# Rangjung Yeshe Tibetan-English Dictionary
# Converted from Wylie to Tibetan Unicode
# Format: Tibetan\tEnglish\tWylie

ཀ	1) the first, number one in an alphabetical register, volume One in a series of books, alpha. 2) primal, basic. 3) primordial, primeval, original. 4) See {ka ba} pillar. 5) the very, just, namely; ...	ka
ཀ་ཀ	excrement, crow, cry of the crow	ka ka
ཀ་ཀ་ཐ་ཏ	bird resembling a crow, big crow, raven	ka ka tha ta
ཀ་ཀ་ནི	1) small Indian coin worth 20 cowrie shells; 2) 1/4 pa a or m na; 3) seed of Albrus precatorius used as med. weight; 4) shell of Cyprea moneta used as money	ka ka ni
ཀ་ཀ་ནཱི་ལ	sapphire	ka ka nI la
ཀ་ཀ་མུ་ཁ	kakamukha, kangkamukha [one of {phra men brgyad} crow/ravenfaced one	ka ka mu kha
ཅྲོཝ	faced	crow
ཀ་ཀ་རང	cucumber	ka ka rang
ཀ་ཀ་རི	fabulous snowy mountain where tujanaya grows	ka ka ri
ཀཱ་ཀལ་ལི	pleasant sound, melody	kA kal li
ཀ་ཀི་ནི	1) n. of a mountain. 2) n. of female deity	ka ki ni
ཀ་ཀིའི་སྒྲ	cry of a peacock	ka ki'i sgra
ཀ་ཀུ་སྟ	a river	ka ku sta
ཀ་ཀུ་བྷ་ཡ	SK tree, dug mo nyung or aardzu na	ka ku bha ya
ཀ་ཀེ་རི་ཡ	tree which grew on vulture peak hill of magadha	ka ke ri ya
ཀ་ཀོ	SA ka ko la	ka ko
ཀ་ཀོ་ལ	med/poison castor bean tree [saccharum munja cardomum cocculus indicus secret abode of dakinis; rgya gar nag dang lho mon nas thon pa'i rtsva ldum gyi 'bras bu de'i lo sdong ljang gu dang 'bru'i pa...	ka ko la
ཀ་བཀོལ་མ	ka khol ma	ka bkol ma
ཀ་བཀྱག	column seat	ka bkyag
ཀ་རྐ་ཏ	cancer (constellation). Syn {kar ka ta}	ka rka ta
ཀ་རྐེ་ཏ	yellow precious stone	ka rke ta
ཀ་སྐེ	neck of a pillar or column	ka ske
ཀ་སྐེད	shaft of column	ka sked
ཀ་སྐོང་བ	fill up a void, make up a deficiency, fill up the mouth with water, rinse the mouth	ka skong ba
ཀ་སྐྱོར	ka ba'i 'gram nas skyor ba'i shing,...Khang gog la ka skyor brgyab ???	ka skyor
ཀ་ཁ	a-b-c, alphabet, feather	ka kha
ཀ་ཁ་པ	abecedarian, beginner of the alphabet, child	ka kha pa
ཀ་ཁ་ཕྱེ	region of dividing KA and KHA [mdo khams kyi sa cha phal mo cher ka dang ga gnyis kyi sgra gdangs gcig tu klog pas de gnyis dbye ba 'byed ched mdo smad pas ka la ka kha phye zer la, ka kha dbye 'an...	ka kha phye
ཀ་ཁའི་ཀློག་ཐབས	Tibetan primer	ka kha'i klog thabs
ཀ་ཁའི་ཐོ	alphabetical register	ka kha'i tho
ཀ་ཁའི་དཔེ	a-b-c book, a-b-c book, primer	ka kha'i dpe
ཀ་ཁའི་རིམ་པ	alphabetic order. Syn {ka kha'i tho} alphabetic index	ka kha'i rim pa
ཀ་ཁི་ལ	door, entrance	ka khi la
ཀ་ཁུ་བྷ་ཡ	med. plant [terminalia arjuna = {dug mo nyung gi shing nor}	ka khu bha ya
ཀ་ཁོང	alphabetical group	ka khong
ཀ་ཁོལ་མ	SA khol ma, historical pillar in lhasa	ka khol ma
ཀ་ཁྱི	rtsab cig under water wheel axle	ka khyi
ཀ་འཁོར་བ	beginningless cyclic existence. beginningless samsara, cyclic existence	ka 'khor ba
ཀ་གཱ་ནཱི་ལ	sapphire	ka gA nI la
ཀ་ག་ནིའ་ལ	kind of sapphire	ka ga ni' la
ཀ་གའ་ནིའ་ལ	kind of sapphire	ka ga' ni' la
ཀ་གིས	suddenly, immediately	ka gis
ཀ་གྲངས	consonants ka mad 30 etc. signified #	ka grangs
ཀ་མགོ	capital of a column	ka mgo
ཀ་འགོ	1) sne'i cha on top of a column; 2) Chu 'khor gyi srog shing gi 'go la bskon pa'i lcags sgor	ka 'go
ཀ་རྒྱན	'phan etc pillar ornament	ka rgyan
ཀ་རྒྱུག	sbra and tent pole	ka rgyug
ཀ་སྒྲོག	crow	ka sgrog
ཀ་སྒྲོགས	crow	ka sgrogs
ཀ་སྒྲོམ	ka ba'i sgrom skyor	ka sgrom
ཀ་རྔ་ཀ་ལ	black poison	ka rnga ka la
ཀ་ཅ	goods, things, articles, effects, property, furniture	ka ca
ཊཿE་ཪཱཎགJཨཱུཎག་ཡEསཿE་ཊཱིབEཊཱཎ	ENGLISH DICTIONARY OF BUDDHIST CULTURE, V3 - 2003	THE RANGJUNG YESHE TIBETAN
ཀ་ཅ་ལྷུང་སྒྲ	rhyme, strophe	ka ca lhung sgra
ཀ་ཅན	having pillars, a house	ka can
ཀ་ཅན་བཞི	the four pillars [4 chief disciples of marpa as pillars of his house: rngog chos rdor, bsod nams rgyal mthan, mtshur dbang rdo rje of tol, milarepa]	ka can bzhi
ཀ་ཅི	1) fine silken cloth. 2) coarse white cotton cloth	ka ci
ཀ་ཅི་སྐུས་མ	inferior kind of cloth	ka ci skus ma
ཀ་ཅི་སྐྱུས་མ	an inferior, fine silken cloth or Varanasi cotton, special coarse cotton (from Nepal for prayer flags, muslin	ka ci skyus ma
ཀ་ཅི་སྐྱེམ་རས	paper of superior quality	ka ci skyem ras
ཀ་ཅི་སྐྱེས་མ	inferior cotton cloth	ka ci skyes ma
ཀ་ཅི་སྒོང་ཤུན་མ	white cotton cloth	ka ci sgong shun ma
ཀ་ཅི་ལ	a flower, nickname, alias	ka ci la
ཀ་ཅི་ལི	kachu Arum colocasia, a food plant	ka ci li
ཀ་ཅིག	1) short time, for a moment. 2) momentary, fleeting	ka cig
ཀ་ཅོག་ཞང་གསུམ	kawa paltseg, chokro lui gyaltsen, and ma rinchen chok	ka cog zhang gsum
ཀ་གཅིག་སྒོ་གཅིག	1) small prison house. 2) mode of capital punishment	ka gcig sgo gcig
ཀ་གཅིག་སྒོ་གཅིག་མ	mdo sbug med pa'i 1 pillar house	ka gcig sgo gcig ma
ཀ་གཅིག་ལྕམ་གང་མ	khang pa ka gnyis ma'i ka ba gcig gi thad nas bar bcad brgyab pa'i khang pa	ka gcig lcam gang ma
ཀ་གཅིག་པ	having one pillar	ka gcig pa
ཀ་གཅིག་མ	Syn {ka ci}	ka gcig ma
ཀ་ལྕི	SA ka ci	ka lci
ཀ་ལྕོག	ka wa dpal brtsegs and klu'i rgyal mtshan of lcog ro, [two famous translators of the bka' 'gyur]	ka lcog
ཀ་ཆ	household things. Syn {ka ca}; goods, property, furniture	ka cha
ཀ་ཆ་ཏ	habitation, hut	ka cha ta
ཀ་ཆུག	[arch] de ltar, so, like that, accordingly	ka chug
ཀ་ཆུག་མཛོད	do like that, do accordingly	ka chug mdzod
ཀ་ཆེན	1) main pillar. 2) upholder, uplifter	ka chen
ཀ་ཆེན་བཅུ	Ten Great Pillars: Thönmi Sambhota, Vairochana, Kawa Paltsek,	ka chen bcu
ཆོཀ	ro Lui Gyaltsen, Zhang Yeshe Dey, Rinchen Zangpo, Dromtön Gyalwa Jungney, Ngok Lotsawa Loden Sherab, Sakya Pandita and Gokhukpa Lhatsey	Chok
ཀ་ཆེན་བཞི	four great pillars [the four main disciples of lhodrak marpa {rngog chos sku rdo rje {mtshur ston dbang gi rdo rje} {mes ston tshon po} {mi la ras pa}	ka chen bzhi
ཀ་འཇའ་ལ	ka 'ja' pass [si khron zhing chen, dkar mdzes, dpal yul rdzong]	ka 'ja' la
ཀ་འཇི	shirt, chinese jacket, kuatzu	ka 'ji
ཀ་རྗི	Syn {ka ci}	ka rji
ཀ་ཉཱ	1) girl. 2) Virgo	ka nyA
ཀ་ཉའ	girl, Virgo 3	ka nya'
ཀ་གཉིས་པ	(met crow	ka gnyis pa
ཀ་ཏ	mother, mother in mystical language	ka ta
ཀ་ཏ་ཀ	lataka med tree, clearing nut [strychnos pototorum, seed rubbed inside a water jar precipitates particles in the water)	ka ta ka
ཀ་ཏ་ཀི	generic name for mountain	ka ta ki
ཀ་ཏ་ཀི་ལ	city in ancient sind, pillar of grass	ka ta ki la
ཀ་ཏ་པུར	camphor	ka ta pur
ཀ་ཏ་པུར་འཛག	moon	ka ta pur 'dzag
ཀ་ཏ་བུ་ར	camphor	ka ta bu ra
ཀ་ཏ་བོ་ཏ	town of paro in bhutan	ka ta bo ta
ཀ་ཏ་བྱེད	advise, counsel	ka ta byed
ཀ་ཏ་མ་ཀ	a bird	ka ta ma ka
ཀ་ཏ་ཝ	name of a locality	ka ta wa
ཀ་ཏ་ཡ	place in ancient india	ka ta ya
ཀ་ཏ་ཡ་ན	one of six heretical teachers who disputed with buddha	ka ta ya na
ཀ་ཏ་ཡ་ན་ནོག་ཅན	Katyayana the Hunchback, Kahuda (one of the six heretical teachers who disputed with Buddha) who did not assert anything whatsoever. See {mu stegs ston pa drug}	ka ta ya na nog can
ཀ་ཏ་ཡའ་ན	Katyay na the hunchback [one of six heretical teachers who debated with buddha {mu stegs ston pa drug} did not assert anything whatsoever {ka ta'i bu}, kahuda]	ka ta ya' na
ཀ་ཏ་ཡའ་ན་ནོག་ཅན	katyay na the hunchback [one of six heretical teachers who debated with Buddha {mu stegs ston pa drug} did not assert anything whatsoever]	ka ta ya' na nog can
ཀ་ཏ་ར	a flower	ka ta ra
ཀ་ཏ་རུ	table of figures made of lines crossing each other and forming squares	ka ta ru
ཀ་ཏ་ལཱི	deer, antelope	ka ta lI
ཀ་ཏན	cotton cloth	ka tan
ཀ་ཏམ་བྷ	an insect	ka tam bha
ཀ་ཏའི་བུ	son of katyayani, a bhiksu	ka ta'i bu
ཀ་ཏའི་བུ་ནོག་ཅན	Kahuda Katyayana,	ka ta'i bu nog can
ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སི྾་ནོན	Buddhist teachers, who disputed with Buddha, {mu stegs ston pa drug}. did not assert anything whatsoever	one of the six non
ཀ་ཏའི་བུ་མོ	1) the goddess Uma. 2) n. of the mother of the monk Katyayana	ka ta'i bu mo
ཀ་ཏི	the kati channel. Syn {ka ti shel gyi sbu gu can} crystal kati tube	ka ti
ཀ་ཏི་ཤེལ	kati crystal	ka ti shel
ཀ་ཏི་ཤེལ་གྱི་སྦུ་གུ	Kati crystal channel	ka ti shel gyi sbu gu
ཀ་ཏི་ཤེལ་གྱི་སྦུ་གུ་ཅན	kati crystal tube?	ka ti shel gyi sbu gu can
ཀ་ཏི་ཤེལ་གྱི་རྩ	crystal kati channel	ka ti shel gyi rtsa
ཀ་ཏི་གསེར་གྱི་རྩ	golden kati channel	ka ti gser gyi rtsa
ཀ་ཏི་གསེར་གྱི་རྩ་ཆེན	kati having great gold veins/roots?	ka ti gser gyi rtsa chen
ཀ་ཏུ	SA ke tu	ka tu
ཀ་ཏུ་ཀ	fabulous city	ka tu ka
ཀ་ཏེ	what, which	ka te
ཀ་ཏོ་ར	metal cup, dish, basin, bowl, tibetan form of the hindi word katora	ka to ra
ཀ་ཏྱ	place in ancient india	ka tya
ཀ་ཏྱ་ན	Syn {ka ta ya na nog can}. see. {mu stegs kyi ston pa drug}	ka tya na
ཀཱ་ཏྱ་བུ་མོ	Syn {ka ta'i bu mo}	kA tya bu mo
ཀཱ་ཏྱཱ་ཡ་ན	Katyayana. A shravaka disciple of the Buddha. Syn {ka ta'i bu}	kA tyA ya na
ཀ་ཏྱའི་ཕུག་པ	cave of Katyayana [near Kathmandu in Nepal where Milarepa used to meditate]	ka tya'i phug pa
ཀ་ཏྱའི་བུ	[Skt] K ty yana [sh'akya mu ne'i dngos slob nyan thos mtha''khor 'dul ba'i mchog tu gyur pa zhig yin pa de nyan thos kyirtsa ba'i sde bzhi'i gnas brtan pa'i sde'i srol gtod mkhan	ka tya'i bu
ཀ་ཏྱའི་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	Maha Katyayana, important monk follower of the Buddha	ka tya'i bu chen po
ཀ་ཏྱའི་བུ་ནོག་ཅན	one of the {mu stegs pa'i ston pa drug}. [not asserting anything]	ka tya'i bu nog can
ཀ་ཏྱའི་བུས	arhat of the abhidharma tradition	ka tya'i bus
ཀ་གཏུགས	1) unable not to, forced to. 3) desperation	ka gtugs
ཀ་བཏད	against	ka btad
ཀ་རྟི་ཀ	1) Skanda (the god of war). 2) the tenth lunar month	ka rti ka
ཀ་རྟེན	base of a pillar, plinth or base of a pillar	ka rten
ཀ་སྟན	Syn {ka rten}	ka stan
ཀ་སྟུ་དྷ	kaustubha (used to separate gold from ore), a precious stone which when pulverized in murky water has the property of eliminating the water's impurities and making it limpid	ka stu dha
ཀ་སྟེགས	pedestal, base of a pillar, pedestal of a pillar	ka stegs
ཀ་བསྟོད	alphabetical praise; a praise composed in verse, each line beginning with a letter of the Tibetan alphabet in alphabetic order	ka bstod
ཀ་ཐ་མན་གྲུ	Khatmandu	ka tha man gru
ཀ་ཐ་ར	peach	ka tha ra
ཀ་ཐམ	vessel	ka tham
ཀ་ཐམ་བ	an insect	ka tham ba
ཀ་ཐི་ཤི	chinese minister who founded hikwanzse monastery	ka thi shi
ཀ་ཐུམ	1) pillar hanging; 2) red woolen cloth	ka thum
ཀ་ཐེ	{ka ba}, pillar	ka the
ཀ་ཐོ	alphabetical register, index	ka tho
ཀ་ཐོག	Kathok monastery	ka thog
ཀ་ཐོག་དགོན	Katok Monastery, In Derge of Kham region [east Tibet]. founded by Kadampa Deshek in 1159	ka thog dgon
ཀ་ཐོག་དགོན་པ	Kathok Monastery [Nyingma, literally on top of [arch] hill like) kain derge of kham region (east tibet) founded by kadampa deshek in 1159]	ka thog dgon pa
ཀ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྡན	the Vajra Seat of Katok. The name for {ka thog dgon}; see also {ka: thog}	ka thog rdo rje ldan
ཀ་ཐོག་བླ་རབས་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 gurus of Kathok {kathok tampa/ deshek tshangt"npa/ campa bum/ sonam bumpa/ uw" yeshe bumpa/ jangchub pelwa/ sonam zangpo/ kunga bum /wangchuk pelwa/ lodr" bumpa/ lodr" senge/ jangchub lodr"/ jan...	ka thog bla rabs bcu gsum
ཀ་ཐོག་ཚེ་དབང་ནོར་བུ	Tsewang Norbu, of Katok, see {ka thog rig 'dzin tshe dbang nor bu} ka thog rig 'dzin tshe dbang nor bu 1698-1755 - Rigdzin Tsewang Norbu, of Katok	ka thog tshe dbang nor bu
ཀ་ཐོག་སི་ཏུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Katok Situ, Chökyi Gyatso: ?-1913 or 18801925	ka thog si tu chos kyi rgya mtsho
ཀ་ད་ཀ	a fruit, a bird	ka da ka
ཀ་ད་པ	a fruit of ficus religiosa	ka da pa
ཀ་ད་རུ་ཧ	bird nestling on khadira trees	ka da ru ha
ཀ་དག	primordial purity, primordially pure; original purity; originally pure, pure from the beginning / first	ka dag
ཀ་དག་ཀློང	abbr. of {ka dag gi klong}	ka dag klong
ཀ་དག་ཀློང་ཡངས	the vast space of primordial purity	ka dag klong yangs
ཀ་དག་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད	cutting through/, trekchö of primordial purity, cutting through resistance to primordial purity [pith ofpractice of dzongchen mantra, instruction in le lo can effortless liberation; gzhi gnas self ...	ka dag khregs chod
ཀ་དག་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	Trekchö realization of primordial purity	ka dag khregs chod kyi dgongs pa
བ་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	experienced realization of the primordial purity of Trekcho without error	ba rgyud la skyes te
ཀ་དག་གི་ཀློང	1) primordially pure space. 2) space of primordial purity	ka dag gi klong
ཀ་དག་གི་གྲོལ་ས	the liberation place of primordial purity	ka dag gi grol sa
ཀ་དག་གི་ངོ་བོ	essence of primordial purity	ka dag gi ngo bo
ཀ་དག་གི་ཆོས་སྐུ	primordially pure dharmakaya	ka dag gi chos sku
ཀ་དག་གི་གནས་ལུགས	the natural condition of primordial purity, the primordial purity of things as they are	ka dag gi gnas lugs
ཀ་དག་གི་སྤྱི་གཞི	common ground of primordial purity	ka dag gi spyi gzhi
ཀ་དག་གི་གཞི	the ground of primordial purity, the primordially pure ground	ka dag gi gzhi
ཀ་དག་གི་ཡེ་གཞི	original ground of primordial purity	ka dag gi ye gzhi
ཀ་དག་གི་རིག་པ	primordially pure awareness, primordial purity of insight	ka dag gi rig pa
ཀ་དག་གི་ལམ	the path of primordial purity	ka dag gi lam
ཀ་དག་ཅིག་སྟོང	the awareness and emptiness of primal purity	ka dag cig stong
ཀ་དག་ཆེན་པོ	the great primordial purity	ka dag chen po
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	primordially pure dharmakaya, the dharmakaya of primordial purity	ka dag chos kyi sku
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་སྣང་བ	the dharmakaya manifestation of primordial purity	ka dag chos sku'i snang ba
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་བར་དོ	bardo of primordially pure dharmakaya	ka dag chos sku'i bar do
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ	dharmakaya luminosity of primordial purity	ka dag chos sku'i 'od gsal
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་རང་གདངས	the selfmanifestation of primordially pure dharmakaya	ka dag chos sku'i rang gdangs
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་རིག་པ	primordially pure dharmakaya awareness	ka dag chos sku'i rig pa
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་ཟད	primordially pure exhaustion of phenomena	ka dag chos zad
ཀ་དག་ཆོས་ཟད་བློ་འདས་ཆེན་པོ	1) great primordial purity beyond concepts in which phenomena has been exhausted. 2) exhaustion of phenomena beyond concepts	ka dag chos zad blo 'das chen po
ཀ་དག་གཏིང་གསལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the primordially pure dharmakaya of basic clarity, dharmakaya the fundamentally luminous primordial purity	ka dag gting gsal chos kyi sku
ཀ་དག་སྟོང་ཉིད	emptiness of primordial purity	ka dag stong nyid
ཀ་དག་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of original purity	ka dag stong pa nyid
ཀ་དག་སྟོང་གསལ་ཆོས་སྐུ	primordially pure dharmakaya of empty cognizance	ka dag stong gsal chos sku
ཀ་དག་གདོད་མའི་གཤིས་ལུགས	original nature of primordial purity	ka dag gdod ma'i gshis lugs
ཀ་དག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	practitioners who have acquired authentic knowledge of the original purity	ka dag rnal 'byor
ཀ་དག་དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྒྲལ	liberated into primordially pure space	ka dag dbyings su bsgral
ཀ་དག་དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྒྲལ་བ	delivered into the primordially pure space	ka dag dbyings su bsgral ba
ཀ་དག་གཞིའི་གནས་ལུགས	the natural condition of the primordial pure ground, primordial purity the way things fundamentally are	ka dag gzhi'i gnas lugs
ཀ་དག་ཟང་ཐལ་ངང	the transparent state of primordial purity	ka dag zang thal ngang
ཀ་དག་ཡེ་ཐོག་ཏུ་གྲོལ་བ	be liberated into the original primordial purity	ka dag ye thog tu grol ba
ཀ་དག་ཡེ་གཞི	original ground of primordial purity	ka dag ye gzhi
ཀ་དག་རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	recognizing/ encountering one's nature as primordial purity	ka dag rang ngo 'phrod pa
ཀ་དག་རང་བྱུང་རང་ཤར	Kadag Rangjung Rangshar. The title of one of the five volumes contained in Gongpa Sangtal. Kadag Rangjung Rangshar	ka dag rang byung rang shar
མེཨནས་འསེལཕ༹	existing and self-manifest primordial purity.' See also {rdzogs pa chen po ka dag rang byung rang shar}	means 'self
ཀ་དག་རང་རིག	primordially pure selfawareness	ka dag rang rig
ཀ་དག་རིག་སྟོང	awareness and emptiness of primordial purity	ka dag rig stong
ཀ་དག་རིག་སྟོང་མཚོན་པ	symbolize the awareness and emptiness of primal purity ka dag rig pa shes rab rang byung gi	ka dag rig stong mtshon pa
སྒྲོན་མ	the lamp of self-originated discriminating wisdom which is primordially pure awareness	sgron ma
ཀ་དག་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	co-emergent primordial purity	ka dag lhan skyes
ཀ་དག་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	primordial purity and spontaneous presence	ka dag lhun grub
སེལཕ༹	perfected	self
ཀ་དན	kind of cloth	ka dan
ཀ་དམ་པ	SK 1) ka ampa Priyaka puvya, a tree w fragrant orange flowers, shing tshogs can; 2) water bird mthing ril or chu skyar, deep blue, Nauclia cadamba; 3) cloud; 4) kind of grass	ka dam pa
ཀ་དམ་པ་ཅན	cloud	ka dam pa can
ཀ་དམ་པ་བདེ་གཤེགས	Kadampa Deshek. (1122-1192) Nyingma master and founder of Katok Monastery	ka dam pa bde gshegs
ཀ་དམ་པའི་མེ་ཏོག	kadamba flower	ka dam pa'i me tog
ཀ་དམ་པའི་མེ་ཏོག་སྐྱེས	1) lit. born by kadamba flower, cloud. 2) n. of a bird of a deep blue color. 3) kind of grass	ka dam pa'i me tog skyes
ཀ་དམ་བྷ་ར	SK; 1) med. herb {ka dam bha ra}; 2) Brel byed skabs ka ba la sgrog pa'i kha btags	ka dam bha ra
ཀ་དར	to be cautious, take care, take heed	ka dar
ཀ་དྲའི་བུ	sons of kadru, kadraveya [nagas or serpents supposed to habituate in lower regions]	ka dra'i bu
ཀ་དྲུ	kadru [wife of kashyapa and mother of nagas]	ka dru
ཀཱ་དྲུའི་བུ	Kadraveya, sons of Kadru (n. of a class of Nagas)	kA dru'i bu
ཀ་གདན	SA ka stegs base or pedestal on which a pillar stands	ka gdan
ཀ་གདུང	pillars and beams	ka gdung
ཀ་རྡོར	Kalimpong and Darjeeling	ka rdor
ཀ་སྡེ	the "ka" group (the first letters of the Tibetan alphabet. {ka kha ga nga}	ka sde
ཀ་སྡེར	porcelain dish	ka sder
ཀ་ན	Ghana	ka na
ཀ་ན་ཀ	gold	ka na ka
ཀ་ན་ཀ་མུ་ནི	kanakamuni [former buddha]	ka na ka mu ni
ཀ་ན་ཀམ	gold	ka na kam
ཀ་ན་པ	short lance attached to arm by a string and pulled back once thrown	ka na pa
ཀ་ན་ཙ	1) sprouting; 2) [flowering] tree (3, the plant Albrus precatorius	ka na tsa
ཀ་ན་ཙ་ན	ka achana tree, the plant Commelina bengalensis	ka na tsa na
ཀ་ན་ཡ	kind of weapon, short lance attached by a string to the arm	ka na ya
ཀ་ནའ་ཡ	short lance attached to arm by a string and pulled back once thrown	ka na' ya
ཀ་ནས	from the 1st, primordially	ka nas
ཀ་ནས་བརྗོད	tell/ narrate, explain	ka nas brjod
ཀ་ནས་དག	SA ka dag	ka nas dag
ཀ་ནས་དག་པ	pure from the beginning [primordial emptiness unborn, {ka dag}, {ye dag}, {dang po nas dag pa}, {gdod ma nas dag pa}	ka nas dag pa
ཀ་ནས་དག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordially pure wisdom	ka nas dag pa'i ye shes
ཀ་ནས་ཤོད	tell/ narrate, explain	ka nas shod
ཀ་ནི་ཀ	[Skt] King Kanika [sngar rgya gar gyi rgyal po zhig ste, dusrabs dang po'i mjug tu drag shugs kyis rgyal phran gzhan rnamsbtul nas jan to la zhes pa'i rgyal khab btsugs, tshe mjug tusangs rgyas sky...	ka ni ka
ཀ་ནི་སྐ	King Kanika [buddhist tartar king ruling pulhava, kashmir, and jalandhara (punjab kabul) held the last great council to compile the mahayana tripi aka in first century bc]	ka ni ska
ཀ་ནི་ཤ་ཀ	king Kanika	ka ni sha ka
ཀ་ནེ་རུ་ཀ	bones of the limbs	ka ne ru ka
ཀ་གནམ	Kanam Province [R] [district in Kongpo]	ka gnam
ཀ་གནམ་པ	native of Kanam	ka gnam pa
ཀ་རྣ་ནང	food of pigs	ka rna nang
ཀ་རྣི་ཀ	1) ear ornament. 2) bell	ka rni ka
ཀ་རྣི་སྒོ་བཞིའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	4-doored Karni Stupa [N of the main temple in Lhasa, built 1368]	ka rni sgo bzhi'i mchod rten
ཀ་པ	the first volume of a work or a series of works, volume or anything else marked with the letter ka	ka pa
ཀ་པ་ཀ་ཚ	a medicinal plant, plant mucuna pruritus	ka pa ka tsha
ཀ་པ་རུ	alabaster; {ka ma ru}	ka pa ru
ཀ་པཱ་ལ	skull-cup	ka pA la
ཀ་པ་ལ་ཡི་སྐྲ་དཀར	my hair is getting grey	ka pa la yi skra dkar
ཀ་པ་ལི	see. {ka pa la}	ka pa li
ཀཱ་པ་ལི་ཏཱ་ར	Bhattarika Kapala Tara; n. of one of the aspects of the goddess Tara	kA pa li tA ra
ཀ་པའ་ལ	kap la, skull[cup] {bde skyong}, forehead	ka pa' la
ཀ་པི	1) divine language in which the Bon history was compiled. 2) monkey	ka pi
ཝོཨོད	apple tree, a yellow orpiment	wood
ཀ་པི་ཁ་ཚ	med. plant Mucuna pruritas	ka pi kha tsha
ཀ་པི་ཉ་ཛ་ལ	Franklin partridge;	ka pi nya dza la
ཧེཨཐ	cock	heath
ཀ་པི་ཏ	gum, resin, pigment	ka pi ta
ཀ་པི་ད	1) divine language of Kapistan in which the B"n "royal-rabs," a history of kings of Tibet was compiled; 2) Spondias magnifera, the hog-plum; 3) Pentaptira tomentosa, the mane-fig; 4) Ficus inpector...	ka pi da
ཀ་པི་དང་མ་རྐང	monkey	ka pi dang ma rkang
ཀ་པི་ན	a kink of southern india who lived at buddha's time	ka pi na
ཀ་པི་ལ་མུ་ནི	a brahmanical sage whose hermitage was at the mouth of the ganges	ka pi la mu ni
ཀ་པིང་ཐ	fruit of Feronia elephantum tree	ka ping tha
ཀ་པིན་ཆེན་པོ	Kapila, important monk follower of the Buddha	ka pin chen po
ཀ་པིན་ད	n. of a bird	ka pin da
ཀ་པུ་ཏ	Kaputa [place in india where according to the curse of a sage adultery and incest were punished by burning the house where these occurred]	ka pu ta
ཀ་པུར	Kabul	ka pur
ཀ་པུར་ཏེས་ལོ	delphinium trichophorum franch., delphinium trichophorum fr. var. platycentrum w. t. wang	ka pur tes lo
ཀ་པེད	gourd, med. fruit	ka ped
ཀ་པོ་ཏ	cheek[-bone], pigeon	ka po ta
ཀ་པོ་ཛི	Cambodia	ka po dzi
ཀ་དཔེ	a-b-c book, primer	ka dpe
ཀ་དཔེ་དང་པོ	Tibetan primer	ka dpe dang po
ཀ་དཔེ་པེ	alphabet	ka dpe pe
ཀ་འཔན	ornamental silk for decorating pillars, pillar pendant, pillar ornament of brocade	ka 'pan
ཀ་སྤུངས	colonnade	ka spungs
ཀ་ཕ	a tree	ka pha
ཀ་ཕན	pillar hangings	ka phan
ཀ་ཕིབས	corridor	ka phibs
ཀ་ཕུར	long stake for tying cattle	ka phur
ཀ་ཕུར་ལ་བཏགས	tie to a tethering stake	ka phur la btags
ཀ་ཕོར	water wheel axle ka 'go'i 'og gi shing sgor	ka phor
ཀ་ཕྲེང	Tibetan alphabet, series of consonants in the tibetan alphabet	ka phreng
ཀ་ཕྲེང་དུ་བཀོད་པའི་བསྟོད་པ	verse praise/ stotra, each line beginning w a different letter of the Tibetan alphabet in order	ka phreng du bkod pa'i bstod pa
ཀ་འཕན	pillar pendant [pillar ornament of brocade], ornamental silk for decorating pillars, silk ornaments on a column. Syn {ka pha}	ka 'phan
ཀ་འཕྲེང	Syn {ka phreng}	ka 'phreng
ཀ་བ	pillars	ka ba
ཀ་བ་བརྒྱད	8 pillars (of a mandala palace	ka ba brgyad
ཀ་བ་ཅན	(large) house with columns	ka ba can
ཀ་བ་དང་ཉེ་བའི་ཀ་བའི་གླིང	town of houses with pillars and king posts [one of 36 buddhist holy places]	ka ba dang nye ba'i ka ba'i gling
ཀ་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་དབང	Kawa Dorje Chang Wang, also known as Katok Dorje Wangpo, a master from Katok, who attained the rainbow body	ka ba rdo rje 'chang dbang
ཀ་བ་དཔལ་བརྩེགས	a translator	ka ba dpal brtsegs
ཀ་བ་བུམ་པ་ཅན	one of the pillars of the great jokhang temple at lhasa 7	ka ba bum pa can
ཐེ་Jཨོ	khang temple in Lhasa]. Vase Pillar	the Jo
ཀ་བ་བོང་མིག	mule with a veil of white hairs over its face	ka ba bong mig
ཀ་བ་སྦྲུལ་མགོ་ཅན	pillar in Lhasa jokhang temple 'phrul snang gtsug lag khang under which king srong btsan Gampo concealed a mthu sngags kyi terma	ka ba sbrul mgo can
སེརཔེནཏ	shaped capital	serpent
ཀ་བ་འཛུག་པ	set up a pillar	ka ba 'dzug pa
ཀ་བ་བཞི	four pillars [the four main students of zurchungpa sheraptra namely kyot"n sh kye of gungbu yangkeng lama of kyonglung len sh kya zangpo of chuwar and datik cosh k of nakmore chn, the four main stu...	ka ba bzhi
ཀ་བ་ཟུར་བརྒྱད་པ	octangular pillar	ka ba zur brgyad pa
ཀ་བ་བཟང་པོ	firm column, eminent pillar	ka ba bzang po
ཀ་བ་ལི	SK sho ka li, case for books, wooden planks used to keep wood blocks	ka ba li
ཀ་བ་ཤིང་མགོ་ཅན	pillar w design of leaves of trees round its capital	ka ba shing mgo can
ཀ་བ་ཤིང་ལོ་ཅན	pillar in Lhasa Ja khang temple, 'phrul snang gtsug lag khang, under which king srong btsan Gampo concealed a nor gter	ka ba shing lo can
ཀ་བ་ཤུལ་ཅན	carved /grooved pillar	ka ba shul can
ཀ་བ་སུམ་མདོ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	ka ba sum mdo
ཀ་བ་སེང་མགོ་ཅན	pillar with a lion's head on its capital	ka ba seng mgo can
ཀ་བའི་ཐོག་ཕིབས	abacus	ka ba'i thog phibs
ཀ་བའི་སྦྱར་བཀོད	cornice, ornamental pieces on/ atop a pillar	ka ba'i sbyar bkod
ཀ་བར	grave	ka bar
ཀ་བི་ཏ	elephant or wood apple tree Feronia elephantum	ka bi ta
ཀ་བི་ཏ་ལ	a tree, benzoin, storax	ka bi ta la
ཀ་བུ་ལོ	a gandharva raja	ka bu lo
ཀ་བུམ	pillar and pot/ vase	ka bum
ཀ་བེ་ཀོ་བེ	shriveled, not smooth and flexible [like dried beans]	ka be ko be
ཀ་བེ་རི	river cauvery in mysore	ka be ri
ཀ་བེད	1) fruit bil ba mo [from stod vase shaped and can ve made into a water vessel]; 2) med. tree [bitter-sweet, heating, by its power 'khru ba gcod, overcoming swollen limbs]	ka bed
ཀ་བེལ	a city in ancient udiyana	ka bel
ཀ་བོ་ཀ	ancient prince of Kabul	ka bo ka
ཀ་བོ་ཏ	pigeon	ka bo ta
ཀ་བྲེ	1) rosette. 2) capital of a column	ka bre
ཀ་བློང	Syn {sgo gsum gyi las}	ka blong
ཀ་དབྲག	middle part of a column, pillar	ka dbrag
ཀ་དབྲག་བཞག	leave a space, skip a turn	ka dbrag bzhag
ཀ་རྦུ་ར	1) of a variegated or spotted color. 2) gold. 3) yellow pigment	ka rbu ra
ཀ་རྦུ་རི	yellow pigment	ka rbu ri
ཀ་སྦུག	Kalimpong	ka sbug
ཀ་སྦྱོར་བཟུང	keep them unified	ka sbyor bzung
ཀ་མ་ཆ	sacred place in Assam w	ka ma cha
སྟོནེ	cut symbol of Kali	stone
ཀ་མ་ཏ	lotus	ka ma ta
ཀ་མ་ཐ	turtle	ka ma tha
ཀ་མ་དུ	sun	ka ma du
ཀ་མ་ཙ	sacred place in Assam w	ka ma tsa
ཀ་མ་ཙི	kamachi, med. plant said to induce sleep if the root is placed on the head	ka ma tsi
ཀ་མ་གཙང	impure	ka ma gtsang
ཀ་མ་རྩི	kind of medicinal plant	ka ma rtsi
ཀ་མ་རུ	alabaster, name of a country, kamarupa in assam	ka ma ru
ཀ་མ་རུ་པ	marble, alabaster	ka ma ru pa
ཀ་མ་ལ	water lily, lotus nelumbium, a river, a consulting or reflecting mind	ka ma la
ཀ་མ་ལ་ཅན	1) the goddess Lakshmi, wife of Vishnu. 2) n. of a river	ka ma la can
ཀ་མ་ལ་ཤི	buddhist philosophy	ka ma la shi
ཀ་མ་ལ་ཤི་ལ	name of famous pandit	ka ma la shi la
ཆིནེསེ་མོནཀ་Hཨ	Shang in debate. Disciple of Shantarakshita and invited to Tibet by King Trisong Deutsen. proponent of Svatantrika	Chinese monk Ha
ཀ་མ་ལི	very sharp sword	ka ma li
ཀ་མང	the alphabet. See {ka dpe}	ka mang
ཀ་མང་མ	having many pillars	ka mang ma
ཀ་མད	Tibetan consonants	ka mad
ཀ་མད་སུམ་ཅུ	Syn {ka smad sum cu}	ka mad sum cu
ཀ་མི་ཡམ	SK mtsher pa, spleen	ka mi yam
ཀ་མིག	1) n. of a mineral substance. 2) square enclosed by four pillars	ka mig
ཀ་མིག་བསྒྲིགས་པ	to alphabetize	ka mig bsgrigs pa
ཀ་མུ་ལ་རྡོ་རྒྱད	kind of alabaster	ka mu la rdo rgyad
ཀ་མུ་ལ་རྡོ་རྒྱུད	sort of alabaster or steatite found in central tibet	ka mu la rdo rgyud
ཀ་མུ་ལ་རྡོ་བརྒྱད	1) alabaster. 2) steatite	ka mu la rdo brgyad
ཀ་མེ	lamp, light	ka me
ཀ་མེ་སྦར་བ	to light a lamp	ka me sbar ba
ཀ་མེ་སྦར་མ	light a lamp 8	ka me sbar ma
ཀ་མེ་བསད་པ	to extinguish a light	ka me bsad pa
ཀ་མེད	no way not to, unable not to, forced to, had to, no choice but to, can't help but, no way but to, at all costs, at any rate, helpless, powerless	ka med
ཀ་རྨ	1) karma; 2) action; 3) karma family/ activity; 4) buddha activity; 5) person's name	ka rma
ཀ་རྨ་ཀམ་ཚང	Karma Kamtshang {karma bka' brgyud} (the karmapa teaching lineage, originates from the first karmapa {dus gsum mkhyen pa}, a disciple of gampopa]	ka rma kam tshang
ཀ་རྨ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Karma Kagyu school	ka rma bka' brgyud
ཀ་རྨ་ད་ཀི	karma dakini	ka rma da ki
ཀ་རྨ་དུས་གསུམ་མཁྱེན་པ	1st Karmapa Tusum Khyenpa	ka rma dus gsum mkhyen pa
ཀ་རྨ་པ	Gyalwa Karmapa, head of the Karma Kagyu school, Karma kagyu [karma here = buddha activity]	ka rma pa
ཀ་རྨ་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	Karmapa Deshin Shekpa [1384-1415 5th Karmapa]	ka rma pa de bzhin gshegs pa
ཀ་རྨ་པ་མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Karmapa Mikyo Dorje [1507-1554 the eighth karmapa disciple of pawo tsuklag trengwa and author of many scholastic works]	ka rma pa mi bskyod rdo rje
ཀ་རྨ་པ་ཞྭ་དམར་ནག་གཉིས	the Karmapas and Shamarpas	ka rma pa zhwa dmar nag gnyis
ཀ་རྨ་པའི་རྒྱུད་པ	members of the Karmapa lineage	ka rma pa'i rgyud pa
ཀ་རྨ་རབས་བརྒྱད	the 8 1st Karmapas [dusum khyenpa, karma pakshi, rangjung dorje, rolpey dorje, deshin shekpa, thongwa donden, chodrak gyamtsho, mikyo dorje]	ka rma rabs brgyad
ཀ་རྨ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Rolpe Dorje, 4th Karmapa	ka rma rol pa'i rdo rje
ཀ་རྨ་ཤ་ཏམ	{mdo sde las brgya pa}	ka rma sha tam
ཀ་སྨད་སུམ་ཅུ	30 Tibetan consonants	ka smad sum cu
ཀ་སྨད་སུམ་ཆུ	tibetan alphabet	ka smad sum chu
ཀ་སྨུག	brown sugar	ka smug
ཀ་ཙ	1) kind of a silk cloth. 2) precious stone. 3) saw	ka tsa
ཀ་ཙ་རྐེད་ཉག	rusty and crooked	ka tsa rked nyag
ཀ་ཙ་རུ་ཙ་ཀ	a kind of bird	ka tsa ru tsa ka
ཀ་ཙ་ལིན་དི	[dress made of] the finest kind of silk linen etc	ka tsa lin di
ཀ་ཙང་ཀ་ལ	a buddhist nun	ka tsang ka la
ཀ་ཙི་ཀ	species of bamboo which when bent by the wind is said to emit fire, plant bearing a red and black seed used as a weight, arbus precatorius, or nigella indica	ka tsi ka
ཀ་ཙི་ལི་བན	the kachili forest	ka tsi li ban
ཀ་གཙང་མ	pure	ka gtsang ma
ཀ་རྩ་ག་ལ	sea	ka rtsa ga la
ཀ་རྩ་མ	sort of oats, inferior kind of barley	ka rtsa ma
ཀ་རྩམ	species of wild oats	ka rtsam
ཀ་རྩེ	capital of a pillar	ka rtse
ཀ་རྩོམ	alphabetic poetry. Syn {ka bshad}	ka rtsom
ཀ་ཚ་ཀ་ལ	ocean	ka tsha ka la
ཀ་ཚ་པ	turtle	ka tsha pa
ཀ་ཚལ	place east of lhasa	ka tshal
ཀ་ཚལ་དགོན	{ka tshal} Monestery [E of Lhasa in upper U]	ka tshal dgon
ཀ་ཚི་ལི་བན	Kachili Forest [N bank of river Rohita]	ka tshi li ban
ཀ་ཚིགས་ཆེན་པ	work on the genealogy of the kings of Tibet	ka tshigs chen pa
ཀ་ཚིགས་ཆེན་པོ	book on genealogy of kings of Tibet	ka tshigs chen po
ཀ་ཝ	pillar	ka wa
ཀ་ཝ་ཅན	channeled pillar	ka wa can
ཀ་ཝ་རིགས	Kawa ethic minority in SW Yunan	ka wa rigs
ཀ་གཞུ	capital of a pillar	ka gzhu
ཀ་བཞི་གདུང་བརྒྱད	room w four beams and 8 pillars	ka bzhi gdung brgyad
མ	Yül	Mang
ཀ་གཟུ	capital of a pillar	ka gzu
ཀ་གཟུ་གདུང	beam of the pillar	ka gzu gdung
ཀ་གཟོང	rang 'thag la so 'don byed kyi gzong [chisel, punch]	ka gzong
ཀ་ཡ	kaya, body, {sku}	ka ya
ཀ་ཡ་གོའུ་རི	Gayagauri [stupa in ancient Gaya, bihar)	ka ya go'u ri
ཀ་ཡང་རྩེ	architrave	ka yang rtse
ཀ་ཡིག	the letter "k"	ka yig
ཀ་ཡེ	cry, call, oh!; [social =s]	ka ye
ཀ་ཡེ་དཀར་པོ	white sugar	ka ye dkar po
ཀ་ཡེ་དཀར་སྨུག	brown sugar	ka ye dkar smug
ཀ་ཡེ་ཏོག་ཏོག	lump sugar, whiting	ka ye tog tog
ཀ་ར	{sbra chung gi ka ra} tent poles	ka ra
ཀ་ར་ཀ	water-vessel	ka ra ka
ཀ་ར་དཀར་པོ	white sugar	ka ra dkar po
ཀ་ར་དཀར་སྨུག	brown sugar	ka ra dkar smug
ཀ་ར་ཅི	Karachi	ka ra ci
ཀ་ར་ཆི	Karachi	ka ra chi
ཀ་ར་ཇ	sweet gruel	ka ra ja
ཀ་ར་ཏོག་ཏོག	loaf/ cube/ lump sugar	ka ra tog tog
ཀ་ར་ད	a bird whose cry is like a drum	ka ra da
ཀ་ར་དོག་གཅིག	lump of sugar	ka ra dog gcig
ཀ་ར་སྡིག་པོད	tent pole w grooved bulb on top	ka ra sdig pod
ཀ་ར་སྡིག་མེད	tent pole without a grooved bulb on top 9	ka ra sdig med
ཀ་ར་སྡེའང་མེད	tent pole w/o grooved bulb on top	ka ra sde'ang med
ཀ་ར་ན་ཇུས	kind of fine CH satin	ka ra na jus
ཀ་ར་ན་རུས	kind of satin	ka ra na rus
ཀ་ར་ནང	food of pigs	ka ra nang
ཀ་ར་བི་ར	fragrant oleander, nerium odorum, species of soma, formula to recover missile after discharge, daphne plant	ka ra bi ra
ཀ་ར་སྨུག་པོ	Syn {kar smug}	ka ra smug po
ཀ་ར་རུ་བེ་ཀ	a bird	ka ra ru be ka
ཀ་ར་ཤིང	sugar-cane	ka ra shing
ཀ་ར་ཧ་རི	SK cane sugar, molasses	ka ra ha ri
ཀ་ར་བྷ	young elephant	ka ra bha
ཀ་རག	white earth color, lime whitewash	ka rag
ཀ་རང་ག	deer, insect	ka rang ga
ཀ་རན་ད	wild duck, basket, covered box, flower basket, a buddhist work, white	ka ran da
ཀ་རན་དྷ	duck	ka ran dha
ཀ་རན་ཨ	1) basket or covered box of bamboo wicker used for keeping books; 2) a wild duck; 3) white	ka ran a
ཀ་རས	1) Benares muslin, Varanasi muslin; 2) divine garment (the gods are said to wear it)	ka ras
ཀ་རི་ཀ	Syn tshig le'ur byas pa	ka ri ka
ཀ་རི་བུ་མོ	daughter of Katy yana	ka ri bu mo
ཀ་རིང་གི་འཕན	pillar-banners	ka ring gi 'phan
ཀ་རིའི་བུ་མོ	Syn {ka ta'i bu mo}	ka ri'i bu mo
ཀ་རིའུ་བུ	uma	ka ri'u bu
ཀ་རིའུ་བུ་མོ	daughter of katyayana	ka ri'u bu mo
ཀ་རུ	1) wedge. 2) white. 3) barley. 4) n. of a temple in Lhasa	ka ru
ཀ་རུའི་དབྱིངས་ཅན	having the form of a wedge	ka ru'i dbyings can
ཀ་རུའི་དབྱིབས་ཅན	having the form of a wedge	ka ru'i dbyibs can
ཀ་རེ	what, which	ka re
ཀ་རེ་ཀོ་རེ	1) devious way of speaking; 2) [Phar tshur 'then thogs kyis nar 'gyangs byed stangs] dilly-dallying, dawdling, lingering; 3) crooked)	ka re ko re
ཀ་རེ་གོ་རེ	dispute, quarrel, disagreement, crooked	ka re go re
ཀ་ལ	1) black. 2) blue. 3) period of time	ka la
ཀ་ལ་ཀ	water jar	ka la ka
ཀ་ལ་ཀོ	country beyond the sea into which the indus flows and where the finest coral grows	ka la ko
ཀ་ལ་སྔོ་བསང	deep blue-black color	ka la sngo bsang
ཀ་ལ་སྙོམས་པ	regulate a matter, manage justly, direct uniformly	ka la snyoms pa
ཀ་ལ་ཏ	beautiful handsome person	ka la ta
ཀ་ལ་ཐིང་ཀའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	cry of the indian cuckoo, sparrow	ka la thing ka'i sgra dbyangs
ཀ་ལ་དུང་མཚོ	Kala Dungtso, lake, in Dakpo	ka la dung mtsho
ཀ་ལ་པ	aggregate of many accomplishments, buddhist utopia, capital of shambhala	ka la pa
ཀ་ལ་པིང་ཀ	warbling bird sparrow, singing bird with a sweet voice, indian cuckoo	ka la ping ka
ཀ་ལ་པིང་ཀའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	1) cry of the Indian cuckoo. 2) sparrow. Comp. {ka la ping ka}	ka la ping ka'i sgra dbyangs
ཀ་ལ་བིང་ཀ	Syn {ka la ping ka}	ka la bing ka
ཀ་ལ་བིང་ཀ་མ	Kalapinga, fem. the Indian cuckoo	ka la bing ka ma
ཀ་ལ་བུ	a king	ka la bu
ཀ་ལ་ཙ་ཀྲ	Kalachakra ["wheel of time" teachings and deity of tantric buddhism]	ka la tsa kra
ཀ་ལ་ཝིང་ཀ	Syn {ka la ping ka}	ka la wing ka
ཀ་ལ་ཝིང་ཀའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	cry of the Indian cuckoo, sparrow	ka la wing ka'i sgra dbyangs
ཀཱ་ལ་ཞེས་མིང་ནག་པོ་ཟེར་བ	named Kala the Black	kA la zhes ming nag po zer ba
ཀ་ལ་རོ་ཟན	SK a charnel bird, the black 1 who eats the dead [arch] naga	ka la ro zan
ཀ་ལ་ཤ	pitcher, jar, large water pot	ka la sha
ཀ་ལ་སིད་དྷི	Kalasiddhi, the Qualitiesemanation of Vajra Varahi	ka la sid dhi
ཀ་ལ་ཧཾ་ས	the hamsa bird, goose, swan	ka la haM sa
ཀ་ལག	mortar, mud	ka lag
ཀ་ལན་ཏ	little bird, sparrow	ka lan ta
ཀ་ལན་ཏ་ཀ	kalantaka bird	ka lan ta ka
ཀ་ལན་ཏ་ཀའི་གནས	Kalandaka	ka lan ta ka'i gnas
ཀ་ལན་ཏ་ཀའི་གནས་ཞེས	Kalandaka	ka lan ta ka'i gnas zhes
ཀ་ལན་ད་ཀ	town, individual	ka lan da ka
ཀ་ལན་ད་ཀའི་གནས	1) Kalanda Kanivasa. 2) name of a grove near Rajgir	ka lan da ka'i gnas
ཀ་ལན་ཛ་རི	flower used in sacrificial fire, tobacco, an animal struck with a poisoned arrow	ka lan dza ri
ཀ་ལན་ཛ་རི་ཀ	1) n. of a plant. 2) tobacco	ka lan dza ri ka
ཀ་ལམ་ཀ	place in ancient india	ka lam ka
ཀ་ལམ་བ	med. herb Convulvus repens, Menispermum calamba	ka lam ba
ཀ་ལའ་པ	1) accumulation of excellent properties in 1 place; 2) mythical land where king Visakhayapa ruled; 3) capital of Shambhala; 4) cell of king Maru of the solar dynasty and of king devari of the lunar...	ka la' pa
ཀ་ལི	1) alphabet. 2) consonants [either Tibetan or Sanskrit]. 3) skull. Syn {ka pa la}	ka li
ཀ་ལི་ཀ	1) fruit of the magnolia plant. 2) bud of that flower	ka li ka
ཀ་ལི་ཀ་ཏ	Calcutta	ka li ka ta
ཀ་ལི་རྒྱག་པ	to strike with a stick	ka li rgyag pa
ཀ་ལི་མཐུག་པོ	thick-headed, stubborn	ka li mthug po
ཀཱ་ལཱི་ཡ	the yellow species of sandalwood	kA lI ya
ཀ་ལིང་ཀ	ka ling ka [one of 36 buddhist sacred places 60 yojana SE of Gaya] birth place of Viswantara, a bird	ka ling ka
ཀ་ལིང་ཀའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of Kalinga	ka ling ka'i rgyal po
ཀ་ལིང་ག	a bird	ka ling ga
ཀ་ལིང་འབུད	a bird	ka ling 'bud
ཀ་ལིན་དའི་བུ་མོ	Syn {ka' lin da'i}	ka lin da'i bu mo
ཀ་ལིན་དི	1) Kalindi (wife of Krishna; 2) Yamuna River	ka lin di
ཀ་ལིབ	bullet-mold	ka lib
ཀ་ལེ	saddlecloth	ka le
ཀ་ལེབ	saddle-cloth	ka leb
ཀ་ལོན་སྦུག	Kalimpong	ka lon sbug
ཀ་ཤ	species of grass, saccharum spontaneum, city in ancient india which was twenty yojana in area	ka sha
ཀ་ཤ་ར	hair, mane, filament of lotus/ any vegetable	ka sha ra
ཀ་ཤི	1) Benares. 2) Varanasi. Syn {gsal ldan} 3) muslin tissue produced in Benares	ka shi
ཀ་ཤི་ཀ	1) cotton cloth. 2) the finest Benares muslin	ka shi ka
ཀ་ཤི་ཀ་ཕྲ	benares muslin	ka shi ka phra
ཀ་ཤི་ཀ་ཕྲ་མོ	fine flax, Benares muslin	ka shi ka phra mo
ཀ་ཤི་ཀ་རས	Varanasi muslin	ka shi ka ras
ཀ་ཤི་ཀའི་འབྲུ	linseed oil	ka shi ka'i 'bru
ཀ་ཤི་ཀའི་འབྲུ་སྣུམ	the oil of kashika grain, linseed oil	ka shi ka'i 'bru snum
ཀ་ཤི་ཀའི་རས	benares muslin (which in ancient times was of great repute)	ka shi ka'i ras
ཀ་ཤི་ཀའི་རས་དཀར་པོ	white Varanasi muslin	ka shi ka'i ras dkar po
ཀ་ཤི་པ	native of Varanasi	ka shi pa
ཀ་ཤི་མབ་ལ	a tree	ka shi mba la
ཀ་ཤི་མིར	Kashmir	ka shi mir
ཀ་ཤི་རུ	a place in indian ocean	ka shi ru
ཀ་ཤིམ་བ་ལ	a tree	ka shim ba la
ཀ་ཤིས	Benares muslin	ka shis
ཀ་ཤུ་ཀ	SK black stone used to tell quality of gold	ka shu ka
ཀ་ཤུབས	silk etc ka ba'i shubs	ka shubs
ཀ་ཥེ་ཏྲ་པཱ་ལ	guardian of the realm. Syn {zhing skyong} 4) yaksha in the	ka She tra pA la
རེཏིནུཨེ་ཨོཕ༹་སི྾	armed Mahakala	retinue of Six
ཀ་ཤེའི་མེ་ཏོག	n. of a flower	ka she'i me tog
ཀ་ཤྱ་པ	Kashyapa [n. of a former Buddha. the one immediately preceding Shakyamuni]	ka shya pa
ཀ་བཤད	acrostic, alphabetic poetry	ka bshad
ཀ་རཤ་པ་ན	coin in ancient India	ka rsha pa na
ཀ་ས	1) yes. Sir!. 2) very well. 3) Sir! 4) at your service!	ka sa
ཀ་ས་ལི	SA ku sha li	ka sa li
ཀ་སན་ཀ་ར	city of ancient india	ka san ka ra
ཀ་སུ་ར	amber	ka su ra
ཀ་སུལ	fluting in a column	ka sul
ཀ་སེ་རུ་པའི་གླིང	the island of Kaserupa	ka se ru pa'i gling
ཀ་སེ་རུའི་གླིང	the island of Kaserupa	ka se ru'i gling
ཀ་ཧ་ན་ཡ་ན་ཤི་ལ	an indian pandit	ka ha na ya na shi la
ཀ་ཧི	Syn {kun tu rgyug pa}	ka hi
ཀ་གྷམ་གི	[Skt] med. mineral [gyu yi rigs sngo nag cig, dug sel and good for mchin pa'i tsha ba]	ka gham gi
ཀ་ཨ་ཀ	fruit, ?Ficus religiosa, the bodhi tree, kind of bird	ka a ka
ཀ་ཨ་ཀའ་རི	1) wild rubus plant/ fruit; 2) drug from Solanum jaquini; 3) a thorny stick	ka a ka' ri
ཀ་ཨ་ཀི	[name of] mt	ka a ki
ཀ་ཨ་ཀི་ལ	ka akila [city in ancient sind, lit pillar of grass]	ka a ki la
ཀ་ཨ་བོ་ཨ	ka abo a [indian for town of paro in Bhutan]	ka a bo a
ཀ་ཨ་ཡ	short lance attached to arm by a string and pulled back once thrown	ka a ya
ཀ་ཨི་ལ་ཤ	Mt. Kailash. See {ri bo gangs can}	ka i la sha
ཀ་ཨུ་ཀ	Ka uka [fabulous city said to be 50 yojanas in circumference]	ka u ka
ཀ་ཨུ་ནི	elbow	ka u ni
ཀ་ཨུན་དི་ཉ	{kun shes kun di nya} [one of {lnga sde bzang po}	ka un di nya
ཀ་ཨོ་ར	{gshong}, bowl, basin [for making dough]	ka o ra
ཀྭ	oh!, oh	kwa
ཀྭ་སྐྱོག	pumpkin gourd	kwa skyog
ཀྭ་ཕྲ་རིང	pumpkin gourd	kwa phra ring
ཀྭ་ཙི	melon seeds	kwa tsi
ཀྭ་ཡེ	Cry of hello, exclamation used in calling someone generally a subordinate, oh! hola! hear!	kwa ye
ཀག	Syn {kag ma}	kag
ཀག་ཀ་བ	kagkawa bird [living on the Vulture Peak, gridhrakuta]	kag ka ba
བུ༹ལྟུརེ	peak hill near gaya	vulture
ཀག་ཀྱག་བྱེད	joke, kid around	kag kyag byed
ཀག་གིས	quick[ly], sudden[ly], immeadiate[ly]	kag gis
ཀག་གིས་ལངས	fleeing from harm	kag gis langs
ཀག་གེ་ཀོག་གེ	carelessly, laxly	kag ge kog ge
ཀག་ཉེན་བཟློག་པའི	to repel periodic misfortunes	kag nyen bzlog pa'i
ཀག་ཉེན་བཟློག་པའི་ཉེན་གཏོ	rites for dangers	kag nyen bzlog pa'i nyen gto
ཀག་མ	1) obstacle year [in astrology]. 2) mischief, harm, injury	kag ma
ཀག་སྲི	sri that provoke chronic interruptions	kag sri
ཀང་ཀ	the kangka bird, crane, heron. Feeds on corpses, black head and white back. Syn {kang bya, dur bya}	kang ka
ཀང་ཀ་མུ་ཁ	Kankamukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	kang ka mu kha
ཀང་ཀ་ར	flower growing on vulture peak hill of Gaya, kankara a plant, Alangium hexapetalam	kang ka ra
ཀང་ཀའི་མཆུ	SK sha rngams mthug po'i gting du yod pa'i broken bones 'don byed kyi skam pa	kang ka'i mchu
ཀང་ཀུའོ	Congo	kang ku'o
ཀང་སྒྲ་ཅན	Syn {kang ka}	kang sgra can
ཀང་ཆིན	piano	kang chin
ཀང་དང་ཀིང	a terrifying deity, Rahula	kang dang king
ཀང་དྲ	eating fork	kang dra
ཀང་བྱ	kangka [charnel] bird	kang bya
ཀང་ཚ་རང་ག	place in bengal	kang tsha rang ga
ཀང་ར	cucumber	kang ra
ཀང་ལ	used to indicate alternatives. {'dam ka}	kang la
ཀང་ལིང	program	kang ling
ཀཏ་བུ་ར	camphor	kat bu ra
ཀད	at the verge of	kad
ཀད་ཀྱིས	suddenly	kad kyis
ཀད་ཅིག་ཡུད་ཙམ	a split second	kad cig yud tsam
ཀན	1) side, bank; 2) palate; 3) thorn; 4) illness that seizes by force; 5) (CH) way of hand nadi pressing physicians middle finger patient's mkhrig ma gnon sa'i nadi (6) middle finger; 3) beyond, the ...	kan
ཀན་ཁྲང	(CH small long CH style noodles, bod thug man chi'i sogs sgril byed kyi rgyug hril	kan khrang
ཀན་སྒྲ་ཅན	sound of smacking the tongue on the palate	kan sgra can
ཀན་ཉ་ཀུབ་ཛ	(daughter of the hunchback), city in Ancient India, the capital of which was kanyakubja, the modern kanouj	kan nya kub dza
ཀན་ཏ	ear	kan ta
ཀཎ་ཊ་ཀ་རི	Syn {kan da ka ri}	kaN Ta ka ri
ཀན་ཏུར	(CH gzugs po gan bub bam mgo rting slog pa'i lus rtsal	kan tur
ཀན་ད་ཀ་རི	rubus biflorus buch.-ham., rubus amabilis focke	kan da ka ri
ཀན་ད་ཤང་ཀ	horned couch shell	kan da shang ka
ཀན་ད་ཤམ་མ་ཀ	horned conch shell	kan da sham ma ka
ཀན་ནི་ཀ	district in east of India	kan ni ka
ཀན་མ	pulse felt with middle finger, the middle finger	kan ma
ཀན་ཙི	province, city of buddhist fame in southern india	kan tsi
ཀན་རྩ	1) the pulse felt with / under the middle finger. 2) ladder. 3) stairs	kan rtsa
ཀན་ཚལ	dry vegetables	kan tshal
ཀན་ཚི	kan tshi province /city in S India	kan tshi
ཀན་འོག	(CH nadi under middle finger	kan 'og
ཀན་ཡིའུ	glycerine kan g.yas - 'og nad pa'i lag pa gyas pa'i kan rtsar don lnga'i nang gi mtser pa, snod drug nang gi pho ba'i rtsa yod kan g.yon - 'og nad pa'i lag pa gyon pa'i kan rtsar don lnga'i mchin p...	kan yi'u
ཀན་སུའུ	Kansu Province PRC	kan su'u
ཀན་ལྷོ་བོད་རིགས་རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ	Kan Lho Region [kan su'u zhing chen gyi lho phyogs su yod pa'i bod rigs rang skyong khul zhig ste, 1953lor btsugs, de'i khongs su zha ho rdzong, rma chu rdzong, kluchu rdzong, co ni rdzong, the bo ...	kan lho bod rigs rang skyong khul
ཀབ་ཀོབ	hide, untanned skin, noise produced from stretching of hides	kab kob
ཀབ་ཀོབ་པ	shriveled	kab kob pa
ཀབ་ཚེ་པ	period of famine /privation during the last kalpa	kab tshe pa
ཀབ་ཟ	hilt of a sword, handle	kab za
ཀབ་ཤ	shoe, leather shoes of hindu fashion used by the wealthier tibetans	kab sha
ཀམ་ཀ	heron, crane, SA kang ka	kam ka
ཀམ་ཀུམ	leather, cloths etc wrinkled 'khums tshul	kam kum
ཀམ་ཀེམ	1) again and again opening the eyes wide and closing; 2) appearance, gait	kam kem
ཀམ་པ	SK 1) 1st month; 2) pincers, wrench, pliers	kam pa
ཀམ་པ་ནི	company	kam pa ni
ཀམ་པ་ལི	blanket	kam pa li
ཀམ་པོ་མི་ལི་ནོ	Campomolino which is a village in North Italy	kam po mi li no
ཀམ་པོ་རྩེ	{kam po rtse} [fabulous city of 100 yojanas area]	kam po rtse
ཀམ་པོ་ཛི	{kam po dzi} [one of {yul chen bcu drug} subcontinent (probably Cambodia]	kam po dzi
ཀམ་སྤྱོད་བཟོ་པ	fitter, tool maker	kam spyod bzo pa
ཀམ་བ་ལ	Kambala (n. of a naga-raja)	kam ba la
ཀམ་བི་ལ	tree growing on vulture peak [prob Crinum amarylla]	kam bi la
ཀམ་བོ་ཛ	Cambodia	kam bo dza
ཀམ་བོ་ཛི་ཀ	name of the country, also of the people, as well as of articles tha come from it	kam bo dzi ka
ཀམ་མི་ཀུམ་མི	leather, cloths etc wrinkled 'khums tshul	kam mi kum mi
ཀམ་མེ་ཀེམ་མེ	1) again and again opening the eyes wide and closing; 2) appearance, gait	kam me kem me
ཀམ་མེ་ཀོམ་མེ	appearance, gait	kam me kom me
ཀམ་ཚང	main monastery of Kamtsang Kagyü belonging under Karma Kagyü. See {kar ma kam tshang} 12	kam tshang
ཀའ་ཀ	crow	ka' ka
ཀའ་ཀོ་ལ	a poison	ka' ko la
ཀའ་ཁི་ལ	door, entrance	ka' khi la
ཀའ་རྔ་ཀའ་ལ	{ka' rnga ka' la}, black, a poison	ka' rnga ka' la
ཀའ་ཏ་ཀ	a fish	ka' ta ka
ཀའ་ཏྱ་བུ་མོ	goddess Hma	ka' tya bu mo
ཀའ་ཏྱ་ཡ་ན	Katyayana [R]	ka' tya ya na
ཀའ་ཐོག་དགོན	Kathok monastery [in derge of kham region E Tibet founded by kadampa deshek in 1159]	ka' thog dgon
ཀའ་དྲུ	kadru [wife of kasyapa and mother of nagas]	ka' dru
ཀའ་དྲུའི་བུ	kadraveya, sons of kadru [class of nagas]	ka' dru'i bu
ཀའ་པ་ལི	kapala, skull cup	ka' pa li
ཀའ་པ་ལི་ཏའ་ར	bhattarika kapala-tara [aspect of the goddess tara]	ka' pa li ta' ra
ཀའ་བེ་རི	K beri River [in mysore]	ka' be ri
ཀའ་ཙི་ཀའ	species of bamboo said to emit fire when bent by wind	ka' tsi ka'
ཀའ་ཡའ	kaya, body, {sku}	ka' ya'
ཀའ་རི་ཀ	{tshig le'ur byas pa}, verses	ka' ri ka
ཀའ་རི་ཀའ	K rik, verse SK	ka' ri ka'
ཀའ་རུ	ka' ru temple, Lhasa	ka' ru
ཀའ་ལ་ཀོ	k lako [country beyond Indian Ocean where fine coral grows]	ka' la ko
ཀའ་ལ་སྔོ་བསང	deep blue-black color	ka' la sngo bsang
ཀའ་ལ་ཙ་ཀྲ	Kalachakra	ka' la tsa kra
ཀའ་ལི	30 letters of Tibetan alphabet	ka' li
ཀའ་ལིན་དིའ	1) Kalind, wife of k a; 2) Yamuna River	ka' lin di'
ཀའ་ལིའ་ཡ	yellow sandal-wood	ka' li' ya
ཀའ་ཤ	1) K sha, city in india; 2) grass saccharum spontaneum	ka' sha
ཀའ་ཤི་མབ་ལ	a tree	ka' shi mba la
ཀའ་ཤིའ	tissue produced in Benares	ka' shi'
ཀའ་ཤྱ་པ	Kashyapa	ka' shya pa
ཀའི་ཐོག་པ	old school lineage	ka'i thog pa
ཀྭའི	exclamation, calling, oh!	kwa'i
ཀྭའི་གྲོགས་པོ	Oh friend!	kwa'i grogs po
ཀའུ	watermelon	ka'u
ཀའུ་ཀ་རི	a tree	ka'u ka ri
ཀའུ་རྔ	a poison	ka'u rnga
ཀའུ་བེ་ར	son of Kubera	ka'u be ra
ཀའུ་རིང་བསྲེལ	(CH an herb	ka'u ring bsrel
ཀའུ་ཧིས	name of a chinese minister	ka'u his
ཀྭའུ	melon, gourd, cucumber	kwa'u
ཀའོ་མུ་ཨར་ཁ	Gomulka	ka'o mu ar kha
ཀར	great pain, suffering	kar
ཀར་ཀ་ཊ	Syn {kar-ka ta}	kar ka Ta
ཀར་ཀ་ཏ་ཁྱིམ	constellation of Cancer	kar ka ta khyim
ཀར་ཀ་ཏའི་ཁྱིམ	the house of karkata/Cancer, 4th house of the zodiac, (in Tibet a frog)	kar ka ta'i khyim
ཀར་ཀར	acute pain	kar kar
ཀར་ཀར་ཟུག་ལངས	aching pain	kar kar zug langs
ཀར་ཀེ་ཏ	yellow gem, precious stone	kar ke ta
ཀར་ཀོར	1) devious way of speaking; 2) Phar tshur 'then thogs kyis nar 'gyangs	kar kor
བྱེད་སྟངས་ཅྲོཨོཀེད་དིལལཡ	dallying	byed stangs crooked dilly
ཀར་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་པ	Karma Kagyu	kar bka' brgyud pa
ཀར་སྐྱིན	loan, thing borrowed, money advanced without interest	kar skyin
ཀར་གྱིས་ཟུག	acute pain	kar gyis zug
ཀར་གླིང	Chinese trumpet	kar gling
ཀར་རྒྱལ	a naga	kar rgyal
ཀར་རྒྱུད	abbr of kar ma pa'i rgyud pa	kar rgyud
ཀར་བརྒྱུད	karma bka' brgyud, Karma Kagyu	kar brgyud
ཀར་ང་ཀ་ལ	black poison	kar nga ka la
ཀར་ཆག	register. Syn {dkar chag}	kar chag
ཀར་ཏི་ཀ	Kartika. Syn {hor zla bcu pa} the tenth Hor month	kar ti ka
ཀར་ཏི་སྒང	place in Tibet	kar ti sgang
ཀར་ཎ་ཀ	ear ornament, ear ring. flower of the shape of ear ring. Premna spinosa	kar Na ka
ཀར་ན་ནང	food of pigs	kar na nang
ཀར་ནི་ཀ	bell (symbolizing energy), flower of trees Pterospermum acerifoluim and Cassia fistula [shaped like	kar ni ka
ཨེཨར	ring]	ear
ཀར་ནི་སྒོ་བཞིའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	4-doored Karni Stupa [N of the main temple in Lhasa (built 1368]	kar ni sgo bzhi'i mchod rten
ཀར་མ	1) karma, action, activity, function. 2) the karma [family / ]. Syn {phrin las, 'phrin las} 3) derived from the name of Gyalwang Karmapa	kar ma
ཀར་མ་ཀམ་ཚང	Karma Kagyu school [when Rangjung Dorje went to E Tibet and was meditating tamarisk shrubs on the mountain took the shape of a kam ? the initial of Karmapa; see Born in Tibet p 89 literally "the fa...	kar ma kam tshang
མོཨུནཏཻན་ཏོཨོཀ་ཐེ་ཤཔེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཀམ	the initial of karmapa see \_born in tibet\_ p 89 literally "the family of ka\m"] kar ma kam tshang Karma Kamtshang/Kagyu	mountain took the shape of a kam
ཀར་མ་བཀའ་རྒྱུད	sect of kagyud	kar ma bka' rgyud
ཀར་མ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Karma Kagyu	kar ma bka' brgyud
པོའི་སྡེ	Karma Guru, Tashi Tobgyal Wangpö Deh (1550-1603), tertön	po'i sde
ཀར་མ་གླིང་པ	14th cent. b. 1326 Karma Lingpa, tertön	kar ma gling pa
ཀར་མ་གླིང་པའི་ཞི་ཁྲོ	{kar gling zhi khro} kar ma ngag dbang yon tan rgya mtsho {kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas} (18131899) kar ma ngag dbang bsam gtan ye shes	kar ma gling pa'i zhi khro
རྒྱ་མཚོ	Karma Ngawang Samten Yeshe Gyatso. He is also known as Ngaktrin Rinpoche or Samten Gyatso, the root guru of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	rgya mtsho
ཀར་མ་ངེས་དོན་བསྟན་རྒྱས	fl. 1891; alias {sman sdong mtshams pa rin po che} author of the biography of {sgam po pa bsod nams rin chen} 1079-1153	kar ma nges don bstan rgyas
ཀར་མ་ཆགས་མེད	(17th cent)	kar ma chags med
ཀར་མ་ཆགས་མེད་ར་ག་ཨ་སྱ	Karma Chagmey Raga Asya (1613-1678); a great master of both the Nyingma and 13 Kagyü traditions. Wrote the Instructions For Retreat Practice {ri chos}. An emanation of Guru Rinpoche's disciple Chok	kar ma chags med ra ga a sya
ཀར་མ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	early ruler of Tibet	kar ma chos rgyal
ཀར་མ་གཉིས་པ	2nd head of karmapa sect	kar ma gnyis pa
ཀར་མ་སྙིང་ཐིག	Karma Nyingtig; written by Karmapa Rangjung Dorje	kar ma snying thig
ཀར་མ་བསྟན་སྐྱོང	last of sde ba gtsang pa overthown by Mongol Chief Gushi Khan	kar ma bstan skyong
ཀར་མ་ད་ཀི	the karma dakini	kar ma da ki
ཀར་མ་དུས་གསུམ་མཁྱེན་པ	Tusum Khyenpa the 1st Karmapa	kar ma dus gsum mkhyen pa
ཀར་མ་པ	10th chos dbyings rdo rje, 1604-1674 [tsd]	kar ma pa
ཀར་མ་པ་སྒར་བསངས་ཆེན་མོ	the collected rituals for the offering of bsangs of the karma pa sgar by the 15th rgyal dbang karma pa mkha' khyab rdo rje and other masters	kar ma pa sgar bsangs chen mo
ཀར་མ་པ་བཅོ་ལྔ་པ	Karmapa, the 15th. Khakyab Dorje	kar ma pa bco lnga pa
ཀར་མ་པ་དུས་གསུམ་མཁྱེན་པ	{ka rma pa dus gsum mkhyen pa}	kar ma pa dus gsum mkhyen pa
ཀར་མ་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	Karmapa Deshin Shekpa (1384-1415, the 5th karmapa	kar ma pa de bzhin gshegs pa
ཀར་མ་པ་མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Karmapa Mikyo Dorje	kar ma pa mi bskyod rdo rje
ཀར་མ་པ་ཞྭ་དམར་ནག་གཉིས	Karmapa and Shamarpa	kar ma pa zhwa dmar nag gnyis
ཀར་མ་པ་རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	Karmapa Rangjung Dorje [1284-1339, the 3rd karmapa, disciple of urgyenpa rinchen pal]	kar ma pa rang byung rdo rje
ཀར་མ་པ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	4th Karmapa Rolpe Dorje	kar ma pa rol pa'i rdo rje
ཀར་མ་པ་གསུམ་པ	Karmapa, the 3rd. Rangjung Dorje	kar ma pa gsum pa
ཀར་མ་པའི་རྒྱུད་པ	members of the line of the Karmapa hierarchy	kar ma pa'i rgyud pa
ཀར་མ་དཔལ་འཛིན་མ	dakini in retinue of Yudronma	kar ma dpal 'dzin ma
ཀར་མ་ཕྲིན་ལས་པ	1) Gyalwa Karmapa. 2) Karma Trinley; a great scholar in the Kagyü Lineage; Karma Trinleypa, one of Dakpo Tashi Namgyal's teachers	kar ma phrin las pa
ཀར་མ་འཕྲིན་ལས་པ	(1456-1539)	kar ma 'phrin las pa
ཀར་མ་མ་ལེ	a Mahayoga tantra. Syn {'phrin las kyi rgyud kar ma ma le}	kar ma ma le
ཀར་མ་མ་ལེ་འཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Activity Garland Tantra; A Mahayoga scripture listed here as one of the Six Secret Sections. Sometimes also mentioned as one of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras as the tantra of enlightened activity	kar ma ma le 'phrin las kyi rgyud
ཀར་མ་མི་འགྱུར	1914-1974; alias {skyo brag mi 'gyur}	kar ma mi 'gyur
ཀར་མ་མི་འགྱུར་དབང་རྒྱལ	Karma Mingyur Wangyal, author of a history of the Tertön masters	kar ma mi 'gyur dbang rgyal
ཀར་མ་མི་ཕམ་མགོན་པོ	Karma Mipham Gönpo. disciple of {sna tshogs rang grol} {rtse le rgod tshang pa} b. 1608	kar ma mi pham mgon po
ཀར་མ་བཙན་སྐྱོང	{kar ma btsan skyong} last of sde ba gtsang pa, rulers of u and tsang overethrown by mongol gu shi khan kar ma zhwa dmar ba'i skyes rabs bcu	kar ma btsan skyong
གཉིས	1st 12 Shamarpas	gnyis
ཀར་མ་ཡེ་ཤེས	skyo brag bla ma	kar ma ye shes
ཀར་མ་རབས་བརྒྱད	1st 8 karmapas [dusum khyenpa, karma pakshi, rangjung dorje, rolpey dorje, deshin shekpa, thongwa donden, chodrak gyamtsho, mikyo dorje]	kar ma rabs brgyad
ཀར་མ་རིན་ཆེན་དར་རྒྱས	mkhan po alias karma ratna of lho karma dgon in Tibet; also Khenpo Ratna, {kar ma'i mkhan po rin chen dar rgyas}	kar ma rin chen dar rgyas
ཀར་མ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Karmapa Rolpe Dorje	kar ma rol pa'i rdo rje
ཀར་མ་ཤ་ཏམ	the Sutra on the One Hundred Karmas. Syn {las brgya pa, mdo sde las brgya pa} Name of a sutra on karma.}	kar ma sha tam
ཀར་མ་ཤ་ཨ	{las brgya pa} sutra on karma	kar ma sha a
ཀར་མ་གསང་སྔགས་བསྟན་འཛིན	stag sham vi	kar ma gsang sngags bstan 'dzin
ཀར་མ་བྷ་དྲ	Indian pandit who worked in Tibet	kar ma bha dra
ཀར་མ་ལྷ་སྡིང	n of place	kar ma lha sding
ཀར་མྱང་གི་རྩིས	ka ra'i ro myang lta bu'i rtsis te Nepa du dar ba'i char 'bras sogs brtag thabs	kar myang gi rtsis
ཀར་སྨུག	brown sugar	kar smug
ཀར་རྩིན	n. of a disease	kar rtsin
ཀར་ཚུགས	goblet, wine cup 14	kar tshugs
ཀར་ཚུགས་ཀྱི་སྟེགས	support for a goblet,	kar tshugs kyi stegs
ཝིནེ	cup	wine
ཀར་ཚུགས་རྐང་གསུམ	goblet on three supports	kar tshugs rkang gsum
ཀར་འོང	Syn {kar gyis zug}	kar 'ong
ཀར་ཡོལ	porcelain, china-ware, cup	kar yol
ཀར་ལང་བ	stand up, rise	kar lang ba
ཀར་ལངས་པ	irritation or pain in sickness, exacerbation	kar langs pa
ཀར་ལུགས	the system / tradition / style of Karma Kagyü	kar lugs
ཀར་ཤ	4 kar sha = 1 srang	kar sha
ཀར་ཤ་པ་ཎ	Syn {ka rsha pa na}	kar sha pa Na
ཀར་ཤ་པ་ནི	Karshapani (= Avalokiteshvara	kar sha pa ni
ཀར་ཤའི་འབྲས་བུ	fruit of the tree Terminalia chebula	kar sha'i 'bras bu
ཀར་ཤུབས	cover of a china teacup generally made of iron brass or silver	kar shubs
ཀར་ས	kind of brick tea from CH province Ljang	kar sa
ཀར་སོག	abbr of kar ma pa and sog po	kar sog
ཀར་སྲས་ཀོང་སྤྲུལ	Karsey Kongtrül. The reincarnation of Jamgön Kongtrül the First who was born as the son of Khakyab Dorje, the 15th Karmapa	kar sras kong sprul
ཀར་ཨི་ཀ	ear ornament	kar i ka
ཀལ	load, SA 'gel ba	kal
ཀལ་ཀ་ཊ	Calcutta	kal ka Ta
ཀལ་ཀའ་ཨ	Calcutta	kal ka' a
ཀལ་ཀླ་ཨ	Calcutta	kal kla a
ཀལ་དེ	Caldey which is an island in Wales	kal de
ཀལ་པ	SK kalpa	kal pa
ཀས་ཀོ	chin	kas ko
ཀས་འཆེ་བ	claim	kas 'che ba
ཀས་ཏུ་རི	musk	kas tu ri
ཀས་བླངས	has been promised	kas blangs
ཀས་མ་རི	Kashmari [Ghasmari]. One of the {ma mo brgyad}	kas ma ri
ཀས་མིར	Kashmir	kas mir
ཀི	related to	ki
ཅལླིང	encouraging gsang mthon po	calling
ཀི་ཀང	wild leek, a demigod, naga	ki kang
ཀི་ཀི	war cry, hortative utterance in the invocation of spirits	ki ki
ཀི་ཀི་བསྭོ་བསྭོ	cry in supplicating deities, when praising the divine level, [Shambhala] war cry,	ki ki bswo bswo
ཀི་ཀིའི་སྒྲ	cry of the peacock	ki ki'i sgra
ཀི་ཀིས་རྩེན	blue jay	ki kis rtsen
ཀི་ཀུ	[mark indicating] the vowel "i"	ki ku
ཀི་ཀོང	the vowel "i"	ki kong
ཀི་གུ	[mark indicating] the vowel "i"	ki gu
ཀི་རྒྱག་པ	shout "ki" war cry/ callingencouraging	ki rgyag pa
ཀི་རྒྱུང	mystical invocation signifying lord	ki rgyung
ཀི་སྒྲ	warcry	ki sgra
ཀི་སྒྲ་རྒྱབ་པ	scream	ki sgra rgyab pa
ཀི་སྒྲོག	parrot	ki sgrog
ཀི་བརྒྱབ	shout "ki" war cry/ callingencouraging	ki brgyab
ཀི་ཏ་ཀ	a raksha an insect	ki ta ka
ཀི་བཏབ་པ	shouted "Ki!"	ki btab pa
ཀི་འདེབས་པ	shout "ki" war cry/ callingencouraging	ki 'debs pa
ཀི་ལྡིར	shrill shout, howl	ki ldir
ཀི་ནི་རི་ཏི	1) bones. 2) skeleton	ki ni ri ti
ཀི་པ	number 31; volume marked with the letter {ki}	ki pa
ཀི་མ	7 string khin, zither CH	ki ma
ཀི་ཙི	tickling	ki tsi
ཀི་ཙི་བྱེད་པ	to tickle	ki tsi byed pa
ཀི་ཙེ	1) tickling. 2) to tickle	ki tse
ཀི་རྩི	ticklish	ki rtsi
ཀི་རྩི་བྱེད	tickle	ki rtsi byed
ཀི་ཝན་ཨལ	100 kg.	ki wan al
ཀི་ར་ཏ	Kirata [a tribe of hunters in Nepal]	ki ra ta
ཀི་ར་ན	flower	ki ra na
ཀི་ར་ཨ	a flower	ki ra a
ཀི་རི་ཀ་ར	1) dilatory. 2) dawdling. 3) tardy. 4) slow	ki ri ka ra
ཀི་རི་ཀན	kind of pepper, Piper chaba	ki ri kan
ཀི་རི་ཏ་ཀ	country of the sapta kosi in nepal inhabited by the kirat tribes and called kiranta, a district in mon yul subhimalaya	ki ri ta ka
ཀི་ལ་ཀི་ལ	epithet of shiva, town in ancient india, raksasa king, onomatopoetic for sounds or cries	ki la ki la
ཀི་ལ་ཀི་ལན	revenge, do to others as they do to you	ki la ki lan
ཀི་ལ་ཀི་ལན་རྒྱག	take revenge, do to others as they do to you	ki la ki lan rgyag
ཀི་ལ་ཀི་ལན་སྤྲོད	take revenge, do to others as they do to you	ki la ki lan sprod
ཀི་ལ་ཡ	1) Vajra Kilaya. Syn {rdo rje phur pa}. 2) dagger. 3) pin, nail, wedge	ki la ya
ཀི་ལ་ཡ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelvefold Kilaya Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. Tantras with similar titles are found in Vol. DZA and HA of the Nyingma Gyübum	ki la ya bcu gnyis
ཀི་ལི་ཀི་སྒྲོགས	Kilikil, one of eight charnel grounds	ki li ki sgrogs
ཀི་ལི་ཀི་ལ	1) Syn {rdo rje phur pa}. 2) noisy, clamorous	ki li ki la
ཀི་ལི་ཀི་ལ་སྒྲོགས	1 of 8 charnel grounds	ki li ki la sgrogs
ཀི་ལི་ཀི་ལིའི་སྒྲ་ཅན	1 of the 8 great charnel grounds, clamoring	ki li ki li'i sgra can
ཀི་ལི་ཀི་ལིར་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	ki li ki lir sgra sgrog pa
ཀི་ལི་གི་ལ	noisy, clamorous {rdo rje phur pa}	ki li gi la
ཀི་ལིག་ཞེས་པའི་སྒྲ	click	ki lig zhes pa'i sgra
ཀི་ལོ	kilo	ki lo
ཀི་ལོ་མེ་ཨེར	kilometer 15	ki lo me er
ཀི་ཤའི་འདབ	kind of tree, leaf of the tree achyranthes aspera used in incantations and in sacrifices, medicine, washing linen	ki sha'i 'dab
ཀི་ཧ་ཀ	raksasa, cannibal demon, worm, insect	ki ha ka
ཀི་ཧི་ཧི	1) warrior/ encouraging cry gsang mthon po; 2) uselessly look for something to criticize in others	ki hi hi
ཀི་ལྷང་ལྷང་བཏབ་པ	shouting out, 'Kihi-hi!'	ki lhang lhang btab pa
ཀིང	Syn {ging}	king
ཀིང་ཀ་ར	{ging ka ra}, messenger, attendant	king ka ra
པིཏ	ladle. Gingkara is a corrupt form of the Sanskrit kingkara which in Tibetan is phonya, emissary.	pit
ཀིང་ཀང	(CH vajra	king kang
ཀིང་གཱི་རྩེ	Kalki [n. of the tenth incarnation of Vishnu]	king gI rtse
ཀིང་ཤུ་ཀ	kind of flower, tree butea frondosa, tree bearing pretty flowers	king shu ka
ཀིམ	guitar	kim
ཀིམ་ཁབ	gold brocade	kim khab
ཀིམ་པ	pretty bitter fruit	kim pa
ཀིམ་པ་ཀ	kimp ka (pretty bitter fruit) [cucurbitaceouis trichosanthes palmata ?Cucumis colocynthis]	kim pa ka
ཀིམ་པ་ལ	cymbals	kim pa la
ཀིམ་བ	poisonous cucumber. [makes thirst then death]	kim ba
ཀིམ་བ་ལ	musical instrument, cymbal	kim ba la
ཀིམས་ཤིང་ཀོང་ཅོ	gyim shing kong jo [CH Queen rjes ma]	kims shing kong co
ཀིའུ	1) small red garlic; 2) long distance calling, root, wild leek, kind of onion, ?carrot	ki'u
ཀིར	bskor	kir
ཀིལ	lowly	kil
ཀུ	cry, moan	ku
ཀུ་ཀུ	?iddle	ku ku
ཀུ་ཀུ་སྒྲོག	cuckoo, pheasant (lit. that	ku ku sgrog
ཅྲིཨེས་ཀུ	ku)	cries ku
ཀུ་ཀུ་སྒྲོགས	species of bird, (that cries kuku), grey species of duck	ku ku sgrogs
ཀུ་ཀུ་ཏ	1) sparrow. 2) cock, wild cock	ku ku ta
ཀུ་ཀུ་བུ་ཤི	ti ti ku ku	ku ku bu shi
ཀུ་ཀུ་ར་ཙ	teacher or trainer of dogs, indian buddhist sage who was also called kukuripa	ku ku ra tsa
ཀུ་ཀུ་ར་ཚ	Kukuripa, Kukuraja	ku ku ra tsha
ཀུ་ཀུ་རི་པ	indian buddhist sage	ku ku ri pa
ཀུ་ཀུར་ཏ་པཱ་དཱ	n. of a hill in Magadha	ku kur ta pA dA
ཀུ་ཀུར་ཏ་པའ་དའ	{ku kur ta pa' da'} Hill [in magadha]	ku kur ta pa' da'
ཀུ་ཀེ	gu ge, in ngari province	ku ke
ཀུ་དགའ་ར་བ	monastic garden	ku dga' ra ba
ཀུ་སྒྲ	clamor, noise	ku sgra
ཀུ་སྒྲ་ཏི་རི	vociferations of many people together	ku sgra ti ri
ཀུ་སྒྲ་ཏི་རི་བྱེད་པ	general outcry, hubbub, make a noise	ku sgra ti ri byed pa
ཀུ་ཅན་དན	bad sandalwood	ku can dan
ཀུ་ཅོ	1) clamor of speech, loud meaningless shout[ing]/ babble/ noise; 2) critical/ insulting harsh words [crowd, army, river, dog] noise, clamor, howling, shouting, laughing, roar	ku co
ཀུ་ཅོ་སྒྲོག	make a noise, shout, noise, clamor, howling, shouting, laughing, roar	ku co sgrog
ཀུ་ཅོ་སྒྲོག་པ	to make a noise, shout	ku co sgrog pa
ཀུ་ཅོ་ཅ་ཅོ	babble of a crowd, loud hubbub/babble of many people	ku co ca co
ཀུ་ཅོ་ཅན	noisy, clamorous	ku co can
ཀུ་ཅོ་ཆལ་རྩོལ	bawl out	ku co chal rtsol
ཀུ་ཅོ་ཆལ་རྩོལ་སྨྲ་བ	to speak in a loud voice	ku co chal rtsol smra ba
ཀུ་ཅོ་ཆེ་བ	1) outcry, shout. 2) noisy, clamorous	ku co che ba
ཀུ་ཅོ་དི་རི་རི	big meaningless hubbub of voices, emit a meaningless shout/ loud clamor	ku co di ri ri
ཀུ་ཅོ་དིང་ངེ	loud meaningless babble/ hubbub	ku co ding nge
ཀུ་ཅོ་འདོན་པ	bawl, cry out, roar of a crowd, shout, emit a clamor of speech, howl, roar	ku co 'don pa
ཀུ་ཅོར	place in tibet	ku cor
ཀུ་ཆོར	place in tibet	ku chor
ཀུ་ཏ	story, construction	ku ta
ཀུ་ཏྲ	mtsho ku tra'i 'gram - on the shores of lake Kutra [in Uddiyana]	ku tra
ཀུ་ཐུག་ཐབས་ཟད་པ	Ku dam, ku ba'i dam 'bi, alcoholic beverage of oil etc. blug snod	ku thug thabs zad pa
ཀུ་ཐེར	heavenly breeze	ku ther
ཀུ་དིང་ངེ	loud meaningless babble/ hubbub/ shout	ku ding nge
ཀུ་དིར	hubbub, roar of a crowd, shouting, bawl/ many people talking	ku dir
ཀུ་དིར་བཞད་སྒྲ	sounds of laughter	ku dir bzhad sgra
ཀུ་དེང་ངེ	noise	ku deng nge
ཀུ་དོག	(A; 1) narrow, tight; 2) deficiency, shortage	ku dog
ཀུ་འདེབས་པ	shout, cry out	ku 'debs pa
ཀུ་ན་ལ	1) himalayan peasant; 2) bird on mt meru w beautiful eyes; 3) eldest son of Ashoka	ku na la
ཀུ་ན་ཧ	vessel filled w water	ku na ha
ཀུ་ནི	elbow	ku ni
ཀུ་ནུའི་རྒུན་འབྲུམ	grapes form khu nu	ku nu'i rgun 'brum
ཀུ་པ	Cuba	ku pa
ཀུ་བ	(CH gourd, kind of boat?..Rgya mtsho'i steng gi ku ba bzhin	ku ba
ཀུ་བ་ཁ་མོ	cucumber	ku ba kha mo
ཀུ་བ་ལ	utpala lotus	ku ba la
ཀུ་བ་ལ་མེ	water-lily, jujube plant, zizyphus jujuba and the fruit of that plant	ku ba la me
ཀུ་བ་ལ་མེ་ཏོག	1) water lily; 2) jujube plant/ fruit Zisiphus jujuba	ku ba la me tog
ཀུ་བའི་གཟིངས	sgrung nang gsal ba kva kva fruit bshags nas bzos pa'i boat gourd? boat	ku ba'i gzings
ཀུ་བེ་ར	[Skt] Kubera, Kuvera [1 of the rnam sras rta bdag brgyad, later kuvera, a god of riches and wealth son of {rnam sras}, 1 of 8 keepers of the horses of vaishravana, keeper of N quarter; i avi a chie...	ku be ra
ཀུ་བྱི་མང་ཀེ	B"n deity counterpart of bodhisattva Manjushri	ku byi mang ke
ཀུ་མ་ད	Utpala	ku ma da
ཀུ་མ་ནཱ་པ	camel	ku ma nA pa
ཀུ་མ་ནའ་པ	camel	ku ma na' pa
ཀུ་མ་ར	Syn gzhon nu, young, youthful	ku ma ra
ཀུ་མ་ར་ཏ	[Skt] Kumarata [b 2nd or 3rd century W India follower of reasoning division rigs pa'i rjes 'brang Sautrantika master]	ku ma ra ta
ཀུ་མཱ་ར་ཛི་བ	Kumarajiva. 344-413. Indian master who translated numerous sutras into Chinese	ku mA ra dzi ba
ཀུ་མ་ར་གཞོན་ནུ	young, youth[ful], prince	ku ma ra gzhon nu
ཀུ་མད་ཚལ	fascinating	ku mad tshal
ཀུ་མའ་ར	young, youthful youth, prince	ku ma' ra
ཀུ་མའ་ར་ཛི་བ	Kumarajiva	ku ma' ra dzi ba
ཀུ་མི་ར	crocodile	ku mi ra
ཀུ་མུ་ཏ	night lily	ku mu ta
ཀུ་མུ་ཏྲ	tiara, diadem	ku mu tra
ཀུ་མུ་ད	esculent night-blooming white	ku mu da
ཝཏེར	lily, red lotus	water
ཀུ་མུ་ད་ཚལ	grove of lilies	ku mu da tshal
ཀུ་མུ་ད་ཡི་ནགས་ཚལ	bush or cluster of	ku mu da yi nags tshal
ཀུ་མུ་དའི་གཉེན	the moon (lit. friend of the lotus)	ku mu da'i gnyen
ཀུ་མུ་དའི་ནགས་ཚལ	grove of water-lilies	ku mu da'i nags tshal
ཀུ་མུ་དའི་ཚལ	parterre of lily plants	ku mu da'i tshal
ཀུ་མུ་དི	moonlight	ku mu di
ཀུ་མུ་དིའ	moonlight	ku mu di'
ཀུ་མུཏ	ku mud, SK white lotus, blossoms at night	ku mut
ཀུ་མུད	[Skt] water-lily, white lotus, blossoms at night [Nymphea esculanta 'dam las skyes pa'i me tog cig mtshan mo zla bashar tshe 'dab ma kha 'byed cing, nyin mo nyi ma shar tshe metog kha zum pa zhig y...	ku mud
ཀུ་མུད་གྲོགས	moonbeams	ku mud grogs
ཀུ་མུད་དགའ	partridge [lit. loving the lotus]	ku mud dga'
ཀུ་མུད་དགྲ	the sun (lit. enemy of the lotus, makes it close)	ku mud dgra
ཀུ་མུད་ཅན	SA ku mud tshal	ku mud can
ནིགྷཏ	blooming water-lilies	night
ཀུ་མུད་བཅུད་འཐུངས	partridge [drinks lotus nectar]	ku mud bcud 'thungs
ཀུ་མུད་གཉེན	the moon, the friend of the kumud. Syn {ku mu da'i gnyen}	ku mud gnyen
ཀུ་མུད་ལྡན	cluster of ku mud water lilies	ku mud ldan
ཀུ་མུད་ཕན	moonlight [beneficial to the lotus]	ku mud phan
ཀུ་མུད་ཚལ	cluster of water lilies	ku mud tshal
ཀུ་མུད་བཞད་དུས	night, time of the	ku mud bzhad dus
སྨིལེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནིགྷཏ	blooming water-lily	smile of night
ཀུ་མུད་ཟས་ཅན	partridge, eating lotus	ku mud zas can
ཀུ་མུད་ལོ་མ	medicinal plant of the lily species	ku mud lo ma
ཀུ་མེད་ལོ་མ	wish-fulfilling tree	ku med lo ma
ཀུ་ཙན་ད་ན	inferior sandal-wood	ku tsan da na
ཀུ་ཛ	tree (that which grows on the earth), the planet mars	ku dza
ཀུ་བཞི	the four bodies of a buddha [1) {ngo bo nyid sku} natural truth body 2) {ye shes chos sku}-wisdom truth body 3) {longs sku} complete enjoyment body 4) {sprul sku}-emanation body]	ku bzhi
ཀུ་བཟུང་རྒྱབ་པ	strike/ punch w one's fist	ku bzung rgyab pa
ཀུ་བཟུང་ཅོང་བ	to show a closed fist; see {khu tshur btsangs pa}	ku bzung cong ba
ཀུ་ཡ	dried urine used for diagnosis by physicians [nad can nad med gang gi dri chu'i nang du 'byung zhing chu'i rang mdog gis bsgyur mi gtub pa lbu ba'i dbyibs ltar che chung sro ma tsam sogs mdog shas ...	ku ya
ཀུ་ཡངས	open, free. Syn {bag yangs, gu yangs} 17	ku yangs
ཀུ་ཡངས་དོག	[arch] wide and narrow	ku yangs dog
ཀུ་ར་བ་ཀ	crimson amaranth, purple or yellow barleria	ku ra ba ka
ཀུ་ར་ར	bird, osprey	ku ra ra
ཀུ་རང་ག	deer, antelope	ku rang ga
ཀུ་རའི་ཚིག	joke	ku ra'i tshig
ཀུ་རི་ཀུལ་ལེ	Kurukul goddess [ass w kuvera, goddess of power venerated by first Dalai Lama]	ku ri kul le
ཀུ་རུ	city in ancient india near delhi, also a province	ku ru
ཀུ་རུ་ཀུ་ལེ	Kurukulla, red Tara, for wealth & unhappy lovers, Om Kurukulle Hum Hrih Svaha, SA ku ru kul le	ku ru ku le
ཀུ་རུ་ཀུ་ལླེ	goddess ku ru ku le	ku ru ku lle
ཀུ་རུ་ཀུལ་ལེ	SA ku ru ku le, female buddhist deity associated with kuvera, goddess of might and power, also known as rig byed ma	ku ru kul le
ཀུ་རུ་ཀུལ་ལེ་གསང་སྒྲུབ	secret practice/ sadhana of kurukulle	ku ru kul le gsang sgrub
ཀུ་རུ་ཁ	cross	ku ru kha
ཀུ་རུ་པིན་ད	1) lead; 2) fragrant grass Cyperus rotundus; 3) flower bud; 4) ruby; 5) cinnabar	ku ru pin da
ཀུ་རུ་བན་ད	breed of sheep in subhimalayan countries	ku ru ban da
ཀུ་རུ་བན་དི	breed of sheep in the subHimalayan countries	ku ru ban di
ཀུ་རུ་ར	goose	ku ru ra
ཀུ་རུག	colt of an ass	ku rug
ཀུ་རེ	joking, jest, joke, teasing, kidding, sport, diversion, laughter	ku re
ཀུ་རེ་ཀྱལ་ཀ	laughter	ku re kyal ka
ཀུ་རེ་ཅན	playful	ku re can
ཀུ་རེ་ཐལ་བ	practical joke	ku re thal ba
ཀུ་རེ་དང་རྩེད་མོ	{ma brtags pa'i bab col ku re dang rtsed mo bzhad sogs} unconsidered or insincere words, laughing and joking, playing the fool	ku re dang rtsed mo
ཀུ་རེ་བྱས་པ	mi snyan ku re byas pa - to make crude jokes	ku re byas pa
ཀུ་རེ་བྱེད	kid, sport, joke	ku re byed
ཀུ་རེ་བྱེད་པ	ma 'ongs par ku re byed	ku re byed pa
པ	fooling others	pa
ཀུ་རེ་རྩེ་མཚར	+ gyi tshul du - playfully	ku re rtse mtshar
ཀུ་རེ་ཚིག	jest	ku re tshig
ཀུ་རེ་ལ་དགའ་བ	to take pleasure in teasing	ku re la dga' ba
ཀུ་རེའི་ཆེད	for the purpose of amusement or fun	ku re'i ched
ཀུ་རེས	sport, diversion, jest, horseplay	ku res
ཀུ་ལ་ཀ	a srin mo that lived only on lotus	ku la ka
ཕ༹ློཝེརས་ཨནད་ལོཏུས	honey and resided in the fabulous island of ramamo	flowers and lotus
ཀུ་ལ་གངས་རི	{ku la gangs ri mt in Bhutan	ku la gangs ri
ཀུ་ལ་ལ	phasianus gallus, SA ku na la	ku la la
ཀུ་ལན་ཏ	country inhabited by an aboriginal race of people	ku lan ta
ཀུ་ལའ་ལ	himalayan pheasant	ku la' la
ཀུ་ལིག	key, lock	ku lig
ཀུ་ལུ་ཏ	place situated in SE of kashmir	ku lu ta
ནོཝ་ཅལླེད་ཉུན	ti by tibetans, by hindus kulu	now called nyun
ཀུ་ལུང	herb	ku lung
ཀུ་ལེ་ཏ	frog.	ku le ta
ཀུ་ཤ	SK 1) kusha grass; 2) city of Kusha	ku sha
ཀུ་ཤ་ཅན	n. of Indra	ku sha can
ཀུ་ཤ་ཆེན་པོ	a chakravarti raja	ku sha chen po
ཀུ་ཤ་ན	a flower	ku sha na
ཀུ་ཤ་ན་གར	{ku sha na gar} {rtswa	ku sha na gar
མཆོག་གྲོང	village where buddha passed into nirvana]	mchog grong
ཀུ་ཤ་བན་དྷ	gem which is said to possess the property of curing infectious diseases and plague	ku sha ban dha
ཀུ་ཤ་བན་ལྷ	gem said to cure disease	ku sha ban lha
ཀུ་ཤ་གཙང་བསྲེལ	kusha grass gdan 'og tu bting nas gtsang sbra symbolizing	ku sha gtsang bsrel
ཀུ་ཤ་ལ	piety, holiness	ku sha la
ཀུ་ཤ་ལི	buddhist sage, title of buddhist monk	ku sha li
ཀུ་ཤ་བྷན་དྷ	[Skt] 1) ngan sil bde skyong, med. [precious substance from kusha fruit, curing rims nad]; 2) conch coiling right)	ku sha bhan dha
ཀུ་ཤའི་གྲོང	city of Kusha [where Buddha died]	ku sha'i grong
ཀུ་ཤའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	[Kushinagar] The city of Kusha; the holy place where Buddha Shakyamuni entered into the State of Ultimate Peace of parinirvana; believed to be near Gorakhpur close to the border of India and Nepal	ku sha'i grong khyer
ཀུ་ཤའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བུ	prince of Kusha	ku sha'i rgyal po'i bu
ཀུ་ཤུ	apple	ku shu
ཀུ་ཤུ་ལུ	Syn {ku sha li}	ku shu lu
ཀུ་ཤུ་ཤིང	apple tree	ku shu shing
ཀུ་ཤུའི་ཁམས	a kind of blue flower, SA mthing	ku shu'i khams
ཀུ་ཤེ་ཤ་ཡ	a kind of lotus flower, generic name for water-lily or lotus	ku she sha ya
ཀུ་ས་ར	Indian master invited to Tibet by King Songtsen Gampo	ku sa ra
ཀུ་སཱ་ལའི་ཚོགས་གསོགས	gathering the accumulations of a ku sa la	ku sA la'i tshogs gsogs
ཀུ་སཱ་ལི	1) Syn {dge ba can}. 2) learned. 3) beggar. Syn {ku sha li}. Syn {ku sha li}	ku sA li
ཀུ་ས་ལི་བྷ་དྲ	an indian buddhist sage	ku sa li bha dra
ཀུ་ས་ལིའི་ཚོགས་གསོག	gather the accumulation of a kusali [a chod practice]	ku sa li'i tshogs gsog
ཀུ་སའ་ལའི་ཚོགས་གསོགས	gather the accumulations of a ku sa la [a chod practice]	ku sa' la'i tshogs gsogs
ཀུ་སའ་ལི	sadhu, learned beggar, kusulu	ku sa' li
ཀུ་སུ་མ	gurkum saffron, flower	ku su ma
ཀུ་སུ་ལི	Buddhist exorcist, practice of a Buddhist exorcist	ku su li
ཀུ་སུ་ལིའི་སྤྱོད	practice exorcism	ku su li'i spyod
ཀུ་སུ་ལིའི་སྤྱོད་པ་མཛད་པ	to practice exorcism	ku su li'i spyod pa mdzad pa
ཀུ་སུ་ལུ	kusulu, beggar, bum [type of yogin, doing what comes naturally), shaman natural, uncontrived]	ku su lu
ཀུ་སུ་ལུ་པ	1) kusulu yogin; 2) tantric word for mysticism	ku su lu pa
ཀུ་སུ་ལུའི་འཇོག་སྒོམ	resting meditation of a kusulu	ku su lu'i 'jog sgom
ཀུ་སུ་ལུའི་ལུགས	the kusulu way. [only meditation without analyzing]	ku su lu'i lugs
ཀུ་སུམ་པུ་རིའི་གཙུག་ལ་ཁང	monastery in Kusumapuri (Pataliputra town), where the Second Buddhist Council was held	ku sum pu ri'i gtsug la khang
ཀུ་སུམ་པུ་རིའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	monastery in Kusumapuri [pataliputra town) where the 2nd buddhist council was held]	ku sum pu ri'i gtsug lag khang
ཀུ་སེ་རྫོང	a fort and district in khams	ku se rdzong
ཀུ་སྭོ	cry at time of sacrifice/ war	ku swo
ཀུ་བསྭོ	a shrill war cry	ku bswo
ཀུ་བསྭོ་ཆ་སྒྲ	war cry	ku bswo cha sgra
ཀུ་ཧུ	ku-ku (cry of an Indian cuckoo). 1)	ku hu
རིང	dove. 2) the sound of the khu byug bird	ring
ཀུ་ཧུ་འདོན	poet. the Indian cuckoo	ku hu 'don
ཀུ་ཧུའི་མགྲིན་ལྡན	poet. Indian cuckoo. Syn {ku hu}	ku hu'i mgrin ldan
ཀུ་ཧུའི་སྒྲ་ལྡན	poet. Indian cuckoo, kokila. Syn {ku hu}	ku hu'i sgra ldan
ཀུ་ཧྲང	sheep and goats, traveler, wild ass, SA rkyang	ku hrang
ཀུ་ཨ་ལ	1) himalayan peasant; 2) bird on mt meru w beautiful eyes; 3) eldest son of Ashoka	ku a la
ཀུག	crooked hook, bend, curve, clinch, nod, of beckon, draw water	kug
ཀུག་ཀུག	altogether crooked	kug kug
ཀུག་ཀུག་བྱེད་པ	to bend, curve	kug kug byed pa
ཀུག་པ་ཉིད	crookedness	kug pa nyid
ཀུག་བྱེད	end	kug byed
ཀུག་རྩེ	cuckoo	kug rtse
ཀུང་ཀར	1) Turks, the Sultan of Turkey. 2) title of the Turkish sultan	kung kar
ཀུང་ཀུ་ན	possibly the province of konkan in western india	kung ku na
ཀུང་ཀུ་མ	saffron	kung ku ma
ཀུང་ཀུ་མམ	SK saffron	kung ku mam
ཀུང་ཀུང	whisper	kung kung
ཀུང་ཀུམ	saffron	kung kum
ཀུང་ཁང	(CH sbrag khang or sbrag tshugs te gzhung don mi sna dang sbrag yig skyel mkhan gyi gnas tshang	kung khang
ཀུང་ཁྲེང་ཧྲི	engineer	kung khreng hri
ཀུང་ཏུང	Kwangtung Province	kung tung
ཀུང་གཞི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	undecided allground, neutral alaya	kung gzhi lung ma bstan
ཀུང་ལི	millimeter	kung li
ཀུང་སི	company	kung si
ཀུང་གསལ	sky, heaven	kung gsal
ཀུང་ཧྲི	commune	kung hri
ཀུང་ཧྲེ	commune	kung hre
ཀུན	totality, all, whole, entire, universal (aspect of basic cause situation)	kun
ཨེབེ༹ར	omni, each, whole, round about, wholly, thoroughly, {kun tu}	ever
ཀུན་ཀྱང	everywhere, in all places, at all times. 2)can also just mean 'all' where {kyang} can be verse-padding	kun kyang
ཀུན་ཀྱང་གྲུབ	everything is accomplished	kun kyang grub
ཀུན་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	the supreme teacher	kun kyi bla ma
ཀུན་དཀའ་ར་བ	[monastic] garden, grove	kun dka' ra ba
ཀུན་དཀར	virtuous	kun dkar
ཀུན་དཀྱིལ	center of all	kun dkyil
ཀུན་དཀྲིས	misery (that which binds all), moral corruption, general corruptness, sin, fetter	kun dkris
ཀུན་དཀྲིས་བརྒྱད	{khro ba dang 'chab pa}, the 8 fetters [1 {rmugs pa}-) two {gnyid) three {rgod pa}-) {'gyod pa}-) {phrag dog}-) {ser sna}-) {ngo tsha med pa}-) {khrel med pa} zhi gnas dang btang snyoms kyi dus su ...	kun dkris brgyad
ཀུན་དཀྲིས་བཅུ	the ten fetters [kun dkris brgyad + khro ba dang 'chab pa]	kun dkris bcu
ཀུན་དཀྲིས་བཞི	The four ever-binding factors, the four fetters [1 {nyes dmigs mi blta ba} not regarding the breach as wrong two {spyod 'dod ma log pa} not wishing to avoid it in future three {dga' mgu byid ba} re...	kun dkris bzhi
ཀུན་བཀྲམ	strewn about, spread over	kun bkram
ཀུན་སྐྱབས	refuge of all beings	kun skyabs
ཀུན་སྐྱབས་གླིང	{kun skyabs gling} [palace of the Tashi Lama in Shigatse [park of protection to all]	kun skyabs gling
ཀུན་སྐྱེ	grows everywhere	kun skye
ཀུན་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད	the all-maker, (met heart, mind, consciousness, imagination, lit, all-producing	kun skyed par byed
ཀུན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	the all-maker, (met heart, mind, consciousness, imagination, lit, all-producing	kun skyed byed
ཐེ་ཨལལ	maker, the heart, mind, consciousness. 2) imagination, lit, allproducing	the all
ཀུན་སྐྱོ་བ	become penitent, thoroughly regret	kun skyo ba
ཀུན་སྐྱོང་མྱོས་པ	the elephant of the gods	kun skyong myos pa
ཀུན་སྐྱོང་མྱོས་པའི་སྣ	the mad elephant of the gods	kun skyong myos pa'i sna
ཀུན་སྐྱོད	agitated, moved, agitation	kun skyod
ཀུན་སྐྱོབ་གླིང	n. of a monastery in Tibet	kun skyob gling
ཀུན་སྐྱོབས	fire (lit. all-devouring)	kun skyobs
ཀུན་བརྐོས	tank, well	kun brkos
ཀུན་བསྐོར	surrounding	kun bskor
ཀུན་བསྐྱེད	multitude, great assembly	kun bskyed
ཀུན་ཁེབས	all covering; 1) cover 2) sky 3) lord of death]	kun khebs
ཀུན་ཁྱབ	all-pervading, pervades everything, omnipresent, all-pervasive, universal, that which encompasses all things, void space, sky, four quarters of heaven, he that takes away misery, all- pervading ene...	kun khyab
ཨལལ	pervasive, all-permeating, widespread, omnipresent factor, universal, embracing all, all-encompassing. Syn {kun tu khyab pa}. 2) the sky. 3) epithet of the lord of Death. 4) the ultimate reality or...	all
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་དོན་གཞན་བཀོད་པ	presenting a universally-applying reason [don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan gyi nang tshan zhig ste bsgrub bya grags che ba'i dngos po'i gnas tshul khyad par ba zhig dam bcar bkod nas, de'i sgrub byed kyi ...	kun khyab kyi don gzhan bkod pa
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཏུ	universally, generally	kun khyab tu
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	all-pervasive great bliss	kun khyab bde ba chen po
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་འདེམས་དབང	universal suffrage	kun khyab 'dems dbang
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ནམ་མཁའ	{kun khyab nam mkha' las yangs pa} more immense	kun khyab nam mkha'
ཐན་ཐེ་ཨལལ	encompassing sky	than the all
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་སྣང་བ	manifests in all and pervades all	kun khyab snang ba
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་པ	all-pervading	kun khyab pa
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་དཔལ་མོ	sky, a goddess	kun khyab dpal mo
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་སེར་པོ	a yellow pigment (prepared from the bile of a cow)	kun khyab byed ser po
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་མུན་པ	great or universal darkness	kun khyab mun pa
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཚད་མ་གསུམ	three kinds of universally valid cognition [scripture, inference, perception)	kun khyab tshad ma gsum
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་བཞིན་སྟོན	epith. of Garuda, king of the birds	kun khyab bzhin ston
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་རང་བཞིན	universality, generality	kun khyab rang bzhin
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་རླུང་འཕྲིན་ཁང	radio station	kun khyab rlung 'phrin khang
ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ལུས་མེད	sky	kun khyab lus med
ཀུན་ཁྱི་ཁུར་ཅན	leader	kun khyi khur can
ཀུན་ཁྱི་མ	epith. of the goddess Uma	kun khyi ma
ཀུན་ཁྱེབས	1) all-encompassing cover. a)sky. b) darkness. 2) cover	kun khyebs
ཀུན་ཁྲུགས	agitated, anxious	kun khrugs
ཀུན་དཁའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Kunga Gyaltsen	kun dkha' rgyal mtshan
ཀུན་དཁའ་བོ	Ananda	kun dkha' bo
ཀུན་དཁའ་རྭ་བ	grove, [monastic] garden	kun dkha' rwa ba
ཀུན་དཁའ་རྭ་བ་པ	monastic garden attendant	kun dkha' rwa ba pa
ཀུན་དཁའ་རྭབ	grove, [monastic] garden	kun dkha' rwab
ཀུན་མཁྱེན	thoroughly trained (scholar)	kun mkhyen
བེཨིང་ཨལལ	knowing. 3) thoroughly versed. 4) the Omniscient One. [Buddha]. epithet of Buddha on highest order of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, knower of all things	being all
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཀུན་གཟིགས	omniscient and	kun mkhyen kun gzigs
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཀློང་ཆེན	religious teacher of the rnying ma school who founded a sect of his own called kun dga' lugs	kun mkhyen klong chen
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཀློང་ཆེན་པ	omniscient Longchenpa	kun mkhyen klong chen pa
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས	the omniscient Longchen Rabjam; 13081363. A major lineage master and writer of the Nyingma lineage. Syn {klong chen rab 'byams}	kun mkhyen klong chen rab 'byams
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་བརྒྱུད་པའི་གཞུང	the writings of Omniscient Longchenpa and his lineage	kun mkhyen brgyud pa'i gzhung
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཆེན་པོ	{klong chen rab 'byams} the great omniscient 1	kun mkhyen chen po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མེད་འོད་ཟེར་ཀློང་ཆེན་པ་དྲི་མེད་འོད་ཟེར	13081363	kun mkhyen chen po dri med 'od zer klong chen pa dri med 'od zer
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the omniscient king of dharma, {klong chen rab 'byams}	kun mkhyen chos kyi rgyal po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཆོས་སྐུ་འོད་ཟེར	the tibetan	kun mkhyen chos sku 'od zer
ཧིཨེརརཆ་ཨོཕ༹་ས	skya who first shaped the mongolian alphabet kun mkhyen jo nang tA ra na thA kun dga'	hierarch of sa
སྙིང་པོ	Jetsün Taranatha, Kunga Nyingpo: b1575	snying po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་འཇིགས་མེད་གླིང་པ	the omniscient Jigmey Lingpa. See {'jigs med gling pa}	kun mkhyen 'jigs med gling pa
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་རྗེ་བཙུན	All-knowing Lord	kun mkhyen rje btsun
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་རྗེ་བཙུན་པ	the omniscient jetsun	kun mkhyen rje btsun pa
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཉི་མའི་གཉེན	the allknowing kinsman of the sun [shakyamuni, adityabandhu]	kun mkhyen nyi ma'i gnyen
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཉིད	all-knowledge	kun mkhyen nyid
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་དྲི་མེད་འོད་ཟེར	Syn {klong chen rab 'byams pa}	kun mkhyen dri med 'od zer
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	Künkhyen Pema Karpo (1527-1592), the fourth Drukchen {'brug chen}. The omniscient Pema Karpo	kun mkhyen pad ma dkar po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་སྤྱན	all-knowing eyes, eyes of omniscience	kun mkhyen spyan
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་བུ་རམ་ཤིང་པ	The Omniscient Molasses Tree One	kun mkhyen bu ram shing pa
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་བླ་མ	1) Omniscient Master. 2) often used for Longchenpa	kun mkhyen bla ma
པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་དཔལ་བཟང་པོ	See {'jam dbyangs bzhad pa} kun mkhyen bla ma 'jam dbyangs bzhad	pa rdo rje dpal bzang po
པའ་རྡོ་རྗེ་དཔལ་བཟང་པོ	{kun mkhyen bla ma 'jam dbyangs bzhad pa' rdo rje dpal bzang po}	pa' rdo rje dpal bzang po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཟི་བརྗིད	Syn Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo kun mkhyen bla ma rdo rje gzi brjid Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo kun mkhyen bla ma rdo rje gzi brjid rtsal Künkhyen Lama Dorje Ziji Tsal. Same as Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	kun mkhyen bla ma rdo rje gzi brjid
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་དབྱིག་གཉེན	a lama who was given the religious title of kun mkhyen, 1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug	kun mkhyen dbyig gnyen
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཡེ་ཤེས	omniscient wisdom	kun mkhyen ye shes
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་རོང་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ	all knowing rongtong chenpo	kun mkhyen rong ston chen po
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་སངས་རྒྱས	omniscient Buddha	kun mkhyen sangs rgyas
ཀུན་མཁྱོགས	speed, flurry. speedily	kun mkhyogs
ཀུན་འཁེབས	the sky, heaven, space, darkness	kun 'khebs
ཀུན་འཁོར	1) abbr. of {kun bzang 'khor lo}. 2) name of a mantra in the name of Samantabhadra	kun 'khor
ཀུན་འཁྱམས	wanderer, beggar, mendicant who goes to every door for alms	kun 'khyams
ཀུན་འཁྱིལ	burning round, revolution	kun 'khyil
ཀུན་འཁྲུགས	agitated, anxious	kun 'khrugs
ཀུན་འཁྲུལ	blunder, illusion, all-delusive,	kun 'khrul
ཀུན་གང་བ	all-filling	kun gang ba
ཀུན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ	SA kun dkyil	kun gyi dkyil
ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག	name of the past life of Shakyamuni in which he practiced the paramita of generosity 21 kun gyi rje yin kyang bzod pa dang ldan	kun gyi mchog
ཀུན་གྱི་ཐོག་མར	first of all	kun gyi thog mar
ཀུན་གྱི་ཐོས་པ་ལ	in the hearing of all	kun gyi thos pa la
ཀུན་གྱི་མཐའ	the end or termination of all	kun gyi mtha'
ཀུན་གྱི་མཐུན་སྣང	the shared perception/ common experience of everyone	kun gyi mthun snang
ཀུན་གྱི་དོན	the meaning/ goal of all	kun gyi don
ཀུན་གྱི་གནས	basis, ground (of all miseries), the ground of misery are disease, old age and death	kun gyi gnas
ཀུན་གྱི་སྤྱི་གཞི	universal basis	kun gyi spyi gzhi
ཀུན་གྱི་བྱེད་པོ	the creator / doer of all.	kun gyi byed po
ཀུན་གྱི་བྱེད་པོ་བླ་མ་ཡིན	the teacher is the one who accomplishes everything kun gyi blor mi shong ba tsam gyi mchod	kun gyi byed po bla ma yin
སྦྱིན་བྱས་སོ	decided to make a magnificent burnt offering	sbyin byas so
ཀུན་གྱི་རྩ་བ	root/ source of everything [wisdom, divine knowledge]	kun gyi rtsa ba
ཀུན་གྱི་གཟའ་བ	eating in company with friends, feast	kun gyi gza' ba
ཀུན་གྱི་གཟུགས	incarnated	kun gyi gzugs
ཀུན་གྱི་བཤེས་གཉེན	adviser to everyone	kun gyi bshes gnyen
ཀུན་གྱིས་བཀུར་བ	respected/ venerated by all	kun gyis bkur ba
ཀུན་གྱིས་བཀུར་བའ་སྡེ	sde respected by all	kun gyis bkur ba' sde
ཀུན་གྱིས་བཀུར་བའི་གནས	someone respected by everyone, very venerable	kun gyis bkur ba'i gnas
ཀུན་གྱིས་འགྲན་ཟླ་དང་བྲལ་བ	were free from hostility	kun gyis 'gran zla dang bral ba
ཀུན་གྱིས་མཐོང་བ	for all to see	kun gyis mthong ba
ཀུན་གྱིས་ཕྱག་བྱས	honored by all	kun gyis phyag byas
ཀུན་གྱིས་ཡིད་མི་འོང་བ	lack of sympathy from everyone	kun gyis yid mi 'ong ba
ཀུན་གྲགས	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po	kun grags
ཀུན་གྲགས་མ	Syn {tshe ring ma}	kun grags ma
ཀུན་གྲུབ	Syn {don thams cad grub pa}. Siddhartha	kun grub
ཀུན་གྲུབ་ཟླ་བ	house of Libra {srang gi khyim}, about October, {zla ba dag pa}, {ston zla tha chung} the last month of autumn.]	kun grub zla ba
ཀུན་གྲུབ་ལུས་རྩལ་པ	all-around athlete	kun grub lus rtsal pa
ཀུན་གྲོལ་གྲགས་པ	{rig 'dzin} b. 1700; Bönpo tertön	kun grol grags pa
ཀུན་གྲོས་མཐུན་ནས	all agreed to	kun gros mthun nas
ཀུན་གླིང	SA kun bde gling, the place or grove of all happiness, 1 of 4 royal monasteries of lhasa	kun gling
ཀུན་དག་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Sakya Pandita Kunga Gyaltsen	kun dga rgyal mtshan
ཀུན་དག་སྙིང་པོ	kunga nyingpo [10921158 1 of the five sakya gongma, son of khon konchok gyalpo]	kun dga snying po
ཀུན་དག་པོ	Ananda	kun dga po
ཀུན་དགའ	1) Ananda, rejoicing, joy, liked by all. [the 48'th year. Male Wood Tiger]. 2) abbr. of {kun dga' rva ba}. 3) Kunga. common name	kun dga'
ཀུན་དགའ་གྲོལ་མཆོག	jo nang rje btsun kun dga' grol mchog	kun dga' grol mchog
ཀུན་དགའ་དགེ་ལེགས	lama of dar thang monastery who helped Dr. G	kun dga' dge legs
ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{kun dga' rgyal mtshan} [sa skya pandi ta'i mtshan dngos]	kun dga' rgyal mtshan
ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དཔལ་བཟང་པོ	Sakya Pandita (1182-1251)	kun dga' rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po
ཀུན་དགའ་ཅན	joyous	kun dga' can
ཀུན་དགའ་སྙིང་པོ	Anandagarbha [sa skya gong ma lnga'i gras, 'khon dkonmchog rgyal po'i sras, rab byung gnyis pa'i chu pho sprel lasku 'khrungs shing, rang lo nyi shu pa nas drug cu re bdun gyibar gdan sa sa skya dg...	kun dga' snying po
ཀུན་དགའ་སྙིང་པོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	Anandagarbha by name	kun dga' snying po zhes bya ba
ཀུན་དགའ་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	sde gzhung	kun dga' bstan pa'i nyi ma
ལུང་རིག་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	(1906-?)	lung rig sprul sku
ཀུན་དགའ་དོན་གྲུབ	Kunga Döndrub. [popular name for money or gold]. lit. bestowing all happiness and wishes	kun dga' don grub
ཀུན་དགའ་ལྡན	joyous	kun dga' ldan
ཀུན་དགའ་ནོར	lake in mongolia, probably the gonganor	kun dga' nor
ཀུན་དགའ་ནོར་བུ	bag for weighing cereals	kun dga' nor bu
ཀུན་དགའ་དཔལ་འབྱོར	'brug chen ii, 14281476	kun dga' dpal 'byor
ཀུན་དགའ་བ	kind, friendly 22	kun dga' ba
ཀུན་དགའ་བ་འཛིན་པ	a precious article or gem	kun dga' ba 'dzin pa
ཀུན་དགའ་བོ	personal attendant and cousin of buddha	kun dga' bo
ཀུན་དགའ་བློ་གྲོས	sa skya gong ma (1729-1783)	kun dga' blo gros
ཀུན་དགའ་བློ་གྲོས་སྙིང་པོ	Kunga Lodrö Nyingpo; Drigung master; reincarnation of {grub thob snye mo ba bsam gtan phun tshogs}	kun dga' blo gros snying po
ཀུན་དགའ་འབར	a son of kun dga' snying po, 1 of the chiefs of sa-skya who visited india to study buddhism	kun dga' 'bar
ཀུན་དགའ་འབུམ་པ	Kunga Bumpa, female master, one of the 100 main tertöns	kun dga' 'bum pa
ཀུན་དགའ་མོ	Kungamo. The wisdom dakini who conferred empowerment upon Guru Rinpoche. She is also known as the dakini Leykyi Wangmo, Nyida Ngödrub or as Guhyajnana, the chief of wisdom dakinis	kun dga' mo
ཀུན་དགའ་མཚོ	Kunga Lake [mtsho sngon zhing chen gyi mtsho sho bod rigs rang skyong khul kung ho rdzong khongs su yod pa'i mtsho zhig]	kun dga' mtsho
ཀུན་དགའ་མཛད	satisfaction	kun dga' mdzad
ཀུན་དགའ་འཛིན་པ	{kun dga' 'dzin pa mt in Uttarakuru, N continent	kun dga' 'dzin pa
ཀུན་དགའ་གཞོན་ནུ	coriander	kun dga' gzhon nu
ཀུན་དགའ་འོད་ཟེར	{kun dga' 'od zer}	kun dga' 'od zer
ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ	pleasure grove; the place in a temple hall, where the representations of body, speech and mind (sku gsung thugs rten gyi bzhugs sa) are arranged. Syn. lha khri - seat of the gods	kun dga' ra ba
པླེཨསུརེ	grove containing groups of trees, flower beds, etc	pleasure
ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ་པ	1) caretaker of a garden [for monks etc], student; 2) disciple, pupil	kun dga' ra ba pa
ཀུན་དགའ་རྭ་བ	Syn {kun dga' ra ba}; grove; A garden or a fenced courtyard in a monastery	kun dga' rwa ba
ཀུན་དགའ་རིན་ཆེན	sa skya sngags 'chang	kun dga' rin chen
ཆེན་མོ	(1517-1584) - his biography is {sngags 'chang chen mo kun dga' rin chen rnam thar}	chen mo
ཀུན་དགའ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ii, 1617-1676	kun dga' lhun grub
ཀུན་དགའི་གོས	(met best/ excellent garments	kun dga'i gos
ཀུན་དགའི་དབང་མོ	your ladyship, (lha lcam class	kun dga'i dbang mo
ཀུན་དགའི་ར་བ	Syn {kun dga' ra ba}	kun dga'i ra ba
ཀུན་དགའོ་པོ	Ananda	kun dga'o po
ཀུན་མགྱོགས	speed, at full speed	kun mgyogs
ཀུན་འགེངས་པ	epith. of Vishnu	kun 'gengs pa
ཀུན་འགེབས	sky (lit. all-covering). Syn {kun khebs} the All-coverer, the sky	kun 'gebs
ཀུན་འགོག	1) cessation. Syn {'gog pa}. 2) that which hinders [physical and moral grown]	kun 'gog
ཀུན་འགོངས	all-sustaining	kun 'gongs
ཀུན་འགྱེད	epith. of Brahma	kun 'gyed
ཀུན་འགྲིལ་ནས	all in a heap, all together	kun 'gril nas
ཀུན་འགྲུབ	1) all powerful; 2) universal, all around	kun 'grub
ཀུན་འགྲོ	sky, snake; omnipresent [factor], universal, ever-present, allaccompanying, always accompanying, following all cognitive acts, epithet of Mahasvara, serpent [see {nyon mongs kun 'gro}	kun 'gro
ཀུན་འགྲོ་ལྔ	the five ever-present [mental states]. 1) {sems pa}. - apprehension / intention. 2) {tshor ba} sensation. 3) {'du shes}. perception / recognition. 4) {yid la byed pa}. attention. 5) {reg pa}. contact	kun 'gro lnga
ཀུན་འགྲོ་བདག་ཉིད	1) the lord of all beings, the buddha; 2) the nature of all beings	kun 'gro bdag nyid
ཀུན་འགྲོ་འབད	be assiduous	kun 'gro 'bad
ཀུན་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུ	ever-present/ omnipresent cause	kun 'gro'i rgyu
ཀུན་འགྲོའི་དྲི་ཅན	good path	kun 'gro'i dri can
ཀུན་འགྲོའི་ལམ	the path which leads everywhere	kun 'gro'i lam
ཀུན་འགྲོའི་སྲོལ	road, passage	kun 'gro'i srol
ཀུན་རྒྱལ	Syn {kun tu rgyal ba}	kun rgyal
ཀུན་རྒྱུ	the impetus for everything	kun rgyu
ཀུན་སྒྲིབ	serious hindrance	kun sgrib
ཀུན་སྒྲོགས	cry, sound	kun sgrogs
ཀུན་སྒྲོལ	all-liberating	kun sgrol
ཀུན་དངོས	sangs rgyas kun dngos - embodiment of all Buddhas	kun dngos
ཀུན་ཅིངས	that pains or ties or entangles all at all times, god of love	kun cings
ཀུན་བཅིངས	epith. of the god Kama (lit. that which entangles all)	kun bcings
ཀུན་བཅུག་པ	SA kun tu bcug pa	kun bcug pa
ཀུན་བཅོམ	vanquished, suppressed, fully put down, vanquisher or killer of all, lord of death, a son of a brahman	kun bcom
ཀུན་ཆུབ	buddha. all-understanding, wisdom	kun chub
ཀུན་ཆུབ་པ	he that has comprehended everything	kun chub pa
ཀུན་ཆུབ་བ	all-accomplished one, perfect, adept, prajna that realizes everything	kun chub ba
ཀུན་ཆོས་གཙང་བ	buddhist sect with a few monasteries bordering on yunnan	kun chos gtsang ba
ཀུན་ཆོས་བཙང་བ	Buddhist sect with a few monasteries on the Yunnan border	kun chos btsang ba
ཀུན་མཆོག་ལྡན	1) Syn {dus kyi 'khor lo}; abbr. of {rnam pa kun gyi mchog dang ldan pa}. Syn {stong pa nyid}	kun mchog ldan
ཀུན་འཆིངས	basic bondage	kun 'chings
ཀུན་འཇིགས	fright, terror	kun 'jigs
ཀུན་འཇུག	bringing together, in harmony w all	kun 'jug
ཀུན་འཇུག་པ	misery, suffering	kun 'jug pa
ཀུན་འཇུག་ཕོ་ཉ	messenger of harmony, that which harmonizes or makes everything agreeable, sugar	kun 'jug pho nya
ཀུན་འཇུག་ཕོ་ན	sugar	kun 'jug pho na
ཀུན་འཇོ	seated, sitting	kun 'jo
ཀུན་འཇོམས	that by which everything can be subdued: a)epith. of Indra, monsterfish (with body like a Hill and furnished with eighteen heads); b) yoga. a Hill and furnished with eighteen heads); b) yoga	kun 'joms
ཀུན་འཇོམས་མཆོག	all-conquering supreme elixir	kun 'joms mchog
ཀུན་རྗེས་འབྱུང	Ricinus communis	kun rjes 'byung
ཀུན་རྗོབ་བདེན་པ	relative truth	kun rjob bden pa
ཀུན་རྗོབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	relative bodhicitta	kun rjob byang chub kyi sems
ཀུན་རྗོབ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse relative bodhicitta	kun rjob sems bskyed
ཀུན་བརྗོད	1)order, command, advice. 2) addressing	kun brjod
ཀུན་བརྗོད་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	(spiritual) miracles based on thorough verbal expression	kun brjod pa'i cho 'phrul
ཀུན་ཉོན	affliction; samklesha, disturbance. Syn {kun nas nyon mongs pa}; afflictive emotionality; emotionally afflicted/ tainted	kun nyon
ཏཻནཏེད	in an all-consuming manner	tainted
ཀུན་ཉོན་འཁོར་བའི་ཕྱོགས	affliction, the samsaric aspect	kun nyon 'khor ba'i phyogs
ཀུན་ཉོན་འཁོར་བིའ་ཕྱོགས	samsara, the aspect of the affliction of the kleshas	kun nyon 'khor bi' phyogs
ཀུན་ཉོན་གྱི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five afflicted faculties [tshor ba lnga]	kun nyon gyi dbang po lnga
ཀུན་ཉོན་དང་རྣམ་བྱང	affliction and perfection/ total purification	kun nyon dang rnam byang
ཀུན་ཉོན་རྣམ་བྱང	affliction and perfection	kun nyon rnam byang
ཀུན་ཉོན་རྣམ་བྱང་གཉིས	both affliction and perfection kun nyon rnam byang gnyis ka'i ngo bor	kun nyon rnam byang gnyis
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་གཞན་དབང	shes rig dag pas bag chags kyis kha ma bsgyur bas so	ma grub pa'i gzhan dbang
ཀུན་ཉོན་ཕྱོགས	afflictions, samkleshas	kun nyon phyogs
ཀུན་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	all-encompassing fettering passions	kun nyon mongs pa
ཀུན་ཉོན་གསུམ	the three afflictions. Klesha, karma, productions / sufferings	kun nyon gsum
ཀུན་མཉམ	universal equality	kun mnyam
ཀུན་སྙིང	{kun dga' snying po}	kun snying
ཀུན་སྙོམས	equal	kun snyoms
ཀུན་ཏ	from where?, one from an unknown place, come from where?	kun ta
ཀུན་ཏིང	samadhi of illumination; abbr. of {kun tu snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin}. one of {ting nge 'dzin gsum}	kun ting
ཀུན་ཏུ	1) all the time, at all times, always, ever. 2) in / at / to all places, every- 24 where. 3) emphasizes the verb it precedes, very, completely. fully. excessively. etc. 4) in any way. 5) before, fo...	kun tu
ཀུན་ཏུ་དཀྲིས་པ	Syn {kun dkris}	kun tu dkris pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཀྲམ	SA kun bkram	kun tu bkram
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཀྲམ་པ	spread over, strewn about	kun tu bkram pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྐྱལ་བྱེད	sins	kun tu rkyal byed
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐེམ་བྱེད	a) fire. b) god of fire	kun tu skem byed
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྱེ	SA kun skye	kun tu skye
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྱེད་པ	basic creator	kun tu skyed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྱོ་བ	SA kun skyo ba	kun tu skyo ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྱོད་པ	agitated, pervaded with agitation	kun tu skyod pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྱོབ	universal protector	kun tu skyob
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྐྲག	scary, terrifying	kun tu skrag
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྐྱེད	mind, consciousness, imagination (lit. all producing)	kun tu bskyed
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཁྱབ་འདུག་པ	spread / carry everywhere	kun tu khyab 'dug pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཁྱབ་པ	1) universal, allpervading; 2) epithet of Buddha	kun tu khyab pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཁྱོག་པ	bent, crooked	kun tu khyog pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཁོར་བ	always spinning	kun tu 'khor ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཁོར་བའི་རྒྱན	snyan ngag gi sgra rgyan yi ge'i sgra 'dra bas tshig rkang brtsegs pa'i tshigs bcad sgor mo'am, gru bzhi'i dbyibs can gyi phyogs kun tu 'khor bar bkod pa'[i rgyan zhig	kun tu 'khor ba'i rgyan
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཁྱམས	wandering everywhere	kun tu 'khyams
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཁྲུགས	convulsed, convulsive, subject to agitation and shaking	kun tu 'khrugs
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཁྲུགས་པ	convulsing	kun tu 'khrugs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་གང་བ	totally filled	kun tu gang ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གས	the fully blown, an autumn daisy	kun tu gas
ཀུན་ཏུ་གོ་བ	well-known, celebrated	kun tu go ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གྲོལ	liberated	kun tu grol
ཀུན་ཏུ་དགའ	delightful	kun tu dga'
ཀུན་ཏུ་དགའ་བ་འགྱུར་བའི་གླིང	fabulous continent 1000 mi beyond w ocean	kun tu dga' ba 'gyur ba'i gling
ཀུན་ཏུ་དགའ་བར་གྱུར་བའི་གླིང	continent situated 5000 yojana beyond the western ocean of india where there are lions that fly in space	kun tu dga' bar gyur ba'i gling
ཀུན་ཏུ་དགའ་བར་མཛད་པ	to make rejoice	kun tu dga' bar mdzad pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བགྲོད	Samyata	kun tu bgrod
ཀུན་ཏུ་མགུ་བ	appreciated, beloved	kun tu mgu ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགུལ	shaking greatly	kun tu 'gul
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགེངས་པ	he that provides for the world, all-provider, providence	kun tu 'gengs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྱེད་པ	to be diffused, be distributed everywhere	kun tu 'gyed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ	water, wind, parrot	kun tu 'gro
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་པའི་རྒྱུ	cause which effects everything, omni-present cause [one of {rgyu drug} ever functioning cause, a delusion that acts as a cause of a later instance of the same delusion]	kun tu 'gro pa'i rgyu
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	those who go everywhere	kun tu 'gro ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ་ལྔ	See {kun 'gro lnga}	kun tu 'gro ba lnga
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	five omnipresent factors	kun tu 'gro ba rnam pa lnga
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཁྱད་པར	activity of a follower of the "Three jewels."	kun tu 'gro ba'i khyad par
ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བའི་རྒྱུ	omnipresent cause, cause which effects everything kun tu 'gro ba'i lam mkhyen pa'i stobs the power of knowing the paths which lead everywhere. one of {stobs bcu} kun tu 'gro ba'i lam mkhyen pa'i st...	kun tu 'gro ba'i rgyu
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱལ་བ	epith. of Buddha. The AllVictorious	kun tu rgyal ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱས	radiating	kun tu rgyas
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ	expanded, open wide	kun tu rgyas pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པར	make plentiful everywhere, make copious	kun tu rgyas par
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	fully spread	kun tu rgyas par byed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ	ascetic sage	kun tu rgyu
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	The five great disciples, the five ascetics [see. {'khor lnga sde bzang po}.]	kun tu rgyu chen po lnga
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་གནག་ལྷས་ཀྱི་བུ	{kun tu rgyu gnag lhas kyi bu} [one of six main nonbuddhist teachers at the time of Shakyamuni, {mu stegs pa'i ston pa drug}, nihilist; taught that pleasure and pain of all sentient beings did not ...	kun tu rgyu gnag lhas kyi bu
མཻན་ནོན	Buddhist teachers at the time of Shakyamuni, nihilist. Syn {mu stegs pa'i ston pa drug} kun tu rgyu pang nas skyes dang nye	main non
རྒྱལ	Upatisya and Kaulita	rgyal
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་བ	"Gipsy", wandering mendicant, wanderer, wind	kun tu rgyu ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་རབ་དགའ	Rabga the Wanderer kun tu rgyu sen ring gis zhus pa zhes bya	kun tu rgyu rab dga'
བའི་མདོ	{kun tu rgyu sen ring gis zhus pa zhes bya ba'i mdo} [sho lo ka so bdun pa 'gyur byang med pa]	ba'i mdo
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྒྲིབས	eclipsed	kun tu bsgribs
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཅིངས	SA kun cings	kun tu cings
ཀུན་ཏུ་གཅེས	the most important thing	kun tu gces
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཅུག་པ	to employ, to use	kun tu bcug pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཅོམ	all-conquering	kun tu bcom
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཅོམ་པ	conquest, subjugation	kun tu bcom pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཆགས་པ	anxiety, yearning	kun tu chags pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཆད་པ	annihilated	kun tu chad pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	roaring all about	kun tu chem chem
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	getting in everywhere, truth of suffering	kun tu 'jug pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ་སྒྲོལ	truth about the way out of misery	kun tu 'jug pa sgrol
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ་སྒྲོལ་བ	liberating from what gets in everywhere, truth of the path	kun tu 'jug pa sgrol ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇུག་བྱེད	buddha. sin. Syn {kun 'byung bden pa}. the truth of origin. 2) sin; buddha. sin. Syn {kun 'byung bden pa}. the truth of origin. 2) sin	kun tu 'jug byed
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇུག་བྲལ	the truth of cessation [one of the four noble truths	kun tu 'jug bral
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇོག་པ	constant settling [of mind in meditation]	kun tu 'jog pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད	constantly settle	kun tu 'jog par byed
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཇོམས་པ	uprooting	kun tu 'joms pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྗེས་སོང	all-pervasive, pervades all. Syn {kun tu 'gro ba}	kun tu rjes song
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྗོད་པ	expression	kun tu brjod pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྗོད་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the miraculous action of expression	kun tu brjod pa'i cho 'phrul
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཏགས་པ	conceptual	kun tu btags pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཏགས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	nonrecognition of awareness involving allconsuming labeling/ ascription	kun tu btags pa'i ma rig pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཏགས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the mark / attribute of imputation. See {mtshan	kun tu btags pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག	conception, discursive thoughts	kun tu rtog
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	1) conception. 2) discursive thoughts. e g. {kun tu rtog pa 'ching gcod}. who cut the fetters of discursive thoughts; thinking, assumption, imagination, imputation, fancy, hypothesis. image, false ...	kun tu rtog pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	to fully realize	kun tu rtogs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ	to view thoroughly	kun tu lta ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྟོན་པ	to show, indicate, exhibit	kun tu ston pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྟགས་པ	totally conceptual, postulates, notional-conceptual, labels,	kun tu brtags pa
པོསྟུལཏིཨོནལ	the absolute status for self or entities, SA mtshan nyid gsum, rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags (words which both designate and denote, i.e. 'pleasure', mtshan nyid chad pa'i kun brtags (words which des...	postulational
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྟགས་པའི	decrease in intrinsic awareness	kun tu brtags pa'i
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྟགས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	proliferation	kun tu brtags pa'i ma rig pa
དིསཅྲིམིནཏིང་ཨིགནོརནཅེ	the ignorance of the imaginary	discriminating ignorance
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྟགས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the nature of false conceptions [one of the {mtshan nyid gsum}, existing as mere imputation, conceptually exaggerated nature, mind consciousness kun tu rtog pa des individuals and dharmas wrongly a...	kun tu brtags pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྟན་པ	to reveal in detail, show clearly, demonstrate	kun tu bstan pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྟེན	faith, faith and reverence, possessed of faith & respect	kun tu bsten
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྟེན་པ	faithful, respectful	kun tu bsten pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐ་སྙད་འདོགས་པ	labeling, imputing	kun tu tha snyad 'dogs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐ་སྙད་པ	conventional [ggd]	kun tu tha snyad pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མ	conventional valid cognition [ggd]	kun tu tha snyad pa'i tshad ma
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐོགས་མེད	completely unhindered	kun tu thogs med
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐག་པ	grinding down, crushing	kun tu 'thag pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐོར	strewn over, scattered, diffused, dispersed	kun tu 'thor
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐོར་པ	scattered, dispersed	kun tu 'thor pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐོར་བ	strewn over, scattered	kun tu 'thor ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་དོར	entirely abandon, throw away	kun tu dor
ཀུན་ཏུ་དོར་བ	perfect abandonment	kun tu dor ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་དྲང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to fully guide	kun tu drang bar byed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་དྲིས་པ	totally acquainted	kun tu dris pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་གདུང་བ	tormenting	kun tu gdung ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གདུངས	overcome with grief	kun tu gdungs
ཀུན་ཏུ་བདེ་བ	general happiness or prosperity	kun tu bde ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འདར་བ	terrifying, horrendous	kun tu 'dar ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འདོགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རྟོག	the labeling thoughts	kun tu 'dogs byed kyi rnam rtog
ཀུན་ཏུ་འདོད་ཆགས	desirous	kun tu 'dod chags
ཀུན་ཏུ་འདྲི་བ	questioning	kun tu 'dri ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འདྲེས་པ	1 of 5 great rivers, SA chu bo chen po, a river in continent of godaniya	kun tu 'dres pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ལྡན་པ	possessing all 26	kun tu ldan pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྡལ་བ	all-pervasive	kun tu brdal ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྡུང་བ	burning rays of the sun, extremely painful, all-piercing	kun tu brdung ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གནས	table, abiding everywhere/always	kun tu gnas
ཀུན་ཏུ་གནས་པ	stability, that which remains at all times. basic situation	kun tu gnas pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་གནོད་པར་གྱུར་པ	do mischief everywhere	kun tu gnod par gyur pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་གནོད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	to do mischief everywhere	kun tu gnod par 'gyur ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་མནར་སེམས	hostility	kun tu mnar sems
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང	illuminate, spread light	kun tu snang
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བ	contemplation which is everywhere manifest, gsal ba, snying rje, longs sku, chos nyid bar do, sun, a buddha, all-illumined, all-enlightened,	kun tu snang ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	total presence	kun tu snang ba ting nge 'dzin
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of illumination; the all-illuminating samadhi. One of {ting nge 'dzin gsum} the three samadhis	kun tu snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	allilluminating samadhi [one of {ting nge 'dzin gsum} the three samadhis]	kun tu snang ba'i ting 'dzin
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བར་བྱེད་པ	illuminate, spread light everywhere	kun tu snang bar byed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་དཔྱད་པ	righteous conduct; discernment	kun tu dpyad pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱད	usual duty, habitual work, practice	kun tu spyad
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱད་པ	1) usual duty, conduct; 2) practice	kun tu spyad pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པ	righteous conduct. 1) Syn {kun spyod}. 2) applied, practiced	kun tu spyod pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པའི་སྟོབས	power of applying	kun tu spyod pa'i stobs
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་ལམ	conduct, behavior	kun tu spyod lam
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྲས	dressed in every way, adorning the body with precious ornaments	kun tu spras
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྲས་པ	adorned	kun tu spras pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བོན་པོ	Bon deity (bon Counterpart of Samantabhadra). Syn {kun tu bzang mo yum}. shakti of {kun tu bon po}	kun tu bon po
ཀུན་ཏུ་བླངས་པ	motivated, activated (by	kun tu blangs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འབར་བ	1) blazing ever[ywhere]; 2) light, lustre; 3) luminous	kun tu 'bar ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འབྱུང	the source of all, suffering	kun tu 'byung
ཀུན་ཏུ་འབྱུང་བ	1) come into existence. Syn {kun 'byung}. 2) right conduct, right practice; right conduct, right practice	kun tu 'byung ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འབྱུང་བར་གྱུར་པ	start/ begin functioning/ working	kun tu 'byung bar gyur pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འབྲེལ་བ	interconnected	kun tu 'brel ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྦྱོད་པའི་སྟོབས	power of applying	kun tu sbyod pa'i stobs
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྦྱོར	fettering	kun tu sbyor
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ	fetter, attachment, entanglement, that which binds (to samsara) {kun sbyor}, act of joining or uniting with, abandoning [nyon mongs pa ste de'i dbang gis khams gsumla yid mi 'byung bas dge ba mi sp...	kun tu sbyor ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ་བཅུ	10 universal fetters (lta ba	kun tu sbyor ba bcu
ཀུན་ཏུ་མིག་ལྡན	with eyes everywhere: a) fabulous tree on which glittering gems grow. b) plant or tree in full bloom	kun tu mig ldan
ཀུན་ཏུ་མྱོང་བ	experiencing	kun tu myong ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་དམན་འགྲོ	distress, uneasiness	kun tu dman 'gro
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྨོངས	all-stunning, all-obscuring, darkness of mind, ignorance, totally ignorant	kun tu rmongs
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྨོངས་པ	{kun rmongs}. Syn {rmongs pa}	kun tu rmongs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྨོངས་བྱེད	an arrow of cupid	kun tu rmongs byed
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྨོངས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མདའ	allstupefying fascination	kun tu rmongs byed kyi mda'
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྩེ	to play, to take recreation	kun tu rtse
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཚེ་བ	1) to give constant trouble. 2) rakshasa	kun tu 'tshe ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཚོ	Syn {'tsho thabs}	kun tu 'tsho
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཚོལ་བ	search everywhere	kun tu 'tshol ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	1) seizing, taking, attack. 2) persistence, insisting. 3) attachment; favor, patronage. 4) moral power, courage. 5) holding all or everything (n. of a goddess). holding all or everything of a goddess	kun tu 'dzin pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཛིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ever-grasping	kun tu 'dzin par byed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འཛིན་མ	holding to all or everything, a goddess	kun tu 'dzin ma
ཀུན་ཏུ་རྫོགས་པ	finished, accomplished	kun tu rdzogs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཞལ	the Omni-faced one [the buddha (ye shes gang chen mtsho]	kun tu zhal
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཞི་བ	tranquilizing, pacifying	kun tu zhi ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཞུམ་པ	hanging on to	kun tu zhum pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཞེན་པ	attached, devoted	kun tu zhen pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་གཟི་བརྗིད	epith. of Buddha	kun tu gzi brjid
ཀུན་ཏུ་གཟིགས	he who sees all things and everywhere by his divine eye of knowledge, name of buddha or avalokitesvara	kun tu gzigs
ཀུན་ཏུ་གཟིགས་པ	1) all seeing; 2) Avalokiteshvara; 3) a buddha	kun tu gzigs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང	Samantabhadra	kun tu bzang
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	samantabhadra, adibuddha for rnying ma pa, sometimes a Bodhisattva, universal goodness, bon word for longs sku, good to all and everywhere and at all times, the first dhyani bodhisattva, the kamuga...	kun tu bzang po
སམནཏབྷདྲ	naama-saadhana [one of the {chos bcu bzhi}-14 treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes} (7) 1 of the 8 close spiritual sons of Buddha Shakyamuni	Samantabhadra
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་ཀློང་དྲུག	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras kun tu bzang po klong drug pa'i rgyud Tantra of the Six Spheres of Samantabhadra. This tantra teaches how to prevent rebirth in and purify the six realms, and manifest ...	kun tu bzang po klong drug
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་ལྔ	the five kinds of Samantabhadra; 1) {rang bzhin} natural 2) {rgyan} adornment 3) {ston pa} teacher 4) {rig pa} awareness 5) {rtogs pa} realization]	kun tu bzang po lnga
རྒྱུད	anuyoga branch tantra, branch tantra of anuyoga	rgyud
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	kun tu bzang po thugs kyi me long
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ	major klong sde tantra kun tu bzang po zhes bya ba'i gzungs {kun tu bzang po zhes bya ba'i gzungs} [rgya gar gyi mkhan podzi na mi tra dang, d' na sh'i la dang, lo ts' ba bande yeshes sdes bsgyur c...	kun tu bzang po nam mkha' che
དགོངས་པ	unimpeded wisdom mind of samantabhadra kun tu bzang po ye shes zang thal gyi	dgongs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི	SA thig le drug	kun tu bzang po'i
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་གྲོལ་གཞི	Samantabhadra's ground of liberation, the liberation-ground of Samantabhadra	kun tu bzang po'i grol gzhi
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་གྲོལ་ལུགས	how Samantabhadra was liberated	kun tu bzang po'i grol lugs
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of Samantabhadra	kun tu bzang po'i thig le
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་དོན་བསྡུས་པ	shri herukas dhana [one of the {chos bcu bzhi} 14 treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	kun tu bzang po'i don bsdus pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་སྤྱོད་པ	EverExcellent conduct	kun tu bzang po'i spyod pa
རྒྱལ་པོ	see {bzang spyod smon lam};{rgyal sras kun tu bzang po'i spyod pa'i smon lam gyi rgyal po} kun tu bzang po'i spyod pa'i smon lam gyi	rgyal po
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་ཞིང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	to reach the pure realm of Samantabhadra	kun tu bzang po'i zhing du phyin pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་ས	the level/ state of Samantabhadra	kun tu bzang po'i sa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་མོ	1) (Samantabhadri) female of Samantabhadra; 2) caturangasadhana-samantabhadri-nama [one of the (chos bcu bzhi) fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by	kun tu bzang mo
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟོད་ཅིང	because of bearing everything	kun tu bzod cing
ཀུན་ཏུ་འུར་འུར	roaring everywhere [noise of wind, rain, or thunder]	kun tu 'ur 'ur
ཀུན་ཏུ་འོ་མ	thunderbolt tree, a tree with milky sap	kun tu 'o ma
ཀུན་ཏུ་འོད	light everywhere, universal light (11th sa), fully enlightened, 11th stage of bodhisattva perfection, total light, 1 of sangs rgyas sa gsum	kun tu 'od
ཀུན་ཏུ་འོད་ཀྱི་ས	the [eleventh] bhumi of constant illumination, Universal Light. One of {sangs rgyas kyi sa gsum}	kun tu 'od kyi sa
ཀུན་ཏུ་འོད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ས	vajra level of constant illumination/ Universal light	kun tu 'od rdo rje'i sa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་དགའ	delightful	kun tu rab dga'
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་སྒྲུབ	realize completely	kun tu rab sgrub
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	Syn {kun tu rab tu 'khrugs}	kun tu rab chem chem
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ	name of the 6 descriptions of earthquake, a form of earthquake, a kind of earthquake, 1 of 6 forms of earthquake in which sound comes out of the sea and the mountains, a universal earthquake in whi...	kun tu rab tu
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ་འཁྲུགས	n. of the six causes of the earthquakes	kun tu rab tu 'khrugs
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ་འགུལ	moving and shaking very greatly	kun tu rab tu 'gul
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	roaring all about	kun tu rab tu chem chem
ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ་འུར་འུར	loud and fearful rattling or roaring kun tu rab tu g.yos - everywhere all shaken very much	kun tu rab tu 'ur 'ur
ཀུན་ཏུ་རིག	wisdom, all-knowing, omniscient, a deity	kun tu rig
ཀུན་ཏུ་རིག་པ	all-knowing, wisdom	kun tu rig pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་རིག་ཤེས་རབ	all-knowing prajna, of deity	kun tu rig shes rab
ཀུན་ཏུ་རུ	copulation; union of sexes	kun tu ru
ཀུན་ཏུ་རེག་པ	all-touching (wind in the womb)	kun tu reg pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརླག་པ	slaughter	kun tu brlag pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤིས་མ	the goddess Uma	kun tu shis ma
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤུགས་ལྡན	very useful and important medicine	kun tu shugs ldan
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤུགས་པ	ever-indulging	kun tu shugs pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤུམ་པ	hanging on to	kun tu shum pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ	which should always be known	kun tu shes par bya ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	which always makes known	kun tu shes par byed pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤེས་བྱ	{kun tu shes par bya ba}	kun tu shes bya
ཀུན་ཏུ་སོང	ever-moving; {kun tu song ba}.	kun tu song
ཀུན་ཏུ་སོང་བ	all-pervasive	kun tu song ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་སྲུང	protective	kun tu srung
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསལ	sky, clear inside and outside, very clear, lucid, illuminated	kun tu gsal
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསལ་བ	to shine, become visible, appear, manifest	kun tu gsal ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསལ་ཞིང་འཚེར་བ	completely clear and shining	kun tu gsal zhing 'tsher ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསུང	flower mentioned in Kangyur	kun tu gsung
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསོ	heal everyone or repair everything, healer of all	kun tu gso
ཀུན་ཏུ་གསོ་བ	healer of all	kun tu gso ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསགས་པ	accumulating	kun tu bsags pa
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྲུང་བ	protected	kun tu bsrung ba
ཀུན་ཏུ་བསྲུང་བར་བྱེད་པ	protective	kun tu bsrung bar byed pa
ཀུན་ཏོ་བརྡུང་བ	all painful or piercing, the sun's rays	kun to brdung ba
ཀུན་ཏོ་རྨོངས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མདའ	arrow of all stupefying fascination	kun to rmongs byed kyi mda'
ཀུན་གཏུམ	entirely fierce, the lowest/commoner caste	kun gtum
ཀུན་གཏོང	complete renunciation	kun gtong
ཀུན་གཏོང་བ	renunciate	kun gtong ba
ཀུན་བཏག་གི་བདེན་འཛིན	truth habit;	kun btag gi bden 'dzin
ཀུན་བཏགས	conceptual labeling/ ascription; conceptually ascribed	kun btags
རྟོག་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་འདོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	n, mental labeling. See {kun brtags}	rtog rnams kyis 'dogs par byed pa
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	imputed identity/ essence/ nature imaginatively	kun btags kyi ngo bo nyid
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་འཇིག་ལྟ	conscious futile view, imputed view of the transitory. See {'jig tshogs la lta ba}	kun btags kyi 'jig lta
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་བདག	imputed identity	kun btags kyi bdag
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་བདག་འཛིན	the ego-clinging of imputation. imputed notion of self, imputed fixation on true existence; selfhabit	kun btags kyi bdag 'dzin
ཨེགོ	clinging of imputation, imputed notion of self, imputed fixation on true existence	ego
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་བདེན་འཛིན	imputed fixation on true existence; truth habit	kun btags kyi bden 'dzin
ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་མ་རིག་པ	misknowledge, the ignorance of imputation imputed ignorance	kun btags kyi ma rig pa
ཀུན་བཏགས་གཉིས	the two kinds of imputation. 1) {mtshan nyid chad pa'i kun btags}. 2) {rnam grangs pa'i kun btags}	kun btags gnyis
ཀུན་བཏགས་བདེན་འཛིན	imputed holding as being real / true	kun btags bden 'dzin
ཀུན་བཏགས་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	The three types of imputed (phenomena). Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {mtshan nyid chad pa'i kun btags/ rnam grangs pa'i kun btags/ ltos nas btags pa'i kun btags}	kun btags rnam pa gsum
ཀུན་བཏགས་པ	imagined, imputed	kun btags pa
ཀུན་བཏགས་པའི་ཆོས	imaginary phenomenon	kun btags pa'i chos
ཀུན་བཏགས་པའི་མ་རིག	the ignorance of imputation, imputed ignorance	kun btags pa'i ma rig
ཀུན་བཏགས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	characteristic of the imputed (phenomena)	kun btags pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་བཏགས་པའི་གཟུགས	imagined forms. One of {chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs lnga}	kun btags pa'i gzugs
ཀུན་བཏགས་པའི་བཟུགས	imputed forms [yid kyi snang bar 'char ba'i gzugs termi lam du rta glang khang pa sogs yul lngar snang ba rnamsdang, ting 'dzin du sa gzhi keng rus kyis khyab par snang balta bu]	kun btags pa'i bzugs
ཀུན་བཏགས་མ་རིག	imputed ignorance. Syn {kun tu brtags pa'i ma rig pa}	kun btags ma rig
ཀུན་བཏགས་མ་རིག་པ	nonrecognition of	kun btags ma rig pa
ཨཝརེནེསས་ཨིནབོ༹ལབི༹ང་ཨལལ	consuming labeling/ ascription	awareness involving all
ཀུན་བཏགས་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	the imputed and the innate	kun btags lhan skyes
ཀུན་བཏུས	Abhidharmasamuccaya, a religious work which is full of extracts taken from different sacred books	kun btus
ཨབྷིདྷརྨ	samuccaya The Compendium of Knowledge	abhidharma
ཀུན་རྟགས	the imaginary	kun rtags
ཀུན་རྟོག	1) concept[ualization]; 2) discrimination, analysis; 3) [conceptual/ discursive/ analytical] thought/thinking; 4) fiction; 5) misconception	kun rtog
ཀུན་རྟོག་སྐྱེ་གནས	epith. of Kamadeva (the god of love). 1) the place for the arising of thoughts. 2) Syn {'dod pa'i gnas}	kun rtog skye gnas
ཀུན་རྟོག་གི་སྤྲོས་པ	complexities/ proliferations of thought	kun rtog gi spros pa
ཀུན་རྟོག་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscured by thinking	kun rtog sgrib pa
ཀུན་རྟོག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	the 80 kinds of thoughts	kun rtog brgyad cu
ཀུན་རྟོག་པ	conceptualize	kun rtog pa
ཀུན་རྟོག་འབྱུང	epith. of Kamadeva (the god of Love). the source of thinking. Syn {kun rtog skye gnas}	kun rtog 'byung
ཀུན་རྟོག་མ་རིག་པ	conceptual ignorance. See {kun brtags ma rig} / {kun tu brtags pa'i ma rig pa}	kun rtog ma rig pa
ཀུན་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating wisdom {so sor rtog pa'i ye shes}	kun rtog ye shes
ཀུན་རྟོག་རགས་པའི་སྣང་བ	the coarse appearance of thoughts	kun rtog rags pa'i snang ba
ཀུན་རྟོག་རླབས	waves of thoughts	kun rtog rlabs
ཀུན་རྟོགས་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating wisdom, discriminating knowledge	kun rtogs ye shes
ཀུན་སྟེར་བ	giver, bestower	kun ster ba
ཀུན་སྟོན	teacher, instructor	kun ston
ཀུན་སྟོབས	#	kun stobs
ཀུན་བརྟག	conceptually designated, false conceptions	kun brtag
ཀུན་བརྟག་གི་རང	imaginary nature	kun brtag gi rang
ཀུན་བརྟག་གི་རང་བཞིན	designated nature	kun brtag gi rang bzhin
ཀུན་བརྟག་པ	imaginaries	kun brtag pa
ཀུན་བརྟག་པར་བྱ་བ་མ་ཡིན	not to be imputed	kun brtag par bya ba ma yin
ཀུན་བརྟག་མ་རིག་པ	the ignorance which conceptualizes everything	kun brtag ma rig pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས	imputation, imputed [nature] [thd]	kun brtags
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུའང་མེད	not existent even as a superficial imputation	kun brtags kun rdzob tu'ang med
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་བསྐྱེད་རིམ	conceptualized phase of creation	kun brtags kyi bskyed rim
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	reality; 1) conceptualized identity / essence / nature. 2) constructed reality; conceptualized identity / essence / nature. [constructed reality]	kun brtags kyi ngo bo nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ཆ	the aspect of imputation, the conceptualized aspect	kun brtags kyi cha
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས	imputed klesha/ conflicting emotions	kun brtags kyi nyon mongs
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	imputed klesha/ conflictng emotions [grub mtha' ngan pas blo bsgyurba'i dbang gis yang dag pa'i don la phyin ci log gi rtog paskun tu brtags pa'i sems rab tu ma zhi bar byed pa'i lta banyon mongs c...	kun brtags kyi nyon mongs pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་མ་རིག་པ	conceptual ignorance	kun brtags kyi ma rig pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་མ་རིག་མ	imputed ignorance [intellectual misunderstanding) see {kun btags pa'i ma rig pa}-kun	kun brtags kyi ma rig ma
བརྟགས་ཀྱི་མ་རིགས་པ	intellectual misknowledge grub mtha' ngan pa'i lta ba nyon mongs pa dang 'dres pas dngos po'i tshul ji bzhin mi shes pa'i rmongs pa ste, lta ba log pa rnams so]	brtags kyi ma rigs pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	imaginary category, the third of the three essential categories. the mark / attribute of the imagined / conceptualized. See {mtshan nyid gsum}; imagined nature; the mark / attribute of the imagined...	kun brtags kyi mtshan nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་གྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	reality	kun brtags gyi ngo bo nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	imagined nature	kun brtags gyi mtshan nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་བརྒྱད	eight types of imputed (phenomena)	kun brtags brgyad
ཀུན་བརྟགས་གཉིས	The two types of imputed phenomena 1) {rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags}. nominally imputed phenomena. 2) {mtshan nyid yongs su chad pa'i kun brtags}. imputed phenomena lacking identity	kun brtags gnyis
རྣམ་རྟོག་བཅུ	(chn kun brtags dang 'brel ba rnam g.yeng gi	rnam rtog bcu
ཀུན་བརྟགས་གདོན་ནད	evil spirit diseases	kun brtags gdon nad
ཀུན་བརྟགས་བདག་འཛིན	conceptualized	kun brtags bdag 'dzin
ཀུན་བརྟགས་བདག་འཛིན་སོགས	theoretical (conscious, intellectual self-habit etc	kun brtags bdag 'dzin sogs
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པ	imagined, conceptualized, mentally fabricated, false conceptions	kun brtags pa
མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of parikalpita and paratantra / false conceptions and relativity	mtshan nyid
གསུམ	the three identities such as the imagined and so forth kun brtags pa la sogs pa'i ngo bo nyid	gsum
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་འཁྲུལ་པ	the confusion of the imagined	kun brtags pa'i 'khrul pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་གང་ཟག་མེད་པ	absence of a conceptualized personal (self-entity)	kun brtags pa'i gang zag med pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the essence/facticity of parikalpita/ false conceptions	kun brtags pa'i ngo bo nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the identities of conceptualized phenomena	kun brtags pa'i chos kyi ngo bo nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད	all conceptualized things	kun brtags pa'i chos thams cad
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་ཆོས་མེད་པ	without the dharmas of parikalpita/ false conception	kun brtags pa'i chos med pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of discrimination [ting nge 'dzin dang 'grogs pa'i shes rab kyis phyi nang gi chos thams cad stong pa dang bdag med par mthong bas de la chags pa mi skye ba]	kun brtags pa'i stobs
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་བདག་མེད	without the selfhood of parikalpita	kun brtags pa'i bdag med
ཅོནཅེཔཏུཨལིཟེད་སེལཕ༹	entity	conceptualized self
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	the ignorance of the imaginary/ false conceptions	kun brtags pa'i ma rig pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the mark of the imagined, imagined identity; imputed aspect, wrongly imagined feature, unreality of logical constructions. imputed aspect, wrongly imagined fea- ture, unreality of logical construct...	kun brtags pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་བརྟགས་པའི་གཟུགས	conceptualized form {mi gtsang ba'i ting nge 'dzin gyi rkeng rus lta bu}	kun brtags pa'i gzugs
ཀུན་བརྟགས་མ་རིག་པ	nonrecognition of	kun brtags ma rig pa
ཀུན་བརྟགས་གཞན་དབང་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	the imaginary, the dependent and the absolute; false conceptions, relativity, and the completely established	kun brtags gzhan dbang yongs grub
ཀུན་བརྟན	support, negligence	kun brtan
ཀུན་བསྟེན	reliance, resignation, service, adoration	kun bsten
ཀུན་ཐམས་ཅད	all, every one included	kun thams cad
ཀུན་ཐི་ར	a bird	kun thi ra
ཀུན་ཐུབ	highly proficient; 1) almighty, omnipotent, all-powerful. 2) universal,	kun thub
ཀུན་ཐུབ་འཁོར་སྟེགས	universal machine toolk/ lathe	kun thub 'khor stegs
ཀུན་ཐུབ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྲུང་བ	Protective Ritual of the Highly Proficient King	kun thub rgyal po'i srung ba
ཀུན་ཐུབ་འདུད་འཐེན་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོ	allpurpose tractor	kun thub 'dud 'then 'khor 'khor lo
ཀུན་ཐུབ་ལུས་རྩལ་པ	all-around athlete	kun thub lus rtsal pa
ཀུན་ཐོབ	brought near (n. of kind of consecrated fire)	kun thob
ཀུན་མཐོང	all seeing (met); 1) mirror 2) lake in the land of Asuras where gods fight asuras ]	kun mthong
ཀུན་མཐོང་གི་མཚོ	fabulous lake in the land of asuras	kun mthong gi mtsho
ཀུན་མཐོན་གི་མཚོ	fabulous fresh-water lake in the land of lha ma yin in center of shubhra malika city	kun mthon gi mtsho
ཀུན་འཐོར	trembling, scattering 31	kun 'thor
ཀུན་ད	mistake, blunder, illusion, blue jessamine, jasminum multiflorum or pubescens	kun da
ཀུན་ད་བྱང་སེམས	quicksilver	kun da byang sems
ཀུན་ད་ལ	cat	kun da la
ཀུན་ད་ཤིང	Syn {kun da}	kun da shing
ཀུན་དང་འཁོན	quarrelling w all	kun dang 'khon
ཀུན་དང་འཁོན་པ	quarrelling with all	kun dang 'khon pa
ཀུན་དང་སྙོམས་པ	equate	kun dang snyoms pa
ཀུན་དང་མཐུན	harmonizing w all	kun dang mthun
ཀུན་དང་མཐུན་པ	sociable, harmonious, concordant, agreeing or in harmony with all	kun dang mthun pa
ཀུན་དང་མཐུན་པར	putting harmony with all	kun dang mthun par
ཀུན་དང་མཐུན་པར་འཇུག	bringing together	kun dang mthun par 'jug
ཀུན་དང་བྲལ	beyond all	kun dang bral
ཀུན་དང་མི་འདྲ་བ	abnormal	kun dang mi 'dra ba
ཀུན་དའི་གཉེན	friend of the kunda flower, moon [light]	kun da'i gnyen
ཀུན་དུ་བརྟགས་པ	imputation, false conception	kun du brtags pa
ཀུན་དུ་སྣང་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the allilluminating samadhi. One of {ting nge 'dzin gsum}	kun du snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin
ཀུན་དུ་བཟང་པོ	Syn {kun tu bzang po}	kun du bzang po
ཀུན་དུ་བཟང་པོའི་སྤྱོད་པ	the behavior of [bodhisattva] Samantabhadra, To follow the {chos spyod bcu}	kun du bzang po'i spyod pa
ཀུན་དུ་འོད་ཀྱི་ས	Syn {kun tu 'od kyi sa}	kun du 'od kyi sa
ཀུན་དུ་རུ	sweet-smelling tree, kind of incense, resin of boswellia thurifera, gum olibanum	kun du ru
ཀུན་དུ་ལ	cat	kun du la
ཀུན་དུམ	large cylindrical basket	kun dum
ཀུན་དོང	onion, leek	kun dong
ཀུན་དོན	public weal, general interest, cause of all	kun don
ཀུན་དྲིལ	summarized, taken/ gathered together	kun dril
ཀུན་དྲིལ་བ	all taken together	kun dril ba
ཀུན་གདུང	that afflicts all, the all-burning one, cupid	kun gdung
ཀུན་གདུངས	ascetic practice	kun gdungs
ཀུན་བདག	master ruler nature of the world	kun bdag
ཀུན་བདེ	happiness for all	kun bde
ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང	kun bde ling Monastery/ tulku	kun bde gling
ཀུན་བདེན	{kun 'byung gi bden pa}. the truth of origin. Syn {kun rdzob kyi bden pa}	kun bden
ཀུན་བདེན་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ་བདུན	the seven discards through the truth of origin. 1) {ma rig pa}. 2) {'dod chags}. 3) {khong khro}. 4) {nga rgyal}. 5) {the tshom}. 6) {log lta}. 7) {lta ba mchog 'dzin}	kun bden gyi spang bya bdun
ཀུན་བདེན་མཐོང་སྤང	the discards through insight into the truth of origin	kun bden mthong spang
ཀུན་འདར	n. of an artery or vein	kun 'dar
ཀུན་འདར་མ	the central channel. Syn {rtsa dbu ma}	kun 'dar ma
ཀུན་འདས	to transcend	kun 'das
ཀུན་འདུལ་རྔ	(met wind, prana	kun 'dul rnga
ཀུན་འདུལ་རྟ	1) wind. 2) god of wind	kun 'dul rta
ཀུན་འདུས	Assemblage	kun 'dus
ཀུན་འདུས་དབྱངས	poet. the gong	kun 'dus dbyangs
ཀུན་འདུས་རིག་པ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	kun 'dus rig pa
ཀུན་འདུས་རིག་པའི་མདོ	Assemblage of Knowledge Scripture, Scripture of the Compendium of Knowledge; An Anu Yoga scripture. Compendium of Knowledge Scripture; all-gathering teaching of awareness; an Anu Yoga root tantra	kun 'dus rig pa'i mdo
ཀུན་འདུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རྒྱུད	Precious Assemblage Tantra	kun 'dus rin po che'i rgyud
ཀུན་འདེད་པོ	epith. of the Lord of death	kun 'ded po
ཀུན་འདོར	all-abandoning	kun 'dor
ཀུན་འདྲན	supreme leader, he who leads all into the way of deliverance, epithet of buddha	kun 'dran
ཀུན་འདྲི	questioning	kun 'dri
ཀུན་འདྲི་བ	questioning	kun 'dri ba
ཀུན་འདྲེན	(met the Guide of all, Buddha	kun 'dren
ཀུན་ལྡང	abbr. of {kun nas ldang ba}	kun ldang
ཀུན་ལྡན	(met lcags byi lo, Sarwadin, 34'th year male iron mouse 32	kun ldan
ཀུན་ལྡན་རས་པ	Kunden Repa. 11481217. a disciple of Phagmo Drubpa	kun ldan ras pa
ཀུན་བརྡུང	oppressor, tyrant, 16th astronomical conjunction	kun brdung
ཀུན་བསྡུས	compendium, abridgment	kun bsdus
ཀུན་བསྡུས་པ	embodiment (of a, summary	kun bsdus pa
ཀུན་ན	everywhere	kun na
ཀུན་ཎ་ལ	n. of a flower	kun Na la
ཀུན་ནས	from every place or direction, wholly, thoroughly. in all ways; deeply, strongly; everywhere, all around; 1) [emphatic when preceding a verb]. utterly, fully, totally, completely, universally. 2) b...	kun nas
ཀུན་ནས་དཀྲི་བ	fetters; to be fettered	kun nas dkri ba
ཀུན་ནས་དཀྲིགས་པ	entirely darkened	kun nas dkrigs pa
ཀུན་ནས་དཀྲིས་པ	{kun nas dkri ba} to be deeply ensnared (by)	kun nas dkris pa
ཀུན་ནས་དཀྲིས་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight fetters	kun nas dkris pa brgyad
ཀུན་ནས་སྐོར་བ	surrounding	kun nas skor ba
ཀུན་ནས་སྐྱེ	grown everywhere	kun nas skye
ཀུན་ནས་སྐྱེས	produced or grown everywhere	kun nas skyes
ཀུན་ནས་སྐྱོབ་པ	protecting	kun nas skyob pa
ཀུན་ནས་སྐྲག་པ	to be terrified	kun nas skrag pa
ཀུན་ནས་བསྐོར་བ	totally surrounded	kun nas bskor ba
ཀུན་ནས་ཁོར་ཡུག	surrounding wall	kun nas khor yug
ཀུན་ནས་ཁྱབ་པ	all-embracing	kun nas khyab pa
ཀུན་ནས་མཁྱེན་པ	Omniscient (epith. of Buddha)	kun nas mkhyen pa
ཀུན་ནས་འཁུམས	saffron	kun nas 'khums
ཀུན་ནས་འཁྱུད	poet. creeping plant	kun nas 'khyud
ཀུན་ནས་གང་བ	totally filled	kun nas gang ba
ཀུན་ནས་གྱེངས	thoroughly agitated, excited	kun nas gyengs
ཀུན་ནས་གྲགས་པ	1) very famous; 2) the bodhisattva {kun nas grags pa}	kun nas grags pa
ཀུན་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	ever present. Syn {lhun grub, dang po nas drub pa}	kun nas grub pa
ཀུན་ནས་གྲོལ་བ	utterly free	kun nas grol ba
ཀུན་ནས་དགོད་པ	jest, irony, ridicule	kun nas dgod pa
ཀུན་ནས་འགེགས	residence of a queen (lit. residence that is closed on every side)	kun nas 'gegs
ཀུན་ནས་འགྲོ	communion	kun nas 'gro
ཀུན་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	all-pervasive	kun nas 'gro ba
ཀུན་ནས་རྒོད	laugh out	kun nas rgod
ཀུན་ནས་སྒོའི་ལེའུ	'phags pa kun nas sgo'i le'u [one volume, 360 shlokas, translated and annotated by the Indian pandits Jinamitra and Surendra bodhi and the translator ye shes sde.]	kun nas sgo'i le'u
ཀུན་ནས་སྒོའི་ལེའུ་ཞེས་པའི་མདོ	sutra on the door or entrance from all quarters kun nas sgor 'jug pa'i 'od zer gtsug tor dri ma med par snang ba zhes bya ba'i	kun nas sgo'i le'u zhes pa'i mdo
གཟུངས	{kun nas sgor 'jug pa'i 'od zer gtsug tor dri ma med par snang ba zhes bya ba'i gzungs} [text traslated by the Indian Khenpos dzi na mi tra and, sh'i lendra bo dhi and, the translator mon ye shes s...	gzungs
ཀུན་ནས་སྒྲིབ་པ	overshadow/obscure all around	kun nas sgrib pa
ཀུན་ནས་སྒྲིབ་པར	put into shade in all directions	kun nas sgrib par
ཀུན་ནས་སྒྲིབ་པར་བྱེད	over-shadow all round	kun nas sgrib par byed
ཀུན་ནས་དངངས་པ	to be terrified	kun nas dngangs pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཆས་པ	murderer	kun nas chas pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཉམས་པ	totally degenerate. See {nyams pa}	kun nas nyams pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཉེ་བར་འོངས་པ	approaching from all sides	kun nas nye bar 'ongs pa
བྱང་བ་ཡང་དག་པར་སྟོན་པ	the teacher of the afflictions of the kleshas and of their complete purification kun nas nyong mongs pa dang rnam par	byang ba yang dag par ston pa
བྱང་བ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	thorough investigation of the afflictions of the kleshas and of their complete purification	byang ba yongs su tshol ba
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས	defilement, allconflicting emotions, affliction of the kleshas, very miserable	kun nas nyon mongs
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན	having the affliction of the kleshas	kun nas nyon mongs can
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་གཉེན་པོ	antidote to the afflicting kleshas	kun nas nyon mongs gnyen po
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	made very miserable	kun nas nyon mongs pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན	Syn {kun nas nyon mongs can}	kun nas nyon mongs pa can
དང་འདྲེས་པ	mingled w afflicted phenomena kun nas nyon mongs pa can gyi chos	dang 'dres pa
སེམས	afflicted state of mind kun nas nyon mongs pa can du gyur pa'i	sems
བྱང་བ	the side of the kleshas,[suffering and its origin] and that of enlightenment, [the path and cessation], affliction and perfection/total purification kun nas nyon mongs pa dang rnam par	byang ba
བྱང་བ་དག	affliction and perfection/total purification kun nas nyon mongs pa dang rnam par byang ba dang ldang ba thams cad	byang ba dag
མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of knowing all afflictions perfections and acts of emergence the power of omniscience regarding the side of the kleshas,[suffering and its origin] and that of enlightenment, [the path and...	mkhyen pa'i stobs
བྱང་བ་མི་ལྟ་བ	having no view of affliction or purity kun nas nyon mongs pa dang rnam par	byang ba mi lta ba
བྱང་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the character-	byang ba'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་མེད་པ	entirely free from misery	kun nas nyon mongs pa med pa
དགོངས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of realization without the affliction of the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa med pa'i thabs	dgongs pa'i mtshan nyid
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དོན	the means is being without the affliction of the kleshas, the goal is suchness kun nas nyon mongs pa med pa'i yan lag the limbs of being without the affliction of the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa ...	de kho na nyid kyi don
བར་འགྱུར	be in samsara without the affliction of the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa med par sgrub	bar 'gyur
པའི་རྣམ་པ	the aspect of establishing the absence of afflictions of the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa med par mos pa aspire to being without the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa med par yongs	pa'i rnam pa
སུ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	perfect enjoyment without the afflictions of the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa med par yongs	su longs spyod pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཡང་མེད	completely without the afflictions of the kleshas	kun nas nyon mongs pa yang med
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ལས་ལྡོག་པས	by reversing the affliction og the kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa'i 'khor ba'i rgyu 'bras - the cause and effect of samsaric affliction	kun nas nyon mongs pa las ldog pas
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of afflicting kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa'i cha dang mthun	kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rgyu
པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	attributes that conform w the aspect of affliction kun nas nyon mongs pa'i cha dang mthun	pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharmas of affliction	kun nas nyon mongs pa'i chos
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the dependency of affliction (samsara) kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rten 'brel drug CgdHN kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rten 'brel drug the sixfold dependent origination of affliction	kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rten 'brel
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བདེན་པ	the truth of the affliction of the kleshas [= {kun 'byung gi bden pa} the truth of the origin of suffering.]	kun nas nyon mongs pa'i bden pa
པོ	the antidote for the disease of afflicting kleshas kun nas nyon mongs pa'i phyogs kyi rten 'brel - Syn {kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rten 'brel} kun nas nyon mongs pa'i phyogs 'gag pa the cessation of a...	po
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	attributes of affliction	kun nas nyon mongs pa'i mtshan nyid
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་ཕྱོགས	the aspect of afflicting kleshas	kun nas nyon mongs phyogs
རྐང་ང་གསུམ	50 three divisions of	rkang nga gsum
རྐང་ལྔ་ཅུ་ང་གསུམ	the fifty three	rkang lnga cu nga gsum
དིབི༹སིཨོནས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	afflicted phenomena. 1-5 {phung bo lnga}. five aggregates. see. {phung po lnga}. 6-11 {dbang bo drug}. six sense faculties / powers [see. {dbang po drug}.) 12-17 {rnam shes drug}. six consciousness...	divisions of ever
པོ་བཅུ་བཞི	the fourteen faculties of	po bcu bzhi
ཐེ་ཨེབེ༹ར	afflicted phenomena. the fourteen powers of the ever-afflicted phenomena. 1) {mig gi dbang bo}. eye faculty. 2) {sna'i dbang bo}. nose faculty 3) {rna ba'i dbang bo}. ear faculty 4) {nye'i dbang bo...	the ever
བོ་བཅུ་བཞི	14 faculties/ powers of	bo bcu bzhi
ཕ༹ཅུལཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ལིཕེ༹	force 10 {bde ba'i dbang bo} faculty of joy 11 {sdug bsngal gyi dbang bo}-faculty of suffering 12) {yid bde'i dbang bo}-faculty of mental pleasure 13) {yid mi bde ba'i dbang bo} faculty of mental d...	faculty of life
བདེའི་དབང་བོ	faculty of mental pleasure 13) {yid mi bde ba'i dbang bo} faculty of mental displeasure 14) {btang snyoms kyi dbang bo - faculty of neutrality] kun nas nyon mongs med rnam dag completely pure witho...	bde'i dbang bo
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་ཤིན་ཏུ་གྲོལ	completely liberate the afflicting kleshas kun nas nyon rmong pa'i rtog pa thoughts/ conceptions of the affliction of the kleshas	kun nas nyon mongs shin tu grol
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་རྨོང་པའི་རྟོག་པ	defiled thinking	kun nas nyon rmong pa'i rtog pa
ཀུན་ནས་སྙེམས	very haughty, arrogant	kun nas snyems
ཀུན་ནས་སྙེམས་པ	very haughty, arrogant	kun nas snyems pa
ཀུན་ནས་གཏི་མུག་པ	thoroughly deluded	kun nas gti mug pa
ཀུན་ནས་བཏགས	???? ied on all sides	kun nas btags
ཀུན་ནས་བཏགས་པ	fastened or tied up on all sides	kun nas btags pa
ཀུན་ནས་བཏུས་པ	collected from everywhere, compilation	kun nas btus pa
ཀུན་ནས་རྟོག་པ	conceptualize	kun nas rtog pa
ཀུན་ནས་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of being thoroughly lovely to behold. One of {dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu}	kun nas lta na sdug pa'i dpe byad
ཀུན་ནས་ཐོས་པ	learned	kun nas thos pa
ཀུན་ནས་དོར་བ	abandoned	kun nas dor ba
ཀུན་ནས་གདུང་བ	painful	kun nas gdung ba
ཀུན་ནས་གདུངས་པ	tormented	kun nas gdungs pa
ཀུན་ནས་འདུད	venerated by everyone everywhere	kun nas 'dud
ཀུན་ནས་འདུད་པ	venerated by everybody or everywhere	kun nas 'dud pa
ཀུན་ནས་འདོད་པ	to wish from the bottom of the heart	kun nas 'dod pa
ཀུན་ནས་འདྲི་བ	questioned	kun nas 'dri ba
ཀུན་ནས་འདྲེན་པ	leading	kun nas 'dren pa
ཀུན་ནས་འདྲེས་པ	mixed	kun nas 'dres pa
ཀུན་ནས་ལྡང་བ	active state arising everywhere, well got up	kun nas ldang ba
ཀུན་ནས་སྡུད་པ	collected from every place, brought together from every place	kun nas sdud pa
ཀུན་ནས་སྡོམ་པའི་རྣམ་པ	the aspect of	kun nas sdom pa'i rnam pa
ཀུན་ནས་སྡོམ་པར་བྱེད	to fully restrain (oneself)	kun nas sdom par byed
ཀུན་ནས་གནས་པ	fully abiding	kun nas gnas pa
ཀུན་ནས་གནས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fully settle	kun nas gnas par byed pa
ཀུན་ནས་མནན་པ	subdue	kun nas mnan pa
ཀུན་ནས་མནར་སེམས	a hostile attitude, {gnod sems}	kun nas mnar sems
ཀུན་ནས་མནར་སེམས་ཀྱི་སེམས	hostile thoughts	kun nas mnar sems kyi sems
ཀུན་ནས་མནར་སེམས་པ	hostile attitude/ thought/ wishes	kun nas mnar sems pa
ཀུན་ནས་རྣམ་དག	utterly pure	kun nas rnam dag
ཀུན་ནས་སྣང་བ	all illuminating	kun nas snang ba
ཀུན་ནས་སྣང་བ་བཀོད་པའི་དཔལ	the buddha {kun nas snang ba bkod pa'i dpal}	kun nas snang ba bkod pa'i dpal
ཀུན་ནས་སྣང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to fully illuminate	kun nas snang bar byed pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཕྱིན	destitute of	kun nas phyin
ཀུན་ནས་འཕགས	spring from everywhere	kun nas 'phags
ཀུན་ནས་འཕགས་པ	sprung from everywhere	kun nas 'phags pa
ཀུན་ནས་འཕོ་བ	transferring	kun nas 'pho ba
ཀུན་ནས་འཕྲོ་བ	emanating	kun nas 'phro ba
ཀུན་ནས་འཕྲོས	stream out of everywhere	kun nas 'phros
ཀུན་ནས་བྱུང	source; See {kun 'byung}	kun nas byung
ཀུན་ནས་བྲིས	perfectly painted, described, delineated	kun nas bris
ཀུན་ནས་བྲེལ་བ	always hurrying, acting with speed	kun nas brel ba
ཀུན་ནས་བླངས	taken from every place	kun nas blangs
ཀུན་ནས་འབབ	(met arise	kun nas 'bab
ཀུན་ནས་འབར	ablaze, inflamed	kun nas 'bar
ཀུན་ནས་འབྱུང་བ	origin, source. See {kun 'byung}	kun nas 'byung ba
ཀུན་ནས་སྦྱོར་བ	combine, combination	kun nas sbyor ba
ཀུན་ནས་རྨོངས་པ	completely deluded. total delusion	kun nas rmongs pa
ཀུན་ནས་བརྩེགས	built up everywhere, erected, piled up	kun nas brtsegs
ཀུན་ནས་བརྩེགས་པ	built up everywhere, piled up, erected	kun nas brtsegs pa
ཀུན་ནས་འཚོལ་བའི་ཡིད	longing attitude	kun nas 'tshol ba'i yid
ཀུན་ནས་མཛེས	illuminated very beautiful	kun nas mdzes
ཀུན་ནས་མཛེས་པ	1) extremely beautiful, lovely in all respects; 2) illuminated	kun nas mdzes pa
ཀུན་ནས་འཛིན་པ	constitute	kun nas 'dzin pa
ཀུན་ནས་འཛིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	constitute	kun nas 'dzin par byed pa
ཀུན་ནས་གཞལ	of every kind, complete, unlimited	kun nas gzhal
ཀུན་ནས་ཟད་པ	utterly exhausted, spent, finished	kun nas zad pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཟླུམ་པ	all-inclusive / holistic	kun nas zlum pa
ཀུན་ནས་གཟིགས་པ	epith. of Buddha	kun nas gzigs pa
ཀུན་ནས་བཟང	poet. king's palace. Syn {dpa' gyi lo ma}	kun nas bzang
ཀུན་ནས་བཟང་བ	totally excellent	kun nas bzang ba
ཀུན་ནས་བཟོད	all-forbearing	kun nas bzod
ཀུན་ནས་བཟོད་པ	all-forgiving, very patient	kun nas bzod pa
ཀུན་ནས་འོང་བ	coming from everywhere	kun nas 'ong ba
ཀུན་ནས་འོངས་པ	coming from everywhere	kun nas 'ongs pa
ཀུན་ནས་ཡོངས་སུ	shut up entirely, surrounded on all sides	kun nas yongs su
ཀུན་ནས་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྐོར་བ	entirely besieged	kun nas yongs su bskor ba
ཀུན་ནས་རོལ་བ	enjoyment, merriment. See {rol ba}	kun nas rol ba
ཀུན་ནས་རོལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to enjoy. See {rol ba}	kun nas rol bar byed pa
ཀུན་ནས་ལང་བ	see {kun nas slong ba}	kun nas lang ba
ཀུན་ནས་ཤེས་པ	all-knowing	kun nas shes pa
ཀུན་ནས་སློང་བ	1) to be motivated, activated, intended, completely aroused. 2) motivation. See also {kun slong}	kun nas slong ba
ཀུན་ནས་སློང་བའི་ཐབས	means of motivation	kun nas slong ba'i thabs
ཀུན་ནས་བསྲུང་བ	total protection, allprotecting	kun nas bsrung ba
ཀུན་ནས་བསླང་བ	see {kun nas slong ba}	kun nas bslang ba
ཀུན་ནས་བསླང་བའི་ལས	actions motivated by	kun nas bslang ba'i las
ཀུན་ནས་བསླངས	motivated	kun nas bslangs
ཀུན་ནས་བསླངས་ཏེ	motivated by	kun nas bslangs te
ཀུན་ནས་བསླངས་པ	prompted by	kun nas bslangs pa
ཀུན་ནས་བསླངས་བའི་དགེ་བའི་ལས	an intended virtuous karmic action	kun nas bslangs ba'i dge ba'i las
ཀུན་ནུས	almighty, omnipotent, allpowerful, universal, all-purpose	kun nus
ཀུན་ནུས་ལུས་རྩལ་པ	all-around athlete/ player	kun nus lus rtsal pa
ཀུན་གནས	assembly place	kun gnas
ཀུན་སྣང	1) illuminating, shining; rays of the sun (lit. all-illuminating). 2) abbr. of {kun tu snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin}. 2) n. of a buddha	kun snang
ཀུན་སྣང་ཁྱབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	allilluminating & all-pervasive	kun snang khyab pa chen po
ཀུན་སྣང་གི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of illumination; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 90]	kun snang gi ting nge 'dzin
ཀུན་སྣང་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of illumination; meditative absorption of universal manifestation	kun snang gyi ting nge 'dzin
ཀུན་སྣང་དང་བ་ཅན	n. of a fabulous lake in the region of asuras	kun snang dang ba can
ཀུན་སྣང་དྭངས་པ་ཅན	n. of a lake of	kun snang dwangs pa can
ཐེ་དེམི	gods	the demi
ཀུན་སྣང་འབར	all-illuminating (met sun [rays]	kun snang 'bar
ཀུན་སྣང་འབར་བ	all-illuminating rays, rays of the sun	kun snang 'bar ba
ཀུན་པ་ཉིད	crookedness	kun pa nyid
ཀུན་དཔེ	universal metaphor	kun dpe
ཀུན་སྤང་ཐུགས་རྗེ་བཙོན་གྲུས	Kunpang Thugje Tsondru founder of Jonang Monastery: b1243 kun spang bsod rnam rgyal mtshan Kunpang Sönam Gyaltsen b1342	kun spang thugs rje btson grus
ཀུན་སྤངས	all-abandoning. ascetic, yogi. the main of the five {snying rtsa}. 1). 2) everything abandoned. 3) renunciant. 4) mendicant. 5) nirvana	kun spangs
ཀུན་སྤངས་ཆེན་པོ	all-renouncer, ascetic, hermit	kun spangs chen po
ཀུན་སྤངས་ཐུགས་རྗེ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	{kun spangs thugs rje brtson 'grus} [born in the water rabbit year of the 4th rabjung, died in the 5th rabjung's water ox year, of the lineage of yu mo mi bskyod rdo rje, des in Tsang in lha rtser ...	kun spangs thugs rje brtson 'grus
ཀུན་སྤངས་པ	renunciant, mendicant	kun spangs pa
ཀུན་སྤངས་གཙང་མ་བྱས་པ	to become a pure renunciant	kun spangs gtsang ma byas pa
ཀུན་སྤོང	attitude	kun spong
ཀུན་སྤྱད	customary behavior, habit[ual work]	kun spyad
ཀུན་སྤྱོད	kun tu spyod pa ste, lus ngag yid gsum mam de gsumgang rung gi bya spyod dam spyod lam,...Rtogs pa lha dangmnyam yang, kun spyod mi dang mthun dgos [of body speech or mind	kun spyod
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་བློ་སྦྱོང	moral training	kun spyod kyi blo sbyong
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་སྐོར་གྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	moral ideas	kun spyod skor gyi lta tshul
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་སྐོར་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	moral concept	kun spyod skor gyi 'du shes
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དགུ	nine types of activity	kun spyod dgu
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་ངན་པ	black or fallen brahman, bad habits, vicious acts or professions	kun spyod ngan pa
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དག་བཅོས	[self criticism to produce] direct and proper/rectification of thinking and acting	kun spyod dag bcos
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དག་བཅོས་བྱེད	rectify, use self criticism to produce direct and proper thinking and acting	kun spyod dag bcos byed
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དག་ཐེར	[self criticism to produce] direct and proper/rectification of thinking and acting	kun spyod dag ther
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དག་ཐེར་བྱེད	rectify, use self criticism to produce direct and proper thinking and acting	kun spyod dag ther byed
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་དག་ཐེར་ལས་འགུལ	rectification campaign	kun spyod dag ther las 'gul
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་པར་འགྱུར	will experience	kun spyod par 'gyur
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་སྤྱིའི་ཡོན་ཏན་གསུམ	the three general qualities of conduct. 1) a division of {dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu}. 2) {kun spyod gtsang ba}. 3) {kun nas lta na sdug pa}. 4) {phyag zhabs dpal be'u sogs kyis brgyan pa'i dpe by...	kun spyod spyi'i yon tan gsum
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་གཙང་བ	pure conduct	kun spyod gtsang ba
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་གཙང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of pure conduct [one of {dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu} dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'igras shig thugs gtsang ba nyid kyis sgo gsum gyi kun tu spyodpa la nyes pa'i dri ma med pas gtsang ba]	kun spyod gtsang ba'i dpe byad
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་མཚུངས	(met girl friend, sweetheart	kun spyod mtshungs
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་མཚུངས་མ	female friend, sweetheart, mistress	kun spyod mtshungs ma
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་མཚུངས་མོ	sweetheart, mistress	kun spyod mtshungs mo
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་རབ་ཏུ་གུས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	with respectful manners	kun spyod rab tu gus pa'i sgo nas
ཀུན་སྤྱོད་ལ	conduct	kun spyod la
ཀུན་ཕན	beneficial to all, benefits all	kun phan
ཀུན་ཕན་གྱི་རྒྱན	ornament of benefit for all [ornament teaching how in accomplishing some disired goal the aso-	kun phan gyi rgyan
ཀུན་ཕན་བདུད་རྩི	1) all-benefitting amrita; 2) the moon	kun phan bdud rtsi
ཀུན་ཕན་བདུད་རྩི་དབང་པོ	moon	kun phan bdud rtsi dbang po
ཀུན་ཕན་རིང་ལུགས	humanism humanitarianism	kun phan ring lugs
ཀུན་ཕྱི་འཐོན་ཏེ	all coming forth	kun phyi 'thon te
ཀུན་ཕྱིར་འཐོན་ཏེ	all having come out	kun phyir 'thon te
ཀུན་འཕོ	transferring	kun 'pho
ཀུན་འཕྲིགས	conceptions discursive thoughts {kun 'khrigs}?) means something like {rnam rtog}-word is in daily text of kadro kagyangchod]	kun 'phrigs
ཀུན་བོར	all-renouncer	kun bor
ཀུན་བྱང	Syn {kun nas nyon mongs pa dang rnam par byang ba}	kun byang
ཀུན་བྱང་གི་བསྡུས་པའི་ཆོས	all phenomena/dharmas comprised of affliction and perfection	kun byang gi bsdus pa'i chos
ཀུན་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་གཉིས	the two aspects of affliction and perfection	kun byang phyogs gnyis
ཀུན་བྱམས	universal love/ kindness	kun byams
ཀུན་བྱས	relative, world of appearances, SA gcig ma byas	kun byas
ཀུན་བྱུང	source, origin	kun byung
ཀུན་བྱེད	1) doer/creator of all; 2) {kun byed rgyal po}	kun byed
ཀུན་བྱེད་རྒྱལ་པོ	1) The all-creating king; 2) universal creativity, supreme ordering principle/ creative energy of the universe, majestic/universal creativity in everything/ that fashions everything/ that makes eve...	kun byed rgyal po
ཀུན་བྱེད་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Kunje Gyalpo Tantra. The chief Dzogchen tantra of the Mind Section	kun byed rgyal po'i rgyud
ཀུན་བྱེད་པ	artificial	kun byed pa
ཀུན་བྱེད་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	all-creating bodhichitta	kun byed byang chub sems
ཀུན་བྲལ	beyond all	kun bral
ཀུན་དབང	total power	kun dbang
ཀུན་དབྱིང་རྒྱལ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	AllVictorious Ones of Space	kun dbying rgyal ba'i dkyil 'khor
ཀུན་འབབ	poet. city	kun 'bab
ཀུན་འབུང་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	ensuing acceptance and ensuing cognition concerning the origin	kun 'bung la rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa
ཀུན་འབྱམས	all-encompassing; infinitely extensive [everywhere / in all directions]	kun 'byams
ཀུན་འབྱུང	all-pervasive origin (of suffering)	kun 'byung
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	truth of origin	kun 'byung kyi bden pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་གི་བདེན་པ	truth of allpervasive origin (of suffering)	kun 'byung gi bden pa
ཏྲུཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	pervasive origin (of suffering); Def: by Jamgön Kongtrül: {ngo bo ni/ 'byung 'gyur nyer len gyi phung po'i rgyur gyur pa'i las nyon rnams so}	truth of all
ཀུན་འབྱུང་གི་སྤྱི་མཚན	rgyu dang/ kun 'byung/ rab skye/ rkyen bzhi	kun 'byung gi spyi mtshan
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ཆོས་བཟོད	dharmaacceptance concerning the origin of suffering [mthong lam gyi ye shes skad cig bcu drug gi gras 'dod khamskyi kun 'byung bden par dmigs nas bdag med du rtogs pa'imthong lam bar chad med lam g...	kun 'byung chos bzod
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ཆོས་བཟོད་ཆོས་ཤེས	the	kun 'byung chos bzod chos shes
དྷརྨ	acceptance and dharmacognition concerning the origin of suf-	dharma
བཟོད་རྗེས་ཤེས	cognition, ensuing cognition, acceptance and ensuing acceptance; acceptance of cognizing the attributes of the origin, the cognition of these attributes, the acceptance of ensuing cognition, and th...	bzod rjes shes
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ཆོས་ཤེས	cognition of the attributes of the origin; abbr. of {kun 'byung la chos shes pa}. One of {mthong lam gyi ye shes skad cig bcu drug}; kun 'byung (la) chos shes (pa) knowledge of the phenomenon of the	kun 'byung chos shes
ཀུན་འབྱུང་རྗེས་བཟོད	{kun 'byung la rjes su shes pa'i bzod pa} patient acceptance producing subsequent knowledge of the all-pervasive origin of suffering specifically in the two higher realms]	kun 'byung rjes bzod
ཀུན་འབྱུང་རྗེས་བཟོད་རྗེས་ཤེས	the acceptance of ensuing cognition concerning the origin	kun 'byung rjes bzod rjes shes
ཀུན་འབྱུང་རྗེས་ཤེས	ensuing cognition of the origin; abbr. of {kun 'bung la rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa}. one of {mthong lam gyi ye shes skad cig bcu drug, skad cig bcu drug}	kun 'byung rjes shes
ཀུན་འབྱུང་གཉིས	the two types of origin [impelling karma and kleshas {'phen byed las}-) {nyon mongs}	kun 'byung gnyis
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བདེན	the truth of the origin (of suffering	kun 'byung bden
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བདེན་པ	the truth of the origin (of suffering) truth of the source of misery/suffering [2nd of the {'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi} four noble truths rang 'bras nyerlen gyi phung po ste ma dag pa'i snod bcud tha...	kun 'byung bden pa
བར་བྱ་བ	things to be abandoned through insight into the truth of origin kun 'byung bden pa mthong bas spang	bar bya ba
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བདེན་པའི་ངོ་བོ	the identity of the true origins karma and kleshas	kun 'byung bden pa'i ngo bo
ཏུརྣིང་ཨཝཡ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་དེསིརེ	attachment 2) {mi gnas pa'i rnam pa}-non-abidance 3) {zhi ba'i rnam pa} peaceful 4) {'dod chags med pa'i rnam pa} lack of desireattachment 5) {zhe sdang med pa'i rnam pa} lack of hatred-anger 6) {g...	turning away from desire
ནོན	abidance 3) {zhi ba'i rnam pa}. peaceful 4) {'dod chags med pa'i rnam pa}. lack of desire-attachment 5) {zhe sdang med pa'i rnam pa}. lack of hatred-anger 6) {gti mug med pa'i rnam ba}. lack of clo...	non
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བདེན་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four aspects of the truth of origin. 1) {rgyu}. 2) {kun 'byung}. 3) {rab skye}. 4) {rkyen}	kun 'byung bden pa'i rnam pa bzhi
ཀུན་འབྱུང་འདྲེན་པ	These either refer to the three causal vehicles of the pious attendants. self-centered buddhas. and bodhisattvas. or to the vehicle of directing the cause of suffering	kun 'byung 'dren pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་པིཨོཨུས་ཨཏཏེནདནཙ་སེལཕ༹	centered buddhas and bodhisattvas, vehicle of directing the cause of suffering	of the pious attendants self
ཀུན་འབྱུང་འདྲེན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of directing the cause of suffering. The vehicles of shravakas. pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas; approach that leads away from the origin of suffering	kun 'byung 'dren pa'i theg pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བ	sin	kun 'byung ba
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བག་ཆགས	karmic traces which are the origin of all	kun 'byung bag chags
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བའི་བདེན་པ	the truth of the origin of suffering	kun 'byung ba'i bden pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	having the attributes of origin	kun 'byung ba'i mtshan nyid can
ཀུན་འབྱུང་བཟོད	{kun 'byung la chos shes pa'i bzod pa} patient acceptance	kun 'byung bzod
པྲོདུཅིང་ཀནོཝླེདགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕེནོམེནོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	pervasive origin of suffering (specifically in the desire realm)	producing knowledge of the phenomenon of the all
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་པ	the dharmaacceptance and dharma-cognition concerning the origin [one of {mthong lam gyi ye shes skad cig bcu drug} 'dod khams kyi kun 'byung bden par dmigs nas bdag med du rtogs pa'imthong lam bar ...	kun 'byung la chos shes pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of the cognition of the attributes concerning the origin; patient acceptance producing knowledge of	kun 'byung la chos shes pa'i bzod pa
ཐེ་ཕེནོམེནོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	pervasive origin of suffering (specifically in the desire realm)	the phenomenon of the all
བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of the ensuing cognition of understanding concerning the origin. One of {mthong lam gyi ye shes skad cig bcu drug} kun 'byung la rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa'i	bzod pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	the ensuing cognition concerning the origin; subsequent knowledge of the all-pervasive origin of suffering (specifically in the two higher realms)	kun 'byung la rjes su shes pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་ཤེས་པ	cognition of origin. One of {shes pa bcu}	kun 'byung shes pa
ཀུན་འབྱུང་སྲེད་པ	craving which belong under origin	kun 'byung sred pa
ཀུན་འབྱུངས	complete embodiment, origin (2nd noble truth	kun 'byungs
ཀུན་འབྱོར	ever-connecting. see also {kun tu 'byor ba}; {kun sbyor} kun rbyung bden pa'i khyad chos bzhi the four particular dharmas of the truth of the origin of suffering	kun 'byor
ཀུན་སྦྱོང	thorough purification	kun sbyong
ཀུན་སྦྱོང་བ	thorough purification	kun sbyong ba
ཀུན་སྦྱོར	abbr. of {kun tu sbyor ba}. 1 application. 2 bond, fetter. 3) intercourse; 1) bad thought. 2) thorough empowerment; enjoyment, libertinism	kun sbyor
ཀུན་སྦྱོར་དགུ	the nine bonds / fetters. 1) {rjes su chags pa}. 2) khong khro ba}. 3) {nga rgyal}. 4) {ma rig pa}. 5) {lta ba}. 6) {mchog 'dzin}. 7) {the tshom}. 8) {phrag dog}. 9) {ser sna}	kun sbyor dgu
ཀུན་སྦྱོར་ལྔ	the five fetters. 1) {tha ma'i cha mthun gyi kun sbyor lnga, gong ma'i cha mthun gyi kun sbyor lnga}	kun sbyor lnga
ཀུན་སྦྱོར་ཅན	epith. of the god Kama	kun sbyor can
ཀུན་སྦྱོར་བཅུ	the 10 fetters ??	kun sbyor bcu
ཀུན་སྦྱོར་གསུམ	the three fetters. 1) {'jig lta}. 2) {tshul brtul mchog 'dzin}. 3) {the tshom nyon mongs can}	kun sbyor gsum
ཀུན་མིང	pronoun	kun ming
ཀུན་མོས	agreeable	kun mos
ཀུན་མོས་དྲི་བཟང་བཞོན་པ་ཅན	sweet perfume	kun mos dri bzang bzhon pa can
ཀུན་རྨོང	all-obscuring, ignorance, stupidity [bewilderment, delusion]	kun rmong
ཀུན་རྨོངས	confusion	kun rmongs
ཀུན་རྨོངས་པ	1) ignorant of all knowables; 2) all knowables are obscured	kun rmongs pa
ཀུན་སྨོད	despised	kun smod
ཀུན་འཚོ	livelihood, subsistence	kun 'tsho
ཀུན་ཛ་ར	fabulous silver mountain where sun never sets	kun dza ra
ཀུན་མཛེས	beautiful	kun mdzes
ཀུན་མཛེས་མ	beautiful woman	kun mdzes ma
ཀུན་འཛིན	the all-containing, that which holds everything in itself	kun 'dzin
ཀུན་འཛིན་མ	(met all-grasper/container, the earth	kun 'dzin ma
ཀུན་འཛོམ	where all meet	kun 'dzom
ཀུན་རྫེ་བ་པའི་སྐྱབས	the conventional refuge the conventional object of worship	kun rdze ba pa'i skyabs
ཀུན་རྫོ་བ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	wisdom understanding conventional phenomena kun rdzo ba yul can gyi rjes su yi rang	kun rdzo ba rtogs pa'i shes rab
སྒོམ་ལམ	path of meditation of admiration, observing the conventional entity	sgom lam
ཀུན་རྫོག་སྒྱུ་མ	illusory manifestation of the relative	kun rdzog sgyu ma
ཀུན་རྫོགས	perfect(ion) in everything	kun rdzogs
ཀུན་རྫོགས་པ	1) everything finished. 2) everything perfected	kun rdzogs pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ	'concealing, ' relative, conventional, phenomenal, superficial, condi- tional, mundane, worldly convention, [truth] [relative an outfit that pleases or fits the rest of the world, {rdzob} effigy or...	kun rdzob
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	the relative of the relative. One of {kun rdzob gsum}	kun rdzob kyi kun rdzob
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	the identity of the relative	kun rdzob kyi ngo bo
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	superficial things	kun rdzob kyi dngos po
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་ཆ	the relative aspect	kun rdzob kyi cha
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས	conventional things	kun rdzob kyi chos
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	superficial dependency	kun rdzob kyi rten 'brel
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	relative (level of) truth	kun rdzob kyi bden pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་བདེན་པར	in relative truth	kun rdzob kyi bden par
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་རྣམ་བཞག	definition of the relative	kun rdzob kyi rnam bzhag
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	superficial/relative appearances	kun rdzob kyi snang ba
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ་རགས་པ	coarse superficial experience	kun rdzob kyi snang ba rags pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ་གཅོད་པ	cutting through superficial constructs	kun rdzob kyi spros pa gcod pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	1) superficial attribute. 2) 40	kun rdzob kyi mtshan nyid
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	conventional nature	kun rdzob kyi rang bzhin
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་ཤེས་བྱ	conventional knowledge kun rdzob kyis bsdus pa'i chos thams cad - all relative things / all things included within conventional [phenomena]	kun rdzob kyi shes bya
ཀུན་རྫོབ་འཁྲུལ་སྣང་ཙམ	mere superficial, deluded experience	kun rdzob 'khrul snang tsam
ཀུན་རྫོབ་འཁྲུལ་པ	conventional delusion	kun rdzob 'khrul pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་དྲན་འཛིན	fixated mindfulness of conventional delusion kun rdzob rgya che ba'i lam gyi rim pa aspects of the vast relative path kun rdzob rgya che ba'i lam gyi rim pa the aspects of the path of relative vast...	kun rdzob 'khrul pa'i dran 'dzin
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྒྱུའི་ཐིག་ལེ	relative substance bindus	kun rdzob rgyu'i thig le
ཀུན་རྫོབ་སྒྱུ་མ	illusory manifestation of the relative plane	kun rdzob sgyu ma
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ངེས་བྱེད	that which creates certainty about the relative	kun rdzob nges byed
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཆོས་ཅན	superficial conditioned phenomenon	kun rdzob chos can
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཉིད	superficiality	kun rdzob nyid
ཀུན་རྫོབ་གཉིས	2 aspects of relative appearance, SA yang dag kun rdzob, log pa'i kun rdzob	kun rdzob gnyis
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུ	relatively, conventionally, superficially	kun rdzob tu
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	conventional existence	kun rdzob tu yod pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ་ཙམ	existing in a mere superficial way	kun rdzob tu yod pa tsam
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུའང་མི་འདོད་པ	not asserted even on a relative level	kun rdzob tu'ang mi 'dod pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	mundane coincidence. relative dependency	kun rdzob rten 'brel
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the experience of superficial/relative interdependence	kun rdzob rten 'brel gyi snang ba
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཙམ་དུ	as mere superficial dependency	kun rdzob rten 'brel tsam du
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the knowledge of understanding the conventional, knowledge of the five sciences. One of {shes rab gsum}; Wisdom understanding conventional phenomena	kun rdzob rtogs pa'i shes rab
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཐ་སྙད	superficial semantics, relatively speaking	kun rdzob tha snyad
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དག་པའི་ལྷ་རིགས་གསུམ	three families of deities of the pure relative [in kriyatantra: {de bzhin gshegs pa'i rigs}, {pad ma'i rigs}, {rdo rje'i rigs}; three enlightened families of pure deities of relative appearance (ac...	kun rdzob dag pa'i lha rigs gsum
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དང་དོན་དམ	relative and absolute [conventional and ultimate superficial and truly real,]	kun rdzob dang don dam
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དང་དོན་དམ་པ	conventional and ultimate, superficial and real	kun rdzob dang don dam pa
བསྟན་པ	the Sutra Teaching the Conventional and Ultimate Truths kun rdzob dang don dam pa'i bden pa	bstan pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	conventionally existent	kun rdzob du yod pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དོན་དམ	conventional and ultimate, superficial and real	kun rdzob don dam
ཀུན་རྫོབ་དོན་དམ་ཆོས་རྣམས	all the relative and ultimate dharmas	kun rdzob don dam chos rnams
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	conventional truth superficial truth, conditional or dependent truth, subjective truth, superficial reality	kun rdzob bden pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ་གཉིས	two ways of superficial truth	kun rdzob bden pa gnyis
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པ	relative [being] [stong nyid kyi ldog zla ste snang phyogs kyi chos]	kun rdzob pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་སྐྱབས	the conventional refuge. the conventional object of worship	kun rdzob pa'i skyabs
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་ངོ་བོ	a conventional identity/nature	kun rdzob pa'i ngo bo
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་དངོས་པོ	conventional things [ggd]	kun rdzob pa'i dngos po
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་ཆ	superficial aspect	kun rdzob pa'i cha
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་ཟད་མོ	profundity of the conventional	kun rdzob pa'i zad mo
ཀུན་རྫོབ་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing relative	kun rdzob pa'i sems bskyed
བོདྷི	mind, conventional	bodhi
མིནད	generation kun rdzob bag chags su smra ba'i dbu ma	mind
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	conventional mind of enlightenment	kun rdzob byang chub kyi sems
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་བཞི	the four kinds of conventional bodhichitta: {mos pas spyod pa'i sems bskyed, lhag bsam dag pa'i sems bskyed, rnam par smin pa'i sems bskyed, sgrib pa spangs pa'i sems bskyed}	kun rdzob byang chub kyi sems bzhi
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	conventional bodhichitta	kun rdzob byang chub sems
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བྱང་སེམས	conventional bodhichitta	kun rdzob byang sems
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཙམ་དུ	only superficially	kun rdzob tsam du
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཚད་གྲུབ	superficially verifiable	kun rdzob tshad grub
ཀུན་རྫོབ་གཞན་སེལ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	in terms of relative exclusion / elimination	kun rdzob gzhan sel gyi sgo nas
ཀུན་རྫོབ་གཟུང་འཛིན	superficial perceiver and perceived	kun rdzob gzung 'dzin
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཡིན་པ	to be of a superficial nature kun rdzob yul can gyi rjes su yi rang sgom	kun rdzob yin pa
ལམ	Path of meditation of admiration, observing the conventional entity kun rdzob yul can gyi rjes su yi rang sgom	lam
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཡོད་པ	to exist superficially, have superficial existence	kun rdzob yod pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་རང་བྱིན་བརླབ་པ	relative	kun rdzob rang byin brlab pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཤེས་པ	relative awareness [shes pa bcu'i ya gyal zhig ste, bden pa ma mthong gong gi so so'i skye bo thams cad kyi shes pa]	kun rdzob shes pa
དབུ་མ་པ	division of the Middle Way made by slob dpon Shantipa	dbu ma pa
ཀུན་རྫོབ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	conventional	kun rdzob sems bskyed
ཀུན་རྫོབ་གསུམ	the three kinds of relative truth [kun rdzob kyi kun rdzob dang, yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun rdzob dang, yang dag pa'i kun rdzob]	kun rdzob gsum
ཀུན་རྫོབས	convention	kun rdzobs
ཀུན་གཞི	1) collecting place, begging bowl; 2) continuum of mind, one's nature; 3) alaya [one of the 8 consciousnesses all-ground, basis/ ground/ fundamental structuring of all [experience], the basic store...	kun gzhi
གྲོཨུནད	of-all; gathering place, storehouse, ground of all (ordinary/ samsaric) experience; basis of everything, basic nature. 2) abbr. of {kun gzhi'i rnam par shes pa}, {kun gzhi rnam par shes pa}	ground
ནཏུརེ་ཨལལ	ground spirit, basis, mind, base of all, base, (sometimes synonymous with rang byung ye shes, byang chub sems, bon nyid), primordial base, universal ground of emptiness, the basis of everything, un...	nature all
ཀུན་གཞི་ཁམས	superstrate, pervasive medium, all-ground as a pervasive medium in which the intentionality of a mind does not yet operate	kun gzhi khams
ཀུན་གཞི་དུལ་བ	tamed mind	kun gzhi dul ba
ཀུན་གཞི་བདེན་པར་གྲུབ་པ	a truly existent all-ground	kun gzhi bden par grub pa
ཀུན་གཞི་འདུས་མ་བྱས	Uncompounded	kun gzhi 'dus ma byas
ཀུན་གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	1) the abode	kun gzhi gnas kyi 'khor lo
ཝཧེཨེལ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground. 2) The place in the heart where all the nadis join together	wheel of the all
ཀུན་གཞི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	all-ground consciousness. Usually {kun gzhi'i rnam par shes pa} store house consciousness - alaya vijnana	kun gzhi rnam par shes pa
ཀུན་གཞི་རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཆ	the (karmic)	kun gzhi rnam smin gyi cha
རིཔེནིང་ཨསྤེཅཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground	ripening aspect of the all
ཀུན་གཞི་རྣམ་ཤེས	alayavijnana, allground cognitiveness, substratum awareness, apperceptive mass, stratum-bound perceptivity (a perceptivity tending to distinct perceptual judgment, but as yet undetermined and being...	kun gzhi rnam shes
ཀུན་གཞི་རྣམ་ཤེས་བཀྲེས་པ	hunger	kun gzhi rnam shes bkres pa
ཀུན་གཞི་མ་རིག་པའི་ཆ	ignorant aspect	kun gzhi ma rig pa'i cha
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground/ alaya	of the all
ཀུན་གཞི་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	the actual allground	kun gzhi mtshan nyid pa
ཀུན་གཞི་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordial, panoramic awareness	kun gzhi ye shes
ཀུན་གཞི་ལ་བག་ཆགས་བཞག་ཅིང	placing	kun gzhi la bag chags bzhag cing
ཧབིཏུཨལ་ཏེནདེནཅིཨེས་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground	habitual tendencies in the all
ཀུན་གཞི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	the indefinite allground; undecided all-ground; indefinite / undecided all-ground	kun gzhi lung ma bstan
ཀུན་གཞིའི་ཁམས	SA kun gzhi khams	kun gzhi'i khams
ཀུན་གཞིའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	the alaya system	kun gzhi'i chos lugs
ཀུན་གཞིའི་ནམ་ཤེས	all ground consciousness, alayavijnana	kun gzhi'i nam shes
ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས	alayavijnana, allground- consciousness	kun gzhi'i rnam par shes
ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	alayavijnana,	kun gzhi'i rnam par shes pa
ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	consciousness as the basis/ ground of all (ordinary) experience; conscious aspect of the basis/ ground of all experience	kun gzhi'i rnam shes
ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྫས་རྒྱུན	substantial continuation of the basis of all	kun gzhi'i rdzas rgyun
ཀུན་གཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	all-ground wisdom	kun gzhi'i ye shes
ཀུན་གཞིའི་ཤེས་པ	awareness of alaya	kun gzhi'i shes pa
ཀུན་གཞིར	as alaya/ basis of all	kun gzhir
ཀུན་བཞི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	the indefinite/neutral all- ground/ alaya	kun bzhi lung ma bstan
ཀུན་ཟ	all-eating, fire	kun za
ཀུན་ཟ་མེ་ཏོག	blue flower of spyi shur	kun za me tog
ཀུན་ཟླུམ་པ	all-embracing	kun zlum pa
ཀུན་གཟིགས	all-seeing [one]	kun gzigs
ཀུན་གཟིགས་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	kun gzigs mkhyen brtse
ཀུན་གཟིགས་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Syn Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	kun gzigs mkhyen brtse rin po che
ཀུན་གཟིགས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	'brug chen	kun gzigs chos kyi snang ba
བི༹ཨིཨི	(1768-1822)	viii
ཀུན་གཟིགས་མདོ་སྔགས་གླིང་པ	Künzik	kun gzigs mdo sngags gling pa
ཌོ	Ngak Lingpa. Syn {'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dbang po}	Do
ཀུན་གཟིགས་པན་ཆེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	The Panchen Lama [also known as the Tashi Lama]	kun gzigs pan chen rin po che
ཀུན་བཟང	1) Samantabhadra; 2) kun bzang mt.; 3) all-positive/good, ever excellent, always kind; 4) the {nam mkha'i mdzod} mantra	kun bzang
ཀུན་བཟང་ཀློང་དྲུག	six vast spaces of samantabhadra , six dimensions of samantabhadra	kun bzang klong drug
ཀུན་བཟང་ཀློང་དྲུག་པ	six spheres of samantabhadra	kun bzang klong drug pa
ཀུན་བཟང་ཀློང་དྲུག་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Six Spheres of Samantabhadra	kun bzang klong drug pa'i rgyud
ཀུན་བཟང་མཁའ་ཁྱབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Kunzang Khakyab Dorje. The 15th Karmapa 1871-1922	kun bzang mkha' khyab rdo rje
ཀུན་བཟང་འཁོར་ལོ	chess-board-like pattern sometimes w accrostic [snyan ngag sgra rgyan gyi nang gses ming tshig yi ge re'u mig tu bkod nas yig phreng dkyus su mtharchags dang, phyogs mtshams nas dbus su bklag tshul...	kun bzang 'khor lo
ཨརྲངེམེནཏ་ཨིན་སེབེ༹རལ་སqཨུཨརེས་རེསེམབླིང་ཨ་ཆེསས	board and sometimes forming an acrostic	arrangement in several squares resembling a chess
ཀུན་བཟང་གླིང	a place of pilgrimage in tibet	kun bzang gling
ཀུན་བཟང་དགོངས་འདུས	gter ma of padma glingpa 1450-, The Essence of the State of Samantabhadra	kun bzang dgongs 'dus
ཀུན་བཟང་དགོངས་པ	the Primordial State of Samantabhadra, state of knowledge of Samantabhadra	kun bzang dgongs pa
ཁྲོ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	by rgod	khro lhun grub kyi phrin las
ཀྱི་ལྡེམ་འཕྲུ་ཅན	gter ston - (13371408)	kyi ldem 'phru can
ཀུན་བཟང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	{rdo ring pa kun spangs chen po} 1449-1524 sa skya pa lama	kun bzang chos kyi nyi ma
ཀུན་བཟང་མཆོད་སྤྲིན	clouds of offerings emanated by Samantabhadra Bodhisattva	kun bzang mchod sprin
ཀུན་བཟང་སྙིང་ཐིག	Kunzang Nyingtig, of Tennyi Lingpa, Heart Essence of Samantabhadra	kun bzang snying thig
ཀུན་བཟང་བསྟན་སྙིང	essence of the teaching of Samantabhadra	kun bzang bstan snying
ཀུན་བཟང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the Heart Teachings of Samantabhadra. Syn {rdzogs pa chen po}	kun bzang thugs kyi bstan pa
ཀུན་བཟང་ཐུགས་གཏེར	revealed as {nye brgyud} by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo; originally revealed by {mang so byang chub gling pa dpal gyi rgyal mtshan}	kun bzang thugs gter
ཀུན་བཟང་ཐུགས་བསྟན	teaching on the state of Samantabhadra	kun bzang thugs bstan
ཀུན་བཟང་ཐུགས་ཐིག	Kunzang Tuktig. The 'Heart Essence of Samantabhadra.' A collection of terma teachings revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa focused on the peaceful and wrathful deities	kun bzang thugs thig
ཀུན་བཟང་དོན་ཕྲིན	the Ultimate Sadhana of Samantabhadra; abbr. of {kun tu bzang po'i don gyi phrin las}	kun bzang don phrin
ཀུན་བཟང་བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo tertön, as disciple of Rigdzin Tukchok Dorje; tertön and emanation of {a tsar ya ye shes dbyangs}. also called {smon lam rdo rje}	kun bzang bde chen rgyal po
ཀུན་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ	rig 'dzin - (1738-1805)	kun bzang rdo rje
ཀུན་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན	the great Samantabhadra Vajradhara	kun bzang rdo rje 'chang chen
ཀུན་བཟང་རྣམ་འཕྲུལ	miracles of Samantabhadra	kun bzang rnam 'phrul
ཨོཕ༹ཕེ༹རིང	cloud	offering
ཀུན་བཟང་རྣམ་གསུམ	the triad (the supreme deity of the bon religion with three manifestations)	kun bzang rnam gsum
ཀུན་བཟང་པོ	see {kun tu bzang po} kun bzang phrin las 'gro 'dul rtsal Kunzang Trinley Drodül Tsal, another name for Trülshik Rinpoche Ngawang Chökyi Lodrö	kun bzang po
ཀུན་བཟང་ཕྲིན་ལས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Kunzang Trinley Dorje, another name of Rigdzin Tukchok Dorje	kun bzang phrin las rdo rje
ཀུན་བཟང་བླ་མའི་ཞལ་ལུང	1) Kunsang Lamey Shellung. 2) the Oral Teachings	kun bzang bla ma'i zhal lung
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་Eབེ༹ར	Excellent Master. 3) A widespread commentary on the preliminaries by Paltrül Rinpoche	of the Ever
ཀུན་བཟང་མོ	one of {bdud mo bzhi}	kun bzang mo
ཀུན་བཟང་སྨོན་ལམ	{smon lam stobs po che}	kun bzang smon lam
ཀུན་བཟང་འོད་གསལ་སྙིང་པོ	a name for 'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse chos kyi blo gros	kun bzang 'od gsal snying po
ཀུན་བཟང་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Samantabhadra w consort	kun bzang yab yum
ཀུན་བཟང་རང་ཞལ	The ever-good identity, emptiness	kun bzang rang zhal
ཀུན་བཟང་རིག་འཛིན	Ever Excellent Vidyadhara. Same as Guru Rinpoche	kun bzang rig 'dzin
ཀུན་བཟང་ཤེས་རབ	{rig 'dzin} founder of {dpal yul rnam rgyal byang chub gling} kun bzang sems nyid cer mthong dgongs	kun bzang shes rab
པའི་གནད	the key points in the intent of the Direct Vision of the EverExcellent Mind Essence	pa'i gnad
ཀུན་བཟང་གསུམ	three aspects of b"n god [impersonal, personal and represented, see das for t)	kun bzang gsum
ཀུན་བཟོད	1) all [difficulties] enduring, all [burdens] bearing; 2) the earth	kun bzod
ཀུན་ཡོད་འཐེན་ཤུགས	gravity	kun yod 'then shugs
ཀུན་ར	monastic garden, garden, grove [kun dga' ra ba]	kun ra
ཀུན་རྭ	Syn {kun dga' rwa ba}	kun rwa
ཀུན་རིག	learned, all-knowing, a god, a learned man	kun rig
ཀུན་རིག་ཆོ་ག	practice of the Sarva Durgati Parishodhana tantra	kun rig cho ga
ཀུན་རིག་ཆོ་གའི་རྣམ་བཤད	{dpal ngan song thams cad yong su sbyang ba'i sdig sbyong sgo dgu'i rnam bshad 44 gzhan phan mdzes rgyan} by {'jam dbyangs kun dga' rnam rgyal}	kun rig cho ga'i rnam bshad
ཀུན་རིག་རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད	{kun rig rnam par snang mdzad} [a buddha, a yoga tantra]	kun rig rnam par snang mdzad
ཀུན་རིག་པ	wise, learned. 1) learned. 2 n. of a goddess	kun rig pa
ཀུན་རིགས	[R]1) knowledge perceiving/ knowing all; 2) buddha {kun rig rnam par snang mdzad}; 3) rites performed for the deceased	kun rigs
ཀུན་རིགས་རྣམ་སྣང	Skt. Sarvavid Vairochana - Künrik, an aspect of Buddha Vairochana	kun rigs rnam snang
ཀུན་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད	Vairochana, the All-embodying One, a Buddha from one of the five Buddha families	kun rigs rnam par snang mdzad
ཀུན་ལ	with everyone, everywhere	kun la
ཀུན་ལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས	name of goddess uma, wife of maheswara	kun la bkra shis
ཀུན་ལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་ལྡན་མ	the 1 who gives blessings to all	kun la bkra shis dbang ldan ma
ཀུན་ལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་མ	(met) the 1 who gives blessings to all [Uma wife of Maheshvara]	kun la bkra shis ma
ཀུན་ལ་སྐྱེ	SA kun skye	kun la skye
ཀུན་ལ་ཁྱབ	all-pervasive	kun la khyab
ཀུན་ལ་ཁྱབ་པ	to entirely pervade, to pervade each and every thing	kun la khyab pa
ཀུན་ལ་ཁྱབ་བྱེད	bezoar stone	kun la khyab byed
ཀུན་ལ་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་སེར་པོ	bezoar stone ghi wang, yellow pigment from vomit or urine of cow	kun la khyab byed ser po
ཀུན་ལ་འཇུག	efficient, able to enter into anything	kun la 'jug
ཀུན་ལ་སྙོམས་པ	equal for all	kun la snyoms pa
ཀུན་ལ་ལྟ	epith. of Vishnu	kun la lta
ཀུན་ལ་བདེ	happiness to all	kun la bde
ཀུན་ལ་ཕན	useful or good to all	kun la phan
ཀུན་ལ་ཕེན	beneficial to all	kun la phen
ཀུན་ལ་འཕྲོད	beneficial, agreeable to all	kun la 'phrod
ཀུན་ལ་འཕྲོད་པ	Syn {kun phan}	kun la 'phrod pa
ཀུན་ལ་བཙེས	injuring all	kun la btses
ཀུན་ལ་བཙེས་པ	injuring all, all-hurting, hurtful, obnoxious	kun la btses pa
ཀུན་ལ་རེག	meddling, meddlesome, touching everything	kun la reg
ཀུན་ལ་རོལ་པ	to display (itself) in everything	kun la rol pa
ཀུན་ལས	from every place or direction, SA kun nas, from every place or thing, from all, that all	kun las
ཀུན་ལས་རྒྱལ་བ	1) victorious over all others; 2) name of a buddha	kun las rgyal ba
ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	1) compilation from all sources; 2) Abhidharma- samuccaya the Compendium of Abhidharma {mngon pa kun las btus pa}	kun las btus pa
ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པའི་བཤད་པ	major commentary on the {kun las btus pa}	kun las btus pa'i bshad pa
ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་ཡ	compendium	kun las btus ya
ཀུན་ལས་དམན་པ	retard	kun las dman pa
ཀུན་ལེགས	abbr. of {kun dga' legs pa}	kun legs
ཀུན་ཤར	shines everywhere	kun shar
ཀུན་ཤེས	all knowing [aa'adzny'ana:) apprehending all qualities well known,	kun shes
ཝེལལ	versed, learned, all knowing, omniscient, Vishnu, agreement, mutual understanding, harmony, knowledge, understanding, notion, concept]	well
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཀ་འུན་དི་ཉ	Künshey Kaundinya. one of {lnga sde bzang po}	kun shes ka 'un di nya
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཀ་ཨུན་དི་ཉ	Kunshe kaundinya [one of {lnga sde bzang po}	kun shes ka un di nya
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཀུན་རིག	the cognizant consciousness, consciousness and cognizance. Syn {shes rig}	kun shes kun rig
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཀOན་དི་ཉ	Ajnana Kaundinya, one of {lnga sde bzang po}; important monk follower of the Buddha	kun shes kOn di nya
ཀུན་ཤེས་གཅིག་རྡུགས	knowing much but not being able to reduce it to general principles/ the essence	kun shes gcig rdugs
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཉིད	omniscience	kun shes nyid
ཀུན་ཤེས་ལྡན་པའི་དབང་པོ	faculty of having understood all [one of {zag med kyi dbang po gsum} {mi slob pa'i rgyud kyi dbang po dgu po de dag nyid all the kleshas of the paths of seeing and maditation are abandoned. possess...	kun shes ldan pa'i dbang po
ཀུན་ཤེས་པ	1) omniscient; 2) Vishnu	kun shes pa
ཀུན་ཤེས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	having understood all kun shes pa dang ldan pa'i dbang po faculty of having understood all [one of {zag med kyi dbang po gsum} kun shes pa dang ldan pa'i dbang po faculty of having understood all. ...	kun shes pa dang ldan pa
ཀུན་ཤེས་པ་དོང་ལྡན་པ	possessing omniscience	kun shes pa dong ldan pa
ཀུན་ཤེས་པའི་དབང་པོ	the faculty of understanding all [one of {zag med kyi dbang po gsum}; zag med kyi dbang po gsum gyi ya gyal,sgom lam pa'i rgyud kyi dbang po dgu de dag nyid kyis mi mthun pa dang gnyen po'iphyogs g...	kun shes pa'i dbang po
ཀུན་ཤེས་པའི་ཤོ	being under moral discipline, has reduced his desires and requirements	kun shes pa'i sho
ཀུན་ཤེས་པའི་ཤོ་གམ་པ	religious man who	kun shes pa'i sho gam pa
ཀུན་ཤེས་པར་འདོད་པ་ཉིད	desire for omniscience	kun shes par 'dod pa nyid
ཀུན་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ	omniscient action	kun shes par bya ba
ཀུན་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	make all understood	kun shes par byed pa
ཀུན་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་དབང་པོ	faculty of making all understood. One of {zag med kyi dbang po gsum}	kun shes par byed pa'i dbang po
ཀུན་ཤེས་བར་བྱ	knowable 45	kun shes bar bya
ཀུན་ཤེས་བྱེད་པའི་དབང་པོ	faculty producing omniscience [zag med kyi dbang po gsum gyi yagyal, mthong lam pa'i rgyud kyi dbang po dgu pos mthong spang gi nyon mongs spangs nas sngar mi shes pa kun shes par byedpa'o	kun shes byed pa'i dbang po
ཀུན་ཤེས་ཤིང་གཤེགས་པ	epith. of Buddha	kun shes shing gshegs pa
ཀུན་ཤོང	accommodate/contain everything	kun shong
ཀུན་གཤི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	alayavijnana,	kun gshi rnam par shes pa
ཀུན་བཤད	explaining all religions; wellexplained	kun bshad
ཀུན་བཤད་པ	well-explained	kun bshad pa
ཀུན་སེམས	always thinking, thinking of all	kun sems
ཀུན་སེམས་ལས་ཆེ་བ་མིན་པ་མི་ཡོད	everyone souls not help but worry	kun sems las che ba min pa mi yod
ཀུན་སོང	all-pervading	kun song
ཀུན་སོང་བ	all-pervading	kun song ba
ཀུན་སློང	the right attitude	kun slong
ཀུན་སློང་སྐྱེས་པ	formed the attitude / motivation	kun slong skyes pa
ཀུན་སློང་སྐྱོན་ཅན	x {chos nyan pa'i dus su rang nyid che 'dod dang grags 'dod kun slong skyon can gyis nyan na} if you listen to the teachings with the wrong attitude, such as the desire to become great or famous	kun slong skyon can
ཀུན་སློང་གི་ཁྱད་པར	the attribute of motivation	kun slong gi khyad par
ཀུན་སློང་གི་སེམས་པ	motivated frame of mind	kun slong gi sems pa
ཀུན་སློང་ངན་པ	bad motive, evil minded	kun slong ngan pa
ཀུན་སློང་བཅོས་པ	to change one's attitude	kun slong bcos pa
ཀུན་སློང་བཅོས་མ་ཤེས་ན	if you cannot correct your attitude	kun slong bcos ma shes na
ཀུན་སློང་བཅོས་ཤེས་ན	if you can correct your attitude	kun slong bcos shes na
ཀུན་སློང་ཆེན་པོ	passion, aggression and ignorance	kun slong chen po
ཀུན་སློང་འཆོས་པ	change/correct one's motivation, motivation [kun - all, rouse or inspire yourself w anything that occurs in your life, so as a compound motivation), attitude, incentive, intention, inducement, aspi...	kun slong 'chos pa
ཀུན་སློང་གཉིས	the two types of motivation; 1) {rgyu'i kun slong} causal motivation 2) {dus kyi kun slong} actual/basic motivation {bsam pa rgya che ba byang chub sems kyi kun slong} the motivation of great thoug...	kun slong gnyis
ཀུན་སློང་དྲག་པོ	strong motivation	kun slong drag po
ཀུན་སློང་འདི་གཙོ་ཆེ	more important is motivation kun slong byang chub sems rtsi zin pa 'di	kun slong 'di gtso che
གལ་ཆེ	it is always essential to give rise to bodhichitta	gal che
ཀུན་སློང་བཟང་པོ	perfect attitude	kun slong bzang po
ཀུན་སློང་རང་རྒྱལ་གཞན་ཕུང	selfish motivations/ intentions	kun slong rang rgyal gzhan phung
ཀུན་གསལ	total clarity/ lucidity/ illumination	kun gsal
ཀུན་གསལ་གསར་ཤོག	{kun gsal gsar shog} official Bhutan government newspaper	kun gsal gsar shog
ཀུན་གསོད	killing all [lord of death, rakshasa]	kun gsod
ཀུན་བསགས	filled, loaded with	kun bsags
ཀུན་བསླངས་པ	motivated, inspired	kun bslangs pa
ཀུམ	1) variant for {shi ba}. 2) Syn {kum po}	kum
ཀུམ་ཀུམ	very contracted	kum kum
ཀུམ་ཀུམ་སྡོད་པ	to sit down on one's heels, to squat	kum kum sdod pa
ཀུམ་ཀུམ་བྱེད་པ	to act stupidly	kum kum byed pa
ཀུམ་འགྲོ་བ	to meander, to coil up	kum 'gro ba
ཀུམ་འཇུག	bent, contracted	kum 'jug
ཀུམ་ཊ་ཀ	Syn {kun da}	kum Ta ka
ཀུམ་པ	to contract, to fold. crooked, shriveled, dried up, to bend, to double, curved, contracted, discouraged	kum pa
ཀུམ་པ་ཉིད	contraction	kum pa nyid
ཀུམ་པོ	bent, curved, contracted, discouraged	kum po
ཀུམ་པོར	cringingly, contractedly	kum por
ཀུམ་པོར་གནས་པ	be cowed	kum por gnas pa
ཀུམ་བི་ར	1) crocodile of the Ganges. 2) n. of a yaksha	kum bi ra
ཀུམ་བུམ	flexible	kum bum
ཀུམ་བེ་ར	crocodile	kum be ra
ཀུམ་བྷ	jar 46	kum bha
ཀུམ་བྷཱི་ར	Syn {kum bha}. Syn {kum bi ra}	kum bhI ra
ཀུམས	shrunk, contracted	kums
ཀུའང་ཏུང	Kwangtung Province	ku'ang tung
ཀུའི	ku'e	ku'i
ཀུའི་ཀྲེའོ	kus kro'u	ku'i kre'o
ཀུའི་ཙང	chinese work on divination	ku'i tsang
ཀུའི་ཚང	work on divination	ku'i tshang
ཀུའི་ཡང	Kuei yang	ku'i yang
ཀུའི་རེན	Qui Nhon S Vietnam	ku'i ren
ཀུའི་ཤིང	ind evil spirits from ch kuei shen, devils and gods	ku'i shing
ཀུའི་ཤིན	class of evil spirits, kuei-shen	ku'i shin
ཀུའུ་ལྕགས	cobalt	ku'u lcags
ཀུར་ཀུམ	saffron	kur kum
ཀུར་ཏི	urging, hastening	kur ti
ཀུར་རྟག་རྒགས	make [his] mark	kur rtag rgags
ཀུར་རྟགས	x mark [for signature]	kur rtags
ཀུར་མ	tortoise	kur ma
ཀུལ་ཀ་བྱེད་པའི་གནས	A disputed place, a disputed plot	kul ka byed pa'i gnas
ཀུལ་ཀར	place in tsang, kind of shield manufactured in kul kar	kul kar
ཀུལ་ཀར་ཕུབ	shield manufactured in Kulkar (a locality in Tibet)	kul kar phub
ཀུས་ཀྲོའི	Kweichow Province	kus kro'i
ཀུས་འདེབས་པ	to shout, to bellow	kus 'debs pa
ཀེ	vertical, standing upright, used to indicate all (in a series, 91	ke
ཀེ་ཀ	bird skra kha' or skya ga	ke ka
ཀེ་ཀ་པི་ནོ	country west of jambudvipa of romantic scenery	ke ka pi no
ཀེ་ཀི་སྒྲ	peacock's cry	ke ki sgra
ཀེ་ཀེ	vertical	ke ke
ཀེ་ཀེ་རུ	cat's eye (a precious stone)	ke ke ru
ཀེ་ཀེའི་སྒྲ་ཅན	poet. peacock	ke ke'i sgra can
ཀེ་ཀོ	cavity between the Adam's apple and the breastbone	ke ko
ཀེ་རྐེ་ཏ	yellow precious stone, karketana	ke rke ta
ཀེ་ཁོར་ལ	thereabouts	ke khor la
ཀེ་རྒྱུང	charm of the bon deity	ke rgyung
ཀེ་ཆུ	Ke River [branch of the zla chu in 'jo mda'rdzong and chab mdo rdzong]	ke chu
ཀེ་ཏ་ཀ	SK 1) *, gemstone ke ta ka; 2) ke ta ka tree/ fruit; 3) fabulous mt [R]	ke ta ka
ཀེ་ཏ་ར	mountain, probably kedara	ke ta ra
ཀེ་ཊ་རྱ	n. of a plant	ke Ta rya
ཀེ་ཏུ	meteor, comet Ketu	ke tu
ཀེ་ནའི་བུ	{ke na'i bu} [sage at Buddha's time]	ke na'i bu
ཀེ་ནེ་ཡ	rishi or sage, patronymic of ravana	ke ne ya
ཀེ་ནེའི་བུ	a sage at time of buddha	ke ne'i bu
ཀེ་པ	the 91st volume	ke pa
ཀེ་བྱེད	Kartika (god of war	ke byed
ཀེ་བླང	a {hva shang}. monk from China that help preserve the Vinaya in Tibet when it was destroyed by {glang dar ma}	ke blang
ཀེ་ཙེ	(CH oil making sngo ldum zhig gi seed	ke tse
ཀེ་རྩེ	ke'u tse	ke rtse
ཀེ་རྩེ་བ	a bon teacher	ke rtse ba
ཀེ་ཚེ	sisymbrium heteromallum c. a. beyer, rorippa indica (l.) hiern	ke tshe
ཀེ་ཚེགས	le tshegs, a naga	ke tshegs
ཀེ་ཛི	sa dma' sar skye ba'i klung sgog cig	ke dzi
ཀེ་ཡ	wickedness	ke ya
ཀེ་ཡུ་ར་ཀ	n. of a gandharva. 1) kind of grass used to make monastic garments. 2) n. of a gandharva	ke yu ra ka
ཀེ་ཡུ་ར་ཁ	1) grass once used to make bhikshu robes; 2) a gandharva	ke yu ra kha
ཀེ་ར	banana	ke ra
ཀེ་ར་ལ	Kerala State India	ke ra la
ཀེ་རུ	place and monastery in hon district	ke ru
ཨིན་ཡར	lung, species of peas	in yar
ཀེ་རེ	abruptly	ke re
ཀེ་རེ་བ	[acc. to KOT, such words are nyams kyi skad cha and all have a sense of gsal cha rnam rtog med pa]	ke re ba
ཀེ་རོམ	carrom [game]	ke rom
ཀེ་ལ	kela clan, banana	ke la
ཀེ་ལ་ཀ	ginger	ke la ka
ཀེ་ལ་པ་ཏྲ	gills	ke la pa tra
ཀེ་ལ་ཤ	himalaya mountains, king of mountains, kailasa, huge snowy mountain on the north shore of the manasarowara lake called gang ti se by the tibetans and kailasa by the indians	ke la sha
ཀེ་ལ་ཤའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	(met Ti Si snow mt.	ke la sha'i rgyal po
ཀེ་ལན	corruption of dge ldan	ke lan
ཀེ་ལེ	fabulous place or country	ke le
ཀེ་ལེ་མི་ཤ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	country of cannibals	ke le mi sha can gyi yul
ཀེ་ཤ	hair, mane, letters w long accent or double o or e	ke sha
ཀེ་ཤ་ཅན	SK having e and o marks	ke sha can
ཀེ་ཤ་ར	mane	ke sha ra
ཀེ་ཤུ་ཀ	plant, perhaps arum colocasia, with edible roots	ke shu ka
ཀེ་ས་ར	hair, mane of the lion, hairy filament of the lotus, celestial flower, saffron	ke sa ra
ཀེག	obstacle [year]. Syn {kag ma}	keg
ཀེག་འཕྲང	1) obstacles to life; 2) obstructing spirits (3'gag dog po	keg 'phrang
ཀེག་མ	SA kag ma	keg ma
ཀེང་རུས	skeleton	keng rus
ཀེང་རུས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	visions of skeletons	keng rus kyi lta ba
ཀེང་རུས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	the perception of skeletons [mi sdug pa sgom skabs chags yul ken grus kyi rnam par 'du shes pa'am sems pa]	keng rus kyi 'du shes
ཀེང་རུས་ཅན	[Karankin] the Skeletonfilled Charnel Ground. One of the eight charnel grounds, {dur khrod brgyad}. one of eight charnel grounds	keng rus can
ཀེང་ཤུ་ཀ	rgya skyegs tree,	keng shu ka
ཀེད་ཤུ་ཀ	evergreen tree	ked shu ka
ཀེབ་ཀ་ན་སྦ་རལ	Cape Canavaral	keb ka na sba ral
ཀེམ	(not in DAS)	kem
ཀེམ་ཀེམ	1) lhem lhem du 'gul tshul,...Byi'u 'chi la khad pa'i brang khog kem kem du 'gul,...Bung ba me tog gi steng du kem kem gyo; 2) having lost the power of the eyes zum zum du lta tshul	kem kem
ཀེའི་ཤ་ཡ	robes worn by gods	ke'i sha ya
ཀེའུ	wedge; kind of garlic. cavern, den	ke'u
ཀེའུ་ཆུ	Keuchu, in Domey	ke'u chu
ཀེའུ་ཙེ	(CH gyu byur sngo ne sogs brgyus pa'i bud med kyi brang rgyan phreng zhags shig	ke'u tse
ཀེའུ་རྩེ	jacket. Syn {kA 'ji}	ke'u rtse
ཀེའུ་ཚང	a pagoda/ a treasure-room; 1) treasure cave, cave. 2) cavern. 3) rock overhang. 4) nest. 5) temple. 6) pagoda; 1) cave. 2) cavern. 3) rock overhang. 4) nest. 5) temple. 6) pagoda; store house, trea...	ke'u tshang
ཀེའུ་རི	female deity, female deity of fearful mien	ke'u ri
ཀེའུ་རི་བརྒྱད	eight Gauris (Gauri, Cauri, Pramoha, Vetali, Pukkasi, Ghasmari, Smamani, Candali; ko'u ri, tso'u ri, pra mo, be'e ta li, pus ka si, kas ma ri, sme sha ni, tsan dha li), matrikas, female nature spir...	ke'u ri brgyad
ཀེའུ་རི་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་ཁྲོ་མོ	the 8 wrathful gauris {gnas kyi ma mo brgyad}	ke'u ri brgyad kyi khro mo
ཀེའུ་རི་མ	gauri [a group of eight]. Syn {gnas kyi ma mo brgyad}	ke'u ri ma
ཀེའུ་ལི	Korea, tibetan and mongolian for korea	ke'u li
ཀེའུ་ལེ	customary seal	ke'u le
ཀེའུ་ལེའི་རྒྱ	customary seal	ke'u le'i rgya
ཀེའུ་ཤ་ཡ	yellowish red garment or robe (of Buddhist monk)	ke'u sha ya
ཀེར་ཀེར	body etc raising up	ker ker
ཀེར་ཀོ	cymbals	ker ko
ཀེར་ཀྱིས	suddenly	ker kyis
ཀེར་གྱིས	suddenly	ker gyis
ཀེར་ཐིག	straight vertical line, plumb line	ker thig
ཀེར་བ	(tha mi dad pa,, raise, lift up, rise, stand up	ker ba
ཀེར་མོ	alone, single	ker mo
ཀེར་རུས	skeleton	ker rus
ཀེར་རེ	stand straight up, erect	ker re
ཀེར་རེ་ལངས	standing straight up, erect	ker re langs
ཀེར་རེར་བཙུགས	put straight up	ker rer btsugs
ཀེར་ལངས	suddenly stood up	ker langs
ཀེར་ལེབ་སྒུར	horse, sheep, yak	ker leb sgur
ཀེར་ལེབ་སྒུར་གསུམ	ker ker mi dang, leb leb sa, sgur sgur phyugs te spyi tshogs rnying pa'i skabs khral 'u lag 'gel sa'i yul gsum,...Ker leb sgur gsum gyi khral rigs	ker leb sgur gsum
ཀེལ་མག	possibly indicates the kalmuk tartars	kel mag
ཀོ	ni	ko
ཀོ་ཀ	place in bengal where in ancient times many tantric adepts lived	ko ka
ཀོ་ཀ་ན་ད	red lotus	ko ka na da
ཀོ་ཀ་ལི་ཀ	bhiksu of buddha's time who sided with devadatta	ko ka li ka
ཀོ་ཀི	wild mountainous country east of bengal	ko ki
ཀོ་ཀི་ལ	the Indian cuckoo	ko ki la
ཀོ་ཀོ	chin, throat, neck, tibetan of mixed breed (chinese-tibetan)	ko ko
ཀོ་ཀོ་ལྗང་གུ	cricket	ko ko ljang gu
ཀོ་ཀོ་ཐག་མ	country in or near ceylon ko ko g.yag - 1) male cattle w pha g.yag dang ma mdzo; 2) mixed race child/person (disparaging	ko ko thag ma
ཀོ་ཀོ་ལག་ཤ	the longifolia	ko ko lag sha
ཀོ་ཀྱ	pure	ko kya
ཀོ་ཀྲད	worn out leather of old shoes and boots, leather-shoe	ko krad
ཀོ་དཀྲི	leather envelope	ko dkri
ཀོ་རྐྱལ	leather rkyal snod [boat?]	ko rkyal
ཀོ་སྐམ	the dry hide	ko skam
ཀོ་སྐུད	1) leather thing; 2) when leather is tanned ko bar byug pa'i zhag dang klad zho sogs	ko skud
ཀོ་སྐོ	chin, neck	ko sko
ཀོ་སྐོ་འདེགས	raise the neck	ko sko 'degs
ཀོ་སྐོ་འདེགས་པ	raise the chin	ko sko 'degs pa
ཀོ་སྐོ་ཕག་གི	pig-faced	ko sko phag gi
ཀོ་སྐོ་ཕག་གི་ལྟ་བུ	chin like that of a pig	ko sko phag gi lta bu
ཀོ་སྐོས་བསྙུང	with a slightly perceptible chin	ko skos bsnyung
ཀོ་སྐྱི	ko ba'i phyi shun gyi skyi'am, pags pa srab po, dandruff	ko skyi
ཀོ་སྐྲད	strap	ko skrad
ཀོ་ཁུག	leather purse, little leather	ko khug
མོནེཡ	bag 48	money
ཀོ་ཁྲོལ	sieve made of hide-strips or strings to clean peas, barley grain	ko khrol
ཀོ་མཁན	tanner, steersman of a hide boat	ko mkhan
ཀོ་གད་ད	Syn {ko da}	ko gad da
ཀོ་གྲུ	hide-boat, hide-boat, boat made of the entire hide of a yak, skin coracle	ko gru
ཀོ་གྲུ་གཏོང་བ	drive a leather boat	ko gru gtong ba
ཀོ་གྲུའི་སྒྲོལ་འདོན	cross water in a leather boat and come out	ko gru'i sgrol 'don
ཀོ་གླ	leather boat rent	ko gla
ཀོ་རྒྱུན	leather cord/thing	ko rgyun
ཀོ་སྒམ	box made of hide. leather box, leather trunk	ko sgam
ཀོ་སྒྲོག	1) leather thong binding for leather purse etc.; 2) leather horse hobbles	ko sgrog
ཀོ་སྒྲོམ	leather vessel/container	ko sgrom
ཀོ་ཅག	they, them	ko cag
ཀོ་ཅི	[arch] continuative particle: eg "ste"	ko ci
ཀོ་ལྕག	'gram par [jaws] gzhu byed implement of punishment	ko lcag
ཀོ་ཆུ	pond water, water collecting in a hole	ko chu
ཀོ་ཆེས་པ	[arch] go ba thal drags pa	ko ches pa
ཀོ་ཉ	place in tibet	ko nya
ཀོ་ཉེ	klu bdud rdo rje w white flowers [of two kinds]	ko nye
ཀོ་ཉོན་ཙེ	kernel of pineapple, edible	ko nyon tse
སེཨེད་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ནེཨོས	pine growing in sutlej valley	seed of the neosa
ཀོ་ཉོལ་ཙེ	Syn {ko nyon rtse}	ko nyol tse
ཀོ་མཉེད་པ	tanner, maker of leather goods	ko mnyed pa
ཀོ་བརྙན་ཟློས་གར	shadow play	ko brnyan zlos gar
ཀོ་ཏ	lowest quality grain, like buckwheat	ko ta
ཀོ་ཊ་པ	buckwheat	ko Ta pa
ཀོ་ཏ་མ	Gautama ko ta ma dgung lo gya gcig ring bzhugs	ko ta ma
པའི་གནས་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	the 28 places where Gautama stayed during his 81 years	pa'i gnas nyer brgyad
ཀོ་ཏན	blood	ko tan
ཀོ་ཏམ་པ	mountain	ko tam pa
ཀོ་ཏམ་པའི་གོས	jute cloth	ko tam pa'i gos
ཀོ་ཏམ་པའི་རས	1 of 41 permissible clothing materials for monks	ko tam pa'i ras
ཀོ་ཏམ་བྷག	1 of 41 permissible clothing materials for monks	ko tam bhag
ཀོ་ཊི	hut, house	ko Ti
ཀོ་ཏྲ་པ	nepalese kodu, kind of millet used in sikkim for making beer, species of grain eaten by the poor, paspatum scrobiculatum	ko tra pa
ཀོ་ཏྲ་བ	Paspatum scrobiculatum	ko tra ba
ཀོ་ཏྲོག་ཅན	thoughtless, childish man	ko trog can
ཀོ་བཏབ	insult	ko btab
ཀོ་བཏུམ	hide-packing (criminal punishment where culprit's severed hand stumps are sewn up in leather)	ko btum
ཀོ་བཏུམས	enclosed/ wrapped in leather	ko btums
ཀོ་སྟུ་བྷ	kaustubha used to separate gold from ore, precious stone which when pulverized in murky water has the property of eliminating the impurities of the water and making it limpid	ko stu bha
ཀོ་ཐ	med. herb rtswa dres ma'i rtsa ba ste [sweet astringent, body heat neutral, good for sha dug dang, sbyar dug mazhu dug thabs, smug po bcas la phan]	ko tha
ཀོ་ཐག	thong, strap, leather rope	ko thag
ཀོ་ཐག་ལོད	1) left in the lurch; 2) having released the rope of the coracle	ko thag lod
ཀོ་ཐག་ལོད་བྱུང	1) left in the lurch; 2) having released the rope of the coracle	ko thag lod byung
ཀོ་ཐལ	cinders, ashes	ko thal
ཀོ་ཐལ་འཐོར་བར་གྱུར་པ	scattered about ashes	ko thal 'thor bar gyur pa
ཀོ་ཐལ་དུ་བྱས་པ	reduced to ashes	ko thal du byas pa
ཀོ་ཐུད	kind of tea of inferior quality	ko thud
ཀོ་ཐུམ	ko ba'i nang du btums pa'i thum bu	ko thum
ཀོ་ཐུམས	packed up in hide, leather package	ko thums
ཀོ་ཐོད	woman's head dress	ko thod
ཀོ་འཐགས	small instrument of leather to weave lace with	ko 'thags
ཀོ་འཐུམ	wrapping in leather [sometimes used as a punishment for criminals]	ko 'thum
ཀོ་ད	leather bag	ko da
ཀོ་དཱ་ལ	a tree growing in the mountain called {khu byug ri}	ko dA la
ཀོ་དམ	leather dam bi ??	ko dam
ཀོ་གདན	skin-rug or seat, piece of leather put under the saddle	ko gdan
ཀོ་མདའ	arrow bound with hide	ko mda'
ཀོ་རྡར	razor strop	ko rdar
ཀོ་ལྡིང	vessel or basin made of hide to	ko lding
ཀེཨེཔ་ཨོར་ཅླེཨནསེ་ཨོཨིལ་ཨོར་ལིམེ	wash	keep or cleanse oil or lime
ཀོ་ན་པི་ཝང	a kind of guitar	ko na pi wang
ཀོ་པ	121st volume	ko pa
ཀོ་པགས་མཁན	shoe-maker	ko pags mkhan
ཀོ་པང་ཙེ	sort of tea, usually called capinze	ko pang tse
ཀོ་པང་ཙོ	tea	ko pang tso
ཀོ་ལྤགས	hide, tanned skin	ko lpags
ཀོ་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་གཞི	leather stuff included the fourteen materials prescribed for clothing to be used by Buddhist monks. 1) seat / bed of skin. 2) the skin precept. 3) leather stuff included the 14 materials prescribed...	ko lpags kyi gzhi
ཀོ་ལྤགས་མཁན	Syn {ko pags mkhan}	ko lpags mkhan
ཀོ་ལྤགས་བཟོ་གྲྭ་ཁང	tannery, leather goods factory	ko lpags bzo grwa khang
ཀོ་སྤྱིན	glue, glue made of hides	ko spyin
ཀོ་སྤྱོན	glue	ko spyon
ཀོ་ཕངས	Syn {ko phongs}	ko phangs
ཀོ་ཕན	n. of a game, kind of domino	ko phan
ཀོ་ཕིད	cauliflower	ko phid
ཀོ་ཕུབ	leather buckler	ko phub
ཀོ་ཕོངས	guitar	ko phongs
ཀོ་ཕོར	cup made of leather and painted to look like a wooden cup	ko phor
ཀོ་ཕྱར	sa la gding bya'i leather tanning phyar ba	ko phyar
ཀོ་ཕྱི	coffee	ko phyi
ཀོ་འཕྱགས	all the leather skins 1 has sdud len gyi tax	ko 'phyags
ཀོ་བ	cowhide boat, cowhide, hide, leather (from yaks buffaloes and horses), leather, boat made from hide	ko ba
ཀོ་བ་མཁན	tanner, maker of leather goods	ko ba mkhan
ཀོ་བ་གྱོང་པོ	hide, untanned skin	ko ba gyong po
ཀོ་བ་ཅན	of leather	ko ba can
ཀོ་བ་གཅིག་ནས་དྲས་པའི་རྒྱུན་བུ	leather thong/ strap	ko ba gcig nas dras pa'i rgyun bu
ཀོ་བ་ཉིད་མཁན	tanner, maker of leather gtoods	ko ba nyid mkhan
ཀོ་བ་ཉིད་མ	tanned hides	ko ba nyid ma
ཀོ་བ་མཉེད	tan hides	ko ba mnyed
ཀོ་བ་མཉེད་མཁན	tanner	ko ba mnyed mkhan
ཀོ་བ་མཉེད་པ	tan hides	ko ba mnyed pa
ཀོ་བ་མཉེད་རྩལ	tanning	ko ba mnyed rtsal
ཀོ་བ་གཏོང	sail a hide boat	ko ba gtong
ཀོ་བ་མཐུག་པོ	thick hide	ko ba mthug po
ཀོ་བ་བྲག	district in upper tibet	ko ba brag
ཀོ་བ་འབིགས་བྱེད	awl	ko ba 'bigs byed
ཀོ་བ་ཙི་ཁ་དཀར་པོ	white fatty side of a skin	ko ba tsi kha dkar po
ཀོ་བ་རློན་པ	rawhide	ko ba rlon pa
ཀོ་བ་རློན་པའི་ཤྭ་མོ	rawhide hat	ko ba rlon pa'i shwa mo
ཀོ་བའི་བཟོ་གྲྭ་ཁང	tannery, leather factory	ko ba'i bzo grwa khang
ཀོ་བའི་འུ་ལག	gzhung sar chu thog nas shing cha skyel 'dren byed pa'i tax	ko ba'i 'u lag
ཀོ་བི་ད་ར	n. of the tree growing in paradise	ko bi da ra
ཀོ་བི་ད་ར་ཀ	Syn {ko bi da ra}	ko bi da ra ka
ཀོ་བུགས	whole/ uncut skin	ko bugs
ཀོ་བུགས་གཅིག	Syn {ko bubs}	ko bugs gcig
ཀོ་བུབས	entire skin or hide, uncut hide; entire skin	ko bubs
ཀོ་བོ	a country	ko bo
ཀོ་བྱི་ལ	field herb medicine [bitter, cooling, by its power khrag rlung stod 'tshang 'joms, glang thabs sel, dug tshad zhi bar byed syn: sngo leb spu can dang,ldum stag phur leb, bya 'phur leb]	ko byi la
ཀོ་བྱིལ	ko byi la, field herb med.	ko byil
ཀོ་བྲག་པ	Tantric sect; founded by {bsod nams rgyal mtshan}	ko brag pa
ཀོ་འབིགས	leather punch	ko 'bigs
ཀོ་འབུགས	awl, 3-sided needle for sewing leather	ko 'bugs
ཀོ་འབེ	leather dkar brtsegs kyi khebs te dre'u dang, khal bong sogs kyi sga 'og tu brgyag bya zhig	ko 'be
ཀོ་འབོ	leather 'bo [gain or dry measure]	ko 'bo
ཀོ་འབོ་ནད་ཅན	scabby, measure for rice or barley made of hide	ko 'bo nad can
ཀོ་འབོག	box or bag made of hide	ko 'bog
ཀོ་འབོལ	leather soft/ padded cushion	ko 'bol
ཀོ་ལྦག	skin bag	ko lbag
ཀོ་སྦྲགས	hide filled with butter	ko sbrags
ཀོ་མ	a bird	ko ma
ཀོ་མའི་ལྕག་མ	Pothus officinales	ko ma'i lcag ma
ཀོ་མོག	ripple, pond	ko mog
ཀོ་ཙི་བིག	tanned skin of a kind of deer	ko tsi big
ཀོ་ཙེ	brick-tea	ko tse
ཀོ་བརྩེགས	lham zom pa'i ko mthil brtsegs ma	ko brtsegs
ཀོ་ཚགས	sieve made of leather	ko tshags
ཀོ་ཚལ	pieces of leather or hide	ko tshal
ཀོ་ཚེ	sko tshe	ko tshe
ཀོ་ཝག	sound imitating the voice of a crow	ko wag
ཀོ་ཝགས	expressing the voice of a raven	ko wags
ཀོ་ཞྭ	abbr. of {ko rlon gyi zhva mo}	ko zhwa
ཀོ་གཞོང	leather trough/tub rtsi can	ko gzhong
ཀོ་གཟར	leather seat between saddle and saddle blanket	ko gzar
ཀོ་བཟོ་བ	maker of leather articles	ko bzo ba
ཀོ་བཟོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད་ཆུང་ཞིག	satchel	ko bzos kyi snod chung zhig
ཀོ་བཟོས་དངོས་རྫས	leather products	ko bzos dngos rdzas
ཀོ་ཡོལ	(CH cloth medicinal plaster	ko yol
ཀོ་ར	cloth	ko ra
ཀོ་ར་བ	descendants of kuru, their party, a country in the east	ko ra ba
ཀོ་རཎ་ཌོ	a country situated in the western continent of Godaniya	ko raN Do
ཀོ་རས	cloth	ko ras
ཀོ་རི་ཡ	Korea	ko ri ya
ཀོ་རུ་ཁ	cross	ko ru kha
ཀོ་རུལ	rotten hide	ko rul
ཀོ་རེ	round, cup, tumbler	ko re
ཀོ་རེ་ཙ་ན	brain	ko re tsa na
ཀོ་རོ	mould	ko ro
ཀོ་རླུན	raw, fresh, wet skin, hide, cloak of skin	ko rlun
ཀོ་རློན	hide [of an elephant]; 1) raw, fresh, wet skin, hide. 2) cloak of skin	ko rlon
ཀོ་རློན་གྱི་ཞྭ་མོ	a skin hat	ko rlon gyi zhwa mo
ཀོ་རློན་གཏུམས	packed in a fresh skin 50	ko rlon gtums
ཀོ་ལ	crub which breeds in hides, kind of moth	ko la
ཧིདེ	moth	hide
ཀོ་ལའི་འདབ	na gi [several kinds??	ko la'i 'dab
ཀོ་ལུན་པི་ཡ	Columbia	ko lun pi ya
ཀོ་ལེ	[arch] all	ko le
ཀོ་ལེ་ན	kind of disease	ko le na
ཀོ་ལེ་ཚ་བ	Syn {ko le na}	ko le tsha ba
ཀོ་ལེབ་རྐེ་དྲགས	leather belt	ko leb rke drags
ཀོ་ལེབ་རྐེད་རགས	leather belt	ko leb rked rags
ཀོ་ལོ་ར	cholera	ko lo ra
ཀོ་ལོང	jealous, annoyance, dissatisfaction, jealousy of demi-gods or naga, dispute, fight	ko long
ཀོ་ལོང་ཅན	jealous	ko long can
ཀོ་ལོང་བསྡོམ	become irritated	ko long bsdom
ཀོ་ལོང་བསྡོམ་པའི་ལྷ་དགུ	chn	ko long bsdom pa'i lha dgu
ཀོ་ལོང་བ	hate, envy, disdain	ko long ba
ཀོ་ལོང་ཙེ	sm. {ko nyon tse}	ko long tse
ཀོ་ལོང་རེས་བྱེད་པ	to envy each other	ko long res byed pa
ཀོ་ལོན་ཙེ	Syn {ko nyon tse}	ko lon tse
ཀོ་ལོམ་བོ	Colombo [city in Ceylon]	ko lom bo
ཀོ་ཤ	[Skt] mdzod, a medicine [lus stobs skye ba dang, snying mkhal gyi nad gso bar byed pa]	ko sha
ཀོ་ཤ་ཐི་ལ་ཆེན་པོ	a sravaka attendant of buddha	ko sha thi la chen po
ཀོ་ཤ་ལ	dge ba can}	ko sha la
ཀོ་ཤམ་པ	practice, rule	ko sham pa
ཀོ་ཤམ་བི	n of place	ko sham bi
ཀO་ཤམ་བྷི	the capital {mdzod ldan} in ancient India	kO sham bhi
ཀO་ཤམ་བྷིའི་གཞི	the Kaushambhi precept	kO sham bhi'i gzhi
ཀོ་ཤི་ཀ	epithet of indra, a drug, a vatical robusta, a teacher, owl, patronymic of visvamitra who was grandson of kusika, a river, kosi river	ko shi ka
ཀོ་ཤི་ལ	bird	ko shi la
ཀོ་ཤེལ	shes mnyen po	ko shel
ཀོ་ས་ཏ་རི་ཁ	Costa Rica	ko sa ta ri kha
ཀོ་ས་ལ	mdzod ldan	ko sa la
ཀོ་ས་ལའི་རྒྱ་པོ་གསལ་རྒྱལ	Prasenajit, king of Kosala	ko sa la'i rgya po gsal rgyal
ཀོ་ས་ལའི་བྲེ	a measure unit, one pint	ko sa la'i bre
ཀོ་སག	bowl, cup etc of soft workmanship	ko sag
ཀོ་སེག	bowl, cup etc of soft workmanship	ko seg
ཀོ་སློང	Syn {ko long}	ko slong
ཀོ་བསེ	ko ba mnyes ma'i skyi la rtsi gang rung btang yod pa'i rigs	ko bse
ཀོ་ཧྲོག་ཅན	thoughtless childish man	ko hrog can
ཀོ་ལྷམ	leather shoes	ko lham
ཀོ་ལྷམ་ཡུ་རིང	leather boots w long uppers	ko lham yu ring
ཀོག	Syn {kog pa}; 1) cover, envelope. 2) peel	kog
ཀོག་སྐྱི	dandruff	kog skyi
ཀོག་གིས	[arch] suddenly, quickly	kog gis
ཀོག་གིས་ལྐངས་པ་དང	as soon as [he] stood up	kog gis lkangs pa dang
ཀོག་རྒྱག	wrap, cover, put in an envelope, package	kog rgyag
ཀོག་སྟེ	suddenly quickly	kog ste
ཀོག་པ	cover, name applied to old man after age of 85, splinter off, chip, peel	kog pa
ཀོག་པ་རྒྱག	wrap, cover, put in an envelope, package	kog pa rgyag
ཀོག་པ་ཤུ་བ	peel, pare off	kog pa shu ba
ཀོག་ཕྱི་ཤུན་གྱོང་པོ	eg Mar gyi grod kog ...Shun kog	kog phyi shun gyong po
ཀོག་བ	hard covering	kog ba
ཀོག་མན	(CH dry CH noodles	kog man
ཀོག་ཙེ	net, trap	kog tse
ཀོག་རྩེ	trap, snare	kog rtse
ཀོག་ཚེ	traps, snares	kog tshe
ཀོག་ལང་བ	rise suddenly and run away	kog lang ba
ཀོག་ཤི	dandruff	kog shi
ཀོག་ཤོག	paper cover of a letter, envelope	kog shog
ཀོག་ཤོག་ཤུ་བ	to peel, to pare	kog shog shu ba
ཀོང	1) to break the pride of, cause to become a coward. See {spa kong ba}. 2) concave, crooked, curved, bent, excavated. 3) cup, bowl, crucible, breach, gap, inkstand	kong
ཀོང་ཀན	tangerine	kong kan
ཀོང་ཀོ	Congo	kong ko
ཀོང་ཀོང	concave dent, depression, concave, SA kong	kong kong
ཀོང་ཀོང་མེ་ཏོག	daisy	kong kong me tog
ཀོང་ཀྲུའུ	Canton	kong kru'u
ཀོང་སྐེད	kind of sash or waist-band of fine wool manufactured in kong po	kong sked
ཀོང་སྐྲ	two braids tied on the head kong po style	kong skra
ཀོང་ཁྲུ	kind of yellow satin	kong khru
ཀོང་ཅོ	queen, lady, princess etc, the wife of king Songtsen Gampo	kong co
ཀོང་ཆས	articles/ clothes from kong po	kong chas
ཀོང་ཇོ	chinese kung-chu, princess, tibetan name of daughter of emperor	kong jo
ཏཻ	tsung who married srong tsan sgam po	tai
ཀོང་ཏུང	Guangdong (place in china)	kong tung
ཀོང་ཏོག་མེ་ཏོག	carnation	kong tog me tog
ཀོང་སྟོང	hollow	kong stong
ཀོང་སྟོན་དབང་ཕྱུག་གྲུབ་པ	n of person	kong ston dbang phyug grub pa
ཀོང་དོང	pit, hole in the ground	kong dong
ཀོང་མདུང	kind of spear manufactured in kong po	kong mdung
ཀོང་རྣ	earring, ear ornaments; ear ornaments	kong rna
ཀོང་རྣ་པན་ཏོག	in princely garments	kong rna pan tog
རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས་ཨེཨར	ring right from kong yul and left pan tog	rgya lu chas ear
ཀོང་སྣམ	woollen cloth manufactured in kong bu	kong snam
ཀོང་པ་ཉིད	concavity	kong pa nyid
ཀོང་པོ	Kongpo, in Southern Tibet	kong po
པྲོབི༹ནཅེ་ཨིན་སོཨུཐ	east Tibet, a district in Tibet. 2) Syn {kong bu, mchod kong}. 3) cup, curcide. 4) ravine. 5) cavity 51	province in south
ཀོང་པོ་དཀར་ཟུག་འཕྲང	Karzug Trang, in Kongpo	kong po dkar zug 'phrang
ཀོང་པོ་རྒྱ་མདའ	1) {kong po rgya mda' rdzong} [in kong yul, on the upper nyang chu, nowadays ruled from nga phod zam khar]; 2) a village: at the combining place of two rivers flowing from kong yul nyang chu dang s...	kong po rgya mda'
ཀོང་པོ་གཏེར་ཆེན	Kongpo Terchen, another name for Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo, 569, 574 n. 1	kong po gter chen
ཀོང་པོ་བ	people from Kongpo Province	kong po ba
ཀོང་པོ་བར་ལ	kong po bar pass [between mal gro gung dkar rdzong and kong po rgya mda'i bar du yod pa'i la zhig yin zhing, also mt between dbus and kong po]	kong po bar la
ཀོང་པོ་བུ་ཆུ	{kong po bu chu} temple [bod kyi sa gzhi srin mo gan rkyal du 'gyel ba 'dra ba'i kha gnon du srong btsan Gampo built [one of the gtsug lag khang yang 'dul bzhi]	kong po bu chu
ཀོང་པོ་ལོ་གསར	kong po new year [in the 10th month]	kong po lo gsar
ཀོང་སྤང	planks brought from kong po	kong spang
ཀོང་སྤྲུལ་བློ་གྲོས་མཐ་འྱས	(18131899) - alias {padma gar dbang phrin las 'gro 'dul rtsal}	kong sprul blo gros mtha 'yas
ཀོང་སྤྲུལ་བློ་གྲོས་མཐའ་ཡས	Jamgon kongtrul lodro thaye [great rimey master and composer of the five treasuries {mdzod lnga}	kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas
ཀོང་སྤྲུལ་ཟིན་ཏིག	{kong sprul zin tig} med. text [by kar ma ngag dbang yon tan rgya mtsho in the rab byung bcu bzhi pa, nang sman sprad pa'i nyam syig cig ste, de'i nang gtso che ba ni	kong sprul zin tig
ཀོང་སྤྲུལ་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Kongtrül Yönten Gyatso, [1813-1899] great Rimey master and composer of the Five Treasuries. {mdzod lnga}	kong sprul yon tan rgya mtsho
ཀོང་སྤྲེལ	monkey from kong po	kong sprel
ཀོང་བ་ཉིད	concavity	kong ba nyid
ཀོང་བུ	small cup-shaped brass or copper oil-burner, basket of bamboo	kong bu
བུཏཏེར	lamps	butter
ཀོང་བུ་བྲུས	gouged holes; x {lus la sha'i kong bu brus te 'bru mar gyi sdong bu stong gzugs pa} he gouged holes in his own flesh to serve as offering lamps, filling them with oil and planting in them thousands...	kong bu brus
ཀོང་དབྱི	Quang Ngai S Vietnam	kong dbyi
ཀོང་མོ	1) woman from kong po; 2) depths; 3) cave, cavern (/ [R]	kong mo
ཀོང་སྨྱོན	Mad Yogi of Kongpo. Sm Trati Ngakchang	kong smyon
ཀོང་བཙུན་དེ་མོ	[one of the brtan ma bcu gnyis] local goddess of kong yul	kong btsun de mo
ཀོང་རྩི	photon	kong rtsi
ཀོང་རྩེ་འཕྲུལ་ཡིག	magic letters	kong rtse 'phrul yig
ཀོང་ཚ་དཀར་པོ	1 of sku sras brgyad	kong tsha dkar po
ཀོང་ཚ་འཕུལ་བུ་ཆུང	1 of sku sras brgyad	kong tsha 'phul bu chung
ཀོང་འཛིན་འུལ་མི	sngar lha ldan sa khul du lnga mchod dang, bzhi mchod skabs mchod me 'gengs rgyu dang, dgram rgyu, mchod kong bsdu rgyu sogs kyi las ka byed mkhan 'ul mi	kong 'dzin 'ul mi
ཀོང་ཞྭ	kong po hat [both men and women]	kong zhwa
ཀོང་ཞག	nyi skar 10 + chu tshod six spyi zla 9th date 13 skor nas 'ol pa [vulture] log pa'i kong zhag 15 'dren	kong zhag
ཀོང་ཟོར	triangular zor cup	kong zor
ཀོང་བཟོ	kind of armor or weapon manufactured in kong po	kong bzo
ཀོང་འོག	earlier and later	kong 'og
ཀོང་ཡུལ	hollow place, valley	kong yul
ཀོང་ཡུལ་བྲེ་སྣ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	kong yul bre sna
ཀོང་རུས	the hollow part of bone	kong rus
ཀོང་ཤིས	Kwangsi Province	kong shis
ཀོང་ཤེལ	concave lens	kong shel
ཀོང་ས	undulating/ uneven ground	kong sa
ཀོང་གསུམ	3 divisions of kong yul, kingdom in ancient india ruled by king susarma	kong gsum
ཀོང་ཧའོ	Hiroshima	kong ha'o
ཀོང་ལྷམ	kong po boots [both men and women]	kong lham
ཀོངས་རྒྱུད	system	kongs rgyud
ཀོད	boiled	kod
ཀོད་ཁ	expenses	kod kha
ཀོན་ཏའོ	Guam	kon ta'o
ཀོན་ཏོང	wild leek	kon tong
ཀོན་དི་ཉ	son of upayamati, muni or sage, a grammarian, patronymic of poet jayadeva	kon di nya
ཀོཎ་ཌི་ན	Kaudinya n. of the first disciple of Buddha Shakyamuni	koN Di na
ཀོན་པ	name of plant that grows in solitary places	kon pa
ཀོན་པ་ཁབ་སྐྱེས	plant used for stopping hemorrhage	kon pa khab skyes
ཀོན་པ་གབ་སྐྱེས	saussurea bodinieri levl., saussurea kingii fisch., medicine for stopping hemorrhage	kon pa gab skyes
ཀོན་ཡག་ཕ	glossy (of silk	kon yag pha
ཀོབ་ཀོབ	noise produced from stretching of hides	kob kob
ཀོབ་ཚེ	a kind of 'brum bu dkar po disease	kob tshe
ཀོམ་གདན	seat made of tanned skin	kom gdan
ཀོམ་པ	to tan a skin	kom pa
ཀོམ་པོ	skin which has been made soft and pliable by tanning, leather	kom po
ཀོམ་མོ	tanning	kom mo
ཀོམ་ཤིང་ཀོང་ཇོ	princess kom, the youngest daughter of wen chung	kom shing kong jo
ཀོའ་ཅེ	pumpkin	ko' ce
ཀོའང་གྲེའོ	Canton	ko'ang gre'o
ཀོའང་ཏུང	kong tung	ko'ang tung
ཀོའང་ཤིས	kong shis	ko'ang shis
ཀོའུ་དི་ཉ	Kaudinya {'thab ldan ma'i bu}	ko'u di nya
ཀོའུ་དི་ན་ཡ	Kun shes koondi Nya [one of Buddhas five original disciples]	ko'u di na ya
ཀོའུ་སྡེ	Kohudeh, in Domey	ko'u sde
ཀོའུ་རི	Gauri, 1 of ke'u ri brgyad	ko'u ri
ཀོའུ་ཤམ་བི	city of flowers, SA ko sham bi	ko'u sham bi
ཀོའུ་ཤི་ཀ	1) epith. of Indra. 2) owl. 3) n. of a drug	ko'u shi ka
ཀོར	auxiliary particle, SA skor, anything that has been cut out by the hand or a lathe, a place	kor
ཀོར་ཀོར	coiled	kor kor
ཀོར་དོ་པ	Syn {kor do ba}	kor do pa
ཀོར་དོ་བ	cordwain, Spanish leather	kor do ba
ཀོར་དོབ	boot	kor dob
ཀོར་ནི་རུ་པ	a great lama	kor ni ru pa
ཀོར་ཚེ	[arch] 1) ephemeral, evanescent; 2) partiality, bias, sectarianism	kor tshe
ཀོར་ཚེ་བ	single. a little, some	kor tshe ba
ཀོར་བཟོ	of round make, kind of shield of round shape	kor bzo
ཀོལ	SA kor	kol
ཀོལ་ཏོ	dumb, mute	kol to
ཀོལ་བའི་ལམ	bad road	kol ba'i lam
ཀོལ་མ	boiled liquid	kol ma
ཀོལ་ས	SA 'gol sa, gol sa	kol sa
ཀོས་ཀ	chin	kos ka
ཀོས་ཀོ	chin	kos ko
ཀོས་ཀོ་མེད་པ	chinless, one with a small chin	kos ko med pa
ཀོས་ཀོའི་འོག་མ	lower part of the chin	kos ko'i 'og ma
ཀོས་ཀོའི་གཤོང་འབུར	ma le'i kyong 'bur	kos ko'i gshong 'bur
ཀོས་སྐོ	chin, SA ko ko	kos sko
ཀོས་ཐག	anxiety	kos thag
ཀོས་ཐག་པ	suffering	kos thag pa
ཀོས་མེད	without chin	kos med
ཀོས་སྨྱུང	sharp chin	kos smyung
ཀྱ་གེ་ཀྱོག་གེ	zigzag	kya ge kyog ge
ཀྱ་རེ་ཀྱོ་རེ	feeble, weak, infirm, unable to go/do by oneself	kya re kyo re
ཀྱ་རོམ་པ	auspiciousness	kya rom pa
ཀྱ་ལ	petty, petty state in tibet	kya la
ཀྱ་ལ་མཁན་པོ	chos mchog, 18931957	kya la mkhan po
ཀྱ་ལེ	as much as fills the hollow of the hand	kya le
ཀྱ་ས	violent wind with hail	kya sa
ཀྱ་སིར་རླུང	chilling wind	kya sir rlung
ཀྱ་ཨན	fort in Tibet	kya an
ཀྱག	thick, a stand	kyag
ཀྱག་ཀྱག	kidding, joking	kyag kyag
ཀྱག་ཀྱག་བྱས་ཏེ	deliberately	kyag kyag byas te
ཀྱག་ཀྱག་བྱས་ནས་ལབ་པ	scoff, jeer, sneer, mock, flout, scorn, deride	kyag kyag byas nas lab pa
ཀྱག་ཀྱག་བྱེད་པ	joke	kyag kyag byed pa
ཀྱག་ཀྱོག	1) curved, crooked, zig zag winding; 2) Indian grangs gnas chen po; 3) a flourish	kyag kyog
ཀྱག་སྐྱོག	Syn {kyag kyog}	kyag skyog
ཀྱག་གེ་ཀྱོག་གེ	crooked, twisted, not straightforwardly	kyag ge kyog ge
ཀྱག་གེ་ཀྱོག་གེ་བཤད་པ	to beat around the bush	kyag ge kyog ge bshad pa
ཀྱག་པ	1) to weigh. 2) to measure	kyag pa
ཀྱག་པ་ཉིད	thickness	kyag pa nyid
ཀྱག་རྫུན	1) a lie; 2) falsehood	kyag rdzun
ཀྱག་རྫུན་བཤད་པ	tell a lie	kyag rdzun bshad pa
ཀྱག་བཤད་ཀྱོག་བཤད	beat around the dush	kyag bshad kyog bshad
ཀྱག་བཤད་ཀྱོག་བཤད་བྱེད	beat around the dush	kyag bshad kyog bshad byed
ཀྱང	Nevertheless,	kyang
ཝཧེཐེར	neither nor. B. 1) straight, tall, slender	whether
ཀྱང་ཀྱོང	1) ground with protuberances, concave, excavated, indented undulating, uneven (of ground cavity, hole, low place; 2) indolent, lazy, idle	kyang kyong
ཀྱང་ངེ་ཀྱོང་ངེ	ground with protuberances	kyang nge kyong nge
ཀྱང་ན	or else	kyang na
ཀྱང་མེད་པ	not even	kyang med pa
ཀྱང་རུང	. . . kyang rung (ste) - regardless of . . . ; whatever . . .	kyang rung
ཀྱང་རུང་སྟེ	regardless of. whatever	kyang rung ste
ཀྱང་ལས	although	kyang las
ཀྱད་པར་གྱི་དགའ་བ	the special joy	kyad par gyi dga' ba
ཀྱད་གསོད་བྱེད	look down on, treat w contempt/ disrepect belittle/ scorn	kyad gsod byed
ཀྱམ	(not in DAS)	kyam
ཀྱམ་ཀྱམ	confusedly, in disorder	kyam kyam
ཀྱམ་ཀྱམ་པ	go walking here and there/ back and forth	kyam kyam pa
ཀྱམ་མེ	emitting light, flicker twinkle	kyam me
ཀྱམས	passageway	kyams
ཀྱམས་པ	[arch] remainder, leftovers	kyams pa
ཀྱར་ཀྱར	flat, even, level, = 53	kyar kyar
ཀྱར་ཀྱོར	still, feeble, weak	kyar kyor
ཀྱར་པོ	flat, even, level, =	kyar po
ཀྱར་བོ	flat, not globular	kyar bo
ཀྱལ	jest, joke. Syn {kyal gtam}, jest, jesting conversations	kyal
ཀྱལ་ཀ	worthless people, joke, jest, tricks	kyal ka
ཀྱལ་ཀ་དང་བསྲེས་ནས	enveloped in a joke	kyal ka dang bsres nas
ཀྱལ་ཀ་བྱེད་པའི་གནས	ridiculous	kyal ka byed pa'i gnas
ཀྱལ་ཀྱལ	long and flat	kyal kyal
ཀྱལ་ཀྱེལ་རེ	[arch] a little	kyal kyel re
ཀྱལ་ཀྱོལ	damaged/ degenerated strength, tired w unsteady gait	kyal kyol
ཀྱལ་ཀྱོལ་འགའ་དེད་ནས	after staggering some	kyal kyol 'ga' ded nas
ཀྱལ་ཏ	tree w red bark and leaves like 'om bu	kyal ta
ཀྱལ་གཏམ	meaningless/lying/ playful talk	kyal gtam
ཀྱལ་རྟ	tree w red bark and leaves like 'om bu	kyal rta
ཀྱལ་ལྟ	desert shrub	kyal lta
ཀྱལ་པ	idle talk	kyal pa
ཀྱལ་པ་བྱེད	joke	kyal pa byed
ཀྱལ་བུ	small bag, pouch	kyal bu
ཀྱི	{khyod 'jigs mi dgos kyi} you need not fear	kyi
ཀྱི་ཀློང	amplitude of the mind	kyi klong
ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wheel of the	kyi 'khor lo
ཀྱི་གུ	kind of adornment	kyi gu
ཀྱི་གློང	elbow	kyi glong
ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	by means of	kyi sgo nas
ཀྱི་ལྕེ	medicinal plant	kyi lce
ཀྱི་ལྕེ་དཀར་པོ	gentiana straminea maxim. white species of gentiana decumbens	kyi lce dkar po
ཀྱི་ལྕེ་དངོན་པོ	blue species of gentiana decumbens which heals swelling in throat or glands	kyi lce dngon po
ཀྱི་ལྕེ་ནག་པོ	(CH) {kyi lce nag po} med. herb [kyi lce me tog sngonag 'char ba zhig ste, ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, by its power skrangs pa'joms, gag pa sel, chu ser skem,...syn: skyongbyed dang, spyang dug nag po, ...	kyi lce nag po
ཀྱི་ལྕེ་རྩ་ལོ	khandas ? herb [Tsa ba kun sel, snod lhung mkhris nad 'khru	kyi lce rtsa lo
ཀྱི་ལྕེའི་ཐལ་བ	kyi lce ash [w dkar po'i me tog mer bsregs pa'i thalba ste, by its power rlung rims kyis 'bog pa dang, dran pa mi gsal ba, 'thibs pa sogs la phan	kyi lce'i thal ba
ཀྱི་མཆོག	supreme among	kyi mchog
ཀྱི་སྙ	pha ba dgo dgo	kyi snya
ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	instruction of	kyi gdams pa
ཀྱི་འདུག	present tense complement	kyi 'dug
ཀྱི་ལྡིར	iron hoop	kyi ldir
ཀྱི་ནང་ནས	among	kyi nang nas
ཀྱི་བུན	1) a feeling cold, a chill. Syn {skyi bun}. 2) fright, fear; chill, feeling of cold. fright, fear	kyi bun
ཀྱི་མོ	round coin, rupee	kyi mo
ཀྱི་ཡིན	SA gi yin	kyi yin
ཀྱི་ཡུལ	object	kyi yul
ཀྱི་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement	kyi yod pa red
ཀྱི་རེད	SA gi red	kyi red
ཀྱི་ལི་ལི	1) smelling. 2) spinning, swirling, about. brandishing. 3) shining	kyi li li
ཀྱི་ལིང་ཆུ་རྟ་སྔོན་པོ	quick silver	kyi ling chu rta sngon po
ཀྱི་ལེ	serene, still, quiet	kyi le
ཀྱི་ལེ་མེ་རེ	lucid serenity	kyi le me re
ཀྱི་བསེར	[arch] cold wind and dang grang ngar che ba'i lhags pa	kyi bser
ཀྱི་ཧུད	sound of weeping, lamentation, expression of grief, alas, ah, expression of sorrow or loss, alas, one of 8 cold hells	kyi hud
ཀྱི་ཧུད་དུ་འདོན་པ	to cry out in pain	kyi hud du 'don pa
ཀྱི་ཧུད་འདོན་པ	the Lamenting hell [one of 8 cold hells	kyi hud 'don pa
ཀྱི་ཧུད་ཟེར་བ	the Hell of Howling, one of {grang dmyal brgyad} eight cold hells	kyi hud zer ba
བརྒྱད	8 cold hells]	brgyad
ཀྱིག་རྩེ	unburnt brick	kyig rtse
ཀྱིང	people living in east asia	kying
ཀྱིང་སིར་རླུང	blowing wind	kying sir rlung
ཀྱིང་སེར་རླུང	violent wind with hail, onomatopoetic word, blowing wind	kying ser rlung
ཀྱིང་བསེར	quick cold wind	kying bser
ཀྱིན	(verbal termination used alternatively with gyin and gin after a vowel)	kyin
ཀྱིན་གདའ	it seems	kyin gda'
ཀྱིན་འདུག	present tense complement	kyin 'dug
ཀྱིན་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement	kyin yod pa red
ཀྱིའང	kyi + 'ang; in addition to, also	kyi'ang
ཀྱིར	round, circular, disk, round thing	kyir
ཀྱིར་ཀྱིར	round, circular, disk	kyir kyir
ཀྱིར་བ་ཉིད	roundness	kyir ba nyid
ཀྱིལ་ལེ	curl/ coil up	kyil le
ཀྱིལ་ལེ་ཉོན	listened well	kyil le nyon
ཀྱིས	instrumental [...Khyod kyis yig thog tu 'khod dang, ngas dpod chog ...Brjod kyis mi lang,...Gser khab kyis rma kha brtol,... part inflecting affix denting the instrumental case, by, through, by mea...	kyis
ཀྱིས་ཉེར་མཆིས	drawn near	kyis nyer mchis
ཀྱུ	hook, angle	kyu
ཀྱུ་གུ	a small piece of tsampa attached at the bottom of the {dpal gtor}, used as the {dpal gyi pham phab}	kyu gu
ཀྱུ་མ	gyu	kyu ma
ཀྱུ་རིང	long hook	kyu ring
ཀྱུ་རུ	metal lead	kyu ru
ཀྱུ་རུ་ར	Emblic myrobalan; kind of medicament. Syn {skyu ru ra}. kind of medicament	kyu ru ra
ཀྱུ་རུ་རུ	rings and rings, whistling, ringing [high toned piercing sound, like a flute or an opera singer) (undulating high sound)	kyu ru ru
ཀྱུག	shining, dazzling	kyug
ཀྱུག་ཀྱུག	to shine	kyug kyug
ཀྱུང་བུ	needle	kyung bu
ཀྱུར་ཀྱུར	twittering, cry of a small bird	kyur kyur
ཀྱུར་འབུར	preparation of wheat flour,	kyur 'bur
སུགར	beer	sugar
ཀྱུས་བུར	treacle of inferior quality	kyus bur
ཀྱུས་སུ་རིང་བ	lengthwise, in length	kyus su ring ba
ཀྱེ	1) o! [calling someone higher than oneself] 2) oh! hi! listen! pag heed! hey! etc calling [vocative]	kye
ཀྱེ་ཀྱེ	1) stack syllable; 2) earnest calling/exclaiming word	kye kye
ཀྱེ་ག	magpie	kye ga
ཀྱེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	Oh great king. Syn {kye}	kye rgyal po chen po
ཀྱེ་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་དག	Listen, sons of the victorious ones!	kye rgyal ba'i sras dag
ཀྱེ་ཇོར་གྱི་གྱུད་གསུམ	[chn]	kye jor gyi gyud gsum
ཀྱེ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Hevajra {dgyes pa rdo rje yidam of anuttara yoga tantra syn: dgyes pa rdo rje dang, rdo rje gri gug dpal ldan khrag 'thung, rol pa'i rdo rje, he badzra, he ru ka]	kye rdo rje
ཀྱེ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་འགྲེལ་བ	Hevajra Tantra commentary [rnal 'byor bla na med pa'i rgyud sde] brtag pa gnyis pas te, dgyes pa rdo rje'i rtsa ba'i rgyud extensivea 'bum phrag bdun yod pa las abbridgeda 'bum phrag lnga pa &, de ...	kye rdo rje'i 'grel ba
ཀྱེ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྒྱུད	Hevajra Tantra; the king of the prajna mother tantras, has an extensive, medium and condensed versions. The extensive is the Seven Hundred Thousand ('bum phrag bdun pa). The medium is the Five Hund...	kye rdo rje'i rgyud
ཀྱེ་རྡོར	Syn {kye rdo rje}; abbr. of {kye rdo rje}. Hevajra	kye rdor
ཀྱེ་རྡོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	three Hevajra Tantras	kye rdor gyi rgyud gsum
ཀྱེ་རྡོར་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	sixbranched sadhana of Hevajra	kye rdor sgrub thabs yan lag drug
ཀཡE་རྡོར་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	1) Hevajra and Coemergent One [consort]. 2) a yidam of Anuttara yoga tantra	kyE rdor lhan skyes
ཀྱེ་ཕང་པ	an idol of nying ma sect made of enchanted stick with rags	kye phang pa
ཀྱེ་མ	Alas!, "oy; "Oh dear". an exclamation of surprise and sadness. see {kyi hud}. oh! alas. o! "oy" ah! exclamation of distress, surprise or compassion, oh! or listen! [with tone of urgency and sadness...	kye ma
ཀྱེ་མ་ཀྱི་ཧུད	exclamation of deep distress	kye ma kyi hud
ཀྱེ་མ་ཀྱེ་ཧུད	exclamation of deep distress	kye ma kye hud
ཀྱེ་མ་ཀྱེ་ཧུད་ཀྱེ་མ་ཀླང	alas	kye ma kye hud kye ma klang
ཀྱེ་མ་ཀྱེ་ཧུད་ཀྱེ་མ་ཀློང	alas	kye ma kye hud kye ma klong
ཀྱེ་མ་མ	1) mama!; 2) alas!	kye ma ma
ཀྱེ་མ་མ་ལ	exclamation of surprise/sadness	kye ma ma la
ཀྱེ་མ་ཧུད	exclamation of sadness/ suffering	kye ma hud
ཀྱེ་མ་ཧོ	Kyemaho. Exclamation of sadness	kye ma ho
ཀྱེ་མའི	calling out, alas!	kye ma'i
ཀྱེ་མའོ	exclamation of despair/ distress	kye ma'o
ཀྱེ་རེ	upright, erect	kye re
ཀྱེ་རེ་ཉིད	act of standing erect	kye re nyid
ཀྱེ་རེ་སྡོད་པ	to stand erect	kye re sdod pa
ཀྱེ་རེ་བ	upright	kye re ba
ཀྱེ་རེ་ལང་བ་སྔོད་པ	stand erect	kye re lang ba sngod pa
ཀྱེ་རེ་ལང་བ་སྡོད་པ	to stand erect	kye re lang ba sdod pa
ཀྱེ་ལགས	oh sir	kye lags
ཀྱེ་ཧུ	oh, alas, woe, grief interjection	kye hu
ཀྱེ་ཧུད	exclamation of sadness, unbearable compassion etc	kye hud
ཀྱེ་ཧུད་ཟེར་བ	4th cold hell, the Hell of Lamentation [one of (grang dmyal brgyad) -(hahava]	kye hud zer ba
ཀྱེ་ཧོ	what oh, holla, (exclamatory word)	kye ho
ཀྱེད	Syn {'greng bu} used sometimes for {'greng bu} (the vowel "e")	kyed
ཀྱེད་དག	you two	kyed dag
ཀྱེན	(not in DAS)	kyen
ཀྱེན་རྒྱུ	upward moving	kyen rgyu
ཀྱེའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	hevajra; {dgyes pa rdo rje, rol pa'i rdo rje, dges pa rdo rje}	kye'i rdo rje
ཀྱེའི་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྷ་དགུ	nine emanation devis of Hevajra	kye'i rdo rje lha dgu
ཀྱེར	Syn {kye re}	kyer
ཀྱོ་ཏང	[arch] hook	kyo tang
ཀྱོ་བ	pointed iron-hook, large pin to pierce with	kyo ba
ཀྱོ་བ་ཏང	[arch] hook	kyo ba tang
ཀྱོ་རང	SA kyo ba	kyo rang
ཀྱོ་རང་ཀྱོག་ཀྱོག	Syn {lcags kyu}	kyo rang kyog kyog
ཀྱོག	crooked, bent, winding, curved, zigzag	kyog
ཀྱོག་ཀྱོག	crooked, winding [of roads]. Syn {kyog}	kyog kyog
ཀྱོག་སྐོར	indirect movement, detour	kyog skor
ཀྱོག་གེ་བ	not straightforward, devious, deceitful	kyog ge ba
ཀྱོག་ཐིག	crooked/curved line	kyog thig
ཀྱོག་པ	Syn {kyog po}	kyog pa
ཀྱོག་པ་ཉིད	crookedness	kyog pa nyid
ཀྱོག་པར	crookedly	kyog par
ཀྱོག་པོ	crooked, bent	kyog po
ཀྱོག་བྱེད་པ	to bend. Syn {kyog}	kyog byed pa
ཀྱོག་ལམ	crooked, winding, zigzag path/road	kyog lam
ཀྱོག་ཤད	rin chen spungs shad	kyog shad
ཀྱོག་ཤིང	crooked stick/ tree	kyog shing
ཀྱོག་བཤད	deceitful/ devious speaking	kyog bshad
ཀྱོག་བཤད་བྱེད	speak deceitfully/deviously	kyog bshad byed
ཀྱོང	Syn {kyong bu}. Syn {kyong kyong}; 1) hard, obstinate, unmanageable, oblong, quarrel. 2) hollow, cavity. 3) small shovel	kyong
ཀྱོང་ཀྱོང	1) hard. 2) obstinate 3) cavity, hollow. 4) oblong	kyong kyong
ཀྱོང་ཀྲོང	1) concave, excavated, indented; 2) undulating, uneven (of ground; 3) cavity, hole, low place	kyong krong
ཀྱོང་ཁ	quarrel 56	kyong kha
ཀྱོང་གྲུག	hard to break	kyong grug
ཀྱོང་པོ	hollow from ground collapsing downward [Sa bab kyong po,...Sa cha kyong por nyal nas yib]	kyong po
ཀྱོང་བ་ཉིད	oblongness	kyong ba nyid
ཀྱོང་བུ	small shovel	kyong bu
ཀྱོང་འབུར	gold and silver ornaments in relievo	kyong 'bur
ཀྱོང་མོ	kyong po	kyong mo
ཀྱོན	Syn 1) {bkyon pa}. 2) {bskyon pa}	kyon
ཀྱོབ	hook	kyob
ཀྱོམ	flexible but without elasticity, flabby, loose, lax	kyom
ཀྱོམ་ཀྱོམ	of irregular shape, not rectilinear	kyom kyom
ཀྱོམ་ཀྱོམ་བྱེད	shaking (liquids in containers	kyom kyom byed
ཀྱོམ་པ	soft and tough	kyom pa
ཀྱོམ་པ་ཉིད	pliancy, toughness	kyom pa nyid
ཀྱོར	weak, feeble, unfortified	kyor
ཀྱོར་ཀྱོར	weak, feeble, unfortified	kyor kyor
ཀྱོར་ཀྱོར་ཅན	weak, feeble, infirm	kyor kyor can
ཀྱོལ	SA kyor	kyol
ཀྱོལ་ཀྱོལ	Syn {kyor kyor can}	kyol kyol
ཀྲ	established a dharmasala	kra
ཀྲ་ཁ་ཁྲ་ཆུང	1) med. herb kon pa gab skyes [of two kinds div by where it grows mt grown; 2) hawk	kra kha khra chung
ཀྲ་ཉ་ཅ	mountain crane	kra nya ca
ཀྲ་ཏན	bomb	kra tan
ཀྲ་ཏན་གྱུག་བྱེད་གནམ་གྲུ	bomber airplane	kra tan gyug byed gnam gru
ཀྲ་ཏན་དབྱུག	bomb	kra tan dbyug
ཀྲ་མ་ཤར་ཤ	kind of precious stone	kra ma shar sha
ཀྲ་མ་ཤི་ལ	a monastery in ancient India (probably Vikramashila	kra ma shi la
ཀྲ་མ་འསྲིར་ས	kramasrirsha	kra ma 'srir sa
ཀྲ་བཙུགས	established a dharmasala	kra btsugs
ཀྲ་ཡེ	exclamation for gaining attention	kra ye
ཀྲག	side/ edgeways strike [on cymbals]	krag
ཀྲང	1) leader, chief, head director; 2) standing up, erect	krang
ཀྲང་ཀོར	thik man's ring	krang kor
ཀྲང་ཀྲོང	standing straight	krang krong
ཀྲང་མཁྲིས	feverish chill	krang mkhris
ཀྲང་ངེ	standing	krang nge
ཀྲང་ངེ་ཀྲོང་ངེ	standing straight	krang nge krong nge
ཀྲང་ངེ་བ	standing up straight, erect	krang nge ba
ཀྲང་ངེ་བ་ཉིད	uprightness	krang nge ba nyid
ཀྲང་ངེ་བཙུག་པ	to plant	krang nge btsug pa
ཀྲང་ཅིག་ཝུའི	PRC rep in Lhasa in 1959	krang cig wu'i
ཀྲང་དེ་བ	upright	krang de ba
ཀྲང་སྡོད་པ	to stand	krang sdod pa
ཀྲང་ནང	gallery round a house, covered passage	krang nang
ཀྲང་པ	Tibetan boot (upper part usually wool	krang pa
ཀྲང་མའོ་ཚེ	(CH kong po man's hat	krang ma'o tshe
ཀྲང་གཞོན	vice director/ chief	krang gzhon
ཀྲང་ལ་རྒྱུགས་པ	leaves and snying po rgyas ma thub par sdong rkang ring por gyur pa Lud ma brgyab pas tshal rigs tshang ma krang la rgyugs 'dug	krang la rgyugs pa
ཀྲད	leather bowstring	krad
ཀྲད་ཀོར	ring used in the exercise of archery	krad kor
ཀྲད་འཁོར	mtheb kor,...on the thumb wearing an ivory krad kor	krad 'khor
ཀྲད་རྒྱུན	piece of long narrow leather to mend shoes	krad rgyun
ཀྲད་པ	shoe sole, leather half-boot, shoe	krad pa
ཀྲད་ལྷན	patch for shoe	krad lhan
ཀྲན་ཀྲང	station master	kran krang
ཀྲན་མ	peas	kran ma
ཀྲབ་ཀྲབ	sound of stamping, stomping, tromping	krab krab
ཀྲབ་ཀྲབ་པ	to dance	krab krab pa
ཀྲབ་ཀྲོབ	1) dancing [esp quick repetitive steps]; 2) w devious thoughts of deception	krab krob
ཀྲབ་བེ་ཀྲོབ་བེ	1) dancing [esp quick repetitive steps]; 2) w devious thoughts of deception	krab be krob be
ཀྲམ	cabbage	kram
ཀྲམ་སྐྱུར	cabbage-pickle. Syn {kram}	kram skyur
ཀྲམ་མངར	fresh cabbage. Syn {kram}	kram mngar
ཀྲའུ་ཨེ་ལེ	Chou en Lai	kra'u e le
ཀྲའོ་ཙི་དབྱང	proper name, Zhao Ziyang	kra'o tsi dbyang
ཀྲའོ་རླུང	methane gas	kra'o rlung
ཀྲི་ཀ་རུ་ཀ	a monastery in ancient Behar	kri ka ru ka
ཀྲི་ཀ་ལ་ཤ	small lizard	kri ka la sha
ཀྲི་ཀི་ཀི	ticket, stamp	kri ki ki
ཀྲི་ཀྲི	n. of a legendary kind of Benares in the time of the Buddha Kashyapa	kri kri
ཀྲི་ཁ	magpie	kri kha
ཀྲི་ག	1) Nyag nyag [gi ri mo],...Phor pa'i kri ga Mig gi kri ga; 2) well enclosure	kri ga
ཀྲི་ཅ་གོ	Chicago	kri ca go
ཀྲི་ཏ་མུ་ཁ	Grdhramukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	kri ta mu kha
ཀྲི་རྟི་ཀ	the Pleiades	kri rti ka
ཀྲཱི་སྣ་སཱ་རི	Syn {krI Sna sA ra}	krI sna sA ri
ཀྲི་སྣཱ་སར	the spotted (black) antelope	kri snA sar
ཀྲི་སྣའ་སར	the spotted antelope	kri sna' sar
ཀྲི་པུའུ	branch of an organization	kri pu'u
ཀྲི་པུའུ་ཧྲུའུ་ཅི	[party] branch secretary	kri pu'u hru'u ci
ཀྲི་བ་ཤའི་གདོང	a place in Tibet	kri ba sha'i gdong
ཀྲཱི་མི	insect, pheasant 57	krI mi
ཀྲི་མིང་ཏི	colony, colonial	kri ming ti
ཀྲི་མིང་ཏི་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	semi-colony/ colonial	kri ming ti phyed tsam
ཀྲི་མིང་ཏི་རིང་ལུགས	colonialism	kri ming ti ring lugs
ཀྲི་ཙི	proton	kri tsi
ཀྲི་ཙི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	proton	kri tsi rdul phran
ཀྲི་ཡ	ritualistic part of sambhawa mysticism	kri ya
ཀྲི་ཡ་ཏན་ཏྲ	Kriya tantra. Tib. {bya ba'i rgyud}	kri ya tan tra
ཀྲི་ཡ་དོན་གྱི་ལྷ་དྲུག	six ultimate deities of Kriya Tantra	kri ya don gyi lha drug
ཀྲི་ཡ་དཔུང་བཟང་གི་རྒྱུད	Kriya Tantra of Eminent Courage	kri ya dpung bzang gi rgyud
ཀྲི་ཡ་ལྷ་དྲུག	6 divine powers of kriya yoga (gestures, syllables, thoughts, mansion, sending & receiving), six kriya deities (stong pa'i lha, yi ge'i lha, sgra'i lha, gzugs kyi lha, phyags rgya'i lha, mtshan ma'...	kri ya lha drug
ཀྲི་ཡོ་ག	[Skt] kriya and yoga [bya rgyud dang, rnal'byor rgyud]	kri yo ga
ཀྲི་ཡོག	abbr. of Kriya + yoga [tantra]	kri yog
ཀྲི་ཡོག་སྡེ་གསུམ	the three sections from kriya to yoga [kriya, upa and yoga tantra yanas]	kri yog sde gsum
ཀྲི་ལི	Chile	kri li
ཀྲི་ཤ་ན	Krishna	kri sha na
ཀྲི་ཤ་ན་ས་ར	the krishnasara antelope, deer of compassion	kri sha na sa ra
ཀྲི་ཤ་ནའི་པགས་གདན	a seat of a krishnasara skin	kri sha na'i pags gdan
ཀྲི་ཤོང་བ་རོ	an individual in Atisha's service	kri shong ba ro
ཀྲཱི་ས་ར	a rice gruel made from cooking black sesame, mashed peas and rice	krI sa ra
ཀྲི་ཧ་ཕུ	uniform	kri ha phu
ཀྲི་དྷ་ན	fierce	kri dha na
ཀྲིག	lined up, straight; straight	krig
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག	1) creaking sound; 2) brilliantly gleaming, trembling [w fear]; 3) strongly/ tightly grasping; 4) promptly, on time	krig krig
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག་ཏུ་སྒྲོག	creaking	krig krig tu sgrog
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	tightly grasped	krig krig tu 'dzin pa
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག་ལྟ	look trembling	krig krig lta
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག་བྱེད་པ	to press, to urge	krig krig byed pa
ཀྲིག་ཀྲིག་འོད་ཅིག་འདུག	there is a brilliant light	krig krig 'od cig 'dug
ཀྲིག་གི	straight	krig gi
ཀྲིག་ཅར	1) ascertained, settled decided; 2) customarily, as a rule; 3) prompt, on time	krig car
ཀྲིག་ཅར་བཟོས་སོང	was settled	krig car bzos song
ཀྲིག་ཆགས	1) ascertained, settled decided; 2) customarily, as a rule; 3) prompt, on time	krig chags
ཀྲིག་ཆགས་མེད་པ	not customary or purposelessly, for nothing	krig chags med pa
ཀྲིང་ཀང	weapon like the spear, forked spear	kring kang
ཀྲིང་བག་སྐྱོ	flour paste	kring bag skyo
ཀྲིང་བག་སྒྱོ	glue, paste made of flour	kring bag sgyo
ཀྲིད	(not in DAS)	krid
ཀྲིན་ནད	colic	krin nad
ཀྲིའ་ས་ར	gruel made from black sesame, masha peas and rice	kri' sa ra
ཀྲིལ	(not in DAS)	kril
ཀྲུ་ཀྲུ	wind-pipe	kru kru
ཀྲུ་ཀྲུ་ཧྲིས	kind of yellow chintz resembling satin of great value	kru kru hris
ཀྲུ་མ་ཀྲུའུ	tomato	kru ma kru'u
ཀྲུ་ར	vulgar	kru ra
ཀྲུག་མེད་པ	lifeless, inanimate, of no strength	krug med pa
ཀྲུགས	[arch] 1) quarrel disturbance, fight; 2) Dkrug spyad	krugs
ཀྲུང་ཀྲུང	crane (bird	krung krung
ཀྲུང་ཀྲུང་སྒྲ་ཅན	filled with the cry of cranes, (n. of a country)	krung krung sgra can
ཀྲུང་གོ	China	krung go
ཀྲུང་ཐང	(CH emperor's [prime] minister [h] address	krung thang
ཀྲུང་དབན	(CH china 'bring ba	krung dban
ཀྲུང་དབྱང	central authorities	krung dbyang
ཀྲུང་དབྱང་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	Central Committee	krung dbyang u yon lhan khang
ཀྲུང་ཡོ	China & Vietnam, SinoVietnamese, abbr of krung go dang yo nan	krung yo
ཀྲུང་ཧྭ་མི་རིགས	dus yun ring ba'i lo rgyus dang, 'od stong 'bar ba'i rig gnas rjes 'bras, gzi brjid che ba'i gsar brje'i srol rgyun dang ldan pa'i rang re'i krung hva mi dmangs spyi mthun rgyal khab kyi khongs gto...	krung hwa mi rigs
ཀྲུང་ཨུ	abbr of krung u tshang 'dzoms gros tshogs	krung u
ཀྲུང་ཨུ་ཚང་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	plenary session of the Central Committee	krung u tshang 'dzoms gros tshogs
ཀྲུབ་ཟན	srubs zan te, tshem bu'i bar srub tu 'jug pa'i rgyan	krub zan
ཀྲུམ	meat, flesh [h]	krum
ཀྲུམ་དོད	sha'i dod dngul[tshab dngul]	krum dod
ཀྲུམ་མདའ	short me mda'[gun/ fire arrow] 'phrul mda' [magical gun/ fire arrow]	krum mda'
ཀྲུམ་པ	broken in the edge, nobbled	krum pa
ཀྲུམས	meet	krums
ཀྲུའུ་ཞི	(CH kingdom, srid tang, tshod pa, tshogs 'du sogs 'ga' zhig gi 'go khrid highest rank name, chairman	kru'u zhi
ཀྲུའུ་ཞི་གནང	act as chairman	kru'u zhi gnang
ཀྲུའུ་ཞི་བྱེད	act as chairman	kru'u zhi byed
ཀྲུའུ་ཞི་ཞུགས་སྟེགས	rostrum	kru'u zhi zhugs stegs
ཀྲུའུ་ཞི་གཞོན་པ	vice chairman	kru'u zhi gzhon pa
ཀྲུའུ་ཞིའི་སྟེགས་བུ	rostrum	kru'u zhi'i stegs bu
ཀྲུའུ་ཞིའི་ཐོན	presidium	kru'u zhi'i thon
ཀྲུའུ་ཞིའི་ཚོགས	presidium	kru'u zhi'i tshogs
ཀྲུའུ་ཞིའི་ཚོགས་པ	presidium	kru'u zhi'i tshogs pa
ཀྲུའུ་ལའེ	Chu Lai S Vietnam	kru'u l'e
ཀྲུའུ་རེན	chairman, leader, director, head, chief	kru'u ren
ཀྲེ་ཅང	Chekiang Province	kre cang
ཀྲེ་ཉག	place in kham	kre nyag
ཀྲེ་ནག	spout of a kettle	kre nag
ཀྲེ་པ	forehead, forehead	kre pa
ཀྲེ་བོ	place in kham	kre bo
ཀྲེང་སྒ་རིལ	tank	kreng sga ril
ཀྲེང་ཏང	political party	kreng tang
ཀྲེན	town	kren
ཀྲེན་ཀྲང	chief administer of a town	kren krang
ཀྲེན་ཅང	Chinkiang	kren cang
ཀྲེབ་འཁོར	tape recorder	kreb 'khor
ཀྲེམས་པ	watering	krems pa
ཀྲོ་ཏི	n. of a plant	kro ti
ཀྲོ་མདའ	pistol, revolver	kro mda'
ཀྲོ་མ་ཀྲོ	tomato	kro ma kro
ཀྲོ་དྷ་ན	fierce woman, amazon	kro dha na
ཀྲོག	life, strength	krog
ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག	boast, kind of sound produced by grinding of hard or brittle objects together, grating sound	krog krog
ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག་བྱེད	show off	krog krog byed
ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག་ཚ་པ	a show off	krog krog tsha pa
ཀྲོག་ཁྱོ	Tokyo	krog khyo
ཀྲོག་གྲོག	Syn {krog krog} 58	krog grog
ཀྲོག་ཆེན་པོ	durable, enduring, firm, lasting	krog chen po
ཀྲོག་མེད་པ	lifeless, inanimate, of no strength. Syn {krog}	krog med pa
ཀྲོག་འུར	sound of dragging (feet)	krog 'ur
ཀྲོང	erect, standing	krong
ཀྲོང་ཀྲོང	1) standing erect, upright, upstanding, raised, upraised. 2) standing. standing upright	krong krong
ཀྲོང་ཀྲོང་བྱེད	raise straight up	krong krong byed
ཀྲོང་ངེ	erect	krong nge
ཀྲོང་ངེ་བ	standing straight/ upright/ erect	krong nge ba
ཀྲོང་ངེར	standing straight/ upright/ erect	krong nger
ཀྲོང་ངེར་སྡོད	sit/ stand upright/ erect	krong nger sdod
ཀྲོང་ཅ་འཁོར་ལོ	armored vehicle	krong ca 'khor lo
ཀྲོང་ཅ་དམག་དཔུང	armored forces	krong ca dmag dpung
ཀྲོང་རྩེ	n. of a kind of writing used in China	krong rtse
ཀྲོང་རིགས	proper name of a nationality	krong rigs
ཀྲོང་ལང	erection	krong lang
ཀྲོངས	to kill, murder, Variant imp, tense	krongs
ཀྲོན	ton	kron
ཀྲོན་ཀྲོན	handing	kron kron
ཀྲོན་ཅ	specialist, expert	kron ca
ཀྲོན་ཆུས	prefecture (like province in traditional Tibet)	kron chus
ཀྲོན་ཡོན	district/ regional commissioner	kron yon
ཀྲོན་ཡོན་ཀུང་ཧུའུ	district/ regional commissioner's office	kron yon kung hu'u
ཀྲོན་ཧྲུའུ	town	kron hru'u
ཀྲོམ	loud sound	krom
ཀྲོམ་མདའ	revolver, pistol	krom mda'
ཀྲོམས	{'grems pa}! put!, place!, spread!, distribute!, {dgram pa}! strew!, uncivilized person	kroms
ཀྲོའི་ཀྲང	administrative head of a region	kro'i krang
ཀྲོའུ	region, state, country	kro'u
ཀྲོའུ་རྒྱལ་རབས	Chou Dynasty [1100221 BC]	kro'u rgyal rabs
ཀྲོའུ་ཨེན་ལའེ	Chou en Lai	kro'u en l'e
ཀླ	1 of sde brgyad	kla
ཀླ་ཀློ	Barbarian. A human being in an uncivilized area where the Dharma has not flourished	kla klo
མེཨནས་ཐོསེ་ཝཧོ་ལིབེ༹་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཐིརཏཡ	two border countries, such as lokhatha, and all those who consider harming others an act of faith or whose savage beliefs see taking life as good	means those who live in the thirty
ཀླ་ཀློ་ཁ	(met copper	kla klo kha
ཀླ་ཀློ་མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	barbarian border law [T's border region du spyod cing bod rang la mkho chung ba'i law; among {khrims yig zhal lce bcu drug}	kla klo mtha' 'khob kyi zhal lce
ཀླ་ཀློ་རྣམས	barbarians	kla klo rnams
ཀླ་ཀློ་ཚེ་རིང་ལྷ་དང་ནི	a long-lived god or a barbarian	kla klo tshe ring lha dang ni
ཀླ་ཀློའི་སྐད	barbarian language, met, foreign language, nonsense. Syn {kla klo}	kla klo'i skad
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཁ	musalman's mouth, widemouthed man, musalman of kashmir	kla klo'i kha
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཆོས	1) heretical doctrine, Islam. 2) hunter. 3) un-aryan, ignoble. Syn {kla klo}; 1) barbarian doctrine / customs. 2) heretical doctrine. 3) Islam	kla klo'i chos
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཆོས་པ	1) heretic. 2) Mohammedan	kla klo'i chos pa
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	barbarian doctrine / customs	kla klo'i chos lugs
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཏིག་ཏ	n. of a root growing in the Himalayas	kla klo'i tig ta
ཀླ་ཀློའི་སྤོས	(met garlic	kla klo'i spos
ཀླ་ཀློའི་འཕེལ	a turuska king	kla klo'i 'phel
ཀླ་ཀློའི་བྱེ་བྲག	tribe of turuska, tartar	kla klo'i bye brag
ཀླ་ཀློའི་ཡུལ	country of barbarians, met. foreign country, heretic, Mohammedan. Syn {kla klo}	kla klo'i yul
ཀླ་ཅོལ	foolish talk, unconnected speech, delirium	kla col
ཀླ་ཐེབས	coming out of snakes	kla thebs
ཀླ་རྩི	musk	kla rtsi
ཀླག	[arch] wool cloth lva ba bklag f read	klag
ཀླག་འཁས་པ	prevail (in an argument/ dispute	klag 'khas pa
ཀླག་ཅོར	clamor, noise	klag cor
ཀླག་ཅོར་ཅན	noisy	klag cor can
ཀླག་ཅོར་ཆུང་བ	less noisy	klag cor chung ba
ཀླག་ཅོར་བྱེད་པ	to make noise	klag cor byed pa
ཀླག་པ	study, reading, incarnate	klag pa
ཀླག་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	reading teacher	klag pa'i slob dpon
ཀླགས	{bklags pa} path, reading read, recite, bklags	klags
ཀླགས་ལྟ་བ	waiting for or expectant of one's advent or incarnation	klags lta ba
ཀླགས་པ	[arch] better than others, especially fine	klags pa
ཀླགས་མི་ཁུགས	not incarnated	klags mi khugs
ཀླགས་མི་སྙེད	not incarnated	klags mi snyed
ཀླད	1) above, over, overhead, up, on, on the top; 2) beginning, at first; 3) jar; 4) head, brain, pia mater, fontanel, cerebellum, spinal marrow; 5) headache	klad
ཀླད་ཀར	zero, naught	klad kar
ཀླད་ཀོར	zero, SA thig, circular dot put over the head of certain letters to signify the letter ma	klad kor
ཀླད་ཀྱི་དོན	introduction, foreword, title page, original work, name for the SK title of Tibetan work, old, what is taught in the beginning, the first meanings	klad kyi don
ཀླད་སྐོར	dot, cipher, zero	klad skor
ཀླད་སྐྱོན	1) brain sickness; 2) Bsam pa'i lhad	klad skyon
ཀླད་ཁྱིམ	skull	klad khyim
ཀླད་ཁྲག་རྒྱས་ནད	cerebral hemorrhage	klad khrag rgyas nad
ཀླད་ཁྲག་ཉམས་པ	mgo nad cig	klad khrag nyams pa
ཀླད་རྒྱ	1) cerebral / cranial membrane. 2) membrane covering the brain; membrane covering the brain	klad rgya
ཀླད་རྒྱའི་ཁྲག་ལུད	apoplexy	klad rgya'i khrag lud
ཀླད་རྒྱས	1) brain	klad rgyas
ཀླད་རྒྱས་ལྷ་པ	bloody marrow in the bones	klad rgyas lha pa
ཀླད་རྒྱས་ལྷ་མ	1) marrow in the brain. 2) amplification of an original text	klad rgyas lha ma
ཀླད་སྒུའི་ཚ་ཚད	cerebro-spinal meningitis	klad sgu'i tsha tshad
ཀླད་སྒོ	fontanel	klad sgo
ཨོཕ༹་བྷྲམ	fontanel (in the infant cranium	of Bhrama
ཀླད་ཆུང	cerebellum	klad chung
ཀླད་ཆེན་གྱི་ཚ་ནད	cerebritis	klad chen gyi tsha nad
ཀླད་ལྗངས	conservative, overly traditional, reactionary	klad ljangs
ཀླད་རྙིང་འཁྲེགས་པོ	conservative, overly traditional, reactionary	klad rnying 'khregs po
ཀླད་ཐོ	top length of a Tibetan tent (distance between two poles)	klad tho
ཀླད་དུ	formerly	klad du
ཀླད་དོན	meaning of text or original work, sanskrit expressions which head most religious books in tibet	klad don
ཀླད་ནད	brain disease	klad nad
ཀླད་ནས	from the first	klad nas
ཀླད་པ	1) + neg. 2) stupid. 3) foolish. 4) gullible. 5) brains. 6) intelligence. 7) reason[-ing]. 8) mind. 9) what is uppermost; brain	klad pa
ཀླད་པ་ཀླད་ཀོར	dot or cypher placed on the top of a letter as abbr for ma	klad pa klad kor
ཀླད་པ་དཀར་པོ	white/ virtuous/ faultless thoughts	klad pa dkar po
ཀླད་པ་དཀྲུག་དཀྲུག་གཏོང་བ	use one's brains	klad pa dkrug dkrug gtong ba
ཀླད་པ་འགུལ་བ	use one's brains	klad pa 'gul ba
ཀླད་པ་འགེམས	1	klad pa 'gems
ཀླད་པ་འགེམས་པ	to stun, to surprise. what is uppermost	klad pa 'gems pa
ཀླད་པ་འགྲེམས	be confounded, be thrown into confusion/ disorder	klad pa 'grems
ཀླད་པ་རྒྱབ་མ	back brain: motor area	klad pa rgyab ma
ཀླད་པ་ཅན	head	klad pa can
ཀླད་པ་ལྗང་གུ	bad evil rotten thoughts	klad pa ljang gu
ཀླད་པ་མདུན་མ	front brain: area of thought and feelings	klad pa mdun ma
ཀླད་པ་ཚ་ཚག་ཚག	1	klad pa tsha tshag tshag
ཀླད་པ་ཡེ་མི་འདུག	be very gullible	klad pa ye mi 'dug
ཀླད་པ་སྲབ་པོ	gullible, easily fooled, or made to change views	klad pa srab po
ཀླད་པའི་ངལ་རྩོལ	brain work [bsam blo'i bya ba gtso bor byed pa'i ngal rtsol dper na rgyal khab kyi las don bdag gnyer gyi bya ba dang, thon skyed rtsa 'dzugs kyi bya ba, chab srid dang rig gnas kyi bya ba, tshan r...	klad pa'i ngal rtsol
ཀླད་པའི་དར་རྩ	brain rgya dar nadis [above the brain's rgya dar like veins in leaves white nadis [7 div: gnyan gyi re thag bzhi, kun rgyug gnyis, tshangs pa'i skud pa gcig]	klad pa'i dar rtsa
ཀླད་པའི་ཕྱི་ནད	neuro-surgical study	klad pa'i phyi nad
ཀླད་པའི་ཕྱི་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	department of neuro- surgery	klad pa'i phyi nad tshan khag
ཀླད་པའི་དབང་རྩ	brain, cranial nerves	klad pa'i dbang rtsa
ཀླད་པའི་རྩ	veins of the brain	klad pa'i rtsa
ཀླད་པའི་ལས་རྩོལ	brain work	klad pa'i las rtsol
ཀླད་པའི་ཤུན་པ	cranial membrane [covering the brain]	klad pa'i shun pa
ཀླད་པོ་ཆེ	kettle, pot	klad po che
ཀླད་སྤྲི	klad pa'i skyi dkar	klad spri
ཀླད་ཕོར	ka li [part of the brain]	klad phor
ཀླད་བྱི	red or copper colored head, hair naturally bud pa	klad byi
ཀླད་མ	priority, beginning, top	klad ma
ཀླད་མེད	brainless	klad med
ཀླད་མེད་ཀྱི་གཏམ	nonsensical talk	klad med kyi gtam
ཀླད་རྩ	brain 'phel rgyas 'byung ba'i rtsa [embryonic or brain stem?]	klad rtsa
ཀླད་རྩལ	power of thinking	klad rtsal
ཀླད་ཞོ	substance of the brain	klad zho
ཀླད་གཞུང	1) spinal marrow. 2) from the beginning to the end	klad gzhung
ཀླད་གཞུངས	spinal cord	klad gzhungs
ཀླད་གཟིགས	overseer/ director; unde the supervision of [KNT]	klad gzigs
ཀླད་གཟེར	among {gnyan nad rigs bco brgyad} disease attacking brain w great pain and death	klad gzer
ཀླད་བཟེར	disease of the brain	klad bzer
ཀླད་བཟོ	making (of the outer side of anything) 60	klad bzo
ཀླད་ཡུ་འཁོར	mgo yu 'khor ba disease	klad yu 'khor
ཀླད་ལ་བསྐོར་ནས	revolving round overhead	klad la bskor nas
ཀླད་ལ་འཕྱར་བ	raise	klad la 'phyar ba
ཀླད་ཤུན	klad pa'i skyi dkar	klad shun
ཀླད་ཤུབས	klad pa'i skyi dkar [inside of skin or cranial membrane?]	klad shubs
ཀླད་སྲིན	brain worm	klad srin
ཀླད་སྲིན་ནད	brain worms disease [sweet etc. bskyed pas srin 'khrugs te ldang dub byas nas na ba'i mgo nad cig]	klad srin nad
ཀླན་ཀ	blame, criticism [thd]	klan ka
ཀླན་ཀ་འདེབས་པ	censure, blame	klan ka 'debs pa
ཀླན་ཀ་འདེམས་པ	to blame	klan ka 'dems pa
ཀླན་ཀ་མི་འཚོལ་བ	one not seeking brawl	klan ka mi 'tshol ba
ཀླན་ཀ་འཚོལ་བ	fomenting a dispute, casting imputations, one who seeks brawls	klan ka 'tshol ba
ཀླན་ཀ་བསམ་པ	to look for a quarrel	klan ka bsam pa
ཀླན་པ	(A; 1) answer, reply; 2) avenge a wrong, wreak vengeance for, revenge	klan pa
ཀླན་བྱ	part to be mended or patched	klan bya
ཀླན་བྱེད་པ	censure, blame	klan byed pa
ཀླབ	[arch] lva ba'/ thick cloth	klab
ཀླབ་པ	thixk woolen blanket	klab pa
ཀླམ་པ	1) thick blanket. 2) turban used by Tibetans	klam pa
ཀླལ་བ	1) yawning. 2) to yawn	klal ba
ཀླས	copious, abundant, beyond, apart, without	klas
ཀླས་པ	1) endless, boundless, vast, 2) less, without, beyond. Syn {yas pa}. Ex. {mtha' med pa'am rgya che ba} without limit/(limitless) or vast. {mtha' klas pa} limitless. {'byams klas pa}: {yon tan 'byam...	klas pa
ཀླིང་མ	margin of a river or lake	kling ma
ཀླུ	1) n ga; 2) * rtog byed cig; 3) 8 * serpent [spirit/ deity/ demon, *, spirits of the water, beings, half-human halfserpent who live in the ocean	klu
ཨོཕ༹་ཝཏེར	dwelling animal; 2) among the Byed pa bcu gcig nang gi rtog byed cig; 3) (met) 8 [klu chen la mtha' yas dang, 'jog po, stobs rgyu, rigs ldan, nor rgyas bu, dung skyong, pad ma, pad ma chen po ste, ...	of water
ཀླུ་སྐྱེས	tree	klu skyes
ཀླུ་ཁང	residence of klu at bottom of sea or lake	klu khang
ཀླུ་གྱི་རླུང	the tortoise energy	klu gyi rlung
ཀླུ་གྲུབ	Nagarjuna	klu grub
ཀླུ་གྲུབ་ཞབས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	the authoritative scriptures of Nagarjuna	klu grub zhabs kyi gzhung
ཀླུ་གྲུབ་ཡབ་སྲས	Nagarjuna father and son, nagarjuna and chandrakirti?	klu grub yab sras
ཀླུ་གླང་ནག་པོ	bull-horned black klu	klu glang nag po
ཀླུ་གླང་ནག་པོ་བ་རུ་ཅན	crab	klu glang nag po ba ru can
ཀླུ་གླང་ནག་པོ་རྭ་ཅན	1) mtsho glang zhig; 2) Sdig srin	klu glang nag po rwa can
ཀླུ་དགའ	epith. of Buddha	klu dga'
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ	naga king [sde brgyad nang tshan gyi klu rigs kyi gtso bo]	klu rgyal
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་དཀར་པོ་དུང་སྐྱོང	protector	klu rgyal dkar po dung skyong
ཨོཕ༹་ཝཧིཏེ་ཅོནཆ	shells (n. of a naga king)	of white conch
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་དགའ་བ	Nanda (n. of a naga king)	klu rgyal dga' ba
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྒྱ་མཚོས་ཞུས་པ	the Sutra Requested by Naga King Ocean/manasarowar; 'phags pa klu'i rgyal po rgya mtshos zhus pa'i mdo rgyas pa [bam po bdun dang, le'u bcu 61 pa, rgya gar gyi mkhan po dzi na mi tradang, pradzny' ...	klu rgyal rgya mtshos zhus pa
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ་དགུ	the 9 major naga (kings) [klu chen brgyad) + vahruna]	klu rgyal chen po dgu
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་འཇོག་པོ	Naga King Jogpo. One of the Five Eminent Beings who received the Anu Yoga transmission	klu rgyal 'jog po
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ཉེ་དགའ	Upananda (n. of a naga king)	klu rgyal nye dga'
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་མཐའ་ཡས	infinite, king of snakes, one of 8 klu chen	klu rgyal mtha' yas
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་མ་དྲོས་པས་ཞུས་པ	'phags pa klu'i rgyal po ma dros pas zhus pa'i mdo [bam po bzhi pa, rgya gar gyi mkhan podzi na mi tra dang, d' na sh'i la dang, lo ts' ba bande yeshes sdes bsgyur ba]	klu rgyal ma dros pas zhus pa
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ཝ་རུ་ཎ	Varuna (n. of a naga king)	klu rgyal wa ru Na
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རིགས	nagas as the warrior caste (art	klu rgyal rigs
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རིགས་ལྔ	five classes of klu kings	klu rgyal rigs lnga
ཀླུ་སྒུག་སྒར་སྒྲིག	1st month 22nd day nyin lha sa'i brag ra klu sgug gi thang chen du gzim chung ba rnams sdeb tshogs kyis smon lam gtor rgyag pa'i rgyab snon du 'gro rgyu'i sgar sgrig byed pa]	klu sgug sgar sgrig
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ	expounder of the madhyamika school, Nagarjuna (also in Guhyasamaja tradition transmitted by mahasiddha Saraha)	klu sgrub
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	Nagarjuna's intent	klu sgrub kyi dgongs pa
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་སྲས་བདུན	The seven spiritual sons of Nagarjuna. 1) {shA kya mi tra}. Sakyamitra. 2) {nA ga bo dhi}. Nagabodhi 3) 'phags pa lha}. Aryadeva 4) {ma tang ki}. Matangi 5) {sangs rgyas bskyangs}. Buddhapalita 6) ...	klu sgrub kyi thugs sras bdun
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་གཞུང	scriptural tradition of Nagarjuna	klu sgrub kyi gzhung
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ལུགས	scriptural tradition of Nagarjuna klu sgrub kyi sA lu ljang pa'i mdo 'grel Nagarjuna's commentary on the Salu Sprout Sutra	klu sgrub kyi gzhung lugs
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས	Nagarjuna lists them as follows:	klu sgrub kyis
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དགོངས་འགྲེལ	clarifying Nagarjuna's intent	klu sgrub dgongs 'grel
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་རྗེས་འབྲང་གི་མན་ངག	instructions of Nagarjuna and his followers	klu sgrub rjes 'brang gi man ngag
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་སྙིང་པོ	Nagarjuna garbha; another name of Nagarjuna	klu sgrub snying po
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཞབས	venerable Nagarjuna	klu sgrub zhabs
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཡབ་སྲས	nagarjuna father and son [nagarjuna and chandrakirti?]	klu sgrub yab sras
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཡབ་སྲས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	scriptural tradition of Nagarjuna and sons	klu sgrub yab sras kyi gzhung
ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	the system / tradition of Nagarjuna	klu sgrub lugs
ཀླུ་ལྕེ་བ	red arsenic	klu lce ba
ཀླུ་ཆུ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	klu chu
ཀླུ་ཆུ་ཐང	Luchu Thang, in Domey	klu chu thang
ཀླུ་ཆེན	king of nagas	klu chen
ཀླུ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the eight great nagas	klu chen brgyad
ཀླུ་འཇིག་རྟེན	naga region	klu 'jig rten
ཀླུ་འཇོག་པ	carpenter, architect	klu 'jog pa
ཀླུ་འཇོག་པོ	class of klu called taksaka	klu 'jog po
ཀླུ་འཇོམས	myth. n. of the elder brother of Krishna (lit. the destroyer of nagas)	klu 'joms
ཀླུ་གཉན	1) powerful or malicious naga; 2) having naga and gnyan sa bdag	klu gnyan
ཀླུ་གཉན་གཏོད་ཀྱི་འགྲམས་བཅོས	rites to repair disturbances to the klu gnyan & gtod	klu gnyan gtod kyi 'grams bcos
ཀླུ་གཏའ་སྡོམ་པ	Binding the Entrustment to Nagas	klu gta' sdom pa
ཀླུ་གཏེར་སྦ་བ	Hiding the Naga Treasure	klu gter sba ba
ཀླུ་གཏོར	naga torma	klu gtor
ཀླུ་གཏོར་བཏང་བ	perform the torma offering to the nagas	klu gtor btang ba
ཀླུ་ཐེབས	the coming forth of the nagas in summer from their retreats (the time fixed in Tibetan almanacs for worshipping them)	klu thebs
ཀླུ་ཐོར	thor nad cig	klu thor
ཀླུ་མཐར་བྱེད	destroyer of nagas: a) Garuda bird, b) the chief patriarch of the nagas	klu mthar byed
ཀླུ་དུག	1) harm arising from nagas [kha rlangs kyi dug dang, mthong dug, tshor ba'i dug, reg pa'i dug sogs]; 2) naga poison, a very venomous snake)	klu dug
ཀླུ་དུག་ཅན	poisonous snake	klu dug can
ཀླུ་གདོན་འཇོམས་བྱེད	musk (lit. that which kills naga demons)	klu gdon 'joms byed
ཀླུ་གདོན་ནད	[among {lha srin sde brgyad}, gdug pa can mdze nad sogs said to be caused by nagas	klu gdon nad
ཀླུ་བདག	naga king	klu bdag
ཀླུ་བདུད	serpent-demon	klu bdud
ཀླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ	medicinal plant (which is believed to heal diseases caused by nagas)	klu bdud rdo rje
ཀླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་དཀར་པོ	med. herb [in low places nyin ngos las skye ba, lo ma	klu bdud rdo rje dkar po
ཀླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་ནག་པོ	med. herb [srib kyi shing phran gseb las skye ba, lo ma dngul gyi mdel zhib 'dra ba, me tog thal dkar glangchen mdog dril bu 'dra ba thur du bub pa zhig 'dis gza' klu'bam gdon rnams 'joms]	klu bdud rdo rje nag po
ཀླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་དམན་པ	med. herb ['dis chu khams gso badang glo ba'i tsha ba sel]	klu bdud rdo rje dman pa
ཀླུ་བདུད་ནག་པོ	Black Naga's Devil;	klu bdud nag po
བོནནེཏ་བེལལ	flower (Lat. Codonopsis)	Bonnet Bell
ཀླུ་བདུད་སྤུ་གྲི	Naga Demon Razor. Ludü Pudri	klu bdud spu gri
ཀླུ་མདུད	codonopsis ovata which cures arthritis and rheumatism	klu mdud
ཀླུ་འདུལ་ཁྱུང་ཆེན	sgra bla named great khyung that subdues the klu	klu 'dul khyung chen
ཀླུ་ལྡོག	the retiring of the nagas to their abodes (which time is said to fall in December)	klu ldog
ཀླུ་སྡིངས	peak or flanks of a mountain where snakes reside	klu sdings
ཀླུ་སྡེ	1) naga city in mt bihula; 2) n gasena [one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the 16 staviras or arhants)	klu sde
ཀླུ་ནད	leprosy	klu nad
ཀླུ་ནོར་ཉེར་གཅིག	21 naga offerings	klu nor nyer gcig
ཀླུ་གནས	abode of the klu	klu gnas
ཀླུ་གནས་བརྒྱད	eight naga abodes	klu gnas brgyad
ཀླུ་གནོད	harmful influence/ disease caused by nagas	klu gnod
ཀླུ་རྣམས	Mipham: {klu rnams las dbang che ba 'ga' zhig lha la'ang gtogs la, phal cher dud 'gror gtogs pa'o} some powerful nagas are also included within the gods, but generally they are defined as animals k...	klu rnams
གནས	most nagas live in the oceans, such as within the Sea of Enjoyment	gnas
ཀླུ་བུམ	vase of the klu	klu bum
ཀླུ་བོད	one of the disciples of nagarjuna	klu bod
ཀླུ་བྱང	{klu'i byang chub}, lord of nagas [epithet of nagarjuna]	klu byang
ཀླུ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	Naga Bodhisattva, an inhabitant of Lake Kokonor	klu byang chub sems dpa'
ཀླུ་དབང	one of sku lnga rgyal po	klu dbang
ཀླུ་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	buddha ruling over the klu	klu dbang gi rgyal po
ཀླུ་དབང་གཏད་མདོས	mdos to eliminate the witchcraft of the powerful klu	klu dbang gtad mdos
ཀླུ་དབྱངས	song, music	klu dbyangs
ཀླུ་འབུམ	section of dpal ldan 'bras spungs monastery, ritual text devoted to klu	klu 'bum
ཀླུ་འབུམ་དཀར་ནག	the White and Black Scriptures that Help against Influence of the Nagas (B"n) [bon gzhung klu 'bum sde tshan]	klu 'bum dkar nag
ཀླུ་འབུམ་དཀར་པོ	White Scripture that Helps against Influence of Nagas	klu 'bum dkar po
ཀླུ་འབུམ་ཁ་བོ	a bonpo text, mottled	klu 'bum kha bo
ཀླུ་འབུམ་ཁྲ་བོ	med. plant	klu 'bum khra bo
ཀླུ་འབུམ་ནག་པོ	3rd B"n gzhung klu 'bum sde tshan- Black Scripture that Helps against Influence of Nagas	klu 'bum nag po
ཀླུ་འབྱོར་ལྡན	possessing the wealth of the nagas 63	klu 'byor ldan
ཀླུ་སྦུག་སྒར་སྒྲིག	preparing the camp at Lubu (ceremony on the 22nd day of the 1st Tibetan month)	klu sbug sgar sgrig
ཀླུ་སྦྱིན	epith. of Buddha	klu sbyin
ཀླུ་མེས	a lama	klu mes
ཀླུ་མེས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཤེས་རབ	lumey tsultrim sherab [took ordination in 978 1 of {dbus gtsang mi bcu}; rab byung dang po'i me yos yangyi lo zhe dgu pa sa stag lor mdo smad dan tig shel gyi yangdgon la bla chen dgongs pa rab gsa...	klu mes tshul khrims shes rab
ཀླུ་མོ	female serpent, serpent demoness	klu mo
ཀླུ་མོ་ཁྲག་མིག་མ	mother of Rahu	klu mo khrag mig ma
ཀླུ་མོ་མུ་ཏིག་ནུ་ཞོ་ཅན	a medicinal plant used for wounds or sores	klu mo mu tig nu zho can
ཀླུ་སྨན	a medicine	klu sman
ཀླུ་བཙན	nagas and btsan	klu btsan
ཀླུ་བཙན་ས་བདག	btsan and sa bdag	klu btsan sa bdag
ཀླུ་བཙན་ས་བདག་བཅོས་པའི་ཤ་བ	deer that repairs offences cause to the klu	klu btsan sa bdag bcos pa'i sha ba
ཀླུ་རྩི	musk	klu rtsi
ཀླུ་འཛིན	the abode of nagas	klu 'dzin
ཀླུ་ཟ	Garuda bird	klu za
ཀླུ་གཟུགས	body or likeness of a snake, klu in the body of a snake, anything in the guise of a snake	klu gzugs
ཀླུ་འི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the nagas	klu 'i rgyal po
ཀླུ་ཡི་སྐད	language of the klu	klu yi skad
ཀླུ་ཡི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	a leafy creeping plant	klu yi 'khri shing
ཀླུ་ཡི་དགྲ	Garuda bird	klu yi dgra
ཀླུ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Lui Gyaltsen. See	klu yi rgyal mtshan
ཀླུ་ཡི་ལྕེ	snake's tongue, a medicinal plant	klu yi lce
ཀླུ་ཡི་འཇིག་རྟེན	(met underground	klu yi 'jig rten
ཀླུ་ཡི་སྡེ	n gasena [one of the 16 sthaviras)	klu yi sde
ཀླུ་ཡི་དབང་པོ	1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug	klu yi dbang po
ཀླུ་ཡི་གཞི	earth	klu yi gzhi
ཀླུ་ཡི་ཤ	naga flesh animal medicine [gser sbrul gyi sha ste, sweet, heating, by its power gnyan nad 'joms pa dang,ro tsha, lus sha rgyas par byed]	klu yi sha
ཀླུ་ཡུལ	domains of nagas	klu yul
ཀླུ་རིགས	1 of rigs gsum	klu rigs
ཀླུ་ཤིང	snake tree, tree of golden bark, species of euphorbia used in offerings to the snake goddess	klu shing
ཀླུ་ཤོད་ཐང་དམར	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	klu shod thang dmar
ཀླུ་གཤེད་གསུམ	n. of the three medicines: a) {sdig srin}, {zhal nag}. b) {byang nag}	klu gshed gsum
ཀླུ་བསང	smoke offering to the nagas w visualization	klu bsang
ཀླུ་བསངས	smoke offering to the nagas w visualization	klu bsangs
ཀླུགས་པར་སྐྱེས	born idiotic or mute	klugs par skyes
ཀླུང	1) river, stream, valley [of a river]. 2) drainage basin, cultivated field; river valley, river bank, river bed	klung
ཀླུང་དཀར་དགོན	Lungkar Monastery, in Lokha	klung dkar dgon
ཀླུང་སྐྱེས་ཀོན་པ་གབ་སྐྱེས	an herb	klung skyes kon pa gab skyes
ཀླུང་སྐྱེས་ལོ་ཚན	med. herb [with different names by where it grows, mt: bya rkang, klung: lo tshan, good for 'khru pa gcod]	klung skyes lo tshan
ཀླུང་ཁང	sa bab low place house	klung khang
ཀླུང་གི་རྒྱུན	the flow of a river	klung gi rgyun
ཀླུང་གི་ལྷ	deities of fortune	klung gi lha
ཀླུང་གི་ལྷ་གསུམ	four triads of deities represented by the twelve animals of the astrological cycle	klung gi lha gsum
ཀླུང་རྒྱ	lung gzhung skam gsher la gnas pa'i discipline of not killing ...Skam gsher la gnas pa'i srog chags che phrar 'tse ba mi chog pa'i klung rgya sdom pa	klung rgya
ཀླུང་རྒྱུན	stream, current. river current / flow, stream	klung rgyun
ཀླུང་སྒོག	wild marsh garlic; kind of garlic	klung sgog
ཀླུང་ཆུ	1) gtsang chu river; 2) river water	klung chu
ཀླུང་ཆེར་རྒྱུན	great flowing river, stream of a great river	klung cher rgyun
ཀླུང་རྟ	luck, fortune; comp. {rlung rta}	klung rta
ཀླུང་རྟ་ཆགས	bad luck	klung rta chags
ཀླུང་རྟ་ཉམས	bad luck	klung rta nyams
ཀླུང་རྟ་དམའ་པོ	bad luck	klung rta dma' po
ཀླུང་རྟའི་ལྷ	deities of the klung rta	klung rta'i lha
ཀླུང་ཐང	[river] plain, river valley	klung thang
ཀླུང་ལྡན	river	klung ldan
ཀླུང་པ	valley (of a river)	klung pa
ཀླུང་ཕྱུགས	cattle living in the lower tablelands of tibet, yaks in lower plains	klung phyugs
ཀླུང་བུ	denotes the attribute of a person endowed with a highly developed klung rta so that good fortune is on his side klung bus khrims kha bsgyur ba'i sha ba deer that diverts elsewhere the punishments b...	klung bu
ཀླུང་འབབ	river 'bab pa	klung 'bab
ཀླུང་འབབ་པ	rushing of a hill torrent, flowing of a river	klung 'bab pa
ཀླུང་མ	river	klung ma
ཀླུང་རྩྭ	grass growing in river plain/ low place	klung rtswa
ཀླུང་ཚག	yak of the valley	klung tshag
ཀླུང་བཞི	the four rivers 64	klung bzhi
ཀླུང་རགས	dam	klung rags
ཀླུང་རབས	river crossing place, ford	klung rabs
ཀླུང་ཤ	klung shod dam bde thang sogs la skye ba dmar la kham pa zhig	klung sha
ཀླུང་ཤོ	klung grown sho mang, med herb	klung sho
ཀླུང་ཤོད	sa yul kha lung dma' ba'i phyogs	klung shod
ཀླུང་ཤོད་འབྲི་གུང	place in Tibet	klung shod 'bri gung
ཀླུང་ཤོས	plant growing on river edge efficacious when applied to sores	klung shos
ཀླུངས	cultivated land, field. cultivated land, field, a complex of fields. klungs Syn {klung}. Syn {lung}	klungs
ཀླུངས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	established in the natural state	klungs su gyur pa
ཀླུབ	klub clan, clothing	klub
ཀླུབ་པ	{klub pa, bklubs pa, bklub pa, klubs} trans. v.; {bklubs pa, bklub pa, klubs}. - to wear, be wearing, be garbed in, be enveloped in, to cover, put on, don, wear draped. Syn {gyon, 'dogs pa}. Syn {b...	klub pa
ཀླུབས	wear, be wearing, be enveloped in, cover, put on, {klub pa}! wear!	klubs
ཀླུབས་པ	pf. of {klub pa}. Syn {klub pa}	klubs pa
ཀླུའི་སྐད	1) naga language. 2) the Chinese language	klu'i skad
ཀླུའི་སྐྱོན	Syn {klu'i gnod pa}	klu'i skyon
ཀླུའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	place where many nagas live	klu'i grong khyer
ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of nagas	klu'i rgyal po
ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རྒྱ་མཚོས་ཞུས་པ	Requested by Naga King Sagara [thd]	klu'i rgyal po rgya mtshos zhus pa
ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	Syn {klu chen brgyad}	klu'i rgyal po chen po brgyad
ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་མ་དྲོས་པས་ཞུས་པ	Requested by Naga # klu'i rgyal po ma dros pas zhus pa'i mdo Sutra on Questions by the King of Nagas klu'i rgyal po ma dros pas zhus pa'i mdo Questions of the King of Nagas Sutra	klu'i rgyal po ma dros pas zhus pa
ཀླུའི་ལྕེ	snake's tongue (n. of a medicine)	klu'i lce
ཀླུའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the nether world inhabited by klu	klu'i 'jig rten
ཀླུའི་གཏོར་མ	Syn {klu gtor}	klu'i gtor ma
ཀླུའི་དུག་བཅོམ	a fabulous sea which lies beyond a great sandy desert where stobs ldan lives	klu'i dug bcom
ཀླུའི་གདེངས་ཀ	hood or neck of a klu	klu'i gdengs ka
ཀླུའི་གདོན	serpent-spirit demons causing leprosy	klu'i gdon
ཀླུའི་སྡེ	a buddhist sage, one of the 80 buddhist saints of the northern school	klu'i sde
ཀླུའི་གནོད་པ	codonopsis ovata which cures arthritis and rheumatism plague, disease of unknown origin, maladies originated from klu	klu'i gnod pa
ཀླུའི་ཕོ་བྲང་གསོ་བ	Restoring the Naga Castle	klu'i pho brang gso ba
ཀླུའི་བྱང་ཆུབ	Nagabodhi [Prasangika philosopher]. disciple of Nagarjuna and holder of his tantric lineage. Syn {klu'i blo}	klu'i byang chub
ཀླུའི་བློ	{klu'i byang chub}, Nagabodhi [prasangika philosopher) disciple of nagarjuna and holder of his tantric lineage, {klu'i blo} siddha of mahamudra]	klu'i blo
ཀླུའི་དབང་པའི་སྒྲ	the words/sound of the lord of nagas, the words of Nagarjuna	klu'i dbang pa'i sgra
ཀླུའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	1) the buddha; 2) naga king	klu'i dbang phyug
ཀླུའི་སྦྲུལ	1) klu rigs kyi snake; 2) king of nagas	klu'i sbrul
ཀླུའི་མེ་ཏོག	Syn {klu shing}	klu'i me tog
ཀླུའི་མེས་པ་ཐོད་དཀར	{gnyen chen thang lha} local deity of Tangla Mts	klu'i mes pa thod dkar
ཀླུའི་མེས་པོ་ཐོད་དཀར	White Skull Naga Forefather. Another name for the protector Nyenchen Tanglha	klu'i mes po thod dkar
ཀླུའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས	the nagas	klu'i tshogs rnams
ཀླུའི་མཚན	tree	klu'i mtshan
ཀླུའི་ཡི་གེ	chinese character, nagari character	klu'i yi ge
ཀླུའི་ཡུལ	{sa 'og klu'i yul} the land of the nagas under the earth	klu'i yul
ཀླུའི་རླུང	pranas/ winds of the nagas	klu'i rlung
ཀླུའི་བཤེས	name of master who wrote sku gsum la 'jug pa	klu'i bshes
ཀླུའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	a buddhist saint	klu'i bshes gnyen
ཀླུས་བོད	1 of 28 buddhist sages	klus bod
ཀླུས་བྱང་ཆུབ	one of Nagarjuna's chief disciples	klus byang chub
ཀླེས	rack for clothes, clothes-horse	kles
ཀློ	area in SE Tibet	klo
ཀློ་ཁ་ཁྲ	lokhatha; x {kla klo zhes pa ni klo kha khra zhes pa la sogs mtha' 'khob sum cu rtsa gnyis yod par bshad pa rnams dang 'tshe ba chos su smra ba kla klo'i chos lugs zhes srog bcad pa dge bar rtsi ba...	klo kha khra
ཀློ་པ	1) uncivilized people. 2) savages. 3) barbarians, primitive or uncivilized person. Syn {kla klo}	klo pa
ཀློ་མོན	1) barbaric mon. 2) the barbaric country / area of Mon. [probably Bhutan]	klo mon
ཀློ་ཡུལ	place in SE Tibet	klo yul
ཀློ་ཤོག	paper from stod klo valley klo shog stod klo zhes pa'i lung pa nas	klo shog
ཐོན་པའི་ཤོག་བུ	... Klo sug klo yul nas thon pa'i sug smel gyi ming	thon pa'i shog bu
ཀློ་སུག	klo yul nas thon pa'i sug smel, medicinal rtsi	klo sug
ཀློག	observe omens, read	klog
ཀློག་ཀླག	[a] reading	klog klag
ཀློག་དཀའ	difficult to read	klog dka'
ཀློག་སྐྱ	klog skya	klog skya
ཀློག་ཁོམས	time to read	klog khoms
ཀློག་མཁན	reader	klog mkhan
ཀློག་མཁྱེན	literate	klog mkhyen
ཀློག་གམ་ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་ནས	reading or saying by heart	klog gam kha ton du nas
ཀློག་གི་སློབ་དཔོན	reading teacher	klog gi slob dpon
ཀློག་གྱུར་བྱས	made secret	klog gyur byas
ཀློག་གྲྭ	reading class, assembly of readers	klog grwa
ཀློག་གྲྭའི་གནས	(met monastery	klog grwa'i gnas
ཀློག་གྲུབ་ཉེར་ཡོད	almost at the end of reading	klog grub nyer yod
ཀློག་ཏུ	back, behind	klog tu
ཀློག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	to cause one to read	klog tu 'jug pa
ཀློག་ཐོབ	n. of a bodhisattva	klog thob
ཀློག་དར	alphabet primer	klog dar
ཀློག་དེབ	book, primer, textbook	klog deb
ཀློག་དེབ་ཀྱི	textual	klog deb kyi
ཀློག་འདོན	1) reading. 2) recital; read and recite	klog 'don
ཀློག་འདོན་གྱི་ཚུལ	by reading	klog 'don gyi tshul
ཀློག་འདོན་པ	to read aloud	klog 'don pa
ཀློག་འདོན་བྱེད	read aloud, recite	klog 'don byed
ཀློག་ནོར	secret articles, stolen property	klog nor
ཀློག་པ	earwax, read, study, reading, browse, peruse	klog pa
ཀློག་པ་ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the study wheel of learning and contemplation [see {spang klog 'khor lo gsum}	klog pa thos bsam gyi 'khor lo
ཀློག་པ་པོ	reader	klog pa po
ཀློག་པ་ཡང་ཀློག་པ	read again	klog pa yang klog pa
ཀློག་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	1) reading teacher. 2) a guru who teaches one the alphabet and now to read; teacher. Syn {klog pa}	klog pa'i slob dpon
ཀློག་པར་བྱེད	is reading	klog par byed
ཀློག་པར་བྱེད་པ	act of reading	klog par byed pa
ཀློག་དཔོན	teacher	klog dpon
ཀློག་བྱ	anything to be read	klog bya
ཀློག་བྱང	well-read, accomplished in reading, scholar	klog byang
ཀློག་བྱེད	reading	klog byed
ཀློག་མ	reading	klog ma
ཀློག་མི་ཐུབ་པ	illegible	klog mi thub pa
ཀློག་ཚུལ་གཞན	bundle (in general)	klog tshul gzhan
ཀློག་རྫུན་བྱས་པ	gave a wrong reading	klog rdzun byas pa
ཀློག་བཞིན་པ	reading	klog bzhin pa
ཀློག་ཡིག	read	klog yig
ཀློག་ར	reading room/ place, library, study hall	klog ra
ཀློག་རུང་བ	legible readable	klog rung ba
ཀློག་ལབ	slander	klog lab
ཀློག་ཤུ	hair gseb sogs lus kyi pags pa'i steng na sgog pa'i shun lpags dkar zhib can, scalp	klog shu
ཀློག་ཤེས	literate	klog shes
ཀློག་སློབ	training in reading	klog slob
ཀློག་སློབ་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	teacher for training in reading	klog slob pa'i slob dpon
ཀློག་སློབ་སའི་དགེ་རྒན	reading and letters teacher	klog slob sa'i dge rgan
ཀློགས	imp. of {klog}; imp. of {klog pa}. Syn {klog pa}	klogs
ཀློགས་མ	[arch] dpon mo	klogs ma
ཀློགས་ཤིག	do read	klogs shig
ཀློང	space, vast expanse, point-instant, undulating movement, subsection, sphere, extend, mass, body, bulk, depth, abyss, wave, any undulating thing, expresses idea of vastness or space, center, middle,...	klong
ཀློང་དཀར་ནག་ཁྲ་གསུམ	three subsets of the {klong sde} [white black, and variegated klong]	klong dkar nag khra gsum
ཀློང་དཀར་པོ	white space subsection of {klong sde}	klong dkar po
ཀློང་དཀར་པོ་སེམས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	the white space which propounds the mind	klong dkar po sems su smra ba
ཀློང་དཀྱིལ	(within the) (vast/ immense) expanse	klong dkyil
ཀློང་ཁྲ་བོ	a subsection of the {blong sde}	klong khra bo
ཀློང་ཁྲ་བོ་སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	the variegated space which propounds diversity	klong khra bo sna tshogs su smra ba
ཀློང་འཁོར	vast experience, whirlpool, eddy	klong 'khor
ཀློང་འཁོར་ཅན	billow, wave	klong 'khor can
ཀློང་འཁྱིལ	1) 'od kor; 2) edge of a lake	klong 'khyil
ཀློང་གི་དམ་ཅན་བརྟེན་པ	rites to establish the support of the oath bound protectors of space	klong gi dam can brten pa
ཀློང་གི་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra of the primordial dimension	klong gi rdo rje
ཀློང་གི་སྡེ	the Space Section of the Great Perfection {rdzogs chen}. Category of Vast Expanse of Being; See also {rdzogs chen sde gsum}	klong gi sde
ཀློང་གི་སྡེ་དཀར་ནག་ཁྲ་གསུམ	three branches of the spatial class [fundamentals pt 4], white, black and multicolored space sections	klong gi sde dkar nag khra gsum
ཀློང་གྱུར	1) perfected, realized, mastered. 2) perfection. See {klong du gyur pa}	klong gyur
ཀློང་གྱུར་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of perfected means. [imperial yana]. The three last of {theg pa rim pa dgu}. sm. {nang rgyud gsum}	klong gyur thabs kyi theg pa
ཀློང་གྲུམ	badger	klong grum
ཀློང་གྲོལ	spontaneously liberated	klong grol
ཀློང་དགུ	the 9 sections/spaces of the {klong sde} [the three {klong dkar po} + the three {klong nag pa} + three {klong khra bo} in {rdzogs chen} teachings]	klong dgu
ཀློང་དགུ་བམ་པོ་ཉི་ཁྲི	the twentythousand volumes of the Nine Expanses	klong dgu bam po nyi khri
ཀློང་ལྔ	five vast spaces	klong lnga
ཀློང་ཆེན	1) great expanse, immense space, great vast expanse. 2) vast knowledge	klong chen
ཀློང་ཆེན་དགོངས་པ	great expanse of realization [= dharmadhatu, allencompassing space; used in a general way here]	klong chen dgongs pa
ཀློང་ཆེན་སྙིང་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	The HeartEssence of the Vast Expanse 67	klong chen snying gi thig le
བཞུགས་སོ	by Rigdzin Jigmey Lingpa; alias {rang byung rdo rje 'jigs med gling pa}, {klong chen nam mkha'i rnal 'byor du grags pa'i rdzogs chen pa}	bzhugs so
ཀློང་ཆེན་སྙིང་ཏིག	the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse	klong chen snying tig
ཀློང་ཆེན་སྙིང་ཐིག	visions (dag snang) of 'jigs med gling pa; Longchen Nyingtig. the Heart Essence of the Great Expanse / Longchenpa. A cycle of teachings revealed to Jigmey Lingpa in three visions of Longchenpa; ter...	klong chen snying thig
ལོངཆེནཔ་དྲིམེཡ་ཨོསེར	Longchenpa, Longchen rabjampa (1308-1363) the great nyingmapa master Longchenpa drimey oser; rnying ma'i slob dpon klong chen padri med 'od zer zhes pa dbus lho gyo ru gra'i cha stod grongdu rab by...	Longchenpa drimey oser
ཀློང་ཆེན་སྙིང་པོ	essence of the universe	klong chen snying po
ཀློང་ཆེན་ནམ་མཁའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	alias {'jigs med gling pa rang byung rdo rje} (1729 or 30-1798), Rigdzin Jigmey Lingpa	klong chen nam mkha'i rnal 'byor
ཀློང་ཆེན་པ	Longchenpa, Longchen Rabjampa [1308-1363) great Nyingmapa master aka drimey oser]	klong chen pa
ཀློང་ཆེན་པ་དྲི་མེད་འོད་ཟེར	13081363; 1308-1363	klong chen pa dri med 'od zer
ཀློང་ཆེན་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Kanjur Rinpoche	klong chen pa ye shes rdo rje
ཀློང་ཆེན་པའི་མཛོད་བདུན	the 7 treasuries of Longchenpa	klong chen pa'i mdzod bdun
ཀློང་ཆེན་འབྲུ་དྲུག	six syllables of the universe	klong chen 'bru drug
ཀློང་ཆེན་མཛོད་བདུན	the 7 treasur[i]es of Longchenpa {grub mtha' mdzod}-) {theg mchog mdzod}-) {yid bzhin mdzod}-) {man ngag mdzod}-) {chos dbyings mdzod}-) {gnas lugs mdzod}-) {tshig don mdzod} {klong chen pa dus rab...	klong chen mdzod bdun
ཀློང་ཆེན་འོད་གསལ	luminous clarity of the universe klong chen 'od gsal mkha' 'gro'i snying	klong chen 'od gsal
ཐིག	terma teachings of Chogyal Namkhai Norbu	thig
ཀློང་ཆེན་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Kangyur Rinpoche	klong chen ye shes rdo rje
ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམ་པ	klong chen pa	klong chen rab 'byam pa
དྲི་མེད་འོད་ཟེར	(1308-1363)	dri med 'od zer
ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས	Longchen Rabjam realization of vast knowledge. Syn {klong chen rab 'byams pa}	klong chen rab 'byams
ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱལ་པོ	major klong sde tantra	klong chen rab 'byams rgyal po
ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས་པ	longchen rabjampa (1308-1363) the great nyingmapa master longchenpa drimey oserlongchenpa, longchen rabjampa (13081363) the great nyingmapa master longchenpa drimey oser; rnying ma'i slob dpon klon...	klong chen rab 'byams pa
ཀློང་ཆེན་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	a name of chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu	klong chen rol pa'i rdo rje
ཀློང་ཆེན་སེམས	vast state of presence	klong chen sems
ཀློང་ཉིད	primordial dimension	klong nyid
ཀློང་ཉིད་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	primordial dimension of self-perfection	klong nyid lhun grub
ཀློང་སྙིང	Abbr. of {klong chen snying thig}	klong snying
ཀློང་ཏུ་ཀྱུར	right to their depths	klong tu kyur
ཀློང་ཏུ་གྱུར	right to their depths; see also {klong du gyur ba}	klong tu gyur
ཀློང་ཐང་སྒྲོན་མ	Longtang Drönma	klong thang sgron ma
ཀློང་ཐང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང	{klong thang sgrol ma lha khang}	klong thang sgrol ma lha khang
ཀློང་ཐིམ	dissolution/ absorption within the expanse (of being)*	klong thim
ཀློང་དུ	deeply	klong du
ཀློང་དུ་ཁྱུར་བ	understand to the depths	klong du khyur ba
ཀློང་དུ་གྱུར	1) realized. 2) attained mastery. 3) fathoming. 4) perfected. 5) waking, become awake	klong du gyur
ཀློང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	master, completely realize, attain mastery, fathom, perfect, wake, become awake	klong du gyur pa
ཀློང་དུ་གྱུར་བ	to perfect, master, fully comprehend (a practice); understand to the depths	klong du gyur ba
ཀློང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	"understanding the depth"	klong du chud pa
ཀློང་དུ་ཕེབས་པ	Syn {klong du gyur pa}	klong du phebs pa
ཀློང་དུ་མ་གྱུར་བ	until it is perfected, mastered	klong du ma gyur ba
ཀློང་དྲུག	six vast spaces, six spheres (of Samantabhadra), six great dimensions, six dimensions	klong drug
ཀློང་དྲུག་པ	nt. Six Spheres; the Sixfold Expanse {klong drug gi rgyud} Tantra of the Six Spheres of Samantabhadra {kun tu bzang po klong drug pa'i rgyud} One of the 17 Dzogchen tantras	klong drug pa
ཀློང་འདྲེས	integrate with the dimension	klong 'dres
ཀློང་འདྲེས་པ	integrated in the dimension	klong 'dres pa
ཀློང་རྡོལ	burst into, bursting forth from the depth	klong rdol
ཀློང་རྡོལ་བ	[realization] overflowing/welling forth from within klong rdol bla ma ngag dbang blo bzang {klong rdol bla ma ngag dbang blo bzang} [rab byung bcu gnyis pa'i sa phag lor 'khrungs, rgyal mchog bskal...	klong rdol ba
ཀློང་སྡེ	Category of Expanse*	klong sde
ཀློང་སྡེ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཟམ་པ	the Vajra Bridge of the Space Section; Syn {snyan brgyud rdor zam}	klong sde rdo rje zam pa
ཀློང་སྡེ་གསུམ་དུ་འདུས་པ	three categories of the spatial class [of the great perfection, liberation from activity {byas grol}; liberation in establishment of abiding in the nature {bzhag grol}; direct liberation {cer grol} GD	klong sde gsum du 'dus pa
ཀློང་སྡེའི་ལྟ་བ	SA klong nag po rgyu med du smra ba, klong khra bo sna tshogs su smra ba, klong dkar po sems su smra ba, klong rab 'byams rgyu 'bras la zlo ba	klong sde'i lta ba
ཀློང་སྡེའི་བཞི	{klong nag po, klong khra bo, klong dkar po, klong rab 'byams}	klong sde'i bzhi
ཀློང་བརྡོལ	spontaneous realization/ inspiration, overflow	klong brdol
ཀློང་བརྡོལ་བ	'phrin las klong brdol nas when the expanse of compassion unfolds	klong brdol ba
ཀློང་ན	amidst	klong na
ཀློང་ནག་པ	a subsection of {blong sde}	klong nag pa
ཀློང་ནག་པོ་རྒྱུ་མེད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	the black Space (Section) which propounds the absence of causes	klong nag po rgyu med du smra ba
ཀློང་ནས	from; from [their] midst	klong nas
ཀློང་ནས་བརྡོལ་བ	to burst forth from space	klong nas brdol ba
ཀློང་སྣང་མཐའ་དག	all visions of the primordial dimension	klong snang mtha' dag
ཀློང་པ	dirt, mud	klong pa
ཀློང་བ	extent, SA klong	klong ba
ཀློང་དབྱངས	openness	klong dbyangs
ཀློང་འབྱམས	infinite expanse	klong 'byams
ཀློང་མ	primordial dimension	klong ma
ཀློང་མ་དཀྱེལ	of great capacity. cavity of the abdomen	klong ma dkyel
ཀློང་མ་དཀྱེལ་ལྡན	all-pervading primordial dimension	klong ma dkyel ldan
ཀློང་མ་སྐྱེལ	of great capacity, cavity of the abdomen	klong ma skyel
ཀློང་ཟབ	depth, profundity	klong zab
ཀློང་ཡང	great vastness, vast [space], extensive, wide expanse, open space, expansive vastness, immensity	klong yang
ཀློང་ཡངས	{khyab gdal klong yangs} allpervasive vast expanse	klong yangs
ཀློང་ཡངས་ཆེན་པོ	immense expanse	klong yangs chen po
ཀློང་ཡངས་སུ་འབྱམས་ནས	dissolve into that vast expanse	klong yangs su 'byams nas
ཀློང་རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་ཟློ་བ	1 of klong sde'i lta ba klong rab 'byams rgyu 'bras la bzla ba the infinite/universal space which has determined/resolved cause and result	klong rab 'byams rgyu 'bras la zlo ba
ཀློང་རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་བཟླ་བ་ཐེ་ཨལལ	encompassing Space (Section) which transcends cause and effect	klong rab 'byams rgyu 'bras la bzla ba the all
ཀློང་རོལ	[manifestation of] mental space, space of mind 69	klong rol
ཀློང་ལོག	the fault of the introduction	klong log
ཀློང་བཤགས	see {lta ba klong bshags}	klong bshags
ཀློང་གསལ	clarity expanse, luminous space, Tantra of the Brilliant Expanse, Clear Space text, Clarity of the Universe	klong gsal
ཀློང་གསལ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Dakinis of the Clarity of the Universe	klong gsal mkha' 'gro
ཀློང་གསལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Brilliant Expanse	klong gsal gyi rgyud
ཀློང་གསལ་དགོངས་མཛོད	treasure of the clarity expanse	klong gsal dgongs mdzod
ཀློང་གསལ་ཆོས་སྐོར	the teachings of the clear expanse	klong gsal chos skor
ཀློང་གསལ་སྙིང་པོ	Longsal Nyingpo; Vidyadhara Longsal Nyingpo. tertön, 1625-1692. One of the early masters of the Katok Nyingma tradition	klong gsal snying po
ཀློང་གསལ་འབར་མ	major man ngag sde tantra	klong gsal 'bar ma
ཀློངས་པ	SA dkrugs pa	klongs pa
ཀློངས་རག	place in tibet	klongs rag
ཀློད	1) letting be. 2) not fixating	klod
ཀློད་བཏང་བ	release, set free, relax	klod btang ba
ཀློད་པ	letting be, not fixating	klod pa
ཀློན	mend/ patch [shoes]	klon
ཀློན་པ	1) mend; 2) patch	klon pa
ཀློན་པ་པོ	cobbler	klon pa po
ཀློར་ཤིང	turner's lathe	klor shing
ཀློལ་མདུད	larynx	klol mdud
ཀློལ་བ	simmer	klol ba
གཀ་སྟུ་རི	musk	gka stu ri
གཀ་དག་ལྷན་སྐྱིས	innately pure from the beginning, the primordial principle	gka dag lhan skyis
གཀག་འདོམས	prohibition, hindrance, obstruction	gkag 'doms
གཀུ་རུ་བན་དི	breed of sub-Himalayan sheep	gku ru ban di
གཀུན་ནས	throughout	gkun nas
དཀ་ངལ་གཙང་སེལ	overcome all hardship, solve all difficulties	dka ngal gtsang sel
དཀ་ངལ་ཡོད་ཚད་སེལ	overcome all hardship, solve all difficulties	dka ngal yod tshad sel
དཀ་ངལ་སེལ	overcome hardship, solve difficulties	dka ngal sel
དཀ་འཐབ	hard/ difficult struggle/ fight	dka 'thab
དཀ་འདོར་ཡང་ལེན	avoid difficulties, take the easy way	dka 'dor yang len
དཀ་སྤྱད་བབ་ཆགས	hard work and plain living	dka spyad bab chags
དཀ་རྩ་མ	sort of oats, inferior kind of barley	dka rtsa ma
དཀག་པ	constipation	dkag pa
དཀག་བ	constipation, obstructed bowels	dkag ba
དཀགས་པོ	difficult	dkags po
དཀད་ཆ་གཤོད་བཞིན་པ	talking	dkad cha gshod bzhin pa
དཀན	1) uphill, upwards, upslope [Brag dkan gzar po,...Ri bo dkan gzar 'dzeg dus dbugs kyang sngangs]; 2) palate, roof of the mouth)	dkan
དཀན་ཁྲག་རྒྱབ་པ	to bleed the palate (common remedy for lampas)	dkan khrag rgyab pa
དཀན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	palatal letters	dkan gyi yi ge
དཀན་གཉེར	wrinkles on the roof of the mouth	dkan gnyer
དཀན་གཏོག	abscess in the palate	dkan gtog
དཀན་ནད	any disease of the palate	dkan nad
དཀན་པོ	Syn {dkon po}	dkan po
དཀན་གཟར	steep upward slope	dkan gzar
དཀན་གཟར་པོ	steep declivity, precipice	dkan gzar po
དཀའ	Syn {dka' ba}; 1) difficult. 2) hard	dka'
དཀའ་དཀའ	difficult; x {gang dka' dka' dang mang ba yang mi zin snyam du sgyid mi lug par snying rus kyis 'dzin} however long and difficult the teaching may be, do not feel disheartened and wonder if it will...	dka' dka'
དཀའ་འགག	1) difficult point. 2) difficulty	dka' 'gag
དཀའ་འགྲེལ	[text gi tshig don rnams mthar chags su ma bshad par difficult points rtsal du bton nas] explaining commentary on the difficult points, elucidation, explanation of a difficult point	dka' 'grel
དཀའ་འགྲེལ་དགོས་འདོད་འབྱུང་བ	{dka' 'grel dgos 'dod 'byung ba} [in the 7th rab byung by byang pa rnam rgyal grags bzang, phyi ma rgyud kyi difficult points commenting medical shastra]	dka' 'grel dgos 'dod 'byung ba
དཀའ་འགྲེལ་རྒྱག	explain a difficult point	dka' 'grel rgyag
དཀའ་འགྲེལ་ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་རྒྱན	{dka' 'grel legs bshad gser rgyan}	dka' 'grel legs bshad gser rgyan
དཀའ་རྒྱུ་མེད	w/o anything causing difficulty	dka' rgyu med
དཀའ་སྒྲུབ	persevere, take great pains, undergo hardship, perform austerities, work, strive	dka' sgrub
དཀའ་ངལ	1) difficulty. 2) pains. 3) hardship. 4) problems	dka' ngal
དཀའ་ངལ་ཁྱ་གསོད	ignore hardship/ difficulty	dka' ngal khya gsod
དཀའ་ངལ་ཁྱད་གསོད	ignore hardship/ difficulty	dka' ngal khyad gsod
དཀའ་ངལ་ཅན	burdensome, laborious dka' ngal dang las 'gan dogs nas 'phral ba discharge 70	dka' ngal can
དཀའ་ངལ་སྤྱད	underwent hardship/ difficulty, suffered	dka' ngal spyad
དཀའ་ངལ་སྤྱད་པའི་བཟོ་པ་རྣམས	longsuffering workers	dka' ngal spyad pa'i bzo pa rnams
དཀའ་ངལ་སྤྱོད	1) to undergo hardship. 2) suffer	dka' ngal spyod
དཀའ་ངལ་མེད་པ	ease, effortless	dka' ngal med pa
དཀའ་ངལ་ཚ་པོ	irksome tortuous	dka' ngal tsha po
དཀའ་ངལ་བཟོ་བ	would you mind, please encumber	dka' ngal bzo ba
དཀའ་ངལ་བཟོད	tolerate/ endure hardship/ difficulty	dka' ngal bzod
དཀའ་བཅུ	1) make only rough study of the five kinds of teachings {bka' pod lnga} * and commentaries; 2) a geshe degree at Tashi lhunpo; 3) ten ascetic hardships; 4) 1 who can give multiple interpretations o...	dka' bcu
དཀའ་ཆད	tired	dka' chad
དཀའ་ཆིགས་མེད	without too much effort	dka' chigs med
དཀའ་ཆེན	1) a geshe status at Tashi Lhunpo. 2) major trials, hardships	dka' chen
དཀའ་ཆེན་གྲངས་མེད་གསུམ	the hardship / austerity of the three incalculable aeons	dka' chen grangs med gsum
དཀའ་ཆེན་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve major trials [of Naropa]	dka' chen bcu gnyis
དཀའ་ཉེན	hazard	dka' nyen
དཀའ་ཉེན་ཅན	hazardous	dka' nyen can
དཀའ་རྙོག	trouble	dka' rnyog
དཀའ་རྙོག་ཅན	cumbersome	dka' rnyog can
དཀའ་རྙོག་ནང་བཅུག་པ	entangle	dka' rnyog nang bcug pa
དཀའ་རྙོག་ནང་བླུག་པ	embroil	dka' rnyog nang blug pa
དཀའ་རྙོག་ཚ་པོ	troublesome	dka' rnyog tsha po
དཀའ་རྙོག་བཟོ་བ	confound	dka' rnyog bzo ba
དཀའ་རྙོགས	troubles, problems	dka' rnyogs
དཀའ་ཐུག་དགྲ	"ascetic's enemy", name of the god of love	dka' thug dgra
དཀའ་ཐུབ	1) ability to undergo hardships, fortitude, tolerance of hardship / suffering, asceticism, austerity, ascetic practice, penance. 2) to bear what is difficult. 3) an ascetic, hermit. 4) the first mo...	dka' thub
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི	austere	dka' thub kyi
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ནགས	the forest of the ascetics	dka' thub kyi nags
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་གནས	hermitage of an ascetic	dka' thub kyi gnas
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྐྱེས	epith of Indra	dka' thub skyes
དཀའ་ཐུབ་དགྲ	epith of the God of love (lit. the ascetic's enemy)	dka' thub dgra
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཅན	1) spang spos; 2) Lha chen dbang phyug; 3) Mchu month; 4) Dbo month; 5) house of Aquarius	dka' thub can
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཆགས་བྲལ་གྱི་གནས	spirituality	dka' thub chags bral gyi gnas
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great tolerance of hardships; 2) name of a buddha	dka' thub chen po
དཀའ་ཐུབ་གཏོང	bud med kyi phyir du la	dka' thub gtong
ལ་དཀའ་ཐུབ་གཏོང	because of women, many will give up their abstemious practices dka' thub sdom pa bcing ba grol pa srog	la dka' thub gtong
སྲོག་མིན	release the bonds of vows of austerity in life or otherwise	srog min
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྡོམ་པ་ལ་བསླབས་པ་རྣམས་ཐོསེ་ཝཧོ་ཧབེ༹་ལེཨརྣེད་སེལཕ༹	control in the process of subduing their minds	dka' thub sdom pa la bslabs pa rnams those who have learned self
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ནགས་ཚལ	forest retreat place dka' thub nags su yang dag snying po	dka' thub nags tshal
སྒོམ་དུ་འགྲོ	I go to meditate on the true essence of existence in the forest of ascetics	sgom du 'gro
དཀའ་ཐུབ་གནས	forest retreat place	dka' thub gnas
དཀའ་ཐུབ་པ	an ascetic; hermit	dka' thub pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱད་པ	to live an ascetic life	dka' thub spyad pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱོད	rishi, be able to tolerate suffering	dka' thub spyod
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱོད་མཁན	ascetic person	dka' thub spyod mkhan
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱོད་པ	[practices of an] ascetic/ hermit /penitent, brahmin, valerian	dka' thub spyod pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་བྱེད་པ	to practice asceticism	dka' thub byed pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་མྱོང	be able to tolerate suffering	dka' thub myong
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཟླ་བ	1) Syn {mchu stod zla ba}. 2) {hor zla dang po}, the first Hor Month. 3) the first or the second month of the Tibetan calendar. 4) poet	dka' thub zla ba
དཀའ་ཐུབ་རིག	Syn {dka' thub rig byed kyi theg pa}	dka' thub rig
དཀའ་ཐུབ་རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	approach that evokes awareness through ascetic practices	dka' thub rig byed kyi theg pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་རིགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of vedic asceticism, The middle three of the 9 yanas	dka' thub rigs byed kyi theg pa
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to embrace the life of an anchorite	dka' thub la 'gro ba
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ལ་གནས་སོ	is living alone and austerely,	dka' thub la gnas so
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ལེགས	asceticism	dka' thub legs
དཀའ་ཐུབ་སེར་པོ	saffron	dka' thub ser po
དཀའ་ཐུབ་གསལ	one whose asceticism is visible or exemplary	dka' thub gsal
དཀའ་དང་དུ་ལོངས་ཤིག	be equal to hardship	dka' dang du longs shig
དཀའ་དུབ	hardship, difficulty	dka' dub
དཀའ་གདམས་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of the Kadampa school	dka' gdams chos bzhi
དཀའ་གདམས་པ	kadampa	dka' gdams pa
དཀའ་མདོ	[arch] rka mdo ?irrigation channel 71	dka' mdo
དཀའ་སྡུག	bitter, painful doom, ordeal, torment, trauma, tribulation	dka' sdug
དཀའ་སྡུག་བྱེད་པ	take great pains, go to a lot of trouble	dka' sdug byed pa
དཀའ་གནད	1) difficult points. 2) tough problem. 3) difficult matter. 4) {dka' gnas}. Syn {dka' gnad}	dka' gnad
དཀའ་གནད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་མདུད་བཀྲོལ	11th rabjung, by dar mo sman rams pa {blo bzang chos grags} as a mes po'i zhal lung gi kha skong, phyi ma rgyud commentary	dka' gnad rdo rje'i mdud bkrol
དཀའ་གནད་སེལ	solve a difficult point/ problem/ matter	dka' gnad sel
དཀའ་གནས	difficult point/ matter, tough problem, difficult situation	dka' gnas
དཀའ་གནས་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་པ	to fully scrutinize the difficult point	dka' gnas rnam par dpyad pa
དཀའ་གནས་མེད་པར	without difficulty	dka' gnas med par
དཀའ་གནས་སེལ	solve a difficult point/ matter /tough problem	dka' gnas sel
དཀའ་སྣང	difficult seeming/ experience	dka' snang
དཀའ་པོ	difficult, tiring exhausting	dka' po
དཀའ་དཔྱད	difficult to perform	dka' dpyad
དཀའ་སྤྱད	difficult to perform, undertake, undergo trials, endure, bear hardship, practice austerity. asceticism, austerity, fortitude; ascetic	dka' spyad
དཀའ་སྤྱད་སྙིང་རུས	enduring austerities, tolerating hardships untiring, indefatigable	dka' spyad snying rus
དཀའ་སྤྱད་པ	austere life	dka' spyad pa
དཀའ་སྤྱད་འབད་རྩོན	enduring austerities, tolerating hardships untiring, indefatigable	dka' spyad 'bad rtson
དཀའ་སྤྱད་མཛད་པ	to undertake hardship	dka' spyad mdzad pa
དཀའ་སྤྱོད	Syn {dka' thub} dka' spyod dang snying rus kyi sgo nas	dka' spyod
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པ	putting [the teachings] into practice with determination, disregarding all hardship	nyams su len pa
དཀའ་ཕྲན་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 minor trials	dka' phran bcu gnyis
དཀའ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa tired, exhausted, fatigued; 2) trouble, effort, pains, painful, suffering; 3) difficult[y],	dka' ba
པ་ཡིན	obtained the teachings at the price of hundreds of hardships dka' ba gcod thengs gcig la gtan bde 'grub - put things right once and for all	pa yin
དཀའ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 trials	dka' ba bcu gnyis
དཀའ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great hardship. 2) major trial	dka' ba chen po
དཀའ་བ་ཉིད	difficulty	dka' ba nyid
དཀའ་བ་དང་དུ་བླང	to undergo hardship	dka' ba dang du blang
དཀའ་བ་དུ་མའི་སྒོ་ནས	endured numerous trials	dka' ba du ma'i sgo nas
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱད	past of dka' ba spyod, to bear hardship	dka' ba spyad
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱད་དེ་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས	practised, undertaking great hardships	dka' ba spyad de nyams su blangs
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱད་པ	endures hardships	dka' ba spyad pa
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱད་པའི་ཐུགས་དམ	practice of austerities, doing what is difficult	dka' ba spyad pa'i thugs dam
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱོད	undergo hardship	dka' ba spyod
དཀའ་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	{dka' ba byed pa} to undertake difficulty/ hardship	dka' ba spyod pa
དཀའ་བ་བྱེད་པ	to undergo difficulties	dka' ba byed pa
དཀའ་བ་མེད་པ	w/o difficulty	dka' ba med pa
དཀའ་བ་བཟོད་པ	patience in enduring hardship	dka' ba bzod pa
དཀའ་བ་སླ་བ	mistaking ill for ease, seeing the painful as pleasant [one of the {phyin ci log bzhi} four misapprehensions]	dka' ba sla ba
དཀའ་བའི་ངོར	cry of delight	dka' ba'i ngor
དཀའ་བའི་སྙན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	1 of the bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior	dka' ba'i snyan par smra ba
དཀའ་བའི་དོན་མཐུན་པ	1 of the bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi, in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior	dka' ba'i don mthun pa
དཀའ་བའི་དོན་སྤྱོད་པ	performing difficult actions [one of the bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi in the impure field bodhisattvas' behavior]	dka' ba'i don spyod pa
དཀའ་བའི་སྦྱིན་པ	1) difficult generosity. 2) One of {bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi}	dka' ba'i sbyin pa
དཀའ་བའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	[one of the six paramitas] in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior	dka' ba'i brtson 'grus
དཀའ་བའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of hardship/ austerity [one of the pha rol tu phyin pa drug, in the impure field bodhisattvas' behavior]	dka' ba'i tshul khrims
དཀའ་བའི་བཟོད་པ	[one of the six paramitas] in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior	dka' ba'i bzod pa
དཀའ་བའི་ལས	arduous work	dka' ba'i las
དཀའ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	[= 1 of the six paramitas] in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior 72	dka' ba'i shes rab
དཀའ་བའི་བསམ་གཏན	[one of the six paramitas] in the impure field bodhisattvas's behavior	dka' ba'i bsam gtan
དཀའ་བས	w joy, w difficulty	dka' bas
དཀའ་བས་དོང	joyfully dispersed	dka' bas dong
དཀའ་བོ	hard, SA dka'	dka' bo
དཀའ་བྱུང་བ	embarrassed, awkward	dka' byung ba
དཀའ་བྱེད	perform austerities	dka' byed
དཀའ་བྱེད་པ	[one who] perform[s] austerities	dka' byed pa
དཀའ་སྦྱོང	[train/ purify the mind w bodily] hardship, rigorous study/ training	dka' sbyong
དཀའ་མོ	difficult, hard, tough	dka' mo
དཀའ་མོ་གདའ	it is difficult	dka' mo gda'
དཀའ་ཚད	difficulties	dka' tshad
དཀའ་ཚིགས	hardship	dka' tshigs
དཀའ་ཚེ་གཏ	pledge a life of asceticism	dka' tshe gta
དཀའ་ཚེགས	1) hardship. Syn {dka' ngal}. 2) difficulty. 3) struggle	dka' tshegs
དཀའ་ཚེགས་ངལ་དུབ་ཀྱི་མཐའ	"the extreme of hardship and difficulites", austerities or asceticism, the extreme of asceticism	dka' tshegs ngal dub kyi mtha'
དཀའ་ཚེགས་མང་པོ་བྱེད	undergo many difficulties	dka' tshegs mang po byed
དཀའ་ཚེགས་མེད	without too much effort	dka' tshegs med
དཀའ་ཚེགས་ཚ་གྲང	heat, cold and whatever trials and difficulties	dka' tshegs tsha grang
དཀའ་ཚེགས་ཡོད	have difficulty	dka' tshegs yod
དཀའ་ཚེགས་སེལ	overcome difficulties	dka' tshegs sel
དཀའ་ཚོགས་ཆེན་པོ	travail	dka' tshogs chen po
དཀའ་བཞི་པ	1) a geshe well-versed in Madhyamika. 2) Prajnaparamita. 3) Vinaya and Abhidharma	dka' bzhi pa
དཀའ་ཟློག་བླ་མ	a snowy mountain, often ri bo gangs can	dka' zlog bla ma
དཀའ་ཟློག་མ	the goddess Gauri	dka' zlog ma
དཀའ་བཟློག་བླ་མ	himalaya mountains	dka' bzlog bla ma
དཀའ་རུག	[arch] lag g.yor te las rogs	dka' rug
དཀའ་ལ་ཆེ་བ	very difficult	dka' la che ba
དཀའ་ལས	1) toil. 2) hard work. 3) difficulty. 4) trouble. 5) problem. 6) difficulty. 7) hardship; difficulty	dka' las
དཀའ་ལས་དཀའ་མོ་བྱེད་པ	toil, slave	dka' las dka' mo byed pa
དཀའ་ལས་ཁ	to undergo difficulties, get tired	dka' las kha
དཀའ་ལས་ཁ་བ	breathless	dka' las kha ba
དཀའ་ལས་ཁག་པོ	difficult, arduous, wearisome, fatiguing, tiring	dka' las khag po
དཀའ་ལས་ཁག་པོ་མིན་འདུག	this work is not all that difficult]	dka' las khag po min 'dug
དཀའ་ལས་ཁག་སོང	sorry to have given you so much trouble	dka' las khag song
དཀའ་ལས་རྒྱག	work hard, toil	dka' las rgyag
དཀའ་ལས་རྒྱག་པ	tired	dka' las rgyag pa
དཀའ་ལས་ཆེ་བ	very difficult	dka' las che ba
དཀའ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	to be afflicted, in trouble	dka' las byung ba
དཀའ་ལས་མེད་པ	without difficulty, easy	dka' las med pa
དཀའ་ལས་མྱང་བ	work very hard	dka' las myang ba
དཀའ་ལས་མྱོང་བ	to face hardships; +	dka' las myong ba
མཁན	those in difficulty; difficulties befell me	mkhan
དཀའ་ས	difficult point	dka' sa
དཀའ་སེ་བ	very difficult [seeming]	dka' se ba
དཀའ་སེལ	solve/ overcome difficulties/ problems	dka' sel
དཀའ་སེལ་བྱེད	solve/ overcome difficulties/ problems	dka' sel byed
དཀའི་གནས	problem, difficult problems	dka'i gnas
དཀའི་སྤྱོད	hardship, asceticism, austerity difficult	dka'i spyod
དཀའི་བ	hardship, asceticism, austerity difficult	dka'i ba
དཀའི་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	difficult to perform, undertake hardships, undergo trials, endure austerity, practice asceticism, asceticism, austerity, fortitude, hardship, trials	dka'i ba spyod pa
དཀའི་བ་ཡུན་རིང་པོས་མི་སྐྱོ་བ	not sad at long hardship	dka'i ba yun ring pos mi skyo ba
དཀའི་བ་ཡུན་རིང་མི་སྐྱོ	not sad at long hardship	dka'i ba yun ring mi skyo
དཀར	1) white. 2) light. 3) bright. 4) sharp light. 5) virtuous. 6) wholesome. 7) diary product. 8) very white	dkar
དཀར་ཀ་མ	species of white crane	dkar ka ma
དཀར་ཀྲིང	white of an egg	dkar kring
དཀར་དཀར	whitish	dkar dkar
དཀར་དཀར་བ་ཉིད	whiteness	dkar dkar ba nyid
དཀར་རྐྱང	unmixed white	dkar rkyang
དཀར་སྐྱ	pure white	dkar skya
དཀར་སྐྱེམས	white drink [of curd or milk etc.]	dkar skyems
དཀར་སྐྱོ	pale, white	dkar skyo
དཀར་སྐྱོང	not mixed w meat, bone fat, blood etc of the red kind, butter and cheese milk curds rice rtsam pa etc. dkar rtsi &, dkar sdor only eating and drinking]	dkar skyong
དཀར་ཁང	lighted house, store room	dkar khang
དཀར་ཁུང	window, smoke hole, skylight dkar khung} -}-- window, smoke hole, skylight [hole in the wall or roof of a house for light and/or smoke]	dkar khung
དཀར་ཁྱུག	anything ornamented with diverse colors	dkar khyug
དཀར་ཁྱུག་ཁྱུག	moving white light [shooting star]	dkar khyug khyug
དཀར་ཁྲ	white mottled w blue, red etc. various colors	dkar khra
དཀར་ཁྲ་མན	w white background and figuring/ mottling of different kinds variegated: not definitely blue, red,white etc., nus pas gza' nad dang 'byung po'i gdon srung	dkar khra man
དཀར་ཁྲ་མེན	kind of jewel kyi rdo gnam sa kha sprod zer ba 73	dkar khra men
དཀར་ཁྲའི་དབུ་རྒྱན	white mottled kerchief	dkar khra'i dbu rgyan
དཀར་ཁྲི་ནག་སྟོང	lug khri dang gnag phyugs stong	dkar khri nag stong
དཀར་ཁྲིགས	white, shining, bright, glittering, brilliant	dkar khrigs
དཀར་ཁྲོམ་མེ	'od dang zil pa sogs dvangs pa'i rnam pa,...Zla 'od phog pa'i chu zil dkar khrom me	dkar khrom me
དཀར་ཁྲོམ་མེ་བ	dazzling, sparkling bright	dkar khrom me ba
དཀར་འཁྱིལ་ལེ་བ	wreathed in white light	dkar 'khyil le ba
དཀར་གོང	kind of white clay, porcelain clay, flint, white pebbles in medical works	dkar gong
དཀར་གྱའ	see {dkar ya}	dkar gya'
དཀར་གྱི་དྲུང	the cream of the milk, the curds of the yoghurt	dkar gyi drung
དཀར་གྱེང	trial or investigation under law	dkar gyeng
དཀར་གླེག་གླེག་པ	gleaming / glimmering white	dkar gleg gleg pa
དཀར་བགེགས	Abbr. of {dkar gtor dang bgegs gtor}	dkar bgegs
དཀར་འགག	difficulty, difficult point	dkar 'gag
དཀར་འགྱེད	1) zho 'o ma sogs kyi 'gyed,...2 Bam ro bdud rtsir zhu ba las yar dkon mchog sri zhu'i mgron la mchod pa gcod gzhung las gsungs,... white distribution (in chod practice	dkar 'gyed
དཀར་རྒྱ	rose-colored, pale pink	dkar rgya
དཀར་རྒྱན	white/butter adornments (on tormas	dkar rgyan
དཀར་བརྒྱུད་པ	the White lineage [= bka' brgyud as Marpa Mila, Ling Repa etc supposedly wore only white clothing]	dkar brgyud pa
དཀར་སྔོ	light blue	dkar sngo
དཀར་ཅིས་གཏོང་བ	whitewash	dkar cis gtong ba
དཀར་བཅད	1) white outlining. 2) elixir	dkar bcad
དཀར་བཅུད་གསུམ	cream from the milk of a female yak, ewe and cow (lit. triple white elixir)	dkar bcud gsum
དཀར་ཆ	1) white component, white element. 2) male gamete. 3) whiteness; lightness, brightness [in the {'chi kha'i bar do}	dkar cha
དཀར་ཆ་དོད་པོ	well-lit [rooms]	dkar cha dod po
དཀར་ཆ་བཞི	rite	dkar cha bzhi
དཀར་ཆག	register; index, catalogue, contents. 1) index. 2) register. 3) catalogue. 4) list. 5) table of contents. 6) Syn {tho}. 7) sincere. 8) candid. 9) moral. 10) white. 11) wholesome; grey, sincere, can...	dkar chag
དཀར་ཆག་མཆིམས་ཕུ་མ	bod rje sad na legs mjing yon te in the reign of Trisong Deutsen, by the tr monk dpal brtsegs etc. kept in {bsam yas mchims phur} bka' 'gyur la dag ther mdzad nas bsgrigs pa'i dkar chag gsum pa'i t...	dkar chag mchims phu ma
དཀར་ཆག་ཐར་ལམ་དཀར་པོ	a description of the gold offering to the Boudhanath Stupa	dkar chag thar lam dkar po
དཀར་ཆག་ལྡན་དཀར་མ	bod rje sad na legs mjing yon te in the reign of Trisong Deutsen, by the tr monk dpal brtsegs etc. kept in {stong thang ldan dkar gyi pho brang} bka' 'gyur la dag ther mdzad nas bkod pa'i dkar chag...	dkar chag ldan dkar ma
དཀར་ཆག་ནང་གང་ཡོད་པ	content	dkar chag nang gang yod pa
དཀར་ཆག་འཕང་ཐང་མ	bod rje sad na legs mjing yon te in the reign of Trisong Deutsen, by the tr monk dpal brtsegs etc. kept in {'phang thang ka med kyi gtsug lag khang} an accounting of translated books etc. gzhung ts...	dkar chag 'phang thang ma
དཀར་ཆག་རིན་ཆེན་དོ་ཤལ	{bsam gtan gling}'s ati yoga dkar chag 14th century by rgyal dbang lnga pa	dkar chag rin chen do shal
དཀར་ཆག་ཤེལ་དཀར་མེ་ལོང	14th century by rgyal dbang lnga pa lha, in ldan gtsug lag khang, a catalog	dkar chag shel dkar me long
དཀར་ཆགས་གསལ་བའི་མེ་ལོང	Bright Mirror Record, description of the restoration work on the Tashi Gomang Stupa of Chung Riwoche	dkar chags gsal ba'i me long
དཀར་ཆབ་ཆབ	snow-white, glittering white rays	dkar chab chab
དཀར་ཆལ	rdo gcal	dkar chal
དཀར་ཆས	white robes	dkar chas
དཀར་ཆུ	1) zho, mar phyur; 2) 'Bri chu River's chu 'go S, in SW mtsho sngon	dkar chu
དཀར་ཆུང་ལྷ་ཁང	n. of a monastery in Tibet	dkar chung lha khang
དཀར་ཆེན	bright white	dkar chen
དཀར་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	glittering white rays	dkar chem chem
དཀར་ཆེམ་མེ་བ	glittering white	dkar chem me ba
དཀར་ཆོས	poet. dairy produce. 1) the White Dharma. 2) virtuous practice. 3) dairy produce	dkar chos
དཀར་ཆོས་བཞི	four positive doctrines	dkar chos bzhi
དཀར་འཇམ	1) white and soft. 2) kind of satin	dkar 'jam
དཀར་འཇམ་རྩའི་སྒྲོན་མ	white and smooth nadi lamp, the lamp of the smooth white nerve, lam gang las phyung pa ye shes zang thal gyi gnad, method of wisdom arising in the central channel	dkar 'jam rtsa'i sgron ma
དཀར་ཉེ	relation, friend, acquaintance	dkar nye
དཀར་གཏོར	white torma [to the {gzhi bdag}.]	dkar gtor
དཀར་གཏོར་འབུལ	to present a kartor / white torma [to the local guardians]	dkar gtor 'bul
དཀར་སྟིང་ཆ་ངམ	a place in kham	dkar sting cha ngam
དཀར་སྟོན	white food feast, vegetarian meal. sha khrag	dkar ston
དཀར་ཐག	string of a bow	dkar thag
དཀར་ཐིག	1) white lines as auspicious symbols drawn on the ground inside and outside houses etc. on special occasions; 2) Ri mo white round sgor sgor white designs; 3) contribution to a good cause	dkar thig
དཀར་ཐིགས	to establish virtue/ merit offered lamp's zhal 'debs [Lha khang gi mchod mer dkar thigs brgyab pa]	dkar thigs
དཀར་ཐོག	barley, wheat, rice (lit. white cereals, cereals of the first quality)	dkar thog
དཀར་ཐོད་དཀར་པོ	white silk turban, turban of white silk	dkar thod dkar po
དཀར་དྭངས	pure white	dkar dwangs
དཀར་དུ་མགོ་ནག	small shrub abrus precatorius bearing red and black berries	dkar du mgo nag
དཀར་དུ་གཏོང་བ	whiten	dkar du gtong ba
དཀར་དུང	Kardung	dkar dung
དཀར་དུས	summer time w good water	dkar dus
དཀར་དྲོ	poet. mind and curd	dkar dro
དཀར་མདངས	tshos gzhi dkar po'i mdangs,...Mtshan mo'i zla ba dkar mdangs can	dkar mdangs
དཀར་མདངས་ཡག་པོ	bright, light [within a room]	dkar mdangs yag po
དཀར་མདའ	shooting star	dkar mda'
དཀར་མདོག་ཅན	silver	dkar mdog can
དཀར་འདོ	1) white light. 2) fire-fly	dkar 'do
དཀར་འདོན	1) means of curing wind disease w tshva dang sga skya; 2) Nag med nyes 'gel byas pa rnams mtha' gsal byung ste dkar 'don byed pa	dkar 'don
དཀར་ལྡན	the fair one: a) the goddess Gauri (consort of Shiva). b) poet. moon	dkar ldan
དཀར་སྡུད་པ	butter and cheese tax collector in nomad regions, donation collector	dkar sdud pa
དཀར་སྡུད་བྱེད་པ	to collect alms, donations	dkar sdud byed pa
དཀར་སྡེར	dish, saucer, porcelain dish	dkar sder
དཀར་ནག	positive and negative	dkar nag
དཀར་ནག་ཁྲ་གསུམ	1) white, black and variegated; 2) in legal papers punishment w stages of great, middle, and small, or heavy, between, and light	dkar nag khra gsum
དཀར་ནག་གོ་ལྡོག	call black white, do the opposite of what should be done	dkar nag go ldog
དཀར་ནག་བདེན་རྫུན	1) [black and white], true and false; 2) good and evil right and wrong	dkar nag bden rdzun
དཀར་ནག་འདྲེས་པ	{las kyi ngo bo dkar nag 'dres pa min kyang byed las las de ltar bzhag go} The nature of an action cannot be a mixture of virtue and nonvirtue, yet it is defined this way in terms of its function.	dkar nag 'dres pa
དཀར་ནག་འདྲེས་པའི་ལས	{skye bo rnams kyi lus ni dkar nag 'dres pa'i las kyis bskyed pa} The bodies of beings are produced through black and white and mixed karma	dkar nag 'dres pa'i las
དཀར་ནག་རྩིས་ཁྲ	note counting goat sheep dris and yaks	dkar nag rtsis khra
དཀར་ནག་མཚམས	space between the nipples	dkar nag mtshams
དཀར་སྣང	1) gleam of white light; 2) joyful mind	dkar snang
དཀར་སྣུམ	bright white glittering color	dkar snum
དཀར་པོ	kind {bsam pa dkar po gyis} have kind thoughts!	dkar po
དཀར་པོ་དཀར་ཀྱང	1) pale. 2) wan	dkar po dkar kyang
དཀར་པོ་དཀར་གྱང	pale, wan	dkar po dkar gyang
དཀར་པོ་གིང	White Gings	dkar po ging
དཀར་པོ་དགེ་བ་བྱས་པ	acted virtuously	dkar po dge ba byas pa
དཀར་པོ་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལ་འབད་པ	persevering in virtuous actions	dkar po dge ba'i las la 'bad pa
དཀར་པོ་ཆིག་ཐུབ	1) med. herb, sweet, astringent, cooling, by its power srin nad sel, dug nad sdud, gag lhog dang, pho ba'i glang thabs 'joms; 2) Thang khrom dkar po	dkar po chig thub
དཀར་པོ་ཆིག་ཐུབ་དམན་པ	dug sdud gnyan srin 'joms zhes pa g.ya' brag la skye ba rtsa ba nyung ma gzhon nu'i dbyibs can de yin	dkar po chig thub dman pa
དཀར་པོ་དུང་སྐྱོང	1 of the klu chen brgyad	dkar po dung skyong
དཀར་པོ་རྣམ་པར་མཐོང་བའི་ས	the first of the seven stages of progressive religious development of the Shravaka. 1) stage of bright vision. 2) the stage of perceiving virtue. 3) the {tshogs lam}. of the shravakas. 4) One of {t...	dkar po rnam par mthong ba'i sa
དཀར་པོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three white ones	dkar po rnam gsum
དཀར་པོ་ཕྱོགས་བརྒྱད	saga month smyung gnas srung tshul gyi khyad par zhig	dkar po phyogs brgyad
དཀར་པོ་འབར	white lustre	dkar po 'bar
དཀར་པོ་སྦབ་རྒྱབ	a medicinal stone called white frog's back	dkar po sbab rgyab
དཀར་པོ་སྦལ་རྒྱབ	white frog's back (n. of a stone possessing medicinal properties)	dkar po sbal rgyab
དཀར་པོ་དམར་པོ	cosmetics	dkar po dmar po
དཀར་པོ་དམར་པོ་འབྱུག	put on/ wear cosmetics	dkar po dmar po 'byug
དཀར་པོ་བཟོ་བ	whiten	dkar po bzo ba
དཀར་པོ་ས་བོན་གྱི་སྟོབས	power of the white seed	dkar po sa bon gyi stobs
དཀར་པོའི་བསྐལ་པ	1) the virtuous eon; n.	dkar po'i bskal pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་པརྟིཅུལར་ཝོརལད	period. 2) met. wise, talented. 3) met. silver. 4) met. moonlight. 5) the planet Venus. 6) the third year of 60 years cycle. an aeon of virtue	of a particular world
དཀར་པོའི་ཆོས	white/ virtuous dharmas	dkar po'i chos
དཀར་པོའི་ཆོས་བཞི	1) the four white wholesome, virtuous producing white karmic results which prevent the degeneration of Bodhichitta. 2) actions [of a bodhisattva]. 3) {srog gi phyir ram tha na bzhad gad kyi phyir y...	dkar po'i chos bzhi
དཀར་པོའི་འཇིགས་སྐྲག	the white peril [political]	dkar po'i 'jigs skrag
དཀར་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	the side of virtue, the period of the waxing moon, {dkar phyogs}	dkar po'i phyogs
དཀར་པོའི་ལས	white karma, wholesome activity	dkar po'i las
དཀར་པོའི་ལས་འབྲེལ	connection of dharma or virtuous karma	dkar po'i las 'brel
དཀར་པོའི་ས་ཁུལ	the white area [political]	dkar po'i sa khul
དཀར་སྤུའི་ཐོབ་འབྲས	dkar chu pags rid bcas kyi yong 'bab	dkar spu'i thob 'bras
དཀར་སྤྱད	vessels for a milk and milk products	dkar spyad
དཀར་སྤྲང	butter and cheese etc. slong mkhan	dkar sprang
དཀར་སྤྲང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to beg for milk products	dkar sprang bar byed pa
དཀར་སྤྲོ	pastry	dkar spro
དཀར་ཕིགས	SA skar phibs	dkar phigs
དཀར་ཕིབས	balcony, porch	dkar phibs
དཀར་ཕུད	by nomads to deities 'brul rgyu'i new mar phyur 'o zho	dkar phud
དཀར་ཕྱེ	dkar rag phye ma	dkar phye
དཀར་ཕྱོགས	light half of a month, period from the new to the full moon, innocent side in two contending parties	dkar phyogs
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	chos la dga' ba'i 'jig rten pa'i lha rnams virtuous gods, gods on the side of virtue, the protectors of Dharma	dkar phyogs kyi lha
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོངས་པ	protection of the good & virtuous	dkar phyogs skyongs pa
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་མཐའ	1) the end of the waxing moon. 2) The 15h day of the month	dkar phyogs mtha'
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་དང་པོ	the first day of the month; poet. the first day of month	dkar phyogs dang po
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་པའི་ལྷ	spirits of the light quarter, good spirits	dkar phyogs pa'i lha
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་འཕལ་བ	moon on the increase	dkar phyogs 'phal ba
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་རྩ་བ	the 1st day of the month	dkar phyogs rtsa ba
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་རྫོགས་གསུམ	the fifteenth day of month	dkar phyogs rdzogs gsum
དཀར་ཕྱོགས་ལྷ	the gods who take delight in virtue	dkar phyogs lha
དཀར་ཕྲེང	n. of a fabulous Asura city	dkar phreng
དཀར་ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ་པ	glittering / shining white	dkar phrom phrom pa
དཀར་འཕྲེང	White Garland, one of {rgyal po bzhi'i ris} Abodes of the Four Kings [of demigods]	dkar 'phreng
དཀར་བ	1) be sympathetic towards, be interested in, like, enjoy; 2) comp {dkar po} white, pure, good, virtuous, wholesome, positive; 3) whitish, gray, pink,	dkar ba
རོསེ	colored register shining white; 4) be sincere towards; 5) select, put aside, separate; 6) white rice/ food; 7) window- hole,, white-wash, clean food; 8) lenten diet; 9) porcelain, china-ware	rose
ལིགྷཏ	red. 23) white-wash. 24) clean food. 25) lenten diet. 26) porcelain. 27)	light
ཆིན	ware. 28) shining white	china
དཀར་བ་ཉིད	1) whiteness. 2) great or glorious act, achievement	dkar ba nyid
དཀར་བའི་ཉེ་བ	Syn {dkar nye}	dkar ba'i nye ba
དཀར་བའི་ལས	virtuous actions, karma	dkar ba'i las
དཀར་བར་ཡོད་པ	{chos la dkar bar yod pa} had faith in the Dharma	dkar bar yod pa
དཀར་བོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three whites	dkar bo rnam gsum
དཀར་བྱུག་པ	1) whitewash a house; 2) pour oil/butter on torma	dkar byug pa
དཀར་འབབ	river	dkar 'bab
དཀར་འབྱམས	pervasively white	dkar 'byams
དཀར་མི	1) mna' skyel mkhan; 2) Blo nye ba'i mi	dkar mi
དཀར་མི་བྱས	not confessing one's guilt, not exonerated, not making a clean breast of anything	dkar mi byas
དཀར་མི་བྱེད་པ	plead innocence	dkar mi byed pa
དཀར་མིན	not white, black, dark, chaos, bent, crooked	dkar min
དཀར་མིན་ཅན	dark, gloomy, somber	dkar min can
དཀར་མིན་ལྟོ་འགྲོ	poet. black naga, sinful	dkar min lto 'gro
དཀར་མིན་བུ	son of dkar min, offspring of chaos, epithet of the son of brahma	dkar min bu
དཀར་མེ	[offering] lamp, torch	dkar me
དཀར་མེ་བསྔོ་ཞུ	phung po 'don pa'i snga nyin mchod sprin dang bsngo rten tradition of offering	dkar me bsngo zhu
དཀར་མེ་བྱེད་པ	to plead innocence	dkar me byed pa
དཀར་མེད་མ	name of the queen of the yaksa	dkar med ma
དཀར་མེར་རེ	glitter	dkar mer re
དཀར་མོ	1) white. 2) epith. of the goddess of learning. 3) epith. of the goddess Marichi. 4) epith of goddess Durga. 5) mutton. 6) white rice	dkar mo
དཀར་མོ་གོས་གཅིག་མ	queen of the deity dbang phyug	dkar mo gos gcig ma
དཀར་མོ་གྲེ་འགག	sheeps's mid pa 'gag nas quickly dying myur du 'chi ba'i 'gos nad cig	dkar mo gre 'gag
དཀར་མོ་ཆེན་པོ	Syn {dkar mo}	dkar mo chen po
དཀར་མོ་མ	Syn {dkar mo}	dkar mo ma
དཀར་མོ་རི	myth. epith. of the consort of Shiva (lit. mountain of perfection)	dkar mo ri
དཀར་དམར	rosy white, light red or whitish red	dkar dmar
དཀར་དམར་གྱི་གསུར	white and/or red fireoffering, white and red burnt substance	dkar dmar gyi gsur
དཀར་དམར་དུ་སྣང་བ་འདི	your present visual experience	dkar dmar du snang ba 'di
དཀར་དམར་མདངས་དང་ལྡན་པ	glowed white and rosy	dkar dmar mdangs dang ldan pa
དཀར་དམར་མདངས་ལྡན	white complexion glowing w a tinge of red	dkar dmar mdangs ldan
དཀར་དམར་ནག་པོའི་སྣང་བ	the white, red and black experiences {snang ba gsum} {snang gsum 'pho ba'i bag chags}	dkar dmar nag po'i snang ba
དཀར་དམར་ནག་ལམ་སྣང་བ	the white, red and black experiences [See {snang ba gsum} {snang gsum 'pho ba'i bag chags} See {snang ba gsum} {snang gsum 'pho ba'i bag chags}	dkar dmar nag lam snang ba
དཀར་དམར་ནག་གསུམ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the white, red and black experiences	dkar dmar nag gsum gyi snang ba
དཀར་སྨུག	brown sugar	dkar smug
དཀར་སྨུག་མདངས	reddish-brown color	dkar smug mdangs
དཀར་ཙག	saddle cloth	dkar tsag
དཀར་ཙག་ཙག་པ	glittering / shining white	dkar tsag tsag pa
དཀར་ཙི	Syn {dkar rtsi}	dkar tsi
དཀར་ཙེ	lime, SA skar rtsi	dkar tse
དཀར་གཙང	spotless white	dkar gtsang
དཀར་རྩི	whitewash, white-paint. lint. 1) whitewash. 2)lint	dkar rtsi
དཀར་རྩི་གཏོང	whitewash	dkar rtsi gtong
དཀར་རྩི་གཏོང་བ	whitewash	dkar rtsi gtong ba
དཀར་རྩི་དང་དམར་རྩི་བྱུགས་པ	wearing powder and rouge	dkar rtsi dang dmar rtsi byugs pa
དཀར་རྩིས	astrology. Syn {skar rtsis}	dkar rtsis
དཀར་རྩིས་གཏོང་བ	to whitewash	dkar rtsis gtong ba
དཀར་རྩིས་པ	thugs spro chen po gtong skabs 1 who looks after the chinaware	dkar rtsis pa
དཀར་རྩེར་བ	very white or fair	dkar rtser ba
དཀར་བརྩེགས	khal phyugs kyi sga 'og tu rgyag bya'i re snam gyi rgyab ldan felt khebs shig	dkar brtsegs
དཀར་ཚན	white tshan, purification rite mixing water milk and medicine	dkar tshan
དཀར་འཚེར	brilliant/ dazzling white	dkar 'tsher
དཀར་འཚེར་འོད་འབར	brilliant white	dkar 'tsher 'od 'bar
དཀར་མཛེས	county in 21th cent Tibet. dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul {dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul [si khron zhing chen khongs kyi nub rgyud du yod, 1950 lo'i zla ba 12 tshes 25 nyin shis khams ...	dkar mdzes
དཀར་མཛོད	dispensary	dkar mdzod
དཀར་འཛིན	the female breasts	dkar 'dzin
དཀར་འཛོམ་ལ	dkar 'dzom pass [in si khron great region dkar mdzes, in sde rong rdzong]	dkar 'dzom la
དཀར་རྫེས	1) white and beautiful; 2) {dkar mdzes rdzong} [area in ET, formerly among the hor khog lnga lta in si khron Province dkar mdzes, in N Tibet on the upper nyag chu river]	dkar rdzes
དཀར་ཞལ	courtyard	dkar zhal
དཀར་ཞིང་ཞེ	rock-salt	dkar zhing zhe
དཀར་ཞོད	milk	dkar zhod
དཀར་ཟལ	dkar khra	dkar zal
དཀར་ཟས	1) vegetarian food. 2) food of quality; food of quality	dkar zas
དཀར་ཟིང་ཟིང	sparkling, scintillating light	dkar zing zing
དཀར་ཟླ	white month	dkar zla
དཀར་འོད	firefly	dkar 'od
དཀར་ཡ	solder	dkar ya
དཀར་ཡེར་ན	pure white	dkar yer na
དཀར་ཡོ་ལ	cup	dkar yo la
དཀར་ཡོལ	porcelain cup, porcelain. 1) cup. 2) bowl. 3) porcelain. 4) chinaware	dkar yol
དཀར་ཡོལ་དཀར་སངས	white cup	dkar yol dkar sangs
དཀར་ཡོལ་གང	one cup	dkar yol gang
དཀར་ཡོལ་གྱི་ཅ་ལག	chinaware	dkar yol gyi ca lag
དཀར་ཡོལ་གྱི་ཤུབས	Syn {kar shubs}	dkar yol gyi shubs
དཀར་ཡོལ་རྡོ་རྩི	rtsi to be poured into cup/ chinaware	dkar yol rdo rtsi
དཀར་ཡོལ་འབྲུག་རིས་མ	cup with the dragon design on it	dkar yol 'brug ris ma
དཀར་ཡོལ་ཡུ་རིང	lamas and ministers etc tea etc 'dren snod of china w long handle dkar g.ya' - tin dkar g.yeng - a trial or investigation under law	dkar yol yu ring
དཀར་རག	white earth to be smeared on houses etc., whitewash	dkar rag
དཀར་རག་ཕྱེ་མ	1) powdered lime, for whitewash etc/; 2) bleaching powder	dkar rag phye ma
དཀར་རིགས	butter, cheese, milk, etc.	dkar rigs
དཀར་རིལ	1) small. 2) uncolored tsampa ball attached to the lower part of torma	dkar ril
དཀར་རུ	1) white; 2) sheep gi khyu dkar ru grub dbang bstan 'dzin rin chen b. 1801 Bönpo master	dkar ru
དཀར་ལ་དམར་བའི་མདངས་ཆགས་པ	white w a tinge of red	dkar la dmar ba'i mdangs chags pa
དཀར་ལ་ལྷ་མཚོ	dkar la lha Lake [in mtsho zhig mtsho province, mgo log, rma stod rdzong]	dkar la lha mtsho
དཀར་ལམ	the white experience mind of radiant white appearance [the falling of	dkar lam
ཐེ་ཝཧིཏེ་བོདྷིཅིཏཏ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཧེཨདཅེནཏེར་ཏོ་ཐེ་ཧེཨརཏ	center eg at the time of the dissolution of the bodily elements during the process of death accompanied by a mental perception of whiteness, whiteness, the first of {snang ba gsum} {snang mched tho...	the white Bodhicitta from the headcenter to the heart
དཀར་ལམ་པ	Syn {dkar lam}. utter whiteness; 1) A mind of radiant white appearance. 2) the falling of the white	dkar lam pa
བོདྷིཆིཏཏ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཧེཨད	center to	Bodhichitta from the head
ཐེ་ཧེཨརཏ	center at the time of the dissolution of the bodily elements during the process of death. accompanied by a mental perception of whiteness	the heart
དཀར་ལམ་བ	[A mind] of radiant white appearance	dkar lam ba
བོདྷིཅིཏཏ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཧེཨད	center to the	bodhicitta from the head
ཧེཨརཏ	center eg at the time of the dissolution of the bodily elements during the process of death accompanied by a mental perception of whiteness]	heart
དཀར་ལམ་མེ	very white	dkar lam me
དཀར་ལམ་མེ་བ	very white	dkar lam me ba
དཀར་ལམ་དམར་ལམ་ནག་ལམ	Whiteness, redness and blackness. The three experiences accompanying the stages of appearance, increase, and attainment	dkar lam dmar lam nag lam
དཀར་ལས	1) good actions/ karma; 2) work w diary food, diary industry	dkar las
དཀར་ལས་གཞན་འགྲོ་བ	fire of god of fire	dkar las gzhan 'gro ba
དཀར་ལོང	blindness where the eye is obscured by white 'bras skya rib	dkar long
དཀར་ཤ	white mushroom	dkar sha
དཀར་ཤམ	pure	dkar sham
དཀར་ཤལ་དམར་ཤལ	lha lcam tsho'i gzab rgyan bye brag cig	dkar shal dmar shal
དཀར་ཤས	white part	dkar shas
དཀར་ཤུབས	china vessel ['jug snod]	dkar shubs
དཀར་ཤེ	mo phyugs bogs mar btang ba'i bod 'bab butter and cheese	dkar she
དཀར་ཤོག	1) white sheet. 2) sheet of tin	dkar shog
དཀར་བཤལ	diarrhea w white pus 78	dkar bshal
དཀར་སངས	pure white	dkar sangs
དཀར་སེང་ངེ་བ	Syn {dkar sangs}}	dkar seng nge ba
དཀར་སེམས་ནག་སྒྲིབ	by faults defile virtuous mind	dkar sems nag sgrib
དཀར་སེར	light yellow	dkar ser
དཀར་སོབ་ཡང་བའི་འོད་ཅན	alabaster	dkar sob yang ba'i 'od can
དཀར་སླེལ	lcang lcug shun lpags bshus nas bzos pa'i sles po	dkar slel
དཀར་སློང	in summer from nomad regions butter, cheese, milk, and curds slong ba	dkar slong
དཀར་གསལ	white and radiant, fair, light clear, pure white, fire, light, window, smoke hole, skylight [hole in the wall or roof of a house for the admission of light and egress of smoke]	dkar gsal
དཀར་གསལ་མདངས	radiant countenance, pure white radiance	dkar gsal mdangs
དཀར་གསུམ	three whites	dkar gsum
དཀར་གསུམ་མངར་གསུམ	the three whites and the three sweets	dkar gsum mngar gsum
དཀར་གསུར	ritual of burning edibles; 1) white fire offering. 2) burnt offering of diary product without meat	dkar gsur
དཀར་བསོད	summer bla sprul or grva pas 'brog khul du mar phyur sogs slong mo byed pa'i bsod snyoms	dkar bsod
དཀར་ལྷག་གེ་བ	Syn {dkar chab chab}	dkar lhag ge ba
དཀལ	(not in DAS)	dkal
དཀུ	{lus kyi sta zur} the side of one's body; {dku ni dpyi mgo'i gon tsam rtsib	dku
དཀུ་སྐབས	gsus pa'i skabs mtshams te hips gyi thad,...Dku skabs su ska rags bcings	dku skabs
དཀུ་སྐབས་ཕྱིན་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	1 of the 80 minor marks of the Buddha, by faults of samsara ma sbags pa nyid kyis dku skabs phyin pa'am, sked skabs 'tshams pa	dku skabs phyin pa'i dpe byad
དཀུ་ལྕི	a heavy feeling in the side, as a symptom of pregnancy	dku lci
དཀུ་མཉེ	(A; 1) fire; 2) rug seat cushion massage, yoga health exercise, rug, seat	dku mnye
དཀུ་ལྟོ	craft, cunning, trick, stratagem	dku lto
དཀུ་ལྟོ་ཆེ་བ	Syn {dku sbom}	dku lto che ba
དཀུ་ལྟོ་བྱེད་པ	to contrive	dku lto byed pa
དཀུ་སྟེ	remaining, in excess	dku ste
དཀུ་བརྟེན་པ	to put one's arms akimbo	dku brten pa
དཀུ་བརྟོལ་བ	to come forth out of the side [of the breast] (about the Buddha's birth)	dku brtol ba
དཀུ་ནད	kidney disease	dku nad
དཀུ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,; 2) arise, bro ba,...Dri ngan dku ba; 3) fall; 4) [arch] remainder; 5) sweet scent, stench	dku ba
དཀུ་བ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	five kinds of odors, garlic, onion, Chinese garlic, Tibetan garlic, asafetida (the use of these are forbidden to the bhikshu)	dku ba rnam pa lnga
དཀུ་སྦོམ	1) big, heavy man. 2) big belly	dku sbom
དཀུ་མ	belly	dku ma
དཀུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	one who keeps his thoughts to himself	dku ma chen po
དཀུ་མ་རྙོངས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of, One of {dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu}	dku ma rnyongs pa'i dpe byad
དཀུ་ཚོད	intention	dku tshod
དཀུ་མཚམས	brother of whole blood	dku mtshams
དཀུ་ཟླུམ	round and plump buttocks	dku zlum
དཀུ་ཟླུམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	1 of the 80 minor marks of the Buddha, slob ma tshul khrims phun sum tshogs par gyur pa nyid kyis, having a round waist, dpyi'i sta zur gyis mtshon pa'i sked pa zlum pa	dku zlum pa'i dpe byad
དཀུ་ཟླུམ་པོ	round and plump buttocks dku g.yas - on the right side	dku zlum po
དཀུ་ལ་རྟེན་པ	to carry a thing at one's side	dku la rten pa
དཀུག་ལས་བཟོ་པ	lathe/ milling machine operator	dkug las bzo pa
དཀུར་བརྟེན་པ	{dug gsum rtsad nas gcod pa'i gri gu dkur brten pa} resting on her hip, holding the curved knife that cuts the root of the three poisons	dkur brten pa
དཀུར་ལ་རྟེན་པ	carry a thing at one's side	dkur la rten pa
དཀེལ	load, SA 'gel ba	dkel
དཀོག་ཉུལ	[arch] so lta byed mkhan	dkog nyul
དཀོང་བུ	the butter lamp vessel, {kong bu}	dkong bu
དཀོན	rare, scarce, hard to acquire, rarity	dkon
དཀོན་རྒྱུ་མེད	that is not a very precious thing, there is nothing particular in that	dkon rgyu med
དཀོན་ཅོག	old form Syn {dkon mchog}	dkon cog
དཀོན་ཅོག་ཕོ་བྲང	1) the palace of the Precious Ones. 2) A vihar. 3) temple. 4) monastery	dkon cog pho brang
དཀོན་ཅོག་བརྩེགས་པ	the Ratnakuta Sutra	dkon cog brtsegs pa
དཀོན་ཆོག	Syn {dkon mchog}	dkon chog
དཀོན་ཆོག་བརྩེགས་པའི་མདོ	Ratnakuta, Bank/Heap of Jewels Sutra	dkon chog brtsegs pa'i mdo
དཀོན་མཆོག	jewel, superior rarity the (Three jewels, the greatest rarity, most precious object, ratna, jewel, precious stone, precious, superior, supreme rarest, the most precious thing rare and sublime	dkon mchog
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཀུན་འདུས	the embodiment of the three jewels	dkon mchog kun 'dus
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཀུན་འདུས་གསུམ	Three jewels: Buddha, Dharma and Sangha dkon mchog khas mi len pa'i ring lugs atheism	dkon mchog kun 'dus gsum
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་མཆོད་པ	worship of the Three jewels	dkon mchog gi mchod pa
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རྟེན་དྲུང	in the presence of the Three Jewels	dkon mchog gi rten drung
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རྟེན་བཤིག་པ	destroyed representations of the Three Jewels	dkon mchog gi rten bshig pa
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་ཐུགས་རྗེས	be the compassion of the [3] jewels/ God	dkon mchog gi thugs rjes
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རྫས་བརྐུ་བ	to steal what belongs to the Three Jewels	dkon mchog gi rdzas brku ba
དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་ཟ་མ་ཏོག	n. of a sutra; {dkon mchog za ma tog gi mdo}	dkon mchog gi za ma tog
དཀོན་མཆོག་དགུ་ཕྲུག	see {skyabs gnas dgu phrug}	dkon mchog dgu phrug
དཀོན་མཆོག་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the three jewels	dkon mchog rgyal po
དཀོན་མཆོག་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{rdzogs chen stag bla}	dkon mchog rgyal mtshan
དཀོན་མཆོག་མངོན་རྟོགས	a sadhana of lhag pa'i lha	dkon mchog mngon rtogs
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཆོས	1) Syn {chos dkon mchog}. 2) The Precious Dharma	dkon mchog chos
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཆོས་གྲགས	{rnam gling pan chen}	dkon mchog chos grags
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཆོས་འཕེལ	Könchok Chöpel :1767-1834	dkon mchog chos 'phel
དཀོན་མཆོག་མཆོད་པ	to venerate the Three Jewels dkon mchog 'jigs med dbang po Jamyang Shepa II, Könchok Jigmey Wangpo: 1728-1791	dkon mchog mchod pa
དཀོན་མཆོག་རྗེས་དྲན	Triratna Anusmriti Sutra	dkon mchog rjes dran
དཀོན་མཆོག་རྗེས་དྲན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra on the Recollection of the Three Jewels	dkon mchog rjes dran gyi mdo
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཏ་ལ་ལ	Precious Lamp Sutra	dkon mchog ta la la
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཏ་ལ་ལའི་གཟུངས	the Ratna talala dharani	dkon mchog ta la la'i gzungs
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཏ་ལའི་མདོ	Precious Tala Sutra	dkon mchog ta la'i mdo
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཏ་ལའི་གཟུངས	Ratnolka nama dharani	dkon mchog ta la'i gzungs
དཀོན་མཆོག་བསྟན་པའི་རབ་རྒྱས	1801--? - Könchok Tenpa Rabgye, author of a religious history of Amdo dkon mchog bstod pa'i glu dbyangs hymn	dkon mchog bstan pa'i rab rgyas
དཀོན་མཆོག་དྲུག	the Six Precious Ones. 1) {bla ma}. 2) {yi dam}. 3) {mkha' 'gro}. 4) {sangs rgyas}. 5) {chos}. 6) {dge bdun}	dkon mchog drug
དཀོན་མཆོག་ནང་བཞིན	god-like	dkon mchog nang bzhin
དཀོན་མཆོག་དཔང་བཙུགས	mna' skyel ba'i tshig	dkon mchog dpang btsugs
དཀོན་མཆོག་དཔལ་སྒྲོན	Ratna Shri. The daughter of Chokgyur Lingpa	dkon mchog dpal sgron
དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྱི་འདུས	revealed by Jatsön Nyingpo	dkon mchog spyi 'dus
དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྲིན	Precious Cloud [thd]	dkon mchog sprin
དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྲིན་གྱི	Cloud of Jewels Sutra	dkon mchog sprin gyi
དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྲིན་གྱི་མདོ	Ratnamegha Sutra. Cloud of Jewels Sutra	dkon mchog sprin gyi mdo
སུཏྲ	Cloud of Jewels Sutra	Sutra
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཕོ་བྲང	a palace for the three jewels, a shrine or temple	dkon mchog pho brang
དཀོན་མཆོག་འཕྲིན་ལས་བཟང་པོ	{'bri gung che tshang} ii, 1656-1718	dkon mchog 'phrin las bzang po
དཀོན་མཆོག་བློ་གཏད	to rely on the Three Jewels	dkon mchog blo gtad
དཀོན་མཆོག་དབུ་འཕང་བསྟོད	to elevate the Three Jewels	dkon mchog dbu 'phang bstod
དཀོན་མཆོག་དབྱངས	Ratnadasa indian philosopher	dkon mchog dbyangs
དཀོན་མཆོག་འབངས	king who had wife mkha' 'gro gsang ba ye shes	dkon mchog 'bangs
དཀོན་མཆོག་འབྱུང་གནས	1) 1 of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas} the buddhas of the ten directions; 2) the Ratnakara Sutra, Jewel Mine Sutra; 3) emptiness and compassion snying rje dang stong nyid	dkon mchog 'byung gnas
དཀོན་མཆོག་མེད་པར་ངོས་འཛིན་མཁན་ཨནཏི	theist	dkon mchog med par ngos 'dzin mkhan anti
དཀོན་མཆོག་བརྩེགས་པ	Jewel Mound. A Mahayana sutra	dkon mchog brtsegs pa
ཪཏནཀུཏ	sutra. Also known as the Maharatnakuta sutra, an important collection of forty-nine Mahayana sutras	Ratnakuta
མདོ	Mah -ratnakuuta- dharmapary yashatas hasrika-granthasuutra; Heap of Jewels Sutra dkon mchog brtsegs pa chen po'i chos kyi rnam grangs le'u stong phrag brgya pa'i	mdo
དཀོན་མཆོག་བརྩེགས་པའི་མདོ	Ratnakuta sutra, jewel mound sutra	dkon mchog brtsegs pa'i mdo
དཀོན་མཆོག་བཞི	the four precious ones (the three jewels and the root guru	dkon mchog bzhi
དཀོན་མཆོག་བཞི་པ	the four gem [the root guru]	dkon mchog bzhi pa
དཀོན་མཆོག་བཞི་པ་མཆོད	to offer to the Fourth Jewel, [the lama]	dkon mchog bzhi pa mchod
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཟ་མ་ཏོག	Ratna Karanda Sutra; Könchok Samatok	dkon mchog za ma tog
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཡན་ལག	1525-1583 - fifth Shamar, Könchok Yenlak	dkon mchog yan lag
དཀོན་མཆོག་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{ri khrod pa}	dkon mchog yon tan rgyal mtshan
དཀོན་མཆོག་རིན་ཆེན་གསུམ	three jewels, triratna, the three jewels, three precious ones, the triple gem, the three rare and sublime ones, three noncompounds {sangs rgyas} = buddha 2) {chos} = dharma; 3) {dag 'dun} = sangha ...	dkon mchog rin chen gsum
དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་སྐུར་འདེབས	to slander the Three Jewels	dkon mchog la skur 'debs
དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་བསྔོས་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	materials dedicated to the Three Jewels	dkon mchog la bsngos pa'i yo byad
དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་ལོག་ལྟ	to turn against / harbor wrong views about the Three Jewels	dkon mchog la log lta
དཀོན་མཆོག་སྲི་ཞུའི་མགྲོན	the worshipful guests of the three jewels	dkon mchog sri zhu'i mgron
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ	Three Jewels	dkon mchog gsum
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་གྱི	devout buddhist, an individual dkon mchog gsum gyi sgra tsam yang mi	dkon mchog gsum gyi
གྲགས	no-one has ever even heard of the Three Jewels	grags
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་གྱི་གནས	monastery, temple, place of three jewels	dkon mchog gsum gyi gnas
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་གྱི་ཕོ་བྲང	(lit. the palace of the Three jewels)	dkon mchog gsum gyi pho brang
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་གྱི་འབངས	servant of the Three jewels	dkon mchog gsum gyi 'bangs
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་འབྱུང་གནས	source of the jewels, the first of the nine stages of samadhi 81	dkon mchog gsum 'byung gnas
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་ལ་ཡོན་ཕུལ་བ	made offerings to the Three Jewels	dkon mchog gsum la yon phul ba
དཀོན་མཆོག་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	{ngor chen} 1497-1557	dkon mchog lhun grub
དཀོན་མཆོད་གསུམ	three precious jewels (buddha {sangs rgyas}, doctrine {chos}, dharma, the community sangha, {dge 'dun}	dkon mchod gsum
དཀོན་གཉེར	1) caretaker of a temple. 2) guardian of religious objects. 3) person in charge of a temple. Syn {sku bnyer}	dkon gnyer
དཀོན་མཐོང	to realize the rarity	dkon mthong
དཀོན་དུས	slack/ slow season/ period	dkon dus
དཀོན་ནོར	valuable property, riches, rare things	dkon nor
དཀོན་པ	rare, scarce, dear, precious, valuable	dkon pa
དཀོན་པ་ཉིད	rarity	dkon pa nyid
དཀོན་པའི་ལྕགས་རིགས	rare metals	dkon pa'i lcags rigs
དཀོན་པའི་མཆོག	chief of rarities, rarest being or object, supreme being, SA dkon mchog	dkon pa'i mchog
དཀོན་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་ཞོག	be aware of the rarity of such an occasion	dkon pa'i 'du shes zhog
དཀོན་པོ	rare, few, valuable, dear, dearth, exiguous, scant, scanty, scarce, spare, sparse, precious, rare, scarce	dkon po
དཀོན་པོ་བྱུང་ཟེར	said that meat had become scarce	dkon po byung zer
དཀོན་པོར	hardly	dkon por
དཀོན་པོར་འགྱུར་བ	extinct	dkon por 'gyur ba
དཀོན་སྤྱིའི་ལས་བྱང	bka' rdzogs pa chen po yang zab dkon mchog spyi 'dus kyi las byang don gsal khyer bder	dkon spyi'i las byang
བསྒྲིགས་པ་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	by {padma gar dbang phrin las 'gro 'dul rtsal} alias {kong sprul blo gros mtha 'yas} (1813-1899)	bsgrigs pa phrin las kun khyab
དཀོན་བུ	wreath	dkon bu
དཀོན་མོ	rare, scarce, dear, precious	dkon mo
དཀོན་བརྩེགས	Ratnakuta, Jewel Mound Sutra. Syn {dkon mchog brtsegs pa'i mdo}	dkon brtsegs
དཀོན་ཟོག	scarce commodities	dkon zog
དཀོན་ཟོག་སྡེབ་བསགས	hoard scarce commodities	dkon zog sdeb bsags
དཀོར	property/ possession; (misappropriation of same); undeserved offerings [Ngawang]	dkor
དཀོར་སྐྱེད	Syn {sku gnyer}; treasurer in charge of monastic property	dkor skyed
དཀོར་ཁང	store room	dkor khang
དཀོར་གྱི་བླ	lama who appropriates sacred property to himself	dkor gyi bla
དཀོར་གྱི་བླ་མ	lama who appropriates sacred property to himself	dkor gyi bla ma
དཀོར་གྱིས་བསླུ	seduced by wealth	dkor gyis bslu
དཀོར་གྲིབ	obscuration by mishandling religious funds	dkor grib
དཀོར་སྒྲིབ	obscuration by mishandling religious funds	dkor sgrib
དཀོར་ཆ	donation, charity, offerings, religious offerings, material things offered out of faith, funds, treasury, wealth, gift, monastic property, handout, offering made to the objects of refuge, in a temp...	dkor cha
དཀོར་གཉེར	caretaker of monastic property	dkor gnyer
དཀོར་དོན	property, wealth	dkor don
དཀོར་བདག	1) owner of property. 2) custodian of religious property. 3) spirit of a locality. 4) epith. of Kuvera. owner of property	dkor bdag
དཀོར་བདུན	seven riches (dbyings kyi don dam, ye shes kyi don dam, 'bras bu'i don dam (subdivided into sku, gsung, thugs, yon tan, phrin las)	dkor bdun
དཀོར་འདྲུབ་པ	to gather wealth	dkor 'drub pa
དཀོར་འདྲེ	wealth spirits	dkor 'dre
དཀོར་ནོར	donation, charity, [religious] offerings, material things offered out of faith, funds, treasury, wealth, donation, charity, gift, monastic property, handout, offering made to the objects of refuge,...	dkor nor
དཀོར་པ	treasurer, one in charge of the endowments and properties of a temple	dkor pa
དཀོར་བླ	the monk in charge of monastic property. Syn {dkor gyi bla}	dkor bla
དཀོར་སྦྱོང	purification of mishandling faith offerings	dkor sbyong
དཀོར་མ་འབགས	not misappropriating the treasures and stores of the church	dkor ma 'bags
དཀོར་མི	Syn {dkor pa}	dkor mi
དཀོར་མཛོད	[monastic] treasury, treasure-chest	dkor mdzod
དཀོར་རྫོགས	monastery in southern ladak	dkor rdzogs
དཀོར་ཟ	to enjoy faith offerings	dkor za
དཀོར་ཟན	devourer of gifts	dkor zan
དཀོར་ཟས	hand-out, spendthrift	dkor zas
ཧནད	out. food given out of devotion	hand
དཀོར་གཟན	devourer of offerings	dkor gzan
དཀོར་རིགས	different properties belonging to a monastery 82	dkor rigs
དཀོར་ལ་རྔམས་པ	to crave for misused religious wealth	dkor la rngams pa
དཀོར་སྲུང	shrine-keeper, temple servant/ caretaker	dkor srung
དཀོལ་པ	struck by calamity, afflicted, one in suffering	dkol pa
དཀོལ་བ	1) struck by calamity, one in suffering. 2) to rub in (oils or ointments)	dkol ba
དཀོས་ཐག	suffering, affliction, exciting disgust	dkos thag
དཀོས་ཐག་ཅན	worried, troubled	dkos thag can
དཀོས་ཐག་པ	to worry, to trouble	dkos thag pa
དཀྱ་བོ་སྤྱི	vulgar people, common worldly men	dkya bo spyi
དཀྱག་པ	to lose color	dkyag pa
དཀྱར	snow-shoes	dkyar
དཀྱལ་པ	to speak nonsense	dkyal pa
དཀྱིགས་པ	bound, fastened	dkyigs pa
དཀྱིན་པ་སྤྲོད་རྒྱུ	owe	dkyin pa sprod rgyu
དཀྱིལ	(the very) center/ core; isc. vault [of space/ sky]; isc. domain/ field	dkyil
མནདལ	center, the principal deity or attribute, circle, circumference, figure, quadrangle, square, diagram model, a circle of objects, area of a circle, disk inner	mandala
དཀྱིལ་ཀྲུང	crossed-legged. Syn {skyil krung, dkyil dkrung}	dkyil krung
དཀྱིལ་དཀྲུང	Syn {dkyil krung}. crosslegged posture. Syn {dkyil krungs}	dkyil dkrung
དཀྱིལ་དཀྲུང་བཅས་པ	to sit in a crosslegged posture [in meditation]	dkyil dkrung bcas pa
དཀྱིལ་དཀྲུངས	cross-legged posture	dkyil dkrungs
དཀྱིལ་འཀྲུངས	cross-legged posture	dkyil 'krungs
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	Mandala. 1) 'Center and surrounding.' Usually a deity along with its surrounding environment. A mandala is a symbolic, graphic representation of a tantric deity's realm of existence. 2) A mandala o...	dkyil 'khor
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཀུན་བདག	the lord of all mandalas	dkyil 'khor kun bdag
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་སྐབས་སུ་སའི་རོ་ལྔ	CHN	dkyil 'khor skabs su sa'i ro lnga
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བསྐྱེད་པ	1) to visualize, develop the mandala. 2) visualization of the mandala	dkyil 'khor bskyed pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཁང་པ	shrine room	dkyil 'khor khang pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra mandala	dkyil 'khor 'khor lo
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	the entire mandala circle	dkyil 'khor 'khor lo yongs rdzogs
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོ་རབ་འབྱམས	universal chakra mandala	dkyil 'khor 'khor lo rab 'byams
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོའི་ལམ	path of the	dkyil 'khor 'khor lo'i lam
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོར་བལྟ་བ	to regard as the mandala circle	dkyil 'khor 'khor lor blta ba
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གང	1) the full moon. 2) the 15th day of the month	dkyil 'khor gang
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	circle of the mandala; 1) mandala circle. 2) Central figure with surrounding deities. 3) circle of the mandala	dkyil 'khor gyi 'khor lo
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	mandala ritual	dkyil 'khor gyi cho ga
ལྔ་བཅུ་པ	one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	lnga bcu pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་བདག་པོ	lord of the mandala	dkyil 'khor gyi bdag po
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་མུ་རན	the periphery of the mandala	dkyil 'khor gyi mu ran
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་ལྷ	mandala deity	dkyil 'khor gyi lha
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྲུ་བཞི	square, certain mystical figure, diagram, model	dkyil 'khor gru bzhi
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྲུ་བཞི་པ	quadrangle	dkyil 'khor gru bzhi pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཁྱབ་བདག	Lord who Pervades an Ocean of Mandalas. In the pervaded (khyab bya), the infinite ocean of mandalas, the pervader (khyab byed) is the Guru, the embodiment of all the families. The analogy is the su...	dkyil 'khor rgya mtsho'i khyab bdag
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྒྱལ་མཆོག	1) the supreme king of the mandala. 2) the supreme mandala [samadhi]	dkyil 'khor rgyal mchog
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད	the offering of practicing a mandala	dkyil 'khor sgrub mchod
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual of accomplishing the mandala 83	dkyil 'khor sgrub pa'i cho ga
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བརྒྱད་པའི་མདོ	description of 8 mansions of 8 buddhas	dkyil 'khor brgyad pa'i mdo
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བསྒོམ་པ	mandala, visualization of; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 93]	dkyil 'khor bsgom pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྔ	the five kinds of mandalas	dkyil 'khor lnga
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཅན	poet. moon (lit. having a disk), magic circle	dkyil 'khor can
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གཅིག་དུ་རྫོགས	the single perfect mandala	dkyil 'khor gcig du rdzogs
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གཅིག་དུ་རྫོགས་པ	complete within a single mandala	dkyil 'khor gcig du rdzogs pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཅུ་གཉིས་བདག་པོ	sun (lit. Lord of the 12 mansions of Zodiac). poet. sun (lit. Lord of the 12 mansions of Zodiac)	dkyil 'khor bcu gnyis bdag po
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཆོ་ག	mandala ritual - rites	dkyil 'khor cho ga
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐང	the Mandala Plain of Tsari	dkyil 'khor thang
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐམས་ཅད་འབྱུང་བ	the source of all mandalas	dkyil 'khor thams cad 'byung ba
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐིག་ཚད	mandala drawing/ proportions	dkyil 'khor thig tshad
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བདག་པོ	the lord/ the chief figure of the mandala	dkyil 'khor bdag po
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འདུས་པ	unified mandala	dkyil 'khor 'dus pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྡིང	n. of the temple of Buddha in Lhasa, region, sphere; n. of the temple of Buddha in Lhasa	dkyil 'khor lding
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་སྡིངས	center of a divine palace	dkyil 'khor sdings
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ན་འང་སྣང་བ	also appear within the mandala	dkyil 'khor na 'ang snang ba
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྣམ་པ	rang bzhin lhun gyis grub pa'i dkyil 'khor, rtsa ba byang chub sems kyi dkyil 'khor)	dkyil 'khor rnam pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three kinds of mandala	dkyil 'khor rnam pa gsum
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་པ	mandala deity	dkyil 'khor pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གཙོ་བོ	chief deity of the mandala	dkyil 'khor gtso bo
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཞལ་ཕྱེ་བ	open up the mandala of a certain deity, practice the sadhana, confer the empowerment	dkyil 'khor zhal phye ba
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞེངས་པ	to erect the mandala	dkyil 'khor bzhengs pa
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འོད་འཕྲོ	light emanating mandala	dkyil 'khor 'od 'phro
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཡོངས་དག	1) the complete purity of the mandala. 2) One of the four special qualities of Mantrayana. {gsang sngags kyi thabs mkhas khyad chos bzhi}	dkyil 'khor yongs dag
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལས་མཁས	proficient in the drawing /making of mandalas	dkyil 'khor las mkhas
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལོག	speaks of four times instead of three; the fault of the mandala ???	dkyil 'khor log
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	3 cycles of offerings (rang bzhin dal gyi dbyings nas lhun grub, ting nge 'dzin dkyil 'khor mkha' la yid kyis bsgom pa, 'dus byas dkyil 'khor sa la rgyus gyis sbyar ba'o), SA dkyil 'khor rnam pa gsum	dkyil 'khor gsum
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ་གྱི་ཁྱེར་སོ	the practice of the three mandalas	dkyil 'khor gsum gyi khyer so
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྷ	mandala deity	dkyil 'khor lha
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the assembly of deities of the mandala	dkyil 'khor lha tshogs
དཀྱིལ་གུ	1) lham gyi snga rting dang phyi rting bar gyi rgyong byed shing gru bzhi; 2) Shing chas bzo skabs kyi shing rtsab bam shing gzer	dkyil gu
དཀྱིལ་གྱི	central, focal	dkyil gyi
དཀྱིལ་རྒྱུད	navel/ waist area, middle part	dkyil rgyud
དཀྱིལ་སྒོ	sgo dbus ma	dkyil sgo
དཀྱིལ་ཆུ	pond, puddle	dkyil chu
དཀྱིལ་ཆེ་བ	with wide base, spacious interior, comprehensive understanding, quick comprehension	dkyil che ba
དཀྱིལ་ཆོག	mandala ritual	dkyil chog
དཀྱིལ་ཐང	1) mandala painting, tangka. 2) picture or representation of a deity	dkyil thang
དཀྱིལ་ཐད	in the middle, halfway along	dkyil thad
དཀྱིལ་ཐིག	1) picture etc centerline; 2) mandala picture / measurements; 3) diameter	dkyil thig
དཀྱིལ་དུ	in the middle, center. [mostly in reference to place]	dkyil du
དཀྱིལ་དུ་སྦོས	to conceal within one's innermost heart	dkyil du sbos
དཀྱིལ་ནས	from the middle or center, from amidst, from the bottom	dkyil nas
དཀྱིལ་གནས	median	dkyil gnas
དཀྱིལ་ཕྱོགས	dbus phyogs sam lte ba yod sa	dkyil phyogs
དཀྱིལ་དབུས་སུ	at the center of	dkyil dbus su
དཀྱིལ་མ	middle, center, the 1 in the middle, the central one	dkyil ma
དཀྱིལ་མོ་དཀྲུང	cross-legged position (for meditation	dkyil mo dkrung
དཀྱིལ་མོ་དཀྲུང་བཅས་ཏེ	sitting in a crosslegged posture	dkyil mo dkrung bcas te
དཀྱིལ་མོ་དཀྲུངས་བཅས་པ	to sit in a	dkyil mo dkrungs bcas pa
ཅྲོསས	legged posture (in meditation)	cross
དཀྱིལ་སྨད	the lower half	dkyil smad
དཀྱིལ་མཛུག	middle finger/toe	dkyil mdzug
དཀྱིལ་མཛུབ	middle finger/toe	dkyil mdzub
དཀྱིལ་གཞུང	dkyil dkyil rkyang	dkyil gzhung
དཀྱིལ་ཟངས	thab kyi dkyil du 'dzugs pa'i zangs	dkyil zangs
དཀྱིལ་ཡངས་པ	open center [of a valley]	dkyil yangs pa
དཀྱིལ་ལ	in the middle/ center of, between, among, amidst	dkyil la
དཀྱིལ་གཤགས	dbus nas kha gshags pa,...Smyug sdong dkyil gshags btang ba,...Dmag sgar dkyil gshags btang nas phyin	dkyil gshags
དཀྱིས་སྲུང་རྒྱག་མཁན	center guard in soccer	dkyis srung rgyag mkhan
དཀྱུ	(tha dad pa dkyus pa, dkyu ba, dkyus,, run, gallop, raze, run away, flee, escape, run a race, wring out, filter, caper about	dkyu
དཀྱུ་རྟ	race-horse	dkyu rta
དཀྱུ་ཐག	rope, used to mark the racecourse	dkyu thag
དཀྱུ་པ	lose color by washing	dkyu pa
དཀྱུ་པོ	race a horse, jockey	dkyu po
དཀྱུ་བ	(tha dad pa dkyus pa, dkyu ba, dkyus,, run, gallop, raze, run away, flee, escape, run a race, wring out, filter, caper about	dkyu ba
དཀྱུ་བའི་རྟ	race-horse	dkyu ba'i rta
དཀྱུ་བོ	[arch] cas cus or 'chus po	dkyu bo
དཀྱུ་ས	race-track	dkyu sa
དཀྱུ་སར་དཀྱུས	running a race	dkyu sar dkyus
དཀྱུད	length & breadth	dkyud
དཀྱུད་པ	dkon nor - valuable property, riches. to forget	dkyud pa
དཀྱུས	untruth. bold, insolent, speed. Syn {dkyu ba}; imp. of {dkyu ba}; 1) length. 2) diameter. 3) imp. of {dkyu}. 4) adj. comp. of {dkyus ma}. 5) untruth. 6) bold. 7) insolent. 8) speed. 9) long. 10) un...	dkyus
ཨེབེ༹རཡ	day, ordinary, general, inferior, coarse; 7) lay, non-clerical; 9) bold, insolent; 10) long; 11) twisted into a point; 12) secret; 13) Srid, gzhung,...Mig dkyus ring ba; 14) Rgyu spun gyi rgyu [war...	every
ལེངཐ	wise, untruth, untrue, spurious, bold, insolent	length
དཀྱུས་དཀར	common\inferior china	dkyus dkar
དཀྱུས་འགྲེ	1) abbreviated. 2) condensed	dkyus 'gre
དཀྱུས་གཅིག	gzhung gcig pa'am star gcig pa	dkyus gcig
དཀྱུས་ཇ	ordinary/ everyday/ inferior tea	dkyus ja
དཀྱུས་བཏགས	scarf of ordinary quality	dkyus btags
དཀྱུས་ལྟར	according to the general liturgy	dkyus ltar
དཀྱུས་ཐག	wrap. 1) length. 2) wrap [threads that are stretched length wise in weaving]	dkyus thag
དཀྱུས་ཐོག་བཅད་པ	horse racing better than others's khyad chos bton pa	dkyus thog bcad pa
དཀྱུས་པ	pf. of {dkyu ba}; pf. of {dkyu ba}	dkyus pa
དཀྱུས་བུར	common/inferior molasses	dkyus bur
དཀྱུས་འབོལ	thin cushion	dkyus 'bol
དཀྱུས་འབྲས	ordinary/ inferior rice	dkyus 'bras
དཀྱུས་མ	1) common [or garden], everyday, ordinary, general; 2) inferior; 3) coarse; 4) lay, non-clerical	dkyus ma
དཀྱུས་མའི་རྒྱུན་སྤྱོད	ordinary circumstances	dkyus ma'i rgyun spyod
དཀྱུས་མོ	quickly, swiftly	dkyus mo
དཀྱུས་མོར	quickly, swiftly	dkyus mor
དཀྱུས་རྩེ	running and playing	dkyus rtse
དཀྱུས་རྩེད་བྱས་པ	playing and running (deer / horses)	dkyus rtsed byas pa
དཀྱུས་ཚད	length	dkyus tshad
དཀྱུས་ཞེང	width and length, large basket w lid carried on the back	dkyus zheng
དཀྱུས་བཞིན	customarily	dkyus bzhin
དཀྱུས་རིང	long, oblong	dkyus ring
དཀྱུས་རིང་གྲུ་བཞི	rectangle	dkyus ring gru bzhi
དཀྱུས་སུ	1) lengthwise, in length; 2) usually, in general	dkyus su
དཀྱུས་སུ་རིང་པོ	long, lengthwise	dkyus su ring po
དཀྱེར་བ	[arch] gtong ba, give	dkyer ba
དཀྱེལ	1) extent. 2) compass. 3) size. 4) bulk. 5) universe; extent, bulk. {nam mkha'i dkyel}. compass of the heavens. {rgya mtsho'i dkyel}. stretch of sea	dkyel
དཀྱེལ་ཆེ	spacious, of wide capacity	dkyel che
དཀྱེལ་ཆེ་བ	spacious, of wide capacity	dkyel che ba
དཀྱེལ་ལྡན	all-pervading, all-pervading	dkyel ldan
དཀྱེལ་པོ་ཆེ	/(1 blo great vast mind; 2) the world	dkyel po che
དཀྱེལ་བོ་ཆེ	Syn {dkyel che ba}	dkyel bo che
དཀྱེས་རྡོར	Hevajra	dkyes rdor
དཀྱེས་པ་སྐོང	fulfill	dkyes pa skong
དཀྱོག་བཤད	misinterpret	dkyog bshad
དཀྱོར་འབྱིན	[arch] hypocritical, deceptive	dkyor 'byin
དཀྲ་བ	wind, SA 'khri ba 85	dkra ba
དཀྲམ་ཀོ་འཐུག་པ	impertinent. 1) transgression. 2) impertinent	dkram ko 'thug pa
དཀྲི	[p dkris] wrap, bind, bandage	dkri
དཀྲི་སྐོར	wool spinning wheel/ machine	dkri skor
དཀྲི་ག	mig lpags kyi yas mtha'i ri mo	dkri ga
དཀྲི་ཐག	coil	dkri thag
དཀྲི་ཐག་རྒྱབ་པ	entwine	dkri thag rgyab pa
དཀྲི་ཐག་ཐེབས་པ	snarl	dkri thag thebs pa
དཀྲི་འཕང	spun dkri byed 'khor chung	dkri 'phang
དཀྲི་བ	tie, fasten, twine, bind, wind, conduct one's pupil from one stage to another, wrap round about, ensnare, a snare, anything to entangle with, coil, wrap, to bring nearer to	dkri ba
དཀྲི་བ་ཆོད	cut attachment	dkri ba chod
དཀྲི་བ་པོ	one who wraps up	dkri ba po
དཀྲི་བར་བྱེད་མཁན	one who wraps up	dkri bar byed mkhan
དཀྲི་བར་བྱེད་པ	to wrap	dkri bar byed pa
དཀྲི་བྱེད	clump or cluster, troop of soldiers	dkri byed
དཀྲི་ཤིང	skud pa dkri sa'i shing	dkri shing
དཀྲིག	personally	dkrig
དཀྲིག་ཅར	customarily, as a rule	dkrig car
དཀྲིག་པ	to make overcast, gather clouds, pile up; {dkrig pa, dkrigs pa, dkrig pa, dkrigs} trans. v.; {dkrigs pa, dkrig pa, dkrigs}. - 1) to gather. 2) arrange. 3) pile up. 4) line up. 5) make overcast; ft....	dkrig pa
དཀྲིགས	thousand billions, dense, thicklygathered	dkrigs
དཀྲིགས་བཅར	SA krig car	dkrigs bcar
དཀྲིགས་ཆེན	a great number	dkrigs chen
དཀྲིགས་ཆེན་པོ	term denoting a very large number	dkrigs chen po
དཀྲིགས་ལྡན	summer	dkrigs ldan
དཀྲིགས་པ	placed near, contiguous. to obscure. pf. of {dkrig pa}; pf. of {dkrig pa}; 1) pf. of {dkrig}. 2) to be covered. 3) full of. 4) a number. 5) placed near. 6) contiguous. 7) obscure. 8) darkened. 9) o...	dkrigs pa
དཀྲིགས་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད	8 quintillion	dkrigs phrag brgyad
དཀྲིགས་ཕྲག་ཆེན་པོ	Syn {dkrigs chen po}	dkrigs phrag chen po
དཀྲིས	1) {dkri ba}! bind, fetter, tie, ensnare, fasten, roll up, wrap [around], wind up; 2) twine, wrapping materials; 3) {'khrid}, take along, lead on, guide	dkris
དཀྲིས་གྱུར	surrounded, encircled, encompassed	dkris gyur
དཀྲིས་ཐག་ཐེབས་པ	intertwine	dkris thag thebs pa
དཀྲིས་པ	surround, encircle, ensnare, lie round, wind up, to be fettered by	dkris pa
དཀྲིས་ཕྲག	a large number	dkris phrag
དཀྲིས་སྦྲུལ	intertwined snakes	dkris sbrul
དཀྲིས་ཟིན་པ	woven	dkris zin pa
དཀྲིས་རས	cloth bandage	dkris ras
དཀྲིས་ཤིང་བསྐོར་བ	to entwine and encircle	dkris shing bskor ba
དཀྲུ་བ	pollution, filth	dkru ba
དཀྲུག	churn; disturbed, wild	dkrug
དཀྲུག་དཀྲུག་གཏོང	1) mixing curd and milk as an after noon beverage; 2) stir [up], shake, agitate; 3) trouble, disturb, confound; 4) turn on a lathe	dkrug dkrug gtong
དཀྲུག་དཀྲུག་བཏང་བ	to rattle	dkrug dkrug btang ba
དཀྲུག་དཀྲུག་བྱེད	1) mixing curd and milk as an after noon beverage; 2) stir [up], shake, agitate; 3) trouble, disturb, confound; 4) turn on a lathe	dkrug dkrug byed
དཀྲུག་དཀྲུག་བྱེད་པ	1) to shake up. 2) to turn [on a lathe]	dkrug dkrug byed pa
དཀྲུག་འཁོར	lathe, milling machine	dkrug 'khor
དཀྲུག་གྲི	lathe/ milling cutting tool	dkrug gri
དཀྲུག་རྒྱག་བཟོ་པ	lathe/ milling machine operator	dkrug rgyag bzo pa
དཀྲུག་སྟེགས	lathe, milling machine	dkrug stegs
དཀྲུག་སྣོད	container for shaking/ mixing	dkrug snod
དཀྲུག་པ	to shake, agitate	dkrug pa
སྟིརྲིང	stick, twirling stick. 6) disturber, enemy. 7) churned, stirred. 8) to be disturbed, agitated, incited, stirred up, troubled	stirring
དཀྲུག་གཞོག་འཁོར་སྟེགས	lathe, milling machine	dkrug gzhog 'khor stegs
དཀྲུག་ཟིང	instigation, incitement, provocation	dkrug zing
དཀྲུག་ལས	milling/ lathe work	dkrug las
དཀྲུག་ལས་བཟོ་རིགས	milling/ lathe work	dkrug las bzo rigs
དཀྲུག་ཤིང	instigation provocation	dkrug shing
དཀྲུག་ཤིང་རྒྱག་པ	instigate, provoke [fights/ animosity]	dkrug shing rgyag pa
དཀྲུག་ཤིང་བྱེད	instigate, provoke [fights/ animosity]	dkrug shing byed
དཀྲུག་ཤིང་བྱེད་པ	make trouble, misunderstanding	dkrug shing byed pa
དཀྲུག་ཤིངས	instigation provocation	dkrug shings
དཀྲུག་གསོར	drill in lathe? planing tool	dkrug gsor
དཀྲུགས	churned, stirred {dkrug pa}! [p dkrug] stir, churn, shake, disturb, agitate, incite, stir up 86	dkrugs
དཀྲུགས་སྟེགས	lathe, milling machine	dkrugs stegs
དཀྲུགས་པ	to stir (up)/ arouse	dkrugs pa
དཀྲུགས་པ་པོ	confounder	dkrugs pa po
དཀྲུགས་ཡིག	kind of character used in tibet which is puzzling	dkrugs yig
དཀྲུགས་ཤིང་བྱེད་མཁན	one who causes or excites brawls & feuds	dkrugs shing byed mkhan
དཀྲུགས་བཤིགས་བྱེད་པ	ransack	dkrugs bshigs byed pa
དཀྲུང་ཀྲུང་སྒྲ་ཅན	a country filled with stork and crane cries	dkrung krung sgra can
དཀྲུབ་བདར་འཕུའ་འཁོར	planing machine	dkrub bdar 'phu' 'khor
དཀྲུམ	meat. 1) Syn {gcog}. 2) to break. 3) meat. Also spelled {krums}	dkrum
དཀྲུམ་ཁུ	1) meat broth. 2) meat soup	dkrum khu
དཀྲུམ་པ	brittle	dkrum pa
དཀྲུམ་ཕག	park [h]	dkrum phag
དཀྲུམས	imp. of {dkrum pa}; imp. of {dkrum pa}	dkrums
དཀྲུམས་པ	[p {dkrum pa}	dkrums pa
དཀྲེ	penis	dkre
དཀྲོ	Syn {dkre}	dkro
དཀྲོག	{dkrogs pa} {dkrog pa} {dkrogs},, churn, agitate, stir up, scare away, surprise, wake up, shake up, mingle, rouse, wag	dkrog
དཀྲོག་དཀྲོག་གི་སྒྲ	rattle	dkrog dkrog gi sgra
དཀྲོག་རྐྱེན	disturbance, agitation	dkrog rkyen
དཀྲོག་རྐྱེན་སློང	cause/instigate a disturbance	dkrog rkyen slong
དཀྲོག་གཏམ	hearsay, rumor, scandal	dkrog gtam
དཀྲོག་གཏམ་བཟོ་བ	scandalize	dkrog gtam bzo ba
དཀྲོག་པ	{dkrogs pa} {dkrog pa} {dkrogs},, churn, agitate, stir up, scare away, surprise, wake up, shake up, mingle, rouse, wag	dkrog pa
དཀྲོགས	imp. of {dkrog pa}; imp. of {dkrog pa}	dkrogs
དཀྲོགས་སྐྱེས	butter (lit. produced from churning)	dkrogs skyes
དཀྲོགས་མདའ་རྒྱག	shoot a rifle/ shots fired to scare	dkrogs mda' rgyag
དཀྲོགས་པ	pf. of {dkrog pa}; pf. of {dkrog pa}	dkrogs pa
དཀྲོགས་པ་པོ	one who churns	dkrogs pa po
དཀྲོགས་པར་བྱེད་མཁན	one who churns	dkrogs par byed mkhan
དཀྲོགས་མ	churning rod	dkrogs ma
དཀྲོང་སྐྱེད	leap in which the meditator becomes identified with the deity	dkrong skyed
དཀྲོང་བསྐྱེད	instantaneous visualization, momentary vision (of a deity, instantaneous birth, clash (cymbals, ring [arch] bell	dkrong bskyed
དཀྲོངས	1) to kill. 2) murder	dkrongs
དཀྲོལ	loosen, deliver, sounded, play music, SA 'grol ba, SA 'khrol ba, SA 'khrol	dkrol
དཀྲོལ་རྒྱབ་པ	carve	dkrol rgyab pa
དཀྲོལ་བ	1) play music, sound instruments; 2) untie, release, let loose; 3) give permission; 4) appearance	dkrol ba
དཀྲོལ་བ་པོ	one who causes music to sound or be sounded	dkrol ba po
དཀྲོས	engraving, carving, etching	dkros
དཀྲོས་རྒྱག་མཁན	Syn {dkros rgyab pa po}	dkros rgyag mkhan
དཀྲོས་རྒྱག་པ	to carve, to cut; to engrave. 1) to carve. 2) to cut. 3) to engrave	dkros rgyag pa
དཀྲོས་རྒྱག་པ་པོ	engraver, carver	dkros rgyag pa po
དཀྲོས་བྱེད	engrave, carve, etch	dkros byed
དཀྲོས་མ	engraving, wood-cut ornaments (on temple columns), engraved image. 1) engraving. 2) wood-cut ornaments [on temple columns]. 3) engraved image	dkros ma
བཀ་བགྲོས	conference/ consultation, discussion	bka bgros
བཀ་སྒོས	bka sgo! command!	bka sgos
བཀ་དྲིན་ཅན	kind, gracious, benevolent	bka drin can
བཀ་གདམས་གོང་མའི་གསུང་གྲོས	the teachings of the Kadampa masters	bka gdams gong ma'i gsung gros
བཀ་འདྲི	questions	bka 'dri
བཀ་འདྲི་གནང་འདུག	he asked	bka 'dri gnang 'dug
བཀ་འདྲིན	kindness	bka 'drin
བཀ་འབབས་པ	specific transmission	bka 'babs pa
བཀག	blockade, barrier, obstruction, barricade	bkag
ལེཨཐེར	trunk, obstructed, opposed, prohibition, hindrance, obstruction, past of 'gog, stopped, arrest, to be stopped	leather
བཀག་དཀྱིལ	obstruction	bkag dkyil
བཀག་དཀྱིལ་བྱེད་པ	to prevent, to stop, to object	bkag dkyil byed pa
བཀག་སྐོར་མེད་པ	w/o hindrance	bkag skor med pa
བཀག་སྐོར་མེད་པར	without hindrance, without delay	bkag skor med par
བཀག་སྐྱིལ	detention, holding back, halting	bkag skyil
བཀག་སྐྱིལ་བྱེད	detain, hold back, halt, stop	bkag skyil byed
བཀག་བསྐྱིལ	detention, holding back, halting	bkag bskyil
བཀག་བསྐྱིལ་བྱེད	detain, hold back, halt, stop	bkag bskyil byed
བཀག་འཁོར་མེད་པར	Syn {bkag skor med par}	bkag 'khor med par
བཀག་གན	1) limit; 2) prevent/ stop; 2) forbidden [prohibited, halt, obstruct, block]	bkag gan
བཀག་འགོག	1) limit; 2) prevent/ stop; 2) forbidden [prohibited, halt, obstruct, block] jam radio transmission, restrict	bkag 'gog
བཀག་འགོག་བྱེད	1) limit; 2) prevent/ stop; 2) forbid [prohibit, halt, obstruct, block] jam radio transmission, restrict	bkag 'gog byed
བཀག་འགོག་བྱེད་མཁན་དངོས་པོ	obstacle, barrier	bkag 'gog byed mkhan dngos po
བཀག་འགོག་བྱེད་པ	forbid, prohibit, limit, debar, hinder	bkag 'gog byed pa
བཀག་འགོར་མེད་པ	w/o delay/ hindrance	bkag 'gor med pa
བཀག་རྒོལ	[military] interception	bkag rgol
བཀག་རྒོལ་བྱེད	[militarily] intercept	bkag rgol byed
བཀག་རྒྱ	prohibition, restriction, ban, restraining order	bkag rgya
བཀག་རྒྱ་དང་འགལ	breaking a prohibition/ restriction/ ban	bkag rgya dang 'gal
བཀག་རྒྱའི་དངོས་རྫས	contraband goods	bkag rgya'i dngos rdzas
བཀག་རྒྱའི་རང་བཞིན	restricted, prohibited, narrow, tight	bkag rgya'i rang bzhin
བཀག་རྒྱའི་ས་ཁུལ	restricted area	bkag rgya'i sa khul
བཀག་ཆ	1) limit; 2) prevent/ stop; 2) forbidden [prohibited, halt, obstruct, block] jam radio transmission, restrict	bkag cha
བཀག་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	forbid, put a hindrance	bkag cha byed pa
བཀག་ཆད	[punishment for] wrongdoing, transgression, crime	bkag chad
བཀག་ཉར	detention, custody	bkag nyar
བཀག་ཉར་བྱེད	keep in detention, custody, detain	bkag nyar byed
བཀག་ཉར་ཧམ་ཚང	[financial] speculation	bkag nyar ham tshang
བཀག་ཉར་ཧམ་ཚང་རྒྱག	carry on [financial] speculation	bkag nyar ham tshang rgyag
བཀག་འདོམས	1) limit; 2) prevent/ stop; 2) forbidden [prohibited, halt, obstruct, block] jam radio transmission, restrict	bkag 'doms
བཀག་འདོམས་བྱེད་པ	to prohibit, to hinder	bkag 'doms byed pa
བཀག་རྡོ	stumbling/ obstacle/ blocking stone	bkag rdo
བཀག་སྡོམ	1) block, obstruct; 2) prohibit, prevent	bkag sdom
བཀག་སྡོམ་ཉེས་གཅོད	sanction, censure	bkag sdom nyes gcod
བཀག་སྡོམ་གནང་བ	1) to prohibit. 2) forbid. 3) to prevent	bkag sdom gnang ba
བཀག་སྡོམ་བྱེད་པ	forbid	bkag sdom byed pa
བཀག་སྡོམ་བྱེད་ཟིན་པ	barred	bkag sdom byed zin pa
བཀག་སྡོམ་ས་མཚམས	blockade line	bkag sdom sa mtshams
བཀག་བསྡམས་བྱེད་པ	to forbid, ban, prohibit	bkag bsdams byed pa
བཀག་བསྡོམས	blockade	bkag bsdoms
བཀག་ནས	forbidden	bkag nas
བཀག་པ	[learn to] refrain, forbid obstructed negat[ed][ion] refut[ed][ation] [block, inhibit, stop, restrict, obstruct, check, interrupt, prevent, control, hinder, repudiate, restrain, suppress, oppose, t...	bkag pa
བཀག་པ་ལྟར	almost repressing	bkag pa ltar
བཀག་པ་མེད་པ	without being stopped	bkag pa med pa
བཀག་པ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ	refutation	bkag pa sun 'byin pa
བཀག་པས་ཁེགས་པ	refutation	bkag pas khegs pa
བཀག་པས་མི་ཁེགས	cannot be stopped by blocking them off	bkag pas mi khegs
བཀག་བྱ	brake	bkag bya
བཀག་འབྲང	trying to stop [thoughts] or following them	bkag 'brang
བཀག་མི་ཐུབ་པ	irresistible	bkag mi thub pa
བཀག་མེད	without reservation, without being stopped, not arrested	bkag med
བཀག་མེད་ལྷུག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	to speak freely	bkag med lhug par smra ba
བཀག་མོ་ཁེགས་པ	1) to transgress. 2) to trespass	bkag mo khegs pa
བཀག་ཙམ	merely negated	bkag tsam
བཀག་ཙམ་གྱི་མེད་དགག	the negating something as being nonexistent which is a mere negation	bkag tsam gyi med dgag
བཀག་ཙམ་གྱི་མེད་པར་དགག་པ	mere negation	bkag tsam gyi med par dgag pa
བཀག་ཟིན	refute	bkag zin
བཀག་ཟིན་པ	stop	bkag zin pa
བཀག་ལངས	lid or cover of a trunk, SA bkag	bkag langs
བཀག་ཤུལ	negation	bkag shul
བཀག་ཤུལ་དུ	in place of the negation	bkag shul du
བཀགས	(not in DAS)	bkags
བཀགས་པ	forbidden, prohibited	bkags pa
བཀང	fill; full; filled to the brim	bkang
བཀང་འཇུག	reserve stock	bkang 'jug
བཀང་བ	1) pf. of {'gengs pa}. 2) full. 3) filled. 4) fulfilled. 4) satiate; pf. of {'gengs pa}; to fill (up), filled to the brim	bkang ba
བཀང་བ་འདོད་པ	fulfilled wish	bkang ba 'dod pa
བཀད	set in order, placed in order, arrangement	bkad
བཀད་གཉིས་པ	secondly	bkad gnyis pa
བཀད་དང་པོ	firstly	bkad dang po
བཀད་ནས	having described, represented in any manner	bkad nas
བཀད་པ	open hall or shed (erected on festive occasions). pf. of {'gad pa}	bkad pa
བཀད་ས	1) a bake-house. 2) kitchen. 3) cook's shop. 4) open hall. 5) shed; 1) inn. 2) one's own dwelling place. 3)	bkad sa
དྲཝིང	room. 4) kitchen; 1) place where corn. 2) barley etc. are parched. 3) bake-house. 4) kitchen; inn, one's own dwelling place, drawing-room, kitchen	drawing
བཀན	{bkan pa}	bkan
བཀན་པ	{bkan pa, bkan pa, bkan pa, bkan} trans. v. 1) to face upwards; to turn up [anything by applying a stick at its foot or root]; 2) to put, press, apply; 3) to bend backwards. 4) to brace, push, lean...	bkan pa
བཀན་གཟོང་ག་མ	mgar ba'i lag cha tho ba zhig ???	bkan gzong ga ma
བཀན་ཤར	smith's implement, kind of hammer	bkan shar
བཀབ	Syn {bkab pa}	bkab
བཀབ་ཅིང་བཀུར	[arch] guard and protect	bkab cing bkur
བཀབ་པ	covered, sheltered [p 'gebs]	bkab pa
བཀབ་ཤོག	tracing/ copy paper	bkab shog
བཀམ་པ	pincers, nippers. rgyag pa - to hold with pincers, to cut with pincers	bkam pa
བཀམ་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	hold or cut with pincers	bkam pa brgyab pa
བཀའ	the words of the Buddha	bka'
བཀའ་དཀྲོལ	permission, consent, approval	bka' dkrol
བཀའ་དཀྲོལ་གནང	give permission/ consent/ approval	bka' dkrol gnang
བཀའ་བཀོད	1) instruction, advice, directions; 2) proclaim command	bka' bkod
བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང	command headquarters	bka' bkod khang
བཀའ་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིན་རིང་ལུགས	feudalism	bka' bkod rgyud 'dzin ring lugs
བཀའ་བཀོད་གཏོང	1) instruct, advise, direct; 2) proclaim command	bka' bkod gtong
བཀའ་བཀོད་བཏང་མཁན	one who issues a proclamation	bka' bkod btang mkhan
བཀའ་བཀོད་ཐད་ཀའི་འོག	under the direct orders of..	bka' bkod thad ka'i 'og
བཀའ་བཀོད་པ	publish, proclaim, proclamation	bka' bkod pa
བཀའ་བཀོད་པུའུ	command headquarters	bka' bkod pu'u
བཀའ་བཀོད་བྱེད	1) instruct, advise, direct; 2) proclaim command	bka' bkod byed
བཀའ་བཀོད་དབང་སྲོལ	dictatorship	bka' bkod dbang srol
བཀའ་བཀོད་སྲོལ་འཛིན	dictator	bka' bkod srol 'dzin
བཀའ་བཀྱོན	implies blaming, verbal blow, reprimand, rebuke given by a superior	bka' bkyon
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་འཁྱེལ	be scolded/ blamed/ reprimanded/ rebuked/ chastised	bka' bkyon 'khyel
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	with rebuke / scolding	bka' bkyon gyi sgo nas
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་དྲག་པོས་ཚར་བཅད	reprimand severely	bka' bkyon drag pos tshar bcad
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་གནང	scold, blame, reprimand, rebuke, chastise	bka' bkyon gnang
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་པ	rebuked	bka' bkyon pa
བཀའ་བཀྱོན་འཕོག	be scolded/ blamed/ reprimanded/ rebuked/ chastised	bka' bkyon 'phog
བཀའ་བཀྲོལ	1) permission. 2) explanation. 3) elucidation. 4) pardon. 5) leave of absence; a leave of absence; explanation, elucidation, pardon, leave of absence	bka' bkrol
བཀའ་བཀྲོལ་སྤྲོད	give permission/ control	bka' bkrol sprod
བཀའ་བཀླགས་པ	read scriptures	bka' bklags pa
བཀའ་སྐུལ་སྙན་ཞུ	writ petition	bka' skul snyan zhu
བཀའ་སྐོར་མེད་པ	without delay	bka' skor med pa
བཀའ་སྐྱིད་ཚལ	1) garden; 2) park; 3) pleasure grove 89	bka' skyid tshal
བཀའ་སྐྱིབས	covered terrace, small portico before a house	bka' skyibs
བཀའ་སྐྱོང	guardian of precepts, guardians	bka' skyong
བཀའ་སྐྱོན་གནང་བ	scold	bka' skyon gnang ba
བཀའ་བསྐུལ	appeal	bka' bskul
བཀའ་བསྐྱོན	1) scold, reprimand; 2) blame	bka' bskyon
བཀའ་ཁོལ	very important order	bka' khol
བཀའ་ཁྱབ	1) paper of legal ruling; 2) decree, [edict, manifesto, proclamation, general order]	bka' khyab
བཀའ་ཁྱབ་གནང	give/ issue a paper of legal ruling/ decree, edict, manifesto, proclamation, general order [h]	bka' khyab gnang
བཀའ་ཁྱབ་གནང་བ	gave his command	bka' khyab gnang ba
བཀའ་ཁྱབ་སྩལ	give/ issue a paper of legal ruling/ decree, edict, manifesto, proclamation, general order [h]	bka' khyab stsal
བཀའ་ཁྲ་གཏན་ཙིགས	written judgement lastingly resolving a dispute	bka' khra gtan tsigs
བཀའ་ཁྲིད	teaching, instruction[al talk] [h] of khrid]	bka' khrid
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས	1) law; 2) command[ment], edict	bka' khrims
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་གའུ་ལེ	small book outlining the details of the law	bka' khrims kyi ga'u le
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	judge. judge	bka' khrims kyi bdag po
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་གཏོང	try/ prosecute a case	bka' khrims gtong
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ནང་བཞིན	1) lawfully. 2) legally. 3) according to law	bka' khrims nang bzhin
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་པ	lawyer, magistrate	bka' khrims pa
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་བཙན་པ	strict justice	bka' khrims btsan pa
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་བཙན་པོ	strict justice, severe punishment	bka' khrims btsan po
བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ཚོད་ལོན	pay little regard to the nyams lon ??? of the law	bka' khrims tshod lon
བཀའ་ཁྲོལ	be approved/ permitted, consented to	bka' khrol
བཀའ་ཁྲོས	(H conference	bka' khros
བཀའ་འཁུར་དྭངས་བླངས་བྱེད་པ	1) to follow an order. 2) to execute an order in all its details	bka' 'khur dwangs blangs byed pa
བཀའ་འཁུར་དབ༹ངས་བླངས་བྱེད་པ	follow an order	bka' 'khur dvangs blangs byed pa
བཀའ་འཁོར	[h]; 1) retinue; 2) wheel of the word	bka' 'khor
བཀའ་འཁོར་དང་པོ་གཉིས	two first Wheels of Teaching; {bden pa bzhi dang mtshan nyid med pa}	bka' 'khor dang po gnyis
བཀའ་འཁོར་ཕྱི་མ	the last Wheel of Teaching bka' 'khor bran g.yog - servant, servant who transmits orders, accompanying servant bka' 'khor bran g.yog - those who wait for orders, attendants	bka' 'khor phyi ma
བཀའ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཐ་མ	the final set of teachings; third turning of the Wheel of the Dharma	bka' 'khor lo tha ma
བཀའ་འཁོར་ལོ་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	the three successive Dharma Wheels	bka' 'khor lo rim pa gsum
བཀའ་འཁྲིད	discourse	bka' 'khrid
བཀའ་འཁྲོལ	[get] permission, approval, consent [h]	bka' 'khrol
བཀའ་འཁྲོལ་ཐོབ་པ	get approval	bka' 'khrol thob pa
བཀའ་འཁྲོལ་གནང་བ	sanction	bka' 'khrol gnang ba
བཀའ་འཁྲོལ་པ	approve bka' 'khrol lam chog mchan gnang ba approve	bka' 'khrol pa
བཀའ་གྲོལ	obtain authorization	bka' grol
བཀའ་གྲོས	discussion, talk, confer[ence], consult[ation]	bka' gros
བཀའ་གྲོས་གནང་བ	to give advice	bka' gros gnang ba
བཀའ་གྲོས་པ	counselor, adviser	bka' gros pa
བཀའ་གྲོས་བྱས་པ	took counsel with	bka' gros byas pa
བཀའ་གྲོས་བྱེད	makes consultation, gives advice or counsel, gives instructions	bka' gros byed
བཀའ་གྲོས་བྱེད་པ	give advice	bka' gros byed pa
བཀའ་གླེགས	1) book. 2) volume of the scriptures. 3) letter. 4) message. 5) certificate; letter, certificate	bka' glegs
བཀའ་གླེགས་བུ	diploma	bka' glegs bu
བཀའ་གློ་བུར་བ	emergency order	bka' glo bur ba
བཀའ་དགོངས	1) expressed wishes. 2) order. 3) idea. 4) command. 5) judgment. 6) opinion. 7) thought; 1) order, command. 2) judgment, opinion	bka' dgongs
བཀའ་བགོས་པ	ordered, commanded	bka' bgos pa
བཀའ་བགྲོ་བ	debating, considering, taking measures for	bka' bgro ba
བཀའ་བགྲོས་པ	conference	bka' bgros pa
བཀའ་མགྲོན	in the Tibetan govt bka' shag office an aide position, bka' shag la letters [h] brgyud 'bul dang mar bka' bsgyur rgyu ??? and such duties	bka' mgron
བཀའ་འགོ	letter of reply [previously bod kyi bka' shag nas sent official reply 'go mchan to/ from? higher authorities te snyan zhu'i 'gor bkod pa'i letter.]	bka' 'go
བཀའ་འགོ་དམ་དམར	in former Tibetan government Dalai Lama or srid skyong nas sent official reply te snyan zhu'i 'gor bkod pa'i letter w vermillion seal	bka' 'go dam dmar
བཀའ་འགྱངས	a long/ extended time	bka' 'gyangs
བཀའ་འགྱུར	translated word of Buddha (108 volumes), 110 volumes of buddha's teachings in tibetan, instructions and precepts of buddha (108 volumes), translated word	bka' 'gyur
བཀའ་འགྱུར་གནང་བ	to deliver an order; to express an opinion. to deliver judgment	bka' 'gyur gnang ba
བཀའ་འགྱུར་ཕེབས་པ	to receive an order bka' 'gyur ba mgon po bsod nams mchog	bka' 'gyur phebs pa
ལྡན	mgon po bsod nams mchog ldan - bka' 'gyur ba	ldan
བཀའ་འགྱུར་རི་ཉག	{bka' 'gyur ri nyag} pass [in mtso sngon great region w of the lake from Mongolia to Tibet in the ha sag clan's Tibetan region in then cun rdzong]	bka' 'gyur ri nyag
རྡོ་རྗེ	1897-1975 - Kangyur Rinpoche, Longchen Yeshe Dorje bka' 'gyur ro cog gi snying po bsdus pa'i	rdo rje
ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	1212-1273	kyi dbang phyug
བཀའ་འགྱུར་ལྷ་ཁང	Kangyur Temple; Kangyur Lhakang. a temple where a Kangyur is preserved	bka' 'gyur lha khang
བཀའ་འགྲེལ	commentary on the Buddha's Teachings; scriptural commentary	bka' 'grel
བཀའ་འགྲོ	1) intercourse. 2) considering	bka' 'gro
བཀའ་འགྲོལ	1) consent. 2) approval. 3) permission. 4) dismiss. 5) dissolve	bka' 'grol
བཀའ་འགྲོལ་གནང	give consent, approval, permission	bka' 'grol gnang
བཀའ་འགྲོལ་བ	to dismiss, to dissolve (a meeting, a conference). 1) to dismiss. 2) adjourn [a meeting]	bka' 'grol ba
བཀའ་འགྲོས	consultation, instruction	bka' 'gros
བཀའ་འགྲོས་ཆེན་མོ་དྲུག	six ways of performing the command	bka' 'gros chen mo drug
བཀའ་འགྲོས་བྱེད་པ	Syn {bka' gros}	bka' 'gros byed pa
བཀའ་རྒྱ	1) seal of secrecy, commandseal [part of hearing lineage tradition, teachings restricted to certain lineage holders. can concern a text]; 2) secret song; 3) official order; 4) edict, proclamation; ...	bka' rgya
ཅོམམནད	seal teachings. 11) pith instructions	command
བཀའ་རྒྱ་བཅུག་པ	issuing of an official order, accumulation of gold, silver and grain in government treasury	bka' rgya bcug pa
བཀའ་རྒྱ་གཏོང	issue seal of secrecy,	bka' rgya gtong
བཀའ་རྒྱ་གནང་བ	to issue an order	bka' rgya gnang ba
བཀའ་རྒྱ་ཕེབས་པ	to receive an order	bka' rgya phebs pa
བཀའ་རྒྱ་མ	secret song, secret command-seal teachings, public order, permit, missive, communication, secret precept, occult communication, one of the longest and most authoritative treasure prophecy texts, pa...	bka' rgya ma
བཀའ་རྒྱའི	mandatory	bka' rgya'i
བཀའ་རྒྱུད	Kagyu school	bka' rgyud
བཀའ་རྒྱུད་བསྟན་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད	general designation of chief lamas of bka' rgyud pa sect	bka' rgyud bstan pa'i gsal byed
བཀའ་རྒྱུད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	chief lama whom mongol chief gushi khan dethroned in 1643	bka' rgyud rnam rgyal
བཀའ་རྒྱུད་པ་བཞི	the four kagyu schools	bka' rgyud pa bzhi
བཀའ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ	masters of the whispered lineage	bka' rgyud bla ma
བཀའ་སྒོ	1) public order, command; 2) permission, permit; 3) secret instruction; 4) precept	bka' sgo
བཀའ་སྒོ་བ	1) order, command; 2) give permission, permit	bka' sgo ba
བཀའ་སྒོ་བྱེད	1) order, command; 2) give permission, permit	bka' sgo byed
བཀའ་སྒྱུར	admonition, warning	bka' sgyur
བཀའ་སྒྱུར་གཏོང་བ	to admonish, to point out the faults	bka' sgyur gtong ba
བཀའ་སྒྱུར་བཏང་བ	instruct a subordinate in a rough pointed manner, cautioning him against his faults, counsel against wrong practices	bka' sgyur btang ba
བཀའ་སྒྱུར་གནང་བ	issue an order, admonish	bka' sgyur gnang ba
བཀའ་སྒྱུར་བ	1) translate; 2) rebuke, scold, reprimand	bka' sgyur ba
བཀའ་སྒྲུབ	following, carrying out an order, command, doing as told	bka' sgrub
བཀའ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to execute an order	bka' sgrub pa
བཀའ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	1) follow/ carry out an order; 2) do as told	bka' sgrub byed
བཀའ་སྒྲུབས	1) follow/ carry out an order!; 2) do as told!	bka' sgrubs
བཀའ་སྒྲོག་པ	1) to publish an order. 2) to proclaim an order or edict	bka' sgrog pa
བཀའ་སྒྲོག་བྱེད	publish / announce/ proclaim an order or edict	bka' sgrog byed
བཀའ་སྒྲོགས	publish / announce/ proclaim an order or edict!	bka' sgrogs
བཀའ་བརྒྱད	[scriptures on the] Eight Sadhana Teachings; see {grub pa bka' brgyad}; Eight Sadhana Teachings. Syn {sgrub sde chen po brgyad}; eight pronouncements; 1) eight great deities. 2) the eight divinities	bka' brgyad
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Eight Sadhana Teachings	bka' brgyad kyi rgyud
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་སྒྲུབ་ཁོག	Sadhana Framework for the Eight Sacred Teachings bka' brgyad drag po rang byung rang shar - terma revealed by {rgod kyi ldem 'phru can} {gter ston} 1337-1408; terma text in four volumes by {rig 'dz...	bka' brgyad sgrub khog
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་བདེ་གཤེགས་འདུས་པ	{bka' brgyad bde 'dus}, Kabgye Deshek Düpa, Eight Commands, Union of the Sugatas. Terma in 9 or 13 volumes revealed by {nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer}, Nyang Ral Nyima Özer (1124-1192), alias {mnga' bda...	bka' brgyad bde gshegs 'dus pa
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three 8 logoi sadhana terma teachings	bka' brgyad rnam gsum
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་རྫོངས་འཕྲང	a Semdey tantra of Ati Yoga	bka' brgyad rdzongs 'phrang
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་རྫོངས་འཕྲེང	{bka' brgyad rdzongs 'phreng} [Semde tantra of ati]	bka' brgyad rdzongs 'phreng
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་ཡོངས་འདུས	Complete Collection of the Eight Instructions"	bka' brgyad yongs 'dus
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	Kabgye Yongdzog	bka' brgyad yongs rdzogs
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་རང་ཤར	Syn {bka' brgyad drag po rang byung rang shar} Terma revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	bka' brgyad rang shar
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་གསང་བ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	{bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs} [Terma revealed by guru chowang] bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs Terma revealed by Guru Chöwang	bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་གསང་རྫོགས	Syn {bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs}. Terma revealed by Guru Chöwang	bka' brgyad gsang rdzogs
བཀའ་བརྒྱད་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the deities of the Eight Sadhana Teachings, the deities of the Eight Transmitted Precepts	bka' brgyad lha tshogs
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Kagyü lineage	bka' brgyud
བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་པ	those who uphold the instruction lineage	brgyud 'dzin pa
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་གོང་མ	kagyu forefathers	bka' brgyud gong ma
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་གོང་མའི་ལུང	the sayings of the saints of the Kagyü lineage	bka' brgyud gong ma'i lung
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་མགུར་མཚོ	Rain of Wisdom. A collection of songs of the masters of the Kagyü Lineages. Shambhala Publications	bka' brgyud mgur mtsho
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་སྔགས་མཛོད	Kagyü Ngakdzö. On of the Five Treasuries of Jamgön Kongtrül containing the chief Kagyü empowerments	bka' brgyud sngags mdzod
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་ཆུང་བརྒྱད	the eight lesser Kagyü schools	bka' brgyud chung brgyad
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་ཆེ་བཞི	the Four Greater Kagyü Schools, Four Great Kagyü Traditions: The kam tshang or karma bka' brgyud founded by the 1st Karmapa Düsum Khyenpa (1110-1193), the 'ba' rom bka' brgyud founded by Darma Wang...	bka' brgyud che bzhi
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་བསྟན་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད	Syn {bka' brgyud}	bka' brgyud bstan pa'i gsal byed
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་པ	a follower of the Kagyü School. {shangs pa bka' brgyud, dvags po bka' brgyud}	bka' brgyud pa
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཆུང་བ་བརྒྱད	the eight lesser Kagyü schools	bka' brgyud pa'i chung ba brgyad
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་པ	kagyu lineage holder	bka' brgyud 'dzin pa
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	in the writings of the Drukchen Padma Karpo, often refers to Gampopa 92	bka' brgyud rin po che
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཡབ་སྲས	Master and disciples of the Precious School of {bka' brgyud}: {nA ro pa/ mar pa/ mi la ras pa/ sgam po pa} bka' brgyud lugs kyi phyag rgya chen po'i	bka' brgyud rin po che yab sras
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི	the four yogas of mahamudra of the kagyu tradition bka' brgyud lugs kyi phyag rgya chen po'i	rnal 'byor bzhi
བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་གསེར་ཕྲེང	a collection of hagiographies of Kagyü saints	bka' brgyud gser phreng
བཀའ་བསྒོ	1) [will] command, order; 2)	bka' bsgo
པྲོཏེཅཏིཨོན	blessing; 3) prayer for the protection of travelers during the journey; 4) give permission, permit	protection
བཀའ་བསྒོ་བ	1) command, order; 2) protection-blessing [w phurba on one's head, ritual for getting rid of demon, evil	bka' bsgo ba
བཀའ་བསྒོ་བྱས་པ	gave them my spiritual protection	bka' bsgo byas pa
བཀའ་བསྒོས	a sentence passed	bka' bsgos
བཀའ་བསྒོས་པ	give directions, issue commands, coercive bidding of exorcist towards evil spirit	bka' bsgos pa
བཀའ་བསྒྲག	published / announced/ proclaimed an order or edict	bka' bsgrag
བཀའ་བསྒྲུབ	1) will follow/ carry out an order; 2) will do as told	bka' bsgrub
བཀའ་བསྒྲུབས	1) followed/ carried out an order; 2) did as told	bka' bsgrubs
བཀའ་མངག་གནང་བ	advise, tell	bka' mngag gnang ba
བཀའ་མངགས	asking, ordering	bka' mngags
བཀའ་མངགས་པ	send a verbal message, give a reply	bka' mngags pa
བཀའ་གཅོག་པ	act against an order, disregard an express order or command	bka' gcog pa
བཀའ་བཅག	break the command	bka' bcag
བཀའ་བཅག་པ	to disobey, to defy / flout a command	bka' bcag pa
བཀའ་བཅད	1) Proscribed law. 2) decree {bka' bcad}. 3) to break. 4) not fulfill a command, word	bka' bcad
བཀའ་བཅད་གཏོང	make a decision, issue a verdict/ decree	bka' bcad gtong
བཀའ་བཅད་གནང	make a decision, issue a verdict/ decree	bka' bcad gnang
བཀའ་བཅུ	Syn {bka' chen}	bka' bcu
མོནཀ	scholar who has passed preliminary examinations, 2 classes (gleng bsres, gsang phu)	monk
བཀའ་བཅོས	edit, proofread, correct (h	bka' bcos
བཀའ་བཅོས་གནང	edit, proofread, correct (h	bka' bcos gnang
བཀའ་བཅོས་ཞུ	submit for editing, proofreading, correcting (h	bka' bcos zhu
བཀའ་བཅོས་ཞུས་གནང་བ	edit, proofread (h	bka' bcos zhus gnang ba
བཀའ་ཆད	punishment, penalty; punishment	bka' chad
བཀའ་ཆད་གཏོང་བ	to punish	bka' chad gtong ba
བཀའ་ཆེན	one who observes the ten precepts (the highest learned degree given by the philosophical faculty of Tashi Lhunpo). 1) the title or academic degree awarded at Tashi Lhunpo monastery. 2) equivalent t...	bka' chen
བཀའ་ཆེམས	a will, last testament; 1) will. 2) last, final word testament will, h. of {kha chems}. 3) last teaching, advice. See. also {zhal chems}	bka' chems
བཀའ་ཆེམས་བཀའ་ཁོལ་མ	by srong bstan sgam po	bka' chems bka' khol ma
བཀའ་ཆོས	teachings. Syn {chos}	bka' chos
བཀའ་ཆོས་གནང	give teachings/ the word of dharma/ a sermon [h]	bka' chos gnang
བཀའ་ཆོས་གནང་བ	to give teachings (h)	bka' chos gnang ba
བཀའ་ཆོས་སྩོལ་བར་ཞུ	please teach us the Dharma	bka' chos stsol bar zhu
བཀའ་མཆིད	talk, discourse, speech, letter, command in reply, speech of superior person	bka' mchid
བཀའ་མཆིད་པ	1) officer. 2) official discourse; 1) officer. 2) official discourse	bka' mchid pa
བཀའ་ཉན	1) obey, listen; 2) attendant, servant; 3) minister; 4) obedient, dutiful; 5) Dharma protector; 6) 1's yidam	bka' nyan
བཀའ་ཉན་ཅི་བགྱི	service, doing service	bka' nyan ci bgyi
བཀའ་ཉན་པ	obey, listen to [h]	bka' nyan pa
བཀའ་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་མཁན	observer of orders or precepts. Syn {bka' nyan pa}	bka' nyams su len mkhan
བཀའ་ཉེས	punishment	bka' nyes
བཀའ་ཉེས་གཏོང	give [judicial] punishment	bka' nyes gtong
བཀའ་ཉེས་གཏོང་བ	to punish	bka' nyes gtong ba
བཀའ་ཉེས་གནང	give [judicial] punishment	bka' nyes gnang
བཀའ་གཉན	1) strict officer. 2) strict order; 1) strict officer. 2) strict order	bka' gnyan
བཀའ་གཉན་བརྗིད	weighty command or injunction. weighty command or injunction	bka' gnyan brjid
བཀའ་གཉན་པ	very powerful and sensitive	bka' gnyan pa
བཀའ་གཉན་པོ	strict, dictatorial	bka' gnyan po
བཀའ་གཉན་བ	very powerful and sensitive notes {gnyan} means "touchy"]	bka' gnyan ba
བཀའ་གཉན་བཙན་པོ	strict, dictatorial	bka' gnyan btsan po
བཀའ་གཉེན	acolytes	bka' gnyen
བཀའ་སྙིང་བཤད་སྒྲུབ་གླིང	Ka-Nying Shedrub Ling Monastery. Tulku Chökyi Nyima Rinpoche's monastery in Boudhanath, Nepal. The name means 'sanctuary for Kagyü and Nyingma teaching and practice.'	bka' snying bshad sgrub gling
བཀའ་ཏར	telegram [h]	bka' tar
བཀའ་གཏད	Entrustment. Short empowerment ritual, usually for receiving the blessings of the body, speech and mind of the deity	bka' gtad
བཀའ་གཏད་པ	assigned to	bka' gtad pa
བཀའ་གཏན	lease, contract	bka' gtan
བཀའ་གཏེར	kama and terma [scriptures and rediscovered (texts] [R]	bka' gter
བཀའ་གཏེར་དག་སྣང་གསུམ	Kama, Terma, and Pure Vision	bka' gter dag snang gsum
བཀའ་གཏེར་སྤྱི་འགྲོ	for Kahma and Terma in common	bka' gter spyi 'gro
བཀའ་གཏོགས་པ	astrologer	bka' gtogs pa
བཀའ་གཏོང	to summon, order to come	bka' gtong
བཀའ་གཏོང་མཁན	commander, dictator	bka' gtong mkhan
བཀའ་གཏོང་བ	command, enjoin	bka' gtong ba
བཀའ་བཏགས	proclaimed order, one versed in drawing omens, astrologer	bka' btags
བཀའ་རྟགས	[decree/ letter w a] seal	bka' rtags
བཀའ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	Syn {chos kyi sdom bzhi}. the Four Seals that Signify the Teachings, Buddha's Words, or Four Seals Indicative of the Transmitted Precepts: 1) All composite things are impermanent, or All that is co...	bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi
ཨེམཔཏཡ་ཨནད་དེབོ༹ཨིད་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity, or All things are without self {chos thams cad stong zhing bdag med pa}; 4) Nirvana is peace/quiescence {mya ngan las 'das pa zhi ba}	empty and devoid of a self
བཀའ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱས་བསྐོས་པ	established by royal decree	bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa
བཀའ་ལྟར་རྫོགས་ཡོད	it has been carried out according to the order	bka' ltar rdzogs yod
བཀའ་སྟོད	Syn {bka' sdod}	bka' stod
བཀའ་བརྟན	document, credentials [h]	bka' brtan
བཀའ་བརྟན་ལག་ཁྱེར་ཕུལ	present 1's credentials [diplomat] [h]	bka' brtan lag khyer phul
བཀའ་བསྟན	Syn {bka' bcos}; 1) abbr. of {bka' 'gyur dang bstan 'gyur}. 2) Kangyur and Tengyur. 3) the Translated Words of the Buddha and their commentaries and Treatises by Indian pan- ditas. 4) {bka' dang bs...	bka' bstan
བཀའ་བསྟན་བཅོས	the Kangyur and Tengyur	bka' bstan bcos
བཀའ་བསྟན་ལྷ་ཁང	library for the Kangyur and Tangyur	bka' bstan lha khang
བཀའ་བསྟེན་བཅོས	Kangyur & Tengyur	bka' bsten bcos
བཀའ་བསྟོད	one waiting for orders, SA bka' sdod	bka' bstod
བཀའ་ཐ་མ	1) the Final Set of Teachings. 2) the final transmitted precepts. 3) the last. 4) Def: {don dam rnam par nges pa'i chos kyi 'khor lo}	bka' tha ma
ཆོས་འཁོར	the last excellent teachings of the dharma wheel of fully disclosing [the 3rd final turning of the wheel of dharma] bka' tha ma legs pa rnam par phye ba'i	chos 'khor
བཀའ་ཐ་མའི་ཆོས་སྐད	Dharma terminology of the Final Set of Teachings	bka' tha ma'i chos skad
བཀའ་ཐང	1) history, narration; 2) last words of advice; 3) written order, command	bka' thang
བཀའ་ཐང་སྡེ་ལྔ	terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323); contains: {lha 'dre bka'i thang yig, rgyal po bka'i thang yig, btsun mo bka'i thang yig, lo pan bka'i thang yig, blon po bka'i thang yig}	bka' thang sde lnga
བཀའ་ཐང་བསྡུས་པ	brief life of padma sambhava, revealed by o rgyan gling	bka' thang bsdus pa
བཀའ་ཐང་ཡིག་ཀྱི་མུན་སེལ	written by sog	bka' thang yig kyi mun sel
བཟློག་པ་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	b. 1552	bzlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan
བཀའ་ཐང་ཤེལ་བྲག་མ	revealed by gter chen o rgyan gling pa	bka' thang shel brag ma
བཀའ་ཐང་གསེར་ཕྲེང	Golden Garland Chronicles; by Drodül Sangye Lingpa (1340-1396). Also known as Katang Sertreng. 117 chapters, 727 pages with tiny script	bka' thang gser phreng
བཀའ་ཐམ	seal, chief seal	bka' tham
བཀའ་ཐམ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Precious seal [n. of the seal of the Grand Lama]	bka' tham rin po che
བཀའ་ཐོབ	receive orders/ briefing	bka' thob
བཀའ་མཐུན་ཞུ་བ	be loyal	bka' mthun zhu ba
བཀའ་དང་དགོངས་འགྲེལ	Buddha's words and their commentaries	bka' dang dgongs 'grel
བཀའ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས	1) Buddha's words and their commentaries; 2) kangyur and tangyur	bka' dang bstan bcos
བཀའ་དང་མཐུན་པར	following the word of [...]	bka' dang mthun par
བཀའ་དང་པོ	the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma	bka' dang po
བཀའ་དང་པོ་བདེན་བཞིའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	1st turning of the wheel of dharma, of the four truths	bka' dang po bden bzhi'i chos 'khor
བཀའ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ལས་དོན	task in accord w/ connected w an order	bka' dang 'brel ba'i las don
བཀའ་དམ	oath	bka' dam
བཀའ་དུས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	kind of ritualistic observance of rdzogs chen sect	bka' dus chos kyi rgya mtsho
བཀའ་དོག་པོ	restrictive	bka' dog po
བཀའ་དོན	1) essence of the teachings; 2) an order [h]	bka' don
བཀའ་དོན་ཐོད་བཅིངས	summarize the main points [to be observed] of the teachings [bka' la srung rtsi zhus pa]	bka' don thod bcings
བཀའ་དྲག་པོ་ཕབ	hastily or severely, issue an ultimatum	bka' drag po phab
བཀའ་དྲག་པོ་ཕབ་པ	to command sternly	bka' drag po phab pa
བཀའ་དྲི	1) question. 2) inquiry. 3) asking	bka' dri
བཀའ་དྲི་གནང་བ	ask, inquire, question [about] (H	bka' dri gnang ba
བཀའ་དྲི་བ	(h) to ask	bka' dri ba
བཀའ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	flawless teaching	bka' dri ma med pa
བཀའ་དྲི་ཞུ་བ	1) to ask. 2) consult. 3) seek advice	bka' dri zhu ba
བཀའ་དྲིང	Syn {bka' drin}	bka' dring
བཀའ་དྲིན	kindness, grace, boon, graciousness, goodness, benevolence, favor. 2) gratitude	bka' drin
བཀའ་དྲིན་འཁོར་མེད	uninterrupted mercy	bka' drin 'khor med
བཀའ་དྲིན་གྱི་ངོས་ཐུགས་རྗེ	his compassionate bounty	bka' drin gyi ngos thugs rje
བཀའ་དྲིན་གྱི་ཡོན	repay kindness	bka' drin gyi yon
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཅན	merciful	bka' drin can
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ	we are in your debt! we are grateful	bka' drin che
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ་ཞུ་བ	thank	bka' drin che zhu ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ་ཞུས	acknowledge kindness, thanks	bka' drin che zhus
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ་ཞུས་པ	say it is an act of great kindness	bka' drin che zhus pa
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེན་པོ	gratitude, appreciation	bka' drin chen po
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེན་ཞུ་བ	(h) to thank	bka' drin chen zhu ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེའོ	thank you!, how gracious!	bka' drin che'o
བཀའ་དྲིན་འཇལ་བ	- appreciate, repay with gratitude, show appreciation	bka' drin 'jal ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་རྗེས་དྲན	be grateful gratitude, remembering/ commemorating a kindness	bka' drin rjes dran
བཀའ་དྲིན་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	remember a benefit or kindness received	bka' drin rjes su dran pa
བཀའ་དྲིན་སྙིང་བཅང	gratitude	bka' drin snying bcang
བཀའ་དྲིན་སྙིང་བཅངས	gratitude, keeping kindness in mind	bka' drin snying bcangs
བཀའ་དྲིན་སྙིང་དཔྱངས	be grateful gratitude, remembering/ commemorating a kindness	bka' drin snying dpyangs
བཀའ་དྲིན་གཏང་རག་ཏུ	to express his gratitude	bka' drin gtang rag tu
བཀའ་དྲིན་གཏང་རག་ཕུལ་བ	as a gesture of gratitude he offered	bka' drin gtang rag phul ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཐུགས་རྗེ	compassionate kindness, graceful compassion	bka' drin thugs rje
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ་བ་གདའ	It would be most kind and compassionate	bka' drin thugs rje che ba gda'
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཐོབ་པའི་བླ་མ	the teacher whose kindness you have received	bka' drin thob pa'i bla ma
བཀའ་དྲིན་དྲན	remember kindness	bka' drin dran
བཀའ་དྲིན་དྲན་ནོ	I am grateful!	bka' drin dran no
བཀའ་དྲིན་དྲན་གསོ	in memory of	bka' drin dran gso
བཀའ་དྲིན་མི་ཆེ་བ་མ་ཡིན	we are grateful indeed	bka' drin mi che ba ma yin
བཀའ་དྲིན་བརྩེ་བས	by the strength of your kindness and mercy	bka' drin brtse bas
བཀའ་དྲིན་བསྩལ་དུ་གསོལ	please be so kind as to bestow	bka' drin bstsal du gsol
བཀའ་དྲིན་མཚུངས་མེད	incomparable kindness	bka' drin mtshungs med
བཀའ་དྲིན་མཛད་པ	to bestow a favor, to show kindness	bka' drin mdzad pa
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཞུ	ask you to kindly confer, ask	bka' drin zhu
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཟླ་མེད	incomparable kindness	bka' drin zla med
བཀའ་དྲིན་ལ་མི་རྩི་བ	feel no gratitude; x {bla ma'i bka' drin la mi rtsi ba rnams ni chos la brten nas sdig pa'i las bsags te ngan song gi gting rdo byed pa yin} they feel no gratitude toward the teacher. They use Dhar...	bka' drin la mi rtsi ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ	we are extremely grateful!	bka' drin shin tu che
བཀའ་དྲིན་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	felt extremely grateful to bka' drin sangs rgyas las lhag pa'i rtsa ba'i	bka' drin shin tu che ba
བླ་མ	my root teacher whose kindness has been greater than that of the Buddha	bla ma
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསབ	repay a favor/ kindness	bka' drin gsab
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ	the 3-fold kindness:	bka' drin gsum
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ་ལྡན	endowed with the three kindnesses	bka' drin gsum ldan
ཐེ་ཨོནེ་ཝཧོ་གིབེ༹ས་ཐེ་པོཨིནཏིང	out instruction.	the one who gives the pointing
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ་ལྡན་གྱི་བླ་མ	the guru who manifested the three kindnesses	bka' drin gsum ldan gyi bla ma
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ་ལྡན་པ	possessed of the three qualities. {rin pa bslab pa} teaching of Logic. {mdo rgyud bstan pa} explaining of Sutras and tantras. {dbang bskur byin rlabs byed pa} giving initiation	bka' drin gsum ldan pa
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ་ལྡན་བླ་མ	the master possessing the threefold kindness: 1) giving precepts {sdom pa}. reading authorization {lung}. 2) teachings {khrid}. of the sutra tradition. Alternately: {dbang bskur}. 3) conferring emp...	bka' drin gsum ldan bla ma
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསོ་བ	repay a kindness	bka' drin gso ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསོབ	repay a favor/ kindness	bka' drin gsob
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསོལ	repay a favor/ kindness	bka' drin gsol
བཀའ་དྲིན་གསོལ་བ	thank, be grateful for favors	bka' drin gsol ba
བཀའ་དྲིན་བསབ་པ	to return a favor, repay a kindness	bka' drin bsab pa
བཀའ་དྲིན་བསམ	be grateful	bka' drin bsam
བཀའ་དྲིན་བསམ་ཤེས	bka' drin shes shing bsam pa	bka' drin bsam shes
བཀའ་དྲུང	secretary of state	bka' drung
བཀའ་དྲེན་གསོལ་བ	1) repay a kindness; 2) return a favor	bka' dren gsol ba
བཀའ་གདམས	advice, counsel, instruction from a high official	bka' gdams
བཀའ་གདམས་སྐུ་མཆེད་གསུམ	The three spiritual brothers of the Kadampa Tradition. 1) {thu chung pa gzhon nu rgyal mtshan}. 2) {bo to ba rin chen sal}. 3) {spyan snga ba tshul khrims 'bar}	bka' gdams sku mched gsum
བཀའ་གདམས་གོང་མ	early Kadam master	bka' gdams gong ma
བཀའ་གདམས་གླེགས་བམ	the scriptures of Kadampa Father and Son Teachings. {pha chos dang bu chos}	bka' gdams glegs bam
ཕྲེང་བ	by Atisha	phreng ba
བཀའ་གདམས་དགེ་བཤེས	Kadam Geshe [great master of the kadampa tradition of Tibet buddhism]	bka' gdams dge bshes
བཀའ་གདམས་སྒྲོལ་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	The twelve taras of the kadampa tradition [one {gtso bo dmag zor ma} two {ma gcig dpal gyi lha mo} three {ma gcig rdo rje rab brtan ma} 4) {lha mo bdud sol ma} 5) {lha mo phyag bzhi ma} 6) {lha mo ...	bka' gdams sgrol ma bcu gnyis
བཀའ་གདམས་ཆོས་བཞི	the four teachings of the Kadampas	bka' gdams chos bzhi
བཀའ་གདམས་ཉུང་ངུ	the lesser kadampas	bka' gdams nyung ngu
བཀའ་གདམས་རྙིང་མ	the Old kadampa School, from Dromtonpa up to Tsongkhapa [having the {lha chos bdun}: four deities of the Kadampa [shakyamuni, achala (akshobhya), avalokiteshvara, tara {mi gyo ba}, {sgrol ma}, {spy...	bka' gdams rnying ma
བཀའ་གདམས་བསྟན་པ	the Kadampa teachings	bka' gdams bstan pa
བཀའ་གདམས་ཐིག་ལེ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sadhana	bka' gdams thig le bcu drug
བཀའ་གདམས་གདམས་ངག	Kadam oral instructions	bka' gdams gdams ngag
བཀའ་གདམས་པ	Kadampa, the lineage initiated in Tibet by Atisha 9, 332	bka' gdams pa
བེ༹རཡ་ཝེལལ	known bka' gdams pa lineage of masters were both gzhung pa and gdams ngag pa or three with man ngag pa.]	very well
བཀའ་གདམས་པའི་སྐོར	Kadampa cycles	bka' gdams pa'i skor
བཀའ་གདམས་པའི་སྒྲོལ་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 Taras of the Kadampa school	bka' gdams pa'i sgrol ma bcu gnyis
བཀའ་གདམས་པའི་ལྷ་བཞི	four deities of the Kadampa	bka' gdams pa'i lha bzhi
བཀའ་གདམས་པོ	Kadampa	bka' gdams po
བཀའ་གདམས་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	n. of text by Shabkar	bka' gdams sprul pa'i glegs bam
བཀའ་གདམས་ཕ་ཆོས་བུ་ཆོས	the father and son teachings of the kadampa school [jo bo yab sras [father and son] kyi gsung chos [dharma teachings]. the oral instructions known as the bka' gdams glegs bam. father pha: 'brom sto...	bka' gdams pha chos bu chos
བཀའ་གདམས་ཕུགས་ནོར་བཅུ	The 10 innermost jewels of kadampa tradition {gtad pa bzhi} the four entrustments??? n/l + {rdo rje gsum} the three vajra resolutions; 1) {thegs med rdo rje} the resolution to reject objections fro...	bka' gdams phugs nor bcu
བཀའ་གདམས་ཕོ་བྲང	the Kadampa palace [the name of each radreng and the chamber at tashi lhunpo. rwa sgreng dang bkra shis lhun po'i gzim chung re'i ming.]	bka' gdams pho brang
བཀའ་གདམས་བླ་མ་གོང་མ	the Kadampa patriarchs	bka' gdams bla ma gong ma
བཀའ་གདམས་མན་ངག་པ	Kadampas of the instruction lineage	bka' gdams man ngag pa
བཀའ་གདམས་རྩ་གཞུང	1) the Root Texts of the Kadampa School. 2) the main teachings of Atisha	bka' gdams rtsa gzhung
བཀའ་གདམས་གཞུང་དྲུག	six root texts of the Kadampa school {skyes rabs} jataka tales {ched du brjod pa'i tshoms} specific teachings {byang sa} = bodhisattvabhumi (+ {nyan sa} of Asanga, 4) {mdo sde rgyan} = mahayanasutr...	bka' gdams gzhung drug
བཀའ་གདམས་གཞུང་པ་བ	Kadampas of the textual lineage	bka' gdams gzhung pa ba
བཀའ་གདམས་གཞུང་ལུགས་དྲུག	six root texts of the Kadampa School: 1) {skyes rabs}. life stories of Buddha. 2) {ched du brjod pa'i tshoms}. specific teachings. 3) {byang sa}. bodhisattva levels. {nyan sa}.], 4) {mdo sde rgyan}...	bka' gdams gzhung lugs drug
བཀའ་གདམས་གཞུངས་པ་བ	Kadampas of the textual lineage	bka' gdams gzhungs pa ba
བཀའ་གདམས་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་གཅིག	the paramount ornament of the Kadampas	bka' gdams yongs kyi rgyan gcig
བཀའ་གདམས་ལམ་རིམ་པ	Kadampas of the path lineage	bka' gdams lam rim pa
བཀའ་གདམས་ལུགས	the Kadampa system / tradition	bka' gdams lugs
བཀའ་གདམས་གསར་མ	the New Kadampa School, after Tsongkhapa	bka' gdams gsar ma
བཀའ་གདམས་གསུང་བགྲོས་ཐོར་བུ	the Collected Sayings of the Kadampas	bka' gdams gsung bgros thor bu
བཀའ་གདམས་གསུང་འགྲོས་ཐོར་བུ	Miscellaneous Sayings of the Kadampas	bka' gdams gsung 'gros thor bu
བཀའ་གདམས་གསུང་ཐོར་བུ	Miscellaneous Sayings of the Kadampas	bka' gdams gsung thor bu
བཀའ་གདམས་ལྷ་ཆོས་བདུན	the 7 deities and teachings of the Kadampa school [4 deities of the Kadampa [Shakyamuni, achala (akshobhya), avalokiteshvara, tara {mi gyo ba}, {sgrol ma}, {spyan ras gzigs}, {sha kya thub pa} + th...	bka' gdams lha chos bdun
བཀའ་གདམས་ལྷ་བཞི	four deities of the Kadampa [Shakyamuni, Achala (Akshobhya), Avalokiteshvara, Tara {mi gyo ba}, {sgrol ma}, {spyan ras gzigs}, {sha kya thub pa}	bka' gdams lha bzhi
བཀའ་བདག	one who proclaims. one who proclaims	bka' bdag
བཀའ་བདེ་གཤེགས་འདུས་པ	Sacred Embodiment of Sugatas	bka' bde gshegs 'dus pa
བཀའ་བདོད	{bka' sdod}: 1) aide. 2) attendant. 3) servant	bka' bdod
བཀའ་མདའ	minister and general	bka' mda'
བཀའ་མདོ་རྒྱུད	the teachings of sutra and tantra	bka' mdo rgyud
བཀའ་འདུས	a compendium of teachings	bka' 'dus
བཀའ་འདུས་རྒྱས་པའི་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ	extensive practice collection of the Gathering of the transmitted precepts	bka' 'dus rgyas pa'i sgrub sde
བཀའ་འདུས་ཆོས་ཀྱི	rgya mtsho gter ma of o rgyan gling pa	bka' 'dus chos kyi
བཀའ་འདུས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Ocean of Dharmas of the Gathering of the Transmitted Precepts	bka' 'dus chos kyi rgya mtsho
ཉེར་གཅིག	21 mandala clusters of the gathering of the transmitted precepts [glorious Chemchok heruka in the center; Yangdag heruka, vajr vali, vajrap ni, and {rdo-rje rtsal rdzogs} E; vajrakap lam la, Chakra...	nyer gcig
བཀའ་འདུས་ཚོམ་བུ་ཉེར་གཅིག	21 mandala clusters of the gathering of the transmitted precepts	bka' 'dus tshom bu nyer gcig
བཀའ་འདུས་ཞི་ཁྲོ	terma by {bde chen gling pa}	bka' 'dus zhi khro
བཀའ་འདོགས་པ	proclaim	bka' 'dogs pa
བཀའ་འདོམས	effective order	bka' 'doms
བཀའ་འདྲི	question, ask (h	bka' 'dri
བཀའ་འདྲི་གནང་དགོས	if you think that you have any questions	bka' 'dri gnang dgos
བཀའ་འདྲི་གནང་བ	to ask	bka' 'dri gnang ba
བཀའ་འདྲི་མང་པོ	many questions	bka' 'dri mang po
བཀའ་འདྲི་ཞུ་བ	ask a question [h]	bka' 'dri zhu ba
བཀའ་འདྲི་ཞུས་པ	to ask a question	bka' 'dri zhus pa
བཀའ་འདྲིན	kind	bka' 'drin
བཀའ་སྡེ་ཟུར་པ	the canonical lineage of Zur [1 This is the oral lineage that comes down from Zurpoche Shakya Jungne]	bka' sde zur pa
བཀའ་སྡོད	1) attendant, aide, private servant; 2) [dharma protector] waiting for/ who takes orders; 3) keep/ abide in the command	bka' sdod
བཀའ་བསྡུ	1) the compilation of the teachings. 2) A council for compiling the teachings	bka' bsdu
བཀའ་བསྡུ་གཉིས་པ	2) the second council. 2) 110 years after Buddha's nirvana	bka' bsdu gnyis pa
བཀའ་བསྡུ་དང་པོ	1) the first council. 2) the year after Buddha's nirvana	bka' bsdu dang po
བཀའ་བསྡུ་བ	collection of the doctrine, synopsis of the scriptures, convocations where precepts were promulgated	bka' bsdu ba
བཀའ་བསྡུ་བ་གཉིས་པ	2nd council	bka' bsdu ba gnyis pa
བཀའ་བསྡུ་བ་དང་པོ	1st council [at Rajgir]	bka' bsdu ba dang po
བཀའ་བསྡུ་བ་གསུམ	three councils:	bka' bsdu ba gsum
བཀའ་བསྡུ་བ་གསུམ་པ	the Third Council	bka' bsdu ba gsum pa
བཀའ་བསྡུ་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	1) the three councils. 2) compilations of teachings of the Buddha's passing	bka' bsdu rim pa gsum
བཀའ་བསྡུ་གསུམ	1) the three councils. 2) the three meeting of the Buddha's followers to compile his teachings	bka' bsdu gsum
བཀའ་བསྡུ་གསུམ་པ	the third council; more than hundred years after the Buddha's nirvana	bka' bsdu gsum pa
བཀའ་བསྡུར	conference, discussion [h] 98	bka' bsdur
བཀའ་བསྡུར་གནང	confer, discuss [h]	bka' bsdur gnang
བཀའ་བསྡུས	1) synopsis of the scriptures; 2) collection of the doctrine	bka' bsdus
བཀའ་བསྡུས་མཛད་པ	to compile teachings	bka' bsdus mdzad pa
བཀའ་བསྡོམས	authoritative decision/ verdict [h]	bka' bsdoms
བཀའ་བསྡོམས་གནང	issue/ render an authoritative decision/ verdict [h]	bka' bsdoms gnang
བཀའ་ནང་ལྟར	according to order or command	bka' nang ltar
བཀའ་ནན	insistent request; command	bka' nan
བཀའ་ནས་འོངས	come from the Buddha's words / command	bka' nas 'ongs
བཀའ་ནོན	urgent command	bka' non
བཀའ་གནང	1) command, order; 2) grant, permit; 2) say tell [h]	bka' gnang
བཀའ་གནང་བ	1) command, order; 2) grant, permit; 3) say tell [h]	bka' gnang ba
བཀའ་གནང་རང	exactly	bka' gnang rang
བཀའ་གནང་རང་རེད	1) of course. 2) quite so	bka' gnang rang red
བཀའ་གནན་བཙན་པོ	strict, dictatorial	bka' gnan btsan po
བཀའ་གནམ	district in east of kong bu, district of ngari khorsum in western tibet	bka' gnam
བཀའ་པོད་ལྔ	the five volumes/kinds of teachings: 1) (logic {tshad ma}, 2) madhyamika {dbu ma}, 3) Prajnaparamita {phar phyin} 4) abhidharmakosha, {mngon pa mdzod} = abhidharma [philosophy of elements of existe...	bka' pod lnga
བཀའ་དཔྱད	verdict, decision, settlement	bka' dpyad
བཀའ་དཔྲུད་གནང་བ	to pass judgement	bka' dprud gnang ba
བཀའ་སྤྱོད་དག་པའི་ཞིང	Pure Realm of Celestial Enjoyment	bka' spyod dag pa'i zhing
བཀའ་ཕབ	1) authorization. 2) appointment	bka' phab
བཀའ་ཕེབ	receive/ be in receipt of an order/ instruction, authorization	bka' pheb
བཀའ་ཕེབས	great man's order, to have an order or instructions come or arrive	bka' phebs
བཀའ་ཕེབས་བཞིན	according to command	bka' phebs bzhin
བཀའ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	sacred teaching of Mahamudra	bka' phyag rgya chen po
བཀའ་ཕྱག་ཆུ་བོ་གཉིས་འདྲེས	The combined rivers [of tradition] of the kadampa and mahamudra teachings [as contained in the jewel ornament of liberation {sgam po thar rgyan} of Gampopa]	bka' phyag chu bo gnyis 'dres
བཀའ་ཕྲིན	message	bka' phrin
བཀའ་འཕྲིན	message, letter [of command] [h]	bka' 'phrin
བཀའ་འཕྲིན་བཀོད་པ	to write a letter of command	bka' 'phrin bkod pa
བཀའ་བབ	order, instructions, advice, transmission	bka' bab
བཀའ་བབ་བདུན	1) the 7 transmissions: 1) {bka' ma} 2) {sa gter} terma hidden in the earth 3) {dgongs gter} mind terma 4)re-concealed terma {yang gter} 5) sacred outlook {dag snang} 6) recollection {rjes dran} 7)...	bka' bab bdun
བཀའ་བབ་བདུན་ལྡན	possessor of seven transmissions	bka' bab bdun ldan
བཀའ་བབ་བཞི	the four recipients of the teachings [the four major disciples of Marpa (1) {rngog chos sku rdo rje} 2) {mtshur ston dbang gi rdo rje} 3) {mes ston tshon po} 4) {mi la ras pa} the four special tran...	bka' bab bzhi
བཀའ་བབ་ལུང་བསྟན	Prophesied Transmission. One of the six or nine lineages of The Nyingma School	bka' bab lung bstan
བཀའ་བབས	order, instructions, advice, transmission	bka' babs
བཀའ་བབས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེས་བུ	the master who holds the linear transmission	bka' babs kyi skyes bu
བཀའ་བབས་ཀྱི་ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	Four Great Rivers of Transmissions. The rivers of empowerment of yidam, tantric scriptures, spiritual friend, and of the expression of awareness. These four transmissions originate from, respective...	bka' babs kyi chu bo chen po bzhi
བཀའ་བབས་ཆུ་བོ་བདུན	transmission of 7 dreams	bka' babs chu bo bdun
བཀའ་བབས་བདུན	Seven transmissions are: 1) Oral tradition (bka' ma) the early translated Tripitaka and tantras passed on unbrokenly from master to disciple; 2) Earth Treasure (sa gter), revealed by the tertön; 3)...	bka' babs bdun
བཀའ་བབས་པ	authorized; to transmit the teachings, transfer the mandate	bka' babs pa
བཀའ་བབས་བཞི	4 commissioned ones	bka' babs bzhi
ཐྲེཨེ་ལུམིནོསིཏཡ་ཨནད་ནོན	duality from Lavapa four mother tantra, ejection, and bardo from sumati Samantabhadri.]	three luminosity and non
བཀའ་བབས་བཞིའི་གདམས	Four special transmissions	bka' babs bzhi'i gdams
བཀའ་བབས་རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	eight great vidyadhara receivers of the transmissions	bka' babs rig 'dzin chen po brgyad
བཀའ་བབས་ལུང་བསྟན	prophetic mandate; prophetic mandate; Prophetic Authorization; predicted receiving of teachings	bka' babs lung bstan
བཀའ་བབས་ལུང་བསྟན་གྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of prophesied mandate; lineage of prophetically declared spiritual succession; the lineage of prophesied transmission; One of {brgyud pa drug, dgu}	bka' babs lung bstan gyi brgyud pa
བཀའ་བབས་ལུང་བསྟན་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of prophetically declared spiritual succession/ transmission [one of {brgyud pa drug} or {dgu}	bka' babs lung bstan brgyud pa
བཀའ་བམ	order, diploma	bka' bam
བཀའ་བར་མ	the second set of teaching. Def. {mtshan nyid med pa'i chos kyi 'khor lo}; 1) the intermediate set of teachings. 2) the intermediate transmitted precepts	bka' bar ma
བཀའ་བྲིས	letter, written authority	bka' bris
བཀའ་བློ	1) reprimand. 2) advice. 3) an action of the three doors	bka' blo
བཀའ་བློ་བདེ་བ	[arch] 1 delighting in words of advice [actual precept refers to reprimand]; 2) eloquent, speaking well	bka' blo bde ba
བཀའ་བློ་མི་བདེ་བ	1) not liking advice and not letting 1's fault be mentioned; 2) not eloquent	bka' blo mi bde ba
བཀའ་བློ་མི་བདེ་བའི་ལྷག་མ	the additional precept against showing dislike to a reprimand	bka' blo mi bde ba'i lhag ma
བཀའ་བློན	1) [former Tibetan government officer rank = zhabs pad = sa dbang. In 1720 the Ching dynasty emperor khang shis kyis the 7th Dalai Lama to Tibet phebs skyel gyis khri la 'khod skabs khang chen pa s...	bka' blon
བཀའ་བློན་ཁྲི་པ	formerly the 1 who received the duty being the oldest of the ministers ['gan 'khur mkhan.]	bka' blon khri pa
བཀའ་བློན་ཐོན་པ	tibetan minister bron in thon mi family	bka' blon thon pa
བཀའ་བློན་དྲུང་འཁོར	official staff of minister	bka' blon drung 'khor
བཀའ་བློན་སྤུང	Kalimpong	bka' blon spung
བཀའ་བློན་གཞི	four ministers (of an old Tibetan government). four ministers (whom the Emperor Ch'ien-lung appointed to govern Tibet)	bka' blon gzhi
བཀའ་བློན་བཞི	4 ministers whom 4th manchu emperor appointed	bka' blon bzhi
བཀའ་བློན་གཟིམས་ཤག	office of a minister	bka' blon gzims shag
བཀའ་བློན་སྲམ	sable	bka' blon sram
བཀའ་བློན་གསུམ	3 ministers	bka' blon gsum
བཀའ་དབང	minister	bka' dbang
བཀའ་དབངས	nation, people	bka' dbangs
བཀའ་འབངས	follower, subject, disciple; 1) nation. 2) people. 1) nation. 2) people	bka' 'bangs
བཀའ་འབངས་མི་སེར	subjects [of a ruler/ government], people subject to a certain authority, under the same master/ command	bka' 'bangs mi ser
བཀའ་འབབ	descent of Buddha's Words	bka' 'bab
བཀའ་འབབ་པ	going forth of an order or edict	bka' 'bab pa
བཀའ་འབབ་རིང་ལུགས	authoritarianism, autocracy [h]	bka' 'bab ring lugs
བཀའ་འབབ་ལུང་བསྟན	prophecy of the revelation	bka' 'bab lung bstan
བཀའ་འབུམ	the writings of	bka' 'bum
བཀའ་འབེབས	order, command	bka' 'bebs
བཀའ་འབེབས་རིང་ལུགས	authoritarianism, autocracy [h]	bka' 'bebs ring lugs
བཀའ་འབྲེལ	task in accord w/ connected w an order	bka' 'brel
བཀའ་མ	Kama, the words of the buddha [the canonical teachings. non-terma]	bka' ma
སྤིརིཏུཨལ་ཨོར་ཨིནཏེལླེཅཏུཨལ་ཧེཨིར	loom, unbroken succession of scripture, canonical teachings (category of rnying ma tantras), oral transmissions from master to disciple by word, oral tradition	spiritual or intellectual heir
བཀའ་མ་གཏེར་མ་དག་སྣང	Kahma, Terma and Dagnang	bka' ma gter ma dag snang
བཀའ་མ་ན་རག་དོང་སྤྲུགས	the Narak Dongtruk cycle of teachings from the Nyingma Kama	bka' ma na rag dong sprugs
བཀའ་མ་ཕུར་པའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	The History of Kilaya according to Nyingma Kama	bka' ma phur pa'i lo rgyus
བཀའ་མ་ལོག	county in 21th cent Tibet.	bka' ma log
བཀའ་མང	many precepts or commands	bka' mang
བཀའ་མང་ཐིམ་པ	contain many precepts or commands, one on whom there are instructions or commissions to perform	bka' mang thim pa
བཀའ་མན་གནང་བ	(h [officially] answer (letter etc	bka' man gnang ba
བཀའ་མི་འགྱུར་བ	true, infallible words	bka' mi 'gyur ba
བཀའ་མི་ཉན་པ	disobey, not listen to	bka' mi nyan pa
བཀའ་མེད	no way not to, unable to avoid	bka' med
བཀའ་མོལ	1) conversation, discussion [deliberation, consultation, negotiation, conference]	bka' mol
བཀའ་མོལ་གནང	have a conversation/ discussion [* [h]	bka' mol gnang
བཀའ་མོལ་གནང་པ་མཛད་པ	(h) to confer, to negotiate	bka' mol gnang pa mdzad pa
བཀའ་མོལ་ཞུ	have a conversation/ discussion [* [h]	bka' mol zhu
བཀའ་མོལ་ཞུ་བ	1) to ask for advice. 2) request a consultation	bka' mol zhu ba
བཀའ་གཙང་མ	1) unconfused or genuine/ original teachings; 2) pure discipline	bka' gtsang ma
བཀའ་གཙིགས	1 last will, final word; 2) Mna' tshig ??...3 letter of a lama or minister [h]	bka' gtsigs
བཀའ་གཙིགས་གཉིས་པ	in the case of king Trisong Deutsen skabs rje blon tsang 'dzoms sar skyabs gsum witness du bzhag ste sngar yab mes gong rim gyi dus su belief in karma and its fruition byas pa'i srol rgyun bskyang ...	bka' gtsigs gnyis pa
བཀའ་གཙིགས་དང་པོ	in the case of king Trisong Deutsen skabs rje blon tsang 'dzoms sar skyabs gsum witness du bzhag ste sngar yab mes gong rim gyi dus ltar expressed the qualities of the three jewels and, taking them...	bka' gtsigs dang po
བཀའ་བཙན	strict orders	bka' btsan
བཀའ་བཙན་པོ	1) btsan shes [shed = strict?] kyi skad cha; 2) Gang bshad don la gnas pa ??? strict order, command	bka' btsan po
བཀའ་རྩ	ordinance, rule [h]	bka' rtsa
བཀའ་རྩ་ཕྱོགས་འགལ	against/ violations of a country's fundamental laws/ rules/ principles 101	bka' rtsa phyogs 'gal
བཀའ་རྩལ་བ	gave the following teaching	bka' rtsal ba
བཀའ་རྩི	obey, heed	bka' rtsi
བཀའ་རྩོམ	(h draft, compos[ition]	bka' rtsom
བཀའ་རྩོམ་གཅེས་བསྡུས	anthology [of the best and most important parts]	bka' rtsom gces bsdus
བཀའ་རྩོམ་གནང་བ	(H draft, compose	bka' rtsom gnang ba
བཀའ་རྩོམ་ཕྱག་བསྟར་མ	self composed and written letter	bka' rtsom phyag bstar ma
བཀའ་སྩལ	to ask	bka' stsal
བཀའ་སྩལ་དུ་གསོལ	please give [h]	bka' stsal du gsol
བཀའ་སྩལ་པ	(high honorific); pf. of {bka' bstsal ba}. 1) spoke, had thus spoken, said, replied, bestowed a reply. 2) to be so gracious as to tell, to relate, to inform. 3) command	bka' stsal pa
བཀའ་སྩལ་བ	[h] say, speak, proclaim, command [esp B in sutras]	bka' stsal ba
བཀའ་སྩལ་བར་མཛད་དོ	he proclaimed / said	bka' stsal bar mdzad do
བཀའ་སྩོལ	imp. of {bka' stsal}. 1) to say. 2) address. 3) to command [where an honored person is the spokesman]. 4) to beg for precept	bka' stsol
བཀའ་སྩོལ་ཅིག	[h] say! command! Please give teachings!.	bka' stsol cig
བཀའ་སྩོལ་བ	1) to say, address, command [where an honored person is the spokesman], 2) to beg for precept	bka' stsol ba
བཀའ་བརྩལ་པ	pf. of {bka' stsal pa}; spoke	bka' brtsal pa
བཀའ་བརྩི	1) to obey. 2) heed	bka' brtsi
བཀའ་བརྩི་གནང	obey, heed	bka' brtsi gnang
བཀའ་བསྩལ	past of bka' stsol	bka' bstsal
བཀའ་བསྩལ་པ	spoke	bka' bstsal pa
བཀའ་ཚ་པོ	1 bka' tsa nan ??? two as soon as it is given there is unsubsiding heat of the dharma bka' drod.	bka' tsha po
བཀའ་ཚད་མ	authentic exponent/ teaching	bka' tshad ma
བཀའ་ཚབ	substitute/ replacement for a cabinet minister, Deputy Council Minister	bka' tshab
བཀའ་ཚལ་དགོན་པ	1) Katsal Gompa. 2) one of the four {mtha' 'dul gyi gtsug lag khang}. build at the time of Songtsen Gampo at Maldro Gungkar	bka' tshal dgon pa
བཀའ་ཚིགས	bka' gtsigs dang 'dra,	bka' tshigs
བཀའ་ཚོགས	reply in the way of instruction	bka' tshogs
བཀའ་འཛིན	1) letter of authority. 2) commission. 3) warrant. 4) travel permit. [often including authority to requisition transport facilities]; letter of authority	bka' 'dzin
བཀའ་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Sacred Great Perfection bka' rdzogs pa chen po dkon mchog spyi 'dus - Cycle of teachings focused upon Padmasambhava revealed by rig 'dzin 'ja' tshon snying po (1585-1656) bka' rdzogs pa chen po dko...	bka' rdzogs pa chen po
མཆོག་སྤྱི་འདུས	by 'ja' tshon snying	mchog spyi 'dus
ཁྱབ	by {padma gar dbang phrin las 'gro 'dul rtsal} alias {kong sprul blo gros mtha 'yas} (1813-1899)	khyab
བཀའ་ཞལ	command, order	bka' zhal
བཀའ་ཞིབ	(h) 1) inquest. 2) inquire. 3) investigation; inquest, inquire, investigation	bka' zhib
བཀའ་ཞིབ་གནང་བ	to inquire, to investigate	bka' zhib gnang ba
བཀའ་ཞིབ་གནང་མུས་པའི་གནས་ཚུལ	report on an investigation	bka' zhib gnang mus pa'i gnas tshul
བཀའ་ཞིབ་པ	(h) to inquire, to investigate	bka' zhib pa
བཀའ་ཞིབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	high commissioner	bka' zhib pa chen po
བཀའ་ཞུ་དམ་འབེབས	sger dbang gi sa rigs sogs la rang 'dod kyi gtan tsigs yi ge gsar pa dang, sngar yod kyi rgyab snon sogs zhu len byed pa ???	bka' zhu dam 'bebs
བཀའ་གཞིས	estate given to a bka' blon while he is in office	bka' gzhis
བཀའ་བཞི་བརྒྱུད་པ	1) Four Transmitted Precepts. 2) the lineage of. 3) The transmitted precepts of the Great Seal which descended through Vajrapani. 4) Saraha. 5) Lohipa. 6) Dharikapa. 7)	bka' bzhi brgyud pa
ཌིང	gi-pa. 8) Tilopa. 9) the transmitted precepts of the Father Tantras which descended through Guhyapati. {sa bcu dbang phyug blo gros rin chen}. 10) Nagarjuna. 11) Matangipa. 12) Tilopa. 13) the tran...	Ding
གསེར	phreng, p three = {bka' babs bzhi}.]	gser
བཀའ་བཞི་པ	1) a geshe adept in the four teachings of Madhyamika. 2) prajnaparamita. 3) Vinaya and AbhidharmaKosha	bka' bzhi pa
བཀའ་བཞིན	according to his instructions	bka' bzhin
བཀའ་བཞིན་སྒྲུབ	obey/accomplish the command [fulfill the word, practice according to command, do as told]	bka' bzhin sgrub
བཀའ་བཞིན་སྒྲུབ་པ	obeying	bka' bzhin sgrub pa
བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབ་པ	to fulfill your commands	bka' bzhin bsgrub pa
བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབས	obeyed him	bka' bzhin bsgrubs
བསྒྲུབས	I have done everything he told me	bsgrubs
བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབས་པ	{ci gsung bka' bzhin bsgrubs pa} doing whatever he says	bka' bzhin bsgrubs pa
བཀའ་བཞིན་ཉན་པ	1) to be obedient. 2) faithful attendant	bka' bzhin nyan pa
བཀའ་བཞིན་ཉན་པ་བྲན་ཁོལ་ལྟ་བུ	to obey every order, like a servant	bka' bzhin nyan pa bran khol lta bu
བཀའ་བཞིན་བྱེད་པ	1) to act according to order. 2) servant. 1) to act according to order. 2) servant. 3) to be obedient. 3) faithful attendant	bka' bzhin byed pa
བཀའ་བཞིན་མ་བསྒྲུབས	without doing what he says; x {bla ma bstan kyang bla ma'i bka' bzhin ma bsgrubs na sman pa'i bsgo ba mi nyan na sman pas nad par phan 'dogs thabs med pa dang 'dra} following a teacher without doin...	bka' bzhin ma bsgrubs
བཀའ་ཟུར	former council Minister	bka' zur
བཀའ་བཟང	good/ appropriate order	bka' bzang
བཀའ་བཟང་གནང་བ	to give an appropriate order	bka' bzang gnang ba
བཀའ་བཟང་སྤྱི་ཕེབས	graciously advise	bka' bzang spyi phebs
བཀའ་བཟང་སྤྱི་སྨིན	send an answering letter to someone's questions	bka' bzang spyi smin
བཀའ་འོག་ནས་མི་ལྡང་བ	unable to transgress the order	bka' 'og nas mi ldang ba
བཀའ་ཡང་དག་པའི་ཚད་མ	1) the perfect measure of [Buddha's] words. 2) a work on logic by Trisong Deutsen	bka' yang dag pa'i tshad ma
བཀའ་ཡི་འཁོར་ལོ	command circle	bka' yi 'khor lo
བཀའ་ཡི་རྒྱུད	line or thread of the word, oral tradition of buddha's word	bka' yi rgyud
བཀའ་ཡི་ཆད་པ	punishment	bka' yi chad pa
བཀའ་ཡི་ཆད་པ་གཅོད་པར་བྱེད	to inflict punishment	bka' yi chad pa gcod par byed
བཀའ་ཡི་གཉེར་གཏད	keeper of his teachings	bka' yi gnyer gtad
བཀའ་ཡི་ཐང་ཡིག	chronicle	bka' yi thang yig
བཀའ་ཡི་བསྡུ་བ་པོ་མཛད་པ	made a collection of his teachings; functioned as the compiler of the teachings	bka' yi bsdu ba po mdzad pa
བཀའ་ཡི་གནང་བ	permission	bka' yi gnang ba
བཀའ་ཡིག	[official] letter/ document	bka' yig
བཀའ་ཡིས་བསྐུལ	comply with a command	bka' yis bskul
བཀའ་ཡིས་གནང	give permission	bka' yis gnang
བཀའ་ཡིས་གནང་བ	granted, allowed, approved as	bka' yis gnang ba
བཀའ་ཡིས་ཡུལ་ལ་དབང་བསྒྱུར	to take command of a region	bka' yis yul la dbang bsgyur
བཀའ་རབ་འབྱམས་པ	{bka' rab 'byams pa}, scholar learned in all the teachings who has passed the highest examination in a philosophical college at monastery]	bka' rab 'byams pa
བཀའ་རམ་འཛིན་གྲྭ	Karam class [final class before geshe]	bka' ram 'dzin grwa
བཀའ་རམས་པ	one who has passed the highest exam in metaphysics	bka' rams pa
བཀའ་རས་ཆོད་མཁན	one who falsifies the teachings	bka' ras chod mkhan
བཀའ་རུ་འདོད་པ	to accept as being the Buddha's words	bka' ru 'dod pa
བཀའ་ལ་ཉན་པ	obey, subordinate, obey the commands, yield	bka' la nyan pa
བཀའ་ལ་བཏགས	to issue and edict	bka' la btags
བཀའ་ལ་རྩི	obey orders	bka' la rtsi
བཀའ་ལ་རྩི་བ	give heed to or attend to an instruction or precept, listen to any advice	bka' la rtsi ba
བཀའ་ལན	(H; 1) [official written] answer, reply [h]; 2) order	bka' lan
བཀའ་ལན་སྐྱོན	(H(/ give an [official written] answer, reply	bka' lan skyon
བཀའ་ལན་གནང	(H(/ give an [official written] answer, reply	bka' lan gnang
བཀའ་ལས་འགོངས	breach of an order	bka' las 'gongs
བཀའ་ལས་ཉམས་པ	1) to violate a command, the words [of the master]. 2) One of {nyams pa bdun}	bka' las nyams pa
བཀའ་ལས་འདའ་བ	1) transgress the teachings/ command; 2) break orders	bka' las 'da' ba
བཀའ་ལས་འདས་པ	to break orders	bka' las 'das pa
བཀའ་ལས་མི་འདའ	without dispute	bka' las mi 'da'
བཀའ་ལུག	instructions	bka' lug
བཀའ་ལུང	words	bka' lung
བཀའ་ལུང་གི་སྤྱི་ཆིངས	Epitome of Teachings Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen 103	bka' lung gi spyi chings
བཀའ་ལུང་གནང་བ	1) make an official prophecy; 2) issue an injunction	bka' lung gnang ba
བཀའ་ལོག	one who has given up his religious vows, monk turned out of monastery for misconduct	bka' log
བཀའ་ལོག་པ	fallen monk who has given up his vows	bka' log pa
བཀའ་ཤག	Council-house of ministers (in Tibet)	bka' shag
བཀའ་ཤག་འགག	{bka' drung gnyis} and {bka' mgron bzhi} combined 'tshog sa'i office; their duties were tr and sending / receiving letters and papers	bka' shag 'gag
བཀའ་ཤགས	[arch] gdong bsher rgyag pa [dispute, quarrel] bka' shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rgyas 'bring rnam gsum - Three extensive and medium length versions of the Prajnaparamita teachings	bka' shags
བཀའ་ཤོག	1) official authorization [i.e. passport, license, etc.]. 2) official decree. 3) written order. 4) certificate. 5) diploma; (h) letter. any writing authority (from superior)	bka' shog
བཀའ་ཤོག་ནང་ལྟར	according to the orders of government	bka' shog nang ltar
བཀའ་ཤོག་སྤེལ	issue official document passport, license, decree, order, certificate, diploma. communique, notice	bka' shog spel
བཀའ་ཤོག་རྫུན་མ	fabricated authority, spurious writing or deed	bka' shog rdzun ma
བཀའ་ཤོག་རྫུན་ཨ	fabricated authority	bka' shog rdzun a
བཀའ་ཤོག་རིམ་སྐྱེལ	circulate a passport or official order, serial letters sent one after another	bka' shog rim skyel
བཀའ་གཤགས	court of justice	bka' gshags
བཀའ་གཤགས་ལྷན་རྒྱས	chief court of justice or council	bka' gshags lhan rgyas
བཀའ་སངས་རྒྱས	Buddha's teaching	bka' sangs rgyas
བཀའ་སམ	h. samTa	bka' sam
བཀའ་སྲུང	teaching guardians	bka' srung
བཀའ་སྲུང་མཁན	obedient	bka' srung mkhan
བཀའ་སྲུང་སྔགས་སྲུང་མ	Ekajati	bka' srung sngags srung ma
བཀའ་སྲུང་མཆོད་ཐབས	liturgical text for the propitiation of the protective deities	bka' srung mchod thabs
བཀའ་སྲུང་གཏོར་འབུལ	torma offering to the guardians of the teaching	bka' srung gtor 'bul
བཀའ་སྲོག་པ	publish an order, proclaim or read an order or edict	bka' srog pa
བཀའ་སྲོལ	tradition, system of teachings; heritage; 1) tradition. 2) oral tradition. 3) system	bka' srol
བཀའ་སྲོལ་གསུམ	the three [Nyingma] traditions. 1) {ring brgyud bka' ma}. 2) {nye brgyud gter ma}. 3) {zab mo dag snang}	bka' srol gsum
བཀའ་སྲོལ་གསུམ་པའི་བྱང་སེམས	Three Traditions of Bodhisattva Vow: the tradition of Manjushri via Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti, the tradition of Maitreya via Asanga and Vasubandhu, and the tradition of Manjushri via Nagarjuna and...	bka' srol gsum pa'i byang sems
བཀའ་སློབ	advice	bka' slob
བཀའ་སློབ་གནང	give advice/ instruction/ teaching [h]	bka' slob gnang
བཀའ་སློབ་གནང་བ	to advise	bka' slob gnang ba
བཀའ་སློབ་གནང་མཛད	to advise	bka' slob gnang mdzad
བཀའ་སློབ་གནང་རོགས་གནང	1) please advise. 2) please give advice. 3) please instruct	bka' slob gnang rogs gnang
བཀའ་སློབ་ཞུ	ask for advice/ instruction/ teaching [h]	bka' slob zhu
བཀའ་སློབ་ཞུ་བ	ask for advice, consult	bka' slob zhu ba
བཀའ་གསང	secret teaching	bka' gsang
བཀའ་གསལ	official order	bka' gsal
བཀའ་གསལ་ཞུ	give an answer/ reply	bka' gsal zhu
བཀའ་གསུང་ཅི་སྒྲུབ	1) do as commanded; 2) carry out to the letter	bka' gsung ci sgrub
བཀའ་གསུང་དང་ལེན	compliance, acquiescence	bka' gsung dang len
བཀའ་གསུང་དང་ལེན་ཞུ	comply, acquiesce	bka' gsung dang len zhu
བཀའ་གསུམ	three kinds of transmitted precept	bka' gsum
བཀའ་བསལ	(h) 1) answer. 2) reply [sent to clarify a matter]. 3) clarification. 4) official message	bka' bsal
བཀའ་བསླད་མ	a false teaching	bka' bslad ma
བཀའི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	four special qualities of the transmitted precepts	bka'i khyad par bzhi
བཀའི་གླེགས་བུ	diploma	bka'i glegs bu
བཀའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	oral transmission	bka'i brgyud pa
བཀའི་བརྒྱུད་པ་གསུམ	Three transmissions of the teachings. Buddhas' Mind Transmission, Vidyadharas' Sign Transmission and Great Masters' Oral Transmission	bka'i brgyud pa gsum
བཀའི་རྔ་བོ་ཆེ	proclamation by the beat of the drum	bka'i rnga bo che
བཀའི་ཅོད་པན	instruction or precept to be received with perfect obedience. 1) the crown of a command [poetical expression]. 2) instruction or precept to be received with perfect obedience	bka'i cod pan
བཀའི་ཆུ་བབས་བཞི	four rivers of the teachings	bka'i chu babs bzhi
བཀའི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞི	the four streams of teachings; 1) texts with commentaries, 2) instructions with special notes, 3) empowerments with transmissions, 4) ritual performances with mantras of dharma protectors, buddha a...	bka'i chu bo bzhi
བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	chronicles	bka'i thang yig
བཀའི་མདུན་བློན	minister	bka'i mdun blon
བཀའི་རྡ་བོ་ཆེ	proclamation by the beat of the drum, the great drum of the teachings	bka'i rda bo che
བཀའི་སྡུད་པ་པོ་མཛད	compiled the teachings	bka'i sdud pa po mdzad
བཀའི་བསྡུ་བ་མཛད་པ	collect/ summarize the teachings	bka'i bsdu ba mdzad pa
བཀའི་གནང་བ	to give permission	bka'i gnang ba
བཀའི་སྤྲིང་བློན	[arch] great minister	bka'i spring blon
བཀའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་དྲུག	1 bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya sgrom bu [box mudra] dang, two khrom rtags kyi phyag rgya ru mtshon [division standard], three yul rtags kyi phyag rgya sku mkhar [fort, castle], four chos rtags kyi phy...	bka'i phyag rgya drug
བཀའི་ཕྱིང་སང	(CH minister	bka'i phying sang
བཀའི་འཕྲིན་ལས་པ	1) ambassador. 2) minister	bka'i 'phrin las pa
བཀའི་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	Three Successive Transmitted Precepts: 1) Corresponding to the three promulgations are the teachings they contain, respectively the first transmitted precepts {bka' dang po}. 2) the intermediate tr...	bka'i rim pa gsum
བཀའི་ལུས	the body of the teachings [main texts]	bka'i lus
བཀར	according to law, legalize, make it into law, proclaim, publish	bkar
བཀར་སྐྱིན	bkar mdzod nas bton te bskyar du 'jug pa rnams	bkar skyin
བཀར་ཁང	phugs gsog gi 'bru sogs dngos rigs 'jug khang ???	bkar khang
བཀར་རྒྱ	bkar mdzod kyi phyi nang dam rgya,...Bkar rgyar 'jug pa ???	bkar rgya
བཀར་རྒྱ་བ	bkar khang caretaker	bkar rgya ba
བཀར་རྒྱག	prop up	bkar rgyag
བཀར་འཇུག	reserved, selected set aside, store	bkar 'jug
བཀར་འཇུག་རྒྱག	reserve, select, set aside, store	bkar 'jug rgyag
བཀར་འཇུག་པ	person who reserves/ selects and sets aside things	bkar 'jug pa
བཀར་འཇོག	reserved, selected, put aside, store	bkar 'jog
བཀར་འཇོག་རྒྱག	reserve, select, put aside, store	bkar 'jog rgyag
བཀར་འཇོག་པ	to put aside	bkar 'jog pa
བཀར་གཏོགས་པ	proclaimed	bkar gtogs pa
བཀར་བཏག	law, rule	bkar btag
བཀར་བཏགས	proclaimed order, astrologer	bkar btags
བཀར་བཏགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	seals which distinguish the view	bkar btags kyi phyag rgya
བཀར་བཏགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	four seals which distinguish the view	bkar btags kyi phyag rgya bzhi
བཀར་བཏགས་གཏོང	interrogate, question	bkar btags gtong
བཀར་བཏགས་ལྟ་བ	the view that marks the Buddha's words	bkar btags lta ba
བཀར་བཏགས་པ	{khrims 'og tu bcug pa}	bkar btags pa
བཀར་བཏགས་བཞི	the four things signifying the Buddha's Words. Syn {lta ba bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi}	bkar btags bzhi
བཀར་བཏགས་གསུམ	the three things signifying the Dharma	bkar btags gsum
བཀར་བཏོགས་པ	publish, publication	bkar btogs pa
བཀར་པ	1) make into law; 2) proclaim, publish [arch] proclamation	bkar pa
བཀར་བ	separate, put aside, select, banish, ask any question cautiously, make a peevish enquiry	bkar ba
བཀར་འབྲུ	stored grain	bkar 'bru
བཀར་རྩིས	bkar mdzod kyi nang du 'don 'jug byas pa'i rtsis tho	bkar rtsis
བཀར་མཛོད	receptacle for bkar 'jug	bkar mdzod
བཀར་ཡོང	bkar khang bdag gnyer mkhan la bkar rgya ba dang, rgyun gtan gyi yong 'bab len mkhan la yong bzhes pa zhes pa gnyis kyi bsdus ming	bkar yong
བཀལ	/ [p 'gel 'khel]; 1) leaned on; 2) trusted	bkal
བཀལ་ཐགས	kind of stuff made of coarse	bkal thags
གོཨཏ	hair	goat
ཅོཨརསེ་གོཨཏ	hair; 2) spin and weave	coarse goat
བཀལ་ཐབས	kind of stuff made of coarse	bkal thabs
བཀལ་བ	{rgyud thog tu bkal} assimilate	bkal ba
བཀལ་སྲོལ	heritage	bkal srol
བཀལ་སྲོལ་འཛིན	follower of the tradition	bkal srol 'dzin
བཀལ་སྲོས་འཛིན	follower of the tradition	bkal sros 'dzin
བཀས	1) cracked, split; 2) entreaty; 3) by command	bkas
བཀས་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིན	feudal	bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin
བདག་པོ	feudal serf owner/ lord bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin gyi zhing bran lam	bdag po
ལུགས	system of feudal serfdom bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin gyi zhing bran lam	lugs
བཀས་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིན་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	halffeudal	bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin phyed tsam
བཀས་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིན་རིང་ལུགས	feudalism	bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin ring lugs
བཀས་བསྐུལ་བ	encouraged, requested	bkas bskul ba
བཀས་བསྐོ་གཞག་གནང་བ	decree from the earlier to the later stages [gong nas 'og rim la bka' phab ste las kyi sne mor bskos pa] ???	bkas bsko gzhag gnang ba
བཀས་བཅད	decree	bkas bcad
བཀས་བཅད་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three legal orders by king khri ral pa can; 1) hereafter here in Tibet schools other than the Vaibhashikas {gzhi thams cad yod par smra ba} mi 'dzugs pa may not be established or cultivated, and th...	bkas bcad rnam pa gsum
བཀས་བཅད་པ	1 legally decide [in court, by decree or judge] etc. two give an [written] order	bkas bcad pa
བཀས་འཇུག་པ	to split, to cause to crack, to cleave. 1) to split. 2) to cause to crack. 3) to cleave	bkas 'jug pa
བཀས་ནས་གས་པ	crack[ed], split	bkas nas gas pa
བཀས་གནང་བ	1) granted. 2) allowed. 3) abbr. of {bka' yis gnang ba}. 4) granted to be. 5) approved as	bkas gnang ba
བཀས་པ	1) pf. of {'gas pa}. 2) variant pf. of {dgas pa}. 3) broken open. 4) split; alt. of {'gas pa, bkas pa, dgas pa, khos} trans. v.; to split, cleft, crack; pf. of {'gas pa}	bkas pa
བཀས་ཤིང	cleft or chopped wood	bkas shing
བཀུ	(tha dad pa bkus pa, bku ba, bkus,, 1) extract [juice, medicinal essences etc.; 2) apply; 3) wash, cleanse; 4) elixir, quintessence; 5) evil smell; 5) will conceal	bku
བཀུ་མཉེ	massage	bku mnye
བཀུ་ཕྱུང	spirit extracted	bku phyung
བཀུ་བ	elixir, quintessence	bku ba
བཀུ་བ་འབྱིན་པ	extract the spirit of	bku ba 'byin pa
བཀུ་བའི་སྨན་སྦྱོར	medical mixture. to make an extract of a drug by drawing out the juice. Syn {bku ba}	bku ba'i sman sbyor
བཀུ་འབྱི་པ	press juice	bku 'byi pa
བཀུ་འབྱིན་པ	to press juice	bku 'byin pa
བཀུ་ཞིང་མཉེ	to apply massage	bku zhing mnye
བཀུག	/ [p 'gugs]; 1) bend; 2) seize; 3) arrest; 4) summon; 5) draw in 106	bkug
བཀུག་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	inflexible	bkug rgyu med pa
བཀུག་ན་མཉེན་པ	when bending it is pliable, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	bkug na mnyen pa
བཀུག་ནས་བསྒོམ་པ	meditate by withholding [thoughts]	bkug nas bsgom pa
བཀུག་པ	arraigned	bkug pa
བཀུག་ཟིན་པ	bent	bkug zin pa
བཀུག་ཤིང	bent tree	bkug shing
བཀུག་ཤོག	summons	bkug shog
བཀུགས	1) bend; 2) seize; 3) arrest; 3) summon; 4) draw/ focus in	bkugs
བཀུགས་པ	1) bend; 2) seize; 3) arrest; 3) summon; 4) draw/ focus in	bkugs pa
བཀུད་པ	applied to	bkud pa
བཀུམ	kill, destroy	bkum
བཀུམ་པ	kill, destroy	bkum pa
བཀུམས	1) to kill. 2) destroy; killed, murdered/ destroyed. Syn {gkum pa}	bkums
བཀུམས་པ	slain, killed. pf. of {'gums pa}; 1) pf. of {'gums pa}. 2) pf. of {bkum pa}. 3) slain. 4) killed	bkums pa
བཀུར	provide, carry, esteem, honor, SA 'khur ba, discredit	bkur
བཀུར་རྙེད	get respect	bkur rnyed
བཀུར་སྟི	respect, service, homage [syn: bkur ba dang, gus bkur, bsnye bkur, zhabs tog zhabs 'bring, ri mor byed, rim gro. veneration, esteem, honor]	bkur sti
བཀུར་སྟི་མཆོད་པ	to honor, to respect	bkur sti mchod pa
བཀུར་སྟི་དང་བཅས་པ	to be honored	bkur sti dang bcas pa
བཀུར་སྟི་བྱ་བ	Syn {bkur ba}	bkur sti bya ba
བཀུར་སྟི་བྱས་པ	honored	bkur sti byas pa
བཀུར་སྟི་བྱེད	give respect, service, homage	bkur sti byed
བཀུར་སྟི་བྱེད་པ	paying respect	bkur sti byed pa
བཀུར་སྟི་མ་ཞུས་ན	if you do not honor him	bkur sti ma zhus na
བཀུར་སྟི་ཞུ	give respect, service, homage	bkur sti zhu
བཀུར་སྟིར་བྱེད་བ	to regard, show respect	bkur stir byed ba
བཀུར་སྟིས་དྲེགས	1) sense of honor; 2) selfrespect	bkur stis dregs
བཀུར་སྟིས་དམན་པ	humble respect lessen by veneration ??.	bkur stis dman pa
བཀུར་བསྟི	Syn {bkur sti}; respect	bkur bsti
བཀུར་འདེབས	Syn {skur 'debs}; joy, pleasure. 1) joy. 2) pleasure	bkur 'debs
བཀུར་བ	respect	bkur ba
བཀུར་བའི་ལྕི་བ་བཞི	the four objects of heavy respect CHN	bkur ba'i lci ba bzhi
བཀུར་བའི་ལས	ceremony. Syn {bkur ba}	bkur ba'i las
བཀུར་བར་བྱེད་པ	act of respecting, do honor, make reverence, salute	bkur bar byed pa
བཀུར་རྩི	respect	bkur rtsi
བཀུར་ཚིག	eulogy, praise, expressions of honor	bkur tshig
བཀུར་བཟོས	praising, expression of respect	bkur bzos
བཀུར་བཟོས་ཀྱི་བསྔགས	praising, expression of respect	bkur bzos kyi bsngags
བཀུར་འོས	1) worthy of honor, respect. 2) venerable	bkur 'os
བཀུར་འོས་ཀྱི་གནས	respectable, honorable	bkur 'os kyi gnas
བཀུར་འོས་པ	reverend	bkur 'os pa
བཀུར་འོས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	worthy of honor	bkur 'os su gyur pa
བཀུལ་བ	to admonish, exhort	bkul ba
བཀུས	apply! extract! extracted [juice, medicinal essences etc.; 2) applied; 3) washed, cleansed	bkus
བཀུས་ཏེ་བོར་བ	[arch] impurities/ residue drawn off in extraction	bkus te bor ba
བཀུས་པ	make extract of a drug by drawing out the juice	bkus pa
བཀོ་བུ	small basket	bko bu
བཀོག	take away, SA 'gog pa, past of 'gog	bkog
བཀོག་འཐེན	extraction	bkog 'then
བཀོག་པ	extract, SA 'gog pa	bkog pa
བཀོང	1) to subdue. 2) cause to lose courage. 3) to summon. 4) convene. 5) variant fut. of {kong ba}	bkong
བཀོང་པ	inspiring presentation	bkong pa
བཀོང་བ	{bkong ba, bkong ba, bkong ba, bkong} trans. v	bkong ba
བཀོང་ཚོགས	meeting, gathering	bkong tshogs
བཀོང་ཚོགས་ཏོག	at a meeting	bkong tshogs tog
བཀོང་ཚོགས་བྱེད	call/ convene a meeting, gathering	bkong tshogs byed
བཀོང་འཚོགས	convening	bkong 'tshogs
བཀོང་འཚོགས་བྱེད	call/ convene a meeting, gathering	bkong 'tshogs byed
བཀོངས་པ	1) subdued, broke the pride of; 2) caused to lose courage; 3) summoned, convened [p kong ba}	bkongs pa
བཀོད	direct, settle, sit, placed, manifestations, wondrous, display, SA 'god pa, SA 'khod pa, appoint, raise to the throne, design, past of 'god	bkod
བཀོད་ཁྱབ	* direction, instruction, command, order	bkod khyab
བཀོད་ཁྱབ་གཏོང	* issue a direction, instruction, command, order	bkod khyab gtong
བཀོད་ཁྱབ་པ	* director, instructor, commander	bkod khyab pa
བཀོད་ཁྱབ་བྱེད	* issue a direction, instruction, command, order	bkod khyab byed
བཀོད་རྒྱ	written orders / letters/ documents sent out under a certain office	bkod rgya
བཀོད་སྒྲིག	1) arrangement. 2) adjustment	bkod sgrig
བཀོད་སྒྲིག་པ	1) arranger, deployer, organizer, planner; 2) adjuster	bkod sgrig pa
བཀོད་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	1) lay out, arrange, deploy, organize, plan; 2) adjustment	bkod sgrig byed
བཀོད་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་སྟངས	layout, arrangement, deployment	bkod sgrig byed stangs
བཀོད་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	arrange	bkod sgrig byed pa
བཀོད་སྒྲིག་ཡང་དག་འོག	under their perfect organization	bkod sgrig yang dag 'og
བཀོད་མངག	1) [lay out and] arrange[ment] deploy, organization, arrangement, planning; 2) adjustment	bkod mngag
བཀོད་འཆུན	by a presentation of speech soften and subdue/ tame [make bad	bkod 'chun
བཀོད་ཇུས	direction, guidance, planning, arrangement, organization	bkod jus
བཀོད་ཇུས་གཏོང	direct, guide, plan, arrange, organize, supervise	bkod jus gtong
བཀོད་ཇུས་བྱེད	direct, guide, plan, arrange, organize, supervise	bkod jus byed
བཀོད་འཇོག	placement, deployment, arrangement, organization	bkod 'jog
བཀོད་འཇོག་བྱེད	place, deploy, arrange, organize	bkod 'jog byed
བཀོད་གཏོང	1) [lay out and] arrange[ment] deploy, organization, arrangement, planning; 2) adjustment	bkod gtong
བཀོད་གཏོང་མཁན	planner, architect	bkod gtong mkhan
བཀོད་སྟོང་ནམ་ཚ	Kotong namtsha [one of {ma sang dpun dgu} 9 masang brothers]	bkod stong nam tsha
བཀོད་སྟོན	1) arrange[ment] [= bkod pa]; 2) by arranging gather/ instruct/ bring over; 3) command, order	bkod ston
བཀོད་བལྟ	scheme, plot, design, plan	bkod blta
བཀོད་ཐང	1) vocation; 2) destiny; 3) chance	bkod thang
བཀོད་འདོམས	advice [KNT]	bkod 'doms
བཀོད་འདོམས་ཁང	command headquarters, commander's office	bkod 'doms khang
བཀོད་འདོམས་ཆེ་གྲལ	high ranking officers/ administrators	bkod 'doms che gral
བཀོད་འདོམས་པ	commander, administrator, person in charge	bkod 'doms pa
བཀོད་འདོམས་པུའུ	command headquarters, commander's office	bkod 'doms pu'u
བཀོད་འདོམས་བྱེད	command, give orders	bkod 'doms byed
བཀོད་འདོམས་བྱེད་པ	command, direct	bkod 'doms byed pa
བཀོད་འདོམས་ལ་ཉན་འཇོག་བྱེད	obey orders	bkod 'doms la nyan 'jog byed
བཀོད་ལྡན	the eleventh month of the Tibetan calendar	bkod ldan
བཀོད་པ	{'god pa} to establish/ place	bkod pa
བཀོད་པ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala array	bkod pa dkyil 'khor
བཀོད་པ་ལྔ	five levels	bkod pa lnga
བཀོད་པ་གཏོང	instruct, direct, order, command	bkod pa gtong
བཀོད་པ་བཏང་བ	made the design	bkod pa btang ba
བཀོད་པ་ཐིག་ལེ	arrayed bindus	bkod pa thig le
བཀོད་པ་མཐའ་ཡས	Boundless Array, Anantavyuha [name of a bodhisattva]	bkod pa mtha' yas
བཀོད་པ་སྤྲས་པ	Syn {rgyan gyis brgyan par byas pa}	bkod pa spras pa
བཀོད་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ	enlightenment as potentiality	bkod pa byang chub
བཀོད་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	placed bodhicitta 108	bkod pa byang chub sems
རྫོགས་པར་གསལ་བ	visualizing as complete in all its features	rdzogs par gsal ba
བཀོད་པ་མཛད	assume the form of	bkod pa mdzad
བཀོད་པ་མཛེས་པ	1) good arrangement; 2) n of a Buddha	bkod pa mdzes pa
བཀོད་པ་ཡག་པོ	well planned/ arranged	bkod pa yag po
བཀོད་པ་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་པ	pleasing[ly] array[ed]	bkod pa yid du 'ong pa
བཀོད་པ་ལུས	structure of the body	bkod pa lus
བཀོད་པ་བཤད་པ	1) arrange; 2) plan; 3) give instructions (/ [to workers]	bkod pa bshad pa
བཀོད་པ་གསལ	manifested	bkod pa gsal
བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱན	the scenic adornments	bkod pa'i rgyan
བཀོད་པའི་ཆུ	reservoir	bkod pa'i chu
བཀོད་པའི་གཙུག་ཏོར	{bkod pa'i gtsug tor}. a wrathful deity	bkod pa'i gtsug tor
བཀོད་པའི་གཙུག་གཏོར	prince of learning, science	bkod pa'i gtsug gtor
བཀོད་པར	establish	bkod par
བཀོད་པར་སྣང་བ	to manifest in full array	bkod par snang ba
བཀོད་པར་ཛེས་པ	beautiful as to arrangement, nicely ordered	bkod par dzes pa
བཀོད་བ	1) Adornment; 2) physical description; 3) arrangement	bkod ba
བཀོད་བྱུས	rulker's/ director's [bkod pa dang byus] direction, guidance, planning, arrangement, organization, strategy	bkod byus
བཀོད་བྱུས་མཁས་པ	capable planning/ direction/ strategy	bkod byus mkhas pa
བཀོད་འབྲེལ	gong rim gyi ngag bkod dang 'brel ba ???	bkod 'brel
བཀོད་མ	1) class of demigods, celestial singers and musicians; 2) spring, fountain; 3) dash; 4) flow, stream forth	bkod ma
བཀོད་མ་འདྲ་བ	fountain-like	bkod ma 'dra ba
བཀོད་མའི་ཆུ	fountain, hot spring	bkod ma'i chu
བཀོད་མའི་ཆུ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	fountain-like arousal of bodhicitta [one of the 22 kinds of arousing bodhicitta {sems bskyed nyer gnyis}, abiding in 3fold purity, arousal of bodhicitta w retention and ready speech, by inex-	bkod ma'i chu lta bu'i sems bskyed
བཀོད་ཚུལ	arrangement	bkod tshul
བཀོད་ཚོད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	stated reason (predicate)	bkod tshod kyi rtags
བཀོད་ཡག	according to the written	bkod yag
བཀོད་རིས	sketch	bkod ris
བཀོད་རིས་བྲི་བ	sketch	bkod ris bri ba
བཀོད་ལུགས	[method of] order/ arranging/ planning/ directing	bkod lugs
བཀོད་ལེགས	1) well arranged. 2) neat. 3) elegant	bkod legs
བཀོད་ལེགས་པ	well-formed, beautiful	bkod legs pa
བཀོད་ལེགས་སྤྲས	well-structured and adorned	bkod legs spras
བཀོད་གསལ	according to what is said/ written	bkod gsal
བཀོན	to wear	bkon
བཀོན་པ	furious, fierce, frightful. 1) fut. of {'khon pa}. 2) furious. 3) fierce. 4) frightful. 5) to dress	bkon pa
བཀོན་བུ	small basket	bkon bu
བཀོན་ཨ	to dress	bkon a
བཀོབ་ལྟ	plan of an undertaking, design, plot	bkob lta
བཀོར་མགོ	preparations	bkor mgo
བཀོར་མགོ་བྱེད	make preparations, prepare	bkor mgo byed
བཀོར་ཏེ་འདུག	held, surrounding, embraced	bkor te 'dug
བཀོར་འདྲེ	spirit attached to monastic funds	bkor 'dre
བཀོལ	make a person a slave, SA 'khol ba	bkol
བཀོལ་གཅོད	1) slavery, exploitation; 2) utilization, putting to work; 3) torture w hot water; 4) servitude, forced labor	bkol gcod
བཀོལ་སྙིགས	waste material, cast off things	bkol snyigs
བཀོལ་བཏུབ	duty, necessity	bkol btub
བཀོལ་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	unusable, unemployable	bkol du mi rung ba
བཀོལ་བདེ	easily employed, user-friendly	bkol bde
བཀོལ་མདོ	text by dharmabodhi who was an Indian master of the anuyoga lineage, The Extracts	bkol mdo
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད	abused; mistreatment; mishandle; slavery	bkol spyod
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་གཏོང	1) urge/ put to work [people, animals]; 2) enslave, exploit, force to labor; 3) torture w a hot water; 4) utilize, use	bkol spyod gtong
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	1) urge/ put to work [people, animals]; 2) enslave, exploit, force to labo; 3) torture w a hot water; 4) utilize, use	bkol spyod byed
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་ལག་རྩལ	skill in working/ operating	bkol spyod lag rtsal
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་ལུགས་སྲོལ	regulations for working/ operating	bkol spyod lugs srol
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་གསོད་པ	bondage and slaughter	bkol spyod gsod pa
བཀོལ་བ	A. {bkol ba, bkol ba, khol}. trans. v. B. pf. and fut. of {'khol ba}. to boil. 1) to set aside, separate. 2) to employ, hire, take into one's service, enslave. 3) to boil. 4) to use, employ	bkol ba
བཀོལ་བར་ཤིན་ཏུ་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	completely workable when employed	bkol bar shin tu las su rung ba
བཀོལ་བྱང	sadhana text, concise manual; practice manual; a daily practice	bkol byang
བཀོལ་མག	husband of the daughter having come to live with the wife's parents 109	bkol mag
བཀོལ་ཟོག	working animals	bkol zog
བཀྱག་པ	1) fut. of {'gyog pa}. 2) to lift up 3) move. 4) raise to weigh; ft. of {'gyog pa}; to lift, raise, to weigh	bkyag pa
བཀྱགས་པ	lifted, carried, moved raised to weigh [p 'gyog pa]	bkyags pa
བཀྱལ་བ	to talk nonsense. 1) gossip. 2) pointless, wanton talk. 3) to talk nonsense	bkyal ba
བཀྱལ་བའི་ངག	1) idle talk. 2) incoherent talk; incoherent talk. Syn {bkyal ba}	bkyal ba'i ngag
བཀྱི་བ	bkyil ba	bkyi ba
བཀྱིག	tie, bind	bkyig
བཀྱིག་ཐག	binding rope	bkyig thag
བཀྱིག་པ	tie by rope, SA 'khyig pa	bkyig pa
བཀྱིགས	bind, SA 'khyig pa, bound, tied, fastened	bkyigs
བཞག	tied her up and hid her in a closet	bzhag
བཀྱིགས་པ	tied up. pf. of {'khyig pa}	bkyigs pa
བཀྱིལ	idle talk	bkyil
བཀྱིལ་བ	[arch] not give oral instructions [mi sbyin pa]	bkyil ba
བཀྱིས་པ	not give oral instructions	bkyis pa
བཀྱེ	will send out, emit, radiate [f {'gyed pa}	bkye
བཀྱེ་བ	1) ft. of {'gyed pa}. Syn {'phro ba}, to emanate, dispatch, send out, send forth, emit, radiate. Ex. {sprul pa bkye ba} to emanate [infinite] forms. 2) delegate, put to [work]	bkye ba
བཀྱེ་ལམ	[arch] path/ road for messengers	bkye lam
བཀྱེད	grow larger, expand	bkyed
བཀྱེད་པ	bend back, recline	bkyed pa
བཀྱེས	p. of {'gyed}	bkyes
བཀྱེས་པ	sent [out], emitted, radiated [p 'gyed pa]	bkyes pa
བཀྱོ་པ	(tha dad pa beat scold [h]Bka' bkyo pa]	bkyo pa
བཀྱོ་འབེབས	scold, reprimand	bkyo 'bebs
བཀྱོན	1) put, build; 2) shoot; 3) scold, reprimand; 4) hit punishment (/ [h] rgyag, rgyab, hit]	bkyon
བཀྱོན་བཀྱལ་བ	chiding	bkyon bkyal ba
བཀྱོན་དྲི	questions, interrogations	bkyon dri
བཀྱོན་འདྲི་བྱེད	question, interrogate	bkyon 'dri byed
བཀྱོན་པ	to scold. predicative morpheme forming compound verbs used in "motile language". {bkyon pa, bkyon pa, bkyon pa, bkyon} trans. v.; 1) to beat. 2) to scold	bkyon pa
བཀྱོན་དབབ	to correct	bkyon dbab
བཀྱོན་འབེབས	to be chastised, punished	bkyon 'bebs
བཀྲ	1) beautiful; 2) bright, radiant, splendid; 3) variegated; 4) chameleon	bkra
བཀྲ་ཆེན	great painting	bkra chen
བཀྲ་རྟགས	rnam par bkra ba'i rtags mtshan,	bkra rtags
བཀྲ་རྟགས་ལོད་པ	bad sign or omen	bkra rtags lod pa
བཀྲ་སྡེ	Tradeh, in Tsang	bkra sde
བཀྲ་བ	arrayed/ variegated	bkra ba
བཀྲ་བ་ཉིད	1) resplendence. 2) elegance	bkra ba nyid
བཀྲ་བ་འཛིན	perception enriched by rnam rtog	bkra ba 'dzin
བཀྲ་བའི་སྐད་འབྱིན	bird called darghongata	bkra ba'i skad 'byin
བཀྲ་བའི་འདབ་ལྡན	creeper	bkra ba'i 'dab ldan
བཀྲ་བའི་འོག་བག་ཅན	(beautifully ornamented peacock	bkra ba'i 'og bag can
བཀྲ་བའི་འོད་དཔག	illuminated halo	bkra ba'i 'od dpag
བཀྲ་བའི་འོད་དཔག་ཅན	radiant zone	bkra ba'i 'od dpag can
བཀྲ་བའི་རི་མོ	paintings	bkra ba'i ri mo
བཀྲ་བའི་རི་མོ་ཅན	with variegated figures	bkra ba'i ri mo can
བཀྲ་བར་དམིགས་པ	1) to understand. 2) to grasp the general idea	bkra bar dmigs pa
བཀྲ་བར་འཛིན་པ	painter	bkra bar 'dzin pa
བཀྲ་བར་འཛོ་པ	painter	bkra bar 'dzo pa
བཀྲ་བྱེད	painter	bkra byed
བཀྲ་མ་ཤིས་པ	inauspicious	bkra ma shis pa
བཀྲ་མི་ཤིས	1) inauspicious, unlucky; 2) wretched, unfortunate; 3) bad luck, misfortune, calamity; 4) bad sign	bkra mi shis
བཀྲ་མི་ཤིས་པ	calamity, wretched, unlucky	bkra mi shis pa
བཀྲ་མི་ཤིས་པའི་གཏམ	bad news	bkra mi shis pa'i gtam
བཀྲ་མི་ཤིས་པའི་རྟགས་ངན་པ	bad sign or omen. Syn {bkra mi shis pa}	bkra mi shis pa'i rtags ngan pa
བཀྲ་མི་ཤེས་པ	unfortunate, unlucky	bkra mi shes pa
བཀྲ་ཝལ་ཝལ	1) [know] very clearly; 2) clear[ly] and vivid[ly] [awake] (/ [meaning, light rays.] 110	bkra wal wal
བཀྲ་ཝལ་ལེ	1) [know] very clearly; 2) clear[ly] and vivid[ly] [awake]	bkra wal le
བཀྲ་ཞིང་དམར	parti-colored	bkra zhing dmar
བཀྲ་ཡར	variegated, with shades of color	bkra yar
བཀྲ་ལ་ཤིས་པ	auspicious[ness] [verses]	bkra la shis pa
བཀྲ་ལམ་གྱིས	Syn {bkra lam me}	bkra lam gyis
བཀྲ་ལམ་གྱིས་འཆར	appear vividly, vividly experienced	bkra lam gyis 'char
བཀྲ་ལམ་མེ	1) vividness. 2) vividly clear. 2) crisp and clear. 3) glaring; vividly clear; iridescent	bkra lam me
བཀྲ་ལམ་མེ་བ	vivid(ness)	bkra lam me ba
བཀྲ་ལམ་མེར	vividly	bkra lam mer
བཀྲ་ལམ་ལམ་པ	vividly bright	bkra lam lam pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས	1) auspiciousness, good luck, good fortune, goodness, prosperity, happiness. 2) auspicious, favorable, fortunate, successful, felicitous, lucky. 3) verse of auspiciousness; benediction, blessing. 4...	bkra shis
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་གླིང	Tashi Künkyab Ling	bkra shis kun khyab gling
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་ཆུ	holy water, consecrated water	bkra shis kyi chu
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་མལ	auspicious bed, nuptial bed	bkra shis kyi mal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་ཚིག	benediction	bkra shis kyi tshig
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	verse of auspiciousness	bkra shis kyi tshigs su bcad pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	auspicious fasting	bkra shis kyi gso sbyong
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	the eight auspicious goddesses. 1) {dus ldan ma}. 2) {pad ma can}. 3) {'jigs bral ma}. 4) {'od ldan ma}. 5){mdangs ldan ma}. 6) {dri med ma}). 7) {rgyal ba'i gdung ma}. 8) {yid bzang ma}	bkra shis kyi lha mo brgyad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁ་བཏགས	ceremonial scarf	bkra shis kha btags
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁྱི་འདྲེན	Tashi Kyedren, one of the five main spiritual consorts of Guru Padmasambhava	bkra shis khyi 'dren
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁྲ་རིང	striped long scarf	bkra shis khra ring
བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ	Tashi Kyil	bkra shis 'khyil
བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ	retreat center, founded by Kalden Gyatso	bkra shis 'khyil sgrub sde
བཀྲ་ཤིས་གོ་ཆ	amulet, implement of good luck	bkra shis go cha
བཀྲ་ཤིས་གྲལ་གང	complete line of disciple	bkra shis gral gang
བཀྲ་ཤིས་གླིང	place in si khron province rnga ba in S T. ruled by li zhan rdzong	bkra shis gling
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགའ་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ	great auspicious festival	bkra shis dga' ston chen po
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགུ་ཙིགས	1 med. herb curing broken bones of the head, dries up chu ser, cures klad skyo; 2) sound like a rgya gling	bkra shis dgu tsigs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགུ་རྩེག	lamium amplexicaule l.	bkra shis dgu rtseg
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགུ་བརྩེགས	nine good signs	bkra shis dgu brtsegs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགེ་འཕེལ	Tashi Gephel, in Domey	bkra shis dge 'phel
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{shar rdza} 18591934	bkra shis rgyal mtshan
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒང	Tashigang, in Latö	bkra shis sgang
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒང་བ	people from Tashigang	bkra shis sgang ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒར	rdzogs chen 'dus sde under chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu near cordova argentina	bkra shis sgar
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒོ་མང	1) Tashi Gomang Stupa; 2) in {'bras spungs} monastery {sgo mang grwa tsang} monastic college; 3) in Bla brang, bkra shis 'khyil monetary	bkra shis sgo mang
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒོ་མང་མཆོད་རྟེན	Many Doors of Auspiciousness, in Tsari	bkra shis sgo mang mchod rten
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒོར་མོ	auspicious circle [one special kind of auspicious seating arrangement; 2) Rten 'brel gyi ru sgrig khyad par ba zhig; 3) Bkras sgor in previous Tibetan government {rten 'brel mdzad sgo} (ceremony fo...	bkra shis sgor mo
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒྲོན་མའི་རྒྱུད	Auspicious Lamp Tantra. One of The Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	bkra shis sgron ma'i rgyud
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྒྱད་པ	the Sutra of the Eightfold auspiciousness	bkra shis brgyad pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྒྱད་པའི་མདོ	a short sutra with names of 8 buddhas	bkra shis brgyad pa'i mdo
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མངའ་གསོལ	congratulate	bkra shis mnga' gsol
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མངའ་གསོལ་བ	wish auspicious success	bkra shis mnga' gsol ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཅན	an incense	bkra shis can
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཆོས་རྫོང	summer seat of government of bhutan	bkra shis chos rdzong
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཆོག	the Auspicious Forest, one of {dur khrod chen po brgyad}	bkra shis mchog
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཆོག་གམ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚལ	supremely auspicious Auspicious grove charnel ground	bkra shis mchog gam bkra shis tshal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྗོད	benediction	bkra shis brjod
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྗོད་པ	benediction. to utter the verses of auspiciousness, recite/ express auspicious wishes, made prayers of auspiciousness	bkra shis brjod pa
བྱ་བ	shis brjod - shis pa brjod pa pronouncement of auspiciousness	bya ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཉི་མ	suns of fortune	bkra shis nyi ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྟགས	possessed of auspicious marks	bkra shis rtags
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	the eight auspicious signs. symbols. 1) {gdugs mchog}. umbrella. 2) {gser nya}. a paired golden fish, 3) {bum pa}. a treasure vase. 4) {pad ma}. lotus, 5) {dung dkar g.yas 'khyil}. a white conch sh...	bkra shis rtags brgyad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྟགས་ཅན	possessed of auspicious marks	bkra shis rtags can
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྟོབས་རྒྱལ	alias {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal}	bkra shis stobs rgyal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཐེམ་པ་ཡར་འཛེགས	auspicious stairs [from below to above w four steps.]	bkra shis them pa yar 'dzegs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དར་རས	auspicious scarf	bkra shis dar ras
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དུང	SA dung dkar g.yas 'khyil,	bkra shis dung
ཅོནཆ	shell with its whorls turning to the right instead of to the left	conch
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས	1) good luck, auspicious goodness; 2) congratulations; 3) hello	bkra shis bde legs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས་ཕུན་སུ་ཚོགས	a New year's greeting [lit. "May you have abundant prosperity and happiness!'] bkra shis bde legs phun sum tshogs (New year's greeting "may you have	bkra shis bde legs phun su tshogs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས་སྩོལ་བ	to bestow prosperity and auspiciousness	bkra shis bde legs stsol ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས་ཞུ	1) wish good luck, auspicious goodness, congratulate, say hello	bkra shis bde legs zhu
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས་ཞུ་རྒྱུ་ཡིན	congratulations!	bkra shis bde legs zhu rgyu yin
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྡན	auspicious, lucky	bkra shis ldan
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པ	1) auspicious [important action]; 2) may it be auspicious [lucky, fortunate, propitious, blessed.]	bkra shis pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པ་ཡང་དག་པ	good fortune	bkra shis pa yang dag pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་དགེ	some special good quality	bkra shis pa'i dge
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་དགེ་མཚན	propitious signs	bkra shis pa'i dge mtshan
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་རྟགས	lucky configurations or semblances, happy omens, auspicious sign or mark	bkra shis pa'i rtags
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	Syn {bkra shis rtags brgyad}	bkra shis pa'i rtags brgyad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་ལྟས	propitious omen, good omens, lucky signs	bkra shis pa'i ltas
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་དོན	auspicious syllable	bkra shis pa'i don
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་བྱ་བ	like the ones in lhasangs, but I don't know if it actually is one]	bkra shis pa'i bya ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་བྱ་ཚོགས	auspicious birds	bkra shis pa'i bya tshogs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་ཚིགས་བཅད	auspicious song	bkra shis pa'i tshigs bcad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་རྫས	lucky articles	bkra shis pa'i rdzas
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་རྫས་བརྒྱད	Syn {bkra shis rdzas brgyad}	bkra shis pa'i rdzas brgyad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་ཡི་གེ	kind of auspicious writing	bkra shis pa'i yi ge
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་ལས་དོན	happy affair/ wedding, joyous occasion	bkra shis pa'i las don
བཀྲ་ཤིས་པར་གྱུར་ཅིག	may you enjoy prosperity	bkra shis par gyur cig
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ	auspicious glory and brilliance	bkra shis dpal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་གྱི་མཐོང་རི	Mount Everest	bkra shis dpal gyi mthong ri
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་འབར	blazing glory of goodness	bkra shis dpal 'bar
བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	Tashi Paljor, one of Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche's names	bkra shis dpal 'byor
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྤེལ་བ	to increase one's welfare	bkra shis spel ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྤྱི་འདྲེན	Tashi Chidren, the	bkra shis spyi 'dren
ཨཱཅཏིབི༹ཏིཨེས	emanation of Vajra Varahi	Activities
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཕུན་ཚོགས	auspicious happiness and prosperity	bkra shis phun tshogs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བ	fortunate being	bkra shis ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བྱ་བ	bkra shis brjod pa - shis	bkra shis bya ba
བརྗོད	shis pa brjod pa - Pronouncement of auspiciousness	brjod
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བྱས་པ	made wishes for auspiciousness	bkra shis byas pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བྱེད་མ	a goddess	bkra shis byed ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བླ་མ	European name of panchen lama, lama priest who officiates at marriage ceremony in sikkim	bkra shis bla ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་འབྱུང་བའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	bde gshegs stupa [name or kind???]	bkra shis 'byung ba'i mchod rten
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མ	a deity; n. of a goddess	bkra shis ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཙེ་རིང་མ	Tashi Tseringma [one of five goddesses the {jo mo glang ma ri'i lha mo [OR zo mo] tse ring mched lnga}	bkra shis tse ring ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྩེ	village in stod lung district	bkra shis rtse
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྩེགས	brother of king skyid lde nyi ma'i mgon 112	bkra shis brtsegs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྩེགས་པ	Tashi Tsekpa, Heap of Goodness; from the Collection of Dharanis {gzungs 'dus}	bkra shis brtsegs pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་བརྩེགས་པའི་མདོ	a work the reading of which produced auspicious occurrences	bkra shis brtsegs pa'i mdo
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚལ	laksmivana, 1 of 8 charnel grounds, 1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	bkra shis tshal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	verse of auspiciousness	bkra shis tshigs su bcad pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང་མཆེད་ལྔ	syn {jo mo tshe ring mched lnga} 'The five sisters of Long Life', they are: Tashi Tseringma {bkra shis tshe ring ma}, Tingi Shalzangma {mthing gi zhal bzang ma}, Miyo Losangma {mi g.yo blo bzang ma...	bkra shis tshe ring mched lnga
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང་མ	Tashi Tseringma. A female Dharma protector of Tibet	bkra shis tshe ring ma
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཛེས་ལྡ་ཆེ་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Great Auspicious Beauty	bkra shis mdzes lda che po'i rgyud
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཛེས་ལྡན	the beauteous good auspices	bkra shis mdzes ldan
བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཛེས་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Graceful Auspiciousness. This scripture teaches how to establish the nature of awareness, and how to identify the basis of confusion and the unmistaken wisdom bkra shis mdzes ldan chen po...	bkra shis mdzes ldan gyi rgyud
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས	auspicious objects (received by participants of a rite). eight lucky articles. {me long/ gi wang/ zho/ rtsa/ dur ba/ shing tog bil ba/ dung dkar g.yas 'khyil/ li khri/ yangs dkar}. auspicious objec...	bkra shis rdzas
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious articles	bkra shis rdzas brgyad
རིགྷཏ	coiling conch shell, 6) {dung g.yas 'khyil}; bezoar/ (elephant bile), 7) {ghi wang}; vermilion powder, {li khri}; 8) white mustard seeds, {yungs kar}.]	right
པནིཅུམ་དཅཏཡློན་གྲསས	{rtsva dur ba}. 5) wood-apply fruit - {shing tog bil ba}. 6) right-coiling conch shell - {dung g.yas 'khyil}. 7) bezoars, [elephant bile] - {ghi wang}. 8) vermilion powder - {li khri}. 9)	panicum dactylon grass
ཝཧིཏེ་མུསྟརད་སེཨེདས	{yungs kar}	white mustard seeds
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས་རྟགས	Syn {bkra shis rdzas brgyad, bkra shis rtags brgyad}	bkra shis rdzas rtags
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས་དབང་བཅུ་དྲུག	the sixteen auspicious articles and powers Syn {bkra shis rdzas brgyad}. + {bkra shis rtags brgyad}	bkra shis rdzas dbang bcu drug
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས་རྫོགས་པ	fortunate completion (of a work or event)	bkra shis rdzas rdzogs pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫས་སྲུང་བའི་གོ་ཆ	amulet used for insuring luck	bkra shis rdzas srung ba'i go cha
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྫོགས་པ	completion of an auspicious work or event	bkra shis rdzogs pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཟླ་བ	auspicious month [date count has neither lack nor surplus]	bkra shis zla ba
བཀྲ་ཤིས་འོད་ཟེར	Mangala Rasmi, auspicious ray of light	bkra shis 'od zer
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཡིན་པ	auspicious bkra shis g.yang 'khyil - spiral / whorl of auspiciousness and good fortune bkra shis rab gsal bde chen dpal 'bar {shar kha ba sgom chen}	bkra shis yin pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལུགས་ལེགས	the good auspicious way [without enmity and strife accomplish what is wished for]	bkra shis lugs legs
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལེགས་སྐྱེས	congratulatory gifts	bkra shis legs skyes
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཤོག	Mangalam. "May all be auspicious."	bkra shis shog
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྲུང་བའི	sacrificial ceremony by which blessings are to be drawn down	bkra shis srung ba'i
བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྲུང་བའི་གོ་ཆ	instruments used for insuring luck	bkra shis srung ba'i go cha
བཀྲ་ཤིས་གསོ་སྦྱོང	1) the sojong done on an auspicious event. 2) the auspicious restoration and purification ceremony	bkra shis gso sbyong
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷ་རྒྱལ	Lha Gyal torma	bkra shis lha rgyal
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	eight auspicious goddesses. See {bkra shis kyi lha mo brgyad}	bkra shis lha mo brgyad
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷ་རྫས	a white scarf of auspiciousness	bkra shis lha rdzas
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷུ་པོའི་དགོ་པ	Tashi lhunpo monastery	bkra shis lhu po'i dgo pa
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷུན་པོ	seat of the Panchen Lama, Gelukpa Monastery	bkra shis lhun po
ལས་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་གླིང	Tashi lhunpo glorious great community, monastery victorious in all directions	las rnam par rgyal ba'i gling
ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་གླིང	n of monastery	phyogs las rnam par rgyal ba'i gling
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷུན་པོའི་དགོན་པ	Tashi Lhunpo monastery	bkra shis lhun po'i dgon pa
བཀྲ་ཤེས་འཁྱིལ་བ	Tashi Kyilwa	bkra shes 'khyil ba
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	verse of auspiciousness	bkra bshis kyi tshigs su bcad pa
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious goddesses	bkra bshis kyi lha mo brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་སྒོ་མང	1) Tashi Gomang Stupa; 3) section of Drepung monastery; 4) the monastery of Tashi Khyil	bkra bshis sgo mang
བཀྲ་བཤིས་བརྒྱད་པ	Sutra of the 8-fold Auspiciousness	bkra bshis brgyad pa
བཀྲ་བཤིས་མཆོག	Auspicious forest [one of the 8 great charnel grounds]	bkra bshis mchog
བཀྲ་བཤིས་བརྗོད་པ	utter lines of auspiciousness	bkra bshis brjod pa
བཀྲ་བཤིས་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious signs symbols	bkra bshis rtags brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་དུང	the auspicious conch [white, coils right or clockwise]	bkra bshis dung
བཀྲ་བཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས	1) good luck, auspicious goodness; 2) congratulations; 3) hello	bkra bshis bde legs
བཀྲ་བཤིས་པ	(mangalam, auspicious	bkra bshis pa
བཀྲ་བཤིས་པའི་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	the eight auspicious symbols; 1) {gdugs mchog} = excellent umbrella 2) {gser nya} = paired gold fish 3) {bum pa} = a treasure vase 4) {pad ma} = lotus 5) {dung dkar g.yas 'khyil} = a white conch sh...	bkra bshis pa'i rtags brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་པའི་རྫས	[8] auspicious articles	bkra bshis pa'i rdzas
བཀྲ་བཤིས་པའི་རྫས་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious substances; 1) (mirror, {me long}; 2) curds, {zho}; 3) panicum dactylo grass {rtsva dur ba}; 4) wood-apple fruit, {shing tog bil ba}; 5) right-coiling conch shell, 6) {dung gyas 'k...	bkra bshis pa'i rdzas brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་དཔལ་འབར	blazing glory of goodness blaze w glorious goodness bkra bshis 'byung ba'i mchod rten Source of Auspiciousness Stupa	bkra bshis dpal 'bar
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	verse of auspiciousness	bkra bshis tshigs su bcad pa
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ཚེ་རིང་མ	Tashi Tseringma	bkra bshis tshe ring ma
བཀྲ་བཤིས་རྫས་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious substances	bkra bshis rdzas brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་རྫས་དབང་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 auspicious articles and powers	bkra bshis rdzas dbang bcu drug
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ཤོག	1) mangalam, may there be auspiciousness; 2) may the auspiciousness of so and so be present	bkra bshis shog
བཀྲ་བཤིས་གསོ་སྦྱོང	1) sojong done at an auspicious event; 2) auspicious sojong)/ [vow restoration and purification ceremony.]	bkra bshis gso sbyong
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious goddesses	bkra bshis lha mo brgyad
བཀྲ་བཤིས་ལྷུ་པོན	Lucky mound, Tashi Lhunpo	bkra bshis lhu pon
བཀྲ་ས་ལེ	[with ]vivid clarity	bkra sa le
བཀྲ་སྲི	1) evil spirit. 2) demon	bkra sri
བཀྲ་སླག	1) lie. 2) falsehood	bkra slag
བཀྲ་གསལ་ལེ	with vivid clarity	bkra gsal le
བཀྲ་ལྷང་ངེ	vividly present	bkra lhang nge
བཀྲ་ལྷང་ངེར་འཆར་བ	experienced as being vividly present	bkra lhang nger 'char ba
བཀྲག	luster, dazzling brightness. complexion; 1) flash. 2) brightness. 3) luster. 4) resplendence. 5) light. 6) brilliant. 7) bright. 8) lustrous. 9) resplendent. 10) dazzling. 11) beautiful appearance....	bkrag
བཀྲག་ཁྲིག་གེར་བཞུགས་པ	radiantly present	bkrag khrig ger bzhugs pa
བཀྲག་ཅན	dazzling, bright	bkrag can
བཀྲག་ཆེ	very bright	bkrag che
བཀྲག་འཆོར	without splendor, lusterless	bkrag 'chor
བཀྲག་དང་གཟི་མདངས	bskyed pa'i rlung - subtle energy that gives rise to sheen and luster bkrag dang gzi mdangs bskyed pa'i rlung prana, producing brilliance and splendor bkrag dang gzi mdangs bskyed pa'i rlung the wi...	bkrag dang gzi mdangs
བཀྲག་གདངས	Luster, brilliance, luminosity	bkrag gdangs
བཀྲག་མདངས	lus kyi bkrag mdangs	bkrag mdangs
བཟང་བ	his complexion was more radiant	bzang ba
བཀྲག་མདངས་བསྐྱེད་པའི་རླུང	radiance producing prana	bkrag mdangs bskyed pa'i rlung
བཀྲག་མདངས་རྒྱས་པ	radiant with good health	bkrag mdangs rgyas pa
བཀྲག་མདངས་མཚར་བ	splendid and vivid	bkrag mdangs mtshar ba
བཀྲག་པ	fair complexion, fine complexion, fry	bkrag pa
བཀྲག་མ་ཡལ	still radiant, not faded	bkrag ma yal
བཀྲག་མེད	pallid, pale, wan complexion, dull, lackluster, lifeless	bkrag med
བཀྲག་མེད་པ	1 dim[ed]; 2) soft [light]; 2) w impaired brilliance [dull, pale, lackluster, not bright, darkened boring tedious]	bkrag med pa
བཀྲག་མེར་མེར་བ	effulgent, dazzling	bkrag mer mer ba
བཀྲག་རྩི	varnish [glossy], paint, enamel. lacquer	bkrag rtsi
བཀྲག་རྩི་རྒྱག་པ	to varnish	bkrag rtsi rgyag pa
བཀྲག་རྩི་གཏོང	varnish [glossy], paint, apply enamel/ lacquer	bkrag rtsi gtong
བཀྲག་རྩི་ཤིང	tree from which varnish is obtained	bkrag rtsi shing
བཀྲག་རྩིའི་སྣུམ	oil for making varnish	bkrag rtsi'i snum
བཀྲག་འཚེར	1) brilliance. 2) brightness. 3) splendor. 4) sharp and bright. 5) brilliant	bkrag 'tsher
བཀྲག་འཚེར་འཚེར་བ	dazzling, radiant	bkrag 'tsher 'tsher ba
བཀྲག་ཞི་འཚེར་བ	dazzling (light	bkrag zhi 'tsher ba
བཀྲག་ཞིང་འཚེར་བ	dazzling [light]	bkrag zhing 'tsher ba
བཀྲག་ཡ་ལེ་བ	{kha bkrag ya le ba} an eloquent, radiant person	bkrag ya le ba
བཀྲག་ཡལ་ལེ་བ	{kha bkrag yal le ba} a beautiful, bright countenance	bkrag yal le ba
བཀྲག་ལ་འཚེར་བ	resplendent and brilliant	bkrag la 'tsher ba
བཀྲག་ཤོག	oiled paper or shel shog [varnished?] ??? [hard for water to destroy.]	bkrag shog
བཀྲག་གསལ	brightness	bkrag gsal
བཀྲག་གསལ་ལྷུན་སྡུག	brillian[t][ce] and magnificen[t][ce]	bkrag gsal lhun sdug
བཀྲག་ལྷག་གེ་བ	supremely brilliant radiance	bkrag lhag ge ba
བཀྲང་བ	bloat, hard	bkrang ba
བཀྲན་ནད	n. of a disease	bkran nad
བཀྲབ	select	bkrab
བཀྲབ་པ	choose or select from among many	bkrab pa
བཀྲབས	chose, selected	bkrabs
བཀྲབས་པ	choose from many, SA bkrab pa	bkrabs pa
བཀྲམ	1) put [out], placed, displayed, exhibited; 2) distribute[d]; 3) cover [p {'grems pa}	bkram
བཀྲམ་བཀྲམ	display	bkram bkram
བཀྲམ་སྟོན	exhibition	bkram ston
བཀྲམ་སྟོན་ཁང	exhibition hall	bkram ston khang
བཀྲམ་པ	scatter, SA gtor ba, display, spread	bkram pa
བཀྲམ་བཞག་ཁང	exhibition hall	bkram bzhag khang
བཀྲམས	past of bkram	bkrams
བཀྲམས་པ	spread over, scatter, SA bkram pa	bkrams pa
བཀྲར་འཛིན	concretize, specify	bkrar 'dzin
བཀྲལ	skim (?); explain	bkral
བཀྲལ་བ	1) urge; 2) display; 3) spread [out], scatter; 4) commented; 5) appoint {'gel ba}, [p {'grel ba} admonish, encourage, elucidated, classified, explained in detail] 115	bkral ba
བཀྲས	rolled or varnished in	bkras
བཀྲས་སྒོར	auspicious circle [one special kind of auspicious seating arrangement; 2) Rten 'brel gyi ru sgrig khyad par ba zhig ...3 Bkras sgor in previous Tibetan government at {rten 'brel mdzad sgo} (ceremon...	bkras sgor
བཀྲས་བཏགས	gzhi dang ri mo kha phral te bsgrigs pa'i gos che zhig ???	bkras btags
བཀྲས་འདུར	'dur of fortune	bkras 'dur
བཀྲས་པ	abbr. of bkra shis pa, SA bkra ba	bkras pa
བཀྲས་བླ་ནང་སྒང	sngar bkra shis lhun po'i pa che gyi zhabs 'bring che khag 'tshog sa'i las khungs ???	bkras bla nang sgang
བཀྲས་ལུང	valley in Tibet	bkras lung
བཀྲས་ལྷུན	Tashi Lhunpo monastery	bkras lhun
བཀྲི	lead, SA 'khrid pa	bkri
བཀྲི་དོན	provisional meaning [=drang don]	bkri don
བཀྲི་པོ	miserly	bkri po
བཀྲི་བ	1) guide, lead, teach, instruct; 2) try; 3) search for; 4) lay up (/ [lead [astray] conduct] (tha dad pa bkris pa, bkri ba, bkris,, [f 'khrid]	bkri ba
བཀྲི་བར་མི་བཏུབ	cannot be led astray	bkri bar mi btub
བཀྲི་བྱ	1) to be led; 2) act of leading	bkri bya
བཀྲིགས་པ	cores	bkrigs pa
བཀྲིད་དྲང	black discipliner of the unsubdued, black and wrathful appearance of manjughosa, series of the indirect path	bkrid drang
བཀྲིན	1) gratitude; 2) kindness; 3) goodness, benevolence; 3) favor, boon [h]	bkrin
བཀྲིན་ཅན	courteous	bkrin can
བཀྲིན་པོ	miserly	bkrin po
བཀྲིན་བསམ་ཤེས	gratitude, thankful	bkrin bsam shes
བཀྲིན་བསམ་ཤེས་ཅན	grateful	bkrin bsam shes can
བཀྲིར་མི་བཏུབ་པ་ཉིད	cannot be led astray	bkrir mi btub pa nyid
བཀྲིས	lead, SA 'khrid pa, abbr. of bkra shis, abbr of bkra shis	bkris
བཀྲིས་སྒང	Tashi gang Bhutan	bkris sgang
བཀྲིས་ཆོས་རྫོང	bkra shis chos rdzong	bkris chos rdzong
བཀྲིས་བདེ་ལེགས	congratulations, a greeting	bkris bde legs
བཀྲིས་བདེ་ལེགས་ཞུ	to convey one's greetings or congratulations	bkris bde legs zhu
བཀྲིས་པ	1) conducted. 2) pf. of {bkri ba}; 3) pf. of 'khrid pa	bkris pa
བཀྲིས་ཞོལ་པ	proper name of an opera troupe	bkris zhol pa
བཀྲུ	1) to wash. 2) cleanse; to wash out a vessel	bkru
བཀྲུ་འཁྲུད་བཀྲུས་ཁྲུས	bathing ablution	bkru 'khrud bkrus khrus
བཀྲུ་འཇམ	laxative suppository [for wind diseases rlung nad la mi 'da' ba'i among the applications of 'jam rtsi [downward purgation using substances in oil butter broth and milk]. having wind and bile bsngag...	bkru 'jam
བྲོཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ཝཏེར	inhabiting animals like sbal lcong frog taspoles and so forth, cows milk with butter and curds in which ru rta, de ba d' ru, pi pi ling, rgyam tsa, aa ru ra, and dur byid are powdered and mixed. Th...	broth of water
བཀྲུ་དག	taking an oath, having been purified	bkru dag
བཀྲུ་བ	to wash	bkru ba
བཀྲུ་བོན	bon purifiers	bkru bon
བཀྲུ་བྱ	the object to be washed	bkru bya
བཀྲུ་མ་སླེན	laxative suppository for wind diseases [rlung nad la mi 'da' ba'i among the applications of 'jam rtsi [downward purgation using substances in oil butter broth and milk]. bad rlung ldan par bsngad p...	bkru ma slen
བཀྲུ་སྨན	laxative [dur byid dang thar nu lta bu sa chu'i nus pa shas cher las byung ba'i sma mkhris nad sogs rgyu long gi nad thur du bkru bar nus pa'i bshal sma spyi la zer]	bkru sman
བཀྲུ་སྨན་གཏོང་བ	to apply lotion to a wound	bkru sman gtong ba
བཀྲུ་ཟིན	wash, SA bkru	bkru zin
བཀྲུ་བཤལ	wash and rinse	bkru bshal
བཀྲུ་བཤལ་གྱི་སྣོད	washing bowl	bkru bshal gyi snod
བཀྲུག་པ	be in commotion, SA 'khrug pa, dkrug pa	bkrug pa
བཀྲུག་ཤིང་བརྒྱབ་པ	to agitate, cause trouble	bkrug shing brgyab pa
བཀྲུམ་པ	to be broken into pieces	bkrum pa
བཀྲུམས	[arch] phye mar [flour + butter, gsil flour [cool, wash???] gsil ba, ???	bkrums
བཀྲུས	wash, SA 'khrud pa	bkrus
བཀྲུས་ཆག	in previous regional custom mna' skyel [taking a oath] dag 'bud byas na [break? get rid of?] khral 'bab [measure of tax] chag pa	bkrus chag
བཀྲུས་ནས་ཉི་མ་ལ་བཞག་པ	washed his [clothes] and put them in the sun to dry	bkrus nas nyi ma la bzhag pa
བཀྲུས་པ	washed, cleansed [p {'khrud pa}	bkrus pa
བཀྲེ	place in khams	bkre
བཀྲེ་རྔམ	craving for wealth	bkre rngam
བཀྲེ་ནག་ཚང	place in khams	bkre nag tshang
བཀྲེ་པ	1) destitute; 2) meager [wages]; 3) miserly, stingy; 4) hungry [poor, needy, indigent, meager, miserly, stingy 116	bkre pa
བཀྲེ་པོ	1) miser; 2) beggar [destitute/ hungry person.]	bkre po
བཀྲེ་ཧོར	section of sgo mang dept of monastic school of 'bras spungs	bkre hor
བཀྲེན	comp bkren po	bkren
བཀྲེན་རྔབ་ཅན	poor, destitute person, beggar, hungry	bkren rngab can
བཀྲེན་པ	poor, indigent, hungry, miserly, stingy	bkren pa
བཀྲེན་པ་ཅན	poor	bkren pa can
བཀྲེན་པོ	miserly, stingy, poor destitute	bkren po
བཀྲེས	feel hungry, hunger	bkres
བཀྲེས་སྐོམ	hunger and thirst	bkres skom
བཀྲེས་སྐོམ་གྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of, misery from hunger and thirst	bkres skom gyi sdug bsngal
བཀྲེས་སྐོམ་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of hunger and thirst	bkres skom sdug bsngal
བཀྲེས་སྐོམས	hunger and thirst	bkres skoms
བཀྲེས་རྔབ	hunger	bkres rngab
བཀྲེས་རྔབ་པ	be greedy, have a craving appetite	bkres rngab pa
བཀྲེས་རྔབ་བ	have a ravenous appetite	bkres rngab ba
བཀྲེས་རྔམ་ཅན	1) pauper, beggar; 2) person w great craving for wealth	bkres rngam can
བཀྲེས་སྔབ	hunger	bkres sngab
བཀྲེས་ལྟོགས	hunger	bkres ltogs
བཀྲེས་ནས	being hungry	bkres nas
བཀྲེས་ནས་ཤི་བ	died of hunger, died of starvation	bkres nas shi ba
བཀྲེས་སྣང	sensation of hunger	bkres snang
བཀྲེས་པ	{bkres pa, bkres pa, bkres pa} intr. v.; 1) hungry. 2) hunger. 3) to be hungry	bkres pa
བཀྲེས་པ་དང་སྐོམ་པ	Syn {bkres skom}	bkres pa dang skom pa
བཀྲེས་པ་དང་སྐོམ་པས་ཉེན་པ	when you get hungry or thirsty	bkres pa dang skom pas nyen pa
བཀྲེས་ཤིང་རིད་པ	hungry and grew weak	bkres shing rid pa
བཀྲོངས	Syn {'grongs pa}; killed	bkrongs
བཀྲོངས་པ	killed	bkrongs pa
བཀྲོད་པ	walk	bkrod pa
བཀྲོབས	imp. of {bkrab pa}	bkrobs
བཀྲོལ	consent, permission/ to relinquish; imp. of {bkral ba}; imp. of {bkral ba}	bkrol
བཀྲོལ་པ	pf. of {'grol ba}	bkrol pa
བཀྲོལ་བ	reveal, untie, loosen, SA 'grol ba, extricate	bkrol ba
བཀྲོལ་བྱེད་པ	1) to explain. 2) elucidate. 3) interpret	bkrol byed pa
བཀྲོལ་བཤད	1) elucidation. 2) clear explanation of key points	bkrol bshad
བཀྲོས	choose, select	bkros
བཀྲོས་གདམས	[arch] 1) precepts; 2) training; 3) oral instructions	bkros gdams
བཀྲོས་པ	[arch] chose	bkros pa
བཀྲོས་བཤད	[arch] beneficial instructions	bkros bshad
བཀླག	[f klog] will read	bklag
བཀླག་ཆོག	ready to be recited	bklag chog
བཀླག་ཆོག་ཏུ་བཀོད་པ	to arrange as a liturgy for recitation aloud	bklag chog tu bkod pa
བཀླག་པ	ft. of {klog pa}; fut. of {klog pa}. read	bklag pa
བཀླག་པར་བྱ	is reading	bklag par bya
བཀླག་ཚུལ	1) way of reading. 2) pronunciation	bklag tshul
བཀླགས	read [p {klog pa}	bklags
བཀླགས་གྲུབ	finish reading, finished reading	bklags grub
བཀླགས་ཆོག	arranged for [easy] reading	bklags chog
བཀླགས་ཆོག་ཏུ་བཀོད་པ	liturgical arrangement	bklags chog tu bkod pa
བཀླགས་ཆོག་མར་བཀོད་པ	liturgical arrangement	bklags chog mar bkod pa
བཀླགས་པ	pf. of {klog pa}; pf. of {klog pa}. read	bklags pa
བཀླགས་པ་འདོད	wishes to read or sing	bklags pa 'dod
བཀླུབ་པ	fut. of {klub pa}; ft. of {klub pa}; fut. of {klub pa}	bklub pa
བཀླུབས	(not in DAS)	bklubs
བཀླུབས་པ	pf. of {klub pa}; pf. of {klub pa}	bklubs pa
མཀའ་བགྲོད	birds	mka' bgrod
མཀའ་འགྲོ་གསང་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	a deity	mka' 'gro gsang ba'i ye shes
མཀར་ཆེན་བཟའ་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	1 of the five wives of {khri srong lde'u bstan}	mkar chen bza' mtsho rgyal
མཀུལ་རྒྱན	TSE smla' khyab ye shes kyi sku ??? 'kan 'khur - responsible 'kam mkhas - gentle/ mild and tactful 'ku 'khrug - distemper, illness, tumult, riot, uproar 'kun 'dus - compendium, composite 'kor lo 'd...	mkul rgyan
རྐ	gutter, small channel on the roof of a house or at the edge of the roof for carrying off the rain, small furrow conveying water from a conduit to trees or plants, furrow between the beds of a garde...	rka
རྐ་མགོ	irrigation channel mgo, ...Chu'i rka mgo gtsang po la thug yod	rka mgo
རྐ་འགོ	point irrigation channel joins water source	rka 'go
རྐ་ཆུ	gutter	rka chu
རྐ་ཆུའི་ལྷ་ཁང	n. of a monastery	rka chu'i lha khang
ནེཨར་སམ	ye. n. of a monastery near	near Sam
སམ	ye	Sam
རྐ་དེབ	irrigation water 'dren notebook ste, saying chu rka bzo mkhan gyi mi gtong stangs &, chu dividing bsha' rgyag stangs sogs	rka deb
རྐ་འབའ་སུམ་མདོ	{rka 'ba' sum mdo}	rka 'ba' sum mdo
རྐ་ཙམ	[arch] just a moment	rka tsam
རྐ་ཞིང	1) irrigated field; 2) lean, meager	rka zhing
རྐ་བཟོ་བ	1) to make a channel. 2) dig a furrow. 3) to irrigate	rka bzo ba
རྐ་རགས	Syn {ska rags}	rka rags
རྐ་ཤི	decay and death	rka shi
རྐག་ཏུ་ངུ	Sadaprarudita (legendary person noted for efforts in Dharma)	rkag tu ngu
རྐང	marrow, pith, descent, extraction, origin, stuff, bundle, collection, foot, leg, stalk	rkang
རྐང་ཀོར	anklet; anklet	rkang kor
རྐང་ཀྱོག	lame, crippled, band-legged	rkang kyog
རྐང་ཀྱོག་བྱེད་པ	to be lame	rkang kyog byed pa
རྐང་ཀྲབ	1) thags mkhan gyi rkang pas rgyu'i snal ma'i bkad 'degs 'jog re mos byed pa'i thags chas shig; 2) sewing machine rkang shing	rkang krab
རྐང་ཀྲི	cloth used to wrap feet	rkang kri
རྐང་དཀྲི	cloth used to wrap feet	rkang dkri
རྐང་དཀྲིས	rkang par dkri bya'i ras	rkang dkris
རྐང་བཀོད	manner of walking	rkang bkod
རྐང་བཀྲ་མ	n. of a bird	rkang bkra ma
རྐང་རྐྱང་འདུར་སྒྲུབ	'don grangs rkang la phab ste khral 'dra mnyam rgyug pa	rkang rkyang 'dur sgrub
རྐང་སྐས	in 1 tree many holes bton pa in them long insects re re btsugs nas bzos pa'i bod skas	rkang skas
རྐང་སྐོང་བ	term of grammar. Verse padding or verse filler	rkang skong ba
རྐང་སྐྱེས	sudra caste of india [originated from the foot of Brahma]	rkang skyes
རྐང་སྐྱོབ	shoes, boots	rkang skyob
རྐང་ཁྲ	a king of India	rkang khra
རྐང་ཁྲག་ས་ལ་བརྡབ	blood from her feet lying spattered on the ground,	rkang khrag sa la brdab
རྐང་ཁྲབ	iron shoes, greaves	rkang khrab
རྐང་ཁྲི	foot-stool. footstool; foot-stool	rkang khri
རྐང་མཁལ	side of the foot, sides of the feet	rkang mkhal
རྐང་མཁྱོགས	swift-footedness, fast walking, 'swift feet'	rkang mkhyogs
རྐང་འཁུམ	a diseased foot	rkang 'khum
རྐང་འཁུམས་ལག་འཁུམས	over-cautious, timid	rkang 'khums lag 'khums
རྐང་འཁོར	bicycle, bandy-legged bicycle, bike, cycle	rkang 'khor
རྐང་འཁོར་བཞོན	ride a bicycle	rkang 'khor bzhon
རྐང་འཁྱར	rove, wander, disperse, separate	rkang 'khyar
རྐང་འཁྱར་ཏེ་བོད་ཡུལ་དུ་ཕེབ	wandered off on foot and finally ended up in Tibet	rkang 'khyar te bod yul du pheb
རྐང་འཁྱོར	trembling in the knees	rkang 'khyor
རྐང་འཁྲབ	dance	rkang 'khrab
རྐང་འཁྲབ་ལག་འཁྲབ	1) endeavoring to do whatever 1 can; 2) expression of unbearable physical pain; 3) dance w joy	rkang 'khrab lag 'khrab
རྐང་འཁྲབ་ལག་གྱོབ	dancing w the legs and wining the arms around, brel ba chen po'i dpe	rkang 'khrab lag gyob
རྐང་འཁྲིས་སུ	nearly, by one's side; nearly, by one's side	rkang 'khris su
རྐང་ག་རིལ	bicycle	rkang ga ril
རྐང་གི་ཁོང་ནས	from the bottom of one's heart. from the bottom of one's heart	rkang gi khong nas
རྐང་གོས	Tibetan felt boots	rkang gos
རྐང་གྱོག	bent or crooked leg	rkang gyog
རྐང་གྱོལ་པོ	crooked legs	rkang gyol po
རྐང་གྲ་འགྲིག་པོ	dmag dpung ru bsgrigs te 'gro skabs kyi rkang 'gros gcig mtshungs	rkang gra 'grig po
རྐང་གྲངས	extent	rkang grangs
རྐང་གླ	wages given to messengers etc 118	rkang gla
རྐང་གླིང	trumpet of human thigh bone, femoral bone trumpet	rkang gling
རྐང་མགོ	Syn {rkang rtse}	rkang mgo
རྐང་མགོའི་རུས་པ	from the ankles to the toes rkang mgo'i bones	rkang mgo'i rus pa
རྐང་མགྱོགས	swift-footed. swift feet (practice); swift-footed, fast-walking. See {rkang mgyogs kyi dngos grub};	rkang mgyogs
སྭིཕ༹ཏ	footed, fleet of foot	swift
རྐང་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, power of walking swiftly	rkang mgyogs kyi dngos
རྐང་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	1 of 8 ordinary accomplishments	rkang mgyogs kyi dngos grub
རྐང་མགྱོགས་དངོས་གྲུབ	accomplishment in speed walking	rkang mgyogs dngos grub
རྐང་མགྱོགས་པ	a fast-walker, practitioner of swift-walking	rkang mgyogs pa
རྐང་འགོ	Syn {rkang rtse}	rkang 'go
རྐང་འགྱོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhi of	rkang 'gyog gi dngos grub
རྐང་འགྲོ	one who travels on foot, vassal, subject, messenger, porter, subject who performs his services as an errandgoer or a porter	rkang 'gro
ཕོ༹ཨོཏ	passenger. 2) messenger, porter. 3) foot-soldier. 4) domestic cattle; 1) one who travels on foot. 2) messenger, porter. 3) foot-soldier. 4) domestic cattle. traveler [on foot] porter, messenger [i....	foot
རྐང་འགྲོ་བོགས་སྒྱུར	rkang 'gro'i khral ngo rgyug ma dgos par bogs mar sgyur ba	rkang 'gro bogs sgyur
རྐང་འགྲོ་ལག་འདོན	rkang 'gro ni after people and cattle have actually arrived sgrub dgos pa'i khral &, lag 'don ni dngul dngos 'jal ba'i khral te name of those two former Tibetan tax obligations	rkang 'gro lag 'don
རྐང་འགྲོའི་ཁྲལ་འུལ	rta khal mi gsum gyi khral ming	rkang 'gro'i khral 'ul
རྐང་འགྲོས	walking on foot. met. domestic cattle, animal	rkang 'gros
རྐང་འགྲོས་འགྲོ་དགོས	[we] must go on foot	rkang 'gros 'gro dgos
རྐང་འགྲོས་བཅིངས	kind of lotus; kind of lotus	rkang 'gros bcings
རྐང་འགྲོས་སྤེལ་བ	to breed cattle	rkang 'gros spel ba
རྐང་རྒྱན	anklet, foot ornament; foot ornament	rkang rgyan
རྐང་རྒྱུ	foot soldier	rkang rgyu
རྐང་སྒ་རི	bicycle	rkang sga ri
རྐང་སྒ་རིལ	bicycle	rkang sga ril
རྐང་སྒྲོག	leg chains	rkang sgrog
རྐང་སྒྲོག་ལག་ལྕགས	leg chains leg irons and hand chains/cuffs	rkang sgrog lag lcags
རྐང་བརྒྱ	centipede	rkang brgya
རྐང་བརྒྱ་པ	100 feet, centipede? millipede?	rkang brgya pa
རྐང་བརྒྱ་མ	100 feet, centipede? millipede?	rkang brgya ma
རྐང་བརྒྱ་ལག་བརྒྱ	100 feet 100 hands, centipede? millipede?	rkang brgya lag brgya
རྐང་བརྒྱད་པ	8-footed lion	rkang brgyad pa
རྐང་ངར	shank, lower part of the leg	rkang ngar
རྐང་དངུལ	1) principal [money], share, stock; 2) rkang la 'khri ba'i dngul khral	rkang dngul
རྐང་དངུལ་སྡུས	collect capital by selling stock	rkang dngul sdus
རྐང་དངུལ་འཛིན་ཡིན	stock certificate	rkang dngul 'dzin yin
རྐང་སྔུན	rkang sngon	rkang sngun
རྐང་སྔོན	rkang longs in a table/ diagram rkang sdom chu tshod gang du yod pa'i bya ra de'i 'og na gnas pa'i sgyur byed kyi ri mo de ni each house or each star rkang pa'i measure of extra and shortfall yin, ...	rkang sngon
རྐང་གཅིག	monopode with only one foot	rkang gcig
རྐང་གཅིག་ཅན	isolated trunks [about trees]	rkang gcig can
རྐང་གཅིག་པ	one-footed. met. tree	rkang gcig pa
རྐང་ལྕགས	leg iron	rkang lcags
རྐང་ཆེན	khral rkang che ba ste, sa zhing mang bas khral 'bab lci ba'am mang ba rgyug dgos mkhan	rkang chen
རྐང་འཇབ་ལག་འཇབ	gzhan gyis mi tshor bar byas te 'jab stangs shig	rkang 'jab lag 'jab
རྐང་རྗེན	bare-footed	rkang rjen
བརེ	footed	bare
རྐང་རྗེན་གྱིས་ཞབ༹་བྱེད	she will stay up long into the night with only the stars to cover her head,	rkang rjen gyis zhva byed
རྐང་རྗེན་མ	barefoot	rkang rjen ma
རྐང་རྗེས	footstep, foot mark, dog, footfollower	rkang rjes
རྐང་རྗེས་ལག་སུབ	said of one who destroys his own work, previously welldone. met. dog (lit. foot-follower)	rkang rjes lag sub
རྐང་རྗེས་ལག་བསུབས	after a good result, wipe it out by bad actions	rkang rjes lag bsubs
རྐང་རྗེས་སུབ་པ	cover the trace or track, efface every vestige	rkang rjes sub pa
རྐང་རྗེས་བསུབས	rubbed out the foot mark	rkang rjes bsubs
རྐང་ཉྭ	rkang pa'i byin pa'am nywa ril	rkang nywa
རྐང་གཉིས	"bipeds" human beings, man, mankind	rkang gnyis
རྐང་གཉིས་ཀྱི་གཙོ	buddha	rkang gnyis kyi gtso
རྐང་གཉིས་ཀྱི་གཙོ་བོ	chief of men	rkang gnyis kyi gtso bo
རྐང་གཉིས་མཆོག	most excellent of those w two legs,the Buddha 119	rkang gnyis mchog
རྐང་གཉིས་བདག་པོ	lord of humans	rkang gnyis bdag po
རྐང་གཉིས་བདག་པོའི་མཆོག	the supreme lord of humans, Buddha Shakyamuni	rkang gnyis bdag po'i mchog
རྐང་གཉིས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	the supreme of all humans, Buddha shakyamuni	rkang gnyis rnams kyi mchog
རྐང་གཉིས་པ	those w two legs, person	rkang gnyis pa
རྐང་གཉིས་གཙོ་བོ	the chief of humans, the Buddha	rkang gnyis gtso bo
རྐང་ཏོན་བགྱིས	[arch] bdam pa	rkang ton bgyis
རྐང་གཏད	specially	rkang gtad
རྐང་བཏུབ	foot ornament, foot bangle	rkang btub
རྐང་རྟིང	heel	rkang rting
རྐང་རྟེགས	footstool	rkang rtegs
རྐང་རྟེང་རོང་ཆུ	{rkang rteng rong chu	rkang rteng rong chu
རྐང་རྟེན	Syn {rkang khri}	rkang rten
རྐང་རྟེན་རྡོ	stepping stone	rkang rten rdo
རྐང་སྟབས	way of walking	rkang stabs
རྐང་སྟེགས	foot stool [rkang khri, rkang rten, zhabs stegs]	rkang stegs
རྐང་སྟེང	ankle	rkang steng
རྐང་སྟེང་བུ	fixed star	rkang steng bu
རྐང་སྟེང་ལུས་བཏེགས	self-supporting, standing on 1's own feet	rkang steng lus btegs
རྐང་སྟེན་བུ	the star of higher flight	rkang sten bu
རྐང་བརྟེག	blow with the foot, kick	rkang brteg
རྐང་ཐག	long rope	rkang thag
རྐང་ཐང	walking	rkang thang
རྐང་ཐང་འགྲུལ་པ	pedestrian	rkang thang 'grul pa
རྐང་ཐང་ཏུ་འགྲུལ	go on foot	rkang thang tu 'grul
རྐང་ཐང་ཏུ་འགྲུལ་བ	walk	rkang thang tu 'grul ba
རྐང་ཐང་རྟ་པ	infantry & cavalry	rkang thang rta pa
རྐང་ཐང་དུ་འགྲུངས་བ	to go on foot	rkang thang du 'grungs ba
རྐང་ཐང་སྣ་ཚོགས	footman, footsoldier	rkang thang sna tshogs
རྐང་ཐང་པ	walker, hiker, pedestrian	rkang thang pa
རྐང་ཐང་པ་ལས་སྐྱེས་བ	Syn {rkang skyes}	rkang thang pa las skyes ba
རྐང་ཐང་པའི་དཔུང	infantry. Syn {rkang thang pa}	rkang thang pa'i dpung
རྐང་ཐང་དམག་མི	foot-soldier	rkang thang dmag mi
རྐང་ཐང་ལ	afoot	rkang thang la
རྐང་ཐང་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to go on foot, walk	rkang thang la 'gro ba
རྐང་ཐུང	short legs	rkang thung
རྐང་ཐོ	1) rdog tho'am, rdog tsan; 2) Khral rkang gi tho	rkang tho
རྐང་ཐོང	human pulled plow	rkang thong
རྐང་མཐིལ	sole of the foot	rkang mthil
རྐང་འཐུང	tree, that which drinks through its feet]	rkang 'thung
རྐང་འཐུང་དམར་པོ	red tree, devil's tree	rkang 'thung dmar po
རྐང་འཐེང	crooked legs, lame	rkang 'theng
རྐང་འཐེང་པ	crooked legs, lame	rkang 'theng pa
རྐང་འཐེང་ལག་ཞ	rkang zha lag 'theng	rkang 'theng lag zha
རྐང་དུང	trumpet made of a hollow	rkang dung
ཐིགྷ	bone, thigh-bone trumpet	thigh
རྐང་དེ་འགོ་ཁྲིད་ཡོད	the leaders have the responsibility	rkang de 'go khrid yod
རྐང་དྲངས་པ	Syn {rkang 'dren}	rkang drangs pa
རྐང་དྲུག	'6-feeter', a bee	rkang drug
རྐང་དྲུག་འདུ་བ	attracted bees	rkang drug 'du ba
རྐང་དྲུག་ལྡན་པ	bee, 6-footed]	rkang drug ldan pa
རྐང་དྲུག་ལྡན་བུང་བ	six-legged bees	rkang drug ldan bung ba
རྐང་དྲུག་པ	six-footed, bee	rkang drug pa
རྐང་དྲུག་ཚེས	mango tree	rkang drug tshes
རྐང་གདན	doormat	rkang gdan
རྐང་གདུབ	anklet, anklets	rkang gdub
རྐང་གདུབ་ཅན	wearing anklets	rkang gdub can
རྐང་གདོང	rkang sngon	rkang gdong
རྐང་གདོས	chain for the feet of offenders	rkang gdos
རྐང་འདེགས	stepping stones	rkang 'degs
རྐང་འདེད	slip, slide	rkang 'ded
རྐང་འདོན	sngar khral 'khri'i sa rten brtsi stangs rkang zhes pa dang 'don zhes pa gnyis kyi ming	rkang 'don
རྐང་འདྲེད	rkang pa 'byid pa	rkang 'dred
རྐང་འདྲེད་ཤོར་བ	trip	rkang 'dred shor ba
རྐང་འདྲེན	disgrace, shame	rkang 'dren
རྐང་འདྲེན་པ	disgrace, debase; x {bstan pa'i rkang 'dren pa yin} this will debase the teaching	rkang 'dren pa
རྐང་རྡུམ	legless	rkang rdum
རྐང་རྡུམ་པ	below the ankle person w foot chad pa	rkang rdum pa
རྐང་རྡོག	lham gyi rdog pa-	rkang rdog
རྐང་ལྡན	shoes, that which holds the feet, a road, passage	rkang ldan
རྐང་ལྡན་མ	lion's-tail tree, species of tree	rkang ldan ma
རྐང་སྡོམ	planet steps coursed and not sdom pa'i chu tshod	rkang sdom
རྐང་བརྡབ	stamp the feet	rkang brdab
རྐང་བརྡེག	kicking	rkang brdeg
རྐང་བརྡེག་བྱེད	kick	rkang brdeg byed
རྐང་ནས	from the beginning	rkang nas
རྐང་ནས་མེད	completely w/o 120	rkang nas med
རྐང་གནོན་ཐོང་གཤོལ	human pulled plow	rkang gnon thong gshol
རྐང་སྣམ	1) coarse woolen Tibetan leggings; 2) trousers; 3) short garment	rkang snam
རྐང་སྣམ་ནང་ཙངས་ཅན	short garment bar tshangs can	rkang snam nang tsangs can
རྐང་སྣམ་བཙུགས་པ	to get established	rkang snam btsugs pa
རྐང་སྣམ་གསུམ་ལྡན	epith. of Vishnu	rkang snam gsum ldan
རྐང་བསྣོལ	on top of 1 rkang pa place another pa	rkang bsnol
རྐང་པ	"leg", one-fourth of a cha chung or sor; 1) a foot, leg, thigh, feet, lower part, stem, stalk, verse. 2) pillar, foot, base, foundation. 3) a verse line. 4) "leg", a measurement, one-fourth of a {c...	rkang pa
རྒྱུག	crutch	rgyug
རྐང་པ་བརྐྱངས	legs stretched	rkang pa brkyangs
རྐང་པ་བརྐྱངས་པ	legs stretched out	rkang pa brkyangs pa
རྐང་པ་བསྐུམས	contracted legs	rkang pa bskums
རྐང་པ་ཁ་སྐོང་གི་ཡི་གེ	verse feet/ lines tsheg khyim kha skong ba'i tshig phrad [ra ru, 'i yi, 'ang, yang, 'o, 'u, 'am gong du tseg yod pa rnams] verse filler	rkang pa kha skong gi yi ge
རྐང་པ་འཁད་དེ་འགྱེལ་བ	get entangled with the foot so as to fall	rkang pa 'khad de 'gyel ba
རྐང་པ་འཁྱོག་འཁྱོག་བྱེད་པ	to limp	rkang pa 'khyog 'khyog byed pa
རྐང་པ་འཁྱོག་ཏེ་འགྲོ་བ	limp	rkang pa 'khyog te 'gro ba
རྐང་པ་འཁྱོག་སྟེ་འགྲོ་བ	hobble	rkang pa 'khyog ste 'gro ba
རྐང་པ་གུག་པ	bowleg	rkang pa gug pa
རྐང་པ་བགྲད་པ	part the legs, astride, straddle, part the legs wide, straddle	rkang pa bgrad pa
རྐང་པ་རྒོད་པ	gar yang 'gro thub mkhan gyi rkang pa	rkang pa rgod pa
རྐང་པ་བརྒྱ་པ	centipede	rkang pa brgya pa
རྐང་པ་ཅན	having a foot (9 letters that extend below the line)	rkang pa can
རྐང་པ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	Ka kha ga ta da na zha sha ha	rkang pa can gyi yi ge
རྐང་པ་འཇིམ་བཟོས་ཅན་གྱི་མི་ཆེན	giant w feet of clay	rkang pa 'jim bzos can gyi mi chen
རྐང་པ་འཇོགས་ས	footstool	rkang pa 'jogs sa
རྐང་པ་ལྗིད་པོར་སྤོ་བ	plod	rkang pa ljid por spo ba
རྐང་པ་གཉིས	two legs	rkang pa gnyis
རྐང་པ་གཉིས་ཅན	biped rkang pa gnyis spos nas 'gro ba'i byed walking on two legs policy	rkang pa gnyis can
རྐང་པ་བརྟན་པོ	safe footing, firm foundation	rkang pa brtan po
རྐང་པ་བརྟན་པོ་འཚུག	be on a safe footing/ firm foundation	rkang pa brtan po 'tshug
རྐང་པ་འཐེང་པོ	lame	rkang pa 'theng po
རྐང་པ་རྡབ་པ	stamp 1's foot	rkang pa rdab pa
རྐང་པ་སྣོལ་བ	join the legs	rkang pa snol ba
རྐང་པ་སྤོ་བ	march	rkang pa spo ba
རྐང་པ་ཕན་ཚུན་གདངས	to stretch the legs apart	rkang pa phan tshun gdangs
རྐང་པ་སྦྲིད་པ	numb legs	rkang pa sbrid pa
རྐང་པ་མེད་པ	without feet. met. snake	rkang pa med pa
རྐང་པ་བཙུགས་པ	to get established. to get established	rkang pa btsugs pa
རྐང་པ་རྩིག་པ་ལ་བཀན་པ	press one's foot against a wall	rkang pa rtsig pa la bkan pa
རྐང་པ་ཚ་བ	1) walk on rough ground w bare feet te rkang pa tsa ba; 2) wind disease: feet drod che ba 'ur 'ur po dang bcas 'gro ba'i tse lhag par du tsha ba'i rlung nad cig{rkang pa - verse, foot	rkang pa tsha ba
རྐང་པ་འཛིན་བྱེད	if the sun shines, rkang sdom 'dzin byed kyi khyim grangs, also depending on step coursing and, sun step, moon step etc. kyi thad	rkang pa 'dzin byed
རྐང་པ་འཛུགས་ས	place 1 can get a foot hold	rkang pa 'dzugs sa
རྐང་པ་བརྫུམས་མ	artificial leg	rkang pa brdzums ma
རྐང་པ་ཞ་བོ	crooked legs, unable to straighten the legs	rkang pa zha bo
རྐང་པ་ཞ་རིལ	rkang pa'i rtsa rgyus 'khums te zha ba	rkang pa zha ril
རྐང་པ་ཡང་པོ	back and forth 'gro bzhud hur po and quick	rkang pa yang po
qཨུཨིཅཀ	footed, agile	quick
རྐང་པ་གསུམ་ལྡན	epith. of Vishnu. He with three legs, Lord Kuvera {rnam thos sras}. the god of wealth; epith. of Vishnu	rkang pa gsum ldan
རྐང་པའི་ངར་དུང	shin	rkang pa'i ngar dung
རྐང་པའི་ཉ	calf of leg	rkang pa'i nya
རྐང་པའི་ཉ་ཧྲིལ	calf	rkang pa'i nya hril
རྐང་པའི་སྟབས་སྒྱུར	dancing to the cadence of a song, falling of feet to musical cadence	rkang pa'i stabs sgyur
རྐང་པའི་སྟབས་བསྒྱུར	dancing at the cadence of a song. Syn {rkang pa}	rkang pa'i stabs bsgyur
རྐང་པའི་མཐེ་བོ	big toe	rkang pa'i mthe bo
རྐང་པའི་མཐེ་བོང	toe	rkang pa'i mthe bong
རྐང་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	movements of the feet, dancing to music, walking with a dancing gait, dancing movement of the feet, slothful motion, walking very slowly out of laziness	rkang pa'i 'du byed
རྐང་པའི་རྡོག་པ	sole. Syn {rkang pa}	rkang pa'i rdog pa
རྐང་པའི་ནོར་ལྡན	herdsman, shepherd. Syn {rkang pa}	rkang pa'i nor ldan
རྐང་པའི་རྩ་བ	heel. Syn {rkang pa}	rkang pa'i rtsa ba
རྐང་པའི་ཚིགས་རྡོག	ankle	rkang pa'i tshigs rdog
རྐང་པའི་མཚོན་ཅན	cock, weapon feet	rkang pa'i mtshon can
རྐང་པའི་མཚོན་ཆ	fowl, having a foot for a weapon	rkang pa'i mtshon cha
རྐང་པའི་མཚོན་ཆ་ཅན	poet. poultry, fowl (lit. of which the weapon is in its feel). Syn {rkang pa}	rkang pa'i mtshon cha can
རྐང་པའི་མཛུག་གུ	total wealth	rkang pa'i mdzug gu
རྐང་པའི་རིན་ཆེན	Syn {rkang gdub} going on foot, foot man, foot soldier	rkang pa'i rin chen
རྐང་པའི་ལོགས་ནས	from the region of the feet, up from the feet	rkang pa'i logs nas
རྐང་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	boots	rkang pa'i shing rta
རྐང་པས་འགོམས་ཤིང་འགྲོ	walks pacing with the feet	rkang pas 'goms shing 'gro
རྐང་པས་འགྲོ་ཞིང	walking around	rkang pas 'gro zhing
རྐང་པས་ཇི་བ	to trample, tread upon	rkang pas ji ba
རྐང་པས་འཐུང	Syn {rkang 'thung} to kick, met. base, foundation 121	rkang pas 'thung
རྐང་པས་འདུ་བྱེད	foot gesture while dancing	rkang pas 'du byed
རྐང་པས་རྫི་བ	tread	rkang pas rdzi ba
རྐང་ཕྱིན	felt for covering the legs	rkang phyin
རྐང་འཕོལ	sore or tumor on the foot	rkang 'phol
རྐང་འཕྲ	horse/ mule etc rkang pa gzhu stangs	rkang 'phra
རྐང་བ	leg	rkang ba
རྐང་བམ	swelled legs, elephantiasis. swelled legs, elephantiasis	rkang bam
རྐང་བས་ཕུལ་བ	to mistreat	rkang bas phul ba
རྐང་བུ་ཆུང་གི་ཚོགས	infantry	rkang bu chung gi tshogs
རྐང་བོལ	upper part of the foot	rkang bol
རྐང་བོལ་རྒྱ་ཆིངས	a nadi	rkang bol rgya chings
རྐང་བྱེད	backbone, mainstay	rkang byed
རྐང་བྱེད་མཁན	those who are the backbone [of the movement]	rkang byed mkhan
རྐང་བྲལ	1) footless; 2) helpless; 3) involved	rkang bral
རྐང་བྲོ	dance	rkang bro
རྐང་བྲོ་གླུ་གར	dance and, sing a [biographical] song	rkang bro glu gar
རྐང་བྲོ་གླུ་གཞས	dancing and singing	rkang bro glu gzhas
རྐང་བྲོའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	sngar lha sa'i smon lam chen mo skabs mi dmangs tshos tshogs chen zhal ngor zhabs bro rgyag chog pa'i dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	rkang bro'i 'khrol 'dzin
རྐང་བྲོས	SA rkang 'gros	rkang bros
རྐང་བླ	travel expenses	rkang bla
རྐང་བླ་ཕབ	to adjust	rkang bla phab
རྐང་འབམ	disease in the foot, swelling in the foot, gout	rkang 'bam
རྐང་འབྲས	sore or ulcer on the foot	rkang 'bras
རྐང་འབྲོས	SA rkang 'gros	rkang 'bros
རྐང་སྦས	snake [lit. hidden feet]	rkang sbas
རྐང་མ	left channel	rkang ma
རྐང་མ་རྐང་ཆིག	a part of nether world where nagas reside	rkang ma rkang chig
རྐང་མང	scorpion, any many legged insect etc.	rkang mang
རྐང་མང་པོ	crab	rkang mang po
རྐང་མར	marrow	rkang mar
རྐང་མར་ནག	kind of nut	rkang mar nag
རྐང་མི་འགྲོ	snake	rkang mi 'gro
རྐང་མིག	founder of Nyaya school in India	rkang mig
རྐང་མིག་པ	TSE	rkang mig pa
རྐང་མིག་པ་རིག་པ་ཅན་པ	the philosopher Akshapada	rkang mig pa rig pa can pa
རྐང་མེད	legless, snake	rkang med
རྐང་མེད་པ	Syn {rkang pa med pa}	rkang med pa
རྐང་དམག	infantry, foot soldier. foot soldier[s], infantry	rkang dmag
རྐང་གཙུགས	1) form a basis / foundation, establish, remain stable. 2) deliberately, in order to	rkang gtsugs
རྐང་བཙུགས	1) to remain grounded / stable. 2) to walk barefoot, go on foot	rkang btsugs
རྐང་བཙུགས་ནས	willful, purposely	rkang btsugs nas
རྐང་བཙུགས་ནས་ཕྱིན་པ	deliberately, intentionally; to go for the purpose [of doing something], came for some particular purpose	rkang btsugs nas phyin pa
རྐང་བཙུགས་ནས་བྱས་པ	do [a thing] on purpose	rkang btsugs nas byas pa
རྐང་བཙུགས་ནས་མིན་པར	inadvertently	rkang btsugs nas min par
རྐང་བཙུགས་ནས་ཡོང་བ	come purposely	rkang btsugs nas yong ba
རྐང་རྩ	shoes, "foot grass"	rkang rtsa
རྐང་རྩ་འཁྱམས་རུ	Kangtsa Kyamru. See Kyamru	rkang rtsa 'khyams ru
རྐང་རྩེ	front end of the foot	rkang rtse
རྐང་རྩེད་པོ་ལོ	soccer	rkang rtsed po lo
རྐང་རྩེད་སྤོ་ལོ	polo, soccer [ball]	rkang rtsed spo lo
རྐང་རྩེད་རྩེད་མོའི་ལྷམ	boot	rkang rtsed rtsed mo'i lham
རྐང་བརྩེ	{rkang brtse} wind disease	rkang brtse
རྐང་ཚ	Kangtsa, in Domey	rkang tsha
རྐང་ཚད་དངུལ་འཛིན	ma rkang btsugs pa'i 'dzin shog	rkang tshad dngul 'dzin
རྐང་ཚིགས	ankle	rkang tshigs
རྐང་ཚུགས	gzhi'am rtsa ba tshugs pa	rkang tshugs
རྐང་ཚུགས་པ	to take root, to get a firm footing. to take root, to get a firm footing	rkang tshugs pa
རྐང་ཚུགས་པར་བྱ	try to be steadfast, get a firm footing	rkang tshugs par bya
རྐང་ཚུགས་ཕུག	footprint cave	rkang tshugs phug
རྐང་ཚེགས	difficulty/ exertion of walking	rkang tshegs
རྐང་ཚེགས་ཆེ	much clattering of feet	rkang tshegs che
རྐང་མཚོན	sparrow	rkang mtshon
རྐང་མཛུབ	toe	rkang mdzub
རྐང་མཛེད	iron spikes fastened to te	rkang mdzed
བོཨོཏ	sole (for climbing)	boot
རྐང་མཛེར	iron nails fasted to boot sole for climbing	rkang mdzer
རྐང་མཛེས	Ashoka tree, Jonesia Asoka Roxburgh	rkang mdzes
རྐང་འཛིན	root of the Andropogon muricatus	rkang 'dzin
རྐང་འཛིན་མཁན	1) who are the backbone [of the organization; 2) specialist	rkang 'dzin mkhan
རྐང་འཛིན་སློབ་གྲྭ	technical school	rkang 'dzin slob grwa
རྐང་ཞ་བ	four-footed, quadruped, beast, cattle	rkang zha ba
རྐང་ཞ་ལག་འཐེང	1) both arms and legs crippled; 2) Khag 'dogs,...Rang 'khris las 'gan sgrub skabs rkang zha lag 'theng byas na mi 'grig	rkang zha lag 'theng
རྐང་བཞག	rkang pa'i brla sha	rkang bzhag
རྐང་བཞི	four-footed, quadruped, beast, anything that stands on 4 legs	rkang bzhi
རྐང་བཞི་པ	quadruped	rkang bzhi pa
རྐང་བཞིའི་ནོར་ལྡན	herdsman [lit. possessed of four-legged riches]; herdsman (lit. possessed of four-legged riches)	rkang bzhi'i nor ldan
རྐང་ཟམ	1) foot bridge; 2) messenger	rkang zam
རྐང་འོག	nether world where the nagas	rkang 'og
དེམི	gods reside; nether world (where	demi
ཐེ་ནགས་དེམི	gods reside)	the nagas demi
རྐང་འོག་རྡེའུ	pebble under the ground, example of no attention/ consideration	rkang 'og rde'u
རྐང་ཡང	Syn {rkang pa yang po}	rkang yang
རྐང་ཡུ	stalk, stem	rkang yu
རྐང་ཡོན	crooked/ deformed legs	rkang yon
རྐང་རིང	crane [lit long shanks	rkang ring
རྐང་རིལ	crippled legs	rkang ril
རྐང་རུ་ལྷུང་པ	[arch] exhaust 1's physical strength lus zungs zad pa	rkang ru lhung pa
རྐང་རུས	bone of the foot	rkang rus
རྐང་བརླག་པ	lose the root/ principal	rkang brlag pa
རྐང་ལག	limbs, arms and legs, hands and feet, extremities	rkang lag
རྐང་ལག་ཀྲབ་ཀྲབ	arms and legs moving and shaking	rkang lag krab krab
རྐང་ལག་རྐྱོང་བ	to stretch one's arms and legs	rkang lag rkyong ba
རྐང་ལག་བརྐྱངས་ཉལ	sprawl	rkang lag brkyangs nyal
རྐང་ལག་འཁུམས་པ	contracted hands and feet	rkang lag 'khums pa
རྐང་ལག་འགྱུས་པ	(prash'akh'a: 5th of the mngal gyi gnas skabs lnga or, 5th week of gestation, from khu khrag gnyis having completely ripened the five limbs of the body so sor grub pa'i dus skabs from which to the ...	rkang lag 'gyus pa
རྐང་ལག་བཅད་པ	sems can gyi rkang lag	rkang lag bcad pa
བཅད་པ	cut off the legs of animals	bcad pa
རྐང་ལག་བརྟན་ཤིང	crutches	rkang lag brtan shing
རྐང་ལག་རྣམས་མྱུར་དུ་ཆོད་ཅིག	ordered his hands and feet cut off at once	rkang lag rnams myur du chod cig
རྐང་ལག་ཞ་ཅན	having a maimed foot or hand	rkang lag zha can
རྐང་ལག་བཞི	all fours; arms and legs rkang lag g.yas gnyis - right arm & leg rkang lag g.yob pa - strike out with the arms and legs	rkang lag bzhi
རྐང་ལག་ལ་ཤ་འདྲེག་ཆགས	working hard, w calloused hands and feet	rkang lag la sha 'dreg chags
རྐང་ལག་སོགས་རྐྱང་པ	stretch	rkang lag sogs rkyang pa
རྐང་ལམ	foot path, passage where person can't ride but has to walk	rkang lam
རྐང་ལེབ	crush/ flatten [w the feet]	rkang leb
རྐང་ལེབ་འཐེབ	be flattened, crushed [w 1's foot]	rkang leb 'theb
རྐང་ལེབ་འཐེབ་པ	to flatten, crush [with one's foot]	rkang leb 'theb pa
རྐང་ལེབ་བྱེད	crush/ flatten [w the feet]	rkang leb byed
རྐང་ལོགས	rkang pa'i ngos sam ldebs	rkang logs
རྐང་ལོངས	step coursing	rkang longs
རྐང་ཤ	leg [of mutton, beef, etc.]	rkang sha
རྐང་ཤར་པ	foot soldier	rkang shar pa
རྐང་ཤར་བ	foot-soldier	rkang shar ba
རྐང་ཤིང	treadle of a loom	rkang shing
རྐང་ཤུ	1) blemishes, sores, pustules on the legs; 2) particular leg disease	rkang shu
རྐང་ཤུབ་རིང་པོ	stocking	rkang shub ring po
རྐང་ཤུབས	1) shoes/ boots; 2) Ao mo su lu; 3) socks	rkang shubs
རྐང་སུག	1) hands and feet, arms and legs; 2) rkang pas gzhan la btang ba'i brda /..Kha nas lab mi bde stabs rkang sug cig brgyab byung	rkang sug
རྐང་སོར	toe	rkang sor
རྐང་གསུམ	tripod	rkang gsum
རྐང་གསུམ་སྟེགས་བུ	tripod	rkang gsum stegs bu
རྐང་གསུམ་པ	1) having three feet. 2) Vaishravana [epith. of Kuvera, the god, who guards the northern quarter. 3) tripod. 4) mule; 1) having three feet. 2) Vaishravana (epith. of Kuvera, the god, who guards the...	rkang gsum pa
རྐང་བསུམ	tripod	rkang bsum
རྐན	palate {gums}	rkan
རྐན་གྱི་སུམ་མདོ	nadi in the mouth	rkan gyi sum mdo
རྐན་མགྱོགས	swift-footed, fast-walking [one of {thun mong gi dngos grub brgyad}	rkan mgyogs
རྐན་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhi	rkan mgyogs kyi dngos grub
ཨོཕ༹་ཕ༹སཏ	walking [one of {thun mong gi dngos grub brgyad}	of fast
རྐན་མགྱོགས་པ	a fast-walker	rkan mgyogs pa
རྐན་སྒྲ	palatal sound, smacking/ cracking sound, smacking of the palate, palatal sound	rkan sgra
རྐན་སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས	smacking the palate	rkan sgra sgrogs
རྐན་སྒྲ་གཏོག	palatalized sound	rkan sgra gtog
རྐན་རྙིལ	rkan mtha'i rnyil te, so rnyil	rkan rnyil
རྐན་མཐའི་རྙིལ	end of the palate, gums at the end of the palate	rkan mtha'i rnyil
རྐན་འདེབས	Syn {rkan sgra gtog}	rkan 'debs
རྐན་རྡེབ	make a sound w the palate	rkan rdeb
རྐན་ནད	disease of the palate	rkan nad
རྐན་ནད་དྲུག	CHN	rkan nad drug
རྐན་ཕུག	ya rkan gyi sbug	rkan phug
རྐན་དབུས	ya rkan gyi dbus sam dkyil	rkan dbus
རྐན་འབྲུམ	pustules on the palate	rkan 'brum
རྐན་མར	butter used to moisten the palate [of newly born babies]	rkan mar
རྐན་རྨེན	pustules on the palate	rkan rmen
རྐམ	desire, long for, lust for, long[ing], be attached to	rkam
རྐམ་མཁན	Syn {rkam pa po}	rkam mkhan
རྐམ་ཆགས	Syn {rkam pa}	rkam chags
རྐམ་པ	passionate, desire. to desire, long for, lust for, to long, longing	rkam pa
རྐམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to desire; to desire	rkam par byed pa
རྐམ་པོ	arid	rkam po
རྐུ	steal	rku
རྐུ་རྐ	riddle, enigma; riddle, enigma	rku rka
རྐུ་མཁན	thief, robber	rku mkhan
རྐུ་འཁྱེར	abduct, abduction	rku 'khyer
རྐུ་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	steal, rob	rku 'khyer byed
རྐུ་འཇལ	fine for theft	rku 'jal
རྐུ་ཐབས་སུ་གནས་པ	one living in monastery, but not a monk. lit. 'living in sneak.' a non-Buddhist pretending to be a Buddhist monk; 1) Living a lie. 2) changing one's way of life without actually receiving monk vows...	rku thabs su gnas pa
རྐུ་དང་ཇག་པ	robbery and the like	rku dang jag pa
རྐུ་རྡོ	[arch] rdab dkrugs sam, dbyen sbyor phra ma	rku rdo
རྐུ་སྤོང	to give up stealing	rku spong
རྐུ་འཕྲོག	stealing, robbery, plundering	rku 'phrog
རྐུ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	to rob and steal	rku 'phrog byed
རྐུ་བ	steal, rob	rku ba
རྐུ་བ་བཅུ	the 10 ways of stealing [ma byin par len pa'i thabs tshul bcu ste, mthus rku ba dang, sgyu thabs kyis rku ba, 'brid pas rku ba, gtam pas rku ba, slar byin zer nas rku ba, phyir bsab zer nas rku ba,...	rku ba bcu
རྐུ་བ་པོ	thief	rku ba po
རྐུ་བའི་ལས	karma/an action of stealth/ stealing, theft	rku ba'i las
རྐུ་བར་བགྲང་བ	count as stealing	rku bar bgrang ba
རྐུ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	to grow lean, dry. Syn {rke ba}	rku bar 'gyur ba
རྐུ་བར་བྱེད	steal, SA rku ba	rku bar byed
རྐུ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to steal, rob. sm. {rku ba}	rku bar byed pa
རྐུ་བྱ	keep secret, hide	rku bya
རྐུ་བྱེད	thief	rku byed
རྐུ་མ	thief, robber, pickpocket, theft	rku ma
རྐུ་མ་རྐུ་བ	steal	rku ma rku ba
རྐུ་མ་ཚབས་ཆེ་བ	daring robbery	rku ma tshabs che ba
རྐུ་ལས	larceny, theft	rku las
རྐུ་ཤས	brkus pa'i rdzas kyi cha shas	rku shas
རྐུ་བཤུས	plagiarism	rku bshus
རྐུ་སེམས	1) thievish mind. 2) intention to commit theft; thievish mind, intention to commit theft	rku sems
རྐུག	wager	rkug
རྐུག་པ	Syn {lkugs pa}	rkug pa
རྐུན་རྒྱབ་རྫུན་ལངས	tshul dang mi mthun pa la tshul dang mi mthun pas rgyab rtsa byas pa	rkun rgyab rdzun langs
རྐུན་སྒྱིག	thief's pouch, sort of small wallet or bag	rkun sgyig
རྐུན་ཅན	Syn {rku ma}	rkun can
རྐུན་བཅོམ	plunder	rkun bcom
རྐུན་བཅོམ་རྒྱག	loot, plunder	rkun bcom rgyag
རྐུན་ཇག	thief and robber, bandit	rkun jag
རྐུན་ཇག་གི་སྡོད་ཁང	den	rkun jag gi sdod khang
རྐུན་འཇག	bandit	rkun 'jag
རྐུན་ཐབས་སུ་བླང	take away by thievish means	rkun thabs su blang
རྐུན་ཐབས་སུ་བླང་བ	to take away by plunder; to take away by plunder	rkun thabs su blang ba
རྐུན་ཐོ	after things are stolen from a house list offered to the police 124	rkun tho
རྐུན་དོང	hole for hiding stolen goods	rkun dong
རྐུན་ནོར	stolen goods	rkun nor
རྐུན་པོ	robber, 1 of 'jigs pa rnam par brgyad, thief, thief	rkun po
བྱེད	the downfall of accompanying a thief [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, rkun po dang, chom po dang, sho gam ma byin pa'i mgron po bcas dang lhan cig tu rgyang grags las 'das par 'gro ba]...	byed
རྐུན་པོས་བསྒོ་བ	the harm done by a thief	rkun pos bsgo ba
རྐུན་པོས་ངན་བྱེད་པ	the harm done by a thief	rkun pos ngan byed pa
རྐུན་དཔོན	head of a gang of marauders	rkun dpon
རྐུན་སྤྱིག	thief's pouch, sort of small wallet	rkun spyig
རྐུན་བུ	1) young robber; 2) liver disease w cold legs and ro stod pain and not being able to close the eyes etc.; 3) marmot	rkun bu
རྐུན་བྱི	steal &, commit adultery	rkun byi
རྐུན་སྦྱིག	Syn {rkun sgyig}	rkun sbyig
རྐུན་མ	a thief; thief, robber. 1) a thief, [robber]. 2) the act of stealing, stealth, stealing	rkun ma
རྐུན་མ་བརྐུས་ཚར་བ	stolen	rkun ma brkus tshar ba
རྐུན་མ་རྒྱབ་པ	steal, thief	rkun ma rgyab pa
རྐུན་མ་ཇག	thief and robber	rkun ma jag
རྐུན་མ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་འགྲོ་བ	Syn {rkun po dang lhan cig tu 'gro ba'i ltung byed}	rkun ma dang lhan cig 'gro ba
རྐུན་མ་ཚབས་ཆེན	thief who has stolen many things and does not fear the law	rkun ma tshabs chen
རྐུན་མ་འཛབ་ཆེན	dangerous thief, daring robber	rkun ma 'dzab chen
རྐུན་མ་རྫབ་ཆེན	thief who has stolen many things and does not fear the law	rkun ma rdzab chen
རྐུན་མས་བཅོམས་པ	be assaulted by a thief, be knocked down and robbed	rkun mas bcoms pa
རྐུན་མོ	thief	rkun mo
རྐུན་ཚང	place a thief stays and stolen articles sbed sa'i mi tshang	rkun tshang
རྐུན་རྫས	stolen goods	rkun rdzas
རྐུན་རྫོས	stolen goods or things	rkun rdzos
རྐུན་ཟླ	thief's accomplice	rkun zla
རྐུན་རོགས	Syn {rkun zla}	rkun rogs
རྐུན་སྲུང	guard, watchman. guard, watchman	rkun srung
རྐུན་སྲུང་བྱེད	guard against thieves	rkun srung byed
རྐུབ	anus	rkub
རྐུབ་ཀྱག	chair, bench, stool, seat	rkub kyag
རྐུབ་ཀྱག་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	wheelchair	rkub kyag 'khor lo can
རྐུབ་ཀྱག་རྒྱབ་སྙེས་མ	chair	rkub kyag rgyab snyes ma
རྐུབ་ཀྱག་ནེམ་འབོལ	sofa	rkub kyag nem 'bol
རྐུབ་ཀྱི	anal, rectal	rkub kyi
རྐུབ་བཀྱག	chair	rkub bkyag
རྐུབ་རྐྱག	chair	rkub rkyag
རྐུབ་སྐྱོད་པར	move or shake one's hinder parts, mode of nautch girls' dance in india	rkub skyod par
རྐུབ་རྒྱག	chair	rkub rgyag
རྐུབ་བཅད	[arch] 1) mjug 'gril ba; 2) resolve	rkub bcad
རྐུབ་ཆུང་ཆུང	small buttocks, cowardly	rkub chung chung
རྐུབ་ལྗིད་པོ	[heavy buttocks] lazy	rkub ljid po
རྐུབ་སྟེགས	bench	rkub stegs
རྐུབ་སྟེགས་ཐོབ	get a seat, be seated	rkub stegs thob
རྐུབ་སྟེགས་ནས་བསླངས	made [them] stand	rkub stegs nas bslangs
རྐུབ་འདེགས	chair, bench, stool, seat	rkub 'degs
རྐུབ་རྡུང་བ	to spank	rkub rdung ba
རྐུབ་སྡོད	be [left] at the end [of the row]	rkub sdod
རྐུབ་བརྡོལ	1) fall out [the bottom], burst open; 2) be exposed, become obvious; 3) container w damaged bottom	rkub brdol
རྐུབ་འཕག་བརྒྱབ་པ	horse etc. kyis rkub 'phag 'phag byas pa	rkub 'phag brgyab pa
རྐུབ་ཙོམ	buttocks	rkub tsom
རྐུབ་ཙོས	Syn {rkub chos}	rkub tsos
རྐུབ་ཚོས	buttocks. buttocks	rkub tshos
རྐུབ་ཡང་པོ	[light buttocks] active	rkub yang po
རྐུབ་ལ་རྡུང་བ	to flog. Syn {rkub}	rkub la rdung ba
རྐུབ་སུལ	bod chas gyon skabs rgyab gsham gyi sul ming	rkub sul
རྐུམ་རྐུ་བ	rob	rkum rku ba
རྐུམ་ཕྱག	Short prostration	rkum phyag
རྐུར་བཅུག་པ	10 kinds of stealing (mthus rku ba, sgyur thabs kyis rku ba, 'brid pas, gtam pas, slar byin zer nas, phyir bsab zer nas, nan dgug pa'i, dngan 'than gyis, 'jam pos, chos)	rkur bcug pa
རྐུས	{rku ba}! steal	rkus
རྐུས་འཕྲོག	theft and robbery	rkus 'phrog
རྐུས་འཕྲོག་བཅོམ་བྱེད་པ	theft, robbery, or banditry	rkus 'phrog bcom byed pa
རྐུས་རྫོས	stolen property	rkus rdzos
རྐེ	neck	rke
རྐེ་བ	1) lean, meager, emaciated, dry skin/ flesh; 2) dry, miser	rke ba
རྐེ་བར་འགྱུར་བར	grow lean, thin	rke bar 'gyur bar
རྐེ་ལ་བཏགས	{zhags nag rke la btags} tying one by the neck with a black rope	rke la btags
རྐེང་རུས	skeleton	rkeng rus
རྐེད	waist	rked
རྐེད་སྐབས་ཕྱེད་པ	having slender waist, slender	rked skabs phyed pa
རྐེད་རྒྱན	ornament of the girdle	rked rgyan
རྐེད་རྒྱུན	ornament (chain) hanging from waist	rked rgyun
རྐེད་རྔ	drum held at the waist 125	rked rnga
རྐེད་འཆུ	buttocks	rked 'chu
རྐེད་དུ་བཅད	[arch] myur lam du 'gro ba	rked du bcad
རྐེད་མདུད	1) tied up waist. 2) anything twisted in the middle. 3) met. n. of a biscuit	rked mdud
རྐེད་ནད	pain in the waist	rked nad
རྐེད་ནད་ཅན་མ	woman in menses	rked nad can ma
རྐེད་པ	Syn {sked pa}. 1) waist, base of spine, middle; loins. 2) middle part of an object. Syn {sked pa}. 1) waist, base of spine, middle, loins. 2) middle part of an object; waist loins. the waist, to bo...	rked pa
རྐེད་པ་གྱོང་པ	stiff & unyielding waist	rked pa gyong pa
རྐེད་པ་རྒྱག	menstruate	rked pa rgyag
རྐེད་པ་རྒྱུར་བ	become a female slave	rked pa rgyur ba
རྐེད་པ་ཆག	fail in a great undertaking (broken waist)	rked pa chag
རྐེད་པ་འཆགས་པ	met. to fail in an undertaking (lit. to brake waist)	rked pa 'chags pa
རྐེད་པ་ཕྲ	slender waist	rked pa phra
རྐེད་ཕྲ་མ	pretty woman, woman w slender waist]	rked phra ma
རྐེད་འབྲས	fruit used in fever	rked 'bras
རྐེད་སྦོམ	Syn {kho gnyer can}	rked sbom
རྐེད་མ	se 'bru tree	rked ma
རྐེད་མེད་མ	pretty woman, woman with a slender waist	rked med ma
རྐེད་མཚམས	waist{rked pa - {sked pa} 1) waist, base of spine, middle; loins; 2) akimbo; 3) menstruation	rked mtshams
རྐེད་རགས	waistband, girdle	rked rags
རྐེད་ལེགས་མ	pretty woman; pretty woman	rked legs ma
རྐེད་སོ	waist	rked so
རྐེན་ཐོག་གནད་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	realizing the path instruction through a condition, introducing the essential point in a circumstance	rken thog gnad ngo 'phrod pa
རྐོ	(brkos pa (brko ba (rkos,, 1) dig [up/out], hoe; 2) engrave, carve, in-	rko
རྐོ་མཁན	engraver	rko mkhan
རྐོ་ཆུ	well [water]	rko chu
རྐོ་འདོན	dig a hole and take substances out, mine, excavate, dig up	rko 'don
རྐོ་འདོན་བྱེད	dig a hole and take substances out, mine, excavate, dig up	rko 'don byed
རྐོ་འདྲུ	(brkos pa (brko ba (rkos,, dig [up/out], hoe	rko 'dru
རྐོ་སྤྱད	digging/ engraving tool	rko spyad
རྐོ་བ	dig, excavate, dig out, hoe, engrave, turn up, till, 1 of zhing las	rko ba
རྐོ་བར་གཟས་སོ	prepared to dig out, began to dig out	rko bar gzas so
རྐོ་བྱེད	1) dig; 2) byi ba, marmot; 3) pig	rko byed
རྐོ་འབྲི	engraving, carving, inscription	rko 'bri
རྐོ་འབྲི་བྱེད	engrave, carve, inscribe	rko 'bri byed
རྐོ་མ	kind of small hoe for digging earth, bird called ko ma, pick axe	rko ma
རྐོ་མ་རྒྱག་པ	hoe weeds	rko ma rgyag pa
རྐོ་མའི་མཆུ་འདྲ	broken bone 'don byed kyi implement	rko ma'i mchu 'dra
རྐོ་མི	digger, one who hoes	rko mi
རྐོ་མོ	well [water]	rko mo
རྐོ་འཚོལ	dig a hole and take substances out, mine, excavate, dig up	rko 'tshol
རྐོ་བཞིན་པ	digging	rko bzhin pa
རྐོ་གཟུང	knife of an engraver or sculptor	rko gzung
རྐོ་བཟོ	(brkos pa (brko ba (rkos,, / engrave, carve, inscribe a gouge, sculpture *, engrave picture	rko bzo
རྐོ་ལས	excavation	rko las
རྐོག་མ	SA lkog ma	rkog ma
རྐོང་ཅན	scabby	rkong can
རྐོང་པ	ringworm, itch	rkong pa
རྐོང་པོ	hole	rkong po
རྐོང་པོ་འབྲས་ཆེན	n. of a skin disease with large eruption	rkong po 'bras chen
རྐོང་ཕོག་མི	scabby individual	rkong phog mi
རྐོང་བུ	Syn {rkong po}	rkong bu
རྐོང་འབྲས	za 'phrug skye ba'i rma 'bras	rkong 'bras
རྐོང་འབྲས་ཆེན	Syn {rkong po 'bras chen}	rkong 'bras chen
རྐོང་སྨན	remedy against itch	rkong sman
རྐོད་པ	engraving, SA rko ba	rkod pa
རྐོན་པ	basket, net; vessel	rkon pa
རྐོན་བུ	Syn {rkon pa}	rkon bu
རྐོམ་ཚུགས	at tip of hand or stick brten pa'i aom tshugs	rkom tshugs
རྐོལ་མདོ	SA bkol mdo	rkol mdo
རྐོས	1) imp. of {rko ba}. 2) the act of engraving, carving; imp. of {rko ba}	rkos
རྐོས་སྐུ	engraved image	rkos sku
རྐོས་མཁན	digger, excavator, carver, engraver, sculptor	rkos mkhan
རྐོས་རྒྱག	1) dig!; 2) engraving, carving	rkos rgyag
རྐོས་རྒྱག་པ	engrave pictures, letters	rkos rgyag pa
རྐོས་ཕོར	mould for making clay, images	rkos phor
རྐོས་རིས	sculpture	rkos ris
རྐོས་རིས་རྒྱབ་མཁན	sculptor	rkos ris rgyab mkhan
རྐོས་ཤིག	dig, SA rko ba	rkos shig
རྐོས་ཤིང	woodcut	rkos shing
རྐྱ	1) single, alone; 2) cord/ rope's rkya; 3) bridge	rkya
རྐྱ་རྒྱག་པ	1) to row. 2) to ladle. 3) oarsman rkya rgyag phan tsun snol ba'am 'brel ba ...Thag pa gnyis rkya rgyag	rkya rgyag pa
རྐྱ་རྟ	riding horse	rkya rta
རྐྱ་འཐབ	1) mutually connect/ tie together; 2) tie bad person's hands together	rkya 'thab
རྐྱ་འཐབ་བྱེད་པའི་མི་ངན	tie the hands	rkya 'thab byed pa'i mi ngan
རྐྱ་པ	skya mi	rkya pa
རྐྱ་བ	stirring spoon; 1) Syn {skya ba}. 2) a ladle, oar. 3) stirring spoon	rkya ba
རྐྱ་བར	aligning cord so wall etc will be straight, between left and right	rkya bar
རྐྱ་མ	skya ma	rkya ma
རྐྱ་མི	skya mi	rkya mi
རྐྱ་རགས	rta rags	rkya rags
རྐྱག	dirt, excrement	rkyag
རྐྱག་པ	dirt, excrement	rkyag pa
རྐྱག་པ་གཏོང	defecate	rkyag pa gtong
རྐྱག་པ་གཏོང་བ	ease nature	rkyag pa gtong ba
རྐྱག་པ་བཏོང་བ	cause purging	rkyag pa btong ba
རྐྱང	1) wild ass, donkey, onager; 2) do something w/o ?/hesitation, right away; 3) only, completely entirely; 4) solely barely, simply, just, only, nothing but, definitely, stretch out; 5) kind of a fis...	rkyang
རྐྱང་དཀར	horse/ mule white and red mixed	rkyang dkar
རྐྱང་རྐྱང	always, single, one, odd, alone, solitary, alone, matchless, only	rkyang rkyang
རྐྱང་རྐྱོང	mind crude/ uncultivated, nature of not wanting to work	rkyang rkyong
རྐྱང་སྐྲས	single ladder (1 pole)	rkyang skras
རྐྱང་གོས	gos gcig rkyang	rkyang gos
རྐྱང་གླུ	solo song	rkyang glu
རྐྱང་བགོད	dividing [bgod byed] # kyi grangs gnas not more than 1 bgo rtsis	rkyang bgod
རྐྱང་མགྱོགས	swift runner, short-cut	rkyang mgyogs
རྐྱང་འགྲོའི་ལམ་ཐིག	1-way street	rkyang 'gro'i lam thig
རྐྱང་རྒན	old wild ass	rkyang rgan
རྐྱང་རྒྱག	singles [tennis etc]	rkyang rgyag
རྐྱང་ངེ་རྐྱོང་ངེ	mind crude/ uncultivated, nature of not wanting to work	rkyang nge rkyong nge
རྐྱང་ངེ་ཅོ་ངེ་བ	to hesitate, to be in doubt; to hesitate, to be in doubt	rkyang nge co nge ba
རྐྱང་ཆུ	a lake in Ladak	rkyang chu
རྐྱང་ཇུས	a kind of silk scarf, satin	rkyang jus
རྐྱང་ལྟབ་པ	fold single	rkyang ltab pa
རྐྱང་ཐག	long rope	rkyang thag
རྐྱང་ཐང	1) grassy plain w/o people where wild asses stay; 2) flat ground/ field	rkyang thang
རྐྱང་ཐང་སྒང	place near Lhasa	rkyang thang sgang
རྐྱང་ཐང་ནག	{rkyang thang nag} meadow near Norbu linga	rkyang thang nag
རྐྱང་དར	young onager	rkyang dar
རྐྱང་དར་མ	adult wild ass	rkyang dar ma
རྐྱང་འདེད	to chase after	rkyang 'ded
རྐྱང་འདེད་པ	to pursue . . . and . . . alone	rkyang 'ded pa
རྐྱང་ནུལ	act of smearing, plastering	rkyang nul
རྐྱང་ནུལ་རས	dressed only in cotton cloth, ascetic, follower of a mystic school	rkyang nul ras
རྐྱང་པ	1) complete, total; 2) single, alone, each; 3) prose, writing; 4) extended, spread; 5) alone, only; 6) simple, single [used to describe a letter which forms a syllable by itself w/o other prefixed ...	rkyang pa
རྐྱང་པའི་གྲངས	n. of 1, 10,100 and the further multiples of 10	rkyang pa'i grangs
རྐྱང་པའི་གྲངས་ཀ	1 gnas to 100 million, as all grangs gnas names rkyang pa yin pas, they are called rkyang pa'i grangs ka	rkyang pa'i grangs ka
རྐྱང་པོ	{rkyang} alone; sole(ly)	rkyang po
རྐྱང་པོའི་རྟ	horse w hair/ color of a wild ass	rkyang po'i rta
རྐྱང་པོས་མ་ཚད་པར	not only [---/ for/ by]	rkyang pos ma tshad par
རྐྱང་ཕན་ནམ་མཁའ་རྫོང	Kyangpen Namkha Dzong, in Tsang	rkyang phan nam mkha' rdzong
རྐྱང་ཕུག	[arch] chu rkyan	rkyang phug
རྐྱང་ཕྱག	full-length prostration	rkyang phyag
རྐྱང་ཕྱག་བཙལ	offered a full prostration	rkyang phyag btsal
རྐྱང་འཕུལ	gug kyed brtsegs 'dogs med pa'i ming gzhi sngon 'jug can,...Dga'a...Mda'a	rkyang 'phul
རྐྱང་འཕྱེས	immensely large number	rkyang 'phyes
རྐྱང་བ	extended, spread, extend	rkyang ba
རྐྱང་བུལ	plaster	rkyang bul
རྐྱང་བྱེད	do something w/o ?/hesitation, right away	rkyang byed
རྐྱང་མ	left-hand pathway, SA 'dzin gyi rlung, pingala, kyangma, left solar nostril for males 127	rkyang ma
རྐྱང་མ་ཤོར	don't waver!	rkyang ma shor
རྐྱང་མོ	red-brown wild horse	rkyang mo
རྐྱང་ཝོ་གཉའ་བ་ཅན	[arch] spyi blugs 'ju lung can	rkyang wo gnya' ba can
རྐྱང་གཞས	solo song	rkyang gzhas
རྐྱང་ཟླ	mtshan mo	rkyang zla
རྐྱང་ཤད	single stroke/dot in dbu can writing after words	rkyang shad
རྐྱང་ཤིང	stretcher	rkyang shing
རྐྱང་ཤོག་པ	pedicularis elwesii hook. f.	rkyang shog pa
རྐྱང་སིར་རླུང	cool air	rkyang sir rlung
རྐྱང་སེར	light yellow. light yellow	rkyang ser
རྐྱངས་པ	stretch, SA rkyong ba	rkyangs pa
རྐྱངས་ཤིང	SA rgyangs shing	rkyangs shing
རྐྱད	(not in DAS)	rkyad
རྐྱན	1) brass, silver etc. vessel, jar, pot [for coffee tea etc]; 2) vessel [w spout]; 3) pot-belly, paunch	rkyan
རྐྱན་མཁན	navigator	rkyan mkhan
རྐྱན་བུ	vessel made of brass	rkyan bu
རྐྱལ	swim, skill in crossing rivers [= chu rtsal, 'phyan 'dzin]	rkyal
རྐྱལ་ཀ	vain talk	rkyal ka
རྐྱལ་ཀ་བྱེད་པ	play a practical joke on, make a game of	rkyal ka byed pa
རྐྱལ་རྐྱལ	long and flat, not globular	rkyal rkyal
རྐྱལ་གོག་མཐིལ་རྡོལ	1) ko khug zhabs rdol; 2) rgud pa'am nyams pa'i dpe,...Mi tsang rkyal gog mthil rdol zhig	rkyal gog mthil rdol
རྐྱལ་འགྲོ	mon lug gla sgang	rkyal 'gro
རྐྱལ་རྒྱག་པ	swimming, floating, raft,	rkyal rgyag pa
ཕེ༹རརཡ	boat. Syn {rkyal}	ferry
རྐྱལ་རྒྱབ་མཁན	swimmer	rkyal rgyab mkhan
རྐྱལ་རྒྱབ་པ	swim	rkyal rgyab pa
རྐྱལ་ཅན	frog; frog	rkyal can
རྐྱལ་ཆེན	1) fisherman. 2) fish	rkyal chen
རྐྱལ་སྟོང	empty bag	rkyal stong
རྐྱལ་པ	1) leather bag, small bag, pouch. 2) body. a sack	rkyal pa
རྐྱལ་པ་ཆུ་ཐུབ	med herb {rkyal pa chu thub} [bod ljongs yongs kyi ri'i ldebs su skye ba'i sngo sman zhig ste, rang bzhin bsil che ba dang, nus pa dug sel, skrang pas 'jags, gcin pa 'bab bde ba bcas byed]	rkyal pa chu thub
རྐྱལ་པ་ཐར་བྱེད	exhaustion of misery, cessation of suffering	rkyal pa thar byed
རྐྱལ་བ	{rkyal ba, rkyal ba, rkyal ba, rkyol} tha dad pa: to swim	rkyal ba
རྐྱལ་བ་གང	a full bag	rkyal ba gang
རྐྱལ་བ་པོ	swimmer	rkyal ba po
རྐྱལ་བུ	small swimmer	rkyal bu
རྐྱལ་བྱེད	misery	rkyal byed
རྐྱལ་བྱེད་པ	act of swimming or bathing, to swim	rkyal byed pa
རྐྱལ་མི	swimmer	rkyal mi
རྐྱལ་རྩེ	Syn {rkyal rtsed pa}	rkyal rtse
རྐྱལ་རྩེད	water sports, recreational swimming	rkyal rtsed
རྐྱལ་རྩེད་པ	to amuse oneself by swimming	rkyal rtsed pa
རྐྱལ་རྩེད་རྫིང་བུ	swimming pool	rkyal rtsed rdzing bu
རྐྱལ་རྫིང	swimming pool	rkyal rdzing
རྐྱལ་ཟད་སྒོམ་པ	meditate on the exhaustion of misery, way to nirvana	rkyal zad sgom pa
རྐྱལ་སློབ	swimming lessons	rkyal slob
རྐྱུའི་ཁྱད་པར་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign proving a particular cause	rkyu'i khyad par sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྐྱེན	circumstance, opportunity	rkyen
མོསཏལཡ་ཨིན་ནོན	philosophical contexts] circumstance, there usu a co-operating / contributing] cause, causal factor, circumstantial influence- fruition ripening condition]; 2) adversity, calamity, misfortune, mish...	mostly in non
རྐྱེན་ཀློག་པ	avert a misfortune	rkyen klog pa
རྐྱེན་གོད	obstacles and loss/ destruction	rkyen god
རྐྱེན་གྱི་སྟོབས	the power of circumstance	rkyen gyi stobs
རྐྱེན་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	defined as circumstance	rkyen gyi mtshan nyid can
རྐྱེན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	SK aa ga ma &, Tibetan writing dbu dang shad kyi yi ge, ...... '','' ?	rkyen gyi yi ge
རྐྱེན་གྱིས	because of, due to, owing to, because, for, therefore, so, by reason of, on account of, by, by reason of this condition	rkyen gyis
རྐྱེན་གྱིས་རྐྱེན་གྲོལ་བ	liberate secondary causes by means of secondary causes	rkyen gyis rkyen grol ba
རྐྱེན་གྱིས་མི་བཤིག་པ	not be destroyed by circumstances	rkyen gyis mi bshig pa
རྐྱེན་གྱིས་སད་པ	awakened through conditions	rkyen gyis sad pa
རྐྱེན་གློག་པ	avert a misfortune	rkyen glog pa
རྐྱེན་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	the circumstance of having a spiritual friend	rkyen dge ba'i bshes gnyen
རྐྱེན་ངན	mi 'dod rkyen ngan - hard circumstances	rkyen ngan
རྐྱེན་ངན་གྱི	tragic	rkyen ngan gyi
རྐྱེན་ངན་གྱི་རླུང	the wind of adversity	rkyen ngan gyi rlung
རྐྱེན་ངན་གྲོགས་ཤར	'gal rkyen, incompatible condition becoming mthun rkyen compatible/ corresponding	rkyen ngan grogs shar
རྐྱེན་ངན་གྲོགས་སུ་འཆར་བ	turning adversity into favor	rkyen ngan grogs su 'char ba
རྐྱེན་ངན་པ	1) evil cause, unfortunate circumstance, misfortune, disaster; 2) fatal accident	rkyen ngan pa
རྐྱེན་ངན་པས་འདས	perished by an evil incident	rkyen ngan pas 'das
རྐྱེན་ཅན	having a cause, having a consequence	rkyen can
རྐྱེན་ཅིས	through what circumstance, due to some circumstance	rkyen cis
རྐྱེན་གཅིག་རྟོགས	1) realizing through one [outer] condition. 2) Syn pratyekabuddha. Syn {rang sangs rgyas}; epith. of a pratyekabuddha	rkyen gcig rtogs
རྐྱེན་ཆགས	geks/obstructing spirits and obstacles	rkyen chags
རྐྱེན་ཆགས་འབྱུང་བ	die, be abolished	rkyen chags 'byung ba
རྐྱེན་འཇུག་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the conditions characterized as the entrance	rkyen 'jug pa'i mtshan nyid
རྐྱེན་འཇུག་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཐེ་ཅོནདིཏིཨོནས་ཆརཅཏེརིསེད་ཨས་ཐེ་ཨེནཏྲནཅེ་ཨརེ་ཅོནཏེམཔླཏིཨོན	. the samadhi characterized as engaging in the conditions [one of {rim gyis pa grol lam rnam gsum} rkyen 'jug pa'i mtshan nyid ting nge 'dzin the conditions characterized as the en-	rkyen 'jug pa'i mtshan nyid ting nge 'dzin the conditions characterised as the entrance are contemplation
ཏྲནཅེ་ཨརེ་ཅོནཏེམཔླཏིཨོན	. the samadhi characterized as engaging in the conditions	trance are contemplation
རྐྱེན་རྙེད	encounter conditions	rkyen rnyed
རྐྱེན་རྟོགས	Syn pratyekabuddha. {rang rgyal, rang sangs rgyas}	rkyen rtogs
རྐྱེན་བསྟུན་འཕྲོག་བཅོམ	gzhan nor len bde'i go skabs btsal nas rnyed mtshams 'phrog bcom byed pa	rkyen bstun 'phrog bcom
རྐྱེན་ཐུབ	patience, forbearance	rkyen thub
རྐྱེན་ཐུབ་པ	be equal to the occasion, cope with calamity	rkyen thub pa
རྐྱེན་ཐེག་པ	Syn {rkyen thub pa}. to endure misfortune	rkyen theg pa
ཐེག་པ	{rkyen thub pa} endure misfortune	theg pa
རྐྱེན་ཐེགས་པ	endure misfortune	rkyen thegs pa
རྐྱེན་དང་ལྡན་ན	when / if the right conditions are present	rkyen dang ldan na
རྐྱེན་དང་ཕྲད་པ	meeting with difficulties, facing adversity, encountering bad luck	rkyen dang phrad pa
རྐྱེན་དང་འཕྲད་ཚེ	as soon as bad times come	rkyen dang 'phrad tshe
རྐྱེན་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	related conditions	rkyen dang 'brel ba
རྐྱེན་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་དྲུག	the six related conditions [1) (sa chu); 2) (me rlung); 3) (nam mkha') 4) (dus) See (phyi'i rten 'brel]	rkyen dang 'brel ba drug
རྐྱེན་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the interdependence of related conditions	rkyen dang 'brel ba'i rten 'brel
རྐྱེན་དུ་འགྱུར	it will become the secondary cause rkyen de dang de la brten nas dngos po	rkyen du 'gyur
དེ་དང་དེ་དག་འབྱུང་ངོ	based on such and such condition, such and such thing will occur	de dang de dag 'byung ngo
རྐྱེན་དེ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	owing to that circumstance 129	rkyen de la brten nas
རྐྱེན་དྲུག	the six conditions [dpa' bo'i rkyen du gung dang stag dang, sngar ma'i rkyen du wa zhu, ya rabs kyi rkyen du lha chos, gyung po'i rkyen du thags dang bon, mdzangs pa'i rkyen du yig tsang, ngan pa'i...	rkyen drug
རྐྱེན་དྲུང	[arch] take care of land people and cattle	rkyen drung
རྐྱེན་འདི་པ་ཙམ་ཉིད	conditionality	rkyen 'di pa tsam nyid
རྐྱེན་འདི་པ་ཙམ་ཉེང	conditionality	rkyen 'di pa tsam nyeng
རྐྱེན་ནས་ངེས	through various circumstances	rkyen nas nges
རྐྱེན་སྣང	1) conditions, situation, events, incidents; 2) objects, appearances	rkyen snang
རྐྱེན་པ	barley	rkyen pa
རྐྱེན་པས	because	rkyen pas
རྐྱེན་བྱས	caused	rkyen byas
རྐྱེན་བྱས་ནས	because	rkyen byas nas
རྐྱེན་བྱིས	on account of, by reason of, because of, in consequence of, as a result of	rkyen byis
རྐྱེན་བྱུང	circumstamces that occur; isc. conditioned	rkyen byung
རྐྱེན་བྱེད	to cause, condition, on account of	rkyen byed
རྐྱེན་འབབ	skabs dang 'tsam par 'byung ba	rkyen 'bab
རྐྱེན་མེད	w/o cause/ motive/ conditions	rkyen med
རྐྱེན་སྨན	medicine that is administered for determining the cooperative cause of a disease	rkyen sman
རྐྱེན་རྩི	disease curing med.	rkyen rtsi
རྐྱེན་བཞི	The four condition 1) {rgyu rken} causal, ruling, condition; 2) {dmigs rkyen} objective condition; 3) {bdag rkyen} fundamental condition 4) {de ma thag rkyen} immediate condition	rkyen bzhi
རྐྱེན་བཞི་ཚང་བ	complete four conditions	rkyen bzhi tshang ba
རྐྱེན་བཞིའི་འཁྲུལ་པ	four conditions of bewilderment	rkyen bzhi'i 'khrul pa
རྐྱེན་ཟློག	[ritual for] averting misfortune	rkyen zlog
རྐྱེན་ཟློག་བར་ཆད་སེལ་བ	eliminating 'Gal rkyen thabs la 'bad	rkyen zlog bar chad sel ba
རྐྱེན་བཟང	fortunate/ happy/ auspicious event/ circumstance	rkyen bzang
རྐྱེན་བཟང་ནས	fortunately	rkyen bzang nas
རྐྱེན་ཡུལ	anything around you; x {da lta rtog pa rkyen yul du shor ba} to let your present thoughts get distracted by anything around you	rkyen yul
རྐྱེན་རིས	cha rkyen	rkyen ris
རྐྱེན་རེ་རེ	every daily event in life	rkyen re re
རྐྱེན་ལ་ལྟོས་པ	dependent upon circumstances	rkyen la ltos pa
རྐྱེན་ལ་བལྟས་ཏེ	considering the case of	rkyen la bltas te
རྐྱེན་ལ་མི་ལྟོས་པ	independent of circumstances	rkyen la mi ltos pa
རྐྱེན་ལ་རག་ལས་པ	dependent upon circumstances	rkyen la rag las pa
རྐྱེན་ལ་རག་ལུས་པ	dependent upon circumstances	rkyen la rag lus pa
རྐྱེན་ལམ	mtshon 'og tu 'chi ba	rkyen lam
རྐྱེན་ལམ་སོང	"death by misadventure"	rkyen lam song
རྐྱེན་ལས	because of	rkyen las
རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	arisen from conditions	rkyen las skyes pa
རྐྱེན་ལས་ངེས	introduction through various circumstances	rkyen las nges
རྐྱེན་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from conditions	rkyen las byung ba
རྐྱེན་ས	speed, swift	rkyen sa
རྐྱེན་སེལ	dispelling obstacles	rkyen sel
རྐྱེན་སེལ་གཏོ	rites to remove adverse conditions	rkyen sel gto
རྐྱེན་གསུམ	{dmigs rkyen, bdag rkyen, de ma thag rkyen}. See {rkyen bzhi}; Three types of conditions 1) {g.yo ba med pa'i rkyen}. the unchanging condition. 2) {mi rtag pa'i rkyen}. the impermanent condition 3)...	rkyen gsum
རྐྱོང	to stretch, extend, raise the hand	rkyong
རྐྱོང་གདན	lteb brtsegs brgyab chog pa'i [a] long thin mattress [gdan], small mat	rkyong gdan
རྐྱོང་པ	stretch [arms legs], extend [1's hand] stick out [1's tongue] spread [wings]	rkyong pa
རྐྱོང་བ	{ppafi: rkyong ba, brkyangs pa, brkyang ba, rkyongs} tha dad pa. to stretch, stretch out, extend, stretch forth, put out; spread; raise, distend	rkyong ba
རྐྱོང་ཙེ	lamp, candle	rkyong tse
རྐྱོང་རྩེ	candle, lamp	rkyong rtse
རྐྱོང་ཚེ	lamp, candle	rkyong tshe
རྐྱོང་རིང	lteb brtsegs brgyab chog pa'i [a] long thin mattress [gdan]	rkyong ring
རྐྱོང་ཤད	bya rmyang, stretch out arms and legs	rkyong shad
རྐྱོངས	imp. of {rkyong ba}; imp. of {rkyong ba}	rkyongs
རྐྱོངས་པ	stretch, SA rkyong ba	rkyongs pa
རྐྱོན	defects	rkyon
རྐྱོལ	{rkyal ba}! swim	rkyol
ལྐ་དན	kind of cloth	lka dan
ལྐག་ལྐོག	solitary place	lkag lkog
ལྐག་ལྐོགས	remote, solitary out-of-the way place	lkag lkogs
ལྐག་པ་སྐམ་པོ	stingy	lkag pa skam po
ལྐད་ཅིག་མ	TSE	lkad cig ma
ལྐལ	[arch] non-existent	lkal
ལྐལ་ལྡན་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	to accept fortunate disciples	lkal ldan rjes su 'dzin pa
ལྐུ	[arch] thief	lku
ལྐུག	wager	lkug
ལྐུག་རྟགས	fool-hardy	lkug rtags
ལྐུག་ལྡིབ	mute	lkug ldib
ལྐུག་བརྡ	hand signals	lkug brda
ལྐུག་པ	to become foolish, become dumb; 1) mute, dumb, [unable to talk]. verbally inept. 2) idiot, witless, imbecile, fool. 3) stupid, dull, foolish, idiotic, retarded, debilitated	lkug pa
ལྐུག་པ་གཏི་མུག་ཅན	in the manner of a deluded mute	lkug pa gti mug can
ལྐུགས	dumb, mute, dull, making dumb, 1 of 'phrin las bcu	lkugs
ལྐུགས་གར	pantomime	lkugs gar
ལྐུགས་གཏམ	foolish talk	lkugs gtam
ལྐུགས་རྟགས་ཚ་པོ	stupid, tactless	lkugs rtags tsha po
ལྐུགས་ལྡིབ	mute	lkugs ldib
ལྐུགས་བརྡ	sign language, non-verbal signals/ gestures	lkugs brda
ལྐུགས་པ	[become] mute, dumbness, stupid, idiotic, dull	lkugs pa
ལྐུགས་པ་མ	dumb woman	lkugs pa ma
ལྐུགས་པར་སྐྱེས་པ	a person born deaf and mute	lkugs par skyes pa
ལྐུགས་བུ	mute	lkugs bu
ལྐུགས་ཚུལ	pretending to be/ acting as if stupid	lkugs tshul
ལྐུགས་སེ	smra lce dig lkugs cung zad yod pa	lkugs se
ལྐོ་མོག	chu 'khyil ba'i low place where water collects	lko mog
ལྐོག	1) hidden, concealed, secret, covert. 2) private, on the sly; secret, private. in secret	lkog
ལྐོག་དཀར	Helictis manticola	lkog dkar
ལྐོག་ལྐོག	behind some1's back, secret[ly], private[ly], internally, hidden, concealed, secret, covert, on the sly	lkog lkog
ལྐོག་ལྐོག་སུད་སུད	hypocritical deceptive	lkog lkog sud sud
ལྐོག་ཁ་གཏོང་བ	secretly slander	lkog kha gtong ba
ལྐོག་གི་ཆུང་མ	concubine	lkog gi chung ma
ལྐོག་གི་རི་སྣ	the corner of the hill there	lkog gi ri sna
ལྐོག་གྱུར	secret, private. 1) inevident, hidden, concealed, private, covert, secret. [not perceptible] {gzhal bya gsum}. 2) abstract, non-factual. 3) a hidden obscure phenomenon	lkog gyur
ལྐོག་གྱུར་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	intimate relations, obscure, dark, bad	lkog gyur gyi 'brel ba
ལྐོག་གྱུར་གྱི་རིག་པ	occultism, Taoism	lkog gyur gyi rig pa
ལྐོག་གྱུར་གྱི་ལས་དོན	obscure (bad) affair	lkog gyur gyi las don
ལྐོག་གྲོས	plot, machination	lkog gros
ལྐོག་གྲོས་བྱེད	plot, machinate	lkog gros byed
ལྐོག་གླུ	secret[ly hummed] song	lkog glu
ལྐོག་འགག	rough voice	lkog 'gag
ལྐོག་འགྱུར	beyond the range of sight, invisible, secret	lkog 'gyur
ལྐོག་རྒོལ	secretly quarrel/ argue, surprise attack	lkog rgol
ལྐོག་རྒོལ་བྱེད	secretly quarrel/ argue, make a surprise attack	lkog rgol byed
ལྐོག་བརྒྱབ	ambush	lkog brgyab
ལྐོག་བརྒྱབ་བྱེད	ambush	lkog brgyab byed
ལྐོག་རྔན	bribery given privately	lkog rngan
ལྐོག་རྔན་སྤྲོད	bribe	lkog rngan sprod
ལྐོག་རྔན་སྤྲོད་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	to give and to accept a bribe	lkog rngan sprod len byed pa
ལྐོག་རྔན་ཟ	take a bribe	lkog rngan za
ལྐོག་རྔན་ལེན	take a bribe	lkog rngan len
ལྐོག་ཆད	secret punishment	lkog chad
ལྐོག་ཆོས	secret doctrine. 1) hidden phenomena, secret teaching / doctrine / transmission	lkog chos
ལྐོག་ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	apply oneself to religious studies secretly	lkog chos byed pa
ལྐོག་ཇབ་བྱེད་ནས	witness from a lurkingplace	lkog jab byed nas
ལྐོག་ཇབ་བྱེད་ནས་ལྟ་བ	watch	lkog jab byed nas lta ba
ལྐོག་ཇུས	plot, secret plan, intrigue	lkog jus
ལྐོག་ཇུས་འདིང	plot, plan in secret plan, intrigue	lkog jus 'ding
ལྐོག་ཇུས་འདིངས	plot, plan in secret plan, intrigue	lkog jus 'dings
ལྐོག་ཇུས་བྱེད	plot, plan in secret plan, intrigue	lkog jus byed
ལྐོག་ཇུས་བཤམ	plot, plan in secret plan, intrigue	lkog jus bsham
ལྐོག་འཇབ	invisibly hide/ hidden, guerrilla/ covert warfare	lkog 'jab
ལྐོག་འཇབ་ཀྱིས་དམག་རྒྱག་པ	wage war by stealth, guerrilla/ covert warfare	lkog 'jab kyis dmag rgyag pa
ལྐོག་འཇབ་དགྲ་རྒྱག	invisibly hide, wage guerrilla/ covert warfare	lkog 'jab dgra rgyag
ལྐོག་འཇབ་རྒྱག	invisibly hide, wage guerrilla/ covert warfare	lkog 'jab rgyag
ལྐོག་འཇབ་བྱེད	invisibly hide, wage guerrilla/ covert warfare	lkog 'jab byed
ལྐོག་ཉན	secretly listen, eavesdrop	lkog nyan
ལྐོག་ཉར	something kept secret/ hidden	lkog nyar
ལྐོག་ཉར་རྒྱུ་ནོར	hidden wealth	lkog nyar rgyu nor
ལྐོག་རྙན	reward given secretly, bribe	lkog rnyan
ལྐོག་ཏུ	inevident, in secret, confidentially concealed, on the sly, in private, covertly, back, secretly, behind; secretly, confidentially 131	lkog tu
ལྐོག་ཏུ་བརྐུས	stolen, removed secretly	lkog tu brkus
ལྐོག་ཏུ་གྱུར	[become] hidden, secret, covert, out of sight	lkog tu gyur
ལྐོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	secret, hidden, out of sight	lkog tu gyur pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	secret buddha	lkog tu gyur pa'i sangs rgyas
ལྐོག་ཏུ་གླེན་པ	converse secretly	lkog tu glen pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་ཆོས	secret doctrine	lkog tu chos
ལྐོག་ཏུ་སྣང	appear in a hidden way [ggd]	lkog tu snang
ལྐོག་ཏུ་ཕྲ་མ་བྱེད་པ	misunderstanding	lkog tu phra ma byed pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་འཕྱས་པ	slandered	lkog tu 'phyas pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་སྦས་པ	conceal in a secret place, SA skung ba	lkog tu sbas pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་ལབ་པ	to speak confidentially	lkog tu lab pa
ལྐོག་ཏུ་སོང་བ	residing alone in retirement	lkog tu song ba
ལྐོག་གཏམ	secret talk	lkog gtam
ལྐོག་གཏམ་བཤད་པ	speak secretly	lkog gtam bshad pa
ལྐོག་ལྟ	secret view, spying, peeping	lkog lta
ལྐོག་ལྟ་བྱེད	spy, peep	lkog lta byed
ལྐོག་ཐབས	secret means/ schemes	lkog thabs
ལྐོག་མཐོང་རྒྱང་ཤེལ	periscope	lkog mthong rgyang shel
ལྐོག་དོན	1) secret meaning; 2) indirect/ implied meaning	lkog don
ལྐོག་བདུད	larynx	lkog bdud
ལྐོག་མདུད	larynx	lkog mdud
ལྐོག་འདུན	secret conversation or deliberating. a secret 'coded' conversation/ a bribe	lkog 'dun
ལྐོག་བརྡ	secret symbols/ code, hint	lkog brda
ལྐོག་བརྡ་གཏོང	send secret symbols/ code/ hint	lkog brda gtong
ལྐོག་ན་མ	made secret, that which is not evident	lkog na ma
ལྐོག་ན་མོ	'hidden" [ggd]	lkog na mo
ལྐོག་ནས	behind [someone's] back	lkog nas
ལྐོག་ནས་སྐྱོན་འདོགས	secret harm/ injury, sabotage	lkog nas skyon 'dogs
ལྐོག་ནས་ཁས་ལེན	covert/ tacit consent	lkog nas khas len
ལྐོག་ནས་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་མ	w hook-like gra ma good quality barley	lkog nas lcags kyu ma
ལྐོག་ནོར	1) private property [??]; 2) secretly concealed stolen articles; 3) hidden wealth	lkog nor
ལྐོག་ནོར་གསོག་པ	surreptitiously hoards money and precious things	lkog nor gsog pa
ལྐོག་གནོད	secret harm/ injury, sabotage	lkog gnod
ལྐོག་གནོད་སྐྱེལ	secretly harm/ injure, sabotage	lkog gnod skyel
ལྐོག་གནོད་རྒྱག	secretly harm/ injure, sabotage	lkog gnod rgyag
ལྐོག་མནོ	secret thoughts	lkog mno
ལྐོག་པ	hard covering	lkog pa
ལྐོག་ཕྲ	misunderstanding. indirect slander, misunderstanding	lkog phra
ལྐོག་འཕྱང	front of ox's throat	lkog 'phyang
ལྐོག་འཕྲིན	private letter	lkog 'phrin
ལྐོག་བྱེད་པ	to act secretly	lkog byed pa
ལྐོག་བྲོས	escape abscond	lkog bros
ལྐོག་བྲོས་བྱེད	escape abscond	lkog bros byed
ལྐོག་དབེན	isolated place w/o bustle	lkog dben
ལྐོག་འབྲེལ	secret/ covert relations, conspiracy	lkog 'brel
ལྐོག་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	have secret/ covert relations, conspire	lkog 'brel byed
ལྐོག་མ	aog ma, chin, gullet, wind pipe, esophagus, throat, neck	lkog ma
ཝིནད	pipe, chin	wind
ལྐོག་མའི་ལྷ་གོང	larynx	lkog ma'i lha gong
ལྐོག་མའི་ལྷར་གོང	larynx	lkog ma'i lhar gong
ལྐོག་རྨེན	tonsils	lkog rmen
ལྐོག་སྨད	secretly disparage	lkog smad
ལྐོག་རྩ	front of throat nadi	lkog rtsa
ལྐོག་རྩིས	secret plot, conspiracy	lkog rtsis
ལྐོག་རྩིས་རྒྱག	carry out a secret plot, conspire	lkog rtsis rgyag
ལྐོག་ཚོང	illegal commerce, black market, smuggling	lkog tshong
ལྐོག་ཚོང་རྒྱག	carry on illegal commerce/ black market activities, smuggle	lkog tshong rgyag
ལྐོག་མཚང་རྗེན་འབྱིན	expose/pierce a deception/ falsehood	lkog mtshang rjen 'byin
ལྐོག་འཛིང	secretly quarrel/fight	lkog 'dzing
ལྐོག་འཛུལ	by secret means get/sneak in/ infiltrate	lkog 'dzul
ལྐོག་འཛུལ་བྱེད	by secret means get/sneak in/ infiltrate	lkog 'dzul byed
ལྐོག་ཞལ	Syn {lkag shal}	lkog zhal
ལྐོག་ཞུ	secret report	lkog zhu
ལྐོག་ཞུ་བྱེད	report secretly	lkog zhu byed
ལྐོག་ཟ	1) eat secretly/ in a place unseen by others; 2) corruption, graft bribery	lkog za
ལྐོག་ཟ་ཁོག་རུལ	corrupt and degenerate	lkog za khog rul
ལྐོག་ཟ་བྱེད	1) eat secretly/ in a place unseen by others; 2) take corruption/ graft/ bribery	lkog za byed
ལྐོག་ཟན	secret profit	lkog zan
ལྐོག་ཟན་ཟ་བ	to receive secret profit	lkog zan za ba
ལྐོག་ཟས	1) food to be secretly/privately eaten; 2) graft, corruption, bribery; 3) embezzlement	lkog zas
ལྐོག་ཟས་བྱེད	1) eat food secretly/privately; 2) take graft, corruption, bribery; 3) embezzle	lkog zas byed
ལྐོག་ཟས་ཟ་བ	take food secretly	lkog zas za ba
ལྐོག་ཟོས་རྐུ་རྒྱག	corruption/ graft and robbery	lkog zos rku rgyag
ལྐོག་ཡིག	Syn {lkog 'phrin} lkog g.yo - secret arrangement, plot, conspiracy, intrigue lkog g.yo ngan jus - secret deception	lkog yig
ལྐོག་ལ་བྲང་འབྱར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	name of asura kingdom where people have no necks	lkog la brang 'byar gyi rgyal khams
ལྐོག་ལབ	slander	lkog lab
ལྐོག་ལབ་རྒྱབ་པ	to speak against anyone behind his back	lkog lab rgyab pa
ལྐོག་ལས	secret/ underground/ covert/ illegal work/ activity	lkog las
ལྐོག་ལས་བྱེད	do secret/ underground/ covert/ illegal work/ activity	lkog las byed
ལྐོག་ཤལ	dewlap (of oxen)	lkog shal
ལྐོག་ཤལ་ཅན	ox	lkog shal can
ལྐོག་ཤོམ	secret arrangement, conspiracy, intrigue	lkog shom
ལྐོག་གཤོམ	secret arrangement, plot conspiracy, intrigue	lkog gshom
ལྐོག་གཤོམ་པ	conspirator	lkog gshom pa
ལྐོག་གཤོམ་བྱེད	make secret arrangement, plot, conspire, intrigue	lkog gshom byed
ལྐོག་གཤོམ་བྱེད་པ	make a secret arrangement	lkog gshom byed pa
ལྐོག་སོག	craw	lkog sog
ལྐོག་གསོག	1) under a bird's chin zas gsog snod; 2) secretly collect wealth	lkog gsog
ལྐོག་གསོད	murder, assassination	lkog gsod
ལྐོག་གསོད་གཏོང་བ	murder, assassinate 132	lkog gsod gtong ba
ལྐོག་གསོད་བཏང་བ	murder, assassinate	lkog gsod btang ba
ལྐོག་གསོད་བྱས་པ	murder, assassination	lkog gsod byas pa
ལྐོགས	secret	lkogs
ལྐོབ	fat, heavy, plump; fat, plump	lkob
ལྐོལ་མདུད	Syn {lkog mdud ska} water channel	lkol mdud
སྐ	news, SA skyes, shows complete knowledge of all phenomena	ska
སྐ་དཀར་གཉེར་མ་ཡིས་ནོན་ཀྱང	{I may bear the marks of grey hair and wrinkles}	ska dkar gnyer ma yis non kyang
སྐ་ཅིག	instant	ska cig
སྐ་ཅིག་ཏུ	in a moment	ska cig tu
སྐ་ཅིག་ལ	Syn {ska cig tu}	ska cig la
སྐ་ཅོག	names of 2 grammarians jointly written in abbr, SA ska ba dpal brtsegs, cog ro klu yi rgyal mtshan	ska cog
སྐ་ཅོག་ཞང་གསུམ	the three translators. 1) {ska ba dpal brtsegs}. 2) {cog ro klu'i rgyal mtshan}. 3) {zhang ye shes sde}	ska cog zhang gsum
སྐ་བ	1) Tibetan clan; 2) astringent; 3) thick [dough thug pa, fluids etc] * astringent; 4) strong in taste; 5) consistence, dense[ity]	ska ba
སྐ་བ་ཉིད	density	ska ba nyid
སྐ་བ་དཔལ་བརྩེགས	Kawa Paltsek, a translator sent to India by Trisong Deutsen	ska ba dpal brtsegs
སྐ་བོ་སྤྱི	vulgar people, common worldly men	ska bo spyi
སྐ་ཚལ	a Songtsen Gampo temple	ska tshal
སྐ་རགས	girdle, sash, sash	ska rags
སྐ་རགས་འགྲོལ་བ	to untie a belt	ska rags 'grol ba
སྐ་རགས་རྒྱན་ཅན	ornamental chain (worn by Tibetan women)	ska rags rgyan can
སྐ་རགས་ཅན	the earth	ska rags can
སྐ་རགས་ཆུང་པ	sash	ska rags chung pa
སྐ་རགས་འཆིང་བ	put on a girdle	ska rags 'ching ba
སྐ་རགས་བཟང་པོ་མ	n. of goddess of the yaksha class	ska rags bzang po ma
ནོཨིཇིན་དེམི	gods	noijin demi
སྐ་རགས་ཡུལ	waist	ska rags yul
སྐ་རགས་བཤུར་བ	girdle with a clasp	ska rags bshur ba
སྐ་རིང་མཚོ	{ska ring} salt lake	ska ring mtsho
སྐ་སླ	thick and liquid	ska sla
སྐ་སླད	consistence, density	ska slad
སྐག	1) obstacles having a certain duration [Lo skag Zla skag Zhag skag Dus skag]; 2) skag [Rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad kyi nang gses [[lit = gdengs can lha mo dang wa'o]; 3) [arch] rgya tshos, lac dy...	skag
སྐག་རྩིས	astrology which treats of the planets and of bad omens	skag rtsis
སྐག་ཚེན་འདེབས་པ	to cover with red varnish. Syn {skag}	skag tshen 'debs pa
སྐག་ལས་སྐྱེས	comet, born under the skag constellation	skag las skyes
སྐག་ལོ་སྐག	bad year, n. of the 7th (according to the latest versions - of the 9th) constellation of the lunar Zodiac	skag lo skag
སྐང	{bskangs pa},, [ful]fill, amend, atone, appease, correct, remedy, make up, repair, reconcile, mend; 2) satisfaction, gratification	skang
སྐང་གཏོར	mending torma (skang gtor) is given in the manner of manifold sensepleasures	skang gtor
སྐང་པ	satisfaction, expiatory sacrifice, gratification	skang pa
སྐང་བ	expiatory sacrifices, satisfaction, kind of expiatory sacrifice to make amends for a duty not performed	skang ba
སྐང་ར	resentment, not liking, mind not satisfied/ liking bshad pa'i skad cha	skang ra
སྐང་ཤ	turf (cut in the shape of bricks and used for laying walls). sods	skang sha
སྐང་བཤགས	expiatory rituals	skang bshags
སྐང་གསོ	satisfaction	skang gso
སྐང་གསོ་བ	to be satisfied	skang gso ba
སྐད	voice, sound, speech, language, cry, say, ladder, noise, shout, yell, "it is said" particle, I had heard that, I found out that	skad
བ	to be called, named; sound, voice. language	ba
སྐད་ཀྱི	vocal	skad kyi
སྐད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	donkey, king of the voice	skad kyi rgyal po
སྐད་ཀྱི་ང་རོ	sound of voice/ speech	skad kyi nga ro
སྐད་ཀྱི་གཅོང	vocal melodies	skad kyi gcong
སྐད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	substance of a speech	skad kyi snying po
སྐད་ཀྱི་གདངས	tone of the voice	skad kyi gdangs
སྐད་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས	root of a word	skad kyi dbyings
སྐད་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	six limbs of voice	skad kyi yan lag drug
སྐད་སྐྱེལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	transmitter	skad skyel 'phrul 'khor
སྐད་སྐྲ་དིར་བ	groan loud from pain 133	skad skra dir ba
སྐད་ཁོངས	language family/group [linguistics]	skad khongs
སྐད་གྱི་གདངས	character or tone of the voice	skad gyi gdangs
སྐད་གྱོང་པོ	imperfect language	skad gyong po
སྐད་གྲག	noise resounding	skad grag
སྐད་གྲགས	1) famous, well known. 2) fame, renown, repute, reputation. 3) rumor	skad grags
སྐད་གྲགས་ཁྱབ	be famous/ wellknown	skad grags khyab
སྐད་གྲགས་ཅན	notable, popular	skad grags can
སྐད་གྲགས་ཆེན་པོ	famous, renowned, distinguished, well-known, prominent	skad grags chen po
སྐད་གྲགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཟོ་བ	popularize	skad grags chen po bzo ba
སྐད་གྲགས་པ	fame, rumor	skad grags pa
སྐད་གྲགས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཁྱབ་པ	famous,	skad grags yongs su khyab pa
སྐད་གྲགས་ཡོད	famous, well-known	skad grags yod
སྐད་གྲགས་ཡོད་པ	famous, well-known	skad grags yod pa
སྐད་འགག	become hoarse, choke when speaking	skad 'gag
སྐད་འགགས	voice stopping disease * became hoarse, choked when speaking	skad 'gags
སྐད་འགྱུར	1) having remained a long time in another region/ country change from the language of one's own country brjed de 'gyur ba [forget and change?]; 2) song kyi 'gyur khug	skad 'gyur
སྐད་རྒྱག	to shout	skad rgyag
སྐད་རྒྱག་པ	call, cry, shout, yell, call to a person	skad rgyag pa
སྐད་རྒྱལ	donkey	skad rgyal
སྐད་རྒྱུད	language family/ group	skad rgyud
སྐད་སྒྱུར	1) translate[or][ion]; 2) modulation of voice	skad sgyur
སྐད་སྒྱུར་མཁན	interpreter, translator	skad sgyur mkhan
སྐད་སྒྱུར་སྒྲ་སྐྱེལ་འཕུལ་ཆས	earphones for simultaneous tr	skad sgyur sgra skyel 'phul chas
སྐད་སྒྱུར་བ	modulate the voice, hum a tune, sing, whistle	skad sgyur ba
སྐད་སྒྲ	noise	skad sgra
སྐད་སྒྲ་ཆེ	fame	skad sgra che
སྐད་སྒྲ་ཆེ་བ	loud	skad sgra che ba
སྐད་སྒྲ་འདོན་པ	utter	skad sgra 'don pa
སྐད་སྒྲ་སྦོམ་པོ	drone	skad sgra sbom po
སྐད་སྒྲ་མེད་པའི་ཁྲབ་སྟོན	pantomime	skad sgra med pa'i khrab ston
སྐད་སྒྲ་རྩུབ་པོ	raucous	skad sgra rtsub po
སྐད་སྒྲ་ཤུགས་ཆེ	very loud voice	skad sgra shugs che
སྐད་བརྒྱ་པ	lightning that comes from the south (that of a 100 rattles)	skad brgya pa
སྐད་བརྒྱབ་པ	aloud	skad brgyab pa
སྐད་བསྒྱུར	tr, interpreter	skad bsgyur
སྐད་བསྒྱུར་མཁན	one who has changed his language	skad bsgyur mkhan
སྐད་བསྒྱུར་པ	interpreter	skad bsgyur pa
སྐད་བསྒྱུར་བ	interpret, tr	skad bsgyur ba
སྐད་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད་པ	interpret	skad bsgyur byed pa
སྐད་ངན	1) inauspicious words; 2) painful words; 3) cry of anguish	skad ngan
སྐད་ངར	rough language	skad ngar
སྐད་ཅ	; 1) talk, discussion, conversation, speech, words, chat, discourse, remarks, negotiations; 2) message, news, report, rumor	skad ca
སྐད་ཅན	having a voice, sounding	skad can
སྐད་ཅིག	1) instant, [only for a] moment, 2nd [of time]; 2) nowness; 3) at once instantly	skad cig
སྐད་ཅིག་ཀྱང	even a second, even an instant	skad cig kyang
སྐད་ཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད་པ	not for even one moment	skad cig kyang med pa
སྐད་ཅིག་དཀྲོང་སྐྱེད	instantaneous leap in which the meditator becomes identified with the deity	skad cig dkrong skyed
སྐད་ཅིག་དཀྲོང་བསྐྱེད	instantaneous visualization	skad cig dkrong bskyed
སྐད་ཅིག་སྐད་ཅིག	momentarily, only a moment skad cig skad cig gi skye 'gag byed pa arising and ceasing each moment	skad cig skad cig
སྐད་ཅིག་ཁོ་ན	only for a moment	skad cig kho na
སྐད་ཅིག་གིས	in a single instant, suddenly, in an instant	skad cig gis
སྐད་ཅིག་གིས་རྟོགས་པ	attaining instantaneous realization	skad cig gis rtogs pa
སྐད་ཅིག་གིས་མི་རྟག་པ	each moment are impermanent	skad cig gis mi rtag pa
སྐད་ཅིག་གློག་འོད	lightning	skad cig glog 'od
སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག	one single instant	skad cig gcig
སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག་གི་རྒྱུན	continuity of single instants	skad cig gcig gi rgyun
སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག་གིས	instantaneously, in a single moment skad cig gcig gis rdzogs sangs rgyas completely enlightened in one instant skad cig gcig gis rdzogs sangs rgyas completely enlightened in 1 instant skad cig gcig...	skad cig gcig gis
སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག་པ	belongs to one single moment	skad cig gcig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག་པ་ཡི་རྟོགས་པ	single instantaneous understanding skad cig gcig pa'i mngon par rdzogs par	skad cig gcig pa yi rtogs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	momentary divine wisdom	byang chub pa
སྐད་ཅིག་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 moments [of the path of seeing]	skad cig bcu drug
སྐད་ཅིག་བཅུ་དྲུག་པ	the 16 moments	skad cig bcu drug pa
སྐད་ཅིག་བཅོམ	SA bcom pa	skad cig bcom
སྐད་ཅིག་ཆ་ཅན	time	skad cig cha can
སྐད་ཅིག་ཆ་མེད	indivisible moment, partless moment; partless / indivisible moment, [The finality of time / absolute time fraction.] See {shes pa skad cig cha med}	skad cig cha med
སྐད་ཅིག་འཇིག་པ	to perish moment by moment. instantaneously perishing	skad cig 'jig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་གཉིས	CHN	skad cig gnyis
སྐད་ཅིག་ཏུ	in a moment	skad cig tu
སྐད་ཅིག་ཏུ་འཇིག་ཅིང་མི་གནས་པ	instantaneously perishing and not remaining/	skad cig tu 'jig cing mi gnas pa
སྐད་ཅིག་ཏུ་འབྱུང་ཞིང་འགག་པ	momentarily arising and ceasing	skad cig tu 'byung zhing 'gag pa
སྐད་ཅིག་ཐ་མ	last moment	skad cig tha ma
སྐད་ཅིག་དང་པོ	first moment	skad cig dang po
སྐད་ཅིག་དང་པོ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the first 15 moments	skad cig dang po bco lnga
སྐད་ཅིག་དེ་ཉིད	in that very moment	skad cig de nyid
སྐད་ཅིག་དེ་ཉིད་དུ	instantly	skad cig de nyid du
སྐད་ཅིག་དྲན་པ	instant presence	skad cig dran pa
སྐད་ཅིག་དྲན་རྫོགས	perfected in instantaneous recollection; instantaneous recollection. The type of development stage in which the visual image of the deity is perfected in a single moment. complete in an instant's r...	skad cig dran rdzogs
སྐད་ཅིག་དྲན་རྫོགས་སུ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to visualize as perfected in instantaneous recollection	skad cig dran rdzogs su bskyed pa
སྐད་ཅིག་དྲན་རིག	instant presence	skad cig dran rig
སྐད་ཅིག་འདོད	sudden flash, flash of the lightning	skad cig 'dod
སྐད་ཅིག་འདོད་ལྡན	pigeon	skad cig 'dod ldan
སྐད་ཅིག་པ	1/5 of a finger-snap, instantaneous, ephemeral, momentary, lightning	skad cig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་དབུགས	otter (that takes breath only for a moment)	skad cig dbugs
སྐད་ཅིག་མ	instantaneous, momentary, fleeting moments, something of an instant, definition of transitory, very useful and important medicine, present, instant	skad cig ma
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་གཅིག	1 moment, a single instant	skad cig ma gcig
ཆུབ་པ	the single instantaneous full understanding	chub pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 moments	skad cig ma bcu drug
ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom endowed w the nature of the 16 moments skad cig ma bcu drug gi bdag nyid can gyi	ye shes
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག་པ	the 16 moments	skad cig ma bcu drug pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཉིད	momentariness	skad cig ma nyid
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་གཉིས	the two kinds of moment	skad cig ma gnyis
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་དུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན	timecontinuity of instants	skad cig ma dus kyi rgyun
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་འབྱུང་བར་འོས་པ་མ་ཡིན	not liable to occur momentarily	skad cig ma 'byung bar 'os pa ma yin
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not of a momentary nature	skad cig ma ma yin pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཡི་ཀློང	instant dimension	skad cig ma yi klong
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཡི་ཡུན	1/5 of a finger-snap	skad cig ma yi yun
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཡི་རིག་པ	instant rigpa	skad cig ma yi rig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཡིན་པ	momentary	skad cig ma yin pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མ་རེ་རེ་ལ	in each instant skad cig ma'i skye 'gag gi phreng ba sha ra	skad cig ma re re la
ར	a continuous succession of instants arising and ceasing	ra
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་པ	of a momentary nature	skad cig ma'i rgyu yin pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependence of a moment, interdependence arising every moment	skad cig ma'i rten 'brel
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་བློའི་ཡུལ	a momentary perceived object	skad cig ma'i blo'i yul
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་སྦྱོར་བ	instantaneous joining, momentary training, the training of a single-instant, the yoga of the last moment before enlightenment	skad cig ma'i sbyor ba
ཆོས་བཞི	four qualities that indicate instantaneous joining	chos bzhi
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་སྦྱོར་བའི་ཆོས་བཞི	[sher phyin don bdun cu las sbyor ba bzhi'i chos so drug gi nang tshan, skad cig ma'i sbyor ba mtshon byed kyi chos bzhi ste, rnam par smin pa ma yin pa'i skad cig ma'i sbyor ba dang, rnam par smin...	skad cig ma'i sbyor ba'i chos bzhi
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	instantaneous wisdom/ wakefulness	skad cig ma'i ye shes
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་རང་བཞིན	of a momentary nature	skad cig ma'i rang bzhin
སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་རིག་པ	instantaneous awareness	skad cig ma'i rig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་མར	momentary [thd]	skad cig mar
སྐད་ཅིག་མི་རྟག	momentary impermanence	skad cig mi rtag
སྐད་ཅིག་ཙམ	merely an instant	skad cig tsam
སྐད་ཅིག་ཙམ་གྱིས་གཤེགས་སུ་གསོལ	please come at once	skad cig tsam gyis gshegs su gsol
སྐད་ཅིག་ཝལ་བསྐྱེད	instantaneous visualization	skad cig wal bskyed
སྐད་ཅིག་བཞི	the four moments	skad cig bzhi
སྐད་ཅིག་འོད	lightning	skad cig 'od
སྐད་ཅིག་རང་གྲོལ	in one instant selfliberation occurs	skad cig rang grol
སྐད་ཅིག་རིག་ཀློང	dimension of instant rigpa 135	skad cig rig klong
སྐད་ཅིག་རིག་པ	instant rigpa	skad cig rig pa
སྐད་ཅིག་རེ་རེ་ལ	in each moment	skad cig re re la
སྐད་ཅིག་ལ	in an instant	skad cig la
སྐད་ཅིག་ལ་ཆ་མེད	divisible to the point where nothing remains in time or space	skad cig la cha med
སྐད་ཅིག་ལ་འཇིག་པའི་དོན	the fact of perishing each moment	skad cig la 'jig pa'i don
སྐད་ཅིག་ཤེས་པ	instantaneous awareness	skad cig shes pa
སྐད་ཅིག་སེམས	momentary cognition	skad cig sems
སྐད་ཅིག་གསལ་བ	instantaneous light	skad cig gsal ba
སྐད་ཅོར	noise, noisiness, clamoring, chattering, shouting	skad cor
སྐད་ཅོར་རྒྱག	chatter, shout, make a hubbub/clamor	skad cor rgyag
སྐད་ཅོར་རྒྱག་པ	make a noise	skad cor rgyag pa
སྐད་ཅོར་རྒྱབ་པ	yap	skad cor rgyab pa
སྐད་ཅོར་ཚ་པོ	noisy	skad cor tsha po
སྐད་གཅིག་མ	nowness, present, instantaneous	skad gcig ma
སྐད་གཅིག་མ་གཅིག	a single instant	skad gcig ma gcig
སྐད་གཅིག་མ་རེ	each instant	skad gcig ma re
སྐད་གཅིག་ཙམ་ཡང	even for an instant	skad gcig tsam yang
སྐད་གཅོམ	discussion	skad gcom
སྐད་ཆ	language, words, talk, remarks, topic, conversation, dialogue, speaking, news, report, discourse, conversation, topic, verbal utterance, conversation, talk	skad cha
སྐད་ཆ་བཀྲམ	spread rumors	skad cha bkram
སྐད་ཆ་བསྐོར་ནས་གཤོད་པ	circumlocution	skad cha bskor nas gshod pa
སྐད་ཆ་མཁོ་མེད	nonsense, rubbish	skad cha mkho med
སྐད་ཆ་འགྲུབ་པ	to agree	skad cha 'grub pa
སྐད་ཆ་རྒྱབ་པ	to speak, to converse, to talk, news, report	skad cha rgyab pa
སྐད་ཆ་སྒྲ་འདོགས་པ	to exaggerate	skad cha sgra 'dogs pa
སྐད་ཆ་གཅིག་མཐུན	common language/ terminology	skad cha gcig mthun
སྐད་ཆ་ཆོ་མེད་མང་བཤད	jabber	skad cha cho med mang bshad
སྐད་ཆ་ཆོ་མེད་གཤོད་པ	rant	skad cha cho med gshod pa
སྐད་ཆ་ཉུང་ཉུང	reticence, taciturn skad cha don med mang po gshod pa prattle	skad cha nyung nyung
སྐད་ཆ་དོན་མེད་གཤོད་པ	cant	skad cha don med gshod pa
སྐད་ཆ་དྲི་ས	information office	skad cha dri sa
སྐད་ཆ་དྲིས	inquired, asked about	skad cha dris
སྐད་ཆ་འདྲི	inquire, ask about	skad cha 'dri
སྐད་ཆ་འདྲི་བ	ask about, inquire	skad cha 'dri ba
སྐད་ཆ་ནན་བཤད	emphasis	skad cha nan bshad
སྐད་ཆ་བྱེད	; 1) talk, discuss, converse, speak, chat, discourse, remark, negotiate; 2) tell message, news, report, rumor	skad cha byed
སྐད་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	to have a talk, hold a conversation	skad cha byed pa
སྐད་ཆ་མ་གསལ་བ་ལབ་པ	murmur	skad cha ma gsal ba lab pa
སྐད་ཆ་མང་པོ	loquacious, talkative	skad cha mang po
སྐད་ཆ་མི་བརྟན	discrepancy in speech, contradictory language	skad cha mi brtan
སྐད་ཆ་ཙག་ཙིག་གཤོད་པ	natter	skad cha tsag tsig gshod pa
སྐད་ཆ་ཚབས་ཆེན	very bad news	skad cha tshabs chen
སྐད་ཆ་ལབ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	one who has nothing much to say	skad cha lab rgyu med pa
སྐད་ཆ་ལབ་པ	converse, have a chat	skad cha lab pa
སྐད་ཆ་ཤབ་ཤུབ	whisper	skad cha shab shub
སྐད་ཆ་ཤོད	talk, converse, discuss, negotiate, speak	skad cha shod
སྐད་ཆ་ཤོད་སྟངས	tone, intonation, accent	skad cha shod stangs
སྐད་ཆ་ཤོད་དབང	freedom of speech	skad cha shod dbang
སྐད་ཆ་ཤོད་ས	addressee	skad cha shod sa
སྐད་ཆ་ཤོར་བ	to blurt out	skad cha shor ba
སྐད་ཆ་གཤོད་པ	converse, chat, speak, talk	skad cha gshod pa
སྐད་ཆ་གཤོད་མི་ཐུབ་མཁན	dumb	skad cha gshod mi thub mkhan
སྐད་ཆ་བཤད	; 1) talk, discuss, converse, speak, chat, discourse, remark, negotiate; 2) tell message, news, report, rumor	skad cha bshad
སྐད་ཆ་བཤད་པ	to declare, state	skad cha bshad pa
སྐད་ཆ་བཤད་རེས	chat, converse	skad cha bshad res
སྐད་ཆ་བཤད་རེས་བྱེད་པ	talk	skad cha bshad res byed pa
སྐད་ཆའི་གླེང་གཞི	subject of conversation/ discussion, talk	skad cha'i gleng gzhi
སྐད་ཆལ་ལ་འཁྱར་མ་བཅུག	do not err in conversation	skad chal la 'khyar ma bcug
སྐད་ཆིག་ཤེས་པ	instantaneous awareness	skad chig shes pa
སྐད་ཆེན	blare, donkey	skad chen
སྐད་ཆེན་རྒྱབ་པ	bellow, screech, shout	skad chen rgyab pa
སྐད་ཆེན་པོ	loud	skad chen po
སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱབ་ནས་ངུ་བ	crying loudly	skad chen po brgyab nas ngu ba
སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་བོར་རོ	was heard calling out	skad chen po bor ro
སྐད་ཆེན་པོར	aloud	skad chen por
སྐད་ཆེན་འབྱིན་པ	cry aloud	skad chen 'byin pa
སྐད་ཆེན་འབྲུག	loud thunder	skad chen 'brug
སྐད་འཇེར་བ	be hoarse	skad 'jer ba
སྐད་ཉན་པ	listen	skad nyan pa
སྐད་གཉན	high sounding voice	skad gnyan
སྐད་གཉའ	skad shugs	skad gnya'
སྐད་གཉིས་པ	1) parrot. 2) lotsawa. interpreter. translator. 3) lit. "that having two kinds of voices."; that having two kinds of voices, poet. interpreter, translator, parrot	skad gnyis pa
སྐད་གཉིས་དབང་ཕྱུག	"bilingual master" great tr	skad gnyis dbang phyug
སྐད་གཉིས་སྦྱོར	usually Sanskrit compared with Tibetan	skad gnyis sbyor
སྐད་གཉིས་སྨྲ་བ	bilingual, tr	skad gnyis smra ba
སྐད་གཉིས་སྨྲ་བའི	one who has mastered at least 2 languages	skad gnyis smra ba'i
སྐད་གཉིས་སྨྲ་བའི་དབང་པོ	one learned in science	skad gnyis smra ba'i dbang po
སྐད་གཉིས་ཤན་སྦྱར	dictionary go don gcig pa'i yig rigs khag gnyis mnyam du bsgrigs pa	skad gnyis shan sbyar
སྐད་གཉིས་ཤན་སྦྱར་དུ་བསྟན་པ	showing the correspondence between the two languages [usually Sanskrit and Tibetan] skad gnyis shan sbyar nor bu'i do shal nye bar mkho ba'i SK bod kyi brda k' li'i 'phreng bsgrigs ngo mtshar nor b...	skad gnyis shan sbyar du bstan pa
སྐད་མཉམ	equal, same words or opinion	skad mnyam
སྐད་མཉེན་པ	gre 'gyur bde ba'i skad gdangs	skad mnyen pa
སྐད་རྙོངས	jargon	skad rnyongs
སྐད་སྙན	melodious, sweet-sounding, pleasant voice, eloquent	skad snyan
སྭེཨེཏ	sounding, pleasant voice, eloquent	sweet
སྐད་སྙན་སྒྱུར་བ	sing pleasant melody, produce sound/ speech	skad snyan sgyur ba
སྐད་སྙན་སྒྲོག་པ	sings sweetly	skad snyan sgrog pa
སྐད་སྙན་བསྒྱུར་བ	to sing or whistle in a quavering, warbling manner (of birds, flute players, etc.)	skad snyan bsgyur ba
ཕ༹ླུཏེ	players)	flute
སྐད་སྙན་པ	sounding, sonorous, cuckoo (one with a sweet voice)	skad snyan pa
སྐད་སྙན་པ་གླིང་བུ་པི་ཝང་ལྟ་བུ	a melodious call like the sound of a flute	skad snyan pa gling bu pi wang lta bu
སྐད་སྙན་པོ	1) pleasing voice/ singing/ sound; 2) ka la ping ka bird	skad snyan po
སྐད་སྙན་མ	princess of noijin demigods	skad snyan ma
སྐད་སྙམ་མ	n. of a goddess of the yaksha class	skad snyam ma
སྐད་སྙིང་པ	archaic, antique vernacular	skad snying pa
སྐད་བརྙན	brag cha	skad brnyan
སྐད་བསྙན	echo returned by a rock	skad bsnyan
སྐད་གཏོང	call [upon]/for, invite, ask for, greet	skad gtong
སྐད་གཏོང་བ	to call, to invite. to exclaim, cry out, to call [a person]. hail, to invite [a guest]	skad gtong ba
སྐད་བཏང	called [upon]/for, invited, asked for, greeted	skad btang
སྐད་སྟེར་བ	to call to a person	skad ster ba
སྐད་ཐུང	1) sound of speaking lasting only a short time; 2) calling back and forth over a short distance	skad thung
སྐད་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	innumerable languages	skad mtha' yas pa
སྐད་མཐུན་པ	1) the same language; 2) skad kyi gdangs mthun pa	skad mthun pa
སྐད་མཐུན་པར	with one voice; with one accord	skad mthun par
སྐད་འཐམས་པ	to begin to speak in a lower voice	skad 'thams pa
སྐད་དུ་མཛད	to claim	skad du mdzad
སྐད་དེབ	language primer	skad deb
སྐད་དོད	1) equivalent term, tr equivalent; 2) original	skad dod
སྐད་དོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	etymological definition	skad dod kyi sgra
སྐད་དོད་མེད	without the original text	skad dod med
སྐད་དོད་ཡོད་མེད	whether there are any original texts	skad dod yod med
སྐད་དྲག་པ	powerful voice	skad drag pa
སྐད་དྲག་པོ་བཏོན་པ	shouted strongly	skad drag po bton pa
སྐད་གདངས	1) character or tone of voice; accent. 2) tune	skad gdangs
སྐད་གདངས་སྙན་པ	beautiful tunes	skad gdangs snyan pa
སྐད་གདངས་དམའ་བ	low sinking voice, word, speech, language	skad gdangs dma' ba
སྐད་གདངས་ལེགས་པ	a good voice	skad gdangs legs pa
སྐད་འདོན	bawling out, loud voice	skad 'don
སྐད་འདོན་པ	resound, groan, cry loudly, utter, ejaculate, pronounce 2 consonants as 2 distinct sounds	skad 'don pa
སྐད་སྡེབ	language primer	skad sdeb
སྐད་བརྡ	spoken symbols, understandable symbols	skad brda
སྐད་བརྡ་ཐོངས	notify!	skad brda thongs
སྐད་བརྡ་འཕྲོད	to be able to communicate verbally	skad brda 'phrod
སྐད་པ	1) it is said/ mentioned/ spoken of, say, tell, relate, call[ed] name[d], call; 2) interpreter, teacher	skad pa
སྐད་པ་ཆེ	celebrated, famed	skad pa che
སྐད་པའི་དྲུ་བུ	ball of thread or wool	skad pa'i dru bu
སྐད་པར	phonograph	skad par
སྐད་པར་འཁོར་ལོ	phonograph	skad par 'khor lo
སྐད་པར་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	Lhasa commoners nas smon lam gyi dus su skad par btang chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	skad par 'khrol 'dzin
སྐད་པར་ཕེན་ཙི	gramophone record	skad par phen tsi
སྐད་པོ་ཆེ	Syn {skad pa che}	skad po che
སྐད་ཕྲ་པོ་རྒྱབ་པ	squeak	skad phra po rgyab pa
སྐད་ཕྲ་བོ་འདོན་པ	squeal	skad phra bo 'don pa
སྐད་ཕྲ་མོ	high pitched voice	skad phra mo
སྐད་ཕྲ་ཤོས	soprano	skad phra shos
སྐད་འཕང	[tone of] voice	skad 'phang
སྐད་བྱེད་པ	claim to, profess to {sgom pa skad byed pa} profess to be meditating	skad byed pa
སྐད་དབུགས	poet. otter	skad dbugs
སྐད་འབོད	slogan, call, appeal, shout	skad 'bod
སྐད་འབོད་རྒྱག	shout slogans	skad 'bod rgyag
སྐད་འབོད་གཏོང	call on, appeal to	skad 'bod gtong
སྐད་འབོད་བྱེད	issue a call/ appeal	skad 'bod byed
སྐད་འབྱིན	singing of birds	skad 'byin
སྐད་འབྱིན་པ	the call [of birds]	skad 'byin pa
སྐད་སྦོམ་པོ	bass	skad sbom po
སྐད་སྦྱང་བ	improve the voice by exercise, train the voice	skad sbyang ba
སྐད་སྦྱངས་ཤིག	cultivate your voice, improve the voice by exercise	skad sbyangs shig
སྐད་སྦྱར་བ	to inform	skad sbyar ba
སྐད་མ་ཟེར	don't talk like that skad mi thon pa ltar ldab ldib kyi tshig gis	skad ma zer
སྨྲས་པ	haltingly whispered like one barely able to speak	smras pa
སྐད་མི་གསལ	one whose language is not intelligible, a barbarian	skad mi gsal
སྐད་དམའ་བ	to speak in a low voice	skad dma' ba
སྐད་སྨྲ་བ	give an account, relate	skad smra ba
སྐད་གཙེར	shriek, shrill	skad gtser
སྐད་གཙེར་རྒྱབ་པ	shriek	skad gtser rgyab pa
སྐད་ཚ་པོ	noisy, loud	skad tsha po
སྐད་ཚབ	Syn {skad dod}	skad tshab
སྐད་འཛེར	be hoarse	skad 'dzer
སྐད་འཛེར་པོ	hoarseness of the voice	skad 'dzer po
སྐད་འཛེར་བ	Syn {skad 'gags}	skad 'dzer ba
སྐད་འཛེར་འཛེར་གཏམ་ཟེར་རོ	spoke lovingly 137	skad 'dzer 'dzer gtam zer ro
སྐད་འཛེར་འཛེར་དུ་ངུ་བ	weep with a hoarse voice	skad 'dzer 'dzer du ngu ba
སྐད་འཛེར་འཛེར་དུ་དུ་བ	weep with a hoarse voice	skad 'dzer 'dzer du du ba
སྐད་ཟ་ང་ཟིང་ངེ	hubbub	skad za nga zing nge
སྐད་ཟ་ངེ་ཟིང	discord	skad za nge zing
སྐད་ཟ་ངེ་ཟིང་ངེ	cacophony	skad za nge zing nge
སྐད་ཟུར་ཆག་པ	corrupted language. Syn {skad}	skad zur chag pa
སྐད་ཟུར་ཉམས་པ	changed/ corrupted words	skad zur nyams pa
སྐད་ཟེར	to claim	skad zer
སྐད་གཟེང་མཐོན་པོས	loudly [& clearly]	skad gzeng mthon pos
སྐད་གཟེངས	[tone of] voice	skad gzengs
སྐད་བཟང	pleasant voice	skad bzang
སྐད་འུར	many people making loud sound	skad 'ur
སྐད་ཡིག	Chinese (school subject) language, spoken and written language	skad yig
སྐད་ཡིག་གི་མཚན་རིག	philology	skad yig gi mtshan rig
སྐད་ཡིག་སྒྱུར་བ	translate, interpret skad yig mdzub 'khrid u yon lhan khang Minority Languages Commission	skad yig sgyur ba
སྐད་རིག་བཞི	four languages GD	skad rig bzhi
སྐད་རིགས	tongues	skad rigs
སྐད་རིགས་མཁས་པ	linguist	skad rigs mkhas pa
སྐད་རིགས་ཆེན་པོ	pi sha tsi te sha ja'i skad, rang bzhin zhes pa pra kri ta, a pa bhram sha jur chag sgra)	skad rigs chen po
སྐད་རིགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great languages [sngar rgya gar gyi skad rigs bzhi ste, sam skri ta ni legs sbyar gyi skad dang, pra kri ti ni rang bzhin gyi skad, pi sha tshi ni sha za'i skad, aa ba bhram sha ni zur cha...	skad rigs chen po bzhi
སྐད་རིགས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཁང	linguistic institute	skad rigs brtag dpyad khang
སྐད་རིགས་བཞི	four languages	skad rigs bzhi
སྐད་རིགས་སློབ་གྲ	language school	skad rigs slob gra
སྐད་རིང	1) voice/sound coming from far away; 2) calling back and forth over a long distance	skad ring
སྐད་ལུགས	dialect, idiom; dialect	skad lugs
སྐད་ལེགས་མ	celestial courtesan	skad legs ma
སྐད་ལོག	clamor, screaming	skad log
སྐད་ཤུགས་ཆུང་ངུས	slowly	skad shugs chung ngus
སྐད་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	loud voice, loud noise	skad shugs chen po
སྐད་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོས	loudly	skad shugs chen pos
སྐད་ཤུབ་ཤུབ་རྒྱབ་པ	mutter	skad shub shub rgyab pa
སྐད་ཤེས	knowledge of speech	skad shes
སྐད་ཤོར	to cry out / scream out in fright or anguish	skad shor
སྐད་ཤོར་བ	1) scream in pain/ fear/ anguish; 2) involuntary talking, groaning; 3) become hoarse	skad shor ba
སྐད་གསང	[tone of] voice	skad gsang
སྐད་གསང་མཐོན་པོས	loudly [& clearly]	skad gsang mthon pos
སྐད་གསང་པོ	clear loud voice	skad gsang po
སྐད་གསངས་མཐོན་པོ	Syn {skag gsang mtho}	skad gsangs mthon po
སྐད་གསར	"new Language"	skad gsar
སྐད་གསར་བཅད	script revision, instituting a new language	skad gsar bcad
སྐད་གསར་བཅད་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three word revisions ['bri klog mi bde ba'i brda rnying 'ga' zhig gi zur dor te klog bde ba'i skad yig gtan la phab pa gsum ste, btsan po khri srong lde'u btsan nas mnga' bdag khri ral pa can y...	skad gsar bcad rnam pa gsum
སྐད་གསར་པ	latest news	skad gsar pa
སྐད་གསལ	loud or clear voice	skad gsal
སྐད་གསེར	loud voice	skad gser
སྐད་བསང་མཐོ	high pitched voice	skad bsang mtho
སྐན	oath	skan
སྐན་ཉན་ཙེ	SA ko nyon tse	skan nyan tse
སྐན་ཏེ	SA ska ba	skan te
སྐན་ལྡལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེང་གེ	n of person	skan ldal ye shes seng ge
སྐན་དྷ	phung po'i sgra	skan dha
སྐབ	delay	skab
སྐབས	1) time * two moment, time, interval, lapse of time [bar skabs shig Tshogs 'du skabs dang po, Sked pa'i skabs,Dku skabs; 3) section, chapter; 4) occasion, opportunity, situation, state, case, circu...	skabs
སྐབས་ཀ	on a certain occasion	skabs ka
སྐབས་ཀྱི	as explained in the section about	skabs kyi
སྐབས་ཀྱི་གཏམ	course of conversation	skabs kyi gtam
སྐབས་ཀྱི་དཔྱད་བྱ	contextual inquiry	skabs kyi dpyad bya
སྐབས་སྐབས	from time to time	skabs skabs
སྐབས་སྐབས་ལ	occasionally, now and then	skabs skabs la
སྐབས་སྐབས་སུ	sometimes, from time to time. sm.{skabs}; occasionally, at times, from time to time 138	skabs skabs su
སྐབས་ཁེལ་བ	time for	skabs khel ba
སྐབས་འཁེལ	occur at the same time as/ coincide w, it was a time when...	skabs 'khel
སྐབས་འཁེལ་སོང	occurred at the same time as/ coincided w, it was a time when...	skabs 'khel song
སྐབས་འགའ	every two times, sometimes	skabs 'ga'
སྐབས་འགར	at times. in some cases	skabs 'gar
སྐབས་འགེལ	occur at the same time as/ coincide w, it was a time when...	skabs 'gel
སྐབས་འགེལ་སོང	occurred at the same time as/ coincided w, it was a time when...	skabs 'gel song
སྐབས་ཅིག	in a moment, in a short time, soon	skabs cig
སྐབས་ཅིག་ལ	at 1 time	skabs cig la
སྐབས་བཅུ	10 sections of the doctrine	skabs bcu
སྐབས་བཅོལ་མིའི་སྡོད་སྒར	refugee camp	skabs bcol mi'i sdod sgar
སྐབས་མཆིས	to have time / leisure / opportunity	skabs mchis
སྐབས་རྗེས་མ	the next time	skabs rjes ma
སྐབས་གཉིས་པ	second chapter	skabs gnyis pa
སྐབས་རྙེད	find a chance/ opportunity	skabs rnyed
སྐབས་རྙེད་པ	to get a chance	skabs rnyed pa
སྐབས་ཏོག	now, at present	skabs tog
སྐབས་ལྟ	looking for an opportunity	skabs lta
སྐབས་བརྟགས་པ	to discern the right moment {skabs brtags nas thugs dang 'thad pa dbul} at the right moment bring him whatever would please him	skabs brtags pa
སྐབས་བསྟུན	in accordance with time / situation, fitting / proper with respect to the period / circumstance	skabs bstun
སྐབས་བསྟུན་གྱིས	in accordance w time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance	skabs bstun gyis
སྐབས་བསྟུན་ཐབས	seeking means in accordance w the time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance	skabs bstun thabs
སྐབས་ཐོག	at present, this time around, now	skabs thog
སྐབས་ཐོག་གི་གནས་ཚུལ	current situation/ news	skabs thog gi gnas tshul
སྐབས་ཐོབ	opportunity arising	skabs thob
སྐབས་ཐོབ་པ	the opportunity arose	skabs thob pa
སྐབས་དང་བསྟུན	* 1) in accordance w time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance; 2) modern, up to date	skabs dang bstun
སྐབས་དང་བསྟུན་གྱིས	in accordance w time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance	skabs dang bstun gyis
སྐབས་དང་བསྟུན་ཐབས	seeking means in accordance w the time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance	skabs dang bstun thabs
སྐབས་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in accordance with the situation	skabs dang bstun pa
སྐབས་དང་པོ	the 1st time	skabs dang po
སྐབས་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་མེད་པ	irrelevant	skabs dang 'brel ba med pa
སྐབས་དང་སྦྱར	appropriate, fitting the situation, proper	skabs dang sbyar
སྐབས་དང་སྦྱར་བ	appropriate, fitting the situation, proper	skabs dang sbyar ba
སྐབས་དང་སྦྱོར	be suitable, fit the occasion, be appropriate	skabs dang sbyor
སྐབས་དང་སྦྱོར་བ	be suitable, fit the occasion, be appropriate	skabs dang sbyor ba
སྐབས་དང་མཚུངས་པོ	expedient	skabs dang mtshungs po
སྐབས་དེར	at that time	skabs der
སྐབས་དོན	1) skabs su bab pa'i don; 2) present situation, current events; 3) chapter, section	skabs don
སྐབས་འདི་ལ	at this opportunity, at this time, on this subject	skabs 'di la
སྐབས་འདིར	now, here, in this case, in this place, there at that time	skabs 'dir
སྐབས་འདིར་ཡོད་པ	were there at that time	skabs 'dir yod pa
སྐབས་བསྡུ་བ	to conclude the chapter	skabs bsdu ba
སྐབས་ནས	at the moment of	skabs nas
སྐབས་ཕྱིན་པ	1) dku skabs phyed pa; 2) Go skabs attain/ arising	skabs phyin pa
སྐབས་ཕྱེ་ན	make opportunity	skabs phye na
སྐབས་ཕྱེད་པ	1) dus skabs yong bar byas pa; 2) Dku skabs phyed pa ste rked pa phra ba	skabs phyed pa
སྐབས་འཕྲལ	1) lam seng &, dus thog [appointed time]; 2) a little while, opportunity * for the time being, temporarily, in the meantime	skabs 'phral
སྐབས་འཕྲལ་སྲིད་གཞུང	provisional government	skabs 'phral srid gzhung
སྐབས་བབ	1) arrive at the right time. 2) timely, according to the situation, timely, opportunely	skabs bab
སྐབས་བབས	Syn {skabs bab}	skabs babs
སྐབས་དབྱེ	clarification	skabs dbye
སྐབས་དབྱེ་བ	1) subchapter. 2) dividing into chapters	skabs dbye ba
སྐབས་འབྱེད་པ	leisure	skabs 'byed pa
སྐབས་སྦྱར	1) appropriate, suited to the situation	skabs sbyar
སྐབས་སྦྱོར	* 1) in accordance w time/ situation, fitting/ proper w respect to the period/ circumstance; 2) modern, up to date	skabs sbyor
སྐབས་སྦྱོར་བདུན་པ	anuyoga branch tantra, branch tantra of anuyoga	skabs sbyor bdun pa
སྐབས་མ་ཡིན	inappropriate time	skabs ma yin
སྐབས་མི་རྙེད	to utterly hinder	skabs mi rnyed
སྐབས་མི་འབྱེད	given no opportunity	skabs mi 'byed
སྐབས་མིན་བསྟོད་པའི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, yul gang la bstod pa gtong ba'i skabs su ma bab kyang, 'phral rkyen la brten nas yul de la glo bur du bstod pa'i rgyan zhig	skabs min bstod pa'i rgyan
སྐབས་མེད	w/o gap/ break leisure, chance, time, unable to, impossible	skabs med
སྐབས་མེད་མགོན་མེད	without refuge or protector	skabs med mgon med
སྐབས་མཚམས	juncture	skabs mtshams
སྐབས་མཚམས་ཕྱེད་པ	making dividing points	skabs mtshams phyed pa
སྐབས་མཚམས་ལ	at [this] juncture 139	skabs mtshams la
སྐབས་འཚོལ	search/ seek for an opportunity, look for a chance, speculate, be opportunistic	skabs 'tshol
སྐབས་འཚོལ་མཁོ་བདེ	profiteering,	skabs 'tshol mkho bde
བླཅཀ	marketing	black
སྐབས་འཚོལ་པ	opportunist, profiteer, black marketer	skabs 'tshol pa
སྐབས་འཚོལ་བ	1) search/ seek for an opportunity, look for a chance, speculate, be opportunistic, opportunism, speculation, profiteering; 2) opportunist, profiteer, black marketer	skabs 'tshol ba
སྐབས་འཚོལ་བྱེད	search/ seek for an opportunity, look for a chance, speculate, be opportunistic, opportunism, speculation, profiteering	skabs 'tshol byed
སྐབས་འཚོལ་ཚོང་རྒྱག	carry on speculative/ profiteering/ black market activities skabs 'tshol g.yo 'phral - exploitative/ opportunistic deceit	skabs 'tshol tshong rgyag
སྐབས་འཚོལ་རིང་ལུགས	opportunism	skabs 'tshol ring lugs
སྐབས་འཚོལ་ལས་ལུགས	opportunism	skabs 'tshol las lugs
སྐབས་རིས	picture painted from time to time	skabs ris
སྐབས་རེ	at times, sometimes, in each case, on each occasion- seldom	skabs re
སྐབས་རེ་ཙམ	only occasionally	skabs re tsam
སྐབས་རེར	occasionally	skabs rer
སྐབས་རེས་འགར	variant of {skabs re, skabs 'gar} in each case, on each occasion. [mss]	skabs res 'gar
སྐབས་ལ་འཁེལ་བ	by chance, fortunately	skabs la 'khel ba
སྐབས་ལ་བབས་པ	when the time came, opportunity arrived	skabs la babs pa
སྐབས་ལང་བྱེད་པ	wake up suddenly	skabs lang byed pa
སྐབས་ཤར	Italy??	skabs shar
སྐབས་ཤིག	One day, on one occasion, when, at one time, once upon a time, There came a time, On a later occassion,	skabs shig
སྐབས་ཤིག་ལ	"at one time" verbal connective	skabs shig la
སྐབས་སུ	when, during, while, at the time of, at the occasion of	skabs su
སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པ	1) a given situation, when opportunity arises; 2) timely, opportunely; 3) "the time has come"	skabs su bab pa
སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པར	when opportunity arises, section, chapter. Syn {skabs}	skabs su bab par
སྐབས་སུ་བབས	when the time comes, occasion arises	skabs su babs
སྐབས་སུ་བབས་པ	to be timely/ of concern at present	skabs su babs pa
ཆར	Tibetan Proverb: Timely conversation [is like] timely rain. [mss]	char
སྐབས་སུ་འབབས་པ	to be timely/ of concern at present	skabs su 'babs pa
སྐབས་གསུམ	1) the three times; 2) {skabs gsum sutra; 3) deities; 4) the former life, this, and the next	skabs gsum
སྐབས་གསུམ་འཇིགས་བྱེད	Rahu	skabs gsum 'jigs byed
སྐབས་གསུམ་བཏུང་བ	drink of the gods, ambrosia	skabs gsum btung ba
སྐབས་གསུམ་བདག་པོ	epith. of Indra (lit. the lord of the gods)	skabs gsum bdag po
སྐབས་གསུམ་གནས	heavens; Mt. Meru. lit. "abode of the gods."	skabs gsum gnas
སྐབས་གསུམ་པ	a god, common name for gods possessed of the knowledge of their past and future births and also of those of others, name of the celestial musician	skabs gsum pa
སྐབས་གསུམ་དབང	Indra	skabs gsum dbang
སྐབས་གསུམ་དབང་པོ	epith. of Indra (lit. the lord of the gods)	skabs gsum dbang po
སྐབས་གསུམ་མཚོན་ཆ	thunderbolt of indra	skabs gsum mtshon cha
སྐབས་གསུམ་ལ་བ་དཀར་པོ	white stone throne in the Devaloka (where Lord Buddha sat and preached his doctrine to the Devas)	skabs gsum la ba dkar po
སྐམ	dry spot of dry ground	skam
སྐམ་ཀྲོག་གེ	very dry	skam krog ge
སྐམ་ཀྲོང	lanky	skam krong
སྐམ་ཀློག	flash of summer lightning	skam klog
སྐམ་སྐོམ	in hot season dry lips and mouth	skam skom
སྐམ་སྐྱེས	person [born] in dry land place	skam skyes
སྐམ་སྐྱེས་བྱིན་ཚལ	eliminate pus and fever and alleviate swelling	skam skyes byin tshal
སྐམ་སྐྱོད་དམག་གྲུ	military landing ship	skam skyod dmag gru
སྐམ་སྐྲགས	1) dry w heat/ drought; 2) mouth dry w thirst; 3) Tibetan sa gnas su at festivals given to ser skya dpon rigs snum rtsi med pa'i bread	skam skrags
སྐམ་འཁོལ	cham tshad sickness	skam 'khol
སྐམ་འཁོལ་བྱེད	kind of disease	skam 'khol byed
སྐམ་གྱོང	dry and rough	skam gyong
སྐམ་གློག	1) lightning [w/o rain]; 2) dry cell	skam glog
སྐམ་འགྲོ་བ	wither	skam 'gro ba
སྐམ་རྒྱགས	dry food for traveling	skam rgyags
སྐམ་སྒྲིག	machinery etc la tshod lta'i sgo nas parts sgrig sbyor byed pa	skam sgrig
སྐམ་ཆག་བཅུ་ཟུར	Tibetan govt in selecting/ putting aside grain bcu zur 140 gcig skam dpyar bcag as way of figuring what is due as tax	skam chag bcu zur
སྐམ་ཆས	furniture, things in a house, all goods	skam chas
སྐམ་ཆུང	small smith's tongs	skam chung
སྐམ་ཆེན	continent, CH, large dry place	skam chen
སྐམ་རྙིད	nearly dry/dried	skam rnyid
སྐམ་ཐག་གེ	very dry	skam thag ge
སྐམ་ཐག་ཆད	completely dry/dried	skam thag chad
སྐམ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	completely dried	skam thag chod pa
སྐམ་ཐག་ཐག	try to completely dry	skam thag thag
སྐམ་ཐལ	dust in a cattle pen	skam thal
སྐམ་ཐིག	line laid down with dry chalk line	skam thig
སྐམ་ཐུག	gruel of barley four, dry meat and radish	skam thug
སྐམ་ཐོག	overland	skam thog
སྐམ་ཐོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	land transport	skam thog skyel 'dren
སྐམ་དྲས	neat and clean	skam dras
སྐམ་མདངས	dry shading	skam mdangs
སྐམ་སྡེབ	way of fastening gser shog	skam sdeb
སྐམ་གནོན	Tibetan gun's skam pa 'then byed lcags mda' [hammer]	skam gnon
སྐམ་པ	1) pliers, tongs, pincers, crimpers; 2) dry red clay for vessel making; 3) gun trigger/ hammer; 4) dry, roast[ed]; 5) female cattle w/o milk; 6) long for; 7) journey by land; 8) type of mudra	skam pa
སྐམ་པག	dry, flour of barley	skam pag
སྐམ་པའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	sngar lha ldan smon lam gyi dus su lha sa'i mi dmangs so so'i khang thog tu dngos po nyi mar skam 'grems byas 'thus tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus 'khrol gyi ngos sbyor 'dzin tham	skam pa'i 'khrol 'dzin
སྐམ་པས་འཛིན་པ	hold w pincers	skam pas 'dzin pa
སྐམ་པོ	1) dry, dried. 2) thin, skinny; lean	skam po
སྐམ་པོ་ལྔའི་དབུ་རྒྱན	crown of five dry skulls	skam po lnga'i dbu rgyan
སྐམ་པོ་དང་ཚ་པོ	arid	skam po dang tsha po
སྐམ་པོའི་བསོད་བདེ	damaged diminished merit and happiness	skam po'i bsod bde
སྐམ་དཔྱ་བཅུ་ཟུར	Tibetan sa gnas su 10% grain debt gtong skabs ngo bo every 10 loads produced 1 is received len pa'i brtsi stangs shig	skam dpya bcu zur
སྐམ་སྤྱོད	work of machine shop fitter/ mechanic	skam spyod
སྐམ་སྤྱོད་བཟོ་བ	machine shop fitter/ mechanic	skam spyod bzo ba
སྐམ་ཕོགས	employees and servants la 'bru rigs ma gtogs tea chang etc btung bya med pa'i salary tradition	skam phogs
སྐམ་བྲིས	rough sketch in charcoal etc.	skam bris
སྐམ་དབུར	dry polishing	skam dbur
སྐམ་འབྲས	dry rice paddy	skam 'bras
སྐམ་སྦྱོང	before the main part preliminaries/ preparations/ studies	skam sbyong
སྐམ་དམག	army	skam dmag
སྐམ་ཚག	1) emaciated thin, lean; 2) eye disease mig skam and mi bde ba and rtsub cing bser bus gnod pa zhig	skam tshag
སྐམ་ཚོགས	assembly/feast w/o food and drink	skam tshogs
སྐམ་མཚོ་མཁའ	land, sea and air	skam mtsho mkha'
སྐམ་འཛིང	land battle/ combat	skam 'dzing
སྐམ་འཛིང་རུ་ཁག	land troops	skam 'dzing ru khag
སྐམ་འཛིན	work of machine shop fitter/ mechanic	skam 'dzin
སྐམ་འཛིན་བཟོ་པ	fitter [in a machine shop]	skam 'dzin bzo pa
སྐམ་འཛིན་བཟོ་བ	machine shop fitter/ mechanic	skam 'dzin bzo ba
སྐམ་ཞིང	unirrigated field	skam zhing
སྐམ་ཟན	dry/dried foods	skam zan
སྐམ་ཟས	dry/dried foods	skam zas
སྐམ་ཟུག	tshad nad etc kyi sngon bsu'i pain	skam zug
སྐམ་ཟུག་ཆེ་བ	kind of disease	skam zug che ba
སྐམ་ཟོག	dry goods	skam zog
སྐམ་ཟོང	1) merchandise. 2) food and wages	skam zong
སྐམ་འོན	disease causing deafness	skam 'on
སྐམ་རིད	body very thin and emaciated	skam rid
སྐམ་རློན	dry and wet, dry & wet, dampness	skam rlon
ཆགས	amphibian	chags
སྐམ་རློན་རྙིང	{thod pa skam rlon rnying gsum} three severed heads:a driedup one, a rotten one, and a fresh one	skam rlon rnying
སྐམ་ལ་གནག་པ	to be dark and skinny	skam la gnag pa
སྐམ་ལ་ཕྱིན་པ	Tathagata	skam la phyin pa
སྐམ་ལམ	journey by land	skam lam
སྐམ་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	born on land	skam las skye ba
སྐམ་ཤ	dried meat	skam sha
སྐམ་ཤས	extent of dryness	skam shas
སྐམ་ཤིང	withered tree, dry wood	skam shing
སྐམ་བཤད	dry meaningless words, hollow expressions	skam bshad
སྐམ་ས	[dry] land, [vs sea] shore	skam sa
སྐམ་ས་ཆེན་པོ	1) land w/o moisture; 2) continent; 3) CH	skam sa chen po
སྐམ་སངས	skam po skam rkyang	skam sangs
སྐམ་སའི་གནམ་ཤིས	continental weather	skam sa'i gnam shis
སྐམ་སའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གནམ་ཤིས	continental climate	skam sa'i rang bzhin gyi gnam shis
སྐམ་སར་སྐྱོད	go ashore, land, disembark skam sar thon pa nya ma ji bzhin gyur like a fish out of water	skam sar skyod
སྐམ་སར་ཐོན་སྤྱོད་དཔུང་སྡེ	land expeditionary force	skam sar thon spyod dpung sde
སྐམ་སར་ཐོན་སྤྱོད་དམག་གྲུ	military landing craft	skam sar thon spyod dmag gru
སྐམ་སར་འཐབ་མཁན་མཚོ་དམག	the marines [corps]	skam sar 'thab mkhan mtsho dmag
སྐམ་སོབ	1) roast grain w/o water producing poor quality rtsam pa; 2) skam la sob pa	skam sob
སྐམ་སྲོ	tempering metal, firing pottery	skam sro
སྐམ་སྲོ་གཏོང	tempering metal, firing pottery	skam sro gtong
སྐམ་གསེང	dry and hollow/ soft. completely dry	skam gseng
སྐམ་གསོལ	1) having cleaned image of deity supplicate; 2) dry and fresh	skam gsol
སྐམས་པ	bleak and barren place	skams pa
སྐར	stars, weight	skar
སྐར་ཀ	weight	skar ka
སྐར་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	linguistics	skar kyi rig pa
སྐར་རྐང	rgyu skar individual time circling the go la divided by 365	skar rkang
སྐར་སྐྱེད	zla srang skar skyed measures	skar skyed
སྐར་སྐྱོད	fire fly	skar skyod
སྐར་སྐྱོད་མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའ	interplanetary rocket	skar skyod me shugs 'phur mda'
སྐར་བསྐྱེད	astrologer	skar bskyed
སྐར་ཁ	weight	skar kha
སྐར་ཁབ	Tibetan silver skar weight sprod dgos pa'i khab long, short or between	skar khab
སྐར་ཁུང	window, openings, hole or small opening for admission of light in a house	skar khung
སྐར་ཁུང་རྒྱག	close the window	skar khung rgyag
སྐར་ཁུང་དྲ་བ	grated window	skar khung dra ba
སྐར་ཁུང་དྲ་བ་ཅན	lattice window	skar khung dra ba can
སྐར་ཁུང་འབྱེད	open the window	skar khung 'byed
སྐར་ཁོངས	spheres of a lunar mansion, constellation including minor stars	skar khongs
སྐར་ཁྱིམ	the 17/28 rgyu skar in the 12 houses [khyim bcu gnyis] so sor 'dzin pa'i bar thag	skar khyim
སྐར་ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གོ་ལ	moving band of constellations, in astrology	skar khyim gyi go la
སྐར་ཁྱིམ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 star mansions [of the zodiac]	skar khyim bcu gnyis
སྐར་ཁྱོན	complete extent of the rgyu skar nyer bdun	skar khyon
སྐར་མཁན	astrologer, knower of stars	skar mkhan
སྐར་འཁོར་ཁྲ་མ	1) railing, balustrade; 2) step, rung	skar 'khor khra ma
སྐར་གང	ten 'on which is a little less than an Indian anna	skar gang
སྐར་གོངས	angular distance between the stars	skar gongs
སྐར་གྲངས	score	skar grangs
སྐར་གྲངས་འགོད	score/ record points	skar grangs 'god
སྐར་གྲངས་སྡུར	record/ evaluate work points	skar grangs sdur
སྐར་གྲངས་སྲང་བསྒྲིལ	count of skar ma weights in terms of srang weights	skar grangs srang bsgril
སྐར་རྒྱལ	1) the Gyal star. the 6th. [according to an old enumeration, or the 8th [new enumeration] constellation of lunar zodiac. 2) Pusya [a former Buddha]. 3) Tisya [Buddha]. 4) king of constellations	skar rgyal
སྐར་རྒྱལ་བཤེས་འཉན	advisor of the constellations	skar rgyal bshes 'nyan
སྐར་ལྔ	1) five stars; 2) formerly 1/2 silver zho	skar lnga
སྐར་ལྔའི་དར་དམར	PRC CH flag	skar lnga'i dar dmar
སྐར་རཅིས་རིག་པ	TSE	skar rcis rig pa
སྐར་ལྕག	rigorous enquiry, flogging	skar lcag
སྐར་ཆ	1) astr 1/60 chu tshod = skar ma and 1/60 skar ma = skar cha; 2) second; 3) basis of measuring shares of result of work that has been done	skar cha
སྐར་ཆུ	star-water, bathing when the ri byi appears in October, dew which is said to come from the stars	skar chu
སྐར་ཆུང	little star skar chung rdor dbyings kyi lha khang Vajradhatu Temple at Karchung	skar chung
སྐར་ཆུང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	alias {dkon mchog blo gros}	skar chung sprul sku ye shes rdo rje
སྐར་ཆེན	constellation, medicinal root	skar chen
སྐར་ཏག་ཏང་ཆེ	enquire rigorously, restrict, bind down, flog	skar tag tang che
སྐར་ལྟས	astrological omen	skar ltas
སྐར་ལྟས་མཁན	astrologer	skar ltas mkhan
སྐར་མདའ	shooting star, lamp, meteor	skar mda'
སྐར་མདའ་འཁྲུག་པ	meteors shot across the sky	skar mda' 'khrug pa
སྐར་མདའ་འཁྲུག་པ་ལྟར	as fast as a shooting star	skar mda' 'khrug pa ltar
སྐར་མདའ་ཆད་པ་ལྟར	dropped like a shooting star	skar mda' chad pa ltar
སྐར་མདའ་ཆད་པ་ལྡར	like a descending meteor	skar mda' chad pa ldar
སྐར་མདའ་ལྟུང་བ	falling of a meteor	skar mda' ltung ba
སྐར་མདའ་གདོང	Meteor Face	skar mda' gdong
སྐར་མདའ་འཕངས་པ	shooting star	skar mda' 'phangs pa
སྐར་མདའ་འཕངས་པ་ལྟར	like a shooting star	skar mda' 'phangs pa ltar
སྐར་མདའི་གདོང	face glowing like a meteor, no. of a class of demons into which Brahmins turn after death if they ate unclean food in their life, orifice of a crucible, orifice of a forging furnace	skar mda'i gdong
སྐར་མདའི་གདོང་ངམ	demon, meteormouthed arrow, ancient indian firearm, ancestor of buddha	skar mda'i gdong ngam
སྐར་མདའི་གདོང་ངམ་སྣ	one having either his face or nose glowing as a meteor	skar mda'i gdong ngam sna
སྐར་མདོག	color of stars	skar mdog
སྐར་རྡོ	[stony] meteor[ite]	skar rdo
སྐར་དཔྱད	astrology	skar dpyad
སྐར་དཔྱད་པ	accountant, astrologer	skar dpyad pa
སྐར་ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད	Tibetan coin 3/4 zho 1/2 tam/ {ttaa ka}	skar phyed brgyad
སྐར་ཕྱེད་གསུམ	Tibetan coin 1/4 zho 1/6 tam	skar phyed gsum
སྐར་ཕྲན	little star	skar phran
སྐར་འཕྲེང	fabulous city where asura king lives, square in constellation chart, angular distance between two stars or planets	skar 'phreng
སྐར་བ	hang up, weigh, measure, scale, pen [cattle], sort, separate	skar ba
སྐར་བོན་ཚིག་གུ	bon of stars	skar bon tshig gu
སྐར་འབྱུང་རྩིས	astrology	skar 'byung rtsis
སྐར་མ	minute; 1) star, starlight, asterism, star constellation. 2) minute. 3) a Tibetan cent [smallest unit]. 1 / 100 of a {srang}. 4) weight measure	skar ma
སྐར་མ་ཁྲ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	twinkling star	skar ma khra chem chem
སྐར་མ་མཁན	astrologer	skar ma mkhan
སྐར་མ་གྲོ་བཞིན་ཉིན་སྐྱེས་པ	was born on a very auspicious day	skar ma gro bzhin nyin skyes pa
སྐར་མ་མགོ	SA smal po	skar ma mgo
སྐར་མ་རྒྱལ	constellation pusya	skar ma rgyal
སྐར་མ་ཅན	shawl with stars on it	skar ma can
སྐར་མ་གཅིག་ཙམ	for about a minute	skar ma gcig tsam
སྐར་མ་བཅོ་ལྔ	a quarter of an hour	skar ma bco lnga
སྐར་མ་ཆུ་སྟོད	constellation Purvashadha, possible the Big Dipper	skar ma chu stod
སྐར་མ་འཆོ་བ	injury caused by a malignant star	skar ma 'cho ba
སྐར་མ་འཇུག་མ་ཅན	comet	skar ma 'jug ma can
སྐར་མ་སྟོད་ཕུར	the star Leonis, crown star, fixed star	skar ma stod phur
སྐར་མ་བརྟན་པ	pole star, Polaris	skar ma brtan pa
སྐར་མ་ནམ་གྲུ	one of the lunar mansions	skar ma nam gru
སྐར་མ་གནམ་རྒྱུལ	planet Uranus	skar ma gnam rgyul
སྐར་མ་སྣར་མ	4th constellation	skar ma snar ma
སྐར་མ་ཕོད	comet	skar ma phod
སྐར་མ་སྨིན་བདུན	big dipper	skar ma smin bdun
སྐར་མ་རྩག་རྩིག	twinkling, canopy painting, starry design on ceiling	skar ma rtsag rtsig
སྐར་མ་ཚོམ་ཚོམ	skar ma sum tshom bzhi tshom sogs yod pa [Skya rengs tha mar skar ma tshom tshom du shar]	skar ma tshom tshom
སྐར་མ་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	Neptune	skar ma mtsho rgyal
སྐར་མ་འཚེ	injury caused by a malignant star	skar ma 'tshe
སྐར་མ་འཚོ་རྒྱལ	planet Neptune	skar ma 'tsho rgyal
སྐར་མ་འཚོ་བ	injury caused by a malignant star	skar ma 'tsho ba
སྐར་མ་ཞོ་བརླག	skar ma gang la bltas nas zho gang are lost: by being wrong in small action big ones are lost	skar ma zho brlag
སྐར་མ་འོད་ཆེན	bright star	skar ma 'od chen
སྐར་མ་རབ་རིབ	faint glimmering of a star	skar ma rab rib
སྐར་མ་རི་ཤི	star/constellation ri 'dor	skar ma ri shi
སྐར་མ་ལ་དགའ་བ	delight in stars	skar ma la dga' ba
སྐར་མ་གསུམ་ཙམ	about three minutes skar ma'i gos dang zla ba'i zhwa mo gyon - dress in the stars w the moon as a hat, get up and go to sleep during the night, work long hours	skar ma gsum tsam
སྐར་མའི་འགྲོས	motions of the stars	skar ma'i 'gros
སྐར་མའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	moon	skar ma'i rgyal po
སྐར་མའི་ཐལ་བ	Thalwa of the Stars, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	skar ma'i thal ba
སྐར་མའི་དྲི་ལྡན་མ	medicinal root	skar ma'i dri ldan ma
སྐར་མའི་དཔྱད	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	skar ma'i dpyad
སྐར་མའི་དཔྱོད	observation of the stars	skar ma'i dpyod
སྐར་མའི་དབྱོད	observation of the stars	skar ma'i dbyod
སྐར་མའི་མ་ལག	solar system + stars	skar ma'i ma lag
སྐར་མའི་ཡུམ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་གཟུངས	Nakshatras Matrikanama dharani	skar ma'i yum zhes bya ba'i gzungs
སྐར་མར་འཚེ་བ	moon	skar mar 'tshe ba
སྐར་མིག་བུ	1) son of Star-eye. 2) Garuda bird	skar mig bu
སྐར་མེད་རྐུབ་སྐྱོག	'byor med 'byor yod du very arrogant way of walking	skar med rkub skyog
སྐར་རྩིས	astronomy/astrology and mathematics	skar rtsis
སྐར་རྩིས་སྐོར་གྱི་གཞུང	astrology texts	skar rtsis skor gyi gzhung
སྐར་རྩིས་ཁང	observatory, planetarium	skar rtsis khang
སྐར་རྩིས་མཁན	astrologer/astronomer	skar rtsis mkhan
སྐར་རྩིས་དཔྱད་སྟེགས	observatory	skar rtsis dpyad stegs
སྐར་རྩིས་མཚུར་ལུགས	the mtshur lugs of Tibetan astrology	skar rtsis mtshur lugs
སྐར་རྩིས་ཞིབ་ལྟ་ཁང	observatory, planetarium	skar rtsis zhib lta khang
སྐར་རྩིས་རིག་པ	Astronomy / Astrology and mathematics, one of the five minor branches of knowledge see. {rig gnas chung ba lnga}	skar rtsis rig pa
སྐར་ཚད	measure, scale	skar tshad
སྐར་ཚོགས	star cluster	skar tshogs
སྐར་ཚོགས་ལྟར་རྒྱས	multiply like stars	skar tshogs ltar rgyas
སྐར་ཚོམ	constellation	skar tshom
སྐར་འཛིན	traditionally action gang zhig sgrub rgyu'i date sngon du gtan 'khel ba'i nyin mo having inauspicious stars/ planets and the previous day having good ones, so beginning a little on that one rten 'brel	skar 'dzin
སྐར་ཟླ	star and the moon	skar zla
སྐར་བཟང	{dge slong skar bzang} the monk Sunaksatra	skar bzang
སྐར་འོད	star light, light emitted by a star, a flower	skar 'od
སྐར་ཡུམ	treatises on the stars	skar yum
སྐར་ཡུམ་གཟའ་ཡུམ	sacred works on stars and planets	skar yum gza' yum
སྐར་ལས་སྐྱེས	poet. comet	skar las skyes
སྐར་གསལ	window, skylight	skar gsal
སྐལ	1) fortune, fate, destiny, luck, lot, opportunity; 2) fortunate, suitable, worthy, destined, lucky; 3) portion, share, inheritance; 4) to dry	skal
སྐལ་རྒྱབ་པ	wager, bet, lay a wager, gamble	skal rgyab pa
སྐལ་ངན	wretched, unlucky, unfortunate	skal ngan
སྐལ་དངུལ	share of the money	skal dngul
སྐལ་ལྔན	fortunate, auspicious	skal lngan
སྐལ་ལྔན་དགའ	joyful fortune	skal lngan dga'
སྐལ་ཅན	fortunate	skal can
སྐལ་ཅན་མ	1) Bhagyavati (Happy -n. of a goddess). 2) n. of disease which affects hair	skal can ma
སྐལ་ཆད	1) excluded from inheritance/ 1's portion; 2) misfortune, unlucky; 3) lam 'gro med pa	skal chad
སྐལ་ཆད་ཀྱི་རིགས	the type of person without the right fortune	skal chad kyi rigs
སྐལ་འཇིག	death	skal 'jig
སྐལ་ཉམས	similarity	skal nyams
སྐལ་མཉམ	1) of =/ similar kind/ status/ category/ destiny/ species, matching, homogenous; 2) beings belonging to =/similar realms w =/similar dharmas; 2) the quality of belonging to the same class of beings...	skal mnyam
སྐལ་མཉམ་གྱི་རྒྱུ	equivalent cause	skal mnyam gyi rgyu
སྐལ་མཉམ་རྒྱུ	equal/similar status/ state/ class cause congruent cause	skal mnyam rgyu
སྐལ་མཉམ་པ	those of equal lot	skal mnyam pa
སྐལ་མཉམ་པར་འདྲ་བ	homogenous with...	skal mnyam par 'dra ba
སྐལ་ཐོབ	one's portion/ lot	skal thob
སྐལ་དོན	supersensory object	skal don
སྐལ་དྲུག	the six fortunate possessions, the excellent riches	skal drug
སྐལ་ལྡན	having merit/ good luck * fortunate, destined, suitable, worthy, lucky, fit, proper, happy, blessed, proper receptacle, worthy one	skal ldan
སྐལ་ལྡན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བུ	student of religion, religious person	skal ldan gyi skye bu
སྐལ་ལྡན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བུ་སློབ་མ	student of religion, religious person	skal ldan gyi skye bu slob ma
སྐལ་ལྡན་དགའ	joyful fortune	skal ldan dga'
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཛཱ	the fortunate King Jah	skal ldan rgyal po dzA
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྒྱུད་དུ	to fortunate disciples	skal ldan rgyud du
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	to accept disciples	skal ldan rjes su bzung ba
སྐལ་ལྡན་སྙིང་གི་བུ་མཆོག	my supreme and worthy heart-son	skal ldan snying gi bu mchog
སྐལ་ལྡན་འདྲེན་མཛད	Kalden Drendzey. One of the 12 manifestations of Guru Rinpoche	skal ldan 'dren mdzad
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྣམས	suitable ones	skal ldan rnams
སྐལ་ལྡན་ཕོ་མོ	fortunate male or female person	skal ldan pho mo
སྐལ་ལྡན་བུ	fortunate son	skal ldan bu
སྐལ་ལྡན་བུ་ཀུན	worthy disciples	skal ldan bu kun
སྐལ་ལྡན་མེད་ཀྱི་སློབ་མ	heretic, Bhavya (n. of one of the 38 ancient Buddhist teachers)	skal ldan med kyi slob ma
སྐལ་ལྡན་ཤིང་རྟ	Bhagiratha [king who brought down the sacred Ganges from heaven to earth]	skal ldan shing rta
སྐལ་ལྡན་ཤིང་རྟ་ནུ་བོ་མོ	the river Ganges	skal ldan shing rta nu bo mo
སྐལ་ལྡན་ཤིང་རྟའི་བུ་མོ	the river Ganges	skal ldan shing rta'i bu mo
སྐལ་ལྡན་སློབ་བུ	fortunate spiritual son	skal ldan slob bu
སྐལ་བསྡུད་སུང་སི	joint stock co.	skal bsdud sung si
སྐལ་བསྡུས་སུང་སི	joint stock co.	skal bsdus sung si
སྐལ་པ	(good) fortune/ lot; potential	skal pa
སྐལ་པ་ཅན	the fortunate	skal pa can
སྐལ་པ་ཆད་པ	cutting off of good fortune	skal pa chad pa
སྐལ་པ་ཆན	fortunate	skal pa chan
སྐལ་པ་ཆེ	very fortunate	skal pa che
སྐལ་པ་ཆེ་བ	great influence, power	skal pa che ba
སྐལ་པ་མཉམ་པ	uniformly fortunate, always lucky	skal pa mnyam pa
སྐལ་པ་མཉམ་པའི་རྒྱུ	congruent cause, associated cause	skal pa mnyam pa'i rgyu
སྐལ་པ་མཉམ་པར་སྐྱེས་པ	born in same class	skal pa mnyam par skyes pa
སྐལ་པ་དང་མཐུན་པ	appropriate	skal pa dang mthun pa
སྐལ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	Syn {skal ldan}; to have luck	skal pa dang ldan pa
སྐལ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པར་བྱེད་པ	make oneself worthy to	skal pa dang ldan par byed pa
སྐལ་པ་དང་སྤྱོད་པ་མཐུན་པ	similar class and behavior	skal pa dang spyod pa mthun pa
སྐལ་པ་མི་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས	the frame of mind of dissimilar classes [of beings]	skal pa mi mnyam pa'i sems
སྐལ་པ་མེད་པ	unlucky, unfortunate	skal pa med pa
སྐལ་པ་དམན་པ	lesser fortune	skal pa dman pa
སྐལ་པ་རྫོགས་ལྡན	Golden age	skal pa rdzogs ldan
སྐལ་པ་བཟང	what good fortune this is!	skal pa bzang
སྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོ	golden age	skal pa bzang po
སྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོ་བྱུང	[today] we are indeed fortunate	skal pa bzang po byung
སྐལ་པ་བཟང་བ	good fortune, be respected, have influence and be successful	skal pa bzang ba
སྐལ་པ་ཡང་རབ	most fortunate	skal pa yang rab
སྐལ་པ་རབ་གྱུར་པ	most fortunate	skal pa rab gyur pa
སྐལ་པ་རབ་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	most fortunate	skal pa rab tu gyur pa
སྐལ་པ་ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང	one's individual share/ lot of subtle motile energy of karma	skal pa las kyi rlung
སྐལ་པར་ལྡན	blessed w good fortune	skal par ldan
སྐལ་པར་ལྡན་པའི་གདུལ་བྱ	fortunate disciples	skal par ldan pa'i gdul bya
སྐལ་པར་མི་ལྡན	unsuitable	skal par mi ldan
སྐལ་འཕར	bgos pa'i skal ba 'phar ma	skal 'phar
སྐལ་བ	portion, share (of an inheritance); good fortune; portion, share, ration, inheritance, lot, fate, destiny, happy, blessed, pious devout, unhappy, irreligious, portion, quota	skal ba
སྐལ་བ་གང་ཡང་མེད	has no such fortune	skal ba gang yang med
སྐལ་བ་ངན་པ	misfortune	skal ba ngan pa
སྐལ་བ་ཅན	fortunate, lucky	skal ba can
སྐལ་བ་ཅན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	give the possibility	skal ba can du byed pa
སྐལ་བ་གཅོད	not include when dividing something	skal ba gcod
སྐལ་བ་ཆད་པ	the good fortune has come to an end	skal ba chad pa
སྐལ་བ་མཆོག་ལྡན	excellent condition	skal ba mchog ldan
སྐལ་བ་ཇི་བཞིན	which corresponds to the merit	skal ba ji bzhin
སྐལ་བ་མཉམ་པ	of equal fate / status	skal ba mnyam pa
སྐལ་བ་མཉམ་པའི་རྒྱུ	homogeneity between cause and effect	skal ba mnyam pa'i rgyu
སྐལ་བ་མཉམ་བའི་རྒྱུ	homogeneity between cause and effect	skal ba mnyam ba'i rgyu
སྐལ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	having merit/ good luck * fortunate, destined, suitable, worthy, lucky, fit, proper, happy, blessed, proper receptacle, worthy one	skal ba dang ldan pa
སྐལ་བ་དང་མི་ལྡན་པ	who does not have the good fortune	skal ba dang mi ldan pa
སྐལ་བ་དྲུག	Syn {phun sum tshogs pa drug}. The six fortunate possessions, six excellent riches. 1) {dbang phyug phun sum tshogs pa}. excellent possession of power and wealth. 2) {gzugs phun sum tshogs pa}. exc...	skal ba drug
སྐལ་བ་སྤྲོད་པ	allocate, assign	skal ba sprod pa
སྐལ་བ་བྱུང་བ	{byed rgyu'i skal ba byung na} when you have the chance to do so	skal ba byung ba
སྐལ་བ་དབེན	do not have the good fortune	skal ba dben
སྐལ་བ་མི་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས	different kinds of thoughts of beings of different realms	skal ba mi mnyam pa'i sems
སྐལ་བ་མེད་པ	unworthy, unlucky, unfortunate	skal ba med pa
སྐལ་བ་དམན་པ	[the ones] of inferior fortune	skal ba dman pa
སྐལ་བ་བཟང	great fortune	skal ba bzang
སྐལ་བ་བཟང་པོ	lucky, fortunate, person's name	skal ba bzang po
སྐལ་བ་བཟང་བ	{phrag dog spangs pas skal ba bzang ba} Good fortune results from abandoning envy.	skal ba bzang ba
སྐལ་བ་ཡོད་པ	to have the good fortune	skal ba yod pa
སྐལ་བ་རེ་ཆུང	how miserable I am!	skal ba re chung
སྐལ་མེད	unfortunate, lack the fortune	skal med
སྐལ་མེད་དབུལ་བ	poverty	skal med dbul ba
སྐལ་དམན	inferior class / fortune, misfortune; unfortunate; those of lesser fortune	skal dman
སྐལ་དམྱིགས	[arch] skyin tshab	skal dmyigs
སྐལ་རྫོངས	mna' ma dang mag par skal ba bskur ba'i dngos po	skal rdzongs
སྐལ་ཞིང	land share/ inheritance	skal zhing
སྐལ་བཟང	fortunate person	skal bzang
སྐལ་བཟང་གི་གདུལ་བྱ	fortunate students	skal bzang gi gdul bya
སྐལ་བཟང་གི་འདུལ་བྱ	worthy disciples	skal bzang gi 'dul bya
སྐལ་བཟང་བགྲོད་པའི་མྱུར་ལམ	{skal bzang bgrod pa'i myur lam	skal bzang bgrod pa'i myur lam
སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1708-1757 - seventh Dalai Lama, Kalsang Gyatso	skal bzang rgya mtsho
སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན	'on rgyal sras - author of {sgrol dkar yid bzhin 'khor lo'i sgo nas tshe sgrub}	skal bzang thub bstan
སྐལ་བཟང་པད་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Kalsang Pema Wangchuk (b. 1719), fifth Rigdzin of Dorje Drak	skal bzang pad ma dbang phyug
སྐལ་བཟང་མེ་ཏོག	a yellow autumn flower	skal bzang me tog
སྐལ་བཟང་ལས་འཕྲོ་ཅན	worthy ones with good karma; fortunate disciple with a special connection	skal bzang las 'phro can
སྐལ་བཟང་སེམས་ཅན	person of great merit	skal bzang sems can
སྐལ་རིན	share, portion	skal rin
སྐལ་ལ	share, portion	skal la
སྐལ་ལ་ཐོབ་པ	inherit, obtain 1's inheritance	skal la thob pa
སྐས	ladder, stairs	skas
སྐས་ཀ	ladder, stairs	skas ka
སྐས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	order of steps	skas kyi rim pa
སྐས་སྐོར་ཁྲ་མ	1) [stair] railing, balustrade. 2) step, rung	skas skor khra ma
སྐས་འགོ	beginning of ladder/ stairs	skas 'go
སྐས་འགྲམ	two side pieces of staircase or ladder	skas 'gram
སྐས་འཇུག་པ	place a ladder	skas 'jug pa
སྐས་འཇེག	ladder	skas 'jeg
སྐས་འཇེག་འཇེག་པ	climb a ladder	skas 'jeg 'jeg pa
སྐས་རྟིང	bottom of steps/ ladder	skas rting
སྐས་ཐེམ	step, rung	skas them
སྐས་གདང	wooden steps/ ladder kyi gdang bu	skas gdang
སྐས་གདང་བུ	flight of long steps in a ladder	skas gdang bu
སྐས་དབྱིབས	1) trapezoid, trapezium; 2) ladder shape	skas dbyibs
སྐས་ཚང	signifies a flight of steps	skas tshang
སྐས་ཛ་གདང་རིང་པོ	flight of long steps in a ladder	skas dza gdang ring po
སྐས་འཛེག	staircase	skas 'dzeg
སྐས་འཛེག་པ	to climb a ladder 145	skas 'dzeg pa
སྐས་ཞིང	terraced field	skas zhing
སྐས་རིང	{rin po che'i skas ring} - long ladder	skas ring
སྐས་རིམ	staircase	skas rim
སྐས་རིམ་ཅན་གྱི་ཞིང་ཁ	terraced field	skas rim can gyi zhing kha
སྐས་རུ	rails of the stairs	skas ru
སྐས་ལ་འབབ་པ	come down a ladder	skas la 'bab pa
སྐས་ལེབ	skas hril min par gdang bu shing leb btsugs pa'i skas	skas leb
སྐས་གཤམ	foot of the stairs	skas gsham
སྐས་བཤད	stairs explanation	skas bshad
སྐས་སུམ་སྦྲེལ	of temple, palace etc three steps	skas sum sbrel
སྐས་ཧྲིལ	'dre skas sam byi'u skas te beam hril por nyag ka bzos pa'i skas	skas hril
སྐི་བཏུབ་པ	behead	ski btub pa
སྐི་རགས	girdle	ski rags
སྐིད་སྡུག་དྲི	ask about someone's livelihood/ living conditions/ welfare	skid sdug dri
སྐིད་སྡུག་དྲིས	asked about someone's livelihood/ living conditions/ welfare	skid sdug dris
སྐིད་སྡུག་འདྲི	ask about someone's livelihood/ living conditions/ welfare	skid sdug 'dri
སྐུ	kayas. 'Body' in the sense of a body or embodiment of numerous qualities. When speaking of two kayas: dharmakaya and rupakaya. The three kayas are dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya. See also...	sku
སྐུ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	the form aspect of Samantabhadra	sku kun tu bzang po
སྐུ་དཀར	whitewash [h]	sku dkar
སྐུ་དཀར་གསོལ	1) whitewash a house; 2) praise flatter	sku dkar gsol
སྐུ་དཀར་གསོལ་བ	1) whitewash a house; 2) praise flatter	sku dkar gsol ba
སྐུ་དཀྱིལ་གསལ་དྭངས	* [h] How do yo do?	sku dkyil gsal dwangs
སྐུ་བཀྲེས་པ	appetite or feeling of hunger	sku bkres pa
སྐུ་རྐེད	waist [h]	sku rked
སྐུ་རྐྱང	h alone	sku rkyang
སྐུ་རྐྱང་བཞུགས	live alone [h]	sku rkyang bzhugs
སྐུ་སྐལ	(h) share, portion, inheritance	sku skal
སྐུ་སྐུ	enigma, riddle, puzzling question	sku sku
སྐུ་སྐེམ	lean slender body of a respectable person	sku skem
སྐུ་སྐྱིད་སྐུ་སྐྱིད	please, please!	sku skyid sku skyid
སྐུ་སྐྱེ	1) birth. 2) rebirth	sku skye
སྐུ་སྐྱེ་བཞེས	take [re]birth [h]	sku skye bzhes
སྐུ་སྐྱེད	hind parts below the waist	sku skyed
སྐུ་སྐྱེས	1) incarnation, tulku; 2) present, gift	sku skyes
སྐུ་བསྐྱོད་པ	approach, arrive, come	sku bskyod pa
སྐུ་ཁབ	needle, injection [h]	sku khab
སྐུ་ཁབ་སྐྱོན	give an injection [h]	sku khab skyon
སྐུ་ཁབ་སྒྲོན	give an injection [h]	sku khab sgron
སྐུ་ཁམས	1) well-being, health, state of health, physical condition; 2) body, person, physical form; 3) great man's person	sku khams
སྐུ་ཁམས་ཅི་བདེར་བཞུགས	to remain in good health	sku khams ci bder bzhugs
སྐུ་ཁམས་བདེ	good health	sku khams bde
སྐུ་ཁམས་བདེ་པོ	1) (h) body, person. 2) state of health	sku khams bde po
སྐུ་ཁམས་བཟང་པོ	good health [h]	sku khams bzang po
སྐུ་ཁམས་ཨེ་བཟང	Is your health good?	sku khams e bzang
སྐུ་ཁེ	(h) gain, profit; profit	sku khe
སྐུ་ཁེ་བཞེས་པ	(h) to profit, make a profit	sku khe bzhes pa
སྐུ་ཁྱས	[h] ablution, cleansing, washing away [of sins]	sku khyas
སྐུ་ཁྲ	likeness	sku khra
སྐུ་ཁྲག	blood	sku khrag
སྐུ་ཁྲུས	1) washing. 2) ablution	sku khrus
སྐུ་ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	bathing ritual	sku khrus kyi cho ga
སྐུ་ཁྲུས་གསོལ་བ	1) khrus brgyab pa; 2) dharma practice of asking to wash deity statue	sku khrus gsol ba
སྐུ་མཁར	fort, castle	sku mkhar
སྐུ་མཁར་ཉི་གཟུངས	{sku mkhar nyi gzungs castle	sku mkhar nyi gzungs
སྐུ་མཁེན	Excellency, excellent sir!	sku mkhen
སྐུ་མཁྱེན	excellency, excellent Sir!	sku mkhyen
སྐུ་འཁོར	attendant, servant	sku 'khor
སྐུ་འཁྲིལ་བག་ཅན	slender, of good build, impressively beautiful or handsome	sku 'khril bag can
སྐུ་འཁྲིལ་བག་ཆགས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of being slender, of good build, impressively beautiful or handsome	sku 'khril bag chags pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་འཁྲིལ་བག་ཆགས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of a slender good build	sku 'khril bag chags pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་འཁྲུག	fight [h]	sku 'khrug
སྐུ་འཁྲུག་སྐྱོན	fight w [h]	sku 'khrug skyon
སྐུ་འཁྲུག་ཤོར	get into a fight [h]	sku 'khrug shor
སྐུ་འཁྲུགས	feel ill at ease/ unwell, be indisposed	sku 'khrugs
སྐུ་འཁྲུགས་པ	body elements disordered, not well	sku 'khrugs pa
སྐུ་འཁྲུང་བ	be born	sku 'khrung ba
སྐུ་འཁྲུངས	to be born, take birth 146	sku 'khrungs
སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	(h) to be born	sku 'khrungs pa
སྐུ་གམ	near, before	sku gam
སྐུ་གམ་ངོ་བཅར	personal interview, approach or come before a great man personally	sku gam ngo bcar
སྐུ་གེགས	1) [physical/ bodily] obstacles [h]; 2) failure, misfortune	sku gegs
སྐུ་གོང་མ	former incarnation/ life/ birth [h]	sku gong ma
སྐུ་གོང་མའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	previous Dalai Lama	sku gong ma'i rgyal po rin po che
སྐུ་གོང་མའི་དུས	during the time of his predecessors	sku gong ma'i dus
སྐུ་གྲིབ	impure obscuration [h]	sku grib
སྐུ་གྲིམས་པ	1) holiday, vacation; 2) a stroll, walk three convalescence; 4) healthy	sku grims pa
སྐུ་གླུད	ransom offering (bon practice)	sku glud
སྐུ་དགེ་འདུན	his body is the sangha	sku dge 'dun
སྐུ་དགྲ	personal enemy	sku dgra
སྐུ་དགྲ་ལྔ	CHN	sku dgra lnga
སྐུ་བགེགས་ཆགས	disease caused by evil spirits	sku bgegs chags
སྐུ་བགྲེས	[h] elderly man	sku bgres
སྐུ་བགྲེས་པ	1) old, aged; 2) the older elder[s]	sku bgres pa
སྐུ་མགྲོན	1) guest, visitor. 2) feast, entertainment, festive occasion	sku mgron
སྐུ་མགྲོན་ཁང	guest house [h]	sku mgron khang
སྐུ་མགྲོན་འབུལ་བ	entertain	sku mgron 'bul ba
སྐུ་འགྱེད	distribution [of money to monks individually	sku 'gyed
སྐུ་འགྱེད་འབུལ་བ	(h) to make a donation (to a monastery or ecclesiastic)	sku 'gyed 'bul ba
སྐུ་འགྲམ	side {de nas sangs rgyas kyi sku 'gram las 'khrungs pa'i me dpung rab tu 'bar ba} then a brilliant tongue of flame issued from the Buddha's side	sku 'gram
སྐུ་རྒྱན	1) body ornaments; 2) stake [at play] [h]	sku rgyan
སྐུ་རྒྱབ	1) behind, in back of; 2) back of the body	sku rgyab
སྐུ་རྒྱབ་དེ་གར	behind you	sku rgyab de gar
སྐུ་རྒྱབ་ལ	(h) in back, behind	sku rgyab la
སྐུ་རྒྱས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of large body	sku rgyas pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་རྒྱས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark	sku rgyas pa'i dpe byed
ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཕི༹ལླེད	out bodily frame	of a filled
སྐུ་རྒྱུ	matter or substance whereof an image is made	sku rgyu
སྐུ་རྒྱུད	descent of the spirit in emanations as in the case of incarnate lamas, scion, descendant of a noble family	sku rgyud
སྐུ་སྒེར	private [h]	sku sger
སྐུ་སྒེར་གྱི་སྐུ་ཆས	(h) private property	sku sger gyi sku chas
སྐུ་སྒེར་བླ་བྲང	[h] residence of the Regent	sku sger bla brang
སྐུ་སྒེར་ཡིག་ཚང	private office	sku sger yig tshang
སྐུ་བརྒྱུད	ancestry, descendant, scion [of a noble family]	sku brgyud
སྐུ་བརྒྱུབ	descendant, scion [of a noble family]	sku brgyub
སྐུ་བསྒྲེས	aged	sku bsgres
སྐུ་ང	[arch] give a name, nickname	sku nga
སྐུ་ངལ	difficulty, hardship	sku ngal
སྐུ་ངལ་བ	fatigue, weariness	sku ngal ba
སྐུ་ངལ་གསོ	[h] rest, ease, refresh	sku ngal gso
སྐུ་ངལ་གསོ་བ	[h] rest, ease,refresh	sku ngal gso ba
སྐུ་ངལ་གསོ་རོགས་གནང	please rest	sku ngal gso rogs gnang
སྐུ་ངལ་གསོས	[h] rested, eased, refreshed	sku ngal gsos
སྐུ་ངེས་པ	TSE	sku nges pa
སྐུ་ངོ	1) Sir, lord, chief, master; 2) in person; 3) a vip	sku ngo
སྐུ་ངོ་མཁྱེན	[h] Your excellency, respected sir	sku ngo mkhyen
སྐུ་ངོ་ཆེན་པོ	(h) cabinet minister	sku ngo chen po
སྐུ་ངོ་ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས	name [highest honorific]	sku ngo chos ldan lags
སྐུ་ངོ་མདའ་དཔོན	[h] colonel	sku ngo mda' dpon
སྐུ་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	himself	sku ngo bo nyid
སྐུ་ངོ་མ	oneself, personally, in person	sku ngo ma
སྐུ་ངོ་མ་རང	that very person	sku ngo ma rang
སྐུ་ངོ་མཚར་ཅན་གསུམ	the three miraculous statues	sku ngo mtshar can gsum
སྐུ་ངོ་རྫོང	(h) magistrate, district officer	sku ngo rdzong
སྐུ་དངོས	himself, in person, that very person	sku dngos
སྐུ་ལྔ	the five kayas	sku lnga
སྐུ་ལྔ་རྒྱལ་པོ	the five Regal Buddhas	sku lnga rgyal po
སྐུ་ལྔ་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	the spontaneously present five kayas	sku lnga lhun gyis grub pa
སྐུ་ལྔ་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	vidyahara of the spontaneously accomplished/present five kayas	sku lnga lhun gyis grub pa'i rig 'dzin
སྐུ་ལྔ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རིག་འཛིན	vidyadhara of the spontaneously accomplished / present five kayas sku gcer bu grang grang bsil bsil ltar	sku lnga lhun grub kyi rig 'dzin
བཞུགས་པ	sitting naked, perfectly cool and fresh	bzhugs pa
སྐུ་གཅེར་མོ	she is naked	sku gcer mo
སྐུ་བཅར	personal attendant of a great man, attendant monks of dalai lama	sku bcar
སྐུ་བཅར་མཁན་པོ	domestic priest of the dalai lama, he who sits in company of the grand lama	sku bcar mkhan po
སྐུ་བཅར་ཆོག་པ	be permitted to interview	sku bcar chog pa
སྐུ་བཅར་མོ	[h] raiment worn next to the skin	sku bcar mo
སྐུ་བཅར་ཞུ་བ	(h) to approach with respect, come to visit, to interview [an official]	sku bcar zhu ba
སྐུ་ཆ	1) well-being, health, state of health, physical condition; 2) body, person, physical form; 3) great man's person	sku cha
སྐུ་ཆམ	walk around [h] take a walk	sku cham
སྐུ་ཆལ	belly, abdomen	sku chal
སྐུ་ཆས	(h) belongings, possessions, goods, property, chattels, bags. Syn {cha lag}; properties	sku chas
སྐུ་ཆས་ཐམས་ཅད	all his possessions	sku chas thams cad
སྐུ་ཆིངས	belt, sash	sku chings
སྐུ་ཆེ	Excellency, Excellent Sir	sku che
སྐུ་ཆེ་བ	great, greatness; great (h.)	sku che ba
སྐུ་ཆེ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	great qualities sku che zhing drang ba'i mtshan bzang the major mark of a body which is large and straight sku che zhing drang ba'i mtshan bzang the major mark of being tall and straight	sku che ba'i yon tan
སྐུ་ཆེ་རིང་པོ	(h) long-lived	sku che ring po
སྐུ་ཆེན་པོ	large bodied god/ person	sku chen po
སྐུ་ཆོས	robes, dress worn by great men or by lamas	sku chos
སྐུ་མཆན	(h) armpits	sku mchan
སྐུ་མཆིན	liver	sku mchin
སྐུ་མཆེད	1) relatives, family [not parents]. 2) disciple. 3) (h) brother. [or sister]. 4) pupils of one lama	sku mched
སྐུ་མཆེད་རྣམ་གསུམ	The three brothers;" {po to ba, spyan snga ba, phu chung ba}, who were the heart sons of 'brom ston.	sku mched rnam gsum
སྐུ་མཆེད་གསུམ	1) three brothers. 2) three disciples / spiritual sons of Dromtönpa. 1] {po to ba}. 2] {spyan lnga ba}. 3] {phu chung ba}. Potowa, Chengawa and Phuchungwa	sku mched gsum
སྐུ་མཆོད	commemoration service / puja	sku mchod
སྐུ་འཆམ	dance, get along [h]	sku 'cham
སྐུ་ཇུས	bya gzhag gi gzhi chus, Las drang po'i 'dun ma ma bzung na, dus tha ma sku jus shor na 'gyod	sku jus
སྐུ་མཇལ	[h] interview, audience [w a high official]	sku mjal
སྐུ་མཇུག	posteriors, backside, tail	sku mjug
སྐུ་འཇམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, thugs rje can gyi phyir sku la rtsub bag med pas 'jam pa,	sku 'jam pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་འཇམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of a soft body	sku 'jam pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་འཇིང་འཇིང་ཀྱོག	wry neck	sku 'jing 'jing kyog
སྐུ་འཇུག	blouse	sku 'jug
སྐུ་རྗེས	imprint of the body [in solid rock]; body imprint sku nya gro ta ltar chu zheng gab pa'i	sku rjes
མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of body proportions like a nya gro ta tree sku nya gro ta ltar chu zheng gab pa'i	mtshan bzang
སྐུ་ཉམས	dignity, elegance, lordliness	sku nyams
སྐུ་ཉམས་གནང	act w dignity, elegance, lordliness	sku nyams gnang
སྐུ་ཉིད	your self	sku nyid
སྐུ་ཉེ	(h) relative, kinsman, relation	sku nye
སྐུ་གཉིས	The two bodies of a Buddha. 1] {gzugs sku}. [rupakaya] Form Body 2] The body of reality {chos sku}. [dharmakaya], Truth Body 148	sku gnyis
སྐུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	Fruition of the two kayas. The state of complete and perfect buddhahood comprised of dharmakaya and rupakaya of which rupakaya, the form body, refers to both sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya	sku gnyis kyi 'bras bu
སྐུ་གཉིས་ཟུང་འཇུག	Unity of the two kayas	sku gnyis zung 'jug
སྐུ་གཉེན	[h] relative	sku gnyen
སྐུ་གཉེར	[H] shrine keeper, temple servant /superintendent /caretaker, steward [of a monastery]	sku gnyer
སྐུ་མཉེ	1) fire; 2) seat	sku mnye
སྐུ་མཉེད	handkerchief	sku mnyed
སྐུ་མཉེལ	tired, fatigued	sku mnyel
སྐུ་མཉེལ་པོ	(h) tired, weary, fatigued; (h) tired, fatigued	sku mnyel po
སྐུ་མཉེལ་བ	[h] be/get tired	sku mnyel ba
སྐུ་མཉེས་པོ་བཟོས	would you mind, please	sku mnyes po bzos
སྐུ་སྙུང	ill, sick	sku snyung
སྐུ་སྙེ	[h] lean against, recline upon	sku snye
སྐུ་སྙེས	[h] lean against, recline upon	sku snyes
སྐུ་སྙེས་གནང་བ	(h) to lean against, to recline upon	sku snyes gnang ba
སྐུ་བརྙན	1) image, icon, statue. 2) likeness. 3) Syn {snang brnyan, 'dra sku}. 4) reflection	sku brnyan
སྐུ་རྟེན	body support, art and iconography, holder or receptacle of person	sku rten
སྐུ་རྟེན་པ	lha'i khog rten, chos rje sku rten gtsug lag gi khang pa bzhengs had temples built to uphold representations of the buddhas' form	sku rten pa
སྐུ་ལྟབ	folding [h]	sku ltab
སྐུ་ལྟབ་སྐྱོན	fold [h]	sku ltab skyon
སྐུ་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in a manner) consistent with enlightened embodiment*	sku ltar shar ba
སྐུ་ལྟེམ	[h] be ill, get sick	sku ltem
སྐུ་ལྟེམས་པ	(h) to be ill	sku ltems pa
སྐུ་སྟོད	upper part of the body	sku stod
སྐུ་སྟོད་སྨད	upper and lower parts of the body	sku stod smad
སྐུ་སྟོབས་ཉམས་པ	[H] be powerless, be impotent	sku stobs nyams pa
སྐུ་བརྟེན	image, icon, statue [h]	sku brten
སྐུ་བརྟེན་པ	made use of	sku brten pa
སྐུ་བལྟམ་པ	to take birth/ be born (honorific; one of twelve deeds)	sku bltam pa
སྐུ་བལྟམས	(h) to be born, take birth; (h) to be born	sku bltams
སྐུ་བལྟམས་པ	(h) to be born	sku bltams pa
སྐུ་བསྟོད	praise [the good qualities of the buddha kayas]	sku bstod
སྐུ་ཐང	[H] thangka, picture, painting, representation of a deity	sku thang
སྐུ་ཐང་མཉེལ	be tired, weary fatigued, difficult [h]	sku thang mnyel
སྐུ་ཐང་མཉེལ་པོ	be tired, weary fatigued, difficult [h]	sku thang mnyel po
སྐུ་ཐང་ཐང་ག	painted likeness	sku thang thang ga
སྐུ་ཐིམ་པ	to pass away	sku thim pa
སྐུ་ཐུགས་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unification of body and mind, the state of physical and mental unity	sku thugs zung 'jug
སྐུ་ཐོག	stomach, lifetime, age, generation	sku thog
སྐུ་ཐོག་གོང་མ	former/ previous incarnations/ generations, ancestor[s] [h]	sku thog gong ma
སྐུ་ཐོག་སྔ་མ	former generation, ancestor, predecessor	sku thog snga ma
སྐུ་ཐོག་འཇུག་མ	succeeding generation	sku thog 'jug ma
སྐུ་ཐོག་རྗེས་མ	[H] succeeding lives/ generation[s], descendants	sku thog rjes ma
སྐུ་ཐོག་མང་པོ	many generations	sku thog mang po
སྐུ་ཐོབ་པ	attainment of the kayas	sku thob pa
སྐུ་དག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of pure/ clean body	sku dag pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་དག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of	sku dag pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་དང་བཅས	together with himself (h)	sku dang bcas
སྐུ་དང་ཕྱག་མཚན	forms & symbolic attributes of deities	sku dang phyag mtshan
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས	the kayas and timeless awareness	sku dang ye shes
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature of kayas and wisdoms	sku dang ye shes kyi chos nyid
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the display of the kayas and wisdoms	sku dang ye shes kyi snang ba
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐམས་ཅད	the totality of the kayas and timeless awareness	sku dang ye shes thams cad
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་འདུ་བྲལ་མེད་པ	indivisible kayas and wisdoms	sku dang ye shes 'du bral med pa
སྐུ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་འདུ་འབྲལ་མེད་པ	inseparable kayas and wisdoms 149 sku dang gsung dang thugs kyi sprul pa Body, Speech and Mind emanations	sku dang ye shes 'du 'bral med pa
སྐུ་དུབ་པ	(h) to be tired, to get tired	sku dub pa
སྐུ་དུས	time, lifetime, life, during so and so	sku dus
སྐུ་དུས་སུ	during the lifetime of..	sku dus su
སྐུ་དོན	1) (h) matter, affair, business. 2) meaning, significance. 3) intention purpose	sku don
སྐུ་དྲག	1) nobleman, aristocrat, gentleman, high official; 2) nobility, aristocracy, officials (/ [h]	sku drag
སྐུ་དྲག་མཐོ་རིམ་རིང་ལུགས	aristocracy	sku drag mtho rim ring lugs
སྐུ་དྲིན	kindness, benevolence, mercy [h]	sku drin
སྐུ་དྲིན་འཁུར་བ	[h] be grateful	sku drin 'khur ba
སྐུ་དྲིན་བསབ་པ	repay a kindness	sku drin bsab pa
སྐུ་དྲུང	presence of, near, vicinity [h]	sku drung
སྐུ་དྲུང་དུ	in the presence of	sku drung du
སྐུ་དྲུང་དུ་བཅར	should go to	sku drung du bcar
སྐུ་དྲུང་དེར་ཕྱིན	to go before, to come in front of	sku drung der phyin
སྐུ་དྲུང་ན	{rang nyid bla ma'i sku drung na gnas pa'i tshe} in the presence of your teacher	sku drung na
སྐུ་དྲུང་པ	secretary, page, attendant of a great man, private secretary to a high official	sku drung pa
སྐུ་གདུང	1) corpse, bodily remains; 2) [ring bsrel cremation] relics; 3) Ring bsrel or body stupa (/ [h]	sku gdung
སྐུ་གདུང་གི་རིང་བསྲེལ	relics (of buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-	sku gdung gi ring bsrel
སྐུ་གདུང་ཆ་བརྒྱད	a stupa containing one eighth of Buddha Shakyamuni's relics	sku gdung cha brgyad
སྐུ་གདུང་མཆོད་རྟེན	1) remains, relic; 2) reliquary [stupa]; 3) dead body [in funeral pyre] four descendants	sku gdung mchod rten
སྐུ་གདུང་འབར་བ	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	sku gdung 'bar ba
བུདདྷ	Body	Buddha
སྐུ་གདུང་འབར་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Shining Relics. This tantra describes the outer and inner signs of awareness reaching maturity which are manifest before and after the time of death in order to inspire and instill confid...	sku gdung 'bar ba'i rgyud
སྐུ་གདུང་བཞུ་བ	to perform a cremation	sku gdung bzhu ba
སྐུ་གདུང་བཞུགས་འབུལ	cremation	sku gdung bzhugs 'bul
སྐུ་གདུང་བཞུགས་འབུལ་ཞུ	perform a cremation	sku gdung bzhugs 'bul zhu
སྐུ་གདུང་རིགས་ལྔ	CHN	sku gdung rigs lnga
སྐུ་གདུང་རིང་བསྲེལ	relics of bone remains GD	sku gdung ring bsrel
སྐུ་གདུང་སོགས་འཇོག་ས	reliquary	sku gdung sogs 'jog sa
སྐུ་གདུད	remains, [H] corpse	sku gdud
སྐུ་མདངས	complexion	sku mdangs
སྐུ་མདུན	before, near, in the presence [of high lama etc.]; 2) Sku ngo ma rang (/; 3) the presence = Dalai Lama [etc] title (/ [h]	sku mdun
སྐུ་མདུན་ཏུ་བཅར	call on/ visit/ make a request of jogher ranking person [h]	sku mdun tu bcar
སྐུ་མདུན་དུ་བསྡད	sat down in front of him	sku mdun du bsdad
སྐུ་མདུན་དུ་བསླེབས	arrived in his presence	sku mdun du bslebs
སྐུ་མདུན་ནས	from so and so, in the presence of	sku mdun nas
སྐུ་མདུན་པ	secretary, domestic priest of the dalai lama, aide-de-camp, personal attendant, private secretary, officer in waiting	sku mdun pa
སྐུ་མདུན་ལ	[h] in the presence of, before [a superior]	sku mdun la
སྐུ་མདུན་ལ་བཅར་བ	1) (h) to come into the presence [of a superior]. 2) to visit, call [on a high official]	sku mdun la bcar ba
སྐུ་མདུན་ལ་བཞག་པ	put in front of [h]	sku mdun la bzhag pa
སྐུ་མདོག	color of the body	sku mdog
སྐུ་མདོག་དམར་མོ	red	sku mdog dmar mo
སྐུ་འདད	funeral repast	sku 'dad
སྐུ་འདའ་བ	(h) to pass away	sku 'da' ba
སྐུ་འདྲ	* image, statue, likeness	sku 'dra
སྐུ་འདྲའི	statuary	sku 'dra'i
སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ	kayavajra, environmental being, cognitive being, indestructible dimension	sku rdo rje
སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ	external rdo rje sems dpa', living up to authentic being-in-anenvironment	sku rdo rje rnal
སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	kayavajrayoga sku rdo rjes lus la sbyangs ste sor sdud	sku rdo rje rnal 'byor
བསྙེན་པའི་ཡན་ལག	* training the body through the indestructible reality of the	bsnyen pa'i yan lag
སྐུ་ལྡེམ་པ	be unwell, ill, ill-health	sku ldem pa
སྐུ་ལྡེར	clay statue	sku lder
སྐུ་བསྡུས་པ	to pass away	sku bsdus pa
སྐུ་ན	(h) age. [of a woman]	sku na
སྐུ་ན་བགྲེས	[h] grow old/ aged, age	sku na bgres
སྐུ་ན་བགྲེས་པོ	[h] old, aged	sku na bgres po
སྐུ་ན་འགྲེས་པོ	old, aged, of a high age	sku na 'gres po
སྐུ་ན་ཕྲ་མོ	[his] lifetime was short	sku na phra mo
སྐུ་ན་གཞོན	young 150	sku na gzhon
སྐུ་ན་སོན	grow up, come of age [h]	sku na son
སྐུ་ནམ་སོན་པ	only a minor	sku nam son pa
སྐུ་པང	lap	sku pang
སྐུ་པར	[h] photograph, photo, portrait	sku par
སྐུ་པར་སྒྲོན	[h] take photographs	sku par sgron
སྐུ་པར་བྲིས་པ	painted/ drawn portrait [h]	sku par bris pa
སྐུ་པུར	(h) corpse	sku pur
སྐུ་པོ	morning, twilight, dawn	sku po
སྐུ་པྲེང	incarnation	sku preng
སྐུ་དཔུང	shoulder	sku dpung
སྐུ་སྤུར	(h) corpse	sku spur
སྐུ་སྤྱིའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ	the 10 good qualities of body [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, sku mnyen zhing 'gying legs pas 'khril bag chags pa dang, ring thung sbom phra sogs ma 'chol bas rim par 'tshams pa dang,...	sku spyi'i yon tan bcu
སྐུ་སྤྲུལ	body emanation	sku sprul
སྐུ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	his body is the nirmanakaya	sku sprul sku
སྐུ་ཕུང	dead body, corpse [h]	sku phung
སྐུ་ཕུང་མཇལ་སྨོན	funeral ceremony	sku phung mjal smon
སྐུ་ཕུང་གདན་ཞུ	funeral	sku phung gdan zhu
སྐུ་ཕྱག	prostration, bowing down	sku phyag
སྐུ་ཕྱག་གནང	prostrate, bow down [h]	sku phyag gnang
སྐུ་ཕྲག	[h] shoulder	sku phrag
སྐུ་ཕྲེང	lifetimes, incarnation line, string of lives, lineage/ succession/ line of reincarnations	sku phreng
སྐུ་འཕཡབ༹	health of a dignitary	sku 'phyva
སྐུ་འཕྱྭ	health of a dignitary	sku 'phywa
སྐུ་འཕྲེང	Incarnate lineage, the lineage of an incarnate lama	sku 'phreng
སྐུ་འཕྲེང་ལྔ་པ	the fifth in a line of incarnations	sku 'phreng lnga pa
སྐུ་བ	to build, to erect	sku ba
སྐུ་བག	(h) 1) bride. 2) son's or grandson's wife	sku bag
སྐུ་བལ་རིང་བསྲེལ	relics of clothing GD	sku bal ring bsrel
སྐུ་བུབ	monkey of the langur class found near bathang	sku bub
སྐུ་བེམ	zla gam, thul pa	sku bem
སྐུ་བེར	coat, cloak. Syn {ber, zla gam}	sku ber
སྐུ་བོན	former Tibetan rgyal gyi 'khris su bsdad nas 'don pa 'don mkhan bon po	sku bon
སྐུ་བྱི་དོར་བྱས་འདྲ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of	sku byi dor byas 'dra ba'i dpe byed
སྐུ་བྱི་དོར་བྱས་འདྲའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of body being as if cleansed	sku byi dor byas 'dra'i dpe byad
སྐུ་བྱུག་སྒྲོན	rub in oil [h]	sku byug sgron
སྐུ་བྲང	chest [h]	sku brang
སྐུ་བྲིས	paintings (of deities)	sku bris
སྐུ་བླ	deity that protects the body, often associated with a sacred mountain	sku bla
སྐུ་བླ་མ	his body is the teacher	sku bla ma
སྐུ་དབང	power, authority [h]	sku dbang
སྐུ་དབང་ཆེན་པོ	almighty	sku dbang chen po
སྐུ་དབང་གནང	have power/ authority, rule [h]	sku dbang gnang
སྐུ་དབྱིབས	shape of body	sku dbyibs
སྐུ་དབྱེ་བ	classification of the kayas	sku dbye ba
སྐུ་འབག	image, likeness, statue, mask, effigy, figure	sku 'bag
སྐུ་འབུམ	1); 2) 100,000 images; 2) stupa w many images/ tsha-tshas; 3) the Kumbum temple/monastery	sku 'bum
ཙ	tsas; lit. "hundred thousand images" 1) the Kumbum temple {byams pa gling}. [a monastery located east of lake Kokonor]. 2) a stupa with many images / tsa-tsas. 3) monastery built on spot of Tsong K...	tsa
སྐུ་འབུམ་བྱམས་པ་གླིང	{sku 'bum byams pa gling	sku 'bum byams pa gling
སྐུ་འབུམ་ཙན་དན	the sacred tree in the monastery of Kumbum	sku 'bum tsan dan
སྐུ་འབུམ་ཚན་དན	the sacred tree in the monastery of Kumbum	sku 'bum tshan dan
སྐུ་འབུར་མ	statue relief	sku 'bur ma
སྐུ་འབྲས	1) composure. 2) testicles	sku 'bras
སྐུ་མ་ནོངས་པ	safely	sku ma nongs pa
སྐུ་མ་ནོངས་པར	safely	sku ma nongs par
སྐུ་མེད་པ	disembodied	sku med pa
སྐུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས	pass away into parinirvana	sku mya ngan las 'das
སྐུ་རྨ	wound [h]	sku rma
སྐུ་སྨད	part of the body below the navel	sku smad
སྐུ་སྨད་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་བཞི	the four minor marks of the lower part of the body [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, 1 dku zlum pa zhes dpyi'i sta zur gyis mtshon pa'i sked pa zlum pa dang, two sked skabs 'tshams pas ...	sku smad kyi dpe byad bzhi
སྐུ་གཙང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of clean body	sku gtsang ba'i dpe byad
སྐུ་གཙང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of	sku gtsang ba'i dpe byed
སྐུ་གཙེར	argument	sku gtser
སྐུ་གཙེར་སྐྱོན	argue	sku gtser skyon
སྐུ་གཙེར་གནང	argue	sku gtser gnang
སྐུ་བཙད	h birth	sku btsad
སྐུ་བཙས	(h) to be born	sku btsas
སྐུ་རྩལ	attendants	sku rtsal
སྐུ་རྩེ	play, joke, jest, teasing [h]	sku rtse
སྐུ་རྩེ་གནང	play, joke, jest, tease [h]	sku rtse gnang
སྐུ་རྩེ་ཞུས	play, joke, jest, tease, kid around [h]	sku rtse zhus
སྐུ་རྩེད	amusement 151	sku rtsed
སྐུ་རྩེད་ཞུས་པ	[h] play, have fun, engage in merriment [by singing and dancing], joke	sku rtsed zhus pa
སྐུ་ཚ	nephew, niece [h]	sku tsha
སྐུ་ཚགས	pags tshags	sku tshags
སྐུ་ཚད	size of body, stature	sku tshad
སྐུ་ཚད་སྙུང་བ	[h] have a fever, feverish	sku tshad snyung ba
སྐུ་ཚད་ཚིག	feel hot/ feverish [h]	sku tshad tshig
སྐུ་ཚབ	1) [H] representative, ambassador, commissioner, substitute, delegate, agent, deputy, proxy, replacement person; 2) representation [holy statue], images [h]	sku tshab
སྐུ་ཚབ་གྲོས་ཚོགས	meeting/ conference of delegates/ representatives	sku tshab gros tshogs
སྐུ་ཚབ་གཏེར་ལྔ	CHN	sku tshab gter lnga
སྐུ་ཚབ་གཏོང་བ	delegate	sku tshab gtong ba
སྐུ་ཚབ་གནང་བ	1) [h] see (make a replacement, substitute, representative	sku tshab gnang ba
སྐུ་ཚབ་བྱེད་པ	1) represent, act as a deputy; 2) officiate	sku tshab byed pa
སྐུ་ཚབ་ཚོགས་པ	delegation, mission	sku tshab tshogs pa
སྐུ་ཚབ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	meeting/ conference of delegates/ representatives	sku tshab lhan tshogs
སྐུ་ཚབས	image [statue], representative image / figure	sku tshabs
སྐུ་ཚར	tshar slog, pags tshags	sku tshar
སྐུ་ཚེ	lifetime, life	sku tshe
སྐུ་ཚེ་ཁྲི་ཕྲག་ཏུ་བརྟན་པར་ཤོག་ལོང་ལིབེ༹	--	sku tshe khri phrag tu brtan par shog long live
སྐུ་ཚེ་སྟོད	during the time of his predecessors	sku tshe stod
སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟེན་པ	to make the life firm sku tshe dang sgrub pa bsnyams nas spending your whole life in practice	sku tshe brten pa
སྐུ་ཚེ་འདིར	in this lifetime	sku tshe 'dir
སྐུ་ཚེ་སྨད	future life, remaining/ later part of life	sku tshe smad
སྐུ་ཚེ་རྫོག	die	sku tshe rdzog
སྐུ་ཚེ་རྫོགས	die	sku tshe rdzogs
སྐུ་ཚེ་ཞབས་པད་བརྟན	may you have a long life; may your life be long / firm!	sku tshe zhabs pad brtan
སྐུ་ཚེ་ཞབས་པད་བརྟན་པར་ཤོག	may you have a long life!	sku tshe zhabs pad brtan par shog
སྐུ་ཚེ་ཟིན	die	sku tshe zin
སྐུ་ཚེ་རིང	[May you have a] long life! [h]	sku tshe ring
སྐུ་ཚེ་རིང་པོ	long life[!] [h]	sku tshe ring po
སྐུ་ཚེའི་འདུ་བྱེད	the physical body (h)	sku tshe'i 'du byed
སྐུ་ཚེའི་འདུ་བྱེད་གཏོང་བ	to pass away (h)	sku tshe'i 'du byed gtong ba
སྐུ་ཚེའི་འཕེན་པ་རྫོགས	die, pass away [h]	sku tshe'i 'phen pa rdzogs
སྐུ་ཚེའི་ཚད	extent of their life span, he lived for, his life span	sku tshe'i tshad
སྐུ་ཚོང	(h) trade	sku tshong
སྐུ་ཚོས	paint, rouge sku mtshan bzang po so gnyis dang dpe	sku tshos
བྱད་བཟང་པོ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	the 32 major and 80 minor marks of excellence	byad bzang po brgyad bcu
སྐུ་མཚམ་སྡོམ་པ་གནང་བ	dwell in meditation practice meditation [h]	sku mtsham sdom pa gnang ba
སྐུ་མཚམས	retreat, seclusion, meditation	sku mtshams
སྐུ་མཚམས་བཅད་པ	draw the boundaries of retreat [h]	sku mtshams bcad pa
སྐུ་མཚམས་སྡོམ་པ་གནང་བ	dwell in meditation practice meditation [h]	sku mtshams sdom pa gnang ba
སྐུ་མཚམས་པ	[h] meditative lama or hermit [h]	sku mtshams pa
སྐུ་མཚལ	[h] blood	sku mtshal
སྐུ་མཚུངས་པ	similarity in person or appearance, 1 of 4 mtshungs pa rnam pa sku mdzes shing lta bas chog mi shes pa so handsome that none could tear their eyes from him	sku mtshungs pa
སྐུ་རྫི	(h) nurse	sku rdzi
སྐུ་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the miraculous display of body, {sangs rgyas kyi cho 'phrul gsum}. physical miraculous activity. One of the three miraculous activities by which a Buddha tames sentient beings	sku rdzu 'phrul gyi cho 'phrul
སྐུ་རྫུས་སྐྱེས་སུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	came into the world in a miraculous way	sku rdzus skyes su 'khrungs pa
སྐུ་ཞགས	mister, Mr., gentleman	sku zhags
སྐུ་ཞགས་དྲུང	your honor	sku zhags drung
སྐུ་ཞང	maternal uncle	sku zhang
སྐུ་ཞབས	1) Mr, Sir, mister, gentleman, his excellency, your lordship [h] [joined to title/name [Sku zhabs rgya mtsho, Mda' dpon sku zhabs, Mr. the honorable, or address for monk when name isn't known]; 2) ...	sku zhabs
སྐུ་ཞབས་མཁན་པོ	title used when addressing an abbot	sku zhabs mkhan po
སྐུ་ཞབས་ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས	name [higher honorific]	sku zhabs chos ldan lags
སྐུ་ཞབས་ཆོས་ལགས	nun [H.]	sku zhabs chos lags
སྐུ་ཞབས་སྙིང་ལགས	lady or madam	sku zhabs snying lags
སྐུ་ཞབས་ལ་བསེར་གྱིན་མི་འདུག་གམ	is not your honor feeling cold	sku zhabs la bser gyin mi 'dug gam
སྐུ་ཞབས་སུ	in the presence of	sku zhabs su
སྐུ་ཞབས་ལྷན་རྒྱས	[h] Sirs! Gentlemen!	sku zhabs lhan rgyas
སྐུ་ཞིང་ལ་ཕེབས	(h) to pass away, die	sku zhing la phebs
སྐུ་ཞུམ་པ་མེད་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of an body that is not wasted away/emaciated [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, thugs rtag tu ma zhum pa'i phyir sku zhum pa med pa ste sku rid pa sog...	sku zhum pa med pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་ཞུམ་པ་མེད་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of #	sku zhum pa med pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་གཞག	period of day and night, overnight 152	sku gzhag
སྐུ་གཞི	1) estate. 2) hereditary landed property	sku gzhi
སྐུ་གཞུགས་གནང་བ	[h] live, dwell at	sku gzhugs gnang ba
སྐུ་གཞོགས	1) Syn {sku zhabs}. sir, master. 2) neighbor	sku gzhogs
སྐུ་གཞོན	youthful body	sku gzhon
སྐུ་བཞི	4 modes of being( rdo rje lta bu'i sku, sgyu ma lta bu'i sku, 'ja' lus rdo rje'i sku, ting 'dzin rtsal gyi sku)	sku bzhi
ཨུནདེར་ཕོ༹ཨུར་བུདདྷ	bodies[gd] four	under four buddha
ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16-fold classification of Body, Speech, Mind and Wisdom for each of the four kayas sku bzhir thugs gsung sku dang ye shes	kyi dbye ba bcu drug
སྐུ་བཞུགས་གནང་བ	(h) to live, to dwell at	sku bzhugs gnang ba
སྐུ་བཞེངས	to stand up	sku bzhengs
སྐུ་བཞེངས་གནང	please get up	sku bzhengs gnang
སྐུ་བཞེངས་གནང་བ	[H] arise, get up [from bed, chair, etc] [h]	sku bzhengs gnang ba
སྐུ་བཞེངས་པ	to arise	sku bzhengs pa
སྐུ་བཞོགས	see {sku zhabs}	sku bzhogs
སྐུ་ཟིལ་ཆེ	body very pleasant to see/ resplendent	sku zil che
སྐུ་ཟོ	physical constitution	sku zo
སྐུ་ཟོ་མདོག་ལེགས	fair complexion	sku zo mdog legs
སྐུ་ཟོ་མདོག་ལེགས་པ	good appearance	sku zo mdog legs pa
སྐུ་ཟླ	(h) husband and wife, spouse, consort; (h) spouse, consort	sku zla
སྐུ་ཟླམ	body-wrap, cloak, coat	sku zlam
སྐུ་གཟན	wrapper used by a lama or a great man, wrapper worn by lamas	sku gzan
སྐུ་གཟིམས་གནང་བ	(h) to fall asleep	sku gzims gnang ba
སྐུ་གཟུགས	statue, body	sku gzugs
སྐུ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཚད	iconographical proportions	sku gzugs kyi tshad
སྐུ་གཟུགས་གཅོང་པོ	[h] delicate health	sku gzugs gcong po
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ	health, healthy	sku gzugs bde
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་པོ	in good health, well [h]	sku gzugs bde po
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་པོ་ཡིན་པས	are you well, how are you, hello [h]	sku gzugs bde po yin pas
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་པོ་ཡོད་པ	(h) How are you? Are you well?	sku gzugs bde po yod pa
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་པོ་ཡོད་པས	[h] How are you? Are you well?	sku gzugs bde po yod pas
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་བ	good health	sku gzugs bde ba
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེའམ	are you well?	sku gzugs bde'am
སྐུ་གཟུགས་བསིལ	bathe [h]	sku gzugs bsil
སྐུ་འོད་དུ་ཡལ	vanish into body of light	sku 'od du yal
སྐུ་ཡལ་བ	pass away, die	sku yal ba
སྐུ་ཡི	honorific his her or yours	sku yi
སྐུ་ཡི་ཁོ་ལག	knee orbs	sku yi kho lag
སྐུ་ཡི་ཆ་ལུགས	accouterments, attire, dress, ornaments	sku yi cha lugs
སྐུ་ཡི་ལྟོ་བ	belly, stomach	sku yi lto ba
སྐུ་ཡི་བདག་ཉིད	lord of the body [family]	sku yi bdag nyid
སྐུ་ཡི་གནས	the sacred place of the Body [of such-and-such deity]	sku yi gnas
སྐུ་ཡི་གནས་བརྒྱད	1 of gnas chen lnga	sku yi gnas brgyad
སྐུ་ཡི་བབས་དང	according to the state of one's health	sku yi babs dang
སྐུ་ཡི་བབས་དང་བསྟུན	according as his health permits	sku yi babs dang bstun
སྐུ་ཡི་བྱིན་ཆེན་ཕེབ	showing down the great resplendence of enlightened body	sku yi byin chen pheb
སྐུ་ཡི་དབྱིངས	the realm of the enlightened body	sku yi dbyings
སྐུ་ཡི་དབྱིབས་བརྒྱུད	passing through the bodily form	sku yi dbyibs brgyud
སྐུ་ཡི་མེ་ཏོག་འཐོར	tossed away the flower of his life [h passed away]	sku yi me tog 'thor
སྐུ་ཡི་ཟོ་མདོག	health	sku yi zo mdog
སྐུ་ཡི་འོད	radiant bodily form	sku yi 'od
སྐུ་ཡི་རིང་ལ	during so and so, at the	sku yi ring la
ཏིམེ་ཨོཕ༹	-	time of
སྐུ་ཡིག	letter, circular epistle	sku yig
སྐུ་ཡེ་གཉིས	sku dang ye shes gnyis	sku ye gnyis
སྐུ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	the body of the deity in its entirety, the complete / perfect body of the deity	sku yongs rdzogs
སྐུ་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	the complete body	sku yongs su rdzogs pa
སྐུ་ཡོན	1) education, knowledge, good qualities; 2) wage, gift, fee, donation, offering; 3) attainments, accomplishments, talents, gifts; 4) fee (/ [h] [Gla rngan wages and rngan pa ?] wages to long life s...	sku yon
སྐུ་ཡོན་ཆེན་པོ	knowledgeable	sku yon chen po
སྐུ་ཡོལ	inner lower garment of a man of rank sku g.yon ngos der - on his left	sku yol
སྐུ་ར	intoxication [h]	sku ra
སྐུ་ར་བད	be drunk [h]	sku ra bad
སྐུ་རག	sash	sku rag
སྐུ་རགས	belt, sash [h]	sku rags
སྐུ་རང་ཕེབས་བརྒྱབ་པ	manifesting through [someone's] trance	sku rang phebs brgyab pa
སྐུ་རབ་པ	proper name of an aristocratic family in Tibet	sku rab pa
སྐུ་རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	an infinite ocean of bodily forms	sku rab 'byams rgya mtsho
སྐུ་རིང	during the life of, lifetime	sku ring
སྐུ་རིང་ལ	during the reign	sku ring la
སྐུ་རིམ	1) Syn {zhabs brtan, rim gro}. healing ceremony, religious service, act of worship. 2) A protective prayer-ritual for the sake of long life, prosperity etc. 3) respect, reverence	sku rim
སྐུ་རིམ་བགྱི་བ	to perform ceremonies [to help someone]	sku rim bgyi ba
སྐུ་རིམ་ཆོས་ར	evening classes in a monastery	sku rim chos ra
སྐུ་རིམ་པར་འཚམས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of all bodily parts being in proper proportion	sku rim par 'tshams pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་རིམ་པར་འཚམས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of #	sku rim par 'tshams pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་རུ	1) a paddle-wheel, water-wheel w/o rim; 2) the figure of a cross/asterisk	sku ru
པདདླེ	wheel, water-wheel without a rim. 2) the figure of a cross	paddle
སྐུ་རུ་ཁ	1) asterisk; 2) cross	sku ru kha
སྐུ་རུས	1) bone, relic. 2) family line / lineage	sku rus
སྐུ་རླུང	[h] rlung, tshig pa	sku rlung
སྐུ་ལ་ཀླུབས	garbed	sku la klubs
སྐུ་ལ་བཀབ་པ	cover	sku la bkab pa
སྐུ་ལ་དབང་འབྱོར་བ་ཉིད	mastery over physical presence sku la sme ba dang nag bag med pa'i dpe	sku la dbang 'byor ba nyid
བྱད	minor mark of body w/o moles and ??? sku la sme ba dang nag bag med pa'i dpe	byad
སྐུ་ལ་རྫོགས	Perfected in Body; charnel ground	sku la rdzogs
སྐུ་ལ་གསོལ་བ	{sku la za ber chos gos phod ka gsol ba} is wearing brocade cape, a monk's robe, and a longsleeved blue gown	sku la gsol ba
སྐུ་ལང	bad habits [h]	sku lang
སྐུ་ལས	hard work, exhaustion, toil, difficulty [h]	sku las
སྐུ་ལུས	person or body of a great man, body	sku lus
སྐུ་ལུས་སློང་དུ་ཡོང་བ་གདའ	is coming here to ask for your body	sku lus slong du yong ba gda'
སྐུ་ཤ	(h) flesh, texture of body. flesh	sku sha
སྐུ་ཤ་སྐམ་པོ	[h] lean, thin	sku sha skam po
སྐུ་ཤ་ཆུང་བ	thin (h)	sku sha chung ba
སྐུ་ཤ་འབྱོར་པོ	corpulent, original name of 'brom rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas	sku sha 'byor po
སྐུ་ཤ་རློན་པ	in the flesh, in person	sku sha rlon pa
སྐུ་ཤམ	cassock-like garment, skirt	sku sham
སྐུ་ཤིན་ཏུ་གྲིམས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of a very firm body	sku shin tu grims pa'i dpe byad
སྐུ་ཤིན་ཏུ་གྲིམས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད	the minor mark of # sku shin tu gzhon sha can gyi dpe byad the minor mark of fresh and delicate youthful appearance	sku shin tu grims pa'i dpe byed
སྐུ་ཤུགས	[h] force, strength	sku shugs
སྐུ་ཤེད	force, strength- [h] bodily strength	sku shed
སྐུ་ཤོགས	your honor, your lordship, your worship	sku shogs
སྐུ་གཤིན་རྒེ་སྐོར	{gshin rje skor}	sku gshin rge skor
སྐུ་གཤིན་རྗེ་སྐོར	Syn {gshin rje skor}	sku gshin rje skor
སྐུ་གཤེགས	[H) 1) the late, deceased. 2) to die, pass away	sku gshegs
སྐུ་གཤེགས་ཁར	when he was about to leave this world	sku gshegs khar
སྐུ་གཤེགས་པ	(h pass away, die	sku gshegs pa
སྐུ་གཤེན	1) in bon terminology dharmakaya; 2) respectful address to the great teacher of the Bon {gshen rabs mi bo}	sku gshen
སྐུ་སས	[h] child, boy	sku sas
སྐུ་སྲས	(h) child, boy	sku sras
སྐུ་སྲས་བརྒྱད	the eight spiritual sons of {gshen rabs mi bo} (the great teacher of the Bon). 1) {mu chos}. 2) {'ol drug thang po}. 3){dpyad bu gyi shing}. 4){lung 'dren}. 5) {gto bu bum sangs}. 6) {brgyud 'dren}...	sku sras brgyad
སྐུ་སྲུང	bodyguard, escort, bodyguard	sku srung
སྐུ་སྲུང་འཁྲིད་པ་གནང་བ	(h) to escort	sku srung 'khrid pa gnang ba
སྐུ་སྲུང་བ	1) guard the body from danger; 2) bodyguard	sku srung ba
སྐུ་སྲུང་དམག་མི	bodyguard soldier, Bhutanese royal bodyguard	sku srung dmag mi
སྐུ་སྲོག	(H life[-force]	sku srog
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས	Body, Speech, and Mind	sku gsung thugs
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག	samayas of Body, speech, and mind	sku gsung thugs kyi dam tshig
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་རྩ	the nadis of body, speech and mind	sku gsung thugs kyi rtsa
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་མཚན་མ	attribute of Body, Speech and Mind	sku gsung thugs kyi mtshan ma
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་གསང་བ	Mysteries of body, speech and mind. The vajra body, speech and mind 154	sku gsung thugs kyi gsang ba
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་རྟེན	sacred objects symbolic of enlightened body, speech, and mind	sku gsung thugs rten
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	the vajra body, speech and mind sku gsung thugs mi zad pa rgyan gyi 'khor	sku gsung thugs rdo rje
ལོ	Inexhaustible adornment wheel of Body, Speech and Mind. Same as vajra body, speech, and mind sku gsung thugs mi zad pa rgyan gyi 'khor	lo
ལོའི་མཛད་པ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	Thirtysix Actions of the Wheels of the Inexhaustible Ornaments of Body, Speech and Mind sku gsung thugs mi zad pa rgyan gyi 'khor	lo'i mdzad pa sum cu rtsa drug
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཕྲིན་ལས	body, speech, mind, qualities, and activities	sku gsung thugs yon tan phrin las
པ་རྒྱན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	never-ending adornment wheels of Body, Speech, Mind, Qualities and Activities; of Body,	pa rgyan gyi 'khor lo
སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་གསང	the mysteries of Body, Speech and Mind	sku gsung thugs gsang
སྐུ་གསུམ	three buddha bodies, three kayas trikaya	sku gsum
ཨནད་ཨེནདོཝེད་ཝིཐ་ཐེ་འཏྭེནཏཡ	one sets of enlightened qualities;' the sambhogakaya, which is of the nature of light and endowed with the perfect major and minor marks perceptible only to bodhisattvas; and the nirmanakaya, which...	and endowed with the 'twenty
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཀུན་འདུས	embodiment of the three kayas. [the root guru]	sku gsum kun 'dus
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཀྱི་བཞུགས་སྟངས	the postures of the three kayas	sku gsum kyi bzhugs stangs
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཀྱི་གཟིགས་སྟངས	the gazes of the three kayas	sku gsum kyi gzigs stangs
སྐུ་གསུམ་གྱི་མན	section of dkon mchog spyi 'dus	sku gsum gyi man
སྐུ་གསུམ་གྱི་མན་དལ	Mandala of the Three Dimensions	sku gsum gyi man dal
སྐུ་གསུམ་གྱི་བཙན་ས	royal throne of the three kayas. Same as complete buddhahood	sku gsum gyi btsan sa
སྐུ་གསུམ་དགུ་ཕྲག	CHN	sku gsum dgu phrag
སྐུ་གསུམ་དགུ་ཕྲུག	the ninefold aspects of the three kayas	sku gsum dgu phrug
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཐུག་ཕྲད	Meeting the Three Kayas. A Dzogchen text by Garab Dorje	sku gsum thug phrad
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཐུགས་ཏིག	Heart Essence of the Three Kayas	sku gsum thugs tig
སྐུ་གསུམ་ནོར་བུའི་ལུགས	Style of the Trikaya Jewel. The manner of visualization in which the root guru is regarded as the embodiment of the three kayas	sku gsum nor bu'i lugs
སྐུ་གསུམ་པ	the third kaya	sku gsum pa
སྐུ་གསུམ་པོ	the three kayas	sku gsum po
སྐུ་གསུམ་བླ་མ	the guru who is the three kayas	sku gsum bla ma
སྐུ་གསུམ་བླ་མའི་གོ་འཕང	the state of the Trikaya Guru	sku gsum bla ma'i go 'phang
སྐུ་གསུམ་བླ་མའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the deities of the Trikaya Guru	sku gsum bla ma'i lha tshogs
སྐུ་གསུམ་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible three kayas	sku gsum dbyer med
སྐུ་གསུམ་དབྱེར་མེད་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature in which the three kayas are indivisible	sku gsum dbyer med kyi bdag nyid
སྐུ་གསུམ་དབྱེར་མེད་པ	indivisibility of the three kayas	sku gsum dbyer med pa
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཞིང་ཁམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཨོཅེཨན	like realms of the three kayas	sku gsum zhing khams rgya mtsho ocean
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཞིང་སྦྱོང་སྨོན་ལམ	Aspiration for Purifying the Realm of the Three Kayas, by Jigmey Lingpa	sku gsum zhing sbyong smon lam
སྐུ་གསུམ་རིགས་འདུས	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang po'i sde}	sku gsum rigs 'dus
སྐུ་གསུམ་རིགས་འདུས་ཟབ་ཏིག	Kusum Rikdü Zabtig; terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	sku gsum rigs 'dus zab tig
རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅོ་ལྔར་སྦྱར་བ	CHN	rnam grangs bco lngar sbyar ba
སྐུ་གསུམ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	name of text by klu'i bshes	sku gsum la 'jug pa
སྐུ་གསུམ་ལ་བསྟོད་པ	Kayatrayastotra	sku gsum la bstod pa
སྐུ་གསུམ་ལམ་ཁྱེར	terma by {legs ldan rje}	sku gsum lam khyer
སྐུ་གསུམ་ལམ་འཁྱེར	Taking the three bodies of a buddha as paths	sku gsum lam 'khyer
སྐུ་གསེང	rest and gentle exercise of a great man when convalescent	sku gseng
སྐུ་གསེང་དུ་ཕེབས་སོང	went on vacation/ a walk sku gser gyi ri bo la nyi zla'i 'od kyis	sku gseng du phebs song
བརྒྱན་པ་ལྟར	the mountain of [the Buddha's] glorious body, ornamented by the light of sun and moon	brgyan pa ltar
སྐུ་གསོབ	nang du rtsa sogs brgyangs nas bzos pa'i 'dra gzugs	sku gsob
སྐུ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable bodily form	sku bsam gyis mi khyab pa
སྐུ་བསིལ	be cool/ cold [h]	sku bsil
སྐུ་བསིལ་པོ	cool/ cold [h]	sku bsil po
སྐུ་བསེལ་པོ	[H] cool, cold	sku bsel po
སྐུ་བསོད	[increasing] merit, splendor, powerful, affluence	sku bsod
སྐུ་བསོད་ཆེན་པོ	[H] lucky, fortunate	sku bsod chen po
སྐུ་བསོད་ནམས་ཆེན་པོས་འདུལ་བ	influencing by means of the great merit of the enlightened body	sku bsod nams chen pos 'dul ba
སྐུ་བསྲུངས	attendant, waiter, body guard	sku bsrungs
སྐུ་མསུང་ཐུགས	body, speech, mind	sku msung thugs
སྐུ་ལྷ	deity that protects the body	sku lha
སྐུ་ལྷམ་མེ	body brightly shining	sku lham me
སྐུ་ལྷོད་ལྷོད	(h) leisurely	sku lhod lhod
སྐུ་ལྷོད་ལྷོད་གནང་ནས་བཞུགས་པ	[h] sit/ be at leisure	sku lhod lhod gnang nas bzhugs pa
སྐུག་པ	{skug pa, bskugs pa, bskug pa, skugs} trans. v	skug pa
སྐུག་བརྫུས་འདེབས་པ	to play the fool	skug brdzus 'debs pa
སྐུགས	wager, stake in a game received by the winner	skugs
སྐུགས་སུ་འཛུགས་པ	anything placed in pawn	skugs su 'dzugs pa
སྐུང	p bskungs d bskung skungs!,, conceal, hide	skung
སྐུང་འཕྲང	hiding place hideout by thieves/ bandits narrow sgug rgyag sa	skung 'phrang
སྐུང་བ	{skung ba, bskungs pa, bskung ba, skungs} trans. v.; 1) to conceal, hide, keep secret, to hide in the ground, to bury, to inter, to cord, lurking place, hiding place. 2) to lie, to tie on all sides...	skung ba
སྐུངས	1) conceal, hide, keep secret, hide in the ground, bury, inter, cord, lurking place, hiding place; 2) lie, tie on all sides [corpse before it is burnt] (/ * skung ba!	skungs
སྐུངས་ས	hiding place, hideout	skungs sa
སྐུད	one's husband's male relatives; string, yarn, thread, wire, twin	skud
སྐུད་ཁུག་པ	entwining of a thread	skud khug pa
སྐུད་བརྒྱད་པ	name of an ancient gos chen [brocade]	skud brgyad pa
སྐུད་བསྒྲིལ་འཁོར་ལོ	thread winding/ spinning machine	skud bsgril 'khor lo
སྐུད་ཆུན	tuft tassel of threads	skud chun
སྐུད་སྙིགས	waste thread/ yarn	skud snyigs
སྐུད་འཐེན་བཟོ་ཁང	wire drawing factory	skud 'then bzo khang
སྐུད་འཐེན་བཟོ་གྲ	wire drawing factory	skud 'then bzo gra
སྐུད་འདྲེན་ལེན་པོ	magnet[ic stone]	skud 'dren len po
སྐུད་སྡོམ	skein of thread/ yarn	skud sdom
སྐུད་ནག	black line [for opposing the party]	skud nag
སྐུད་སྣེ	end/tip of a thread	skud sne
སྐུད་པ	1) {bskus pa} {bsku ba} {skus} apply, put on, be smeared, rub/ smear on; 2) thread, yarn, string, wire; 3) daub, paint, ointment * (/ two Srad bu	skud pa
སྐུད་པ་རྐྱང་མ	single thread	skud pa rkyang ma
སྐུད་པ་སྐམ་ཁང	drying room for textiles	skud pa skam khang
སྐུད་པ་འཁེལ་བ	twine a cord, spin thread	skud pa 'khel ba
སྐུད་པ་འཁོལ་བར	spinning thread	skud pa 'khol bar
སྐུད་པ་རྒྱུད་པ	thread	skud pa rgyud pa
སྐུད་པ་སྒྲིམ་པ	twist threads together	skud pa sgrim pa
སྐུད་པ་བརྒྱད་སྒྲིལ	thread in eight-fold twists	skud pa brgyad sgril
སྐུད་པ་བརྒྱུས་པ	threaded a thread	skud pa brgyus pa
སྐུད་པ་བསྒྲིམས	threads twisted together	skud pa bsgrims
སྐུད་པ་བསྒྲིམས་ཟིན	threads twisted together	skud pa bsgrims zin
སྐུད་པ་གཅོད་པ	cut thread, divorce	skud pa gcod pa
སྐུད་པ་འཇུག་པ	to thread (a needle)	skud pa 'jug pa
སྐུད་པ་ཕྲ་མོ	fine thread	skud pa phra mo
སྐུད་པ་སྦོམ་པོ	cord	skud pa sbom po
སྐུད་པ་རྨེལ	spin thread	skud pa rmel
སྐུད་པའི་དོག་པ	bunch/tuft of threads	skud pa'i dog pa
སྐུད་པའི་དྲུ་གུ	ball of string	skud pa'i dru gu
སྐུད་པའི་འབུ	silk-worm	skud pa'i 'bu
སྐུད་པོ	wife's brother, brother-in-law, father-in-law, husband's younger brother in sikkim	skud po
སྐུད་འཕང	spindle	skud 'phang
སྐུད་བྲིས་མཁན	embroiderer, one that makes up a picture with threads of different colors	skud bris mkhan
སྐུད་འབུ	silk-worm	skud 'bu
སྐུད་མེད	wireless, radio	skud med
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་གི་སྒྲིག་ཆས	radio equipment	skud med glog gi sgrig chas
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་གི་ཏེན་ཙི་རིག་པ	radio electronics	skud med glog gi ten tsi rig pa
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་གྲྭ	radio equipment factory	skud med glog grwa
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་བརྡ	radio/TV transmission	skud med glog brda
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་འཕྲིན	radio 156	skud med glog 'phrin
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་འཕྲིན་ཁང	radio station	skud med glog 'phrin khang
སྐུད་མེད་གློག་བརླབས	radio/TV waves	skud med glog brlabs
སྐུད་མེད་སྒྲགས་ཏར་པ	radio operator	skud med sgrags tar pa
སྐུད་མོ	wife's sister; sister-in-low	skud mo
སྐུད་རིས	needlework on cloth	skud ris
སྐུད་རོ	ends of threads in a seam, rayed ends of a seam	skud ro
སྐུད་སེར	yellow thread	skud ser
སྐུན་ཁར	fort, castle	skun khar
སྐུན་མཁར	[arch] fort, castle	skun mkhar
སྐུན་པོ	1) little bowl/ vessel; 2) tub, basin, trough	skun po
སྐུན་བུ	1) wicker-work basket. 2) small basin or bowl	skun bu
སྐུན་གསུམ་ལས་འདའ་བ	depart from the three kayas	skun gsum las 'da' ba
སྐུབ	very low	skub
སྐུམ	{bskums pa} {bskum pa} {skums 1) draw back, pull in, bend, contract, shrink; 2) conceal, keep private; 3) be shriveled, be drawn up [of limbs],	skum
སྐུམ་ཁྲུ་གང	one and a half feel	skum khru gang
སྐུམ་པ	1) to draw back, pull in, bend, contract, shrink. 2) to conceal, keep private. 3) to be shriveled, be drawn up [of limbs]; {skum pa, bskums pa, bskum pa, skums} trans. v.; to contract, to draw in	skum pa
སྐུམ་པའི	contraction	skum pa'i
སྐུམས	imp. of {skum pa}	skums
སྐུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of enlightened body	sku'i dkyil 'khor
སྐུའི་བཀོད་པ	physical manifestation	sku'i bkod pa
སྐུའི་བཀོད་པ་བསྡུས་པ	to die, pass away	sku'i bkod pa bsdus pa
སྐུའི་སྐྱེ་བ	rebirth, incarnation, birth	sku'i skye ba
སྐུའི་སྐྱོན་མེད་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད་བཞི	the four minor marks of a faultless body [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras	sku'i skyon med pa'i dpe byad bzhi
སྐུའི་སྐྱོན་མེད་པའི་དཔེ་བྱེད་བཞི	the four minor marks of faultless body sku'i kho lag yangs shing bzang ba'i dpe	sku'i skyon med pa'i dpe byed bzhi
སྐུའི་ཁྲུང་སྐར	birthday [h]	sku'i khrung skar
སྐུའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	one of sku lnga rgyal po sku'i rgyud dpal sangs rgyas thams cad	sku'i rgyal po
མཉམ་པར་སྦྱོར	the tantra dealing with existence. one of the {rtsa rgyud sde lnga'i nang tshan}. the five basic Mahayoga Tantras which are concerned with the five aspects of Buddhahood sku'i rgyud dpal sangs rgya...	mnyam par sbyor
མཉམ་པར་སྦྱོར་བ	the tantra dealing with existence, one of the {rtsa rgyud sde lnga'i nang tshan}. the five basic Mahayoga Tantras which are concerned with the five aspects of Buddhahood sku'i rgyud dpal sangs rgya...	mnyam par sbyor ba
སྐུའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	Syn {sku mtshan bzang po so gnyis dang dpe byad bzang po brgyad bcu'o}	sku'i dngos grub
སྐུའི་ཆ	relatives	sku'i cha
སྐུའི་ཉམས	physical air/ posture	sku'i nyams
སྐུའི་ཉེ་དྲུང་དུ་བཅར	went in front of him	sku'i nye drung du bcar
སྐུའི་རྟེན་ཙིན་ཏ་མ་ཎིའི་སྐུ	the image called the Chintamani, representing their enlightened form	sku'i rten tsin ta ma Ni'i sku
སྐུའི་སྟོབས	physical strength	sku'i stobs
སྐུའི་ཐིག་ལེ	[kaya tilaka, kayabindu] The drop of the body, the drops of the waking state	sku'i thig le
སྐུའི་མདོག	body color	sku'i mdog
སྐུའི་གནས	the sacred place of the Body [of such-and-such deity]	sku'i gnas
སྐུའི་གནས་བདུན་མཐོ་བ	CHN sku'i gnas bdun mtho ba'i mtshan bzang the major mark of # sku'i gnas bdun mtho ba'i mtshan bzang the major mark of the 7 parts of the body being filled out	sku'i gnas bdun mtho ba
སྐུའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	physical expressions	sku'i rnam 'gyur
སྐུའི་སྤུ་གྱེན་ཏུ་ཕྱོགས་པ	the hair of the body turns upwards	sku'i spu gyen tu phyogs pa
སྐུའི་སྤུ་གྱེན་དུ་ཕྱིགས་པ	the hair of the body turns upwards	sku'i spu gyen du phyigs pa
སྐུའི་སྤུ་གྱེན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པ	the hair of the body turns upwards; one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis}. the thirty marks of a great being	sku'i spu gyen du phyogs pa
སྐུའི་ཕྱལ	[arch] belly [h]	sku'i phyal
སྐུའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the activities of enlightened body	sku'i phrin las
སྐུའི་འཕྲིན་ལས	actions/ conduct buddha activity of body [h]/the kayas	sku'i 'phrin las
སྐུའི་བབས་དང་བསྟུན	according to the state of one's health sku'i dben gnas sgrags yongs rdzong power place of Guru Rinpoche's body	sku'i babs dang bstun
སྐུའི་དབྱིབས	the shape of the body	sku'i dbyibs
སྐུའི་ཚིགས	joints	sku'i tshigs
སྐུའི་ཚུགས	shape of the body [Sku'i tshugs mdzes shing 'tshams pa,Sku'i rus tshugs dpangs mtho,Sku'i sha tshugs]	sku'i tshugs
སྐུའི་མཛད་པ	deeds, activities	sku'i mdzad pa
སྐུའི་བཞེངས་བཞུགས	your presence	sku'i bzhengs bzhugs
སྐུའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཉི་མ་ལས་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས	brilliant rays of light streamed from [the Buddha's] body as if from the sun	sku'i gzi brjid nyi ma las rab tu rgyas
སྐུའི་རིམ་གྲོ	healing ceremony	sku'i rim gro
སྐུའི་གཤམ་ན	underneath the painted figure	sku'i gsham na
སྐུའི་གསང་བ	the secret of body	sku'i gsang ba
སྐུར	as the form of, to confer, as the forms of, in the form of	skur
སྐུར་ཀླན	censure, blame	skur klan
སྐུར་ཁུ	1) sour juice; 2) whey *	skur khu
སྐུར་གྱུར	to take on the form of	skur gyur
སྐུར་བཏབ	to take something away	skur btab
སྐུར་བསྟན	manifests	skur bstan
སྐུར་བསྟེན	to flank	skur bsten
སྐུར་བདེབས	depreciation [in philosophical context of sgro btags/skur bdebs]	skur bdebs
སྐུར་འདེབས	denial, deprecation, slander	skur 'debs
སྐུར་འདེབས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of belittling	skur 'debs kyi lta ba
སྐུར་འདེབས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	extreme of denial/ deprecation	skur 'debs kyi mtha'
སྐུར་འདེབས་ཀྱི་མེད་མཐའ	the extreme of denigrated nihilism	skur 'debs kyi med mtha'
སྐུར་འདེབས་ཀྱི་ལོག་ལྟ	the wrong view of deprecation	skur 'debs kyi log lta
སྐུར་འདེབས་སྒྲོ་འདོགས	denigration and exaggeration	skur 'debs sgro 'dogs
སྐུར་འདེབས་པ	throw abuse, bear false witness, speak impiously	skur 'debs pa
སྐུར་འདེབས་བྱེད	deny, deprecate, slander	skur 'debs byed
སྐུར་འདེབས་ཞུ	deny, deprecate, slander	skur 'debs zhu
སྐུར་སྣང་བ	manifested/ appears in the form of	skur snang ba
སྐུར་པ	1) abuse, blasphemy, abuse; 2) contract, shrink, be shriveled, be drawn up [of limbs]; 3) slander	skur pa
སྐུར་པ་བཏབ་པ	throw abuse, cast aspersion, bear false witness, speak impiously	skur pa btab pa
སྐུར་པ་གདབ	to be refuted, to disparage	skur pa gdab
སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པ	slander, cast reflection	skur pa 'debs pa
སྐུར་ཕྱུངས	to manifest in the form of	skur phyungs
སྐུར་བ	negation, detractions, send by post, consign, send, to confer	skur ba
སྐུར་བ་བཏབ་པ	dam pa'i chos la skur ba	skur ba btab pa
བཏབ་པ	slandered the sacred teachings	btab pa
སྐུར་བ་འདེབས་པ	hold as not existing what exists, belittle	skur ba 'debs pa
ཨེ྾ཨིསྟིང་ཝཧཏ་ཨེ྾ཨིསཙ	detract from/ diminish the truth	existing what exists
སྐུར་བ་འདེབས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of slandering [another monk]	skur ba 'debs pa'i ltung byed
སྐུར་བ་མི་འདེབས་པ	to not denigrate	skur ba mi 'debs pa
སྐུར་མི་འདེབས	don't belittle	skur mi 'debs
སྐུར་ཞུས	scandal, h	skur zhus
སྐུར་ཞུས་པ	slander, mock, ridicule	skur zhus pa
སྐུར་བཞེངས་པ	change into/ manifest in the form [of deity]	skur bzhengs pa
སྐུར་བཟེང	become a patter	skur bzeng
སྐུར་ཡིག	letter	skur yig
སྐུར་ས	consignee	skur sa
སྐུལ	arouse, entreat, incite, urge, exhort, persuade, induce, motivate appeal to/for, call for action {skul ba}!, compel to.. request, remind, encourage, admonish	skul
སྐུལ་བསྐྱོད་འཁོར་ལོ	motor, engine	skul bskyod 'khor lo
སྐུལ་ཁྲིད	leadership, direction	skul khrid
སྐུལ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	lead, direct	skul khrid byed
སྐུལ་མཁན	overseer, supervisor leader	skul mkhan
སྐུལ་རྒྱག་པ	rebuke, incite	skul rgyag pa
སྐུལ་རྒྱུ	render service, exact service	skul rgyu
སྐུལ་ངན	instigation, incitement	skul ngan
སྐུལ་ངན་བྱེད	instigate, incite	skul ngan byed
སྐུལ་ཅག་བྱེད་པ	rebuke, incite	skul cag byed pa
སྐུལ་ལྕག	1) horse whip; 2) encouragement and ' slap w the whip = means of stimulation to get someone to act	skul lcag
སྐུལ་ལྕག་གཏོང་བ	encourage	skul lcag gtong ba
སྐུལ་ལྕག་བཤུས་པ	urge on w a whip	skul lcag bshus pa
སྐུལ་ལྕགས	encouragement	skul lcags
སྐུལ་གཏམ	directive, order	skul gtam
སྐུལ་སྟོབས	motive, motivating force	skul stobs
སྐུལ་དེད་བྱེད་པ	enforce	skul ded byed pa
སྐུལ་བདེ	easily motivated, aroused to action	skul bde
སྐུལ་འདེད	encouragement, impetus, motivation, urging, push, promotion, incentive, stimulus, inspiration	skul 'ded
སྐུལ་འདེད་གྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	motivating force	skul 'ded gyi nus shugs
སྐུལ་འདེད་གཏོང	inspire, stimulate, give impetus/ incentive, motivate	skul 'ded gtong
སྐུལ་འདེད་གཏོང་བ	supervise, urge	skul 'ded gtong ba
སྐུལ་འདེད་གནང	inspire, stimulate, give impetus/ incentive, motivate	skul 'ded gnang
སྐུལ་འདེད་བྱེད་པ	promote, push forward	skul 'ded byed pa
སྐུལ་འདེབས	encourage, motivate, give incentive inspire, encourage	skul 'debs
སྐུལ་འདེབས་བྱེད	encourage, motivate, give incentive inspire, encourage	skul 'debs byed
སྐུལ་བརྡ	words of admonishing, encouragement, urging, summons, call, appeal	skul brda
སྐུལ་བརྡ་གཏོང	call, summon, appeal	skul brda gtong
སྐུལ་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	call on	skul brda gtong ba
སྐུལ་བརྡ་དང་ལེན	respond [voluntarily to a call, appeal, summons	skul brda dang len
སྐུལ་བརྡ་བྱེད	call, summon, appeal	skul brda byed
སྐུལ་སྤེལ	spread and become all pervading, stimulus, impetus, inspiration, motivation	skul spel
སྐུལ་བ	{bskul ba} {bskul ba} {skul} 1) admonish, invoke, request, remind, encourage, urge, exhort, admonish, enjoin, arouse, incite, induce, activate, goad, spur on, persuade, motivate; 2) call on for act...	skul ba
སྐུལ་བ་པོ	the one who requests	skul ba po
སྐུལ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	impulse	skul ba'i rang bzhin
སྐུལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to request, urge	skul bar byed pa
སྐུལ་བྱེད	1) bodhisattva (tsunda; 2) horse whip	skul byed
སྐུལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཟུངས	cundadharani	skul byed kyi gzungs
སྐུལ་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	motor	skul byed 'phrul 'khor
སྐུལ་མ	stimulus, encouragement, inspiration, motivation, agitation	skul ma
སྐུལ་མ་གཏོང	stimulate, encourage, inspire, motivate, agitate, move	skul ma gtong
སྐུལ་མ་གཏོང་བ	agitate, encourage	skul ma gtong ba
སྐུལ་མ་ཐེབས	receive stimulus, encouragement, inspiration, motivation, agitation	skul ma thebs
སྐུལ་མ་འདེབས་པ	exhort	skul ma 'debs pa
སྐུལ་ཚིག	word in the imperative mood	skul tshig
སྐུལ་གཞུང	taxes etc. skul ba'i gzhung khra	skul gzhung
སྐུལ་ཟད	wear [and tear]	skul zad
སྐུལ་ཟད་འགྲོ	wear out	skul zad 'gro
སྐུལ་ཟད་ཕྱིན	wore out	skul zad phyin
སྐུལ་སློང	mobilization, arousing, giving impetus, motivating	skul slong
སྐུལ་སློང་གི་བཀའ	mobilization order	skul slong gi bka'
སྐུལ་སློང་གཏོང་བ	mobilize	skul slong gtong ba
སྐུལ་སློང་བ	kindle, arouse, give impetus [to], motivate	skul slong ba
སྐུལ་སློང་བྱེད་པ	agitate, mobilize	skul slong byed pa
སྐུས	smear, SA skud	skus
སྐུས་ཆོས	robe	skus chos
སྐུས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་བཀའ	a teaching inspired by the body [of the buddha]	skus byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka'
སྐེ	1) neck, throat, to choke, strangle, to behead, slaughter, necklace. 2) larynx	ske
སྐེ་ཀྱོག་ཀྱོག	crooked neck	ske kyog kyog
སྐེ་ཀྲོང་ཀྲོང	neck upward bsgrengs pa'i shape	ske krong krong
སྐེ་དཀྲིས	scarf, muffler	ske dkris
སྐེ་བཀག	strangle	ske bkag
སྐེ་བཀག་གཏོང	strangle	ske bkag gtong
སྐེ་བཀག་བཏང་ནས་བསད་པ	to strangle	ske bkag btang nas bsad pa
སྐེ་ཁུག	neck bag with charmed letters, courier bag	ske khug
སྐེ་ཁྱེར་ཞགས་འཛེད	phan du re'ang don du harm oneself	ske khyer zhags 'dzed
སྐེ་འཁོར	1) neck ornament; 2) scarf; 3) collar [usu for dog]	ske 'khor
སྐེ་འགག	cattle disease quickly causing death	ske 'gag
སྐེ་རྒྱན	ornament for the neck. necklace, ornament of the neck	ske rgyan
སྐེ་སྒོར	1) horse/ mule neck cover; 2) neck ornament	ske sgor
སྐེ་གཅོད	to behead	ske gcod
སྐེ་གཅོད་སྟེགས་བུ	guillotine	ske gcod stegs bu
སྐེ་གཅོད་སྣུམ་གཏིག	ske gcod dgos or snum gtig gi yin zhes btsan shed byed pa, dpe 'di children locust grasping ste btsir nas tobacco juice skyug tu bcug pa'i game	ske gcod snum gtig
སྐེ་གཅོད་པ	decapitate, cut one's throat, behead	ske gcod pa
སྐེ་བཅད་པ	to decapitate, behead	ske bcad pa
སྐེ་ལྕིབས	piece of armor	ske lcibs
སྐེ་ཆ	ornament for the neck, necklace	ske cha
སྐེ་ཆས	neck ornament, necklace	ske chas
སྐེ་འཆིང	tie	ske 'ching
སྐེ་མཇིང	front and back of the neck	ske mjing
སྐེ་མཇིན	neck, throat	ske mjin
སྐེ་འཇིང	neck [& throat]	ske 'jing
སྐེ་སྙེང་སྙེང	ske mgrin gyen nam thad kar rkyong 'gul gyi rnam pa	ske snyeng snyeng
སྐེ་གཏུབ	cut the throat	ske gtub
སྐེ་གཏུབ་པ	cut one's throat, behead	ske gtub pa
སྐེ་དཏུབ	cut the throat	ske dtub
སྐེ་བཏགས	locket	ske btags
སྐེ་སྟོང	hole under the adam's apple, throat cavity	ske stong
སྐེ་ཐག	chain	ske thag
སྐེ་ཐིག	dog cattle etc. on the neck mdzes rgyun du 'dogs rgyu zhig	ske thig
སྐེ་མདུན	throat	ske mdun
སྐེ་འདོགས	1) tie [to] the neck w a rope; 2) ornament tied to the neck	ske 'dogs
སྐེ་སྡོམ	strangulation	ske sdom
སྐེ་བསྡམ་ནས་གསོད་པ	strangle	ske bsdam nas gsod pa
སྐེ་བསྡམ་པ	strangulate	ske bsdam pa
སྐེ་བསྡམས	strangle, hang	ske bsdams
སྐེ་བསྡམས་སྲོག་གཅོད	strangle w a rope	ske bsdams srog gcod
སྐེ་ན་བ	have a sore throat	ske na ba
སྐེ་པང	bowl etc dkrug byed kyi 'khor lo'i ske 'dzin byed kyi pang leb	ske pang
སྐེ་ཕྲ་བ	thin neck	ske phra ba
སྐེ་ཕྲུག	necklace	ske phrug
སྐེ་ཕྲེང	necklace	ske phreng
སྐེ་འཕྲེང	necklace	ske 'phreng
སྐེ་བལ	sheep neck wool	ske bal
སྐེ་འབྱར	1) sha khog ske 'byar; 2) short neck	ske 'byar
སྐེ་འབྲེག་པ	behead	ske 'breg pa
སྐེ་སྦྲེལ	newly bought sgo phyugs de sngar yod pa zhig gi name tied to the neck	ske sbrel
སྐེ་རྨ	neck wound	ske rma
སྐེ་ཙེ	black mustard, sinapis ramosa, mustard seeds	ske tse
སྐེ་བཙིར་གཏོང	strangle	ske btsir gtong
སྐེ་བཙིར་བ	strangle	ske btsir ba
སྐེ་བཙིར་སྲོག་གཅོད	strangle	ske btsir srog gcod
སྐེ་རྩོང	1) ske krong krong; 2) become thin/ lean / emaciated	ske rtsong
སྐེ་ཚང	old monastery situated in the mountains behind the monastery of sera	ske tshang
སྐེ་ཚིགས	neck vertebrae	ske tshigs
སྐེ་ཚིགས་དང་པོ	cervical vertebra	ske tshigs dang po
སྐེ་ཚིངས	necktie	ske tshings
སྐེ་ཚེ	black mustard. black mustard, mustard seed	ske tshe
སྐེ་ཚོང	ske rtsong	ske tshong
སྐེ་འཚིར་ཐག་པ	strangle w rope around the neck	ske 'tshir thag pa
སྐེ་མཟིན	neck, throat	ske mzin
སྐེ་ཡོན	crooked neck 159	ske yon
སྐེ་རག	sash; {bag yod ske rag bcings} fastened with the sash of mindfulness	ske rag
སྐེ་རགས	scarf	ske rags
སྐེ་རགས་ཐུང་ངུ	short belt, sash	ske rags thung ngu
སྐེ་རགས་རིང་པོ	girdle, belt	ske rags ring po
སྐེ་རགས་ལས་སྣེ་འཛར་རིང་བ	scarf w long hanging strings on the end	ske rags las sne 'dzar ring ba
སྐེ་རས	scarf	ske ras
སྐེ་རས་ལས་སྣེ་འཛར་རིང་བ	scarf w long hanging strings on the end	ske ras las sne 'dzar ring ba
སྐེ་རིང་མཚོ	{ske ring mtsho	ske ring mtsho
སྐེ་ལ་འཁྱུད་པ	to clasp round the neck, embrace	ske la 'khyud pa
སྐེ་ལ་ཐག་པ་བསྔམས་ནས་བསད་པ	to hang ske la thag pa bsngams nas bsad pa hang ske la shing sgo g.yogs pa - neck cangues	ske la thag pa bsngams nas bsad pa
སྐེ་ཤིང	yoke	ske shing
སྐེ་སྲུང	amulet worn on the neck	ske srung
སྐེག	a constellation, astrological hindrances, astrological intervals	skeg
སྐེག་རྩིས	astrology of hindrances	skeg rtsis
སྐེག་ཚོས	paint, rouge, rouge for the face	skeg tshos
སྐེག་ལ་སྐྱེས	born in the constellation of aclesa	skeg la skyes
སྐེགས	skegs bird	skegs
སྐེང་ལུངས	a place in tibet	skeng lungs
སྐེད	waist, middle	sked
སྐེད་དཀར	white sash	sked dkar
སྐེད་དཀྲིས	sash	sked dkris
སྐེད་སྐབས	hind parts below the waist	sked skabs
སྐེད་འཁྱོག	1) sked pa 'khyog po; 2) 1 of the rgyu skar	sked 'khyog
སྐེད་གྲི	knife worn at the waist	sked gri
སྐེད་རྒྱན	girdle, belt, waist ornament	sked rgyan
སྐེད་རྔ	drum worn at the waist	sked rnga
སྐེད་འཆིང	belt, sash	sked 'ching
སྐེད་འཆིངས	belt	sked 'chings
སྐེད་འཇིགས	a medicinal drug, SA da dru 'joms	sked 'jigs
སྐེད་ཉག	sked pa nyag nyag	sked nyag
སྐེད་ཐིག་གི	equatorial	sked thig gi
སྐེད་ནད	1) waist disease, lumbago; 2) menstruation	sked nad
སྐེད་ནད་ཅན་མ	menstruating woman	sked nad can ma
སྐེད་པ	1) waist. 2) the middle, the small of the back	sked pa
སྐེད་པ་རྒྱག་པ	occurrence of menstruation	sked pa rgyag pa
སྐེད་པ་ན་བ	to have lumbago	sked pa na ba
སྐེད་པ་ནོན་པ	falling down to the waist	sked pa non pa
སྐེད་པའི་ཕྱོགས	waist band	sked pa'i phyogs
སྐེད་པའི་མཚམས	buttocks	sked pa'i mtshams
སྐེད་པར་ནོན་པ	{skra yang sked pa non par 'dug} her hair fell to her waist	sked par non pa
སྐེད་ཕྲ་མ	pretty woman	sked phra ma
སྐེད་མ	pomegranate	sked ma
སྐེད་མེད་མ	pretty woman	sked med ma
སྐེད་མོས་ཚལ	pleasure garden	sked mos tshal
སྐེད་ཙམ	nearly halfway	sked tsam
སྐེད་ཚིགས	waist joints	sked tshigs
སྐེད་མཚམས	middle, halfway	sked mtshams
སྐེད་གཟེར	dpyi mgo la lag pa rten pa; Lag gnyis sked gzer byas nas sgo khar langs	sked gzer
སྐེད་རགས	belt, sash, waist bank, girdle	sked rags
སྐེད་རགས་རྒྱ་མ	btags nas bzos pa'i sked chings	sked rags rgya ma
སྐེད་རགས་བཅིང་བ	wrap a sash around one's waist, put on a belt	sked rags bcing ba
སྐེད་རགས་ལྷས་མ	bslas pa'i belt/ sash	sked rags lhas ma
སྐེད་རེག	belt	sked reg
སྐེད་རེག་བཅིངས	to tie / buckle a belt	sked reg bcings
སྐེད་ལུང	sked pa'i lung thag gam aa long	sked lung
སྐེད་ལེགས་མ	1) pretty woman; 2) daughter of the gods	sked legs ma
སྐེད་སོ	waistline	sked so
སྐེམ	SA skam	skem
སྐེམ་ནད	consumption, tuberculosis	skem nad
སྐེམ་པ	1) (Tha dad pa bskams pa, bskam pa, skoms,, moisture disappearing, drying out; 2) become thin/ emaciated	skem pa
སྐེམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to dry, dry out	skem par byed pa
སྐེམ་པོ	1) {bskams pa} {bskam pa} {skoms} put to dry, make dry, dry [up], arid, lean, meager, exsiccate; 2) skinny, thin, emaciated	skem po
སྐེམ་བྱེད	Skanda. Skanda is the Brahmanical god of war, leader of demons that cure illness in children, and the god of thieves	skem byed
སྐེམ་བྱེད་དཀར་པོ	resin of sal tree burnt as incense	skem byed dkar po
སྐེམ་བྱེད་མདའ	1 of the five arrows of lha dga' rab dbang phyug	skem byed mda'
སྐེམ་བྱེད་མ	drought causing demon	skem byed ma
སྐེམ་བྱེད་ཤ་ཟ	epithet of kumara, the younger son of mahadeva	skem byed sha za
སྐེམས	1) draught. 2) variant imp. of {skem pa}; dried up	skems
སྐེམས་པ	dried up	skems pa
སྐེམས་པའི་སྦྲེབས་པ	hunger of emaciating disease	skems pa'i sbrebs pa
སྐེའི་གའུ	Tibetan women's gzab spros neck ornament ga'u of gold or silver, set w turquoise, pearls and gzi onyx etc. sogs bstar la brgyus nas lung thag byas pa zhig	ske'i ga'u
སྐེར	SA ker	sker
སྐེར་འཐམ་པ	seize by the throat, worry	sker 'tham pa
སྐེར་དོགས་པ	to tie round the neck	sker dogs pa
སྐེར་ལེབ་སྒུར	cattle	sker leb sgur
སྐོ	to appoint, select	sko
སྐོ་སྐོ	chin	sko sko
སྐོ་བ	{sko ba, bskos pa, bsko ba, skos} trans. v.; {bskos pa, bsko ba, skos}. 1) to appoint, select, elect, commission, nominate, charge, destined. 2) given / placed [by the power of karma]. 3) to employ...	sko ba
སྐོ་བ་ཆུ་ལྕགས་རྒྱལ་མོ	she who is entrusted to control the order of existence	sko ba chu lcags rgyal mo
སྐོ་ཙེ	mixture of leeks leaves pounded into dried balls, spice	sko tse
སྐོ་ཚེ	(CH poor quality tea	sko tshe
སྐོ་རེ	on	sko re
སྐོག་ཏུ	in secret	skog tu
སྐོག་པ	shell, bark, peel	skog pa
སྐོག་ཙོང	garlic and onions	skog tsong
སྐོག་ཤལ	dewlap?	skog shal
སྐོགས	hard covering, rind, bark, shell	skogs
སྐོགས་པ	shell, bark, peel, wrapping, envelope, hard covering	skogs pa
སྐོགས་ལྤགས	peel, husk, shell, bark, envelope	skogs lpags
སྐོགས་ཤུན	external skin, husk, peel, shell	skogs shun
སྐོགས་བཤུ	skin, peel	skogs bshu
སྐོང	appeasing, SA kong, expiation	skong
སྐོང་འགུག	summon	skong 'gug
སྐོང་སྒྲིག	keep/ gather to 1 side, arrange and prepare	skong sgrig
སྐོང་ཆོག	fulfillment / amendment ritual; ceremony for the fulfillment of commitments, this expiates violations of the commitments	skong chog
སྐོང་འཐེན	withdrawal	skong 'then
སྐོང་འཐེན་བྱེད	withdraw	skong 'then byed
སྐོང་འཐེན་བྱེད་པ	change, move, transfer	skong 'then byed pa
སྐོང་བ	(tha dad pa [I] Bskangs pa, bskang ba, skongs,,(1 satisfy [ful]fill; 2) complete total; 3) appendix, supplement; 4) appease, amend[ment], appease, reconciliation, make up for a deficiency [II] bsko...	skong ba
སྐོང་འབྲི	fill in forms	skong 'bri
སྐོང་འབྲི་བྱེད	fill in forms	skong 'bri byed
སྐོང་འཚོགས་བྱེད	summon, convene	skong 'tshogs byed
སྐོང་རྫས	appeasements	skong rdzas
སྐོང་ཞགས	fish net	skong zhags
སྐོང་བཤགས	ritual of mending and apology; fulfillment and confession; purification	skong bshags
སྐོང་གསོ	fulfillment; see also {bskang gso}	skong gso
སྐོང་གསོལ	fulfillment petition	skong gsol
སྐོངས	{skong ba}!	skongs
སྐོངས་མདོས	expiation mdos	skongs mdos
སྐོངས་ཤིག	may your hope be fulfilled	skongs shig
སྐོད	(not in DAS)	skod
སྐོན	imp. of {skon pa}	skon
སྐོན་པ	1) (Tha dad pa bskon pa, bskon pa, skon,, wear, dress, clothe, put on clothes [clothing], cover [Phru gur gos gsar bskon, Rtsam pa rang gis brkus nas rtsam khug gzhan mgor bskon]; 2) trap net, snar...	skon pa
སྐོན་བུ	1) mchod kong etc. little vessels; 2) birds and wild animals trap/ net; 3) Lcug mas bslas pa'i snod chung gras	skon bu
སྐོན་བུ་ཁ་སྦྱར	[arch] wicker vessel for monk's begging bowl etc.	skon bu kha sbyar
སྐོབས	1) something hard to do; 2) pit	skobs
སྐོབས་སུ་ཆུད	get into difficulty/ trouble	skobs su chud
སྐོམ	thirst, drink, dry land, be thirsty	skom
སྐོམ་སྐྱུར	sour beer, sour fermented liquor	skom skyur
སྐོམ་ཆང	thirst-quenching chang/beer	skom chang
སྐོམ་དད	1) [great/insatiable] thirst; 2) great thirst disease	skom dad
སྐོམ་དད་ཆེ	thirst	skom dad che
སྐོམ་དུ་ཆང་གསོལ	take wine for thirst	skom du chang gsol
སྐོམ་དྲི	stains of drink	skom dri
སྐོམ་དྲོད	thirsty and hot	skom drod
སྐོམ་འདོད	thirst	skom 'dod
སྐོམ་འདོད་པ་ལ་སྐོམ	give drink to the thirsty	skom 'dod pa la skom
སྐོམ་ལྡུད་པ	btung ba blud pa'am, 'thung du 'jug pa, Tsha ba'i nad kyis mnar ba la skom yang yang ldud dgos	skom ldud pa
སྐོམ་ནས	thirsty	skom nas
སྐོམ་པ	1) thirst; 2) drinks; 2) a thirsty person	skom pa
སྐོམ་པ་ཆུ་འདོད	thirsty person wanting water	skom pa chu 'dod
སྐོམ་པ་ཆུ་འདོད་ལྟར	like a thirsty person wanting water	skom pa chu 'dod ltar
སྐོམ་པ་བསེལ	(Tha mi dad pa skoms pa, skom pa,, quench thirst	skom pa bsel
སྐོམ་པས་གདུངས་པ	parched and tormented by thirst	skom pas gdungs pa
སྐོམ་པོ	cross-bred of a yak and a cow. thirsty	skom po
སྐོམ་བཞིན་འདུག	thirsty	skom bzhin 'dug
སྐོམ་ཟོང	[arch] gla lto	skom zong
སྐོམ་རེད	lus rngul, rma gsher, rnag chu mang po rdol pa'i rma nad	skom red
སྐོམ་ཤ	ba lang gi sha, flesh of a calf	skom sha
སྐོམས	dry up, SA skem pa	skoms
སྐོམས་པ	thirst	skoms pa
སྐོམས་ཤིག	become thirsty	skoms shig
སྐོར	about, with regard to, on, circle, luminous circle, lantern, hang up, SA skar ba, cycle of literature, trilogies, set of teachings, round, class, order, appertaining to, subject, body, anything rou...	skor
སྐོར་ཀྱོག	crooked not straightforward/ direct	skor kyog
སྐོར་སྐད་པ	person pronouncing the	skor skad pa
མནཏྲ་Oམ	mani-pad-me-hum	mantra Om
སྐོར་བསྐྱོད	move from place to place, mobile, circuit	skor bskyod
སྐོར་བསྐྱོད་སྨན་བཅོས་རུ་ཁོག	mobile medical unit	skor bskyod sman bcos ru khog
སྐོར་ཁང	passage running around a building	skor khang
སྐོར་མཁན	one who goes round, turner, one who goes on his rounds	skor mkhan
སྐོར་གྱི་བླ	1 in charge of elephants	skor gyi bla
སྐོར་གྱེངས	1) watch, guard. 2) inconstancy, inconsistency	skor gyengs
སྐོར་འགོ	chapter in a book, section, head. as to	skor 'go
སྐོར་རྒྱགས	turning [the enemy] getting into [the enemy's rear]	skor rgyags
སྐོར་རྒྱུག	wander around	skor rgyug
སྐོར་རྒྱུགས	turning the enemy, getting into his rear	skor rgyugs
སྐོར་ཅག་པ	policeman, constable	skor cag pa
སྐོར་ཅིག	once, one time	skor cig
སྐོར་བཅོམ	encirclement and suppression	skor bcom
སྐོར་ལྕག་པ	police	skor lcag pa
སྐོར་ཆུང	small group, circle, cell	skor chung
སྐོར་ཆེར	on this occasion	skor cher
སྐོར་འཆག་པ	policeman	skor 'chag pa
སྐོར་འཆག་བྱེད	patrol, police	skor 'chag byed
སྐོར་འཆག་དམག	police force, policeman	skor 'chag dmag
སྐོར་གཏུག་བྱེད་པ	to encircle	skor gtug byed pa
སྐོར་གཏོར	breaking [through] an encirclement, encircling and annihilating	skor gtor
སྐོར་གཏོར་བྱེད	break [through] an encirclement, encircle and annihilate	skor gtor byed
སྐོར་ཐག	1) circumambulation gyi bar thag; 2) path that must go indirectly, around something; 3) cord of a lathe	skor thag
སྐོར་ཐང	1) price, rate. 2) interest paid in kind	skor thang
སྐོར་ཐིག	pair of compasses	skor thig
སྐོར་ཐེང	skor ba	skor theng
སྐོར་དུ	clockwise, anti-clockwise, around. 2) concerning, as to	skor du
སྐོར་དེབ	field la thon skor rtsi ba'i deb yig	skor deb
སྐོར་གདུག	encirclement	skor gdug
སྐོར་གདུག་བྱེད	encircle	skor gdug byed
སྐོར་འདྲི	interrogation, inquest	skor 'dri
སྐོར་འདྲི་བྱེད	interrogate, conduct an inquest	skor 'dri byed
སྐོར་རྡུང	encirclement attack	skor rdung
སྐོར་ལྡབ་པ	repeat	skor ldab pa
སྐོར་ནས	1) from this point of view, regarding this; 2) [go] from around	skor nas
སྐོར་པ	one who turns a lathe, one who circumambulates a sacred object, turner, one who goes on his rounds	skor pa
སྐོར་པང	compass board	skor pang
སྐོར་བ	(Tha dad pa bskor ba, bskor ba, skor,, 1) turn, revolve, spin, circle, whirl, go/ cycle, rotate, move around, go [home], move,; 2) surround, encircle, enclose, [besiege]; 3) make the rounds of, enc...	skor ba
སྐོར་བ་བསྐོར་བ	to circumambulate, make circumambulations	skor ba bskor ba
སྐོར་བ་འཁོར་བ	1) action rjes zin pa'am [going after/ follow behind], lcogs pa [leisure, ability] [Las ka mang po de 'dra skor ba 'khor thub bam mi thub, Dus tshod da dung skor ba 'khor ma song]; 2) in buying and...	skor ba 'khor ba
སྐོར་བ་འཁོར་ཚད	# revolutions during a certain time	skor ba 'khor tshad
སྐོར་བ་བགྱི་བ	to circumambulate	skor ba bgyi ba
སྐོར་བ་རྒྱག	circumambulate, revolve around, go around	skor ba rgyag
སྐོར་བ་རྒྱག་པ	turn a corner, make a turn	skor ba rgyag pa
སྐོར་བ་རྒྱག་སའམ	place for circumambulating	skor ba rgyag sa'am
སྐོར་བ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to walk around, circumambulate	skor ba brgyab pa
སྐོར་བ་བྱ་བ	offer circumambulations	skor ba bya ba
སྐོར་བ་བྱས་པ	completing a circumambulation	skor ba byas pa
སྐོར་བ་བྱེད	circumambulation of a holy object	skor ba byed
སྐོར་བ་བྱེད་པ	act of circumambulation of a holy object	skor ba byed pa
སྐོར་བྱ་བ	police	skor bya ba
སྐོར་བྱེད་དམག་མི	military patrol	skor byed dmag mi
སྐོར་བྲོ་རྒྱག་པ	singing and dancing in a circle	skor bro rgyag pa
སྐོར་དབྱུག	sling	skor dbyug
སྐོར་དབྱེ	1) grain stones dividing toolsieve; 2) divide by fineness	skor dbye
སྐོར་མི	pilgrims	skor mi
སྐོར་དམག	encircling the borders te rgol ba'i soldiers 162	skor dmag
སྐོར་ཚེ	1) separate[d]; 2) section, division, chapter; 3) time of coming back	skor tshe
སྐོར་ཚེར	on this occasion	skor tsher
སྐོར་ཚོ	assembly	skor tsho
སྐོར་ཚོ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	Four major sets of teaching. Four divisions of Lamey Tukdrub Barchey Künsel. Sheldam Nyingjang, Ladrub, Köljang, and Kyepar gyi lha bzhi. Four divisions of Lamey Tukdrub Barchey Künsel: The root ta...	skor tsho chen po rnam pa bzhi
ཌིབི༹ནིཏིཨེས་ཝཧོ་ཌིསྤེལ་Oབསྟཅླེས	Tara, Achala, Dorje Bechön and Mewa Tsekpa	Divinities who Dispel Obstacles
སྐོར་འཚུབ	strong whirling wind	skor 'tshub
སྐོར་ཞིབ	survey, inspection (tour	skor zhib
སྐོར་ཞིབ་བྱེད	survey, go on an inspection (tour	skor zhib byed
སྐོར་ཞིབ་དམག་གྲུ	cruiser	skor zhib dmag gru
སྐོར་བཞི	4 categories of man ngag sde (phyi skor, nang skor, gsang skor, gsang ba bla med skor)	skor bzhi
སྐོར་ཟེར་བ་མ་གཏོགས་བོད་ཚིག	coat	skor zer ba ma gtogs bod tshig
སྐོར་ཡང	watch skor g.yeng - watch in all directions, inspect, patrol skor g.yeng gru gzings - patrol boat skor g.yeng rgyag - watch in all directions, inspect, patrol skor g.yeng byed - watch in all direct...	skor yang
སྐོར་ར	circumambulation, round [encircling a holy object]	skor ra
སྐོར་ར་གནང་བ	[h] encircle	skor ra gnang ba
སྐོར་ར་པ	turner, one who goes on his rounds	skor ra pa
སྐོར་རུ	rtsid skud 'khal byed kyi shing ru bzhi with handle	skor ru
སྐོར་རེས	in rotation, one coming after another	skor res
སྐོར་རེས་བྱེད	rotate, 1 coming after another, take turns	skor res byed
སྐོར་ལ	1) Postpone. 2) concerning, about, regarding, with reference to	skor la
སྐོར་ལམ	roundabout way, passage round any sacred place, passage running round a building	skor lam
སྐོར་ལིང	grain flailing dbyug skor	skor ling
སྐོར་ལོག	1) wrong circumambulation, to walk around in a wrong way. 2 ) turn, return	skor log
སྐོར་ལོག་པ	wrong turn	skor log pa
སྐོར་ལོག་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	walk round an object in the wrong way (keeping it to the left)	skor log la 'gro ba
སྐོར་ཤིང	turner's lathe or tool	skor shing
སྐོར་བཤེར	survey, inspection (tour	skor bsher
སྐོར་སྲུང	policing, patrolling	skor srung
སྐོར་སྲུང་དུ་བཞག	leave someone on guard	skor srung du bzhag
སྐོར་སྲུང་དཔུང་སྡེ	police force	skor srung dpung sde
སྐོར་སྲུང་དཔུང་དམག	police force	skor srung dpung dmag
སྐོར་སྲུང་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	chief inspector of police	skor srung spyi khyab
སྐོར་སྲུང་བ	policeman, guard	skor srung ba
སྐོར་སྲུང་བྱེད	police, patrol	skor srung byed
སྐོར་སྲུང་དམག་མི	policeman, guard	skor srung dmag mi
སྐོར་གསུམ	trilogy	skor gsum
སྐོལ	{skol ba}!	skol
སྐོལ་བ	(tha dad pa bskol ba, bskol ba, skol,, 1) [cause to/ make] boil, braise; 2) be inflamed, pain boil; 3) 'khor bar byed pa	skol ba
སྐོལ་མི	one who boils tea	skol mi
སྐོལ་ཚེ་བ	minor; partial	skol tshe ba
སྐོས	entrusted, charged, to keep order	skos
སྐོས་དགུ	nine orders of existence	skos dgu
སྐོས་རྗེ་དྲང་དཀར	lord entrusted with controlling order who has a white staff, lord of order with a white staff, 1 of srid pa pho dgu	skos rje drang dkar
སྐོས་པ	SA sko ba	skos pa
སྐོས་བོན	a bon po who specialized in astrological calculations to identify positive and negative aspects and to discover the right way to improve circumstances	skos bon
སྐོས་བོན་གཙུག་སྲས	bon who controls the order of existence	skos bon gtsug sras
སྐོས་མལ	couch, bed, place one stays	skos mal
སྐོས་ཤེས་རྩིས་མཁན	astrologer who knows how to control the order of existence, the astrologer who knows how to control the order of existence, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis	skos shes rtsis mkhan
སྐྱ	gray/ white; 1) crop, harvest, the produce of a year. 2) paddle a) car b) ladle, pot-ladle 3) wall 4) a)whitish,	skya
པལེ	white, pale, light [of colors] b) insipid, 5) oar, rudder, to row, spatula,	pale
པོཏ	ladle, gray	pot
སྐྱ་ཀ	magpie	skya ka
སྐྱ་ཀྲང་སྐྱི་ཀྲང	horsemen	skya krang skyi krang
སྐྱ་སྐྱ	light, pale, whitish, grey	skya skya
སྐྱ་ཁོག	complexion blue or pale from old age	skya khog
སྐྱ་ཁྲ	large pigeon and rabbit etc. eating bird of hawk family	skya khra
སྐྱ་ཁྲིག་གེ་བ	dkar lam me ba, Grod mar gyi bcad kha skya khrig ger bsdad 'dug Khang pa'i sgo gsar pa skya khrig ge bar 'dug	skya khrig ge ba
སྐྱ་ཁྲོམ་ཁྲོམ	snow white	skya khrom khrom
སྐྱ་ཁྲོལ་ལེ	bleached white [very white]	skya khrol le
སྐྱ་འཁོགས	deteriorated complexion and luster, pale and lusterless	skya 'khogs
སྐྱ་ག	magpie	skya ga
སྐྱ་ག་ཐིགས་ཚགས	lo ltar char 'go tshugs skabs khang steng du sa bkram ste thigs pa 'gog pa'i dus tshod nges can zhig	skya ga thigs tshags
སྐྱ་གང	joint of a thumb [unit of measure]	skya gang
སྐྱ་གམ	plain unpainted box	skya gam
སྐྱ་གླེག	mdog skya la gang yin unclear or covered w thick dirt	skya gleg
སྐྱ་འགྲིབ	obscuration of vision by cataracts	skya 'grib
སྐྱ་རྒྱག་པ	1) a) to row, b) to ladle c) oarsman	skya rgyag pa
སྐྱ་རྒྱབ་པ	row, ladle	skya rgyab pa
སྐྱ་རྒྱལ	donkey	skya rgyal
སྐྱ་རྒྱལ་བ	amulet, that which removes evil influences	skya rgyal ba
སྐྱ་རྒྱས	plenteous crop	skya rgyas
སྐྱ་རྒྱས་པ	crop on the root, rich harvest	skya rgyas pa
སྐྱ་རྒྱས་པོ	a good economy	skya rgyas po
སྐྱ་ལྒང་ངེ	perfectly white	skya lgang nge
སྐྱ་སྒང་གནས་མོའི་བང་བ	Kyagang Nemö Bangwa, also known as Dori Palgyi Ritse (do ri dpal gyi ri rtse), one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	skya sgang gnas mo'i bang ba
སྐྱ་སྒམ	w/o outer cover or paint wooden box	skya sgam
སྐྱ་ཆས	householder's clothes	skya chas
སྐྱ་ཆིལ་ཆིལ	dkar ba'i rnam pa, Kha ba skya chil chil du 'bab, Rba rlabs skya chil chil du gyo,	skya chil chil
སྐྱ་ཆེན	superior kind of plain scarf	skya chen
སྐྱ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	dkar mdangs 'phro tshul zhig Gnam la skar ma skya chem chem shar ba, Gangs ri nas 'od skya chem chem zhig 'phro gin 'dug	skya chem chem
སྐྱ་ཆེམ་མེ་བ	emanating white light	skya chem me ba
སྐྱ་ཆོས	blank book	skya chos
སྐྱ་མཇུག	rudder	skya mjug
སྐྱ་ཉིལ	1) white appearance; 2) zinc	skya nyil
སྐྱ་གཉིས་མའི་ཐག་པ	two strand rope	skya gnyis ma'i thag pa
སྐྱ་ལྟེམ་མེ	dkar pos gang tshul zhig Dkar yol 'o mas skya ltem mer gang 'dug	skya ltem me
སྐྱ་ཐ་ལ་ལ	whitish ash color	skya tha la la
སྐྱ་ཐ་ལེ	of plain white color	skya tha le
སྐྱ་ཐལ་ལེ་བ	dkar shig shig	skya thal le ba
སྐྱ་ཐིག	rough house plan	skya thig
སྐྱ་ཐིང་དགུ་ཐིང	it is white everywhere with snow or anything else	skya thing dgu thing
སྐྱ་ཐུད	cheese w/o much oil	skya thud
སྐྱ་ཐུད་ལེབ	kind of cheese-cake made of dried milk and butter	skya thud leb
སྐྱ་ཐུམ	kind of cake or biscuit made without sugar or treacle	skya thum
སྐྱ་ཐུམ་མེ་བ	unclearly seen white light	skya thum me ba
སྐྱ་ཐེར་ཐེར	w/o any plants white earth	skya ther ther
སྐྱ་ཐོམ་མེ་བ	very white, glaring white	skya thom me ba
སྐྱ་ཐོར	eye disease w pustules mig lcibs kyi nang du	skya thor
སྐྱ་འཐོར་བ	1) skud pa'i skya zhig pa; 2) ripe crops	skya 'thor ba
སྐྱ་དར	have good livelihood/ economy	skya dar
སྐྱ་མདའ	a lake from which the river of the golden sands takes its rise	skya mda'
སྐྱ་མདའ་གཏོང་བ	dawn	skya mda' gtong ba
སྐྱ་མདོག	grey, pale	skya mdog
སྐྱ་ལྡེབས	rtsig logs	skya ldebs
སྐྱ་ནམ་རྒྱས་པོ	in a region have abundant food and clothing	skya nam rgyas po
སྐྱ་ནར	a kind of rtsva [plant/ grass	skya nar
སྐྱ་ནར་ཁྲ་བོ	a flower	skya nar khra bo
སྐྱ་ནར་གྱི་བུ	city of pataliputra in india now supposed to be patna	skya nar gyi bu
སྐྱ་ནར་ལྡན་མ	ancient river in india	skya nar ldan ma
སྐྱ་སྣར་བཀྲ་ཆེན	species of bignonia graveolens	skya snar bkra chen
སྐྱ་སྣར་བཀྲ་བོ	a flower	skya snar bkra bo
སྐྱ་པོ	pale whitish yellow	skya po
སྐྱ་ཕམ	by a king his minister rgol ba la skya pham zhes mdo sde stag rna'i brda tshig yin par bshad	skya pham
སྐྱ་ཕམ་པོ	bad crop, poor harvest	skya pham po
སྐྱ་ཕྱུར	phyur khu or sngo khu boiled a long time, after drying bton pa'i cheese ro bcud zhan pa	skya phyur
སྐྱ་ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	white	skya phyur phyur
སྐྱ་ཕྱེད་སྔོ་ཕྱེད	mixed white and black hairs	skya phyed sngo phyed
སྐྱ་ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ	emanating white light	skya phrom phrom
སྐྱ་འཕམ་པོ	w poor food drink and necessities of life	skya 'pham po
སྐྱ་འཕྱིངས	[arch] skud pa'i skya 'dzings pa	skya 'phyings
སྐྱ་བ	1 (Tha dad pa bskyas pa, bskya ba, skyos,; 1) move to another residence * two [arch] accompany, see off, deliver, bring, escort; 3) oar, rudder, paddle; 4) stir tea, soup etc; 5) whiteish light pal...	skya ba
སྐྱ་བ་སྐྱོད་པ	row/ steer a boat	skya ba skyod pa
སྐྱ་བ་རྒྱག་པ	row/ steer a boat	skya ba rgyag pa
སྐྱ་བ་ཉིད	whiteness	skya ba nyid
སྐྱ་བ་འཛིན	=	skya ba 'dzin
སྐྱ་བ་འཛིན་པ	oarsman	skya ba 'dzin pa
སྐྱ་བ་ཤིང	ladle; spoon	skya ba shing
སྐྱ་བག	greyish color, iron-grey color	skya bag
སྐྱ་བབས་པ	lose ordination, fall down into being a layman	skya babs pa
སྐྱ་བའི་དུས	period of being layman	skya ba'i dus
སྐྱ་བུན	thal 'tshub cheese-like appearance	skya bun
སྐྱ་བོ	1) householder; 2) ashen whitish color; 3) pale and lusterless	skya bo
ཝཧིཏིཤ	yellow, laity, grey or whitish grey, SA skya ba	whitish
སྐྱ་བོ་སྤྱི	vulgar people, common worldly men. common people, masses	skya bo spyi
སྐྱ་བོ་སེང་སེང་པོ	pale lusterless and emaciated	skya bo seng seng po
སྐྱ་བྲ	white bra bo grain	skya bra
སྐྱ་རྦབ	swelling, edema, dropsy	skya rbab
སྐྱ་རྦབ་ལྔ	CHN	skya rbab lnga
སྐྱ་སྦྱོར	virtuous deed, good deed (lit. white deed)	skya sbyor
སྐྱ་མ	soil which is hard and rough for cultivation	skya ma
སྐྱ་མ་ན་ཁ	a vast grassy plain or common belonging to the government of lhasa	skya ma na kha
སྐྱ་མ་འཛིངས་པ	bristly threads	skya ma 'dzings pa
སྐྱ་མར	fresh, butter	skya mar
སྐྱ་མི	rider	skya mi
སྐྱ་མིང	mon's previous layman's name	skya ming
སྐྱ་མེར་རེ	white rigs phyur bur gang tshul, 'O zom skya mer rer gang 'dug	skya mer re
སྐྱ་མྱི	[arch] horseman, boatman	skya myi
སྐྱ་ཙ་རེ	utterly pale / colorless	skya tsa re
སྐྱ་རྩ	1) house's oldest son pas mi skya byed rgyu'i rigs; 2) Rtsa ba'i mi khongs	skya rtsa
སློག་བྱས་པ	skya rtsa rang bdag grva pa log kyang mi bdag dgon pa de rang gis byed pa	slog byas pa
སྐྱ་རྩྭ	whitish-green shoots of grass	skya rtswa
སྐྱ་རཙབ༹	gzhan pa skam po	skya rtsva
སྐྱ་རྩི	med. for cattle lung disease	skya rtsi
སྐྱ་རྩེ	layman at the top of a row	skya rtse
སྐྱ་ཚ་རེ	white color and 'dzar 'dzar ram nar nar gyi tshul du 'bab pa	skya tsha re
སྐྱ་ཚོན	paints applied in thin washes, giving a pale result	skya tshon
སྐྱ་ཚོས	white tshos	skya tshos
སྐྱ་རྫས	at night the ocean from far away seen thal 'tshub 'dra ba zhig	skya rdzas
སྐྱ་ཞབ༹	1) tshos gzhi dang rgyan ris med pa'i zhva mo; 2) khyim pa'i zhva mo	skya zhva
སྐྱ་ཞྭ	plain hat without riband	skya zhwa
སྐྱ་ཟད་སྔོ་གཏུགས	old rtsa dkar rigs having been exhausted new green yang zla gtud pa, beginning of summer before harvest when grain supply is nearly gone	skya zad sngo gtugs
སྐྱ་ཟན	sha mar sogs zhag tshi med pa'i zas rigs	skya zan
སྐྱ་བཟོ	khang sgrom lta bu'i bzo dbyibs rags pa	skya bzo
སྐྱ་ཡ	skud pa'i skya gnyis kyi ya gcig [Snam bu skya ya ma]	skya ya
སྐྱ་ཡོ་རེ་བ	tall and shining white	skya yo re ba
སྐྱ་ཡོར་ཡོར	white and gsal la ma gsal	skya yor yor
སྐྱ་རིང་མཆོད་རྟེན	Kyaring stupa, in Domey	skya ring mchod rten
སྐྱ་རིངས་ཁྲག་མེད	colorless and pale	skya rings khrag med
སྐྱ་རིབ	1) light not shining; 2) vision w cataracts so that forms are dim and unclear	skya rib
སྐྱ་རིམས	rims nad ma smin pa'i skabs	skya rims
སྐྱ་རིས	outline of a drawing / design, sketch, drawing [usually in charcoal]	skya ris
སྐྱ་རིས་རྒྱག	sketch, outline	skya ris rgyag
སྐྱ་རུ་ར	n. of a medicine	skya ru ra
སྐྱ་རེ་སྐྱོ་རེ	feeble, week, infirm, unable to act by 1self	skya re skyo re
སྐྱ་རེང	dawn. see also {tho rangs skya reng dang po'i tshe}	skya reng
སྐྱ་རེངས	dawn, twilight	skya rengs
སྐྱ་རེངས་དཀར	white dawn	skya rengs dkar
སྐྱ་རེངས་ཐ་མ	last part of dawn just before sunrise w red sky, 3rd session of dawn/ night watch	skya rengs tha ma
སྐྱ་རེངས་དང་པོ	the 1st night watch ?? See {skya rengs tha ma}	skya rengs dang po
སྐྱ་རེངས་དང་པོ་ཤར་བ	first appearance of the dawn	skya rengs dang po shar ba
སྐྱ་རེངས་ནུ་བོ	epith. of Garuda	skya rengs nu bo
སྐྱ་རེངས་བར་མ	1) before daybreak when E is light yellow; 2) 2nd night session/ watch ??	skya rengs bar ma
སྐྱ་རེངས་བར་མ་ཤར་བ	the appearance of the middle or the yellow dawn	skya rengs bar ma shar ba
སྐྱ་རེངས་དམར	copper-red dawn	skya rengs dmar
སྐྱ་རེངས་ཤར	be early morning	skya rengs shar
སྐྱ་རེངས་ཤར་བ	dawn	skya rengs shar ba
སྐྱ་རེངས་སེར	golden or yellow dawn	skya rengs ser
སྐྱ་རེངས་གསུམ	the three parts of dawn [skya rengs dang po dang, bar ma, tha ma'am, skya rengs, sngo rengs, dmar rengs te gsum]	skya rengs gsum
སྐྱ་ལ་སྔོ་འབྱར	1) mi ngan dang 'grogs 'dris byed pa, Ma rabs kyi mi dang skya la sngo 'byar gyi ngan sbrel ma byed; 2) stay near, depend on others	skya la sngo 'byar
སྐྱ་ལན	dawn, morning. dawn, morning, twilight	skya lan
སྐྱ་ལུད	lud tsho po min pa	skya lud
སྐྱ་ལེབ	1) srog chags rtsangs pa sgal ral [intractibly bad?]; 2) rudder	skya leb
སྐྱ་ལོག་སྔོ་ལོག	color/ dye neither white nor blue [Gyon pa skya log sngo log cig gyon 'dug]	skya log sngo log
སྐྱ་ལོག་པ	bka' log pa [h]	skya log pa
སྐྱ་ལོང་ལོང	sprin dang thal ba sogs gyen du 'phyur tshul, Me sgyod phog pa'i sa nas thal ba skya long long du 'phyur	skya long long
སྐྱ་ཤར	'brum bu dkar po disease	skya shar
སྐྱ་ཤར་ཤར	white radiance	skya shar shar
སྐྱ་བཤིག་པ	skud sgrim destroy disrupt	skya bshig pa
སྐྱ་སང	pure white	skya sang
སྐྱ་སང་ངེ་བ	white and pure	skya sang nge ba
སྐྱ་སང་སང	1) mostly white and pure; 2) [arch] pale complexion and luster	skya sang sang
སྐྱ་སིང་པོ	pure and clear	skya sing po
སྐྱ་སེང	skya sang	skya seng
སྐྱ་སེང་གི་བུ	sons of pandu	skya seng gi bu
སྐྱ་སེང་གི་བུ་ལྔ	TSE	skya seng gi bu lnga
སྐྱ་སེང་ངེ་བ	white	skya seng nge ba
སྐྱ་སེང་སེང་པོ	1) light blue. 2) sickly, unhealthy [look], grey, pale [complexion]; 1) light blue. 2) sickly	skya seng seng po
སྐྱ་སེར	white and yellow, laity and clergy, laymen and monks	skya ser
སྐྱ་སེར་གཉིས	laity and clergy	skya ser gnyis
སྐྱ་སེར་ཕོ་མོ་རྣམས	local men and women, laypeople and clergy alike	skya ser pho mo rnams
སྐྱ་སོབ་སོབ	light colored and hollow/ insipid	skya sob sob
སྐྱ་སྲབ་པོ	conditions for livelihood hard to find	skya srab po
སྐྱ་གསེར	Syn {skya ser}	skya gser
སྐྱ་གསོག	inferior barley flour	skya gsog
སྐྱ་གསོབ	1) pale and lusterless; 2) skya sob sob	skya gsob
སྐྱ་བསང	clean and white	skya bsang
སྐྱ་བསངས	clean and white	skya bsangs
སྐྱ་བསེང	clean and white 165	skya bseng
སྐྱ་ལྷག་གེ་བ	white and pale	skya lhag ge ba
སྐྱ་ལྷམ	1) uncolored/ dyed shoes; 2) layman's shoes	skya lham
སྐྱ་ལྷེབ་བེ	white and lheb lheb kyis slowly waving,	skya lheb be
སྐྱག	misfortune	skyag
སྐྱག་སྒོ	expenditure or items of expenditure	skyag sgo
སྐྱག་གཅིན	excreta	skyag gcin
སྐྱག་ཐོ	expense account	skyag tho
སྐྱག་དོང	dung hole	skyag dong
སྐྱག་པ	stool, excrements, faeces, shit, dung, SA rkyag pa, human excrement, ordure, bad man, dreg, scum of society, SA sbang skyag, rkyag pa, spend, lay out, expend, slaughter, murder, dirt	skyag pa
སྐྱག་པ་གཏོང	defecate	skyag pa gtong
སྐྱག་པ་གཏོང་བ	shit	skyag pa gtong ba
སྐྱག་པ་མ་འབབ་པ	constipation	skyag pa ma 'bab pa
སྐྱག་པོ	a place in tibet	skyag po
སྐྱག་པོ་འདམ་ར	marshy plain	skyag po 'dam ra
སྐྱག་བ	to be used to, spoiled	skyag ba
སྐྱག་རྫུན	lie, false statement	skyag rdzun
སྐྱག་རྫུན་སྐྱག་ནག	completely untrue	skyag rdzun skyag nag
སྐྱག་རྫུན་མ་ཤོད	don't lie	skyag rdzun ma shod
སྐྱག་རྫུན་ཤོད	tell a lie	skyag rdzun shod
སྐྱག་རྫུན་བཤད་པ	tell a lie, lie	skyag rdzun bshad pa
སྐྱག་ལང	bad habits * spoil [a child]	skyag lang
སྐྱག་ལང་གཏོང	spoil [a child]	skyag lang gtong
སྐྱག་ལང་ལ་ཤོར་བ	get spoiled [child]	skyag lang la shor ba
སྐྱག་ལང་ཤོར་བ	be used to, spoil, addict	skyag lang shor ba
སྐྱགས་ཀྱིས་བླུག་པ	to ladle, scoop out, spoon out	skyags kyis blug pa
སྐྱང	1) but, although; 2) pale, grey; 3) reddish brown	skyang
སྐྱང་ཀའི་ཁྲག	jackdaw blood animal med.	skyang ka'i khrag
སྐྱང་དཀར	light bay [colored]	skyang dkar
སྐྱང་སྐྱང	skyung ka bird's call	skyang skyang
སྐྱང་ནུལ	pavement, clay-floor, mud floor, plastering	skyang nul
མུད	flour	mud
སྐྱང་ནུལ་གྲུགས་པ	[arch] zhal ba gog pa	skyang nul grugs pa
སྐྱང་ནུལ་བྱེད་པ	pave, plaster, rub, polish	skyang nul byed pa
སྐྱང་པོ	bay, chestnut colored	skyang po
སྐྱང་འཕྱེས	#	skyang 'phyes
སྐྱང་བ	(tha dad pa bskyungs pa, bskyung ba, skyungs,; 1) abandon; 2) be few/ small * _	skyang ba
སྐྱང་བུ	snyung bu, hole piercing tool	skyang bu
སྐྱང་མ	lalana, the left channel; see {rkyang ma}	skyang ma
སྐྱང་ཞག	nyi skar nyer bzhi and chu tshod zhe bzhi la slebs pa and 3rd western month 25th day yas mas tsham nas skyung zhag dgu are figured te sos than yod med brtag pa ste de'i ring la kha char bab nas if ...	skyang zhag
སྐྱངས	ashamed, in shame	skyangs
སྐྱངས་ཀྱི་སྦྱང་གི	med. {skyangs kyi sbyang gi	skyangs kyi sbyang gi
སྐྱངས་གྱུར་ཅིང	being ashamed	skyangs gyur cing
སྐྱད་ལང་ཤོར་བ	to be spoiled, used to, have the [bad] habit of	skyad lang shor ba
སྐྱབ་མགོན	protector; usually {skyabs mgon}	skyab mgon
སྐྱབ་འཇུག་བྱ	I shall give you a blessing!	skyab 'jug bya
སྐྱབ་འཇུག་བྱ་བ	phan pa'i skyab 'jug	skyab 'jug bya ba
བྱ	I shall pray that you be protected	bya
སྐྱབ་པ	Protector	skyab pa
སྐྱབ་ལང་ཤོར་བ	become a bad habit	skyab lang shor ba
སྐྱབ་གསོ་སྤྲོད	to give welfare	skyab gso sprod
སྐྱབས	take refuge	skyabs
སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་མཆོག་གྱུར	supreme refuge	skyabs kyi mchog gyur
སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	the generosity of giving protection. Same as {mi 'jigs pa sbyin pa}. one of the {sbyin pa rnam gsum}. three types of generosity	skyabs kyi sbyin pa
སྐྱབས་མགོན	1) lord, His Eminence, supreme protector. 2) refuge and protector, savior, helper, deliver	skyabs mgon
སྐྱབས་མགོན་རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	An epithet applied to the regent who rules Tibet during the minority of a Dalai lama	skyabs mgon rgyal tshab rin po che
སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཆེན་པོ	title of high lamas	skyabs mgon chen po
སྐྱབས་མགོན་དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ	title of high lamas	skyabs mgon don gyi bdag po
སྐྱབས་མགོན་པཎ་ཆེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the Lord Protector, Panchen Rinpoche skyabs mgon 'brug pa thams cad mkhyen	skyabs mgon paN chen rin po che
སྐྱབས་མགོན་སྦུག	innermost protector, dalai lama	skyabs mgon sbug
སྐྱབས་མགོན་རྩེ་ཤོད	protector residing on the top of potala and the court below	skyabs mgon rtse shod
སྐྱབས་མགོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious protector, title of the Dalai Lama and tashi lama	skyabs mgon rin po che
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ	1) going for refuge; 2) practice [h]	skyabs 'gro
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་གྱིས་ཤིག	ex {rtag tu skyabs 'gro gyis shig} take refuge at all times!	skyabs 'gro gyis shig
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་བདུན་ཅུ་པ	the Seventy verses on Taking Refuge by acharya Chandrakirti	skyabs 'gro bdun cu pa
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་ཙམ་གྱི་དགེ་བསྙེན	[sharana matraka upasaka] A Buddhist layman who obtains lay ordination merely by the strength of his seeking refuge i.e. without any formal ritual, see. {dge bsnyen btags pa ba bzhi}	skyabs 'gro tsam gyi dge bsnyen
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་བཞི་སྐོར	the fourfold taking refuge. 1) guru. 2) Buddha. 3) Dharma. 4) Sangha	skyabs 'gro bzhi skor
སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་གསུམ	the sources of refuge	skyabs 'gro gsum
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	refuge layman/ lay person [who takes three jewels as refuge	skyabs 'gro'i dge bsnyen
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་སྡོམ་པ	refuge precepts/ vows	skyabs 'gro'i sdom pa
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་ཚོགས་ཞིང	the accumulation field for taking refuge	skyabs 'gro'i tshogs zhing
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	instruction on the Buddhist formula of refuge	skyabs 'gro'i lo rgyus
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་བསླབ་བྱ་གསུམ	the three refuge precepts/ trainings	skyabs 'gro'i bslab bya gsum
སྐྱབས་སྒྲིལ	silken scarf used to wrap a letter	skyabs sgril
སྐྱབས་སྒྲོན	Protector and enlightener	skyabs sgron
སྐྱབས་དངོས	1) the actual / true refuge. 2) the Dharma of the true cessations and true paths	skyabs dngos
སྐྱབས་གཅིག	only refuge	skyabs gcig
སྐྱབས་གཅིག་པུ	only refuge, sole protector	skyabs gcig pu
སྐྱབས་བཅའ	[will] rely on as a refuge [f skyabs 'cha']	skyabs bca'
སྐྱབས་བཅས	relied on as a refuge [p skyabs 'cha']	skyabs bcas
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ	object of refuge, refugee	skyabs bcol
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ་པ	refugee	skyabs bcol pa
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ་བ	refugee	skyabs bcol ba
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ་ཞུ	seek refuge	skyabs bcol zhu
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ་རོགས་རམ་ཚོགས་པ	refugee aid organization/ agency	skyabs bcol rogs ram tshogs pa
སྐྱབས་བཅོལ་ས	place of refuge	skyabs bcol sa
སྐྱབས་མཆོག	the supreme refuge	skyabs mchog
སྐྱབས་འཆའ	seek refuge/ protection	skyabs 'cha'
སྐྱབས་འཆོལ	seek refuge/ protection	skyabs 'chol
སྐྱབས་འཇུག	spiritual protection	skyabs 'jug
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས་པར་ཞུ	under your spiritual protection and compassionate attention [may I ...]	skyabs 'jug thugs rjes gzigs par zhu
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་གནང	confer a blessing, grant a request/ favor	skyabs 'jug gnang
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་གནང་བ	confer a blessing, grant a request/ favor	skyabs 'jug gnang ba
ཞུ	ask for protection so obstacles may not arise	zhu
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུ	1) ask for protection, request [a favor]; 2) kindly protect us! (/ [h]	skyabs 'jug zhu
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུ་བ	ask benediction from the higher class of incarnate lamas for protection against disease, evil spirits, and other enemies	skyabs 'jug zhu ba
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུས	asked for protection	skyabs 'jug zhus
སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུས་པ	requested a protection	skyabs 'jug zhus pa
སྐྱབས་རྗེ	refuge master/ lord; "His/ Her Holiness" (title)	skyabs rje
སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཀར་མ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག་པ	H.H. the 16th Karmapa	skyabs rje kar ma pa bcu drug pa
སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ལྡིལ་མགོ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	His Holiness Dilgo Khyentse skyabs rje ldil mgo mkhyen brtse rin po	skyabs rje ldil mgo mkhyen brtse
ཆེ	His Holiness Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche. (b. 1910). Regarded by followers of all four schools as one of the foremost masters of Tibetan Buddhism. Among his other names are Rabsel Dawa and Tashi Paljor...	che
སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཡོངས་འཛིན་སྐུ་གཞོན	Junior tutor to Dalai Lama	skyabs rje yongs 'dzin sku gzhon
སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཡོངས་འཛིན་རྣམ་པ	tutors of HH the Dalai lama	skyabs rje yongs 'dzin rnam pa
སྐྱབས་རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	title used when addressing the spiritual preceptor of the Dalai lama	skyabs rje rin po che
སྐྱབས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the refuge, [the three jewels]	skyabs rjes su dran pa
སྐྱབས་ཏུ	as the object of refuge	skyabs tu
སྐྱབས་རྟེན	bribe	skyabs rten
སྐྱབས་སྟོན་པ	teaching/ giving refuge, expounding the dharma	skyabs ston pa
སྐྱབས་ཐམས་ཅད	all refuges	skyabs thams cad
སྐྱབས་ཐོ	letter requesting refuge 167	skyabs tho
སྐྱབས་དང་སྐྱེལ་མ	{tshe 'di phyi bar do gtan gyi skyabs dang skyel ma} my lasting refuge and guide in this life, in the bardo, and in future lives	skyabs dang skyel ma
སྐྱབས་དང་སྐྱེལ་མ་མཛོད་ཅིག	be my escort and my refuge	skyabs dang skyel ma mdzod cig
སྐྱབས་དང་རེ་ལྟོས	refuge and hope; x {bros sa dang gab sa skyabs dang re ltos thams cad zad nas ci bya gtol med pa'i skabs su} how could such a moment-when there is no place to run to and nowhere to hide, no refuge ...	skyabs dang re ltos
སྐྱབས་སྡོམ	refuge precepts	skyabs sdom
སྐྱབས་གནས	object/ place of refuge, shelter/ protection/ help	skyabs gnas
སྐྱབས་གནས་ཀུན་འདུས	embodiment of all objects of refuge	skyabs gnas kun 'dus
སྐྱབས་གནས་རྒྱ་ཆེན	great object of worship or adoration, supreme objects of refuge	skyabs gnas rgya chen
སྐྱབས་གནས་དམ་པ	holy / sacred object of refuge	skyabs gnas dam pa
སྐྱབས་གནས་གསུམ	Triple Refuge. Same as the Three Jewels	skyabs gnas gsum
སྐྱབས་གནས་བསླུ་བ་མེད་པ	the unfailing source of refuge	skyabs gnas bslu ba med pa
སྐྱབས་པ	[p {skyob pa} protection, refuge, help	skyabs pa
སྐྱབས་སྤྱིན	bestowing refuge	skyabs spyin
སྐྱབས་བྱ	person who seeks refuge	skyabs bya
སྐྱབས་བྱེད	protection, defence	skyabs byed
སྐྱབས་བྱེད་པ	to protect, to help, to save	skyabs byed pa
སྐྱབས་བྲལ	w/o refuge, unprotected	skyabs bral
སྐྱབས་བླ་ན་མེད་པ་ཡིན་པ	unexcelled refuge	skyabs bla na med pa yin pa
སྐྱབས་དབྱིངས	sngar pan chen gyi treasurer called the dza sag bla ma	skyabs dbyings
སྐྱབས་སྦྱིན	Giving Refuge, abhaya mudra	skyabs sbyin
སྐྱབས་སྦྱིན་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the protecting mudra; mudra of bestowing protection, protection mudra, the gesture of giving refuge	skyabs sbyin gyi phyag rgya
སྐྱབས་སྦྱིན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	refuge/protection granting mudra	skyabs sbyin phyag rgya
སྐྱབས་མེད	w/o refuge	skyabs med
སྐྱབས་མེད་མགོན་མེད	helpless and w/o protector	skyabs med mgon med
སྐྱབས་མེད་པ	unprotected, defenseless, vulnerable	skyabs med pa
སྐྱབས་མེད་ཟས་སྦྱིན	give food to the poor	skyabs med zas sbyin
སྐྱབས་འཚལ་བ	to ask for protection, to take refuge	skyabs 'tshal ba
སྐྱབས་འཚོལ	seeking refuge/ protection	skyabs 'tshol
སྐྱབས་འཚོལ་བ	seek refuge/ protection/ shelter	skyabs 'tshol ba
སྐྱབས་ཞུ	request [refuge/ a favor]	skyabs zhu
སྐྱབས་ཞུས་པ	asked for the protection of	skyabs zhus pa
སྐྱབས་འོག་ཏུ་བཅུག	to bring under one's protection	skyabs 'og tu bcug
སྐྱབས་འོས	worthy of protection	skyabs 'os
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ	Objects of refuge. The Three Jewels, Three Roots and Three Kayas	skyabs yul
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་མཆོད་གནས	place of refuge and offering	skyabs yul mchod gnas
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་དམ་པ	the sacred object of refuge	skyabs yul dam pa
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་རྣམས	the object of refuge	skyabs yul rnams
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་རང་ལ་བསྟིམ	to dissolve the objects of refuge into oneself	skyabs yul rang la bstim
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་གསལ་གདབ་པ	to visualize the objects of refuge	skyabs yul gsal gdab pa
སྐྱབས་ཡུལ་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the object of refuge divinities	skyabs yul lha tshogs
སྐྱབས་རོགས་མེད་པ	destitute	skyabs rogs med pa
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ	seek protection, take refuge in	skyabs su 'gro
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	to take refuge; taking refuge. Syn {skyabs 'gro}. to seek protection / help, take refuge in	skyabs su 'gro ba
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་བགྱིའོ	I will engage myself in taking refuge	skyabs su 'gro ba la 'jug par bgyi'o
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་སྐབས	when taking refuge	skyabs su 'gro ba'i skabs
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཁྱད་པར	the difference of taking refuge	skyabs su 'gro ba'i khyad par
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	the ceremony/ ritual for taking refuge	skyabs su 'gro ba'i cho ga
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཞིང	sources of refuge	skyabs su 'gro ba'i zhing
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་ཚུལ	the way of taking refuge	skyabs su 'gro tshul
སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོའི་ཞིང	the field of refuge	skyabs su 'gro'i zhing
སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆི	go for refuge	skyabs su mchi
སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆི་བ	to go for / take refuge	skyabs su mchi ba
སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆིའོ	I take / go for refuge	skyabs su mchi'o
སྐྱབས་སུ་བསྟེན་པ	to regard as refuge	skyabs su bsten pa
སྐྱབས་སུ་སོང	{bcom ldan 'das la skyabs su song} went for refuge to the Bhagavan	skyabs su song
སྐྱབས་སུ་སོང་བ	to have taken refuge	skyabs su song ba
སྐྱབས་སུ་གསོལ	{'di la skyabs su gsol} Please help him! 168	skyabs su gsol
སྐྱབས་སུ་གསོལ་ཞུས་པ	I pray that you will relieve me	skyabs su gsol zhus pa
སྐྱབས་སེམས	take refuge and arouse bodhichitta	skyabs sems
སྐྱབས་གསུམ	Threefold Refuge. Refuge in the Three Precious Jewels. 1) Buddha. 2) Doctrine. 3) Community. threefold Triple Refuge, three / jewels refuges. Syn {dkon mchog gsum}	skyabs gsum
སྐྱབས་གསུམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go to the Triple Refuge	skyabs gsum du 'gro ba
སྐྱབས་གསུམ་འཛིན་པ	someone who holds the refuge [to the triple gem]	skyabs gsum 'dzin pa
སྐྱབས་གསུམ་འཛིན་པའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	triplerefuge-holder upasaka	skyabs gsum 'dzin pa'i dge bsnyen
སྐྱབས་གསོལ་བ	to ask for refuge, protection	skyabs gsol ba
སྐྱབས་བསླུ་མེད	infallible refuge	skyabs bslu med
སྐྱམ་ཕུ	place in tibet	skyam phu
སྐྱར	Syn {bskyar}	skyar
སྐྱར་སྐྱེ	again, repeatedly	skyar skye
སྐྱར་སྐྱོར	1) feeble, weak, infirm, unable to act by 1self; 2) repeating words over and over	skyar skyor
སྐྱར་གོག	naked	skyar gog
སྐྱར་བཅག	bring into recollection, bring back into memory anything that has been forgotten	skyar bcag
སྐྱར་དད	enjoying chang	skyar dad
སྐྱར་དུ	again	skyar du
སྐྱར་ལྡབ	again, repeatedly, afresh	skyar ldab
སྐྱར་པོ	snipe, wood-cock, a large snipe, heron, spoon-bill, duck, bittern	skyar po
སྐྱར་བ	again and again	skyar ba
སྐྱར་བའི་ཚིག	repetition	skyar ba'i tshig
སྐྱར་རྦབ	kind of dropsy, greyish rheumatic swelling	skyar rbab
སྐྱར་སྦྱོང	review, rehearse, repeat, practice again	skyar sbyong
སྐྱར་སྦྱོང་དེབ	exercise book	skyar sbyong deb
སྐྱར་མོ	heron	skyar mo
སྐྱར་མོ་ཉ་ཁྱེར	a heron fishing bird	skyar mo nya khyer
སྐྱར་ཟློས	repetition	skyar zlos
སྐྱར་ལེབ	sheldrake	skyar leb
སྐྱལ	swimming	skyal
སྐྱལ་ཁ	leaping, boat	skyal kha
སྐྱལ་གྱིས་སྒྲོལ	crossing over by swimming	skyal gyis sgrol
སྐྱལ་ཆེན	fisherman	skyal chen
སྐྱལ་སོང	take away!	skyal song
སྐྱས	1) nomad campground; 2) present; 3) changing of abode/residence	skyas
སྐྱས་ཆེན	death	skyas chen
སྐྱས་ཆེན་བཏེགས	1) move residence; 2) die	skyas chen btegs
སྐྱས་ཆེན་འདེགས	1) move residence; 2) die	skyas chen 'degs
སྐྱས་ཆེན་འདེགས་པ	1) gzhis bsgril nas 'gro ba; 2) die	skyas chen 'degs pa
སྐྱས་ཆེན་པོ	moving residence, death	skyas chen po
སྐྱས་ཆེན་པོ་བཏེགས	1) move residence; 2) die	skyas chen po btegs
སྐྱས་ཆེན་པོ་འདེགས	1) move residence; 2) die	skyas chen po 'degs
སྐྱས་ཆེན་པོ་འདེགས་པ	death (the great uplifting change of place)	skyas chen po 'degs pa
སྐྱས་བཏེག་པ	move to a different area	skyas bteg pa
སྐྱས་བཏེགས	1) move residence; 2) die	skyas btegs
སྐྱས་འདེགས་པ	change one's dwelling place, move	skyas 'degs pa
སྐྱས་པ	transfer, depart this life	skyas pa
སྐྱས་སྤོ	move camp	skyas spo
སྐྱས་མ	1) fern. 2) present. see {skyes ma}	skyas ma
སྐྱས་མ་ཐག་ཏུ	immediately upon being [re]born	skyas ma thag tu
སྐྱི	{bskyis} {bskyi} {skyis}! 1) loan, borrow; 2) interest [on loan]; 3) [outward side of a] skin or hide	skyi
སྐྱི་དཀར	leather phyi rtsi'am sha mtshams sam ko ba'i ngos kyi shun pa srab mo	skyi dkar
སྐྱི་དཀར་གྱི་པགས་པ	dressed leather	skyi dkar gyi pags pa
སྐྱི་དཀར་གྱི་པགས་ཤོག	parchment	skyi dkar gyi pags shog
སྐྱི་སྐྱི་ན་ག	a pasture land in province gtsang	skyi skyi na ga
སྐྱི་ཁུང	place in tibet	skyi khung
སྐྱི་མཁར་ལྷ་ཁང	a monastery in gtsang	skyi mkhar lha khang
སྐྱི་གས	crack/ gap in skin	skyi gas
སྐྱི་གོས	clothes made of thin leather	skyi gos
སྐྱི་གྱའ	fear	skyi gya'
སྐྱི་གྱའ་བ	to shiver, tremble with fear, to be struck with panic	skyi gya' ba
སྐྱི་གྲི	knife for flaying or scraping a hide	skyi gri
སྐྱི་སྒམ	hide/ leather covered box	skyi sgam
སྐྱི་བསྟུམས	anything packed or tied round with dressed hide, skin or hide to pack with	skyi bstums
སྐྱི་ཐོག	common property	skyi thog
སྐྱི་དར	silk scarf	skyi dar
སྐྱི་སྡུག	well-being, welfare	skyi sdug
སྐྱི་ནག	a pasture land in province gtsang	skyi nag
སྐྱི་ནོར	wealth from interest	skyi nor
སྐྱི་ལྤགས	chamois wash-leather	skyi lpags
སྐྱི་བ	{skyi ba, bskyis pa, bskyi ba, skyis} trans. v.; 1) to borrow. 2) n. of medicinal plant. 3) potato	skyi ba
སྐྱི་བའི་ཉམས་ཆེན	feel very upset	skyi ba'i nyams chen
སྐྱི་བུང	[arch] fear, bag tsha ba, cloud	skyi bung
སྐྱི་བུང་བ	terrifying, horrifying	skyi bung ba
སྐྱི་བུངས	fear, bag tsha ba, cloud	skyi bungs
སྐྱི་བུད་པ	leather etc. kyi skyi dkar nag naturally bud pa	skyi bud pa
སྐྱི་བུན	fear, an itching of the skin	skyi bun
སྐྱི་བུན་པ	to fear	skyi bun pa
སྐྱི་འབྲས	skyi ba tree fruit	skyi 'bras
སྐྱི་འབྲུ	skyi ba tree fruit	skyi 'bru
སྐྱི་མོ	skin	skyi mo
སྐྱི་རྨ	lus kyi pags shun la byung ba'i wound	skyi rma
སྐྱི་ཙེར	rtsa gas nas langs pa'i skyi lpags	skyi tser
སྐྱི་ཞབ༹	hat made of pags pa srab mo/ suede	skyi zhva
སྐྱི་ཟིང་ཟིང	panic stricken, shivering with terror	skyi zing zing
སྐྱི་རལ	shun wags ral ba	skyi ral
སྐྱི་ཤ	outward and inward side of a hide, anus	skyi sha
སྐྱི་ཤིང	sar btsugs te ko ba'i sha dang skyi gcod sa'i shing	skyi shing
སྐྱི་སེ་རླུང་པོ	cold winter wind	skyi se rlung po
སྐྱི་སེར	wind	skyi ser
སྐྱི་བསེར	skyi ser	skyi bser
སྐྱིག་པ	hiccough, belching, sob	skyig pa
སྐྱིགས	coot, water-hen, grouse, healthcock, shellac	skyigs
སྐྱིགས་པ	hicoughs	skyigs pa
སྐྱིགས་བུ	hiccups	skyigs bu
སྐྱིགས་བུ་རྒྱག་པ	hiccup	skyigs bu rgyag pa
སྐྱིགས་བུ་ལྔ	CHN	skyigs bu lnga
སྐྱིགས་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	mig har and words not coming out w powerful hiccough	skyigs bu chen po
སྐྱིགས་བུ་བརྩེག་པར	keep on sobbing	skyigs bu brtseg par
སྐྱིགས་བུ་ཟབ་མོ	from beneath the navel 1 after another kind of hiccough disease	skyigs bu zab mo
སྐྱིགས་བུ་ཟས་བྱུང	after eating food rings stabs kind of hiccough disease	skyigs bu zas byung
སྐྱིགས་བུ་ཟུང་འབྱུང	after eating food kind of disease w hicoughs in pairs	skyigs bu zung 'byung
སྐྱིང་ཁབ	brocade	skying khab
སྐྱིང་ཁེབ	brocade	skying kheb
སྐྱིང་ཁེབས	brocade	skying khebs
སྐྱིང་སེར	eagle; vulture	skying ser
སྐྱིད	happy	skyid
སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་གྲོ་མ་ལུང	Droma land of Kyi	skyid kyi gro ma lung
སྐྱིད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱགས་པ	brod rgyags langs pa, 'Tsho ba skyid kyis rgyags pa	skyid kyis rgyags pa
སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད	it seems so wondrous	skyid skyid
སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད་གཏོང	have a festive occasion/ party/ picnic	skyid skyid gtong
སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད་འདྲ་ན	when everything goes well	skyid skyid 'dra na
སྐྱིད་སྐྱུར་པ	acute pain in the knee and leg, woman with child	skyid skyur pa
སྐྱིད་འཁྱམ	excursion	skyid 'khyam
སྐྱིད་གྲོགས་བྱེད་པ	to be friendly, to rejoice with friends	skyid grogs byed pa
སྐྱིད་གྲོང	Kyirong WT	skyid grong
སྐྱིད་གྲོང་སྐྱིད་ཐང	Kyitang, in Kyirong	skyid grong skyid thang
སྐྱིད་གྲོང་ཇོ་བོ	the Phakpa Wati statue in Kyirong	skyid grong jo bo
སྐྱིད་གྲོང་འཕགས་པ	The Avalokiteshvara of Kyidrong	skyid grong 'phags pa
ཧེ་ཨིས་སཻད་ཏོ་ཧབེ༹་ཕོ༹ཨུནད་ཕོ༹ཨུར་སེལཕ༹	born images of Avalokiteshvara, the Kyirong Phakpa is one of them; The Avalokiteshvara of Kyirong; Songtsen Gampo once emanated himself in the form of a Gelong and came to Nepal, there he felled a ...	he is said to have found four self
སྐྱིད་གྲོང་བསམ་གཏན་གླིང	Samten Ling, monastery	skyid grong bsam gtan gling
སྐྱིད་གླུ	happy/ joyful song	skyid glu
སྐྱིད་མགོ	beginning of happiness	skyid mgo
སྐྱིད་མགོ་ཚུགས	begin happiness/ good era	skyid mgo tshugs
སྐྱིད་འགོ	1st/ beginning of happiness	skyid 'go
སྐྱིད་རྒན	old in/ entire life of happiness	skyid rgan
སྐྱིད་རྒྱག	full belly / rich and proud	skyid rgyag
སྐྱིད་ཆུ	Kyichu river	skyid chu
སྐྱིད་ཆུའི་ཟམ་པ	bridge on the skyid chu river 170	skyid chu'i zam pa
སྐྱིད་ཆེས	comfortable	skyid ches
སྐྱིད་ཆེས་པ	skyid drags pa	skyid ches pa
སྐྱིད་ཆོས	luxurious Dharma-practice	skyid chos
ཅོམཕོ༹རཏ	seeking	comfort
སྐྱིད་རྟག	1) long-lasting/ eternal happiness, always happy; 2) king khri gtsug lde btsan	skyid rtag
སྐྱིད་སྟོད	upper lha sa'i gtsang chu region	skyid stod
སྐྱིད་ཐབས	comfort, means to happiness, made of comfortable living	skyid thabs
སྐྱིད་ཐེག་སྡུག་ཐེག	able to bear good fortune and ill fortune	skyid theg sdug theg
སྐྱིད་དར	spread of happiness	skyid dar
སྐྱིད་དལ	joyful, happy, and relaxed	skyid dal
སྐྱིད་དུ་ཕངས་པ	skyid na mi dga' ba, Bdag la yul mi khyim mtshes skyid du phangs pa 'ga' bdog	skyid du phangs pa
སྐྱིད་དུ་མི་སྟེར་སྡུག་པའི་འདྲེ	'dre who make sad and do not allow joy	skyid du mi ster sdug pa'i 'dre
སྐྱིད་དེ་བ	[arch] dear/beloved child	skyid de ba
སྐྱིད་དོ	contentment!	skyid do
སྐྱིད་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	cozy	skyid mdog kha po
སྐྱིད་འདོད	desire for ordinary happiness	skyid 'dod
སྐྱིད་འདོད་ཁོག་རུལ	self-indulgent and corrupt	skyid 'dod khog rul
སྐྱིད་འདོད་འགུལ་འཚེར	loving pleasure and disliking work	skyid 'dod 'gul 'tsher
སྐྱིད་འདོད་རིང་ལུགས	hedonism	skyid 'dod ring lugs
སྐྱིད་འདོད་ལས་བསྣུན	loving pleasure and disliking work	skyid 'dod las bsnun
སྐྱིད་ལྡེ་ཉི་མ་མགོན	a king of tibet	skyid lde nyi ma mgon
སྐྱིད་སྡུག	1) joy and sorrow, good and bad fortune, ups and downs, happiness and grief / sadness / misery, please and pain. 2) livelihood, wealth and poverty. 3) membership, society, community. 4) conditions ...	skyid sdug
གཅིག་པ	family	gcig pa
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ཅི་བྱུང་ཀྱང	whatever circumstances may happen	skyid sdug ci byung kyang
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མཉམ་འཁུར	experience happiness and sorrow	skyid sdug mnyam 'khur
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མཉམ་འབྲེལ	sharing in joy and sorrow/ the same lot, solidarity, unity	skyid sdug mnyam 'brel
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མཉམ་མྱོང	sharing in joy and sorrow/ the same lot, solidarity, unity	skyid sdug mnyam myong
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མཐུན་ཚོགས	association	skyid sdug mthun tshogs
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་གནས་ལུགས	conditions, circumstances [good or bad]	skyid sdug gnas lugs
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་འཕོ་འགྱུར	vicissitude	skyid sdug 'pho 'gyur
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་བློན་པོ	Home Minister	skyid sdug blon po
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་རོ་བསྙོམས་པ	equalizing / equating happiness and sadness	skyid sdug ro bsnyoms pa
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད	belief in happiness/sorrow	skyid sdug la yid ches byed
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ལོགས་བཀར་བྱེད་པ	division of the property of a family	skyid sdug logs bkar byed pa
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་སྲེ་བ	share pleasure and pain	skyid sdug sre ba
སྐྱིད་སྡུག་བསྲེ་བ	pleasure and pain intermingled	skyid sdug bsre ba
སྐྱིད་སྣང་དོད་པོ	fun	skyid snang dod po
སྐྱིད་པ	1) adj. comp. of {skyid po}. 2) happiness; to be happy; to be happy, happiness, joyful	skyid pa
སྐྱིད་པ་ལ	how joyous!	skyid pa la
སྐྱིད་པའི་རྒྱངས་གླུ་བླངས་པ	sang songs of happiness	skyid pa'i rgyangs glu blangs pa
སྐྱིད་པའི་ཉི་མ	auspicious day, lucky day	skyid pa'i nyi ma
སྐྱིད་པའི་ཐབས	the means of happiness skyid pa'i gdung rabs phyed dang bcu	skyid pa'i thabs
སྐྱིད་པའི་རང་བཞིན	happy, happiness, joyful [comp skyid po]	skyid pa'i rang bzhin
སྐྱིད་པོ	comfortable, happy, merry, cheerful, joyful, sweet, happiness, happy, glad, enjoyable	skyid po
སྐྱིད་པོ་ཉལ་བ	sleep well	skyid po nyal ba
སྐྱིད་པོ་གཏོང	enjoy [oneself], have a good time	skyid po gtong
སྐྱིད་པོ་གཏོང་བ	to enjoy	skyid po gtong ba
སྐྱིད་པོ་བྱེད	enjoy [oneself], have a good time	skyid po byed
སྐྱིད་པོ་བྱེད་པ	enjoy	skyid po byed pa
སྐྱིད་པོ་མེད་པ	to be unhappy	skyid po med pa
སྐྱིད་པོ་བཟོ་བ	entertain	skyid po bzo ba
སྐྱིད་པོ་ལ་འགྲོ	happy	skyid po la 'gro
སྐྱིད་པོ་ལ་འགྲོ་བར	be prosperous	skyid po la 'gro bar
སྐྱིད་ཕུག་ཉི་མ་རྫོང	Kyipuk Nyima Dzong, the Pleasant Cave of the Sun Citadel, one of Milarepa's caves in Tsang	skyid phug nyi ma rdzong
སྐྱིད་བློན	Home Minister	skyid blon
སྐྱིད་འབོལ་ལེ	happy, relaxed and comfortable	skyid 'bol le
སྐྱིད་སྦུག་པ	proper name of an aristocratic family	skyid sbug pa
སྐྱིད་མེད་སྡུག་ཟད	= skye med sdug zad, khe nyen mi rtsi bar gang byung mang byung byed pa	skyid med sdug zad
སྐྱིད་མོས་ཚལ	pleasure grove	skyid mos tshal
སྐྱིད་སྨད	lower lha sa'i gtsang chu region	skyid smad
སྐྱིད་ཚལ	garden, park, pleasure grove	skyid tshal
སྐྱིད་འཛོམས	plentiful happiness, gathering all happiness	skyid 'dzoms
སྐྱིད་ཟིང་ངེ	always happy	skyid zing nge
སྐྱིད་ཟིང་ཟིང་བྱེད་པ	be continuously happy	skyid zing zing byed pa
སྐྱིད་ཡུལ	happy region	skyid yul
སྐྱིད་རུང་སྡུག་རུང	in sadness or happiness	skyid rung sdug rung
སྐྱིད་རོགས	companion in happiness	skyid rogs
སྐྱིད་རོང	{skyid rong	skyid rong
སྐྱིད་རོང་གཙང་ཆུ	{skyid rong gtsang chu river	skyid rong gtsang chu
སྐྱིད་ལ་ལྷོད་པ	happy, relaxed and comfortable	skyid la lhod pa
སྐྱིད་ཤོད	district including the tracts in the lower valley of the river skyid	skyid shod
སྐྱིད་ཤོད་པ	name of an aristocratic family	skyid shod pa
སྐྱིད་ཤོད་ལུང་ནག	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	skyid shod lung nag
སྐྱིད་ལྷན	be prosperous, be happy	skyid lhan
སྐྱིད་ལྷོད	happy and relaxed	skyid lhod
སྐྱིན	tibetan ibex, capra sakeen, proxy	skyin
སྐྱིན་ཁབ	kind of chinese satin, SA gos chen	skyin khab
སྐྱིན་ཁེབ	skying khab	skyin kheb
སྐྱིན་ཁེབས	skying khab	skyin khebs
སྐྱིན་འཁྲི་ཚབ་གསུམ	return what was stolen from others, 'khri 'jal, dngos 171 tshab ste former khrims 'jal gsum for theft	skyin 'khri tshab gsum
སྐྱིན་གོར	lizard	skyin gor
སྐྱིན་མགོ	lizard	skyin mgo
སྐྱིན་མགོ་མ	One of {ma mo brgyad, dbang phyug ma 28}	skyin mgo ma
སྐྱིན་ཐང	hail and sleet	skyin thang
སྐྱིན་ཐང་ཆུ	flood after hail falls	skyin thang chu
སྐྱིན་དང་ངར་གྱི	1 of srid pa pho dgu	skyin dang ngar gyi
སྐྱིན་དང་ངར་གྱི་རྗེ	lord that governs the atmosphere	skyin dang ngar gyi rje
སྐྱིན་གནས	the worthy offerers	skyin gnas
སྐྱིན་པ	debt, loan, borrowed goods or money	skyin pa
སྐྱིན་པ་མཇལ་བ	pay back a loan, return something borrowed, replace something lost/ damaged	skyin pa mjal ba
སྐྱིན་པ་འཇལ་བ	pay back a loan, return something borrowed, replace something lost/ damaged	skyin pa 'jal ba
སྐྱིན་པ་སྤྲོད	pay back a loan, return something borrowed, replace something lost/ damaged	skyin pa sprod
སྐྱིན་པ་སྤྲོད་པ	give back, return, repay, pay back a loan, return a loan	skyin pa sprod pa
སྐྱིན་པ་འཚབ	pay back a loan, return something borrowed, replace something lost/ damaged	skyin pa 'tshab
སྐྱིན་པ་འཚབ་པ	liquidator of debts	skyin pa 'tshab pa
སྐྱིན་པ་འཚབ་པ་པོ	one who pays back	skyin pa 'tshab pa po
སྐྱིན་པ་ལེན་པ	take on credit	skyin pa len pa
སྐྱིན་པ་གསོབ་པ	repay a loan	skyin pa gsob pa
སྐྱིན་པོ	debt, loan, borrowed goods or money	skyin po
སྐྱིན་མི	debtor	skyin mi
སྐྱིན་ཚབ	1) pledge for a loan. 2) anything paid as equivalent of thing taken on loan, debt, pledge, security [for the repayment of a loan]	skyin tshab
སྐྱིན་ཚབ་འགལ	pay back, repay a loan, replace, compensate, indemnify, make reparations	skyin tshab 'gal
སྐྱིན་ཚབ་སྤྲད་པ	to pay back, repay a loan	skyin tshab sprad pa
སྐྱིན་ཚབ་སྤྲོད	pay back, repay a loan, replace, compensate, indemnify, make reparations	skyin tshab sprod
སྐྱིན་ཚབ་སྤྲོད་པ	compensate, pay for, repay	skyin tshab sprod pa
སྐྱིན་ལུས	'jal rgyur bsdad pa'i skyin pa lhag ma	skyin lus
སྐྱིབས	shelter, air hole, round window	skyibs
སྐྱིམ	dressed leather painted red or in other colors, japanned or varnished leather	skyim
སྐྱིམ་ཙེ	scissors	skyim tse
སྐྱིམ་ཚེ	scissors	skyim tshe
སྐྱིལ	{skyil ba}! p bskyil],, 1) dam up water, let water puddle; 2) shut/ pen up, contain	skyil
སྐྱིལ་ཀྱོང	bottom of a hollow	skyil kyong
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲང་བྱེད་པ	sit cross-legged	skyil krang byed pa
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	1) posture. 2) sitting crosslegged; cross-legged posture	skyil krung
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བཅང	the legs crossed	skyil krung bcang
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་འཆའ་བ	adjust in cross-legged posture	skyil krung 'cha' ba
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་མཉམ་བཞག	sitting with crossed legs with hands in meditation gesture	skyil krung mnyam bzhag
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བསྣོལ	cross-legged posture	skyil krung bsnol
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བསྣོལ་བ	cross-legged posture	skyil krung bsnol ba
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་ཕལ་པ	ordinary crossed legs	skyil krung phal pa
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་ཕྱེད་པ	half-vajra posture, loosely crossed, ardha-paryanka, 'halfcross legged' position	skyil krung phyed pa
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བྱེད	sit cross-legged, meditate	skyil krung byed
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བྱེད་དེ་སྡོད	sit crosslegged, meditate	skyil krung byed de sdod
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བྱེད་དེ་ནས་སྡོད	sit crosslegged, meditate	skyil krung byed de nas sdod
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བྱེད་པ	to sit cross-legged, to meditate	skyil krung byed pa
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བཞི	the four kinds of cross legged posture	skyil krung bzhi
བླིསས	emptiness	bliss
སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་གསུམ	the three postures. the three vajra postures of the channels, winds and essences	skyil krung gsum
སྐྱིལ་དཀྲུང	Syn {skyil krung}	skyil dkrung
སྐྱིལ་དཀྲུང་ཕྱེད་པ	half-vajra posture	skyil dkrung phyed pa
སྐྱིལ་དཀྲུང་ཕྱེད་པས་ལངས	rise into a	skyil dkrung phyed pas langs
ཧལཕ༹	vajra posture	half
སྐྱིལ་དཀྲུང་ཕྱེད་པས་ལངས་ཏེ	rise into	skyil dkrung phyed pas langs te
ཨ་ཧལཕ༹	vajra posture	a half
སྐྱིལ་ཁྲུང	cross-legged sitting posture	skyil khrung
སྐྱིལ་འཁོར	sacred diagram	skyil 'khor
སྐྱིལ་དགྲུང་ཕྱེད་པ	half-vajra posture	skyil dgrung phyed pa
སྐྱིལ་ཆུ་བླུག་སྣོད	potter's water blug sa'i yo byad	skyil chu blug snod
སྐྱིལ་བ	pen up, shut up, dam up, bend the legs, bend, closed, hold with kumbhaka, to block, to hold closed, SA rlung bsang brgyad, closed holding	skyil ba
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང	cross-legged sitting posture, SA skyil krung, skyil khrung, posture of sitting, SA rdo rje skyil krung	skyil mo krung
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་གི་འདུག་པ	sit in a crosslegged posture	skyil mo krung gi 'dug pa
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་གི་བཞུགས་པ	sit in a	skyil mo krung gi bzhugs pa
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་མཆོག	sit cross legged	skyil mo krung mchog
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་མ་བཞིག་པ	without uncrossing my legs	skyil mo krung ma bzhig pa
སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུད་མ་བཞིག་པ	without uncrossing my legs 172	skyil mo krud ma bzhig pa
སྐྱིལ་མོ་དཀྲུང	cross-legged posture	skyil mo dkrung
སྐྱིས	borrow, SA skyi ba	skyis
སྐྱིས་སྡུག་ཚོགས་པ	association, club, society, membership	skyis sdug tshogs pa
སྐྱུ	mtheb tshigs dkyil ma nas mtheb rtse bar tshon gang gi tshad	skyu
སྐྱུ་གང	1) w thumb hollowed doug mtheb skyu; 2) substance to rub on the face; 3) distance from center thumb joint to tip of thumb	skyu gang
སྐྱུ་དུམ	kind of table vegetable, condiment, sauce, pickle	skyu dum
སྐྱུ་དུམ་སྦྱོར་བ	prepare sauce	skyu dum sbyor ba
སྐྱུ་ཚེ	zan gyi mtheb skyu, Mar khu'i skyu tshe bzo ba	skyu tshe
སྐྱུ་ར	1 of 5 smad mdo khams sbang	skyu ra
སྐྱུ་ར་སྒང	1 of 6 districts of khams, SA sgang drug	skyu ra sgang
སྐྱུ་རུ	olive, the olive tree	skyu ru
སྐྱུ་རུ་ར	amalaki, a med. plant, emblic myrobalan Also {skyur ru ra med. tree	skyu ru ra
སྐྱུ་རུ་ར་རློན་པ	fresh skyu ru ra fruit	skyu ru ra rlon pa
སྐྱུ་རུ་ཤིང	olive tree	skyu ru shing
སྐྱུ་རུམ	[arch] 1) btung ba'i bye brag thug pa two pickled vegetables; 3) condiment; 4) sauce, gravy; 5) dish	skyu rum
སྐྱུ་རུམ་མཁན	vegetable cook	skyu rum mkhan
སྐྱུག	vomiting, nausea, vomit	skyug
སྐྱུག་མཁན	1 who vomits	skyug mkhan
སྐྱུག་གཅོད་པ	1) stop vomiting; 2) that which stops vomiting [med]	skyug gcod pa
སྐྱུག་ཉེས་པ	indigestible food	skyug nyes pa
སྐྱུག་སྙམ་བྱེད་པོ	one who vomits	skyug snyam byed po
སྐྱུག་ཏིང་ཏིང་བ	skyug log log byed pa	skyug ting ting ba
སྐྱུག་ལྡང	zhe mer rgyag pa	skyug ldang
སྐྱུག་ལྡད	rumination, chewing the cud, eructation	skyug ldad
སྐྱུག་ལྡད་པ	chew the cut, ruminate	skyug ldad pa
སྐྱུག་ལྡད་བྱེད	ruminate, chew the cud	skyug ldad byed
སྐྱུག་ལྡད་བྱེད་པ	chew the cud as cattle	skyug ldad byed pa
སྐྱུག་ནད	vomiting sickness	skyug nad
སྐྱུག་པ	{bskyugs pa, bskyug pa, skyugs}. - I]. 1) to vomit, throw up, feel disgusted, nauseated. 2) to pour forth, come out forcefully, eject. II]. vomit. sm. {skyugs pa}; {skyug pa, bskyugs pa, bskyug pa,...	skyug pa
སྐྱུག་པ་སྐྱུགས	vomit	skyug pa skyugs
སྐྱུག་པ་འཆོར་བ	to vomit	skyug pa 'chor ba
སྐྱུག་པ་དྲེན་པ	excite vomiting	skyug pa dren pa
སྐྱུག་པ་ཤོར	vomit	skyug pa shor
སྐྱུག་བྱེད	emetic, Mahaesvara	skyug byed
སྐྱུག་བྲོ	disgusting, feel nauseated/ disgusted/ sick of/ dirty/ awful, nauseating, sickening, loathsome[ly ugly], disgusting, abominable	skyug bro
སྐྱུག་བྲོ་པོ	nauseating, sickening, loathsome[ly ugly], disgusting, abominable, dirty	skyug bro po
སྐྱུག་བྲོ་བ	disgusting, to feel nauseated, disgusted, sick of	skyug bro ba
སྐྱུག་བྲོ་བའི་ནད	disease of nausea	skyug bro ba'i nad
སྐྱུག་བྲོ་བས	from disgust (to eat anything)	skyug bro bas
སྐྱུག་མིད	swallowing	skyug mid
སྐྱུག་མིད་གཏོང	swallow	skyug mid gtong
སྐྱུག་མེར	nausea, disgust	skyug mer
སྐྱུག་མེར་ལང	feel nausea/ disgust	skyug mer lang
སྐྱུག་སྨན	emetic	skyug sman
སྐྱུག་ལོག	nausea	skyug log
སྐྱུག་ལོག་པ	feel disgust	skyug log pa
སྐྱུག་ལོང	disgust, nausea	skyug long
སྐྱུག་བཤལ	cholera	skyug bshal
སྐྱུག་བཤལ་ནད་འབུ	cholera bacteria	skyug bshal nad 'bu
སྐྱུགས	imp. of {skyug pa}; pour forth; imp. of {skug pa}. pour forth	skyugs
སྐྱུགས་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	cause to vomit	skyugs tu 'jug pa
སྐྱུགས་པ	1) vomit. 2) pf. of {skyug pa}	skyugs pa
སྐྱུགས་པའི་ཚེ	during the period of his exile	skyugs pa'i tshe
སྐྱུགས་པོ	clear, a bird the bill of which is of coral color	skyugs po
སྐྱུགས་བྲོ་བ	repulsive, nauseating	skyugs bro ba
སྐྱུགས་མེར་ལང་བ	nauseating	skyugs mer lang ba
སྐྱུགས་ལོག	nausea	skyugs log
སྐྱུང	{bskyungs pa} {bskyung ba} {skyungs},,] throw, cast away, fling, discard, reduce, diminish, make smaller, lower, give up, abandon	skyung
སྐྱུང་ཀ	jackdaw, choughs, pyrrhocorora graculus, bird of the crow family common in the Tibetan high plateau; it has a black body with red beak and claws	skyung ka
སྐྱུང་ཀ་ཁ་ལེབ	tshag rgyag byed kyi yo byad shaped like bya skyung ka [jackdaw] beak	skyung ka kha leb
སྐྱུང་ཀ་རྩེ་རྐྱོང	tshag rgyag byed kyi yo byad shaped like bya skyung ka [jackdaw] beak	skyung ka rtse rkyong
སྐྱུང་ཁ	jackdaw, SA skyung ka	skyung kha
སྐྱུང་བ	to leave behind, to lay aside; {skyung ba, bskyungs pa, bskyung ba, skyungs} trans. v	skyung ba
སྐྱུང་བུ	awl	skyung bu
སྐྱུངས	{skyung ba}!	skyungs
སྐྱུད	p bskyud,, brjed	skyud
སྐྱུད་པ	forget	skyud pa
སྐྱུར	skyur ba!	skyur
སྐྱུར་བཀོད	creation	skyur bkod
སྐྱུར་ཁ	phu thung dang lham yu sogs kyi tshem mtshams su mthud pa'i rgyu cha zhig	skyur kha
སྐྱུར་ཁུ	sour soup, sour juice, vinegar	skyur khu
སྐྱུར་གོང	drunkard	skyur gong
སྐྱུར་འགོག	acid resistant/ proof	skyur 'gog
སྐྱུར་འགོང	having become drunk act w/o control	skyur 'gong
སྐྱུར་ངོན	drunkard	skyur ngon
སྐྱུར་ངོམ	necessity by habit to drink, passion for drinking	skyur ngom
སྐྱུར་ཅན	powerful, spirited	skyur can
སྐྱུར་ཆུ	1) chang; 2) chu skyur mo	skyur chu
སྐྱུར་འཇུག་པ	to turn sour	skyur 'jug pa
སྐྱུར་འཇོག་བྱས་པ	abandoned	skyur 'jog byas pa
སྐྱུར་བསྙལ་རྒྱག་པ	zho chang etc snyol ba	skyur bsnyal rgyag pa
སྐྱུར་ཏུམ	condiment, sauce	skyur tum
སྐྱུར་དད	craving for alcohol, an alcoholic	skyur dad
སྐྱུར་འདོད་བྱེད	be willing to compromise/ let go of	skyur 'dod byed
སྐྱུར་འདོན	gro'i glum la nye'u byas te sman sbyar nas btsos pa'i rlung nad lus la zhen pa phyir 'don pa'i thabs kyi sman rta zhig	skyur 'don
སྐྱུར་རྡོག	star bu sogs kyi skyur khu'i nang du fermented cheese in little pieces	skyur rdog
སྐྱུར་མནམ་པ	skyur mo'i dri ma kha ba'am snom pa	skyur mnam pa
སྐྱུར་པ	bleached, bleaching	skyur pa
སྐྱུར་པོ	same as {skyur mo}; same as skyur mo	skyur po
སྐྱུར་སྤྲང་བྱེད་པ	to beg for [wine]	skyur sprang byed pa
སྐྱུར་ཕྱུར	sour cheese	skyur phyur
སྐྱུར་བ	1 (Tha dad pa bskyur ba, bskyur ba, skyur,, I] {bskyur ba} {bskyur ba} {skyur} 1) cast/ throw [away], abandon, discard, give up, leave, cast out, repudiate * Ii](1 be/ become sour; 2) fling, throw;...	skyur ba
སྐྱུར་བ་ཉིད	acidity	skyur ba nyid
སྐྱུར་བག	skyur po'i dri ma	skyur bag
སྐྱུར་བའི་རང་བཞིན	sour/ acidic taste	skyur ba'i rang bzhin
སྐྱུར་བྱེད་གསུམ	three sours {a ru} {ba ru} {skyu ru} three kinds of myrobalan]	skyur byed gsum
སྐྱུར་འབྱམས	drinking	skyur 'byams
སྐྱུར་མ	abortion	skyur ma
སྐྱུར་མོ	sour, putrid, rotten	skyur mo
སྐྱུར་མོ་ཚབ༹	sour salt	skyur mo tshva
སྐྱུར་རྩབས	1) chang lees; 2) curds/zho ru rtsi	skyur rtsabs
སྐྱུར་རྩི	kapettha tree, acid, yeast, kind of lemon	skyur rtsi
སྐྱུར་རྩི་ཆུང	smaller species of orange	skyur rtsi chung
སྐྱུར་རྩི་ཆེན་པོ	kind of lemon	skyur rtsi chen po
སྐྱུར་ཚ	sour salt	skyur tsha
སྐྱུར་ཚད་ལྟ་བྱེད	acidity meter	skyur tshad lta byed
སྐྱུར་ཚད་ཡོ་བྱད	acidity meter	skyur tshad yo byad
སྐྱུར་ཚལ	asparagus	skyur tshal
སྐྱུར་རྫས	acid	skyur rdzas
སྐྱུར་ཞོ	curds from fermented buttermilk	skyur zho
སྐྱུར་རུ	sour tasting lees/ juice	skyur ru
སྐྱུར་རུ་ར	crataegus pinnatifida	skyur ru ra
སྐྱུར་རུམ	[arch] tshod ma	skyur rum
སྐྱུར་ལ་ཐོངས	cast it aside; x {'bad pa don med yin gyis skyur la thongs} since all such effort is pointless, cast it aside	skyur la thongs
སྐྱུར་ལོ	sorrel	skyur lo
སྐྱུར་ཤིང	olive tree	skyur shing
སྐྱུས	altogether	skyus
སྐྱུས་ཐོག་གཅིག་པ	mi thog gcig pa'am, tsho thog gcig pa	skyus thog gcig pa
སྐྱུས་ཐོག་པ	altogether	skyus thog pa
སྐྱུས་སུ་ཀློག་པ	to pronounce jointly	skyus su klog pa
སྐྱེ	1) grow; 2) beings; 3) arise, [be] born, give birth	skye
སྐྱེ་ཀ	[arch] magpie	skye ka
སྐྱེ་ཀུན	[in] all [my] lifetimes	skye kun
སྐྱེ་བཀག	birth control, sterilization	skye bkag
སྐྱེ་སྐར	1) birth star. 2) birthday	skye skar
སྐྱེ་སྐར་རྟགས་པ	horoscope	skye skar rtags pa
སྐྱེ་ཁུངས	class, family origin, background	skye khungs
སྐྱེ་མཁན	the thinker 174	skye mkhan
སྐྱེ་གྲོགས	midwifery	skye grogs
སྐྱེ་གྲོགས་སྨན་པ	midwife	skye grogs sman pa
སྐྱེ་གྲོལ	to self-liberate in the moment of arising	skye grol
སྐྱེ་དགག་གནས་གསུམ	Syn {skye 'gags gnas gsum}. the three production, cessation and abiding	skye dgag gnas gsum
སྐྱེ་དགུ	1) [all] [sentient] beings; 2) people, human beings; 3) all [my] births	skye dgu
སྐྱེ་དགུ་བདག་མོ	name of Buddha's wife Yasodhara??? Mahaprajapati stepmother wife, aunt or nurse or some damn thing of Buddha	skye dgu bdag mo
སྐྱེ་དགུ་མདོ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	skye dgu mdo
སྐྱེ་དགུ་མ	queen; lady	skye dgu ma
སྐྱེ་དགུ་མ་རུང	sensate beings	skye dgu ma rung
སྐྱེ་དགུ་མ་རུང་བ	wicked animals	skye dgu ma rung ba
སྐྱེ་དགུ་ཡོངས	all beings	skye dgu yongs
སྐྱེ་དགུ་ཡོངས་གྱི་དཔལ་དུ་ཤར་བ	(you arose as the glory of all beings arising	skye dgu yongs gyi dpal du shar ba
སྐྱེ་དགུའི་བདག་པོ	4th constellation, brahma	skye dgu'i bdag po
སྐྱེ་དགུའི་བདག་མོ	lady of the ruling / merchant caste, queen	skye dgu'i bdag mo
སྐྱེ་དགུའི་བདག་མོ་ཆེན་མོ	Mahaprajapati; 1) name of Buddha's step	skye dgu'i bdag mo chen mo
སྐྱེ་འགག	1) origin/ production and cessation; 2) arising and ceasing	skye 'gag
སྐྱེ་འགག་ཅན	subject to origination and cessation	skye 'gag can
སྐྱེ་འགག་ཆོས་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond phenomena that originate or cease	skye 'gag chos las 'das pa
སྐྱེ་འགག་གཉིས་མེད	devoid of arising and ceasing, uncompounded, unconditioned, permanent [dharmas]	skye 'gag gnyis med
སྐྱེ་འགག་གནས	arising, ceasing, and dwelling (arising, cessation, stillness), arising, ceasing and dwelling	skye 'gag gnas
སྐྱེ་འགག་གནས་གསུམ	arising, dwelling and ceasing	skye 'gag gnas gsum
སྐྱེ་འགག་གནས་གསུམ་དང་བྲལ་བ	does not truly begin, remain, or come to an end	skye 'gag gnas gsum dang bral ba
སྐྱེ་འགག་བྱས་པ	to arise and cease	skye 'gag byas pa
སྐྱེ་འགག་བྱེད་པ	cause to arise and cease	skye 'gag byed pa
སྐྱེ་འགག་མེད	SA skye 'gags med	skye 'gag med
སྐྱེ་འགག་མེད་པ	neither arising nor ceasing	skye 'gag med pa
སྐྱེ་འགགས་གནས་གསུམ	1) arising, dwelling and ceasing; 2) production, cessation and abiding	skye 'gags gnas gsum
སྐྱེ་འགགས་གནས་གསུམ་དང་བྲལ་བ	1) nonarising, nondwelling and unceasing. 2) beyond arising, dwelling and ceasing	skye 'gags gnas gsum dang bral ba
སྐྱེ་འགགས་མེད	no origination or cessation, without beginning or end	skye 'gags med
སྐྱེ་འགགས་མེད་པ	1) free from arising and ceasing; 2) unborn and unceasing	skye 'gags med pa
སྐྱེ་འགགས་མེད་པ་ནམ་མཁའ་འདྲ	has neither birth nor cessation, like space.	skye 'gags med pa nam mkha' 'dra
སྐྱེ་འགགས་མེད་པའི་ངང	while never arising or ceasing	skye 'gags med pa'i ngang
སྐྱེ་འགོག	arising and	skye 'gog
སྐྱེ་འགོག་བྱེད་པ	sterilize	skye 'gog byed pa
སྐྱེ་འགོག་སྨན	birth control pill	skye 'gog sman
སྐྱེ་འགོག་སྨན་བཅོས	birth control treatment	skye 'gog sman bcos
སྐྱེ་འགྱུར	{skye 'gyur gyi lam} - (path) causing new influences to come into being	skye 'gyur
སྐྱེ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལམ	the path that is to arise [in one's stream of being]; path causing new influences to come into being	skye 'gyur gyi lam
སྐྱེ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	karma to appear later	skye 'gyur gyi las
སྐྱེ་འགྲོ	living beings, creatures, sentient beings,	skye 'gro
སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་མང་པོའི་སྲོག་གཅོད་པ	many people would be killed	skye 'gro mang po'i srog gcod pa
སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་མདོག་གསལ	honey	skye 'gro yongs kyi mdog gsal
སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་སྲོག	1) wind; 2) karmic forces	skye 'gro'i srog
སྐྱེ་རྒ་ན་འཆི	birth, old age, sickness and death	skye rga na 'chi
སྐྱེ་རྒ་ན་འཆི་བཞི	the four: birth, old age, sickness and death	skye rga na 'chi bzhi
སྐྱེ་རྒ་ན་འཆིའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness and death	skye rga na 'chi'i sdug bsngal
སྐྱེ་རྒས	by birth and old age, death	skye rgas
སྐྱེ་རྒུ	1) [living/ sentient] being; 2) people, human beings	skye rgu
སྐྱེ་རྒུ་ཀུན་གྱི་མ་ལྟ་བུ	like a mother to all beings	skye rgu kun gyi ma lta bu
སྐྱེ་རྒུ་ཀུན་ལ་ཕན་པ	help all beings	skye rgu kun la phan pa
སྐྱེ་རྒུ་ཆོས་བཞིན་སྤྱོད་པ་ཡིན	I could then do what accords with the Dharma for all beings	skye rgu chos bzhin spyod pa yin
སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མཐའ་དག	1) all beings; 2) crowds of people, masses of humans	skye rgu mtha' dag
སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ	town {skye rgu mdo skye rgu rnams bde bas tshim par mdzad filling all beings with happiness skye rgu rnams tshe lo stong phrag	skye rgu mdo
བརྒྱད་ཅུ་པའི་དུས་སུ	when beings will live for eighty thousand years skye rgu rnams tshe lo ni bzhi khri dang	brgyad cu pa'i dus su
བརྒྱ་ཕྲག	the people in that land lived for forty thousand years	brgya phrag
སྐྱེ་རྒྱལ	human being	skye rgyal
སྐྱེ་རྒྱུད	family line, blood line	skye rgyud
སྐྱེ་རྒྱུད་རྣམ་གཉིས	two birth modes [of Guru rinpoche] ; 1) {mngal skyes}; 2) {rdzus skyes}	skye rgyud rnam gnyis
སྐྱེ་རྒྱུས	story, legend, folk tales	skye rgyus
སྐྱེ་སྒུར	crooked	skye sgur
སྐྱེ་སྒོ	1) door to birth, entrance/gate of rebirth, gateway to birth, womb, vagina; 2) ayatana {skye mched}; 3) face	skye sgo
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་བཀག་པ	birth control	skye sgo bkag pa
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་འགོག་པ	1) blocking the gate of/ not taking rebirth; 2) child prevention, use contraception	skye sgo 'gog pa
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་གཅོད་པ	prevent birth, lock it up, to block the gate of rebirth	skye sgo gcod pa
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་ཆོད་པ	ngan song gsum gyi + to shut the doors to the three lower realms	skye sgo chod pa
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་ཞན་པ	ugly face	skye sgo zhan pa
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་བཞི	Birth, four doors of. Birth from a womb, from an egg, from moist heat, or miraculously	skye sgo bzhi
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་ལེགས	beautiful face	skye sgo legs
སྐྱེ་སྒོ་ལེགས་པ	handsome face	skye sgo legs pa
སྐྱེ་བརྒྱུད	an incarnation	skye brgyud
སྐྱེ་བརྒྱུད་གཉིས	1] {mngal skyes}. 2] {rdzus skyes}	skye brgyud gnyis
སྐྱེ་ངན	bad man, dwarf	skye ngan
སྐྱེ་ངལ	weariness	skye ngal
སྐྱེ་ངེས	repentance	skye nges
སྐྱེ་ངེས་པའི་ལས	a karma which is sure to cause production/ rebirth, action of repentance	skye nges pa'i las
སྐྱེ་ངེས་པར་འགྱུར	will surely arise / take rebirth	skye nges par 'gyur
སྐྱེ་དངོས	living things, organic matter	skye dngos
སྐྱེ་དངོས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	world of living things/ organic matter	skye dngos kyi khams
སྐྱེ་དངོས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	biology	skye dngos kyi rig pa
སྐྱེ་དངོས་རིག་པ	biology	skye dngos rig pa
སྐྱེ་སྔོན་མ	former life	skye sngon ma
སྐྱེ་ཅན	yellow species of sandal wood	skye can
སྐྱེ་ཆ	1) dress, ornament. 2) appearance	skye cha
སྐྱེ་ཆུ་ལྷ་ཁང	the Kyechu Temple at Paro in Bhutan built by Songtsen Gampo	skye chu lha khang
སྐྱེ་ཆེས	birthday	skye ches
སྐྱེ་མཆེད	1) ayatana * " the sources, bases [of cognition], faculty, sense fields/ factors/ spheres/ mediums/ bases, constituent[s of experience, arising expansion [as in {mu bzhi} entrances; 2) perception, ...	skye mched
སེནསེ	bases/factors, sense bases, sources and places of origin of the senses, inner and outward organs of sense, field of extension (consciousness emerges and spreads), sense faculties, experiential medi...	sense
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependence of the ayatanas sense-bases	skye mched kyi rten 'brel
ཐེ་སེནསེ	bases	the sense
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	the nidana/interdependent link of the	skye mched kyi yan lag
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཀྱི་ལྷ	ayatana deities	skye mched kyi lha
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 ayatanas [mig la sogs pa'i rnam par shes pa drug 'byung zhing skye ba'i rgyu'am sgo lta bur gyur pa'i mig dang, rna ba, sna, lce, lus, yid bcas nang gi skye mched dbang po@drug dang, gzugs dang,...	skye mched bcu gnyis
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དངས་པ	luminous complexion	skye mched dangs pa
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དོད་པ	fetus at the stage when nose and ears are being formed	skye mched dod pa
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	six sense fields [one of twelve links of interdependent connection]	skye mched drug
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག་གི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the interdependent link of six sources of perception, the link of the six cognitive faculties, the fifth link in the twelve linked chain of interdependent origination. Def: {yan lag lnga pa ni/ mng...	skye mched drug gi rten 'brel
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག་གིས་མ་འབྱེད་པ	to avoid being caught up in the Six Sense Fields	skye mched drug gis ma 'byed pa
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་རྣམས་བསྡམས་པ	controlled sense bases	skye mched rnams bsdams pa
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་མུ་བཞི	the four perception spheres/formless realms [See {gzugs med pa'i khams bzhi} {gzugs med pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa bzhi} mu here = kind of]	skye mched mu bzhi
ཕོ༹ཨུར་པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན	spheres of Infinite Space, Infinite Consciousness, Nothing Whatsoever, and Neither Presence Nor Absence [of Perception]	four perception
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་མུ་བཞི་ཀྱི་གནས་རིས	Four realms of infinite perception. Same as the 'four Formless Realms.'	skye mched mu bzhi kyi gnas ris
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཞི	the four formless realms/ayatanas	skye mched bzhi
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཟླ་བ	4th month w sun in Taurus	skye mched zla ba
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་གཟུགས་ཅན་ལྔ	the five sense bases w [physical] form/ sense organs	skye mched gzugs can lnga
སྐྱེ་མཆོག་ཚུལ་བཟང	Eminent Person. One of {rnam 'phrul bcu gnyis}. the twelve manifestations of Guru Rinpoche	skye mchog tshul bzang
སྐྱེ་འཆི	birth and death	skye 'chi
བ་རྣམས	being are bound by the destructive emotions, and by birth and death	ba rnams
སྐྱེ་འཆི་གཉིས་སྤངས་པ	who has abandoned birth and death. [samsaric existence]	skye 'chi gnyis spangs pa
སྐྱེ་འཆི་བྱེད	one takes birth and dies	skye 'chi byed
སྐྱེ་འཆི་མེད་པ	without / beyond birth and death, immortal, eternal	skye 'chi med pa
སྐྱེ་འཆི་ལ་ངེས་པ་མེད་པ	nothing is certain about birth and death	skye 'chi la nges pa med pa
སྐྱེ་འཆིའི་རྟགས	signs of birth and death	skye 'chi'i rtags
སྐྱེ་འཆིའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery of birth and death	skye 'chi'i sdug bsngal
སྐྱེ་སཆེད	sources of perception	skye sched
སྐྱེ་འཇིག	1) creation and destruction, production and destruction. 2) to arise and perish	skye 'jig
སྐྱེ་འཇིགས་མེད་པ	does not arise and is indestructible	skye 'jigs med pa
སྐྱེ་འཇུག	birth and entering	skye 'jug
སྐྱེ་གཉིས་པ	twice-born; brahmin	skye gnyis pa
སྐྱེ་རྟགས	skye brtag, divination of births	skye rtags
སྐྱེ་སྟོང	chu shing [banana etc?] w edible fruit	skye stong
སྐྱེ་སྟོན་པ	enacting [the drama of] taking rebirth	skye ston pa
སྐྱེ་སྟོབས	growing/ developing strength	skye stobs
སྐྱེ་སྟོབས་ལྡན་པ	growth, development 177	skye stobs ldan pa
སྐྱེ་བརྟག	divination of births	skye brtag
སྐྱེ་མཐའ་འཆི་ངེས	death inevitably follows birth skye mtha' dpyod pa'i rigs pa mu bzhi CHN	skye mtha' 'chi nges
སྐྱེ་དུས་ནས་བྱུང་བ	congenital	skye dus nas byung ba
སྐྱེ་གདུའི་བདག་པོ	the lord of living creatures	skye gdu'i bdag po
སྐྱེ་བདག	the lord of living creatures; 2) 5th year of the 60 years cycle; 3) Brahma	skye bdag
སྐྱེ་བདུན	brahman seven times	skye bdun
སྐྱེ་བདུན་རིལ་བུ	Seven-rebirth Pills	skye bdun ril bu
སྐྱེ་མདོ	skye rgu mdo	skye mdo
སྐྱེ་མདོ་བ	arise, what arises	skye mdo ba
སྐྱེ་ལྡན	1) sentient beings; 2) world; 3) organic, living	skye ldan
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	organism	skye ldan gyi phung po
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་གྱི་ལུད	organic fertilizer	skye ldan gyi lud
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	effective strength	skye ldan stobs shugs
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་མཐའ་ཡས	durva grass	skye ldan mtha' yas
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་འདྲེས་སྦྱོར	organic synthesis	skye ldan 'dres sbyor
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་ཕྲ་རབ	micro-organism	skye ldan phra rab
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་རྫས་འགྱུར་རིག་པ	organic chemistry	skye ldan rdzas 'gyur rig pa
སྐྱེ་ལྡན་རིག་པ	physiology	skye ldan rig pa
སྐྱེ་ལྡུམ	plantain	skye ldum
སྐྱེ་སྡོང	growing wood, tree, banana	skye sdong
སྐྱེ་ནག་རོང	{skye nag rong district	skye nag rong
སྐྱེ་གནད	main point for making understanding arise	skye gnad
སྐྱེ་གནས	1) source, location for arising [of a sound etc.]. 2) the womb, vagina. 3) birth place. Syn {skye sa}, mode/ process of rebirth	skye gnas
སྐྱེ་གནས་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	interval/ intermediate state of rebirth and life	skye gnas kyi bar do
སྐྱེ་གནས་འཁྲུལ་པའི་ཡུལ་རྐྱེན	deluded object of a birth place	skye gnas 'khrul pa'i yul rkyen
སྐྱེ་གནས་འཆིང་བྱེད	pregnancy	skye gnas 'ching byed
སྐྱེ་གནས་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the birth place/ former lives	skye gnas rje su dran pa
སྐྱེ་གནས་མཐུན་པ	by beings skye ba'i rgyud bsdus pa'i gnas rigs gcig pa ste, beings included in the four manners of birth rang gi skye gnas mthun pa	skye gnas mthun pa
སྐྱེ་གནས་འདམས་བའི་ཐབས	methods for choosing the place of birth	skye gnas 'dams ba'i thabs
སྐྱེ་གནས་རྣམ་དག	purify rebirth	skye gnas rnam dag
སྐྱེ་གནས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four types / modes of birth. 1) {mngal skyes}. 2) {sgong skyes}. 3) {rdzus skyes}. 4) {drod gsher las skyes pa}. 1) Womb-born. 2)	skye gnas rnam pa bzhi
ཨེགག	born. 3) miracle-born. 4) heat-born	egg
སྐྱེ་གནས་རྣམ་བཞི	4 modes of origination(womb, egg, heat-moisture, spontaneous)	skye gnas rnam bzhi
སྐྱེ་གནས་བར་དོ	the bardo of the present life. interval/ intermediate state of rebirth and life. Syn {skye gnas kyi bar do}	skye gnas bar do
སྐྱེ་གནས་མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	action whose result is experienced in a subsequent rebirth	skye gnas myong 'gyur gyi las
སྐྱེ་གནས་ཚད་ལྡན	1) unfruitful, barren. 2) female generative organ	skye gnas tshad ldan
སྐྱེ་གནས་མཚུངས་པ	uterine, ??? siblings	skye gnas mtshungs pa
སྐྱེ་གནས་བཞི	4 states or ways of being born	skye gnas bzhi
ཧེཨཏ	and-moisture-born, womb-born,	heat
ཨནད་ཨེགག	born. Of these four, the first is superior [to the second] and so forth	and egg
སྐྱེ་གནས་བཞི་པོ	four modes of rebirth	skye gnas bzhi po
སྐྱེ་གནས་བཞི་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ་ཡོད	can be born through any of the four modes of birth	skye gnas bzhi las skyes pa yod
སྐྱེ་གནས་རིགས་བཞི	four stations of birth: 1) Birth from the womb {mngal nas skye ba}; 2) birth from an egg {sgo nga las skye ba} 3) birth from moisture {drod sher las skye ba} 4) and miraculous birth {brdzus te skye...	skye gnas rigs bzhi
སྐྱེ་གནས་སུ་འཁྲིད་པར་བྱེད་པ	that which leads to a place of rebirth	skye gnas su 'khrid par byed pa
སྐྱེ་པའི་རབས་གྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	The Garland of Rebirths, Jatakamala, (T 4150) by Aryasura	skye pa'i rabs gyi phreng ba
སྐྱེ་པོ	poor	skye po
སྐྱེ་པོ་བདག་འཛིན་ཅན	1) someone who believes in permanence; 2) eternalist	skye po bdag 'dzin can
སྐྱེ་སྤེལ	having sex and amorous behavior	skye spel
སྐྱེ་སྤྲུལ	1) incarnation. 2) abbr. of {skye ba sprul sku}	skye sprul
སྐྱེ་ཕོ་ནང་ཁུལ་ཆགས་པ	sodomy	skye pho nang khul chags pa
སྐྱེ་འཕགས	the exalted ones	skye 'phags
སྐྱེ་འཕེལ	growth increase [of cattle/ people	skye 'phel
སྐྱེ་འཕེལ་གྱི་ནུས་པ	vitality, virility	skye 'phel gyi nus pa
སྐྱེ་འཕེལ་བྱེད	breed, increase by breeding	skye 'phel byed
སྐྱེ་འཕྲེང	garland/ succession of births	skye 'phreng
སྐྱེ་འཕྲོ་ཆད་པ	child skye mtshams chad pa	skye 'phro chad pa
སྐྱེ་བ	1 (Tha mi dad pa skyes pa, skye ba,; 1) newly arise, be born, give birth; 2) increase, grow; 3) human life	skye ba
སྐྱེ་བ་ཀུན་ཏུ	in all lifetimes	skye ba kun tu
སྐྱེ་བ་དཀར་པོ	skye ba khyad par can thob nas skye ba dang 'gag pa	skye ba dkar po
སྐྱེ་བ་དགུ	Nine-fold birth, nine rebirths. 1) {'dod pa las khams gsum du skye ba}. taking rebirth from the desire realm within the three realms. 2) {gzugs las khams gsum du skye ba}. taking rebirth from the f...	skye ba dgu
སྐྱེ་བ་རྒྱལ	person	skye ba rgyal
སྐྱེ་བ་རྒྱུན་གཅོད	stop the continuance of birth, interrupt continuity of birth	skye ba rgyun gcod
སྐྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་མང་པོར	for many hundreds of births	skye ba brgya phrag mang por
སྐྱེ་བ་བརྒྱུད	many lifetimes	skye ba brgyud
སྐྱེ་བ་བརྒྱུད་པ	continue to be reborn	skye ba brgyud pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ངན་པ	1) an evil rebirth. 2) the three lower realms	skye ba ngan pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	1) causal unreality or relativity of individual ideas. 2) production unreality	skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ་ཉིད	essencelessness of arising / production	skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa nyid
སྐྱེ་བ་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	the superknowledge of rebirth	skye ba mngon par shes pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ལྔ་པ	dung g.yas 'khyil,	skye ba lnga pa
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ	former birth, anterior birth	skye ba snga
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་ཕྱི	in his many lives	skye ba snga phyi
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་ཕྱི་མེད་པ	no past and no future lives	skye ba snga phyi med pa
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་མ	former life	skye ba snga ma
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་མ་དྲན་པ	remember one's previous life / lives	skye ba snga ma dran pa
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་མའི་རེ་ཁ	lines or marks in the hand or head which are supposed to represent the symbols of one's acts in a former life	skye ba snga ma'i re kha
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔ་མའི་ལས་ཉོན	the karma and disturbing emotions of former lives skye ba sngon gyi las kyi bag chags langs	skye ba snga ma'i las nyon
ནས	because of various propensities carried over from previous lives	nas
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔོན་གྱི་ལས་ཀྱིས	as a result of propensities developed in previous lives	skye ba sngon gyi las kyis
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔོན་དྲན་པ	remembered his previous lives	skye ba sngon dran pa
སྐྱེ་བ་སྔོན་མ	previous lives	skye ba sngon ma
སྐྱེ་བ་གཅིག་གིས་ཐོགས་པ	Syn {skye ba gcig thogs}. he who is bound by one more birth, separated from enlightenment by one birth, [the bodhisattva before the attainment of Buddhahood; had but one birth remaining	skye ba gcig gis thogs pa
སྐྱེ་བ་གཅིག་ཐོགས	1) obstructed by 1 lifetime; 2) bodhisattva w only 1 rebirth before enlightenment	skye ba gcig thogs
སྐྱེ་བ་གཅོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of cutting what grows	skye ba gcod pa'i ltung byed
སྐྱེ་བ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of former lives. See {dran pa bcu}	skye ba rjes su dran pa
སྐྱེ་བ་གཏན་གྱི་སོ་ནམ	the lasting harvest	skye ba gtan gyi so nam
སྐྱེ་བ་ཐ་མ	the last rebirth	skye ba tha ma
སྐྱེ་བ་ཐམས་ཅད	{ma 'ongs skye ba thams cad du} in all future lives	skye ba thams cad
སྐྱེ་བ་ཐོག་མ་མེད	beginningless time	skye ba thog ma med
སྐྱེ་བ་མཐུན་པ	the being born of one and the same lineage, the being born on one day	skye ba mthun pa
སྐྱེ་བ་མཐོ་བ	high birth, nobleman, male	skye ba mtho ba
སྐྱེ་བ་ད་རེས	the present life	skye ba da res
སྐྱེ་བ་དང་འགག་པ	arise and cease, come into being and vanish	skye ba dang 'gag pa
སྐྱེ་བ་དང་རྒ་བས	SA skye rgas skye ba dang 'chi 'pho ba 'byung ba'i rten 'brel - the dependent origination of birth and death and transmigration skye ba dang 'chi 'pho ba shes pa'i	skye ba dang rga bas
མཁྱེན་པ	the knowledge of cognizing rebirths and deaths. One of {mkhyen pa gsum} 179 skye ba dang 'chi 'pho ba shes pa'i	mkhyen pa
སྐྱེ་བ་དང་འཇིག་པ	birth and death	skye ba dang 'jig pa
སྐྱེ་བ་དང་ཚེ་རབས	in this and all of our lives; syn {skye ba nas tshe rabs} {skye ba dang tshe rabs thams dad du}	skye ba dang tshe rabs
སྐྱེ་བ་དོན་མེད་པ	a meaningless life	skye ba don med pa
སྐྱེ་བ་དྲན་པ	recollection of [former] lives/ previous incarnations	skye ba dran pa
སྐྱེ་བ་བདུན	the 7 periods of life	skye ba bdun
སྐྱེ་བ་བདུན་ནས་ངེས་པར་གྲོལ	you will for certain be liberated after seven births	skye ba bdun nas nges par grol
སྐྱེ་བ་འདི	this life/ lifetime	skye ba 'di
སྐྱེ་བ་འདི་ཡི་ཨོག་ཏུ	in our next life	skye ba 'di yi og tu
སྐྱེ་བ་འདི་ལ	in this my present period of life	skye ba 'di la
སྐྱེ་བ་འདིའི་ཕྱི་མར	after this life	skye ba 'di'i phyi mar
སྐྱེ་བ་འདིའི་འོག་ཏུ	in the next life	skye ba 'di'i 'og tu
སྐྱེ་བ་ནས་ཚེ་རབས	in life after life, throughout a / our series of lifetimes	skye ba nas tshe rabs
སྐྱེ་བ་པོ	sentient beng	skye ba po
སྐྱེ་བ་པྱི་མ	future birth, future existence	skye ba pyi ma
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤེལ	copulate	skye ba spel
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	born, incarnated nirmanakaya, the emanation body of a Buddha by birth. One of {sprul sku rnam gsum}. 3 types of emanation body	skye ba sprul sku
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ལམ་འཁྱེར	taking birth as a path to attain an Emanation body	skye ba sprul sku'i lam 'khyer
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་པ	an incarnation	skye ba sprul pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མ	later births/ lives, the following life, future rebirths, next life	skye ba phyi ma
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མ་ཕན་ཆད་དུ	in future lifetimes, other than the next	skye ba phyi ma phan chad du
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མའི་འཕྲོ་མཐུད	continue to the following rebirth	skye ba phyi ma'i 'phro mthud
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མའི་ཡང་སྲིད	reincarnation	skye ba phyi ma'i yang srid
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མར	in the next life	skye ba phyi mar
སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྲ་མོ	1) insect, germ, etc. 2) sprout, seedling. 3) subtle rebirth, bardo body	skye ba phra mo
སྐྱེ་བ་འཕོ་པ	to transmigrate [of souls passing from one body to another at death]	skye ba 'pho pa
སྐྱེ་བ་བར་མ	intermediate state before birth GD	skye ba bar ma
སྐྱེ་བ་བླང་པ	rebirth	skye ba blang pa
སྐྱེ་བ་བླང་བ	take rebirth	skye ba blang ba
སྐྱེ་བ་བླངས་པ	took rebirth, was born as	skye ba blangs pa
སྐྱེ་བ་མེད	unborn, non-arising	skye ba med
སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པ	no rebirth, non-genesis, without origination, nonproduction, nonarising, [unborn {skyes med}.]. uncreated, lacking production, beyond birth / arising. One of {chos mnyam pa nyid bcu}	skye ba med pa
སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད	acceptance of the nature of nonarising	skye ba med pa'i chos la bzod
སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ	Acceptance of the nature of nonarising	skye ba med pa'i chos la bzod pa
སྐྱེ་བ་མོ	bud med,	skye ba mo
སྐྱེ་བ་དམན	woman	skye ba dman
སྐྱེ་བ་དམན་པ	woman sm {skye med} ??	skye ba dman pa
སྐྱེ་བ་དམའ་བ	low birth, ignoble, woman	skye ba dma' ba
སྐྱེ་བ་མཚུངས་པ་དེ་དག	beings who will take birth within a similar class	skye ba mtshungs pa de dag
སྐྱེ་བ་འཛིན	have a rebirth	skye ba 'dzin
སྐྱེ་བ་འཛིན་ཏོ	took rebirth	skye ba 'dzin to
སྐྱེ་བ་གཞན	{bdag gi sngon skye ba gzhan mang por} throughout many lives	skye ba gzhan
སྐྱེ་བ་གཞན་དུ	in an earlier life	skye ba gzhan du
སྐྱེ་བ་གཞན་དུ་ཡང	in other lives also	skye ba gzhan du yang
སྐྱེ་བ་བཞི	1) {mngal nas skye ba}. 2) {sgo las skye ba}. 3) {drod gsher las skye ba}	skye ba bzhi
སྐྱེ་བ་བཞེས་པ	accept rebirth	skye ba bzhes pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ཟད་པ	the cessation of birth, the cessation of uncontrolled birth which is due to karma	skye ba zad pa
སྐྱེ་བ་བཟང་པོ	1) a good rebirth; 2) the higher realms	skye ba bzang po
སྐྱེ་བ་ཡང་མེད་འགག་པ་ཡང་མེད	neither arising nor ceasing	skye ba yang med 'gag pa yang med
སྐྱེ་བ་རིག་པ	inherited intelligence	skye ba rig pa
སྐྱེ་བ་རིམ་གསུམ	the three phases of birth	skye ba rim gsum
སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་མངོན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པ	1 who proceeds to birth	skye ba la mngon du phyogs pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu 180	skye ba la dbang
སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་དབང་བ	freedom / mastery of / over rebirth, he who has control over birth. One of {dbang bcu}	skye ba la dbang ba
སྐྱེ་བ་ལེན	be born	skye ba len
སྐྱེ་བ་ལེན་པ	to take rebirth; to take birth / rebirth, be reborn, reincarnate	skye ba len pa
སྐྱེ་བ་ལེན་ཚུལ	modes of rebirth	skye ba len tshul
སྐྱེ་བ་ལེན་ཚུལ་བཞི	four modes of taking birth. Syn {skye gnas rnam pa bzhi}	skye ba len tshul bzhi
སྐྱེ་བ་ཤེས་པ	cognition of rebirth	skye ba shes pa
སྐྱེ་བ་གསུམ་པ	the life after the next	skye ba gsum pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཀུན་ཉོན	all afflicting klesha of birth/ production	skye ba'i kun nyon
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	1) birth group of bad thoughts; 2) defiling influence of phenomenal being	skye ba'i kun nas nyon mongs pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་རྐྱེན	conditions for rebirth	skye ba'i rkyen
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཁུངས	origin of arising	skye ba'i khungs
སྐྱེ་བའི་རྒྱུ	causes for rebirth	skye ba'i rgyu
སྐྱེ་བའི་རྒྱུན	continuity of arising	skye ba'i rgyun
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྒོ	avenue of birth	skye ba'i sgo
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྒོ་ཆོད	can close the doors of rebirth in	skye ba'i sgo chod
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྒོར་གྱུར་པ	which is the door to a rebirth	skye ba'i sgor gyur pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆ་ཅན	dog	skye ba'i cha can
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆུ་བོ	chu bo bzhi'i gras shig	skye ba'i chu bo
སྐྱེ་བའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related birth	skye ba'i rten 'brel
སྐྱེ་བའི་མཐའ	extreme/ limitation of origination	skye ba'i mtha'
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery of birth	skye ba'i sdug bsngal
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྡོག་ཕྱོགས	the opposite of arising	skye ba'i sdog phyogs
སྐྱེ་བའི་གནས	place of birth	skye ba'i gnas
སྐྱེ་བའི་གནས་སྐབས	the time of birth	skye ba'i gnas skabs
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	birth emanation; incarnated nirmanakaya; emanation of/ by birth	skye ba'i sprul sku
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྤྲུལ་པ	{skye ba'i sprul sku} emanation through conscious rebirth	skye ba'i sprul pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཕུར་བུ	epithet of Vishnu	skye ba'i phur bu
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཕྱི་མར	in your next birth	skye ba'i phyi mar
སྐྱེ་བའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	active causal force of	skye ba'i byed rgyu
ཨོན	set	on
སྐྱེ་བའི་དབང་པོ	lord of beings	skye ba'i dbang po
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཚུལ	way of taking rebirth skye ba'i zhing la dge dang mi dge'i sa	skye ba'i tshul
བོན་གང་བཏབ	whatever seeds of virtue or nonvirtue you plant in the field of your life skye ba'i zhing la bsod nams kyi sa bon btab nas smon lam gyi mtha' btsan pa	bon gang btab
དགོས་པ	when the seeds of merit are planted in the fields of life, they need to be secured by prayers of virtuous aspiration	dgos pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཟླ་བ	the tenth Hor month	skye ba'i zla ba
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཡན་ལག	nidana/ link of [re]birth	skye ba'i yan lag
སྐྱེ་བའི་ཡུལ	birth place	skye ba'i yul
སྐྱེ་བའི་རིམ་པ	process of taking birth	skye ba'i rim pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་རིམ་གསུམ	three phases of birth	skye ba'i rim gsum
སྐྱེ་བའི་ལམ་སྟེར	mother [lit. she who gives the road of life]	skye ba'i lam ster
སྐྱེ་བའི་སྲིད་པ	the existence of rebirth	skye ba'i srid pa
སྐྱེ་བའི་བསམ་གཏན	the effect of attainment of a particular stage of meditation as outlined by its cause, meditation effect or attainment	skye ba'i bsam gtan
སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	will be born, will arise	skye bar 'gyur ba
སྐྱེ་བར་བྱེད་པ	make arise	skye bar byed pa
སྐྱེ་བར་འཚོལ	yearn for a rebirth	skye bar 'tshol
སྐྱེ་བས་རྒྱལ	man	skye bas rgyal
སྐྱེ་བས་ཐོབ་པ	1) naturally occurring by [the situation of one's] birth, naturally arising	skye bas thob pa
སྐྱེ་བས་ཐོབ་པའི་དགེ་བ	{sngon goms pa'i rgyus tshe 'dir ngang gis dge ba byed pa thob pa} 'Birth-obtained virtues' are the acquirement of spontaneously performed virtues in this lifetime due to the causes of former habit...	skye bas thob pa'i dge ba
སྐྱེ་བས་ཐོབ་པའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{mi dge ba dang dge ba zag bcas kyi rnam smin rnams so} 'Birth-obtained indeterminates' are all the ripenings of defiling virtues and nonvirtues.	skye bas thob pa'i lung ma bstan
སྐྱེ་བས་མཐོ	of high birth, man	skye bas mtho
སྐྱེ་བས་འཐོབ	inheritance, heritage	skye bas 'thob
སྐྱེ་བས་དབེན་པ	solitary/single man	skye bas dben pa
སྐྱེ་བས་དམན་པ	woman, inferior birth	skye bas dman pa
སྐྱེ་བུ	being [thd]	skye bu
སྐྱེ་བེམ	felt cloak	skye bem
སྐྱེ་བོ	1) sentient being. 2) person, human being, ordinary men / people / beings, living creature. 3) mankind; beings	skye bo
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཀུན	all beings/ people	skye bo kun
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཀུན་གྱི་བདེ་དོན	for the good of all beings/ people	skye bo kun gyi bde don
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཀུན་གྱིས	all people	skye bo kun gyis
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཀུན་འཇུག	whore house, prostitute	skye bo kun 'jug
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཀུན་ནས་འདྲེན་པ	leading beings	skye bo kun nas 'dren pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་བཀྲེས་པ	hungry person	skye bo bkres pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་མཁས་པ	intellectual people	skye bo mkhas pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་དགེ་བ	a virtuous person 181	skye bo dge ba
སྐྱེ་བོ་ངན་པ	weak human beings	skye bo ngan pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་མངོན་ཞེན་ཅན	an attached person skye bo nyon mongs pa can la rjes su	skye bo mngon zhen can
བརྩེ་བ	be loving towards people with disturbing emotions	brtse ba
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཐ་མལ	ordinary beings	skye bo tha mal
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཐ་མལ་པ	an ordinary person, superior man, saint	skye bo tha mal pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཐ་མལ་བ	common/ ordinary people, [superior man, saint]	skye bo tha mal ba
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཐམས་ཅད	all the people	skye bo thams cad
སྐྱེ་བོ་དམ་པ	exalted being, good person, holy man, incarnate being	skye bo dam pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་གནས་པ	inhabited place, hamlet	skye bo gnas pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས	the people	skye bo rnams
སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་བདེ་སྐྱིད་དང་ལྡན	all were happy	skye bo rnams bde skyid dang ldan
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕལ་པ	ordinary person, commoner, the people, the public	skye bo phal pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕན་པ	the benefit of ordinary people	skye bo phal po che'i phan pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ	most ordinary beings/ commoners	skye bo phal mo che
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕོ་མོ	men and women	skye bo pho mo
སྐྱེ་བོ་དབེན་པ	solitary man	skye bo dben pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་མང་པོ	many beings / men	skye bo mang po
སྐྱེ་བོ་མན	many men	skye bo man
སྐྱེ་བོ་རྨོངས་པ	ignorant people	skye bo rmongs pa
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཚན་པོ	nobleman, great man, crowd	skye bo tshan po
སྐྱེ་བོ་ཚན་པོ་ཆེ	large number of men	skye bo tshan po che
སྐྱེ་བོ་གསོ་ཐིག	a treatise on ethics by nagarjuna	skye bo gso thig
སྐྱེ་བོའི་སྐྲ་ཅན	coquettish woman	skye bo'i skra can
སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཅོད་པན	hat	skye bo'i cod pan
སྐྱེ་བོའི་གཏམ	popular talk, rumor	skye bo'i gtam
སྐྱེ་བོའི་བདག་པོ	"the Lord of living creatures" [epith. of Brahma]	skye bo'i bdag po
སྐྱེ་བོའི་འདུ་འཛི	commotion	skye bo'i 'du 'dzi
སྐྱེ་བོའི་གནས	shelter; inn, caravansary	skye bo'i gnas
སྐྱེ་བོའི་གནས་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve dwelling places of men	skye bo'i gnas bcu gnyis
སྐྱེ་བོའི་སྤྱོད་པ	people's behavior	skye bo'i spyod pa
སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཚོགས	assembly, crowd	skye bo'i tshogs
སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཚོགས་ཅན	queen of the harlots	skye bo'i tshogs can
སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཚོགས་ཐམས་ཅད	all those gathered	skye bo'i tshogs thams cad
སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཤེས་རྒྱུད	the minds of beings	skye bo'i shes rgyud
སྐྱེ་བོས་བསྐུར་མ	madam of a whore house	skye bos bskur ma
སྐྱེ་བོས་ཐོས་པ	rumor	skye bos thos pa
སྐྱེ་བོས་དབེན་པ	solitary man	skye bos dben pa
སྐྱེ་བྲི་མེད་པ	neither increases nor decreases	skye bri med pa
སྐྱེ་འབྲས	skye gzugs te the body	skye 'bras
སྐྱེ་སྦྱང་མྱོང་གསུམ	birth, learning and experience skye sbyang myong gsum gyi yon tan knowledge by birth, learning and experience	skye sbyang myong gsum
སྐྱེ་མ	1) woman; 2) night	skye ma
སྐྱེ་མ་མོ	woman	skye ma mo
སྐྱེ་མེད	unoriginatedness, unoriginated, unborn, never becomes what it seems to be, does not come about,	skye med
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཀྱི་བྱིན་རླབས	blessings of the nonarising	skye med kyi byin rlabs
ཐེ་ནོན	arising/unborn	the non
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཀློང	expanse of non-arising	skye med klong
སྐྱེ་མེད་གྱི་ཚྭ	inorganic salt	skye med gyi tshwa
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of the nonarising of all things, the patience of nonarising of phenomena, [anutpattika-dharma-kshanti]	skye med chos kyi bzod pa
སྐྱེ་མེད་འཆི་མེད	nomad cattle she la gtong skabs every year 'phel shi gang byung ma brtsis par thog mar rtsis sprad pa'i kha grangs de rang la she mar bsdu ba'i lam lugs shig	skye med 'chi med
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཉིད	nonarising	skye med nyid
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཏི་ལ་ཀའི་ལུང	Nonarising Tilaka Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	skye med ti la ka'i lung
སྐྱེ་མེད་དོན	unborn reality	skye med don
སྐྱེ་མེད་དོན་གྱི་གསུང	the ultimate	skye med don gyi gsung
སྤེཨེཆ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	arising/ the unborn	speech of non
སྐྱེ་མེད་བདེ་ཆེན	great bliss/ mahasukha of the unborn	skye med bde chen
སྐྱེ་མེད་སྡུག་ཟད	skyid med sdug zad	skye med sdug zad
སྐྱེ་མེད་པ	nonarising	skye med pa
སྐྱེ་མེད་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	nonarising and devoid of constructs	skye med spros bral
སྐྱེ་མེད་བཙན་ས	the stronghold / royal throne of nonarising. Syn nirvana	skye med btsan sa
སྐྱེ་མེད་བཙན་ས་ཟིན་པ	attained to an exalted state of existence from which there is no rebirth	skye med btsan sa zin pa
སྐྱེ་མེད་རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རིག་པ	inorganic chemistry	skye med rdzas sbyor gyi rig pa
སྐྱེ་མེད་ཟང་ཐལ	non-arising openness	skye med zang thal
སྐྱེ་མེད་རང་གྲོལ	nonarising selfliberation	skye med rang grol
སྐྱེ་མེད་རང་རིག	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	skye med rang rig
སྐྱེ་མེད་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཛོད	Treasury of the Nonarising Jewel	skye med rin po che'i mdzod
སྐྱེ་མེད་ལུད་རྫས	inorganic fertilizer	skye med lud rdzas
སྐྱེ་དམན	wife, low birth, ignoble, woman, female, woman, female	skye dman
སྐྱེ་དམན་གྱི	feminine	skye dman gyi
སྐྱེ་དམན་གྱི་སྤུན་ཀྱག	sister/ brotherin-law	skye dman gyi spun kyag
བྲོཐེར	in-low	brother
སྐྱེ་དམན་གྱི་སྨད་གོས་ཞིག	skirt	skye dman gyi smad gos zhig
སྐྱེ་དམན་གྱི་ཟླ	period	skye dman gyi zla
སྐྱེ་དམན་གྱི་ཟླ་ཁྲག	menstruation	skye dman gyi zla khrag
སྐྱེ་དམན་གཉིས་པ	concubine	skye dman gnyis pa
སྐྱེ་དམན་འདྲ་པོ	effeminate	skye dman 'dra po
སྐྱེ་དམན་རྫོར་པོ	slut 182	skye dman rdzor po
སྐྱེ་དམན་གཞོན་གཞོན	dame	skye dman gzhon gzhon
སྐྱེ་དམན་ཧྲང་ཧྲང	spinster	skye dman hrang hrang
སྐྱེ་དམའ	low birth, ignoble, woman	skye dma'
སྐྱེ་བམེད་པ	non-arising	skye bmed pa
སྐྱེ་རྨོངས	a deluded / ignorant person	skye rmongs
སྐྱེ་ཚུལ	way of arising	skye tshul
སྐྱེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	the progressive stages of arising	skye tshul gyi rim pa
སྐྱེ་ཚེ	mustard, birthday	skye tshe
སྐྱེ་ཚེའི་འབྲུ	mustard grain	skye tshe'i 'bru
སྐྱེ་ཚེས	birthday, birth date	skye tshes
སྐྱེ་འཛིན	female genitals	skye 'dzin
སྐྱེ་ཞིང་སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	life after life, birth after birth, in this and future births	skye zhing skye bar 'gyur ba
སྐྱེ་ཞིང་མཆེད་པ	arise and proliferate	skye zhing mched pa
སྐྱེ་གཞི་རྫས་ཕྲ	cell [bio]	skye gzhi rdzas phra
སྐྱེ་བཞིན་པ	while arising	skye bzhin pa
སྐྱེ་ཟུག	labor pains	skye zug
སྐྱེ་ཟླ	month in which one is born	skye zla
སྐྱེ་གཟིགས	outward form	skye gzigs
སྐྱེ་གཟུགས	face and body shape	skye gzugs
སྐྱེ་བཟང་བྱི་བ	shedding/ losing hair	skye bzang byi ba
སྐྱེ་ཡི	sediment, dregs	skye yi
སྐྱེ་ཡི་སྤྲུལ་པ	Syn {skye ba sprul pa}	skye yi sprul pa
སྐྱེ་ཡུལ	birth place, native home, place of birth	skye yul
སྐྱེ་ཡོད་འཆི་ཡོད	sngar 'brog pa la gnag phyugs she la gtong skabs lo re 'phel shi gang byung zhib rtsis brgyab ste she mar bsdu ba'i lam lugs shig go ma gsum bu gnyis dang, ma lnga@bu gnyis sogs grangs ka brtsis pa...	skye yod 'chi yod
སྐྱེ་རགས	girdle	skye rags
སྐྱེ་རགས་ཕྲ་བོ	fine sash	skye rags phra bo
སྐྱེ་རབས	1) the Jataka-mala; 2) lifetimes, series/ succession of lives, the chain of	skye rabs
སྐྱེ་རབས་ཐང་ཀ	painting representing the chain of former existences of saints or incarnate lamas	skye rabs thang ka
སྐྱེ་རབས་གསོལ་འདེབས	prayer to obtain a happy rebirth??	skye rabs gsol 'debs
སྐྱེ་རིག	physiology	skye rig
སྐྱེ་རེ	straight, upright	skye re
སྐྱེ་རེ་ལང་བ	erect	skye re lang ba
སྐྱེ་རོགས	skye g.yog, midwife	skye rogs
སྐྱེ་ལ་སྐྱེས	illness	skye la skyes
སྐྱེ་ལ་དྲ་བ་དགོགས་པའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning that refutes the resembling product [thd]	skye la dra ba dgogs pa'i rigs pa
སྐྱེ་ལག	diminished	skye lag
སྐྱེ་ལུགས་གསུམ	the three stages of arising. 1) {go ba}. 2) {myong ba}. 3) {rtogs pa}	skye lugs gsum
སྐྱེ་ལེན	midwifery	skye len
སྐྱེ་ལེན་པ	midwife	skye len pa
སྐྱེ་ལེན་བྱེད	act as midwife	skye len byed
སྐྱེ་ཤི	birth and death	skye shi
སྐྱེ་ཤི་དང་འདུ་འབྲལ་མེད་པ	beyond birth and death	skye shi dang 'du 'bral med pa
སྐྱེ་ཤི་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of birth and death	skye shi dang bral ba
སྐྱེ་ཤིང	tree with a huge trunk	skye shing
སྐྱེ་ཤིའི་བར་དོ	the bardo between birth and death, ordinary waking consciousness during the present lifetime	skye shi'i bar do
སྐྱེ་ཤུགས	growth, growing power	skye shugs
སྐྱེ་ས	place/ station of birth, homeland, native land	skye sa
སྐྱེ་ས་མཐོ་པོ	high status / birth	skye sa mtho po
སྐྱེ་ས་དམན	lowborn, of ignoble birth	skye sa dman
སྐྱེ་ས་དམའ་པོ	low status / birth	skye sa dma' po
སྐྱེ་སེར་གྱི་རླུང	cold north wind	skye ser gyi rlung
སྐྱེ་སོགས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	having the nature of birth etc	skye sogs kyi rang bzhin can
སྐྱེ་སོགས་རྣམ་པར་དབེན་པ	free from arising etc sm {don dam pa}	skye sogs rnam par dben pa
སྐྱེ་སྲིད	1) reincarnation; 2) existence of rebirth; 3) father; 4) the birth state; 5) the very moment of conception in the mother's womb	skye srid
སྐྱེ་སྲིད་ས་བོན	father	skye srid sa bon
སྐྱེ་སྲིད་ས་བོན་པ	father	skye srid sa bon pa
སྐྱེ་སྲིན་ས་བོན	father	skye srin sa bon
སྐྱེ་བསུ	when a child is born ma bu bde grol yong ba'i bya ba	skye bsu
སྐྱེག	misfortune	skyeg
སྐྱེག་ཚེས	paint, rouge	skyeg tshes
སྐྱེགས	violet color	skyegs
སྐྱེང	be ashamed, be shy, ashamed, bashful, embarrassed, embarrassment	skyeng
སྐྱེང་པ	shame, bashfulness, embarrassment	skyeng pa
སྐྱེང་བ	to be ashamed, to be shy, ashamed, bashful, embarrassed, embarrassment	skyeng ba
སྐྱེང་ས	be ashamed, be shy, ashamed, bashful, embarrassed, embarrassment	skyeng sa
སྐྱེང་སེར	chill	skyeng ser
སྐྱེང་སེར་རླུང	cold wind	skyeng ser rlung
སྐྱེངས	embarrassed	skyengs
སྐྱེངས་སྟབས	bashful, modest, ashamed	skyengs stabs
སྐྱེངས་ནས	embarrassed	skyengs nas
སྐྱེངས་པ	embarrassed	skyengs pa
སྐྱེངས་པ་མེད	shameless, brazen	skyengs pa med
སྐྱེངས་བ་མེད	shameless	skyengs ba med
སྐྱེངས་ཤིང་ཁྲོས་པ	embarrassed and angry	skyengs shing khros pa
སྐྱེངས་ཤིང་བསྔགས་འོས་མིན	embarrassing and not worthy of praise	skyengs shing bsngags 'os min
སྐྱེད	formation, generation, news, SA skyes, growth, progress, increase, interest, profit, gain, to grow, increase, widen,\	skyed
སྐྱེད་ཀ	profit, interest	skyed ka
སྐྱེད་བཀག	interest/profit cut off [dus sgo gtsang mtshams skyed bkag gis the principal is phyir bslog [cast out? lost?	skyed bkag
སྐྱེད་སྐྲུན	1) means of increasing; 2) increase/ yield from the seed/ principal; 3) becoming more/ better	skyed skrun
སྐྱེད་ཁ	profit, interest, dividend skyed kha chen por bu long gtong mkhan - usurer	skyed kha
སྐྱེད་ཁེ	profit, interest	skyed khe
སྐྱེད་མཁན	the producer, creator, the 1 who gives rise to	skyed mkhan
སྐྱེད་གུ	beings	skyed gu
སྐྱེད་གུ་བདུད་ལམ	beings who live like demons	skyed gu bdud lam
སྐྱེད་གྱིས་འཚོ་བ	nurse up	skyed gyis 'tsho ba
སྐྱེད་གྲོང	place on nepal border where wo ti bzang po is located	skyed grong
སྐྱེད་འགོག	birth and death. production and cessation	skyed 'gog
སྐྱེད་སྒོ	door of rebirth	skyed sgo
སྐྱེད་ཅན	yielding interest or profit, sandal wood called snake's heart	skyed can
སྐྱེད་ཅིག	let it grow up, let it thrive	skyed cig
སྐྱེད་ཅིང་རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ལས	an action which produces and brings to completion	skyed cing rdzogs par byed pa'i las
སྐྱེད་ལྕི	high interest	skyed lci
སྐྱེད་ཆག	redirection in interest	skyed chag
སྐྱེད་ཆག་གཏོང	reduce interest rate	skyed chag gtong
སྐྱེད་ཆའི་བུ་ལོན	high interest loan	skyed cha'i bu lon
སྐྱེད་ཆེ	grew up much faster; x {byis pa rtse dga' dang bcas gzhan las skyed che zhing} the child was happy and kind, and grew up much faster than others	skyed che
སྐྱེད་ཆེ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	grow much	skyed che bar 'gyur ba
སྐྱེད་མཆེད་དྲུག	six senses	skyed mched drug
སྐྱེད་གཏོང་བྱེད	lend on interest	skyed gtong byed
སྐྱེད་གཏོང་བྱེད་པ	to lend on interest	skyed gtong byed pa
སྐྱེད་ཐོག	compound interest	skyed thog
སྐྱེད་ཐོན	progress, advance, development, profit	skyed thon
སྐྱེད་ཐོན་རྒྱུ	progress	skyed thon rgyu
སྐྱེད་དང་གསལ	develop and visualize	skyed dang gsal
སྐྱེད་དུ་གཏང་བ	lay out or give on interest	skyed du gtang ba
སྐྱེད་འདོན	make a profit, advance one's purposes	skyed 'don
སྐྱེད་པ	thrown, dropped	skyed pa
སྐྱེད་པ་པོ	progenitor, disposer. Syn {skyed mkhan}. 1) creator, procreator, generator. 2) father. 3) fire, god of fire	skyed pa po
སྐྱེད་པའི་ཡུམ	mother who gave birth to	skyed pa'i yum
སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད	it will cause	skyed par byed
སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	that which produces / makes arise	skyed par byed pa
སྐྱེད་པོ	father	skyed po
སྐྱེད་སྤེལ་བྱེད་པ	to breed	skyed spel byed pa
སྐྱེད་སྤོགས	interest from money	skyed spogs
སྐྱེད་འཕེལ	increasing yields/ profit, reproduction, copying	skyed 'phel
སྐྱེད་འཕེལ་བྱེད	reproduce, copy	skyed 'phel byed
སྐྱེད་བུ	hearth	skyed bu
སྐྱེད་བྱ་འབྲས་བུ	the result which is produced	skyed bya 'bras bu
སྐྱེད་བྱེད	1) the producer; 2) the navel chakra	skyed byed
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	the producing cause	skyed byed kyi rgyu
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་རྐྱེན་བཞི	4 generating	skyed byed rkyen bzhi
ཅཽསེ	factors, SA rgyu rkyen, bdag rkyen, dmigs rkyen, mtshungs pa de ma thag pa'i rkyen	cause
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་འཁོར་ལོ	generating chakra	skyed byed 'khor lo
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	creative cause, ignorance	skyed byed rgyu
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་དང་པོའི་འཁོར་ལོ	the generating first wheel / chakra	skyed byed dang po'i 'khor lo
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་དུ	at the generating chakra	skyed byed du
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་པ	blowing	skyed byed pa
སྐྱེད་བྱེད་མ	mother, shadow, shade	skyed byed ma
སྐྱེད་འབབ	accrue	skyed 'bab
སྐྱེད་འབྲུ	farmers in payment for each 'bo grain measure given out give back in harvested grain four bre measures	skyed 'bru
སྐྱེད་མ	mother, shadow, shade	skyed ma
སྐྱེད་མེད	non-origination, interest free	skyed med
སྐྱེད་མེད་དངུལ་བུན	interest free loan	skyed med dngul bun
སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ	pleasure grove, garden, park	skyed mos tshal
སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་དུ་རྩེ་ཞིང་རོལ་ལོ	went to disport in the pleasure gardens	skyed mos tshal du rtse zhing rol lo
སྐྱེད་དམན	woman, wife	skyed dman
སྐྱེད་རྩིས	calculate the profit/ interest/ yield	skyed rtsis
སྐྱེད་ཚད	interest/ growth rate	skyed tshad
སྐྱེད་ཚལ	grove, tibetan park, artificial grove, grove or garden attached to a house	skyed tshal
སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཁོ་བི་ད་རའི་དྲུང་དུ	in the garden of Kobidara [in the Heaven of	skyed tshal kho bi da ra'i drung du
ཐེ་ཋིརཏཡ	Three] skyed tshal gyi khug cig tu sbas nas bzhag - hid in a hollow of the garden	the Thirty
སྐྱེད་ཚལ་གྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the garden	skyed tshal gyi lha
སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become a park, garden, pleasure grove	skyed tshal can du 'gyur
སྐྱེད་རྫོགས	two kinds of degrees of meditation	skyed rdzogs
སྐྱེད་བཞེས་གནང	bzhes	skyed bzhes gnang
སྐྱེད་ཡོང	shall make progress	skyed yong
སྐྱེད་ར	1) fence of park, garden, pleasure grove; 2) profit, interest, dividend	skyed ra
སྐྱེད་རིམ	development stage	skyed rim
སྐྱེད་སྲིང	to rear, bring up, foster, train [children]	skyed sring
སྐྱེད་སྲིང་བ	bring up, train up, rear	skyed sring ba
སྐྱེད་སྲིད	bringing up, fostering, rearing	skyed srid
སྐྱེད་སྲིད་བྱེད	bringing up, fostering, rearing	skyed srid byed
སྐྱེད་གསོ	nourish/ nurse a child	skyed gso
སྐྱེད་བསྲིང	bringing up, fostering, rearing	skyed bsring
སྐྱེན	1) thorn. 2) wild mountain goat	skyen
སྐྱེན་ཐུབ	patience	skyen thub
སྐྱེན་པ	1) quick, swift, hasty; 2) dexterous, skillful, nimble, talented, artistic, sharp; 3) easy	skyen pa
སྐྱེན་པོ	1) quick, fast; 2) easy; 3) clever and learned/ capable, dexterous, sharp, capable	skyen po
སྐྱེན་ཟིན་སྐྱེན་བྱེད	to do quickly	skyen zin skyen byed
སྐྱེན་ཡང་བ	quickly arising, powerful, skilled	skyen yang ba
སྐྱེན་ལ	upwards	skyen la
སྐྱེན་སེལ	blessing of protective rituals	skyen sel
སྐྱེམ	drink, beverage, get/be thirsty	skyem
སྐྱེམ་པ	be thirsty [h]	skyem pa
སྐྱེམ་བྱེད	1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags	skyem byed
སྐྱེམ་བྱེད་མ	the goddess Ishvari, Durga	skyem byed ma
སྐྱེམ་བཞེས	drink	skyem bzhes
སྐྱེམ་ཤོག	Tibetan paper of the best quality	skyem shog
སྐྱེམས	1) beverage, drink, beer, drinkable water, cup, dish; 2) thirst	skyems
སྐྱེམས་ཆང	chang, beer	skyems chang
སྐྱེམས་ཆུ	drinking/drinkable water	skyems chu
སྐྱེམས་སྟོང་རྫོང	fort where fine paper is manufactured	skyems stong rdzong
སྐྱེམས་དྲངས	offered beverages	skyems drangs
སྐྱེམས་འདྲེན་པ	offer honored person a drink	skyems 'dren pa
སྐྱེམས་ཚུག	cup, dish	skyems tshug
སྐྱེམས་བཞེས	drink	skyems bzhes
སྐྱེམས་བཞེས་པ	accept an offered drink	skyems bzhes pa
སྐྱེམས་བཟང	pleasant beverage like wine or tea	skyems bzang
སྐྱེམས་སིང	small beer cup	skyems sing
སྐྱེམས་གསོལ	beverage, drink	skyems gsol
སྐྱེའུ	child, kid, infant, baby	skye'u
སྐྱེར	getting; x {khong gi res 'ga' ni grims ches res 'ga' ni lhod che bas sgom yang dag pa skyer ma btub} Shrona had great difficulty getting it right, sometimes he was too tense, sometimes too relaxed	skyer
སྐྱེར་དཀར	berberis dasystachya maxim., berberis vernae schneid, berberis vulgaris l.	skyer dkar
སྐྱེར་སྐྱ	reddish brown	skyer skya
སྐྱེར་སྐྱེར	solitary	skyer skyer
སྐྱེར་ཁ	kind of dye, color, yellow dye, light yellow color	skyer kha
སྐྱེར་ཁན་ད	confection skyer pa useful in eye diseases	skyer khan da
སྐྱེར་ཆུ	a river of spa gro in Bhutan	skyer chu
སྐྱེར་ཆུའི་ལྷ་ཁང	Kyerchu Temple	skyer chu'i lha khang
སྐྱེར་མདའ	a wooden arrow	skyer mda'
སྐྱེར་པ	barberry plant and wood from which yellow dye is extracted, yellow plant, berberis aristata, indian barberry, prickly bush, berberis asiatica, kind of barberry	skyer pa
སྐྱེར་པ་ཤིང	yellow tree, berberry	skyer pa shing
སྐྱེར་བ	a plant from which a kind of yellow dye is made in tibet	skyer ba
སྐྱེར་དམན	see {skyes dman} woman	skyer dman
སྐྱེར་ཤིང	a tree Flacourtia cataphracta	skyer shing
སྐྱེར་ཤུན	kind of medicinal fruit	skyer shun
སྐྱེལ	{bskyal ba} {bskyal ba} {skyol 1) send/ see off, bring, conduct to, guide, accompany, escort; 2) send, transport, take to, conduct to, deliver, convey, bring, bear, carry, move, take away, trade, p...	skyel
སྐྱེལ་མཁན	guide, escort, convoy	skyel mkhan
སྐྱེལ་གྱུར	removal of articles	skyel gyur
སྐྱེལ་གླ	escort fee	skyel gla
སྐྱེལ་སྒྲོལ	escort, company	skyel sgrol
སྐྱེལ་སྒྲོལ་བྱེད	escort, accompany	skyel sgrol byed
སྐྱེལ་ཆང	chang served to see someone off	skyel chang
སྐྱེལ་ཆུང་དུ་བྱུང་བ	accompanied us for a short while	skyel chung du byung ba
སྐྱེལ་ཆུང་དུ་བྱོན་པ	accompanied us for a while	skyel chung du byon pa
སྐྱེལ་ཆུང་བྱས	Accompany them for a short distance!	skyel chung byas
སྐྱེལ་ཆེ་བ	frequent removal, often changing	skyel che ba
སྐྱེལ་གཏོང	send [letter etc]	skyel gtong
སྐྱེལ་ཐུང	seeing someone off, escort	skyel thung
སྐྱེལ་ཐུང་གི་སར་གནང	gave (it to him when seeing (him off	skyel thung gi sar gnang
སྐྱེལ་ཐུང་བྱས་པ	accompanied for some distance; who had been following me on the way; doing a farewellescort	skyel thung byas pa
སྐྱེལ་ཐུང་བྱེད་པ	to accompany someone for a short way when they are departing	skyel thung byed pa
སྐྱེལ་ཐུང་མཛད་པ	accompanied	skyel thung mdzad pa
སྐྱེལ་དར	presentation scarf of the departing person to those that had accompanied him for a short distance	skyel dar
སྐྱེལ་བདར	fee to escort, charge for conveyance	skyel bdar
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	carriage, conveyance, delivery, transmission, transportation, transportation, shipping	skyel 'dren
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བཀག་འགོག	embargo	skyel 'dren bkag 'gog
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་གི་བྱ	transportation	skyel 'dren gi bya
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་གི་བྱ་བ	transport service	skyel 'dren gi bya ba
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་གྱི་དྲ་བ	transportation network	skyel 'dren gyi dra ba
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་འགྱིག་ཐག	conveyor belt	skyel 'dren 'gyig thag
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	transport/ shipping coop	skyel 'dren mnyam las khang
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་གནམ་གྲུ	transport/cargo plane	skyel 'dren gnam gru
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport, ship	skyel 'dren byed
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད་པ	transport	skyel 'dren byed pa
སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བཟོ་པ	transport worker	skyel 'dren bzo pa
སྐྱེལ་བ	to consign/ carry/ send/ lead	skyel ba
སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་འགྱིག་ཐག	conveyor belt	skyel byed 'gyig thag
སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའ	carrier rocket	skyel byed me shugs 'phur mda'
སྐྱེལ་མ	escort, see one off, a convoy. opposite of {bsu ma}. to receive	skyel ma
སྐྱེལ་མས་བསླུས་པ	abandoned by our guide	skyel mas bslus pa
སྐྱེལ་མི	escort	skyel mi
སྐྱེལ་རྫོངས	anything sent, dowry, article presented	skyel rdzongs
སྐྱེལ་རོགས་བྱེད	escort	skyel rogs byed
སྐྱེལ་རོགས་བྱེད་པ	to escort	skyel rogs byed pa
སྐྱེལ་ས་བརྒྱད	1) {yod pa dang}. 2) {med pa dang}. 3) {snang ba dab}. 4) {stong pa dang}. 5) {'khor ba dang}. 6) {'das pa dang}. 7) {bcing ba dang}. 8) {grol ba dang brgyad kyi 'dzin pa med pa'i mtha' grol klong ...	skyel sa brgyad
སྐྱེལ་སོ	destination	skyel so
སྐྱེལ་བསུ	welcoming or sending off, involvement; a marriage	skyel bsu
སྐྱེས	1) gift, present. 2) variant imp. of {skye ba}. 3) to feel. 4) birth; 1) a present. 2) to feel; a gift	skyes
སྐྱེས་སྐར	birth day	skyes skar
སྐྱེས་སྐར་བརྟག་པ	birth horoscope {tshe rabs las rtsis}	skyes skar brtag pa
སྐྱེས་ཁ	in return, in recompense	skyes kha
སྐྱེས་ཁུར	present of cakes	skyes khur
སྐྱེས་ཁྲག	blood from child birth	skyes khrag
སྐྱེས་གྲོལ	freed upon occurrence, liberated upon arising	skyes grol
སྐྱེས་སྒྲ་ཅན	goat	skyes sgra can
སྐྱེས་ངེས	certain of being born	skyes nges
སྐྱེས་དངོས	living matter/ things	skyes dngos
སྐྱེས་དངོས་རྫས་བསྒྱུར་རིག་པ	biochemistry	skyes dngos rdzas bsgyur rig pa
སྐྱེས་དངོས་རིག་པ	biology	skyes dngos rig pa
སྐྱེས་དངོས་རིག་པའི་མཁས་པ	biologist	skyes dngos rig pa'i mkhas pa
སྐྱེས་ཆང	a present of beer	skyes chang
སྐྱེས་ཆེན	1) {skyes bu chen po}; 2) (great (gift/ (present; 3) (great man, saint; 4) (present w a letter 186	skyes chen
སྐྱེས་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་གནས	hermitage of holy persons	skyes chen sgrub gnas
སྐྱེས་ཆེན་དམ་པ	holy great being, great saint	skyes chen dam pa
སྐྱེས་ཆེན་རྣམས	the great masters	skyes chen rnams
སྐྱེས་མཆོག	1) supreme being. 2) wellborn, excellent, eminent, the most excellent of beings	skyes mchog
སྐྱེས་མཆོག་ཆེན་པོ	very great being	skyes mchog chen po
སྐྱེས་མཆོག་ཏེ་ལོ་པ	the great Tilopa	skyes mchog te lo pa
སྐྱེས་མཆོག་ཚུལ་བཟང	Kyechok Tsülsang. One of the 12 manifestations of Guru Rinpoche	skyes mchog tshul bzang
སྐྱེས་མཆོག་བཞི	four great Chinese persons	skyes mchog bzhi
སྐྱེས་འཆི	birth and death	skyes 'chi
སྐྱེས་རྟགས	birthmark	skyes rtags
སྐྱེས་སྟོབས	1) innate, inherent; 2) hereditary; 3) acquired by birth	skyes stobs
སྐྱེས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	intelligence by birth	skyes stobs kyi rig pa
སྐྱེས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ་ཅན	a genius	skyes stobs kyi rig pa can
སྐྱེས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ	intelligence by birth	skyes stobs kyi shes rab
སྐྱེས་སྟོབས་ཤེས་རབ	natural intelligence	skyes stobs shes rab
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ	acquired by birth	skyes thob
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	virtue acquired by birth	skyes thob kyi dge ba
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བ	nonvirtue acquired by birth	skyes thob kyi mi dge ba
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་མུ་སྟེགས་པ	A nonbuddhist by birth, those w wrong view that phenomena exist truly of their own accord	skyes thob kyi mu stegs pa
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱིས	acquired by birth	skyes thob kyis
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱིས་མི་དགེ་བ	{de yang sngon gyi mi dge ba goms pas tshe 'dir thob pa skyes thob kyis mi dge ba} 'Birth-obtained nonvirtues' are nonvirtues present in this lifetime through being habituated to nonvirtue in the p...	skyes thob kyis mi dge ba
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	neutral things acquired by birth	skyes thob lung ma bstan
སྐྱེས་ཐོབ་ཤེས་རབ	innate intelligence	skyes thob shes rab
སྐྱེས་དུས	when they arise	skyes dus
སྐྱེས་བདག	1) layman; 2) name of a flower three widower; 4) Prajapati, [5th year of 60 yr cycle, Female iron sheep] ?	skyes bdag
སྐྱེས་ལྡན	animate being, mankind	skyes ldan
སྐྱེས་སྡོང	banana, plantain	skyes sdong
སྐྱེས་ནག	widower	skyes nag
སྐྱེས་ནས	was born as	skyes nas
སྐྱེས་ནས་འདའ་བ	nirvana after [one] rebirth. See {dge bdun nyi shu}	skyes nas 'da' ba
སྐྱེས་ནས་འདའ་བ་གསུམ	the three kinds of nirvana after 1 rebirth	skyes nas 'da' ba gsum
སྐྱེས་ནས་མ་ནིང	neuter at birth	skyes nas ma ning
སྐྱེས་ནས་མྱོང་འགྱུར	experienced after next birth	skyes nas myong 'gyur
སྐྱེས་ནས་མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	karma to be experienced after taking birth	skyes nas myong 'gyur gyi las
སྐྱེས་གནས	birth place. Usually {skye gnas}	skyes gnas
སྐྱེས་གནས་བར་དོ	intermediate state of	skyes gnas bar do
ཐེ་བིརཐ	place	the birth
སྐྱེས་གནས་འབྱུང་པ་ཀུན	source of all birthplaces skyes gnas 'byung pa kun gyi rang bzhin	skyes gnas 'byung pa kun
གཟུགས	your form is the source/ creator of all birthplaces	gzugs
སྐྱེས་གནས་འབྱུང་བ་ཀུན	source of all birthplaces, creator of all birthplaces	skyes gnas 'byung ba kun
སྐྱེས་གནས་བཞི	four types of rebirth skyes gnas yongs su mya ngan las 'da' ba TSE skyes gnas yongs su mya ngan las 'da' ba to pass beyond all rebirth	skyes gnas bzhi
སྐྱེས་པ	snying rje + - felt compassion	skyes pa
སྐྱེས་པ་རྗེས་དྲན	recollection of arising ??	skyes pa rjes dran
སྐྱེས་པ་བརྟན	stabilizing what has arisen	skyes pa brtan
སྐྱེས་པ་དར་མ	full, manhood	skyes pa dar ma
སྐྱེས་པ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Jataka stories	skyes pa sprul sku
སྐྱེས་པ་བྱུང	felt (an emotion)	skyes pa byung
སྐྱེས་པ་འབྲུས་ཕྱུང་པ	eunuch	skyes pa 'brus phyung pa
སྐྱེས་པ་འབྲུས་ཕྱུང་བ	eunuch	skyes pa 'brus phyung ba
སྐྱེས་པ་མ་ཐག་ཙམ	as soon as born/arising skyes pa med par bud med dang lam du 'gro ba - keep company of women without any men present skyes pa med par bud med dang lam du 'gro ba - to keep company of women without ...	skyes pa ma thag tsam
སྐྱེས་པ་གཞན་ལ་སེམས་པ	these are to think of other persons GD	skyes pa gzhan la sems pa
སྐྱེས་པ་རབས	1 of 12 gsung rab yan lag	skyes pa rabs
སྐྱེས་པ་རབས་ཀྱི་གླེང་གཞི	the Jataka tales	skyes pa rabs kyi gleng gzhi
སྐྱེས་པའི་རྒྱུ་སྐར	the constellation under which one is born	skyes pa'i rgyu skar
སྐྱེས་པའི་ཐ་མ་འཆི	the end of being born is death, birth ends in death	skyes pa'i tha ma 'chi
སྐྱེས་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ་འདོན་པ	emit semen	skyes pa'i thig le 'don pa
སྐྱེས་པའི་མཐའ་འཆི་བ	birth ends in death	skyes pa'i mtha' 'chi ba
སྐྱེས་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five periods of a person	skyes pa'i gnas skabs lnga
སྐྱེས་པའི་ཕ་ཡུལ	land of birth	skyes pa'i pha yul
སྐྱེས་པའི་བུ་ཚ	young children	skyes pa'i bu tsha
སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡུལ	born	skyes pa'i yul
སྐྱེས་པའི་རང་དབང	manly independence	skyes pa'i rang dbang
སྐྱེས་པའི་རབས	{skyes rabs}	skyes pa'i rabs
སྐྱེས་པའི་རབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	narrations of life stories [of the Buddha]	skyes pa'i rabs kyi rgyud
སྐྱེས་པའི་རབས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the section of life stories [of the Buddha], the Jatakas. narratives of former births. one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} twelve divisions of the teachings	skyes pa'i rabs kyi sde
སྐྱེས་པའི་སྲོག་ཆགས	creature, sentient being	skyes pa'i srog chags
སྐྱེས་པོ	male	skyes po
སྐྱེས་སྤོར	measure used by creditors in receiving back the loan of grain	skyes spor
སྐྱེས་ཕན	damsel, maiden	skyes phan
སྐྱེས་ཕན་ཆད	once having been born	skyes phan chad
སྐྱེས་ཕོ	male, man	skyes pho
སྐྱེས་ཕོ་མོ་དད་ཅན	faithful men and women	skyes pho mo dad can
སྐྱེས་ཕྲན	1) person in the prime of life. 2) boy	skyes phran
སྐྱེས་འཕྲལ	{ma las skyes 'phral} newborn babies	skyes 'phral
སྐྱེས་འཕྲེང	birth chain, successive incarnations	skyes 'phreng
སྐྱེས་བ	repentance, grief	skyes ba
སྐྱེས་བ་རྒྱལ	man	skyes ba rgyal
སྐྱེས་བ་ལྔ་པ	conch-shell w its coil reverting to the right	skyes ba lnga pa
སྐྱེས་བ་སྔ་མ	previous birth, former life	skyes ba snga ma
སྐྱེས་བ་ཅན	having a birth, having a form skyes ba chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa	skyes ba can
སྐྱེས་བ་གཉིས་པ	twice-born, brahman	skyes ba gnyis pa
སྐྱེས་བ་མཐུན་པ	persons of one and the same family, of equal birth and extraction	skyes ba mthun pa
སྐྱེས་བ་མཐོ་བ	of high birth	skyes ba mtho ba
སྐྱེས་བ་དང་རྒ་བས	death [lit by birth and old age]	skyes ba dang rga bas
སྐྱེས་བ་དང་འཇིག་པ	arise and pass away [of thoughts, passions]	skyes ba dang 'jig pa
སྐྱེས་བུ	1) noble man, great being. 2) man, human being, person, individual, male, creature, spiritual person; spirit. 3) symbolic designation of number three	skyes bu
སྐྱེས་བུ་སྐྱེས་མཆོག	supreme person, Buddha, the best/chief among human beings	skyes bu skyes mchog
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཁམས་དྲུག་པ	the six elements of a person [..khams; 1) {sa; 2) {chu three {me four {rlung five {nam mkha six {rnam shes	skyes bu khams drug pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཁུ་མཆོག	the leader of men	skyes bu khu mchog
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	leader of men, [the Buddha]	skyes bu khyu mchog
སྐྱེས་བུ་གང	human, whosoever	skyes bu gang
སྐྱེས་བུ་གང་ཟག	a human being, person	skyes bu gang zag
སྐྱེས་བུ་གང་ཟག་བརྒྱད	the eight types of noble beings. See {zhugs gnas brgyad, skyes bu zung bzhi}	skyes bu gang zag brgyad
སྐྱེས་བུ་གིང	[12]	skyes bu ging
སྐྱེས་བུ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་དཔུང་མདོས	mdos for the hordes of the eight lords	skyes bu brgyad kyi dpung mdos
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཅན	horseman, one on horseback	skyes bu can
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་ངུ	TSE	skyes bu chung ngu
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་ངུའི་བློ	the mental scope of a lesser individual	skyes bu chung ngu'i blo
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་ངུའི་ལམ	the path of an inferior person	skyes bu chung ngu'i lam
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་ངུའི་ལམ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the path of an inferior person	skyes bu chung ngu'i lam gyi lta ba
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་བ	Syn {skyes bu chung ngu}	skyes bu chung ba
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་བ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	a special lesser person	skyes bu chung ba khyad par can
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆུང་བའི་ལམ	the path for the lesser person 188	skyes bu chung ba'i lam
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	1) superior / great / advanced person, holy being, saint a person of the highest acumen / scope / mental capacity / intellect / faculties; exemplary human being. See {skyes bu gsum}. 2) Syn Buddha ...	skyes bu chen po
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	brgyad eight thoughts of a superior individual skyes bu chen po'i rnam rtog brgyad eight thoughts of a superior individual skyes bu chen po'i mtshan rnams kyis	skyes bu chen po'i rnam rtog
མཛེས་པ	was made beautiful with the signs of a Great Being skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa	mdzes pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིམ་པ་བརྒྱད	8 grades of superior beings [See {skyes bu zung bzhi} {zhugs gnas brgyad}	skyes bu chen po'i rim pa brgyad
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལམ	the path of a superior person	skyes bu chen po'i lam
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལམ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the path of a superior person. See {'khor gsum mi dmigs pa'i shes rab}	skyes bu chen po'i lam gyi lta ba
མེད་པ་འཇུག་ཉོགས་སུ་འགྱུར་རོ	you will have set out on the path of great beings skyes bu chen mtshan sum cu rtsa gnyis 32 marks of a great man	med pa 'jug nyogs su 'gyur ro
སྐྱེས་བུ་མཆོག	a supreme / superior person, epithet of Vishnu, n. of a tree growing in the land of the nagas	skyes bu mchog
རྟོག	imputation regarding subject as a nominal reality skyes bu btags yod kyi rten can gyi 'dzin	rtog
སྐྱེས་བུ་བརྟག་པ	investigation of the reality of "self"	skyes bu brtag pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཐ་མ	inferior person	skyes bu tha ma
སྐྱེས་བུ་མཐོ	a tree in land of nagas, tree	skyes bu mtho
སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པ	wise/good person, satpurusha, holy being, saint	skyes bu dam pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	relying on holy being. one of the {lha dang mi rnams kyi 'khor lo bzhi}. four states of existence of gods and men	skyes bu dam pa la brten pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པའི་འགྲོ་བ་བདུན	the seven kinds of holy beings [at the time of abiding in the fruit of nonreturn, {phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas, bar dor 'da' ba gsum, skyes nas 'da' ba gsum, gong du 'pho ba}	skyes bu dam pa'i 'gro ba bdun
ཨཱབིདིང་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	return, {phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas} {bar dor 'da' ba gsum} {skyes nas 'da' ba gsum} {gong du 'pho ba]	Abiding in the fruit of non
སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པའི་ལས་བྱེད་པ	his deeds are those of a virtuous person	skyes bu dam pa'i las byed pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་དེ་ནི	anyone who	skyes bu de ni
སྐྱེས་བུ་འདུལ་བའི་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་པ	leader of those yet to be trained skyes bu 'dul ba'i kha lo sgyur ba bla na	skyes bu 'dul ba'i kha lo sgyur pa
མེད་པ	the unexcelled steersman / charioteer of taming beings. Syn the Buddha skyes bu 'dul ba'i kha lo sgyur ba bla na	med pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་འདུལ་བའི་ཁ་ལོ་བསྒྱུར་བ	the charioteer taming men [epith. of Buddha]	skyes bu 'dul ba'i kha lo bsgyur ba
སྐྱེས་བུ་ནག་པོ	a kind of flower	skyes bu nag po
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་སྡེ་བཞི	The 'four exquisite things' pursued by all people; Mipham Rinpoche:{mngon mtho nges legs sgrub pa'i chos dang, gnas grogs grags nor sgrub pa sogs don dang, de dag gi 'bras bu gnas skabs su 'dod pa ...	phun sum tshogs pa sde bzhi
སྐྱེས་བུ་སྤྲོས་པ་ཅན	elaborate person	skyes bu spros pa can
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཕོ	man, male person	skyes bu pho
སྐྱེས་བུ་བར་མ	mediocre / middling person, anthropomorphic conception of causation, fruit produced by the person	skyes bu bar ma
སྐྱེས་བུ་བྱེད་པ	human efforts [of farming etc]	skyes bu byed pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་བྱེད་པའི	viripotent, resultant force	skyes bu byed pa'i
སྐྱེས་བུ་བྱེད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	inherent potential of an act	skyes bu byed pa'i 'bras bu
སྐྱེས་བུ་འབྲིང	the second person, personal pronoun	skyes bu 'bring
སྐྱེས་བུ་འབྲིང་གི་ལམ	the path of the mediocre person	skyes bu 'bring gi lam
སྐྱེས་བུ་འབྲིང་གི་ལམ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the path of the mediocre person	skyes bu 'bring gi lam gyi lta ba
སྐྱེས་བུ་འབྲིང་བ	the mediocre person	skyes bu 'bring ba
སྐྱེས་བུ་མིའམ་ཅི	men and yet not men [kinnara-heavenly musicians with men's bodies and horses' heads]	skyes bu mi'am ci
སྐྱེས་བུ་འམ་ཅི	men and yet not men,	skyes bu 'ma ci
ཀིནནར	heavenly musicians w men's bodies and horses's heads	kinnara
སྐྱེས་བུ་རྨོངས་པ	ignorant person	skyes bu rmongs pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཚད་མ	valid person, authentic being; those persons upon whose speech one can rely for authentic teaching and advice	skyes bu tshad ma
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཞིག་ཏུ་སྤྲུལ	manifested in the form of a *godness	skyes bu zhig tu sprul
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཟུང་བཞི	the four kinds of noble beings {'phags pa'i skyes bu bzhi} the four (pairs (of (noble (beings 1 {rgyun zhugs zhugs gnas} 2() {phyir 'ong zhugs gnas} 3() {phyir mi 'ong zhugs gnas} 4() {dga bcom zhu...	skyes bu zung bzhi
ནེབེ༹ར	returner 4) {dgra bcom} [arhat]	never
ཕོ༹ཨེ	destroyer	foe
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཟུང་བཞི་ཡ་བརྒྱད	8 stages of levels in hinayana	skyes bu zung bzhi ya brgyad
སྐྱེས་བུ་བཟང་དགའ	being of fine delight	skyes bu bzang dga'
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	or skye bo +, 12th century - Kyebu Yeshe Dorje, a disciple of Gampopa and one of the first masters to enter the sacred land of Tsari	skyes bu ye shes rdo rje
སྐྱེས་བུ་ཡོངས	all intellectual beings/ human beings	skyes bu yongs
སྐྱེས་བུ་གསུམ	three types of individuals	skyes bu gsum
སྐྱེས་བུ་གསུམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	a graded path for the three kinds of individuals	skyes bu gsum gyi rim pa
སྐྱེས་བུ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལམ	the paths for the three types of individuals	skyes bu gsum gyi lam
སྐྱེས་བུ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	the gradual path for the three types of individuals skyes bu gsum gyi lam gyi rim pa chen	skyes bu gsum gyi lam gyi rim pa
མོ	the Great Stages of the Path for the Three Kinds of Individuals	mo
སྐྱེས་བུ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལམ་རིམ	Stages of the Path for the Three Kinds of Individuals, Tsongkhapa's greater and lesser	skyes bu gsum gyi lam rim
སྐྱེས་བུའི་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་བ	the steersman of human beings. Syn the Buddha	skyes bu'i kha lo sgyur ba
སྐྱེས་བུའི་ཁམས	elemental constitution of the individual	skyes bu'i khams
སྐྱེས་བུའི་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	the supreme among beings	skyes bu'i khyu mchog
སྐྱེས་བུའི་འཁྲུགས་པ	pride, self-respect	skyes bu'i 'khrugs pa
སྐྱེས་བུའི་གང་ཟག	an individual person	skyes bu'i gang zag
སྐྱེས་བུའི་ངོས	manliness, manly, selfrespect, confidence	skyes bu'i ngos
སྐྱེས་བུའི་མཆོག	the most excellent of beings	skyes bu'i mchog
སྐྱེས་བུའི་རྟགས	sense organ, faculty of sense perception	skyes bu'i rtags
སྐྱེས་བུའི་སེང་གེ	the lion among men. Syn Buddha Shakyamuni	skyes bu'i seng ge
སྐྱེས་བུས་བྱེད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	result caused by the person	skyes bus byed pa'i 'bras bu
སྐྱེས་བོ	ordinary person	skyes bo
སྐྱེས་བྱུང	[sadness] wells up in me	skyes byung
སྐྱེས་བྱུང་བ	sprang, sprang forth	skyes byung ba
སྐྱེས་སྦྱངས	innate and learned	skyes sbyangs
སྐྱེས་མ	1) woman. 2) present, gift. 3) bride. 4) fern	skyes ma
སྐྱེས་མ་ཐག	right after birth	skyes ma thag
སྐྱེས་མ་ཐག་པ	just born/grown	skyes ma thag pa
སྐྱེས་མ་ཐག་པའི་བྱིས་པ	newborn infant	skyes ma thag pa'i byis pa
སྐྱེས་མའི་གུང་སེང	maternity leave	skyes ma'i gung seng
སྐྱེས་མེད	"not arisen," unborn, unoriginated, not arisen	skyes med
སྐྱེས་མེད་པའི་དབྱིངས	unborn ultimate dimension	skyes med pa'i dbyings
སྐྱེས་དམན	woman, wife	skyes dman
སྐྱེས་དམན་གྱི་གནས་སྐབས	womanhood	skyes dman gyi gnas skabs
སྐྱེས་ཙམ་ནས་འདའ་བ	nirvana just after rebirth. See {dge bdun nyi shu}	skyes tsam nas 'da' ba
སྐྱེས་ཚད	effectiveness	skyes tshad
སྐྱེས་ཚལ	gardens 190	skyes tshal
སྐྱེས་ཚུལ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	progress [of experience and realization]	skyes tshul gyi rim pa
སྐྱེས་ཚེ	was born as	skyes tshe
སྐྱེས་ཚེས	birth date	skyes tshes
སྐྱེས་རྫོངས	cultivation, farm	skyes rdzongs
སྐྱེས་ཟིན་པ	born, arisen	skyes zin pa
སྐྱེས་ཟླ	Scorpion [constellation]	skyes zla
སྐྱེས་གཟུགས	1) form or born-shape, stature. 2) gold	skyes gzugs
སྐྱེས་བཟང	present	skyes bzang
སྐྱེས་བཟང་པོ	fine gift {bcom ldan 'das la mu tig dang rin po che'i skyes bzang po bskur ba} - sent a gift of many fine gems and pearls to the Bhagavan	skyes bzang po
སྐྱེས་བཟང་བ	luxuriant, exuberant, flourishing	skyes bzang ba
སྐྱེས་ཡུལ	birthplace, mother country, motherland	skyes yul
སྐྱེས་རབས	The Garland of Rebirths	skyes rabs
སྐྱེས་རབས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the section of Jatakas/ life stories/ birth stories	skyes rabs kyi sde
སྐྱེས་རབས་བརྒྱ་རྩ་མ	One Hundred Episodes of Lord Buddha's Former Lives, by Karmapa Rangjung Dorje	skyes rabs brgya rtsa ma
སྐྱེས་རབས་རྣམ་ཐར	stories of a succession of lives	skyes rabs rnam thar
སྐྱེས་རབས་ལས	the Jatakas:	skyes rabs las
སྐྱེས་རི	Kyeri, birth place of Tsongkhapa	skyes ri
སྐྱེས་རེག	to touch a man [refers to gelongma rules]	skyes reg
སྐྱེས་ལ	Kyela, pass, in Domey	skyes la
སྐྱེས་ལ་སྡོང	plantain, layman	skyes la sdong
སྐྱེས་ལན	present made in return; a reciprocating gift	skyes lan
སྐྱེས་ས	birth place	skyes sa
སྐྱེས་སུ་སྐུར	send as a present	skyes su skur
སྐྱེས་སུ་བསྐུར	sent as a present	skyes su bskur
སྐྱེས་སོ་ཅོག	all who were ever born	skyes so cog
སྐྱེས་ལྷ	deity of birth	skyes lha
སྐྱོ	abbr. of 1) {skyo po}. 2) {skyo ba}. 3) grief, sorrow; ward off, protect	skyo
སྐྱོ་གླུ	elegy, song of sadness	skyo glu
སྐྱོ་མགུར	melancholy songs	skyo mgur
སྐྱོ་མགུར་བླངས་པ	sang a melancholy song	skyo mgur blangs pa
སྐྱོ་འགྱེད	weariness dispersed	skyo 'gyed
སྐྱོ་ངལ	weariness, sadness [of mind] and tiredness [of body], great sorrow	skyo ngal
སྐྱོ་ངལ་ཆུང	self-sacrifice	skyo ngal chung
སྐྱོ་ངལ་ཆུང་བ	[strength to overcome] weariness or discouragement	skyo ngal chung ba
སྐྱོ་ངལ་སྤངས་པ	shows no weariness or discouragement	skyo ngal spangs pa
སྐྱོ་ངལ་བ	sadness	skyo ngal ba
སྐྱོ་ངལ་མེད་པ	without ever complaining	skyo ngal med pa
སྐྱོ་ངེས	repent, repentance	skyo nges
སྐྱོ་ངེས་འབྱུང	weariness and revulsion	skyo nges 'byung
སྐྱོ་ངོགས	quarrel, contest, strife	skyo ngogs
སྐྱོ་སྔོགས	1) reviving an old grudge. 2) argument, strife, quarrel	skyo sngogs
སྐྱོ་སྔོགས་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of reinstigating old arguments w another monk	skyo sngogs byed pa'i ltung byed
དོཝནཕ༹ལལ་ཨོཕ༹་རེ	instigating old arguments with another monk	downfall of re
སྐྱོ་ཆ	weak point, weakness	skyo cha
སྐྱོ་ཆད	grief, sadness	skyo chad
སྐྱོ་ཉམས	mind of sadness, tender yearning	skyo nyams
སྐྱོ་སྟོན་བསོད་ནམས་བླ་མ	Kyotön Sönam Lama. The root teacher of Machik Labdrön	skyo ston bsod nams bla ma
སྐྱོ་ཐང	1) [barley] broth, thin gruel; 2) quarrel	skyo thang
སྐྱོ་དུབ	sadness and tiredness, weariness	skyo dub
སྐྱོ་འདུར	barley broth/ soup	skyo 'dur
སྐྱོ་ནལ	weariness, fatigue	skyo nal
སྐྱོ་གནས	sad news/ topic	skyo gnas
སྐྱོ་སྣང	feeling sad, depressed pessimistic	skyo snang
སྐྱོ་སྣང་སྐྱེ	feel sad, depressed, pessimistic	skyo snang skye
སྐྱོ་སྣང་སྐྱེ་བ	pessimistic	skyo snang skye ba
སྐྱོ་སྣང་རིང་ལུགས	pessimism	skyo snang ring lugs
སྐྱོ་པོ	1) sad, gloomy, discontent, depressed, weary, tired; 2) poor, weak, wretched, needy, inferior; 3) poor man, beggar	skyo po
སྐྱོ་པོ་ཆགས་པ	emaciate	skyo po chags pa
སྐྱོ་ཕོད་དེ་བ	strong feeling of sadness	skyo phod de ba
སྐྱོ་ཕྱོད་དེ་བ་ཞིག་ལ	feeling sad	skyo phyod de ba zhig la
སྐྱོ་བ	will sadden	skyo ba
སྐྱོ་བ་སྐྱེ	feel sad/ sorry	skyo ba skye
སྐྱོ་བ་སྐྱེ་བ	deplore	skyo ba skye ba
སྐྱོ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to develop distaste, disenchantment	skyo ba bskyed pa
སྐྱོ་བ་ཅན	weary	skyo ba can
སྐྱོ་བ་དང་ངལ་བ་མེད་པ	without ever feeling bored or tired	skyo ba dang ngal ba med pa
སྐྱོ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	weary	skyo ba dang ldan pa
སྐྱོ་བ་དང་སུན་པ་མེད་པ	never feel weary or irritated with them	skyo ba dang sun pa med pa
སྐྱོ་བ་མ་མཛད་ཅིག	do not despair	skyo ba ma mdzad cig
སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ	tirelessly, unstintingly	skyo ba med pa
སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	keeping a tireless frame of mind	skyo ba med pa yid la byed pa
སྐྱོ་བ་སང་བ	to dispel grief	skyo ba sang ba
སྐྱོ་བ་བསངས	relax	skyo ba bsangs
སྐྱོ་བའི་ཉམས	feeling upset, a feeling of sadness	skyo ba'i nyams
སྐྱོ་བའི་ཉམས་ཆེན	feel very upset	skyo ba'i nyams chen
སྐྱོ་བའི་རྣམ་པ	sad expression	skyo ba'i rnam pa
སྐྱོ་བའི་བློ	thought of repentance	skyo ba'i blo
སྐྱོ་བའི་ཟློས་སྒར	tragedy	skyo ba'i zlos sgar
སྐྱོ་བས་ཉན་པ	listening by melancholy, discouragement	skyo bas nyan pa
སྐྱོ་བས་འདུལ་བ	correction with rebukes	skyo bas 'dul ba
སྐྱོ་བོ	poor	skyo bo
སྐྱོ་བྱུང	to regret, feel dismay; I feel utterly depressed	skyo byung
སྐྱོ་བྲག	{'bab rom bka' brgyud pa} monastery in Nangchen, kham; monastery of the {'ba' rom bka' brgyud pa} tradition	skyo brag
སྐྱོ་བྲག་བླ་མ	karma ye shes	skyo brag bla ma
སྐྱོ་བྲག་མི་འགྱུར	alias {kar-ma mi 'gyur} 1914-1974	skyo brag mi 'gyur
སྐྱོ་བྲན	servant, slave	skyo bran
སྐྱོ་མ	gruel	skyo ma
སྐྱོ་མ་སྔ་བཙན	one who was once convicted before on the occasion of a former dispute	skyo ma snga btsan
སྐྱོ་མ་ཅན	slanderous	skyo ma can
སྐྱོ་མ་བྱེད་པ	slander	skyo ma byed pa
སྐྱོ་མེད	heaven-realm, tirelessly	skyo med
སྐྱོ་མེད་ཁྱབ	name of vishnu's bow	skyo med khyab
སྐྱོ་མེད་མགོན་པོ	epith. of Indra	skyo med mgon po
སྐྱོ་མེད་གནས	heaven [lit place without sorrow]	skyo med gnas
སྐྱོ་མོ་ལུང	1 of 3 places west of lhasa, SA dga' skyo zul gsum	skyo mo lung
སྐྱོ་མོ་ལུང་པ	{skyo mo lung pa Tibetan opera troupe in Lhasa	skyo mo lung pa
སྐྱོ་ཚ	broth, gruel	skyo tsha
སྐྱོ་ཚག	light broth made of barleyflour with addition of a little butter	skyo tshag
སྐྱོ་ཡོང	will be sad	skyo yong
སྐྱོ་རས་ཚོ་ཚོགས	name of a kind of chintz	skyo ras tsho tshogs
སྐྱོ་རོགས	friend in sorrow, comforter, consoler	skyo rogs
སྐྱོ་རོགས་བྱེད	be a friend in sorrow/ comforter/ consoler	skyo rogs byed
སྐྱོ་ཤས	weariness, sadness, sorrow[ful], disgust, grief, lassitude, remorse TSE	skyo shas
སྐྱོ་ཤས་ཀྱི་གླུ་དབྱངས	singing the blues, sorrowful song	skyo shas kyi glu dbyangs
སྐྱོ་ཤས་སྐྱེས་པ	felt sadness	skyo shas skyes pa
སྐྱོ་ཤས་བསྐྱེད	develop disenchantment	skyo shas bskyed
སྐྱོ་ཤས་ངེས་འབྱུང	weariness and renunciation	skyo shas nges 'byung
སྐྱོ་ཤས་ཅན	being weary	skyo shas can
སྐྱོ་ཤས་དབང་མེད་དུ་སྐྱེས་བྱུང	I feel helplessly sad	skyo shas dbang med du skyes byung
སྐྱོ་ཤེས	revulsion	skyo shes
སྐྱོ་སངས	1) consolation in grief; 2) rare; 3) surprising, astonishing; 4) vacation, holiday	skyo sangs
སྐྱོ་སངས་ཉིད	freedom from fatigue	skyo sangs nyid
སྐྱོ་སངས་གནས	holiday resort, park	skyo sangs gnas
སྐྱོ་སེང	anguish, depression, grief	skyo seng
སྐྱོ་སེང་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	take a constitutional walk	skyo seng la 'gro ba
སྐྱོ་སེམས	remorse	skyo sems
སྐྱོ་བསང	recreation, entertainment	skyo bsang
སྐྱོ་བསང་བ	recreate, divert oneself	skyo bsang ba
སྐྱོ་བསངས	1) holiday, day off, vacation. 2) to refresh oneself, relax, take time off	skyo bsangs
སྐྱོ་བསེང	days off, vacation, clearing away sadness	skyo bseng
སྐྱོག	spend, SA skyag pa	skyog
སྐྱོག་ཏང་ཅེ	slaughter, murder	skyog tang ce
སྐྱོག་ལྟོ་འབུ	snail	skyog lto 'bu
སྐྱོག་ནག	iron spoon or scoop	skyog nag
སྐྱོག་པ	{skyog pa, bskyogs pa, bskyog pa, skyogs} trans. v	skyog pa
སྐྱོག་པོ	false, crooked	skyog po
སྐྱོགས	1) scoop, dipper, large ladle. 2) spoon, milting spoon. 3) scoop, shovel,	skyogs
ཅོཨལ	shovel, ladle. 4) cup, goblet, drinking cup, crucible, bowl, goblet; imp. of {skyog pa}; spoon, ladle/ goblet, bowl, vessel	coal
སྐྱོགས་ལྟོ་འབུ	snail	skyogs lto 'bu
སྐྱོགས་ཐལ	cannon fodder	skyogs thal
སྐྱོགས་པ	turn, twist [the neck] look around, look back	skyogs pa
སྐྱོགས་མེད	not curved	skyogs med
སྐྱོགས་ར	shoulder-blade	skyogs ra
སྐྱོང	nurtures, to rule, govern, protect, take care of, sustain	skyong
སྐྱོང་ཁུལ	autonomous area/ region	skyong khul
སྐྱོང་དགོས	must sustain, reasons for meditation training	skyong dgos
སྐྱོང་མཐར་བྱེད	look after, care for, bring up, take care of	skyong mthar byed
སྐྱོང་མཐར་བྱེད་པ	to look after, care for, bring up	skyong mthar byed pa
སྐྱོང་དལ	assistance	skyong dal
སྐྱོང་དལ་བྱེད་པ	help	skyong dal byed pa
སྐྱོང་དུ་བཅུག	continue the training, simply sustain, sustain, to train	skyong du bcug
སྐྱོང་བདེ	simple to sustain	skyong bde
སྐྱོང་བདེ་བ	simple / easy to sustain	skyong bde ba
སྐྱོང་ལྡན་པ	she who protects	skyong ldan pa
སྐྱོང་ལྡན་མ	she who protects, a goddess	skyong ldan ma
སྐྱོང་བ	to maintain (one's experience of)/ protect/ sustain; to foster (a relationship with); isc. to continue (to experience)	skyong ba
སྐྱོང་བར་བྱས་པ	maintained	skyong bar byas pa
སྐྱོང་བྱེད	one who supports or protects	skyong byed
སྐྱོང་བྱེད་མ	1) she who protects. 2) mother	skyong byed ma
སྐྱོང་མ	goddess of the earth, protectress	skyong ma
སྐྱོང་མ་ཁྲམ་གྱི་བཟེ་མདོས	mdos for redemption from the nailed crosses of the skyong ma	skyong ma khram gyi bze mdos
སྐྱོང་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve Kyongma Goddesses. Retinue of the Twelve Tenma Goddesses	skyong ma bcu gnyis
སྐྱོང་ཚུལ	method of remaining, way to continue, training	skyong tshul
སྐྱོང་རོགས་བྱེད་པ	attend	skyong rogs byed pa
སྐྱོངས	imp. of {skyong ba}; care for!, nurture, sustain, maintain; guard, keep, defend, support, take care of	skyongs
སྐྱོངས་ཆེད་དུ	to deliberately train	skyongs ched du
སྐྱོངས་བ	preserved	skyongs ba
སྐྱོད	to go	skyod
སྐྱོད་པ	{bskyod pa} {bskyod pa} {skyod} 1) go, come/ go out, travel, walk, tread; 2) move, shake, agitate, tremble, drift, be carried off; 3) bound towards; 4) expire, pass, elapse	skyod pa
སྐྱོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to make tremble	skyod par byed pa
སྐྱོད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge that causes mutability/ movement	skyod par byed pa'i shes rab
སྐྱོད་བྱེད	oar	skyod byed
སྐྱོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང	subtle energy/ air that causes mutability/ movement	skyod byed kyi rlung
སྐྱོད་བྱེད་འཕན	undulating decorated garlands	skyod byed 'phan
སྐྱོད་ཟིན་པ	gone	skyod zin pa
སྐྱོན	{rang gi skyon rnams mi mthong zhing gzhan skyon mthong} do not see what they themselves do wrong, but they see the faults of others	skyon
སྐྱོན་ཀུན་ཟད	all defects exhausted	skyon kun zad
སྐྱོན་ཀུན་ཟད་ཡོན་ཏན་ཀུན་ལྡན	exhaustion of all flaws and endowment with all qualities [=buddhahood]	skyon kun zad yon tan kun ldan
སྐྱོན་སྐྱེ	damaged, faulty, broken	skyon skye
སྐྱོན་གང་ཡང་མེད	no fault whatever	skyon gang yang med
སྐྱོན་གྱི་སེལ	obstacles of defects	skyon gyi sel
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་དབགས	covered with fault, guilty, implicated in crime	skyon gyis dbags
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མ་གོས	not defiled by sin	skyon gyis ma gos
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མ་གོས་པ	untainted by defects	skyon gyis ma gos pa
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མ་སླད་པ	not marred by any defects	skyon gyis ma slad pa
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མི་གོས་པར་གདའ	it won't defile you	skyon gyis mi gos par gda'
སྐྱོན་གྱིས་བསླད	polluted by faults	skyon gyis bslad
སྐྱོན་བགྲང	blame, disapprove, criticize	skyon bgrang
སྐྱོན་བགྲང་བ	blame, disapprove, criticize	skyon bgrang ba
སྐྱོན་འགེབ་མཛེས་འཚོས	cover up, conceal, disguise [faults]	skyon 'geb mdzes 'tshos
སྐྱོན་རྒྱག	cause damage, harm, faults	skyon rgyag
སྐྱོན་ངག	thorny, mischievous	skyon ngag
སྐྱོན་ངན་ཅན	vicious	skyon ngan can
སྐྱོན་ཅན	1) defective, damaged, faulty, incorrect, imperfect; 2) sinful; 3) guilty	skyon can
སྐྱོན་ཅན་གྱི་ལས	{zhe sdang las skyes pa'i sgo gsum gyi las} 'flawed actions' which are the three produced through anger	skyon can gyi las
སྐྱོན་ཅན་བྱེད་པ	to harm {dam tshig skyon can byed} will harm your own samaya	skyon can byed pa
སྐྱོན་ཅུང་ཟད	slightly defective, little fault	skyon cung zad
སྐྱོན་བཅུ	ten defects [of recitation]:	skyon bcu
ཎེཨིཐེར་ལོཨུད	sounding not feeblesounding; Neither hastily nor slowed; Neither fiercely nor attached; Without degrading any aspect of the seedsyllables; Not while distracted and not while talking; And not interr...	Neither loud
སྐྱོན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the eighteen defects. 1) {mi sdug pa}. ugliness. 2) {mgo ska ngan pa}. bad or bristling hair. 3) {dpral ba chung ba}. narrow forehead. 4) {mgo ser skya}. brown hair 5) {mig ser ba}. yellow eye. 6) ...	skyon bco brgyad
སྐྱོན་བཅོས	correction, revision, reformation, rectification	skyon bcos
སྐྱོན་བཅོས་བྱེད	correct, revise, reform, rectify	skyon bcos byed
སྐྱོན་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	rectify	skyon bcos byed pa
སྐྱོན་ཆ	fault, shortcoming, defect, illness, trouble, accident	skyon cha
སྐྱོན་ཆག	fault, shortcoming, defect, illness, trouble, accident	skyon chag
སྐྱོན་ཆགས	fault, shortcoming, defect, illness, trouble, accident	skyon chags
སྐྱོན་ཆགས་པ	trespasser, criminal	skyon chags pa
སྐྱོན་ཆེ	grave fault	skyon che
སྐྱོན་ཆེན་པོ	guilty	skyon chen po
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	objection, criticism, exposition of faults, slander, expressing a criticism	skyon brjod
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་དང་རང་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	criticism and self-criticism	skyon brjod dang rang skyon brjod
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པ	slander, speak ill of others	skyon brjod pa
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of criticizing [the defects or shortcomings of other monks]	skyon brjod pa'i ltung byed
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པར་མཛད་པ	criticize, reprove	skyon brjod par mdzad pa
སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་བྱེད་པ	criticize, accuse, denounce	skyon brjod byed pa
སྐྱོན་གཏོང་བ	damage, spoil	skyon gtong ba
སྐྱོན་བཏོན་པ	blame, censure, criticize [p skyon 'don]	skyon bton pa
སྐྱོན་རྟོག	supervision, inspection, surveillance watching over	skyon rtog
སྐྱོན་རྟོག་བྱེད	supervise, inspect, make surveillance, watch over	skyon rtog byed
སྐྱོན་རྟོག་བྱེད་པ	to look for flaws	skyon rtog byed pa
སྐྱོན་སྟོན་པ	see {skyon bton pa}	skyon ston pa
སྐྱོན་ཐོ་འགོད	record faults/ demerits	skyon tho 'god
སྐྱོན་དང་བཅས་པ	faulty	skyon dang bcas pa
སྐྱོན་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of disabilities skyon dang mi bde ba'i ming mi grags pa did not know even the words for sin or unhappiness skyon dang yon tan du so so yang dag	skyon dang bral ba
པར་རིག་པ	correct discrimination of faults and qualities	par rig pa
སྐྱོན་དང་ཡོན་ཏན་དབྱེ་བ	to separate faults and good qualities	skyon dang yon tan dbye ba
སྐྱོན་དུ་གྱུར་བ	which is a flaw, defect	skyon du gyur ba
སྐྱོན་དུ་འགྱུར	. . . (gi) skyon du 'gyur ba - to entail a/ the flaw of . . .	skyon du 'gyur
སྐྱོན་དུ་འགྱུར་རོ	will become a defect	skyon du 'gyur ro
སྐྱོན་དུ་འགྲང་བ	reckon as or into sin or defect	skyon du 'grang ba
སྐྱོན་དུ་མཐོང	see faults in {bla ma dam pa'i mdzad spyod la skyon du mthong na} whenever you see faults in anything your sublime teacher does	skyon du mthong
སྐྱོན་དུ་མཐོང་བ	consider as a loss, find fault with	skyon du mthong ba
སྐྱོན་དུ་མཐོང་བ་ཡིན	find fault in	skyon du mthong ba yin
སྐྱོན་དུ་མི་གཟུང	do not regard as a shortcoming	skyon du mi gzung
སྐྱོན་དུ་མི་བཟུང	do not regard as a fault	skyon du mi bzung
སྐྱོན་དྲུག	six faults	skyon drug
སྐྱོན་འདོགས	blame, criticize, charge w a crime, slander, libel	skyon 'dogs
སྐྱོན་འདོགས་པ	to blame, criticize, charge with a crime	skyon 'dogs pa
སྐྱོན་འདོགས་བྱེད	blame, criticize, charge w a crime, slander, libel	skyon 'dogs byed
སྐྱོན་འདོན	criticize, blame	skyon 'don
སྐྱོན་འདོན་པ	criticize, blame	skyon 'don pa
སྐྱོན་ལྡན	faulty, defective, incorrect, sinful, guilty	skyon ldan
སྐྱོན་ནས་སྨྲ་བ	ascribe a fault	skyon nas smra ba
སྐྱོན་གནད་མེད་པ	without the least fault or blemish	skyon gnad med pa
སྐྱོན་གནོད	sabotage	skyon gnod
སྐྱོན་པ	put astride, impale	skyon pa
སྐྱོན་དཔྱོད	investigation of damage/ defects/ shortcomings, [self- ]criticism	skyon dpyod
སྐྱོན་སྤང་དགེ་སྒྲུབ	give up faults and take up what is right	skyon spang dge sgrub
སྐྱོན་སྤང་དགེ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	give up faults and take up what is right, reform, overcome shortcomings	skyon spang dge sgrub byed
སྐྱོན་སྤང་བ	leave off a fault	skyon spang ba
སྐྱོན་སྤངས	those who have overcome faults	skyon spangs
སྐྱོན་སྤོང་བ	get rid of a fault	skyon spong ba
སྐྱོན་ཕྲན་བུ	slightly defective, little fault	skyon phran bu
སྐྱོན་བྱུང་བ	suffered injury	skyon byung ba
སྐྱོན་བྱེད་པ	commit a fault	skyon byed pa
སྐྱོན་བྲལ	Syn {skyon med}. faultlessness, without fault	skyon bral
སྐྱོན་འབེབས་པ	assign a crime to a person	skyon 'bebs pa
སྐྱོན་འབྱུང་བ	to become defective	skyon 'byung ba
སྐྱོན་མ	night	skyon ma
སྐྱོན་མི་མངོན་པ	not perceive a fault or defect	skyon mi mngon pa
སྐྱོན་མེད	faultless	skyon med
སྐྱོན་མེད་སྐྱོན་འཚོལ	seek faults where there are none	skyon med skyon 'tshol
སྐྱོན་མེད་རྟོག	free from disease, taking as faultless	skyon med rtog
སྐྱོན་མེད་གནས	remaining innocent, living faultlessly	skyon med gnas
སྐྱོན་མེད་པ	1) faultless, blameless, immaculate. 2) It will be all right!	skyon med pa
སྐྱོན་མེད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	entering certainty / {mthong lam} See {nges pa la zhugs pa}	skyon med pa la 'jug pa
སྐྱོན་མེད་པར་བཞུགས་པ	residing without fault	skyon med par bzhugs pa
སྐྱོན་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་ཅན	flawless and perfect	skyon med yon tan can
སྐྱོན་བཙལ	found/ sought faults	skyon btsal
སྐྱོན་བཙུགས	accused, blamed, criticized	skyon btsugs
སྐྱོན་ཚིག	slander, scandal	skyon tshig
སྐྱོན་ཚིག་དྲི	question; x {dogs sel phyir na skyon tshig dri} question him in order to dispel your doubts	skyon tshig dri
སྐྱོན་འཚོལ	find/ seek faults	skyon 'tshol
སྐྱོན་འཚོལ་བྱེད	find/ seek faults	skyon 'tshol byed
སྐྱོན་འཛིན	find fault	skyon 'dzin
སྐྱོན་འཛིན་པ	to find fault	skyon 'dzin pa
སྐྱོན་འཛུགས	accusation, blame, criticism	skyon 'dzugs
སྐྱོན་འཛུགས་བྱེད	accuse, blame, criticize	skyon 'dzugs byed
སྐྱོན་འཛུགས་བྱེད་པ	arraign, incriminate	skyon 'dzugs byed pa
སྐྱོན་ཞིབ	check up, examination	skyon zhib
སྐྱོན་ཞིབ་བྱེད	check up, examine	skyon zhib byed
སྐྱོན་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	check, examine, inspect	skyon zhib byed pa
སྐྱོན་བཞི	four faults [attributed to the secret nucleus by gokhukpa lhetse in	skyon bzhi
ཧིས་འབྱམས	yig 1 The fault of the introduction {klong log} which claims that the Secret nucleus has no audience of bodhisattvas who requested and received it as is the case with other tantras, two the fault o...	his 'byams
ཧིས་རྒྱུད	'bum dris- len, by rikpei reldri and by others [gd}	his rgyud
སྐྱོན་ཟད་ཡོན་ཏན་རྫོགས་པར་འགྱུར	will exhaust all defects and perfect all attainments	skyon zad yon tan rdzogs par 'gyur
སྐྱོན་ཟུར	weak point, defect	skyon zur
སྐྱོན་བཟློག་བྱེད	reverse/ restore/ save a bad situation	skyon bzlog byed
སྐྱོན་ཡོད་པ	faulty, with faults	skyon yod pa
སྐྱོན་ཡོན	* 1) virtues and evils, faults and good qualities, merits and demerits; 2) judgement, criticism, censure	skyon yon
སྐྱོན་ཡོན་བསྟན་པ	describing faults and benefits	skyon yon bstan pa
སྐྱོན་ཡོན་བྱེད	criticize, judge, censure	skyon yon byed
སྐྱོན་ལ་རྟོག་པ	critical, faultfinding, disparaging	skyon la rtog pa
སྐྱོན་ལ་བརྟགས་པ	{log par lta bas skyon la brtags pa} misinterpreting and criticizing	skyon la brtags pa
སྐྱོན་ལས་གྲོལ	free from faults / shortcomings	skyon las grol
སྐྱོན་ལས་གྲོལ་ཚུལ	how to be free from defects	skyon las grol tshul
སྐྱོན་ཤེས	critic	skyon shes
སྐྱོན་ཤེས་པ	1) knowing the faults. 2) doctor 195	skyon shes pa
སྐྱོན་ཤོར	breakdown	skyon shor
སྐྱོན་ཤོར་འགག་སྲུང	insurance	skyon shor 'gag srung
སྐྱོན་ཤོར་ཆོག་ཆོག	delicate	skyon shor chog chog
སྐྱོན་ཤོར་བ	damage, wreck	skyon shor ba
སྐྱོན་སེལ	exorcism of negativities	skyon sel
སྐྱོན་སེལ་བ	remove a blemish/fault/transgression/ mistake, correct[ion], pardon, repair, restore	skyon sel ba
སྐྱོན་སེལ་བྱེད	remove a blemish/fault/transgression/ mistake, correct[ion], pardon, repair, restore	skyon sel byed
སྐྱོན་སེལ་ཞུ	point out a mistake	skyon sel zhu
སྐྱོན་སེལ་ཞུ་བ	point out a mistake	skyon sel zhu ba
སྐྱོན་སྲངས	those who have overcome faults, wrongs	skyon srangs
སྐྱོན་གསང་བ	hide one's fault	skyon gsang ba
སྐྱོན་གསལ	removal of faults	skyon gsal
སྐྱོན་གསུམ	Three Defects. When listening to a Dharma talk: Not paying attention, not remembering, being mixed with impure motivation	skyon gsum
སྐྱོན་བསལ	clear up shortcomings	skyon bsal
སྐྱོན་བསལ་ཏོ	disclosed the fault	skyon bsal to
སྐྱོན་བསལ་བ	1) removed/restored/ corrected a transgression/ fault/ mistake; 2) Buddha	skyon bsal ba
སྐྱོན་བསྲང	criticism	skyon bsrang
སྐྱོན་བསྲང་བྱེད	criticize	skyon bsrang byed
སྐྱོན་ཧ་མ་གོ་བ	not perceive a fault or defect	skyon ha ma go ba
སྐྱོབ	Protector/ Savior; ward off	skyob
སྐྱོབ་མཁན	savior	skyob mkhan
སྐྱོབ་དངུལ	relief money	skyob dngul
སྐྱོབ་སྟོན	protector	skyob ston
སྐྱོབ་ཐབས	means of helping/ saving/ rescuing	skyob thabs
སྐྱོབ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	hopeless, helpless	skyob thabs med pa
སྐྱོབ་པ	{bskyabs pa, bskyab pa, skyobs}. 1) to protect, save, preserve, defend, support, rescue, help, ward off, deliver, escape [from danger], defect. 2) protector. [buddha]. 3) shelter. 4) assistance, re...	skyob pa
སྐྱོབ་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན	SA rje 'bring gung pa	skyob pa 'jig rten
སྐྱོབ་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་མགོན་པོ	Kyobpa Jigten Gönpo skyob pa 'jig rten mgon po rin chen dpal Kyobpa jigten gonpo rinchen pal skyob pa 'jig rten mgon po rin chen dpal Kyobpa Jigten Gönpo Rinchen Pal, [1143-1217]. Disciple of Phagm...	skyob pa 'jig rten mgon po
སྐྱོབ་པ་པོ	protector, guardian	skyob pa po
སྐྱོབ་པ་རིན་པོ	founder of drigung Kagyu School.	skyob pa rin po
སྐྱོབ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1143-1217	skyob pa rin po che
སྐྱོབ་པའི་ནུས་མཐུ	protective quality of (spiritual) power and might	skyob pa'i nus mthu
སྐྱོབ་པར་ནུས་པ	can protect {'khor ba dang ngan song gi sdug bsngal las skyob par mi nus pa} none of them can protect you from the sufferings of samsara or from rebirth in lower realms	skyob par nus pa
སྐྱོབ་ཕྱིར་གསོད་པ	to kill in order to save lives	skyob phyir gsod pa
སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	1) one who protects, protector. 2) n of Balabhadra	skyob byed
སྐྱོབ་སྦྱིན་པ	1 who gives refuge or shelter, protector	skyob sbyin pa
སྐྱོབ་མ	protectoress, help, assistance	skyob ma
སྐྱོབ་དམག	relief troops	skyob dmag
སྐྱོབ་ཚུལ	means of protection, way of escape	skyob tshul
སྐྱོབ་རོགས	aid, support, assistance, relief, protection, defense	skyob rogs
སྐྱོབ་རོགས་གནང	give aid/ support/ assistance/ relief/ protection/ defense	skyob rogs gnang
སྐྱོབ་ས	ward off, protect	skyob sa
སྐྱོབ་སྲུང	rescue, protection, defense	skyob srung
སྐྱོབ་སྲུང་འཁོར་ལོ	ambulance	skyob srung 'khor lo
སྐྱོབ་སྲུང་བྱེད	rescue, protect, defend	skyob srung byed
སྐྱོབ་གསོ	relief, aid	skyob gso
སྐྱོབ་གསོ་ཚོགས་པ	relief/ aid organization	skyob gso tshogs pa
སྐྱོབས	{skyob pa}!	skyobs
སྐྱོབས་པ	protector	skyobs pa
སྐྱོབས་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་མགོན་པོ	TSE Kyopa jigten gonpo	skyobs pa 'jig rten mgon po
སྐྱོབས་པའི་ལྷ་དགུ	nine protective deities	skyobs pa'i lha dgu
སྐྱོབས་བྱེད	one who protects, name of balabhadra	skyobs byed
སྐྱོབས་སྦྱིན་པ	giver of refuge or shelter	skyobs sbyin pa
སྐྱོབས་མ	preservation of life, escape, he that saves another's life, helper	skyobs ma
སྐྱོབས་བཞུམས	cried for help	skyobs bzhums
སྐྱོམ	{bskyoms, bskyom, skyom}. - 1) to shake, stir, agitate. 2) to drain. 3) to pour, pour out; {bskyoms, bskyom, skyom}. 1) to shake, stir, agitate. 2) to drain. 3) to pour, pour out	skyom
སྐྱོམ་སྐྱོམ	shake, stir, agitate	skyom skyom
སྐྱོམ་པ	{bskyoms} {bskyom} {skyom 1) shake, stir, agitate; 2) drain; 3) pour [out]	skyom pa
སྐྱོམས	imp. of {skyom pa}	skyoms
སྐྱོར	{skyor ba}!	skyor
སྐྱོར་སྐྱོར	again and again, repeatedly	skyor skyor
སྐྱོར་བསྐྱོད་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	touring performance/ show	skyor bskyod 'khrab ston
སྐྱོར་བསྐྱོད་དམག་འཐབ	mobile warfare	skyor bskyod dmag 'thab
སྐྱོར་གྲྭ	rehearsal class	skyor grwa
སྐྱོར་གརབ༹	rehearsal class	skyor grva
སྐྱོར་ཏེ་སླང་བ	prop	skyor te slang ba
སྐྱོར་དུན་རྩེ	Kyor Düntse	skyor dun rtse
སྐྱོར་དཔོན	rehearsal teacher, lead reciter / chanter, the student, leader of a monastic class	skyor dpon
སྐྱོར་བ	{bskyor} {bskyar} {skyor} 1) recite, repeat, rehearse; 2) support, hold [up], prop [up] paste, recite by heart; 3) serve seconds	skyor ba
སྐྱོར་འབྱིན	cunning, sly	skyor 'byin
སྐྱོར་སྦྱང	recital from memory, training in memorizing	skyor sbyang
སྐྱོར་སྦྱང་བྱེད	recite from memory, train in memorizing	skyor sbyang byed
སྐྱོར་སྦྱངས	recital from memory, training in memorizing	skyor sbyangs
སྐྱོར་སྦྱངས་བྱེད	recite from memory, train in memorizing	skyor sbyangs byed
སྐྱོར་སྦྱོང	home studies	skyor sbyong
སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང	a village with monastery west of lhasa	skyor mo lung
སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང་པ	name of Tibetan opera troupe	skyor mo lung pa
སྐྱོར་ཚིག	repetition, SA skyar ba	skyor tshig
སྐྱོལ	carry, accompany, SA skyel ba	skyol
སྐྱོལ་བ	see {skyel ba}	skyol ba
སྐྱོལ་མ	goddess Tara	skyol ma
སྐྱོས	imp. of {skya ba}	skyos
སྐྱོས་པ	wasted, spoiled, degenerated	skyos pa
སྐྱོས་མ	present, gift	skyos ma
སྐྲ	hair [on the head]	skra
སྐྲ་དཀར	gray hair	skra dkar
སྐྲ་རྐང	a single strand of hair	skra rkang
སྐྲ་སྐྱེས	head	skra skyes
སྐྲ་སྐྱོག་པ	pull out the hair	skra skyog pa
སྐྲ་ཁ	to pleat hair	skra kha
སྐྲ་ཁང	barber shop	skra khang
སྐྲ་ཁམ་པ	brownish hair	skra kham pa
སྐྲ་ཁུང་གི་སྒོ	shutters	skra khung gi sgo
སྐྲ་ཁུང་གི་སྒོ་ལེགས	board for a window	skra khung gi sgo legs
སྐྲ་མཁན	barber	skra mkhan
སྐྲ་གྱེན་དུ་འགྲེང་བ་ལྟ་བུ	one whose hairs stand upwards as bristles	skra gyen du 'greng ba lta bu
སྐྲ་གྲི	razor	skra gri
སྐྲ་གྲོལ	1) w a loose or carelessly worn hair; 2) Vishnu}	skra grol
སྐྲ་གྲོལ་བ	loosed hair	skra grol ba
སྐྲ་སྒྲ་སྒྲི་ཅན	ribbon of silk or cotton attached to the hair	skra sgra sgri can
སྐྲ་བསྒྲིལ་བ	plaited hair, curled hair	skra bsgril ba
སྐྲ་ཅན	1) hairy. 2) Kesin [n. of an asura]	skra can
སྐྲ་ཅན་གྱི་སེང་མོ	n. of the goddess Uma	skra can gyi seng mo
སྐྲ་ཅན་གནས	lady's bed-chamber	skra can gnas
སྐྲ་ཅན་མ	thief's flower tree, kind of hairy worm, woman	skra can ma
སྐྲ་ཅན་གསོད	killer of Kesin [n. of Krishna]	skra can gsod
སྐྲ་གཅད	(gesture of) letting down/ combing out hair [in dance]	skra gcad
སྐྲ་གཅོད	to cut hair	skra gcod
སྐྲ་བཅིངས	binding the hair, fillet of hair	skra bcings
སྐྲ་ཆིངས	hair ribbon	skra chings
སྐྲ་ཉག་གཅིག	single tuft of hair	skra nyag gcig
སྐྲ་གཉིས་པ	comet	skra gnyis pa
སྐྲ་བརྙན	wig, false hair	skra brnyan
སྐྲ་བསྙན	fake hair, wig	skra bsnyan
སྐྲ་ཏོག་པ	pull out the hair	skra tog pa
སྐྲ་ཐུག་པོ	thick/ lots of hair	skra thug po
སྐྲ་ཐུང་ཐུང	very short hair	skra thung thung
སྐྲ་ཐུང་བ	hairdos [in the case of a monk]	skra thung ba
སྐྲ་དང་ཁ་སྤུ་འབྲེག་མཁན	one who shaves the head and moustache	skra dang kha spu 'breg mkhan
སྐྲ་དང་སྤུ་འབྱི་བར་འགྱུར	the hair of the head and body will fall off	skra dang spu 'byi bar 'gyur
སྐྲ་དོ་ཀེར	hair dressed and plaited together on crown of head	skra do ker
སྐྲ་དོ་ཀེར་ཅན	having a head surmounted by an excrescence, having a head the size and shape of which make it seem turbaned	skra do ker can
སྐྲ་མདུད	hair knot	skra mdud
སྐྲ་མདོག་སེར་པོ	blonde	skra mdog ser po
སྐྲ་འདྲེས་མ	celestial courtesan	skra 'dres ma
སྐྲ་སྡེམ	bow, ribbon for hair	skra sdem
སྐྲ་གནས	species of sensitive plant	skra gnas
སྐྲ་རྣམས་མེད་ཅིང	shaved his head	skra rnams med cing
སྐྲ་སྣུམ	hair oil	skra snum
སྐྲ་ཕུད	tuft of hair [cut by the preceptor when taking ordination or by a	skra phud
ལམ་ཨཏ་ཨ་ནམེ	giving ceremony]	lama at a name
སྐྲ་འཕྱི་བ	pull out the hair	skra 'phyi ba
སྐྲ་འཕྱིངས	matted hair	skra 'phyings
སྐྲ་བ་གླང་གི་སྤུ་འདྲ་བ	hair like that of a bull	skra ba glang gi spu 'dra ba
སྐྲ་བྱི	lose hair, hair falling out	skra byi
སྐྲ་བྲེགས	shaven-head	skra bregs
སྐྲ་བྲེགས་པ	to shave one's hair / head	skra bregs pa
སྐྲ་འབལ་ཅན	indian religious sect	skra 'bal can
སྐྲ་འབལ་བ	pull out the hair	skra 'bal ba
སྐྲ་འབྲེག་མཁན	barber	skra 'breg mkhan
སྐྲ་འབྲེགས	shaved/ cut the hair	skra 'bregs
སྐྲ་རྦད་རྦད	hair style w hair at about ear length	skra rbad rbad
སྐྲ་རྦད་རྦོད	thick hair	skra rbad rbod
སྐྲ་མེད་མགོ	head without hair, nutmeg, jarminum grandiflorum	skra med mgo
སྐྲ་ཙལ	false hair, peruke	skra tsal
སྐྲ་རྩ	clotted hair	skra rtsa
སྐྲ་རྩེ	hair ends	skra rtse
སྐྲ་རྩེ་བརྒྱར་གཤགས་ཀྱི་ཚད་ཙམ་ཨབོཨུཏ་ཐེ་སིཟེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཧཻར	tip split into hundred parts	skra rtse brgyar gshags kyi tshad tsam about the size of a hair
སྐྲ་རྩེགས་མ	celestial damsel	skra rtsegs ma
སྐྲ་ཚབ	wig 197	skra tshab
སྐྲ་ཚོགས	hair	skra tshogs
སྐྲ་ཚོམ	topknot	skra tshom
སྐྲ་མཚམས	arrangement of the hair	skra mtshams
སྐྲ་འཛིངས	be tangled [hair]	skra 'dzings
སྐྲ་རྫུས	wig	skra rdzus
སྐྲ་ཞགས	locks of hair of women	skra zhags
སྐྲ་ཞེང	thin hair	skra zheng
སྐྲ་གཞར	shave/cut the hair	skra gzhar
སྐྲ་གཞར་ཁང	barber shop	skra gzhar khang
སྐྲ་གཞར་མཁན	barber	skra gzhar mkhan
སྐྲ་གཞར་བ	shaving of one's hair	skra gzhar ba
སྐྲ་གཞུག	hair ribbon/ tassel	skra gzhug
སྐྲ་བཞད་པ	comb hair	skra bzhad pa
སྐྲ་བཞར	shaved/ cut the hair	skra bzhar
སྐྲ་བཞར་ཁང	barber shop	skra bzhar khang
སྐྲ་བཞར་མཁན	barber	skra bzhar mkhan
སྐྲ་བཞར་པ	have a haircut	skra bzhar pa
སྐྲ་བཞར་བ	1) shaved/ cut the hair; 2) barber	skra bzhar ba
སྐྲ་བཞར་ར	barber [shop? [Gold]	skra bzhar ra
སྐྲ་ཟིངས	vanity, pride	skra zings
སྐྲ་གཟེར	barber, napkin	skra gzer
སྐྲ་བཟང	1) good, beautiful [hair]; 2) yaksha goddess {skra bzang	skra bzang
སྐྲ་བཟང་མ	a yaksa goddess	skra bzang ma
སྐྲ་ཡི་ཕྲེང་བ	smoke	skra yi phreng ba
སྐྲ་ཡི་མཚམས	hairline	skra yi mtshams
སྐྲ་རིང་པོ	braided hair	skra ring po
སྐྲ་ལི་བ	curls, curly hair	skra li ba
སྐྲ་ལེ་བ	curly hair, dress the hair	skra le ba
སྐྲ་ལོ	pleat [of hair]	skra lo
སྐྲ་ཤད	comb, hair brush; 1) a strand of hair. 2) a comb, combing, hair tuffs	skra shad
སྐྲ་ཤད་རྒྱག	comb [one's hair]	skra shad rgyag
སྐྲ་ཤད་ལྟར	like a strand of hair	skra shad ltar
སྐྲ་ཤད་དུ་སྣང་བ	seen as a tuff of hair	skra shad du snang ba
སྐྲ་ཤད་པ	to comb [one's hair]	skra shad pa
སྐྲ་ཤད་བྱེད	comb [one's hair]	skra shad byed
སྐྲ་ཤད་འབབ་པ	falling hair	skra shad 'bab pa
སྐྲ་ཤད་འཛག་པ་ལྟར	ex. for {med bzhin du snang ba'i rdzun pa}	skra shad 'dzag pa ltar
སྐྲ་ཤད་འཛགས་སྣང	a false appearance of falling hair	skra shad 'dzags snang
སྐྲ་ཤིས་ལྷུན་པོ	{skra shis lhun po	skra shis lhun po
སྐྲ་གཤོར་བོ	thick hair	skra gshor bo
སྐྲ་སད	hair separator, comb	skra sad
སྐྲ་སིལ་བུ	thin hair	skra sil bu
སྐྲ་སེ་བོ	grey hair	skra se bo
སྐྲ་སེན་བྲེག་པ	cutting hair and nails	skra sen breg pa
སྐྲ་སེར་པོ	blond	skra ser po
སྐྲ་སེར་བ	albino	skra ser ba
སྐྲ་ལྷས་མ	pigtail	skra lhas ma
སྐྲག	terrified	skrag
སྐྲག་སྐྲག	hard	skrag skrag
སྐྲག་དགོས་པ	terrible, dreadful, horrible, fearful	skrag dgos pa
སྐྲག་དངངས	feeling bewildered, fear	skrag dngangs
སྐྲག་ཅིང་དངངས་ཏེ	startled and terrified	skrag cing dngangs te
སྐྲག་ཅིང་སྡང	wrought with anxiety	skrag cing sdang
སྐྲག་དོགས	apprehensions, misgivings, suspicions	skrag dogs
སྐྲག་སྣང	fear, fright	skrag snang
སྐྲག་སྣང་སྐྱེ་དགོས	dreadful, horrible, fearful	skrag snang skye dgos
སྐྲག་སྣང་སྐྱེ་དགོས་པ	terrible	skrag snang skye dgos pa
སྐྲག་སྣང་བསྐུལ	scare, frighten	skrag snang bskul
སྐྲག་སྣང་བྱེད	fear, be frightened	skrag snang byed
སྐྲག་སྣང་སློང	intimidate, threaten, menace	skrag snang slong
སྐྲག་པ	fear, be afraid of, be terrified, frightened, afraid of something	skrag pa
སྐྲག་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	struck with fear	skrag pa skyes pa
སྐྲག་པ་ཤིང	malus rocki rehd.	skrag pa shing
སྐྲག་པའི	worry	skrag pa'i
སྐྲག་པའི་རྒྱུ	something terrible	skrag pa'i rgyu
སྐྲག་པའི་གནས	that which is terrifying skrag pa'i mig g.yo - x {yid gdung bas skrag pa'i mig g.yo} miserable and afraid, averted her eyes	skrag pa'i gnas
སྐྲག་པར་བྱ་བ	become frightened	skrag par bya ba
སྐྲག་པར་བྱེད་པ	terrifying	skrag par byed pa
སྐྲག་བྱེད	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	skrag byed
སྐྲག་བྱེད་མ	Terrifying Goddess, [Santrasini]. [wife of the sun]	skrag byed ma
སྐྲག་མེད	1) not afraid, fearless. 2) soft light, lackluster. See {bkrag med}	skrag med
སྐྲག་ལ་འཚེར་བ	sharp and brilliant	skrag la 'tsher ba
སྐྲག་སློང	threat, menacing, intimidation	skrag slong
སྐྲག་སློང་བྱེད	intimidate, threaten, menace	skrag slong byed
སྐྲགས	{skrag pa}!	skrags
སྐྲགས་པ	[p {skrag pa}	skrags pa
སྐྲང	to swell	skrang
སྐྲང་བ	{skrangs pa, skrang ba}. to swell up, be swollen, puff up; {skrang ba, skrangs pa, skrang ba} intr. v.; to swell, be swollen; ft. of {skrang ba}	skrang ba
སྐྲང་འབུར	abscess	skrang 'bur
སྐྲང་སོང	it is swollen	skrang song
སྐྲངས	1) [p {skrang ba}; 2) a swelling/ tumor	skrangs
སྐྲངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱང་ཀི	a medicine	skrangs kyi spyang ki
སྐྲངས་པ	swelling	skrangs pa
སྐྲངས་པོ	swelling, tumor	skrangs po
སྐྲངས་འབུར་འཇོམས	a medicinal tree which removes tumors	skrangs 'bur 'joms
སྐྲད	expelling	skrad
སྐྲད་པ	to expel (hindrances)	skrad pa
སྐྲན	tumor, fleshy excrescence in the abdomen, concretion under the skin or in bowels, swelling of the glands, 1 of 6 chronic diseases, SA gcong chen nad drug	skran
སྐྲན་ནད	cancer	skran nad
སྐྲན་པ	cancer	skran pa
སྐྲབ	{skrabs, bskrabs}. to trample, stamp down, tread	skrab
སྐྲབ་པ	see {'khrab pa}. to stamp, tread	skrab pa
སྐྲའི་བཀོད་པ	well-braided hair, fillet of hair	skra'i bkod pa
སྐྲའི་ཁྱོན་ནམ་བྱིས་པའི་ལམ	hair parting	skra'i khyon nam byis pa'i lam
སྐྲའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	grove, garden, a vegetable	skra'i rgyal po
སྐྲའི་ཅོད་པན	tiara	skra'i cod pan
སྐྲའི་རྣམ་གྱུར	curly hair, dress the hair	skra'i rnam gyur
སྐྲའི་བྱི་དོར	SA skra sad	skra'i byi dor
སྐྲའི་རྩེ་མོའི་མཐའ	hair-end	skra'i rtse mo'i mtha'
སྐྲའི་ལྭ་བ	kind of hair cloth	skra'i lwa ba
སྐྲའི་ལན་བུ	hair plaids, braids	skra'i lan bu
སྐྲས་ཀ	see {skas}	skras ka
སྐྲི་བ	conduct, send	skri ba
སྐྲི་ཞིག	let him send	skri zhig
སྐྲུ་བ	wait, cut	skru ba
སྐྲུག་པ	{dkrug pa}	skrug pa
སྐྲུད་པ	make another run away by devices	skrud pa
སྐྲུན	make, form, construct, produce, publish	skrun
སྐྲུན་ཁང	publishing house	skrun khang
སྐྲུན་པ	{bskrun pa} {bskrun pa} {skrun 1) make, construct, produce; 2) publish	skrun pa
སྐྲུམ	meat (honored people)	skrum
སྐྲུས	{skru ba}!	skrus
སྐྲེ	(not in DAS)	skre
སྐྲོག	beat (the drum)	skrog
སྐྲོག་པ	{skrog pa, bskrogs pa, bskrog pa, skrogs} trans. v.; {bskrogs pa, bskrog pa, skrogs}. 1) to beat / play [a drum]. 2) to churn, stir	skrog pa
སྐྲོགས	{skrog pa}!	skrogs
སྐྲོང་ས	{skrong sa} Bhutan	skrong sa
སྐྲོད	imp. of {skrod pa}	skrod
སྐྲོད་པ	{skrod pa, bskrad pa, bskrad pa, skrod} trans. v. 1) to drive away, banish, chase out, expel, dispel, drive out, cast out. 2) to hand. 3) to eject. 4) expulsion	skrod pa
སྐྲོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of expulsion [of a monk from a dwelling]	skrod pa'i ltung byed
སྐྲོན	(not in DAS)	skron
དརྐིས་མ	something tied/ wrapped up, package	drkis ma
བརྐམ	(tha mi dad pa,, desire, crave, long for, be attached to	brkam
བརྐམ་ཆགས	deeply rooted attachment	brkam chags
བརྐམ་པ	{brkam pa, brkam pa, brkam pa} intr. v.; 1) desire. 2) attachment. 3) greed; greed	brkam pa
བརྐམ་སྲེད	desire, attachment, clinging, craving	brkam sred
བརྐམས	1) variant pf. of {rkam}. 2) to dry	brkams
བརྐུ	steal, SA rku ba	brku
བརྐུ་བ	will dig [up] engrave, carve [f {rku ba}	brku ba
བརྐུ་བར་བྱ	steal, SA rku ba	brku bar bya
བརྐུ་བྱ	article to be stolen	brku bya
བརྐུ་བྱའི་རྫས	that may be stolen, stolen property	brku bya'i rdzas
བརྐུན་པ	[arch] dig up, engrave, carve	brkun pa
བརྐུས	to steal	brkus
བརྐུས་ཁྱེར	steal other's things unseen	brkus khyer
བརྐུས་ཁྱེར་བྱེད	steal other's things [unseen], rob, plunder	brkus khyer byed
བརྐུས་འཁྱེར	steal other's things [unseen], theft, robbery, plunder	brkus 'khyer
བརྐུས་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	steal other's things [unseen], rob, plunder	brkus 'khyer byed
བརྐུས་འཇལ	fine/ penalty for stealing	brkus 'jal
བརྐུས་ཏེ་བོར་བ	abandon or throw away a thing after stealing it	brkus te bor ba
བརྐུས་ནོར	stolen goods, loot, plunder	brkus nor
བརྐུས་ནོར་བགོ	divide up stolen goods/ loot/ plunder	brkus nor bgo
བརྐུས་པ	pf. of {rku ba}; pf. of {rku ba}	brkus pa
བརྐུས་པ་འཇལ་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	among the {zhal lce bcu drug}, gzhan nor brkus tshabs che chung la gzhigs pa'i rkun 'jal gyi fault punishing law	brkus pa 'jal gyi zhal lce
བརྐུས་རྫས	stolen goods, loot, plunder	brkus rdzas
བརྐུས་ཟིན་པ	stole	brkus zin pa
བརྐུས་ཟོག	stolen goods, loot, plunder	brkus zog
བརྐུས་གཟུང	illegal occupation/ seizure of property	brkus gzung
བརྐུས་ལེན	steal other's things [unseen], theft, robbery, plunder	brkus len
བརྐུས་ལེན་བྱེད	steal other's things [unseen], rob, plunder	brkus len byed
བརྐུས་བཤུས	plagiarism	brkus bshus
བརྐུས་བཤུས་བྱེད	plagiarize	brkus bshus byed
བརྐོ	to dig	brko
བརྐོ་སྤྱོད	1) gouge. 2) engraving tool	brko spyod
བརྐོ་བ	fut. of {rko ba}; ft. of {rko ba}; dig out, carve	brko ba
བརྐོ་བྱའི་ས	ploughed land	brko bya'i sa
བརྐོལ་ཕོར	a tsa-tsa mould; SA {brkos phor}	brkol phor
བརྐོས	mold/ sculpture	brkos
བརྐོས་མཁན	digger, one who hoes	brkos mkhan
བརྐོས་རྒྱབ་པ	engrave	brkos rgyab pa
བརྐོས་ཆུ	water in a pool/ well/ spring] chu	brkos chu
བརྐོས་སྡེར	claws carved in wood	brkos sder
བརྐོས་པ	dug [up], engraved, carved [p rko ba]	brkos pa
བརྐོས་ཕོར	mould for making clay images	brkos phor
བརྐོས་བྱང	engraved inscription	brkos byang
བརྐོས་མ	1) Syn {brkos ris}. 2) engraved. 3) carved. 4) sculptured	brkos ma
བརྐོས་རིས	sculpture, carving, engraving	brkos ris
བརྐོས་ཤུལ	carving debris	brkos shul
བརྐྱང	raised, extended, bent [f rkyong]	brkyang
བརྐྱང་སྐུམ	stretching and bending, expansion and contraction, flexible, elastic	brkyang skum
བརྐྱང་སྐུམ་བྱེད	stretch and bend, expand and contract, be flexible/ elastic	brkyang skum byed
བརྐྱང་བསྐུམ	stretch [out] and bend/ draw in	brkyang bskum
བརྐྱང་བསྐུམ་བྱེད་པ	to stretch and bend	brkyang bskum byed pa
བརྐྱང་ནུལ	[arch] aar ga'i zhal ba	brkyang nul
བརྐྱང་ཕྱག	salutation by prostrating the body on the ground	brkyang phyag
བརྐྱང་བ	stretch, SA rkyong ba	brkyang ba
བརྐྱང་མ	left channel, SA rkyang ma	brkyang ma
བརྐྱང་ཤིང	instrument of torture in tibet (extending-wood), cross in new testament	brkyang shing
བརྐྱངས	stretched forth; to stretch out	brkyangs
བརྐྱངས་ཁྲུ	cubit	brkyangs khru
བརྐྱངས་ཁྲུ་གང	The length from the end of the elbow (gru mo'i snas) to the tip of the stretched out middle finger (gung mdzub kyi rtse mo) is called one stretched cubit	brkyangs khru gang
བརྐྱངས་མཁྱིད	span, measure from extended thumb to little finger	brkyangs mkhyid
བརྐྱངས་ཉལ	sleep w arms and legs extended	brkyangs nyal
བརྐྱངས་འདོམ	extended fingers [measure]	brkyangs 'dom
བརྐྱངས་པ	stretch out, prostrate, extend [p rkyong ba]	brkyangs pa
བརྐྱངས་ཕྱག	full-prostration	brkyangs phyag
བརྐྱངས་ཤད	extend/ stretch the arms, legs etc.	brkyangs shad
བརྐྱངས་སོར་ལྔ	above the bent four fingers the thumb joints mtheb tshigs and finger? joints mdzub tsigs la joined sbyar ba'i ring tshad ???	brkyangs sor lnga
བརྐྱལ	swum [p {rkyal}	brkyal
བརྐྱལ་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	swam	brkyal rgyab zin pa
གསྐར་ཕྱེད་གསུམ	Tibetan coin worth	gskar phyed gsum
ཨོནེ	sixth of a tamka	one
གསྐུད་པའི་འབུ	silk-worm	gskud pa'i 'bu
གསྐྱ་གསོབ	hollow, empty	gskya gsob
གསྐྱོགས་པ	to find fault with	gskyogs pa
བསྐ་བ	astringent, thick	bska ba
བསྐང	mend 1) be amended. 2) be remedied. 3) be corrected. 4) be fulfilled. 5) atone. fulfill a wish. 6) fulfill samaya. 7) amend corruptions. 8) correct. 9) perverted views. 10) remedy carelessness. etc...	bskang
བསྐང་ཆོག	mending ritual. A practice to purify outer, inner and secret or innermost breaches and violations of a practitioner's Hinayana precepts, Mahayana vows, or Vajrayana commitments	bskang chog
བསྐང་གཏོར	fulfillment torma offering [to gods and protectors gsol mchod kyi rnam grangs fulfulling and amending torma]	bskang gtor
བསྐང་རྟེན་གྱི་རྫས	amendment materials/ offerings	bskang rten gyi rdzas
ཨས་སུཔཔོརཏ་ཕོ༹ར་ཨ་མེནདིང	ritual	as support for a mending
བསྐང་མདོས	thread-cross of fulfillment [ransom ritual with framework made of sticks and colored thread) ofering to deities and protectors]	bskang mdos
བསྐང་འཕྲིན	propitiation	bskang 'phrin
བསྐང་འཕྲིན་བསྟོད་བསྐུལ	fulfillment, enjoining, praise, and incitation	bskang 'phrin bstod bskul
བསྐང་བ	[ful]fill[ing offering], correct, satisfy, amend, remedy, appease, summon [f {skang ba}/ {skong ba}	bskang ba
བསྐང་རྫས	fulfillment articles/ offerings [for ritual of amending and restoring]	bskang rdzas
བསྐང་ཞིང་བཤགས	fulfillment and confession	bskang zhing bshags
བསྐང་ཞིང་བཤགས་པ	to mend [vows] and apologize [for misdeeds]	bskang zhing bshags pa
བསྐང་བཟློག་བསད་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོས་ཐྲེཨད	cross for mending, averting, and cutting down	bskang bzlog bsad gsum gyi mdos thread
བསྐང་བཤགས	amendment-confession offering; during a feast is the second feast offering (tshogs bar pa) among the three feast offerings; bar pa bskang bshags	bskang bshags
བསྐང་གསོ	offering to guardian deities, offering to gods, religious service	bskang gso
བསྐང་གསོ་གཏོང་བ	propitiate	bskang gso gtong ba
བསྐང་གསོ་གཏོར་ཆོག	torma ritual for mending and restoring	bskang gso gtor chog
བསྐང་གསོལ	fulfillment-petition; usually to a Dharma protector	bskang gsol
བསྐངས	fulfil, full to the brim, SA skong ba	bskangs
བསྐངས་པ	pf. of {skong ba}; 1) pf. of {skong ba}. 2) filled. 3) full. 4) fulfilled	bskangs pa
བསྐད་བྱས	to pretend	bskad byas
བསྐམ	bskam bya'i dngos po, dry up, SA skem pa	bskam
བསྐམ་ཆགས་ཀྱི་སྲེད་པ	desirous craving	bskam chags kyi sred pa
བསྐམ་པ	ft. of {skem pa}; 1) fut. of {skem pa}. 2) to dry	bskam pa
བསྐམ་པར་བྱ	dry up, SA skem pa	bskam par bya
བསྐམས	withered, dried up	bskams
བསྐམས་པ	1) pf. of {skem pa}. 2) weightloss sickness. 3) dried; pf. of {skem pa}	bskams pa
ཝེཨིགྷཏ	loss sickness	weight
བསྐར	hang up, SA skar ba	bskar
བསྐར་བ	1) separated. 2) enclosed	bskar ba
བསྐལ	obscuration (like curtains [see (ngos bskal]	bskal
བསྐལ་རྒྱ	lit. 100 aeons, but the meaning is "aeons," or "countless aeons," forever. [mss]	bskal rgya
བསྐལ་བརྒྱར	one hundred aeons	bskal brgyar
བསྐལ་བརྒྱར་བཞུགས་པ	to remain for a hundred aeons	bskal brgyar bzhugs pa
བསྐལ་ཆུང	a small aeon. [Around 8.400.000 years)	bskal chung
བསྐལ་ཆུང་བཞི	four small aeons. [one {bskal chen}.] Syn {'chags gnas 'jig stongs}; four small aeons. [= one bskal chen]: 'chags gnas 'jig stongs	bskal chung bzhi
བསྐལ་ཆེན	mahakalpa [according to the Abhidharmakosha tradition 80 small kalpas, acc to abhidharma-samuccaya = four {bskal chung} in human years dung phyur drug dang bye ba bdun sa ya gcig 'bum dgu khri gnyi...	bskal chen
ཏོ་ཨབྷིདྷརྨ	samuccaya = four {bskal chung} see {bskal pa chen po} eighty intermediate aeons {bar bskal} and is divided into; {chags pa'i bskal pa nyi shu} = twenty aeons of the formation of the universe {gnas ...	to abhidharma
བསྐལ་ཆེན་གྲངས་མེད་གསུམ	1) The three incalculable aeons. 2) the three great incalculable aeons. 3) according to Abhidharma tradition a period longer than a sixty digit number of years is counted as one incalculable aeon. ...	bskal chen grangs med gsum
བསྐལ་མཆོག	supreme kalpa	bskal mchog
བསྐལ་དོན	doubt	bskal don
བསྐལ་དོན་དུ་སོང་བ	entertaining doubt	bskal don du song ba
བསྐལ་དོན་གསུམ	the three kinds of "bskal don": [1) {dus kyi bskal don}: because of great length of time hard to realize 2) {yul gyi bskal don}: because the object is very long hard to realize, 3) {rang bzhin /ngo...	bskal don gsum
བསྐལ་པ	eon	bskal pa
བསྐལ་པ་ཀུན་བཀོད	display of all the kalpa/ all kalpas	bskal pa kun bkod
བསྐལ་པ་གྲངས་ཅན	for numbered ages	bskal pa grangs can
བསྐལ་པ་གྲངས་ལྡན	countable aeons	bskal pa grangs ldan
བསྐལ་པ་གྲངས་མེད	unnumbered ages	bskal pa grangs med
བསྐལ་པ་གྲངས་མེད་པ	innumerable kalpa	bskal pa grangs med pa
བསྐལ་པ་གྲངས་མེད་གསུམ	Three incalculable aeons. Incalculable refers to 201 the number ten followed by 52 zeros. three "uncountable/ innumerable" aeons	bskal pa grangs med gsum
བསྐལ་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	oceans of aeons	bskal pa rgya mtsho
བསྐལ་པ་ངན་པ	an evil aeon / period [without a buddha]. Syn {mun nag gi bskal pa}	bskal pa ngan pa
བསྐལ་པ་ཆུང་བ	Syn {bskal chung}	bskal pa chung ba
བསྐལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great eon	bskal pa chen po
བསྐལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ	the perfect delight of the great kalpa?	bskal pa chen po mngon par dga' ba
བསྐལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་དུམ་བུ་བཞི	the four great kalpa parts	bskal pa chen po dum bu bzhi
བསྐལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great kalpas [of this universe of 1) creation, 2) enduring 3) destruction 4) emptiness OR the four rdzogs ldan and so forth]	bskal pa chen po bzhi
བསྐལ་པ་འཇིག་པའི་རླུང	the kalpadestroying wind [The wind that will destroy the world at the end of the present kalpa syn, {dus mtha'i rlung}	bskal pa 'jig pa'i rlung
བསྐལ་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of kalpas	bskal pa gnyis
བསྐལ་པ་གཉིས་ལྡན	1) [dvaparayuga] the aeon of keeping two precepts. 2) the	bskal pa gnyis ldan
ཏྭོ	fold aeon	two
བསྐལ་པ་སྟོང	the universal destruction at the end of the kalpa	bskal pa stong
བསྐལ་པ་སྟོང་ཕྲག་དུ་མ	many thousands of aeons	bskal pa stong phrag du ma
བསྐལ་པ་མཐོང་ན་དགའ་བ	the kalpa delightful to see	bskal pa mthong na dga' ba
བསྐལ་པ་དང་ལྡན	see {skal ldan}	bskal pa dang ldan
བསྐལ་པ་དང་པོ	the first kalpa [after the formation of the world) period that did'nt last very long]	bskal pa dang po
བསྐལ་པ་དྲང་མེད་པ	innumerable kalpas; x {bskal pa drang med pa'i bar du tshogs bsags pa'i 'bras bu} the fruit of merits accumulated over innumerable kalpas	bskal pa drang med pa
བསྐལ་པ་དྲུག	the six kinds of aeons: 1) {chags bskal}. 2) {gnas bskal}. 3) {bar bskal}. 4) {bskal chen}. 5) {'jig bskal}. 6) {stongs bskal}	bskal pa drug
བསྐལ་པ་འདི་ཤེས་བྱ་བ	the knowables of this kalpa	bskal pa 'di shes bya ba
བསྐལ་པ་འདི་ཤེས་བྱ་བ་ལ	in such and such aeons	bskal pa 'di shes bya ba la
བསྐལ་པ་དཔག་མེད	countless aeons	bskal pa dpag med
བསྐལ་པ་བར་མ	intermediate Kalpa [acc	bskal pa bar ma
བསྐལ་པ་བར་མ་གསུམ	the three intermediate kalpas	bskal pa bar ma gsum
བསྐལ་པ་བྱེ་བ་སྟོང	a billion aeons	bskal pa bye ba stong
བསྐལ་པ་བྱེ་བ་མང་པོ	for many millions of kalpas / aeons	bskal pa bye ba mang po
བསྐལ་པ་བྱེ་བ་བསམ་ཡས་སུ	for myriad aeons	bskal pa bye ba bsam yas su
བསྐལ་པ་མ་འཇིག་གི་བར་དུ	until the end of the age	bskal pa ma 'jig gi bar du
བསྐལ་པ་མ་ཐོག	upward kalpa	bskal pa ma thog
བསྐལ་པ་མང་པོ	many kalpas	bskal pa mang po
བསྐལ་པ་མར་འགྲིབ	the eon diminishes	bskal pa mar 'grib
བསྐལ་པ་མེ་ཏོག་བཀོད་པ	the kalpa flower arrangement	bskal pa me tog bkod pa
བསྐལ་པ་མེ་ལྟར་འབར་བའི་རྒྱུད	Blazing	bskal pa me ltar 'bar ba'i rgyud
ལིཀེ་ཀལྤ	fire Tantra	like Kalpa
བསྐལ་པ་རྩོད་ལྡན	the age of strife [kali yuga, the time when human lives are 100 years. people mostly of the {rtza ba bzhi} do not keep even one and mutually quarrel = {tse lo brgya pa'i dus}	bskal pa rtsod ldan
བསྐལ་པ་བརྩི་ཚུལ་དྲུག	six ways of calculating aeons	bskal pa brtsi tshul drug
བསྐལ་པ་རྫོགས་ལྡན	1) [krita yuga] the age of completeness. 2) the perfected, aeon. 3) The first aeon, in which humans are able to keep the four root precepts in completeness	bskal pa rdzogs ldan
བསྐལ་པ་བཞི	the four kalpas:	bskal pa bzhi
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང	virtuous, virtue	bskal pa bzang
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོ	good kalpa, golden age	bskal pa bzang po
ཨིམམེནསེ་ཨོཅེཨན་ཨོན་ཝཧོསེ་སུརཕ༹ཅེ་ཨཔཔེཨརེད་ཨ་ཐོཨུསནད	petaled lotuses. The	immense ocean on whose surface appeared a thousand
གོདས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བྲཧམ	world, wondering how this could be, through clairvoyance understood it to signify that during this kalpa one thousand Buddhas would appear. "This will be a good kalpa", they said, and "Good" became...	gods of the Brahma
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོ་འདི་ཉིད	our own kalpa, the Good Kalpa	bskal pa bzang po 'di nyid
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་མདོ	the Good Kalpa Sutra bskal pa bzang po zhes bya ba'i mdo The Good Kalpa Sutra	bskal pa bzang po zhes bya ba'i mdo
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོའི་དུས	the time of the good kalpa.	bskal pa bzang po'i dus
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོའི་མདོ	bhadrakalpika	bskal pa bzang po'i mdo
བསྐལ་པ་བཟང་པོའི་ལུས	a body of the good kalpa	bskal pa bzang po'i lus
བསྐལ་པ་ཡ་ཐོག	the kalpa of completion [when people live tse lo khri thub [10,000 years?] and sa zhag dang, 'bras sa lu sogs live by enjoying a harvest without plowing.]	bskal pa ya thog
བསྐལ་པ་ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང	karmic wind of the kalpa	bskal pa las kyi rlung
བསྐལ་པ་ཤེས	astrologer	bskal pa shes
བསྐལ་པ་ཤེས་པ	accountant, astrologer	bskal pa shes pa
བསྐལ་པ་གསུམ་ལྡན	(tretayuga) [the kalpa of keeping three [precepts or in Kalachakra when the rigdens control 3/4 of the earth]	bskal pa gsum ldan
ཐྲེཨེ	fold aeon	three
བསྐལ་པའི་མཐའ	1) indefinite time span. 2) the end of the world, aeon. 3) period of dissolution of the universe. 4) Syn {'jig pa'i bskal pa}	bskal pa'i mtha'
བསྐལ་པའི་དུས་བཞི	the four periods of the aeon: 1) {rdzogs ldan}. 2) {gsum ldan}. 3) {gnyis ldan}. 4) rtsod ldan}	bskal pa'i dus bzhi
བསྐལ་པའི་མེ	apocalyptic fire/ fire at the end of time	bskal pa'i me
བསྐལ་པའི་མེ་དཔུང	the fire at the end of the aeon	bskal pa'i me dpung
བསྐལ་པས	universally, cosmically	bskal pas
བསྐལ་དཔག་མེད་པར	immeasurable kalpa	bskal dpag med par
བསྐལ་བ	1) An aeon. 2) world age. 3) kalpa. {bskal pa, bskal ba, bskal ba, bskal ba} intr. v	bskal ba
བསྐལ་བ་གཉིས	two kalpas	bskal ba gnyis
བསྐལ་མེ	1) conflagration which will destroy the universe at the end of the present kalpa. 2) kalpa fire. 3) {bskal pa'i me}. Syn {dus kyi me}. 4) cosmic fire	bskal me
བསྐལ་བཟང	good kalpa [fortunate aeon, Bhadrakalpa. bskal pa bzang po]	bskal bzang
བསྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Kalsang Gyatso (1708-1757). the Seventh Dalai Lama; Dalai lama vii, 1708-1757	bskal bzang rgya mtsho
བསྐལ་བཟང་འདིའི་རྒྱལ་བ	the victorious ones of this Good Aeon	bskal bzang 'di'i rgyal ba
བསྐལ་བཟང་པོ	happy or glorious period in which the buddhas appear	bskal bzang po
བསྐལ་བཟང་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddhas of the Good kalpa	bskal bzang sangs rgyas
བསྐལ་ལི	li tho good for many years	bskal li
བསྐལ་ལིའི་རེའུ་མིག	table showing 371 coursing six houses khyim drug spyi nor to be added	bskal li'i re'u mig
བསྐལ་སྲིད་ཆགས་པའི་གཞུང་ཆེན	great rites of the original formation of the bskal pa	bskal srid chags pa'i gzhung chen
བསྐས་མཁར	the elect, one who has been appointed	bskas mkhar
བསྐུ	ointment	bsku
བསྐུ་མཉེ	ointment massage, do massage	bsku mnye
བསྐུ་མཉེ་བྱ	do massage	bsku mnye bya
བསྐུ་མཉེ་བྱེད	massage	bsku mnye byed
བསྐུ་བ	[will] paint, smear, anoint [f {skud pa}	bsku ba
བསྐུག་པ	[f {skug pa}	bskug pa
བསྐུགས་པ	pf. of {skug pa}; pf. of {skug pa}	bskugs pa
བསྐུང	bury, SA skung ba	bskung
བསྐུང་བ	to conceal; ft. of {skung ba}	bskung ba
བསྐུངས	1) concealed. 2) hidden	bskungs
བསྐུངས་པ	hidden, buried, concealed [p skung ba]	bskungs pa
བསྐུངས་ཡིག	1) abbreviation. 2) condensation of several words into one	bskungs yig
བསྐུད་པ	oblivion	bskud pa
བསྐུབས	(not in DAS)	bskubs
བསྐུམ	drawn up, shrink, contract, bent, raised, SA skum pa, bend	bskum
བསྐུམ་ཁྲུ	about a cubit measure with the fingers drawn in a fist, cubit measure, about the measure of 15 inches from the elbow to the fisted middle finger	bskum khru
བསྐུམ་མཁྱིད	a measure of distance [equal to about one-half a span or a little over four inches]	bskum mkhyid
བསྐུམ་འཁྲིལ་བ	drawn around	bskum 'khril ba
བསྐུམ་འདོམ	measure of distance by stretching apart the two arms, a little less than a fathom's measure	bskum 'dom
བསྐུམ་པ	[f skum pa]	bskum pa
བསྐུམ་ཕྱག	salutation by bending the body and touching the ground with the head	bskum phyag
བསྐུམ་བྱེད	contract, draw in	bskum byed
བསྐུམས	shrink, contract, drawn up, SA skum pa	bskums
བསྐུམས་ཁྲུ	cubit	bskums khru
བསྐུམས་མཁྱིད	khu tsur gyi thumb brkyangs te measure	bskums mkhyid
བསྐུམས་འདོམ	lag sor bskums te 'jal ba'i 'dom gyi tshad	bskums 'dom
བསྐུམས་པ	[p {skum pa} curled, contracted, bent	bskums pa
བསྐུམས་ཕྱག	place the five points of the body on the ground, prostration	bskums phyag
བསྐུམས་སོར་ལྔ	lag sor bzhi bskums pa'i steng mtheb rtse mdzub tsigs la sbyar ba'i ring tshad	bskums sor lnga
བསྐུར	venerate, respect	bskur
བསྐུར་མཁན	consignor	bskur mkhan
བསྐུར་སྟི	Service of honor	bskur sti
བསྐུར་སྟི་བྱེད་པ	honor	bskur sti byed pa
བསྐུར་ཐབས	1) conferral of empowerment. 2) the means for conferring	bskur thabs
བསྐུར་འདེབས	1) censuring blame. 2) abuse	bskur 'debs
བསྐུར་ནས	carrying	bskur nas
བསྐུར་བ	confer	bskur ba
བསྐུར་བ་འདེབས་པ	censure, blame, abuse	bskur ba 'debs pa
བསྐུར་མཛད་པ	that you sent	bskur mdzad pa
བསྐུར་ཟིན་པ	sent	bskur zin pa
བསྐུར་འོས	1) respectable. 2) venerable. 3) worthy of respect. 4) worshipping	bskur 'os
བསྐུར་ཡིག	letter, correspondence	bskur yig
བསྐུར་གཤོམ	bskur rgyu'i gra sgrig ...Gnyen nye dur kha chems bskur gshom gyis ???	bskur gshom
བསྐུལ	excite, incite into action, SA skul ba, encouraged	bskul
བསྐུལ་བསྐྱོད་པ	to move	bskul bskyod pa
བསྐུལ་མཁན	supervisor, leader	bskul mkhan
བསྐུལ་འགྲོ	boat, ship	bskul 'gro
བསྐུལ་ངན	instigation, incitement [to do wrong]	bskul ngan
བསྐུལ་ངོར	1) at the request of. 2) fulfillment of a request	bskul ngor
བསྐུལ་གཅག་བྱེད་པ	prompt	bskul gcag byed pa
བསྐུལ་གཏམ	official notification 204	bskul gtam
བསྐུལ་སྟོབས	motive [force]	bskul stobs
བསྐུལ་ཐབས	way to exhort / request	bskul thabs
བསྐུལ་ཐམ	order [w official seal]	bskul tham
བསྐུལ་འདེད	impetus, motivation, encouragement, inspiration	bskul 'ded
བསྐུལ་འདེད་བྱེད་པ	coax	bskul 'ded byed pa
བསྐུལ་འདེབས	urge, incite, arouse [depreciation, underestimation, encouragement, impetus, motivation, urging, push, promotion, incentive, stimulus, inspiration]	bskul 'debs
བསྐུལ་བརྡའ	signal to call one to his business, signal to call workmen to their respective duties	bskul brda'
བསྐུལ་སྤེལ	spread and become all pervading, stimulus, impetus, inspiration, motivation	bskul spel
བསྐུལ་བ	[p and [f {skul ba} encouragement, invocation, exhortation, urging [admonition, arousing, incitation, requesting, admonishment, propelled, impel, exhort, remind, request] [one of the {yan lag bdun ...	bskul ba
བསྐུལ་བ་པོ	instigator	bskul ba po
བསྐུལ་བ་བཞིན	just as exhorted	bskul ba bzhin
བསྐུལ་བའི་ངོར	in response to, in the face	bskul ba'i ngor
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་རེqཨུཨེསཏ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་སོ	and-so	of the request from so
བསྐུལ་བའི་སྤང་བ	the offense of encouraging (gifts	bskul ba'i spang ba
བསྐུལ་བར་བྱ	excite, SA skul ba	bskul bar bya
བསྐུལ་བྱང	urging certificate (example of gter certificate)	bskul byang
བསྐུལ་བྱེད་འཁོར་ལོ	skul bskyod 'khor lo	bskul byed 'khor lo
བསྐུལ་མ	admonition, advice, exhortation, stimulus, encouragement, inspiration, motivation, agitation	bskul ma
བསྐུལ་མ་འདེབས	rebuke, incite	bskul ma 'debs
བསྐུལ་ཚིག	imperative [grammatical]	bskul tshig
བསྐུལ་ཞིང་གསོལ་བ་གདབ་པ	beseeching and supplicating (to remain and teach	bskul zhing gsol ba gdab pa
བསྐུལ་གཞུང	one who gets government works executed	bskul gzhung
བསྐུལ་ཟད	wear [& tear], wear out	bskul zad
བསྐུལ་ལོ	We invoke	bskul lo
བསྐུལ་སློང	stimulus, impetus	bskul slong
བསྐུས	1) anointed. 2) stained. 3) poisoned	bskus
བསྐུས་པ	pf. of {skud pa}; 1) pf. of {skud pa}. 2) flushed. 3) ointment	bskus pa
བསྐུས་པ་གནང་བ	to anoint	bskus pa gnang ba
བསྐེམ	[f skem] will dry [out]/ become thin	bskem
བསྐེམས	[p skem] dried [out]/ became thin	bskems
བསྐོ	select, SA sko ba	bsko
བསྐོ་མངག	appointment, assignment [to a post]	bsko mngag
བསྐོ་མངག་གནང	appoint, assign [to a post]	bsko mngag gnang
བསྐོ་མངག་བྱེད	appoint, assign [to a post]	bsko mngag byed
བསྐོ་བ	will order, admonish [f {sko ba}	bsko ba
བསྐོ་བྱ	the candidate to be appointed	bsko bya
བསྐོ་སྩལ	admonish workers	bsko stsal
བསྐོ་འཛུགས	admonish workers	bsko 'dzugs
བསྐོ་གཞག	appointment, nomination	bsko gzhag
བསྐོ་གཞག་གནང་བ	to appoint	bsko gzhag gnang ba
བསྐོ་གཞག་བྱེད་པ	appoint, nominate	bsko gzhag byed pa
བསྐོ་བཞག	appointment to a position or job	bsko bzhag
བསྐོ་ཡས	#	bsko yas
བསྐོག་ཞག	designate	bskog zhag
བསྐོང	to summon, to order to come	bskong
བསྐོང་འགུགས	summon those who have been sent	bskong 'gugs
བསྐོང་གཏོང	summon and send away/ dispatch [soldiers, workers]	bskong gtong
བསྐོང་བསྡུ	summon and gather, gathering	bskong bsdu
བསྐོང་བ	1) will appease, satisfy; 2) will [ful]fill; 3) supplement; 4) will amend, make up for; 5) will summon, call up; 6) will gather [f {skong ba}	bskong ba
བསྐོངས	imp. of {skong ba}	bskongs
བསྐོངས་པ	pf. of {skong ba}; alt. pf. of {skong ba}	bskongs pa
བསྐོད	to fulfill (hopes)	bskod
བསྐོན	be dressed	bskon
བསྐོན་པ	pf. of {skon pa}; ft. of {skon pa}; dressed	bskon pa
བསྐོབ	1) difficult situation/ part; 2) pit	bskob
བསྐོབ་ཏུ་ཆུད	to put in a difficult situation	bskob tu chud
བསྐོམ	(not in DAS)	bskom
བསྐོར	surrounded by	bskor
བསྐོར་ཀྱོག	devious	bskor kyog
བསྐོར་བསྐྱོད	circulation 205	bskor bskyod
བསྐོར་བསྐྱོད་སྨན་ཁང	ambulance	bskor bskyod sman khang
བསྐོར་བསྐྱོད་སྨན་བཅོས་རུ་ཁོག	mobile medical unit	bskor bskyod sman bcos ru khog
བསྐོར་འཁྱིར	spiral	bskor 'khyir
བསྐོར་བཅོམ	encirclement and suppression	bskor bcom
བསྐོར་འཆག	1) alternate, go around, take turns; 2) watch-man; 3) patrolling, policing	bskor 'chag
བསྐོར་འཆག་པ	1) alternate, go around, take turns; 2) watch-man, police man; 3) patrolling, policing	bskor 'chag pa
བསྐོར་འཆག་བྱེད	patrol, police	bskor 'chag byed
བསྐོར་འཆག་དམག	police force, policeman	bskor 'chag dmag
བསྐོར་ཏེ་འགྲོ	go from around	bskor te 'gro
བསྐོར་གཏོར	breaking [through] an encirclement, encircling and annihilating	bskor gtor
བསྐོར་གཏོར་བྱེད	break [through] an encirclement, encircle and annihilate	bskor gtor byed
བསྐོར་ཐེང	1) turn, revolve, spin, circle, whirl, go/ cycle, rotate, move around, go [home], move,; 2) surround, encircle, enclose, [besiege]; 3) make the rounds of, encircle, circumambulate; 4) wander throug...	bskor theng
བསྐོར་འདྲི	interrogation, inquest	bskor 'dri
བསྐོར་འདྲི་བྱེད	interrogate, conduct an inquest	bskor 'dri byed
བསྐོར་རྡུང	encirclement attack	bskor rdung
བསྐོར་ན་འཁོར་བ	when turned it revolves, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	bskor na 'khor ba
བསྐོར་ནས	bypass, go around	bskor nas
བསྐོར་ཕྱོགས	detour	bskor phyogs
བསྐོར་བ	to be turned around	bskor ba
བསྐོར་བ་བྱས	were circing round them	bskor ba byas
བསྐོར་བ་བྱེད་ཀྱང	circumambulations	bskor ba byed kyang
བསྐོར་བ་བྱེད་པ	to make rounds, circumambulations	bskor ba byed pa
བསྐོར་བའི་རྒྱན	ornament of circling repitition [among ornaments of meaning, don rgyan, words meaning or both	bskor ba'i rgyan
བསྐོར་བའི་རྒྱན་གསུམ	the three ornaments of bskor ba	bskor ba'i rgyan gsum
བསྐོར་བྱ་བ	cop	bskor bya ba
བསྐོར་མི	pilgrims	bskor mi
བསྐོར་ཞིབ	survey, inspection (tour	bskor zhib
བསྐོར་ཞིབ་བྱེད	survey, go on an inspection (tour	bskor zhib byed
བསྐོར་ཞིབ་དམག་གྲུ	cruiser bskor g.yeng - watch in all directions, inspect, patrol bskor g.yeng gru gzings - patrol boat bskor g.yeng rgyag - watch in all directions, inspect, patrol bskor g.yeng byed - watch in all ...	bskor zhib dmag gru
བསྐོར་ར	circumambulation	bskor ra
བསྐོར་ར་བསྐོར་བ	circumambulate a sacred object, go on a pilgrimage	bskor ra bskor ba
བསྐོར་ར་གནང་བ	[h] encircle, circumambulate	bskor ra gnang ba
བསྐོར་རེས	in rotation, 1 coming after another, by turns	bskor res
བསྐོར་རེས་བྱེད	rotate, 1 coming after another, take turns	bskor res byed
བསྐོར་ལམ	1) round about way. 2) circuitous route	bskor lam
བསྐོར་ལོག	turning counter-clockwise	bskor log
བསྐོར་བཤད	skad cha thad kar ma bshad par bskor nas bshad pa	bskor bshad
བསྐོར་བཤེར	survey, inspection (tour	bskor bsher
བསྐོར་སྲུང	policing, patrolling	bskor srung
བསྐོར་སྲུང་དུ་བཞག	leave someone on guard	bskor srung du bzhag
བསྐོར་སྲུང་དཔུང་སྡེ	police force	bskor srung dpung sde
བསྐོར་སྲུང་དཔུང་དམག	police force	bskor srung dpung dmag
བསྐོར་སྲུང་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	chief inspector of police	bskor srung spyi khyab
བསྐོར་སྲུང་བ	policeman, guard	bskor srung ba
བསྐོར་སྲུང་བྱེད	police, patrol	bskor srung byed
བསྐོར་སྲུང་དམག་མི	policeman, guard	bskor srung dmag mi
བསྐོལ	boil	bskol
བསྐོལ་གྲང	boiled and cooled [water etc]	bskol grang
བསྐོལ་འདན	winter drink w molasses, sngo phyur, and tsampa boiled in chang	bskol 'dan
བསྐོལ་ལྡན	winter drink w molasses, sngo phyur, and tsampa boiled in chang	bskol ldan
བསྐོལ་བ	ft. of {skol ba}; pf. of {skol ba}; 1) pf. and fut. of {skol ba}. 2) wellcooked. 3) infused	bskol ba
བསྐོལ་མ	a boiled liquid	bskol ma
བསྐོས	select, appoint, raise to the throne, SA bkod, sko ba, past of sko	bskos
བསྐོས་པ	pf. of {sko ba}; to establish; entrusted, appointed, nominated. pf. of {sko ba}. to expel, dispel, turn out, send away, drive out	bskos pa
བསྐོས་བཞག་གནང་བ	to appoint (someone to an office)	bskos bzhag gnang ba
བསྐྱ	carry, SA skya ba, transfer, SA skyas pa	bskya
བསྐྱ་བ	[f skya ba],; 1) will move to another residence * two [arch] will accompany, see off, deliver, bring, escort; 4) will stir tea, soup etc; 5) will [change] place, carry, convey, swim	bskya ba
བསྐྱ་བར་བྱ	transfer, SA skyas pa	bskya bar bya
བསྐྱག	spend, SA skyag pa	bskyag
བསྐྱང	practice, maintain, nurture, rest, sustain, lengthen, continue, preserve, practice, care for, help, keep [to], take care of, look after, cherish, guard, protect[er]; 2) enjoy; 3) rule, govern, fost...	bskyang
བསྐྱང་དུ་བཅུག	continue training	bskyang du bcug
བསྐྱང་དུ་མེད	numberless, immeasurable	bskyang du med
བསྐྱང་བ	[f {skyong ba} practice, maintain, nurture, rest	bskyang ba
བསྐྱང་བས་ཆོག་པ	it is enough to sustain	bskyang bas chog pa
བསྐྱང་བྱ	subjects, those to be protected	bskyang bya
བསྐྱང་བྱའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	protectorate	bskyang bya'i rgyal khab
བསྐྱང་འཚལ	please do!	bskyang 'tshal
བསྐྱངས	[p skyong ba] practice, maintain, nurture, rest, sustain, lengthen, continue, preserve, practice, care for, 206 help, keep [to], take care of, look after, cherish, guard, protect[er]; 2) enjoy; 3) ...	bskyangs
བསྐྱངས་པ	breed, to continue in, to sustain	bskyangs pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ་ཐེ་དེབ༹	gods	of all the deva
བསྐྱངས་བས	continuing in this way	bskyangs bas
བསྐྱངས་ཟིན་པ	bred	bskyangs zin pa
བསྐྱད་དུ་མེད་པ	[arch] immeasurable	bskyad du med pa
བསྐྱད་པ	[arch] struggle, contend, kill	bskyad pa
བསྐྱབ	[f {skyob pa} guard, keep, protect	bskyab
བསྐྱབ་པ	ft. of {skyob pa}; fut. of {skyob pa}	bskyab pa
བསྐྱབ་པར་བྱ་བའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings who are to be protected bskyab par bya ba'i sems can yal bar bor to forsake the beings who need protection bskyab par bya ba'i sems can yal bar bor disappear and reject sentient bei...	bskyab par bya ba'i sems can
བསྐྱབས	[p {skyob pa} protected, kept, guarded	bskyabs
བསྐྱབས་པ	protecting power, preserving cause	bskyabs pa
བསྐྱམ་པ	[f skyom pa] will shake, agitate, stir up	bskyam pa
བསྐྱམས	dried	bskyams
བསྐྱམས་པ	[p skyom pa] shook, agitated, stirred up	bskyams pa
བསྐྱར	1) again. 2) once more. 3) again and again. 4) explaining. 5) repeated. From {skyor ba} to repeat. 6) hold up. 7) prop	bskyar
བསྐྱར་སྐྱེ	rebirth, be reborn	bskyar skye
བསྐྱར་སྐྱེས་ཆུ་འབྲས	fertile rice grains	bskyar skyes chu 'bras
བསྐྱར་བསྐྲུན	rebuilding, reconstructing, renovating	bskyar bskrun
བསྐྱར་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	rebuild, reconstruct, renovate	bskyar bskrun byed
བསྐྱར་གྲངས	plurality, plural number	bskyar grangs
བསྐྱར་གྲོལ	re-free/ liberate	bskyar grol
བསྐྱར་གྲོས	re-discussion	bskyar gros
བསྐྱར་གྲོས་བྱེད	re-discuss	bskyar gros byed
བསྐྱར་འགལ	repeat offense	bskyar 'gal
བསྐྱར་འགལ་བྱེད	repeatedly offend/ violate	bskyar 'gal byed
བསྐྱར་འགོད	reproduction, restatement, republication, reprint	bskyar 'god
བསྐྱར་འགོད་བྱེད	reproduce, restate, republish, reprint	bskyar 'god byed
བསྐྱར་སྒྲིག	readjustment, reassembly, reorganization, coordination	bskyar sgrig
བསྐྱར་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	readjust, reassemble, reorganize, coordinate	bskyar sgrig byed
བསྐྱར་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	readjust	bskyar sgrig byed pa
བསྐྱར་བསྒྱུར	yang bskyar bsgyur ba,...Rang mtshams bskyar bsgyur dgos sam ci retranslate	bskyar bsgyur
བསྐྱར་བསྒྲགས	re-statement, reannouncement, re-publication	bskyar bsgrags
བསྐྱར་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	re-state, reannounce, re-publicize	bskyar bsgrags byed
བསྐྱར་གཅོད་དབང་ཆ	referendum	bskyar gcod dbang cha
བསྐྱར་བཅོས	alteration, adjustment, modification, remodeling, revision	bskyar bcos
བསྐྱར་བཅོས་བྱེད	alter, adjust, modify, remodel, revise	bskyar bcos byed
བསྐྱར་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	countermand	bskyar bcos byed pa
བསྐྱར་ཉེས	repeat offense/ violation	bskyar nyes
བསྐྱར་ཏེ་བཏང	it was repeatedly sent	bskyar te btang
བསྐྱར་དུ	1) again. 2) once more	bskyar du
བསྐྱར་དུ་དགང་བ	refill	bskyar du dgang ba
བསྐྱར་དུ་རྒྱུགས་ལེན	re-examin[ation]	bskyar du rgyugs len
བསྐྱར་དུ་འཇུགས་སྐྲུན་བྱེད་པ	reestablish	bskyar du 'jugs skrun byed pa
བསྐྱར་དུ་རྩིག་པ	rebuilt	bskyar du rtsig pa
བསྐྱར་དུ་རྩེད་པ	replay	bskyar du rtsed pa
བསྐྱར་དུ་འཚོལ་བ	research	bskyar du 'tshol ba
བསྐྱར་དུ་འཛུལ་བ	reenter	bskyar du 'dzul ba
བསྐྱར་དུ་བཟོ་བ	reproduce	bskyar du bzo ba
བསྐྱར་དུ་ཤུགས་གནོན་བྱེད་པ	recharge	bskyar du shugs gnon byed pa
བསྐྱར་དུ་སློང་བ	refresh	bskyar du slong ba
བསྐྱར་འདེབས	multiple planting/ cropping	bskyar 'debs
བསྐྱར་འདེམས	re-select/ elect	bskyar 'dems
བསྐྱར་ལྡབ	repetition	bskyar ldab
བསྐྱར་ལྡབ་བྱེད་པ	repeat	bskyar ldab byed pa
བསྐྱར་བསྡུར	review, overhaul, reexamine	bskyar bsdur
བསྐྱར་ནས་བསྐྱར་དུ	repeatedly	bskyar nas bskyar du
བསྐྱར་ནས་དགང་བ	replenish	bskyar nas dgang ba
བསྐྱར་སྣོན	supplementary, additional	bskyar snon
བསྐྱར་པ	repeated	bskyar pa
བསྐྱར་པར	reprinting/ publication, new edition	bskyar par
བསྐྱར་པར་རྒྱག	reprint/ publish, issue new edition	bskyar par rgyag
བསྐྱར་པར་འདེབས	reprint/ publish, issue new edition	bskyar par 'debs
བསྐྱར་དཔར	reprinting/ publication, new edition	bskyar dpar
བསྐྱར་དཔར་རྒྱག	reprint/ publish, issue new edition	bskyar dpar rgyag
བསྐྱར་དཔར་འདེབས	reprint/ publish, issue new edition	bskyar dpar 'debs
བསྐྱར་བ	alt. pf. of {skyor ba}; 1) pf. and fut. of {skyor ba}. 2) to repeat. 3) re do. 4) prop up. 5) hold up; alt. ft. of {skyor ba}	bskyar ba
བསྐྱར་བའི་སྒྲ	connective [also and yang]	bskyar ba'i sgra
བསྐྱར་བྱེད	to repeat, do again	bskyar byed
བསྐྱར་སྦྱོང	1) review, rehearse; 2) repeat, practice [again]; 3) exercise, homework	bskyar sbyong
བསྐྱར་སྦྱོང་གི་ས་བོན	exercise/ problem [academic]	bskyar sbyong gi sa bon
བསྐྱར་སྦྱོང་གི་སློབ་གཞི	exercise/ problem [academic]	bskyar sbyong gi slob gzhi
བསྐྱར་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	1) review, rehearse; 2) repeat, practice [again]; 3) do exercise/ homework	bskyar sbyong byed
བསྐྱར་མ	repeat [again and again]	bskyar ma
བསྐྱར་ཚད	frequency	bskyar tshad
བསྐྱར་ཚིག	repetition bskyar tshig lab skyor byed pa'i gtam repetitious talk	bskyar tshig
བསྐྱར་འཛུགས	re-construction/ establishment/ constitution/ building	bskyar 'dzugs
བསྐྱར་འཛུགས་བྱེད	re-construct/ establish/ constitute/ build	bskyar 'dzugs byed
བསྐྱར་འཛུལ	reentry	bskyar 'dzul
བསྐྱར་འཛོམས	reunion	bskyar 'dzoms
བསྐྱར་ཞིབ	review	bskyar zhib
བསྐྱར་ཞུ	postscript	bskyar zhu
བསྐྱར་ཞུགས	rejoining, going back to 207	bskyar zhugs
བསྐྱར་ཞུགས་བྱེད	rejoin, go back to	bskyar zhugs byed
བསྐྱར་གཞི	basis for repetition	bskyar gzhi
བསྐྱར་ཟློས	repetition, parroting	bskyar zlos
བསྐྱར་ཟློས་བྱེད	repeat, parrot	bskyar zlos byed
བསྐྱར་བཟོ	remaking/ producing/ manufacturing, revision	bskyar bzo
བསྐྱར་བཟོ་བྱེད	remake/ produce/ manufacture, revise	bskyar bzo byed
བསྐྱར་བཟོས	remaking/ producing/ manufacturing/ cycling, revision	bskyar bzos
བསྐྱར་བཟོས་འགྱིག	reprocessed/ recycled rubber	bskyar bzos 'gyig
བསྐྱར་བཟློས	Syn {bskyar zlos}	bskyar bzlos
བསྐྱར་བཟློས་བྱེད	repeat, parrot	bskyar bzlos byed
བསྐྱར་ལེན	resumption	bskyar len
བསྐྱར་ལོག	comeback, reversion, overthrowing	bskyar log
བསྐྱར་ལོག་རྒྱག	make a comeback, reverse, overthrow	bskyar log rgyag
བསྐྱར་བཤད	re-state/ announce	bskyar bshad
བསྐྱར་གསོ	recovery, restoration, restitution restoration, putting back in its original condition	bskyar gso
བསྐྱར་གསོ་བྱེད	recover, restore, make restitution, put back in its original condition	bskyar gso byed
བསྐྱར་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	renew, restore	bskyar gso byed pa
བསྐྱར་ལྷོང	recovery, restoration, restitution restoration, putting back in its original condition	bskyar lhong
བསྐྱལ	carry, SA skyel ba, past of skyel, recite, resounding	bskyal
བསྐྱལ་གྱིན	resounding	bskyal gyin
བསྐྱལ་ནུལ	[arch] Indian floor paste made of the five ingredients of a cow [ba byung lnga]	bskyal nul
བསྐྱལ་བ	escorted	bskyal ba
བསྐྱལ་ཤོག	fetch it	bskyal shog
བསྐྱས	carry, SA skya ba, transfer, SA skyas pa	bskyas
བསྐྱས་པ	transition, passage, progress [p skya ba]	bskyas pa
བསྐྱི	borrow, SA skyi ba	bskyi
བསྐྱི་གཉའ་བྱས	became surety for the loan	bskyi gnya' byas
བསྐྱི་བརྙ་བྱས་པ	nor nan gyis bskyi	bskyi brnya byas pa
བརྙ་བྱས་པ	borrow without repayment / repaying	brnya byas pa
བསྐྱི་བ	[f skyi ba] will borrow	bskyi ba
བསྐྱིག	bind, tie, fasten, hold in 1's arms	bskyig
བསྐྱིན་པ	debt, loan, borrowed goods or money, replacement/ payment for things lost/ damaged	bskyin pa
བསྐྱིམས་པ	[arch] sbyor kha byas pa ???	bskyims pa
བསྐྱིལ	1) {bskyed byed}. 2) producer	bskyil
བསྐྱིལ་ཆུ	water pooled and collected in a low place	bskyil chu
བསྐྱིལ་པ	pen up, SA skyil ba	bskyil pa
བསྐྱིལ་བ	1) pf. and fut. of {skyil ba}. 2) to keep. 3) detain; ft. of {skyil ba}; pf. of {skyil ba}	bskyil ba
བསྐྱིས	[p skyi ba] borrowed	bskyis
བསྐྱིས་པ	[p skyi ba] borrowed	bskyis pa
བསྐྱུག་པ	[f skyug pa] will vomit, throw up, feel disgusted, be nauseated, pour forth, come out forcefully, eject	bskyug pa
བསྐྱུགས་པ	pf. of {skyug pa}; pf. of {skyug pa}	bskyugs pa
བསྐྱུང	reduce, SA skyung ba	bskyung
སྭལློཝ་ཡོཨུར་སེལཕ༹	importance	swallow your self
བསྐྱུང་བ	[p f of {skyung} throw, cast away, fling, discard, reduce, diminish, make smaller/ lower, give up, abandon	bskyung ba
བསྐྱུངས	1) humility. See {khengs skyung}. 2) reduced. 3) diminished. 4) left. 5) abandoned	bskyungs
བསྐྱུངས་པ	pf. of {skyung ba}	bskyungs pa
བསྐྱུངས་བ	humility/ to subdue	bskyungs ba
བསྐྱུད	forget about!	bskyud
བསྐྱུད་ངས	forgetfulness, {brjed ngas}	bskyud ngas
བསྐྱུད་པ	ft. of {skyud pa}; pf. and fut. of {skyud pa}; pf. of {skyud pa}	bskyud pa
བསྐྱུད་བྱང	1) notes for recollection. 2) memorandum. 3) Syn {brjed byang}	bskyud byang
བསྐྱུར	1) let be. 2) point. 3) reduce	bskyur
བསྐྱུར་དུ་བཅུག་པ	cause anyone to cast of fling anything away	bskyur du bcug pa
བསྐྱུར་བ	[f p {skyur ba} abandon, reduce, leave behind	bskyur ba
བསྐྱུར་མོ	bad woman discarded by a husband/ real man	bskyur mo
བསྐྱེང	1) shame. 2) fear	bskyeng
བསྐྱེང་ས	[object of] shame, fear	bskyeng sa
བསྐྱེད	1) visualize; 2) arouse; 3) create, develop; 4) produce; 5) benefit; 6) interest, profit; 7) wave	bskyed
བསྐྱེད་བསྐྲུན	expansion, extension, growing wider	bskyed bskrun
བསྐྱེད་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	expand, extend, grow wider	bskyed bskrun byed
བསྐྱེད་གྲུབ	produced {pha yi rgyu yis ma bskyed ma yi rkyen las ma grub} was not conceived by a father or born from a mother	bskyed grub
བསྐྱེད་དང་རྫོགས་པ་ཟུང	union of utpattikrama and sampannakrama/ development and completion stages	bskyed dang rdzogs pa zung
བསྐྱེད་དང་རྫོགས་པ་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of the development and completion	bskyed dang rdzogs pa zung 'jug
བསྐྱེད་འདོད	growth, growing, wish to grow	bskyed 'dod
བསྐྱེད་བསྡུད	created and reabsorbed, generation and reabsorption	bskyed bsdud
བསྐྱེད་པ	I) ft. & pf. of {skyed pa}; for verbs, see {skyed pa}. II) 1) visualization, creative imagination. 2) {bskyed rim}; development stage, phase of development. 3) growth, improvement	bskyed pa
བསྐྱེད་པ་བགྱིའོ	have a conception of	bskyed pa bgyi'o
བསྐྱེད་པ་དང་རྫོགས་པ	[utpatti krama] development and completion [stages]	bskyed pa dang rdzogs pa
བསྐྱེད་པ་མ་ཧ་ཡོ་ག	Development Mahayoga	bskyed pa ma ha yo ga
བསྐྱེད་པ་མ་ཧཱ་ཡོ་ཧ	stage of development mahayoga bskyed pa rdzogs pa rdzogs pa chen po	bskyed pa ma hA yo ha
བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ	development procedure	bskyed pa'i tshul
བསྐྱེད་པའི་བཟོ	work of growing or rearing	bskyed pa'i bzo
བསྐྱེད་པའི་རིམ་པ	utpattikrama, developing stage [visualization stage w form, in sadhana]	bskyed pa'i rim pa
བསྐྱེད་པར་མཛད་པ	developed, produced	bskyed par mdzad pa
བསྐྱེད་བའི་རིམ་པ	development stage	bskyed ba'i rim pa
བསྐྱེད་བྱ	1) the product. 2) object to be produced etc. 3) produced. 4) born; {'bras bu}	bskyed bya
བསྐྱེད་བྱ་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the dependency of the produced and that which produces	bskyed bya skyed byed kyi rten 'brel
བསྐྱེད་བྱེད	{rgyu}; producer	bskyed byed
བསྐྱེད་ཚུལ	how (something) is produced	bskyed tshul
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས	1) development and completion [stages]. utpatti and sampannakrama. 2) two stages of a process of contemplation. 4) utpatti and sampannakrama; the Generation Process and the Perfection Process	bskyed rdzogs
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	the practice of development and completion	bskyed rdzogs kyi sgrub pa
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	Stages of development and completion. The two main aspects of Vajrayana practice	bskyed rdzogs kyi rim pa
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་ལས་བྱང	Practice manuals for development and completion. Sadhana texts and liturgies of tantric practices bskyed rdzogs sgom pa thams cad las	bskyed rdzogs kyi las byang
ཀྱང་ལྷག་པ	superior to all the practices of the generation and perfection phases	kyang lhag pa
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་བསྒོམ	the generation and perfection phase practices	bskyed rdzogs bsgom
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ངོ་བོ	the essence of what is to be realized through the generation and perfection phases	bskyed rdzogs bsgrub bya'i ngo bo
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་སྡེ་གསུམ	the three aspects of creation and perfection	bskyed rdzogs sde gsum
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་དམིགས་རིམ	visualization procedure for development and completion	bskyed rdzogs dmigs rim
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་རྫོགས་ཆེན	1) development. 2) completion 3) great perfection	bskyed rdzogs rdzogs chen
བཟང	the excellent practices of the development, completion, and Great Perfection stages	bzang
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of the generation and perfection phases	bskyed rdzogs zung 'jug
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་གསུམ	three aspects of creation and perfection [the creation stage {bskyed rim} the perfection stage {rdzogs rim} and the great perfection {rdzogs chen}	bskyed rdzogs gsum
བསྐྱེད་བཟླས	visualization and recitation	bskyed bzlas
བསྐྱེད་བཟླས་འབྲལ་མེད	never parting from visualization and recitation	bskyed bzlas 'bral med
བསྐྱེད་བཟླས་རྫོགས་གསུམ	development, recitation and completion	bskyed bzlas rdzogs gsum
བསྐྱེད་ཡུམ	mother	bskyed yum
བསྐྱེད་ཡོད་ན	if one has visualized	bskyed yod na
བསྐྱེད་རིམ	creation/ developing stage	bskyed rim
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་གྱི་དཔྱད་པའི་གནས་དྲུག	the six topics of examination of the developing stage	bskyed rim gyi dpyad pa'i gnas drug
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་གྱི་དབྱེ་བ་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 types of development stage	bskyed rim gyi dbye ba bcu gcig
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་བསྒོམ་པ	practices of the generation phase bskyed rim bsgom pa'i gnas skabs bzhi the four occasions of meditating in the developing stage bskyed rim bsgom pa'i gnas skabs bzhi four occasions of training in ...	bskyed rim bsgom pa
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་དབུ་མ	the Middle Way connected to development stage bskyed rim dang rdzogs rim sgom pa practices of the generation and perfection phases	bskyed rim dang 'brel ba'i dbu ma
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་སྣང་ཞེན་སྦྱོང་བ	to purify the clinging to the appearances of the development stage	bskyed rim snang zhen sbyong ba
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་པ	1 who practices the development stage	bskyed rim pa
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་པའི་སྤྱི་དོན	general meaning of the development stage / creation stage	bskyed rim pa'i spyi don
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle development stage	bskyed rim phra mo
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་བ	a practitioner of the development stage	bskyed rim ba
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་ཟིན་བྲིས	Notes for the Development Stage	bskyed rim zin bris
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་ཡན་ལག	the auxiliary of the development stage	bskyed rim yan lag
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་རགས་པ	gross development stage	bskyed rim rags pa
བསྐྱེད་བསྲིངས	1) Syn {skyed sring}. 2) brought up. 3) reared. 4) to raise. 5) to keep; to raise, rear	bskyed bsrings
བསྐྱེལ	conduct, accompany, SA skyel ba, to neglect, to deliver	bskyel
བསྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བློན་ཆེན	minister of communications	bskyel 'dren blon chen
བསྐྱེལ་བ	to consign/ carry/ send/ lead	bskyel ba
བསྐྱེས	(not in DAS)	bskyes
བསྐྱོག་པ	[f skyog pa]	bskyog pa
བསྐྱོགས	spend, SA skyag pa	bskyogs
བསྐྱོགས་པ	pf. of {skyog pa}	bskyogs pa
བསྐྱོང	(not in DAS)	bskyong
བསྐྱོང་བ	to maintain (one's experience of)/ protect/ sustain; to foster (a relationship with); isc. to continue (to experience)	bskyong ba
བསྐྱོངས	guard, SA skyong ba	bskyongs
བསྐྱོད	agitate, stir, move; soared; {skyod pa}	bskyod
བསྐྱོད་སྐབས་ལ	at the time of going or coming	bskyod skabs la
བསྐྱོད་འགོད་བྱེད	go	bskyod 'god byed
བསྐྱོད་འདོད	desirous to go, about to go	bskyod 'dod
བསྐྱོད་ནས	SA spos nas	bskyod nas
བསྐྱོད་པ	[p f {skyod pa} come, go [out], travel, walk, tread, move, shake, agitate, tremble, drift, be carried off, bound towards, expire, pass, elapse, be disturbed, flap, soar, move, agitate, arouse, stir...	bskyod pa
བསྐྱོད་པ་མི་མངའ	that which has never moved	bskyod pa mi mnga'
བསྐྱོད་པ་ཡང་བ	person who likes travelling	bskyod pa yang ba
བསྐྱོད་པ་ཡང་མ	moving again and again, at paroxysm	bskyod pa yang ma
བསྐྱོད་བྱེད་མ	Sancarini	bskyod byed ma
བསྐྱོད་མེད་པ	1) not shaking/ trembling; 2) a number	bskyod med pa
བསྐྱོད་འཚལ	please approach	bskyod 'tshal
བསྐྱོད་ཡས	55 digit number	bskyod yas
བསྐྱོན	skyon	bskyon
བསྐྱོན་པ	ft. of {skyon pa}; pf. of {skyon pa}	bskyon pa
བསྐྱོབ	(not in DAS)	bskyob
བསྐྱོམ	pour, SA skyom pa	bskyom
བསྐྱོམས	pour, SA skyom pa	bskyoms
བསྐྱོར་བསྐྱོད	move from place to place, mobile, circuit	bskyor bskyod
བསྐྱོར་བསྐྱོད་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	touring performance/ show	bskyor bskyod 'khrab ston
བསྐྱོར་བསྐྱོད་དམག་འཐབ	mobile warfare	bskyor bskyod dmag 'thab
བསྐྱོར་བ	pf. of {skyor ba}; ft. of {skyor ba}; pf. and fut. of {skyor ba}	bskyor ba
བསྐྱོས་པ	(A; 1) battle, dispute; 2) skyos pa [give? gift?] 210	bskyos pa
བསྐྲད	will drive/ drove/ send/ sent away, chase[d] out, expel[ed] [p f {skrod pa}	bskrad
བསྐྲད་འཆིང་བཀར་གསུམ	destructive magic to drive away, chain and separate	bskrad 'ching bkar gsum
བསྐྲད་པ	exorciscm	bskrad pa
བསྐྲད་པ་རྒྱག་བྱེད	expel, eject	bskrad pa rgyag byed
བསྐྲད་པ་རྒྱག་བྱེད་པ	banishment	bskrad pa rgyag byed pa
བསྐྲབས	[p skrab] stamped, tread	bskrabs
བསྐྲལ་པ	concealed, time period, various	bskral pa
བསྐྲུ	wait, cut, SA skru ba	bskru
བསྐྲུ་བ	will wait, cut, be smitten [f {skru ba}	bskru ba
བསྐྲུན	will multiply[ied], establish[ed], produce[ed], grow/ grew, print[ed], sow[ed], make/ made from [p f {skrun pa}	bskrun
བསྐྲུན་པ	produced, grown up, SA skrun pa, 1 of zhing las	bskrun pa
བསྐྲུན་བྱའི་ལོ་ཏོག	growing crop	bskrun bya'i lo tog
བསྐྲུས	wait, cut, SA skru ba, cut up	bskrus
བསྐྲུས་པ	pf. of {skru ba}	bskrus pa
བསྐྲེས་སྐོམ	hunger	bskres skom
བསྐྲོག་པ	[f {skrog pa} churn [with a stick]	bskrog pa
བསྐྲོགས་པ	pf. of {skrog pa}; 1) pf. of {skrog pa}. 2) to sound [a damaru]	bskrogs pa
བསྐྲོན	(not in DAS)	bskron
ཁ	1) face, front; 2) lips, mouth, snout; 3) words, talk, say; 4) opening, bank, shore, rim, surface; 5) measurement = 1 square [of width given]; 6) direction; 7) appearance; 8) the letter kha used in...	kha
བོདཡ	guard, experience physically, smack, interfere, meddle with, promise, kiss, inveigh, part, 1st particle in many words, snow, part, at the verge of, about to, bitter, some, several	body
ཁ་ཀྱེལ	kiss	kha kyel
ཁ་ཀྱེལ་བ	kiss	kha kyel ba
ཁ་ཀྱོག	crooked mouth/jaw	kha kyog
ཁ་ཀྲབ་པ	smack one's lips, make a clucking sound	kha krab pa
ཁ་ཀློ	people in upper klo yul	kha klo
ཁ་དཀར	politeness	kha dkar
ཁ་དཀར་ཁོག་ནག	white tongues and black hearts	kha dkar khog nag
ཁ་དཀར་ངོ་དཀར	bright day light	kha dkar ngo dkar
ཁ་དཀར་ངོ་དཀར་ནང	in broad daylight	kha dkar ngo dkar nang
ཁ་དཀར་གཏིང་ནག	crafty, cunning [lit.	kha dkar gting nag
ཨོཨུཏ་སིདེ	white, inside-black]; deceitful, treacherous [i.e. white on the surface, black underneath]	out side
ཁ་དཀར་པོ	1) bright. 2) auspicious	kha dkar po
ཁ་དཀྲི	cloth to tie round the face or cover the mouth, muffler, neck-cloth, raw silk manufactured in Assam	kha dkri
ཁ་དཀྲི་བྱེད	scarf, muffler, wrap neck/mouth in a scarf	kha dkri byed
ཁ་དཀྲིས	scarf, muffler	kha dkris
ཁ་བཀག	1) to block, to obstruct, to stop. 2) to apply brakes [car], to rein in a horse 3) to make airtight	kha bkag
ཁ་བཀག་པ	1) [make] not able to speak; 2) stop up a hole; 3) lame, unable to walk	kha bkag pa
ཁ་བཀང་བ	w full mouth	kha bkang ba
ཁ་བཀལ	1) use as an excuse/pretext; 2) blame	kha bkal
ཁ་བཀུག	1) at the end of clothing bkug pa'i tshem srub; 2) Rtar god po srab kha 'then kyang mi nyan par kha sgur brgyab pa,...Rta drel sogs kha bkug brgyab pa	kha bkug
ཁ་བཀྱེ་བ	Syn {kha 'gyed pa}	kha bkye ba
ཁ་བཀྲག་ཡ་ལེ་བ	an eloquent, radiant person	kha bkrag ya le ba
ཁ་བཀྲམ	to spread out, to be dispersed, scattered 211	kha bkram
ཁ་བཀྲམ་ནས་བདག་གཉེར	decentralized management	kha bkram nas bdag gnyer
ཁ་བཀྲམ་པ	decentralize	kha bkram pa
ཁ་བཀྲལ	put aside, separate	kha bkral
ཁ་བཀྲལ་ཏེ་བཞག་པ	separate, put aside	kha bkral te bzhag pa
ཁ་རྐྱང	alone	kha rkyang
ཁ་ལྐུག	dumb, indistinct speech	kha lkug
ཁ་ལྐུག་པ	dumb	kha lkug pa
ཁ་ལྐུགས་པ	dump, mute, indistinct [of speech]	kha lkugs pa
ཁ་ལྐུགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to silence, to get silent, dull, stupid. Syn {lkugs pa}	kha lkugs par byed pa
ཁ་སྐང	amendment, improvement, addition, augmentation; see also {kha skong}	kha skang
ཁ་སྐད	proverb; x {'jig rten pa'i kha skad la'ang zer ba ltar yin} as the proverb puts it:	kha skad
ཁ་སྐམ་པོ	(dry mouth unlucky	kha skam po
ཁ་སྐོང	1) add[ition], take a mouthful, fill up [a void]; 2) complete the #; 3) amendment, addition, anything that makes up a shortage; 4) a supplement; 5) fill up, fill in; 6) supplement fire puja amendin...	kha skong
ཁ་སྐོང་གི་ཆོས་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 additional things (for a fully ordained monk) [bsnyen rdzogs kyi dge 'dun mngon gyur gyi nang gses, kha skong gi chos la las gral du mi 'dug par'greng ba dang, yul de chad las sogs bya ba'i ...	kha skong gi chos bcu gsum
ཁ་སྐོང་བཅས	together with the amending number; [plus 10%]	kha skong bcas
ཁ་སྐོང་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	minor amendments	kha skong phran tshegs
ཁ་སྐོང་བ	1) to fill up, add, supplement, , fill up a void, make up a deficiency. 2) to take a mouthful. 3) appendix of a book	kha skong ba
ཁ་སྐོང་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	amending fire puja	kha skong sbyin sreg
ཁ་སྐོང་སྦྱིན་སྲེག་ཆོ་ག	fire puja liturgy for amending faults of suplications and ommissions [yi dam gang rung gi sgos blug pa'i fire puja or cho ga'i yan lag tshang bar blug pa'i las sbyor gyi sbyin sreg]	kha skong sbyin sreg cho ga
ཁ་སྐོམ	1) beverage, drinking water. 2) thirst	kha skom
ཁ་སྐོམ་ནས་ཁྲོན་པ་འདྲུ	do something too late, lack foresight	kha skom nas khron pa 'dru
ཁ་སྐོམ་པ	his throat felt very dry	kha skom pa
ཁ་སྐོམ་པོ	thirsty	kha skom po
ཁ་སྐོམས	thirst, mouth drying, thirsty	kha skoms
ཁ་སྐོར	1) circumference, perimeter; 2) turn around; 3) shop around for the best price, collect estimates	kha skor
ཁ་སྐོར་འདེམས་སྐོ	by election	kha skor 'dems sko
ཁ་སྐོར་བ	surround, speak cunningly	kha skor ba
ཁ་སྐོས	to give orders	kha skos
ཁ་སྐྱུར	ljang sprin te, lha 'bri ba tsho'i logs skad cig	kha skyur
ཁ་སྐྱུར་དྲི་ཆིལ་ཆིལ	his breath has a rotten stench	kha skyur dri chil chil
ཁ་སྐྱུར་པོ	olive	kha skyur po
ཁ་སྐྱུར་པོན	sour, of acid taste, olive, olive tree	kha skyur pon
ཁ་སྐྱུར་པོའི་ཤིང	olive tree	kha skyur po'i shing
ཁ་སྐྱུར་བ	1) tshos log pa; 2) sour tasting	kha skyur ba
ཁ་སྐྱེང་བ	be unable to reply out of shame	kha skyeng ba
ཁ་སྐྱེངས	shame	kha skyengs
ཁ་སྐྱེངས་པ	ashamed, embarrassed	kha skyengs pa
བསྔལ་བྱེད་དོ	felt so ashamed that they suffered as if they themselves were about to die	bsngal byed do
ཁ་སྐྱེད	zla srang kha skyed qv	kha skyed
ཁ་སྐྱེལ	kiss	kha skyel
ཁ་སྐྱེལ་བ	kiss	kha skyel ba
ཁ་སྐྱོང	as a means so that others can take care of themselves assist them of see to their livelihood	kha skyong
ཁ་སྐྱོར	heightening, raise the edge of a container to keep in the contents	kha skyor
ཁ་སྐྱོར་གཏོང	heighten, raise the edge of a container to keep in the contents	kha skyor gtong
ཁ་བསྐང	multiplication, increase, preservation, saving [p kha skong] added, made up a deficit, supplemented	kha bskang
ཁ་བསྐངས	amendment, updating	kha bskangs
ཁ་བསྐངས་པ	amended, {kha skong}	kha bskangs pa
ཁ་བསྐོང་བཅས	together with the additional number	kha bskong bcas
ཁ་བསྐོར་བ	1) discuss by each person speaking and then being questioned; 212 2) guide steer; 3) fool and leave behind (/ [p kha bskor]	kha bskor ba
ཁ་བསྐྱོགས་པ	1) kha phar gcus tshur gcus byas pa,...Rta kha phar phyogs su bskyogs pa; 2) Gros kha bsgyur ba,...Gros kha log par bskyogs pa	kha bskyogs pa
ཁ་ཁ	bitter; separate, apart	kha kha
ཁ་ཁ་བསྔད་པ	to be mute, be silent, sit speechless	kha kha bsngad pa
ཁ་ཁ་སྡོད	[h] bzhugs] keep quiet	kha kha sdod
ཁ་ཁ་བྱས་ནས	separately, individually, having separated/ been divorced	kha kha byas nas
ཁ་ཁ་བྱེད	separate, divorce	kha kha byed
ཁ་ཁ་མུ་ཁ	Kakamukha [one of {phra men brgyad}	kha kha mu kha
ཁ་ཁ་མུ་ཁ་ནག་མོ	black Kakamukha/ Raven-head	kha kha mu kha nag mo
ཁ་ཁ་མོ	bitter taste	kha kha mo
ཁ་ཁ་ལ	quietly, stealthily	kha kha la
ཁ་ཁ་སོ་སོ	individually, separately, separated, divided into compartments	kha kha so so
ཁ་ཁག	1) not speak at all; 2) separate parts, apart	kha khag
ཁ་ཁབ	cover, lid	kha khab
ཁ་ཁའི་ཐོ	register, index	kha kha'i tho
ཁ་ཁར	quietly, stealthily	kha khar
ཁ་ཁར་སྡོད་ཅིག	keep quiet!	kha khar sdod cig
ཁ་ཁར་བཞུགས་པ	1) not speak at all; 2) Logs su rang gar sdod pa	kha khar bzhugs pa
ཁ་ཁར་ལ་སྤྱིན	abscond	kha khar la spyin
ཁ་ཁུ	words, way of speaking, what 1 says	kha khu
ཁ་ཁུ་སིམ་པོ	1) solitary, not busied w activities, peaceful, tranquil; 2) w little speaking, quiet, silent	kha khu sim po
ཁ་ཁུ་སིམ་པོར	silently	kha khu sim por
ཁ་ཁུག་སིམ་པོ	quiet, peaceful, solitary	kha khug sim po
ཁ་ཁུངས་བྱེད	look for what someone wants/ opportunities for them	kha khungs byed
ཁ་ཁེངས	so tshang bar brjes zin pa'i phyugs kyi lo ming	kha khengs
ཁ་ཁེབས	veil, cover	kha khebs
ཁ་ཁོག་མི་མཚུངས་པ	saying one thing and meaning another, hypocritical	kha khog mi mtshungs pa
ཁ་ཁོག་མེད་པ	accord between what 1 thinks and says	kha khog med pa
ཁ་ཁོར	border, edge, circumference	kha khor
ཁ་ཁོལ	stunned, insensible	kha khol
ཁ་ཁྱག	guarantee surety, contradiction, denying one's liability	kha khyag
ཅོ	signer	co
ཁ་ཁྱག་པ	deny having undertaken to do a thing, denying one's liability	kha khyag pa
ཁ་ཁྱག་བྱེད་པ	attest, guarantee	kha khyag byed pa
ཁ་ཁྱུད	vessel's mouth rim/edge	kha khyud
ཁ་ཁྱེར	shelf or box on which birds perch, altar, raised seat, surrounding line or circumference of anything, surrounding edge of a cloth	kha khyer
ཙམ་གྱིས	you will only be verbally clever kha khyer dang tshig khyer la mkhas pa	tsam gyis
ཁ་ཁྱེར་དུ་བྱེད་པ	pay lip service	kha khyer du byed pa
ཁ་ཁྱེར་ལ	around it, on the rim	kha khyer la
ཁ་ཁྱེར་ལ་འཕང་ངོ	flung to the border	kha khyer la 'phang ngo
ཁ་ཁྲ	1) multicolored tattooed face; 2) kha khra tribe in the abor. country	kha khra
ཁ་ཁྲག་པ	to vomit blood	kha khrag pa
ཁ་ཁྲམ	cunning talk, deceitful language	kha khram
ཁ་ཁྲམ་པ	one who speaks cunningly so as to cheat	kha khram pa
ཁ་ཁྲལ	duty/obligation to speak	kha khral
ཁ་ཁྲིམས	discipline/rule of not talking to others	kha khrims
ཁ་ཁྲིམས་བསྡམས་པ	be bound by the discipline of not talking to others	kha khrims bsdams pa
ཁ་ཁྲེ	truck, lorry	kha khre
ཁ་མཁས	sweet-talking	kha mkhas
ཁ་མཁས་ཁོག་སྟོང	verbally facile but without real content	kha mkhas khog stong
ཁ་མཁས་འདྲ་ཆགས	talk that isn't true/ genuine, hypocrite, saying nice things but not meaning it	kha mkhas 'dra chags
ཁ་མཁས་པོ	(with skilled mouth tactful, very capable verbally, fast talking [often negative]	kha mkhas po
ཁ་འཁུར་ངན་ཤེད	evil exploitative force	kha 'khur ngan shed
ཁ་འཁེབས	cover, lid	kha 'khebs
ཁ་འཁོར	circumference of the mouth	kha 'khor
ཁ་འཁོར་བ	surround	kha 'khor ba
ཁ་འཁོར་མ	bride/wife returning home	kha 'khor ma
ཁ་འཁོལ་བ	mouth watering	kha 'khol ba
ཁ་འཁྱགས་ངོ་འཁྱགས	unpleasant talk and action	kha 'khyags ngo 'khyags
ཁ་འཁྱིག་པ	bind an animal's mouth, gag, strangle	kha 'khyig pa
ཁ་འཁྱེར	= {kha la 'khyer} do something in the name of ... kha khyer mere talk	kha 'khyer
ཁ་འཁྱེར་དང་ཚིག་ཁྱེར	mere talk and words	kha 'khyer dang tshig khyer
ཁ་འཁྱོམས	agitated, disturbed, ruffled (wind blowing through trees or over water	kha 'khyoms
ཁ་འཁྲིལ་བ	speak imperfectly like children, lisp, stammer	kha 'khril ba
ཁ་འཁྲུད་པ	rinse one's mouth, gargle	kha 'khrud pa
ཁ་ག་པོ	difficult	kha ga po
ཁ་ག་མ	square rug	kha ga ma
ཁ་གང	1) square; 2) monetary unit [arch] = 1/20 of a sho b = two 1/2 skar ma; 3) mouthful of food; 4) Nor lug sogs mdun so brgyad po brjes zin pa,??? 1 square (of cloth; 5) a paltry amount, a pittance; 5...	kha gang
ཁ་གང་དཀར་སྨྲ་བ	talk at random	kha gang dkar smra ba
ཁ་གང་དགར་སྨྲ	speak at pleasure	kha gang dgar smra
ཁ་གང་དགར་སྨྲ་བ	talk at random	kha gang dgar smra ba
ཁ་གང་བ	square	kha gang ba
ཁ་གང་བྱུང་དུ་ཤོར་བ	say whatever comes out	kha gang byung du shor ba
ཁ་གང་མ	square [cushion]	kha gang ma
ཁ་གབ	cover, lid	kha gab
ཁ་གོང	snow ball	kha gong
ཁ་གྱའ་བ	itch	kha gya' ba
ཁ་གྱར་བ	to name, to give a nickname	kha gyar ba
ཁ་གྱུ་བ	kha tshur log pa'am, kha tshur phyogs pa,...Phar 'gro bzhin du tshur kha gyu ba	kha gyu ba
ཁ་གྱེངས་པ	distraction, wandering; negligent speech	kha gyengs pa
ཁ་གྱེན་བསྟན	facing upwards	kha gyen bstan
ཁ་གྱེན་ཕྱོགས	raising face, looking up or at	kha gyen phyogs
ཁ་གྱེར་བ	the flaring edge of the mouth (of a bell, wide mouth	kha gyer ba
ཁ་གྱེལ	wide mouth	kha gyel
ཁ་གྱེལ་བ	distraction, wandering	kha gyel ba
ཁ་གྱེས	separate, part	kha gyes
ཁ་གྱེས་པ	1) separate, put aside; 2) scatter; 3) [opening] new leaves	kha gyes pa
ཁ་གྱོ་ངོས་ལེན	give a [personal] verbal statement/ promise	kha gyo ngos len
ཁ་གྱོག་མཛུབ་འཁྲི	kha'i gyog po mdzub mor 'khri bas te, 'os babs 'gan 'khri'i gtam dpe	kha gyog mdzub 'khri
ཁ་གྱོང་ཆེ	hard, stubborn	kha gyong che
ཁ་གྱོང་པ	1) stubborn person. 2)	kha gyong pa
ཧརད	mouthed [of a horse]	hard
ཁ་གྱོང་པོ	[tough mouth] able to hold one's own verbally, tough negotiator	kha gyong po
ཁ་གྱོན	outer garments worn over inner ones	kha gyon
ཁ་གྲག་པ	1) speak; 2) answer [verbally]	kha grag pa
ཁ་གྲགས	1) pay attention to, take notice of; 2) speak, vocalize	kha grags
ཁ་གྲགས་པ	pay attention to, take notice of	kha grags pa
ཁ་གྲགས་ཡས་མི་འདུག	was speechless	kha grags yas mi 'dug
ཁ་གྲངས	number, enumeration	kha grangs
ཁ་གྲངས་ཀྱི་ཐོ	statistics	kha grangs kyi tho
ཁ་གྲངས་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete count	kha grangs ma tshang ba
ཁ་གྲམ	1) [go] separately; 2) [be] dispered/ scatter[ed] [in every direction] divide in sections/kinds, spread out	kha gram
ཁ་གྲམ་པ	1) [go] separately; 2) [be] dispered/ scatter[ed] [in every direction] divide in sections/kinds, spread out	kha gram pa
ཁ་གྲུ	corner or limit or sphere of a place, corner of the mouth, width of the mouth of a vessel, opening of the mouth	kha gru
ཁ་གྲོགས	friend in words	kha grogs
ཁ་གླ	rental fee	kha gla
ཁ་གླལ་བ	yawn gape	kha glal ba
ཁ་གླིང	border country	kha gling
ཁ་གླིང་སྒྲ	noise of the foe which	kha gling sgra
ཨརིསེས་ཨིན་ཨ་བཏཏླེ	field	arises in a battle
ཁ་དགབ	cover up	kha dgab
ཁ་དགའ་ངོ་དགའ	1) though 1 is not joyful put on a joyful expression; 2) mi la kha snyan ngo 'dzum byed pa	kha dga' ngo dga'
ཁ་དགའ་ངོ་བསྟོད	praising as if joyfully though not joyful	kha dga' ngo bstod
ཁ་དགྲི	neck cloth	kha dgri
ཁ་བགྱིད་པ	[arch] kha gtong ba	kha bgyid pa
ཁ་བགྲད་མཆེ་གཙིགས	open the mouth and clench the fangs	kha bgrad mche gtsigs
ཁ་བགྲད་པ	gape	kha bgrad pa
ཁ་འགག	mouth	kha 'gag
ཁ་འགགས	appetite is gone	kha 'gags
ཁ་འགགས་པ	1) closed hole; 2) stop speaking	kha 'gags pa
ཁ་འགལ་ཚིག་འགལ	earlier words not agreeing w the later	kha 'gal tshig 'gal
ཁ་འགུལ	1) cheeks jaws shaking; 2) eat; 3) declare, state[ment] talk kha 'gul tsam zhig kyang byas ma song didn't make any statement at all	kha 'gul
ཁ་འགོག	wish, request	kha 'gog
ཁ་འགོག་པ	1) hindering. 2) mute, one who does not speak	kha 'gog pa
ཁ་འགྱུར	not stay with one's former story, tr	kha 'gyur
ཁ་འགྱུར་བ	1) to interpret, to translate. 2) to change color	kha 'gyur ba
ཁ་འགྱེད	branch from the root	kha 'gyed
ཁ་འགྱེད་པ	gape, branch from the root	kha 'gyed pa
ཁ་འགྲམ	close to	kha 'gram
ཁ་འགྲིག	unanimous, of one voice or opinion	kha 'grig
ཁ་འགྲིག་པ	of the same opinion	kha 'grig pa
ཁ་འགྲིག་པོ	well suited, fitting, appropriate, agreeable, suitable	kha 'grig po
ཁ་འགྲིལ	1) clothing and vessels mtha' 'gril [piping/ cord used as trim at the edges; 2) be in agreement, of the same opinion, loose tufts of thread; 3) selvedge; 4) molding	kha 'gril
ཁ་འགྲེག་པ	unanimity in deposition, all of one expression or speech	kha 'greg pa
ཁ་འགྲེམ	1) [go] separately; 2) [be] dispered/ scatter[ed] [in every direction] divide in sections/kinds, spread out	kha 'grem
ཁ་འགྲོ་བརྟན་ཡིག	dakini script	kha 'gro brtan yig
ཁ་རྒན	aged animal	kha rgan
ཁ་རྒན་པོ	phyugs rigs na so mtho ba,...Rta drel kha rgan po	kha rgan po
ཁ་རྒས་པ	old horse/animal	kha rgas pa
ཁ་རྒོད	ill or rough language, slanderer	kha rgod
ཁ་རྒོད་གཏིང་རྒོད	speak fearlessly and really be so	kha rgod gting rgod
ཁ་རྒོད་པོ	/ (1eloquent, verbal[ly articulate]/ facile/ gifted, pleasantly speaking, sweet talking ..Gtam kha rgod stong bshad mkhas mdog kha; 2) verbally agressive/ rough/ tough [person]	kha rgod po
ཁ་རྒོད་བྱེད་པ	to slander	kha rgod byed pa
ཁ་རྒྱ	1) 'phred zheng ngam rgya khyon, width, extent; 2) Yig shubs sogs kyi kha dang phyi rol la btab pa'i rgya	kha rgya
ཁ་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	narrow course of a river	kha rgya chung ba
ཁ་རྒྱག	close	kha rgyag
ཁ་རྒྱག་པ	talking much	kha rgyag pa
ཁ་རྒྱགས་པ	[fat mouth] sassy, cheeky, impertinent, wise guy	kha rgyags pa
ཁ་རྒྱན	betel-leaf which the indians chew (beautifier of the mouth)	kha rgyan
ཁ་རྒྱབ	food and clothing	kha rgyab
ཁ་རྒྱབ་གཉིས་མེད	w neither food nor clothing	kha rgyab gnyis med
ཁ་རྒྱབ་པ	seal	kha rgyab pa
ཁ་རྒྱལ་བ	to win a dispute	kha rgyal ba
ཁ་རྒྱས་པ	bloom, full blown, yawn	kha rgyas pa
ཁ་རྒྱུ་བྲོ་རྒྱུ	taste Zas de sa zos pa bzhin ...Skad cha de la kha rgyu bro rgyu mang po 'dug	kha rgyu bro rgyu
ཁ་རྒྱུ་བྲོ་རྒྱུ་གང་ཡང་མི་འདུག	had no taste at all	kha rgyu bro rgyu gang yang mi 'dug
ཁ་རྒྱུ་དབང་ཐང	all 1's possessions	kha rgyu dbang thang
ཁ་རྒྱུ་གཤིན་པོ	1) soft/ agreeable speech; 2) Kha la nyan po	kha rgyu gshin po
ཁ་རྒྱུག	idle talk, unfounded assertion	kha rgyug
ཁ་རྒྱུག་གཞན	w/o speak what others have said	kha rgyug gzhan
ཁ་རྒྱུགས	oral examination	kha rgyugs
ཁ་རྒྱུད	oral tradition, mystical doctrine not allowed bo be written down	kha rgyud
ཁ་རྒྱུན	1) oral tradition, folk saying/ tales; 2) rkyal snod kyi kha sgrog ko rgyun	kha rgyun
ཁ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྩོམ་རིག	oral literature	kha rgyun gyi rtsom rig
ཁ་རྒྱུན་དུ་འགྱུར	become part of the oral tradition/ legendary/ generally known	kha rgyun du 'gyur
ཁ་རྒྱུན་དུ་ཆགས	become part of the oral tradition/ legendary/ generally known	kha rgyun du chags
ཁ་སྒང	Khagang, at Mapha Ri, in Domey	kha sgang
ཁ་སྒོ	opening of the mouth	kha sgo
ཁ་སྒོ་སྐྱེ་འབྲས་ལེགས་པ	having a handsome exterior	kha sgo skye 'bras legs pa
ཁ་སྒོང	supplement	kha sgong
ཁ་སྒོར	shoulder bone	kha sgor
ཁ་སྒྱུར	1) change color, dye; 2) change the direction 1 is facing; 3) change the manner; 4) steer, direct, guide; 5) substitute, change, turn, switch over	kha sgyur
ཁ་སྒྱུར་དངུལ་ཆས	changed color	kha sgyur dngul chas
ཁ་སྒྱུར་ཅི	lead the beings	kha sgyur ci
ཁ་སྒྱུར་གཏོང	1) change color, dye; 2) change the direction 1 is facing; 3) change the manner; 4) steer, direct, guide; 5) substitute, change, turn, switch over	kha sgyur gtong
ཁ་སྒྱུར་བ	1) to steer, direct, guide, change direction. 2) to change colors [e.g. by dyeing], substitute, change, turn, switch over; to govern	kha sgyur ba
ཁ་སྒྱུར་བྱེད	1) change color, dye; 2) change the direction 1 is facing; 3) change the manner; 4) steer, direct, guide; 5) substitute, change, turn, switch over	kha sgyur byed
ཁ་སྒྱེར	lip circle	kha sgyer
ཁ་སྒྲིན	gullible	kha sgrin
ཁ་སྒྲིལ་པོ	unified, w/o dissension	kha sgril po
ཁ་སྒྲོག	binding cord for a leather bag, purse etc., shoe strap/ lace	kha sgrog
ཁ་སྒྲོག་རྒྱག	tie up binding cord for a leather bag, purse etc, shoe strap/ lace	kha sgrog rgyag
ཁ་སྒྲོག་བཤིག	untie binding cord for a leather bag, purse etc, shoe strap/ lace	kha sgrog bshig
ཁ་སྒྲོབ	missing the point, boasting, exaggerating	kha sgrob
ཁ་སྒྲོབ་ཚར་པོ	boastful	kha sgrob tshar po
ཁ་སྒྲོབ་བཤད	miss the point, boast, exaggerate	kha sgrob bshad
ཁ་སྒྲོམ	talk missing the point, boasting, exaggeration	kha sgrom
ཁ་བརྒྱ	1 who talks [too] much, gossipy, catty	kha brgya
ཁ་བརྒྱུད	pass/ go through	kha brgyud
ཁ་བརྒྱུད་པ	to (provide the) link; ongoing/ continuous succession; to perpetuate	kha brgyud pa
ཁ་བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཚེ	throughout the course of all	kha brgyud pa'i tshe
ཁ་བསྒོས	advice	kha bsgos
ཁ་བསྒོས་པ	give advice/ counsel to other[s]	kha bsgos pa
ཁ་བསྒྱུར	alteration, distortion [thd]	kha bsgyur
ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བ	amplify, paraphrase a passage	kha bsgyur ba
ཁ་ངད	vapor from the mouth, snowy vapor	kha ngad
ཁ་ངན	bad language	kha ngan
ཁ་ངན་སྨྲས	slandered	kha ngan smras
ཁ་ངར་ཆེན	hard, cruel words	kha ngar chen
ཁ་ངལ	kha thang chad pa,...Mi nyan pa la shod pa kha ngal rogs red	kha ngal
ཁ་ངིངས	bound, suppressed	kha ngings
ཁ་ངོ	face	kha ngo
ཁ་ངོམས	to ge quenched	kha ngoms
ཁ་ངོམས་གྲོད་འགྲངས	be relieved of hunger and thirst Rang nyid kha ngoms grod 'grangs yong thabs bya rgyu las gzhan gyi skyid sdug mi lta ba	kha ngoms grod 'grangs
ཁ་ངོམས་པ	to be full, to sate oneself	kha ngoms pa
ཁ་ངོར་ལྟ་བ	look at the face	kha ngor lta ba
ཁ་དངོམ་པ	by pride kha bde ngom so bshad pa,...Lag len med par btang btang byung byung gis kha dngom pa	kha dngom pa
ཁ་དངོས	arrogant, proud speech	kha dngos
ཁ་མངག	send on a mission, put in charge of	kha mngag
ཁ་མངག་བྱེད	order, command	kha mngag byed
ཁ་མངར	bitter and sweet	kha mngar
ཁ་མངར་བ	skad cha 'jam 'jam snyan snyan shod tshul	kha mngar ba
ཁ་མངལ	unclear taste on top of the tongue [phlegm disease sign]	kha mngal
ཁ་མངལ་བ	bad offensive smell from the mouth	kha mngal ba
ཁ་ལྔ་པ	poet, lion	kha lnga pa
ཁ་སྔ་བ	former speaker[ing]	kha snga ba
ཁ་བསྔལ	get tired from talking	kha bsngal
ཁ་ཅག	best sort of wool for manufacturing shawls	kha cag
ཁ་ཅིག	some/ several/ a few	kha cig
ཁ་ཅིག་གིས	by someone	kha cig gis
ཁ་ཅིག་ཏུ	unanimously, in agreement	kha cig tu
ཁ་ཅིག་དག	some	kha cig dag
ཁ་ཅིག་ན་ཡེ	some says	kha cig na ye
ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ	some say	kha cig na re
ཁ་ཅིག་བོ	some[one]	kha cig bo
ཁ་ཅིག་ཙམ	few rare cases	kha cig tsam
ཁ་ཅིག་ལས	from some	kha cig las
ཁ་ཅུར	kashmir, kashmirian	kha cur
ཁ་ཅུལ	Cashmere	kha cul
ཁ་ཅོལ	disorderly/ indiscriminate/ idle/ small/ meaningless talk	kha col
ཁ་གཅང	eloquent	kha gcang
ཁ་གཅང་པོ	1) eloquent; 2) pleasant talk/ speech	kha gcang po
ཁ་གཅང་བྱེད་པ	to speak eloquently	kha gcang byed pa
ཁ་གཅིག	Syn {kha cig}	kha gcig
ཁ་གཅིག་ཁོག་གཉིས	example of words and feelings not being in accord	kha gcig khog gnyis
ཁ་གཅིག་གྲག	everything in agreement/unity	kha gcig grag
ཁ་གཅིག་ལྕེ་གཉིས	1 mouth two stories	kha gcig lce gnyis
ཁ་གཅིག་ཏུ་མཐུན་པ	agreeing in an account	kha gcig tu mthun pa
ཁ་གཅུ	1) turn to another direction twist; 2) steer	kha gcu
ཁ་གཅུ་བ	1) turn to another direction; 2) steer	kha gcu ba
ཁ་གཅུས་སྣ་གཅུས	mouth and nose turning left and right, talk of others etc. 'dod par mi 'bab pa'i rnam 'gyur zhig	kha gcus sna gcus
ཁ་གཅུས་པ	maneuver	kha gcus pa
ཁ་གཅོད	cover, lid	kha gcod
ཁ་གཅོད་རྒྱག	cover	kha gcod rgyag
ཁ་གཅོད་རྒྱག་པ	cover	kha gcod rgyag pa
ཁ་གཅོད་དམ་པོར་རྒྱག་པ	tightly cover	kha gcod dam por rgyag pa
ཁ་གཅོད་པ	to cover	kha gcod pa
ཁ་གཅོད་ཕྱེ	open the cover/ lid	kha gcod phye
ཁ་གཅོད་ཕྱེ་བ	open the cover/ lid	kha gcod phye ba
ཁ་བཅད	covering	kha bcad
ཁ་བཅད་པ	covering	kha bcad pa
ཁ་བཅུད	a medicinal substance	kha bcud
ཁ་བཅུས	turn, twist	kha bcus
ཁ་བཅོལ	idle talk, prattle	kha bcol
ཁ་བཅོལ་ངག་བཅོལ	1) make/ send a [verbal] statement answer; 2) verbally don bcol ba	kha bcol ngag bcol
ཁ་བཅོལ་བ	send a message	kha bcol ba
ཁ་ལྕགས	steel	kha lcags
ཁ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་མཆུ	"iron beak" [n. of a crow in hell]	kha lcags kyi mchu
ཁ་ལྕང་ཅན	eloquent	kha lcang can
ཁ་ལྕེ་བདེ་བ	eloquent	kha lce bde ba
ཁ་སཅགས་ཀྱི་མཆུ	"iron beak" (the crow from hell	kha scags kyi mchu
ཁ་ཆ	verbal message/ answer	kha cha
ཁ་ཆག	defect in the blade (of a knife or an axe), abuse, ill language, chipped, broken edge	kha chag
ཁ་ཆག་སྣ་རལ	torn mouth, broken and torn, misfortune	kha chag sna ral
ཁ་ཆག་པ	1) snod spyad sogs kyi kha grams pa; 2) diminish, lessen, subtract	kha chag pa
ཁ་ཆད	gtan 'khel [settled, determined, resolved] apopointment, engagement [oath/ conclusion] oral agreement/ contract/ promise,	kha chad
ཁ་ཆད་བསྒོ	make an [oral] agreement/ contract	kha chad bsgo
ཁ་ཆད་འཇོག་པ	agree on, arrange	kha chad 'jog pa
ཁ་ཆད་དོན་ལ་གནས་པ	abide in the consusion/oath	kha chad don la gnas pa
ཁ་ཆད་དོར	break one's word/ agreement	kha chad dor
ཁ་ཆད་བྱེད	make an [oral] agreement/ contract	kha chad byed
ཁ་ཆད་བྱེད་པ	agree on, arrange	kha chad byed pa
ཁ་ཆད་བཞག	make an [oral] agreement/ contract	kha chad bzhag
ཁ་ཆད་ཡོད་པ	promise	kha chad yod pa
ཁ་ཆད་ལ་མ་གནས	break one's word/ agreement	kha chad la ma gnas
ཁ་ཆད་ལ་བརྩི	keep one's agreement/word	kha chad la brtsi
ཁ་ཆབ	[arch] 1) saliva; 2) thin chang	kha chab
ཁ་ཆར	snow and rain	kha char
ཁ་ཆར་བུ་ཡུག	blizzard, storm w snow and rain	kha char bu yug
ཁ་ཆིག	some/ several/ a few	kha chig
ཁ་ཆིག་ན་རེ	some/ several/ a few say . . .	kha chig na re
ཁ་ཆིངས	taming or appeasing of wild beast by witchcraft	kha chings
ཁ་ཆིངས་བརྒྱབ་པ	subdue, suppress	kha chings brgyab pa
ཁ་ཆུ	spit	kha chu
ཁ་ཆུ་འཁོལ་བ	mouth-watering, succulent	kha chu 'khol ba
ཁ་ཆུ་འཁོལ་བའི	mouth-watering, succulent	kha chu 'khol ba'i
ཁ་ཆུ་རྒྱག	sue, dispute, quarrel	kha chu rgyag
ཁ་ཆུ་ཆུས་ཕྱུང	kind of shoes	kha chu chus phyung
ཁ་ཆུ་གཏོང	drool	kha chu gtong
ཁ་ཆུ་འདོན་པ	salivate	kha chu 'don pa
ཁ་ཆུ་ཕུག	a place on the uplands of kha chu	kha chu phug
ཁ་ཆུ་བཙུགས་མཁན	plaintiff	kha chu btsugs mkhan
ཁ་ཆུང	soft, gentle, young (animal	kha chung
ཁ་ཆུང་བ	1) young horse cattle etc.; 2) small mouthed vase etc.	kha chung ba
ཁ་ཆུངས་ནས	softly, gently, not loudly	kha chungs nas
ཁ་ཆེ	1) Moslem. 2) Kashmir. 3) person from Kashmir, Kashmiri. 4) saffron	kha che
ཁ་ཆེ་སྐྱེས	saffron, the produce of Kashmir	kha che skyes
ཁ་ཆེ་གུར་ཀུམ	Kashmiri saffron * rtsi med.	kha che gur kum
ཁ་ཆེ་གུར་གུམ	Kashmiri saffron	kha che gur gum
ཁ་ཆེ་འགྲོན་ཁང	an inn kept by a mussalman at lhasa or in peking	kha che 'gron khang
ཁ་ཆེ་མཆོག	chief article, saffron	kha che mchog
ཁ་ཆེ་འདུས་བཟང	Moslem / Kashmiri festival	kha che 'dus bzang
ཁ་ཆེ་པ་ཆེན	the great scholar of kashmir, Shakyashri	kha che pa chen
ཁ་ཆེ་པཎ་ཆེན	the great scholar of Kashmir, Shakya Shri kha che pan chen zla ba mngon dga' kache panchen dawa ngonga kha che pan chen zla ba mngon dga' kache panchen dawa ngonga [same as {kha che pan chen}; rgya...	kha che paN chen
ཁ་ཆེ་པན་ཆེན་ལུགས	the tradition / system of {kha che pan chen}	kha che pan chen lugs
ཁ་ཆེ་བ	Syn {kha che bye brag smra ba}	kha che ba
ཁ་ཆེ་བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ་བ	Kashmiri subschool of Vaibhashika	kha che bye brag smra ba
སུབ	school of Vaibhashika	sub
ཁ་ཆེ་བྱེ་སྨྲ	{kha che bye brag smra ba}	kha che bye smra
ཁ་ཆེ་བྱེ་སྨྲས	Kashmiri sub-school of Vaibhashika	kha che bye smras
ཁ་ཆེ་དབང་ཐང	wealth, possessions, property	kha che dbang thang
ཁ་ཆེ་ཟ་ཁང	an inn kept by a mussalman at lhasa or in peking	kha che za khang
ཁ་ཆེ་ཡུལ	{kha che lung pa} mohammedan country, Kashmir	kha che yul
ཁ་ཆེ་ལུང་པ	Mohammedan country, Kashmir	kha che lung pa
ཁ་ཆེ་ཤ་སྐམ་མ	Kashmiri saffron	kha che sha skam ma
ཁ་ཆེ་ཤ་ཁ་མ	saffron	kha che sha kha ma
ཁ་ཆེམ	testament, SA chems, will	kha chem
ཁ་ཆེམས	testament	kha chems
ཁ་ཆེམས་འཇོག	leave a will/ last testament	kha chems 'jog
ཁ་ཆེམས་འཇོག་པ	make a will	kha chems 'jog pa
ཁ་ཆེམས་འབྲི་བ	write one's will	kha chems 'bri ba
ཁ་ཆེམས་བཞག་པ	to make one's testament	kha chems bzhag pa
ཁ་ཆེམས་རླུང་བསྐུར	testament entrusted to the wind [fable that evil actions cannot be hid, a bandit killed a wealthy man gspd khar nor ldan des "nga gsod mkhan mi de red" ces rlung phyogs la kha gtad de bshad, after ...	kha chems rlung bskur
ཁ་ཆེམས་རླུང་ལ་བསྐུར	sent last will to the winds	kha chems rlung la bskur
ཁ་ཆེམས་སུ་གདམས་པ	last advice, advising as a testament	kha chems su gdams pa
ཁ་ཆེའི	Kashmiri, Moslem	kha che'i
ཁ་ཆེའི་ལྷ་ཁང	mosque	kha che'i lha khang
ཁ་ཆོད	cover, lid	kha chod
ཁ་ཆོལ་བསྐུར	see {lta ba kha chol bskur}	kha chol bskur
ཁ་ཆོས	hypocrisy, religion in talk only	kha chos
ཁ་ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	flounder, speak in platitudes, give lip service, mere words, hypocrisy, lip service	kha chos byed pa
ཁ་མཆུ	dispute, altercation, [instigating a] court case/ suit	kha mchu
ཁ་མཆུ་འགྲིག་པ	compromise in a law suit or case	kha mchu 'grig pa
ཁ་མཆུ་རྒྱག་པ	to bring an action	kha mchu rgyag pa
ཁ་མཆུ་རྒྱབ་མཁན	suitor	kha mchu rgyab mkhan
ཁ་མཆུ་རྒྱལ་བ	to win a lawsuit	kha mchu rgyal ba
ཁ་མཆུ་བོགས་ལེན	gzhan gyi gyod don rang gis 'gan len pa	kha mchu bogs len
ཁ་མཆུ་བྱེད་པ	operate the lips, bicker, quarrel	kha mchu byed pa
ཁ་མཆུ་འཛུགས	begin a case or lawsuit	kha mchu 'dzugs
ཁ་མཆུ་འཛུགས་པ	to file a case	kha mchu 'dzugs pa
ཁ་མཆུའི་དུག་རོ	ancient source of a dispute	kha mchu'i dug ro
ཁ་མཆུའི་དཔང་པོ	witness in a lawsuit	kha mchu'i dpang po
ཁ་མཆུས་འདྲེན་པ	suck	kha mchus 'dren pa
ཁ་མཆོག	palace	kha mchog
ཁ་འཆ་བྱེད	he prattles	kha 'cha byed
ཁ་འཆམ	agree upon, unanimous, of one voice or opinion, agreement, consent, to agree upon	kha 'cham
ཁ་འཆམ་ཁྲུགས	residing together as husband and wife, live harmoniously	kha 'cham khrugs
ཁ་འཆམ་པ	agreement, consent	kha 'cham pa
ཁ་འཆམ་བྱེད	agree, consent	kha 'cham byed
ཁ་འཆམ་ཡིད་མཐུན	agreement, unanimity	kha 'cham yid mthun
ཁ་འཆམས་ཕྲུགས་གཅིག	came to agreement	kha 'chams phrugs gcig
ཁ་འཆམས་བྱེད	agreed, consented	kha 'chams byed
ཁ་འཆལ	meaningless talk, babble, chatter	kha 'chal
ཁ་འཆལ་ངག་འཆལ	meaningless talk, babble, chatter	kha 'chal ngag 'chal
ཁ་འཆལ་བྱེད	conduct idle talk	kha 'chal byed
ཁ་འཆལ་བྱེད་པ	to conduct an idle talk	kha 'chal byed pa
ཁ་འཆལ་སྨྲ་བ	speak meaningless talk, babble, chatter	kha 'chal smra ba
ཁ་འཆིང	tie up the mouth of bag of cloth	kha 'ching
ཁ་འཆིངས	slander, malicious gossip	kha 'chings
ཁ་འཆིངས་པ	slander	kha 'chings pa
ཁ་འཆུ	bend, curve, [be] turn[ed]	kha 'chu
ཁ་འཆུ་བ	naturally crooked, twisted	kha 'chu ba
ཁ་འཆུས	bent, curved, [was] turn[ed]	kha 'chus
ཁ་འཆེ་བ	promise, speaking sweet words meaning nothing or evil	kha 'che ba
ཁ་འཆོལ	not able to speak genuinely/ truly	kha 'chol
ཁ་ཇའུ་ར	n. of a medicinal herb	kha ja'u ra
ཁ་མཇལ་བ	to kiss each other	kha mjal ba
ཁ་འཇམ	soft spoken, gentle in speech	kha 'jam
ཁ་འཇམ་གཏིང་ཁག	soft and polite in language but evil at heart	kha 'jam gting khag
ཁ་འཇམ་གཏིང་ནག	soft and polite in language but evil in heart	kha 'jam gting nag
ཁ་འཇམ་གཏིང་གནག	soft words and evil thoughts	kha 'jam gting gnag
ཁ་འཇམ་གཏིང་རྩུབ	soft and polite in language but evil/cruel in heart	kha 'jam gting rtsub
ཁ་འཇམ་པོ	soft spoken, gentle in speech	kha 'jam po
ཁ་འཇམ་ཚིག	kind words	kha 'jam tshig
ཁ་འཇལ	measure	kha 'jal
ཁ་འཇལ་བ	measure	kha 'jal ba
ཁ་འཇུག	interfere, intervene in, meddle w	kha 'jug
ཁ་འཇུག་པ	interfere, intervene in, meddle w	kha 'jug pa
ཁ་རྗེ	fortune, chief of the clouds,	kha rje
ཅློཨུད	god, great lord, mighty personage, good luck, good fortune, wealth	cloud
ཁ་རྗེ་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	[great] merit, moral virtue	kha rje khyu mchog
ཁ་རྗེ་ཅན	possessed of moral merit, virtuous	kha rje can
ཁ་རྗེ་ཆེ	powerful	kha rje che
ཁ་རྗེ་དབང་ཐང	good fortune and influence	kha rje dbang thang
ཁ་རྗེའི་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	great merit	kha rje'i khyu mchog
ཁ་ལྗིད་པོ	[heavy mouth], person who does not talk much	kha ljid po
ཁ་ལྗོངས	Tibet, abbr. of {kha ba ljongs}	kha ljongs
ཁ་ཉན་པ	hear, obey	kha nyan pa
ཁ་ཉན་པོ	obedient	kha nyan po
ཁ་ཉམས་ལྕེས་དཔྱད	nang rgyus nang gis brtag pa,...Kha nyams lces dpyad byas pa'i sgo nas las don 'thus shor med par sgrub dgos	kha nyams lces dpyad
ཁ་ཉིན	the day before yesterday	kha nyin
ཁ་ཉུང	laconic, terse, sparing of words	kha nyung
ཁ་ཉུང་ཉུང	laconic, quiet person	kha nyung nyung
ཁ་ཉུང་བ	not gossiping, chatting	kha nyung ba
ཁ་ཉུང་ལག་གཙང	quiet and reliable, doesn't talk muich and doen't steal	kha nyung lag gtsang
ཁ་ཉུལ	skad cha sngog thabs,...Gzhan bsam kha nyul byed pa	kha nyul
ཁ་ཉེ་གཏོང་བ	blame	kha nye gtong ba
ཁ་ཉེན་པོ	poor servant	kha nyen po
ཁ་ཉེར་ཉེར	yid la mi 'thad pa'i rnam 'gyur kha nyer nyer byed pa	kha nyer nyer
ཁ་ཉོག	SA kha nog, clamorous	kha nyog
ཁ་གཉིས	two faced	kha gnyis
ཁ་གཉིས་སུ	into 2 parts	kha gnyis su
ཁ་མཉན	listen to speech, obedient	kha mnyan
ཁ་མཉམ	without high and low, unanimity, equalize, even [out]	kha mnyam
ཁ་མཉམ་ལབ་པ	agree in speech	kha mnyam lab pa
ཁ་རྙིང	old or second-hand articles	kha rnying
ཁ་རྙིང་པ	las song gi dngos po,...Phyu pa kha rnying pa zhig gyon pa	kha rnying pa
ཁ་སྙན་པོ	sweet mouth, soft spoken, gentle/pleasant in speech	kha snyan po
ཁ་སྙོགས་པ	implore	kha snyogs pa
ཁ་སྙོམས	of same height, of level surface	kha snyoms
ཁ་བརྙོགས་པ	zas za rgyur goms te chags pa'i lang shor,...Bzas bzas kyis kha brnyogs, phyin phyin gyis lam byang ???	kha brnyogs pa
ཁ་བརྙོངས	bad at heart but polite in expression	kha brnyongs
ཁ་ཏ	crow, good advice, lesson, advice	kha ta
ཁ་ཏ་སྐུལ་ལྕག	encouraging advice, stimulation	kha ta skul lcag
ཁ་ཏ་སྐུལ་ལྕག་བྱེད	encourage, stimulate	kha ta skul lcag byed
ཁ་ཏ་བསྐུལ་ལྕག	encouraging advice, stimulation	kha ta bskul lcag
ཁ་ཏ་བསྐུལ་ལྕག་བྱེད	encourage, stimulate	kha ta bskul lcag byed
ཁ་ཏ་སྒམ་པོ	idle talk	kha ta sgam po
ཁ་ཏ་བསྒོ་བསླབ	advice	kha ta bsgo bslab
ཁ་ཏ་བཅུག་པ	gave them advice	kha ta bcug pa
ཁ་ཏ་འཇོག་པ	to give advice	kha ta 'jog pa
ཁ་ཏ་པ	counsellor, adviser	kha ta pa
ཁ་ཏ་བ	giver of advice	kha ta ba
ཁ་ཏ་བྱས་པ	gave advice 218	kha ta byas pa
ཁ་ཏ་བྱེད་པ	give advice	kha ta byed pa
ཁ་ཏ་སློབ་སྟོན	advice, counsel	kha ta slob ston
ཁ་ཏ་བསླབ་བྱ	discuss, advise, advice, counsel, counsellor, adviser	kha ta bslab bya
ཁ་ཏ་བསླབ་བྱ་གཏོང་བ	persuade	kha ta bslab bya gtong ba
ཁ་ཏ་བལསབ་བྱ	advice, counsel	kha ta blsab bya
ཁ་ཏྭ	rook, club or staff with a skull at the top, weapon of shiva, trident, crow	kha twa
ཁ་ཏྭ་ག	khatvanga, trident	kha twa ga
ཁ་ཏང	khatvanga	kha tang
ཁ་ཏང་ག	khatvanga	kha tang ga
ཁ་ཏབ༹ང་ག	khatvanga, trident	kha tvang ga
ཁ་ཏྭང་ག	khatvanga, trident	kha twang ga
ཁ་ཊཾ་ག	a trident [bearing three heads]	kha TaM ga
ཁ་ཏམ་གཉིས	two divisions of the oral tradition category of the ati yoga {man ngag sde} oral instruction class: oral tradition which permeates all discourses {gleng ba yongs la bor ba'i kha gtam} and oral trad...	kha tam gnyis
ཁ་ཏྭམ	khatvanga, trident	kha twam
ཁ་ཊབ༹ཾ་ཀ	khatvanga, trident	kha TvaM ka
ཁ་ཏྭམ་ག	trident, tantric staff with 3 skulls piled one above another at the top	kha twam ga
ཁ་ཏབ༹མ་ག	Khatvanga. A staff carried by tantric adepts and representing the secret consort and transformation of the three poisons	kha tvam ga
ཁ་ཏས་བློ་ཁུག	persuasion	kha tas blo khug
ཁ་ཏས་བློ་ཁུག་བྱེད	persuasade	kha tas blo khug byed
ཁ་ཏས་བློ་འགུགས	persuasion	kha tas blo 'gugs
ཁ་ཏས་བློ་འགུགས་བྱེད	persuade	kha tas blo 'gugs byed
ཁ་ཏས་བློ་ལ་འགུག་ཤུགས	persuasive power	kha tas blo la 'gug shugs
ཁ་ཏི	saliva, price in barley grain	kha ti
ཁ་ཏི་ཁ་བ	{kha ti kha ba} monastery	kha ti kha ba
ཁ་ཏིག	firm, bitter, [acrid], determined speech	kha tig
ཁ་ཏིག་ཁ	taste bitter	kha tig kha
ཁ་ཏིག་ཁ་བ	bitter	kha tig kha ba
ཁ་ཏིག་བཟོ་བ	embitter	kha tig bzo ba
ཁ་ཏིང་མེད་པར་དྲང་པོ་བཤད	tell frankly w/o hypocrisy/ concealment	kha ting med par drang po bshad
ཁ་ཏོ་ཤིང	pointed stake used for the execution of criminals	kha to shing
ཁ་ཏོག་ནས	from on top of	kha tog nas
ཁ་ཏོན	recitation, chanting, daily liturgy, daily practice, liturgy, prayer, saying prayers	kha ton
ཁ་ཏོན་ཀློག་པ	read a recitation, do a daily practice	kha ton klog pa
ཁ་ཏོན་གྱིས་དང	and read loudly	kha ton gyis dang
ཁ་ཏོན་བགྱི་བར་གསུངས་པ	(h) to recite a daily practice	kha ton bgyi bar gsungs pa
ཁ་ཏོན་བགྱིད་པ	recite, chant	kha ton bgyid pa
ཁ་ཏོན་སྒོམ་ཡོང་བ	to do recitation and meditation	kha ton sgom yong ba
ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་བྱ་བ	to be chanted	kha ton du bya ba
ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་བྱས་པ	recited; mdo sde kha	kha ton du byas pa
ཏོན་དུ་བྱས་པ	recitation of the sutras	ton du byas pa
ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	to chant	kha ton du byed pa
ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་ཤེས་པ	know by heart	kha ton du shes pa
ཁ་ཏོན་འདོན	recite	kha ton 'don
ཁ་ཏོན་བྱང་པ	recitation training, adept in recitation	kha ton byang pa
ཁ་ཏོན་བྱང་བ	clear recitation of prayer or hymns, recite religious tracts from memory	kha ton byang ba
ཁ་ཏོན་བྱེད་པ	read by heart	kha ton byed pa
ཁ་ཏོན་བྱེད་ལོ	merely reciting prayers	kha ton byed lo
ཁ་ཏོན་བཟླས་བརྗོད	prayers and recitations	kha ton bzlas brjod
ཁ་ཏོན་གསུང་བ	(h) to recite a daily practice	kha ton gsung ba
ཁ་ཏྲམ	well-tempered blade	kha tram
ཁ་གཏད	opposite	kha gtad
ཁ་གཏད་གྱོང་མཉམ	'thab zla gnyis ka gyong tshad mtshungs pa	kha gtad gyong mnyam
ཁ་གཏད་གཅོག	challenge, compete against	kha gtad gcog
ཁ་གཏད་གཅོག་མཁན	challenger	kha gtad gcog mkhan
ཁ་གཏད་ལྕར	challenge, compete against	kha gtad lcar
ཁ་གཏད་ལྕར་མཁན	challenger	kha gtad lcar mkhan
ཁ་གཏད་ལྕོག	challenge, compete against	kha gtad lcog
ཁ་གཏད་ལྕོག་མཁན	challenger	kha gtad lcog mkhan
ཁ་གཏད་ཆོག	be in a position to challenge/ compete	kha gtad chog
ཁ་གཏད་འཇལ	take up a challenge, deal/ cope w	kha gtad 'jal
ཁ་གཏད་འཇལ་ཐབས	means of dealing w/ challenging	kha gtad 'jal thabs
ཁ་གཏད་དུ་ལངས	rise up in opposition to, challenge, rival, oppose	kha gtad du langs
ཁ་གཏད་དོ་ཟླར་ལངས	rise up in opposition to, challenge, rival, oppose	kha gtad do zlar langs
ཁ་གཏད་པ	1) face in a certain direction; 2) compete, rival	kha gtad pa
ཁ་གཏད་ཕྱོགས	alliance, side to ally w	kha gtad phyogs
ཁ་གཏད་བྱེད	bring a lawsuit, challenge, compete against	kha gtad byed
ཁ་གཏད་བྱེད་པ	1) to bring a lawsuit. 2) to oppose, be against	kha gtad byed pa
ཁ་གཏམ	talk, lecture, proverb, oral tradition, myth, fable	kha gtam
ཁ་གཏམ་གཉིས	two types of oral tradition [of {man ngag sde}. two subdivisions of the Oral Tradition category of the Instruction Section. The Oral Tradition which Permeates All Discourses {gleng ba yongs la bor ...	kha gtam gnyis
དུས་མེད་པའི་ཁ་གཏམ	two types of oral tradition (of {man ngag sde}, {gleng ba yongs la bor ba'i kha gtam}, {khar phog dus ///med pa'i kha gtam}	dus med pa'i kha gtam
ཁ་གཏམ་གཏོང	give a talk/ lecture, tell a proverb, / myth/ fable 219	kha gtam gtong
ཁ་གཏིང	rgya mtsho'i + - ocean depths	kha gting
ཁ་གཏིང་གཉིས་ཡོད	1) words and [thoughts/ feelings] contradictory or dissimilar; 2) top and bottom; 3) inside and outside; 4) overt and covert; 5) hypocrisy	kha gting gnyis yod
ཁ་གཏིང་བྲལ	beyond surface or bottom	kha gting bral
ཁ་གཏིང་མེད་པ	1) similar above and below; 2) without hypocrisy	kha gting med pa
ཁ་གཏིང་ལོག་པ	kha dang gting mi mthun pa'am, ga ci log pa	kha gting log pa
ཁ་གཏུགས	1) kiss; 2) Snod dang snod kha sprod pa; 3) cause to meet, bring together	kha gtugs
ཁ་གཏུགས་པ	kiss	kha gtugs pa
ཁ་གཏུད་པ	to face an inquiry, to prove	kha gtud pa
ཁ་གཏོགས	interference	kha gtogs
ཁ་གཏོང་བ	backbite, condemn, scandal, injure, abuse, call names	kha gtong ba
ཁ་གཏོར	to scatter, to disperse	kha gtor
ཁ་གཏོར་བ	disintegrate	kha gtor ba
ཁ་གཏོར་བའི་གནས་ཚུལ	state of division/ fragmentation, scattered state	kha gtor ba'i gnas tshul
ཁ་བཏགས	{kha btags nang mdzod mang po} many ceremonial silken scarves, short and long	kha btags
ཁ་བཏགས་གྱོག་པ	place a scarf	kha btags gyog pa
ཁ་བཏགས་འགྲོལ	to kill [lit. to untie a salutation scarf]	kha btags 'grol
ཁ་བཏགས་འཆིང་བ	to fasten a salutation scarf	kha btags 'ching ba
ཁ་བཏགས་འཇལ་བ	exchange salutation	kha btags 'jal ba
ཁ་བཏགས་ཉིན་མོ་བདེ་ལེགས	white scarf w "nyin mo bde legs" on it	kha btags nyin mo bde legs
ཁ་བཏགས་པ	anything bound to the face or placed in front of anyone for acceptance	kha btags pa
ཁ་བཏགས་ཕྱི་མཛོད	a long white silken scarf	kha btags phyi mdzod
ཁ་བཏགས་འབུལ་བ	present a salutation scarf	kha btags 'bul ba
ཁ་བཏུལ	tame, break [horse], tame, ridable	kha btul
ཁ་བཏོན་དང་བཟླས་བརྗོད	prayers and mantras	kha bton dang bzlas brjod
ཁ་རྟ་ངན་པ	evil talk	kha rta ngan pa
ཁ་རྟབ་པ	to stumble [of persons]	kha rtab pa
ཁ་རྟར་བ	gossip	kha rtar ba
ཁ་རྟེན	verbal promise/ oath/ word	kha rten
ཁ་ལྟ	platitude; babble, points	kha lta
ཁ་ལྟ་ཕྱོགས	the direction one faces	kha lta phyogs
ཁ་ལྟ་བ	to face towards the front direction	kha lta ba
ཁ་ལྟ་བའི་ཕྱོགས	direction of one's sight	kha lta ba'i phyogs
ཁ་ལྟ་མིག་ལྟ	kha nas slob ston dang mig gis lta rtog [Dwa phrug la kha lta mig lta byed pa]	kha lta mig lta
ཁ་ལྟས	characteristics of talk	kha ltas
ཁ་ལྟས་པ	towards, forward, straight ahead, moving towards	kha ltas pa
ཁ་ལྟིར	bod dngul kha gang ri ba'i [worth] chang blug snod	kha ltir
ཁ་ལྟོག	snack	kha ltog
ཁ་སྟན	rug for covering a seat	kha stan
ཁ་སྟབས	1) power, ability, capability; 2) facial expression; 3) boastful, bragging	kha stabs
ཁ་སྟབས་མེད	incapable	kha stabs med
ཁ་སྟེང་དུ	on, upon, above, besides	kha steng du
ཁ་སྟོང	not yet having eaten anything (empty mouth)	kha stong
ཁ་སྟོང་ལག་སྟོང	poor, distitute, q neither goods nor hope	kha stong lag stong
ཁ་སྟོད	the upper part of a valley	kha stod
ཁ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	self-study	kha ston byed pa
ཁ་སྟོབས	eloquence, power of speaking	kha stobs
ཁ་སྟོམས་རྒྱག་པ	revile	kha stoms rgyag pa
ཁ་སྟོམས་རྒྱབ་པ	revile one another for no purpose	kha stoms rgyab pa
ཁ་སྟོར	divide, share	kha stor
ཁ་བརྟན་པོ	1) not speak/use words; 2) not changing one's words/position	kha brtan po
ཁ་བལྟས	facing	kha bltas
ཁ་བལྟས་ན	looking at your words	kha bltas na
ཁ་བསྟན	face	kha bstan
ཁ་བསྟན་པ	facing, directed towards	kha bstan pa
ཁ་བསྟམ	bid for	kha bstam
ཁ་བསྟས་ན	when you speak	kha bstas na
ཁ་ཐག	"attached by the nose", bridled	kha thag
ཁ་ཐག་སྐྱེལ་དྲེན་འཁོར་ལོ	conveyer belt	kha thag skyel dren 'khor lo
ཁ་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	be disappointed, despair	kha thag gcod pa
ཁ་ཐག་རིང་པོ	great distances	kha thag ring po
ཁ་ཐག་ཤང་པོ	kha gsang po'am ngag sgo yang po	kha thag shang po
ཁ་ཐད	opposite side, rival, opponent	kha thad
ཁ་ཐད་ལང་མཁན	defiant	kha thad lang mkhan
ཁ་ཐད་ལང་བ	defiance, defy	kha thad lang ba
ཁ་ཐབས	'jon thang dang nus pa,...Dpal 'byor gyi kha thabs legs pa,...Mi de'i kha thabs skyo po red	kha thabs
ཁ་ཐམ	sealed, secret 220	kha tham
ཁ་ཐལ	1) verbosity. 2) promise. 3) rice or barley particles	kha thal
ཁ་ཐལ་བ	promise, speaking sweet words meaning nothing or evil	kha thal ba
ཁ་ཐི	kind of satin in variegated colors	kha thi
ཁ་ཐི་ཤི	CH minister (founder of monastery of hi kwan-sze	kha thi shi
ཁ་ཐིའི་རིས་ཅན	in the middle of a round picture a rectangle/square, former times kyi coin picture having cushion cover etc.	kha thi'i ris can
ཁ་ཐུག	1) direct, straightforward [Lam kha thug tu song na thag nye,...Gtam kha thug la bshad na go sla,...Las don gang byung yang kha thug so sor byed dgos]; 2) be married [Do bdag gnyis mos kyis bza' ts...	kha thug
ཁ་ཐུག་སྐོང་བ	fill to the brim	kha thug skong ba
ཁ་ཐུག་འཁེལ་སོང	corresponded, came together	kha thug 'khel song
ཁ་ཐུག་གདོང་ཐུག	met, came together	kha thug gdong thug
ཁ་ཐུག་ནས	face to face	kha thug nas
ཁ་ཐུག་པ	1) direct, straightforward; 2) Do bdag gnyis mos kyis bza' tshang byas pa; 3) coincide, correspond, come together; 4) come/ meet face to face; 5) join	kha thug pa
ཁ་ཐུག་པོ་སོང	edge (of knife) has become blunt	kha thug po song
ཁ་ཐུག་ལ	straight, directly at/ facing	kha thug la
ཁ་ཐུང	princess, lady	kha thung
ཁ་ཐུན་ནག་པོའི་སྐོར	1 of the two divisions of the {gshin rje skor}	kha thun nag po'i skor
ཁ་ཐུམ	1) stopper of a vessel; 2) hem of a garment; 3) seal up; 4) wrap	kha thum
ཁ་ཐུམ་བརྒྱབ་པ	hem	kha thum brgyab pa
ཁ་ཐུར	chopsticks, spoon	kha thur
ཁ་ཐུར་བསྟན	facing downwards	kha thur bstan
ཁ་ཐུར་དུ	{lhung bzed kha thur du bstan} showed his begging bowl facing down	kha thur du
ཁ་ཐུར་དུ་ལྟ་བ	face-looking-down (wind in womb)	kha thur du lta ba
ཁ་ཐེག	rival, guarantee, security, bail	kha theg
ཁ་ཐེག་པ	1) to strangle. 2) to consent, to adopt with the mouth; to guarantee	kha theg pa
ཁ་ཐེག་བྱེད	provide guarantee/ security/ bail	kha theg byed
ཁ་ཐེག་བྱེད་པ	contradiction, denying one's liability, denying having undertaken to do a thing	kha theg byed pa
ཁ་ཐེར་ཐེར	1) dgod 'tsher 'tsher; 2) vessel's wide mouth	kha ther ther
ཁ་ཐོག	top, surface, upper flat, upper story, roof, on top, upon, what someone says, say right away	kha thog
ཁ་ཐོག་ཏུ	at that moment/ time, on [top of]	kha thog tu
ཁ་ཐོག་ལ	up, above	kha thog la
ཁ་ཐོག་ལག་བཞག	make good/ act on one's words, do as one says	kha thog lag bzhag
ཁ་ཐོགས	kha btags nas thogs pa'am, tshang ma gsod thub pa	kha thogs
ཁ་ཐོད་ལ	up, above	kha thod la
ཁ་ཐོན	self-study, recital	kha thon
ཁ་ཐོན་པ	be able to sustain oneself	kha thon pa
ཁ་ཐོར	scattered, dispersed, not unified, split up, fragmented	kha thor
ཁ་ཐོར་གུ་ཐོར	disintegration, disunity, fragmentation	kha thor gu thor
ཁ་ཐོར་གཏོང	to scatter, to undermine, to fragment, to break up, to make disintegrate	kha thor gtong
ཁ་ཐོར་དུ་འགྱུར	become scattered dispersed, split up	kha thor du 'gyur
ཁ་ཐོར་དུ་འཇུག	Syn {kha thor gtong}	kha thor du 'jug
ཁ་ཐོར་དུ་གཏོང	scatter, undermine, fragment, break up, make disintegrate	kha thor du gtong
ཁ་ཐོར་བ	rove, wander, disperse, separate, breakup	kha thor ba
ཁ་ཐོར་བའི་དུས་སྐབས	a time of disunity	kha thor ba'i dus skabs
ཁ་ཐོར་ཡ་བྲལ	scattered, broken up, separated	kha thor ya bral
ཁ་ཐོར་ཡ་བྲལ་ཆགས	become scattered/ broken up/ separated	kha thor ya bral chags
ཁ་ཐོར་ཡ་བྲལ་གཏོང	scatter, break up, separate	kha thor ya bral gtong
ཁ་ཐོར་རིང་ལུགས	separatism	kha thor ring lugs
ཁ་མཐུན	unity, harmony, agreement	kha mthun
ཁ་མཐུན་ཁོག་འགལ	similar words but different thoughts	kha mthun khog 'gal
ཁ་མཐུན་གྲོས་བསྡུར	1 pointed gyi gros mol	kha mthun gros bsdur
ཁ་མཐུན་པ	unanimous, conspire, cooperate, agree upon, agreeing upon, together with	kha mthun pa
ཁ་མཐུན་པོ	allied, united, of the same view	kha mthun po
ཁ་མཐུན་ཞེ་མཐུན	words and thoughts/feelings in accord	kha mthun zhe mthun
ཁ་མཐོ་བ	high, raised, uplifted 221	kha mtho ba
ཁ་མཐོ་དམན་མཉམ	filled to the brims	kha mtho dman mnyam
ཁ་མཐོ་དམན་སྙོམས་པོ	even, neither high nor low	kha mtho dman snyoms po
ཁ་འཐབ	1) [verbally] quarrel, fight; 2) equalize the amount, balance the books	kha 'thab
ཁ་འཐབ་གཏོང	makle two things = in amount	kha 'thab gtong
ཁ་འཐབ་པ	fight, give battle	kha 'thab pa
ཁ་འཐབ་བ	1) to quarrel. 2) to fight	kha 'thab ba
ཁ་འཐབ་རང་དག་བྱུང་སོང	the argument solved itself	kha 'thab rang dag byung song
ཁ་འཐབས་ནས་མགོ་ཐུག་པ	stupid at/ stubborn in argument	kha 'thabs nas mgo thug pa
ཁ་འཐམ་པ	1) lockjaw, unable to open/close the mouth; 2) unable to speak, dumb	kha 'tham pa
ཁ་འཐུང	kind of a nut	kha 'thung
ཁ་འཐུར་དུ་ལྟ	turned downwards	kha 'thur du lta
ཁ་འཐེན	1) rein up/ stop horse etc.; 2) keep silence	kha 'then
ཁ་འཐེན་བཏང་བ	send a reply	kha 'then btang ba
ཁ་འཐེན་པ	to stop a beast of burden	kha 'then pa
ཁ་འཐོར	random, separate[d], selected, scattered, dispersed, not unified, split up, fragmented, {khar 'thor ba}	kha 'thor
ཁ་འཐོར་ཀྱི་དུད་འགྲོ	scattered animals	kha 'thor kyi dud 'gro
ཁ་འཐོར་གྱི་དུད་འགྲོ	'scattered animals' {phal cher sa chu shing sogs dang lha mi klu yi gnas sogs na gnas} live mostly on the earth, in water, in trees, and in the realms of the gods, humans and nagas	kha 'thor gyi dud 'gro
ཁ་འཐོར་གྱི་མན་ངག་གཉིས	Two Subdivisions of the Random Category of the Esoteric Instruction Class. With reference to the establishment of reality there are the Esoteric Instructions Which Conclude the Path {bzhag pa lam g...	kha 'thor gyi man ngag gnyis
ཁ་འཐོར་དགུ་འཐོར	= next	kha 'thor dgu 'thor
ཁ་འཐོར་ཅི་རིགས་པ་ཞིག	a suitable selection kha 'thor rnams la bkol spyod gsod pa the scattered animals suffer bondage and slaughter	kha 'thor ci rigs pa zhig
ཁ་འཐོར་པ	scatter, separate one from another, disordered, confused	kha 'thor pa
ཁ་འཐོར་བ	1) scattered. 2) selected; a selection of texts	kha 'thor ba
ཁ་འཐོར་བའི་དུད་འགྲོ	scattered animals [on the surface of this world]	kha 'thor ba'i dud 'gro
ཁ་འཐོར་བའི་བཟའ་ཚང	selected foods	kha 'thor ba'i bza' tshang
ཁ་འཐོར་ཡ་འཐོར	portion, fragment, section khyu grangs sogs g.yar tshabs che ba	kha 'thor ya 'thor
ཁ་ད་ག	scimitar or sabre of the hindus	kha da ga
ཁ་ད་ཆད	[arch] to the brim	kha da chad
ཁ་ད་ཆད་དུ་གང་བ	filled to the brim	kha da chad du gang ba
ཁ་དག	1) be in agreement; 2) [arch] all are dead; 3) eliminated, annihilated; 4) cleared up, swept clean, eliminated	kha dag
ཁ་དག་པ	cleared up, swept clean	kha dag pa
ཁ་དང་སྙིང་མ་འདྲེས	a person with whom outer word and inner feelings do not blend	kha dang snying ma 'dres
ཁ་དད	false faith	kha dad
ཁ་དན	* promise, oath, agreement	kha dan
ཁ་དན་འགྱུར	retract a promise	kha dan 'gyur
ཁ་དན་རྒྱབ་བསྒྱུར	knowingly violate a promise/ one's word	kha dan rgyab bsgyur
ཁ་དན་ལ་གནས	keep a promise	kha dan la gnas
ཁ་དམ	pursed mouth, clenched teeth	kha dam
ཁ་དམ་པོ	tight-lipped, able to keep saecrets	kha dam po
ཁ་དར	gaining more power, become more active	kha dar
ཁ་དལ	one's voice unengaged [in spiritual practice]	kha dal
ཁ་དལ་སྤྱོད་དལ	body and speech both dal ba, saying and doing whatever comes up	kha dal spyod dal
ཁ་དལ་བར་མ་འདུག	don't let your voice be idle	kha dal bar ma 'dug
ཁ་དི་ར	sandal wood tree	kha di ra
ཁ་དིག	stammer	kha dig
ཁ་དིག་མཁན	person who stammers / stutters	kha dig mkhan
ཁ་དིག་ལྕེ་རེངས	not able to speak freely and properly	kha dig lce rengs
ཁ་དིག་དིག	[defective mouth] speech defect, stuttering, stammering	kha dig dig
ཁ་དིག་པ	stuttering, stammering, being unable to speak clearly	kha dig pa
ཁ་དུག་ཅན	(met 1) snake; 2) mosquito; 3) having a poison in the mouth	kha dug can
ཁ་དུད་དཀྲོལ	the avalanche resounded 222	kha dud dkrol
ཁ་དུམ་པ	1) girl choosing her own husband. 2) equal, friend	kha dum pa
ཁ་དུལ་པོ	(soft mouth), manageable, tractable	kha dul po
ཁ་དེབ་ཚད་འཛིན	yig rigs sogs rtsa ba 'dzin sa med par what 1 says [Kha deb tshad 'dzin du ma gyur par zhib brtsad byed pa gal che ???]	kha deb tshad 'dzin
ཁ་དོ	two squares, kha gang	kha do
ཁ་དོག	1) color, hue. 2) beautiful appearance, complexion	kha dog
ཁ་དོག་དཀར་པོ	cleanser, purifier, dub grass, name for the dub grass	kha dog dkar po
ཁ་དོག་གི་ཆ	[its] identity as a color [ggd]	kha dog gi cha
ཁ་དོག་གི་རྩི་བ་བཞི	the four basic colors. 1] {sngo sngon po} blue. 2) {ser po} yellow 3) {dkar po} white 4) {dmar po} red	kha dog gi rtsi ba bzhi
ཁ་དོག་གི་ཟིལ་གནོན་བཞི	the four colors and suppressions, the charismatic/ overpowering four colors	kha dog gi zil gnon bzhi
ཁ་དོག་གི་གཟུགས	color [form] [aspect of {gzugs kyi phung po}	kha dog gi gzugs
ཁ་དོག་གི་ཡན་ལག	subsidiary colors, subcolors	kha dog gi yan lag
ཁ་དོག་གི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of shades {sprin pa} cloud 2) {du ba} smoke 3) {rdul} dust 4) {khug sna} fog, mist 5) {nyi ma} sun 6) {grib pa} shadow 7) {snang ba} lustre 8) {mun pa} darkness]	kha dog gi yan lag brgyad
ཁ་དོག་འགྱུར	the color changes	kha dog 'gyur
ཁ་དོག་སྒྱུར་བ	to change color	kha dog sgyur ba
ཁ་དོག་བསྒྱུར་བ	change colors	kha dog bsgyur ba
ཁ་དོག་ངན་པ	of disagreeable color	kha dog ngan pa
ཁ་དོག་ལྔ་ལྡན	five-colored	kha dog lnga ldan
ཁ་དོག་ལྔ་ཚང་བ	having all the 5 colors complete	kha dog lnga tshang ba
ཁ་དོག་ཅན	colorful, colored	kha dog can
ཁ་དོག་གཅིག་པ	uniformly colored	kha dog gcig pa
ཁ་དོག་ཆེན་པོ	gold	kha dog chen po
ཁ་དོག་མཆོག	excellent/ beautiful woman, woman having an excellent color/ complexion	kha dog mchog
ཁ་དོག་མཆོག་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ	wonderful color	kha dog mchog tu rgyas pa
ཁ་དོག་མཆོག་མ	beautiful woman, woman having an excellent color/ complexion	kha dog mchog ma
ཁ་དོག་ལྟ་བུ	in color, like its color	kha dog lta bu
ཁ་དོག་ཐ	many-colored, variegated	kha dog tha
ཁ་དོག་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	variegated colors	kha dog mtha' yas pa
ཁ་དོག་མཐུན་པ	one uniform color kha dog dang dri dang ro dang reg bya colors, smells, tastes and touchables kha dog dang dri dang ro dang reg bya color, smell, taste, and texture kha dog dang dbyibs nyid ka yin ...	kha dog mthun pa
མུ་བཞི	chn kha dog dang dbyibs gnyis ka yin min gyi	mu bzhi
ཁ་དོག་དུམ་སྣང་བ	w light of many colors	kha dog dum snang ba
ཁ་དོག་འདྲ་བ	in color, like its color	kha dog 'dra ba
ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ལྔ	five-colored	kha dog sna lnga
ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ལྔའི	of the five colors	kha dog sna lnga'i
ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ལྔའི་ཆོད་པན	five-colored crown pendant	kha dog sna lnga'i chod pan
ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ཆོགས	variety of colors, of different colors, variegated	kha dog sna chogs
ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ཚོགས	variety of colors, different colors	kha dog sna tshogs
ཁ་དོག་པ	small hole, narrow hole	kha dog pa
ཁ་དོག་པོ	narrow mouthed, cramped, small	kha dog po
ཁ་དོག་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect colors	kha dog phun sum tshogs pa
ཁ་དོག་བྱེད	colored paint	kha dog byed
ཁ་དོག་མཛེས	beautiful color/ complexion	kha dog mdzes
ཁ་དོག་ཟིལ་གནོན་བཞི	Syn {kha dog gi zil gnon bzhi}	kha dog zil gnon bzhi
ཁ་དོག་གསུམ་པ	bull's eye-flower, name	kha dog gsum pa
ཕོ༹ར་ཨོ྾	hoof tree	for ox
ཁ་དོན	Syn {kha ton}	kha don
ཁ་དོན་བྱེད་བ	recite religious texts, say prayers, do recitation opp of {ngag 'khyal}	kha don byed ba
ཁ་དྲག	1) haughty; 2) loquacious; 3) powerful speech; 4) rough/ crude speech; 5) sarcastic, sharp-tongued; 6) mighty	kha drag
ཁ་དྲག་དྲག	1) haughty; 2) loquacious; 3) powerful speech; 4) rough/ crude speech; 5) sarcastic, sharp- tongued	kha drag drag
ཁ་དྲག་པ	very true	kha drag pa
ཁ་དྲག་པོ	1) haughty; 2) loquacious; 3) powerful speech; 4) rough/ crude speech; 5) sarcastic, sharp-tongued	kha drag po
ཁ་དྲག་དབང་བཙན	great power of speaking and dbang shed ngoms pa	kha drag dbang btsan
ཁ་དྲག་ཚིག་བརྩུབ	spiteful words	kha drag tshig brtsub
ཁ་དྲགས	bitter	kha drags
ཁ་དྲང	straight forward man	kha drang
ཁ་དྲང་པོ	speech true direct and straightforward	kha drang po
ཁ་དྲང་བ	to lead/ be led along	kha drang ba
ཁ་དྲང་མི་ཐུབ	not able to change one's mind (not able to guide face)	kha drang mi thub
ཁ་དྲངས	lead, guide, take along	kha drangs
ཁ་དྲངས་པ	to be drawn, pulled into; 1) to draw, to pull. 2) charioteer 223	kha drangs pa
ཁ་དྲན	to praise	kha dran
ཁ་དྲལ	1) destroy, annihilate; 2) muzzle [for animals]	kha dral
ཁ་དྲི	way of speaking	kha dri
ཁ་དྲི་འཇམ་པོ	soft way of speaking.	kha dri 'jam po
ཁ་དྲོ	sku mkhyen,...Kha dro kha dro	kha dro
ཁ་དྲོ་པོ	w a warm mouth, lucky, auspicious	kha dro po
ཁ་དྲོ་བ	auspicious, legs po 'ong ba	kha dro ba
ཁ་དྲོ་བོ	agreeable, amiable, of pleasant company	kha dro bo
ཁ་དྲོག	1) fortune of incidentally/ suddenly finding food and drink; 2) of only incidently or verbal benefit kha drog che la gting drog chung ba much talk little depth	kha drog
ཁ་དྲོད	enjoyment of the mouth	kha drod
ཁ་གདང	to open one's mouth	kha gdang
ཁ་གདང་ནས	agape	kha gdang nas
ཁ་གདང་བ	1) to open the mouth, to yawn. 2) to be idle, 3) to speak	kha gdang ba
ཁ་གདངས	1) to open the mouth. 2) to speak out, complain. 3) wide open	kha gdangs
ཁ་གདངས་གློ་མཐོང	speak openly/ frankly	kha gdangs glo mthong
ཁ་གདངས་ནས	having opened the mouth widely	kha gdangs nas
ཁ་གདངས་པ	yawning, opening the mouth, gaping, widening the mouth	kha gdangs pa
ཁ་གདངས་མིག་བགྲད	astonished, dumbfounded	kha gdangs mig bgrad
ཁ་གདན	cushion, mattress, rug	kha gdan
ཁ་གདམས	directions, instruction, counsel	kha gdams
ཁ་གདེངས	wide, open, open the mouth, speak out, complain	kha gdengs
ཁ་གདེངས་ཆེ་བ	enormous mouth, wide opening	kha gdengs che ba
ཁ་གདོང	face	kha gdong
ཁ་དད་ག	scimitar	kha dda ga
ཁ་བདགས	silk scarves	kha bdags
ཁ་བདན	bed sheet	kha bdan
ཁ་བདར	gossip, prattle, chatter	kha bdar
ཁ་བདར་གློད	gossip, prattle, chatter	kha bdar glod
ཁ་བདར་ལྷོད་པ	gossip, prattle	kha bdar lhod pa
ཁ་བདེ	gluttonous, word, speech	kha bde
ཁ་བདེ་ལྕེ་བདེ	facile speech facile tongue	kha bde lce bde
ཁ་བདེ་པོ	voluble	kha bde po
ཁ་མདོག	color of the face/ complexion, appearance	kha mdog
ཁ་མདོག་ཉེས་པོ	w bad complexion, ugly	kha mdog nyes po
ཁ་མདོག་ནག་པོ	black color, dark appearance	kha mdog nag po
ཁ་མདོག་སེར་པོ	sallow complexion, yellowish color	kha mdog ser po
ཁ་འདམ	sge'u gsher	kha 'dam
ཁ་འདར	nonsense	kha 'dar
ཁ་འདར་པོ	one who talks nonsense	kha 'dar po
ཁ་འདར་བ	talk nonsense	kha 'dar ba
ཁ་འདར་ཤོར	chattering w cold [teeth]	kha 'dar shor
ཁ་འདིག	1) cork, bung. 2) stutterer, stammerer	kha 'dig
ཁ་འདིག་པ	stop up, close w a stopper, cork [arch] bottle	kha 'dig pa
ཁ་འདུམ	be reconciled, come into accord	kha 'dum
ཁ་འདེབས	agreeing in an account	kha 'debs
ཁ་འདེབས་བཏབ་པ	replenish	kha 'debs btab pa
ཁ་འདོགས་པ	[arch] tshang ma [all, pregnant bitch] gsod pa [kill] ???	kha 'dogs pa
ཁ་འདོན	daily recitation/ liturgy, prayer	kha 'don
ཁ་འདོན་བྱེད་པ	to recite scriptures, recite or mutter a charm or mantra	kha 'don byed pa
ཁ་འདྲི	1) check someone's way of speaking, test experiment, check; 2) medically examine a sick person; 3) excuse, pretext; 4) blame, accuse	kha 'dri
ཁ་འདྲི་བཏགས	blame w, use as an excuse	kha 'dri btags
ཁ་འདྲི་བྱེད་པ	alibi	kha 'dri byed pa
ཁ་འདྲི་བཤད་པ	make excused	kha 'dri bshad pa
ཁ་འདྲིས་ཁོག་འདྲིས	'grogs 'dris zab mo [deep conversation between friends?]	kha 'dris khog 'dris
ཁ་རྡ	muttering, whispering	kha rda
ཁ་རྡབ	stumble, fall	kha rdab
ཁ་རྡབ་པ	stumble	kha rdab pa
ཁ་རྡིབ་པ	1) so bud de mchu rdib pa; 2) Gangs rdib pa,...Rtsva thang tshang mar kha rdib byung ba	kha rdib pa
ཁ་རྡུང	scolding	kha rdung
ཁ་རྡུང་གཏོང	scold, curse, condemn, denounce	kha rdung gtong
ཁ་རྡུང་གཏོང་བ	scold, curse, condemn, denounce	kha rdung gtong ba
ཁ་རྡུམ	stubby, squat	kha rdum
ཁ་ལྡིག	stammer	kha ldig
ཁ་ལྡིག་མཁན	stammerer, stutterer	kha ldig mkhan
ཁ་ལྡིག་པ	Syn {kha dig dig} stutter, stammering	kha ldig pa
ཁ་ལྡིབ	silly/ very unclear talk	kha ldib
ཁ་ལྡིབ་ལྡིབ	unclear way of speaking	kha ldib ldib
ཁ་ལྡིབ་པ	stammering	kha ldib pa
ཁ་སྡམས	advice	kha sdams
ཁ་སྡུད་པ	1) close the mouth of a vessel; 2) gather many people phyogs gcig tu	kha sdud pa
ཁ་སྡུམ	mediation, reconciliation	kha sdum
ཁ་སྡུམ་གཏོང	mediate, reconcile	kha sdum gtong
ཁ་སྡུམ་བྱེད	mediate, reconcile	kha sdum byed
ཁ་སྡུམ་བྱེད་པ	to mediate, reconcile 224	kha sdum byed pa
ཁ་སྡུར	kha bshad 'gran pa, be verbose	kha sdur
ཁ་སྡོམ་པ	silence, gag or stop the speech	kha sdom pa
ཁ་བརྡ	utterance, speech, advice, admonition, conversation, talk, prediction, prophecy	kha brda
ཁ་བརྡ་གློད	talk a lot, chatter	kha brda glod
ཁ་བརྡ་མང་པོ་བྱས་པ	much talking	kha brda mang po byas pa
ཁ་བརྡ་བཟང་པོ་བྱེད	mutter or speak auspiciously	kha brda bzang po byed
ཁ་བརྡབ་པ	smack	kha brdab pa
ཁ་བརྡའ	verbal utterance	kha brda'
ཁ་བརྡའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྒོ་འབྱེད	opeing to door w auspicious words [meeting new year's morning, "bkra shis bde legs phun sum tshogs, gtan du bde ba thob par shog" saying gro yos phye mar &, ja phud chang phud, wheat and rice etc. ...	kha brda'i rten 'brel sgo 'byed
ཁ་བརྡར	verbosity, chattering	kha brdar
ཁ་བརྡར་བ	verbosity, chattering	kha brdar ba
ཁ་བརྡར་བྱེད་པ	be verbose	kha brdar byed pa
ཁ་བརྡུང	verbally abuse, condemn, denounce	kha brdung
ཁ་བསྡུས	to agree with	kha bsdus
ཁ་ན	fault, sin, evil transgression	kha na
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ	fault, perverted actions	kha na ma tho
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	hidden/ unacknowledged flaw/ evil	kha na ma tho ba
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་བཅས་པ	faulty, sinner	kha na ma tho ba bcas pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་གཉིས	Two types of misdeeds, two types of non-virtue. 1) {bcas pa'i kha na ma tho ba} proscribed misdeed. 2) {rang bzhin gyi kha na ma tho ba} natural misdeed	kha na ma tho ba gnyis
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་དང་བཅས་པ	involved in misdeeds	kha na ma tho ba dang bcas pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་ཕྲ་རབ་ཙམ	the minutest evil	kha na ma tho ba phra rab tsam
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་མི་མང་བ	sinless	kha na ma tho ba mi mnga ba
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་མི་མངའ་བ	free from misdeeds (quality of Buddha)	kha na ma tho ba mi mnga' ba
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་མེད་པ	without sin or moral corruption	kha na ma tho ba med pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཡོངས་སུ	perfect without misdeeds kha na ma tho ba med pa'i yongs su	kha na ma tho ba med pa'i yongs su
སྤྱད་པ་རྗེས་སུ་གནང་བ	permission blessing/mandate of perfect activity without misdeeds	spyad pa rjes su gnang ba
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	the obscuration of misdeeds	kha na ma tho ba'i sgrib pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བའི་སྡིག་པ	a grievous sin	kha na ma tho ba'i sdig pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་མེད་པ	without wrongdoing	kha na ma tho med pa
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་མེད་ཡུལ	someone free from wrongdoing	kha na ma tho med yul
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོའི་གཏམ	sinful talk	kha na ma tho'i gtam
ཁ་ན་མ་མཐོ་བ	faults	kha na ma mtho ba
ཁ་ན་མེད	useless	kha na med
ཁ་ནག་དེང་དེང	a gasping mouth	kha nag deng deng
ཁ་ནག་པོ	[black mouth] grumble, unlucky	kha nag po
ཁ་ནང	1) yesterday morning. 2) inwards	kha nang
ཁ་ནང་ལྕེ་རྒྱུས	kha nang du gang yod lce la rgyus yod zer ba ste, nang khul gyi rgyus nang khul gyi mi la yod pa'i dpe	kha nang lce rgyus
ཁ་ནང་ལྟ	looking towards oneself, taking it personal; inwardly-directed/ imploded (consciousness/ attention); implosion	kha nang lta
ཁ་ནང་ལྟའི་ཆ	internal factor [ggd]	kha nang lta'i cha
ཁ་ནང་བལྟས་པ	directed inwards	kha nang bltas pa
ཁ་ནང་དུ	inwards	kha nang du
ཁ་ནང་དུ་ལྟོས	turn your attention inward	kha nang du ltos
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བལྟ་བ	introspection, looking / facing within	kha nang du blta ba
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བལྟས	facing inwards	kha nang du bltas
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བལྟས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	knowledge gained by introspection	kha nang du bltas kyi shes pa
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བལྟས་པ	introspection	kha nang du bltas pa
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བལྟས་པའི་མྱོང་བ་རང་རིག་ཐེ་སེལཕ༹	knowing experienced by facing oneself kha nang du bltas pa'i myong ba rang rig introspective experience of selfawareness	kha nang du bltas pa'i myong ba rang rig the self
ཁ་ནང་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པ	to focus inwardly, to direct / apply to oneself	kha nang du phyogs pa
ཁ་ནང་དུ་བློ་བཀུག	turn the mind inwards	kha nang du blo bkug
ཁ་ནང་དུ་ལོག	look within oneself	kha nang du log
ཁ་ནད	mouth disease	kha nad
ཁ་ནར་ཅན	rectangular, oblong	kha nar can
ཁ་ནས	orally, by word of mouth	kha nas
ཁ་ནས་སྐྱེས་པ	"born from the mouth" Brahman, Brahma	kha nas skyes pa
ཁ་ནས་ཁུ་བྱུག	cry like the cuckoo	kha nas khu byug
ཁ་ནས་གང་ཐོན་ཤོད	say whatever comes to mind 225	kha nas gang thon shod
ཁ་ནས་གང་བྱུང་ཤོད	say whatever comes to mind	kha nas gang byung shod
ཁ་ནས་ཐོན་ལ་མ་ཐོན	minccing words, speaking haltingly/ hesiutatingly	kha nas thon la ma thon
ཁ་ནས་ཐོས་པ	was told by, heard from; ex {gnas skor ba zhig gi kha nas thos pa} I heard from a pilgrim	kha nas thos pa
ཁ་ནས་དོན་པ	ejaculated	kha nas don pa
ཁ་ནས་བྱུང་བ	"come from the mouth" (vinaya term	kha nas byung ba
ཁ་ནས་ཟེར་བ	to transmit orally	kha nas zer ba
ཁ་ནས་ལེན་སྐྱལ་བ	deliver a message orally	kha nas len skyal ba
ཁ་ནིང	last year	kha ning
ཁ་ནིམ	of cotton cloth	kha nim
ཁ་ནུབ	last evening	kha nub
ཁ་ནེམ	a little old	kha nem
ཁ་ནོག	clamorous, importunate	kha nog
ཁ་ནོག་པ	covered w defilement, dirty	kha nog pa
ཁ་ནོན་རྒྱག་པ	add, increase	kha non rgyag pa
ཁ་ནོར	make a mistake (in speech(/ slip of the tongue	kha nor
ཁ་ནོར་བ	to make a mistake [in speech], make a slip of the tongue	kha nor ba
ཁ་ནོར་སོང	he has erred in conversation	kha nor song
ཁ་གནག	kind of srin bu infesting the human body	kha gnag
ཁ་གནོན	1) vi. to suppress, subdue. 2) antidote, counter force, adversary	kha gnon
ཅོཨུནཏེར	force, adversary, counteracting	counter
ཁ་མནན་པ	1) press down from above; 2) cover the mouth with the hand; 3) keep silent	kha mnan pa
ཁ་སྣ་ལག་པས་སུབ་པ	stop one's mouth and nose with one's hand	kha sna lag pas sub pa
ཁ་སྣོན	add to the original, replenishment, supplement, addition, reinforcement	kha snon
ཁ་སྣོན་རྒྱག	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon rgyag
ཁ་སྣོན་རྒྱག་པ	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon rgyag pa
ཁ་སྣོན་རྒྱབ་པ	add, annex	kha snon rgyab pa
ཁ་སྣོན་སྤྲོད	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon sprod
ཁ་སྣོན་སྤྲོད་པ	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon sprod pa
ཁ་སྣོན་བྱེད	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon byed
ཁ་སྣོན་བྱེད་པ	supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, add on	kha snon byed pa
ཁ་པ	1) volume {kha}, the 2nd; 2) SK 'khrugs sdeb gsal byed ha sa'i re'u mig nang kha to pa [Kha pha tsha tha tha...Tsha ta ta ka pa]; 3) Tshong pa phan tshun bar 'dum 'grig byed mkhan; 4) skilled in sp...	kha pa
ཁ་པར	telephone, phone, telephone	kha par
ཁ་པར་སྐུལ་ལམ	telephone line	kha par skul lam
ཁ་པར་ཁང	telephone office	kha par khang
ཁ་པར་གྲོས་ཚོགས	telephone conference	kha par gros tshogs
ཁ་པར་ཅུས	telephone exchange/ bureau	kha par cus
ཁ་པར་གཏོང	telephone	kha par gtong
ཁ་པར་གཏོང་བ	telephone	kha par gtong ba
ཁ་པར་བཏང	telephoned	kha par btang
ཁ་པར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	telephone [instrument]	kha par 'phrul 'khor
ཁ་པར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	telephone equipment	kha par 'phrul chas
ཁ་པུར	Kabul	kha pur
ཁ་པོ	1) w bitter/ acrid taste; 2) be damaged; 3) speech	kha po
ཁ་པོ་རྒྱུན་ཁྱེར	continual/ habitual boasting	kha po rgyun khyer
ཁ་པོ་རྒྱུན་ཁྱེར་བྱེད	continually/ habitually boast	kha po rgyun khyer byed
ཁ་པོ་ཆེ	talkative	kha po che
ཁ་པོ་ཆེ་ཤོད	talk a lot	kha po che shod
ཁ་པོ་དུལ་མོ	mild speech	kha po dul mo
ཁ་དཔར	telephone	kha dpar
ཁ་དཔེ	tale, old saying, proverb	kha dpe
ཁ་དཔྱ	revile, deprecate	kha dpya
ཁ་ལྤགས	SA kha pags	kha lpags
ཁ་སྤམ	Tibetan govt. gung dang bka' blon, ya sor khri pa'i mgron gnyer bcas kyi gzab zhva	kha spam
ཁ་སྤིང	gum, glue [on stamp/ envelope]	kha sping
ཁ་སྤུ	mustache, beard	kha spu
ཁ་སྤུབ་པ	turn upside down (of vessels, face down	kha spub pa
ཁ་སྤུབ་ལོག	put/ turn face down	kha spub log
ཁ་སྤུབ་སློག	put/ turn face down	kha spub slog
ཁ་སྤུབས	turned upside down (of vessels, face down	kha spubs
ཁ་སྤོ	change, shift, move	kha spo
ཁ་སྤོན	speak boldly	kha spon
ཁ་སྤོས	move over	kha spos
ཁ་སྤོས་པ	change [residence] newly master/ change/ move	kha spos pa
ཁ་སྤོས་རྩིས་སྤྲོད	las byed changing/moving obligation/task kyi 'gan khur give/ receive	kha spos rtsis sprod
ཁ་སྤྱ	oral competition in song/ verse	kha spya
ཁ་སྤྱ་ཟེར་བ	debate, discuss	kha spya zer ba
ཁ་སྤྱིན	moist w saliva or w moist breath dros bcug ste paper joining glue	kha spyin
ཁ་སྤྲད	meet	kha sprad
ཁ་སྤྲད་པ	bring together personally, confront	kha sprad pa
ཁ་སྤྲིས	curds and milk etc. floating scum, congealed stuff [maybe cream]	kha spris
ཁ་སྤྲུ	fang, tusk	kha spru
ཁ་སྤྲོད	face to face, facing, opposite	kha sprod
ཁ་སྤྲོད་པ	1) mutual introduction; 2) [be] face to face, facing; 3) join together	kha sprod pa
ཁ་སྤྲོད་བྱེད	bring face to face, jopin together	kha sprod byed
ཁ་ཕན	advantage	kha phan
ཁ་ཕུ་བ	turned upside down	kha phu ba
ཁ་ཕེན	card	kha phen
ཁ་ཕོ	boasting, bragging; boastful	kha pho
ཁ་ཕོ་ཆེ	boastful, conceited	kha pho che
ཁ་ཕོ་བཏང་བ	to boast, brag	kha pho btang ba
ཁ་ཕོ་ཟླ་བ	to boast	kha pho zla ba
ཁ་ཕོ་ཟློ་བ	boast	kha pho zlo ba
ཁ་ཕོ་བཟླས་པ	boast, talk conceitedly	kha pho bzlas pa
ཁ་ཕོག	verbal reproof	kha phog
ཁ་ཕོའི་ཚིག	boasting, rdzig gtam	kha pho'i tshig
ཁ་ཕོར	bowl, rice bowl, cup, saucer	kha phor
ཁ་ཕོར་གོ	to have a brief effect	kha phor go
ཁ་ཕྱི	poor quality white offering scarf	kha phyi
ཁ་ཕྱིན་པ	unanimity in a conference, unanimous vote	kha phyin pa
ཁ་ཕྱིར	outwards	kha phyir
ཁ་ཕྱིར་འཁོར་དུ་འཇུག་མི་ཉན	there will be no taking anything back	kha phyir 'khor du 'jug mi nyan
ཁ་ཕྱིར་གཅུ	to turn one's body backward, to reverse direction	kha phyir gcu
ཁ་ཕྱིར་གཅུས	past of kha phyir gcu	kha phyir gcus
ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལྟ	face/ turn backwards, reverse direction, turn around	kha phyir lta
ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལྟ་བ	looking away, facing away, facing outward, looking back, criticizing others, fault-finding	kha phyir lta ba
ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལྟའི་ཆ	external factor [ggd]	kha phyir lta'i cha
ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལྟས་འཆད་པ	arbitrary theorectical distinction/ explanation	kha phyir ltas 'chad pa
ཁ་ཕྱིར་བལྟ་བ	extroverted, facing outward	kha phyir blta ba
ཁ་ཕྱིར་བལྟས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	knowing or judging things by their external appearance	kha phyir bltas kyi shes pa
ཁ་ཕྱིར་བསྟས་པ	directed outwards	kha phyir bstas pa
ཁ་ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་པ	turned around	kha phyir phyogs pa
ཁ་ཕྱིར་སློག	face backwards, turn backwards, reverse direction, turn around	kha phyir slog
ཁ་ཕྱིས	napkin	kha phyis
ཁ་ཕྱེ	open up, blossom, spread, uncover, expose, reveal, disclose, open (book, door, opened up, unfolded, unfurled	kha phye
ཁ་ཕྱེ་བ	to open [book, door], to blossom, opened up, unfolded, un-	kha phye ba
ཁ་ཕྱེད	monetary unit = 1/2 {kha gang}	kha phyed
ཁ་ཕྱེས་ཏེ	ajar	kha phyes te
ཁ་ཕྱོགས	direction, course, toward, trend, direction of one's sight	kha phyogs
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྐོར་མཚམས	turning point	kha phyogs skor mtshams
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་འགྱུར་མཚམས	turning point	kha phyogs 'gyur mtshams
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར	reverse direction, turn around	kha phyogs sgyur
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར་མཁན	one who leads or guides, shadow	kha phyogs sgyur mkhan
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར་བ	redirect	kha phyogs sgyur ba
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར་མཚམས	turning point	kha phyogs sgyur mtshams
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར་སློག	reverse/change direction, turn around, shift allegiance	kha phyogs sgyur slog
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་བསྒྱུར་བ	divert	kha phyogs bsgyur ba
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་པ	one who leads or guides, shadow	kha phyogs pa
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་མ་འདྲ་བར་འགྲོ་བ	diverge	kha phyogs ma 'dra bar 'gro ba
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སུ	towards	kha phyogs su
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སློག་པ	to reverse [one's direction], turn around	kha phyogs slog pa
ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སློག་བཤད	speak the contrary of what is so	kha phyogs slog bshad
ཁ་ཕྱོར་བ	speaking vainly	kha phyor ba
ཁ་ཕྲལ	to separate, to split up, to take apart	kha phral
ཁ་ཕྲལ་དུ་གཏོང	separate, split up, take apart	kha phral du gtong
ཁ་ཕྲལ་རིང་ལུགས	separatism, factionalism	kha phral ring lugs
ཁ་ཕྲལ་རིང་ལུགས་པ	separatist, factionalist	kha phral ring lugs pa
ཁ་ཕྲུ	water taken into the mouth and spit out in droplets	kha phru
ཁ་ཕྲུ་གཏོར་བ	when consecrating the leftovers 1 takes {sman phud} or {mang} crunched in the mouth and spits it on the leftovers	kha phru gtor ba
ཁ་ཕྲུ་འདེབས་པ	spit out [amrita taken in one's mouth to consecrate the leftovers]	kha phru 'debs pa
བྲན	kha phrus bran pa	bran
ཁ་ཕྲུམ	cartilage, gristle	kha phrum
ཁ་ཕྲུས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས	consecrate with the spitting	kha phrus byin gyis brlabs
ཁ་ཕྲུས་བྲན་པ	spitting. Syn kha phru 'debs pa - zhal chab bran	kha phrus bran pa
ཁ་འཕང་མཐོན་པོ	great facility of speech	kha 'phang mthon po
ཁ་འཕང་མཐོན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	speak w great facility of speech	kha 'phang mthon po byed pa
ཁ་འཕང་བ	divulge, spread ill rumors	kha 'phang ba
ཁ་འཕངས	reference	kha 'phangs
ཁ་འཕངས་པ	1) gzhan du yod tshul bshad pa; 2) Tshong gi bar 'dum	kha 'phangs pa
ཁ་འཕངས་ལག་ཕྱིས	wrongly attribute faults to others	kha 'phangs lag phyis
ཁ་འཕོ	a Chinese silk cloth	kha 'pho
ཁ་འཕྱར	solid measure for grain	kha 'phyar
ཁ་འཕྱིད	be able to sustain oneself	kha 'phyid
ཁ་འཕྱིད་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	produce means of sustaining oneself	kha 'phyid thabs byed pa
ཁ་འཕྱིད་ཐུབ་ཙམ་བྱུང	just produce means of sustaining oneself	kha 'phyid thub tsam byung
ཁ་འཕྱུར	1) solid measure for grain; 2) fill to the brim/ overflowing; 3) be heaped up	kha 'phyur
ཁ་འཕྱོར་བ	rave, talk deliriously	kha 'phyor ba
ཁ་འཕྲལ	separate, split up, take apart	kha 'phral
ཁ་འཕྲལ་དུ་གཏོང	separate, split up, take apart	kha 'phral du gtong
ཁ་འཕྲལ་བ	detach, disconnect, disengage, dissociate, separate, sever	kha 'phral ba
ཁ་འཕྲི	diminish, lessen	kha 'phri
ཁ་འཕྲིན	ngag thog gi answer or statement	kha 'phrin
ཁ་འཕྲེད་འཕྲེད་སྒྱིད་ཞ་ཞ	servility, cringing	kha 'phred 'phred sgyid zha zha
ཁ་འཕྲོད་པོ	1) put cover on a vessel; 2) stupid actions / talk	kha 'phrod po
ཁ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa smell, issue a scent; 2) snow; 3) bitter * snow, coffee, bitter (taste	kha ba
ཁ་བ་དཀར་པོ	1) the deer of the {kha ba dkar po} mountain. 2) n. of a monastery in Khams. 2) a mountain in S.E. Tibet	kha ba dkar po
ཁ་བ་དཀར་པོ་ཚོང་དཔོན	merchant? of kha va dkar po mt	kha ba dkar po tshong dpon
ཁ་བ་སྐྱ་ཐུལ་ཐུལ	soft falling snow	kha ba skya thul thul
ཁ་བ་སྐྱེ	snow-born	kha ba skye
ཁ་བ་སྐྱེངས	hoar-frost	kha ba skyengs
ཁ་བ་ཅ་ད	snow-swallow	kha ba ca da
ཁ་བ་ཅ་ད་ཀ	swallow	kha ba ca da ka
ཁ་བ་ཅན	snowy land/ Land of Snows [=Tibet]	kha ba can
ཁ་བ་ཅན་གྱི	snowy country	kha ba can gyi
ཁ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་ལྗོངས	the Snowy Land, [Tibet]	kha ba can gyi ljongs
ཁ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	country of snow	kha ba can gyi yul
ཁ་བ་ཆར་ལྡོག	1st month's sgang tshad la, season when snow char du 'gro ba	kha ba char ldog
ཁ་བ་ཆུང	from the beginning of the 11th month until a snowfall	kha ba chung
ཁ་བ་ཆེ	from the beginning of the 11th month until a major snowfall	kha ba che
ཁ་བ་ལྗོངས	Tibet	kha ba ljongs
ཁ་བ་ཉིད	bitterness	kha ba nyid
ཁ་བ་ལྡན	SA thar nu	kha ba ldan
ཁ་བ་བབ་པ	snow	kha ba bab pa
ཁ་བ་བུ་ཡུག་འཚུབ་པ	swirling snowstorm	kha ba bu yug 'tshub pa
ཁ་བ་འབབ	snowfall, avalanche	kha ba 'bab
ཁ་བ་འབབ་པ	snow	kha ba 'bab pa
ཁ་བ་རི	snowy mts, T, the land of snow, the Himalayas, a snowy place	kha ba ri
ཁ་བ་རི་པ	1) someone staying in mt retreat; 2) Tibetan	kha ba ri pa
ཁ་བ་རིངས་པ	frozen snow, glacier	kha ba rings pa
ཁ་བད	the architectural ornament of a Tibetan house formed by the projecting ends of the beams which support the roof	kha bad
ཁ་བབ	down-faced	kha bab
ཁ་བབས	issue speech, talk, statements	kha babs
ཁ་བབས་ལྗིད་པ	heavy issuance of speech	kha babs ljid pa
ཁ་བབས་པ	something new becoming a little old	kha babs pa
ཁ་བའི་གོང་རིལ	snow ball	kha ba'i gong ril
ཁ་བའི་དགྲ་བ	[god of] fire	kha ba'i dgra ba
ཁ་བའི་དགྲ་བོ	[god of] fire	kha ba'i dgra bo
ཁ་བའི་རྟུལ	lumps of snow	kha ba'i rtul
ཁ་བའི་རྟུལ་བརྩེགས	snow mountain, glacier	kha ba'i rtul brtsegs
ཁ་བའི་དུས	winter	kha ba'i dus
ཁ་བའི་འདབ་མ	snow flake	kha ba'i 'dab ma
ཁ་བའི་རྡུལ་བརྩེགས	snow mountain, glacier	kha ba'i rdul brtsegs
ཁ་བའི་ཕུང་པོ	a mas of snow or ice	kha ba'i phung po
ཁ་བའི་ཕྱེ་མ	Syn {kha ba'i bye ma} camphor]	kha ba'i phye ma
ཁ་བའི་བྱེ་མ	camphor, snow powder	kha ba'i bye ma
ཁ་བའི་མིང་ཅན	that having the name of snow, camphor	kha ba'i ming can
ཁ་བའི་འོད	snow brilliance	kha ba'i 'od
ཁ་བའི་ལྷུན་པོ	snow mt, Mt Kailasha, snow mass	kha ba'i lhun po
ཁ་བར་བྱེད	soft or pleasant touch	kha bar byed
ཁ་བས་ནོན་པ	became blanketed with snow	kha bas non pa
ཁ་བུ	turned downwards	kha bu
ཁ་བུབ	facing down, upside down, creeping, crawling	kha bub
ཁ་བུབ་གོག་པ	crawl, creep	kha bub gog pa
ཁ་བུབ་འགོག	crawl, creep	kha bub 'gog
ཁ་བུབ་འགོག་པ	crawl, creep	kha bub 'gog pa
ཁ་བུབ་དུ་འགྱེལ་བ	to fall forward	kha bub du 'gyel ba
ཁ་བུབ་ནས་བཞག་པ	put upside down	kha bub nas bzhag pa
ཁ་བུབ་པ	1) lie facing face down; 2) [turn vessel] upside down	kha bub pa
ཁ་བུབ་ལོག་པ	bend over	kha bub log pa
ཁ་བེ་ཁོབ་བེ	not active (physically	kha be khob be
ཁ་བོ	1) opening, mouth. 2) boasting	kha bo
ཁ་བྱ	[arch] story-teller's gna'[ancient times] gtam	kha bya
ཁ་བྱང	list, note, title, topic, subject, eating and speaking la goms pa, tag, label, name board, address, title, general, prophet, guide, introduction, inventory 228	kha byang
ཏྲེཨསུརེ	doctrines;	treasure
ཕ༹ཅེ	down/ learned, wise/ location list of terma	face
ཁ་བྱང་བ	intelligent	kha byang ba
ཁ་བྱང་ལག་བྱང	as familiar as mouth and hand/ eating and grasping	kha byang lag byang
ཁ་བྱང་ཤོག་ལྷེ	note paper	kha byang shog lhe
ཁ་བྱམས་ཚིག་འཇམ	soft/ gentle speech Kha bye ba, 1) naturally bye ba'am srub gas pa; 2) kha bral rgyab 'gal; 3) child's first speaking	kha byams tshig 'jam
ཁ་བྱས་པ	scorned	kha byas pa
ཁ་བྱི་བོ	be opened	kha byi bo
ཁ་བྱིན་པ	to agree	kha byin pa
ཁ་བྱེ	full-bloom	kha bye
ཁ་བྱེ་བ	in bloom	kha bye ba
ཁ་བྲག	serrated rocks, fork[ed] [object]/winnowing implement, v shaped, between	kha brag
ཁ་བྲག་ཅན	forked kha brang rtsi las mngar ba sems tsher ma	kha brag can
ལས་རྩུབ་པ	words sweeter than honey heart sharper than thorns	las rtsub pa
ཁ་བྲལ	divorce, separation	kha bral
ཁ་བྲལ་དུ་གཏོང	set apart, divide up	kha bral du gtong
ཁ་བྲལ་དུ་གཏོང་བ	separate	kha bral du gtong ba
ཁ་བྲལ་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	not suitably separated, inseparable, integral to	kha bral du mi rung ba
ཁ་བྲལ་བ	1) [be] separate[d]/ [set] apart; 2) scattered, broken, demolished; 3) divided up; 4) break away from, depart from, leave, split; 5) separations; 6) factions	kha bral ba
ཁ་བྲལ་རིང་ལུགས	separatism, factionalism	kha bral ring lugs
ཁ་བྲུབ་པ	turn upside down (of vessels	kha brub pa
ཁ་བླན་པ	[arch] kha bsgyur ba tr	kha blan pa
ཁ་བློན	leader governor of a region	kha blon
ཁ་དབང	1) power of speaking, eloquent; 2) Mi sger gyi wealth and enjoyment	kha dbang
ཁ་དབང་ཆེ་བ	able to speak powerfully, eloquent	kha dbang che ba
ཁ་དབང་ཆེག	able to speak powerfully, eloquent	kha dbang cheg
ཁ་དབང་ཆོག	able to speak powerfully, eloquent	kha dbang chog
ཁ་དབང་དུ་ཕྱིན་སོང	spoke powerfully	kha dbang du phyin song
ཁ་དབང་དཔུང་ཤུགས	strength of power of speech, military force supressing others	kha dbang dpung shugs
ཁ་དབང་གཞུང་བཞེས	two	kha dbang gzhung bzhes
ཁ་དབྱེན	create discord	kha dbyen
ཁ་དབྲག	forked, bifurcated, split	kha dbrag
ཁ་དབྲི་བ	kha 'bri ba; decrease, deduction	kha dbri ba
ཁ་འབབ	snowfall	kha 'bab
ཁ་འབབ་ཀྱི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞི	the four rivers issuing (from {ma dros pa'i mtsho} into the four directions) 1) ganga 2) sindhu 3) pakhu 4) sit)	kha 'bab kyi chu bo bzhi
ཁ་འབབ་ཆུ་བཞི	the four rivers	kha 'bab chu bzhi
ཁ་འབབ་བཞི	from Ti Se snow mt in four directions flowing four rivers	kha 'bab bzhi
ཁ་འབར་གྱོ་གཏམ	fluent deceptive talk	kha 'bar gyo gtam
ཁ་འབར་དེ་བ	Jvala-mukha deva, flaming mouth	kha 'bar de ba
ཁ་འབར་བ	1) speak harsh words; 2) suddenly phyug por 'gyur ba [rich?] Dud tshang kha 'bar ba; 3) skilled at speaking/ eloquent and saying much	kha 'bar ba
ཁ་འབར་མ	Flaming Mouth, the queen f the hungry ghosts	kha 'bar ma
ཁ་འབར་མ་ནག་པོ	a protective deity in the rngog system	kha 'bar ma nag po
ཁ་འབར་མའི་གླུད་ཆོག	the ransom ritual for flaming mouth	kha 'bar ma'i glud chog
ཁ་འབལ་པོ	talkative, gossipy, catty	kha 'bal po
ཁ་འབིལ་པོ	[plentiful mouth] loose tongued	kha 'bil po
ཁ་འབུ་བ	opening of the buds of flowers, open	kha 'bu ba
ཁ་འབུད	load a gun	kha 'bud
ཁ་འབུབ	upside down, facing downwards	kha 'bub
ཁ་འབུབ་ཏུ་ཉལ་བ	lie face downwards	kha 'bub tu nyal ba
ཁ་འབུར	carpenter's tool	kha 'bur
ཁ་འབུས	opening buds, new shoots, bloom, child's 1st vocalizations	kha 'bus
ཁ་འབུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་བྱེ་བ	about to blossom	kha 'bus kyi rnam par bye ba
ཁ་འབུས་པ	1) bloomed, blown, opened; 2) a child beginning to speak; 3) flower and leaf buds, shoots newly opening	kha 'bus pa
ཁ་འབོག	rta drel la chag ster snod chag phad	kha 'bog
ཁ་འབོར་མ	Jvalamukhi	kha 'bor ma
ཁ་འབྱམས	1) empty talk pointless chatter; 2) diffused, spread out	kha 'byams
ཁ་འབྱམས་ཀྱིས	completely invaded	kha 'byams kyis
ཁ་འབྱམས་པ	1) talkative. 2) extraneous talk	kha 'byams pa
ཁ་འབྱར	1) join together tightly [two boards]; 2) vest	kha 'byar
ཁ་འབྱེ་བ	open/ unclose itself	kha 'bye ba
ཁ་འབྱེད	1) separate, split/take apart; 2) [make] open [the moputh]; 3) open [the cover]; 4) blossom	kha 'byed
ཁ་འབྱེད་པ	1) separate, split/take apart; 2) [make] open [the moputh]; 3) open the cover; 4) blossom	kha 'byed pa
ཁ་འབྲལ་བ	divorce, separate	kha 'bral ba
ཁ་འབྲས	face rnam pa' or shape kha 'bras gtsang ma zhig 'dug	kha 'bras
ཁ་འབྲི	diminish, be reduced	kha 'bri
ཁ་འབྲི་བ	to diminish	kha 'bri ba
ཁ་འབྲིད་པ	1) deceive/ deceptive; 2) diminish, lessen; 3) not do much	kha 'brid pa
ཁ་འབྲིད་པར་བྱེད	diminish, lessen	kha 'brid par byed
ཁ་འབྲུ་བ	talk tell	kha 'bru ba
ཁ་རྦད	boasting, proud words, boastful, conceited	kha rbad
ཁ་སྦུག་དོག་པོ	speaking mtsher chen po [avoiding?, narrow?]	kha sbug dog po
ཁ་སྦུག་སློག་པ	capsize	kha sbug slog pa
ཁ་སྦུབ	face down, head to foot	kha sbub
ཁ་སྦུབ་ཉལ	life face down	kha sbub nyal
ཁ་སྦུབ་བསྣོལ	laid head to foot, face down	kha sbub bsnol
ཁ་སྦུབ་པ	turned to face down, facing downwards, turn upside down	kha sbub pa
ཁ་སྦུབ་ལོག	put face down/ head to foot	kha sbub log
ཁ་སྦུབ་སློག	put face down/ head to foot	kha sbub slog
ཁ་སྦུབས	facing down(wards	kha sbubs
ཁ་སྦུབས་ལྟ་བུ	like a pot turned upside down, the upside-down pot	kha sbubs lta bu
ཁ་སྦུབས་ནས་འཇོགས་པ	placing upside down	kha sbubs nas 'jogs pa
ཁ་སྦོན	[arch] recitation, chanting, daily liturgy, daily practice, liturgy, prayer, saying prayers	kha sbon
ཁ་སྦྱང	eloquence, indications	kha sbyang
ཁ་སྦྱང་ངོ	eloquent	kha sbyang ngo
ཁ་སྦྱང་པོ	eloquent	kha sbyang po
ཁ་སྦྱར	non-dually united [roughly equivalent to {zung 'jug} a higher teaching and practice]	kha sbyar
ཁ་སྦྱར་བ	the mouth (of a vessel closed, talisman, charm-box	kha sbyar ba
ཁ་སྦྱོང་བ	1) zas la kha goms su 'jug pa; 2) Klog pa dang gtam gyi kha rtsal sbyong ba	kha sbyong ba
ཁ་སྦྱོར	integration; interface/ interfacing	kha sbyor
ཁ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Union	kha sbyor gyi rgyud
ཁ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the 7 aspects of union	kha sbyor gyi yan lag bdun
ཁ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ལུས	a body [of god and goddess] face to face	kha sbyor gyi lus
ཁ་སྦྱོར་ཐིག་ལེ	united sphere. [Usually two joined half spheres of a sun and a moon]	kha sbyor thig le
ཁ་སྦྱོར་བདུན	sevenfold union(relative & ultimate, fusion with bliss, incorruptibleness of bliss, non-entitative character of bliss, its great compassionateness that transcends every dichotomy, its continuity, u...	kha sbyor bdun
ཁ་སྦྱོར་བདུན་ལྡན	(met rdo rje 'chang, endowed w the 7 aspects of union {rdo rje 'chang};	kha sbyor bdun ldan
ཁ་སྦྱོར་བ	kiss 230	kha sbyor ba
ཁ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	to breed [different species of animals]	kha sbyor byed pa
ཁ་སྦྱོར་ཡན་ལག	the seven qualities of a sambhogakaya buddha (complete enjoyment, union, great bliss, absence of	kha sbyor yan lag
ཨ་སེལཕ༹	nature, presence of compassion, being uninterrupted, being unceasing)	a self
ཁ་སྦྱོར་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the seven aspects of union	kha sbyor yan lag bdun
ཁ་སྦྱོར་ཡན་ལག་བདུན་ལྡན	endowed with the seven attributes/ aspects of integration	kha sbyor yan lag bdun ldan
ཁ་སྦྱོར་རླུང	union prana (Syn {bum can}	kha sbyor rlung
ཁ་སྦྱོར་ལྷུ་སྒྲིག	two	kha sbyor lhu sgrig
ཁ་སྦྲང་རྩི་ཁོག་སྣག་ཚ	honey mouth inky interior, soft speech and evil mind	kha sbrang rtsi khog snag tsha
ཁ་མ	1 about to attain	kha ma
ཁ་མ་བསྒྱུར་བ	undirected	kha ma bsgyur ba
ཁ་མ་ཆར	sleet	kha ma char
ཁ་མ་འཆམ	discordant	kha ma 'cham
ཁ་མ་ཐུན་པ	accede	kha ma thun pa
ཁ་མ་དྲོ	bad omen, unlucky	kha ma dro
ཁ་མ་ཕྱེ་བ	opening bud, 1 of 21 hells (being bound with ropes)	kha ma phye ba
ཁ་མ་བྱེ	store, repository	kha ma bye
ཁ་མང་དོང་ལྐམ	many mouthed tunnel	kha mang dong lkam
ཁ་མང་པོ	[many mouth] gossipy, chatty	kha mang po
ཁ་མི་འཆམ	does not agree, not live in harmony	kha mi 'cham
ཁ་མི་མཐུན	discordant	kha mi mthun
ཁ་མི་འབགས་པ	faulty, censurable	kha mi 'bags pa
ཁ་མི་ཤེས་པ	not knowing the language	kha mi shes pa
ཁ་མི་གསལ	indistinct, not clearly shown	kha mi gsal
ཁ་མི་གསལ་བ	obscure, not in clear terms	kha mi gsal ba
ཁ་མིག་མར་ལྟ	bad behavior 'i rjes su 'gro ba'am der mig ltos byed pa	kha mig mar lta
ཁ་མིག་མི་འཛུམ	mouth & eyes open	kha mig mi 'dzum
ཁ་མིག་ཡར་ལྟ	good behavior 'i rjes su 'gro ba'am der mig ltos byed pa	kha mig yar lta
ཁ་མིག་ཡར་བལྟ་བྱས་པ	to emulate	kha mig yar blta byas pa
ཁ་མིན	not merely paying lip-service	kha min
ཁ་མུར	bit (of a bridle)	kha mur
ཁ་མེ	lamp	kha me
ཁ་མེ་རུང	Cameroons	kha me rung
ཁ་མེད	[net. + vb. + kha med] no choice but to do the verbal action	kha med
བུཏ་ཏོ	--	but to
ཁ་མེད་ལྐུག་པ	the dumb do not speak	kha med lkug pa
ཁ་མེད་མིག་མེད	1) excessive, without limit. 2) foolhardy, rash, reckless, hasty	kha med mig med
ཁ་མོ	bitter, enchantment, irresistible, influence	kha mo
ཁ་མོས་ཞེ་མོས	[words and thoughts/feelings] totally in agreement	kha mos zhe mos
ཁ་དམར	1) clearly prophesy the good or bad fruition of a astrological conjunction; 2) [arch] accept responsibility for a task; 3) oral instruction	kha dmar
ཁ་དམར་ཏོག	non-realization of an affirmative prediction	kha dmar tog
ཁ་དམར་གདགས	physician clearly prophesying this sick person has this disease and there will be such and such sort of life or death	kha dmar gdags
ཁ་དམར་གདགས་པ	clear view	kha dmar gdags pa
ཁ་དམར་ཕོག	realization of an affirmative prediction	kha dmar phog
ཁ་དམར་བ	1) red mouthed little birds and infants (2(A 1 who accepts a task/ responsibility	kha dmar ba
ཁ་དམར་འབྱེད་པ	grod khog kha gshag pa ???	kha dmar 'byed pa
ཁ་རྨ་ལྷགས་པ	abscess of a wound	kha rma lhags pa
ཁ་རྨ་ལྷོག་པ	in the mouth rma skrangs sbos can zhig	kha rma lhog pa
ཁ་སྨར་བ	[arch] kha brnyogs pa qv	kha smar ba
ཁ་སྨྲང	verbosity	kha smrang
ཁ་སྨྲས	mi kha,...Kha smras gleng brjod	kha smras
ཁ་ཙ	1) pustules in a child's mouth; 2) virulent contagious disease attacking cattle's kha lce dang sug bzhi	kha tsa
ཁ་ཙ་དགོས་གལ	kha tsa dgos nges,...'Tsho ba'i nang nas lto gos gnyis kha tsa dgos gal che shos red 231	kha tsa dgos gal
ཁ་ཙ་དགོས་གཏུགས	kha tsa dgos gal dang don gcig	kha tsa dgos gtugs
ཁ་ཙ་དུས་གཏུགས	shin tu gal gnad che ba'i dus tshod la nye bar slebs pa	kha tsa dus gtugs
ཁ་ཙ་པོ	1) mi kha drag po'am kha rtsub po; 2) Gal che ba'am lag thogs po,...Dgos mkho kha tsa po; 3) Ro kha tsha ba,...Phru gu la kha tsha po'i zas ma sprod; 4) Shugs drag po Dmag kha tsha po zhig rgyag gi...	kha tsa po
ཁ་ཙ་བ	hot and bitter tasting	kha tsa ba
ཁ་ཙ་རྨིག་ཙ	rmig pa kha dbrag can gyi dud 'gro'i rims nad cig thog mar phog skabs kha chu mang du thon rjes khar phog na kha rul ba dang, lce 'chad pa, rmig par phog na rmig pa rul te chad 'gro ba'i phyugs kyi...	kha tsa rmig tsa
ཁ་ཙ་ར	Tibet and Nepal 'dus pa las byung ba'i person	kha tsa ra
ཁ་ཙམ	in word only, mere words of mouth, lip service, platitude	kha tsam
ཁ་ཙམ་མིན་པ	1) really, truly, not just with words. 2) not just mechanically repeating	kha tsam min pa
ཁ་ཙམ་མིན་པར	not mere lip-service	kha tsam min par
ཁ་ཙམ་ཚིག་ཙམ་མ་ཡིན	not just mouthing words	kha tsam tshig tsam ma yin
ཁ་ཙམ་ཚིག་ཙམ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not just paying lip service	kha tsam tshig tsam ma yin pa
ཁ་ཙམ་ཚིག་ཙམ་མིན་པ	not just mouthing words	kha tsam tshig tsam min pa
ཁ་ཙོན་ཆོད་པ	determined	kha tson chod pa
ཁ་ཙོལ་བསྐུར	see {lta ba kha tsol bskur}	kha tsol bskur
ཁ་བཙན	shut one's mouth, keep quiet	kha btsan
ཁ་བཙན་པོ	to be discreet. See also kha btsan. [mss]	kha btsan po
ཏིགྷཏ	lipped; 5) powerful faculty of speech	tight
ཁ་བཙུམ	shut one's mouth, keep quiet	kha btsum
ཁ་བཙུམ་སྟེ	silently	kha btsum ste
ཁ་བཙུམ་པ	mum silence	kha btsum pa
ཁ་བཙུམས་ནས	mute	kha btsums nas
ཁ་བཙོག་པ	filthy/ dirty talking mouth	kha btsog pa
ཁ་བཙོག་བཤད་པ	talk dirty	kha btsog bshad pa
ཁ་རྩང	yesterday forenoon, day before yesterday	kha rtsang
ཁ་རྩར་འཁྲིལ་པོ	kha la nyan po,...Bzhon rta kha rtsar 'khril po,...Gang bshad lag len byed pa'i las rogs kha rtsar 'khril po	kha rtsar 'khril po
ཁ་རྩལ	power of speaking, eloquence	kha rtsal
ཁ་རྩིས	oral calculation	kha rtsis
ཁ་རྩུབ་ཁོག་ཡག	harsh words but good heart	kha rtsub khog yag
ཁ་རྩུབ་པོ	stale, rancid	kha rtsub po
ཁ་རྩེད	kha nas rtsed mo shod pa	kha rtsed
ཁ་རྩོད	argument, debate, quarrel	kha rtsod
ཁ་རྩོད་རྒྱག	quarrel, debate	kha rtsod rgyag
ཁ་རྩོད་རྒྱག་པ	quarrel	kha rtsod rgyag pa
ཁ་རྩོད་རྒྱབ་པ	wrangle	kha rtsod rgyab pa
ཁ་རྩོད་པ	haggle	kha rtsod pa
ཁ་རྩོད་བྱེད	quarrel, debate	kha rtsod byed
ཁ་རྩོད་བྱེད་པ	quarrel, debate	kha rtsod byed pa
ཁ་ཚ	bitter and acrid, hot in the	kha tsha
མོཨུཐ་ཕོ༹ཨོཏ	and mouth disease	mouth foot
ཁ་ཚ་སྐྱུར་གསུམ	bitter, hot and sour	kha tsha skyur gsum
ཁ་ཚ་དགོས་གལ	[certainly] important/essential and necessary, pressing, vital, urgent	kha tsha dgos gal
ཁ་ཚ་དགོས་གལ་གྱི་དོན་གནས	pressing/ vital issue	kha tsha dgos gal gyi don gnas
ཁ་ཚ་དགོས་ངེས	certainly important/essential and necessary	kha tsha dgos nges
ཁ་ཚ་དགོས་གཏུགས	[certainly] important/essential and necessary	kha tsha dgos gtugs
ཁ་ཚ་དགོས་གདུག	[certainly] important/essential and necessary, pressing, vital, urgent	kha tsha dgos gdug
ཁ་ཚ་དུས་གཏུགས	approach of a very important essential time	kha tsha dus gtugs
ཁ་ཚ་པོ	1) hot mouth; 2) sharp tongued (in a fight; 3) hot (spicy	kha tsha po
ཁ་ཚ་བ	urgent, acute	kha tsha ba
ཁ་ཚ་བའི་དགོས་གནད	urgent need	kha tsha ba'i dgos gnad
ཁ་ཚ་བའི་ལས་གན	urgent tasks	kha tsha ba'i las gan
ཁ་ཚ་མིག་ཚ	hoof and mouth disease	kha tsha mig tsha
ཁ་ཚ་མོ	pungent, bitter, acrid	kha tsha mo
ཁ་ཚ་རྨིག་ཚ	amimal disease [rmig pa kha dbrag can gyi animals' rims nad cig thog mar phog skabs kha chu mang du thon rjes kharphog na kha rul ba dang, lce 'chad pa, rmig par phog na rmigpa rul te chad 'gro ba'...	kha tsha rmig tsha
ཁ་ཚ་ར	Nepali Tibetan cross person	kha tsha ra
ཁ་ཚྭ	hare/ split lip, tshwa sgros?? talk inconsiderately	kha tshwa
ཁ་ཚག	china etc w mouth/ edge a little chipped/broken	kha tshag
ཁ་ཚང	1) gnag phyugs kyi mdun so brgyad po brjes pa'i lo bdun pa'i ming; 2) Grangs tshang,...Kha tshang cha tshang,...Sgo ra kha tshang	kha tshang
ཁ་ཚང་དོན་འདྲིལ	complete and concise	kha tshang don 'dril
ཁ་ཚད	fringe	kha tshad
ཁ་ཚན	1) measure/ extent of a snowfall; 2) power/ eloquence/ extent of speaking Bden rdzun gyi dbye ba ma phye gong du kha tshan chen po de 'dra bshad nas gang yong; 3) strength of mouth and teeth	kha tshan
ཁ་ཚན་ཆེ	large snowfall	kha tshan che
ཁ་ཚན་ཆེན་པོ་ཡིན་པས	since it has a very strong mouth and teeth	kha tshan chen po yin pas
ཁ་ཚར	fringes, threads at the end of a web or cloth or rug, minor ingredients in a medicinal mixture	kha tshar
ཁ་ཚར་བཏབ་པ	two	kha tshar btab pa
ཁ་ཚར་སྨན	in addition to the principle medicine, kha tshar gdab pa'i another 2nd medicine [eg in addition to khyung lnga add mgron thal, skran nad kyi sman du btang ba]	kha tshar sman
ཁ་ཚིག	rhetoric, spoken words/talk	kha tshig
ཁ་ཚིག་པ	burning the mouth	kha tshig pa
ཁ་ཚིག་ཙམ	mere verbalisms	kha tshig tsam
ཁ་ཚུགས	stability	kha tshugs
ཁ་ཚུགས་བཟུང་བ	keep precisely	kha tshugs bzung ba
ཁ་ཚུབ	snowstorm	kha tshub
ཁ་ཚུབ་དབྱུག་པ	cover of a nomad tent etc 'degs rgyug pa	kha tshub dbyug pa
ཁ་ཚུམས་པ	sit silent without speaking	kha tshums pa
ཁ་ཚེ་ཚེ	smile	kha tshe tshe
ཁ་ཚེ་ཚེ་བྱེད	smile	kha tshe tshe byed
ཁ་ཚོ	boasting	kha tsho
ཁ་ཚོ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	great swaggerer	kha tsho shin tu che ba
ཁ་ཚོགས་པ	ngag tshod zin pa,...Nang gtam phyi la mi 'khyar ba'i kha tshogs pa	kha tshogs pa
ཁ་ཚོང	determine prices w/o really buying and selling	kha tshong
ཁ་ཚོད	weighing	kha tshod
ཁ་ཚོད་ཟིན་པ	finish speaking/say what 1 has/wants to say	kha tshod zin pa
ཁ་ཚོད་ལེན་པ	check someone's way of speaking	kha tshod len pa
ཁ་ཚོན	1) talk. 2) the same opinion, decision, final decision	kha tshon
ཁ་ཚོན་གཅོད་དུ་མེད	cannot be stated/ decided definitively	kha tshon gcod du med
ཁ་ཚོན་གཅོད་པ	make a decision/ judgement/ determination	kha tshon gcod pa
ཁ་ཚོན་བཅད	decided	kha tshon bcad
ཁ་ཚོན་ཆོད་པ	determined, judged, decided	kha tshon chod pa
ཁ་ཚོན་པ	person who makes decisions	kha tshon pa
ཁ་ཚོན་མཙོང་པ	to make decision	kha tshon mtsong pa
ཁ་ཚོན་མཚོང་པ	make a decision	kha tshon mtshong pa
ཁ་ཚོལ་བསྐུར	philosophize * conceptualize	kha tshol bskur
ཁ་ཚོལ་བསྐུར་བ	philosophize/conceptualize	kha tshol bskur ba
ཁ་མཚམས	brim	kha mtshams
ཁ་མཚམས་འབྱེད་པ	distinguish mthud mtshams	kha mtshams 'byed pa
ཁ་མཚར	a joke. [mss]	kha mtshar
ཁ་མཚུལ	mouth, lips, face, mule 1) mchu sgros; 2) Kha'i nye 'gram g.yas g.yon	kha mtshul
ཁ་འཚངས་པ	1) by food kyis kha 'gags pa,...Lto chas za rngam ches pas kha 'tshangs pa; 2) Skad cha shod rgyur 'tshang gar gyag pa,...Nga'i skad cha shod gzhug ma rdzogs gong du khos kha 'tshangs pa; 3) (met i...	kha 'tshangs pa
ཁ་འཚུབ	whirling snow	kha 'tshub
ཁ་འཚོག	abuse	kha 'tshog
ཁ་འཚོག་ཆེན་པོ	great abuser, reviler	kha 'tshog chen po
ཁ་འཚོགས	many people talking	kha 'tshogs
ཁ་ཛར	1) 'phro 'dzar?? fraction, remainder, remnant, odds and ends; 2) as familiar as one's mouth/ eating	kha dzar
ཁ་ཛོར་པོ	dirty mouth, uses dirty language	kha dzor po
ཁ་འཛིང	quarrel argue	kha 'dzing
ཁ་འཛིང་ཤོར་བ	be lost in argument, argue	kha 'dzing shor ba
ཁ་འཛིངས	cold war, scuffle	kha 'dzings
ཁ་འཛིངས་རྒྱབ་པ	scuffle	kha 'dzings rgyab pa
ཁ་འཛིན	cuckoo	kha 'dzin
ཁ་འཛིན་རྒྱག་པ	quarrel	kha 'dzin rgyag pa
ཁ་འཛིན་ཆེ	{phyogs ris dang kha 'dzin che} revel in bigotry and prejudice	kha 'dzin che
ཁ་འཛིན་པར་མངགས་པ	sent or commissioned for governing	kha 'dzin par mngags pa
ཁ་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	extremely partial to --, be partial	kha 'dzin byed pa
ཁ་འཛིན་མཛོད	become friends	kha 'dzin mdzod
ཁ་འཛིན་རོགས་དན	take someone's part and help out kha 'dzin rogs dan gang thub byed pa take someone's part and help out as 1 can	kha 'dzin rogs dan
ཁ་འཛིན་གསུམ	sug smel, gur gum, and pi pi ling	kha 'dzin gsum
ཁ་འཛུམ	to shut [one's / your) mouth, to keep quiet	kha 'dzum
ཁ་འཛུམ་ནས་བསྡད་པ	stayed/ sat quietly	kha 'dzum nas bsdad pa
ཁ་འཛུམ་པ	smile, open, blossom (of a bud	kha 'dzum pa
ཁ་རྫབ་ཆེན	(unprincipled mouth dissenter	kha rdzab chen
ཁ་རྫིག་ངོ་རྫིག	face +/or talk rdzig po	kha rdzig ngo rdzig
ཁ་ཞག	foam	kha zhag
ཁ་ཞན	of inferior quality, low position	kha zhan
ཁ་ཞན་པ	of low birth, of low position, of inferior quality	kha zhan pa
ཁ་ཞན་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering/ misfortune of being of low birth	kha zhan pa'i sdug bsngal
ཁ་ཞན་པོ	defenseless	kha zhan po
ཁ་ཞབས་སློག་པ	turn upside down	kha zhabs slog pa
ཁ་ཞི་མེད་པ	sincere, non-hypocritical	kha zhi med pa
ཁ་ཞིམ་གྱི་ཟས་ལ་དགའ་བ	to relish delicious foods	kha zhim gyi zas la dga' ba
ཁ་ཞུགས	kha brnyogs lang shor	kha zhugs
ཁ་ཞུན	snum zhun sgron me'i yas snod	kha zhun
ཁ་ཞུར	water-hen	kha zhur
ཁ་ཞེ	mouth and mind 233	kha zhe
ཁ་ཞེ་གཉིས་མེད	w no duality of words and thoughts/feelings, sincere, forthright	kha zhe gnyis med
ཁ་ཞེ་མཐུན་པ	words and thoughts/feelings in accord, sincere	kha zhe mthun pa
ཁ་ཞེ་མ་མཚུངས་པ	insincere	kha zhe ma mtshungs pa
ཁ་ཞེ་མི་མཐུན	hypocritical	kha zhe mi mthun
ཁ་ཞེ་མི་མཚང་པ	no discrepancy/ deception between words and thoughts/feelings	kha zhe mi mtshang pa
ཁ་ཞེ་མི་མཚུངས	hypocrite	kha zhe mi mtshungs
ཁ་ཞེ་མི་མཚུངས་པ	to say one thing and mean another, hypocritical	kha zhe mi mtshungs pa
ཁ་ཞེ་མེད་པ	1) without hypocrisy. 2) Syn {kha zhe mi mtshang pa, kha zhe mthun pa}	kha zhe med pa
ཁ་ཞེ་འཛོལ་པ	to be hypocritical	kha zhe 'dzol pa
ཁ་ཞེང	breadth, expanse, width [of a road, river, etc.]	kha zheng
ཁ་ཞེང་ཆེ་བ	+ nam mkha' - vast open sky	kha zheng che ba
ཁ་ཞེང་ཆེན་པོ	broad	kha zheng chen po
ཁ་ཞེད་ཅན	eloquent	kha zhed can
ཁ་ཞེན	1) be attached to mere words; 2) completely feigned joy [Gting nas sha zhen med pa'i [disloyal? no alleigance] dga' khul [feigned joy])	kha zhen
ཁ་ཞེས	food, victuals	kha zhes
ཁ་གཞོན་པ	young cattle	kha gzhon pa
ཁ་བཞག་སྔོད་པ	be wide open, be gaping (of wounds	kha bzhag sngod pa
ཁ་ཟད	lip service, hypocrisy, only talking not doing	kha zad
ཁ་ཟམ	kind of chintz from kashmir, kind of cloth or silk stuff in variegated colors	kha zam
ཁ་ཟས	food, cake, pastry, deep-fried twisted dough strips, biscuit, particular article of food	kha zas
ཁ་ཟས་ངན་ཆེས	very bad food	kha zas ngan ches
ཁ་ཟས་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་ཉེར་གཅིག	the 21 rules for partaking of food (for monks) [nyes byas kyi sde tshan lnga pa zas za	kha zas spyod tshul nyer gcig
བའི་སྡེ་ལ	zas legs par mi za ba dang, zas kham hacang che ba dang, ha cang chung ba dang, 'jig rten dang mthunpa'i kham ran pa min pa dang, zas kha sgor ma slebs par khagdangs pa dang, za bzhin du gtam smra ...	ba'i sde la
ཁ་ཟས་གཙང་མ	clean food, sweet cakes	kha zas gtsang ma
ཁ་ཟས་ཤིམ་པོ	tasty/ delicious food	kha zas shim po
ཁ་ཟུངས	trap made of horn's rgyud thag	kha zungs
ཁ་ཟུམ་པ	be/get closed, close the mouth, close (any opening	kha zum pa
ཁ་ཟུར	1) speaking place/ class; 2) tshig zur of speech [phrase?] date	kha zur
ཁ་ཟེར	talkative, loquacious, sarcastic	kha zer
ཁ་ཟེར་བ	slander, gossip, false accusation	kha zer ba
ཁ་ཟླ	1) person w whom 1 is speaking; 2) reply	kha zla
ཁ་གཟར	spoon, ladle	kha gzar
ཁ་གཟར་པོ	[very] steep hill/ ascent	kha gzar po
ཁ་གཟི	rake in gardening, carrier's load	kha gzi
ཁ་གཟེ	rake in gardening, carrier's load	kha gze
ཁ་གཟེ་པ	coolie	kha gze pa
ཁ་གཟེ་མོ	conspicuous progress	kha gze mo
ཁ་གཟེར་པོ	1) w a sharp mouth/ tongue; 2) clear and nakedly direct explanation	kha gzer po
ཁ་བཟང	sweet words, good speech, one who speaks pleasantly	kha bzang
ཁ་བཟས་འགབ་བཏང	example of returning bad for good	kha bzas 'gab btang
ཁ་བཟས་ལྕེ་ཐིམ	rang gis bzas tshar ba'am bed spyad tshar ba'i don,...Kha bzas lce thim gyi bu lon de gang ltar sel dgos ???	kha bzas lce thim
ཁ་བཟེད་པ	kha gyen du bslangs pa	kha bzed pa
ཁ་བཟོ་འཕེར་པོ	skilled in speaking, eloquent	kha bzo 'pher po
ཁ་འོག	downcast, bowed (of the head, below	kha 'og
ཁ་འོག་ཏུ	silently, mutely	kha 'og tu
ཁ་འོག་ཏུ་བཅུག	enforce obedience upon	kha 'og tu bcug
ཁ་འོག་ཏུ་བཅུག་པ	subjugator one	kha 'og tu bcug pa
ཁ་འོག་ཏུ་ཆུད	enforce obedience upon	kha 'og tu chud
ཁ་འོག་ཏུ་ཆུད་པ	subjugator one	kha 'og tu chud pa
ཁ་ཡ	being one's partner or match as to speaking, partner, assistant	kha ya
ཁ་ཡ་ངོ་ཡ	traveller's welcome, paying attention to another	kha ya ngo ya
ཁ་ཡ་བྱེད	make an answer, pay attention to, take notice of, welcome	kha ya byed
ཁ་ཡ་བྱེད་པ	v. to pay attention to, to take notice of	kha ya byed pa
ཁ་ཡ་གཟབ་རྒྱས་བྱས་པ	two	kha ya gzab rgyas byas pa
ཁ་ཡག་ངོ་བསྟོད	eloquent flattery	kha yag ngo bstod
ཁ་ཡག་ངོ་ཡག	loquacious eloquence	kha yag ngo yag
ཁ་ཡག་ཚིག་ཡག	auspicious/ pleasing/ elegant words	kha yag tshig yag
ཁ་ཡང་གིས	speaking too freely	kha yang gis
ཁ་ཡང་གིས་སོམ	it is my opinion	kha yang gis som
ཁ་ཡང་པོ	[light mouth] frank, open 234	kha yang po
ཁ་ཡང་བ	1) much talking; 2) not stable in what is said	kha yang ba
ཁ་ཡན	free, 'without leash' (riding term), unbridled, uninhibited, given free rein, unbound, free-flowing, let be, set free, let loose, run wild, frivolous, unrestricted total abandonment, let be, leave ...	kha yan
ཁ་ཡན་གློད་ལ་ཐོངས	let it rest at ease	kha yan glod la thongs
ཁ་ཡན་ཏུ་བཏང	let run rampant/ uncontrolled	kha yan tu btang
ཁ་ཡན་དུ་ཀློད	given free rein	kha yan du klod
ཁ་ཡན་དུ་ཀློད་པ	letting be whatever arises in mind, given free rein, see also {zang thal du kha yan}	kha yan du klod pa
ཁ་ཡན་དུ་གློད་པ	set free, let loose, let run wild, give free rein	kha yan du glod pa
ཁ་ཡན་འདི་ཀ་རིག་པ	free flowing insight	kha yan 'di ka rig pa
ཁ་ཡན་འདི་རིག་པ	free flowing insight	kha yan 'di rig pa
ཁ་ཡན་པ	1) talkative, loose-mouthed. 2) scattered. 3) one who says everything that comes to mind	kha yan pa
ཁ་ཡར	1) individual, each 1; 2) scattered, dispersed; 3) broken, crushed; 4) some	kha yar
ཁ་ཡི་རྡོ	covering rock	kha yi rdo
ཁ་ཡི་སྡུག་རབ་བཤད	scold, disparage	kha yi sdug rab bshad
ཁ་ཡི་ཟས	food[stuff], provisions	kha yi zas
ཁ་ཡིག	title, topic, subject, letter, label, writing on the cover of any parcel or letter, inscription, address	kha yig
ཁ་ཡུ	hornless	kha yu
ཁ་ཡེངས	letting the "mouth wander about," talking frivolously	kha yengs
ཁ་ཡེངས་པ	distraction, wandering	kha yengs pa
ཁ་ཡེལ	spout [of a vessel]	kha yel
ཁ་ཡོ	mouth crooked	kha yo
ཁ་ཡོག	false charge, {ma nyes pa'i kha yog} unjustly accused, unfounded accusation	kha yog
ཁ་ཡོག་མ་ངེས	false charge, unjust accusation kha yog ma nyes par nyes so zhes khag	kha yog ma nges
ཁ་ཡོད་ལག་མེད	meaningless empty talk	kha yod lag med
ཁ་ཡོན	crooked mouth, devious speech kha g.ya' ba - itch; za rkong ba ste lus la za 'phrug langs pa kha g.yar - pretense kha g.yar - gzhan la khag 'gel ba [impose/ blame], Gzhung don la kha g.yar nas sger...	kha yon
ཁ་ར	trough, manger, sugar	kha ra
ཁ་ར་ཆི	Karachi	kha ra chi
ཁ་རག	Kharak [where ny" the translator was from]	kha rag
ཁ་རག་གི་བྲག	a cave in Karak	kha rag gi brag
ཁ་རག་སྒོམ་ཆུང	10-11th cent. Kharak Gomchung, a famed Kadampa master	kha rag sgom chung
ཁ་རག་སྒོམ་ཆུང་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Karak Gomchung Rinpoche, the paramount ornament of the Kadampas	kha rag sgom chung pa rin po che
ཁ་རག་གཏེར་སྟོན	Kharak Tertön, another name for Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	kha rag gter ston
ཁ་རག་གཏོང	whitewash	kha rag gtong
ཁ་རག་པ	keep silent	kha rag pa
ཁ་རལ	break, go apart, muzzle [for animals]	kha ral
ཁ་རལ་དུས	(see {bzhi bcu kha ral gyi dus}	kha ral dus
ཁ་རལ་བ	1) old te so bud pa; 2) Mchu to ral ba'i tshwa re ba,...Ri bong kha ral ba,...Stag kha ral ba,... get tired, wear out, take a calf away from a cow	kha ral ba
ཁ་རས	neck cloth, towel, cotton cloth to tie round the mouth to protect the face from the cold, hard snow that will bear a man	kha ras
ཁ་རི	SA kha ru, khal ri, measure of about 20 bushels	kha ri
ཁ་རི་ཁ་ཐུག	1) straight forward, direct, pointed; 2) right away	kha ri kha thug
ཁ་རི་ཁར་ཐུག	straight-forward	kha ri khar thug
ཁ་རི་ངོ་མདོག	face. Syn {dong}	kha ri ngo mdog
ཁ་རི་ལ	kha ri pass	kha ri la
ཁ་རིག་ཏུ	in some place	kha rig tu
ཁ་རིམས	in children's mouths small pustules = kha tsha, kha lang	kha rims
ཁ་རིལ	blunt	kha ril
ཁ་རུ	at the time of, on, at, beside, measure of about 20 bushels	kha ru
ཁ་རུ་ཙྭ	kind of salt [salty hot, heating, good for pho ba'i drod nyams pa dang, zas mi 'ju ba, rgyu rgan gyi nad dang glang thabs etc. syn: bi tam ngo &, smin tsva, ru tsva ka ]	kha ru tswa
ཁ་རུ་ཚ	black salt	kha ru tsha
ཁ་རུ་ཚྭ	black salt used medicinally (from boiling earth impregnated with saline particles), tonic aperient medicine salt of fetid odor from fusing fossil salt with emblic myrobalan, black salt	kha ru tshwa
ཁ་རུད	avalanche, snowslip	kha rud
ཁ་རུབ་སྡོད	sit quiet, shutting the lips	kha rub sdod
ཁ་རུབ་པ	shut the mouth, be silent	kha rub pa
ཁ་རུབ་བྱེད་པ	out-cry, bear down by a louder crying	kha rub byed pa
ཁ་རུལ་ནང་བཤང	kha rul na kha'i nang 'khrud dgos pa ltar nang khul gyi 'gal ba'am mi mthun pa rnams nang khul du sel dgos pa'i dpe	kha rul nang bshang
ཁ་རུས	jawbone	kha rus
ཁ་རེ་སྐྱེངས	w shame	kha re skyengs
ཁ་རེ་ཁོ་རེ	gya gyu can te mi drang ba'i tshul,...Ya yo khar khor can gyi las ka byed stangs	kha re kho re
ཁ་རེག་པ	touch anything by the lips, put one's mouth to a thing in order to eat or drink it	kha reg pa
ཁ་རོ	tasty thing, taste in the mouth	kha ro
ཁ་རོག	1) just such, neutral, indifferent, indolent. Syn {lung ma bstan}. 2) silent, not talking	kha rog
ཁ་རོག་གེ་བ	keeping silent	kha rog ge ba
ཁ་རོག་གེ་བར་སྡོད་པ	remain silent	kha rog ge bar sdod pa
ཁ་རོག་ཏེ་འདུག་པ	remain silent	kha rog te 'dug pa
ཁ་རོག་འདུག	remain silent, stay without talking	kha rog 'dug
ཁ་རོག་སྡོད	sit quiet, shutting the lips	kha rog sdod
ཁ་རོག་སྡོད་ཅིག	to silent	kha rog sdod cig
ཁ་རོག་སྡོད་པ	sit silent without speaking	kha rog sdod pa
ཁ་རོག་བསྡད	having remained silent kha rog bsdad nas bsam blo gtong ba stayed silent and thought	kha rog bsdad
ཁ་རོག་པ	be silent!	kha rog pa
ཁ་རོགས་སྡོད	1) to keep quiet silent	kha rogs sdod
ཁ་རོང་དོག་པོ	narrow place between two mts	kha rong dog po
ཁ་རོན་ཁོག	Karonkhok, in Domey	kha ron khog
ཁ་རླང	breath, mouth steam/moisture	kha rlang
ཁ་རླངས	breath, mouth steam	kha rlangs
ཁ་རླངས་བཏབ	having breathed moisture on	kha rlangs btab
ཁ་རླངས་ཕོག	breath poison [snake]	kha rlangs phog
ཁ་རླངས་མ་ཡལ་བ	warm breath	kha rlangs ma yal ba
ཁ་བརླང་པོ	harsh words	kha brlang po
ཁ་ལ	above, upon	kha la
ཁ་ལ་ཁར	"about to" clause connective	kha la khar
ཁ་ལ་འཁྱེར	to do in the name of	kha la 'khyer
ཁ་ལ་གངས་དཀར་སྨན་མདོས	mdos for the sman mo kha la gangs dkar	kha la gangs dkar sman mdos
ཁ་ལ་རྒྱ་བྱིན	kha la thel tshe brgyab ste gtam smra ru ma bcug pa'am smra ba'i nus pa med par bzo ba,...Rtsod gshags btab pas kha la rgya byin ltar lan gdab rgyu med par gyur	kha la rgya byin
ཁ་ལ་སྒྱུར་བ	charioteer	kha la sgyur ba
ཁ་ལ་ཅ་ལེ་བ	gting la ma 'dres par kha la gyengs pa	kha la ca le ba
ཁ་ལ་ཆི	Karachi	kha la chi
ཁ་ལ་ཉན	obey, listen [to]	kha la nyan
ཁ་ལ་ཉན་མཁན	one who is obedient	kha la nyan mkhan
ཁ་ལ་ཉན་པ	{ci zer kha la nyan pa} obedient, subservient; practice whatever you are taught	kha la nyan pa
ཁ་ལ་ཉན་པོ	obedient listen to advice	kha la nyan po
ཁ་ལ་མཉན	listen to what someone says	kha la mnyan
ཁ་ལ་གཏད	trust	kha la gtad
ཁ་ལ་བྱེ་ལ	1) pass of glaciers and sand dunes; 2) snow-laden sand dune (snow on top, sliding sand at the bottom)	kha la bye la
ཁ་ལ་བྲག	Khala Cliff	kha la brag
ཁ་ལ་བྲག་རི	Khala Dragri [place visited by Padmakara on his way to T]	kha la brag ri
ཁ་ལ་མ་ཉན་མཁན	disobedient	kha la ma nyan mkhan
ཁ་ལ་མི་ཉན་མཁན	one who is disobedient	kha la mi nyan mkhan
ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར	a king of the yi dwags	kha la me 'bar
ཁ་ལ་མཛེས་པ	very handsome outwardly kha la zas med lag na nor med rgyab na	kha la mdzes pa
གོས་མེད	with no food in your mouth, no money in your hands, and no clothes on your back	gos med
ཁ་ལ་འོ་གཏུགས	kiss	kha la 'o gtugs
ཁ་ལ་འོ་བྱེད	kiss the mouth	kha la 'o byed
ཁ་ལ་འོ་བྱེད་པ	kiss	kha la 'o byed pa
ཁ་ལ་ཡུག	swallow	kha la yug
ཁ་ལ་རེག་པ	eat, do eat	kha la reg pa
ཁ་ལ་ལ་ཆ་མིག་ལ་བུ་རམ	sealing wax that looks like molasses	kha la la cha mig la bu ram
ཁ་ལ་སླ་ཏེ་དོན་ལ་དཀའ	easily spoken but difficult in meaning	kha la sla te don la dka'
ཁ་ལག	1) food; 2) mouth and hand	kha lag
ཁ་ལག་ཟ	eat	kha lag za
ཁ་ལག་ཟ་སའི་ཁང་མིག	dining hall kha lag bzo ched kyi thur ma dang gri	kha lag za sa'i khang mig
ཆུང་སོགས	cutlery	chung sogs
ཁ་ལག་བཟོ་སྟངས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	gastrology	kha lag bzo stangs kyi rig pa
ཁ་ལག་བཟོ་བ	cook	kha lag bzo ba
ཁ་ལག་བསྲོ་བ	to warm one's face and hands	kha lag bsro ba
ཁ་ལང	1) small pustules in child's mouth; 2) meal, food [and drink]; 3) mouth and hands; 4) face and arms	kha lang
ཁ་ལད་པ	1) kha ngan lang la shor ba; 2) Zas za nyes shor ba	kha lad pa
ཁ་ལན	1) [verbal] answer, reply; 2) hostile reply, talking back; 3) [give] thanks [for]	kha lan
ཁ་ལན་བྱེད	answer, reply	kha lan byed
ཁ་ལན་ཟ་བ	dine	kha lan za ba
ཁ་ལན་འོང་དུ་རེ་བ	to hope for something in return	kha lan 'ong du re ba
ཁ་ལན་ལོག་པ	to answer (in anger), retort, give a snappy reply	kha lan log pa
ཁ་ལན་སློག་པ	reply in anger, talk back	kha lan slog pa
ཁ་ལན་བསློགས་པ	reply in anger, talk back	kha lan bslogs pa
ཁ་ལབ	1) speak, talk, conversation; 2) secret talk/ discussion	kha lab
ཁ་ལབ་གྲོས་ངན	a bad secret discussion	kha lab gros ngan
ཁ་ལབ་གཏོང	boast, speak, talk, converse	kha lab gtong
ཁ་ལབ་བྱེད	boast, speak, talk, converse	kha lab byed
ཁ་ལབ་བྱེད་པ	boast, speak, talk, converse	kha lab byed pa
ཁ་ལབ་ཞན་པ	modest in speech, not able to speak sell	kha lab zhan pa
ཁ་ལབ་བཤད	boast, speak, talk, converse	kha lab bshad
ཁ་ལབ་བཤད་པ	boast, speak, talk, converse	kha lab bshad pa
ཁ་ལས	lies, boating, meaningless empty words, [wide off the mark], talk, conversation	kha las
ཁ་ལས་སྐྱེས	bhramin, "one born from the mouth"	kha las skyes
ཁ་ལས་བྱུང	sprung forth from the mouth	kha las byung
ཁ་ལས་བཤད་པ	to chat, gossip, to joke, jest	kha las bshad pa
ཁ་ལིན་པ	place in tibet	kha lin pa
ཁ་ལུགས	proverb, language	kha lugs
ཁ་ལུང་པ	dweller in a 'brog dgon pa	kha lung pa
ཁ་ལུད	1) thick spittle in the mouth; 2) not contained in a vessel, overflowing; 3) field manure, fertilizer	kha lud
ཁ་ལུད་རྒྱག	spread fertilizer	kha lud rgyag
ཁ་ལུད་རྒྱག་པ	spread fertilizer	kha lud rgyag pa
ཁ་ལུད་གཏོར་པ	spit out	kha lud gtor pa
ཁ་ལུད་གཏོར་བ	spit out	kha lud gtor ba
ཁ་ལུད་འདོར	spit	kha lud 'dor
ཁ་ལུས་ལ་དྲི	bad fetid smell coming out of the body and mouth	kha lus la dri
ཁ་ལུས་ལ་དྲི་མི་ཞིམ་པ་ཡོད་པ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad	kha lus la dri mi zhim pa yod pa
ཁ་ལེ	a handful (?)	kha le
ཁ་ལེ་ཁོལ་ལེ	uneasiness	kha le khol le
ཁ་ལེ་ན	bit of a bridle	kha le na
ཁ་ལེ་མོན	place in mongolia	kha le mon
ཁ་ལེན	approval, acceptance, acknowledgement	kha len
ཁ་ལེབ	cover, lid	kha leb
ཁ་ལེབ་ཕོ་བྲང	Syn {dza yi pho brang kha leb} the residence of the family {tshangs gsar}	kha leb pho brang
ཁ་ལོ	1) prow, helm. 2) {sgyur} to control, to pilot, to dominate, to manage; helm/ prow of ship	kha lo
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར	to control, govern, lead, influence; 1) Charioteer. 2) guide	kha lo sgyur
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་མཁན	one with controlling power, ruler	kha lo sgyur mkhan
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་པ	one who steers, governor, driver, charioteer	kha lo sgyur pa
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་བ	steersman, charioteer, driver, pilot, helmsman; 1) to drive, pilot, sail, fly. 2) to control, master, manipulate. 3) to turn, turn a corner	kha lo sgyur ba
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་དབང	domination, hegemony, sepremacy, control	kha lo sgyur dbang
ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་དབང་འོག	under the domination/ hegemony of	kha lo sgyur dbang 'og
ཁ་ལོ་བསྒྱུར	govern	kha lo bsgyur
ཁ་ལོ་བསྒྱུར་བ	charioteer	kha lo bsgyur ba
ཁ་ལོ་ཆོས་ལ་བསྒྱུར་བ	who leads [all sentient beings] to the Dharma	kha lo chos la bsgyur ba
ཁ་ལོ་དྲང་བ	to steer, direct	kha lo drang ba
ཁ་ལོ་པ	one who leads or guides, shadow	kha lo pa
ཁ་ལོ་བ	steersman, pilot, driver	kha lo ba
ཁ་ལོག་ངོ་ལོག	disputative talk and actions	kha log ngo log
ཁ་ལོག་པ	1) contradict, disagree; 2) weapon's edge dulled/ worn out; 3) vomit; 4) disobey; 5) answer, reply	kha log pa
ཁ་ལོག་ཚིག་ལོག	contradict and criticize, talk back, bicker	kha log tshig log
ཁ་ལོག་སོང	blade has become turned (bad), kha mi 'dug, sharpness is wanting	kha log song
ཁ་ལོང་ཙམ	a little bit less than, a little under. ex. {sum rgya kha long tsam}; a little less than three hundred	kha long tsam
ཁ་ལོངས་བ	be at least #, reach a predetermined #	kha longs ba
ཁ་ཤ	capreolus linnaeus, spotted deer, elk, common deer of the duars in sikkim, common deer of the duars, cervus elaphus wallichii	kha sha
ཁ་ཤ་སྐྱུར་པོ	olive	kha sha skyur po
ཁ་ཤགས	jest, joke	kha shags
ཁ་ཤང་པོ	frank	kha shang po
ཁ་ཤན་པོ	defenseless	kha shan po
ཁ་ཤའི་རྭ	animal med [salty, cooling, by its power glo ba sogs byang khog tu rnag khrag chu ser rgyas pa skem, dug tshad sel]	kha sha'i rwa
ཁ་ཤས	some	kha shas
ཁ་ཤས་ཤིག	please give me some	kha shas shig
ཁ་ཤིང	1) shoe tree; 2) Kharu; 3) ornament above a door gyi bang rim zhig	kha shing
ཁ་ཤུགས	eloquence, power of speech	kha shugs
ཁ་ཤུགས་ཅན	eloquent	kha shugs can
ཁ་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	[strong mouth], forceful / effective speech	kha shugs chen po
ཁ་ཤུགས་མེད་པ	one who has nothing much to say	kha shugs med pa
ཁ་ཤུབས	par rko'i yo byad lugs snod	kha shubs
ཁ་ཤུར	kind of saddle shaped chisel	kha shur
ཁ་ཤེ་མཐུན་པ	consistency between word and thought	kha she mthun pa
ཁ་ཤེ་མི་མཐུན	hypocritical	kha she mi mthun
ཁ་ཤེད	eloquence, power of speaking, effective speech	kha shed
ཁ་ཤོ	harelip. Syn {sho re}	kha sho
ཁ་ཤོང་ལ	Kashong pass, in Dakpo	kha shong la
ཁ་ཤོབ	1) lies, false words; 2) talk missing the point, boasting, exaggeration; 3) kidding, joking	kha shob
ཁ་ཤོབ་བཤད	lie, joke, empty talk, exaggerating/ boasting/ missing the point	kha shob bshad
ཁ་ཤོམ	talk missing the point, boasting, exaggeration	kha shom
ཁ་ཤོམ་བཤད	speak empty talk exaggerating/ boasting/ missing the point	kha shom bshad
ཁ་ཤོར	thoughtless promise, breach of promise	kha shor
ཁ་ཤོར་བ	1) accidentally loose from one's mouth/ reveal, have a slip of the tongue; 2) miss/ exceed the mark; 3) go out of control	kha shor ba
ཁ་ཤོར་སོང	(mouth has run away), denoting inconsiderate talk	kha shor song
ཁ་ཤོལ་བ	rinsing the mouth	kha shol ba
ཁ་གཤག	1) tshem bu gcig brgyab nas [having done a piece of sewing g.yas g.yon du bslogs [turned around/inside out ???] pa'i tshem srub [edges]; 2) divide into two equal parts	kha gshag
ཁ་གཤགས	discussion	kha gshags
ཁ་གཤགས་འགྱེད་པ	hold controversy	kha gshags 'gyed pa
ཁ་གཤགས་རྒྱག་པ	dispute	kha gshags rgyag pa
ཁ་གཤིབ་གྲོས་སྡུར	dal dal lhing lhing gi gros mol,...Do bdag phan tshun tshang 'dzoms thog nas kha gshib gros sdur brtan lhing byed pa,...Kha gshib gshib, kha spu rub rub byas nas gros sdur gyis thag gcod pa ???	kha gshib gros sdur
ཁ་གཤེར	cross examination, SA ngag gsher	kha gsher
ཁ་གཤོག	to split open, cleave	kha gshog
ཁ་གཤོག་པ	break, split to pieces	kha gshog pa
ཁ་བཤད	empty talk, talk, gossip	kha bshad
ཁ་བཤད་ཁོ་ནས་དོན་མི་འགྲུབ	the goal is not accomplished by talk alone	kha bshad kho nas don mi 'grub
ཁ་བཤད་མཁན	talkative person	kha bshad mkhan
ཁ་བཤད་རྒྱབ་པ	1) lecture; 2) argue; 3) say auspicious words	kha bshad rgyab pa
ཁ་བཤད་བརྒྱབ	lecture, address verbally	kha bshad brgyab
ཁ་བཤད་དང་ལག་ལེན	word and deed, saying and doing	kha bshad dang lag len
ཁ་བཤད་དང་ལག་ལེན་མཐུན་པ	consistency between words and practice	kha bshad dang lag len mthun pa
ཁ་བཤད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	conversing intellectually about	kha bshad du smra ba
ཁ་བཤད་ལག་སྒྲུབ	do/practice as explained	kha bshad lag sgrub
ཁ་བཤད་ལག་ལེན	word and deed, saying and doing	kha bshad lag len
ཁ་བཤད་ལག་ལེན་མཐུན་པ	consistency between words and practice	kha bshad lag len mthun pa
ཁ་བཤལ	1) rinse [the mouth] w water; 2) water used in religious ablutions, holy water	kha bshal
ཁ་བཤལ་གཏོང	rinse [the mouth] w water [repeatedly], make an ablution	kha bshal gtong
ཁ་བཤལ་གཏོང་བ	rinse [the mouth] w water [repeatedly], make an ablution	kha bshal gtong ba
ཁ་བཤལ་བ	rinse the mouth w water, make an ablution	kha bshal ba
ཁ་བཤིག	unpack, unwrap, open up	kha bshig
ཁ་ས	yesterday	kha sa
ཁ་ས་ཁ་ཉིན	today and tomorrow	kha sa kha nyin
ཁ་སག	wild country on border of tibet	kha sag
ཁ་སང	yesterday; some time ago, some days ago	kha sang
ཁ་སངས	speak one's mind, tell honestly what has occurred in the mind	kha sangs
ཁ་སངས་པ	to tell honestly one's own thoughts	kha sangs pa
ཁ་སངས་པོ	[keen mouth], frank, open	kha sangs po
ཁ་སར་པ་ཎི	[Skt.] Syn {mkha' spyod} an aspect of {spyan ras gzigs} Avalokiteshvara	kha sar pa Ni
ཁ་སར་པ་ཨི	celestial realms, aspect of {spyan ras gzigs} Avalokiteshvara SK	kha sar pa i
ཁ་སི	wild hill tribe of india	kha si
ཁ་སིང	some time ago, several weeks ago	kha sing
ཁ་སུབ	bribe, kha sub byin pa offer a bribe	kha sub
ཁ་སུར	jujube, date, fig, date fruit, SA kha zur	kha sur
ཁ་སུར་སྡོང་པོ	jujube tree, date tree	kha sur sdong po
ཁ་སེ་ཐེ་ལུའུ	Fidel Castro	kha se the lu'u
ཁ་སེང	Syn {kha sang}	kha seng
ཁ་སོ	1) mouth and teeth. 2) edge, border	kha so
ཁ་སོ་ངོ་ལག་ལྟ་བ	look at another's expression and what the hands are doing [in order to know their mood] kha so ngo lag lta ba'i sgo nas gzhan sems	kha so ngo lag lta ba
ཤེས་པ	know the thoughts of another by looking at mouth and teeth, face white and black dang, actions of the hands	shes pa
ཁ་སོ་ལ་འཕང་ངོ	flung to the border 238	kha so la 'phang ngo
ཁ་སོག་ལ་ཁ	Khasog Lakha, in Domey	kha sog la kha
ཁ་སོང	1) before; 2) old cow/horse	kha song
ཁ་སོས	to be able to sustain oneself	kha sos
ཁ་སོས་དལ་བ	leisure, more time	kha sos dal ba
ཁ་སྲ་བོ	1) not say much; 2) horse etc hard to steer/lead, going where it wants	kha sra bo
ཁ་སྲབ	a bit for horse/ bridle	kha srab
ཁ་སྲལ་ཆུང་ངུ	deaf	kha sral chung ngu
ཁ་སྲི	nyung du gtong ba,...'Gro song gi grangs 'bor kha sri rgyag pa	kha sri
ཁ་སྲེ་བ	communicate with another (live, eat, drink, smoke with a person)	kha sre ba
ཁ་སླ་པོ	[weak mouth] 1) flannel mouth, can't keep a secret. 2) a person who eats everything	kha sla po
ཁ་སླ་བ	1) say whatever comes out; 2) eat whatever comes to hand	kha sla ba
ཁ་སླེ་ཡོན	[arch] crooked mouth, devious, deceitful	kha sle yon
ཁ་སླེབས་ཆེན་པོ	very profitable yielding good income	kha slebs chen po
ཁ་སློག	1) tshur zug pa...Bdag por kha slog rgyag pa'i sgo khyi ni, dbyug pas bsnun te rgyang ring bskrad na legs, (2(A gyen log	kha slog
ཁ་སློག་རྒྱག	SNT: used this word as "mar kha slog" to describe how a PM would "strike back" at his ministers. kha slog rgyag seems to mean "to strike back, to bite back". CM gives two meanings: 1) tshur zug pa,...	kha slog rgyag
ཁ་སློང	replenishment, supplement, addition supplement, add, increase, enlarge, mix, put in, something that makes up a deficiency	kha slong
ཁ་སློང་བ	1) amend incomplete or wrong words; 2) turn a vessel's mouth upwards; 3) replenish what is incomplete or damaged	kha slong ba
ཁ་སློབ	learning by heart, primer used by children	kha slob
ཁ་གས་ར	new, fresh	kha gsa ra
ཁ་གསག	1) getting someone to give you something by flattering him, one of the five wrong livelihoods [see. {log 'tso lnga} flattery, obsequious flattery, soliciting, flattery [for one's own end]. 2) to sp...	kha gsag
ཁ་གསག་གི་ཚིག	eloquent/ soft words	kha gsag gi tshig
ཁ་གསག་ཅན	frivolous/ superficial	kha gsag can
ཁ་གསག་བྱེད	flatter, be loquacious/ obsequious	kha gsag byed
ཁ་གསག་མེད་པ	not talkative/ eloquent	kha gsag med pa
ཁ་གསགས	Syn {kha gsag}	kha gsags
ཁ་གསང	female and male genitals together [esp. in karmamudra context]	kha gsang
ཁ་གསང་པོ	kha yangs po'am 'khrol po,...Skad cha kha gsang po bshad ???	kha gsang po
ཁ་གསངས	skad cha 'dzem bag med par bshad pa [shameless?],...Zhib gsal kha gsangs,...Kha gsangs na go bde, nam langs na 'gro bde	kha gsangs
ཁ་གསབ	everyday expressions; that which makes up a shortage, supplement, addition	kha gsab
ཁ་གསབ་དངུལ	monetary subsidy	kha gsab dngul
ཁ་གསབ་སྣོན་པ	add to make up a shortage	kha gsab snon pa
ཁ་གསབ་པ	reply	kha gsab pa
ཁ་གསབ་བྱེད་པ	to supplement, add	kha gsab byed pa
ཁ་གསབ་རོགས་དངུལ	monetary aid	kha gsab rogs dngul
ཁ་གསབ་རོགས་རམ	supplementary/ subsidy aid	kha gsab rogs ram
ཁ་གསར	new, fresh, edge or blade just sharpened	kha gsar
ཁ་གསར་པ	fresh	kha gsar pa
ཁ་གསལ	clear, distinct, explicit	kha gsal
ཁ་གསལ་གཏིང་གསལ	gang dran? say what 1 remembers?	kha gsal gting gsal
ཁ་གསལ་པོ	clear and definite, evident, explicit, lucid	kha gsal po
ཁ་གསལ་པོ་མེད་པ	ambiguous	kha gsal po med pa
ཁ་གསལ་པོར	point-blank	kha gsal por
ཁ་གསལ་བ	brighter (colors	kha gsal ba
ཁ་གསལ་ཞུ་བ	speak/ say clearly/ explicitly	kha gsal zhu ba
ཁ་གསལ་བཤད་པ	speak/ explain clearly	kha gsal bshad pa
ཁ་གསུབ	1) close/ cover an opening; 2) erase; 3) push someone's head to the ground	kha gsub
ཁ་གསུམ	shut 1's mouth, keep quiet	kha gsum
ཁ་གསེ་བ	break, split divide in pieces	kha gse ba
ཁ་གསོ	take care of, support, feed, rear, add, renew	kha gso
ཁ་གསོ་བ	to replenish, made full by adding something more to it	kha gso ba
ཁ་གསོད	kind of a salutation scarf	kha gsod
ཁ་གསོས	replenish	kha gsos
ཁ་བསག	talkative, loquacious, flatterer	kha bsag
ཁ་བསགས	talkative, flatterer	kha bsags
ཁ་བསང་པོ	affable, frank, outspoken	kha bsang po
ཁ་བསབ་བྱེད་པ	reply, give answer 239	kha bsab byed pa
ཁ་བསོད	1) merit kata, [poor quality] salutation scarf; 2) merit/ good fortune of obtaining good food	kha bsod
ཁ་བསྲེ	several people w 1 eating/ drinking vessel	kha bsre
ཁ་བསྲེ་བ	associate with one another (like drinking & smoking together)	kha bsre ba
ཁ་བསླང	turned upwards	kha bslang
ཁ་བསླང་པ	lie with the face uppermost	kha bslang pa
ཁ་བསླང་བ	to lie with the face uppermost	kha bslang ba
ཁ་བསླངས	that which makes up a shortage, supplement, addition, replenishment, subsidy	kha bslangs
ཁ་བསླུས	tempt by false hopes and promises, deceive by sweet words	kha bslus
ཁ་བསླུས་པ	1) deceive/con by lying ste; 2) con artist, person who leads others astray	kha bslus pa
ཁ་ཧམ་ཆེ་བ	kha shed mkhrang ba'am kha shob tsha ba	kha ham che ba
ཁཱ་ཧི	please eat / drink / enjoy / accept!; please enjoy, accept, eat, drink! Syn {gsol cig}	khA hi
ཁ་ཧུབ་རྒྱག་པ	khas rngub pa	kha hub rgyag pa
ཁ་ཧྲག	forked mouth or point, bifurcated mouth or end of anything made of iron or wood	kha hrag
ཁ་ཧྲག་པོ	eloquent, powerful speaker	kha hrag po
ཁ་ཧྲི་གར	Kashgar	kha hri gar
ཁ་ལྷག	remains [of a meal], leftovers	kha lhag
ཁ་ལྷོ་ངོས་སུ་བསྟན	face the south	kha lho ngos su bstan
ཁ་ལྷོར	to face south	kha lhor
ཁ་ལྷོར་བལྟ	facing south	kha lhor blta
ཁབ༹	crow, small raven	khva
ཁྭ	raven	khwa
ཁྭ་སྐད	caw of a raven [as an omen]	khwa skad
ཁབ༹་སྐད	crow's call	khva skad
ཁྭ་སྐད་ཤེས་པ	to draw omens from the caw of a raven	khwa skad shes pa
ཁབ༹་སྐད་ཤེས་པའི་རིག་པ	divination from crow's call	khva skad shes pa'i rig pa
ཁྭ་སྐད་ཤེས་པའི་རིག་པ	science of drawing omens from the caw of a raven	khwa skad shes pa'i rig pa
ཁྭ་སྐྲོད་ནུས་པ	able to scare a crow	khwa skrod nus pa
ཁབ༹་སྐྲོད་ནུས་པ	able to scare a crow	khva skrod nus pa
ཁྭ་ཁ་མུ་ཁ	Kakamukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	khwa kha mu kha
ཁྭ་ཁྭ	crow	khwa khwa
ཁྭ་ཏ	crow; crow, raven, magpie	khwa ta
ཁབ༹་ཏ	crow	khva ta
ཁྭ་ཏ་ཁྲ་བ	full name for the magpie	khwa ta khra ba
ཁྭ་ཏའི་ཁྱུ	flock of crows, undisciplined mob	khwa ta'i khyu
ཁྭ་ཏའི་མགོ	Crow-head. Syn {rdo rje dmar mo} One of {dbang phyug ma nyer brgyad}	khwa ta'i mgo
ཁབ༹་གདོང	Crow Face	khva gdong
ཁྭ་བ	tax	khwa ba
ཁག	1) word indicating a plurality of different kinds of units / sections / types / parts. 2) division, section, group, part. 3) fault, blame. 4) various. 5) difficulty, {chos dang 'jal ba'i khag lugs}...	khag
ཁག་དཀྲི	attribute/shift fault/blame [I didn't you did]	khag dkri
ཁག་དཀྲི་བསྙོན་འཛུགས	lyingly attributes one's transgressions to others	khag dkri bsnyon 'dzugs
ཁག་དཀྲི་བཞག་པ	attribute/shift faults/blame [I didn't you did]	khag dkri bzhag pa
ཁག་བཀལ	use as a pretext, blame	khag bkal
ཁག་སྐུར	1) falsely attribute a fault; 2) bestow a task/ responsibility	khag skur
ཁག་ཁ	different, distinct	khag kha
ཁག་ཁ་ཆགས་པ	decompose	khag kha chags pa
ཁག་ཁ་བཟོ་བ	detach, isolate	khag kha bzo ba
ཁག་ཁག	silent	khag khag
ཁག་ཁག་བྱེད	do separately, divorce	khag khag byed
ཁག་ཁག་བཟོ	separate	khag khag bzo
ཁག་ཁག་ལ	silently	khag khag la
ཁག་ཁག་སོ་སོ	separate parts	khag khag so so
ཁག་ཁག་སོ་སོ་ཕེ་བ	separate	khag khag so so phe ba
ཁག་ཁག་སོ་སོ་ཕྱེ་བ	to separate	khag khag so so phye ba
ཁག་ཁར	apart	khag khar
ཁག་ཁུར	take charge of a thing or person, be responsible for anything, be surety for anyone	khag khur
ཁག་ཁྱག	sponsor, bail, warrant, guarantee, security	khag khyag
ཁག་འཁུར	'gan 'khur,...Nga rang gis khag 'khur thub	khag 'khur
ཁག་འཁུར་ཐུབ	be able to assume responsibility/ take charge	khag 'khur thub
ཁག་འཁུར་བ	assume charge of	khag 'khur ba
ཁག་འཁྲི་བའི་ཉེན་ཁ	liable	khag 'khri ba'i nyen kha
ཁག་འཁྲིས	assign a task/responsibility	khag 'khris
ཁག་བགོ	v. to separate, set apart, divide up	khag bgo
ཁག་བགོ་བ	separate, set apart, divide up	khag bgo ba
ཁག་བགོས	divided into individual parts, sections, etc, separated, set apart, divided up, classified	khag bgos
ཁག་བགོས་ཀྱིས་སྤྲད་པ	divide into individual pats, sections, etc, separate, set apart, divide up	khag bgos kyis sprad pa
ཁག་བགོས་ཏེ་བཏང་བ	divide into individual parts/ sections, etc, separate, set apart, divide up, classify	khag bgos te btang ba
ཁག་བགོས་ནས་དབང་སྒྱུར	divide and conquer 240	khag bgos nas dbang sgyur
ཁག་བགོས་བྱེད	divide into individual parts, sections, etc, separated, set apart, divide up, classify	khag bgos byed
ཁག་འགན	1) responsibility for a task; 2) responsibility for a fault/ transgression	khag 'gan
ཁག་འགན་ལེན་པ	/accept/ take on a task/ responsibility	khag 'gan len pa
ཁག་འགེལ	[wrongly] attribute faults/ blame, use as a pretext	khag 'gel
ཁག་འགེལ་བ	place in charge	khag 'gel ba
ཁག་འགྱུར	take the blame	khag 'gyur
ཁག་རྒྱག་པ	to guarantee, to become responsible	khag rgyag pa
ཁག་ངན	blame	khag ngan
ཁག་ངན་པ	blame	khag ngan pa
ཁག་ངན་སྦིར་སྒྲ	reports that 1 has faults	khag ngan sbir sgra
ཁག་ངས་ཐེག	I assure you	khag ngas theg
ཁག་ཅན	important	khag can
ཁག་ཅིག	a part, a section, some	khag cig
ཁག་གཅིག	part, part of, portion, share	khag gcig
ཁག་ཆེན	important	khag chen
ཁག་འཇོག	place/ attribute faults, blame khag 'jog skyon 'gel ba'am snyad 'dogs pa - ...Rang nongs ngos len mi byed par gzhan la khag 'jog thabs byas	khag 'jog
ཁག་འཇོག་ཐབས་བྱས	used as a means of attributing faults	khag 'jog thabs byas
ཁག་ཏིག	bitter	khag tig
ཁག་བཏགས	use as a pretext, blame	khag btags
ཁག་བཏགས་པ	1) khag 'phangs pa,...Kham bu za 'dod med pas sour taste la khag btags; 2) attribute faults	khag btags pa
ཁག་ཐེག	bail	khag theg
ཁག་ཐེག་པ	1) 1 who accepts a task/ responsibility; 2) be able to accept a task/ responsibility	khag theg pa
ཁག་ཐེག་བཙུགས་ནས་གློད	release on bail	khag theg btsugs nas glod
ཁག་ཐེག་ཞུ་ཡིག	guarantee, warrenty, bond	khag theg zhu yig
ཁག་ཐེགས	witness, give evidence	khag thegs
ཁག་དྲི	fishy, stinking	khag dri
ཁག་འདོགས	use as a pretext, blame	khag 'dogs
ཁག་གནད	crucial point key point	khag gnad
ཁག་པོ	difficult, hard	khag po
ཁག་པོ་ཆེ་བ	suffer from want	khag po che ba
ཁག་པོ་བྱུང	difficulties arose	khag po byung
ཁག་པོ་བཟོ་བ	demur	khag po bzo ba
ཁག་པོར	hardly	khag por
ཁག་ཕྱེ	differentiate, distinguish, divide, separate [into parts]	khag phye
ཁག་ཕྱེ་བ	differentiate, distinguish	khag phye ba
ཁག་འཕང་བཞག་པ	to blame; {ya la bzhag pa, ya la dkris pa}	khag 'phang bzhag pa
ཁག་འཕངས	?impelled/caused	khag 'phangs
ཁག་འཕྲི	responsibility	khag 'phri
ཁག་དབྱེ	parting, separation	khag dbye
ཁག་དབྱེ་བ	part, separate	khag dbye ba
ཁག་འབྱེད	differentiate, distinguish, divide, separate [into parts]	khag 'byed
ཁག་འབྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	dividing, separating machine	khag 'byed 'phrul chas
ཁག་སྦྱོང	hardship, difficulties	khag sbyong
ཁག་མི་འདུག	not at fault	khag mi 'dug
ཁག་མེད	'gan med pa = true, w/o fault	khag med
ཁག་སྨད	adominal	khag smad
ཁག་འཛུད	faults/ transgressions 'dzugs pa [cultivate? establish?]	khag 'dzud
ཁག་བཞག	pretense	khag bzhag
ཁག་བཞག་པ	brgyags phyer khag	khag bzhag pa
བཞག་པ	to entrust the provisions and tsampa to a friend khag g.yog - blame, attribute fault khag g.yogs - burden another w one's own fault	bzhag pa
ཁག་རུབ	many [parts/divisions etc.] combined into 1/ brought together	khag rub
ཁག་ལེན	assert, accept, promise	khag len
ཁག་ཤག་པ	dissect	khag shag pa
ཁག་སོ་སོ	each, every, different	khag so so
ཁང	house, building	khang
ཁང་ཁུངས	house's ownership	khang khungs
ཁང་ཁོངས	su yang rung ba zhig la bdag dbang thob pa'i khang pa'i gras,...Gzhung la bdag pa'i khang khongs le lag khor yug ...Sger la dbang ba'i khang khongs steng shod khe gtsang	khang khongs
ཁང་ཁྱིམ	house	khang khyim
ཁང་ཁྱིམ་འདུག་ས	residence, home, house	khang khyim 'dug sa
ཁང་ཁྱིམ་ནོར་དང་བཅས་པ	household and wealth	khang khyim nor dang bcas pa
ཁང་ཁྲལ	by house tenants to the landlord, besides the rent work obligation labor obligations	khang khral
ཁང་གླ	rent, house rent	khang gla
ཁང་གླ་བསྡུ་བ	collect rent	khang gla bsdu ba
ཁང་གླ་སྤྲོད	pay rent [for house]	khang gla sprod
ཁང་གླ་སྤྲོད་པ	pay rent	khang gla sprod pa
ཁང་གླའི་ཐོག	rental	khang gla'i thog
ཁང་གླར་གཏོང་བ	pay rent	khang glar gtong ba
ཁང་གླིང	a temple	khang gling
ཁང་སྒྲོམ	house's neighborhood, compartment, apartment	khang sgrom
ཁང་ཅན་ཟོའོ་སྨན	antibiotics	khang can zo'o sman
ཁང་ཅུན་ཟོའོ་སྨན	antibiotics	khang cun zo'o sman
ཁང་ཆུང	small room	khang chung
ཁང་ཆུང་གོབ་ཏོ	shack	khang chung gob to
ཁང་ཆུང་པ	occupant of a small house	khang chung pa
ཁང་ཆེན	1) mansion, castle, palace, big house. 2) temple. Syn {gtsug lag khang}	khang chen
ཁང་ཆེན་གྱི་ལྷག་མ	the infraction of building a big house [with improper means]. One of {dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum}	khang chen gyi lhag ma
ཁང་ཆེན་འདེགས་པའི་ཀ་བ	master pillar in the great house	khang chen 'degs pa'i ka ba
ཁང་ཆེན་པ	1) occupant of a large house. 2) old persons belonging to Gautama's family	khang chen pa
ཁང་ཆེན་བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱལ་པོ	{khang chen bsod nams rgyal po}	khang chen bsod nams rgyal po
ཁང་གཉེར	housekeeper, steward of a house, person in whose charge a house is kept 241	khang gnyer
ཁང་གཉེར་མ	mistress	khang gnyer ma
ཁང་རྟགས	house #/ address	khang rtags
ཁང་ལྟག་སྐོར	top of a house	khang ltag skor
ཁང་སྟེང	upper roof or terrace of a house	khang steng
ཁང་སྟེང་དུ	on the roof of the palace	khang steng du
ཁང་སྟེང་དུ་བབས	fell on to the palace roof	khang steng du babs
ཁང་སྟོང	empty house	khang stong
ཁང་སྟོང་རྐུན་མ	don med rnam rtog gi dpe,...Rnam rtog dgra ru langs na, khang stong rkun mas khengs,...- "a thief in an empty house" Pointless, meaningless, fruitless, futile	khang stong rkun ma
ཁང་ཐོག	1) house top, roof; 2) Khang	khang thog
པའི་ཐོག་འགེབས་སམ་ཐོག་ཁེབས	[syn: chu skyob, ya phub, yang thog]	pa'i thog 'gebs sam thog khebs
ཐོག་ཁེབས	...syn: chu skyob dang, ya phub, yang thog bcas so roof	thog khebs
ཁང་ཐོག་ཆུ་འགྲོ	gutter	khang thog chu 'gro
ཁང་ཐོག་དར་ལྕོག	put on housetop prayer flags w spreading cords/ tassels	khang thog dar lcog
ཁང་ཐོག་པུ་ཤུ	house's nya rgyab [balustrade,railing? ]	khang thog pu shu
ཁང་བདག	owner of a house, landlord	khang bdag
ཁང་རྡེབ་གཏོང	murdr by causing a house to fall on someone	khang rdeb gtong
ཁང་རྡོ	foundation stone	khang rdo
ཁང་གནད	crucial point key point	khang gnad
ཁང་པ	[R] house, mansion, building, floor, story, hall, room, chamber	khang pa
ཁང་པ་ཀ་བ་བཞི་པ	a vast granary	khang pa ka ba bzhi pa
ཁང་པ་བཀྲ་བ	painted house	khang pa bkra ba
ཁང་པ་རྒྱག	to build a house	khang pa rgyag
ཁང་པ་རྒྱག་པ	build a house	khang pa rgyag pa
ཁང་པ་ལྕམ་གང་མ	zheng du lcam gang las med pa'i room	khang pa lcam gang ma
ཁང་པ་ཐོག་ཚད་གཅིག་ཅན	bungalow	khang pa thog tshad gcig can
ཁང་པ་དང་རིང་བ	far from the house	khang pa dang ring ba
ཁང་པ་དོག	small narrow house	khang pa dog
ཁང་པ་རྡིབ་པ	house breaks down	khang pa rdib pa
ཁང་པ་ནག་ཁུང	dungeon	khang pa nag khung
ཁང་པ་སྤོས་པ	move, change one's residence	khang pa spos pa
ཁང་པ་མེར་བསྲེགས	arson	khang pa mer bsregs
ཁང་པ་མེས་བསྲེགས	house is burnt down	khang pa mes bsregs
ཁང་པ་བཙན་པོ	consecrated house where thieves or robbers cannot have access	khang pa btsan po
ཁང་པ་རྩེགས་པ	upper story of a house, balcony on the roof of a house	khang pa rtsegs pa
ཁང་པ་བརྩེགས་པ	second story of a house, masonry building, storeyed house	khang pa brtsegs pa
ཁང་པ་རལ་ཞིང	ruined edifice, ruined edifice	khang pa ral zhing
ཁང་པ་རལ་ཞིང་གྲུམ་པ	dilapidated house	khang pa ral zhing grum pa
ཁང་པ་རལ་ཞིང་འདྲུམས་པ	dilapidated house	khang pa ral zhing 'drums pa
ཁང་པ་བཤིག་པ	demolish a house	khang pa bshig pa
ཁང་པ་བཤུ་བ	demolish a house	khang pa bshu ba
ཁང་པ་གསུམ་བརྩེགས	three-storied house	khang pa gsum brtsegs
ཁང་པ་བསིལ་བ	zhig, a cool house	khang pa bsil ba
ཁང་པའི་མཁོ་ཆས	household	khang pa'i mkho chas
ཁང་པའི་འཁྱམ་ར	balcony	khang pa'i 'khyam ra
ཁང་པའི་ཐེམ་པ	threshold of the house	khang pa'i them pa
ཁང་པའི་ནང	inside of a house, room, apartment	khang pa'i nang
ཁང་པའི་ནང་གི་སྡོད་མི	tenant	khang pa'i nang gi sdod mi
ཁང་པའི་ནང་ནས་དོན་ཡོང་བ	come out of the room khang pa'i nang phyag dar byed pa sweep the inside of a house	khang pa'i nang nas don yong ba
ཁང་པའི་སྤེན་པ	roof made of tamarisk stems	khang pa'i spen pa
ཁང་པའི་བར་འཁྱམས་བྱེད་ས	corridor	khang pa'i bar 'khyams byed sa
ཁང་པའི་བྱ་གདབ	balcony khang pa'i bya g.yab - projection of a roof where birds take shelter	khang pa'i bya gdab
ཁང་པའི་ཚོམས	courtyard of a house	khang pa'i tshoms
ཁང་པའི་ར་བ	yard, courtyard, fold, pen	khang pa'i ra ba
ཁང་པའི་ལོགས	inner wall of inner side of the house	khang pa'i logs
ཁང་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the infraction of house building. One of {dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum}	khang pa'i lhag ma
ཁང་པོའི་ནང	indoor	khang po'i nang
ཁང་སྤྱིལ	little house	khang spyil
ཁང་བ	building	khang ba
ཁང་བུ	little house, small hut/ house, mansion	khang bu
ཁང་བུ་རྡིབ་པ	collapse the inner sanctum of, destroy the mansion of	khang bu rdib pa
ཁང་བུ་བརྩེགས་པ	little houses, [multistoried] mansion [KPSR once tr 'og min	khang bu brtsegs pa
གྱི	- as little houses]	gyi
ཁང་བུ་བརྩེགས་པའི་མདོ	the Kutagara Sutra	khang bu brtsegs pa'i mdo
ཁང་བྱ	poultry, hen	khang bya
ཁང་བྱིའུ	sparrow	khang byi'u
ཁང་བྱེ	house sparrow	khang bye
ཁང་བྱེའུ	khang byi'u	khang bye'u
ཁང་བྱེལ	khang byi'u	khang byel
ཁང་དབྱིབས་བཟོ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཚན་རིག	architecture	khang dbyibs bzo rigs kyi tshan rig
ཁང་མིག	apartment, chamber, compartment, room, cell	khang mig
ཁང་མིག་ཙམ་པ	the size of small room	khang mig tsam pa
ཁང་མེད་རོ་དུད་སྤྲད་པ	burning down houses and the people inside	khang med ro dud sprad pa
ཁང་མོ་ཆེ	big house	khang mo che
ཁང་དམར	khang dmar rdzong [ST between rgyal rtse and gro mo, rdzong, to the S bordeing Bhutan] 242	khang dmar
ཁང་རྨང	foundation of a house	khang rmang
ཁང་རྩ	foundation of a house	khang rtsa
ཁང་རྩིག	wall of a house	khang rtsig
ཁང་རྩེ	house top	khang rtse
ཁང་རྩེག	house w stories	khang rtseg
ཁང་བརྩེགས	upper house or a stories room	khang brtsegs
ཁང་ཚན	1) Syn {kham tshan}, smaller institutional unit, Monastic house, regional division [within a monastic college], regional section of a {grva tshang} in a monastery	khang tshan
ཁང་མཚན	house/ dormitory in a college/ monastery	khang mtshan
ཁང་མཚེས	city dwellers who are [next door] neighbors	khang mtshes
ཁང་འཛིན	khang gla sprad 'dzin	khang 'dzin
ཁང་ཞབས	floor, flooring	khang zhabs
ཁང་ཞིང	house and cultivated fields, landed property	khang zhing
ཁང་གཞི	estate	khang gzhi
ཁང་བཞིས	estate	khang bzhis
ཁང་ཟུན་སུའུ	antibiotics	khang zun su'u
ཁང་བཟང	residence, mansion	khang bzang
ཁང་བཟང་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བ	Indra's palace	khang bzang rnam par rgyal ba
ཁང་བཟངས	storyed house, abode of gods, cubical part of chorten	khang bzangs
ཁང་བཟོ	construction of houses/ buildings	khang bzo
ཁང་བཟོ་བ	mason, architect	khang bzo ba
ཁང་འོག	downstairs, basement	khang 'og
ཁང་ཡངས་པ	universe (the wide house)	khang yangs pa
ཁང་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་བསྐོར	zodiac	khang yongs kyi bskor
ཁང་རལ་ཞིག	a ruin, broken / fallen down house	khang ral zhig
ཁང་རུལ	old house	khang rul
ཁང་རོ	gnas khang zhig ro	khang ro
ཁང་རོ་ཙབ༹་ཁ	{khang ro tsva kha in shan rtsa rdzong	khang ro tsva kha
ཁང་ཤིང	beam	khang shing
ཁང་ཤུལ་སྟོང་པ	empty land where once there was a house	khang shul stong pa
ཁང་སྲུང་བ	house/building guard/ watchman	khang srung ba
ཁང་གསར	new house	khang gsar
ཁང་གསོལ	house gsar 'dzin gyi rten 'brel	khang gsol
ཁངས	vi. to be filled	khangs
ཁངས་ཅན་ཀྱི་ཁྲོད	the country of snows, Tibet	khangs can kyi khrod
ཁངས་པ	1) haste, hurry. 2) to delay. 3) distance	khangs pa
ཁཏ་ཝང་ག	* khatvanga	khat wang ga
ཁཏ་ཝམ	khatvanga	khat wam
ཁཏ་ཝམ་ག	The tantric staff held in the crook of Guru Rinpoche's left arm	khat wam ga
ཁད	1) approach, come near; 2) slow; 2) right away, as soon as ['gro ma khad] about to, near to, at the eve of, almost, on the verge of, like, as, [p {'khad} sit firmly, sit, stop. be stopped, keep bac...	khad
ཁད་ཀྱིས	gradually, slowly, by degrees, privately	khad kyis
ཁད་ཀྱིས་ཁད་ཀྱིས	slowly, in slow motion	khad kyis khad kyis
ཁད་ཀྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	go slowly	khad kyis 'gro ba
ཁད་ཀྱིས་བཟློ	speak of privately	khad kyis bzlo
ཁད་ཁད	slowly	khad khad
ཁད་ཁད་པ	ex {lcags sgrog sgril ba ltar khad khad pa}	khad khad pa
ཁད་མཁས	expert, specialist	khad mkhas
ཁད་ག	1) battle ax. 2) military commander	khad ga
ཁད་འགྱངས་ཁ་ཐོར	phan tshun bar thag 'gyangs shing kha tshang mnyam rub tu med pa	khad 'gyangs kha thor
ཁད་རྒྱག་པ	jab w a needle, inoculate	khad rgyag pa
ཁད་རྒྱང	sa khad rgyang ba ste phan tshun thag ha cang ring ba	khad rgyang
ཁད་ཉེ	near, not far, close by	khad nye
ཁད་ཉེ་བ	near	khad nye ba
ཁད་ཉེར་སླེབས་པ	came near	khad nyer slebs pa
ཁད་མཉམ	even, level	khad mnyam
ཁད་སྙམས	equal, even, SA 'khod snyams	khad snyams
ཁད་སྙོམས	Syn {khod snyoms}	khad snyoms
ཁད་སྙོམས་པོ	even, level	khad snyoms po
ཁད་སྙོམས་པོར་བཟོ་བ	make even	khad snyoms por bzo ba
ཁད་དང་སྐུད་པ	needle and thread	khad dang skud pa
ཁད་དུ	as far as	khad du
ཁད་པ	near to, almost, on the verge of, about to {rdzogs la khad pa - almost completed]	khad pa
ཁད་པར་གྱུར་པ	to be stopped or hindered	khad par gyur pa
ཁད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	be stopped/ hindered	khad par 'gyur ba
ཁད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to stop, hinder, impede	khad par byed pa
ཁད་བཙུན་མ	married woman	khad btsun ma
ཁད་ཡངས་པ	open, wide, vast	khad yangs pa
ཁད་རིང་གིས་ཆོད་པ	be far from	khad ring gis chod pa
ཁད་ལོང	magnet	khad long
ཁན	mouthful	khan
ཁན་ཁོན	resentful/ vindictive attitude	khan khon
ཁན་ཏི	he, she	khan ti
ཁན་ད	confection, medicinal syrup, treacle, molasses partially dried, concentrated medicines	khan da
ཁན་འདེ	[arch] difficult	khan 'de
ཁན་ནེ་ཁོན་ནེ	resentful/ vindictive attitude	khan ne khon ne
ཁན་པ	to add	khan pa
ཁན་སྦྱར	vest	khan sbyar
ཁན་མན	modest	khan man
ཁབ	1) needle; 2) house, place [h]; 3) bride, wife	khab
ཁབ་ཀོངས	extent	khab kongs
ཁབ་ཀྱི་ཁ	needle's eye	khab kyi kha
ཁབ་ཀྱི་མིག	the eye of a needle	khab kyi mig
ཁབ་ཀྱི་ཞབས་ཕྱི	courtier, palace servant	khab kyi zhabs phyi
ཁབ་ཀྱིས་རི་མོ་འབྲི་བ	to embroider	khab kyis ri mo 'bri ba
ཁབ་སྐུད	[needle and] thread, the smallest item	khab skud
ཁབ་སྐུད་པ	a needle and thread	khab skud pa
ཁབ་ཁ	needle [point], court, residence (h house, mansion, palace, bride	khab kha
ཁབ་ཁོབ	unworkable body, unable to do a job properly	khab khob
ཁབ་གུང་ཐང	the place Khab Gungtang	khab gung thang
ཁབ་གོང་གཟེར	example of bor zags med pa	khab gong gzer
ཁབ་མགོ	tool for examining whether head bones are broken	khab mgo
ཁབ་རྒྱག་པ	give/ have an injection, be injected	khab rgyag pa
ཁབ་རྒྱབ་པ	give/ have an injection, be injected	khab rgyab pa
ཁབ་རྒྱུ་བ	thread a needle	khab rgyu ba
ཁབ་ཆུན་མ	mna' ma young	khab chun ma
ཁབ་ཆེན་མ	first wife	khab chen ma
ཁབ་སྙུང་གང་འགྲོ	'gro tshod dam gyo thabs gang thub ci thub byed pa'i dpe	khab snyung gang 'gro
ཁབ་ཏ་ཀ	knapsack, pouch	khab ta ka
ཁབ་ཏུ་བཞས་པ	to marry, take as wife	khab tu bzhas pa
ཁབ་ཏུ་བཞེས	get married	khab tu bzhes
ཁབ་ཏུ་བཞེས་པ	take for a wife khab tu bsus pa'i rdzongs su jo bo rnam	khab tu bzhes pa
པ་གཉིས་སྤྱན་དྲངས	each brought with her, as part of her dowry, [an image of the Buddha; these] two statues [came to be known as] Jowo	pa gnyis spyan drangs
ཁབ་འཐག	knitting	khab 'thag
ཁབ་འཐག་རྒྱག	knit	khab 'thag rgyag
ཁབ་འཐག་བྱེད	knit	khab 'thag byed
ཁབ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	knitting factory	khab 'thag bzo grwa
ཁབ་དང་མེ་བཙའ	acupuncture and cauterization	khab dang me btsa'
ཁབ་གདལ་ཀློང་ཡངས་ཆེན་པོ	immense, all-encompassing expanse	khab gdal klong yangs chen po
ཁབ་སྣོད	vessel for sewing needles	khab snod
ཁབ་སྤང་བ	abandon the world/householder's life, enter religion	khab spang ba
ཁབ་སྤུ	bristle, needle-like hair	khab spu
ཁབ་སྤོང་བ	to abandon the world, to enter religion	khab spong ba
ཁབ་ཕྲ	small fine needle	khab phra
ཁབ་བེ་ཁོབ་བེ	unworkable body, unable to do a job properly	khab be khob be
ཁབ་སྦོམ	large needle	khab sbom
ཁབ་མིག	eye of a needle	khab mig
ཁབ་མིག་ཏུ་སྐུད་པ་བརྒྱུས་པ	thread a needle	khab mig tu skud pa brgyus pa
ཁབ་སྨན	injection	khab sman
ཁབ་སྨན་རྒྱག	give an injection	khab sman rgyag
ཁབ་སྨན་འཛུགས	give an injection	khab sman 'dzugs
ཁབ་གཙག	lancet	khab gtsag
ཁབ་བཙའ	acupuncture and moxibustion	khab btsa'
ཁབ་བཙུན་མ	lady of the house, queen	khab btsun ma
ཁབ་བཙུན་མོ	lady of the house, queen	khab btsun mo
ཁབ་རྩེ	pin / needle point; a needlepoint	khab rtse
ཁབ་འཛིན་མ	house wife, lady of the house	khab 'dzin ma
ཁབ་འཛིན་མོ	bride, house wife, lady of the house	khab 'dzin mo
ཁབ་འཛུགས་སྙུང་འཛུགས	one's own dod pa gzhan la 'gel gang thub byed pa'i dpe	khab 'dzugs snyung 'dzugs
ཁབ་བཞེས	take as wife	khab bzhes
ཁབ་བཞེས་པ	to marry	khab bzhes pa
ཁབ་གཟེར	safety pin	khab gzer
ཁབ་རལ	sewing needle vessel or needle cover	khab ral
ཁབ་རལ་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of #. One of {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}	khab ral byed pa'i ltung byed
ཁབ་ལས	tailoring	khab las
ཁབ་ལེ	difficult	khab le
ཁབ་ལེན	med. mineral [bitter, slightly cooling syn: skud 'dren lenpo'o, a kind of mineral medicine, bitter tasting? [also the name of a particular medicine] By its power arrows/bullets are drawn out, rust ...	khab len
ཁབ་ལེན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	magnetic properties	khab len gyi rang bzhin
ཁབ་ལེན་རྡོ	magnet[ic stone]	khab len rdo
ཁབ་ལེན་པ	marry	khab len pa
ཁབ་ལོང	magnet	khab long
ཁབ་ཤུབས	sewing needle vessel/ case	khab shubs
ཁབ་སོ	a duty	khab so
ཁབ་སོ་ནང་པའི་ཁྲིམས	the law of putting in the king's treasury [by king srong btsan sgam po, bod du personally written khrims yig drug pa: bden rdzun dbye 'byed skabs gnyis ka bden na gnyis ka bden dang dga' gsum du gc...	khab so nang pa'i khrims
ཁབ་སྲུབ	sewing bar mtshams, needle mark, pin prick	khab srub
ཁབ་སླས	knitting, knitted	khab slas
ཁབ་བསླས	knitting, knitted	khab bslas
ཁབ་བསླས་གྱོན་ཆས	knitted clothing	khab bslas gyon chas
ཁབ་བསླས་དངོས་རྫས	knitted goods	khab bslas dngos rdzas
ཁབ་བསླས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	knitting factory	khab bslas bzo grwa
ཁབ་ལྷས	knitting, knitted	khab lhas
ཁབས	on the face etc chags pa'i gro thig [many little nag thig]	khabs
ཁབས་སུ་བཞེས་པ	took to wife	khabs su bzhes pa
ཁམ	1) a bit. 2) one who is about to. 3) piece / bite of something, mouthful. 4) fitness. 5) one of {spar kha brgyad} 6) color, water or southern quarter; a morsel	kham
ཁམ་ཀྱ་ཟས	morsels. [in magic texts]	kham kya zas
ཁམ་དཀར	cattle color dark yellow las white shas che ba	kham dkar
ཁམ་སྐྱུར	bitter apricot	kham skyur
ཁམ་ཁམ	pale yellow	kham kham
ཁམ་ཁུམ	uneven, in ridges, like puckered skin	kham khum
ཁམ་ཁུམ་གྱི་གཉེར་མ	'khums pa'i wrinkle/ripple	kham khum gyi gnyer ma
ཁམ་གང	bit	kham gang
ཁམ་གྱ་གྲས	morsels	kham gya gras
ཁམ་གྱི་ཟས	material food [a morsel of food (of smell, taste or texture consumed by the nose, tongue or body of someone in the {'dod khams} 244	kham gyi zas
ཁམ་གྱི་ཟས་ནི	the sustenance of material ingestion	kham gyi zas ni
ཁམ་གཅིག	bit	kham gcig
ཁམ་ཆུ	1 of the spar kha brgyad	kham chu
ཁམ་ཆུང	morsel, fragment	kham chung
ཁམ་ཆུའི་སྐོར་ལ	on the subject of litigation	kham chu'i skor la
ཁམ་ཆེན	the extensive prajnaparamita as translated into Bon	kham chen
ཁམ་སྟར	abbr. of kham bu dang star ga	kham star
ཁམ་དར	walnut	kham dar
ཁམ་དུ་བྱས	ingested	kham du byas
ཁམ་མདོག	fox-colored, sorrel, dark yellow brownish, porcelain-clain, reddish brown color	kham mdog
ཁམ་ལྡོག	nausea, disgust	kham ldog
ཁམ་སྡོང	apricot tree, peach tree	kham sdong
ཁམ་ནག	dark brown; dark yellow, darkbrown	kham nag
ཁམ་ནག་དབུ་སྐྲ	yellowish, reddish black hair	kham nag dbu skra
ཁམ་པ	1) fox-colored, sorrel, brownish, porcelain, reddish brown color. 2) Syn {khams pa}	kham pa
ཁམ་པ་ཛ	Cambodia	kham pa dza
ཁམ་ཕོར	cup or saucer made of burnt clay, cup made of sough used in sacrifice as lamps	kham phor
ཁམ་འཕྲོ	food particles left in the mouth after eating, food leavings	kham 'phro
ཁམ་འཕྲོ་མི་བཅད	not taking more than what one can eat	kham 'phro mi bcad
ཁམ་འཕྲོ་མི་བཅད་པ	refers to buddha having enjoined that a monk must not eat a fruit or cake leaving any of it	kham 'phro mi bcad pa
ཁམ་བུ	1) peach, apricot. 2) Syn {za ba'i kham zas}; peach, apricot	kham bu
ཁམ་བུ་ཁམ་གང	mouthful	kham bu kham gang
ཁམ་བུ་རྡོ་ལེན	Kham child's game ['khyil chu'i nang du rdo leb kyi steng du rdo ril chung nguzhig bzhag nas mig btsums te mgo chu nang du bcug nas rdo rilde kha yis sgrug pa]	kham bu rdo len
ཁམ་བུ་མ་ཆུ	{kham bu ma chu} river	kham bu ma chu
ཁམ་བུ་ཞིག	peach	kham bu zhig
ཁམ་བུ་རག་ཤ	prunus persica	kham bu rag sha
ཁམ་བུ་སེར་པོ་ཞིག	apricot	kham bu ser po zhig
ཁམ་བུའི་མེ་ཏོག	apricot flower	kham bu'i me tog
ཁམ་བུའི་རྩི་གུ	stone of an apricot	kham bu'i rtsi gu
ཁམ་མ	heart	kham ma
ཁམ་མི་ཁུམ་མི	1) w many clefts/ ravines; 2) wrinkled	kham mi khum mi
ཁམ་དམར	color dark yellow las red shas che ba	kham dmar
ཁམ་སྨུག	dark yellow, brown	kham smug
ཁམ་སྨྱུག་རི་མོ	peach and smyug ma'i picture	kham smyug ri mo
ཁམ་བཙུན་མ	married lady	kham btsun ma
ཁམ་ཚད	mouthful	kham tshad
ཁམ་ཚད་དུ་གཅོད་པ	cut even into bits	kham tshad du gcod pa
ཁམ་ཚན	Syn {khang tshan}	kham tshan
ཁམ་ཚིག	apricot pit	kham tshig
ཁམ་ཚིག་གི་ནང་སྙིང	white seed in an apricot pit	kham tshig gi nang snying
ཁམ་ཚོད	mouthful	kham tshod
ཁམ་འཛིན་མ	housewife, lady of the house	kham 'dzin ma
ཁམ་འཛིན་བཟོ་པ	fitter, tool maker	kham 'dzin bzo pa
ཁམ་ཟན	porridge	kham zan
ཁམ་ཟས	material food, a morsel of food. [of smell, taste or texture consumed by the nose, tongue or body of someone in the {'dod khams} Syn {kham gyi zas}	kham zas
ཁམ་ཟས་གསུམ	material food having the three natures	kham zas gsum
ཁམ་ཡིག་མ	daily ritual for {rdo rje ber nag can}, the main protector of the {kam tshang bka' brgyud} school [tsd] kham g.yag - bos grunniens, brown yakbull of khams, cherries, morels	kham yig ma
ཁམ་རན་པ	food kyi kham tshad che chung ran pa	kham ran pa
ཁམ་ལོག	want of appetite, nausea, aversion, dislike	kham log
ཁམ་ལོག་པ	nausea, disgust	kham log pa
ཁམ་ས	clay for making pottery, pottery clay	kham sa
ཁམ་སང	evacuation, purging, making water	kham sang
ཁམ་སེར	1) pale yellow color, dark yellowish red / or yellow. 2) loess	kham ser
ཁམ་བྷོ་ཡ	Cambodia	kham bho ya
ཁམས	realm; factor/ constituent element/ component of (ordinary) experience [in sense of eighteen dhatus]; fundamental nature/ constituent of being (in the sense of buddha nature) (specific) character t...	khams
མཀེ	up, gzugs to reg bya, chos 6, mig to lus, yid shes to yid kyi rnam shes 6 for total of 18, SA yid kyi khams	make
ཁམས་ཀུན	all worlds	khams kun
ཁམས་ཀུན་ན་ཡོད་དོ	are present in all the realms	khams kun na yod do
ཁམས་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་དོན	in the world realm w three divisions of the desire, form and formless realms, in reference to the formless the others are called lower 'og ma lta bur mtshon na those in the desire realm gzugs khams...	khams kyi bskal don
ཁམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	mtha' mtshams kyi rgyal phran	khams kyi rgyal po
ཁམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་དོན་དྲུག	six meanings of 'dhatu'	khams kyi sgra don drug
ཁམས་ཀྱི་སྙན་འགྲེལ་ཆེན་མོ	commentary on the snyan ngag me long, dbyangs can ngag gi rol mtsho legs bshad nor bu'i 'byung khungs [rab byung bcu gsum pa'i lcags stag lor by khams sprul bstan 'dzin chos kyi nyi ma]	khams kyi snyan 'grel chen mo
ཁམས་ཀྱི་སྙིགས	impurities of the material condition	khams kyi snyigs
ཁམས་ཀྱི་དྭངས་མ	pure essences	khams kyi dwangs ma
ཁམས་ཀྱི་དྭངས་མ་དཀར་དམར	white and red pure essences	khams kyi dwangs ma dkar dmar
ཁམས་ཀྱི་དོན	two-fold (de kho na'i mtshan nyid, yongs su shes pa'i mtshan nyid), 1 of don rnam pa gsum	khams kyi don
ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	assemblies of the dhatus	khams kyi tshogs
ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཟས	material food	khams kyi zas
ཁམས་ཀྱི་རབ་དབྱེ	the division of the elements	khams kyi rab dbye
ཁམས་ཀྱི་སླ་ང	cooking pan made in khams	khams kyi sla nga
ཁམས་ཀྱིས་གཅོད་པ	1 of 4 phyogs kyi gcod bgegs	khams kyis gcod pa
ཁམས་དཀར	the white element, {byang sems dkar po} {thig le dkar po}, semen, spermatozoa	khams dkar
ཁམས་དཀར་རྒྱུག་སའི་རྩ	sperm duct	khams dkar rgyug sa'i rtsa
ཁམས་དཀར་ཆའི་དྭངས་མ	the essence of the white element	khams dkar cha'i dwangs ma
ཁམས་དཀར་ཆའི་དབ༹ངས་མ	the essence of the white element	khams dkar cha'i dvangs ma
ཁམས་དཀར་པོ	semen [h (suklabodhicitta) the white constituent element, semen,{byang sems dkar po}	khams dkar po
ཁམས་ཁུལ	Khams, ET	khams khul
ཁམས་འཁྲུག་པ	illness, distemper, disorder in the constitution	khams 'khrug pa
ཁམས་འཁྲུགས	to be upset, disturbed [physically], be depressed	khams 'khrugs
ཁམས་འཁྲུགས་པ	bad health, not be well, be upset, disturbed (physically, be depressed	khams 'khrugs pa
ཁམས་གོང་གི་ས་པ	someone on the level of the upper realms, the higher [two] realms	khams gong gi sa pa
ཁམས་གོང་མ	the upper/higher realms	khams gong ma
ཁམས་གོང་མ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག་ཊྭེནཏཡ	one Higher Realms. The seventeen realms of form together with the four formless realms 246	khams gong ma nyi shu rtsa gcig Twenty
ཁམས་གོང་མ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	21 higher realms [17 of form + four formless see chart GDMK]	khams gong ma nyi shu rtsa gcig
ཁམས་གོང་མ་གཉིས	the two higher realms	khams gong ma gnyis
ཁམས་གོང་མ་རྣམས	the upper realms	khams gong ma rnams
ཁམས་གོང་མའི་འདོད་ཆགས	desire of the upper realms	khams gong ma'i 'dod chags
ཁམས་གོང་མའི་བསམ་གཏན	the dhyanas of the upper realms	khams gong ma'i bsam gtan
ཁམས་གླུ	song [style] from Khams	khams glu
ཁམས་རྒྱས་པ	in the best of health	khams rgyas pa
ཁམས་སྒར	{khams pa sgar}	khams sgar
ཁམས་བརྒྱད	the 8 substances [khams) required for the dngul chu btso bkru chen mo, pha wang long bu &, gser rdo, dngul rdo, khab len, chu skyur rdo, ba bla, ldong ros, lhang tsher dmar po]	khams brgyad
ཁམས་བརྒྱད་གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པའི་འབུམ	n of text khams brgyad gtan la phab pa'i 'bum bon practice text, the vase that resolves the 8 khams	khams brgyad gtan la phab pa'i 'bum
ཁམས་ལྔ	the five elements/natures	khams lnga
ཝཧིཆ་ཨེམབྲཅེས་ཐེ་སེནསེ	organs, the property of cohesion which embraces names, the property of solidity which produces the basis of the body, the property of fire which brings objects to maturity, and the property of move...	which embraces the sense
ཨེམབྲཅེས་ཐེ་སེནསེ	organs, the property of cohesion which embraces names, the property of solidity which produces the basis of the body, the property of fire which brings objects to maturity, and the property of move...	embraces the sense
ཁམས་ལྔའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the properties of the five elements [such as texture, taste, sound, form or smell]	khams lnga'i yon tan
ཁམས་ཅམ	world system	khams cam
ཁམས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the eighteen elements. {rten gyi khams drug} six sense powers as the reliance + {dmigs pa'i khams drug} the six objects as the bases. + {brten pa'i khams drug} the six consciousness the rely [upon ...	khams bco brgyad
ཁམས་དྲུག	the six objects as the bases + {brten pa'i khams drug - the six consciousness they rely (upon sensory powers) Or {phyi'i khams drug - {nang	khams drug
གི་ཁམས་དྲུག	{rnam par shes pa'i khams drug} -eighteen psycho-physical bases the sensory bases of the eye, of form, and the consciousness of the eye, those of the ear, sound and the consciousness of the ear, th...	gi khams drug
ཁམས་ཆེན	1) empire. 2) earth	khams chen
ཁམས་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 major constituents	khams chen bco brgyad
ཁམས་ཆེན་པོ	mercury, quicksilver	khams chen po
ཁམས་འཇིག་རྟེན	world realm	khams 'jig rten
ཁམས་ཉོག་པ	1) unhealthy in body and mind; 2) not pure/clear in nature	khams nyog pa
ཁམས་རྙོག་པ	upset health, disturbed physical condition be tired/ run down, feel ill	khams rnyog pa
ཁམས་རྙོག་པོ	body and mind mi dvangs pa/ mi bde ba	khams rnyog po
ཁམས་སྙོམས་པ	balanced constitution, good health	khams snyoms pa
ཁམས་ཏྲེ་བོ	si khron zhing chen khongs dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi rong pa tsha nas rta'u bar gyi	khams tre bo
ཁམས་སྟོད	Upper Kham [north of {mtsho sngon}	khams stod
ཁམས་སྟོད་རྒྱལ་མོའི་དངུལ་ཆུ	rgyal mo'i dngul chu river in upper Kham	khams stod rgyal mo'i dngul chu
ཁམས་བརྟས	expansion of physical strength	khams brtas
ཁམས་བརྟས་པ	one who draws omens	khams brtas pa
ཁམས་བརྟས་བྱེད་པ	one who draws omens	khams brtas byed pa
ཁམས་ཐ་མ	1) the worst/inferior nature/character; 2) the last realm, the desire realm	khams tha ma
ཁམས་ཐ་མ་གསུམ	the last three dhatus [of {khams bco brgyad} ; 1) {yid kyi khams}-) {yid shes gyi khams}-) {chos gyi khams}	khams tha ma gsum
ཁམས་ཐིམ་ཚུལ	how the elements dissolve, manner of the dissolving of the elements [in the {'chi kha'i bar do}	khams thim tshul
ཁམས་དང་བསྟུན་པ	according to one's disposition/ preference	khams dang bstun pa
ཁམས་དང་མོས་པ	disposition and inclination	khams dang mos pa
ཁམས་དང་འཚམས་པ	according to the propensities	khams dang 'tshams pa
ཁམས་དང་ས་པ	the realms and what they consist of/ the inhabitants	khams dang sa pa
ཁམས་དངས་པོ	debonair	khams dangs po
ཁམས་དངས་མ	clear essence	khams dangs ma
ཁམས་དངས་མ་ཆེན་པོ	the major essence elements {thig le dkar dmar}	khams dangs ma chen po
ཁམས་དྭངས	limpid condition	khams dwangs
ཁམས་དྭངས་པ	1) pure, clear. 2) good health	khams dwangs pa
ཁམས་དྭངས་པོ	healthy, clean, neat khams dvangs las 'dod chags dang bral ba - being free from attachment to the [three] realms and [nine] levels	khams dwangs po
ཁམས་དུབ་པ	dull, tired, exhausted	khams dub pa
ཁམས་དྲངས་པོ	clear	khams drangs po
ཁམས་དྲིས	[p khams 'dri] asked someone's health	khams dris
ཁམས་དྲུག་ལྡན	endowed w six elements	khams drug ldan
ཁམས་དྲུག་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུས	the vajra body endowed with the six elements [The human body in the realm of desire]	khams drug ldan rdo rje'i lus
ཁམས་དྲུག་ལྡན་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུས	Vajra body endowed with the six elements. The six outer elements are the five elements and the element of mental objects (chos khams). The six inner elements are flesh, blood, warmth, breath, vacui...	khams drug ldan pa'i rdo rje'i lus
ཁམས་དྲུག་སའི་ཁམས	chu'i khams, me'i khams, rlung gi khams, nam mkha'i khams, rnam par shes pa'i khams bcas drug go	khams drug sa'i khams
ཁམས་བདུད་རྩི	seed in form of nectar	khams bdud rtsi
ཁམས་བདེ	free from disease, health	khams bde
ཁམས་བདེ་དྲི་སྨེད	inquire of one's health	khams bde dri smed
ཁམས་བདེ་འདྲི་བ	inquire whether someone is in good health	khams bde 'dri ba
ཁམས་བདེ་པོ	well	khams bde po
ཁམས་བདེ་བ	good health	khams bde ba
ཁམས་བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	the	khams bde bar gshegs pa'i snying po
ནཏུརེ་སུགཏ	essence, {de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po}, the dhatu sugatagarbha	nature sugata
ཁམས་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	buddhahood of man	khams bde gshegs snying po
ཁམས་མདོ་སྒར	Khamdogar, home of rig 'dzin byang chub rdo rje	khams mdo sgar
ཁམས་འདུས་པ	drowsiness	khams 'dus pa
ཁམས་འདྲི	ask about someoness health/ comfort	khams 'dri
ཁམས་རྡིག	zangs rag gi rdig from sde dge dang dpal yul in si khron zhing chen, dkar mdzes	khams rdig
ཁམས་ལྡོག་པ	want of appetite, aversion, dislike	khams ldog pa
ཁམས་བསྡུས	dulled. "the elements gathered inwards"	khams bsdus
ཁམས་རྣམས་དང་མི་ལྡན་པ	not endowed with the dhatus. [One of the qualities of a buddha]	khams rnams dang mi ldan pa
ཁམས་སྣ་ཚོགས	the power of knowing diverse sensory bases	khams sna tshogs
ཁམས་སྣ་ཚོགས་མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of knowing various natures/dispositions khams sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs power of knowing the constitution of all sorts of bodies	khams sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs
ཁམས་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	various dispositions	khams sna tshogs pa
ཁམས་པ	1) Khampa, a person from Kham. 2) prosperity. 3) one who wanders	khams pa
ཁམས་པ་སྒར	{smad 'brug chos sde chen po}	khams pa sgar
ཁམས་པ་སྒར་ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ	the Khampa gar monastery in kham	khams pa sgar chos sde chen po
ཁམས་པ་རྡོར་རྒྱལ	Khampa Dorgyal. Phagmo Drupa; Dorje Gyalpo (phag mo gru pa rdo rje rgyal po), (11101170):	khams pa rdor rgyal
ཁམས་པ་དབུ་སེ	Karmapa I dus gsum mkhyen pa, the bald Khampa	khams pa dbu se
ཁམས་པ་མི་གསུམ	three men from kham [students of gampopa phakmotrupa, karmapa dusum kyenpa, and seltong shogom]	khams pa mi gsum
ཁམས་སྤྲུལ་ཀུན་དགའ་བསྟན་འཛིན	the 3rd (1680-1728), - alias {ngag dbang kun dga' bstan 'dzin}	khams sprul kun dga' bstan 'dzin
ཁམས་འཕོ་བ	dying and transmigrating, losing thig le	khams 'pho ba
ཁམས་བར་མ	gzugs khams,...- the middle realm {gzugs khams}	khams bar ma
ཁམས་བོད	Khams-T	khams bod
ཁམས་བོད་གཞུང་ལམ	Khams Tibet highway	khams bod gzhung lam
ཁམས་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ	Khams Tibet highway	khams bod rlangs 'khor 'gro lam
ཁམས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	seed that is enlightened mind	khams byang chub sems
ཁམས་བྲིས	painting/ calligraphy/ text from Kham	khams bris
ཁམས་དབང	person's disposition and capacity	khams dbang
ཁམས་དབང་དགོས་པ	conditions & capacities & necessities	khams dbang dgos pa
ཁམས་དབང་པོ་བསམ་པ	nature, faculty, and thought	khams dbang po bsam pa
ཁམས་དབྱིངས	space of the dhatu	khams dbyings
ཁམས་དབྱེ་བ	classifications of 'dhatu'	khams dbye ba
ཨེསསེནཅེ	elements	essence
ཁམས་མ་འཚོ་བ	dead, death	khams ma 'tsho ba
ཁམས་མི	sexual power, vitality	khams mi
ཁམས་མི་ཉག	one of the petty principalities in khams	khams mi nyag
ཁམས་མི་མཉམ་པ	indifferent state of health, non-uniform health	khams mi mnyam pa
ཁམས་མི་འདྲ་བ	different or dissimilar worlds	khams mi 'dra ba
ཁམས་མོ	woman from Eastern Tibet	khams mo
ཁམས་མོས་པ	disposition and inclination	khams mos pa
ཁམས་དམན་པ	inferior disposition	khams dman pa
ཁམས་དམར	red element (menstrual blood)	khams dmar
ཁམས་དམར་གྱི་སྣོད	ovary	khams dmar gyi snod
ཁམས་དམར་རྒྱུག་སའི་རྩ	fallopian tube	khams dmar rgyug sa'i rtsa
ཁམས་དམར་ཆའི་དྭངས་མ	the essence of the red element	khams dmar cha'i dwangs ma
ཁམས་དམར་པོ	the red element. Syn {byang sems dmar po} [lohitabo- dhichitta] the red element / constituent, blood	khams dmar po
ཁམས་རྨྱ	falling sick, nausea	khams rmya
ཁམས་རྨྱ་བ	be tired, run down, feel ill/ mind's clarity impaired	khams rmya ba
ཁམས་སྨད	lower Kam [kham rivers mostly flowing N to S sngar bod kyi deb ther nang du gsang sngags chos rdzong gi shar rgyud nas yun nan zhing chen gyi nub rgyu dbar la khams smad zer]	khams smad
ཁམས་སྨྱོན་དྷར་མ་སེང་གེ	Mad Khampa Dharma Senge	khams smyon dhar ma seng ge
ཁམས་གཙང	refine	khams gtsang
ཁམས་གཙང་མ	tidy	khams gtsang ma
ཁམས་གཙང་མར	clearly, tidily	khams gtsang mar
ཁམས་ཚན	sector of a monastery, monastic hostel [section of monastery's grwa tshang, where monks yong khungs sa khul la gzhigs nas are divided into individual sections; se ra dgon par had 30,'bras spungs 80...	khams tshan
ཁམས་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན	the disciplinarian of a monastic section	khams tshan dge rgan
ཁམས་ཚན་ཆོས་མཛད	monk in a monastic section {gtong sgo btang} nas doe not have to give otherwise mandatory gzhon khral	khams tshan chos mdzad
ཁམས་མཚན་ཉིད	property	khams mtshan nyid
ཁམས་མཚོ	Khams Ch'inghai Motor Highway khams mtsho rlangs 'khor 'gro lam Khams Ch'inghai Motor Highway	khams mtsho
ཁམས་ཞྭ	Kham hat	khams zhwa
ཁམས་ཞན་པ	of a weak body, of delicate health	khams zhan pa
ཁམས་བཞི	the four elements; {sa earth, 2) {chu - water 3) {me - fire 4) {rlung}-wind]	khams bzhi
ཁམས་ཟངས	chu snod zangs from Kham	khams zangs
ཁམས་ཟས་ཕྲ་མོ	finer foods like nectar, sweet smell	khams zas phra mo
ཁམས་ཟས་རག་པ	meat and drink	khams zas rag pa
ཁམས་བཟང	healthy	khams bzang
ཁམས་བཟང་ངན	higher or lower acumen 249	khams bzang ngan
ཁམས་བཟང་པོ	1) well, healthy. 2) the upper realms	khams bzang po
ཁམས་འོག་མ	Syn {'dod khams}	khams 'og ma
ཁམས་འོག་མ་གཉིས	2 lower realms (rupadhatu, kamadhatu)	khams 'og ma gnyis
ཁམས་ཡངས་པོ	gay, light-hearted	khams yangs po
ཁམས་རིགས	being, nature	khams rigs
ཁམས་རིས	painting/ calligraphy/ text from Kham	khams ris
ཁམས་ལ་མཁས་པར་བྱ་བ	becoming learned in the elements / dhatus	khams la mkhas par bya ba
ཁམས་ལུགས	rdzogs chen sems sde tradition established by the teacher a ro ye shes 'byung gnas in the 10th century	khams lugs
ཁམས་ལུགས་བ་ཤ་ཀ	ri skyes skra bzang, an herb	khams lugs ba sha ka
ཁམས་ལོག	aversion/ fed-up; worsened physical condition	khams log
ཁམས་ལོག་པ	1) aversion, dislike. 2) nausea, to lose health	khams log pa
ཁམས་སང	urine, making water	khams sang
ཁམས་སང་པོ	1) good health. 2) refreshing	khams sang po
ཁམས་སང་བ	good health, refreshing	khams sang ba
ཁམས་སངས་པ	1) rmongs 'thibs sangs pa; 2) serious illness refreshed, rejuvenated, recovered	khams sangs pa
ཁམས་སས	rest, health, comfort, recreation, recovery, restoration of healthy	khams sas
ཁམས་སུ་གཏོགས་པ	included in the constitution	khams su gtogs pa
ཁམས་སེང	rest, health	khams seng
ཁམས་སོས	restoration of health, recovery, cure, good health, rest	khams sos
ཁམས་སོས་པ	1) be refreshed/ eased, rest; 2) restore impaired body strength	khams sos pa
ཁམས་སླང	cooking pan made in khams	khams slang
ཁམས་སླེ	better kind of coarse serge of the pattern coming from yarkand, blanket manufactured in khams	khams sle
ཁམས་སླེའུ	1) khams khul du lcug mas bslas pa'i snod ru bzhi can; 2) sle'u' or phyar ba from Kham	khams sle'u
ཁམས་གསུམ	three realms. world realms. Desire realm {'dod pa'i khams} or Kama dhatu. form realm {gzugs khams} or rupa dhatu. and formless realm {gzugs med kyi khams} or arupya dhatu. three realms (of being). ...	khams gsum
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ་གསུམ	three becomings of the three realms	khams gsum kyi srid pa gsum
ཁམས་གསུམ་སྐྱོབ་པ་གའུ་ཏ་མ	Gautama, the savior of the three realms (syn buddha shakyamuni	khams gsum skyob pa ga'u ta ma
ཁམས་གསུམ་སྐྱོབ་པ་གO་ཏ་མ	Goutama, the Savior of the Three Realms. Syn. Buddha Shakyamuni	khams gsum skyob pa gO ta ma
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཁོར་བ	three realms of samsara	khams gsum 'khor ba
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཁོར་བའི་གནས	a place in the three realms of samsara	khams gsum 'khor ba'i gnas
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཁོར་ལོས་སྒྱུར་བ	(met Kalachakra {dus 'khor}	khams gsum 'khor los sgyur ba
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར	name of kalachakra system	khams gsum 'khor los bsgyur
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ	the Chakravartin of the three realms, Kalachakra system. Syn {dus kyi 'khor lo}	khams gsum 'khor los bsgyur ba
ཁམས་གསུམ་གྱི་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	the behaviors of the three realms	khams gsum gyi kun spyod
ཁམས་གསུམ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	experience of the three realms, field [of activity of] the three realms	khams gsum gyi spyod yul
ཁམས་གསུམ་གྱི་ས་དགུ་པོ	the nine levels of the three realms khams gsum gyi sas bsdus pa'i 'du shes the notions included within the three realms khams gsum gyi sems dang sems byung the cognitions and mental states of the t...	khams gsum gyi sa dgu po
ཁམས་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	are concentrated within the three realms	khams gsum gyis bsdus pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་པའི་སེམས	the states of mind included within the three realms	khams gsum gyis bsdus pa'i sems
ཁམས་གསུམ་འགྲོ་བ	the beings of the three realms khams gsum 'gro ba'i bla ma ba sod nams	khams gsum 'gro ba
ཁམས་གསུམ་འགྲོ་བའི་ལས་ཉོན	the karmas and disturbing emotions of the beings of the three realms	khams gsum 'gro ba'i las nyon
ཁམས་གསུམ་སྒྲོན་མའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Lamp of the Three Realms. One of	khams gsum sgron ma'i rgyud
ཐེ་ཊྭེནཏཡ	five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana. A text with similar title is found in Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	the Twenty
ཁམས་གསུམ་འཅིངས་གྲོལ	fetters of the three realms untied	khams gsum 'cings grol
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	religious king of the three worlds	khams gsum chos kyi rgyal po
ཁམས་གསུམ་མཆོད་གནས	[Buddha] object of worship of the three realms	khams gsum mchod gnas
ཁམས་གསུམ་དུ་གཏོགས་པ	belonging to the three realms	khams gsum du gtogs pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་དུ་མ་གཏོགས་པ	not included within the three realms	khams gsum du ma gtogs pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་འདུས་བྱས	the three conditioned realms	khams gsum 'dus byas
ཁམས་གསུམ་སྡེ་བརྒྱད་དྲེགས་པ	the eight classes of drekpas of the three realms	khams gsum sde brgyad dregs pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་ན་སྤྱོད་པ	living in the three realms	khams gsum na spyod pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	planet, SA sgra gcan	khams gsum rnam rgyal
ཁམས་གསུམ་སྣོད་བཅུད	the vessel and essence/ environment and inhabitants of the three realms	khams gsum snod bcud
ཁམས་གསུམ་པ	1) the third realm. Syn {gzugs med kyi khams}. 2) "the lord of three worlds" [epithet of the eldest son of Mahadeva]	khams gsum pa
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the experience that completely transcends the three realms khams gsum pa las yang dag par 'das pa'i	spyod yul
ཁམས་གསུམ་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	the beings of the third realm [the formless] khams gsum pa'i sems dang sems byung the cognitions and mental states of the third realm [the formless]	khams gsum pa'i sems can
ཁམས་གསུམ་པོ	what belongs to the triple world	khams gsum po
ཁམས་གསུམ་པོར	in the three realms	khams gsum por
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཟངས་ཁང་གླིང	Khamsum Copper Temple. A temple at Samye built by Lady Margyen of Tsepang, a queen of king Trisong Deutsen	khams gsum zangs khang gling
ཐེ་མོནསྟེརཡ་ཨོཕ༹་སམ	yas	the monastery of sam
ཏེམཔླེ་ཨིན་ཐེ་མོནསྟེརཡ་ཨོཕ༹་སམ	ya	temple in the monastery of Sam
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཟིལ་ནོན	painting depicting the excersize of political power	khams gsum zil non
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཟིལ་གནོན	a diety	khams gsum zil gnon
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཡོངས་གྲོལ	name of a text by Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye on the {rdzogs rim} of {gu ru'i dgongs rgyal nyin byed snying po} in the {dkon mchog spyi 'dus} cycle	khams gsum yongs grol
ཁམས་གསུམ་རིགས་དྲུག་གི་སེམས་ཅན	the six classes of sentient beings of the three realms	khams gsum rigs drug gi sems can
ཁམས་གསུམ་ལ་མ་ཆགས་པ	unattached to the three realms	khams gsum la ma chags pa
ཁམས་གསུམ་ས་དགུ	expl. the nine levels of the three realms. 1) {'dod khams} desire realm. 2) {bsam gtan dang bo} first concentration. 3) {bsam gtan gnyis pa} second concentration. 4) {bsam gtan gsum pa} third conce...	khams gsum sa dgu
ཁམས་གསུམ་སེམས་ཅན	beings of the three worlds	khams gsum sems can
ཁམས་གསུམ་སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་གཞི	the ground of confusion of the sentient beings of the three realms, the deluded foundation of the sentient beings of the three realms	khams gsum sems can gyi 'khrul gzhi
ཡང	I know that all beings of the three worlds have been my parents khams gsum sems can yongs la snying rje	yang
ཁམས་གསེང	refresh oneself	khams gseng
ཁམས་གསོ	to restore health / physical well being, rest khams gso increase/ restore health/strength, physical well being, rest	khams gso
ཁམས་གསོ་ཁང	rest home, sanatorium	khams gso khang
ཁམས་གསོས་པ	repair health	khams gsos pa
ཁམས་གསོས་པར	repair broken health	khams gsos par
ཁམས་བསང	syn {khams sangs pa}, {khams gseng/ skyo dub bsang ba'am gseng bar byed pa}; about a dwelling: clean, spick and span. invigorating, stimulating, inspiring, revitalizing	khams bsang
ཁམས་བསངས	refresh oneself, take fresh air	khams bsangs
ཁམས་བསངས་བྱས་པ	was relaxing	khams bsangs byas pa
ཁམས་བསིལ	1) torment by cold; 2) cold elements	khams bsil
ཁམས་བསེང	refresh oneself	khams bseng
ཁམས་བསོས	increased/ restored health/strength, physical well being, rest	khams bsos
ཁའ་ཧི	please enjoy! accept! eat! drink!	kha' hi
ཁའི་ཉིན	day before yesterday	kha'i nyin
ཁའི་རྡོ	covering rock	kha'i rdo
ཁའི་སྤུ	beard	kha'i spu
ཁའི་སྦུག་ཆ་ནས	stomatititis	kha'i sbug cha nas
ཁའི་མ་ལེ	lower jaw	kha'i ma le
ཁའི་ཡ་ལེ	upper jaw	kha'i ya le
ཁའི་རོ	Cairo	kha'i ro
ཁའེ་རོ	Cairo	kha'e ro
ཁའོ	section, department	kha'o
ཁར	on the surface, face; 1) in addition to. 2) on top of, post position, in addition to, upon. 3) just before, right before [verb]. 4) {bha} at, in. 5) as well as. {de'i khar} {ma zad}. 6) abbr. of {k...	khar
ཁར་བཀྲོལ	wooden peg, wooden pin	khar bkrol
ཁར་ཁོར	crooked, deceptive	khar khor
ཁར་གོང	steatite, soapstone	khar gong
ཁར་ཆེན་བཟའ	Princess of Kharchen, a queen of khri srong lde'u btsan	khar chen bza'
ཁར་རྗེ	good fortune	khar rje
ཁར་ཉན་པ	obedient. Syn {kha la nyan pa}	khar nyan pa
ཁར་ཉེ་བའི་ཚེ	verb + - as I was about to	khar nye ba'i tshe
ཁར་ཏ་ཏ	a city on the mouth of the Indus River	khar ta ta
ཁར་ཏུམ	Khartoum	khar tum
ཁར་བཏང	to indulge in/ to succumb to	khar btang
ཁར་ཐུག	straight, upright, direct	khar thug
ཁར་ཐུག་མིན་པ	devious	khar thug min pa
ཁར་ཐུག་ལ	directly	khar thug la
ཁར་འདོན་པ	1) speak out, express in speech; 2) things etc. steng du 'don pa	khar 'don pa
ཁར་པ	a demon killed by Krishna, compound of copper and zinc, bell metal	khar pa
ཁར་པ་མགར	a maker of bell-metal	khar pa mgar
ཁར་ཕོག་དུས་མེད་པའི་ཁ་གཏམ	the oral tradition divulged in speech at uncertain times	khar phog dus med pa'i kha gtam
ཁར་ཕོག་སྣར་ཕོག	harsh language without avoiding impropriety	khar phog snar phog
ཁར་བ	1) n. of a demon killed by Krishna. 2) compound of copper and zinc, bell metal. 3) staff	khar ba
ཁར་བ་མགར	maker of bell-metal	khar ba mgar
ཁར་བུ་ཛ	water-melon	khar bu dza
ཁར་དབང	kha rje dbang thang	khar dbang
ཁར་དབང་མེད་དུ་སོང	{rgyal po bud med kyi khar dbang med du song nas} the king was powerless to deny his [beloved] queen's request	khar dbang med du song
ཁར་འབྱིན་པ	issue from the mouth, "express."	khar 'byin pa
ཁར་མ་བཏང	don't follow the advice	khar ma btang
ཁར་རྩང	yesterday	khar rtsang
ཁར་ཚུད	approach	khar tshud
ཁར་ཛུ་ར	date, fruit	khar dzu ra
ཁར་བཞུགས	sat on the peak	khar bzhugs
ཁར་ཤོར	slip (involuntarily into	khar shor
ཁར་ས་པ་ནི	1) n. of Avalokiteshvara. 2) n. of Vishnu	khar sa pa ni
ཁར་སང	1) yesterday, some time ago, earlier, the other time. 2) Syn {kha sang}; yesterday	khar sang
ཁར་སང་གཟའ་ཉི་མ	last sunday	khar sang gza' nyi ma
ཁར་གསིལ	trident-staff [carried by wandering lamas belonging to the tantrayana]	khar gsil
ཁར་གསེལ	trident carried by sngags pa	khar gsel
ཁལ	1) a standard measure of volume equal to about twenty five to thirty pounds. 2) a load, burden; load, pack; a bushel	khal
ཁལ་བཀལ་བ	load	khal bkal ba
ཁལ་སྐྱེལ	load on	khal skyel
ཁལ་ཁ	native name of mongolia proper, country of jenghiskhan	khal kha
ཁལ་ཁ་ཁུ་རལ	(Mongolian Urga (now	khal kha khu ral
ཨཱུལན	Bator	Ulan
ཁལ་ཁ་ཁུ་རལ་བླ་བྲང	the town and monastery of Urga [now Ulan-Bator]	khal kha khu ral bla brang
ཁལ་ཁ་ཁུ་རལ་ལབླ་བྲང	the town and monastery of Urga (now Ulan-Bator	khal kha khu ral lbla brang
ཁལ་ཁ་རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ	Bogdo Gegen [the Incarnated Lama of Mongolia]; Gelukpa high tulku, 1st incarnation said to be dge slong Taranatha	khal kha rje btsun dam pa
ཁལ་ཁ་གཟུགས	Tibetan great men gzab mchor du worn Mongolian style gos rgyan cha tshang	khal kha gzugs
ཁལ་ཁོལ	stunned, insensible	khal khol
ཁལ་འཁྱེར་བ	to carry a load	khal 'khyer ba
ཁལ་བགེལ་བ	to put on a load, to load	khal bgel ba
ཁལ་འགལ་བ	to carry burdens	khal 'gal ba
ཁལ་འགེལ་བ	to be burdened	khal 'gel ba
ཁལ་རྒྱབ	a load	khal rgyab
ཁལ་སྒ	pack saddle	khal sga
ཁལ་རྔ	yak tail	khal rnga
ཁལ་ཅག	best sort of wool [coming from the northern solitudes of Tibet]	khal cag
ཁལ་གཅིག	20 or a score of anything 252	khal gcig
ཁལ་ཇགས	masonry work and, smon lam tshogs shing sogs la mandatory work obligation phyi khral	khal jags
ཁལ་རྗེས	those who conduct a caravan or follow the train of packed animals (pony, yaks, oxen), relay of packed animals	khal rjes
ཁལ་སྙོམས་པ	equalize a load	khal snyoms pa
ཁལ་རྟ	pack horse	khal rta
ཁལ་དོ	1) load for a pack animal. 2) a	khal do
པཻར་ཨོཕ༹་པཅཀ	loads	pair of pack
ཁལ་དོས	load for a pack animal	khal dos
ཁལ་དྲེའུ	pack mule	khal dre'u
ཁལ་དྲེལ	pack mule	khal drel
ཁལ་སྡེམ	length more than 1 smi gcig and width 1 smi lon tsam gyi Tibetan shog bre kha 20 each	khal sdem
ཁལ་རྣམས་ཕོག	the loads were taken off	khal rnams phog
ཁལ་པ	wether, castrated ram, sow thistle, sonchus	khal pa
སོཝ	thistle	sow
ཁལ་འཕྱགས	masonry work and, smon lam tshogs shing sogs la mandatory work obligation phyi khral	khal 'phyags
ཁལ་འཕྱགས་རྒྱག་པ	khal ma gar yod btsan khral du skul ba	khal 'phyags rgyag pa
ཁལ་བན	jug or pitcher to hold wine for 20 persons	khal ban
ཁལ་འབོགས་པ	take off the burden	khal 'bogs pa
ཁལ་མ	beast of burden, pack/ transport animals	khal ma
ཁལ་མ་ཆད་པ	pack animals, exhausted and left behind	khal ma chad pa
ཁལ་མ་རྟ	relay of packed animals	khal ma rta
ཁལ་རྫ	1 khal measure of grain containing [clay [cooking] pot	khal rdza
ཁལ་ཡ་གཅིག	1 of the pair of packs	khal ya gcig
ཁལ་ཡག	pack yak khal g.yag - pack yak khal g.yag - laden yaks, a carrying/transport yak khal g.yag - carrying yak	khal yag
ཁལ་རི	measure of about 20 bushels	khal ri
ཁལ་རུ	measure of about 20 bushels	khal ru
ཁལ་ལེ	quietly	khal le
ཁས	verbally, orally, by the mouth	khas
ཁས་སྐོང	appendix, supplement	khas skong
ཁས་ཁུགས་ཁུགས	right in the corner	khas khugs khugs
ཁས་ཁྱག	bail	khas khyag
ཁས་ཁྱག་པ	be responsible/ vouch (for	khas khyag pa
ཁས་ཁྱགས	bail, security, bond, guarantee	khas khyags
ཁས་ཁྱགས་བྱེད	guarantee, give bail, act as security, underwrite	khas khyags byed
ཁས་ཆེ	promise	khas che
ཁས་ཆེ་བ	promise, undertake	khas che ba
ཁས་ཆེ་བའི་དགེ་སློང	buddhist monk who has taken the vows	khas che ba'i dge slong
ཁས་འཆེ	pretend, bail, security, bond, guarantee	khas 'che
ཁས་འཆེ་བ	1) thesis, dissertation. 2) claim, promise. 3) pretense, pretend; to promise, pledge. 4) {rang gis khas len pa'am rang nyid ngo sprod pa}	khas 'che ba
ཁས་འཆེ་བའི་དགེ་སློང	a nominal bhikshu, an insincere monk	khas 'che ba'i dge slong
ཁས་འཆེས་པའི་དགེ་སློང	person pretending to be a monk [w no or broken vows]	khas 'ches pa'i dge slong
ཁས་བརྗོད	song, singing	khas brjod
ཁས་ཉིན	yesterday	khas nyin
ཁས་ཉེན་དབང་ཆུང	powerless, humble [man]	khas nyen dbang chung
ཁས་ཐེགས	witness, give evidence	khas thegs
ཁས་བླང	assert, claim, hold, state, propose, accept, allow, permit, proclaim [f khas len]	khas blang
ཁས་བླང་ནང་འགལ	internally inconsistent assertions	khas blang nang 'gal
ཁས་བླང་བ	taking a pledge	khas blang ba
ཁས་བླང་བ་བཞིན	in accordance with what was pledged	khas blang ba bzhin
ཁས་བླང་བར་བྱ	what should be/is to be/ has been asserted	khas blang bar bya
ཁས་བླང་ལས་ལྡོག་པ	withdrawing one's pledge	khas blang las ldog pa
ཁས་བླངས	consented, accepted, promise, consent, approval, knowledge, acceptance, past of khas len	khas blangs
ཁས་བླངས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	the asserted sign	khas blangs kyi rtags
ཁས་བླངས་ཀྱིས་བསལ་བ	excluded by assertion. One of {bsal ba bzhi}	khas blangs kyis bsal ba
ཁས་བླངས་རྒྱབ་སྐྱུར	ignoring one's assertion	khas blangs rgyab skyur
ཁས་བླངས་ཐེབས་གཅོག	khas len byas pa'i don lag tu mi len pa} ..Las rogs sgrub rgyu gtan 'khel byas kyang khas blangs thebs gcog byed pa,... nonapplication of assertion, what 1 promises mi len pa [Las rogs sgrub rgyu g...	khas blangs thebs gcog
ཁས་བླངས་ནས	having asserted	khas blangs nas
ཁས་བླངས་པ	assertion	khas blangs pa
ཁས་བླངས་པས་ཞི་བ	pacified by promise [one of {rtsod pa zhi byed kyi chos bdun}	khas blangs pas zhi ba
ཁས་བླངས་ལག་བསྟར	application of assertion; "walk one's talk"	khas blangs lag bstar
ཁས་མ་བླངས	not claimed	khas ma blangs
ཁས་མ་ལེན་པའི	negative	khas ma len pa'i
ཁས་མི་ལེན	not assert	khas mi len
ཁས་མི་ལེན་ཀ་མེད	"must be asserted." SA {khas mi len rang len}	khas mi len ka med
ཁས་མི་ལེན་པ	refuse, reject, deny, slander 253	khas mi len pa
ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི	denial	khas mi len pa'i
ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི་དབང་ཆ	veto [power]	khas mi len pa'i dbang cha
ཁས་དམན	w little capacity/ shrewdness	khas dman
ཁས་དམན་པ	weak speech; someone to whom no one listens	khas dman pa
ཁས་མཚར་པོ	strange	khas mtshar po
ཁས་ཞན་པ	humble	khas zhan pa
ཁས་གཞེས་ཉིན	khas nyin and three days from now	khas gzhes nyin
ཁས་ལན་པ	to accept, acknowledge, agree to, admit	khas lan pa
ཁས་ལན་མེད་པ	assertionlessness	khas lan med pa
ཁས་ལེན	1) to assert, agree, accept, guarantee, promise; admit to. 2) acceptance, consent, recognition, admission. 3) belief, view, claim, dissertation	khas len
ཁས་ལེན་ཀུན་བྲལ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view free from all assertions. Syn {rnam grangs ma yin pa'i don dam}, {lta ba} Syn {thal 'gyur gyi lta ba}	khas len kun bral gyi lta ba
ཁས་ལེན་རྒན་ཁུར	responsibility	khas len rgan khur
ཁས་ལེན་ཐེབས་གཅོག	to break one's promise	khas len thebs gcog
ཁས་ལེན་མཐོ་ལ་ཉམས་ལེན་ཞན	high in promises but low in practice	khas len mtho la nyams len zhan
ཁས་ལེན་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from asserting anything	khas len dang bral ba
ཁས་ལེན་པ	promise, give assurance of, acquiesce, assure, promise, stand bail or security, presume, arrogate, accept, adopt with the mouth, acknowledge, admit	khas len pa
ཁས་ལེན་པ་པོ	volunteer, guarantor, promiser, asserter, accepter, admitter	khas len pa po
ཁས་ལེན་པ་མི	volunteer	khas len pa mi
ཁས་ལེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to assert	khas len par byed pa
ཁས་ལེན་བྱས་པ	accepted responsibility	khas len byas pa
ཁས་ལེན་བྱེད	assert, claim, hold, state, propose, accept, allow, permit, proclaim, promise, consent, guarantee	khas len byed
ཁས་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	to assert, claim, hold, state, propose, accept, allow, permit, proclaim, promise, consent, guarantee	khas len byed pa
ཁས་ལེན་མི་ལེན	accept or not accept	khas len mi len
ཁས་ལེན་མེད	non-acceptance	khas len med
ཁས་ལེན་ཞུ་བ	admit, recognize	khas len zhu ba
ཁས་ལེན་ཟོས་པ	break a promise	khas len zos pa
ཁས་ལེན་ལག་བསྟར	implementation of a promise/ agreement	khas len lag bstar
ཁས་ལེན་ཤུ་བ	admit, recognize	khas len shu ba
ཁས་ལེན་ཤོར	break a promise	khas len shor
ཁས་ལེན་སོས་ཐེག	vows promises which had been made	khas len sos theg
ཁས་ས	yesterday	khas sa
ཁས་བསླངས་པ	pledged themselves	khas bslangs pa
ཁི	numerical figure 2	khi
ཁི་བ་ཛི་ལ	Khivajila	khi ba dzi la
ཁི་བི་ཛ་ལ	city near shambhala	khi bi dza la
ཁི་ལོ་ཝ་ཏེ	kilowatt	khi lo wa te
ཁི་ཧུད	Oh! (crying)	khi hud
ཁིངས་འཁྱོལ	accomplish, succeed, "make it"	khings 'khyol
ཁིམ	(not in DAS)	khim
ཁིའུ	1) of long and short animal hair short soft hair; 2) a cutting out knife, small knife	khi'u
ཁིས་མགོ	stove's ash door	khis mgo
ཁུ	numerical figure 62, SA khu ba, humor, juice, sap, blood	khu
ཁུ་སྐྱོང	herdsman w many animals	khu skyong
ཁུ་ཁོག	kha zas sreg pa large iron/ copper vessel [cooking pot?]	khu khog
ཁུ་ཁྲག	semen and blood	khu khrag
ཝཧིཆ་ཐེ་ཕེ༹ཏུས་ཨིས་ཕོ༹རྨེད་ཨིན་ཨཱིནདོ	TT med., = white and red bodhicitta]	which the fetus is formed in Indo
ཁུ་ཁྲག་འདྲེས་པ	sperm and egg mixing	khu khrag 'dres pa
ཁུ་འཁྲིག	doubt	khu 'khrig
ཁུ་གུ	1) paternal uncle. 2) small bag / pouch	khu gu
ཁུ་གེ	small bag/ pouch	khu ge
ཁུ་རྔོག་འབྲོམ་གསུམ	{khu brtson 'grus gyung drung}	khu rngog 'brom gsum
ཁུ་ཆུ	liquid, juice. semen	khu chu
ཁུ་ཏུ	hut, cottage	khu tu
ཁུ་ཐུ་ཆི	title of mongolian nobleman	khu thu chi
ཁུ་གདུས	boiled medicinal essence etc	khu gdus
ཁུ་འདུས	simple, palin	khu 'dus
ཁུ་འདེབས	call loudly	khu 'debs
ཁུ་རྡུལ	semen and female uterine blood [source of fetus in Indo Tibetan med.]	khu rdul
ཁུ་རྡོག་འབྲོམ་གསུམ	Atisha's three chief students: Khu brtson 'grus gyung drung &, Rdog legs pa'i shes rab, 'Brom rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas	khu rdog 'brom gsum
ཁུ་བསྡུ	curtailment, cut-back simplification, stream- lining, put in good order	khu bsdu
ཁུ་བསྡུ་བྱེད	curtail, cut-back, simplify,	khu bsdu byed
སྟྲེཨམ	line, put in good order	stream
ཁུ་བསྡུས	curtailment, cut-back simplification, stream-lining, put in good order	khu bsdus
ཁུ་ནུ	districts of kunawar and bissahar on the upper sutlej	khu nu
ཁུ་ནུ་རི་བོ	K'un Lun mts	khu nu ri bo
ཁུ་ནུ་ལ	khu nu pass mt	khu nu la
ཁུ་རྣ	SA khu rdul	khu rna
ཁུ་པ	[arch] 'chag pa [break, abate..]	khu pa
ཁུ་པོ	place and also lama of that place	khu po
ཁུ་དཔོན	uncle and nephew	khu dpon
ཁུ་ཕངས	n. of Brahma or Vishnu	khu phangs
ཁུ་འཕང	sleet	khu 'phang
ཁུ་འཕངས	snow	khu 'phangs
ཁུ་འཕྲིག	1) worry. 2) Thrangu Rinpoche: = {dogs pa} suspicion	khu 'phrig
ཁུ་འཕྲིག་པ	doubt, suspicion, apprehension	khu 'phrig pa
ཁུ་འཕྲིག་བྱེད་པ	doubt, be suspicious/ apprehensive	khu 'phrig byed pa
ཁུ་འཕྲིག་མ་བྱུང་ན	if unresolved	khu 'phrig ma byung na
ཁུ་འཕྲིག་ཟ་བ	doubt, be suspicious/ apprehensive	khu 'phrig za ba
ཁུ་འཕྲིགས	doubt	khu 'phrigs
ཁུ་བ	semen	khu ba
ཁུ་བ་ཀུན་ལྡན	sal tree [dried sap of which is used as incense]	khu ba kun ldan
ཁུ་བ་དཀར་བ	1) white soup / juice. 2) semen. 3) metaphor for the planet Venus	khu ba dkar ba
ཁུ་བ་བཏོན་པ	decoction	khu ba bton pa
ཁུ་བ་དྭངས་མ	essence of khu ba, essential juice	khu ba dwangs ma
ཁུ་བ་མདོག་མཛེས་པ	the planet Venus	khu ba mdog mdzes pa
ཁུ་བ་མདོག་མཛེས་པའི་ཟླ་བ	5th month of Tibetan calendar	khu ba mdog mdzes pa'i zla ba
ཁུ་བ་འདོན་པ	a disease	khu ba 'don pa
ཁུ་བ་ལྡན	medicinal root used as purgative	khu ba ldan
ཁུ་བ་བྱེད	semen producer, marrow	khu ba byed
ཁུ་བ་འབྱིན་པ	1) extract / take out the juice. 2) to ejaculate, emit semen	khu ba 'byin pa
ཁུ་བ་འབྱིན་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the infraction of ejaculating. One of {dge bdun lhag ma bcu gsum}	khu ba 'byin pa'i lhag ma
ཁུ་བ་མ	a nadi	khu ba ma
ཁུ་བ་དམར་པོ	blood	khu ba dmar po
ཁུ་བ་གཙག་པ	distil	khu ba gtsag pa
ཁུ་བ་བཞུར་བ	a disease	khu ba bzhur ba
ཁུ་བ་ཟད	exhaustion of semen	khu ba zad
ཁུ་བ་སེར་པོ	n. of a plant from which a kind of yellow dye is made	khu ba ser po
ཁུ་བའི་མངུལ	vitriol of copper vermilion	khu ba'i mngul
ཁུ་བའི་སྙིང	privy parts	khu ba'i snying
ཁུ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད	(met man, male person	khu ba'i bdag nyid
ཁུ་བའི་རྡེའུ	semen stones	khu ba'i rde'u
ཁུ་བའི་གནས	(met testicles	khu ba'i gnas
ཁུ་བའི་འཕོ	discharge of semen	khu ba'i 'pho
ཁུ་བའི་དབང་པོ	(met mercury, semen	khu ba'i dbang po
ཁུ་བའི་ཡང་ཁུ	khu ba'i dvangs ma, quintessence	khu ba'i yang khu
ཁུ་བའི་སློབ་མ	(met asuras	khu ba'i slob ma
ཁུ་བའི་གསང	semen moxibustion point	khu ba'i gsang
ཁུ་བེ	place west of lhasa	khu be
ཁུ་བོ	brother; uncle, [the brother of one's father]; uncle (father's side)	khu bo
ཁུ་བྱག	cuckoo	khu byag
ཁུ་བྱུ	tended, nourished	khu byu
ཁུ་བྱུ་གྲགས་ཟླ	"friend of a kokila" [the fourth month of the Tibetan year]	khu byu grags zla
ཁུ་བྱུག	1) of a Dzogchen tantra. 2) the cuckoo bird	khu byug
ཁུ་བྱུག་གྲག་ཟླ	1) 3rd month; 2) Taurus [one of the 12 houses]	khu byug grag zla
ཁུ་བྱུག་གྲགས་ཟླ	4th month of Tibetan year (about may)	khu byug grags zla
ཁུ་བྱུག་མགོ	cuckoo-head [one of {dbang phyug ma nyer brgyad}, {rdo rje dkar mo]	khu byug mgo
ཁུ་བྱུག་སྔོན་མོའི་སྐད་སྙན	Gentle Call of the Blue Cuckoo, by Shabkar	khu byug sngon mo'i skad snyan
ཁུ་བྱུག་རྟྭི་ཐོག	lesser of two qualities of the med herb {khu byug rtsva ljang}	khu byug rtwi thog
ཁུ་བྱུག་པ	orostachys fimbriatus (turcz.) A. Berger	khu byug pa
ཁུ་བྱུག་མིག	red eyes, cuckoo eyes, eyes like those of the cuckoo, a tree	khu byug mig
ཁུ་བྱུག་རྩ	medicinal herb, medicinal herb	khu byug rtsa
ཁུ་བྱུག་རྩྭ་ལྗང	med. herb, bittersweet, body heat neutral, by its power rtsa kha 'byed, chu 'gags 'byin	khu byug rtswa ljang
ཁུ་བྱུག་རི	mountain where ko da la grows	khu byug ri
ཁུ་དབོན	uncle and nephews. Syn {a khu dang tsha bo}	khu dbon
ཁུ་འབངས	sleet	khu 'bangs
ཁུ་མ་འདུས་པ	implements/ requisites incomplete, ' 'ub extent of work?] ma 'dus pa	khu ma 'dus pa
ཁུ་མག	purse, money-bag, {'khu mo}, kitchen utensils	khu mag
ཁུ་གཙོ	chief of regional people's resresentative assembly	khu gtso
ཁུ་ཚན	paternal uncle and his nephew's	khu tshan
ཁུ་ཚུར	1) clenched hand, fist. 2) handle or grasping point of a weapon	khu tshur
ཁུ་ཚུར་གྱིས་བརྡུང་བ	beat with the clenched hand or fist	khu tshur gyis brdung ba
ཁུ་ཚུར་གྱིས་འཚོ	living by the hands (met goldsmith	khu tshur gyis 'tsho
ཁུ་ཚུར་གྱེས་འཚོ	goldsmith, one who makes his livelihood by the use of his fist, hand-craft	khu tshur gyes 'tsho
ཁུ་ཚུར་རྒྱག	punch, box	khu tshur rgyag
ཁུ་ཚུར་བཅིངས་པ	clench one's fist	khu tshur bcings pa
ཁུ་ཚུར་སྣུན་པ	strike with the fist,	khu tshur snun pa
སྟྲིཀེ་ཝིཐ་ཧལཕ༹	closed fist	strike with half
ཁུ་ཚུར་གཞུ	punch, box	khu tshur gzhu
ཁུ་ཚུར་ཨི་གཏེམ	to press the I points with the fists	khu tshur i gtem
ཁུ་ཚུལ་བཅངས་པ	clenched hands for boxing	khu tshul bcangs pa
ཁུ་ཚུལ་བཅིངས	fist, closed hand	khu tshul bcings
ཁུ་ཚུལ་བཅིངས་པ	clench the fist, hold with the fist	khu tshul bcings pa
ཁུ་མཚན	uncle [on the father's side], relation	khu mtshan
ཁུ་བཟའ་བ	scum of boiled rice	khu bza' ba
ཁུ་འོད་བཟའ	mother of brom ston	khu 'od bza'
ཁུ་ཡུ	hornless	khu yu
ཁུ་ཡུག	cuckoo	khu yug
ཁུ་ཡེ	phyva g.yang khug cig ces 'bod sgra	khu ye
ཁུ་ར	cakes or pastry fried in oil or butter	khu ra
ཁུ་རླངས	mist and vapor	khu rlangs
ཁུ་ལུ	fine wool growing next to skin, short soft hair of the yak, wool in general, venereal disease, syphilis, soft wool of tibetan goat	khu lu
ཁུ་ལུ་ཚི་རིང	long but fine and soft cattle hair, pashm wool	khu lu tshi ring
ཁུ་ལུགས	chief of horchen	khu lugs
ཁུ་ལེ	1) nya ga' measure of wt? balance beam ? srang gi mda'; 2) Zo ba'am zo lag ?	khu le
ཁུ་ལེ་ལག	the chief of the brahmin caste	khu le lag
ཁུ་ལེའི་རི་མོ	srang mda'i ngos kyi grangs tshad ri mo	khu le'i ri mo
ཁུ་ཤུ	meat broth	khu shu
ཁུ་ཤུག	excrement	khu shug
ཁུ་ཤུགས་ལྡན་སྤྲིན	rain cloud	khu shugs ldan sprin
ཁུ་སིམ་པོ	quiet, still, peaceful (place	khu sim po
ཁུ་སིམ་བུ	quiet, still [of places]. Syn {khu sim po}	khu sim bu
ཁུ་སིམ་བྱེད་པ	hush	khu sim byed pa
ཁུ་སིམ་སིམ	quiet, still, peaceful	khu sim sim
ཁུག	imp. of {'gugs pa}; a corner/ to earn, draw cash/ be worth; 1) corner. Syn {kho sim bu} nook. 2) imp. of {'gugs} creek, inlet, bay, gulf. 4) bag. {mgo ba khug} keep your head bowed, {rna ba khug} e...	khug
ཁུག་ཀྱོག	1) out of the way, remote. 2. corner. khug kyog du yod pa'i par "the picture in the corner."	khug kyog
ཁུག་ཁུག	corner, nook, creek, bay, gulf, cove, solitary place	khug khug
ཁུག་ཁུགས	corner, nook, creek, bay, gulf, cove	khug khugs
ཁུག་ཁྱོག	solitary place, out of the way, remote, corner	khug khyog
ཁུག་ཁྲ	when wearing {rgya lu chas} waist ornament	khug khra
ཁུག་འཁྱོག	khug kyog, khug chung, tig ta med. herb	khug 'khyog
ཁུག་འཁྲིག་མ་བྱུང	unresolved; syn {thag bcad ma byung}	khug 'khrig ma byung
ཁུག་ཅིག	niche, corner, summon	khug cig
ཁུག་ཆོས་མེ་ཏོག	khukc" flowers	khug chos me tog
ཁུག་ཏ	swallow Cuculus melanolucus	khug ta
ཁུག་ཏུ	within a cavity	khug tu
ཁུག་རྟ	swallow (bird) [char sdod byi'u 'am, kha la yug gam, 'dag byi'u syn: sgra sgrog, char dga', char sdod, chu nyung, thub pa'i bu, sprin 'degs, sprin las long, bzang mo]	khug rta
ཁུག་རྟ་གཅིག་འཕུར	a swallow flew past	khug rta gcig 'phur
ཁུག་རྟའི་གློ་བ	swallow lung animal med. [ro mngar, body heat neutral, by its power glo rnag skem, glo rdol gso]	khug rta'i glo ba
ཁུག་ཐུབ	earned, acquired	khug thub
ཁུག་རྣ	1) haze. 2) mist, fog	khug rna
ཁུག་རྣའི་ཁ་དོག	hazy, misty color	khug rna'i kha dog
ཁུག་སྣ	haze, mist, fog	khug sna
ཁུག་སྣ་ཡི་ཁ་དོག	hazy, misty color	khug sna yi kha dog
ཁུག་པ	to find, get, earn, draw, weigh,	khug pa
ཏུརྣིང་ལིཀེ་ཨ་ཟིག	zag, bending like a thread, cycle of breathing with inhalation, retention, & exhalation	turning like a zig
ཁུག་པ་གཅིག་ཏུ	reckoned as one unit	khug pa gcig tu
ཁུག་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 returns (to life in the present kalpa	khug pa bco brgyad
ཁུག་པའི་གྲངས་ཀ	numbers x 10 by "chen po" eg "ther 'bum chen po"	khug pa'i grangs ka
ཁུག་པར་བཟླ་བ	low-voice recitation	khug par bzla ba
ཁུག་ཕྱིན་པ	to fall asleep	khug phyin pa
ཁུག་མ	bag, purse, small bag, pouch	khug ma
ཁུག་ཡའི་གསེར་གཞོང	Khuk-ya, Golden Valley, in Domey	khug ya'i gser gzhong
ཁུག་ལ	inside, in, into	khug la
ཁུག་སིམ་པོ	solitary place	khug sim po
ཁུག་སེང	cover, shelter	khug seng
ཁུགས	imp. of {'gugs}, {'gyur khugs} modulating waves [of sweet sound]	khugs
ཁུགས་པ	a dynasty originated at khugs pa	khugs pa
ཁུང	hole, pit, hollow, cavity, root, deep hole, SA dong, panting (snoring noise, animal noise)	khung
ཁུང་སྐྱུགས	garuda vomit gem/med. [khyung gis sbrul zos pa las byung bar grags pa'i rin po che gyu rnying las chung mthing mdangs chags pa zhig ste, by its power dug nad dang, mchin nad, mdze nad sogs 'joms]	khung skyugs
ཁུང་བཅད	search (?)	khung bcad
ཁུང་ཉལ	snake, hibernate in a hole	khung nyal
ཁུང་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	well-founded, sound, reliable, related /connected w the source	khung dang 'brel ba
ཁུང་དུ་ཉལ	snake [lit. that which sleeps in a lair]	khung du nyal
ཁུང་དུ་འཛུལ་བ་པོ	that which enters a hole or slips down into its den so as not to be seen or captured	khung du 'dzul ba po
ཁུང་དྲོགས	soot of oven or chimney	khung drogs
ཁུང་པ	large hole	khung pa
ཁུང་པོ	large hole	khung po
ཁུང་ཕུའུ་ཙི	confucius	khung phu'u tsi
ཁུང་ཕུའུ་རྩི	Confucius	khung phu'u rtsi
ཁུང་ཕྱུའུ་རྩི	Confucius	khung phyu'u rtsi
ཁུང་བུ	pore, small hole/ cave, tunnel, vacancy	khung bu
ཁུང་བུ་ཅན	full of cavities or holes	khung bu can
ཁུང་བུ་བྲུས་པ	dig a little hole	khung bu brus pa
ཁུང་བུ་རིམ་གསབ	fill a vacancy	khung bu rim gsab
ཁུང་བུ་རིམ་གསབ་བྱེད	fill a vacancy	khung bu rim gsab byed
ཁུང་འབིགས	pierce/ bore/ drill perforate holes	khung 'bigs
ཁུང་འབིགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	machine to pierce/ bore/ drill perforate holes	khung 'bigs 'phrul 'khor
ཁུང་འབིགས་བྱེད	pierce/ bore/ drill perforate holes	khung 'bigs byed
ཁུང་སྦུབས	inside a hole	khung sbubs
ཁུང་མིང	Kumming	khung ming
ཁུང་ཙི	Confucius	khung tsi
ཁུང་བཙུན	reliable source	khung btsun
ཁུང་བཙུན་པ	a pure source	khung btsun pa
ཁུང་བཙུན་པོ	a pure source	khung btsun po
ཁུང་རྩི	Confucius	khung rtsi
ཁུང་གཟོང	leather punch	khung gzong
ཁུང་སེང	spaces between [the spokes of a wheel]	khung seng
ཁུངས	origin, source, reason, why, foundation	khungs
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ	tell the reason something is true and right, make over the charge, proove	khungs skyel
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་མཁན	witness, 1 who testifies	khungs skyel mkhan
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་དངོས་པོ	[complete] evidence, proof	khungs skyel dngos po
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་དངོས་རིགས	[complete] evidence, proof	khungs skyel dngos rigs
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་དག་འབུད	definitively establish what is so	khungs skyel dag 'bud
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་བ	to prove, substantiate, verify	khungs skyel ba
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་ར་འཕྲོད	definitively finally establish what can be established, [complete] evidence, proof khungs skyel ra 'phrod dag tshang byung	khungs skyel ra 'phrod
ཁུངས་བསྐྱལ	[p khungs skyel]	khungs bskyal
ཁུངས་འཁྱོལ་པོ	keeping on to the end, suitable object of trust	khungs 'khyol po
ཁུངས་འཁྱོལ་པོ་ཡོང	will be completed, are a suitable object of trust	khungs 'khyol po yong
ཁུངས་སྒྲིག་པ	1) dngos chad tshab sgrig pa,...Rtsis 'khrid ngos rigs bor chad rnams kyi khungs sgrig pa; 2) 'Gro khungs 'tshol ba,...Phru gu slob grvar gtong sa'i khungs sgrig pa; 3) order/ 257 put the parts tog...	khungs sgrig pa
ཁུངས་ངན་པ	inferior, mean	khungs ngan pa
ཁུངས་ཅན	of noble origin	khungs can
ཁུངས་བཅད	inquiry	khungs bcad
ཁུངས་ཆེ་བ	genuine, authentic	khungs che ba
ཁུངས་གཏུགས	Original reference, tracing the source	khungs gtugs
ཁུངས་གཏོགས	constitute	khungs gtogs
ཁུངས་བརྟན	baseless	khungs brtan
ཁུངས་ཐུབ	pure, real, original	khungs thub
ཁུངས་ཐུབ་པ	reliable, trustworthy, authentic, genuine	khungs thub pa
ཁུངས་ཐུབ་པོ	durable, hardy	khungs thub po
ཁུངས་དག	good quality, faultless/reliable [source], trustworthy, authentic, genuine	khungs dag
ཁུངས་དག་པ	1) pure; 2) genuine; 3) of the best make and quality	khungs dag pa
ཁུངས་དག་པོ	1) reliable (source; 2) of good/the best quality; 3) genuine, authentic; 4) pure	khungs dag po
ཁུངས་དག་སྤུས་གཙང	faultless source, good quality, reliable, trustworthy, authentic, genuine	khungs dag spus gtsang
ཁུངས་དྲངས	explain the source of the reason	khungs drangs
ཁུངས་འདེད	be destroyed by that which was the source,?? trace/ search out the source	khungs 'ded
ཁུངས་འདེད་པ	be destroyed by that which was the source,?? trace/ search out the source	khungs 'ded pa
ཁུངས་འདྲེན	quote, cite	khungs 'dren
ཁུངས་འདྲེན་པ	quote, cite	khungs 'dren pa
ཁུངས་རྡིབ	to overturn the foundations of, to collapse their very foundation, to overturn the foundations	khungs rdib
ཁུངས་རྡིབ་པ	to undermine	khungs rdib pa
ཁུངས་ལྡན	reliable, authentic	khungs ldan
ཁུངས་སྣེ	reason showing the ground, truth, hint, indication	khungs sne
ཁུངས་ཕྱུང	[arch] eliminated/ annihilated source	khungs phyung
ཁུངས་འཕེར	verification, authentication	khungs 'pher
ཁུངས་མ	authentic, reliable [source], of good/the best quality, genuine, pure, authentic, true	khungs ma
ཁུངས་མའི་དཔེ་ཆ་ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད	put faith in reliable texts	khungs ma'i dpe cha yid ches byed
ཁུངས་མེད	baseless, unfounded, foundationless, w/o substance, senseless, meaningless, of low birth	khungs med
ཁུངས་མེད་པ	lacking authentic origin	khungs med pa
ཁུངས་མེད་ལུང་མེད	baseless, unfounded, foundationless, w/o substance, senseless, meaningless, of low birth	khungs med lung med
ཁུངས་མེད་ཤོད་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	w/o resources, w nothing to talk about	khungs med shod rgyu med pa
ཁུངས་གཙང	1) pure, clean; 2) genuine; 3) of the best make and quality	khungs gtsang
ཁུངས་གཙང་མ	1) pure, clean; 2) genuine; 3) of the best make and quality	khungs gtsang ma
ཁུངས་གཙན	reliable, suthoritative, authentic	khungs gtsan
ཁུངས་གཙིགས	true, genuine, have the foundation, [grasp the] basis/ meaning/ substance/ sense/ principle/ maxim/ truth, establishing reason[ing]	khungs gtsigs
ཁུངས་བཙན	reliable, authentic	khungs btsan
ཁུངས་བཙན་པ	1) pure source; 2) powerful support	khungs btsan pa
ཁུངས་བཙུན	well-founded, genuine, of undefiled origin, trustworthy	khungs btsun
ཁུངས་བཙུན་པ	1) pure source; 2) authentic[ity], genuine; 3) reliable; 4) well founded; 5) of noble descent	khungs btsun pa
ཁུངས་བཙུན་པོ	1) pure source; 2) reliable, soundly based, authoritative; 3) authentic	khungs btsun po
ཁུངས་འཚོལ	be destroyed by that which was the source	khungs 'tshol
ཁུངས་ཡོད	foundation, basis, justified, sound, rational	khungs yod
ཁུངས་ཡོད་པ	veritable, having authentic origin	khungs yod pa
ཁུངས་ཡོད་ལུང་ཡོད	foundation, basis, justified, sound, rational, worthy of confidence, factual, authentic	khungs yod lung yod
ཁུངས་ལ	khungs pass [S 'brong pa rdzong]	khungs la
ཁུངས་ལུང	foundation, basis, meaning, substance, sense, principle, maxim, truth, [grasp the] basis, establishing reason[ing]	khungs lung
ཁུངས་ལུང་ཏན་ཏིག	stable and certain basis/ reason[ing]	khungs lung tan tig
ཁུངས་ལུང་བདེན་དཔང	evidence, proof	khungs lung bden dpang
ཁུངས་ལུང་བདེན་དཔངས	1) evidence, proof. 2) Syn {dpang rtags}	khungs lung bden dpangs
ཁུངས་ལུང་འདྲེན་པ	draw out the source/ reason	khungs lung 'dren pa
ཁུངས་ལུང་མེད་པ	w/o foundation, basis, meaning, substance, sense, truth	khungs lung med pa
ཁུངས་སུ	in their own places	khungs su
ཁུངས་སུ་འཚུད་པ	qualify	khungs su 'tshud pa
ཁུད	coat lap	khud
ཁུད་དུ	aside, apart, secretly	khud du
ཁུད་དུ་འཇོག་པ	put aside, lay aside	khud du 'jog pa
ཁུད་དུ་བྱས་པ	have shown one's authority over a thing which belongs to many	khud du byas pa
ཁུད་དུ་བྱེད་པ	separate, lay aside	khud du byed pa
ཁུད་པ	pocket, pouch	khud pa
ཁུད་མ	side, edge, corner	khud ma
ཁུད་ཟེ	hold forth the lap of your coat	khud ze
ཁུད་ལ་གཟད	hold forth the lap of your coat 258	khud la gzad
ཁུན་ཆུ་ལི	(M brocade w crane pictures etc.	khun chu li
ཁུན་ཏི	he, she	khun ti
ཁུན་པ	[arch] grunt, groan, rattle, rumble, noise	khun pa
ཁུན་ཚོས	cheek	khun tshos
ཁུབ	(not in DAS)	khub
ཁུམ	kill, SA 'gum pa, crooked	khum
ཁུམ་ཁུམ	contracted, uneven	khum khum
ཁུམ་གཉེར	wrinkles/folds from tshur 'dus	khum gnyer
ཁུམ་པ	contraction	khum pa
ཁུམ་བུ	place in tibet and nepal	khum bu
ཁུམས	1) 'gums pa! die, kill, put to death!; 2) [arch] comprehend, understand; 3) suit[able], agree, correspond, be right; 4) be suitable/able to take on an obligation, responsible; 5) certainly; 6) hear...	khums
ཁུམས་པ	1) to hear. 2) to know, to understand	khums pa
ཁུམས་ལག	diminished	khums lag
ཁུར	imp. of {'khur ba}; 1) burden, load, responsibility. 2) pf. of {'khar}. 3) imp. of {'khur}. 4) cookie. 5) vegetables. 6) to carry off (a load) /a load, burden/ regarding / to pay respects to	khur
ཁུར་དཀར	1 of the two kinds of khur mong, dandelion? w white flower]	khur dkar
ཁུར་བཀལ	responsibilities	khur bkal
ཁུར་སྐུར་བ	1) baggage carrier undertaking a burden; 2) receive a work obligation	khur skur ba
ཁུར་ཁུར་པོ	corporeal being	khur khur po
ཁུར་ཁྱེར	carry the burden	khur khyer
ཁུར་ཁྱེར་ནས	carried the burden	khur khyer nas
ཁུར་ཁྱེར་བ	take on a burden	khur khyer ba
ཁུར་འཁུར	carry a load	khur 'khur
ཁུར་འཁུར་བ	to carry a load	khur 'khur ba
ཁུར་འཁུར་བ་པོ	porter	khur 'khur ba po
ཁུར་འཁྱེར	to bear / carry the burden, take responsibility	khur 'khyer
ཁུར་འཁྲི	duty, responsibility, obligation	khur 'khri
ཁུར་འཁྲིའི་ལས་གན	duty, responsibility, obligation that someone is responsible for	khur 'khri'i las gan
ཁུར་གྱིས་དུ་བ་པ	one worn out by carrying loads	khur gyis du ba pa
ཁུར་གྱིས་དུབ	exhausted by the burden/ responsibility	khur gyis dub
ཁུར་གྱིས་དུབ་པ	exhausted by the burden/ responsibility	khur gyis dub pa
ཁུར་གྱིས་ནོན	1 dropping under the load	khur gyis non
ཁུར་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	one dropping under the load	khur gyis non pa
ཁུར་གླ	wage for carrying a load	khur gla
ཁུར་འགེལ་བ	to get responsibility	khur 'gel ba
ཁུར་རྔན	heavy load or responsibility	khur rngan
ཁུར་ལྕི	heavy burden/ responsibility	khur lci
ཁུར་ལྕི་བ	heavy load, heavy responsibility	khur lci ba
ཁུར་ཆུང་ངུ	small burden	khur chung ngu
ཁུར་ཆེན	great load/ responsibility	khur chen
ཁུར་ཆེན་པོ	great burden	khur chen po
ཁུར་བརྙན་པ	borrow, take loan of	khur brnyan pa
ཁུར་ཐག	rope for carrying baggage by tying on the back	khur thag
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཨེནདས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཡོཀེ	like pole, rope to carry loads	from the ends of a yoke
ཁུར་ཐེགས་པ	bear the burden	khur thegs pa
ཁུར་དང་ལྡན་པ	burdened	khur dang ldan pa
ཁུར་དུ་འཁྱེར	take on the burden	khur du 'khyer
ཁུར་དུ་འཁྱེར་བ	take on the burden	khur du 'khyer ba
ཁུར་དུ་ལེན	accept the burden/ responsibility	khur du len
ཁུར་དུ་ལེན་པ	accept the burden/ responsibility	khur du len pa
ཁུར་དྲགས་པ	fearful burden	khur drags pa
ཁུར་གདང	load carrier's stick [shoulder pole]	khur gdang
ཁུར་འདེགས	shift/ turn over a load/ responsibility (to someone else	khur 'degs
ཁུར་འདེགས་བྱེད	shift/ turn over a load/ responsibility (to someone else	khur 'degs byed
ཁུར་འདེགས་བྱེད་པ	shift/ turn over a load/ responsibility (to someone else	khur 'degs byed pa
ཁུར་འདོན	throw away the burden	khur 'don
ཁུར་འདོན་པ	throw away the burden	khur 'don pa
ཁུར་འདོར་བ	cast off/ lay down the burden (of samsara	khur 'dor ba
ཁུར་འདྲེན་པ	1) transport a load; 2) porter	khur 'dren pa
ཁུར་ནག	black khur mong{khur dkar - 1 of the two kinds of khur mong, dandelion?[w white flower] [among black and white, has yellow flowers]	khur nag
ཁུར་པ	load carrier, coolie	khur pa
ཁུར་པོ	burden, backpack, load	khur po
ཁུར་པོ་ཁུར	I put my bundle on my back	khur po khur
ཁུར་པོ་ཁུར་བ	carried a burden	khur po khur ba
ཁུར་པོ་བཅིངས་པ	retying my bundle	khur po bcings pa
ཁུར་པོ་བསྡམས་པ	rang rang gi + - each person packed his or her things	khur po bsdams pa
ཁུར་པོ་བ	porter	khur po ba
ཁུར་ཕོག་པ	x {yab 'das nas bu der pha'i khur phog pa} when the father passed away, the son took on his father's responsibilities	khur phog pa
ཁུར་འཕྲོག	deprive of one's charge	khur 'phrog
ཁུར་འཕྲོག་པ	robbing of one's load, depriving of one's charge	khur 'phrog pa
ཁུར་བ	pastry	khur ba
ཁུར་བོར་བ	one who has laid down the five skandhas [i.e. he who will not have again to take corporal existence]; he who laid down the burden [responsibility]	khur bor ba
ཁུར་བླང	take charge, accept responsibility/ a burden	khur blang
ཁུར་བླང་པ	take charge, accept responsibility/ a burden	khur blang pa
ཁུར་བླངས་པ	take over charge	khur blangs pa
ཁུར་མ	load	khur ma
ཁུར་མང	dandelion, taraxacum mongolicum hand.-mazz.	khur mang
ཁུར་མངས	dandelion	khur mangs
ཁུར་མི	coolie, porter	khur mi
ཁུར་མོང	med herb khur mong dandelion? [two kinds white and black w white and yellow flowers]	khur mong
ཁུར་ཙ	baggage [carrier]	khur tsa
ཁུར་ཙ་བ	baggage carrier	khur tsa ba
ཁུར་རྩ	root of the herb khur mong	khur rtsa
ཁུར་རྩལ་བ	(met 1 who takes on a burden	khur rtsal ba
ཁུར་ཚད	amount of baggage	khur tshad
ཁུར་ཚོད	tshod ma made from the herb khur mong clears heat/fever	khur tshod
ཁུར་ཚོས	cheek. Syn {mkhur tshos}	khur tshos
ཁུར་འཛིན	accept a burden/ responsibility	khur 'dzin
ཁུར་བཞི	the four burdens. 1) {phung po'i khur} burden of aggregates. 2) {brtson 'grus kyi khur} burden of effort. 3) {nyon mongs pa'i khur} burden of delusions. 4) {dam bca'i khur} burden of pledges	khur bzhi
པོའི་ཁུར	burden of aggregates/skandhas 2) {brtson 'grus kyi khur - burden of effort 3) {nyon mongs pa'i	po'i khur
ཁུར་ཟིན་པ	bore	khur zin pa
ཁུར་བཟོད་པ	one who is able to carry a load, one who has patience with responsibility	khur bzod pa
ཁུར་ཡོངས་འདྲེན་ཐག	rope used in suspending loads from the ends of a yokelike pole	khur yongs 'dren thag
ཁུར་རིན	wages for carrying a burden	khur rin
ཁུར་ལ་མི་འཇིགས	not afraid to bear a burden (met the earth	khur la mi 'jigs
ཁུར་ལེན	take responsibility/ charge of/ care of/ a burden, take interest in	khur len
ཁུར་ལེན་པ	/ receive a burden/ load/ responsibility	khur len pa
ཁུར་ཤིང	1) implement for carrying a load when travelling far on foot; 2) baggage carrier's carrying stick [usu shoulder stick]	khur shing
ཁུར་ཤོག	bring hither	khur shog
ཁུར་སེམས	wish to undertake a responsibility/ burden	khur sems
ཁུར་བསམ་ཆེ་བ	one having a sense of responsibility	khur bsam che ba
ཁུར་བསླང་ངོ	[arch] accumulate transgressions of speech	khur bslang ngo
ཁུལ	tributary, jurisdiction, province, domain, district, manner, state, circumstance, ravine, soft down of furs, small basket for wool, very soft wool of tibetan goat, "pretend" particle, region, area	khul
ཁུལ་སྒྱེ	from short soft hair of cattle etc [khu lu] woven and sewn snod spyad	khul sgye
ཁུལ་སྒྱེ་མོ	softest goat-hair or yak-hair	khul sgye mo
ཁུལ་དུ	in a corner, marginally	khul du
ཁུལ་པ	regional people	khul pa
ཁུལ་ཕྱིང	felt made from two	khul phying
ཁུལ་འཕྱིང	felt made from short soft hair of cattle etc	khul 'phying
ཁུལ་བ	pretend, pretense, manner, way, as if, short soft hair/ wool	khul ba
ཁུལ་བལ	short soft hair of cattle and wool	khul bal
ཁུལ་བྱས	SA khul	khul byas
ཁུལ་བྱེད་པ	act as if, pretend	khul byed pa
ཁུལ་མ	bottom or side of a thing	khul ma
ཁུལ་མལ	small basket for wool	khul mal
ཁུལ་མི	regional people	khul mi
ཁུལ་མི་དམངས	regional people	khul mi dmangs
ཁུལ་མི་དམངས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	regional people's committee	khul mi dmangs u yon lhan khang
ཁུལ་རྩིད	abbr of khu lu and rtsid	khul rtsid
ཁུལ་རྩེ	from top to bottom, entirely, all, in great measure	khul rtse
ཁུལ་ཞོ	[arch] container for a small child	khul zho
ཁུས	1) imp. of {'khus}. 2) Syn {bkus}	khus
ཁུས་སྐད	wailing/ weeping sound	khus skad
ཁུས་འདེབས	wailing, weeping, howling sound	khus 'debs
ཁུས་མོ	loud weeping sound	khus mo
ཁུས་མོ་བཏབ་པ	weep loudly	khus mo btab pa
ཁེ	1) profit, gain, wealth. 2) numerical figure of 92; profit	khe
ཁེ་ཀ	victory	khe ka
ཁེ་རྐྱང	naked	khe rkyang
ཁེ་སྐྱེད	business gain, capital's 'phal cha and debt interest, profit	khe skyed
ཁེ་སྐྱེད་ཟ	make a profit	khe skyed za
ཁེ་ཁོལ	uneven color/dying	khe khol
ཁེ་ཁོལ་བྱུང་འདུག	it came out unevenly colored	khe khol byung 'dug
ཁེ་ཁྱེ	profit, gain, tetter, herpes, ringworm	khe khye
ཁེ་གད	a place, birthplace of lo tsa ba 'khor lo grags pa	khe gad
ཁེ་གན་རྩེ	monastery in china	khe gan rtse
ཁེ་གུན	profit and loss	khe gun
ཁེ་གྱོང	profit and loss	khe gyong
ཁེ་གྲགས	wealth and fame	khe grags
ཁེ་གྲགས་རྙེད་འཚོལ	pursue profit, face, and gain	khe grags rnyed 'tshol
ཁེ་གྲགས་དང་འཕྱོར	wealth, fame and glory 260	khe grags dang 'phyor
ཁེ་གྲི	scissors, cloth cutting implement	khe gri
ཁེ་རྒྱག་པ	make profit	khe rgyag pa
ཁེ་རྒྱལ	profit and victory	khe rgyal
ཁེ་རྒྱལ་གཞན་ལ་བྱིན	always yield to others	khe rgyal gzhan la byin
ཁེ་སྒྲུབ	[means of] attaining profit	khe sgrub
ཁེ་སྒྲུབ་ཁོ་ནའི་བསམ་བློ	thinking only of profit	khe sgrub kho na'i bsam blo
ཁེ་སྒྲུབ་པ	make profit, gain	khe sgrub pa
ཁེ་བརྒྱབ་པ	make a good bargain	khe brgyab pa
ཁེ་ཅན	with profit, profitable	khe can
ཁེ་ཆེན་པོ	a big profit	khe chen po
ཁེ་འཇའ	(CH sleeveless upper garment	khe 'ja'
ཁེ་ཉེན	what is profitable and what is detrimental	khe nyen
ཁེ་ཉེན་གོ་ཤེས	clearly recognize beneficial profit and harmful danger/ risk	khe nyen go shes
ཁེ་ཉེན་གོ་ཤེས་བྱེད་པ	clearly recognize beneficial profit and harmful danger	khe nyen go shes byed pa
ཁེ་ཉེན་ཆུང་བ	almost completely devoid of risks	khe nyen chung ba
ཁེ་རྙེད་པ	get a profit	khe rnyed pa
ཁེ་ཐོབ་ཆེ་བ	[very] profitable	khe thob che ba
ཁེ་དང་རྒྱལ་ཁ	gain and victory	khe dang rgyal kha
ཁེ་དྲག	income; profit and influence	khe drag
ཁེ་འདོད	want to attain profit	khe 'dod
ཁེ་པ	tradesman, dealer, one who makes profit bye selling or in business	khe pa
ཁེ་པོ	1) cheap, inexpensive; 2) promiscuous/ immoral man	khe po
ཁེ་སྤོགས	ditto, profit, gain	khe spogs
ཁེ་སྤོགས་ཀྱི་ཚད	rate of profit/ interest	khe spogs kyi tshad
ཁེ་སྤོགས་སྒྲུབ་པ	make a profit	khe spogs sgrub pa
ཁེ་སྤོགས་འདོད་གདུང	be tormented by the desire for profit	khe spogs 'dod gdung
ཁེ་སྤོགས་པ	1 who makes [great] profit	khe spogs pa
ཁེ་ཕན	profit, interest, benefit, emolument	khe phan
ཁེ་ཕན་གྱི་ཚོང་ལས	enterprise	khe phan gyi tshong las
ཁེ་ཕན་ཅན	profitable	khe phan can
ཁེ་ཕན་བྱུང་བ	benefit	khe phan byung ba
ཁེ་ཕན་མེད་པ	disadvantage, unprofitable	khe phan med pa
ཁེ་ཕན་རིང་ལུགས	utilitarianism	khe phan ring lugs
ཁེ་ཕམ	profit and loss	khe pham
ཁེ་འཕྲོས	gain, profit, earnings	khe 'phros
ཁེ་བ	win	khe ba
ཁེ་བུ་སུ	on top of a bed gding bya'i gdan te kha gdan nam rum	khe bu su
ཁེ་བེན	advantage, gain, benefit	khe ben
ཁེ་བོ	cheap	khe bo
ཁེ་བོ་བྱུང	cheap, inexpensive	khe bo byung
ཁེ་བོགས	profit and gain/ interest	khe bogs
ཁེ་བྲག་མདོ	place in kong po	khe brag mdo
ཁེ་དབང	jurisdiction, rights [as China's rights in Shangtung]	khe dbang
ཁེ་འབབ	profit, gain interest byung 'bor	khe 'bab
ཁེ་འབུན	gain and loss, usury	khe 'bun
ཁེ་འབུན་བསྐྱེད	practicing usury	khe 'bun bskyed
ཁེ་རྦད	advantage, gain, benefit	khe rbad
ཁེ་སྦྲུབ་པ	to make a profit	khe sbrub pa
ཁེ་མ	profit, herpes	khe ma
ཁེ་མེད	unprofitable	khe med
ཁེ་མེད་གྱོང་མེད	w neither profit or loss	khe med gyong med
ཁེ་གཙང	not mixed w others, isolated, exclusively, solely, alone, by itself	khe gtsang
ཁེ་གཙང་སྡོད	stay isolated	khe gtsang sdod
ཁེ་ཚོང	profit, profitable, trade, commerce, retailing	khe tshong
ཁེ་ཚོང་རྒྱག་པ	trade, engage in commerce, retail	khe tshong rgyag pa
ཁེ་ཚོང་པ	retail seller	khe tshong pa
ཁེ་ཚོང་བྱེད་པ	trade, traffic, bargain	khe tshong byed pa
ཁེ་འཚོལ	seek profit	khe 'tshol
ཁེ་འཚོལ་བ	seek profit	khe 'tshol ba
ཁེ་འཚོལ་བའི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	viewpoint of seeking profit	khe 'tshol ba'i lta tshul
ཁེ་འཚོལ་བྱེད	seek profit	khe 'tshol byed
ཁེ་བཟང	gain, profit, profit	khe bzang
ཁེ་བཟང་ཁོ་ན་དོན་གཉེར	working exclusively for profit	khe bzang kho na don gnyer
ཁེ་བཟང་ཅན	gainful	khe bzang can
ཁེ་བཟང་ཐོབ་ཐབས	means of attaining profit	khe bzang thob thabs
ཁེ་བཟང་དང་སྐད་གྲགས	profit / wealth and fame	khe bzang dang skad grags
ཁེ་བཟང་སྤྲད་པ	make a big profit	khe bzang sprad pa
ཁེ་བཟང་ཟ	make a profit	khe bzang za
ཁེ་བཟང་ཟས་པ	to earn, gain	khe bzang zas pa
ཁེ་བཟང་ཡོང་སྒོ	means of making a big profit	khe bzang yong sgo
ཁེ་བཟང་ལོན	make a profit	khe bzang lon
ཁེ་བཟང་ལོན་པ	make a profit	khe bzang lon pa
ཁེ་རག	pitchfork	khe rag
ཁེ་རུ་འགྲོ་བ	fall in price	khe ru 'gro ba
ཁེ་རུ་མ	gcig pu'am hrang hrang,...Mi tshang khe ru ma	khe ru ma
ཁེ་ལས	profitable work, business enterprise, factory, mill	khe las
ཁེ་ལས་དེང་རབས་ཅན	modern business enterprise	khe las deng rabs can
ཁེ་ལས་བདག་གཉེར	maneage [ment]/ those who] administer/ take care of/increase a business / manufacture and selling etc.	khe las bdag gnyer
ཁེ་ལས་སྤེལ་བ	increase business	khe las spel ba
ཁེ་ལིམ་ཕོ་བྲང	Kremlin	khe lim pho brang
ཁེ་ལེ	alone	khe le
ཁེ་ལེན་ཏ	basin	khe len ta
ཁེ་ལོ་ཝ་ཐེ	kilowatt	khe lo wa the
ཁེ་ལོག་ཚོང་ལོག	arguing over price, caring only for profit	khe log tshong log
ཁེ་སང	profit	khe sang
ཁེ་སང་ཅན	lucrative	khe sang can
ཁེ་སླེབས	income	khe slebs
ཁེ་སླེབས་ཆེན་པོ	yielding good income, very profitable	khe slebs chen po
ཁེ་གསུམ	place in tibet	khe gsum
ཁེ་ལྷག	profit	khe lhag
ཁེག	kind of riddle	kheg
ཁེག་པ	(tha mi dad pa khegs pa, kheg pa,, be blocked and stopped, refute	kheg pa
ཁེགས	negate, refute, cease, stop	khegs
ཁེགས་པ	[p {kheg pa} be stopped, close, shut off, refute blocked, stopped, blocked, obstruct, refuted, darkness, arrogance	khegs pa
ཁེང	statute labor	kheng
ཁེང་པ	arrogance	kheng pa
ཁེང་བ	{khengs pa} {kheng ba},, be filled, full	kheng ba
ཁེང་ལོག	[arch] 'bangs gyen log	kheng log
ཁེངས	full, past of 'khengs	khengs
ཁེངས་དཀའ་བ	hard to fill up	khengs dka' ba
ཁེངས་སྐུང་བག་ཡོད	humble and conscientious, modest and upright / principled	khengs skung bag yod
ཁེངས་སྐྱུང	modesty, humility, openmindedness	khengs skyung
ཁེངས་སྐྱུང་གི་སྒོ་ནས	modestly	khengs skyung gi sgo nas
ཁེངས་སྐྱུང་ཆེན་པོ	[very] modest	khengs skyung chen po
ཁེངས་སྐྱུང་བག་ཡོད	humble and conscientious, modest and upright/ principled	khengs skyung bag yod
ཁེངས་སྐྱུང་བྱེད	act w modesty, humility, open- mindedness	khengs skyung byed
ཁེངས་སྐྱུངས་པ	to get rid of a pride	khengs skyungs pa
ཁེངས་བསྐྱུངས	1) humility, modesty. 2) self-effacing	khengs bskyungs
ཁེངས་ཅན	proud, haughty	khengs can
ཁེངས་ཆུང	humble	khengs chung
ཁེངས་གཏམ	boastful words or language	khengs gtam
ཁེངས་གཏམ་ཤོད	speak proud/ arrogant talk	khengs gtam shod
ཁེངས་དྲེགས	{phun sum tshogs pa'i khengs dregs} self-satisfied with their perfections	khengs dregs
ཁེངས་དྲེགས་ཆེན་པོ	conceited, arrogant, haughty	khengs dregs chen po
ཁེངས་དྲེགས་མེད་པ	humble	khengs dregs med pa
ཁེངས་ལྡན་མ	woman in the prime of life [lit. proud woman]	khengs ldan ma
ཁེངས་པ	pf. of {kheng ba}; 1) to be inflated, bloated, puffed up, become arrogant, boast of. 2) full, filled up; to fill up, become filled with. 3) arrogance; pride, selfishness, haughtiness, conceit. 4) t...	khengs pa
ཁེངས་པ་སྐྱུང	act modest	khengs pa skyung
ཁེངས་པ་སྐྱུང་བ	be humble, act modest	khengs pa skyung ba
ཁེངས་པ་བསྐྱུངས་པ	humility,	khengs pa bskyungs pa
ཁེངས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	humble	khengs pa dang bral ba
ཁེངས་པ་སྤོང་བ	abandon humility	khengs pa spong ba
ཁེངས་པ་མ་བྱེད	be free of pride!	khengs pa ma byed
ཁེངས་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	inflated arrogance, conceited pride	khengs pa'i nga rgyal
ཁེངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	arrogance; (to become) arrogant	khengs par 'gyur ba
ཁེངས་མེད	1) humble, modest. 2) epithet of the Buddha	khengs med
ཁེངས་ཚིག་སྨྲ་བ	to speak boastfully, brag	khengs tshig smra ba
ཁེངས་རློམ	arrogance, haughtiness	khengs rlom
ཁེངས་རློམ་གཞན་བརྙས	by arrogant pride scorn/ belittle others	khengs rlom gzhan brnyas
ཁེངས་སེམས	self-infatuation, conceitedness, arrogance. Syn {khengs dregs}	khengs sems
ཁེངས་སེམས་མེད་པ	modesty, openmindedness	khengs sems med pa
ཨོཔེན	mindedness	open
ཁེད	kind of riddle	khed
ཁེན	(CH 1 of the spar kha brgyad, 8 trigrams, sky, NE (in magic texts	khen
ཁེན་ཉི་ཡ	Kenya	khen nyi ya
ཁེན་འདྲ	kind of cotton cloth	khen 'dra
ཁེན་གནམ	(CH 1 of the spar kha brgyad 8 trigrams	khen gnam
ཁེན་པ	snye ba' [lean against repose, rten pa,...right and left la mi khen par remain tshog pur	khen pa
ཁེབ	survey, {bsam pa mi kheb} inconceivable	kheb
ཁེབ་ཆེ	more benefit	kheb che
ཁེབ་ལྡན	covered	kheb ldan
ཁེབ་རིམ	layer	kheb rim
ཁེབས	1) cover[let], lid, wrapping, veil; 2) [p {'kheb} cover, spread over, conceal,	khebs
ཨོབེ༹ར	spreading 262	over
ཁེབས་འགབ་པ	place a covering over a thing, cover	khebs 'gab pa
ཁེབས་འགེབས་པ	covered	khebs 'gebs pa
ཁེབས་གཅོད	cover, lid	khebs gcod
ཁེབས་གཅོད་རྒྱག	cover w lid, conceal, hide	khebs gcod rgyag
ཁེབས་ཆེ	Syn khyab che ba	khebs che
ཁེབས་ཆེ་བ	khyab che ba	khebs che ba
ཁེབས་ལྡན	covered realm	khebs ldan
ཁེབས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, be covered, veiled, spread over	khebs pa
ཁེབས་པའི་ལྡིང་གོས	overcoat	khebs pa'i lding gos
ཁེབས་འབུབས་པ	gyog pa and 'gebs pa	khebs 'bubs pa
ཁེབས་མ	covering	khebs ma
ཁེབས་མེད	uncovered, open, roofless	khebs med
ཁེབས་མེད་འཁོར་ལོ	vehivcle w/o roof khebs g.yogs - cover, lid khebs g.yogs pa - enshroud khebs g.yogs pa - loaded	khebs med 'khor lo
ཁེབས་གཤུ་བ	uncover	khebs gshu ba
ཁེབས་སང་བ	take a covering off	khebs sang ba
ཁེབས་སེད་པ	bald	khebs sed pa
ཁེམ	SA khyem	khem
ཁེམ་ལྕགས	iron shovel	khem lcags
ཁེམ་པ	a brief period	khem pa
ཁེམ་བུ	spoon	khem bu
ཁེའི་ཨེར་ཁེའི་ཅི	Khirgiz	khe'i er khe'i ci
ཁེའུ	1) child; 2) hooked knife	khe'u
ཁེའུ་གེལ་པོ	sha rgyags pa'i child	khe'u gel po
ཁེའུ་ཆུང	small child	khe'u chung
ཁེའུ་ཐོན་པ	1) mi'i phru gu btsa' ba; 2) Lo tog dang,shing sogs kyi myu gu kha 'bus pa	khe'u thon pa
ཁེའུ་སུས	[arch] 1) rgyun zas kyi zur du bzos pa'i occasional food; 2) eat more than the measure of food, rgyun zas ma yin pa'i good food	khe'u sus
ཁེར	single	kher
ཁེར་རྐྱ	alone, individual, single, isolated, lonely, solitary	kher rkya
ཁེར་རྐྱང	lone, alone, solitary	kher rkyang
ཁེར་རྐྱང་གི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	individual/ petty economy, econmy whose basic unit is an individual working alone/ uncollectivized	kher rkyang gi dpal 'byor
ཁེར་རྐྱང་གི་ཞིང་ལས	system of individual farming	kher rkyang gi zhing las
ཁེར་རྐྱང་གི་ལས་ཤེས་བཟོ་ལས	system of individual craft industry	kher rkyang gi las shes bzo las
ཁེར་རྐྱང་འགྲོ་བ	travelling alone	kher rkyang 'gro ba
ཁེར་རྐྱང་ངལ་རྩལ་བ	individual laborer	kher rkyang ngal rtsal ba
ཁེར་རྐྱང་ཐོན་པ	segregate	kher rkyang thon pa
ཁེར་རྐྱང་དུ་འཇོག	isolate	kher rkyang du 'jog
ཁེར་རྐྱང་དུ་ལུས་པ	left alone	kher rkyang du lus pa
ཁེར་རྐྱང་འབྲོག་པ	individual/ noncollectivized nomads	kher rkyang 'brog pa
ཁེར་རྐྱང་ཞིང་པ	individual/ noncollectivized farmers	kher rkyang zhing pa
ཁེར་རྐྱང་ལ་དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	system of private property	kher rkyang la dbang ba'i lam lugs
ཁེར་དགོད	oneself alone laugh/joke	kher dgod
ཁེར་འགྲོ	go/walk alone	kher 'gro
ཁེར་རྒོད	oneself alone laugh/ joke	kher rgod
ཁེར་རྒྱག་པ	to defraud, to usurp	kher rgyag pa
ཁེར་ཉལ་བྱས་པ	{bzur te kher nyal byas pa} have set you apart, and you live alone	kher nyal byas pa
ཁེར་གཉེར	individual management/ control	kher gnyer
ཁེར་མ	alone ..Rkyen med pa'i rgyu kher ma la 'bras bu ga nas yong,...[Mda' rgod kher 'phen, dpung rgod kher ngom]	kher ma
ཁེར་མེད	gone away, disappeared	kher med
ཁེར་ཡ	alone	kher ya
ཁེར་རེ་མ	alone, isolated, single	kher re ma
ཁེར་ལབ	talk to oneself	kher lab
ཁེར་ལས	individual management/ control	kher las
ཁེར་ལས་དུད་ཚང	individual[ly controlled] household	kher las dud tshang
ཁེལ	put on, SA 'khel ba	khel
ཁེལ་སྒོ	a district, a mountain	khel sgo
ཁེལ་འདེབས་པ	give an accounting of others' faults	khel 'debs pa
ཁེལ་པར་བྱུང	fulfilled	khel par byung
ཁེལ་བ	pf. of {'khel ba} to load; pf. of {'khel ba}	khel ba
ཁེལ་བར་བྱུང	will be fulfilled	khel bar byung
ཁེས	hit the mark, strike the target	khes
ཁེས་ཉིན	the day before yesterday	khes nyin
ཁེས་པ	hit (the right thing), one who makes profit or bargain by selling, petty dealer, trader	khes pa
ཁེས་ལེན་མེད	non-acceptance	khes len med
ཁོ	he; 1) he, she. 2) it. 3) I. numerical figure for 122	kho
ཁོ་ཁོ	cocoa	kho kho
ཁོ་ཁོ་ཞི་ལི	kho kho hsi li mt	kho kho zhi li
ཁོ་གྱུ	threshing	kho gyu
ཁོ་ཅག	they are, they	kho cag
ཁོ་ཅག་ལ་ཡོད	they have	kho cag la yod
ཁོ་ཅན	his, her	kho can
ཁོ་ཅན་དུ་མི་འགྲོ	I do not go to him	kho can du mi 'gro
ཁོ་ཅུས	imperial examination system	kho cus
ཁོ་ཆུ་གོང་མ	upper kho chu river	kho chu gong ma
ཁོ་ཆུ་འགབ་མ	{kho chu 'gab ma} river	kho chu 'gab ma
ཁོ་ཆེ	what may be needed, necessary things	kho che
ཁོ་ཉིད	him her they them -sel[ves]	kho nyid
ཁོ་ཏི	tea kettle	kho ti
ཁོ་ཐག་གཅད་པ	to be resigned to/ to hope for	kho thag gcad pa
ཁོ་ཐག་གཅོ་ད་པ	despair of, resign, acquiesce in, reconcile one's self to	kho thag gco da pa
ཁོ་ཐག་གཅོད	{kho thag chod, kho thag bcad pa} to acquiesce/ give in/ accept (as inevitable); to have the decision be made	kho thag gcod
ཁོ་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	to decide finally / definitely, resolve. To resign, to despair of, to acquiesce in, to despair of, to resign, to acquiesce in, to reconcile one's self to	kho thag gcod pa
ཁོ་ཐག་བཅད	to decide, resolve, decisively make up one's mind	kho thag bcad
ཁོ་ཐག་བཅོད	decide finally 263	kho thag bcod
ཁོ་ཐག་བཅོད་པ	to decide finally	kho thag bcod pa
ཁོ་ཐག་ཆོད	lose/ exhaust hope, decide (finally/definitely, unquestionable, decisive, {phu thag chod pa}, despair of, resign, acquiesce in, reconcile one's self to	kho thag chod
ཁོ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	1) vi. to decide [finally / definitely]. 2) unquestionable, decisive. Syn {phu thag chod pa}	kho thag chod pa
ཁོ་ཐག་མ་ཆོད་ཀྱི་བར	until you have settled this point decisively	kho thag ma chod kyi bar
ཁོ་ཐོ	leather gun stuff pouch	kho tho
ཁོ་མཐིང	in lho brag	kho mthing
ཁོ་མཐིང་ལྷ་ཁང	{kho mthing lha khang} monastery, S Tibet	kho mthing lha khang
ཁོ་ན	alone, only, purely, only, solely, exclusive, nothing but, mere, just, single-handedly, the very, exactly, death	kho na
ཁོ་ན་གལ་ཆེ	(being of vital importance	kho na gal che
ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	just that, thatness. See {de kho na nyid}	kho na nyid
ཁོ་ན་འདྲ་བ	just like a	kho na 'dra ba
ཁོ་ན་གཙོ་བོ	exclusive emphasis	kho na gtso bo
ཁོ་ན་རུབ་ཡོང	they will jointly come upon me	kho na rub yong
ཁོ་ན་རེ	+ {zer na - if someone says, the question arises/ is raised	kho na re
ཁོ་ན་རེ་ཟེར་ན	if someone says, the question arises, the question is raised	kho na re zer na
ཁོ་ནག	Khonag, in Domey	kho nag
ཁོ་ནའི་མ་འདྲས	special	kho na'i ma 'dras
ཁོ་ནའི་མ་འདྲེས	special	kho na'i ma 'dres
ཁོ་ནར	to that only / alone, exclusively, solely. 2) just [as], exactly, the very [same]	kho nar
ཁོ་ནར་མ་ངེས	not categorically	kho nar ma nges
ཁོ་ནས	by 1 alone	kho nas
ཁོ་ནས་བྱེད་པ	performed solely by	kho nas byed pa
ཁོ་ནས་སྲིད་དབང	dictatorship	kho nas srid dbang
ཁོ་པ	him her they them, he	kho pa
ཁོ་པ་ཚོ	they	kho pa tsho
ཁོ་པོ	tribal name in tibet	kho po
ཁོ་བ	they, curse, reviling	kho ba
ཁོ་བ་མཉེས་པ	tanned leather	kho ba mnyes pa
ཁོ་བའི་ཡོ་བྱད	presents; whatever was needed for that purpose	kho ba'i yo byad
ཁོ་བོ	1) 'I,' myself, me, oneself [personal pronoun masculine]. 2) he, himself	kho bo
ཁོ་བོ་ང	I myself	kho bo nga
ཁོ་བོ་ཅག	we	kho bo cag
ཁོ་བོ་ཅག་ལ	to us	kho bo cag la
ཁོ་བོ་ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ	turned towards me	kho bo la phyogs pa
ཁོ་བོ་ལ་གཟིགས	looked at me	kho bo la gzigs
ཁོ་བོམ	early tibetan name for katmandu	kho bom
ཁོ་བོའི་གྲོགས་པོ	my friend	kho bo'i grogs po
ཁོ་བོས་ཀྱང	when I	kho bos kyang
ཁོ་མ	knapsack, wallet	kho ma
ཁོ་མོ	we, I, (feminine)	kho mo
ཁོ་ཙེ	chopstick	kho tse
ཁོ་རྩེ	chopstick	kho rtse
ཁོ་ཚག	zas rlangs cooking implement [steamer?]	kho tshag
ཁོ་ཚེ	chopstick	kho tshe
ཁོ་ཚོ	they	kho tsho
ཁོ་ཞ	they	kho zha
ཁོ་ཞི་ཁར	Kashgar	kho zhi khar
ཁོ་ཡ་ཆེན་ཝ	large space, dough made of rtsam pa and beer	kho ya chen wa
ཁོ་ཡིན	he is	kho yin
ཁོ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐོབ	he is not talented but makes a show	kho yon tan thob
ཁོ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐོབ་ལོ	he is conceited kho g.yu - thrashing process	kho yon tan thob lo
ཁོ་ར	SA kho rang, 'khor sa, of the man himself, circumference, circumjacent space	kho ra
ཁོ་ར་ཁོར་ཟུག	near/ around/ surrounding the edge/circumference	kho ra khor zug
ཁོ་ར་ཁོར་ཡུག	space, fence, any surrounding wall, ditch filled with water or moat round a city or fort, from everywhere, from all directions, in circumference, roundabout, all round, encompass	kho ra khor yug
ཁོ་ར་ཁོར་ཡུག་ཏུ	in a circle	kho ra khor yug tu
ཁོ་རང	1) you. 2) he [himself]	kho rang
ཁོ་རང་ཁོམ་མེད	he is not at leisure	kho rang khom med
ཁོ་རང་ག་ལ་ཡོད	where is he	kho rang ga la yod
ཁོ་རང་ཚོ་རང	themselves	kho rang tsho rang
ཁོ་རང་རང་ཉིད	he himself	kho rang rang nyid
ཁོ་རང་ལ	himself	kho rang la
ཁོ་རང་སླར་ཡང་སོང	he went away again	kho rang slar yang song
ཁོ་རའི	his	kho ra'i
ཁོ་རེ	hey [you]	kho re
ཁོ་རེ་ཁྱོད	[hey] you	kho re khyod
ཁོ་ལ	him	kho la
ཁོ་ལ་ཚབ་ཡོད	he has got a representative, equivalent, substitute	kho la tshab yod
ཁོ་ལ་ཡོད	he has	kho la yod
ཁོ་ལག	limbs, entire body	kho lag
ཁོ་ལག་ཆེ་བ	anything that is large all over, generally well-developed shape	kho lag che ba
ཁོ་ལག་རྫོགས	youthfulness, full youth	kho lag rdzogs
ཁོ་ལག་རྫོགས་པ	'phel stobs yongs su rdzogs pa,...Lus kyi kho lag rdzogs pa'i dar ma zhig exhausted?	kho lag rdzogs pa
ཁོ་ལག་ཡངས་པ	1) great extent; 2) great physical strength	kho lag yangs pa
ཁོ་ལོམ་པི་ཡ	Columbia	kho lom pi ya
ཁོ་ཤེད	he/she said	kho shed
ཁོ་གསེར་གྱིས་མགུ་སྟེ་འགྲོ་མེད	how could be not be satisfied with gold?	kho gser gyis mgu ste 'gro med
ཁོག	stop {rta khog ces smras 'dug pa} asked to have his horse stopped 264	khog
ཁོག་ཁོང་འཁྲུག	uneasiness, anxiety, sorrow	khog khong 'khrug
ཁོག་བརྒྱངས་ཟིང་སློང	bsam ngan gyis gzhan sems bskul nas zing 'khrug slong ba	khog brgyangs zing slong
ཁོག་གཅིག	1) yak sheep etc meat phyi sgrom cha [box?] all in 1; 2) example of a single inner meaning, all of a piece	khog gcig
ཁོག་གཅོང	chronic disease in the stomach or internal parts of the body, chronic cough	khog gcong
ཁོག་ཆུ	disrespected, slighted, neglected	khog chu
ཁོག་ཆུང	small belly/ cavity	khog chung
ཁོག་ཆུད	SA khong du chud	khog chud
ཁོག་ཆེན	a large corpse's trunk?, large pot for cooking	khog chen
ཁོག་ཏུ་མི་འཇུ་བ	indigestible, can't digest	khog tu mi 'ju ba
ཁོག་གཏམ	one's innermost thoughts/ feelings	khog gtam
ཁོག་ལྟིར	clay etc. tea/chang vessel, teapot	khog ltir
ཁོག་སྟིར	kettle	khog stir
ཁོག་སྟོང	cavity, hollow	khog stong
ཁོག་སྟོང་འབྲུ་བ	excavate	khog stong 'bru ba
ཁོག་སྟོད	upper torso, part of body	khog stod
ཁོག་ལྡིར	teapot	khog ldir
ཁོག་སྡིར	teapot	khog sdir
ཁོག་ནག	kha dkar khog nag - white tongues and black hearts	khog nag
ཁོག་ནད	stomach ache	khog nad
ཁོག་ནད་ཆེ	"pain in the stomach," great internal illness	khog nad che
ཁོག་ནད་སྨན་བཅོས་སྡེ་ཁག	internal medicine division	khog nad sman bcos sde khag
ཁོག་ནས་ཁས་ལེན	tacit consent	khog nas khas len
ཁོག་མནའ	vow or promise from the bottom of one's heart	khog mna'
ཁོག་པ	chest; ex {khog pa na don snying med pa} have no hearts in their chests	khog pa
ཁོག་པ་འཁུར	endure, be patient/ tolerant, carry a burden w patience and fortitude	khog pa 'khur
ཁོག་པ་འཁུར་བ	to endure, be patient, to carry a burden with patience and fortitude	khog pa 'khur ba
ཁོག་པ་འགྲངས་པ	have had their fill	khog pa 'grangs pa
ཁོག་པ་འགྲིམ	have diarrhoea	khog pa 'grim
ཁོག་པ་འགྲིམ་པ	have diarrhoea	khog pa 'grim pa
ཁོག་པ་རྒྱང	1) by dkrug 'dod [disturbed desire? desire to stir up?] incite/ instigate bad ideas and actions in others; 2) Nang nas rgyong ba [fill extend?]	khog pa rgyang
ཁོག་པ་རྒྱང་བ	1) by dkrug 'dod [disturbed desire? desire to stir up?] incite/ instigate bad ideas and actions in others; 2) Nang nas rgyong ba [fill extend?]	khog pa rgyang ba
ཁོག་པ་རྒྱངས་པ	instigate	khog pa rgyangs pa
ཁོག་པ་རྒྱོང	1) by dkrug 'dod [disturbed desire? desire to stir up?] incite/ instigate bad ideas and actions in others; 2) Nang nas rgyong ba [fill extend?]	khog pa rgyong
ཁོག་པ་རྒྱོང་བ	1) by dkrug 'dod [disturbed desire? desire to stir up?] incite/ instigate bad ideas and actions in others; 2) Nang nas rgyong ba [fill extend?]	khog pa rgyong ba
ཁོག་པ་བརྒྱངས	1) by dkrug 'dod [disturbed desire? desire to stir up?] incited/ instigated bad ideas and actions in others; 2) Nang nas rgyong ba [filled extended?]	khog pa brgyangs
ཁོག་པ་སྔོག	ferret out secrets [by devious means, dig up the insides	khog pa sngog
ཁོག་པ་བསྔོགས	ferret out secrets [by devious means, dig up the insides	khog pa bsngogs
ཁོག་པ་ཅན	1) person w capacious mind; 2) (met tortoise	khog pa can
ཁོག་པ་ཆུང་ངུ	1) small belly/ capacity; 2) without patience, steadfastness, endurance; 3) tortoise	khog pa chung ngu
ཁོག་པ་ཆེ་བ	capacious or large interior	khog pa che ba
ཁོག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	1) patient, steadfast, enduring, plucky. 2) {khog pa} refers to internal cavity of the trunk or torso; thus someone who eats immoderately, who has an excessive appetite, is called {khog pa chen pa}...	khog pa chen po
ཁོག་པ་བརྗེས་པ	dense, having no intervals	khog pa brjes pa
ཁོག་པ་དྲང་པོ	straightforward mind	khog pa drang po
ཁོག་པ་བྱེད	be patient/ tolerant	khog pa byed
ཁོག་པ་བྲུས	ferreted out secrets [by devious means, dug up the insides	khog pa brus
ཁོག་པ་འབྲུ	ferret out secrets [by devious means, dig up the insides	khog pa 'bru
ཁོག་པ་ཡངས་པ	broad-minded	khog pa yangs pa
ཁོག་པ་ལ་ལྟོ་ཞུ་བ	digestion of food in the stomach	khog pa la lto zhu ba
ཁོག་པ་ལེན	get the measure of a person and act accordingly	khog pa len
ཁོག་པ་བཤག	cut open, dissect	khog pa bshag
ཁོག་པའི་ནང་གི་སྒང་ཕུག	bladder	khog pa'i nang gi sgang phug
ཁོག་པའི་ནང་གི་སྒྱུ་མ་སོགས	intestine	khog pa'i nang gi sgyu ma sogs
ཁོག་པའི་ནང་གི་སྒྱུར་མ་སོགས	bowel	khog pa'i nang gi sgyur ma sogs
ཁོག་ཕུབ	1) to raise the structure. 2) setting, framework	khog phub
ཁོག་ཕུབ་པ	pitching the framework	khog phub pa
ཁོག་དབུབ	liturgical procedures, main body	khog dbub
ཁོག་དབུབ་སྟོང་ཐུན་གྱི་ཆིངས	[one of the chings lnga], meaning of a text khog sgrig gi sa bcad	khog dbub stong thun gyi chings
ཁོག་དབུབས	liturgical procedures, main body	khog dbubs
ཁོག་འབུབས	1) tent etc. 'bubs pa Nyi gdugs rtsibs mas khog 'bubs pa; 2) Khog sgrig ste go rim sgrig pa, .Khang pa'i phyi sgrom spyi khog 'bubs pa, pitch a framework/ tent arrangement of stages/details, outline	khog 'bubs
ཟློས་གར	{khog 'bubs drang srong kun tu dga' ba'i zlos gar} khog 'bubs drang srong kun tu dga' ba'i	zlos gar
ཁོག་འབུབས་ཤེས་བྱ་རབ་གསལ	{khog 'bubs shes bya rab gsal}	khog 'bubs shes bya rab gsal
ཁོག་འབྲེལ	conspiracy, collusion	khog 'brel
ཁོག་མ	earthenware, pot, earthen vessel (for cooking rice, meat, broth)	khog ma
ཁོག་སྨད	lower torso, lower part of the body	khog smad
ཁོག་གཙང	chronic disease of the stomach	khog gtsang
ཁོག་ཚིལ	suet	khog tshil
ཁོག་ཚོད་བླངས	took the measure of a person and acted accordingly	khog tshod blangs
ཁོག་ཚོད་ལེན	take the measure of a person and act accordingly	khog tshod len
ཁོག་ཞུགས	instigated, brainwashed	khog zhugs
ཁོག་གཞི	body, frame	khog gzhi
ཁོག་ཡངས	spacious, w large capacity, patient, tolerant	khog yangs
ཁོག་རུལ	rotten	khog rul
ཁོག་ཤིང	core of a tree, heart-wood	khog shing
ཁོག་ཤུགས	groan, sigh	khog shugs
ཁོག་སོབ	hollow tree	khog sob
ཁོགས	cough. imp. of {'gog}	khogs
ཁོགས་པ	SA 'gog pa, cough	khogs pa
ཁོགས་མ	earthen pot/ vessel	khogs ma
ཁོགས་ཤིག	do read	khogs shig
ཁོང	1) (h) of {kho rang}, he / she. 2) within. 3) among. 4) imp. of {'gengs pa} 5) the mind, feelings. 6) interior, inside; imp. of {'gengs pa}; inside of/ enclosure	khong
ཁོང་སྐྲན	ulcer	khong skran
ཁོང་བསྐོར	collar	khong bskor
ཁོང་ཁོང	empty	khong khong
ཁོང་ཁོར་འོས་པ	righteous indignation	khong khor 'os pa
ཁོང་ཁྲག	blood of the vein	khong khrag
ཁོང་ཁྲག་བསྐྱུགས་པ	vomit blood	khong khrag bskyugs pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ	malice	khong khro
དྲུག	six root delusions gnod byed sems can dang gnod pa sdug bsngal dang gnod pa'i rkyen dug mtshon sogs la dmigs te kun nas mnar sems pa]	drug
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བཀག་པ	to control anger	khong khro bkag pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་འཀྲུག་པ	let irritate, annoy, offend	khong khro 'krug pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སྒྲིབ	the obscuration of anger	khong khro sgrib
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ཅན	irate, bitter, angry, malicious	khong khro can
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སྤང་བ	to subdue anger, renouncing anger	khong khro spang ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སྤོང་བ	put away or subdue anger	khong khro spong ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བ	Anger [as in one of the six root disturbances], to be angry, aggressive, hateful, passion; to be angry, aggressive, hateful	khong khro ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བ་མེད་པའི་སེམས	nonaggressiveness, attitude of non-anger	khong khro ba med pa'i sems
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བ་བཟོད་པ	showing patience in the face of anger	khong khro ba bzod pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་འབར་བ	flaming/ intense anger	khong khro 'bar ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ཞི་བ	pacify/ eliminate anger	khong khro zhi ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ཟ	to get angry	khong khro za
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ཟ་བ	to be angry, aggravated	khong khro za ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ཟས	got/ was angry/ indignant	khong khro zas
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བཟས་པ	get angry	khong khro bzas pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ལང་པ	irritated, angry	khong khro lang pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ལངས་པ	got angry	khong khro langs pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ལོངས་པ	anger, indignation	khong khro longs pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སླང་བ	to annoy	khong khro slang ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སློང	make angy, provoke anger	khong khro slong
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སློང་མཁན	1 who provokes anger	khong khro slong mkhan
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སློང་ཆོག	provocative 266	khong khro slong chog
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སློང་བ	annoy, exasperate, irritate, provoke	khong khro slong ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བསླངས	make angry	khong khro bslangs
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བསླངས་པ	to make angry, antagonize	khong khro bslangs pa
ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་ཕྲ་རྒྱས	the subtle developer of anger	khong khro'i phra rgyas
ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་ཚིག་ངན་སྨྲ་བ	to say harsh, angry things	khong khro'i tshig ngan smra ba
ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་ཡུལ	object of anger	khong khro'i yul
ཁོང་འཁྱིད	[arch] nang nas bton pa	khong 'khyid
ཁོང་འཁྲུག	sorrow, anxiety	khong 'khrug
ཁོང་འཁྲུགས	agitation of the mind	khong 'khrugs
ཁོང་འཁྲུགས་པ	1) [mind becoming] disturbed, upset; 2) angry	khong 'khrugs pa
ཁོང་འཁྲུགས་ལངས	be upset/ disturbed	khong 'khrugs langs
ཁོང་གང	full, packed	khong gang
ཁོང་གི་སྐུ་མདུན་དུ	in his presence	khong gi sku mdun du
ཁོང་གི་ཐུགས་ལ	in his thoughts	khong gi thugs la
ཁོང་གྲོ	anger	khong gro
ཁོང་གྲོ་ཅན	bitter, angry	khong gro can
ཁོང་གྲོ་བ	indignation	khong gro ba
ཁོང་གློད	to relax, relax deeply from within, relax from within, simply relax, deeply relax	khong glod
ཁོང་གློད་པ	(to be) deeply/ profoundly relaxed	khong glod pa
ཁོང་དགོད	laugh from the depths of one's mind	khong dgod
ཁོང་རྒྱུད	drone	khong rgyud
ཁོང་སྒྲིལ	[arch] metal chain, fetters	khong sgril
ཁོང་ང་ཚོའི་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཡོང་བ	he came up to us	khong nga tsho'i phyogs la yong ba
ཁོང་ངན་ལག་ཡང	bad thoughts hand strikes out	khong ngan lag yang
ཁོང་གཅོང	[arch] 1) have worries; 2) have an internal disease khong nad	khong gcong
ཁོང་ཆུད	1) [well] understood, comprehended, realized; 2) (met suffering	khong chud
ཁོང་ཉིད	he	khong nyid
ཁོང་སྙིང	1) inner essence, heart. 2) internal organs. 3) pitch, core inner essence. 4) secret thought, intention or design. 5) iron chain	khong snying
ཁོང་སྙོམ	[arch] sluggish and lazy	khong snyom
ཁོང་སྙོམས་པ	calm, tranquil	khong snyoms pa
ཁོང་སྟོང	cavity, hollow	khong stong
ཁོང་སྟོང་སྟོང་བྱེད་པ	to feel utter despair	khong stong stong byed pa
ཁོང་སྟོང་མེད	not empty inside	khong stong med
ཁོང་དང་ང	he and myself	khong dang nga
ཁོང་དུ	inside, within	khong du
ཁོང་དུ་བཅུག	to curtail	khong du bcug
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུང	gained in understanding, ("included in your belly", presumably misprint of {khong du chud}	khong du chung
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུང་པ	understand	khong du chung pa
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད	1) vi. to master, comprehend thoroughly. 2) understanding, knowledge. 3) gained in understanding; understand	khong du chud
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	assimilate x {chos thams cad khong du chud} assimilated the entire Dharma	khong du chud pa
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པའི་ལེའུ་གསུམ	three periods of comprehension	khong du chud pa'i le'u gsum
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to comprehend / grasp / understand	khong du chud par dka' ba
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པར་བྱེད་པ	cause understand, lead to clearness	khong du chud par byed pa
ཁོང་དུ་ཆུབ་པ	to understand, comprehend fully, to remember, to keep in memory	khong du chub pa
ཁོང་དུ་བསྡུ་བ	collect in the mind, impress on the memory, learn by heart	khong du bsdu ba
ཁོང་དུ་བསྡུས་པ	included, subsumed, contained	khong du bsdus pa
ཁོང་དུ་མ་ཆུད་པ	not appreciate	khong du ma chud pa
ཁོང་དུ་ཚུད་པ	be anxious, bear in mind, be impressed	khong du tshud pa
ཁོང་དུ་སོང་བ	swallowing	khong du song ba
ཁོང་དུ་བསད	ignore what you hear	khong du bsad
ཁོང་ན	1) in, inside; in your heart. 2) within, among. {shes bya'i khong na}, within / among objects of knowledge	khong na
ཁོང་ན་འཛིན་པར་བྱེད	internally grasp	khong na 'dzin par byed
ཁོང་ན་འཛིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to retain, memorize	khong na 'dzin par byed pa
ཁོང་ན་རེ	he said, she told me	khong na re
ཁོང་ནང	khog pa'i nang	khong nang
ཁོང་ནད	internal disease, tuberculosis	khong nad
ཁོང་ནད་ལྡང་བ	bitter, sharp	khong nad ldang ba
ཁོང་ནས	from my depths, from my heart, out of	khong nas
ཁོང་ནས་རྒྱས་པ	have flowered within	khong nas rgyas pa
ཁོང་ནས་ལྡང་བ	stirred up, agitated, confused, rage, anger, passionate	khong nas ldang ba
ཁོང་ནས་སྡང་ཝ	be angry or indignant 267	khong nas sdang wa
ཁོང་ནས་ཕྱུང	was taken out	khong nas phyung
ཁོང་ནས་མེ་འབར	burning from within/	khong nas me 'bar
ཁོང་ནས་སྨྲ་བ	repeat from memory	khong nas smra ba
ཁོང་ནས་ལྷོད་པ	relax from within	khong nas lhod pa
ཁོང་ནི་མ་ལུས་འགེངས	fill through and through	khong ni ma lus 'gengs
ཁོང་གནག	bad mood/thoughts	khong gnag
ཁོང་རྣམ་པ	him, [single or plural in Amdo]	khong rnam pa
ཁོང་རྣམ་ཚོ	they (h)	khong rnam tsho
ཁོང་པ	intestines, marrow, interior of anything, inside	khong pa
ཁོང་པ་བསྐྱེད	to be undaunted	khong pa bskyed
ཁོང་པ་རྒྱང	fill the mind, instigate	khong pa rgyang
ཁོང་པའི་གཏིང་ནས	from one's depths / heart / innermost feelings	khong pa'i gting nas
ཁོང་པའི་དྲོད	internal bodily fire-heat	khong pa'i drod
ཁོང་པའི་དྲོད་ལ་ཕན	helps digestion (internal heat)	khong pa'i drod la phan
ཁོང་པར་དཀྲིས་པ	cast-off skin [of a serpent], outer skin [of the embryo]	khong par dkris pa
ཁོང་པར་དགྲིས་པ	cast-off skin (of a serpent, outer skin (of the embryo	khong par dgris pa
ཁོང་སྤུན	claustrophobia	khong spun
ཁོང་བར་སོང་བ	swallowing	khong bar song ba
ཁོང་དབུབ	basic set-up	khong dbub
ཁོང་འབྱིན	khog gam, bring out from inside	khong 'byin
ཁོང་འབྲས	[khong pa'i nang gi don snod la 'byung ba'i 'bras nad phyir mi mngon pa] abscess	khong 'bras
ཁོང་མ	house, home	khong ma
ཁོང་མར	butter used in making cakelike offerings to the gods	khong mar
ཁོང་མི་ཁྲོ་བ	restraint from anger	khong mi khro ba
ཁོང་མོ་འབྲོང	female 'brong	khong mo 'brong
ཁོང་སྨན	medicine taken internally	khong sman
ཁོང་སྨན་སེར་པོ	yellow medicine from the intestines, bile, gall	khong sman ser po
ཁོང་ཙིལ	suet	khong tsil
ཁོང་རྩིལ	suet	khong rtsil
ཁོང་རྩུབ	Cruel-minded, nasty, conniving	khong rtsub
ཁོང་ཚང	him, he, they, them (Amdo dialect)	khong tshang
ཁོང་ཚར	fetal lamb skin	khong tshar
ཁོང་ཚོ	them, they, people	khong tsho
ཁོང་ཚོ་འགག་ཞིག	some of the people	khong tsho 'gag zhig
ཁོང་ཚོ་ཡིན	they are	khong tsho yin
ཁོང་ཚོ་ལ་ཡོད	they have	khong tsho la yod
ཁོང་ཚོ་གསར་བརྗེ	revolutionaries	khong tsho gsar brje
ཁོང་ཚོའི	their	khong tsho'i
ཁོང་འཚུད་པ	comprehend	khong 'tshud pa
ཁོང་འཛིན	anger, vindictiveness	khong 'dzin
ཁོང་འཛུམ	1) laugh from the depths of one's mind; 2) clearing the throat	khong 'dzum
ཁོང་འཛུམ་བྱས་པ	puffed out [her] chest, puffed himself up	khong 'dzum byas pa
ཁོང་ཟུར་གསུམ	triangular room	khong zur gsum
ཁོང་ཡངས	profoundly spacious	khong yangs
ཁོང་ཡངས་དཀྱིལ་ཆེ	lighthearted	khong yangs dkyil che
ཁོང་ཡངས་ཆེ	open-minded	khong yangs che
ཁོང་ཡངས་པ	1) spacious, open, vast, broad. 2) perception, understanding	khong yangs pa
ཁོང་ཡིན	he is	khong yin
ཁོང་ཡུས	phan btags drin ngoms	khong yus
ཁོང་རལ	inner rot	khong ral
ཁོང་རུལ	1) internally rotten; 2) person without decency/ knowing how to think	khong rul
ཁོང་ལག	put the hand inside [the body cavity]	khong lag
ཁོང་ལོང	blind by birth	khong long
ཁོང་ཤིང	srog shing, chief essential meaning	khong shing
ཁོང་ཤོར	1) khog pa'i nang du song ba ste byis pas rde'u sogs mid nor byung lta bu; 2) Phyugs la bya bcos byed skabs 'bras bu khong du shor te lus pa	khong shor
ཁོང་ས	with wide base, SA dkyil che ba	khong sa
ཁོང་སུབས	[arch] replenishment, supplement, addition	khong subs
ཁོང་སེང	crevice, hole in a rock or tree, interior space, vacuity, hole, crevasse	khong seng
ཁོང་སོབ	hollow tree	khong sob
ཁོང་སྲན	resistance, patient	khong sran
ཁོང་སྲན་ཅན	those with resistance	khong sran can
ཁོང་སྲིན	intestinal worm	khong srin
ཁོང་གསལ	deeply indwelling lucidity	khong gsal
ཁོང་གསེང	crevice, hole in a rock or tree, interior space, vacuity, hole, crevasse	khong gseng
ཁོང་གསེབ	hollow (of a tree), inner recess	khong gseb
ཁོང་ལྷོད	relax from within mentally relaxed	khong lhod
ཁོང་ལྷོད་པ	deeply relaxed	khong lhod pa
ཁོངས	realm, sphere	khongs
ཁོངས་གྲོལ	understand, assimilate	khongs grol
ཁོངས་ཆ་འདུག	bent, curved, warped	khongs cha 'dug
ཁོངས་གཏོགས	belonging to, part of, included within a type/ category, component, constituent, classification, categorization	khongs gtogs
ཁོངས་གཏོགས་བྱེད	classify, categorize	khongs gtogs byed
ཁོངས་རྟོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	satellite country	khongs rtogs rgyal khab
ཁོངས་དག	between	khongs dag
ཁོངས་དུ་ཆུབ	understand fully	khongs du chub
ཁོངས་ན	in the midst	khongs na
ཁོངས་ནས	among	khongs nas
ཁོངས་ནི་མ་ལུས	through	khongs ni ma lus
ཁོངས་པ	highly injurious, violent, cruel, rough, crooked	khongs pa
ཁོངས་འཕེར	verification, authentication	khongs 'pher
ཁོངས་བྱེད	classify, categorize	khongs byed
ཁོངས་མ	middle, center, the middle part	khongs ma
ཁོངས་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	colonial state	khongs 'dzin rgyal khab
ཁོངས་རིལ	crippled	khongs ril
ཁོངས་སུ	within the sphere of, in the midst	khongs su
ཁོངས་སུ་གཏོགས	be a part of, belong to, be subsumed under [arch] type or category, included within	khongs su gtogs
ཁོངས་སུ་གཏོགས་པ	be a part of, belong to, be subsumed under [arch] type or category, included within	khongs su gtogs pa
ཁོངས་སུ་བདག	be a part of, belong to, be subsumed under [arch] type or category, included within	khongs su bdag
ཁོངས་སུ་འདུ	vi. to be included, encompass, be subsumed	khongs su 'du
སུབསུམེད་ཝིཐིན་ཐེ་ཨབོབེ༹	mentioned three	subsumed within the above
ཁོངས་སུ་སྡུད་པ	bring together, collect abridgement	khongs su sdud pa
ཁོངས་སུ་བྲུབས	to imprison/ to encompass, subsume	khongs su brubs
ཁོངས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	be part of/ included within	khongs su tshud pa
ཁོངས་སུ་འཚུད་པ	go into the midst, understand	khongs su 'tshud pa
ཁོད	1) 'God pa!; 2) exterior, surface, base, external appearance, outward look, even [surface], plain [p {'god pa} manifest, display, set, arrange, establish, create, spread, distribute, write, state, ...	khod
ཁོད་ཁོ་གྲངས	average number	khod kho grangs
ཁོད་ཁོད་གྲངས	average number	khod khod grangs
ཁོད་མཉམ་པ	fine, smooth, refined, pleasant	khod mnyam pa
ཁོད་སྙོམས	level, even	khod snyoms
ཁོད་སྙོམས་པ	1) even, level. 2) equal. 3) average	khod snyoms pa
ཁོད་སྙོམས་པོ	even temper, even surface, uniform distribution	khod snyoms po
ཁོད་སྙོམས་བྱེད	level, equalize	khod snyoms byed
ཁོད་སྙོམས་བཟོ	level, equalize	khod snyoms bzo
ཁོད་བསྙམས་པ	made even, level	khod bsnyams pa
ཁོད་པ	design, SA 'god pa	khod pa
ཁོད་ཚད	level	khod tshad
ཁོད་ཡངས་པོ	wide open, expansive	khod yangs po
ཁོད་ར	in a water mill tsampa 'bab yul gyi skyor ra [support?]	khod ra
ཁོན	[p {'khon] disturb [friendly relations], impede, block, be dissatisfied anger, [create] enmity, grudge, resentment 1) (CH 1 of the spar kha brgyad	khon
ཁོན་གུག་ཏེ་སྡད	to take revenge upon	khon gug te sdad
ཁོན་གུག་ཏེ་སྡད་པ	to sit waiting to take revenge	khon gug te sdad pa
ཁོན་འཇུག་པ	to instigate hatred	khon 'jug pa
ཁོན་སྙོམ	of even temper	khon snyom
ཁོན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	resentment mibp 83, feel rancor, hatred	khon du 'dzin pa
གྲུདགེ	holding, to take rancor, vindictiveness, malice resentfulness. as one	grudge
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ་སུབ	disturbances. See {'khon 'dzin}, {'khon du 'dzin pa}	of the twenty sub
ཁོན་མདོར	brief	khon mdor
ཁོན་པ	anger, grudge, resentment, animosity, enmity, malice, hostility, spite create enmity, disturb [friendly relations], impede, block, be dissatisfied, 1 whose lot is cast in {khon} divination	khon pa
ཁོན་འབར	sting, burning of anger or hatred in the soul	khon 'bar
ཁོན་མི་མངའ་བ	not vindictive, forgiving	khon mi mnga' ba
ཁོན་འཛིན	1) resentment, grudgeholding. 2) vindictive. 3) Syn {'khon 'dzin} 4) hate, rancor	khon 'dzin
ཁོན་འཛིན་པ	feel rancor, hatred	khon 'dzin pa
ཁོན་ཞུགས་པ	causing resentfulness	khon zhugs pa
ཁོན་བཟེད་པ	endure, forbear	khon bzed pa
ཁོན་བཟོད་པ	forbear, endure, forgive	khon bzod pa
ཁོན་ས	(CH 1 of the spar kha brgyad	khon sa
ཁོབ	'gebs pa [!] cover! wrap! fat, heavy, clumsy, uncoordinated, limit, frontier, get rusty [of skills] worn out	khob
ཁོབ་ཁྲོབ	sound caused by the tapping of one thing upon another	khob khrob
ཁོབ་ཏོ	stupid, foolish	khob to
ཁོབ་པོ	clumsy, uncoordinated, limit, frontier, get rusty [of skills], worn out	khob po
ཁོབ་ཤ་ཚ་པོ	person who cannot do work quickly/ right away	khob sha tsha po
ཁོམ	leisure, wallet, leather trunk, felt or hide bag, hide carpet, have time for	khom
ཁོམ་གྱི་མི་འདུག	there is no time/leisure	khom gyi mi 'dug
ཁོམ་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, [have] free time/ spare time, time/ leisure, freedom [moment], the condition of leisure, be enabled, sure	khom pa
ཁོམ་པ་བྱེད	make time for	khom pa byed
ཁོམ་པ་མིན	I have no time, I cannot do it now	khom pa min
ཁོམ་པ་བཟོ	make time for	khom pa bzo
ཁོམ་འབོག	bag usually made of leather for a journey	khom 'bog
ཁོམ་འབོགས	leather trunk	khom 'bogs
ཁོམ་ལོང	leisure, spare time lcogs pa, opportunity to do	khom long
ཁོམ་ལོང་བྱུང་ན	if there is time/a chance/ an opportunity	khom long byung na
ཁོམས	1) time, leisure, free time, freedom. Syn {dal ba}. 2) chance, opportunity. 3) Syn {kham} 4) imp. of {'grem}; time to do something	khoms
ཁོམས་པ	to have the opportunity to	khoms pa
ཁོམས་མེད	un free, leisureless, busy, occupied. Syn {mi khoms pa}	khoms med
ཁོམས་ཡོད་ཙམ་པ	enough time	khoms yod tsam pa
ཁོའི	his, his, their	kho'i
ཁོའི་རྒྱབ་ཏུ་ཉལ་སོང	lay down behind him	kho'i rgyab tu nyal song
ཁོའི་པན	quick time [in music]	kho'i pan
ཁོའི་ཙེ	chopsticks	kho'i tse
ཁོའི་རྩི	chopsticks	kho'i rtsi
ཁོའུ་ཆིན	harmonica	kho'u chin
ཁོའོ་ཀྲང	section chief, department head	kho'o krang
ཁོར	to him	khor
ཁོར་རྒྱ	circumference	khor rgya
ཁོར་བཅས	accompanied by his assembly	khor bcas
ཁོར་ཐིག	line of the winter solstice, tropic of capricorn	khor thig
ཁོར་ཕ	[arch] people in a house/ family	khor pha
ཁོར་མེད	unrepayable; bka' drin 'khor	khor med
མེད	unrepayable kindness	med
ཁོར་མོ	1) continuous, uninterrupted; 2) always surrounding wall, surrounding area/ circle, circuit, circumference, horizon	khor mo
ཁོར་མོ་ཁྱོག་དུ	meandering	khor mo khyog du
ཁོར་མོ་ཁྱོག་དུ་འབབ	meander [river]	khor mo khyog du 'bab
ཁོར་མོ་ཡུག	1) always surrounding wall, surrounding area/ circle, circuit, circumference, horizon; 2) continuously, constant, incessant, continuous, continual; 3) yojana, league (measure of distance in Ancient...	khor mo yug
ཁོར་མོ་ཡུག་ཏུ་བསྐོར་བ	[always] surrounding wall	khor mo yug tu bskor ba
ཁོར་མོར	all around, surrounding	khor mor
ཁོར་མོར་བསྐོར་བ	continuously surrounded	khor mor bskor ba
ཁོར་མོར་སྤྱོད་པ	uninterrupted, continual; 1) to experience continuously. 2) continual or uninterrupted suffering	khor mor spyod pa
ཁོར་མོར་མྱོང་བ	experience continuously	khor mor myong ba
ཁོར་ཚོ	cheek	khor tsho
ཁོར་ཚོས	cheek	khor tshos
ཁོར་ཟུག	[arch] nearby, around, surrounding	khor zug
ཁོར་ཡུག	1) environment, surroundings. 2) all around, horizon, circumference, outer line, surrounding perimeter wall (of mansion); surrounding. 3) continually, day and night, at all times, continuous, in a ...	khor yug
ཝོརལད	system), {lcags ri'i khor yug}, {khor mo yug} 6) {gi lcags ri} Lokaloka, the outer ring or circle of mountains [beyond which is the realm of darkness]; surrounding, encircling/ a ring 7) horizon	world
ཁོར་ཡུག་ཀུན་ཏུ	in the whole circuit, roundabout	khor yug kun tu
ཁོར་ཡུག་གི	all-encompassing; also {'khor yug}	khor yug gi
ཁོར་ཡུག་གི་གླིང་བདུན	the surrounding 7 continents chn	khor yug gi gling bdun
ཁོར་ཡུག་གི་ལྕགས་རི	the surrounding wall of mountains [around Mt. Sumeru and the four continents]	khor yug gi lcags ri
ཁོར་ཡུག་གི་ར་བ	surrounding wall / enclosure	khor yug gi ra ba
ཁོར་ཡུག་གི་རི་བདུན	seven mountains rings	khor yug gi ri bdun
ཁོར་ཡུག་ཆེན་པོ	outer wall of the world, greater horizon from the top of sumeru	khor yug chen po
ཁོར་ཡུག་ཏུ	1) around, all around, surrounding. 2) continuously	khor yug tu
ཁོར་ཡུག་ཕྱོགས་བཞི	all around	khor yug phyogs bzhi
ཁོར་ཡུག་རི	the surrounding wall of mountains [around Mt sumeru and the four continents, as explained in abhidharma, gling bzhi'i phyi rol na lcags las grub pa'i ri ste, de'i phyi'i mtha' skor du dpag tshad 3,...	khor yug ri
ཁོར་ར་ཁོར་ཡུག་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པ	1) go around in circles. 2) to experience continuously	khor ra khor yug tu spyod pa
ཁོར་རེ	sometimes, often, now and then	khor re
ཁོར་ལོ	wheel	khor lo
ཁོར་ས	divine palace's bar khyams [colonnade hall roof projection w skylights] surrounding path/veranda	khor sa
ཁོར་ས་ནང་མ	inner veranda	khor sa nang ma
ཁོར་ས་ཕྱི་མ	outer veranda	khor sa phyi ma
ཁོར་ས་བར་མ	middle veranda	khor sa bar ma
ཁོལ	{p {'khol ba} {'khol},, boil (p {'gel ba load, lay on (p {'khel} decide, settle, fall on, coincide with, trust in, rely on, put on, place on, load, pack on, spin (p {bkol ba} set aside, separate, e...	khol
ཁོལ་རྐྱལ	bag of a bellows	khol rkyal
ཁོལ་ཁོལ	standing on end, rising up [in waves], and moving about, boiling up	khol khol
ཁོལ་འགྲོ་བ	be boiled	khol 'gro ba
ཁོལ་རྒྱུད	servant family/ caste	khol rgyud
ཁོལ་མཆུ	mouth of the bellows	khol mchu
ཁོལ་དུ	in a corner, marginally	khol du
ཁོལ་དུ་འདོན་པ	separate, set aside	khol du 'don pa
ཁོལ་དུ་པྱུང	adapted	khol du pyung
ཁོལ་དུ་ཕྱུང	bring out from, set aside, keep separate	khol du phyung
ཁོལ་དུ་ཕྱུང་བ	abridged, to extract from, has been taken from	khol du phyung ba
ཁོལ་དུ་ཕྱུངས	pf. of {khol du phyung ba}	khol du phyungs
ཁོལ་པ	boiled, boiling, bubbling	khol pa
ཁོལ་པར་རྗེས་སུ	hire for a servant	khol par rjes su
ཁོལ་པར་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	take	khol par rjes su bzung ba
ཁོལ་པོ	servant	khol po
ཁོལ་པོ་སྒོག་སྐྱའི་ཁུར་པོ་ཅན	kind of vegetable medicine applied to wounds and sores	khol po sgog skya'i khur po can
ཁོལ་པོ་བྱས་པ	lto gos khol po byas we slave to find food and clothes	khol po byas pa
ཁོལ་པོར་གྱུར་པ	be enslaved	khol por gyur pa
ཁོལ་པོར་སོང	I have become a slave of food and clothing	khol por song
ཁོལ་པོར་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	to hire as a servant	khol por rjes su 'dzin pa
ཁོལ་ཕྱུང	extract, excerpt	khol phyung
ཁོལ་ཕྱུངས	excerpt, extract	khol phyungs
ཁོལ་བ	tha mi dad par [p 'khol ba]	khol ba
ཁོལ་བའི	ebullient	khol ba'i
ཁོལ་བུ	a small piece. Syn {thor ba}; boyservant, [?] Syn {thor ba}, {lus kyi sha khol bur 'phar ba} the flesh of your body raise into lumps. Small piece, bit, fragment	khol bu
ཁོལ་བུ་ཁོལ་བུར་བཅད	in a limited way, one by one, individually	khol bu khol bur bcad
ཁོལ་བུ་ཐོར་བ	boy-servant	khol bu thor ba
ཁོལ་བུ་བ	encapsulated; pocket-like [?]	khol bu ba
ཁོལ་བུ་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཤ་ཁོལ་བུར་འཕར་བ	the flesh of your body raised into lumps	khol bu lus kyi sha khol bur 'phar ba
ཁོལ་བུར་འཁྲུགས	arise in conflicted against one another	khol bur 'khrugs
ཁོལ་བྲན	slave	khol bran
ཁོལ་མ	window, hole in the wall or roof of a house to serve as window, outlet for the smoke in a roof, anything boiled	khol ma
ཁོལ་མོ	bellows, maid servant, female slave, mowed corn, swath	khol mo
ཁོལ་ཚད	boiling point	khol tshad
ཁོས	imp. of {'gas pa}; 1) by him. 2) imp. of {'gas pa} 3) "{kho}" with the syntactic marker "{sa}"	khos
ཁོས་རྒྱུད	SA khol rgyud, slave family, of mean extraction	khos rgyud
ཁོས་ཆུང	unresourceful	khos chung
ཁོས་པ	wished for	khos pa
ཁོས་ཞགས	a black rope/ lasso	khos zhags
ཁྱ་རྐང་གཉིས	bastard dog, cur, inferior breed of dog	khya rkang gnyis
ཁྱ་གེ་ཁྱོ་གེ	crooked, zigzag, winding, circuitous, not straight, twisted, devious	khya ge khyo ge
ཁྱ་མ	firewood, kindling	khya ma
ཁྱ་འི་ཙེ	running handwriting of the chinese	khya 'i tse
ཁྱ་རི་ཁྱོ་རི	unsteady, precarious, wavering, unstable	khya ri khyo ri
ཁྱ་རེ་ཁྱོ་རེ	unable to walk, unsteady, precarious, wavering, unstable	khya re khyo re
ཁྱ་རེ་ཁྱོ་རེར་འགྲོ་བ	falter	khya re khyo rer 'gro ba
ཁྱ་རེ་ཁྱོར་རེ་བྱེད་པ	sway	khya re khyor re byed pa
ཁྱ་ལེ	handful	khya le
ཁྱག	to be cold	khyag
ཁྱག་ཁྱོག	crooked, zigzag, winding, circuitous, undulating, devious, roundabout	khyag khyog
ཁྱག་གི་ཁྱོག་གི	crooked, zigzag, winding circuitous	khyag gi khyog gi
ཁྱག་ཐོག་ཁར	on the ice	khyag thog khar
ཁྱག་པ	1) (Tha dad pa able to bear, endure, raise up; 2) vehicle; 3) be[come] frozen, freeze	khyag pa
ཁྱག་པ་རྒྱག	become frozen	khyag pa rgyag
ཁྱག་པ་ཆགས	become frozen	khyag pa chags
ཁྱག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great vehicle	khyag pa chen po
ཁྱག་པ་བྱེད	be able to bear/ lift [a burden]	khyag pa byed
ཁྱག་པ་བཟོ	make ice	khyag pa bzo
ཁྱག་པར་འཁོར་བ	frost has formed	khyag par 'khor ba
ཁྱག་ཞུ་ཀོ་ཀོ	mud caused by a thaw, snow water	khyag zhu ko ko
ཁྱག་རུམ	1) ice, floating blocks of ice. 2) glacier	khyag rum
ཁྱག་རོམ	[floating blocks of] ice, glacier	khyag rom
ཁྱག་ལ་སྦྱར་སོང	it is stuck fast by freezing	khyag la sbyar song
ཁྱག་སྲན་ཅན	hardened by frost	khyag sran can
ཁྱག་སྲན་སྲན	hardened by frost	khyag sran sran
ཁྱགས	be/ feel cold, ice, frost, icicle, icy, frozen, freeze, become frozen	khyags
ཁྱགས་སྡོང	icicle	khyags sdong
ཁྱགས་པ	ice, frost, icicle, icy, frozen. Comp. with {'khyags pa}; frozen; ice, the frost, cold	khyags pa
ཁྱགས་པ་རྒྱག	become frozen	khyags pa rgyag
ཁྱགས་པ་ཆགས	ice formed on water	khyags pa chags
ཁྱགས་པ་བཟོ	make ice	khyags pa bzo
ཁྱགས་ཟིལ	frost	khyags zil
ཁྱགས་ཟིལ་ཅན	frosty	khyags zil can
ཁྱགས་རི	iceberg	khyags ri
ཁྱགས་རུམ	[pieces/blocks of] ice, glacier	khyags rum
ཁྱགས་རོམ	[floating blocks of] ice, glacier	khyags rom
ཁྱང་དུ་གསོད་པ	a transgression in the Vinaya	khyang du gsod pa
ཁྱད	1) dissimilar divisions, distinctions of [dualistic] opposites, [degree of] difference; 2) in particular, particulars, particularity, distinctive, special, specifics, [special] quality/ state'/ con...	khyad
ཁྱད་ཀྱིས	slowly, gently	khyad kyis
ཁྱད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱད་ཀྱིས	by degrees, in slow motion	khyad kyis khyad kyis
ཁྱད་ཁོངས	objects/ area pervaded by something	khyad khongs
ཁྱད་ཁྱུད	n. of a number	khyad khyud
ཁྱད་དགའ	special delight, special joy, SA dga' bral, (ordinary judgments as to the varying intensity do not apply any more, between heart, navel, and sex chakras)	khyad dga'
ཁྱད་དགའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	special joy	khyad dga'i ye shes
ཁྱད་མངག	specially assigned	khyad mngag
ཁྱད་མངག་སྐུ་ཚབ	specially assigned representative	khyad mngag sku tshab
ཁྱད་ཅན	particular, distinct	khyad can
ཁྱད་ཅི	1) what's the difference?; 2) there is no division/ difference/ distinction	khyad ci
ཁྱད་ཆེས་པ	over-pervasion	khyad ches pa
ཁྱད་ཆེས་འཕགས་པ	greatly exalted	khyad ches 'phags pa
ཁྱད་ཆོས	1) specialty. 2) distinctive sign. 3) particular quality / property / characteristic, distinguishing special feature / attribute / quality / trait, salient feature. 4) special / extraordinary teach...	khyad chos
ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 aspects of 4 noble truths	khyad chos bcu drug
ཁྱད་ཆོས་ཆེ་བ	distinctive sign	khyad chos che ba
ཁྱད་ཆོས་བརྗོད་པ	describing	khyad chos brjod pa
ཁྱད་ཆོས་སྟོན་པ	show the special dharma/features	khyad chos ston pa
ཁྱད་ཆོས་དྲུག	the six special qualities/ dharmas (of Samantabhadra	khyad chos drug
ཁྱད་ཆོས་དྲུག་ལྡན	endowed with six special attributes/ qualities*	khyad chos drug ldan
ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	four special attributes (of the treatises	khyad chos bzhi
ཁྱད་པར	and the attribute of purposeful composition {dgos pa byed las kyi khyad par}	khyad par
ཁྱད་བརྗོད	specification	khyad brjod
ཁྱད་ཉོན	chief, select, best, most excellent	khyad nyon
ཁྱད་རྟགས	Syn {khyad chos}	khyad rtags
ཁྱད་ཐོན	turning out excellent, particularly good	khyad thon
ཁྱད་ཐོན་པ	better than others shugs nus byung ba	khyad thon pa
ཁྱད་དུ	1) especially, particularly. Syn {khyad par du}. 2) despise	khyad du
ཁྱད་དུ་འཕགས	extraordinary, distinguished	khyad du 'phags
ཁྱད་དུ་འཕགས་པ	Syn {khyad par du 'phags pa}; is distinguished	khyad du 'phags pa
ཁྱད་དུ་འཕགས་པས	[since it] is distinguished especially, noble great, magnificent, excellent	khyad du 'phags pas
ཁྱད་དུ་གསད	to condescend, belittle	khyad du gsad
ཁྱད་དུ་གསད་པ	completely scorned, contempt, disrespect scorn, ignore, disregard, look down upon, treat w contempt, disrespect, depreciate, overlook, belittle, condescend	khyad du gsad pa
ཁྱད་དུ་གསད་མི་བྱེད	not to condescend / belittle [others]	khyad du gsad mi byed
ཁྱད་དུ་གསོད	to ignore, disdain, scorn, show contempt for	khyad du gsod
ཁྱད་དུ་གསོད་པ	scorn, ignore, disregard, look down upon, [treat with] contempt, disrespect, depreciate, overlook, belittle, condescend; despise, unconscientious, unconcerned w propriety	khyad du gsod pa
ཁྱད་དུ་གསོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the transgression of showing contempt. the transgression of disregarding [the precepts], one of {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}	khyad du gsod pa'i ltung byed
ཁྱད་དུ་བསད	ignoring; x {don gnyer chen pos dka' tshegs tsha grang thams cad khyad du bsad de nyan dgos} listen to the teachings, with great effort, ig-	khyad du bsad
ཁྱད་དུ་བསད་པ	to disregard {tsha grang bkres skom sogs dka' ba thams cad khyad du bsad} disregard all hardships, heat, cold, hunger, thirst and so on	khyad du bsad pa
ཁྱད་དོན	special/ preferential action/ project, main sense, advantage	khyad don
ཁྱད་ནོར	special value, chief or principal wealth	khyad nor
ཁྱད་པ	different kinds, peculiarity, difference	khyad pa
ཁྱད་པ་འཕགས	especially noble khyad pang ltos pa pa'i rang bzhin kyi	khyad pa 'phags
རྟགས	nature sign that relates to a qualification	rtags
ཁྱད་པར་ཀྱི་ཆོས	particular quality, special teaching khyad par kyi chos rdzas gzhan 'phen pa'i	khyad par kyi chos
རང་བཞིན་ཀྱི་རྟགས	nature sign which implies a qualification or agent which is another substantial entity khyad par kyi chos rdzas gzhan 'phen pa'i	rang bzhin kyi rtags
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟགས	nature sign which implies [a qualification or agent which is another's substantial entity]	rang bzhin gyi rtags
ཁྱད་པར་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	three distinctive features or mandalas of the mantras [purity of their visualisation {dmigs pa rnam par dag pa} power of their assistance {grogs kyi mthu - and the level of their conduct {spyod pa'...	khyad par dkyil 'khor gsum
ཁྱད་པར་བཀོད་པ	1) in dissimilar way explain, depict; 2) house etc. w special construction, appearance	khyad par bkod pa
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི	/ can - particular/ special	khyad par gyi
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་ཀུན་བཏགས	special imputed [phenomena]	khyad par gyi kun btags
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་སྐལ་ཅན་ཆོས་ཅན	the dharmin having special good fortune	khyad par gyi skal can chos can
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དགའ	SA khyad dga', 1 of dga' ba bzhi	khyad par gyi dga'
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དགའ་བ	extraordinary/ the special joy,	khyad par gyi dga' ba
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དགེ་འདུན	the special sangha 273	khyad par gyi dge 'dun
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	without a special cause	khyad par gyi rgyu med pa
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ་གསུམ	the three special lineages (of the Nyingma school) {bka' babs lung bstan}-) {smon lam dbang bskur}-{mkha' 'gro gtad rgya}	khyad par gyi brgyud pa gsum
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་ཆོས	specific attributes, See {khyad chos}	khyad par gyi chos
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་ཆོས་འབྱོར་པ	the special attributes which are the riches	khyad par gyi chos 'byor pa
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་འཆིང	worldliness	khyad par gyi 'ching
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་འཆིང་བ	worldliness [lit. that which binds particularly]	khyad par gyi 'ching ba
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དམ་ཚིག	the particular samayas	khyad par gyi dam tshig
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དམ་ཚིག་ཉི་ཤུ	according to Anu Yoga; expl	khyad par gyi dam tshig nyi shu
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དུས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four special holy days	khyad par gyi dus chen bzhi
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དོན	special point	khyad par gyi don
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་ལྔ	the five special actions ['dul ba las bshad pa'i spo mgu spyod skabs khyad par gyi spyod pa lnga spang dgos pa ste, spo mgu spyod pa'i gang zag gis dge slong rang bzhin du gnas pa'i bsnyen bkur bye...	khyad par gyi spyod pa lnga
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་དབྱེ་བ	special classification	khyad par gyi dbye ba
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the special riches, special mark, essential feature. Syn {'byor ba bcu}	khyad par gyi 'byor pa
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	specific characteristic, special attribute khyad par gyi mtshan nyid ma mchis pa devoid of particular features	khyad par gyi mtshan nyid
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	unique/ special/ distinguishing trait/ characteristic/ nature	khyad par gyi rang bzhin
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་ལམ	path of special distinctions	khyad par gyi lam
ཁྱད་པར་བགྲོད	separate & graduated	khyad par bgrod
ཁྱད་པར་བརྒྱད	the 8 distinctions	khyad par brgyad
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	extraordinary; unique, unequaled	khyad par can
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	five components	khyad par can gyi phung po lnga
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་གྱི་སྦྱོད་པ་ལྔ	chn	khyad par can gyi sbyod pa lnga
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	having an exce[tional form [among gzugs can gyi rgyan, dpe can don gyi dngos po dma' ba zhig dpe'i dngos po mtho ba zhig gi gzugs can du bkod pa des khyad du thon pa'i bya ba lhag par 'grub par sto...	khyad par can gyi gzugs can
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	which has become excellent	khyad par can du gyur pa
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	which has become excellent	khyad par can du 'gyur ba
ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་རྣམས	special aspects khyad par can rab tu grags pa ma yin pa distinction not known [= {chos can ma grub pa} dharmin not existent/ established; among tshad ma'i rig pa'i bsgrub bya ltar snang, grangs can...	khyad par can rnams
ཁྱད་པར་ཅི་འདུག	whether there is any difference	khyad par ci 'dug
ཁྱད་པར་ཅི་ཡང	no difference between	khyad par ci yang
ཁྱད་པར་ཅི་ཡང་མ་བྱུང་བ	no distinction between	khyad par ci yang ma byung ba
ཁྱད་པར་ཅིར་ཡང་མཚུངས་པ་ལས	that which is the sameness of all distinctions	khyad par cir yang mtshungs pa las
ཁྱད་པར་བཅས་པ	with qualification	khyad par bcas pa
ཁྱད་པར་ཆེ	very special/ distinctive/ different	khyad par che
ཁྱད་པར་ཆེ་བ	highly distinguished	khyad par che ba
ཁྱད་པར་ཆེར་མེད་ཀྱང	though not very different	khyad par cher med kyang
ཁྱད་པར་ཆེས་ཆེར་འཕགས་པར་འགྱུར	will rise to even greater excellence	khyad par ches cher 'phags par 'gyur
ཁྱད་པར་ཆོས་སྐུའི་མ་དལ	the special mandala offering of dharmakaya	khyad par chos sku'i ma dal
ཁྱད་པར་ཆོས་སྐུའི་མན་ཌལ	the special mandala offering of dharmakaya	khyad par chos sku'i man Dal
ཁྱད་པར་ཆོས་ཁམས	special dharma realm/dhatu	khyad par chos khams
ཁྱད་པར་ལྗོང་ཤིང	Vidruma [epith. of Buddha]	khyad par ljong shing
ཁྱད་པར་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན་ལྔ	the five distinction expressing	khyad par brjod pa'i rgyan lnga
ཁྱད་པར་རྟོགས་པ	perceiving/ understanding distinctions/ differences [of bzang ngan dang che chung etc.]	khyad par rtogs pa
ཁྱད་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	distinct	khyad par rtogs pa'i blo gros
ཁྱད་པར་ལྟོས་པ	dependent distinction	khyad par ltos pa
ཁྱད་པར་ལྟོས་པ་པ	involving a qualification khyad par ltos pa pa'i rang bzhin kyi rtags - nature sign that relates to a qualification	khyad par ltos pa pa
ཁྱད་པར་ལྟོས་པ་བ	involving a qualification	khyad par ltos pa ba
ཁྱད་པར་ལྟོས་པ་བའི་རྟགས	the sign of dependent distinction	khyad par ltos pa ba'i rtags
ཁྱད་པར་སྟོན་པ	contrast, differentiate, distinguish	khyad par ston pa
ཁྱད་པར་འཐུང	moon	khyad par 'thung
ཁྱད་པར་དག་པ་པ	free of qualification khyad par dag pa pa'i rang bzhin kyi rtags - nature sign that is free of qualification	khyad par dag pa pa
ཁྱད་པར་དག་པ་བ	not suggesting an agent	khyad par dag pa ba
ཁྱད་པར་དག་པ་བའི་རྟགས	sign of independent distinction, sign that is free of qualification [among rang bzhin gyi rtags yang dag], rang rjod byed kyi sgras sgrub byed kyi dngos po rang gi rang bzhin brjod pa las, rgyu rky...	khyad par dag pa ba'i rtags
ཁྱད་པར་དང་ལྡན	epith of Buddha	khyad par dang ldan
ཁྱད་པར་དང་བྱེ་བྲག	differences and varieties	khyad par dang bye brag
ཁྱད་པར་དམ་ཚིག་བརྒྱད	8 samayas; from Chakrasamvara	khyad par dam tshig brgyad
ཁྱད་པར་དུ	specially, particularly, especially, SA khyad du, chiefly, just like, in particular	khyad par du
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་གྱུར་པ	special	khyad par du gyur pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	excel, be superior	khyad par du 'gyur ba
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འགྲོ	enhance	khyad par du 'gro
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	become superior, excel	khyad par du 'gro ba
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་རྟོག་པ	to conceive of as being superior	khyad par du rtog pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	special realization	khyad par du rtogs pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་བརྟགས་པ	designation qualitative (descriptive designation	khyad par du brtags pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་གདགས་པ	especially labeled	khyad par du gdags pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འདོགས་པ་འཚོལ་བ	investigation of the designation of qualities khyad par du 'dogs pa 'tshol ba nas yang	khyad par du 'dogs pa 'tshol ba
དག་ཡེ་ཤེས	right cognition from the investigation of the designation of qualities	dag ye shes
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འདོན་པ	more than others nus shugs 'don pa	khyad par du 'don pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཔགས་པ	superior, exalted	khyad par du 'pags pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་ཕགས	extraordinary aspects	khyad par du phags
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་ཕགས་པ	to stand over all	khyad par du phags pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས	especially exalted, eminent, exalted as special, distinguished, famous, excellent, superior, particularly sublime, superior, exalted	khyad par du 'phags
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	especially exalted, eminent, exalted as special, distinguished, famous, excellent, superior (through such and such special qualities, particularly sublime, superior, exalted especially noble	khyad par du 'phags pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	especially noble/exalted vehicle	khyad par du 'phags pa'i theg pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་བྱ་བ	made special	khyad par du bya ba
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་བྱས་པ	qualified by, enhanced (by	khyad par du byas pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་བྱེད་པ	discrimination	khyad par du byed pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་དབྱེ་བ	particularized	khyad par du dbye ba
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་བཤད་པ	detailed explanation	khyad par du bshad pa
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་སོད	despises, ridicules, vilifies	khyad par du sod
ཁྱད་པར་དུ་སོད་པར་བྱེད	he scorns	khyad par du sod par byed
ཁྱད་པར་བདུན	the 7 features [by which {thod rgal} is superior to {khregs chod}; {nyams len lag dang 'brel pa'i khyad par}-) {lus gnad rtsa'i khyad par}-) {snang byed sgo'i khyad par}-) {mthong ba dwang po'i khy...	khyad par bdun
ཁྱད་པར་རྡུལ་ཙམ་ཡང་མེད་པ	there exists not the slightest difference between ..	khyad par rdul tsam yang med pa
ཁྱད་པར་གནས	(met the Bodhi tree	khyad par gnas
ཁྱད་པར་རྣམས	the differences	khyad par rnams
ཁྱད་པར་དཔྱོད་པ	analyze the particulars	khyad par dpyod pa
ཁྱད་པར་ཕྱིན་པ	vary	khyad par phyin pa
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས	the most extraordinary	khyad par 'phags
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་བསྟོད	{khyad par 'phags bstod}; [praise of the Buddha by the Indian master mtho btsun grub rjes mdzad pa]	khyad par 'phags bstod
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པ	most eminent Syn {khyad par du 'phags pa} distinguished, noble, eminent, excellent	khyad par 'phags pa
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པའི་འགོག་པ	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {sangs rgyas byang sems rnams kyi shes rab dang snying rje la brten nas srid zhi'i mtha' gnyis la mi gnas pa'i myang 'das kyis bsdus pa'i 'gog pa gang yin pa ste/ sems can tha...	khyad par 'phags pa'i 'gog pa
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	Syn {khyad par du 'phags pa'i theg pa}	khyad par 'phags pa'i theg pa
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པའི་གདན་ཁྲི	the exalted thrones	khyad par 'phags pa'i gdan khri
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	especially noble vidyadhara	khyad par 'phags pa'i rig 'dzin
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པར་འགྱུར	will rise to excellence	khyad par 'phags par 'gyur
ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་སོ	is superior!	khyad par 'phags so
ཁྱད་པར་བ	dissimilar particulars	khyad par ba
ཁྱད་པར་བྱ་བ	distinguished	khyad par bya ba
ཁྱད་པར་བྱུང་བ	differ, turning out excellent, particularly good	khyad par byung ba
ཁྱད་པར་དབྱེ་བ	categorized	khyad par dbye ba
ཁྱད་པར་འབྱེད	{dge ba dang mi dge ba'i khyad par ci zhig gis 'byed na} what are the distinctions between the different types of virtue and nonvirtue?	khyad par 'byed
ཁྱད་པར་འབྱེད་རྒྱུ	to make a difference between	khyad par 'byed rgyu
ཁྱད་པར་འབྱེད་པ	to distinguish	khyad par 'byed pa
ཁྱད་པར་འབྱེད་ཚུལ	how to make the difference / differentiate between	khyad par 'byed tshul
ཁྱད་པར་སྦྱར་བ	to qualify (something) with specific/ distinctive features	khyad par sbyar ba
ཁྱད་པར་མ་མཆིས་སོ	there is no difference	khyad par ma mchis so
ཁྱད་པར་མེད	without difference, without distinction, not special	khyad par med
ཁྱད་པར་མེད་ན	if there is no difference	khyad par med na
ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པ	without difference/ distinction, not special	khyad par med pa
ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པ་ཉིད	lack of difference/ distinction	khyad par med pa nyid
ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པར	without difference	khyad par med par
ཁྱད་པར་འཚམས་པར	in accordance w the particularities	khyad par 'tshams par
ཁྱད་པར་བརྫོད་པའི་རྒྱན	distinction expressing ornaments [among don rgyan, brjod bya yon tan dang, rigs, bya ba, rdzas, rgyu rnams la rang rang gi mtshan nyid ma tshang yang, tsang ba dang khyad med dngos po'i nus pa phul...	khyad par brdzod pa'i rgyan
ཁྱད་པར་གཞན་སྤོང་གི་སྒྲ	phrase's excluding what is other and different [expresing sgra gang zhig rang gis zin par brjod pa'i sgras brjod bya'i khyad chos gzhan rnams rang gi brjod byar spangs pa'i sgo nas ston pa ste, khy...	khyad par gzhan spong gi sgra
ཁྱད་པར་གཞན་སྤོངས	eliminating other characteristics [ggd] khyad par gzhan mi spong ba'i sgra phrase not abandoning what is other and different {khyad par gzhan	khyad par gzhan spongs
ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	four special qualities of the transmitted precepts	khyad par bzhi
ཁྱད་པར་ཡང་དག་ཡེ་ཤེས	right cognition from investigation of the designation of qualities	khyad par yang dag ye shes
ཁྱད་པར་ཡོ་བྱད་ལྔ	five special articles, are the five articles of sadhana materials: the ali-kali; and the articles for ornaments and attires; articles for food and drink; articles for sacred dance; and the articles...	khyad par yo byad lnga
ཁྱད་པར་རབ་ཏུ་གྲགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	unknown distinction	khyad par rab tu grags pa ma yin pa
ཁྱད་པར་རུ་བརྗོད་པ	specify khyad par la gnas pa'i don gzhan bkod pa - presenting another thing with different features [in the reason from the thesis; among don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan, bsgrub bya brjod 'dod kyi dngos ...	khyad par ru brjod pa
ཁྱད་པར་ལ་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	to discern differences	khyad par la rnam par rtog pa
ཁྱད་པར་ལོ་མ	Visakha [former life of Buddha's cousin Devadatta]	khyad par lo ma
ཁྱད་པར་ཤེས་རིག	specific mental faculty	khyad par shes rig
ཁྱད་པར་སུམ	threefold excellence	khyad par sum
ཁྱད་པར་གསུམ	three special qualities (of mahayana	khyad par gsum
ཁྱད་པར་གསུམ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཡོངས་འཛིན	a mentor endowed with three superior qualities	khyad par gsum ldan gyi yongs 'dzin
ཁྱད་ཕྱིན	number 10 000 0003	khyad phyin
ཁྱད་འཕགས	{khyad par du 'phags pa} especially/ remarkably exalted/ superior	khyad 'phags
ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཀྱི	excellence	khyad 'phags kyi
ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	extrarodinary quality/ characteristic/ nature	khyad 'phags kyi rang bzhin
ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཅན	special	khyad 'phags can
ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཕུལ་བྱུང	completely specially noble [among phul byung gi rgyan,ornament saying that th e	khyad 'phags phul byung
ཁྱད་འཕགས་བྱུང་བ	excel	khyad 'phags byung ba
ཁྱད་འཕགས་དབྱངས	"With an excellent voice" [epith of Buddha]	khyad 'phags dbyangs
ཁྱད་འཕགས་རིག་འཛིན	Eminent Vidyadhara. One of the twelve manifestations	khyad 'phags rig 'dzin
ཁྱད་འཕགས་སུ་འདུག་པ	is far superior	khyad 'phags su 'dug pa
ཁྱད་དབང	special/ extraordinary privilege	khyad dbang
ཁྱད་མི་འདུག་པ	no distinction between, no difference between	khyad mi 'dug pa
ཁྱད་མི་སྣང	are quite the same	khyad mi snang
ཁྱད་མེད	same as, identical, not different from, same, no difference, alike, equal, makes no difference, doesn't matter, w/o divisions/ dissimilarity/ distinction	khyad med
ཁྱད་ཙམ	differ as much as	khyad tsam
ཁྱད་རྩལ	special skill	khyad rtsal
ཁྱད་ཚར	amazing	khyad tshar
ཁྱད་ཚར་ཅན	wonderful, curious, strange	khyad tshar can
ཁྱད་མཚན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 points of superiority (of mahayana	khyad mtshan bcu drug
ཁྱད་མཚར	wonderful, marvelous	khyad mtshar
ཁྱད་མཚར་ཅན	1) wonderful, curious. 2) many	khyad mtshar can
ཁྱད་མཚར་པོ	rare, curious, strange, odd, fanciful, fantastic, grotesque, quaint	khyad mtshar po
ཁྱད་འཛིན	discrimination	khyad 'dzin
ཁྱད་འཛིན་བྱེད	discriminate	khyad 'dzin byed
ཁྱད་རྫས	distinctive local product	khyad rdzas
ཁྱད་རྫོགས	special perfection	khyad rdzogs
ཁྱད་ཞུགས	superiority, eminent	khyad zhugs
ཁྱད་ཞུགས་པ	dissimilar byung ba	khyad zhugs pa
ཁྱད་ཞུགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	enhance	khyad zhugs par byed pa
ཁྱད་གཞི	substratum, superior basis, virtues which cannot be found elsewhere	khyad gzhi
ཁྱད་གཞི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་སྦྱར་བ	predication [ggd]	khyad gzhi khyad chos sbyar ba
ཁྱད་གཞི་ཆོས་ཅན	basis of specifics possessing attributes khyad gzhi tha dad la khyad chos mtshungs dang mi mtshungs gnyis kha'i	khyad gzhi chos can
བསྡུས་བརྗོད	different bases of qualities both similar and different distinguishing dharmas bsdus brjod [bsdus brjod kyi rgyan gyi nang tshan zhig ste, dpe'i khyad gzhi khyad chos kyi rang bzhin ji 'dra ba brjo...	bsdus brjod
ཁྱད་གཞི་ཚངས་པ	the god Brahma	khyad gzhi tshangs pa
ཁྱད་ཡོད	different, distinctive, characteristic	khyad yod
ཁྱད་ལས	specialized work, trade, occupation	khyad las
ཁྱད་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ	trade school	khyad las slob grwa
ཁྱད་ཤུགས	distinguished	khyad shugs
ཁྱད་གསད	condescend, look down upon, belittle, depreciate, undermine, criticize, contempt, disrespect, scorn	khyad gsad
ཁྱད་གསད་པ	destroy the importance of a person or thing, despise	khyad gsad pa
ཁྱད་གསོད	completely scorned, scorn, ignore, disregard, look down upon, [treat with] contempt, disrespect, depreciate, overlook, belittle, condescend	khyad gsod
ཁྱད་བསད	completely scorned, look down on, treat w disrespect	khyad bsad
ཁྱད་བསད་ནས	completely scorned	khyad bsad nas
ཁྱད་བསད་བྱེད་པ	overcome, surmount	khyad bsad byed pa
ཁྱད་བསོད	completely scorned, look down on, treat w disrespect	khyad bsod
ཁྱབ་ཁོངས	area, region, field khyab gral lhun grub chen po'i zhing gnas - the all- pervasive great realm of spontaneous presence, all encompassing great spontaneous buddhafield	khyab khongs
ཁྱབ་འགྲེམས	[be] put/ distribute universally	khyab 'grems
ཁྱབ་འགྲོ	1) heavy shower. 2) servant, slave	khyab 'gro
ཁྱབ་རྒྱས	widespread	khyab rgyas
ཁྱབ་རྒྱས་བྱེད	make widespread	khyab rgyas byed
ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས	published, widely proclaimed/ showed	khyab bsgrags
ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས་བརྡ་ཡིག	communique, press release	khyab bsgrags brda yig
ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	issue a notice, announce, prolame, publicize	khyab bsgrags byed
ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་པ	publish, issue	khyab bsgrags byed pa
ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས་དབུ་འཛིན	publicity chairman	khyab bsgrags dbu 'dzin
ཁྱབ་ངེས་པའི་གནད	point of being certain of the pervasion	khyab nges pa'i gnad
ཁྱབ་ཆ	pervasion, work, duty	khyab cha
ཁྱབ་ཆ་ཆུང་བ	small/lesser pervasion, not wide- spread	khyab cha chung ba
ཁྱབ་ཆ་ཆེ་བ	widespread, broad/ greater pervasion	khyab cha che ba
ཁྱབ་ཆུང	not widespread, parochial	khyab chung
ཁྱབ་ཆུང་བ	khyab cha chung ba small/lesser pervasion, not wide-spread	khyab chung ba
ཝིདེ	spread	wide
ཁྱབ་ཆེ་བ	widespread, broad/ greater pervasion	khyab che ba
ཁྱབ་ཆེ་བའི་སྐྱོན	fallacy of a pervasion that is too extensive	khyab che ba'i skyon
ཁྱབ་ཆེ་ཤོས	most widespread	khyab che shos
ཁྱབ་ཆེན	all-pervasive	khyab chen
ཁྱབ་ཆེན་པོ	the great all-pervading	khyab chen po
ཁྱབ་ཆེར	pervasive	khyab cher
ཁྱབ་ཆེས	over extension	khyab ches
ཁྱབ་ཆེས་པ	over-pervasion	khyab ches pa
ཁྱབ་ཆེས་བ	so broad [ggd]	khyab ches ba
ཁྱབ་མཆི	that will do	khyab mchi
ཁྱབ་མཆེད	increase until it is universal, proliferate everywhere	khyab mched
ཁྱབ་མཇུག་ཆེན་པོ	1 of sde brgyad	khyab mjug chen po
ཁྱབ་འཇུག	Vishnu/ All-Pervasive/ Omnipresent/ Omnipotent Lord	Khyab 'jug
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་རྐང་པ	(met Ganges	khyab 'jug rkang pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་རྐང་བ	Ganges river	khyab 'jug rkang ba
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་སྐྱེས	fragrant sandal wood tree	khyab 'jug skyes
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་ཁུ་བོ	Balarama [elder brother of Krishna]	khyab 'jug khu bo
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	Vishnu's disc/ circle	khyab 'jug gi 'khor lo
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་ཆུང་མ	vishnu's consort (goddess sri, Lakshmi	khyab 'jug gi chung ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་འཇུག་པ་བཅུ	the 10 incarnations emanations avatars of Vishnu (1) fish 2) {rus sbal - tortoise 3) wildpig 4) {mi'i seng ge - a human-lion 5) rwa ma tta = the god rama 6) {mi'u thung - a dwarf 7) {nag po - the g...	khyab 'jug gi 'jug pa bcu
ཐུབ་པ	buddha shakyamuni 10) {rigs	thub pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་དུང	Vishnu's conch	khyab 'jug gi dung
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་མདུད་ཐུང	the small knot of Vishnu	khyab 'jug gi mdud thung
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་ཕ	Vishnu's father, Kuvera	khyab 'jug gi pha
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་ཕུ་བོའི་ཆུང་མ	vishnu's elder brother's wife, revati (yaksha princess	khyab 'jug gi phu bo'i chung ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་བུ	Vishnu's son, Kamadeva	khyab 'jug gi bu
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་བུ་ཆུང་མ	Rati, Kamadeva's consort	khyab 'jug gi bu chung ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་མ	the third constellation or lunar mansion [in Indian astronomy]	khyab 'jug gi ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་བཞོན	garuda bird, Vishnu's mount	khyab 'jug gi bzhon
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གི་སྲིང་མོ	Vishnu's sister, goddess Uma	khyab 'jug gi sring mo
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་དགའ་མ	Vishnu's lover	khyab 'jug dga' ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་ཆུང་མ	Vishnu's wife	khyab 'jug chung ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་དྲེགས་པའི་གདོང	aconite	khyab 'jug dregs pa'i gdong
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གནས	the Vishnupada temple in Gaya, heaven	khyab 'jug gnas
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གནོན་པ	ornament of glass	khyab 'jug gnon pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་པ	1) Vaishnava; 2) Vishnu worshippers	khyab 'jug pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བདུན་པོ	the seven symbols / attributes of Vishnu. 1) {'khor lo} disc, circle [particular mystic circle, formed [by lines in the palm). 2) {dung} conch. 3) {be con} 4) {ral gri} 5) {phub zlum} 6) {nam mkha'...	khyab 'jug phyag rgya bdun po
མཁའ་ལྡིང	garuda {phag} boar}	mkha' lding
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་བྱིན	epith of Buddha	khyab 'jug byin
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་སྦས་པ	Hidden Omnipresent One	khyab 'jug sbas pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་མ	the personified energy [shakti] of Vishnu	khyab 'jug ma
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གཞོན་པ	golden eagle which Vishnu rides	khyab 'jug gzhon pa
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་གཟེར	(lit nail of Vishnu epilepsy (r' hu le ne	khyab 'jug gzer
ཁྱབ་འཇུག་ཤིང་རྟ	Garuda bird	khyab 'jug shing rta
ཁྱབ་མཉམ	equal/equivalent pervasion [if x then y, and if y then x, eg: conditioned = impermanent]	khyab mnyam
ཁྱབ་གཏམ	broadcast, statement, news report	khyab gtam
ཁྱབ་གཏམ་འདོན	issue a broadcast/ statement/ news report	khyab gtam 'don
ཁྱབ་གཏམ་སྤེལ	issue a broadcast/ statement/ news report	khyab gtam spel
ཁྱབ་གཏམ་སྤེལ་མཁན	spokesman, PR man	khyab gtam spel mkhan
ཁྱབ་གཏམ་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ	joint broadcast/ statement/ news report	khyab gtam zung sbrel
ཁྱབ་རྟགས	major premise and reason	khyab rtags
ཁྱབ་སྟོབས	All-powerful [epith. of Indra]	khyab stobs
ཁྱབ་མཐའ	fathoming/ boundaries/extremes of pervasion; [rtags gsal dang mtshan mtshon sogs phan tshun khyab pa yod med kyi gnas la mtha' dpyad bkod pa ste, eliminating extremes of yod med &, yin min, eg, bya...	khyab mtha'
ཁྱབ་མཐའ་དཔྱད་བཀོད་པ	examine the boundaries/ extremes of the pervasion	khyab mtha' dpyad bkod pa
ཁྱབ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	to cover, spread over	khyab du 'jug pa
ཁྱབ་གདལ	1) spreading everywhere; 2) primordial presence of sugatagarbha/emptiness in all beings; 3) all- pervading/ -encompassing /-embracing, widespread, general, universal, comprehensive, widespread khya...	khyab gdal
ཁྱབ་གདལ་ཀློང་ཡངས	all-pervasive expanse	khyab gdal klong yangs
ཁྱབ་གདལ་གཏིང་ཕྱིན	1	khyab gdal gting phyin
ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ	continually	khyab gdal du
ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ་གཏོང	extend, spread	khyab gdal du gtong
ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ་གཏོང་བ	popularize	khyab gdal du gtong ba
ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ་སྤེལ་བ	popularize, extend, spread/ disseminate widely	khyab gdal du spel ba
ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ་བཤད	to spread the word around	khyab gdal du bshad
ཁྱབ་གདལ་གནས་པ	to be allencompassing khyab gdal lhun grub chen po'i zhing	khyab gdal gnas pa
ཁྱབ་བདག	encompass within oneself,	khyab bdag
ཁྱབ་བདལ	to entirely pervade	khyab bdal
ཁྱབ་འདོད	1) wish to encompass everything. 2) everyone	khyab 'dod
ཁྱབ་རྡལ	comprehensive, allembracing, SA khyab brdal	khyab rdal
ཁྱབ་ལྡན	sewage, excrement	khyab ldan
ཁྱབ་སྡོད	be propular/ widespread khyab brdal	khyab sdod
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ	all-embracing, all-absorbing,	khyab brdal
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་ཆེན་པོ	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu, totally pervades everything	khyab brdal chen po
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་གཏིང་ཕྱིན	1	khyab brdal gting phyin
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་དུ	continually	khyab brdal du
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་དུ་གཏོང་བ	popularize, extend, spread/ disseminate widely	khyab brdal du gtong ba
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་དུ་སྤེལ་བ	popularize, extend, spread/ disseminate widely	khyab brdal du spel ba
ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་དུ་བཤད	spread the word around	khyab brdal du bshad
ཁྱབ་གནས	(met blood	khyab gnas
ཁྱབ་པ	(Tha dad pa),, prevade, all be, fill, cover [kun tu khyab pa, X yin na Y yin pas khyab]	khyab pa
ཁྱབ་པ་ཁས	You have accepted the pervasion	khyab pa khas
ཁྱབ་པ་ཁོ་ན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonestablishment of solely the pervasion	khyab pa kho na ma grub pa
ཁྱབ་པ་འགལ་བ	contradicting the pervasion	khyab pa 'gal ba
ཁྱབ་པ་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	8 types/doors of pervasion	khyab pa sgo brgyad
ཁྱབ་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to prove the pervasion	khyab pa sgrub pa
ཁྱབ་པ་ངེས་པའི་གནད	the point of being certain of the pervasion	khyab pa nges pa'i gnad
ཁྱབ་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང	extensive and restrictive pervasions	khyab pa che chung
ཁྱབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	all-pervasive	khyab pa chen po
ཁྱབ་པ་འཇལ་པའི་རྟགས་འཛིན་སེམས	the mind apprehending the sign that estimates the pervasion	khyab pa 'jal pa'i rtags 'dzin sems
ཁྱབ་པ་འཇལ་བའི་རྟགས་འཛིན་སེམས	the mind apprehending the reason that evaluates the pervasion	khyab pa 'jal ba'i rtags 'dzin sems
ཁྱབ་པ་བདེ་མཆོག	SA ston pa bcu	khyab pa bde mchog
ཁྱབ་པ་བདེ་མཆོག་འཁོར་ལོ	1 of 10 bon teachers	khyab pa bde mchog 'khor lo
ཁྱབ་པ་འདུ་བྱེད	all-pervasive conditionedness	khyab pa 'du byed
ཁྱབ་པ་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	{zag bcas kyi phung po mtha' dag srid pa nye bar len pa'i rgyu yin pas khyab pa 'du byed kyi sdug bsngal} Since all the defiling aggregates are the causes that perpetuate [samsaric] existence, [the...	khyab pa 'du byed kyi sdug bsngal
ཁྱབ་པ་རྣལ་མ་བཞི	four positive/ authentic pervasions	khyab pa rnal ma bzhi
ཁྱབ་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	mistaken pervasion, perverse pervasion	khyab pa phyin ci log pa
ཁྱབ་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of wrong pervasion	khyab pa phyin ci log pa bzhi
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་གྲུབ	non-establishment of pervasion	khyab pa ma grub
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་ངེས་པ	uncertain pervasion	khyab pa ma nges pa
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་ངེས་སོ	the pervasion is uncertain!	khyab pa ma nges so
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་བྱུང	faulty premise	khyab pa ma byung
ཁྱབ་པ་མ་འབྱུང	"no pervasion!"	khyab pa ma 'byung
ཁྱབ་པ་མེད	not in the strict sense of the word khyab pa tshad mas grub cing rtags khas	khyab pa med
བླངས་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	pervasion that is established through valid cognition and through the asserted proof khyab pa tshad mas grub cing rtags khas	blangs kyis grub pa
ཁྱབ་པ་ཡེ་རྫོགས	all-pervading primordial perfection	khyab pa ye rdzogs
ཁྱབ་པ་ལག་རིང	Khyabpa Lagring	khyab pa lag ring
ཁྱབ་པའི་ལྟོས་གཞི	basis of concomitance, predicate of thesis	khyab pa'i ltos gzhi
ཁྱབ་པའི་སྟོང་ཉིད	pervasive emptiness, an emptiness that pervades [all phenomena]; {khyod 'dod pa'i stong nyid kyi sthul de lta bu de chos thams cha la khab pa'i stong pa nyid dpyis phyin de ma yin pa}, The type of ...	khyab pa'i stong nyid
ཁྱབ་པའི་ཕྱིར	because it logically follows	khyab pa'i phyir
ཁྱབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ	pervasive object,	khyab pa'i dmigs pa
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཅུས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	pervasiveness, One of {zhi gnas kyi dmigs pa bzhi} four meditative objects. of a yogi practicing mental pure essence a meditation {zhig nas}	the focus of all
ཁྱབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ་ཞི	four objects of pervasion, four pervasive objects. 1) {rnam par rtog pa dang bcas pa} conceptual. 2) {rnam par rtog ba med ba}	khyab pa'i dmigs pa zhi
ཁྱབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ་བཞི	four objects of pervasion, four pervasive objects [of shamatha]; 1) {rnam par rtog pa dang bcas pa['i gzugs brnyan]} conceptual 2) {rnam par rtog ba med ba}['i gzugs brnyan]} non-conceptual 3) {dng...	khyab pa'i dmigs pa bzhi
ཁྱབ་པར	all pervading	khyab par
ཁྱབ་པར་གྱི་དགའ་བ	special joy	khyab par gyi dga' ba
ཁྱབ་པར་འགྲོ་བ	to pervade, to expand	khyab par 'gro ba
ཁྱབ་པར་འཇུག་པ	pervade [khyab byed kyis khyab bya'i gnas kun la khyab par 'jug pa ste, dper na tshan dan yin na shing yin pas khyab pa'am, me yin na tsha zhing bsreg pa yin pas khyab pa lta bu, shing ni tsan dan ...	khyab par 'jug pa
ཁྱབ་པར་ཐལ	the pervasion follows consequently!	khyab par thal
ཁྱབ་པར་བརྡལ་བ	all-encompassing, allabsorbing, widely-diffused	khyab par brdal ba
ཁྱབ་པར་བྱ་བ	the pervaded	khyab par bya ba
ཁྱབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	the pervader [sun, herb/drug, existence, being, well-being, prosperity wealth, metabolism, circulation, muscular movement]	khyab par byed pa
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ	widespread, disseminated	khyab spel
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་གཏོང	popularize, extend, spread, carry out, develop, unfold, disseminate	khyab spel gtong
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་གཏོང་བ	popularize, extend, spread, carry out, develop, unfold, disseminate	khyab spel gtong ba
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་དུ་འགྲོ	to be widespread, widely disseminated	khyab spel du 'gro
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་བྱེད	popularize, extend, spread, carry out, develop, unfold, disseminate	khyab spel byed
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་བྱེད་པ	increase pervading everywhere, spread, disseminate	khyab spel byed pa
ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་བྱེད་རྩིས	plan to spread	khyab spel byed rtsis
ཁྱབ་ཕྱིན་པ	diffuse	khyab phyin pa
ཁྱབ་འཕེལ	spread disseminate	khyab 'phel
ཁྱབ་བའི་དམིགས་པ་བཞི	chn	khyab ba'i dmigs pa bzhi
ཁྱབ་བྱ	object pervaded, object of pervasion, the pervaded object	khyab bya
ཁྱབ་བྱ་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འགལ་བ	contradiction between pervader and the pervaded	khyab bya khyab byed kyi 'gal ba
ཁྱབ་བྱེད	pervade[r] [general term covering many instances, eg, vase, is khyab byed of its kinds like gold and clay vase &, rtag pa of ma byas, mi rtag of byas pa]	khyab byed
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང	the pervading wind/ prana/ energy	khyab byed kyi rlung
ལྔ	five life winds of the body)	lnga
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ	pervasive knowledge	khyab byed kyi shes rab
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་འགལ་དམིགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	the sign of a contradictory observance of the pervader	khyab byed 'gal dmigs kyi rtags
དམིགས་པ	'gal ba'i khyab bya dmigs pa bzhi'i nang gses, gnod byed kyi khyab bya rtags su bkod nas, gnod bya'i khyab bya 'gog pa ste, dper na, tsan dan gyi mes khyab par non pa'i gzhir chos can, kha ba'i reg...	dmigs pa
དམིགས་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	the consequence of an observance of a pervaded object that contradicts the pervader, the consequence of a notion of a pervaded object that contradicts the pervader khyab byed dang 'gal ba'i khyab bya	dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur
ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence of observation of a cause that contradicts the pervader khyab byed dang 'gal ba'i rgyu dmigs pa'i	thal 'gyur
པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence of observation/notion of a nature that contradicts the pervader khyab byed dang 'gal ba'i 'bras bu dmigs	pa'i thal 'gyur
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་དང་འགལ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	a nature that contradicts the pervader	khyab byed dang 'gal ba'i rang bzhin
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	pervasion [of the thesis gsal ba by the reason] [rtags de bsgrub bya'i chos kyi mthun phyogs sam, mi mthun phyogs gang rung dang gnyis ka la khyab par yod pa the syllogism is valid only if the reas...	khyab byed du 'jug pa
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Vajrasattva, the pervader [of the five families]	khyab byed rdo rje sems dpa'
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་འབྱུང་བ་ལྔ	the pervading five elements khyab byed 'byung ba lnga phrag lnga ste	khyab byed 'byung ba lnga
ཉེར་ལྔ	chn	nyer lnga
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་མ་དམིགས་པ	nonobservation of a pervader {rig pa rang gsal mal}	khyab byed ma dmigs pa
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	the sign	khyab byed ma dmigs pa'i rtags
ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	observation of a pervader [snang rung gi 'brel zla ma dmigspa'i rtags kyi nang gses, bdag gcig gi 'brel ba la brten nas'gog byed khyab byed ma dmigs pa'i rtags kyis dgag bya khyab byabkag pa, dper ...	of non
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་མ་དམིགས་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	the	khyab byed ma dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur
ཅོནསེqཨུཨེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	observation of a pervader	consequence of non
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་མ་དམིགས་བ	nonobservation of an effect	khyab byed ma dmigs ba
ཁྱབ་བྱེད་རླུང	pervasive prana / wind, One of {rtsa ba'i rlung lnga}	khyab byed rlung
ཁྱབ་མཛད་པ	carry out	khyab mdzad pa
ཁྱབ་མཛད་རེ་སྐོང	thorough-going fulfillment of wishes	khyab mdzad re skong
ཁྱབ་འཛིན	to envelope	khyab 'dzin
ཁྱབ་རྫོགས	all-pervasive and complete	khyab rdzogs
ཁྱབ་རྫོགས་པ	all-pervasive and complete	khyab rdzogs pa
ཁྱབ་ལོག	the pervasion is opposite	khyab log
ཁྱབ་སོང་བ	all-sufficing, all-covering	khyab song ba
ཁྱབ་གསལ	sun	khyab gsal
ཁྱམ	gallery, yard, court yard, rafter, truss, impluvium, colonnade, portico, entrance, hall, beam	khyam
ཁྱམ་ཁྱོམ	trembling	khyam khyom
ཁྱམ་ཁྱོམ་དུ་གྱོ	[world] trembling	khyam khyom du gyo
ཁྱམ་མེ་ཁྱོམ་མེ	[world] trembling	khyam me khyom me
ཁྱམས	yard, courtyard, gallery, open, uncovered place, open passage or ground around a monastery or temple, court, hall	khyams
ཁྱམས་གྲ	monastery compound, courtyard	khyams gra
ཁྱམས་ཆེན	huge hall	khyams chen
ཁྱམས་སྟོད	fence/ wall/ enclosure surrounding a [court]yard/ gallery 'am khang pa'i tshoms [dkyil ma middle] sbug [cavity?] side phyogs	khyams stod
ཁྱམས་མཐོངས	opening to the sky in the middle of a building, skylight, opening to sky in middle of building	khyams mthongs
ཁྱམས་མདོ་བ	native of Chamdo	khyams mdo ba
ཁྱམས་པ	SA khyar ba, khyal pa, 'khyams pa	khyams pa
ཁྱམས་སྨད	lower courtyard	khyams smad
ཁྱམས་ར	building's courtyard surrounded by a fanece/ wall 283	khyams ra
ཁྱམས་རྭ	courtyard [fence/ wall]	khyams rwa
ཁྱར	(not in DAS)	khyar
ཁྱར་ཁྱོར	unable to walk, unsteady, precarious, wavering, unstable	khyar khyor
ཁྱར་ཁྱོར་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	go unsteadily, precariously, waveringly, unstably	khyar khyor du phyin pa
ཁྱར་ཁྱོར་བྱས་ཏེ་འགྲོ་བ	stagger	khyar khyor byas te 'gro ba
ཁྱར་ཁྱོར་བྱེད་པ	totter	khyar khyor byed pa
ཁྱར་མཁན	[arch] yul 'khyar pa [wander? unsteady?]	khyar mkhan
ཁྱར་རི་ཁྱོར་རི	weak, feeble, unstable	khyar ri khyor ri
ཁྱར་རེ་ཁྱར་རེ	unsteady, precarious, unstable	khyar re khyar re
ཁྱལ	(not in DAS)	khyal
ཁྱལ་གྱབ་མཁན	swimmer	khyal gyab mkhan
ཁྱས་འཆེ་བ	pretend	khyas 'che ba
ཁྱི	dog [syn: skye ba'i cha can, grong gi gcan gzan, 'dod dbang, rdo rje'i mjug ma can, nor srung, rdzig sang ba, sha khyi, seng ge'i rigs, gso byed]; 2) 1 of the animals in the 12 year cycle	khyi
ཁྱི་དཀར་དུང་གི་ཐག་པ་ཅན	vegetable possessing medicinal properties for healing wounds and sores	khyi dkar dung gi thag pa can
ཁྱི་བཀྱེ་བ	hound on	khyi bkye ba
ཁྱི་རྐུན	1) thieving dog; 2) Khyi la smod pa'i tshig	khyi rkun
ཁྱི་ལྐུང	place and valley in tibet	khyi lkung
ཁྱི་སྐད	barking of a dog	khyi skad
ཁྱི་སྐད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	bark	khyi skad kyi sgra
ཁྱི་སྐད་ལྷང་ལྷང་པ	clear barking of dogs	khyi skad lhang lhang pa
ཁྱི་ཁ་རྡོ་ལེན	dog's mouth receiving a ston [project la kha gtad 'jal mkhan re dgos pa'i dpe]	khyi kha rdo len
ཁྱི་ཁང	dog kennel	khyi khang
ཁྱི་ཁར་རུས་བཟུང	dog's mout holding a bone [see as very important, not able to get one's mind off it]	khyi khar rus bzung
ཁྱི་ཁྱོ	Khyi Khyo: fabulous country in E Asia	khyi khyo
ཁྱི་འཁྱམས	stray dog	khyi 'khyams
ཁྱི་འཁྱར	stray/ ownerless dog	khyi 'khyar
ཁྱི་གུ	puppy, leaf bud	khyi gu
ཁྱི་གྲལ་བསྙེགས	take your place among dogs; one of {bud bsnyegs thob gsum}	khyi gral bsnyegs
ཁྱི་གླེན	a silly dog	khyi glen
ཁྱི་གླེན་བཞིན་དུ	like a dazed dog; x {rnam shes bar dor khyi glen bzhin du 'khyams} Your consciousness, already wandering in the intermediate state like a dazed dog	khyi glen bzhin du
ཁྱི་གློ་སྤྱང་སྙིང	dogs lungs, wolf's heart, cruel abnd feirce	khyi glo spyang snying
ཁྱི་མགོ་མ	Dog-head [one of the 28 {dbang phyug ma}	khyi mgo ma
ཁྱི་འགོག	dog stopping/ staying or rmug [lethargy?] tu mi 'jug pa	khyi 'gog
ཁྱི་འགྱེད	urge/ sic a dog	khyi 'gyed
ཁྱི་རྒན	slang. derogatory explicative similar to "pig" [lit. old dog]	khyi rgan
ཁྱི་རྒན་རྒྱ་བོ	khyi rgan 'gram pa'i spu mdog rgya bo, slang derogatory explicative similar to "pig" (lit old dog	khyi rgan rgya bo
ཁྱི་རྒན་བཏང་བ་བཞིན	like a thieving dog in flight	khyi rgan btang ba bzhin
ཁྱི་རྒན་མེ་གོ་རྒྱུགས་ཤིག	US dogs get out!	khyi rgan me go rgyugs shig
ཁྱི་སྒོག	garlic/ leeks growing on mt	khyi sgog
ཁྱི་ངན	cur	khyi ngan
ཁྱི་ངར་བ	bad/ vicious / angry dog	khyi ngar ba
ཁྱི་རྔ་སྤྱང་ཚེར	mdzo mo tree	khyi rnga spyang tsher
ཁྱི་རྔོ	za phrug langs nas spu byi ba'i dog disease	khyi rngo
ཁྱི་འཆང་བ	bark	khyi 'chang ba
ཁྱི་ཉར་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus lha sa'i mi tsho'i khyim du khyi nyar chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin ???	khyi nyar 'khrol 'dzin
ཁྱི་ཉལ་རྒྱུག་སློང	encourage a sleeping dog to run [useless gzhan la snyad rko'i gtam]	khyi nyal rgyug slong
ཁྱི་ཉལ་རྒྱུག་ལྷོང	rouse to action one who is silent, cause a sleeping dog to get up by poking him with a stick	khyi nyal rgyug lhong
ཁྱི་བཏགས་པ	chained the dog	khyi btags pa
ཁྱི་ལྟར་འཚོ་བ	"a dog's life," servitude	khyi ltar 'tsho ba
ཁྱི་ལྟར་ཟུག་པ	yap	khyi ltar zug pa
ཁྱི་སྟོན་ཇོ་ཡེ	a buddhist teacher of tibet	khyi ston jo ye
ཁྱི་སྟོམ	stray dog	khyi stom
ཁྱི་ཐག	leash	khyi thag
ཁྱི་ཐུ	vicious, biting dog	khyi thu
ཁྱི་ཐུ་པོ	wild/ vicious, biting dog	khyi thu po
ཁྱི་ཐུལ	dog-skin	khyi thul
ཁྱི་དང་ཁྱི་རིགས	canine	khyi dang khyi rigs
ཁྱི་དམ	(dog's seal), mark burnt in, stigma	khyi dam
ཁྱི་དུག	dog poison disease, rabies	khyi dug
ཁྱི་མདུད་པ	pairing of dogs	khyi mdud pa
ཁྱི་འདྲ	dog-like	khyi 'dra
ཁྱི་ལྡོམ	ownerless dog	khyi ldom
ཁྱི་སྡོམ	stray dog	khyi sdom
ཁྱི་པལ་ཇོར	blitum virgatam	khyi pal jor
ཁྱི་པུལ	dog kennel, dog house	khyi pul
ཁྱི་སྤྱང	fox, jackal	khyi spyang
ཁྱི་སྤྱང་ཁ་འགྲིལ	talk like/ agree w dogs and wolves	khyi spyang kha 'gril
ཁྱི་སྤྱང་ཁ་མཐུན	talk like/ agree w dogs and wolves	khyi spyang kha mthun
ཁྱི་སྤྱང་ཚ	wolf-like predator of dog family, fierce, sharp rdzi ??	khyi spyang tsha
ཁྱི་སྤྱང་ལག་སྦྲེལ	mi ngan kha mthun gyi dpe	khyi spyang lag sbrel
ཁྱི་སྤྲང	dog[s] and beggar[s]	khyi sprang
ཁྱི་ཕག་གི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	the yogic discipline of dogs and pigs	khyi phag gi brtul zhugs
ཁྱི་ཕུར	stake for tying a dog	khyi phur
ཁྱི་ཕྱུགས	dogs and cattle	khyi phyugs
ཁྱི་ཕྲུག	puppy	khyi phrug
ཁྱི་བྲུ	vicious & biting dog	khyi bru
ཁྱི་འབིགས	hedgehog	khyi 'bigs
ཁྱི་རྦད་པ	to catch or hurt them sic dog on someone/thing	khyi rbad pa
ཁྱི་སྦྱང	jackal	khyi sbyang
ཁྱི་སྦྱང་ངན་སྦྲེལ	jackal/ wolf dogalliance, alliance between two evils	khyi sbyang ngan sbrel
ཁྱི་སྦྲང	flea (dog's fly)	khyi sbrang
ཁྱི་མ	W channel at the heart	khyi ma
ཁྱི་མིག་བཞི	four eyed dog [w yellow spots over its eyes]	khyi mig bzhi
ཁྱི་མེ་ཏོག	an herb 284	khyi me tog
ཁྱི་མོ	bitch, female dog	khyi mo
ཁྱི་མོ་སྣ་གསང་མ	name of square in lde'u 'phrul	khyi mo sna gsang ma
ཁྱི་མོ་ཚང་མ	pregnant bitch	khyi mo tshang ma
ཁྱི་མྱོང	rabid dog, canine madness, hydrophobia	khyi myong
ཁྱི་རྨུག་ཡོང	the dog will bite	khyi rmug yong
ཁྱི་སྨྱོན	mad dog khyi smyon gyis so rgyab pa'i smyo nang rabies	khyi smyon
ཁྱི་སྨྱོན་པ	mad dog	khyi smyon pa
ཁྱི་ཚང	dog house, kennel	khyi tshang
ཁྱི་འཚེད	baker, seller of parched rice	khyi 'tshed
ཁྱི་རྫི	dog feeder	khyi rdzi
ཁྱི་གཞོང	trough for feeding dogs and other animals	khyi gzhong
ཁྱི་ཟན	n. of a low caste	khyi zan
ཁྱི་ཟུག་ཁྱིས་སྐད་རྒྱག་པ	'Grul pa slebs na khyi zug yong	khyi zug khyis skad rgyag pa
ཁྱི་ཟུག་པ	distemper in dogs	khyi zug pa
ཁྱི་ཟླ	9th month, Libra	khyi zla
ཁྱི་གཟིག	dog's gaze	khyi gzig
ཁྱི་ཡན	bdag po med pa'i khyi 'khyams	khyi yan
ཁྱི་ཡན་པ	dog without a master	khyi yan pa
ཁྱི་ཡི་སྤྱོད་པ	habits of the dog	khyi yi spyod pa
ཁྱི་ར	chase, hunting	khyi ra
ཁྱི་ར་མགོན་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ	the hunter Gönpo Dorje, a disciple of Milarepa	khyi ra mgon po rdo rje
ཁྱི་ར་རྒྱག	hunt	khyi ra rgyag
ཁྱི་ར་པ	huntsman, one who kills wild animals by chasing them with dogs, tribe in nepal who live by hunting	khyi ra pa
ཁྱི་ར་བ	hunter	khyi ra ba
ཁྱི་རིགས་ཤིག	bulldog	khyi rigs shig
ཁྱི་རོ	1) dead dog; 2) khyi la gshe ba'i tshig [you are insulting the dog or calling someone a dog?]	khyi ro
ཁྱི་ལ་ཝ་རི	tree acacia catechu, terra japonica	khyi la wa ri
ཁྱི་ལས་ལོད	worse than a dog, very low	khyi las lod
ཁྱི་ལི་ལི	squall, heaving waves	khyi li li
ཁྱི་ལོ	dog year [one of the 12 year cycle]	khyi lo
ཁྱི་ལོ་པ	person born in the dog year	khyi lo pa
ཁྱི་ཤིག	flea	khyi shig
ཁྱི་ཤིང	"dog's tree" med. [tree which cures diseases of the lungs and the eyes); sweet, body heat neautral, by its power, lud pa gyen du 'dren]	khyi shing
ཁྱི་ཤིང་དམན་པ	lesser "dog's tree} med.	khyi shing dman pa
ཁྱི་སེ་མཁལ་ནག	black dog with a strip of white hairs on its back	khyi se mkhal nag
ཁྱི་སོ་རྒྱབ་པ	bite of a dog	khyi so rgyab pa
ཁྱི་གསར	young dog	khyi gsar
ཁྱི་ལྷན་བཞིན་དུ	like a starved dog	khyi lhan bzhin du
ཁྱིག	bind, SA 'khyig pa	khyig
ཁྱིགས	'khyig pa! fettered	khyigs
ཁྱིད	span	khyid
ཁྱིད་འཁྲིད	instruction, teaching	khyid 'khrid
ཁྱིམ	1) house [permanent living place gtan du chags pa'i gnas]; 2) wife; 3) the zodiac, a sign of the zodiac (Griha) gza' skar rnams la 'dzin par byed pa'i las kyis phan 'dogs pas khyim zer Nyi khyim; 4...	khyim
ཁྱིམ་སྐྱེས	native, locally born	khyim skyes
ཁྱིམ་སྐྱོང	gain[er of] livelihood, look[er] after the house	khyim skyong
ཁྱིམ་སྐྱོང་བ	gain livelihood, look after the house	khyim skyong ba
ཁྱིམ་ཁང	family, household	khyim khang
ཁྱིམ་ཁོལ	one belonging or related to a family, domestic slave, eunuch	khyim khol
ཁྱིམ་ཁོལ་སུང་མ	eunuch	khyim khol sung ma
ཁྱིམ་འཁོར	family/ household members	khyim 'khor
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ཀུན་དགའ	garden attached to a house	khyim gyi kun dga'
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ	yard, park, pleasure garden	khyim gyi kun dga' ra ba
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the zodiac circle of houses [sun's path amng the stars]	khyim gyi 'khor lo
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གོ་རེ་ལོང	[arch] khyim gad dar byed pa	khyim gyi go re long
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གོ་ལ	the band of the zodiac, gola of the houses [path of sun moon and planets among the stars]	khyim gyi go la
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ངལ་རྩོལ	household chores	khyim gyi ngal rtsol
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་རྗེ་དཔོན	owner of a house	khyim gyi rje dpon
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གཏོར་ཟ	grey species of duck	khyim gyi gtor za
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ཐབ་འདོན་པ	performances of the home hearth	khyim gyi thab 'don pa
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་དག་ར	fence/wall in front of a house	khyim gyi dag ra
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་བདག་པོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 periods of the day [two hr periods w names corresponding to 12 animals of year cycle]	khyim gyi bdag po bcu gnyis
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་རྡོ	(met tshon rtsi coming from the mountains	khyim gyi rdo
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ནོར་བུ	(met lamp	khyim gyi nor bu
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གནས་པ	a householder, layman	khyim gyi gnas pa
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གཙུག་ཕུད་ཅན	(met chicken	khyim gyi gtsug phud can
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ཚལ	yard, park, pleasure garden	khyim gyi tshal
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ཞོར་ལམ	domestic sideoccupatiopn khyim gyi g.yabs - veranda, portico	khyim gyi zhor lam
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་རིག་པ	worldly [fields of] knowledge/ skill 285	khyim gyi rig pa
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་ས་ཙིས	household, housekeeping, farming	khyim gyi sa tsis
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་སོ་ནམ	housekeeping, management of domestic concerns, husbandry	khyim gyi so nam
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་སོ་ཚིས	household's means of making a living	khyim gyi so tshis
ཁྱིམ་གྱི་མསུག་ཕུད་ཅན	domestic fowl, poultry, chickens	khyim gyi msug phud can
ཁྱིམ་གྱིས་སྟོངས་པ	emptied house	khyim gyis stongs pa
ཁྱིམ་གྲངས	1) count of houe[hold]s/ families, population; 2) for the 12 houses # Aries = 0, Taurus = 1 etc.	khyim grangs
ཁྱིམ་གྲོགས	household/ family living together	khyim grogs
ཁྱིམ་གྲོང	village of houses/ families	khyim grong
ཁྱིམ་འགྲམ་དུ	at the home of	khyim 'gram du
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད	family/ clan [lineage], tribe	khyim rgyud
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	tribal society	khyim rgyud kyi spyi tshogs
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	family relation	khyim rgyud kyi 'brel ba
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ལུགས་སྲོལ	tribal system	khyim rgyud kyi lugs srol
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད་རིང་ལུགས	tribalism	khyim rgyud ring lugs
ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད་ལམ་ལུགས	tribal system	khyim rgyud lam lugs
ཁྱིམ་སྔགས་པ	lay mantrika, tantric lay practitioner	khyim sngags pa
ཁྱིམ་ཅན	the sun and planets	khyim can
ཁྱིམ་བཅུ་གཉིས	zodiac, 12 signs of zodiac (lug, glang, 'khrig pa, ka rka ta, seng ge, bu mo, srang, sdig pa, gzhu, chu srin, bum pa, nya)	khyim bcu gnyis
ཁྱིམ་ཆ	household prospects	khyim cha
ཁྱིམ་ཆགས	gzhis chags pa	khyim chags
ཁྱིམ་ཆས	furniture	khyim chas
ཁྱིམ་ཉ	whale. "fish of the size of a house" [n. of a mythological fish]; "fish of the size of a house" [n. of a mythological fish]; whale	khyim nya
ཁྱིམ་ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	perfect ideal of a lay subject of a king	khyim nye ba'i rin po che
ཁྱིམ་ལྟག	back of a house	khyim ltag
ཁྱིམ་སྟོང་པ	empty house	khyim stong pa
ཁྱིམ་སྟོངས་པ	emptied house, scattered family	khyim stongs pa
ཁྱིམ་བརྟག་པའི་དཔྱད	means of examining whether [family household's sa dbyibs is good or bad [prob geomancy]	khyim brtag pa'i dpyad
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ	1) householder life, family, layman. 2) married couple, husband, wife	khyim thab
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་འཁྲི་བ	conjugal embrace	khyim thab kyi 'khri ba
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	wife true to a husband	khyim thab kyi brtul zhugs
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་སྒྲིག་པ	set oneself up as a house holder	khyim thab sgrig pa
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ཏུ་ཁྱེར	{bud med 'di khyod kyi khyim thab tu khyer cig} you must take that woman into your own household	khyim thab tu khyer
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་སྤངས་པ	abandoning the life of a householder	khyim thab spangs pa
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་བླངས	accept the life of a householder	khyim thab blangs
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་འབོར་བ	forsake a husband or wife	khyim thab 'bor ba
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་མ	chung ma'am khyim bdag mo	khyim thab ma
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་མོ	wife, housewife	khyim thab mo
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ལ་སློང	give away a woman for a wife	khyim thab la slong
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ལ་སློང་བ	give a marriage	khyim thab la slong ba
ཁྱིམ་ཐབ་ལས་མ་འཕྱོ་བ	devoted wife	khyim thab las ma 'phyo ba
ཁྱིམ་ཐབས	Syn {khyim thab}; husband	khyim thabs
ཁྱིམ་ཐབས་བྱས	married	khyim thabs byas
ཁྱིམ་ཐོར་ནོར་བརླག	loss of family and bankruptcy	khyim thor nor brlag
ཁྱིམ་དག་སྤངས	renounced the house holder's life	khyim dag spangs
ཁྱིམ་དང་ཁྱིམ་ན	house to house, each in his house	khyim dang khyim na
ཁྱིམ་དུ	at home, in the house	khyim du
ཁྱིམ་དུ་བསྐུར	sent it back to her home	khyim du bskur
ཁྱིམ་དུ་འགྲོ	{da bdag khyim du 'gro zhus pa} said, “Please, let me go home now.”	khyim du 'gro
ཁྱིམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཉི་ཤུ	chn	khyim du 'gro ba nyi shu
ཁྱིམ་དུ་ཉལ	swallow	khyim du nyal
ཁྱིམ་དུ་འདུག་པ་དགུ	chn	khyim du 'dug pa dgu
ཁྱིམ་དུ་བོས་ནས	invited to his household	khyim du bos nas
ཁྱིམ་དུ་བྱོན་པ	{dga' bo'i khyim du byon pa} went to Nanda's house	khyim du byon pa
ཁྱིམ་དུ་བྲོས་ནས་ཕྱིན	ran back to his house	khyim du bros nas phyin
ཁྱིམ་དུ་ཚུད	locked in the home	khyim du tshud
ཁྱིམ་དུ་ལོག་པར	returned home	khyim du log par
ཁྱིམ་དུད	family, household	khyim dud
ཁྱིམ་དོན	household affairs	khyim don
ཁྱིམ་བདག	wealthy layman	khyim bdag
ཁྱིམ་བདག་གི་བུ	son of a householder	khyim bdag gi bu
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དང་བཅས་པ	and her husband	khyim bdag dang bcas pa
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དྲག་ཤུལ་ཅན	rough uncultured householder khyim bdag drag shul can gyis zhus pa see {'phags pa dkon mchog brtsegs pa chen po'i chos kyi rnam grangs le'u stong phrag brgya pa las le'u bcu dgu pa ste khyim bdag d...	khyim bdag drag shul can
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དཔལ་སྐྱེས	Palkye, an elderly householder disciple of the Buddha	khyim bdag dpal skyes
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དཔལ་སྦས་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of the householder Shrigupta	khyim bdag dpal sbas kyi rtogs brjod
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དཔལ་སྦས་ཞེས	the householder Shrigupta	khyim bdag dpal sbas zhes
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དཔལ་སྦྱིན	Sridatta [householder devoted to buddha]	khyim bdag dpal sbyin
ཁྱིམ་བདག་སྤོང་ཉམས	to wear lay clothes [refers to gelong]	khyim bdag spong nyams
ཁྱིམ་བདག་མ	housewife	khyim bdag ma
ཁྱིམ་བདག་མོ	mi tshang gi bdag mo	khyim bdag mo
ཁྱིམ་བདག་རབ་བཟང་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	a householder named Subhadra	khyim bdag rab bzang zhes bya ba
ཁྱིམ་བདག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	jewel of stewards	khyim bdag rin po che
ཁྱིམ་འདོད	I wish I were at home	khyim 'dod
ཁྱིམ་རྡགས་སྤོང་ཉམས	wear lay clothes (gelong	khyim rdags spong nyams
ཁྱིམ་ལྡན	(met chameleon	khyim ldan
ཁྱིམ་སྡོད་བུད་མེད	housewife	khyim sdod bud med
ཁྱིམ་ན	at home	khyim na
ཁྱིམ་ན་གནས་པ	layman, 'one who dwells in a house, householder / lay person	khyim na gnas pa
ཁྱིམ་ན་གནས་པའི་རྟེན་ཅན	having the support of living in a house	khyim na gnas pa'i rten can
ཁྱིམ་ན་གནས་པའི་ཚེ	when you were a layman	khyim na gnas pa'i tshe
ཁྱིམ་ན་ལྷོད	relaxing at home	khyim na lhod
ཁྱིམ་ནང	at home, in one's family house	khyim nang
ཁྱིམ་ནས་འབྱུང	1 of lo ma lnga, renunciation	khyim nas 'byung
ཁྱིམ་ནས་འབྱུང་བ	to enter into a religious community, leaf of the Bodhi Tree	khyim nas 'byung ba
ཁྱིམ་ནོར	family property/ wealth	khyim nor
ཁྱིམ་གནས	worldly life, householder's life	khyim gnas
ཁྱིམ་གནས་སྐྱེ་མ	house wife	khyim gnas skye ma
ཁྱིམ་གནས་སྐྱེད་མ	(met mother	khyim gnas skyed ma
ཁྱིམ་པ	1) layman. 2) householder, married man. 3) laity. a householder	khyim pa
ཁྱིམ་པ་སྐྱ་བོ	lay people	khyim pa skya bo
ཁྱིམ་པ་རྟག་པའི་དཔྱད	science of discerning the fit place for the residence	khyim pa rtag pa'i dpyad
ཁྱིམ་པ་བརྟག་པའི་དཔྱད	householders' mtshan nyid brtag dpyad byed pa'i thabs	khyim pa brtag pa'i dpyad
ཁྱིམ་པ་དང་རབ་ཏུ་བྱང་བ	laity and clergy, lay people and monastics	khyim pa dang rab tu byang ba
ཁྱིམ་པ་དང་རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ	householders and renunciates	khyim pa dang rab tu byung ba
ཁྱིམ་པ་མི་ནག	lay people	khyim pa mi nag
ཁྱིམ་པ་མོ	1) female householder; 2) (met bride/ daughter in law	khyim pa mo
ཁྱིམ་པ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ	offending / causing the scorn of lay people	khyim pa sun 'byin pa
ཁྱིམ་པའི་ཆ་ལུགས	wearing laymen's clothes	khyim pa'i cha lugs
ཁྱིམ་པའི་ཆོས	householders activities	khyim pa'i chos
ཁྱིམ་པའི་སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ	Three vows of the householders. 1) {bsnyen gnas kyi sdom ba} one day vow. 2) {dge bsnyen pha'i sdom pa} layman's vow. 3) {dge bsnyen ma'i sdom pa} laywoman's vow	khyim pa'i sdom pa gsum
ཁྱིམ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ཅན	he who betakes to the life of practitioner	khyim pa'i spyod pa can
ཁྱིམ་པའི་མཚན་རྟགས	lay people's/householders' rtags mtshan	khyim pa'i mtshan rtags
ཁྱིམ་པའི་ལས	householder's/ lay people's work	khyim pa'i las
ཁྱིམ་པའི་ལུས་སུ་མ་གྱུར་ཅིག	do not revert to the life of a layman	khyim pa'i lus su ma gyur cig
ཁྱིམ་པར་གནས	living as a house holder, one of the {gnas bzhi} four ways of living	khyim par gnas
ཁྱིམ་པར་གནས་པ	living as a householder	khyim par gnas pa
ཁྱིམ་དཔོན	1) king or minister's treasurer lta bu; 2) Bza' dpon nam house owner	khyim dpon
ཁྱིམ་སྤངས	renunciant, mendicant	khyim spangs
ཁྱིམ་སྤོ	move (house	khyim spo
ཁྱིམ་སྤོ་བ	change residence/ house, migrate	khyim spo ba
ཁྱིམ་ཕུགས	[arch] thief, mouse, etc. making a hole in a house wall	khyim phugs
ཁྱིམ་ཕུང	[arch] quarrel within a household	khyim phung
ཁྱིམ་ཕུབ	roof constructed like a canopy, living in divided families	khyim phub
ཁྱིམ་ཕུབ་པ	khyim gzhis gsar du brgyab pa'am khyim bzung ba,...Kho bos khyim phub nas lo mang po phyin song	khyim phub pa
ཁྱིམ་ཕཡབ༹	depending on lag rtsar and gnyen tshan examining good and bad etc. mo phyva [B"n mo divination]	khyim phyva
ཁྱིམ་ཕྱྭ	divination in relation to the family, phywa of the family	khyim phywa
ཁྱིམ་འཕུབ་པ	set up or erect a house	khyim 'phub pa
ཁྱིམ་འཕོ	sun and moon moving from house to house	khyim 'pho
ཁྱིམ་འཕོའི་གཟའ་ཡང་ཟེར	planet of the day of the week when the sun goes into individual houses	khyim 'pho'i gza' yang zer
ཁྱིམ་བྱ	1) domestic fowl, poultry, chicken [syn: rkang pa'i mtshon bya can dang, dga' byed, sngabar sgra sgrog tho rengs skad sgrog bde legs can, nor bu'imgrin can, pags pa'i gtsug phud can, 'phel byed, my...	khyim bya
ཁྱིམ་བྱ་ཕོ	rooster	khyim bya pho
ཁྱིམ་བྱ་མཚལ་ལུ	very large species of fowl called sde pho mtshal lu, bile of this bird cures poison	khyim bya mtshal lu
ཁྱིམ་བྱའི་སྤྱོད་པ	the four habits of a cock [a) {tho rangs ldang} crowing before dawn b) {'thab pa dang ldan} always fighting c) {gnyen lag zas snyoms par byed} sharing food equally with one's friends d) {mo la rab ...	khyim bya'i spyod pa
ཁྱིམ་འབིགས་པ	thief, mouse, etc. making a hole in a house wall	khyim 'bigs pa
ཁྱིམ་འབྱོར་པ	rich family	khyim 'byor pa
ཁྱིམ་སྦུག་ན	the inner part of the house	khyim sbug na
ཁྱིམ་སྦྱོང	house cleaner [arch] mouse	khyim sbyong
ཁྱིམ་མ	back channel	khyim ma
ཁྱིམ་མི	person in a house	khyim mi
ཁྱིམ་མིང	family name, surname	khyim ming
ཁྱིམ་མེད་པ	renunciant, mendicant, homeless, servants	khyim med pa
ཁྱིམ་གཙོ	chief of the householders	khyim gtso
ཁྱིམ་གཙོ་བུད་མེད	woman chief of the householders	khyim gtso bud med
ཁྱིམ་ཚང	families	khyim tshang
ཁྱིམ་ཚང་གི	domestic	khyim tshang gi
ཁྱིམ་ཚང་གི་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	social origin	khyim tshang gi 'byung khungs
ཁྱིམ་ཚང་མི་གྲངས	population	khyim tshang mi grangs
ཁྱིམ་ཚིས	families' means of livelihood	khyim tshis
ཁྱིམ་ཚུགས	families' gzhi'am means of livelihood	khyim tshugs
ཁྱིམ་ཚོ	families' means of livelihood or of supporting itself	khyim tsho
ཁྱིམ་ཚོ་ཟིན་པ	have accomplished a means of livelihood	khyim tsho zin pa
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས	neighbors	khyim mtshes
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་ཀྱི་མི	person belonging to the family	khyim mtshes kyi mi
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	friendly neigboring country	khyim mtshes rgyal khab
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་དུད་པ	neighborhood	khyim mtshes dud pa
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་དུད་པ་བཏང་འབྲེལ	nearness of residence	khyim mtshes dud pa btang 'brel
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་པ	male neighbor	khyim mtshes pa
ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་མ	female neighbor	khyim mtshes ma
ཁྱིམ་འཚོ	1) taking care of the needs of a household; 2) house and livelihood	khyim 'tsho
ཁྱིམ་འཛིན	household	khyim 'dzin
ཁྱིམ་འཛིན་མ	wife, mistress of the house	khyim 'dzin ma
ཁྱིམ་ཞག	1/30 of time for sun to pass over zodiac, time, zodiacal day	khyim zhag
ཐེ་མོནཐ	long period of sun traversing 1 house {khyim}	the month
ཁྱིམ་ཞག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	1 house/ zodiacal year of 360 zodiacal days	khyim zhag dkyil 'khor
ཁྱིམ་ཞག་དུས་ཀྱི་རྟག་ལོངས	time of 1 zodiacal day	khyim zhag dus kyi rtag longs
ཁྱིམ་ཞེན་ཅན	bride	khyim zhen can
ཁྱིམ་གཞན་དུ་ཕྱིན	moved to another house	khyim gzhan du phyin
ཁྱིམ་གཞི	property, wealth	khyim gzhi
ཁྱིམ་གཞི་སྟོང་པ	bankrupt	khyim gzhi stong pa
ཁྱིམ་གཞི་ལྡན	rich, possessing property	khyim gzhi ldan
ཁྱིམ་གཞིས	home and property [where one always lives]	khyim gzhis
ཁྱིམ་གཞིས་ཆགས	settle down	khyim gzhis chags
ཁྱིམ་གཞིས་ཐོར	become bankrupt	khyim gzhis thor
ཁྱིམ་གཞིས་བཙུགས	develop, establish	khyim gzhis btsugs
ཁྱིམ་གཞིས་གསར་དུ་བརྒྱབ་པ	newly adopt the householders life	khyim gzhis gsar du brgyab pa
ཁྱིམ་ཟླ	zodiacal month	khyim zla
ཁྱིམ་ཟླའི་དུས་ཀྱི་རྟག་ལོངས	zodiacal month rtag longs [gza'i rang 'khor four song zin pa'i 'phro na gza'[7] gnas su two dang, chu tshod 26 chu srang 21 dbugs 1 dbugs gcig ri ro'i cha 10, rim kha' ri'i tsha 573, 'dod cha gnyis...	khyim zla'i dus kyi rtag longs
ཁྱིམ་གཟའ	planet of the day of the week when the sun goes into individual houses	khyim gza'
ཁྱིམ་བཟང	palace	khyim bzang
ཁྱིམ་བཟའ་ཚང	your family	khyim bza' tshang
ཁྱིམ་རོག	neighbor	khyim rog
ཁྱིམ་ལ	at home	khyim la
ཁྱིམ་ལ་ངེས་འབྱུང་བསྐྱེད	renounce the household and worldly life	khyim la nges 'byung bskyed
ཁྱིམ་ལ་ཞེན་པ	lover of home, one attached to his home, homesick	khyim la zhen pa
ཁྱིམ་ལ་འོང་བ	get married, be given in marriage on the female part	khyim la 'ong ba
ཁྱིམ་ལ་ལོག་པ	to go / return / come home	khyim la log pa
ཁྱིམ་ལས	families outside and domestic work, housework, household affairs	khyim las
ཁྱིམ་ལས་བྱེད	do domestic work/ housework, take care of household affairs	khyim las byed
ཁྱིམ་ལོ	a zodiacal year [the time it takes the sun to traverse the 12 zodiacs nyi ma rang 'gros kyis rgyu skar 'khor lo rdzogs par spyod pa la brten nas sa la dus bzhi 'khor tshul gyi khyim bcu gnyis rdzog...	khyim lo
ཁྱིམ་ཤར	rise of a constellation	khyim shar
ཁྱིམ་ས	sweepings	khyim sa
ཁྱིམ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ	Syn {khyim pa sun 'byin pa}	khyim sun 'byin pa
ཁྱིམ་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the infraction of offending the laity [among the dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum, bsgo ba las gyur pa'i lhag ma bzhi, bslab pa dang 'gal ba'i ngan spyod kyis offending the laity, ma dad pa byed pa'i tshe...	khyim sun 'byin pa'i lhag ma
ཁྱིམ་སོ	homesick	khyim so
ཁྱིམ་སོ་འཛིན་པ	1) keep/maintain [er of] a family; 3) go as a bride	khyim so 'dzin pa
ཁྱིམ་སོ་ཟིན་ཐུབ	were able to make an independent living	khyim so zin thub
ཁྱིམ་སོ་སོར་བསྒོ་བ	one who creates dissensions in a family	khyim so sor bsgo ba
ཁྱིམ་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན	the precept set set of houses and so forth [among the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, the 6th set of 10: zan gcod du 'jug pa'i ltung byed, me la reg pa'i ltung byed, 'dun pa phyir bsgyur ba'i ltun...	khyim sogs kyi sde tshan
ཁྱིམ་སྲ་ཚོ	family able to live independently [make a living?]	khyim sra tsho
ཁྱིམ་སྲིད་དམས་པ	[arch] harm/ diminishing of the family wealth	khyim srid dmas pa
ཁྱིམ་སྲུང	guard/ defend one's home	khyim srung
ཁྱིམ་སྲུང་རྒྱལ་སྐྱོབ	defend home and country	khyim srung rgyal skyob
ཁྱིམ་སླེབ	entering the houses [having placed the enterline in the center of the S continent, sun into the 12 houses 1st entering chu tshod: lug, tha skar, chu tshod 0; glang, smin drug, chu tshod 15; 'khrig ...	khyim sleb
ཁྱིམ་གསར	bride	khyim gsar
ཁྱིམ་གསར་མ	bride, wife	khyim gsar ma
ཁྱིམ་གསོ་བ	1) maintain/ nourish/ support a household; 2) produce a means of livelihood for a house/ family	khyim gso ba
ཁྱིམ་གསོ་བྱ་རིགས	chicken	khyim gso bya rigs
ཁྱིམ་གསོ་སེམས་ཅན	draught animal	khyim gso sems can
ཁྱིམ་ལྷ	house spirit	khyim lha
ཁྱིའི་གདོང་ཅན	one with a dog's face, a bon god	khyi'i gdong can
ཁྱིའི་ཟླ	pack of dogs	khyi'i zla
ཁྱིའི་འུར་ཁ	dog's bark	khyi'i 'ur kha
ཁྱིའུ	shang gshag pa &, implement straightening tool kyi shing bu	khyi'u
ཁྱིའུ་ཀ	remainder of anything cut or chopped off	khyi'u ka
ཁྱིའུ་ཟླ	7th month	khyi'u zla
ཁྱིར	[arch] chang khyir ram chang rdza ??? chang crock?	khyir
ཁྱིར་བ	hunter	khyir ba
ཁྱིལ	[see {ye re khyil ler dgyes bzhin du};	khyil
ཁྱིལ་ཁྱིལ་བ	gleaming, glistening	khyil khyil ba
ཁྱིལ་གྱིས་སྡོད	quickly [decide to and be ready to] stay	khyil gyis sdod
ཁྱིལ་ལེར	wreathed khyil ler wreathed, twisted, wove/woven, curled, meandered, twined, snaked, spiraled, coiled, entwined, wound	khyil ler
ཁྱིས	by a dog	khyis
ཁྱིས་ངའི་རྐང་པ་ཕུག་སོང	the dog has bitten my foot	khyis nga'i rkang pa phug song
ཁྱིས་མཇུག་མ་སྣར་བ	dog wagging its tail	khyis mjug ma snar ba
ཁྱུ	1) horde, herd, group, flock, pride, host. 2) company, troop. {skyes bu'i khyu mchog} the leaders of men. Syn {skru}; herd, flock/ company (society); herd, pack	khyu
ཁྱུ་སྐད	crowd's bustle/ hubbub	khyu skad
ཁྱུ་སྐྱོང་བ	keep a flock, tend a herd, company, band, gang, troop	khyu skyong ba
ཁྱུ་ཁྱུག	quick way of going	khyu khyug
ཁྱུ་རྒྱུག	stampede	khyu rgyug
ཁྱུ་སྒྲིག	arrange in/ form a herd	khyu sgrig
ཁྱུ་བསྒྲིགས	sems can rigs mthun so so'i tshogs gral bsdebs pa	khyu bsgrigs
ཁྱུ་མཆོག	1) leader, a chief, a king. 2) best in a herd or group, best of all, the best of all [beings], [Syn the Buddha]. 3) lordly bull, bull. 4) Vrisha, the fifteenth year of {rab byung, lcags mo sbrul} t...	khyu mchog
མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	...Mi'i nang gi khyu mchog dam pa; 2) (met chu rta lo	mchog tu gyur pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་རྐང་པ	the eighth month of the Tibetan year	khyu mchog rkang pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་བགྲོད་པ	bull-crosser, kind of swallow	khyu mchog bgrod pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་རྒྱལ་མཚན	name of mahadeva	khyu mchog rgyal mtshan
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་ཅན	8th month [middle month of autumn]	khyu mchog can
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་ལྟོ་བ	w a belly resembling that of a bull 289	khyu mchog lto ba
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་ལྡན་པ	8th month [middle month of autumn]	khyu mchog ldan pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་སྡིག་ཅན་མ	epith of the goddess Uma	khyu mchog sdig can ma
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་མིག་དམར	(met buffalo	khyu mchog mig dmar
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་མིག་སྨན	Shiva	khyu mchog mig sman
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་མཚན་པ	"One with the signs of a bull" [epith. of Shiva]	khyu mchog mtshan pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་གཞོན་པ	young bull [epithet of Shiva]	khyu mchog gzhon pa
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་ཟླ་བ	Syn {khrums zla}	khyu mchog zla ba
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་སེར་སྐྱ	3rd month	khyu mchog ser skya
ཁྱུ་ལྟོ་བ	with a belly resembling that of a bull	khyu lto ba
ཁྱུ་དང་ཁྱུ་བྱས་ནས	forming in herds/ groups/ crowds	khyu dang khyu byas nas
ཁྱུ་འདུས་པ	collected in a herd or flock, heap, multitude, aggregate	khyu 'dus pa
ཁྱུ་འདྲེས	flock[ing] together	khyu 'dres
ཁྱུ་ལྡན	tamarisk	khyu ldan
ཁྱུ་ནས་འབུད་པ	exclude from the flock or company	khyu nas 'bud pa
ཁྱུ་སྣ་འདྲེན་པ	go before, take the lead of a troop or a flock	khyu sna 'dren pa
ཁྱུ་པ	uncastrated yak	khyu pa
ཁྱུ་བྱུག	cuckoo, large bird of sweet note, SA khu byug	khyu byug
ཁྱུ་བྱུག་ཀུ་ཧུ	note of black indian cuckoo	khyu byug ku hu
ཁྱུ་བྱུག་མེ་ཏོག	rhododendron	khyu byug me tog
ཁྱུ་མ	(SK)[kshuma corruption] jute hemp flax flax ?sesame	khyu ma
ཁྱུ་རྩེད	mang po 'dus te mnyam du gar rtsed rtse ba	khyu rtsed
ཁྱུ་ཚན	[arch] rgyu stobs chen	khyu tshan
ཁྱུ་ཚོགས	herd	khyu tshogs
ཁྱུ་འུར་རྒྱུག་པ	1) crowd's bustle/ hubbub; 2) wince start shy	khyu 'ur rgyug pa
ཁྱུ་ཡི་མགོན་པོ	(met leader of the herd, bull	khyu yi mgon po
ཁྱུ་ཡི་བདག	(met leader of the herd, bull khyu g.yag - uncastrated yak	khyu yi bdag
ཁྱུ་རེ་འགྲོགས་མང་པོ	many companions in each flock	khyu re 'grogs mang po
ཁྱུ་གསགས་པ	collect or gather in flocks	khyu gsags pa
ཁྱུག	cursive script	khyug
ཁྱུག་སྐྱོང	herd animals	khyug skyong
ཁྱུག་ཁྱུག	zigzag flash of a lightning, flashing. Syn {khyugs se khyug}	khyug khyug
ཁྱུག་ཁྱུག་རྒྱུ་བའི་གློག	quick flashing lightning	khyug khyug rgyu ba'i glog
ཁྱུག་གིས་འགྲོ	go quickly	khyug gis 'gro
ཁྱུག་གེ	ex {mtha' dbus bral bas khyug ge ste khyab brdal tu yod pa}	khyug ge
ཁྱུག་གེ་བ	bright, lucent, [going] quickly	khyug ge ba
ཁྱུག་གྱུག	flash of lightning	khyug gyug
ཁྱུག་པ	quick	khyug pa
ཁྱུག་པོ	ebullient, swift	khyug po
ཁྱུག་བྱེད	herd animals	khyug byed
ཁྱུག་མིད་པ	swallow	khyug mid pa
ཁྱུག་ཙམ	awhile, little, little while	khyug tsam
ཁྱུག་ཙམ་རིང	momentary	khyug tsam ring
ཁྱུགས	shimmering	khyugs
ཁྱུགས་ཙམ	for a short time	khyugs tsam
ཁྱུགས་སེ་ཁྱུག	1) flashing. Syn {khyug khyug}; move about, dazzle and flash 2) swift(ly) and sure(ly)	khyugs se khyug
ཁྱུགས་སེ་ཁྱུགས	moving about [dazzle and flash]	khyugs se khyugs
ཁྱུགས་སེ་བ	dazzling	khyugs se ba
ཁྱུང	1) [deity in the form of a] garuda; 2) large bird; 3) sacred lord; 4) a clan; 5) herd, multitude	khyung
ཁྱུང་དཀར	mdzo	khyung dkar
ཁྱུང་དཀར་མོ	White Garuda	khyung dkar mo
ཁྱུང་སྐྱུག	garuda vomit gem stone [found in T, used as jewelry in Khams, said to have been brought from Mt Meru by garuda and vomited]	khyung skyug
ཁྱུང་སྐྱེས	(met emerald? a gem stone	khyung skyes
ཁྱུང་ཁྲ	Variegated Garuda, Multicolored Garudas	khyung khra
ཁྱུང་ག་ཡག	bull-yak (notes usually white, not castrated, powerful	khyung ga yag
ཁྱུང་གི་ཚྭ་ཚྭ	"garuda sparks"; tiny garuda emanations	khyung gi tshwa tshwa
ཁྱུང་གི་ཝེར་མ་ཀླུ་འདུལ	wer ma of the khyung that subjugate the klu khyung gi rigs las skyes pa'i bya skyes bu'i	khyung gi wer ma klu 'dul
དབྱིབས་ཅན	a man who was of the lineage of the garudas	dbyibs can
ཁྱུང་དགོན	Khyung Gön, in Domey. Garuda Monastery	khyung dgon
ཁྱུང་མགོ་མ	Garuda-head Lady {stobs chen dmar mo} [one of the 28 {dbang phyug ma}	khyung mgo ma
ཁྱུང་སྒོ	garuda heads; one of {'bras bu'i rta babs brgyad}	khyung sgo
ཁྱུང་བརྒྱད	eight khyung, male mtsho, a kind of pure knot in ju thig	khyung brgyad
ཁྱུང་སྔོན་སྐྱེས	1) dawn; 2) born before garuda; 3) Aruna, charioteer of Surya (sun	khyung sngon skyes
ཁྱུང་ཆེན	Great Garuda, n of tantra	khyung chen
ཁྱུང་ཆེན་སྐེ་རིང	crane [bird]	khyung chen ske ring
ཁྱུང་ཆེན་མཁའ་ལྡིང	nt. The Great Garuda Soaring in Space	khyung chen mkha' lding
ཁྱུང་ཆེན་མཁའ་ལྡིང་གི་རྒྱུད	tantra of the great soaring garuda	khyung chen mkha' lding gi rgyud
ཁྱུང་ཆེན་ལྡིང་བ	1 of 5 earlier translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, earlier translated sems sde tantra, 1 of snga 'gyur lnga	khyung chen lding ba
ཁྱུང་ཆེན་རྩལ་རྫོགས	already fullfledged garuda in the egg	khyung chen rtsal rdzogs
ཁྱུང་བསྟོད	devotional piece addressed to garuda	khyung bstod
ཁྱུང་ཐུར་ཅན	coat of mail	khyung thur can
ཁྱུང་སྡེར	1) bya khyung gi sder mo; 2) med tree, garuda-claw, a medicinal	khyung sder
ཁྱུང་སྡེར་དཀར་པོ	med. tree [like bya pho'i phyi sder, by its power dug tshad sel]	khyung sder dkar po
ཁྱུང་སྡེར་དཀར་མོ	white species of medicinal root which neutralizes snake poison	khyung sder dkar mo
ཁྱུང་སྡེར་སྨག་པོ	dark brown species of medicinal root which neutralizes snake poison	khyung sder smag po
ཁྱུང་སྡེར་སྨུག་པོ	brown garuda claw, med. tree	khyung sder smug po
ཁྱུང་ནག	black garuda, 8-legged lion	khyung nag
ཁྱུང་ནག་ཁྱུང་ཁྲ	Black and multicolored garudas	khyung nag khyung khra
ཁྱུང་ནག་ཤ་ཟན	sgra bla named black carnivorous khyung	khyung nag sha zan
ཁྱུང་པོ	many collected or assembled together	khyung po
ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན	{khyung po steng chen rdzong} NE Tibet	khyung po steng chen
ཁྱུང་པོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Khyungpo Naljor; See. {mkhas grub khyung po rnal 'byor}	khyung po rnal 'byor
ཅེནཏུརཡ	Khyungpo Naljor, who founded the Shangpa Kagyü lineage in Tibet	century
ཁྱུང་པོ་སེར་ཙ	{khyung po ser tsa} region	khyung po ser tsa
ཁྱུང་དཔྱད	small round basket of reed	khyung dpyad
ཁྱུང་ཕྲུག	garuda birdling	khyung phrug
ཁྱུང་མོ	female eagle	khyung mo
ཁྱུང་རྩེ་དགོན	n. of a monastery in the valley of Panam in Tsang	khyung rtse dgon
ཁྱུང་རིལ	large cylindrical basket	khyung ril
ཁྱུང་རུ	garuda's horn	khyung ru
ཁྱུང་རུ་དེང་ངེ་བྱ་བ་ཡིན་པ	uprightness, head and shoulders, dignity, crown	khyung ru deng nge bya ba yin pa
ཁྱུང་རེ་དེང་དངེ	uprightness, head and shoulders, dignity, crown	khyung re deng dnge
ཁྱུང་རེ་དེང་དངེ་བྱ་བ་ཡིན་པ	keep his garuda's horns	khyung re deng dnge bya ba yin pa
ཁྱུང་ལུང་དགོན	Khyung Lung Monastery, near Kailash	khyung lung dgon
ཁྱུང་ལུང་དངུལ་མཁར	Silver Palace of the Garuda Valley	khyung lung dngul mkhar
ཁྱུང་ཤོག་ཅན	early morning which advances with the wings of an eagle	khyung shog can
ཁྱུང་གཤོག	garuda wings khyung gshog g.yas par khro bo lnga bcu	khyung gshog
ང་དྲུག	chn khyung gshog g.yon par khro mo drug cu - chn	nga drug
ཁྱུང་སེང་འདུས	1) lion and garuda fucking; 2) 8 legged lion	khyung seng 'dus
ཁྱུང་སེར་བཀའ་གདམས་ལུགས	the kadampa yellow garuda	khyung ser bka' gdams lugs
ཁྱུང་གསེར་མིག་འཁྱིལ་བ	form of a presentation of Garuda, eagle	khyung gser mig 'khyil ba
ཁྱུད	worship, adore [p 'khyud] embraced, copulated	khyud
ཁྱུད་འཁོར	full complete, entire, a full round	khyud 'khor
ཁྱུད་འཁོར་ལོ	full complete, entire year	khyud 'khor lo
ཁྱུད་འཁོར་ཧི་ལོ་གཅིག	a full year	khyud 'khor hi lo gcig
ཁྱུད་གང	a hand length	khyud gang
ཁྱུད་པ	worship, adore	khyud pa
ཁྱུད་མོ	equipments of a horse, rim of vessel	khyud mo
ཁྱུད་མོ་དོ	two hand lengths	khyud mo do
ཁྱུར་ཁྱུར	gya gyu'i 'gro stangs,...Nya rnams chu nang du khyur khyur 'gro,...Dug sbrul rtsva khrod du khyur khyur rgyug	khyur khyur
ཁྱུར་ཁྱུར་རྒྱུག	back and forth/ curvy motion [fish/ snake/ river]	khyur khyur rgyug
ཁྱུར་དགའ	(met nomad	khyur dga'
ཁྱུར་པོ	entire, full, whole 291	khyur po
ཁྱུར་པོར་མིད་པ	swallow/ gulp food without chewing	khyur por mid pa
ཁྱུར་མིད	swallow/ gulp food [w/o chewing] annex, engulf	khyur mid
ཁྱུར་མིད་གཏོང་བ	swallow, gulp down, gulp, engulf	khyur mid gtong ba
ཁྱུར་མིད་བཏང་བ	swallow/ gulp food without chewing, annexed	khyur mid btang ba
ཁྱུར་མིད་པ	to swallow / eat food(without chewing)	khyur mid pa
ཁྱུར་མིད་བྱས་པ	swallowed	khyur mid byas pa
ཁྱུར་མིད་བྱེད་པ	swallow, gulp down, devour	khyur mid byed pa
ཁྱུར་མེད་པ	swallow/ gulp food without chewing	khyur med pa
ཁྱུས	line, row	khyus
ཁྱུས་ལྡིང་བ	fly around in flocks	khyus lding ba
ཁྱེ	gain. Syn {khe}	khye
ཁྱེ་ཆུང	1) infant, small child; 2) [arch] small profit	khye chung
ཁྱེ་ཉེན	[arch] profit and lose, gain and risk	khye nyen
ཁྱེ་པ	[arch] profit making seller/ business-person	khye pa
ཁྱེ་སྤོགས	[arch] profit	khye spogs
ཁྱེ་བོ	children	khye bo
ཁྱེ་བོགས་མཁན	[arch] profit making merchant	khye bogs mkhan
ཁྱེ་མ	khye ma skin disease	khye ma
ཁྱེ་མ་ཁྱེ	[arch] rgyal pham dang, khe gun	khye ma khye
ཁྱེ་མ་མེད་པར	evenly	khye ma med par
ཁྱེ་ར	chasing, hunting (of a single huntsman)	khye ra
ཁྱེ་བཤང་མཚོ	{khye bshang lake [dpal mgon rdzong, rtsa skya gtsang po N side]	khye bshang mtsho
ཁྱེད	thou, you, you	khyed
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི	your, yours	khyed kyi
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ	following your path	khyed kyi rjes su
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་དཔལ	your glory	khyed kyi dpal
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན	your name	khyed kyi mtshan
ཁྱེད་སྐུ་ཁམས་བདེའམ	how are you?	khyed sku khams bde'am
ཁྱེད་ཁམས་བདེ་འམ	are you well?	khyed khams bde 'am
ཁྱེད་མཁྱེན	is in your hands	khyed mkhyen
ཁྱེད་མཁྱེན་ནོ	care for me!	khyed mkhyen no
ཁྱེད་མགོན་ལྡན་པ	servant	khyed mgon ldan pa
ཁྱེད་ཅག	(H you pl	khyed cag
ཁྱེད་ཅག་རྣམས	all of you	khyed cag rnams
ཁྱེད་ཅད་རྣམས	you [plural]	khyed cad rnams
ཁྱེད་ལྕག	(H you pl	khyed lcag
ཁྱེད་ཉིད	you	khyed nyid
ཁྱེད་གཉིས	you two	khyed gnyis
ཁྱེད་རྣམ་ཚོ	(H you pl	khyed rnam tsho
ཁྱེད་རྣམས	all of you	khyed rnams
ཁྱེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ་ཚོ	ye ascetics	khyed rnal 'byor pa tsho
ཁྱེད་པ	[arch] 1) come to/ arrive at a certain measure; 2) =, even, level	khyed pa
ཁྱེད་པར	[6] qualities [according to the {klong chen snying thig} {ye shes bla ma} fol 69a, p 4414-6), these are 1) insight is elevated above the basis of confusion from the beginning 2) its dharmata shines...	khyed par
ཁྱེད་མད་གསུང་ཞིང	as you are speaking the truth khyed min re sa gzhan ma mchis pa have no other hope but you	khyed mad gsung zhing
ཁྱེད་ཚོ	you	khyed tsho
ཁྱེད་ཚོའི་བློ་མངའ་ལྟར་ཡོང	it will be as you all think	khyed tsho'i blo mnga' ltar yong
ཁྱེད་རང	thee, you, you	khyed rang
ཁྱེད་རང་མཁྱེན	is in your hands	khyed rang mkhyen
ཁྱེད་རང་གི	thine, thy, your, yours	khyed rang gi
ཁྱེད་རང་རང	yourself	khyed rang rang
ཁྱེད་རང་ལ་དབང	you are the owner	khyed rang la dbang
ཁྱེད་རང་ཤེས	it's up to you [you alone know]	khyed rang shes
ཁྱེད་ལ	in you	khyed la
ཁྱེད་ལ་མངོན་ཕྱུང	manifest in you	khyed la mngon phyung
ཁྱེད་ལ་འབུལ	to give to you	khyed la 'bul
ཁྱེད་ལ་ཞེན་ཅིང་ཆགས	I love you ardently	khyed la zhen cing chags
ཁྱེད་ལ་རེ་ལྟོས	hope and confidence in you	khyed la re ltos
ཁྱེད་ལགས་སམ	Is that you?	khyed lags sam
ཁྱེད་ལས་རེ་ས་གཞན་ན་མེད	there is no other hope but you	khyed las re sa gzhan na med
ཁྱེད་ཤེས	You know [best]! it's up to you!	khyed shes
ཁྱེད་སུ་ཡིན	who are you?	khyed su yin
ཁྱེན་ཏི	he she	khyen ti
ཁྱེན་ཏེ	he, she	khyen te
ཁྱེབས	cover, SA khebs	khyebs
ཁྱེམ	shovel, spade, 'jag ma, grass	khyem
ཁྱེམ་གང	handful	khyem gang
ཁྱེམ་གྱི་འདབ་མ	blade of a shovel	khyem gyi 'dab ma
ཁྱེམ་གྱི་ཡུ་བ	handle of a shovel	khyem gyi yu ba
ཁྱེམ་གྱིས་བཅུས	Khyemkyichu, in Latö	khyem gyis bcus
ཁྱེམ་དང་འཕེན་པ	shovel away, cast out with a shovel	khyem dang 'phen pa
ཁྱེམ་པོ	sbyag ma dang, dru skya, ko skya sogs kyem che ba	khyem po
ཁྱེམ་བུ	spoon	khyem bu
ཁྱེའུ	of long coarse and short soft animal hair the short	khye'u
ཁྱེའུ་ཁ	crop sprouts, flower buds, and tree leaves newly opening	khye'u kha
ཁྱེའུ་ཆུ་འབེབས	Khyeu Chubeb, Youth Who Brings Water, a Bodhisattva, the Buddha Shakyamuni a in former birth	khye'u chu 'bebs
ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང	infant, small child	khye'u chung
ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང་མཁའ་ལྡིང་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che	khye'u chung mkha' lding rtsal
ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང་ལོ་ཙཱ	Kyeuchung Lotsawa, one of Guru Padmasambhava's twentyfive main disciples	khye'u chung lo tsA
ཁྱེའུ་མཐོན་པ	delivery of a child	khye'u mthon pa
ཁྱེའུ་དེ་བཙས་པ་ན	at the birth of the prince	khye'u de btsas pa na
ཁྱེའུ་བདེ་བྱེད	udayana	khye'u bde byed
ཁྱེའུ་སྣང་བ་དམ་པ	the child with perfect vision [= {rang byung ye shes}1st of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis} who taught the {sgra thal 'gyur rtsha ba'i rgyud}	khye'u snang ba dam pa
ཡོད་པ	a boy who had a jewel on the top of his head	yod pa
ཁྱེའུ་ཕོ་རོག་སྐྲོད་ནུས་པ	a child capable of scaring crows away, the age at which a child can take ordination	khye'u pho rog skrod nus pa
ཁྱེའུ་བྱེ་བ	delivery of a child	khye'u bye ba
ཁྱེའུ་ཙང	[arch] new	khye'u tsang
ཁྱེའུ་གཙང་མ	infant, innocent child, pure youth	khye'u gtsang ma
ཁྱེའུ་བཙས་པ	birth of a male child	khye'u btsas pa
ཁྱེའུ་འོད་མི་འཁྲུགས་པ	Youth of Immutable Light; second of {ston pa bcu gnyis}	khye'u 'od mi 'khrugs pa
ཁྱེར	imp. of {'khyer ba}; carry off/ to take; 1) imp. of {'khyer ba}. 2) houses and walls. 3) roof. 4) carry, to bring. 5) handful	khyer
ཁྱེར་རྐྱང	alone, singly, individually, solo	khyer rkyang
ཁྱེར་བདེ	convenient/ easy to implement/ carry with one	khyer bde
ཁྱེར་བདེ་ཀུན་ཚང	simple and complete	khyer bde kun tshang
ཁྱེར་བདེར་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arranged for liturgical recitation	khyer bder bsgrigs pa
ཁྱེར་ནས	of, with	khyer nas
ཁྱེར་བ	carried off	khyer ba
ཁྱེར་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དད་འདུན	total devotion	khyer shes kyi dad 'dun
ཁྱེར་ཤོག	bring, carry it away	khyer shog
ཁྱེར་ཤོག་ཅིག	give me one, fetch me one	khyer shog cig
ཁྱེར་སོ་གསུམ	three adoptions	khyer so gsum
ཁྱེར་སོ་གསུམ་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	three yogas of continual practice. Perceiving appearances as deities and pure lands, sounds as mantra and thoughts as wisdom	khyer so gsum gyi rnal 'byor
ཁྱེར་སོ་གསུམ་ལྡན	possessing the three applications	khyer so gsum ldan
ཁྱེར་སོང	carry off, take away	khyer song
ཁྱེལ་འདུག	loose posture	khyel 'dug
ཁྱེལ་བཞུགས་པ	a posture in yoga, a mode of sitting	khyel bzhugs pa
ཁྱེས	imp. of {'gyed pa}; imp. of {'gyed pa}	khyes
ཁྱོ	Syn {khyo ga} husband, man; husband, man	khyo
ཁྱོ་ཀ	Syn {khyo ga}	khyo ka
ཁྱོ་ཁ	husband, real man, male person	khyo kha
ཁྱོ་ག	husband, [real] man, male person	khyo ga
ཁྱོ་ག་པོ	hero	khyo ga po
ཁྱོ་ག་མང་པོ་ལེན་སྲོལ	polyandry	khyo ga mang po len srol
ཁྱོ་གའི་སྐོར	class of husband, that which concerns a husband	khyo ga'i skor
ཁྱོ་གའི་དབང་ཆ	male prerogative, authority of husband over wife	khyo ga'i dbang cha
ཁྱོ་འདམ་མ	(met bride, wife, lady of the house	khyo 'dam ma
ཁྱོ་འདོད་མ	lascivious woman	khyo 'dod ma
ཁྱོ་ལྡན་མ	bride, wife, lady of the house	khyo ldan ma
ཁྱོ་ཕོ	1) owner of a house; 2) husband	khyo pho
ཁྱོ་བོ	house owner, husband, lover master of a house	khyo bo
ཁྱོ་བྱེད་པ	act as a husband, take a wife	khyo byed pa
ཁྱོ་མང	prostitute, woman w many husbands	khyo mang
ཁྱོ་མང་མ	prostitute [lit. woman with many husbands]	khyo mang ma
ཁྱོ་མེད	unmarried, w/o spouse	khyo med
ཁྱོ་མེད་པ	widow	khyo med pa
ཁྱོ་མེད་མ	woman without a husband	khyo med ma
ཁྱོ་མོ	woman w a husband	khyo mo
ཁྱོ་རེ	stand erect, upright	khyo re
ཁྱོ་ལེ	wobbling, [knees]	khyo le
ཁྱོ་ཤུག	husband and wife, married couple, wife, consort, spouse	khyo shug
ཁྱོ་ཤུག་གཉིས་འགྲོགས་ནས	after the married couple met	khyo shug gnyis 'grogs nas
ཁྱོ་ཤུག་ཏུ་སྡུད་པ	unite in matrimony	khyo shug tu sdud pa
ཁྱོ་ཤུག་ཏུ་བསྡུ་བ	unite as husband and wife	khyo shug tu bsdu ba
ཁྱོ་ཤུག་གནས	place where married couple pass their honeymoon	khyo shug gnas
ཁྱོག	'gyog pa! [p 'khyog]	khyog
ཁྱོག་ཐོང	young man, youth	khyog thong
ཁྱོག་པ	(tha mi dad pa able to bear/ go/ lift	khyog pa
ཁྱོག་པོ	curved, bent, cunning, crooked	khyog po
ཁྱོག་པོའི་རི་མོ	crooked figure, curve, flourish, crescent	khyog po'i ri mo
ཁྱོགས	palanquin, stretcher, Sanskrit palyanka (phebs byams) (do li). A covered litter for one person carried on poles on the shoulders of two or four men	khyogs
ཁྱོགས་ཁྲི	litter, palanquin	khyogs khri
ཁྱོགས་འཁྱེར	stretcher	khyogs 'khyer
ཁྱོགས་གྱོགས	palanquin cover	khyogs gyogs
ཁྱོགས་ལྔ་ལྡི་ཅན	'gyogs byams dra phyed dar 'phan sogs kyi rgyan can	khyogs lnga ldi can
ཁྱོགས་པ	vehicle, conveyance	khyogs pa
ཁྱོགས་སྤྱིལ	litter, palanquin	khyogs spyil
ཁྱོང	one day's entertainment, SA skyong, khong ba	khyong
ཁྱོང་ཁ	quarrel	khyong kha
ཁྱོངས	'khyong!	khyongs
ཁྱོད	thou, you, you	khyod
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི	thine, your, yours khyod kyi lce bcad pas sdig pa mi 'dag gi cutting off your tongue does not purify evil actions!	khyod kyi
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མདུན་ལ	in your presence	khyod kyi mdun la
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མིང་གང་ཟེར	what is your name	khyod kyi ming gang zer
ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས	by you	khyod kyis
ཁྱོད་ག་རེ་བཟོ་གི་འདུག	what are you making?	khyod ga re bzo gi 'dug
ཁྱོད་གང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འདུག	what are you doing?	khyod gang byed kyi 'dug
ཁྱོད་ཅག	you pl [inferiors =]	khyod cag
ཁྱོད་ཅག་གི	your, of you all	khyod cag gi
ཁྱོད་ཅག་ཡིན	you are	khyod cag yin
ཁྱོད་ཅག་ལ་ཡོད	you have	khyod cag la yod
ཁྱོད་ཅན	you or one like you	khyod can
ཤེས	why he does not interest himself in your behalf I know not	shes
ཁྱོད་དང་ང་གཉིས	we two, both you and I	khyod dang nga gnyis
ཁྱོད་དང་ཚོ	you, you all	khyod dang tsho
ཁྱོད་དེའི་བུ་ཡིན་ནམ	are you his son	khyod de'i bu yin nam
ཁྱོད་རྣམས	you, ye	khyod rnams
ཁྱོད་མ་བློ་ན	if you cannot	khyod ma blo na
ཁྱོད་ཚོ	you jeering, disdain, you, ye	khyod tsho
ཁྱོད་ཟེར་བ་བདེན	you are right	khyod zer ba bden
ཁྱོད་ཟེར་བ་བདེན་ནོ	what you say is true	khyod zer ba bden no
ཁྱོད་ཡིན	you are	khyod yin
ཁྱོད་ར	you	khyod ra
ཁྱོད་རང	you [yourself]	khyod rang
ཁྱོད་རུང	you yourself	khyod rung
ཁྱོད་ལ་མིང་ཅི་ཟེར	what is your name	khyod la ming ci zer
ཁྱོད་ལ་ཡོད	you have	khyod la yod
ཁྱོད་ལ་ལིང་གང་ཟེར	what is your name	khyod la ling gang zer
ཁྱོད་ལམ་སངས་ཤོག	come at once	khyod lam sangs shog
ཁྱོད་ལོ་དུ་ལོན	how old are you, what is your age	khyod lo du lon
ཁྱོད་སུ་ཡིན	who are you?	khyod su yin
ཁྱོད་སུགས	pair, SA khyo shug	khyod sugs
ཁྱོད་སྲོག་འཚོ	my life would be saved	khyod srog 'tsho
ཁྱོད་གསན་དང	listen to me	khyod gsan dang
ཁྱོད་ཨ་ལེ་མ་འགྲོ	do not go for awhile	khyod a le ma 'gro
ཁྱོན	I) size, measurement; 1) area, all, all over. 2) all told, in all, extent. 3) size, surface. 4) extension, width, area, size, total, height, circumference. II) 1) all, all over {'dzam gling khyon l...	khyon
ཁྱོན་ཀུན	whole extent	khyon kun
ཁྱོན་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	extensive, wide, vast	khyon rgya che ba
ཁྱོན་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	extensive, wide, vast	khyon rgya chen po
ཁྱོན་སྒྲིལ	all together	khyon sgril
ཁྱོན་བསྒྲིལ	all [added] together, in all, all told, in total	khyon bsgril
ཁྱོན་བསྒྲིལ་ན་ཆེ་ཆུང་གཉིས་སུ་འདུ	in totalling up big and little are all added together	khyon bsgril na che chung gnyis su 'du
ཁྱོན་ཆེ	Syn {khyon chen po}	khyon che
ཁྱོན་ཆེ་བ	1) large extensive; 2) large total [count]	khyon che ba
ཁྱོན་ཆེན་པོ	extensive, wide, vast	khyon chen po
ཁྱོན་དོག་པ	narrow	khyon dog pa
ཁྱོན་སྡོམ	narrow extent, small area	khyon sdom
ཁྱོན་བསྡོམས	aggregate, total	khyon bsdoms
ཁྱོན་བསྡོམས་ནས	totally	khyon bsdoms nas
ཁྱོན་བསྡོམས་པ	all added together, in all, all together, all told, in total	khyon bsdoms pa
ཁྱོན་ནས	absolutely + neg	khyon nas
ཁྱོན་ནས་མེད	none at all, never	khyon nas med
ཁྱོན་པོ	[arch] mostly, majority	khyon po
ཁྱོན་འབོར	combined count * total amount	khyon 'bor
ཁྱོན་ཚད	size, scale, breadth	khyon tshad
ཁྱོན་ཡངས	vast, extensive, wide	khyon yangs
ཁྱོན་ཡངས་བ	vast, extensive, wide	khyon yangs ba
ཁྱོན་ཡོངས	entire, general, wide, all over	khyon yongs
ཁྱོམ་ཁྱོམ	oblique, awry, irregularly shaped	khyom khyom
ཁྱོམ་ཁྱོམ་དོ་བ	reel, stagger	khyom khyom do ba
ཁྱོམས	'khyom!	khyoms
ཁྱོར	[measure of] 1 of the palms slightly bent	khyor
ཁྱོར་ཆུ	thal mo'i sor mo cung zad bskums pa'i nang du blugs pa'i chu	khyor chu
ཁྱོར་དོ	measure of the two palms joined	khyor do
ཁྱོར་པ	the hollow of the palm, handful	khyor pa
ཁྱོར་པ་སྦྱོར་བ	join the palms of the hands (in greeting	khyor pa sbyor ba
ཁྱོར་བ	move totteringly, stumble, be dizzy, as much as fills the hollow of the hand, hollow of the snyim pa	khyor ba
ཁྱོར་བ་གང	handful of anything	khyor ba gang
ཁྱོར་བ་དོ	two handsful of anything	khyor ba do
ཁྱོལ	pf. of {'khyol} satisfactory; to be carried, brought 294	khyol
ཁྱོལ་བ	carried through	khyol ba
ཁྱོས་མ	news, SA skyes	khyos ma
ཁྲ	hawk	khra
ཁྲ་ཀྱི་ལེ	khra lham me	khra kyi le
ཁྲ་བཀྱག	ja dkar gyi stegs	khra bkyag
ཁྲ་ཁྱུག་པ	gleam, twinkle, shine in various colors	khra khyug pa
ཁྲ་ཁྲ	variegated, multicolored, striped	khra khra
ཁྲ་ཁྲོ	short tempered, impatient, impetuous	khra khro
ཁྲ་ཁྲོ་ཅན	passionate or wrathful individual	khra khro can
ཁྲ་གླག	1) eagle; 2) lie, liar; 3) studded gems; 4) jewelry, cheat	khra glag
ཁྲ་གླིང	sge'u khung khra ma nyis sbyar ram gsum sbyar gyi gling	khra gling
ཁྲ་མགོ་མ	hawk-head, {zla ba dmar mo}	khra mgo ma
ཁྲ་རྒྱ	bya khra snare	khra rgya
ཁྲ་རྒྱན	ornament or decoration on a	khra rgyan
ཤྲིནེ་ཨོར་ཆརམ	box	shrine or charm
ཁྲ་རྒྱུ	variegated color	khra rgyu
ཁྲ་སྒྲིགས	arranging in variegated colors with rows of turquoise, corals, pearls etc.	khra sgrigs
ཁྲ་བརྒྱན	variegating an ornament with precious stones	khra brgyan
ཁྲ་ཅན	multicolored, a fish	khra can
ཁྲ་ཅེམ་ཅེམ	glittering, sparkling, shining; very bright and variegated	khra cem cem
ཁྲ་ཅེམ་མེ	rainbow, tinted, meteor	khra cem me
ཁྲ་ཅེམ་མེར་ཤར	rise sparkling	khra cem mer shar
ཁྲ་བཅད	in a house shing gi khra ma bsgrigs pa'i yol bcad	khra bcad
ཁྲ་ཆིལ	atmospheric phenomena like rainbows, meteors, aurora borealis	khra chil
ཁྲ་ཆིལ་ལེ་བ	bkrag mdangs che ba,...Mda' gri mdung gzhu dang bcas khra chil le ba'i ngang nas gyul du bskyod do	khra chil le ba
ཁྲ་ཆུང་མིག	viewing eye	khra chung mig
ཁྲ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	a flight of birds	khra chem chem
ཁྲ་ཆེམ་མེ	dazzling brilliant light, rainbow, glittering, sparkling, shining	khra chem me
ཁྲ་ཆེམ་མེར་ཤར	rise sparkling	khra chem mer shar
ཁྲ་ཆེམ་སེ	atmospheric phenomena	khra chem se
ཁྲ་ཆོད	shing gi khra ma'i bcad	khra chod
ཁྲ་ཆོམ་མེ	multicolored	khra chom me
ཁྲ་ཆོལ	mixed white and black grain etc.	khra chol
ཁྲ་ཆོལ་ལེ	multi-colored, a colored array	khra chol le
ཁྲ་སྟན	variegated seat	khra stan
ཁྲ་ཐ་རེ	show various colors	khra tha re
ཁྲ་ཐར	atmospheric phenomena like rainbows, meteors, aurora borealis	khra thar
ཁྲ་ཐར་རེ	multicolored	khra thar re
ཁྲ་ཐལ	atmospheric phenomena like rainbows, meteors, aurora borealis	khra thal
ཁྲ་ཐལ་ཐལ་དུ	brightly and continuously	khra thal thal du
ཁྲ་ཐིག	1) thig le'i ri mo; 2) Lham gyi sna mgo'i yar tsam gyi phar phyin	khra thig
ཁྲ་འདྲུད	pulling out of the glossiest (hairs) [a term for fine dry shading in thanka painting]	khra 'drud
ཁྲ་ནག	kind of falcon or eagle	khra nag
ཁྲ་སྣ་ཀེ་རུ	place near 'on in Tibet	khra sna ke ru
ཁྲ་པ	falconer	khra pa
ཁྲ་དཔུང་ངེ་བ	rich with many colors	khra dpung nge ba
ཁྲ་སྤོ	a constellation	khra spo
ཁྲ་བ	subtle	khra ba
ཁྲ་བུན་ནེ	multicolored, a fish	khra bun ne
ཁྲ་བོ	many-colored, piebald, twocolored, mottled, colorful	khra bo
ཁྲ་བོ་ལ	Khra bo Pass [snyan rong rdzong gi byang shar ngos su yod cing, el smi 4930]	khra bo la
ཁྲ་བོར་འགྱེད་པ	the multicolored feast [in the {chod} offering, referring to various offerings]	khra bor 'gyed pa
ཁྲ་འབྲུག་ལྷ་ཁང	{khra 'brug lha khang} temple [in Yarlung built by Songtsen Gampo	khra 'brug lha khang
ཁྲ་འབྲུག་ལྷ་གང	{khra 'brug lha gang} temple	khra 'brug lha gang
ཁྲ་སྦོ	(met khra or dbo 2nd month	khra sbo
ཁྲ་མ	1) cross [vajra] design like picture, window's khra ma; 2) document: law case deciding decision/ verdict; 3) Btab nas zhag 60 song mtshams ripened barley and millet; 4) firewood, kindling, lies, re...	khra ma
ཁྲ་མ་འཇུག	create dissension, foment discord	khra ma 'jug
ཁྲ་མ་ཉིས་སྒྲོམ	window khra ma gling nyis bsgrigs	khra ma nyis sgrom
ཁྲ་མ་གཉིས་སྒྲོམ	variegating with two colors in jewelry or lacquer work	khra ma gnyis sgrom
ཁྲ་མ་གཏོང	issue written decision [legal]	khra ma gtong
ཁྲ་མ་གནང	issue written decision [legal]	khra ma gnang
ཁྲ་མ་བྱེད	issue written decision [legal]	khra ma byed
ཁྲ་མ་ཤོད	tell lies	khra ma shod
ཁྲ་མན	gzi onyx having blue, red, and white designs	khra man
ཁྲ་མར	kind of biscuit with twisted cross ribs	khra mar
ཁྲ་མིག	window grating/ lattice design	khra mig
ཁྲ་མེ་རེ	shining w various colors [sharp and] bright	khra me re
ཁྲ་མེར་མེར	kha dog sna tshogs kyi rang mdangs snang tshul,...Glog zhu tshon mdog mang po khra mer mer bkra ba,...Ril debs rnams ra lug gis khra mer mer du gang 'dug	khra mer mer
ཁྲ་མོ	pretty (pejorative	khra mo
ཁྲ་མོད	pretty, (pejorative sense	khra mod
ཁྲ་རྩེ	biscuit in shape of grating	khra rtse
ཁྲ་ཚུབ་བེ	many-colored swirl, variegated colors	khra tshub be
ཁྲ་ཚུབ་བེར་སོང	to dissolve into variegated colors	khra tshub ber song
ཁྲ་འཛིན་རྟོག་མེད་པ	multicolored, a fish	khra 'dzin rtog med pa
ཁྲ་ཟུར	species of eagle	khra zur
ཁྲ་ཟླ	the hawk month, the second Hor month, the second month of the year according to Tibetan calendar	khra zla
ཁྲ་ཡི་ཟླ	2nd hawk month	khra yi zla
ཁྲ་ཡི་ཟླ་བ	second month	khra yi zla ba
ཁྲ་ཡི་ལྷ	tramen deity w animal head	khra yi lha
ཁྲ་ཡིག	variegated letters written in inks of various colors	khra yig
ཁྲ་ཡོལ	curtain, drape [for window]	khra yol
ཁྲ་ཡོལ་རྒྱག	close curtain, drape [for window]	khra yol rgyag
ཁྲ་ཡོལ་ཕྱེ	open curtain, drape [for window]	khra yol phye
ཁྲ་རིང	at times of auspicious coincidence performance, gathering any or all of silk, cotton, and clothing on top of a house arrange ornaments, bkra shis khra ring	khra ring
ཁྲ་རིལ་རིལ	'od gsal zhing dbyibs ril mor snang tshul,...Zhum bu'i mig gnyis khra ril ril du lta, luminous and round shining	khra ril ril
ཁྲ་རུ	window's glass fixing ru [place?]	khra ru
ཁྲ་ལ	khra pass	khra la
ཁྲ་ལ་ལ	sound of hooves sway, dangle, swing back and forth	khra la la
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེ	atmospheric phenomena, bright and vivid, glaring	khra lam me
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེ་བ	splendidly	khra lam me ba
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེ་བར་ཡོད	have splendor	khra lam me bar yod
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེར	vividly	khra lam mer
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེར་མཐོང་བ	see vividly	khra lam mer mthong ba
ཁྲ་ལམ་མེར་གསལ	appear vividly	khra lam mer gsal
ཁྲ་ལམ་ལམ	vividly	khra lam lam
ཁྲ་ལི་ཁྲོལ་ལི	something in loose condition	khra li khrol li
ཁྲ་ལིང་ངེ་བ	a multi-colored array	khra ling nge ba
ཁྲ་ལོག	rejection/ appeal of decision of court of mnediators	khra log
ཁྲ་ཤར་རེ་བ	very clear like white	khra shar re ba
ཁྲ་ཤིག་གེ	a whole colorful crowd of people	khra shig ge
ཁྲ་ཤིག་ཤིག	in dazzling array	khra shig shig
ཁྲ་ཤིགས་སེ	multicolored, a fish, vividly present	khra shigs se
ཁྲ་ཤེལ	window glass	khra shel
ཁྲ་སིང་སིང	1) holes in grating lattice etc; 2) bring out naked [bone etc]	khra sing sing
ཁྲ་སེམས་ཤེས	a bird	khra sems shes
ཁྲ་སེལ	multicolored exorcism	khra sel
ཁྲ་སློག	dpyad khra not accept/ undertake	khra slog
ཁྲ་གསོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་མཁན	falconer	khra gso skyong byed mkhan
ཁྲ་ཧར	Khra Har tribe, Inner Mongolia	khra har
ཁྲ་ཧོར	Mongolian hawk	khra hor
ཁྲ་ཧྲིག	wide open [eyes]. brightening	khra hrig
ཁྲ་ཧྲིག་གེ	glaring, staring, wide open [eyes]	khra hrig ge
ཁྲ་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག	stare w protruding eyes	khra hrig hrig
ཁྲ་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག་ལྟ་བ	stare w protruding eyes	khra hrig hrig lta ba
ཁྲ་ལྷམ་མེ	atmospheric phenomena	khra lham me
ཁྲ་ལྷམ་མེར་དྲན་པ	vividly remember	khra lham mer dran pa
ཁྲ་ལྷམ་མེར་གསལ	shine brightly and vividly	khra lham mer gsal
ཁྲ་ལྷེམ་ལྷེམ	glittering, sparkling, shining; very bright and variegated	khra lhem lhem
ཁྲག	1) blood. 2) Skt. rakta. See {rak} as in {sman rak gtor gsum}; blood	khrag
ཁྲག་རྐང	med. herb ser po khrag rkang or myang rtsi spras	khrag rkang
ཁྲག་སྐེམ	khrag skem [stopping haemorrhage, a drug]	khrag skem
ཁྲག་སྐྱིན	blood debt, revenge	khrag skyin
ཁྲག་སྐྱིན་སྤྲོད	take revenge	khrag skyin sprod
ཁྲག་སྐྱུག	1) blood vomiting disease, haemoptysis	khrag skyug
ཁྲག་སྐྱེམས	rakta offering drink	khrag skyems
ཁྲག་སྐྱེས	(met meat, flesh	khrag skyes
ཁྲག་སྐྲན	blood swelling [food essence undigested ba don snod kyi nang du bad blood spreads and collects w swelling]	khrag skran
ཁྲག་སྐྲན་ཧྲེམ་པོ	stiff blood swelling disease	khrag skran hrem po
ཁྲག་ཁྲིག	100,000 million, moving and oscillating, about one hundred billion	khrag khrig
ཁྲག་ཁྲིག་ཆེན་པོ	one trillion	khrag khrig chen po
ཁྲག་ཁྲིག་སྣང་བ	mirage, optical illusion	khrag khrig snang ba
ཁྲག་ཁྲུག	khrag gi khrug gi'i bsdus tshig flutter, derangement, disorder, tumult, unrest scintillating colors, quarrel, struggle, wrestle, complicate, confused, after mixing 'khrugs pa'i tshul [fight confuse...	khrag khrug
ཁྲག་ཁྲུབ་བྱེད	cause unrest	khrag khrub byed
ཁྲག་ཁྲོག	disordered, lepidium apetalum willd.	khrag khrog
ཁྲག་ཁྲོག་པ	a med. herb [khang phug pa'am dar ya kan te, by its power byang khog nang gi rnag khrag skem, rkang 'bam'joms]	khrag khrog pa
ཁྲག་མཁྲིས	combined blood and bile disease	khrag mkhris
ཁྲག་འཁོར་བའི་དབང་པོ	organs of the circulatory system	khrag 'khor ba'i dbang po
ཁྲག་འཁྲགས	agitation, flutter, blood, orgasm	khrag 'khrags
ཁྲག་འཁྲུག	blood 'khrug disease	khrag 'khrug
ཁྲག་འཁྲུགས	agitation, unrest, disturbance, flutter, orgasm of the blood	khrag 'khrugs
ཁྲག་གི་སྐྱོ་མོ	blood plasma	khrag gi skyo mo
ཁྲག་གི་ཁྲུག་གི	quarrel, struggle, after mixing 'khrugs pa'i tshul [fight confused?] mixed up, unrest, disorder, disagreement, falling-out, quarrel, confusion, mixing up, turmoil	khrag gi khrug gi
ཁྲག་གི་ཐིག	drop of blood	khrag gi thig
ཁྲག་གི་རིགས	blood type	khrag gi rigs
ཁྲག་གི་སོ་ནད	a kind of so nad	khrag gi so nad
ཁྲག་གིས་ཁེངས་ཡོད་པ	was filled with blood	khrag gis khengs yod pa
ཁྲག་གིས་ནོན	x {rgyal po'i dbu khrag gis non zhing} blood poured from the king's head	khrag gis non
ཁྲག་གེ་ཁྲུག་གེ	disagreement, quarrel	khrag ge khrug ge
ཁྲག་གེ་ཁྲོག་གེ	confused disordered, w turmoil, unrest	khrag ge khrog ge
ཁྲག་གྲང་སྲོག་ཆགས	cold blooded animal	khrag grang srog chags
ཁྲག་རྒྱག་པ	to cause bleeding, to let blood	khrag rgyag pa
ཁྲག་རྒྱབ་པ	cause bleeding, let blood	khrag rgyab pa
ཁྲག་རྒྱས	blood being produced in the body	khrag rgyas
ཁྲག་རྒྱུད	blood type	khrag rgyud
ཁྲག་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	blood relationship	khrag rgyud kyi 'brel ba
ཁྲག་རྒྱུན	circulation of blood	khrag rgyun
ཁྲག་རྔུལ	blood and sweat	khrag rngul
ཁྲག་ཅན	bloody, sanguinary	khrag can
ཁྲག་གཅོད	medicinal herb which stops bleeding	khrag gcod
ཁྲག་གཅོད་པ	stop bleeding	khrag gcod pa
ཁྲག་གཅོར	mig 'don sgyid 'breg sogs mi lus steng du gtong ba'i bad punishment custom	khrag gcor
ཁྲག་ཆག་པ	clotted blood, gore	khrag chag pa
ཁྲག་ཆགས	living being	khrag chags
ཁྲག་ཆགས་རྟ	blood bred horse	khrag chags rta
ཁྲག་ཆགས་རྟ་ཆད་པ	cessation of bleeding	khrag chags rta chad pa
ཁྲག་ཆད་པ	cessation of bleeding	khrag chad pa
ཁྲག་མཆོད	symbolic blood offering	khrag mchod
ཁྲག་འཇིབ	suck blood	khrag 'jib
ཁྲག་འཇིབ་འབུ	leech	khrag 'jib 'bu
ཁྲག་འཇིབས	to suck blood, to blister	khrag 'jibs
ཁྲག་རྗེས	bleeding, blood spot [where someone was killed]	khrag rjes
ཁྲག་ཉམས་པའི་ནད	anemia	khrag nyams pa'i nad
ཁྲག་ཉུང་ཉུང་ཆགས་པ	anemia	khrag nyung nyung chags pa
ཁྲག་གཏར	let blood, bleed medically	khrag gtar
ཁྲག་གཏར་བ	let blood, bleed medically	khrag gtar ba
ཁྲག་ལྟར་དམར་བ	bloodshot eyes	khrag ltar dmar ba
ཁྲག་ཐིག	bloodstain	khrag thig
ཁྲག་ཐིག་པགས་ནད	blood drops skin disease, #pethechia	khrag thig pags nad
ཁྲག་ཐིགས	blood drops	khrag thigs
ཁྲག་ཐུང	blood drinker, heruka drink blood	khrag thung
ཁྲག་ཐུང་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལྔ་བརྒྱད	fiftyeight Blood Drinkers	khrag thung lnga bcu lnga brgyad
ཁྲག་ཐུན་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལྔ་བརྒྱད	58 blood drinkers	khrag thun lnga bcu lnga brgyad
ཁྲག་ཐོན་པ	draw/ lose blood, bleed	khrag thon pa
ཁྲག་འཐུང	class of terrifying deities, heruka, SA skyu ru ra, blood drinker, general name of wrathful manifestations that appear in the Anuttara tantra mandalas	khrag 'thung
དྲིནཀེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བློཨོད་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེགོ	clinging. 2) drinking blood	drinker of the blood of ego
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཁྲོ་བོའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the	khrag 'thung khro bo'i lha tshogs
བློཨོད	drinking wrathful deities, [assembly of] wrathful heruka deities	blood
ཁྲག་འཐུང་མཁན	vampire	khrag 'thung mkhan
ཁྲག་འཐུང་གི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the blooddrinking deities	khrag 'thung gi lha tshogs
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལྔ་བརྒྱད	the 58 herukas [according to the tantra of the Secret Nucleus and works such as the Tibetan book of the dead, these comprise the buddha, vajra, ratna, padma, and karma herukas, along with their res...	khrag 'thung lnga brgyad
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལྔ་བཅུ་ང་བརྒྱད	Fiftyeight herukas. The five male and female herukas, eight yoginis, eight tramen goddesses, four female gatekeepers, and twenty-eight Ishvaris	khrag 'thung lnga bcu nga brgyad
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལྔ་བརྒྱད	the 58 blood drinkers (see wrathful deities, 58 blood drinkers khrag 'thung chen po'i sgrub thabs yang	khrag 'thung lnga bcu lnga brgyad
དག་པར་གྲུབ་པ	the Perfect Accomplishment of the Sadhana of the Great Heruka (tantric scripture khrag 'thung chen po'i sgrub thabs yang	dag par grub pa
ཁྲག་འཐུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་རིགས	the heruka of the vajra family, blood-drinking manifestation of the vajra family	khrag 'thung rdo rje rigs
ཁྲག་འཐུང་དཔའ་བོ	Traktung Pawo. The name of Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje	khrag 'thung dpa' bo
ཁྲག་འཐུང་དཔའ་བོས	blood drinking viras	khrag 'thung dpa' bos
ཁྲག་འཐུང་འབུ	worm that drinks blood	khrag 'thung 'bu
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཡབ་ལྔ	the five male	khrag 'thung yab lnga
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Vajra, Ratna, Padma, and Karma Herukas plus consorts)	khrag 'thung yab yum
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཡབ་ཡུམ་བཅུ	ten blood drinking mothers and fathers (Buddha	khrag 'thung yab yum bcu
ཁྲག་འཐུང་སྲིན་བུ	leech	khrag 'thung srin bu
ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	name of dgyes pa rdo rje	khrag 'thung he ru ka
ཁྲག་འཐུན་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལྔ་བརྒྱད	the 58 blood drinkers [see also under wrathful deities and Glossary of enumerations under fifty 8 blood drinkers)	khrag 'thun lnga bcu lnga brgyad
ཁྲག་འཐོང་ཁྲོ་བོའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	wrathful heruka deities	khrag 'thong khro bo'i lha tshogs
ཁྲག་དོན	bleed	khrag don
ཁྲག་དྲི	blood stains	khrag dri
ཁྲག་དྲོན	blood heat not subsided/ warm	khrag dron
ཁྲག་དྲོན་མོ	warm blood	khrag dron mo
ཁྲག་གདན	mi bsad pa'i ro 'jog sa'i gdan nam gos chas	khrag gdan
ཁྲག་མདངས	blood color/ appearance	khrag mdangs
ཁྲག་མདངས་གསལ་བ	have a ruddy appearance	khrag mdangs gsal ba
ཁྲག་འདོན	to draw blood, bleed. Syn {khrag thon pa}	khrag 'don
ཁྲག་འདོན་པ	bleed	khrag 'don pa
ཁྲག་ལྡག་པ	lick blood	khrag ldag pa
ཁྲག་ལྡན	tiger, a red pine tree, parrot, red tree	khrag ldan
ཁྲག་ལྡན་མ	woman having her period	khrag ldan ma
ཁྲག་ནད	disease of the blood w bad of degenerated blood [ngan khrag rgyas pa dam khrag nyams pa]	khrag nad
ཁྲག་རྣག	blood and pus	khrag rnag
ཁྲག་པོ	hard	khrag po
ཁྲག་པོར་སྐྱེ་བ	leaves of plants	khrag por skye ba
ཁྲག་ཕྱུང་བ	to draw blood	khrag phyung ba
ཁྲག་འབབ	1) draw blood, bleed; 2) (met river Sita	khrag 'bab
ཁྲག་འབབ་པ	bleed	khrag 'bab pa
ཁྲག་འབྱིན	draw blood, bleed	khrag 'byin
ཁྲག་སྦྱོར	blood application	khrag sbyor
ཁྲག་མ་ཆོད་པའི་མོ་ནད	disease where after childbirth a woman khrag mtshams ma chod pa	khrag ma chod pa'i mo nad
ཁྲག་རྨེན	red mole on the body	khrag rmen
ཁྲག་སྨྱོ	bad blood engendered in the mouth of a wound	khrag smyo
ཁྲག་གཙག་པ	bleed with an instrument	khrag gtsag pa
ཁྲག་གཙག་པའི་ལག་ཆ	instrument for bleeding	khrag gtsag pa'i lag cha
ཁྲག་གཙགས	let blood, bleed medically	khrag gtsags
ཁྲག་བཙག་པ	to bleed [med], draw blood	khrag btsag pa
ཁྲག་རྩ	arteries, blood-vessels	khrag rtsa
ཁྲག་རྩ་གཅོད་པ	stop bleeding	khrag rtsa gcod pa
ཁྲག་ཚད	blood pressure	khrag tshad
ཁྲག་ཚབས	blood [severe, intense, strong] [woman's menses rgyun ldan bzhin ma bab par rlung gis ngan khrag lus la gtor nas byer ba'i disease w 10 kinds: glo ba'i khrag tshabs dang, snying gi khrag tshabs, mc...	khrag tshabs
ཁྲག་ཚབས་གོར་པ	thick/ stiff blood [severe, intense, strong]	khrag tshabs gor pa
ཁྲག་འཚབ	bsad pa'am rmas pa'i lan len pa	khrag 'tshab
ཁྲག་འཛག	bleed, drip blood	khrag 'dzag
ཁྲག་འཛག་པ	spilling forth blood	khrag 'dzag pa
ཁྲག་འཛིན	skin	khrag 'dzin
ཁྲག་ཝ	bloody goitre	khrag wa
ཁྲག་ཞག	khrag and zhag tsi	khrag zhag
ཁྲག་ཟག	bleed	khrag zag
ཁྲག་རྭ	deer horn w velvet containing blood	khrag rwa
ཁྲག་རིགས	blood type	khrag rigs
ཁྲག་རུལ	rotten blood, pus/ suppuration	khrag rul
ཁྲག་རོ	clotted blood	khrag ro
ཁྲག་རླངས	1) khrag gi rlangs pa; 2) [arch] ro langs	khrag rlangs
ཁྲག་རླུང	khyab byed kyi rlung 'khrugs nas khrag dang rlung gnyis res mos byas nas stod du 'tshang ba'i nad de nad rtags sum go dang lus stod na zhing snying mi bde ba sogs byed pa zhig	khrag rlung
ཁྲག་ལ་རྔམ་པ	thirsty for blood	khrag la rngam pa
ཁྲག་ལ་རྔམས་པ	thirsting for blood	khrag la rngams pa
ཁྲག་ལམ	blood nadi	khrag lam
ཁྲག་ལམ་ཧྲེངས་ནད	disease where blood vessels stiffen	khrag lam hrengs nad
ཁྲག་ལས་གྱུར་པ	(met meat/ flesh	khrag las gyur pa
ཁྲག་ལས་གྱུར་པ་རྣ་བའི་ནད	an ear disease	khrag las gyur pa rna ba'i nad
ཁྲག་ལས་འཕེལ	poison	khrag las 'phel
ཁྲག་ལིང	clot of blood	khrag ling
ཁྲག་ལིང་ཆད་པ	congealed blood	khrag ling chad pa
ཁྲག་ལོང	intestines rt side area	khrag long
ཁྲག་ཤ	congealed blood, coagulated blood	khrag sha
ཁྲག་ཤས་ཆེ་བ	plethoric	khrag shas che ba
ཁྲག་ཤུགས	blood pressure	khrag shugs
ཁྲག་ཤུགས་ཆུང་ཆུང	hypotension	khrag shugs chung chung
ཁྲག་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	hypertension	khrag shugs chen po
ཁྲག་ཤེད	blood pressure	khrag shed
ཁྲག་ཤེད་ཆེ་བ	strong blood	khrag shed che ba
ཁྲག་ཤོར	hemorrhage, bloody-flux	khrag shor
ཁྲག་བཤལ	bloody dysentery, hemorrhage after child- birth	khrag bshal
ཆིལད	birth	child
ཁྲག་སྲིན	1) srin [worm] disease w bleeding; 2) in the {lus la lhan skyes su mchis pa'i srin bu rigs bdun} tiny red round worms that travel in the blood all over the body	khrag srin
ཁྲང	narrow passage which is difficult to pass, SA mkhrang	khrang
ཁྲང་ཀྲང	factory director	khrang krang
ཁྲང་ཐང	hard, firm 298	khrang thang
ཁྲང་ཞི	(CH Indian style dis[play]	khrang zhi
ཁྲང་ཞི་འཁྲབ་པ	put on an Indian style dis[play]	khrang zhi 'khrab pa
ཁྲད་ཁྲོད	crevice, hole in a rock or tree, interior space, vacuity, hole, crevasse, gap crack	khrad khrod
ཁྲད་པ	stretched out	khrad pa
ཁྲད་པར་གནས	indian fig-tree	khrad par gnas
ཁྲད་པོར་སྡོད་པ	sit with legs stretched out	khrad por sdod pa
ཁྲབ	harness, shield, buckler, coat of mail	khrab
ཁྲབ་ཁྲབ	weeper, one that sheds tears on every occasion	khrab khrab
ཁྲབ་མཁན	one who makes or wears armor, dancer	khrab mkhan
ཁྲབ་མཁན་གྱི་བྱེད་སྒོ	role	khrab mkhan gyi byed sgo
ཁྲབ་གྱོན་པ	put an armor	khrab gyon pa
ཁྲབ་ཅན	scaled, wearing a coat of mail	khrab can
ཁྲབ་ལྕིབས	armor's nang gdan or inner garment	khrab lcibs
ཁྲབ་ཆས	drag chas go khrab	khrab chas
ཁྲབ་ཆེན	corselet	khrab chen
ཁྲབ་སྟོན	show	khrab ston
ཁྲབ་སྟོན་ཁང	theater	khrab ston khang
ཁྲབ་ལྡན་འཁོར་ལོ	armored car	khrab ldan 'khor lo
ཁྲབ་བྱང	khrab kyi byang bu	khrab byang
ཁྲབ་བྱང་གུ	scales or iron foils used in a coat of mail	khrab byang gu
ཁྲབ་བྱིན་ལུས་ཁེབ	coat of mail for covering the whole body	khrab byin lus kheb
ཁྲབ་མ	1) Khrab gyon pa'i dmag mi; 2) [arch] lus la gyon byed pa'i khrab	khrab ma
ཁྲབ་རྨོག	armor [coat of mail] and helmet	khrab rmog
ཁྲབ་རྨོག་གྱོན་པ	wear armor and helmet	khrab rmog gyon pa
ཁྲབ་བཞི	4 bucklers	khrab bzhi
ཁྲབ་རིས	chain-net	khrab ris
ཁྲབས	(')khrabs se khrab - (to) stamp out/ tread	khrabs
ཁྲབས་སེ་ཁྲབ	(to) stamp out/ tread	khrabs se khrab
ཁྲམ	false; astrological chart of crossed lines etc, kind of cross-hatched	khram
ཁྲམ་ཁ	1) crossed vajra picture/ design; 2) board/ plate w crossed lines ([or summoning evil spirits/ demons d"ns ill-famed; 3) notorious slander; 4) astrological chart of crossed lines; 5) notches or lin...	khram kha
པརྟི	colored appearance of wrathful gods, chart used in witchcraft or necromancy, cross marks cut into a piece of wood	parti
ཁྲམ་ཁ་ལ་བབས	the sign of one's ruin having been incident on the chart of fate	khram kha la babs
ཁྲམ་ཁའི་ཤིང	board/ plate w crossed lines ([or summoning evil spirits/ demons d"ns, club-like implement (carved w lines representing the attributes of a god	khram kha'i shing
ཁྲམ་ཁྲམ	steaming / flowing down	khram khram
ཁྲམ་ཁྲུམ	fragments, baked fragments	khram khrum
ཁྲམ་ཁྲུམ་དུ་རྡུང་བ	pounded into coarse fragments	khram khrum du rdung ba
ཁྲམ་རྒྱག	human corpse bya gtor byed skabs flesh and skin sbrags mar [combined in pairs?] fragments dra ba [series of them as offerings??]	khram rgyag
ཁྲམ་བརྒྱབ་པ	make up an astrological chart w crossed lines etc.	khram brgyab pa
ཁྲམ་ལྡན	tiger	khram ldan
ཁྲམ་ནག	incorrigible liar/ swindler/ con man, act of..	khram nag
ཁྲམ་པ	liar, swindler, con man, cheat, charlatan, artful person; a cheat, hypocrite/ a liar, swindler/ deceitful person	khram pa
ཁྲམ་པ་གཅོད	get out of mishaps caused by the evil machinations of enemies, make evil charms of enemies ineffectual	khram pa gcod
ཁྲམ་པ་བྱེད་པ	feign	khram pa byed pa
ཁྲམ་བམ	crossed vajra design/ picture	khram bam
ཁྲམ་བྱེད	cheat, SA g.yo can, phra ma byed	khram byed
ཁྲམ་མ	deceitful woman	khram ma
ཁྲམ་མི་ཁྲུམ་མི	tired, exhausted	khram mi khrum mi
ཁྲམ་ཚན	[arch] rtsis tho	khram tshan
ཁྲམ་ཚོང་པ	business swindler	khram tshong pa
ཁྲམ་ཟོལ	Syn {khram pa}	khram zol
ཁྲམ་རིས	criss-cross lines/ design	khram ris
ཁྲམ་རིས་བཏབ་པ	scored with crisscrossed lines	khram ris btab pa
ཁྲམ་རིས་བཏབ་པའི་ཤིང	'dre gdon summoning board, plate w crossed lines ([or summoning evil spirits/ demons d"ns, club-like implement (carved w lines representing the attributes of a god	khram ris btab pa'i shing
ཁྲམ་ལ་བཏབ	liturgy for suppressing those who harm the dharma	khram la btab
ཁྲམ་ཤིང	1) scored stick. 2) the records of karma. See {khram kha'i shing} 3) board [on which the body of a culprit is stretched to flog him on the back]	khram shing
ཁྲམ་གཤོམ་པ	1) gyo khram gyi grabs gshom byed pa; 2) Gyo khram byed mkhan,...Mi khram gshom pa tha chad,..	khram gshom pa
ཁྲམ་སེམས	evil thoughts of lying and deception	khram sems
ཁྲམ་སེམས་ཅན	lying, mendacious	khram sems can
ཁྲམ་སེམས་འཛིན་པ	grasp[er of] evil thoughts of lying and deception	khram sems 'dzin pa
ཁྲའ་ཏན་ཉིང	tannic acid	khra' tan nying
ཁྲའུ	paper money	khra'u
ཁྲལ	1) tax, to impose a tax, punishment, chastisement, visitation. duty, toll, tribute duty, forced service. 2) sorrow, worry, concerned, upset, grief 299	khral
ཁྲལ་བཀལ་བ	levied tax	khral bkal ba
ཁྲལ་བཀོད	levied/ established taxes	khral bkod
ཁྲལ་བཀྲལ	collect tax	khral bkral
ཁྲལ་སྐུང་ཁྲལ་ཆད	tax evasion/ dodging	khral skung khral chad
ཁྲལ་སྐུལ	collect taxes, ask for/encourage payment of taxes	khral skul
ཁྲལ་སྐུལ་མཁན	tax collector	khral skul mkhan
ཁྲལ་སྐུལ་བ	collect tax, urge/ request payment of tax	khral skul ba
ཁྲལ་སྐོར་བ	pay taxes or customs duty	khral skor ba
ཁྲལ་སྐྱེལ་བ	levy tax	khral skyel ba
ཁྲལ་བརྐོལ་བ	remitted revenue or rent	khral brkol ba
ཁྲལ་ཁུངས	tax and compulsory post service paying regional governing office, tax source/ origin	khral khungs
ཁྲལ་ཁོངས	those who must pay tax and/or do compulsory post service	khral khongs
ཁྲལ་ཁྲལ	scattered, incomplete	khral khral
ཁྲལ་ཁྲིམས	1) tax and law system; 2) tax laws	khral khrims
ཁྲལ་ཁྲིམས་འཁུར་ཤེས	khral dang yul khrims dang du len shes pa'am, rtsi 'jog byed shes pa	khral khrims 'khur shes
ཁྲལ་ཁྲུག	very large number	khral khrug
ཁྲལ་ཁྲུལ	1) fragments, broken thing; 2) scattered; 3) foggy/ depressed/ panicked; 4) hanging down	khral khrul
ཁྲལ་ཁྲོལ	faint, free & pure	khral khrol
ཁྲལ་ཁྲོལ་ཁལ་ཁོལ་མེད་པར་ཕུག	totally perforated	khral khrol khal khol med par phug
ཁྲལ་ཁྲོལ་དུ་སོང་བ	become completely perforated	khral khrol du song ba
ཁྲལ་འཁུལ་བ	force a tax on a person	khral 'khul ba
ཁྲལ་འཁྲི	tax and compulsory post service obligation	khral 'khri
ཁྲལ་འཁྲི་བ	tied by taxes	khral 'khri ba
ཁྲལ་གྱོག	khral pa'i gyog po	khral gyog
ཁྲལ་འགེལ	taxation	khral 'gel
ཁྲལ་འགེལ་བ	levy taxes/ service obligations	khral 'gel ba
ཁྲལ་འགོད	levy/ establish taxes	khral 'god
ཁྲལ་རྒྱག་མཁན	taxpayer	khral rgyag mkhan
ཁྲལ་རྒྱག་པ	1) pay tax, go on compulsory postal service; 2) journey or hand work tax/ service obligation substitute person who actually has to do it	khral rgyag pa
ཁྲལ་རྒྱགས	1) pay tax, go on compulsory postal service; 2) journey or hand work tax/ service obligation substitute person who actually has to do it	khral rgyags
ཁྲལ་རྒྱབ་པ	levy tax	khral rgyab pa
ཁྲལ་རྒྱབ་རུང་བ	taxable	khral rgyab rung ba
ཁྲལ་རྒྱུག་མཁན	taxpayer	khral rgyug mkhan
ཁྲལ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུ་བྱོལ་བ	tax evasion/ dodging	khral rgyug rgyu byol ba
ཁྲལ་རྒྱུག་པ	perform forced service	khral rgyug pa
ཁྲལ་སྒྲུབ་པ	pay tax	khral sgrub pa
ཁྲལ་ངན	bad/ opressive tax	khral ngan
ཁྲལ་དངུལ	tax money, revenue	khral dngul
ཁྲལ་མངོན་སླ་བཅོས	khral yin bsams te rang 'gan not paying/ performing well legs par mi sgrub pa	khral mngon sla bcos
ཁྲལ་ཆག	khral 'bab yang du phyin pa	khral chag
ཁྲལ་འཇལ	pay rent or tax	khral 'jal
ཁྲལ་འཇལ་བ	to pay taxes	khral 'jal ba
ཁྲལ་འཇོག་པ	to impose taxes	khral 'jog pa
ཁྲལ་རྟེན་ས་ཞིང	field that is the basis of taxes and compulsory postal service	khral rten sa zhing
ཁྲལ་འདུ	collect tax	khral 'du
ཁྲལ་འདེད་པ	tax and compulsory post service rgyug par skul 'ded byed pa/ byed mkhan	khral 'ded pa
ཁྲལ་སྡུ་བ	[collect] taxes	khral sdu ba
ཁྲལ་སྡུད་པ	1) [collect] taxes; 2) tax collector	khral sdud pa
ཁྲལ་སྡུད་བྱེད	[collect] taxes	khral sdud byed
ཁྲལ་སྡུད་ཞིབ་སྲོལ	tax recods/ documents	khral sdud zhib srol
ཁྲལ་སྡུད་ལམ་ལུགས	tax system	khral sdud lam lugs
ཁྲལ་བརྡ	tax and compulsory post service skul 'ded kyi brda	khral brda
ཁྲལ་བརྡ་གཏོང་མཁན	tax and compulsory post service gi skul brda rgyag mkhan nam rgan po	khral brda gtong mkhan
ཁྲལ་བསྡུ་བར་བྱ	will collect taxes	khral bsdu bar bya
ཁྲལ་བསྡུས	fiscal, collected taxes	khral bsdus
ཁྲལ་པ	[high status] peasant paying tax in kind or labor [by being a land tenant tax and compulsory post service rgyug mkhan]	khral pa
ཁྲལ་སྤྱོད	pay taxes	khral spyod
ཁྲལ་སྤྱོད་པ	pay taxes	khral spyod pa
ཁྲལ་སྤྲད	pay tax	khral sprad
ཁྲལ་སྤྲོད	pay tax	khral sprod
ཁྲལ་སྤྲོད་པ	payment of revenue	khral sprod pa
ཁྲལ་འཕར	in addition to the root tax imposed 'phar khral	khral 'phar
ཁྲལ་བོགས	1) rich taxpayers power of others paying their taxes or doing their required service; 2) tax and bogs ma [profit, power, benefit] lease fees, rent	khral bogs
ཁྲལ་འབབ	quantity of tax to be paid or work performed, revenue	khral 'bab
ཁྲལ་འབུལ་བ	to pay taxes	khral 'bul ba
ཁྲལ་མ་ཁྲོལ	unobstructed, unhindered, freely traveling through anything	khral ma khrol
ཁྲལ་མ་ཁྲོལ་མ	unhindered, evanescent	khral ma khrol ma
ཁྲལ་མི	taxpayer	khral mi
ཁྲལ་མི་ཟླར་གྱབ	by a taxpayer khral rogs sbran nas khral skul mkhan la ngo rgol byed pa	khral mi zlar gyab
ཁྲལ་ཚད	measure/ rate of taxes owed	khral tshad
ཁྲལ་ཚད་གཅོག	reduce taxes	khral tshad gcog
ཁྲལ་ཚད་སྤོར	raise taxes	khral tshad spor
ཁྲལ་ཞིང	field/ farm for which taxes are paid	khral zhing
ཁྲལ་ཟླ་ཁྲལ་རོགས	tax and compulsory postal service payer nang khul gyi mi	khral zla khral rogs
ཁྲལ་འམ་བུ་ལོང	liabilities on account of rent or debt	khral 'am bu long
ཁྲལ་འི་ལག	tax in kind and compulsory post service	khral 'i lag
ཁྲལ་འུལ	tax and compulsory post service	khral 'ul
ཁྲལ་འུལ་འགེལ་དཀྲི	levy tax and compulsory post service 300	khral 'ul 'gel dkri
ཁྲལ་འུལ་སྒྲུབ་འཇལ	pay taxes in grain, money, etc. or [postal] service obligations	khral 'ul sgrub 'jal
ཁྲལ་འུལ་སྒྲུབ་རྟེན་གྱི་ས་ཞིང	field/ farm for which taxes are paid	khral 'ul sgrub rten gyi sa zhing
ཁྲལ་ཡོད	Modesty khral g.yol - tax evasion/ dodging khral g.yol ba - tax evader khral g.yol byed - evade taxes	khral yod
ཁྲལ་རིགས	taxes and compulsory postal service	khral rigs
ཁྲལ་རིགས་སྒྲུབ་ཁུངས	tax determining regional overseer	khral rigs sgrub khungs
ཁྲལ་ལི་ཁྲུལ་ལི	hanging down	khral li khrul li
ཁྲལ་ལི་ཁྲུལ་ལི་མང་པོ་བཏགས་འདུག	many were attached hanging down	khral li khrul li mang po btags 'dug
ཁྲལ་ལི་ཁྲུལ་ལི་འཛར	hanging down	khral li khrul li 'dzar
ཁྲལ་ལི་ཁྲུལ་ལིར་བསྡད	stayed hanging down	khral li khrul lir bsdad
ཁྲལ་ལེ་ཁྲོལ་ལེ	many ornaments hanging down and jingling together	khral le khrol le
ཁྲལ་ཤོལ	smuggling	khral shol
ཁྲལ་གཤལ	paid taxes in kind, money, etc. or service obligations	khral gshal
ཁྲལ་སི	(CH 1) gzhung don; 2) khral rigs skor gyi las don	khral si
ཁྲལ་སི་སྐེད་ཆད	two	khral si sked chad
ཁྲལ་སི་ཞབས་འདེགས	1	khral si zhabs 'degs
ཁྲལ་སེམས	suffering	khral sems
ཁྲལ་སོགས་རྒྱབ་པ	impose	khral sogs rgyab pa
ཁྲལ་གསར	levying of a new tax khras bdas pa'i phug ron rang gi lus kyi	khral gsar
ཤས་བསྲུངས	a pigeon from a hawk by giving up my own body	shas bsrungs
ཁྲི	1) throne/ platform where the chief individual sits; 2) base of a stupa between sa 'dzin and bang rim; 3) 10,000, myriad; 4) box; 5) seat, chair, couch, bench; 6) table; 7) bed; 8) platform, work s...	khri
ཁྲི་ཀ	Trika, in Domey	khri ka
ཁྲི་ཀ་དར	contractor	khri ka dar
ཁྲི་ཀླིང་བ	[arch] w dra bas [nets? garlands? sbrel bar byas pa'i throne	khri kling ba
ཁྲི་རྐང	leg	khri rkang
ཁྲི་རྐང་ཅན	seat with legs, seat furnished with legs, bedstead	khri rkang can
ཁྲི་རྐང་འཆོས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the transgression of making a throne [higher than 1 cubit) [one of {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}	khri rkang 'chos pa'i ltung byed
ཁྲི་རྐད	throne (support	khri rkad
ཁྲི་སྐ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	khri ska
ཁྲི་སྐོར	1) 10,000; 2) place w 10,000 families; 3) circumambulating stupas etc 10,000 times	khri skor
ཁྲི་སྐོར་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 throneholders ['gro mgon chos rgyal 'phags pa according ot the command of se chen rgyal po dbus gtsang la dbang sgyur skabs su btsugs pa'i khri skor sa khul te la stod lho byang gnyis dang, ...	khri skor bcu gsum
ཁྲི་སྐོར་བཏང་བ	sa gdan sogs 'thag dus lag pas yar mi rnyob tse thags khri dma' ru btang ba'i don	khri skor btang ba
ཁྲི་ཁ	on the chair, seat, throne	khri kha
ཁྲི་ཁ་ན	on the chair	khri kha na
ཁྲི་ཁེབས	carpet spread on a throne or chair, bed-spread, table cloth	khri khebs
ཁྲི་ཁྲག	number, ten thousand, myriad	khri khrag
ཁྲི་ཁྲི	100 million	khri khri
ཁྲི་ཁྲི་འབུམ་འབུམ	very many	khri khri 'bum 'bum
ཁྲི་གྲངས	number, ten thousand, myriad	khri grangs
ཁྲི་དགུ་དང་སྟོང	000	khri dgu dang stong
ཁྲི་དགུ་དང་སྟོང་ཕྲག་དྲུག	96	khri dgu dang stong phrag drug
ཁྲི་བགྲངས་མཙོ	{khri bgrangs} lake	khri bgrangs mtso
ཁྲི་འགྱོགས་ལེ་ཚན་བདུན	chn	khri 'gyogs le tshan bdun
ཁྲི་རྒན	abbot	khri rgan
ཁྲི་རྒྱབ	back of a chair	khri rgyab
ཁྲི་རྒྱབ་དྲུག་འགྱོགས	back of a throne six carrying [bya khyung, klu mo, chu srin, bu chung, krishna ? nA s' ra, glang chen] kyis bteg pa'i buddhas and bodhisattvas kyi chair back drapery, the garuda above and others L ...	khri rgyab drug 'gyogs
ཁྲི་རྒྱབ་ཡོལ	throne with an ornate back	khri rgyab yol
ཁྲི་སྒམ	drawer in a table	khri sgam
ཁྲི་སྒོ་བརྩེགས	city of outlaws	khri sgo brtsegs
ཁྲི་སྒྱོགས	1) byams khri; 2) cannons	khri sgyogs
ཁྲི་སྒྲ་དཔུང་བཅན	{khri sgra dpung bcan} [khri btsan nam and sman bza' khri dkar gnyis kyi sras; bod rgyal 26th [btsan lnga]	khri sgra dpung bcan
ཁྲི་སྒྲ་དཔུང་བཙན	Tibetan king	khri sgra dpung btsan
ཁྲི་སྒྲ་སྤུང་བཅན	{khri sgra spung bcan} [khri btshan nam and sman bza' khri dkar gnyis kyi sras; bod rgyal 26th [btsan lnga]	khri sgra spung bcan
ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང	18,000	khri brgyad stong
ཁྲི་ཅན	1) fire. 2) god of fire. 3) sun	khri can
ཁྲི་ལྕོག	throne table [high so person on the throne can use it]	khri lcog
ཁྲི་ཆིག་སྟོང	eleven thousand	khri chig stong
ཁྲི་ཆེན	great chair, title of abbot of dga' ldan monastery	khri chen
རྒྱས	1759-1816 - Trichen Lobsang Yeshe Tenpa Rabgye	rgyas
ཁྲི་འཇལ	payment in 10,000 fold is necessary for making good the loss of sacred life or objects	khri 'jal
ཁྲི་ཉིས་སྟོང	12,000	khri nyis stong
ཁྲི་གཉན	a black antelope / deer. Syn {khri snyan}	khri gnyan
ཁྲི་གཉན་གཟུང་བཙན	Tibetan king	khri gnyan gzung btsan
ཁྲི་གཉན་གཟུངས་བཅན	{khri gnyan gzungs bcan} [sngar bod rgyal nyer dgu pa, lha tho thori gnyan btsan gyi bu yin, rgyal po de'i skabs su bod kyi zhing sa dang 'brog sa 'brel mthud dang, mtsho dang mtshe'u yur bur 'brel...	khri gnyan gzungs bcan
ཁྲི་སྙན	black antelope, gentle deer, buddhist physician of lhasa 301	khri snyan
ཁྲི་སྙན་ས་ར	krishnasara, the deer of compassion	khri snyan sa ra
ཁྲི་སྙན་ས་ལེ	skin of black antelope	khri snyan sa le
ཁྲི་སྙན་སའ་ར	krishnasara, the deer of compassion	khri snyan sa' ra
ཁྲི་བཏོན	enthronement [ceremony]. Syn {khri 'don}	khri bton
ཁྲི་སྟན	seats	khri stan
ཁྲི་སྟན་ཆེན་པོ	large couch or bed	khri stan chen po
པོ་སྤོང་བ	renouncing big and lofty seats/ thrones [one of {bslab pa'i gzhi brgyad}-eight basic trainingsuccashayana mah shayana virat h] khri stan chen po dang khri stan mthon	po spong ba
ཁྲི་སྟན་མཐོན་པོ	a tall / lofty throne	khri stan mthon po
ཁྲི་སྟེགས	throne	khri stegs
ཁྲི་སྟེགས་མཐོན་པོ	high throne	khri stegs mthon po
ཁྲི་སྟོང	10s of thousands	khri stong
ཁྲི་སྟོང་མང་པོ	word indicating indefinately many	khri stong mang po
ཁྲི་སྟོན	throne cushion, carpet spread on a throne or couch, enthronement ceremony, coronation, inauguration, installation (as chair person	khri ston
ཁྲི་ཐུབ	life span of ten thousand years	khri thub
ཁྲི་ཐོག	Trithok [kingdom near Mustang]	khri thog
ཁྲི་ཐོག་གི་དཔོན་པོ	a chieftain on his throne	khri thog gi dpon po
ཁྲི་ཐོག་རྗེ་ཐོག་བཙན	Tibetan king	khri thog rje thog btsan
ཁྲི་ཐོག་ཏུ་འདོན་པ	raise to the throne	khri thog tu 'don pa
ཁྲི་ཐོག་པ	{mkhan po sogs las thog pa}	khri thog pa
ཁྲི་དྲུག་འཁྱོགས	six ornaments/ adornments / supports of throne	khri drug 'khyogs
ཁྲི་དྲུག་འགྱོགས	Six ornaments of a throne, six adornments of a throne, six supports of throne. A] 1) {bya khyung} garuda. 2) {klu gdengs ka can} a waterspirit [naga] with multiple hoods behind the head 3) chu srin...	khri drug 'gyogs
ཆེན	elephant 3) {rta mchog - supreme horse 4) {rma bya - peacock 5) {bya khyung - garuda bird 6) {gyad kyi	chen
མི	strong man]	mi
ཁྲི་དྲུག་སྟོང	sixteen thousand	khri drug stong
ཁྲི་གདན	throne cover/ seat/ cushion	khri gdan
ཁྲི་གདན་ཟུར	retired (abbot	khri gdan zur
ཁྲི་གདུགས	1) the sun. [also the moon]. throne and canopy	khri gdugs
ཁྲི་གདུགས་འོག་ན	under the sun	khri gdugs 'og na
ཁྲི་འདུ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	khri 'du
ཁྲི་འདོན	enthronement	khri 'don
ཁྲི་འདོན་མངའ་གསོལ	coronation ceremony, enthronement, enthronement and empowerment	khri 'don mnga' gsol
ཁྲི་འདོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	auspicious occasion of an installation or coronation	khri 'don rten 'brel
ཁྲི་འདོན་གནང་བ	to install, to enthrone, coronate	khri 'don gnang ba
ཁྲི་ལྡན	president, chairman	khri ldan
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་མགོན་ཉི	Tibetan king	khri lde mgon nyi
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་གཙུག་རྟེན	Tridey Tsugten	khri lde gtsug rten
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་གཙུག་བརྟན	{khri lde gtsug brtan} [sngar bod rgyal so bdun pa ste, ming gzhan khri lde gtsug btsan dang, mes aag tsom yang zer, rgyal po de'i skabs su thang krung tsung gi sras mo gyim shang kong jo btsun mor...	khri lde gtsug brtan
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་གཙུག་བཙན	Tibetan king	khri lde gtsug btsan
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་འོད	1 of drang srong bdun	khri lde 'od
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་ཡུམ་བརྟན	{khri lde yum brtan}	khri lde yum brtan
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་རིག་པ་མགོན	Tibetan king	khri lde rig pa mgon
ཁྲི་ལྡེ་སྲོང་བཙན	{khri lde srong btsan} [khri srong lde'u btsan's 3rd son = mutig btsan po, and 4th &, yang dbon sras khri ral pa can etc bzhed tshul sna tshogs 'dug go]	khri lde srong btsan
ཁྲི་སྡེ	1) ten thousand families. 2) 10,000. 3) the general public	khri sde
ཁྲི་པ	abbot	khri pa
ཁྲི་པ་ཟུར་པ	ex chairman/ head	khri pa zur pa
ཁྲི་དཔོན	myriarchs	khri dpon
ཁྲི་ཕྱེད་དང་གཉིས	2500, two thousand and a half	khri phyed dang gnyis
ཁྲི་ཕྲག	1) ten thousand. 2) splitting, cleaving, disjoined, detached	khri phrag
ཁྲི་ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་སྙེད	a million	khri phrag brgya snyed
ཁྲི་ཕྲག་བརྟན་པར་ཤོག	may --- remain 10,000 years	khri phrag brtan par shog
ཁྲི་ཕྲག་དྲུག	60,000	khri phrag drug
ཁྲི་ཕྲག་མང་པོ	thousands, hundreds of thousands	khri phrag mang po
ཁྲི་ཕྲག་ལོངས་པ	thousands	khri phrag longs pa
ཁྲི་འཕང	1) height of a seat, high chair. 2) rank of an official position, high official position	khri 'phang
ཁྲི་བམ	Tribam	khri bam
ཁྲི་བུ	small chair	khri bu
ཁྲི་བེར	throne-cloak	khri ber
ཁྲི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆོས་འཕེལ	1756-1838 Tri Jangchub Chöpel Rinpoche, the first Trijang Rinpoche	khri byang chub chos 'phel
ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Trijang Rinpoche	khri byang rin po che
ཁྲི་བྱེ་བ	ten millions	khri bye ba
ཁྲི་འབུལ	presents on the occasion of an installation	khri 'bul
ཁྲི་འབོལ་སྟན་ཅན	couch	khri 'bol stan can
ཁྲི་འབྱུང་བར་འགྱུར་རོ	will appear ten thousand	khri 'byung bar 'gyur ro
ཁྲི་འབྱུད་བར་འགྱུར་རོ	will appear 10,000	khri 'byud bar 'gyur ro
ཁྲི་སྦྲེལ་མ	khri nyis gshibs sam, khri nyis bsgrid	khri sbrel ma
ཁྲི་མིན	prison, jail	khri min
ཁྲི་མུ	{khri mu} [place lho kha kron chus khongs mtsho sna rdzong gi sa cha zhig 'gro ba bzang mo zhes pa'i sgrung nang bdud mo ha shang gi pha yul ni 'di'i rgyud na yod	khri mu
ཁྲི་མུན	[arch] prison, dungeon	khri mun
ཁྲི་མོན	prison	khri mon
ཁྲི་གཙུག་ལྡེ་བཙན	khri ral pa can's real name	khri gtsug lde btsan
ཁྲི་བཙན་ནམ	Tibetan king	khri btsan nam
ཁྲི་བཙུན	1) queen. 2) the Nepalese queen of King Songtsen Gampo	khri btsun
ཁྲི་རྩེ་འབུམ་བཞེར་གྱི་ཁྲིམས	1st law edict written by srong btsan sgam po	khri rtse 'bum bzher gyi khrims
ཁྲི་ཚུལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	chn	khri tshul drug cu rtsa brgyad
ཁྲི་འཛིན	abbot, hierarch, 'throne holder'	khri 'dzin
ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	fourteen thousand	khri bzhi stong
ཁྲི་ཟུར	1) part of 10,000; 2) ex chairman/ head	khri zur
ཁྲི་ཟུར་པ	las thog yol te thron in a corner. las thog [perform an obligation] yol te zur du gnas pa'i khri pa	khri zur pa
ཁྲི་བཟང་ཡབ་ལྷག	Trisang Yablhag. A minister of King Trisong Deutsen	khri bzang yab lhag
ཁྲི་བཟང་ལྷ་ལོད	Trisang Lhalö. A minister of King Trisong Deutsen	khri bzang lha lod
ཁྲི་འུར	a bird	khri 'ur
ཁྲི་རྭ་བ་ཅན	grangs khri longs ma longs tsam	khri rwa ba can
ཁྲི་རལ	Syn {khri ral pa can}	khri ral
ཁྲི་རལ་པ་ཅན	{khri ral pa can} [mtshan dngos la khri gtsug lde btsan yang zer,dbu skra 'khrud pa la mi mnyes shing, ral pa'i lan bu rnam par dud pas na btsan po ral pa can du mtshan thogs, 'di n@sad na legs mji...	khri ral pa can
ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	head of a big monastery	khri rin po che
ཁྲི་ལ་བཀོད་པ	enthrone	khri la bkod pa
ཁྲི་ལ་བསྐོ	to enthrone / crown, to raise to the thrown	khri la bsko
ཁྲི་ལ་བསྐོ་བ	to ascend the throne	khri la bsko ba
ཁྲི་ལ་འཁོད་པ	sit on the throne	khri la 'khod pa
ཁྲི་ལ་ཉལ་བར་མི་བྱ	Not to sleep on a high bed. or meditation throne	khri la nyal bar mi bya
ཁྲི་ལ་མི་ཉལ་བ	not to sleep on a throne	khri la mi nyal ba
ཁྲི་ལ་བཞུགས་པ	be enthroned	khri la bzhugs pa
ཁྲི་ལམ	horse road	khri lam
ཁྲི་ལེ་བ	fear	khri le ba
ཁྲི་ལེར	sheer; ex {bde ba khri ler 'char ba} to experience sheer bliss	khri ler
ཁྲི་ལོ	10,000 years	khri lo
ཁྲི་ལོ་བརྟན་པར་ཤོག	long live	khri lo brtan par shog
ཁྲི་ཤིང	1) cane, rattan, vine, creeper, tamarisk; 2) chair	khri shing
ཁྲི་ཤོག་རྒྱལ་མོ	1) Kokonor, the Blue Lake, Trishok Gyalmo, in Domey. "Queen who Destroyed Ten Thousand". 2) Trishok Gyalmo, the deity associated with Lake Kokonor	khri shog rgyal mo
ཁྲི་ཤོད་རྒྱལ་མོ	Trishö Gyalmo; {khri shog rgyal mo}	khri shod rgyal mo
ཁྲི་ཤོར་རྒྱལ་མོ	{khri shog rgyal mo}	khri shor rgyal mo
ཁྲི་བཤམས	bzhugs khri brgyab pa, throne arrangement	khri bshams
ཁྲི་བཤམས་པ	thrones were prepared for	khri bshams pa
ཁྲི་བཤོལ་བ	to abdicate	khri bshol ba
ཁྲི་སོང	king trisong deutsen	khri song
ཁྲི་སོང་ལྡེའུ་བཙན	Trisong Deutsen [dharma king of Tibet who invited guru rinpoche)	khri song lde'u btsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང	King Trisong Deutsen, abbr. of {khri srong de'u btsan}	khri srong
ཁྲི་སྲོང་དེའུ་བཙན	Trisong Deutsen. (790-844) The second great Dharma king of Tibet who invited Guru Rinpoche, Shantarakshita, Vimalamitra, and many other Buddhist teachers including Jinamitra and Danashila. In The P...	khri srong de'u btsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེ་བཙན	King Trisong Deutsen	khri srong lde btsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེ་བརྩན	[arch] khri srong lde btsan	khri srong lde brtsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེའུ་བཙན	King Trisong Deutsen, the main Dharma King of Tibet who invited Guru Rinpoche	khri srong lde'u btsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་བཙན	Syn {srong btsan sgam po}	khri srong btsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་རྩན	[arch] King srong btsan sgam po	khri srong rtsan
ཁྲི་སྲོང་ཡབ་སྲས	Trisong Deutsen and sons	khri srong yab sras
ཁྲིག	not less, not more	khrig
ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག	bro + - prancing 304	khrig khrig
ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག་བསྒྲིགས་སོང	it has suited well, it fits exactly khrig khrig cig mang nyung cha smoms	khrig khrig bsgrigs song
པ་བྱུང	a moderate number appeared, neither few nor many	pa byung
ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག་བྱེད	arrange, order	khrig khrig byed
ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག་མེད་པ	vague, uncertain, there is no certainty about, proper, suitable	khrig khrig med pa
ཁྲིག་གེ	completely still, free, freely	khrig ge
ཁྲིག་གེར་གཏད	stare straight	khrig ger gtad
ཁྲིག་གྱིས་ཆོད	completely cut through/ off	khrig gyis chod
ཁྲིག་གཅིག	sdeb gcig	khrig gcig
ཁྲིག་ཆགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	arranged in order [so as to be readily recited]	khrig chags su bkod pa
ཁྲིག་སྙོམས	cha snyoms	khrig snyoms
ཁྲིག་པ་གང	filled to overflowing	khrig pa gang
ཁྲིག་སྦྱོར	coitus	khrig sbyor
ཁྲིག་ཙེ་དཀའ་ཆེན	alias {blo bzang bzod pa}; dge lugs pa author	khrig tse dka' chen
ཁྲིགས	vibrate, arranged in proper order or row without deviation	khrigs
ཁྲིགས་ཀ	an abundance	khrigs ka
ཁྲིགས་ཁྲིགས	1) changeless, stable, persistent; 2) moderate number, average, in between, medeocre so so questionably; 3) bad, improper; 4) creaking of shoes; 5) precisely, punctually, sure, accurate, exact, cor...	khrigs khrigs
ཁྲིགས་ཁྲིགས་མེད	mostly confident or hopeful, but apprehensive etc[.Da lo lo yag 'byung bar khrigs khrigs med,'Gro dang mi 'gro khrigs khrigs med]	khrigs khrigs med
ཁྲིགས་ཆགས	in order / line, arranged, row, furrow	khrigs chags
ཁྲིགས་ཆགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	priest who is intent on service without looking to the side	khrigs chags su bkod pa
ཁྲིགས་ཆགས་སུ་བསྒྲིགས	arranged in a line/row	khrigs chags su bsgrigs
ཁྲིགས་ཆགས་སུ་བསྡེབས་པ	arranged in successive order	khrigs chags su bsdebs pa
ཁྲིགས་ཆགས་སུ་སྤེལ་བ	continuous regular increase	khrigs chags su spel ba
ཁྲིགས་ཆོད	cutting through	khrigs chod
ཁྲིགས་ཏེ	totally, thorough, completely, fully	khrigs te
ཁྲིགས་ཏེ་ཚར་སོང	was fully completed	khrigs te tshar song
ཁྲིགས་བསྡེབས	arrangement, ordering	khrigs bsdebs
ཁྲིགས་པ	alluring, seductive	khrigs pa
ཁྲིགས་ལུགས་བཞིན	in right order	khrigs lugs bzhin
ཁྲིགས་སུ་ཆགས་པ	occurring abundantly/ in order	khrigs su chags pa
ཁྲིགས་སུ་འདེབས	edited	khrigs su 'debs
ཁྲིགས་སུ་འདེབས་པ	edited	khrigs su 'debs pa
ཁྲིགས་སུ་སྡེབ་པ	1) to edit, arrange in proper order. 2) arrangement, edition	khrigs su sdeb pa
ཁྲིགས་སུ་སྡེབས	edited	khrigs su sdebs
ཁྲིགས་སུ་སྡེབས་པ	arrangement, edited	khrigs su sdebs pa
ཁྲིགས་སུ་བསྡེབ་པ	arranged in proper order	khrigs su bsdeb pa
ཁྲིགས་སེ	1) totally, thorough, completely, fully; 2) plentiful, abundant; 3) fit	khrigs se
ཁྲིགས་སེ་ཁེངས་སོང	was completely satisfied	khrigs se khengs song
ཁྲིགས་སེ་ཁྲིག	draw up in formation	khrigs se khrig
ཁྲིགས་སེ་གང	fully/ abundantly filled	khrigs se gang
ཁྲིགས་སེ་བྱས་ཚར	completely finished	khrigs se byas tshar
ཁྲིགས་སེ་བྱེད་པ	treat, entertain plentifully	khrigs se byed pa
ཁྲིགས་སེ་བཞག་པ	rest simply	khrigs se bzhag pa
ཁྲིགས་སེ་སད	fully awake	khrigs se sad
ཁྲིད	counsel, guidance, instructions, commentaries, explanation, lead, accompanied by, bringing with, instruction, tutelage, row, order, serial arrangement, SA 'khrid pa, instruction, past of 'khrid, ex...	khrid
ཁྲིད་ཀ	(spiritual) instruction	khrid ka
ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་དཀའ་གནད	difficult points	khrid kyi dka' gnad
ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the instruction preliminaries [usually the {blo ldog rnam bzhi) (cf {thun gyi sngon 'gro}	khrid kyi sngon 'gro
ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་ཟིན་བྲིས	instructional notes	khrid kyi zin bris
ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	the progressive stages of instructions, points of instructions	khrid kyi rim pa
ཁྲིད་བཀའ	guides	khrid bka'
ཁྲིད་སྐོར	cycle / set of instructions; khrid material	khrid skor
ཁྲིད་མཁས	to skillfully guide	khrid mkhas
ཁྲིད་རྒྱན	lineage of a teaching	khrid rgyan
ཁྲིད་བརྒྱ	Tri Gya, the Hundred Instructions; one hundred meditative instructions from all traditions collected and arranged by Jonang Jetsün Kunga Drölchok, 1507-1566. (Can be found in the gdams ngag mdzod, ...	khrid brgya
ཁྲིད་བརྒྱུད	lineage of instructions	khrid brgyud
ཁྲིད་སྔོན་འགྲོ	abbr. {khrid kyi sngon 'gro}	khrid sngon 'gro
ཁྲིད་སྔོན་འདྲོ	the instruction preliminaries	khrid sngon 'dro
ཁྲིད་ཆེན	a major / extensive commentary / instruction text; elaborate / major instruction text	khrid chen
ཁྲིད་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great transmissions (of the gelupa tradition) or {phyag chen khrid chen brgyad} the 8 great transmissions on the great seal [: 1) {bla	khrid chen brgyad
མ་སྐུ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཁྲིད	teaching on guru and the three bodies of a buddha 305 2) {byams snying rje'i khrid} teaching on love and compassion 3) {rgyu 'bras rten 'brel gyi khrid} teaching on causality and dependent originat...	ma sku gsum gyi khrid
ཨོཕ༹་ནེཅཏར	like five fold teachings on the Great Seal. 5) {lhan cig skyes sbyor gyi khrid} teaching on simultaneous and unification. 6) {nA ro chos drug gi khrid} teaching on six yogas of Naropa. {na ro chos ...	of nectar
ཁྲིད་ཆོག	I shall take you there	khrid chog
ཁྲིད་འཆད་ཐབས	way of instructing	khrid 'chad thabs
ཁྲིད་འཆད་པ	x {bla mas slob ma la khrid 'chad pa} the teacher gives the disciple instructions	khrid 'chad pa
ཁྲིད་ཉན་པའི་ཚུལ	how to listen to teachings	khrid nyan pa'i tshul
ཁྲིད་བཏབ་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ	have been able to guide	khrid btab pa yin te
ཁྲིད་སྟོན	teacher of a tri, lam khrid /path instructions, leading, guiding, directing	khrid ston
ཁྲིད་སྟོན་པ	to transmit instructions	khrid ston pa
ཁྲིད་སྟོན་བྱེད	lead, guide, direct	khrid ston byed
ཁྲིད་ཐོན་ནས	after receiving particular instructions	khrid thon nas
ཁྲིད་ཐོབ་པ	received instructions	khrid thob pa
ཁྲིད་དུ	among	khrid du
ཁྲིད་གདམས	instructions	khrid gdams
ཁྲིད་མདའ	guided missle	khrid mda'
ཁྲིད་མདའ་དཔུང་ཁག	guided missle forces	khrid mda' dpung khag
ཁྲིད་འདེབས	give an explanation/ tri of a percha etc	khrid 'debs
ཁྲིད་འདེབས་པ	give instruction, thorough instruction	khrid 'debs pa
ཁྲིད་འདེབས་བྱེད་པ	give instruction/an explanation/ tri	khrid 'debs byed pa
ཁྲིད་པ	pf. of {'khrid pa} 1) to lead, guide, take along, bring, accompany, to pull, bring with, accompanied by. 2) scripture, text of instructions; led	khrid pa
ཁྲིད་པའི་རིམ་པ	steps of guidance	khrid pa'i rim pa
ཁྲིད་པས་ཆོག	I am willing to give instruction, you may have lessons with me	khrid pas chog
ཁྲིད་ཕྲུག	pupil, student	khrid phrug
ཁྲིད་འཕྲུག	scholar, pupil	khrid 'phrug
ཁྲིད་རྩ	Syn {khrid gzhung}	khrid rtsa
ཁྲིད་ཚར	have the complete transmission	khrid tshar
ཁྲིད་ཚར་བ	Syn {khrid tshar}	khrid tshar ba
ཁྲིད་ཚུལ	system of teaching, ways of instruction / guidance	khrid tshul
ཁྲིད་གཞུང	instruction manual	khrid gzhung
ཁྲིད་ཟབ་པོ	thorough instruction	khrid zab po
ཁྲིད་ཟིན	instructional notes	khrid zin
ཁྲིད་འོངས་སོ	came leading, conducting 306	khrid 'ongs so
ཁྲིད་ཡིག	guidance-text, practice manual, manual of instructions, instruction text, guide book; instructions; a guidebook; explanatory text, (a manual which gives an explanation of the meditation practice; g...	khrid yig
ཁྲིད་ཡིག་གི་ས་བཅད	lesson	khrid yig gi sa bcad
ཁྲིད་ཡིག་ཟབ་རྒྱས	detailed instructional manual	khrid yig zab rgyas
ཁྲིད་ཡིག་ཡེ་ཤེ་བླ་མ	Yeshe Lama, the Unsurpassable Primordial Wisdom, a guide to Dzogchen practice by Jigmey Lingpa	khrid yig ye she bla ma
ཁྲིད་ཡིག་ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་མ	the Esoteric Instructions on All-surpassing Realization	khrid yig ye shes bla ma
ཁྲིད་རིམ	gradual steps of guidance	khrid rim
ཁྲིད་ལུང	oral transmission	khrid lung
ཁྲིད་བཤད	give an oral commentary on a pecha, techniques, or whatever	khrid bshad
ཁྲིད་བཤད་པ	give instruction, make admonitory speeches	khrid bshad pa
ཁྲིད་ས	place to take along, opportunity, chance to do	khrid sa
ཁྲིད་བསླབ་པ	instruction	khrid bslab pa
ཁྲིན་དུའུ	Ch'engtu	khrin du'u
ཁྲིན་བོན་ཕྱྭ་སངས	bon of laws	khrin bon phywa sangs
ཁྲིབ་ཁྲིབ	a large number	khrib khrib
ཁྲིམ་པ	one convicted, smaller transgression	khrim pa
ཁྲིམ་བོན	a bon po entrusted with inspecting the observance of the laws	khrim bon
ཁྲིམས	in accord w the dharmas of gods or humans, rule, usage, duty, regulation, law, code of conduct,, precept, custom, habit, right, justice	khrims
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི	judicial, legal	khrims kyi
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཁ་ལོ	legal officer	khrims kyi kha lo
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	minister	khrims kyi kha lo pa
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཁོལ་པོ	law worker	khrims kyi khol po
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཁྲམ་ཤིང	board on which the body of a culprit is stretched to flog him on the back	khrims kyi khram shing
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་དཔྱད་ཁྲ	judgement	khrims kyi dpyad khra
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་རིགས	study of law	khrims kyi rigs
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལེན	practice of laws	khrims kyi lag len
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལེན་པ	lawyer	khrims kyi lag len pa
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱིས་བཅོས	modify with the law of	khrims kyis bcos
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱིས་སྲུང་བའི་དགེ་སློང་མ	nun who keeps discipline	khrims kyis srung ba'i dge slong ma
ཁྲིམས་རྐུན་ལྐོག་བརྡུངས	khrims lugs kha khyer gyi sgo nas gzhan la lkog brnyas mnar brdungs	khrims rkun lkog brdungs
ཁྲིམས་ཁང	law court, place of justice court, court	khrims khang
ཁྲིམས་ཁང་མཐོ་ཤོས	highest court	khrims khang mtho shos
ཁྲིམས་འཁུར	abide by the law	khrims 'khur
ཁྲིམས་འཁུར་མི་དགོས་པའི་དབང་ཆ	diplomatic immunity	khrims 'khur mi dgos pa'i dbang cha
ཁྲིམས་འགལ	action against the law, break/ violate the law	khrims 'gal
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་ཅན	violator of the law, criminal	khrims 'gal can
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་བ	to break the law, transgressor, offender, criminal	khrims 'gal ba
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་བྱ་སྤྱོད	action against the law	khrims 'gal bya spyod
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་བྱེད	act against the law, break/ violate the law	khrims 'gal byed
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་ལས་ཀ	crime	khrims 'gal las ka
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་ལུགས་དཀྲུག	savage, wild, ruthless, outrageous	khrims 'gal lugs dkrug
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་ལུགས་དཀྲུག་བྱེད	act savage, wild, ruthless, outrageous	khrims 'gal lugs dkrug byed
ཁྲིམས་འགལ་ལུགས་འཆོལ	savage, wild, ruthless, outrageous	khrims 'gal lugs 'chol
ཁྲིམས་རྒྱུན	tradition of discipline/ law	khrims rgyun
ཁྲིམས་སྒོ	court, courtroom	khrims sgo
ཁྲིམས་སྒོ་རང་བཙན་གྱི་དབང་ཆ	extra- territoriality	khrims sgo rang btsan gyi dbang cha
ཁྲིམས་བརྒལ	break/ violate the law	khrims brgal
ཁྲིམས་བསྒྲགས་པ	proclaimed order	khrims bsgrags pa
ཁྲིམས་རྔ	nag can la khrims gcod dus beaten drum	khrims rnga
ཁྲིམས་རྔའི་ཁང་པ	(met khrims khang	khrims rnga'i khang pa
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད	broken law; judgment, sentence, punishment	khrims gcod
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་གཏོང	try a case, render judgement	khrims gcod gtong
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་དུ་འཇུག	hand over for punishment	khrims gcod du 'jug
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་པ	judge	khrims gcod pa
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་བྱེད	try a case, render judgement	khrims gcod byed
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	judge	khrims gcod byed pa
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་དབང་ཆ	right to adjudicate, jurisdiction	khrims gcod dbang cha
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་ཡུལ	1) khrims ra; 2) the person on whom sentence is passed	khrims gcod yul
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་ལས་མཁན	sentence carrier outer, executioner	khrims gcod las mkhan
ཁྲིམས་གཅོད་ས	[both court and place of punishment???	khrims gcod sa
ཁྲིམས་བཅད	tried a case, [rendered] judgement/ sentence	khrims bcad
ཁྲིམས་བཅའ་བ	to instigate the law/ to establish the law	khrims bca' ba
ཁྲིམས་བཅས	religious laws	khrims bcas
ཁྲིམས་ཆད	sentence, punishment	khrims chad
ཁྲིམས་ཆད་གཅོད	render sentence, punishment	khrims chad gcod
ཁྲིམས་ཆས	instrument of punishment	khrims chas
ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་དྲུག	the six major laws, {gtan khrims lnga} + {kheng mi ldog pa} [instigated by King Songtsen Gampo]	khrims chen drug
ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་བདུན	the seven major laws, {khrims chen drug} + {bang so mi 'dru ba}	khrims chen bdun
ཁྲིམས་འཇགས	according to the meaning or spirit of the law	khrims 'jags
ཁྲིམས་འཇལ	appraise punishment for a wrongdoing	khrims 'jal
ཁྲིམས་ཉིས་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	the 253 rules for a fully ordained monk	khrims nyis brgya lnga bcu rtsa gsum
ཁྲིམས་གཉན་པ	severe justice, cruel laws	khrims gnyan pa
ཁྲིམས་གཏམ	words to the offender at the time of khrims gcod	khrims gtam
ཁྲིམས་གཏོང	judgment, sentence, punishment [for crime]	khrims gtong
ཁྲིམས་གཏོང་གཅོད	try a case, render judgement	khrims gtong gcod
ཁྲིམས་གཏོང་བ	condemn	khrims gtong ba
ཁྲིམས་གཏོང་བྱེད	try a case, render judgement	khrims gtong byed
ཁྲིམས་གཏོང་དབང་ཆ	right to adjudicate, jurisdiction	khrims gtong dbang cha
ཁྲིམས་ཐུ་མོ་ཆེ	very powerful/ heavy law 307	khrims thu mo che
ཁྲིམས་ཐོག་གི	statutory	khrims thog gi
ཁྲིམས་ཐོག་མར་འགལ་བ	first offence/ offender	khrims thog mar 'gal ba
ཁྲིམས་མཐུན	in accord w law/ discipline, legal, lawful, legitimate	khrims mthun
ཁྲིམས་མཐུན་གོ་གནས	legal status	khrims mthun go gnas
ཁྲིམས་མཐུན་གཅོད་རྒྱ	chod gan deciding in accord w law	khrims mthun gcod rgya
ཁྲིམས་མཐུན་ཐོབ་ཐངས	dejure	khrims mthun thob thangs
ཁྲིམས་མཐུན་རྩ་འཛུགས	legal/ lawful organization	khrims mthun rtsa 'dzugs
ཁྲིམས་དག་པ	dge slong khrims dag pa a monk or a nun who has been keeping pure discipline	khrims dag pa
ཁྲིམས་དང་མཐུན་པ	lawful	khrims dang mthun pa
ཁྲིམས་དང་མི་མཐུན་པ	not in accord w law/ discipline, illlegal, unlawful, illegitimate	khrims dang mi mthun pa
ཁྲིམས་དུང	trumpet used in courts of justice	khrims dung
ཁྲིམས་དེབ	law book	khrims deb
ཁྲིམས་དོག་པོ	strict justice, hard punishment	khrims dog po
ཁྲིམས་དོན	legal matter	khrims don
ཁྲིམས་དོན་མཁས་པ	legal expert, lawyer	khrims don mkhas pa
ཁྲིམས་དོན་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	legislative assembly	khrims don spyi tshogs
ཁྲིམས་དོན་བློན་ཆེན	Minister of Justice	khrims don blon chen
ཁྲིམས་དོན་འཛིན་སྐྱོང	judiciary	khrims don 'dzin skyong
ཁྲིམས་དྲག་པ	severe punishment	khrims drag pa
ཁྲིམས་དྲག་པོ	severe/ capital law	khrims drag po
ཁྲིམས་དྲང་པོ	justice, righteous judgment	khrims drang po
ཁྲིམས་དྲལ	khrims bshig pa'am, khrims rgya dbral ba	khrims dral
ཁྲིམས་བདག	judge	khrims bdag
ཁྲིམས་བདག་གོང་ས	high/ presiding? judge	khrims bdag gong sa
ཁྲིམས་འདོམས་ཉེས་ཆད	legal punishment/ sentence	khrims 'doms nyes chad
ཁྲིམས་འདྲལ	break law	khrims 'dral
ཁྲིམས་ལྡན	proper, in accord w law/ rules/ discipline	khrims ldan
ཁྲིམས་ལྡན་དགེ་འདུན་སྡེ	the virtuous communities of the sangha	khrims ldan dge 'dun sde
ཁྲིམས་སྡོམ་པ	make a law	khrims sdom pa
ཁྲིམས་ནང་བཞིན	legal, lawful	khrims nang bzhin
ཁྲིམས་གནས	1) remain within/topic of the law; 2) Khrims gcod sa'i gnas / yul	khrims gnas
ཁྲིམས་གནས་པ	law being in force	khrims gnas pa
ཁྲིམས་པ	disciplinarian	khrims pa
ཁྲིམས་དཔོན	judge, magistrate, title of 2nd judge at lhasa, judge	khrims dpon
ཁྲིམས་དཔོན་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	chief justice	khrims dpon spyi khyab
ཁྲིམས་དཔོན་གཙོ་བོ	chief justice	khrims dpon gtso bo
ཁྲིམས་དཔོན་ལྷན་ཁང	judiciary, justice department	khrims dpon lhan khang
ཁྲིམས་དཔོན་ལྷན་ཚོགས	jury	khrims dpon lhan tshogs
ཁྲིམས་དཔྱད	proceedings, verdict	khrims dpyad
ཁྲིམས་དཔྱད་བྱེད	judge, decide legal questions	khrims dpyad byed
ཁྲིམས་ཕོག	khrims kyis nyes pa lus dang rgyu thog tu phog pa	khrims phog
ཁྲིམས་ཕོག་པ	punished	khrims phog pa
ཁྲིམས་བྱས་པ	was punished	khrims byas pa
ཁྲིམས་བྱེད	to enforce the law	khrims byed
ཁྲིམས་བླངས་པ	have undertaken the moral code	khrims blangs pa
ཁྲིམས་བློན	minister of justice, officer of justice	khrims blon
ཁྲིམས་དབང	legal jurisdiction	khrims dbang
ཁྲིམས་སྦྱོར	khrims la sbyor ba ste khrims sar skyel ba	khrims sbyor
ཁྲིམས་མུན	[arch] 1) khrims gcod ra ba; 2) prison	khrims mun
ཁྲིམས་མེད	lawless	khrims med
ཁྲིམས་མེད་པ	undisciplined	khrims med pa
ཁྲིམས་མེད་བཙན་ཤེད	having no regard for law gzhan la dbang yod thub tshod	khrims med btsan shed
ཁྲིམས་མེད་ལུགས་མེད	great evil actions not in accord w any law or spiritual tradition	khrims med lugs med
ཁྲིམས་མེད་ལུགས་མེད་བྱེད	act lawless, savage, wild, ruthless, outrageous	khrims med lugs med byed
ཁྲིམས་བཙུན	disciplined btsun pa	khrims btsun
ཁྲིམས་རྩ	tradition of law/discipline, constitution, code of law	khrims rtsa
ཁྲིམས་རྩོད	arguing/ trying in court	khrims rtsod
ཁྲིམས་རྩོད་མཁན	advocate	khrims rtsod mkhan
ཁྲིམས་རྩོད་པ	lawyer	khrims rtsod pa
ཁྲིམས་རྩོད་ཞིབ་འཇུག	court trial	khrims rtsod zhib 'jug
ཁྲིམས་བརྩི	accept/ have regard for/ abide by law/justice	khrims brtsi
ཁྲིམས་ཚོད་མི་གྲངས	quorum	khrims tshod mi grangs
ཁྲིམས་འཛིན	judicial	khrims 'dzin
ཁྲིམས་འཛིན་ཁྲུའུ	judicial office/ bureau	khrims 'dzin khru'u
ཁྲིམས་འཛིན་གྱི་གནས་དོན	judicial question	khrims 'dzin gyi gnas don
ཁྲིམས་འཛིན་པ	keeper/ holder of a tradition of law/dharma	khrims 'dzin pa
ཁྲིམས་འཛུགས་ཨུ་ཡོན	legislative committee	khrims 'dzugs u yon
ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ	verdict, judgement	khrims zhib
ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ་གཅོད	issue a verdict/ judgement	khrims zhib gcod
ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	a trial or investigation under law	khrims zhib cha byed pa
ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	jury	khrims zhib lhan tshogs
ཁྲིམས་གཞིར་གྲོས་ཞིབ	reading of legislative bill	khrims gzhir gros zhib
ཁྲིམས་གཞུང་སྡེ་ཚན	legislative act	khrims gzhung sde tshan
ཁྲིམས་གཞུང་རིག་གནས	jurisprudence	khrims gzhung rig gnas
ཁྲིམས་བཟོ	make laws	khrims bzo
ཁྲིམས་བཟོའི་གྲོས་ཚོགས	legislative assembly	khrims bzo'i gros tshogs
ཁྲིམས་བཟོའི་གྲོས་གཞི	legislative bill	khrims bzo'i gros gzhi
ཁྲིམས་བཟོའི་འཐུས་མི	legislator	khrims bzo'i 'thus mi
ཁྲིམས་ཡིག	deed, statute	khrims yig
ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་དྭངས་ཤེལ་མེ་ལོང	{khrims yig dwangs shel me long} [rab byung bcu gcig pa'i lcags bya lor sde srid sangs rgyas rgya mtshos brtsams pa zhig,.1681]	khrims yig dwangs shel me long
ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་དྲུག	the six edicts of law	khrims yig drug
ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་ནང་ལྟར	according to law	khrims yig nang ltar
ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་གསུམ	Srong btsan sgam po's three edicts of law [lag len bstar ba'i bden rdzun dbye 'byed kyi zhal lce khag gsum [mdo lon zhu bcad kyi khrims dang, dbang chen bcad kyi spyi khrims, khab so nang pa'i khri...	khrims yig gsum
ཁྲིམས་ཡོད	legal, lawful	khrims yod
ཁྲིམས་ར	yard before court of justice	khrims ra
ཁྲིམས་ར་འཆའ་བ	establish a court of justice	khrims ra 'cha' ba
ཁྲིམས་ལ་སྐྱལ་བ	deliver up to justice	khrims la skyal ba
ཁྲིམས་ལ་འགོད་པ	rule over	khrims la 'god pa
ཁྲིམས་ལ་གཏུག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན	decided to settle the matter by law	khrims la gtug tu phyin
ཁྲིམས་ལ་གཏུག་པ	{dbang po che yis khrims la gtug tu med} a powerful man cannot prohibit death	khrims la gtug pa
ཁྲིམས་ལ་གནས་པ	one abiding by law, holy man, one belonging to the holy order	khrims la gnas pa
ཁྲིམས་ལ་སྦྱར	take someone to court, sue	khrims la sbyar
ཁྲིམས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	take someone to court, sue	khrims la sbyor ba
ཁྲིམས་ལས་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	attorney general 308	khrims las spyi khyab
ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	tradition of law/ discipline, discipline, the law, right, legal system	khrims lugs
ཁྲིམས་ལུགས་མཁས་པ	lawyer	khrims lugs mkhas pa
ཁྲིམས་ལུགས་ཐོག་ནས	from legal point	khrims lugs thog nas
ཁྲིམས་ལུངས་སྟོན་པ	transmit the precepts	khrims lungs ston pa
ཁྲིམས་ཤགས	lawsuit	khrims shags
ཁྲིམས་བཤིག	khrims la ma brtsis par gtor ba	khrims bshig
ཁྲིམས་བཤིག་པ	infringe justice	khrims bshig pa
ཁྲིམས་ས	court of law	khrims sa
ཁྲིམས་ས་བར་གཅོད	khrims khang nas thag gcod dgos nges kyi gyod don de 'og nas khrims 'gal gyis thag gcod byas pa	khrims sa bar gcod
ཁྲིམས་ས་ཚོད་ལོངས	have little regard for the law	khrims sa tshod longs
ཁྲིམས་སུ་གཅད་པ	to punish, give a sentence	khrims su gcad pa
ཁྲིམས་སུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ	the 360 rules for a fully ordained nun	khrims sum brgya drug cu
ཁྲིམས་སྲུང	keep the law/ discipline,	khrims srung
ལཝ	abiding	law
ཁྲིམས་སྲུང་འགགས་པ	police team	khrims srung 'gags pa
ཁྲིམས་སྲུང་བྱེད	keep the law/ discipline	khrims srung byed
ཁྲིམས་སྲོལ	tradition of law/discipline, legal system	khrims srol
ཁྲིམས་ལྷོད	lose discipline or, yul khrims dam po min pa	khrims lhod
ཁྲིའི་རྐང་རྟེན	legs of a chair	khri'i rkang rten
ཁྲིའི་རྐང་པ	discipline the mind so that religion may take hold of it	khri'i rkang pa
ཁྲིའི་རྐང་པ་ཆོས་པ	bed furnished with legs or supports	khri'i rkang pa chos pa
ཁྲིའི་ཁ	platform	khri'i kha
ཁྲིའི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	{khri rgyan brgyad}; compare with {khri drug 'gyogs}	khri'i rgyan brgyad
ཁྲིའི་སྟེང	on the chair	khri'i steng
ཁྲིའུ	chair, stool	khri'u
ཁྲིའུ་ཁྱོགས	palanquin, sedan chair	khri'u khyogs
ཁྲིའུ་རྒྱབ་ཡོལ་ཅན	stool	khri'u rgyab yol can
ཁྲིའུ་བཙན་དར་མ	king {glang dar ma}	khri'u btsan dar ma
ཁྲིའུ་ཤིང	chair	khri'u shing
ཁྲིར་འགོད་པ	to coronate, enthrone, empower, place on a throne	khrir 'god pa
ཁྲིལ	SA 'khril, flickering	khril
ཁྲིལ་གྱིས	naturally, freely	khril gyis
ཁྲིལ་བ	wind, coil round, embrace closely	khril ba
ཁྲིལ་ལེ	naturally, freely	khril le
ཁྲིས	peace; solitary single	khris
ཁྲིས་སྐུད	gyon pa'i mthar gtong rgyu'i skud pa bslas ma [rope, braid]	khris skud
ཁྲིས་འཇགས	time of prosperity	khris 'jags
ཁྲིས་འཇོགས་པ	SA 'jugs pa	khris 'jogs pa
ཁྲིས་པ་བྱེད	leading	khris pa byed
ཁྲུ	1) cubit. [the size of 24 fingers, approx. 15-18 inches]. 2) two seventh's the length of one's own body. distance from the elbow to the tips of one's fingers. 3) pf. {khrud} to wash, to bathe	khru
ཁྲུ་སྐྱ	scum of boiled rice	khru skya
ཁྲུ་གང	1 cubit, (24 finger spans	khru gang
ཁྲུ་གང་ཁོར་ཡུག	khru gang gru bzhi	khru gang khor yug
ཁྲུ་གང་པ	a cubit high	khru gang pa
ཁྲུ་གང་ཙམ	about the measure of 15 inches from elbow to the fisted middle finger	khru gang tsam
ཁྲུ་གང་སོར་བཞི	one cubit and four fingers in length	khru gang sor bzhi
ཁྲུ་དགུ་པ	measuring nine cubits	khru dgu pa
ཁྲུ་འཇལ	khru tshad len pa	khru 'jal
ཁྲུ་འཇལ་བ	measure with a cubit measure	khru 'jal ba
ཁྲུ་ཐིལ	(CH cha sgam [cabinet wardrobe etc] sgrog tshe sogs kyi logs ngos dngos po 'jug snod	khru thil
ཁྲུ་དོ	two cubits	khru do
ཁྲུ་བ	to wash, bathe, rinse, cleanse	khru ba
ཁྲུ་མ་གྲུ་ཚད་མ	block-print a cubit long	khru ma gru tshad ma
ཁྲུ་བཞི	gru bzhi - out cubit	khru bzhi
ཁྲུ་གཟར	kind of stew-pan	khru gzar
ཁྲུ་བཟར	stew-pan	khru bzar
ཁྲུ་རློག	tilling the ground	khru rlog
ཁྲུ་སློག	1) establish a new field; 2) plow a field (30 break dig turn soil	khru slog
ཁྲུ་སློག་པ	1) establish a new field; 2) plow a field	khru slog pa
ཁྲུ་སློག་བྱེད	1) establish a new field; 2) plow a field; 3) break dig turn soil	khru slog byed
ཁྲུག	(not in DAS)	khrug
ཁྲུག་ཁྲུག	dazzling [color]	khrug khrug
ཁྲུག་གིས	completely	khrug gis
ཁྲུག་ཙམ་ཞིག	awhile	khrug tsam zhig
ཁྲུང	alcoholic drinks (h)	khrung
ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང	crane, grus cinerea, stork, heron	khrung khrung
ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོ	crane, brus nigricollis przevalski	khrung khrung dkar mo
ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་ཁ་སྤྲོད	picture of two cranes gdong sprod	khrung khrung kha sprod
ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་འཇོམས	"Conqueror of the cranes," Kumara, 2nd son of Ishvara	khrung khrung 'joms
ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དྲོ	call of the crane	khrung khrung dro
ཁྲུང་གིས་བད	get drunk [h]	khrung gis bad
ཁྲུང་ཆིང	Chungking	khrung ching
ཁྲུང་བན	chang cup/ vessel	khrung ban
ཁྲུང་བན་རྟ་མགོ་མ	horse headed chang cup in the Jo Khang [chos rgyal srong btsan sgam po'i skyems chang blug snod, rje tshong kha pas sa 'og nas bton te lha ldang tshug lag khang gi srong btsan sgam po'i sku mdun la...	khrung ban rta mgo ma
ཁྲུང་མ	landlady of a tavern, female keeper of a wine shop	khrung ma
ཁྲུང་ཞུ་མ	barmaid	khrung zhu ma
ཁྲུང་རྭ	tavern [h]	khrung rwa
ཁྲུང་རྭ་བད	drunk [h]	khrung rwa bad
ཁྲུང་རིན	price of chang, tip, gift	khrung rin
ཁྲུང་ས	1) tavern; 2) Chang sa: gnyen sgrig [mental accord, marriage] arrange put together] byed sgo	khrung sa
ཁྲུང་ཧྲེང་ཏའོ	Okinawa	khrung hreng ta'o
ཁྲུད	bathing water [p {'khrud}, {khru} washed, bathed, {'khrud pa}! bathe!	khrud
ཁྲུད་ཁང	bathroom, washroom	khrud khang
ཁྲུད་དང་གཙང་སྦྲའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of bathing and cleansing	khrud dang gtsang sbra'i cho ga
ཁྲུད་པ	wash, cleanse out dirt from body 309	khrud pa
ཁྲུད་མ	1) wash and rinse; 2) dirt in wash water; 3) something washed and cleaned	khrud ma
ཁྲུད་མ་བརྒྱབ	wash and rinse	khrud ma brgyab
ཁྲུན	1) division, distinction divide distinguish; 2) width, height, length, extension, altitude	khrun
ཁྲུན་གཅོད་པ	divide up	khrun gcod pa
ཁྲུན་ཐག་གཅོད	settle a controversy	khrun thag gcod
ཁྲུན་ཐག་ཆོད	settle a controversy	khrun thag chod
ཁྲུན་མཐོ་བ	high	khrun mtho ba
ཁྲུན་ཕང་སྲིད	height and breadth	khrun phang srid
ཁྲུན་འབྱེད་པ	divide, distinguish	khrun 'byed pa
ཁྲུན་རིང་བ	long	khrun ring ba
ཁྲུན་ཤིང	tree of heaven, Chinese toon	khrun shing
ཁྲུམ་ཁྲུམ	dry food chewing sound	khrum khrum
ཁྲུམ་ཁྲུམ་བརྡུང་བ	pound in a mortar	khrum khrum brdung ba
ཁྲུམ་ཁྲུམ་བྱེད་པ	pound in a mortar	khrum khrum byed pa
ཁྲུམས	n. of a constellation	khrums
ཁྲུམས་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ	the eighth month of the year according to Tibetan calendar	khrums kyi zla ba
ཁྲུམས་སྟོད	the 25th lunar mansion, One of {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} the 28 Nakshatras gods of the constellations	khrums stod
ཁྲུམས་སྟོད་ཀྱི་ཉ་བ	full moon of the month of July	khrums stod kyi nya ba
ཁྲུམས་སྟོད་ཟླ་བ	the eighth month	khrums stod zla ba
ཁྲུམས་སྨད	name of the 25th constellation (26th lunar mansion in hindu astronomy) figured by a conch and comprehending two stars of which one is andromeda, 1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, gama pegasi, 1...	khrums smad
ཁྲུམས་ཞག	log zhag nyer bzhi dang bya zhag bzhi bcu rdzogs rjes su	khrums zhag
ཁྲུམས་ཞག་བཅུ་གཉིས་བརྩི་སྟེ	bya zhag rdzogs rjes gtsang gi khrums zhag brtsi zhes pa ltar ro	khrums zhag bcu gnyis brtsi ste
ཁྲུམས་ཟླ	khrums month [zla bdun pa'i bcu drug nas brgyad pa'i bco lnga'i bar, 8th month {ston zla rwa ba}	khrums zla
ཁྲུའ་ཞི	chairman	khru' zhi
ཁྲུའུ	office, bureau	khru'u
ཁྲུའུ་ཀྲུང	director of office/ bureau	khru'u krung
ཁྲུའུ་རྩེ	(CH silk [made of stong skud thread]	khru'u rtse
ཁྲུལ	fall, drop	khrul
ཁྲུལ་གཏོང	fall, drop	khrul gtong
ཁྲུལ་གཏོང་བ	let fall, drop	khrul gtong ba
ཁྲུལ་པོ	cheerful, merry, fornicator	khrul po
ཁྲུལ་བ	mistake {'di ni 'khrul ba med par byed} there is no mistake concerning this	khrul ba
ཁྲུལ་མ	harlot	khrul ma
ཁྲུལ་ཚུལ	arising of delusion	khrul tshul
ཁྲུས	cleansing ritual to remove effect of {grib}	khrus
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་བཏུལ་ཞུགས་ཅན	sage who observes the vow of ablution	khrus kyi btul zhugs can
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	bathing discipline, rishi, ascetic	khrus kyi brtul zhugs
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	bathing yoga / practice. One of {dmangs kyi rnal 'byor bdun}	khrus kyi rnal 'byor
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རྩ	ku sha grass	khrus kyi rtsa
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རྩྭ	sacred grass kusha	khrus kyi rtswa
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རཙབ༹	sacred grass kusha	khrus kyi rtsva
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རྫིང	bathing tank	khrus kyi rdzing
ཁྲུས་ཁང	bathroom, washroom, bathhouse, toilet	khrus khang
ཁྲུས་ཁང་གླིང	Temple of Purification. A temple at Samye	khrus khang gling
ཁྲུས་ཁང་བརྩེགས་པ	making of a bath or bathing place	khrus khang brtsegs pa
ཁྲུས་ཁུ	dish wash, swill, water for bathing	khrus khu
ཁྲུས་མཁན	one who bathes, he that has bathed	khrus mkhan
ཁྲུས་རྒྱག་པ	wash	khrus rgyag pa
ཁྲུས་རྒྱབ་སའི་རྫིང	bathing tank	khrus rgyab sa'i rdzing
ཁྲུས་སྒོ	the "Gate of the Thaw," in the south; one of the eight monasteries around Manasarovar [MR]	khrus sgo
ཁྲུས་སྒོ་དགོན་པ	Gelukpa monastery built near {khrus sgo lho}	khrus sgo dgon pa
ཁྲུས་སྒོ་ལྷོ	Trugolho, the Southern Gate of the Thaw, on the shore of Lake Manasarovar	khrus sgo lho
ཁྲུས་ཆབ	ablution water	khrus chab
ཁྲུས་ཆལ	washing materials, bathing implements	khrus chal
ཁྲུས་ཆུ	bathing water, water consecrated by a deity being washed in it	khrus chu
ཁྲུས་ཆུ་འཐོར	sprinkle cleansing water	khrus chu 'thor
ཁྲུས་ཆོག	purification ritual	khrus chog
ཁྲུས་ཆོག་མཛད	perform the cleansing ritual / ceremony	khrus chog mdzad
ཁྲུས་འཆལ	soap	khrus 'chal
ཁྲུས་སྟེར	washing bowl	khrus ster
ཁྲུས་དང་གཙང་སྦྲའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of cleansing and purification 310	khrus dang gtsang sbra'i cho ga
ཁྲུས་དར	scarf or good linen towel for the toilet, scarf of silk used in washing the images of deities	khrus dar
ཁྲུས་སྡེར	basin used in washing ritual	khrus sder
ཁྲུས་པ	washed, washing	khrus pa
ཁྲུས་བུམ	cleansing vase	khrus bum
ཁྲུས་བྱ་བ	cleansing [before a mandala empowerment) phyi 'jug gi nang gses, outside the students las bum gyi chus bkru ba'o]	khrus bya ba
ཁྲུས་བྱས	cleansed	khrus byas
ཁྲུས་བྱེད	1) one that bathes. 2)	khrus byed
ཝཤེར	man. 3) cat. 4) kind of fish. 5) epith. of Vishnu	washer
ཁྲུས་བྱེད་དུ་ཕྱིན	went to the nearby bathhouse	khrus byed du phyin
ཁྲུས་བྱེད་པ	perform ablution, bathe	khrus byed pa
ཁྲུས་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of bathing (improperly	khrus byed pa'i ltung byed
ཁྲུས་དབང	baptism	khrus dbang
ཁྲུས་མ	something washed/ cleaned	khrus ma
ཁྲུས་མ་ཁྲུད་མ	washings of rice or any other millet remnant of water in which rice is boiled	khrus ma khrud ma
ཁྲུས་རཙབ༹	(met kusha grass as cleansing substance	khrus rtsva
ཁྲུས་རྩི	soap	khrus rtsi
ཁྲུས་རྫས	articles of washing, to wash with soap	khrus rdzas
ཁྲུས་རྫིང	bathing pool	khrus rdzing
ཁྲུས་གཞུང	basin	khrus gzhung
ཁྲུས་གཞོང	wash basin	khrus gzhong
ཁྲུས་རས	towel, silk piece used in the performance of the ceremony of ablution	khrus ras
ཁྲུས་ལུང	purification rite	khrus lung
ཁྲུས་གཤེར	bathing water, medical procedure or method of curing	khrus gsher
ཁྲུས་བཤལ	washing, rinsing	khrus bshal
ཁྲུས་བཤལ་གཏོང	rinse	khrus bshal gtong
ཁྲུས་སུམ་བྱེད་པ	performing 3-fold cleansing (kriya yoga	khrus sum byed pa
ཁྲུས་གསོལ	ritual for the purification of imperfections through the sprinkling of water on icons, books, and stupas; cleansing ceremony, ablution; cleansing ritual, to offer a bath / bathing, baptism	khrus gsol
ཁྲུས་གསོལ་བཏང་བ	perform the cleansing ritual	khrus gsol btang ba
ཁྲུས་གསོལ་བ	bathing places of great men	khrus gsol ba
ཁྲུས་གསོལ་བྱས་པ	perform / do ablution	khrus gsol byas pa
ཁྲུས་བསུམ་བྱེད་པ	the three washings [kriya tantra: phyi'i khrus yan lag lnga khrus, nang gi khrus rtsa ltung dag par byed pa, gsang pa'i khrus mtshan rtog dag par byed pa'o]	khrus bsum byed pa
ཁྲེ	1) millet; 2) measure = .32 meter; 3) ruler; 4) vermicelli	khre
ཁྲེ་ཀྲང	captain	khre krang
ཁྲེ་གད	scornful laughter	khre gad
ཁྲེ་རྒོད	wild millet	khre rgod
ཁྲེ་རྡོ	porcelain	khre rdo
ཁྲེ་ཙེ	1) ruler. 2) vermicelli	khre tse
ཁྲེ་ཙེ་བཅུ	zhang = 3.33m	khre tse bcu
ཁྲེ་རྩེ	chinese vermicelli	khre rtse
ཁྲེ་རྩེ་གྲུ་ཀྱོག	carpenter's/ Tibet square	khre rtse gru kyog
ཁྲེ་རྩེ་སྒྲིལ་མ	tape measure	khre rtse sgril ma
ཁྲེ་ལོག་ལོག་བྱེད	roll back and forth on the ground	khre log log byed
ཁྲེག་པོ	hard	khreg po
ཁྲེགས	hardness	khregs
ཁྲེགས་གཅོད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	the instruction in cutting through/trekchö	khregs gcod kyi gdams pa
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད	trecho, trekcho, cutting through, clear-cut, single pointed contemplation, total relaxation, the dissolving of tensions, the fundamental practice of integrating the state of contemplation into dail...	khregs chod
བརྲིཨེར	free, seeing through, cutting through solidity, tregchöd	barrier
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག	the trekcho samaya {med pa}, {phyal ba}	khregs chod kyi dam tshig
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ་བཞི	the four visions/levels of experience of Trekcho/ cutting through	khregs chod kyi snang ba bzhi
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་གནས་ལུགས	the natural state / condition of Trekchö / Cutting Through	khregs chod gnas lugs
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་བྱི་དམ་ཚིག	the samaya of trekchö	khregs chod byi dam tshig
ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་གཞིའི་གནས་ལུགས	ground nature of trekcho	khregs chod gzhi'i gnas lugs
ཁྲེགས་ཐོད	{khregs chod} and {thod rgal}, cutting through and direct crossing	khregs thod
ཁྲེགས་པ	SA mkhregs pa	khregs pa
ཁྲེགས་སུ་ཆོད་པ	tregchöd, SA khregs chod	khregs su chod pa
ཁྲེང་ཏུའུ	Chengtu	khreng tu'u
ཁྲེང་ཏེའུ	Chengtu (capital of Sichuan)	khreng te'u
ཁྲེང་ལོང	food steamer	khreng long
ཁྲེད་ཁྲེད	unclear/impure color	khred khred
ཁྲེད་གླིང	transverse flute	khred gling
ཁྲེན	[arch] skyon	khren
ཁྲེན་པོ་ཏ	chen po ta [high CH official]	khren po ta
ཁྲེན་དབྱི	chen yi [high CH official]	khren dbyi
ཁྲེམ་གཉེར	ripples, SA chu gnyer	khrem gnyer
ཁྲེམ་མཉེར	sha rgyags pa'i gnyer ma khrem khrem	khrem mnyer
ཁྲེམ་པ	frightened, shrink	khrem pa
ཁྲེམ་མེ་བ	gleaming w light	khrem me ba
ཁྲེམས	flow through, dissolve into	khrems
ཁྲེམས་པ	irrigation, water gardens, sprinkle water, a book	khrems pa
ཁྲེའུ	[arch] variegated seat	khre'u
ཁྲེའུ་ཙེ	colorful mat/ carpet/ seat	khre'u tse
ཁྲེའུ་ཟླ་བ	Uttaraphalguni. early April	khre'u zla ba
ཁྲེལ	modesty, piety/ chastity/ despised; 1) to feel ashamed [of oneself], shame, shamefaced, bashfulness, modesty, despised, guilty. 2) decency, selfreproach, embarrassment, consideration, bashfulness, ...	khrel
ཁྲེལ་གད	jeering, sarcasm, ridicule	khrel gad
ཁྲེལ་གད་བྱེད	to jeer, laugh, ridicule	khrel gad byed
ཁྲེལ་དགོད	disrespectful scornful/deprecating laughing/joking, jeering	khrel dgod
ཁྲེལ་དགོད་བྱེད	be disrespectful scornful, deprecatingly laugh/joke, jeer	khrel dgod byed
ཁྲེལ་དགོད་ཟེར་ཟ	satire	khrel dgod zer za
ཁྲེལ་བགད	mockery, derision	khrel bgad
ཁྲེལ་རྒོད	SA khrel gad	khrel rgod
ཁྲེལ་ཅན	bashful, modest, possessed of shame, conscientious, dreading blame	khrel can
ཁྲེལ་ལྟས	modest	khrel ltas
ཁྲེལ་ལྟོས	pusillanimous, shame-faced	khrel ltos
ཁྲེལ་བལྟས	bashful/ modest/ possessed of shame/ conscientious viewpoint	khrel bltas
ཁྲེལ་དང་ངོ་ཚ	block-print a cubit long, modesty and honesty	khrel dang ngo tsha
ཁྲེལ་དང་ངོ་ཚ་མེད་པ	who have no sense of shame or modesty	khrel dang ngo tsha med pa
ཁྲེལ་དང་ལྡན	bashful, modest, possessed of shame, conscientious	khrel dang ldan
ཁྲེལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	modest, decent	khrel dang ldan pa
ཁྲེལ་དོགས	gzhan zhe khrel ba'i fear/ apprehension	khrel dogs
ཁྲེལ་གདོང	bashful/shameful face	khrel gdong
ཁྲེལ་འདོད་ཅན	ready to shame others	khrel 'dod can
ཁྲེལ་ལྡན	shame, modest	khrel ldan
ཁྲེལ་ནས	scornfully	khrel nas
ཁྲེལ་པོ	shameful	khrel po
ཁྲེལ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa; 1) avoid/ shun evil[doer]; 2) feel ashamed of; 3) despise, scorn [faults, evildoers]	khrel ba
ཁྲེལ་བག	conscientiousness/ concern for propriety and the condemnation of others and carefulness	khrel bag
ཁྲེལ་བའི་རྒྱུ	dam pa khrel ba'i rgyu - It would surely displease the holy ones	khrel ba'i rgyu
ཁྲེལ་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	dam pa khrel ba'i	khrel ba'i spyod pa
སྤྱོད་པ	behavior that would shame sublime beings	spyod pa
ཁྲེལ་བོར	shameless, immodest, not caring what others think	khrel bor
ཁྲེལ་བོར་བ	shameless, immodest	khrel bor ba
ཁྲེལ་བྱེད	shame	khrel byed
ཁྲེལ་མེད	shameless, inconsideration, immodest, brazen, contemptible, indifference to blame. lack of concern for the consequences of actions done to others or the lack of any sense of embarrassment, lack of ...	khrel med
ཁྲེལ་མེད་ངོ་སྲུང	shameless subservience, fawning	khrel med ngo srung
ཁྲེལ་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྗེས་ལ་བཞག	Place behind you the vajra of no shame. end with the vajra of indifference to what others may think of you	khrel med rdo rje rjes la bzhag
ཁྲེལ་མེད་པ	lack of dread of blame, lack of sense of propriety, mibp 90,	khrel med pa
ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ་སུབ	disturbances {nye nyon 312 nyi shu}, not caring about the condemnation of others, inconsiderateness, lack of propriety shamelessness, indecent, immodesty, non-embarrassment, outward shamelessness	the twenty sub
ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ་སུབ	disturbances; {gzhan la ltos nas nyes spyod mi 'dzem pa}	one of the twenty sub
ཁྲེལ་མེད་བྱེད་པ	to behave in shameless ways	khrel med byed pa
ཁྲེལ་མེད་འོད་ཤོབ	shameless/ brazen exaggeration	khrel med 'od shob
ཁྲེལ་མེད་ལུགས་མེད	without shame or discipline	khrel med lugs med
ཁྲེལ་མེད་ལུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ངན	evil actions without shame or discipline	khrel med lugs med kyi spyod ngan
ཁྲེལ་འཛེམ	modesty, shame	khrel 'dzem
ཁྲེལ་འཛེམ་ཆེ་བ	very modest	khrel 'dzem che ba
ཁྲེལ་གཞུང	conscientiousness/ concern for propriety and the condemnation of others	khrel gzhung
ཁྲེལ་གཞུང་མེད་པ	base, mean	khrel gzhung med pa
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད	* shame, dread of blame/ condemnation/ avoidance, decency, modesty	khrel yod
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་གྲོགས་པོ	real friends	khrel yod grogs po
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་པ	decorum, mibp 42, dread of blame, shame, embarrassment, consideration, be chaste	khrel yod pa
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་པའི་ནོར	the richness of bashfulness. One of {'phags pa'i nor bdun}	khrel yod pa'i nor
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་པར་བྱེད	with modesty	khrel yod par byed
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	behave chastely	khrel yod par byed pa
ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་ཡ་རབས་ཀྱི་གྲལ	{'jig rten na khrel yod ya rabs kyi gral yin pa} is a noble thing in this world	khrel yod ya rabs kyi gral
ཁྲེལ་ཤེས	awareness of potential condemnation by others	khrel shes
ཁྲེས	1) grass seat/ cushion; 2) [arch] all/ entirely; 3) load, burden	khres
ཁྲེས་ཁུར	load, burden, backpack baggage	khres khur
ཁྲེས་ཁྲེས	to sit erect, falling down	khres khres
ཁྲེས་ཁྲེས་སུ་ན་བ	illness where 1 faints w pain	khres khres su na ba
ཁྲེས་པོ	baggage/ load [carrier]	khres po
ཁྲེས་པོ་འཁུར་མཁན	baggage/ load carrier	khres po 'khur mkhan
ཁྲེས་པོ་དེའི་ནང་ནས	from within that package	khres po de'i nang nas
ཁྲེས་སེ	completely, totally relaxed, free and easy, not controlled or designed, left as it is	khres se
ཁྲོ	1) Zhun bdar ma bcad pa'i metal; 2) bronze vessel pot, pan, molten metal/ bronze, bell metal,{khro ba}, {khro bo}, anger, rage, angry wrath[ful][1], enrage	khro
ཁྲོ་དཀར	white bronze (with more zinc)	khro dkar
ཁྲོ་རྐྱན	bronze small metal pitcher w spout/ teapot	khro rkyan
ཁྲོ་སྐྱབས	{khro skyabs}	khro skyabs
ཁྲོ་ཁང	wrathful mansion	khro khang
ཁྲོ་ཁོག	place in sde dge, Trokhog	khro khog
ཁྲོ་འཁོར	rgya lu chas spros skabs worn hat	khro 'khor
ཁྲོ་འཁྲུགས	arising of anger, enraged	khro 'khrugs
ཁྲོ་འཁྲུགས་མེ་ལྟར་འབར	anger blazing like fire	khro 'khrugs me ltar 'bar
ཁྲོ་གྲོག་རྒྱག་པ	to drink hastily, to gulp down	khro grog rgyag pa
ཁྲོ་རྒྱན	ornaments made of bronze	khro rgyan
ཁྲོ་རྒྱལ	wrathful king, king/ principal 1 of the wrathful ones, a wrathful buddha	khro rgyal
ཁྲོ་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great wrathful kings [4 male gate-keepers 1) vijaya, the victorious 1 2) yamaantaka, destroyer of death 3) hayagriva, the	khro rgyal chen po bzhi
ཧོརསེ	necked 4) am taku ali, coil of nectar see {rnam rgyal}-{gshin rje gshed}-{rta mgrin}-{bdud rtsi 'khyil ba}	horse
གཤེད	{rta mgrin} -{bdud rtsi 'khyil ba}	gshed
ཁྲོ་རྒྱུད་མདོ་ཆེན་བྱམས་པ	B"n text explaining the fruition of bskyed rdzogs	khro rgyud mdo chen byams pa
ཁྲོ་ངར	indignation, wrath, fury	khro ngar
ཁྲོ་རྔམ	wrathfully awesome, menacing, intimidating	khro rngam
ཁྲོ་རྔམས	wrathful, eagerly threatening to kill; 2) khrodhana, the 59th year of {rab byung}, {shing mo glang} the female wood ox	khro rngams
ཁྲོ་བཅུ	the ten wrathful ones [surrounding Vajra Kilaya] 313	khro bcu
ཁྲོ་ལྕགས	cast iron / brass, [alloy of iron and copper]	khro lcags
ཁྲོ་ཆ	wrathful aspect	khro cha
ཁྲོ་ཆགས	intensely passionate	khro chags
ཁྲོ་ཆས	ornaments of a wrathful deity, wrathful accouterments	khro chas
ཁྲོ་ཆུ	molten bronze; 1) molten metal / substance. 2) molten cast iron or bronze. 3) the Trochu river; bronze [cast]	khro chu
ཁྲོ་ཆུ་ཁོལ་མ	boiling metal	khro chu khol ma
ཁྲོ་ཆུ་སྡོམ་པ	fill up joints with melted bronze, solder	khro chu sdom pa
ཁྲོ་ཆུ་དམུ་རྫོང	Cast-Iron Fortress of the Mu	khro chu dmu rdzong
ཁྲོ་ཆུང	small wrathful emanations	khro chung
ཁྲོ་ཆུར	into / inside molten metal	khro chur
ཁྲོ་ཆུས་སྡོམ་པ	solder, fasten by melted metal	khro chus sdom pa
ཁྲོ་ཆེན་གཏུམ་པོའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	the sadhana of the Great ferocious one	khro chen gtum po'i sgrub thabs
ཁྲོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great wrathful ones [gate-keepers]. See {khro rgyal bzhi}	khro chen po bzhi
ཁྲོ་འཆམ་པ	one who dances in frantic leaps wearing a frightful mask	khro 'cham pa
ཁྲོ་འཇོམས	overcome/ eliminate anger	khro 'joms
ཁྲོ་འཇོམས་པ	overcome anger	khro 'joms pa
ཁྲོ་ཉམས	1) splendid/ majestic; 2) irritation fierce expression, angry countenance, angry mood, {khro gnyer, frown, wrathful grimace	khro nyams
ཁྲོ་ཉལ	rfierce/ angry countenance	khro nyal
ཁྲོ་གཉེར	frown, wrathful grimace	khro gnyer
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཅན	wrathfully grimacing, scowling, frowning	khro gnyer can
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཅན་མ	the Frowning one [aspect of Tara, epithet of palden lhamo]	khro gnyer can ma
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཆ་ལུགས	wrathful attributes	khro gnyer cha lugs
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་སྟོན་པ	sign of wrath on the nose or brow of a tantric meditational deity {khro gnyer can}	khro gnyer ston pa
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་དང་བྲལ་བ	become free from anger	khro gnyer dang bral ba
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་བསྡུས	face gathered into a wrathful frown	khro gnyer bsdus
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་བསྡུས་པ	Syn {khro gnyer can}	khro gnyer bsdus pa
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་མེད་པ	free from frowning or anger	khro gnyer med pa
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་གཟི་བརྗིད་ལྡན་པ	a medicinal root	khro gnyer gzi brjid ldan pa
ཁྲོ་གཉེར་རིམ་པ	ripples of furred brow	khro gnyer rim pa
ཁྲོ་གཏུམ	1) [strong] wrath, vicious, wrathful, furious fury, rage, anger; 2) khro gtum pass	khro gtum
ཁྲོ་གཏུམ་པ	furious with rage	khro gtum pa
ཁྲོ་གཏུམ་པོ	short-tempered, angry	khro gtum po
ཁྲོ་ཐབ	metal/ cast iron stove, boiler	khro thab
ཁྲོ་ཐབ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	boiler factory	khro thab bzo grwa
ཁྲོ་གདོང	angry/ vicious face	khro gdong
ཁྲོ་བདག་ཆེན་པོ	great heruka	khro bdag chen po
ཁྲོ་འདར	after anger arises tremble	khro 'dar
ཁྲོ་ལྡན	furious, raging hero, fearless man	khro ldan
ཁྲོ་ནག	bronze which emits ringing sound when struck, dark bronze (with more iron)	khro nag
ཁྲོ་སྣོད	cast iron container	khro snod
ཁྲོ་པ	SA khro	khro pa
ཁྲོ་པོ	brittle, fragile	khro po
ཁྲོ་པོ་འོད	brightness (on water when the sun shines on it	khro po 'od
ཁྲོ་ཕུ་བཀའ་བརྒྱད	Trophu Kagyü, the Kagyü School transmitted through {phag mo gru pa}, {rin po che rgyal tsha} and {khro phu lo tsA ba byams pa dpal}	khro phu bka' brgyad
ཁྲོ་ཕུ་དགོན་པ	khro phu monestary [phag gru'i yang slob byams pa dpal gyis phyag btab pa'i dgon pa gtsang shab gzhung gi shar rgyud du yod,... trophu monastery, founded by {khro phu lo tsha' ba byams pa dpal} sit...	khro phu dgon pa
ཁྲོ་ཕུ་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་བྱམས་པ་དཔལ	Jampa Pal, the Translator of Trophu [11731225], founder of {khro phu bka' brgyud}	khro phu lo tsA ba byams pa dpal
ཁྲོ་བ	indignation mibp 82, make one angry, get angry, enrage, belligerence, anger, wrath, wrathful	khro ba
ཁྲོ་བ་ཅན	angry, wrathful	khro ba can
ཁྲོ་བ་འཆོལ་བ	the wrathful crazy one	khro ba 'chol ba
ཁྲོ་བ་དང་འཁོན་འཛིན་མེད་པ	never getting angry or resentful	khro ba dang 'khon 'dzin med pa
ཁྲོ་བ་མ	a goddess	khro ba ma
ཁྲོ་བ་མེད་པ	good temperament	khro ba med pa
ཁྲོ་བ་ཟིལ་གནོན	subjugator of hostile [forces]	khro ba zil gnon
ཁྲོ་བ་བཟོད་པ	subduing or abstaining from anger	khro ba bzod pa
ཁྲོ་བ་ལ་ཆས་བཅུའི་དབང	chn	khro ba la chas bcu'i dbang
ཁྲོ་བའི་རྒོད་པ	wild/distracted/ beside oneself w anger	khro ba'i rgod pa
ཁྲོ་བའི་ཉམས་ལྡན	wrathful style	khro ba'i nyams ldan
ཁྲོ་བའི་གཉེར་མ	wrinkles/grimace of wrath	khro ba'i gnyer ma
ཁྲོ་བའི་སྦྱིན་བསྲེག	anuyoga rare tantra	khro ba'i sbyin bsreg
ཁྲོ་བར་འགྱུར	get angry	khro bar 'gyur
ཁྲོ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	grow angry	khro bar 'gyur ba
ཁྲོ་བར་བྱེད	get angry	khro bar byed
ཁྲོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	grow angry	khro bar byed pa
ཁྲོ་བར་མི་བྱ་བ	do not get angry	khro bar mi bya ba
ཁྲོ་བས་འགོག་པ	among 'gog pa'i rgyan, dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po byung zin pa zhig by means of 'gog byed ko long gi wrathful words 'gog par byed pa'i rgyan zhig	khro bas 'gog pa
ཁྲོ་བས་ལྟ	angry looks, look back with anger	khro bas lta
ཁྲོ་བོ	{khro bo khro mo} (masculine/ feminine) wrathful deity	khro bo
ཁྲོ་བོ་ཁྲོ་མོ	male and female wrathful deities	khro bo khro mo
ཁྲོ་བོ་རྒྱས་འདེབས	a wrathful bon deity	khro bo rgyas 'debs
ཁྲོ་བོ་ལྔ་བཅུ་ང་བརྒྱད	the 58 wrathful ones	khro bo lnga bcu nga brgyad
ཁྲོ་བོ་བཅུ	ten wrathful ones	khro bo bcu
ཁྲོ་བོ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 ones: 1) {gnod	khro bo bcu gcig
མཛེས	sumbharaja 2) {gshin rje gshed - yamantaka 3) {gzhan gyis mi thub pa aparijita 4) {rta mgrin - hayagriva 5) {bdud rtsi 'khyil ba - amrtakundala 6) {'dod rgyal - kamaa 7) {dbyug sngon	mdzes
ཅན	nilaclanda 8) {stobs po che makabala 9) {mi gyo ba - acala 10) {gtsug tor 'khor sgyur - usnisacakravartin) {rdo rje sa 'og - vajrasadhu]	can
ཁྲོ་བོ་བཅོམ་པ	epith. of Buddha	khro bo bcom pa
ཁྲོ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	the great wrathful one, epithet of mahakala	khro bo chen po
ཁྲོ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	four mah krodha deities	khro bo chen po bzhi
ཁྲོ་བོ་རྟ་གྲིན	[Krodha Hayagriva] the	khro bo rta grin
ཝྲཐཕུ༹ལ་ཨསྤེཅཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཡི	dam Hayagriva	wrathful aspect of the yi
ཁྲོ་བོ་སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེ	mahaloka	khro bo stobs po che
ཁྲོ་བོ་སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེའི་སྒྲུབ་བབས	sadhana of the great wrathful powerful one	khro bo stobs po che'i sgrub babs
ཁྲོ་བོ་བདུད་རྩི་འཁྱིལ་པ	Krodha Amrta Kundali	khro bo bdud rtsi 'khyil pa
ཁྲོ་བོ་འདོད་རྒྱལ	dakiraja	khro bo 'dod rgyal
ཁྲོ་བོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འོག	Vajrapatala	khro bo rdo rje 'og
བའི་རྒྱུད	a tantra [le'u bcu yod cing, bod yig gi sgyur yig yod kyang, tr unknown, slar rgya yig gzhir bzung nas bsgyur bcos byas pa zhig] khro bo rnam par rgyal ba'i rtog pa gsang	ba'i rgyud
ཁྲོ་བོ་པུན་ད་རི་ཀའི་རྒྱུད	Wrathful Blue Lotus Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras; focused on Vishuddha Mind. Found in Vol. RA of the Nyingma Gyübum	khro bo pun da ri ka'i rgyud
ཁྲོ་བོ་དབྱུག་པ་སྔོན་པོ	niladanda	khro bo dbyug pa sngon po
ཁྲོ་བོ་འབར་བའི་ལྟ་སྟང	the fiery gaze of the wrathful ones	khro bo 'bar ba'i lta stang
ཁྲོ་བོ་འབར་བའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the fiery gaze of the wrathful ones	khro bo 'bar ba'i lta stangs
ཁྲོ་བོ་མི་གྱོ་བ	krodhacala khro bo mi g.yo ba - Krodhacala	khro bo mi gyo ba
ཁྲོ་བོ་གཙུག་ཏོར་འཁོར་བསྒྱུར	ulagrivacakra-varti	khro bo gtsug tor 'khor bsgyur
ཁྲོ་བོ་རོལ་པའི་འདོར་སྟབས	posture of wrathful dance	khro bo rol pa'i 'dor stabs
ཁྲོ་བོ་གསུམ	the three types of wrathful ones	khro bo gsum
ཁྲོ་བོ་ལྷ་ང་བརྒྱད	fifty-eight wrathful deities	khro bo lha nga brgyad
ཁྲོ་བོའི་སྐུ	wrathful body khro bo'i skur sbrul gyis brgyan pa lnga chn khro bo'i skur sbrul gyis brgyan pa lnga five snake ornaments on the wrathful deity	khro bo'i sku
ཁྲོ་བོའི་རྒྱན	wrathful ornaments, ornaments of wrathful divinities 315	khro bo'i rgyan
ཁྲོ་བོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the wrathful king, principal wrathful divinity	khro bo'i rgyal po
ཁྲོ་བོའི་སྔགས	1) the mantra of the wrathful ones; 2) {ru lu} mantra	khro bo'i sngags
ཁྲོ་བོའི་སྟངས་སྟབས	manner & posture of a wrathful deity	khro bo'i stangs stabs
ཁྲོ་བོའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	wrathful vajra [9 points]	khro bo'i rdo rje
ཁྲོ་བོའི་བར་དོ	the bardo of the wrathful deities	khro bo'i bar do
ཁྲོ་བོའི་བར་དོ་འཆར་ཚུལ	how the bardo of the wrathful deities is experienced khro bo'i sbyin bsreg rdo rje'i ngur mo rare tantra of anuyoga	khro bo'i bar do 'char tshul
ཁྲོ་བོའི་རྩ་བའི་གདངས	the root melody of the wrathful ones	khro bo'i rtsa ba'i gdangs
ཁྲོ་བོའི་ཞད་པ་བརྒྱད	8 laughs of indignation and wrath khro bo'i zhing dang zhi ba'i zhing khams - the realms of the peaceful and wrathful ones	khro bo'i zhad pa brgyad
ཁྲོ་བོའི་བཞད་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of laughter of the wrathful ones	khro bo'i bzhad pa brgyad
པའི་གད་མོ་ཧ་ཧ	threatening laughter ha ha 2) {dgyes pa'i gad mo he he joyful laughter he he 3) {sgeg pa'i gad	pa'i gad mo ha ha
མོ་ཧི་ཧི	enticing laughter hi hi 4) {zil	mo hi hi
གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་གད་མོ་ཧོ་ཧོ	subjugating laughter ho ho); sdigs pa'i gad mo, ha ha, dgyes pa'igad mo, he he, sgeg pa'i gad mo, hi hi, zil gyis gnon pa'i gadmo, ho ho ste brgyad]	gyis gnon pa'i gad mo ho ho
ཁྲོ་བོའི་བཞུགས་སྟངས	wrathful position/ stance [one leg bent and 1 extended]	khro bo'i bzhugs stangs
ཁྲོ་བོའི་ལྷ་རྒྱུད་ཆེན་མོ	anuyoga rare tantra, rare tantra of anuyoga	khro bo'i lha rgyud chen mo
ཁྲོ་བོའི་ལྷ་རྒྱུད་རྟོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	rare tantra of anuyoga	khro bo'i lha rgyud rtogs pa chen po
ཁྲོ་བོའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the wrathful deities	khro bo'i lha tshogs
ཁྲོ་བྱེད	frightful	khro byed
ཁྲོ་བྱེད་མ	goddess Paldan lhamo	khro byed ma
ཁྲོ་བྲལ	without anger, peaceful	khro bral
ཁྲོ་མ	wrathful female deity	khro ma
ཁྲོ་མི་ཐང	[arch] should/ must not be angry	khro mi thang
ཁྲོ་མིག	expression of the eye, angry eyes	khro mig
ཁྲོ་མེད	free from anger, forbearance, patience, composure	khro med
ཁྲོ་མེད་བཟོད་པ་བསྒོམ	be tolerant and don't let anger develop	khro med bzod pa bsgom
ཁྲོ་མོ	1) angry woman; 2) (met) female wood dragon yr [krodhin, the 38th year of rab byung, {shing pho 'brug}; 3) wrathful goddess female wrathful one/ deity	khro mo
ཁྲོ་མོ་བརྒྱད	eight wrathful goddesses	khro mo brgyad
ཁྲོ་མོ་ཆེན་མོ་བཞི	four mah krodh deities [ankush, p sh, sphot, and ganth ]	khro mo chen mo bzhi
ཁྲོ་མོན	prison	khro mon
ཁྲོ་རྩ	the root melody of the wrathful ones	khro rtsa
ཁྲོ་ཚིག	censure, reproach	khro tshig
ཁྲོ་ཚུབ	blast of anger [presented as a harsh wind]	khro tshub
ཁྲོ་ཚུལ	wrathful manner	khro tshul
ཁྲོ་འཛུམ	angrily smiling. Syn {zhi ma khro}	khro 'dzum
ཁྲོ་ཞིང་གཏུམ་པ	fierce and enraged	khro zhing gtum pa
ཁྲོ་ཞིང་སྡང་བ	aggression and anger	khro zhing sdang ba
ཁྲོ་ཟངས	1) equally mixed copper and bronze pot; 2) a kind of bronze	khro zangs
ཁྲོ་བཟོད	forbearance in the face of wrath	khro bzod
ཁྲོ་བཟོད་པ	to bear / endure anger	khro bzod pa
ཁྲོ་རླབས	great anger, waves of anger	khro rlabs
ཁྲོ་ལ	1) khro la mt [in si khron zhing chen, dkar mdzes, sde dge rdzong]; 2) khro pass [between kong po nyang phu and aar rtsa mtso'i ed smi 5494]	khro la
ཁྲོ་ལ་སྐྱེན་པ	swift to wrath	khro la skyen pa
ཁྲོ་ལེ་བ	1) clacking sound. 2) open and free. See also {khral khrol}, {khral ma khrol} Syn {shigs se}, {bun ne}, {rgya chen po}, {glod po}	khro le ba
ཁྲོ་ལོ་ལོ	(to) chime and tinkle; clacking	khro lo lo
ཁྲོ་སེམས	resentment	khro sems
ཁྲོག	drink hastily, gulp down	khrog
ཁྲོག་ཁྲོག	one who speaks irrelevantly and is not steady in his acts or words, the sound caused by something falling heavily on the ground, kettle, sound	khrog khrog
ཁྲོག་བགྱབ་པ	drink hastily, gulp down	khrog bgyab pa
ཁྲོག་ཆུང	herb with leaves resembling a saw in shape	khrog chung
ཁྲོག་ཆེན	{khrog chen} med herb	khrog chen
ཁྲོག་པོ	botanical term used of leaves standing round the stem scattered or alternately	khrog po
ཁྲོག་སྨན	prepared substance of a medicine	khrog sman
ཁྲོག་རླག	loss, ruin	khrog rlag
ཁྲོང་ངེ	upright, straight, erect	khrong nge
ཁྲོང་ངེ་བ	erect, straight, upright	khrong nge ba
ཁྲོང་ངེ་ལུས་པ	transfixed {tshe 'di'i snang ba tur tur po 'di dar cig 'gags nas khrong nge lus 'dug} for an instant all his restless ordinary thoughts ceased and he stood transfixed	khrong nge lus pa
ཁྲོང་ངེར་ལངས་འདུག	stand straight up	khrong nger langs 'dug
ཁྲོང་པོ	close-fisted, stingy	khrong po
ཁྲོད	center, midst, among, crowd, place [of], assemblage, mass, multitude, side (of, in, location, land, ranges, region, area, site, ground, middle, mass, assembly	khrod
ཁྲོད་རྔམས	awesomely wrathful	khrod rngams
ཁྲོད་དུ	in the crowd, in the middle of	khrod du
ཁྲོད་རྡམས	awesomely wrathful	khrod rdams
ཁྲོད་ནས	from the midst of	khrod nas
ཁྲོན	pit, claw	khron
ཁྲོན་ཀྱིས་རྐོ་བ	gallinaceous birds	khron kyis rko ba
ཁྲོན་སྐྱོགས	ladle used at a well	khron skyogs
ཁྲོན་ཆུ	well water	khron chu
ཁྲོན་ཆུ་གཏོང	irrigate from a well	khron chu gtong
ཁྲོན་ཐག	well rope	khron thag
ཁྲོན་པ	well, spring [syn: kun brkos dang, chu nyal, chu yi ka ba, brus chu]	khron pa
ཁྲོན་པ་བརྐོས	dig a well	khron pa brkos
ཁྲོན་པ་གཅིག	a well	khron pa gcig
ཁྲོན་པའི་ཆུ	well water	khron pa'i chu
ཁྲོན་པས་རུང་བ	water in a well that has been made it by priest to drink	khron pas rung ba
ཁྲོན་བུ	1) Khron pa chung chung; 2) field herb, sweet, body heat neutral, by its power dug tshad dang, snod tshad, bad kan gyi nad sogs thur du sbyong bar byed]	khron bu
ཁྲོན་བོད	Sichuan-Tibet	khron bod
ཁྲོན་འབིགས	well drilling	khron 'bigs
ཁྲོན་འབིགས་བྱེད	drill wells	khron 'bigs byed
ཁྲོན་འབིགས་བཟོ་པ	well driller	khron 'bigs bzo pa
ཁྲོན་འབིགས་རུ་ཁག	well drilling group	khron 'bigs ru khag
ཁྲོན་སྦལ	1) frog in a well, small viewpoint; 2) medicinal root and vegetable purgative	khron sbal
ཁྲོན་མ	[arch] rtsub po	khron ma
ཁྲོན་ཚྭ	well salt	khron tshwa
ཁྲོན་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus lha sa'i sgo ra so so'i nang du yod pa'i khron pa'i chu bed spyod sngar bzhin byas chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor gnang ba zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	khron 'dzin
ཁྲོན་རགས	well mouth enclosure	khron rags
ཁྲོམ	street, mart, scatter, SA 'grem pa, market place, bazaar, crowd of people, market, negativities, probably the name given by Tibetans to Byzantium and the Anatolian peoples	khrom
མརྐེཏ	street; 2) multitude, mass gathering crowd; 3) city, town; 4) streets; 5) publicly; 6) military activities	market
ཁྲོམ་སྐོར	1) w many people in rows khrom lam du bskor te gzi rngam very colorful/ splendid display, parade demonstration; 2) go to the market, shopping	khrom skor
ཁྲོམ་སྐོར་བ	to wander about a market	khrom skor ba
ཁྲོམ་སྐོར་བྱེད	demonstrate, parade, shop	khrom skor byed
ཁྲོམ་སྐོར་མ	street woman, harlot	khrom skor ma
ཁྲོམ་སྐོར་རུ་འཕྲེང	1) many people having arranged rows khrom lam du bskor te gzi rngam very colorful/ splendid display, parade demonstra- tion; 2) go to the market, shopping	khrom skor ru 'phreng
ཁྲོམ་བསྐོར	paraded	khrom bskor
ཁྲོམ་ཁྲོམ	dom dom,...Bzhon rta la khrom khrom nyis brtsegs brgyab pa	khrom khrom
ཁྲོམ་གོང	market [wares'] price	khrom gong
ཁྲོམ་གྱི་རུ་སྣ	gyul 'gyed pa'i mi sna	khrom gyi ru sna
ཁྲོམ་བསྒྲགས	proclaim in the marketplace/ to all, openly publicized, public knowledge	khrom bsgrags
ཁྲོམ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	proclaim in the marketplace/ to all, openly publicize, make public knowledge, proclaim, announce, publish	khrom bsgrags byed
ཁྲོམ་བསྒྲགས་ཡི་གེ	open letter, street poster/ proclamation	khrom bsgrags yi ge
ཁྲོམ་ཆུ	Khrom River	khrom chu
ཁྲོམ་ཆེན	great crowd	khrom chen
ཁྲོམ་ཆེན་པོ	chief market place, principal street	khrom chen po
ཁྲོམ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཚོགས	a huge market gathering	khrom chen po'i tshogs
ཁྲོམ་ཆོས	preaching in a public place	khrom chos
ཁྲོམ་གཉེར	market superintendent	khrom gnyer
ཁྲོམ་མཉེར	market superintendent	khrom mnyer
ཁྲོམ་གཏམ་ལམ་ཆ	loose/ disconnected talk not worthy of making an accounting and relying on it	khrom gtam lam cha
ཁྲོམ་གཏེར	publicly discovered terma	khrom gter
ཁྲོམ་གཏེར་དུ་སྤྱན་དྲངས	revealed as a public terma	khrom gter du spyan drangs
ཁྲོམ་གཏེར་དུ་བཞེས	taken as a public terma [revealed among a crowd]	khrom gter du bzhes
ཁྲོམ་བཏབ	[arch] 1) undertake military activitiesdmag brgyab pa; 2) establish a military encampment 317	khrom btab
ཁྲོམ་བཏོན	arrange in a place where many people assemble, display and sell	khrom bton
ཁྲོམ་སྟོན་བྱེད་མི	stall-keeper, peddler, vender	khrom ston byed mi
ཁྲོམ་ཐག་ཀུན་ཆོད	was the very best. Syn {khrom thog kun chod}	khrom thag kun chod
ཁྲོམ་ཐང	market-place	khrom thang
ཁྲོམ་ཐོག་ཀུན་ཆོད	was the very best	khrom thog kun chod
ཁྲོམ་ཐོག་ཆོད	win over the crowd	khrom thog chod
ཁྲོམ་ཐོག་ཆོད་པ	person possessed of accomplishments above the crowd	khrom thog chod pa
ཁྲོམ་དུ་སྒྲོག	proclaim publicly	khrom du sgrog
ཁྲོམ་དུ་ཚོགས་པ	crowds came	khrom du tshogs pa
ཁྲོམ་པ	a province in tibet, market vendor	khrom pa
ཁྲོམ་པོ་པ	inhabitant of khrom	khrom po pa
ཁྲོམ་དཔོན	officer who is charged with the supervision of a market	khrom dpon
ཁྲོམ་བུ	1) casket, small shrine. 2) name of a medicine	khrom bu
ཁྲོམ་དབང	religious ceremony which consists in giving blessing to a crowd and public preaching	khrom dbang
ཁྲོམ་མེ	sparkling, glittering	khrom me
ཁྲོམ་མེ་བ	shinning, glittering, sparkling	khrom me ba
ཁྲོམ་དམངས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	street committee	khrom dmangs u yon lhan khang
ཁྲོམ་དམར་ནག་འཁྱིལ	throng (black and red intermingled)	khrom dmar nag 'khyil
ཁྲོམ་དམར་ནག་འཁྱིལ་བ	motley crowd	khrom dmar nag 'khyil ba
ཁྲོམ་ཚ	Tromtsa, in Domey	khrom tsha
ཁྲོམ་ཚིག	announcement, proclamation notice	khrom tshig
ཁྲོམ་ཚིག་བསྒྲགས	announce, proclaim, iussue public notice	khrom tshig bsgrags
ཁྲོམ་ཚོགས	gathering of buyers and sellers in a market	khrom tshogs
ཁྲོམ་ཚོགས་པ	a fair-ground	khrom tshogs pa
ཁྲོམ་ཚོང་པ	stall-keeper, peddler, vendor	khrom tshong pa
ཁྲོམ་ཚོང་བཤོལ	close shops in protest	khrom tshong bshol
ཁྲོམ་འཚལ	[arch] dmag brgyab pa	khrom 'tshal
ཁྲོམ་འཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ	in the manner of a market gathering, the chief figure surrounded by a huge retinue	khrom 'tshogs kyi tshul
ཁྲོམ་གཞུང	main street, business section	khrom gzhung
ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང	well known resthouse in Lhasa	khrom gzigs khang
ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་གནང	go shopping	khrom gzigs gnang
ཁྲོམ་ར	market, market, marketplace	khrom ra
ཁྲོམ་རུ	assembly of soldiers	khrom ru
ཁྲོམ་ལ་མ་ནི་བསྐུལ་བའི་ཐབས	on the efficacy of the om mani padme hum mantra (six syllable formula of Avalokiteshvara) in popular Buddhist practice	khrom la ma ni bskul ba'i thabs
ཁྲོམ་ལམ	street, main street, avenue, boulevard	khrom lam
ཁྲོམ་ལམ་མདོ	street intersection	khrom lam mdo
ཁྲོམ་ལམ་གསུམ་མདོ	three street intersection	khrom lam gsum mdo
ཁྲོམ་ས	[arch] military place	khrom sa
ཁྲོམ་སྲང	[main] street, avenue, boulevard	khrom srang
ཁྲོམ་གསེབ	in the market ngam khrod	khrom gseb
ཁྲོམ་ལྷ	Tromlha, in Domey	khrom lha
ཁྲོམས	imp. of 'grems pa; imp. of {'grems pa}	khroms
ཁྲོའི་ཁུག་ཏིལ	bronze pot to boil tea	khro'i khug til
ཁྲོལ	'grel ba! 'grol ba! resounding take off! {bkrol ba} stop! 'khrol	khrol
ཁྲོལ་ཁྲོལ	damaru etc. sound (of musical instruments rumbling, loud noise, bright, shining, insubstantial, inconcrete	khrol khrol
ཁྲོལ་ཁྲོལ་བྱེད་པ	stare at	khrol khrol byed pa
ཁྲོལ་གྱིས་སོང	slide making a sound	khrol gyis song
ཁྲོལ་རྒྱག	plow a field a second time	khrol rgyag
ཁྲོལ་རྒྱལ	the fierce Buddhas	khrol rgyal
ཁྲོལ་ཅིག	liberate, be free from	khrol cig
ཁྲོལ་ཆ	permission, pardon	khrol cha
ཁྲོལ་ཆ་བྱེད	give permission/ pardon	khrol cha byed
ཁྲོལ་ཆགས	clanging, ringing, rumbling	khrol chags
ཁྲོལ་དོང	large hand-bell	khrol dong
ཁྲོལ་པོ	bright, shining, cheerful, merry, sparkling, glittering, dazzling, fornicator, distinct, intelligible	khrol po
ཁྲོལ་བ	[arch] know, realize	khrol ba
ཁྲོལ་བུ	1) small sieve/strainer; 2) bits and pieces	khrol bu
ཁྲོལ་བུ་ལི	a fragment	khrol bu li
ཁྲོལ་བུར་བརྡུངས	ground/ pounded into bits	khrol bur brdungs
ཁྲོལ་མ	large bamboo basket, sieve, sieve for cleansing and sifting grains	khrol ma
ཁྲོལ་མ་རྒྱག	sift, strain	khrol ma rgyag
ཁྲོལ་མོ	brittle, fragile	khrol mo
ཁྲོལ་ཚགས	[grain] sieve, sifter, strainer	khrol tshags
ཁྲོལ་ཚགས་རྒྱག	sift, strain	khrol tshags rgyag
ཁྲོལ་ཚོགས	sieve	khrol tshogs
ཁྲོལ་ལེ	openness, freely flowing	khrol le
ཁྲོལ་ལེ་བ	damaru etc sound	khrol le ba
ཁྲོལ་ལེར་བཞག	rest freely	khrol ler bzhag
ཁྲོལ་ལོ་ལོ	khro lo lo	khrol lo lo
ཁྲོལ་ལོག	kettle, sound	khrol log
ཁྲོས	Syn {khros pa}	khros
ཁྲོས་ཀྱང་སླར་མི་ཁྲོ་བར་བྱ	not to retaliate when angered, although made angry, one does not respond with anger. One of the {dge sbyong chos bzhi} 4 dharmas of those skilled in virtue	khros kyang slar mi khro bar bya
ཁྲོས་ཏེ	in fury	khros te
ཁྲོས་ན་སྡོད་པ	to be surly	khros na sdod pa
ཁྲོས་ནག	black wrathful one [fierce black goddess (aspect of vajra yogini]	khros nag
ཁྲོས་ནག་ལྷ་ལྔ	Five Wrathful Black Deities, of Yamantaka mandala	khros nag lha lnga
ཁྲོས་ནས	in great anger,	khros nas
ཁྲོས་པ	to become angry/ wrathful	khros pa
ཁྲོས་པའི་གར	dance in wrathful mood	khros pa'i gar
ཁྲོས་པའི་གདོང་གི་གཉེར་མ	wrinkles on an angry face	khros pa'i gdong gi gnyer ma
ཁྲོས་སྤྱན་གྱིས་གཟིགས	gaze full of wrath	khros spyan gyis gzigs
ཁྲོས་མ	1) Krodhi, female wrathful one. 2) Syn {khros ma nag mo}	khros ma
ཁྲོས་མ་ནག་མོ	ma gcig khros ma nag	khros ma nag mo
ཁྲོས་ཚིག	angry words	khros tshig
ཁྲོས་བཞིན	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	khros bzhin
མཁ་འགྲོ་མ	kin GD	mkha 'gro ma
མཁ་འགྲོ་ཡང་ཐིག	a part of the {snying thig ya bzhi} by {klong chen rab 'byams}	mkha 'gro yang thig
མཁ་ནོར	sun	mkha nor
མཁ་གནད་ཆེ་ཤོས	quintessence	mkha gnad che shos
མཁ་དབྱིངས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the space mudr	mkha dbyings phyag rgya
མཁང	(not in DAS)	mkhang
མཁན་དཀར	white fern	mkhan dkar
མཁན་སྐྱ	artemisia sieversiana willd.	mkhan skya
མཁན་རྒྱུད	hierarchy of the religious preceptors	mkhan rgyud
མཁན་བརྒྱུད	TSE preceptor lineage (for monk's vows), succession of khenpos/ scholars/ abbots (at a monastery)	mkhan brgyud
མཁན་ཆུང	1) Tibetan govt nobles ser mo ba'i rank; 2) kind of mkhan pa ldum med. w yellow flowers	mkhan chung
མཁན་ཆུང་གསེར་མགོ	{mkhan chung gser mgo ldum med.	mkhan chung gser mgo
མཁན་ཆེན	mah pa ita, great learned one/ scholar, great preceptor/ abbot, title of a high lama, political position of religious head, professor, buddha 1) in a school khri 'dzin che gras; 2) Tibetan govt. re...	mkhan chen
མཁན་ཆེན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འོད་ཟེར	Khenchen Tashi Özer: 1836-1910 mkhan chen phyag rdor ba'i lha gsum The three deities of the great master Vajrapani: 1) {rta mgrin}. Hayagriva 2) {phyag na rdo rje}. Vajrapani 3) {bya khyung}. Garud...	mkhan chen bkra shis 'od zer
མཁན་ཆེན་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏྭ	Shantarakshita, the supreme abbot bodhisattva {zhi ba 'tsho} (indian pa ita who ordained the first monks in T, exponent of madhyamaka yogachara svatantrika)	mkhan chen bo dhi sa twa
མཁན་ཆེན་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹	Khenchen Bodhisattva. Shantarakshita	mkhan chen bo dhi sa tva
མཁན་ཆེན་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	Shantarakshita 319 mkhan chen byang chub sems dpa' bsod	mkhan chen byang chub sems
ནམས་གྲགས་པ	Khenchen Jangchub Sempa Sönam Drakpa, 1273-1345	nams grags pa
མཁན་ཆེན་ཞི་བ་འཚོ	{chos rgyal go ma de byi bya ba'i sras po mkhan chen zhi ba 'tsho} a great abbot called santaraksita, son of the religious king Gomadeviya mkhan chen zhi ba 'tsho} - Shantarakshita, also known as K...	mkhan chen zhi ba 'tsho
མཁན་ཆེན་རཏ་ན	Karmey Khenpo Rinchen Dargye mkhan chen lo tsA ba dhar ma shrI Dharma Shri, the great scholar translator	mkhan chen rat na
མཁན་ཆེན་ལོ་ཚ་བ་དྷ	sma shri	mkhan chen lo tsha ba dha
མཁན་ཆེན་ཤ་ཀྱ་བཟང་པོ	15-16th cent. - Khenchen Shakya Zangpo, one of Gampo Tashi Namgyal's teachers	mkhan chen sha kya bzang po
མཁན་ཆེན་བྷོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹	Shantarakshita, the supreme abbot Bodhisattva. Syn {zhi ba 'tsho. Indian pandita who ordained the first monks in Tibet	mkhan chen bho dhi sa tva
མཁན་ཆེན་ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་འཛིན	b.1742 Khenchen Orgyen Tendzin of Mindröl Ling.	mkhan chen o rgyan bstan 'dzin
མཁན་ཆེན་ཨོ་ཌི་ཡ་ན	Nyingma author	mkhan chen o Di ya na
མཁན་དྲུང	Tibetan govt, yig tshang las khungs kyi las 'gan 'khur ba'i drung yig chen mo	mkhan drung
མཁན་དྲུང་སྦྲེལ་པོ	mkhan drung mnyam sbrel te Tibetan govt. yig tshang las khungs su mkhan drung zhes ser mo ba rim bzhi bzhi yod pa de dag mnyam sbrel la zer	mkhan drung sbrel po
མཁན་ལྡུམ	rtsva ldum med. mkhan pa	mkhan ldum
མཁན་སྡེ་ཆེ་ཆུང	Tibetan govt nobles ser mo ba'i titles	mkhan sde che chung
མཁན་སྡེ་ཕྱི་ཀ	outside khanpo (those that enjoy this distinction but partially)	mkhan sde phyi ka
མཁན་ནག	black fern	mkhan nag
མཁན་ནང	Tibetan govt. gis sa mtshams srung 'dzin du btang ba'i rtse drung la mkhan po dang, shod drung la nang so zer	mkhan nang
མཁན་པ	ferns of 2 species useful for healing fresh wounds and swellings, incense, frankincense, artemisia	mkhan pa
མཁན་པ་དཀར་པོ	Tibetan mkhan pa med fern	mkhan pa dkar po
མཁན་པ་ཆིག་སྐྱེས	rkang re rer skyes pa'i rtsva mkhan pa	mkhan pa chig skyes
མཁན་པ་ལྗོངས	Khenpa Valley	mkhan pa ljongs
མཁན་པ་ནག་པོ	trans Himalayan med fern	mkhan pa nag po
མཁན་པ་སེར་པོ	{mkhan pa ser po} med, incense	mkhan pa ser po
མཁན་པོ	scholar-abbot; abbot (monastic)	mkhan po
མཁན་པོ་ཀུན་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན	c.1870c.1940 - Khenpo Kunzang Palden, a disciple of Paltrül Rinpoche	mkhan po kun bzang dpal ldan
མཁན་པོ་བཀོད་པ	to elect a head of a monastery	mkhan po bkod pa
མཁན་པོ་སྐལ་བཟང་མཁས་གྲུབ	1819th cent. - Khenpo Kalsang Khedrub, abbot of Pelgye Ling monastery at Nyanang	mkhan po skal bzang mkhas grub
མཁན་པོ་ངག་ཆུང	alias {ngag dbang dpal bzang} {mkhan po} 1879-1941; see {ngag dbang dpal bzang} mkhan po ngag dbang dpal bzang Khenpo Ngakchung / Ngawang Palsang. (1879-1941). A khenpo at Katok and a very importan...	mkhan po ngag chung
མཁན་པོ་མངོན་གྱུར	the (qualified) preceptor in person	mkhan po mngon gyur
མཁན་པོ་སྔོ	kind of shrub from which an incense is made	mkhan po sngo
མཁན་པོ་གཉིས	rab byung gi mkhan po dang bsnyen rdzogs kyi mkhan po	mkhan po gnyis
མཁན་པོ་དང་སློབ་དཔོན	master and disciple, scholar and master, abbot and master, {mkhan po bod dhi sat tva} Shantarakshita and {slob dpon pad ma 'byung gnas} the master padmasambhava mkhan po dang slob dpon} - master an...	mkhan po dang slob dpon
མཁན་པོ་འདྲ་བ	like a khenpo/ preceptor/ abbot	mkhan po 'dra ba
མཁན་པོ་རྣམས	authors	mkhan po rnams
མཁན་པོ་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹	Khenpo Bodhisattva. The Indian master who ordained the first monks in Tibet. See Shantarakshita	mkhan po bo dhi sa tva
མཁན་པོ་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏྭ	khenpo/ abbot/ preceptor bodhisattva, Shantarakshita	mkhan po bo dhi sa twa
མཁན་པོ་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏྭ་ཞི་བ་འཚོ	Bodhisattva Shantarakshita	mkhan po bo dhi sa twa zhi ba 'tsho
མཁན་པོ་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹་ཞི་བ་འཚོ	Bodhisattva Shantarakshita	mkhan po bo dhi sa tva zhi ba 'tsho
མཁན་པོ་མཛད་པ	to act as the preceptor	mkhan po mdzad pa
མཁན་པོ་ཡག་པོ	excellent lecturer	mkhan po yag po
མཁན་པོ་ལ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of khenpos [one mkhan po chos kyis sdud la zang zing gis ma yin pa'i yod conveys dharma not wealth two zang zing gys sdud la chos kyis ma yin pa'anf yod three chos kyis sdud cing zai...	mkhan po la rnam pa bzhi
མཁན་པོའི་གོ་གནས	abbacy	mkhan po'i go gnas
མཁན་བུ	1) abbot-disciple, [successor in a lineage of preceptors]. 2) pupil, student	mkhan bu
མཁན་བོ་གསུམ	the three kinds of preceptors; {rab byung gi mkhan bo}he abbot of a novice, {de slong ma'i mkhan bo} the abbot of a probationary nun, {dge slong gi mkhan bo} the abbot of a fully ordained monk (tse...	mkhan bo gsum
མཁན་མོ	mistress, instructress	mkhan mo
མཁན་ཚབ	temporary Dalai Lama's mdzod pa spyi khyab mkhan po until the real one is appointed	mkhan tshab
མཁན་ཟུར	an ex/ retired abbot TSE	mkhan zur
མཁན་རབས	succession of abbots in a great monastery	mkhan rabs
མཁན་རབས་དྲུག	the six generations of	mkhan rabs drug
སཆོལར	abbots	scholar
མཁན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	abbot	mkhan rin po che
མཁན་རིམ	1) lineage of abbots/ preceptors; 2) Tibetan govt mkhan chung dang rim bzhi, hierarchy of abbots/ preceptors in a monastic establishment	mkhan rim
མཁན་རིམས	respective prospects of being elected abbot as depending on the different ranks of the expectant candidates, order of succession of abbots	mkhan rims
མཁན་སློབ	Abbr. of {mkhan po} & {slob dpon} 1) master and disciple, scholar and master, abbot and master. 2) Abbr. of {mkhan po bod dhi sat tva}, {slob dpon pad ma 'byung gnas}; a preceptor	mkhan slob
མཁན་སློབ་ཆོས་གསུམ	The Abbot, the Master [Acharya], and the Dharma King. 1) khenpo Bodhisattva, Shantarakshita; {mkhan po bo dhi sa tva}, {zhi ba 'tsho}. 2) Lobpön Pema Jungney {slob dpon pad ma 'byung gnas}, Padmasa...	mkhan slob chos gsum
མཁན་སློབ་སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད་དྲུག	(TS) six characteristics of the abbot and assistant abbots in general [one {tshul khrims dang ldan ba} purity of moral discipline two {'dul ba'i cho ga shes pa} knowledge of monastic code three {na...	mkhan slob spyi'i mtshan nyid drug
མཁམས	(not in DAS)	mkhams
མཁའ	space, sky, heaven, external space	mkha'
མཁའ་ཀློང	whole compass or extent of the heavens, expanse of the sky, sky, space	mkha' klong
མཁའ་ཀློང་གཏད	gaze at the sky	mkha' klong gtad
མཁའ་ཀློང་དབྱིངས་གསུམ	sky, expanse and space. Syn {ngo bo rang bzhin thugs rje}	mkha' klong dbyings gsum
མཁའ་ཀློང་ཡངས་པ	immense skyrealm 321	mkha' klong yangs pa
མཁའ་ཀློང་རབ་འབྱམས་བསྐོང་བ	funerary deities	mkha' klong rab 'byams bskong ba
མཁའ་ཀློང་རོལ	manifests in the expanse of the sky	mkha' klong rol
མཁའ་དཀྱིལ	the center of the sky	mkha' dkyil
མཁའ་སྐྱེས	"born of heavens" [the year	mkha' skyes
ཨོཕ༹་ཕི༹རེ	tiger in the Tibetan sixty-years cycle]	of fire
མཁའ་བསྐྱོད	aviation, flight	mkha' bskyod
མཁའ་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	fly	mkha' bskyod byed
མཁའ་ཁམས	the element/ realm of space/ the sky	mkha' khams
མཁའ་ཁོངས	air space	mkha' khongs
མཁའ་ཁྱབ	{mkha' khyab tu} pervading all of space	mkha' khyab
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་འགྲོ་བ	infinite beings; all beings under the sky	mkha' khyab kyi 'gro ba
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	spacefilling/ all-pervading/ comprehending/ absorbing samadhi	mkha' khyab kyi ting nge 'dzin
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་འགྲོ	beings as infinite as space	mkha' khyab 'gro
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་འགྲོ་བ	sentient beings pervading space, sentient beings as limitless as space	mkha' khyab 'gro ba
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཏིང་ངེ	all-absorbing contemplation	mkha' khyab ting nge
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	all inclusive all pervasive samadhi	mkha' khyab ting nge 'dzin
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཏུ	pervading all of space	mkha' khyab tu
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་བདེ་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	the 15th Karmapa	mkha' khyab bde ba'i rdo rje
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་འདྲོ་བ་ཀུན	all sentient beings pervading space	mkha' khyab 'dro ba kun
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	karma pa - XV (1871-1922)	mkha' khyab rdo rje
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩལ	Khakyab Dorje Tsal	mkha' khyab rdo rje rtsal
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྩལ	Khakyab Dorje	mkha' khyab rdo rje'i rtsal
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཡངས་པ	vast and pervasive	mkha' khyab yangs pa
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the allpervasive wisdom body	mkha' khyab ye shes kyi sku
མཁའ་ཁྱབ་རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	Khakyab Rangjung Dorje	mkha' khyab rang byung rdo rje
མཁའ་ཁྱིམ་ཅན	sun	mkha' khyim can
མཁའ་ཁྱིམ་པ	the houses of the sky/ the zodiac	mkha' khyim pa
མཁའ་གོས་ཅན	cloud, clouds	mkha' gos can
མཁའ་གྲུ	airplane	mkha' gru
མཁའ་གློག	lightning in the sky	mkha' glog
མཁའ་བགྲོད	birds	mkha' bgrod
མཁའ་འགྱིང་དབལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	outer series of tantras	mkha' 'gying dbal gyi rgyud
མཁའ་འགྲུལ	air travel [in an airplane]	mkha' 'grul
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་གྱི་ལྟེ་གནས	airport	mkha' 'grul gyi lte gnas
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་འཕྲིན་ཡིག	air mail	mkha' 'grul 'phrin yig
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་བྱེད	travel by air, fly [in an airplane]	mkha' 'grul byed
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་སྲུང་སྐྱེལ	convoy, escort for planes	mkha' 'grul srung skyel
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་སྲུང་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	convoy/ escort planes	mkha' 'grul srung skyel byed
མཁའ་འགྲུལ་སློབ་གྲྭ	aviation school	mkha' 'grul slob grwa
མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakini, inspirations, bird, angel, fairy, SA rin chen mkha' 'gro, god, arrow, sky-goer, possessor of spiritual daka power in male form	mkha' 'gro
མལེ་སྤཅེ	farers or viras {dpa' bo}, celestial flight; daka; sky-goer/ dancer; goddess [sky goers], possessor of spiritual daka power in male form	male space
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་དགའ་བུམ	14th cent. Kunga Bum, Dakini	mkha' 'gro kun dga' bum
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྐྱེས	"born by dakini", rakshasa	mkha' 'gro skyes
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	Dakinis and wisdom protectors are the root of the pacifying etc. activities	mkha' 'gro chos skyong
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་ནོར་ལྷ	dakinis, Dharma protectors and wealth gods mkha' 'gro chos skyong phrin las kyi rtsa	mkha' 'gro chos skyong nor lha
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Dakini Hearing Lineage	mkha' 'gro snyan brgyud
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྙིང་ཐིག	{mkha' 'gro snying thig	mkha' 'gro snying thig
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྙིང་ཐིག་མ་བུ	the Mother and son (texts) of khandro nyingtig [the terma khandro nyingtig (on dzogchen revealed by {pad ma las 'brel rtsal} and the commentaries by Longchen Rabjam	mkha' 'gro snying thig ma bu
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གཏད་རྒྱ	entrusting the	mkha' 'gro gtad rgya
ཏེཨཆིངས་ཏོ་ཐེ་ཀིན་ས	entrustment to kin 's, the kin entrusted (terma lineage)	teachings to the kin s
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གཏད་རྒྱ་བརྒྱུད་པ	the kin entrusted lineage	mkha' 'gro gtad rgya brgyud pa
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གཏད་རྒྱ་ཡི་བརྒྱུད་པ	the kin -entrusted lineage	mkha' 'gro gtad rgya yi brgyud pa
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གཏད་རྒྱའི་རྒྱ་མདུད	work on medicine by {'phyongs rgyas ngag dbang dpal bzang}	mkha' 'gro gtad rgya'i rgya mdud
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གཏད་རྒྱའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of the kin s' seal of entrustment GD	mkha' 'gro gtad rgya'i brgyud pa
མཁའ་འགྲོ་དམ་ཅན	dakinis and loyal guardians	mkha' 'gro dam can
མཁའ་འགྲོ་བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མོ	Sky-faring Queen of Great Bliss, part of the cycle of the Longchen Nyingtig revealed by Jigmey Lingpa	mkha' 'gro bde chen rgyal mo
མཁའ་འགྲོ་འདུ་བའི་དུས་ཚེས	the gathering of te Skygoers (ceremony on the 10th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	mkha' 'gro 'du ba'i dus tshes
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five dakini aspects. Syn {mkha' 'gro ma rigs lnga} The five families. 1) {rdo rje mkha' 'gro} Vajra dakini. 2) {rin chen mkha' 'gro} Ratna dakini 3) {pad ma mkha' 'gro} Padma dakini 4) {las kyi...	mkha' 'gro sde lnga
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྡེ་བཞི	the four classes/ aspects of kin s [sm {mkha' 'gro sde lnga} the five kin aspects sm {mkha' 'gro ma rigs lnga} the five families of kin s (1 {rdo rje mkha' 'gro} vajra kin two {rin chen mkha' 'gro}...	mkha' 'gro sde bzhi
མཁའ་འགྲོ་བརྡ་ཡིག	dakini code script, symbolic script / writing of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro brda yig
མཁའ་འགྲོ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Khandro Wangchuk, [common name], Lord of Dakinis	mkha' 'gro dbang phyug
མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	DAKINI. 1) Spiritual beings who fulfill the enlightened activities; female tantric deities who protect and serve the Buddhist doctrine and practitioners. Also one of the 'Three Roots.' 2) Female en...	mkha' 'gro ma
མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གུར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	the kin vajra song tantra, kin vajrapa¤tjaratantra	mkha' 'gro ma rdo rje gur gyi rgyud
རྒྱུད་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Skt. dakini-vajrapanjara-mahatantraraja-kalpa mkha' 'gro ma rdo rje gur zhes bya ba'i	rgyud gi rgyal po
བཤགས་པ	Secret Confession of the Four Classes of Dakinis	bshags pa
མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་རྣམས	the dakinis	mkha' 'gro ma rnams
མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་སེང་གེའི་གདོང་ཅན	the	mkha' 'gro ma seng ge'i gdong can
ལིཨོན	faced Dakini. See also {seng gdong ma}	Lion
མཁའ་འགྲོ་མའི་ཡུལ	the land of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro ma'i yul
མཁའ་འགྲོ་འོད་འཆང	the dakini Prabhadhara, the emanation of the Suchness aspect of Vajra Varahi	mkha' 'gro 'od 'chang
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཡང་ཏིག	Longchenpa's commentary on mkha' 'gro snying thig	mkha' 'gro yang tig
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཡི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of celestial beings, Vi h u	mkha' 'gro yi dbang phyug
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	dakinis and wisdom protectors	mkha' 'gro ye shes chos skyong
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	the kin Yeshe Tsogyal,	mkha' 'gro ye shes mtsho rgyal
མཁའ་འགྲོ་རིགས་བཞི	four classes of dakinis	mkha' 'gro rigs bzhi
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལ་ཕུག	med herb	mkha' 'gro la phug
རྩིའི་རིགས་ཤིག་སྟེ	ro skyur la bska, zhu rjes drod, nus pas chu 'gags 'bigs, skyug pa gcod, chu ser dang dmu chu sbyong,	rtsi'i rigs shig ste
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལག་རྩལ	aviation tech skills	mkha' 'gro lag rtsal
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལག་རྩལ་མཁན	aviation mechanic	mkha' 'gro lag rtsal mkhan
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལག་རྩལ་པ	aviation mechanic	mkha' 'gro lag rtsal pa
མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་མོ	Leykyi Wangmo, dakini	mkha' 'gro las kyi dbang mo
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སངས་བ་ཡེ་ཤེས	{mkha' 'gro sangs ba ye shes [a lady deified as goddess of divine learning, said in a former life to have been wife of king Ratna d sa	mkha' 'gro sangs ba ye shes
མཁའ་འགྲོ་སོ་གཉིས	thirty-two dakinis;	mkha' 'gro so gnyis
ལྷག་མགྲོན	residual guests	lhag mgron
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གསང་བ	goddess of mystical learning	mkha' 'gro gsang ba
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གསང་བ་ཡེ་ཤེས	revealed by Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	mkha' 'gro gsang ba ye shes
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གསང་བའི་བརྡ	secret signs of the dakinis; "the twilight" language or "the secret" language of heavenly denizens	mkha' 'gro gsang ba'i brda
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གསང་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Secret Wisdom, Guhyajnana; a dakini teacher of Padmasambhava	mkha' 'gro gsang ba'i ye shes
མཁའ་འགྲོ་གསང་མཛོད	Secret Treasury of the Dakinis	mkha' 'gro gsang mdzod
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཁང་པ	Indra's palace	mkha' 'gro'i khang pa
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	golden bird with a crest	mkha' 'gro'i rgyal po
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སྙིང་ཐིག	Heart-drop of the Dakinis, transmitted by Guru Padmasambhava to Yeshe Tsogyal. Part of Longchen Rabjam's snying thig ya bzhi	mkha' 'gro'i snying thig
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བརྟན་ཡིག	kin script	mkha' 'gro'i brtan yig
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཐུགས་ཐིག	by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje, 1904-89?	mkha' 'gro'i thugs thig
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བརྡ་སྐད	language of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro'i brda skad
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བརྡ་ཡིག	dakini script, dakini script	mkha' 'gro'i brda yig
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བརྡའ་ཡིག	dakini script	mkha' 'gro'i brda' yig
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་གནས	the land of the kin s	mkha' 'gro'i gnas
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དབང	1) sgrol ma'i gtso mo; 2) Chakrasamvara; 3) garuda)	mkha' 'gro'i dbang
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དབང་པོ	epithet. of a Tantric deity	mkha' 'gro'i dbang po
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of space, Vishnu	mkha' 'gro'i dbang phyug
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་གཙོ་བོ	chief of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro'i gtso bo
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཚོ་བོ	the chief kin	mkha' 'gro'i tsho bo
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཚོགས་ཁང་ཆེན་མོ	Great Gathering Cave of the Dakinis; Khandro Tsokhang Chenmo, at Drigung Shotö	mkha' 'gro'i tshogs khang chen mo
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཚོགས་ལྔ	the five assemblies of dakinis chn	mkha' 'gro'i tshogs lnga
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ལུང་བསྟན	the dakini's prophecy	mkha' 'gro'i lung bstan
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	predicted / foretold by the dakinis	mkha' 'gro'i lung bstan pa
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སུན་མ	the call of the dakinis [indicating the passing away of a master]	mkha' 'gro'i sun ma
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སུན་མ་བཟློག་པ	averting the call of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro'i sun ma bzlog pa
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སུན་མ་བཟློགས་པ	averting the call of the kin s (for a master to die and go w them in spirit)	mkha' 'gro'i sun ma bzlogs pa
མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བསུན་ཟློག	averting the call of the dakinis	mkha' 'gro'i bsun zlog
མཁའ་འགྲོས་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	predicted / foretold by the dakinis	mkha' 'gros lung bstan pa
མཁའ་རྒོལ	air raid	mkha' rgol
མཁའ་རྒོལ་བྱེད	conduct an air raid	mkha' rgol byed
མཁའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	sky-ensign	mkha' rgyal mtshan
མཁའ་རྒྱུའི་ཡི་དབ༹གས	air-dwelling hungry ghost / preta, hungry ghost living in the air	mkha' rgyu'i yi dvags
མཁའ་རྒྱུའི་ཡི་དྭགས	air-dwelling hungry ghost/ preta, hungry ghost living in the air	mkha' rgyu'i yi dwags
མཁའ་རྗ་སྐྱེས	the disciple of the demon king of Ceylon	mkha' rja skyes
མཁའ་རྗེ་སྐྱེས	the disciple of the demon king of Ceylon	mkha' rje skyes
མཁའ་ཉལ	bird	mkha' nyal
མཁའ་མཉམ	like the heavens, infinite	mkha' mnyam
མཁའ་མཉམ་གྱི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings = to/ as limitless as space	mkha' mnyam gyi sems can
མཁའ་མཉམ་འགྲོ་བ	all beings, as infinite as the sky	mkha' mnyam 'gro ba
མཁའ་མཉམ་འགྲོ་བའི	as extensive as space	mkha' mnyam 'gro ba'i
མཁའ་མཉམ་བདེ་རོལ	enjoy bliss to the limits of space	mkha' mnyam bde rol
མཁའ་མཉམ་པ	like the heavens, infinite, endless, as limitless as space, Buddha	mkha' mnyam pa
མཁའ་མཉམ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	bodhichitta that is equal to space / the sky	mkha' mnyam byang chub kyi sems
མཁའ་མཉམ་སེམས་ཅན	beings as limitless as space	mkha' mnyam sems can
མཁའ་རྟེན	firmament, sky supporting, sort of ornament	mkha' rten
མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	like space	mkha' lta bu
མཁའ་ལྟར	like space, like the sky	mkha' ltar
མཁའ་ལྟར་ཁྱབ	all-pervasive like space	mkha' ltar khyab
མཁའ་ལྟར་ཁྱབ་པ	all-pervasive like the sky	mkha' ltar khyab pa
མཁའ་ལྟར་དག་པ	clear as the sky	mkha' ltar dag pa
མཁའ་སྟེང་འགྲོ	the planet of Mars	mkha' steng 'gro
མཁའ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	open-sky nature	mkha' stong pa nyid
མཁའ་ཐེག	the sky-vehicle	mkha' theg
མཁའ་འཐབ	air battle/ combat, dog fight	mkha' 'thab
མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་བརྡལ	pervading space	mkha' dang mnyam brdal
མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པ	equal to the sky	mkha' dang mnyam pa
མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པར	equaling the sky	mkha' dang mnyam par
མཁའ་དང་འདྲེས	merged into space	mkha' dang 'dres
མཁའ་དུ་བ	cloud	mkha' du ba
མཁའ་འདྲ	like the sky, like space	mkha' 'dra
སཀཡ	soarer. Syn {khyung}, {bya khyung}	sky
མཁའ་ལྡིང་ཀླུ་མོ་རྒྱལ	{mkha' lding klu mo rgyal	mkha' lding klu mo rgyal
མཁའ་ལྡིང་དཀར་པོ	buddhist, swan D	mkha' lding dkar po
མཁའ་ལྡིང་གི་རྒྱ	nam mkha' lding gi	mkha' lding gi rgya
རྒྱ	Garuda mudra	rgya
མཁའ་ལྡིང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the feathered race, the garu a bird 324	mkha' lding gi rgyal po
མཁའ་ལྡིང་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	garuda mudra; garuda mudra	mkha' lding gi phyag rgya
མཁའ་ལྡིང་རྒྱལ་མཚན	vishnu	mkha' lding rgyal mtshan
མཁའ་ལྡིང་དབང་པོ	garuda	mkha' lding dbang po
མཁའ་ལྡིང་གཤོག་པ	a green gem, SA mar gad	mkha' lding gshog pa
མཁའ་ལྡིང་གསེར་མིག་འཁྱིལ་བ	{mkha' lding gser mig 'khyil ba	mkha' lding gser mig 'khyil ba
མཁའ་ནང	female genitals	mkha' nang
མཁའ་ནང་མེ་འཁྱེར་གྱི་སྣང་བ	fireflies appearance	mkha' nang me 'khyer gyi snang ba
མཁའ་ནོར	sun	mkha' nor
མཁའ་གནས	abode of gods	mkha' gnas
མཁའ་སྣང	light of heaven, fire-fly	mkha' snang
མཁའ་སྣང་མེ་ཁྱེར	fire fly ngu	mkha' snang me khyer
མཁའ་སྤྱོད	Kachö. The accomplishment of being able to go to a celestial realm	mkha' spyod
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, power to vanish bodily into state of gods	mkha' spyod kyi dngos
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	1 of 8 ordinary accomplishments	mkha' spyod kyi dngos grub
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་གནས་བརྒྱད	eight celestial abodes; Skt. Khagacharya	mkha' spyod kyi gnas brgyad
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the celestial realm, realm of space	mkha' spyod kyi zhing khams
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་སྐོར་གསུམ	the three cycles of Khachoma	mkha' spyod skor gsum
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་སྒྲུབ་པ	attaining the celestial form	mkha' spyod sgrub pa
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཆུང་ངུ	the lesser celestial (accomplishment)*	mkha' spyod chung ngu
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཆེན་པོ	the greater celestial (accomplishment)	mkha' spyod chen po
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དག་པའི་ཞིང	the pure land of Heavenly enjoyment	mkha' spyod dag pa'i zhing
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དུ་འབྱོན་པ	pass on to the Pure Realm of Celestial Enjoyment	mkha' spyod du 'byon pa
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དུ་གཤེགས	gone to heaven	mkha' spyod du gshegs
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དུ་གཤེགས་པ	gone to the state of beatitude	mkha' spyod du gshegs pa
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་གནས	celestial realm, the home of aerial spirits/ dakinis	mkha' spyod gnas
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་པ	name of avalokiteshvara	mkha' spyod pa
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	sky-faring awareness holder GD	mkha' spyod pa'i rig 'dzin
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་འཕོ་བ	Phowa of the celestial realm. A type of phowa	mkha' spyod 'pho ba
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དབང་པོ	garuda, the lord of the kin s, the garu a, Shamar Rinpoche, gande	mkha' spyod dbang po
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དབང་མོ	epithet. of the goddess Dorje Phagmo	mkha' spyod dbang mo
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་མ	Skt. Khecari Khachöma, an aspect of Vajra Yogini	mkha' spyod ma
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཞིང	realm of Khechara	mkha' spyod zhing
མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཞིང་ཁམས	gnas dag pa	mkha' spyod zhing khams
མཁའ་སྤྲིན	cloud	mkha' sprin
མཁའ་སྤྲིན་ཅན	"clouded sky". the seventh month of the Tibetan calendar, poet. Lion [the sign of the Zodiac]	mkha' sprin can
མཁའ་འཕྲིང	(A) phor shubs	mkha' 'phring
མཁའ་འཕྲོ	daka 325	mkha' 'phro
མཁའ་བབས་མཚོངས་གདུགས	parachute	mkha' babs mtshongs gdugs
མཁའ་དབྱིངས	spacious sky	mkha' dbyings
དབྱིངས	the sky-expanse of your empty, luminous mind	dbyings
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ	mkha' dbyings	mkha' dbyings kyi rgya
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་གོང་མ	outer space	mkha' dbyings gong ma
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་གོང་མའི་དུས་རབས	space age	mkha' dbyings gong ma'i dus rabs
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་བརྟག་ཞིབ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	observation/ spy satellite mkha' dbyings dag pa sbyor ba byang	mkha' dbyings brtag zhib 'phrul 'khor
ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	Union Bodhichitta Sadhana of Pure Space	chub sems kyi sgrub pa
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་གནམ་རིག	astronomy mkha' dbyings rnam par dag pa'i bdag	mkha' dbyings gnam rig
ཉིད	the utterly pure nature of space	nyid
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the space mudr [used at the time of the {lhag ma}	mkha' dbyings phyag rgya
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་འཕུར་འཁོར	space ship mkha' dbyings brtsad zhib las khang space research center mkha' dbyings yum gyi bha ga la tshe	mkha' dbyings 'phur 'khor
སྒྲུབ་པ	Longevity Sadhana within the Secret Space of the Consort	sgrub pa
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་སུ་གཅེར	directly into open space	mkha' dbyings su gcer
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྟན	to face towards to sky	mkha' dbyings su bstan
མཁའ་དབྱིངས་སུ་ཐིམས་པར་གྱུར	melted into empty space	mkha' dbyings su thims par gyur
མཁའ་དབྱུག	trident, staff of tantric lamas (lit sky-stick) bed-stead D	mkha' dbyug
མཁའ་འབབ	from space 'bab pa'i mi rgyu kha char sogs	mkha' 'bab
མཁའ་སྦྱོད	sky-enjoyer, celestial realms/ accomplishment	mkha' sbyod
མཁའ་སྦྱོད་དུ་གཤེགས་པ	die	mkha' sbyod du gshegs pa
མཁའ་སྦྱོད་མ	Sky Enjoyer Lady, lady of the celestial realms, goddess	mkha' sbyod ma
མཁའ་དམག	air force, air force	mkha' dmag
མཁའ་དམག་རྟེན་གཞི	air force base	mkha' dmag rten gzhi
མཁའ་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	air marshal	mkha' dmag spyi khyab
མཁའ་ཟོན	[civil] air defense measurers	mkha' zon
མཁའ་ཟོན་གབ་ཁུང	air raid shelter	mkha' zon gab khung
མཁའ་ཟོན་གབ་ས	air raid shelter	mkha' zon gab sa
མཁའ་ཟོན་བྱེད	defend against air attack	mkha' zon byed
མཁའ་ཡི་སྙེ་མ	victory banner	mkha' yi snye ma
མཁའ་རི	great tibetan mountain range	mkha' ri
མཁའ་རི་གངས་བྲག	Glacier Rock Sky Mountain	mkha' ri gangs brag
མཁའ་རུ	towards the sky	mkha' ru
མཁའ་རུ་གཏད	direct in the space	mkha' ru gtad
མཁའ་རུ་གཟེངས	lift up towards the sky	mkha' ru gzengs
མཁའ་རོ་པ	divine musician that plays or moves merrily in the sky	mkha' ro pa
མཁའ་རོལ་པ	divine musician, one who plays n the sky	mkha' rol pa
མཁའ་རླངས	moisture/ vapor in space	mkha' rlangs
མཁའ་རླུང	air, atmosphere, air, atmosphere , prana of space in heart which provides a place, is blue or without color and gives a feeling of limpidity of consciousness	mkha' rlung
མཁའ་རླུང་གློད	talk hot air	mkha' rlung glod
མཁའ་རླུང་ཉུང་བ	rarified air	mkha' rlung nyung ba
མཁའ་རླུང་དུས་སུ	in the period of the prana of space (5-7am, 5-7pm)	mkha' rlung dus su
མཁའ་རླུང་གནོན་བཙིར	compressed air	mkha' rlung gnon btsir
མཁའ་རླུང་ཤོད	talk hot air	mkha' rlung shod
མཁའ་རླུང་སྲབ་པོ	thin/rarefied air	mkha' rlung srab po
མཁའ་ལ་འཁོར	vulture	mkha' la 'khor
མཁའ་ལ་འགྲོ	1) arrow; 2) bird; 3) deity)	mkha' la 'gro
མཁའ་ལ་རྒྱུ	1) cloud; 2) bird; 3) deva; 4) space)	mkha' la rgyu
མཁའ་ལ་རྒྱུ་བ	"that which moves in the sky", bird, god	mkha' la rgyu ba
མཁའ་ལ་རྒྱུ་བའི་ཡི་དྭགས	the pretas living in the air [Includes {btsan} {rgyal po} {shi 'dre} {'byung po} {ma mo} {the'u rang} etc mi yul gyi 'byung po dang the'u rang la sogs pa	mkha' la rgyu ba'i yi dwags
མཁའ་ལ་རྒྱུ་བའི་ཡི་དབ༹གས	'hungry ghosts living in the air'	mkha' la rgyu ba'i yi dvags
མཁའ་ལ་ལྡིང་བ	soar in the air	mkha' la lding ba
མཁའ་ལ་གནས	residing in heaven, god, Vi u	mkha' la gnas
མཁའ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	'living in the sky,' dakini. see {mkha' spyod}	mkha' la spyod pa
མཁའ་ལ་འཕུར	fly/ soar in space	mkha' la 'phur
མཁའ་ལ་འཕུར་བ	to soar through the sky	mkha' la 'phur ba
མཁའ་ལ་འཕྱར	rise into space/ the sky	mkha' la 'phyar
མཁའ་ལ་འཕྱར་བ	raised in the air	mkha' la 'phyar ba
མཁའ་ལ་མ	heavenly path, aerial way	mkha' la ma
མཁའ་ལ་མྱུར་འགྲོ	arrow	mkha' la myur 'gro
མཁའ་ལ་རིང་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	epithet. of the goddess Tara	mkha' la ring du bzhugs pa
མཁའ་ལ་གཤེགས་པ	going in the sky Avalokiteshvara	mkha' la gshegs pa
མཁའ་ལམ	the sky, air route, airline	mkha' lam
མཁའ་ལམ་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	air transport	mkha' lam skyel 'dren
མཁའ་ལམ་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport by air	mkha' lam skyel 'dren byed
མཁའ་ལམ་འཁྲིད	navigate a plane	mkha' lam 'khrid
མཁའ་ལམ་འཁྲིད་པ	navigator of a plane	mkha' lam 'khrid pa
མཁའ་ལམ་གྱི་སྣ་འཁྲིད	navigation of a plane	mkha' lam gyi sna 'khrid
མཁའ་ལམ་གྱི་སྣ་འཁྲིད་པ	navigator of a plane	mkha' lam gyi sna 'khrid pa
མཁའ་ལམ་གྱི་སྣ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	navigate a plane	mkha' lam gyi sna 'khrid byed
མཁའ་ལམ་གྱི་སྦྲགས་འཛིན	air mail stamp	mkha' lam gyi sbrags 'dzin
མཁའ་ལམ་པ	sun	mkha' lam pa
མཁའ་ལས་བབ	rain	mkha' las bab
མཁའ་ལས་འབབ	rain	mkha' las 'bab
མཁའ་བཤེར་སློག་སྒྲོན	search/flood light	mkha' bsher slog sgron
མཁའ་སྲུང	air defense	mkha' srung
མཁའ་གསང	secret center/ space, female organ	mkha' gsang
མཁའ་གསང་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the secret space mudra. Syn {mkha dbyings phyag rgya} 326	mkha' gsang gi phyag rgya
མཁའ་གསང་གཉིས	the two secret centers [sexual centers of the father-consort {yab} and the mother-consort {yum} (gkmk)	mkha' gsang gnyis
མཁའ་གསལ་གློག་བཞུ	flood/ search light	mkha' gsal glog bzhu
མཁའི	of the sky/ space	mkha'i
མཁའི་མཁའི་ལ་ཚོན་གྱི་རི་མོ	a painting the color of space on space	mkha'i mkha'i la tshon gyi ri mo
མཁའི་གོས་ཅན	cover or dress of the sky, night	mkha'i gos can
མཁའི་གླང་པོ	1) cloud, thunder/ dragon	mkha'i glang po
མཁའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	cloud, victory banner of the sky	mkha'i rgyal mtshan
མཁའི་ནོར་བུ	gem of heaven, sun, moon, star	mkha'i nor bu
མཁའི་པགས་པ	[lit. skin of sky] darkness	mkha'i pags pa
མཁའི་དབལ་མོ་བསྐང་བ	expiation rites for the dbal mo of the sky	mkha'i dbal mo bskang ba
མཁའི་ཟིལ་པ	cow	mkha'i zil pa
མཁའི་ཟིལ་བ	fog	mkha'i zil ba
མཁར	castle/ citadel/ a staff, walking stick; 1) building, castle, fort, palace, stronghold, house, chalet, mansion,	mkhar
མནོར	house, citadel, tower. 2) in the sky; fortress; citadel	manor
མཁར་ཁ	place in Tsang	mkhar kha
མཁར་ཁང	ri sgang sogs la brtsigs pa'i castle	mkhar khang
མཁར་འཁོར	/; 1) cloud; 2) vulture)	mkhar 'khor
མཁར་གོང	{mkhar gong mineral med. [mkkar gong srin can dang srin med gnyis mchis, nus pas srin 'don, dug brtag thub	mkhar gong
མཁར་གོང་སྲིན་ཅན	a poisonous white stone	mkhar gong srin can
མཁར་གོང་སྲིན་མེད	a poisonous white stone	mkhar gong srin med
མཁར་གྲོང	walled city, urban and rural, city and country	mkhar grong
མཁར་འགོ	commander of a fort	mkhar 'go
མཁར་འགྱེལ	the castle collapses	mkhar 'gyel
མཁར་འགྲོ	the sky-goer, god, cloud	mkhar 'gro
མཁར་རྒྱ	mkhar ru'i rgya ma ste mkhar rgya'i 'degs khal gcig la rgya ma brgyad tsam yod	mkhar rgya
མཁར་རྒྱབ་པ	fortify	mkhar rgyab pa
མཁར་རྒྱའི་ཁལ	= 768 dbus sho, 640 mgyur sho	mkhar rgya'i khal
མཁར་རྒྱའི་སྤོར	mkhar 'degs or mkhar khal 1/ 80th part	mkhar rgya'i spor
མཁར་སྒོ	gate of the castle	mkhar sgo
མཁར་དངོས	home and belongings mkhar dngos dbang 'dzin mkhe dbang right to property	mkhar dngos
མཁར་རྔ	kettle drum, drum, minstrel, gong	mkhar rnga
མཁར་སྔོན	{mkhar sngon}	mkhar sngon
མཁར་ཆུ་བ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	mkhar chu ba
མཁར་ཆེན	{mkhar chen} [place or family name	mkhar chen
མཁར་ཆེན་པ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	mkhar chen pa
མཁར་ཆེན་དཔལ་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	mkhar chen dpal gyi dbang phyug
མཁར་ཆེན་བྲག་དཀར	{mkhar chen brag dkar	mkhar chen brag dkar
མཁར་ཆེན་རྫོང	a for near Tengri Nor	mkhar chen rdzong
མཁར་ཆེན་བཟའ	Lady Kharchen. See Yeshe Tsogyal	mkhar chen bza'
མཁར་ཆེན་བཟའ་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	Lady Tsogyal of Kharchen. See Yeshe Tsogyal	mkhar chen bza' mtsho rgyal
མཁར་རྗེ	1) rdzong gi sde pa ste rdzong dpon,...2) Bsod	mkhar rje
མཁར་ཉག	mkhar gyi nya ga: mkhar rgya wt. 1/ 20 part, nya ga gang rer ha lam rgya ma'i srang bzhi re or 38 sho of dbus + 8 skar	mkhar nyag
མཁར་ཉག་གི་ཁལ	gold weight in a steelyard ?	mkhar nyag gi khal
མཁར་ཉལ	that sleeps on space, general name for gods and birds	mkhar nyal
མཁར་རྟ	place near Tibet Nepal border	mkhar rta
མཁར་ལྟག	forts {mkhar rtse} and {lhag rtse}	mkhar ltag
མཁར་ཐབས	castle, tower, mansion	mkhar thabs
མཁར་ཐོག	n. of Tibet	mkhar thog
མཁར་མཐོང	seen in the sky moon	mkhar mthong
མཁར་དོ་བསམ་གཏན་གླིང	Khardo Samten Ling, the Stone Citadel of Contemplation, in U	mkhar do bsam gtan gling
མཁར་དྲངས	while it is pulled up in space	mkhar drangs
མཁར་འདེགས	mkhar ru'i 'degs khal ste, mkhar 'degs kyi khal gcig la ha lam rgya ma brgyad tsam zhig yin	mkhar 'degs
མཁར་རྡོ	a medicine, metallic substance in large grains, pyrite	mkhar rdo
མཁར་རྡོ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	third Khardo Rinpoche, Chökyi Dorje (died c.1820)	mkhar rdo chos kyi rdo rje
མཁར་རྡོ་ཆོས་ལྡན་དབང་པོ	second Khardo Rinpoche, Chöden Wangpo. (18th cent.) 327	mkhar rdo chos ldan dbang po
མཁར་རྡོ་བཟོད་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	first Khardo Rinpoche, Söpa Gyatso. (b. 1672)	mkhar rdo bzod pa rgya mtsho
མཁར་ལྡེར	plate of bell-metal	mkhar lder
མཁར་སྡེར	plate/ dish of bell metal	mkhar sder
མཁར་ནག་རྡོ་རྗེ	local deity of mtshur phu monastery	mkhar nag rdo rje
མཁར་ནག་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	the vajra king of Karnak [local deity of Tsurphu)	mkhar nag rdo rje rgyal po
མཁར་པོ	Syn {mkhar}	mkhar po
མཁར་དཔོན	governor of a castle, commander of a fortress	mkhar dpon
མཁར་སྤེའུ	1) at the border of a wall/ fence mtho tsam du brtsigs pa'i house = lcog; 2) (A) shing gi sdong bu	mkhar spe'u
མཁར་བ	walking stick, staff * bell metal, gong, guest-house	mkhar ba
མཁར་བའི་དགྲ	epithet. of Vishnu	mkhar ba'i dgra
མཁར་བའི་མཛའ་བོ	old man, friend of a staff)	mkhar ba'i mdza' bo
མཁར་བུ	(A) small castle or btsan rdzong	mkhar bu
མཁར་བྲེ	mkhar ru'i bre ste, 'bo gang gi nyi shu tham pa'i cha gcig yin zhing, bre gang la ha lam nas rgya ma gang dang srang bzhi'i ljid yod	mkhar bre
མཁར་དབང་སྒར་འཛིན	private ownership od property	mkhar dbang sgar 'dzin
མཁར་འབོ	mkhar ru ste nas mkhar 'bo'i khal gcig rer ljid tshad ha lam rgya ma nyi shu rtsa brgyad re yod	mkhar 'bo
མཁར་མེ	wine-cup	mkhar me
མཁར་རྩེ	mkhar rtse rdzong	mkhar rtse
མཁར་རྩེ་བ	a fort in Phan -yul in Tibet	mkhar rtse ba
ཕན	yul	Phan
མཁར་བརྩེག་པ	multi-storied mansion, fort, fortress	mkhar brtseg pa
མཁར་བརྩེགས	a certain kin script	mkhar brtsegs
མཁར་ཚོ	(A)/; 1) castle guards; 2) common people living in a castle)	mkhar tsho
མཁར་རྫོང	[castle] fort[ress]	mkhar rdzong
མཁར་ཞོལ	1) mkhar gyi rtsa ba'am gsham,...2) Mkhar dang khad nye ba'i sa cha	mkhar zhol
མཁར་ཟམ་ལྷ་ཁང་རྫོང	{mkhar zam lha khang rdzong} fort/town	mkhar zam lha khang rdzong
མཁར་བཟོ་བ	maker of articles of bellmetal, fortification	mkhar bzo ba
མཁར་རིས	(A) mkhar rdzong gi khongs gtogs	mkhar ris
མཁར་རུ	in the beginning of the 7th century karma bstan skyong gis 'degs gshor gyi dngos po'i tshad gzhi gtan 'bebs bzos pa'i 'bo la gtan tshigs mkhar ru dang nya ga la mkhar rgya zhes grags	mkhar ru
མཁར་རུའི་སྤོར་གང	one spor of mkhar ru measure is equal to one silver srang	mkhar ru'i spor gang
མཁར་ལན	(A) bricklayer's/ stone-mason's work, repairs, renovations	mkhar lan
མཁར་ལན་བྱེད	repair, renovate	mkhar lan byed
མཁར་ལས	bricklayer's/ stone-mason's work	mkhar las
མཁར་ལས་བྱེད་པ	build sand castles	mkhar las byed pa
མཁར་བཤིགས	destroyed the fort	mkhar bshigs
མཁར་སིལ	monk's mendicant's staff	mkhar sil
མཁར་སྲང	the garrison of a fortress	mkhar srang
མཁར་སྲུང	castle/ garrison/ fortress guard	mkhar srung
མཁར་གསིལ	staff of the Buddhist mendicant/ monk TSE, cymbal	mkhar gsil
མཁར་བསེལ	(A) castle guarding soldiers	mkhar bsel
མཁར་ལྷན	khang pa nyams gso byed pa	mkhar lhan
མཁལ	sides	mkhal
མཁལ་གྲང	kidney disease where kidney heat diminishes	mkhal grang
མཁལ་གྲུམ	grum bu'i nad occuring in the kidneys [symptoms sked pa man chad na zhing mjing pa phan tshun bsgyur dka' ba zhig	mkhal grum
མཁལ་འགྲམས	1 of the mkhal nad rigs brgyad	mkhal 'grams
མཁལ་སྔོན་ལ	{mkhal sngon} pass [in aa mdo rdzong]	mkhal sngon la
མཁལ་གཅོང	lus smad grang zhing rked pa kha 'khor nas rgyun ring du na ba'i kidney disease	mkhal gcong
མཁལ་མདོག	kidney-colored, dark red	mkhal mdog
མཁལ་ནད	kidney disease	mkhal nad
མཁལ་ནད་གྲང་བ	mkhal grang	mkhal nad grang ba
མཁལ་ནད་བརྒྱད	the 8 kideny diseases [lus brdabs 'grams shor ba dang rlan grang gi gnas su las mang byas pa sogs las byung ba'i mkhal nad brgyad de: 1 mkhal rlung, two mkhal gcong, three mkhal nad 'or lhung, four...	mkhal nad brgyad
མཁལ་ནད་བདུན	seven types of kidney disease	mkhal nad bdun
མཁལ་འབྲས	dri chu sri zhing rked pa kha 'khor nas na ba sogs 'byung ba'i 'bras nad mkhal mar babs pa zhig	mkhal 'bras
མཁལ་མ	kidney	mkhal ma
ཁོག་སྨད་ཀྱི་ཆར་སྟ་ཟུར་ག	yas gayon gnyis kyi gong thad du gnas shing don lnga'i ya gyal zhig ste, de'i byed las ni lus kyi chu khams kyi dvangs ma rnams lus la skyel zhing snyigs ma rnams rgyu grog rtsa'i brgyud lgang par ...	khog smad kyi char sta zur ga
མཁལ་མ་ཞོ་ཤ	{mkhal ma zho sha} med. tree	mkhal ma zho sha
མཁལ་མའི	renal 328	mkhal ma'i
མཁལ་མའི་ནད	disease of the kidneys	mkhal ma'i nad
མཁལ་མའི་རྩ་ཀུན་འདར་མ	the kidney nadi avadhuti	mkhal ma'i rtsa kun 'dar ma
མཁལ་མའི་རླུང་ཚབས	{mkhal ma'i rlung tshabs kidney disease	mkhal ma'i rlung tshabs
མཁལ་མའི་གསང	kidney moxibustion point	mkhal ma'i gsang
མཁལ་དམར་ལ	{mkhal dmar pass} [in aa mdo rdzong	mkhal dmar la
མཁལ་རྩ	bleeding nadi connected w the kidneys	mkhal rtsa
མཁལ་ཚད	{mkhal tshad kidney disease [mkhal mar tsha ba zhugs pa zhig, symptoms: urine sri zhing rked pa kha 'khor nas na ba sogs 'byung ba zhig mkhal nad brgyad kyi nang tshan	mkhal tshad
མཁལ་ཚིལ	1) kidney fat; 2) Lus kyi gsang gnad kyi bye brag cig)	mkhal tshil
མཁལ་ཞོ	mkhal ma zho sha	mkhal zho
མཁལ་རིལ	kidney	mkhal ril
མཁལ་རླུང	air entering into the kidneys [nad rtags su rked pa 'phyangs nas na zhing rna ba 'on par 'gyur ba zhig mkhal nad rigs brgyad kyi nang tshan	mkhal rlung
མཁས	learned person, sage, skilled in, learned	mkhas
གོཨོད་བི༹ན	player, weren't you?	good vina
མཁས་མཁུར་འཛུམ	smiling face	mkhas mkhur 'dzum
མཁས་གྲུབ	1) scholar-adept, learned and accomplished, siddhas and panditas, realized master, accomplished scholar, learned and saintly, master practitioner. 2) One of Tzongkhapa's two main students (1385-1438)	mkhas grub
སཻནཏལཡ་སཆོལར	adept, siddhas and pa its, realized master, accomplished scholar, master practitioner, 1 of	saintly scholar
མཁས་གྲུབ་ཀར་མ་ཆགས་མེད	see {kar ma chags med}	mkhas grub kar ma chags med
མཁས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	a learned and accomplished master	mkhas grub kyi bla ma
མཁས་གྲུབ་ཁྱུང་པོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the learned and accomplished Khyungpo Naljor, [978-1127], founder of {shangs pa bka' brgyud} lineage	mkhas grub khyung po rnal 'byor
མཁས་གྲུབ་དགེ་ལེགས་དཔལ་བཟང	the learned and accomplished Gelek Palsang [1385-1438), disciple of Tsongkhapa and 1st Panchen Lama yab sras gsum gyi ya gyal, dga' ldan khri rabs gsum pa	mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang
མཁས་གྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Khedrup gyatso, (1838-1855), the 11th dalai lama [rab byung bcu bzhi pa'i sa khyi lor khams mgar thar du 'khrungs, chu stag lor gser bum dkrugs te t' la'i bla ma'i yang srid du ngos 'dzin gyis gser...	mkhas grub rgya mtsho
མཁས་གྲུབ་རྗེ	Khedrubje, a disciple of {rje btsong kha pa} Syn {mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang}	mkhas grub rje
མཁས་གྲུབ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	the learned and accomplished omniscient one mkhas grub thams cad mkhyen pa learned and accomplished omniscient one	mkhas grub thams cad mkhyen pa
མཁས་གྲུབ་ནོར་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the learned and accomplished nor bzang rgya mtsho	mkhas grub nor bzang rgya mtsho
མཁས་གྲུབ་བློ་བཟང་ནོར་བུ	Khedrub Lobsang Norbu; great meditator, and founder of {bon ri} monastery at Kailash	mkhas grub blo bzang nor bu
མཁས་གྲུབ་རའ་ག་ཨ་སྱ	karma chags	mkhas grub r'a ga a sya
མཁས་གྲུབ་སོག་པོ་བསྟན་དར	Sogpo Tendar: b1759	mkhas grub sog po bstan dar
མཁས་འགྲུབ་རྗེ	one of tsong khapa's disciples	mkhas 'grub rje
མཁས་བརྒྱས་མཉམ་གླེང	let 100 schools contend	mkhas brgyas mnyam gleng
མཁས་ངན	evil genius	mkhas ngan
མཁས་མཆོག	supreme expert, profound scholar	mkhas mchog
མཁས་མཆོག་རྣམས	most learned men	mkhas mchog rnams
མཁས་མཆོག་དབྱིག་གཉེན	eminent pandita Dignaga	mkhas mchog dbyig gnyen
མཁས་འཇུག	byis pa bde blag du 'jug pa'i rnam par bshad pa mkhas pa 'jug pa'i	mkhas 'jug
སྒོ	by skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal	sgo
མཚན	(1182-1251); monumental presentation of the principles and categories of Buddhist scholasticism 329	mtshan
མཁས་འཇུག་རྣམ་བཤད	mkhas pa rnams 'jug pa'i sgo'i rnam par bshad pa rig	mkhas 'jug rnam bshad
གནས་གསལ་བྱེད	a detailed commentary on sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan}'s monumental presentation of the principles and categories of Buddhist scholasticism; by {glo bo mkhan chen bsod nams lhun grub	gnas gsal byed
མཁས་སྙན	sweet-talk, coaxing, flattery	mkhas snyan
མཁས་སྙན་བཤད	sweet-talk, coax, flatter	mkhas snyan bshad
མཁས་བརྟན	learned and steady/ reliable	mkhas brtan
མཁས་ཐལ	clever/ skillful manner thal ches pa	mkhas thal
མཁས་ཐལ་ཤོར	fail by trying to be too clever	mkhas thal shor
མཁས་དང་གྲུབ་པ	scholarship and accomplishment	mkhas dang grub pa
མཁས་མདོག	though 1 is not learned, pretending 1 is	mkhas mdog
མཁས་མདོག་བྱེད་པ	brag	mkhas mdog byed pa
མཁས་འདོད	desire to be learned, intellectual ambition	mkhas 'dod
མཁས་གནས	abode of a sage, monastery	mkhas gnas
མཁས་རྣམས	all panditas / scholars, learned ones	mkhas rnams
མཁས་པ	discerning; mi mkhas - who lack discernment, who are unable to discern	mkhas pa
མཁས་པ་ཅན	wise, learned, skillful	mkhas pa can
མཁས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great scholar / pandita	mkhas pa chen po
མཁས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	byis pa bde blag tu 'jug pa'i rnam par bshad pa mkhas	mkhas pa 'jug pa'i sgo
པ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	an introduction to the principles of Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism; by {sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan} (1182-1251)	pa 'jug pa'i sgo
མཁས་པ་ཉི་འབུམ	disciple and son of {zhang ston bkra shis chos 'bar} in the {snying thig} lineage	mkhas pa nyi 'bum
མཁས་པ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	21 sages in lineage shared by anu yoga and sems sde	mkhas pa nyi shu rtsa gcig
མཁས་པ་ཉིད	learnedness, scholarship, erudition	mkhas pa nyid
མཁས་པ་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 pa itas	mkhas pa nyer lnga
མཁས་པ་ཉེར་གཅིག	Twenty-one Adepts. Masters of the Mind Section and Space Section of Dzogchen	mkhas pa nyer gcig
མཁས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like a dexterous man, appearing skillful	mkhas pa lta bu
མཁས་པ་དག	learned ones	mkhas pa dag
མཁས་པ་དང་གྲུབ་པ	learned and accomplished	mkhas pa dang grub pa
མཁས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	erudite, wise, scholastic, scholarly, learned	mkhas pa dang ldan pa
མཁས་པ་ནཱ་རོ་པཎ་ཆེན	the mahapandita Naropa mkhas pa rnams kyi las rnam gsum po threefold activity of all panditas mkhas pa rnams kyi las rnam gsum po the 3-fold talk of learned ones mkhas pa rnams kyis tshul bzhin brt...	mkhas pa nA ro paN chen
མཁས་པ་རྣམས་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	by sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan; (1182-1251) mkhas pa rnams 'jug pa'i sgo'i rnam par	mkhas pa rnams 'jug pa'i sgo
བཤད་པ་རིག་གནས་གསལ་བྱེད	a detailed commentary on sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan}'s monumental presentation of the principles and categories of Buddhist scholasticism; by {glo bo mkhan chen bsod nams lhun grub	bshad pa rig gnas gsal byed
མཁས་པ་མ་ཡིན	inexpert	mkhas pa ma yin
མཁས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	artless	mkhas pa ma yin pa
མཁས་པ་མི་དགུ	nine sages	mkhas pa mi dgu
མཁས་པ་མི་བརྒྱད	eight sages	mkhas pa mi brgyad
མཁས་པ་མི་བཞི	chn	mkhas pa mi bzhi
མཁས་པ་མིན་པ	inapt	mkhas pa min pa
མཁས་པ་སྨད་པ	of inferior attainments	mkhas pa smad pa
མཁས་པ་བཞིན་བྱེད	showing as one skillful but not really so	mkhas pa bzhin byed
མཁས་པ་ལས	the wise say that	mkhas pa las
མཁས་པའི	intellectual	mkhas pa'i
མཁས་པའི་དགའ་སྟོན	a commentary on tibetan orthography, book by dpa' bo gtsug lag	mkhas pa'i dga' ston
མཁས་པའི་མགུལ་རྒྱན	{mkhas pa'i mgul rgyan}	mkhas pa'i mgul rgyan
མཁས་པའི་རྒྱན	{mkhas pa'i rgyan [grammatical text by karma rab rgyas of ho phug]	mkhas pa'i rgyan
མཁས་པའི་ང་གྱལ	intellectual pride/ arrogance, conceited person proud of one's learning	mkhas pa'i nga gyal
མཁས་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	intellectual pride / arrogance, proud of one's learning, conceited person	mkhas pa'i nga rgyal
མཁས་པའི་འཇུག་པའི་གནས་བཅུ	the 10 topics to be engaged in by learned ones	mkhas pa'i 'jug pa'i gnas bcu
མཁས་པའི་གཏམ	the talk of learned people	mkhas pa'i gtam
མཁས་པའི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the nature of learning	mkhas pa'i de kho na nyid
མཁས་པའི་གནས་ལྔ	the five topics of learnedness	mkhas pa'i gnas lnga
མཁས་པའི་རྣ་རྒྱན	mngon brjod kyi bstan bcos mkhas pa'i rna rgyan zhes pa, sde pa rin spungs pa ngag dbang 'jig rten dbang phyug grags pas rab byung bcu pa'i lcags mo sbrul gyi lo la mdzad pa'i mngon brjod kyi bstan...	mkhas pa'i rna rgyan
མཁས་པའི་བྱ་བ་གསུམ	the three actions of learnedness. {'chad}, {rtsod}, {rtsom gsum}- exposition, debate and composition	mkhas pa'i bya ba gsum
མཁས་པའི་དབང་པོ	king of learned ones / panditas, lord of panditas / scholars	mkhas pa'i dbang po
མཁས་པའི་དམིགས་པ	objects that render skillful, object of the wise	mkhas pa'i dmigs pa
མཁས་པའི་དམིགས་པ་ལྔ	(Tserig) the five stages of mastery [1 {mang du thos pa} extensive hearing two {don la mkhas pa} mastery over meaning three {yi gi la mkhas pa} mastery over diction 4{nges pa'i tshig la mkhas pa} m...	mkhas pa'i dmigs pa lnga
མཁས་པའི་ཚུལ་དགུ	the 9 ways of being learned	mkhas pa'i tshul dgu
མཁས་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	gate for entering the way of a pa ita	mkhas pa'i tshul la 'jug pa'i sgo
མཁས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	knowledge, expertise, proficiency	mkhas pa'i yon tan
མཁས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	naturally wise, naturally skillful	mkhas pa'i rang bzhin
མཁས་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	naturally skillful, possessing the nature of learning	mkhas pa'i rang bzhin can
མཁས་པའི་རིགས	of the learned class	mkhas pa'i rigs
མཁས་པའི་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	chn	mkhas pa'i rim pa lnga
མཁས་པའི་ལམ	the path of knowledge / learning	mkhas pa'i lam
མཁས་པའི་ཤེས་མྱོང	expertise	mkhas pa'i shes myong
མཁས་པར	wisely, cleverly, skillfully	mkhas par
མཁས་པར་འགྱུར	vi. to become an expert	mkhas par 'gyur
མཁས་པར་ལྡན	wise, clever, skillful	mkhas par ldan
མཁས་པར་བྱ	causing learnedness/ 1 to be learned	mkhas par bya
མཁས་པར་བྱ་བ	causing learnedness/ 1 to be learned	mkhas par bya ba
མཁས་པར་བྱ་བའི་གནས་བཅུ	the 10 topics which cause learnedness, the 10 points of knowledge [1 {phung} two {khams} three {skye mched} four {rten 'brel} five {gnas dang gnas min} six {dbang po} 7 {dus} 8 {bden pa} 9 {theg pa...	mkhas par bya ba'i gnas bcu
མཁས་པར་བྱས	was learned in ..	mkhas par byas
མཁས་པར་བྱེད་པ	become learned	mkhas par byed pa
མཁས་པར་སྦྱངས	became learned	mkhas par sbyangs
མཁས་པར་རློམ	egotistic, w pretense of being learned, conceited [person], pedantic	mkhas par rlom
མཁས་པར་རློམ་པ	Syn {mkhas rloms} pretense of being learned, conceited person	mkhas par rlom pa
མཁས་པར་བསླབས	learned thoroughly	mkhas par bslabs
མཁས་པས་དྲེགས	pedantic	mkhas pas dregs
མཁས་པོ	able, expert, capable	mkhas po
མཁས་པོ་བྱེད	act tactfully/ skillfully/ cleverly	mkhas po byed
མཁས་པོར	professionally	mkhas por
མཁས་དཔགས	in accord w 1's ability/ resources	mkhas dpags
མཁས་བྱའི་གནས་དྲུག	the six topics of learnedness/ knowledge	mkhas bya'i gnas drug
མཁས་བླུན	wise and foolish, wisdom and folly	mkhas blun
མཁས་བློ	"Wise" [epithet. of buddha]	mkhas blo
མཁས་དབང	Abbr. of {mkhas pa'i dbang po}	mkhas dbang
མཁས་མ	noble, learned woman	mkhas ma
མཁས་མྱོན་ཅན	knowledgeable/ experienced and expert [at..]	mkhas myon can
མཁས་བཙུན	learned and righteous	mkhas btsun
མཁས་བཙུན་ཆེན་པོ	nam mkha' legs pa'i rgyal mtshan	mkhas btsun chen po
མཁས་བཙུན་བཟང	learned, conscientious and good	mkhas btsun bzang
མཁས་བཙུན་བཟང་གྲུབ	learning, discipline, goodness and miraculous power	mkhas btsun bzang grub
མཁས་བཙུན་བཟང་པོ	learning, discipline and nobility	mkhas btsun bzang po
མཁས་བཙུན་བཟང་གསུམ	learning, discipline and nobility wise, pure and noble-minded [bya rig pa'i gnas la ma rmongs pa dang, sgo gsum gyi nyes spyod sdom pa'i tshul khrims gtsang ba dang, gzhan phan gyi lhag bsam rnam p...	mkhas btsun bzang gsum
ཨནད་ནོབླེ	minded	and noble
མཁས་རྩལ	talent, skill	mkhas rtsal
མཁས་བརྩན་བཟད་བསུམ	learned disciplined and noble, wise pure and nobleminded	mkhas brtsan bzad bsum
མཁས་ཚད	all the learned, ingratiating	mkhas tshad
མཁས་ཚུལ་གསུམ	Three Ways of the Wise. Teaching, debate, and composition	mkhas tshul gsum
མཁས་མཛངས	capable and courageous, w excellent conduct, wise	mkhas mdzangs
མཁས་མཛངས་པའི་སྲིད་ཇུས	wise policy	mkhas mdzangs pa'i srid jus
མཁས་ཞིང	clever, capable	mkhas zhing
མཁས་ཡུས	bragging about one's skill, dogmatic	mkhas yus
མཁས་རློམ	not learned but thinking one is and proud	mkhas rlom
མཁས་རློམ་ཅན	one pretending to be learned	mkhas rlom can
མཁས་རློམ་སྟོང་བཤད	empty explanation of 1 not knowing but thinking 1 does	mkhas rlom stong bshad
མཁས་རློམས	conceited person	mkhas rloms
མཁས་ཤིང་ཐབས་ཤེས་པ་ཡིན	wise and skillful	mkhas shing thabs shes pa yin
མཁས་ཤོད	most skillful/ dexterous	mkhas shod
མཁས་ཤོས	ace	mkhas shos
མཁས་གསལ	yon tan la mkhas and clearminded	mkhas gsal
མཁིད་གང	the measure about six inches	mkhid gang
མཁིས་ཤས་ཆེ	one in whose constitution the bilious diseases predominate	mkhis shas che
མཁུ་ལྡོག	grief, sadness, rage, wrath, fury	mkhu ldog
མཁུ་བ	(A) go ldog pa	mkhu ba
མཁུན	'khun	mkhun
མཁུན་པ	SA khun pa	mkhun pa
མཁུར་བ	cheeks	mkhur ba
མཁུར་བ་མི་སྤོ	zas 'gram khug g.yas g.yon here and there mi spo ba, as explained in the vinaya	mkhur ba mi spo
མཁུར་ཚོས	cheek, SA khur tshos	mkhur tshos
མཁུར་ཚོས་ཀྱི་རུས་པ	cheek bone	mkhur tshos kyi rus pa
མཁུར་འཛུམ	gad mo dgod skabs kyi mkhur tshos kyi rnam 'gyur zhig	mkhur 'dzum
མཁེ	profit	mkhe
མཁེ་གཙང	alone, only, solely, exclusively	mkhe gtsang
མཁེན་གསལ	as you know/ understand	mkhen gsal
མཁོ	1) need, necessity. 2) vi. to need require. 3) useful, necessary, needful; necessary/ to want; necessities	mkho
མཁོ་གལ	need, necessity, requirement	mkho gal
མཁོ་དགུ	1) necessities, what one needs / is necessary. 2) utensils, household articles. 3) useful, needful	mkho dgu
མཁོ་དགུའི་ནོར	necessary wealth	mkho dgu'i nor
མཁོ་དགུའི་ཡོ་བྱད	possessions	mkho dgu'i yo byad
མཁོ་དགོས	requirement, supply	mkho dgos
མཁོ་རྒུ	everything one needs, every need, all needs	mkho rgu
མཁོ་རྒྱུའི་ཡོ་བྱད	necessary articles/ goods	mkho rgyu'i yo byad
མཁོ་སྒྲུབ	supplies	mkho sgrub
མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	supply	mkho sgrub byed
མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ཀ	[rear area] supply service	mkho sgrub las ka
མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ཁུངས	supplies office, service bureau	mkho sgrub las khungs
མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་དོན	[rear area] supply service	mkho sgrub las don
མཁོ་ཆས	needed things, necessary articles, equipment/ gear, tool, instrument, {'tsho ba'i mkho chas}, articles for daily use	mkho chas
མཁོ་ཆས་སྒྲུབ་པ	supply	mkho chas sgrub pa
མཁོ་ཆས་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	supply equipment	mkho chas sgrub byed
མཁོ་ཆས་སྦྱར་བ	equip	mkho chas sbyar ba
མཁོ་བཏོན	supplying	mkho bton
མཁོ་བཏོན་བྱེད	supply	mkho bton byed
མཁོ་བསྟུན་ཐོབ་སྤྲོད	to each according to his need	mkho bstun thob sprod
མཁོ་མཐིང	a place in Tibet 332	mkho mthing
མཁོ་མཐིང་ལྷ་ཁང	Khoting Temple	mkho mthing lha khang
མཁོ་དུས	needful	mkho dus
མཁོ་འདོན	supplying [necessary articles]	mkho 'don
མཁོ་འདོན་བྱེད	supply [necessary articles]	mkho 'don byed
མཁོ་གནད་ཆེན་པོ	essential	mkho gnad chen po
མཁོ་གནད་བྱུང་བ	require	mkho gnad byung ba
མཁོ་སྤྱད	needful things	mkho spyad
མཁོ་སྤྲོད	supplies	mkho sprod
མཁོ་སྤྲོད་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ་ལོངས	undersupply, supply failing to meet demand	mkho sprod kyi tshad ma longs
མཁོ་སྤྲོད་ཁང	supply station, warehouse	mkho sprod khang
མཁོ་སྤྲོད་དགོས་ཐད་ལས་འདས	supply exceeding demand, oversupplied	mkho sprod dgos thad las 'das
མཁོ་སྤྲོད་ལམ་ལུགས	free supply system	mkho sprod lam lugs
མཁོ་སྤྲོད་ས་ཚིགས	supply station, warehouse	mkho sprod sa tshigs
མཁོ་བ	mi mkho ba - have no need for	mkho ba
མཁོ་བ་ཉིད	utility, usefulness	mkho ba nyid
མཁོ་བ་མང	you'll always be needy	mkho ba mang
མཁོ་བའི	that he needed	mkho ba'i
མཁོ་བའི་ཆས	necessities	mkho ba'i chas
མཁོ་བའི་ནོར	objects of commerce, merchandise	mkho ba'i nor
མཁོ་བའི་ཡོ་བྱད	TSE necessary articles	mkho ba'i yo byad
མཁོ་བའི་ཡོ་བྱད་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	minor articles of necessity (for monks) TSE	mkho ba'i yo byad phran tshegs
མཁོ་བའི་ས	earth, clay, loam	mkho ba'i sa
མཁོ་བོ	useful	mkho bo
མཁོ་བྱད	Syn {mkho rgyu'i yo byad} necessary articles / goods	mkho byad
མཁོ་བྱེད	need, want, necessity	mkho byed
མཁོ་སྦྱོར	supply necessary articles	mkho sbyor
མཁོ་མ་བཟོད	phan ma thogs pa	mkho ma bzod
མཁོ་མེད	useless, unnecessary, {skad cha mkho med} nonsense, rubbish	mkho med
མཁོ་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཆ	nonsense, verbal rubbish	mkho med kyi skad cha
མཁོ་མེད་རྒྱུ་ཆ	unnecessary/ waste materials	mkho med rgyu cha
མཁོ་མེད་དངོས་པོ	unnecessary/ waste materials	mkho med dngos po
མཁོ་ཚད	1) all 1 needs; 2) mkho rgyu'i 'bor tshad)	mkho tshad
མཁོ་རྫས	Syn {mkho chas}	mkho rdzas
མཁོ་ཡ	need, necessity, requirement	mkho ya
མཁོ་བཤུས	abstract, excerpt, extract	mkho bshus
མཁོངས་ཁ	platform on a flat roof	mkhongs kha
མཁོངས་ཕབ	liking for, wish, want something, a fancy for a thing	mkhongs phab
མཁོན	enmity	mkhon
མཁོས་ཀ	necessary, useful, standard of living, economic capacity/ wealth	mkhos ka
མཁོས་ཀ་མེད	poor	mkhos ka med
མཁོས་ཀ་ཞན་པོ	poor	mkhos ka zhan po
མཁོས་ཀར་གཤིགས་པས་ཁྲལ་འདུ	collect taxes on the basis of living standard	mkhos kar gshigs pas khral 'du
མཁོས་ཁྱབ	most needful, most desirable	mkhos khyab
མཁོས་ཕབ	mind comfortable/ relaxed, most needful/ necessary, fancy/ want/ wish for something	mkhos phab
མཁོས་ཕེབས	blo bag phebs pa	mkhos phebs
མཁོས་འབྱོར	economic condition	mkhos 'byor
མཁོས་འབྱོར་དྲག་དུ་ཕྱིན	improved economic condition	mkhos 'byor drag du phyin
མཁོས་ཞན	self-willed, wanton	mkhos zhan
མཁོས་ཞན་པ	(A) useless, of little use, unnecessary	mkhos zhan pa
མཁོས་སུ་ཕབ	most needful, most necessary	mkhos su phab
མཁོས་སུ་འབབ་པ	blo la 'gro ba'am blo bag phebs pa,...Yul lung skyid cing mkhos su 'bab pa zhig tu phyin nas gnas skabs ngal gso ba	mkhos su 'bab pa
མཁྱང	hard, solid, compact	mkhyang
མཁྱན་དཔྱོད་ཡངས་པ	wide and critical knowledge, wide discriminating wisdom D	mkhyan dpyod yangs pa
མཁྱར་རྟ	mkhyar rta	mkhyar rta
མཁྱས	venerable	mkhyas
མཁྱིད	measure of extended thumb and little finger	mkhyid
མཁྱིད་གང	measure of extended thumb and little finger	mkhyid gang
མཁྱུད	conceal, keep secret/ hidden, keep, hold, retain	mkhyud
མཁྱུད་པ	conceal, keep secret/ hidden, keep, hod retain	mkhyud pa
མཁྱུད་དཔྱད	treatment (of disease) very deep practice oral instructions concealed gzhung	mkhyud dpyad
མཁྱུད་དཔྱད་པ	1) physician; 2) scope of knowledge, vast knowledge) performer of various Rten 'brel gyi bcos ka)	mkhyud dpyad pa
མཁྱུད་སྤྱད	secret treatment, sort of bag or vessel for carrying medicine, sorcery, witchcraft	mkhyud spyad
མཁྱུད་སྤྱད་པ	medicine man, physician	mkhyud spyad pa
མཁྱེན	think (of me), consider (us), knowledge, know[ing], seeing, wisdom, understand	mkhyen
མཁྱེན་ཀྱི་ཆེ་བ	superior knowledge	mkhyen kyi che ba
མཁྱེན་མཁན	learned	mkhyen mkhan
མཁྱེན་མཁྱེན	you know full well, you will understand, you know everything	mkhyen mkhyen
མཁྱེན་མཁྲོ	coconut	mkhyen mkhro
མཁྱེན་རྒྱ	scope of knowledge, vast knowledge, [science]	mkhyen rgya
མཁྱེན་རྒྱ་ཅན	possessed of great/ vast learning/ understanding	mkhyen rgya can
མཁྱེན་རྒྱ་ཆེ	vast knowledge	mkhyen rgya che
མཁྱེན་ལྔ་པ	epithet. of Buddha	mkhyen lnga pa
མཁྱེན་ཆ	the knowing/ cognizing aspect/ quality	mkhyen cha
མཁྱེན་ཆོད་ལྟར	as we know	mkhyen chod ltar
མཁྱེན་མཆོག	most learned	mkhyen mchog
མཁྱེན་གཉིས	the twofold knowledge, two knowledges, two kinds of knowledge, see {ji lta ji rnyed} Or. 1) {gnas lugs ji lta ba mkhyen pa}. 2) {shes bya ji rnyed pa mkhyen pa} knowing, seeing	mkhyen gnyis
མཁྱེན་གཉིས་སྣང་བ	the brilliance of the twofold knowledge / two understandings	mkhyen gnyis snang ba
མཁྱེན་གཉིས་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the two kinds of knowledge	mkhyen gnyis ye shes
མཁྱེན་རྟོག	understanding, knowing	mkhyen rtog
མཁྱེན་ལྡན	learned, knowledgeable, wise, intelligent (h)	mkhyen ldan
མཁྱེན་ནམ	did you understand it?	mkhyen nam
མཁྱེན་ནས	having known	mkhyen nas
མཁྱེན་ནུས	power of knowledge [h] mkhyen no} - think of me	mkhyen nus
མཁྱེན་ནོ	think of/ consider/ care for/ (please) know me! it's up to you	mkhyen no
མཁྱེན་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of knowledge. Syn {ye shes lnga}	mkhyen pa lnga
མཁྱེན་པ་ཅན	wise	mkhyen pa can
མཁྱེན་པ་གཉིས	Syn {mkhyen gnyis}. chos nyid ji lta ba mkhyen pa dang chos can ji snyed pa mkhyen pa	mkhyen pa gnyis
མཁྱེན་པ་ནང་བཞིན	as is known	mkhyen pa nang bzhin
མཁྱེན་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of knowledge. 1) {khams mkhyen pa}. 2) {rang bzhin mkhyen pa} 3) {bsam pa mkhyen pa} 4) {bag la nyal mkhyen pa} knowledge of disposition, nature, inclination and potential	mkhyen pa bzhi
མཁྱེན་པ་བཟང་པོ	learned, knowledgeable, wise, intelligent (h) mkhyen pa yongs su rdzogs pa'i mngon	mkhyen pa bzang po
པར་ཤེས་པ	the superknowledge of completely perfected cognizance mkhyen pa yongs su rdzogs pa'i mngon	par shes pa
མཁྱེན་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of knowledge	mkhyen pa gsum
མཁྱེན་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཆོས་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 dharmas of of the three kinds of knowledge; {rnam mkhyen gyi chos bcu gcig} the 11 dharmas of omniscience + {lam shes kyi chos bcu} the 10 dharmas of knwing the path + {gzhi shes kyi chos dg...	mkhyen pa gsum gyi chos sum cu
གསུམ་གྱི་ཆོས་སུམ་ཅུ	sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang tshan, mkhyen pa gsum mtshon byed kyi chos sum cu ste, rnam mkhyen gyi chos bcu dang, lam shes kyi chos bcu gcig dang, gzhi shes kyi chos dgu bcas sum cu'o,	gsum gyi chos sum cu
མཁྱེན་པའི་ཀློང་དུ་ཆུབ་པ	(h) exalted wisdom, knowledge, insight, understanding, cognition, perception, cognizance, knowing know, realize, perceive, insight, cognize, understand	mkhyen pa'i klong du chub pa
མཁྱེན་པའི་མངའ་བདག	master of knowing (intuitive independent unconditional perceiving)	mkhyen pa'i mnga' bdag
མཁྱེན་པའི་གཏེར	receptacle of knowledge, Ma¤jushri	mkhyen pa'i gter
མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	ten powers of perfect knowledge {stobs bcu} (1 {gnas dang gnas min mkhyen pa'i stobs} power of knowing what is possible and impossible two {las kyi rnam par smin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs} power of know...	mkhyen pa'i stobs bcu
མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	working of the primal awareness, supreme all-knowing wisdom	mkhyen pa'i ye shes
མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	attainments, accomplishments of a high order	mkhyen pa'i yon tan
མཁྱེན་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ	perceived, found out, discovered	mkhyen par gyur to
མཁྱེན་པར་མཛད་དུ་གསོལ	please grant knowledge of	mkhyen par mdzad du gsol
མཁྱེན་པར་མཛད་པ	know	mkhyen par mdzad pa
མཁྱེན་པར་གསོལ	please grant knowledge of	mkhyen par gsol
མཁྱེན་དཔྱོད	(h) discernment, intelligence. Syn {shes rab}	mkhyen dpyod
མཁྱེན་དཔྱོད་ཡངས་པ	wide and critical knowledge, wide discriminating wisdom	mkhyen dpyod yangs pa
མཁྱེན་སྤྱན	the eye of knowledge	mkhyen spyan
མཁྱེན་སྤྱན་མཆོག་ཏུ་ཡངས་པ	the supremely vast eye of knowledge	mkhyen spyan mchog tu yangs pa
མཁྱེན་སྤྱན་ཡངས་པ	with broad views and wisdoms, wide prophetic vision	mkhyen spyan yangs pa
མཁྱེན་བྱ	that which should be known	mkhyen bya
མཁྱེན་བླ་མེད	"most wise" (epith of Buddha)	mkhyen bla med
མཁྱེན་རྩེ་ནུས་མཐུ	(wisdom, compassion and power)	mkhyen rtse nus mthu
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	wisdom and compassion, omniscient mercy, knowledge and kindness, {mkhyen pa'i ye shes dang brtse ba'i thugs rje}	mkhyen brtse
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ཀློང་གྲོལ	{rig 'dzin} 18321909	mkhyen brtse klong grol
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	rdzong sar mkhyen brtse 'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros	mkhyen brtse chos kyi blo gros
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ནུས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	knowing kind and powerful wisdom	mkhyen brtse nus pa'i ye shes
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ནུས་གསུམ	wisdom/ knowledge compassion/ love and power wise, kind and able/ capable	mkhyen brtse nus gsum
ཕྱུག	maternal uncle of Ch”gyal Namkhai Norbu	phyug
མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་གཏེར	treasury of wisdom and love mkhyen brtse'i rnam rgyal ma'i stong	mkhyen brtse'i gter
མཆོད	'chi med 'phags ma'i snying thig gi cha lag gtsug tor rnam par rgyal ma'i gzungs sgrub dang mchod pa'i 335 cho ga bltas du bkod pa dri med nor	mchod
བུ	on uSHN'iSHavijay'a, by kong	bu
སྤྲུལ་བློ་གྲོས་མཐའ་ཡས	(1813-1899)	sprul blo gros mtha' yas
མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་དབང་པོ	Khyentse Wangpo. 1820-1892. Same as Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. 'jam dbyangs +	mkhyen brtse'i dbang po
མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་འོད	Abbr. of {mkhyen brtse'i 'od zer}	mkhyen brtse'i 'od
མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་འོད་ཟེར	Khyentse Özer. 1) Karsey Kongtrül: 1904-1953. 2) H.H. Dilgo Khyentse	mkhyen brtse'i 'od zer
མཁྱེན་ཚུལ་ཅན	learned	mkhyen tshul can
མཁྱེན་མཛོད	please know! knew	mkhyen mdzod
མཁྱེན་བཞིན་དུ	knowingly, well knowing	mkhyen bzhin du
མཁྱེན་གཟིགས	realize/ comprehend shes bya'i gnas, vision of omniscience, supernatural perception	mkhyen gzigs
མཁྱེན་བཟང	learned, knowledgeable, wise, intelligent (h)	mkhyen bzang
མཁྱེན་ཡུལ	Syn {mkhyen rgya}	mkhyen yul
མཁྱེན་ཡོན	knowledge, (h) for {shes yon}	mkhyen yon
མཁྱེན་ཡོན་ལྡན	knowledgeable, wise	mkhyen yon ldan
མཁྱེན་ཡོན་ལྡན་པ	knowledgeable, wise	mkhyen yon ldan pa
མཁྱེན་རབ	(h) [one w] {shes rab}, knowledge, discernment, intelligence, best/ great/ supreme knowledge	mkhyen rab
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག	Manjushri, the Lord of Knowledge	mkhyen rab kyi mnga' bdag
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཆོས་ཀྱི	Sakyapa master of Chogyal Namkhai Norbu at dbon stod college	mkhyen rab chos kyi
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འོད་ཟེར	1901-1960	mkhyen rab chos kyi 'od zer
མཁྱེན་རབ་བདག་པོ	Lord of Supreme Wisdom, Manjushri	mkhyen rab bdag po
མཁྱེན་རབ་ནོར་བུ	{mkhyen rab nor bu} [rab byung bco lnga pa'i chu lug lor, dvags lha sgam po'i ri zhol du sku 'khrungs, chung dus nas rtse thang lnga mchod grva tshang du chos zhugs gnang, de nas lha sa lcags po ri...	mkhyen rab nor bu
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of supreme knowledge	mkhyen rab ye shes
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ	the wisdom light of supreme knowledge	mkhyen rab ye shes snang ba
མཁྱེན་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རྒྱས	blossoming/ increase/ spreading of experience/ appearances of the wisdom of supreme knowledge mkhyen rab ye shes snang ba rgyas pa spreading the wisdom light of supreme knowledge mkhyen rab ye shes...	mkhyen rab ye shes snang ba rgyas
མཁྱེན་རིག	omniscient intrinsic awareness, awareness knowledge	mkhyen rig
མཁྱེན་རླབས	wise, knowledgeable	mkhyen rlabs
མཁྱེན་ཤིང་ངམ	did you understand it?	mkhyen shing ngam
མཁྱེན་གསུམ	three knowledges (gzhi shes, lam shes, rnam mkhyen)	mkhyen gsum
མཁྱེན་གསུམ་བསྡུས་སྒོམ	(Tserig) condensed/abbreviated meditation on the three wisdoms [basic wisdom, path wisdom and omniscient wisdom)	mkhyen gsum bsdus sgom
མཁྲང་མཁྲང་པོ	mkhrang 'gyur	mkhrang mkhrang po
མཁྲང་འགྱུར	hardened	mkhrang 'gyur
མཁྲང་ཐང	stiff rigid	mkhrang thang
མཁྲང་པ	fourth stage in development of fetus	mkhrang pa
མཁྲང་པོ	robust constitution	mkhrang po
མཁྲང་བ	1) sra la mkhregs pa; 2) mkhrang po)	mkhrang ba
མཁྲངས	hard, solid, compact	mkhrangs
མཁྲད	(not in DAS)	mkhrad
མཁྲིག་དཀར	horse/ mule's legs's mkhrig ma man chad having white hair	mkhrig dkar
མཁྲིག་མ	wrist of the hand	mkhrig ma
མཁྲིགས	hard, solid. Comp. with {mkhregs po}	mkhrigs
མཁྲིགས་པ	hard, solid, firm, wrist	mkhrigs pa
མཁྲིགས་པོ	hard, firm, unbreakable, stubborn, obstinate 336	mkhrigs po
མཁྲིད་ནད	jaundice	mkhrid nad
མཁྲིད་ནས	jaundice	mkhrid nas
མཁྲིད་གནོད	gall bladder	mkhrid gnod
མཁྲིད་པ	bile, gall	mkhrid pa
མཁྲིད་པ་ཅན	bilious, jaundiced, bitter acrimonious [people]	mkhrid pa can
མཁྲིད་པ་ན	have jaundice	mkhrid pa na
མཁྲིད་ཚད	bilious fever	mkhrid tshad
མཁྲིས	bile	mkhris
མཁྲིས་སྐྲན	snod kyi mkhris thum swelling disease	mkhris skran
མཁྲིས་གླང	mkhris pa glang 'thab kyi nad	mkhris glang
མཁྲིས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great biles	mkhris chen bzhi
མཁྲིས་ནད	jaundice, jaundice	mkhris nad
མཁྲིས་ནད་ཀྱི་ཟས་རིགས་བཅུ་གཅིག	chn	mkhris nad kyi zas rigs bcu gcig
མཁྲིས་ནད་བརྒྱད	8 types of jaundice	mkhris nad brgyad
མཁྲིས་ནད་ཅན་གྱི་དམིགས་པ	the perception of one w jaundice	mkhris nad can gyi dmigs pa
མཁྲིས་ནད་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	Syn {tshad min gyi blo}, {log shes}	mkhris nad med pa'i shes pa
མཁྲིས་ནད་ཡོད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	{tshad yin gyi blo}	mkhris nad yod pa'i shes pa
མཁྲིས་སྣོད	gall-bladder	mkhris snod
མཁྲིས་པ	1) gall bladder. 2) bile, gall. 3) jaundice	mkhris pa
མཁྲིས་པ་ཁ་ལུད	snod kyi mkhris pa kha lud nas mkhris khu rtsa mig tu byer ba zhig	mkhris pa kha lud
མཁྲིས་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of bile	mkhris pa lnga
མཁྲིས་པ་ཅན	splenetic, short-tempered person	mkhris pa can
མཁྲིས་པ་འཇུ་བྱེད	digestive bile	mkhris pa 'ju byed
མཁྲིས་པ་ཐང་ལས་ལྷག་པ	me drod mkhris pa rang gi ldang tshad, a man's gsang sgro gang and a woman's la dngos bstan ma gsungs na'ang shud bstan de ltar go dgos pas de las lhag par gyur pa'i don	mkhris pa thang las lhag pa
མཁྲིས་པ་མིག་སེར	snod mkhris kha lud de rtsa mig tu byer nas mig sprin turn yellow mkhris pa rtsa rgyug rims nad mkhris par	mkhris pa mig ser
བབས་པ་དང	zas spyod sogs rkyen gzhan gyis snod mkhris rtsar brgyugs nas bzhin mig pags pa rnams become yellow	babs pa dang
མཁྲིས་པ་ཤ་སེར	snod mkhris kha lud de rtsa mig tu byer nas sha mdog ser por 'gyur ba zhig	mkhris pa sha ser
མཁྲིས་པ་གཤའ་རིང	ru thung zur nas mar lag ngar rgyab ngos nas thur du 'gro ba'i rtsa dang po snod mkhris dang 'brel ba'i gtar rtsa zhig ste, de gtar na mkhris nad yun lon dang, mkhris rims mgo nad sogs la phan	mkhris pa gsha' ring
མཁྲིས་པའི་རྒྱུ་ལམ་ལྔ	five pathways for the circulation of bile	mkhris pa'i rgyu lam lnga
མཁྲིས་པའི་དྲི་ཆབ	gall offering, one of {nang mchod}	mkhris pa'i dri chab
མཁྲིས་པའི་ནད	bile disease [lus kyi drod khams rgyas pa'i tsha ba'i nad la nyes pa'i mkhris pa dang, mchin 'dabs mkhris thum skyon du gyur pa'i mkhris pa gnyis	mkhris pa'i nad
མཁྲིས་པའི་སྤྱི་རྟགས་བདུན	7 general signs of bile	mkhris pa'i spyi rtags bdun
མཁྲིས་པའི་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་བཞི	chn	mkhris pa'i sbyong byed bzhi
མཁྲིས་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད	ri bong mkhris pa, 'phyi ba'i mkhris pa, nya mkhris	mkhris pa'i gsal byed
མཁྲིས་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད་བཞི	the four animal's bile used in medicine 1) {dom mkhris} bear's bile. 2) {nyam khris} fish bile. 3) {ri bong mkhris} hare's bile. 4) {'phyi ba'i mkhris pa} marmot's bile	mkhris pa'i gsal byed bzhi
མཁྲིས་པར་བརྟག	ascertained to be bile	mkhris par brtag
མཁྲིས་མ	SA 'khris	mkhris ma
མཁྲིས་སྨྱོ	mostly bile smyo byed disease [symptoms sems khro zhing brdeg snying 'dod pa &, mig dang chu mdog ser zhing mig sngar me dang skar ma mthong snang shar ba zhig	mkhris smyo
མཁྲིས་ཚད	bilious fever	mkhris tshad
མཁྲིས་ཚབས	a womb disease	mkhris tshabs
མཁྲིས་ཟད	{mkhris zad disease [bile's ldang tshad gsang sgro gang yin pas de'i cha shas having become exhausted, body heat diminishes &, skin color becomes black	mkhris zad
མཁྲིས་རིམས	rims nad mkhris pa la babs pa'i nad [symptoms mgo na ba dang, tsha ba rgyas pa, gshang gci pags mig rnams ser por 'gyur ba zhig	mkhris rims
མཁྲིས་ཤས་ཆེ	one in whose constitution the bilious diseases predominate	mkhris shas che
མཁྲིས་སེལ་གྱི་རོ་གསུམ	chn	mkhris sel gyi ro gsum
མཁྲིས་སེལ་སྤྱོད་ལམ་གཉིས	chn	mkhris sel spyod lam gnyis
མཁྲིས་གསང	moxibustion points at 2nd and 10th vertebrae connected w bile [de la me btsa' bzhag na mkhris pa grang mkhris la phan	mkhris gsang
མཁྲེགས	firm, solid, compact, strong, stiff, hard, rigid, inflexible	mkhregs
མཁྲེགས་རྒོལ	stubborn opposition/ resistance	mkhregs rgol
མཁྲེགས་ཆོད	SA khregs chod	mkhregs chod
མཁྲེགས་གདན	hard seat	mkhregs gdan
མཁྲེགས་འདྲེད་འབོལ་ཟུག	gyong po dang thug na 'jigs nas g.yol mnyen po dang phrad na brnyas bcos byed pa'i dpe	mkhregs 'dred 'bol zug
མཁྲེགས་པ	firm, solid, compact, strong, stiff, hard, rigid, inflexible	mkhregs pa
མཁྲེགས་པོ	consolidated, strengthened, hard, stiff, solid, strong, concrete, rigid, stark, sturdy, taut, tough	mkhregs po
མཁྲེགས་པོ་བཟོ་བ	harden	mkhregs po bzo ba
མཁྲེགས་ཚད	degree of hardness	mkhregs tshad
མཁྲེགས་གཟུང	persistence, maintaining	mkhregs gzung
མཁྲེགས་གཟུང་བྱེད	persist in, maintain	mkhregs gzung byed
མཁྲེགས་བཟུང	obstinate, stubborn, persistence	mkhregs bzung
མཁྲེགས་བཟུང་བྱེད	persist in, maintain	mkhregs bzung byed
མཁྲེགས་ཤིང	hardwood 337	mkhregs shing
མཁྲེགས་ས	cement	mkhregs sa
མཁྲེལ་བ	to integrate 'khang - p. {'khangs} vi. to resent, to bear ill will 'khang - resent/ bear ill will 'khang skad - angry/ aggressive talk 'khang sgra - words of ill will 'khang ba - hurt at heart, off...	mkhrel ba
བེལལ	metal, adhere to, stick to, gong,	bell
དྲུམ་ཨོཕ༹་བེལལ	metal, large bell-metal disk, walking stick, cane 'khar ba - 1) hold 2. walking stick/ staff, cane; 2) bronze/ bell metal * cast iron; 3) gong/ bell; 4) water preserved in a bronze vessel (said to ...	drum of bell
ཨ་བོཝལ་མདེ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་བེལལ	metal. (li = bellmetal), a metal bowl. [mss] 'khar gzhon - dish or basin of bronze/ bell metal 'khar gzhon - dish or basin of metal 'khar zangs - metallic kettle, bronze or brass kettle 'khar zangs...	a bowl made from bell
བོ	the copper universal monarch] 'khor sgyur bzhi - the four universal emperors 'khor sgrom - car[t], vehicle 'khor sgrom nyi shu yod pa'i me 'khor train of 20 cars 'khor bsgyur rgyal po - Chakravarti...	bo
སིལབེ༹ར	crowned Buddhas, in Purang. See Korchak Jowo 'khor chu - whirlpool 'khor chos - samsaric phenomena 'khor 'jig - "breaker of transmigratory existence," Krakucchanda, [4th buddha in this kalpa] 'khor...	silver
ཐོས་པ	that people in the retinue hear equally whether close or distant; one of the qualities of the Buddha's voice 'khor nye ba dang ring bas mtshungs par	thos pa
ཐམས་ཅད	all phenomena comprised of samsara, nirvana, and the path 'khor 'das lam gsum gyis bsdus pa'i chos	thams cad
བརྒྱུད	the perfect assembly consists of the mind lineage of the conquerors 'khor phun sum tshogs pa pad ma rigs kyi	brgyud
ལྷ་ཚོགས	the assembly deities of the lotus family 'khor phong - spindle 'khor phyed dor - discarding half the circle [astr: half of the 27 motion stars: 13) stars and (30 chuts", the sun la mtshon na in Can...	lha tshogs
ཡང་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན	there is never any	yang yod ma yin
པླེཨསུརེ་ཨོན་ཐེ་ནེཨེདླེ	tip pf samsara;	pleasure on the needle
ཨིན་ཨལལ་ཨོཕ༹་སམསར་ཐེརེ་ཨིས་ནོ་པླཅེ	-even	in all of samsara there is no place
ཨོནེ་ཨས་སྨལལ་ཨས་ཨ་ནེཨེདླེ	tip--where real happiness is to be found 'khor ba khas len pa - accept/ proclaim samsara 'khor ba 'khor mor - transmigrate in the world 'khor ba 'khyams pa - wander in samsara 'khor ba 'khyams pa -...	one as small as a needle
བཞིན	overcome with passion, lust arose 'khor ba ji srid - as long as samsara lasts 'khor ba ji srid - as long as samsara lasts, exists, remains 'khor ba ji srid pa'i phung po - the heap that lasts as lo...	bzhin
གནས་པ	dwelling neither in samsara nor nirvana 'khor ba dang mya ngan las 'das pa la mi	gnas pa
གནས་པ་ཉིད	dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana 'khor ba dang myang 'das - samsara and nirvana 'khor ba dang zhi ba ro gcig pa - the one taste of samsara and [nirvanic] peace 'khor ba dang shi ba ro gcig p...	gnas pa nyid
ཅད་ལས་ཀྱི་རྦ་རླབས་ཀྱིས་དཀྲུགས	All beings are swept away by the waves of the ocean of samsara 'khor ba'i rgyu - the cause of samsara 'khor ba'i rgyu - the seed, cause of samsara 'khor ba'i rgyu byed - be a samsaric cause, produc...	cad las kyi rba rlabs kyis dkrugs
ཐེ་རོཨོཏ	cause of samsara 'khor ba'i mtsho - the lake of samsara; {'khor ba'i mtsho las sgrol mkhan} who carries us across this lake of samsara 'khor ba'i dzin pa - samsaric clinging / fixation 'khor ba'i '...	the root
ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བའི་རྒྱལ་བོ	the copper universal monarch) 4) {lcags kyi 'khor	los bsgyur ba'i rgyal bo
བཞི	the four consecrations of the completion stage of the great wheel. 1) {lus byin rlabs}. 2) {ngag byin rlabs} 3) {yid byin rlabs} 4) {de kho na nyid kyi byin rlabs} 'khor lo chen po'i rdzogs rim byi...	bzhi
གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	1 the study wheel of study / learning; 2) {spong ba bsam gtan gyi 'khor lo - the renunciation wheel of contemplation / meditation three {bya	gyi 'khor lo
བ་ལས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the action wheel of dharmic activity / practical conduct; 3) three spheres of a teacher's activity (exegesis {bshad pa}, attainment {sgrub pa} and work {las}.(1 klog pa thos bsam gyi 'khor lo dang,...	ba las kyi 'khor lo
ཡུལ་ན་གནས་པ	1) dwell in a favorable country; 2) {skyes chen bsten pa - follow a great being; 3) {rang nyid legs	yul na gnas pa
སྨོན	one's individual good aspirations 4) {sngon bsod nams bsags pa having accumulated merit formerly) OR the four chakras ; 1) {snying khar chos kyi 'khor lo} = the wheel of phenomena at the heart; 2) ...	smon
བསྒྱུར་བའི་རྒྱལ་བོ	the copper universal monarch; 4) {lcags kyi 'khor los	bsgyur ba'i rgyal bo
ཐེ་ཐྲེཨེ	fold objects; 2) the objects of	the three
ལིགྷཏནིང	like, snaking 'khyugs po - nimble 'khyugs se 'khyug - flashing/ running quickly 'khyugs se 'khyug - flashing quickly 'khyud - embrace, hug, copulate, shinny up 'khyud - to embrace, hug, clasp 'khyu...	lightning
ཐེ་བུདདྷ	body of reality, the buddha-body of perfect rapture and the emanational body see longcenpa, treasury of the supreme vehicle, vol (2, p 282] 'khrid pa'i rim pa - elucidation 'khrid pa'i sa mkhan - g...	the buddha
མོ་འཁྲིད་ཡོང་བ	the brahmin youth leading the queen away 'khrid rim - guidance manuals, texts of instruction 'khrims - terror, panic, fear 'khril - 1) bent/ tortuous; 2) wind/ coil around be attached to 'khril - u...	mo 'khrid yong ba
བོདིལཡ་ཕོ༹རམ་ལ	-]; 2) respected/ honored 'khril shing - climbing plant, creeper, creeping plant 'khril shing - bent tree 'khris - in front of, near, before, nearby, side, wind, SA 'khri ba, neighboring bank, shor...	bodily form la
པནིཅ	strides, in a state of commotion, ruffled, upset. 3) to be mixed up, disordered. {mchi ma 'khrug} burst into tears. Comp. with {dkrug pa} 4) fighting, quarrel, strife, tumult, dispute, disorder, di...	panic
བེ་པནིཅ	stricken, be angry, quarrel, contend 'khrug pa - cause trouble 'khrug pa - {nga'i glang dgos zhes 'khrug nas} yelling, 'Give me back my ox!' and they quarreled 'khrug pa rgyag pa - quarrel, dispute...	be panic
པར་འཁྲུགས་པ	raging [river]; 4) disagreement, disturbance. 5) to vibrate, tremble [with rage] conflict; pf. of {'khrug pa} 1) disturbed, agitated, mobbed with, distress, violated, excited. irritated, stirred up...	par 'khrugs pa
གྲསྤིང་ནོན	ego as ego and so forth, stupidity rmongs pa not knowing dharmas as they are phugs kyi 'khrul rgyu dang, sensory degeneration etc] 'khrul rgyu - causes of mistake [ggd] 'khrul rgyu bzhi - the four ...	grasping non
ག	1) GA; 2) vol 3; 3) what where; 4) Kaptse; 5) particle	ga
ག་ཁ་བསུམ	as in Amdo and khams sometimes KA = GA pronunciation GA indicating word	ga kha bsum
ག་ཁྲལ	tax, duty	ga khral
ག་ག	title of honor	ga ga
ག་ག་མོ	such person / thing	ga ga mo
ག་ག་ཙིལ	g.ya' sgog pa [in U dialect ai tzi lu gu]	ga ga tsil
ག་ག་ཚིལ	tickling, to tickle	ga ga tshil
ག་ག་ཡེ	nothing at all	ga ga ye
ག་གལ	anything, [+ neg] nothing	ga gal
ག་གལ་མེད	{ci yang med} [mss]	ga gal med
ག་གི	which	ga gi
ག་གི་མོ	such and such a..	ga gi mo
ག་གི་ཡིན་ནའང	whichever	ga gi yin na'ang
ག་གིར	to/ by which?	ga gir
ག་གིས	by which	ga gis
ག་གེ་བ	such and such a 1 / thing indefinite = gang zhig	ga ge ba
ག་གེ་མོ	place in tibet, such a one, such a thing, such and such	ga ge mo
ག་གོན	a melon	ga gon
ག་འགྲིག	saddle	ga 'grig
ག་འགྲིག་པ	1) lhu 'grig pa,...Lhug lag che chung tshang ma ga 'grig pa; 2) Mgo thug pa, ra 'phrod pa,...Bshad lugs ga 'grig pa,... a melon	ga 'grig pa
ག་རྒྱག་པ	mutually 'grig pa &, [= match rival] ra 'phrod pa,... Kha bshad lag len ga rgyag pa,...Byung song gi rtsis grangs ga rgyag pa	ga rgyag pa
ག་སྒྱུར	transferring	ga sgyur
ག་སྒྱུར་གཏོང	transfer	ga sgyur gtong
ག་བསྒྱུར	phar tshur go brjes 'gebs sbyor,...Zog rin 'bru 'bab sprod dgos rnams dngul rkyang sprod rgyu'i ga	ga bsgyur
ག་ཅི	what	ga ci
ག་ཅི་མོ	what	ga ci mo
ག་ཅེན	some, a good many, good deal	ga cen
ག་ཆད	w/o cause, involuntarily, can't help, have no choice but to, can only, be disappointed/ apprehensive	ga chad
ག་ཆད་དུས་པ	weeping without cause, hysterical weeping	ga chad dus pa
ག་ཆད་པ	fatigued, very tired	ga chad pa
ག་ཆེན	some, a good many, good deal	ga chen
ག་ཉ་ཛི་ར	spire	ga nya dzi ra
ག་ཏ	kind of indian handwriting	ga ta
ག་ཏའི་སྡེ་ཚན	kind of indian handwriting	ga ta'i sde tshan
ག་ཐག	[arch] all there is	ga thag
ག་མཐའ	a final ga	ga mtha'
ག་ད	club, mace	ga da
ག་དག	[arch] all that exist, whatever there are	ga dag
ག་དུར	rhodiola wallichiana (hook.)fu var. cholaensis (praeger) fu, astringent medicinal root for fever and lung and bowel diseases	ga dur
ག་དུས	when at what time; when, at what time	ga dus
ག་དུས་ག་པར	when and where?	ga dus ga par
ག་དུས་ཙམ	about when	ga dus tsam
ག་དུས་ཡང	whenever, every time, all the time	ga dus yang
ག་དུས་ཡིན་ན	all the time	ga dus yin na
ག་དུས་ཡིན་ན་ཡང	whenever, every time, all the time	ga dus yin na yang
ག་དུས་ཡིན་ནའང	at all times, whenever	ga dus yin na'ang
ག་དུས་ཡིན་ཡང	always	ga dus yin yang
ག་དུས་ཡིན་རུང	whenever, every time, all the time	ga dus yin rung
ག་དོར	tender growth of fresh horn in rhino stag or antelope	ga dor
ག་དོར་གསུམ	tyhe three {ga dor} meds [srog chags kyi sman gyi nang tshan, sha ba dang, kha sha, bse ru gsum gyi rva'o]	ga dor gsum
ག་འདས	how, of what kind?, what sort?	ga 'das
ག་འདྲ	how, what, why, how	ga 'dra
ག་འདྲ་འདུག	how, why	ga 'dra 'dug
ག་འདྲ་བྱས་ནས	how? in what way?	ga 'dra byas nas
ག་འདྲ་ཞིག	what kind of?	ga 'dra zhig
ག་འདྲ་ཞིག་ནས	from whence?	ga 'dra zhig nas
ག་འདྲ་རེད	how, why	ga 'dra red
ག་འདྲ་སེ	how	ga 'dra se
ག་འདྲས	[by] what? [by] what kind of	ga 'dras
ག་སྡུམ	Amdo and khams kyi yul gru 'gar ka and ga pronunciation gcig tu 'bod pas ga yig gsal bar ston byed kyi tshig cig	ga sdum
ག་ན	where?; 1) to liberate, deliver. 2) where. 3) how, how could; 1) to liberate, deliver. 2) where, whereabouts. 3) how, how could. 4) definitely not, no way to	ga na
ག་ན་འདུག	where exactly?	ga na 'dug
ག་ན་པ་ཏི	name of great god called lord of the multitude	ga na pa ti
ག་ན་བ	whereabouts, locations	ga na ba
ག་ན་བྱེད	how could [I] do that?	ga na byed
ག་ན་སྦྱོར་མཆོད	the offering of gana union [in ganachakra, tshogs kyi 'khor lo]	ga na sbyor mchod
ག་ན་སྦྱོར་བ	the gana union [in {tshogs kyi 'khor lo}]	ga na sbyor ba
ག་ན་མེད	random, haphazard, absolutely, at all events	ga na med
ག་ན་ཚད	what was previously mainly counted the remainder still/now is to be counted	ga na tshad
ག་ན་བཞུགས	where is [he] staying	ga na bzhugs
ག་ནས	1) from where 2) how, how could	ga nas
ག་ནས་ག་ནས	1) khengs skyung gi tshig ...Ga nas ga nas dpe srid pas,...; 2) Yong bzo med pa'i tshig ...De 'dra ga nas ga nas, khos shes kyi ma red	ga nas ga nas
ག་ནས་འགྲིག	"how could that be okay?"	ga nas 'grig
ག་ནས་འགྲིགས	"how could that be okay?"	ga nas 'grigs
ག་ནས་བལྟས་ཀྱང	no matter in what light i look at it	ga nas bltas kyang
ག་སྣོད	cummin seed, nigella indica	ga snod
ག་པ་ག་པ	uncertain place ? word where?	ga pa ga pa
ག་པ་ཡ	the Indian cow-like {ba men} antelope, deer	ga pa ya
ག་པར	1) where. 2) Syn {ga na}	ga par
ག་པར་ཡིན་ན	anywhere, anyplace	ga par yin na
ག་པར་ཡིན་ནའང	anywhere, wherever	ga par yin na'ang
ག་པར་ཡོད་མིན	whereabouts	ga par yod min
ག་པུར	camphor	ga pur
ག་པུར་འཐུལ	smell of camphor	ga pur 'thul
ག་པུར་ནག་པོ	ashes of the burnt dung of pigs, secret name	ga pur nag po
ག་པུར་དབང	moon	ga pur dbang
ག་པུར་འཛིན	moon	ga pur 'dzin
ག་ཕྱི་ག་ལོག	wrongly, incorrectly	ga phyi ga log
ག་ཕྱི་ལོག་པ	wrongly, incorrectly	ga phyi log pa
ག་བ	force, press some thing on a person	ga ba
ག་བ་ཏ་བ	a flower	ga ba ta ba
ག་བ་ཏ་བ་རི་ནི	small cardamom	ga ba ta ba ri ni
ག་བུ་ཐུད་གསོབ	pha ba dgo dgo	ga bu thud gsob
ག་བུར	[Skt] camphor [lus rgyas, rab bsil, med. herb astringent, highly cooling, clearing away rgyas tshad, rnying tsad syn: kha ba'i phye ma dang, kha ba'i ming can, rdul gyi snying po, nus ldan, sprin g...	ga bur
ག་བུར་ཏིས་ལོ	{ga bur tis lo} med. herb	ga bur tis lo
ག་བུར་ནག་པོ	ri phag gi brun in a vessel like a clay pot w closed mouth so that smoke does not escape burned to ash,	ga bur nag po
ག་བུར་འཛིན	moon	ga bur 'dzin
ག་བུར་འཛིན་པ	moon	ga bur 'dzin pa
ག་བྱེད	to try to do	ga byed
ག་བྱེད་འདི་བྱེད་མི་ཤེས་པ	not knowing what to do, confused, out of hand	ga byed 'di byed mi shes pa
ག་བྱེད་འདི་བྱེད་མེད་པ	not knowing what to do, confused, out of hand	ga byed 'di byed med pa
ག་བྱེད་འདི་བྱེད་མེད་པར་གྱུར	"came into a state in which there was nothing that could be done"	ga byed 'di byed med par gyur
ག་བྲ	a medicine, twig, fresh shoot on a tree	ga bra
ག་འབབ	ga khral gyi 'bab	ga 'bab
ག་མིན་གུ་མིན	not in the proper place	ga min gu min
ག་མིན་འདི་མིན	not in the proper place	ga min 'di min
ག་མུ	go, go away	ga mu
ག་མོ་བྱེ་ལ	species of wild cat	ga mo bye la
ག་ཙམ	how much/ long/ many [ga tsam...de tsam however much/ long many, that much..]	ga tsam
ག་བཙོན	eruption of the skin	ga btson
ག་རྩེ་བཞི	Kaptse, the four diagrams of	ga rtse bzhi
ཅཡཅླིཅལ་ཨེ྾ཨིསྟེནཅེ	based on Chinese divination	cyclical existence
ག་ཚད	how much	ga tshad
ག་ཚུག	how, in what way?	ga tshug
ག་ཚོད	how much? how many? how long?	ga tshod
ག་ཛ་དན	[Skt] elephant tooth (ivory) [by its power gdon nad &, 'go ba'i rims nad srung]	ga dza dan
ག་ཛན་ཏ	precious stone for curing infectious fevers or relieve one from influence of malignant spirits gañ dzir - top ornament	ga dzan ta
ག་འཛོལ	mgo ma thug pa,...Phar sprod tshur len gyi rtsis grangs ga 'dzol ba	ga 'dzol
ག་ཞ	'phya lad kyi gad mo,...Drang gtam bshad par gzhan gyis ga zha byas kyang skyon ci yod,...Mi rnams kyis ga zha byed par mi 'dzem pa,...Mi mang po'i dbus su sma 'bebs kyi ga zha sgrog pa	ga zha
ག་ཞ་དཀར་དངས་དགོན	n of monastery	ga zha dkar dangs dgon
ག་ཞན	[arch] laughter	ga zhan
ག་གཞའ	laughter, jest, joke	ga gzha'
ག་གཞུང	ga khral bsdu rgyu'i yaks and sheep white and black count note	ga gzhung
ག་ཟུག	how	ga zug
ག་གཟི	squinting	ga gzi
ག་འུ	rga bu	ga 'u
ག་འུ་ཏ་མ	Gautama	ga 'u ta ma
ག་ཡ་ག་རིའི་མདོ	sutra delivered on mountain gaya gauri	ga ya ga ri'i mdo
ག་ཡ་གོ་རིའི་མདོ	Gayagori Sutra	ga ya go ri'i mdo
ག་ཡ་འོད་སྲུང	Gaya Kashyapa, important monk follower of the Buddha	ga ya 'od srung
ག་ཡ་འོད་སྲུངས	{ga ya 'od srung}	ga ya 'od srungs
ག་ཡ་དྷ་ར	Gayadhara	ga ya dha ra
ག་ར་ཁ་ཏན	root of plant	ga ra kha tan
ག་ར་ཁ་ཏན་དུ་ལིའི་རྩ་བ	excellent rice	ga ra kha tan du li'i rtsa ba
ག་རི	what. Syn {ga re}	ga ri
ག་རི་དགའ་རིས	dejected	ga ri dga' ris
ག་རིམ་བཞིན	respectively	ga rim bzhin
ག་རུ	to where? whither?	ga ru
ག་རུ་ད	fabulous chief of feathered race, SA khyung	ga ru da
ག་རེ	what, which, where, whence, what	ga re
ག་རེ་བྱས་ནས	why	ga re byas nas
ག་རེ་བྱེད་ཀ	why, what for	ga re byed ka
ག་རེ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་རེད	why, what are they doing?	ga re byed kyi yod red
ག་རེ་བྱེད་མཁན	what for	ga re byed mkhan
ག་རེ་བྱེད་མཁན་ཡིན་པ	why	ga re byed mkhan yin pa
ག་རེ་ཟེར་གྱི་ཡོད	what is?	ga re zer gyi yod
ག་རེ་ཡིན་ན་ཡང	anyhow, in any case	ga re yin na yang
ག་རེ་ཡིན་ནའང	whatsoever, whatever 369	ga re yin na'ang
ག་རེ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན	because, the reason why	ga re yin zer na
ག་རེ་ཡིན་ཡང	whatever it is, whatever it may be	ga re yin yang
ག་རེ་རེད་ཟེར་ན	if you ask what it is	ga re red zer na
ག་རེའི་དོན་དུ	why	ga re'i don du
ག་རེས	by what?	ga res
ག་རོ	place in india, garo hills	ga ro
ག་ལ	how could {dad pas dge ba sgrub pa phun sum tshogs pas ga la gnod} How could wealth and glory be harmful to one who faithfully practice virtuous action?	ga la
ག་ལ་ག་ལ	indefinite place ? word: what place where?	ga la ga la
ག་ལ་ག་ལེ	slowly, softly, gently	ga la ga le
ག་ལ་གང་ཙམ	considerable	ga la gang tsam
ག་ལ་གོ་ལི་ཀ	insect which subsists only on air	ga la go li ka
ག་ལ་འགྱུར	how will they be able?, how can it find anything?	ga la 'gyur
ག་ལ་འགྲིག	"how can it be okay?"	ga la 'grig
ག་ལ་འགྲིགས	"how can it be okay?"	ga la 'grigs
ག་ལ་ཆེན་མིན་པ	non-entity	ga la chen min pa
ག་ལ་ཐོས	how can I hear?	ga la thos
ག་ལ་ཕན	to what does this serve, what is the use of this	ga la phan
ག་ལ་ཕོད	"how could one dare?"	ga la phod
ག་ལ་བ	before	ga la ba
ག་ལ་བ་དེར	to the location where	ga la ba der
ག་ལ་བྱེད	how could I?	ga la byed
ག་ལ་ཞིག	not only	ga la zhig
ག་ལ་འོང	how could it arise, it is impossible, how could it have	ga la 'ong
ག་ལ་འོངས	how can there be?	ga la 'ongs
ག་ལ་ཡིན	how could it be? No way!	ga la yin
ག་ལ་ཡོང	How can; x {nga'i ngan sems mi shes pa'i thams cad mkhyen pa ga la yong} The Buddha does not know my evil intentions. How can he be said to	ga la yong
བེ་ཨལལ	knowing?	be all
ག་ལ་ཡོད	"how can it be okay?", how can there be	ga la yod
ག་ལ་རུང	"how can it be okay?"	ga la rung
ག་ལས	from which, how	ga las
ག་ལེ	slow leisurely, relaxed, easily, gradually	ga le
ག་ལེ་ག་ལེར	slowly, gradually	ga le ga ler
ག་ལེ་ག་ལེར་ཤེས	slowly/ gradually learn	ga le ga ler shes
ག་ལེ་གུ་ལེ	shugs med pa'i slow	ga le gu le
ག་ལེ་ཕེབ	go gently (farewell salute to a visitor)	ga le pheb
ག་ལེ་ཕེབས	farewell, good-bye, 'go in peace'	ga le phebs
ག་ལེ་ཞུགས	goodbye [by the 1 going]	ga le zhugs
ག་ལེ་བཞུགས	farewell, good-bye, 'remain in peace'	ga le bzhugs
ག་ལེ་ཤོག	come slowly or gently	ga le shog
ག་ལེ་སོས་དལ	when it's convenient	ga le sos dal
ག་ལེའི	lightly, slowly	ga le'i
ག་ལེར	gently, gradual, slow, slowly, softly	ga ler
ག་ལེར་ག་ལེར	gradually	ga ler ga ler
ག་ལེར་ཕེབས	adieu	ga ler phebs
ག་ལེར་ཕེབས་རོགས་གནང	goodbye	ga ler phebs rogs gnang
ག་ལོག	squinting	ga log
ག་ལོག་སྒྲོ་འདོགས	squint	ga log sgro 'dogs
ག་ཤ	a jest, joke, laughter, girth, rope, garland, necklace, bandoleer, shoulderbelt, string, raiment	ga sha
ག་ཤ་སྒྲོག	loud laughter	ga sha sgrog
ག་ཤར	rope on beast of burden, dog harness, shoulder belt as badge of dignity, cord worn round shoulder and waist at time of meditation	ga shar
ག་ཤར་བཅུག	cause laughter	ga shar bcug
ག་ཤལ	ornament going from the shoulders under the arms, flower, jewel	ga shal
ག་ཤས	some, part, few	ga shas
ག་ཤེད	uncertain, not definitely known, approximate but uncertain direction	ga shed
ག་ཤེད་གཅིག་ལ	it is somewhere	ga shed gcig la
ག་ཤེད་གཅིག་ལ་ཡོད	it is at a certain place	ga shed gcig la yod
ག་ཤེལ	glass beads, glass pearls	ga shel
ག་ཤེས	[arch] kha rdung btang ba, kha zer ba	ga shes
ག་ས	all uncertain places Sa phyogs ga sa ga la dril bsgrags byed du phyin,... Ga slog phyin ci slog pa,...Las ka byed stangs ga slog tu gyur na don mi 'grub	ga sa
ག་ས་ག་ནས	from all over/ everywhere	ga sa ga nas
ག་ས་ག་ལ	all over, everywhere	ga sa ga la
ག་ས་ག་ལ་ཡོད་པ	ubiquity	ga sa ga la yod pa
ག་ས་གར	here, there, and everywhere	ga sa gar
ག་སིར	punishment	ga sir
ག་སུབ	cover	ga sub
གབ༹	white mark on animal's face in center from forehead to tip of nose	gva
གབ༹་གབ༹	(CH a kind of sngo tshal	gva gva
གབ༹་ཆུ	gva river	gva chu
གྭ་ཏེ་མ་ལ	Guatemala	gwa te ma la
གབ༹་དོར	shva ba'i khrag rva	gva dor
གབ༹་པ	blaze in middle of face of horse mule	gva pa
གྭ་ཚང	of the Buddhist monastery	gwa tshang
གབ༹་ཞུར	in middle of face of horse etc mchu rtse bar spu mdog skya khyu re ba yod pa	gva zhur
གབ༹་ཤབ༹	gva zhur dang 'dra, gya, grangs brgyad cu gya gcig nas brgyad cu gya dgu'i bar du sbyor rgyu'itshiggrogs shig ...Brgyad cu gya lnga,...Gya bdun	gva shva
གག	[arch] 1) calling word; 2) Spyi sgra gang; 3) silver [uncoined], wad, wadding	gag
གག་གེ་གོག་གེ	1) unworkable, heavy; 2) crawl	gag ge gog ge
གག་གོག	1) unworkable, heavy; 2) crawl	gag gog
གག་པ	1) Gnyan nad attacking tongue which swells stopping speech [div: pho gag, mo gag, bu gag, gnyan gag]; 2) duck	gag pa
གག་ཚིལ་སྒོག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	[one of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu] skyi g.ya' bar [fear, panic] 'dod pa'i bsam pas gelong la g.ya sgog pa	gag tshil sgog pa'i ltung byed
གག་ཚེ	water fowl 370	gag tshe
གག་ཟོར	gag pas lce steng thor pa thon pa &, lce 'og skrangs pa gshag byed kyi implement	gag zor
གག་སེལ	exorcism of hindrances	gag sel
གག་ལྷོག	gnyan nad lce la babs te gre ba 'gag pa gag pa'i nad and sha la babs te thor pa 'byung ba lhog pa'i nad	gag lhog
གགས	obstructed	gags
གང	[+verb] - whatever . . . ; regardless of what . . .	gang
གང་དཀའ་དཀའ	however difficult gang skye ba nang bcud kyi sems can those who take birth, the 'inner contents of sentient beings' {khams gsum gyis bsdus pa} are concentrated within the three realms	gang dka' dka'
གང་མཁོ་གང་ལེན	to each in accord w his needs	gang mkho gang len
གང་ག	1) all; 2) the river Ganges; 3) Ganga	gang ga
གང་ག་ཆུང	med. herb [bitter, cooling, by its power dug tsad, rma tsad, tsa 'khru, tsa bas skrangs pa etc overcoming	gang ga chung
གང་ག་འཛིན	epithet of shiva, the great ocean which holds the entire discharge of ganges river	gang ga 'dzin
གང་གང	however much	gang gang
གང་གཱའི་ཀླུང	the river Ganges	gang gA'i klung
གང་གཱའི་ཀླུང་ཀི་བྱེ་མ	the sand of the river Ganges	gang gA'i klung ki bye ma
གང་གཱའི་ཀླུང་གི་བྱེ་མ་སྙེད	as much as the sand of river Ganges	gang gA'i klung gi bye ma snyed
མཉམ་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	as many buddhas as there are sand grains in the river Ganges gang ga'i klung gi bye ma 'di snyed dang	mnyam pa'i sangs rgyas
གང་གའི་འགྲམ	the banks of the Ganges	gang ga'i 'gram
གང་གཱའི་བྱེ་སྙེད	all the sand in the river Ganges	gang gA'i bye snyed
གང་གཱའི་བྱེ་མ	the sand of the river Ganges	gang gA'i bye ma
གང་གའི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess of the river ganga	gang ga'i lha mo
གང་གི	what	gang gi
གང་གི་སྐབས་སུ	at either occasion, at the occasion of	gang gi skabs su
གང་གི་སྒོ་ནས་ཀྱང	in any possible way, whichever way	gang gi sgo nas kyang
གང་གི་ཆ་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang gi cha nas
གང་གི་ཆེད་དུ	for what reason/ purpose, why	gang gi ched du
གང་གི་ལྟར་ན	ltar na, by itself, means "in that case"; gang gi don du means "for the sake of which" so, by extrapolation, it seems gang gi ltar na should mean something like "in which case," "in the case of whi...	gang gi ltar na
གང་གི་ཐད་ནས	bya all means, in all respects	gang gi thad nas
གང་གི་ཐོག་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang gi thog nas
གང་གི་དུས	when, at which time	gang gi dus
གང་གི་དུས་སུ་ཡང	every time; x {nyan 'chad sgom pa gang gi dus su yang 'gal ba 'du} every time you listen to it, explain it, or meditate on it the confusion will be multiplied	gang gi dus su yang
གང་གི་དོན་དུ	why, what for	gang gi don du
གང་གི་དོན་ལ	for what purpose? for what reason? why?	gang gi don la
གང་གི་ཕྱིར	for which, for the sake or purpose of which, why so?	gang gi phyir
གང་གི་ཚེ	at the time of, at which time	gang gi tshe
གང་གི་ཡང	whatever	gang gi yang
གང་གི་ཡོངས་སུ་ཟིན་པར	whatever has happened	gang gi yongs su zin par
གང་གི་སླད་དུ	for what purpose? for what reason? why?	gang gi slad du
གང་གིས	by/ [because] of/ what/ which, whatever, how to	gang gis
གང་གིས་ཀྱང	no matter by what	gang gis kyang
གང་གིས་ཀྱང་མ	not subject to any noxious influence	gang gis kyang ma
གང་གིས་ཀྱང་མ་སླད་པ	without any thing detrimental	gang gis kyang ma slad pa
གང་གིས་བསྐལ་པ་བྱེ་བ་རུ	{gang gis bskal pa bye ba ru lha sku 'bum phrag bsgoms pa las bla ma skad cig dran pa mchog} - Better than meditating on a hundred thousand deities for ten million kalpas, is to think of one's teac...	gang gis bskal pa bye ba ru
གང་གིས་སྟོང་པ	1) what is it empty of?; 2) emptied out of everything; 3) emanation body emptied out of everything	gang gis stong pa
གང་གིས་མཐོང་ན	who can see these	gang gis mthong na
གང་གིས་དང་གང་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	by what and where it is established	gang gis dang gang du sgrub pa
གང་གིས་ལན་ན	Why?	gang gis lan na
གང་གིས་ཤེ་ན	why	gang gis she na
གང་གིས་ཤེས་ན	[if you ask] why, because 371	gang gis shes na
གང་གྲུབ་མཐར	After completing any set number (of recitations)	gang grub mthar
གང་གག	the river Ganges	gang gga
གང་དགའ	natural, as you please, as you like	gang dga'
གང་དགའ་ཀྱིས	Just let it go	gang dga' kyis
གང་དགའ་གྱིས	just let it go	gang dga' gyis
གང་དགའ་ཐོང	be carefree (comp. w {rang dga'}	gang dga' thong
གང་དགའ་བར	according to one's wish; what feels natural, whatever one's feels inclined to	gang dga' bar
གང་དགའ་བྱེད	to act according to one's own desire, to do as one pleases; do what you like	gang dga' byed
གང་དགར	at the will of, as 1 feels, naturally	gang dgar
གང་དགར་གོར་ཞོག	let go naturally	gang dgar gor zhog
གང་དགར་བཏང	simply leave it to itself	gang dgar btang
གང་དགར་ཐོང	let freely be!	gang dgar thong
གང་དགར་བོར་ཞོག	leave it as you please	gang dgar bor zhog
གང་དགོན	Tshongkhapa's hermitage	gang dgon
གང་དགོས	all what we needed	gang dgos
གང་དགོས་དགོས	whatever is necessary, everything needed	gang dgos dgos
གང་དགོས་ཡོད	what do you need?	gang dgos yod
གང་མགོ	bowl of tobacco pipe	gang mgo
གང་མགྱོགས་ཀྱིས	at once, quickly	gang mgyogs kyis
གང་མགྱོགས་རྒྱུག་པ	sprint	gang mgyogs rgyug pa
གང་མགྱོགས་ཅི་མགྱོགས	as soon as possible	gang mgyogs ci mgyogs
གང་འགབ	what[ever] is appropriate/ fitting/ proper	gang 'gab
གང་འགྲིགས	what you like, what suits you	gang 'grigs
གང་རྒྱ	full	gang rgya
གང་སྒྲ	spyi sgra zhig = gang	gang sgra
གང་སྔ	who was first?	gang snga
གང་སྔ་སྔ	gang mgyogs mgyogs,...Sang nyin gang snga snga phebs rogs gnang	gang snga snga
གང་ཅི	whatsoever, any kind, various, all kinds of, in many ways	gang ci
གང་ཅིའི	of all kinds	gang ci'i
གང་ཅིའི་ཐད་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang ci'i thad nas
གང་ཅིའི་ཐོག་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang ci'i thog nas
གང་བཅོལ་གོ་ཆོད	who would always do whatever I asked	gang bcol go chod
གང་ལྕོགས	whichever is appropriate, whichever is suitable	gang lcogs
གང་ཆེ	the 1 who has most	gang che
གང་ཆེ་ཆེ	as big as possible	gang che che
གང་ཆེ་བ	most, best	gang che ba
གང་ཆེན	infinite	gang chen
གང་ཆེན་མཚོ	Immense Ocean, (n. of a sambhogakaya buddha]. [= {rnam snang gang chen mtsho}, {gangs chen mtsho}	gang chen mtsho
གང་ཇག་དབང་པོ་འབྲིང	someone of medium intelligence	gang jag dbang po 'bring
གང་ཇི་སྙེད་པ་ཅིག	whatever the variety [of]... (?) [mss]	gang ji snyed pa cig
གང་མཇུག	mouthpiece or tip of tobacco pipe	gang mjug
གང་ཉིད	you	gang nyid
གང་ཏི་སེ	SA ke la sha	gang ti se
གང་ཏུ་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not existing in any form	gang tu yang ma grub pa
གང་བཏང་ན་ཁྱད	med, it is no matter which you give me	gang btang na khyad
གང་ལྟར	however; however, whatever, anyway, in case	gang ltar
གང་ལྟར་ནའང	regardless	gang ltar na'ang
གང་ལྟར་བཞག	in any circumstance	gang ltar bzhag
གང་ལྟར་ཡང	however; whatever; whichever is the case; in any case	gang ltar yang
གང་ལྟར་བསམས	whatever one thinks about	gang ltar bsams
གང་སྟབས	in any way	gang stabs
གང་སྟབས་བདེ་བ	whichever way is convenient	gang stabs bde ba
གང་སྟོང	full and empty	gang stong
གང་སྟོང་པའི་གཞི	the object which is empty of so and so, the [basis of emptiness]	gang stong pa'i gzhi
གང་ཐད་ནས	whether; x {chos dang 'jig rten gang thad nas} whether worldly or spiritual	gang thad nas
གང་ཐད་ནས་ཆེས་དང་འཇིག་རྟེན	in respect to either religious or mundane	gang thad nas ches dang 'jig rten
གང་ཐུབ	as far as possible	gang thub
གང་ཐུབ་ཀྱིས	as far as possible, as much as [one can]	gang thub kyis
གང་ཐུབ་གང་ལྕོགས	ci nus ci lcogs, gang thub thub	gang thub gang lcogs
གང་ཐུབ་ཅི་ཐུབ	enthusiastic, energetic	gang thub ci thub
གང་ཐུབ་ཅི་ཐུབ་བྱེད་པ	as far as possible	gang thub ci thub byed pa
གང་ཐུབ་ཐུབ	as far as possible, as much as [one can]	gang thub thub
གང་ཐུབ་བྱེད	to do as much as one can regarding the verbal action	gang thub byed
གང་ཐོན་ཐོན	gang byung byung,... Skad cha gang thon thon bshad na mi 'grog	gang thon thon
གང་ཐོས་ཐམས་ཅད	all that is heard	gang thos thams cad
གང་འཐད	what you like, what suits you	gang 'thad
གང་འཐད་གང་རིགས	however/ as many as is right/ proper	gang 'thad gang rigs
གང་དག	whoever	gang dag
གང་དག་གི་ཕྱིར	for whom or what, for the sake of whom or what	gang dag gi phyir
གང་དག་ཅི་ཡོད	any/ all there are	gang dag ci yod
གང་དག་ཉིད	whichever	gang dag nyid
གང་དག་འདིར	all those here, those two who are here, whoever present	gang dag 'dir
གང་དག་ཡིན་པ	what are the ..? 372	gang dag yin pa
གང་དང་གང	one or the other, whatever, however much	gang dang gang
གང་དང་གང་དུ	no matter where	gang dang gang du
གང་དང་གང་ཞིག	such and such, so and so	gang dang gang zhig
གང་དང་གང་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཀྱང	whatever	gang dang gang zhig yin kyang
གང་དང་གང་ཞིག་ཡིན་རུང	whatever, such and such	gang dang gang zhig yin rung
གང་དང་ཅི	"lots of ways" construction	gang dang ci
གང་དང་མཇལ་བའི་བླ་མ	the teacher whom you have met	gang dang mjal ba'i bla ma
གང་དང་ཡང	whatever	gang dang yang
གང་དུ	where, to which, at what, whenever, to whichever	gang du
གང་དུ་ཀྱང	whenever, to whatever/ whichever, anywhere- wherever	gang du kyang
གང་དུ་ཀྱང་རུང	whithersoever	gang du kyang rung
གང་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ་ལེན་པ	where one will take rebirth gang du skye ba'i skye gnas rnam pa bzhi - four modes through which living beings take rebirth: {brdzus skyes dang, drod gsher skyes dang, mngal skyes dang, sgong skyes}...	gang du skye ba len pa
གང་དུ་སྐྱེ་བའི་སྣོད	the 'vessel', the places where beings take rebirth	gang du skye ba'i snod
གང་དུ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱང	wherever one is born	gang du skyes kyang
གང་དུ་འགྲོ་གི་ཡོད་ཀྱང	whichever country [they] are going to	gang du 'gro gi yod kyang
གང་དུ་གཅིག	how they are identical	gang du gcig
གང་དུ་འདུག	where to sit	gang du 'dug
གང་དུ་གནས་པ	wherever it is	gang du gnas pa
གང་དུ་ཕེབས་བཞེད	where do you want to go	gang du phebs bzhed
གང་དུ་ཕེབས་སམ	where are you going?	gang du phebs sam
གང་དུ་ཕྱིན་སོང	where are?, where have they gone?	gang du phyin song
གང་དུ་འབྱུང་བ	the source, where it comes from	gang du 'byung ba
གང་དུ་མི་སྟེར་སྟོང་བའི་འདྲེ	'dre who empty and do not allow to fill	gang du mi ster stong ba'i 'dre
གང་དུ་གཟུང་ཡང	some thing	gang du gzung yang
གང་དུ་འང	whenever, to whatever/ whichever, anywhere- wherever, anything at all	gang du 'ang
གང་དུ་འང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	1) not existent anywhere/ at all; 2) have no existence at all whatsoever/ anywhere	gang du 'ang ma grub pa
གང་དུ་འང་མ་ངེས་པའི་རིགས	undetermined type/nature	gang du 'ang ma nges pa'i rigs
གང་དུ་འང་མི་རྟོག་པ	not conceptualize anything	gang du 'ang mi rtog pa
གང་དུ་འོང་བ	from where it comes	gang du 'ong ba
གང་དུ་ཡང	+ neg. not at all	gang du yang
གང་དུ་ཡང་སྣང	permeate everywhere	gang du yang snang
གང་དུ་ཡང་མ་སོང་བ	not going anywhere	gang du yang ma song ba
གང་དུ་ཡོད་པ	where I was	gang du yod pa
གང་དུ་སོང་ཀྱང	wherever you may go	gang du song kyang
གང་དུའང	anything	gang du'ang
གང་དུའང་ཁས་མ་ལེན་པ	not assert anything whatsoever	gang du'ang khas ma len pa
གང་དུའང་མ་གྲུབ	nothing exists, not have any concrete existence	gang du'ang ma grub
གང་དུའང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	1) not existent anywhere. 2) no existence whatsoever	gang du'ang ma grub pa
གང་དུའང་མ་ངེས་པའི་རིགས	the undetermined type / nature	gang du'ang ma nges pa'i rigs
གང་དུའང་མི་རྟོག	not conceptualize anything, not forming any concept whatsoever	gang du'ang mi rtog
གང་དུའང་མི་རྟོག་པ	not conceptualizing anything whatsoever	gang du'ang mi rtog pa
གང་དུས	when	gang dus
གང་དེ	de'i	gang de
གང་དེ་ཡོད་ན	in this case	gang de yod na
གང་དོགས	what fear, do not be afraid of	gang dogs
གང་དྲ	which one?, like what?	gang dra
གང་དྲག	1) as good / well as possible, the best one can do. 2) too bad, its a pity	gang drag
གང་དྲག་ཅི་དྲག	as far as possible, what is best? what to do?	gang drag ci drag
གང་དྲན	whatever 1 thinks of	gang dran
གང་དྲན་ཐམས་ཅད	all that is thought	gang dran thams cad
གང་དྲན་དྲན་དུ	say what occurs in the mind, speak falsehood	gang dran dran du
གང་དྲན་དྲན་དུ་བཤད་པ	to speak at random	gang dran dran du bshad pa
གང་དྲན་ལག་འགེལ	all appearances that arise lag len bstar ba	gang dran lag 'gel
གང་དྲན་ཤར་མར་ཤོད	speak w/o reservation, say what is on/ whatever is in one's mind	gang dran shar mar shod
གང་དྲན་ཤོད	speak w/o reservation, say what is on/ whatever is in one's mind, talk aimlessly	gang dran shod
གང་བདེ	whatever 1 likes	gang bde
གང་བདེ་སྟབས་བདེ་རང་བྱེད་པ	who can do what pleases him, as it pleases him	gang bde stabs bde rang byed pa
གང་བདེར་ཐོང	leave it alone, to itself	gang bder thong
གང་འདུག	exactly as it is	gang 'dug
གང་འདུག་ཅི་ཤར	exactly as it is and during any type of experience	gang 'dug ci shar
གང་འདུལ	1) taming whoever needs to be tamed/beings; 2) tameable ones	gang 'dul
གང་འདུལ་རྒྱན་དང་ཆ་ལུགས	appropriate ornaments and attire	gang 'dul rgyan dang cha lugs
གང་འདུལ་ཐབས་མཁས	skilled in the means of taming whoever needs to be tamed	gang 'dul thabs mkhas
གང་འདུལ་དེར་སྣང	Whatever is needed for taming, that appears	gang 'dul der snang
གང་འདུལ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	nirmanakaya who tames whatever needs to be tamed 373	gang 'dul sprul sku
གང་འདུལ་རིགས་བཞི	the four classes of those to be tamed	gang 'dul rigs bzhi
གང་འདོད	whatever is wished for	gang 'dod
གང་འདོད་འགྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	the ways to accomplish one's aims	gang 'dod 'grub pa'i thabs
གང་འདོད་ཅན	having whatever is desired	gang 'dod can
གང་འདོད་སྟེར	whatever they desired	gang 'dod ster
གང་འདོད་པ་བཙལ་གྱིས་མ་རྙེད་པ	impossible to fulfill one's needs	gang 'dod pa btsal gyis ma rnyed pa
གང་འདོད་བྱེད	do whatever 1 desires/ likes	gang 'dod byed
གང་འདོད་དབང་ཤེད	arbitrarily autocratic/ tyrannical/ dictatorial rule	gang 'dod dbang shed
གང་འདོད་བཞིན	ad libitum	gang 'dod bzhin
གང་འདྲ	how? like what? in what way?	gang 'dra
གང་འདྲ་མཐོང	what have you seen?	gang 'dra mthong
གང་འདྲ་བྱས	how? like what? in what way?	gang 'dra byas
གང་འདྲ་བྱས་ཏེ	{gang 'dra} [mss]	gang 'dra byas te
གང་འདྲ་བྱས་ནས	{gang 'dra} [mss]	gang 'dra byas nas
གང་འདྲ་བྱུང་ནའང	no matter (how, what), regardless of	gang 'dra byung na'ang
གང་འདྲ་ཞིག	"what kind of" construction	gang 'dra zhig
གང་འདྲ་ཟེར	how? like what? in what way?	gang 'dra zer
གང་འདྲ་ཡོད་ནའང	no matter (how, what), regardless of	gang 'dra yod na'ang
གང་འདྲས	how, of what kind, what sort?	gang 'dras
གང་འདྲས་ཤིག་ལ་བྱས་ཀྱང	whatever 1 makes	gang 'dras shig la byas kyang
གང་འདྲས་སེ	how	gang 'dras se
གང་ན	where, whither, whereabouts of a person, place of residence, where	gang na
གང་ན་ཅི་ཡོད	"whatever exists" construction	gang na ci yod
གང་ན་གནས	where is it?	gang na gnas
གང་ན་བ	1) wherever it is. 2) whatever sickness	gang na ba
གང་ན་ཡང	wherever. + neg.; nowhere	gang na yang
གང་ན་ཡོད་རྩད་གཅོད་པར་བྱ	decided to send [a horseman] to search	gang na yod rtsad gcod par bya
གང་ནའང་མེད	nowhere	gang na'ang med
གང་ནའང་རུང	wheresoever	gang na'ang rung
གང་ནས	{gang nas mjal} how will I ever meet him?	gang nas
གང་ནས་ཀྱང	{ci nas kyang} by all means [mss]	gang nas kyang
གང་ནས་ཀྱང་རུང	whence-so-ever	gang nas kyang rung
གང་ནས་ཅི་ཐུབ	as far/ much as possible	gang nas ci thub
གང་ནས་བལྟས་ཀྱང	in whatever way one looks, wherever one looks	gang nas bltas kyang
གང་ནས་བྱུང་ཆ	out of nowhere	gang nas byung cha
གང་ནས་བྱུང་ཆ་མེད་པ	whatever arises is partless	gang nas byung cha med pa
གང་ནས་འོང	where does it come from?	gang nas 'ong
གང་ནས་འོང་སུ་ཡིན་དྲིས་པ	asked him where he had come from and who he was	gang nas 'ong su yin dris pa
གང་ནས་ཨོང	Where are you from?	gang nas ong
གང་ནུས	as far as possible	gang nus
གང་ནུས་ཅི་ནུས	as far/ much as possible	gang nus ci nus
གང་ནུས་དེ་སྒྲུབ	from each according to his ability gang nus de sgrub dang rtsol bstun thob	gang nus de sgrub
སྤྲོད	from each according to his ability; to each according to his work [spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi spyi tshogs nang mi so so'i 'tsho ba'i rgyu chas bgo bsha' rgyag stangs kyi rtsa don zhig rtsa don des n...	sprod
གང་གནས	where it dwells	gang gnas
གང་གནས་པ	whoever remains	gang gnas pa
གང་རྣམས་ཀྱི	of what, pertaining to what	gang rnams kyi
གང་སྣང	whatever manifests/ appears/ is experienced	gang snang
གང་སྣང་ཅི་ཤར	whatever appears and is experienced	gang snang ci shar
གང་སྣང་ཉིད་ནས	from the moment it appears	gang snang nyid nas
གང་སྣང་ཐམས་ཅད	all that appears	gang snang thams cad
གང་སྣང་རང་གྲོལ	every appears &	gang snang rang grol
གང་སྣང་རང་རིག་རྗེན་པར་སྐོང་བ་སུསྟཻན་ནཀེད་སེལཕ༹	awareness in whatever is experienced	gang snang rang rig rjen par skong ba sustain naked self
གང་སྣང་རང་རིག་རྗེན་པར་སྐོང་བ	to	gang snang rang rig rjen par skong ba
སུསྟཻན་ནཀེད་སེལཕ༹	awareness in whatever is experienced	sustain naked self
གང་པོ	the entire, whole, the rest of; dgra bcom pa and compiler of Abhidharma; Purna, important monk follower of the Buddha; arhat of the Abhidharma tradition	gang po
གང་པོ་འབོད	name of brgya byin lha	gang po 'bod
གང་པོར	lump, mass	gang por
གང་སྤེལ་མ	Vasubandhu's student gang spel's Abhidharmakosha commentary	gang spel ma
གང་སྤྱིའི་ཐད་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang spyi'i thad nas
གང་སྤྱིའི་ཐོག་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang spyi'i thog nas
གང་སྤྲོ་སྤྲོ	in a most joyous manner	gang spro spro
གང་ཕན་པ་དེ་ལྟར་བྱེད་པ	will do whatever is best	gang phan pa de ltar byed pa
གང་ཕྱིར	therefore; because of what, why	gang phyir
གང་ཕྱོགས	waxing period of the moon	gang phyogs
གང་འཕྲོད	whatever is suitable, more suitable	gang 'phrod
གང་བ	fill, make full, piled up, finished, completed, filled up	gang ba
གང་བ་མེད་པ	incomplete, not full	gang ba med pa
གང་བ་བཟང་པོ	completely happy, a serpent demon, completely happy or gentle	gang ba bzang po
གང་བའམ་བརྩེགས་པ	piled up, made full	gang ba'am brtsegs pa
གང་བའི་ཟླ་བ	full moon	gang ba'i zla ba
གང་བར་འགྱུར	be full	gang bar 'gyur
གང་བུ	pod, shell, husk	gang bu
གང་བུ་ཅན་གྱི་ལོ་ཏོག	leguminous crops	gang bu can gyi lo tog
གང་བྱམས་གཅེས	show all possible kindness!	gang byams gces
གང་བྱས	however, in any case	gang byas
གང་བྱས་ཀྱང	whatever 1 does	gang byas kyang
གང་བྱས་ཀྱང་ཆོག	whatever one likes	gang byas kyang chog
གང་བྱས་ཀྱང་རུང	whatever has been done is proper, do as you please	gang byas kyang rung
གང་བྱས་གང་ལྟར	however, in any case	gang byas gang ltar
གང་བྱུང	whatever arises, jumble, whatever happens	gang byung
གང་བྱུང་གི་རོག་རམ་ལེན	take whatever help 1 can get	gang byung gi rog ram len
གང་བྱུང་དུ	random	gang byung du
གང་བྱུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	rampage	gang byung du 'gro ba
གང་བྱུང་དུ་སྤྱོད	use indiscriminately, waste, misuse	gang byung du spyod
གང་བྱུང་དུ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	use indiscriminately, waste, misuse	gang byung du longs spyod byed
གང་བྱུང་སྤྱོད་པ	1) experiencing whatever occurs. 2) spontaneous conduct	gang byung spyod pa
གང་བྱུང་བ	1) thob tshad tshang ma,...Go skabs gang byung ba tshang ma bed spyod byas pa; 2) Ci'ang rung ba,...Lto gos gang bung na yang 'grig	gang byung ba
གང་བྱུང་བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་པ	squander	gang byung bed spyod byed pa
གང་བྱུང་བྱུང	1) all, [there are], as much/ well as one can; 2) Gang rung rung; 3) Lag tu gang thebs thebs	gang byung byung
གང་བྱུང་མ་བྱུང	spontaneous, unpremeditated; unpredictable; sm. {nges med}, {cho rol mo rol}	gang byung ma byung
གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང	haphazard, irregular	gang byung mang byung
གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང་དུ	pellmell	gang byung mang byung du
གང་བྱུང་མེ་འཕེན་བྱས	they fired indiscriminately	gang byung me 'phen byas
གང་བྱུང་སྨྲ་བ	1) kha nas gang thon shod pa; 2) Byung lugs ji bzhin drang por smra ba	gang byung smra ba
གང་བྱེད	whatever he does, whatever he has been doing, whatever he is doing	gang byed
གང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་རེད	what is he doing? gang byed 'di byed med pa'i gnas stangs dilemma	gang byed kyi yod red
གང་བྱོ	to fill to the brim	gang byo
གང་འབྲེལ་དོན་དང་ལྡན་པ	meaningful for whoever has connection	gang 'brel don dang ldan pa
གང་སྦྱིན་པ	object to give	gang sbyin pa
གང་མང	as much / many as possible	gang mang
གང་མང་མང	as many as possible gang mang mang ngam che shos bzo ba maximize	gang mang mang
གང་མི་སྲིད	incredible, mind blowing, fantastic	gang mi srid
གང་མིན	1) immense[ly], extreme[ly], wondrous, extraordinarily, absolutely, immeasurable[y], completely, very; 2) very bad, "something else"	gang min
གང་མིན་ཚད	1) immense[ly], extreme[ly], wondrous, extraordinarily, absolutely, immeasurable[y], completely, very; 2) very bad, "something else"	gang min tshad
གང་མིན་ཚད་པའི་ཁྲིམས་བརྒལ	completely illegal	gang min tshad pa'i khrims brgal
གང་མེད	no increase	gang med
གང་མེད་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	indispensable	gang med du mi rung ba
གང་མེད་པ	no one, nothing	gang med pa
གང་མོས	various, different sorts, whatever is wished for	gang mos
གང་མྱུར	as fast/ soon as possible, ASAP	gang myur
གང་མྱུར་ཅི་མྱུར	as fast/ soon as possible, ASAP	gang myur ci myur
གང་ཙམ	quite a few	gang tsam
གང་ཙམ་གྱི་ཆེན་པོ	sizable	gang tsam gyi chen po
གང་ཙམ་ནས	after some time	gang tsam nas
གང་ཙམ་ཞིག	much	gang tsam zhig
གང་ཙམ་སོང་ནས	after a while	gang tsam song nas
གང་ཙུག་ཡིན	SA gang nas yin	gang tsug yin
གང་ཚང	full, integrate, whole	gang tshang
གང་ཚང་དུ	fully	gang tshang du
གང་ཚེ	at that time, point, occasion	gang tshe
གང་མཚམས	some, several	gang mtshams
གང་འཚམ་ཞིག	some	gang 'tsham zhig
གང་འཚམས	thal cha med pa'i 'tshams po'am, gnyis mthar ma lhung ba'i 'tshams po 1) quite many/ long/ much, appropriate; 2) whatever is fitting/ appropriate; 3) some several	gang 'tshams
གང་འཚམས་ཞིག་ནས	after awhile/ some time	gang 'tshams zhig nas
གང་འཚམས་སོང་ནས	after awhile/ some time	gang 'tshams song nas
གང་ཞིག	1) the one, those, that, whoever, the one who, which, certain, specific, given; whatever; who(so)ever. 2) "how will...?" [interrogative]	gang zhig
གང་ཞིག་ཀྱང	any	gang zhig kyang
གང་ཞིག་གིས་ནི	how...? why...? [mss]	gang zhig gis ni
གང་ཞིག་དྲག	as well as possible, the best 1 can	gang zhig drag
གང་ཞིག་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	why, what is it 375	gang zhig byed rgyu
གང་ཞིང་ཟག་པ	{gang zag}, subject to transmigration	gang zhing zag pa
གང་ཞུ་གི་ཡོད	what is?	gang zhu gi yod
གང་ཞེ་བསྟན་པ	which has been explained, what has been shown	gang zhe bstan pa
གང་ཞེ་ན	if asked / if you ask how / what / why, why is this? which are they? what are they?	gang zhe na
གང་ཟག	(ordinary) individual	gang zag
གང་ཟག་ཀྱི་བདག	concrete personality, individual self	gang zag kyi bdag
གང་ཟག་གི	personal, of personal self	gang zag gi
གང་ཟག་གི་རྒྱུད	individual mindstream gang zag gi rgyud tshod dang bstun pa corresponding to the measure of a person's mentality	gang zag gi rgyud
གང་ཟག་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	essence of the person	gang zag gi ngo bo nyid
གང་ཟག་གི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of personal self	gang zag gi stong pa nyid
གང་ཟག་གི་གདག་གཞི	the imputation basis for the person	gang zag gi gdag gzhi
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག	individual ego	gang zag gi bdag
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་ཉིད	the self of individuals	gang zag gi bdag nyid
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་བློ	the attitude that clings to an individual self gang zag gi bdag tu 'dzin pa'i 'dzin stangs - the conceptual attitude that holds the idea of an individual self	gang zag gi bdag tu 'dzin pa'i blo
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་མེད	the selflessness of	gang zag gi bdag med
ཨིནདིབི༹དུཨལས	individual nonself, egolessness of persons [absence of a selfentity in a person, selflessness of the person, personal selflessness, lack of individual self [one of {bdag med gnyis}. = two self-less...	individuals
གྱི་ས	the yoga-stage of realizing the nonself of person gang zag gi bdag med rtogs pa'i rnal 'byor	gyi sa
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་མེད་པ	absence of an individual self / personal identity	gang zag gi bdag med pa
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་མེད་པར་རྟོགས་པ	to realize the nonexistence of an individual self / personal identity	gang zag gi bdag med par rtogs pa
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་མེད་རགས་པ	coarse personal selflessness	gang zag gi bdag med rags pa
གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་འཛིན	adherence to a	gang zag gi bdag 'dzin
པེརསོནལ་སེལཕ༹	entity, clinging to a personal ego	personal self
མེད་པའི་སྟོང་ཉིད	the emptiness of	med pa'i stong nyid
གང་ཟག་གི་བྱེ་བྲག	the particulars of individuals	gang zag gi bye brag
གང་ཟག་གི་དབང་པོ་གསུམ	the three types of individual capacity	gang zag gi dbang po gsum
གང་ཟག་གི་གཞི	the basis for a person	gang zag gi gzhi
གང་ཟག་གི་རིགས་དགུ	the 9 types of individuals [rab kyi rab, rab kyi 'bring, rab kyi tha ma, etc)	gang zag gi rigs dgu
གང་ཟག་གི་བསམ་པ་ལ་དགོངས་པ	the intention of individual wishes some individuals la bsngags pa'i virtuous roots 'ga' zhig des chog par 'dzin pa'i gang zag kha cig gi ngor smad pa lta bu'o	gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa
གང་ཟག་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ	completely realized individual, complete realization of the individual, the thought of the individual	gang zag mngon par rtogs pa
གང་ཟག་ལྔ	the five kinds of individuals	gang zag lnga
གང་ཟག་ཆེན་པོ	great personage, an individual with the 32 major and 80 minor marks of a buddha	gang zag chen po
གང་ཟག་རྗེས་ཡོད་དུ་རྟོག་པ	the conception of subsequent existence of the individual	gang zag rjes yod du rtog pa
གང་ཟག་ཉན་བརྒྱུད	Hearing lineage of great individuals	gang zag nyan brgyud
གང་ཟག་ཉམས་ལེན་ཅན	practitioner	gang zag nyams len can
གང་ཟག་གཉིས	the two kinds of superior person. {nyan thos dang rang rgyal gyi gang zag}	gang zag gnyis
གང་ཟག་སྙང་རྒྱུད	oral transmission of the teachers	gang zag snyang rgyud
གང་ཟག་སྙན་ཁུང་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	oral lineage of mundane individuals	gang zag snyan khung gi brgyud pa
གང་ཟག་སྙན་གྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of oral transmission of (human) individuals*	gang zag snyan gyi brgyud pa
གང་ཟག་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	the hearing lineage of ordinary beings	gang zag snyan brgyud
གང་ཟག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	1) personalism. 2) personalist, adherent of personalism, pudgalavada	gang zag tu smra ba
གང་ཟག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	ego-grasping, grasping the existence of individuals	gang zag tu 'dzin pa
གང་ཟག་བཏགས་ཡོད་དུ་རྟོག་པ	conceive of the individual as being nominally existent / having nominal existence	gang zag btags yod du rtog pa
གང་ཟག་སྟ་གོན	summer liturgy, thog mar gnas mal stobs pa'i ched du, khyad chos bcu ldan gyi dge slong gcig gam gnyis gsol ba dang gnyis kyi las kyis gnas mal stoms pa'i gang zag tu bskos te, sbyor ba tshul shing...	gang zag sta gon
གང་ཟག་འཐེན	smoke a pipe	gang zag 'then
གང་ཟག་དང་ཆོས	the individual and phenomena, people and things	gang zag dang chos
གང་ཟག་དང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད	individual and phenomenal non-self	gang zag dang chos kyi bdag med
ཕྱིར	because of seeing / finding neither the individual nor phenomena gang zag dang chos bdag mi dmigs pa'i	phyir
པ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྨོངས་པ	the complete delusion of clinging to person and phenomena	pa kun tu rmongs pa
གང་ཟག་དང་ཆོས་ལ་བདག་མེད་པ	the	gang zag dang chos la bdag med pa
ཨབསེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity in people and things	absence of a self
ཡོངས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	full understanding of the absence of both a personal identity	yongs su shes pa
ཡོངས་སུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	because individual and phenomenal nonself should be completely known	yongs su shes par bya ba'i phyir
གང་ཟག་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	Syn {gang zag tu smra ba}	gang zag du smra ba
གང་ཟག་གདགས་པ	labeled personal identity	gang zag gdags pa
གང་ཟག་བདག	individual self, personal identity	gang zag bdag
གང་ཟག་བདག་མེད	non-existence of the individual self	gang zag bdag med
ཤིང་རྟའི་རིགས་པ	the "sevenfold chariot reasoning" to prove the nonexistence of the personal identity	shing rta'i rigs pa
གང་ཟག་བདག་མེད་པ	the nonexistence of the individual self	gang zag bdag med pa
གང་ཟག་བདག་མེད་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle nonexistence of the individual self	gang zag bdag med phra mo
གང་ཟག་བདག་མེད་རགས་པ	coarse nonexistence of the individual self	gang zag bdag med rags pa
གང་ཟག་བདག་འཛིན	grasping an individual ego	gang zag bdag 'dzin
གང་ཟག་བདག་འཛིན་གཉིས	the two kinds of grasping an individual ego	gang zag bdag 'dzin gnyis
གང་ཟག་པ	Gangsakpa, at Kailash	gang zag pa
གང་ཟག་སྤྱི	animated beings in general 377	gang zag spyi
གང་ཟག་ཕལ་པ	common people, vulgar people	gang zag phal pa
གང་ཟག་དབང་པོ་འབྲིང	someone of medium intelligence	gang zag dbang po 'bring
གང་ཟག་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་ནོན	person compositional factor	gang zag ma yin pa'i ldan min 'du byed non
གང་ཟག་མི	human being	gang zag mi
གང་ཟག་མི་ཡི་ཚུལ་བཟུང	{nges par rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas rdo rje 'chang chen po nyid gang zag mi yi tshul bzung} He really a perfect Buddha, the Great perfect Vajradhara, in an ordinary human form	gang zag mi yi tshul bzung
གང་ཟག་མི་ལས་སྐལ་པ་རབ་གྱུར་པ	a human being with most fortunate karma	gang zag mi las skal pa rab gyur pa
གང་ཟག་མིའི་གཟུགས	{rnam pa gang zag mi'i gzugs su sprul} has appeared in ordinary human form	gang zag mi'i gzugs
གང་ཟག་རྫས་ཡོད་དུ་རྟོག་པ	to conceive of the individual as being substantially existent	gang zag rdzas yod du rtog pa
གང་ཟག་གཞན་ལ་དགོངས་པ	the intention directed towards the thoughts of individuals	gang zag gzhan la dgongs pa
གང་ཟག་བཞི	four kinds of individuals [ordinary persons {so so skye bo}. or p.rthagjana, pious attendants {nyan thos}. or s'r vaka., self-centred buddhas {rang rgyal}. or pratyekabuddha., and bodhisattvas {bya...	gang zag bzhi
གང་ཟག་ཟག་གདགས་པ	imputing the stains of personhood	gang zag zag gdags pa
གང་ཟག་ཟག་རྣམ་པར་བཤག་པ	postulation of the stains of the individual gang zag zag mi rtag pa nyid du thal bar 'gyur ba - the impermanence of the individual [following from the individual]	gang zag zag rnam par bshag pa
གང་ཟག་ཟག་ཡོད་པར	the existence of the stains of the individual	gang zag zag yod par
གང་ཟག་ཡ་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of superior beings [= {skyes bu zung bzhi}	gang zag ya brgyad
གང་ཟག་ཡོད་པ	existence of a personal identity	gang zag yod pa
གང་ཟག་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	Pudgalavadin, proponents of a person [a buddhist school]	gang zag yod par smra ba
ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ	empty of a substantial and independent personality gang zag rang rkya thub pa'i rdzas yod	kyis stong pa
ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of a substantial and independent personality	kyis stong pa nyid
གང་ཟག་རང་རྒྱུད་པ	an ordinary person	gang zag rang rgyud pa
གང་ཟག་ལ་བདག་མེད་པ	absence of a	gang zag la bdag med pa
གང་ཟག་ལ་མི་རྟོན	not relying on individuals [one of the four non-reliances mi rton pa bzhi, if they don't have proper/ dharmic behavior not relying on rigs rus snyan grangs mnga' thang etc.]	gang zag la mi rton
གང་ཟག་ལ་མི་རྟོན་ཆོས་ལ་རྟོན	not relying on individuals, but on the teachings	gang zag la mi rton chos la rton
གང་ཟག་ཤས་ཆེ་བ	most people	gang zag shas che ba
གང་ཟག་སོ་སོ	individual people gang zag so so'i rtsa khams dang nad	gang zag so so
གང་ཟག་སོ་སོའི་རང་བློས	by people's individual understanding	gang zag so so'i rang blos
གང་ཟག་ལྷ་མི	{lus ni gang zag lha mi yang dgongs pa dam pa sangs rgyas dngos} though his body is that of an ordinary god or man, his perfect mind is the true Buddha	gang zag lha mi
གང་ཟབ	SA gang gzab	gang zab
གང་གཟབ	as good as possible	gang gzab
གང་གཟབ་གཟབ	as good/ well/ carefully as possible, whatever is best	gang gzab gzab
གང་གཟབས	as good/ well/ carefully as possible, whatever is best	gang gzabs
གང་གཟར	patri [implement in fire puja]	gang gzar
གང་བཟང	great tibetan mountain range	gang bzang
གང་འོག	sequence	gang 'og
གང་འོས	whichever is suitable	gang 'os
གང་འོས་པ	whatever is fit, whatever is becoming	gang 'os pa
གང་འོས་སུ	the necessary number of	gang 'os su
གང་གའ	[Skt] the Ganges; 2) 'U thu]	gang g'a
གང་གའའི་བྱེ་མ	1) the sands of the river Ganges; 2) SK #	gang g'a'i bye ma
གང་གའའི་ཡབ	Ti Se snow mt.	gang g'a'i yab
གང་ཡ	very large figure	gang ya
གང་ཡག	considerate, thoughtful, satisfactory	gang yag
གང་ཡག་ཡག	as good/ well/ carefully as possible, whatever is best 'grig tsam dang, lo tsam,...Ca lag 'di gang yag yag 'dug ...Las ka byed stangs gang yag yag 'dug	gang yag yag
གང་ཡག་ཡོད་པ་རེད	as good as possible	gang yag yod pa red
གང་ཡང	at all	gang yang
གང་ཡང་གྲུབ་མིན	no existence is present	gang yang grub min
གང་ཡང་འགྲིག་པ	as many as/ whichever apply/ are appropriate	gang yang 'grig pa
གང་ཡང་སྒོམ་མིན	nothing is meditation	gang yang sgom min
གང་ཡང་བྱེད་ཐུབ	can do anything	gang yang byed thub
གང་ཡང་བྱེད་མི་ནུས	incapable of doing anything	gang yang byed mi nus
གང་ཡང་མ་རྙེད	not find anything 378	gang yang ma rnyed
གང་ཡང་མི་བྱ་བར	without in any way whatsoever trying to	gang yang mi bya bar
གང་ཡང་མིན	nothing at all	gang yang min
གང་ཡང་མིན་པ	nothing	gang yang min pa
གང་ཡང་མེད	none whatsoever, nought, without any kind of	gang yang med
གང་ཡང་མེད་མཁན	dispossessed	gang yang med mkhan
གང་ཡང་མེད་པ	nothing whatsoever, not at all	gang yang med pa
གང་ཡང་མེད་པ་ཞིག་འདུག	no longer find anything	gang yang med pa zhig 'dug
གང་ཡང་རུང	any appropriate	gang yang rung
གང་ཡང་རུང་ཅི	whatsoever it may be	gang yang rung ci
གང་ཡང་རུང་ཅི་ཡང་རུང	whosoever he may be	gang yang rung ci yang rung
གང་ཡང་རུང་གཅིག	any suitable one	gang yang rung gcig
གང་ཡང་རུང་བ	any	gang yang rung ba
གང་ཡིན	why, what for, whatever, something, there may be, what was, whether	gang yin
སྐྱོང་གང་ཡིན་ཁྱོད	o you buddhafield protector. Notes: gang means "whoever"; gang yin in the above context is lends emphasis, pointing to zhing skyong]	skyong gang yin khyod
གང་ཡིན་ཀྱང	whichever	gang yin kyang
གང་ཡིན་ཀྱང་རུང	emphatic form of {gang rung} [mss]	gang yin kyang rung
གང་ཡིན་ཅེ་ན	which?	gang yin ce na
གང་ཡིན་འདི་ཡིན་མེད་པ	1) at a complete loss as to what is what. 2) inexpressible	gang yin 'di yin med pa
གང་ཡིན་པ	constitutes	gang yin pa
གང་ཡིན་པ་དེ	that which is	gang yin pa de
གང་ཡིན་པ་དེ་ནི	that very	gang yin pa de ni
གང་ཡིན་མ་ངེས	unknown place	gang yin ma nges
གང་ཡིན་ཞི་ན	if you ask why, because	gang yin zhi na
གང་ཡིན་ཞེ་ན	rgyu mtshan gang yin	gang yin zhe na
ཞེ་ན	Why?; why is this you might ask	zhe na
གང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན	because, "why" construction	gang yin zer na
གང་ཡོང་ཅི་ཡོང	as far as possible	gang yong ci yong
གང་ཡོད	1) all there is, whatever there is. 2) whatever you have, whatever is possible to you	gang yod
གང་ཡོད་དྲིས་པ	asked where he lived	gang yod dris pa
གང་ཡོད་རྣམས	whichever they were	gang yod rnams
གང་རག་བསྡད་པ	what 1 happens to have	gang rag bsdad pa
གང་རིགས	whichever is suitable	gang rigs
གང་རིགས་པ	whatever is suitable/ proper	gang rigs pa
གང་རུང	/ gang yang rung - whosoever he may be; any, one among, either one or both, what ever, whatever is suitable / proper, anything, anyone, whichever, any kind / sort of people or thing; what is proper	gang rung
གང་རུང་གིས	by any, through any	gang rung gis
གང་རུང་གཅིག	which, whichever, any	gang rung gcig
གང་རུང་དུ	which, whichever, any	gang rung du
གང་རུང་ཡིན་པ	whichever is appropriate	gang rung yin pa
གང་རུང་རུང	1) gang byung byung,...Lag cha gang rung rung zhig 'khyer yong na mi 'grig; 2) Gang 'os 'os,...Da res kyi dngul lhag 'di gang rung rung du spyad chog	gang rung rung
གང་རུའང	somewhere	gang ru'ang
གང་རེད	what is?	gang red
གང་ལ	wherever	gang la
གང་ལ་གང	whoever; whichever	gang la gang
གང་ལ་གང་འདུལ	in whatever way is necessary to guide under any circumstances; whatever (activity) is necessary/ required to tame/ tames any being in any way necessary/ under any circumstances; in any way necessar...	gang la gang 'dul
གང་ལ་གང་འདུལ་གྱི་ཆོས	teachings to influence whoever needs in the most skillful ways	gang la gang 'dul gyi chos
གང་ལ་གང་འདུལ་མཛད་པ	activity to fulfill beings' need	gang la gang 'dul mdzad pa
གང་ལ་གང་མཚམས་སུ	according to circumstances	gang la gang mtshams su
གང་ལ་གང་འཚམ	not stick to, not confine to	gang la gang 'tsham
གང་ལ་གང་འཚམས	appropriate, proper and fitting, in accordance with [need, capacity, capability, etc.]	gang la gang 'tshams
གང་ལ་གང་འཚམས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	appropriate teachings	gang la gang 'tshams kyi chos
གང་ལ་གང་འཚམས་ཀྱི་ཡར་རྒྱས	very good progress	gang la gang 'tshams kyi yar rgyas
གང་ལ་གང་འཚམས་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀ	appropriate work	gang la gang 'tshams kyi las ka
གང་ལ་གང་འཚིས	appropriate, proper and fitting, in accordance w [need, capacity, capability, etc.]	gang la gang 'tshis
གང་ལ་གང་འོས	yul gang la dngos po'am bya ba gang ran pa	gang la gang 'os
གང་ལ་ཅི་འོས	1) appropriate, proper and fitting, in accordance w [need, capacity, capability, etc.]; 2) not bad, very good	gang la ci 'os
གང་ལ་ཇི་འོས	1) appropriate, proper and fitting, in accordance w [need, capacity, capability, etc.]; 2) not bad, very good 379	gang la ji 'os
གང་ལ་འཇུག་སྒོ	the particular point of entry	gang la 'jug sgo
གང་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	what is entered	gang la 'jug pa'i sgo
གང་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	because of what, why	gang la brten nas
གང་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་མི་ཐུབ	why can't [they]?	gang la brten nas mi thub
གང་ལ་དེ་འཚམས	of the same kind as that	gang la de 'tshams
གང་ལ་ཡང	anything	gang la yang
གང་ལ་ཡང་མ་འཛེམས་པར	brazenly, crudely, wantonly	gang la yang ma 'dzems par
གང་ལ་ལ	somebody, anyone, whatever	gang la la
གང་ལ་ལ་ཞིག	someone, whoever, the 1 who	gang la la zhig
གང་ལགས	why?	gang lags
གང་ལགས་ཞེ་ན	[if you ask] why	gang lags zhe na
གང་ལགས་ཟེར་ན	[if you ask] why	gang lags zer na
གང་ལའང	anything; nothing	gang la'ang
གང་ལའང་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	totally unhindered	gang la'ang thogs pa med pa
གང་ལའང་མ་འཛིན	without fixating on anything	gang la'ang ma 'dzin
གང་ལའང་མི་གནས་པ	not abiding/ dwelling on anything	gang la'ang mi gnas pa
གང་ལས	from what/ where[ever]	gang las
གང་ལས་ཀྱང	+ neg., from nowhere	gang las kyang
གང་ལས་ཀྱང་མཆོག	superior to everything	gang las kyang mchog
གང་ལས་བྱུང	where it comes from	gang las byung
གང་ལས་མ་བྱུང	not arise from anything	gang las ma byung
གང་ལེགས	1) whatever is best; 2) fairly well	gang legs
གང་ལེགས་པ	gang bzang pa,...Skad cha gang legs pa zhig bshad 'dug ...Gang legs gang bzab	gang legs pa
གང་ལེགས་བྱེད	to do as well as one can	gang legs byed
གང་ལོ	empty pod, freed from the kernels	gang lo
གང་ཤར	sems la gang shar - whatever comes to my mind	gang shar
གང་ཤར་བཀག་མེད་ལྷུག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	to speak freely without reservation whatever comes to mind	gang shar bkag med lhug par smra ba
གང་ཤར་སྐྱེ་མེད་དུ་ཐག་བཅད་པ	resolving that all experience is nonarising	gang shar skye med du thag bcad pa
གང་ཤར་སྐྱོང་བ	to maintain [the practice] in whatever occurs, watch whatever arises	gang shar skyong ba
གང་ཤར་ངོས་བཟུང་མེད་པར	without pinpointing whatever is experienced	gang shar ngos bzung med par
གང་ཤར་བཟོ་མེད	letting be whatever arises	gang shar bzo med
གང་ཤར་རང་གྲོལ	whatever appears [arises] as self-liberation	gang shar rang grol
གང་ཤིག	someone	gang shig
གང་ཤིག་སྟོན་པ	whatever is displayed/ taught	gang shig ston pa
གང་ཤེད	uncertain, not definitely known	gang shed
གང་ཤེས་བསྟན་པ	to teach whatever one knows	gang shes bstan pa
གང་ཤེས་པ	to one's best ability, to the utmost of one's power	gang shes pa
གང་ས	all regions, parts, aspects, directions, sgo kun	gang sa
གང་ས་གང་དུ	everywhere	gang sa gang du
གང་ས་ཅི་ཐད	all directions	gang sa ci thad
གང་ས་ཅི་ཐད་ནས	by all means, in all respects	gang sa ci thad nas
གང་ས་ནས	"lots of ways", "bya all means" construction	gang sa nas
གང་སག་གི་བདག་མེད	selflessness of persons	gang sag gi bdag med
གང་སར	everywhere, all over	gang sar
གང་སར་འཁྱམ་འགྲོ་མཁན	vagrant	gang sar 'khyam 'gro mkhan
གང་སར་ལྟ་རྟོག	thoughtful, satisfactory	gang sar lta rtog
གང་སར་ལྟ་རྟོག་བྱེད་ཐུབ་པ	considerate	gang sar lta rtog byed thub pa
གང་སར་མཐོང་ཐུབ	thoughtful, satisfactory	gang sar mthong thub
གང་སར་མཐོང་ཐུབ་པ	considerate	gang sar mthong thub pa
གང་སར་སྤོ་འཁྱམ་བྱེད་མཁན	erratic	gang sar spo 'khyam byed mkhan
གང་སུ་དག	whichever of those gang gsungs bcos bsgyur kyis lhad ma 'jug - Do not distort anything he says!	gang su dag
གང་གསུངས་པ	what was being transmitted	gang gsungs pa
གང་བསམ་འགྲུབ་པའི་ནོར་བུ	the jewel that grants all wishes	gang bsam 'grub pa'i nor bu
གངས	(glacial) snow and ice	gangs
གངས་ཀྱི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	in offering smon lam Lhasa's common people snow which fell on top of and around their housetops 'phyag skyel chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin]	gangs kyi 'khrol 'dzin
གངས་ཀྱི་བུ་ཡུག	snowstorm	gangs kyi bu yug
གངས་ཀྱི་ཟུར་ཁ	the glacier's edge gangs kyi yum chen rdo rje g.yu bun ma Great Glacier Lady of Invincible Turquoise Mist. A protector of the Dharma teachings bound under oath by Padmasambhava. She was formerly a ...	gangs kyi zur kha
གངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	bod yul gangs kyi ra ba the Snow Land of Tibet	gangs kyi ra ba
གངས་ཀྱིས་གང་བ	snowy	gangs kyis gang ba
གངས་དཀར	Gangkar. The White Snow Mountain, Kailash	gangs dkar
གངས་དཀར་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཏེ་སེ	Kailash, the king of snow mountains	gangs dkar kyi rgyal po te se
གངས་དཀར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of mountains	gangs dkar gyi rgyal po
གངས་དཀར་མགུལ་ན	near the crest of	gangs dkar mgul na
ཝཧིཏེ་སྣོཝ	peaks	white snow
གངས་དཀར་ཏི་སི	Mt. Kailash, gangdis mountains	gangs dkar ti si
གངས་དཀར་ཏི་སེ	Kailash, the White Mountain	gangs dkar ti se
གངས་དཀར་ཏེ་སེ	the snow mountain Kailash 380	gangs dkar te se
གངས་དཀར་ལྟོངས	the highest ice-peak	gangs dkar ltongs
གངས་ཁྲོད	snow-retreat. Syn {gnas can gyi khrod}	gangs khrod
གངས་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམ	roam the snow ranges	gangs khrod 'grim
གངས་འཁྱགས	snow and ice	gangs 'khyags
གངས་གྲུ	sled	gangs gru
གངས་རྒན	glacier	gangs rgan
གངས་རྒྱབ་པ	snow	gangs rgyab pa
གངས་རྒྱལ	lion	gangs rgyal
གངས་རྒྱུད	chain of snowy mountains	gangs rgyud
གངས་ཅན	1) snowy [place], glacier, snow mt; 2) the snow land, T; 1)	gangs can
གངས་ཅན་མཁས་པའི་གཙུག་རྒྱན	name of tsong khapa	gangs can mkhas pa'i gtsug rgyan
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁྲོད	the snowy mountain ranges	gangs can gyi khrod
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་མཁས་པ	the learned ones of Tibet	gangs can gyi mkhas pa
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་མཁས་པ་མི་གསུམ	the three learned ones of Tibet [in words sa skya pandi ta kun dga' rgyal mtsan, in the sense bu ston rin chen grub, in both rje btsun blo bzang grags pa]	gangs can gyi mkhas pa mi gsum
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ལྗོངས	Tibet, the Land of Snow	gangs can gyi ljongs
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ལྗོངས་ཆེན་པོ	the Great land of snows, all Tibet	gangs can gyi ljongs chen po
གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	Land of Snow. Tibet	gangs can gyi yul
གངས་ཅན་མགོན་པོ	Lord of the Land of Snow	gangs can mgon po
གངས་ཅན་འགྲོ་རྣམས	the living creatures of Tibet	gangs can 'gro rnams
གངས་ཅན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of tibet, dalai lama	gangs can rgyal po
གངས་ཅན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བསྟི་གནས	lhasa gangs can ngos na bsam gtan la bzhugs	gangs can rgyal po'i bsti gnas
སྣོཝ	peaked mountain	snow
གངས་ཅན་ཆེན་པོ	mountainous region from ladak to the kailas range, fabulous mountainous region	gangs can chen po
གངས་ཅན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	the Dharma King of Tibet	gangs can chos rgyal
གངས་ཅན་ལྗོངས	Tibet	gangs can ljongs
གངས་ཅན་པ	Tibetan	gangs can pa
གངས་ཅན་པ་དག	the Tibetan masters	gangs can pa dag
གངས་ཅན་མ	very useful and important medicine	gangs can ma
གངས་ཅན་མུན་པའི་སྨག་རུམ	the dense darkness of the Snowy Range, [Tibet before Buddhism]	gangs can mun pa'i smag rum
གངས་ཅན་ཞིང	tibet	gangs can zhing
གངས་ཅན་ཤིང་རྟ	tsong khapa	gangs can shing rta
གངས་ཅན་ས་ལའི་སྨན་ལྗོངས	tibet	gangs can sa la'i sman ljongs
གངས་ཆར	sleet	gangs char
གངས་ཆུ	glacial water, natural icewater, glacier stream	gangs chu
གངས་ཆུའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	when making smon Lhasa commoners kyi khang thog 'khyil ba'i water from melted snow phyi logs su gsho 'don chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin]	gangs chu'i 'khrol 'dzin
གངས་ཆེན	any great range of snowy mountains, a great glacier, village at sw foot of gangs chen mdzod lnga	gangs chen
གངས་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	grand lama of tibet, guardian deity, name of yama	gangs chen chos rgyal
གངས་ཆེན་ཏི་སེ	Mount Kailash	gangs chen ti se
གངས་ཆེན་མཚོ	Immense Ocean	gangs chen mtsho
གངས་ཆེན་མཚོ་རིགས་ལྔ	five families of Buddha Immense Ocean	gangs chen mtsho rigs lnga
གངས་ཆེན་མཛོད་ལྔ	name of a holy mountain "five great repositories of snow", Kanchenjunga mountain in sikkim	gangs chen mdzod lnga
གངས་མཆོད་ཕུལ	made offerings to Mount Kailash	gangs mchod phul
གངས་མཆོད་མཛད་པ	paid homage to the Snow Mountain, Kailash	gangs mchod mdzad pa
གངས་འཆར་འབབ་པ	sleet	gangs 'char 'bab pa
གངས་ལྗོངས	T, the Himalaya region, the land of snow	gangs ljongs
ཡིག	Account of a Pilgrimage to Central Tibet, by Katok Situ Chökyi Gyatso gangs ljongs dbus gtsang gnas bskor lam	yig
གངས་ལྗོངས་ཡུལ	tibet	gangs ljongs yul
གངས་ཉི་ཤུ	the twenty principal mountains of tibet	gangs nyi shu
གངས་ཏི་སེ	Kailash	gangs ti se
གངས་ཏེ་སེ	Kailash Snow Mountain	gangs te se
གངས་ཏེ་སེའི་རི་རྒྱུད	the mountain range of Mount tise	gangs te se'i ri rgyud
གངས་ལྟར་དཀར་བ	snow white	gangs ltar dkar ba
གངས་སྟོད	snows, ice-peak	gangs stod
གངས་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ	the high snows;	gangs stod mthon po
ཐེ་ཧེཨིགྷཙ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨིཅེ	peak	the heights of the ice
གངས་བསྟོད་འགྲིམས་པ	roaming the glacier's heights	gangs bstod 'grims pa
གངས་ཐིག	snow-line	gangs thig
གངས་ཐིབས	1) great snow falling; 2) med. mineral [astringent, cooling, by its poer curing broken bones, mchin tshad sel]	gangs thibs
གངས་ཐུལ	kha ba sib sib,...Da nang lnga dro ri mgor gangs thul skya chags pa zhig bab 'dug ...Sbrang bu lding ba bzhin du gangs thul si li si li 'bab kyin 'dug	gangs thul
གངས་མཐར་ལྷུང་བ	falling over the glacier's edge	gangs mthar lhung ba
གངས་མཐོན་མཐིང་རྒྱལ་མོ	jo mo glang ma ri	gangs mthon mthing rgyal mo
གངས་འཐུལ	to snow	gangs 'thul
གངས་ད་བྱིད	gangs sbal	gangs da byid
གངས་དང་རླུང་ཚུབ་ཆེན་པོ	blizzard	gangs dang rlung tshub chen po
གངས་མདོག	snow mt color, white	gangs mdog
གངས་རྡིབ	1) gangs ri nas gangs nyil ba; 2) great fall of snow	gangs rdib
གངས་ལྡན	himalaya mountains	gangs ldan
གངས་པ་ཤེའུ	a kadampa lama	gangs pa she'u
གངས་ཕྱིད	snow blindness	gangs phyid
གངས་ཕྱིད་རྒྱག	get frost bite	gangs phyid rgyag
གངས་འཕྲེད	along or across the glacier	gangs 'phred
གངས་བབ་པ	to snow	gangs bab pa
གངས་འབབ	avalanche, it snows	gangs 'bab
གངས་འབབ་པ	to snow	gangs 'bab pa
གངས་སྦལ	animal medicine [sweet and a little sour, heating, by its power ro tsa bar byed, khu stobs 'phel, mkhal ma'i drod skyed syn: gangs da byid, stobs skyed, stobs ldan mu tig gos can, sha'i rgyal po] 381	gangs sbal
གངས་སྦལ་མཛའ་མོ	chu skyar, a fish eating water bird	gangs sbal mdza' mo
གངས་མ་ཆར	mixed rain and snow	gangs ma char
གངས་རྩེ་བརྒྱད	{gangs rtse brgyad snow mt.	gangs rtse brgyad
གངས་ཚན	water from snow	gangs tshan
གངས་ཚུབ	snowstorm, blizzard	gangs tshub
གངས་མཚོ	glacier lakes, glacial lake	gangs mtsho
གངས་འཛེགས	mt climbing, mountaineering	gangs 'dzegs
གངས་འཛེགས་ཚོགས་པ	mt climbing/ mountaineering club	gangs 'dzegs tshogs pa
གངས་ཞོད	glacier flood	gangs zhod
གངས་བཞུ་རྫ་ཆག	collapsed, finished, ended, over	gangs bzhu rdza chag
གངས་ཟུར	the snow-line	gangs zur
གངས་གཟིགས	snow leopard	gangs gzigs
གངས་འུར་རྒྱག་པ	1) gangs lhags 'tshub pa,...2 Gangs nyil ba	gangs 'ur rgyag pa
གངས་ར	snowy area	gangs ra
གངས་རི	snow-covered mountain, snowy mountain, glacier, any great tibetan mountain range, vegetable drug	gangs ri
གངས་རི་དཀར་པོ	mt range between spo yul and me tog rjong	gangs ri dkar po
གངས་རི་སྙིལ	the snow peak has collapsed	gangs ri snyil
གངས་རི་ཐོད་དཀར	Gang-Ri Tökar; White Skull Snow Mountain, hermitage of Longchenpa above Shukseb monastery	gangs ri thod dkar
གངས་རི་མཐོན་པོ	the high snow ranges	gangs ri mthon po
གངས་རི་ནས་གངས་ཉིལ་བ	avalanche	gangs ri nas gangs nyil ba
གངས་རི་པའི་སྡེ	Syn {gangs ri'i sde}	gangs ri pa'i sde
གངས་རི་དབང	himalaya mountains gangs ri g.yo ba ltar 'dug pa - standing proudly, as majestic as a moving mountain	gangs ri dbang
གངས་རི་ར་བའི་སྐོར་བའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	tibet	gangs ri ra ba'i skor ba'i zhing khams
གངས་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	snow dwellers, Tibetan people. phal chen sde pa lnga'i nang gses shig	gangs ri la gnas pa'i sde
གངས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	{gangs rin po che} mt	gangs rin po che
གངས་རིའི་ཁྲོད	Tibet	gangs ri'i khrod
གངས་རིའི་ཁྲོད་པ	snow dwellers, Tibetan	gangs ri'i khrod pa
གངས་རིའི་མགུལ	the slopes of the Snow Mountain	gangs ri'i mgul
གངས་རིའི་ལྗོངས	the land of snow mountains, Tibet	gangs ri'i ljongs
གངས་རིའི་སྡེ	snow dwellers, Tibetan	gangs ri'i sde
གངས་རིའི་འཕྲེང	chain of snowy mountains	gangs ri'i 'phreng
གངས་རིའི་བུ	Te Se snow mt	gangs ri'i bu
གངས་རིའི་དབང	snow mt	gangs ri'i dbang
གངས་རིའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཕུག	the Snow Mountain Cave of Miracles [at Kailash]	gangs ri'i rdzu 'phrul phug
གངས་རིའི་ར་བ	kha ba'i ri rgyud,...Gangs ri'i ra bas bskor ba'i zhing khams	gangs ri'i ra ba
གངས་རིས་མཚོན་པ	Mount Kailasha	gangs ris mtshon pa
གངས་རུད	avalanche	gangs rud
གངས་རླབས	avalanche	gangs rlabs
གངས་རླུང	snowstorm, blizzard	gangs rlung
གངས་ཤུགས	amount of snow	gangs shugs
གངས་ཤུད	skiing	gangs shud
གངས་ཤུད་འཁོར་ལོ	snow-mobile/ vehicle	gangs shud 'khor lo
གངས་ཤུད་གློད	ski	gangs shud glod
གངས་ཤུད་གཏོང	ski	gangs shud gtong
གངས་ཤུར་གློད་པ	gangs kyi dkyil du shur rer rgyug pa ski?	gangs shur glod pa
གངས་ཤོད	glacier flood	gangs shod
གངས་བཤོག་པ	break through the ice	gangs bshog pa
གངས་སུལ	among snow mts	gangs sul
གངས་སྲག	along or across the glacier	gangs srag
གངས་སྲུལ	avalanche, slip in the snowy side of a mountain, snowslip	gangs srul
གངས་ལྷགས	kha rlung ste bu yug gi 'tshub ma,...Gangs lhags 'tshub pa'i mtshan mo,...Lam bar du gangs lhags drag po ldang byung	gangs lhags
གད	1) cleaning [up]; 2) laughter; 3) split, crack	gad
གད་ཀ	cliff	gad ka
གད་ཀྱལ	Syn {gan rkyal}	gad kyal
གད་སྐྱིབས	cave, cavern	gad skyibs
གད་ཁ	cliff	gad kha
གད་ཁུང	gad pa'i phug gting ring can	gad khung
གད་མཁན	sweeper, cleanser	gad mkhan
གད་གྱམ	grotto beneath a conglomerate rock, shelter in the steep side of a rock	gad gyam
གད་དགོད	laugh	gad dgod
གད་མགོ་སུ	Gegosu, in Domey	gad mgo su
གད་རྒྱག	sweep, clear away	gad rgyag
གད་རྒྱག་པ	sweep the floor, clear away	gad rgyag pa
གད་རྒྱང་སྒྲོག་པ	to laugh out aloud	gad rgyang sgrog pa
གད་རྒྱངས	far-reaching laughter	gad rgyangs
གད་རྒྱངས་ཅན	deity dbang phyug chen po	gad rgyangs can
གད་རྒྱབ་མཁན	sweeper	gad rgyab mkhan
གད་རྒྱབ་པ	sweep	gad rgyab pa
གད་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	swept	gad rgyab zin pa
གད་རྒྱལ	walls of conglomerate rock through which mountain torrents have cut their way	gad rgyal
གད་རྒྱུངས་ཅན	loud laughter	gad rgyungs can
གད་སྒྲ	laughing skad sgra	gad sgra
གད་སྒྲོགས	bellows/shouts of laughter [deep, terrifying, like horror films]	gad sgrogs
གད་བརྒྱངས	gad rgyangs	gad brgyangs
གད་བརྒྱབ	clean [up]	gad brgyab
གད་ཆུ	water scattered before cleaning	gad chu
གད་མཆོངས	jump into an abyss	gad mchongs
གད་ཉིག	debris, dust, garbage, junk, rubbish	gad nyig
གད་སྙིག	dirt, garbage	gad snyig
གད་སྙིགས	cleaned up dust and dirt, rubbish, garbage, trash	gad snyigs
གད་སྙིགས་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	at smon lam times Lhasa's commoners kyi khyim nang dirt and rubbish phyi logs su 'don skyel chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	gad snyigs 'khrol 'dzin
གད་གཏོང་པ	to break, crack	gad gtong pa
གད་གཏོང་བ	to break, crack	gad gtong ba
གད་དར	cleaning [up], sweeping, liquidation	gad dar
གད་དར་རྒྱག	clean [up], sweep, liquidate 382	gad dar rgyag
གད་དར་བ	{khang pa'i gad dar ba bskos nas bzhag} sweeping his house	gad dar ba
གད་དར་བྱེད	clean [up], sweep, liquidate	gad dar byed
གད་དར་བྱེད་པ	clearing from dust, dusting, making a thing clean, cleansing, sweeping well a place, keeping a place clean	gad dar byed pa
གད་བདར	clean [up], sweep, liquidate	gad bdar
གད་བདར་རྒྱག	clean [up], sweep, liquidate	gad bdar rgyag
གད་བདར་རྒྱག་མཁན	sweeper, janitor	gad bdar rgyag mkhan
གད་བདར་རྒྱབ་མཁན	sweeper, janitor	gad bdar rgyab mkhan
གད་བདར་བྱེད	clean [up], sweep, liquidate	gad bdar byed
གད་བདར་བྱེད་མཁན	sweeper, janitor	gad bdar byed mkhan
གད་མདའ་ལ	a mountain, lowlands at food of a gad	gad mda' la
གད་མདལ་ལ་ཚུན	this side of the mountain	gad mdal la tshun
གད་སྣོད	dustpan	gad snod
གད་པ	1) sweeper, janitor; 2) cliff; 3) crevice, fissure; 4) sand trap	gad pa
གད་ཕུག	rock cave; cave between caps in rocks	gad phug
གད་ཕྱིས	cleaning, sweeping	gad phyis
གད་ཕྱིས་ཆེན་པོ	thorough cleaning	gad phyis chen po
གད་ཕྱིས་བྱེད་མཁན	sweeper, janitor	gad phyis byed mkhan
གད་བྱེད་པ	{khang pa'i rdul chu rgyab nas gad byas kyang rdul mi dag} you sweep and sprinkle water, the house's dust is not going to go away	gad byed pa
གད་མོ	laugh, laughter, laughing, a laugh, laughing	gad mo
གད་མོ་དགོད	utter a laugh	gad mo dgod
གད་མོ་དགོད་པ	laugh	gad mo dgod pa
གད་མོ་བགད	cause laughter	gad mo bgad
གད་མོ་བགད་པ	laugh, smile	gad mo bgad pa
གད་མོ་བགད་བྱུང	I have laughed	gad mo bgad byung
གད་མོ་བགད་སོང	he has laughed	gad mo bgad song
གད་མོ་རྒོད	laugh	gad mo rgod
གད་མོ་རྒོད་པ	laugh	gad mo rgod pa
གད་མོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve point of laughter [in Dzogchen]	gad mo bcu gnyis
གད་མོ་དིང་དིང	laughing aloud	gad mo ding ding
གད་མོ་བྲོ	to laugh with amusement; make one laugh	gad mo bro
གད་མོ་བྲོ་བ	laugh, feel like laughing	gad mo bro ba
གད་མོ་ཤོར	burst out laughing	gad mo shor
གད་མོ་ཤོར་དགོས	laughable, funny, absurd	gad mo shor dgos
གད་མོ་ཤོར་དགོས་པ	ridiculous	gad mo shor dgos pa
གད་མོ་ཤོར་བྱུང	laughter sprang forth	gad mo shor byung
གད་མོ་ཤོར་སོང	laughter sprang forth	gad mo shor song
གད་མོ་སློང་པའི་གཏམ	joke, jest, make people laugh	gad mo slong pa'i gtam
གད་མོ་སློང་བའི	jest	gad mo slong ba'i
གད་མོ་སློང་བའི་གཏམ	joke gad mo'am bstan bshig slong mkhan joker	gad mo slong ba'i gtam
གད་མོའི་གནས	gad mo chor ba'i yul	gad mo'i gnas
གད་མོའི་དབྱངས་ལྡན	owl	gad mo'i dbyangs ldan
གད་མོས་སྟོང་ཁམས་གྱོ	laughter which makes the universe tremble gad mos stong khams g.yo - laughter which makes the universe tremble	gad mos stong khams gyo
གད་མོས་འདེབས་པ	laugh at a person	gad mos 'debs pa
གད་གཙང	clean grain w/o dirt stones etc	gad gtsang
གད་གཙང་མ	any place or object well dusted or cleansed	gad gtsang ma
གད་ཟུར	steep river bank, precipice	gad zur
གད་འོག	in the ditch [depression in the ground]	gad 'og
གད་རོ	cleaned up dust and dirt	gad ro
གད་སིག	epilepsy	gad sig
གད་སིག་རྒྱག	have epilepsy	gad sig rgyag
གད་སྲིན	involuntary continuous laughter gos pa byung	gad srin
གན	the land of Gen	gan
གན་ཀྱལ	supine, lying on the back with the face upward	gan kyal
གན་ཀྱལ་དུ་འགྱེལ་བ	to fall on the back	gan kyal du 'gyel ba
གན་ཀྱལ་དུ་ཉལ་བ	to lie on the back	gan kyal du nyal ba
གན་རྐྱལ	back of the body, like down on your back	gan rkyal
གན་རྐྱལ་ཁ་གདངས	we lie helpless on our backs, crying and spewing	gan rkyal kha gdangs
གན་རྐྱལ་འགྱེལ	fell on his back with face upwards	gan rkyal 'gyel
གན་རྐྱལ་ཉལ	to like down on one's back	gan rkyal nyal
གན་རྐྱལ་བུ	fixed/pole star	gan rkyal bu
གན་ག	the Ganges	gan ga
གན་གའི་ཀླུང	the Ganges gan ga'i klung gi bye ma 'di snyed dang	gan ga'i klung
གན་གྱོག	gandi beating stick	gan gyog
གན་རྒྱ	written contract/ agreement, guarantee	gan rgya
གན་རྒྱ་འཇོག	to sign an agreement	gan rgya 'jog
གན་རྒྱ་བསྡུ	annul a written contract/ agreement	gan rgya bsdu
གན་རྒྱ་འཛུགས	draw up/ sign a written contract/ agreement	gan rgya 'dzugs
གན་རྒྱ་བཟོ	draw up/ sign a written contract/ agreement	gan rgya bzo
གན་ཇག་ཐང་ཏ	child name of {ba gor bE ro tsa na}	gan jag thang ta
གན་ཇི་ར	gnydzira, gtsug lag khang etc roof ornaments	gan ji ra
གན་ཇིར	gan ji ra	gan jir
གན་ཏི	piece of thick plank used to summon monks	gan ti
གན་ཐི་པར་ན	medicinal plant	gan thi par na
གན་དའི་ཏོག	medicinal plant	gan da'i tog
གན་དར	kind of silk brocade, kata	gan dar
གན་དི	(Skt) a hardwood beam gong	gan di
གན་དུ	near	gan du
གན་དེ	gandi [wood block beaten to make sound]	gan de
གན་དེ་ཐེའུ	gandi beating stick	gan de the'u
གན་དོན	gan rgya'i nang don	gan don
གན་འདེག	lift a burden	gan 'deg
གན་འདོམས	gan rgya len pa or having done so decide	gan 'doms
གན་ལྡེ	gal lde: snod phad mgo sbrel zhig	gan lde
གན་ན་བ	where, whereabouts of a person, place of residence 383	gan na ba
གན་པ	[arch] caretaker, treasurer	gan pa
གན་བུབ	[arch] gan rkyal and kha sbub	gan bub
གན་སྦུབ	gan rkyal and kha sbub	gan sbub
གན་མཛོད	[arch] storehouse, storeroom	gan mdzod
གན་འཛིན	1) rtags thel bzhag pa'i [sealed?] document of agreement bsdus pa; 2) written contract, agreement, guarantee, document	gan 'dzin
གན་འཛིན་གཅིག་འཐུས	gan rgya dang 'dzin [yig] thung yi ge gcig gis 'thus pa	gan 'dzin gcig 'thus
གན་ཟག	individual	gan zag
གན་ཡིག	1) [words of] a contract/ agreement; 2) contracts and other kinds of writing gan g.yog - hammer to strike gan ti	gan yig
གན་ཤོག	1) written contract/ agreement; 2) paper where contract is [to be] written	gan shog
གན་དྷ་པ་ཏྲ	perfume, juniper leaf, sandal leaf	gan dha pa tra
གན་དྷ་རིའི་སྔགས	mantra with power to enable one to move in space	gan dha ri'i sngags
གན་དྷ་བྷ་དྲ	kind of drug used in liver derangement	gan dha bha dra
གན་དྷི	mineral substance used as a cure for leprosy	gan dhi
གན་དྷོ་ལ	the temple at Vajrasana	gan dho la
གབ	to hide	gab
གབ་ཁུང	hiding place, hideout	gab khung
གབ་རྒྱ	seal of secrecy	gab rgya
གབ་སྒྲ	belch	gab sgra
གབ་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	creep	gab nas 'gro ba
གབ་ནས་སྡོད	stay hidden/ in seclusion	gab nas sdod
གབ་ནས་བསྡས	stayed hidden/ in seclusion	gab nas bsdas
གབ་ནས་ཕྱིན་པ	crept	gab nas phyin pa
གབ་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa gab pa, gab pa, gob,, hide, conceal; 2) Cha mnyam pa Chu zheng gab pa [= width? =?] 1) hidden, shortened	gab pa
གབ་པ་མངོན་ཕྱུང	sems kyi mtshan nyid gab pa mngon du phyung ba; by Gampopa (1079-1153)	gab pa mngon phyung
གབ་པ་འབྱིན་པ	to bring forth what is concealed	gab pa 'byin pa
གབ་པ་བཞི	the four secrets	gab pa bzhi
གབ་པའི་གསང	self-secrecy, teachings cannot be understood without preparation and instruction	gab pa'i gsang
གབ་པའི་གསང་བ	1) concealed secrecy,	gab pa'i gsang ba
ཧིདདེན་སེཅྲེཏ་ཏྭོ་སེལཕ༹	secret	hidden secret two self
གབ་སྤངས	avoiding secrecy	gab spangs
གབ་སྤྲད	combination	gab sprad
གབ་ཕྱི་གོ་ལོག	reverse a position, do the opposite, act contrary be topsyturvy/ upside down	gab phyi go log
གབ་ཕྱི་ལོག	reverse a position, do the opposite, act contrary, be topsy-turvy/ upside down	gab phyi log
གབ་ཕྱུང	see {gab pa mngon phyung}	gab phyung
གབ་བྱང	secret manual	gab byang
གབ་བྱོལ	avoid, hide away, conceal, escape from	gab byol
གབ་བྱོལ་བྱེད	avoid, hide away, conceal, escape from	gab byol byed
གབ་སྦས	hidden	gab sbas
གབ་སྦས་གཉིས	hidden secret and concealed secret	gab sbas gnyis
གབ་མིང	secret names, mystic	gab ming
གབ་དམག	ambush, sneak attack	gab dmag
གབ་ཙེ	silk cushions	gab tse
གབ་རྩ	mi mngon pa'i nadi 'phar stangs	gab rtsa
གབ་རྩེ	kaptse, Diagrams of CH divination	gab rtse
གབ་རྩེ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མེ་ལོང	mirror of the manifestations of the hidden points	gab rtse 'phrul gyi me long
གབ་རྩེ་བཞི	Four Kaptse. Diagrams of Chinese divination representing the discrete entities of the elements {'byung ba rang rgyud} objective appearances {snang ba yul} the acting intellect {spyod byed yid} and ...	gab rtse bzhi
གབ་ཚད	slow insidious fever, hectic, consumptive fever, 1 of tsha ba'i nad	gab tshad
གབ་ཚིག	riddle, sounds to stupefy enemies, 16 types of ornamental allusions	gab tshig
གབ་ཚིག་གི་རྒྱན	ornaments of enigmatic innuendo [games etc kyi mdun sar bzhad gad slong ba'i ched &, gab tshig shes pa rnams nang phan tsun gsang gtam tsig tu smra ba &, rang dang mi mthun pa'i pha rol po rnams mg...	gab tshig gi rgyan
གབ་ཚིག་གི་རྒྱན་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 ornaments of enigmatic innuendo	gab tshig gi rgyan bcu drug
གབ་ཚེ	number tables for numerology	gab tshe
གབ་འཚོལ	gsang ba byas nas 'tshol ba	gab 'tshol
གབ་ཡིག	secret writing/ manual	gab yig
གབ་ཡོད་པ	latent	gab yod pa
གབ་རེས་འུར་རེས	hide and go seek	gab res 'ur res
གབ་རེས་ཡིབ་རེས	hide and go seek	gab res yib res
གབ་ས	hiding place	gab sa
གམ	{rgyal po'i gam du skyel} was carried back to the king	gam
གམ་གུམ	a number	gam gum
གམ་རྒྱ	written contract, agreement	gam rgya
གམ་ཅར་མཁན་སྡེ་ཆེ་ཆུང	nearby staying mkhan chen and mkhan chung, Dalai Lama's gsol dpon &, gzim dpon, mchod dpon etc.	gam car mkhan sde che chung
གམ་བཅར་བ	sku gam mam nye 'gram du living person	gam bcar ba
གམ་ཆུང་ལ	gam chung pass in N steng chen rdzong	gam chung la
གམ་དུ	near	gam du
གམ་དུ་བསྙེགས	went / reached near / in the presence of	gam du bsnyegs
གམ་ན	near to	gam na
གམ་ནས	from the presence/ before/ near	gam nas
གམ་པ	gam pa rdzong [in S T, connecting w Sikkim onthe S, ruled from gam pa zhol]	gam pa
གམ་པ་ལ	gam pa pass [in W gong dkar rdzong]	gam pa la
གམ་སྤངས	panels beneath the cornice of a roof	gam spangs
གམ་བུ་ར	citron, lemon	gam bu ra
གམ་འབྲོག	dairy near one's residence	gam 'brog
གམ་འཛིན	abbr. of gan rgya dang 'dzin, receipt, acknowledgement, letter of transfer, money transaction	gam 'dzin
གམ་གཟོང	tshag rgyag skabs lcags sogs kyi ngos su gug thig 'bri byed kyi lag cha zhig	gam gzong
གམ་ཡོ	[arch] near, in the presence	gam yo
གམ་རུམ	from the gam pa region gdan rum	gam rum
གའ་ན	Ghana	ga' na
གའི་བྱེ	sands of the ganges	ga'i bye
གའུ	1) place to put a deity statue, amulet box, reliquary box, small box/pendant for keeping religious objects [ze'u lha khang syn: kha sbyar dang za ma tog]; 2) ornament [men or women]; 3) circular sp...	ga'u
གའུ་ཁ་སྦྱར	closed spheres	ga'u kha sbyar
གའུ་ཏ་མ	Gautama	ga'u ta ma
གའུ་མ	{ga'u rI ma}	ga'u ma
གའུ་རི	gauri [kind of tantric goddess]	ga'u ri
གའུ་རི་མ་བརྒྱད	the eight Gaurimas; in the {zhi khro} sm. {gnas kyi ma mo brgyad}; {gnas kyi khro mo chen mo brgyad}	ga'u ri ma brgyad
གའུ་ལེ	1) little book recording stages/details of a job; 2) Yig rigs 'jug snod shog shubs	ga'u le
གའུ་ལེ་མཚུངས་པ	las ka'i go rim gyi sgrig stangs 'dra ba	ga'u le mtshungs pa
གའུ་གསུམ་སྒྲོམ	bod kyi lha lcam gyi gzab spros ske rgyan bye brag cig gold ga'u che ba gcig dang chung ba gnyis kyi bar la string turquoise and pearls brang khar 'dogs &, gong gi chung ba gnyis over the breasts &...	ga'u gsum sgrom
གར	1) dancing, performing in drama; 2) display (3, whither, where	gar
གར་སྐྱེ་ཞུ་བ	{legs pa'i skar ma gar skye zhus pa} he asked the Buddha where Sunaksatra would be reborn	gar skye zhu ba
གར་སྐྱེས	wherever I am born	gar skyes
གར་ཁང	theater	gar khang
གར་མཁན	1) dancer/ performer/ actor [syn: gar pa, zlos gar mkhan, rol sgeg ma, rol rtsed ma]; 2) peacock	gar mkhan
གར་མཁན་གྱི་རིགས	brahmin family	gar mkhan gyi rigs
གར་མཁན་ཆེ	dbang phyug chen po	gar mkhan che
གར་མཁན་མ	dancing girl, 13 modulations of the voice, dancing woman	gar mkhan ma
གར་འཁྲབ	dance, perform in plays	gar 'khrab
གར་འཁྲབ་མཁན	actor	gar 'khrab mkhan
གར་གྱི་སྐྱོན་ལྔ	the five faults of dance	gar gyi skyon lnga
གར་གྱི་བརྒྱན	stage dress	gar gyi brgyan
གར་གྱི་ཆ་བྱད་དགུ	the 9 dance moods [among the {sgyu rtsal drug cu re bzhi}, gar 'khrab skabs kyi rnam 'gyur la: sgeg pa, dpa' ba, mi sdug pa, the three expressions of body ni lus kyi nyams gsum; drag shul, bzhad ga...	gar gyi cha byad dgu
གར་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	dance ritual	gar gyi cho ga
གར་གྱི་ཉམས་དགུ	9 sentiments of dramatic art	gar gyi nyams dgu
གར་གྱི་ཉམས་བརྒྱད	8 sentiments of dramatic art	gar gyi nyams brgyad
གར་གྱི་ཉམས་བཅུ	ten dance expressions	gar gyi nyams bcu
གར་གྱི་ལྟད་མོ	dancing entertainment	gar gyi ltad mo
གར་གྱི་སྟངས་སྟབས	dancing posture	gar gyi stangs stabs
གར་གྱི་ཕུ་དུང	sleeves, as for dancing	gar gyi phu dung
གར་གྱི་ཕུ་དོང	jacket, dancing jacket	gar gyi phu dong
གར་གྱི་ཕྱི་དུང	sleeves, as for dancing	gar gyi phyi dung
གར་གྱི་དབང་པོ	practitioner in meditation	gar gyi dbang po
གར་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of dancers	gar gyi dbang phyug
གར་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ	[mistress of all female demons]	gar gyi dbang phyug ma
གར་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	dance teacher, performance director, stage master	gar gyi gtso bo
གར་གྱིས་རོལ་པ	sensuous dance	gar gyis rol pa
གར་གླུ	Dalai Lama's gar pas gtong ba'i glu	gar glu
གར་གླུ་རོལ་གསུམ	entertainments of dance, song, and music	gar glu rol gsum
གར་དགུ	{gar gyi nyams dgu}; nine moods of dance (of wrathful deities)	gar dgu
གར་དགུའི་ཉམས	the nine-fold dance moods, {gar gyi nyams dgu}	gar dgu'i nyams
གར་དགུའི་ཉམས་དགུ	Syn {gar dgu'i nyams}	gar dgu'i nyams dgu
གར་དགུའི་རོལ་མཛད་དཔལ་གྱི་ཆས	the glorious attire of reveling in the 9 dance expressions	gar dgu'i rol mdzad dpal gyi chas
གར་དགུར་བསྒྱུར	to perform a dance in 9 aspects; 9 dances of life/ dance in 9 aspects (?)	gar dgur bsgyur
གར་དགུར་བསྒྱུར་བ	dance, perform your dances	gar dgur bsgyur ba
གར་དགོས་འུ་ལག	sngar dgos gal gar byung la skul 'ded byed rgyu'i dmigs su bkar ba'i khral pa tsho chung zhig	gar dgos 'u lag
གར་འགྲོ	where does it go?, where does it disappear?	gar 'gro
གར་འགྲོས	dancing steps, body movements used in dancing. Abbr. of {gar stabs kyi 'gros}	gar 'gros
གར་རྒྱན	dance ornaments	gar rgyan
གར་རྒྱབ	encampment	gar rgyab
གར་སྒུའི་ཉམས	the 9 modes of expression [of a wrathful deity. {sgeg pa dpa' ba mi sdug pa}., {rgod dang drag shul 'jigs su rung}., {snying rje rngam dang zhi ba'o}.]	gar sgu'i nyams
གར་བསྒྱུར་བ	to perform [the] dance	gar bsgyur ba
གར་ཅིག	which one, whichever one	gar cig
གར་ཆང	strong beer	gar chang
གར་ཆེན	great dancer	gar chen
གར་འཆམ	1) [graceful] dance[r]; 2) Gar and 'cham	gar 'cham
གར་འཆམ་ཁྲབ་པ	dance	gar 'cham khrab pa
གར་འཆམས	dance, dancer	gar 'chams
གར་འཆམས་སྐོར་གྱི་རྩ་ཚིག	instructions on the performance of the sacred dance	gar 'chams skor gyi rtsa tshig
གར་འཆམས་རྩ་ཚིག	{'chams yig}	gar 'chams rtsa tshig
གར་ཉམས	postures of dance	gar nyams
གར་རྙེད	where they might find, sufficiency	gar rnyed
གར་ཏིང་ནམ་ཚོ	Karting namtsho [one of {ma sang dpun dgu}, 9 masang brothers]	gar ting nam tsho
གར་སྟབས	dancing posture/ pose / movements	gar stabs
གར་སྟབས་ཀྱི་གྲོས	dance steps/ movements	gar stabs kyi gros
གར་སྟབས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	the list of dance expressions	gar stabs kyi rnam grangs
གར་སྟབས་ཀྱི་རོལ་གར	dance gar stabs kyi rol gar sna tshogs mdzad pa performing various dances	gar stabs kyi rol gar
གར་སྟབས་དགུ	nine dance expressions, nine moods [of a heruka], See also {gar dgu'i nyams}	gar stabs dgu
གར་སྟབས་སྒྱུར	performed dances	gar stabs sgyur
གར་སྟབས་བསྒྱུར་བ	to perform dance movements	gar stabs bsgyur ba
གར་སྟབས་འབྱིངས	assume a dancing pose	gar stabs 'byings
གར་སྟབས་ལིང་ལིང་བསྒྱུར་བ	to move in a harmonious dance	gar stabs ling ling bsgyur ba
གར་སྟབས་ལིང་ལིང་ཤིག་ཤིག་བགྱུར	move in a myriad of dance movements	gar stabs ling ling shig shig bgyur
གར་སྟབས་ལིང་ལིང་ཤིག་ཤིག་བསྒྱུར	to move in a myriad of dance movements	gar stabs ling ling shig shig bsgyur
གར་སྟབས་སུ་འགྱིང་བ	to assume a dancing pose	gar stabs su 'gying ba
གར་སྟེགས	dance platform, stage	gar stegs
གར་སྟེགས་ཐོག་གི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	stage arts 386	gar stegs thog gi sgyu rtsal
གར་ཐབས	dance movements. Syn {gar stabs}	gar thabs
གར་ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	the list of dance expressions	gar thabs kyi rnam grangs
གར་ཐབས་དགུ	the nine moods [of a wrathful deity]	gar thabs dgu
གར་ཐལ	to vanish	gar thal
གར་ཐལ་ཆ་མེད་པ	vanished	gar thal cha med pa
གར་ཐལ་བའི་གཏོལ་མེད	not knowing where she had gone	gar thal ba'i gtol med
གར་ཐིག་དབྱངས་གསུམ	dance, [w suitable costumes] proportion [painting mandalas], and songs	gar thig dbyangs gsum
གར་ཐོད་ཐོད	gang byung byung,...Khe nyen bsam blo ma btang bar las ka gar thod thod ma byed	gar thod thod
གར་དག	actor, stage player	gar dag
གར་དུ་མ་བསྒྱུར་བ	performing the various dances	gar du ma bsgyur ba
གར་གདོང་བཙན	a Tibetan general about 630 AD	gar gdong btsan
གར་བདེར་སོང	go wherever you like	gar bder song
གར་འདོད་པར	wherever is wishes; gal te	gar 'dod par
གར་རྡེབ	environment devastated by overflowing river	gar rdeb
གར་ནག	ashes of pig shit	gar nag
གར་པ	dancer	gar pa
གར་པད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	dancing lotus mudra; the dancing lotus mudra	gar pad kyi phyag rgya
གར་པོ	1) thick, strong [drinks]; 2) strong tough; 3) big, major	gar po
གར་པོ་ཆགས་པ	coagulate	gar po chags pa
གར་དཔོན	chief administrative officer of gartok and rudok districts	gar dpon
གར་ཕྱིད	sufficiency	gar phyid
གར་ཕྲུག	[TT govt.] dancing child, member of Dalai Lama's dance troupe	gar phrug
གར་ཕྲུག་པ	[TT govt.] dancing child, member of Dalai Lama's dance troupe	gar phrug pa
གར་ཕྲེང	dancing line	gar phreng
གར་འཕྱགས	Tibetan govt. gar phrug bsdu ba'i khral	gar 'phyags
གར་བ	dense, thick, heavy, astringent, strong	gar ba
གར་བབ	w no particular place to go or stay gang du 'khel 'khel	gar bab
གར་བས་བསྐོར	surrounded by dancers	gar bas bskor
གར་བུ	1) lump, gcig tu 'gril ba'i rdog po,...Lcags kyi gar bu; 2) (met iron; 3) [arch] tongue.. solid	gar bu
གར་བྱེད་པ	dance	gar byed pa
གར་བྲོ	zlos gar bro gzhas	gar bro
གར་དབང	majestic	gar dbang
གར་དབང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	Garwang Chökyi Drakpa. Probably identical with	gar dbang chos kyi grags pa
གར་དབང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	the majestic Chökyi Wangchuk	gar dbang chos kyi dbang phyug
གར་དབང་བདུད་འདུལ་ལས་རབ་རྩལ	alias {dri med gling pa}	gar dbang bdud 'dul las rab rtsal
གར་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ	{mnga' ris gter ston} 1640-1685	gar dbang rdo rje
གར་དབང་གནམ་ལྕགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	alias {rtsa gsum gter bdag gling pa} {gter ston} 17th cent	gar dbang gnam lcags rdo rje
གར་དབང་ཞིག་གླིང	alias {'od gsal sgyu ma}	gar dbang zhig gling
གར་དབང་ཞིག་པོ་གླིང་པ	tertön and reincarnation of {lha sras mu rub btsad po} also called {zhig gling}	gar dbang zhig po gling pa
གར་འབག	dance gyi gdong 'bag	gar 'bag
གར་མ	1) goddess of dance, Dancing Maid / Girl. Syn {gar mkhan ma} the female bodhisattva [consort of Vajrapani]. 2) dancing girls; Nirti Dance Goddess; Nirti Dance Goddess (his consort)	gar ma
གར་མེད	at all events, by all means	gar med
གར་མོ	thick	gar mo
གར་བཙན་འཕགས་པ	a monastery, a god	gar btsan 'phags pa
གར་རྩལ	theatrical arts	gar rtsal
གར་རྩེ	dance entertainment	gar rtse
གར་རྩེད	dancing [play/ display]	gar rtsed
གར་ཞ	dancing hat	gar zha
གར་བཞུགས	where he lives	gar bzhugs
གར་ཟག་གི་ཚོད་ཟང་ཟག་གིས་མི་བཟུང	1 ordinary person cannot measure another person	gar zag gi tshod zang zag gis mi bzung
གར་ཟས	the food given to performers	gar zas
གར་གཟིགས	the appearance of the eyes of a painted figure seeming to follow the observer	gar gzigs
གར་ཡང	anywhere	gar yang
གར་ཡང་མི་འགྲོ	to go nowhere, not go anywhere	gar yang mi 'gro
གར་ཡང་མི་གནས	not abide anywhere	gar yang mi gnas
གར་ཡོལ	stage curtain	gar yol
གར་ཡོལ་རྒྱག	close a stage curtain, end a performance	gar yol rgyag
གར་རོལ་པ	dancer[s] and musician[s]	gar rol pa
གར་ལ་དགའ་བ	very fond of dancing	gar la dga' ba
གར་ལ་བལྟ	attending a dance	gar la blta
གར་ལོ	a kind of Tibetan boots	gar lo
གར་ལོག	former Kashmiri people among tu ru ka, in the 11th century their king lha bla ma ye shes 'od bkrongs pa	gar log
གར་ཤ	flesh between thumb and 1st finger	gar sha
གར་ཤྭ	Lahoul	gar shwa
གར་ཤོར	{lo zla nyin zhag rnams gar shor} where did the years, months, and days go?	gar shor
གར་སོང	vanished; whereabouts, where a thing / person has gone	gar song
གར་སོང་ཆ་མེད	vanished with no trace	gar song cha med
གར་སོང་ཆ་མེད་དུ་གྱུར	to vanish without a trace	gar song cha med du gyur
གར་སོང་ཆ་མེད་དུ་སོང་ངོ	vanished	gar song cha med du song ngo
གར་སོང་ཇི་བྱས	where [they] are and what has become of [them] 387	gar song ji byas
གར་སོང་རྗེས་མེད	disappearance, vanishing w no traces	gar song rjes med
གར་སོང་རྗེས་མེད་དུ་འགྱུར	disappear/ vanish w no traces	gar song rjes med du 'gyur
གར་སོང་མེད་པ	vanished	gar song med pa
གར་སླ	thick and/or thin, thickness [liquids] strength [food/ drink]	gar sla
གར་སླའི་ཚད	viscosity, thickness [liquids] strength [food/ drink]	gar sla'i tshad
གར་གསས་བཙན་པོ	bon god who suppresses 'dod chags	gar gsas btsan po
གར་ལྷམ	a kind of Tibetan boots	gar lham
གལ	important, importance	gal
གལ་རྐྱལ་དུ་སྟོན་པ	shoulder, bear on one's back	gal rkyal du ston pa
གལ་གྱིས	[arch] sincerely, wholeheartedly, try hard to, make an effort to	gal gyis
གལ་གྱིས་གལ་གྱིས	pressingly, urgently	gal gyis gal gyis
གལ་འགག	important, really	gal 'gag
གལ་འགག་ཆེ་བ	very important	gal 'gag che ba
གལ་འགངས	importance, significance, essentiality	gal 'gangs
གལ་ཆུང	unimportant, insignificant, undervalued, slighted	gal chung
གལ་ཆེ་སྟེ	it is of great importance	gal che ste
གལ་ཆེ་དུས་གཏུགས	important and urgent	gal che dus gtugs
གལ་ཆེ་བ	important, of greater importance, crucial	gal che ba
གལ་ཆེ་བར་འགྱུར་ཚུལ	why this is important	gal che bar 'gyur tshul
གལ་ཆེ་བྭར་འགྱུར་ཚུལ	why this is important	gal che bwar 'gyur tshul
གལ་ཆེ་ཤོས	most/extremely important	gal che shos
གལ་ཆེན	important	gal chen
གལ་ཆེན་པོ	of great importance, vital, essential, paramount	gal chen po
གལ་ཆེན་སྦྱོང་བའི་ས	important level of purification [Nyingma mantrayana, in the case of the two yogas 3rd bhumi, in the path of preparation clearing away all the habitual patterns which are the cause of manifestation ...	gal chen sbyong ba'i sa
གལ་ཆེའོ	very important, imperative	gal che'o
གལ་ཆེར་ནས་ཤོད	emphasize, stress	gal cher nas shod
གལ་ཆེར་འཛིན	to consider / hold as very important, to regard as essential	gal cher 'dzin
གལ་ཏ	bag, shoulder bag	gal ta
གལ་ཏ་མགོ་སྦྲེལ	re lde [bast, woven?, felt] rgyags phye blug snod mgo sbrel,...Dpe re bshad na don re yod, dpe don gal ta mgo sbrel yin	gal ta mgo sbrel
གལ་ཏ་ན	if [so], in case	gal ta na
གལ་ཏ་ཚེ	if, in case	gal ta tshe
གལ་ཏེ	should it be {gal te 'jigs pa dang bcas pa'i lam lta bu yin na} should the road be hazardous	gal te
གལ་ཏེ་ན	if [na at the end of phrase]	gal te na
གལ་ཏེ་འཕྱིས་ན	if I have come too late	gal te 'phyis na
གལ་ཏེ་ཡང	at the beginning of a sentence: "Indeed, in that case,..." [mss]	gal te yang
གལ་དུ་འཛིན་པ	consider of importance, esteem	gal du 'dzin pa
གལ་དུ་བཤད	said to be important	gal du bshad
གལ་མདོ	really, essentially of importance, a disease, 1 of tsha ba'i nad	gal mdo
གལ་མདོ་ངེས་པའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	four commitments definitive to the important s tra which gathers all intentions [jamgo"n kongtru"l, shes-bya kun-khyab mdzod, vol. 2, p. 188ff. ..of utter purity in relation to the body, speech, mi...	gal mdo nges pa'i dam tshig bzhi
གལ་མདོ་ཚད་མ	Bon text of Dzogchen logic	gal mdo tshad ma
གལ་བསྡོམས	summary of vital points	gal bsdoms
གལ་གནད	utmost importance, crucial, stress	gal gnad
གལ་གནད་ཅན	of great importance, essential, significant	gal gnad can
གལ་གནད་ཆུང་ཆུང	trifle, trivial	gal gnad chung chung
གལ་གནད་ཆེ་བ	a most vital/ essential point, of great importance, essential, significant	gal gnad che ba
གལ་པོ	Galpo Tantra	gal po
གལ་པོ་ཆེ	very important (point); most important	gal po che
གལ་པོ་བསྡུས་པ	Galpo Düpa. Also named: Tantra of the General Accomplishment of Knowledge Mantras (rig sngags spyi'i sgrub lugs kyi rgyud). One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	gal po bsdus pa
གལ་ཕྱིས	[in {thogs] sm. {spos sna tshogs kyi g.yos pa}	gal phyis
གལ་ཕྱེ	[in {tshogs}.] = {spos sna tshogs chang gis g.yos pa}	gal phye
གལ་ཕྲེང	Galtreng; text name	gal phreng
གལ་བ	to force, to press	gal ba
གལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	be assiduous	gal bar byed pa
གལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མ	don't mention it, not at all, never mind, that's all right, it doesn't matter 388	gal byed kyi ma
གལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད	you are welcome	gal byed kyi ma red
གལ་མེད	never mind, it doesn't matter, that's all right	gal med
གལ་འཛིན་པ	1) rngon pa; 2) [arch] dgag pa rgyag pa,...Gal 'dzin pa las rgyal ba	gal 'dzin pa
གལ་འཛུག་པ	set a snare	gal 'dzug pa
གལ་འཛུགས་པ	1) rnyi 'dzugs pa; 2) Ya la 'dzugs pa	gal 'dzugs pa
གལ་ཞི	if	gal zhi
གལ་བཟུང	renunciation (get hold of important thing)	gal bzung
གལ་རོ	refuse, rubbish	gal ro
གལ་ལ	[arch] bu ram dvangs ma	gal la
གལ་སྲིད	if. Syn {gal te}; if possible; if by chance	gal srid
གལ་ཨེ་ཡོད	I don't think it's important to ...	gal e yod
གས	ooze, split, cleave, rift, SA 'gas pa, question particle	gas
གས་ཁ	cracks	gas kha
གས་ཆག་མེད	without a crack or flaw or chink	gas chag med
གས་གཏོར	destroying, demolishing	gas gtor
གས་གཏོར་བྱེད	destroy, demolish	gas gtor byed
གས་པ	pf. of {'gas pa} split into pieces; crack, split; alt. pf. of {'gas pa}; to split apart	gas pa
གས་འཕན	cracked	gas 'phan
གས་ཙག་མདངས	granular dry shading	gas tsag mdangs
གས་ཚག་མདངས	granular dry shading	gas tshag mdangs
གས་གཤོངས	chasm	gas gshongs
གས་སྲུབས	crack, fissure, rift	gas srubs
གི	of, (-'s) affix instead of kyi after ga and nga, SA kyi of, genitive particle, related to	gi
གི་སྐབས་སུ	at the time of; see {skabs}	gi skabs su
གི་གུ	name of vowel 'i.'	gi gu
གི་གུ་ཤ	having a white speck in the eye	gi gu sha
གི་གུ་ཤ་ཆ་ལག	enamel ware	gi gu sha cha lag
གི་གུ་ཤེལ	having a white speck in the eye, wall-eyed (of horses)	gi gu shel
གི་སྒོ་ནས	through, by means of, in terms of	gi sgo nas
གི་ལྗི་བིག	tanned skin of a kind of deer	gi lji big
གི་ཉམས་ལེན	practice	gi nyams len
གི་འདས་ཚིག	be, bid	gi 'das tshig
གི་འདུག	present tense complement	gi 'dug
གི་ནི་རི་ཏི	bones, skeleton	gi ni ri ti
གི་སྣང་པ་དང་བསམ་སྦྱོར	feelings, thoughts, and deeds of	gi snang pa dang bsam sbyor
གི་སྣང་བ	experiences	gi snang ba
གི་འཕོ་བ	phowa of the utterly pure nature of space	gi 'pho ba
གི་བར་གྱི	. . . gi bar gyi/ du - (anything) up to and including . . .	gi bar gyi
གི་བར་དུ	until	gi bar du
གི་ཝང	yellow pigment, anthelminthic medicine, concretion in the entrails of some animals used for medicine, bear's bile used as medicine, medicinal concretion from the brains of elephant	gi wang
གི་ཡིན	future tense complement	gi yin
གི་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement	gi yod pa red
གི་རི་བྷན་དྷ	a mountainous country	gi ri bhan dha
གི་རིན་ལ	Greenland	gi rin la
གི་རེད	future tense complement	gi red
གི་ལིང	gyi ling	gi ling
གི་ལིན	fabulous animal	gi lin
གི་ཤང་རྒྱ	a tibetan tribe	gi shang rgya
གི་ཧང	gi wang solidified bile, medicine	gi hang
གིག	(not in DAS)	gig
གིགས་སྟངས་གསུམ	the three ways of looking [in thogal practice]	gigs stangs gsum
གིང	1) ging, ging warrior. 2) skeleton. 3) servant [of a heruka], corrupt form of {king ka ra} Syn {pho nya}; a small drum	ging
གིང་ཀ་ར	Gingkara is a corrupt form of the Sanskrit kingkara which in Tibetan is phonya, emissary	ging ka ra
གིང་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	eighteen great Ging; belongs also under {lhag mgron} residual guests	ging chen bco brgyad
གིང་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great skeletons	ging chen bzhi
གིང་ཆེན་སྲོག་བདག	Gingchen Sogdak	ging chen srog bdag
གིང་ཕོ	male [ging] skeleton [dancer], servant/ messenger [of a heruka/deity]	ging pho
གིང་མོ	female [ging] skeleton [dancer], servant/ messenger [of a heruka/deity]	ging mo
གིན	particle forming the present infinitive of a verb. Syn {kyin} [used after final ga and nga]	gin
གིམ	soft musical tone	gim
གིའུ	clyster pipe	gi'u
གིར་མོ	rupee	gir mo
གིས	(verb) + gis - though/ while. Syn {kyis} [used after final {ga} and {nga}. 2) ! [imperative]	gis
གུ	63, sign of diminutives, extension, extent, room, space	gu
གུ་གུ	kiku, I mark	gu gu
གུ་གུ་ཤ	enamelled plates & cups 389	gu gu sha
གུ་གུལ	frankincense; also called demon scarer ('dre 'jigs)	gu gul
གུ་གུལ་དཀར་པ	frankincense	gu gul dkar pa
གུ་གུལ་དཀར་པོ	frankincense	gu gul dkar po
གུ་གུལ་བདུག	gugulu instance	gu gul bdug
གུ་གུལ་ནག་པོ	Bdellium	gu gul nag po
གུ་གུལ་ཤིང	amyris galloca plant from which incense is obtained	gu gul shing
གུ་གེ	1) place in rtsa mda' rdzong, old name zhang zhung, glang dar ma'i rabs 4th lde gtsug mgon gyis in this region skyong myong bas, hence called gu ge rgyal rabs. ming rgyal rabs kyi skabs su'ang bsda...	gu ge
གུ་གེ་ཁམས་ཚན	dbus gtsang chos sde chen po rnams su stod mnga' ris gu ge nas yong ba'i grva rgyun 'du sa'i khams tshan zhig gu ge g.ya' yi skor - Gugey Ya'i Kor, the Slate Land of Gugey, one of the three distric...	gu ge khams tshan
གུ་གླིང	gold embroidered cloth or silk	gu gling
གུ་ལྗང	SA gug kyed	gu ljang
གུ་ཏན	elder grandson of jen gis khan	gu tan
གུ་ཏི	deaf	gu ti
གུ་ཐུང	pants	gu thung
གུ་དུང	gu thung	gu dung
གུ་དོག	narrow, deficient	gu dog
གུ་དོག་པོ	narrow, narrow passage which is difficult to pass	gu dog po
གུ་དྲག	Padmasambhava wrathful skur bzhengs pa'i aspect	gu drag
གུ་ན	Skt. Syn {yon ten}	gu na
གུ་ན་མི་ཏྲ	buddhist monk mentioned in phar phyin books	gu na mi tra
གུ་ན་ས་ག་ར	yon tan rgya mtsho, ocean of virtues	gu na sa ga ra
གུ་ཟུལ	hair-pendants of precious stones	gu zul
གུ་ཡ	ring	gu ya
གུ་ཡངས	freely, carefree, loose, clemency, lenient, open, feeling very free, openness, wide-open, relax oneself	gu yangs
གུ་ཡངས་ཀྱི་དུས་ཡུན	leisure	gu yangs kyi dus yun
གུ་ཡངས་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀའམ་རྩེད་མོ	recreation	gu yangs kyi las ka'am rtsed mo
གུ་ཡངས་སྙིང་ཐིག	Guyang Nyingthig, essence drop of vastness	gu yangs snying thig
ཡངས་སྙིང་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	by Chingkar Donyö Dorje	yangs snying gi thig le
གུ་ཡངས་ནམ་ཡང་མེད་པ	not free at all	gu yangs nam yang med pa
གུ་ཡངས་པ	free, loose, carefree, totally free, unfixed, open [minded], spacious, roomy, lenient, liberal, vast, broad	gu yangs pa
གུ་ཡངས་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག་འབྱུང་བ	you get a sense of feeling very free	gu yangs pa lta bu zhig 'byung ba
གུ་ཡངས་པ་འདུག	there is much room here	gu yangs pa 'dug
གུ་ཡངས་པོ	wide, broad liberal, spacious, capacious	gu yangs po
གླིང་པ	Guyang Lodey Dechen Dongak Lingpa, tertön, otherwise known as Chingkar Donyö Dorje	gling pa
གུ་ཡངས་ཡན་པ	a relaxed freedom, vast and free	gu yangs yan pa
གུ་ཡངས་ཡོད་པ	to be at ease	gu yangs yod pa
གུ་ཡངས་སང་ངེ	utterly transparent and serene	gu yangs sang nge
གུ་ཡངས་སང་ངེ་བསྐྱང	train in being open and vividly present	gu yangs sang nge bskyang
གུ་ཡངས་སེ	vast, open, spacious, broad,	gu yangs se
གུ་ཡངས་ལྷོད་དེ	loose and utterly free	gu yangs lhod de
གུ་ཡར	slowly, gently, without noise	gu yar
གུ་ཡུ	quick-silver	gu yu
གུ་ཡུངས	frankincense with the mustard seeds	gu yungs
གུ་ཡོག	king of birds, 2nd son of jen gis khan	gu yog
གུ་རུ	1) guru, lama, teacher, master. 2) Guru Rinpoche, Guru Padmasambhava [most often]. 3) The Sanskrit literally means "heavy", laden / loaded with qualities	gu ru
གུ་རུ་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen aspects of the Guru	gu ru bcu gsum
གུ་རུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	(12121273); revealed {gsang 'dus bla ma'i thugs sgrub}	gu ru chos kyi dbang phyug
གུ་རུ་ཆོས་དབང	1212-1270, one of the 5 gter ston kings	gu ru chos dbang
གུ་རུ་ཇོ་འབེར	disciple of {mkhas pa nyi 'bum} in the {snying thig} lineage	gu ru jo 'ber
གུ་རུ་དྲག་པོ	Wrathful Guru, Guru Drakpo	gu ru drag po
གུ་རུ་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Guru Mahasukha, a form of Padmasambhava	gu ru bde ba chen po
གུ་རུ་རྣོ་རྩེ	1136-, ban & bon gter ston	gu ru rno rtse
གུ་རུ་རྣོན་རྩེ	b. 1136; Bönpo tertön	gu ru rnon rtse
གུ་རུ་པ་མ་སམ་བྷ་ཝ	Guru padmasambhava, guru rinpoche	gu ru pa ma sam bha wa
གུ་རུ་པད་མ	Guru Padma	gu ru pad ma
གུ་རུ་པད་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ	Guru Pema Gyalpo, one of the eight main aspects of Guru Padmasambhava	gu ru pad ma rgyal po
གུ་རུ་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	Guru Padmasambhava	gu ru pad ma 'byung gnas
གུ་རུ་པད་མ་སམ་བྷ་ཝ	Guru Padmasambhava, the Lotus Born Master. Syn Guru Rinpoche	gu ru pad ma sam bha wa
གུ་རུ་སྤྲུལ་མཚན་བརྒྱད	eight emanated aspects of the Guru; {gu ru mtshan brgyad}	gu ru sprul mtshan brgyad
གུ་རུ་བྱང་མ	Guru Changma	gu ru byang ma
གུ་རུ་མཚན་བརྒྱད	eight manifestations	gu ru mtshan brgyad
གུ་རུ་མཚན་བརྒྱའི་བསྟོད་པ	praising Padmasambhava's hundred names, by {klong gsal rdo rje snying po}	gu ru mtshan brgya'i bstod pa
གུ་རུ་ཞི་དྲག	peaceful and wrathful guru, the peaceful and wrathful forms of Guru padmasambhava	gu ru zhi drag
གུ་རུ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Guru Chintamani. "The Wish-fulfilling Guru". This is a form of Padmakara in which he does not hold a vajra or have the khatvanga in the crook of his arm, but his hands are in the meditation mudra, ...	gu ru yid bzhin nor bu
གུ་རུ་རིགས་དྲུག	gurus of the six classes	gu ru rigs drug
གུ་རུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Guru Rinpoche 'Precious Master.' The lotus born tantric master who established Vajrayana Buddhism in Tibet in the 9th century at the invitation of King Trisong Deutsen. He manifested the attainment...	gu ru rin po che
གུ་རུ་གསང་འདུས	{bla ma chos sku rdo rje 'chang gsang ba 'dus pa}, terma by Guru Chöwang; dharmakaya form of Padmasambhava	gu ru gsang 'dus
གུ་རུ་དྷེ་ཝ་དྷ་ཀི་ནི	see {bla ma yi dam mkha' 'gro}	gu ru dhe wa dha ki ni
གུ་རུག	colt, foal	gu rug
གུ་རུའི་སྐུ་ཚབ	representative figure of Guru Rinpoche	gu ru'i sku tshab
གུ་རུའི་སྐུར་གསལ་བ	visualize in the form of the guru	gu ru'i skur gsal ba
གུ་རུའི་སྐུར་གསལ་བའི	of the luminous body of the guru gu ru'i dgongs rgyan nyin byed snying po - {gu ru'i dgongs rgyan nyin byed snying po [a {khrid} tri to the terma cycle {dkon mchog spyi 'dus} Konchok Chidu by Jamgo...	gu ru'i skur gsal ba'i
གུ་རུའི་རྣམ་ཐར	biography of Padmasambhava gu ru'i rnam thar bka' thang don bsdus	gu ru'i rnam thar
གསོལ་འདེབས	by {'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dbang po}; in [RT] Vol 1	gsol 'debs
གུ་རུའི་རྣམ་ཐར་རྒྱ་གར་ལུགས	written by {jo nang rje btsun kun dga' grol mchog}; in [RT] Vol 1 gu ru'i rnam thar mdzad pa bcu gcig gi	gu ru'i rnam thar rgya gar lugs
གུ་རུའི་རྣམ་ཐར་ཟངས་གླིང་མ	revealed by {mnga' bdag nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer}; in [RT] Vol 1	gu ru'i rnam thar zangs gling ma
གུ་ལང	deity propitiated by mothers	gu lang
གུ་ལང་པ	pure	gu lang pa
གུ་ལང་དབང་ཕྱུག	Maheshvara, Pashupatishvara	gu lang dbang phyug
གུ་ལང་གསེར	pure gold	gu lang gser
གུ་ལང་གསེར་གྱི་ཏོག	flowers of pure gold	gu lang gser gyi tog
གུ་ལང་གསེར་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	flower of pure gold	gu lang gser gyi me tog
གུ་ལིང	pure gold picked out from a mine, gold embroidered cloth or silk	gu ling
གུ་ལེ	slowly, softly, gently	gu le
གུ་ཤ	plate, flat dish, enameled metal implement	gu sha
གུ་ཤི	(M learned, tr	gu shi
གུ་ཤི་ཧན	(M 1) M title/rank meaning learned lord; 2) gu shr'i bstan 'dzin chos rgyal	gu shi han
གུ་ཤྲི	chinese title for monks and laymen	gu shri
གུ་ཤྲི་སོག་པོ	chief who conquered tibet in 164	gu shri sog po
གུ་སུ	garment, dress	gu su
གུ་ཧྱ	(Skt.) secret. Syn {gsang ba}	gu hya
གུག	crook	gug
གུག་ཀྱེད	gug refers to vowel signs gi gu and zhabs kyu, kyed refers to vowel signs 'greng bu and na ro	gug kyed
གུག་གུ	gi gu kiki, I mark	gug gu
གུག་གུ་བཤན	oblation cup	gug gu bshan
གུག་གུག	nod crooked, bend low	gug gug
གུག་གུག་བྱེད་པ	bend, bow droop	gug gug byed pa
གུག་གུལ	costly incense (white or black), SA gu gul	gug gul
གུག་གེ་བ	bent	gug ge ba
གུག་རྟགས་སྒོར་ཅན	bracket 391	gug rtags sgor can
གུག་པ	(tha mi dad pa, crooked, bent, twisted, hooked	gug pa
གུག་པོ	bent	gug po
གུག་བྱེད	bend [over], bow	gug byed
གུག་ཙམ	crooked in	gug tsam
གུག་གཟོང	smith's silver punch	gug gzong
གུག་བཟོ	bend [over], bow	gug bzo
གུག་སྲང	weight of gold	gug srang
གུགས	(not in DAS)	gugs
གུང	1) kind of leopard in Tibet. 2) middle, center. 3) high title in traditional Tibetan Government. 4) midnight. 5) noon. 6) {gung}, one of the nine great carnivores {gcan gzan che dgu}	gung
གུང་བཀུར	respect to the communist party	gung bkur
གུང་བཀུར་ཆེན་པོའི་ནང་ནས	w great respect to the communist party	gung bkur chen po'i nang nas
གུང་ཁྲན	communist	gung khran
གུང་ཁྲན་ཏང	communist party	gung khran tang
གུང་ཁྲན་ཏང་གི་བསྒྲགས་གཏམ	Communist Manifesto	gung khran tang gi bsgrags gtam
གུང་ཁྲན་ཏང་མི	communist party member	gung khran tang mi
གུང་ཁྲན་ཏང་ཡོན	party member, communist	gung khran tang yon
གུང་ཁྲན་རིང་ལུགས	communism [mi'i rigs kyi phugs bsam dang mthun shos kyi spyi tshogs kyi lam lugs shig yin, de 'phel rgyas 'gro ba'i dus rim gnyis su phye ste, dus rim dma' ba ni spyi tshod ring lugs dang, dus rim ...	gung khran ring lugs
གུང་ཁྲན་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གོ་རྟགས	communist consciousness gung khran ring lugs kyi 'jigs snang communist menace gung khran ring lugs kyi spyi tshogs communist society gung khran ring lugs kyi spyod bzang communist ethics gung khran...	gung khran ring lugs kyi go rtags
གུང་ཁྲན་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ལས་འགུལ	communist movement	gung khran ring lugs kyi las 'gul
གུང་ཁྲན་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གཤིས་ཀ	communist character	gung khran ring lugs kyi gshis ka
གུང་ཁྲན་རིང་ལུགས་པ	communist	gung khran ring lugs pa
གུང་གྲལ	the middle row/ to feel moved	gung gral
གུང་རྒོལ	anti communist	gung rgol
གུང་རྒོལ་བྱེད	oppose communism, be anti communist	gung rgol byed
གུང་རྒྱལ	one of early kings of tibet	gung rgyal
གུང་སྒྲིག་པ	compare	gung sgrig pa
གུང་བསྒྲིག་པ	comparative study	gung bsgrig pa
གུང་བསྒྲིགས	arranged [gral or go rim]	gung bsgrigs
གུང་བསྒྲིགས་པར་བྱས	to compare	gung bsgrigs par byas
གུང་ང་ལ་ཕུག	carrot	gung nga la phug
གུང་སྔོན	before midnight, before noon (9-11pm, 9-11am)	gung sngon
གུང་ཆིང་ཐོན	Communist Youth League	gung ching thon
གུང་ཆིང་ཐོན་ཡོན	Communist Youth League member	gung ching thon yon
གུང་ཇ	noon tea	gung ja
གུང་ཇག	communist bandits	gung jag
གུང་གཉིས	the two middles: noon, midnight	gung gnyis
གུང་ཐང	Gungthang	gung thang
མེ	(1762-1823) gung thang dkon mchog bstan pa'i sgron	me
གུང་ཐང་འཇམ་དབྱངས	incarnate lama of amdo	gung thang 'jam dbyangs
གུང་ཐང་པ	Gungtangpa An epithet	gung thang pa
ཨོཕ༹་མིལརེཔ	the person from Gungtang (a region in southwestern Tibet along the Nepalese border)	of Milarepa
གུང་ཐང་མི་ལ་རས་པ	Milarepa of Gungthang	gung thang mi la ras pa
གུང་ཐང་མེ་ཏོག་མཆོད་པ	the flower offering at Gungthang (ceremony on the 15th day of the 4th Tibetan month)	gung thang me tog mchod pa
གུང་ཐང་རྩའི་ཀོ་རོན	birthplace of mi la ras pa	gung thang rtsa'i ko ron
གུང་ཐང་ལ་ཁ	Gungtang pass. Sky Plain Pass	gung thang la kha
གུང་ཐང་ལྷ་མོ	the Gungtang goddess	gung thang lha mo
གུང་ཐུན	3rd of the four sessions of the day	gung thun
གུང་མཐུན་པར	in harmony with	gung mthun par
གུང་མཐོ	height of thumb and middle finger extended	gung mtho
གུང་དུ་བྱེད་པ	divide through middle, dissect anatomically	gung du byed pa
གུང་པ	the middle 1	gung pa
གུང་བྲན་ཏང	the communist party	gung bran tang
གུང་བྲན་རིང་ལུགས	communism	gung bran ring lugs
གུང་བློན	1) chief or internal affairs minister; 2) Gung and bka' blon	gung blon
གུང་འབབ་པ	take rest at noon on a journey	gung 'bab pa
གུང་མོ	1) middle finger; 2) leopard like predator	gung mo
གུང་དམར་ལ་ཕུག	carrot	gung dmar la phug
གུང་སྨན་ལྷ་རི	Gungmen Lhari, Magyal Pomra's wife	gung sman lha ri
གུང་ཚིགས	noon, lunch, midday [meal], eating only before noon	gung tshigs
གུང་མཛུབ	middle finger	gung mdzub
གུང་འཛུག	middle finger	gung 'dzug
གུང་འཛུབ	middle finger	gung 'dzub
གུང་གཞོན་ཐོན་ཡོན	Communist Youth League member 392	gung gzhon thon yon
གུང་ཟ	lion	gung za
གུང་ཟག	communist bandits [derogatory term for communists]	gung zag
གུང་ཟས	lunch	gung zas
གུང་རི་གུང་བཙན	king {gung ri gung btsan	gung ri gung btsan
གུང་རུ	bar dbus gtsang ru bzhi'i g.yo ru'i new name	gung ru
གུང་རུ་ལེགས	king {gung ru legs	gung ru legs
གུང་ལ	in the middle	gung la
གུང་ལ་ཕུག	radish, carrot	gung la phug
གུང་ལ་ཕྱུག་གུད	slope, declivity, separation, solitude, seclusion	gung la phyug gud
གུང་ལོན	take a walk at noon	gung lon
གུང་སང	gung seng	gung sang
གུང་སངས་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	take a walk about midday	gung sangs la 'gro ba
གུང་སེང	holiday, leave, vacation	gung seng
གུང་གསེང	vacation, holiday	gung gseng
གུང་གསེང་གཏོང	have/take a holiday, give time off	gung gseng gtong
གུང་གསེང་གཏོང་བ	to have a holiday	gung gseng gtong ba
གུང་གསེང་བཏང	have/take a holiday, gave time off	gung gseng btang
གུང་བསང	holiday	gung bsang
གུད	Syn {gud pa}	gud
གུད་དུ	aside, apart	gud du
གུད་དུ་ཆད	{gud du bcad pa} to deviate (from); to be fragmented within (itself); to be split off (from)	gud du chad
གུད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	humiliate, deprecate	gud du 'jug pa
གུད་དུ་འབོར་བ	place to one side, separate, disperse, buy at a loss	gud du 'bor ba
གུད་དུ་བཙལ་བ	to be sought for elsewhere	gud du btsal ba
གུད་དུ་སོང་བ་མེད་པ	not gone anywhere else	gud du song ba med pa
གུད་ན	if elsewhere/ different	gud na
གུད་ན་མེད	no other than, not separable from, not existing elsewhere	gud na med
གུད་ནག	quite deaf	gud nag
གུད་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, degenerate, weakened, weakening; 2) Rtsa 'phar stangs unclear	gud pa
གུད་པོ	degenerate, weakened, weakening	gud po
གུད་བྱང	separate manual text	gud byang
གུན	loss, damage	gun
གུན་འཁྱེར	inflict loss/damage	gun 'khyer
གུན་གོད	heavy or thick of hearing	gun god
གུན་ཇ	midday tea, religious service at midday	gun ja
གུན་གཏོང	inflict loss/damage	gun gtong
གུན་ཐེག་པ	suffer sickness or loss	gun theg pa
གུན་མཐུད	gyong gsab,...'Gro gron 'phar song gi gun mthud mtshon byed shog sgor lnga brgya tham pa sprad	gun mthud
གུན་དུམ	basket	gun dum
གུན་པོ	expensive, dear	gun po
གུན་ཕོག	suffer a loss	gun phog
གུན་གསབ	compensation, recompense	gun gsab
གུན་གསབ་གྱི་དངུལ	compensation money	gun gsab gyi dngul
གུན་གསབ་སྤྲོད་པ	compensate	gun gsab sprod pa
གུན་གསབ་བྱེད	compensate, recompense	gun gsab byed
གུམ	die, pass away	gum
གུམ་གུམ	respectfully	gum gum
གུམ་གུམ་ཆུམ་ཆུམ	obediently and humbly	gum gum chum chum
གུམ་གུམ་པ	fumbling	gum gum pa
གུམ་སྟེ	having died, been dead	gum ste
གུམ་པ	[p 'gum pa]	gum pa
གུམ་པར	deadly	gum par
གུའང་ཏུང	Kwangtung Province	gu'ang tung
གུའང་ཤིའི	Kwangsi Province	gu'ang shi'i
གུའི་ཀྲོའུ	Kweichow Province	gu'i kro'u
གུར	Vajra Dome; a tent/ dome; Vajra Panjara tantra, tent, half sphere, dome	gur
གུར་ཀུམ	saffron	gur kum
གུར་ཀླད	gur gyi thod steng	gur klad
གུར་དཀར	white tent tribes of mongolia	gur dkar
གུར་བཀྲམ་པ	pitched tents	gur bkram pa
གུར་ཁང	1) tent[like shaped enclosure/ building]; 2) tent/ palace of light/ rainbow; 3) dome, sphere, pavilion	gur khang
གུར་ཁེབས	gur steng gi g.yab	gur khebs
གུར་ཁྱིམ	dome, abode, encirclement; 1) tent[like shaped enclosure/ building]; 2) tent/ palace of light/ rainbow; 3) dome, sphere, pavilion; 4) tent in which someone lives	gur khyim
གུར་མཁན	tent maker	gur mkhan
གུར་གུམ	[Skt] saffron	gur gum
གུར་གུམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of saffron [Kasmiri, Nepali, Tibetan [pri yang ku] 393	gur gum gsum
གུར་གུར	churn, small churn used for preparing tea	gur gur
གུར་གུལ	movement, shaking	gur gul
གུར་གུལ་མཁན	movers, shakers	gur gul mkhan
གུར་གུལ་བྱེད	move, shake	gur gul byed
གུར་གྱི་མགོན་པོ	{gur mgon}, {mgon po gur}, a Dharma protector jnanasattva protector/ress	gur gyi mgon po
གུར་གྱི་བབ་ལེ	gur gyi rgyan spros ri mo tshem drub ma	gur gyi bab le
གུར་གྱི་ཤམ་བུ	outer canopy-like cover of a tent, upper part of a double tent	gur gyi sham bu
གུར་གླད	tope or crown of a tent, tent smoke passage	gur glad
གུར་མགོན	Syn {gur gyi mgon po}	gur mgon
གུར་མགོན་ལྕམ་དྲལ	the jnanasattva protector gur mgon yab yum	gur mgon lcam dral
གུར་འགྲམ	lattice in the side of a tent	gur 'gram
གུར་རྒྱག	pitch a tent	gur rgyag
གུར་ལྕམ	stakes supporting the roof of a tent	gur lcam
གུར་མཆོག	magnificent tent	gur mchog
གུར་ཏིག	me tog ser skya 'char ba zhig ste ro kha, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas khrag mkhris dang, rma tshad 'joms	gur tig
གུར་ཐག	tent robes	gur thag
གུར་ཐོག	upper covering or outer fly of a tent	gur thog
གུར་མཐོངས	gur gyi thog khung	gur mthongs
གུར་དྲག	deity of sakyapa school	gur drag
གུར་གདུང	gur gyi gdung ma	gur gdung
གུར་འདེབས་པ	pitch a tent	gur 'debs pa
གུར་ནག	black tent mongols	gur nag
གུར་པ་ཁྲ་ཚང	buddhist congregation at gyang tse	gur pa khra tshang
གུར་ལྤགས	tent skin/fabric	gur lpags
གུར་ཕུབ	pitched [a] tent, sphere, dome	gur phub
གུར་ཕུར	tent stake	gur phur
གུར་འཕུབ་པ	pitch a tent	gur 'phub pa
གུར་བུ	1) square; 2) small tent	gur bu
གུར་བེར	tent poles	gur ber
གུར་འབིབ་པ	tent	gur 'bib pa
གུར་འབུབས	pitch a tent	gur 'bubs
གུར་འབུབས་པ	pitch a tent	gur 'bubs pa
གུར་འབུམ	spiritual songs	gur 'bum
གུར་མོ	place in gting skyes rdzong once 'gro mgon chos rgyal 'phags pas btsugs pa'i 1 of the {bod khri skor bcu gsum}	gur mo
གུར་ཞོལ	gur gyi gsham du yod pa'i chu len ras	gur zhol
གུར་གཞོལ	walls of a tent	gur gzhol
གུར་ཡོལ	ceiling of tent	gur yol
གུར་ཤིང	tent pole	gur shing
གུར་སེར	tribe of mongols who lived in yellow tents	gur ser
གུལ་གུལ	quaking, shaken	gul gul
གུལ་ནག	the black, a medicine	gul nag
གུལ་བུམ	1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags	gul bum
གུལ་ཡུངས	Abbr. of {gu gul} + {yungs kar} fragrant resin and mustard seeds [to expel evil spirits]	gul yungs
གུལ་ལེ	slowly, gently	gul le
གུལ་ལེ་བྱོན	went slowly	gul le byon
གུས	I (a humble address for oneself); 1) "I", [humble term]. 2) respect, See also {gus pa}	gus
གུས་བཀུར	respect and service, honor, esteem, reverence, homage	gus bkur
གུས་བཀུར་ཅན	humility	gus bkur can
གུས་བཀུར་བྱེད	respect [and service], honor, esteem, reverence, give homage	gus bkur byed
གུས་བཀུར་བྱེད་པ	to bow [respectfully]	gus bkur byed pa
གུས་བཀུར་བྱེད་འོས་པ	honorable	gus bkur byed 'os pa
གུས་བཀུར་བརྩི་འཇོག	respect and obedience/obey	gus bkur brtsi 'jog
གུས་བཀུར་ཞུ	respect [and service], honor, esteem, reverence, give homage	gus bkur zhu
གུས་བཀུར་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem	gus bkur zhu ba
གུས་བཀུར་ཡིད་རང	admiration, respect	gus bkur yid rang
གུས་བསྐུར	respect [and service], honor, esteem, reverence, homage	gus bskur
གུས་བསྐུར་བྱེད	respect [and service], honor, esteem, reverence, give homage	gus bskur byed
གུས་བསྐུར་བརྩི་འཇོག	respect and obedience/obey	gus bskur brtsi 'jog
གུས་བསྐུར་ཞུ	respect [and service], honor, esteem, reverence, give homage	gus bskur zhu
གུས་བསྐུར་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem	gus bskur zhu ba
གུས་བསྐུར་ཡིད་རང	admiration, respect	gus bskur yid rang
གུས་གུས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ	gestures of reverence	gus gus kyi tshul
གུས་གུས་ལྟར་བྱས	pretending reverence	gus gus ltar byas
གུས་གུས་འདུད་འདུད	1) {su} but used after final {ga} and {nga} 2) verbal particle	gus gus 'dud 'dud
ཨིནདིཅཏིང་ནོན	past, submissive, humble	indicating non
གུས་གུས་འདུད་འདུད་བྱེད	be submissive/ humble	gus gus 'dud 'dud byed
གུས་གུས་ཞུམ་ཞུམ	submissive, humble	gus gus zhum zhum
གུས་གུས་ཞུམ་ཞུམ་བྱེད	be submissive, humble	gus gus zhum zhum byed
གུས་བགྱིས་ཏེ	reverent	gus bgyis te
གུས་བཅས	respectfully, with dignity and honor	gus bcas
གུས་ཉིན	three days ago	gus nyin
གུས་བཏུད	respect, reverence, to bow with respect	gus btud
གུས་འདུད	obeisance, respect, reverence	gus 'dud
གུས་འདུད་གོང་བཀུར	look up to w respect	gus 'dud gong bkur
གུས་འདུད་ཞུ་བ	to bow, salute	gus 'dud zhu ba
གུས་འདུད་རུ་སྒྲིགས	guard of honor	gus 'dud ru sgrigs
གུས་ལྡན	faith	gus ldan
གུས་པ	politely	gus pa
གུས་པ་བསྐྱེད	{sangs rgyas dang chos la gus pa bskyed} awakened respect for the Buddha and the Dharma	gus pa bskyed
གུས་པ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to generate respect, inspire devotion	gus pa bskyed pa
གུས་པ་བགྱི་བ	ex {de la gus pa gyis shig} show him respect!	gus pa bgyi ba
གུས་པ་ཉིད	respect	gus pa nyid
གུས་པ་དང་བཅས	respectfully	gus pa dang bcas
གུས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	with devotion, respectfully	gus pa dang bcas pa
གུས་པ་དང་བཅས་པས	reverent	gus pa dang bcas pas
གུས་པ་ཕྱག་བྱེད་པ	faith	gus pa phyag byed pa
གུས་པ་མེད་པ	disrespect, irreverence, impudence, rudeness	gus pa med pa
གུས་པའི་ཞབས་ཏོག	worship, homage	gus pa'i zhabs tog
གུས་པའི་ལུས	respectful person	gus pa'i lus
གུས་པར	respectfully	gus par
གུས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	be respectful, humble oneself	gus par 'gyur ba
གུས་པར་བསྒྲིམ་པ	behave with respect	gus par bsgrim pa
གུས་པར་ཉན	serve or attend respectfully, listen with respect	gus par nyan
གུས་པར་བྱ་བ	honoring	gus par bya ba
གུས་པར་བྱ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	attitude of honoring	gus par bya ba yid la byed pa
གུས་པར་བྱས་ཏེ	devotedly	gus par byas te
གུས་པར་བྱས་ཏེ་སྦྱོར་བ	devotedly apply [not continuous], intense application	gus par byas te sbyor ba
གུས་པར་བྱེད	faith	gus par byed
གུས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to pay respect	gus par byed pa
གུས་པར་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ripen devotion	gus par smin par byed pa
གུས་པར་འོས	respected, revered, worthy of respect	gus par 'os
གུས་པར་འོས་པ	respected, revered, worthy of respect	gus par 'os pa
གུས་པས	with respect, respectfully	gus pas
གུས་པས་བཀུར	to honor and respect {rgyal po tshangs byin rang yin shag byas te gus pas bkur ro} to honor and respect the new king as they had King Brahmadatta	gus pas bkur
གུས་པས་ཉོན	Listen with respect!	gus pas nyon
གུས་པས་འདུད་ཅིང	honored and respected	gus pas 'dud cing
གུས་པས་འདུད་པ	bowing with devotion	gus pas 'dud pa
གུས་པས་ཕྱག་བྱས་པ	made respectful prostrations	gus pas phyag byas pa
གུས་པས་ཕྱག་འཚལ	respectfully bow down	gus pas phyag 'tshal
གུས་པས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	respectfully paid homage / bowed down, bowed respectfully, we prostrate ourselves with veneration	gus pas phyag 'tshal ba
གུས་པས་ཞུ་བ	solicit	gus pas zhu ba
གུས་པས་གསོལ་པ	prayed humbly	gus pas gsol pa
གུས་པོ	expensive, costly, dear	gus po
གུས་ཕྱག	reverent prostration, bow down respectfully	gus phyag
གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ	I respectfully prostrate myself before	gus phyag 'tshal
གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	to make prostrations	gus phyag 'tshal ba
གུས་སྦྱོར	devoted application [not continuous], intense application	gus sbyor
གུས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	the diligence of devoted application; 1) of {brtson 'grus gsum}	gus sbyor gyi brtson 'grus
གུས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་རྩོམ་པ	to train in the diligence of devoted application	gus sbyor gyi brtson 'grus rtsom pa
གུས་བརྩི	respect and love/ obedience, esteem	gus brtsi
གུས་བརྩི་བྱེད་པ	to respect and esteem	gus brtsi byed pa
གུས་བརྩི་བྱེད་བ	be reverent, respect and esteem/ obey	gus brtsi byed ba
གུས་བརྩེ	respect and love	gus brtse
གུས་བརྩེ་བྱེད་བ	be reverent, respect and esteem	gus brtse byed ba
གུས་རྫས	offering, present	gus rdzas
གུས་ཞབས	respect, veneration, worship	gus zhabs
གུས་ཞབས་ཅན	lowly, respectful	gus zhabs can
གུས་ཞབས་དང་དོན་ལྡན་པའི	solemn	gus zhabs dang don ldan pa'i
གུས་ཞབས་བྱེད	to be polite. [mss]	gus zhabs byed
གུས་ཞབས་མེད་པ	impolite	gus zhabs med pa
གུས་ཞབས་ཞུ་བ	to show respect (to)	gus zhabs zhu ba
གུས་ཞབས་ཞུ་རུང་བ	respectable	gus zhabs zhu rung ba
གུས་ཞས་བྱེད་པ	respect, venerate, show respect	gus zhas byed pa
གུས་ཞེན	respect and loyalty	gus zhen
གུས་ལན	return bow/ salute/ gesture of respect/ greeting	gus lan
གུས་ལན་གནང	return bow/ salute/ gesture of respect/ greeting	gus lan gnang
གུས་ལན་སློག	return bow/ salute/ gesture of respect/ greeting	gus lan slog
གུས་ལུགས	courtesy, manners	gus lugs
གུས་སེམས	respect, devotion, esteem, reverence	gus sems
གུས་སོ	becomes very dear, respects, worships	gus so
གུས་སྲོལ	respectful manner * politeness, courtesy, manners, requirements of etiquette	gus srol
གེ	number 93	ge
གེ་ཁོད	one of the preeminent deities of bon	ge khod
གེ་རྒྱས	dog flesh	ge rgyas
གེ་ཐོ	Getho. Amnye Getho	ge tho
གེ་བ	aux. particle signifying emphatic did	ge ba
གེ་འཛོ	local guardian, the deity that protects the hero, deity of the homonymous sacred mountain of Gling	ge 'dzo
གེ་ར	a country	ge ra
གེ་ར་ལྷ	east of Lhasa	ge ra lha
གེ་ར་ལྷ་པ	ancient tibetan chief	ge ra lha pa
གེ་ཤ	kerchief for the head	ge sha
གེ་སར	1) flower [anthers/ stamens/ pistils]; 2) saffron [med. herb by its power clearing away fever]; 3) king Gesar of Ling; 4) glory in full bloom, the country {hor} blossoming)	ge sar
གེ་སར་གྱི་སྒྲུང	extracts from fables 395	ge sar gyi sgrung
གེ་སར་རྒྱ་གླིང་སྒྲུང	an epic account of the conquest of china by the famed ge sar, king of gling	ge sar rgya gling sgrung
གེ་སར་ཅན	lotus	ge sar can
གེ་སར་སྤྱོད	bee	ge sar spyod
གེ་སར་མར་པོ	tree	ge sar mar po
གེ་སར་དམར་པོ	naga vrksa	ge sar dmar po
གེ་སར་འཛིན	bee	ge sar 'dzin
གེ་སར་གསུམ	the three kinds of saffron [n' ga ge sar, pushpe ge sar, padma ge sar	ge sar gsum
གེག་པ	gnyan nad du go ba'i gag pa	geg pa
གེག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Acharya lilavajra	geg pa rdo rje
གེགས	(causer of) hindrance	gegs
གེགས་སྐྱོན	hinderance, impediment, obstacle, obstruction, accident, misfortune	gegs skyon
གེགས་གོལ་ས	obstacles and deviations	gegs gol sa
གེགས་ཆ	the aspect of geks/ obstructing spirits	gegs cha
གེགས་ཆགས	danger, interruption by an accident, SA bar chad	gegs chags
གེགས་ཆེ་བ	strong obstacle	gegs che ba
གེགས་དང་གོལ་ས	obstacles & deviations	gegs dang gol sa
གེགས་རྣམས་ཀུན	all obstacles	gegs rnams kun
གེགས་པ	hindrance	gegs pa
གེགས་བར	geks and obstacles, obstacles and interruptions, disaster, calamity	gegs bar
གེགས་བར་ཆད	obstacles and interruptions	gegs bar chad
གེགས་བར་གཏོང	hinder impede, obstruct	gegs bar gtong
གེགས་བྱེད	hindrance	gegs byed
གེགས་བྱེད་བགེགས	obstructing spirits/ geks	gegs byed bgegs
གེགས་བྱེད་པ	create obstacles	gegs byed pa
གེགས་བྱེད་པོ	harmful demon/ gdon 'dre	gegs byed po
གེགས་དབང་བར་ཆད	sudden dangers, misfortunes and obstacles arising from obstructing spirits and d"ns	gegs dbang bar chad
གེགས་མེད	without hindrance, unhindered, free from obstacles / misfortunes / obstructions / problems / interference	gegs med
གེགས་མེད་བདེ་བགྲོད	going/ travelling auspiciously w/o obstructing spirits/hindrances	gegs med bde bgrod
གེགས་འཚུབ	'tshub lhongs of obstacles ???	gegs 'tshub
གེགས་ཟད་བོགས་འདོན	the benefit of exhausting obstacles	gegs zad bogs 'don
གེགས་ཤོར་གོལ་ས	hindrances, sidetracks and deviations	gegs shor gol sa
གེགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	has become a hindrance	gegs su gyur pa
གེགས་སུ་འགྲོ	be a hinderance/ obstruction	gegs su 'gro
གེགས་སེལ	clear/ remove [obstacles/ hindrances impediments, pitfalls]	gegs sel
གེགས་སེལ་བོགས་འདོན	enhancing practice and removing obstacles	gegs sel bogs 'don
གེགས་སེལ་གསུམ	three levels of dispelling hindrances	gegs sel gsum
གེགས་བསལ་བ	to dispel hindrances	gegs bsal ba
གེན་དར་པ	king of birds	gen dar pa
གེར	(not in DAS)	ger
གེར་མ	[arch] rag rjen pa ???	ger ma
གེར་ལིང	excellent horse	ger ling
གེལ་པ	trunk of a tree with a spiral top	gel pa
གེལ་པོ	flesh and blood developing	gel po
གེལ་བ	squatting	gel ba
ཏྲེཨེ	branch	tree
གེལ་ཤིང	log, post	gel shing
གེས	(not in DAS)	ges
གོ	1) Abbr. of {go ba}. 2) Abbr. of {go cha} 3) numerical particle for the nineties. 4) place, room, space, See also {go ma 'gag pa} 5) comprehension	go
གོ་དཀའ་བ	difficult to understand	go dka' ba
གོ་སྐབས	chance, opportunity, interval, leisure, space, in the meanwhile, opportunity	go skabs
གོ་སྐབས་བཅོམ	forgets about	go skabs bcom
གོ་སྐབས་འབྱེད་པ	{go skabs 'byed pa} to be open; to provide an open avenue (for the expression of . . . ); isc. open dimension/ limitless potential	go skabs 'byed pa
གོ་སྐབས་མི་རྙེད་པ་འདུག	would have no opportunity	go skabs mi rnyed pa 'dug
གོ་སྐམ	dry understanding. Syn {go ba skam po}	go skam
གོ་སྐལ	portion because of rank	go skal
གོ་སྐོན	making understand, advising, persuading, convincing	go skon
གོ་སྐོན་བྱེད	make understand, advise, persuade, convince	go skon byed
གོ་སྐོན་བྱེད་པ	make understand, advise, persuade, convince	go skon byed pa
གོ་སྐོན་བློ་འགུག	convince	go skon blo 'gug
གོ་སྐོན་བློ་འགུག་བྱེད	persuade, convince	go skon blo 'gug byed
གོ་སྐོན་བློ་འགུག་བྱེད་པ	persuade	go skon blo 'gug byed pa
གོ་བསྐོན	making understand, advising, persuading, convincing	go bskon
གོ་བསྐོན་གྱི་སློབ་གསོ	persuasive education	go bskon gyi slob gso
གོ་བསྐོན་བྱེད	make understand, advise, persuade, convince 396	go bskon byed
གོ་བསྐོན་བློ་འགུག	persuasion, convincing	go bskon blo 'gug
གོ་བསྐོན་བློ་འགུག་བྱེད་པ	persuade, convince	go bskon blo 'gug byed pa
གོ་བསྐོན་གསེད་འགྲོལ	clearly explain the essential meaning	go bskon gsed 'grol
གོ་ཁ	1) thab 'og gi go thal 'don sa; 2) house's lto gral,...Las phyi ru byed, lto go khar za	go kha
གོ་ཁང	arsenal	go khang
གོ་ཁར	doorstep	go khar
གོ་ཁུག	grain sack	go khug
གོ་ཁྲབ	armor, coat of mail, harness	go khrab
གོ་ཁྲབ་གྱོན་པ	wear armor	go khrab gyon pa
གོ་ཁྲབ་བགོ	wear/ put on armor	go khrab bgo
གོ་ཁྲབ་ལྡན་པའི་རླངས	armored car	go khrab ldan pa'i rlangs
གོ་ཁྲབ་རིས	chain nets	go khrab ris
གོ་གེ་པ	people of gu ge province	go ge pa
གོ་གོར་པོ	round, oval	go gor po
གོ་གྱོན་པ	don an armor	go gyon pa
གོ་གྲལ	1) class, rank; 2) go kha'i gral	go gral
གོ་གྲས	go gral	go gras
གོ་གྲོལ	rank, dignity	go grol
གོ་དགུ	99	go dgu
གོ་བགོ	wear/ don armor	go bgo
གོ་བགོས་པ	act of equipping or arraying	go bgos pa
གོ་རྒས་ན	when rank and dignity are grown old and gone, when position in life has been lost	go rgas na
གོ་རྒས་མ	in the parents house rang du becoming old woman	go rgas ma
གོ་རྒྱ	1) extensive/ extent of learning; 2) w great power of learning	go rgya
གོ་རྒྱ་ཅན	1) person who can understand an extensive range of subjects; 2) extensively learned person	go rgya can
གོ་རྒྱུ	1) meaning, essence; 2) implication, indirect meaning	go rgyu
གོ་རྒྱུ་བཏང་བ	to hint at, allude	go rgyu btang ba
གོ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	inaudible	go rgyu med pa
གོ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	audible	go rgyu yod pa
གོ་སྒྲིག	preparations, arrangement, organizing	go sgrig
གོ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	prepare, arrange, organize	go sgrig byed
གོ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	organize	go sgrig byed pa
གོ་སྒྲིགས	preparations, arrangement, organizing	go sgrigs
གོ་སྒྲུབ	Syn {go cha'i sgrub pa} achieving armor	go sgrub
གོ་ངན་ཀླད་བླུགས	give wrong precepts/ bslab pa	go ngan klad blugs
གོ་ངན་མ	as a wife phyin ma zin par rang gi nang du lus pa'i bsam shes med pa'i woman	go ngan ma
གོ་སྔོན	bird, blue-headed	go sngon
གོ་ཅ	[arch] 1) weapon; 2) armor, harness; 3) deity and mantra srung thabs shig	go ca
གོ་ཅན	intelligent	go can
གོ་ཅན་ཐང་ཆུ	white sandalwood sap	go can thang chu
གོ་ཅོག	rjes 'jug ga yig gi mthar 'jug pa'i thams cad	go cog
གོ་གཅལ	pang gcal	go gcal
གོ་གཅིག་པ	isc. to understand to be the same	go gcig pa
གོ་གཅོད	[make] use [of]	go gcod
གོ་བཅད	excellent, definite	go bcad
གོ་བཅད་པ	1) 'dod don bsgrubs pa,...Las don khag mang mi gcig gis go bcad pa; 2) tshab bam dod thub par byas pa,...Lcags skyogs med sar shing skyogs kyis go bcad pa ?	go bcad pa
གོ་ཆ	armor, harness, gear, implements, tools, coat of mail	go cha
གོ་ཆ་བསྐྱེལ་བ	donning armor	go cha bskyel ba
གོ་ཆ་གྱོན་པ	to don the armor	go cha gyon pa
གོ་ཆ་གྲོལ	blossoming	go cha grol
གོ་ཆ་འཐུག་པ	thick armor	go cha 'thug pa
གོ་ཆ་དང་བཅས	with a ball	go cha dang bcas
གོ་ཆ་འཛིན་ཚུལ	my way of wearing the armor	go cha 'dzin tshul
གོ་ཆའི་བཀོད་པ་བསྟན་པ	sutra 'gos chos 'grub kyis having fundamentally grasped the SK tr to Tibetan	go cha'i bkod pa bstan pa
གོ་ཆའི་ཁང་པ	arsenal	go cha'i khang pa
གོ་ཆའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	armor-like practice,	go cha'i sgrub pa
གོ་ཆའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	armor-like diligence	go cha'i brtson 'grus
གོ་ཆའི་བརཚོན་འགྲུས	armor-like diligence [one of {brtson 'grus gsum}	go cha'i brtshon 'grus
གོ་ཆའི་ལྷ་ཡབ་དྲུག	the six armor deities	go cha'i lha yab drug
གོ་ཆའི་ལྷ་ཡུམ་དྲུག	the six armor goddesses	go cha'i lha yum drug
གོ་ཆོད	utility	go chod
གོ་ཆོད་པ	to be sufficient/ effective/ adequate	go chod pa
གོ་ཆོད་པའི་ཡུན་ཚད	period of validity, effective date	go chod pa'i yun tshad
གོ་ཆོད་པའི་ཡུན་ཚད་རྫོགས	period of validity/ effective date expired	go chod pa'i yun tshad rdzogs
གོ་ཆོད་པར་ཤོག	may / let it take the place of	go chod par shog
གོ་ཆོད་པོ	helpful, capable [of doing what needs to be done]	go chod po
གོ་འཇོ	a district in Eastern Tibet	go 'jo
གོ་བརྗེས	go sa'am, gnas spos pa,...'Dod mos kyis las gnas go brjes brgyab pa,...Rta dang g.yag lug go brjes brgyab pa	go brjes
གོ་བརྗེས་སྟབས	absorbed in one's own thoughts	go brjes stabs
གོ་ཉམས	1) experience of the idea / theory / intellectual grasp, experience of understanding. 2) intellectual understanding and practical experience	go nyams
གོ་སྙོད	cumin seed med. herb	go snyod
གོ་སྙོད་ཕྱེ་མ	anise seed powder	go snyod phye ma
གོ་ཏ་མ	family in ancient india, name of buddha	go ta ma
གོ་ཏམ	Gautama	go tam
གོ་ཏྲ	Sanskrit for {rigs} family, line, etc	go tra
གོ་རྟོག	Syn {go rtogs}	go rtog
གོ་རྟོགས	1) consciousness, awareness. 2) theoretical knowledge, understanding, comprehension	go rtogs
གོ་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་ཚད	level of comprehension, ability to understand	go rtogs kyi tshad
གོ་རྟོགས་གང་བདེར་བྲིས	written to be as easily understood as possible	go rtogs gang bder bris
གོ་རྟོགས་མཐོ་བ	high consciousness/ level of understand{'byor med pa - not wealthy, prole	go rtogs mtho ba
གོ་རྟོགས་བདེ་པོ	easy to understand	go rtogs bde po
གོ་རྟོགས་སད་པ	to be / become aware of	go rtogs sad pa
གོ་སྟོབས	comprehension, ability to understand	go stobs
གོ་བསྟུན	in accordance/ consultation w	go bstun
གོ་ཐང	bed spyod 'pher ba, ...Rta shed bzang, mi go thang	go thang
གོ་ཐལ	vulture shit, ash	go thal
གོ་ཐལ་གྱི་མདོག	ashen	go thal gyi mdog
གོ་ཐལ་མདོག	ash-colored, light grey	go thal mdog
གོ་ཐོབ	official rank/ position	go thob
གོ་ཐོས	1) to hear and understand, learn. 2) be told, hear of	go thos
གོ་ཐོས་ལྟར	according to the news/ information	go thos ltar
གོ་ཐོས་བྱུང་བ	heard	go thos byung ba
གོ་ཐོས་ལ	be told, hear of	go thos la
གོ་མཐའ་ཡས	limitless, doors	go mtha' yas
གོ་འཐུན	[arch] 1) gang mos; 2) variety; 3) gather[ing] collect[ion]	go 'thun
གO་ད་ནི་ཡ	One of the four continents	gO da ni ya
གོ་དམ་བ	a drug	go dam ba
གོ་དུབ་བ	a medicine	go dub ba
གོ་དུམ་པ	a medicine	go dum pa
གོ་དོན	essential meaning to be understood	go don
གོ་དོན་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	broad meaning/ idea/ purport/ sense	go don rgya che ba
གོ་དོན་གཉིས་ཅན	equivocal	go don gnyis can
གོ་དོན་རྟོགས་ཚུལ	way of understanding the meaning of what is heard	go don rtogs tshul
གོ་དོན་ཐག་གཅིག་ཏུ་འོང	converge on one point	go don thag gcig tu 'ong
གོ་དོན་ནོར་བ	misleading	go don nor ba
གོ་དོན་ཕྱོགས་ཙམ་པ	restricted/ specific sense/ meaning	go don phyogs tsam pa
གོ་དོན་མེད་པའི་སྐད་སྒྲ	gibberish	go don med pa'i skad sgra
གོ་དོན་ཡོད་པ	sensible	go don yod pa
གོ་དོན་ལོག་སྒྱུར་བྱེད་པ	misinterpret	go don log sgyur byed pa
གོ་དོན་གསལ་བ	define	go don gsal ba
གོ་དོར	tender growth of fresh horn in rhino stag or antelope	go dor
གོ་བདེ	easy to understand/ read, intelligible	go bde
གོ་བདེ་པོ	lucid	go bde po
གོ་བདེ་བ	simple, easy, that which is easily understood	go bde ba
གོ་བདེ་བ་ཡོང	it will be easy to understand	go bde ba yong
གོ་བདེ་བར	for the sake of convenience/ ease in comprehension	go bde bar
གོ་བདེ་བར་བརྗོད་ན	to rephrase simply	go bde bar brjod na
གོ་འདུག	business	go 'dug
གོ་འདུན	several kinds, diverse, various	go 'dun
གོ་འདྲིས་ཁྱེར་བ	be friendly, intimate	go 'dris khyer ba
གོ་ལྡོག	1) opposite, contrary, reverse, counter. 2) to reverse [positions]	go ldog
གོ་ལྡོག་ཏུ	in reverse order	go ldog tu
གོ་ལྡོག་པ	1) transform; 2) wrong meaning/ idea	go ldog pa
གོ་ལྡོག་པའི་བསྡུར་ཚད	inverse proportion	go ldog pa'i bsdur tshad
གོ་ལྡོག་པའི་ནུས་པ	counter-force 398	go ldog pa'i nus pa
གོ་ལྡོག་པའི་བྱེད་སྟངས	being contrary to	go ldog pa'i byed stangs
གོ་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	consult, discuss, talk over	go sdur byed pa
གོ་བརྡ	* notification, communication, warning	go brda
གོ་བརྡ་སྤྲད་པ	notified, communicated, warned	go brda sprad pa
གོ་བརྡ་སྤྲོད་པ	notify, communicate, warn	go brda sprod pa
གོ་བརྡ་འཕྲོད	be able to communicate	go brda 'phrod
གོ་བརྡའ་མི་འཕྲོད་པ	unable to comprehend	go brda' mi 'phrod pa
གོ་བསྡུར	consultation, discussion	go bsdur
གོ་བསྡུར་བྱ	discuss	go bsdur bya
གོ་བསྡུར་བྱེད	converse, discuss, consult	go bsdur byed
གོ་ན་ཉིད་ལས་མ་འདས་པ	?	go na nyid las ma 'das pa
གོ་ནས	according to, in proportion to	go nas
གོ་ནས་སྤར	promote	go nas spar
གོ་ནས་འབེབས	demote, fire, dismiss from office, degrade	go nas 'bebs
གོ་ནོར	1) misunderstanding, error in understanding; 2) out of order	go nor
གོ་ནོར་ཐེབས	make an error in understanding the meaning, misunderstand, hear wrong	go nor thebs
གོ་ནོར་ཐེབས་པ	make an error in understanding the meaning, misunderstand, hear wrong	go nor thebs pa
གོ་གནས	position, rank, status. Syn {go sa'i gnas stangs}	go gnas
གོ་གནས་བསྐོ	hiring, promoting, appointing to office/ job	go gnas bsko
གོ་གནས་བསྐོ་འཐེན	hiring and firing, promoting and demoting, appointing and dismissing	go gnas bsko 'then
གོ་གནས་གཅིག་པ	coordinate	go gnas gcig pa
གོ་གནས་འཐེན	firing, demoting, dismissing from office	go gnas 'then
གོ་གནས་ནས་འབུད་པ	dethrone	go gnas nas 'bud pa
གོ་གནས་སྤང་བ	abdicate	go gnas spang ba
གོ་གནས་སྤར་བ	promote	go gnas spar ba
གོ་གནས་ཕབ	demoted, fired, dismissed from office, degraded	go gnas phab
གོ་གནས་ཕབ་པ	demoted, fired, dismissed from office, degraded	go gnas phab pa
གོ་གནས་འཕན	promotion	go gnas 'phan
གོ་གནས་འཕར	be promoted	go gnas 'phar
གོ་གནས་འཕར་མགྱོགས	quick promotion, rapid advance	go gnas 'phar mgyogs
གོ་གནས་འབུད་པ	depose	go gnas 'bud pa
གོ་གནས་འབེབ་པ	to abase	go gnas 'beb pa
གོ་གནས་དམའ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	degrade	go gnas dma' ru gtong ba
གོ་གནས་བཤོལ་བ	abdicate	go gnas bshol ba
གོ་སྣང	[apparent] way of hearing	go snang
གོ་པོ	a kind of vulture	go po
གོ་འཕང	state/ level; status/ rank; isc. majesty	go 'phang
གོ་འཕང་མཆོག་ཏུ	at the supreme level	go 'phang mchog tu
གོ་འཕང་མཐོན་པོ	high level	go 'phang mthon po
གོ་འཕང་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassed stage	go 'phang bla na med pa
གོ་འཕང་བླ་མེད	unsurpassed stage	go 'phang bla med
གོ་འཕང་མྱུར་ཐོབ	quickly / swiftly attain the state of ...	go 'phang myur thob
གོ་འཕང་དམའ་བ	low position/ level	go 'phang dma' ba
གོ་འཕེར	1) helpful, beneficial; 2) [cap]able; 3) capable [of doing what needs to be done], able, handy effective, beneficial, efficacious, useful, be of use, effective, suffice as, serve the function of, s...	go 'pher
གོ་འཕོ་པའི་རྟགས	signs of transformation	go 'pho pa'i rtags
གོ་འཕོ་བ	transformation	go 'pho ba
གོ་འཕོས་པ	be transformed into	go 'phos pa
གོ་བ	x {mi go bar} does not notice	go ba
གོ་བ་སྐམ་པོ	dry understanding, dry theory	go ba skam po
གོ་བ་སྐོན་པ	persuade, convince	go ba skon pa
གོ་བ་བསྐོན	making understand, advising, persuading, convincing	go ba bskon
གོ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to encourage understanding	go ba bskyed pa
གོ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་ས་ནས་བྱས་ན	From a very wide point of view...; lit. "in terms of a very broad understanding." [mss]	go ba rgya che sa nas byas na
གོ་བ་ཅན	learned, well-versed	go ba can
གོ་བ་ཆགས་པ	to have understanding of	go ba chags pa
གོ་བ་རྙེད	understand, gain a comprehension of, comprehend	go ba rnyed
གོ་བ་རྙེད་པ	vi. to understand, gain a comprehension of 399	go ba rnyed pa
གོ་བ་སྟོན་པ	decode	go ba ston pa
གོ་བ་བརྟན་པོ	stable understanding	go ba brtan po
གོ་བ་མྱོང་བ་རྟོགས་པ	understanding, experience, realization	go ba myong ba rtogs pa
གོ་བ་ཙམ	discursiveness, only theory, mere theory	go ba tsam
གོ་བ་ལ	As I understand it	go ba la
གོ་བ་ལེན	understand, gain a comprehension of, comprehend	go ba len
གོ་བ་ལེན་ནུས	power of understanding/ comprehension	go ba len nus
གོ་བ་ལེན་པ	Syn {go ba rnyed pa}	go ba len pa
གོ་བ་ལོག་སྒྲུབ	misunderstanding, misconception, misinterpretation, wrongly understand	go ba log sgrub
གོ་བ་ལོག་པ	wrong understanding	go ba log pa
གོ་བབ	right, privileges, entitlements in accord w 1's rank	go bab
གོ་བབ་ཀྱི་ཐོབ་ཐང	position, rank, status	go bab kyi thob thang
གོ་བའི་མཇལ་བ	understand, comprehend	go ba'i mjal ba
གོ་བའི་ཚིག	words to comprehend	go ba'i tshig
གོ་བའི་ཡུལ་དུ་ལུས	left in the realm of theory	go ba'i yul du lus
གོ་བར་འགྱུར	come to understand	go bar 'gyur
གོ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	come to understand	go bar 'gyur ba
གོ་བར་རྙེད	understand, comprehend	go bar rnyed
གོ་བར་རྙེད་པ	understand, comprehend	go bar rnyed pa
གོ་བར་བྱ	understand!	go bar bya
གོ་བར་བྱ་བ	make intelligible, elucidate	go bar bya ba
གོ་བར་བྱའོ	one should understand	go bar bya'o
གོ་བར་བྱེད	understand, produce understanding	go bar byed
གོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to understand; make understood	go bar byed pa
གོ་བར་བྱེད་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	acting cause for comprehending	go bar byed pa'i byed rgyu
གོ་བར་མ་སྨྲས་པ	did not clearly tell	go bar ma smras pa
གོ་བར་མཛད་པ	causing comprehension	go bar mdzad pa
གོ་བར་ཟད	exhausting understanding, understood	go bar zad
གོ་བར་ཟད་དོ	there's nothing else to be said, it's quite understandable	go bar zad do
གོ་བར་ཟད་པ	exhausted understanding, understood	go bar zad pa
གོ་བར་ལེན	understand, comprehend	go bar len
གོ་བར་ལེན་ནུས	power of understanding/ comprehension	go bar len nus
གོ་བར་ལེན་པ	understand, gain a comprehension of, comprehend	go bar len pa
གོ་བར་ལོན	understand, comprehend	go bar lon
གོ་བར་ལོན་ནུས	power of understanding/ comprehension	go bar lon nus
གོ་བར་ལོན་པ	understand, gain a comprehension of, comprehend	go bar lon pa
གོ་བར་སླ	easy to understand	go bar sla
གོ་བར་སླ་བ	easy to understand	go bar sla ba
གོ་བིན་ད	[Skt] Vishnu	go bin da
གོ་བེ་ལ	(M former mgon chos rgyal 'phags pa dang sku thog gcig pa'i Yuan dynasty king = se chen rgyal po	go be la
གོ་བོ	eagle, vulture	go bo
གོ་བོ་གླག་གག	pho drod che ba'i large bird	go bo glag gag
གོ་བོ་སྟེར་ནུས་པ	would be able to give	go bo ster nus pa
གོ་བྱ	object of knowledge/ understanding, topic to be comprehended	go bya
གོ་བྱུང	this I've come to understand	go byung
གོ་བྱེ	{go bye med. tree	go bye
གོ་བྱེད	quality of the air	go byed
གོ་བློ	prajna, understanding, intellect	go blo
གོ་འབྱེད	opening up, living space, place for functioning, separates, to open a passage, to open a passage, function to provide a place, spacious	go 'byed
གོ་འབྱེད་ཅན	space	go 'byed can
གོ་འབྱེད་གནས	provides basic dimension	go 'byed gnas
གོ་འབྱེད་པ	openness; to be open. 1) separate. 2) spacious, accommodating, open. 3) to accommodate, make space. Syn {go ma 'gags pa}	go 'byed pa
གོ་མ	ignorance	go ma
གོ་མ་བཀག་ཙམ	mere openness	go ma bkag tsam
གོ་མ་འགག་པ	unobstructed, unceasing avenue; to provide an unceasing avenue for. unobstructed, openness	go ma 'gag pa
གོ་མ་འགགས་པ	unobstructed openness	go ma 'gags pa
གོ་མ་ཆོད	useless, ineffective, incapable	go ma chod
གོ་མ་ཆོད་བྱེད	make useless/ ineffective/ incapable	go ma chod byed
གོ་མ་ལོག་པ	correct, unperverted, undistorted	go ma log pa
གོ་མག	mag pa	go mag
གོ་མང་ཆོད་པ	universal go mang chod pa'i dsar byed 'khor lo universal sanding/ grinding machine universal	go mang chod pa
གོ་མི	[Skt] btsun pa	go mi
གོ་མི་དགེ་བསྙེན	as long as one lives keep the genyen vows [4 pecepts and yan lag bzhi &, btsun pa'i cha lugs]	go mi dge bsnyen
གོ་མི་ཆོད	useless, ineffective, incapable, unable to perform the function of	go mi chod
གོ་མི་ཆོད་པ	useless, ineffective, incapable, unable to perform the function of	go mi chod pa
གོ་མི་ཆོད་པ་བྱེད	make useless/ ineffective/ incapable/ unable to perform the function of	go mi chod pa byed
གོ་མི་ཆོད་པར་འགྱུར	become useless/ ineffective/ incapable/ unable to perform the function of, fail	go mi chod par 'gyur
གོ་མི་ཆོད་བྱེད	make useless/ ineffective/ incapable/ unable to perform the function of	go mi chod byed
གོ་མིང	title 400	go ming
གོ་མིན་ཏང	Kuomintang	go min tang
གོ་མཱིའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	Chandragomin	go mI'i dge bsnyen
གོ་མེད	1) meaningless, useless; 2) w/o understanding, feeling, perception; 3) unarmed	go med
གོ་མེད་ཚོར་མེད	w/o any perception/ feeling of good and bad, joy and sorrow	go med tshor med
གོ་མྱོང	possibility of experience by vividly imagining	go myong
གོ་མྱོང་རྟོགས	experience and realization	go myong rtogs
གོ་མྱོང་རྟོགས་གསུམ	theory, experience and realization. Understanding, experience, and realization. Intellectual comprehension, practical experience, and unchanging realization. Abbr. of {go ba nyams myong rtogs pa}	go myong rtogs gsum
གོ་རྩེད	in lha ldan smon lam chen mo, by gzim chung dmag mi guns, arrows, knives, spears, phub sogs having brought do exercises of skill w them	go rtsed
གོ་ཚམས་མེད་པ	on all sides	go tshams med pa
གོ་ཚོད	CM: shes pa'i tshod yin nam shes yod shag,"level of knowledge/education or the likelihood that [someone] else understands/knows". E.g.'s thengs mang po bslabs tshar/ don ha go tshod yin/ [mss]	go tshod
གོ་མཚམས	spaces in between	go mtshams
གོ་མཚམས་མེད	dense, close together	go mtshams med
གོ་མཚམས་མེད་པ	continuous	go mtshams med pa
གོ་མཚོན	indication, weapon, arms	go mtshon
གོ་མཚོན་ལྡན	armed	go mtshon ldan
གོ་མཚོན་ལྡན་པ	armed	go mtshon ldan pa
གོ་མཚོན་སྣ་དགུ	nine weapons	go mtshon sna dgu
གོ་མཚོན་དཔུང་དམག	armed forces, troops	go mtshon dpung dmag
གོ་མཚོན་ལུས་ལ་འདོགས་པ	buckle on the armor	go mtshon lus la 'dogs pa
གོ་མཛོད	arsenal, armory	go mdzod
གོ་འཛོལ་ཐེབས	misunderstand, hear wrong	go 'dzol thebs
གོ་ཞུབ	[arch] khrab	go zhub
གོ་ཟུ	black silk dress	go zu
གོ་ཟློག	reverse [order]	go zlog
གོ་ཟློག་པ	to reverse/ turn back (on itself); to negate; isc. to revert	go zlog pa
གོ་བཟློག	1) Syn {go ldog}, reverse order, misunderstanding. 2) to understand backwards (the opposite of what one should/is correct)	go bzlog
གོ་བཟློག་འགྲོ	become reversed [order], become misunderstood/ the opposite, contrary	go bzlog 'gro
གོ་བཟློག་པ	to reverse/ turn back (on itself); to negate; isc. to revert	go bzlog pa
གོ་ལའ	[Skt] ldong ros, med.	go l'a
གོ་ཡུ	betel nut	go yu
གོ་ཡུལ	theory, dogmatism, realm of theory, theoretical knowledge; theory, intellectual understanding; the known world	go yul
གོ་ཡུལ་དུ	I believe [...]	go yul du
གོ་ཡོག	go g.yog go g.yog - thab me dkrug byed kyi shing, .Tshan dan gyis go g.yog dang, gos chen gyis thab phyis	go yog
གོ་ར	trap, snare	go ra
གོ་ར་ལ་ཆུད་པ	caught in a trap	go ra la chud pa
གོ་རྭ	courtyard	go rwa
གོ་རམ་པ་བསོད་ནམས་སེང་གེ	14291489 Sakya philosopher [ggd] go rams pa bsod nams seng ge Gorampa Sönam Senge, Sakya master: 1429-1489	go ram pa bsod nams seng ge
གO་རི	tantric goddess	gO ri
གO་རི་བརྒྱད	Eight Gauris	gO ri brgyad
གོ་རིག	power of understanding	go rig
གོ་རིག་ཅན	person w clear understanding	go rig can
གོ་རིམ	(in) proper order; structure	go rim
ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏེན་ནོན	concurrent formations; in Abhidharma: Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {cig car mi 'byung ba'i rgyu 'bras re re nas snga ma'i rjes su phyi ma 'byung ba'o}	one of the ten non
གོ་རིམ་གྱིས་འབྲེལ	sequential relationship	go rim gyis 'brel
གོ་རིམ་སྒྲིག	put in order, rank, stratify, arrange	go rim sgrig
གོ་རིམ་ངེས་ཅན	having true/ fixed order	go rim nges can
གོ་རིམ་ངེས་པ	fixed order, set sequence	go rim nges pa
གོ་རིམ་ལྟར	orderly	go rim ltar
གོ་རིམ་ལྡན་པ	systematic, orderly	go rim ldan pa
གོ་རིམ་མ་ངེས་པ	having an uncertain order, not having true/ a fixed order	go rim ma nges pa
གོ་རིམ་མེད	there is no fixed order	go rim med
གོ་རིམ་མེད་པ	disorder	go rim med pa
གོ་རིམ་བཞིན	by order, gradual, systematically	go rim bzhin
གོ་རིམ་བཞིན་དུ	in due order respectively	go rim bzhin du
གོ་རིམ་ཡོད་པ	systematic, orderly	go rim yod pa
གོ་རིམས	misspelling for {go rim} (in) proper order; structure	go rims
གོ་རེ	steamed bread, perfected, finished, completed	go re
གོ་རེ་ལོང	page	go re long
གོ་རེ་སེར་པོ་གྱོད་དོ་ཆག་པོ	crumpled pieces of paper	go re ser po gyod do chag po
གོ་ལ	Gola; (so chang). A drink of sugar cane or grain from Nepal	go la
གོ་ལག	weapon, arms	go lag
གོ་ལག་ཆ	weapon, arms	go lag cha
གོ་ལའི་རི་མོ	circle, circular	go la'i ri mo
གོ་ལའི་རླུང	wind which keeps sun and stars moving in space	go la'i rlung
གོ་ལའི་རླུང་གི་གཞི	the base of the universal wind, wind base of the gola [wind mandala that moves the stars etc in buddhist cosmology]	go la'i rlung gi gzhi
གོ་ལུགས	way to / how to understand, manner of comprehending	go lugs
གོ་ལེ	slowly	go le
གོ་ལེབ	horn trap's lhu lag gras shig	go leb
གོ་ལོ	merely hearing	go lo
གོ་ལོ་ཐོས་ལོ	1) go tsam shes tsham,...Mi des bshad tshad go lo thos lo kho na red,..; 2) told w/o clear ascertainment go lo dang thos blo tsam du bzhag pa have mere intellectual understanding and leave it at that	go lo thos lo
གོ་ལོ་དང་ཐོས་ལོ	merely understood, merely heard	go lo dang thos lo
གོ་ལོ་གདེང་ལྡན	capable confident person	go lo gdeng ldan
གོ་ལོག	1) wrong, false, fake; 2) wrong understanding, misunderstanding'; 3) understanding exchanging before and	go log
གོ་ལོག་པ	1) go rim/ go sa log pa ste, gong 'og gam steng 'og ga phyi log par gyur pa,...Dpon g.yog go log pa..; 2) Mag par phyin nas rang gi pha ma'i nang la gtan du log mkhan skyes pa (/ misunderstanding, ...	go log pa
གོ་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	act in distorted ways	go log byed pa
གོ་ལོག་མ	married, woman returning to her parents	go log ma
གོ་ལོད	go brda 'phrod lod dam go bde lod,...Kho'i skad cha de khyod kyi rna bar go lod ji 'dra 'dug	go lod
གོ་ལོབ	[arch] 1) quick; 2) deception	go lob
གོ་ཤེས	realization/ perception and knowledge	go shes
གོ་བཤེར	armor, helmet, shield etc to guard from weapons la blta bsher byas pa [Dmag dpon gyis dmag gi go bsher byas te song]	go bsher
གོ་ས	status [thd]	go sa
གོ་ས་ཆེན་པོ་འགྲིམ་པ	make one's way to a high rank	go sa chen po 'grim pa
གོ་ས་མཐོ་བ	high ranking, lofty	go sa mtho ba
གོ་ས་མཐོ་རུ་བཏང་བ	bestow high rank	go sa mtho ru btang ba
གོ་ས་སྤར	promote	go sa spar
གོ་ས་སྤར་བ	advance one's rank	go sa spar ba
གོ་ས་འཕར་བ	be officially promoted	go sa 'phar ba
གོ་ས་དམའ་བ	subordinate	go sa dma' ba
གོ་ས་ལོག་པ	degraded, demotion	go sa log pa
གོ་སའི་རིམ་པ	degree in rank or dignity	go sa'i rim pa
གོ་སླ	intelligible, easy to understand	go sla
གོ་སླ་དོན་གསལ	intelligible, easy to understand	go sla don gsal
གོ་སླ་པོ་བཟོ	simplify	go sla po bzo
གོ་སླ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	decipher	go sla po bzo ba
གོ་སླ་བ	comprehensible, understandable, intelligible	go sla ba
གོ་སླ་བར	intelligible/ easy to understand way	go sla bar
གོ་སླར་བཤད	to make the meaning more clear	go slar bshad
གོ་གསེད	clearly explain the meaning	go gsed
གོ་ཧུའི་གྲོས་ཚོགས	assembly, congress, parliament	go hu'i gros tshogs
གོ་ཧུའི་རྒྱལ་ཚོགས	national assembly	go hu'i rgyal tshogs
གོ་ཧྲག	good troops w arms and horses	go hrag
གོག	a lump, to crawl, creep	gog
གོག་སྐྱོན	old and dilapidated	gog skyon
གོག་འགྲོ	crawling, creeping	gog 'gro
གོག་རྙིང	tattered, decrepit, fallen to ruins, dilapidated, ruinous	gog rnying
གོག་རྙིང་ཧྲུལ་སྐྱོན	old and dilapidated	gog rnying hrul skyon
གོག་ཐལ	fire ashes, ashes, burnt fragments	gog thal
གོག་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, 1) crawl; 2) crumble/ scale/ fall off [p 'gog pa]	gog pa
གོག་པོ	dilapidated, damaged, in ruins, worn out, old, beat-up	gog po
གོག་པོ་གུག	crawl	gog po gug
གོག་པོ་འགོག	to start to crawl around	gog po 'gog
གོག་ཚེ	snare/ trap for wild animals	gog tshe
གོག་ཧྲུལ	old and tattered/ dilapidated, ramshackle	gog hrul
གོགས	(not in DAS)	gogs
གོང	earlier, top, up, above, price, value, honorable, gully, price, "before" clause connective, quoted before, before, globe	gong
གོང་དཀར	1) bird bigger than a gong mo, living in rdza ri high places; 2) gong dkar rdzong [in yar klungs gtzang po'i rked rgyud &, yar N of 'brog g.yu mtso, ruled from rva smad]	gong dkar
གོང་དཀར་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	origin of Kyenri Art	gong dkar rdo rje gdan
གོང་དཀར་རྫོང	fort & town in tsangpo	gong dkar rdzong
གོང་དཀྲིས	necktie	gong dkris
གོང་བཀུར	1) respect, veneration, esteem, high regard, revere; 2) support, backing	gong bkur
གོང་བཀུར་བྱེད	respect, veneration, esteem, have high regard, revere	gong bkur byed
གོང་བཀུར་ཞུ	respect, veneration, esteem, have high regard, revere	gong bkur zhu
གོང་བཀོད་ལྟར	as written/ stated above	gong bkod ltar
གོང་སྐུ་གཞོགས	title of honor, his highness, his excellence	gong sku gzhogs
གོང་སྐྱེས	previously arisen /occurring	gong skyes
གོང་ཁེ་པོ	cheap, inexpensive, lowpriced	gong khe po
གོང་ཁྲི་བདལ་འོད	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu	gong khri bdal 'od
གོང་ཁྲི་བདལ་འོད་འབར	bon saint in nw quarter	gong khri bdal 'od 'bar
གོང་འཁོད	explained above	gong 'khod
གོང་འཁོད་ལྟར	as stated above	gong 'khod ltar
གོང་འཁོད་བཞིན	as stated above	gong 'khod bzhin
གོང་གི	the former, the above former	gong gi
གོང་གི་བཀའ་ཕེབས	instructions from higher authorities, those arrived or received earlier	gong gi bka' phebs
གོང་གི་དེ་རྣམས	those preceding	gong gi de rnams
གོང་གི་ཞེས་སྨོས་པ	the above statement that	gong gi zhes smos pa
གོང་གི་ལུང	the previously mentioned works	gong gi lung
གོང་གི་བཤད་པ་ལྟར	as has been stated above	gong gi bshad pa ltar
གོང་གུ་རྨེ་རུ	Lhasa jo bo hairs rdo ring du gsal ba'i skabs de'i the'u cu'i phyogs kyi yul zhig gi ming	gong gu rme ru
གོང་གོང	before what was before	gong gong
གོང་གོང་ལྟར	as mentioned above, as earlier in the text	gong gong ltar
གོང་གྲས	upper class	gong gras
གོང་འགྲིག	previously resolved	gong 'grig
གོང་འགྲིགས	be settled/ agreed on a price	gong 'grigs
གོང་འགྲིགས་པ	to agree on a price	gong 'grigs pa
གོང་རྒྱག	1) name/ fix a price; 2) regard highly	gong rgyag
གོང་རྒྱག་པ	1) name/ fix a price; 2) regard highly [Sha shi sha la mi lta yang, sder ma gser sder la gong brgyab]	gong rgyag pa
གོང་རྒྱན	collar's external ornament	gong rgyan
གོང་རྒྱབ	1) name/ fix a price; 2) regard highly	gong rgyab
གོང་སྒྲིག	bargain for items for sale	gong sgrig
གོང་སྒྲིག་པ	fix a price bargain	gong sgrig pa
གོང་བརྒྱབ་པ	fix a price	gong brgyab pa
གོང་བསྒྲིགས་པ	to bargain	gong bsgrigs pa
གོང་གཅོག	reduce the price gong gcog}-{gong bu - 1) lump, sphere, heap, bundle, lump, ball, mass, clot [syn: gor mdang, gor gzugs, rdog po]; 2) collected particles [depending of the substances of the desire ...	gong gcog
གོང་བཅག་པ	price	gong bcag pa
གོང་ཆུང་ཆུང	valueless	gong chung chung
གོང་ཆེན	expensive	gong chen
གོང་ཆེན་པོ	expensive	gong chen po
གོང་ཆེན་བོ	expensive	gong chen bo
གོང་འཆག	decline/ decrease in price	gong 'chag
གོང་གཏམ་པ	bargaining over price	gong gtam pa
གོང་རྟགས	1) price tag; 2) collar insignia of rank etc.	gong rtags
གོང་ལྟར	as already explained previously, follow what was said before, as above, as mentioned above	gong ltar
གོང་བསྟན	above-mentioned, explained above	gong bstan
གོང་ཐག	1) price gi chod mtshams; 2) saddle's gong thag	gong thag
གོང་ཐག་གཅོད	fix a price	gong thag gcod
གོང་ཐག་བཅད་པ	determine the price	gong thag bcad pa
གོང་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	previously resolved	gong thag chod pa
གོང་ཐང	price	gong thang
གོང་ཐང་བ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	gong thang ba
གོང་ཐིག	sham bu [door/window ornament] gong ba'i steng gi {thig le lnga} assembly	gong thig
གོང་མཐུན	1) in accord w the previous; 2) Rin gong 'tshams pa	gong mthun
གོང་མཐོང་འགྲོ	go up and up, go higher and higher, get better and better	gong mthong 'gro
གོང་མཐོར་གཏོང	to make higher / better, to increase, to improve	gong mthor gtong
གོང་མཐོར་སྤེལ	make higher, make better, increase, improve, advance	gong mthor spel
གོང་འཐུས	1) gong gis go chod pa; 2) Sngar gro mo ba'i mi ser gyi 'go byed de, rdzong gzhis gzhan dag gi tsho dpon dang 'dra ba zhig	gong 'thus
གོང་དང་མཐུན	similar to the above	gong dang mthun
གོང་དང་འདྲ	as above, abovementioned	gong dang 'dra
གོང་དང་འདྲ་བར	similar to the above, the same as before	gong dang 'dra bar
གོང་དུ	above, earlier, before, higher	gong du
གོང་དུ་བཀུར	respect, venerate, hold in high esteem, consider above oneself	gong du bkur
གོང་དུ་བཀུར་བ	respect, venerate, hold in high esteem, consider above oneself	gong du bkur ba
གོང་དུ་ཁུར་བ	respect, venerate, hold in high esteem, consider above oneself	gong du khur ba
གོང་དུ་འཁྱུད	to firmly encircle	gong du 'khyud
གོང་དུ་འགྲོ	go up and up/ higher and higher, get better and better gong du 'gro ba dang ldan pa'i phyir since it existed before/ has a predecessor	gong du 'gro
གོང་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	said before	gong du brjod pa
གོང་དུ་བརྗོད་ཟིན	concluded above, talked about before	gong du brjod zin
གོང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	explained above	gong du bstan pa
གོང་དུ་བསྟན་པ་ལྟར	above-mentioned, as explained above	gong du bstan pa ltar
གོང་དུ་སྤེལ	further increase	gong du spel
གོང་དུ་སྤེལ་བ	develop, increase further, promote, to improve, raise	gong du spel ba
གོང་དུ་ཕུད	placed in a position of dignity, kept on the top	gong du phud
གོང་དུ་ཕུད་པ	lift up, ride up	gong du phud pa
གོང་དུ་འཕགས་པ	taken upwards, gone upwards, improved, progressed	gong du 'phags pa
གོང་དུ་འཕེལ	develop, promote, [cause to] progress further, go higher and higher, get better and batter	gong du 'phel
གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་བ	to be developed, promoted, caused to progress further	gong du 'phel ba
གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་བའི་ཉམས་སྣང	the increased experience. Syn {nyams snang gong 'phel} One of {snang ba bzhi}	gong du 'phel ba'i nyams snang
གོང་དུ་འཕོ་བ	transmigrating higher [among the gzugs su nye bar 'gro ba gsum, in the form realm 1st skyes pa'i rten la until nirvana is attained gong du 'phos te 'da' ba'o, within it are those having Akanishta '...	gong du 'pho ba
གོང་དུ་འཕྱུར	rise [river]	gong du 'phyur
གོང་དུ་སྦྱོར་བ	ready	gong du sbyor ba
གོང་དུ་མོས་པ	the above mentioned	gong du mos pa
གོང་དུ་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to develop, raise higher, bring to a higher level of maturity	gong du smin par byed pa
གོང་དུ་སྨོས་པ	above-mentioned	gong du smos pa
གོང་དུ་སྨོས་པ་ལྟར	as mentioned earlier / above	gong du smos pa ltar
གོང་དུ་ཞུ	SA gong zhu	gong du zhu
གོང་དུ་ཡོད་པ	existing above	gong du yod pa
གོང་དུ་བཤད་པ	explained above	gong du bshad pa
གོང་དུ་བཤད་པ་ལྟར་གྱི	in accordance	gong du bshad pa ltar gyi
ཝིཐ་ཐེ་ཨབོབེ༹	mentioned	with the above
གོང་དུ་བཤད་པ་ལྟར་རོ	as explained earlier / above	gong du bshad pa ltar ro
གོང་དུ་བཤད་ཟིན་ཏོ	which has already been explained	gong du bshad zin to
གོང་དུ་སོང་ཞིང	already covered	gong du song zhing
གོང་དུ་གསལ་བར	set forth above, elucidated above	gong du gsal bar
གོང་ན	on, up, upon, over, above, on it	gong na
གོང་ན་མེད	{bla ma sgom pa'i gong na med} not one of them surpasses meditation on the teacher	gong na med
གོང་ན་མེད་པ	the best, unequalled, unsurpassed, unexcelled, highest, unprecedented, never having occurred before	gong na med pa
གོང་ནས	from above/ before	gong nas
གོང་ནས་གོང་མཐོར	higher and higher, better and better	gong nas gong mthor
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ	more and more, higher and higher, utterly, ascending from level to level	gong nas gong du
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་བསྐྱོད	increase more and more, progress higher and higher, get better and batter	gong nas gong du bskyod
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་འགྲོ	increase more and more, progress higher and higher, get better and batter	gong nas gong du 'gro
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་གཏོང	improve, raise, develop, make better, enhance further, progress	gong nas gong du gtong
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	improve, raise, develop, make better, enhance further, progress	gong nas gong du gtong ba
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་བཏང	improved, raised, developed, made better, enhanced further, progressed	gong nas gong du btang
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་བཏང་བ	improved, raised, developed, made better, enhanced further, progressed	gong nas gong du btang ba
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་སྤེལ	improve, raise, develop, make better, enhance further, progress	gong nas gong du spel
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་སྤེལ་བ	improve, raise, develop, make better, enhance further, progress	gong nas gong du spel ba
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་འཕེལ	increase more and more, progress higher and higher, get better and batter	gong nas gong du 'phel
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་བ	continually grows ever greater	gong nas gong du 'phel ba
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	increase more and more, progress higher and higher	gong nas gong du 'phel bar byed pa
གོང་ནས་ཆེས་གོང་དུ	further and further	gong nas ches gong du
གོང་ནས་འོག་ཏུ	from top to bottom, down	gong nas 'og tu
གོང་ནས་འོག་བར	from top to bottom, down	gong nas 'og bar
གོང་ནས་འོང	whence did it arise?	gong nas 'ong
གོང་པ	collar	gong pa
གོང་པོ	meeting, assembly, fame, renown, globular	gong po
གོང་དཔྱད་པ	apprize, fix a price	gong dpyad pa
གོང་སྤེལ	to develop, spread, propagate, improve, increase	gong spel
གོང་ཕུད	gong du phud pa ste, dmigs bsal btang ba,...Mi de gong du phud pa,...Ra bzi smyon pa gong du phud,...Dkon mchog gong phud	gong phud
གོང་ཕུད་པ	lift up, ride up	gong phud pa
གོང་ཕེབས	instructions from higher authorities, those arrived or received earlier	gong phebs
གོང་ཕེབས་བཞིན	as previously taught	gong phebs bzhin
གོང་འཕར	increase the price	gong 'phar
གོང་འཕེལ	increase, progress, development, advancement, improvement	gong 'phel
གོང་འཕེལ་གི་སྣང་བ	experience of increase [one of {snang ba bzhi} = {nyams snang {gong 'phel}power mkhal nad sel, so yi	gong 'phel gi snang ba
གོང་འཕེལ་འགྲོ	increase, progress, develop, advance, improve	gong 'phel 'gro
གོང་འཕེལ་གཏོང	increase, progress, develop, advance, improve	gong 'phel gtong
གོང་འཕེལ་དུ་གྱུར	to become / be increased	gong 'phel du gyur
གོང་འཕེལ་དུ་གཏོང་བ	to make / cause to progress	gong 'phel du gtong ba
གོང་འཕེལ་བློན་པོ	development minister 404	gong 'phel blon po
གོང་བ	collar [of clothing {gong gor, Wa gong stod thung gi gong ba'i mtha' lcags ornamented with flowers,...{gos gong ba med na bzo 'phro red]	gong ba
གོང་བུ	meeting, assembly, fame, renown, globular, globular mass, lump, heap, agglomeration of atoms, bundle, mass, clot, sphere	gong bu
གོང་བུ་བསྒངས	made a ball of	gong bu bsgangs
གོང་བུ་ཅན	clot, clotty, in lump, in heaps, shrub	gong bu can
གོང་བུ་ཆིག་སྒྲིག	solidified, united in/ as, unified	gong bu chig sgrig
གོང་བུ་སོ་སོ	catarrh or cold	gong bu so so
གོང་བུར	heaped, in bundles	gong bur
གོང་བུར་འགྱུར	be heaped/ collected in bundles, congeal/ be gathered/ solidify into a lump	gong bur 'gyur
གོང་བུར་བྱས	made into globular mass or lump	gong bur byas
གོང་བོ	w/o limbs and creeping on its belly	gong bo
གོང་འབབ	[total] price	gong 'bab
གོང་མ	higher/ more advanced; elder; former; master of yore/ the past	gong ma
ཐེ་ཕི༹རསཏ	named, best, imperial, emperor, superior one, emperor	the first
གོང་མ་གོང་མ་བཟང་ངོ	the first is superior [to the second] and so forth	gong ma gong ma bzang ngo
གོང་མ་ལྔ	Five Forefathers, Gongma Nga: 1) Sachen Kunga Nyingpo (sa chen kun dga' snying po): 1092-1158. 2) Sönam Tsemo (bsod nams rtse mo) :1142-1182. 3) Jetsün Drakpa Gyaltsen (rje btsun grags pa rgyal mts...	gong ma lnga
གོང་མ་ཆག་པར	without a doubt	gong ma chag par
གོང་མ་ཆེ	the most high	gong ma che
གོང་མ་ཆེ་དྲུག	six bon Lamas	gong ma che drug
གོང་མ་ཆེན་པོ	the most high	gong ma chen po
གོང་མ་ཆེན་ལུང་རྒྱལ་པོ	tibetan name of 4th manchu emperor kyunlun	gong ma chen lung rgyal po
གོང་མ་མཆོད་ཡོན	Tibetan highest object of offering, Dalai Lama and highest patron, the emperor of China	gong ma mchod yon
གོང་མ་རྣམས	the gods and superior beings	gong ma rnams
གོང་མ་ཚང	king/ emperor, retinue and dwelling place	gong ma tshang
གོང་མ་བཞིན	as before, as the above mentioned, like the aforesaid, as the previous one	gong ma bzhin
གོང་མ་འོག་མ	first & second, SA gong 'og	gong ma 'og ma
གོང་མ་སྲུང་མཁན	royalist	gong ma srung mkhan
གོང་མ་སྲེག་བྱ་སྲེག་པ་སྟེ	like the bird gong mo w bill and feet yellow	gong ma sreg bya sreg pa ste
གོང་མ་གསུམ	three superiors of katok	gong ma gsum
གོང་མའི	of the past	gong ma'i
གོང་མའི་ཁམས	the upper realms	gong ma'i khams
གོང་མའི་གོང་མ	superior's superior, more and more, more in future, best	gong ma'i gong ma
གོང་མའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	emperor's empire gong ma'i cha mthun gyi kun sbyor lnga the five aspects pertaining to the higher realms [5 kun sbyor of the form and formless realms: gzugs kyi 'dod chags, gzugs med pa'i 'dod chag...	gong ma'i rgyal khab
གོང་མའི་ཆ་མཐུན་ལྔ	the five aspects pertaining to the higher realms [5 kun sbyor of the form and formless realms: gzugs kyi 'dod chags, gzugs med pa'i 'dod chags, rgod pa, rmongs pa, nga rgyal]	gong ma'i cha mthun lnga
གོང་མའི་རྗེས་སུ་སྙེགས་པ	to fallow in the footsteps of the forefathers / lineage masters	gong ma'i rjes su snyegs pa
གོང་མའི་རྗེས་སུ་སྙོགས་པ	follow in the footsteps of the forefathers	gong ma'i rjes su snyogs pa
གོང་མའི་གནས་གཙང་ལྔ	gnas gtsang ma'i sa lnga	gong ma'i gnas gtsang lnga
གོང་མའི་སྤྱི	vertical universal [ggd]	gong ma'i spyi
གོང་མའི་ཕོ་བྲང	emperor's palace	gong ma'i pho brang
གོང་མའི་བཙུན་མོ	empress	gong ma'i btsun mo
གོང་མའི་མཛད་ཕྲིན	the deeds of the forefathers (h)	gong ma'i mdzad phrin
གོང་མའི་སྲིད་གཞུང	dynasty, kingdom	gong ma'i srid gzhung
གོང་མར་གྱུར་པ	highest	gong mar gyur pa
གོང་མེད	valueless, worthless	gong med
གོང་མོ	ptarmigan, white grouse [spang la gnas pa'i lha bird gong mo ste, w light yellow feathers, belly feathers khra bo bstar la bsgrigs pa, w red beak and legs]	gong mo
གོང་མོ་མཙོ	gong mo lake [in sna dkar rtze rdzong W of yar 'brog g.yu Lake]	gong mo mtso
གོང་མོ་མཚོ	gong mo lake	gong mo mtsho
གོང་མོ་ལ	Gongmo La, the Snow Grouse Pass	gong mo la
གོང་མོ་སྲེག	pheasant, phasianus decollatus	gong mo sreg
གོང་མོའི་གུར་ཁང་བྲག་རྩ	Gongmo Gurkhang Draktsa, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	gong mo'i gur khang brag rtsa
གོང་མོའི་ལ	Gongmo, pass, on the way to Tsari	gong mo'i la
གོང་རྨེད	saddle's gong thag and rmed thag	gong rmed
གོང་སྨན་དཀོན་ཅོག་བདེ་ལེགས	{gong sman dkon cog bde legs} [in the 8th rabjung b gtzang sa skyar, eg brang ti chos rgyal bkra shis attended many masters &, Tibetan famous medicine yig cha phal mo che la closely studied; indian...	gong sman dkon cog bde legs
གོང་སྨན་དཀོན་ཅོག་ཕན་དར	{gong sman dkon cog phan dar} [in the 9th rabjung b gtzang sa skyar, at 9'i thog rang gi mes po dkon cog bde legs sogs bsten nas medicine dpyis phyin par sbyangs, the general oral instructions of m...	gong sman dkon cog phan dar
གོང་སྨོས	above statement, what is said above	gong smos
གོང་སྨོས་ལྟར	as stated above	gong smos ltar
གོང་སྨོས་བཞིན	as mentioned before	gong smos bzhin
གོང་ཚད	price	gong tshad
གོང་ཚད་ཆུང་དུ་བཏང་བ	devalue	gong tshad chung du btang ba
གོང་ཚེས་ཉིན	the above date	gong tshes nyin
གོང་ཚོད	appraisal, estimate of value	gong tshod
གོང་ཚོད་བརྒྱབ་པ	to appraise, judge the value/ quality	gong tshod brgyab pa
གོང་ཚོད་བྱེད	appraise, estimate	gong tshod byed
གོང་མཚུངས	as above	gong mtshungs
གོང་མཛུག	index finger	gong mdzug
གོང་མཛུབ	index finger	gong mdzub
གོང་འཛོམ་པ་ལས	because of a connection	gong 'dzom pa las
གོང་ཞུ	as stated or prayed above, paper lantern	gong zhu
གོང་ཞུ་བྱེད	appeal to a superior	gong zhu byed
གོང་ཞུས་ལྟར	as said before	gong zhus ltar
གོང་བཞད	stated above	gong bzhad
གོང་བཞིན	as above/ before	gong bzhin
གོང་བཞིན་བྱ	continue as before	gong bzhin bya
གོང་འོག	high & low, earlier & later upper and lower, context, first & second	gong 'og
གོང་འོག་འཆོལ་བ	confusing above and below/ earlier and later	gong 'og 'chol ba
གོང་འོག་ནོར	out of order; x {gong 'og nor nas 'dzin pa} remembering them out of order	gong 'og nor
གོང་ཡོང་རྩིས་ཐོ	account book, ledger	gong yong rtsis tho
གོང་ཡོང་ཞིབ་རྩིས	audit	gong yong zhib rtsis
གོང་ཡོང་ཞིབ་རྩིས་བྱེད	audit	gong yong zhib rtsis byed
གོང་རིམ	superior/ upper [level], higher authorities, preceding stage[s]	gong rim
གོང་རིམ་གྲལ་རིམ	upper classes	gong rim gral rim
གོང་རིམ་དུ	before, earlier, prior	gong rim du
གོང་རིམ་མི་སྣ	people of the upper classes	gong rim mi sna
གོང་རིམ་ལ	before, earlier, prior	gong rim la
གོང་རོལ	1) above. 2) long time ago	gong rol
གོང་རོལ་ཏུ	in the past, before	gong rol tu
གོང་རོལ་དུ	before, earlier, prior to	gong rol du
གོང་ལ	on, up, upon, over, above	gong la
གོང་ལབ	stated above/ before	gong lab
གོང་གཤམ	1) thang ga'i me long gi four sides gos chen mtha' lcags outer and inner; 2) above and below	gong gsham
གོང་བཤམ	above and below, top and bottom	gong bsham
གོང་ས	upper place/ position, sovereign, ruler, Dalai Lama, highest officials, place/ level of the emperor	gong sa
གོང་ས་སྐྱབས་མགོན	Dalai Lama	gong sa skyabs mgon
གོང་ས་སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཆེན་པོ	Dalai Lama	gong sa skyabs mgon chen po
གོང་ས་མཆོག	Dalai Lama	gong sa mchog
གོང་ས་མཆོད་ཡོན	previous highest tulkus like the Dalai Lama &, highest patrons like the bod kyi rgyal tshab &, sometimes Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama who are mutually guru and disciple	gong sa mchod yon
གོང་ས་ཡས་ཕྱིན	persons in more exalted stations	gong sa yas phyin
གོང་ས་ཡས་ཕྱིན་པ	those superior persons gone before	gong sa yas phyin pa
གོང་སའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	higher samapattis [of form and formless realms]	gong sa'i snyoms 'jug
གོང་སའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག་དག་པ་བ་བཞི	the four higher samapattis	gong sa'i snyoms 'jug dag pa ba bzhi
གོང་སའི་དབང་པོ	1) Bhrama [lord of the form realm]; 2) sovereign lord)	gong sa'i dbang po
གོང་སྲུང་བ	royalist	gong srung ba
གོང་གསང་འོག་བསླུ	concealing from superiors and deceiving followers	gong gsang 'og bslu
གོང་གསལ	above-mentioned	gong gsal
གོང་གསལ་ལྟར	as clarified / mentioned above / earlier [in the text]	gong gsal ltar
གོངས	(not in DAS)	gongs
གོཏ་མ	Gautama	got ma
གོད	loss, damage; loss, misfortune	god
གོད་ཀ	* lost, destroyed, degenerated, decreased misfortune	god ka
གོད་བཀྲོལ	parole	god bkrol
གོད་ཁ	loss, damage (to property). Syn {god pa} 406	god kha
གོད་ཁའི་ངོ	losses	god kha'i ngo
གོད་འགྱུར	sustain misfortune[s]/ loss	god 'gyur
གོད་འགྱུར་བ	suffer loss	god 'gyur ba
གོད་ཆགས	animals dying for any reason	god chags
གོད་ཆུང	1) zad chung, gron chung; 2) few animals dying	god chung
གོད་ཉམས	degeneration	god nyams
གོད་ཉམས་མེད་པར	complete and unspoiled	god nyams med par
གོད་པ	{god pa, god pa, god pa} intr. v.; 1) lost, destroyed, become degenerated, decreased. 2) misfortune	god pa
གོད་པ་འགྱུར	sustain misfortune[s]/ loss	god pa 'gyur
གོད་མ	fear, loss	god ma
གོད་མེད	{phyugs la god med pa} cattle is free from epidemics	god med
གོན	gourd, pumpkin, clothes	gon
གོན་ནས་གནོན	lording over	gon nas gnon
གོན་སྣམ	serge or broadcloth for making robes	gon snam
གོན་པ	put on	gon pa
གོན་པ་འདྲ་བ་རེ་རེ	the cost of a set of anything to wear	gon pa 'dra ba re re
གོན་པ་ནང་ཚང་ཅན	quilted clothes	gon pa nang tshang can
གོན་ཕྱིང	felt used for wearing	gon phying
གོན་ལྷམ	shoes to put on	gon lham
གོབ	gab pa!	gob
གོབ་ཏོ	awkward	gob to
གོབ་ནོན	to tease, vex, irritate	gob non
གོབ་ལོབ	[arch] sla bcos,...Bsgrub byar gob lob ma byed	gob lob
གོམ	habit, being familiar, accustomed to. See also {goms}	gom
གོམ་ཁ	distance covered in a step	gom kha
གོམ་ཁ་ཡང་པོ	big steps	gom kha yang po
གོམ་འཁྱོར	halting steps	gom 'khyor
གོམ་འཁྱོལ	rkang thang la phyin te slebs pa	gom 'khyol
གོམ་གང	a step/ pace	gom gang
གོམ་གང་གང་བྱས	step by step	gom gang gang byas
གོམ་གང་མདུན་དུ་སྤོ	take a step/ move forward	gom gang mdun du spo
གོམ་གང་མདུན་དུ་སྤོས	took a step/ moved forward	gom gang mdun du spos
གོམ་གང་མདུན་སྤོས	a step forward, step by step, gradual/ steady improvement	gom gang mdun spos
གོམ་བགྲོད	walk, go on foot	gom bgrod
གོམ་བགྲོད་བྱེད	walk, go on foot	gom bgrod byed
གོམ་བགྲོས	walking, on foot	gom bgros
གོམ་བགྲོས་བྱེད	walk, go on foot	gom bgros byed
གོམ་འགྲོས	walking in step like soldiers or a procession passage, the way of movement	gom 'gros
གོམ་ཆེན་པོ	rgyab pa long strides, big paces	gom chen po
གོམ་ཆེན་སྤོ་བ	take large steps	gom chen spo ba
གོམ་མཆོངས	leap/ jump forward, advance rapidly	gom mchongs
གོམ་མཆོངས་བྱེད	leap/ jump forward, advance rapidly	gom mchongs byed
གོམ་སྙོམས་པ	walks at an even pace	gom snyoms pa
གོམ་སྟངས	the manner of pacing, waling in measured step	gom stangs
གོམ་སྟབས	way of walking, a step	gom stabs
གོམ་སྟབས་འགྲན	[compete in a foot] race	gom stabs 'gran
གོམ་སྟབས་གཅིག་མཐུན	the same way of walking	gom stabs gcig mthun
གོམ་སྟབས་ཆེན་པོ	a big step	gom stabs chen po
གོམ་སྟབས་ཆེན་པོས་མདུན་བསྐྱོད	taking a big step forward, make great progress/ development	gom stabs chen pos mdun bskyod
གོམ་འདྲིས	adept	gom 'dris
གོམ་སྣོམས་པ	walk at an even pace	gom snoms pa
གོམ་པ	pace, step, 1 meter pace, know, footstep, stride, a step, stride	gom pa
གོམ་པ་འཁྱོར	be lame, limp	gom pa 'khyor
གོམ་པ་འཁྱོར་བ	be lame, limp	gom pa 'khyor ba
གོམ་པ་འཁྱོལ	go on foot	gom pa 'khyol
གོམ་པ་འཁྱོལ་བ	go on foot	gom pa 'khyol ba
གོམ་པ་གང་དོ	1 or two steps	gom pa gang do
གོམ་པ་འགོམ་པ	walk, step	gom pa 'gom pa
གོམ་པ་རྒྱག	to walk	gom pa rgyag
གོམ་པ་རྒྱག་པ	to step, walk	gom pa rgyag pa
གོམ་པ་རྒྱག་ཚུལ	way of walking	gom pa rgyag tshul
གོམ་པ་བརྒྱབ་ནས	leap over a thing	gom pa brgyab nas
གོམ་པ་བརྒྱབ་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	pass over a thing	gom pa brgyab nas 'gro ba
གོམ་པ་སྔོན་སྤོས	advance, progress, develop[ment]	gom pa sngon spos
གོམ་པ་སྔོན་སྤོས་ཅན	advanced, progressive, developed	gom pa sngon spos can
གོམ་པ་ཐང་ཆད་མདོག་སྤོ་བ	trudge	gom pa thang chad mdog spo ba
གོམ་པ་བདུན་བོར་བ	make seven steps (a religious ceremony)	gom pa bdun bor ba
གོམ་པ་མདུན་དུ་སྤོ	take a step/ move forward	gom pa mdun du spo
གོམ་པ་མདུན་སྤོས	1) advance, progress, develop[ment]; 2) a step forward, step by step, gradual/ steady improvement	gom pa mdun spos
གོམ་པ་འདོར	stride on towards	gom pa 'dor
གོམ་པ་འདོར་བ	fling forth one's steps, stride on	gom pa 'dor ba
གོམ་པ་སྤོ	walk, take a step	gom pa spo
གོམ་པ་སྤོ་ཚུལ	way of walking	gom pa spo tshul
གོམ་པ་སྤོས་པ	taking one step after the other	gom pa spos pa
གོམ་པ་སྤོས་ཟིན་པ	strode	gom pa spos zin pa
གོམ་པ་ཕྱིར་ཕྲི་བ	[arch] gom pa phyir 'then pa	gom pa phyir phri ba
གོམ་པ་བོར་བ	[arch] gom pa spo ba	gom pa bor ba
གོམ་པ་བྱེད	to walk	gom pa byed
གོམ་པ་བཞི་འཆམ	four step dance movement	gom pa bzhi 'cham
གོམ་པ་ཡར་འདོར	take a step/ move forward	gom pa yar 'dor
གོམ་པ་རིངས་པར	w long paces	gom pa rings par
གོམ་པ་རིམ་བགྲོད	a step forward, step by step, gradual/ steady improvement	gom pa rim bgrod
གོམ་པ་རིམ་སྤོས	a step forward, step by step, gradual/ steady improvement	gom pa rim spos
གོམ་པ་སློ་བ	walk, step, stride	gom pa slo ba
གོམ་པའི་སྟངས	manner of walking, gait	gom pa'i stangs
གོམ་པའི་སྟབས	peculiar stepping in procession or dancing	gom pa'i stabs
གོམ་པའི་འདེགས་འཇོག	raise and put down the foot in making a step	gom pa'i 'degs 'jog
གོམ་སྤོས	walking	gom spos
གོམ་སྤོས་བཞིན	astride	gom spos bzhin
གོམ་ཕྱེད་བོར	to take half a step	gom phyed bor
གོམ་ཚད	pace	gom tshad
གོམ་ཚུགས	steps	gom tshugs
གོམ་ཚུལ	way of walking	gom tshul
གོམ་མཚམས	footing, position	gom mtshams
གོམ་ཞེང	length of stride, a step	gom zheng
གོམ་ཞེང་ཆེན་པོ	big stride/ step 407	gom zheng chen po
གོམ་རིམ	[by] stages, step, procedure	gom rim
གོམ་རིམ་དང་པོ	1st stage/ step/ procedure	gom rim dang po
གོམ་རླབས	gom zheng	gom rlabs
གོམ་ཤུགས	way of walking	gom shugs
གོམ་ཤུགས་ཅན	powerful walk	gom shugs can
གོམ་བཤལ་བྱེད	delay, procrastinate, drag out time	gom bshal byed
གོམ་གསུམ	three paces (heavens, earth, and the nether region)	gom gsum
གོམ་གསུམ་གནོན	name of Vishnu	gom gsum gnon
གོམ་གསུམ་པ	one with three steps	gom gsum pa
གོམས	1) to be habituated, trained, made familiar with, adept, practiced, mastered, skilled, accustomed. 2) to be used to, spoiled, get adapted to, be acclimatized to. 3) familiarization, habit, skill, a...	goms
གོམས་ཁྱད	habit, custom	goms khyad
གོམས་གང	the distance of one footstep	goms gang
གོམས་འགྲོས	passage	goms 'gros
གོམས་ཆ་ལོན་པ	to grow accustomed	goms cha lon pa
གོམས་ཆེན	yogins	goms chen
གོམས་རྟགས	signs of familiarity	goms rtags
གོམས་སྟོབས	power of practice	goms stobs
གོམས་འདྲི	conditioning	goms 'dri
གོམས་འདྲིས	1) familiarization, acquaintance, habituation, familiarity, acclimatization. 2) used to, adept, habituated, adept, completely / thoroughly trained; acquainted	goms 'dris
གོམས་འདྲིས་ཀྱི་ཁྲིམས་སྲོལ	customary law	goms 'dris kyi khrims srol
གོམས་འདྲིས་ངན་པ	bad habits	goms 'dris ngan pa
གོམས་འདྲིས་ཆགས	become familiar w, used to, adept, completely trained in	goms 'dris chags
གོམས་འདྲིས་ཆུང	not adept	goms 'dris chung
གོམས་འདྲིས་བྱེད	make familiar, accustomed, acquainted], used to, adept, completely trained	goms 'dris byed
གོམས་འདྲིས་བྱེད་པ	acquaint, familiarize	goms 'dris byed pa
གོམས་འདྲིས་ཡོད་པ	familiar	goms 'dris yod pa
གོམས་འདྲིས་སུ་འགྱུར	become familiar w, used to, adept, completely trained in	goms 'dris su 'gyur
གོམས་འདྲེ	conditioning	goms 'dre
གོམས་པ	habituation, be used to, spoil, skilled, wont, one practiced in any work, familiarization, adept, habit, accustomation	goms pa
གོམས་པ་ཀློང་གྱུར	perfection of training, fully perfected the practice	goms pa klong gyur
གོམས་པ་ཅན	skilled, practiced, intelligent	goms pa can
གོམས་པ་ཆོང་ཚེ	not sufficiently acquainted with	goms pa chong tshe
གོམས་པ་འདོར་བ	taking footsteps	goms pa 'dor ba
གོམས་པ་མེད་པ	unable to be treated as predictable/ with familiarity	goms pa med pa
གོམས་པ་རེ་བཞིན	step by step	goms pa re bzhin
གོམས་པའི་སྐད་ཆ	habitual saying	goms pa'i skad cha
གོམས་པའི་ངང་ཚུལ	habit	goms pa'i ngang tshul
གོམས་པའི་ཉམས	experience of familiarization	goms pa'i nyams
གོམས་པའི་སྟོབས	power of training	goms pa'i stobs
གོམས་པའི་མཐུས་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་བ	the actualization by the power of familiarization	goms pa'i mthus mngon du gyur ba
གོམས་པའི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of familiarity	goms pa'i bag chags
གོམས་པའི་བློ	frame of mind acquainted with	goms pa'i blo
གོམས་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the luminosity of acquaintance / training with which one is familiar, the first of {snang mched thob gsum}, {'od gsal bzhi}	goms pa'i 'od gsal
གོམས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	1) habitual; 2) inertia	goms pa'i rang bzhin
གོམས་པའི་ལམ	path of repeated meditational practice	goms pa'i lam
གོམས་པར་གྱུར	becomes developed, ability	goms par gyur
གོམས་པར་སྒོམ་པ	to cultivate a familiarity	goms par sgom pa
གོམས་པར་བྱ	accustom yourself to, it is necessary to get used to	goms par bya
གོམས་པར་བྱས	familiarize oneself with	goms par byas
གོམས་པར་བྱས་པ	grown accustomed	goms par byas pa
གོམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	one who is skilled or accustomed	goms par byed pa
གོམས་བྱ་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtues of familiarization	goms bya yon tan
གོམས་བྱང	purified by familiarization	goms byang
གོམས་སྦྱང	purify through familiarity	goms sbyang
གོམས་མེད	unable to be treated as predictable/ with familiarity	goms med
གོམས་མྱོང	familiar experience	goms myong
གོམས་ཡུན་བསྲིང་བ	long training/ familiarity	goms yun bsring ba
གོམས་ལོན	properly completed work	goms lon
གོམས་ཤུགས	power of training / acquaintance, the power of one's practice	goms shugs
གོམས་གཤིས	* habit, usage, used to, familiar, accustomed	goms gshis
གོམས་གཤིས་ངན་པ	bad habits	goms gshis ngan pa
གོམས་གཤིས་ཆགས་པ	habituate	goms gshis chags pa
གོམས་གཤིས་རྙིང་པ	old habits	goms gshis rnying pa
གོམས་སུ་འཇུག	make get used to	goms su 'jug
གོམས་སོང་བ	to become accustomed	goms song ba
གོམས་སྲོལ	habit, usage	goms srol
གོམས་སྲོལ་གྱི	traditional	goms srol gyi
གོའུ་ཏ་མ	family in ancient india, name of buddha	go'u ta ma
གོར	in the place, in the position, packet, murrain, SA phyogs gor	gor
གོར་ཁ	Gurkha, Nepalese	gor kha
གོར་གོར	circle, round, circular	gor gor
གོར་གོར་པོ	round, circular, ghana	gor gor po
གོར་གོར་བ	hard, solid	gor gor ba
གོར་རྡོ	river bed stone	gor rdo
གོར་ནད	1) gor disease [when cattle are first afflicted nas gcig tu langs te when it remains for a long time, so 'cha' ba, internally the heat rapidly increases. The flesh inside becomes white as if cooked...	gor nad
གོར་པ	solid, stiff, hard	gor pa
གོར་བ	kind of bread	gor ba
གོར་བུ	quadrangle, wisdom	gor bu
གོར་བོད	Nepal and Tibet	gor bod
གོར་མ	[arch] stones	gor ma
གོར་མ་བཀུམ་པ	[arch] doubtless	gor ma bkum pa
གོར་མ་ཆག	without interruption, certain, sure, indubitable	gor ma chag
གོར་མ་ཆག་པ	doubtless, certain, of course, sure, w/o a doubt	gor ma chag pa
གོར་མ་ཆག་པར	doubtless, certain, of course, sure, w/o a doubt	gor ma chag par
གོར་མ་ཆགས	certain, sure, indubitable, of course, sure, w/o a doubt	gor ma chags
གོར་མོ	round circular; circular, round	gor mo
གོར་རོ་རོ	going in a circle	gor ro ro
གོར་ལེབ	kind of bread	gor leb
གོར་ཤ	a kind of people mi rigs? in Nepal	gor sha
གོར་ཤི་ཤ	kind of sandal wood	gor shi sha
གོལ	separate, err, SA 'gol ba, to deviate from	gol
གོལ་སྒྲིབ	1) veil of straying. 2) Abbr. of {gol sa} + {sgrib pa}; deviation and obscuration, error and obscuration	gol sgrib
གོལ་སྒྲིབ་བཅས་པ	errant and obscure; (involving) error and obscuration	gol sgrib bcas pa
གོལ་སྒྲིབ་མེད་པ	without error or obscuration; unerring and unobscure	gol sgrib med pa
གོལ་ཕི	golf	gol phi
གོལ་འཕྱུགས	1) to deviate. 2) misunderstanding	gol 'phyugs
གོལ་འཕྱུགས་མེད་པ	neither errs nor misleads	gol 'phyugs med pa
གོལ་བ	separate, err, SA 'gol ba	gol ba
གོལ་བའི་བསམ་པ	confused/ erroneous thoughts	gol ba'i bsam pa
གོལ་བར་གྱུར་པ	to move away from	gol bar gyur pa
གོལ་མ	[arch] hot tsampa dough, dumpling	gol ma
གོལ་ཤོར	error, straying, erring, going astray, misunderstanding; to be sidetracked, go astray, stray	gol shor
གོལ་ཤོར་ཚར་གཅོད	Cutting Off Errors and Deviations	gol shor tshar gcod
གོལ་ཤོར་ཚར་གཅོད་སེང་གེའི་ང་རོ	the Lion's Roar for Cutting Through Errors and Deviations, by Jigmey Lingpa	gol shor tshar gcod seng ge'i nga ro
གོལ་ས	1) place of error or wrong path {gzhung lam bor nas, a place to stray /fall/ err /go astray/ go wrong; 2) cliff; 3) deviation, straying, error, misunderstanding, perversion, rampant confusion	gol sa
གོལ་ས་གཅོད་ཐབས	method of cutting deviations	gol sa gcod thabs
གོལ་ས་བཅད་པ	to eliminate deviations, to eliminate errors	gol sa bcad pa
གོལ་ས་ཆོད་པ	to overcome straying, cut through errors	gol sa chod pa
གོལ་ས་གསུམ	the three misunderstandings	gol sa gsum
གོལ་སར་གྱུར	one ends up on the wrong path	gol sar gyur
གོལ་སར་འགྲོ	to fall into deviations; to deviate, be sidetracked, go stray, stray	gol sar 'gro
གོལ་སར་འཕྱན་པ	stray/ wander into a place of error, go astray	gol sar 'phyan pa
གོས	wardrobe	gos
གོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱིམ	tent, diseased man's wardrobe	gos kyi khyim
གོས་ཀྱི་གར	bamboo or bar to hang or keep the dress	gos kyi gar
གོས་ཀྱི་གོན་འཕྲོ	clothes unworn	gos kyi gon 'phro
གོས་ཀྱི་གྲྭ	coat-tail	gos kyi grwa
གོས་ཀྱི་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	be content w one's clothes 409	gos kyi chog shes pa
གོས་ཀྱི་དྲོད	warmth derived from clothes	gos kyi drod
གོས་ཀྱི་གདང་ཤིང	rope or string to hang clothes	gos kyi gdang shing
གོས་ཀྱི་རྩེ	the best of cloth gos kyi rtse g.yogs - covered the very best clothing gos kyi rtses g.yogs - dressed with the best of clothing gos kyi rtses g.yogs - dressed w the best of clothing	gos kyi rtse
གོས་ཀྱི་གཞི	fundamental garments, monks robes	gos kyi gzhi
གོས་ཀྱི་གཞི་གསུམ	the three robes of a monk	gos kyi gzhi gsum
གོས་ཀྱི་རླུབས	pocket in a robe	gos kyi rlubs
གོས་ཀྱི་ཤན	among rdzas kyi shan, unblessed phyi ma la shan brdegs pa; zhag 10 'das pa dang, zhag 30 'das pa'i rjes su producing a downfall	gos kyi shan
གོས་ཀྱི་ཧྭ	collar of a coat	gos kyi hwa
གོས་ཀྱིས་རླུབས་པ	hide under a robe	gos kyis rlubs pa
གོས་དཀའ	difficult to cure	gos dka'
གོས་དཀར	white dress	gos dkar
གོས་དཀར་ཅན	[householder mantrika] white garment wearer	gos dkar can
གོས་དཀར་ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན	having white robes and long hair, tantric layman	gos dkar lcang lo can
གོས་དཀར་མོ	1) Pandaravasini; 2) overcome straying; 3) cut through errors	gos dkar mo
གོས་རྐྱོང	silk [brocade] rkyong gdan	gos rkyong
གོས་སྐུ	silk [brocade] w person's picture	gos sku
གོས་སྐུ་ཆེན་མོ	Great Hanging Brocade Image, Göku Chenmo, in Amnye Machen	gos sku chen mo
གོས་སྐུད	silk cord or si shan	gos skud
གོས་སྐྱིན	loan of clothes	gos skyin
གོས་བསྐོན་ཏོ	be dressed	gos bskon to
གོས་ཁ	gos chen gyi kha gdan square	gos kha
གོས་ཁ་བརྒྱ་ཐམ་པ	1/100 breadthmeasure of blankets gos kha ma bsgyur ba gyon pa'i ltung	gos kha brgya tham pa
གོས་ཁང	tent	gos khang
གོས་ཁུད	gos kyi khud lteb	gos khud
གོས་ཁུམས་པ	cloth folded as to look like waves or wrinkles	gos khums pa
གོས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	superior garment	gos khyad par du 'phags pa
གོས་ཁྱིམ	tent	gos khyim
གོས་འཁོར་ལོས་འཚེམ་པ	sew clothes on a machine	gos 'khor los 'tshem pa
གོས་འཁྲུ་མཁན	washer man	gos 'khru mkhan
གོས་གུར	silk [brocade]	gos gur
གོས་གོང	gos kyi gong ba	gos gong
གོས་གྱོན	put on/ wear clothes	gos gyon
གོས་གྱོན་པ	to put on clothes, wear a robe	gos gyon pa
གོས་གྱོན་ཡོད་པ	clad	gos gyon yod pa
གོས་གྲིབ	defilement from dirty clothing	gos grib
གོས་གྲིལ	roll of satin or cloth, garment folded up	gos gril
གོས་གྲུམ	square rug made of chinese satin	gos grum
གོས་བགོ་བའི་ཚུལ་བཅུ	the 10 ways of dividing clothes [nyes byas kyi sde tshan dang po, gos bgo ba'i sde la sham thabs kyi ya mtha' dang ma mtha' mi mnyam pas zlum po min pa dang, pus mo yan chad du brtzengs pa dang, lo...	gos bgo ba'i tshul bcu
གོས་འགེལ་གདང	stand to hang clothes on	gos 'gel gdang
གོས་འགྱེད་པ	folds in the garment of a monk, one who folds clothes	gos 'gyed pa
གོས་རྒྱན་བསྐུར་ཏེ	sending clothes and ornaments	gos rgyan bskur te
གོས་རྒྱུ	clothes making materials	gos rgyu
གོས་སྒབ	lower edge of a garment, hem	gos sgab
གོས་སྒམ	box, chest or press for clothes, wardrobe	gos sgam
གོས་སྒྲིལ	bunch	gos sgril
གོས་བསྒྱུར་བ	change clothes, change the cover, translate	gos bsgyur ba
གོས་སྔོན་ཅན	one dressed in a blue dress, sky, phyag rdor, planet saturn	gos sngon can
གོས་ཅན	having clothes, sandalwood	gos can
གོས་གཅིག་མ	Syn {lha mo U mA:}	gos gcig ma
གོས་ཆས	clothing	gos chas
གོས་ཆས་ལྟ་བུ	SA pa car	gos chas lta bu
གོས་ཆེན	satin, brocade, silk, silk fabrics, chinese satin, different kinds (hor gos, thon thi, nor bu chab bdun ma, mdzod gos, skyin khab, jus, rgyan bzhi ma, rgyan drug ma, 'brug ris ma, 'brug brgya ma)	gos chen
གོས་ཆེན་གྱི	silken	gos chen gyi
གོས་ཆེན་རྒྱན་བཞི	"four themed" brocades	gos chen rgyan bzhi
གོས་ཆེན་འདྲ་པོ	silky	gos chen 'dra po
གོས་ཆེན་པོ	silk-cloth	gos chen po
གོས་ཆེན་སྤུ་མ	silk [brocade w spu ma'i picture	gos chen spu ma
གོས་ཆེན་གསེར་མ	silk [brocade] w picture in gold thread	gos chen gser ma
གོས་མཆོག	finest satin or silk-cloth, very fine silk robe	gos mchog
གོས་ཇུས	multi-colored silk [brocade]	gos jus
གོས་འཇབ	gos chen gyi kha gdan ring po	gos 'jab
གོས་ལྗང་ཁུ	dressed in green	gos ljang khu
གོས་བརྗེ་ཁང	dressing room	gos brje khang
གོས་བརྗེ་བ	change dress or clothes	gos brje ba
གོས་ཉོ	purchased dress, cloth fit to be purchased	gos nyo
གོས་རྙིང	old coat or dress	gos rnying
གོས་རྙིང་པ	old & worn out clothes	gos rnying pa
གོས་རྙིང་ཧྲུལ	old tattered clothes	gos rnying hrul
གོས་སྙིང་བེ	old, box, SA bem 410	gos snying be
གོས་བརྙན	mendicant who puts on a ragged garment, ragged dress	gos brnyan
གོས་བརྙིངས	worn clothes	gos brnyings
གོས་བཏེག་པ	tuck up	gos bteg pa
གོས་སྟན	seat	gos stan
གོས་སྟོད	Tibetan govt. gi rtse drung tsho'i las garment	gos stod
གོས་ཐང	silk/ brocade thangka	gos thang
གོས་ཐུང	trousers, pants	gos thung
གོས་མཐའ	skirt of dress or robe	gos mtha'
གོས་འཐེབ	supernumerary dress	gos 'theb
གོས་དང་ཁེབས་བཤུ་བ	denude	gos dang khebs bshu ba
གོས་དང་བཅས་སུ	having clothes on	gos dang bcas su
གོས་དང་བྲལ་ཞིང	naked	gos dang bral zhing
གོས་དང་རིན་ཆེན་བང་མཛོད	fine clothes and jewels	gos dang rin chen bang mdzod
གོས་དུག་པ	old cloth, ragged cloth, torn cloth	gos dug pa
གོས་དོག	robe that does not fit being narrow in dimensions	gos dog
གོས་དྲས	cloth cut out for a garment	gos dras
གོས་དྲི་མ་ཅན	dirty clothes	gos dri ma can
གོས་དྲི་མེད	clean cloth	gos dri med
གོས་འདང	gos 'gel sa'i gdang, gos ldeng	gos 'dang
གོས་འདུག	bathing cloth	gos 'dug
གོས་ལྡབ་པ	lay or fold a coat together	gos ldab pa
གོས་ལྡེང	garment's rgyu long tshad	gos ldeng
གོས་བརྡབ་པ	keep clothes in proper folds, fold up clothes	gos brdab pa
གོས་སྣམ	english broadcloth	gos snam
གོས་སྣེ	1) gyon pa'i sne mo'am zur; 2) Gos kyi rigs kha	gos sne
གོས་པ	to be sullied/ covered with/ by	gos pa
གོས་པ་མེད་པ	untainted	gos pa med pa
གོས་པང	silk [brocade] pang gdan	gos pang
གོས་པར་འགྱུར	will be tainted	gos par 'gyur
གོས་པོ	father-in-law	gos po
གོས་པོས་བསྲུངས་པ	protected by one's	gos pos bsrungs pa
ཕ༹ཐེར	in-law	father
གོས་སྤུ་མ	cloth w pile etc.	gos spu ma
གོས་སྤུ་རིས་མ	spu ris yod pa'i cloth etc.	gos spu ris ma
གོས་སྤོ་བ	change one's dress, dismiss, alter, mend, correct	gos spo ba
གོས་སྤྲིན་རིས་མ	brocade/ silk robe w cloud picture	gos sprin ris ma
གོས་ཕྱེད་ཕུ་ལུང	sleeveless robe or garment	gos phyed phu lung
གོས་ཕྲ	fine-silk, muslin	gos phra
གོས་འཕན	silk ka 'phan	gos 'phan
གོས་བུབས	cotton cloth	gos bubs
གོས་བེམ་པོ	old coat or dress	gos bem po
གོས་བྱིན་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of giving clothing	gos byin pa'i ltung byed
གོས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤིང	banner tree	gos byung ba'i shing
གོས་བྱེད	gain, acceptance, performance, honor	gos byed
གོས་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of making clothing	gos byed pa'i ltung byed
གོས་བྲལ	1) naked; 2) buddha {gos bral}	gos bral
གོས་འབུད་པ	take off dress	gos 'bud pa
གོས་འབོག	1) gos chen gyi 'bog; 2) Phyogs la 'gro skabs place to pack necessary sleeping and wearing articles	gos 'bog
གོས་འབོལ	silk cushion	gos 'bol
གོས་འབྱུང་ལྗོན་པ	wish fulfilling tree	gos 'byung ljon pa
གོས་སྦེད་པ	one concealing his mendicant's clothes	gos sbed pa
གོས་སྦེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	any of the rab byung sde lnga po gi gyon pa rku sems med par sbed pa downfall	gos sbed pa'i ltung byed
གོས་མིན	roof, veil, film over the eyes, multitude	gos min
གོས་མུག	clothes moth	gos mug
གོས་མེད་པ	naked ascetic; an ascetic of Jain Dighambhara "sky-clad one" sect	gos med pa
གོས་མེད་ལྷམ་མེད	shoeless and halfnaked	gos med lham med
གོས་དམར	red robes	gos dmar
གོས་དམར་ཅན	1 of 7 thams cad yod par smra ba	gos dmar can
གོས་དམར་སྡེ	Tamrasatiyas, classes of buddhists who are dressed in red	gos dmar sde
གོས་དམར་བ	red-robed	gos dmar ba
གོས་ཙམ	satin	gos tsam
གོས་བཙེམས	sewed the clothes	gos btsems
གོས་བཙེམས་ཉེས་པ	badly-sewn clothes	gos btsems nyes pa
གོས་བརྩེགས་པ	put one garment over the other	gos brtsegs pa
གོས་ཚགས	coat and cap	gos tshags
གོས་ཚར	fur coat	gos tshar
གོས་ཚར་གྱི་གོན་པ	coat	gos tshar gyi gon pa
གོས་ཚོན་ལ་བཙོ་བ	dyeing the cloth	gos tshon la btso ba
གོས་ཚོས་མ	dyed clothing	gos tshos ma
གོས་འཚེམ་པ	sew or make a robe	gos 'tshem pa
གོས་འཛར	1) gyon pa dang gos chen gyi sne 'dzar; 2) {gos lhug ste 'dzar ba	gos 'dzar
གོས་ཞིག་པ	wave or plait or fold in a garment	gos zhig pa
གོས་ཟད་པོ	worn-out clothes	gos zad po
གོས་ཟས་ཀྱི་འཚོས	one who lives doing nothing more that eating and dressing	gos zas kyi 'tshos
གོས་ཟས་ཀྱི་འཚོས་མ	female mendicant clothed in suitable dress	gos zas kyi 'tshos ma
གོས་ཟས་གནས་མལ	clothes, food, and bedding	gos zas gnas mal
གོས་ཟེགས	worn out clothes, old clothes	gos zegs
གོས་ཟེགས་པོ	old/tattered clothing	gos zegs po
གོས་གཟན	silk [brocade] pho mo'i gzan	gos gzan
གོས་བཟང	fine cloth	gos bzang
གོས་བཟོ	trade of a tailor	gos bzo
གོས་བཟོ་བའི་རྒྱུ་ཆ	clothes making materials	gos bzo ba'i rgyu cha
གོས་བཟོས་པ	made myself a garment	gos bzos pa
གོས་ཡིག་རིས་མ	brocade/ silk robe w calligraphy	gos yig ris ma
གོས་ཡུག	roll of cloth	gos yug
གོས་རིང	long dress	gos ring
གོས་རིམ་གྱི་མཐིལ	bottom of the pile of clothes	gos rim gyi mthil
གོས་རིས	[gold] brocade designs	gos ris
གོས་ལ་དགའ་བ	to be obsessed with clothes	gos la dga' ba
གོས་ལ་དབུར་ཏི་རྒྱག་པ	iron clothes	gos la dbur ti rgyag pa
གོས་ལག	coat, dress, clothes	gos lag
གོས་ལུས་ཆ	complete suit of clothes	gos lus cha
གོས་ལེན་པའི་སྤང་པ	abandoning fault of receiving garments [among the 30 spang ltung, rang la chos gos rnam gsum yod bzhin 'khor gsum khebs pa'i tshad du longs pa'i gos receive from an unrelated gelongma]	gos len pa'i spang pa
གོས་ལེབ	a scrap of clothing	gos leb
གོས་ལོག	apparel, attire, clothing	gos log
གོས་ལོག་འཁྲུ་མཁན	dhobi	gos log 'khru mkhan
གོས་གཤམ	lower edge/hem of a garment	gos gsham
གོས་སུ་ཧྲུལ་པོ་གྱོན་པ	put on rags for a garment	gos su hrul po gyon pa
གོས་སུལ	gos kyi gnyer ma or ster kha	gos sul
གོས་སེར་ཅན	monk, yellow-robed	gos ser can
གོས་སོ་མོ	new or fresh cloth	gos so mo
གོས་སོགས་དཀྲི་བར་བྱེད་པ	to fold up cloth, etc	gos sogs dkri bar byed pa
གོས་སོགས་ལྡབ་པ	fold up clothes	gos sogs ldab pa
གོས་སོགས་ཚེམ་ངན་པ	badly sewn clothes	gos sogs tshem ngan pa
གོས་སྲབ	light clothes 411	gos srab
གོས་སྲབ་བསྟེན	to wear light clothes	gos srab bsten
གོས་སློག	1) phyu pa dang pags tshar; 2) clothing	gos slog
གོས་གསར	new clothes	gos gsar
གོས་གསར་གྱོན	to put on new garments	gos gsar gyon
གོས་གསར་བཏགས་མ	new gos chen	gos gsar btags ma
གོས་གསུམ	1) Syn {chos gos gsum}. 2) [among {dpal gyi chas brgyad, glang chen sko lon}, {zhing lpags}, {stag sham}	gos gsum
གོས་གསུམ་བརྗེ་བ	the three kinds of changing clothing	gos gsum brje ba
གོས་གསེར་སྐུད་མ	gos chen w gold thread designs	gos gser skud ma
གོས་གསོར་མ	brje res bya rgyu'i gos	gos gsor ma
གོས་བསུམ	[arch] clothing	gos bsum
གོས་ཧབ༹	gos smad kha bral ba'am gos kyi zur 'bral	gos hva
གོས་ཧུལ	tatter	gos hul
གོས་ཧྲུལ	torn tattered ragged clothing	gos hrul
གོས་ཧྲུལ་པོ	torn tattered ragged clothing	gos hrul po
གོས་ཧྲུལ་པོ་གྱོན	put on a ragged dress	gos hrul po gyon
གོས་ཧླམ	old ragged clothes	gos hlam
གོས་ལྷག་འཆང་བའི་སྤང་བ	among the spang ltung sum cu, chos gos kyi rgyur ma bsngos pa khru tshad du longs pa yan chad kyi gos lhag por rang la dbang ba not blessed up to 10 days 'jog pa'o	gos lhag 'chang ba'i spang ba
གོས་ལྷམ	clothes [& shoes]	gos lham
གོས་ལྷའི་གོས་ལྟ་བུ	had clothes like those of the gods	gos lha'i gos lta bu
གོས་ལྷུག་ལྷུག་གྱོན་པ	remain naked	gos lhug lhug gyon pa
གོས་ལྷོད་པ	let go a robe which has been grasped	gos lhod pa
གྱ	abbreviated form of brgyad cu swirls, eighties particle	gya
གྱ་སྐད	chuck	gya skad
གྱ་གྱུ	dissimulation, crookedness, intrigue, secret machinations	gya gyu
སོ	felt their vision flicker as if they were dying	so
གྱ་གྱུ་འགྲོས	1) unsteady, wavering way of going; 2) smoke; 2) river; 3) snake	gya gyu 'gros
གྱ་གྱུ་ཅན	cheat, crafty, deceitful, fraudulent	gya gyu can
གྱ་གྱུ་བ	1) deceptive; 2) unstable	gya gyu ba
གྱ་གྱུ་བྱེད	deceive, trick	gya gyu byed
གྱ་གྱུ་བྱེད་པ	intrigue, plot	gya gyu byed pa
གྱ་གྱུ་མེད	w/o deceit, guileless	gya gyu med
གྱ་གྱུ་ལ་ཁ	{gya gyu la kha} pass [si khron zhing chen, rnga ba, btsan lha rdzong]	gya gyu la kha
གྱ་གྱུའི་རི་མོ	1) crooked picture; 2) met mirage	gya gyu'i ri mo
གྱ་གྱུར	flickering vision	gya gyur
གྱ་གྱུར་འགྲོ	crooked/ wavering way of going	gya gyur 'gro
གྱ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་བ	serpentine-motion, move circuitously	gya gyur 'gro ba
གྱ་དགུ	number 89	gya dgu
གྱ་བརྒྱད	number 88	gya brgyad
གྱ་ལྔ	85	gya lnga
གྱ་གཅིག	81	gya gcig
གྱ་ཉེས	marvelous, inexplicable	gya nyes
གྱ་གཉིས	82	gya gnyis
གྱ་རྟ་དམར་པོ	Red Gyata, a type of tree	gya rta dmar po
གྱ་ཐོ	[arch] ear ring	gya tho
གྱ་དོ	[arch] ear ring	gya do
གྱ་དྲུག	86	gya drug
གྱ་བདུན	87	gya bdun
གྱ་ནོག་སྣང	beautiful, of nice appearance	gya nog snang
གྱ་ནོམ	excellence; among the 16 aspects of the four truths: Def. By Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyon mongs pa dang bral bas gtsang ba dang sdug bsngal dang bral bas bde ba'i dngos po yin pa'i mtshan nyid can}	gya nom
གྱ་ནོམ་སྣང	={gya nom snang ba}	gya nom snang
གྱ་ནོམ་སྣང་བ	1) good; 2) (A) exist/ have; 3) excellent light [6th 4th dhyana realm, where gods have completely pacified minds and bodies so that bde ba chos kyi mchog appear/shine hence called "excellent appear...	gya nom snang ba
གྱ་ནོམ་པ	joy, sublime, perfected state, best, exotic, completely satisfied, one in abundance, in plenty, possessed of wealth and power	gya nom pa
གྱ་ནོམ་ལྷར་ཞེན	clinging to the sublime divinity	gya nom lhar zhen
གྱ་ནོམ་ལྷར་ཞེན་རྟོག་པ	the concept of clinging to the sublime divinity	gya nom lhar zhen rtog pa
གྱ་པ	spoiled, degenerated, deformed, disfigured, having lost former beauty	gya pa
གྱ་བ	to be spoiled, ruined; deformed, disfigured	gya ba
གྱ་མ་གྱུ	swim and dive, meandering of rivers, quiet, calm, gently flowing along, cautious, scheming	gya ma gyu
གྱ་མ་ལུང	{gya ma lung} Cave	gya ma lung
གྱ་མོ	brick 412	gya mo
གྱ་ཙོམ	1) dishonesty, deceit[fulness], guile, trick, nonsense; 2) swift movement, glimpse, swirling, intermittent flashing, flashing forth; 3) not thinking/ examining, acting w/o checking out, blind rash act	gya tsom
གྱ་ཙོམ་དུ་ཁ་ཚོན་མ་གཅོད	don't speak w/o thinking	gya tsom du kha tshon ma gcod
གྱ་ཙོམ་དུ་བསྟེན	rely on w/o examination/ consideration	gya tsom du bsten
གྱ་ཙོམ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	say whatever comes out	gya tsom du smra ba
གྱ་རྩོམ	haste, hurry, rashness	gya rtsom
གྱ་ཚོམ	1) dishonesty, deceit[fulness], guile, trick, nonsense; 2) swift movement, glimpse, swirling, intermittent flashing, flashing forth; 3) not thinking/ examining, acting w/o checking out, blind rash act	gya tshom
གྱ་ཚོམ་ཅན	bard of the magadha tribe, one in doubt	gya tshom can
གྱ་ཚོམ་དུ་ཁ་ཚོན་མ་གཅོད	don't speak w/o thinking	gya tshom du kha tshon ma gcod
གྱ་ཚོམ་དུ་བསྟེན	rely on w/o examination/ consideration	gya tshom du bsten
གྱ་ཚོམ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	say whatever comes out	gya tshom du smra ba
གྱ་བཞི	84	gya bzhi
གྱ་རོམ་པ	exaltedness [11th of the {'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi rnam pa bcu drug] 16 aspects of the four noble truths]	gya rom pa
གྱ་གསུམ	83	gya gsum
གྱག་པ	destroyed, ruined, diminished, SA 'gyag pa, brlag pa	gyag pa
གྱག་རྭ	yak horn	gyag rwa
གྱག་ཤ	yak meat	gyag sha
གྱང	(CH sa shing sgrom nang du brdungs pa'i rtsig pa 1) sacred, enriching; 2) abyss, precipice, chasm	gyang
གྱང་སྐུ	gyang ldebs su painted body pictures	gyang sku
གྱང་སྐོར	house, village etc surrounding gyang gi ra ba	gyang skor
གྱང་འཁུར་བ	be reduced to want	gyang 'khur ba
གྱང་གི་རི་མོ	fresco	gyang gi ri mo
གྱང་གོག	ruins of buildings	gyang gog
གྱང་གོག་ཞིག་ཤུལ	ruin	gyang gog zhig shul
གྱང་གྱིང	1) haughty, arrogant [A -bodily expression/manner]	gyang gying
གྱང་གྱོང	untamed, uncultivated, crude	gyang gyong
གྱང་རྒྱུག	gyang sa rdung byed rgyug pa	gyang rgyug
གྱང་སྒྲོམ	gyang rdung snod shing sgrom	gyang sgrom
གྱང་ངི་གྱིང་ངི	haughty, arrogant	gyang ngi gying ngi
གྱང་ངེ་གྱོང་ངེ	untamed, uncultivated, crude	gyang nge gyong nge
གྱང་ངོས	face or side of a wall	gyang ngos
གྱང་ཆགས	prosperity	gyang chags
གྱང་ཆགས་པ	growth of prosperity, rich in virtue	gyang chags pa
གྱང་མཆོངས	jumping off a cliff	gyang mchongs
གྱང་ལྟེབས	wall surface/ side	gyang ltebs
གྱང་ཐོ	lha ri gyang tho	gyang tho
གྱང་མཐུད	corner between two walls	gyang mthud
གྱང་ལྡེབས	wall surface/ side	gyang ldebs
གྱང་ནག་ཁ་སྦྱོར	phyogs gnyis phan tshun dbyen sbyor dkrug shing gis rgyab 'gal du gtong ba'i example	gyang nag kha sbyor
གྱང་ཕག	block/ brick for making walls	gyang phag
གྱང་ཕྲེང	gyang gi dpangs rim,...Lcags ri'i dpangs la gyang phreng 36	gyang phreng
གྱང་འཕེན་པ	view of the materialists who assert that only matter exists, and of nihilists who deny the law of karma	gyang 'phen pa
གྱང་མེད་པའི་རི་མོ་ལྟར	like trying to paint a fresco where there is not even a wall	gyang med pa'i ri mo ltar
གྱང་ཙེ	pise terrace, wall of dry earth in ladak	gyang tse
གྱང་རྩིག	1) wall dang rtsig pa; 2) earth wall or skya	gyang rtsig
གྱང་མཚམས	1) corner, meeting point or space between two walls; 2) Gyang gi 'khris, nye 'gram	gyang mtshams
གྱང་འཛོམས	abundant prosperity	gyang 'dzoms
གྱང་གཞི	1) skin two happiness, blessing, prosperity, auspiciousness	gyang gzhi
གྱང་གཞིས	antelope skin	gyang gzhis
གྱང་ཡིག	wall poster, newspaper	gyang yig
གྱང་ར	walled enclosure [usu for wild animals]	gyang ra
གྱང་རལ་ཤིག	ruined wall	gyang ral shig
གྱང་རིམ	pise layer, about one ell in height, measure of the depth of snow	gyang rim
གྱང་རིས	fresco or all painting	gyang ris
གྱང་རོ	ruins	gyang ro
གྱང་རོལ	ruins	gyang rol
གྱང་ལ་འཆོང	jumping off a cliff	gyang la 'chong
གྱང་ལ་ལྷུན་བ	falling from a cliff	gyang la lhun ba
གྱང་ལུགས	skin	gyang lugs
གྱང་ལོགས	wall surface/ side/ face	gyang logs
གྱང་ལོགས་ལ་རི་མོ་བྲིས་པ་བཞིན	like a painting on the wall	gyang logs la ri mo bris pa bzhin
གྱང་ཤིང	gyang rtsig making wooden sgrom	gyang shing
གྱད	1) strength; 2) gyad *, athlete, champion, strong man, the best, a master wrestler, fighter, giant, a rich person	gyad
གྱད་ཀྱི་འདོར་སྟབས	fighter stance, pace of a giant	gyad kyi 'dor stabs
གྱད་ཀྱི་འདོར་ཐབས་ས་བགྲད	feet set wide apart in the hero's stance	gyad kyi 'dor thabs sa bgrad
གྱད་ཀྱི་འཛིན་སྟངས	stance/ pace of a giant/ fighter/ champion	gyad kyi 'dzin stangs
གྱད་གྱི་ཤུགས	prowess or strength of a champion	gyad gyi shugs
གྱད་ལྔ་བརྒྱ	500 fighters	gyad lnga brgya
གྱད་ཆེན	great strength [and skill], great champion	gyad chen
གྱད་སྟོབས	[athletic/ fighting] strength	gyad stobs
གྱད་སྟོབས་སྡུར་བ	compare/ contend in strength	gyad stobs sdur ba
གྱད་སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེ	powerful athletes	gyad stobs po che
གྱད་འཐབ	contend in strength	gyad 'thab
གྱད་དུ་གྱུར	perfected, realized, become adept, to attain mastery	gyad du gyur
གྱད་རྡོ	strength and skill sbyong byed yar 'gyogs rgyu'i stone	gyad rdo
གྱད་ནར་སོན་པ	receive a champion's strength and skill	gyad nar son pa
གྱད་པ	athlete, champion, strong man, the best, master wrestler, fighter, giant, rich person	gyad pa
གྱད་མི	strong man, champion, master wrestler, fighter, giant, a rich person	gyad mi
གྱད་རྩལ	1) contending in strength; 2) physical strength	gyad rtsal
གྱད་འཛིང	contend in strength	gyad 'dzing
གྱབ་མོ	wave	gyab mo
གྱབ་མཛད	beckoned	gyab mdzad
གྱབས	joking, sport, diversion	gyabs
གྱབས་ཀྱིས་མི་མཛད	don't do/ say jokingly	gyabs kyis mi mdzad
གྱམ	a shelter, grotto 413	gyam
གྱམ་རྒྱུག	conformity to others	gyam rgyug
གྱམ་པ	[arch] bab shul of a large river, a slab of state, roof-slate	gyam pa
གྱམ་བུ	small cave	gyam bu
གྱའ་ཐིག	slate-pencil, lead pencil, line drawn with lead pencil	gya' thig
གྱའ་དག་པ	pure	gya' dag pa
གྱའ་བ	shrink, start up	gya' ba
གྱའ་བཟང་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Gyazang kagyu	gya' bzang bka' brgyud
གྱའ་ཡ	yes	gya' ya
གྱའ་རི་གོང	{gya' ri gong} [where Padmakara bound all the {rgyal po}. and .ral po}. and..]	gya' ri gong
གྱར	[not g.yar] get fall into [state/ situation] go astray, get separated	gyar
གྱར་གྱོད	loss, damage	gyar gyod
གྱར་བ	(tha mi dad pa 1) become, come to [gnas su gyar ba]; 2) wander; 3) scatter, be lost, borrow, lend, hire; 4) mouth, face	gyar ba
གྱར་ཚུས	food, nourishment, victuals	gyar tshus
གྱལ	pramana eliminating confusion, yawn	gyal
གྱལ་སྟོང	yawn	gyal stong
གྱལ་སྟོང་རྒྱག	yawn	gyal stong rgyag
གྱལ་འདར	tremble common w yawning	gyal 'dar
གྱལ་ཕྲན་རྣམས	the princes of the land	gyal phran rnams
གྱི་སྐབས་སུ	at the time of, in the context of. See {skabs}	gyi skabs su
གྱི་གླིང	kulti, a place	gyi gling
གྱི་ལྗང	a place in tibet	gyi ljang
གྱི་ཐང	1) tshongkhapa; 2) now in mtsho sngon zhing chen E of the lake the rma chu'i rgyud]	gyi thang
གྱི་ཐན	a place, a tribe in e. tibet	gyi than
གྱི་བསྡུས་ཚིག	shall not gyi bsdus tshig ye shu ma shi ka'i 'khrungs	gyi bsdus tshig
ཚེས	christmas	tshes
གྱི་ན	1) bad, coarse, mean, poor, miserable, inferior, low, worst. 2) ordinary. 3) pointless	gyi na
གྱི་ན་པ	ordinary person, lay aside I or arrogance	gyi na pa
གྱི་ན་བ	1) ordinary; 2) low, inferior; 3) lazy; 4) useless	gyi na ba
གྱི་ན་བ་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	be satisfied w the bare minimum	gyi na ba tsam gyis chog shes pa
གྱི་ན་ཙམ	simply an ordinary state	gyi na tsam
གྱི་ན་འཚོ་བ	miserable starving life	gyi na 'tsho ba
གྱི་ནང་ནས	among gyi na'i g.yang - state of inactivity, idleness	gyi nang nas
གྱི་ནར	1) natural. 2) meaningless. 3) inferior, common, ordinary	gyi nar
གྱི་ནས་འཚོ་བ	ordinary/ inferior livelihood	gyi nas 'tsho ba
གྱི་ཕ་མ	father and mother who are	gyi pha ma
ཐེ	-	the
གྱི་ཕན	monk who assassinated {glang dar ma	gyi phan
གྱི་འཕྱོ	large number	gyi 'phyo
གྱི་དབང་གིས	by the power of	gyi dbang gis
གྱི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་ནས	in terms of	gyi dbang du byas nas
གྱི་ལིང	in the manner of a Gyiling steed	gyi ling
གྱི་ལིང་ཆུ་རྟ	probably mercury	gyi ling chu rta
གྱི་ལིང་ཆུ་རྟ་དཀར་པོ	mineral medicine	gyi ling chu rta dkar po
གྱི་ལིང་ཆུ་རྟ་སྔོན་པོ	quick silver	gyi ling chu rta sngon po
གྱིག	caoutchouc, india rubber	gyig
གྱིག་ཁུག	rubber/ plastic bag	gyig khug
གྱིག་འཁོར	rubber tire	gyig 'khor
གྱིག་སྡོང	caoutchouc tree	gyig sdong
གྱིག་པ	be hindered	gyig pa
གྱིག་ཤིང	rubber tree	gyig shing
གྱིག་ལྷམ	rubber boots/ shoes	gyig lham
གྱིང	a deity, maybe king kang, clay stamped into moulds, SA gyang	gying
གྱིང་གོང	[arch] peace	gying gong
གྱིང་འཆམ	dance of graceful stretching	gying 'cham
གྱིང་མོ	sloping	gying mo
གྱིང་ཤང་ཀོང་ཇོ	gyim shing kong jo	gying shang kong jo
གྱིད	(not in DAS)	gyid
གྱིད་མི་ལུག་པ	to be discouraged	gyid mi lug pa
གྱིན	(use present continuous tense), SA kying	gyin
གྱིན་ཏ	[arch] w/o cause and conditions	gyin ta
གྱིན་འདའ	natural	gyin 'da'
གྱིན་འདའ་བ	unfeigned	gyin 'da' ba
གྱིན་འདར	naturalness	gyin 'dar
གྱིམ་པོ	[arch] so dmag	gyim po
གྱིམ་བག	amalgam	gyim bag
གྱིམ་བག་གིས་འབྱུག་པ	gild in the fire	gyim bag gis 'byug pa
གྱིམ་མཚེས	neighbor	gyim mtshes
གྱིམ་ཤང་ཀོང་ཇོ	gyim shing kong jo, CH queen rgya bza' rjes ma [rgya'i deb ther las, bod kyi rgyal mo khu dan gyis bu mo slong du byung ba la, rgya rje thang krung tsung gi nu bo yung dbang gi bu mo kims shing kon...	gyim shang kong jo
གྱིམ་ཤང་རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	an astrological text	gyim shang rin chen spungs pa
གྱིམ་ཤིང	[arch] music	gyim shing
གྱིམ་ཤུང	(CH auspicious and inauspicious good and bad zhi tshub po	gyim shung
གྱིམ་ཤུང་རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	CH divination nag rtsis text in old tr and 'di'i dpe rgyun bar skabs thor nas unavailable]	gyim shung rin chen spungs pa
གྱིས	through	gyis
གྱིས་ཤིག	bgyid! do, !	gyis shig
གྱིས་སུ	duality	gyis su
གྱུ་གྱུ་བ	unsteady, flicker, waver, flutter; see {shes pa phyo phyo ba} unsteady mind	gyu gyu ba
གྱུ་ནམ	deceitful person	gyu nam
གྱུ་བ	[arch] 1) gong du bkur ba; 2) zos pa; 3) Bkru ba; 4) proud	gyu ba
གྱུ་རུ་ལུགས	[arch] rgyun chags pa	gyu ru lugs
གྱུ་རུ་ལུགས་སུ་ཤོད་པ	[arch] speak straightforwardly	gyu ru lugs su shod pa
གྱུང་བ	tame	gyung ba
གྱུང་མོ	a libidinous woman	gyung mo
གྱུང་རོ	SA gyong ra	gyung ro
གྱུན་མཁོའི་ཤེས་རིག	common sense	gyun mkho'i shes rig
གྱུབ་གསེར	golden paint	gyub gser
གྱུར	consumed, become, change, translate, SA 'gyur ba, past of 'gyur, are transformed into, to turn into, to find oneself in	gyur
གྱུར་ཅིག	became, SA 'gyur ba	gyur cig
གྱུར་ཅིག་གུ	come on ! Let there be...! [thinking: yid shin tu bskyod pas ci ma rung]	gyur cig gu
གྱུར་ཅིང	became and ..	gyur cing
གྱུར་ཏ་རེ	certainly, indeed, undoubtedly	gyur ta re
གྱུར་ཏོ	became, SA 'gyur ba	gyur to
གྱུར་དུ་ཟིན	SA gyur du chug	gyur du zin
གྱུར་དུག	become poisonous, go toxic	gyur dug
གྱུར་ལྡོག	change, alteration	gyur ldog
གྱུར་ན	if it so happened, if it became so	gyur na
གྱུར་ནས	having become	gyur nas
གྱུར་པ	. . .r gyur pa - to constitute/ become/ function as . . . ; will . . . [future tense]	gyur pa
གྱུར་པའི་དུག	substances that have been converted into poison	gyur pa'i dug
གྱུར་པའི་རྣམ་པ	anything changeable, subject to change	gyur pa'i rnam pa
གྱུར་པས་ན	this being so, ..	gyur pas na
གྱུར་བ	to droop, to hang or sink down	gyur ba
གྱུར་མིད	so ma brgyab par hril bur mid pa,...Gzhan gyi mnga' khongs sa cha gyur mid gtong ba,...Lto chas sos ma blad par gyur mid byas na 'ju dka'	gyur mid
གྱུར་འཛག	kind of grang nad	gyur 'dzag
གྱུར་སོང	began to	gyur song
གྱེ་གུ	crookedness, curve, hunch, hump	gye gu
གྱེ་གུར་གྱུར་པ	double hump-back, bactrian camel	gye gur gyur pa
གྱེ་གོར	bon po deity	gye gor
གྱེ་མགོ	clay vessel	gye mgo
གྱེ་རེ	place on the tsang po s.e. of lhasa	gye re
གྱེ་རེ་ལྷ་པ	very old noble family of tibet	gye re lha pa
གྱེང	SA gyang	gyeng
གྱེང་བ་དྲུག	the six types of distraction; 1) {pi rol du}. 2) {ng gi}. 3) {mhan ma'i}. 4) {gs ngan len gyi}. 5) {y la byed pa'i}. 6) {rg bzhin gyis}	gyeng ba drug
གྱེངས་ཤིང	fluffing [with a pillow]	gyengs shing
གྱེད	SA 'gyed, eight	gyed
གྱེད་པ	SA 'gyed pa	gyed pa
གྱེན	steep, up hill, uphill, upwards	gyen
གྱེན་འགོག	oppose, resist	gyen 'gog
གྱེན་འགྱུའི་རླུང	upward moving subtle energy (responsible for respiration)	gyen 'gyu'i rlung
གྱེན་འགྲེང	vertical, standing upwards	gyen 'greng
གྱེན་རྒོལ	uprising, revolt, mutiny	gyen rgol
གྱེན་རྒྱུ	1) fire; 2) upward-moving [wind]	gyen rgyu
གྱེན་རྒྱུ་རླུང	upward moving wind, prana of circulation	gyen rgyu rlung
གྱེན་རྒྱུའི་མཐུ	name of a disease	gyen rgyu'i mthu
གྱེན་རྒྱུའི་རླུང	Syn {gyen rgyu rlung}	gyen rgyu'i rlung
གྱེན་ཐིག	vertical line	gyen thig
གྱེན་ཐུར	slopes, uphill and downhill, ups and downs	gyen thur
གྱེན་ཐུར་སློག	throw into confusion/ disorder	gyen thur slog
གྱེན་འཐེན	pull[ing]/ haul up	gyen 'then
གྱེན་འཐེན་ལྕགས་ཐག	hoisting cable gyen 'then lcags thag dkri ba'i 'phrul 'khor - hoisting machine	gyen 'then lcags thag
གྱེན་འཐེན་བྱེད	pull/ haul up	gyen 'then byed
གྱེན་དམ་པོ	steep	gyen dam po
གྱེན་དུ	upwards, uphill, up	gyen du
གྱེན་དུ་ཁུག	called upward to good luck	gyen du khug
གྱེན་དུ་གྱོས་པ	ascending	gyen du gyos pa
གྱེན་དུ་དགྱེད	bend upwards	gyen du dgyed
གྱེན་དུ་འགྱུར	(hair) standing on end, bristles upward	gyen du 'gyur
གྱེན་དུ་འགྱོག་པ་པོ	one who climbs up	gyen du 'gyog pa po
གྱེན་དུ་འགྲོ	going upwards, flowing upwards	gyen du 'gro
གྱེན་དུ་རྒྱུ་བ	circulation	gyen du rgyu ba
གྱེན་དུ་རྒྱུ་བའི་རླུང	upward-moving wind, prana of circulation in the body	gyen du rgyu ba'i rlung
གྱེན་དུ་བལྟ་བ	look upwards	gyen du blta ba
གྱེན་དུ་བསྟན	facing upwards	gyen du bstan
གྱེན་དུ་བསྟན་པ	directed/ facing upwards	gyen du bstan pa
གྱེན་དུ་དྲངས་པ	to bring up	gyen du drangs pa
གྱེན་དུ་དྲི	fragrance, sweet scent, fragrant	gyen du dri
གྱེན་དུ་འདེགས	raise, lift	gyen du 'degs
གྱེན་དུ་འདེགས་པ	lift high, praise	gyen du 'degs pa
གྱེན་དུ་འདྲེན	drawing upwards, marriage	gyen du 'dren
གྱེན་དུ་ཕྱོགས	point upwards	gyen du phyogs
གྱེན་དུ་འཕུལ	to be pushed upwards	gyen du 'phul
གྱེན་དུ་བརྩེགས་ཏེ	ascend in tiers	gyen du brtsegs te
གྱེན་དུ་ཛག	climb up	gyen du dzag
གྱེན་དུ་འཛེག་པ	one who walks up a steep incline	gyen du 'dzeg pa
གྱེན་དུ་འཛེག་པ་པོ	one who ascends	gyen du 'dzeg pa po
གྱེན་དུ་འཛེགས	to climb up, climbed up	gyen du 'dzegs
གྱེན་དུ་བརྫིས་པ	turn up, cock a hat	gyen du brdzis pa
གྱེན་དུ་གཟེང	remain uplifted gyen du g.yos pa - ascending	gyen du gzeng
གྱེན་དུ་ལངས	stood up	gyen du langs
གྱེན་དུ་ལངས་པ	to stand up	gyen du langs pa
གྱེན་དུ་ལུས་པ	keep above water	gyen du lus pa
གྱེན་དུ་ལོག	reversing [up]	gyen du log
གྱེན་དུ་སོང་བ	moving upwards	gyen du song ba
གྱེན་དུ་སླང	raise vertically or perpendicularly 415	gyen du slang
གྱེན་དུ་སློང་བ	raise upwards	gyen du slong ba
གྱེན་དུ་བསླང་པ	raised upwards	gyen du bslang pa
གྱེན་དུ་བསླངས	lifted up	gyen du bslangs
གྱེན་འདེགས	yar 'gyog pa	gyen 'degs
གྱེན་འདྲེན	bring/ draw/ lad upward	gyen 'dren
གྱེན་འདྲེན་སྨན	emetic [medicine clearing upper body diseases and vomiting upward having qualities of fire and wind, eg, ri sho and spyang tser]	gyen 'dren sman
གྱེན་ལྡོག	1) reverse, turn around; 2) rebel[lion], revolt, uprising; 2) bka' be little/ condescend to; 3) yar log pa	gyen ldog
གྱེན་ལྡོག་གི་རང་བཞིན	rebellious	gyen ldog gi rang bzhin
གྱེན་ལྡོག་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	reverse	gyen ldog tu gtong ba
གྱེན་ལྡོག་པ	rebel	gyen ldog pa
གྱེན་ལྡོག་བྱེད	1) reverse, turn around; 2) rebel, revolt, conduct uprising	gyen ldog byed
གྱེན་ལྡོག་བྱེད་པ	revolt, resist	gyen ldog byed pa
གྱེན་བརྡོལ	fly/ rise upward	gyen brdol
གྱེན་རྣ་ཅན	owl	gyen rna can
གྱེན་ཕྱོགས་སུ	upward	gyen phyogs su
གྱེན་ཕྱོགས་སུ་འཛེགས	climbing upwards	gyen phyogs su 'dzegs
གྱེན་འཕུར་གནམ་གྲུ	helicopter	gyen 'phur gnam gru
གྱེན་འཕྱུར	1) fly/ rise/ surge upward; 2) (met mt	gyen 'phyur
གྱེན་འབྱུང	dbugs 'tshang ba'i disease	gyen 'byung
གྱེན་མ་གསེག	gyen gzar po ma yin pa	gyen ma gseg
གྱེན་མིག	2nd of the 7 lower regions under the earth	gyen mig
གྱེན་མིག་ཅན	sha ra bha: 8 legged lion	gyen mig can
གྱེན་བརྩེགས	mt	gyen brtsegs
གྱེན་མཛེས	streaming upwards	gyen mdzes
གྱེན་འཛེགས	to climb up	gyen 'dzegs
གྱེན་ཟློག	revolution, revolt, rebellion	gyen zlog
གྱེན་གཟར་པོ	steep ascent	gyen gzar po
གྱེན་བཟློག་པ	vomit	gyen bzlog pa
གྱེན་ལ	upward	gyen la
གྱེན་ལ་བལྟ་བ	be uplifted	gyen la blta ba
གྱེན་ལ་བལྟ་བ་ཡིན	looking upward	gyen la blta ba yin
གྱེན་ལ་འཐེན་པ	pull up, hoist	gyen la 'then pa
གྱེན་ལ་དྲང་པོ	perpendicular, vertical	gyen la drang po
གྱེན་ལངས	revolt, uprising, rebellion	gyen langs
གྱེན་ལམ	uphill road, ascent	gyen lam
གྱེན་ལོག	1) reverse; 2) revolt, revolution; 3) kan tur slog pa	gyen log
གྱེན་སློང	raise/ hoist/ lift up	gyen slong
གྱེན་གསེག	gsegs lam	gyen gseg
གྱེར	1) to chant, to sing. 2) to scatter, distribute. 3) pull; imp. of {gyer ba}; to go astray, fall into (a state)	gyer
གྱེར་ཁ	bell; bells, set of bells	gyer kha
གྱེར་བག་པ	luminous space	gyer bga pa
གྱེར་སྒོམ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་སེང་གེ	{gyer sgom tshul khrims seng ge} [b 2nd	gyer sgom tshul khrims seng ge
གྱེར་སྒོམ་བཞི	B"n yogic application text	gyer sgom bzhi
གྱེར་བསྒོམ	bonpo meditation	gyer bsgom
གྱེར་ཆུང	w little fame	gyer chung
གྱེར་ཆེན	greatly famed	gyer chen
གྱེར་པ	to have strayed [into], bon du	gyer pa
གྱེར་པོ	wise, prudent, circumspect,	gyer po
ཐོརོཨུགྷ	going	thorough
གྱེར་པོ་ཆེ	illustrious, widely renowned, famed [one]	gyer po che
གྱེར་སྤུངས	master, masters gyer spungs snang bzer lod po 'khor lo	gyer spungs
བཞི་སྦྲགས	teacher of Tapihritsa	bzhi sbrags
གྱེར་བ	ft. of {gyer ba}; {gyer ba, gyer ba, gyer ba, gyer} trans. v.; strayed; pf. of {gyer ba}	gyer ba
གྱེར་བག	a light luminous place	gyer bag
གྱེར་དབྱངས	tune, melody	gyer dbyangs
གྱེར་མ	Guinea pepper	gyer ma
གྱེར་མི་ཉི་འོད	{gter ston} fl. 1108	gyer mi nyi 'od
གྱེར་མོ	(ritual) chanting	gyer mo
གྱེར་ལིང	high breed horse or pony	gyer ling
གྱེལ	turn upside down, SA 'gyel ba	gyel
གྱེལ་བ	to be idle, lazy, slothful, idleness, laziness	gyel ba
གྱེལ་མེད་སྲུང་བཞིན་འགྲོ	careful, alert	gyel med srung bzhin 'gro
གྱེས	divide; to separate, split apart/ to multiply; spread out; p. of gye. 1) to separate, go one's own way. 2) to radiate	gyes
གྱེས་བརྗེས	raised up, magnanimous, noble	gyes brjes
གྱེས་མདོ	dividing point, junction	gyes mdo
གྱེས་པ	gathers, extends, diffuse, analyze, resolve, separate, split asunder	gyes pa
གྱེས་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 divisions of Hinayana	gyes pa bco brgyad
གྱེས་མཚམས	the point at which a river forks or bifurcates; {gyes so} [mss]	gyes mtshams
གྱེས་འཛོམས	reunion, separation and coming together	gyes 'dzoms
གྱེས་ལ	gyes pass	gyes la
གྱེས་སོ	[path, tree] branches etc. juncture, dividing point	gyes so
གྱེས་སླ	{tshong dus mgron po bas kyang gyes sla} as easily parted from as from people met in a marketplace	gyes sla
གྱོ	dishonesty	gyo
གྱོ་དགེ་འབྱུང	one of the 'three men from khams' who managed to preserve the Vinaya under the suppression of {glang dar ma}	gyo dge 'byung
གྱོ་དུམ	sugar, potsherd, brick tile	gyo dum
གྱོ་མོ	gravel, grit, potsherd, clay vessel	gyo mo
གྱོ་མོ་འཇམ་པོ	smooth brick	gyo mo 'jam po
གྱོག་པ	curved, crooked, left-handed, awkward, to cover	gyog pa
གྱོག་པོ	[not g.y] crooked, curved	gyog po
གྱོག་བའི་ཉམས	experience of turbulence	gyog ba'i nyams
གྱོག་མོ	female servant	gyog mo
གྱོགས	cannon, cover, covering	gyogs
གྱོང	needs/ harsh, rude; 1) loss. 2) stubborn, harsh, hardened, wild, untamed, unruly. Syn {gyong po} 3) lawsuit. 4) want, need, indigence; stubborn	gyong
གྱོང་ཀུན	loss	gyong kun
གྱོང་བསྐུར	1) make someone suffer a loss; 2) sacrifice, reduce to the bare necessity	gyong bskur
གྱོང་ཁ	part that was lost or did not occur 416	gyong kha
གྱོང་ཁེལ	gyong chags pa'am thob skal gyi 'bor tshad chag pa	gyong khel
གྱོང་འཁེལ་བ	suffer losses	gyong 'khel ba
གྱོང་གུན	loss	gyong gun
གྱོང་གུན་གཏོང་བ	suffer/ take a loss	gyong gun gtong ba
གྱོང་གྲུགས	[arch] 1) in the bskal pa ya thog, mi rnams kyi zas su rung ba'i sa zhag; 2) Sa'i tshi zhag	gyong grugs
གྱོང་ཆེ	it is a great loss	gyong che
གྱོང་མཉམ་ཐུག་པ	of similar power, ngar ba, mkhregs pa	gyong mnyam thug pa
གྱོང་མཉམ་གདོང་གཏུགས	mi ngar po dang ngar po dngos su 'thab pa	gyong mnyam gdong gtugs
གྱོང་གཏོང	make someone suffer a loss [usu by deceit]	gyong gtong
གྱོང་དང་ཕམ་ཁ	{gyong dang pham kha thams cad rang gis longs} take loss and defeat upon yourself	gyong dang pham kha
གྱོང་དང་བུབ་ཀ	{gyong dang bub ka rang gis len khe dang rgyal kha sems can la sbyin/ gyong dang bub ka rang gis len} offering gain and victory to sentient beings and taking loss and defeat for oneself	gyong dang bub ka
གྱོང་པོ	harsh, inflexible, restive, rigorous, rude, stiff, tough, wild, SA reng ba, crooked, rough, hard to understand	gyong po
རྒྱུད་གྱོང་པོ	our tough minds	rgyud gyong po
བྱས	tried my best to soften my rigid mind	byas
གྱོང་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not stiff	gyong po ma yin pa
གྱོང་ཕོག	incur loss [business]	gyong phog
གྱོང་བ	very rude, impudent	gyong ba
གྱོང་རྩུབ	harsh, rough	gyong rtsub
གྱོང་རག	suffer losses [business]	gyong rag
གྱོང་རག་པ	great/ major loss	gyong rag pa
གྱོང་རགས	suffer losses [business]	gyong rags
གྱོང་རལ	film of dirt on surface of water, scum	gyong ral
གྱོང་རུ་བ	1) rgyud gyong po can; 2) w/o moisture becoming dry gyong	gyong ru ba
གྱོང་རོ	dried up, shrivelled	gyong ro
གྱོང་རོལ	(A; 1) sa zhag ste in the bskal pa ya thog sa steng nas natural zhag rtsi mi'i edible; 2) Sa rdul sogs rdzing chu'i khar chags nas byung ba'i spris ma lta bu zhig foam, froth	gyong rol
གྱོང་ལ་བསྐུར	make someone suffer a loss	gyong la bskur
གྱོང་སིལ་སིལ	gyong shas chetsamgyi tshul,...Mi de'i lus po gyong sil sil zhig red	gyong sil sil
གྱོང་གསབ	compensation, recompense	gyong gsab
གྱོང་ཧྲག་ཧྲག	mostly rough/ coarse	gyong hrag hrag
གྱོད	lawsuit, pretence	gyod
གྱོད་ཀ	dispute, loss, quarrel, law-suit	gyod ka
གྱོད་ཀ་གཏུག	sue, file a complaint/ law case	gyod ka gtug
གྱོད་ཀ་གཏུག་པ	sue, file a complaint/ law case	gyod ka gtug pa
གྱོད་ཀ་གཏུགས	sued, filed a complaint/ law case	gyod ka gtugs
གྱོད་ཀ་གཏུགས་པ	sued, filed a complaint/ law case	gyod ka gtugs pa
གྱོད་ཀྱི་ནང་དུ་ཚུད་མཁན	party in a lawsuit/ quarrel	gyod kyi nang du tshud mkhan
གྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས	party in a lawsuit/ quarrel	gyod kyi phyogs gtogs
གྱོད་ཁ	dispute, loss, quarrel, law-suit	gyod kha
གྱོད་ཁ་རྩོད་པ	quarrel, conduct a	gyod kha rtsod pa
གྱོད་ཁོངས	party in a lawsuit/ quarrel	gyod khongs
གྱོད་འཁྲུན	gyod thag .Lo mang po song yang, da dung gyod 'khrun chod ma song	gyod 'khrun
གྱོད་གཅོད	settle a case/ quarrel/ dispute	gyod gcod
གྱོད་ཆགས	gyod dang byur chags	gyod chags
གྱོད་གཏུག	sue, file a complaint/ law case	gyod gtug
གྱོད་གཏུགས	sued, filed a complaint/ law case	gyod gtugs
གྱོད་ཐག་གཅོད	settle a case/ quarrel/ dispute	gyod thag gcod
གྱོད་ཐོག་གྱོད་བརྩེགས	1) kha mchu gcig thog nyis brtsegs byung ba; 2) Nag nyes thog la nag nyes brtsegs pa	gyod thog gyod brtsegs
གྱོད་དོན	law case	gyod don
གྱོད་བརྡལ་བྱས	khag 'phang gi bsnyon btsugs pa'am ya la dkris pa	gyod brdal byas
གྱོད་རྩ	source of a quarrel/ law-suit	gyod rtsa
གྱོད་འཚོལ	rtsod gleng ched du 'tshol ba,...Sngar 'khon zhe la bzhag nas ched du gyod 'tshol byas pa	gyod 'tshol
གྱོད་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt. sger chos etc. che khag bar gyi legal dispute deciding office	gyod zhib las khungs
གྱོད་གཞི	a contest-ground/ basis for a quarrel	gyod gzhi
གྱོད་ཡ	party/ defendant in a legal dispute	gyod ya
གྱོད་ཡ་འཛིན	bring to trial	gyod ya 'dzin
གྱོད་ལོག	appeal [of legal decision]	gyod log
གྱོད་ལོག་ཁྲ་ལོག	kha mchu ma 'dums &, dpyad khra khrims sar phyir log pa	gyod log khra log
གྱོད་ལོག་རྒྱག	appeal [legal decision]	gyod log rgyag
གྱོད་ལོག་བྱེད	appeal [legal decision]	gyod log byed
གྱོད་གཤོད་པ	pretend	gyod gshod pa
གྱོན	imp. of {gyon pa}. Syn {gyon pa}	gyon
གྱོན་འཁྱིལ	rotating anti-clockwise	gyon 'khyil
གྱོན་གོས	clothing, dressing	gyon gos
གྱོན་རྒྱུ	materials for clothing	gyon rgyu
གྱོན་རྒྱུའི་གོས	clothes to wear	gyon rgyu'i gos
གྱོན་ཅན	demon, fornicator, garlic	gyon can
གྱོན་ཆས	clothes, clothing, garb, garment, clothes	gyon chas
གྱོན་ཆས་སྒྱུར་བ	[ex]change clothing	gyon chas sgyur ba
གྱོན་ཆས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	clothing/ garment factory	gyon chas bzo grwa
གྱོན་ཆས་ལུས་འབྱར་ཙམ་ལས་མེད	w no clothes but those [they] had on	gyon chas lus 'byar tsam las med
གྱོན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	to cover, put on, wear	gyon du 'jug pa
གྱོན་འདང	gyon ldeng	gyon 'dang
གྱོན་ལྡང	gyon pa gcig gi rgyu long tshad	gyon ldang
གྱོན་ལྡེང	gyon pa gcig gi rgyu long tshad	gyon ldeng
གྱོན་ནས	emphatic negative adverb, never, in double negative constructions	gyon nas
གྱོན་པ	to put on, wear; pf. of {gyon pa}; ft. of {gyon pa}; 1) v. to wear, put on, don, cover oneself, drape, be dressed in, wrap around, drape over [one's shoulders]. 2) clothing, dress. 3) left; {gyon p...	gyon pa
གྱོན་པོ	[arch] contender in strength/ skill	gyon po
གྱོན་ཕྱིང	felt clothing/ draping	gyon phying
གྱོན་ཟིན་པ	wore, worn	gyon zin pa
གྱོན་ལྷམ	shoes to put on	gyon lham
གྱོབ་པ	to move about to, to swing, brandish	gyob pa
གྱོམ	deception	gyom
གྱོམ་པ	deception	gyom pa
གྱོམ་ལས	careless	gyom las
གྱོར་མོ	sail	gyor mo
གྱོལ	deceitfulness	gyol
གྱོལ་པོ	lame	gyol po
གྱོལ་བ	deceitfulness	gyol ba
གྱོས	stirring, quivered, spread, roll, activated, actuated, wavering [w/o from samadhi], depart, hypocrisy [one of the 20 upakleshas/ sub-disturbances], deceit, dishonesty	gyos
གྱོས་འགྱུར	shook and trembled	gyos 'gyur
གྱོས་སྒྱུག	mother /father in law	gyos sgyug
གྱོས་པ	perturbable	gyos pa
གྱོས་པོ	father-in-law	gyos po
གྱོས་མི་སྟོན་པ	not be deceitful	gyos mi ston pa
གྱོས་མོ	mother in law	gyos mo
གྱོས་རབ་ཏུ་གྱོས	shook and trembled	gyos rab tu gyos
གྲ	1) fence, yard. 2) angle, shape, stripe, corner. 3) abbr. of {grva pa} 4) school. 5) coat. Comp. with {grva}	gra
གྲ་ཁེབས	horse/mule's back g.yog byed	gra khebs
གྲ་འགྲིག	1) 'thus sgo/ preparations/preliminaries arranged/complete and able/ready to do the main part; 2) go smoothly, work out well, go according to plan	gra 'grig
གྲ་འགྲིག་འཐུས་ཚང	a project completed w/o obstruction, accomplishing its goal	gra 'grig 'thus tshang
གྲ་འགྲིག་པ	'thus sgo/ preparations/preliminaries arranged/complete and able/ready to do the main part	gra 'grig pa
གྲ་འགྲིག་པོ	in good order, neat, tidy	gra 'grig po
གྲ་འགྲིག་པོ་ཡོང	preparations/ arrangements were completed	gra 'grig po yong
གྲ་འགྲིག་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	preparations/ preliminaries completed	gra 'grig phun sum tshogs pa
གྲ་འགྲིགས	1) 'thus sgo/ preparations/preliminaries arranged/completed and able/ready to do the main part; 2) went smoothly, worked out well/ according to plan	gra 'grigs
གྲ་རྒྱས	thick and abundant, elaborate preparations	gra rgyas
གྲ་རྒྱས་པ	great spread of power and wealth	gra rgyas pa
གྲ་རྒྱས་པོ	elaborate	gra rgyas po
གྲ་རྒྱས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	complete in desirable qualities	gra rgyas phun sum tshogs pa
གྲ་སྒོམ	scholarly and contemplative monks	gra sgom
གྲ་སྒྲིག	preparation	gra sgrig
གྲ་སྒྲིག་གི་ཚུལ	readiness	gra sgrig gi tshul
གྲ་སྒྲིག་གྲོས་ཚོགས	preliminary [discussion] meeting	gra sgrig gros tshogs
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཏུ	readily	gra sgrig tu
གྲ་སྒྲིག་པོ	everything put in order, looking neat and clean	gra sgrig po
གྲ་སྒྲིག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	dispose	gra sgrig po byed pa
གྲ་སྒྲིག་དཔུང་ཁག	reserve forces/ troops	gra sgrig dpung khag
གྲ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	prepare [for], arrange	gra sgrig byed
གྲ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	to prepare	gra sgrig byed pa
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཚན་ཁག	preliminary course	gra sgrig tshan khag
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཚོགས་པ	preparatory committee	gra sgrig tshogs pa
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཡུན་ཚད	probationary period	gra sgrig yun tshad
གྲ་སྒྲིག་རེད་པས	are [they] ready?	gra sgrig red pas
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ལྷན་ཚོགས	preparatory committee	gra sgrig lhan tshogs
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨང་བསར	all ready, set	gra sgrig ang bsar
གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	preparation committee	gra sgrig u yon lhan khang
གྲ་སྒྲིགས	prepare!	gra sgrigs
གྲ་བརྒྱབ་པ	gzan pa'i gra ma phyugs kyi lce 'og tu zug nas rma bzos pa	gra brgyab pa
གྲ་བསྒྲིག	will prepare, preparatory/ preliminary actions, preparation, prepared, ready, preparatory, held in reserve	gra bsgrig
གྲ་བསྒྲིགས	prepared, arranged	gra bsgrigs
གྲ་ཆག་གྲུ་ཉམས	dngos por skyon shor ba, g.yar zhus dngos po tshang ma gra chag gru nyams med par rtsis 'bul zhus yod	gra chag gru nyams
གྲ་ཆགས་པོ	nice and smooth or glossy, very fine, fit and outwardly appearing nice, appropriate, elegant, looking well	gra chags po
གྲ་ཆུ	spu gshis rtsub po'i gra	gra chu
གྲ་ཏི	plate, dish	gra ti
གྲ་རྟེན་ལེགས་འགྲིགས	successful, well, fine gra rten legs 'grigs nang nas grol song ended successfully	gra rten legs 'grigs
གྲ་དག	cleansing, purification	gra dag
གྲ་དང་ཕུབ	bristles of barley grain and its chaff	gra dang phub
གྲ་དུ་རྒྱས	display [show off the colors]	gra du rgyas
གྲ་དོལ	abbr of 2 names of places called lho gra and nang dol	gra dol
གྲ་སྡེབ	1) pags pa'i spu gra snyoms sgrig; 2) tshogs pa gcig tu bsdebs pa'am ngan 'brel,...Mi ngan gra sdeb byas nas yul lung dkrugs	gra sdeb
གྲ་སྡེབས	proper order, arrangement	gra sdebs
གྲ་ནང	name of village in lho kha	gra nang
གྲ་པ	monks, employees	gra pa
གྲ་པ་རགས་བཞི	4 trustworthy students	gra pa rags bzhi
གྲ་པད	a great lama who unearthed many works, net before the window to	gra pad
པྲེབེ༹ནཏ་པསསེརས	by from looking into the room, carvings in wood	prevent passers
གྲ་པའི	monastic	gra pa'i
གྲ་ཕུད	grain ears awn/ beard/ hairs	gra phud
གྲ་ཕུབ	bristles of barley grain and is chaff	gra phub
གྲ་ཕྱི	name of village in lho kha	gra phyi
གྲ་ཕྱི་རྩིས་བཤེར	The review at Trapchi (ceremony on the 23rd day of the 1st Tibetan month)	gra phyi rtsis bsher
གྲ་ཕྱི་ཚོང་འདུས	great mart of trade in lho kha during 11th cent	gra phyi tshong 'dus
གྲ་བ	a muzzle gra ma - a beard, awl	gra ba
གྲ་སྦུག	musical instrument of chinese make, cymbal	gra sbug
གྲ་སྦུག་ཆ་རེ་རེ	each pair of cymbal	gra sbug cha re re
གྲ་སྦུབ	kind of good sound of a musical instrument	gra sbub
གྲ་མ	awn	gra ma
གྲ་མ་འགྲིག	preparations/preliminaries not completed	gra ma 'grig
གྲ་མ་ཅན	1) having gra ma [grain]; 2) in the penis gra mas khengs snyam pa'i painful penis disease	gra ma can
གྲ་མ་ཆག་པ	complete/ unbroken	gra ma chag pa
གྲ་མ་ཆག་ཟུར་མ་ཉམས་པར	intact, complete, Thrangu Rinpoche: "luster not lost, corners not broken; {cha tshang ba}	gra ma chag zur ma nyams par
གྲ་མ་ཆེ	king of ancient time	gra ma che
གྲ་མ་ཉམས	unchanged, shape unimpaired	gra ma nyams
གྲ་མ་ཉམས་པ	complete/ unbroken	gra ma nyams pa
གྲ་མ་ཉམས་པར	undamaged, unimpaired, whole, entire, perfect, sound, intact, unbroken, flawless, uninjured, unblemished, unmarred	gra ma nyams par
གྲ་མ་ལེགས་པ	hairs of wild animals when thick and glossy	gra ma legs pa
གྲ་རྩུབ	bal gyi gra rtsub po	gra rtsub
གྲ་ཚང	lamasery, monastery	gra tshang
གྲ་འཛུམ	stripe, well striped	gra 'dzum
གྲ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt. office, las 'gan ni dngul dang zangs shog bcas la dngul par brgyab nas 'grems rgyu dang, dngul gsar rnying brje rgyu, debt gtong rgyu etc	gra bzhi las khungs
གྲ་བཞུར	burn [cloth] spu gra	gra bzhur
གྲ་ཟུག་པ	in great cold horses hair tips 'khums pa [shrivel?	gra zug pa
གྲ་ཟུར	corner or junction of sides	gra zur
གྲ་རུ	bowl etc dkrug byed [turning?] wheel's left and right ru shing	gra ru
གྲ་རུ་རྒྱས	fully display, show off the colors	gra ru rgyas
གྲ་ལེགས་པ	hairs of wild animals when thick and glossy	gra legs pa
གྲ་ལོ་རྒྱས་པོ	great spreading	gra lo rgyas po
གྲ་ཤ་འཆད	to tire oneself	gra sha 'chad
གྲ་གསར	novice	gra gsar
གྲྭ	angle, corner, side, lap, lappet, extremity, school, extremity, tophouse, dome, school house, monk's residence	grwa
གརབ༹	1) place where something is done or sde tshan; 2) corner, angle	grva
གརབ༹་སྐལ	monk's 'gyed skal	grva skal
གྲྭ་སྐོར	academic tour	grwa skor
གྲྭ་སྐོར་པ	monk pilgrim	grwa skor pa
གརབ༹་སྐོར་བ	rtsod grva khag tu bskyod nas dogs gcod bgro gleng byed mkhan	grva skor ba
གྲྭ་ཁང	top house, dome, schoolhouse, monk's residence	grwa khang
གརབ༹་ཁང	monks living house	grva khang
གརབ༹་ཁྲལ	grva khongs su 'jug pa'i btsun khral	grva khral
གྲྭ་གྱུ་སྒང་བྲག	a Guru Rinpoche cave	grwa gyu sgang brag
གྲྭ་གྱོག	monk servant / attendant	grwa gyog
གརབ༹་གྲངས	count of the sangha	grva grangs
གྲྭ་གྲངས	number of candidate monks in a monastery	grwa grangs
གྲྭ་རྒན	1) old / senior monk. 2) senior monk [in years of ordination]	grwa rgan
གརབ༹་རྒན	1) old monk; 2) sgrigs zhugs snga ba	grva rgan
གྲྭ་རྒྱུན	a continuing monk	grwa rgyun
གརབ༹་རྒྱུན	monks and nuns yong sa'i rgyun	grva rgyun
གྲྭ་མངོན་ཤེས་ཅན	clairvoyant monk	grwa mngon shes can
གརབ༹་ལྔ	gzungs chen grva five	grva lnga
གྲྭ་ལྔ	{gzungs chen grwa lnga}	grwa lnga
གརབ༹་ཆས	monks garments	grva chas
གྲྭ་ཆས	monastic robes, monk's clothes, the garb of a monk or nun	grwa chas
གྲྭ་ཆུང	novice monk	grwa chung
གརབ༹་ཇ	grva tshang nas gtong ba'i tea	grva ja
གྲྭ་ཏི	plate, dish	grwa ti
གརབ༹་རྟགས	embroidered sign of monkhood [eg: conch, lotus, leaves, jewel]	grva rtags
གྲྭ་ཐང	corner or nook in a plain	grwa thang
གརབ༹་ཐོག	monks's mi rabs rgan gzhon	grva thog
གྲྭ་སྡེ	monastery	grwa sde
གརབ༹་སྡེབ	dpung stobs sgrig pa	grva sdeb
གྲྭ་ནང	Grwanang [district in yerpa	grwa nang
ཨེཨསཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཡར	klungs, upper {mdo khams}	east of yar
གྲྭ་ནང་ཐང	monastery	grwa nang thang
གརབ༹་ནང་བྱམས་གླིང	{grva nang byams gling} monestery [founded in the 8th century in the water dragon yr by thu mi lhun grub bkra shis in lho kha'i yar klungs gtzang po'i lho'i ri ldebs]	grva nang byams gling
གྲྭ་པ	monk, ordained person, student	grwa pa
གརབ༹་པ	monk	grva pa
གརབ༹་པ་བཀའ་ལོག་པ	after renunciate discipline is damaged or yar phul, returning home	grva pa bka' log pa
གྲྭ་པ་བཀའ་ལོག་པ	fallen monk who has become a layman	grwa pa bka' log pa
གརབ༹་པ་གརབ༹་རྐྱང	renunciate w/o support of desire and going and remaining in virtue	grva pa grva rkyang
གརབ༹་པ་མངོན་ཤེས་ཅན	= shes rab rgyal ba or dbang phyug 'bar	grva pa mngon shes can
གྲྭ་པ་མངོན་ཤེས་ཅན	the "Monk Learned in Abhidharma" also known as {shes rab rgyal ba}, {dbang phyug 'bar} [1012]. Revealed terma on medicine	grwa pa mngon shes can
གརབ༹་པ་རྡབ་བེ་རྡོབ་བེ	1) monk neither young nor old; 2) Dpe cha mi lta ba'i yang yeng can	grva pa rdab be rdob be
གྲྭ་པ་གནང་བ	(h) to become a monk	grwa pa gnang ba
གརབ༹་པ་གནས་སྐོར་བ	pilgrim monk	grva pa gnas skor ba
གྲྭ་པ་དཔེ་ཆ་བ	scholar monk	grwa pa dpe cha ba
གརབ༹་པ་དཔེ་ཆ་བ	monk who studies [philosophical] pechas	grva pa dpe cha ba
གྲྭ་པ་བྱེད་པ	become a monk	grwa pa byed pa
གྲྭ་པ་ལོག་བ	Syn {grva log}	grwa pa log ba
གྲྭ་དཔོན	schoolmaster, chief monk	grwa dpon
གྲྭ་ཕོར	monk's bowl	grwa phor
གརབ༹་ཕོར	grva shag so sor tea drinking shing phor	grva phor
གརབ༹་ཕྲུག	child monk, btsun chung	grva phrug
གྲྭ་ཕྲུག	novice	grwa phrug
གརབ༹་འཕྱགས	rab tu byung ran pa'i mi tshang ma obligation og becoming a monk	grva 'phyags
གརབ༹་བུ་སློབ	pupil in a school	grva bu slob
གྲྭ་བུ་སློབ	1) ordained disciples. 2) monks and disciples; monks and disciples	grwa bu slob
གརབ༹་བུ་སློབ་ཡོན་བདག	monks, disciples, and patrons	grva bu slob yon bdag
གྲྭ་མ་ཅན	grain which has a beard, unthreshed grain	grwa ma can
གརབ༹་མ་ཉམས་ཁྲུལ་མ་ཉམས	1) unchanged, unimpaired. 2) not distorted by being compartmentalized or confused	grva ma nyams khrul ma nyams
གྲྭ་མང	community of monks	grwa mang
གརབ༹་མང	many monks	grva mang
གརབ༹་དམག	ser dmag; dmag 'gro weapon carrying monk	grva dmag
གྲྭ་དམངས	the [general congregation of] monks, monastic community, # of monks in residence	grwa dmangs
གརབ༹་དམངས	grva mang byings	grva dmangs
གརབ༹་བཙུན	pure monks	grva btsun
གྲྭ་བཙུན	monks and nuns	grwa btsun
གརབ༹་ཚང	monastic college [eg Mtshan nyid/ Sngags pa/ Dus 'khor/ Ser byes grva tshang]	grva tshang
གྲྭ་ཚང	monks' quarters of a Buddhist monastery	grwa tshang
གརབ༹་ཚང་ཆོས་མཛད	monk in a monastic college gtong sgo btang nas receiving special responsibilities/powers	grva tshang chos mdzad
གརབ༹་ཚབ	grva pa'i tshab	grva tshab
གརབ༹་ཚོགས	1) assembly of the sangha; 2) # of monks	grva tshogs
གྲྭ་ཚོགས	convention of monks, congregation	grwa tshogs
གྲྭ་གཞོན	novice	grwa gzhon
གརབ༹་གཞོན	young/ novice monk	grva gzhon
གྲྭ་བཞི	the four corners	grwa bzhi
གརབ༹་བཞི་རྩིས་བཤེར	1st month 23rd day, smon lam gtor rgyab 500 cavalry &, gzims pa etc. tshang min grangs bsher gtong ba'i brtsi gzhag gi byed sgo zhig	grva bzhi rtsis bsher
གྲྭ་བཞིར	four corners, four sides of a house, in the four corners, on the four sides of a house	grwa bzhir
གྲྭ་ཟུར	corner room, monk's cell, restrictions	grwa zur
གརབ༹་ཟུར	zur sne'am gru	grva zur
གྲྭ་ཟུར་མེད་པ	free from corners and edges	grwa zur med pa
གརབ༹་ཟུར་མེད་པ	without "hard edges"/ (sharp) edges/ angles or corners/ corners or edges	grva zur med pa
གྲྭ་གཟུགས	monk image exterior, fake monk	grwa gzugs
གརབ༹་གཟུགས	grva pa's reflection or cha byad	grva gzugs
གརབ༹་གཟུགས་དབོན་པོ	grva chas gyon pa'i skya bo	grva gzugs dbon po
གྲྭ་གཟུངས་ཐུབ	to keep one's integrity grwa g.yog - monk servant, monastic attendant grva g.yog - monk's servant	grwa gzungs thub
གརབ༹་རིགས	kinds of monks	grva rigs
གརབ༹་རུ	monastery khag gi grva tshang or, grva pa'i ru ba	grva ru
གྲྭ་ལན	monk's vest	grwa lan
གྲྭ་ལོག	fallen monk, monk who has broken 1 of his main vows [usually celibacy]	grwa log
གརབ༹་ལོག	monk who returns to being a layman	grva log
གརབ༹་ལོངས་པ	monks	grva longs pa
གརབ༹་ཤག	house where monks live	grva shag
གྲྭ་ཤག	monk's quarters	grwa shag
གརབ༹་ཤར	monk na gzhon	grva shar
གྲྭ་ས	monastery	grwa sa
གརབ༹་ས	monastery, monastic gathering	grva sa
གྲྭ་ས་གྲིམས་ཤིག	be attentive in the monastic school	grwa sa grims shig
གྲྭ་ས་ཆེན་པོ	great departmental school attached to large monastery	grwa sa chen po
གྲྭ་སར་སྒྲིག་ལ་ཞུགས	enroll in the regimen at a monastic center	grwa sar sgrig la zhugs
གྲག	hearing; see {grags}	grag
གྲག་སྟོང	audible and yet empty	grag stong
གྲག་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད	the inseparability of being audible and yet empty	grag stong dbyer med
གྲག་འདོད་ཅན	ambitious	grag 'dod can
གྲག་པ	{grag pa, grag pa, grag pa} intr. v.; 1) fame, reputation. 2) discuss, talk. 3) rumor, noise, to resound, be audible, be heard. 4) to hear, notice	grag pa
གྲགས་སྐམ	empty fame	grags skam
གྲགས་ཅ	echo	grags ca
གྲགས་ཅན	famous, renowned, beautiful, splendid, glorious, proud, merchant	grags can
གྲགས་ཆ	echo	grags cha
གྲགས་ཆེ	plays a role in, is important for, eminence, well known	grags che
གྲགས་ཆེ་བ	more famous, better known	grags che ba
གྲགས་ཆེན	(general name for a bodhisattva)	grags chen
གྲགས་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 renowned scriptures	grags chen bco brgyad
གྲགས་མཆོག	supremely famous	grags mchog
གྲགས་སྙན	fame, reputation	grags snyan
གྲགས་སྙན་དཀར་བ	good repute	grags snyan dkar ba
གྲགས་རྟགས	proof that is renowned	grags rtags
གྲགས་སྟོང	sound-emptiness	grags stong
གྲགས་འདོད	desire for fame	grags 'dod
གྲགས་ལྡན	intelligent, medicinal root	grags ldan
གྲགས་པ	1. (Tha mi dad pa,, 1) universal; 2) famous, renowned, well-known, widespread, illustrious, acknowledged fame, honor, renown, reputation, celebrity, glory; 3) known as; 4) called a disgrace; 5) bin...	grags pa
གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཙན	{grags pa rgyal mtsan} [son of sa chen kun dga' snying po, 3rd sa skya gong ma, b 3rd fire female rabbit, at 26 gdan sar bzhugs, died at 70 in the fire male mouse yr]	grags pa rgyal mtsan
གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Drakpa gyaltsen	grags pa rgyal mtshan
གྲགས་པ་ངན་པ	notorious, of ill repute	grags pa ngan pa
གྲགས་པ་ཅན	famous, renowned, wellknown	grags pa can
གྲགས་པ་ཆེ་བ	reputation	grags pa che ba
གྲགས་པ་ཆེན	1) great fame/ glory, greatly renowned, very famous; 2) bodhicitta	grags pa chen
གྲགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great fame/ glory, greatly renowned, very famous; 2) bodhicitta	grags pa chen po
གྲགས་པ་ཉམས་པའི་རྒྱུ་དྲུག	the six causes of grags pa nyams pa [rgyan 'gyed pa, 'dus pa la blta ba, le lo, chang 'thung ba, sdig grogs bsten pa, mtsan mo grong du 'gro ba]	grags pa nyams pa'i rgyu drug
གྲགས་པ་ཉིད	fame, renown	grags pa nyid
གྲགས་པ་ཐོབ་པ	learned man, learned	grags pa thob pa
གྲགས་པ་དམ་པ	immensely famous	grags pa dam pa
གྲགས་པ་དོན་གྲུབ	rgyal tshab IV, 15471613	grags pa don grub
གྲགས་པ་འདྲ	sound like	grags pa 'dra
གྲགས་པ་སྤངས	one who has renounced fame	grags pa spangs
གྲགས་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ	{grags pa byang chub	grags pa byang chub
གྲགས་པ་མིན་པ	[an] unknown	grags pa min pa
གྲགས་པ་ཡིན་པ	infamy	grags pa yin pa
གྲགས་པ་སེང་གེ	Drakpa Senge, Shamar I, 1283-1349 or 1350	grags pa seng ge
གྲགས་པའི་གོ་སར	raise to distinction	grags pa'i go sar
གྲགས་པའི་གོ་སར་འདེགས་པ	raise to a high rank	grags pa'i go sar 'degs pa
གྲགས་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཉིད	cause of fame	grags pa'i rgyu nyid
གྲགས་པའི་རྗེས་གྲུབ་པ	conventional /inherent existence	grags pa'i rjes grub pa
གྲགས་པའི་རྗེས་དཔག	inference from opinion	grags pa'i rjes dpag
གྲགས་པའི་རྟགས	proof of renown / convention. One of {rtags yang dag gsum}	grags pa'i rtags
གྲགས་པའི་དུང་བུད	sounding the conch of renown / fame	grags pa'i dung bud
གྲགས་པའི་དབྱངས	song of glory	grags pa'i dbyangs
གྲགས་པའི་མིང	accepted name grags pa'i ming dang ma grags pa'i ming Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {yul dus de dang der grags pa dang ma grags pa dper na ha sti ste lag ldan ces pa'i sgra glang po che la grags shing/ lag...	grags pa'i ming
གྲགས་པའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	name of brgya byin lha	grags pa'i mu khyud
གྲགས་པའི་མཙོ་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great and famous lakes [ma pham ga-yu mtso, byang gnam mtso phyug mo, yar 'brog ga-yu mtso, mtso sngon po khri shor rgyal mo]	grags pa'i mtso chen bzhi
གྲགས་པའི་མཚན་མ	mark/ proof of renown, convention	grags pa'i mtshan ma
གྲགས་པའི་མཚོ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	four renowned lakes: Yamdrok Yutso (yar 'brog g.yu mtsho), Trishö Gyalmo (khri shod rgyal mo) which is the same as Lingtso Ngönmo (ling mtsho sngon mo), Tso Mapham (mtsho ma pham), and Namtso to th...	grags pa'i mtsho chen brgyad
གྲགས་པའི་མཚོ་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great and famous lakes	grags pa'i mtsho chen bzhi
གྲགས་པས་བསལ་བ	thesis contradicted by worldly opinion	grags pas bsal ba
གྲགས་བ་བོན་ལུགས	the exoteric bon tradition	grags ba bon lugs
གྲགས་བྱིན	one of devoted Buddha attendants	grags byin
གྲགས་འབྱོར་ལྡན་པ	influential	grags 'byor ldan pa
གྲགས་སྦྱིན	Yashodeva, important monk follower of the Buddha	grags sbyin
གྲགས་མ	name of dpal ldan lha mo	grags ma
གྲགས་མ་གྲགས	known and unknown	grags ma grags
གྲགས་མེད	unknown, unsung	grags med
གྲགས་ཚོད	conventional opinion	grags tshod
གྲགས་ཚོད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ་གསུམ	Syn {steng lha'i srid pa} the world of gods above, {'og klu'i srid pa} the world of nagas below, {bar mi'i srid pa} the world of humans in between	grags tshod kyi srid pa gsum
གྲགས་འཛིན་མ	Shakyamuni's wife	grags 'dzin ma
གྲགས་ཡས	worldwide fame, boundless celebrity	grags yas
གྲགས་རུང་གི་ཐ་སྙད	acceptable name	grags rung gi tha snyad
གྲགས་ཤིང་གྲུབ	known and proven to be	grags shing grub
གྲགས་ཤིང་གསལ་བ	clear-sounding	grags shing gsal ba
གྲགས་སུ་ཁྱུད	name of legendary king	grags su khyud
གྲགས་སོ	rumors arose that [...]	grags so
གྲང	CM (snying): dri ba'am the tshom stong pa'i tshig grogs zhig. Archaic: an auxiliary word that indicates a question or a doubt. N.B. often written as "drang na" [mss]	grang
གྲང་ཀླུང	cold valley, large village in himalayas	grang klung
གྲང་སྐྱོབ	protection from cold, warm woolen clothes	grang skyob
གྲང་ཁུལ	cold place/ region, frigid/ arctic zone	grang khul
གྲང་ཁུལ་བྱང་མ	arctic circle	grang khul byang ma
གྲང་ཁུལ་ལྷོ་མ	antarctic circle, Antarctica	grang khul lho ma
གྲང་ཁྲག	mixed grang ba'i nad dang khrag nad	grang khrag
གྲང་མཁྲིས	bile's digestive power damaged grang ba shas che ba'i bile disorder, symptoms: mig sprin, sha mdog ser po, food not digested, white excrement etc]	grang mkhris
གྲང་འཁུམས	lus grang nas 'khums pa shrink back?]	grang 'khums
གྲང་འཁྲུ	cold phlegm shas che ba'i w mucus and foam/bubbles dysentery	grang 'khru
གྲང་གས	splitting w cold	grang gas
གྲང་གི་འདུག	he feels cold	grang gi 'dug
གྲང་གྲང	fresh	grang grang
གྲང་གྲུམ	mostly cold grum bu'i nad [= trem dkar]	grang grum
གྲང་གླང	by indigestion cold glang 'thab cig	grang glang
གྲང་གློག	air-conditioned	grang glog
གྲང་འགོག་གི་རང་བཞིན	cold-enduring/ resistant	grang 'gog gi rang bzhin
གྲང་འགྲོ་བར་འདུག	it will grow cold	grang 'gro bar 'dug
གྲང་རྒྱུན	cold wave	grang rgyun
གྲང་ངད	1) cold's ngar shugs cold[ness]; 2) cold wind, biting frost	grang ngad
གྲང་ངད་ཀྱི་དུས་རླབས	cold wave	grang ngad kyi dus rlabs
གྲང་ངད་ཆེ་བའི་ཁུལ	frigid/ arctic area	grang ngad che ba'i khul
གྲང་ངར	cold's ngar shugs, cold[ness], intense cold, biting frost	grang ngar
གྲང་ངར་ཀྱི་དུས་རླབས	cold wave	grang ngar kyi dus rlabs
གྲང་ངར་ཆུང	of the 12 months dbugs la little cold time	grang ngar chung
གྲང་ངར་ཆེ	very cold time of the year	grang ngar che
གྲང་ངར་ཆེ་བའི་ཁུལ	frigid/ arctic area	grang ngar che ba'i khul
གྲང་ངར་མི་བཟོད་པ	unbearable cold	grang ngar mi bzod pa
གྲང་ངེས	fixed number	grang nges
གྲང་ངོ	it is cold	grang ngo
གྲང་ཅང་ཅང	'khyags tshul lam 'khyags stangs shig ...Lhags bsil lus la phog pas grang cang cang byas byung	grang cang cang
གྲང་ཅན	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	grang can
གྲང་ཅན་པ	Samkhya. See {grangs can pa}	grang can pa
གྲང་ཆགས་རླང་བསྐོར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	condensing turbine	grang chags rlang bskor 'phrul chas
གྲང་ཆུ	1) urine in grang nad; 2) a disease	grang chu
གྲང་ཉུང	minority 422	grang nyung
གྲང་གཏམ་འཕྲོས་དོན་དུ	in all honestly	grang gtam 'phros don du
གྲང་ཐུབ	cold resistant/ enduring	grang thub
གྲང་ཐུབ་ལོ་ཐོག	cold resistant crops	grang thub lo thog
གྲང་ཐུར	dpyad kyi lag cha burn pain steng du dbug par bya ba'i thur ma spyi'i ming	grang thur
གྲང་ཐོག་ལས་སྣོན	cold processing	grang thog las snon
གྲང་དུག	from conflict of cold and heat glang thabs su gyur pa'i horse disease	grang dug
གྲང་དུས	winter	grang dus
གྲང་དྲོ	1) temperature; 2) cold and heat	grang dro
གྲང་དྲོད་ཆ་སྙོམས་ལྡན་པ	temperate grang drod cha snyoms ldan pa'i sa khul temperate zone	grang drod cha snyoms ldan pa
གྲང་འདར	lus grang ba dang 'dar ba'i wind disease symptom	grang 'dar
གྲང་ནག	a disease	grang nag
གྲང་ནད	1) disease after being chilled/ frozen; 2) gonorrhea	grang nad
གྲང་གནས	place w cold weather	grang gnas
གྲང་བ	cool, cold; 1) cold. 2) a sickness caused by phlegm disorder. 3) property of digested medicine	grang ba
གྲང་བ་དགུ	nine diseases from cold	grang ba dgu
གྲང་བ་གཏིང་འཁར	nad grang ba pas the time it can be cured; the body becomes weak, the physician breath external and internal movements gcig la pulse nadis ['phar rtsa] more than once or twice cannot 'phar get a pu...	grang ba gting 'khar
བསྔལ	the suffering of cold, heat, and so forth grang ba dang tsha ba la sogs pa'i sdug	bsngal
གྲང་བ་སེལ	warm, where there is no cold to remove	grang ba sel
གྲང་བ་ལྷིང་ཆད	phlegm smug po three times gyi nang tshan unaccompanied by heat; cold alone gyur pa'i don	grang ba lhing chad
གྲང་བའ་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of cold	grang ba' sdug bsngal
གྲང་བའི་ཁུལ	cold place/ region, frigid/ arctic zone	grang ba'i khul
གྲང་བའི་འཁྲུ་བ	cold phlegm shas che ba'i w mucus and foam/bubbles dysentery	grang ba'i 'khru ba
གྲང་བའི་ཆུ	arising from the body's earth and water elements increasing grang ba'i nad, symptoms: red or blue urine sla ba, rlangs pa dang dri ma chung ba, w big bubbles	grang ba'i chu
གྲང་བའི་དུས	cold season	grang ba'i dus
གྲང་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of cold	grang ba'i sdug bsngal
གྲང་བའི་ནད	cold fit of the ague, cold disturbances attributed to an increase in rlung and bad kan	grang ba'i nad
གྲང་བའི་གནས	cool place	grang ba'i gnas
གྲང་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	the cold hells	grang ba'i dmyal ba
གྲང་བའི་དམྱལ་བ་བརྒྱད	eight cold hells. Syn {grang dmyal brgyad}	grang ba'i dmyal ba brgyad
གྲང་བའི་རྩ	gold disease nadis	grang ba'i rtsa
གྲང་བའི་ཚོར་བ	feeling of cold, cold sensation	grang ba'i tshor ba
གྲང་བའི་ས་ཁུལ	cold place/ region, frigid/ arctic zone	grang ba'i sa khul
གྲང་བའི་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ	Syn {grang ba'i dmyal ba}	grang ba'i sems can dmyal ba
གྲང་བའི་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 cold hells grang ba'i sems can dmyal ba brgyad Syn {grang dmyal brgyad}	grang ba'i sems can dmyal ba brgyad
གྲང་བས་མནར་བ	suffer from cold	grang bas mnar ba
གྲང་བས་གཟིར	frozen or congealed by cold	grang bas gzir
གྲང་བས་ལུས་གཟིར་བ	body afflicted w cold	grang bas lus gzir ba
གྲང་མེད་བསྐལ་པ	incalculable aeon	grang med bskal pa
གྲང་མོ	cold	grang mo
གྲང་མོ་བཟོས་པ	chilled	grang mo bzos pa
གྲང་དམྱལ	cold hells	grang dmyal
གྲང་དམྱལ་བརྒྱད	[the eight] cold hells. 1) {chu bur can}. 2) {chu bur rdol ba} 3) {so thams thams pa} 4) {a chu zer ba} 5) {kyi hud zer ba} 6) u dpal ltar gas pa} 7) {pad-ma ltar gas pa} 8) {pad ma ltar chen gas pa}	grang dmyal brgyad
གྲང་ཚ	dngos chas mer ma bsregs par tsha la gtong ba'i thabs	grang tsha
གྲང་ཚལ	salad	grang tshal
གྲང་མཛོད	cold storage	grang mdzod
གྲང་འཛགས	lgang pa'i nad cig	grang 'dzags
གྲང་གཞི	disease induced by cold, dyspepsia	grang gzhi
གྲང་ཟིལ	1) grang ngad, grang ngar; 2) Zil pa grang mo	grang zil
གྲང་ཟུག	cooling power, piercing/ bitter cold	grang zug
གྲང་འོར	'or nad from cold [undigested food mixed w dvangs snyigs, dvangs ma'i lam du shor ba des bad blood spreads te sha lpags la byer bas chu ser increases and thur du lhung and lus g.yo bar gyur pa la "...	grang 'or
གྲང་རེག	cold to the touch	grang reg
གྲང་རེག་ཅན	winter	grang reg can
གྲང་རེག་ཕོ་ཉ	jack-daw	grang reg pho nya
གྲང་རླུང	1) cold wind; 2) Pho ba'i heat impaired, cold and wind combined: food not digested and lto ba sbos pa &, dpyi sked etc disease	grang rlung
གྲང་ཤས	aspect of cold	grang shas
གྲང་ཤུམ	[phyi rol gyi bser bu'i rlung gis bus pa etc ma yin par don med du lus grang shum byed pa'i rlung gi nad rtags shig ...Cham pa'i 'phrul gyis lus la grang shum rgyag pa,...Gzugs por grang shum rgyag...	grang shum
གྲང་ཤུམ་བྱེད	shiver from cold	grang shum byed
གྲང་ཤུམ་བྱེད་པ	shiver with cold, tremble, shudder	grang shum byed pa
གྲང་ས	cold place/ region	grang sa
གྲང་སངས	grang mo bzo ba	grang sangs
གྲང་སི་རི་རི	way of arising of cool/ cold wind	grang si ri ri
གྲང་སི་ལེ་བ	cool feeling	grang si le ba
གྲང་གསུམ་དྲོ་གསུམ	three [days] hot three cold	grang gsum dro gsum
གྲང་གསེར	phye mar btul ba'i gser 'byug dus not needing to be heated to pour	grang gser
ཕ༹ླ྾	seed binder	flax
གྲང་ལྷག	icy wind	grang lhag
གྲང་ལྷག་གི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of icy wind	grang lhag gi sdug bsngal
གྲང་ལྷགས	cold wind	grang lhags
གྲང་ལྷང་ལྷང	'khyag lhang lhang [Lhags pa'i dkyil du phyin na grang lhang lhang byas yong]	grang lhang lhang
གྲངས	cold, frequency, number, enumerate, multiplicity, quantity	grangs
ཏེན་ནོན	concurrent formations. Def: {tha mi dad pa gcig pu la mi 'thad pas 'du byed rnams kyi so sor tha dad par gnas pa'i cha'o}. 3) cold. Syn {grang}	ten non
གྲངས་ཀ	number, numeration, enumeration; numbers	grangs ka
གྲངས་ཀ་རྒྱབ་པ	count	grangs ka rgyab pa
གྲངས་ཀ་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete count	grangs ka ma tshang ba
གྲངས་ཀ་མིང་རྐྱང་མ	'jal byed tshad gzhi'i ming gcig las med pa'i grangs ka, [eg, khal gcig, rgya ma gsum]	grangs ka ming rkyang ma
གྲངས་ཀ་མིང་ཅན	assigned # of measure units [eg five miles]	grangs ka ming can
གྲངས་ཀ་མིང་སྦྲགས་མ	'jal byed tshad gzhi'i ming gnyis sam, mang po yod	grangs ka ming sbrags ma
གྲངས་ཀ་མིང་མེད་མ	# not assigned [one two 3]	grangs ka ming med ma
གྲངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	numerical comparisons; x {grangs kyi khyad par bsam pa} and reflecting on numerical comparisons	grangs kyi khyad par
གྲངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བསམ་པ	reflecting on / thinking of the difference in number / amount	grangs kyi khyad par bsam pa
གྲངས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	in terms of numbers / amount	grangs kyi sgo nas
གྲངས་ཀྱི་བསྙེན་པ	# recitation [to complete a set amount]	grangs kyi bsnyen pa
གྲངས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	arithmetical, enumeration	grangs kyi rnam grangs
གྲངས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ	manifestation of multiplicity	grangs kyi rnam pa
གྲངས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	numerical order, serial number	grangs kyi rim pa
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་ཆོད་པ	countable	grangs kyis chod pa
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་མི་ཆོད	incalculable; beyond count; innumerable	grangs kyis mi chod
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་མི་ཆོད་པ	countless, innumerable	grangs kyis mi chod pa
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་མི་ཟིན་པ	an incalculable number of	grangs kyis mi zin pa
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་མི་ལོངས	innumerable	grangs kyis mi longs
གྲངས་ཀྱིས་མི་ལོངས་པ	countless	grangs kyis mi longs pa
གྲངས་ཁྱོན	#, quantity, amount	grangs khyon
གྲངས་རྒྱག	count	grangs rgyag
གྲངས་རྒྱག་བྱེད	count	grangs rgyag byed
གྲངས་ངེས	definitive in number [ggd]	grangs nges
གྲངས་ངེས་བགོ་བཤའི་ལམ་ལུགས	quota system	grangs nges bgo bsha'i lam lugs
གྲངས་ཅན	finite; Samkhya, 'Enumerators', [a non-Buddhist school]. Syn {rig pa can}	grangs can
གྲངས་ཅན་གྱི་འདོད་པ	belief of numerism	grangs can gyi 'dod pa
གྲངས་ཅན་གྱི་སྨྲ་བ	Samkhya proponent	grangs can gyi smra ba
གྲངས་ཅན་བདག་སྐྱེ་འདོད་པ	Samkhyas	grangs can bdag skye 'dod pa
ཨཅཅེཔཏིང་སེལཕ༹	production	accepting self
གྲངས་ཅན་པ	Sankhya sect, Samkhya	grangs can pa
གྲངས་ཅན་པའི་རྟག་པར་ལྟ་བ	the Samkhya eternalist view	grangs can pa'i rtag par lta ba
གྲངས་ཅན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	Samkhya view	grangs can pa'i lta ba
གྲངས་ཅན་པའི་འདོད	samkhya system	grangs can pa'i 'dod
གྲངས་བཅད	#, establish[ed]/ fix[ed] #/ amount /size	grangs bcad
གྲངས་བཅད་ཀྱི་ལག་འཁྱེར	permit, license	grangs bcad kyi lag 'khyer
གྲངས་བཅས	dawn, goddess of the dawn, together with number	grangs bcas
གྲངས་ཆུང	[the] decimal fraction [...], decimal point	grangs chung
གྲངས་ཆུང་གི་ཐིག་ཚིག	decimal point	grangs chung gi thig tshig
གྲངས་ཉུང	minority, a few, limited #	grangs nyung
གྲངས་ཉུང་མི་རིགས	minority nationality	grangs nyung mi rigs
གྲངས་མཉམ	equal #/ amount 424	grangs mnyam
གྲངས་མཉམ་པ	equal number	grangs mnyam pa
གྲངས་བསྙེན་མཁན་པོ	practitioners of number recitation	grangs bsnyen mkhan po
གྲངས་ཐེམ་པ	fulfill the required #	grangs them pa
གྲངས་ཐེལ	common/ serf workers skyel 'dren 'u lag 'gro thengs many or few figuring du ngo la brgyab pa'i thel tshe	grangs thel
གྲངས་ཐོ	book, sheet, list, record etc to record #'s	grangs tho
གྲངས་ཐོ་རྒྱག	make list record of #	grangs tho rgyag
གྲངས་མཐའ	{grangs mtha' zad pa} - (attempts at) quantifying . . . fail	grangs mtha'
གྲངས་དང་གོ་རིམ	number and order	grangs dang go rim
གྲངས་དང་རྩིས	numbers and arithmetic	grangs dang rtsis
གྲངས་དང་ཚད་བཟུང	delimited and measured	grangs dang tshad bzung
གྲངས་འདེབས་པ	keeping score	grangs 'debs pa
གྲངས་འདྲེན་པ	count	grangs 'dren pa
གྲངས་སྡུད་པ	among the rnam dbye lnga pa,...Gcig nas brgya'i bar	grangs sdud pa
གྲངས་བརྡ	symbolical numbers	grangs brda
གྲངས་ནི	regarding quantity	grangs ni
གྲངས་གནས	# group/place [by # of decimal figures]	grangs gnas
གྲངས་གནས་དྲུག་ཅུ	60 former induan numbers by # of places [, ; 1) gcig 2) bcu, 3) brgya, 4) stong, 5) khri, 6) 'bum, 7) sa ya, 8) bye ba, 9) dung phyur te dgu bo re re nas brtzis pas rkyang@ba'i grangs gnas dgu dang...	grangs gnas drug cu
གྲངས་པ	synonymous	grangs pa
གྲངས་པ་ཅན	Samkhya proponent	grangs pa can
གྲངས་ཕྱེད	1/2 a #	grangs phyed
གྲངས་བས་འདར་བ	shiver with cold	grangs bas 'dar ba
གྲངས་བོན	bon calculators	grangs bon
གྲངས་འབོར	count, amount, total, quantity	grangs 'bor
གྲངས་འབོར་རྩི	measure, count, calculate the amount/ total/ quantity	grangs 'bor rtsi
གྲངས་འབྱམས	numberless, countless	grangs 'byams
གྲངས་མ་མཆིས་པ	countless	grangs ma mchis pa
གྲངས་མ་མཆིས་པར	having no number, without number, numberless	grangs ma mchis par
གྲངས་མང	repeating many times, many times , many	grangs mang
གྲངས་མང་ཆ	repeated four times	grangs mang cha
གྲངས་མང་ཉུང	amount, number	grangs mang nyung
གྲངས་མང་དུ་བྱ	repeat many times	grangs mang du bya
གྲངས་མང་བ	a multitude of	grangs mang ba
གྲངས་མང་བའི་གྲས	majority party	grangs mang ba'i gras
གྲངས་མང་བའི་རིགས	majority nationality/ race / people	grangs mang ba'i rigs
གྲངས་མེད	Countless	grangs med
གྲངས་མེད་བསྐལ་པ	asamkhya kalpa, #less aeon	grangs med bskal pa
གྲངས་མེད་ཅན	supreme	grangs med can
གྲངས་མེད་གཅིག	the numberless one	grangs med gcig
གྲངས་མེད་ཐ་མ	the last of the {grangs gnas drug cu} One followed by 59 zeros	grangs med tha ma
གྲངས་མེད་པ	samkhya 1) in adhidharma etc. a certain large #; 2) uncountable	grangs med pa
གྲངས་མེད་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	countless great aeons	grangs med dpag tu med pa
གྲངས་མེད་གཞལ་མེད	countless great aeons	grangs med gzhal med
གྲངས་མེད་གསུམ	three incalculable aeons	grangs med gsum
གྲངས་དམྱལ་བརྒྱད	the 8 cold hells	grangs dmyal brgyad
གྲངས་ཚང	complete in #	grangs tshang
གྲངས་ཚང་བ	completion of a specified number	grangs tshang ba
གྲངས་ཚང་གཙང་འབུལ	gtsang dag offer w/o remainder	grangs tshang gtsang 'bul
གྲངས་ཚད	requisite number (of mantra repetitions)	grangs tshad
གྲངས་ཚད་ངེས་པའི་དབྱེ་ཞིབ	quantitative analysis	grangs tshad nges pa'i dbye zhib
གྲངས་ཚད་མེད་པ	unlimited, immeasurable	grangs tshad med pa
གྲངས་ཚན	sde tshan of a count	grangs tshan
གྲངས་ཚིག	numerals	grangs tshig
གྲངས་འཛིན	keeping count, {phreng ba'i grangs 'dzin} counting beads; a counter	grangs 'dzin
གྲངས་འཛིན་པ	to keep count	grangs 'dzin pa
གྲངས་རྫོགས་པ	completing the number	grangs rdzogs pa
གྲངས་ཞིབ་ཏུ་བསྒྲངས་པ	carefully count	grangs zhib tu bsgrangs pa
གྲངས་རིག	accountant, astrologer 425	grangs rig
གྲངས་རིམ་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	among snyan ngag don rgyan, rim pa can gyi rgyan	grangs rim pa can gyi rgyan
གྲངས་ལས་ཀྱང་མང་བ	more numerous than	grangs las kyang mang ba
གྲངས་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond count, innumerable, incalculable, countless	grangs las 'das pa
གྲངས་ཤེས	arithmetic	grangs shes
གྲངས་གཤེར	enumerate, count the number one by one	grangs gsher
གྲངས་བཤེར་གྱིས་རྩིས་སྤྲོད	closely calculate the #	grangs bsher gyis rtsis sprod
གྲངས་ས	number	grangs sa
གྲངས་ས་ཆེན་པོ	great number	grangs sa chen po
གྲངས་སུ་འགྲོ	to come into the reckoning of	grangs su 'gro
གྲངས་སུ་བཅད	a certain number of times	grangs su bcad
གྲངས་སུ་བཅུག་པ	put into numbers, counted	grangs su bcug pa
གྲངས་སུ་འདྲེན་པ	counted	grangs su 'dren pa
གྲངས་སུ་བྱར་ནུས་པ	be able to count	grangs su byar nus pa
གྲངས་སུ་རྩི་བ	count, SA rtsi ba	grangs su rtsi ba
གྲངས་སུ་བརྩིས་པ་མ་ཡིན	uncountable	grangs su brtsis pa ma yin
གྲངས་སུ་འཚུད	be counted as, be 1 of	grangs su 'tshud
གྲངས་སུ་ཡང	even in number	grangs su yang
གྲབ	prepare; plan, preparation	grab
གྲབ་རྒྱག	preparation	grab rgyag
གྲབ་རྒྱབ	pride, boasting	grab rgyab
གྲབ་པ	swamp, marsh, fen	grab pa
གྲབ་བྱེད་པ	verb + grab byed pa - to prepare (to do the verb)	grab byed pa
གྲབ་ཡུལ	goal, aim, pursuit	grab yul
གྲབ་ཡུལ་འདིང	make plans, goal	grab yul 'ding
གྲབ་ཡུལ་འདིང་བ	to make plans grab g.yer tshva kha - {grab g.yer tshva kha} in N brong pa rdzong	grab yul 'ding ba
གྲབ་ཤོམ	plans x {phyi tshes grab shom drog skam nya rgya 'dra} your future projects and plans are like nets cast in a dry riverbed	grab shom
གྲབ་ཤོམ་བགྱི་བ	to prepare	grab shom bgyi ba
གྲབ་ཤོམས	Syn {grab shom}	grab shoms
གྲབས	1) [vb. + grabs] on the verge of; about to do verbal action. 2) va.-{byed}	grabs
གྲབས་རྒྱགས	provisions for the road	grabs rgyags
གྲབས་སྒྲིགས	preparations	grabs sgrigs
གྲབས་སྒྲིགས་བྱེད	make preparations	grabs sgrigs byed
གྲབས་དངོས	spare objects, supplies, parts	grabs dngos
གྲབས་ཆས	spare objects, supplies, parts	grabs chas
གྲབས་མཐུན	be in harmony with	grabs mthun
གྲབས་མཐུན་པ	live in harmony, unanimous in judgment	grabs mthun pa
གྲབས་བྱས	to make preparations	grabs byas
གྲབས་བྱེད	"about to" clause connective	grabs byed
གྲབས་བྱེད་པ	to almost do something, be about to	grabs byed pa
གྲབས་འབྲུ	grain collected in case of famine	grabs 'bru
གྲབས་དམག	rgyab gnon dang helping troops	grabs dmag
གྲབས་ཡིན	just, just now, a moment ago	grabs yin
གྲབས་ཡུལ	preparations, arrangements	grabs yul
གྲབས་ཡོད	be near/ in the vicinity of	grabs yod
གྲབས་གཤོམ	arrangements, preliminaries, preparations	grabs gshom
གྲབས་གཤོམ་འབྲུ་ཁང	reserve granary	grabs gshom 'bru khang
གྲབས་སུ་ཚུད	prepared	grabs su tshud
གྲབས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	to prepare	grabs su tshud pa
གྲམ	kind of stone found in water, swamp, marsh, SA 'grem pa	gram
གྲམ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྩེ་པ	named after a place in gtsang rnam gling rdzong Tibetan lha mo'i tshogs pa zhig	gram bkra shis rtse pa
གྲམ་ཁ	river bank	gram kha
གྲམ་ཁྲོད	secluded river bank	gram khrod
གྲམ་གཅལ	sit	gram gcal
གྲམ་སྟོང	plain filled w little round pebbles	gram stong
གྲམ་ཐང	fenny or swampy plain	gram thang
གྲམ་རྡོ	river rocks/ pebbles	gram rdo
གྲམ་པ	pebbles; a wadi, river bed; {gram pa, gram pa, gram pa} intr. v	gram pa
གྲམ་པ་ཁམ་བུ	bon place of pilgrimage	gram pa kham bu
གྲམ་པ་རྒྱངས	Drampa Gyang; One of the twelve missionary temple (mtha' 'dul gtsug lag khang) built in the 7th century by King Songtsen Gampo	gram pa rgyangs
གྲམ་པ་ལྷ་རྩེ	Drampa Lhatse; lha rtse rdzong	gram pa lha rtse
གྲམ་བུའི་ཚལ	Trambu Forest	gram bu'i tshal
གྲམ་བུར་བརྡལ་བ	spread out, disseminate	gram bur brdal ba
གྲམ་ས	stony	gram sa
གྲམ་སོ	molar tooth, corner tooth, canine tooth	gram so
གྲམ་གསེག	chu song shul gyi rdo hrug	gram gseg
གྲམ་ཧྲུག	little rock gor ma	gram hrug
གྲལ	Sitting row	gral
གྲལ་སྐོར	subunit, detachment	gral skor
གྲལ་སྐྱོང་བ	shadow	gral skyong ba
གྲལ་ཁོངས་སུ་བཅུག	include	gral khongs su bcug
གྲལ་ཁྲིགས་པ	arranged in order, SA khrigs	gral khrigs pa
གྲལ་གྱི་ཐོག་མ	upper end of a row	gral gyi thog ma
གྲལ་མགོ	the head of a line/ row	gral mgo
གྲལ་མགོ་གནོན་པ	to assume the place of honor {g.yas nas song na gral mgo gnon pas mi 'gro} nor should you walk to his right, since that would be assuming the place of honor	gral mgo gnon pa
གྲལ་འགོ	beginning of the row/line	gral 'go
གྲལ་འགྲིག་པ	arrangements, plan, preparation, make everything ready	gral 'grig pa
གྲལ་སྒོར་གྲོས་ཚོགས	round table conference	gral sgor gros tshogs
གྲལ་སྒྲིག	line up, put things in rows, arrange in rows, put things in order	gral sgrig
གྲལ་སྒྲིག་པ	well arranged, arrangement	gral sgrig pa
གྲལ་བསྒྲིགས	put in order, arrange properly	gral bsgrigs
གྲལ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arrange, set in order	gral bsgrigs pa
གྲལ་བསྒྲིགས་བྱས་པ	have made arrangement	gral bsgrigs byas pa
གྲལ་བསྒྲིབས	past of gral sgrig	gral bsgribs
གྲལ་མཇུག	end of the row/line	gral mjug
གྲལ་མཇུག་དེར	at the end of the row	gral mjug der
གྲལ་གཏམ	house-talk	gral gtam
གྲལ་སྟར	row, line	gral star
གྲལ་བསྟར	rows, queue, line	gral bstar
གྲལ་བསྟར་སྒྲིག	line up, put things in rows, arrange in rows, put things in order	gral bstar sgrig
གྲལ་མཐའ་ཐིན་པ	to hold the last seat in the line	gral mtha' thin pa
གྲལ་མཐར་བསྙོགས་པ	to follow at the end of the row, line	gral mthar bsnyogs pa
གྲལ་མཐོ་ས	at the head of the row	gral mtho sa
གྲལ་དུ	roped; among	gral du
གྲལ་དུ་འཁོད་པ	seated in order	gral du 'khod pa
གྲལ་དུ་སྒྲིག་པ	arrange in order	gral du sgrig pa
གྲལ་དུ་བཅུག་པ	admit	gral du bcug pa
གྲལ་དུ་བཅུག་འོས་པ	admissible	gral du bcug 'os pa
གྲལ་དུ་མ་བཅུག་པ	exclude	gral du ma bcug pa
གྲལ་དུ་མ་ཚུད་པའི་མ་གཅུག་པ	disqualify	gral du ma tshud pa'i ma gcug pa
གྲལ་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	affiliate, participate	gral du bzhugs pa
གྲལ་ནས་འབུད་པ	exclude, ostracize	gral nas 'bud pa
གྲལ་པ	beer-house customer	gral pa
གྲལ་ཕྱམ	rafter	gral phyam
གྲལ་ཕྱམ་བགོད་པ་འདྲ	as the rafters of a roof are placed side by side	gral phyam bgod pa 'dra
གྲལ་དབུ	presiding over	gral dbu
གྲལ་མ	small beam, rafter	gral ma
གྲལ་ཚུད	gral du tshud pa	gral tshud
གྲལ་ཚེས	consecutive date, date	gral tshes
གྲལ་མཚུངས	rigs mtshungs sam khyu tsho 'dra ba	gral mtshungs
གྲལ་མཚེས	equally spaced places in the row mnyam	gral mtshes
གྲལ་མཚེས་པ	gral rogs	gral mtshes pa
གྲལ་འཚོས་པ	[arch] bab la gzhigs pa'am lta ba,...Gtam bshad na gral 'tshos	gral 'tshos pa
གྲལ་འཛིན	to arrange the seating at monk's prayer ceremony	gral 'dzin
གྲལ་གཞུག	end of a row	gral gzhug
གྲལ་འོག	a place at the end of a row	gral 'og
གྲལ་ཡན	untilled fields	gral yan
གྲལ་རིམ	class, rank, position, line sequence	gral rim
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་གོ་རྟགས	class consciousness	gral rim gyi go rtags
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་གྱེས་པ	class class differentiation	gral rim gyi gyes pa
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་འགལ་བ	class contradiction	gral rim gyi 'gal ba
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ཆབ་སྲིད་གོ་རྟགས	class political consciousness	gral rim gyi chab srid go rtags
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	class viewpoint	gral rim gyi lta tshul
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	class struggle	gral rim gyi 'thab rtsod
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	class consciousness	gral rim gyi 'du shes
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	class society	gral rim gyi spyi tshogs
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་དབྱེ་ཞིབ	class analysis	gral rim gyi dbye zhib
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་བརྩེ་གདུང	class love	gral rim gyi brtse gdung
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་མཛའ་མཐུན	class friendship/ amity	gral rim gyi mdza' mthun
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་རང་ནུས	class instinct	gral rim gyi rang nus
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	class nature	gral rim gyi rang bzhin
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ལངས་ཚོགས	class standing	gral rim gyi langs tshogs
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	class line/ position	gral rim gyi lam phyogs
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་བཤུ་གཞོག	class exploitation	gral rim gyi bshu gzhog
གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་སློབ་གསོ	class education	gral rim gyi slob gso
གྲལ་རིམ་དགྲ་བོ	class struggle	gral rim dgra bo
གྲལ་རིམ་ཐ་དད་པའི་གྲས	alien class elements	gral rim tha dad pa'i gras
གྲལ་རིམ་འཐབ་རྩོད	class struggle	gral rim 'thab rtsod
གྲལ་རིམ་དུ་དབྱེ་བ	classify	gral rim du dbye ba
གྲལ་རིམ་སྤུན་ཟླ	class brothers	gral rim spun zla
གྲལ་རིམ་བར་གྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	class struggle	gral rim bar gyi 'thab rtsod
གྲལ་རིམ་མ་འཁྲུགས་པ	undisturbed order	gral rim ma 'khrugs pa
གྲལ་རིམ་མེད་པ	classless	gral rim med pa
གྲལ་རིམ་མེད་པའི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	classless society	gral rim med pa'i spyi tshogs
གྲལ་རིམ་ལས་འདས	transcending/ above class	gral rim las 'das
གྲལ་རོགས	gral 'khris su sdod mkhan	gral rogs
གྲལ་ལ་འཁོད	take/ be given seats	gral la 'khod
གྲལ་ལ་འཁོད་པ	take/ be given seats	gral la 'khod pa
གྲལ་གཤམས	gshams gral - mtha' gral Back central space - The area directly in front of the mandala, and facing the dorje lobpön	gral gshams
གྲལ་གཤིབས	little gaps in the row	gral gshibs
གྲལ་གསེང	spaces in the row	gral gseng
གྲས	class, grade, kind, species, order, series, rank, dignity, tribe, kind, class, type, sort	gras
གྲས་རྣམས	group	gras rnams
གྲས་པ	to bind	gras pa
གྲས་རི	class, position	gras ri
གྲས་སུ	among	gras su
གྲི	knife, sword, weapon, sabre, weapons (chu gri, gri thung, ral gri'i bu, gri gug, gri 'khyog po, dgra sta, sta ri, sta gri, ral gri'i 'khrul 'khor, gri sgur, sa rang)	gri
གྲི་ཀུག	curved knife; iron hook	gri kug
གྲི་ཀླད	offering substance brain of a person who died 'thab grir]	gri klad
གྲི་ཁ	edge of a knife	gri kha
གྲི་ཁ་ལྕགས་ཟམ	{gri kha lcags zam bridge [in yun nan province in 'ba' lung rdzong over the zla chu an iron bridge]	gri kha lcags zam
གྲི་ཁྲག	offering substance [blood of a person who died by weapons]	gri khrag
གྲི་གི་ཆུང	small knife	gri gi chung
གྲི་གུ	1) small knife; 2) gri gu	gri gu
གྲི་གུ་ཆུང	small knife	gri gu chung
གྲི་གུ་མཚོ	gri gu lake [in mtsho smad rdzong]	gri gu mtsho
གྲི་གུག	short crooked sword, knife	gri gug
གྲི་གུམ་བཙན་པོ	king {gri gum btsan po	gri gum btsan po
གྲི་མགོ	knife handle	gri mgo
གྲི་འགག་གསོར	short sked gri	gri 'gag gsor
གྲི་རྒྱག	strike w a knife	gri rgyag
གྲི་དངོ	knife edge	gri dngo
གྲི་ལྔ	the "five knives" of {me gri}, {mtshon gri}, {chu gri}, {g.yang gri}, {'thib gri}, [used in the {gri 'dul} ritual to overcome five types of danger]	gri lnga
གྲི་བཅོ་ལྔ་པ	the 15 knives [in the {gri 'dul ritual}.] ; 1) {mda' gri zer pa}. 2) {me gri tshig cing 'bar ba}. 3) {rta gri shun dmar}. 4) {ral hri btub pa}. 5) {chu gri dar shar}. 6) {gad gri zam pa}. 7) {bu gr...	gri bco lnga pa
གྲི་ལྕག	gri'i leb bam ltag	gri lcag
གྲི་ལྕེ	tongue or blade of a knife	gri lce
གྲི་ཆད	killed person's knife la 'khri ba'i fault	gri chad
གྲི་ཆས	cutting instrument	gri chas
གྲི་ཆུང	small knife	gri chung
གྲི་ཆེན	dagger	gri chen
གྲི་བཏོན	unsheathe a knife/ sword	gri bton
གྲི་བཏོན་གཞུ་བཀང	unsheathe swords and pull bows, sabre rattling	gri bton gzhu bkang
གྲི་ལྟག	back/ blunt side of a knife	gri ltag
གྲི་ལྟག་པ	back of a knife	gri ltag pa
གྲི་ཐོད་གར་སྟབས	in dancing posture holding vajra knife and kapala	gri thod gar stabs
ཧོལྡིང་བ༹ཇྲ	knife and kapala	holding vajra
གྲི་འཐག	w two knives cut up meat	gri 'thag
གྲི་འཐབ	1) phan tshun knives bkye ba' or fight w knives; 2) jem rtse	gri 'thab
གྲི་བདག་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 gri bdag	gri bdag bco lnga
ས་ག	yeng ba}	sa ga
གྲི་བདུད	Tridud secondary emanations	gri bdud
གྲི་མདུར	knife point's gseg kha	gri mdur
གྲི་འདུར	'dur for the slain	gri 'dur
གྲི་འདུལ	knife-taming	gri 'dul
གྲི་འདུལ་བ	funerary rite to appease the spirits of the slain	gri 'dul ba
གྲི་འདྲེ	knife-demon	gri 'dre
གྲི་འདྲེ་འགུགས་པ	summon the knifedemons	gri 'dre 'gugs pa
གྲི་འདྲེ་བཞི	1) {gri bdud}. 2) {sri btsan} 3) {sman mo} 4) {rgyal po}	gri 'dre bzhi
གྲི་རྡར	sharpen a knife	gri rdar
གྲི་རྡར་བ	sharpen a knife	gri rdar ba
གྲི་བརྡར	sharpen a knife	gri brdar
གྲི་བརྡར་བརྡར་བ	repeatedly sharpen a knife	gri brdar brdar ba
གྲི་བརྡར་བ	sharpen a knife	gri brdar ba
གྲི་ནོན	a disease	gri non
གྲི་རྣོན་པོ	sharp scissors	gri rnon po
གྲི་དཔའ་ཏམ	kind of knife with thin broad long blade	gri dpa' tam
གྲི་དཔའ་གཏམ	dagger	gri dpa' gtam
གྲི་དཔའ་དམ	sked gri ring po	gri dpa' dam
གྲི་དཔའ་དམ་གྱི་ཤུབས	scabbard	gri dpa' dam gyi shubs
གྲི་བོ	murderers	gri bo
གྲི་བོ་གཉིས	the two kinds of knifedemons; {gri bo}. + {gri mo}., {pho gri}. + {mo gri}	gri bo gnyis
གྲི་བྱ་གག་གི་གཤོག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	knife of shape of the wings of a cock	gri bya gag gi gshog pa lta bu
གྲི་བྱ་རོག་གི་མཆུ	knife of the shape of the crow's bill	gri bya rog gi mchu
གྲི་མ	SA grib ma	gri ma
གྲི་མག	SA grib ma	gri mag
གྲི་མོ	female knife-demon	gri mo
གྲི་དམར	knife of superior quality in tibet	gri dmar
གྲི་བཙན	deer-headed Trisen	gri btsan
གྲི་རྩི	knife-point	gri rtsi
གྲི་རྩེ	point of a knife	gri rtse
གྲི་རྩེ་འཐབ་ཚུལ	knife-point tactics, hand to hand combat	gri rtse 'thab tshul
གྲི་རྩེད	fencing	gri rtsed
གྲི་མཚོན	weapon knife, sword, long knife, spear	gri mtshon
གྲི་འཛིང	fight w knives/ swords/ bayonets/ hand to hand	gri 'dzing
གྲི་གཞོག	slice of	gri gzhog
གྲི་ཡ	handle of a knife	gri ya
གྲི་ཡི་ལྟག་པ	back/ blunt side of a knife	gri yi ltag pa
གྲི་ཡི་སོ	edge of a knife	gri yi so
གྲི་ཡུ	haft of a knife	gri yu
གྲི་རིང	sword, [long knife, spear]	gri ring
གྲི་རིང་པོ	sword	gri ring po
གྲི་རུ་ཤི་བ	death through accident	gri ru shi ba
གྲི་རུབ	many people to 1 gri sdeb g.yug gam sdeb 'dzugs byed pa 428	gri rub
གྲི་རུས	offering substance of bone of mature person w/o sickness suddenly killed w a knife]	gri rus
གྲི་ལ་ཁུ་ཚུར་རྡེག་པ	dangerous place 'dzem mi shes pa'i example	gri la khu tshur rdeg pa
གྲི་ལམ	the way of a knife, cut, slit, slash	gri lam
གྲི་ཤ	flesh of a person mi dar ma nad med suddenly killed w a knife [sweet, heating, good for gnyan nad, srog rlung, rgyal gdon]	gri sha
གྲི་ཤུབས	knife sheath/ scabbard	gri shubs
གྲི་ཤུར	gris bzhogs pa'i ri mo shur can	gri shur
གྲི་ཤོག	piece, slice	gri shog
གྲི་བཤིད	gri bshid funerary rite for the slain	gri bshid
གྲི་སོ	knife blade/ edge	gri so
གྲི་སོགས་བཙུག་པ	stab	gri sogs btsug pa
གྲི་གསུམ་བཙན་པོ	Tibetan King	gri gsum btsan po
གྲིག	agree, SA 'grig pa	grig
གྲིན་པ	skillful, clever	grin pa
གྲིབ	1) shade, stain, obscuration, contamination, defilement, pollution, sickness caused by defilement. 2) shadow. Syn {grib ma} 3) pf. of {'grib}	grib
གྲིབ་ཀྱི་ཕུ	shady valley, north side of mountain range	grib kyi phu
གྲིབ་སྐམ	rlan can grib nag tu skam bcug pa	grib skam
གྲིབ་སྐྱོན	stroke, brain sickness [believed to be caused by {gza' bdud rA hu la}	grib skyon
གྲིབ་སྐྱོན་ཕོག	have a stroke	grib skyon phog
གྲིབ་ཁུང	place where the sun don't shine, shady corner [of house]	grib khung
གྲིབ་ཁྲུས	cleansing ritual to remove effect of {grib} nad	grib khrus
གྲིབ་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	be paralysed by a stroke	grib gyis non pa
གྲིབ་ཅན	stubborn, refractory	grib can
གྲིབ་བརྙན	grib ma'am grib nag gi reflection	grib brnyan
གྲིབ་དྭངས	cleared of shadows, selfluminous, bright	grib dwangs
གྲིབ་གདོན	fits	grib gdon
གྲིབ་མདོས	thread-cross ritual to remove effects of {grib}	grib mdos
གྲིབ་ནག	place where light does not penetrate, shade, shadow	grib nag
གྲིབ་ནག་འདྲེར་མཐོང	fear arising in an inappropriate place	grib nag 'drer mthong
གྲིབ་ནད	epileptic fits	grib nad
གྲིབ་གནོན	shadow, defilement from unclean things, 1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags, those that contaminate, Caya	grib gnon
གྲིབ་གནོན་གྱི་གདོན	opression by a shadow, type of evil spirit [in sleep confused appearance of body and mind being pressed/ crushed said to be caused by a kind of demon]	grib gnon gyi gdon
གྲིབ་པ་གཉིས	related to the two obstacles	grib pa gnyis
གྲིབ་ཕོག	vi. to get contaminated / polluted	grib phog
གྲིབ་ཕོག་པ	to become defiled	grib phog pa
གྲིབ་ཕྱོགས	shady side of a hill or mountain, side not exposed to the sun	grib phyogs
གྲིབ་མ	shadow, shade[d]	grib ma
གྲིབ་མ་སྔོན་པོའི་ནགས	forest of darkblue shade in northern continent of uttara kuru	grib ma sngon po'i nags
གྲིབ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཤིན་སྦྱངས	shadow-like suppleness	grib ma lta bu'i shin sbyangs
གྲིབ་མ་སྣུམ་པོ	cool and pleasant shade	grib ma snum po
གྲིབ་མ་བྱེད	to cast a shadow grib ma bzhin du grags pa ngan pa 'grogs	grib ma byed
པར	accompanied like a shadow by ill fame	par
གྲིབ་མའི་ཁ་དོག	shadowy color [one of {yan lag gi kha dog}	grib ma'i kha dog
གྲིབ་མའི་ལམ	milky-way, path by the shady side of a mountain or in a valley	grib ma'i lam
གྲིབ་མའི་ལུས	moon, shadowy body, body of defilements	grib ma'i lus
གྲིབ་མས་སྒྲིབ་པ	{lag tu mar me thogs pas snod kyi grib mas sgrib pa dang 'dra} like putting a heavy shade over a lamp and obscuring its light	grib mas sgrib pa
གྲིབ་བཙོག	btsog pa'i nad filth, defilement, contamination disease	grib btsog
གྲིབ་ཚོད	1) tell time by the sun's shadow; 2) measure of a shadow	grib tshod
གྲིབ་གཟུགས	shadow	grib gzugs
གྲིབ་ཡོང	contamination will arise	grib yong
གྲིབ་རི	N side of mt where little light comes	grib ri
གྲིབ་ལ་འཛེམ་པ	keep off from pollution or defilement	grib la 'dzem pa
གྲིབ་ལམ	1) gnam gyi dgu tshigs; 2) Ri'i srib kyi 'gro lam	grib lam
གྲིབ་ལིང	eye ling tog arising from grib	grib ling
གྲིབ་ལུང	srib kyi valley	grib lung
གྲིབ་ལོང	grib skyon gyis mig 'grib pa'i blindness	grib long
གྲིབ་ཤོར	gtsang mar btsog grib kyi skyon shor ba	grib shor
གྲིབ་སེལ	removal of defilement, one in whom there is no contamination, name of a buddha, removing of pollution or defilement of anything by religious rites	grib sel
གྲིབ་སོ	quickly vanishing of the shadows of trees at sunset	grib so
གྲིབ་སོ་འགྲིམ	flitting through the shadows	grib so 'grim
གྲིབ་སྲུང	guarding against defilement	grib srung
གྲིབ་བསངས	cleansed or purified of defilement, purification of defilement	grib bsangs
གྲིབ་བསིལ	cool shade {ljon shing bzang po'i grib bsil} the cool shade of a good tree	grib bsil
གྲིབ་བསིལ་དུ	in the cool shade 429	grib bsil du
གྲིབ་ལྷགས	cool shade	grib lhags
གྲིམ་དཀའ་བ	hard to tighten	grim dka' ba
གྲིམ་གྱིས	scrupulously	grim gyis
གྲིམ་གྱིས་བསྒྲིམས	scrupulously focus yourself	grim gyis bsgrims
གྲིམ་ཅག	care caution, looking out	grim cag
གྲིམ་པ	hasten, hurry	grim pa
གྲིམ་པར་འགྱུར	tighten	grim par 'gyur
གྲིམ་པོ	1) clever, intelligent. 2) tight	grim po
གྲིམ་ཙེ	scissors	grim tse
གྲིམ་རྩེ	pair of scissors	grim rtse
གྲིམ་ཚེ	scissors	grim tshe
གྲིམ་སླ་བ	easy to tighten	grim sla ba
གྲིམ་ལྷོད	tight-loose; tight and loose	grim lhod
གྲིམ་ལྷོད་རན་པ	; x {sems ha cang grims te nang du mi sdud par grim lhod ran par byas} do not let your mind get inwardly concentrated by being too tense	grim lhod ran pa
གྲིམ་ལྷོད་རན་པར་བྱ	balance / equalize being concentrated and loose	grim lhod ran par bya
གྲིམས	tight/ concentrated	grims
གྲིམས་ཀྱིས་སྐྲིམ	tight[en]	grims kyis skrim
གྲིམས་ཀྱིས་སྒྲིམ	firmly concentrated; x {grims kyis sgrim la lhod kyis glod} be firmly concentrated and loosely relaxed	grims kyis sgrim
གྲིམས་ཆ	firmness	grims cha
གྲིམས་ཆེས	too concentrated / tight	grims ches
གྲིམས་པ	to be alert/ tense; tension	grims pa
གྲིམས་པོ	1) efficient, competent, smart; 2) good market, selling well	grims po
གྲིམས་ཤིག	take care, be attentive	grims shig
གྲིམས་ལྷོད	focusing and relaxing	grims lhod
གྲིའི་ཁ	blade of a knife	gri'i kha
གྲིའི་ཙེ་མོ	point of a sword, point of a scimitar	gri'i tse mo
གྲིའི་སོ	sharp edge of a knife, blade of a knife	gri'i so
གྲིའུ	small knife	gri'u
གྲིར་འགུམ་པ	kill with a knife	grir 'gum pa
གྲིར་རྔམ་པ	kill with a knife	grir rngam pa
གྲིར་འཆི	accidental death	grir 'chi
གྲིར་བསོད་པ	kill with a knife	grir bsod pa
གྲིལ	a roll, [p 'gril] was twisted, rolled	gril
གྲིལ་ཁ	a roll [paper etc]	gril kha
གྲིལ་ཁ་རྒྱག་པའི་གོས	rolled up cloth	gril kha rgyag pa'i gos
གྲིལ་ཁ་བྱེད་པ	make up a parcel	gril kha byed pa
གྲིལ་གཞུས	stab w a knife	gril gzhus
གྲིས	(not in DAS)	gris
གྲིས་སྒྲིག་པ	prepare, get ready	gris sgrig pa
གྲིས་བྲེག་པ	to shave; to shear	gris breg pa
གྲིས་འབྲད	scrape smooth w a knife	gris 'brad
གྲུ	ship; sail boat; 1) boat, ferry, ship,	gru
སེཨ	going vessel. 2) angle, corner	sea
གྲུ་དཀར	kind of turquoise	gru dkar
གྲུ་སྐས	in the corner of a house 'dzugs rgyu'i skas	gru skas
གྲུ་སྐྱ	an oar	gru skya
གྲུ་སྐྱོད་བྱེད་སྐྱ་བ	oar, paddle	gru skyod byed skya ba
གྲུ་སྐྲས	probably a flight of steps at the corner of a building	gru skras
གྲུ་ཁ	1) wharf, dock. 2) corner	gru kha
གྲུ་ཁའི་ཁྲལ	wharf tax	gru kha'i khral
གྲུ་ཁུག	1) lag pa bskums pa'i gru mo'i khug; 2) Zur khug	gru khug
གྲུ་ཁྱེམ	oar	gru khyem
གྲུ་མཁན	ship steersman [syn: skya ba 'dzin, mnyan pa, gdos pa, rna ba 'dzin]	gru mkhan
གྲུ་ག	clew, hank, whitish-blue color	gru ga
གྲུ་གུ	1) ball of yarn/ thread; 2) gru gu [N T, Shin Jang, and mtsho sngon sa 'brel khul du chags pa'i rgyal phran zhig]	gru gu
གྲུ་གུ་དགོན་པ	monastery in Nangchen	gru gu dgon pa
གྲུ་གུ་ཨེ་པག་ཤ	Epagsha of Drugu. One of the first Tibetans to take ordination; received transmission from Hungkara in India together with Namkhai Nyingpo	gru gu e pag sha
གྲུ་གླ	ferry passage money, boatman's fee	gru gla
གྲུ་མགོ	1) lag pa'i gru mo'i mgo'am sne; 2) Gru'i mgo	gru mgo
གྲུ་ཆགས་མའི་ལུགས	'phyugs par 'dod pa'i lugs nang gses gling bzhi dus bzhi 'khor bar 'dod pa'i lugs de la'ang mkha' la khyim dang sar dus bzhi gnyis ka g.yon skor du 'dod pa dang, dus g.yon khyim g.yas dang, gnyis k...	gru chags ma'i lugs
གྲུ་ཆད	a square; a square pattern	gru chad
གྲུ་ཆར	soft rain, drizzle	gru char
གྲུ་ཆུང	small rowboat, boat, ferry	gru chung
གྲུ་ཆུང་ཞིག	canoe, yacht	gru chung zhig
གྲུ་ཆོད	sde tshan sde tshan du bcad pa'i re'u mig diagram	gru chod
གྲུ་གཏོང་མཁན	sailor, rower	gru gtong mkhan
གྲུ་གཏོང་ཆེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱ་བ	oar	gru gtong ched kyi skya ba
གྲུ་གཏོང་བ	row	gru gtong ba
གྲུ་བཏང་བ	sailed	gru btang ba
གྲུ་ཐག	thick ropes for tying boats	gru thag
གྲུ་དྲང	right angle	gru drang
གྲུ་གདུབ	boat's ornaments	gru gdub
གྲུ་འདྲེན	boat passenger	gru 'dren
གྲུ་ནང་ཕྱིན་པ	sail	gru nang phyin pa
གྲུ་ནང་སེམས་གཅིག	mi tshang ma bsam blo gcig pa	gru nang sems gcig
གྲུ་ནར	rectangle [-ular]	gru nar
གྲུ་ནར་ཅན	rhombic, lozenge-shaped	gru nar can
གྲུ་པ	boatman	gru pa
གྲུ་པོད	captain, helmsman	gru pod
གྲུ་དཔུང	ko gru rgyong byed kyi shing 430	gru dpung
གྲུ་དཔོན	ship captain, helmsman	gru dpon
གྲུ་ཕུབས	corner, pavilion	gru phubs
གྲུ་བ་ཆུ་ཁ	{gru ba chu kha	gru ba chu kha
གྲུ་བུ	ball of twine	gru bu
གྲུ་བོ	ship	gru bo
གྲུ་བོ་ཆེ	great vessel	gru bo che
གྲུ་མ	angle	gru ma
གྲུ་མོ	cubit [distance from the elbow to the knuckles of a closed fist, = two cha chen in one sense, elbow, crook of the arm]	gru mo
གྲུ་མོ་གཞུ་མཆོག་རུས་འབུར	lus kyi gsang gnad cig gru mo g.yon gyi nang du - in the crook of her left arm	gru mo gzhu mchog rus 'bur
གྲུ་མོའི་ཁུག	hollow of the elbow joint	gru mo'i khug
གྲུ་མོའི་ཆུ་བ	= nye ba'i dpung pa'o	gru mo'i chu ba
གྲུ་དམར	reddish lustre of precious stones	gru dmar
གྲུ་བཙས	boatman's fee, ferry toll	gru btsas
གྲུ་བཙས་པ	mnyan dpon	gru btsas pa
གྲུ་ཚིགས	elbow [joint]	gru tshigs
གྲུ་ཚུགས	harbor, wharf, port	gru tshugs
གྲུ་ཚུགས་པ	harbor, wharf, port	gru tshugs pa
གྲུ་ཚུགས་ས	1) harbor, wharf, port where boats stay; 2) ko gru gtong sa place leather boats are sailed	gru tshugs sa
གྲུ་ཚུམས་པ	sit silent without speaking	gru tshums pa
གྲུ་འཛིན	harbour, potala, buddha field of avalokiteshvara	gru 'dzin
གྲུ་འཛིན་གཉིས་པ	the second Potala. Syn {lha sa po tA la}	gru 'dzin gnyis pa
གྲུ་འཛིན་བདག་པོ	the Lord of Potala. Syn {spyan ras gzigs}; Chenrezig, Avalokiteshvara. the Lord of Potala. Syn {spyan ras gzigs}	gru 'dzin bdag po
གྲུ་འཛིན་རི	potala mountain	gru 'dzin ri
གྲུ་རྫིངས	ship	gru rdzings
གྲུ་རྫོང	cargo	gru rdzong
གྲུ་ཞབས	bottom of a boat	gru zhabs
གྲུ་ཞིག་བརྒྱུད	sailing in a boat	gru zhig brgyud
གྲུ་བཞི	square	gru bzhi
གྲུ་བཞི་ཁ་གང་མ	mtha' bzhi'i long and short cha snyoms pa'i bzo dbyibs shig	gru bzhi kha gang ma
གྲུ་བཞི་སྒོ་བཞི	four sides and four gates	gru bzhi sgo bzhi
གྲུ་བཞི་ནར་ནར	rectangular	gru bzhi nar nar
གྲུ་བཞི་ནར་མོ	rectangular gru bzhi 'am sgor sgor tag tag ma yin pa oblong	gru bzhi nar mo
གྲུ་བཞི་ལམ་འཁྱེར	practicing to the letter, * taking the words of the Buddha as literal advice]	gru bzhi lam 'khyer
གྲུ་བཞི་གསེག་ནར་མོ	parallelogram	gru bzhi gseg nar mo
གྲུ་བཞི་ལྷམ་པ	cube	gru bzhi lham pa
གྲུ་བཞི་ལྷས་པ	dice-shape	gru bzhi lhas pa
གྲུ་ཟམ	1) boats and bridges; 2) bridge of many boats; 3) bridge to a boat, pier; 4) ferry	gru zam
གྲུ་ཟིང་ནས་འབབ་པ	debark	gru zing nas 'bab pa
གྲུ་ཟུར	corners	gru zur
གྲུ་ཟོག	shipment	gru zog
གྲུ་གཟིང	ship, vessel, boat	gru gzing
གྲུ་གཟིངས	ship	gru gzings
གྲུ་གཟིངས་ཀྱི	shipping	gru gzings kyi
གྲུ་གཟིངས་ཀྱི་བབས་ཚུགས	port	gru gzings kyi babs tshugs
གྲུ་གཟིངས་ནང་འཛུལ་བ	embark	gru gzings nang 'dzul ba
གྲུ་གཟིངས་བབ་ཚུགས	wharf, dock, corner, port, harbor	gru gzings bab tshugs
གྲུ་གཟིངས་བབས་ཚུགས	quay	gru gzings babs tshugs
གྲུ་གཟིངས་བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་ཀུང་སི	ship building company	gru gzings bzo bskrun kung si
གྲུ་གཟིངས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	shipyard, dock yard, ship building factory	gru gzings bzo grwa
གྲུ་གཟིངས་བཟོ་ས	shipyard	gru gzings bzo sa
གྲུ་གཟིངས་སུ་ཞུགས་ནས་ཕྱིན	they set sail together	gru gzings su zhugs nas phyin
གྲུ་བཟིངས་ཀྱི	naval	gru bzings kyi
གྲུ་བཟོ	ship building	gru bzo
གྲུ་ཡི་རབ	ship	gru yi rab
གྲུ་ཡི་གཤོག་པ	wings of a boat, oars	gru yi gshog pa
གྲུ་ཡིས་སྒྲོལ	navigator	gru yis sgrol
གྲུ་ཡོན	oblique angle gru g.yas - right elbow gru g.yel - oblique angle	gru yon
གྲུ་ལ་ཞོན	boat passenger	gru la zhon
གྲུ་ལ་ཞོན་པ	to go on a boat	gru la zhon pa
གྲུ་ལམ	path over the water, shipping route	gru lam
གྲུ་ལས་འདས་པ	one who has made a voyage	gru las 'das pa
གྲུ་ལོག	capsizing	gru log
གྲུ་ལོག་རྒྱག	capsize	gru log rgyag
གྲུ་ལོག་བྱེད	capsize	gru log byed
གྲུ་ལོགས	corner	gru logs
གྲུ་ལོགས་སུ	in the corner	gru logs su
གྲུ་ཤན	ferry-crossing	gru shan
གྲུ་ཤན་ཁ	ferry landing	gru shan kha
གྲུ་ཤན་གཏོང་མཁན	ferryman	gru shan gtong mkhan
གྲུ་ཤན་པ	ferry helmsman/ ferryman	gru shan pa
གྲུ་ཤིང	gru sa la 'byar skabs 'phul rgyag gtong byed kyi rgyug pa ring po	gru shing
གྲུ་ས	port, harbor, ferry landing, boat dock	gru sa
གྲུ་གསུམ	triangle, triangular	gru gsum
གྲྭུ་ཟུར	corners	grwu zur
གྲུག	be bruised	grug
གྲུག་མདོ	horse, donkey etc. kyi 'phongs mgo,...Rta la grug shur thon pa	grug mdo
གྲུག་པ	(tha mi dad pa grugs pa, grug pa,; 1) be chipped/ broken to pieces; 2) body kyi skyi spags la grang nad phog nas becoming rough bruised, crumble, vicious	grug pa
གྲུག་པའི་འབྲས	bruised rice	grug pa'i 'bras
གྲུག་བུ	chag por gyur pa'i snod spyad	grug bu
གྲུགས་པ	[p grug pa]	grugs pa
གྲུགས་བུ	something broken	grugs bu
གྲུང	bright, crystal clear, thoughtful	grung
གྲུང་ཆ	brightness, sharpness	grung cha
གྲུང་ཐང་རྒྱ་སེར་གོས་ཆེན	kind of yellow chintze resembling satin of great value	grung thang rgya ser gos chen
གྲུང་པོ	clever/ sharp	grung po
གྲུང་བ	wise, prudent	grung ba
གྲུང་བྱེད	gem which purifies water	grung byed
གྲུང་མི་གྲུང	whether or not you have creativity	grung mi grung
གྲུང་མོ	middle finger	grung mo
གྲུང་ཟོན་གཉིས་ལྡན	cautious/ vigilant and alert	grung zon gnyis ldan
གྲུང་ཤ	alertness, keenness, awareness	grung sha
གྲུང་ཤ་དོད་པོ	lively, vivacious, quick, nimble, alert, lively, active	grung sha dod po
གྲུངས་བྱེད	water purifier	grungs byed
གྲུངས་མ	clear, pure [liquid]	grungs ma
གྲུངས་མ་ཉོས	to flirt with	grungs ma nyos
གྲུབ	[p 'grub pa] accomplished, perfected, fulfilled, attain[ed], obtain[ed], achieve[d], be present, be existent, possess existence, be, prove, establish, confirm, form, become, be made, be created fro...	grub
གྲུབ་གྲུབ་ལྟར	as if it were concrete	grub grub ltar
གྲུབ་རྒྱལ་མ	Niguma [consort of naropa]	grub rgyal ma
གྲུབ་བརྒྱུད	the Siddha Lineage	grub brgyud
གྲུབ་ཆ	element	grub cha
གྲུབ་ཆུ	miraculous water	grub chu
གྲུབ་ཆེན	mahasiddha [yogin who has attained supreme siddhi]	grub chen
གྲུབ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	8 great siddhas/ siddhis [= {dpal rgyi rig 'dzin brgyad} ; 1) slop dpon hum ka ra}. 2) {slop dpon klu sgrub snying po}. 3) {slop dpon 'jam dpal bshes bnyen}. 4) {slop dpon}. dhanasmtri. 5) {slop dp...	grub chen brgyad
གྲུབ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	eighty mahasiddhas	grub chen brgyad cu
གྲུབ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	eighty mahasiddhas	grub chen brgyad bcu
གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Drubchen Chökyi Dorje (15th century), one of the six "siddhas of the Ganden Mahamudra" tradition	grub chen chos kyi rdo rje
གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཐང་རྒྱལ	{thang stong rgyal po}	grub chen thang rgyal
གྲུབ་ཆེན་དྲིལ་བུ་ཞབས	mahasiddha Ghantapada	grub chen dril bu zhabs
གྲུབ་ཆེན་རྣམས	the great accomplished practitioners	grub chen rnams
གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཨུ་རྒྱན་པ	{rin chen dpal	grub chen u rgyan pa
གྲུབ་མཆོག	great saint	grub mchog
གྲུབ་མཆོག་མ	female mahasiddha	grub mchog ma
གྲུབ་རྗེ	mahasiddha	grub rje
གྲུབ་རྗེས	after finished	grub rjes
གྲུབ་རྗེས་སུ	when finished	grub rjes su
གྲུབ་གཉིས	supreme and ordinary siddhis mchog dang thun mong gi dngos grub	grub gnyis
གྲུབ་བརྙེད	siddha, accomplished one, miraculous powers	grub brnyed
གྲུབ་བརྙེས	accomplished, adept, [attainment of one of the {grub pa'i dngos grub brgyad}; accomplished, adept; a perfected being	grub brnyes
གྲུབ་བརྙེས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེས་བུ	accomplished master	grub brnyes kyi skyes bu
གྲུབ་ཏེ	altogether, jointly	grub te
གྲུབ་རྟགས	miracles	grub rtags
གྲུབ་རྟགས་ཐོན་པ	to show signs of practice, be successful	grub rtags thon pa
གྲུབ་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	the supreme signs of accomplishment, [devotion and compassion etc.]	grub rtogs kyi mchog
གྲུབ་ཐབས	sadhana	grub thabs
གྲུབ་ཐོབ	Siddha. 'Accomplished one.' Someone who has attained siddhi; an accomplished master	grub thob
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཀར་མ་གླིང་པ	the siddha Karma Lingpa grub thob kar ma tshe dbang rig 'dzin the siddha karma Tsewang Rigdzin	grub thob kar ma gling pa
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ	the sovereign of siddhas	grub thob kyi 'khor los bsgyur ba
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་སྐྱེས་ཆེན	siddhas and great beings	grub thob skyes chen
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཁྱུང་པོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the siddha khyung po	grub thob khyung po rnal 'byor
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	Eighty mahasiddhas	grub thob brgyad bcu
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ་བཞི	84 siddhas	grub thob brgyad bcu bzhi
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བརྒྱུད་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	biographical account of the lives of the eighty four Buddhist mahasiddhas	grub thob brgyud cu rtsa bzhi
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན	mahasiddhas	grub thob chen
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahasiddha	grub thob chen po
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་པོ་གཅོ་ལྔ	the 53 great siddhas	grub thob chen po gco lnga
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅོ་ལྔ	15 great siddhas grub thob snye mo ba bsam gtan phun	grub thob chen po bco lnga
ཚོགས	Drupthob Nyemowa Samten Phüntsok; Drigung master; founder of {glang sna} monastery at Kailash grub thob snye mo ba bsam gtan phun	tshogs
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཐུགས་ཏིག	the Heart Essence of the Great Siddha	grub thob thugs tig
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཐུགས་ཐིག	terma revealed by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, based on teachings by Tangtong Gyalpo	grub thob thugs thig
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	emanations of those accomplished practitioners	grub thob sprul pa'i sku
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་མེ་ལོང་རྡོ་རྗེ	disciple of {'khrul zhig sangs rgyas dbon} in the {snying thig} lineage	grub thob me long rdo rje
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་མོ	[female] meditator grub thob o rgyan pa rin chen dpal 1230-1309	grub thob mo
གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཨོ་རྒྱན་པ་རིན་ཆེན་དཔལ	Orgyenpa alias Drubtob Orgyenpa Rinchen Pal (1230-1309). A disciple of Gyalwa Götsangpa Gönpo Dorje and Karma Pakshi, the second Karmapa (1204-1283). He traveled to the terrestrial pure land Uddiya...	grub thob o rgyan pa rin chen dpal
གྲུབ་མཐའ	tenets; tenet systems [ggd]	grub mtha'
གྲུབ་མཐའ་གོང་མ	the higher doctrines	grub mtha' gong ma
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཆེན་མོ	grub mtha'i rnam bshad rang gzhan grub mtha' kun dang zab don mchog tu gsal ba kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma lung rigs rgya mtsho skye dgu'i re ba kun skong [17th century by kun mkhyen 'jam dbyangs bzh...	grub mtha' chen mo
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཉམས་པ	1) to lose one's philosophical position [in debate]. 2) the decline of a philosophical school	grub mtha' nyams pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་གཉིས	the two doctrines [buddhist and not] 433 grub mtha' lta ba'i rtsa ba brgya rtsa bcu the 80 basic philosophical viewpoints grub mtha' lta ba'i rtsa ba brgya rtsa bcu the 110 root views	grub mtha' gnyis
གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྟོན་པ་པོ	expounder of a philosophical school	grub mtha' ston pa po
གྲུབ་མཐའ་དབུ་མ་པ	{grub mtha' dbu ma pa rang bzang ba lags sam} Are the tenets of the Madhyamikas superior?" [mss]	grub mtha' dbu ma pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་དམན་པ	Lower philosophical schools. The two main Hinayana schools: Vaibhashika and Sautrantika. Compared to Mahayana they are called 'lower' in that they fail to establish the emptiness of all phenomena	grub mtha' dman pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་པ	proponent of tenets	grub mtha' smra pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ	philosopher, proponent of tenets	grub mtha' smra ba
གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ་གཉིས	the two kinds of doctrinal exponents [buddhist and not]	grub mtha' smra ba gnyis
གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ་བཞི	exponents of the four doctrines [theg pa che chung gi grub mtha' smra ba bzhi ste bye brag smra ba, mdo sde pa, sems tzam pa, dbu ma pa]	grub mtha' smra ba bzhi
གྲུབ་མཐའ་མཛོད	the Treasury of Philosophy composed by {klong chen rab	grub mtha' mdzod
གྲུབ་མཐའ་འཛིན་པ་རྣམ་གཉིས	phyi rol pa dang nang pa	grub mtha' 'dzin pa rnam gnyis
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞི	Four Philosophical Systems, the four schools of philosophy, four systems of tenets. Those of the Vaibhashikas {bye brag tu smra ba} Sautrantikas {mdo sde pa} Vijnanavadins {rnam shes su smra ba} or...	grub mtha' bzhi
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞི་པོ	the four philosophical schools	grub mtha' bzhi po
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞིའི་རྣམ་གཞག	comparative siddhanta of the Buddhist schools grub mtha' bzhi'i ya gyal du gyur pa'i dbu	grub mtha' bzhi'i rnam gzhag
མ	the Madhyamika among the four philosophical schools	ma
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞིའི་ལུགས	the philosophical positions (siddhanta) of the four major schools of Buddhism	grub mtha' bzhi'i lugs
གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞིར	in the four schools	grub mtha' bzhir
གྲུབ་མཐའ་འོག་མ	the lower tenets [Vaibhashika {bye brag smra ba}, Sautrantika {mdo sde pa}	grub mtha' 'og ma
Vཨཻབྷཤིཀ	{bye brag smra ba} and	Vaibhashika
སཽཏྲནཏིཀ	{mdo sde pa}	Sautrantika
གྲུབ་མཐའ་རིས་མེད	regardless of lineage	grub mtha' ris med
གྲུབ་མཐའ་རིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	a teaching	grub mtha' ris med kyi chos
ཨཅཅོརྡིང་ཏོ་ཐེ་ནོན	sectarian point of view	according to the non
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལ་མ་ཞུགས་པ	not entering a doctrine [not depend on a textual tradition joined to reasoning rang dgar devote this life only to virtue]	grub mtha' la ma zhugs pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	person who has entered a philosophical school	grub mtha' la zhugs pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པ	transcending philosophical viewpoints	grub mtha' las 'das pa
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ལོག་པ	perverted philosophy grub mtha' so so'i bzhed tshul gzhung gsal bar ston pa chos 'byung grub	grub mtha' log pa
མཐའ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	a detailed survey of comparative siddhanta in the context of Mahayana Buddhism and in particular the rnying ma pa tradition of Tibet; by {rog ban de shes rab 'od}	mtha' chen po bstan pa'i sgron me
གྲུབ་མཐའི་གཏིང་སླེབས་པ	reaching to the depth /core of the philosophical views	grub mtha'i gting slebs pa
གྲུབ་མཐའི་རྟོག་གེ	dogmatic sophistry, intellectualism	grub mtha'i rtog ge
གྲུབ་མཐའི་འཐེན་འཁྱེར	sectarianism	grub mtha'i 'then 'khyer
གྲུབ་མཐའི་དོན	philosophical point	grub mtha'i don
གྲུབ་མཐའི་དོན་འདོད་ཚུལ	philosophical position grub mtha'i gnad thun mong ma yin pa extraordinary philosophical key point	grub mtha'i don 'dod tshul
གྲུབ་མཐའི་རྣམ་གཞག	philosophical presentation / system	grub mtha'i rnam gzhag
གྲུབ་མཐའི་ཕྱོགས་རིས	sectarianism	grub mtha'i phyogs ris
གྲུབ་མཐའི་དབྱེ་བ	classification of tenets	grub mtha'i dbye ba
གྲུབ་མཐའི་གཙོ་བོ	primary philosophical position	grub mtha'i gtso bo
གྲུབ་མཐའི་ཚེས་ལོངས	grub rtsis kyi tshes kyi longs spyod	grub mtha'i tshes longs
གྲུབ་མཐའི་འཛིན་ལུགས	various systems	grub mtha'i 'dzin lugs
གྲུབ་མཐའི་ཟབ་གནད	profound key points of philosophy	grub mtha'i zab gnad
གྲུབ་མཐའི་ལུགས	philosophical systems model	grub mtha'i lugs
གྲུབ་མཐར	grub mtha' la, grub mtha' ru	grub mthar
གྲུབ་དང་མ་གྲུབ	perfection or nonperfection	grub dang ma grub
གྲུབ་དུས	time of establishment [ggd]	grub dus
གྲུབ་དོན	outcome, result, effect, attainment	grub don
གྲུབ་བདེ་གཅིག	the same in terms of establishment and abiding	grub bde gcig
གྲུབ་བདེ་རྗས་གཅིག་པའི་བྱས་པ	made into a conveniently proven identical substance, 1 substantial entity of establishment and abiding	grub bde rjas gcig pa'i byas pa
གྲུབ་བདེ་དབྱེར་མེད་ཀྱི་རྫས་གཅིག	conveniently proven indivisible and identical substance	grub bde dbyer med kyi rdzas gcig
གྲུབ་བདེ་རྫས་གཅིག	conveniently proven identical substance; one substantial entity of establishment and abiding	grub bde rdzas gcig
གྲུབ་སྡེ	mahayoga tradition of sadhanas	grub sde
གྲུབ་ནས	finally	grub nas
གྲུབ་པ	Siddha (grub thob). Perfected one, realized one, adept who has attained siddhi	grub pa
གྲུབ་པ་ཀུན་ཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར	attain all the siddhis	grub pa kun thob par 'gyur
གྲུབ་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱད	Eight Sadhana Teachings. Eight chief yidam deities of Mahayoga and their corresponding tantras and sadhanas: Manjushri Body, Lotus Speech, Vishuddha Mind, Nectar Quality, Kilaya Activity, Liberatin...	grub pa bka' brgyad
གྲུབ་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight [common] siddhis. 1) {mig sman}. 2) {rkang mgyogs} 3) {ral gri} 4) {sa 'og 'grub} 5) {ril bu} 6) {mkha' spyod} 7) {mi snang ba} 8) {bcud len} Syn {thun mong gi dngos grub}	grub pa brgyad
གྲུབ་པ་གཅིག་པུ	single realization	grub pa gcig pu
གྲུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 [common] siddhis	grub pa chen po brgyad
གྲུབ་པ་ཐོབ	attain siddhi, siddha	grub pa thob
གྲུབ་པ་ཐོབ་པ	to attain siddhi/ spiritual attainment	grub pa thob pa
གྲུབ་པ་དང་བདེ་བ	happiness arising from union with the eternal void	grub pa dang bde ba
གྲུབ་པ་སྡེ་བདུན	Seven Sections of Accomplishment; by seven Indian masters	grub pa sde bdun
གྲུབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་བཤག་པ	present a proof	grub pa rnam par bshag pa
གྲུབ་པ་པོ	sadhaka, a practitioner of sadhana, [sadhaka]	grub pa po
གྲུབ་པ་མ	constellation, SA rgyal	grub pa ma
གྲུབ་པ་མ་ཐོབ་པ	one who has not attained siddhis	grub pa ma thob pa
གྲུབ་པ་མེད	does not constitute, to have no concrete existence	grub pa med
གྲུབ་པ་མེད་པ	unfinished, incomplete	grub pa med pa
གྲུབ་པ་བཞི་ལྡན	fourfold accomplishment	grub pa bzhi ldan
གྲུབ་པ་ལ་སྒྲུབ་པ	prove the [already] established	grub pa la sgrub pa
གྲུབ་པ་ལུས	structure of the body, formed body, body of five aggregates, 1 of gnas bcu gcig	grub pa lus
གྲུབ་པའི་སྐྱེ་པོ	a siddha, accomplished person	grub pa'i skye po
གྲུབ་པའི་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་པ	siddha, cakravartin	grub pa'i 'khor los bsgyur pa
གྲུབ་པའི་གོ་འཕང	the state of accomplishment, accomplished level	grub pa'i go 'phang
གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	Drubpey Gyalmo, Queen of the Siddhas	grub pa'i rgyal mo
གྲུབ་པའི་ཆེ་བ	superior accomplishment	grub pa'i che ba
གྲུབ་པའི་མཆོད་པ	the offering of practice.	grub pa'i mchod pa
གྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས	sign of practice/ accomplishment	grub pa'i rtags
གྲུབ་པའི་མཐ	philosophy, tenet [thd]	grub pa'i mtha
གྲུབ་པའི་མཐའ	1) Syn {grub mtha'}. 2) established conclusion / finality / viewpoint, tenet, philosophical school, belief, doctrinal views. 3) Syn {thar pa'i 435 blo gros} resolution for liberation, determination...	grub pa'i mtha'
གྲུབ་པའི་མཐའ་དང་བསྟན་པ	established view and doctrine	grub pa'i mtha' dang bstan pa
མཛོད	an introduction to the comparative siddhanta of the spiritual traditions of India, Buddhist and non Buddhist; by {dbus pa blo gsal}	mdzod
གྲུབ་པའི་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ་བཞི	exponents of the four schools	grub pa'i mtha' smra ba bzhi
གྲུབ་པའི་དོན་ཅན	what is necessary in the charms of necromancy for propitiation	grub pa'i don can
གྲུབ་པའི་གནས་མཆོག	supreme place of accomplishment	grub pa'i gnas mchog
གྲུབ་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	accomplished yogis	grub pa'i rnal 'byor pa
གྲུབ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	rgyud kyi lam gyi mngon rtogs spyod pa'i sgo bzhi'i nang gses te, lha dang skal ba mnyam pa'i rig 'dzin nam mkha' spyod grub nas, de'i rten la sngags kyi phyin drug gi spyod pa spyad de mthar thug ...	grub pa'i spyod pa
གྲུབ་པའི་བྱིན	the blessing of accomplishment	grub pa'i byin
གྲུབ་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	mighty siddhas {rgya gar 'phags pa'i yul gyi grub pa'i dbang phyug} the mighty siddhas of India	grub pa'i dbang phyug
གྲུབ་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་དམ་པ	noble lords of accomplished beings	grub pa'i dbang phyug dam pa
གྲུབ་པའི་འབྲས་བུའི་ཡན་ལག	the aspect of accomplished result / effect. Syn {grub pa'i yan lag}	grub pa'i 'bras bu'i yan lag
གྲུབ་པའི་སྦྱོད་པ	enlightened action	grub pa'i sbyod pa
གྲུབ་པའི་མིག་སྨན	the siddhi of eyepotion [for invisibility], One of {grub pa brgyad}	grub pa'i mig sman
གྲུབ་པའི་ཚད	the measure of accomplishment grub pa'i mdzad spyod la nges pa med pa - the actions of siddhas are incomprehensible	grub pa'i tshad
གྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག	aspects of accomplishment	grub pa'i yan lag
གྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་གཉིས	the two aspects of accomplishment. {skye ba'i yan lag} and {rga shi'i yan lag} among the {rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis}	grub pa'i yan lag gnyis
གྲུབ་པའི་རང་བྱོན	the self-formed avalokiteshvara	grub pa'i rang byon
གྲུབ་པའི་རང་བྱོན་སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས	the saint originated by himself	grub pa'i rang byon spyan ras gzigs
གྲུབ་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the enlightened state of accomplishment	grub pa'i sangs rgyas
གྲུབ་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	accomplished teacher	grub pa'i slob dpon
གྲུབ་པའི་ལྷ་མོ	1 of sman bla brgyad	grub pa'i lha mo
གྲུབ་པར་གྱུར་ཅིག	be it ready complete or perfect	grub par gyur cig
གྲུབ་པར་གྱུར་པ་རྟོགས་པ	accomplished realization	grub par gyur pa rtogs pa
གྲུབ་པར་བྱས་པ	give rise to	grub par byas pa
གྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་འཇུག	saint	grub par byed 'jug
གྲུབ་པས་བཏགས་པ	accomplished by a saint	grub pas btags pa
གྲུབ་པས་བསྟན་པ	taught or preached by a saint	grub pas bstan pa
གྲུབ་དབང	lord of siddhas; great siddha	grub dbang
གྲུབ་དབང་དཔལ་ཆེན་འདུས་པ་རྩལ	the first {pad nor rin po che}	grub dbang dpal chen 'dus pa rtsal
གྲུབ་དབང་ཚོགས་གཉིས	Tsok-nyi Rinpoche: 1789-1844 grub dbang shA kya shrI'i rnam thar me	grub dbang tshogs gnyis
ཏོག་ཕྲེང་བ	rje btsun bla ma rdo rje 'chang chen po shA kya shrI dznya na'i rnam thar me tog phreng ba zhes bya	tog phreng ba
ངག་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཨནད་ཧིས་སུབསེqཨུཨེནཏ་རེབིརཐས	the chief lamas of Hemis monastery; by {ngag dbang dkar brgyud rgya mtsho} and the 5th {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ye shes grub pa}	ngag dbang rgya mtsho and his subsequent rebirths
གྲུབ་འབྲས	achievement, success, result, gain, achievement, result, accomplishment	grub 'bras
གྲུབ་འབྲས་འོད་སྟོང་འབར་བ	brilliant/ remarkable achievement/ success/ result/ gain/ outcome/ effect/ fruits, success blazing w 1000 lights	grub 'bras 'od stong 'bar ba
གྲུབ་མ་ཐག	just after	grub ma thag
གྲུབ་མེད	uncreated, not realized	grub med
གྲུབ་རྩིས	doctrinal astrology * philosophical astrology [of Kalachakra]	grub rtsis
གྲུབ་རྫས	finished product	grub rdzas
གྲུབ་རཏཟིས	doctrinal astrology [in the Kalachakra root tantra dngos su bstan pa'i astrology, called grub mtha'i rtzis,	grub rtzis
ཝིཐིན་ཐིས་ཨརེ་མཉ་སུབ	traditions: phug lugs, mtsur phu lugs, dga' ldan rtzis gsar etc]	within this are many sub
གྲུབ་བརྫུ་བྱེད་པ	pretend to be accomplished	grub brdzu byed pa
གྲུབ་ཟིན	already existent, present	grub zin
གྲུབ་ཟིན་པ	proven, established	grub zin pa
གྲུབ་གཟུགས	1) form established after many are fathered into 1; 2) brtsis tshar nas bab pa'i grangs kyi ri mo	grub gzugs
གྲུབ་རུང་དུ་ཡོད་པ	one who is able to do it	grub rung du yod pa
གྲུབ་ཤི་སོང	all are dead	grub shi song
གྲུབ་གསལ	established and evident, actual, concrete, logical factual, shown by proof	grub gsal
གྲུབ་བསལ	blo ngor tshad mas grub zin pa dang, don la tshad ma'i bsal ba zhugs pa'o	grub bsal
གྲུབ་བསལ་མེད་པ	beyond establishment and refutation 436	grub bsal med pa
གྲུམ	meditative realization, pinch off, SA 'grum pa	grum
གྲུམ་དཀར	variety of smallpox	grum dkar
གྲུམ་མཐའ	system, tenet, view, opinion, school, philosophical (school, system), SA grub mtha'	grum mtha'
གྲུམ་འཐག	carpet weaving	grum 'thag
གྲུམ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	carpet weaving factory	grum 'thag bzo grwa
གྲུམ་གདན	carpet, rug	grum gdan
གྲུམ་ནག	variety of smallpox	grum nag
གྲུམ་ནད	grum bu disease, arthritis, rheumatism	grum nad
གྲུམ་ནད་དྲུག	the six kinds of grum bu disease	grum nad drug
གྲུམ་པ	chipmunk? fox?, meles-meles linnaeus, tibetan badger	grum pa
གྲུམ་པ་རྒྱང་ལྷ་ཁང	{grum pa rgyang temple	grum pa rgyang lha khang
གྲུམ་པའི་རྨ	wound of brdungs pa or btsir ba	grum pa'i rma
གྲུམ་པུ	gout, rheumatism, arthritic pain	grum pu
གྲུམ་པོ	maimed person, cripple	grum po
གྲུམ་ལྤགས	badger skin	grum lpags
གྲུམ་བུ	rheumatism, gout	grum bu
གྲུམ་བུ་དཀར་པོ	{grum bu dkar po disease [one of the bad kan rigs drug, symptoms: pho mchin mi bde, kha zas 'khru skyugs byed pa, nyva bzhi mig rus sogs na nas mjug tu grum bur 'gyur ba'i nad cig]	grum bu dkar po
གྲུམ་ཙེ	blanket	grum tse
གྲུམ་རྩེ	carpet, rug	grum rtse
གྲུམ་ཚེ	gdan gyi bye brag dre'u rngog, blanket	grum tshe
གྲུམས་པ	pf. of {grum pa}	grums pa
གྲུའི་སྐྱ་བ	paddle	gru'i skya ba
གྲུའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	holder of the boat, steersman of a vessel	gru'i kha lo pa
གྲུའི་ཉག་ཐག	boat pulling rope	gru'i nyag thag
གྲུའི་མཐིལ	bottom of a boat	gru'i mthil
གྲུའི་དར་ཅོག	sail	gru'i dar cog
གྲུའི་དར་ཤིང	1) boat's rlung g.yab/ fan hanging stick; 2) mast	gru'i dar shing
གྲུའི་ནང་འོར་འདྲེན	ferry	gru'i nang 'or 'dren
གྲུའི་རྩི	silk	gru'i rtsi
གྲུའི་འོག	bottom of a boat	gru'i 'og
གྲུའི་ཡན་ལག	oar, paddle	gru'i yan lag
གྲུའི་རབ	gru shan gru'i rlung g.yor - sail	gru'i rab
གྲུའི་གཤོག་པ	oar, paddle	gru'i gshog pa
གྲུའུ་ཙེ	silk, pongee, silk fabric	gru'u tse
གྲུར་འཇུག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of taking a boat ride [w female ordained persons 1 of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, up or downstream going a rgyang grags]	grur 'jug pa'i ltung byed
གྲུལ་ཐུབ་པ	[arch] reliable [benefit]	grul thub pa
གྲུལ་བུམ	vampire-ghouls feeding in cemeteries, kumbhanda, vampire ghouls, live in the sea and have human bodies with animal heads, kumbhanda of the Indian tradition	grul bum
གྲུལ་བུམ་གྱི་བུ་གུ	a kimbhanda child famed for a melodious voice	grul bum gyi bu gu
གྲུལ་བུམ་ཅན	a medicinal drug, esculent root arum campanulatum, cure for piles	grul bum can
གྲུལ་བུམ་གདོན	kind of d"n, grul bum [symptom: ngo nag la dal bar 'gro and swollen genitals]	grul bum gdon
གྲུལ་བུམ་སྡེ་དཔོན	master of the yakshas	grul bum sde dpon
གྲུལ་བུམ་དབང་པོ	a king of the yakshas	grul bum dbang po
གྲུལ་བུམ་མ	female vampire-ghouls	grul bum ma
གྲུལ་བུམ་ཟླ་བའི	gza' dug, gnyan dug	grul bum zla ba'i
གྲུལ་བུམ་ཟླ་བའི་ནུ་ཞོ་ཅན	klu dug	grul bum zla ba'i nu zho can
གྲུལ་མི་ཐུབ	unreliable	grul mi thub
གྲུལ་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unreliable	grul mi thub pa
གྲུས	clean rice by beating, SA bgrud pa, bestow pains upon a thing, SA 'gru ba	grus
གྲུས་ཀྱང་བསྒྲལ	across by the boat	grus kyang bsgral
གྲུས་པོ	boat	grus po
གྲུས་མ	female yak	grus ma
གྲེ	11th of 27 constellations, 1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, 1 of 28 constellations, delta leonis, 1 of rgyu skar	gre
གྲེ་སྐྱེས	Jupiter	gre skyes
གྲེ་ག	sheet of paper	gre ga
གྲེ་གུ་གསེར་ཐིག	lepisorus clathratus (c. b. clarke)	gre gu gser thig
གྲེ་འགྱུར	experience of sound/ speech	gre 'gyur
གྲེ་ཅང	Chekiang	gre cang
གྲེ་ཆམ	gre ba tsha zhing skad 'dzer ba sogs 'byung ba zhig	gre cham
གྲེ་ཐོགས	phlegm mid dkyus	gre thogs
གྲེ་སྣ	pace in kong po in central tibet	gre sna
གྲེ་བ	* wind-pipe, throat, vocal cords	gre ba
གྲེ་བ་གགས་པ	obstruction in the throat, hoarseness	gre ba gags pa
གྲེ་བ་གོགས	become hoarse	gre ba gogs
གྲེ་བ་འགགས་པ	become hoarse	gre ba 'gags pa
གྲེ་བ་ངར་བ	hoarse throat	gre ba ngar ba
གྲེ་བ་དར་བ	stertorous voice	gre ba dar ba
གྲེ་བ་བདེ་མོ	good voice	gre ba bde mo
གྲེ་བ་འཛེར	become hoarse 437	gre ba 'dzer
གྲེ་བོ	kind of male gdon	gre bo
གྲེ་མག	awn/ beard/ hairs of grain ear	gre mag
གྲེ་མོ	kind of female gdon	gre mo
གྲེ་མོག་འབུ	ant, emmet	gre mog 'bu
གྲེ་སེར་འབྲོང	wild yak 'brong	gre ser 'brong
གྲེ་གསང	glo gsang rgyag pa ste, mid pa bde po bzo ba	gre gsang
གྲེ་བསལ	gre gsang	gre bsal
གྲེ་བསལ་བཏང་བྱེད	hawk, hem, clear the throat	gre bsal btang byed
གྲེགས་བུ	page	gregs bu
གྲེངས	(not in DAS)	grengs
གྲེན་ཚག	plaited wicker-work in straight rows	gren tshag
གྲེམས	'grem pa!	grems
གྲེམས་མཙོ	Grems Lake [in sna dkar rtze rdzong, W of yar 'brog g.yu mtso]	grems mtso
གྲེམས་མཚོ	Grems Lake	grems mtsho
གྲེའུ	pea, peas	gre'u
གྲེས་མ	gres ma med. herb [w three kinds, hot, by its power bras bus srin gsod, me tog gis mig gsal, glang thabs 'joms]	gres ma
གྲོ	wheat, food, supper	gro
གྲོ་དཀར	light gray horse color	gro dkar
གྲོ་ལྐོགས་པ	cough, clear the throat	gro lkogs pa
གྲོ་སྐམ	dry wheat	gro skam
གྲོ་ཁ	black spotted, white birch bark used for writing charms on	gro kha
གྲོ་ཁང	horse/ mule etc kyis bskor te gro zhib 'thag sa'i khang pa	gro khang
གྲོ་ཁའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	food, supplies, provisions	gro kha'i mthun rkyen
གྲོ་ཁོག	stomach, abdomen	gro khog
གྲོ་ཁྱེར་ལྔ་པ	five cities	gro khyer lnga pa
གྲོ་ག	birch[-bark]	gro ga
གྲོ་གའི་འཇོར་བུ་གཅུས་པ	the [curved] knot of a birch tree	gro ga'i 'jor bu gcus pa
གྲོ་གའི་འཇོར་བུ་བཅུས་པ	curved piece of birch bark	gro ga'i 'jor bu bcus pa
གྲོ་གྲོ	wool of black and white mixed	gro gro
གྲོ་གྲོན	expenses	gro gron
གྲོ་སྔོན	horse white sngo mostly	gro sngon
གྲོ་བརྔོས་པའི་ཡོས	puffed wheat	gro brngos pa'i yos
གྲོ་བཅས་གཞན་མེད་པ	the only food he had	gro bcas gzhan med pa
གྲོ་ལྕོག	piled gro sog	gro lcog
གྲོ་ཆག	brdungs, flattened wheat	gro chag
གྲོ་ཆང	wheat beer	gro chang
གྲོ་ཆན	gro chag noodles	gro chan
གྲོ་ཆས	travel provisions	gro chas
གྲོ་ཆུ	gro ril gyi noodles	gro chu
གྲོ་རྗེན	gro btags pa'i flour	gro rjen
གྲོ་རྟེན	travel money and things	gro rten
གྲོ་ཐང	Drotang, in Latö	gro thang
གྲོ་ཐལ	when harvest wheat and barley ears have grown 'bru rdog black dust disease	gro thal
གྲོ་ཐིག	ngo la have many little nag thig	gro thig
གྲོ་ཐུག	gro ril noodles	gro thug
གྲོ་དོང	winter granary of wheat in tibet, underground cell where wheat is kept during the winter	gro dong
གྲོ་འདེབས་པ	1) lam du tsha phogs rgyag pa; 2) sow wheat	gro 'debs pa
གྲོ་ལྤགས	gro zhib btags nas thon pa'i chaff	gro lpags
གྲོ་སྤྱི	Tibetan govt. gro mo rdzong's supervisor	gro spyi
གྲོ་ཕུབ	wheat ears chaff phub ma	gro phub
གྲོ་ཕྱེ	flour; wheat flower	gro phye
གྲོ་བ	shing stag pa	gro ba
གྲོ་བའི་འཇོར་བུ་གཅུས་པ	curved knot of a birch tree	gro ba'i 'jor bu gcus pa
གྲོ་བོ	reddish gray	gro bo
གྲོ་བོ་ལུང	Trowo valley [in lhodrag rdzing {lho brag}where mar pa lo tsha was born]	gro bo lung
གྲོ་བྱིན་སྐྱེས	Shrona; x {sngon gro byin skyes la kun dga' bos sgom bslabs pa} once, in the past, Ananda was teaching Shrona to meditate	gro byin skyes
གྲོ་འབྲུ	wheat grain	gro 'bru
གྲོ་མ	silver weed in grassy plains, wild sweet potato, sweet potato of tibet, name of a herb, grass scirpus kysoor	gro ma
གྲོ་མ་ལུང	place in north of tibet	gro ma lung
གྲོ་མར	travellers bza' mar	gro mar
གྲོ་མོ	reddish grey	gro mo
གྲོ་དམར	horse/mule sngon po a little red	gro dmar
གྲོ་རྩམ	wheat tsampa	gro rtsam
གྲོ་ཚག	sieve for sifting wheat	gro tshag
གྲོ་ཚང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gro tshang
གྲོ་ཚང་དགོན་པ	gro tshang monastery	gro tshang dgon pa
གྲོ་ཞིང	wheat field	gro zhing
གྲོ་ཞིན	gro bzhin	gro zhin
གྲོ་ཞིབ	[wheat] flour	gro zhib
གྲོ་ཞིབ་རྫི	make/ knead dough	gro zhib rdzi
གྲོ་ཞུན	gro shun	gro zhun
གྲོ་བཞིན	one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} twenty-eighth nakshatras gods of the constellations	gro bzhin
གྲོ་བཞིན་སྐྱེས	{gro bzhin skyes [person in the sutras, at the time of Buddha]	gro bzhin skyes
གྲོ་བཞིན་སྐྱེས་རྣ་བ་བྱེ་བ	[shro ako kar a] [person in the sutras at the time of Buddha]	gro bzhin skyes rna ba bye ba
གྲོ་བཞིན་སྐྱེས་རྣ་བ་བྱེ་བ་རི	person in the sutras, at the time of Buddha	gro bzhin skyes rna ba bye ba ri
གྲོ་བཞིན་སྐྱེས་རི	a person	gro bzhin skyes ri
གྲོ་བཞིན་གྱི་ཉ་བ	full moon in the	gro bzhin gyi nya ba
མོནཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ཇུལཡ	august	month of july
གྲོ་བཞིན་གྱི་ཟླ	7th month	gro bzhin gyi zla
གྲོ་བཞིན་ཅན	gro bzhin month	gro bzhin can
གྲོ་བཞིན་བྱེ་བ་རྣའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the Story of Shronakatikarna	gro bzhin bye ba rna'i rtogs brjod
གྲོ་བཞིན་བྱེད	hole under the ground where wheat is kept in winter	gro bzhin byed
གྲོ་བཞིན་ཟླ་བ	7th month	gro bzhin zla ba
གྲོ་ཟན	1) food made of wheat dough; 2) food made of wheat flour boiled w mar, phyur ba, molasses etc. sogs	gro zan
གྲོ་ཟས	1) travel provisions; 2) food made of wheat	gro zas
གྲོ་ཟོས་ཟིན	[we] have had supper	gro zos zin
གྲོ་ཡོས	parched wheat or corn	gro yos
གྲོ་རིལ	'thag las ma byas pa'i wheat	gro ril
གྲོ་ལམ	path to liberation	gro lam
གྲོ་ལམ་གྱི་དབང་བཞི	four empowerments of the path to liberation	gro lam gyi dbang bzhi
གྲོ་ལམ་གཅིག	1 meal's journey	gro lam gcig
གྲོ་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	four great modes of liberation	gro lugs chen po bzhi
གྲོ་ལུང	village in lho kha	gro lung
གྲོ་ལུང་པ	real name blo gros 'byung gnas, when young studied kadamapa dharma w jo bo rje and 'brom ston, rngog lo'i slob ma'i gras las learned in all the teachings, jo bo'i gzhung chung rnams gtso bor gyur p...	gro lung pa
གྲོ་ལོ	gro ma'i leaves	gro lo
གྲོ་ལོ་མ	kid of satin, silk stuff	gro lo ma
གྲོ་ལོ་ས་འཛིན	potentilla anserina l.	gro lo sa 'dzin
གྲོ་ལོད་བཀའ་ཐང	life of Guru Padmasambhava in the form of rdo rje gro lod / revealed from its place of concealment by stag sham nus ldan rdo rje	gro lod bka' thang
གྲོ་ཤ	travellers lam rgyags meat	gro sha
གྲོ་ཤང་རྩེ	orobanche megalantha h. smith	gro shang rtse
གྲོ་ཤོད	{gro shod district	gro shod
གྲོ་ས	village in the district of phen yul	gro sa
གྲོ་སོ་ཕྱེ་མར	CM: bod du lo gsar sogs rten 'brel gyi byed sgo'i skabs su sgrig gshom byed pa'i gro yos dang phye mar 'bo nang du blugs nas de'i thog tu gro snye dang me tog sogs btsugs shing. mgron po phebs du d...	gro so phye mar
གྲོ་སོག	wheat straw	gro sog
གྲོ་ཧོ	mystical word used in phyag rgya rites	gro ho
གྲོག	1) pit, ravine, gorge, river bed; 2) suddenly/incidentally arising food and drink or enjoyment; 3) ant	grog
གྲོག་སྐད	as a sign of coming food and wealth pho rog and bya khra'i calls	grog skad
གྲོག་སྐམ	dry river bed	grog skam
གྲོག་སྐེད	1) ant's waist; 2) ngam grog gi sked pa	grog sked
གྲོག་མཁར	1) ant hill; 2) ant shit	grog mkhar
གྲོག་མཁར་བ	{grog mkhar ba [Indian rishi who performed auterities on an ant hill]	grog mkhar ba
གྲོག་ཆུ	water flowing in a pit, ravine, gorge	grog chu
གྲོག་ཆེ	stes dbang gis attained great wealth	grog che
གྲོག་སྟོང	earthen pit; desolate valley	grog stong
གྲོག་ལྡན	the side of a ravine	grog ldan
གྲོག་ནག	black ant	grog nag
གྲོག་པོ	dell, ravine	grog po
གྲོག་ཕུག	earthen cave, hollow, cavity	grog phug
གྲོག་ཕཡབ༹	having examined pulse nadis rnyed pa dang, nor 'tshol gyi lam 'gro yod med brtag thabs shig	grog phyva
གྲོག་བྱུང་བ	sudden/ incidental food, drink or enjoyment arising	grog byung ba
གྲོག་སྦུ	ant	grog sbu
གྲོག་སྦུར	kind of 'bu srin	grog sbur
གྲོག་སྦྱིན	grog mkhar yod sar tsampa and oil/butter mixed phye mar grog mar sbyin pa'i tradition	grog sbyin
གྲོག་སྦྲང	ants and bees	grog sbrang
གྲོག་མ	ant, emmet	grog ma
གྲོག་མ་དཀར་པོ	1) kind of tree harming insects that eat it; 2) termite	grog ma dkar po
གྲོག་མའི་ཚང	ant-hill	grog ma'i tshang
གྲོག་མོ	ravine eroded by stream or, ri sul	grog mo
གྲོག་དམར	red ant	grog dmar
གྲོག་ཙང	ant-hill [syn: grog mkhar dang, grog ma'i khyim, brgya byin spyi bo, nor ldan brtzegs]	grog tsang
གྲོག་རྩེ	table	grog rtse
གྲོག་ཚང	ant hill / nest; anthill	grog tshang
གྲོག་ཚང་ཁ་ཡི་རྡོ་བླངས་བཞིན	like when the anthill's covering rock has been removed	grog tshang kha yi rdo blangs bzhin
གྲོག་ཞིང	cultivation in uneven narrow ground away from villages, medicine which cures obstruction of the urine, kind of moss growing on the sides of chorten	grog zhing
གྲོག་གཟར	torrent pouring down a ravine	grog gzar
གྲོག་རོག	ravine	grog rog
གྲོག་རོང	gully, [water eroded] ravine, gorge	grog rong
གྲོག་རོང་དོག་པོ	narrow gully, [water eroded] ravine, gorge	grog rong dog po
གྲོག་རོང་ས་ཁུལ	gorge region	grog rong sa khul
གྲོག་ཤིང	mchod rten &, gyang rnying etc kyi ldebs su char pa phog nas spang gi rnam pa ltar gyur pa de la zer te, des dugs byas na old wounds and &, swelling of the joints, chu ser gyi za 'phrug etc. la phan	grog shing
གྲོག་ཤུར	ravines eroded by floods	grog shur
གྲོགས	adjuncts, friend, lover, companion,	grogs
ཕེ༹ལློཝ	laborer, assistant, paramour, husband, fellowship, auxiliary word to give polite turn to request like "will you kindly", 1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a pers...	fellow
གྲོགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	coemergent/ accompanying cause	grogs kyi rgyu
གྲོགས་ཀྱིས་འགོག་པ	among 'gog pa'i rgyan, dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po zhig 'gog byed assisting phan tshig brjod pa'i zol gyis naturally 'gog pa'i rgyan	grogs kyis 'gog pa
གྲོགས་སྐལ	lot of being forever bza' zla	grogs skal
གྲོགས་ཁྱེ	playmate, play-fellow	grogs khye
གྲོགས་མགོན	help and protection/ support	grogs mgon
གྲོགས་ངན	bad friend	grogs ngan
གྲོགས་མཆེད	friends and siblings	grogs mched
གྲོགས་མཆོག	supreme friend	grogs mchog
གྲོགས་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	meditative absorption into a feeling of fellowship	grogs ting nge 'dzin
གྲོགས་སྟོབས	power of help, power of support	grogs stobs
གྲོགས་དང་བཅས	together with	grogs dang bcas
གྲོགས་དང་ཕྲད	meeting a friend, collision	grogs dang phrad
གྲོགས་དན	help, assistance	grogs dan
གྲོགས་དོན	friendship	grogs don
གྲོགས་འདེད	in 'byung rtsis nang depending on conflict figure compatibility	grogs 'ded
གྲོགས་འདྲིས	mutual friendship	grogs 'dris
གྲོགས་ན་བདེ་བ	easy to get along with	grogs na bde ba
གྲོགས་གནང	please [= rogs gnang]	grogs gnang
གྲོགས་པོ	male friend, companion	grogs po
གྲོགས་པོ་གྲོགས་མཆེད	companion loved like a brother	grogs po grogs mched
གྲོགས་པོ་འགའ་ཞིག	several friends	grogs po 'ga' zhig
གྲོགས་པོ་རྒྱག	be/ make friends	grogs po rgyag
གྲོགས་པོ་རྒྱབ་པ	befriend	grogs po rgyab pa
གྲོགས་པོ་སྒྲིག	be/ make friends	grogs po sgrig
གྲོགས་པོ་ངན་པ	bad friend / company	grogs po ngan pa
གྲོགས་པོ་འདྲ་བ	like a friend	grogs po 'dra ba
གྲོགས་པོ་ནང་བཞིན	friendly	grogs po nang bzhin
གྲོགས་པོ་བྱེད	be/ make friends	grogs po byed
གྲོགས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to befriend, make friends with, assist	grogs po byed pa
གྲོགས་པོ་མི་བརྟན་པ	fickle-minded friend	grogs po mi brtan pa
གྲོགས་པོ་དམན་པ	bad friend / companions}	grogs po dman pa
གྲོགས་པོ་ལས་བླངས་པ	[vow] taken from a friend	grogs po las blangs pa
གྲོགས་པོའི་རྐྱེན	assisting condition	grogs po'i rkyen
གྲོགས་པོའི་འབྲེལ་བ	friendship	grogs po'i 'brel ba
གྲོགས་སྤུན	grogs po and spun mched	grogs spun
གྲོགས་ཕྱྭ	divination about income and earnings	grogs phywa
གྲོགས་ཕཡབ༹	grogs rtsa	grogs phyva
གྲོགས་བྱ་བ་ལ་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ	tireless in helping	grogs bya ba la skyo ba med pa
གྲོགས་བྱས	having become friends	grogs byas
གྲོགས་བྱེད	assist, aid; to assist, help, aid	grogs byed
གྲོགས་བྱེད་པ	to help, aid, assist, help out	grogs byed pa
གྲོགས་སྦུར	insect	grogs sbur
གྲོགས་མ་ཆེད	brothers and companions, friends	grogs ma ched
གྲོགས་མི་ལ་བཅོལ་བ	trust in friends	grogs mi la bcol ba
གྲོགས་མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན	non-buddhist companions	grogs mu stegs can
གྲོགས་མེད	friendless	grogs med
གྲོགས་མེད་ཁེར་རྐྱང	alone, w/o help/ friends	grogs med kher rkyang
གྲོགས་མེད་ཁེར་རྐྱང་དུ་གཏོང	isolate by withdrawing friendship	grogs med kher rkyang du gtong
གྲོགས་མེད་གཅིག་པུ	alone, w/o help	grogs med gcig pu
གྲོགས་མེད་གཅིག་པུར་ལུས་པ	be left alone w/o help	grogs med gcig pur lus pa
གྲོགས་མེད་པའི་ཁེར་རྐྱང	alone w/o help	grogs med pa'i kher rkyang
གྲོགས་མེད་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of friendlessness [one of the sdug bsngal drug]	grogs med pa'i sdug bsngal
གྲོགས་མོ	woman friend [syn: kun spyod mtsungs, na mnyam ma, pho nya mo, blo dkar ma, zla ma]	grogs mo
གྲོགས་དམག	dmag rgyag skabs mutually helping dmag	grogs dmag
གྲོགས་རྩ	mother and son enemy and friends 'byung ba brtsis nas rtsa brtag skabs and grogs sa lta bu grogs dang 'phrad pa de la grogs rtsa zhes zer	grogs rtsa
གྲོགས་ཚིག	auxiliary word / particle	grogs tshig
གྲོགས་མཛའ	lover	grogs mdza'
གྲོགས་མཛའ་བཤེས	relatives and friends	grogs mdza' bshes
གྲོགས་མཛོད་ཅིག	please help / assist	grogs mdzod cig
གྲོགས་བཟང	friendship, sweetheart	grogs bzang
གྲོགས་བཟང་པོ	good friends [of like view and conduct]	grogs bzang po
གྲོགས་བཟང་བ	good friends [of like view and conduct]	grogs bzang ba
གྲོགས་རམ	help, assistance, aid	grogs ram
གྲོགས་རམ་བྱེད	help, assist, aid	grogs ram byed
གྲོགས་བཤེས	blo bkal chog pa'i grogs po	grogs bshes
གྲོགས་སུ	in friendship, helpful	grogs su
གྲོགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	become a friend	grogs su gyur pa
གྲོགས་སུ་འགྱུར	become helpful	grogs su 'gyur
གྲོགས་སུ་འཆར	appear as friends	grogs su 'char
གྲོགས་སུ་འཐམས་པ	seal friendship under a solemn oath	grogs su 'thams pa
གྲོགས་སུ་འོས་པ	he is worthy to be his colleague	grogs su 'os pa
གྲོགས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	regard as helpful	grogs su shes pa
གྲོགས་ལྷ	deities of gain	grogs lha
གྲོང	1) house, town, village, hamlet. 2) p. of {'grong} 3) dice. 4) family dwell- 440 ing. 4) to have died, one who has died	grong
གྲོང་ཀྱེར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁབ	the city of Rajagriha	grong kyer rgyal po'i khab
གྲོང་དཀྱིལ	center of the village	grong dkyil
གྲོང་སྐད	regional dialect	grong skad
གྲོང་ཁང	house in a city/ village	grong khang
གྲོང་ཁུལ	in a city/ village	grong khul
གྲོང་ཁྱིམ	village family / house[hold]	grong khyim
ཨ་ཅིཏཡ	dwelling/ a townhouse	a city
གྲོང་ཁྱེར	las rigs mang po 'dzoms pa'i sde ste sngar gyi bshad srol du lcags bzo sogs bzo ba'i rigs 18 tshang ba'i yul,	grong khyer
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི	urban	grong khyer gyi
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་སྒབ་མོ	[arch] 1) prostitute; 2) gsang thag 'then mkhan [secret rope puller?]	grong khyer gyi sgab mo
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་ཉེ་འདབས	vicinity of a city	grong khyer gyi nye 'dabs
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་མཐའ་བསྐོར	suburb grong khyer gyi mtha' na nags tshal zhig	grong khyer gyi mtha' bskor
ན	in a forest at the edge of the city	na
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་མཐའ་དབུས་ཀུན་ཏུ	here and there throughout the kingdom	grong khyer gyi mtha' dbus kun tu
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་ཕྱི	open country	grong khyer gyi phyi
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་ཕྱི་རོལ	field	grong khyer gyi phyi rol
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་བུད་མེད་ཀུན	the ladies of the city	grong khyer gyi bud med kun
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་མི་ཀུན	all the other people in the city	grong khyer gyi mi kun
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྱི་མི་རྣམས	the people of the city	grong khyer gyi mi rnams
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གྲོལ་བའི་ཁོར་ལོ	wheel which liberates the cities	grong khyer grol ba'i khor lo
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དགྲ	enemy of the city, shiva	grong khyer dgra
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་རྒྱུན་གཅོད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view that interrupts the city of samsara	grong khyer rgyun gcod kyi lta ba
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྔ་པ	city of five cities	grong khyer lnga pa
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཁང	municipal council	grong khyer chab srid gros khang
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཆེ་ཆུང	size of a city, big and small cities, cities and towns	grong khyer che chung
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཆེན་པོ	large city	grong khyer chen po
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་འཇིག	indra	grong khyer 'jig
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་རྗེ	sheriff, chief of a city	grong khyer rje
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་རྗེ་བོ	lord/ ruler of a village or small kingdom	grong khyer rje bo
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཉེ་ཀོར	vicinity of a village	grong khyer nye kor
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཉེ་འདབས	suburbs	grong khyer nye 'dabs
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གཉེན་ལྡན	the city of Bandhumati	grong khyer gnyen ldan
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག	the Captivating City [on the summit of Mt. Sumeru]	grong khyer lta na sdug
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟེ་བ	capital city	grong khyer lte ba
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་བརྟེན་པ	a king	grong khyer brten pa
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་བལྟ་ན་སྡུག	lovely city	grong khyer blta na sdug
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་བསྟ་ན་སྟུག	lovely city	grong khyer bsta na stug
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དང་ཉེ་བ	near the town	grong khyer dang nye ba
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དམ་པ	Nagki Rinchen, Vajranatha of Sadnagar: 1384-1458	grong khyer dam pa
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ་ཕྱིན་ནས	went into the city	grong khyer du phyin nas
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དོ་དམ་གྱི་ལས་དོན	municipal affairs	grong khyer do dam gyi las don
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དྲུག་པོ	the cities of the six realms	grong khyer drug po
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་པ	inhabitants of the city	grong khyer pa
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་པ་རྣམས	the citizens of	grong khyer pa rnams
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་ལས་དོན	city public services/ utilities	grong khyer spyi spyod las don
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་སྤྱོད	crow	grong khyer spyod
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	wondrous land	grong khyer phun sum tshogs pa
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་བ	city-dweller	grong khyer ba
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་མེ་ཏོག	city of flowers, pataliputra, patna grong khyer tsam pa ka dang nye ba near the city of Campa grong khyer bzang po'i brag ces bya ba a town called Bhadrasila	grong khyer me tog
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཤང་ཀ་ཤྱའི་འགྲམ	near the city of Samkasya grong khyer ser skya'i nya gro dha'i nags	grong khyer shang ka shya'i 'gram
ཚལ་དུ	in the Nyagrodha Grove near the city of Kapilavastu	tshal du
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གསུམ	the three realms	grong khyer gsum
གྲོང་འཁྱེར	city, town	grong 'khyer
གྲོང་གི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city of 1 who has died	grong gi grong khyer
གྲོང་གི་གཅན་གཟན	village predator, dog	grong gi gcan gzan
གྲོང་གི་བརྗོད་པ	provincialism, country or rural language	grong gi brjod pa
གྲོང་གི་ཉེ་འཁོར	suburbs	grong gi nye 'khor
གྲོང་གི་འཐབ་མོ	feuds and quarrels among villagers	grong gi 'thab mo
གྲོང་གི་དྲ་བ	circle or circuit of a village, fortification round a city	grong gi dra ba
གྲོང་གི་བདག	headman of a village	grong gi bdag
གྲོང་གི་སྤྲེའུ	village monkey, cat	grong gi spre'u
གྲོང་གི་འཕྲེང་ལྡན་མ	village flowerwoman	grong gi 'phreng ldan ma
གྲོང་གི་གཙོ་བོ	chief man in a town or village, headman	grong gi gtso bo
གྲོང་གྱེར	city	grong gyer
གྲོང་གྲངས	number of houses in a village or town	grong grangs
གྲོང་དགོན	the one monastery in a town	grong dgon
གྲོང་འགྲམ	outskirts of a village/ city	grong 'gram
གྲོང་སྔགས	city practitioner, town yogi	grong sngags
གྲོང་གཅིག་མ	village w only 1 dud tshang	grong gcig ma
གྲོང་ཆུང་ནན་ཏན	rigid economizing	grong chung nan tan
གྲོང་ཆོག	performing village rites	grong chog
གྲོང་ཆོག་པ	those who conduct village ceremonies	grong chog pa
གྲོང་ཆོས	have sex	grong chos
གྲོང་མཆོག	chief city or scene or sphere	grong mchog
གྲོང་འཇུག	resurrection, transference of consciousness, practice to transfer one's own principle of consciousness into another body 441	grong 'jug
གྲོང་འཇུག་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of entering the dead	grong 'jug gi rnal 'byor
གྲོང་འཇུག་འཕོ་བ	Drongjug transference	grong 'jug 'pho ba
གྲོང་འཇུག་མཛད	transferred his consciousness	grong 'jug mdzad
གྲོང་འཇུག་མཛད་པ	to transfer [the consciousness]	grong 'jug mdzad pa
གྲོང་འཇོམས	1) Vishnu; 2) Indra; 3) buddhist	grong 'joms
གྲོང་གཉིས་ལ	grong gnyis pass	grong gnyis la
གྲོང་བསྙེན	lama who performs meditations or asceticism remaining inside a village	grong bsnyen
གྲོང་གཏམ	ordinary/ village talk, regional dialect	grong gtam
གྲོང་སྟོང	empty city/town	grong stong
གྲོང་སྟོད	upper city	grong stod
གྲོང་ཐག་ཉེ་བ	monastery near a town	grong thag nye ba
གྲོང་དང་དགོན་སྡེ	towns or monasteries	grong dang dgon sde
གྲོང་དུ་རྒྱུ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of roaming a city	grong du rgyu ba'i ltung byed
གྲོང་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་ལྷུང་བྱེད	the downfall of remaining overnight in a village	grong du 'jug pa'i lhung byed
གྲོང་དུ་འདྲེན	donkey	grong du 'dren
གྲོང་དུ་ཕབ་སོང	drives him back into town	grong du phab song
གྲོང་དུ་བབས་པ	comes down to the villages	grong du babs pa
གྲོང་དུ་སོང་བ	to descend to the villages	grong du song ba
གྲོང་དྲ་བ་ཅན	town surrounded with fortifications	grong dra ba can
གྲོང་དྲག་དམག་སྒར	Tibetan govt sngar nas 'khri srol yod med la ma ltos par khyim tshang drag rigs tshang mar dmigs bsal 'phar ma'i dmag mi skong 'dems byas pa'i dmag sgar zhig	grong drag dmag sgar
གྲོང་བདག	headman of a village or city	grong bdag
གྲོང་འདབས	neighborhood of a village	grong 'dabs
གྲོང་རྡལ	smaller than a city but not very small grong chung chung min pa grong khyer las chung ba, w many manufactories and commercial enterprises	grong rdal
གྲོང་སྡེ	colony town	grong sde
གྲོང་སྡེའི	municipal	grong sde'i
གྲོང་སྡེའི་ཕྲ་མ་མཁན	one who causes or excites brawls & feuds	grong sde'i phra ma mkhan
གྲོང་བརྡལ	large town together with its suburbs, a town, city	grong brdal
གྲོང་སྣེ	grong gi 'go'am, mtha'a	grong sne
གྲོང་པ	neighbor, villager, one holding a house, tenant	grong pa
གྲོང་པ་ཁ་ཤས	a group of people in the town	grong pa kha shas
གྲོང་པ་ཆུང་ཆུང	hamlet	grong pa chung chung
གྲོང་པའི	. . . commonplace	grong pa'i
གྲོང་པའི་འགྲམ	vicinity of a village	grong pa'i 'gram
གྲོང་པའི་ཆོས	sexual union	grong pa'i chos
གྲོང་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱིས	maiden not touched by a male	grong pa'i chos kyis
གྲོང་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་མ་གོས་པ	not defiled w sexual activity	grong pa'i chos kyis ma gos pa
གྲོང་པའི་གཙོ་བོ	headman of a village or city	grong pa'i gtso bo
གྲོང་དཔོན	chief of a town	grong dpon
གྲོང་སྤངས	one who is liberated or has abandoned the life of a layman	grong spangs
གྲོང་འཕོ	Drongjug transference	grong 'pho
གྲོང་འཕོ་གྲོང་འཇུག་གདམས་པ	the instruction in the transference of consciousness	grong 'pho grong 'jug gdams pa
གྲོང་བ	cold	grong ba
གྲོང་བར	the middle of a village	grong bar
གྲོང་བོག	perform village rites	grong bog
གྲོང་མི	city people	grong mi
གྲོང་མི་ཚོ	townsmen	grong mi tsho
གྲོང་མིང	family name, surname	grong ming
གྲོང་སྨད	lower city	grong smad
གྲོང་ཚ	village	grong tsha
གྲོང་ཚན	town, village	grong tshan
གྲོང་ཚིག	1) colloquial talk; 2) Btsog pa'i tshig	grong tshig
གྲོང་ཚོ	grong khyim khag gam sde tshan	grong tsho
གྲོང་མཚེས	neighbors	grong mtshes
གྲོང་མཚེས་པ	grong pa khyim mtshes pa	grong mtshes pa
གྲོང་མཚོ་མེར་མོ	village in the district of e in lho kha	grong mtsho mer mo
གྲོང་གཞི	estate, farm	grong gzhi
གྲོང་གཞིས	in a village chags pa'i khyim tshang	grong gzhis
གྲོང་བཟོ	sngar dus rtag tu gzhung las la 'gro mi dgos pa'i tshem bu ba'i tshogs pa	grong bzo
གྲོང་ཡུལ	city of Yama /the dead, city and country, place w houses	grong yul
གྲོང་རོགས	khyim mtshes	grong rogs
གྲོང་ལ་འགྲོ	going or gone to the village	grong la 'gro
གྲོང་ས	village, peopled area	grong sa
གྲོང་ས་སོང་བ	gone to a village	grong sa song ba
གྲོང་གསུམ	the three realms	grong gsum
གྲོང་གསུམ་མཐར་བྱེད	the deity dbang phyug chen po	grong gsum mthar byed
གྲོང་གསེབ	countryside, the country, rural district, hamlet, village, village	grong gseb
གྲོང་གསེབ་ཀྱི	rural	grong gseb kyi
གྲོང་གསེབ་ཁུལ	countryside	grong gseb khul
གྲོང་གསེབ་པ	villager	grong gseb pa
གྲོངས	die [h], died, death	grongs
གྲོངས་པ	died [p {'grongs pa}	grongs pa
གྲོངས་པོར་ངན་པ	lesser dead	grongs por ngan pa
གྲོངས་པོར་དམན་པ	lesser dead	grongs por dman pa
གྲོངས་ཚར་བ	had passed away	grongs tshar ba
གྲོད་ཀོག	belly, stomach	grod kog
གྲོད་ཁོག	belly [= dku, dgang bya, lto ba, pho ba, brang zhol, gsus pa]	grod khog
གྲོད་ཁོག་གི	abdominal	grod khog gi
གྲོད་ཁོག་འགྲངས	be full	grod khog 'grangs
གྲོད་ཁོག་རྒྱགས	be full	grod khog rgyags
གྲོད་ཁོག་ཆེན་པོ	big stomach, greedy	grod khog chen po
གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྟོགས	to be hungry	grod khog ltogs
གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྟོགས་པ	be hungry	grod khog ltogs pa
གྲོད་ཁོག་བཤལ་ནད	diarrhoea	grod khog bshal nad
གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྷུག་གེ་བ	belly big and hanging	grod khog lhug ge ba
གྲོད་ཉོར་ཅན	fat w big hanging belly	grod nyor can
གྲོད་པ	belly, progress. Syn {grod khog}	grod pa
གྲོད་པ་འགེངས	bellyful	grod pa 'gengs
གྲོད་པ་འགེངས་ཆིམ་པ	satiated with food	grod pa 'gengs chim pa
གྲོད་པ་འགྲངས་པ	filled our stomachs	grod pa 'grangs pa
གྲོད་པ་རྒྱགས	to be full/satisfied (for food)	grod pa rgyags
གྲོད་པ་ཅན	zas gron che ba'i gras	grod pa can
གྲོད་པ་ཆེ	large belly, appetite	grod pa che
གྲོད་པ་འཇོལ་ལེ	hanging belly, paunch	grod pa 'jol le
གྲོད་པ་ཕུག	Dröpa Phuk, one of Milarepa's caves at Nyanang. See Belly Cave of Nyanang	grod pa phug
གྲོད་པོ	stomach, belly	grod po
གྲོད་སྦོམ	large belly, dried paunch of a bullock to keep oil	grod sbom
གྲོད་ཚིལ	lard	grod tshil
གྲོད་རིལ	in bellies of cattle btums pa'i mar ril etc.	grod ril
གྲོད་ལུགས	paunch	grod lugs
གྲོན	mi tshe gron - I've frittered my life away	gron
གྲོན་དངུལ	expenditure, expenses	gron dngul
གྲོན་ཅན	expensive	gron can
གྲོན་ཆུང	economical, inexpensive, thrifty	gron chung
གྲོན་ཆུང་ཐོན་སྤེལ	increasing production and decreasing expenses	gron chung thon spel
གྲོན་ཆུང་དམ་ཚགས	thrifty, economical	gron chung dam tshags
གྲོན་ཆུང་བྱེད	be economical/ thrifty	gron chung byed
གྲོན་ཆེ	uneconomical, expensive, large outlay	gron che
གྲོན་ཆེན	uneconomical, expensive, large outlay	gron chen
གྲོན་གཏོང	paying expenditures/ expenses	gron gtong
གྲོན་གཏོང་བྱེད	pay/ meet expenditures/ expenses	gron gtong byed
གྲོན་པ	much expenditure, expensive, expend, squander, great or illustrious family, one who is patient and forbearing, thing that is durable and hard	gron pa
གྲོན་པ་ཅན	[arch] having harm	gron pa can
གྲོན་པ་ཆུང	low consumption	gron pa chung
གྲོན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	high consumption	gron pa chen po
གྲོན་མེད	free	gron med
གྲོན་འཛག	expenditure, consumption, expense	gron 'dzag
གྲོན་འཛར་སོང་བ	wasted and squandered	gron 'dzar song ba
གྲོན་ཤས	item of expenditure, account of distribution and lending of grain	gron shas
གྲོབ་སོ་ཆེར་བབས་པ	long projection of shadows	grob so cher babs pa
གྲོམ་པ་རྒྱང	place in tsang with 1 of 12 temples built by srong btsan sgam po	grom pa rgyang
གྲོའི་སྙེ་ནག	grain blight gro'i g.yung drung - in case of producing auspiciousness on bzhugs khri and gdan gyi gro'i 'bru rnams star du 'then pa'i swastika picture	gro'i snye nag
གྲོལ	liberation, freedom, release, releasing, disperse, loosen, deliver, deliverance, SA 'grol ba, to be over, to be let out (from class / meeting), are released, become liberated in, liberating, one wi...	grol
གྲོལ་འཁྲུལ	liberation and delusion	grol 'khrul
གྲོལ་འགྱུར	liberation occurs	grol 'gyur
གྲོལ་ཆ	on the side of liberation	grol cha
གྲོལ་ཆའི་ཆོས་སྐུ་ངོས་བཟུང་བ	recognize the Dharmakaya on the side of liberation	grol cha'i chos sku ngos bzung ba
གྲོལ་ཉིན	the day when the annual assembly of the lamas dissolve	grol nyin
གྲོལ་ཏིག	See also {grol thig}; See also {grol thig}	grol tig
གྲོལ་ཏིག་དགོངས་པ་རང་གྲོལ	terma by {shes rab 'od zer}	grol tig dgongs pa rang grol
གྲོལ་སྟོན	finishing/ closing/ completion feast/ celebration for a project/ graduation	grol ston
གྲོལ་ཐིག	Abbr. of {grol thig dgongs pa rang grol} terma revealed by {'phrang mgo gter ston shes rab 'od zer}	grol thig
གྲོལ་ཐིག་དགོངས་པ་རང་གྲོལ	terma revealed by {'phrang mgo gter ston shes rab 'od zer}	grol thig dgongs pa rang grol
གྲོལ་ཐིག་ཞི་ཁྲོ	terma of Sherab Özer	grol thig zhi khro
གྲོལ་དུ་མེད་པ	there is nothing to liberate	grol du med pa
གྲོལ་དྲུག	6 liberations (liberation attainted through the doors of the 6 sense aggregates)	grol drug
གྲོལ་གདམས	instructions for liberation	grol gdams
གྲོལ་མདུད	mdud pa grol chog chog	grol mdud
གྲོལ་འདོད	wishing to be emancipated or set free from transmigratory existence and misery, abbr of 'khor ba dang sdug bsngal sogs las grol bar 'dod pa	grol 'dod
གྲོལ་སྡེ	proponent of Svatantrika	grol sde
གྲོལ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtues/ buddha qualities of liberation	grol pa'i yon tan
གྲོལ་ཕུག	myth	grol phug
གྲོལ་ཕུགས	source	grol phugs
གྲོལ་བ	close, conclude a meeting, deliverance, deliverance from worldly existence, to transcend, to be released from, to dissolve	grol ba
ལེབེ༹ལ་ཨོཕ༹	existence, thus benefiting that	level of
ཨོནེ་ཨནད་རེམོབི༹ང་ཨོབསྟཅླེས	caused by his or her evil karma	one and removing obstacles
གྲོལ་བ་ཅན	1) med na le sham; 2) pearl	grol ba can
གྲོལ་བ་ཅན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	oyster	grol ba can skyed byed
གྲོལ་བ་གཅིག་པུ	unique liberation, a single mode of liberation	grol ba gcig pu
གྲོལ་བ་ཉིད	free from grol ba stobs dag pa lam mngon gyur gyi	grol ba nyid
མན་ངག	the instruction of liberation which disclose the path of pure power [one of {kha 'thor gyi man ngag gnyis}, with reference to liberation the esoteric instructions of pure power which disclose the p...	man ngag
གྲོལ་བ་ཐོབ་པ	to attain liberation. Syn {thar pa thob pa}	grol ba thob pa
གྲོལ་བ་མཐར་ཐུག	final liberation, ultimate freedom	grol ba mthar thug
གྲོལ་བ་དྲུག	six liberations	grol ba drug
གྲོལ་བ་དྲུག་ལྡན	endowed with the six liberations	grol ba drug ldan
གྲོལ་བ་རྣམ་བཞི	four types of liberation	grol ba rnam bzhi
གྲོལ་བ་པོ	the one to be liberated	grol ba po
གྲོལ་བ་བཞི	four types of liberation	grol ba bzhi
གྲོལ་བ་བཞི་ལྡན	four liberations	grol ba bzhi ldan
གྲོལ་བ་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	complete/ perfect liberation	grol ba yongs su rdzogs pa
གྲོལ་བ་གསུམ	three types of liberation / freeing	grol ba gsum
གྲོལ་བའི་སྐུ	the body/ embodiment of liberation	grol ba'i sku
གྲོལ་བའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city of liberation	grol ba'i grong khyer
གྲོལ་བའི་ཐིག་ལེ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	Muktitlakanaama [one of the {chos bcu bzhi 14 treatises on the guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs-rgyas ye shes}	grol ba'i thig le zhes bya ba
གྲོལ་བའི་གདེངས	the assurance of liberation	grol ba'i gdengs
གྲོལ་བའི་ཕུང་བོ	aggregate of liberation; muktiskandha [buddha]	grol ba'i phung bo
གྲོལ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of freedom / liberation; see {rig grol gyi yon tan}	grol ba'i yon tan
གྲོལ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	to become released from	grol bar 'gyur ba
གྲོལ་བར་བྱ	must be overcome	grol bar bya
གྲོལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	the progressive steps of instruction which gives liberation	grol bar byed pa khrid kyi rim pa
གྲོལ་བར་མཛད་པ	acts to liberate	grol bar mdzad pa
གྲོལ་བུའི་ལྷ་ལྔ	five demigods, naga demigods	grol bu'i lha lnga
གྲོལ་བྱེད	liberating	grol byed
གྲོལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཁྲིད	liberating instructions	grol byed kyi khrid
གྲོལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	liberating instructions	grol byed kyi gdams pa
གྲོལ་བྱེད་བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས	the liberating stages of development and completion; the development and completion stages, which bring liberation	grol byed bskyed rdzogs
གྲོལ་བྱེད་འཇོམས	name of brgya byin lha	grol byed 'joms
གྲོལ་མ	'bu dmar ba in the entrails	grol ma
གྲོལ་མེད	there is nothing to liberate	grol med
གྲོལ་མེད་འཇོམས	killer of namuci, epithet of indra	grol med 'joms
གྲོལ་མོལ	discussion, talk	grol mol
གྲོལ་ཚད	degree of liberation	grol tshad
གྲོལ་ཚད་ཀྱི་གདིངས་བཞི	fourfold confidence of liberation	grol tshad kyi gdings bzhi
གྲོལ་ཚད་ངེས་པའི་གཟེར	stakes of certainty of liberation	grol tshad nges pa'i gzer
གྲོལ་ཚུགས	beginning and end, start and finish	grol tshugs
གྲོལ་ཚུལ	the way of freeing	grol tshul
གྲོལ་མཚམས	intermission, adjournment, break	grol mtshams
གྲོལ་གཞི	ground of liberation, base of	grol gzhi
གྲོལ་གཞི་དངོས	true ground of liberation	grol gzhi dngos
གྲོལ་གཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ངོས་འཛིན	recognizing the knowledge which is the basis of liberation	grol gzhi'i ye shes ngos 'dzin
གྲོལ་བཞིའི་ཚུལ་གི་ཕྲིན་ལས	activity of the four liberating ways. Liberation by sight 444 {mthong grol} liberation by hearing {thos grol} liberation by wearing {brtags grol} and liberation by tasting {myang grol}	grol bzhi'i tshul gi phrin las
གྲོལ་ཟིན་ཡུལ་གྲུ	liberated zone/ area	grol zin yul gru
གྲོལ་ཟིན་ས་གནས	liberated zone/ area	grol zin sa gnas
གྲོལ་ལམ	freedom path, liberation path,	grol lam
གྲོལ་ལམ་གྱི་དབང་བཞི	four empowerments of the path to liberation	grol lam gyi dbang bzhi
གྲོལ་ལམ་ཅིག་ཅར་བ	instantaneous path of liberation	grol lam cig car ba
གྲོལ་ལམ་གཉིས	the two modes of the path of liberation. {cig car ba}, {rim gyis pa}	grol lam gnyis
གྲོལ་ལམ་རྣམ་གཉིས	two modes of the path to liberation, in mah yoga [The immediately attained path to liberation {cig car pa}. and the gradually attained path to liberation {rim gyis pa}	grol lam rnam gnyis
གྲོལ་ལམ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamudra, the path of liberation. Comp. with {thabs lam na ro chos drug}	grol lam phyag rgya chen po
གྲོལ་ལམ་བག་ཡོད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་བརྒྱད	8 divisions of the conduct of self restraint in Mah yoga	grol lam bag yod kyi spyod pa brgyad
གྲོལ་ལམ་རིམ་གྱིས་པ	gradual path of liberation	grol lam rim gyis pa
གྲོལ་ལུགས	mode of freedom	grol lugs
གྲོལ་ལུགས་ལྔ	five manners of liberation; 1) {ye grol}. = primordially freed. 2) {rang grol}. = spontaneously free. 3) {cer grol}. - directly freed. 4) {mtha' grol}. - freed from extremes. 5) {gcig grol}. - sing...	grol lugs lnga
གྲོལ་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	instructions of primordially pure khregs chod, the four great means of liberating insightawareness in dharmakaya	grol lugs chen po bzhi
གྲོལ་ལུགས་བཞི	the four modes of liberation	grol lugs bzhi
གྲོལ་ས	context/ environment of freedom	grol sa
གྲོལ་ས་གཅིག་པུ	unique state of liberation	grol sa gcig pu
གྲོལ་ས་གཅིག་པོ་ཡིན་པར་ངོས་ཤེས	recognize to be the unique state of liberation	grol sa gcig po yin par ngos shes
གྲོས	conference, consultation, advice, counsel, speech, talk, care, heed, caution, discussion	gros
གྲོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	minister	gros kyi snod
གྲོས་ཁང	parliament, assembly, congress, council, soviet	gros khang
གྲོས་ཁང་གི་ཁོངས་མི	member of [parliament, assembly, congress, council, soviet]	gros khang gi khongs mi
གྲོས་ཁང་གོང་མ	upper house [British House of Lords, US Senate, Japanese House of Councilors]	gros khang gong ma
གྲོས་ཁང་གཉིས་ཡོད་པའི་ལམ་ལུགས	bicameral system	gros khang gnyis yod pa'i lam lugs
གྲོས་ཁང་འོག་མ	lower house	gros khang 'og ma
གྲོས་མཁན	a guide, advisor	gros mkhan
གྲོས་གྲོགས	1) place/ region where talks/ discussions are held; 2) person participating in talks; 3) consultant	gros grogs
གྲོས་གླེང	discussion	gros gleng
གྲོས་གླེང་ལེན	discuss	gros gleng len
གྲོས་མགོ	leading a meeting, beginning of a consultation	gros mgo
གྲོས་འགོ	subject to be discussed resolution, motion, initiative in discussions	gros 'go
གྲོས་འགོ་དུ་འདོན་པ	propose, suggest	gros 'go du 'don pa
གྲོས་འགོ་འདོན	propose a resolution, suggest subject to be discussed, make a motion, initiative in discussions, display initiative	gros 'go 'don
གྲོས་འགོ་འདོན་པ	propose, suggest	gros 'go 'don pa
གྲོས་འགོ་རྩོམ	begin/ undertake a discussion	gros 'go rtsom
གྲོས་ངན	conspiracy	gros ngan
གྲོས་ཅན	careful, cautious	gros can
གྲོས་གཅམ	consultation, consult, made a conference, talked over 445	gros gcam
གྲོས་ཆོད	resolution, decision, agreement	gros chod
གྲོས་ཆོད་ཀྱི་འཆར་ཟིན	draft resolution	gros chod kyi 'char zin
གྲོས་ཆོད་འཇོག	pass a resolution, come to a decision, sign an agreement	gros chod 'jog
གྲོས་ཆོད་ཟིན་ཐོ	minutes	gros chod zin tho
གྲོས་ཆོད་ཡི་གེ	protocol	gros chod yi ge
གྲོས་འཆམ	agreement, resolution	gros 'cham
གྲོས་འཆམ་པ	they agreed that	gros 'cham pa
གྲོས་འཆམ་བྱེད་པ	adopt, pass, carry	gros 'cham byed pa
གྲོས་འཆམས	agreement, resolution	gros 'chams
གྲོས་འཆམས་འབྱུང	agree[d], resolve[d], adopted a resolution	gros 'chams 'byung
གྲོས་འཆར	agenda of a meeting	gros 'char
གྲོས་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	decide, resolve	gros thag gcod pa
གྲོས་ཐག་གཅོད་པའི་གྲོས་གཞི	resolution which has been approved/ passed	gros thag gcod pa'i gros gzhi
གྲོས་ཐག་བཅད་པ	resolved, decided, conclusion, agreement	gros thag bcad pa
གྲོས་ཐག་ཆོད	come to an agreement / conclusion, be resolved, decide, resolve, agree	gros thag chod
གྲོས་མཐུན	agreement accord, concord	gros mthun
གྲོས་མཐུན་ཆོད་ཡིག	treaty, agreement, concord	gros mthun chod yig
གྲོས་མཐུན་ཆོད་ཡིག་འཇོག	sign treaty/ agreement/ concord	gros mthun chod yig 'jog
གྲོས་མཐུན་འཇོག	sign an agreement	gros mthun 'jog
གྲོས་མཐུན་པ	live in harmony, unanimous (in judgment, in a conference, vote)	gros mthun pa
གྲོས་མཐུན་པར	unanimously, by unanimous decree	gros mthun par
གྲོས་དན	gros kha mthun pa	gros dan
གྲོས་དོན	subjects of discussion/ debate	gros don
གྲོས་དོན་ཆོད་ཡིག	resolution, decision	gros don chod yig
གྲོས་དྲི་ས	the place where advice may be asked, oracle	gros dri sa
གྲོས་འདེབས	counsel, discussion, talk	gros 'debs
གྲོས་འདེབས་པ	give advice	gros 'debs pa
གྲོས་འདྲི་བ	ask a person's advice, consult with	gros 'dri ba
གྲོས་སྡུར	discuss/ compare ideas about a project	gros sdur
གྲོས་སྡུར་བྱ་རྒྱུའི་ནང་དོན	subjects of discussion/ debate	gros sdur bya rgyu'i nang don
གྲོས་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	consult, discuss, talk over	gros sdur byed pa
གྲོས་བསྡུར	discuss[ion], compare ideas, consult, talk [over]	gros bsdur
གྲོས་བསྡུར་བྱེད	discuss, compare ideas, consult, talk [over]	gros bsdur byed
གྲོས་པ	1) blo 'dri sa'i mi; 2) minister	gros pa
གྲོས་ཕུག	best counsel	gros phug
གྲོས་ཕུག་ཐམས་ཅད	1) the best recommendation. 2) "heart of conference."	gros phug thams cad
གྲོས་བྱས	consulted; x {rgyal blon rnams gros byas} the king consulted all his ministers	gros byas
གྲོས་བྱས་པ	have consulted, consultation, conference, made a conference, talked over	gros byas pa
གྲོས་བྱེད	discuss, talk over, consult	gros byed
གྲོས་བྱེད་པ	to give advice	gros byed pa
གྲོས་བྱེད་པའི་གོ་རིམ	agenda	gros byed pa'i go rim
གྲོས་མི	parliamentary representative	gros mi
གྲོས་མེད	without asking or consulting anybody, self-sufficient, careless, heedless	gros med
གྲོས་མེད་བསམ་མཐུན	similar thoughts even w/o discussion	gros med bsam mthun
གྲོས་མོལ	council conversation, discussion	gros mol
གྲོས་མོལ་བྱེད་པ	to consult	gros mol byed pa
གྲོས་རྩོད	debate	gros rtsod
གྲོས་རྩོད་ཕྱིར་འགྱངས་གྲོས་ཤོག	adjournment motion	gros rtsod phyir 'gyangs gros shog
གྲོས་ཚབ	parliamentary representative	gros tshab
གྲོས་ཚོགས	assembly [for discussion], conference, meeting, parliament, congress, conference	gros tshogs
གྲོས་ཚོགས་གོང་མ	upper house of parliament etc.	gros tshogs gong ma
གྲོས་ཚོགས་གོང་འོག	upper and lower houses of parliament etc.	gros tshogs gong 'og
གྲོས་ཚོགས་གྲོལ་བ	sine die (latin)	gros tshogs grol ba
གྲོས་ཚོགས་འཐུས་མི	parliamentarian	gros tshogs 'thus mi
གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཕྱིར་འཐེན	prorogue in parliament	gros tshogs phyir 'then
གྲོས་ཚོགས་འོག་མ	lower house of parliament etc.	gros tshogs 'og ma
གྲོས་ཚོད	real points or object of a conference	gros tshod
གྲོས་ཞིབ	thorough discussion	gros zhib
གྲོས་ཞིབ་ཁང	congress, assembly, parliament, soviet, etc.	gros zhib khang
གྲོས་ཞིབ་བྱེད	discuss thoroughly/ in detail	gros zhib byed
གྲོས་གཞི	proposal, subject for discussion, motion, topic	gros gzhi
གྲོས་གཞི་འདོན	propose, raise subject for discussion, put forth a motion, topic, resolution	gros gzhi 'don
གྲོས་གཞི་འདོན་མཁན	1 who proposes/ raises subject for discussion/ puts forth a motion, topic, resolution	gros gzhi 'don mkhan
གྲོས་གཞི་འདོན་པ	propose, suggest	gros gzhi 'don pa
གྲོས་གཞིའི་ཡི་གེ	motion, proposal, resolution	gros gzhi'i yi ge
གྲོས་ཡ	gros sdur byed sa'i rogs pa	gros ya
གྲོས་ཡུག	best recommendation, heart of the conference	gros yug
གྲོས་རིམ	agenda	gros rim
གྲོས་ལ་མེད་པ	without consulting any	gros la med pa
གྲོས་ཤོམས	take advice	gros shoms
གྲོས་ས	place to escape	gros sa
གྲོས་སེམས	a consulting or reflecting mind	gros sems
གླ	1) wage, salary. 2) rental fee, rent. 3) fare, freight fee / charge. 4) p. glas - to hire, rent	gla
གླ་སྐྱེས	wages and gzigs bzos	gla skyes
གླ་བསྐུལ	coercive employment, exploitation	gla bskul
གླ་བསྐུལ་བཀག་བསྡོམས	prohibition of coercive employment, exploitation	gla bskul bkag bsdoms
གླ་ཁུག	deerskin bag [from the musk deer]	gla khug
གླ་ཁོངས་ནས་འབུད	dismiss from employment, remove from the payroll	gla khongs nas 'bud
གླ་ཁོལ	paid servant, employee	gla khol
གླ་གོར་ཞོ་ཤ	a fruit	gla gor zho sha
གླ་གླ	pay rent/ wages	gla gla
གླ་རྒྱུན	gla lpags mnyes ma'i rgyun bu 446	gla rgyun
གླ་སྒང	polygonum sphaerostachyum meissn., medicinal herb cyperus rotundus, root of cyperus pertennis	gla sgang
གླ་སྒྲིལ་ལྟོ་སྒྲིལ	wages and food dngul sogs la sgril ba	gla sgril lto sgril
གླ་རྔན	wages, remuneration	gla rngan
གླ་ཆ	wages, reward, rental fee, fare, freight fee/ charge	gla cha
གླ་ཆ་སྤྲོད	pay wages/ reward	gla cha sprod
གླ་ཆ་སྤྲོད་པ	remunerate	gla cha sprod pa
གླ་ཆའི་ཐང་གཞི	prevailing rate of wages/ fees/ fares etc.	gla cha'i thang gzhi
གླ་ཆུ	gla chu river	gla chu
གླ་ལྟོ	wages as/and provisions	gla lto
གླ་ཐང	las gla'i tshad or thang gzhi	gla thang
གླ་ཐོབ	wages [attained]	gla thob
གླ་དང་རྔན་པ	wages and remuneration	gla dang rngan pa
གླ་བདག	1) wage worker and payer, labor and management; 2) employer, payer of wages	gla bdag
གླ་གནས	principal place	gla gnas
གླ་རྣའི་པགས	variety of musk deer, SA gla ba	gla rna'i pags
གླ་པ	employee, one who works on wages, servant employed on a fixed salary, day-laborer, hired workman	gla pa
གླ་པ་སྐབས་འཕྲལ	temporary wageworker/ employee	gla pa skabs 'phral
གླ་པ་བསྒྲིགས་པའི་དམག་སྡེ	mercenary troops	gla pa bsgrigs pa'i dmag sde
གླ་པོ	on fixed salary, SA gla pa	gla po
གླ་ཕོགས	salary, wage, pay, income, pay	gla phogs
གླ་ཕོར	kind of tree whose wood is good for cups and plates	gla phor
གླ་ཕྲུག	young one of a musk deer	gla phrug
གླ་བ	deer, moschus sifanicus buchner, musk, musk deer, moschus mo-	gla ba
གླ་བ་གླ་རྩི་ཅན	male musk deer	gla ba gla rtsi can
གླ་བ་མཆེ་བ་ཅན	male musk deer	gla ba mche ba can
གླ་བ་ཤིང་དཀར་པོ	a tree	gla ba shing dkar po
གླ་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	as though a musk-deer; x {zhes gsungs pa ltar bla ma la gla ba'i 'du shes} such people behave as though their spiritual teacher were a	gla ba'i 'du shes
མུསཀ	deer	musk
གླ་བའི་ནོར་བུ	musk	gla ba'i nor bu
གླ་བུ	wage worker	gla bu
གླ་བོ	[arch] gleng mo,...Gla bo drin du gcags pa ste, gleng mo gang byung ba rnams thugs la btags pa	gla bo
གླ་བྱེད་སྣུམ་འཁོར	taxi	gla byed snum 'khor
གླ་བྱེད་རླངས་འཁོར	taxi	gla byed rlangs 'khor
གླ་བླངས་པ	has taken or received wages for work	gla blangs pa
གླ་འབོལ	gla spu'i nang tshangs can gyi 'bol gdan	gla 'bol
གླ་མི	wage worker, employee	gla mi
གླ་མེད	w/o wages, [working for] free	gla med
གླ་མེད་ངལ་རྩོལ	working w/o wages/ for free	gla med ngal rtsol
གླ་མོ	hired female servant, musk doe	gla mo
གླ་བཙས	[arch] gla and btsas = gla cha ..Gla btsas kyis 'grul pa gtser ba	gla btsas
གླ་རྩི	musk, rtsi medicine [bitter, cooling, good for dug nad &, mchin nad, mkhal ma'i gnyan tshad, srin nad, gnyan rims ; syn: lte ba'i dri, dri chen lte ba, dri'i rtsi, dri yi gos can, dri yi thod, 'dom...	gla rtsi
གླ་རྩི་ཁ	{gla rtsi kha} pass	gla rtsi kha
གླ་རྩི་གོར་གཅིག	one bar of musk	gla rtsi gor gcig
གླ་རྩི་ཅན	musk deer	gla rtsi can
གླ་རྩི་རྙེད་པ	musk-game; x {dam chos gla rtsi'i rnyed pa thob nas slar} having extracted the musk, the perfect Dharma	gla rtsi rnyed pa
གླ་རྩིའི་འདུ་ཤེས	x {chos la gla rtsi'i 'du shes} as though the Dharma were the musk	gla rtsi'i 'du shes
གླ་རྩིའི་མེ་ཏོག	flower pedicularis megalantha	gla rtsi'i me tog
གླ་རྩེ	musk, rtsi medicine	gla rtse
གླ་ཚེར	a tree	gla tsher
གླ་ཚོལ	try to capture/ catch/ subdue	gla tshol
གླ་གཞས་ལེན་མཁན	professional singer	gla gzhas len mkhan
གླ་ཟ་མཁན	wage worker	gla za mkhan
གླ་ཟན	wage worker[s' food]	gla zan
གླ་ཡོན	fee gla g.yu - forehead turquoise gla g.yog - paid servant, employee gla g.yog - paid servants, employee	gla yon
གླ་རིན	wages and price, cost/rate of wages, reward, rental fee, fare, freight fee/ charge	gla rin
གླ་རུ	suddenly	gla ru
གླ་ཤ	beef	gla sha
གླག	hawk?, habaeetus leucoryphus pallas, bird resembling an eagle but smaller than vulture and larger than hawk of blackish chocolate color which carries away children and lambs, probably the lammergayer	glag
གླག་ཁྲ་མོ	female eagle/ vulture	glag khra mo
གླག་ཅོར་ཅ་བོའི་སྒྲ་འདྲེས་པ	a kind of war cry	glag cor ca bo'i sgra 'dres pa
གླག་ནད	disease, SA lhog pa	glag nad
གླག་པ	upper or back part or side	glag pa
གླག་པ་ལམ	place in tibet	glag pa lam
གླག་མ་འཁེལ་བ	impregnable	glag ma 'khel ba
གླག་ཚོལ	seeking an opportunity	glag tshol
གླག་ཚོལ་བ	to try to capture / catch / subdue. Comp. with {glags tshol ba}	glag tshol ba
གླགས	1) chance, opportunity, possibility, occasion, time. 2) harm. 3) means, way. 4) i) opportunity, occasion, possibility: {glags 'tshol ba} to seek for an opportunity; {da glags rnyed par 'dug} now th...	glags
གླགས་སྐབས་འཚོལ་བ	harm-seeking	glags skabs 'tshol ba
གླགས་ཁེལ་བ	to subdue, match, beat	glags khel ba
གླགས་འཁེལ་བ	able to handle	glags 'khel ba
གླགས་འཆོལ	looking for an opportunity	glags 'chol
གླགས་རྙེད	I) 1) to harm, to cause harm. 2) to get a chance to do. 3) to subdue. II) opportunistic, to take an opportunity	glags rnyed
གླགས་རྙེད་པ	1) to get a chance to; 2) able to compete/ vie w/ deal w; 3) harm; 4) subdue	glags rnyed pa
གླགས་རྙེད་སླ་པོ	vulnerable	glags rnyed sla po
གླགས་ལྟ	harm-seeking	glags lta
གླགས་ལྟ་བ	1) view the measure; 2) seek faults	glags lta ba
གླགས་བལྟ	seek an opportunity	glags blta
གླགས་པ	go, be going, proceed, be on the point of	glags pa
གླགས་མ་རྙེད་པ	destitute, wrecked	glags ma rnyed pa
གླགས་མི་ཁེལ	not able to do, injury or some interruption to one's actions	glags mi khel
གླགས་མི་ཉེས་པ	not find the weak point, not be able to deal with	glags mi nyes pa
གླགས་མི་རྙེད	cannot be harmed	glags mi rnyed
གླགས་མི་རྙེད་པ	not find the weak point, not be able to deal with	glags mi rnyed pa
གླགས་མེད་པ	{sgo skabs med pa} [mss]	glags med pa
གླགས་ཚོལ་བ	try to find an opportunity to harm/ get a chance	glags tshol ba
གླགས་འཚོལ	seek to harm/ an opportunity	glags 'tshol
གླགས་འཚོལ་བ	seek an opportunity	glags 'tshol ba
གླང	1) bull [syn khyu mchog, 'gro byed, stobs ldan bzang po, 'dren byed, bzang po]; 2) 1 of the 12 year cycle ox, bull, elephant, bullock, cow; 3) Taurus (one of {khyim bcu gnyis}; 4) colic, gripes)	glang
གླང་ཀོ	cowhide	glang ko
གླང་ཀླད	khrus rdzas te, rgya skad du y'i rtsi	glang klad
གླང་སྐེར་བེལ་བཏགས	example of mnyam sbrel big and small etc...Mi tsho'i lus stobs bzang ngan glang sker bel btags bzhin mnyam sbrel sgrigs 'dzugs byas pa	glang sker bel btags
གླང་བསྐོར་མཆོད་རྟེན	Langkhor Stupa,	glang bskor mchod rten
ཨིན་ཌིང	ri in Latö	in Ding
གླང་ཁྱིམ	Taurus *, cowshed	glang khyim
གླང་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	ox elephant	glang khyu mchog
གླང་ཁྱུ་བ	bull kept for breeding purpose	glang khyu ba
གླང་འཁོར	bullock	glang 'khor
གླང་གི་ཁྱིམ	mansion of Taurus, [fourth in the zodiac, See also {skar khyim bcu gnyis}	glang gi khyim
གླང་གི་མགོ་མ	elephant-head	glang gi mgo ma
གླང་གི་གཉའ་བར་སྲིན་བུ	a worm living	glang gi gnya' bar srin bu
ཨོན་ཐེ་ནེཅཀ	sore of an ox	on the neck
གླང་གི་རྡུལ	'cow particle' [the size of 7 {lug rdul}	glang gi rdul
གླང་གི་ཤ	1) elephant meat. 2) cow's meat, beef	glang gi sha
གླང་གོག	bull[ock], ox	glang gog
གླང་གླད	brains of the bullock or ox. soap	glang glad
གླང་འགྲོ་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ	Langdro Lotsawa.	glang 'gro lo tsA ba
Oནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five disciples of Guru Rinpoche	One of the twenty
གླང་འགྲོ་ལོ་ཚ་བ	langdro lotsawa	glang 'gro lo tsha ba
གླང་རྒོད	wild elephant	glang rgod
གླང་རྒྱབ	1) bull's sgal pa; 2) Glang gis khyer ba'i do rgyab; 3) a level on the archways of a mandala	glang rgyab
གླང་རྒྱབ་ནང	interior	glang rgyab nang
གླང་སྒུར	mchin nad	glang sgur
གླང་ལྕག	ox whip	glang lcag
གླང་ལྕག་དང་རྒྱུན་ལྕག	cultivation	glang lcag dang rgyun lcag
གླང་ཆུང	young bull	glang chung
གླང་ཆེན	elephant	glang chen
གླང་ཆེན་ཁ་འབབ	river in mnga' ris, rtsa mda' rdzong, source of the Ganges]	glang chen kha 'bab
གླང་ཆེན་གི་ཝམ	solidified elephant bile gi wam, the best and most potent kind	glang chen gi wam
གླང་ཆེན་གྱི་ཀོ་རློན	elephant skin cloak	glang chen gyi ko rlon
གླང་ཆེན་གྱི་མཆེ་བ	tusk	glang chen gyi mche ba
གླང་ཆེན་གྱི་སྣ	proboscis trunk	glang chen gyi sna
གླང་ཆེན་གྱི་པགས་པའི་སྟོད་གྱོགས	elephant skin upper garment	glang chen gyi pags pa'i stod gyogs
གླང་ཆེན་མགོ	elephant-head. (sm. {sna chen ljang nag} 1 of {dbang phyug ma nyer brgyad}	glang chen mgo
གླང་ཆེན་འགྱིང་རི	{glang chen 'gying} mt [in si khron zhing chen, SW ao me rdzong el smi 3099, krung go'i nang pa'i dharma tradition kyi gnas mchog cig]	glang chen 'gying ri
གླང་ཆེན་འགྲོས	supreme/ excellent woman	glang chen 'gros
གླང་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	medicine with 18 ingredients	glang chen bco brgyad
གླང་ཆེན་ཆིག་ཐུབ	medicinal herb dpa' bo chen po	glang chen chig thub
གླང་ཆེན་ཆོད	in the manner of a rutting elephant	glang chen chod
གླང་ཆེན་མཆེ་བ	elephant's tusk	glang chen mche ba
གླང་ཆེན་ཐལ་དཀར	white elephant, elephant with white forehead, chief of the elephants	glang chen thal dkar
གླང་ཆེན་འདོགས་པའི་ཀ་བ	a pillar to which an elephant is tied	glang chen 'dogs pa'i ka ba
གླང་ཆེན་དཔལ་སེང	Langchen Palseng. See Palgyi Senge 448	glang chen dpal seng
གླང་ཆེན་སྨྱོན་པ	1) mad elephant; 2) Dug shas che ba'i herb rigs shig	glang chen smyon pa
གླང་ཆེན་རྩི	secretion of the elephant,	glang chen rtsi
ཨེལེཕནཏ	musk	elephant
གླང་ཆེན་རབ་འབོག	mahayoga action tantra, mahayoga tantra of activity	glang chen rab 'bog
གླང་ཆེན་ས་སྲུང	a white elephant in the god realm, w red head and six tusks la yan lag bdun legs par gnas pa dbang po dang nye dbang rnams kyi bzhon par gyur pa zhig	glang chen sa srung
གླང་མཇིང་ཡོན	name of prince sad na legs mjing yon who was son of khri srong lde'u btsan	glang mjing yon
གླང་ཏིག་པ	an herb	glang tig pa
གླང་ཏོ	indian bull	glang to
གླང་ཐང	originally a Kadampa monastery, later became Sakya	glang thang
གླང་ཐང་དགོན	Langthang Monestery [in the 2nd water bird year geshe glang ri thang pa founded this monestery E of Lhasa in lhun grub rdzong]	glang thang dgon
གླང་ཐབས	1) {glang thabs disease; 2) sudden, incidental	glang thabs
གླང་ཐུག	bull	glang thug
གླང་འཐབ	{glang 'thab disease	glang 'thab
གླང་དར་མ	Langdarma. Brother of the great Dharma king Ralpachen and the persecutor of the Sangha in central Tibet during a five year reign. During his brief reign, he almost succeeded in eradicating Buddhism...	glang dar ma
གླང་དོར	pair of bullocks	glang dor
གླང་དྲམ	king Lang Dharma	glang dram
གླང་བདག	the owner of the ox	glang bdag
གླང་མདུན	proper name	glang mdun
གླང་འདེད	husbandman, rustic	glang 'ded
གླང་རྡུལ	ox particle [measure the size of 7 {lug rdul}	glang rdul
གླང་སྣ	Lang-na, on the banks of Lake Manasarovar. See Elephant Trunk	glang sna
གླང་སྣ་དཀར་པོ	pedicularis szetschuanica maxim.	glang sna dkar po
གླང་པོ	elephant	glang po
གླང་པོ་སྐྱོང	cow herd, one who tends cows	glang po skyong
གླང་པོ་རྒོད	elephant wild for union	glang po rgod
ཝིཐ་ཤེ	elephant	with she
གླང་པོ་ཆུར་འཇུག་གི་རྒྱུད་ཕྱི་མ	Subsequent Tantra of the Bathing Elephant	glang po chur 'jug gi rgyud phyi ma
གླང་པོ་ཆེ	elephant	glang po che
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་ཁྲོ་བོ	vicious elephant	glang po che khro bo
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་འཁྲུལ་པ	confused elephant	glang po che 'khrul pa
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་ཅང་ཤེས	an elephant knowing good and bad signs etc. glang po che dang rta'i tshogs la sogs pa	glang po che cang shes
དང་འདྲ་བ	like a herd of elephants, horses, and so forth	dang 'dra ba
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་འདམ་དུ་བྱིངས་པ་ལྟར	like elephants stuck in a swamp	glang po che 'dam du byings pa ltar
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་དམུ་རྒོད	elephant who harms others	glang po che dmu rgod
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་རབ་འབོག་གི་རྒྱུད	Rampant Elephant Tantra. A Mahayoga scripture. A tantra of this title is found in Vol. DZA of the Nyingma Gyübum	glang po che rab 'bog gi rgyud
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་སོགས་པར་མེད་པ	w/o elephants and so forth	glang po che la sogs par med pa
གླང་པོ་ཆེ་ས་ལ་རབ་བརྟན	guard of place where elephants are	glang po che sa la rab brtan
གླང་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Elephant, [sm. the Buddha]	glang po chen po
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་ཁྲི	elephant throne. Syn {glang chen khri}	glang po che'i khri
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་སྒྲ་སྐད	the speech of elephants	glang po che'i sgra skad
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	elephant gaze. One of {lta stangs gsum}	glang po che'i lta stangs
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་རྡུལ	comp with {glang gi rdul}	glang po che'i rdul
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་གནས	stable where elephants are kept	glang po che'i gnas
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་རྩལ་གྱི་མདོ	Elephant's Strengt [thd]	glang po che'i rtsal gyi mdo
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་ཚོགས	elephant troops	glang po che'i tshogs
གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་ཤུགས	elephant's strength	glang po che'i shugs
གླང་པོ་ཆེར་ཞོན་ནས་བྱོན་ནོ	left /rode off on the elephant	glang po cher zhon nas byon no
གླང་པོ་ཆེས་འགྱེད	elephant fighting	glang po ches 'gyed
གླང་པོ་མཆོག	king of elephants	glang po mchog
གླང་པོ་འཇོམས	lion	glang po 'joms
གླང་པོ་དུལ་ཡོད	well-trained	glang po dul yod
གླང་པོ་འདོད་པས་དྲེགས་པ	elephant	glang po 'dod pas dregs pa
ཝིལད་ཕོ༹ར་ཨུནིཨོན་ཝིཐ་ཤེ	elephant	wild for union with she
གླང་པོ་སྣའི་གླིང་སྨད	place in district of shigatse in tsang	glang po sna'i gling smad
གླང་པོ་མྱོན་པ	wild & mad elephant	glang po myon pa
གླང་པོ་རྩལ	Hasti-kaksya sutra	glang po rtsal
གླང་པོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	[one of the rgyal srid sna bdun] jewel of elephants, the precious elephant	glang po rin po che
གླང་པོ་ཤོངས	place in tibet, place near ancient kapilavastu	glang po shongs
གླང་པོ་ས་འཛིན	Mahidhara	glang po sa 'dzin
གླང་པོའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	conductor of an elephant	glang po'i kha lo pa
གླང་པོའི་ལྕུག་མ	plantain tree	glang po'i lcug ma
གླང་པོའི་མཆོག་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ	a magnificent elephant	glang po'i mchog rmad du byung ba
གླང་པོའི་སྟོབས	strength of elephants	glang po'i stobs
གླང་པོའི་སྟོས	powerful giant-like king	glang po'i stos
གླང་པོའི་བདག་པོ	master of bulls	glang po'i bdag po
གླང་པོའི་གནས	stable where elephants are kept	glang po'i gnas
གླང་པོའི་རྣ་བ	castor oil plant	glang po'i rna ba
གླང་པོའི་པི་པི་ལིང	plantain leaf	glang po'i pi pi ling
གླང་པོའི་དཔའ་སྒྲ	a kind of war cry	glang po'i dpa' sgra
གླང་པོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the bull mudra	glang po'i phyag rgya
གླང་པོའི་བྲེས	elephant-stall glang po'i mo la spyad pas 'dod pa tshims - with the female, the elephant assuaged his desire	glang po'i bres
གླང་པོའི་མྱོས་བུམ	teats of an elephant	glang po'i myos bum
གླང་པོའི་རྩལ་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of the Power of the Elephant	glang po'i rtsal gyi mdo
གླང་པོའི་ཟས	peepul tree, indian fig-tree	glang po'i zas
གླང་པོའི་ཨོད	Prahasti, Skt. Prabhahasti). 'Radiant Elephant.' Among the Eight Vidyadharas the receiver of the transmission of the tantras of Kilaya Activity. Born to a royal family in the western part of India ...	glang po'i od
གླང་དཔལ་གྱི་སེང་གེ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	glang dpal gyi seng ge
གླང་ཕྲན	young elephant	glang phran
གླང་བུ	young bull	glang bu
གླང་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious elephant	glang bo rin po che
གླང་བོའི་སྟོབས	strength of elephants	glang bo'i stobs
གླང་བྲེས	ox-manger	glang bres
གླང་མ	willow	glang ma
གླང་མ་རི	Mt Everest	glang ma ri
གླང་མ་ཤིང	kind of tree growing largely in tibet whose leaves are burnt as incense	glang ma shing
གླང་མོ	she-elephant	glang mo
གླང་མོའི་དྲི་ཚོར་བ	sensing a female elephant	glang mo'i dri tshor ba
གླང་དམར	stallion ox	glang dmar
གླང་སྨྱོན	wild/ mad/ savage/ ferocious [elephant]	glang smyon
གླང་སྨྱོན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	wild/ mad/ savage/ ferocious [elephant] behavior/ act	glang smyon gyi spyod pa
གླང་རྩིས	among lo tho'i rtsis stangs	glang rtsis
གླང་རྩེད	bullfight	glang rtsed
གླང་ཚེར	a tree	glang tsher
གླང་རྫི	elephant keeper / herder	glang rdzi
གླང་ཟལ་པོ	glang gog khra khra	glang zal po
གླང་ཟླ	the Ox Month, the 12th Hor month	glang zla
གླང་འོག་ཅན	bull glang g.yag dri ldan - musk-like scented secretion in brains of stomach of an elephant, bear's bile	glang 'og can
གླང་རྭ	bull's horns	glang rwa
གླང་རི་ཐང་པ	Langri Tangpa	glang ri thang pa
གླང་རི་ཐང་བ	Lang-ri Tangpa Dorje Senge: 1054-1123	glang ri thang ba
གླང་རིགས་ཤིག	bison	glang rigs shig
གླང་རུ	ox horns	glang ru
གླང་རོག	black haired bull	glang rog
གླང་ལུང་གནས་ཁྲ་མོ	place in kham	glang lung gnas khra mo
གླང་ལོ	ox year [one of the 12 year cycle]	glang lo
གླང་ལོ་པ	man born in the ox year	glang lo pa
གླང་ལོ་མ	woman born in the ox year	glang lo ma
གླང་ཤ	elephant meat, beef	glang sha
གླང་ཤིང	glang ma tree	glang shing
གླང་ཤུ	{glang shu skin disease	glang shu
གླང་སེང	lion ornaments [on temples]	glang seng
གླང་སེང་དྲང་སྲོང་འདུག་སྟངས	the elephant, lion and rishi postures	glang seng drang srong 'dug stangs
གླང་སོགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས	relay of packed animals	glang sogs kyi rjes
གླང་ཧྲང	pha glang	glang hrang
གླངས་ཁམས་པ	a learned lama invited by khri srog lde'u btsan	glangs khams pa
གླད	the head	glad
གླད་རྒྱ	veins of the brain	glad rgya
གླད་པ	to thin; brain	glad pa
གླད་ལ	on the top, on the head, over, close over	glad la
གླན	[p f glon pa], patch, botch, mend, cover up	glan
གླན་གླེན	dumb, SA glen pa	glan glen
གླན་རྒྱག་པ	patch, botch, mend, cover up	glan rgyag pa
གླན་བརྒྱབ་པ	sew on a patch	glan brgyab pa
གླན་ཆགས	misfortune, adversity, calamity, unlucky accident, retribution for deeds of former life, destiny, fate, disaster	glan chags
གླན་ཏེ་འཇོག་པ	repeated settling/ resting	glan te 'jog pa
གླན་པ	to patch, botch, mend, cover up	glan pa
གླམ་གྱིས་ཁྱེར	[arch] ham spu rgyag pa	glam gyis khyer
གླམ་པ	kind of thick blanket	glam pa
གླལ་བ	{glal ba, glal ba, glal ba} intr. v.; to yawn	glal ba
གླས	paid/ by wages/ fee/ rent	glas
གླས་འཐུང	tortoise	glas 'thung
གླས་པ	1) {gla ba, glos} trans. v.; 2) musk deer	glas pa
གླས་པའི་ངལ་རྩོལ	hired labor	glas pa'i ngal rtsol
གླས་མི	wage worker	glas mi
གླས་དམག	mercenaries	glas dmag
གླས་འཚོ་བ	one who subsists on salary or wages	glas 'tsho ba
གླི	pear	gli
གླིང	1) island, land, place. 2) sanctuary. 3) continent. 4) monastery, temple complex. 5) mansion. 6) part. 7) a district in Tibet; continent	gling
གླིང་ཀ	garden, pleasure grove	gling ka
གླིང་དཀར་རྫོང	a district in Tibet	gling dkar rdzong
གླིང་སྐོར	outer path/ circuit	gling skor
གླིང་བསྐོར	outer circumambulation road in Lhasa	gling bskor
གླིང་བསྐྱོད	intercontinental	gling bskyod
གླིང་ཁ	park, picnic	gling kha
གླིང་ཁམས	fields	gling khams
གླིང་ག	park, garden	gling ga
གླིང་ག་གཏོང	have a picnic	gling ga gtong
གླིང་གེ་སར	King Gesar of Ling, [famous warrior king]	gling ge sar
གླིང་གྱོག	gling lag, sub-continent	gling gyog
གླིང་གྱོག་གམ་གླིང་ཕྲན་བརྒྱད	the 8	gling gyog gam gling phran brgyad
གླིང་རྒྱ	Lingya, in Domey	gling rgya
གླིང་ངན	dispute, quarrel	gling ngan
གླིང་ཆེ་བ	great islands	gling che ba
གླིང་ཆེན	spacious continent	gling chen
གླིང་ཆེན་ལྔ	the five continents [n/S America, Europe, Asia, Africa]	gling chen lnga
གླིང་ཆེན་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 bon continents	gling chen bcu gnyis
གླིང་ཆེན་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཤིང་རྟ་མ	river	gling chen 'jig rten shing rta ma
གླིང་ཆེན་འཕྲུལ་མདེལ	inter-continental ballistic missile	gling chen 'phrul mdel
གླིང་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great continents	gling chen bzhi
གླིང་ཆེན་རས་པ	Lingchen repa	gling chen ras pa
གླིང་རྗེ་གེ་སར	King Gesar of Ling; see {ge sar}	gling rje ge sar
གླིང་རྗེ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རས་པ	Lingje Dorje Repa. A great master in the lineage of the Drukpa Kagyü School. gling chen ras pa	gling rje rdo rje ras pa
གླིང་རྗེ་རས་པ	1128-88	gling rje ras pa
གླིང་དང་གླིང་ཕྲན	continents and eight subcontinents. 1) {shar gyi lus 'phags lus dang lus 'phags} [Purvavideha Deha Videha] eastern continent of great mass, body of a land and great body of land. 2) {lho yi 'dzam b...	gling dang gling phran
སོཨུཐེརན་ཅོནཏིནེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་རོསེ	apple, tail of the continent and minor tail. 3) {nub kyi ba lang spyod g.yo ldan dang lam mchog 'gro ba} [Aparagodaniya Shatha Uttaramantrina] western land of cattle, land of deceit and land of gre...	southern continent of the rose
གླིང་དར	kind of cloud	gling dar
གླིང་དྲུག	Enjoyment abodes of the six continents	gling drug
གླིང་དྲུག་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ས	the Enjoyment Abodes of the Six Continents [according to Kalachakra]. {zla ba}, {'od dkar}, {ku sha}, {mi'am ci}, {khrung khrung}, {drag po}	gling drug longs spyod kyi sa
གླིང་བདག	world ruler, king of the four continents	gling bdag
གླིང་བདུན	explained in Kalachakra, 7 continents around Mt Meru [khor yug tu 'khod pa'i zla ba dang, 'od dkar, ku sha, mi'am ci, khrung khrung, drag po'i gling, 'dzam gling chen po bcas so = {'dzam gling chen...	gling bdun
གླིང་འདི	on this continent ['dzam bu gling]	gling 'di
གླིང་ལྡན	land of islands	gling ldan
གླིང་ལྡན་མ	lake with islands	gling ldan ma
གླིང་སྣ	the poles	gling sna
གླིང་སྣེ	the poles	gling sne
གླིང་སྣེ་བྱང་མ	north pole	gling sne byang ma
གླིང་སྣེ་བྱང་མའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	arctic circle	gling sne byang ma'i mu khyud
གླིང་སྣེ་བྱང་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	northern lights, aurora borealis	gling sne byang ma'i 'od zer
གླིང་སྣེ་ལྷོ་མ	S pole	gling sne lho ma
གླིང་སྣེ་ལྷོ་མའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	antarctic circle	gling sne lho ma'i mu khyud
གླིང་སྣེ་ལྷོ་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	aurora australis	gling sne lho ma'i 'od zer
གླིང་སྣེའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	antarctic and arctic circles	gling sne'i mu khyud
གླིང་སྣེའི་འོད་ཟེར	aurora	gling sne'i 'od zer
གླིང་པ་བརྒྱད	Eight Lingpas. Sangye, Dorje, Rinchen, Padma, Ratna, Künkyong, Do-ngag and Tennyi Lingpa	gling pa brgyad
གླིང་ཕྲན	island, subcontinent [in the great ocean]	gling phran
གླིང་ཕྲན་གྱི་ཆ་ཤས	subcontinent [in the great ocean]	gling phran gyi cha shas
གླིང་ཕྲན་བརྒྱད	8 subcontinents [Mount Meru kyi mtsams bzhir chad pa'i lus dang lus 'phags, rnga yab dang rnga yab gzhan, gyo ldan dang lam mchog 'gro, sgra mi snyan dang sgra mi snyan gyi zla	gling phran brgyad
གླིང་ཕྲན་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་མི	humans of the eight subcontinents	gling phran brgyad kyi mi
གླིང་ཕྲན་བ་རྒྱད	the eight subcontinents	gling phran ba rgyad
གླིང་ཕྲེང	bstar phreng du chags pa'i gling tshom	gling phreng
གླིང་བུ	1) fife, flageolet, flute; 2) sbubs ma can gyi rol cha spyi ['Phred gling,...Rgya gling,...Rkang gling,...Dung rgya gling 'bud pa]	gling bu
གླིང་བུ་མཁན	flute player	gling bu mkhan
གླིང་བུ་གཏོང	play a flute	gling bu gtong
གླིང་བུ་གཏོང་མཁན	flautist	gling bu gtong mkhan
གླིང་བུ་བ	trombone blower	gling bu ba
གླིང་བུ་འབུད་པ	thrill the flute	gling bu 'bud pa
གླིང་བུ་མ	flute girl / goddess / maiden / lady	gling bu ma
གླིང་བུ་ཤིང	bamboo	gling bu shing
གླིང་བུར	temporary, momentary	gling bur
གླིང་མ	dry place in a river	gling ma
གླིང་མེ	'das mchod skabs mtshan mor thog khar spar ba'i mchod me	gling me
གླིང་ཚོམ	archipelago, group of islands	gling tshom
གླིང་འཛིན	continent grasper, the earth	gling 'dzin
གླིང་ཝར་མུན་པ	eclipse caused by the earth's shadow	gling war mun pa
གླིང་གཞན	other continents [than Jambudvipa]	gling gzhan
གླིང་གཞི	four continents.	gling gzhi
གླིང་བཞི	the four continents	gling bzhi
གླིང་བཞི་བསྐོར	surrounded by the four continents	gling bzhi bskor
གླིང་བཞི་གླིང་ཕྲན་བརྒྱད	Four major and eight minor temples. The temples positioned around the central temple of Samye. Listed in Chapter Eleven of	gling bzhi gling phran brgyad
ལོཏུས	Born (zangs gling ma)	Lotus
གླིང་བཞི་གླིང་ཕྲན་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 major and minor continents	gling bzhi gling phran bcu gnyis
གླིང་བཞི་པ	four continent world system gling bzhi pa chen po'i 'jig rten gyi khams - a great world system of four continents gling bzhi pa chen po'i 'jig rten gyi khams - great world system of four continents	gling bzhi pa
གླིང་བཞི་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	Mipham: {gling bzhi ri rab 'dod lha drug tshangs pa'i 'jig rten dang bcas pa la gling bzhi pa'i 'jig rten gyi khams zhes bya} The four continents, Mount Sumeru, the [abodes of the] six desire gods,...	gling bzhi pa'i 'jig rten gyi khams
ཅོནཏིནེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་རོསེ	apple, tail of the continent and minor tail. 3) {nub kyi ba lang spyod g.yo ldan dang lam mchog 'gro ba} western land of cattle, land of deceit and land of great passage. 4) {byang gi sgra mi snyan...	continent of the rose
གླིང་བཞིའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	world system of four continents	gling bzhi'i 'jig rten gyi khams
གླིང་བཞིའི་བདག་པོ་བྱས	was master of the Four Continents	gling bzhi'i bdag po byas
གླིང་བཞིའི་མི	humans of the four continents	gling bzhi'i mi
གླིང་ཡགས་པ	a chief priest of dga' ldan gling g.yog - sub-continent gling g.yog gam gling phran brgyad - the	gling yags pa
ཨེཨིགྷཏ་ཨཏཏེནདནཏ་ཨོར་སུབ	continents	eight attendant or sub
གླིང་རས་པ་པད	founder of 'brug pa bka' brgyud tradition, SA gling rje ras pa	gling ras pa pad
གླིང་རས་པ་པད་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ	1128-1188	gling ras pa pad ma rdo rje
གླིང་རས་པད་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Ling Repa padma dorje	gling ras pad ma rdo rje
གླིང་ལག	tongue of land	gling lag
གླིང་ལག་འབྲེལ	isthmus, neck of land	gling lag 'brel
གླིང་ལོག	revolution, internal dissension	gling log
གླིང་བཤི་པ	four continent world system	gling bshi pa
གླིང་སེབ	in the streets of the monastery	gling seb
གླིང་སྲུང་པ	caretaker of park/ grove	gling srung pa
གླིང་གསུམ	Ling Sum, three residences, at Lhasa	gling gsum
གླིང་གསུམ་གྱི་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལུས་རྟེན	a [human] form born on one of the three continents [excluding sgra mi snyan]	gling gsum gyi skyes pa'i lus rten
གླིང་གསེབ	in the streets of the monastery	gling gseb
གླིང་གསེབ་པ	lowest of the four grades of geshe]	gling gseb pa
གླིང་བསྲེ	sngon gsang phu ne'u thog gi dgon par gling stod smad gnyis bzang 'gran gyi tshul du phan tshun bsres nas chos kyi rtsod pa mdzad pa la gling bsre zhes grags pa, phyis su 'bras spungs sod grva sa g...	gling bsre
གླིང་བསྲེའི་དགེ་བཤེས	gdan sa 'ga' re'i tshogs chen du gling yongs kyi dge 'dun bsres te bza' btung gi chos ston bzang po gshom bzhin du mtshan nyid dam bca' 'jog pa'i dge bshes	gling bsre'i dge bshes
གླིངས་སྟན	[arch] felt seat	glings stan
གླིངས་པ	[arch] felt cushion/ seat	glings pa
གླུ	{glu len pa} (to sing a) song	glu
གླུ་མཁན་མ	songstress	glu mkhan ma
གླུ་གར	song and dance	glu gar
གླུ་གར་མཁས་པ	artiste	glu gar mkhas pa
གླུ་གར་བ	song and dance performer	glu gar ba
གླུ་གར་རྩེད་འཇོ	{glu gar rtsed 'jo yi ngang nas} singing, dancing, and playing	glu gar rtsed 'jo
གླུ་གར་རྩེད་མོ	dance and play	glu gar rtsed mo
གླུ་གར་རྩེད་མོ་བྱེད་པ	sing	glu gar rtsed mo byed pa
གླུ་གར་ཚོགས	song and dance troupe	glu gar tshogs
གླུ་གར་ཚོགས་པ	song and dance troupe	glu gar tshogs pa
གླུ་གར་རོལ་མོ	song, dance, and music; singers, dancers, and musicians	glu gar rol mo
གླུ་གར་ལེན་པ	sang and danced	glu gar len pa
གླུ་གློང	sing [??? gtong?]	glu glong
གླུ་དགྱེར་བ	sing, chant	glu dgyer ba
གླུ་སྒྲ	sound of singing, music	glu sgra
གླུ་ལྕེ་བ	ldong ros, med. mineral	glu lce ba
གླུ་ཆུང	little song, ditty	glu chung
གླུ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great songs	glu chen brgyad
གླུ་སྙན་ལེན་པ	sing a sweet song	glu snyan len pa
གླུ་གདངས	melody, tune	glu gdangs
གླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ	codonopsis pilosula (franch.) nannf.	glu bdud rdo rje
གླུ་པ	singer, bard, poet, songster	glu pa
གླུ་ཕྲེང	song	glu phreng
གླུ་བ	singer	glu ba
གླུ་བྱངས	melodious song	glu byangs
གླུ་བླངས་བ	sang a spontaneous song	glu blangs ba
གླུ་དབྱངས	song, melody, melodious song	glu dbyangs
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཁང	place where singing is done, music booth	glu dbyangs kyi khang
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཁང་པ	stage	glu dbyangs kyi khang pa
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ངེས་པ	succession of high and low notes etc	glu dbyangs kyi nges pa
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ངེས་པ་བདུན	seven harmonious tones	glu dbyangs kyi nges pa bdun
གླུ་དབྱངས་མཁན	singer, singing instructor	glu dbyangs mkhan
གླུ་དབྱངས་གྱེར་བ	sing a [very slow] song/ chant/ melody	glu dbyangs gyer ba
གླུ་དབྱངས་དགའ་སྟོན	Festival of Melodious Songs	glu dbyangs dga' ston
གླུ་དབྱངས་ངེས་པ་བདུན	seven harmonious tones	glu dbyangs nges pa bdun
གླུ་དབྱངས་མཉམ་ལས་རུ་ཁག	chorus, choir	glu dbyangs mnyam las ru khag
གླུ་དབྱངས་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse	glu dbyangs lta bu'i sems bskyed
སོང	like bodhicitta [among the sems bskyed nyer gnyis}, in the continuum of the 10th bhumi having wisdom paramita the ye shes kyi phar phyin as for arousing bodhicitta, as for teaching the dharma produ...	song
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཕུལ་བ	offered a song	glu dbyangs phul ba
གླུ་དབྱངས་བླངས	sang songs	glu dbyangs blangs
གླུ་དབྱངས་བླངས་པ	sang songs	glu dbyangs blangs pa
གླུ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ	Moon of Songs	glu dbyangs zla ba
གླུ་དབྱངས་ལེན་པ	to sing a song 453	glu dbyangs len pa
གླུ་དབྱངས་ལོངས	sing out!	glu dbyangs longs
གླུ་དབྱངས་སུ་ལེན	to sing	glu dbyangs su len
གླུ་མ	1) female singer; 2) Gita, song girl	glu ma
གླུ་མ་གཏམ	female singer gtam	glu ma gtam
གླུ་མ་དབྱངས	song [of one's experience]..Yid skyo ba'i	glu ma dbyangs
གླུ་མ་དབྱངས་བླངས	sing a song	glu ma dbyangs blangs
གླུ་ཚིག	words of a song/ singing, lyrics	glu tshig
གླུ་ཝ	singer	glu wa
གླུ་གཞས	songs [& joke]	glu gzhas
གླུ་གཞས་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	at the time of smon lam the people of Lhasa kyi khyim du glu gzhas btang chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	glu gzhas 'khrol 'dzin
གླུ་གཞས་མཉམ་གཏོང	choral singing	glu gzhas mnyam gtong
གླུ་གཞས་མཉམ་གཏོང་ཚོགས་པ	chorus, choir	glu gzhas mnyam gtong tshogs pa
གླུ་གཞས་མཉམ་ལེན་རུ་ཁག	chorus, choir	glu gzhas mnyam len ru khag
གླུ་གཞས་གཏོང	sing	glu gzhas gtong
གླུ་གཞས་ཟློས་གར	[TT] opera, musical play	glu gzhas zlos gar
གླུ་རུ་ཕུལ་བ	expressed as a song	glu ru phul ba
གླུ་རུ་བླངས་པ	chanted	glu ru blangs pa
གླུ་རུ་ལེན་པ	to express in song	glu ru len pa
གླུ་རེས	alternate songs	glu res
གླུ་ལེན	sing	glu len
གླུ་ལེན་ཁྲང་ཞི	opera	glu len khrang zhi
གླུ་ལེན་པ	to sing; (to sing a) song	glu len pa
གླུ་ལེན་བྲོ་ཁྲབ	singing and dancing	glu len bro khrab
གླུ་ལེན་བྲོ་འཁྲབ	song and dance	glu len bro 'khrab
གླུ་ལེན་མ	songstress	glu len ma
གླུ་ལེན་རེས	two persons singing to each other, duet in musical play	glu len res
གླུ་ལེན་རེས་བྱེད	sing to each other/ duet in musical play	glu len res byed
གླུ་ཤགས	dbyangs kyi sgo nas tshig shags rgyag res,...Dga' spror 'tshogs pa'i mi rnams glu shags rgyag res byed pa,...Phan tshun gtam nad ma theg par glu shags rgyag pa	glu shags
གླུ་ཤིང	naga brksa	glu shing
གླུ་གཤེད་གསུམ	3 medicines(sdig srin, zhal nag, byang nag)	glu gshed gsum
གླུ་གསང་མཐོན་པོ	skad gsang mthon pos gtong ba'i song	glu gsang mthon po
གླུགས་གཟར	shruva [implement in fire puja], filling tool]	glugs gzar
གླུང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	1) of {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	glung du bstan pa
གླུང་ཤོ	ligularia achyrotricha (diels) ling, ligularia sagitta (maxim.)mattf.	glung sho
གླུད	ransom, redemption, pawn, pledge [could be anything]	glud
གླུད་གོས	ransom attire	glud gos
གླུད་གྱེར	to throw a ransom, [certain ritual]	glud gyer
གླུད་འགོང	in Lhasa tshogs offered torma, rdzong ba'i glud 'gong	glud 'gong
གླུད་འགོད་རྒྱལ་པོ	the demon-ransom king (ceremony on the 29th day of the 2nd Tibetan month)	glud 'god rgyal po
གླུད་ཆས	implements for the ransom ritual	glud chas
གླུད་གཏོང	give a ransom/ pledge	glud gtong
གླུད་གཏོར	ransom torma [for sick people etc. given to 'dre gdon etc.]	glud gtor
གླུད་པ	release	glud pa
གླུད་བླུད་གླུད་ཚབ	ransom	glud blud glud tshab
གླུད་ཚབ	ransom offered to some malignant spirit, effigy offering, ransoming by effigy form of exorcism	glud tshab
གླུད་རྫས	ransom articles [various things given w with ransom torma]	glud rdzas
གླུད་གཟུགས	substitute effigy	glud gzugs
གླུད་ཡས	glud dang rdzongs chas	glud yas
གླུད་ལ་བཏང	ransom a scape-goat	glud la btang
གླུམ	fresh fermented grain used to brew beer instead of malt	glum
གླུས	(not in DAS)	glus
གླེ	gram thang between two rivers	gle
གླེ་གདམས་པ	sle 'dams pa	gle gdams pa
གླེ་འདམ་ཅན	sle 'dam can	gle 'dam can
གླེ་འདམས་མ	one having the disease in which urine and fecal matter pass together by the rectum, hermaphrodite having neither the sign or male nor of female	gle 'dams ma
གླེ་བར	gling phran	gle bar
གླེ་མོ	large basket	gle mo
གླེག	(not in DAS)	gleg
གླེག་པོ	[arch] mthug po dang, unclear	gleg po
གླེགས	flat piece of wood	glegs
གླེགས་སྒོ	door made of a flat piece of wood	glegs sgo
གླེགས་ཆབ	buckle, clasp	glegs chab
གླེགས་ཐག	cord for tying up a pecha	glegs thag
གླེགས་བམ	book, volume of scripture	glegs bam
གླེགས་བམ་ཀླག་པའི་ཐབས	method of reading a scripture	glegs bam klag pa'i thabs
གླེགས་བམ་དུ་བྱས་པ	made into a book	glegs bam du byas pa
གླེགས་བམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ	make into a book	glegs bam du byed pa
གླེགས་བུ	page; page, flat	glegs bu
གླེགས་མ	leb mo pang leb lta bu	glegs ma
གླེགས་རལ	{dngul 'jangs brdungs kyi glegs ral} a volume of scripture and a sword of pure beaten silver	glegs ral
གླེགས་ཤིང	wood cover plates for a volume of scripture	glegs shing
གླེང	converse [ation], talk, discuss[ion]	gleng
གླེང་བརྗོད	talk, conversation, story, account, introduction, foreword	gleng brjod
གླེང་བརྗོད་འཚོལ་བ	look for controversy/ verbal arguments/ dispute	gleng brjod 'tshol ba
གླེང་བརྗོད་གཞི	introduction	gleng brjod gzhi
གླེང་དུག་གསུམ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་གཏོང	whatever he says is bent toward the three poisons	gleng dug gsum phyogs la gtong
གླེང་པོ	converser, disscusser	gleng po
གླེང་ཕྱོགས	public opinion	gleng phyogs
གླེང་བ	ft. of {gleng ba}; p. {glengs} to discuss, say, talk, speak, chant; to tell, narrate; {gleng ba, glengs pa, gleng ba, glengs} trans. v	gleng ba
གླེང་བ་པོ	story teller	gleng ba po
གླེང་བ་ཡོངས་ལ་བོར་བའི་ཁ་གཏམ	the oral tradition which permeates all discourses [one of {kha gtam gnyis}	gleng ba yongs la bor ba'i kha gtam
གླེང་བྲལ	ineffable	gleng bral
གླེང་འབུམ	'dul ba'i gleng gzhi pecha	gleng 'bum
གླེང་མེད	unconditional, not an issue for discussion/ debate	gleng med
གླེང་མོ	talk, conversation, story, account	gleng mo
གླེང་མོ་བྱེད་པ	to converse, have a conversation	gleng mo byed pa
གླེང་མོད	considered to be	gleng mod
གླེང་མོལ	discussion talk, conversation	gleng mol
གླེང་མོལ་གྱི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	dialogue	gleng mol gyi sgra dbyangs
གླེང་རྩེ	collar, lapel	gleng rtse
གླེང་རྩོད	controversy, verbal arguments, dispute	gleng rtsod
གླེང་གཞི	narration, discourse, subject, index, table of contents, scene of dis-	gleng gzhi
གླེང་གཞིའི་སྡེ	pragmatic narratives, one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} twelve divisions of the teachings; the Topics, the Set of Declarations, One of {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	gleng gzhi'i sde
གླེང་བཞི	subject, primary cause, narration, subject of discourse, table of contents, index, place, scene of discourse	gleng bzhi
གླེང་ལན་ལམ་ཙང་སྐྱེས	Lenglen Lamtsangkye. One of {ma sang dpun dgu} Nine Masang Brothers	gleng lan lam tsang skyes
གླེང་ལན་ལམ་ཚང་སྐྱེས	Lenglen lamtsangkye	gleng lan lam tshang skyes
གླེང་ས་མེད་པ	no one to ask or communicate with	gleng sa med pa
གླེང་སེལ	dispute, controversy sel byed tsam,...Nyes chad gleng sel tsam zhig gtong ba,...Gleng sel nyes pa,...Skad cha gleng sel tsam bshad pa,...Lag rtags gleng sel zhig phul	gleng sel
གླེང་སློང	discussion, conversation, talk about, issue, ?, motion	gleng slong
གླེང་སློང་བ	instigate a talk, start a discussion, raise an issue, raise a question, begin a conversation	gleng slong ba
གླེང་སློང་བྱེད	instigate a talk, start a discussion, raise an issue/ question, begin a conversation	gleng slong byed
གླེང་སློང་བྱེད་པ	to raise an issue / question, bring something up for discussion	gleng slong byed pa
གླེང་བསྲེས	class of monk-scholar, SA bka' bcu	gleng bsres
གླེང་བསླང	pf. of {gleng slong ba} initiated the discussion	gleng bslang
གླེངས	gleng ba!	glengs
གླེངས་པ	[p {gleng} talk, discuss	glengs pa
གླེན	stupid, dumb, foolish	glen
གླེན་ལྐུག	stupidity	glen lkug
གླེན་ལྐུག་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of being mute and dull	glen lkug sdug bsngal
གླེན་ལྐུག་བཟོ་བ	stupefy	glen lkug bzo ba
གླེན་ལྐུགས	stupidity and being dumb [unable to speak], imbecile, idiot, moron, simpleton, stupid, foolish	glen lkugs
གླེན་གོག་བླུན་པོའམ	totally ignorant, not knowing anything at all	glen gog blun po'am
གླེན་རྟགས	stupidity, idiocy	glen rtags
གླེན་རྟགས་སྟོན་པ	goof	glen rtags ston pa
གླེན་སྣང	appearances just as they are	glen snang
གླེན་པ	idiot, blockhead, bloke, brainless, clod, dolt, dull, fool, imbecile, silly, simpleton, stupid, slow, indolent, apathetic, stupid, foolish, ignorant,	glen pa
ཐིཅཀ	headed fool	thick
ཉན	“You are an ignorant fool. You listened to the tirthikas”	nyan
གླེན་པ་གཏི་མུག་ཅན	fool	glen pa gti mug can
གླེན་པས་རོ་མྱོང་བ་ལྟ་བུ	x {bsgoms pa'i dus su glen pas ro myong ba lta bu zhig dgos} meditate on them like a dumb person savouring food	glen pas ro myong ba lta bu
གླེན་པོ	stupid, dull	glen po
གླེན་མ	lady fool	glen ma
གླེན་རྨོངས	stupidity	glen rmongs
གླེབ	press flat, make flat/ plain	gleb
གླེབ་པ	(tha dad pa glebs pa, gleb pa, glebs,, press flat, make flat/ plain	gleb pa
གླེབས	make flat, SA gleb pa	glebs
གླེབས་པ	trample, tread down, press down by the feet	glebs pa
གླེབས་རིལ	horse's mane/ tail etc. kyis bzos pa'i dbyar kha lci ba rlon pa leb mo bzo byed	glebs ril
གླེམ་པ	press, squeeze, crush, squash	glem pa
གླེའུ	baby musk deer	gle'u
གློ	lungs; 1) abbr. for glo ba. 2) a cough. 3) girth of a saddle. 4) side. 5) Mustang [area in northwest Nepal]. 6) proximity, "side"	glo
གློ་དཀར	rtsig ldebs right or left window	glo dkar
གློ་དཀར་ཅན	gzhang 'brum gcod byed kyi yo byed ldebs sam logs su bug pa yod pa zhig	glo dkar can
གློ་དཀར་ཅན་ཕོ	pho'i gzhang 'brum gang na yod shes nas 'brum pa gcod byed kyi yo byad cig	glo dkar can pho
གློ་དཀར་ཅན་མོ	mo'i gzhang 'brum gang na yod shes nas 'brum pa gcod byed kyi yod byad cig	glo dkar can mo
གློ་བཀྲ	country in tibet	glo bkra
གློ་སྐར	[rtsig ldebs right or left] window	glo skar
གློ་ཁ	lung color	glo kha
གློ་ཁ་ཀྲ	Lhopa tribesmen	glo kha kra
གློ་ཁུག	bag carried at one's side, small moneybag attached to the sash or girdle of a tibetan	glo khug
གློ་ཁྲ	tribesmen	glo khra
གློ་འཁོགས་པ	cough, feel stifled	glo 'khogs pa
གློ་གྲི	glor 'dogs pa'i gri chung shubs ldan	glo gri
གློ་དགའ	delighted, fascinated	glo dga'
གློ་འགོག	glo brgyab ste lud pa 'gog pa	glo 'gog
གློ་འགོག་པ	cough	glo 'gog pa
གློ་འགོགས་པ	cough, feel stifled	glo 'gogs pa
གློ་འགྲམས	a disease	glo 'grams
གློ་རྒོད	sheep, calves etc. glo drag tu lu ba'i cattle disease	glo rgod
གློ་རྒྱག	1) cough; 2) incidental, sudden	glo rgyag
གློ་རྒྱག་པ	to cough	glo rgyag pa
གློ་རྒྱན	gzhogs la 'dogs rgyu'i ornament	glo rgyan
གློ་རྒྱབ་པ	cough	glo rgyab pa
གློ་རྒྱས	asthma	glo rgyas
གློ་སྒོ	side door of a house	glo sgo
གློ་སྒྲ	coughing sound	glo sgra
གློ་གཅོང	{glo gcong} disease [one of the glo nad brgyad, glo rgyun du lu ba &, body flesh becomes emaciated la shed chung ba, from the throat nas sor sgra 'byung ba, lus rngul zhing 'gul skyod dka' bar]	glo gcong
གློ་ཆམ	cham pa glo bar bab pa zhig [symptons: glo rgyag and lud pa mang po 'byung ba, dbugs hal ba, brang dang stod rgyab gzer ba etc.]	glo cham
གློ་ཆུང	phyi glo'am rgyu glo	glo chung
གློ་མཆིན་འདོམས་རྩ	glo mchin 'doms nadi	glo mchin 'doms rtsa
གློ་མཆོང	to jump to the side	glo mchong
གློ་སྙིང	lungs and heart	glo snying
གློ་སྙིང་འདར་བ	making your very heart quiver with fear	glo snying 'dar ba
གློ་སྙིང་བྲང་གསུམ་གཏོད་པ	the mind w/o any hesitation 1 pointedly focused blo gtad 'chol ba, entrust oneself completely, give one's lungs, heart and chest	glo snying brang gsum gtod pa
གློ་སྙིན་འདོམས་རྩ	the lungs's sgang rtsa dang snying rtsa snod kha gnyis 'doms pa'i 'khrig ma'i yar zur gyi rus 'bur nas upwards four fingers bleeding nadi, if bled good for glo snying la tsha ba zhugs pa &, brang r...	glo snyin 'doms rtsa
གློ་ཐག	saddle cinch	glo thag
གློ་དོང	windpipe	glo dong
གློ་འདོགས	lus kyi left and right lung la 'dogs pa'i gri dang khab shubs etc.	glo 'dogs
གློ་རྡེག་གློ་བུར	glo rdeg tu many people 'dzoms pa	glo rdeg glo bur
གློ་རྡོག	sudden	glo rdog
གློ་རྡོལ	excessive expectoration	glo rdol
གློ་ལྡེག་པ	snying 'gul ba	glo ldeg pa
གློ་ནད	1) lung disease of humans/ cattle; 2) TB [in cattle when rlung diesease first appears nyal dus lus stod mthon por byas te nyal ba dang, nang du glo ba rnag gis bzas te 'chi ba'i phyugs kyi major in...	glo nad
གློ་ནད་བརྒྱད	the 8 lung diseases	glo nad brgyad
གློ་ནད་ཐེང་པོ	among the glo nad rigs brgyad} rlung dang 'doms pa'i glo nad symptoms: glo 'gog dka' and dgong dang tho rengs kyi dus su wu sob can lu ba zhig 456	glo nad theng po
གློ་ནད་ཐེས་པོ	among the glo nad brgyad, lus stod lci zhing khengs la dbugs 'tshang ba dang, lud pa lngo ljang du lu ba zhig	glo nad thes po
གློ་རྣག	glo bar tsha ba zhugs nas glo ba'i rtsa sbubs kyi blood and pus rul nas rnag tu gyur pa zhig	glo rnag
གློ་པ	person Lo	glo pa
གློ་སྤིར	kind of shield	glo spir
གློ་ཕབ	lie down	glo phab
གློ་ཕབ་སྡེ་ཉལ	lay down on 1 side	glo phab sde nyal
གློ་ཕུག	1) rtsig ldebs su brus pa'i ca lag 'jog sa; 2) Rtsa lam gyi glo'am logs ngos nas bleeding, medical means or treatment	glo phug
གློ་ཕྲེང	long phreng	glo phreng
གློ་བ	lung, lungs	glo ba
གློ་བ་དཀར་བ	sems dkar ba	glo ba dkar ba
གློ་བ་སྐྱ་རྦབ	{glo ba skya rbab disease	glo ba skya rbab
གློ་བ་དགའ	quite good	glo ba dga'
གློ་བ་ཆུ་ཤོར	{glo ba chu shor disease [among the glo nad rigs brgyad, ngan chu glo la shor ba zhig ste, symptoms: stod brgyang ba dang, mgo na ba, mig sprin ser por 'gyur ba]	glo ba chu shor
གློ་བ་ཉེ་བ	snying thag nye ba	glo ba nye ba
གློ་བ་བུ་ལྔ	glo ba'i mdun ngos kyi cha shas lnga ste, mdzo sna, bya sgab, thugs khab, rte mig dgra lce	glo ba bu lnga
གློ་བ་བུ་ལྔའི་གསང	5th vertebra glo ba bu lnga dang 'brel ba'i me btsa'i gsang mig ste, der me btsa' bzhag na glo la rlung dang bad kan zhugs pa la phan	glo ba bu lnga'i gsang
གློ་བ་བུང་ཚང	{glo ba bung tshang disease	glo ba bung tshang
གློ་བ་མ་ལྔ	5 posterior lobes of the lungs	glo ba ma lnga
གློ་བ་མ་ལྔའི་གསང	at the 4th vertebra ma lnga dang 'brel ba'i me btsa'i gsang ste, der me btsa' bzhag na glo	glo ba ma lnga'i gsang
གློ་བ་རིང་བ	rgyab gtod byas pa'am, snying thag ring ba	glo ba ring ba
གློ་བའི་སྒང་རྩ	{glo ba'i sgang rtsa bleeding nadi [gru mo'i phyi zur nas below four fingers sgang zur bleeding nadi connected w the lungs, if bled good for lung disease, skad 'gag pa etc.]	glo ba'i sgang rtsa
གློ་བའི་རྩ	the lung nadi	glo ba'i rtsa
གློ་བའི་ཚ་ནད	pneumonia	glo ba'i tsha nad
གློ་བུ	glo ba'i mdun phyogs kyi cha shas chung ba	glo bu
གློ་བུག	hole/wound into the lungs	glo bug
གློ་བུར	1) suddenly [& unforseen]; 2) not part of the ongoing nature, incidental, adventitious; 3) newly arisen, never having been seen before; 4) temporary, fleeting, passing, momentary, transient; 5) abr...	glo bur
གློ་བུར་འཁྲུལ་པ	passing confusion, momentarily deluded, [opposed to innate or inherent]	glo bur 'khrul pa
གློ་བུར་གེགས་དབང་གདོན་སྐྱོད	glo bur 'dre yis rgyud brlams pa ste, example of nges med thog rgyag tu obstacles arising	glo bur gegs dbang gdon skyod
གློ་བུར་གྱི་རྐྱེན	secondary and adventitious factors	glo bur gyi rkyen
གློ་བུར་གྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	temporary disturbing emotions	glo bur gyi nyon mongs pa
གློ་བུར་གྱི་དྲི་མ	momentary defilement, passing stains, temporary stains. The obscurations that are not intrinsic	glo bur gyi dri ma
ཏོ་ཐེ་སུགཏ	garbha, like clouds are not inherent in the sky	to the sugata
གློ་བུར་གྱི་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	free from momentary defilement	glo bur gyi dri ma med pa
གློ་བུར་གྱི་དྲི་མས་དག་པ	free from momentary defilement	glo bur gyi dri mas dag pa
གློ་བུར་གྱི་ན་ཚ	sudden illness/ pain, acute disease	glo bur gyi na tsha
གློ་བུར་གྱི་རྣམ་རྟོག	momentary thoughts	glo bur gyi rnam rtog
གློ་བུར་གྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	temporary constructs	glo bur gyi spros pa
གློ་བུར་གྱི་བག་ཆགས	momentary tendencies	glo bur gyi bag chags
གློ་བུར་གྱི་སྨན་བཅོས	emergency medical treatment/ 1st aid	glo bur gyi sman bcos
གློ་བུར་གློ་བུར	[very] suddenly	glo bur glo bur
གློ་བུར་རྒྱལ་པོ	name of king of tibet about 1000 AD	glo bur rgyal po
གློ་བུར་ཐོག་རྒྱག	suddenly, all of a sudden [& unforseen] ngang la new occurrence	glo bur thog rgyag
གློ་བུར་ཐོག་ཏུ་བབས་པ	strikes suddenly	glo bur thog tu babs pa
གློ་བུར་ཐོག་ཏུ་འོང་བ	to come suddenly	glo bur thog tu 'ong ba
གློ་བུར་ཐོག་བབ	glo bur thog rgyag	glo bur thog bab
གློ་བུར་ཐོག་བྱུང་བ	accidentally	glo bur thog byung ba
གློ་བུར་དུ	accidentally, incidentally, suddenly, abruptly, all on a sudden, instantaneously, sudden, suddenly	glo bur du
གློ་བུར་དུ་དར	burst out	glo bur du dar
གློ་བུར་དུ་དར་པ	break out	glo bur du dar pa
གློ་བུར་དུ་སྣང་བ	{rgyu rkyen rten 'brel tshogs pa las glo bur du snang ba sgyu ma lta bu} as in a magic show, things are made to appear by a temporary conjunction of causes, circumstances and connections	glo bur du snang ba
གློ་བུར་དུ་འོངས་པ	incidentally occurring	glo bur du 'ongs pa
གློ་བུར་དྲི་བྲལ་གྱི་ཆ	the factor of freedom from adventitious defilements	glo bur dri bral gyi cha
གློ་བུར་དྲི་བྲལ་གྱི་མྱང་འདས	nirvana free from obscuration of the kleshas/ incidental stains	glo bur dri bral gyi myang 'das
གློ་བུར་དྲི་བྲལ་གྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	buddhahood that is free of/ as freedom from adventitious distortions	glo bur dri bral gyi sangs rgyas
གློ་བུར་དྲི་བྲལ་བའི་སྤང་བ	renunciation as an antidote for obscurations 457 which suddenly arise, the abandonment of freedom from the passing stains	glo bur dri bral ba'i spang ba
གློ་བུར་དྲི་མ	passing stains, incidental impurities	glo bur dri ma
གློ་བུར་དྲི་མེད	free from temporary defilements	glo bur dri med
གློ་བུར་ནད	disease that arises suddenly	glo bur nad
གློ་བུར་རྣམ་བརྒྱད	eight types of temporary [phenomena]	glo bur rnam brgyad
གློ་བུར་རྣམ་དག	completely pure of the incidental	glo bur rnam dag
གློ་བུར་རྣམ་དག་གི་སྐུ	kaya that is totally pure anew (one of the two aspects of svabhavikakaya) glo bur rnam dag gi char gyur pa'i ngo bo	glo bur rnam dag gi sku
ཉིད་སྐུ	the essence-body belonging to the aspect of purity from the temporary glo bur rnam dag gi char gyur pa'i ngo bo	nyid sku
གློ་བུར་པའི་སྒྲིབ་གཉིས	two kinds of suddenly arisen obscuration [conflicting emotions {nyon mongs pa'i sgrib} or kles' vara a and of the knowable {shes bya'i sgrib} or jn~ey vara a]	glo bur pa'i sgrib gnyis
གློ་བུར་བ	temporary, adventitious, superficial; adventitious, transient, passing, coincidental, momentary, noninherent	glo bur ba
གློ་བུར་བ་རེ་བྱོན་ཏེ	took opportune birth	glo bur ba re byon te
གློ་བུར་བའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་གཉིས	the two types of passing obscurations. {nyon mongs pa'i sgrib pa, shes bya'i sgrib pa}	glo bur ba'i sgrib pa gnyis
གློ་བུར་བྱོང་བ	purify the incidental	glo bur byong ba
གློ་བུར་བྲལ་དག་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of supreme enlightenment. +	glo bur bral dag gi dkyil 'khor
གློ་བུར་བྲལ་དག་གི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness of the purity of freedom from the passing	glo bur bral dag gi de bzhin nyid
གློ་བུར་སྦྱོང་བ	purifying the temporary	glo bur sbyong ba
གློ་བུར་མ་དག་པ	adventitious impurities	glo bur ma dag pa
གློ་བུར་མ་རིག་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	momentary coemergent ignorance	glo bur ma rig lhan skyes
གློ་བུར་མ་རིག་ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དྲི་མ	defilements of momentary coemergent ignorance	glo bur ma rig lhan skyes kyi dri ma
གློ་བུར་རྨ	wound from being pieced by knives arrows and weapons etc.	glo bur rma
གློ་བུར་རུ	momentarily, suddenly	glo bur ru
གློ་བུར་རུ་དར་བ	to break out, burst out	glo bur ru dar ba
གློ་བུར་ཤར་བའི་ཀུན་རྟོག་གློག	the suddenly arising lightning of false conceptions	glo bur shar ba'i kun rtog glog
གློ་བོ་མཁན་ཆེན	bsod nams lhun grub glo bo mkhan chen bsod nams lhun grub - sa skya pa	glo bo mkhan chen
གློ་དབུགས་ཤོང་ཚད	lung capacity	glo dbugs shong tshad
གློ་འབུའི་ནད	lung disease of sheep and cattle	glo 'bu'i nad
གློ་འབུར	paintings & sculptures, projection, uprising	glo 'bur
གློ་འབྲས	{glo 'bras} disease	glo 'bras
གློ་སྦུབ	wind pipe	glo sbub
གློ་སྦུབས	lung's khog sbubs	glo sbubs
གློ་མ	back side of the lungs kyi cha shas che ba	glo ma
གློ་མང་ཐང	Mustang, Lo Mangthang,	glo mang thang
གློ་མི་ཁྱིམ་བདུན	Lomi Kyimdun, the Seven Households of Lo, in Tsari	glo mi khyim bdun
གློ་མྱུར་ཞིང	being of quick comprehension, sharp	glo myur zhing
གློ་རྨ	a sore on the lungs	glo rma
གློ་རྨ་སྲ་ཆགས	get a sore on the lungs	glo rma sra chags
གློ་རྩ	1) M mirror? sog pa'i me long 'og gi sngon bu dang gru mo'i sgang rtsa lta bu glo ba dang 'brel ba'i nadi; 2) the mind's way of being and thinking	glo rtsa
གློ་ཚད	{glo tshad} disease	glo tshad
གློ་ཟུང	khams phyogs kyi pho mo gnyis kas gzhogs la 'dogs rgyu'i ornament	glo zung
གློ་ཡུ	windpipe, trachea	glo yu
གློ་ཡུའི་ཚ་ནད	tracheitis	glo yu'i tsha nad
གློ་ཡུལ	Mustang [now in Northwest Nepal]	glo yul
གློ་ལ་བ	convulsions of the lungs, cough	glo la ba
གློ་ལངས་པ	a cough [arose]	glo langs pa
གློ་ལུ་བ	cough	glo lu ba
གློ་ལེན	saddle's glo 'ching thag pa	glo len
གློ་ཤོ་རྒོད	[arch] rig pa spyang ba	glo sho rgod
གློ་སུབ	choking while coughing	glo sub
གློ་སོར	glo yu'i lam nas "sor sor" sound occurring lung disease	glo sor
གློ་གསང	glo gsang moxibustion point	glo gsang
གློ་གསང་བར་པ	a moxibustion point	glo gsang bar pa
གློ་གསང་འོག་མ	a moxibustion point	glo gsang 'og ma
གློ་གསུད	glo rgyun mi 'chad par rgyag pa	glo gsud
གློག	1) electricity. 2) lightning, a flash of lightning	glog
གློག་སྐས	escalator 458	glog skas
གློག་སྐུད	electric wire/ cable/ line	glog skud
གློག་སྐུད་ཀ་བ	electric pole	glog skud ka ba
གློག་སྐུད་ཀྱི་ཀ་བ	electric pole	glog skud kyi ka ba
གློག་སྐུལ	electric	glog skul
གློག་སྐུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric motor/ machinery	glog skul 'phrul 'khor
གློག་སྐུལ་མེ་འཁོར་མགོ	electric locomotive	glog skul me 'khor mgo
གློག་སྐྱེད	electrical power transmission	glog skyed
གློག་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	transmit electrical power	glog skyed byed
གློག་སྐྱེལ	electrical power transmission	glog skyel
གློག་སྐྱེལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	generator	glog skyel 'phrul 'khor
གློག་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	transmit electrical power	glog skyel byed
གློག་སྐྱེལ་མ་འཁོར	generator	glog skyel ma 'khor
གློག་སྐྱེལ་གཟུགས་བརྙན	TV	glog skyel gzugs brnyan
གློག་སྐྱེལ་ས་ཚིགས	electric power station	glog skyel sa tshigs
གློག་བསྐུལ	electric	glog bskul
གློག་བསྐུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric motor/ machine	glog bskul 'phrul 'khor
གློག་བསྐུལ་རླུང་ཡབ	electric fan	glog bskul rlung yab
གློག་བསྐྱེད	electric power transmission	glog bskyed
གློག་ཁང	generator building, electric power plant	glog khang
གློག་ཁྱེམ	electric shovel	glog khyem
གློག་འཁུལ	electric	glog 'khul
གློག་འཁུལ་འཁོར་ལོ	generator	glog 'khul 'khor lo
གློག་འཁུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric motor/ machinery	glog 'khul 'phrul 'khor
གློག་འཁུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར་བཟོ་གྲྭ	electric motor/ machinery factory	glog 'khul 'phrul 'khor bzo grwa
གློག་འཁུལ་མ་འཁོར	electric motor/ machinery	glog 'khul ma 'khor
གློག་འཁུལ་མ་འཁོར་བཟོ་གྲྭ	electric motor/ machinery factory	glog 'khul ma 'khor bzo grwa
གློག་འཁུལ་མེ་འཁོར	electric train	glog 'khul me 'khor
གློག་འཁུལ་ཚེམ་འཁོར	electric sewing machine	glog 'khul tshem 'khor
གློག་འཁོར	electric train/ trolley/ machinery/ motor	glog 'khor
གློག་འཁོར་ས་ཚིགས	tram car station	glog 'khor sa tshigs
གློག་འཁྱག	lightning	glog 'khyag
གློག་འཁྱུག	[be] lightning, flash	glog 'khyug
གློག་འཁྱུག་པ	[be] lightning, flash	glog 'khyug pa
གློག་འཁྱུགས	lightning	glog 'khyugs
གློག་འཁྱུགས་པ	lightning	glog 'khyugs pa
གློག་འཁྱུད་པ	electrocution	glog 'khyud pa
གློག་འཁྲིད	electric conductivity	glog 'khrid
གློག་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	electrify [house etc.]	glog 'khrid byed
གློག་གི	electric	glog gi
གློག་གི་སྐད་འཁོར	phonograph	glog gi skad 'khor
གློག་གི་འཁྱགས་སྒམ	refrigerator	glog gi 'khyags sgam
གློག་གི་ཆུ་ཚོད	electric clock/ watch	glog gi chu tshod
གློག་གི་ཆུ་ཚོད་འཁོར་ལོ	electric clock/ watch	glog gi chu tshod 'khor lo
གློག་གི་སྡེ་མིག	electric switch	glog gi sde mig
གློག་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	string of lightning, aurora borealis, name of a country	glog gi phreng ba
གློག་གི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric motor/ machine	glog gi 'phrul 'khor
གློག་གི་མེ	battery	glog gi me
གློག་གི་བཟོ་པ	electrician, electrical worker	glog gi bzo pa
གློག་གི་འོད	flash of lightning	glog gi 'od
གློག་གི་སོག་ལེ	electric saw	glog gi sog le
གློག་གི་བསིལ་འཁོར	electric fan	glog gi bsil 'khor
གློག་མགོ་འཛུགས་ས	electric socket	glog mgo 'dzugs sa
གློག་འགུལ	electric	glog 'gul
གློག་འགོ་འཛུགས་ས	plug	glog 'go 'dzugs sa
གློག་འགོག	electric resistance	glog 'gog
གློག་འགྱུ	story	glog 'gyu
གློག་འགྱུ་བ	lightning	glog 'gyu ba
གློག་རྒྱག	[be] lightning, flash	glog rgyag
གློག་རྒྱག་པ	[be] lightning, flash	glog rgyag pa
གློག་རྒྱུན	electric current, electric current	glog rgyun
གློག་སྒུལ	electrically operated	glog sgul
གློག་སྒུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric motor	glog sgul 'phrul 'khor
གློག་སྒོ	electric switch, switch	glog sgo
གློག་སྒྱུར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	electric transformer	glog sgyur 'phrul chas
གློག་སྒྱུར་ཡོ་ཆས	electric transformer	glog sgyur yo chas
གློག་སྒྱུར་ས་ཚིགས	electric transformer saltation	glog sgyur sa tshigs
གློག་བརྒྱུད	conduct electricity	glog brgyud
གློག་བཅོས	electro-therapy	glog bcos
གློག་ལྕེ་མ	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	glog lce ma
གློག་ཆས	electric appliances	glog chas
གློག་ཆོད	electric insulation, insulated	glog chod
གློག་ཆོད་ལྕགས་ཤོག	vulcanized/ insulated sheet metal	glog chod lcags shog
གློག་ཆོད་སྦུ་གུ	insulating bushings	glog chod sbu gu
གློག་ཆོད་སོག་བུ	insulating paper	glog chod sog bu
གློག་འཇོར	electric hoe	glog 'jor
གློག་བརྙན	movie	glog brnyan
གློག་བརྙན་ཁང	movie theater	glog brnyan khang
གློག་བརྙན་འཁྲབ	act in movies	glog brnyan 'khrab
གློག་བརྙན་འཁྲབ་གཞུང	movie script	glog brnyan 'khrab gzhung
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་སྟོན་ཁང	movie theater	glog brnyan gyi ston khang
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་སྟོན་འཁོར	movie projector	glog brnyan gyi ston 'khor
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་སྟོན་ས	movie theater	glog brnyan gyi ston sa
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་ཕན་རྩི་གཞི	movies	glog brnyan gyi phan rtsi gzhi
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་ཕན་རྩི་ལེན	make movies	glog brnyan gyi phan rtsi len
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་ཕར་གཞི	movies	glog brnyan gyi phar gzhi
གློག་བརྙན་གྱི་ཕར་གཞི་ལེན	make movies	glog brnyan gyi phar gzhi len
གློག་བརྙན་སྟོན	show movies	glog brnyan ston
གློག་བརྙན་སྟོན་ཁང	movie theater	glog brnyan ston khang
གློག་བརྙན་སྟོན་འཁོར	movie projector	glog brnyan ston 'khor
གློག་བརྙན་སྟོན་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	movie projector	glog brnyan ston byed 'phrul 'khor
གློག་བརྙན་སྟོན་ས	movie theater	glog brnyan ston sa
གློག་བརྙན་པར་གཞི་བཟོ་གྲྭ	film studio	glog brnyan par gzhi bzo grwa
གློག་བརྙན་སྤྱིན་ཤོག	movie film glog brnyan spyin shog par 'khru'i bzo	glog brnyan spyin shog
གློག་བརྙན་བྱས་བ	movie industry	glog brnyan byas ba
གློག་བརྙན་དབྱིབས་ཆེ་བ	feature film	glog brnyan dbyibs che ba
གློག་གཏོང་བ	electrify	glog gtong ba
གློག་བཏོན	produced electric power	glog bton
གློག་ལྟར་འཁྱུག	flashing like lightening	glog ltar 'khyug
གློག་ལྟར་འཁྱུག་པ	move rapidly like the flash of lightning	glog ltar 'khyug pa
གློག་སྟུག་འོད	lightning of dense luster,	glog stug 'od
ཤེཨེཏ	lightning	sheet
གློག་བརྟེན་གསོ་ཐབས	electro-therapy	glog brten gso thabs
གློག་ཐད	electric cable/ wire	glog thad
གློག་ཐད་རྒྱུད	DC current	glog thad rgyud
གློག་ཐབ	electric stove/ furnace	glog thab
གློག་དུའུ	KW hour	glog du'u
གློག་དྲིལ	electric bell/ buzzer	glog dril
གློག་འདོན	to generate electricity	glog 'don
གློག་འདོན་ཁང	electric power plant	glog 'don khang
གློག་འདོན་འཁོར་ལོ	generator	glog 'don 'khor lo
གློག་འདོན་སྒྲིག་ཆས	electric generating equipment	glog 'don sgrig chas
གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electric generator	glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
གློག་འདོན་བྱེད	produce electric power	glog 'don byed
གློག་འདོན་ཚད	generating capacity/ output	glog 'don tshad
གློག་འདོན་ས་ཚིགས	electric power generating station/ plant	glog 'don sa tshigs
གློག་རྡུལ	electron[ic]	glog rdul
གློག་རྡུལ་གྱི་ཆེ་ཤེས	electron microscope	glog rdul gyi che shes
གློག་རྡུལ་ཅན་རྩིས་རྒྱག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electronic computer	glog rdul can rtsis rgyag 'phrul 'khor
གློག་རྡུལ་རྩིས་འཁོར	electronic computer	glog rdul rtsis 'khor
གློག་རྡུལ་རིག་པ	electronics	glog rdul rig pa
གློག་རྡུལ་ཤེལ་སྦུབ	electronic/ vacuum tube	glog rdul shel sbub
གློག་རྡོ	[calcium] carbide	glog rdo
གློག་ལྡན	cloud, full of lightning, flashed cloud	glog ldan
གློག་ནུས	electric energy	glog nus
གློག་གནོན	voltage 459	glog gnon
གློག་གནོན་དཔྱད་ཆས	voltage meter	glog gnon dpyad chas
གློག་གནོན་ཡོ་བྱད	voltage meter	glog gnon yo byad
གློག་སྣེ	electrode	glog sne
གློག་སྣོད	electronic condenser	glog snod
གློག་སྣོད་སྒྱུར་འཁོར	electric transformer	glog snod sgyur 'khor
གློག་སྣོན་སྒྱུར་འཁོར	electric transformer	glog snon sgyur 'khor
གློག་པ	large ulcer or sore, silver	glog pa
གློག་པའི་ནད	disease not found in medical works but mentioned in grammar	glog pa'i nad
གློག་པར	x-ray	glog par
གློག་པར་ཁང	movie theater	glog par khang
གློག་པར་རྒྱག	x-ray	glog par rgyag
གློག་པར་རྒྱབ་པ	x-ray	glog par rgyab pa
གློག་སྤར	x-rays, movie	glog spar
གློག་སྤར་ཁང	movie theater	glog spar khang
གློག་སྤར་རྒྱག	x-ray	glog spar rgyag
གློག་སྤར་ས	switch	glog spar sa
གློག་སྤྱོད	electricity usage	glog spyod
གློག་འཕྲིན	[radio-]telegram, cable, wire [message]	glog 'phrin
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཁང	radio station	glog 'phrin khang
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཁྱབ་གཏོང	[radio-]telegram sent to many places	glog 'phrin khyab gtong
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཁྱབ་གཏོང་བྱེད	send [radio-]telegram to many places	glog 'phrin khyab gtong byed
གློག་འཕྲིན་གྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	[radio-]telegram, cable, wire [message] equipment	glog 'phrin gyi yo byad
གློག་འཕྲིན་གྱི་གསར་འགྱུར	telegraphed/ wireless news	glog 'phrin gyi gsar 'gyur
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཆས	[radio-]telegram, cable, wire [message] equipment	glog 'phrin chas
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཏོག་གི་དངུལ་འགྲུལ	telegraphing money, telegraphed money order	glog 'phrin tog gi dngul 'grul
གློག་འཕྲིན་གཏོང་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	telegraph receiver/ transmitter	glog 'phrin gtong len 'phrul 'khor
གློག་འཕྲིན་པ	telegraph operator	glog 'phrin pa
གློག་འཕྲིན་ཡོ་ཆས	telegraph	glog 'phrin yo chas
གློག་འཕྲུལ	electric machine	glog 'phrul
གློག་འབྱེད	electrolysis	glog 'byed
གློག་འབྲེལ་གཅོད	insulate [electrically]	glog 'brel gcod
གློག་འབྲེལ་གཅོད་བྱེད་དངོས་པོ	insulating material [electrically]	glog 'brel gcod byed dngos po
གློག་འབྲེལ་གཅོད་བྱེད་ཡོ་བྱད	insulating material [electrically]	glog 'brel gcod byed yo byad
གློག་སྦྱིན	gift of lightning	glog sbyin
གློག་མི་འཁྲིད་པའི་དངོས་རྫས	non conductor	glog mi 'khrid pa'i dngos rdzas
གློག་དམར	red lightning .Drag char 'bab	glog dmar
པའི་རྟགས་སུ་གློག་ཆེམ་ཆེམ་ག	yo	pa'i rtags su glog chem chem ga
གློག་སྨན	battery	glog sman
གློག་རྩི	electro-plating	glog rtsi
གློག་ཚད་འཁོར་ལོ	electric meter	glog tshad 'khor lo
གློག་ཚད་ལྟ་ཆས	electric meter	glog tshad lta chas
གློག་ཚད་ལྟ་བྱེད	electric meter	glog tshad lta byed
གློག་ཚད་བརྟག་ཆས	electroscope	glog tshad brtag chas
གློག་མཛེས་ཕྲེང་ཅན	lightning of	glog mdzes phreng can
བེཨཽཏིཕུ༹ལ་སྟྲིངས་ཨོར་ཟིག	zags	beautiful strings or zig
གློག་རྫས	battery	glog rdzas
གློག་ཞགས	flashing noose of lightning	glog zhags
གློག་ཞུ	electric light, lamp, electric light, electricity, flashlight, light	glog zhu
གློག་ཞུ་བསད་ཟིན་པ	to turn off the light	glog zhu bsad zin pa
གློག་ཞུན	electric light	glog zhun
གློག་ཞུའི་འབྲེལ་རྒྱུན་ཆད	electricity was cut off	glog zhu'i 'brel rgyun chad
གློག་ཞུའི་ཤེལ་ཏོག	light bulb	glog zhu'i shel tog
གློག་བཞུ	electric light	glog bzhu
གློག་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན	lightning with flash	glog gzi brjid can
གློག་བཟོ་པ	electric industry worker, electrician	glog bzo pa
གློག་བཟོ་ལས	electric industry	glog bzo las
གློག་འོད	light of lightning	glog 'od
གློག་འོད་ཅན	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	glog 'od can
གློག་ལས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become electrified	glog las can du 'gyur
གློག་ལས་བཟོ་ལས	electric industry	glog las bzo las
གློག་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་སློབ་གྲྭ	school of electrical engineering	glog las lag rtsal slob grwa
གློག་ལས་སུ་འགྱུར	become electrified	glog las su 'gyur
གློག་ལུགས	electro-typing	glog lugs
གློག་ལུགས་རྒྱག	make an electrotype	glog lugs rgyag
གློག་ཤུགས	electric power	glog shugs
གློག་ཤུགས་ཁབ་ལེན	electro magnetism/ magnet	glog shugs khab len
གློག་ཤུགས་ཅན	electrified	glog shugs can
གློག་ཤུགས་ཅན་འགྱུར	be electrified	glog shugs can 'gyur
གློག་ཤུགས་གཏོང་འཛིན་འཁོར་ལོ	electric transformer	glog shugs gtong 'dzin 'khor lo
གློག་ཤུགས་ཚད	volt	glog shugs tshad
གློག་ཤུགས་བཟོ་ལས	electric power industry	glog shugs bzo las
གློག་གཤོལ	electric plow	glog gshol
གློག་གསོག་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	battery	glog gsog 'phrul chas
གློག་གསོར	electric drill	glog gsor
གློང་ཆེན	TSE	glong chen
གློང་ཐང	a place in Tibet and also in kham	glong thang
གློང་ཐང་སྒྲོན་མའི་ལྷ་ཁང	monastery & temple in kham	glong thang sgron ma'i lha khang
གློང་ཐང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང	the Tara Temple at Longtang	glong thang sgrol ma lha khang
གློང་སྡེ	TSE	glong sde
གློང་བ	disturb, SA dkrug pa	glong ba
གློངས་པར་མཆིས་རྣམས་ལ	set at odds	glongs par mchis rnams la
གློད	loosely; to release, to let go, to let loose, to set free, to relax, loosen, let go, rest	glod
གློད་དཀྲོལ	delivery	glod dkrol
གློད་དཀྲོལ་གཏོང་བ	acquit	glod dkrol gtong ba
གློད་བཀྲོལ	emancipation, release	glod bkrol
གློད་བཀྲོལ་གཏོང	loose, [set] free, let go of, relax, slacken, comfort, console, release, pardon	glod bkrol gtong
གློད་འགྲོལ	loose, [set] free, let go of, relax, slacken, comfort, console, release, pardon	glod 'grol
གློད་ཅིག	relax!	glod cig
གློད་ཆ	relaxed quality	glod cha
གློད་གཏོང	1) releasing, letting go, freeing	glod gtong
གློད་གཏོང་བྱེད	release, let go, free, launch, send off	glod gtong byed
གློད་དྲགས་པ	intense relaxation	glod drags pa
གློད་པ	to relax/ let go	glod pa
གློད་སྤང	parting	glod spang
གློད་ལ་རྒྱུན་དུ་བཞུགས	you may stay here always with easy mind	glod la rgyun du bzhugs
གློད་ལ་འཇོག་པ	relax	glod la 'jog pa
གློད་ལ་མཉམ་བཞག	relax in contemplation	glod la mnyam bzhag
གློད་ལ་ཞོག	Relax and rest!	glod la zhog
གློད་ཤོར	btags pa dang bcug pa'i rigs glod pa'am, rang bzhin gyis shor ba,...Btson pa rnams glod shor med par do dam byed pa	glod shor
གློན	glon pa!, patch, cover up	glon
གློན་པ	return, give back, pay back, return an answer, reply, patch, mend	glon pa
གློན་སྨན	sbyar rgyu'i medicine	glon sman
གློབ་པ	to flaunt [material goods]	glob pa
གློབ་ཞུ	lamp, electric light	glob zhu
གློར་འགྱུར	sudden change, mutation 460	glor 'gyur
གློར་བུར་གྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	temporary kleshas	glor bur gyi nyon mongs pa
གློས	gla ba!	glos
གློས་པ	stupidity, ignorance	glos pa
གློས་ཕབ	lie down	glos phab
གློས་ཕབ་སྡེ་ཉལ	lay down on 1 side	glos phab sde nyal
གློས་ཕབ་པ	lie down on one's side, to lie on one side or on the side	glos phab pa
དག་ཅན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of {dga' can} [k la 421]	dga can gyi mdo
དག་འདུལ་གཉེན་སྐྱོང	to get the better of our enemies and care for our families	dga 'dul gnyen skyong
དག་ལྡན	1) joyful; 2) Ganden Monastery [35 mi. Ne of Lhasa, founded by tshongkhapa]; 3) Tushita Heaven [abode of Maitreya the future buddha]	dga ldan
དག་བའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	by the power of joy	dga ba'i shugs kyis
དག་རྩེ	love, affection	dga rtse
དག་རྩེད	amusement, recreation	dga rtsed
དགག	1) to reject, negate, negation, refute, repudiate, disapprove, criticize, deny. 2) obstruct, inhibit, suppress, repress, block	dgag
དགག་གྲུབ	negation & affirmation	dgag grub
དགག་སྒྲ	negating particle	dgag sgra
དགག་སྒྲའི་སྐུལ་ཚིག	las tshig da lta ba'i thog mar 'jug pa'i ma yig ...Bsam blo	dgag sgra'i skul tshig
མ་གཏོང	...Mig gis ma lta	ma gtong
དགག་སྒྲིའི	negative	dgag sgri'i
དགག་སྒྲུབ	deny and/ or affirm; refutation and/ or proof; supression/ repression or indulgence/ promotion	dgag sgrub
དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་དོན	something to be affirmed and negated	dgag sgrub kyi don
དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	constructs to affirm and negate	dgag sgrub kyi spros pa
དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འཛིན་བཏང	the conceptual attitude of affirming or negating	dgag sgrub kyi 'dzin btang
དགག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four aspects of refuting and establishing	dgag sgrub kyi yan lag bzhi
དགག་སྒྲུབ་གཉིས་ཚོགས	combination of both affirmation or negation [ggd]	dgag sgrub gnyis tshogs
དགག་སྒྲུབ་བྱ་བ	something to be affirmed and negated	dgag sgrub bya ba
དགག་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་པ	to judge, "refute and establish	dgag sgrub byed pa
དགག་སྒྲུབ་བྲལ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature that is beyond something to be affirmed and negated	dgag sgrub bral ba'i chos nyid
དགག་སྒྲུབ་མ་བྱེད	do not inhibit one thing while promoting another	dgag sgrub ma byed
དགག་སྒྲུབ་མེད་ན	when there are no obstructions or attainments	dgag sgrub med na
དགག་སྒྲུབ་མེད་པ	neither stopping nor creating (thoughts); free from suppressing or cultivating	dgag sgrub med pa
དགག་བསྒྲུབ	stopping, cultivating	dgag bsgrub
དགག་ཆོས	negative phenomenon	dgag chos
དགག་རྙི	ske nas 'dzin byed kyi zhags rnyi	dgag rnyi
དགག་བཏང་སུན་ཕྱུང	refutation btang nas express a fault or skyon bton pa	dgag btang sun phyung
དགག་རྟགས	sign of negation	dgag rtags
དགག་རྟགས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	wrong sign of negation	dgag rtags phyin ci log pa
དགག་རྟགས་ཡང་དག	correct sign of negation	dgag rtags yang dag
དགག་ལྡོག་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	among ldog pa rigs gcig pa, dgag par gyur pa'i ldog pa rigs gcig pa ni, dgag bya bkag tsam gyi cha med dgag rigs gcig pa: egolessness of individuals and of dharmas gang zag gi bdag med dang, chos k...	dgag ldog rigs gcig pa
དགག་པ	ft. of {'gog pa}; 1) to negate, refute, repudiate, disapprove, criticize, deny, invalidate, nullify, contest. 2) negative phenomenon. 3) obstruct, inhibit, suppress, repress, block, to hinder. 4) o...	dgag pa
དགག་པ་ཀྱང་པ	mere negation [ggd]	dgag pa kyang pa
དགག་པ་བཀག་པ	to still an objection, negate [refute]	dgag pa bkag pa
དགག་པ་འགོད་པ	to posit an objection	dgag pa 'god pa
དགག་པ་རྒྱག་པ	to criticize	dgag pa rgyag pa
དགག་པ་རྒྱང	to refute, object to, contest	dgag pa rgyang
དགག་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	demur, withstand	dgag pa rgyab pa
དགག་པ་རྒྱབ་འོས་པ	objectionable	dgag pa rgyab 'os pa
དགག་པ་དང་བྲལ	without hinderance, unobstructed	dgag pa dang bral
དགག་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	open	dgag pa dang bral ba
དགག་པ་འདུས་མ་བྱས་ཀྱི་གཞི	the unconditioned ground of hinderance/refutation	dgag pa 'dus ma byas kyi gzhi
དགག་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	erroneous refutation	dgag pa phyin ci log pa
དགག་པ་བྱས་པ	refuted, have obstructed one by logic in controversy, defeated an adversary	dgag pa byas pa
དགག་པ་བྱེད་པ	to negate	dgag pa byed pa
དགག་པ་མིན་པ	undeniably due to	dgag pa min pa
དགག་པ་མེད་དགག	an apophatic nonaffirming negation, i.e., a negation that merely negates without proving something in place of what is negated. (see also sgrub pa ma yin dgag) [mss]	dgag pa med dgag
དགག་པང	1) lcam mgo'i bar gyi pang leb gru bzhi; 2) Lham mthil 'tshem spyad	dgag pang
དགག་པའི་དགག་པ	negation of negation	dgag pa'i dgag pa
དགག་པའི་ཐིག	word of prohibition, objection	dgag pa'i thig
དགག་པའི་དཔེ	among dpe'i rgyan, dgag bya example la skyon brjod kyi sgo nas actually dpe can la 'gran pa'i nus pa 461 yod pa ston pa'i 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig	dgag pa'i dpe
དགག་པའི་བསླབ་བྱ	rules to abstain	dgag pa'i bslab bya
དགག་པར་བྱ་བ	to be negated	dgag par bya ba
དགག་ཕྱེ	lifting of retreat conditions, the ceremony ending the Rains Retreat	dgag phye
དགག་ཕྱོགས	negation	dgag phyogs
དགག་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་དམ་བཅའ	the claim from the objector's side	dgag phyogs kyi dam bca'
དགག་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་ལས	negating function	dgag phyogs kyi byed las
དགག་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	rules to abstain	dgag phyogs kyi bslab bya
དགག་བྱ	negandum, object of negation, object of refutation [thd]	dgag bya
དགག་བྱ་ཀག་པ	negation of the object to be refuted [thd]	dgag bya kag pa
དགག་བྱ་བཀག་པ	negation of the object to be refuted	dgag bya bkag pa
དགག་བྱ་བཀག་པའི་མེད་འགག	the negating [of something] as being nonexistent which is the negation of the object denied. a non-affirming negation that negates the object of negation	dgag bya bkag pa'i med 'gag
དགག་བྱ་གང	the particular object of negation	dgag bya gang
དགག་བྱ་འགོག་པ	pure negation [ggd]	dgag bya 'gog pa
དགག་བྱ་ངེས་པའི་གནད	point of certainty about object of negation	dgag bya nges pa'i gnad
དགག་བྱ་དངོས་འཛིན	identification of the object of negation [ggd]	dgag bya dngos 'dzin
དགག་བྱ་གཉིས	the two kinds of things to be refuted [rigs pa dang, lam gyi dgag bya gnyis the two kinds of negation [Ma yin dgag dang, med dgag gnyis]	dgag bya gnyis
དགག་བྱའི་དངོས་པོ	the object to be negated	dgag bya'i dngos po
དགག་བྱའི་ཆོས	predicate of the negandum, predicate to be negated	dgag bya'i chos
དགག་བྱའི་ཆོས་སུ་བཏགས་པའི་དོན	referent of the anti-predicate (actual thing being denied)	dgag bya'i chos su btags pa'i don
དགག་བྱའི་མཐའ་བཞི	the four extremes to be refuted [yod pa'i mtha' dang, med pa'i mtha'a, gnyis ka'i mtha'a, gnyis ka ma yin pa'i mtha'a]	dgag bya'i mtha' bzhi
དགག་བྱའི་དོན་སྤྱི	the generic image of the object negated	dgag bya'i don spyi
དགག་བྱའི་བདག	the self-entity to be refuted dgag bya'i bdag chos rnams kyi ngo bo yul can tha snyad kyi rtog pa gzhan la	dgag bya'i bdag
རག་མ་ལས་པ་སྟེ	de'i dbang gis bzhag pa min pa'i rang bzhin de nyid dgag bya'i bdag ces bya ba'o	rag ma las pa ste
དགག་བྱའི་བདག་གཉིས	the twofold selfentity to be refuted	dgag bya'i bdag gnyis
དགག་བྱའི་ཚིག	statement to be negated	dgag bya'i tshig
དགག་བྱས	refuted	dgag byas
དགག་བྱེད	hindrance, stoppage, interference	dgag byed
དགག་བྲལ	unhindered, unobstructed	dgag bral
དགག་དབྱེ	of the 'dul ba gzhi 17 among the bslab pa yongs sbyong gi gzhi 3, ltung ba gleng dran &, chad las, rnyed pa bgo ba, mtshams kyi phyi rol tu mtshan mo 'da' ba. These dbyar gnas kyi skabs dgag bya yi...	dgag dbye
དགག་དབྱེ་བྱེད	one who stops or obstructs	dgag dbye byed
དགག་དབྱེ་བཞག་པ	'dul ba'i phyag len zhig ste, ltung ba gleng skabs mi 'byed pa'i gang zag la, dge 'dun dang lhan cig par dgag dbye byed du mi 'jug pa'o	dgag dbye bzhag pa
དགག་དབྱེའི་ཆོ་ག	ceremony for releasing the summer retreat rules	dgag dbye'i cho ga
དགག་འབྱངས	delay [due to obstruction]	dgag 'byangs
དགག་མེད	unhindered, unobstructed, ceaseless	dgag med
དགག་མེད་པ	not inhibiting	dgag med pa
དགག་མེད་པ་བདག་པ	mistaking what is not self to be a self, one of the {phyin ci log bzhi} four misapprehensions	dgag med pa bdag pa
དགག་མོ་ཤོར	vi. to burst out laughing	dgag mo shor
དགག་ཚིག	antonym	dgag tshig
དགག་གཞག་སྤང་གསུམ	In purification by reasoning refute the other's tradition, establish one's own, and abandon disputes	dgag gzhag spang gsum
དགག་གཞི	negation ground	dgag gzhi
དགག་གཞི་མངོན་སུམ	site of negation (place to seek denied object)	dgag gzhi mngon sum
དགག་གཞི་ཅན་གྱི་ཆོས	a phenomenon that has a basis of negation	dgag gzhi can gyi chos
དགག་བཞག་སྤང་གསུམ	{gzhan gyi lugs dgag, rang gi lugs bzhag, rtsod pa spang}; refutation, establishment and response; {gzhan gyi lugs dgag}, {rang gi lugs bzhag}, {rtsod pa spang} refutation [of the position of other...	dgag bzhag spang gsum
དགག་ལན	phan tshun gyi 'dod pa dgag pa'i lan	dgag lan
དགག་ལེན	reply to a refutation, rebuttal, answer a charge/ criticism	dgag len
དགག་ལེན་རྒྱབ	reply to a refutation, rebuttal, answer a charge/ criticism	dgag len rgyab
དགགས	hinder, SA 'gegs pa	dgags
དགགས་པ	{'gegs pa, bkag pa, dgags pa} to hinder/ obstruct/ thwart	dgags pa
དགང	f. of {'gengs}	dgang
དགང་དཀའ་བ	hard to fill up	dgang dka' ba
དགང་གླུག	{dgang gzar glug gzar}	dgang glug
དགང་ཐ	individuals with inferior capacities	dgang tha
དགང་བ	ft. of {'gengs pa}	dgang ba
དགང་བླུག	ladle to pour butter in sacrificial fire	dgang blug
དགང་བླུགས	large spoon to fill with	dgang blugs
དགང་གཟར	1) fire puja gzar bu w square head; 2) Du ba 'then par mkho ba'i dbyu gu khog stong zhig patri, fire offering utensil 462	dgang gzar
དགང་གཟར་ཤིང	tree resembling tiger's feet	dgang gzar shing
དགང་ལ	on, upon, in, at	dgang la
དགང་སླ་བ	full to the brim, replete	dgang sla ba
དགངས	(not in DAS)	dgangs
དགད	f. of {'gad}	dgad
དགད་པ	pf. of {dgod pa}	dgad pa
དགད་མོ	laughter	dgad mo
དགན་ལྡན་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལིང	monastery west of Tashi lungo in Tshang where formerly Taranatha lived	dgan ldan phun tshogs ling
དགན་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང	Government house in lhasa	dgan ldan pho brang
དགབ	f. of {'gebs}	dgab
དགབ་པ	ft. of {'gebs pa}; rejoice	dgab pa
དགབ་བྱ	clothing	dgab bya
དགམས	p. of {dgam}	dgams
དགའ	priti, joy, to like, elated, joyful	dga'
དགའ་བཀུར	love and respect	dga' bkur
དགའ་བཀུར་འོས	worthy of love and respect	dga' bkur 'os
དགའ་རྐྱང	large numerical figure	dga' rkyang
དགའ་སྐད	shouts/ cheers of joy	dga' skad
དགའ་སྐད་སྒོར	shout/ cheer w joy	dga' skad sgor
དགའ་སྐྱིད	gay, delight	dga' skyid
དགའ་སྐྱིད་བདེ་བ	happiness and wellbeing	dga' skyid bde ba
དགའ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན	joyful, happy	dga' skyid ldan
དགའ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པ	joyful, happy	dga' skyid ldan pa
དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཚོར་བ	feeling of joy	dga' skyid tshor ba
དགའ་སྐྱེལ	farewell, seeing off spro ba chen pos zhus pa'i phebs skyel,...Tshogs 'du chen mo zhig 'tshogs te dga' skyel zhus pa	dga' skyel
དགའ་སྐྱེལ་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་སྤྲོ	farewell party	dga' skyel kyi thugs spro
དགའ་སྐྱེས	very pleased, glad	dga' skyes
དགའ་སྐྱོ	joy and sorrow	dga' skyo
དགའ་སྐྱོ་གཉིས་འོས	inspiring both joy and sorrow	dga' skyo gnyis 'os
དགའ་སྐྱོ་གཉིས་ཡོད	w both joy and sorrow	dga' skyo gnyis yod
དགའ་སྐྱོ་འདྲེས་མ	mixed joy and sorrow	dga' skyo 'dres ma
དགའ་སྐྱོ་ཟུལ་གསུམ	abbr of 3 places west of lhasa (dga' ba gdong, skyo mo lung, zul po)	dga' skyo zul gsum
དགའ་ཁུལ	though not joyful act like 1 was	dga' khul
དགའ་ཁྲས་ཁྲས	dga' nas kha 'dzum pa'i bzo lta,...Ngo bstod kyi gtam bshad dus dga' khras khras byed	dga' khras khras
དགའ་མཁན	1 who likes---, pro ___	dga' mkhan
དགའ་འཁྱིལ	ganshi, triskelion, gakhyil, gakyil, 3-winged yin-yang symbol	dga' 'khyil
དགའ་གུར	joy, delight	dga' gur
དགའ་གུས	joyful mind and body bowing in respect, love and respect	dga' gus
དགའ་གུས་ཆེ་འོས་ཤོས་ཀྱི་དབུ་ཁྲིད	the most loved and respected leader	dga' gus che 'os shos kyi dbu khrid
དགའ་གྲགས་འུར་བ	shouting with joy	dga' grags 'ur ba
དགའ་གྲོགས	'dza' grogs	dga' grogs
དགའ་གླུ	happy song	dga' glu
དགའ་དགའ	1) happy, laid back, relaxed,	dga' dga'
ཅརེ	free. 2) darling, sweetheart	care
དགའ་དགའ་སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད	joy and happiness, joyful and happy	dga' dga' skyid skyid
དགའ་དགའ་སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད་ནང་ནས	joyfully and happily	dga' dga' skyid skyid nang nas
དགའ་དགའ་སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད་བྱེད	be joyful and happy	dga' dga' skyid skyid byed
དགའ་དགའ་སྤྲོ་སྤྲོ	joyful and happy	dga' dga' spro spro
དགའ་དགའ་སྤྲོ་སྤྲོ་བྱེད	be joyful and happy	dga' dga' spro spro byed
དགའ་དགའ་སྤྲོ་སྤྲོའི་ངང་ནས	joyfully and happily	dga' dga' spro spro'i ngang nas
དགའ་དགུ	intercourse, association, merriment	dga' dgu
དགའ་དགུ་བ	great joy	dga' dgu ba
དགའ་དགུ་རང་བ	great joy	dga' dgu rang ba
དགའ་དགུར་སྤྱོད་པ	engage in merriment/ sexual enjoyment	dga' dgur spyod pa
དགའ་དགོད	glee	dga' dgod
དགའ་མགུ	happy, delighted, joyful	dga' mgu
དགའ་མགུ་ཡི་རང	mind satisfied w joy, immense joy/ happiness	dga' mgu yi rang
དགའ་མགུ་ཡི་རང་བར་གྱུར	took delight, appreciated and rejoiced; made him happy	dga' mgu yi rang bar gyur
དགའ་མགུ་ཡི་རངས	rejoicing; see {dga' mgu rangs} [mss]	dga' mgu yi rangs
དགའ་མགུ་ཡིད་རང	mind satisfied w joy, immense joy/ happiness	dga' mgu yid rang
དགའ་མགུ་རངས	rejoicing	dga' mgu rangs
དགའ་མགུར	satisfied	dga' mgur
དགའ་མགུར་སྤྱོད	copulate	dga' mgur spyod
དགའ་མགུར་སྤྱོད་པ	CM: 1) bde skyid la rol ba, to play happily. 2) 'khrig pa spyod pa, to engage in sexual intercourse [mss]	dga' mgur spyod pa
དགའ་མགུར་རྩེ་བ	affection	dga' mgur rtse ba
དགའ་མགུར་འཟུག་པ	to take joy in	dga' mgur 'zug pa
དགའ་འགད་ཤོར་བ	beam	dga' 'gad shor ba
དགའ་འགུར	joy	dga' 'gur
དགའ་འགྱུར	become joyful	dga' 'gyur
དགའ་སྒོམ	contentment	dga' sgom
དགའ་སྒོམ་བྱེད	be content	dga' sgom byed
དགའ་ངུ	weeping w joy	dga' ngu
དགའ་ཅན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of {dga' can}	dga' can gyi mdo
དགའ་གཅེས	love, affection	dga' gces
དགའ་ཆོས	joyous Dharma	dga' chos
དགའ་ཆོས་དགོན	Gachö Gon, in Tsang	dga' chos dgon
དགའ་མཆོག	supreme delight, sublime joy	dga' mchog
དགའ་མཆོངས	jumping for joy	dga' mchongs
དགའ་འཆལ	garden	dga' 'chal
དགའ་ཉམས	good feelings, high spirits	dga' nyams
དགའ་ཉམས་སྐྱེད	feel good, be in high spirits	dga' nyams skyed
དགའ་ཉེ	close friends, friends and relatives	dga' nye
དགའ་ཉེ་བློ་དཀར	mdza' brtse ldan pa'i blo nye	dga' nye blo dkar
དགའ་སྟེ	were delighted	dga' ste
དགའ་སྟོན	party, banquet, celebration, [joyful] festival	dga' ston
དགའ་སྟོན་སྐྱེས	producing festivity	dga' ston skyes
དགའ་སྟོན་གྱི	festive	dga' ston gyi
དགའ་སྟོན་གྱི་དུས	festival	dga' ston gyi dus
དགའ་སྟོན་གྱི་གདན་ས	place of festival	dga' ston gyi gdan sa
དགའ་སྟོན་གླུ་གར་བྱེད་པ	to hold a feast with song and dance	dga' ston glu gar byed pa
དགའ་སྟོན་འགྱེད་པ	offered a feast	dga' ston 'gyed pa
དགའ་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	celebration	dga' ston rten 'brel
དགའ་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཞུ	celebrate 463	dga' ston rten 'brel zhu
དགའ་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཞུ་བ	to celebrate, congratulate, great	dga' ston rten 'brel zhu ba
དགའ་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལ་བཀྲེས་བདེ	good wishes for the celebration	dga' ston rten 'brel la bkres bde
དགའ་སྟོན་བྱེད	celebrate	dga' ston byed
དགའ་སྟོན་སྦྱིན	astrologer, water	dga' ston sbyin
དགའ་སྟོན་མྱང་བ	I experience joy	dga' ston myang ba
དགའ་སྟོན་ཚོགས་ཆེན	congratulatory meeting/ assembly	dga' ston tshogs chen
དགའ་སྟོན་ཞུ	celebrate	dga' ston zhu
དགའ་སྟོན་བཤམས	give/ have a party/ banquet/ celebration, [joyful] festival	dga' ston bshams
དགའ་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས	joyfully	dga' stobs kyis
དགའ་ཐག་ཆོད	being extraordinarily happy	dga' thag chod
དགའ་མཐུན་པ	mutually joyful and compatible people	dga' mthun pa
དགའ་དང་ལྡན་པ	joyful	dga' dang ldan pa
དགའ་དར	scarf or kata presented for pleasure or consolation	dga' dar
དགའ་དོད	enthusiasm	dga' dod
དགའ་གདུང	affection	dga' gdung
དགའ་གདུངས	fascination	dga' gdungs
དགའ་གདོང	monastery near Dapung w oracle and deity	dga' gdong
དགའ་གདོང་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	rain-making deity of monastery near Dapung	dga' gdong chos skyong
དགའ་བདེ	joyful bliss, bliss	dga' bde
དགའ་བདེ་མགུ་བྲོད་མངོན་ཞེན	attachment to joys and delights	dga' bde mgu brod mngon zhen
དགའ་བདེ་གཉིས	joy and happiness	dga' bde gnyis
དགའ་བདེའི་ཚོར་བ	thrill	dga' bde'i tshor ba
དགའ་མདོག་ཤང་མདོག	ngo srung zol dga' ...Nang 'gal yod bzhin du phyi'i rnam pa dga' mdog shang mdog byas na mthun sgril ngo ma mi yong	dga' mdog shang mdog
དགའ་འདུན	wedding	dga' 'dun
དགའ་འདུན་བྱེད	celebrate a wedding	dga' 'dun byed
དགའ་འདོད	liking	dga' 'dod
དགའ་འདོད་ཀྱི་སྐད་འབོད་བྱས་པ	acclaim	dga' 'dod kyi skad 'bod byas pa
དགའ་འདྲིས	joyful, glad, well acquainted w	dga' 'dris
དགའ་ལྡན	1) joyful; 2) Ganden Monastery; 3) Tushita Heaven	dga' ldan
དགའ་ལྡན་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	extraordinary Geluk bka' bab lineage	dga' ldan bka' brgyud
དགའ་ལྡན་ཁང་གསར	former residence of king dpon po mi dwang, residence of king dga' ldan tshe dbang	dga' ldan khang gsar
དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ	lineal successor tsong kha pa, head abbot of Ganden monastery	dga' ldan khri pa
དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ་གནང	obtain the Ganden throne, the occupier of the Ganden throne	dga' ldan khri pa gnang
དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the Venerable	dga' ldan khri rin po che
ཋྲོནེ	Holder of Ganden	Throne
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་གནས	Tushita heaven	dga' ldan gyi gnas
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་གནས་ན་གནས་པ	to dwell in the Tushita realm	dga' ldan gyi gnas na gnas pa
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་གནས་ན་གཞུགས་པ	abide in a joyful place, stay at Ganden monastery	dga' ldan gyi gnas na gzhugs pa
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་གནས་ན་བཞུགས་པ	dwelling in the Tushita heaven dga' ldan gyi gnas la sogs par skye bar	dga' ldan gyi gnas na bzhugs pa
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་གནས་སུ་སྐྱེས་པ	went to the heaven of Tushita	dga' ldan gyi gnas su skyes pa
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཕོ་བྲང་ནས་འབབ་པ	the descent from the Tushita heaven	dga' ldan gyi pho brang nas 'bab pa
དགའ་ལྡན་གྱི་ལྷ	Tushita devas / gods	dga' ldan gyi lha
དགའ་ལྡན་དགོན་པ	Ganden Monastery [E of Lhasa in stag rtze rdzong on the S of the gtzang chu dbang bskur ri'i ldebs su yod pa'i large principal Geluk monastery, in the 7th earth ox yr founded by Tsongkhapa &, regen...	dga' ldan dgon pa
དགའ་ལྡན་འགྲོ་ཕན་གླིང	Ganden Dropen Ling, at Chubar in Tsang	dga' ldan 'gro phan gling
དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད	10th month 25th day, Tshongkhapa's death day puja	dga' ldan lnga mchod
ཊྭེནཏཡ	fifth, Ganden	Twenty
དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་སྐོར་ལིང	{dga' ldan chos skor ling monastery [in upper T, epithet for other monasteries]	dga' ldan chos skor ling
དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར་གླིང	monastery in higher tibet	dga' ldan chos 'khor gling
དགའ་ལྡན་སྙན་རྒྱུད	oral lineage in the Gelukpa tradition	dga' ldan snyan rgyud
དགའ་ལྡན་དམ་ཆོས་གླིང	n of monastery	dga' ldan dam chos gling
དགའ་ལྡན་བདག	rgyal ba byams mgon	dga' ldan bdag
དགའ་ལྡན་ན་བྱམས་པ་བཞུགས	Maitreya resides in Tushita	dga' ldan na byams pa bzhugs
དགའ་ལྡན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གླིང	Lord Tsongkhapa's monastery	dga' ldan rnam rgyal gling
དགའ་ལྡན་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་པའི་གླིང	"the Victorious Sanctuary of Tushita"; Lord Tsongkhapa's monastery	dga' ldan rnam par rgyal pa'i gling
དགའ་ལྡན་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་གླིང	Ganden Monastery	dga' ldan rnam par rgyal ba'i gling
དགའ་ལྡན་པ	a monk at Ganden monastery	dga' ldan pa
དགའ་ལྡན་པའི་ལུགས	sect founded by tsong khapa, SA dge lugs pa	dga' ldan pa'i lugs
དགའ་ལྡན་པོ	fella, buddy, chap, reserve to be happy with ones like 'my dear,' similar {a po} in Derge slang}	dga' ldan po
དགའ་ལྡན་ཕུན་ཙོགས་གླིང	Ganden Phuntsok Ling [monastery in gzhis ka rtze kron chus, lha rtze rdzong, founded by Taranatha, old name rtag brtan phun tsogs gling, changed by the 5th Dalai Lama]	dga' ldan phun tsogs gling
དགའ་ལྡན་ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང	monastery west of tashi lhunpo	dga' ldan phun tshogs gling
དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང	Ganden Palace	dga' ldan pho brang
དགའ་ལྡན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	the Mahamudra tradition of Ganden Monastery	dga' ldan phyag rgya chen po
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཕོ་བྲང	n of Ganden Palace	rgyal ba'i pho brang
དགའ་ལྡན་བྱམས་པ	Maitreya in Tushita	dga' ldan byams pa
དགའ་ལྡན་དབང་བསྐུར་རི	hill east of lhasa	dga' ldan dbang bskur ri
དགའ་ལྡན་བརྩེགས་པ	Abundant Delight; n. of the first aeon when the life-span of people was unfathomable	dga' ldan brtsegs pa
དགའ་ལྡན་བཞུགས	rgyal ba byams mgon	dga' ldan bzhugs
དགའ་ལྡན་ཡིད་དགའ་ཆོས་འཛིན	place where Maitreya taught	dga' ldan yid dga' chos 'dzin
དགའ་ལྡན་ལུགས་པ	sect founded by tsong khapa, SA dge lugs pa	dga' ldan lugs pa
དགའ་ལྡན་ལེགས་བཤད་གླིང	monastery in western Tibet, alias {la stod shel dkar chos sde}	dga' ldan legs bshad gling
དགའ་ལྡན་གསེར་ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Sertri Rinpoche, the holder of Ganden's golden throne	dga' ldan gser khri rin po che
དགའ་ལྡན་གསེར་གདུང་ཆེན་མོ	the great golden reliquary of Ganden	dga' ldan gser gdung chen mo
དགའ་ལྡན་ལྷ་བརྒྱ	1) the many gods of Ganden; 2) Tsongkhapa guru yoga	dga' ldan lha brgya
དགའ་སྡང	joy and anger	dga' sdang
དགའ་སྡུག	happy and sad, joy and sorrow, likes and dislikes	dga' sdug
དགའ་སྡུག་མང	easily [made) happy or sad	dga' sdug mang
དགའ་ནས	delighted	dga' nas
དགའ་ནས་སོང	went away cheerfully	dga' nas song
དགའ་སྣང	joyful/ happy feeling	dga' snang
དགའ་སྣང་གི་ཐུག་ཐུག	caress	dga' snang gi thug thug
དགའ་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ་སྐྱེས་པ	exult	dga' snang chen po skyes pa
དགའ་པ་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable joy	dga' pa tshad med
དགའ་པོ	1) glad, happy, pleased 2) like, fond of, love	dga' po
དགའ་པོ་ཉེ་པོ	close friends, friends and relatives	dga' po nye po
དགའ་པོ་ཉེ་པོ་འགྱུར	become close friends	dga' po nye po 'gyur
དགའ་པོ་བྱུང་བ	please	dga' po byung ba
དགའ་པོ་བྱེད	like, be fond of, love	dga' po byed
དགའ་པོ་བྱེད་མཁན	fan	dga' po byed mkhan
དགའ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	admire	dga' po byed pa
དགའ་པོ་བྱེད་འོས	lovable	dga' po byed 'os
དགའ་པོ་བྱེད་འོས་པ	lovely	dga' po byed 'os pa
དགའ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	appease	dga' po bzo ba
དགའ་པྲོད	joy	dga' prod
དགའ་སྤོབས	happiness/ joy delight and pride	dga' spobs
དགའ་སྤྱད	enjoying	dga' spyad
དགའ་སྤྱོད	entertainment, merriment, good behavior	dga' spyod
དགའ་སྤྱོད་མ	damsel of mara	dga' spyod ma
དགའ་སྤྲོ	joy [ful mind] and happiness	dga' spro
དགའ་སྤྲོ་སྐྱེ་བ	delight	dga' spro skye ba
དགའ་སྤྲོ་འཁོལ་བ	joy very much rgyas tshul	dga' spro 'khol ba
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཅན	cheerful, enthusiastic	dga' spro can
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཆེ་བ	excited	dga' spro che ba
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཆེན་པོ	glad, happy, pleased, cheerful, pleasant, joyful	dga' spro chen po
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ལྡན་པ	delightful	dga' spro ldan pa
དགའ་སྤྲོ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད	immeasurable joy [ful mind] and happiness	dga' spro dpag tu med
དགའ་སྤྲོ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	immeasurable joy [ful mind] and happiness	dga' spro dpag tu med pa
དགའ་སྤྲོ་དཔག་མེད	immeasurable joy [ful mind] and happiness	dga' spro dpag med
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཚད་མེད	very great joy	dga' spro tshad med
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཡི་བདུད	the demon of joyfulness	dga' spro yi bdud
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཤར	I became filled with joy	dga' spro shar
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཤར་བ	was delighted	dga' spro shar ba
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཤིན་ཏུ	delighted, to one's heart's content	dga' spro shin tu
དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	very happy	dga' spro shin tu che ba
དགའ་སྤྲོད་ཀྱི་བདུད	1 of 4 evil spirits, SA gcod lugs bdud bzhi	dga' sprod kyi bdud
དགའ་སྤྲོའི་དུས་སྟོན	gala	dga' spro'i dus ston
དགའ་སྤྲོའི་སྣང་ཚུལ	joyful, happy	dga' spro'i snang tshul
དགའ་སྤྲོས་ཀྱི་བདུན	the demon of joyfulness	dga' spros kyi bdun
དགའ་ཕྱོགས	rang nyid la dga' ba'i phyogs	dga' phyogs
དགའ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa),, be glad/ joyful, rejoice; 2) joy, delight, happness; 2) Nandana, 26th year of rab byung, male water dragon; 3) Yar ngo'i dga' ba dang po tshes gcig gnyis pa tshes drug gsum pa ...	dga' ba
དགའ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to generate delight	dga' ba bskyed pa
དགའ་བ་འཁྱིལ་བ	ganshi, triskelion, SA dga' 'khyil, all-good, that exists by itself, emblem of purity, gem, king's palace	dga' ba 'khyil ba
དགའ་བ་སྒོམས	be joyous!	dga' ba sgoms
དགའ་བ་བརྒ་པ	Vishnu, the 1 of 100 delights	dga' ba brga pa
དགའ་བ་བརྒྱ་པ	Bhrama	dga' ba brgya pa
དགའ་བ་བསྒོམ་པ	to train in rejoicing [opp of jealusy]	dga' ba bsgom pa
དགའ་བ་བསྒོམས	feel joyful, be joyful!	dga' ba bsgoms
དགའ་བ་ཅན	full of delight	dga' ba can
དགའ་བ་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 delights	dga' ba bcu drug
དགའ་བ་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	to experience joy / bliss	dga' ba nyams su myong ba
དགའ་བ་གཉིས་པ	[the 6'th or 21'st day of the month]	dga' ba gnyis pa
དགའ་བ་རྟ་གདོང	horse-headed Rati, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	dga' ba rta gdong
དགའ་བ་དང་བཅས	{lha mi kun rab tu dga' ba dang bcas phyag 'tshal ba} gods and men alike were delighted and bowed down in joy	dga' ba dang bcas
དགའ་བ་དང་བདེ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to produce happiness and well-being	dga' ba dang bde ba bskyed pa
དགའ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	joyous; {bskal pa dga' ba dang ldan pa la sangs rgyas stong phrag drug cu byung} sixty thousand Buddhas appeared during the Joyous kalpa	dga' ba dang ldan pa
དགའ་བ་དང་པོ	[the first or 16'th of the month]	dga' ba dang po
དགའ་བ་དང་བྲལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	joyless suffering, snying la sdug pa, suffering of parting	dga' ba dang bral ba'i sdug bsngal
དགའ་བ་དང་མཚུངས་པར་ལྡན་པ	accompanying the joy, concurrent bliss	dga' ba dang mtshungs par ldan pa
དགའ་བ་དོན་སྒྲུབ	Bonpo deity connected with the blue light	dga' ba don sgrub
དགའ་བ་གདོང	1 of 3 places west of lhasa, SA dga' skyo zul gsum dga' ba sdud pa yid la byed pa'i bsam	dga' ba gdong
གཏན་བཞི་པ	the fourth dhyana's attention of taking delight	gtan bzhi pa
དགའ་བ་སྡུད་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	attention of taking delight; mental contemplation of joy or withdrawal	dga' ba sdud pa'i yid byed
དགའ་བ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	wrong/ inappropriate joy	dga' ba phyin ci log pa
དགའ་བ་བང་པོ	good pleasure	dga' ba bang po
དགའ་བ་བྱུང	was gladdened	dga' ba byung
དགའ་བ་བྱུང་བ	sems + - everyone was cheerful and relieved	dga' ba byung ba
དགའ་བ་བྱེད	to take pleasure in	dga' ba byed
དགའ་བ་སྦྱིན་བྱེད	field w/o suffering	dga' ba sbyin byed
དགའ་བ་མ་ཡིན་པ	be displeased	dga' ba ma yin pa
དགའ་བ་མེད་པ	joyless, cheerless	dga' ba med pa
དགའ་བ་མྱོན	experience delight/ sexual enjoyment	dga' ba myon
དགའ་བ་དམན་པ	sordid pleasure, one delighting in sexual pleasures, cock	dga' ba dman pa
དགའ་བ་དམར་མོ་རྟའི་མགོ	Rati, pleasure, red, horse-headed	dga' ba dmar mo rta'i mgo
དགའ་བ་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable joy	dga' ba tshad med
དགའ་བ་བཞི	the four joys [dga' ba, mchog dga', khyad dga', lhan skyes kyi dga' ba] OR four delights [lkog pa mi bde glu la dga'; dmangs rigs stan mtho la dga'; dbul po gtong la dga; shing rgan po gshin nu la ...	dga' ba bzhi
དགའ་བ་ཟ་བ	to take joy in	dga' ba za ba
དགའ་བ་བཟང་པོ	good pleasure	dga' ba bzang po
དགའ་བ་འོད་ཕྲོ	1) Atisha's residence at nye thang near Lhasa; 2) emanating joyful light	dga' ba 'od phro
དགའ་བ་འོད་འཕྲོ	atisha's residence at nye thang near lhasa	dga' ba 'od 'phro
དགའ་བ་ཡང་དག	pure state of gladness; one of the {byang chub yan lag bdun} the seven causes of enlightenment; pure state of gladness, one of the {byang chub yan lag bdun} the seven causes of enlightenment	dga' ba yang dag
ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the seven causes of enlightenment] dga' ba yang dag byang chub kyi yan lag limb of enlightened joy dga' ba yang dag byang chub kyi yan lag limb of enlightened joy [one of the {byang chub kyi yan la...	yan lag bdun
དགའ་བ་ཡང་དག་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག	the perfect bodhi factor of joy	dga' ba yang dag byang chub yan lag
དགའ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	to ponder gladly, rejoice in	dga' ba yid la byed pa
དགའ་བ་ཡིན་པ	be pleased	dga' ba yin pa
དགའ་བ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	fully ripened happiness	dga' ba yongs su smin pa
དགའ་བ་ལ	how joyful it would be	dga' ba la
དགའ་བ་ལུང	Gawalung in Powo (spo bo) 466	dga' ba lung
དགའ་བ་སེར་མོ་ཕ་ཝང་མགོ	vajra, yellow, with the head of a pig	dga' ba ser mo pha wang mgo
དགའ་བ་གསུམ་པ	[the 11'nth or 26'th day of the month]	dga' ba gsum pa
དགའ་བའི་གྲགས་པ	brahmana who requested kshemendra to write poems	dga' ba'i grags pa
དགའ་བའི་གྲོགས	beloved friends	dga' ba'i grogs
དགའ་བའི་རྒྱན	ornament of joy [snyan ngag gi khyad 'phags kyi nyams ldan sgo nas yid 'ong gi dga' ba skyed par ston pa'i rgyan zhig]	dga' ba'i rgyan
དགའ་བའི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	the two ornaments of joy [dga' ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses rnam grangs gnyis ni, dngos thob kyi dga' ba dang, gzugs brnyan gyi dga' ba'o]	dga' ba'i rgyan gnyis
དགའ་བའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of happiness	dga' ba'i rgyu
དགའ་བའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	cheers, acclamations	dga' ba'i sgra dbyangs
དགའ་བའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས་སྒྲོག	cheer, acclaim, hail	dga' ba'i sgra dbyangs sgrog
དགའ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	object or matter of rejoicing	dga' ba'i dngos po
དགའ་བའི་མཆོག	supreme happiness	dga' ba'i mchog
དགའ་བའི་ཏོག	essence of joy	dga' ba'i tog
དགའ་བའི་སྡེ	Priyasena	dga' ba'i sde
དགའ་བའི་དཔལ་ཅན	one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas} the buddhas of the ten directions	dga' ba'i dpal can
དགའ་བའི་བུ་ག	female organ	dga' ba'i bu ga
དགའ་བའི་དབང་པོ	lord of joy	dga' ba'i dbang po
དགའ་བའི་འབད་དབྱངས	cheers, acclamations	dga' ba'i 'bad dbyangs
དགའ་བའི་མིག	eyes brimming with joy; x {dga' dang ldan pa'i mig gis blta} look with your eyes brimming with joy	dga' ba'i mig
དགའ་བའི་རྩེད་མོ་དང་བཅས་འགྲོ་བ	delighted in attending frivolous gatherings of all kinds	dga' ba'i rtsed mo dang bcas 'gro ba
དགའ་བའི་རྩེད་མོ་བྱེད་པ	engage in mirthful sports	dga' ba'i rtsed mo byed pa
དགའ་བའི་ཚལ	1) pleasure-grove, pleasant grove, park happy garden, royal gardens, celestial gardens [if a city is seen it is on the pleasant northern side, ponds and trees etc delightful grove in which divine y...	dga' ba'i tshal
དགའ་བའི་འཛུམ་གྱིས་བསུས་པ	smiled joyfully and welcomed him	dga' ba'i 'dzum gyis bsus pa
དགའ་བའི་བཞིན	joyful and peaceful face	dga' ba'i bzhin
དགའ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of joy	dga' ba'i ye shes
དགའ་བའི་རབ	thams cad dga' ba'i rab tu	dga' ba'i rab
དགའ་བའི་རོ	sexual enjoyment	dga' ba'i ro
དགའ་བའི་ཤིང	cadamba tree	dga' ba'i shing
དགའ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	dga' ba'i shing rta
དགའ་བའི་བཤིན	a place = yul ljongs, the orient, the east	dga' ba'i bshin
དགའ་བའི་བཤེས་ཉེན	Nandamitra	dga' ba'i bshes nyen
དགའ་བའི་ས་གཞི	ground of joy, woman	dga' ba'i sa gzhi
དགའ་བའི་ས་གཤི	the ground of joy, the female genitals	dga' ba'i sa gshi
དགའ་བའི་སླད	for the sake of pleasure	dga' ba'i slad
དགའ་བའི་བསམ་པ	joyful thought	dga' ba'i bsam pa
དགའ་བར	at pleasure	dga' bar
དགའ་བར་གྱུར	{khong dga' bar gyur kyang} even though he would be happy to do so	dga' bar gyur
དགའ་བར་བལྟ་བ	look at fondly	dga' bar blta ba
དགའ་བར་བྱེད	friend, sweetheart, husband	dga' bar byed
དགའ་བར་བྱེད་པ	take pleasure in	dga' bar byed pa
དགའ་བར་སྨོན་པ	wish for something joyful	dga' bar smon pa
དགའ་བར་ཚིམ་པར་བྱེད	to satisfy	dga' bar tshim par byed
དགའ་བར་འཛིན་པ	to regard as pleasant	dga' bar 'dzin pa
དགའ་བར་རོལ	to enjoy pleasure	dga' bar rol
དགའ་བས་འགྲོ	proceeding with pleasure	dga' bas 'gro
དགའ་བས་རྒྱུ	raven	dga' bas rgyu
དགའ་བས་བརྒྱན་པའི་ཚལ	gem of happiness park	dga' bas brgyan pa'i tshal
དགའ་བས་བཅིངས	love-bound, bond of love	dga' bas bcings
དགའ་བོ	Nanda; Nanda, important monk follower of the Buddha	dga' bo
དགའ་བོ་ཉེས་བོ	intimate	dga' bo nyes bo
དགའ་བོ་ཉེས་བོ་བྱེད་པ	be friendly	dga' bo nyes bo byed pa
དགའ་བྱེད	Nandika, important monk follower of the Buddha	dga' byed
དགའ་བྱེད་དགྲ་སྟ་ཅན	Rama w a battle axe. 3rd incarnation of Vishnu	dga' byed dgra sta can
དགའ་བྱེད་དགྲ་བོ	king of the rakshasas	dga' byed dgra bo
དགའ་བྱེད་སྙན་པ	personal name	dga' byed snyan pa
དགའ་བྱེད་མ	damsel of mara	dga' byed ma
དགའ་བྱེད་ཞེས་པ	Priyamakara	dga' byed zhes pa
དགའ་བྱེད་ཤིང	yaksha demon, tree called spyi zhur shing	dga' byed shing
དགའ་བྲལ	transcendent joy; absence of delight	dga' bral
དགའ་བྲལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom free from joy, wisdom of the absence of delight [in the heart center]	dga' bral ye shes
དགའ་བྲོད	joy, delight	dga' brod
དགའ་བྲོད་ཀྱི་བདུད	the demon of cheerfulness	dga' brod kyi bdud
དགའ་བྲོད་བདུད	demon of pleasure or enjoyment	dga' brod bdud
དགའ་དབྱངས	melody of delight	dga' dbyangs
དགའ་དབྱེ་འཛུམ་འབྲལ	phan tshun dga' bzhin du dbye, 'dzum bzhin du 'bral ba, sngar spun zla khyim tshang bgo ba'i skabs la bshad pa zhig	dga' dbye 'dzum 'bral
དགའ་འབོད	cheers, acclamations	dga' 'bod
དགའ་འབོད་བྱེད	cheer, acclaim	dga' 'bod byed
དགའ་འབྱམས	full of joy, a number	dga' 'byams
དགའ་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་འདུ	social meeting/ gathering	dga' 'brel tshogs 'du
དགའ་སྦུབས	Tibetan rtse drung tshos winter kyi mdzad sgor hat 467	dga' sbubs
དགའ་མ	the beautiful, name of rati, wife of cupid	dga' ma
དགའ་མའི་བདག	husband of dga' ma	dga' ma'i bdag
དགའ་མའི་བདག་པོ	Kamadeva	dga' ma'i bdag po
དགའ་མི་དགའ	pleasure and displeasure	dga' mi dga'
དགའ་མིན་ཞེ་བཞག	mi dga' ba sems la bzung nas 'khon 'dzin dam po byed pa	dga' min zhe bzhag
དགའ་མོ	a lot, much	dga' mo
དགའ་མོ་འདུག	are happy, joyful	dga' mo 'dug
དགའ་མོ་ཡོང་ཙམ	tolerably fit, just fit	dga' mo yong tsam
དགའ་མོས	liking, delight	dga' mos
དགའ་མོས་བྱེད	like	dga' mos byed
དགའ་སྨོན	congratulations	dga' smon
དགའ་སྨོན་ཞུ	congratulate	dga' smon zhu
དགའ་བཙེ	affection	dga' btse
དགའ་རྩེད	romance	dga' rtsed
དགའ་བརྩེ	affection	dga' brtse
དགའ་ཚང	good, fine, handsome, pretty	dga' tshang
དགའ་ཚད	sufficiently pleased	dga' tshad
དགའ་ཚད་པ	be sufficiently pleased	dga' tshad pa
དགའ་ཚལ	pleasant grove, happy garden, pleasure grove, paradise	dga' tshal
དགའ་ཚེས	the joyful day [of the month]	dga' tshes
དགའ་ཚོར	happy, merry, cheerful, joyful, happy	dga' tshor
དགའ་ཚོར་ཆེན་པོ་བྱུང	felt extremely happy	dga' tshor chen po byung
དགའ་ཚོར་བྱེད	be/ feel joyful/ happy/ glad	dga' tshor byed
དགའ་འཚོར	gusto	dga' 'tshor
དགའ་མཛའ	partner, spouse	dga' mdza'
དགའ་འཛུམ	[happy] smile, grin	dga' 'dzum
དགའ་འཛུམ་བྱེད	smile, grin	dga' 'dzum byed
དགའ་འཛོམས	dga' po'i ngang nas 'dzoms pa	dga' 'dzoms
དགའ་ཞིང་གུས་པ	loving [-ed] and respectful [-ed]	dga' zhing gus pa
དགའ་ཞིང་གུས་པའི་སྐབས་དེར	as they were rejoicing	dga' zhing gus pa'i skabs der
དགའ་ཞིང་སྤྲོ་བ	pleased	dga' zhing spro ba
དགའ་ཞིང་འཛུམ་པ་དང་བཅས	smiled in delight	dga' zhing 'dzum pa dang bcas
དགའ་ཞེན	love [& loyalty]	dga' zhen
དགའ་ཞེན་སྤྱི་འཁུར	loved and respected/ revered	dga' zhen spyi 'khur
དགའ་ཞེན་བྱེད	love	dga' zhen byed
དགའ་བཞི	four degrees of joy	dga' bzhi
དགའ་བཞི་འགྲོས་ཐིམ	progression and dissolution of the four joys	dga' bzhi 'gros thim
དགའ་བཞི་པ	possessed of 4 joys (chos, nor, mi, sa)	dga' bzhi pa
དགའ་བཞི་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ལྷ་ཁང	temple in Lhasa, when it was 1st bzhengs, gods nagas, humans, and yakshas rejoiced]	dga' bzhi 'phrul gyi lha khang
དགའ་བཞིན	joyfully	dga' bzhin
དགའ་བཞིན་སྤྲོ་བཞིན	with joy; x {chos 'di'i ched du dka' tshegs tsha grang ci byung yang bzod par bya dgos snyam du dga' bzhin spro bzhin du nyan dgos pa yin} it is imperative to listen with joy, vowing to bear heat, ...	dga' bzhin spro bzhin
དགའ་བཞིའི་འགྲོས་ཐིམ་བཞི	the fourfold progression and dissolution of the four joys	dga' bzhi'i 'gros thim bzhi
དགའ་བཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the four joys	dga' bzhi'i ye shes
དགའ་འུར	sounds of joy/celebration	dga' 'ur
དགའ་ཡ་ལེ	glowed with bliss	dga' ya le
དགའ་ཡལ་ཡལ	joy and happiness	dga' yal yal
དགའ་ཡས	boundless joy or pleasure	dga' yas
དགའ་ཡི་སྐྱེ་བར	born or grown out of joy or enjoyment	dga' yi skye bar
དགའ་རབ	1) only/ very good; 2) many; 3) Garab dorje; 4) supreme joy	dga' rab
དགའ་རབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Garab Dorje, Skt. Surativajra, Prahevajra, Pramoda Vajra). The incarnation of Semlhag Chen, a god who earlier had been empowered by the buddhas. Immaculately conceived, his mother was a nun, the da...	dga' rab rdo rje
དགའ་རབ་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of gzhan 'phrul dbang byed, Garab wangchuck, the love god Kama	dga' rab dbang phyug
དགའ་རིངས	hog (long in copulation), dog	dga' rings
དགའ་རིས	dejected	dga' ris
དགའ་རོགས	1) close friend; 2) lover; 3) spouse	dga' rogs
དགའ་རོགས་སྒྲིག་པ	be in love	dga' rogs sgrig pa
དགའ་རོགས་སྦྲིག་པ	be in love	dga' rogs sbrig pa
དགའ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	join in bliss	dga' la sbyor ba
དགའ་ཤོས	favorite	dga' shos
དགའ་བཤེས	friends	dga' bshes
དགའ་སེམས	joy [ful mind], joy enthusiasm, happiness	dga' sems
དགའ་སེམས་འཁོལ	be happy/ joyful/ enthusiastic	dga' sems 'khol
དགའ་སོ་ཆེན་པོ	the most tremendous delight and joy	dga' so chen po
དགའ་སྲིད	desiring joy	dga' srid
དགའ་བསུ	ovation, welcome, welcoming	dga' bsu
དགའ་བསུ་བྱེད	welcome, greet, receive [h]	dga' bsu byed
དགའ་བསུ་ཞུ	to welcome, to greet, to receive. (h)	dga' bsu zhu
དགའ་བསུ་ཞུ་གི་ཡིན	welcome	dga' bsu zhu gi yin
དགའ་བསུ་ཞུ་བ	to welcome	dga' bsu zhu ba
དགའ་བསུའི་སྐད་ཅོར	cheer	dga' bsu'i skad cor
དགའ་ལྷང་ལྷང	high spirits, enjoyment, pleasure, elated	dga' lhang lhang
དགའ་ལྷང་ལྷང་བྱེད	be in high spirits/ elated, enjoy	dga' lhang lhang byed
དགའ་ཨོས	dearly loved/ respected	dga' os
དགའ་ཨོས་པ	dearly loved/ respected dga'i dang bde ba yang dag par myong ba - experience true joy and bliss	dga' os pa
དགའི་ལྡན	1) joyful; 2) Tushita Heaven; 3) Ganden Monastery	dga'i ldan
ཏུ་སྟོན་པ	the teacher of all/displayer of all born in Tushita and so forth	tu ston pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་ངེས་པར་སྟོན་པ	the emanation abiding in Tushita and so forth, the true teacher/displaying the truth	sprul pa nges par ston pa
དགའི་བ	joy, delight	dga'i ba
དགའི་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	produce joy, be glad	dga'i ba bskyed pa
དགའི་བ་དང་བདེ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	produce joy and bliss, be joyful and blissful	dga'i ba dang bde ba bskyed pa
དགའི་བའི་གར་སྟབས་བསྒྱུར་བ	dance in their contentment	dga'i ba'i gar stabs bsgyur ba
དགའི་བྱེད་པ	joyful actions, produce joy, be glad	dga'i byed pa
དགའི་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	perceive joy	dga'i yid la byed pa
དགའོ	endearment interjection	dga'o
དགར	a place, a district in Tibet, at pleasure, abbr. for dga' bar	dgar
དགར་རྒྱ་ཅོ་ཅེ	store up	dgar rgya co ce
དགར་དོན་དུ	in a special sense, in particular	dgar don du
དགར་སྡུད	Separate and include. [term of grammar; group of non-case particles {nas/ las/}]	dgar sdud
དགར་བ	(tha dad pa bkar ba, dgar ba, khor,; 1) put aside, separate isolate, confine, fold up; 2) Sbra, cloth tent etc ka ra or dbyug pas yar 'gyogs pa,...Dgar bya'i gur gsar,...Ras gur bkar,.. separate	dgar ba
དགར་བའི་སྒྲ	{rnam dbye lnga pa}'i bye brag cig ste, rigs dang bya ba yon tan rnams kyi khyad par gyis tshogs kyi nang nas 'byin pa lta bur dgar ba la nas sgra dang, dgar gzhi gcig gam, gnyis sam, mang po'i nan...	dgar ba'i sgra
དགར་བའི་དོན་དུ	in special sense, in particular	dgar ba'i don du
དགར་དབང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	the lord of dancers Chokyi wangchuck	dgar dbang chos kyi dbang phyug
དགརད	[arch] {dgar!} separate!	dgard
དགལ	fut. of {'khol} and {'gel}; f. of {'khol} and {'gel}	dgal
དགལ་བ	boil, tame, make a servant [f 'gel ba, {'khol} load, put on, levy	dgal ba
དགས	crack, split, cut into halves or pieces [f {'gas}	dgas
དགས་པ	crack, split, cut into halves or pieces tha dad par [f {'gas}	dgas pa
དགི	(not in DAS)	dgi
དགི་བསྙན་བྱི་སྡོམ་པ	Upadesha/ genyen vows	dgi bsnyan byi sdom pa
དགི་འདུན	sangha	dgi 'dun
དགི་སློབ་མ	ordination for females between gelongma and getsulma	dgi slob ma
དགུ	1) nine. 2) many, all, everything. {zab dgu} a variety of profound; everything; much	dgu
དགུ་ཁྲི	litter, bier 90,000	dgu khri
དགུ་ཁྲི་ཉིས་སྟོང	92,000	dgu khri nyis stong
དགུ་གླིང་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 continents inhabited by living beings	dgu gling bcu gnyis
དགུ་རྒྱུད	nine secret caves	dgu rgyud
དགུ་བརྒྱ	900	dgu brgya
དགུ་བརྒྱ་དང་བརྒྱད	cu gya bdun 987	dgu brgya dang brgyad
དགུ་ཅོག	all everyone/ thing	dgu cog
དགུ་བཅུ	90	dgu bcu
དགུ་བཅུ་གོ་དགུ	99	dgu bcu go dgu
དགུ་བཅུ་འགྲོ	ma rtsa 'bru khal 9 la 1 yr song mtshams ma skyed bsdoms nas 'bru khal 10 paid back way of grain lending	dgu bcu 'gro
དགུ་ཆུ	dgu chu river [in mtso sngon zhing chen mgo log, rma chen rdzong]	dgu chu
དགུ་འཇལ	9-fold repayment for stolen property of ordinary people	dgu 'jal
དགུ་གཏོར	29th day of the 12th month torma throwing puja done before Tibetan new year (losar	dgu gtor
དགུ་སྟེ	[arch] lhag ste	dgu ste
དགུ་སྟོང	9,000	dgu stong
དགུ་ཐུག	on the 29th day 12th month evening skol rgyu'i end of the year auspicious thug pa 469	dgu thug
དགུ་ཐུབ	hero [who can defeat nine men at once]	dgu thub
དགུ་ཐོག	9 story house	dgu thog
དགུ་མཐའི་རེའུ་མིག	multiplication table [to 9]	dgu mtha'i re'u mig
དགུ་འདྲེན	dgun nyi ldog pa'i rjes su nyin dgu dgur brtsis nas grang ngad che ba'i dus tshid 'dren pa'i srol,...Dgu dang po 'dren pa,...Dgu gnyis pa 'dren pa	dgu 'dren
དགུ་སྡེབས	meditation involving breath regulation	dgu sdebs
དགུ་ནིང	three years ago	dgu ning
དགུ་པ	the ninth	dgu pa
དགུ་པའི་གླ་ཐོབ	former Tibetan govt. gi 'dod dpal las khungs nas yearly in the 9th month bzo pa rnams la rgyag pa'i gla phogs	dgu pa'i gla thob
དགུ་པའི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	former Tibetan govt. gi 'dod dpal las khungs nas yearly in the 9th month bzo pa rnams la rgyag pa'i gla phogs	dgu pa'i phogs thob
དགུ་པར	ninthly	dgu par
དགུ་པོ	9th	dgu po
དགུ་པོ་རྒྱུད་མང	Shurpa vina. A kind of vina	dgu po rgyud mang
དགུ་ཕྲུགས	1) ninefold. 2) manifold	dgu phrugs
དགུ་ཕྲུགས་སུ	(in) all manner of	dgu phrugs su
དགུ་བ	bend, make crooked, act of bending, stooping, bowing, inflection, bent	dgu ba
དགུ་བྱེད	doing everything	dgu byed
དགུ་འབུམ	9 hundred thousand	dgu 'bum
དགུ་འབུམ་ལྔ་ཁྲི	950,000	dgu 'bum lnga khri
དགུ་རྩེག་མ	a yellow flower	dgu rtseg ma
དགུ་རྩེགས	a yellow flower	dgu rtsegs
དགུ་ཚིག	tsheg khyim dgu yod pa'i tshig rkang	dgu tshig
དགུ་ཚིགས	the galaxy, the milky way	dgu tshigs
དགུ་ཚིགས་སྐྱ་མོ	the milky way/ galaxy	dgu tshigs skya mo
དགུ་ཚིགས་ལོག	bad sign	dgu tshigs log
དགུ་ཚེགས་སྐྱ་མོ	milky way constellation	dgu tshegs skya mo
དགུ་མཚན	prize	dgu mtshan
དགུ་རྫས	in the 29th day 12th month evening skol ba'i thug pa'i rgyu cha sna 'dzoms	dgu rdzas
དགུ་གཞུང	a place in Tibet	dgu gzhung
དགུ་གཞུར	rde'u dkar nag dgu re dgu re bzhag nas brtse rgyu zhig	dgu gzhur
དགུ་ཟི་གླང་པོ	sna, an enchanted sword, an early king of Tibet	dgu zi glang po
དགུ་ཟླ	astrological sgyur thabs instruction	dgu zla
དགུ་ཡོངས	all	dgu yongs
དགུ་རོང	Gurong dgu rong sprul sku sna tshogs rang grol 19th cent. - Gurong Tulku Natsok Rangdröl	dgu rong
དགུ་གསུམ་གྱི་སློབ་ཚོགས	September three society	dgu gsum gyi slob tshogs
དགུག	[f {'gugs} will summon, call, send for, invoke [wind horse], interest, attract, turn on, bend, force	dgug
དགུག་བསྟིམ་གསད་གསུམ	summoning the enemy's bla, uniting it with his effigy called ling ga, and killing him	dgug bstim gsad gsum
དགུག་པ	SA 'gug pa	dgug pa
དགུག་བྱང	shing byang for summoning dons, demons etc, urgent call	dgug byang
དགུག་གཞུག	draw in and make enter [jnanasattvas dissolving into samayasattva ye shes pa/dam tshig pa]	dgug gzhug
དགུག་གཞུག་བཅིང་མཉེས	draw in, make enter, bind, please	dgug gzhug bcing mnyes
དགུག་ཤུགས	urgent call	dgug shugs
དགུང	1) middle; 2) space, sky; 3) time, year age [h]; 4) last watch of the night; 5) noon, mid-day, mid night; 6) heaven	dgung
དགུང་ཀེག	lo'i bar chad [h]	dgung keg
དགུང་དཀྱིལ	middle of space/ the sky	dgung dkyil
དགུང་སྐེག	obstacle year [for a person every 12]	dgung skeg
དགུང་ཁ་ལ	{dgun kha la} pass [in NW ru thog rdzong]	dgung kha la
དགུང་ཁག	division of time	dgung khag
དགུང་མཁའ	midnight sky	dgung mkha'
དགུང་གྲངས	winters [h] [a man of 80 winters]	dgung grangs
དགུང་སྔོན	[the blue) sky	dgung sngon
དགུང་སྔོན་མཐོང	clear blue depths (of the sky)	dgung sngon mthong
དགུང་སྔོན་པོ	the azure sky	dgung sngon po
དགུང་སྔོན་དབྱིངས	the blue sky	dgung sngon dbyings
དགུང་ཆར	rain	dgung char
དགུང་ཇ	lunch	dgung ja
དགུང་ཉི་ལྡོག	winter solstice	dgung nyi ldog
དགུང་མཉམ	of the same age (h)	dgung mnyam
དགུང་སྙིང	year, year of one's life	dgung snying
དགུང་ཐིག	meridian line	dgung thig
དགུང་ཐིག་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	meridian circle	dgung thig gi dkyil 'khor
དགུང་ཐུན	midnight session	dgung thun
དགུང་མཐོངས	sky	dgung mthongs
དགུང་དུ	gone to heave, dead	dgung du
དགུང་དུ་བསྒྲེང	raise, lift [to the sky]	dgung du bsgreng
དགུང་དུ་འཕྱུར	rise [high], be on the upsurge	dgung du 'phyur
དགུང་དུ་གཤེགས	dead/ gone to heaven	dgung du gshegs
དགུང་དོ་ནུབ	tonight, this evening	dgung do nub
དགུང་དྲོ	afternoon, p.m.	dgung dro
དགུང་གདུགས	heat of noon	dgung gdugs
དགུང་བདུན	7 nights, week	dgung bdun
དགུང་འདེགས	lifting, raising, elevating	dgung 'degs
དགུང་འདེགས་བྱེད	lift, raise, elevate 470	dgung 'degs byed
དགུང་པས་མཐོ	higher than the heavens	dgung pas mtho
དགུང་དབྱིངས	the expanse of sky, heavens	dgung dbyings
དགུང་མོ	early night, evening, 4-7 PM	dgung mo
དགུང་མོར	in the evening	dgung mor
དགུང་སྨན་མཆེད་བདུན	Seven celestial sisters	dgung sman mched bdun
དགུང་ཚིགས	noon, lunch, eating only before noon	dgung tshigs
དགུང་ཞག	day's halt, halt	dgung zhag
དགུང་ཞག་ཞེ་དགུ	after a person dies 49th day	dgung zhag zhe dgu
དགུང་ཞག་ཞེ་དགུ་པ	after a person dies 49th day	dgung zhag zhe dgu pa
དགུང་ཟླ	1) moon; 2) of = age [h]	dgung zla
དགུང་རུམ་ཡེ་ཤེས	1 of drang srong bdun	dgung rum ye shes
དགུང་ལ་སྙེགས	rising in the sky	dgung la snyegs
དགུང་ལ་བསྙེགས་པ	rising aloft	dgung la bsnyegs pa
དགུང་ལ་རེག་པ	touching, sky, meridian	dgung la reg pa
དགུང་ལ་གཤེགས	go to the sky, die	dgung la gshegs
དགུང་ལ་གཤེགས་པ	died	dgung la gshegs pa
དགུང་ལོ	age of a respectable personage, age	dgung lo
དགུང་ལོ་འགྲེས་པ	has grown old, advanced in age	dgung lo 'gres pa
དགུང་ལོ་བཅུ་གསུམ་ལོན་པའི་ཚེ	when he was thirteen years old	dgung lo bcu gsum lon pa'i tshe
དགུང་ལོ་མཐོན་པ	elderly person 61-72 years old	dgung lo mthon pa
དགུང་ལོ་གཞོན	young	dgung lo gzhon
དགུང་སེང་བ	snyan sgron nam snyan gsang zhu ba,...Rim pa gong mar dgung seng ba ma gtogs thag gcod mi thub	dgung seng ba
དགུང་གསར	new year	dgung gsar
དགུང་གསེབ	middle of the sky	dgung gseb
དགུན	winter; winter	dgun
དགུན་ཀ	winter[time]	dgun ka
དགུན་ཀའི་གུང་གསེང	winter vacation	dgun ka'i gung gseng
དགུན་ཀའི་སྨྱུག་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	picture of flowers of the four seasons	dgun ka'i smyug ma'i me tog
དགུན་སྐྱིད	sngar rtse students in the 1st month winter spro skyid gtong ba la zer	dgun skyid
དགུན་སྐྱེལ་ལོ་ཏོག	crops planted in winter	dgun skyel lo tog
དགུན་སྐྱེས	winter grown	dgun skyes
དགུན་ཁ	winter, winter	dgun kha
དགུན་ཁ་ལ	{dgun kha la} pass	dgun kha la
དགུན་ཁའི་གུང་གསེང	winter vacation	dgun kha'i gung gseng
དགུན་ཁའི་སྨྱུག་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	picture of flowers of the four seasons	dgun kha'i smyug ma'i me tog
དགུན་ག	winter	dgun ga
དགུན་གོས	winter clothing	dgun gos
དགུན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་མོ	Hemantadevi (goddess of winter)	dgun gyi rgyal mo
དགུན་གྱི་དུས་སུ	in winter	dgun gyi dus su
དགུན་གྲོ	winter wheat	dgun gro
དགུན་སྒང	dgun shin tu grang ba'i	dgun sgang
སྒང་ལ	in the dead of winter	sgang la
དགུན་ཆས	winter clothing	dgun chas
དགུན་ཆུ	winter irrigation	dgun chu
དགུན་ཆུ་བྱེད	do winter irrigation	dgun chu byed
དགུན་ཆུང་མེ་ཏོག	winter flower growing on riverbanks	dgun chung me tog
དགུན་ཆོས	winter session (of teachings	dgun chos
དགུན་མཆོད	winter puja/offering	dgun mchod
དགུན་ཉལ	hibernators [bears, snakes etc.]	dgun nyal
དགུན་ཉི་ལྡོག	winter solstice	dgun nyi ldog
དགུན་ཉི་ལྡོག་གི	tropic of capricorn	dgun nyi ldog gi
དགུན་ཉི་ལྡོག་གི་ཐིག	the line of the winter solstice	dgun nyi ldog gi thig
དགུན་གཉིས	2 winter months	dgun gnyis
དགུན་སྟོང	early winter	dgun stong
དགུན་སྟོད	first part of winter, anterior winter	dgun stod
དགུན་སྟོད་ཁ་དུས	hemanta, time of snow in the beginning winter	dgun stod kha dus
དགུན་ཐ་མ	last part of winter, third winter month	dgun tha ma
དགུན་ཐའི་སྒང་ཚད	11th month sgang sleb pa, fully reaching the end of winter	dgun tha'i sgang tshad
དགུན་ཐའི་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the 11th month	dgun tha'i dbugs thob
དགུན་ཐོག	throughout the whole winter	dgun thog
དགུན་དལ	in winter so nam pa leisure w no work	dgun dal
དགུན་དུང	tshad gdung chu med pa'i grog po dang sa phyogs	dgun dung
དགུན་དུས	winter, wintertime	dgun dus
དགུན་དྲོ་བའི་གོས	warm winter clothing	dgun dro ba'i gos
དགུན་གདུང	dgun dung	dgun gdung
དགུན་འདེབས་ལོ་ཏོག	crops planted in winter	dgun 'debs lo tog
དགུན་བྱུང	winter	dgun byung
དགུན་བྲེལ	having much work in the winter	dgun brel
དགུན་འབྲིང	middle winter month	dgun 'bring
དགུན་འབྲུམ	winter grapes	dgun 'brum
དགུན་རྨོ	winter plowing	dgun rmo
དགུན་རྨོ་བྱེད	winter plowing	dgun rmo byed
དགུན་སྨད	end of winter	dgun smad
དགུན་སྨད་གྲང་དུས	time of cold, about the end of the winter	dgun smad grang dus
དགུན་སྨད་གཉིས	2 deep winter months	dgun smad gnyis
དགུན་ཚིགས	winter time	dgun tshigs
དགུན་ཚུགས	beginning of the 10th month and the three months of winter	dgun tshugs
དགུན་མཚེར	[nomads'] winter residence	dgun mtsher
དགུན་ཞྭ	winter hat	dgun zhwa
དགུན་ཟུག	beginning of the 10th month and the three months of winter	dgun zug
དགུན་ཟླ	the three months of winter, 10th-12th	dgun zla
དགུན་ཟླ་ཐ་ཆུང	month of jan-feb	dgun zla tha chung
དགུན་ཟླ་འབྲིང་པོ	month of dec-jan	dgun zla 'bring po
དགུན་ཟླ་ར་བ	the 1st month of winter, 10th 471	dgun zla ra ba
དགུན་ཟླ་གསུམ	the three months of winter [dgun zla ra ba, 'bring, tha chung; 10th 12th, or some say 8th-10th	dgun zla gsum
དགུན་རྭ་བ	the 1st month of winter	dgun rwa ba
དགུན་ལམ	road passable in winter	dgun lam
དགུན་ལོ་གསར་ཙག་ཆེ	the dead of winter	dgun lo gsar tsag che
དགུན་ས	winter residence	dgun sa
དགུན་སློབ	winter school	dgun slob
དགུན་ལྷམ	winter boots	dgun lham
དགུམ	fut. of {'gums}; f. of {'gums}	dgum
དགུམ་པ	[f 'gums pa, {'gum pa} die, kill	dgum pa
དགུམས	p. {bkums} to kill	dgums
དགུམས་པ	p. {bkums} to kill	dgums pa
དགུར	crooked, bent, many, all	dgur
དགུར་དགུར	bent over; {stod mgur ba}	dgur dgur
དགུར་དགུར་གྱི་ཕྱག་འཚལ	salutation by bending the head low	dgur dgur gyi phyag 'tshal
དགུར་དགུར་བྱེད་པ	to bend down	dgur dgur byed pa
དགུར་འགྲོ	snake, one of stooping gait	dgur 'gro
དགུར་སྟེང	Upper Gurong	dgur steng
དགུར་པོ	bent, stooped twisted, something crooked	dgur po
དགུར་བ	bent, stooped twisted	dgur ba
དགུར་མོ	bent, stooped twisted	dgur mo
དགུར་སྨད	Lower Gurong	dgur smad
དགུས	this day five days, by 9/ all	dgus
དགུས་ནིང	three years ago	dgus ning
དགེ	1) virtuous, good, excellent, pure, what is good about something; 2) comp {dge ba	dge
དགེ་སྐོས	discipline monk	dge skos
དགེ་སྐྱེས	produced from virtue	dge skyes
དགེ་སྐྱོན	slightly defective, little fault, slight defects in honored persons	dge skyon
དགེ་སྐྱོས	supervisor or director of monks in a monastery, sort of provostsergeant	dge skyos
དགེ་བསྐུལ་བཏང་བ	exhorted them to practice	dge bskul btang ba
དགེ་བསྐོས	{rgyur gyi dge bskos} of the tantric college. disciplinarian, monitor, mentor	dge bskos
དགེ་བསྐོས་བྱ	to obtain a mentor	dge bskos bya
དགེ་བསྐྱོས	supervisor or director of monks in a monastery	dge bskyos
དགེ་གོམས	'one who is used to dharma, virtue.' practitioner	dge goms
དགེ་གོམས་བྱེད་པ	to practice what is wholesome	dge goms byed pa
དགེ་གྱོག	1) discipline monks assistant; 2) young monastic attendant, who, on passing examination, becomes a dge gzhon	dge gyog
དགེ་གླིང	musical instrument like a hautboy	dge gling
དགེ་དགེ	dkrog dkrog [stir up???]: Rang gis mi shes par gzhan la dge dge ma byed	dge dge
དགེ་དགྱེས	rejoice in virtue	dge dgyes
དགེ་འགུན	sangha	dge 'gun
དགེ་རྒན	master, worker, teacher, coach, sir, tutor, surety, moral bail, monk answerable for conduct of another under his care, old man of the religious order, school master, tutor, teacher	dge rgan
དགེ་རྒན་ཆེ་མོ་བ	head master, professor	dge rgan che mo ba
དགེ་རྒན་དམིགས་སྒོ	'byung 'gyur dge rgan gsar bsko'i 'os babs yod pa'i mi person who sees if a new teacher is suitable ?	dge rgan dmigs sgo
དགེ་རྒན་སློབ་གྲྭ	teacher school/ college	dge rgan slob grwa
དགེ་རྒྱན	teacher, master [worker]	dge rgyan
དགེ་རྒྱས	subhakrtsna god, celestial region, one of gzugs khams, flourishing virtue heaven, 1 of gzugs khams gnas rigs bcu bdun	dge rgyas
ཧེཨབེ༹ན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐིརད་དྷྱན	bhumi, & its gods. Virtue Extensive, one of the 28 classes of gods in the {gzugs kyi khams} form realm on the {bsam gtan gsum pa'i} third absorption	heaven of third dhyana
ཨོཕ༹་ཐིརད་དྷྱན	bhumi, and its gods virtue extensive, 1 of the 28 classes of gods in the {gzugs kyi khams} = form realm on the {bsam gtan gsum pa'i} = third absorption) where gods have perfected all the bde ba of ...	of third dhyana
དགེ་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the realm of full virtue/ extensive beauty	dge rgyas kyi lha
དགེ་རྒྱས་པ	extend virtue	dge rgyas pa
དགེ་རྒྱས་བྱེ་མ	monastery near samye	dge rgyas bye ma
དགེ་རྒྱས་བྱེ་མ་གླིང	Gegye Jema Temple. A temple at Samye built by Lady Jangchub Men of Tro, a queen of king Trisong Deutsen	dge rgyas bye ma gling
དགེ་རྒྱུན་བཙུགས་པ	initiated the stream of virtue	dge rgyun btsugs pa
དགེ་སྒྲུབ	sdig spong dge sgrub - give up negative actions and practice wholesome deeds	dge sgrub
དགེ་སྒྲུབ་སྡིག་སྤོང	doing good, avoiding evil	dge sgrub sdig spong
དགེ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	1) [try to] perform good/ virtuous acts; 2) practice dharma, adopt/ cultivate virtue, create merit	dge sgrub byed
དགེ་ངལ	buddhist monk	dge ngal
དགེ་ངལ་བ	novice monk	dge ngal ba
དགེ་བསྔོ	dedicate the merit	dge bsngo
དགེ་བཅུ	10 virtues (srog mi gcod pa, ma byin par mi yin pa, tshangs par spyod pa, bden par smra ba, tshig 'jam por smra ba, ngag mi 'chal ba, phra ma mi byed pa, gzhan gyi nor la ham pa mi byed pa, gzhan l...	dge bcu
དགེ་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven virtues	dge bcu gcig
དགེ་བཅུ་སྤྱོད་པ	practice virtue virtuous conduct	dge bcu spyod pa
དགེ་བཅུའི་ལས་ཀྱི་ལམ	the path of the 10 virtuous actions	dge bcu'i las kyi lam
དགེ་ཆས	requisites of virtue [dead person la dmigs pa'i virtuous roots yi chas]	dge chas
དགེ་ཆུ	sacred water	dge chu
དགེ་ཆུང	1) Limited Beauty, Limited Virtue [first abode in {bsam gtan gsum pa}. 2) one of the 28 classes of gods of the {gzugs kyi khams} Form Realms	dge chung
དགེ་ཆུབ	parittasubha god	dge chub
དགེ་ཆེ	head master, professor	dge che
དགེ་ཆེ་མེད་པ	without some important object or business	dge che med pa
དགེ་ཆེན	great virtue	dge chen
དགེ་ཆོས	positive qualities	dge chos
དགེ་ཆོས་སྡུད་པ	to gather virtue	dge chos sdud pa
དགེ་ཆོས་སྡུས	gather positive actions, apply the virtuous Dharma	dge chos sdus
དགེ་ཆོས་ལ་མི་འབུངས	those who do not apply themselves to gathering positive actions	dge chos la mi 'bungs
དགེ་མཆོག	supreme/ excellent virtue	dge mchog
དགེ་སྙེན	genyens	dge snyen
དགེ་སྙེན་དྲུག	the six genyens	dge snyen drug
དགེ་བསྙན་བྱི་སྡོམ་པ	lay vows	dge bsnyan byi sdom pa
དགེ་བསྙེན	Upasaka. Fem. Upasika. A Buddhist layman, bound by the five vows to avoid killing, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, and intoxicating liquor. The Tibetan equivalent, genyen, means 'pursuer of vir...	dge bsnyen
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཀྱི་གཏན་ཁྲིམས་ལྔ	the five ongoing disciplines of a genynen CHN	dge bsnyen kyi gtan khrims lnga
དགེ་བསྙེན་གི་བསླབ་པ	dge bsnyen gyi vow	dge bsnyen gi bslab pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	vows of a lay devotee. 1) {srog gcod pa song ba} do not kill. 2) {ma byin par len spong ba} do not steal. 3) {'dod pas log par g.yem pa spong ba} do not be sexually impure. 4) {brdzun du smra ba sp...	dge bsnyen gyi sdom pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ་བརྒྱད་པ	the 8 1-day vows of a genyen	dge bsnyen gyi sdom pa brgyad pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་གྱི་བསླབ་པ	genyen discipline/ precepts	dge bsnyen gyi bslab pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་དངོས་གནས་པ་གསུམ	the three main kinds of genyen	dge bsnyen dngos gnas pa gsum
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཆོས་འཕེལ	original name of 'brom ston rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas	dge bsnyen chos 'phel
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	Twenty-one Genyen. A group of powerful spirits indigenous to Tibet. They were converted by Padmasambhava are commanded to serve Buddhism. Today, they are still called upon along with Nyenchen Tangl...	dge bsnyen nyi shu rtsa gcig
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཉེར་གཅིག	21 genyen	dge bsnyen nyer gcig
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཉེར་གཉིས	Twenty-two Genyen	dge bsnyen nyer gnyis
དགེ་བསྙེན་བཏགས་པ་བ་བཞི	four types of provisional upasaka	dge bsnyen btags pa ba bzhi
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཐེག་པ	Way of the Virtuous Lay Practitioners, way of the virtuous ones, 1 of 'bras bu'i bon	dge bsnyen theg pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་དྲུག	six types of layperson / upasaka	dge bsnyen drug
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཕ་མ་གཉིས	male or female layperson; among the {so thar rigs brgyad}	dge bsnyen pha ma gnyis
དགེ་བསྙེན་མ	female lay practitioner	dge bsnyen ma
དགེ་བསྙེན་ཞིག	one lay man	dge bsnyen zhig
དགེ་བསྙེན་རིགས་བདུན	the 7 kinds of genyen	dge bsnyen rigs bdun
དགེ་བསྙེན་ལི་ཙ་བི་དྲི་མེད་གྲགས་པ	the Licchavi Upasaka Vimalakirti	dge bsnyen li tsa bi dri med grags pa
དགེ་བསྙེན་གསུམ	three kinds of genyen [those who take 1 vow not to kill, those who take several vows not to kill, steal or commit falsehood and those taking full vows not to kill, steal, lie, commit sexual miscond...	dge bsnyen gsum
དགེ་བསྙེན་དྷ་རྨ་ཏ་ལ	{dge bsnyen dha rma ta la} [one of the {'phags pa'i	dge bsnyen dha rma ta la
གནས་བརྟན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 (sthaviras)/ (arhats]	gnas brtan bcu drug
དགེ་བསྙེན་དྷར་མ	SA chos skyob	dge bsnyen dhar ma
དགེ་བསྙེན་དྷར་མ་ཏ་ལ	one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [sthaviras] / [arhats]	dge bsnyen dhar ma ta la
དགེ་ལྟས	sign/reason of virtue	dge ltas
དགེ་སྟིག	virtue and vice, good and evil	dge stig
དགེ་སྟོང	good deeds are emptiness	dge stong
དགེ་སྟོང་སྡིག་སྟོང	[nihilistic view that] both good and evil are empty	dge stong sdig stong
དགེ་ཐོན་སློབ་གྲྭ	teacher college	dge thon slob grwa
དགེ་འཐུད	uninterrupted payment of endowments to religious offices or institutions, connected series of pious actions, performance of religious observances	dge 'thud
དགེ་དང་མི་དགེ	virtue and nonvirtue	dge dang mi dge
དགེ་དང་མི་དགེ་བསྐྱེད	produce virtue and non virtue	dge dang mi dge bskyed
དགེ་དང་མི་དགེའི་བྱེ་བྲག	the different	dge dang mi dge'i bye brag
བི༹རྟུཨོཨུས་ཨོར་ནོན	virtuous (attitudes	virtuous or non
དགེ་དྲུང་ལྷ་ཁང	monastery in tsang	dge drung lha khang
དགེ་བདུན་གྱི་སྡེ	divisions of the sangha	dge bdun gyi sde
དགེ་བདུན་གྱི་སྡེ་གཉིས	two congregations of the Sangha	dge bdun gyi sde gnyis
དགེ་བདེ	good use, usefulness	dge bde
དགེ་བདེ་སྤྲོད	make good use of, utilize, be able to use	dge bde sprod
དགེ་འདུན	sangha, community, Spiritual Community, one who is devout or earnest in religion, priesthood, assemblage, church, clergy, 1 of gnas pa dgu, spiritual community, monk	dge 'dun
དགེ་འདུན་ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ	retreat huts for monks are called the pleasure grove of the sangha	dge 'dun kun dga' ra ba
དགེ་འདུན་ཀུན་རྔ	monastic garden/ debating ground/ bookshelves/ assembly place	dge 'dun kun rnga
དགེ་འདུན་དཀོན་མཆོག	Precious Sangha. Noble and accomplished practitioners endowed with the virtues of knowledge and liberation	dge 'dun dkon mchog
དགེ་འདུན་སྐྱེས	medicinal plant, mystic, a lama	dge 'dun skyes
དགེ་འདུན་འཁོར་ལོའི་དབྱེན	division in the sangha cause schism in the sa gha, dividing the monastic community [dge 'dun mutually dividing mtsams med kyi ngo bor gyur pa'i dispute and quarrel producing, dus ni ston pa zhal bz...	dge 'dun 'khor lo'i dbyen
དགེ་འདུན་གུན་རྭ	monastic garden/ debating ground/ bookshelves	dge 'dun gun rwa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དཀོར	property of a monastic congregation 474	dge 'dun gyi dkor
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དུས	belonging to the months following autumn when lamas perform meditation	dge 'dun gyi dus
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་འདུ་པའི་སྒོ་འཕྲོག་པ	taking away the Sangha's place of assembly [one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye	dge 'dun gyi 'du pa'i sgo 'phrog pa
བ་ལྔ	five nearly boundless offenses]	ba lnga
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་འདུ་བའི་སྒོ་ཕྲོགས་པ	taking away the Sangha's place of assembly, one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye ba lnga} five nearly boundless offenses. taking away the Sangha's place of assembly	dge 'dun gyi 'du ba'i sgo phrogs pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་འདུ་བའི་སྒོ་འཕྲག་པ	taking away the sangha's place of assembly [one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye	dge 'dun gyi 'du ba'i sgo 'phrag pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་སྡེ	bzhi sde yan chad khrims ldan btsun pa'i tshogs pa,... order or class of the sangha	dge 'dun gyi sde
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་སྡེ་གཉིས	two congregations of the Sangha: 'dul ba'i sde - Vinaya followers, sngags kyi sde - Mantra followers; 2 types	dge 'dun gyi sde gnyis
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་སྡེ་བཙུགས་པ	to establish a sangha	dge 'dun gyi sde btsugs pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	priestly vow	dge 'dun gyi sdom pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་ནང་ཁྲིམས	inner discipline of the sangha [agreed by them]	dge 'dun gyi nang khrims
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་ནོར་ལ་སྤྱད་པ	to use the possessions of the sangha	dge 'dun gyi nor la spyad pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་གནས	the abode/ domain of the sangha	dge 'dun gyi gnas
བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	bcu gsum
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབེན	producing discord	dge 'dun gyi dben
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབེན་བྱེད་པ	one who produces differences or disunion among the clergy	dge 'dun gyi dben byed pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན	schism in the sangha	dge 'dun gyi dbyen
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན་པ་བྱེད་པ	create discord	dge 'dun gyi dbyen pa byed pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན་བྱས་བ	creating schism in the community, causing dissension in the sangha [one of the {mtshams med pa lnga - five boundless offenses (sa gha-bhedah]	dge 'dun gyi dbyen byas ba
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན་བྱེད་པ	creating schism in the sangha	dge 'dun gyi dbyen byed pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན་འབྱེད་པ	to create schism in the sangha	dge 'dun gyi dbyen 'byed pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་དབྱེན་གསུམ	the three kinds of schism in the sangha	dge 'dun gyi dbyen gsum
དགེ་འདུན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལ་བཅུ་བདུན	CHN	dge 'dun gyi yon tan la bcu bdun
དགེ་འདུན་གྲངས་ཚང	whole monastic community	dge 'dun grangs tshang
དགེ་འདུན་གྲུབ	{dge 'dun grub pa dpal bzang po	dge 'dun grub
དགེ་འདུན་གྲུབ་པ	founder of the hierarchy of the dalai lama	dge 'dun grub pa
དགེ་འདུན་གྲུབ་པ་དཔལ་བཟང་པོ	{dge 'dun grub pa dpal bzang po [1st Dalai lama]	dge 'dun grub pa dpal bzang po
དགེ་འདུན་རྒན་པ	old monk [who took vows a long time ago]	dge 'dun rgan pa
དགེ་འདུན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{dge 'dun rgya mtsho	dge 'dun rgya mtsho
དགེ་འདུན་མངོན་གྱུར	1 of the bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i mngon gyur bcu, tshogs su langs pa ste mkhan po ma gtogs pa'i bzhi tshang ba, kha skong gi chos bcu gsum tshang ba, mi mthun pa gnyis dang bral ba ste, mtshan nyid g...	dge 'dun mngon gyur
དགེ་འདུན་ཆེན་པོ་པ	Great community school, mahasangika	dge 'dun chen po pa
དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་ཕེལ	Gendun Chophel [translator]	dge 'dun chos phel
དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ	Gendün Chöpel, 1905-1951; {a mdo} translator	dge 'dun chos 'phel
དགེ་འདུན་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	(sa gh nusm iti mindfulness of the sangha,one of the {rjes su dran pa drug - (sa hanusm ayah the six recollections, six of the {rjes su	dge 'dun rjes su dran pa
དྲན་པ་བཅུ	10 mindfulnesses recollection of the sangha. be mindful of the sangha jewel's rig pa and grol ba'i yon tan rnams]	dran pa bcu
དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་ཤུ	twenty kinds of saints; the twenty kinds of practitioners, saints	dge 'dun nyi shu
དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་ཤུའི་སྤངས་རྟོགས	the abandonment and realization of the 20 types of practitioner	dge 'dun nyi shu'i spangs rtogs
དགེ་འདུན་རྟག་ཏུ་ཐེག	always supports the clergy	dge 'dun rtag tu theg
དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	alias {a mdo zhva dmar} (1852-1910); author 475 of {byang chub bde lam gyi khrid dmigs skyong tshul shin tu gsal bar bkod pa dge legs 'od snang 'gyed pa'i nyin byed}	dge 'dun bstan 'dzin rgya mtsho
དགེ་འདུན་ཐ་དད་པ	different sanghas [view, practice, accoutrements etc]	dge 'dun tha dad pa
དགེ་འདུན་མཐུན་པ	harmonious sangha community	dge 'dun mthun pa
དགེ་འདུན་དང་བཅས	together w the sangha	dge 'dun dang bcas
དགེ་འདུན་སྡེ	the entire monastic community; ex {dga' ldan dge 'dun sde} the entire monastic community of Ganden	dge 'dun sde
དགེ་འདུན་སྡེ་རྒྱས	developing the sangha	dge 'dun sde rgyas
དགེ་འདུན་སྡེ་གཉིས	2-fold division of the religious community/sangha, monastic and mantrin	dge 'dun sde gnyis
དགེ་འདུན་བསྡུ་བའི་ཕྱིར	for the purpose of assembling the clergy	dge 'dun bsdu ba'i phyir
དགེ་འདུན་གནས་བརྟན	senior member of the holy order	dge 'dun gnas brtan
དགེ་འདུན་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	Four Orders. Monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. See also the entry under four assemblies	dge 'dun rnam pa bzhi
དགེ་འདུན་རྣམས	the members of the Sangha	dge 'dun rnams
དགེ་འདུན་པ	monk, members of the sangha; monk, (h) for {grva pa} pl. monastic congregations, members of the sangha, [bhikshu]	dge 'dun pa
དགེ་འདུན་པ་ལ་ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱེད་པ	serving the sangha	dge 'dun pa la zhabs tog byed pa
དགེ་འདུན་པལ་ཆེན་པ	mah samghika 1 of four main schools of vinaya in India	dge 'dun pal chen pa
དགེ་འདུན་སྤྱན་དྲང་བ	invite the sangha	dge 'dun spyan drang ba
དགེ་འདུན་ཕ་ལ་ཆེན་པ	[Mahasamghika] one of the four main schools of Vinaya in India	dge 'dun pha la chen pa
དགེ་འདུན་ཕལ་ཆེན་པ	clergy of the mahasanghika school	dge 'dun phal chen pa
དགེ་འདུན་ཕལ་ཆེན་པ་ལྔ	the five schools of mahasamgika CHN	dge 'dun phal chen pa lnga
དགེ་འདུན་ཕལ་ཆེན་པའི་སྡེ	mahasamgika school	dge 'dun phal chen pa'i sde
དགེ་འདུན་ཕལ་བོ་ཆེའི་སྡེ་པ་བཞི	the four schools of mahasamgika	dge 'dun phal bo che'i sde pa bzhi
དགེ་འདུན་འཕེལ	a buddhist saint	dge 'dun 'phel
དགེ་འདུན་དབུ་སྡེ་གཉིས	by king khri ral dbu skra tshan pa gnyis su byas pa'i sne la dar yug btags par 1 the sangha or renunciates and two the white clothed lcang lo can gyi dge 'dun bzhugs su bcug nas gtsug tu 'khur ba]	dge 'dun dbu sde gnyis
དགེ་འདུན་དབྱེན	division in the sangha, cause schism in the sa gha, divide the monastic community	dge 'dun dbyen
དགེ་འདུན་འབངས	ordinary sangha	dge 'dun 'bangs
དགེ་འདུན་སྦྱན་དྲང་བ	invite the sangha	dge 'dun sbyan drang ba
དགེ་འདུན་བཙུན་པ	a virtuous monk	dge 'dun btsun pa
དགེ་འདུན་འཚོ	Sangharaksita	dge 'dun 'tsho
དགེ་འདུན་ཞལ་གྲངས	(h) for {grva tshang}	dge 'dun zhal grangs
དགེ་འདུན་བཞི་སྡེ	lam du zhugs pa'am, gsol bzhis bsnyen rdzogs kyi so skye'i dge slong bzhi yod pa'i tshogs pa'o	dge 'dun bzhi sde
དགེ་འདུན་ལ་སྤྲོ་བྱས་པ	to slander members of the sangha and they are expelled	dge 'dun la spro byas pa
དགེ་འདུན་ལ་དབང་ཚུལ་གསུམ	the three empowerments of the sangha [getsul, genyen, gelong]	dge 'dun la dbang tshul gsum
དགེ་འདུན་ལ་སྦྱིན་ཁྲུས་བྱས་པ	offered food and accommodations for the sangha	dge 'dun la sbyin khrus byas pa
དགེ་འདུན་སྲུང	n. of early Hinayana teacher	dge 'dun srung
དགེ་འདུན་གསུམ	the three kinds of sangha [gsol bzhis bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i so skye'i gang zag bzhi yan chad la so skye'i dge 'dun dang, between stream enterers and arhats: slob pa'i dge 'dun; arhats : mi slob pa...	dge 'dun gsum
དགེ་འདུན་བསྲུང་བ	a buddhist sage	dge 'dun bsrung ba
དགེ་འདུན་བསྲོ་ཁང	quarters for the sangha, accommodations	dge 'dun bsro khang
དགེ་འདུན་ལྷག་མ	offense entailing as "residue"; an initial and subsequent meeting of the sangha	dge 'dun lhag ma
དགེ་འདུན་ལྷག་མ་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 residue offenses	dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum
དགེ་འདུན་ལྷག་མའི་ཆོས	the dharma of residue offenses	dge 'dun lhag ma'i chos
དགེ་ལྡན	Gelug [thd]	dge ldan
དགེ་ལྡན་བཀའ་རྒྱུད	sect of bka' brgyud	dge ldan bka' rgyud
དགེ་ལྡན་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	1) the virtuous kagyu; 2) ri bo dge lugs pa'i grub mtha' gelukpa doctrine [R]	dge ldan bka' brgyud
ཆེན་རྩ་བ་རྒྱལ་བའི་གཞུང་ལམ	by Lobsang Chökyi Gyaltsen 476 dge ldan bka' brgyud rin po che'i phyag chen rtsa ba rgyal ba'i gzhung lam Mahamudra Teachings of the Gedenpas, by Lobsang Chökyi Gyaltsen	chen rtsa ba rgyal ba'i gzhung lam
དགེ་ལྡན་པ	monk at Ganden	dge ldan pa
དགེ་ལྡན་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ་ལྔ	CHN	dge ldan pa'i smon lam lnga
དགེ་ལྡན་རྩིས་གསར་མ་བུ	{dge ldan rtsis gsar ma bu} astr. text by sum pa ye shes dpal 'byor in the 13th fire rabbit yr.1747]	dge ldan rtsis gsar ma bu
དགེ་ལྡན་རིང་ལུགས	the ancient Gelukpa tradition of	dge ldan ring lugs
དགེ་སྡིག	positive and negative; virtue and harm; virtuous and harmful actions	dge sdig
དགེ་སྡིག་གི་སྟངས་གཅོད་པ	cut through the viewpoint of judging virtue and evil	dge sdig gi stangs gcod pa
དགེ་སྡིག་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	[with affirmative sense] causes and effects, whether positive or negative/ virtuous or harmful [with negative sense] causes or effects, whether positive or negative/ virtuous or harmful	dge sdig rgyu 'bras
དགེ་སྡིག་ངོ་མི་ཤེས་པ	cannot distinguish good from bad	dge sdig ngo mi shes pa
དགེ་སྡིག་ངོ་ཤེས་བཞིན	able to differentiate virtue and nonvirtue	dge sdig ngo shes bzhin
དགེ་སྡིག་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་མདོ	The Sutra Discriminating between the Path of Virtue and the Path of Vice (Skt. Subhasubha Karmavipaka Nirdesa Sutra, Tib. dge ba dang mi dge ba'i lam gyi rnam par smin pa bstan pa'i mdo, T 355)	dge sdig rnam par 'byed pa'i mdo
དགེ་སྡིག་བླང་དོར	adopting virtue and abandoning evil deeds	dge sdig blang dor
དགེ་སྡིག་མེད	no virtue and no vice	dge sdig med
དགེ་སྡིག་གཟུགས་བརྙན	virtuous or nonvirtuous appearance	dge sdig gzugs brnyan
དགེ་སྡིག་གཟུགས་བརྙན་ཆེ་ཆུང	the size of the appearance of the virtue or the nonvirtue	dge sdig gzugs brnyan che chung
དགེ་སྡིག་ཤེས་པ	ability to recognize right and wrong	dge sdig shes pa
དགེ་ནས	in former law if 1 killed someone the killer had to give surviving relatives dge do grain]	dge nas
དགེ་གནས་གསུམ	Three Abodes of Goodness	dge gnas gsum
དགེ་པའི་ནོར	the wealth of virtue	dge pa'i nor
དགེ་སྤོང་ཆེན་པོ	a severe / grave sin	dge spong chen po
དགེ་སྤོང་སླར་བཅོས་པ	redemption	dge spong slar bcos pa
དགེ་སྤྱོང་གི་དངོས་པོ	the things of a monastic practitioner	dge spyong gi dngos po
དགེ་སྤྱོད	virtuous/religious acts/ practices	dge spyod
དགེ་ཕྱོགས	the side of virtue	dge phyogs
དགེ་ཕྲུག	disciple, student, pupil, apprentice	dge phrug
དགེ་འཕེལ	promoting what is virtuous	dge 'phel
དགེ་བ	good & wholesome, merit, virtue, healthy, positive, virtuous, 1 of 27 coincidences in astrology, SA sbyor ba nyer bdun, 1 of 11 astrological diagrams, SA byed pa bcu gcig, happiness, welfare, happy...	dge ba
དགེ་བ་ཀླད་ཀྱི་དོན	propitious beginning	dge ba klad kyi don
དགེ་བ་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་མི་བཤིག་པ	merit cannot be destroyed by circumstances	dge ba rkyen gyis mi bshig pa
དགེ་བ་སྐྱེས་པ་སྤེལ་བ	increase the birth of virtue	dge ba skyes pa spel ba
དགེ་བ་ཁོ་ན	piety alone	dge ba kho na
དགེ་བ་གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་བ	virtue increasing more and more	dge ba gong nas gong du 'phel ba
དགེ་བ་གོམས་པ	practice virtue	dge ba goms pa
དགེ་བ་བགྱིས་པ	perform virtuous deeds	dge ba bgyis pa
དགེ་བ་སྒོམ་པ	to practice virtue	dge ba sgom pa
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབ	practice virtue	dge ba sgrub
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice virtue	dge ba sgrub pa
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པ་རྣམ་པ	the aspect of practicing virtue dge ba sgrub pa'i rkyen byas pa'i phan	dge ba sgrub pa rnam pa
བཏགས་པ	to help by working with circumstances to enable us to achieve virtue	btags pa
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ	how to practice what is virtuous	dge ba sgrub tshul
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབས	do what is wholesome!	dge ba sgrubs
དགེ་བ་སྒྲུབས་ཤིག	practice virtue!	dge ba sgrubs shig
དགེ་བ་བསྒྲུབ་དགོས	you should perform positive acts	dge ba bsgrub dgos
དགེ་བ་བསྔོ	dedicate the merit	dge ba bsngo
དགེ་བ་བསྔོ་བ	to dedicate the goodness	dge ba bsngo ba
དགེ་བ་ཅན	kosala	dge ba can
དགེ་བ་ཅི་བསགས	all merit you accumulate	dge ba ci bsags
དགེ་བ་བཅུ	Ten Virtues. renunciation of	dge ba bcu
ཐེ་ཏེན་ནོན	virtues. 1-3) {lus kyi legs par spyod pa gsum} three good actions of body. 1) {srog gcod pa spong pa} not destroying life. 2) {ma byin par len pa spong ba} not taking what has not been given. 3) {'...	the ten non
པར་སྤྱོད་པ་གསུམ	three good actions of body ; 1) {srog gcod pa spong	par spyod pa gsum
ལེན་པ་སྤོང་བ	not taking what has not been given 3) {'dod pas log par g.yem pa spong pa - refraining from improper sexual practices 4-7) {dga gi	len pa spong ba
ལེགས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་བཞི	four good actions of speech 4) {brdzun du smra ba	legs par spyod pa bzhi
སྤོང་བ	not telling falsehood 5) {tshig rtsub po smra ba spong ba - not using abusive language 6) {phra mar	spong ba
སྨྲ་བ་སྤང་བ	not slandering others 7) {tshig bkyal ba smra ba spong ba - not indulging in irrelevant talk 8-10) {yid kyi legs par sbyong pa gsum - three good actions of mind 8) {brnab sems spong ba} = not being...	smra ba spang ba
དགེ་བ་བཅུ་སྒྲུབ	to practice the ten virtues	dge ba bcu sgrub
དགེ་བ་བཅུ་གཅིག	{dge ba'i sems byung bcu gcig} eleven virtuous states of mind/ mental events	dge ba bcu gcig
དུ་སྦྱངས་པ	flexibility 9) {bag yod	du sbyangs pa
དགེ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 virtues	dge ba bcu gnyis
དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལམ	one of the {'jig rten legs par byed pa'i chos} the dharmas which makes the world excellent	dge ba bcu'i lam
པའི་ཆོས	the dharmas which makes the world excellent]	pa'i chos
དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས	the ten virtuous actions	dge ba bcu'i las
དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས་ཀྱི་ལམ་བསྟན་པ	teach the path of the action of the 10 virtues	dge ba bcu'i las kyi lam bstan pa
དགེ་བ་ཆོས་སྡུད	creating virtuous qualities, gathering the virtuous doctrine, collecting positive actions	dge ba chos sdud
དགེ་བ་ཆོས་སྡུད་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of gathering virtue/ practicing virtuous qualities [one of {tshul khrims gsum}. dwell is discipline, listening to dharma and sems pa nas	dge ba chos sdud kyi tshul khrims
དགེ་བ་ཆོས་སྡུད་པ	gather virtuous dharmas, collect virtuous actions	dge ba chos sdud pa
དགེ་བ་འཇུག་འདོད	the wish / will to embrace what is wholesome	dge ba 'jug 'dod
དགེ་བ་གཉིས	essential healthiness	dge ba gnyis
དགེ་བ་ཐབས་ཀིས་ཟིན	skillful means will permeate your position actions	dge ba thabs kis zin
དགེ་བ་དག་ནི་སྒོམ་པ	customarily act virtuously	dge ba dag ni sgom pa
དགེ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	virtuous, good, wholesome	dge ba dang ldan pa
སྨིན་པ་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	Skt. Subhasubha Karmavipaka Nirdesa Sutra, T 355 dge ba dang mi dge ba'i lam gyi rnam par	smin pa bstan pa'i mdo
སྨིན་པ	the ripening of virtuous and	smin pa
དགེ་བ་འདོད་པར་བྱེད	wishes for prosperity	dge ba 'dod par byed
དགེ་བ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པའི་གནས	source of boundless goodness	dge ba dpag tu med pa'i gnas
དགེ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པར་སྤྱད	Practice virtue perfectly	dge ba phun sum tshogs par spyad
དགེ་བ་འཕེལ་བ	to promote goodness	dge ba 'phel ba
དགེ་བ་འཕེལ་བའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	a world in which goodness is promoted	dge ba 'phel ba'i 'jig rten
དགེ་བ་བྱ་བ་ལ་སྣོད་ཉིད	vessel of virtuous actions	dge ba bya ba la snod nyid
དགེ་བ་བྱས་པ	virtue committed	dge ba byas pa
དགེ་བ་བྱེད་པ	practice virtue	dge ba byed pa
དགེ་བ་འབའ་ཞིག	virtue alone	dge ba 'ba' zhig
དགེ་བ་སྦྱོང	Syn {dge sbyong}	dge ba sbyong
དགེ་བ་སྦྱོམ་པ	advertise one's acts of charity	dge ba sbyom pa
དགེ་བ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to produce the goodness which has not been produced	dge ba ma skyes pa bskyed pa
དགེ་བ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ་མི	someone in whom no virtue has formed	dge ba ma skyes pa mi
དགེ་བ་མ་བསགས་པ	not accumulate virtue	dge ba ma bsags pa
དགེ་བ་མི་བྱོམས་པ	do virtue secretly without advertising	dge ba mi byoms pa
དགེ་བ་གཞན་གྱིས་སྤྱད་པ	good actions done by others	dge ba gzhan gyis spyad pa
དགེ་བ་བཞི	four virtuous	dge ba bzhi
དགེ་བ་ཟག་བཅས	conditioned virtue	dge ba zag bcas
དགེ་བ་ཡང་དག་ལེན་དུ་འཇུག	to inspire /incite others to embrace true goodness	dge ba yang dag len du 'jug
དགེ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད	to bring forth a virtuous frame of mind 478	dge ba yid la byed
དགེ་བ་ཡོང	to get, obtain merit	dge ba yong
དགེ་བ་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ	practice supreme virtue	dge ba rab tu sbyor ba
དགེ་བ་རབ་གསལ	{bla chen dge ba rab gsal}	dge ba rab gsal
དགེ་བ་ལ་བསྐུལ་བ	{chos dang dge ba la bskul ba} exhorted them all to act virtuously and to follow the Dharma	dge ba la bskul ba
དགེ་བ་ལ་འགོད་པ	establish virtue	dge ba la 'god pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ	rejoice in virtue	dge ba la mngon par dga' ba
དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	betake to pious works	dge ba la 'jug pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline engaging in virtue	dge ba la 'jug pa'i tshul khrims
དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་འདོད་པ	desire to engage in virtue	dge ba la 'jug par 'dod pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་བྱེད་པ	to embrace what is good	dge ba la 'jug par byed pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of engaging in virtue	dge ba la 'jug par byed pa'i phyir
དགེ་བ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་བ	rejoiced in the virtue	dge ba la rjes su yi rang ba
དགེ་བ་ལ་འདུན་པ	to strive towards the virtuous	dge ba la 'dun pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་གནས་པ	persevere in the good	dge ba la gnas pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	to apply oneself to virtue	dge ba la sbyor ba
དགེ་བ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	the diligence of applying oneself to goodness	dge ba la sbyor ba'i brtson 'grus
དགེ་བ་ལ་མ་ཤུགས་པ	not engage in virtue	dge ba la ma shugs pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་མོས་པ	have the wish to do positive actions	dge ba la mos pa
དགེ་བ་ལ་གཤོལ་བ	gzhol be absorbed in...?	dge ba la gshol ba
དགེ་བ་ཤ་སྟག	virtue alone	dge ba sha stag
དགེ་བ་ཤན་པ	differentiate virtue	dge ba shan pa
དགེ་བ་སྲུང་བ	fast, abstain from food	dge ba srung ba
དགེ་བ་གསུམ	the three virtues	dge ba gsum
དགེ་བ་བསགས	accumulate virtue	dge ba bsags
དགེ་བ་བསགས་པ	creating virtue, accumulating good karma	dge ba bsags pa
དགེ་བའི	meritorious, virtuous	dge ba'i
དགེ་བའི་ཁ་སྐོང	fulfil perfectly the laws of virtue	dge ba'i kha skong
དགེ་བའི་གྲོགས	virtuous friends	dge ba'i grogs
དགེ་བའི་གྲོགས་བགྱིད་པ	make a spiritual friend	dge ba'i grogs bgyid pa
དགེ་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	virtuous companion, friend	dge ba'i grogs po
དགེ་བའི་འགལ་ཟླ	the opposite of virtue/ happiness	dge ba'i 'gal zla
དགེ་བའི་རྒྱུ	the seed of virtue	dge ba'i rgyu
དགེ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	virtuous rites	dge ba'i cho ga
དགེ་བའི་ཆོ་ག་ལྔ	the five virtuous rites CHN	dge ba'i cho ga lnga
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས	virtuous dharmas	dge ba'i chos
པར་བརྩོན་པ	make an effort w/o obstacles in habitually practicing virtue	par brtson pa
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་ཐོབ	obtain virtuous dharmas	dge ba'i chos thob
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་ཐོབ་པ	attain good qualities	dge ba'i chos thob pa
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་འཐོབ་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	{dge ba'i chos sdud pa'i tshul khrims}	dge ba'i chos 'thob pa'i tshul khrims
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་སྡུད	gather virtuous dharmas	dge ba'i chos sdud
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་སྡུད་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of creating virtuous qualities	dge ba'i chos sdud pa'i tshul khrims
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་སྤེལ་བ	to promote good qualities	dge ba'i chos spel ba
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་འཕེལ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	the increase of virtuous dharmas	dge ba'i chos 'phel bar 'gyur ba
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to further virtuous qualities	dge ba'i chos 'phel bar byed pa
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	virtuous dharmas according w enlightenment dge ba'i chos ma skyes pa rnams bskyed	dge ba'i chos byang chub kyi phyogs
པའི་ཕྱིར་འདུན་པ་བསྐྱེད	create the aspiration that those who have not given birth to virtue may produce it	pa'i phyir 'dun pa bskyed
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་ལ་སྦོར་བ	practice virtuous dharmas	dge ba'i chos la sbor ba
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་སུ་སྣང་བ	seen as a virtuous quality	dge ba'i chos su snang ba
དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་གསུངས་ཏེ	taught the Dharma of virtue	dge ba'i chos gsungs te
དགེ་བའི་གཏམ	moral maxims, religious discourse	dge ba'i gtam
དགེ་བའི་མཐུས	by the merit of ..	dge ba'i mthus
དགེ་བའི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the suchness of virtue/ the virtuous	dge ba'i de bzhin nyid
དགེ་བའི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་གཉིས	two types of virtuous suchness	dge ba'i de bzhin nyid gnyis
དགེ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད	fortune, good luck	dge ba'i bdag nyid
དགེ་བའི་གནས	place of piety, pious man	dge ba'i gnas
དགེ་བའི་སྤྱོད	virtuous action	dge ba'i spyod
དགེ་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	virtuous conduct / behavior	dge ba'i spyod pa
དགེ་བའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ	good conduct	dge ba'i spyod lam
དགེ་བའི་ཕུང་པོ	mass of virtue, positive accumulation	dge ba'i phung po
དགེ་བའི་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	practice what is virtuous	dge ba'i phyogs la sbyor ba
དགེ་བའི་འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	make virtue increase	dge ba'i 'phel bar byed pa
དགེ་བའི་བྱ་བ	virtuous acts	dge ba'i bya ba
དགེ་བའི་བློ	virtuous frame of mind / attitude	dge ba'i blo
དགེ་བའི་དབང་པོ	1) white nature; 2) Rtogs brjod dpag bsam 'khri shing rtsom mkhan rgya gar gyi snyan ngag mkhan zhig	dge ba'i dbang po
དགེ་བའི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five virtuous faculties	dge ba'i dbang po lnga
དགེ་བའི་འབྱུང་གནས	buddha, virtuous faculty	dge ba'i 'byung gnas
དགེ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	good result; effect of virtuous deeds	dge ba'i 'bras bu
དགེ་བའི་དམིགས་པ	virtuous objective/ concept, concept of virtue	dge ba'i dmigs pa
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	basis of virtuous qualities; fundamental positive quality	dge ba'i rtsa ba
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཆད་པ	entirely destroy the virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba kun tu chad pa
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་ཆུང	the size of the virtuous root	dge ba'i rtsa ba rgya che chung
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	immense virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba rgya che ba
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ་ཉིད	greatness of virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba rgya che ba nyid
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་གཅོད་པ	cut the roots of virtue	dge ba'i rtsa ba gcod pa
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་ཉམ་ཆུང་བ	weak virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba nyam chung ba
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་རྟོན་པ	reliance on the root of virtue dge ba'i rtsa ba dpag tu med pa'i gnas person of immeasurable virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba rton pa
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle virtuous roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba phra mo
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་དམན་པ	inferior virtuous root	dge ba'i rtsa ba dman pa
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	the Three Roots of Virtue {'dzin chags med pa, sdang ba med pa, rmongs pa med pa} freedom from attachment, hatred, and obscuration	dge ba'i rtsa ba gsum
དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་བསགས་པ	create good roots	dge ba'i rtsa ba bsags pa
དགེ་བའི་ཚོགས	accumulation of virtue	dge ba'i tshogs
དགེ་བའི་མཚན་མ	virtuous marks / attributes	dge ba'i mtshan ma
དགེ་བའི་ཞིང	Pure Realms	dge ba'i zhing
དགེ་བའི་ཡིད	virtuous frame of mind / attitude	dge ba'i yid
དགེ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	good qualities; the virtue of good deeds	dge ba'i yon tan
དགེ་བའི་ལམ	path of virtue dge ba'i lam nas rdzogs par byas te When I have completely accomplished the path of virtue	dge ba'i lam
དགེ་བའི་ལས	good works, deeds, virtuous actions	dge ba'i las
དགེ་བའི་ལས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the effects of good deeds	dge ba'i las kyi 'bras bu
དགེ་བའི་ལས་སྒྲུབ་པ	to create good karma	dge ba'i las sgrub pa
དགེ་བའི་ལས་རྣམས་བྱེད་པ	do good deeds	dge ba'i las rnams byed pa
དགེ་བའི་ལས་འཕྲོ	good karmic connection	dge ba'i las 'phro
དགེ་བའི་ལས་ཞིག་བསྒྲུབ	establish virtuous actions	dge ba'i las zhig bsgrub
དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལམ་རྫོགས་པ	to perfect the path of virtuous actions	dge ba'i las lam rdzogs pa
དགེ་བའི་ལས་གསུམ	1) {sbyin pa las byung pa'i bsod nams bya ba'i dngos po}. 2) {tshul khrims las byung ba'i} 3) {sgom pa las byung pa'i}	dge ba'i las gsum
དགེ་བའི་ལོ་ཏོག	good harvest	dge ba'i lo tog
དགེ་བའི་ལོ་ཏོག་སྐྱེས་པ་འཇོམས་པ	destroy the production of a good harvest	dge ba'i lo tog skyes pa 'joms pa
དགེ་བའི་ལོ་ཏོག་རྒྱུ་མཚན	reason for good harvests	dge ba'i lo tog rgyu mtshan
དགེ་བའི་གཤེས་གཉེན	virtuous companion, spiritual friend kaly namitra	dge ba'i gshes gnyen
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས	spiritual friend	dge ba'i bshes
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གྲོགས་བསྟེན་པ	to follow a spiritual teacher	dge ba'i bshes grogs bsten pa
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	spiritual friend [thd]	dge ba'i bshes gnyen
ཀལྱན	mitra, spiritual guide, guru, spiritual mentor; good friend, virtuous friend, spiritual / religious teacher. abbr. as {dge bshes}; also {bshes gnyen} / {bshes gnyen dam pa} / {bsten bya slob dpon}	kalyana
བརྟེན་པ	to follow a spiritual guide and holy personage dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyi tshul bzung ba took on the form of a spiritual friend	brten pa
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱིས་མ་ཟིན་པ	not under the care of a spiritual teacher	dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyis ma zin pa
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱིས་མ་ཟིར་ན	zer? dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyis yongs su zin pa - under the full care of a spiritual teacher dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyis yongs su zin pa - be completely accepted by the spiritual friend dge ba'i bshes...	dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyis ma zir na
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་ལ་བསྟེན་པ	really on the spiritual friend	dge ba'i bshes gnyen la bsten pa
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་སོ་སོ་སྐྱེ་བོ	the spiritual guide who is an ordinary person; Syn {so skye'i bshes gnyen}	dge ba'i bshes gnyen so so skye bo
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་ལ་ཉེ་བར་བརྟེན	closely rely on the spiritual friend	dge ba'i bshes la nye bar brten
དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་ལ་ཉེ་བར་བརྟེན་པ	to take full support of a spiritual teacher	dge ba'i bshes la nye bar brten pa
དགེ་བའི་ས་པ	basis of virtue 480	dge ba'i sa pa
ཤིང་སྐྱེ	if planting the seeds of virtue, the vine of Dharma will be produced	shing skye
དགེ་བའི་ས་མང	virtuous states	dge ba'i sa mang
དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་བཅུ	Jamgön Kongtrül: {dad dang bag yod shin tu sbyangs/ btang snyoms ngo tsha shes khrel yod/ /chags sdangs med pa'i dge rtsa gnyis/ /mi 'tshe ba dang brtson 'grus so}	dge ba'i sa mang bcu
དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ	major bases of virtue	dge ba'i sa mang chen po
དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་པོ	basis of virtue	dge ba'i sa mang po
དགེ་བའི་སེམས	virtuous mind/thoughts/ wishes	dge ba'i sems
དགེ་བའི་སེམས་བྱུང	Virtuous mental states. Feelings such as devotion, compassion and renunciation	dge ba'i sems byung
དགེ་བའི་སེམས་བྱུང་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven virtuous states of mind/ mental events	dge ba'i sems byung bcu gcig
དགེ་བའི་གསལ་འདེབས	to remind her of virtue	dge ba'i gsal 'debs
དགེ་བའི་བསམ་པ	good thought, virtuous frame of mind / attitude	dge ba'i bsam pa
དགེ་བར	good, virtuous	dge bar
དགེ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག	{rgyal po dge bar gyur cig} Your Majesty! May you have good fortune!	dge bar gyur cig
དགེ་བར་རྩི་བ	see as good; x {srog bcad pa dge bar rtsi ba} whose savage beliefs see taking life as good	dge bar rtsi ba
དགེ་བར་སློང	rishi	dge bar slong
དགེ་བེད	legs pa dang bed spyod	dge bed
དགེ་བྱེད	1) water tiger year, Shubhakrit, 36th year; 2) practice virtue	dge byed
དགེ་བྲལ	devoid of virtue or piety	dge bral
དགེ་འབྲས	merit	dge 'bras
དགེ་འབྲས་རྣམས	the fruits of virtue	dge 'bras rnams
དགེ་སྦྱོང	good results, buddhist ascetic, religious person, mendicant, ascetics, religious ascetic (includes dge tshul and dge slong)	dge sbyong
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་དངོས་པོ	the things/ vows and disciplines of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong gi dngos po
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་ཆོས	the dharma of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong gi chos
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་ཆོས་བཞི	four Dharmas of training in virtue: Not returning anger for anger, insult for insult, slander for slander, blow for blow	dge sbyong gi chos bzhi
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	gelong or getsul's 'phral phugs kyi happiness and benefit	dge sbyong gi 'bras bu
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་འབྲས་བུ་བཞི	four results of spiritual cultivation	dge sbyong gi 'bras bu bzhi
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་ཚུལ	the way of a monastic practitioner [spotless unobstructed path]	dge sbyong gi tshul
དགེ་སྦྱོང་གི་ཚུལ་གྱིས་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of the way of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong gi tshul gyis 'bras bu
དགེ་སྦྱོང་མགོ་རེག	after renunciation shave the head	dge sbyong mgo reg
དགེ་སྦྱོང་ཆེན་པོ	Great Mendicant [thd]	dge sbyong chen po
དགེ་སྦྱོང་ལྟར་བཅོས་པ	dge tshul slong min yang yin pa ltar byas pa	dge sbyong ltar bcos pa
དགེ་སྦྱོང་དུ་ཁས་འཆེ་བ	1) not dge slong or dge tshul ma yin bzhin du monastic practitioner; 2) take the vows of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong du khas 'che ba
དགེ་སྦྱོང་དུ་བྱེད་པའི་ཆོས་བཞི	four doctrines of a spiritual ascetic	dge sbyong du byed pa'i chos bzhi
དགེ་སྦྱོང་དུ་ཤེས་པ	venerate one as a member of the buddhist church	dge sbyong du shes pa
དགེ་སྦྱོང་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	Three Degrees of Ordination. Those of the renunciate {rabs sbyang}, the novitiate {dge tshul} shramanera, and complete monkhood {bsnyen rdzogs} upasampada	dge sbyong rnam pa gsum
དགེ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པ	to practice virtue	dge sbyong byed pa
དགེ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པའི	khros kyang slar ma khro bar bya, mtshang brus kyang slar mi bru bar bya, brdeg kyang slar mi brdeg par bya)	dge sbyong byed pa'i
དགེ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པའི་ཆོས་བཞི	4 duties of dge sbyong (gshe'ang slar mi gshe bar bya	dge sbyong byed pa'i chos bzhi
དགེ་སྦྱོང་མ་ཡིན་པར	not being a dge sbyong	dge sbyong ma yin par
དགེ་སྦྱོང་ཙུལ་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of the way of a monastic practitioner [the path of completely liberating 'the compounded/ conditioned &, 'dus ma byas 'gog bden]	dge sbyong tsul gyi 'bras bu
དགེ་སྦྱོང་ཚུལ	the way of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong tshul
དགེ་སྦྱོང་ཚུལ་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of the way of a monastic practitioner	dge sbyong tshul gyi 'bras bu
དགེ་སྦྱོང་སེ་བོ	hair 1/2 white 1/2 sngo [black] or, sha mdog can gelong or getsul	dge sbyong se bo
དགེ་སྦྱོངས་ལ་སྐྱབས	favor the ascetic life x {dbul po lto gos ma 'byor pa rnams slong bde ba'i phyir dge sbyongs la skyabs par 'os} he will favor the ascetic life, because monks give up their	dge sbyongs la skyabs
དགེ་སྦྱོར	practice, one who has attained to a stage of holiness by religious devotion and works, spiritual practice, virtuous activities, virtuous actions	dge sbyor
དགེ་སྦྱོར་སྐོང	practices belonging to yogatantra	dge sbyor skong
དགེ་སྦྱོར་གང་ནུས་བྱས་པ	practiced as best he could	dge sbyor gang nus byas pa
དགེ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	types of virtuous practices	dge sbyor gyi rnam pa
དགེ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་རྣམས	whatever other meritorious activities you may be doing	dge sbyor gyi rnam pa rnams
དགེ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ་བཞི	four results of spiritual practice	dge sbyor gyi 'bras bu bzhi
དགེ་སྦྱོར་བསྒྲུབ	applying	dge sbyor bsgrub
དགེ་སྦྱོར་ན་འཕར་བ	making headway in spiritual practice	dge sbyor na 'phar ba
དགེ་སྦྱོར་འཕེལ་བ	to further virtuous practice	dge sbyor 'phel ba
དགེ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	to practice	dge sbyor byed pa
དགེ་སྦྱོར་མཛད་པ	perform virtuous practices	dge sbyor mdzad pa
དགེ་སྦྱོར་སད་པ	weakens your practice	dge sbyor sad pa
དགེ་སྦྱོར་སྲང་འཇུག	entering the structure of spiritual practice	dge sbyor srang 'jug
དགེ་མ	female practitioner	dge ma
དགེ་མང	many virtues	dge mang
དགེ་མར	'das po'i dge ba sgrub byed mar, in former law if 1 killed someone the killer had to give the surviving relatives dge dod mar had to give]	dge mar
དགེ་མི་དགེ	virtue and nonvirtue, good and evil, right and wrong	dge mi dge
དགེ་མི་དགེ་བཅུ	the ten virtues and nonvirtues	dge mi dge bcu
དགེ་མི་དགེ་ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན	virtuous,	dge mi dge lung du ma bstan
དགེ་མི་དགེ་ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པ	not determined whether [something] is good or evil	dge mi dge lung du ma bstan pa
དགེ་མི་དགེ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	virtuous, unvirtuous or neutral	dge mi dge lung ma bstan
དགེ་མི་དགེ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གསུམ	virtuous, non-virtuous or neutral	dge mi dge lung ma bstan gsum
དགེ་མི་དགེའི་ཆོས	virtuous and nonvirtuous dharmas	dge mi dge'i chos
དགེ་མི་དགེའི་དོན	the meaning of the virtues and nonvirtues dge mi dge'i las kyi bye brag gi rnam	dge mi dge'i don
དགེ་ཙུལ་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	getsul master [among the slob dpon lnga explained in the vinaya, bsgrub bya la dge tsul gyi sdom pa 'bog par byed pa'i dge slong]	dge tsul gyi slob dpon
དགེ་ཙུལ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	getsul vow ritual [sbyor ba bar ma renunciation establishing liturgy having taken formerly, free from the dngos gzhi 'gal rkyen bzhi, having the mthun rkyen lnga, beginning w refuge in the three je...	dge tsul sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་ཙུལ་མ	getsulma (shramanirik'a)[1 of the so thar ris bdun]	dge tsul ma
དགེ་ཙུལ་མ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	getsulma liturgy [dge bsnyen ma and dge tsul ma liturgy in general like the male ones, yul mkhan mo'i sta gon du gnas pa'i dge slong ma des 1st having been established as dge bsnyen ma and bar ma r...	dge tsul ma sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་རྩ	basis of virtuous qualities; fundamental positive quality	dge rtsa
དགེ་རྩ་སྐྱེད་པ	conceive the idea of a meritorious act	dge rtsa skyed pa
དགེ་རྩ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to create good roots	dge rtsa bskyed pa
དགེ་རྩ་གོང་འཕེལ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	he roots of virtue increasing ever more	dge rtsa gong 'phel du 'gro ba
དགེ་རྩ་བཅོམ་པ	We destroy all our merit	dge rtsa bcom pa
དགེ་རྩ་ཆད་པ	utterly without merits 482	dge rtsa chad pa
རྟེན་མེད་པ	by interrupting the root of virtue since the basis for the wish to keep them no longer exists	rten med pa
དགེ་རྩ་ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བ	not to let a virtuous root go to waste	dge rtsa chud mi za ba
དགེ་རྩ་ཆུད་ཟ་བ	waste the roots of virtue	dge rtsa chud za ba
དགེ་རྩ་ཐོངས	perform virtuous deeds! dge rtsa de thabs kyis zin par byed pa embracing the root of virtue with skillful means	dge rtsa thongs
དགེ་རྩ་འཕེལ	the roots of virtue increase dge rtsa byang chub chen por bsngo ba to dedicate the good roots towards supreme enlightenment	dge rtsa 'phel
དགེ་རྩ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་བསྔོ་བ	dedicate the virtuous roots to enlightenment	dge rtsa byang chub tu bsngo ba
དགེ་རྩ་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྔོ་བ	completely dedicate the virtuous roots	dge rtsa yongs su bsngo ba
དགེ་རྩར	thinking to benefit, for the benefit of	dge rtsar
དགེ་རྩར་གཏོང་བ	dedicate	dge rtsar gtong ba
དགེ་ཚུལ	novice monk	dge tshul
བཅུ	the ten preliminary points for a novice dge tshul gyi skabs su sngon gyi cho ga	bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	getsul ordination ritual	dge tshul gyi sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་ལྟུང་བ	downfall of violating getsul precepts	dge tshul gyi ltung ba
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	getsul vow, novice vow	dge tshul gyi sdom pa
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	the 10 things to be renounced by a getsul	dge tshul gyi spang bya yan lag bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱའི་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	ten things to avoided by a novice	dge tshul gyi spang bya'i yan lag bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་ཕྱིར་བཅོས	Buddhist monastic discipline for the novice	dge tshul gyi phyir bcos
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བ་སླབ་པའི་གནས་བཅུ	the 10 novice precepts	dge tshul gyi ba slab pa'i gnas bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བླང་འདས་སོ་དྲུག	a novice's 36 points of do'es and dont's	dge tshul gyi blang 'das so drug
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བླངས་འདས་སོ་དྲུག	Tibetan formula for monastic ordination as a Buddhist novice (dge tshul)	dge tshul gyi blangs 'das so drug
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་རགས་ལྡོག་བཅུ	CHN	dge tshul gyi rags ldog bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	the instructor of novices	dge tshul gyi slob dpon
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བསླབ་པའི་གནས་བཅུ	the 10 novice/getsul precepts [of monastic ordination, the five precepts + afternoon food, singing, and the wearing of ornaments, =8 + precious gems and high thrones or beds = the 10 to be renounce...	dge tshul gyi bslab pa'i gnas bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བསླབ་པའི་གཞིའི་མདོ	the Fundamental sutra on the getsul precepts [Shiks pada S tra a major vinaya text]	dge tshul gyi bslab pa'i gzhi'i mdo
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	the precepts of [for] novice monks	dge tshul gyi bslab bya
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱི་བསླབ་གཞི	points of novice training	dge tshul gyi bslab gzhi
དགེ་ཚུལ་གྱེ་བསླབ་པའི་གནས་བཅུ	the 10 rules/precepts for the novice/getsul	dge tshul gye bslab pa'i gnas bcu
དགེ་ཚུལ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	getsul vow ritual	dge tshul sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་ཚུལ་བསྙིལ་བ	throw down/ destroy a getsul, waste the state of being a getsul	dge tshul bsnyil ba
དགེ་ཚུལ་ཕ་མ་གཉིས	male or female novice; among the {so thar rigs brgyad}	dge tshul pha ma gnyis
དགེ་ཚུལ་བ	monk w 10 precepts	dge tshul ba
དགེ་ཚུལ་མ	sramanerika, female novice, your or old nun who has not yet taken ordination vows	dge tshul ma
དགེ་ཚུལ་མ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual for ordaining a getsulma	dge tshul ma sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་ཚུལ་བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་མདོ	Shiks pada S tra [major vinaya text]	dge tshul bslab pa'i gzhi mdo
དགེ་ཚེས	virtuous acts	dge tshes
དགེ་ཚོགས	wealth of virtue	dge tshogs
དགེ་ཚོགས་བསྔོ	dedicate the multitude of merit	dge tshogs bsngo
དགེ་ཚོགས་བསྔོ་བ	to dedicate the accumulation of virtue	dge tshogs bsngo ba
དགེ་ཚོགས་ཇི་སྙེད་དེ་ཙམ	as much merit as dge tshogs sangs rgyas 'thob phyir bsngo We dedicate our accumulated merit toward the attainment of Buddhahood	dge tshogs ji snyed de tsam
དགེ་མཚན	1) /good/auspicious sign; 2) good rtags mtshan; 3) beneficial qualities/ fruition value, benefit, good, advantage, merit, good points, benefits, virtuous signs	dge mtshan
དགེ་མཚན་ཅན	bearing lucky marks	dge mtshan can
དགེ་མཚན་ཆེ་བ	of great value	dge mtshan che ba
དགེ་མཚན་ལྡན་པ	of value, beneficial, constructive, useful	dge mtshan ldan pa
དགེ་མཚན་ལྡན་པའི་བསམ་འཆར	constructive ideas/ suggestions	dge mtshan ldan pa'i bsam 'char
དགེ་མཚན་བླངས	took the good points of	dge mtshan blangs
དགེ་མཚན་མེད་པ	disadvantageous, unfavorable, negative	dge mtshan med pa
དགེ་མཚན་ལེན	take the good points of	dge mtshan len
དགེ་གཞོན	young student who is studying under a dge rgan tutor (after dge g.yog)	dge gzhon
དགེ་འོས་སློབ་གརབ༹	'byung 'gyur dge rgan gyi dmigs sgor 'gro mkhan rnams kyi school dge g.yog - boy attending upon a monk with a view to enter the holy order, after passing exam then dge gzhon	dge 'os slob grva
དགེ་ལ་བག་ཡོད	latent / potential goodness	dge la bag yod
དགེ་ལ་འབད	be diligent in virtuous actions	dge la 'bad
དགེ་ལ་འབོད་ཅིག	persevere in virtue!	dge la 'bod cig
དགེ་ལ་སྦྱོར	apply virtuous actions	dge la sbyor
དགེ་ལ་ཡང་དག་པར་སྤྲོ་བ	the true uplift/ joy of virtue, truly spread virtue	dge la yang dag par spro ba
དགེ་ལས	virtuous action, deed	dge las
དགེ་ལུགས	Gelug, Geluk. The Tibetan school of Buddhism founded by Lord Tsongkhapa as a reformation of the Kadam tradition of Atisha Dipamkara. The present head is H.H. the 14th Dalai Lama	dge lugs
དགེ་ལུགས་བསྟན་པ	Gelukpa school	dge lugs bstan pa
དགེ་ལུགས་པ	Gelukpa school/lineage	dge lugs pa
དགེ་ལེགས	auspicious[ly virtuous] abundance, perfection, good, fine	dge legs
དགེ་ལེགས་ཀུན་འབྱུང	Fount of Virtue, book by 'jams dbyangs mkhyen rab	dge legs kun 'byung
དགེ་ལེགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	the auspicious victory banner	dge legs kyi rgyal mtshan
དགེ་ལེགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all things of good fortune	dge legs kyi dngos pa thams cad
དགེ་ལེགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ་ཐམས་ཅད	all things of good fortune	dge legs kyi dngos po thams cad
དགེ་ལེགས་ཅན	blessed, glorious	dge legs can
དགེ་ལེགས་དཔལ་བཟང	Splendid Goodness; person's name	dge legs dpal bzang
དགེ་ལེགས་ཕུ	Bhutan	dge legs phu
དགེ་ལེགས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect auspiciousness [accumulating all that is desired]	dge legs phun sum tshogs pa
དགེ་ལེགས་འཕེལ	may virtue increase, property, virtuous goodness, happiness,	dge legs 'phel
ཧཔཔིནེསས་ཨནད་ཝེལལ	being, excellence, good fortune, auspicious, good, fine	happiness and well
དགེ་ལེགས་བཤེས་གཉེན	good counsellor, pious buddhist monk	dge legs bshes gnyen
དགེ་ལེགས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	be auspicious	dge legs su 'gyur ba
དགེ་ཤིས	piety and blessedness (dge ba dang shis pa)	dge shis
དགེ་ཤེས	to understand what is good	dge shes
དགེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གོ་གནས	doctorate	dge shes kyi go gnas
དགེ་བཤད་སྡིག་བཀྲོལ	khe nyen gsal por bshad de bslab bya byed pa	dge bshad sdig bkrol
དགེ་བཤེས	title for a Tibetan Buddhist monk, buddhist dge slong who has mastered metaphysics and important branches of sacred literature, person who leads a pure life and is possessed of learning	dge bshes
དགེ་བཤེས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་བཞི	the four grades/ ranks of geshe	dge bshes kyi rim pa bzhi
དགེ་བཤེས་ཁ་རག་སྒོམ་ཆུང	Geshe Kharak Gomchung; foremost disciple of Geshe Gönpa; (dge shes dgon pa;) 484	dge bshes kha rag sgom chung
དགེ་བཤེས་དགོན་པ	10-11th cent. - Geshe Gönpa, a Kadampa master dge bshes dgon pa dbang phyug rgyal	dge bshes dgon pa
དགེ་བཤེས་ཆུང་ཁག	the lower geshe levels	dge bshes chung khag
དགེ་བཤེས་ཆོས་སྨྲ་བ	The spiritual friend who teaches the Dharma	dge bshes chos smra ba
དགེ་བཤེས་སྟོན་པ	monk scholar	dge bshes ston pa
དགེ་བཤེས་དཔལ་གྲགས	12th-13th century Geshe Paldrak, at Labchi	dge bshes dpal grags
དགེ་བཤེས་སྤྱན་སྔ་བ	the five eyes of the spiritual friend	dge bshes spyan snga ba
དགེ་བཤེས་བྱ་ཡུལ་བ	Geshe Cha-Yulwa. (1075-1138). Also known as Shönnu Ö (gzhon nu 'od), this early master in the Kadam lineage was one of the teachers of Gampopa, the great Kagyü master	dge bshes bya yul ba
དགེ་བཤེས་ཝ་བྲག་དཀར་བ	{bka' gdams pa} master	dge bshes wa brag dkar ba
དགེ་བཤེས་རབ་བརྟན	Geshe Rabten - {tre hor dge bshes rta mgrin rab brtan}	dge bshes rab brtan
དགེ་བཤེས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	High Geshe	dge bshes rin po che
དགེ་བཤེས་ལྷ་རམ་པ	Geshe Lharampa; high rank of scholar in the Geluk tradition	dge bshes lha ram pa
དགེ་བཤོས	monastery overseer	dge bshos
དགེ་སེམས	piety	dge sems
དགེ་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	[very] pious	dge sems chen po
དགེ་སློང	fully ordained monk	dge slong
དགེ་སློང་སྐར་བཟང	the monk Sunaksatra dge slong khrims dag pa la mi gtsang ba	dge slong skar bzang
དགེ་སློང་མཁས་པ	bhikshu of wisdom	dge slong mkhas pa
དགེ་སློང་གི་ཁྲིམས	monk rules dge slong gi khrims nyis brgya nga gsum 253 monk precepts dge slong gi khrims nyis brgya lnga bcu the 250 [253] rules for monks CHN dge slong gi khrims nyis brgya lnga bcu the 250 rules ...	dge slong gi khrims
རྩ་གསུམ	253 monk precepts	rtsa gsum
དགེ་སློང་གི་དགེ་འདུན	monastic assemblies	dge slong gi dge 'dun
དགེ་སློང་གི་དངོས་པོ	1) monk candidate. 2) monkhood	dge slong gi dngos po
དགེ་སློང་གི་ཆས་ཅན	clad in bhikshu robes	dge slong gi chas can
དགེ་སློང་གི་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five dharmas of a monk	dge slong gi chos lnga
དགེ་སློང་གི་སྡོམ་པ	gelong vows [lifelong pratimoksha vow to abandon causes of harm to others]	dge slong gi sdom pa
དགེ་སློང་གི་རྩ་བའི་ལྟུང་བ་བཞི	CHN	dge slong gi rtsa ba'i ltung ba bzhi
དགེ་སློང་གི་ཚུལ	the way of a monk, as a monk	dge slong gi tshul
དགེ་སློང་གི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	gelong discipline	dge slong gi tshul khrims
དགེ་སློང་གི་བསླབ་བྱ	monastic rules	dge slong gi bslab bya
དགེ་སློང་དགེ་འདུན	congregation/ sangha of monks	dge slong dge 'dun
དགེ་སློང་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ	arhat monk [who has abandoned kleshas]	dge slong dgra bcom pa
དགེ་སློང་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	monk ordination ritual	dge slong sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་སློང་ལྔ	five monks	dge slong lnga
དགེ་སློང་ལྔ་བརྒྱས་བསྐོར་ནས	surrounded by a circle of five hundred monks	dge slong lnga brgyas bskor nas
དགེ་སློང་ཆ་ལུགས	attired as a monk	dge slong cha lugs
དགེ་སློང་འཆར་ཀ	the monk Udayin; disciple of the Buddha	dge slong 'char ka
དགེ་སློང་འཆར་ཀ་ཡོད་པ	the monk Udayin dge slong stong phrag drug cu dang bcas	dge slong 'char ka yod pa
དགེ་སློང་དག	monks	dge slong dag
དགེ་སློང་དང་དགེ་སློང་མ	monks and nuns	dge slong dang dge slong ma
དགེ་སློང་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	one unworthy of the position of dge slong	dge slong du mi rung ba
དགེ་སློང་བདེ་བྱེད	Gelong Deje [Indian shravaka gelong who wrote rig pa'i rgyan of 1,200,000' shlokas: theg chen sun 'byin byas pa argued against mahayana]	dge slong bde byed
དགེ་སློང་སྡེ	congregation of monks	dge slong sde
དགེ་སློང་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of gelongs [slong ba'i dge slong, ming gi dge slong, khas 'ches pa'i dge slong, 485 bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i dge slong, nyon mongs pa dang bral ba'i dge slong]	dge slong rnam pa lnga
དགེ་སློང་རྣམས	O monks,	dge slong rnams
དགེ་སློང་རྣམས་ཀྱང་ཉོན་ཅིག	Monks, listen	dge slong rnams kyang nyon cig
དགེ་སློང་རྣམས་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ	with the other monks	dge slong rnams dang lhan cig tu
དགེ་སློང་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	monk practitioner	dge slong rnal 'byor pa
དགེ་སློང་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ	monk practitioner dge slong rnal 'byor spyod pa yogacharin monk	dge slong rnal 'byor spyod pa
དགེ་སློང་པའི་རྣམ་འབྱེད	Sutra on Surety of Karmic Consequence	dge slong pa'i rnam 'byed
དགེ་སློང་པུར་ན	Bhikshu Purna. The previous life of the Tibetan translator Vairochana	dge slong pur na
དགེ་སློང་དཔལ་ལྡན	glorious monk [an earlier name of Nagarjuna, his ordination name at Nalanda]	dge slong dpal ldan
དགེ་སློང་སྤྱོད་ལམ་མཛེས་པ	pure monk	dge slong spyod lam mdzes pa
དགེ་སློང་ཕ་མ་གཉིས	fully ordained monk or nun; among the {so thar rigs brgyad}	dge slong pha ma gnyis
དགེ་སློང་མ	bhikshuni, nun, fully ordained nun; [fully ordained with 364 precepts]	dge slong ma
དགེ་སློང་མ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual of ordination as a nun [having received the support, the dge slob ma vow, for two years, khyim so bzung na 12 years, ma bzung na 20, dge slong ma'i dge 'dun 12 or six tshogs las by the p...	dge slong ma sgrub pa'i cho ga
ནས་གནས་པ	lived with a following of five hundred other nuns dge slong ma bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i las nun's act of taking the gelongma vow	nas gnas pa
དགེ་སློང་མ་དཔལ་མོ	Gelongma Palmo, Bhikshuni Shri, a famed Indian nun dge slong ma la chos ston pa'i ltung byed - the downfall of teaching dharma to gelongmas dge slong ma la chos ston pa'i ltung byed - the downfall ...	dge slong ma dpal mo
དགེ་སློང་མ་ལས་ཟས་ལག་ཏུ་ལེན་པ	to receive food from a nun's hand	dge slong ma las zas lag tu len pa
དགེ་སློང་མ་སུན་ཕྱུང་བ	one who finds fault with or slanders a buddhist nun	dge slong ma sun phyung ba
དགེ་སློང་མ་ཨུཏ་པལ་མདོག	the nun Utpalavarna; disciple of the Buddha dge slong ma'i khrims skyon bral rnam par	dge slong ma ut pal mdog
དག་པ་སྲུང་ཞིང	kept all of her vows perfectly without fault dge slong ma'i khrims sum brgya drug cu	dag pa srung zhing
ཐབས་ཅིག་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go together w the	thabs cig du 'gro ba
མཉ་ནུན	visitors dge slong ma'i mgron po mang po dang	many nun
ལྷན་ཅིག་འགྲོ་བ	go together w the	lhan cig 'gro ba
བདུན	17 precepts to be kept by a nun dge slong ma'i sgrub pa'i bslab bya bcu	bdun
ལྟུང་བྱེད་བརྒྱ་དང་བརྒྱད	108 special infractions for nuns dge slong ma'i thun mong ma yin pa'i	ltung byed brgya dang brgyad
དགེ་སློང་མའི་འདུལ་བ	nun-students	dge slong ma'i 'dul ba
དགེ་སློང་མའི་སྡོམ་པ	nun's vows	dge slong ma'i sdom pa
དགེ་སློང་མའི་སོ་སོར་ཐར་པའི་མདོ	the Pratimoksha Sutra for Nuns	dge slong ma'i so sor thar pa'i mdo
དགེ་སློང་མའི་བསླབ་བྱ	gelongma precepts	dge slong ma'i bslab bya
བརྒྱ་དང་དྲུག་ཅུ་རེ་བཞི	364 precepts for nuns dge slong ma'i bslab bya bsdoms pas sum	brgya dang drug cu re bzhi
དགེ་སློང་མི་ལྔ	five bhikshus CHN	dge slong mi lnga
དགེ་སློང་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་བསྐོར་ནས	together with his following of monks	dge slong tshogs kyis bskor nas
དགེ་སློང་ལ་ཕྲ་མ་སྨྲ་བ	slander a monk	dge slong la phra ma smra ba
དགེ་སློང་ལེགས་པའི་སྐར་མ	the monk Sunaksatra {bcom ldan 'das kyi mched ya dge slong legs pa'i skar ma zhes bya ba} the monk Sunaksatra was the Buddha's half-brother	dge slong legs pa'i skar ma
དགེ་སློང་ཤིང	provincial name for cedrus deodara tree	dge slong shing
དགེ་སློང་གསར་བུ	bsnyen par rdzogs nas ring po ma lon pa	dge slong gsar bu
དགེ་སློང་གསུམ	the three kinds of sgras brjod kyi gelong [rtags tsam 'dzin pa'i dge slong, ming gi dge slong, yang dag pa'i dge slong]	dge slong gsum
དགེ་སློངས་གི་དང་པོའི་ལོ་དྲི་བ	[Bhikshuvarshagrapriccha, a major Vinaya text	dge slongs gi dang po'i lo dri ba
དགེ་སློབ	teacher and student, master and pupil, apprentice	dge slob
དགེ་སློབ་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	teacher and student/ master and pupil relationship	dge slob kyi 'brel ba
དགེ་སློབ་མ	siksamana, observes rules like a female novice, pupil monk who is preparing himself for the higher order	dge slob ma
དགེ་སློབ་མ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	gelobma liturgy	dge slob ma sgrub pa'i cho ga
དགེ་སློབ་མའི་ལྕི་བའི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	CHN	dge slob ma'i lci ba'i chos brgyad
དགེ་སློབ་མའི་སྡོམ་པ	gelobma vow [the vow of a nun with six precepts: having accomplished preliminaries &, by the things to be abandoned by the rtsa ba'i chos drug and rjes mthun gyi chos drug for two years vows of ren...	dge slob ma'i sdom pa
དགེ་སློབ་མའི་བསླབ་བྱ	nun candidate precepts	dge slob ma'i bslab bya
དགེ་ལྷ་གར་ཕྱུག	Bonpo deity connected with the green light	dge lha gar phyug
དགེང་ལ	on, upon, in, at	dgeng la
དགེན་གསུམ	the three confidences	dgen gsum
དགེབས	cover, SA 'gebs ba	dgebs
དགེའ་འདུན་ཆེན་པོ་པ	Great community school dge' 'dun bde bar gzhas par bya ba'i phyir - for the happiness of the congregation	dge' 'dun chen po pa
དགེའ་འདུན་བསྡུ་བའི་ཕྱིར	for unifying the congregation	dge' 'dun bsdu ba'i phyir
དགེའ་འདུན་ལེགས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	for the welfare of/ unifying the congregation/ the sangha	dge' 'dun legs par bya ba'i phyir
དགེའ་སྡིག	good and evil	dge' sdig
དགེའ་སྡིག་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལས་འདས་པ	transcending good and evil, cause and effect	dge' sdig rgyu 'bras las 'das pa
དགེའ་སྡིག་འདོར་ལེན	reject vice and accept virtue	dge' sdig 'dor len
དགེའ་སྡུད	gathering of virtue [all virtuous dharmas in one's continuum	dge' sdud
དགེའ་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	a virtuous thought	dge' pa'i rnam rtog
དགེའ་བ	virtue, good deed	dge' ba
དགེའ་བ་བཅུ	10 virtues	dge' ba bcu
དགེའ་བ་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven virtues	dge' ba bcu gcig
དགེའ་བ་བཅུ་གཅུག	11 virtues	dge' ba bcu gcug
དགེའ་བ་ཆོས་སྡུད་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of practicing virtue	dge' ba chos sdud kyi tshul khrims
དགེའ་བ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	to do what is good	dge' ba la spyod pa
དགེའ་བའི	wholesome, virtuous	dge' ba'i
དགེའ་བའི་གྲོགས་པ	virtuous friend, companion	dge' ba'i grogs pa
དགེའ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	a virtuous point, substance of virtue	dge' ba'i dngos po
དགེའ་སྦྱོང	virtuous endeavor	dge' sbyong
དགེའ་རྩ	basic virtue, the root of virtue	dge' rtsa
དགེའ་ལེགས	virtue and goodness	dge' legs
དགེའ་ལེགས་འཔེལ	may virtue and goodness increase	dge' legs 'pel
དགེའ་ལེགས་འཕེལ	may virtue and goodness increase	dge' legs 'phel
དགེའ་བཤེས་གླང་རི་ཐང་པ	name	dge' bshes glang ri thang pa
དགེའ་སེམས	virtuous mind	dge' sems
དགེའ་སློང	bhikshu, monk, fully ordained monk	dge' slong
དགེའ་སློང་མ	fully ordained nun	dge' slong ma
དགེའུ	a cave	dge'u
དགེའོ	virtue!	dge'o
དགེའོ་དགེའོ	may it be virtuous!	dge'o dge'o
དགེར	1) {dge la}	dger
དགེར་བ	prepare	dger ba
དགེར་འབད	exert oneself in acts of piety, pious person	dger 'bad
དགེས	split, SA 'ges ba	dges
དགེས་རྡོར	Hevajra	dges rdor
དགེས་རྡོར་གཏེར	mind treasure [teachings of Guru rinpoche that have been hidden and rediscovered through the minds of tertons]	dges rdor gter
དགེས་པ	rejoice	dges pa
དགེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Hevajra	dges pa rdo rje
དགོ་དགོ	pha ba dgo dgo mushroom	dgo dgo
དགོ་བ	dgo ba antelope	dgo ba
དགོ་བ་གླ་དཀར	white-breasted eagle	dgo ba gla dkar
དགོ་བ་མ	female of antelope species	dgo ba ma
དགོ་རུ	horn of antelope dgo ba	dgo ru
དགོ་སློག	clothes made of skin of antelope dgo ba	dgo slog
དགོག	1) p. {bkog} - to pull, pestle, tear out. 2) fut. of {dgogs}, {'gog}; p. {bkog} to pull / tear out. 2) fut. of {dgogs} & {'gog}	dgog
དགོག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	(A; 1) get old; 2) Lkog tu phyin pa, phug tu phyin pa	dgog tu phyin pa
དགོག་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	become aged, SA lkog tu phyin pa	dgog du phyin pa
དགོག་པ	alt. ft. of {'gog pa}	dgog pa
དགོགས	[p {bkod} (f {dgog} {khog}!] {'gog} extract extirpate	dgogs
དགོང	evening	dgong
དགོང་ཁ	{phyi dro dgong kha} tonight	dgong kha
དགོང་ཁའི་གྲིབ་སོ	the evening shadows	dgong kha'i grib so
དགོང་ག	last of the three parts of the day, evening, night	dgong ga
དགོང་རྒྱུ	opinion	dgong rgyu
དགོང་བཅད	nyin gung yol mtshams nas tomorrow morning kha zas spong ba	dgong bcad
དགོང་ཆ	1 of the {dus tshod bcu gnyis}, sprel gyi dus 487	dgong cha
དགོང་ཆས	nub mo and phyi dro'i za chas	dgong chas
དགོང་ཇ	supper, evening tea	dgong ja
དགོང་འཇམ	dgong mo'i thug pa	dgong 'jam
དགོང་ཉུག	going hunting in the afternoon	dgong nyug
དགོང་བཏབ	stayed overnight	dgong btab
དགོང་ཐས	supper (H	dgong thas
དགོང་ཐུན	watches of the night	dgong thun
དགོང་དག	evening, night	dgong dag
དགོང་དུས	afternoon	dgong dus
དགོང་དེར	that night	dgong der
དགོང་དྲོ	evening	dgong dro
དགོང་དྲོ་བདེ་ལེགས	good evening	dgong dro bde legs
དགོང་དྲོ་ཞོགས་པ	morning and evening	dgong dro zhogs pa
དགོང་དྲོའི་ལྟོ་ཆས	dinner	dgong dro'i lto chas
དགོང་འདེབས	overnight stop, staying overnight	dgong 'debs
དགོང་འདེབས་བྱེད	make an overnight stop, stay overnight	dgong 'debs byed
དགོང་པ	intention, viewpoint, consider, mind	dgong pa
དགོང་པ་ཅན	having the intention of	dgong pa can
དགོང་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	the four kinds of intention	dgong pa rnam bzhi
དགོང་བ	[arch] smad pa	dgong ba
དགོང་མལ	staying overnight/ to sleep for the night	dgong mal
དགོང་མོ	evening, night, junction of day and night, night	dgong mo
དགོང་མོ་ཉལ་འཕྱི་བ	goes to sleep late	dgong mo nyal 'phyi ba
དགོང་མོ་དེའི་ནམ	that night	dgong mo de'i nam
དགོང་མོའི་དུས་སུ	at night	dgong mo'i dus su
དགོང་མོའི་ཞག་མ	overnight	dgong mo'i zhag ma
དགོང་ཚིགས	supper, dinner, evening meal	dgong tshigs
དགོང་ཚོགས	evening party/ gathering	dgong tshogs
དགོང་ཞག	overnight	dgong zhag
དགོང་ཞིག	one night	dgong zhig
དགོང་ཞོག	evening and morning	dgong zhog
དགོང་ཞོགས	morning and evening	dgong zhogs
དགོང་ཟན	afternoon/ evening food	dgong zan
དགོང་ཟས	supper	dgong zas
དགོང་ཡངས་གནང་བ	excuse	dgong yangs gnang ba
དགོང་སྲོད་ལ་བབས་ཚེ	by dusk	dgong srod la babs tshe
དགོངས	1) to think, to consider (h). 2) n. insight, reflection, intention, consideration, understanding, vision, thought, mind, wisdom, realization, reflect, understand, intend, give thought, care for, th...	dgongs
དགོངས་ཀ	evening, night	dgongs ka
དགོངས་སྐར	leave in general, leave from a superior official, suing someone in court	dgongs skar
དགོངས་སྐོར	discuss action to be undertaken, ask opinions, consult, ask for instruction	dgongs skor
དགོངས་སྐོར་ཞུ	discuss action to be undertaken, ask opinions, consult, ask for instruction	dgongs skor zhu
དགོངས་སྐོར་ཞུ་བ	to ask for instruction	dgongs skor zhu ba
དགོངས་སྐོར་ཤུས་ལེན	comment, response [h]	dgongs skor shus len
དགོངས་ཁྲ	title-flap (on Tibetan book	dgongs khra
དགོངས་ཁྲོལ	permission	dgongs khrol
དགོངས་འཁྲོལ	consent, permission (h)	dgongs 'khrol
དགོངས་འཁྲོལ་གནང	gave permission	dgongs 'khrol gnang
དགོངས་འགལ	offence, displeasure, irritation,...Da res bka' bzhin du sgrub ma thub par	dgongs 'gal
དགོངས་འགལ་མེད་པ	without incurring displeasure or displeasing	dgongs 'gal med pa
དགོངས་འགྲལ	offense, displeasure	dgongs 'gral
དགོངས་འགྲེལ	1) commentary, explanation, clarifying the intent. 2) Samdhinirmocana Sutra; Sutra that Unravels the Intent	dgongs 'grel
དགོངས་འགྲེལ་བསྟན་བཅོས	the treatises that clarify the intent [of the Buddha]	dgongs 'grel bstan bcos
དགོངས་རྒྱན	mind ornament, adornment of realization; embellishment of realization	dgongs rgyan
དགོངས་རྒྱུད	enlightened mindstream	dgongs rgyud
དགོངས་བརྒྱུད	direct/ mind transmission, thought lineage	dgongs brgyud
དགོངས་མངའ་བ	khyed kyis mkhyen gsal de	dgongs mnga' ba
དགོངས་མངོན་འགྱུར	realization of the state	dgongs mngon 'gyur
དགོངས་སྔ	died early	dgongs snga
དགོངས་གཅིག	single intention	dgongs gcig
དགོངས་བཅད	judgment, decision on a law suit	dgongs bcad
དགོངས་བཅུད	essence of the state of knowledge, essential aspects of the state of knowledge	dgongs bcud
དགོངས་མཆོད	commemoration puja	dgongs mchod
དགོངས་འཆར	suggestion, opinion	dgongs 'char
དགོངས་འཆར་གནང	make a suggestion, express an opinion	dgongs 'char gnang
དགོངས་ཉམས	attain realization, h. visionary experience; h. visionary experience; attain realization	dgongs nyams
དགོངས་གཏད	entrustment	dgongs gtad
དགོངས་གཏེར	Mind Treasure	dgongs gter
དགོངས་གཏེར་རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན	by {ka thog rig 'dzin tshe dbang nor bu}	dgongs gter rdo rje slob dpon
དགོངས་གཏེར་བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {ka thog rig 'dzin tshe dbang nor bu} dgongs gter o rgyan rje 'bangs nyer lnga terma by 9th {si tu padma nyin byed dbang po} dgongs gter o rgyan ...	dgongs gter bsam pa lhun grub
དགོངས་མཐུན	according w the intention/ thought /wishes	dgongs mthun
དགོངས་དག	I beg your pardon, I'm sorry, I apologize	dgongs dag
དགོངས་དག་ཐུགས་བདེན	apologize to you	dgongs dag thugs bden
དགོངས་དག་ཐུགས་བདེན་ཞུ	apologize	dgongs dag thugs bden zhu
དགོངས་དག་ཐུགས་བདེན་ཞུ་བ	to apologize	dgongs dag thugs bden zhu ba
དགོངས་དག་ཞུ	be sorry, feel apologetic, ask forgiveness, apologize	dgongs dag zhu
དགོངས་དག་ཞུ་བ	to be sorry, feel apologetic, to ask forgiveness, apologize	dgongs dag zhu ba
དགོངས་དྭངས	pacify anger [h] apologize, ask pardon/ forgiveness	dgongs dwangs
དགོངས་དམ	supreme state of knowledge	dgongs dam
དགོངས་དོན	meaning; ex {rgyal ba'i gsung rab thams cad kyi dgongs don} the complete meaning of the Buddha's teachings	dgongs don
དགོངས་དོན་གྱི་ནོར་བུ	jewels of knowledge	dgongs don gyi nor bu
དགོངས་དོན་གཅིག་པ	corresponding principle	dgongs don gcig pa
དགོངས་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	essential meaning	dgongs don snying po
དགོངས་དོན་དེ་རྣམས	all its meanings	dgongs don de rnams
དགོངས་དོན་རྣམས	all the meanings	dgongs don rnams
དགོངས་དོན་རྣལ་མ	true meaning, real knowledge	dgongs don rnal ma
དགོངས་དོན་ཚུལ	the way of the intended meaning, the way of ultimate knowledge	dgongs don tshul
དགོངས་འདུས	Syn {bla ma dgongs 'dus}; quintessential sublime vision	dgongs 'dus
དགོངས་འདུས་སྐུ་རྒྱུད	Body Tantra of the Assemblage of Realization	dgongs 'dus sku rgyud
དགོངས་འདུས་ཆེན་མོ	terma revealed by Sangye Lingpa. Syn {bla ma dgongs 'dus}	dgongs 'dus chen mo
དགོངས་འདུས་རྣམ་བཤད	bla ma dgongs pa 'dus pa'i cho ga'i rnam bzhag dang 'brel ba'i bskyed rdzogs zung 'jug gi sgom khog mkhyen brtse'i me long 'od	dgongs 'dus rnam bshad
ཟེར་བརྒྱ་པ	{gter chen sangs rgyas gling pa'i bla ma dgongs 'dus rnam bshad} by 'jigs med gling pa rang	zer brgya pa
བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	(1729 or 30-1798)	byung rdo rje
དགོངས་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	intention and concealed intention	dgongs ldem dgongs
དགོངས་བརྡ་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	mind, sign and hearing lineages	dgongs brda snyan brgyud
གསུམ་ཆིག་རྫོགས་སུ་བླངས	received the complete transmission of all three lineages together: the mind lineage, the symbol lineage and the hearing lineage	gsum chig rdzogs su blangs
དགོངས་ནས	intended	dgongs nas
དགོངས་གནད	criterion	dgongs gnad
དགོངས་པ་ཀུན་འདུས	Gongpa Kündü; terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	dgongs pa kun 'dus
དགོངས་པ་དཀྲུག་པ	to annoy	dgongs pa dkrug pa
དགོངས་པ་དཀྲུགས	to make angry, to irritate, annoy	dgongs pa dkrugs
དགོངས་པ་བཀྲལ་བ	explain/ unravel the intention	dgongs pa bkral ba
དགོངས་པ་བཀྲོལ	give permission	dgongs pa bkrol
དགོངས་པ་བཀྲོལ་བ	forgiven, pardoned	dgongs pa bkrol ba
དགོངས་པ་སྐོང	fulfill the wishes/ intentions of	dgongs pa skong
དགོངས་པ་སྐོང་བ	to fulfill the wishes / intentions of	dgongs pa skong ba
དགོངས་པ་སྐྱོ་བ	sadness	dgongs pa skyo ba
དགོངས་པ་སྐྱོ་བར	weary mind	dgongs pa skyo bar
དགོངས་པ་ཁྲེལ་བ	to despise	dgongs pa khrel ba
དགོངས་པ་འཁྲོལ	get permission/ consent/ approval (usu to resign or take leave	dgongs pa 'khrol
དགོངས་པ་འཁྲོལ་བ	MG: to get permision/consent/approval (usu. to resign from a post or to take leave from work). [mss]	dgongs pa 'khrol ba
དགོངས་པ་གྲུབ་པ	fulfill a wish	dgongs pa grub pa
དགོངས་པ་འགྲེལ་པ	explanation of the intent / meaning. See also {dgongs 'grel}	dgongs pa 'grel pa
དགོངས་པ་འགྲེལ་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	the treatises elucidating the intent	dgongs pa 'grel pa'i bstan bcos
དགོངས་པ་ངེས་འགྲེལ	Sutra of Unraveling the Intent	dgongs pa nges 'grel
དགོངས་པ་ངེས་པར་འགྲེལ་པ	Unraveling of the Thought Sutra	dgongs pa nges par 'grel pa
དགོངས་པ་ངེས་པར་འགྲོལ་པའི་མདོ	Sandhi nirmocana sutra	dgongs pa nges par 'grol pa'i mdo
དགོངས་པ་ངོ་སྤྲད	to present the essence of, to introduce knowledge	dgongs pa ngo sprad
དགོངས་པ་མངོན་བྱེད	to realize the state	dgongs pa mngon byed
དགོངས་པ་ཅན	implied; implied, indirect [meaning], intentional, intended meaning, veiled, not readily accessible to superficial investigation, figurative teaching	dgongs pa can
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	among don rgyan, the expressing word snga phyi 'brel chags pa &, don ldan kho na yin pa, bstod smad sogs kyi skabs su bab pa, brjod bya rnams gsal bar ston thub pa ste khyad chos bzhi ldan gyi sbyo...	dgongs pa can gyi rgyan
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་དོན	intended / implied meaning dgongs pa can gyi don dgongs pa shin tu	dgongs pa can gyi don
ཟབ	the very profound indirect intention	zab
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པ	not implied	dgongs pa can ma yin pa
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་མིན་པའི་བཤད་པ	exposition which is not implied'	dgongs pa can min pa'i bshad pa
དགོངས་པ་ཅན་བཞི	four ways of teaching by the Buddha, as his intention was grasped by others	dgongs pa can bzhi
དགོངས་པ་གཅིག	of one mind	dgongs pa gcig
དགོངས་པ་གཅིག་དང་དབྱངས་གཅིག	of one mind and voice	dgongs pa gcig dang dbyangs gcig
དགོངས་པ་གཅིག་དྲིལ	unified realization	dgongs pa gcig dril
དགོངས་པ་མཇལ	to meet the state	dgongs pa mjal
དགོངས་པ་ཉིད	identity	dgongs pa nyid
དགོངས་པ་བརྙེས	encountered the wisdom; x {chos sku'i dgongs pa brnyes} encountered the wisdom of Dharmakaya	dgongs pa brnyes
དགོངས་པ་གཏང	meditative concentration of mind	dgongs pa gtang
དགོངས་པ་གཏད	meditative concentration of mind, was thinking of focusing (his attention (H, direct one's concentration	dgongs pa gtad
དགོངས་པ་གཏད་པ	meditative concentration of mind, was thinking of focusing (his attention (H, direct one's concentration	dgongs pa gtad pa
དགོངས་པ་གཏོང	give permission/ consent/ approval, grant leave, accept a resignation	dgongs pa gtong
དགོངས་པ་སྟེར	grant leave, give permission	dgongs pa ster
དགོངས་པ་མཐར	finality of the state of knowledge	dgongs pa mthar
དགོངས་པ་མཐུན་པ	same state	dgongs pa mthun pa
དགོངས་པ་དམ་པ	supreme state, supreme state of knowledge	dgongs pa dam pa
དགོངས་པ་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	natural state	dgongs pa de kho na nyid
དགོངས་པ་དེས་འགྲེལ	Sa dhi nirmocana sutra	dgongs pa des 'grel
དགོངས་པ་དྲངས	have 1's anger allayed	dgongs pa drangs
དགོངས་པ་འདུས་པ	SA kun 'dus rig pa'i mdo, dpal tshogs chen 'dus	dgongs pa 'dus pa
དགོངས་པ་བརྡ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the	dgongs pa brda brgyud kyi ye shes
ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཐོཨུགྷཏ	sign lineage	wisdom of the thought
དགོངས་པ་བརྡའི་གསུང	speech of symbolic meaning; 1) of the {gsung lnga}, {'bras chos nyer lnga} associated w sambhogakaya, nyingma mantra: sku'i brdas 'khor gyi blo la don 'jal bar ston pa ni symbolic speech of realizi...	dgongs pa brda'i gsung
དགོངས་པ་གནང	h. of {dgongs pa gtong} to give permission	dgongs pa gnang
དགོངས་པ་གནང་བ	permit	dgongs pa gnang ba
དགོངས་པ་གནང་བར་ཞུ	I beg you, think of this!	dgongs pa gnang bar zhu
དགོངས་པ་རྣམ་དག	pure realization	dgongs pa rnam dag
དགོངས་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of intention [the intention directed towards identity {mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa} or samat bhipr ya, the intention directed towards other meanings {don gzhan la dgongs pa} or arth ntar ...	dgongs pa rnam bzhi
དགོངས་པ་རྣལ་མ	authentic principle, the natural primordial state	dgongs pa rnal ma
དགོངས་པ་འཕོ་འགྱུར་མེད	changeless intention	dgongs pa 'pho 'gyur med
དགོངས་པ་འཕོ་འགྱུར་མེད་པ	changeless mind	dgongs pa 'pho 'gyur med pa
དགོངས་པ་དབྱིངས་སུ་སྐྱོལ་བ	to bring the state of realization to embrace basic space	dgongs pa dbyings su skyol ba
དགོངས་པ་དབྱིངས་སུ་སྐྱོལ་ཞིག	bring your realization to encompass dharmadhatu!	dgongs pa dbyings su skyol zhig
དགོངས་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	your mind and your teacher's became one	dgongs pa dbyer med
དགོངས་པ་མ་ཚོམས	I'm sorry, sorry, excuse me, pardon me	dgongs pa ma tshoms
དགོངས་པ་མི་འགྱུར	changeless intention	dgongs pa mi 'gyur
དགོངས་པ་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་གཟེར	the nail of changeless intention.	dgongs pa mi 'gyur ba'i gzer
དགོངས་པ་མི་འདྲ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 different intentions of mind	dgongs pa mi 'dra ba bcu gnyis
ཐེ་པྲེཅིཨོཨུས་ཏོཔ	ornament {rin po che'i tog} of emanation {rnam par rol pa} and of the basket of books {za ma tog}; the four inner contemplations of entering into all objects, manifesting, the	the precious top
ཅྲོཝན	jewel and of the array on the summit of the victory banner {yul kun la 'jug pa, mngon pas snang ba}, {gtsug gi nor bu}, {rgyal mtshan rtse mo yongs su bkod pa}; and the four secret contemplations o...	crown
དགོངས་པ་གཙང་ཞུ	withdrawal, resignation, retirement	dgongs pa gtsang zhu
དགོངས་པ་གཙང་ཞུ་བྱེད	withdraw, resign, retire	dgongs pa gtsang zhu byed
དགོངས་པ་རྩ་ཞུ	withdrawal, resignation, retirement	dgongs pa rtsa zhu
དགོངས་པ་རྩ་ཞུ་བྱེད	withdraw, resign, retire	dgongs pa rtsa zhu byed
དགོངས་པ་ཚིག་གསུམ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Realization in Three Words	dgongs pa tshig gsum pa'i rgyud
དགོངས་པ་ཚོམས	vi. to be angry (h)	dgongs pa tshoms
དགོངས་པ་ཚོམས་པ	to get angry	dgongs pa tshoms pa
དགོངས་པ་འཚོམས་པ	khong khro za ba	dgongs pa 'tshoms pa
དགོངས་པ་མཛད	to meditate	dgongs pa mdzad
དགོངས་པ་མཛད་པ	{bcom ldan 'das rang bzhin gyis gshegs pa'i dgongs pa mdzad pa} the Bhagavan made it known that he would be visiting	dgongs pa mdzad pa
དགོངས་པ་རྫོགས	1) accomplish fully, fulfill all one's wishes/ intentions; 2) (H die, pass away; 3) perfect intention	dgongs pa rdzogs
དགོངས་པ་རྫོགས་པ	to die [honorific]; to complete/ fulfill (one's own/ a teacher's) intentions/ mission	dgongs pa rdzogs pa
དགོངས་པ་ཞུ	to resign, to take a leave of absence	dgongs pa zhu
དགོངས་པ་ཞུ་གི་ཡིན	if you'll excuse me	dgongs pa zhu gi yin
དགོངས་པ་ཞུ་བ	to step aside	dgongs pa zhu ba
དགོངས་པ་བཞི	four intentionalities	dgongs pa bzhi
དགོངས་པ་བཞེས	to think over, to consider	dgongs pa bzhes
དགོངས་པ་ཟང་ཐལ	Openness of Realization Tantra; terma text on Dzogchen revealed by {rig 'dzin rgod ldem}	dgongs pa zang thal
དགོངས་པ་ཟང་ཐལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Openness of Realization Tantra. A tantric scripture concealed by Guru Rinpoche and revealed by Rigdzin Gödem, the master who revealed the Jangter tradition of the Nyingma school. Contains the renow...	dgongs pa zang thal gyi rgyud
དགོངས་པ་ཟབ་མོ་ངེས་འགྲེལ་བ	unravel the profound thought dgongs pa zab mo nges par 'grel pa'i mdo	dgongs pa zab mo nges 'grel ba
རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ་པ	{dgongs pa zab mo nges par 'grel pa'i mdo rgya cher 'grel pa} dgongs pa zab mo nges par 'grel pa'i mdo	rgya cher 'grel pa
དགོངས་པ་ཟབ་མོ་ངེས་པར་འགྲེལ་བ	unraveling of the Profound Thought	dgongs pa zab mo nges par 'grel ba
དགོངས་པ་ཟབ་བཞེས	careful consideration, thorough investigation, thinking over	dgongs pa zab bzhes
དགོངས་པ་ཟབ་བཞེས་གནང	consider carefully, thoroughly investigate, think over	dgongs pa zab bzhes gnang
དགོངས་པ་ཡང་ཟབ	terma revealed by {rin chen phun tshogs} {'bri gung pa} 1509-1557	dgongs pa yang zab
དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	[Clear] illumination of the thought/ intention	dgongs pa rab gsal
དགོངས་པ་ལ་བཞུགས	abide within the intention	dgongs pa la bzhugs
དགོངས་པ་ལ་བཞུགས་པ	to remain in meditation	dgongs pa la bzhugs pa
དགོངས་པ་ལུང་སྟོན	Gongpa Lungtön, Sandhi Vyakarana, Tantra That Prophesies Realization. The exposition tantra of the Father Tantra Guhyasamaja	dgongs pa lung ston
དགོངས་པ་ལོན	sangs rgyas thams cad kyi	dgongs pa lon
དགོངས་པ་ལོན་པ	to understand	dgongs pa lon pa
དགོངས་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	mind of Buddha	dgongs pa sangs rgyas
དགོངས་པ་གསལ	Gongpa Sal, name of early Tibetan monk	dgongs pa gsal
དགོངས་པའི་ཀློང	dynamic meditative mind	dgongs pa'i klong
དགོངས་པའི་ཀློང་ཆེན་པོ	the great expanse of wisdom mind	dgongs pa'i klong chen po
དགོངས་པའི་ཀློང་མཛོད	dynamic sphere of buddha intentionality	dgongs pa'i klong mdzod
དགོངས་པའི་བཅུད	quintessence of the state of knowledge	dgongs pa'i bcud
དགོངས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of the meaning	dgongs pa'i snying po
དགོངས་པའི་གཏེར	mind treasure, SA dgongs gter	dgongs pa'i gter
དགོངས་པའི་གཏེར་མཛོད	mind treasure, SA dgongs gter	dgongs pa'i gter mdzod
དགོངས་པའི་གཏེར་མཛོད་བརྡོལ་བ	the treasury of his realization overflowed	dgongs pa'i gter mdzod brdol ba
དགོངས་པའི་མཐར་ཐུག	final goal	dgongs pa'i mthar thug
དགོངས་པའི་མཐིལ	depth of the mind, vast mind, depth of the state of knowledge	dgongs pa'i mthil
དགོངས་པའི་དོན་གྱི་ཚུད	enter into the intended meaning	dgongs pa'i don gyi tshud
དགོངས་པའི་གནད	the key points in the intent of ..	dgongs pa'i gnad
དགོངས་པའི་རྩ་ཆེན་རྫོགས་པ	perfect the great power of realization	dgongs pa'i rtsa chen rdzogs pa
དགོངས་པའི་རྩལ་འབར་བ	the power of their realization shines forth	dgongs pa'i rtsal 'bar ba
དགོངས་པའི་མཛོད་བརྟོལ	break through into the treasury of realization	dgongs pa'i mdzod brtol
དགོངས་པའི་མཛོད་བརྟོལ་བ	pouring out from the treasury of his realization	dgongs pa'i mdzod brtol ba
དགོངས་པར་གྱུར	be the intent, become the intent	dgongs par gyur
དགོངས་པར་གྱུར་ཏེ	realized, understood	dgongs par gyur te
དགོངས་པར་སྣང་བ	appears to be the thought	dgongs par snang ba
དགོངས་པས་བརྒྱུད་པ	transmitted mentally, wisdom transmission	dgongs pas brgyud pa
དགོངས་པས་ཐུགས་སུ་བརྒྱུད	transmitted directly through the state of mind	dgongs pas thugs su brgyud
དགོངས་པས་བཟུང་དུ་གསོལ	please listen! Pay heed!	dgongs pas bzung du gsol
དགོངས་པས་རིག	we can understand, we can see his idea	dgongs pas rig
དགོངས་དཔྱད	judgement, decision	dgongs dpyad
དགོངས་སྤྱོད	thought and deed	dgongs spyod
དགོངས་སྤྱོད་བླབ་པ	emulating the teacher's realization and actions	dgongs spyod blab pa
དགོངས་སྤྱོད་ལོན་པ	{bla ma'i dgongs spyod ji ltar yin pa de rang rgyud la lon par byed dgos} he will need to assimilate truly the latter's realization and way of behaving	dgongs spyod lon pa
དགོངས་སྤྱོད་བསླབ་པ	train in realization and conduct	dgongs spyod bslab pa
དགོངས་སྤྱོད་བསླབ་པ་ལ་མཁས་པ	to emulates his realization and actions skillfully	dgongs spyod bslab pa la mkhas pa
དགོངས་ཕྱོགས་རི	be partial, act with partiality	dgongs phyogs ri
དགོངས་འཕོག	demotion, dismissal	dgongs 'phog
དགོངས་འཕོག་གཏོང	demote, dismiss	dgongs 'phog gtong
དགོངས་བབས	demotion, dismissal	dgongs babs
དགོངས་བབས་གཏོང	demote, dismiss	dgongs babs gtong
དགོངས་བྱིན	insight blessing	dgongs byin
དགོངས་དབྱིངས	mental sphere, sphere of realization, space of wisdom mind	dgongs dbyings
དགོངས་འབྲེལ	commentaries, in accord w the idea/ purpose	dgongs 'brel
དགོངས་མལ	night quarters	dgongs mal
དགོངས་མིན	not implied exposition	dgongs min
དགོངས་མོ	evening	dgongs mo
དགོངས་ཚུལ	opinion	dgongs tshul
དགོངས་མཛད་རི་ཁྲོད	1038-1096, founder of rdzogs chen a khrid system	dgongs mdzad ri khrod
དགོངས་མཛོད	treasure	dgongs mdzod
དགོངས་མཛོད་ཅིག	consider this! / pay heed! understand this!	dgongs mdzod cig
དགོངས་རྫོགས	fulfilled intentions; ex {dgongs rdzogs phyir} that his enlightened intentions might be fulfilled	dgongs rdzogs
དགོངས་རྫོགས་སྒྲུབ	give death [anniversary], memorial service, funeral service (H	dgongs rdzogs sgrub
དགོངས་རྫོགས་མཆོད་འབུལ	memorial service for the dead	dgongs rdzogs mchod 'bul
དགོངས་རྫོགས་རྗེས་དྲན	memorial service for the dead	dgongs rdzogs rjes dran
དགོངས་རྫོགས་དུས་མཆོད	puja at time of death gshegs pa'i dus tshigs kyi mchod pa	dgongs rdzogs dus mchod
དགོངས་ཞག	day's journey	dgongs zhag
དགོངས་ཞུ	leave of absence	dgongs zhu
དགོངས་ཞུ་ངལ་གསོ	retirement	dgongs zhu ngal gso
དགོངས་ཞུ་ངལ་གསོ་བྱེད	retire	dgongs zhu ngal gso byed
དགོངས་ཞུ་གནང	resign	dgongs zhu gnang
དགོངས་ཞུ་རྩ་དགོངས	resignation	dgongs zhu rtsa dgongs
དགོངས་གཞི	intention [ground], main subject, intended meaning, plan [to], idea, thought [h]	dgongs gzhi
དགོངས་གཞི་ཁྱད་ཅན	special meaning	dgongs gzhi khyad can
དགོངས་གཞི་བསྡུར	examine, inquire into consider an issue/ matter dgongs gzhi gtso bor ston pa'i dgongs pa	dgongs gzhi bsdur
ཅན་གྱི་མདོ་བཞི	the four sutras that have the intention of teaching the chief bases of intention dgongs gzhi gtso bor ston pa'i dgongs pa	can gyi mdo bzhi
དགོངས་བཞི	intention, plan, idea, thought (H	dgongs bzhi
དགོངས་བཞེད	view point; thoughts, consideration, attention (h), intention, system, approach	dgongs bzhed
དགོངས་བཞེད་གནང	to think over	dgongs bzhed gnang
དགོངས་བཞེས	intention	dgongs bzhes
དགོངས་བཞེས་གནང་བ	consider	dgongs bzhes gnang ba
དགོངས་ཟབ	serious consideration, very important	dgongs zab
དགོངས་ཡང	vast thinking/ intention/ realization, magnanimity, generosity, leniency	dgongs yang
དགོངས་ཡང་གཏོང	be magnanimous, generous, lenient, pardon, forgive	dgongs yang gtong
དགོངས་ཡངས	vast thinking/ intention/ realization, magnanimity, generosity, leniency	dgongs yangs
དགོངས་ཡངས་གཏོང	be magnanimous, generous, lenient, pardon, forgive 492	dgongs yangs gtong
དགོངས་ཡངས་སྤྲད་ཟིན་པ	forgave	dgongs yangs sprad zin pa
དགོངས་ཡངས་སྤྲོད་པ	forgive	dgongs yangs sprod pa
དགོངས་ལེན	{dgongs 'di'i len 'ong du} "in coming to understand the thought/intention/intended meaning," "in coming to appropriate --." [mss]	dgongs len
དགོངས་བཤད	implied exposition	dgongs bshad
དགོངས་སུ་མཆི	Do what you want!	dgongs su mchi
དགོངས་སུ་གསོལ	please consider (me, give thought to (me	dgongs su gsol
དགོངས་སེང	apology, pardon	dgongs seng
དགོངས་སེང་ཞུ	apologize, ask for forgiveness/ pardon	dgongs seng zhu
དགོངས་སེང་ཞུ་བ	apologize, ask for forgiveness/ pardon	dgongs seng zhu ba
དགོངས་སེལ	apology, pardon	dgongs sel
དགོངས་སེལ་ཞུ	apologize, ask for forgiveness/ pardon	dgongs sel zhu
དགོངས་སེལ་ཞུ་བ	apologize	dgongs sel zhu ba
དགོངས་སོ	reflected	dgongs so
དགོངས་སྲིད་ན	if you would consider	dgongs srid na
དགོངས་གསོལ	request, beseeching	dgongs gsol
དགོད	imp. of {dgod pa}; p. {bgad} 1) to laugh, to giggle. 2) f. of {'god}; p. {bgad} 1) to laugh, to giggle. 2) fut. of {'god}; a joke; establish	dgod
དགོད་ཀྱིན་འདུག	laughing, being in happiness	dgod kyin 'dug
དགོད་སྒྲ	sound of laughing	dgod sgra
དགོད་གནས	khrel gad dgod pa'i yul	dgod gnas
དགོད་པ	wild [one of the nine moods of dance (speech); see rgod pa]	dgod pa
དགོད་པ་བཞི	the four enterings	dgod pa bzhi
དགོད་བག	dgod pa'i rnam 'gyur	dgod bag
དགོད་བག་ཅན	very open minded person	dgod bag can
དགོད་བྱེད	laughable	dgod byed
དགོད་བྲོ	humor, want to start laughing	dgod bro
དགོད་བྲོ་པའི་གཏམ	enjoyable story	dgod bro pa'i gtam
དགོད་བྲོ་པོ	comical, grotesque, humorous	dgod bro po
དགོད་བྲོ་བ	gad mo bgad 'dod pa, funny, humorous, laughable	dgod bro ba
དགོད་བྲོ་བའི་གཏམ	joke, jest	dgod bro ba'i gtam
དགོད་བྲོ་ལོ	comedy	dgod bro lo
དགོད་མ	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	dgod ma
དགོད་གཞི	'phya gad dgod pa'i gzhi	dgod gzhi
དགོད་ཡས	very large number	dgod yas
དགོད་རེ་བྲོ	enjoy a joke	dgod re bro
དགོད་ཤོར་བ	laugh at	dgod shor ba
དགོད་སློང	joke, make someone laugh	dgod slong
དགོད་གསས་ཁམ་པ	bon god who suppresses zhe sdang	dgod gsas kham pa
དགོན	hermitage	dgon
དགོན་སྐྱབས	protector and refuge	dgon skyabs
དགོན་ཁག	monastery	dgon khag
དགོན་བཅས་པ	they have to help them	dgon bcas pa
དགོན་ཆེན	Gönchen; at Derge	dgon chen
དགོན་ཆེན་རབ་དགའ་བ	Ganden Monastery	dgon chen rab dga' ba
དགོན་མཆོག	god	dgon mchog
དགོན་གཉེར	monastery steward dgon steng bshad sgrub chos gling monastery in Solu, has wood blocks	dgon gnyer
དགོན་དུང	desert, desolate wilderness where there is no water	dgon dung
དགོན་སྡེ	monasteries, monastery	dgon sde
དགོན་གནས	1) place where many sangha gather; 2) solitary place at least 1 rgyang grags from a city	dgon gnas
དགོན་པ	wilderness; monastery	dgon pa
ཝབེ༹ད	leaf fig-tree, monastery, convent, monastery	waved
དགོན་པ་བཀོད་པ	to establish a monastery	dgon pa bkod pa
དགོན་པ་ཁ་ཤས	some monasteries	dgon pa kha shas
དགོན་པ་ཁག	monastery section	dgon pa khag
དགོན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great monastery	dgon pa chen po
དགོན་པ་བརྟེན	to remain in seclusion	dgon pa brten
དགོན་པ་དང་གྲ་པའི	ecclesiastical	dgon pa dang gra pa'i
དགོན་པ་འདེབས་པ	found a monastery	dgon pa 'debs pa
དགོན་པ་ན་གནས་པ	remain in solitude/ a monastery	dgon pa na gnas pa
དགོན་པ་པ	forest dweller, one residing in the wilderness	dgon pa pa
དགོན་པ་བ	1) 1 who stays in solitude/ the wilderness [one of the 12 ascetic practices]; 2) a kadampa lama	dgon pa ba
དགོན་པ་མ	female residing in the wilderness	dgon pa ma
དགོན་པ་ཞིག་རྒྱག་པ	found a monastery	dgon pa zhig rgyag pa
དགོན་པ་བཟུང་བ	to dwell in hermitages	dgon pa bzung ba
དགོན་པ་ལ་གནས	1 of lo ma lnga, residence in solitude	dgon pa la gnas
དགོན་པའི	monastic	dgon pa'i
དགོན་པའི་དཀོར	monastic wealth	dgon pa'i dkor
དགོན་པའི་འགྲམ	neighborhood of a monastery	dgon pa'i 'gram
དགོན་པའི་གནས	hermitage	dgon pa'i gnas
དགོན་པའི་འབྲལ་སྤང	the isolation and renunciation of solitude/ a monastery 493	dgon pa'i 'bral spang
དགོན་པའི་རི་དྭགས	wilderness animals	dgon pa'i ri dwags
དགོན་པར	depend	dgon par
དགོན་པར་གནས	remain in solitude/ a monastery	dgon par gnas
དགོན་པར་གནས་པ	hermit, recluse, retreatant	dgon par gnas pa
དགོན་པར་བག་ཡོད	be conscientious about solitude	dgon par bag yod
དགོན་པོ	lord, protector, refuge	dgon po
དགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་གྲུབ	Lord Nagarjuna	dgon po klu grub
དགོན་པོ་གུར	protective divinity of the Sakya school	dgon po gur
དགོན་པོ་བེར་ཅན	2-armed Mahakala	dgon po ber can
དགོན་པོ་བྱམས་པ	lord Maitreya	dgon po byams pa
དགོན་པོ་རིགས་ལྔ	the lords of the five families	dgon po rigs lnga
དགོན་དཔོན	monastic official	dgon dpon
དགོན་ཕུག	Gönpuk, near Shohong, in Domey	dgon phug
དགོན་བུ	small monastery	dgon bu
དགོན་བྱང	Gönjang, in Tsang	dgon byang
དགོན་མེད	unprotected, protectionless, having no 1 to turn to	dgon med
དགོན་མེད་ཁང	pauper's hostel	dgon med khang
དགོན་མེད་ཁྱིམ	pauper's hostel	dgon med khyim
དགོན་མེད་འདུག་གནས	pauper's hostel	dgon med 'dug gnas
དགོན་གཞི	1) place of solitude; 2) monastery's buildings and estate/ property	dgon gzhi
དགོན་ལག	branch/ affiliate monastery	dgon lag
དགོན་ལུང	Gon Lung monastery [in mtsho sngon great region hu'u kru'u hor rigs rang skyong rdzong khul du in the 10th wood dragon yr founded by rgyal sras don yod chos kyi rgya mtsho, later thu'u bkvan ho tho...	dgon lung
དགོན་ལུང་བྱམས་པ་གླིང	n of gompa	dgon lung byams pa gling
དགོན་ཤུལ	place of an abandoned monastery	dgon shul
དགོན་ཧྲུལ	ruins of a monastery	dgon hrul
དགོལ	disperse, SA dgrol	dgol
དགོས	there is the danger, need, want, to have to, want to, need to, used in conjunction with active verbs, it is necessary, had to, must, should, necessary, one must	dgos
དགོས་ཀྱང་མི་དགོས	there is no point in trying to	dgos kyang mi dgos
དགོས་ཁ	time of need	dgos kha
དགོས་མཁོ	necessary or useful for one's purpose, necessities, requisites, needs	dgos mkho
དགོས་མཁོ་སྐོང	to fill a need	dgos mkho skong
དགོས་མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་སྤྲོད	supplying necessities, requisites, needs, procuring supplies/ provision	dgos mkho sgrub sprod
དགོས་མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་སྤྲོད་ལས་ཁུང	supply office	dgos mkho sgrub sprod las khung
དགོས་མཁོ་ཆེ་བ	necessary	dgos mkho che ba
དགོས་གལ	demand, need, needs, requisition	dgos gal
དགོས་གལ་ཅན	necessary, needful	dgos gal can
དགོས་གལ་ཆེ་བ	necessary, important, essential	dgos gal che ba
དགོས་གལ་ཆེ་ཤོས	primary, foremost, most necessary/ important/ essential	dgos gal che shos
དགོས་གལ་དང་པོ	primary, foremost most necessary/ important/ essential	dgos gal dang po
དགོས་གལ་མ་མཐོང	see no need	dgos gal ma mthong
དགོས་གལ་མེད་པ	inessential, needless	dgos gal med pa
དགོས་གྲུབ	specific sadhana	dgos grub
དགོས་དགུ	whatever ones needs, all that is desired	dgos dgu
དགོས་དགོས	needed	dgos dgos
དགོས་མགོ	need, necessity, supplies/ provisions	dgos mgo
དགོས་རྒྱུ	need necessity	dgos rgyu
དགོས་རྒྱུ་ཆུང	few wants	dgos rgyu chung
དགོས་ངེས	absolutely needed, must, have to, be necessary	dgos nges
དགོས་དངུལ	'gro song gtong byed kyi dngul	dgos dngul
དགོས་དངོས་སྦྱར་བ	furnish	dgos dngos sbyar ba
དགོས་བཅས་སྡུད	attraction	dgos bcas sdud
དགོས་ཆ	necessary things, requisites, necessary objects, indispensables	dgos cha
དགོས་ཆས	necessary requisites, indispensable things	dgos chas
དགོས་ཆས་ལྔ	five needed things	dgos chas lnga
དགོས་ཆེད	need and purpose. benefit and harm gang rung du 'gyur ba'i don	dgos ched
དགོས་ཆེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	dative case	dgos ched kyi sgra
དགོས་ཆེད་ཕན་ཡོན	benefits, purpose and benefits	dgos ched phan yon
དགོས་ཆོས	important things / qualities	dgos chos
དགོས་ཉུང་ཐོན་མང	thon 'bor che drags nas brin mi thub pa	dgos nyung thon mang
དགོས་གཏུགས་ཆེ་བ	urgent need	dgos gtugs che ba
དགོས་ཐག་ཆོད	must, have to	dgos thag chod
དགོས་དུས	whenever you need; x {med thabs med do dgos dus dran par gyis}	dgos dus
ཐིས་ཨིས་ཨིནདིསྤེནསབླེ	remembering it whenever you need it	this is indispensable
དགོས་དོན	significance	dgos don
དགོས་དོན་ལྔ	five aims #	dgos don lnga
དགོས་དོན་བསྟན	show the purpose/ goal/ meaning of necessity/ necessary object/ practical purpose/ reason for a need	dgos don bstan
དགོས་དོན་མེད་པ	need not, not have to	dgos don med pa
དགོས་འདུན	demand, claim	dgos 'dun
དགོས་འདོད	needs, desires and hopes, want	dgos 'dod
དགོས་འདོད་ཀུན་འབྱུང	wish-fulfilling	dgos 'dod kun 'byung
དགོས་འདོད་ཀུན་འབྱུང་བ	that grants all the needs and desires	dgos 'dod kun 'byung ba
དགོས་འདོད་ཀྱི་ཆར	x{dpag tshad stong du dgos 'dod kyi char 'bebs ba'i nor bu phul} offered him a gem which causes 494 whatever is needed to fall like rain for an area a thousand yojanas across	dgos 'dod kyi char
དགོས་འདོད་ཀྱི་གཏེར་ཁ	the wish-fulfilling treasure	dgos 'dod kyi gter kha
དགོས་འདོད་ཆར་དུ་འབེབས་པ	x {'dzam bu gling khyab par dgos 'dod char du 'bebs pa'i nor bu} a gem that left fall whatever anyone desired throughout the whole world	dgos 'dod char du 'bebs pa
དགོས་འདོད་བྱེད	want	dgos 'dod byed
དགོས་འདོད་འབྱུང་བ	to fulfill all needs and wishes	dgos 'dod 'byung ba
དགོས་འདོད་ཞུ་བ	to ask for what I desire	dgos 'dod zhu ba
དགོས་འདོད་རེ་བ	hope for what 1 needs and desires	dgos 'dod re ba
དགོས་འདོད་སློང་བ	to get what I desire	dgos 'dod slong ba
དགོས་ནུས་མེད	unnecessariness	dgos nus med
དགོས་གནས	need, necessity	dgos gnas
དགོས་པ་གྲུབ་པ	achievement of the purpose	dgos pa grub pa
དགོས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great necessity	dgos pa chen po
དགོས་པ་ཆོད	resolve uncertainty	dgos pa chod
དགོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བྱེད་པ	produce all that is needed	dgos pa thams cad byed pa
དགོས་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཚིག	describing the purpose	dgos pa dang bcas pa'i tshig
དགོས་པ་འདྲ	it seems I shall be obliged	dgos pa 'dra
དགོས་པ་བྱེད་ལས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the attribute of purposeful composition	dgos pa byed las kyi khyad par
དགོས་པ་མ་གཏོགས	so long as, only	dgos pa ma gtogs
དགོས་པ་མེད་པ	[ to be] superfluous	dgos pa med pa
དགོས་པ་མེད་པར་བལྟ་བ	disregard	dgos pa med par blta ba
དགོས་པ་ཡིན	you should	dgos pa yin
དགོས་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་འགྲུབ་པ	fulfilling all needs / aims	dgos pa yongs su 'grub pa
དགོས་པ་ཡོད	this will	dgos pa yod
དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པ	has the purpose of	dgos pa yod pa
དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་པ	because of this need	dgos pa yod pa yin pa
དགོས་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	reason for (something) being necessary	dgos pa'i rgyu mtshan
དགོས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	to serve a purpose	dgos pa'i sgo nas
དགོས་པའི་དོན	practical purpose	dgos pa'i don
དགོས་པའི་དབང	the virtue of the need	dgos pa'i dbang
དགོས་པའི་དབང་གིས	by virtue of the need	dgos pa'i dbang gis
དགོས་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	required articles	dgos pa'i yo byad
དགོས་པར་འདོད་སྣང	to feel that one must be	dgos par 'dod snang
དགོས་བྱེད	useful requisite	dgos byed
དགོས་དབང	purpose	dgos dbang
དགོས་དབང་གྱིས་བྱས	done w a purpose/ reason	dgos dbang gyis byas
དགོས་དབང་བརྙས་བཅོས	by a covert purpose of selfish desire of no benefit for others	dgos dbang brnyas bcos
དགོས་དབང་བྱུང་ན	in case the necessity arises	dgos dbang byung na
དགོས་འབྲེལ	shastra composing 'gor purpose dang 'brel ba ste, de'ang skabs bab the subject to be taught de ni brjod bya dang, de nyid 'dzin cing byang chub nas gtsug lag gi dgongs don la 'jug pa'i lam yangs po...	dgos 'brel
དགོས་མང་ཐོན་ཉུང	thon 'bor gyis dgos mkho mi ldang ba	dgos mang thon nyung
དགོས་མེད	renunciation, futility, worthless, pointless, unnecessary, unneeded, has no significance	dgos med
དགོས་མེད་དུ	w/o purpose/ need	dgos med du
དགོས་མེད་མཛེས་མཚོན	dgos don med pa'i 'dra chags kyi mdzes chos	dgos med mdzes mtshon
དགོས་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	liquidationism	dgos med ring lugs
དགོས་མེད་ལྷག་འཁྱིལ	useless dngos lhag	dgos med lhag 'khyil
དགོས་རིང་ཆུ	dgos ring chu	dgos ring chu
དགོས་རེད་དམ	is it true that we have to, it is really necessary	dgos red dam
དགོས་ལབ་པ	demand	dgos lab pa
དགོས་སེ	endearment interjection	dgos se
དགོས་སོགས་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas necessity and so forth	dgos sogs chos bzhi
དགོས་ཨང	really want to	dgos ang
དགྱིག་གི་ཁུ་བ	name of river Sita	dgyig gi khu ba
དགྱིངས	(not in DAS)	dgyings
དགྱིད་རྡོ་རྗེ	name of dgyes pa rdo rje	dgyid rdo rje
དགྱིལ་ཡངས་པ	vast circle	dgyil yangs pa
དགྱེ	be bent/ crooked	dgye
དགྱེ་གུག	bending backwards	dgye gug
དགྱེ་དགུ	bending backwards, moving/ shaking [Mi der khe nyen ga tshod bshad kyang dgye dgu mi byed pa]	dgye dgu
དགྱེ་དགུ་མི་ཤེས་པ	they cannot be bent or curved	dgye dgu mi shes pa
དགྱེ་དགྱེ	bending backwards/ upwards	dgye dgye
དགྱེ་དགྱེ་དགུ་དགུ	bend backwards, moving, shaking	dgye dgye dgu dgu
དགྱེ་དགྱེ་བྱེད	bend backwards/ upwards	dgye dgye byed
དགྱེ་པོ	on the back gzengs bstod pa'i rnam pa/ g.yul sar dgye por langs	dgye po
དགྱེ་བ	(tha mi dad pa lus gyen du g.yo ba or rgyab tu phyogs pa,...Gzugs po rgyab phyogs su dbye ba'i tshul gyis sdod pa,... bend, be curving	dgye ba
དགྱེ་བོ	bent man	dgye bo
དགྱེད	to bend backwards	dgyed
དགྱེད་དགུར	on the back bending backwards and in front stooped/ crooked 495	dgyed dgur
དགྱེད་དགྱེད	crooked backed	dgyed dgyed
དགྱེད་པ	curved	dgyed pa
དགྱེའོ	(A; 1) house w/o stories; 2) surrounding wall	dgye'o
དགྱེར་དགྱེར་བྱེད་པ	to bend backwards	dgyer dgyer byed pa
དགྱེར་བ	to sing, chant	dgyer ba
དགྱེལ་བ	fall down, tumble down	dgyel ba
དགྱེས	pleased, happy; vi. to be pleased, glad, happy, joyful (h), gladness	dgyes
དགྱེས་སྐྱེམས	[arch] feast chang	dgyes skyems
དགྱེས་དགུར	delightful	dgyes dgur
དགྱེས་དགུར་སྤྱོད	enjoy all that is desired	dgyes dgur spyod
དགྱེས་དགུར་སྤྱོད་པ	to enjoy, relish; pleasure, joy, delight, enjoyment	dgyes dgur spyod pa
དགྱེས་དགྱེས	enjoy oneself	dgyes dgyes
དགྱེས་རྒུར་སྤྱོད་པ	do as 1 likes or dga' bde yod do cog longs su spyod pa	dgyes rgur spyod pa
དགྱེས་རྒུར་སྤྱོད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	the rapturous enjoyment of acting as desired	dgyes rgur spyod pa'i longs spyod
དགྱེས་ཉམས	joyful expression	dgyes nyams
དགྱེས་སྟོན	joyful feast/ party [h]	dgyes ston
དགྱེས་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	joyful feast/ party, celebration [h]	dgyes ston rten 'brel
དགྱེས་རྡོར	Hevajra Tantra	dgyes rdor
དགྱེས་རྡོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Hevajratantraraja	dgyes rdor rgyud kyi rgyal po
དགྱེས་རྡོར་བརྟག་པ་ཕྱི་མ	second section of the Hevajra Tantra	dgyes rdor brtag pa phyi ma
དགྱེས་རྡོར་རྩ་རྒྱུད	Hevajra mula tantra	dgyes rdor rtsa rgyud
དགྱེས་ནས	rejoiced	dgyes nas
དགྱེས་པ	{dgyes pa, dgyes pa, dgyes pa} intr. v.; 1) to rejoice, be glad; pleased. 2) to please, delight; 3) delight	dgyes pa
དགྱེས་པ་སྐོང	guard joy	dgyes pa skong
དགྱེས་པ་བསྐྱེད	rejoice	dgyes pa bskyed
དགྱེས་པ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to instill delight	dgyes pa bskyed pa
དགྱེས་པ་ཆེ	greatly pleased	dgyes pa che
དགྱེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Hevajra [anuttara yidam]	dgyes pa rdo rje
རྗེ	rol pa'i rdo rje - dges pa rdo rje}	rje
དགྱེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	sadhana of Hevajra	dgyes pa rdo rje'i sgrub pa'i thabs
དགྱེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུགས་སྲོལ་བདུན	the 7 traditions of Hevajra CHN	dgyes pa rdo rje'i lugs srol bdun
དགྱེས་པའི་གད་མོ	laugh of merriment or rejoicing	dgyes pa'i gad mo
དགྱེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	dam pa dgyes pa'i	dgyes pa'i spyod pa
དགྱེས་པའི་འབངས	humble servant, joyful servant	dgyes pa'i 'bangs
དགྱེས་པར་འཁྲིལ་བ	joyfully embrace	dgyes par 'khril ba
དགྱེས་པར་བྱས	to have pleased	dgyes par byas
དགྱེས་པར་མཛོད་ཅིག	be satisfied	dgyes par mdzod cig
དགྱེས་པར་བཞུགས	sit happily	dgyes par bzhugs
དགྱེས་པར་རོལ	enjoy, take delight in	dgyes par rol
དགྱེས་ཚོར	[feelings of] joy, gladness, pleasure, delight	dgyes tshor
དགྱེས་ཚོར་གནང	be joyful, glad, happy, delighted	dgyes tshor gnang
དགྱེས་མཛད	Hevajra	dgyes mdzad
དགྱེས་མཛད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Hevajra	dgyes mdzad rdo rje
དགྱེས་འཛུམ	[happy] smile	dgyes 'dzum
དགྱེས་ཞལ	joyful expression	dgyes zhal
དགྱེས་བཞིན་སྦྱིན་ནོ	I give this to you joyfully	dgyes bzhin sbyin no
དགྱེས་རོལ	to enjoy, take delight in	dgyes rol
དགྱེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	bend, bend down	dgyes su 'jug pa
དགྲ	enemy, foe, warfare, opponent	dgra
དགྲ་ཁ་བཏད	adversary, antagonist	dgra kha btad
དགྲ་ཁང	enemy's house	dgra khang
དགྲ་གང	turret on top of castle	dgra gang
དགྲ་གྱོང	hard & dangerous enemy	dgra gyong
དགྲ་གྲོགས	1) enemy and friends/allies; 2) in elemental divination compatible/incompatible elements	dgra grogs
དགྲ་བགེགས	enemies and obstructers / hindrances; religious enemy	dgra bgegs
དགྲ་བགེགས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	body - form of the enemies and obstructers	dgra bgegs kyi gzugs
དགྲ་བགེགས་ཀྱི་ལིང་ག	effigy for the enemies and obstructers dgra bgegs bsgral ba la hom bskyed pa Visualization of the triangular pit (hom bskyed) for the liberation of the enemies and obstructers	dgra bgegs kyi ling ga
དགྲ་མགོ	chief enemy, chief of the enemies	dgra mgo
དགྲ་འགོག	resistance [against an enemy]	dgra 'gog
དགྲ་འགོག་དམག་འཁྲུག	war of resistance	dgra 'gog dmag 'khrug
དགྲ་འགོག་ལས་འགུལ	resistance movement	dgra 'gog las 'gul
དགྲ་འགོག་ས་འོབས	moat	dgra 'gog sa 'obs
དགྲ་རྒྱག་པ	1) fight, make war, battle; 2) ravish and plunder	dgra rgyag pa
དགྲ་ངན	evil enemy	dgra ngan
དགྲ་བཅོམ	an Arhat	dgra bcom
དགྲ་བཅོམ་བཅོམ་པ་དྲུག	the six arhats	dgra bcom bcom pa drug
དགྲ་བཅོམ་གཉིས	the two kinds of arhats CHN	dgra bcom gnyis
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ཐོབ་པ	has become an Arhat	dgra bcom thob pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་མཐོང་ཐོབ་པ	attain the seeing of an arhat	dgra bcom mthong thob pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་བདུན	the 7 arhats [Indian mngon pa sde bdun sdud mkhan slob dpon mi bdun: katya'i bu dang, dbyig bshes, bram ze lha skyid, sh' ri'i bu, mo'u gal gyi bu, gsus po che, gang po]	dgra bcom bdun
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ	foe destroyer [thd]	dgra bcom pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་རྒྱན་ཅན	"adorned" arhat	dgra bcom pa rgyan can
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་རྒྱན་མེད	"unadorned" arhat	dgra bcom pa rgyan med
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ཉི་མ་གུང་པ	the arhat ni\yi ma gung pa	dgra bcom pa nyi ma gung pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་གཉིས	two kinds of arhats: 1) in terms of renunciation: shes rab kyis rnam par grol ba, gnyis ka'i cha las rnam par grol ba; 2) in terms of vehicle or support: shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats]	dgra bcom pa gnyis
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ཐོབ་པ	to attain arhatship	dgra bcom pa thob pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ཐོབ་བོ	became an Arhat	dgra bcom pa thob bo
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་དྲུག	six types of arhat #	dgra bcom pa drug
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter into the state of an arhat	dgra bcom pa la 'jug pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་གནས་གཉིས	the pair which enters and becomes established as arhats	dgra bcom pa la zhugs gnas gnyis
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of arhat [R]	dgra bcom pa gsum
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་གསོད་པ	arhatcide	dgra bcom pa gsod pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་བསད་པ	killing an arhat	dgra bcom pa bsad pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ལྷག་བཅས	arhat with residual traces	dgra bcom pa lhag bcas
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ལྷག་མེད	arhat without residual traces	dgra bcom pa lhag med
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པའི་གོ་འཕང	the arhat level, arhathood	dgra bcom pa'i go 'phang
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པའི་ཕུང་པོ་མཐའ་མ	rang rgyud pa man chad kyis lhag bcas myang 'das rgyud ldan gyi phung po lta bur 'dod do	dgra bcom pa'i phung po mtha' ma
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of arhatship [one of the dge sbyong gi 'bras bu bzhi, having abandoned all to be abandoned by meditation in the three realms have conquered the enemy, the four maras]	dgra bcom pa'i 'bras bu
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པའི་རིགས་གསུམ	the three kinds of arhats CHN	dgra bcom pa'i rigs gsum
དགྲ་བཅོམ་པའི་སེམས	the mind of an arhat [w/o kleshas and obscurations]	dgra bcom pa'i sems
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ཕྱིན་མི་འོང	the non returning state of an arhat	dgra bcom phyin mi 'ong
དགྲ་བཅོམ་འཕགས་པའི་མཉམ་གཞག	the meditation state of a noble arhat	dgra bcom 'phags pa'i mnyam gzhag
དགྲ་བཅོམ་འབྲས་གནས	abider in the fruit of foe destroyer. Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {srid nyon dgu pa de nam spangs na khams gsum gyi kun spyod 'ching ba las grol te dgra bcom 'bras gnas su 'gro ba yin}	dgra bcom 'bras gnas
དགྲ་བཅོམ་མ	arhat [female practitioner who has abandoned all obscurations and kleshas]	dgra bcom ma
དགྲ་བཅོམ་གཙུག་ཕུད་ཅན	King Lang Darma, bstan pa nyams rjes monks sham thabs gong ba can gyon, sgra gzhan bzhar, gtsug phud bzhag dbyar zla gsum dgon par dbyar gnas bcas, ston dgun dpyid gsum khyim thab dang grong pa'i m...	dgra bcom gtsug phud can
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ཞུགས	{dgra bcom zhugs pa}	dgra bcom zhugs
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ཞུགས་པ	approacher to foe destroyer [one of the zhugs gnas brgyad, 1 of the dge 'dun nyi shu, from the 1st dhyana up to the peak of samsara abandoning all kleshas sbyor ba can]	dgra bcom zhugs pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་བསད་པ	killing a buddhist saint, 1 of 5 mtshams med pa	dgra bcom bsad pa
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ལྷག་བཅས	arhat w remainder (of upadhi	dgra bcom lhag bcas
དགྲ་བཅོམ་ལྷག་མེད	arhat w/o remainder (of upadhi	dgra bcom lhag med
དགྲ་ཆ	expectations as to one's enemies	dgra cha
དགྲ་ཆས	weapons and military equipment	dgra chas
དགྲ་ཆས་ཅན	armed [w weapons and military equipment]	dgra chas can
དགྲ་ཆས་ཅན་གྱི་དཔུང་དམག	armed forces	dgra chas can gyi dpung dmag
དགྲ་ཆས་འཕྲོག་སྡུད	capture of weapons and military equipment	dgra chas 'phrog sdud
དགྲ་ཆོས	enemy suppressing liturgy	dgra chos
དགྲ་འཇོམས	overcome/ conquer the enemy	dgra 'joms
དགྲ་འཇོམས་གནམ་གྲུ	fighter/ military plane	dgra 'joms gnam gru
དགྲ་ཉམས	destruction of the enemy	dgra nyams
དགྲ་གཉེན	friend and foe, enemies	dgra gnyen
དགྲ་གཉེན་ཆགས་སྡང་མེད་པ	without any attachment to friends or aversion to enemies	dgra gnyen chags sdang med pa
དགྲ་གཉེན་བཏང་སྙོམས་གསུམ	enemies, friends or neutrals 497	dgra gnyen btang snyoms gsum
དགྲ་གཉེན་བར་མ	enemies, friends or neutrals	dgra gnyen bar ma
དགྲ་གཉེན་བར་གསུམ	enemies, friends or neutrals	dgra gnyen bar gsum
དགྲ་གཉེན་དབྱེར་མེད་གོ་བ	to stop distinguishing between enemies and friends	dgra gnyen dbyer med go ba
དགྲ་གཉེན་གསལ་འབྱེད	drawing a line between enemies and friends	dgra gnyen gsal 'byed
དགྲ་གཉེན་གསལ་འབྱེད་བྱེད	draw a line between enemies and friends	dgra gnyen gsal 'byed byed
དགྲ་སྟ	axe with semi-circular blade, weapon of war	dgra sta
དགྲ་སྟ་ཅན	frightful	dgra sta can
དགྲ་སྟ་བ	one who holds the axe	dgra sta ba
དགྲ་སྟྭ	ax, battle ax	dgra stwa
དགྲ་སྟབས	fighting	dgra stabs
དགྲ་སྟའི་དུམ་བུ	deity dbang phyug chen po	dgra sta'i dum bu
དགྲ་ཐབས	enemy conquering thabs jus	dgra thabs
དགྲ་ཐམས་ཅད	the adversaries	dgra thams cad
དགྲ་དག་པ	give pains, take vengeance	dgra dag pa
དགྲ་དང་གྲོགས	friends and enemies	dgra dang grogs
དགྲ་དུ་སློང་བ	enemy, cause a person to rise in revolt	dgra du slong ba
དགྲ་གདོག་ནུས་རྩལ	fighting techniques	dgra gdog nus rtsal
དགྲ་གདོན	enemies and d"ns	dgra gdon
དགྲ་འདུལ	to vanquish their opponents / enemies	dgra 'dul
དགྲ་འདུལ་གཉེན་སྐྱོང	take care of your friends and finish off your enemies	dgra 'dul gnyen skyong
དགྲ་འདུལ་གཉེན་སྐྱོང་གི་སེམས	a mind which subdues enemies and keeps friends	dgra 'dul gnyen skyong gi sems
དགྲ་འདུལ་དཔུང་འཇུག	lead an army to conquer an enemy	dgra 'dul dpung 'jug
དགྲ་འདུལ་བ	to defeat the enemy	dgra 'dul ba
དགྲ་འདུལ་བྱེད	subdue conquer the enemy	dgra 'dul byed
དགྲ་འདུལ་རླུང་གཤོག	Dradül Lung Shok, mountain in Amnye Machen	dgra 'dul rlung gshog
དགྲ་འདུལ་ལུགས	way of subduing the enemy, tradition of conquerors	dgra 'dul lugs
དགྲ་འདེད	1) dgra bo mthar skrod pa; 2) in elemental divination depending on which are friendly figure enemies [Shing dgra lcad,...Lcags dgra me,...Me dgra chu,...Chu dgra sa,...Sa dgra shing]	dgra 'ded
དགྲ་འདྲེ	enemies and ghosts	dgra 'dre
དགྲ་སྡང་བ	hostile enemies	dgra sdang ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of fear of meeting w hostile enemies dgra sdang ba dang phrad kyi dogs pa'i	sdug bsngal
དགྲ་ནག	sworn enemy	dgra nag
དགྲ་ནག་གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད	the sworn enemy of the lord of death Yamantaka	dgra nag gshin rje gshed
དགྲ་རྣམས	[multitude of] enemies	dgra rnams
དགྲ་དཔུང	enemy army	dgra dpung
དགྲ་དཔོན	warlord, enemy general	dgra dpon
དགྲ་ཕཡབ༹	enemy divination	dgra phyva
དགྲ་ཕྱྭ	divination about possible attacks from enemies or negative forces, enemy, hostile external forces which can cause disturbances	dgra phywa
དགྲ་ཕྱོགས	opponents	dgra phyogs
དགྲ་ཕྱོགས་གྲལ་རིམ	enemy classes	dgra phyogs gral rim
དགྲ་བ་སྤུ་གྲི་དམར་ནག	the black and red enemy razor knives	dgra ba spu gri dmar nag
དགྲ་བོ	enemy	dgra bo
དགྲ་བོ་ཐུལ་ཅིག	wage war on your [true] enemy!	dgra bo thul cig
དགྲ་བོ་གདུང་བ	one who has destroyed his enemy	dgra bo gdung ba
དགྲ་བོ་ཡིན་ཡང	those who are really our enemies	dgra bo yin yang
དགྲ་བོའི	hostile	dgra bo'i
དགྲ་བོའི་དྭངས་མ	chief enemy	dgra bo'i dwangs ma
དགྲ་བོའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of an enemy	dgra bo'i 'du shes
དགྲ་བོའི་འདུ་ཤེས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	to regard someone as an enemy	dgra bo'i 'du shes su byed pa
དགྲ་བོའི་གཟུགས	body of the enemy	dgra bo'i gzugs
དགྲ་བྱེད	act as enemy/ foe/ opponent, wage war	dgra byed
དགྲ་བྱེད་པ	act in a hostile manner	dgra byed pa
དགྲ་བླ	war god, SA sgra bla	dgra bla
དགྲ་མང་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	increase in enemies	dgra mang du 'gyur ba
དགྲ་མི་ཤ	mortal enemy	dgra mi sha
དགྲ་མི་ཤ་བོ	deadly enemy	dgra mi sha bo
དགྲ་དམག	enemy army/ troops	dgra dmag
དགྲ་རྩ	fundamental enemy [having figured which elements are ma bu dgra grogs in element divination 'byung ba brtzis rtza brtag skabs like water being the enemy of fire = dgra rtza]	dgra rtsa
དགྲ་ཞུ	[arch] helmet	dgra zhu
དགྲ་གཞོམ་པ	SA dgra bcom pa	dgra gzhom pa
དགྲ་བཞི་འདུལ་བ	samayas of Anu Yoga	dgra bzhi 'dul ba
དགྲ་བཞི་གཞོམ་པ	four enemies to be destroyed [according to the commitments of anu yoga the enemy which willfully lapses into artificiality with respect to view, meditation and conduct, the enemy which prattles abo...	dgra bzhi gzhom pa
དགྲ་བཞི་ལམ་ཁྱེར	Bringing the Four Enemies into the Path. An instruction by Gampopa	dgra bzhi lam khyer
དགྲ་བཞིན་དུ་བལྟ་བ	regards you as an enemy	dgra bzhin du blta ba
དགྲ་ཟིན	rival, opponent, adversary	dgra zin
དགྲ་ཟུན	enemy and friend	dgra zun
དགྲ་ཟོན	always on guard, careful	dgra zon
དགྲ་ཟོན་བྱེད	be on guard/ careful [lest enemies come]/ vigilant, take precautions	dgra zon byed
དགྲ་ཟོན་བྱེད་པ	to be on guard, watch one's back, stay alert to enemies	dgra zon byed pa
དགྲ་ཟོར	hatchet 498	dgra zor
དགྲ་ཟླ	1) rival, opponent, kha gtad; 2) mtshungs pa gsal bshad kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	dgra zla
དགྲ་ཟླར	hostility	dgra zlar
དགྲ་ཡ	rival, opponent, adversary	dgra ya
དགྲ་ཡའི་རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས	behind enemy lines, in a hostile area	dgra ya'i rgyab phyogs
དགྲ་ཡའི་གནས་ཚུལ	intelligence about the enemy	dgra ya'i gnas tshul
དགྲ་ཡི་ཁྱིམ	enemy's house	dgra yi khyim
དགྲ་ཡིས་གཅོད་པ	1 of 4 phyogs kyi gcod bgegs	dgra yis gcod pa
དགྲ་རུ་ལྡང་བ	break out into hostilities	dgra ru ldang ba
དགྲ་བརླག	killed the enemy	dgra brlag
དགྲ་ལ་བདོ་བ	hurt an enemy	dgra la bdo ba
དགྲ་ལ་བསྡོས	made a venture against an enemy	dgra la bsdos
དགྲ་ལ་འཛིངས་པ	fights his enemy	dgra la 'dzings pa
དགྲ་ལན	retaliation, revenge, counterattack	dgra lan
དགྲ་ལན་རྒྱག	take revenge, counterattack, retaliate	dgra lan rgyag
དགྲ་ལན་རིང་ལུགས	revanchism [retaliation/ revenge/ counter-attack-ism]	dgra lan ring lugs
དགྲ་ལན་སློག	take revenge, counterattack, retaliate	dgra lan slog
དགྲ་ལས་རྒྱལ་བ	victory over opponents	dgra las rgyal ba
དགྲ་ལས་འཆོས་པ	to overcome the enemy	dgra las 'chos pa
དགྲ་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	jetari	dgra las rnam rgyal
དགྲ་ཤ	revenge, vengeance	dgra sha
དགྲ་ཤ་པ	object of revenge [like someone who killed one's father]	dgra sha pa
དགྲ་ཤ་བོ	chief enemy	dgra sha bo
དགྲ་ཤ་ལེན	take revenge, avenge	dgra sha len
དགྲ་ཤ་ལེན་པ	to retaliate, take revenge	dgra sha len pa
དགྲ་ཤགས	substitute in cattle supplied for killing another's animals	dgra shags
དགྲ་ཤུ་ལེན་འདོད་ཅན	vengeful	dgra shu len 'dod can
དགྲ་གཤེད	enemy relation	dgra gshed
དགྲ་ས	enemy	dgra sa
དགྲ་སེམས	mind that fixates enemies	dgra sems
དགྲ་སྲི	sngar dgra byung ba'i lo zla'i dus mtshams su slar yang dgra 'byung ba der dgra sri zer	dgra sri
དགྲ་སློང་བ	search for one's enemy	dgra slong ba
དགྲ་གསུམ་བསད་པ	kill the three enemies	dgra gsum bsad pa
དགྲ་གསོད་དཔའ་བོ་དཀར་པོ	camphor	dgra gsod dpa' bo dkar po
དགྲ་བསད་ནས	killing the enemies	dgra bsad nas
དགྲ་ལྷ	Warrior spirit. Dralha	dgra lha
དགྲ་ལྷ་དཔང་བསྟོད	hymns or religious service to the war god	dgra lha dpang bstod
དགྲ་ལྷའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་པེ་ཀར	King Pekar of	dgra lha'i rgyal po pe kar
ཐེ་ཝརྲིཨོར	spirits	the Warrior
དགྲག་དགྲུག	shaking, nodding	dgrag dgrug
དགྲག་དགྲུག་བྱེད	shake, nod	dgrag dgrug byed
དགྲད་པ	[arch] bgrad pa, spread	dgrad pa
དགྲན་ཟླ	rival, opponent, adversary	dgran zla
དགྲམ	[f {'grems} put, place, distribute	dgram
དགྲམ་པ	to spread it	dgram pa
དགྲམ་ཕྱིས་པ	pervade	dgram phyis pa
དགྲམས	that which is to be arranged or set out	dgrams
དགྲའི་དྭངས་མ	dgra bo'i dvangs mag	dgra'i dwangs ma
དགྲའི་དབང་དུ་སོང་བ	overcome by the enemy	dgra'i dbang du song ba
དགྲར	as an enemy, as an opponent	dgrar
དགྲར་གྱུར	become/ be an enemy	dgrar gyur
དགྲར་ལྟ	to regard as an enemy	dgrar lta
དགྲར་དེད་པ	chasing the enemy	dgrar ded pa
དགྲར་ལྡང་བ	to regard as opponents	dgrar ldang ba
དགྲར་ལྡོག་པ	renew the war	dgrar ldog pa
དགྲར་འཛིན	regard as an enemy	dgrar 'dzin
དགྲར་འཛིན་གྲལ་རིམ	enemy class	dgrar 'dzin gral rim
དགྲར་ལང་བ	to rise up as enemies	dgrar lang ba
དགྲར་སེམས་པ་འཛིན་པ	look upon one as an enemy	dgrar sems pa 'dzin pa
དགྲར་སློང	conflict, clash	dgrar slong
དགྲལ	to take across	dgral
དགྲས	(not in DAS)	dgras
དགྲས་འཇོམས་པ	would be destroyed by their enemy	dgras 'joms pa
དགྲས་བཟུང་ས་ཁུལ	enemy territory	dgras bzung sa khul
དགྲས་བརླག	destroyed by the adversary	dgras brlag
དགྲུང	purify, filter, strain	dgrung
དགྲེལ	to explain, to make clear	dgrel
དགྲེས་པ	to rejoice	dgres pa
དགྲོང	fut. of {'grongs}; f. of {'grongs}	dgrong
དགྲོང་པ	die	dgrong pa
དགྲོང་བ	(tha mi dad pa bkrongs pa, dgrong pa, dgrongs,, be killed [h] die (H	dgrong ba
དགྲོངས	dgrong ba! [f {'grongs} will die (H	dgrongs
དགྲོལ	[f {'grol} be liberated, untie, loosen	dgrol
དགྲོལ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	inextricable	dgrol thabs med pa
དགྲོལ་བ	{f of 'grol ba] be liberated, untie, loosen	dgrol ba
བག་མེད་པ	unconcern [one of the {sems las byung lnga bcu nga gcig - 51 mental events, {nye nyon nye shu} = 20 proximate kleshas	bga med pa
བགག	[p {bgags},, be blocked/ obstructed	bgag
བགག་བརྒལ་བང་རྩལ	obstacle race	bgag brgal bang rtsal
བགག་པ	{bgag pa, bgags pa, bgag pa, bgogs} trans. v.; ft. of {bgag pa}	bgag pa
བགག་ཙམ	merely denied	bgag tsam
བགགས་པ	obstructed, SA 'gegs pa, refutation	bgags pa
བགད	laughed, joked	bgad
བགད་པ	laughed; ft. of {dgod pa}; ft. of {'gad pa}	bgad pa
བགད་མོ	laughed, joked	bgad mo
བགད་མོ་བགད་པ	laugh	bgad mo bgad pa
བགད་མོ་བགོད	laugh	bgad mo bgod
བགད་མོ་བྲོ་པོ	funny, humorous	bgad mo bro po
བགད་མོ་ཤོར	burst out laughing	bgad mo shor
བགབ	cover up, SA 'gebs pa	bgab
བགམ	p. {bgams} to test, to estimate [usu. follows {tshod}	bgam
བགམ་པ	eat, gobble, throw into the mouth	bgam pa
བགམས	(p {bgams},, tested, tried, estimated	bgams
བགལ	obstruction	bgal
བགལ་རྐྱེན	obstacles	bgal rkyen
བགལ་རྐྱེན་པར་དུ་གཅོད་པ	obstacles and interruptions	bgal rkyen par du gcod pa
བགས	cleave, SA 'ges pa	bgas
བགས་ཆགས	predisposition	bgas chags
བགས་ཆགས་ནུས་པ	potency	bgas chags nus pa
བགུ་སུ་ཀུ་ལྦ	yidam, exalted deity	bgu su ku lba
བགེགས	geks, obstructing spirits	bgegs
བགེགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	ganesha the remover of obstacles	bgegs kyi rgyal po
བགེགས་ཀྱི་བདག་མོ	goddess	bgegs kyi bdag mo
བགེགས་ཀྱི་མཚོ	{bgegs kyi mtsho} [of {bdud mo bzhi}	bgegs kyi mtsho
བགེགས་རྐྱེན	obstacles of geks,	bgegs rkyen
བགེགས་སྐྱོན	trouble arising from harm from geks	bgegs skyon
བགེགས་སྐྲད	scaring away the obstructers	bgegs skrad
བགེགས་བསྐྲད	1) exorcise obstructing spirits; 2) dispel obstructing forces	bgegs bskrad
བགེགས་བསྐྲད་ནས	having exorcised the obstructing spirits	bgegs bskrad nas
བགེགས་བསྐྲད་པ	to dispel obstructing forces; to banish/ banishing hindrances	bgegs bskrad pa
བགེགས་འཁྲད་བྱེད	expel the evil (from one's body)	bgegs 'khrad byed
བགེགས་གཏོར	Gektor	bgegs gtor
བགེགས་གཏོར་བསྔོ་བ	give / assign a torma to the obstructers	bgegs gtor bsngo ba
བགེགས་མཐར་བྱེད	a wrathful deity	bgegs mthar byed
བགེགས་བར་ཆད	obstacles and hindrances	bgegs bar chad
བགེགས་བྱེད་པ	create obstacles, obstruct, hinder, block, cause misfortune	bgegs byed pa
བགེགས་དབང་བར་ཆད	sudden harm or misfortune from dons and demons	bgegs dbang bar chad
བགེགས་འཚུབ	hindrance, obstacle [by evil spirits]	bgegs 'tshub
བགེགས་བཟློག་ཆོག	exorcism	bgegs bzlog chog
བགེགས་རིགས	[the class of] geks [obstructing spirits	bgegs rigs
བགེགས་རིགས་སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	the 80,000 kinds of obstructing forces	bgegs rigs stong phrag brgyad cu
བགེགས་ལིང	effigy in the form of enemies and obstructing spirits	bgegs ling
བགེགས་སེལ	Clearing hindrances away	bgegs sel
བགེགས་སེལ་བ	remove obstruction or calamity or disease	bgegs sel ba
བགེགས་སོགས་བསྲུངས	guard against evil spirits	bgegs sogs bsrungs
བགེགས་གསལ	clearing away obstacles, the obstructing forces	bgegs gsal
བགེགས་བསལ་བ	clearing away the obstructing forces	bgegs bsal ba
བགེས	cleave, SA 'ges pa	bges
བགོ	fut. of {bgod}. 2) to wear, to put on, to share; f. of {bgod}. 2) to wear, to put on, to share	bgo
བགོ་སྐལ	portion, doctrine of strict retribution	bgo skal
བགོ་སྐལ་སྤྱོད	strict result	bgo skal spyod
བགོ་སྐལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	apportion	bgo skal la spyod pa
བགོ་འགྲེམས	divide, distribute, cut up	bgo 'grems
བགོ་ཉེས	error in [way of] division	bgo nyes
བགོ་རྟགས	division sign	bgo rtags
བགོ་ཐབས	1) way of dividing; 2) division	bgo thabs
བགོ་བ	(Tha dad pa bgos pa, bgo ba, bgos,, 1) wear, put/ have on [clothes, saddle]; 2) divide, allot; 3) share, quota; 4) clothing	bgo ba
བགོ་བ་དང་བཟའ་བ	food and clothes	bgo ba dang bza' ba
བགོ་བའི་གོས་གསུམ	three garments worn	bgo ba'i gos gsum
པགས་པ	human-skin cloak {glang chen	pags pa
གྱི་ཀོ་རློན	elephant-skin cloak {stag lpags kyi sham thabs} tiger-skin skirt.]	gyi ko rlon
བགོ་བྱ	dividend [math]	bgo bya
བགོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲངས	divisor	bgo byed kyi grangs
བགོ་རྩིས	division [math]	bgo rtsis
བགོ་ཚུལ	way of/ time-table for apportioning/ wearing/ dividing	bgo tshul
བགོ་གཞི	thing/ number to be divided/ distributed	bgo gzhi
བགོ་གཞི་རགས་པ	thur grib skabs su [khyim so so'i bgo gzhi rags pa de] thur ma'i rang grib bdun po dang btsugs pa'i grib ma bsdoms pas, depending on division examine the actual time [bgo ba la brten nas ngo thog [...	bgo gzhi rags pa
བགོ་གཟེ	base of infusion	bgo gze
བགོ་རིས་སུ་གཅོད	divide in individual portions	bgo ris su gcod
བགོ་རེ	[arch] rectangular building	bgo re
བགོ་ལུགས	way of/ time-table for apportioning/ wearing/ dividing	bgo lugs
བགོ་ཤ	division	bgo sha
བགོ་བཤ	SA bgo skal	bgo bsha
བགོ་བཤའ	SA bgo skal	bgo bsha'
བགོ་བཤའ་བགོད	distribute, allot, assign, separate,allocate, apportion	bgo bsha' bgod
བགོ་བཤའ་རྒྱག་པ	to distribute, allot, assign, separate	bgo bsha' rgyag pa
བགོ་བཤའ་རྒྱབ་པ	share, distribute, allot, apportion	bgo bsha' rgyab pa
བགོ་བཤའ་བྱེད་པ	to divide, distribute, apportion	bgo bsha' byed pa
བགོ་བཤར་བྱས	distributed	bgo bshar byas
བགོ་འཤ	part, portion, lot [allotted retribution]	bgo 'sha
བགོ་འཤའི་བྱེད་པ	to divide up, share	bgo 'sha'i byed pa
བགོ་འཤའི་ལ་དབང་བ་ཉིད	power of apportioning	bgo 'sha'i la dbang ba nyid
བགོགས	obstruct! oppose!	bgogs
བགོད	1) (Tha dad pa bgos pa, bgo ba, bgos,, divide, distribute, share, divide, allot, apportion; 2) [arch] exhaust use up; 3) laughter	bgod
བགོད་འགྲེམས	distribution, allocation	bgod 'grems
བགོད་འགྲེམས་བྱེད	distribute, allocate	bgod 'grems byed
བགོད་པ	to allot	bgod pa
བགོད་པ་པོ	divider	bgod pa po
བགོད་བྱེད	divisor	bgod byed
བགོད་རྩིས	division [math]	bgod rtsis
བགོད་ཡས	protection, a number	bgod yas
བགོད་ར	apportionment, share	bgod ra
བགོན་བཅས་པ	they have to help them	bgon bcas pa
བགོམ	(p {bgoms},, walk/ step over, test!	bgom
བགོམ་འགྲོ་བ	pace, walk slowly	bgom 'gro ba
བགོམ་པ	walk, step, stride, pace	bgom pa
བགོམ་བྱ	way, road	bgom bya
བགོམས	imp. of {'gom pa}; p. of {bgom}	bgoms
བགོམས་པ	walked, stepped over	bgoms pa
བགོར	1) take time, elapse; 2) live	bgor
བགོར་བ	{bgor ba, bgor ba, bgor ba, bgor} trans. v	bgor ba
བགོར་མ་ཐུབ	{nga'i rta 'di bgor ma thub pas rta 'di khog dang byas pa} "I have lost control of my horse please stop it," he yelled	bgor ma thub
བགོལ་རྐྱེན	any circumstance adverse to the success of an action, obstacle	bgol rkyen
བགོས	divide, SA bgod pa, put on clothes, SA bgo ba, divide	bgos
བགོས་མཁན	dealer	bgos mkhan
བགོས་འགྲེམས	divide, distribute, cut up	bgos 'grems
བགོས་འགྲེམས་བྱེད་པ	dispense, distribute	bgos 'grems byed pa
བགོས་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indivisible	bgos thabs med pa
བགོས་ཐོབ	share of something divided up, dividend [math]	bgos thob
བགོས་པ	1) divided, apportioned; 2) wore	bgos pa
བགོས་པའི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns that are 1's lot	bgos pa'i bag chags
བགོས་འབབ	1) 1's portion; 2) quotient	bgos 'bab
བགོས་འཚོང	ration, quota system [in selling]	bgos 'tshong
བགོས་འཚོང་བྱེད	ration, sell by quota system	bgos 'tshong byed
བགྱང	postpone, delay	bgyang
བགྱང་བ	(tha dad pa bgyangs pa, bgyang ba, bgyongs,, postpone, delay	bgyang ba
བགྱངས	postponed, delayed	bgyangs
བགྱངས་པ	1) postponed, delayed; 2) will make/ manufacture; 3) work / action; 4) [arch] say; 5) extend, stretch, spread out	bgyangs pa
བགྱི	1) will make, manufacture, [be about to] do [genitive particle (sm {gi}	bgyi
བགྱི་འདུག	present tense complement	bgyi 'dug
བགྱི་བ	deeds	bgyi ba
བགྱི་བ་དཀའ་བ	hard to do	bgyi ba dka' ba
མཆིས་པ	still unfinished or completely finished; lit. 'having something to do' and 'not having anything to do.'	mchis pa
བགྱི་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement 501	bgyi yod pa red
བགྱིངས	(not in DAS)	bgyings
བགྱིད	make, manufacture, do	bgyid
བགྱིད་དུ་བཅུག	{dge mi dge gang yang rang gis bgyis pa dang, gzhan la bgyid du bcug na yang 'dra'o,} It is the same whether a certain virtue or nonvirtue is done by oneself or whether one induces another person t...	bgyid du bcug
བགྱིད་དུ་སྩལ	commanded to do	bgyid du stsal
བགྱིད་དུ་བསྩལ་བ	make someone else do, make do	bgyid du bstsal ba
བགྱིད་ལྡན་བཞུད	a tathagata	bgyid ldan bzhud
བགྱིད་པ	(tha dad pa bgyis pa, bgyi ba, gyis,, do, make, manufacture	bgyid pa
བགྱིད་པ་པོ	doer, actor; in context of a text colophon: "the composer" [mss]	bgyid pa po
བགྱིད་སྩལ	make do, order to do	bgyid stsal
བགྱིད་ལ་ཉེས་པོ	lazy	bgyid la nyes po
བགྱིས	do, deed, act, make, SA bgyid pa	bgyis
བགྱིས་པ	1) did, made; 2) action, deed	bgyis pa
བགྱིས་པ་དང་ནི	having done or about to do	bgyis pa dang ni
བགྱིས་པ་དང་ནི་བགྱི	having done or about to do	bgyis pa dang ni bgyi
བགྱིས་པ་དང་ནི་བགྱིད་སྩལ་པ	done and made others do	bgyis pa dang ni bgyid stsal pa
བགྱིས་པ་དང་ནི་བྱིད་སྩལ་པ	now and in the past	bgyis pa dang ni byid stsal pa
བགྱུད་པ	generations	bgyud pa
བགྱུར	(not in DAS)	bgyur
བགྱེ	going asunder, diffuse, SA 'gyed pa	bgye
བགྱེར་བ	ejaculating, chanting, SA 'gyer ba	bgyer ba
བགྱེས	p. of {'gyed}	bgyes
བགྱོངས	imp. of {bgyang ba}	bgyongs
བགྲ་བཅོམ་པ	arhat, foe destroyer	bgra bcom pa
བགྲང	p. bgrangs - 1) to count, to enumerate, calculation, to calculate, rosary-counting. 2) to tell, to give an account of, to relate, to list, enumerate; count/ retain	bgrang
རོསརཡ	counting; 3) tell, give an account of; 4) list	rosary
བགྲང་གིས་མི་ལང་ངོ	uncountable	bgrang gis mi lang ngo
བགྲང་རྟོགས	a very large number	bgrang rtogs
བགྲང་དུ་མེད་པ	uncountable, infinite, innumerable, immeasurable, incalculable, inestimable, measureless	bgrang du med pa
བགྲང་ཕྲེང	bead-counting	bgrang phreng
བགྲང་ཕྲེང་འཛིན	mala grasper (met) Agni deva [god of fire, depicted w mala]	bgrang phreng 'dzin
བགྲང་འཕྱེས	a great number	bgrang 'phyes
བགྲང་འཕྲེང	rosary beads, rosary for counting	bgrang 'phreng
བགྲང་བ	{bde bar gshegs pa'i mthu ni bgrang bar mi nus so} but you cannot count the powers of the Sugata	bgrang ba
བགྲང་བ་དང་དྲོ་བ	chilled and heated	bgrang ba dang dro ba
བགྲང་བ་ཡང	even counting	bgrang ba yang
བགྲང་བ་ལས་ཤིན་ཏུ་འདས་པ	beyond calculation and number	bgrang ba las shin tu 'das pa
བགྲང་བྱ	to be counted [met 1 time two year]	bgrang bya
བགྲང་གཞི	basis of counting, year	bgrang gzhi
བགྲང་ཡལ	low, a great number	bgrang yal
བགྲང་ཡས	countless	bgrang yas
བགྲང་ཡས་པ	countless	bgrang yas pa
བགྲང་ཡོལ	that cannot be measured	bgrang yol
བགྲངས	1) counted, calculated; 2) rosary-counting; 3) told, gave an account of; 4) listed	bgrangs
བགྲངས་པ	pf. of {bgrang ba}	bgrangs pa
བགྲངས་པ་ལ་འདས	that is past counting	bgrangs pa la 'das
བགྲངས་པ་ལ་འདས་པ	infinite, innumerable, immeasurable, incalculable, inestimable, measureless, uncountable	bgrangs pa la 'das pa
བགྲད	1) spread apart; 2) open wide, gape; 3) put sideways; 4) stretch out	bgrad
བགྲད་པ	spread, enter, open wide, scratch	bgrad pa
བགྲམ་པ	separated, anxious	bgram pa
བགྲིལ་བ	(tha dad pa,, fall downward [in a spiral] ['gril du 'jug pa could also mean combine, pool.]	bgril ba
བགྲུ	to husk, to hull	bgru
བགྲུ་བ	(tha dad pa bgrus pa, bgru ba, bgrus,, thresh/ hull grain	bgru ba
བགྲུགས་པ	agitated	bgrugs pa
བགྲུང་བ	(tha dad pa bgrungs pa, bgrung ba, bgrungs,, strain (water	bgrung ba
བགྲུངས	imp. of {bgrung ba}	bgrungs
བགྲུངས་པ	strained [water]	bgrungs pa
བགྲུད	husk, hull, thresh	bgrud
བགྲུད་པ	husk, shell, thresh	bgrud pa
བགྲུས	husk[ed][!], thresh[ed][!]	bgrus
བགྲུས་འཁོར	roller	bgrus 'khor
བགྲུས་རྒྱག་པ	thresh [stamp on grain and toss in the wind to remove husks]	bgrus rgyag pa
བགྲུས་པ	pf. of {bgru ba}	bgrus pa
བགྲུས་པའི་འབྲས	husked rice	bgrus pa'i 'bras
བགྲུས་མ	threshed grain	bgrus ma
བགྲེ	Syn bgre	bgre
བགྲེ་བ	[arch] roll back and forth [horse] 502	bgre ba
བགྲེང	SA sgeng ba, bgrang ba	bgreng
བགྲེང་ཕྲེང	rosary to count the names of saints	bgreng phreng
བགྲེང་བ	count	bgreng ba
བགྲེན་པ	SA bkren pa	bgren pa
བགྲེན་པོ	miser, beggar	bgren po
བགྲེས	vi. to age, to grow old (h)	bgres
བགྲེས་རྒུད་མི་མངའ་བ	subject to neither decay nor decline	bgres rgud mi mnga' ba
བགྲེས་པ	{bgres pa, bgres pa, bgres pa} intr. v	bgres pa
བགྲེས་པོ	1) old, senior, aged; 2) uncle, grandpa (h	bgres po
བགྲེས་མོ	old [for females] (h)	bgres mo
བགྲེས་ཤོས	senior, oldest	bgres shos
བགྲེས་སོང	old people, the aged	bgres song
བགྲེས་སོན	grown old na tshod mthon por son pa	bgres son
བགྲོ	(p {bgros} {gros}!, , discuss, deliberate, consider confer, argue, resolve, decide	bgro
བགྲོ་གླིང	1) discus[sion], exchange [of] views; 2) debate	bgro gling
བགྲོ་གླེང	discussion, debate, to exchange views, have conversation, talk, converse	bgro gleng
གླེང་བྱས་ཀྱང་མ་ཐུབ	no matter how hard they debated, they could not defeat him	gleng byas kyang ma thub
བགྲོ་གླེང་བཏང་བ	to exchange views	bgro gleng btang ba
བགྲོ་གླེང་པ	argue, discuss	bgro gleng pa
བགྲོ་གླེང་བྱེད་པ	debate	bgro gleng byed pa
བགྲོ་འདེབས་པ	1) argue, debate; 2) discuss, confer, consider, deliberate; 3) resolve, decide	bgro 'debs pa
བགྲོ་བ	ft. of {bgro ba}; {bgro ba, bgros pa, bgro ba, bgros} intr. v	bgro ba
བགྲོ་བའི་ཁག་པ	music booth, stage	bgro ba'i khag pa
བགྲོང་བ	count, SA bgrang ba	bgrong ba
བགྲོངས	snying po bgrongs - Recite the essential [mantra]!	bgrongs
བགྲོད	1) solar transit; 2) tha mi dad pa,, go, travel; 3) have intercourse; 4) path, road; 5) measure how far something has gone; 5) journey; 7) gait, walk, tread; 8) pass, get through, cross, traverse	bgrod
ལུས	the king and his army could not proceed	lus
བགྲོད་དཀའ་པའི་གནས	wilderness, place difficult to traverse	bgrod dka' pa'i gnas
བགྲོད་དཀའ་བ	difficult progress, difficult to pass	bgrod dka' ba
བགྲོད་དཀའ་བའི་ལམ	path difficult to travel	bgrod dka' ba'i lam
བགྲོད་གཅིག་ལམ	{bgrod pa gcig pa'i lam}	bgrod gcig lam
བགྲོད་གཅིག་ལམ་དང་འབྲེལ་པ	connected w the only path of progress	bgrod gcig lam dang 'brel pa
བགྲོད་མཐའི་ས་ཚིགས	last station, end of the line	bgrod mtha'i sa tshigs
བགྲོད་དུས་གཉིས	both declinations	bgrod dus gnyis
བགྲོད་པ	{bgrod pa, bgrod pa, bgrod pa, bgrod} intr. v.; 1) walk, travel, journey, traversing, march [a six month period]. 2) movement, course,. 3) to wander, cross, walk, travel, journey, traverse, pass ov...	bgrod pa
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་པ	the sole path	bgrod pa gcig pa
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་པའི་ལམ	path of sole progress, solitary path	bgrod pa gcig pa'i lam
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་པར་བྱེད་པ	single traversed	bgrod pa gcig par byed pa
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་པུའི་གསང་ལམ	the single secret path traversed [by all the buddhas]	bgrod pa gcig pu'i gsang lam
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་པོ	only way to progress, solitary journey	bgrod pa gcig po
བགྲོད་པ་གཅིག་བུའི་ལམ	single traversed path	bgrod pa gcig bu'i lam
བགྲོད་པའི་དུས་སྐབས	transition period	bgrod pa'i dus skabs
བགྲོད་པར་བྱ་བ	to be traversed	bgrod par bya ba
བགྲོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to travel through	bgrod par byed pa
བགྲོད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་གང་ཟག	the voyager	bgrod par byed pa'i gang zag
བགྲོད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ལམ	the path to be journeyed	bgrod par byed pa'i lam
བགྲོད་ཕྱོགས	inclination, tendency	bgrod phyogs
བགྲོད་བྱ	1) woman two road; 3) journey	bgrod bya
བགྲོད་བྱ་མ་ཡིན་པ	who is not to have sex with	bgrod bya ma yin pa
བགྲོད་བྱེད	traveller	bgrod byed
བགྲོད་བྱེད་གང་ཟག	the person undertaking the journey	bgrod byed gang zag
བགྲོད་བྱེད་ལམ	the path to be journeyed	bgrod byed lam
བགྲོད་མེད	where there is no path to follow	bgrod med
བགྲོད་མེད་ལམ	the way beyond treading	bgrod med lam
བགྲོད་ཚུལ	ways to traverse	bgrod tshul
བགྲོད་ཡས	walking, mover	bgrod yas
བགྲོད་རིམ	steps/ stages of work/ a program	bgrod rim
བགྲོད་ལ་ཕན	is useful in getting along	bgrod la phan
བགྲོད་ལམ	road, passage, female organ	bgrod lam
བགྲོས	conference, consultation, argue, resolve, SA bgro ba	bgros
བགྲོས་ངན	evil strategy of deception	bgros ngan
བགྲོས་ངན་བྱས	made conspiracy, holding unlawful conference	bgros ngan byas
བགྲོས་པ	1) argued, debated; 2) discussed, conferred, considered, deliberated; 3) resolved, decided	bgros pa
མག་འགྲོ་ཡང་ཐིག	{mga 'gro yang thig [part of the {snying thig ya bzhi} by {klong chen rab 'byams}	mga 'gro yang thig
མགང་ཙམ	quite a few	mgang tsam
མགར	a blacksmith	mgar
མགར་ཁང	smithy	mgar khang
མགར་ཁྲི་སྒྲ་ཛི་ཐུན	a celebrated minister of Tibet	mgar khri sgra dzi thun
མགར་གྲུབ་ཆེན	{mgar grub chen} [TT siddha master, emanation of nagarjuna head of a drigung kagyu monastery at nagchukha north of lhasa]	mgar grub chen
མགར་ཆས	smith's tools	mgar chas
མགར་ཐབ	smith's forge	mgar thab
མགར་ནག	black ironsmith, important emanation of rdo rje legs pa	mgar nag
མགར་སྤྱད	smith's tool	mgar spyad
མགར་སྤྱོད	practice or craft of a smith	mgar spyod
མགར་བ	blacksmith {lcags bzo ba}	mgar ba
མགར་བ་ནག་པོ	black ironsmith, important emanation of rdo rje legs pa	mgar ba nag po
མགར་བའི་བཟོ་སྟེགས	a smith's anvil {dka' tshegs dang tsha grang thams cad bzod pa mgar ba'i bzo stegs lta bu} like a smith's anvil, we should endure heat, cold and all other difficulties	mgar ba'i bzo stegs
མགར་བློན་སྟོང་བཙན་ཡུལ་སྲུང	bod rgyal srong btsan sgam po'i skabs a great minister, 'dis bod rgyal gyi bka' 'brel grong khyer khrang an du phyin nas thang rgyal rabs kyi gong ma tha'e tsung gi sras mo mna' mar bslangs nas bod...	mgar blon stong btsan yul srung
མགར་མི	smith	mgar mi
མགར་རྩན་གཉའ་ལྡོམ་བ	Minister Gar [sent to CH by srongtsen Gampo to arrange his marriage wo daughter of Emp. Thang Tai tsung	mgar rtsan gnya' ldom ba
མགར་རྩེ	Gartse, I, near Tashi-khyil, in Domey	mgar rtse
མགར་ཚང	blacksmith shop	mgar tshang
མགར་ར	blacksmith [shop]	mgar ra
མགར་རུ	chu bum mchu ring lung yod cig	mgar ru
མགར་ལས	smithery	mgar las
མགར་ས	smithy	mgar sa
མགལ	1) jaw[-bone]; 2) calf of mdzo mo and bull)	mgal
མགལ་ཆག	broken jawbone	mgal chag
མགལ་མཆུ	large piece of wood split or half burned	mgal mchu
མགལ་དུམ	half burnt split wood	mgal dum
མགལ་པ	billet of wood	mgal pa
མགལ་བ	jaw, jawbone	mgal ba
མགལ་བུད	dislocated jaw	mgal bud
མགལ་མེ	firebrand, torch of long chips of wood	mgal me
མགལ་མེ་བསྐོར་བ	whirl a fire brand	mgal me bskor ba
མགལ་མེ་ལྟ་བུར	like a fire-brand	mgal me lta bur
མགལ་མེའི་ཁོར་ལོ	fire brand circle [thd]	mgal me'i khor lo
མགལ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ	circle of light from whirling firebrand	mgal me'i 'khor lo
བཡ་ཝཧིརླིང་ཨ་ཕི༹རེ	brand	by whirling a fire
མགལ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར་བ	whirling / swirling like a firebrand	mgal me'i 'khor lo bskor ba
མགལ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྟ་བུ	like a fire-brand circle	mgal me'i 'khor lo lta bu
མགལ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྟ་བུའི	like the circle of a whirling firebrand	mgal me'i 'khor lo lta bu'i
མགལ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	the concentration 'like the wheel of a fire brand'	mgal me'i 'khor lo lta bu'i ting 'dzin
མགུ	be devoted to, be impressed by, be glad, rejoice, be content, satisfied, delight, be pleased, overjoyed, elated	mgu
མགུ་ཁག་པོ	fastidious	mgu khag po
མགུ་དུ	satisfied 504	mgu du
མགུ་ལྡན	'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, lhag ltung byung ba'i gang zag gis chad las spo ba dang mgu ba spyad zin zhing, rang bzhin gyi gnas su dbyung ma zin pa la mgu ldan zhes bya'o	mgu ldan
མགུ་ནས	delighted	mgu nas
མགུ་སྤྲོ	glad, delighted	mgu spro
མགུ་འཕང	overjoyed, disgust	mgu 'phang
མགུ་བ	rejoice, be glad joyful, content, satisfied	mgu ba
མགུ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	became devoted	mgu ba bskyed pa
མགུ་བ་དགུ	chn	mgu ba dgu
མགུ་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoy	mgu ba spyod pa
མགུ་བ་བྱེད་པ	gladden the hearts of	mgu ba byed pa
མགུ་བ་སྦྱོད་པ	joyful activities TSE	mgu ba sbyod pa
མགུ་བ་གསུམ	the three joys [spro ba mthol bshags kyi phyir bcos byed tshul gsum gyi nang gses, spyod pa gzhan na gnas pa mgu ba spyod pa la, lhag ltung gi dngos gzhi 'dag pa'i phyir du, dge slong@gis zhag drug...	mgu ba gsum
མགུ་བའི་ལན་མ་བྱུང	did not receive a gratifying/ satisfactory reply	mgu ba'i lan ma byung
མགུ་བར་འགྱུར	rejoice, be joyful, be pleased	mgu bar 'gyur
མགུ་བར་བྱས་ཏེ	rejoicing pleased	mgu bar byas te
མགུ་བར་བྱེད	rejoice, please	mgu bar byed
མགུ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to satisfy	mgu bar byed pa
མགུ་ཞིང་ཚིམ་པ	{lha mi thams cad mgu zhing tshim par mdzad do} gods and humans alike expressed their satisfaction and joy	mgu zhing tshim pa
མགུ་སེམས	'dod pa gang ba'am mos pa'i blo	mgu sems
མགུག་ལ	at the end, after xxx time has passed, at the end of, at last, behind, after	mgug la
མགུར	vocal cords, [spiritual] songs, throat, neck, voice (H)	mgur
མགུར་གྱི་ཚུལ	in the Gur style of spiritual songs	mgur gyi tshul
མགུར་གྲ	chanting session	mgur gra
མགུར་གྲུ་བཞེངས་པ	composed a song	mgur gru bzhengs pa
མགུར་གླུ	dharma song	mgur glu
མགུར་ཆུ	chorten's vase [round part] seat, drinking water (H)	mgur chu
མགུར་ཆུང་གི་མཆོད་རྟེན	Gurchung stupa, in Domey	mgur chung gi mchod rten
མགུར་ཆེན	grand song	mgur chen
མགུར་སྙན	sweet voice	mgur snyan
མགུར་སྙན་པ	sweet voice	mgur snyan pa
མགུར་འཐེན	are to be sung, sing [a song]	mgur 'then
མགུར་འཐེན་པ	sing a song	mgur 'then pa
མགུར་དུ་གསུངས	say /tell /sing a [dharma] song	mgur du gsungs
མགུར་དུ་གསུངས་པ	anything sung or put into verse	mgur du gsungs pa
མགུར་ན་པ	necklace	mgur na pa
མགུར་ན་སྤ	necklace	mgur na spa
མགུར་པ	bard, singer, minstrel	mgur pa
མགུར་བྱངས་པ	are to be song	mgur byangs pa
མགུར་དབྱངས	song, spiritual songs; blangs pa / 'then pa - sang a song	mgur dbyangs
མགུར་དབྱངས་འདི་བླངས་སོ	then I sang this song	mgur dbyangs 'di blangs so
མགུར་དབྱངས་པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད་མངས་མཉ	stringed Lute, written by Shabkar	mgur dbyangs pi wang rgyud mangs Many
མགུར་དབྱངས་བླངས་པ	sang spiritual songs	mgur dbyangs blangs pa
མགུར་འབུམ	spiritual songs	mgur 'bum
མགུར་མ	[spiritual] songs	mgur ma
མགུར་མ་བྱ་བ	sing the songs	mgur ma bya ba
མགུར་མ་གསུང་བ	recite a religious song	mgur ma gsung ba
མགུར་མོ	sngar srol bod tam brgyad rer mgur mo re rtsi ba	mgur mo
མགུར་ཞོ	of the weight of 24 rattee	mgur zho
མགུར་བཞེས	h. of {mgur 'then}	mgur bzhes
མགུར་བཞེས་པ	sing a song (H)	mgur bzhes pa
མགུར་རུ་བཞེངས་པ	composed a song	mgur ru bzhengs pa
མགུར་ཤོ	a weight = 71/ two {skar ma} [D: 7 1/3]	mgur sho
མགུར་གསུངས	sing songs	mgur gsungs
མགུར་གསུངས་པ	sang	mgur gsungs pa
མགུར་བསལ	clear the throat, sing emphatically	mgur bsal
མགུར་བསལ་བ	deliver a song with emphasis, clear the throat, hawk, hem	mgur bsal ba
མགུར་ལྷ	hunting god of M shamans	mgur lha
མགུར་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ	Thirteen Hunting Gods. They are {thang lha yar zhur, yar lha sham po, gtsang lha byol yug, srog lha gangs tar, rgyogs chen sdong ra, dog lha byang rtse, lcogs lha mtshal rtse, gangs dkar gyu rtse, ...	mgur lha bcu gsum
མགུར་ལྷ་མཆེད་བཞི	four sylvan god brothers	mgur lha mched bzhi
མགུལ	slopes, hillside	mgul
མགུལ་གའུ	charm box worn around the neck (h)	mgul ga'u
མགུལ་གླུ	song (H)	mgul glu
མགུལ་གློ	chest, lungs, cough [h]	mgul glo
མགུལ་གློ་སྐྱོན	cough [h] 505	mgul glo skyon
མགུལ་འགགས	1) skad 'dzer ba; 2) a phlegm disease)	mgul 'gags
མགུལ་རྒྱན	necklace/ choker	mgul rgyan
མགུལ་བརྒྱན་ལྟ་བུ	as a neck ornament	mgul brgyan lta bu
མགུལ་སྔོན	the blue throated one, the peacock, Shiva	mgul sngon
མགུལ་ཆམ	consort [h], cold, flu	mgul cham
མགུལ་ཆམ་སྐྱོན	get a cold/ flu	mgul cham skyon
མགུལ་ཆམས	common cold	mgul chams
མགུལ་ཆིང	neck cloth	mgul ching
མགུལ་ཆིང་དཀར་པ	white neck cloth	mgul ching dkar pa
མགུལ་ཆིངས	a neckband	mgul chings
མགུལ་ཆུ	choker, throat ornament	mgul chu
མགུལ་ཆུང	small amulet	mgul chung
མགུལ་ཐབ	button	mgul thab
མགུལ་དར	1) kata [around the neck] [h]; 2) shoulder of a mountain)	mgul dar
མགུལ་དར་སྒྲོན	put kata around the neck] [h] mgul dar g.yogs pa - gave ceremonial scarves	mgul dar sgron
མགུལ་དུ་འདོགས	tie to the neck	mgul du 'dogs
མགུལ་དུ་འདོགས་པ	tie on the neck	mgul du 'dogs pa
མགུལ་གདུབ	neck bangle worn by the Indians	mgul gdub
མགུལ་གདུམ	choker, neck/ throat ornament, necklace, garland (H)	mgul gdum
མགུལ་ན་སྤ	choker, neck/ throat ornament, necklace, garland (H)	mgul na spa
མགུལ་ནག	the deity dbang phyug chen po	mgul nag
མགུལ་ནད	disease of the throat	mgul nad
མགུལ་ནད་ལྦ་བ་བརྒྱད	chn	mgul nad lba ba brgyad
མགུལ་ནས་འཁྱུད་པ	clasp round the neck hug, encompass by spanning	mgul nas 'khyud pa
མགུལ་པ	neck, throat (H)	mgul pa
མགུལ་པ་ནས་འཁྱུད	embrace	mgul pa nas 'khyud
མགུལ་པ་ནས་འཁྱུད་པ	fall on a person's neck	mgul pa nas 'khyud pa
མགུལ་པ་ནས་འཛིན	seize by the throat	mgul pa nas 'dzin
མགུལ་པ་ནས་འཛིན་པ	seize by the throat	mgul pa nas 'dzin pa
མགུལ་པའི་རྒྱན	neck ornament * choker, neck/ throat ornament, necklace, garland (h)	mgul pa'i rgyan
མགུལ་ཕྲེང	demi-god Garland Necklace	mgul phreng
མགུལ་འཕྲེང	Necklace, one of {rgyal po bzhi'i ris} Abodes of the Four Kings [of demigods]	mgul 'phreng
མགུལ་འཕྲེང་དོ་ཤལ	necklace hanging from neck to navel, short necklace (H)	mgul 'phreng do shal
མགུལ་རིང	long neck mgul la mu tig gi 'phreng ba nu ma'i thad	mgul ring
དུ་འཕྱང་བ	the pearl necklace that dangled in front of her breasts	du 'phyang ba
མགུལ་བསལ	glo bsang ba	mgul bsal
མགུལ་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen mgul lha; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	mgul lha bcu gsum
མགུལ་ལྷ་མཆེད་བཞི	four brother deities from who four major tribes were said to have sprung	mgul lha mched bzhi
མགུས་འཐིགས་པ	satisfied	mgus 'thigs pa
མགུས་དུ་གསུངས་པ	put into verse	mgus du gsungs pa
མགེའུ	= {mgo'u}	mge'u
མགོ	head, top, summit [one of the 28 Naksatras gods of the constellations {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} the 5th resembling the head of an antelope] the 1st, the principal, beginning, superscribed let...	mgo
མགོ་ཀླད	brain, top of the head	mgo klad
མགོ་དཀར	white haired	mgo dkar
མགོ་དཀྱིལ	crown of the head, vertex	mgo dkyil
མགོ་བཀད	(A) hair	mgo bkad
མགོ་བཀོད	on top	mgo bkod
མགོ་བཀྱགས	raise the head, rise up, rebel mgo bkrus mjing dag rang 'gan rang gis	mgo bkyags
ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་པའི་དཔེ	...Las don gang yod las 'gan 'khri khungs so sos mgo bkrus mjing dag zhu dgos	khungs skyel byed pa'i dpe
མགོ་བཀྲུས་གདོང་དག	mgo bkrus mjing dag	mgo bkrus gdong dag
མགོ་རྐང	head and feet	mgo rkang
མགོ་རྐང་ཚང་བ	to complete this entire	mgo rkang tshang ba
མགོ་རྐང་ལག་ལྔ	head and four limbs	mgo rkang lag lnga
མགོ་སྐོན	copper-working tool lcags hreng la bskon nas brje len thub pa'i 'og rdo of various shapes	mgo skon
མགོ་སྐོར	abash	mgo skor
མགོ་སྐོར་མཁན	imposter	mgo skor mkhan
མགོ་སྐོར་གྱིས་སླུ	hoax	mgo skor gyis slu
མགོ་སྐོར་བརྙས་བཅོས	racketeering	mgo skor brnyas bcos
མགོ་སྐོར་བརྙས་བཅོས་བྱེད	do racketeering	mgo skor brnyas bcos byed
མགོ་སྐོར་གཏོང	deceive, cheat, coax, humbug, fool	mgo skor gtong
མགོ་སྐོར་གཏོང་བ	coax, humbug, fool, deceive, cheat, beguile, fake	mgo skor gtong ba
མགོ་སྐོར་བཏང	deceived	mgo skor btang
མགོ་སྐོར་བཏང་སྟེ་རྐུ་བ	swine	mgo skor btang ste rku ba
མགོ་སྐོར་བཏང་བ	deceived	mgo skor btang ba
མགོ་སྐོར་ཐེབས་པ	be taken in, be fooled, be duped	mgo skor thebs pa
མགོ་སྐོར་བ	cheat, swindle, confuse	mgo skor ba
མགོ་སྐོར་སླུ་བྲིད	deceive	mgo skor slu brid
མགོ་སྐྱ	grey head, old person	mgo skya
མགོ་སྐྱེས	1) the horned 1 [5th of the 28 Naksatras gods of the constellations {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} resembling the head of an antelope); 2) hair; 3) horns)	mgo skyes
མགོ་སྐྱེས་དཀར་བ	old man	mgo skyes dkar ba
མགོ་སྐྱོང	protector, patron 506	mgo skyong
མགོ་སྐྱོང་བ	1) mgo 'dren byed pa po; 2) mgo khrid byed pa)	mgo skyong ba
མགོ་སྐྱོབ	helmet	mgo skyob
མགོ་སྐྲ	hair	mgo skra
མགོ་སྐྲ་ངན་པ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, bad or bristling hair	mgo skra ngan pa
མགོ་སྐྲ་བྱི	[go] bald	mgo skra byi
མགོ་སྐྲ་བསླས་མ	hair's lan bu bslas pa'i lhas ma	mgo skra bslas ma
མགོ་བསྐོར	to fool, confuse, mislead, deceive, spin others head, puzzle, to trouble your head	mgo bskor
མགོ་བསྐོར་གཏོང་བ	deceive, defraud, delude, dupe	mgo bskor gtong ba
མགོ་བསྐོར་བ	seduce, deception, juggle, deceive, cheat	mgo bskor ba
མགོ་བསྐོར་བྱེད་པ	duping, deceiving	mgo bskor byed pa
མགོ་བསྐོར་སླུ་བྲིད	fraud	mgo bskor slu brid
མགོ་བསྐོར་བསླུ་བྲིད	deception	mgo bskor bslu brid
མགོ་ཁེབས	1) head covering cloth etc.; 2) helmet)	mgo khebs
མགོ་ཁྱི་བསྐོར་བསྐོར་བྱེད་པ	duping, deceiving	mgo khyi bskor bskor byed pa
མགོ་ཁྲ	scald-head	mgo khra
མགོ་ཁྲིད	leader	mgo khrid
མགོ་ཁྲོག	byed gtad che ba'i las shig	mgo khrog
མགོ་མཁྲེགས	hard headed, stubborn, obstinate (in business), haggling	mgo mkhregs
མགོ་མཁྲེགས་ཅན	obstinate, stiff-necked, stubborn, obstinate, pertinacius	mgo mkhregs can
མགོ་མཁྲེགས་པོ	arrogant, indomitable, stubborn	mgo mkhregs po
མགོ་འཁོར	1) vi. to be fooled, to be deceived, to be puzzled, to be infatuated with. 2) the head is spinning, going around in circles, to be rapt or completely caught up in, embroiling one's own mind	mgo 'khor
མགོ་འཁོར་བ	infatuated with, head being turned, puzzled, dizzy	mgo 'khor ba
མགོ་འཁོར་སྲིད་པ	get confused	mgo 'khor srid pa
མགོ་འཁྲུལ	err, be confused	mgo 'khrul
མགོ་གར་བསྟན་རྐུབ་གར་གཏད	khungs lung ra sprod gsal po byung yod pa'i dpe,... yes can rnams kyi mgo gar bstan rkub gar gtad gnas tshul tshang ma gsal por ra 'phrod byung	mgo gar bstan rkub gar gtad
མགོ་གུག	bend/ bow/ nod the head	mgo gug
མགོ་གུག་གུག	bow/ nod the head	mgo gug gug
མགོ་གུག་གུག་བྱེད	bow down the head	mgo gug gug byed
མགོ་གུག་གུག་བྱེད་པ	bend the head	mgo gug gug byed pa
མགོ་གུག་པ	1) bow the head; 2) hooked tip)	mgo gug pa
མགོ་གེམས	stupid	mgo gems
མགོ་གྲུང་པོ	(clever headed) smart	mgo grung po
མགོ་དགུ་མཇུག་དགུ	mgo sgur te 'og tu rbad kyis zhugs pa,...Dgra bo gyul pham ste mgo dgu mjug dgu byas pa	mgo dgu mjug dgu
མགོ་དགུ་བ	SA dgur ba, dgu ba	mgo dgu ba
མགོ་དགུར	surrender, submit, bow down	mgo dgur
མགོ་དགུར་བ	bend, submit, humble oneself	mgo dgur ba
མགོ་དགོས	need, necessity, requirement	mgo dgos
མགོ་འགེམས	to bewilder, confuse/ to subdue, defeat	mgo 'gems
མགོ་འགེམས་པ་པོ	one who confounds or bewilders	mgo 'gems pa po
མགོ་རྒན	dngul gyi zho bdun sgor mo	mgo rgan
མགོ་རྒྱན	crown, head dress, head ornament, place in tibet	mgo rgyan
མགོ་རྒྱན་བཏགས་པ	to put on head ornaments; hair-ornaments	mgo rgyan btags pa
མགོ་རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་དགྱེ་བ	to bend the head backwards	mgo rgyab phyogs su dgye ba
མགོ་རྒྱུག	mgo la gzhu byed kyi rgyug pa	mgo rgyug
མགོ་རྒྱུག་གཞུ་བ	1) mgo la rgyug pa gzhu ba; 2) Tshong pas gyong gtong ba'i dpe)	mgo rgyug gzhu ba
མགོ་སྒང	2nd month &, 8th ad pa'i dbugs thob srin 'gul dang bad dkar nas sa pho gnyis pa nam byung tshe dpyid dang ston gyi mgo sgang zhes pa ste this or next year smin rgyu'i gro sogs 'debs ran yin	mgo sgang
མགོ་སྒུར	bowing down, surrendering	mgo sgur
མགོ་སྒུར་བ	submit, succumb, surrender, yield	mgo sgur ba
མགོ་སྒྱུར་སློག་སློག	bending/ nodding the head	mgo sgyur slog slog
མགོ་སྒྱུར་སློག་སློག་བསྡད	stayed bending [his] head	mgo sgyur slog slog bsdad
མགོ་སྒྲིམ་པོ	spyang po	mgo sgrim po
མགོ་སྒྲོམ	pecha's 'go brjod	mgo sgrom
མགོ་བརྒྱན	head gear	mgo brgyan
མགོ་བསྒུར་ནས་བྱུང	it lowered its head	mgo bsgur nas byung
མགོ་བསྒྲེ་བ	elderly, experienced	mgo bsgre ba
མགོ་བསྒྲེས	rigs mtshungs sbyar ba'am rigs mtshungs par byas pa,..	mgo bsgres
མགོ་སྔས	mgo 'jog sa'i sngas	mgo sngas
མགོ་སྔས་སྦྲེལ་བ	example of inseparability	mgo sngas sbrel ba
མགོ་སྔོ་ཆོབ་ཙམ	hair nearly becoming white	mgo sngo chob tsam
མགོ་ཅན	superscribed letters ra, la, sa or rtsegs gsum	mgo can
མགོ་ཅན་ཡི་གེ	ra la sa headed letter stack	mgo can yi ge
མགོ་གཅིག་ཏུ	absolutely (affirming), w/o reservation	mgo gcig tu
མགོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྨྲ་བ	sayer that w/o reservation it does not exist, sayer that it is not one sidedly so mgo gcig tu ma yin pa'i smra ba yongs su	mgo gcig tu ma yin pa'i smra ba
བསུང	teaching that says entirely w/o reservation that it does not exist	bsung
མགོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	a revelation of absolute affirmation	mgo gcig tu lung bstan pa
མགོ་གཅོད	ex {rang mgo gcod pa} to cut off your head	mgo gcod
མགོ་གཅོད་པ	behead, decapitate	mgo gcod pa
མགོ་བཅོལ	skyabs su bsten pa,...Dpon khungs shig gi mi ser tshos dpon khungs gzhan zhig la mgo bcol zhu ba	mgo bcol
མགོ་བཅོས	head treatment	mgo bcos
མགོ་ལྕག	blow on the head	mgo lcag
མགོ་ལྕོག	lcog mgu zhing khas len pa'i brda ston gyi mgo gyo stangs}-	mgo lcog
མགོ་ལྕོགས	crops, flowers kyi mgo rgyas pa'i rdog ma	mgo lcogs
མགོ་ཆུང་སིག་སིག་བྱས	he shook his little head	mgo chung sig sig byas
མགོ་ཆེན	bya ba'i thog dbye zhib byed mi shes pa'i mi	mgo chen
མགོ་ཆེན་པོ	[big head] not knowledgeable, unintelligent 507	mgo chen po
མགོ་འཆིང	'go khrid pa'am las ka'i bkod 'doms pa	mgo 'ching
མགོ་མཇུག	head and tail	mgo mjug
མགོ་མཇུག་གོ་ལྡོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo mjug go ldog
མགོ་མཇུག་གོ་ལོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo mjug go log
མགོ་མཇུག་བསྒྱུར	turned head over heels	mgo mjug bsgyur
མགོ་མཇུག་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arranged	mgo mjug bsgrigs pa
མགོ་མཇུག་ལྡོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo mjug ldog
མགོ་མཇུག་བར་གསུམ	beginning middle and end	mgo mjug bar gsum
མགོ་མཇུག་མེད	1) disordered; 2) incomplete at the beginning and end, w/o beginning and end/ start and finish; 3) anarchy)	mgo mjug med
མགོ་མཇུག་མེད་པ	1) disordered; 2) incomplete at the beginning and end, w/o beginning and end/ start and finish; 3) anarchy)	mgo mjug med pa
མགོ་མཇུག་ལོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo mjug log
མགོ་མཇུག་སློག	overthrow, tip upside down, upset, bring down	mgo mjug slog
མགོ་མཇུག་སློག་པ	overthrow	mgo mjug slog pa
མགོ་མཇུག་བསློག	overthrew, tipped upside down, upset, brought down	mgo mjug bslog
མགོ་མཇུག་བསློག་པ	overthrew, tipped upside down, upset, brought down	mgo mjug bslog pa
མགོ་འཇོག་པ	placement/ movement of the head	mgo 'jog pa
མགོ་རྗུ་བ	deceive	mgo rju ba
མགོ་རྗེན	with uncovered head	mgo rjen
མགོ་ལྗི་ཡོག་པ	heavy load	mgo lji yog pa
མགོ་ཉལ	hair	mgo nyal
མགོ་ཉུག་ཉུག	stick out the head	mgo nyug nyug
མགོ་ཉུག་ཙམ	stick out the head a little	mgo nyug tsam
མགོ་ཉོག	basis of error/ confusion, mess, muddle, confused, disorganized, bewildered, troublesome	mgo nyog
མགོ་གཉིས་པ	2-faced, double-dealer	mgo gnyis pa
མགོ་གཉིས་མ	phyi ma nang gi mgo bde byed mkhan	mgo gnyis ma
མགོ་མཉམ	1) having the same reasoning; 2) of the same height)	mgo mnyam
མགོ་མཉམ་པ	one the same level	mgo mnyam pa
མགོ་མཉམ་པར་ཤེས	to recognize that something is on the same level	mgo mnyam par shes
མགོ་མཉམ་གསུམ	the three simultaneous occurrences; {'chi ba dran pa/tshe hdi'i blos thongs pa/ chos byed pa} recollection of death; renouncing the affirs of this life; practicing dharma)	mgo mnyam gsum
མགོ་རྙོག	many difficult actions confused/ mixed up and conflicting, muddle, mess, disorganized	mgo rnyog
མགོ་རྙོག་ཆེན་པོ	muddle, big mess, messed up, confused, disorganized	mgo rnyog chen po
མགོ་རྙོག་པོ	many difficult actions confused/ mixed up and conflicting, muddle, mess, disorganized	mgo rnyog po
མགོ་རྙོག་ལུང་པ་གང	big/ complete muddle/ mess	mgo rnyog lung pa gang
མགོ་སྙོམས	equal	mgo snyoms
མགོ་སྙོམས་པ	1) high/ low or long and short =ize, make level; 2) rigs 'gre sbyor ba	mgo snyoms pa
མགོ་སྙོམས་བྱེད་པ	=ize, deal equitably, act fairly, even out	mgo snyoms byed pa
མགོ་བརྙན	1) mgo bo'i gzugs brnyan nam ngo 'bag; 2) in temples bshams pa'i spyan gzigs people and animal head images)	mgo brnyan
མགོ་བརྙན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་མང་པོ	numerous heads	mgo brnyan gyi rnam pa mang po
མགོ་བརྙན་པ	various heads, head	mgo brnyan pa
མགོ་བསྙུང	stiff neck	mgo bsnyung
མགོ་བསྙུས	stiff necked	mgo bsnyus
མགོ་གཏད	to face towards	mgo gtad
མགོ་གཏད་པ	1) gzhan la skyabs bcol ba dang, mgo btags pa,...Kha zhe gnyis med mgo gtad pa,...Mgo gtad sa'i sngas phyogs ma log pa; 2) Rtse mo bstan pa,...Rtsi shing thams cad gyen du mgo gtad pa,...Rgyab tu m...	mgo gtad pa
མགོ་གཏིང་ཟབ་པོའི་ཁོར་བ	engross	mgo gting zab po'i khor ba
མགོ་གཏུག	1) reach the count; 2) mdza' brtse'i sgo nas dpral ba gtug pa)	mgo gtug
མགོ་བཏགས	surrender, capitulate [gzhan la skyabs 'cha' ba'am skyabs bcol ba'i ming,...gus gus zhum zhum gyis mgo btags zhu ba,...Glo snying gtod pa'i dgra ya'i mgo btags len pa]	mgo btags
མགོ་བཏགས་ཞུ	1) seek refuge/ protection from a superior person; 2) surrender)	mgo btags zhu
མགོ་བཏགས་ཞུ་རྟེན	mgo 'don gnang rogs zhu ba'i 'bul rten	mgo btags zhu rten
མགོ་བཏགས་ཞུ་བ	seek protection under one who is superior to himself	mgo btags zhu ba
མགོ་བཏགས་ལུས་གཏད	mgo 'bul lus 'bul	mgo btags lus gtad
མགོ་བཏགས་ལེན	accept surrender)	mgo btags len
མགོ་བཏང་བ	to follow	mgo btang ba
མགོ་བཏེགས་པ	raised her head	mgo btegs pa
མགོ་བཏོན	brought up, reared, raised	mgo bton
མགོ་རྟག་ཆོད་པ	one who can give decided advice	mgo rtag chod pa
མགོ་རྟིང	above/ below, high/ low excellent/ low [part]	mgo rting
མགོ་རྟིང་སློག	overcome, upset, bring down, put upside down	mgo rting slog
མགོ་རྟིང་སློག་པ	somersault	mgo rting slog pa
མགོ་རྟེན	that on which the head rests, throat	mgo rten
མགོ་རྟོན	the neck	mgo rton
མགོ་ལྟག	head & neck	mgo ltag
མགོ་སྟེགས	neck	mgo stegs
མགོ་སྟོང	air head, fool, persons who cannot think for themselves	mgo stong
མགོ་སྟོང་པ	empty-headed, 'thom rgyal	mgo stong pa
མགོ་ཐར་དཔུང་འཇུག	give an inch, they'll take a mile	mgo thar dpung 'jug
མགོ་ཐར་དཔུང་འཛུག	give an inch, they'll take a mile	mgo thar dpung 'dzug
མགོ་ཐར་དཔུང་འཛུད	tshod mi 'dzin pa'am, tshog ? Mi shes pa'i dpe	mgo thar dpung 'dzud
མགོ་ཐུག	tally, agree, fit, come out right [accounting]	mgo thug
མགོ་ཐུག་པ	1) ra 'phrod pa,...Byung song mgo thug pa; 2) mgo bos mgo bor thug pa)	mgo thug pa
མགོ་ཐུར་བསྟན་པ	facing downwards	mgo thur bstan pa
མགོ་ཐུར་དུ	upside-down, head over heels	mgo thur du
མགོ་ཐུར་དུ་བསྟན	head down, head over heels	mgo thur du bstan
མགོ་ཐུར་དུ་བསྟན་ནས	head over heels/ headlong 508	mgo thur du bstan nas
མགོ་ཐོ	like a hammer snun byed kyi mgo	mgo tho
མགོ་ཐོག་གྱམ་སེལ	rang 'gan rang sgrub bam rang khungs rang skyel,...Phan tshun rtsod gleng yong rkyen mgo thog gyam sel gyis 'grig thabs gtso 'don byed dgos	mgo thog gyam sel
མགོ་ཐོག་ནས་མར	head over heels, head first, upside down	mgo thog nas mar
མགོ་ཐོག་ལ་སྡོད	ride roughshod over	mgo thog la sdod
མགོ་ཐོག་ལག་བཞག	dngos po gang yang ma khyer bar lag stong du 'gro 'ong byas pa'i dpe,... ga rang gis kho tsho'i bran gyog lo mang brgyugs kyang gla lto lam rgyags sogs gang yang ma bskur bar mgo thog lag bzhag bya...	mgo thog lag bzhag
མགོ་ཐོད	1) forehead; 2) skull; 3) crown of the head; 4) head ornament, spa phrug (kind of woman's head ornament; 5) summit)	mgo thod
མགོ་ཐོན	1) done w/o obstacles/ faults; 2) be able take care of oneself/ do things independently	mgo thon
མགོ་ཐོན་གྱིས	safely [KNT]	mgo thon gyis
མགོ་ཐོན་པ	one who by his own ability can direct others	mgo thon pa
མགོ་ཐོན་པོ	able, capable 1 who is able to take care of oneself/ do things independently	mgo thon po
མགོ་ཐོམ་པ	muddled, confused	mgo thom pa
མགོ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	mgo mtha' yas pa
མགོ་མཐོ་པོ	high	mgo mtho po
མགོ་འཐུ་བོ	witness	mgo 'thu bo
མགོ་འཐོན	be able to take care of oneself/ do things independently	mgo 'thon
མགོ་འཐོམ	[p {mgo 'thoms} be confused/ puzzled/ dazed/ lost	mgo 'thom
མགོ་འཐོམ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	abash	mgo 'thom du 'jug pa
མགོ་འཐོམ་པ	baffle, daze, perplex, confounded	mgo 'thom pa
མགོ་འཐོམ་པོ	puzzling	mgo 'thom po
མགོ་འཐོམ་བྱེད	puzzle	mgo 'thom byed
མགོ་འཐོམས	dazed head	mgo 'thoms
མགོ་འཐོམས་པ	confuse, puzzled, head being turned	mgo 'thoms pa
མགོ་དམ་མཇུག་ལྷོད	strict in the beginning loose at the end, work not reaching the end/ getting finished	mgo dam mjug lhod
མགོ་དམ་པོ	hard to deceive	mgo dam po
མགོ་དོ་གེར་ཅན	thor cog can nam skra gyen du bcings pa	mgo do ger can
མགོ་བདེ་དྲན་འཕྲུལ	accomplished at deception dran rgyu rgod po,...Rang 'dod phug 'tshang gis mgo bde dran 'phrul byed pa	mgo bde dran 'phrul
མགོ་བདེ་དྲན་འཕྲུལ་རྒྱག	speculate, profiteer, wheel and deal	mgo bde dran 'phrul rgyag
མགོ་བདེ་པོ	cunning, sly	mgo bde po
མགོ་བདེ་བ	easy-going person, wellqualified, well-adapted	mgo bde ba
མགོ་བདེ་བླངས་ཚང	speculation, profiteering	mgo bde blangs tshang
མགོ་འདན	shake the head (signal/ illness)	mgo 'dan
མགོ་འདན་པ	shaking the head as a signal or from illness	mgo 'dan pa
མགོ་འདོགས་པ	to surrender	mgo 'dogs pa
མགོ་འདོགས་རིང་ལུགས	capitulationism	mgo 'dogs ring lugs
མགོ་འདོན	make safe, preserve/ flag (?); p. {mgo bton} 1) bring up, to rear, to raise. 2) preserving; safe	mgo 'don
མགོ་འདོན་པ	favor, preserve, make safe	mgo 'don pa
མགོ་འདོན་འཚོ་སྐྱོང	bring up, rear, raise, preserve, favor, make safe, make able to fend for themselves	mgo 'don 'tsho skyong
མགོ་འདོན་འཚོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	bring up, rear, raise, preserve, favor, make safe, make able to fend for themselves	mgo 'don 'tsho skyong byed
མགོ་འདོན་འཚོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	bring up, rear, raise, preserve, favor, make safe, make able to fend for themselves	mgo 'don 'tsho skyong byed pa
མགོ་འདྲེན	helper and protector, patron, leader	mgo 'dren
མགོ་འདྲེན་གཏོང་བ	help, protect, lead	mgo 'dren gtong ba
མགོ་འདྲེན་བྱེད་པ	instruct a disciple in spiritual learning, protect, patronize, favor, preserve, make safe	mgo 'dren byed pa
མགོ་རྡུང	pham gyong, cheat, beat [in business]	mgo rdung
མགོ་རྡེབས	srin bu mgo rdebs - flatheaded worm	mgo rdebs
མགོ་རྡོག་ཙམ	peek/stick out [the head] a little	mgo rdog tsam
མགོ་ལྡིང་ཅན	tree	mgo lding can
མགོ་ལྡོག་པ	1) mgo mjug log pa; 2) wrong, erroneous)	mgo ldog pa
མགོ་བརྡུངས	pham gyong, cheated, beat [in business]	mgo brdungs
མགོ་བསྡུར	discuss [if things are good or bad]	mgo bsdur
མགོ་ན	[have a] headache	mgo na
མགོ་ན་པོ	[painful head] intransigent	mgo na po
མགོ་ན་བ	1) bya dka' byed gtad kyi gnas su gyar ba'i dpe; 2) have a headache)	mgo na ba
མགོ་ནག	[lay] people, tshe gyog	mgo nag
མགོ་ནག་མི	people	mgo nag mi
མགོ་ནད	headache	mgo nad
མགོ་ནད་བརྒྱད	eight types of head disease	mgo nad brgyad
མགོ་ནན	first, foremost	mgo nan
མགོ་ནས	from the beginning	mgo nas
མགོ་ནས་མཇུག་པར	from beginning to end	mgo nas mjug par
མགོ་ནས་འཛིན་པ	take hold of the head	mgo nas 'dzin pa
མགོ་ནོན	ex {mgo bo non} weakens	mgo non
མགོ་ནོན་པ	rnam rtog mgo non pa - to rise above discursive thoughts	mgo non pa
མགོ་གནོན	push down the head of, subdue, oppress[ion], suppress[ion]	mgo gnon
མགོ་གནོན་གཏོང	push down the head of, subdue, oppress, suppress	mgo gnon gtong
མགོ་གནོན་པ	to repress/ suppress; repression/ suppression	mgo gnon pa
མགོ་གནོན་བྱེད	push down the head of, subdue, oppress, suppress	mgo gnon byed
མགོ་མནན་པ	suppressed	mgo mnan pa
མགོ་སྣམ	rolls of woolen cloth 509	mgo snam
མགོ་པ	leader, chief	mgo pa
མགོ་པགས	scalp	mgo pags
མགོ་དཔོན	chief, governor, ruler, lord	mgo dpon
མགོ་དཔོན་གྱི་བླ་མ	leader priest	mgo dpon gyi bla ma
མགོ་སྤུ	head hair	mgo spu
མགོ་སྤུ་ལག་འཛིངས	mgo'i skra nas 'ju res kyi 'dzings pa	mgo spu lag 'dzings
མགོ་ཕིབས	small tent just for protection from the elements	mgo phibs
མགོ་ཕིབས་ཐབ་ཟངས	tent dang, bya gyab, cooking equipment necessary for nomads	mgo phibs thab zangs
མགོ་ཕྲེང	garland of human heads	mgo phreng
མགོ་འཕང	state, level, rank, position, status	mgo 'phang
མགོ་འཕང་མཐོ	exalted	mgo 'phang mtho
མགོ་འཕུར	by the hands mgo bo 'phur ba'am mgo bo'i za phrug sel thabs	mgo 'phur
མགོ་འཕྲུ	mgo dang zhva tog	mgo 'phru
མགོ་བ	head	mgo ba
མགོ་བོ	head, face	mgo bo
མགོ་བོ་དཀྲིས	(lit. wrapped head) a Muslim	mgo bo dkris
མགོ་བོ་དཀྲིས་པ	wearing a turban	mgo bo dkris pa
མགོ་བོ་འཁོར	be duped, deceived, duped, fooled	mgo bo 'khor
མགོ་བོ་དགྱེ་ནས་ཡོང་བ	It rushed headlong at me, its horns lowered	mgo bo dgye nas yong ba
མགོ་བོ་ལྕོག་ལྕོག་བྱེད་པ	to nod	mgo bo lcog lcog byed pa
མགོ་བོ་ཏར་ཀྱག་པ	upward lift up one's face	mgo bo tar kyag pa
མགོ་བོ་འཐོམ	confounded, dizzy head	mgo bo 'thom
མགོ་བོ་རྡུང་བ	to knock on the head, to play a trick on somebody, to cheat a person into doing something	mgo bo rdung ba
མགོ་བོ་ནོན	ex {nyon mongs mgo bo non} weakens the obscuring emotions	mgo bo non
མགོ་བོ་སྤྱི་ཐེར	bald head	mgo bo spyi ther
མགོ་བོ་སྤྱི་ཐེར་བ	bald head	mgo bo spyi ther ba
མགོ་བོ་རྨོངས	be duped, deceived, duped, fooled	mgo bo rmongs
མགོ་བོ་སྨྱུང་སྨྱུང	mgo bo tshog tshog	mgo bo smyung smyung
མགོ་བོ་བཙུགས	bowing with his head {zhabs la mgo bo btsugs te gsol pa} bowing with his head to the Buddha's feet, he said,	mgo bo btsugs
མགོ་བོ་ཞོ་འདག་ཞོ་དང	'dag pa ltar mgo bo nyes rdung gtong thal che ba'i dpe	mgo bo zho 'dag zho dang
མགོ་བོ་ཡར་ཀྱག	lift up one's face	mgo bo yar kyag
མགོ་བོ་ཡར་ཀྱག་པ	face upward	mgo bo yar kyag pa
མགོ་བོའི་གོས	hat	mgo bo'i gos
མགོ་བོའི་རླུང་ཚབས	mgo yu 'khor la ling thog mang zhing rna ba 'on pa sogs 'byung ba'i mo nad rlung tshabs rigs drug gi ya gyal zhig	mgo bo'i rlung tshabs
མགོ་བོར་བཞག	to place on the head	mgo bor bzhag
མགོ་བྱི་བོ	bald head	mgo byi bo
མགོ་བྱེད	head, command, lead[er], supervise, guide	mgo byed
མགོ་བྱེད་པ	head, command D	mgo byed pa
མགོ་བྲེགས	buddhist monk	mgo bregs
མགོ་འབར་འབུར	on the head have various mgo bor 'bur kong	mgo 'bar 'bur
མགོ་འབུར་འབུར	stick out the head	mgo 'bur 'bur
མགོ་འབུར་ཙམ	stick out the head a little	mgo 'bur tsam
མགོ་འབུལ་ལུས་འབུལ	kha zhe med par mgo btags pa	mgo 'bul lus 'bul
མགོ་སྦུག	head together with the meat of a slain goat or sheep or yak	mgo sbug
མགོ་སྦོས	1) mgo 'thoms pa; 2) mgo bo skrang sbos thebs pa)	mgo sbos
མགོ་སྦོས་མིག་འཁྲུལ	mgo yu 'khor zhing, mig 'khrul ba ste ha cang rig pa 'thoms pa'i dpe	mgo sbos mig 'khrul
མགོ་སྦྲེལ	zung sbrel dang, sne mo mthud pa,...Mi mthun rta g.yag mgo sbrel mi yong	mgo sbrel
མགོ་མ་ཐོན	miscarry, abort not done w/o obstacles/ faults; 2) not be able take care of oneself/ do things independently	mgo ma thon
མགོ་མ་ཚོས་གོང་ལྕེ་སྙབས	grabbing the tongue before the head is cooked	mgo ma tshos gong lce snyabs
མགོ་མར་གུག་པ	bend down the head	mgo mar gug pa
མགོ་མི	work leader, foreman	mgo mi
མགོ་མི་བསྒྱུར	does not change his residence or headquarters	mgo mi bsgyur
མགོ་མི་ཐོན	unfinished	mgo mi thon
མགོ་མེད	headless, without the top	mgo med
མགོ་མེད་མཇུག་མེད	1) w/o order; 2) incomplete [work, letters etc]	mgo med mjug med
མགོ་མེད་དཔུང་རོང	w/o head and tail /order/ sgrigs khrims	mgo med dpung rong
མགོ་མོ་གྱོག	head-covering mgo mo g.yog - head cover	mgo mo gyog
མགོ་མོག་པོར་མཛད་པ	showed a black face	mgo mog por mdzad pa
མགོ་མྱོས	stupid	mgo myos
མགོ་དམག	officers and troops	mgo dmag
མགོ་དམར	bald, bare	mgo dmar
མགོ་དམར་པོ	bald; {mgo dmar po chags pa} to become bald	mgo dmar po
མགོ་རྨ	head wound	mgo rma
མགོ་རྨོང་པ	stupid/ ignorant	mgo rmong pa
མགོ་རྨོངས	bewildered	mgo rmongs
མགོ་རྨོངས་པ	muddled, confused mgo rmongs pa mgrin pa mgron du 'gyed - inviting to a feast mgo rmongs pa mgrin pa mgron du 'gyed - invite to a feast	mgo rmongs pa
མགོ་རྨོངས་སུ་གྱུར་བ	have become / are deluded	mgo rmongs su gyur ba
མགོ་སྨད	hang down the head	mgo smad
མགོ་སྨད་པ	lowering one's head	mgo smad pa
མགོ་སྨན	headache med	mgo sman
མགོ་སྨོས་པ	nod/ slight movement of the head	mgo smos pa
མགོ་སྨོས་པགས་གོ་བ	easily perceive the meaning from a slight movement of the head	mgo smos pags go ba
མགོ་སྨོས་པས་གོ་བ	understand merely by a nod of the head	mgo smos pas go ba
མགོ་ཙོག	round protuberant head	mgo tsog
མགོ་རྩོམ	begin, undertake	mgo rtsom
མགོ་རྩོམ་མཁན	beginner/ undertaker of a task	mgo rtsom mkhan
མགོ་བརྩམ	to start	mgo brtsam
མགོ་ཚང་དམ་པོ	in a hat gi 'khor rgya chung tsam yin pa	mgo tshang dam po
མགོ་ཚུགས	SA 'go tshugs	mgo tshugs
མགོ་ཚུགས་པའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	prelude, overture	mgo tshugs pa'i glu dbyangs
མགོ་ཚོག	round protuberant head	mgo tshog
མགོ་ཚོད	vi. to know, to understand	mgo tshod
མགོ་ཚོད་པོ	knowledgeable, intelligent, well-informed	mgo tshod po
མགོ་ཚོན	binding of a book	mgo tshon
མགོ་ཚོན་སེར་པོ	bound in yellow, yellow bound	mgo tshon ser po
མགོ་མཚུངས	1) equal. 2) rtsa ba'i rigs mtshungs pa, "similar main type,"	mgo mtshungs
མགོ་མཚུངས་པ	on the same footing, having the same kind of reasoning	mgo mtshungs pa
མགོ་འཚོས	know, realize	mgo 'tshos
མགོ་འཛིན	1) foreman, head [of an office], leader, chief; 2) neck, throat) 510	mgo 'dzin
མགོ་འཛུག	Syn 'go ' {dzungs}	mgo 'dzug
མགོ་འཛུག་པ	begin	mgo 'dzug pa
མགོ་རྫུ་བ	deceive	mgo rdzu ba
མགོ་ཞྭ	hat	mgo zhwa
མགོ་ཞགས་ཞགས	mgo gas gas	mgo zhags zhags
མགོ་གཞུག	beginning and end, start and finish, above and below	mgo gzhug
མགོ་གཞུག་གོ་ལྡོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo gzhug go ldog
མགོ་གཞུག་གོ་ལོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo gzhug go log
མགོ་གཞུག་ལྡོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo gzhug ldog
མགོ་གཞུག་བར་གསུམ	beginning middle and end	mgo gzhug bar gsum
མགོ་གཞུག་མེད	1) disordered; 2) incomplete at the beginning and end, w/o beginning and end/ start and finish; 3) anarchy)	mgo gzhug med
མགོ་གཞུག་མེད་པ	1) disordered; 2) incomplete at the beginning and end, w/o beginning and end/ start and finish; 3) anarchy)	mgo gzhug med pa
མགོ་གཞུག་གཙང་འབྲེལ	mchod rten mgo gzhug log kyang, bang rim sked par gnas song	mgo gzhug gtsang 'brel
མགོ་གཞུག་ལོག	reversed/ out of order, upside down, be the opposite	mgo gzhug log
མགོ་གཞུག་ལོག་པ	topsy-turvy	mgo gzhug log pa
མགོ་གཞུག་སློག	overthrow, tip upside down, upset, bring down	mgo gzhug slog
མགོ་གཞུག་སློག་སྟེ	upside-down	mgo gzhug slog ste
མགོ་གཞུག་སློག་པ	overthrow, tip upside down, upset, bring down	mgo gzhug slog pa
མགོ་གཞུག་བསློག	overthrew, tipped upside down, upset, brought down	mgo gzhug bslog
མགོ་གཞུག་བསློག་པ	overthrew, tipped upside down, upset, brought down	mgo gzhug bslog pa
མགོ་ཟླ	11th month, November/ December	mgo zla
མགོ་ཟླ་བ	[the eleventh month]	mgo zla ba
མགོ་ཟླུམ	shaven head, round head, sha gseb tu mde'u lus pa gang na yod med brtag byed implement	mgo zlum
མགོ་ཟླུམ་གནས	monastery (where the shaven heads reside)	mgo zlum gnas
མགོ་ཟླུམ་པ	shaven head, monk	mgo zlum pa
མགོ་ཟླུམ་ལམ་ནག	comet	mgo zlum lam nag
མགོ་གཟེར	headache, painful head disease	mgo gzer
མགོ་འོག་མཇིང་ཚུད	mgo 'og lus chug	mgo 'og mjing tshud
མགོ་འོག་ལུས་ཆུག	so so'i khongs gang yin so so'i sgrigs khrims kyis 'chun pa	mgo 'og lus chug
མགོ་ཡང	1) person easily swayed by others; 2) many husbands seeking woman)	mgo yang
མགོ་ཡན	w/o consideration for others gu yangs can	mgo yan
མགོ་ཡི་སྐྲ་ཟིང་ཟིང	bristle-like hair	mgo yi skra zing zing
མགོ་ཡུ་འཁོར	feel dizzy/ giddy	mgo yu 'khor
མགོ་ཡུ་འཁོར་བ	giddy	mgo yu 'khor ba
མགོ་ཡུར	dizziness	mgo yur
མགོ་ཡུར་འཁོར	feel dizzy/ giddy	mgo yur 'khor
མགོ་ཡུར་འཁོར་པོ	dizzy	mgo yur 'khor po
མགོ་ཡུར་འཁོར་བ	dizzy, giddy, dazzle	mgo yur 'khor ba
མགོ་ཡེགས	(A) mgo'i skra 'dzings pa	mgo yegs
མགོ་ཡོད་མཇུག་ཡོད	speaker listener go bab kyi brtsi 'khur yod pa, systematic, orderly	mgo yod mjug yod
མགོ་ཡོམ་ཡོམ	head awirling, dizzyiness, giddiness [Mig lam du dmar 'thom langs pas mgo yom yom byed kyi 'dug ...Lhags bsil phog pas ljon shing gi mgo yom yom gyo]	mgo yom yom
མགོ་རབ༹་དམ	cattle horns brgyab pa'i rtags the'u tshe la zer ba dang, formerly in Tibet du phyugs rigs shi god byung na mgo rva dam 'byar ma de dag phyugs bdag la rtsis sprod dgos custom	mgo rva dam
མགོ་རལ	scarred head	mgo ral
མགོ་རས	head scarf	mgo ras
མགོ་རིལ	bald	mgo ril
མགོ་རིལ་མགོ་སྐོན	copper working tool	mgo ril mgo skon
མགོ་རུག	bend/ bow the head	mgo rug
མགོ་རུལ	after a head wound rul sungs su gyur pa	mgo rul
མགོ་རུས	skull, frontal bone D	mgo rus
མགོ་རེག	shaven head, round bald-head, buddhist monk	mgo reg
མགོ་ལ	at the beginning, at the head [of the valley]	mgo la
མགོ་ལ་རྣ་འབྱར	mnyam du sbrel ba'i dpe,...Pha gzhis ma lag tshang ma mgo la rna 'byar gyis rtsis sprad,...Khe gyong gang yod mgo la rna 'byar du rtsis blangs	mgo la rna 'byar
མགོ་ལ་སྤུ་སྐྱེས	pho mo rgan gzhon la ma bltos pa'i mi yod tshad	mgo la spu skyes
མགོ་ལ་མེ་འབར	head blazing w fire	mgo la me 'bar
མགོ་ལ་མེ་ཤོར	hair catching fire	mgo la me shor
མགོ་ལ་མེ་ཤོར་བ་ལྟ་བུ	as if one's hair had caught fire mgo la rdza ma g.yog pa - cover one's head with a pot	mgo la me shor ba lta bu
མགོ་ལ་ཞྭ་གོན་པ	put a cap on the head	mgo la zhwa gon pa
མགོ་ལ་རལ་པ	a long plait on my head	mgo la ral pa
མགོ་ལག	head and hand	mgo lag
མགོ་ལས་སྐྱེས	10th month	mgo las skyes
མགོ་ལས་དཔུང་མཐོ	go rim mi brtsi ba'i dpe ste ham pa chen po	mgo las dpung mtho
མགོ་ལས་རྨ་ཆེ་བ	major branch of the root meaning	mgo las rma che ba
མགོ་ལིང	branch	mgo ling
མགོ་ལིང་ཅན	tree, shaking head	mgo ling can
མགོ་ལུས་མཚུངས་པ	cha tshad snyoms pa	mgo lus mtshungs pa
མགོ་ལེགས	Golek, disciple of Marpa	mgo legs
མགོ་ལེན་བསྟེན་བསྐྱིལ	mi gzhan mgo btad blangs nas bsten nyar byed pa	mgo len bsten bskyil
མགོ་ལེན་པ	1) gzhan gyis skyabs bcol ba ltar khas len pa; 2) receive enemy's head as sign of victory; 3) accept submission/ surrender)	mgo len pa
མགོ་ལོག	1) rnyog 'dzing; 2) {mgo log} district	mgo log
མགོ་ལོག་འཛམ་ཐང	Dzamtang, in Golok	mgo log 'dzam thang
མགོ་ཤ་འཁྲེགས	thick headed	mgo sha 'khregs
མགོ་ཤད་ཟླ་ཚེས	crescent moon ornament on top	mgo shad zla tshes
མགོ་ཤུ	mgo la skyes pa'i rma shu	mgo shu
མགོ་ཤུབས	spo bo dang, kong yul gyi gos chas shig	mgo shubs
མགོ་ཤོག	title page of a book	mgo shog
མགོ་སུག	by the head the nipple thug tsam thug tsam byed pa, suckle	mgo sug
མགོ་སེ	mixed white and black/ grey hair	mgo se
མགོ་སེ་བོ	grey-headed person	mgo se bo
མགོ་སེར་སྐྱ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, brown hair	mgo ser skya
མགོ་སླ་པོ	easily deceived, gullible	mgo sla po
མགོ་གསུམ་པ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	mgo gsum pa
མགོ་ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་གཏུམ་ནས	wrapping up his whole head	mgo hril gyis gtum nas
མགོ་ལྷག་ཕྱེད་པ	=ize, deal equitably, act fairly	mgo lhag phyed pa
མགོན	protector, lord, refuge	mgon
མགོན་དཀར	the wish-fulfilling gem	mgon dkar
མགོན་སྐྱབས	god	mgon skyabs
མགོན་སྐྱོབ	protection	mgon skyob
མགོན་ཁང	chapel w images of the fierce protectors, protector's temple	mgon khang
མགོན་ཁང་བཞི	Four Protector Temples	mgon khang bzhi
མགོན་གོན་རྒྱལ་མོ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	mgon gon rgyal mo
མགོན་གྱི་འཕྲིན་སྐྱེལ་བྱ	magpie	mgon gyi 'phrin skyel bya
མགོན་གཉེན	protector and friend	mgon gnyen
མགོན་དང་སྐྱབས་མི་མཛད	not go to refuge w the protector, not protect	mgon dang skyabs mi mdzad
མགོན་དང་སྐྱབས་མཛད་པ	being their refuge and protector	mgon dang skyabs mdzad pa
མགོན་དང་སྐྱབས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	granting protection and refuge	mgon dang skyabs su gyur pa
མགོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to an entertainment	mgon du 'gro ba
མགོན་དུ་བརྟན	to definitively deliver, to be a firm helper	mgon du brtan
མགོན་པ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ	Lord agarjuna	mgon pa klu sgrub
མགོན་པ་ཕྱག་བཞི་པ	Four-armed Mahakala, a Dharma protector	mgon pa phyag bzhi pa
མགོན་པར་དགའ་བ	Buddhafield of Manifest Joy	mgon par dga' ba
མགོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	[one] possessed of right judgement/ discernment	mgon par rtogs pa dang ldan pa
མགོན་པོ	1) lord, protector, refuge, Lord, Protector, defender, savior, 2) patron, principal, master, 3) protector, guardian [of the Dharma]	mgon po
མགོན་པོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པ	crazy yogin	mgon po kun tu spyod pa
ལིཕེ༹	style, protector-like conduct	life
མགོན་པོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་གཟིགས	All-Seeing Guide	mgon po kun tu gzigs
མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ	by Lord Nagarjuna	mgon po klu
མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་གྲུབ	Lord Nagarjuna	mgon po klu grub
མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ	Lord Nagarjuna	mgon po klu sgrub
མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས	from this statement by Lord Nagarjuna	mgon po klu sgrub kyis
མགོན་པོ་སྐོར་གསུམ	1) {ye shes kyi mgon po}. 2) {las kyi mgon po} 3) {'jig rten pa'i kyi mgon po}	mgon po skor gsum
མགོན་པོ་གུར	a deity	mgon po gur
མགོན་པོ་གྲི་གུག	a name	mgon po gri gug
མགོན་པོ་སྒྲུབ་ཆེན	name of a sacred dance	mgon po sgrub chen
མགོན་པོ་དངོས་གྲུབ་དཔལ་འབར	18-19th cent. - Gönpo Ngödrub Palbar, throneholder of Sakya	mgon po dngos grub dpal 'bar
མགོན་པོ་སྔོན་འདོག	ritual instruction setting forth the proper method of invoking Mahakala (Natha) as a protective deity	mgon po sngon 'dog
མགོན་པོ་ལྕམ་དྲལ	powerful mgon po Brothers and Sisters	mgon po lcam dral
མགོན་པོ་བསྟོད་ཆེན	ritual for the propitiation of Mahakala (Natha) as a protective deity	mgon po bstod chen
མགོན་པོ་གདོང་ལྔ	Gönpo Dong-nga,	mgon po gdong lnga
ཐེ་Fཨིབེ༹	faced Lion Protector, mountain near Kokonor	the Five
མགོན་པོ་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahasukha Natha	mgon po bde ba chen po
མགོན་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཅན	Indra	mgon po rdo rje can
མགོན་པོ་ནག་པོ	Mahakala	mgon po nag po
མགོན་པོ་ཕོ་རྒྱུད	protectors of the male class	mgon po pho rgyud
མགོན་པོ་ཕྱག་དྲུག་པ	a dharmapala	mgon po phyag drug pa
མགོན་པོ་ཕྱག་དྲུག་པའི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual of the Six-armed Mahakala	mgon po phyag drug pa'i cho ga
མགོན་པོ་ཕྱག་བཞི	four armed Mahakala	mgon po phyag bzhi
མགོན་པོ་ཕྱག་བཞི་པ	the four armed aspect of Mahakala protective deity	mgon po phyag bzhi pa
མགོན་པོ་བ	dharma protector supplicator and worshipper	mgon po ba
མགོན་པོ་བིར་ཝ་པ	name of or rgyan rin po che	mgon po bir wa pa
མགོན་པོ་བེང	Ravana, at Mount Kailash	mgon po beng
མགོན་པོ་བེར་ཅན	[a two-armed form of Mahakala]	mgon po ber can
མགོན་པོ་བེར་ནག་ཅན	dpal ldan nag po	mgon po ber nag can
ཆེན་པོ	Mahakala, protective deity of the Karma Kagyü	chen po
མགོན་པོ་བེར་ནག་ཅན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	liturgical texts focusing upon the propitiation of Mahakala according to the traditions of the {kaM tshang}	mgon po ber nag can gyi sgrub skor
མགོན་པོ་བོས་པ	call/ invite	mgon po bos pa
མགོན་པོ་བྱམས་པ	Lord Maitreya	mgon po byams pa
མགོན་པོ་མ་ནིང	Lord Ma-ning, [a Dharma protector]	mgon po ma ning
མགོན་པོ་མ་ནིང་གི་སྐོར	a collection of rare texts focusing upon Mahakala in the {ma ning} form	mgon po ma ning gi skor
མགོན་པོ་མི་ཕམ་པ	Lord Ajita, [Maitreya]	mgon po mi pham pa
མགོན་པོ་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད	Protector Amitayus Boundless Life	mgon po tshe dpag med
མགོན་པོ་ཚོགས་བདག་གི་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	rituals for the puja of the protective deity Natha Ganapati	mgon po tshogs bdag gi sgrub skor
མགོན་པོ་ཚོགས་བདག་གླང་སྣ	protective deity Ganapati	mgon po tshogs bdag glang sna
མགོན་པོ་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་མགྲོན	the protector who is a lamp of virtue	mgon po yon tan gyi mgron
མགོན་པོ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five lords 512	mgon po rigs lnga
མགོན་པོ་བསོད་ནམས་མཆོག་ལྡན	{bka' 'gyur ba mgon po bsod nams mchog ldan}, author of {gdugs dkar can gyi mdos chog}	mgon po bsod nams mchog ldan
མགོན་པོའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	Mahakala sadhana	mgon po'i sgrub thabs
མགོན་པོའི་ཚོགས	the assembly of deities of the principal 1	mgon po'i tshogs
མགོན་ཕྲིན་རྒྱས་པ	elaborate invocation of Mahakala	mgon phrin rgyas pa
མགོན་བོ	lord, protector, wrathful protector deity, master, yidam, principal deity TSE	mgon bo
མགོན་བོ་རིགས་ལྔ	the lords of the five families {Akshobhya, ratnasambhava, amitabha, amogasiddhi} (tserig)	mgon bo rigs lnga
མགོན་བླ	Gönla. The lama who performs the rituals for the Dharma protectors	mgon bla
སྐྱེམས་འདོད་དོན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་མ	by the 8th {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ngag gi dbang po kun bzang rang byung rdo rje}	skyems 'dod don lhun grub ma
མགོན་མངས	many patrons/ small sacred pyramids D	mgon mangs
མགོན་མེད	{mgon med mya ngan gyis gdung ba} utterly alone and miserable	mgon med
མགོན་མེད་སྐྱབས་མེད	helpless and without protector, have no refuge or protector, had neither protector nor refuge	mgon med skyabs med
མགོན་མེད་ཁང	pauper's hostel	mgon med khang
མགོན་མེད་ཁྱིམ	pauper's hostel	mgon med khyim
མགོན་མེད་འདུག་གནས	a pauper's hostel	mgon med 'dug gnas
མགོན་མེད་ཟས་སྦྱིན	a householder who accommodated Buddha in Jetavana grove of Sravasti	mgon med zas sbyin
མགོན་བཙུན	savior, dependable refuge	mgon btsun
མགོན་བཙུན་ཕྱའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city in the B"n paradise D	mgon btsun phya'i grong khyer
མགོན་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Mahakala and consort	mgon yab yum
མགོན་ལ་འདོད	invite	mgon la 'dod
མགོན་ཤུལ	Gonshul, in Domey	mgon shul
མགོན་ཤེས་ལྷ་བོན	1 of shes pa bcu gnyis, bon of the deities who know how to protect	mgon shes lha bon
མགོམ་པོ	mah kala	mgom po
མགོའི་ལྟག་པ	crown or upper part of the head	mgo'i ltag pa
མགོའི་ཚད	a heads weight	mgo'i tshad
མགོའུ	head	mgo'u
མགོའུ་ཆུང	small or no head, running hand character of tibet	mgo'u chung
མགོར	imp. of {mgar ba}	mgor
མགོས	unblemished	mgos
མགོས་འཐིགས་པ	unblemished dripping	mgos 'thigs pa
མགོས་འབུམ་ཡུ་འབྱིན	Gobum Yujin	mgos 'bum yu 'byin
མགྱེན་ཆ	the cognizant aspect	mgyen cha
མགྱོགས	hurry, race	mgyogs
མགྱོགས་འཁོར	express train	mgyogs 'khor
མགྱོགས་ག	faster, quicker	mgyogs ga
མགྱོགས་གྲུ	speed boat	mgyogs gru
མགྱོགས་གྲོའི་བྲུན	horse dung	mgyogs gro'i brun
མགྱོགས་འགྲོ	horse, wind	mgyogs 'gro
མགྱོགས་འགྲོའི་བྲུན	horse manure	mgyogs 'gro'i brun
མགྱོགས་འགྲོས	canter	mgyogs 'gros
མགྱོགས་གཏམ	clapper talk	mgyogs gtam
མགྱོགས་རྟགས་ཟིན་འཁོད	stenography, shorthand	mgyogs rtags zin 'khod
མགྱོགས་ནས	early barley	mgyogs nas
མགྱོགས་ནུས	acceleration	mgyogs nus
མགྱོགས་ནུས་དང་ངར་སྤར་བ	rush	mgyogs nus dang ngar spar ba
མགྱོགས་སྣོན	acceleration	mgyogs snon
མགྱོགས་སྣོན་འགུལ་སྐྱོད	acceleration	mgyogs snon 'gul skyod
མགྱོགས་སྣོན་ཚད	rate of acceleration	mgyogs snon tshad
མགྱོགས་པ	1) Lag rtsa'i 'phar grangs myur ba, speed *, rapid succession between cause and effect, speed, swiftness, rapid[ity], quick	mgyogs pa
མགྱོགས་པ་དྲི་ལྡན	assafoetida	mgyogs pa dri ldan
མགྱོགས་པ་བྱེད	quick performance of work	mgyogs pa byed
མགྱོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	acute intelligence	mgyogs pa'i shes rab
མགྱོགས་པར	quickly, swiftly, hastily	mgyogs par
མགྱོགས་པར་འགྲོ་བ	went running quickly	mgyogs par 'gro ba
མགྱོགས་པར་རྒྱུག་པ	began to race	mgyogs par rgyug pa
མགྱོགས་པར་ཕྱིན	quickly started out	mgyogs par phyin
མགྱོགས་པར་ལོངས་ཤོག་བྱས་པ	telling her to make haste in fetching it	mgyogs par longs shog byas pa
མགྱོགས་པོ	at once, quickly, nearly, soon, quick, fast, haste, prompt, snappy, soon, speedy, swift, quick, quickly	mgyogs po
མགྱོགས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	hasten, hurry, speed	mgyogs po byed pa
མགྱོགས་པོའམ་མདོར་བསྡུས་སུ་བྲིས་པ	jot	mgyogs po'am mdor bsdus su bris pa
མགྱོགས་པོར	apace, jiffy, quickly, shortly, quickly, speedily, soon	mgyogs por
མགྱོགས་པོར་བསྐྱོད་མཁན	express	mgyogs por bskyod mkhan
མགྱོགས་པོར་འཁྱེར་འགྲོ་བ	whisk	mgyogs por 'khyer 'gro ba
མགྱོགས་པོར་འགྲོ་བ	scurry	mgyogs por 'gro ba
མགྱོགས་པོར་ཟ་བ	gobble	mgyogs por za ba
མགྱོགས་བུལ	speed	mgyogs bul
མགྱོགས་བྱས	to rush	mgyogs byas
མགྱོགས་བྱེད	horse, riding horse	mgyogs byed
མགྱོགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲལ་དུ	among horses	mgyogs byed kyi gral du
མགྱོགས་བྲིས	quickly written/ drawn/ painted, sketch, shorthand	mgyogs bris
མགྱོགས་མྱུར	[very] quick, rapid, soon	mgyogs myur
མགྱོགས་མྱུར་གྱིས་བྲོས་པ	rapid flight	mgyogs myur gyis bros pa
མགྱོགས་མྱུར་དུ	[very] quickly, rapidly, soon	mgyogs myur du
མགྱོགས་མྱུར་དེད་པ	chase, put to flight	mgyogs myur ded pa
མགྱོགས་ཚ	metal la gtong ba'i grang tsha	mgyogs tsha
མགྱོགས་ཚད	degree of swiftness, speed, velocity	mgyogs tshad
མགྱོགས་ཚད་ཆུང་དུ་བཏང་བ	lessen the speed	mgyogs tshad chung du btang ba
མགྱོགས་ཚད་ཇེ་ཆེར་གཏོང་བ	ever increasing speed	mgyogs tshad je cher gtong ba
མགྱོགས་ཟས	quick meal	mgyogs zas
མགྱོགས་ཡིག	short-hand	mgyogs yig
མགྱོགས་རབ༹	Tibetan gun mgyogs thabs su rdzas mdel blug byed	mgyogs rva
མགྱོགས་རིས	quick drawing, sketch	mgyogs ris
མགྱོགས་ལམ	short/ quick/ direct path, race, short-cut	mgyogs lam
མགྱོགས་ལོད	speed mgyogs lod blta ched kyi 'phrul cha speedometer	mgyogs lod
མགྱོགས་ཤུགས	velocity	mgyogs shugs
མགྱོགས་ཤུགས་སྤར་བ	accelerate	mgyogs shugs spar ba
མགྱོགས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	quicken	mgyogs su gtong ba
མགྱོས་སུ་གཏོང	accelerate, speed up	mgyos su gtong
མགྱོས་སུ་གཏོང་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	accelerator	mgyos su gtong byed 'phrul chas
མགྲིན	throat, neck, throat center; voice	mgrin
མགྲིན་སྐུད་ཅན	having a cord on the throat, bhramin	mgrin skud can
མགྲིན་སྐྱེས	song, music	mgrin skyes
མགྲིན་གུག	camel	mgrin gug
མགྲིན་གླུ	song	mgrin glu
མགྲིན་རྒྱན	necklace	mgrin rgyan
མགྲིན་སྔོན	peacock, mahadeva, he with a blue neck	mgrin sngon
མགྲིན་སྔོན་ཟླ་བའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	{mgrin sngon zla ba'i rtogs brjod} [dus rabs bco brgyad pa'i 'gor rje stag phu pa blo bzang rgya mtshos brtsams pa'i snga rabs rgyal po lha snang stobs ldan gyi sras chos kyi dga' ba khu byug mgrin...	mgrin sngon zla ba'i rtogs brjod
མགྲིན་གཅིག	unanimous, with one voice	mgrin gcig
མགྲིན་གཅིག་གིས	w a single voice, as 1	mgrin gcig gis
མགྲིན་གཅིག་ཏུ	in unison, with a single voice; identical [account]; as / with one voice, in union	mgrin gcig tu
མགྲིན་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	to speak unanimously	mgrin gcig tu smra ba
མགྲིན་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཞེད་པ	accept unanimously/ w 1 voice	mgrin gcig tu bzhed pa
མགྲིན་གཅིག་པས	in unison	mgrin gcig pas
མགྲིན་གཅིག་དབྱངས་གཅིག	all speaking w 1 voice	mgrin gcig dbyangs gcig
མགྲིན་བཅུ	king of the rakshasas, Ravana	mgrin bcu
མགྲིན་བཅུ་པ	king of the rakshasas, Ravana [king of Ceylon and son of Pulasta]	mgrin bcu pa
མགྲིན་བཅུ་པའི་དགྲ	king of the rakshasas, Ravana	mgrin bcu pa'i dgra
མགྲིན་བཅུའི་དགྲ་བོ	king of the rakshasas, Ravana	mgrin bcu'i dgra bo
མགྲིན་ཐུང	short neck	mgrin thung
མགྲིན་ཐུང་བ	short neck or throat or voice	mgrin thung ba
མགྲིན་གདངས	voice	mgrin gdangs
མགྲིན་ལྡན	cuckoo, indian koel	mgrin ldan
མགྲིན་ནག	large raven	mgrin nag
མགྲིན་པ	neck	mgrin pa
མགྲིན་པ་ཁྲ་བོ	Shiva	mgrin pa khra bo
མགྲིན་པ་གློ་རྩ	channel of the lungs at the throat	mgrin pa glo rtsa
མགྲིན་པ་སྔོ	1) Shiva, dbang phyug chen po; 2) peacock)	mgrin pa sngo
མགྲིན་པ་ཅན	peaked mountain	mgrin pa can
མགྲིན་པ་གཅིག	with one throat, unanimously	mgrin pa gcig
མགྲིན་པ་བཏེག་པ	1) skad gzengs bstod pa; 2) Ske bkyag pa)	mgrin pa bteg pa
མགྲིན་པ་བཏེགས	speak out, raised head [panic/ alarm]	mgrin pa btegs
མགྲིན་པ་འདེགས་པ	raise the chin	mgrin pa 'degs pa
མགྲིན་པ་ཕྱེ་བའི་རྩོལ་བ	in reading mgrin pa gdangs nas brjod pa'i rtsol ba	mgrin pa phye ba'i rtsol ba
མགྲིན་པ་བཙུམས་པའི་རྩོལ་བ	in reading mgrin pa btsums nas brjod pa'i rtsol ba	mgrin pa btsums pa'i rtsol ba
མགྲིན་པ་རབ་རིང	stork	mgrin pa rab ring
མགྲིན་པ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	the enjoyment chakra in my throat	mgrin pa longs spyod
མགྲིན་པ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the throat centre, rapture in the throat (Gdmk) [mgrin pa'i thad kyi rtsa dbu ma las gyes pa'i rtsa 'dab bcu drug gdugs kyi rtsibs ma ltar kha yar phyod nas yod pa	mgrin pa longs spyod kyi 'khor lo
མགྲིན་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra of the throat	mgrin pa'i 'khor lo
མགྲིན་པའི་རྒྱན	necklace	mgrin pa'i rgyan
མགྲིན་པའི་སྒྲ	voice D	mgrin pa'i sgra
མགྲིན་པའི་ཕྱོགས	mouth, collar bone D	mgrin pa'i phyogs
མགྲིན་པའི་རྩ	root or base of the neck	mgrin pa'i rtsa
མགྲིན་པའི་རླུང	breath	mgrin pa'i rlung
མགྲིན་པར	at the throat	mgrin par
མགྲིན་དབྱངས	voice	mgrin dbyangs
མགྲིན་དབྱངས་གཅིག་གྱུར	w one voice, in union, w identical (account), unanimously, as 1	mgrin dbyangs gcig gyur
མགྲིན་དབྱངས་གཅིག་པ	w according words	mgrin dbyangs gcig pa
མགྲིན་དམར	a bird D	mgrin dmar
མགྲིན་དམར་ཅན	rakshasa	mgrin dmar can
མགྲིན་ཚབ	spokesman	mgrin tshab
མགྲིན་ཚབ་པ	spokesman, representative, messenger	mgrin tshab pa
མགྲིན་ཚབ་བྱེད	act as spokesman, speak on behalf of	mgrin tshab byed
མགྲིན་མཛེས	hand-some neck	mgrin mdzes
མགྲིན་བཟང	donkey, friend and general of rama in his exile, one with a loud & clear voice	mgrin bzang
མགྲིན་བཟང་བཙུན་མོ	a goddess, concretion found in brains of elephants or stomach of cows, bright yellow pigment	mgrin bzang btsun mo
མགྲིན་བཟན་བཙུན་མོ	a goddess, gi wang med. [solidified bile], a yellow pigment	mgrin bzan btsun mo
མགྲིན་རིང	long necked 1) crane [bird]; 2) 'dab chags bzhad; 3) 'dabs chags shing rta ma)	mgrin ring
མགྲིན་རིང་པ	long neck	mgrin ring pa
མགྲིན་རིང་བ	long necked 1) crane [bird]; 2) 'dab chags bzhad; 3) 'dabs chags shing rta ma)	mgrin ring ba
མགྲེན་པ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the throat enjoyment chakra	mgren pa longs spyod kyi 'khor lo
མགྲོན	guests, rider, feast, treat, banquet, entertainment, object of invocation, 2 kinds in bon (person or deity invoked for worship, person invoked out of compassion)	mgron
མགྲོན་བཀུག	Summon the residual guests; lhag mgron 'bod	mgron bkug
མགྲོན་ཁ	entertainment, a feast	mgron kha
མགྲོན་ཁ་ཞན་པོ	defenseless travellers	mgron kha zhan po
མགྲོན་ཁང	a wayfarer's inn	mgron khang
མགྲོན་ཁང་སྤྲོ་པོ	nice hotel mgron khang mtsher shag sgor ming yig	mgron khang spro po
མགྲོན་གྱི་འཕྲིན་སྐྱེལ་བྱ	magpie	mgron gyi 'phrin skyel bya
མགྲོན་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	chief guest, guest of honor	mgron gyi gtso bo
མགྲོན་འགྱེད་པ	to invite to a party, inviting guests	mgron 'gyed pa
མགྲོན་བརྒྱུད་ཁང	message transmitting/ information office	mgron brgyud khang
མགྲོན་ཆས	guest-objects [in ritual]	mgron chas
མགྲོན་གཉེར	invite/ call a guest	mgron gnyer
མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ	Dalai and Panchen Lama's chief lord chamberlain	mgron gnyer chen mo
མགྲོན་གཏུག་ཁང	drawing room, parlor, reception room. Syn {mgron bsu khang}; drawing room, parlor	mgron gtug khang
མགྲོན་ཐབས	as a guest	mgron thabs
མགྲོན་ཐོ	mgron 'bod kyi ming tho	mgron tho
མགྲོན་དང་ཐུག་འཕྲད་བྱེད་པ	receive a visitor	mgron dang thug 'phrad byed pa
མགྲོན་དུ་འགུགས	invite	mgron du 'gugs
མགྲོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to an entertainment	mgron du 'gro ba
མགྲོན་དུ་གཉེར་ཅིང་ཞབས་ལ་གཏུག་པ	after regaling [the Buddha] with a feast they asked to touch the Buddha's feet	mgron du gnyer cing zhabs la gtug pa
མགྲོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ	regale, treat	mgron du gnyer ba
མགྲོན་དུ་སྤྱན་འདྲེན་པ	invite to an entertainment (H)	mgron du spyan 'dren pa
མགྲོན་དུ་བོས	invoking, invite to a feast	mgron du bos
མགྲོན་དུ་བོས་པ	invited for a feast {me skyes kyi khang par rgyal po mgron du bos pa} the king was invited to Jyotiska's house for a feast	mgron du bos pa
མགྲོན་དུ་འབོད	invite	mgron du 'bod
མགྲོན་བདག	mgron po 'bod mkhan gyi bdag po	mgron bdag
མགྲོན་བརྡ	[written] invitation	mgron brda
མགྲོན་བརྡ་གཏོང	send a [written] invitation, invite	mgron brda gtong
མགྲོན་བརྡ་འབུལ	send a [written] invitation, invite	mgron brda 'bul
མགྲོན་པ	any person invoked, 4 classes (dkon mchog srid zhu'i mgron, mgon po yon tan gyi mgron, rigs drug snying rje'i mgron, gdon bgegs lan chags kyi mgron)	mgron pa
མགྲོན་པོ	guest, visitor [gdan zhus ltar gsar du phebs mkhan nam phyi rol nas yong ba'i mi,...Sku mgron,...Byes mgron,...Gzhis mgron,...Ja mgron,...Chang mgron,...Mgron du 'bod pa,...Mi sdod mgron po song na...	mgron po
མགྲོན་པོ་སྔོན་ནས་བསུས	invite visitors in	mgron po sngon nas bsus
མགྲོན་པོ་དང་ཐུག་འཕྲད་བྱེད་པ	receive a visitor	mgron po dang thug 'phrad byed pa
མགྲོན་པོ་བོས་པ	call or invite a person	mgron po bos pa
མགྲོན་པོ་མལ་དུ་སྙོལ	see the visitors to bed!	mgron po mal du snyol
མགྲོན་པོ་གཙོ་བོ	chief guest/ visitor, guest of honor	mgron po gtso bo
མགྲོན་པོ་བཞི	four classes of guests: 1) {dkon mchog srid zhu'i mgron}. 2) {mgon po yon tan gyi mgron} 3) {rigs drug snying rje'i mgron} 4) {gdon bgegs lan chags kyi mgron}	mgron po bzhi
མགྲོན་པོར་འབོད་པ	treat	mgron por 'bod pa
མགྲོན་ཕྱྭ	divination about travelers	mgron phywa
མགྲོན་ཕཡབ༹	mgron phyogs kyi gzhis sdod mi'i 'phar rtsa la brtags nas mgron po'i don gnyer 'grub min sogs brtag thabs shig [one of the ngo mtshar rtsa bdun]	mgron phyva
མགྲོན་བ་ཞི	four kinds of guests or beings invoked [1 {dkon mchog srid zhu'i mgron} the three jewels, guru, and yidam two {mgon po yon tan gyi mgron} the protectors three {rigs drug snying rje'i mgron} beings ...	mgron ba zhi
མགྲོན་བུ	cowries, bones or shells of exchange	mgron bu
མགྲོན་བུ་གཉེར་བ	chamberlain, receiver of guests	mgron bu gnyer ba
མགྲོན་བུ་ཐལ་བ	medicinal drug to stop bleeding and help fractures & sores	mgron bu thal ba
མགྲོན་བུ་འབོད	invite/ call a guest	mgron bu 'bod
མགྲོན་བུ་འབོད་པ	invite or call a guest	mgron bu 'bod pa
མགྲོན་བོད	invitation to an entertainment (h)	mgron bod
མགྲོན་བོད་བྱེད	invite to an entertainment (h)	mgron bod byed
མགྲོན་འབུལ	entertain	mgron 'bul
མགྲོན་འབོད	invite[ation] to an entertainment (h)	mgron 'bod
མགྲོན་མང་རྐུན་སོགས་སྡེ་ཚན	the set of mgong man, thief etc [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, the 8th set of 10,: 1 rkun po dang lhan cig tu 'gro ba'i ltung byed, two nyi shu ma 515 lon par bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i ...	mgron mang rkun sogs sde tshan
མགྲོན་བཞི	four kinds of guests	mgron bzhi
མགྲོན་ཟབ་སྣེ་ལེན	hospitality	mgron zab sne len
མགྲོན་བཟོ་སྟོན་པ	polite, courteous mgron g.yag - yak hosts in the sense of yaks offered as spyan gzigs to the protective deities	mgron bzo ston pa
མགྲོན་ར	place where guests stay	mgron ra
མགྲོན་རོགས	ordinary guest ste, chief guest zhor la skad btang ba'i mgron po	mgron rogs
མགྲོན་ལ་འབོད་པ	invite to an entertainment	mgron la 'bod pa
མགྲོན་ལས་མྱུར	to arrive more quickly than a guest	mgron las myur
མགྲོན་བསུ་ཁང	drawing room, parlor; drawing room, parlor, reception room	mgron bsu khang
མགྲོན་བསུ་བ	1) appointed receiver of travellers; 2) receive travellers)	mgron bsu ba
མགྲོན་ལྷ	Drönla, in Tö, Mang-Yül 'gag - 1) obstruction/ stoppage; 2) be obstructed; 3) crucial point/ pith; 4) stop, cease 'gag - 1) obstruction, stoppage. 2) crucial point, pith, to stop, cease p. Syn {bga...	mgron lha
ཅེརྟཻནལཡ་ནོཏ་ནོན	existent. Eg, if it is	certainly not non
པྲོདུཅེད་ཨིཏ་ཨིས་ཅེརྟཻནལཡ་ནོཏ་ནོན	impermanent [mi rtag pa ma yin pa ma yin pas khyab].] 'gal khyab phyin ci log - erroneous contradictory pervasion [among the 8 means of the reason pervading that which is to be established rtags gs...	produced it is certainly not non
ཡོད་ཨནད་ནོན	contradictory and, the sbyar gzhi example is shown to be nonexistent and contradictory 'gal ba lci ba - strong/ serious contradiction? 'gal ba lci ba - grave breach 'gal ba brjod pa - contradictory...	yod and non
ཧབི༹ང་ཨ་ཅོནཏྲདིཅཏིཨོན	producing form 'os min gyi bya ba 'gal ba byed mkhan gyi gzugs can du bkod pa'i rgyan.] 'gal ba'i rang bzhin dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur	having a contradiction
ཀིནདས་ཨོཕ༹་ཅོནསེqཨུཨེནཅེས་ཝཧིཆ་ཨརེ་ཅོནཏྲདིཅཏོརཡ་བེཅཽསེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	coexistence lhan cig mi gnas 'gal gyi thal 'gyur dgu, consequence of a pervaded	kinds of consequences which are contradictory because of non
ཀིནདས་ཨོཕ༹་རེཨསོནས་གིབེ༹ན་ཝཧིཆ་ཨརེ་ཅོནཏྲདིཅཏོརཡ་བེཅཽསེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	coexistence lhan cig mi gnas 'gal gyi rtags sbyor bcu gnyis, a nature object contradictory with the nature, cause, fruition, and pervader rang bzhin dang 'gal ba'i rang bzhin dmigs pa dang, rgyu......	kinds of reasons given which are contradictory because of non
ཆད་གཏོང་བ	punish in proportion to the crime 'gal tshabs - 'gal cha'am 'gal ba'i tshad, violation, crime 'gal tshabs can - sinning heinously 'gal tshabs can - guilty of violating the law, criminal 'gal 'dzol ...	chad gtong ba
ཞུགས	see infra) or to be saturated/filled with (sbags pa) or to adhere to/stick to ('byar ba)." | {'go ba'i na tsha 'gos pa}. {skyon 'gos pa}. {gos pa'i nyes pa}. 2) i) vi. to have a substance (like ash...	zhugs
པཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	obstruction, the path of seeing.] 'gog pa chos bzod - acceptance of the dharmas of cessation 'gog pa chos bzod - acceptance of the dharmas of cessation [1of the 16 instants of wisdom in the path of...	path of non
ཨཅཅེཔཏནཅེ་ཨནད་དྷརྨ	cognition concerning cessation 'gog pa chos bzod chos shes rjes bzod	acceptance and dharma
རྗེས་ཤེས	see {'gog pa la chos shes pa'i bzod pa}, {'gog pa la chos shes pa}, {'gog pa la rjes su shes pa'i bzod pa}, {'gog pa la rjes su shes pa} 'gog pa chos bzod pa - {'gog pa la chos shes pa'i bzod pa} p...	rjes shes
སྙོམས	samapatti/equilibrium of cessation: 1) absorption of cessation; 2) the equilibrium of no cessation, as one	snyoms
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུརྟེཨེན་ནོན	concurrent formations; 3) attainment of the suspension of attitudinal and functional operations)/ the mind of shamatha of the summit of samsara and vipashyana having the characteristic of being com...	of the fourteen non
སྤིརིཏ་སཡམབོལིཟིང་ཨེགོ	clinging, sometimes counted among the 'eight classes of gods and demons.' 'gong po - an enchanter, sorcerer; gongpo spirits, bewitching demons, craving spirit; an evil spirit, a demon who causes di...	spirit symbolizing ego
བྲེཨཀས་ཨིནཏོ་ཅུབེ	like pieces 'gong po'i rgyu lam - path of spirits 'gong ba - bewitch, enchant, pass over, get the better of, SA 'da' ba, smad pa 'gong ba - / AR; 1) disenheartened/ afraid/ overcome; 2) stop/ hinde...	breaks into cube
བྱེད་པ	put on a front, acting rich when 1 is poor, shabby gentility 'gram lcags - smack 'gram chang - saliva 'gram chu - saliva 'gram chu khol ba - 1) water at the mouth: want; 2) be startled that what wa...	byed pa
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་འགྲིམས་པ	wandering freely from place to place; ri khrod 'grims pa - wandered off into the wilderness 'grims pa - 1) wandered through [and looked at]; 2) studied 'grims pa - inferiority 'grims pa - to wander...	rgyal khams 'grims pa
སྟནདིང	alone with a woman to whom one is not related; one of the 90 {ba' zhig pa} downfalls 'greng ba'i ltung byed - the downfall of standing [1of the 90 ba' zhig pa downfalls, remain standing alone w a w...	standing
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	84,000 defilements of all beings 'gro ba de ma thag pa - as soon as he went 'gro ba drug - six kinds of beings [of the six lokas]; 1){lha} = gods; 2) {mi} = men; 3) {lha ma yin} = titans, jealous g...	brgyad khri bzhi stong
རྒ	age	rga
རྒ་ཁྲི	footstool	rga khri
རྒ་དང་འཆི་བ	{rga lbang krad kyi - bat,	rga dang 'chi ba
ཕ༹ླིཏཏེར	mouse	flitter
རྒ་ནད་འཆི་གསུམ	old age, sickness and death	rga nad 'chi gsum
རྒ་ཕིབས་ཏོག	gser gyi + - golden-roofed	rga phibs tog
རྒ་བ	decay, be old, aged, go down, set	rga ba
གཞུང	rgyun de nyid skye srid nas 'chi srid kyi bar du byis pa dang gzhon nu dang lang tsho dang dar bab dang rgas 'khogs zhes pa sogs snga phyi'i gnas skabs gzhan dang gzhan du 'gyur ba'i cha'o	gzhung
ཕོ༹ཨུརྟེཨེན་ནོན	concurrent formations, Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rgyun de nyid skye srid nas 'chi srid kyi bar du byis pa dang gzhon nu dang lang tsho dang dar bab dang rgas 'khogs zhes pa sogs snga phyi'i gnas sk...	fourteen non
རྒ་བ་འཆི་བ	old age and death	rga ba 'chi ba
རྒ་བ་གཉིས	CHN	rga ba gnyis
རྒ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery / suffering of old age [one of the {sdug bsngal brgyad} eight miseries / sufferings] Def. {gzugs dang lang tsho yongs su rgud de 'dod pa'i yon tan la ji bzhin longs su spyod pa'i mthu da...	rga ba'i sdug bsngal
བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	sdug bsngal brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig ste, gzugs dang lang tso yongs su rgud de 'dod pa'i yon tan la ji bzhin longs su spyod pa'i mthu dang bral bas sdug bsngal ba'o	ba'i sdug bsngal
རྒ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལྔ	CHN	rga ba'i sdug bsngal lnga
རྒ་བུ	calf w father, a bull & mother	rga bu
རྒ་ལྦང་ཀྲད་ཀྱི	bat, flitter-mouse	rga lbang krad kyi
རྒ་ཝང་ཀྲད་ཀྱི	bat, flitter-mouse	rga wang krad kyi
རྒ་ཞི	decay and death	rga zhi
རྒ་ཤི	1) old age and death [Rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis kyi ya gyal zhig 1 of the {rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba'i yan lag bcu gnyis} = 12 links of dependent origination {rga shi'i yan lag rten 'brel	rga shi
ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ནང་གསེས	skye ba de las phung rgyun 'gyur ba'i rga ba dang, rgyun 'gags pa'i shi ba ste, na tsod dang srog 'gyur bar byed pa'o	yan lag bcu gnyis kyi nang gses
རྒ་ཤི་ཟླ་བ	12th month with sun in Sagittarius	rga shi zla ba
རྒ་ཤི་རི་རིགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related aging and death	rga shi ri rigs pa'i rten 'brel
རྒ་ཤིའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	[tse rig]	rga shi'i rten 'brel
རྒ་ཤིའི་ཡན་ལག	the limb/nidana of old age & death, aging and death. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis kyi nang gses} {skye ba de las phung rgyun 'gyur ba'i rga ba dang, rgyun 'gags pa'i shi b...	rga shi'i yan lag
ཀྱི་ནང་གསེས	skye ba de las phung rgyun 'gyur ba'i rga ba dang, rgyun 'gags pa'i shi ba ste, na tsod dang srog 'gyur bar byed pa'o	kyi nang gses
རྒ་ཤིའི་རིགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related aging and death	rga shi'i rigs pa'i rten 'brel
རྒག་ཅིག	lizard	rgag cig
རྒང	srog chags gzugs mo	rgang
རྒད་པ	old, aged	rgad pa
རྒད་པའི་ཨ་མ	my old mother	rgad pa'i a ma
རྒད་པོ	old man, uncle, grandpa	rgad po
རྒད་པོ་ཡིན་ཡང་མོ་ཡིད་དུ་འོང	[with wealth] even if you are old, women delight in you	rgad po yin yang mo yid du 'ong
རྒད་མོ	aged woman, old woman/ lady, old, aged lady, granny 547	rgad mo
རྒད་གཞོན	young or / and old	rgad gzhon
རྒན	elder; adult, mature	rgan
རྒན་བཀུར	respect for the elders; mi rgan rgon la bkur sti byed pa	rgan bkur
རྒན་ཁོག	old people, the aged, old person	rgan khog
རྒན་འཁོགས	old/ aged [people]	rgan 'khogs
རྒན་འཁོགས་ཀྱི་བཟོ་ལྟ	old-looking rgan 'khogs rnams la gzigs skyong byed	rgan 'khogs kyi bzo lta
རྒན་འཁོགས་གསོ་སྐྱོང་ཀང	old people's home [institution]	rgan 'khogs gso skyong kang
རྒན་གོག	old, aged people; dotard. Syn {rgan 'khogs} old [senile] person	rgan gog
རྒན་གོག་ཆགས་པ	grow old	rgan gog chags pa
རྒན་གྲས	old people, seniors	rgan gras
རྒན་འགོ	eldest, the older child	rgan 'go
རྒན་རྒོན	old man and old woman, old person	rgan rgon
རྒན་རྒོན་གཉིས	old couple	rgan rgon gnyis
རྒན་རྒྱ	Gengya, in Domey	rgan rgya
རྒན་ཆག	sngar gtso rgan byed pa'i khral chag	rgan chag
རྒན་ཆོས	practicing dharma after getting old	rgan chos
རྒན་ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	practice dharma after getting old [kha 'don dge sbyor byed pa]{rgan mo mdzub btsugs - the old	rgan chos byed pa
ལདཡའས་པོཨིནཏིང	out instruction [simple and direct instructions that point out the nature of the mind [ie for an old lady]	lady's pointing
རྒན་འཆལ	senility and childhood	rgan 'chal
རྒན་ཉམས	na tsod song ba'i rgas tsugs,...Lo chung rgan nyams can	rgan nyams
རྒན་བདག	captain, monitor, prefect	rgan bdag
རྒན་ལྡིང	head man of the subjects [& lding dpon of the soldiers]	rgan lding
རྒན་པ	1) the older, old; 2) senior at something	rgan pa
རྒན་པའི་དགེ་རྒན	senior teacher	rgan pa'i dge rgan
རྒན་པོ	1) old person, elder, head man; 2) khral 'go 'tso mkhan, sngar khral 'ul gyi brda gtong mkhan nam thad kar cha gsed byed mkhan yin zhing, 'gan de mi rgyud kyi 'dzin mkhan yod la res mos byed mkhan ...	rgan po
རྒན་པོ་སྐྲ་དཀར	white-haired old person	rgan po skra dkar
རྒན་པོ་འཁོག་པ	decrepit, senile	rgan po 'khog pa
རྒན་པོ་འཇོམས	very useful and important medicine	rgan po 'joms
རྒན་པོ་ཉི་མ་བདེ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like an old person basking in the sunshine	rgan po nyi ma bde ba lta bu
རྒན་པོ་ལོ་ལོན	old men	rgan po lo lon
རྒན་པོའི་ཐིག	vulture, rainbow	rgan po'i thig
རྒན་པོའི་ཐིག་ལེ	old man's son	rgan po'i thig le
རྒན་པོའི་ལས	work of an elderly man	rgan po'i las
རྒན་བྱིས	adults and children	rgan byis
རྒན་བྱེད་ཁྭ་གདོང	crow-headed Vajra (or rgan byed), SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	rgan byed khwa gdong
རྒན་མོ	old woman [syn: skra dkar ma dang, mgo skya ma, rgan 'khogs ma, na rgas ma]	rgan mo
རྒན་མོ་མཛུབ་བཙུགས	the old lady's	rgan mo mdzub btsugs
པོཨིནཏིང	out instruction, simple and direct instructions that point out the na- ture of the mind [i.e. for an old lady]	pointing
རྒན་མོ་གསེར་འཁུར	old woman [can] carry gold [w/o beng robbed, peaceful and orderly	rgan mo gser 'khur
རྒན་དམངས	old people and mi ser dmangs [common subjects, or something to do w taxes??]	rgan dmangs
རྒན་ཚད་མ་ལོངས་པ	immature	rgan tshad ma longs pa
རྒན་ཚད་མ་ལོན་པ	minor	rgan tshad ma lon pa
རྒན་ཞུགས	late-comer; enter the Dharma in old age	rgan zhugs
རྒན་གཞོན	age; old and young; senior & junior at something	rgan gzhon
རྒན་གཞོན་གྱི་གོ་བབ	seniority and juniority of persons	rgan gzhon gyi go bab
རྒན་གཞོན་གྲལ་རིམ	order in which young and old sit, right of seniority	rgan gzhon gral rim
རྒན་གཞོན་ཐམས་ཅད	young and old	rgan gzhon thams cad
རྒན་གཞོན་བར་གསུམ	1) all ages; 2) old, young and between (	rgan gzhon bar gsum
རྒན་བཟོ་དོད་པོ	though some1 is young rgan 'khogs kyi bzo lta dod po yod pa	rgan bzo dod po
རྒན་རབས	venerable, aged, previous generations	rgan rabs
རྒན་རབས་ལ་གུས་པ	respect for elders	rgan rabs la gus pa
རྒན་རིགས	old person	rgan rigs
རྒན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	spiritual teacher	rgan rin po che
རྒན་རིམས	older, class	rgan rims
རྒན་ལ་ཉན	name of brgya byin lha	rgan la nyan
རྒན་ལ་ཉན་པ	listen to the advice of the old	rgan la nyan pa
རྒན་ལགས	polite address for teacher, teacher [general]	rgan lags
རྒན་ལས་ཉན	Indra	rgan las nyan
རྒན་ཤའི་མདོག	the color of an old person's flesh	rgan sha'i mdog
རྒན་ཤོས	elders, oldest, elder, older	rgan shos
རྒན་སོང	has become old	rgan song
རྒན་སྲི	disturber of the old	rgan sri
རྒན་གསོ་ཁང	old people's home [institution]	rgan gso khang
རྒན་གསོ་དངུལ	pension	rgan gso dngul
རྒན་གསོ་ཐོབ	to retire. [mss]	rgan gso thob
རྒབ་འདྲེ	rebellious spirits	rgab 'dre
རྒབ་མས་ལྕགས་བྱེད	hurrying along, the folds of her skirt whipping the backs of her legs,	rgab mas lcags byed
རྒལ	ford, to cross over (rivers) 548	rgal
རྒལ་དཀའ་བ	difficult to ford or cross	rgal dka' ba
རྒལ་གྲུ	ferry	rgal gru
རྒལ་ཅིག	lizard	rgal cig
རྒལ་པ	ford, travel through, pass over, surmount a pass	rgal pa
རྒལ་པ་རྡོག་རྡོག	hunchback	rgal pa rdog rdog
རྒལ་པ་ལེབ་ལེབ	[flat back] person unsatisfied with what he has	rgal pa leb leb
རྒལ་བ	(tha dad pa) brgal ba, brgal ba, rgol,, surpass, go beyond, more than, bring release, step over, cross, ford [La mthon po brgal te klung la babs,...Chu chen po brgal te pha rol@phyin,...Tsad las rg...	rgal ba
རྒལ་ཙེ	large monastery in Central Tibet, Gelukpa	rgal tse
རྒལ་རྩོད	effective argument [in debate]	rgal rtsod
རྒལ་ཚིག	{sgar tshig} privy seal	rgal tshig
རྒལ་ཚིག་གི་མདའ་ཡབ	balustrades of backbones	rgal tshig gi mda' yab
རྒལ་ཚིགས	backbone, vertebra	rgal tshigs
རྒལ་ཚིགས་མེད་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	invertebrates	rgal tshigs med pa'i sems can
རྒལ་མཚན་གྱི་རྩེ་མོའི་ཏོག	the top ornament of the banner of victory	rgal mtshan gyi rtse mo'i tog
རྒལ་རབས	ford in a large river	rgal rabs
རྒས	p. of {rga ba} got old, aged, became weak, lost health	rgas
རྒས་ཀ	old age	rgas ka
རྒས་ཀ་ལ་སླེབས་དུས་འགྱོད་པ་མེད	w/o regret at the time of growing old	rgas ka la slebs dus 'gyod pa med
རྒས་ཀ་སྲ་བ	blo bag phebs &, sems gu yangs yong, youthful, not looking as old as 1 is	rgas ka sra ba
རྒས་ཁ	when reaching old age	rgas kha
རྒས་ཁར	in 1's old age, literally before dying, before getting old	rgas khar
རྒས་ཁོག	aged, old	rgas khog
རྒས་ཁོགས	stupid because of old age	rgas khogs
རྒས་འཁོགས	in extreme old age when bodily strength degenerates & ceases, old people	rgas 'khogs
རྒས་འཁྱོམས	senile, doddery, old with unclear mind	rgas 'khyoms
རྒས་གོག	Syn {rgan 'khogs}	rgas gog
རྒས་འཆོལ	w old age the three gates are confused and unstable	rgas 'chol
རྒས་ཉམས	old-looking	rgas nyams
རྒས་སྡོད	retirement	rgas sdod
རྒས་སྡོད་བྱེད	retire	rgas sdod byed
རྒས་སྡོད་བྱེད་པ	retire	rgas sdod byed pa
རྒས་སྡོད་བཟོ་པ	retired worker	rgas sdod bzo pa
རྒས་པ	aged, old, exhausted, infirm, an old man	rgas pa
སེམས་སྐྱེད	relative bodhichitta which is communicated from an elder	sems skyed
རྒས་པ་སྲ་བ	youth hard to destroy	rgas pa sra ba
རྒས་པ་བསོ་བ	elixir	rgas pa bso ba
རྒས་པའི་དུས	50-70 [dus brgyad kyi nang gses]	rgas pa'i dus
རྒས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of old age	rgas pa'i sdug bsngal
རྒས་པའི་ཕ་མ	old parents	rgas pa'i pha ma
རྒས་པའི་མཚན་མས་ནོན་པ	withered with age	rgas pa'i mtshan mas non pa
རྒས་པར་སྣང་པ	seems old	rgas par snang pa
རྒས་པོ	old man; old/ inform man/ cattle etc	rgas po
རྒས་པོ་མགོ་བོ་དུང་ལྟར་དཀར་བ	old man whose hair is white like a conch	rgas po mgo bo dung ltar dkar ba
རྒས་ཕོགས	pension	rgas phogs
རྒས་བྱེད	[p {rga} got old, aged, became weak, lost health	rgas byed
རྒས་བྱེད་མ	a woman whose company makes a youth look old	rgas byed ma
རྒས་མེད	deva	rgas med
རྒས་མོ	old woman	rgas mo
རྒས་གཙང	old & infirm/ weak/ feeble	rgas gtsang
རྒས་གཞོན	1) old and young; 2) age	rgas gzhon
རྒས་རབ་ཆག་ཆེན	wise old man; {blo gros dang ldan pa'i rgas 'khogs}	rgas rab chag chen
རྒས་ཤིང་འཁོགས་པ	stiff with old age	rgas shing 'khogs pa
རྒས་སྲ	hearty, vigorous old age	rgas sra
རྒས་གསོ་ཁང	old people's home [institution]	rgas gso khang
རྒུ	many	rgu
རྒུ་ཐུབ	one able to overcome many	rgu thub
རྒུ་དྲུས	mixture of many medicinal ingredients, corydalis dasyptera maxim.	rgu drus
རྒུ་དྲུས་མེད	herb	rgu drus med
རྒུ་མཚན་དེ་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པས་ན	for that reason	rgu mtshan de lta bu yin pas na
རྒུད	trouble, go down, decay, degeneration, decline	rgud
རྒུད་སྐྱོབ	clear away sufferings of poverty, [give] relief aid	rgud skyob
རྒུད་སྐྱོབ་དངུལ	relief money	rgud skyob dngul
རྒུད་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	clear away sufferings of poverty, give relief aid	rgud skyob byed
རྒུད་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད་པ	clear away sufferings of poverty, give relief aid	rgud skyob byed pa
རྒུད་ཉམས	ruin, decline, deterioration	rgud nyams
རྒུད་ཉམས་སུ་འགྲོ	become ruined, decline, deteriorate	rgud nyams su 'gro
རྒུད་ནས་ཤིའོ	wasted away and died 549	rgud nas shi'o
རྒུད་པ	(tha mi dad pa) power/strength diminished/ drained/ damaged/ destroyed/ deteriorated [..Dar rgud,...Srid dbang rgud pa,...Sdug bsngal gyis lus sems rgud pa,...Stobs 'byor rgud pa] degeneration, dec...	rgud pa
རྒུད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བསལ་བ	who dispels all degeneration	rgud pa thams cad bsal ba
རྒུད་པ་བྱེད་པ	brought great trouble upon	rgud pa byed pa
རྒུད་པོ	gud po	rgud po
རྒུད་མུན	in a deteriorated state	rgud mun
རྒུད་མེད་དཔལ	unfailing prosperity	rgud med dpal
རྒུན	the vine, grape; grapes	rgun
རྒུན་དཀར	white species of grape	rgun dkar
རྒུན་སྐེམས	wine, drink made from grapes	rgun skems
རྒུན་སྐྱེམས	grape chang, wine	rgun skyems
རྒུན་གྲོག	[arch] gad pa dang sa'i grog phug	rgun grog
རྒུན་རྒོད	wild grapes, raisins	rgun rgod
རྒུན་ཆང	wine from grapes	rgun chang
རྒུན་ཆུ	grape juice	rgun chu
རྒུན་འབྲུ	grapes	rgun 'bru
རྒུན་འབྲུམ	grape, raise grass, plum	rgun 'brum
རྒུན་འབྲུམ་མངར་ཆ	grape sugar, glucose, dextrose	rgun 'brum mngar cha
རྒུན་འབྲུམ་མདོག	grape color, {rgya smug} color dye base	rgun 'brum mdog
རྒུན་འབྲུམ་ཤིང	grape vine	rgun 'brum shing
རྒུན་ཙང	{rgun tsang}	rgun tsang
རྒུན་ཚང	place in W {nying khri rdzong}	rgun tshang
རྒུན་རིང་ཐུང་སྣ་ཚོགས	a varying length of time	rgun ring thung sna tshogs
རྒུམ	{'bu rgum}	rgum
རྒུམ་ཆུང	small collection	rgum chung
རྒུམ་བུ	byas za ba'i dngos rdzas sam bya gso byed kyi zan chas	rgum bu
རྒུམ་འབུ	small insect above the earth	rgum 'bu
རྒུའི	causal	rgu'i
རྒུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the seed-samadhi	rgu'i ting nge 'dzin
རྒུར	to decline	rgur
རྒུར་པོ	hunchback, one bent by age	rgur po
རྒུར་རེ	sit downcast	rgur re
རྒུར་རེ་སྡོད་པ	lie in a heap	rgur re sdod pa
རྒུར་ཤིག	stoop down	rgur shig
རྒེའུ	ri dvags rgo ba offspring	rge'u
རྒོ	antelope, deer	rgo
རྒོ་ལྤགས	rgo ba antelope skin	rgo lpags
རྒོ་བ	dgo ba antelope	rgo ba
རྒོ་བ་ར་ཅ	wool like dgo ba antelope hair	rgo ba ra ca
རྒོ་ལི	bread	rgo li
རྒོ་སློག	rgo ba antelope skin clothing	rgo slog
རྒོང་གཤོང	ups and downs [in landscape]	rgong gshong
རྒོངས་མོ	{dgong mo}	rgongs mo
རྒོད	1) vulture. 2) wild, exited, frivolous, sensual excitement, stubborn, savage, untamed, warlike servants. 3) laughter. 4) agitation. 5) {sgyu rgod} super illusion. comp {rgod po}	rgod
རྒོད་ཀྱི་སྟོང་སྡེ	armies established by king srong btsan sgam po in the regions of T: dbus gtsang ru bzhi and zhang zhung each had 10,000, sum par 11,000 making khyon bsdoms rgod kyi there were 61,000	rgod kyi stong sde
རྒོད་ཀྱི་ཐུ	vulture feather	rgod kyi thu
རྒོད་ཀྱི་ལྡེམ་འཕྲུ་ཅན	gter ston (1337-1408)	rgod kyi ldem 'phru can
རྒོད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་བ	rgod kyi pho ba animal med.	rgod kyi pho ba
རྒོད་ཀྱི་རྩེ་སྒྲོས་བརྒྱན་པ	a vulture's feather adorns the top	rgod kyi rtse sgros brgyan pa
རྒོད་དཀར	white vulture	rgod dkar
རྒོད་དཀར་ལ	{rgod dkar} pass	rgod dkar la
རྒོད་སྐམ་མ	wild mare without foal	rgod skam ma
རྒོད་སྐྱེས	capable [born as a capable]	rgod skyes
རྒོད་གྱུང	wild & tame/gentle; med. someone whose power is strong or gentle	rgod gyung
རྒོད་རྒྱུ	laughing	rgod rgyu
རྒོད་གཏམ	joking distracting/ abusive talk	rgod gtam
རྒོད་ལྟེམས	white fluffy feathers	rgod ltems
རྒོད་ཐང་སྨུག	vulture, bya rgod	rgod thang smug
རྒོད་ཐལ	bya rgod kyi brun	rgod thal
རྒོད་མདོག་མདོག	rgod po grung po yod khul	rgod mdog mdog
རྒོད་འདུར	conquest of wild spirits	rgod 'dur
རྒོད་ལྡེམ	rgod kyi ldem 'phru, to be put on top of hat etc vulture feather	rgod ldem
རྒོད་པ	1) laugh; 2) irrepressible rage/ anger/ hostility; 3) excitement; 3) Mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig [mental] excitement, wildness, overexuberance, restlessness, [mental] agi- 550 tation discur...	rgod pa
རྒོད་པ་དང་འགྱོད་པ	restlessness and guilt	rgod pa dang 'gyod pa
རྒོད་པ་བསྡུ་བ	curbing agitation	rgod pa bsdu ba
རྒོད་པ་ཕྲ་བ	subtle agitation	rgod pa phra ba
རྒོད་པ་ཕྲ་མོ	[tse]	rgod pa phra mo
རྒོད་པ་རགས་པ	blatant excitement, obvious agitation	rgod pa rags pa
པ་བསྒོམ་པ	to train in being concentrated as the remedy for agitation	pa bsgom pa
རྒོད་པོ	1) vulture. 2) capable, able, good at, quick, clever & talented. 3) wild, untamed, uncultivated. 4) vulture	rgod po
རྒོད་པོ་རྫོང	Göpo Dzong, in Domey	rgod po rdzong
རྒོད་འཕྲུ	vulture chick	rgod 'phru
རྒོད་བག	1) w/o good qualities and lowminded, brazen; 2) mind completely wild/ distracted; 3) reckless	rgod bag
རྒོད་བག་ཅན	vain person pretending to be great, disturbed state of mind	rgod bag can
རྒོད་བྱིང་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from the flaws of agitation and dullness	rgod bying kyi skyon dang bral ba
རྒོད་བྱེད	laughing, laughter	rgod byed
རྒོད་བྱེད་མདའ	mda' lnga'i gras kyi skem byed mda'a	rgod byed mda'
རྒོད་བྲུན	vulture brun animal med.	rgod brun
རྒོད་བྲོ	feel like laughing	rgod bro
རྒོད་བྲོ་པོ	freak, funny, jocular, ridiculous	rgod bro po
རྒོད་བྲོ་བ	laughable, funny	rgod bro ba
རྒོད་བྲོའི་སྐད་ཆ	joke	rgod bro'i skad cha
རྒོད་བྲོའི་རྩེད་མོ	fun	rgod bro'i rtsed mo
རྒོད་མ	mare	rgod ma
རྒོད་མ་སྐྱེས	1) fire of rta gdong mt; 2) bhramin; 3) physician of the gods	rgod ma skyes
རྒོད་མ་ཁ	mare's face, mythological being	rgod ma kha
རྒོད་མ་ཁའི་མེ	fire of rta gdong mt in the S of the outer ocean	rgod ma kha'i me
རྒོད་མ་ཅན་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	tha skar [9th] month	rgod ma can gyi zla ba
རྒོད་མ་འདེད་པ	horse pursuing a mare, be in the rut	rgod ma 'ded pa
རྒོད་མ་མ་སྨད	the two	rgod ma ma smad
རྒོད་མ་མ་སྨད་གཉིས	mare and her foal	rgod ma ma smad gnyis
རྒོད་མ་སློང	don't arouse laughter	rgod ma slong
རྒོད་མའི་ཚོགས	herd of mares	rgod ma'i tshogs
རྒོད་མོ	mare	rgod mo
རྒོད་ཚང	vulture nest	rgod tshang
རྒོད་ཚང་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ	Hemis Götsang hermitage, Ladahk	rgod tshang sgrub sde
རྒོད་ཚང་པ	Syn {rgod tshang pa mgon po rdo rje}	rgod tshang pa
རྒོད་ཚང་པ་མགོན་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Gyalwa Götsangpa Gönpo Dorje : 1189-1258	rgod tshang pa mgon po rdo rje
རྒོད་མཚང་པ	Gotsangpa	rgod mtshang pa
རྒོད་ཡས	#	rgod yas
རྒོད་ལན་མེད	unassailable	rgod lan med
རྒོད་སེམས	completely unpacified wild/ discursive mind	rgod sems
རྒོད་སྲན	endurance of painful laughter	rgod sran
རྒོམ་སྤང་རྫས་འཛིན་རྟོག་པ	[tse]	rgom spang rdzas 'dzin rtog pa
རྒོལ	{brgol},, 1) oppose, debate, argue, stand against; 2) attack, fight, assault, offensive; 3) dispute, fight, make controversy; 4) part, separate; 5) err, deviate; 6) party [in a debate] [rgal ba! rg...	rgol
རྒོལ་གླེང	protest, criticism	rgol gleng
རྒོལ་གླེང་བྱེད	protest, criticize	rgol gleng byed
རྒོལ་གླེང་བྱེད་པ	to protest, criticize	rgol gleng byed pa
རྒོལ་འགོག	protest, objection, disagreement	rgol 'gog
རྒོལ་འགོག་བྱེད	protest, object, disagree [w]	rgol 'gog byed
རྒོལ་འགོག་བྱེད་པ	to protest, object, disagree with	rgol 'gog byed pa
རྒོལ་ངན	malicious antagonism	rgol ngan
རྒོལ་མཆོང	attack, assault, offensive, charge	rgol mchong
རྒོལ་མཆོང་བྱེད	attack, assault, launch an offensive, charge	rgol mchong byed
རྒོལ་མཆོང་བྱེད་པ	attack, assault, launch an offensive, charge	rgol mchong byed pa
རྒོལ་གཏམ	quarreling/ fighting talk, protest [slogans]	rgol gtam
རྒོལ་གཏམ་སྒྲོག	protest, shout protest [slogans]	rgol gtam sgrog
རྒོལ་གཏམ་སྒྲོག་པ	protest, shout protest [slogans]	rgol gtam sgrog pa
རྒོལ་གཏམ་བསྒྲོགས	protested, shouted protest [slogans]	rgol gtam bsgrogs
རྒོལ་གཏམ་བརྗོ་ཡིག	document/ note of protest	rgol gtam brjo yig
རྒོལ་གཏམ་བརྗོད་ཡིག	document/ note of protest	rgol gtam brjod yig
རྒོལ་དུ་མེད་པ	indisputable	rgol du med pa
རྒོལ་དེབ	to argue	rgol deb
རྒོལ་རྡུང	attack, assault, offensive, charge	rgol rdung
རྒོལ་རྡུང་བྱེད	attack	rgol rdung byed
རྒོལ་རྡུང་བྱེད་པ	attack	rgol rdung byed pa
རྒོལ་ཕྱི་རྒོལ	posture of witchcraft against evil spirits	rgol phyi rgol
རྒོལ་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ	questioner and answerer in debate	rgol phyir rgol
རྒོལ་བ	to dispute/ argue	rgol ba
རྒོལ་བ་རྣམས་ལན་འདེབས་པ	to respond to criticism	rgol ba rnams lan 'debs pa
རྒོལ་བ་ཚར་བཅད་པ	annihilate opposition	rgol ba tshar bcad pa
རྒོལ་བ་འཛུགས་པ	offer resistance	rgol ba 'dzugs pa
རྒོལ་བ་བཟློག་མི་ནུས་པ	unable to refute criticism rgol ba la ltos nas ma grub pa gsum CHN	rgol ba bzlog mi nus pa
རྒོལ་བའི་དཔུང	opposing forces	rgol ba'i dpung
རྒོལ་བའི་ཚིག	objection, antagonizing words	rgol ba'i tshig
རྒོལ་བའི་ཞུ་དོན	challenge, speech provoking a quarrel	rgol ba'i zhu don
རྒོལ་བར་ལྟོས་ཏེ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonestablishment depending on the debaters	rgol bar ltos te ma grub pa
རྒོལ་བར་ལྟོས་ཏེ་མ་གྲུབ་པ་གསུམ	the	rgol bar ltos te ma grub pa gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་ནོན	establishments depending on the debaters	three non
རྒོལ་རྩོད	argument, dispute	rgol rtsod
རྒོལ་ཚིག	words of quarrel/ argument/ fighting/ threat	rgol tshig
རྒོལ་ཚིག་བྱེད	threaten	rgol tshig byed
རྒོལ་ཚིག་བྱེད་པ	to threaten	rgol tshig byed pa
རྒོལ་རླུང	attack	rgol rlung
རྒོལ་ལན	counter attack, retaliation attack	rgol lan
རྒོལ་ལན་སྤྲོད་པ	to answer in debate; to respond to an attack, counter- attack, retaliate, return fire	rgol lan sprod pa
རྒོལ་ལན་སློག་པ	to answer in debate; to respond to an attack, counter- attack, retaliate, return fire	rgol lan slog pa
རྒོལ་ས	falling place, rampant confusion	rgol sa
རྒོལ་སེམས	wish to challenge / attack, hostility, antagonism	rgol sems
རྒོལ་སྲུང	offense and defense	rgol srung
རྒོལ་སྲུང་མངའ་མཐུན	alliance for offense & defense	rgol srung mnga' mthun
རྒྱ་དཀར	1) India. 2) window. 3) ink, color	rgya dkar
རྒྱ་དཀར་ནག	India and China	rgya dkar nag
རྒྱ་དཀར་ནག་གཉིས	India and CH	rgya dkar nag gnyis
རྒྱ་དཀར་པོ	India	rgya dkar po
རྒྱ་དཀར་རྩིས་ནག་རྩིས	chinese astrology	rgya dkar rtsis nag rtsis
རྒྱ་སྐག	rgya skyegs	rgya skag
རྒྱ་སྐད	Indian, Chinese	rgya skad
རྒྱ་སྐད་དུ	Sanskrit title. "in the language of India."	rgya skad du
རྒྱ་སྐར	like a window/ skylight lus kyi don snod gang dang ma 'brel ba'i stong pa'i gsang zhig ste, lus stod kyi phug ron gsang lta bu'o	rgya skar
རྒྱ་སྐས	staircase; 'dzegs skas	rgya skas
རྒྱ་སྐེད་གཏོང་བ	to enlarge, increase	rgya sked gtong ba
རྒྱ་སྐོགས	yi ge blug sa'i skogs	rgya skogs
རྒྱ་སྐྱེགས	lac dye. & med from tree where lac insect lives	rgya skyegs
རྒྱ་སྐྱེགས་ཙོས	red lac dye from rgya skyegs tree	rgya skyegs tsos
རྒྱ་སྐྱེགས་ཚིགས་མ	la cha bzo byed	rgya skyegs tshigs ma
རྒྱ་སྐྱེགས་ཤིང	tree which is home of the lac insect	rgya skyegs shing
རྒྱ་སྐྱེད	expansion, extension, expansion	rgya skyed
རྒྱ་སྐྱེད་ཆེན་པོ	extensive	rgya skyed chen po
རྒྱ་སྐྱེད་གཏོང་བ	enlarge, increase, extend	rgya skyed gtong ba
རྒྱ་སྐྲས	regular staircase 552	rgya skras
རྒྱ་བསྐུམ	contraction, diminishment	rgya bskum
རྒྱ་བསྐུམ་པ	contract, diminish in extent	rgya bskum pa
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད	expansion, expand the extent/ limit	rgya bskyed
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་ཇུས	expansionist policy	rgya bskyed kyi srid jus
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་གཏོང	expand, extend, increase	rgya bskyed gtong
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་གཏོང་བ	expand	rgya bskyed gtong ba
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་བཏང	expanded, extended, increased	rgya bskyed btang
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་བཏང་བ	expanded, extended, increased	rgya bskyed btang ba
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་པ	widen, enlarge, extend, augment	rgya bskyed pa
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་དཔངས་བསྟོད་པ	to make vast and lofty	rgya bskyed dpangs bstod pa
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་བཙན་འཛུལ	expansionist invasion	rgya bskyed btsan 'dzul
རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་རིང་ལུགས	expansionism	rgya bskyed ring lugs
རྒྱ་ཁ	encompassing sphere [?]	rgya kha
རྒྱ་ཁ་ཆེ	mes rgyal nang khul nas yong ba'i lha sdod kha che	rgya kha che
རྒྱ་ཁ་རལ་བ	violation of encompassing sphere [?]	rgya kha ral ba
རྒྱ་ཁབ	small needle	rgya khab
རྒྱ་ཁམ	peach	rgya kham
རྒྱ་ཁམས་པ	a tribe	rgya khams pa
རྒྱ་ཁུག	leather chinese bags	rgya khug
རྒྱ་ཁོག	ho khog tse'am rta thab	rgya khog
རྒྱ་ཁྱབ	whole district/ country, completely, broad, all [over]	rgya khyab
རྒྱ་ཁྱབ་གྲོང་གསེབ	broad countryside	rgya khyab grong gseb
རྒྱ་ཁྱབ་གསར་བརྗིའ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	revolutionary cadres all over	rgya khyab gsar brji' las byed pa
རྒྱ་ཁྱི	pekingese dog	rgya khyi
རྒྱ་ཁྱོན	area, size, scale, extent, extensive	rgya khyon
རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་ཆེ་བ	large extent/ scale, widespread	rgya khyon che ba
རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་དང་མཉམ་པ	as extensive as	rgya khyon dang mnyam pa
རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་དང་བྲལ་བ	beyond dimensions, free from extent	rgya khyon dang bral ba
རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་ཚང་མ	the total area around	rgya khyon tshang ma
རྒྱ་ཁྲ	birds of prey	rgya khra
རྒྱ་ཁྲག	animal med. [[ro mngar, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas zla mtshan 'gags pa dang, mngal du khrag skran 'dril ba, bu dang sha ma thon pa, skye rgyun gcod pa sogs la phan	rgya khrag
རྒྱ་ཁྲམ	cross [mark/ figure]	rgya khram
རྒྱ་ཁྲམ་དམར་པོ	red cross	rgya khram dmar po
རྒྱ་ཁྲམ་དམར་པོའི་ཚོགས	red cross society	rgya khram dmar po'i tshogs
རྒྱ་ཁྲི	european chair	rgya khri
རྒྱ་ཁྲེ	Gyatre, in Domey	rgya khre
རྒྱ་མཁན	'bu sdom	rgya mkhan
རྒྱ་གང་དུ་མ་ཆད	not delimited, without limits; not partial (iso. incomplete); unbiased. [mss]	rgya gang du ma chad
རྒྱ་གད	harsh/ scolding words	rgya gad
རྒྱ་གར	India	rgya gar
ཨཱིནདོ	European language, not necessarily India), India	Indo
རྒྱ་གར་སྐད	indian language rgya gar mkha' 'gro'i khyad 'phags kyi	rgya gar skad
གདམས་པ་གཅོ་ལྔ	CHN rgya gar gyi grong khyer chen po drug the six great cities of India [1 mnyan	gdams pa gco lnga
ཡོད	two gnas bcas, three tsam pa ka, four wa ra n' si, five yangs pa can, six rgyal po'i khab bcas so rgya gar gyi grong khyer chen po drug the six great cities of India rgya gar gyi grong khyer chen p...	yod
རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་ཆུ་ཆེན་བཞི	the 4 great rivers of India: gang gA, sin dhu, si tA, pa kshu]]	rgya gar gyi chu chen bzhi
བཅོས་གསུམ	CHN	bcos gsum
རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་ཡུལ	india	rgya gar gyi yul
རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་རིག་འཛིན་བརྒྱད	Eight Indian Vidyadharas. Manjushrimitra, Nagarjuna, Hungchenkara, Vimalamitra, Prabhahasti, Danasanskrit, Shintamgarbha and Guhyachandra	rgya gar gyi rig 'dzin brgyad
རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་ཨ་ཙཱ་ར	Indian acharya	rgya gar gyi a tsA ra
རྒྱ་གར་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Indian Ocean	rgya gar rgya mtsho
རྒྱ་གར་སྒོར་མོ	rupee	rgya gar sgor mo
རྒྱ་གར་དམ་པ	the Indian sage, Padampa Sangye	rgya gar dam pa
རྒྱ་གར་དམ་པས་ཀྱང	Phadampa sangye	rgya gar dam pas kyang
རྒྱ་གར་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	Diamond Throne of India, the present Bodhgaya in Bihar, where Buddha Shakyamuni attained enlightenment	rgya gar rdo rje gdan
རྒྱ་གར་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན་ན	in Bodh Gaya, in India	rgya gar rdo rje gdan na
རྒྱ་གར་ནུབ་ལི	West India style statue	rgya gar nub li
རྒྱ་གར་པ	an Indian	rgya gar pa
རྒྱ་གར་འཕགས་པའི་ཡུལ	the noble land of India	rgya gar 'phags pa'i yul
རྒྱ་གར་བ	an Indian; Indians	rgya gar ba
རྒྱ་གར་གཞུང	Indian government	rgya gar gzhung
རྒྱ་གར་ཡང་མ་ཆད	not delimited	rgya gar yang ma chad
རྒྱ་གར་ཡུལ	India	rgya gar yul
རྒྱ་གར་རིག་འཛིན་བརྒྱད	eight vidyadharas of India	rgya gar rig 'dzin brgyad
རྒྱ་གར་ལུགས	the Indian version	rgya gar lugs
རྒྱ་གར་ལུགས་མ	an image cast in india	rgya gar lugs ma
རྒྱ་གར་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ཟ་ཧོར་གྱི་ཡུལ	Zahor, in	rgya gar shar phyogs za hor gyi yul
རྒྱ་གར་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་སུ	to eastern India	rgya gar shar phyogs su
རྒྱ་གར་ཤར་ལི	from E India lugs brgyab pa'i sku 'dra	rgya gar shar li
བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་བཞི	CHN	ba'i bstan bcos bzhi
རྒྱ་གྱུ	treachery rgya gra skye dman gyi dkris gos zhig sari	rgya gyu
རྒྱ་གྲ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	1 of gnas chen lnga	rgya gra rdo rje gdan
རྒྱ་གྲམ	cross [mark/ figure], crossed vajra [design], rtags ku ru kha	rgya gram
རྒྱ་གྲམ་དམར་པོ	red cross	rgya gram dmar po
རྒྱ་གྲམ་དམར་པོའི་ཚོགས	red cross society	rgya gram dmar po'i tshogs
རྒྱ་གྲི	CH knife	rgya gri
རྒྱ་གྲི་ཕོར་ཤུབས	Tibetan nobles tied rked rgyab CH knife and khol tse = rgya khug phor shubs	rgya gri phor shubs
རྒྱ་གྲུ་གུ	wild garlic; {ri sgog gi rigs shig}	rgya gru gu
རྒྱ་གྲོ	potato introduced from india	rgya gro
རྒྱ་གྲོ་མ	dbus khul du zhog khog zer	rgya gro ma
རྒྱ་གྲོལ	liberated, blossoming	rgya grol
རྒྱ་གྲོལ་བ	open, bloom; release bonds	rgya grol ba
རྒྱ་གླང	Indian ox	rgya glang
རྒྱ་གླིང	horns, Tibetan trumpet [a reed musical instrument [used chiefly by monks during religious ceremonies]	rgya gling
རྒྱ་གླིང་ཁ	vessel with mouth shape {ther ther} or {gyel gyel}	rgya gling kha
རྒྱ་གླིང་གི་བུད་ཚད	the bell of a gyaling	rgya gling gi bud tshad
རྒྱ་གླིང་མདའ	mtheb rgyag gi bug mig 'khod sa'i gzhung ngam rgyud	rgya gling mda'
རྒྱ་གླིང་པ	rgya gling player	rgya gling pa
རྒྱ་བགྱབ་པ	set a trap	rgya bgyab pa
རྒྱ་འགྱུར་གྱི་རིགས	enlightened family of inner growth [gd]	rgya 'gyur gyi rigs
རྒྱ་འགྲེལ	Indian commentaries	rgya 'grel
རྒྱ་འགྲེལ་བ	using the Indian explanation	rgya 'grel ba
རྒྱ་འགྲོལ་བ	1) broken seal, opened; 2) released from the seal of secrecy	rgya 'grol ba
རྒྱ་རྒྱ	seal, seal! Top Secret!	rgya rgya
རྒྱ་རྒྱ་རྒྱ	gya gya gya	rgya rgya rgya
རྒྱ་རྒྱག་པ	{thel tse rgyag pa} sealed	rgya rgyag pa
རྒྱ་རྒྱུ་ར	ant	rgya rgyu ra
རྒྱ་སྒ	Chinese rta sga	rgya sga
རྒྱ་སྒོ	gate, principal door, open door	rgya sgo
རྒྱ་སྒོག	Chinese garlic	rgya sgog
རྒྱ་སྒྱུར	ant	rgya sgyur
རྒྱ་དངུལ	Chinese silver money / coins; rta rmig ma	rgya dngul
རྒྱ་དངུལ་རྡོ་ཚད་གཅིག	a dotsey of Chinese silver	rgya dngul rdo tshad gcig
རྒྱ་རྔ	gong, drum of bell-metal	rgya rnga
རྒྱ་སྔོན	trapper	rgya sngon
རྒྱ་ཅང	[arch] khug ma'i go chod pa'i ska rags sbubs stong zhig	rgya cang
རྒྱ་ཅན	sealed, hidden	rgya can
རྒྱ་ཅོག	table	rgya cog
རྒྱ་གཅོག་པ	break a seal	rgya gcog pa
རྒྱ་བཅད་རྒྱག་པ	paint with mtshal/ vermilion & li khri ser po, li skya, rna ros dmar skya etc. 2) to seal a letter	rgya bcad rgyag pa
རྒྱ་ལྕགས	chinese iron	rgya lcags
རྒྱ་ལྕང	willows planted when rgya za kong jo came to Tibet. 2) a kind of weeping willow	rgya lcang
རྒྱ་ལྕོག	chinese or european table	rgya lcog
རྒྱ་ཆ	1) part CH child; 2) rgya cha rdzong	rgya cha
རྒྱ་ཆང	rgya cang	rgya chang
རྒྱ་ཆད	1) to be partial or fragmented; restricted, delimited, confined, disrupted, limited; 2) partiality, fragmentation, limitation; bias, prejudice	rgya chad
རྒྱ་ཆད་ཕྱོགས	bounds and directions, limits and partiality	rgya chad phyogs
རྒྱ་ཆད་ཕྱོགས་མཐའ	limitations related to range and direction	rgya chad phyogs mtha'
རྒྱ་ཆད་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་མེད་པ	[regarding phenomena] not subject to/ defined by restrictions or extremes [regarding nature of mind, etc.] not subject to restrictions or extremes [regarding space] not restricted and not localized	rgya chad phyogs lhung med pa
རྒྱ་ཆད་མེད་པ	not subject to/ defined by restrictions; not subject to/ defined	rgya chad med pa
རྒྱ་ཆས	Chinese/ Indian [things and] clothing	rgya chas
རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	narrow	rgya chung chung
རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	1) narrow, easily measured 2) small/ few	rgya chung ba
རྒྱ་ཆེ	abundance, broad, vast, extensive, great and vast, immense, wide, broad, extensive, hard to measure, wide[ly], abundant, very many; extensively & in detail	rgya che
རྒྱ་ཆེ་ཆུང	sizes	rgya che chung
རྒྱ་ཆེ་གཏིང་ཟབ	great & far reaching, vast & deep/ profound	rgya che gting zab
རྒྱ་ཆེ་པོ	broad, vast, extensive	rgya che po
རྒྱ་ཆེ་སྤྱོད་བརྒྱུད	lineage of vast activity	rgya che spyod brgyud
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	(rgya che bar)/ chen po(r) vast(ness)/ extensive; on a vast scale	rgya che ba
ཕ༹ར	reaching consequences, great ramifications, extensive (refers to spyod pa and the ethical side of the Buddha's teaching) great, copious, diffused, spacious, unlimited	far
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ་སའི་གཏེར	vast earth terma	rgya che ba sa'i gter
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་རྒྱན	orbnaments of vastness [not containable bythe minds of others and, vast abundance of wealth/ splendor ston pa'i rgyan zhig]	rgya che ba'i rgyan
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	the two kinds of ornaments of vastness	rgya che ba'i rgyan gnyis
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་རྟག་པ	"permanence in the largest sense/ on a cosmic scale"	rgya che ba'i rtag pa
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	vast knowledge	rgya che ba'i shes rab
རྒྱ་ཆེ་མུ་མེད	limitless, boundless	rgya che mu med
རྒྱ་ཆེ་ཟབ་རྒྱས	large & numerous	rgya che zab rgyas
རྒྱ་ཆེ་གཟབ་རྒྱས	large and numerous	rgya che gzab rgyas
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་འགྲོ	increase	rgya che ru 'gro
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་འགྲོ་བ	to enlarge, increase	rgya che ru 'gro ba
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་གཏང་བ	expand, enlarge, extend	rgya che ru gtang ba
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང	extend, enlarge	rgya che ru gtong
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	expand	rgya che ru gtong ba
རྒྱ་ཆེ་རུ་བཏང	to broaden	rgya che ru btang
རྒྱ་ཆེ་ལམ	main road, broad way	rgya che lam
རྒྱ་ཆེན	extensive; vast	rgya chen
རྒྱ་ཆེན་བཀའ་མཛོད	Gyachen Kadzö. One of the Five Treasuries of Jamgön Kongtrül the First, containing his collected various writings	rgya chen bka' mdzod
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པ	copiousness, spacious, extensive	rgya chen pa
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	{rgya chen por} vast(ness)/ extensive; on a vast scale	rgya chen po
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	immeasurably vast	rgya chen po dpag tu med pa
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་འདུ་ཤེས	vast conception [for {gzugs khams}	rgya chen po'i 'du shes
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་བསམ་པ	vast thought/ contemplation/ wishes	rgya chen po'i bsam pa
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོར	on a vast scale, immensely, extensively	rgya chen por
རྒྱ་ཆེན་དཔངས་མཐོ	vast and lofty	rgya chen dpangs mtho
རྒྱ་ཆེན་སྤྱོད་བརྒྱུད	lineage of extensive conduct	rgya chen spyod brgyud
རྒྱ་ཆེན་སྤྱོད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	Chariot of the Vast Conduct	rgya chen spyod pa'i shing rta
རྒྱ་ཆེན་སྤྱོད་པའི་སྲོལ	the tradition of vast action	rgya chen spyod pa'i srol
རྒྱ་ཆེན་སྦྱོད་བརྒྱུད	[tse rig]	rgya chen sbyod brgyud
རྒྱ་ཆེན་མ	the earth rgya chen shugs ldan gyi sngags rgya mantra seal of rgya chen shugs ldan	rgya chen ma
རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཤུགས་ལྡན་གྱི་སྔགས་རྒྱ	the mantra and mudra of possessing extensive power	rgya chen shugs ldan gyi sngags rgya
རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཤུགས་ལྡན་གྱི་ཕྱག	the mudra of possessing extensive power one of the {phyag rgya drug} the six mudras [in rituals]	rgya chen shugs ldan gyi phyag
རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཤུགས་ལྡན་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the mudra of possessing extensive power [one of the {phyag rgya drug - the six mudras [in rituals]	rgya chen shugs ldan gyi phyag rgya
རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཤུན་པ	alstonia tree	rgya chen shun pa
རྒྱ་ཆེའི་མི་དམངས	broad masses, general public	rgya che'i mi dmangs
རྒྱ་ཆེའི་མི་དམངས་མང་ཚོགས	broad masses, general public	rgya che'i mi dmangs mang tshogs
རྒྱ་ཆེར	in detail	rgya cher
རྒྱ་ཆེར་གྲགས་པ་ཅན	intelligent	rgya cher grags pa can
རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ	explain extensively	rgya cher 'grel
རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ་མཆན	exegesis	rgya cher 'grel mchan
རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ་བ	extensive commentary [on root text and limbs]	rgya cher 'grel ba
རྒྱ་ཆེར་རྒྱས་པར་སྨོན་པ	prayer (pranidhana) for the propagation and triumph	rgya cher rgyas par smon pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་བསྒྲགས་པ	widely proclaimed	rgya cher bsgrags pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་བསྔགས་པ	copious description	rgya cher bsngags pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་གཏོང	enlarge, expand, broaden, widen	rgya cher gtong
རྒྱ་ཆེར་གཏོང་པ	to enlarge, expand, broaden, widen	rgya cher gtong pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་སྟོན་པ	to teach widely / extensively	rgya cher ston pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་བསྟན་པར་མཛད་པ	to teach widely / extensively	rgya cher bstan par mdzad pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་སྤེལ	spread far and wide, enlarge, expand, broaden, widen	rgya cher spel
རྒྱ་ཆེར་སྤེལ་པ	spread far and wide, enlarge, expand, broaden, widen	rgya cher spel pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་སྤེལ་བ	enlarge, increase	rgya cher spel ba
རྒྱ་ཆེར་འབྱུང	detailed explanations	rgya cher 'byung
རྒྱ་ཆེར་མཛད་པ	make accessible	rgya cher mdzad pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་རོལ་པ	see {'phags pa rgya cher rol pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo}	rgya cher rol pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་རོལ་པའི་མདོ	Lalitavistara suutra, extensive sport sutra	rgya cher rol pa'i mdo
རྒྱ་ཆེར་བཤད	{rgya cher bshad pa} {rgya bshad}	rgya cher bshad
རྒྱ་ཆེར་བཤད་པ	extensive explanation	rgya cher bshad pa
རྒྱ་ཆེར་གསུངས་པ	explained / taught in great detail	rgya cher gsungs pa
རྒྱ་ཇ	CH/ [Indian] tea	rgya ja
རྒྱ་ཇོག	long table, bench	rgya jog
རྒྱ་འཇོག	long table, bench	rgya 'jog
རྒྱ་རྗེ་བཙུན་པོ	noble emperor of china	rgya rje btsun po
རྒྱ་ལྗང	"Chinese green", verdi gris	rgya ljang
རྒྱ་རྙིང	rgya tsos rnying pa	rgya rnying
རྒྱ་ཏིག	1) Indian tig ta'i rigs shig; 2) place [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs hu'u kru'u hor rigs rang skyong rdzong gi rgya tig bod rigs rang skyong zhang gi gnas yul]	rgya tig
རྒྱ་བཏབ	seals	rgya btab
རྒྱ་རྟགས	1) yig skogs kyi khar 'bri ba'i thel tsab kyi yi ge; 2) #	rgya rtags
རྒྱ་རྟགས་ཆེན་པོ	#	rgya rtags chen po
རྒྱ་སྟག	tigress	rgya stag
རྒྱ་སྟག་ཁྲ་བོ	the Bengal tiger	rgya stag khra bo
རྒྱ་སྟག་འཛུམ་ཕྲུག་སྟོན་ས	the place where tigers display their splendid stripes	rgya stag 'dzum phrug ston sa
རྒྱ་སྟག་ཟིལ་བ	corydalis scaeberula maxim.	rgya stag zil ba
རྒྱ་སྟག་ར་མོ་ཆེ	ra mo che temple	rgya stag ra mo che
རྒྱ་སྟོང་ར་ཁྱིམ	Gyatong Rakyim. Gyalto Rami (rgyal to ra mi). Minister of King Trisong Deutsen	rgya stong ra khyim
རྒྱ་སྟོན	monastery in Tibet	rgya ston
རྒྱ་སྟོན་པད་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག	tertön of {bla ma bde mchog 'khor lo} on the	rgya ston pad ma dbang phyug
རྒྱ་ཐང	plain	rgya thang
རྒྱ་ཐིག	snam bu thig ma ste - snam bu gang rung gi,...Thog tsos gzhi gzhan zhig gi thig ris yod pa	rgya thig
རྒྱ་ཐུག	noodle, Chinese porridge	rgya thug
རྒྱ་ཐུར	scale [weighing]	rgya thur
རྒྱ་ཐེབ	seal	rgya theb
རྒྱ་ཐེར	ther ma from India/ China	rgya ther
རྒྱ་ཐེལ	rtags thel lam thel tse	rgya thel
རྒྱ་ཐོར	shu ba	rgya thor
རྒྱ་མཐིང	Chinese or Indian vermilion	rgya mthing
རྒྱ་མཐོངས	a skylight	rgya mthongs
རྒྱ་འཐུར	scale [weighing]	rgya 'thur
རྒྱ་དང་བལ་པོ	China and Nepal	rgya dang bal po
རྒྱ་དར	CH dar gos	rgya dar
རྒྱ་དོར	rgya chas kyi dor ma	rgya dor
རྒྱ་དྲ	wooden rails, fencing	rgya dra
རྒྱ་མདའ	old-fashioned gun from CH	rgya mda'
རྒྱ་མདའ་བརྒྱད་བཞོག	kind of Tibetan gun	rgya mda' brgyad bzhog
རྒྱ་མདུད	intricate knot	rgya mdud
རྒྱ་མདུད་གྲོལ	the great know was loosened	rgya mdud grol
རྒྱ་འདེབས་པ	seal, stamp, fix or attach a seal	rgya 'debs pa
རྒྱ་འདོན	Ching dynasty newly spreading rgya sbyong dmag 'khri'i sa rten	rgya 'don
རྒྱ་འདྲ	gos rgya gser gyi 'dra	rgya 'dra
རྒྱ་འདྲེ	quarrel, squabble, strife	rgya 'dre
རྒྱ་འདྲེ་རྒོད་པོ	bellicose, argumentative, belligerent, antagonistic, aggressive	rgya 'dre rgod po
རྒྱ་འདྲེ་རྒྱབ་པ	to fight, brawl	rgya 'dre rgyab pa
རྒྱ་རྡོ	1) rdo dkrugs ma zur can ring po; 2) 'jal byed rgya ma'i rdo	rgya rdo
རྒྱ་ནག	China	rgya nag
བྱེད་པ་སྟེ	rang ri'i rgyal khab nang gtso cher rgya rigs 'dus sdod kyi sa khul rnams la zer Syn: stong khun dang, ma ha tsi na'o	byed pa ste
རྒྱ་ནག་སྐག་ཟློག	from CH; year, month, day dus kyi obstacle times alleviating ritual	rgya nag skag zlog
རྒྱ་ནག་གི་མི་རིགས	chinese	rgya nag gi mi rigs
རྒྱ་ནག་གི་ཧབ༹་ཤང	Chinese Hashangs	rgya nag gi hva shang
རྒྱ་ནག་གི་ཧྭ་ཤང	CH hashangs	rgya nag gi hwa shang
རྒྱ་ནག་གོང་མ	Emperor of China	rgya nag gong ma
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རླུང་དམར	typhoon	rgya nag rgya mtsho'i rlung dmar
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ	1) Emperor of CH; 2) med. treatment good for nyva lhog, ske skrangs and such gnyan nad	rgya nag rgyal po
རྒྱ་ནག་ལྕགས་རི	1) Great Wall; 2) china and brocade etc. w picture of the Great Wall	rgya nag lcags ri
རྒྱ་ནག་སྟོང་ཁུན	CH t'ung kus, t'ung = E kus = rgyal blon sogs la [H] address, hence king[dom] of E China	rgya nag stong khun
རྒྱ་ནག་དང་བོད	C and Tibet	rgya nag dang bod
རྒྱ་ནག་དོང་ཀུན	CH t'ung kus, t'ung = E kus = rgyal blon sogs la [H] address, hence king[dom] of E China	rgya nag dong kun
རྒྱ་ནག་རི་བོ་རྩེ་ལྔ	Wu Tai Shan	rgya nag ri bo rtse lnga
རྒྱ་ནག་ལི་མ	Chinese bronze	rgya nag li ma
རྒྱ་ནག་ཤོ་ཥའི་གླིང	in China in a place called Shosha	rgya nag sho Sha'i gling
རྒྱ་ནང་རྩིས	chinese astrology	rgya nang rtsis
རྒྱ་ནད	1) tsha nad from India and CH; 2) reg dug / bse mog; 3) gnyan nad called rgya nad mig ser / syphilis	rgya nad
རྒྱ་ནད་སེལ་ཤིང	tea plant (plant which cures indian or chinese diseases), antidote for malaria	rgya nad sel shing
རྒྱ་རྣ་རུ	[arch] having se	rgya rna ru
རྒྱ་རྣམས	Chinese people	rgya rnams
རྒྱ་སྣ་དུ	copulation	rgya sna du
རྒྱ་སྣག	CH ink	rgya snag
རྒྱ་སྣེའུ	{rgya sne'u} herb	rgya sne'u
རྒྱ་པ	1) mi khram pa; 2) [arch] tshong pa / merchant	rgya pa
རྒྱ་པིབས	roof	rgya pibs
རྒྱ་པོ	gyelpo spirits "king" spirits who	rgya po
མནིཕེ༹སཏ་ཐྲོཨུགྷ	anger and hatred [book two /GD]	manifest through
རྒྱ་དཔང	bar dpangs ngam bar mi	rgya dpang
རྒྱ་དཔངས	zhing dang srid	rgya dpangs
རྒྱ་དཔངས་གྲུ་བཞི	cube, cubic	rgya dpangs gru bzhi
རྒྱ་དཔངས་གྲུ་བཞི་མ	cube	rgya dpangs gru bzhi ma
རྒྱ་དཔེ	Sanskrit manuscripts; Indian texts / manuscripts	rgya dpe
རྒྱ་སྤེལ་བ	enlarge, increase	rgya spel ba
རྒྱ་སྤོས	Chinese incense, tagara	rgya spos
རྒྱ་སྤྲེལ	a small monkey	rgya sprel
རྒྱ་ཕིགས	spire or a gilt pinnacle on a temple or royal tomb	rgya phigs
རྒྱ་ཕིབས	roof, balcony; roof [usu. gilded, pagoda-like roof]	rgya phibs
རྒྱ་ཕིབས་ཏོག	{gser gyi rgya phibs tog}	rgya phibs tog
གོལྡེན	roofed	golden
རྒྱ་ཕིབས་གནས་འཆའ	pigeon	rgya phibs gnas 'cha'
རྒྱ་ཕུགས	full covering	rgya phugs
རྒྱ་ཕུབས	rgya phibs	rgya phubs
རྒྱ་ཕྱམ	open space. all pervasive, all embracing	rgya phyam
རྒྱ་ཕྱམ་དུ་བཏང	to let completely go into open space	rgya phyam du btang
རྒྱ་ཕྲུག	rgya rigs kyi phru gu	rgya phrug
རྒྱ་ཕྲུག་གར་མཁན	{rgya phrug gar mkhan} [CH queen kong jo phyi ma'i sras khri srong lde'u btsan gyi rtsed zla ru rgya rjes btang ba'i rgya rigs child, phyis bod kyi skad yig la mkhas par gyur te sman gzhung so ma r...	rgya phrug gar mkhan
རྒྱ་ཕྲུག་ཕོ་མོ	1) rgya rigs kyi phru gu pho mo; 2) Mi tse ring 'khrab dus gyas gyon du 'khrid pa'i phru gu pho mo gnyis	rgya phrug pho mo
རྒྱ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa rgyas pa, rgya ba,, increase greatly, spread widely; 2) sgog pa bye brag pa zhig ???	rgya ba
རྒྱ་བ་པ	jains	rgya ba pa
རྒྱ་བལ	Chinese wool	rgya bal
རྒྱ་བལ་འབྲས་འབྲུག	India/ CH, Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan	rgya bal 'bras 'brug
རྒྱ་བོ	beard	rgya bo
རྒྱ་བོ་རི་ཁྲོད	retreat place at khro khog in sde dge, Rgyawo Ritr”d	rgya bo ri khrod
རྒྱ་བོད	CH/ India and Tibet	rgya bod
ཆིནེསེ	Tibetan, Indian & Tibetan	Chinese
རྒྱ་བོད་ཀྱི་གཞུང	Indian/ CH and Tibetan texts/ tradition[s]	rgya bod kyi gzhung
རྒྱ་བོད་གཉིས	India and Tibet	rgya bod gnyis
རྒྱ་བོད་སོག་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	by Könchok Gyaltsen	rgya bod sog gi lo rgyus
རྒྱ་བྱ	pheasant	rgya bya
རྒྱ་བྱིན་དཀར་པོ	White Gyajin, reading in lde'u 'phrul	rgya byin dkar po
རྒྱ་བྱིན་ཁྲ་བོ	Mottled Gyajin, reading in lde'u 'phrul	rgya byin khra bo
རྒྱ་བྱིན་ནག་པོ	Black Gyajin, reading in lde'u 'phrul	rgya byin nag po
རྒྱ་བྱིན་གཞུ	rainbow	rgya byin gzhu
རྒྱ་བྲ	buckwheat [sweet]	rgya bra
རྒྱ་འབིགས	spire or a gilt pinnacle on a temple or royal tomb	rgya 'bigs
རྒྱ་འབྱམས	pervasive, diffused, dissipated	rgya 'byams
རྒྱ་འབྱམས་སུ་བཏང་བ	let loose, allow to diffuse	rgya 'byams su btang ba
རྒྱ་འབྲས	CH/ Indian rice	rgya 'bras
རྒྱ་སྦུག	CH sbug chal	rgya sbug
རྒྱ་སྦྱོང་དམག་སྒར	sngar man ju gong ma'i skabs bod kyi aam ban gyis lha sar btsugs pa'i rgya mis sbyong brdar byas pa'i bod kyi dmag sgar zhig de dang 'dra ba'i dmag sgar rgyal rtse rdzong dang, ding ri rdzong, tsed...	rgya sbyong dmag sgar
རྒྱ་མ	1) scale, balance; 2) yi ge'i rgya ma [Zhu yig rgya ma,...Bka' yig rgya ma,...Bka' rgya ma]; 3) rgya ma wt measure = 1.1023 lb; 4) steelyard; 5) a [thick] sash {sku chings rgya ma} = sash	rgya ma
རྒྱ་མ་བཀྱག་པ	weigh	rgya ma bkyag pa
རྒྱ་མ་ཆད	with out limitation	rgya ma chad
རྒྱ་མ་ཆད་པ	unfragmented; cohesive	rgya ma chad pa
རྒྱ་མ་ཉམས་པ	seal intact	rgya ma nyams pa
རྒྱ་མ་བ	{rgya ma ba} [one of the Tibetan khri skor bcu gsum, now mal gro gung dkar rdzong khongs kyi rgya ma khri khang du yod	rgya ma ba
རྒྱ་མ་བོད	mixed CH/TT ancestry	rgya ma bod
རྒྱ་མ་ལ་འདེགས་པ	weight on a steelyard	rgya ma la 'degs pa
རྒྱ་མ་ལྷོད	bulky sash	rgya ma lhod
རྒྱ་མའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	sngar lha ldan smon lam tshugs dus mi dmangs kyi nang la rgya ma yod rigs nas 'degs 'gyogs bed gcod byas chog pa zhes tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	rgya ma'i 'khrol 'dzin
རྒྱ་མར	rang gi 'thung jar rgyag rgyu'i mar	rgya mar
རྒྱ་མི	Chinese person, a Han	rgya mi
རྒྱ་མི་ཐོ་ཐོ	designation of boundary marks	rgya mi tho tho
རྒྱ་མི་བོད་མི	Chinese & Tibetan	rgya mi bod mi
རྒྱ་མིག	balance and above it sgor mig	rgya mig
རྒྱ་མིའི་བཙོན་ཁང	Chinese prison	rgya mi'i btson khang
རྒྱ་མེན	{rgya men} med herb	rgya men
རྒྱ་མེན་མེ་ཏོག	flower used as medicine for diseased blood or shoulder pain	rgya men me tog
རྒྱ་མོ	1) CH/ Indian woman; 2) black female mule w mtha' mig gi mtha' dkar ]	rgya mo
རྒྱ་མོ་དངུལ་ཆུ	Salween River	rgya mo dngul chu
རྒྱ་མོ་རྔུལ་ཆུ	Salween River	rgya mo rngul chu
རྒྱ་མོ་མཆུ་ཟློག	CH misfortune averting ritual	rgya mo mchu zlog
རྒྱ་མོ་བཟའ	1) CH woman; 2) King Srong btsan Gampo's and mes aag tsom's CH queens	rgya mo bza'
རྒྱ་མོ་ཨོང་ཇོ	srong btsan sgam po's CH queen rgya bza' kong jo	rgya mo ong jo
རྒྱ་དམར	pigment/ dye color rgya smug mostly red, red/ communist CH 557	rgya dmar
རྒྱ་རྨ	Chinese canker, Chinese wounds, syphilis, venereal disease	rgya rma
རྒྱ་སྨུག	dark brown	rgya smug
རྒྱ་ཙ་བཞིན་བཟང	donkey	rgya tsa bzhin bzang
རྒྱ་ཙྭ	{rgya tswa} salt	rgya tswa
རྒྱ་ཙྭ་ལྕེ་འབིག	rgya tsva	rgya tswa lce 'big
རྒྱ་བཙུན	CH monk	rgya btsun
རྒྱ་མཙོ	1) ocean [Syn: gang g' 'dzin dang, brgal dka' ba, chu bdag chu spel, chu srin grong khyer, chu srin rgyal mtshan can, chu srin 'byung gnas, chu'i phung po, nyal 'gro'i gter, dal 'bab mdzod, dug can...	rgya mtso
རྒྱ་མཙོ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like an ocean [sems bskyed nyer gnyis kyi nang gses, sa gsum pa ba'i rgyud kyi bzod pa'i phar phyin dang ldan pa'i sems bskyed ni me mtson la sogs pa'i mi 'dod pa thams cad thog t...	rgya mtso lta bu'i sems bskyed
རྒྱ་མཙོ་རྡོ་བ	{rgya mtso rdo ba} mineral med. [mtso rde'u kha dog ma nges pa dbyibs zlum po dang, 'bu 'dra ba sogs 'byung, nus pas tsa ba'i srin la phan	rgya mtso rdo ba
རྒྱ་རྩ	'phar rtsa che ba rnams	rgya rtsa
རྒྱ་རྩངས	lizard	rgya rtsangs
རྒྱ་རྩི	CH shing la gtong rgyu'i rtsi	rgya rtsi
རྒྱ་རྩི་དུག་ལོ	adonis coerulea maxim.	rgya rtsi dug lo
རྒྱ་རྩིས	from CH, spread in Tibet astr and 'byung rtsis	rgya rtsis
རྒྱ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་སེང་གེ	{brtson 'grus seng ge}	rgya brtson 'grus seng ge
རྒྱ་ཚ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rgya tsha
རྒྱ་ཚ་ལྷ་སྣང	Gyatsa Lhanang. A minister of King Trisong Deutsen; also spelled Gyaltsa Lhanang (rgyal tsha lha snang)	rgya tsha lha snang
རྒྱ་ཚྭ	[lce 'big] rgya tsva salt [lan tsva'i rigs shig ste, ro lan tsva la tsa ba, zhu rjes drod, nus pas pho ba sogs kyi skran nad dang, zla mtsan 'gags pa, bu dang sha ma ma thon pa, dri chu 'gags	rgya tshwa
རྒྱ་ཚད	1) extent; 2) heat disease in very hot places [EG in India/ China	rgya tshad
རྒྱ་ཚད་ཀྱི་བྲོ་ཚལ་བ	became sick with fever	rgya tshad kyi bro tshal ba
རྒྱ་ཚད་བྲལ་བའི་གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང	dimensionless celestial palaces	rgya tshad bral ba'i gzhal yas khang
རྒྱ་ཚིགས	bol gong tshigs	rgya tshigs
རྒྱ་ཚུགས	sngar man ju gong ma'i skabs btsugs pa'i nyin gcig la slebs pa'i lam gyi bab tshugs	rgya tshugs
རྒྱ་ཚེམ	rgya rigs kyi tsem bzo byed stangs shig	rgya tshem
རྒྱ་ཚོས	vermilion, red pigment from india	rgya tshos
རྒྱ་མཚམས་རིས་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	internationalism	rgya mtshams ris med ring lugs
རྒྱ་མཚལ	{rgya mtshal} med. mineral * CH vermillion	rgya mtshal
རྒྱ་མཚོ་སྐྱེས	moon	rgya mtsho skyes
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཁམ་ཟས་ཅན	large water dragon/ crocodile/ chu srin	rgya mtsho kham zas can
རྒྱ་མཚོ་གྱེན་དུ	SA ri chen po drug	rgya mtsho gyen du
རྒྱ་མཚོ་གྱེན་དུ་འགྲོ	1 of 6 great mountains of lus 'phags pa	rgya mtsho gyen du 'gro
རྒྱ་མཚོ་དགའ	moon	rgya mtsho dga'
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཅོག་གཞག་གི་སྒོམ་པ	meditation of the freely resting ocean	rgya mtsho cog gzhag gi sgom pa
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཅོག་བཞག	the ocean-like state of resting imperturbably/ imper- turbable rest/ presence; the imperturbable resting of an ocean; state of resting imperturbably/ imperturbable rest/ presence that is like a ocean	rgya mtsho cog bzhag
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེ་བ	great ocean	rgya mtsho che ba
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	the great ocean	rgya mtsho chen po
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great oceans [around Mt. Meru]	rgya mtsho chen po bzhi
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆོག་བཞག	ocean-like natural contemplation	rgya mtsho chog bzhag
རྒྱ་མཚོ་གཉིས	two eyes	rgya mtsho gnyis
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟ་བུ	like a sea	rgya mtsho lta bu
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	oceanlike resolve	rgya mtsho lta bu'i sems bskyed
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟར	like a sea	rgya mtsho ltar
རྒྱ་མཚོ་འཐུང	ocean drinker, fire of rta mdong mt to the S of the outer ocean rgod ma kha	rgya mtsho 'thung
རྒྱ་མཚོ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི	maritime	rgya mtsho dang 'brel ba'i
རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྡོ་བ	{rgya mtsho rdo ba} rock med. *z{rgya mtsho skyes - 1) Indra's mount; 2) moon; 3) lha yi shing	rgya mtsho rdo ba
རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three illustrious gyamtshos	rgya mtsho rnam gsum
རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྣམ་གསུམ་དུ་གྲགས་པ	three illustrious gyamtshos rgya mtsho rnam gsum du grags pa Three Illustrious Gyamtsos. The authors of the astrological treatise entitled {pad dkar zhal lung} were Phukpa Lhündrub Gyatso, Khedrub ...	rgya mtsho rnam gsum du grags pa
རྒྱ་མཚོ་དཔེར་བརྗོད་པ	ocean the ocean as analogy 558	rgya mtsho dper brjod pa
རྒྱ་མཚོ་མར་གསར	moon	rgya mtsho mar gsar
རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཞིན་དུ	like the ocean,	rgya mtsho bzhin du
ཨོཅེཨན	like	ocean
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཡི་འཇིང	the whole surface of the sea	rgya mtsho yi 'jing
རྒྱ་མཚོ་སེར་པོ	Yellow Sea rgya mtsho gser gyi bye ma gdal ba'i gling - the island in the ocean where the golden land is scattered rgya mtsho gser gyi bye ma gdal ba'i bling - the island in the ocean where the gol...	rgya mtsho ser po
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཨར་གཏད	ocean-pressing	rgya mtsho ar gtad
རྒྱ་མཚོའི	marine, of the sea	rgya mtsho'i
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དཀྱེལ	stretch of sea	rgya mtsho'i dkyel
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གོས་ཅན	the earth	rgya mtsho'i gos can
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གླིང	isle, island	rgya mtsho'i gling
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གླིང་གསེར་གྱི་རི	the Island of the Gold Mountain	rgya mtsho'i gling gser gyi ri
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་འགྲམ	shore of the ocean	rgya mtsho'i 'gram
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	rgya mtsho chen po	rgya mtsho'i rgyal po
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ངོས	sea level	rgya mtsho'i ngos
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ངོས་ལས	above sea level	rgya mtsho'i ngos las
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ངོས་ལས་ཐོ་ཚད	height above sea level rgya mtsho'i ngos las mtho tshad smi meters above sea level	rgya mtsho'i ngos las tho tshad
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཆུ་གཏིང	depths of the sea	rgya mtsho'i chu gting
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་མཆིང	rgya mtsho'i 'jing/ klong	rgya mtsho'i mching
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་འཇིངས	depths of the sea, center of ocean	rgya mtsho'i 'jings
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་མཐའ	coast	rgya mtsho'i mtha'
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་མཐའ་ཅན	1) gze ma ra mgo; 2) cotton plant	rgya mtsho'i mtha' can
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དུང་ཕྲེང	billows, waves, borax	rgya mtsho'i dung phreng
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དུས་རླབས	ocean tides	rgya mtsho'i dus rlabs
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རྡོ་བ	a medicine	rgya mtsho'i rdo ba
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ནང	in the depths of the sea	rgya mtsho'i nang
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་སྤྲིན་ཕུང	oceans of clouds	rgya mtsho'i sprin phung
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཕ་རོལ	the other side of the ocean/ overseas{rgya mtsho'i pha rol 'gro ba - go to the other side of the ocean/ overseas	rgya mtsho'i pha rol
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཕ་རོལ་འགྲོ་བ	to cross the ocean, reach the other shore of the ocean	rgya mtsho'i pha rol 'gro ba
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	ocean mudra	rgya mtsho'i phyag rgya
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གཟུང་ས	pattern of the expanse of the ocean	rgya mtsho'i phyag rgya gzung sa
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་འཕེལ་གྲིབ	high and low tide	rgya mtsho'i 'phel grib
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་བུ་མོ	lha mo Sarasvati/ dbyangs can ma	rgya mtsho'i bu mo
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་བླ་མ	Dalai Lama	rgya mtsho'i bla ma
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དབུས	center of ocean	rgya mtsho'i dbus
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་འབྲས	pupils of the eyes	rgya mtsho'i 'bras
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ལྦུ་བ	ocean foam [med]	rgya mtsho'i lbu ba
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་མར་གསར	moon	rgya mtsho'i mar gsar
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཝུ་བ	medicine, sea foam, cuttle fish bone	rgya mtsho'i wu ba
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གཟའ་སྐར	reflection of planets and stars in ocean	rgya mtsho'i gza' skar
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རིག་པ	oceanography	rgya mtsho'i rig pa
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རུས་སྦལ	turtle	rgya mtsho'i rus sbal
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རླབས	large wave	rgya mtsho'i rlabs
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རླབས་འཕྲེང	array of the waves of the sea	rgya mtsho'i rlabs 'phreng
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རླུང་ཚུབ	typhoon, cyclone at sea	rgya mtsho'i rlung tshub
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ལྷ་མོ	Goddess Sarasvati/ dbyangs can ma rgya mtshor skor g.yeng dmag gru cruiser [warship]	rgya mtsho'i lha mo
རྒྱ་མཚོར་འགྲོ	go to sea	rgya mtshor 'gro
རྒྱ་མཚོར་འགྲོ་བའི་ཚོང་པ་རྣམས	a group of seafaring merchants	rgya mtshor 'gro ba'i tshong pa rnams
རྒྱ་མཚོར་ཆུ་བོ་འདུ་བ་བཞིན	like water flowing together in the ocean	rgya mtshor chu bo 'du ba bzhin
རྒྱ་མཚོར་རྡོ་དབྱུག	throw a rock in the ocean, example of action w/o reply/ fruition	rgya mtshor rdo dbyug
རྒྱ་མཚོས་ཆོད་པ	cut off by the ocean	rgya mtshos chod pa
རྒྱ་ཞྭ	chinese cap	rgya zhwa
རྒྱ་ཞིབ	buckwheat flour	rgya zhib
རྒྱ་ཞེན་མེད་ཡིས་ཐོབ	seal w nonattachment	rgya zhen med yis thob
རྒྱ་གཞུང	Indian root text, Indian scriptures [of philosophy]	rgya gzhung
རྒྱ་བཞི	a gtor ma offering	rgya bzhi
རྒྱ་ཟ	Gyaza, in Domey	rgya za
རྒྱ་ཟའི་ཁྲི་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Gyaza Tripa Rinpoche, of Serlag Monastery in Domey	rgya za'i khri pa rin po che
རྒྱ་ཟས	tshal sna bsgrigs pa'i zas	rgya zas
རྒྱ་ཟོག	merchandise from CH/ India	rgya zog
རྒྱ་ཟོང	merchandise from CH/ India	rgya zong
རྒྱ་གཟེབ	rake	rgya gzeb
རྒྱ་བཟའ	CH queen	rgya bza'
རྒྱ་བཟའ་ཀོང་ཇོ	{rgya bza' kong jo}	rgya bza' kong jo
རྒྱ་བཟའ་བལ་བཟའ	name of an opera	rgya bza' bal bza'
རྒྱ་བཟའ་ཨང་ཆུང	Lady Angchung of Gya; disciple of Padmasambhava	rgya bza' ang chung
རྒྱ་བཟེབ	large net, large rake	rgya bzeb
རྒྱ་འུབ་འདུ	be able to handle/ cope w [task]	rgya 'ub 'du
རྒྱ་འུབས་འདུས་མི་ཐུབ་པ	not [be] able to handle/ cope w [task]	rgya 'ubs 'dus mi thub pa
རྒྱ་འུབས་མི་འདུས་པ	not [be] able to handle/ cope w [task]	rgya 'ubs mi 'dus pa
རྒྱ་ཡངས་པོ	wide, broad	rgya yangs po
རྒྱ་ཡན	free, loose, carefree, uninhibited, let be, free and easy, careless, happy, unworried, w/o worry, untroubled, unrestrained, unconfined, unfettered, untroubled, comfortable lhod yengs, laissez faire	rgya yan
རྒྱ་ཡན་དུ	unrestrictedly, unbound	rgya yan du
རྒྱ་ཡན་དུ་གློད་པ	relaxed, at ease in that very state of freedom	rgya yan du glod pa
རྒྱ་ཡན་ཕྱོགས་མེད	spontaneously and free of direction	rgya yan phyogs med
རྒྱ་ཡན་ཟང་ཐལ	vast and transparent	rgya yan zang thal
རྒྱ་ཡི་འབུར	engravings on a seal	rgya yi 'bur
རྒྱ་ཡིག	written CH	rgya yig
རྒྱ་ཡིག་སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་སྟངས	proposed phonetic CH alphabet	rgya yig sgra sbyor byed stangs
རྒྱ་ཡིས་ཐེབས	imp seal!	rgya yis thebs
རྒྱ་ཡིས་ཐོབ	consider; x {chos mthun zas kyang zhen med rgya yis thob} consider even your honest earnings without any attachment	rgya yis thob
རྒྱ་ཡིས་གདབ	sealed	rgya yis gdab
རྒྱ་ཡིས་འབུར་དུ་བཀོད་པ	symbol carved in relief	rgya yis 'bur du bkod pa
རྒྱ་ཡིས་འཚོ་བ	butcher, hunter	rgya yis 'tsho ba
རྒྱ་ཡུལ	china, india	rgya yul
རྒྱ་ར	1) kind of wild animal; 2) C/ Indian goat	rgya ra
རྒྱ་ར་འབྲུ	kind of millet flour	rgya ra 'bru
རྒྱ་རག	CH/ Indian aa rag/ lcags rigs rag	rgya rag
རྒྱ་རབ་ཏུ་ཆེན་པོ	immense	rgya rab tu chen po
རྒྱ་རི	painted figures, portion of meat, half dum measure	rgya ri
རྒྱ་རིགས	1) CH majority Han people; 2) Indian people/ nationality	rgya rigs
རྒྱ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ	written CH	rgya rigs kyi yi ge
རྒྱ་རིགས་ཆེན་པོའི་རིང་ལུགས	CH majority Han people's nationalism/ chauvinism	rgya rigs chen po'i ring lugs
རྒྱ་རིམ་པ་བདུན	rig pa'i gnas gang yang rung ba'i gzhung gi don mi 'khrug pa'i ched du gdab pa'i rgya bdun te, don mi 'khrug pa tseg gi rgya dang, tshig rkang mi 'khrug pa shad kyi rgya, tshig don mi 'khrug pa le'...	rgya rim pa bdun
རྒྱ་རུ	horn of ri dvags rgya	rgya ru
རྒྱ་རུ་ལུག་ཐུག	saiga rma	rgya ru lug thug
རྒྱ་རུམ	CH rum	rgya rum
རྒྱ་རེས	'khrug rtsod dam rdung res	rgya res
རྒྱ་རོག	beard	rgya rog
རྒྱ་ལ	{rung} even if	rgya la
རྒྱ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter the net	rgya la 'jug pa
རྒྱ་ལ་དེ་ལྟར་ཡིན་ནའང	even so	rgya la de ltar yin na'ang
རྒྱ་ལ་ཕུག	gossip, rumor	rgya la phug
རྒྱ་ལ་རུང	1) once, eventually, some time[s]; 2) [even] if	rgya la rung
རྒྱ་ལ་སེང་གདོང	chief town in kya la	rgya la seng gdong
རྒྱ་ལན་རིང་ལུགས	laissez faire-ism	rgya lan ring lugs
རྒྱ་ལབ	gossip, rumor	rgya lab
རྒྱ་ལབ་ཅན	talkative	rgya lab can
རྒྱ་ལམ	highway, broad street	rgya lam
རྒྱ་ལས་ཐར	escape from trap/ net	rgya las thar
རྒྱ་ལས་མ་འདས་པ	never transcend the trap	rgya las ma 'das pa
རྒྱ་ལས་ཤོར	escape from trap/ net	rgya las shor
རྒྱ་ལུ	prince	rgya lu
རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས	princely accoutrements	rgya lu chas
རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས་ཀྱི་གཟན	1) gzan of the princely accoutrements [among the rgya lu chas Tibetan zlos gar lha mo 'khrab mkhan costume]; 2) a gzan khra or near retinue in the government	rgya lu chas kyi gzan
རྒྱ་ལུ་བ	the royal one [of Tibetan zlos gar lha mo performers the 1 with the accoutrements of the principal figure]	rgya lu ba
རྒྱ་ལུགས	CH style/ tradition	rgya lugs
རྒྱ་ལུང་ཆེན་པོ	the tibetan version of	rgya lung chen po
ཐེ་ལེང	chia shih-tsu chi attributed to Bodhidharma	the leng
རྒྱ་ལུའི་གྲི	princely knife	rgya lu'i gri
རྒྱ་ལུའི་སྟོད་གོས	princely upper garment [TT govt. near retinue skya rigs and lha mo 'khrab mkhan kyi rgya lu'i upper garment	rgya lu'i stod gos
རྒྱ་ལུའི་རྣམ་ཐར	the royal 1's story	rgya lu'i rnam thar
རྒྱ་ལུས་བྱིན་འབེབས	Tibetan zlos gar lha mo ba'i gtso bos 'khrab yul gyi sa gzhi byin gyis rlob pa'i stangs ka byed tshul	rgya lus byin 'bebs
རྒྱ་ལེའུ	China	rgya le'u
རྒྱ་ལོ	mdong mo'i srub shing	rgya lo
རྒྱ་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཟང་པོ	tertön	rgya lo tsA ba rdo rje bzang po
རྒྱ་ལོའི་སྨོན་ལམ	in the first month on the occasion of the Great Prayers	rgya lo'i smon lam
རྒྱ་ཤིང	kind of tree	rgya shing
རྒྱ་ཤིང་རྔོད་གསུམ	rgya gsos dang, shing dngul, smon rngod de sngar bod sa khul gyi khral chen gsum, ching rgyal rabs skabs su bod mi dmangs kyis aam ban dang bcas pa'i dpon rigs la 'bul dgos pa'i 'bru dngul dang, sm...	rgya shing rngod gsum
རྒྱ་ཤུག	1) kind of juniper; 2) chi bi kha fruit tree	rgya shug
རྒྱ་ཤུག་འཁྱིལ	species of juniper	rgya shug 'khyil
རྒྱ་ཤུག་འབྲས་བུ	1) chi bi kha; 2) Shug pa khro zhal can fruit [ro mngar kha tsa la bska ba, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas gcin 'gags kyi nad dang, bud med kyi tsabs nad, dreg nad, glo tsad, mchin tsad, snod mkhris kyi ...	rgya shug 'bras bu
རྒྱ་ཤུག་ཚིག་གུ	juniper fruit	rgya shug tshig gu
རྒྱ་ཤུག་ཚིག་གུ་ཙམ	the size of a juniper fruit	rgya shug tshig gu tsam
རྒྱ་ཤུགས	cotton plant	rgya shugs
རྒྱ་ཤུབས	light Chinese trousers	rgya shubs
རྒྱ་ཤོ	{rgya sho} field med.	rgya sho
རྒྱ་ཤོག	CH/ Indian paper	rgya shog
རྒྱ་ཤོད	open lower and milder parts, lower tract of land	rgya shod
རྒྱ་ཤོས	vermillion	rgya shos
རྒྱ་སེ	rose	rgya se
རྒྱ་སེ་མེ་ཏོག་འདྲ་པོ	rosy	rgya se me tog 'dra po
རྒྱ་སེན	now lower Russia	rgya sen
རྒྱ་སེའི་མེ་ཏོག	rose	rgya se'i me tog
རྒྱ་སེར	gap, cleft, fissure, dog with yellow spots about the nose, a Russian	rgya ser
རྒྱ་སོག	imported saw, a Tartar	rgya sog
རྒྱ་སྲང	1) scale, balance. 2) street	rgya srang
ཆིནེསེ་ཝེཨིགྷཏ་ཨོར་སྟེཨེལ	yard street, lane	chinese weight or steel
རྒྱ་སྲན	broad bean gram, a kind of pulse	rgya sran
རྒྱ་སྲན་མ	sran ma chen po	rgya sran ma
རྒྱ་གསར	newly brought lac dye, CH vermillion 560	rgya gsar
རྒྱ་གསེར	brocade w gold and silver threads	rgya gser
རྒྱ་གསོས	In the time of Manchu emperors the aam ban residing in Tibet dpon 'khor la yearly tax that had to be given, later Tibetan bka' blon tshos sku mgron la gsol ston gshom byed gron dngul yong khungs sh...	rgya gsos
རྒྱ་ལྷམ	chinese boot	rgya lham
རྒྱག	to put, shoot, hit	rgyag
རྒྱག་སྐོར	1) skad cha bskor nas produce zur za [criticism, insult, bad feelings]; 2) repeat 1 point again and again; 3) chang rgyag skor rgyag pa	rgyag skor
རྒྱག་ག་པ	infatuation	rgyag ga pa
རྒྱག་གཅིག་མཆོངས་གཅིག	1 undivided mind	rgyag gcig mchongs gcig
རྒྱག་ཇ	tea saved for 1's own drinking	rgyag ja
རྒྱག་གཏམ	bskor nas bshad pa'i skad cha, harsh/ cynical/ sarcastic/ biting talk/ remarks	rgyag gtam
རྒྱག་གཏམ་ཤོད	make harsh/ cynical/ sarcastic/ biting/ critical/ insulting talk/ remarks	rgyag gtam shod
རྒྱག་སྟེའུ	ste'u rtsag che ba	rgyag ste'u
རྒྱག་ཐེགས་གཆིག	in 1 stroke/ shot/ round	rgyag thegs gchig
རྒྱག་ཐོ	lcags rdung byed dang gtub byed kyi tho ba	rgyag tho
རྒྱག་དྲེ་ཚ་པོ	pugnacious	rgyag dre tsha po
རྒྱག་མདོང	mortar [weapon]	rgyag mdong
རྒྱག་འདྲེ་རྟག་ཏུ་བརྒྱབ	[they] always fought	rgyag 'dre rtag tu brgyab
རྒྱག་འདྲེ་ཤོར	have a fight/ quarrel/ dispute break out	rgyag 'dre shor
རྒྱག་རྡུང	rdeg 'tshog gam rdung rdeg	rgyag rdung
རྒྱག་པ	{rgyag pa, brgyab pa, brgyag pa, rgyob} trans. v.; alt. ft. of {rgyag pa}; ft. of {rgyags pa}; to throw, cast, fling, fat, put up, build, put over, corpulent	rgyag pa
རྒྱག་དཔོན	musician in a puja in charge of the short trumpet {rgya gling}	rgyag dpon
རྒྱག་དབྱུག	dbyug mgo'i 'phrul mig 'khor te snye ma rdung byed cig	rgyag dbyug
རྒྱག་ཚད	a lot, enough, satiating (of food)	rgyag tshad
རྒྱག་ཞིང	a piece of land as a remuneration for the {rgyag dpon}	rgyag zhing
རྒྱག་རེ་རྒྱབ་ཆོག་ཆོག	bellicose	rgyag re rgyab chog chog
རྒྱག་རེས་རྒྱག་པ	fight, quarrel	rgyag res rgyag pa
རྒྱགས	provisions; p. brgyags - vi. to be full / satisfied, provisions, victuals, food supplies	rgyags
རྒྱགས་སྐྱེལ	delivery of supplies/ provisions	rgyags skyel
རྒྱགས་གྲབས	hoarding wealth	rgyags grabs
རྒྱགས་རྔན	for messengers, travelers etc provisions and bya dga'i rngan pa	rgyags rngan
རྒྱགས་རྔན་ལྷ་བསང	offering of cleansing smoke and soon dedicated to worldly deities	rgyags rngan lha bsang
རྒྱགས་ཆད	tshad of satisfying the belly	rgyags chad
རྒྱགས་ཆས	[necessary] provisions, food supplies	rgyags chas
རྒྱགས་ཆུ	food and drink	rgyags chu
རྒྱགས་ཆེ་བའི་ཡོ་བྱད	luxury items	rgyags che ba'i yo byad
རྒྱགས་རྟེན	conditions supportive of life	rgyags rten
རྒྱགས་ལྟོགས	satisfied belly and being hungry/ starving	rgyags ltogs
རྒྱགས་པ	mental inflation, mibp 89, fat person, fatty, full, intoxication, haughtiness, conceitedness, fat, provisions, victuals, food, arrogance, pride, inebriated, 8 kinds (rigs bzang bas rgyags pa, gzugs...	rgyags pa
རྒྱགས་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of selfinfatuation	rgyags pa brgyad
རྒྱགས་པ་ཆུང་ཆུང	chubby	rgyags pa chung chung
རྒྱགས་པ་ཐུང་ཐུང	stout	rgyags pa thung thung
རྒྱགས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	humble, meek, mild, gentle	rgyags pa dang bral ba
རྒྱགས་པ་བཟོ་བ	fatten	rgyags pa bzo ba
རྒྱགས་པའི་དགའ་སྟོན	mighty, powerful, proud, fat, stout	rgyags pa'i dga' ston
རྒྱགས་སྤྱོད	skyid lang shor ba'i spyod pa	rgyags spyod
རྒྱགས་ཕྱེ	flour as provision for a journey, parched meal	rgyags phye
རྒྱགས་ཕྱེ་སྒྲུབ་པ	procure flour as provision for a journey	rgyags phye sgrub pa
རྒྱགས་སྦྱངས	lto nar mar ster ba,...Gos hrul gyon, lto ngan zos nas bu'i rgyags sbyangs pa	rgyags sbyangs
རྒྱགས་ཚད	enough to satisfy, a lot	rgyags tshad
རྒྱགས་ཟོང	traveling food	rgyags zong
རྒྱགས་རིལ	plump	rgyags ril
རྒྱགས་ལས་ཟད	that which has been spent for provisions	rgyags las zad
རྒྱགས་ལོགས་པ	spare provision	rgyags logs pa
རྒྱགས་ཤ	skyid lang	rgyags sha
རྒྱགས་ཤིང་དྲེགས་པ	proud and aggressive	rgyags shing dregs pa
རྒྱང	distance, wall, span, space, range. {bla ma rgyang 'bod} crying to the gurus from afar	rgyang
རྒྱང་དཀར་བ	name of an opera troupe	rgyang dkar ba
རྒྱང་བཀྲག	striking, noticeable from a distance	rgyang bkrag
རྒྱང་བཀྲག་ཆེན་པོ	very striking/ noticeable from a distance	rgyang bkrag chen po
རྒྱང་བསྐུར་རྩིས་མེད	not do 1's assigned work	rgyang bskur rtsis med
རྒྱང་བསྐྱོད	1) expedition; 2) communist long march of 1934-5	rgyang bskyod
རྒྱང་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	go on an expedition, take a long journey	rgyang bskyod byed
རྒྱང་བསྐྱོད་རླངས་འཁོར	long distance bus	rgyang bskyod rlangs 'khor
རྒྱང་ཁྱད	distance	rgyang khyad
རྒྱང་མཁར་རྫོང	{rgyang mkhar rdzong}	rgyang mkhar rdzong
རྒྱང་གི་ཡོན་པོ་ལུང	Yönpo Valley of Gyang, in Tsang	rgyang gi yon po lung
རྒྱང་གྱེར་ཆེ་བ	much famed from far away	rgyang gyer che ba
རྒྱང་གྲགས	furlong, 500 {gzhu 'dom}/	rgyang grags
བོཝ	lengths, "mile", a krosha, calling distance [Tse]; 2) call from far away; 3) potter's tool for making soft clay articles	bow
རྒྱང་གྲགས་ཅན	person w snyan grags from far away lands	rgyang grags can
རྒྱང་གྲགས་ཐོས	osprey	rgyang grags thos
རྒྱང་གླུ	song	rgyang glu
རྒྱང་འགོ	wooden lham khog rgyong byed 561	rgyang 'go
རྒྱང་རྒྱང་བརྒྱུགས་པ	running off in the distance	rgyang rgyang brgyugs pa
རྒྱང་སྒྲག	broadcasting, loud speaker, PA system	rgyang sgrag
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་གཏོང	broadcast	rgyang sgrag gtong
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་གཏོང་བ	broadcast	rgyang sgrag gtong ba
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་བྱེད	broadcast	rgyang sgrag byed
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་བྱེད་པ	broadcast	rgyang sgrag byed pa
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་བཤད	broadcast	rgyang sgrag bshad
རྒྱང་སྒྲག་བཤད་པ	broadcast	rgyang sgrag bshad pa
རྒྱང་སྒྲོམ	lha 'bri mkhan's tool	rgyang sgrom
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་གཏོང	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags gtong
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་གཏོང་བ	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags gtong ba
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags byed
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་པ	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags byed pa
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་རླུང་འཕྲིན	radio	rgyang bsgrags rlung 'phrin
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་རླུང་འཕྲིན་ཁང	radio station rgyang bsgrags rlung 'phrin rol mo tshogs	rgyang bsgrags rlung 'phrin khang
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་བཤད	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags bshad
རྒྱང་བསྒྲགས་བཤད་པ	broadcast	rgyang bsgrags bshad pa
རྒྱང་ངེ	a good distance	rgyang nge
རྒྱང་ངེ་བ	distance	rgyang nge ba
རྒྱང་ངེ་བ་ལ་བསྡད་ནས	keeping their distance	rgyang nge ba la bsdad nas
རྒྱང་ཆེ་དྲག	exaggerated	rgyang che drag
རྒྱང་ཆེ་དྲགས་པ	so widespread, exaggerated	rgyang che drags pa
རྒྱང་ཆོད	be far/ long separated	rgyang chod
རྒྱང་མཆོང	jump a long distance, long jump	rgyang mchong
རྒྱང་མཆོང་བཏང་གིན	moving forward by long leaps	rgyang mchong btang gin
རྒྱང་མཆོངས	jump a long distance, long jump	rgyang mchongs
རྒྱང་མཇལ	from far away mjal kha zhu ba	rgyang mjal
རྒྱང་ལྟ	eye looking a long way	rgyang lta
རྒྱང་ལྟ་རྒྱབ་པ	look, gaze	rgyang lta rgyab pa
རྒྱང་བལྟས	eye looking a long way	rgyang bltas
རྒྱང་ཐག	distance	rgyang thag
རྒྱང་ཐག་རིང་ཐུང	distance	rgyang thag ring thung
རྒྱང་ཐག་རིང་པོ	far	rgyang thag ring po
རྒྱང་ཐག་རིང་བའི་ས་ཁུལ	remote/ far off place/ border area	rgyang thag ring ba'i sa khul
རྒྱང་ཐག་རིང་ཤོས	farthest, furthest	rgyang thag ring shos
རྒྱང་ཐབས་སུ་བཀལ་བ	brandishes [on a trident]	rgyang thabs su bkal ba
རྒྱང་ཐུང	span	rgyang thung
རྒྱང་ཐུང་བ	nearby, a short distance	rgyang thung ba
རྒྱང་དུ	afar	rgyang du
རྒྱང་དུ་བསྐྱུར	cast far away	rgyang du bskyur
རྒྱང་དུ་ཐོན	to move far away	rgyang du thon
རྒྱང་དུ་ལུས་པ	lingering behind	rgyang du lus pa
རྒྱང་མདའ	bow/ arrow / gun that shoots a long distance	rgyang mda'
རྒྱང་ནས་ཕོག་པ	ear shot, hit from a distance	rgyang nas phog pa
རྒྱང་པ	stretched	rgyang pa
རྒྱང་ཕན	Charvaka	rgyang phan
རྒྱང་ཕན་པ	sect of Hindu philosophers	rgyang phan pa
རྒྱང་ཕུགས	a long time?, phugs rgyang ring po, banish/ expel far away	rgyang phugs
རྒྱང་ཕུགས་ཅན་ཀྱི་ཕོ་གསར	[yong man, bull]...	rgyang phugs can kyi pho gsar
རྒྱང་ཕེན་པ	hedonist	rgyang phen pa
རྒྱང་འཕན་པ	a non-Buddhist school, hedonist, nihilist, follower of Charvaka. "cast out by the world," "belonging to the world of sense," materialist, one who denies past and future lives	rgyang 'phan pa
རྒྱང་འཕེན	1) Charvaka [school]; 2)	rgyang 'phen
ལོང	range	long
རྒྱང་འཕེན་པ	Nihilist Charvakas, philosophical sect of ancient india, Lokayata	rgyang 'phen pa
རྒྱང་འཕེན་པའི་ཆད་པར་ལྟ་བ	the nihilist view of the Charvakas	rgyang 'phen pa'i chad par lta ba
རྒྱང་འཕེན་འཕུར་མདའ	long-range missile	rgyang 'phen 'phur mda'
རྒྱང་འཕེན་མེ་སྒྱོགས	long-range artillery/ cannon	rgyang 'phen me sgyogs
རྒྱང་འཕེན་མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའ	longrange rocket	rgyang 'phen me shugs 'phur mda'
རྒྱང་བ	distant	rgyang ba
རྒྱང་བུ	wooden tablets	rgyang bu
རྒྱང་འབུད	banish[ment]/ expel far away, exile, extradition	rgyang 'bud
རྒྱང་འབུད་གཏོང	banish, expel, exile, extradite, deport	rgyang 'bud gtong
རྒྱང་འབུད་གཏོང་བ	deport, exile	rgyang 'bud gtong ba
རྒྱང་འབུད་བཏང་པ	to banish	rgyang 'bud btang pa
རྒྱང་འབུམ་མོ་ཆེ	Gyang Bumoche, in Tsang	rgyang 'bum mo che
རྒྱང་འབེན	target [placed far away]	rgyang 'ben
རྒྱང་འབོད	calling from afar rgyang 'bod} - crying from afar	rgyang 'bod
རྒྱང་མ	distance; far away	rgyang ma
རྒྱང་མ་ནས	at a distance, from afar	rgyang ma nas
རྒྱང་མིག	wide-eyed	rgyang mig
རྒྱང་མིག་མི་མཐོང་མཁན	shortsighted	rgyang mig mi mthong mkhan
རྒྱང་ཙེ	ordinary pronunciation	rgyang tse
རྒྱང་ཚད	[measurement of] range/ distance	rgyang tshad
རྒྱང་ཚད་ཐིག་ཤིང	signal/ aiming/ distance measuring post	rgyang tshad thig shing
རྒྱང་ཚས	not far from	rgyang tshas
རྒྱང་ཞགས	far-reaching, far-reacher	rgyang zhags
རྒྱང་ཞགས་ཆུ་ཡི་སྒྲོན་མ	{rgyang zhags chu'i sgron ma}	rgyang zhags chu yi sgron ma
རྒྱང་ཞགས་ཆུའི་སྒྲོན་མ	far-reaching water lamp, 1 of sgron ma bzhi, water light loop for long distances, water	rgyang zhags chu'i sgron ma
ལམཔ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕ༹ར	sighted eyes, lamp of the water (globelike) eye which lassos everything at a distance	lamp of the far
རྒྱང་གཞས	very slow way of dancing/ singing	rgyang gzhas
རྒྱང་གཟུགས་རླབས་འཕྲིན	television	rgyang gzugs rlabs 'phrin
རྒྱང་རིང	far, distant, a long distance,	rgyang ring
རྒྱང་རིང་གི་དམིགས་ཡུལ	long-term goal/ plan	rgyang ring gi dmigs yul
རྒྱང་རིང་ཆུ	mirage, illusion	rgyang ring chu
རྒྱང་རིང་དུ	farther	rgyang ring du
རྒྱང་རིང་དུ་ཏོར	cast far away	rgyang ring du tor
རྒྱང་རིང་དུ་བུས	slow direct exhalation	rgyang ring du bus
རྒྱང་རིང་དུ་ལུས	be left hopelessly behind/ far away, be unable to compete	rgyang ring du lus
རྒྱང་རིང་པོ	far, remote, far away	rgyang ring po
རྒྱང་རིང་པོ་ནས	from afar / a long distance	rgyang ring po nas
རྒྱང་རིང་པོ་མེད	not far [away]	rgyang ring po med
རྒྱང་རིང་བ	delaying, procrastinating	rgyang ring ba
རྒྱང་རིང་དམིགས་ཡུལ	long-term goal/ plan 562	rgyang ring dmigs yul
རྒྱང་རིང་དམིགས་ཡུལ་གྱི་འཆར་འགོད	longterm goal/ plan	rgyang ring dmigs yul gyi 'char 'god
རྒྱང་རིང་སྨྲ་བ	theory of remoteness	rgyang ring smra ba
རྒྱང་རིང་མཚོ་ལམ	trans-oceanic shipping	rgyang ring mtsho lam
རྒྱང་ལུགས	customary ornaments	rgyang lugs
རྒྱང་ཤིང	1) where a picture is pained ras gzhi rgyong ba' shing; 2) a prisoner's two hands du rgyong ba'i khrims chas shig	rgyang shing
རྒྱང་ཤེལ	binoculars	rgyang shel
རྒྱང་སོ་ལྟ་བ	watch a place of danger from a distance	rgyang so lta ba
རྒྱང་ཤེལ་འཛུགས	spy/ watch secretly from a distance [w telescope]	rgyang shel 'dzugs
རྒྱང་སོ	spying / watching secretly from a distance	rgyang so
རྒྱང་སོ་བལྟས	having gazed afar	rgyang so bltas
རྒྱང་སོ་བལྟས་པ	gazing afar	rgyang so bltas pa
རྒྱང་སོ་བཙུགས་པ	place a sentry on guard	rgyang so btsugs pa
རྒྱང་སོ་ཚུགས	keep watch from afar	rgyang so tshugs
རྒྱང་བསྲིངས	1) banish/ cast/ stay far away, put off; 2) broadcast	rgyang bsrings
རྒྱང་བསྲིངས་པ	lengthened to a great distance	rgyang bsrings pa
རྒྱངས	far, to stuff, fill up, cram in	rgyangs
རྒྱངས་ཀྱིས	[arch] completely, far away	rgyangs kyis
རྒྱངས་ཀྱིས་ཐོན་པ	shooting straight / far out	rgyangs kyis thon pa
རྒྱངས་བསྐྱེད་དེ	moving far away	rgyangs bskyed de
རྒྱངས་གྲགས	Gyangdrak Monastery; on	rgyangs grags
ཨོལད་མཔས་འགེངཏའ	Gyangdrak Monastery	old maps 'Gengta'
རྒྱངས་གྲགས་དགོན	Gyangdrak Monastery [on the south face of Kailash]	rgyangs grags dgon
རྒྱངས་གླུ	extensive songs	rgyangs glu
རྒྱངས་ཆད་ཀྱི་དོན་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearing as a distant object	rgyangs chad kyi don du snang ba
རྒྱངས་ཏེ	arriving as in haste	rgyangs te
རྒྱངས་པ	fill out, fill up, supply, complete, make up, cure wounds, pay, repay, return rgyangs pa'i dpung pa} - squared shoulders	rgyangs pa
རྒྱངས་ཞག་ཆུའི་སྒྲོན་མ	far-sighted lamp of the watery eyes [gd] distancepulling water lamp, the water-light of	rgyangs zhag chu'i sgron ma
ཐེ་ཕ༹ར	reaching lasso, far-catching water lamp	the far
རྒྱངས་ཡག་མཚེར	Gyang Yaktser, in Domey	rgyangs yag mtsher
རྒྱངས་ཤ	meat stuffed into intestines, sausage	rgyangs sha
རྒྱངས་ཤིང	castle, flogging board, board on which culprit is stretched for flogging, board to lay picture cloth	rgyangs shing
རྒྱངས་ཤིང་རྒྱག	crucify	rgyangs shing rgyag
རྒྱངས་ཤིང་ལ་བཏགས་ནས་གསོད་པ	crucify	rgyangs shing la btags nas gsod pa
རྒྱངས་ཤེལ	telescope, binoculars	rgyangs shel
རྒྱངས་སེ	vivid, very clear	rgyangs se
རྒྱངས་སྲིངས	keep far away	rgyangs srings
རྒྱད	(not in DAS)	rgyad
རྒྱད་བུ	wooden tablets	rgyad bu
རྒྱན	p. {brgyan}, imp. of {rgyan pa}; to decorate, adorn, ornament. {rig pa'i rgyan} the adornment of insight. ornament, ornaments [in poetics], decoration, jewelry. "beauty", enhancement; adornment; 2)...	rgyan
རྒྱན་ཀླུ་བས	adorned w ornaments ???	rgyan klu bas
རྒྱན་ཀླུབས	adorned w ornaments	rgyan klubs
རྒྱན་བཀོད	ornamentation, decoration	rgyan bkod
རྒྱན་བཀོད་པ	arrangement of the ornaments, Lamkaravyuha	rgyan bkod pa
རྒྱན་བཀྲོལ	took off her jewelry	rgyan bkrol
རྒྱན་སྐོར	sga 'bol sgrog byed of gold, silver or other metals, a large flatheaded nail	rgyan skor
རྒྱན་ཁ	skugs, betting rgyan kha btsugs nas rtsed mo rtse ba having bet, play	rgyan kha
རྒྱན་མཁན་པོ	one versed in rhetoric, Prajnakaragupta	rgyan mkhan po
རྒྱན་འཁོར་ལྔ	five aspects	rgyan 'khor lnga
རྒྱན་གོས	ornaments and clothing	rgyan gos
རྒྱན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	ongoing/ continuous/ continuum of adornment	rgyan gyi 'khor lo
རྒྱན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་ལྔ	five causes of sensation, the 5 ornamental causes, five ornamental causes, the five elements	rgyan gyi rgyu lnga
རྒྱན་གྱི་ངག	state of being an ornament	rgyan gyi ngag
རྒྱན་གྱི་ངང	state of being an ornament	rgyan gyi ngang
རྒྱན་གྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	kind of picture shaped like a dorje	rgyan gyi rdo rje
རྒྱན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁའ	"open space," [mss]	rgyan gyi nam mkha'
རྒྱན་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	flower ornament	rgyan gyi me tog
རྒྱན་གྱིས	adorn, ornament, decorate, by ornaments	rgyan gyis
རྒྱན་གྱིས་རྒྱན	adorn w ornaments	rgyan gyis rgyan
རྒྱན་གྱིས་རྒྱན་པ	adorn w ornaments	rgyan gyis rgyan pa
རྒྱན་གྱིས་བརྒྱན་པ	adorned w ornaments	rgyan gyis brgyan pa
རྒྱན་གྱིས་མཛེས	adorned with ornaments	rgyan gyis mdzes
རྒྱན་གྱེར	ornamental bells/ bangles	rgyan gyer
རྒྱན་འགྱེད་པ	lay a wager	rgyan 'gyed pa
རྒྱན་འགྲེལ	commentary on Abhisamaya Alamkara	rgyan 'grel
རྒྱན་རྒྱག	draw lots	rgyan rgyag
རྒྱན་རྒྱབ་པ	cast lots, lay wager	rgyan rgyab pa
རྒྱན་དངུལ	bet	rgyan dngul
རྒྱན་ཅན	adorned, decorated, ornamented, decked, embellished, bedecked	rgyan can
རྒྱན་ཅན་དགྲ་བཅོམ	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {rang sa'i zag bcas kyi rdzu 'phrul gyi mngon shes sogs dang ldan pa}	rgyan can dgra bcom
རྒྱན་ཅན་ཡུལ	waist	rgyan can yul
རྒྱན་ཅན་བཤུར་བ	belt with a lock	rgyan can bshur ba
རྒྱན་གཅིག	ex {bka' gdams yongs kyi rgyan gcig} the paramount ornament of the Kadampas	rgyan gcig
རྒྱན་གཅིག་པུ	chief ornament	rgyan gcig pu
རྒྱན་བཅས་དགྲ་བཅོམ	[tse rig]	rgyan bcas dgra bcom
རྒྱན་བཅས་འགོག་བ	[Tse rig]	rgyan bcas 'gog ba
རྒྱན་འཅོགས	bet	rgyan 'cogs
རྒྱན་ཆ	ornament, SA rgyan, articles of adornment	rgyan cha
རྒྱན་ཆ་བཏགས་པ	to adorn, decorate, ornament, deck, embellish, bedeck	rgyan cha btags pa
རྒྱན་ཆ་ཕལ་པ	trinket	rgyan cha phal pa
རྒྱན་ཆ་ཕྲ་ཕྲ་མང་པོ	spangle	rgyan cha phra phra mang po
རྒྱན་ཆ་ལུགས	customary ornaments	rgyan cha lugs
རྒྱན་ཆས	ornamental things	rgyan chas
རྒྱན་མཆོག	earring	rgyan mchog
རྒྱན་མཆོར	ornament, decoration	rgyan mchor
རྒྱན་འཇོག	place a bet	rgyan 'jog
རྒྱན་གཉིས	two works of Maitreya; mdo sde rgyan, mngon rtogs rgyan	rgyan gnyis
རྒྱན་བཏགས་པ	ornament worn	rgyan btags pa
རྒྱན་རྟེན་ཙམ་དུ	as a mere ornament	rgyan rten tsam du
རྒྱན་སྟུག	Gandavyuha Sutra	rgyan stug
རྒྱན་སྟུག་པོ	Dense Ornamentation [thd]	rgyan stug po
རྒྱན་སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	Array of Dense Ornamentation [thd]	rgyan stug po bkod pa
རྒྱན་སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Dense Array of Adornments, Ghanavyuha Sutra; {bam po bzhi dang le'u dgu gsham ma tshang bar bzhed pa, dzi na mi tra dang, shI len dra bo dhi dang, ban de ye shes sdes bsgyur ba'o}	rgyan stug po bkod pa'i mdo
རྒྱན་ཐོབ	win a bet/ election/ prize	rgyan thob
རྒྱན་དང་བཅས་པ	with adornment; adorned; ornamented, beautified, embellished	rgyan dang bcas pa
རྒྱན་དང་བཅས་པའི་འགོག་པ	cessation with adornment; Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyon mongs pa dang snyoms 'jug gi sgrib pa gnyis ka'i cha las rnam par grol ba 'chi 'pho dang skye ba rig pa dang sngon dang phyi mtha' dang zag zad...	rgyan dang bcas pa'i 'gog pa
རྒྱན་དུ་འཆར	a moral advantage turned into an ornament, blessing	rgyan du 'char
རྒྱན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	enhance	rgyan du byed pa
རྒྱན་དོར་བ	1) place a bet; 2) abandon ornaments	rgyan dor ba
རྒྱན་དྲུག	the six ornaments beautifying Jambuling	rgyan drug
རྒྱན་དྲུག་མཆོག་གཉིས	Six Ornaments and the Two Supreme Ones. The six ornaments are Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, Asanga, Dignaga, Vasubhandu and Dharmakirti. The two supreme ones are Shakyaprabha and Gunaprabha	rgyan drug mchog gnyis
རྒྱན་དྲུག་ཕྱག་མཚན	the six ornaments and accoutrements scepters	rgyan drug phyag mtshan
རྒྱན་དྲུག་མ	kind of chinese satin, SA gos chen	rgyan drug ma
རྒྱན་མདོས	decorated mdos, ornamental mdos	rgyan mdos
རྒྱན་འདོགས་པ	adorn oneself, attach an ornament	rgyan 'dogs pa
རྒྱན་སྡུད	gram. Emphasizing and including. A non-case term. The three particles {kyang/ yang/ ang/}	rgyan sdud
རྒྱན་སྡུད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	ornament adding word, kyang yang 'ang	rgyan sdud kyi sgra
རྒྱན་གནས	the place of ornaments, the forehead	rgyan gnas
རྒྱན་པ	(tha dad pa brgyan pa, brgyan pa, rgyan,, adorn w ornaments	rgyan pa
རྒྱན་པ་བྱེད་པ	lay a wager	rgyan pa byed pa
རྒྱན་པར་བྱེད	adorn w ornaments	rgyan par byed
རྒྱན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to ornament, enhance, adorn, beautify, embellish, grace, decorate, deck, bedeck	rgyan par byed pa
རྒྱན་པོ	throwing dice	rgyan po
རྒྱན་པོ་འགྱེད	gamble	rgyan po 'gyed
རྒྱན་པོ་བ	gambler	rgyan po ba
རྒྱན་སྤངས་པ	unadorned, renounced wearing ornaments	rgyan spangs pa
རྒྱན་སྤྲས	1) adorn, ornament, decorate; 2) bet, wager, stake	rgyan spras
རྒྱན་ཕམ་པ	lose a bet/ election	rgyan pham pa
རྒྱན་ཕྲན	commonly or slightly ornamented	rgyan phran
རྒྱན་འཕྲེང	1) ornaments and necklaces; 2) ornamental necklaces/ garlands	rgyan 'phreng
རྒྱན་མེད	unadorned, unenhanced	rgyan med
རྒྱན་མེད་དགྲ་བཅོམ	[Tse rig]	rgyan med dgra bcom
རྒྱན་མེད་འགོག་པ	[Tse rig]	rgyan med 'gog pa
རྒྱན་མེད་པ	unadorned, unenhanced	rgyan med pa
རྒྱན་མེད་པའི་འགོག་པ	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {shes rab kyi nyon sgrib tsam las rnam par grol ba'i dgra bcom pa rnams kyi 'gog pa gang yin pa ste mngon shes sogs kyi rgyan med pa}	rgyan med pa'i 'gog pa
རྒྱན་བཙུགས	vote, [placed a] bet	rgyan btsugs
རྒྱན་བཙུགས་པ	bet	rgyan btsugs pa
རྒྱན་ཚིག	adjective	rgyan tshig
རྒྱན་མཚན	ornaments and attributes	rgyan mtshan
རྒྱན་འཛུགས	bet	rgyan 'dzugs
རྒྱན་གཞོན་བར་གསུམ	all ages; old, young and middle	rgyan gzhon bar gsum
རྒྱན་བཞག་པ	to bet, make a bet, wage, lay a wager	rgyan bzhag pa
རྒྱན་བཞི	the four ornaments	rgyan bzhi
རྒྱན་བཞི་མ	kind of chinese satin, SA gos chen	rgyan bzhi ma
རྒྱན་ཟླ་གས	semi-circular necklace	rgyan zla gas
རྒྱན་བཟང་པོ	bhadravaha	rgyan bzang po
རྒྱན་བཟང་པོ་བཏགས་པ	adorned with fine ornaments	rgyan bzang po btags pa
རྒྱན་བཟང་མ	woman wearing fine ornaments rgyan g.yug pa - toss	rgyan bzang ma
རྒྱན་རིས	design, pattern, decoration	rgyan ris
རྒྱན་ལུགས	ornamented in the customary way	rgyan lugs
རྒྱན་ཤོག	lottery [ticket]	rgyan shog
རྒྱན་ཤོར	lose a bet	rgyan shor
རྒྱན་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་ལྔ	the 35 ornaments of sense	rgyan sum cu so lnga
རྒྱབ	lto rgyab - food and clothing	rgyab
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི	hind, posterior	rgyab kyi
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ཁུར་པོ	my backpack	rgyab kyi khur po
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་འཛིན	follower	rgyab kyi rgyud 'dzin
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན	drug mdo'am end of the spine	rgyab kyi brgyud 'dzin
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	khres kyi khur	rgyab kyi theg pa
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	behind	rgyab kyi phyogs
རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ཕྲ་མ	covert slander; calumny, defamation	rgyab kyi phra ma
རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས་པ	turning one's back [to]	rgyab kyis phyogs pa
རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	put to flight	rgyab kyis phyogs par byed pa
རྒྱབ་དཀར	dur bya kang ka'i ming	rgyab dkar
རྒྱབ་སྐྱུར་ཚུལ	turning our backs. See also {rgyab sgyur}	rgyab skyur tshul
རྒྱབ་སྐྱོང	encouraging counsels	rgyab skyong
རྒྱབ་སྐྱོར	1) support, backing, aid, help; 2) cushion/ support [for the back]; 3) supplement	rgyab skyor
རྒྱབ་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	support back, aid, help	rgyab skyor byed
རྒྱབ་སྐྱོར་བྱེད་པ	support	rgyab skyor byed pa
རྒྱབ་བསྐྱུར	leave behind, discard, abandon, give up	rgyab bskyur
རྒྱབ་བསྐྱུར་བ	leave behind, discard, abandon, give up	rgyab bskyur ba
རྒྱབ་བསྐྱུར་བྱེད	leave behind, discard, abandon, give up	rgyab bskyur byed
རྒྱབ་ཁལ	burden carried on the back	rgyab khal
རྒྱབ་ཁུག	rucksack, bag, sack, alms-bag carried by mendicants	rgyab khug
རྒྱབ་ཁུར	bring along	rgyab khur
རྒྱབ་གུར་པོ	haunch-back	rgyab gur po
རྒྱབ་གྱེས་པ	totally separating	rgyab gyes pa
རྒྱབ་འགལ	the very opposite; x {ma bag mar len pa la sogs rang gi pha mes kyi srol ngan pa'i rjes su 'brang bas chos mthun gyi spyod pa dang rgyab 'gal} inheriting from their forefathers such	rgyab 'gal
རྒྱབ་འགལ་གྱི་སྣང	opposing perceptions	rgyab 'gal gyi snang
རྒྱབ་འགལ་བྱེད་པ	oppose	rgyab 'gal byed pa
རྒྱབ་འགྲོས	respectfully walking backwards [so as not to turn the back]	rgyab 'gros
རྒྱབ་སྒུར་པོ	sgal pa sgur sgur ram stod sgur po	rgyab sgur po
རྒྱབ་སྒོ	exit	rgyab sgo
རྒྱབ་སྒྱུར	about-face	rgyab sgyur
རྒྱབ་ངོས	back, behind	rgyab ngos
རྒྱབ་ངོས་ཐག་རིང་ཤོས	hindmost	rgyab ngos thag ring shos
རྒྱབ་སྔས	cushion/ pillow [for the back]	rgyab sngas
རྒྱབ་ཆ	dgal bya'i do po	rgyab cha
རྒྱབ་ཆོས	1) funeral services/reading, religious services conducted after; 2)	rgyab chos
བཅཀ	ground teaching	back
རྒྱབ་ཆོས་སྐོར	cycle / set of supportive teachings	rgyab chos skor
རྒྱབ་ཇ	grwa sa'i nang du nyin gung rgyab kyi ja la zer, dgong ja dang don gcig	rgyab ja
རྒྱབ་རྗེན་པ	naked backside	rgyab rjen pa
རྒྱབ་ལྗོངས	background, backdrop (of a stage). 2) bod kyi dus bab (8/10/1998): rgyab ljongs byed, to support/back fully. [mss]	rgyab ljongs
རྒྱབ་གཉེར	help, assistance	rgyab gnyer
རྒྱབ་གཉེར་བབ་བཀོད	nyes med kyi rgyab gnyer byas nas nyes can la bkod 'doms byed pa	rgyab gnyer bab bkod
རྒྱབ་སྙེ	cushion/ pillow [for the back]	rgyab snye
རྒྱབ་སྙེ་རྒྱག	lean back on, rest against	rgyab snye rgyag
རྒྱབ་སྙེ་བྱེད	lean back on, rest against	rgyab snye byed
རྒྱབ་སྙེས	cushion/ pillow [for the back]	rgyab snyes
རྒྱབ་སྙེས་རྒྱག	lean back on, rest against	rgyab snyes rgyag
རྒྱབ་སྙེས་བྱེད	lean back on, rest against	rgyab snyes byed
རྒྱབ་བསྙུན	pain in the back	rgyab bsnyun
རྒྱབ་ཏུ	backward, afterwards, after, behind, at the back, behind, the back side, on the back	rgyab tu
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་སྐྱུར	cast behind you!	rgyab tu skyur
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་བསྐྱུར	(bsgyur) - turn one's back on	rgyab tu bskyur
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་སྒ་གཏད་པ	put a saddle on the back	rgyab tu sga gtad pa
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་སྙེ་སའི་སྔས	cushion/ pillow [for the back]	rgyab tu snye sa'i sngas
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་བསྙེས་པ	1) gzugs po rgyab phyogs su brten pa [Gnyid bro nas ro stod rgyab tu bsnyes pa]; 2) skyabs bcol ba / *ang gi mes rgyal la rgyab bsnyes pa]	rgyab tu bsnyes pa
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་པོར་བ	to cast away	rgyab tu por ba
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་སྤོངས་ཤིག	ex {pha yul rgyab tu spongs shig} leave your homeland behind!	rgyab tu spongs shig
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་ཞོན	mounts on the back	rgyab tu zhon
རྒྱབ་ཏུ་བཞག	leaving behind	rgyab tu bzhag
རྒྱབ་གཏད	turned 1's back, betrayed	rgyab gtad
རྒྱབ་གཏད་པ	to turn one's back to	rgyab gtad pa
རྒྱབ་གཏོད	turn 1's back, betrayal	rgyab gtod
རྒྱབ་གཏོད་པ	traitor	rgyab gtod pa
རྒྱབ་གཏོད་བྱེད	turn 1's back, betray	rgyab gtod byed
རྒྱབ་རྟེན	support, backing, prop	rgyab rten
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་གྱི་ལུང	the supportive reading transmission	rgyab rten gyi lung
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་ཐུབ་པ	supportive	rgyab rten thub pa
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་པ	lean one's back against, lean upon, rest on, rely upon, confide in	rgyab rten pa
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་དཔུང་སྡེ	back up/ supporting force	rgyab rten dpung sde
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་བྱེད་པ	uphold	rgyab rten byed pa
རྒྱབ་ལྟོས	wrong mind, thoughts, view, thesis	rgyab ltos
རྒྱབ་སྟན	slel po 'khur skabs kyi rgyab gdan	rgyab stan
རྒྱབ་སྟོན་པ	turning one's back on {sngon du song na bla ma la rgyab ston pa yin pas mi 'gro} avoid walking in front of him as that would mean turning your back on him	rgyab ston pa
རྒྱབ་བརྟེན	support; support, "back support,"	rgyab brten
རྒྱབ་བརྟེན་གྱི་རྩ་ཐོ	supportive / helpful list; base-register	rgyab brten gyi rtsa tho
རྒྱབ་བརྟེན་མཛོད	please support me	rgyab brten mdzod
རྒྱབ་བརྟེན་ལྷ་ལྔ	the five supporting deities	rgyab brten lha lnga
རྒྱབ་ཐུང	short back	rgyab thung
རྒྱབ་དར	rngon pa 'khrab dus rgyab tu 'dogs rgyu'i ka 'phan lta bu'i gos chen 'dzar ldan gyi ming	rgyab dar
རྒྱབ་དུ་བོར་བ	to turn one's back	rgyab du bor ba
རྒྱབ་དུ་འབོར་བ	to turn one's back	rgyab du 'bor ba
རྒྱབ་དྲོས	gos 'dzoms pa'i ming	rgyab dros
རྒྱབ་མདུན	back and front, both sides	rgyab mdun
རྒྱབ་མདུན་སློག	reverse [back and front]	rgyab mdun slog
རྒྱབ་འདྲེ	fight, quarrel, dispute	rgyab 'dre
རྒྱབ་འདྲེ་རྒྱག	fight, quarrel, dispute	rgyab 'dre rgyag
རྒྱབ་རྡུ	rkang pa'i nyva thad kyi lham yu kha dbrag gi mtha' rgyan ko ba	rgyab rdu
རྒྱབ་སྡོད་པ	affiliated monks; monk's not given food and lodge	rgyab sdod pa
རྒྱབ་ན	afterwards, after, behind, at the back	rgyab na
རྒྱབ་ནས	from behind, from the back	rgyab nas
རྒྱབ་ནས་སྐྱོར	behind me	rgyab nas skyor
རྒྱབ་ནས་དེད	chased from behind	rgyab nas ded
རྒྱབ་ནས་འཕུལ	to push from behind	rgyab nas 'phul
རྒྱབ་ནས་རོགས་མགོན་བྱེད་པ	help and protect from behind, reinforce	rgyab nas rogs mgon byed pa
རྒྱབ་གནོན	help, assistance, aid, backing	rgyab gnon
རྒྱབ་གནོན་ཐམ་ཀ	help, assistance, aid, backing giving bka' shog the'u 'byar ma	rgyab gnon tham ka
རྒྱབ་སྣོན	adding on the back, confirmation	rgyab snon
རྒྱབ་སྣོན་གཏོང	help and protect from behind, reinforce	rgyab snon gtong
རྒྱབ་སྣོན་བྱེད་པ	recommend	rgyab snon byed pa
རྒྱབ་བསྣོལ	opposing, opposite; {rgyab bsnol gyi rtog pa} opposing types of thoughts	rgyab bsnol
རྒྱབ་བསྣོལ་གྱི་རྟོག	opposing types of thoughts	rgyab bsnol gyi rtog
རྒྱབ་པ	to do. Syn {byed pa}	rgyab pa
རྒྱབ་དཔུང	back up/ supporting force	rgyab dpung
རྒྱབ་དཔུང་བྱེད	back up, support, side w	rgyab dpung byed
རྒྱབ་སྤྱོད	contrary, defying, opposite, contradiction, opposition	rgyab spyod
རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས	back side, behind direction, rear, behind the lines	rgyab phyogs
རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས་ཆེན་པོ	great rear area [of CH not occupied by Japan]	rgyab phyogs chen po
རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས་པ	turn one's back to a person or thing, to leave something behind, be indifferent	rgyab phyogs pa
རྒྱབ་ཕྱོགས་སུ	aback, backward	rgyab phyogs su
རྒྱབ་བྱེད	back, support	rgyab byed
རྒྱབ་བྱེད་པ	protect, back	rgyab byed pa
རྒྱབ་བྲག	the rock at my back	rgyab brag
རྒྱབ་འབོལ	cushion for the back	rgyab 'bol
རྒྱབ་སྦྱོར	gshol gyi pus gug gi rgyab tu sbyar bya'i shing	rgyab sbyor
རྒྱབ་མ	1) the 1 behind/ later; 2) [arch] brgya lam mam gal te	rgyab ma
རྒྱབ་དམག	reinforcement, reserve	rgyab dmag
རྒྱབ་རྨ	wound in the back	rgyab rma
རྒྱབ་རྩ	1) supporter, backer, assister; 2) rgyab la yod pa'i rtsa lam	rgyab rtsa
རྒྱབ་རྩ་དྲུག་འདུས	mkhrig ma'i tshigs nas srin lag ngos su sor bzhi gzhal ba'i gnas su yod pa'i bleeding nadi, if bled glo mchin dang pho long gnyan nad sogs la phan	rgyab rtsa drug 'dus
རྒྱབ་རྩིས	intend to make, hint	rgyab rtsis
རྒྱབ་ཚེམ	binding [of a book]	rgyab tshem
རྒྱབ་འཛིན	horse	rgyab 'dzin
རྒྱབ་རྫི	one standing behind working people in order to watch and superintend them	rgyab rdzi
རྒྱབ་ཞིན་པ	struck	rgyab zhin pa
རྒྱབ་གཞུང	spine, backbone	rgyab gzhung
རྒྱབ་ཡས	number	rgyab yas
རྒྱབ་ཡོལ	back curtain	rgyab yol
རྒྱབ་རི	the hill behind something	rgyab ri
རྒྱབ་རིང	long back, fish	rgyab ring
རྒྱབ་རིས	background	rgyab ris
རྒྱབ་རུས	backbone	rgyab rus
རྒྱབ་རོགས	reinforcement, backing, support [from the rear]	rgyab rogs
རྒྱབ་རོགས་བྱེད	reinforce, back, support [from the rear]	rgyab rogs byed
རྒྱབ་རོལ	behind direction	rgyab rol
རྒྱབ་ལ	backward, afterwards, after, behind, at the back	rgyab la
རྒྱབ་ལ་གོས་མེད	no clothes to wear	rgyab la gos med
རྒྱབ་ལ་རྒྱུག	run behind	rgyab la rgyug
རྒྱབ་ལག	backhand	rgyab lag
རྒྱབ་ལངས	supporter, backer, assister, reinforcement from the rear	rgyab langs
རྒྱབ་ལས་བྱུང	consequence	rgyab las byung
རྒྱབ་ལོག	turn back	rgyab log
རྒྱབ་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	turn one's back, rebel, revolt	rgyab log byed pa
རྒྱབ་ལོགས	back, behind	rgyab logs
རྒྱབ་ཤ	[of clothing] outside, cover; outside, cover [of a clothing]	rgyab sha
རྒྱབ་ཤིག་རྒྱབ་པ	backing, retrogress	rgyab shig rgyab pa
རྒྱབ་ཤུད	secession	rgyab shud
རྒྱབ་ཤོག	back cover	rgyab shog
རྒྱབ་ཤོག་དཀར་པོའི་དེབ	white paper	rgyab shog dkar po'i deb
རྒྱབ་ཤོག་སྔོན་པའི་དེབ	blue book	rgyab shog sngon pa'i deb
རྒྱབ་བཤད	talking behind some1's back, back-biting	rgyab bshad
རྒྱབ་བཤད་བྱེད	talk behind some1's back, back-bite	rgyab bshad byed
རྒྱབ་བཤུལ	spine	rgyab bshul
རྒྱབ་སྲུང	guard the rear, rear guard	rgyab srung
རྒྱབ་ལྷགས	breeze or wind from behind	rgyab lhags
རྒྱབ་ལྷས	zhva mo lcags mda' dang, 'bu khru gnyis kyi rgyab kyi lhas ma'i ming	rgyab lhas
རྒྱམ་ཚྭ	rgyam tshwa salt	rgyam tshwa
རྒྱམ་མཚོ་དམར་པོ	Red Sea	rgyam mtsho dmar po
རྒྱའི་ཀྲོ་མ	potato introduced from india	rgya'i kro ma
རྒྱའི་ནང	Chinese	rgya'i nang
རྒྱའི་གཙུག་ལག	Chinese astrological system	rgya'i gtsug lag
རྒྱར	rgya + la / ru	rgyar
རྒྱར་མ་ཆད	not fall into limits, no range, without any limitation	rgyar ma chad
རྒྱལ་ཀའི་ཚིག	playful word	rgyal ka'i tshig
རྒྱལ་ཀུན་སྐྱེད་ཡུམ	Prajnaparamita, the mother of all buddhas /victorious ones	rgyal kun skyed yum
རྒྱལ་ཀུན་དགོངས་བཅུད	the essential realization of all victorious ones	rgyal kun dgongs bcud
རྒྱལ་ཀུན་འདུད	Chakravarti Raja	rgyal kun 'dud
རྒྱལ་ཀྱི་ཤྲི	Gyalkyi Shri, "Splendor of the Conquerors", another name for Tsibri, in Latö	rgyal kyi shri
རྒྱལ་དཀའ	invincible, unconquerable	rgyal dka'
རྒྱལ་སྐྱོབ	national salvation	rgyal skyob
རྒྱལ་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	save the nation	rgyal skyob byed
རྒྱལ་ཁ	victory, success, triumph, victory, success	rgyal kha
རྒྱལ་ཁ་བསྒྱུར	to win, overpower/ manipulate	rgyal kha bsgyur
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ཐོབ་མཁན	victor, winner	rgyal kha thob mkhan
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ཐོབ་པ	triumph, victorious	rgyal kha thob pa
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ཐོབ་ཟིན་པ	won	rgyal kha thob zin pa
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ལྡན་པའི	triumphant	rgyal kha ldan pa'i
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ལེན	win, gain victory	rgyal kha len
རྒྱལ་ཁ་ལོན་པ	to win, succeed, triumph, prevail	rgyal kha lon pa
རྒྱལ་ཁག	nations	rgyal khag
རྒྱལ་ཁང	1) king's palace, castle; 2) royal temple)/ [rgyal po sku lnga sogs rgyal po'i rigs kyi srung ma'i lha khang]	rgyal khang
རྒྱལ་ཁང་ནང་བཞིན	palatial	rgyal khang nang bzhin
རྒྱལ་ཁབ	1) kingdom; 2) county, state, nation large region; 3) palace; 4) by the rulers dbang sgyur drag po byed pa'i rtsa 'dzugs shig yin, establishing armies, threats, courts, and jails etc.	rgyal khab
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི	national	rgyal khab kyi
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	form/ structure of government	rgyal khab kyi ngo bo
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་འདས་འཇུག་མཛད་པ	state funeral	rgyal khab kyi 'das 'jug mdzad pa
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་བང་མཛོད	national treasury/ exchequer	rgyal khab kyi bang mdzod
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་དབང་འཛིན་ལས་ཁུངས	offices of the state	rgyal khab kyi dbang 'dzin las khungs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	rgyal khab la dbang ba'i ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi dpal 'byor gyi rigs shig	rgyal khab kyi ma rtsa'i ring lugs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མི་སེར	citizen	rgyal khab kyi mi ser
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མིང	name of the reigning dynasty	rgyal khab kyi ming
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་གཙོ་བོ	head of state, ruler, chief national executive	rgyal khab kyi gtso bo
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཁམས	territory/ region of a kingdom/ country	rgyal khab kyi yul khams
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ས་ཁོངས	national territory	rgyal khab kyi sa khongs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་གསོལ་སྟོན	state banquet	rgyal khab kyi gsol ston
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་མཉམ་འབྲེལ	confederation [of allied states]	rgyal khab brgyad kyi mnyam 'brel
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཆེན་པོ	main government, imperial government	rgyal khab chen po
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིང་ལུགས	big nation chauvinism rgyal khab 'char 'god a yin lhan khang State Planning Commission rgyal khab gnyis dbar mthun bsgril yar	rgyal khab chen po'i ring lugs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཏུ་བསྡུ་ལེན	nationalization	rgyal khab tu bsdu len
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཏུ་བསྡུ་ལེན་བྱེད	nationalize	rgyal khab tu bsdu len byed
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་རྟགས་མཚན	national emblem	rgyal khab rtags mtshan
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ནང	inland rgyal khab nang 'gro sdod chog pa'i lag 'khyer - visa	rgyal khab nang
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཕྱིར་བཙོང	turn 1's back, betray	rgyal khab phyir btsong
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	machinery of state	rgyal khab 'phrul 'khor
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དབུ་བརྙེས	rule of a new country 1st tshugs pa	rgyal khab dbu brnyes
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	state capitalism	rgyal khab ma rtsa'i ring lugs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འཛུགས་བསྐྲུན	national construction	rgyal khab 'dzugs bskrun
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འཛུགས་ཁྲིམས	national law	rgyal khab 'dzugs khrims
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འཛུགས་པའི་སྒྲིག་གཞི	state agency	rgyal khab 'dzugs pa'i sgrig gzhi
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཞན་དུ	abroad	rgyal khab gzhan du
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཡིག་རྒྱ	diplomatic credentials	rgyal khab yig rgya
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་རིང་ལུགས	etatism	rgyal khab ring lugs
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་གཅེས	be patriotic	rgyal khab la gces
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་དབང་བ	state-owned	rgyal khab la dbang ba
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་དབང་བའི་ཁེ་ལེན	stateowned enterprise	rgyal khab la dbang ba'i khe len
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	system	rgyal khab la dbang ba'i lam lugs
ཨོཕ༹་སྟཏེ	ownership	of state
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་ཞེན	nationalism	rgyal khab la zhen
རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཤོར	lose 1's country	rgyal khab shor
རྒྱལ་ཁམས	empire, kingdom, country, habitation, places	rgyal khams
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ཀུན་འགེངས	fill all the kingdoms	rgyal khams kun 'gengs
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་གང	fill the land	rgyal khams gang
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་འགྲིམ་པ	roam over the kingdoms, rove over the countries	rgyal khams 'grim pa
ཁམས་འགྲིམས་པ	wandering freely from place to place	khams 'grims pa
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ཉི་མ་ཤར	the kingdom's sun is rising [makes everyone believe but when really act then is night, idiom for "making people believe everything is rosy"	rgyal khams nyi ma shar
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་པ	vagabond	rgyal khams pa
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་དཔེར་བླངས་ཀྱི་ཁྲིམས	written by srong btsan sgam pos fundamental law document gsum pa ste chos khrims lngar brten nas what was and wasn't right to do, and presenting the {mi chos gtsang ma bcu drug}	rgyal khams dper blangs kyi khrims
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ཕྱོགས་མེ་འགྲིམས་པ	roaming at random from place to place	rgyal khams phyogs me 'grims pa
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ཕྱོགས་མེད་འགྲིམས་པ	to roam through countries at random	rgyal khams phyogs med 'grims pa
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ཕྱོགས་མེད་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to travel from place to place with no particular destination	rgyal khams phyogs med la 'gro ba
རྒྱལ་ཁམས་མྱུལ་བ	explore a country	rgyal khams myul ba
རྒྱལ་ཁའི་སྒོ	Brandenburg Gate	rgyal kha'i sgo
རྒྱལ་ཁའི་ངང་དུ	victoriously	rgyal kha'i ngang du
རྒྱལ་ཁའི་འབྲས	fruits of victory	rgyal kha'i 'bras
རྒྱལ་ཁའི་འབྲས་བུ	fruits of victory	rgyal kha'i 'bras bu
རྒྱལ་ཁོངས	area possessed by a kingdom, national[ity]	rgyal khongs
རྒྱལ་ཁོངས་ཀྱི་བཅའ་ཁྲིམས	naturalization laws	rgyal khongs kyi bca' khrims
རྒྱལ་ཁོངས་གཉིས་སུ་གཏོགས་པ	dual nationality	rgyal khongs gnyis su gtogs pa
རྒྱལ་ཁྲི	throne	rgyal khri
རྒྱལ་ཁྲིམས	national law, imperial rule, government	rgyal khrims
རྒྱལ་ཁྲིམས་འཆའ་བ	draw up a law, give laws	rgyal khrims 'cha' ba
རྒྱལ་ཁྲོམ	royal gathering rgyal mkhan chen grags pa rgyal mtshan Gyal Khenchen 23rd abbot of Labrang	rgyal khrom
ཊཤི	khyil: 1762-1837	Tashi
རྒྱལ་མཁར་ཆོས་རྫོང་བ	{rgyal mkhar chos rdzong ba} festival [r]	rgyal mkhar chos rdzong ba
རྒྱལ་མཁར་གཞུང་ཆུ	{rgyal mkhar gzhung chu}	rgyal mkhar gzhung chu
རྒྱལ་གུར	royal pavilion rgyal gyi khri 'phang 'dzegs pa'i gong sel exorcism to accede to the throne of the king	rgyal gur
རྒྱལ་གྱི་རྩིབ་རི	Tsibri of Gyal	rgyal gyi rtsib ri
རྒྱལ་གྱི་མཚན་མོ	December	rgyal gyi mtshan mo
རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	month of december	rgyal gyi zla ba
རྒྱལ་གྱིས་ཉ་བ	full-moon day of decjan	rgyal gyis nya ba
རྒྱལ་གྱུར་ཅིག	to you the victory!	rgyal gyur cig
རྒྱལ་གྲོན	ADC to king of Bhutan	rgyal gron
རྒྱལ་གླིང་ཚོགས་པ	Gyeling Tsokpa; or (brgyad gling) A Sakya Monastery in Lower Dranang Valley	rgyal gling tshogs pa
རྒྱལ་གླུ	1) national anthem; 2) song from a certain country	rgyal glu
རྒྱལ་གླུད	ransom for the king	rgyal glud
རྒྱལ་དགོང	class of spirits	rgyal dgong
རྒྱལ་འགོང	Spirit King; Gyalgong, "monkdemon"	rgyal 'gong
རྒྱལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་རིགས	developmental lineage	rgyal 'gyur gyi rigs
རྒྱལ་འགྲན	1) rgyal kha sur thob kyi 'gran bsdur; 2) rgyal btsugs te 'gran pa	rgyal 'gran
རྒྱལ་རྒྱུད	royal (line, family, lineage)	rgyal rgyud
རྒྱལ་སྒོ	gate	rgyal sgo
རྒྱལ་བརྒྱུད	dynasty	rgyal brgyud
རྒྱལ་རྔ	gong [used for announcement]. Syn {'khar rnga}	rgyal rnga
རྒྱལ་གཅེས	patriot[ism][ic], 1 who highly values his country	rgyal gces
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་ཆེན་པོ	patriot	rgyal gces chen po
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་འཐབ་རྩོད	patriotic struggle	rgyal gces 'thab rtsod
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་དྲག་ཤུགས་ལམ་སྲོལ	fascism	rgyal gces drag shugs lam srol
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་སྤྱི་ཆིངས	patriotic pact	rgyal gces spyi chings
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་སྤྱི་འབྲུ	patriotic public grain	rgyal gces spyi 'bru
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་མི་སྣ	patriots	rgyal gces mi sna
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཙང་སྦྲའི་ལས་འགུལ	patriotic campaign for better hygiene	rgyal gces gtsang sbra'i las 'gul
རྒྱལ་གཅེས་རིང་ལུགས	patriotism	rgyal gces ring lugs
རྒྱལ་ཆས	regal accouterments	rgyal chas
རྒྱལ་ཆེན	great king	rgyal chen
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་ཁྲབ་རིས	armor of the great kings	rgyal chen khrab ris
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་མཆོད་ཐབས	method of honoring the Great [Guardian] Kings [of the four directions], often done prior to a extensive sadhana	rgyal chen mchod thabs
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་ཐོ	pole for the Great Kings (put up outside a retreat)	rgyal chen tho
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་སྡེ་བཞི	four orders of the great kings, class of the four great kings. Syn {phyogs skyong} guardian of the four directions. Syn {rgyal chen sde bzhi} Four Great / Guardian [directional) Kings, the Four Mig...	rgyal chen sde bzhi
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས	the great king Vaishravana	rgyal chen rnam thos sras
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞི	four great kings [r]	rgyal chen bzhi
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞི་འཁོར་དང་བཅས	the four great kings along with their retinues	rgyal chen bzhi 'khor dang bcas
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞི་པའི་རྣམས	the four great kings	rgyal chen bzhi pa'i rnams
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞི་རིས	the [god] realm of the four great kings	rgyal chen bzhi ris
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞིའི་རིགས་གི་ལྷ	the gods of the abodes of the Four Great Kings	rgyal chen bzhi'i rigs gi lha
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞིའི་རིས	region of the four great kings, one of the twenty eight classes of gods in the {'dod khams} desire realm	rgyal chen bzhi'i ris
Vཨེསསེལ	Bearers. The crests of the seven mountain ranges, the sun, the moon, and all the stars also belong to the abodes of the Four Great Kings.	Vessel
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་བཞིའི་རིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods in the Abode of the Four Great Kings {ri rab kyi bang rim bzhi dang, ri bdun gyi kha khyer dang, go la'i rlung gi gzhi sogs la gnas} reside on the fourth terrace of Mount Sumeru, on the cr...	rgyal chen bzhi'i ris kyi lha
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་བཞི	1) heavens of the Four Great Kings, [first {'dod lha}. 2) a god of this heaven. 3) the four Great Kings / directional guardians; n. of the first of the 6 sensual god realms/desire god realms. 4) {'...	rgyal chen rigs bzhi
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་བཞི་སོགས	the Four Great kings and their followers	rgyal chen rigs bzhi sogs
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་བཞིའི་ལྷ	the gods of the abode of the four great kings	rgyal chen rigs bzhi'i lha
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་ལྷ	type of lha	rgyal chen rigs lha
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིས་བཞི	the abodes Four Great Kings	rgyal chen ris bzhi
རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིས་བཞི་པའི་ལྷ	the gods in the first of {'dod lha rigs drug} live mostly on {lhun po'i bang rim} the [four] terraces of Mt. Sumeru. 1) {gzhong thogs} n. of a yaksha class who resides on the seashore at the foot o...	rgyal chen ris bzhi pa'i lha
རྒྱལ་ཆོས	buddhahood constituents	rgyal chos
རྒྱལ་མཆེད	Prince brothers. [In the context of King Trisong Deutsen, his three sons: Muney Tsenpo, Murub Tsenpo and Mutri Tsenpo	rgyal mched
རྒྱལ་མཆོག	supreme conqueror, supremely victorious	rgyal mchog
རྒྱལ་མཆོག་བཅུ་དྲུག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the 16th Karmapa, hierarch of the karma Kagyü sect	rgyal mchog bcu drug pa chen po
རྒྱལ་མཆོག་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རྡོ་རྗེ	the supremely victorious Choying Dorje	rgyal mchog chos dbyings rdo rje
རྒྱལ་མཆོག་རྣམ་གསུམ	CHN	rgyal mchog rnam gsum
རྒྱལ་མཆོག་རིན་ཆེན	yoga tantra buddha of the S direction in rnal 'byor rgyud	rgyal mchog rin chen
རྒྱལ་ཇུས	government/ national policy	rgyal jus
རྒྱལ་འཇོག་པ	place a bet	rgyal 'jog pa
རྒྱལ་གཉེར	1) after a country has set aside capital a caretaker; 2) state owned/ managed	rgyal gnyer
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ཁེ་ལེས	state run enterprise	rgyal gnyer khe les
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ནགས་ར	national forest	rgyal gnyer nags ra
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་དཔལ་འབྱོར	state-owned economy	rgyal gnyer dpal 'byor
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ཕུགས་ར	state-owned livestock farm	rgyal gnyer phugs ra
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ཚོང་ལས	state-run trade/ commerce/ business	rgyal gnyer tshong las
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ཞིང་ར	state-run farm	rgyal gnyer zhing ra
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་བཟོ་ལས	state-owned industry	rgyal gnyer bzo las
རྒྱལ་གཉེར་སློབ་གྲྭ	state-run schools	rgyal gnyer slob grwa
རྒྱལ་ཏོ་ར་མི	Gyalto Rami. Minister of King Trisong Deutsen; also spelled Gyatong Rakyim (rgya stong ra khyim)	rgyal to ra mi
རྒྱལ་རྟགས	1) national emblem; 2) spoils of battle	rgyal rtags
རྒྱལ་རྟེན་བྱེད་པ	to provide a support, back	rgyal rten byed pa
རྒྱལ་སྟོད	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	rgyal stod
རྒྱལ་སྟོན	victory/ coronation/ national celebration	rgyal ston
རྒྱལ་སྟོན་དུས་ཆེན	National Day	rgyal ston dus chen
རྒྱལ་བསྟན	the doctrine/ teachings of the Victorious 1/ Buddha	rgyal bstan
རྒྱལ་བསྟན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་རིས་མེད	all the Buddhist schools	rgyal bstan grub mtha' ris med
རྒྱལ་བསྟན་མེད་པ	a place without the teachings of the victorious ones	rgyal bstan med pa
རྒྱལ་ཐང	rgyal thang rdzong [yun nan zhing chen bde chen bod rigs rang skyong khul du yod, shar dang, lho, nub bcas ngos gsum du 'bri chus bskor nas yod cing, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung de rgyal thang ste...	rgyal thang
རྒྱལ་ཐང་སྲོང་བཙན་གླིང	{rgyal thang srong btsan gling} monastery [r]	rgyal thang srong btsan gling
རྒྱལ་ཐབས	kingdom	rgyal thabs
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་སྤྱི་བླུགས	the royal vase [instant empowerment]	rgyal thabs spyi blugs
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་སྤྱི་བླུགས་ཀྱི་དབང	empowerment of direct anointment rgyal thabs spyi blugs kyi dbang bskur gave him the full direct empowerment by the pouring of the conquerors' means rgyal thabs spyi blugs kyi dbang chen according ...	rgyal thabs spyi blugs kyi dbang
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་སྤྱི་བླུགས་དབང་ཆུས	by conferring the majestic empowerment rgyal thabs spyi blugs rdzogs pa'i dbang the entire direct empowerment through the 'pouring of the conquerors' means rgyal thabs spyi blugs rdzogs pa'i dbang	rgyal thabs spyi blugs dbang chus
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་སྤྱི་ལུགས	the royal vase [instant empowerment]	rgyal thabs spyi lugs
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་བུམ་དབང	empowerment of the vase that is the conqueror's [gd]	rgyal thabs bum dbang
རྒྱལ་ཐོ	king's list-pole	rgyal tho
རྒྱལ་ཐོ་གཏོར་མ	Gyalto torma; torma	rgyal tho gtor ma
པླཅེད་ཨོན	at the poles for the Guardian Kings	placed on
རྒྱལ་ཐོའི་མཆོད་གཏོར	offering torma at the Guardian King poles	rgyal tho'i mchod gtor
རྒྱལ་དམ	rgyal thang [a place?]	rgyal dam
རྒྱལ་དར	national flag	rgyal dar
རྒྱལ་དོན	national, state	rgyal don
རྒྱལ་དོན་ཁང	State Department	rgyal don khang
རྒྱལ་དོན་གྲོས་ཚོགས	national parliament/ assembly/ congress	rgyal don gros tshogs
རྒྱལ་དོན་བློན་ཆེན	Secretary of State	rgyal don blon chen
རྒྱལ་དོན་མ་དངུལ	national capital	rgyal don ma dngul
རྒྱལ་དོན་མ་རྩ	national capital	rgyal don ma rtsa
རྒྱལ་དོན་མཚམས་འདྲི	state visit	rgyal don mtshams 'dri
རྒྱལ་དོན་ཞལ་འདེབས	national contribution [collected from Tibetan by government in exile]	rgyal don zhal 'debs
རྒྱལ་དོན་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	national defense	rgyal don srung skyob
རྒྱལ་དོན་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་འགྲོ་གྲོན	national defense expenditure	rgyal don srung skyob 'gro gron
རྒྱལ་མདོས	worldly deities rgyal por bsngo ba'i yas mdos	rgyal mdos
རྒྱལ་འདབ	name of a tree	rgyal 'dab
རྒྱལ་འདུས	rgyal ba 'dus pa - terma by zhing gling	rgyal 'dus
རྒྱལ་སྡེ	rgyal po'i mnga' 'bangs	rgyal sde
རྒྱལ་སྡེ་ཞེས་པ	Jayasena	rgyal sde zhes pa
རྒྱལ་བརྡ	rgyal kha thob pa'i brda	rgyal brda
རྒྱལ་ནང	in the country, domestic, internal	rgyal nang
རྒྱལ་ནང་གི་དམག་འཁྲུག	civil war	rgyal nang gi dmag 'khrug
རྒྱལ་ནང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི	domestic and foreign	rgyal nang rgyal spyi
རྒྱལ་ནང་ཉོ་ཚོང	domestic trade	rgyal nang nyo tshong
རྒྱལ་ནང་ཚོང་ཁོམ	domestic market	rgyal nang tshong khom
རྒྱལ་ནང་གསར་བརྗེའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	revolutionary civil war	rgyal nang gsar brje'i dmag 'khrug
རྒྱལ་ནས	transcending, {brtson 'grus rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa} the feet of miraculous endeavor	rgyal nas
རྒྱལ་གནས་ཞུ་ཡིག	state of the union message	rgyal gnas zhu yig
རྒྱལ་པ	to conquer	rgyal pa
རྒྱལ་པའི་བཀའ་རབ་འབྱམས	infinite teachings of the buddhas	rgyal pa'i bka' rab 'byams
རྒྱལ་པར་བཤད་པ	detailed explanation, to explain / expound in detail	rgyal par bshad pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀྲི་ཀྲི	{rgyal po kri kris sangs rgyas 'od srung gi mchod rten rin chen bdun las grub pa bzhengs} King Krikin built a stupa ornamented with the seven precious gems for the Buddha Kasyapa	rgyal po kri kri
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀྲི་ཀྲིའི་རྨི་ལྟས་བཅུ	CHN	rgyal po kri kri'i rmi ltas bcu
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	part of {bka' thang sde lnga}, terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323)	rgyal po bka'i thang yig
རྒྱལ་པོ་སྐུ་ན་གཞོན་པ	youthful king	rgyal po sku na gzhon pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་བསྐྱལ་ནས	who had been driving the king	rgyal po bskyal nas
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཁྲི་རལ	King Triral	rgyal po khri ral
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེའུ་བཙན	King Trisong Deutsen	rgyal po khri srong lde'u btsan
རྒྱལ་པོ་འཁོར་བཅས	the king and his entourage	rgyal po 'khor bcas
རྒྱལ་པོ་འཁྱིལ་པ	conch coiled to the right	rgyal po 'khyil pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་འཁྱིལ་བ	SA dung dkar g.yas 'khyil, medicine, kind of precious stone, royal fillet	rgyal po 'khyil ba
རྒྱལ་པོ་དགའ་བོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	a king called Nanda	rgyal po dga' bo zhes bya ba
རྒྱལ་པོ་རྒྱན་འདེབས	1 or two kings &, many soldiers rdel rtsed rtse stangs shig	rgyal po rgyan 'debs
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཅན	royal, kingly	rgyal po can
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	maharaja	rgyal po chen po
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་སྡེ་བཞི	the Four Great Kings; see {rgyal chen sde bzhi} rgyal po chen po rnam thos sras Vaishravana, Vajrayana Buddhist god of wealth	rgyal po chen po sde bzhi
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	CHN the four great kings	rgyal po chen po bzhi
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞིའི་རིགས	the four great kings	rgyal po chen po bzhi'i rigs
རྒྱལ་པོ་འཇོམས	one who has killed the king, regicide	rgyal po 'joms
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཉིད	Your Majesty!, the king himself	rgyal po nyid
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཉེས་པར་དཀའི	of a king who is hard to please	rgyal po mnyes par dka'i
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	king-like resolve [of bodhichitta]	rgyal po lta bu'i sems bskyed
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཐོབ་པ	become king	rgyal po thob pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་རྒྱལ་མོའི་ཞ་མོ	crown 570	rgyal po dang rgyal mo'i zha mo
རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་འབངས་མི་ཐམས་ཅད	the king and all his subjects rgyal po dang rtsa khrims gnyis ldan constitutional monarchy	rgyal po dang 'bangs mi thams cad
རྒྱལ་པོ་དུང	King Sankha	rgyal po dung
རྒྱལ་པོ་དོ་ཧ	the Songs for the King, by Saraha	rgyal po do ha
རྒྱལ་པོ་དྲག་ཤུལ་ཅན	tyrant, despot	rgyal po drag shul can
རྒྱལ་པོ་མདོ་ལྔ	the five king sutras [bzang po spyod pa'i smon lam gyi mdo, rdo rje rnam 'joms khrus kyi mdo, shes rab snying po lta ba'i mdo, 'da' ka ye shes sgom pa'i mdo, bya ba ltung bshags bshags pa'i mdo	rgyal po mdo lnga
རྒྱལ་པོ་མདོ་བཅུ	the 10 king sutras [rgyal po mdo lnga + dpag tu med pa tse ring mdo, gos sngon can ni gzungs kyi mdo, gtsug tor gdugs dkar bzlog pa'i mdo, nor rgyun ma ni nor gyi mdo, yi ge gcig ma snying po'i mdo	rgyal po mdo bcu
རྒྱལ་པོ་འདིའི་རིང་ལ	during the reign of this king	rgyal po 'di'i ring la
རྒྱལ་པོ་འདོད་པ	wish to be a king	rgyal po 'dod pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྡེ་བརྒྱད	the eight "lde" kings [16th za nam zin lde &, 17th 'phrul nam gzhung btsan lde, 18th se snol gnam lde, 19th se snol po lde, 20th lde snol nam, 21st lde snol po, 22nd lde rgyal po, 23rd lde sprin bt...	rgyal po lde brgyad
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཕྲུག་གུ	prince	rgyal po phrug gu
རྒྱལ་པོ་བག་ལྡན	in the manner of a modest king [r]	rgyal po bag ldan
རྒྱལ་པོ་བུ་ཙམ	adopted child, foster child	rgyal po bu tsam
རྒྱལ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to rule, govern	rgyal po byed pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་དབུ་གཉིས་པ	the two headed king [r]	rgyal po dbu gnyis pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་སྦྱིང་བདག	patron king	rgyal po sbying bdag
རྒྱལ་པོ་མ་སྐྱེས་དགྲ	King Ajatasatru	rgyal po ma skyes dgra
རྒྱལ་པོ་མ་མོ་དང་བཙན	Gyalpo, mamo and tsen. The names for three types of evil spirits, the manifestations of the three poisons	rgyal po ma mo dang btsan
རྒྱལ་པོ་མང་པོས་བཀུར་བ	(sasmata: the world's 1st king	rgyal po mang pos bkur ba
རྒྱལ་པོ་མེད་པར	instead of the king	rgyal po med par
རྒྱལ་པོ་མྱ་ངན་མེད	chos rgyal mya ngan med	rgyal po mya ngan med
རྒྱལ་པོ་དམག་བརྒྱ་པ	the king w the 100 armies	rgyal po dmag brgya pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་སྨུག་པོ	that which destroys poison or kills klu demons, musk	rgyal po smug po
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཙན་དྲའི་མིང་ཅན་བཅུ་དགུ	the 19 kings named chandra CHN	rgyal po tsan dra'i ming can bcu dgu
རྒྱལ་པོ་གཙུག་ན་ནོར་བུའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of King Manicuda, Jeweled Topknot	rgyal po gtsug na nor bu'i rtogs brjod
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཙུན་མོ་འཁོར་བཅས	king, queen, and royal house hold	rgyal po btsun mo 'khor bcas
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཙོན་འཛིན	Parable of the Imprisoned King	rgyal po btson 'dzin
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཚང	palace	rgyal po tshang
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཚངས་བྱིན་ཞེས་པ	a king called Brahmadatta	rgyal po tshangs byin zhes pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཚངས་སྦྱིན་ཞེས	a king called Brahmadatta	rgyal po tshangs sbyin zhes
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་བྱེད	cock	rgyal po mtshon byed
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཛ	King Jah. The recipient of the Mahayoga teachings	rgyal po dza
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཞིན	in the manner of a king, right royally	rgyal po bzhin
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཞིའི་རིས	the domains of the four great kings [situated on top of mt sumeru], [under their power is also {ri bdun gyi kha khyer} and {nyi zla skar ma} 1) {sgra can} 2) {dgar 'phreng} 3) {mgul 'phreng} 4) {th...	rgyal po bzhi'i ris
རྒྱལ་པོ་བཞུགས་པ	race of kings	rgyal po bzhugs pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟས་གཙང	King Suddhodana	rgyal po zas gtsang
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟས་གཙང་འཁོར་བཅས	his father Sudhodana with his royal attendants	rgyal po zas gtsang 'khor bcas
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟས་གཙང་མ	Suddhodana, the father of Buddha Shakyamuni rgyal po zla ba la springs pa'i spring yig the letter of king zla ba la springs pa	rgyal po zas gtsang ma
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟླ་འོད་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	The Gift of King Chandrapabha rgyal po zla 'od du gyur tshe drag po'i mig	rgyal po zla 'od kyi rtogs brjod
ལ་མགོ་བོ་སྦྱིན་པ་དྲན	I remember being King Candraprabha and giving	la mgo bo sbyin pa dran
མཡ་ཧེཨད་ཏོ་ཐེ་ཕི༹ཨེརཅེ	eyed one	my head to the fierce
རྒྱལ་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན་སྙིང་པོ	King gzugs can snying po [sngar sh'akya mu ne'i skabs ma ga dha rgyal khab kyi rgyal po des bcom ldan 'das skyabs su bsten te dge bsnyen bsgrubs pa	rgyal po gzugs can snying po
དང་བཅས	King Bimbisara and a great assembly of ministers and others	dang bcas
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡབ་ཡུམ་གསུམ	the king and his (two) queens	rgyal po yab yum gsum
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	[king's] kingdom	rgyal po yod pa'i rgyal khab
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་པ	a great leader in all ways, endowed with such kingly qualities rgyal po g.yu sdong gser 'go - medicinal plant justicia janderussa	rgyal po yon tan dang ldan pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ར་མ་ན	king rama chandra of the ramayana	rgyal po ra ma na
རྒྱལ་པོ་ར་ཛ	King Indrabodhi of Zahor	rgyal po ra dza
རྒྱལ་པོ་རབ་སྣང	king who was born on the day buddha was born	rgyal po rab snang
རྒྱལ་པོ་རེ་རལ	{rgyal po re ral} ldum med.	rgyal po re ral
རྒྱལ་པོ་རོལ་སྟབས	posture w right leg extended and left bent	rgyal po rol stabs
རྒྱལ་པོ་རོལ་པའི་སྟབས	{zhabs gnyis rgyal po rol pa'i stabs su bzhugs pa} he has two legs and is seated in the royal posture	rgyal po rol pa'i stabs
རྒྱལ་པོ་རོལ་བའི་སྟབས	the posture of a revelling king/ royal playfulness [tse rig]	rgyal po rol ba'i stabs
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ངེས་པ་ལྔ	CHN 571 rgyal po la gtam bya ba rin po che'i	rgyal po la nges pa lnga
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་གདམས་པ	rgyal po gsal rgyal la gdams pa'i mdo [sutra teaches impermanence]	rgyal po la gdams pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་གདམས་པའི་མདོ	rajavavadaka	rgyal po la gdams pa'i mdo
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་སོགས་པས་སྐྲག་པ	fear of tyrants etc	rgyal po la sogs pas skrag pa
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས	{rgyal po lugs kyi bstan bcos} [r]	rgyal po lugs kyi bstan bcos
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལེགས་གཞེར་རྗེ	King Leksher	rgyal po legs gzher rje
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལོ་གསར	the king's new year (ceremony on the 2nd day of the 1st Tibetan month)	rgyal po lo gsar
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཤིང	rgyal po tree	rgyal po shing
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཤིང་བྱ་ཅན	King Shingja Chen	rgyal po shing bya can
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཤུལ་ཅན	tyrant, despot	rgyal po shul can
རྒྱལ་པོ་གཤིན་རྗེ	Lord of the Dead	rgyal po gshin rje
རྒྱལ་པོ་གསང་བ་སྤྱན་གཅིག	a medicine	rgyal po gsang ba spyan gcig
རྒྱལ་པོ་གསལ་རྒྱལ	King gsal rgyal [sngar rgya gar mnyan yod kyi rgyal po zhig yin pa de sh'akya mu ne 'khrungs pa'i lo dang zla tses 'dra zhing, khrir phebs rjes rtag tu bcom ldan 'das la chos zhus pas, de'i blon po...	rgyal po gsal rgyal
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྷ་སྲས	King Lhasey (9th Century). The second son of King Trisong Deutsen	rgyal po lha sras
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཨིན་དྲ་བོ་དྷི	King Indrabodhi / bhuti. An Indian king during the time of the Buddha who became a great accomplished master. He symbolizes the person of the highest caliber who can utilize sense pleasures as the ...	rgyal po in dra bo dhi
རྒྱལ་པོའི	regal, royal	rgyal po'i
རྒྱལ་པོའི་དཀོར་མཛོད	king's treasury	rgyal po'i dkor mdzod
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཀའ	king's command rgyal po'i bka' gser gyi me tog bcing ba	rgyal po'i bka'
ལྟར་སྤྱི་བོར་འཁུར	wore his advice like	ltar spyi bor 'khur
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐུ་གླུད	ritual substitute for the king	rgyal po'i sku glud
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐུ་ཚབ	king's representative	rgyal po'i sku tshab
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐུ་རིམ	rite for the well-being of the king	rgyal po'i sku rim
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐུ་བསྲུངས་པ	royal body guard	rgyal po'i sku bsrungs pa
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐོང་མདོས	ransom of expiation to appease the rgyal po	rgyal po'i skong mdos
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐྱེད་ཚལ	royal park/ pleasure grove	rgyal po'i skyed tshal
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	personage of the king's family, official	rgyal po'i skyes bu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁབ	1) palace; 2) Rajagriha [rgya gar gyi grong khyer chen po drug gi gras shig rajgir in india ancient capital of magadha] [tse rig]	rgyal po'i khab
ཁབ་ཏུ	in the royal city of Rajagriha	khab tu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁབ་ཏུ	in the city of Rajagriha	rgyal po'i khab tu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁམས	{rgyal srid}	rgyal po'i khams
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁྲི་སྟོན	coronation	rgyal po'i khri ston
རྒྱལ་པོའི་འཁོར་བཞི	CHN	rgyal po'i 'khor bzhi
རྒྱལ་པོའི་གོ་གནས	royalty	rgyal po'i go gnas
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ	SA rnam thos sras	rgyal po'i rgyal
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	[king's] kingdom	rgyal po'i rgyal khab
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of kings	rgyal po'i rgyal po
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཆད་པ	king's punishment, punishment that the law inflicts on any person	rgyal po'i chad pa
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཆས་ཅན	royal attire rgyal po'i mchod gnas nyang ting 'dzin	rgyal po'i chas can
བཟང་པོ	Nyang Tingdzin Zangpo, the teacher most venerated by the king	bzang po
རྒྱལ་པོའི་གཏན་སྲིད	most majestic ongoing/ continuous (state of) authentic being	rgyal po'i gtan srid
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྟགས	signs of royalty (umbrella, chowry), royal paraphernalia rgyal po'i drung du phyin nas zhus pa requested an audience with the king	rgyal po'i rtags
རྒྱལ་པོའི་གདུང	prince, scion of the royal family, son of a king, royal descendant	rgyal po'i gdung
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྣམ་གྲངས	enumeration of the names of kings	rgyal po'i rnam grangs
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྣམ་ཐར	1) king's biography; 2) in the Tibetan zlos gar aa ce lha mo'i nang rgyal po 'khrab mkhan gyi glu dbyangs	rgyal po'i rnam thar
རྒྱལ་པོའི་དཔྱ	king's ta	rgyal po'i dpya
རྒྱལ་པོའི་དཔྱད	present, tribute	rgyal po'i dpyad
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་ཉ་ལྟ་བུ	like the emissaries of a king	rgyal po'i pho nya lta bu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་ཉ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྤྲོ་བསྡུ	[the visualization for] emanating and absorbing like a king's emissaries	rgyal po'i pho nya lta bu'i spro bsdu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང	capital	rgyal po'i pho brang
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་འཁོར་གྱི་སྒོ	palace gate edifice of special design	rgyal po'i pho brang 'khor gyi sgo
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་གི་སྒོ་དྲུང་དུ	to the gates of the king's palace rgyal po'i pho brang du 'dug pa'i ltung	rgyal po'i pho brang gi sgo drung du
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་དུ་ཕྱིན	went to the palace	rgyal po'i pho brang du phyin
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	he went to the royal palace	rgyal po'i pho brang du phyin pa
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བུ	Mercury	rgyal po'i bu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བླ་གཏེར་བརྒྱ	100 treasures to support the king's life [r]	rgyal po'i bla gter brgya
སིམིལར་ཏོ་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	supporting talismans {bla gnas} described in history, ch five note 10 [gk-	similar to the life
རྒྱལ་པོའི་མི	personage of the king's family, official	rgyal po'i mi
རྒྱལ་པོའི་མྱུ་གུ	son of a king, prince	rgyal po'i myu gu
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཙུན་མོ	the queen, the king's wife	rgyal po'i btsun mo
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཙུན་མོ་རྒྱལ་བའི་འོད	the king's wife, Queen Jayaprabha rgyal po'i btsun mo sngon ma dbyar gnas	rgyal po'i btsun mo rgyal ba'i 'od
མ་ཞེས	Queen Varsika, the king's first wife 572	ma zhes
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཙུན་མོ་ལྟར	one of the {gcun thabs gsum}	rgyal po'i btsun mo ltar
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཙུན་མོ་ལྟར་ཞེས	{mo} 1 of the {gcun thabs gsum} [check original entry!!]	rgyal po'i btsun mo ltar zhes
རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཙུན་མོའི་འོས་སུ་མཆི	fit to become a queen	rgyal po'i btsun mo'i 'os su mchi
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཚལ	royal gardens, park	rgyal po'i tshal
རྒྱལ་པོའི་གཟའ	lo gza' brtsi tshul zhig lo re bzhin res gza' bdun po gang rung zhig 'char	rgyal po'i gza'
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རོལ་སྟབས	pose of reveling king	rgyal po'i rol stabs
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རོལ་ཐབས	posture of "royal enjoyment". With the right leg extended somewhat, as for example in Tara's posture. posture of royal ease	rgyal po'i rol thabs
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ལོ་ཁྲལ	yearly royal ta	rgyal po'i lo khral
རྒྱལ་པོའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	accountrements of kingship	rgyal po'i longs spyod
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྲས	Prince, the prince	rgyal po'i sras
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྲས་མོ	princess, princess	rgyal po'i sras mo
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྲིད་པ	kingdom; see {rgyal srid}	rgyal po'i srid pa
རྒྱལ་པོའི་སླས	queen's apartments in a palace, queen's attendants rgyal po'i lha mo pad ma ldan sras dang	rgyal po'i slas
བཅས་པ	the king's wife, the goddess Padmavati, and her son	bcas pa
རྒྱལ་པོར་མངའ་གསོལ་བ	crowned him king	rgyal por mnga' gsol ba
རྒྱལ་པོས་བཀྲབས་པ	chosen, selected gain and loss, win by the king	rgyal pos bkrabs pa
རྒྱལ་པོས་ཆད་པ་ཕོག	the king will punish me rgyal pos de dang rtse bas sras 'khrungs	rgyal pos chad pa phog
རྒྱལ་པོས་གསོད་པ	be executed by the authority of the king	rgyal pos gsod pa
རྒྱལ་དཔོག་པ	examiner/ analyzer	rgyal dpog pa
རྒྱལ་དཔོགས་པ	the Followers of Jaimini	rgyal dpogs pa
རྒྱལ་དཔོན་ཆུང་ཆུང	suzerain	rgyal dpon chung chung
རྒྱལ་སྤྱི	i) international. 2) also used as an abbr. for the U.N. ¦ rgyal spyi rogs ram tshogs pa U.N. Relief Organization. [mss]	rgyal spyi
རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་གྲོས་མཐུན	international agreement	rgyal spyi gros mthun
རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་གཉིས་པ	2nd International	rgyal spyi gnyis pa
རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་དང་པོ	1st International	rgyal spyi dang po
རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་གསུམ་པ	3rd International	rgyal spyi gsum pa
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཁྱོན	international scope/ sphere, global	rgyal spyi'i khyon
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཁྲིམས་ར	International Court of Justice	rgyal spyi'i khrims ra
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	international law	rgyal spyi'i khrims lugs
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་གོ་གནས	international position/ status/ prestige	rgyal spyi'i go gnas
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	internationale [song]	rgyal spyi'i glu dbyangs
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་སྒེར་ཁྲིམས	international private law	rgyal spyi'i sger khrims
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་སྒྲ་རྟགས	international phonetic alphabet	rgyal spyi'i sgra rtags
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ངལ་རྩོལ་དུས་ཆེན	International Labor Day, May 1	rgyal spyi'i ngal rtsol dus chen
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་མངའ་འབྲེལ	League of Nations	rgyal spyi'i mnga' 'brel
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་བཅའ་ཁྲིམས	international law	rgyal spyi'i bca' khrims
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཆུ་ཚོད	international standard, world level	rgyal spyi'i chu tshod
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཉོ་ཚོང	international trade	rgyal spyi'i nyo tshong
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་གནས་ཚུལ	international situation	rgyal spyi'i gnas tshul
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་སྤྱི་ཁྲིམས	international public law rgyal spyi'i dmangs gtso'i bud med mna' 'brel tshogs pa - Women's International Democratic Federation	rgyal spyi'i spyi khrims
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཚོང་ར	international market	rgyal spyi'i tshong ra
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཞི་བདེ	international peace	rgyal spyi'i zhi bde
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་རིང་ལུགས	internationalism	rgyal spyi'i ring lugs
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་རོགས་རམ་ཚོགས	UN Relief Organization rgyal spyi'i slog grwa ba'i mnyam 'brel	rgyal spyi'i rogs ram tshogs
ཚོགས་པ	International Union of Students	tshogs pa
རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་གསོ་རིག་ཡིག་ཆ	international medical records	rgyal spyi'i gso rig yig cha
རྒྱལ་ཕམ	victory and defeat, winning and losing	rgyal pham
རྒྱལ་ཕམ་འབྱེད	1) decide victory or defeat/ gain or loss, see who wins and loses	rgyal pham 'byed
རྒྱལ་ཕམ་འབྱེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲན་བསྡུར	final heat [of a race]	rgyal pham 'byed byed kyi gran bsdur
རྒྱལ་ཕམ་སུ་ལ་ཡང་ལ་བྱུང་མེད	no 1 won or lost	rgyal pham su la yang la byung med
རྒྱལ་ཕྱི	abroad, external	rgyal phyi
རྒྱལ་ཕྲན	small [sub-]kingdom, principality	rgyal phran
རྒྱལ་ཕྲན་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve Minor Kingdoms. When human beings eventually settled in Tibet, the country was divided into twelve kingdoms, namely, {mchims yul gru shul} ruled by {mchims rje gu yod}, {zhang zhung} ruled b...	rgyal phran bcu gnyis
རྒྱལ་ཕྲན་མཉམ་འབྲེལ	federation, commonwealth, federal union	rgyal phran mnyam 'brel
རྒྱལ་བ	Jina, 'Conqueror'. Victorious One. Same as a buddha; one who has conquered over the four maras	rgyal ba
རྒྱལ་བ་ཀ	kar ma pa bco lnga pa, gyalwa karmapa, 15th	rgyal ba ka
རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ་བཅོ་ལྔ་པ	the 15th Gyalwa Karmapa, {mkha' khyab rdo rje}	rgyal ba kar ma pa bco lnga pa
རྒྱལ་བ་ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས	Gyalwa Longchen Rabjam :1308-1363 rgyal ba klong chen rab 'byams dri med 'od zer - Longchen Rabjam Drimey Özer (1308-1363), one of the most eminent masters of the Nyingma tradition rgyal ba klong c...	rgyal ba klong chen rab 'byams
ཨོད་གཟེར	Longchen Rabjam; Drimey Özer, 1308-1369. A major lineage master and writer of the Nyingma lineage. Longchen Rabjam was an incarnation of Princess Pema Sal, the daughter of King Trisong Deutsen, to ...	od gzer
རྒྱལ་བ་སྐུ་ལྔ	1) the five buddha families, five buddhas. 2) the five kayas of the victorious ones	rgyal ba sku lnga
རྒྱལ་བ་སྐུ་ཕྲེང	reincarnation series of the Dalai Lamas [h]	rgyal ba sku phreng
རྒྱལ་བ་སྐུ་ཕྲེང་གསུམ་པ	3rd Dalai Lama [h]	rgyal ba sku phreng gsum pa
རྒྱལ་བ་བསྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Dalai lama vii, 1708-1857	rgyal ba bskal bzang rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་བ་འཁོར་བཅས	the Buddha and his followers	rgyal ba 'khor bcas
རྒྱལ་བ་འཁོར་བཅས་མཆོད་པ	made offerings to the Victorious One and his assembly	rgyal ba 'khor bcas mchod pa
རྒྱལ་བ་གོང་མ	1) past buddhas. 2) the Dalai Lama	rgyal ba gong ma
རྒྱལ་བ་དགེ་འདུན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Dalai Lama; see {dge 'dun rgya mtsho} rgyal ba dge 'dun rgya mtsho'i rnam thar biography of dge 'dun rgya mtsho,	rgyal ba dge 'dun rgya mtsho
ཌལཻ་ལམ་ཨཱིཨཱི	(1476-1542)	Dalai lama II
རྒྱལ་བ་དགོངས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of	rgyal ba dgongs kyi brgyud pa
རྒྱལ་བ་དགོངས་རྒྱུད	direct transmission of the Buddhas	rgyal ba dgongs rgyud
རྒྱལ་བ་དགོངས་བརྒྱུད	mind lineage of the victorious 1s, the buddha's mind transmission, lineage of buddha-overallintentionality, the jinas's mind lineage/ transmission, 'the buddha thought lineage'	rgyal ba dgongs brgyud
རྒྱལ་བ་དགོངས་པའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	intentional lineage of the conquerors	rgyal ba dgongs pa'i brgyud pa
ཨོཕ༹་མིནད	to-mind transmission of victorious ones*	of mind
ལིནེཨགེ་ཨོཕ༹་མིནད	to-mind transmission of victorious ones; intentional lineage of the conquerors. Syn {rgyal ba dgongs pas brgyud pa}; transmission of the wisdom mind of the buddhas	lineage of mind
རྒྱལ་བ་དགོངས་པས་བརྒྱུད་པ	the mindtransmission of the victorious 1s	rgyal ba dgongs pas brgyud pa
རྒྱལ་བ་དགྱེས་པའི་ལམ	the path enjoyed by the victorious ones	rgyal ba dgyes pa'i lam
རྒྱལ་བ་རྒོད་ཚང	famous 'brug pa bka' brgyud master	rgyal ba rgod tshang
རྒྱལ་བ་རྒོད་ཚང་པ	Gyalwa Götsangpa. (1189-1258). Literally, 'Vulture Nest Dweller.' A great master in the early Drukpa Kagyü lineage; also known as Gönpo Dorje (mgon po rdo rje). A rebirth of Jetsün Milarepa. Among ...	rgyal ba rgod tshang pa
རྒྱལ་བ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Gyalwa Gyatso; Ocean of Jinas / Victorious Ones; a form of Avalokiteshvara	rgyal ba rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་བ་རྒྱ་མཚོ་འི་ཚོགས	ocean like assembly of buddhas	rgyal ba rgya mtsho 'i tshogs
རྒྱལ་བ་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཚོགས	ocean like assembly of buddhas	rgyal ba rgya mtsho'i tshogs
རྒྱལ་བ་ལྔ་པ	5th Dalai Lama rgyal ba lnga pa chen po ngag dbang blo	rgyal ba lnga pa
བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Dalai lama v (16171682) rgyal ba lnga pa'i dag snang rgya can terma by the 5th Dalai Lama	bzang rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་བ་མཆོག་དབྱངས	Gyalwa Choyang. A close disciple of Guru Rinpoche who attained accomplishment through the practice of Hayagriva and later was incarnated as the Karmapas. Born in clan of Nganlam in the Phen Valley,...	rgyal ba mchog dbyangs
རྒྱལ་བ་མཆོད་པ	honoring the victorious ones	rgyal ba mchod pa
རྒྱལ་བ་ཉིད	1) victory. 2) the Buddha himself	rgyal ba nyid
རྒྱལ་བ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	by the Buddha himself	rgyal ba nyid kyis
རྒྱལ་བ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གསུང་རབ	the Excellent Speech / Words of the victorious ones	rgyal ba nyid kyis gsung rab
རྒྱལ་བ་གཉིས་པ	[the 8'th {dkar phyogs rgyal ba gnyis pa} or 23'rd {nag phyogs rgyal ba gnyis pa} of the month]	rgyal ba gnyis pa
རྒྱལ་བ་གཉིས་པ་ཀློང་ཆེན་ཞབས	second buddha, venerable Longchenpa	rgyal ba gnyis pa klong chen zhabs
རྒྱལ་བ་གཉིས་པའི་གསུང་རབ	the writings of that second Buddha, [Longchenpa] rgyal ba thams cad kyi dgongs pa'i bcud	rgyal ba gnyis pa'i gsung rab
བླངས	distilled the essence of all the Conqueror's wisdom rgyal ba thams cad kyi 'phrin las kyi rang gzugs dpal chen rdo rje gzhon nu - 574 Great Glorious Vajra Kumara, the very embodiment of all the con...	blangs
རྒྱལ་བ་ཐུ་བོ	rtsangs pa	rgyal ba thu bo
རྒྱལ་བ་ཐུབ་པའི་དབང་པོ	Victorious King of the Munis	rgyal ba thub pa'i dbang po
རྒྱལ་བ་ཐོད་དཀར	name of founder of Bonpo tradition	rgyal ba thod dkar
རྒྱལ་བ་ཐོབ་མཁན	champion	rgyal ba thob mkhan
རྒྱལ་བ་དང་པོ	[the 3'rd {dgar phyogs rgyal ba dang po} or 18'th {nag phyogs rgyal ba dang po} of the month]	rgyal ba dang po
རྒྱལ་བ་དམ་པ	teacher of the Indian exponent of doctrine rgyal ba pa	rgyal ba dam pa
རྒྱལ་བ་དོན་ཀུན་གྲུབ་པ	the victorious Siddhartha	rgyal ba don kun grub pa
རྒྱལ་བ་དྲུག་པ	Sixth Buddha. Refers to Vajradhara	rgyal ba drug pa
རྒྱལ་བ་མདོ་ལྔ	CHN	rgyal ba mdo lnga
རྒྱལ་བ་འདུས་པ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by zhing gling	rgyal ba 'dus pa
རྒྱལ་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Buddha Vajradhara, the victorious Vajra-Holder	rgyal ba rdo rje 'chang
རྒྱལ་བ་རྣམས་ཐབས	methods of the Buddhas	rgyal ba rnams thabs
རྒྱལ་བ་པ	[naked] Jain	rgyal ba pa
རྒྱལ་བ་དཔག་བསམ་དབང་པོ	the victorious Gyalwa Pagsam Wangpo (15931641), the first Drukchen. The immediate re-embodiment of Pema Karpo (1593-1653?)	rgyal ba dpag bsam dbang po
རྒྱལ་བ་བྱམས་པ	Buddha Maitreya, the victorious Loving One	rgyal ba byams pa
རྒྱལ་བ་བློ་བཟང་གྲགས་པ	Tsong Khapa's name rgyal ba dben sa pa blo bzang don grub Gyalwa Wensapa Lobsang Döndrub (1504-66); one of the six siddhas of the Ganden Mahamudra rgyal ba dben sa pa blo bzang don grub 1504-66 - W...	rgyal ba blo bzang grags pa
རྒྱལ་བ་འབྱམས་པ	Maitreya, the next Buddha who will appear after Shakyamuni	rgyal ba 'byams pa
རྒྱལ་བ་མར་མེ་མཛད	the jina Dipamkara	rgyal ba mar me mdzad
རྒྱལ་བ་ཚངས་དབྱངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	see {tshangs dbyangs rgya mtsho}	rgyal ba tshangs dbyangs rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་བ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	1 of 4 great teachers of bon	rgyal ba tshul khrims
རྒྱལ་བ་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད	a dhyani buddha	rgyal ba tshe dpag med
རྒྱལ་བ་འོད་དཔག་མེད	Buddha Amitabha	rgyal ba 'od dpag med
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡང་དགོན	a master of the Drukpa Kagyu School	rgyal ba yang dgon
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡང་དགོན་པ	1213-1287	rgyal ba yang dgon pa
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས	the Victors, Father and Sons [the main master in a specific context and his chief disciples]	rgyal ba yab sras
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས་རྣམ་གཉིས	1) Dalai and Panchen Lama	rgyal ba yab sras rnam gnyis
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	his holiness the Dalai Lama	rgyal ba yid bzhin nor bu
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡུམ་ལྔ	five female buddhas	rgyal ba yum lnga
རྒྱལ་བ་རིགས་ལྔ	5 jinas, SA rnam par snang mdzod, mi bskyod pa, rin chen 'byung ldan, 'od dpag med, don yod grub pa	rgyal ba rigs lnga
རྒྱལ་བ་རིགས་ལྔའི་གནས	yun nan zhing chen gyi rgyal thang rdzong khongs su yod pa'i gnas ri zhig	rgyal ba rigs lnga'i gnas
རྒྱལ་བ་རིགས་དྲུག	[TRS 137-2] 5 + Vajradhara	rgyal ba rigs drug
རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པ་ཆེ	His Holiness the Dalai lama, Precious Conqueror, [Dalai Lama]	rgyal ba rin pa che
རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	title of dalai lama	rgyal ba rin po che
རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕོ་བྲང	SA po ta la	rgyal ba rin po che'i pho brang
རྒྱལ་བ་ལོ་རས	Gyalwa Lorey. A great master of the Drukpa Kagyü school. See 'Lorepa.'	rgyal ba lo ras
རྒྱལ་བ་ལོ་རས་པ	1187-1250 - Lorepa, Gyalwa, an eminent master of the Drukpa Kagyü lineage rgyal ba longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku sambhogakaya buddha rgyal ba longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku Sambhogakaya buddha	rgyal ba lo ras pa
རྒྱལ་བ་སེང་གེའི་ང་རོ	1 of sman bla brgyad	rgyal ba seng ge'i nga ro
རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅས	Victorious ones and their sons. Same as buddhas and bodhisattvas	rgyal ba sras bcas
རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་དང་བཅས་རྣམས	the Victorious Ones and their sons and daughters	rgyal ba sras dang bcas rnams
རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་དང་བཅས་པ	the Victorious Ones and their sons / heirs	rgyal ba sras dang bcas pa
རྒྱལ་བ་གསུམ་པ	[the 13th {dkar phyogs rgyal gsum pa} or 28th {nag phyogs gsum pa} of the month]	rgyal ba gsum pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	Jina mandalas. The mandalas of the five buddhas	rgyal ba'i dkyil 'khor
རྒྱལ་བའི་བཀའ	the teachings of Buddha, the word of the victorious one	rgyal ba'i bka'
རྒྱལ་བའི་བཀའ་ཚད་མ	the perfect measure of the words of the victorious ones rgyal ba'i bka' yi ge na gcig yan chad 'dor rgyu med par thams cad gdams par	rgyal ba'i bka' tshad ma
ཤར་བ	for whom every syllable of the Buddha's word arose as a pith instruction	shar ba
རྒྱལ་བའི་བཀའ་རབ་འབྱམས	infinite teachings of the buddhas	rgyal ba'i bka' rab 'byams
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྐུ་གཟུགས	{mos gus kyi rten rgyal ba'i sku gzugs mjal ba} to see representations of the conqueror to inspire his devotion 575	rgyal ba'i sku gzugs
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཁམས	man's buddha-nature, pristine cognition sensitive to the facticity of being, province or sphere of buddhas	rgyal ba'i khams
གདེང	The assurance that, though 1 has heard that the enlightened attributes in the fields of the conquerors are limitless, these are pure in their delightful sameness because 1 has reached	gdeng
ཐེ་གྲོཨུནད་ཨིན་ཝཧིཆ་ཐེརེ་ཨིས་ནོཏ་ཨ་སིངླེ་ཧཻར	tip lacking in the diverse qualities of the buddhas, derived from the awareness that is 1's own essence GD	the ground in which there is not a single hair
རྒྱལ་བའི་དགོངས་པ	the mind of the jinas / victorious ones	rgyal ba'i dgongs pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དགོངས་པ་བརྒྱུད་པ	conquerors of the mind lineage	rgyal ba'i dgongs pa brgyud pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དགོངས་འི་རྒྱུད་པ	buddha overall -intentionality	rgyal ba'i dgongs 'i rgyud pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་རྒྱལ་ཚབ	regent of tibet who administers during minority of dalai lama	rgyal ba'i rgyal tshab
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཅོད་པན	famous king of kashmir bout 7th century	rgyal ba'i cod pan
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཆོས་སྒོ	entranceways to the Buddha's teachings rgyal ba'i chos sgo brgyad khri bzhi stong - the 84 dharma doors of the victorious 1s rgyal ba'i chos sgo brgyad khri bzhi stong - the 84000 Dharma doors of t...	rgyal ba'i chos sgo
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	the jina essence, the essence of the victorious 1s [buddha nature]	rgyal ba'i snying po
རྒྱལ་བའི་རྟེན	Buddhist images / shrine objects	rgyal ba'i rten
རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་པ	religion of buddha, buddhism	rgyal ba'i bstan pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious Buddha's teaching rgyal ba'i bstan pa lung dang rtogs pa'i	rgyal ba'i bstan pa rin po che
བདག་ཉིད་ཅན	the conqueror's doctrine, which consists of scripture and realization	bdag nyid can
རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་སྲུང	guardians of the Buddhadharma, of the teachings of the Victorious One	rgyal ba'i bstan srung
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྲས	(general name for a bodhisattva)	rgyal ba'i thugs kyi sras
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཐུགས་སྲས	spiritual son of buddha	rgyal ba'i thugs sras
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཐེག་པ	the Buddhist vehicles	rgyal ba'i theg pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དུས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four holy days of the Victorious 1	rgyal ba'i dus chen bzhi
རྒྱལ་བའི་གདུང་འཛིན	Gyalwey Dungdzin. One of the twelve manifestations	rgyal ba'i gdung 'dzin
རྒྱལ་བའི་མདོ་བཅུ	CHN	rgyal ba'i mdo bcu
རྒྱལ་བའི་གནས	victory	rgyal ba'i gnas
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྤྱན	flower resembling buddha eye used in medicine, a flower	rgyal ba'i spyan
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྤྲུལ་པ	emanation of the	rgyal ba'i sprul pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དབང་པོ	king/ lord of the victorious 1s	rgyal ba'i dbang po
རྒྱལ་བའི་དབང་པོ་ཀར་མ་པ	Karmapa, the Lord of Victorious Ones rgyal ba'i dbang po thams cad mkhyen pa blo bzang bstan pa'i 'byung gnas ngag dbang lung rtogs rgya mtsho dpal bzang po'i zhal snga nas kyi rnam par thar pa mdo...	rgyal ba'i dbang po kar ma pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་དབང་པོ་ཡབ་སྲས་གཉིས	the Lord of Victorious Ones, Father and Son; for instance: Dalai and Panchen Lama rgyal ba'i dbang po rang byung rdo rje Rangjung Dorje, the Lord of Victorious Ones	rgyal ba'i dbang po yab sras gnyis
རྒྱལ་བའི་མྱུ་གུ	1) son of the victorious ones. 2) Dza Drama Drubchen; Paltrül Rinpoche's guru known as Son of the Victors]	rgyal ba'i myu gu
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཚབ	vice-regent of buddha, name of maitreya	rgyal ba'i tshab
རྒྱལ་བའི་མཛད་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the eight major deeds of the Buddha	rgyal ba'i mdzad chen brgyad
རྒྱལ་བའི་གཞི	(general name for a bodhisattva)	rgyal ba'i gzhi
རྒྱལ་བའི་འོད	glory of buddha, name of bodhisattva, one bright like the victorious one, a bodhisattva	rgyal ba'i 'od
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡུམ	the mother of the victorious 1s, [prajna-paramita] [tse rig]	rgyal ba'i yum
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡུམ་གྱི་དབུ་མ	the Middle Way based on the Prajnaparamita scriptures	rgyal ba'i yum gyi dbu ma
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡུམ་རྒྱས་པ	sutra of the expanded mother of the victorious ones	rgyal ba'i yum rgyas pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the victorious 1s	rgyal ba'i ye shes
རྒྱལ་བའི་རིང་བསྲེལ	from the funeral pyre of a buddha little bone lumps, can be almost jewel like	rgyal ba'i ring bsrel
རྒྱལ་བའི་ལུང་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the Buddha's teachings of statement and realization	rgyal ba'i lung rtogs kyi bstan pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	advisor of conquerors	rgyal ba'i bshes gnyen
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས	{rgyal sras}, prince, sons of the buddha [tse]	rgyal ba'i sras
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ	son of the victorious ones	rgyal ba'i sras po
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ་སྒྲ་ཅན་འཛིན	Rahula, the jina putra	rgyal ba'i sras po sgra can 'dzin
རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང	speech of the victorious 1/Buddha	rgyal ba'i gsung
རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་ཚད་མ	authentic words of the victorious one, the Buddha's perfect words 576	rgyal ba'i gsung tshad ma
རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་བཞིན་ནུས་པ	to be able to act in accordance with the words of the Buddha	rgyal ba'i gsung bzhin nus pa
རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་རབ	spoken by the victorious one, the excellent words of the victorious one	rgyal ba'i gsung rab
དོན	the complete meaning of the Buddha's teachings	don
རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་རབ་མདོ་སྡེ	the sutras among the excellent words of the Victorious One	rgyal ba'i gsung rab mdo sde
རྒྱལ་བར་དཀའ	1 of 10 stages of perfection	rgyal bar dka'
རྒྱལ་བར་འགྱུར	be victorious	rgyal bar 'gyur
རྒྱལ་བས་བྱིན	gift of conquerors, given by conquerors	rgyal bas byin
རྒྱལ་བས་ལུང་བསྟན	predicted by the Buddha	rgyal bas lung bstan
རྒྱལ་བུ	prince	rgyal bu
རྒྱལ་བུ་རྒྱལ་བྱེད	a prince in koshala	rgyal bu rgyal byed
རྒྱལ་བུ་རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚལ	Jetavana Grove	rgyal bu rgyal byed kyi tshal
རྒྱལ་བུ་སྙིང་པོ	Gyalbu Nyingpo	rgyal bu snying po
རྒྱལ་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ	Prince Siddhartha	rgyal bu don grub
རྒྱལ་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་མདོ	{rgyal bu don grub kyi mdo}	rgyal bu don grub kyi mdo
རྒྱལ་བུའི་སྟོང་ཐུན	The parable of the Prince	rgyal bu'i stong thun
རྒྱལ་བོ་ཀྲི་ཀྲིའི་རྨི་ལྟས་བཅུ	[Tse rig]	rgyal bo kri kri'i rmi ltas bcu
རྒྱལ་བྱིད་ཚལ	Jetavana	rgyal byid tshal
རྒྱལ་བྱིད་ཚལ་གནས	Jetavanya	rgyal byid tshal gnas
རྒྱལ་བྱེད	conquering	rgyal byed
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚལ	Jetavana Grove	rgyal byed kyi tshal
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ལྕགས	the iron rod of dominion	rgyal byed lcags
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་མ	a goddess	rgyal byed ma
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཚལ	a grove where buddha resided	rgyal byed tshal
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཚལ་དུ	Jeta's Grove	rgyal byed tshal du
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཚལ་ན་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	100 yr after the death of the Buddha spreading from the sthaviras, gnas brtan pa, 1 of the three sthavira schools, gnas brtan sde pa gsum	rgyal byed tshal na gnas pa'i sde
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཚལ་གནས	Jeta vaniya	rgyal byed tshal gnas
རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཤིང	a tree, SA rnam rgyal shing	rgyal byed shing
རྒྱལ་བློན	the king's ministers	rgyal blon
རྒྱལ་བློན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་དྲུག	the six qualities of kings and ministers	rgyal blon gyi yon tan drug
རྒྱལ་བློན་འབངས་འཁོར	kings, ministers and subjects	rgyal blon 'bangs 'khor
རྒྱལ་བློན་སྲིད་ཚོགས	ruling circle/ clique	rgyal blon srid tshogs
རྒྱལ་བློན་ལྷན་ཚོགས	session of the Tibetan Council of Ministers [bka' shag] and Dalai Lama	rgyal blon lhan tshogs
རྒྱལ་དབང	powerful Victorious One	rgyal dbang
རྒྱལ་དབང་ཀ་རྨ་པ	the Gyalwang Karmapa	rgyal dbang ka rma pa
རྒྱལ་དབང་ཀར་མ་པ	the Gyalwang Karmapa Lama, head of the Karma Kagyü / Kamtsang lineage; Gyalwang Karmapa, king of the victorious ones rgyal dbang kar ma pa mkha' khyab rdo	rgyal dbang kar ma pa
རྒྱལ་དབང་ལྔ་པ	the 5th Dalai Lama	rgyal dbang lnga pa
རྒྱལ་དབང་ལྔ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Fifth Dalai Lama	rgyal dbang lnga pa chen po
རྒྱལ་དབང་རྗེ	great master of the 'brug pa bka' rgyud tradition	rgyal dbang rje
རྒྱལ་དབང་བསྟན་འཇིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{rgyal dbang bstan 'jin rgya mtsho}	rgyal dbang bstan 'jin rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་དབང་བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the present Dalai Lama	rgyal dbang bstan 'dzin rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་དབང་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	the Omniscient King of the Victorious Ones, Karmapa	rgyal dbang thams cad mkhyen pa
པ་བསྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the 7th Dalai Lama	pa bskal bzang rgya mtsho
རྒྱལ་དབང་པད་མ	epithet of padma sambhava	rgyal dbang pad ma
རྒྱལ་དབང་པད་མ་ཀ་ར	Padmakara, the king of the victorious ones. He is called the king of victorious ones because he conquered the enemy of the four maras. Padmakara means Lotus Born (padma 'byung gnas)	rgyal dbang pad ma ka ra
རྒྱལ་དབང་པད་མའི་རིང་ལུགས	the victorious lotus-born guru's tradition, the tradition of Padma, king of the victorious 1s	rgyal dbang pad ma'i ring lugs
རྒྱལ་དབང་པད་མའི་ལུགས	the tradition of the powerful Jina Padma Sambhava, the tradition of Padma, the kind of the jinas	rgyal dbang pad ma'i lugs
རྒྱལ་དབང་འབྲུག་པ	12th 'jigs med pad ma dbang chen, b. 1963 [tsd]	rgyal dbang 'brug pa
རྒྱལ་དབང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Gyalwang Rinpoche; 1) Dalai Lama. 2) the Karmapa	rgyal dbang rin po che
རྒྱལ་འབག་དམར་པོ	at the time of the Tibetan zlos gar aa ce lha mo 'khrab a red mask worn by the king	rgyal 'bag dmar po
རྒྱལ་འབངས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	national economy	rgyal 'bangs dpal 'byor
རྒྱལ་འབངས་ཡོང་བབ	national income	rgyal 'bangs yong bab
རྒྱལ་འབངས་སློབ་གསོ	national education	rgyal 'bangs slob gso
རྒྱལ་འབངས་གསར་བརྗེ	national revolution	rgyal 'bangs gsar brje
རྒྱལ་འབྲས	skyu ru ra tree	rgyal 'bras
རྒྱལ་འབྲེལ	international	rgyal 'brel
རྒྱལ་འབྲེལ་འཆིང་ཡིག	international treaty	rgyal 'brel 'ching yig
རྒྱལ་འབྲེལ་རིང་ལུགས	internationalism	rgyal 'brel ring lugs
རྒྱལ་མ	1) Tara; 2) goddess Uma	rgyal ma
རྒྱལ་མ་རོང	{rgyal ma rong} district	rgyal ma rong
རྒྱལ་མའི་བུ	Saturn	rgyal ma'i bu
རྒྱལ་མོ	queen, Her Majesty	rgyal mo
རྒྱལ་མོ་ཀ་ར	sugar from rgyal mo, coarse sugar used in medicine	rgyal mo ka ra
རྒྱལ་མོ་ག་གོན	nyung ma che legs shig	rgyal mo ga gon
རྒྱལ་མོ་རྔུལ་ཆུ	{rgyal mo rngul chu} river [1) rang rgyal lho nub sa khul gyi chu bo chen po zhig yin, stod rgyud kyi nag chu dang, shag chu, sog chu bcas gdang la ri rgyud kyi nub ngos nas byung zhing, bod rang s...	rgyal mo rngul chu
རྒྱལ་མོ་ལྟ་བུ	queenly	rgyal mo lta bu
རྒྱལ་མོ་དྲང་ཟོར་མ	a deity	rgyal mo drang zor ma
རྒྱལ་མོ་ཙ་བ་རོང	{rgyal mo tsa ba rong} [in si khron zhing chen khongs rnga ba, mdo smad kyi rong chen gsum mam bzhir grags pa'i nang tshan rgyal	rgyal mo tsa ba rong
རྒྱལ་མོ་ཚ་བ་རོང	Gyalmo Tsawarong. A district between eastern Tibet and China	rgyal mo tsha ba rong
རྒྱལ་མོ་རོང	a district in Eastern Tibet	rgyal mo rong
རྒྱལ་མོའི་ག་གོན	a place	rgyal mo'i ga gon
རྒྱལ་དམངས	people	rgyal dmangs
རྒྱལ་དམངས་གྲོས་ཁང	people's assembly	rgyal dmangs gros khang
རྒྱལ་སྨད	constellation, SA rgyal	rgyal smad
རྒྱལ་བཙན་ཐེའུ་རང	three kinds of spirits: gyalpo, tsen, and teurang	rgyal btsan the'u rang
རྒྱལ་བཙེན་དམ་སྲི	demons, evil forces	rgyal btsen dam sri
རྒྱལ་མཙན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགུ་རྩེག	{rgyal mtsan bkra shis dgu rtseg} med. herb [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus@pas mgo'i rus chag gso ba dang, chu ser la phan]	rgyal mtsan bkra shis dgu rtseg
རྒྱལ་རྩེ	{rgyal rtse rdzong} [r]	rgyal rtse
རྒྱལ་རྩེ་རྫོང	{rgyal rtse rdzong} [in gzhis ka rtse myang chu stod rgyud kyi, in 1904 bod mi dmangs kyis dbyin ji'i btsan 'dzul 'gog pa'i dmag 'thab byed sa rdzong ri zhes pa 'dir yod	rgyal rtse rdzong
རྒྱལ་ཚབ	disciple of tsong kha pa, viceregent, regent, bde srid or regent of tibet, would-be successor of a king, crown prince, regent	rgyal tshab
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་རིགས་ལྔ	five families of regent teachers	rgyal tshab kyi ston pa rigs lnga
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཀྱི་དབང	regency	rgyal tshab kyi dbang
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་གྱི་གོ་འཕང	regency	rgyal tshab gyi go 'phang
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་གྲགས་པ་དོན་གྲུབ	the iv, 1547-1613	rgyal tshab grags pa don grub
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Regent	rgyal tshab chen po
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རྗེ	rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen	rgyal tshab rje
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རྗེ་དར་མ་རིན་ཆེན	alias {rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen} (13641432)	rgyal tshab rje dar ma rin chen
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རྗེ་དྷར་མ་རིན་ཆེན	13641432 - Gyaltsab Je, Dharma Rinchen, one of Tsongkhapa's chief disciples	rgyal tshab rje dhar ma rin chen
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	Omniscient Gyaltsab Je	rgyal tshab thams cad mkhyen pa
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་དམ་པ	1) dharma successor/ regent; 2) Maitreya	rgyal tshab dam pa
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་དམ་པར་དབང་བསྐུར	empowered him as the foremost representative [of the Buddhas]	rgyal tshab dam par dbang bskur
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་དར་མ་རིན་ཆེན	{rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen} [r]	rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་པའི་སྐྱེས་རབས་བདུན	CHN	rgyal tshab pa'i skyes rabs bdun
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་སྤྱི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དབང	See {rgyal thabs spyi lugs kyi dbang}	rgyal tshab spyi lugs kyi dbang
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་བེ་རོ་རྗེ	regent Vairochana	rgyal tshab be ro rje
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་བྱེད་པ	become their representative	rgyal tshab byed pa
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་མི་ཕམ་མགོན་པོ	the regent Invincible Protector. Syn Maitreya	rgyal tshab mi pham mgon po
རྒྱལ་ཚོགས	UN [= dzam gling mnyam 'brel rgyal tshogs]	rgyal tshogs
རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་བརྟག་ཞིབ་མཁན	UN observer	rgyal tshogs brtag zhib mkhan
རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་ཚོགས་ཆེན	UN General Assembly	rgyal tshogs tshogs chen
རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	UN Security Council	rgyal tshogs srung skyob lhan tshogs
རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་ལྷན་རྒྱས	UN General Assembly	rgyal tshogs lhan rgyas
རྒྱལ་ཚོང	traitor	rgyal tshong
རྒྱལ་ཚོང་སྒེར་ཚོག་སྲིད་དབང	traitorous dictatorship	rgyal tshong sger tshog srid dbang
རྒྱལ་མཚན	standard (erected on summit of mount Meru) 1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person, standard of victory, armorial flag, banner of victory in buddhism, persona...	rgyal mtshan
རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཀྱི་རྩེ་མོའི་དཔུང་རྒྱན	a dharani rgyal mtshan kyi rtse mo'i dpung rgyan final of a victory banner	rgyal mtshan kyi rtse mo'i dpung rgyan
རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགུ་རྩེག	{rgyal mtshan bkra shis dgu rtseg} med. herb	rgyal mtshan bkra shis dgu rtseg
རྒྱལ་མཚན་གྱི་ཏོག	top point of a banner	rgyal mtshan gyi tog
རྒྱལ་མཚན་གྱི་རྩེ་མོའི་ནོར་བུ	jewel final of a victory banner	rgyal mtshan gyi rtse mo'i nor bu
རྒྱལ་མཚན་གྲགས	fame, ornament	rgyal mtshan grags
རྒྱལ་མཚན་བསྒྲེངས་པ	raised the victory banner	rgyal mtshan bsgrengs pa
རྒྱལ་མཚན་འཆང	deity dbang phyug chen po	rgyal mtshan 'chang
རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཏོག	finial jewel etc topping a victory banner	rgyal mtshan tog
རྒྱལ་མཚན་མ	ensign of good fortune	rgyal mtshan ma
རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཙུགས་པ	{sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan btsugs pa} raised there for three years the victory banner of spiritual practice	rgyal mtshan btsugs pa
རྒྱལ་མཚན་རྩེ་མོ	the pinnacle of the victory banner	rgyal mtshan rtse mo
རྒྱལ་མཚན་འཛིན་པ	to hold the victory banner	rgyal mtshan 'dzin pa
རྒྱལ་མཚན་སེང་གེ	abbot of dga' ldan, 1678-1756	rgyal mtshan seng ge
རྒྱལ་མཚམས	borders/ edges of a kingdom/ country	rgyal mtshams
རྒྱལ་མཚམས་རིས་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	internationalism	rgyal mtshams ris med ring lugs
རྒྱལ་འཚོང	traitor	rgyal 'tshong
རྒྱལ་མཛད	'buddha activity,' deeds of the victorious 1s	rgyal mdzad
རྒྱལ་འཛིན	1) after a country has set aside capital a caretaker; 2) state owned/ managed	rgyal 'dzin
རྒྱལ་འཛུགས	bet	rgyal 'dzugs
རྒྱལ་བརྫུས	leather from rgyal thang, dper blangs nas Tibetan kind of black leather	rgyal brdzus
རྒྱལ་ཞན	patriotism	rgyal zhan
རྒྱལ་གཞིས	king's palace w fields and servants	rgyal gzhis
རྒྱལ་བཞིན་པ	winning	rgyal bzhin pa
རྒྱལ་ཟམ	large bridge	rgyal zam
རྒྱལ་ཟུར	ex-regent	rgyal zur
རྒྱལ་ཟླ་བ	1) 12th month; 2) middle month of winter	rgyal zla ba
རྒྱལ་གཟིམ	Private Secretary of the King of Bhutan	rgyal gzim
རྒྱལ་ཡབ	father	rgyal yab
རྒྱལ་ཡིག	diplomatic credentials	rgyal yig
རྒྱལ་ཡུམ	royal mother, the Queen Mother, title for the mother of the Dalai Lama or a king	rgyal yum
སྒྲ	ornament adding word, kyang yang 'ang [tshig phyi ma dang mthun pa'am, mi mthun par ston pa dang, gzhi'am don gzhan zhig la sdud cing sbyor ba'i phrad gzhan dbang can zhig ste, 'di la kyang yang 'a...	sgra
རྒྱལ་ཡུལ	the sphere/ domain of the buddhas	rgyal yul
རྒྱལ་ཡོང	nationwide, national	rgyal yong
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས	nationwide, national	rgyal yongs
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་གྱི་ཁྱོན	nationwide	rgyal yongs gyi khyon
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་འཐུས་མིའི་ཚོགས་ཆེན	national assembly/ congress	rgyal yongs 'thus mi'i tshogs chen
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་དྲུང་ཆེ	Secretary of State rgyal yongs mi dmangs 'thus mi'i tshogs	rgyal yongs drung che
ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱུན་ལས་ལྷན་ཁང	standing committee of the national people's congress	chen gyi rgyun las lhan khang
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཚོགས་ཆེན	national assembly/ congress	rgyal yongs tshogs chen
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཚོགས་འདུ	national assembly/ congress [Bhutan]	rgyal yongs tshogs 'du
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་གཞོན་ནུའི་འཐུས་མི	national youth representative	rgyal yongs gzhon nu'i 'thus mi
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཡོང་བབ	national income	rgyal yongs yong bab
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ལས་དོན་གྲོས་ཚོགས	National Working Conference	rgyal yongs las don gros tshogs
རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	national defense	rgyal yongs srung skyob
རྒྱལ་རབས	annals (of kings)	rgyal rabs
རྒྱལ་རབས་མཁས་པ	historian	rgyal rabs mkhas pa
རྒྱལ་རབས་ལྔ	CHN	rgyal rabs lnga
རྒྱལ་རབས་ལྔ་ན	five generations later,	rgyal rabs lnga na
རྒྱལ་རབས་ལྡན་པ	historical	rgyal rabs ldan pa
རྒྱལ་རབས་རིམ་བྱུང	successive generations [of kings/ rulers]	rgyal rabs rim byung
རྒྱལ་རབས་སུ་གནས་པའི	historic	rgyal rabs su gnas pa'i
རྒྱལ་རབས་སུ་མ་བཀོད་གོང་གི	prehistoric	rgyal rabs su ma bkod gong gi
རྒྱལ་རབས་གསལ་བའི་མེ་ལོང	rgyal rabs rnams kyi byung tshul gsal ba'i me long zhes bya ba, [spyir snod bcud kyi chags tshul dang, rgya gar gyi rgyal rabs, ston pa byon tshul, bstan pa dar tshul mdo 579 tsam smras nas, bye br...	rgyal rabs gsal ba'i me long
རྒྱལ་རིགས	1) kshatriya caste, warrior/ royal caste; 2) king's family, princely descent	rgyal rigs
རྒྱལ་རིགས་ཀྱི་གཤེན་པོ	gshen po of the family of the victorious one	rgyal rigs kyi gshen po
རྒྱལ་རིགས་ཆ་ཤས	petty king, vassal, feudatory prince	rgyal rigs cha shas
རྒྱལ་རིགས་ཆུང་མ	queen	rgyal rigs chung ma
རྒྱལ་རིགས་ཐིག་ལེ	prince, son of a king	rgyal rigs thig le
རྒྱལ་རིགས་མ	queen	rgyal rigs ma
རྒྱལ་རིགས་མོ	lady of the military caste of india	rgyal rigs mo
རྒྱལ་རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེས་པ	one of the Ksatriya clan	rgyal rigs su skyes pa
རྒྱལ་རོང	rgyal mo tsha ba rong place	rgyal rong
རྒྱལ་རོང་ཆོས་མཛད	blo bzang thogs	rgyal rong chos mdzad
རྒྱལ་ལ་བཙུགས་པ	place a bet	rgyal la btsugs pa
རྒྱལ་ལམ	city	rgyal lam
རྒྱལ་ལོ	king year	rgyal lo
རྒྱལ་ལོ་སྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	king-like aspiration [first self, this others] rgyal shor bran g.yog - colonial slaves	rgyal lo sta bu'i sems bskyed
རྒྱལ་གཤེན	gshen of the victorious one	rgyal gshen
རྒྱལ་ས	kingdom, royal seat, capital	rgyal sa
རྒྱལ་ས་ཟིན་པ	seize the throne, hold the royal seat, capture/ rule the kingdom	rgyal sa zin pa
རྒྱལ་སང་བསྐོས་པ	raised to the throne	rgyal sang bskos pa
རྒྱལ་སར་བསྐོས	elected to throne	rgyal sar bskos
རྒྱལ་སར་བསྐོས་ཏེ	ascend to the throne	rgyal sar bskos te
རྒྱལ་སར་བཏོན	install/ enthrone as regent	rgyal sar bton
རྒྱལ་སར་འདོན་པ	raise to the throne	rgyal sar 'don pa
རྒྱལ་སར་གཤིགས	reached the kingdom	rgyal sar gshigs
རྒྱལ་སར་གཤེགས	reached the kingdom	rgyal sar gshegs
རྒྱལ་སེན	mischievous spirits	rgyal sen
རྒྱལ་སྲས	spiritual heir/ child of the victorious ones	rgyal sras
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད	behavior of a rgyal sras	rgyal sras kyi spyod
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct	rgyal sras kyi spyod pa
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟ་བུ་ཐེ་ཨོཅེཨན	like activities of the bodhisattvas	rgyal sras kyi spyod pa rgya mtsho lta bu the ocean
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོང་བའི་ཡུལ	principality	rgyal sras kyis skyong ba'i yul
རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན	author of {sgrol dkar yid bzhin 'khor lo'i sgo nas tshe sgrub}	rgyal sras skal bzang thub bstan
རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྐུ་མཆེད་གསུམ	CHN. [Tse rig]	rgyal sras sku mched gsum
དཔལ	1295-1369 - Ngulchu Tokmey Zangpo Pal, a great Kadampa master	dpal
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཆེན་པོ	great bodhisattva	rgyal sras chen po
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	Prince Chökyi Lodrö. The second son of King Trisong Deutsen who later incarnated as Chokgyur Lingpa	rgyal sras chos kyi blo gros
རྒྱལ་སྲས་རྟག་ཏུ་ངུ	Ever-Weeping Bodhisattva; see {rtag tu ngu}	rgyal sras rtag tu ngu
རྒྱལ་སྲས་བསྟན་འཛིན་རབ་རྒྱས	16381696 - Bhutanese ruler and religious leader	rgyal sras bstan 'dzin rab rgyas
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཐུ་པོ	chief bodhisattva	rgyal sras thu po
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཐོགས་མེད	Gyalsey Togmey, the Unimpeded Bodhisattva	rgyal sras thogs med
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཐོགས་མེད་བཟང་པོ	{rgyal sras thogs med bzang po} [r]	rgyal sras thogs med bzang po
རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	by Shabkar	rgyal sras sprul pa'i glegs bam
རྒྱལ་སྲས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	Jina-son Bodhisattva, bodhisattvas, the sons of the victorious ones	rgyal sras byang chub sems dpa'
རྒྱལ་སྲས་བྱང་སེམས	buddha sons, bodhisattvas	rgyal sras byang sems
རྒྱལ་སྲས་མ	{rgyal sras ma} [r]	rgyal sras ma
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཞི་བ་ལྷ	the bodhisattva Shantideva	rgyal sras zhi ba lha
རྒྱལ་སྲས་གཞན་ཕན་མཐའ་ཡས	Gyalsey Shenpen Thaye: 1740/1800-?	rgyal sras gzhan phan mtha' yas
རྒྱལ་སྲས་རིགས་གསུམ་མགོན་པོ	the three	rgyal sras rigs gsum mgon po
ཕ༹མིལཡ་ལོརད་ཇིན	sons [r]	family lord jina
ཐར་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིགས་པ	Drop of Ambrosia, the Perfect Liberation of the Precious Bodhisattva Tokmey, biography of Ngulchu Tokmey, by Palden Yeshe rgyal sras rin po che thogs med pa'i rnam	thar bdud rtsi'i thigs pa
རྒྱལ་སྲས་རིན་པོ་ཆེས	as Gyalse Rinpoche says:	rgyal sras rin po ches
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ལག་ལེན་སུམ་ཅུ་པ	the Thirtyseven-fold Practices of a Bodhisattva, composed by Gyalsey Togme	rgyal sras lag len sum cu pa
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ལག་ལེན་སོ་བདུན་མ	Thirty	rgyal sras lag len so bdun ma
སེབེ༹ན	fold Practice of a Bodhisattva, by Ngulchu Tokmey Zangpo	Seven
རྒྱལ་སྲས་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva son of the victorious ones	rgyal sras sems dpa'
རྒྱལ་སྲས་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ	bodhisattva mahasattva	rgyal sras sems dpa' chen po
རྒྱལ་སྲས་བྷ་ཀུ་ལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	{rgyal sras bha ku la rin po che} [tulku of Ladakh]	rgyal sras bha ku la rin po che
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ལྷ་རྗེ	Gyalsey Lhaje, the second prince-son of Trisong Deutsen rgyal sras lha rje mchog grub rgyal po Prince Chokdrub Gyalpo; [had thirteen reincarnations as a tertön, the first of which was {sangs rgyas ...	rgyal sras lha rje
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ལྷ་རྗེའི་ཡང་སྲིད་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 incarnations of Prince lharje gyelse lharje chokdrup gyelpo [son of mutik tsenpo and the immediate reincarnation of trhisong detsen according to jamgo"n kongtru"l, great biography of khyentse ri...	rgyal sras lha rje'i yang srid bcu gsum
དོབེན་གྱམཙོ	o" and, simultaneously, zur paksi ?s' kya-o", tragom cho"ki dorje and, simultaneously, khyung-nak s' kyadar, yarje orgyen lingpa, to"l ngakcang letro lingpa, nesar khyentsei wangcuk and, simultaneo...	doben gyamtso
ཙེཝང	tsel, orgyen cho"je lingpa	tsewang
དེཝེཨི་དོརྗེ	tsel, and khyentse rinpoche, ie pema o"sel do-nga lingpa [gk	dewei dorje
གྱཙོ	ö and, simultaneously, Zur	Gyatso
པཀསི་ཥཀྱ	ö, Tragom Chökyi Dorje and, simultaneously, Khyung-nak Shakya-dar, Yarje Orgyen Lingpa, Töl Ngakchang Letro Lingpa, Nesar Khyentse Wangchuk and, simultaneously, Ngari Panchen, Ebacok Garwang Leytro...	Paksi Shakya
ཌེཝེཡ་ཌོརྗེ	Tsal, and Khyentse Rinpoche, i.e. Pema Ösel Do-nga Lingpa. [GM]	Dewey Dorje
རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་འཛིན	Gyalsey Orgyen Tendzin ( 1701-7/8), son of Tertön Nyima Drakpa	rgyal sras o rgyan bstan 'dzin
རྒྱལ་སྲིད	dominion, government, political authority, kingdom, empire, royalty, royal domain, kingship, monarchy, state affairs	rgyal srid
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཀྱིས་ལན	thugs la dgongs - pondered the inherent difficulties of governing	rgyal srid kyis lan
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྐྱོང	defender of the realm	rgyal srid skyong
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་བ	govern a kingdom	rgyal srid skyong ba
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་བ་ཡིན	he is supposed to rule / the hope of the kingdom	rgyal srid skyong ba yin
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས	parliament, congress	rgyal srid gros tshogs
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་རྒྱས་པ	empire	rgyal srid rgyas pa
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཆེ་ལྡན	endowed with great royalty	rgyal srid che ldan
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཆོས་བཞིན་བསྐྱངས	ruled the kingdom with the Dharma	rgyal srid chos bzhin bskyangs
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བདུན	7 emblems of state (wheel, jewel, queen, minister, horse, elephant, commander-in-chief), SA rgyal srid rin chen	rgyal srid bdun
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་རྣམ་བདུན	the seven royal possessions, the seven attributes of kingship or of a universal monarch, the seven royal emblems: The precious wheel, jewel, queen, minister, elephant, horse, and general. 1) {'khor...	rgyal srid rnam bdun
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྣ་བདུན	the 7 royal possessions [r]	rgyal srid sna bdun
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤངས	gave up the kingdom	rgyal srid spangs
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང	each kingdoms highest government office	rgyal srid spyi khyab khang
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་འཕྲོགས་པ	had taken over the kingdom	rgyal srid 'phrogs pa
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་འབངས་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ	his retinue, his kingdom and his subjects	rgyal srid 'bangs 'khor dang bcas pa
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བཟུང	ruled the kingdom	rgyal srid bzung
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བཟུང་བ	assumed the throne, came to the throne, gained the throne {yab gshegs rjes rgyal srid bzung ba} when his father died and he gained the throne	rgyal srid bzung ba
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་རིན་ཆེན	precious possessions of a cakravartin, nor bu, btsun mo, blon po, glang po, rta mchog, khyim bdag, dmag dpon rin po che)	rgyal srid rin chen
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་བདུན	the 7 precious royal possessions	rgyal srid rin chen sna bdun
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་བདུན	see {rgyal srid rin chen sna bdun}	rgyal srid rin po che sna bdun
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ལ་བཀོད	crowned in the kingdom	rgyal srid la bkod
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ལ་རིགས་པ་མ་ཡིན	unsuited to rule	rgyal srid la rigs pa ma yin
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྲས་ལ་གཏད	entrusted the kingdom to his son	rgyal srid sras la gtad
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྲུང་བ	defend a state against enemies	rgyal srid srung ba
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བསྲུང་བའི་བླ་མ	Rajyaraksaguru, the minister entrusted with guarding the kingdom	rgyal srid bsrung ba'i bla ma
རྒྱལ་སྲིན	king and demoness	rgyal srin
རྒྱལ་སྲིས་སྤོང་བ	abdicate	rgyal sris spong ba
རྒྱལ་སྲུང	national defense [rgyal khab cig gis so so'i mnga' khongs dang bdag dbang srung skyob byed pa'i bkod sgrig gi bya ba mtha' dag]	rgyal srung
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་པུའུ	Defense Department, Ministry of Defense	rgyal srung pu'u
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་པུའུ་ཀྲང	Secretary/ Minister of Defense	rgyal srung pu'u krang
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་དམག་དཔུང	national defense army	rgyal srung dmag dpung
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་འཛུགས་བསྐྲུན	national defense construction	rgyal srung 'dzugs bskrun
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་ལུས་རྩོལ	national defense physical training	rgyal srung lus rtsol
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་ས་མཚམས	national defense border	rgyal srung sa mtshams
རྒྱལ་སྲུང་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལཁན་ཁང	national defense Commission	rgyal srung u yon lkhan khang
རྒྱལ་གསུང	king's speech/ words/ command	rgyal gsung
རྒྱལ་གསུང་རྗེས་འགྲོ	ka la ping ka bird	rgyal gsung rjes 'gro
རྒྱལ་གསུང་ཡང་ལག	singing bird	rgyal gsung yang lag
རྒྱལ་བསེན	male and female gdug 'dre	rgyal bsen
རྒྱས་བསྐྲུན	expansion, extension, elaboration	rgyas bskrun
རྒྱས་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	expand, extend, elaborate	rgyas bskrun byed
རྒྱས་ཁོགས	stupid because of old age	rgyas khogs
རྒྱས་འཁོགས	worn out by age	rgyas 'khogs
རྒྱས་འཁྲུགས	heat blood increasing 'khrugs tshad nad, ro stod gzer &, lud pa khrag tu 'byung ba zhig	rgyas 'khrugs
རྒྱས་གྱུར་རིགས	developing gotra i.e. we have gathered accumulations, done practices, cleared away defilements and gradually come to realization. The naturally existing gotra is unconditioned, the dharmadhatu	rgyas gyur rigs
རྒྱས་གྲས	full length [show]	rgyas gras
རྒྱས་འགེབས	1) gzhung tham phab pa; 2) rigs 'gre btang ba	rgyas 'gebs
རྒྱས་འགྱུར་ཀྱི་རིགས	evolving potential	rgyas 'gyur kyi rigs
རྒྱས་འགྱུར་གྱི་རིགས	developed potential, evolved family (trait). the affinity to be developed, One of {rigs rnam gnyis} the enlightened family of inner growth. the fully expanded potential {rang bzhin gnas rigs} the g...	rgyas 'gyur gyi rigs
རྒྱས་འགྱུར་རིགས	growing affinity with being	rgyas 'gyur rigs
རྒྱས་འགྲེལ	extensive commentary	rgyas 'grel
རྒྱས་བཅད	having resolved, decide/ be convinced, regulating/ setting prices/ taxes/ schedules/ interest rates etc	rgyas bcad
རྒྱས་བཅད་ཀྱི་སྐེད་ཀ	fixed interest	rgyas bcad kyi sked ka
རྒྱས་བཅད་བྱེད	having resolved, decide/ be convinced, regulate/ set prices/ taxes/ schedules/ interest rates etc	rgyas bcad byed
རྒྱས་འཆིངས་པ	bind oneself	rgyas 'chings pa
རྒྱས་བཏབ	marked, adorned, sealing	rgyas btab
རྒྱས་བཏབ་པ	1) impress w a seal; 2) [arch] not differently byas pa, adorned [with], concealment	rgyas btab pa
རྒྱས་བཏབ་ར་མོ་ཆེ	ra mo che'i gtsug lag khang	rgyas btab ra mo che
རྒྱས་ཐེབ	seal	rgyas theb
རྒྱས་ཐེབས	having the seal of	rgyas thebs
རྒྱས་ཐོབ	establish it with the seal	rgyas thob
རྒྱས་གདབ	sealing	rgyas gdab
རྒྱས་གདབ་པ	sealed [with]. See {rgyas 'debs}. [mss]	rgyas gdab pa
རྒྱས་འདུག་པ	grew in size	rgyas 'dug pa
རྒྱས་འདེབས	attaching as a label, confirmation, seal in confirmation, generalization	rgyas 'debs
རྒྱས་འདེབས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	great sealing samadhi	rgyas 'debs chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
རྒྱས་འདེབས་པ	to label with	rgyas 'debs pa
རྒྱས་འདེབས་ཕྲལ་ཤོར	temporary straying into generalizing	rgyas 'debs phral shor
རྒྱས་འདེབས་འཕྲལ་ཤོར	temporary straying into generalizing	rgyas 'debs 'phral shor
རྒྱས་འདེབས་བྱེད་པ	impose, generalize, confirm, attaching -- as a label	rgyas 'debs byed pa
རྒྱས་སྡེ་ཐང	Gyede Plain, where Tangtong Gyalpo had a vision of five Dakinis, in Tsang	rgyas sde thang
རྒྱས་བསྡུས	detailed, concise, detailed & concise, extended & short, long or concise form	rgyas bsdus
རྒྱས་བསྡུས་གང་རིགས	in any suitable / appropriate length	rgyas bsdus gang rigs
རྒྱས་བསྡུས་འཚམས་པ	appropriate length	rgyas bsdus 'tshams pa
རྒྱས་བསྡུས་རན་པོ	appropriate in degree of elaboration	rgyas bsdus ran po
རྒྱས་གནང་མཁན	expounder	rgyas gnang mkhan
རྒྱས་གནང་བ	to expound, propagate, teach widely	rgyas gnang ba
རྒྱས་པ	spread, be well developed, be advanced, vast, very extensive, extensive, enriching, vanity, prosper, great sage of ancient india, reputed author of mahabharata, increase in bulk or quantity, augmen...	rgyas pa
རྒྱས་པ་སྐྱུར་རུ	SA nyams rgyud	rgyas pa skyur ru
རྒྱས་པ་སྐྱུར་རུ་སྨུག་གུ	detailed oral transmissions	rgyas pa skyur ru smug gu
རྒྱས་པ་བ	another name for the Indian rishi rgyas pa ba's follower grub mtha' smra ba gcer bu ba'i ming gzhan zhig	rgyas pa ba
རྒྱས་པ་འབུམ་གྱི་བོན	bon of the hundred thousand vast teachings	rgyas pa 'bum gyi bon
རྒྱས་པ་ཞིག་རྟོམ	compose a [more] elaborate 1	rgyas pa zhig rtom
རྒྱས་པ་ལས	The extensive perfection of wisdom scriptures states	rgyas pa las
རྒྱས་པའི་སྐབས	when they are blooming/ flourishing/ spreading, i the case of enriching	rgyas pa'i skabs
རྒྱས་པའི་རྒྱུ	expanding cause	rgyas pa'i rgyu
རྒྱས་པའི་སྒང་ལ	on the increase, in the course of increasing, copious, full	rgyas pa'i sgang la
རྒྱས་པའི་སྤྱན	enhanced eye	rgyas pa'i spyan
རྒྱས་པའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	enriching activity	rgyas pa'i phrin las
རྒྱས་པའི་འཕྲིན་ལས	increasing / enriching activity	rgyas pa'i 'phrin las
རྒྱས་པའི་བོང་བུ	sugar mite, lepisma	rgyas pa'i bong bu
རྒྱས་པའི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	increasing / enriching fire puja	rgyas pa'i sbyin sreg
རྒྱས་པའི་རིགས	increasing / enriching family [of deity / yidam]	rgyas pa'i rigs
རྒྱས་པའི་ལས	enriching activity	rgyas pa'i las
རྒྱས་པའི་ལས་གྲུབ་པ	accomplished the increasing / enriching activity	rgyas pa'i las grub pa
རྒྱས་པའི་ས	abundant place	rgyas pa'i sa
རྒྱས་པར	in elaborate phases, amply, copiously, widely, fully developed	rgyas par
རྒྱས་པར་འགྱུར	become expanded; will flourish	rgyas par 'gyur
རྒྱས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	unfold	rgyas par 'gyur ba
རྒྱས་པར་འགྱུར་རོ	extensive	rgyas par 'gyur ro
རྒྱས་པར་བསྟན་པ	comprehensive teaching, detailed description	rgyas par bstan pa
རྒྱས་པར་ཕྱེ་བ	extensive	rgyas par phye ba
རྒྱས་པར་བྱ	expand!	rgyas par bya
རྒྱས་པར་བྱ་བ	to perform in a detailed way	rgyas par bya ba
རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད	enlarge/ expand/ increase	rgyas par byed
རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to enlarge / expand / increase	rgyas par byed pa
རྒྱས་པར་སྨོས་པ	detailed explanation; narrate in detail	rgyas par smos pa
རྒྱས་པར་མཛད	widely accomplished	rgyas par mdzad
རྒྱས་པར་བཤད་པ	an extensive / detailed/ full explanation, elucidate	rgyas par bshad pa
རྒྱས་པར་བཤད་པ་ལྟར	explained in detail	rgyas par bshad pa ltar
རྒྱས་པར་གསུངས་པ	told at length	rgyas par gsungs pa
རྒྱས་པོ	detail, exhaustive, extensive, grand	rgyas po
རྒྱས་པོ་བཟོ་བ	elaborate	rgyas po bzo ba
རྒྱས་དཔྱད	ration, allotment, standard amount	rgyas dpyad
རྒྱས་དཔྱད་བྱེད	ration, allot, set a standard amount, standardize the amount	rgyas dpyad byed
རྒྱས་དཔྱད་བཟོ་བ	resolve, make an extensive examination	rgyas dpyad bzo ba
རྒྱས་སྤྲོ	pomp	rgyas spro
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས	elaborate detail	rgyas spros
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་དངོས་རིགས	dang dod dam, mchor chas dngos chas	rgyas spros dngos rigs
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་ཅན	luxurious, plush, pompous, splendid	rgyas spros can
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་ཆུ་ཟོས	extravagance	rgyas spros chu zos
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་མེད	w/o extravagance, simple, not elaborate	rgyas spros med
རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་ཚ་པོ	extravagant	rgyas spros tsha po
རྒྱས་ཕྱོགས	moon	rgyas phyogs
རྒྱས་བྱ	to broaden	rgyas bya
རྒྱས་བྱུང	development	rgyas byung
རྒྱས་བྱེད	to make increase	rgyas byed
རྒྱས་བྱེད་འབྱུང་པོའི་ལག་པ	medicinal plant resembling human hand	rgyas byed 'byung po'i lag pa
རྒྱས་བྱེད་མ	goddess cornocopia, goddess of plenty	rgyas byed ma
རྒྱས་འབྲིང	extensive or medium rgyas 'bring bsdus pa snying po'i skor bzhi - elaborated, middle length, brief, and heart	rgyas 'bring
རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་གསུམ	extensive, intermediate and abbreviated. {dbang rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum} empowerment in the extensive, intermediate, and abbreviated versions	rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum
རྒྱས་རྩོད	big debate	rgyas rtsod
རྒྱས་རྩོད་རྒྱས་གླེང	contending and debating to the fullest extent	rgyas rtsod rgyas gleng
རྒྱས་ཚད	1 of tsha ba'i nad	rgyas tshad
རྒྱས་ཚད་གཉིས	CHN	rgyas tshad gnyis
རྒྱས་མཛད	to propagate, expound	rgyas mdzad
རྒྱས་མཛད་པ	propagator	rgyas mdzad pa
རྒྱས་འཛོམས	large/ full/ plenary [session/ meeting/ congress]	rgyas 'dzoms
རྒྱས་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	large/ full/ plenary [session/ meeting/ congress]	rgyas 'dzoms gros tshogs
རྒྱས་འཛོམས་ཚོགས་དུ	in large/ full/ plenary session	rgyas 'dzoms tshogs du
རྒྱས་བཟའ་རྒྱས་བཏུང	overeating and drinking, extravagant consumption	rgyas bza' rgyas btung
རྒྱས་བཟུང	caught by a trap	rgyas bzung
རྒྱས་ཡས	#	rgyas yas
རྒྱས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཐེབས་པ	seal (the action) properly	rgyas yongs su thebs pa
རྒྱས་ཤིང	thriving	rgyas shing
རྒྱས་གཤོམ	elaborate, sumptuous, stylish	rgyas gshom
རྒྱས་བཤད	extensive explanation	rgyas bshad
རྒྱས་བཤད་རྒྱས་གླེང	air 1's views, argue things out	rgyas bshad rgyas gleng
རྒྱས་བཤད་འདྲེན་པ	dam bcas pa'i tshig la go don gyi 'grel bshad 'dren pa'i lhag bcas kyi sgra zhig ...'Grim 'grul 'phrul chas te, gnam gru, me 'khor, rlangs 'khor sogs so	rgyas bshad 'dren pa
རྒྱས་བཤད་བྱེད	explain in detail, elaborate on a subject	rgyas bshad byed
རྒྱས་སུ་བཏང་བ	to amplify, enlarge	rgyas su btang ba
རྒྱས་སུ་ཞུས་པ	reply at length	rgyas su zhus pa
རྒྱས་བསེད	instrument for winnowing grain and chaff in the wind	rgyas bsed
རྒྱུ	cause [thd]	rgyu
རྒྱུ་ཀུན་འབྱུང	causal origin	rgyu kun 'byung
རྒྱུ་ཀུན་འབྱུང་གི་ཕུང་པོ	causal aggregates of origin	rgyu kun 'byung gi phung po
རྒྱུ་དཀར	virtuous cause	rgyu dkar
རྒྱུ་དཀར་ནག	large and small intestine	rgyu dkar nag
རྒྱུ་དཀར་མང་པོ	north polar mountain	rgyu dkar mang po
རྒྱུ་དཀར་མང་པོ་རི	mountain	rgyu dkar mang po ri
རྒྱུ་དཀྲིས	cloth etc. kyi rgyu dkri sa'i shing	rgyu dkris
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	causitive conditions, causesituation, causal condition, cause, reason, basic cause situation including mtshungs ldan kun (universal), 'gro (associate), skal mnyam (similar), byed pa (initiative), l...	rgyu rkyen
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་སྐྱེས་པ	produced by root cause & condition	rgyu rkyen gyis skyes pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་བསྐྱེད	produced by causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen gyis bskyed
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་བསྐྱེད་པ	produced through causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen gyis bskyed pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་འདུས་བྱས་པ	formed by causes and conditions 584	rgyu rkyen gyis 'dus byas pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གཉིས་མ་བྱས་པ	not made by causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen gnyis ma byas pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependency of causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen rten 'brel
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	perceptions that are interdependency of causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen rten 'brel gyi snang ba
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ	{rgyu rkyen rten 'brel tshogs pa las glo bur du snang ba sgyu ma lta bu} as in a magic show, things are made to appear by a temporary conjunction of causes, circumstances and connections	rgyu rkyen rten 'brel tshogs pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་མཐོང་ལ་དཔྱད་པ	understanding of the primary and secondary causes	rgyu rkyen mthong la dpyad pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་མི་རྟག་པ	impermanent causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen mi rtag pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གཙོ་བོ	essential element/ factor, principal cause and conditions	rgyu rkyen gtso bo
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་ཚོགས	meeting between causes and conditions rgyu rkyen 'tshogs nas 'bras bu de ltar	rgyu rkyen tshogs
བྱུང་བ	after the causes and conditions gather the fruition arises like that	byung ba
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་ལ་ལྟོས་པ	dependent upon causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen la ltos pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	arose from causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen las skyes pa
རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་ལས་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	not resulting from causes and conditions	rgyu rkyen las ma skyes pa
རྒྱུ་ལྐུགས	diarrhea	rgyu lkugs
རྒྱུ་སྐར	the lunar mansions, stars, constellations, motion stars [gnam gyi skar ma spyi'i ming ste gza' rnams kyi rgyu lam du so so'i rgyu ba gsal ba'i bkra rtags 'dzin byed skar ma,...Nyin yang mtsan bzhin...	rgyu skar
རྒྱུ་སྐར་འཁོར་ལོ	the circle traversed by the planets	rgyu skar 'khor lo
རྒྱུ་སྐར་གྱི་རྐང་པ	here rkang pa = 1/4, rgyu skar gcig cha 1/4 part = yul gyi chu tshod = rgyu skar gyi rkang pa. 9 such rkang pa is the measure of 1 house = yul gyi chu tsod 135...60??...15	rgyu skar gyi rkang pa
རྒྱུ་སྐར་གྱི་དྲལ་ཕྱམས	woodwork of moving stars, constellation gods	rgyu skar gyi dral phyams
རྒྱུ་སྐར་རྒྱལ་པོ	Naksatraraja [buddha], king of constellations	rgyu skar rgyal po
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ངན་པ	bad star	rgyu skar ngan pa
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཅན	constellation	rgyu skar can
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཆུ་ཚོད	the 27 rgyu skar drug cu'i char byas pa'i yul gyi chu tshod "mkha' mig rgyal" = 1620 la rgyu skar chu tshod zer	rgyu skar chu tshod
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉི་ཤུ་ཙ་དྲུག	26 Nakshatras	rgyu skar nyi shu tsa drug
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	twenty eight Nakshatras gods of the constellations. 1) {smin drug} Eta Tauri; Skt. Krittika. 2) {snar ma} Aldebaran; Skt. Rohini. 3) {mgo} Lambda Orionis; Skt. Mrigashira. 4) {lag} Alpha Orionis; S...	rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	CHN	rgyu skar nyer brgyad
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བདུན	the 27 motion stars [tha skar dang, bra nye, smin drug snar ma, mgo, lag nabs so, rgyal, skag mchu, gre, dbo, me bzhi, nag pa, sa ri, sa ga, lha mtsams, snron, snrubs, chu stod, chu smad, gro bzhin...	rgyu skar nyer bdun
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཏོག	fixed star	rgyu skar tog
རྒྱུ་སྐར་བདག་པོ	moon rgyu skar rnams sgra sgrog cing mchi ma 'don - the stars cried out and shed tears	rgyu skar bdag po
རྒྱུ་སྐར་མུ་ཁྱུད	moon, the moon which is surrounded by the constellations	rgyu skar mu khyud
རྒྱུ་སྐར་གཙོ	moon	rgyu skar gtso
རྒྱུ་སྐར་བཟང་བ	good star	rgyu skar bzang ba
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ལ་བབས་པ	fell on an auspicious constellation	rgyu skar la babs pa
རྒྱུ་སྐར་ལམ	milky-way, starry path	rgyu skar lam
རྒྱུ་སྐྱབས	causal refuge, {rgyu'i skyabs 'gro}	rgyu skyabs
རྒྱུ་སྐྱེད་པ	lay the foundation of 585 rgyu khyad par sgrub kyi 'bras rtags rkyen gzhan la ltos pa'i rtags kyis rang rgyu khyad par ba gzhan yod par sgrub pa ste, dper na, the dharmin sense perception, dbang yi...	rgyu skyed pa
རྒྱུ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	good cause	rgyu khyad par can
རྒྱུ་ཁྲོལ	causing much sound in the stomach	rgyu khrol
རྒྱུ་མཁྲིས	{rgyu mkhris} herb med. [ro mngar la cung kha, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas tsa ba dang dug sel]	rgyu mkhris
རྒྱུ་འཁོར	diarrhea	rgyu 'khor
རྒྱུ་འཁྲིལ	intestinal disease; the intestines by wind having been interfered w, the downward prana does not come forth and painful ldang dub occurs	rgyu 'khril
རྒྱུ་འཁྲོག	diarrhea	rgyu 'khrog
རྒྱུ་འཁྲོག་པ	croaking of the bowels	rgyu 'khrog pa
རྒྱུ་འཁྲོལ	intestinal disease where wind enters the intestines w a sound like "blug blug" w watery stool	rgyu 'khrol
རྒྱུ་གང	for what reason rgyu gang gis 'khor bar skye bar byed pa	rgyu gang
རྒྱུ་གང་ཡོད	what is the reason for?, "what is there to be" construction	rgyu gang yod
རྒྱུ་གྲི	gutting knife	rgyu gri
རྒྱུ་དགུ	manifold things	rgyu dgu
རྒྱུ་འགགས	intestinal disease produced by blood and bile, w blockage and no excretion	rgyu 'gags
རྒྱུ་འགལ་དམིགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	among snang rung gi 'gal zla dmigs pa'i rtags, a thing contradicting its own cause having been presented as reason, dgag chos	rgyu 'gal dmigs kyi rtags
རང་འབྲས་འབྱུང་བ་ཨིས་རེཕུ༹ཏེད་ཨོར་ཨེསྟབླིཤེད་ཨས་ཅེརྟཻནལཡ་ནོན	existent, EG, by a powerful fire khyab par non pa'i gzhir chos can, grang 'bras spu long byed rgyun chags su gnas pa med de, me stobs chen pos khyab par non pa'i dngos po yin pa'i phyir, rgyu cold ...	rang 'bras 'byung ba is refuted or established as certainly non
རྒྱུ་འགོག་པ	'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dgag bya phyi nang gi dngos po gang yang rung ba'i 'bras bu skyed byed kyi rgyu phal pa dag 'gog byed rang 'bras skyed byed kyi rgyu'i	rgyu 'gog pa
རྒྱུ་འགྱིངས	cold having entered the intestines by increase of mucus excretion not regular/ at the right time, 'gyings pa'i nad cig ste, symptoms no excretion or sometimes diarrhoea w mucus	rgyu 'gyings
རྒྱུ་འགྱུར་བ	the cause changing	rgyu 'gyur ba
རྒྱུ་འགྲུལ	set out travelling	rgyu 'grul
རྒྱུ་འགྲོ་རང་གཤོམས	motion/going selfprepared/established	rgyu 'gro rang gshoms
རྒྱུ་འགྲོའི་བྱེ་མ	sand going back and forth	rgyu 'gro'i bye ma
རྒྱུ་རྒན	rgyu rgan disease	rgyu rgan
རྒྱུ་རྒྱུ་བ	1) move repeatedly, back and forth etc.; 2) 'bu grog ma	rgyu rgyu ba
རྒྱུ་རྒྱུད	continuity of cause; cause tantra	rgyu rgyud
རྒྱུ་སྒོག	medical drug, wild garlic	rgyu sgog
རྒྱུ་སྒྲིག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	warping machine [fabric making?]	rgyu sgrig 'phrul 'khor
རྒྱུ་སྒྲོག	envelope of the lower intestines	rgyu sgrog
རྒྱུ་ངན་སྤུན་རྩུབ	example of bad nature and bad action	rgyu ngan spun rtsub
རྒྱུ་ངུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	consciousness at the causal stage	rgyu ngus kyi rnam shes
རྒྱུ་ངེས	certain or real cause	rgyu nges
རྒྱུ་ངོམས	rgyu chen po yod pa'i nyams ston pa	rgyu ngoms
རྒྱུ་དངུལ	riches, wealth	rgyu dngul
རྒྱུ་དངོས	actual cause, property, wealth, possessions, goods	rgyu dngos
རྒྱུ་དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	reason for cause which proves its cause directly	rgyu dngos grub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་དངོས་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign proving an actual cause	rgyu dngos sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་དངོས་པོ	assets	rgyu dngos po
རྒྱུ་མངའ	cause, reason	rgyu mnga'
རྒྱུ་རྔན	nor rdzas kyi rngan pa	rgyu rngan
རྒྱུ་རྔན་སྤྲད་པ	to give a bribe	rgyu rngan sprad pa
རྒྱུ་རྔན་བཟས་པ	to take a bribe	rgyu rngan bzas pa
རྒྱུ་ལྔ	depending on the four elements the five causes of becoming forms ['byung ba'i rgyu, 'dug pa'i rgyu, rjes su 'gyur ba'i rgyu, gnas par byed pa'i rgyu, 'phel bar byed pa'i rgyu bcas so]	rgyu lnga
རྒྱུ་སྔོན་སོང་གི་འབྲས་རྟགས	reason for cause which proves a prior cause	rgyu sngon song gi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་སྔོན་སོང་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign proving a preceding cause	rgyu sngon song sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་ཅ་ལག	assets	rgyu ca lag
རྒྱུ་ཅ་ལག་ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	wealth, things, property, and enjoyment	rgyu ca lag nor longs spyod
རྒྱུ་ཅན	caused by	rgyu can
རྒྱུ་ཅི	what is necessary?	rgyu ci
རྒྱུ་གཅིག	singular cause	rgyu gcig
རྒྱུ་གཅིག་པ	the single basis [gd]	rgyu gcig pa
རྒྱུ་གཅིག་པར་རྟོགས་པ	understanding the single cause	rgyu gcig par rtogs pa
རྒྱུ་གཅིག་པུ	solitary cause	rgyu gcig pu
རྒྱུ་གཅིག་སྨྲ་བ	monist theory of origin	rgyu gcig smra ba
རྒྱུ་བཅུ་བཞི	14 causes #	rgyu bcu bzhi
རྒྱུ་ཆ	[raw] materials for making things	rgyu cha
རྒྱུ་ཆ་འདྲ་བ	similar substances	rgyu cha 'dra ba
རྒྱུ་ཆ་རང་ས་ནས་ལེན	get materials locally	rgyu cha rang sa nas len
རྒྱུ་ཆད	nor rdzas kyi thog nas btang ba'i nyes chad	rgyu chad
རྒྱུ་ཆས	1) wealth and enjoyment; 2) things for making something	rgyu chas
རྒྱུ་ཆོས་རྗེས་དཔག	inference of causal attributes	rgyu chos rjes dpag
རྒྱུ་ཆོས་རྗེས་དཔག་གི་བྲས་རྟགས	effect sign which is a means of inferring causal attributes	rgyu chos rjes dpag gi bras rtags
རྒྱུ་ཆོས་རྗེས་དཔག་གི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign which is a means of inferring causal attribute	rgyu chos rjes dpag gi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་ཆོས་རྗེས་དཔོག	reason for cause which delineates a (a characteristic of) the cause	rgyu chos rjes dpog
རྒྱུ་ཆོས་རྗེས་དཔོག་གི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign which is a means of inferring causal attributes	rgyu chos rjes dpog gi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་མཆན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	rgyu kyi theg pa	rgyu mchan nyid kyi theg pa
རྒྱུ་ཉིད	the cause itself	rgyu nyid
རྒྱུ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	particular cause	rgyu nyid kyi khyad par
རྒྱུ་ཉིད་རྡོ་རྗེ	the first cause is the vajra	rgyu nyid rdo rje
རྒྱུ་གཉིས	the two kinds of cause	rgyu gnyis
རྒྱུ་གཉིས་སྨྲ་བ	[exponents of] dualism	rgyu gnyis smra ba
རྒྱུ་སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་བསམ་གཏན	the causal meditation state for serenity	rgyu snyoms 'jug gi bsam gtan
རྒྱུ་ཏིང	Syn {rgyu'i ting nge 'dzin} seed samadhi	rgyu ting
རྒྱུ་རྟག་པ་ལས་སྐྱེ་བར་འདོད་པ	believe to arise from a permanent cause	rgyu rtag pa las skye bar 'dod pa
རྒྱུ་སྟོང	empty entrails/ intestines	rgyu stong
རྒྱུ་སྟོད	upper bowels	rgyu stod
རྒྱུ་སྟོད་གསང	lte ba'i 'og tu tson gang gzhal ba'i gnas su rgyu stod kyi cha shas dang 'brel ba'i me btsa'i gsang ste [der me btsa' bzhag na rgyu mar grang rlung zhugs nas wu ba dang be snabs can 'khru ba la phan]	rgyu stod gsang
རྒྱུ་སྟོབས	power of cause	rgyu stobs
རྒྱུ་མཐུན	compatibility, cause sufficient to produce observed effect, having the same cause	rgyu mthun
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {kun gzhi chos dang lhan cig skye 'gag byas pa la brten nas chos de dang rigs 'dra ba 'byung ba'i nus pa khyad par can}	rgyu mthun gyi bag chags
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	result which resembles/ is in conformity w the cause * ***	rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ་གཉིས	the two kinds of fruition accoring w the cuse [byed pa rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu dang, myong ba rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu gnyis te, dang po ni tse snga mar sdig pa byas na tse 'dir yang sdig pa byed 'd...	rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu gnyis
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་དང་བདག་པོའི་འབྲས་བུ	result resembling the cause and dominant result	rgyu mthun dang bdag po'i 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པ	. . . (dang) rgyu mthun pa - accordant/ harmonious with . . . ; in accordance/ harmony with	rgyu mthun pa
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་དགེ་བ	* virtue conforming w the cause	rgyu mthun pa'i dge ba
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་འབྲས	conforming resultant force, natural outflow of the existing condition, result similar to its cause, result belongs to same level and has same ethical value as cause, compatibility with the cause	rgyu mthun pa'i 'bras
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	causally concordant effect, effect resembling the cause, the result which is similar to the cause, the result compatible to the cause, the result which is in conformity with the cause; result conso...	rgyu mthun pa'i 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	coemergent w sprul pa'i sems	rgyu mthun pa'i lung ma bstan
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{sprul pa'i sems dang lhan cig skyes pa'o,} 'Indeterminates resembling their cause' are	rgyu mthun pas lung ma bstan
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་འབྲས་བུ	natural outflow of the existing condition	rgyu mthun 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities resembling the cause	rgyu mthun yon tan
རྒྱུ་དག	1) nature; 2) quality [of materials rgyu dag khrig khrig cig las mi 'dug pa'i	rgyu dag
ཙོང་ཟོག	goods no better than average/ mediocre	tsong zog
རྒྱུ་དག་བཟང་པོ	of good nature/ disposition, of good quality materials	rgyu dag bzang po
རྒྱུ་དག་ཧ་ཅང་ལེགས་པོ	very good nature/ quality	rgyu dag ha cang legs po
རྒྱུ་དང་རྐྱེན	causes and conditions,	rgyu dang rkyen
སུབསྟནཏིཨལ་ཅཽསེ་ཨནད་ཅོ	operative conditions	substantial cause and co
རྒྱུ་དང་རྐྱེན་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete causes and conditions	rgyu dang rkyen ma tshang ba
རྒྱུ་དང་རྐྱེན་ལས་བྱུང་བ	arising from causes and conditions	rgyu dang rkyen las byung ba
རྒྱུ་དང་རྐྱེན་ལས་བྱུང་བའོ	they arise from causes and conditions! rgyu dang 'gal ba'i khyab bya dmigs pa 'gal ba'i khyab bya dmigs pa bzhi'i nang gses, gnod byed kyi khyab bya rtags su bkod nas gnod bya'i rgyu 'gog pa ste, d...	rgyu dang rkyen las byung ba'o
རྒྱུ་དང་འགལ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ་དམིགས་པ	'gal ba'i 'bras bu dmigs pa bzhi'i nang gses, gnod byed kyi 'bras bu rtags su bkod nas, gnod bya'i rgyu 'gog pa ste, dper na, du ba drag tu 'phyur bas khyab par non pa'i gzhir chos can, grang rgyu ...	rgyu dang 'gal ba'i 'bras bu dmigs pa
རྒྱུ་དང་བཅས་པ	basis for the causes rgyu dang bdag po dang mtshungs pa de	rgyu dang bcas pa
མ་ཐག་པའི་རྐྱེན	causal, dominant, and consequent condition	ma thag pa'i rkyen
རྒྱུ་དང་བྲལ	causeless, uncaused, uncreated	rgyu dang bral
རྒྱུ་དང་འབྲས་བུ	cause and effect rgyu dang 'bras bu dang rtags kyi dbye ba - the divisions of cause, effect, and reason rgyu dang 'bras bu gsang sngags phyi	rgyu dang 'bras bu
ནང་གི་ཆོས	the teachings based on cause or on those based on result, the teachings of the secret Mantrayana, outer or inner	nang gi chos
རྒྱུ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	related causes, of inner interdependence	rgyu dang 'brel ba
རྒྱུ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་བདུན	seven related causes. 1) {sa bon}. 2) {myu gu} 3) {sdong po} 4) {'dab ma} 5) {sdong bu} 6) {sbu gu} 7) {snying po me tog} 8) {'bras bu}	rgyu dang 'brel ba bdun
རྒྱུ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependence of related causes	rgyu dang 'brel ba'i rten 'brel
རྒྱུ་དང་མི་རྒྱུ	the animate and inanimate, beings and inanimate things	rgyu dang mi rgyu
རྒྱུ་དུ་མ	numerous causes	rgyu du ma
རྒྱུ་དུས	at the time of the cause	rgyu dus
རྒྱུ་དུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	cognition at the time of the cause	rgyu dus kyi rnam shes
རྒྱུ་དུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	causal time mahamudra [Tse rig]	rgyu dus kyi phyag rgya chen po
རྒྱུ་དུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	causal time mahamudra	rgyu dus kyi phyag chen
རྒྱུ་དུས་སུ	at the time of the cause	rgyu dus su
རྒྱུ་དེས་ན	for that reason, therefore	rgyu des na
རྒྱུ་དྲུག	six types of cause. 1) {byed pa'i rgyu} principal cause; enabling cause. 2) {lhan cig 'byung ba'i rgyu} mutual cause; simultaneously arising cause. 3) {rnam par smin pa'i rgyu} matured cause; ripen...	rgyu drug
རྒྱུ་བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་པ	identical in nature with the cause	rgyu bdag nyid gcig pa
རྒྱུ་བདག་གཉིས	the two [conditions]	rgyu bdag gnyis
རྒྱུ་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	the basic of	rgyu bde gshegs snying po
ཨོཨུར་ཨོཝན་བུདདྷ	nature	our own buddha
རྒྱུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	causal vajra-holder [in development stage practice]	rgyu rdo rje 'dzin pa
རྒྱུ་ལྡན	one who knows about a thing,	rgyu ldan
རྒྱུ་ལྡོག་ན	when reversing the cause	rgyu ldog na
རྒྱུ་ནག	small intestine w/o tsi lu	rgyu nag
རྒྱུ་ནག་སོར་བཅུ་གཉིས་མ	duodenum	rgyu nag sor bcu gnyis ma
རྒྱུ་ནད	intestinal disease	rgyu nad
རྒྱུ་ནོམ	possessions of wealth	rgyu nom
རྒྱུ་ནོམ་པ	wealth	rgyu nom pa
རྒྱུ་ནོམ་པོ	wealth, valuables, assets	rgyu nom po
རྒྱུ་ནོར	valuables, wealth, riches, property, possessions	rgyu nor
རྒྱུ་ནོར་ལྐོག་ཟ	gzhan nam spyi la dbang ba'i rgyu dngos lkog tu bdag nyar sger bed spyod pa	rgyu nor lkog za
རྒྱུ་ནོར་འཕྲོག་པ	expropriate	rgyu nor 'phrog pa
རྒྱུ་ནོར་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	resources, source of wealth	rgyu nor 'byung khungs
རྒྱུ་ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	wealth and enjoyment	rgyu nor longs spyod
རྒྱུ་ནོར་ཤོར	lose 1's wealth, go bankrupt	rgyu nor shor
རྒྱུ་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	ascertaining the cause	rgyu rnam par rig pa
རྒྱུ་སྤུ་ཅམ་མེད	not even the slightest thing	rgyu spu cam med
རྒྱུ་སྤུན	warp and woof [snam bu'i dkyus dang 'phred du gtong ba'i skud pa]	rgyu spun
རྒྱུ་སྤུས	quality	rgyu spus
རྒྱུ་སྤུས་དག་པོ	good quality	rgyu spus dag po
རྒྱུ་སྤུས་ཞན་པ	poor quality	rgyu spus zhan pa
རྒྱུ་སྤྱད་པ	enacting / using the cause	rgyu spyad pa
རྒྱུ་སྤྱད་ཟིན་པ	base material spent	rgyu spyad zin pa
རྒྱུ་སྤྱི	general cause 588	rgyu spyi
རྒྱུ་སྤྱི་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	a reason for cause which proves causation in general	rgyu spyi grub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་སྤྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	'bras bu rtags lnga'i nang gses, sgrub byed res 'ga' ba'i rtags kyis bsgrub chos rang nyid rgyu dang bcas pa'am yod par sgrub pa ste, dper na, nyer len gyi phung po chos can, rang rgyu dang bcas pa...	rgyu spyi sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུ་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	causal Paramita vehicle	rgyu pha rol tu phyin pa'i theg pa
རྒྱུ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	essential / perfect cause	rgyu phun sum tshogs pa
རྒྱུ་འཕྲི་སླ་བཅོས	cut back on materials and do careless work/ a cheap job	rgyu 'phri sla bcos
རྒྱུ་འཕྲི་བསླ་བཅོས	cut back on materials and do careless work/ a cheap job	rgyu 'phri bsla bcos
རྒྱུ་འཕྲོག	looting, plundering, stealing	rgyu 'phrog
རྒྱུ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	loot, plunder, steal	rgyu 'phrog byed
རྒྱུ་བ	come and go	rgyu ba
རྒྱུ་བ་དགའ་མོ་འདུག་པ	flies / swims happily here and there	rgyu ba dga' mo 'dug pa
རྒྱུ་བ་ངན	bad breathing	rgyu ba ngan
རྒྱུ་བ་གཅིག	9th transgression class, nyes byas kyi sde tshan, a precept on going rgyu ba'i bslab bya gcig, to avoid danger from tigers etc.do not climb in trees higher than the height of a man, mi gang tsam	rgyu ba gcig
རྒྱུ་བ་བཅད་པ	puts an end to the journey	rgyu ba bcad pa
རྒྱུ་བ་མེད་པ	motionless, still, that which does not move	rgyu ba med pa
རྒྱུ་བ་རླུང	circulating energies	rgyu ba rlung
རྒྱུ་བ་ལོག་པ	reversing the movement	rgyu ba log pa
རྒྱུ་བའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	vow of walking	rgyu ba'i brtul zhugs
རྒྱུ་བའི་ཚུལ	the way prana circulates	rgyu ba'i tshul
རྒྱུ་བའི་ཚེགས	difficulty of breathing	rgyu ba'i tshegs
རྒྱུ་བའི་ཡི་དབ༹གས	a wandering preta	rgyu ba'i yi dvags
རྒྱུ་བའི་རླུང	the prana of circulation [Tse rig]	rgyu ba'i rlung
རྒྱུ་བའི་ལམ་བཅད་པ	blocked their way to enter	rgyu ba'i lam bcad pa
རྒྱུ་བྱང	purified the cause	rgyu byang
རྒྱུ་བྱས	which caused, provoked	rgyu byas
རྒྱུ་བྱེད	becomes the cause of	rgyu byed
རྒྱུ་བྱེད་པ	x {ngan song gi rgyu byed pas de dag spang dgos} abandon them for all of these cause lower rebirths	rgyu byed pa
རྒྱུ་དབང	wealth and power	rgyu dbang
རྒྱུ་འབྱུང་བ་བཞི	the four causal elements	rgyu 'byung ba bzhi
རྒྱུ་འབྱུང་བ་བཞིའི་རིག་བྱ	the textures of the four causal elements	rgyu 'byung ba bzhi'i rig bya
རྒྱུ་འབྱུང་བའི་གཟུགས་བཞི	the four causal element forms	rgyu 'byung ba'i gzugs bzhi
རྒྱུ་འབྱོར	wealth, riches	rgyu 'byor
རྒྱུ་འབྲས	cause and effect/ result, causality	rgyu 'bras
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་ཉོན	causality of affliction [samsara]	rgyu 'bras kyi kun nyon
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	substance of causality	rgyu 'bras kyi dngos po
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the teachings on cause and effect; doctrines of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras kyi chos
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the truth of interdependence of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras kyi rten 'brel
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicles of cause and fruition	rgyu 'bras kyi theg pa
བུའི་ཐེག་པ	causal and resultant vehicles. The teachings of Hinayana and Mahayana that regard the practices of the path as the causes for attaining the fruition of liberation and enlightenment and the Vajrayan...	bu'i theg pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 vehicles of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras kyi theg pa brgyad
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་གཉིས	the two vehicles of cause and fruition	rgyu 'bras kyi theg pa gnyis
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationship between cause and effect	rgyu 'bras kyi 'brel ba
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་འཁོར	reap the results of past action	rgyu 'bras 'khor
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་དགེ་སྡིག	positive or negative cause(s) and effect(s)	rgyu 'bras dge sdig
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་འཆོལ་མེད	random causal interaction	rgyu 'bras 'chol med
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་གཉིས	both cause and effect	rgyu 'bras gnyis
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་དཔྱོད་པ	analyzing both cause and effect. Syn {mu bzhi skye 'gog}	rgyu 'bras gnyis ka la dpyod pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་གཉིས་ཕྲུག	twofold cause and effect	rgyu 'bras gnyis phrug
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་གཉིས་མེད་པར་འདོད་པ	to hold that cause and effect are not two	rgyu 'bras gnyis med par 'dod pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རྟ་བབས་བཅུ་དྲུག	rgyu'i rta	rgyu 'bras rta babs bcu drug
བབས་བརྒྱད	eightfold causal archway; Def: {sgo phub phyi nang gnyis su them skas bzhi bzhi} + 'bras bu'i rta	babs brgyad
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལྟར	causal-like	rgyu 'bras ltar
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཐེག་པ	spiritual approaches based on/ concerned with/ involving causes and results	rgyu 'bras theg pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་མཐུན་པ	conformity between cause and effect	rgyu 'bras mthun pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ	perverted view of causality	rgyu 'bras phyin ci log tu lta ba
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བར་མ་ཆད་པ	uninterrupted causality	rgyu 'bras bar ma chad pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བླང་དོར	accepting and rejecting what concerns cause and effect	rgyu 'bras blang dor
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་དབྱེར་མེད	the inseparability of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras dbyer med
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་འབད་རྩོལ	to struggle with cause and effect	rgyu 'bras 'bad rtsol
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་མན་ངག་བདུན	literally 7 cause and effect precepts	rgyu 'bras man ngag bdun
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་མེད་པ	1) w/o/ non-existence of cause and effect; 2) shameless, outrageous	rgyu 'bras med pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ	cause and effect, effort and achievement	rgyu 'bras rtsol sgrub
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond cause and result, beyond trying and doing	rgyu 'bras rtsol sgrub las 'das pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་རྩོལ་བ	to struggle with cause and effect	rgyu 'bras la rtsol ba
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	pay minute attention to your actions and their effects	rgyu 'bras la zhib tu 'gro ba
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཆོས	the teaching beyond cause and effect	rgyu 'bras las 'das pa'i chos
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཆོས་ཞུ	ask for the teaching beyond the principle of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras las 'das pa'i chos zhu
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལུགས་བཞིན	like those who follow the tradition of cause and effect	rgyu 'bras lugs bzhin
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་སུ་འབྲེལ་བར་འབྱུང་བ	originating in interrelated causality	rgyu 'bras su 'brel bar 'byung ba
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་སོ་སོར་ངེས་པ	distinct causes and effects	rgyu 'bras so sor nges pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable causality	rgyu 'bras bsam mi khyab pa
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	causal and resultant herukas, cause heruka and effect heruka	rgyu 'bras he ru ka
རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལྷན་ཅིག་པའི་རྒྱུ	cause where cause and effect arte simultaneous [w/o stages of earlier and later, simultaneously occuring, ornament teaching simultaneous production of cause and	rgyu 'bras lhan cig pa'i rgyu
རྒྱུ་སྦྱི	general cause	rgyu sbyi
རྒྱུ་སྦྱིན	cloud	rgyu sbyin
རྒྱུ་སྦྱོར	sponsor	rgyu sbyor
རྒྱུ་སྦྱོར་བ	yon gyi bdag po'am rgyu gtong mkhan	rgyu sbyor ba
རྒྱུ་སྦྱོར་ཡོན་བདག	generous beneficiary	rgyu sbyor yon bdag
རྒྱུ་མ	bowels	rgyu ma
རྒྱུ་མ་འཐོན་པ	spilling forth guts	rgyu ma 'thon pa
རྒྱུ་མ་ཕུ་འདེད	rtsad ma chod pa'i gnad don rnams le 'khri rim brgyud du rtsad gcod byed pa	rgyu ma phu 'ded
རྒྱུ་མ་དམིགས་པ	non-observation of a cause, non-observations of a cause	rgyu ma dmigs pa
རྒྱུ་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	snang rung gi 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags kyi ya gyal, de byung gi 'brel ba la brten nas 'gog byed rgyu med pa'i rtags kyis dgag chos 'bras bu yod pa@'gog pa, dper na, mtshan dus kyi rgya mtshor ...	rgyu ma dmigs pa'i rtags
རྒྱུ་མ་དམིགས་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	gzhan rigs 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur bcu bzhi'i nang gses, rgyu rtags su bkod pa'i thal 'gyur gang zhig bzlog na 'bras bu'i gtan tsigs 'phen pa ste, dper na, du ldan gyi la la chos can, du ba med par t...	rgyu ma dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur
རྒྱུ་མ་རིང་པོ	[long intestine] 1) inactive, slow, lazy. 2) not easily angered	rgyu ma ring po
རྒྱུ་མ་ལུགས་པ	nad cig	rgyu ma lugs pa
རྒྱུ་མང་སྨྲ་བ	pluralist	rgyu mang smra ba
རྒྱུ་མང་སྨྲ་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	pluralism	rgyu mang smra ba'i ring lugs
རྒྱུ་མང་སྨྲ་ལུགས	pluralism	rgyu mang smra lugs
རྒྱུ་མའི་གླང་འཐབ	disease {rgyu ma'i glang 'thab}	rgyu ma'i glang 'thab
རྒྱུ་མའི་ནད་ལྔ	five intestinal diseases	rgyu ma'i nad lnga
རྒྱུ་མའི་རླུང་ཚབས	{rgyu ma'i rlung tshabs feminine illness [rlung tshabs rigs drug gi nang tshan, rgyu zhabs bsdams and untimely vaginal bleeding]	rgyu ma'i rlung tshabs
རྒྱུ་མའི་གསང	moxibustion point	rgyu ma'i gsang
རྒྱུ་མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་སྤངས་མི་ཤེས	do not know how to give up the ten negative actions	rgyu mi dge ba bcu spangs mi shes
རྒྱུ་མི་མཐུན་པ	incongruent cause	rgyu mi mthun pa
རྒྱུ་མིན	do not, don't	rgyu min
རྒྱུ་མིན་པ	uncaused entity {bdag dang dus dang dbang phyug sogs rgyu min pa gzhan las ma byung} nor do they originate from some other uncaused entity, such as Self, Time, or an Almighty	rgyu min pa
རྒྱུ་མེད	uncaused, causeless, an absence of causes	rgyu med
རྒྱུ་མེད་རྐྱེན་མེད	meaningless, w/o cause or reason	rgyu med rkyen med
རྒྱུ་མེད་དུ	without any actual cause, spontaneously, without sufficient reason, without good cause	rgyu med du
རྒྱུ་མེད་དེ་འབྱུང་བ	causeless origination	rgyu med de 'byung ba
རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	1) w/o seed/ cause/ causal efficiency, non-causal	rgyu med pa
རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	causeless origination	rgyu med pa las skye ba
རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ལས་མ་བྱུང	do not originate without a cause	rgyu med pa las ma byung
རྒྱུ་མེད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	causeless effect	rgyu med pa'i 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མེད་པར	without any actual cause, spontaneously, without sufficient reason, without good cause, without cause	rgyu med par
རྒྱུ་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of causelessness	rgyu med par smra ba
རྒྱུ་མེད་འབྲས་བུ	unmerited fruit	rgyu med 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་མེད་མུ་སྟེགས་ལྟ་བ	extreme view of causelessness	rgyu med mu stegs lta ba
རྒྱུ་མེད་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	causeless origination	rgyu med las skye ba
རྒྱུ་མེད་ལས་སྐྱེ་བར་འདོད་པ	believe to arise w/o a cause/ from no cause	rgyu med las skye bar 'dod pa
རྒྱུ་མེད་ལས་མ་ཡིན	not from an absence of causes	rgyu med las ma yin
རྒྱུ་མེད་ལས་མི་སྐྱེ	does not arise from an absence of causes	rgyu med las mi skye
རྒྱུ་དམན་པ	inferior	rgyu dman pa
རྒྱུ་སྨད་གསང	under the navel tshon do gzhal ba'i gnas su moxibustion point connected w the lower intestines,	rgyu smad gsang
རྒྱུ་ཙིལ	rgyu dkar gyi tsil	rgyu tsil
རྒྱུ་གཙང	good quality, faultless sgo kun nas, w/o adulteration/ impurity	rgyu gtsang
རྒྱུ་གཙང་སྤུས་གཙང	good quality, faultless sgo kun nas, w/o adulteration/ impurity	rgyu gtsang spus gtsang
རྒྱུ་གཙོ་བོ	essential element/ factor, principal cause	rgyu gtso bo
རྒྱུ་རྩ	soles of the feet khug tu rgyu ma khug ces zer bas bleeding nadi there connected w the heart, if bled good for heart disease	rgyu rtsa
རྒྱུ་བརྩིས་པས	having considered the cause	rgyu brtsis pas
རྒྱུ་ཚད	typhoid	rgyu tshad
རྒྱུ་ཚད་འབྲུམ་པ་ཅན	typhus	rgyu tshad 'brum pa can
རྒྱུ་ཚིགས་འབྲས་བུ	conjunction of cause and effect	rgyu tshigs 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་ཚུལ	vibratory rate, activeness	rgyu tshul
རྒྱུ་ཚོགས	to accumulate the causes of,	rgyu tshogs
ཅཽསལལཡ	based accumulations	causally
རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་བསྟེན་པ	the prerequisites, to rely on the conditions for, to rely on the causes or prerequisites	rgyu tshogs bsten pa
རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་པ	aggregation of causes, causal aggregate, causal complex, aggregate of causes [ggd]	rgyu tshogs pa
རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་ཚང་བ	complete causes	rgyu tshogs tshang ba
རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from causes	rgyu tshogs las byung ba
རྒྱུ་མཚད་ཡང་དག	correct reason	rgyu mtshad yang dag
རྒྱུ་མཚན	causal characteristics [gd], causal process, cause, reason, principle, truth, sign, on account of, because of, rationale, - the reason why	rgyu mtshan
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཁུངས་དག	[believe] with good reason	rgyu mtshan khungs dag
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ག་རེ་རེད	what is the reason?	rgyu mtshan ga re red
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གང་གིས	for which purpose rgyu mtshan gang yang yod ma red meaningless	rgyu mtshan gang gis
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གང་ཡིན་ཞེ་ན	Why?; why is this you might ask	rgyu mtshan gang yin zhe na
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	for a [particular] reason	rgyu mtshan gyi sgo nas
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གྱི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	sound assumption. reasoned correct assumption. [mss]	rgyu mtshan gyi yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གྱིས	for that reason	rgyu mtshan gyis
རྒྱུ་མཚན་གྱིས་སེམས་འགུགས	subdue/ move people by reason	rgyu mtshan gyis sems 'gugs
རྒྱུ་མཚན་འགལ་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	factcontradicting assumption	rgyu mtshan 'gal pa'i yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་འགལ་བའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	yid dpyod kyi nang gses, depending on a contradictory reason rang yul don mthun du 'dzin pa'i thought/ conception, EG, because it is to be heard, grasping that sound is impermanent, by the reason t...	rgyu mtshan 'gal ba'i yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཅི་ཡིན་ཞེས	wondering how this could be	rgyu mtshan ci yin zhes
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན	why? what is the reason?	rgyu mtshan ci'i phyir zhe na
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	Causal philosophical teachings. The teachings of Hinayana and Mahayana that regard the practices of the path as the causes for attaining the fruition of liberation and enlightenment	rgyu mtshan nyid kyi chos
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the causal philosophical teachings [of dialectics]	rgyu mtshan nyid kyi bstan pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Causal philosophical vehicle	rgyu mtshan nyid kyi theg pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པ	the causal philosophical vehicle [of dialectics]	rgyu mtshan nyid theg pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ཕར་ཕྱིན་ཐེག་པ	the causal paramita [philosophical] vehicle [of dialectics]	rgyu mtshan nyid phar phyin theg pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ལྟར་སྣང	[Tse rig]	rgyu mtshan ltar snang
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དང་མི་ལྡན་པ	irrational	rgyu mtshan dang mi ldan pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དུ	on account of	rgyu mtshan du
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དུ་བྱས	on account of	rgyu mtshan du byas
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དུ་བྱེད	use a false reason/ pretext	rgyu mtshan du byed
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དེས་ན	because of that reason	rgyu mtshan des na
རྒྱུ་མཚན་དྲིས་པ	inquired	rgyu mtshan dris pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་འདྲི་བ	ask after the cause	rgyu mtshan 'dri ba
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ལྡན་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	sound assumption	rgyu mtshan ldan pa'i yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ནི་མ་བརྟགས་པ	unexamined reason	rgyu mtshan ni ma brtags pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མ་ངེས་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	assumption that hasn't verified a reason	rgyu mtshan ma nges pa'i yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མ་མེད་པ	signlessness	rgyu mtshan ma med pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མེད་པ	w/o reason, senseless	rgyu mtshan med pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མེད་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	opinion w/o a reason [yid dpyod kyi nang gses, rgyu mtshan gang gi sgo nas kyang mi sems par rang yul don mthun du 'dzin pa'i rtog pa, EG, thinking sound is impermenent for no particular reason]	rgyu mtshan med pa'i yid dpyod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་མེད་པར	pointless rgyu mtshan mtshungs pa'i mgo snyoms one of {rtags bzhi} confutation through similar reason rgyu mtshan mtshungs pa'i mgo snyoms confutation through similar reason	rgyu mtshan med par
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཞུས	told the circumstances [of my.]	rgyu mtshan zhus
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཞུས་པ	told him the circumstances	rgyu mtshan zhus pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཡང་དག	correct reason	rgyu mtshan yang dag
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ར་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	substantiate	rgyu mtshan ra sprod byed pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་རིག	intelligent, relating to proof or cause or reason	rgyu mtshan rig
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཤེས་པའི་དད་པ	the trust of understanding the reason	rgyu mtshan shes pa'i dad pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཤེས་པའི་དད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	to have acquired a properly reasoned faith	rgyu mtshan shes pa'i dad pa thob pa
རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཤོད	tell the reason, appeal to reason	rgyu mtshan shod
རྒྱུ་མཚན་བཤད	argue, reason	rgyu mtshan bshad
རྒྱུ་མཚན་བཤད་པ	argue, reason	rgyu mtshan bshad pa
རྒྱུ་རྫས	property	rgyu rdzas
རྒྱུ་ཞགས	intestines zhags sgor mo	rgyu zhags
རྒྱུ་ཟ	take a bribe	rgyu za
རྒྱུ་ཟས	property, wealth	rgyu zas
རྒྱུ་ཟས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	material goods, food, and money	rgyu zas longs spyod
རྒྱུ་གཟུགས	cause forms	rgyu gzugs
རྒྱུ་གཟུགས་བཞི	the four causal forms	rgyu gzugs bzhi
རྒྱུ་གཟེད	diarrhea	rgyu gzed
རྒྱུ་གཟེར	intestinal gnyan rims, colic, dysentery	rgyu gzer
རྒྱུ་བཟས་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང	gzhan rgyu bzas nas producing phyogs lhung [partiality/ prejudice/ bias]	rgyu bzas phyogs lhung
རྒྱུ་བཟོའི་འཁོར་ཁང	beaming shop [in textile factory]	rgyu bzo'i 'khor khang
རྒྱུ་ཡང་དག་པར	consequence	rgyu yang dag par
རྒྱུ་ཡང་དག་པར་བཅད་པ	that has fully stopped or terminated the cause	rgyu yang dag par bcad pa
རྒྱུ་ཡི་ཏིང་ངེ	SA rgyu'i ting nge 'dzin	rgyu yi ting nge
རྒྱུ་ཡི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	causal contemplation	rgyu yi ting nge 'dzin
རྒྱུ་ཡི་ཏིང་འཛིན	seed samadhi; {rgyu'i ting nge 'dzin}	rgyu yi ting 'dzin
རྒྱུ་ཡི་ཐེག་པ	causal vehicles	rgyu yi theg pa
རྒྱུ་ཡི་ལམ	path to the ground	rgyu yi lam
རྒྱུ་ཡིན	verb + rgyu yin - will do verb	rgyu yin
རྒྱུ་ཡིས་ཁྱད་པར	chief cause, agent	rgyu yis khyad par
རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ་དེ་ཚོ	those who are wealthy	rgyu yod pa de tsho
རྒྱུ་རིག	#	rgyu rig
རྒྱུ་རིག་ཆེན་པོ	number	rgyu rig chen po
རྒྱུ་རླུགས	disease {rgyu rlugs}	rgyu rlugs
རྒྱུ་ལ	Rgyu Pass: 1) in si khron zhing chen khongs dkar mdzes, dar mdo rdzong; 2) in W ru thog rdzong)	rgyu la
རྒྱུ་ལ་གཉིས	CHN	rgyu la gnyis
རྒྱུ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	based on the causes	rgyu la brten pa
རྒྱུ་ལ་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་ནས་འགོག་པ	cessation after fully analyzing the causes	rgyu la rnam par dpyad nas 'gog pa
རྒྱུ་ལ་དཔྱོད་པ	analyzing the causes. Syn {rdo rje gzegs ma}	rgyu la dpyod pa
རྒྱུ་ལ་འབྲས་བུ་བཏགས	attach a fruit to cause	rgyu la 'bras bu btags
རྒྱུ་ལང	{rgyu lang cattle disease [in cattle's pho ba severe pain and nyal lang du ma byed dgos pa]	rgyu lang
རྒྱུ་ལམ	pathways for circulation	rgyu lam
རྒྱུ་ལམ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 paths of circulation	rgyu lam bco lnga
རྒྱུ་ལས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་འབྱུང	the causal origin of karma	rgyu las kyi kun 'byung
རྒྱུ་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	arising form causes	rgyu las skye ba
རྒྱུ་ལས་བསྒྲུབས་པ	produced through the cause of	rgyu las bsgrubs pa
རྒྱུ་ལས་བྱུང	results from, arising from the cause, produced or originated from cause	rgyu las byung
རྒྱུ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting form causes	rgyu las byung ba
རྒྱུ་ལས་འབྲས་བུ་འབྱུང་ངོ	from causes appear effects	rgyu las 'bras bu 'byung ngo
རྒྱུ་ལས་མ་བྱུང་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruit that does not derive from a cause	rgyu las ma byung ba'i 'bras bu
རྒྱུ་ལུས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང	form	rgyu lus kyi 'byung
རྒྱུ་ལུས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་བ	body	rgyu lus kyi 'byung ba
རྒྱུ་ལེགས	good material/ quality	rgyu legs
རྒྱུ་ལེགས་ཉེས	quality of the material	rgyu legs nyes
རྒྱུ་ལོག་པ	reversing the causes	rgyu log pa
རྒྱུ་ལོང་འཁྲོག་ཤིང	a rumbling in the bowels	rgyu long 'khrog shing
རྒྱུ་ཤ	nang khrol gnye ma	rgyu sha
རྒྱུ་ཤགས	lasso of intestines, noose of entrails	rgyu shags
རྒྱུ་ཤུགས	financial resources	rgyu shugs
རྒྱུ་ཤེད་ཀྱི་ང་རྒྱལ་ཆེ་བ	proud of his intellect, arrogant	rgyu shed kyi nga rgyal che ba
རྒྱུ་ཤེད་ཅན	plutocrat	rgyu shed can
རྒྱུ་ཤེར་པྱིན	causal perfection of wisdom	rgyu sher pyin
རྒྱུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན	causal perfection of wisdom	rgyu sher phyin
རྒྱུ་ཤེས་པ	effective noetic capacity	rgyu shes pa
རྒྱུ་ཤེས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	characterized as cognizing the cause	rgyu shes pa'i mtshan nyid
རྒྱུ་ཤེས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྟ་བ	the basis characterized as discriminative awareness is the view [gd], the view characterized as cognizing the cause	rgyu shes pa'i mtshan nyid lta ba
རྒྱུ་གཤིས	nature, character	rgyu gshis
རྒྱུ་ས	path, road	rgyu sa
རྒྱུ་སོང	expenditure, expense	rgyu song
རྒྱུ་སྲང	narrow path srang lam	rgyu srang
རྒྱུ་སྲིན	intestinal worms	rgyu srin
རྒྱུ་གསང	entrails moxibustion point	rgyu gsang
རྒྱུ་གསུམ	the three causes	rgyu gsum
རྒྱུ་ལྷག	appendi	rgyu lhag
རྒྱུ་ཨི་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	causal greater vehicle	rgyu i theg pa chen po
རྒྱུག་ཁྱི	running dog	rgyug khyi
རྒྱུག་ཁྲ	khang pa'i rgya mthongs sogs kyi mtha' skor sgrom skyor	rgyug khra
རྒྱུག་གུག	foot traveler's burden carrying stick = khur shing	rgyug gug
རྒྱུག་འགྲན	gom rgyug su mgyogs 'gran sdur,...Sa bde mor mi rta'i bang rtsal rgyug 'gran byas pa	rgyug 'gran
རྒྱུག་འགྲོ	run	rgyug 'gro
རྒྱུག་འགྲོའི་བྱེ་སྟོང	drifting sand area	rgyug 'gro'i bye stong
རྒྱུག་འགྲོའི་བྱེ་མ	shifting sand desert	rgyug 'gro'i bye ma
རྒྱུག་འགྲོས	gallop	rgyug 'gros
རྒྱུག་ཆུ	[flowing] stream, running water	rgyug chu
རྒྱུག་ཆེ་བ	1) very fast; 2) tsong brin bde ba	rgyug che ba
རྒྱུག་ཆེན	great race, military action, race, robbery, to race at a gallop	rgyug chen
རྒྱུག་མཆོང	1) run and jump; 2) monkey	rgyug mchong
རྒྱུག་མཆོངས	to run and jump	rgyug mchongs
རྒྱུག་རྟ	race horse	rgyug rta
རྒྱུག་ཐིག	hunters place cord on deer path etc. as snare	rgyug thig
རྒྱུག་དུས	busy season [when merchandise etc. moves well]	rgyug dus
རྒྱུག་རྡུང་གཏོང་བ	whack	rgyug rdung gtong ba
རྒྱུག་པ	fishing rod, flow, run, run quickly, rush, stick, wand	rgyug pa
རྒྱུག་པ་འཁྲོག་ལངས	'khrug rkyen bzo ba'i dpe,...Phan tsun mthun pa'i bar du rgyug pa 'khrog langs ma byed	rgyug pa 'khrog langs
རྒྱུག་པ་ཐུང་ཐུང་སྦོམ་པོ	club	rgyug pa thung thung sbom po
རྒྱུག་པ་གཞུ་བ	cane	rgyug pa gzhu ba
རྒྱུག་པ་ལེབ་འདུར	dmigs bsal gang yang med par cha snyoms byed pa'i dpe,...Da lam gyi khral 'dir gzhung sger chos gsum tsang ma rgyug pa leb 'dur du bskul dgos	rgyug pa leb 'dur
རྒྱུག་ཕྱིན	ran	rgyug phyin
རྒྱུག་བྱེད	leg	rgyug byed
རྒྱུག་སྦོམ	stick of dynamite	rgyug sbom
རྒྱུག་རྩལ	running	rgyug rtsal
རྒྱུག་རྩལ་འགྲན	compete in track events	rgyug rtsal 'gran
རྒྱུག་བཞིན་པ	running	rgyug bzhin pa
རྒྱུག་ཟིན་པ	sped	rgyug zin pa
རྒྱུག་ཡིག	cursive script	rgyug yig
རྒྱུག་ལམ	1) people/ cattle water etc. 'gro sa'i lam shur; 2) a path deer etc. habitually go on and become accustomed to; 3) running path/ race track	rgyug lam
རྒྱུག་ཤད	comb	rgyug shad
རྒྱུག་ཤད་སྐྲ་ལ་བརྒྱབ	combed the hair	rgyug shad skra la brgyab
རྒྱུག་ཤད་རྒྱག	comb	rgyug shad rgyag
རྒྱུག་ཤར	zhar 'phen nam bang rgyug	rgyug shar
རྒྱུག་ཤུར	btsugs phrug gi phrug skud gtub sa'i shing	rgyug shur
རྒྱུག་ཤེད	power of running	rgyug shed
རྒྱུག་སར་རྒྱུགས	running a race	rgyug sar rgyugs
རྒྱུག་སུག	short stick byed pa'i brda	rgyug sug
རྒྱུག་ཧྲིལ	dbyug pa hril hril lam kan khrang	rgyug hril
རྒྱུགས	imp. of {rgyug pa}; 1) imp. of {rgyug}. 2) Syn {rgyug} 3) go away!. 4) test, examination. 5) gallop. 6) limit, term, aim, end, task, lesson	rgyugs
རྒྱུགས་མཁན	runner	rgyugs mkhan
རྒྱུགས་ཆུ	creek	rgyugs chu
རྒྱུགས་ཆུ་ཆུང་ཆུང	brook	rgyugs chu chung chung
རྒྱུགས་ཏེ	swiftly running	rgyugs te
རྒྱུགས་ཐོ་འགོད	register/ present 1self for an examination	rgyugs tho 'god
རྒྱུགས་པ	sped to	rgyugs pa
རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད	give examination, to take examination	rgyugs sprod
རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད་བྱ	take an examination	rgyugs sprod bya
རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད་ཡི་གེ	examination paper	rgyugs sprod yi ge
རྒྱུགས་འཕྲོད	be examined, be given examination	rgyugs 'phrod
རྒྱུགས་འབུལ	take an examination [h]	rgyugs 'bul
རྒྱུགས་འབུལ་ཡི་གེ	examination paper [h]	rgyugs 'bul yi ge
རྒྱུགས་རྩལ་བྱེད་མཁན	athlete	rgyugs rtsal byed mkhan
རྒྱུགས་བཞེད	examination, test [h]	rgyugs bzhed
རྒྱུགས་ཡིག	quick/ cursive script	rgyugs yig
རྒྱུགས་ཡོང་བ	run back	rgyugs yong ba
རྒྱུགས་ལ་རྒྱུགས་ལེན	examination, test	rgyugs la rgyugs len
རྒྱུགས་ལེན	examination, test	rgyugs len
རྒྱུགས་ལེན་འདེམས	sgrug legs nyes bltas te 'dems sgrug	rgyugs len 'dems
རྒྱུགས་ལེན་པ	to give test	rgyugs len pa
རྒྱུགས་ལེན་བྱེད	give an examination/ test	rgyugs len byed
རྒྱུགས་ཤར	running, race	rgyugs shar
རྒྱུགས་ཤར་སློད	run, race	rgyugs shar slod
རྒྱུང་བ	the nerves, sinews	rgyung ba
རྒྱུངས	(not in DAS)	rgyungs
རེཕེ༹རས་ཏོ་བེཨིང	in-itself and beingoneself, SA gnyis ka rgyud, snyan rgyud, family, SA brgyud, string, chain, that which joins things together, physical or mental connection, ritual book, to tie, fasten, connect t...	refers to being
རྒྱུད་ཀྱང་མ་སྒུལ་ཏོ	could not even move the bow string	rgyud kyang ma sgul to
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི	Tantric, (sngags kyi). Of or pertaining to Vajrayana rgyud kyi rgyal po sgyu 'phrul dra ba rgyud gsang ba snying po rgyud kyi rgyal po sgyu 'phrul dra ba Mayajala King of Tantras rgyud kyi rgyal po...	rgyud kyi
གི་མཛོད	a detailed commentary on the hevajra tantra according to the rngog tradition of exegesis followed by the 'brug pa dkar brgyud pa; by {brag phug dge bshes dge 'dun rin chen}	gi mdzod
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ་བཅུ	SA dngos po bcu	rgyud kyi dngos po bcu
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འཆད་ཐབས་བཞི	four ways of expounding the tantras	rgyud kyi 'chad thabs bzhi
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ	Vajrayana teacher	rgyud kyi ston pa
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	embracing the tantric topics	rgyud kyi don la 'jug pa
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་བཤད	explanation / exegesis of the tantras	rgyud kyi rnam bshad
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་གཞུང	the texts of the root tantras	rgyud kyi gzhung
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་བཅུ	SA rang bzhin bcu	rgyud kyi rang bzhin bcu
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 excellent divisions of the unsurpassed tantras rgyud kyi rab tu dbye ba bcu gnyis Twelve Excellent Divisions of the Unsurpassed Tantras. See the entries under Six Enlightened Families of the Fat...	rgyud kyi rab tu dbye ba bcu gnyis
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བཤད་པ	explanation / exegesis of the tantras	rgyud kyi bshad pa
རྒྱུད་ཀྱིས་ནོན་པ	depressed (mood)	rgyud kyis non pa
རྒྱུད་ཀློང་གསལ	Brilliant Expanse Tantra; {klong gsal}	rgyud klong gsal
རྒྱུད་སྐད	'tantra-sound,' [a deep resonant vocal production]	rgyud skad
རྒྱུད་སྐུལ	campaign	rgyud skul
རྒྱུད་སྐུལ་བྱེད་མཁན	campaigner	rgyud skul byed mkhan
རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ	1) invoke, incite, arouse [to action]; 2) entreatment, appeal, solicitation, encouragement	rgyud bskul
རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་ཐེབས་སོང	got encouraged	rgyud bskul thebs song
རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་འདེབས	encourage	rgyud bskul 'debs
རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་བ	invoke mind-stream	rgyud bskul ba
རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	1) invoke, incite, arouse [to action]; 2) entreat, appeal, solicit, encourage	rgyud bskul byed
རྒྱུད་མཁོའི་ཤེས་རིག	common sense	rgyud mkho'i shes rig
རྒྱུད་གྱོང་པོ་ཐུལ་བ	tame our tough minds	rgyud gyong po thul ba
རྒྱུད་གྱོང་བ	obstinate	rgyud gyong ba
རྒྱུད་གྲྭ	tantric college	rgyud grwa
རྒྱུད་གྲྭ་སྟོད་སྨད	upper and lower tantric colleges	rgyud grwa stod smad
རྒྱུད་གྲོལ་བ	liberate the being/ mind	rgyud grol ba
རྒྱུད་འགལ	indirect incompatibility	rgyud 'gal
རྒྱུད་འགྲེལ	commentary to the tantra	rgyud 'grel
རྒྱུད་འགྲེལ་སྒྲོན་གསལ་རྣམ་ངེས	The Brilliant Torch of Certainty to Clarify the Tantras; {sgron gsal rnam nges}	rgyud 'grel sgron gsal rnam nges
རྒྱུད་རྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བ	Magical Net Tantra; text name	rgyud rgyu 'phrul drva ba
རྒྱུད་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲ་བ	{rgyud sgyu 'phrul dra ba}	rgyud sgyu 'phrul dra ba
རྒྱུད་ངན	wild nature	rgyud ngan
རྒྱུད་ལྔ	the five states [of sentient beings, {lam rgyud lnga}	rgyud lnga
རྒྱུད་ལྔའི་ལམ	see {lam rgyud lnga}	rgyud lnga'i lam
རྒྱུད་གཅིག	single continuity	rgyud gcig
རྒྱུད་གཅིག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	is of a singular continuity	rgyud gcig tu gyur pa
རྒྱུད་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	making into a single continuum/ identity	rgyud gcig tu byed pa
རྒྱུད་གཅིག་པ	1) 1 string tamboura; 2) single rigs rgyud	rgyud gcig pa
རྒྱུད་གཅོད་པ	to cut the flow	rgyud gcod pa
རྒྱུད་བཅུ་བདུན	Seventeen Tantras	rgyud bcu bdun
རྒྱུད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 tantras of mahayoga	rgyud bco brgyad
རྒྱུད་ཆགས	child being engendered in the womb	rgyud chags
རྒྱུད་ཆགས་གསུམ	three usual practices	rgyud chags gsum
རྒྱུད་ཆད	cut off	rgyud chad
རྒྱུད་ཆིངས	tantric guidelines	rgyud chings
རྒྱུད་ཆིངས་ལྔ	CHN	rgyud chings lnga
རྒྱུད་ཆེན་ཤེས་རབ་སེང་གེ	d. 1445	rgyud chen shes rab seng ge
རྒྱུད་ཆོས་དང་འདྲེས་པ	blend my mind with the Dharma, merged the stream of my mind with the Dharma	rgyud chos dang 'dres pa
རྒྱུད་ཆོས་དང་མ་འདྲེས་པ	my mindstream has not mixed with Dharma	rgyud chos dang ma 'dres pa
རྒྱུད་མཆོག་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	five major tantras rgyud mchog chen po rnam pa lnga CHN	rgyud mchog chen po rnam pa lnga
རྒྱུད་འཇམ	gentle character	rgyud 'jam
རྒྱུད་ཉི་ཟླ་ཁ་སྦྱོར	The Tantra of the Union of sun and moon 594	rgyud nyi zla kha sbyor
རྒྱུད་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ	Twenty-five tantras. Dzogchen tantras belonging to the Mind Section and possibly also the Space Section, taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana and Lekdrub. Listed in Chapter Fourteen of Sanglingma	rgyud nyi shu rtsa lnga
རྒྱུད་གཉིས	the mother and father lineages	rgyud gnyis
རྒྱུད་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	embracing the nature of equality	rgyud mnyam pa nyid du 'jug pa
རྒྱུད་མཉམ་སྦྱོར	Samayoga Tantra; {sangs rgyas thams cad kyi ...}	rgyud mnyam sbyor
རྒྱུད་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱིས་ཁྱབ་པ	one's	rgyud ting nge 'dzin gyis khyab pa
རྒྱུད་གཏན་དུ་འབྱུང	to occur often	rgyud gtan du 'byung
རྒྱུད་རྟག་པ་གཉིས་པ	2nd section of the	rgyud rtag pa gnyis pa
Hཨེབ༹ཇྲ	tantra	Hevajra
རྒྱུད་སྟོད	Gyu Tö, the Upper Tantra College in Lhasa, the Tantric College of Upper Tibet	rgyud stod
རྒྱུད་སྟོད་གྲྭ་ཙང	the Upper tantra college	rgyud stod grwa tsang
རྒྱུད་སྟོད་གྲྭ་ཚང	Upper Tantric College, Lhasa	rgyud stod grwa tshang
རྒྱུད་བརྟག་གཉིས	the Two Segments;	rgyud brtag gnyis
རྒྱུད་བརྟགས་གཉིས	Hevajra-tantra	rgyud brtags gnyis
རྒྱུད་བརྟགས་གཉིས་ལས	as the Hevajra Tantra says	rgyud brtags gnyis las
རྒྱུད་ཐ་དད	different substances	rgyud tha dad
རྒྱུད་ཐ་དད་པ	separate natures	rgyud tha dad pa
རྒྱུད་ཐ་དད་མེད་པ	without separate natures	rgyud tha dad med pa
རྒྱུད་ཐ་མི་དད	not of a different nature rgyud thams cad kyi rgyal po 'phags pa 'jam dpal gyi mtshan yang dag par	rgyud tha mi dad
བརྗོད་པ	Manjushri Nama Sangirti	brjod pa
རྒྱུད་ཐུལ	{slob ma'i rgyud legs par thul} properly transform the attitudes of his disciples	rgyud thul
རྒྱུད་ཐོག	to heart, in one's beings / heart / mind	rgyud thog
རྒྱུད་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཀལ	assimilate; x {chos ci tsam nyan kyang rgyud thog tu bkal nas nyams su len mi shes} not matter how many teachings you hear, you can never assimilate them or put them into practice	rgyud thog tu bkal
རྒྱུད་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཀལ་ནས	having taken to heart, assimilated	rgyud thog tu bkal nas
རྒྱུད་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཁལ་བ	[so that the antidote may) be effective in my being	rgyud thog tu khal ba
རྒྱུད་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཁེལ	apply to 1's being	rgyud thog tu khel
རྒྱུད་ཐོག་དུ་ཉམས་ལེན་ལ་འགེལ	to put into practice in one's mental continuum	rgyud thog du nyams len la 'gel
རྒྱུད་དག	temperament, SA rang bzhin	rgyud dag
རྒྱུད་དག་པ	pure mind / nature	rgyud dag pa
རྒྱུད་དག་པར་སྒྲུབ་ནུས་པ	able to instill the sense of pure ethics	rgyud dag par sgrub nus pa
རྒྱུད་དང་འདྲེས་པ	assimilate the meaning in your mind	rgyud dang 'dres pa
རྒྱུད་དང་པོ	the first string of the harp	rgyud dang po
རྒྱུད་དང་མན་ངག	tantras and oral instructions	rgyud dang man ngag
རྒྱུད་དུ	in the region of, always, at all times, continuously	rgyud du
རྒྱུད་དུ་གཏོགས་པ	belonging to the Tantra system	rgyud du gtogs pa
རྒྱུད་དུ་འབྱོར་བ	to integrate within oneself	rgyud du 'byor ba
རྒྱུད་དུ་འབྲེལ	strode ["joined in the being, merged"]	rgyud du 'brel
རྒྱུད་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	entered the path to liberation, stream winner (1 of lam bzhi)	rgyud du zhugs pa
རྒྱུད་དུམ་བུ་བཞི	four parts of tantra	rgyud dum bu bzhi
རྒྱུད་དུལ་བ	to be gentle, peaceful, disciplined	rgyud dul ba
རྒྱུད་དོན	the tantric meaning / meaning of the tantra	rgyud don
རྒྱུད་དོན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་བཅུ	ten aspects of the subject matter of tantra	rgyud don gyi dngos po bcu
ནས་བཅུ	10 aspects of the subject matter of tantra rgyud don gyi dngos po bye brag tu phye	nas bcu
རྒྱུད་དྲུག	six kinds of causes	rgyud drug
རྒྱུད་དྲུག་གི་སློབ་དཔོན་དྲུག	CHN	rgyud drug gi slob dpon drug
རྒྱུད་དྲུག་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberation of the six lokas	rgyud drug rang grol
རྒྱུད་བདུན	[Tse]	rgyud bdun
རྒྱུད་འདོད་པ་ཀུན་འབྱུང	Tantra of Fulfilling All Needs	rgyud 'dod pa kun 'byung
རྒྱུད་འདྲེས	cross-bred, hybrid	rgyud 'dres
རྒྱུད་འདྲེས་བྱེད	be cross-bred/ hybrid	rgyud 'dres byed
རྒྱུད་འདྲེས་སྦྱོར་སྡེབ	cross-breeding/ hybridization	rgyud 'dres sbyor sdeb
རྒྱུད་འདྲེས་སོན་གསོ	cross-fertilization of seeds, method for hybridization of seeds	rgyud 'dres son gso
རྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་མོ	Vajra Peak Tantra	rgyud rdo rje rtse mo
རྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྙིང་པོ	dag snang ye shes drva ba las gnas lugs rang byung	rgyud rdo rje'i snying po
གི་རྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྙིང་པོ	a systematic presentation of the teachings of the rdzogs chen approach of rnying ma pa Buddhism revealed by bdud 'joms gling pa and edited by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje	gi rgyud rdo rje'i snying po
རྒྱུད་རྡོར་ཕྲེང	Vajra Garland Tantra	rgyud rdor phreng
རྒྱུད་ལྡན་རོལ་ཆ	stringed instrument	rgyud ldan rol cha
རྒྱུད་ལྡབ་རོལ་ཆ	string instrument	rgyud ldab rol cha
རྒྱུད་སྡེ	1) tantra, the tantras 2) Tantra Section, tantra class; of Mahayoga	rgyud sde
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་གོང་མ	higher tantras	rgyud sde gong ma
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	Mayajala Tantras rgyud sde chen po rnams kyi dgongs pa the intent of the major tantras rgyud sde 'chad tshul gyi mtha' drug CHN	rgyud sde sgyu 'phrul
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འཆད་ཚུལ་གྱི་མཐའ་དྲུག	the six limits for expounding the tantras; see {mtha' drug}	rgyud sde 'chad tshul gyi mtha' drug
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ཐམས་ཅད་ནས་གསུངས་པ	all the tantras teach that	rgyud sde thams cad nas gsungs pa
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་དང་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ	Tantra and Sadhana Section. The two aspects of Mahayoga	rgyud sde dang sgrub sde
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་དྲུག	Six tantra sections, six sections of Tantra The three outer tantras of Kriya, Upa and Yoga and the three inner tantras of Maha, Anu and Ati. six classes of Vajrayana tantras, six sections of tantra	rgyud sde drug
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་དྲུག་གི་ཡི་དམ	Yidams of the six tantra sections	rgyud sde drug gi yi dam
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བདུན	the 7 kinds of tantra	rgyud sde bdun
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་སྤྱིའི་རྣམ་གཞག	general survey and classification of the tantras	rgyud sde spyi'i rnam gzhag
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ་རྣམས	most tantras	rgyud sde phal mo che rnams
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འབུམ་ཕྲག་དྲུག་ཅུ	the six million tantras	rgyud sde 'bum phrag drug cu
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འཛིན་པ	to uphold the tantras; memorize the tantras	rgyud sde 'dzin pa
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞི	4 classes of tantra (bya ba'i rgyud, spyod pa'i rgyud, rnal 'byor rgyud, rnal 'byor bla na med pa'i rgyud)	rgyud sde bzhi
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞི་འི་ཆོ་ག	the rituals of the four tantras	rgyud sde bzhi 'i cho ga
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞིའི་ཁྱད་པར	the distinctive features of the Four Sections of Tantra	rgyud sde bzhi'i khyad par
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞིའི་ཆོ་ག	the rituals of the four tantras	rgyud sde bzhi'i cho ga
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞིའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the deities of the four classes of tantra	rgyud sde bzhi'i lha tshogs
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འོག་མ	Lower Sections of Tantra	rgyud sde 'og ma
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འོག་མ་ལྟར	as in the lower tantras	rgyud sde 'og ma ltar
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འོག་མ་གསུམ	three lower sections of tantra	rgyud sde 'og ma gsum
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious tantras	rgyud sde rin po che
རྒྱུད་སྡེའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandalas of the various tantras	rgyud sde'i dkyil 'khor
རྒྱུད་སྡོམ	bind their mindstream / minds	rgyud sdom
རྒྱུད་བསྡམ	{rgyud sdom} bind their minds	rgyud bsdam
རྒྱུད་ནས་འབྲེལ་བ	indirectly relating [ggd]	rgyud nas 'brel ba
རྒྱུད་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three kinds of tantra	rgyud rnam pa gsum
རྒྱུད་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure minded	rgyud rnam par dag pa
རྒྱུད་རྣམ་བཤད	{rgyud rnam bshad}	rgyud rnam bshad
རྒྱུད་རྣམས་དག་པ	purity of the components, bases and activity fields forming the mind-stream [gd]	rgyud rnams dag pa
རྒྱུད་རྣམས་འཛིན	chu shing	rgyud rnams 'dzin
རྒྱུད་པ	tantrika, fasten, pass, teacher, progeny, descendants, offspring, tie, fasten, connect together, religious teacher, extraction, lineage, belonging to a race or family	rgyud pa
རྒྱུད་པ་སྐུ་སྐྱེས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Gyupa Kukye Rinpoche, a teacher in the Kokonor region	rgyud pa sku skyes rin po che
རྒྱུད་པ་ཁུངས་དག	pure origin, pure lineage	rgyud pa khungs dag
རྒྱུད་པ་དྲུག་ལྡན་ནམ་དགུ་ལྡན	those with the six or nine transmissions	rgyud pa drug ldan nam dgu ldan
རྒྱུད་པ་ལྡན	holder of the lineage	rgyud pa ldan
རྒྱུད་པ་འཕེལ	breed, increase by breeding	rgyud pa 'phel
རྒྱུད་པ་གསུམ	3 kinds of lineage (gdung rgyud, sku rgyud, slob rgyud)	rgyud pa gsum
རྒྱུད་པའི་དགེ་བསྐོས	discipline monitor of the tantra college	rgyud pa'i dge bskos
རྒྱུད་པའི་ཆོས་ཐོག	tantra session	rgyud pa'i chos thog
རྒྱུད་པའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	the system of the tantra	rgyud pa'i chos lugs
རྒྱུད་པར	Gyupar Range, in Domey	rgyud par
རྒྱུད་འཕེལ	breed, increase by breeding	rgyud 'phel
རྒྱུད་འཕེལ་ཚད	rate of increase by breeding rgyud byang chub kyi sems dang bral ba someone who lacks bodhichitta	rgyud 'phel tshad
རྒྱུད་བླ	see {rgyud bla ma}	rgyud bla
རྒྱུད་བླ་མ	theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma'i bstan bcos, Mahayanottaratantrashastra; Uttara Tantra, Unexcelled Continuity, short for Uttaratantra, sublime continuum of the Mahayana, by Maitreya, the Uttara tantr...	rgyud bla ma
Fཨིབེ༹་ཊྲེཨཏིསེས་ཨོཕ༹་མཻཏྲེཡ	Asanga [its	Five Treatises of Maitreya
སུབཇེཅཏ་ཨིས་ཏཐགཐ	garbha], unexcelled continuity, peerless continuum	subject is tathagatha
ཨཱུཏཏརཏནཏྲ	shastra; Maitreya-Asanga, 4th century	Uttaratantra
རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་དགོངས་པ	the intent of the Uttaratantra rgyud bla ma'i brjod bya rdo rje'i gnas	rgyud bla ma'i dgongs pa
རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	the Uttaratantra treatise	rgyud bla ma'i bstan bcos
རྒྱུད་བླ་རྩ་འགྲེལ	Uttaratantra, root and commentary	rgyud bla rtsa 'grel
རྒྱུད་བླའི་དགོངས་པ	the intent of the Uttaratantra	rgyud bla'i dgongs pa
རྒྱུད་འབུམ	Gyübum. The Hundred Thousand Tantras of the Nyingma School	rgyud 'bum
རྒྱུད་འབུམ་ཕྲག་དྲུག་ཅུ	Six million tantras. The tantras of Dzogchen received by Garab Dorje from Vajrasattva	rgyud 'bum phrag drug cu
རྒྱུད་འབྲེལ	tantric commentary 596	rgyud 'brel
རྒྱུད་སྦྱང	train oneself, train one's mind	rgyud sbyang
རྒྱུད་སྦྱངས	to purify one's being	rgyud sbyangs
རྒྱུད་མ་ཧ་ཡོ་ག	tantra mahayoga	rgyud ma ha yo ga
རྒྱུད་མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of Tantra mahayoga	rgyud ma ha yo ga'i theg pa
རྒྱུད་མང	lute	rgyud mang
རྒྱུད་མང་བསྒྲེངས་པ	playing of the harp	rgyud mang bsgrengs pa
རྒྱུད་མངས	vina, sitar	rgyud mangs
རྒྱུད་སྨད	Lower Tantric College, [at Sera]. Lhasa	rgyud smad
རྒྱུད་སྨད་གྲྭ་ཙང	Lower tantric college, [Sera] lhasa	rgyud smad grwa tsang
རྒྱུད་སྨད་གྲྭ་ཚང	Lower Tantric College	rgyud smad grwa tshang
རྒྱུད་སྨིན	ripen the stream of consciousness	rgyud smin
རྒྱུད་སྨིན་ཅིང་གྲོལ་བ	to ripen and liberate my mind; mature and free me	rgyud smin cing grol ba
རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པ	ripen the stream of consciousness	rgyud smin pa
རྒྱུད་གཙང	thoroughbred, pure blooded	rgyud gtsang
རྒྱུད་གཙང་འཕེལ་རྒྱ	thoroughbred breeding	rgyud gtsang 'phel rgya
རྒྱུད་བཙང་བ	pure character	rgyud btsang ba
རྒྱུད་རྩལ	race	rgyud rtsal
རྒྱུད་ཚིག	tantric words	rgyud tshig
རྒྱུད་ཚིག་པ	angry/ unhappy mind	rgyud tshig pa
རྒྱུད་ཚོགས་སུ་མ་ཚང་བ	explained in the vinaya mthun rkyen lnga'i nang nas bsam pa'i mthun rkyen zhig ste, bsgrub bya la dge bsnyen bar ma rab byung dge tshul bsnyen rdzogs kyi sdom pa 'bogs pa la, there must be less tha...	rgyud tshogs su ma tshang ba
རྒྱུད་ཚོད	estimation of the mentality [of someone]	rgyud tshod
རྒྱུད་ཚོད་དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony with the level of mind	rgyud tshod dang mthun pa
རྒྱུད་འཛིན	hereditary succession, inherit[er], succeed[er] to	rgyud 'dzin
རྒྱུད་འཛིན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	heredity	rgyud 'dzin gyi rang bzhin
རྒྱུད་འཛིན་གྱི་རིག་པ	genetics	rgyud 'dzin gyi rig pa
རྒྱུད་གཞན	other's stream of being	rgyud gzhan
རྒྱུད་གཞན་གྲུབ་པ	samtaanaaantarasiddhii	rgyud gzhan grub pa
རྒྱུད་བཞི	Four Medical Tantras, revealed by Drakpa Ngönshey	rgyud bzhi
རྒྱུད་བཞི་བསྡོམས་པས	all 4 tantras taken together rgyud bzhi'i dka' 'grel mun sel sgron me {rgyud bzhi'i dka' 'grel mun sel sgron me} rgyud bzhi'i dka' mchan 'dod 'byung nor	rgyud bzhi bsdoms pas
བུའི་མེ་ལོང	{rgyud bzhi'i dka' mchan 'dod 'byung nor bu'i me long}	bu'i me long
རྒྱུད་བཞིའི་དཀའ་འཕྲང་མུན་སེལ	{rgyud bzhi'i dka' 'phrang mun sel} rgyud bzhi'i bshad pa gzhan la phan pa'i	rgyud bzhi'i dka' 'phrang mun sel
གཏེར	{rgyud bzhi'i bshad pa gzhan la phan pa'i gter}	gter
རྒྱུད་བཟང་བ	healthy attitude	rgyud bzang ba
རྒྱུད་ཡས	#	rgyud yas
རྒྱུད་ཡོངས་སྨིན་པ	utterly matured stream of being	rgyud yongs smin pa
རྒྱུད་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱང་བ	to utterly purify / train one's being	rgyud yongs su sbyang ba
རྒྱུད་ཡོངས་སུ་མ་སྨིན	fully matured personage	rgyud yongs su ma smin
རྒྱུད་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	immature personage	rgyud yongs su smin pa
རྒྱུད་རང་གཞུང	textual tradition of tantras	rgyud rang gzhung
རྒྱུད་རང་གཞུང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	teaching according to its own textual tradition of the tantras. One of {man ngag gi sde'i dbye ba gsum}	rgyud rang gzhung du bstan pa
རྒྱུད་རང་ཤར	the Tantra of Self-arising Awareness; n. of a Dzogchen tantra	rgyud rang shar
རྒྱུད་རབས	generation of a lineage, genealogy	rgyud rabs
རྒྱུད་རིང	forbearing, patient	rgyud ring
རྒྱུད་རིང་ཐུང	length of time	rgyud ring thung
རྒྱུད་རིམ	system	rgyud rim
རྒྱུད་རིམ་ལྡན་པ	systematic, orderly	rgyud rim ldan pa
རྒྱུད་རིམ་ཡོད་པ	systematic	rgyud rim yod pa
རྒྱུད་རིས	wall, panel	rgyud ris
རྒྱུད་ལ	in one's being	rgyud la
རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེ་བ	to dawn in one's being / mind, to arise / grow forth in oneself	rgyud la skye ba
རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་པ	nyams rtogs khyad par	rgyud la skyes pa
ཅན་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་པ་བྱུང	had extraordinary experiences and realization	can rgyud la skyes pa byung
ཨོནེའས་སྟྲེཨམ	of-being	one's stream
རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཚད	the sign that you have understood this	rgyud la skyes pa'i tshad
རྒྱུད་ལ་མཁས	expert in the tantras	rgyud la mkhas
རྒྱུད་ལ་འགྲོ	to definitely integrate with one's being	rgyud la 'gro
རྒྱུད་ལ་འཆར	arise within one's mind	rgyud la 'char
རྒྱུད་ལ་འཇོག	{rgyud la gzhag/ rgyud la bzhag pa} to plant in the mindstream	rgyud la 'jog
རྒྱུད་ལ་ཐེབས་པ	penetrate the mind	rgyud la thebs pa
རྒྱུད་ལ་ཐོབ་པ	assimilate {bstan pa yongs su rdzogs pa rgyud la thob pa'i skal ba dang mi ldan pa} cannot assimilate the Dharma in its totality	rgyud la thob pa
རྒྱུད་ལ་འདྲོང	{rang rgyud la 'drong ngo shes par bya dgos te} make sure that you absorb	rgyud la 'drong
རྒྱུད་ལ་ཕན་ངེས	will surely benefit your minds	rgyud la phan nges
རྒྱུད་ལ་ཕན་ཐོགས་འོང	will benefit your mind	rgyud la phan thogs 'ong
རྒྱུད་ལ་ཕན་པ	to benefit their minds	rgyud la phan pa
རྒྱུད་ལ་འབྱོར་བ	taking to heart, cause to become one with one's being	rgyud la 'byor ba
རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱོར	{rgyud la sbyar ba} to apply to/ in one's mindstream/ personal experience	rgyud la sbyor
རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	to apply to one's being	rgyud la sbyor ba
རྒྱུད་ལ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	byang sems rgyud	rgyud la ma skyes pa
ལ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	failed to develop bodhichitta	la ma skyes pa
རྒྱུད་ལམ	tantric teachings, according to the teachings of the tantras	rgyud lam
རྒྱུད་ལས	In one tantra it says:	rgyud las
རྒྱུད་ལས་སྐྱེས་པའི་དབྱངས	musical sounds from strings	rgyud las skyes pa'i dbyangs
རྒྱུད་ལས་འཕོས	shoot an arrow	rgyud las 'phos
རྒྱུད་ལས་བྱུང་བ	from the tantras	rgyud las byung ba
རྒྱུད་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	workable continuum/ body and mind	rgyud las su rung ba
རྒྱུད་ལུགས	Tantra system	rgyud lugs
རྒྱུད་ལུང	tantric text, [maha yoga and anu yoga scripture]	rgyud lung
རྒྱུད་ལུང་མན་ངག	Tantra, statement, and instruction. a) Tantras (rgyud) b) statements (lung) and c) instructions (man ngag). Usually equated with the three inner tantras of maha, Anu and Ati, it is also taught that...	rgyud lung man ngag
པིཐ	instructions. [maha, Anu, Ati]; tantra, statement, and instruction	pith
རྒྱུད་ལུང་མན་ངག་གསུམ	CHN	rgyud lung man ngag gsum
རྒྱུད་ལོག	fault of the tantra itself	rgyud log
རྒྱུད་ལོག་པ	perverted tantra	rgyud log pa
རྒྱུད་ལོང	bolt, door-bar	rgyud long
རྒྱུད་བཤད	explain the tantras	rgyud bshad
རྒྱུད་སེམས་སེམས་བྱུང	the major and attending cognitive acts in the stream of being	rgyud sems sems byung
རྒྱུད་སྲོག	life	rgyud srog
རྒྱུད་གསང་སྙིང	Guhyagarbha Tantra	rgyud gsang snying
རྒྱུད་གསང་བ་སྙིང་པོ	Guhyagarbha Tantra. The widely renowned Mahayoga tantra of the Early Translations	rgyud gsang ba snying po
རྒྱུད་གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	T 442 - Guhyasamaja Tantra	rgyud gsang ba 'dus pa
རྒྱུད་གསུམ	1) three kinds of tantra; 2) three continua/ continuities; 3) rgyun chags gsum pa; 4) three continuua in Sakya lam 'bras practice	rgyud gsum
རྒྱུད་གསུམ་དུ་བསྟན་པའི་ལམ	CHN	rgyud gsum du bstan pa'i lam
རྒྱུན	continua, continuum [ggd]	rgyun
རྒྱུན་སྐམ	constipation	rgyun skam
རྒྱུན་སྐོང	to maintain, to perpetuate, to keep up	rgyun skong
རྒྱུན་སྐྱོང	mu mthud, maintain, perpetuate, keep up	rgyun skyong
རྒྱུན་སྐྱོང་བ	. . . gi rgyun skyong ba to maintain an ongoing/ continuous experience of . . .	rgyun skyong ba
རྒྱུན་སྐྱོངས	sustain the continuity / state!	rgyun skyongs
རྒྱུན་སྐྱོངས་བྱེད་པ	support, keep, remain, maintain, persist in, adhere to, insist on	rgyun skyongs byed pa
རྒྱུན་བསྐྱང་བ	to practice remaining (in the natural state)	rgyun bskyang ba
རྒྱུན་ཁྱེར	daily practice	rgyun khyer
རྒྱུན་ཁྱོངས	always to protect	rgyun khyongs
རྒྱུན་ཁྲི	settled seat or throne	rgyun khri
རྒྱུན་ཁྲིགས	bar ma chad pa dang dus rtag pa	rgyun khrigs
རྒྱུན་མཁོ	always necessary, indispensable, everyday needs, applied	rgyun mkho
རྒྱུན་མཁོའི་དངོས་རྫས	everyday necessities, things used daily	rgyun mkho'i dngos rdzas
རྒྱུན་མཁོའི་རྩིས་རིགས	applied mathematics	rgyun mkho'i rtsis rigs
རྒྱུན་མཁོའི་ཤེས་རིག	common applied knowledge	rgyun mkho'i shes rig
རྒྱུན་འཁོར	rotating, revolving	rgyun 'khor
རྒྱུན་འཁོར་མ་རྩ	revolving capital	rgyun 'khor ma rtsa
རྒྱུན་འཁྱོང	be able to keep up/ continue	rgyun 'khyong
རྒྱུན་འཁྱོང་བ	enduring, lasting, perpetual	rgyun 'khyong ba
རྒྱུན་འཁྱོངས	was able to keep up/ continue	rgyun 'khyongs
རྒྱུན་འཁྱོངས་བྱེད་པ	keep, remain, maintain, persist in, adhere to, insist on, support	rgyun 'khyongs byed pa
རྒྱུན་འཁྲིགས་སུ	ceaselessly, endlessly, continuously	rgyun 'khrigs su
རྒྱུན་གོམས་པ	being fully accomplished, fully skilled	rgyun goms pa
རྒྱུན་གོས	continuously worn clothing	rgyun gos
རྒྱུན་གྱི	ongoing/ continuous	rgyun gyi
རྒྱུན་གྱི་བཀོལ་བྱང	Gyüngyi Köljang, the Daily Practice Manual	rgyun gyi bkol byang
རྒྱུན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	continuous cycle 598	rgyun gyi 'khor lo
རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	daily practice	rgyun gyi nyams len
རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	continuous samadhi, a continuous meditative state	rgyun gyi ting nge 'dzin
རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཐུགས་དམ	daily practice (h)	rgyun gyi thugs dam
རྒྱུན་གྱི་མཐའ་མ	the end of the stream/ continuation	rgyun gyi mtha' ma
རྒྱུན་གྱི་བདག་པོ	lightning which comes from the north, lord of streaming flashes	rgyun gyi bdag po
རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	daily practice	rgyun gyi rnal 'byor
རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཀོལ་བྱང	Concise Manual of Daily Practice	rgyun gyi rnal 'byor bkol byang
རྒྱུན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ	daily activities	rgyun gyi spyod lam
རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	daily sadhana	rgyun gyi phrin las
རྒྱུན་གྱི་མྱུ་གུ	raindrops, dew	rgyun gyi myu gu
རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཡི་དམ	personal yidam	rgyun gyi yi dam
རྒྱུན་གྱིས	always	rgyun gyis
རྒྱུན་གྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	continuous movement	rgyun gyis 'gro ba
རྒྱུན་གྱིས་འཇུག་པ	continuous involvement	rgyun gyis 'jug pa
རྒྱུན་གྱིས་རྟག་པ	sustained / ongoing permanence	rgyun gyis rtag pa
རྒྱུན་འགག	be constipated	rgyun 'gag
རྒྱུན་འགག་པ	interruption	rgyun 'gag pa
རྒྱུན་འགྲོ	daily, recurring	rgyun 'gro
རྒྱུན་འགྲོའི་མ་དངུལ	daily expense money	rgyun 'gro'i ma dngul
རྒྱུན་ངན	bad tradition	rgyun ngan
རྒྱུན་གཅིག	singular flow / continuity	rgyun gcig
རྒྱུན་གཅིག་པ	singular flow / continuity	rgyun gcig pa
རྒྱུན་གཅོད་པ	to break the continuity	rgyun gcod pa
རྒྱུན་གཅོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to interrupt, discontinue	rgyun gcod par byed pa
རྒྱུན་མཅོད་པ	break the continuity	rgyun mcod pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས	continuity, continually safeguarded, breach of trust	rgyun chags
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པ	1) continuous, ongoing flow, sustained. 2) beautiful	rgyun chags pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	continuous interdependence, interdependence, continuous	rgyun chags pa'i rten 'brel
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པར	continuously	rgyun chags par
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པར་འཇུག་པ	continuously engage in	rgyun chags par 'jug pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པར་འདོད་པ	continuously maintain/ desire	rgyun chags par 'dod pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་ཡིན་པ	making a continuous series	rgyun chags yin pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ	continuously, continually	rgyun chags su
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་སྐྱོང་བ	to persevere constantly	rgyun chags su skyong ba
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་བརྟེན	to continuously maintain	rgyun chags su brten
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་གནས་པ	continuously rest/ abide	rgyun chags su gnas pa
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་འཕེལ་བ	perpetual magnification	rgyun chags su 'phel ba
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་འབྱུང་བ	continuously arise	rgyun chags su 'byung ba
རྒྱུན་ཆགས་གསུམ་པ	3rd event of the day [gso sbyong gi ritual, 1st gtsug lag khang gi bdag po and lha rnams kyi don du mdo bskul nas mdo 'don pa &, gzhi bdag sogs la gtor ma byin nas having done homage to the three j...	rgyun chags gsum pa
རྒྱུན་ཆད	interrupted	rgyun chad
རྒྱུན་ཆད་རྒྱུ་མེད	ceaselessly, endlessly, continuously	rgyun chad rgyu med
རྒྱུན་ཆད་ནས	rnam rtog rgyun chad	rgyun chad nas
རྒྱུན་ཆད་པ	disintegrated; interruption; interrupted	rgyun chad pa
རྒྱུན་ཆད་པ་མེད་པ	ever-flowing, unceasing	rgyun chad pa med pa
རྒྱུན་ཆད་པ་མེད་པར	ever-flowing, unceasing, ceaselessly, endlessly, continuously	rgyun chad pa med par
རྒྱུན་ཆད་པར	interruptedly, broken off	rgyun chad par
རྒྱུན་ཆད་མེད	unceasing	rgyun chad med
རྒྱུན་ཆད་མེད་པ	unceasing, uninterrupted, never ceases, continuous, constant, incessant, unremitting, perpetual, perennial, unbroken	rgyun chad med pa
རྒྱུན་ཆད་མེད་པར	1) ceaselessly, endlessly, continuously, unceasingly, uninterruptedly; 2) uninterrupted, ceaseless, incessant, flowing, continuous, without discontinuity, unbroken continuity	rgyun chad med par
རྒྱུན་ཆོད	interrupt	rgyun chod
རྒྱུན་མཆོད	dus nar ma'am rnam kun 'bul ba'i mchod pa	rgyun mchod
རྒྱུན་འཆད	interrupted	rgyun 'chad
རྒྱུན་འཆད་མེད་པར	ceaselessly	rgyun 'chad med par
རྒྱུན་ཇ	1) usual/ constant tea; 2) Dgon sde khag gi dus rgyun 'char can mang ja	rgyun ja
རྒྱུན་འཇགས	hab it or custom of good and bad actions which are done srol rgyun ring du chags pa, usual, normal, regular, at all times	rgyun 'jags
རྒྱུན་འཇུག་པ	on a constant basis	rgyun 'jug pa
རྒྱུན་ལྗང་རྩི་ཤིང	evergreen plant	rgyun ljang rtsi shing
རྒྱུན་ཉར	regular, standing	rgyun nyar
རྒྱུན་ཉར་དམག་དཔུང	regular/ standing army	rgyun nyar dmag dpung
རྒྱུན་བསྙེན	daily recitation	rgyun bsnyen
རྒྱུན་གཏན	at all times, the stream of time	rgyun gtan
རྒྱུན་གཏན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	normal pace/ way of doing something	rgyun gtan gyi rnam pa
རྒྱུན་གཏན་པ	steady, ongoing, continuous	rgyun gtan pa
རྒྱུན་གཏན་པ་ཉོན་ཡིད	the continuous klesha mind 599	rgyun gtan pa nyon yid
རྒྱུན་གཏན་བཞིན	as usual/ always	rgyun gtan bzhin
རྒྱུན་གཏན་ལམ་ལུགས	usual, normal, regular at all times	rgyun gtan lam lugs
རྒྱུན་གཏོར	continuous torma. one that remains upon the shrine throughout the practice, either as offerings or as representations of the deity	rgyun gtor
རྒྱུན་ལྟར	Syn {rgyun gtan bzhin}	rgyun ltar
རྒྱུན་ལྟར་མ་ཡིན་པ	unusual, abnormal	rgyun ltar ma yin pa
རྒྱུན་སྟུག	{rgyun stug}, Gandavyuha Sutra	rgyun stug
རྒྱུན་བརྟན	steady continuance	rgyun brtan
རྒྱུན་བརྟན་པ	steady continuance	rgyun brtan pa
རྒྱུན་བརྟན་པ་ཀུན་གཞི	ongoing allground	rgyun brtan pa kun gzhi
རྒྱུན་བསྟེན	incessant, continuous	rgyun bsten
རྒྱུན་ཐག	continuous, ongoing	rgyun thag
རྒྱུན་མཐའ	the end of the stream	rgyun mtha'
རྒྱུན་མཐའ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཐེ་བ༹ཇྲ	like samadhi at the end of the stream	rgyun mtha' rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin the vajra
རྒྱུན་མཐའ་ཡི་ཤེས	wisdom at the end of the stream	rgyun mtha' yi shes
རྒྱུན་མཐའ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the original wakefulness at the end of the stream	rgyun mtha' ye shes
རྒྱུན་མཐའི་རྡོར་ཏིང	the vajra-like samadhi at the end of the stream	rgyun mtha'i rdor ting
རྒྱུན་མཐའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom at the end of the stream	rgyun mtha'i ye shes
རྒྱུན་མཐུད	continuous, perpetual, persistent	rgyun mthud
རྒྱུན་འཐུད་པ	to continue, go on, hold out, last, endure, persist	rgyun 'thud pa
རྒྱུན་དུ	continuously, always	rgyun du
རྒྱུན་དུ་སྐྱོང་བ	to preserve continuously	rgyun du skyong ba
རྒྱུན་དུ་འཇོག་པ	continual placement, continuous settling	rgyun du 'jog pa
རྒྱུན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	daily repetition	rgyun du byed pa
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	Stream-enterer; entering the stream to nirvana. {rgyun zhugs}, stream-winner	rgyun du zhugs pa
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཞུགས་པའི་ཆོས	practice of the stream enterer	rgyun du zhugs pa'i chos
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཞུགས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	fruit of Stream Entry	rgyun du zhugs pa'i 'bras bu
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཞུགས་པའི་འབྲས་བུས	[by] the fruition of stream entry	rgyun du zhugs pa'i 'bras bus
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཞུགས་པའི་ལམ་ལ་འཇུགས་པ	to enter the path for Stream Entry	rgyun du zhugs pa'i lam la 'jugs pa
རྒྱུན་དུ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	keep daily in mind	rgyun du yid la byed pa
རྒྱུན་ལྡན	generally, usual[ly], continuous[ly], normal[y], regualar[ly], at all times	rgyun ldan
རྒྱུན་ལྡན་ལྟར	as usual	rgyun ldan ltar
རྒྱུན་ལྡན་དུ	generally, usually, continuously, normally, regularly, at all times	rgyun ldan du
རྒྱུན་ལྡན་དུ་འགྱུར	normalize, make normal	rgyun ldan du 'gyur
རྒྱུན་ལྡན་འཚོ་བ	daily life	rgyun ldan 'tsho ba
རྒྱུན་ལྡོག་པ	Syn {rgyun chad 'gro ba}	rgyun ldog pa
རྒྱུན་སྡོད	always/ continuously stay in 1 place, [be a] permanent resident, permanently stationed rgyun sdod kyi slob grwa ba ci tsam 'dug how many resident students are there	rgyun sdod
རྒྱུན་ནས	not at all, never	rgyun nas
རྒྱུན་ནས་མ་བྱས	never did	rgyun nas ma byas
རྒྱུན་ནི་མ་བཅད་པས	since it is continuous/ incessant	rgyun ni ma bcad pas
རྒྱུན་ནུ	leather rgyun bu	rgyun nu
རྒྱུན་གནས	permanent, regular	rgyun gnas
རྒྱུན་གནས་མ་ཡིན་པ	inconsistent	rgyun gnas ma yin pa
རྒྱུན་གནས་དམག་དཔུང	permanent/ regular army	rgyun gnas dmag dpung
རྒྱུན་པ	1) constant, permanent; 2) dead person's remains in the house for as many days as they are left for so many zhal 'don gnang mkhan gyi bla grwa; 3) sinews, tendons	rgyun pa
རྒྱུན་པར	daily {mu mthud pa}	rgyun par
རྒྱུན་སྤྱོད	everyday	rgyun spyod
རྒྱུན་ཕྱོགས	chu rgyug sa'i gzhung phyogs,...Shva 'od kyi chu log chen po rgyun phyogs ma yin par shor ba,...Thog brtsegs can gyi gru gzings la 'dzul nas gtsang chu chen po'i rgyun phyogs su zhugs pa,...Gru gzi...	rgyun phyogs
རྒྱུན་བབ	rain	rgyun bab
རྒྱུན་བབ་ཚ	heavy rain	rgyun bab tsha
རྒྱུན་བུ	leather cord	rgyun bu
རྒྱུན་བུ་ཀོ་འབྲེག	rgyu dngos gang yod pa'i thog nas gang dgos gtong ba	rgyun bu ko 'breg
རྒྱུན་འབབ	1) river; 2) hard rain	rgyun 'bab
རྒྱུན་འབབ་ཆུ་བོ་བཞིན	like the steady flow of a river	rgyun 'bab chu bo bzhin
རྒྱུན་འབྱམས	endless - will proliferate; x {don log par bzung na log rtog rgyun 'byams nas rang rgyud chud zos su 'gyur bstan pa'i rkang 'dren pa yin pas de dag spang te} if you remember incorrectly what has be...	rgyun 'byams
རྒྱུན་འབྱམས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན	corrupt/ evil practices	rgyun 'byams kyi skyon
རྒྱུན་འབྱམས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་ཆ	corrupt/ evil practices	rgyun 'byams kyi skyon cha
རྒྱུན་འབྱམས་འཁྲུལ་པ	continuous state of delusion	rgyun 'byams 'khrul pa
རྒྱུན་སྦར	{mar me rgyun sbar gyi dngul kong} silver butter-lamps which were to remain lit day and night 600	rgyun sbar
རྒྱུན་མ	continuous, unbroken, incessant	rgyun ma
རྒྱུན་མ་བཅད་པ	{/ mi chad pa} (+r) continuous; uninterrupted(ly)	rgyun ma bcad pa
རྒྱུན་མ་ཆག་པར	without interruption, without breaking the continuity or course	rgyun ma chag par
རྒྱུན་མ་ཆད	w/o interruption, uninterrupted[ly], incessant, unbroken	rgyun ma chad
རྒྱུན་མ་ཆད་པ	without interruption, uninterruptedly, uninterrupted, incessant, unbroken	rgyun ma chad pa
རྒྱུན་མ་ཆད་པར	Syn {rgyun chad med par} adv. incessantly	rgyun ma chad par
རྒྱུན་མར	continuously, unbrokenly, incessantly	rgyun mar
རྒྱུན་མི་གཅོད་པ	ever-flowing	rgyun mi gcod pa
རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད་དུ	uninterruptedly	rgyun mi chad du
རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད་དུ་འབྱུང་བ	arise incessantly	rgyun mi chad du 'byung ba
རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད་པ	{/ ma bcad} (+r) continuous; uninterrupted(ly)	rgyun mi chad pa
རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད་པར	w/o interruption, uninterruptedly, continuously	rgyun mi chad par
རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད	is not discontinuous, continuous, without interruption, uninterrupted flow, knows no interruption	rgyun mi 'chad
རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་པ	perpetual, w/o interruption	rgyun mi 'chad pa
རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	ever-turning wheel	rgyun mi 'chad pa'i 'khor lo
རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་པར	uninterrupted	rgyun mi 'chad par
རྒྱུན་མི་ལྡོག་པ	unstoppable flow	rgyun mi ldog pa
རྒྱུན་མེད་པ	cessation, discontinued	rgyun med pa
རྒྱུན་བཙུགས	continuous srol btod	rgyun btsugs
རྒྱུན་རྩ	a way of taking the pulse of a healthy person, in the time of the physicians exhaling twice and inhaling twice, between once	rgyun rtsa
རྒྱུན་ཚུགས	regular, usual, normal; continuous	rgyun tshugs
རྒྱུན་འཚོ	constantly foster	rgyun 'tsho
རྒྱུན་འཛིན	persistence, maintenance, continuity	rgyun 'dzin
རྒྱུན་འཛིན་པ	successor	rgyun 'dzin pa
རྒྱུན་འཛིན་བྱེད	persist, maintain, continue	rgyun 'dzin byed
རྒྱུན་འཛུགས	constant, eternal	rgyun 'dzugs
རྒྱུན་ཞུག་ག	stream-enterer	rgyun zhug ga
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས	stream enterer, streamwinner; stream entrance	rgyun zhugs
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of stream enterer	rgyun zhugs lnga
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་པ	stream-enterer rgyun zhugs pa'i 'bras bu la gnas pa abider in the fruit of stream entrance rgyun zhugs pa'i 'bras bu la zhugs pa candidate for the fruit of stream entrance	rgyun zhugs pa
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་འབྲས་གནས	abider in the fruit of stream entrance; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {spangs pa'i khyad par 'bras zhugs dang 'dra/ rtogs pa'i khyad par skad cig ma bcu drug pa lam gyi rjes shes la rtogs pa thob pa}	rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་འབྲས་གནས་ཙམ་པོ་བ	dge 'dun nyi shu'i nang gses, rgyun du zhugs pa'i 'bras bu la gnas pa gang zhig 'dod pa'i sgom spang gtan ma spangs pa da lta spong ba'i sbyor ba la mi brtson pa'am gcig nas lnga'i bar gang yang ru...	rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas tsam po ba
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་འབྲས་གནས་གསུམ	the three types of abidance in the fruit of stream entrance #	rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas gsum
ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོནས་ཨོཕ༹་སྟྲེཨམ	entry	fruitions of stream
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་འབྲས་བུ	fruition of streamentry	rgyun zhugs 'bras bu
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་ཞུགས་པ	candidate for the fruit of stream entrance	rgyun zhugs zhugs pa
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་ཞུགས་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of dwellers in the fruition of stream entry	rgyun zhugs zhugs pa gnyis
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སྐྱེ	rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas khyad par gsum ldan gyi 'phags pa ste, spangs pa'i khyad par 'dod nyon gsum pa'am bzhi pa spangs pa, dbang po'i khyad par de'i gnyen po zag med kyi dbang thob pa, skye ba'i k...	rgyun zhugs rigs nas rigs skye
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སྐྱེས	[Tse rig]	rgyun zhugs rigs nas rigs skyes
རྒྱུན་ཞུགས་སྲིད་པ་ལན་བདུན་པ	sgom spang nyon mongs gcig kyang ma spangs pa'i rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas yin la, ris mthun gyi skye ba bdun tsun chad du dgra gcom pa'i 'bras bu thob nges kyi 'phags pa'o	rgyun zhugs srid pa lan bdun pa
རྒྱུན་བཞུགས	was a permanent resident/ permanently stationed	rgyun bzhugs
རྒྱུན་གཟན	rab byung gi rgyun du dkri bya'i gzan	rgyun gzan
རྒྱུན་བཟང	good tradition/ custom	rgyun bzang
རྒྱུན་ཡུན	flow	rgyun yun
རྒྱུན་ཡོད་ངེས་པ	definite possession of a lineage	rgyun yod nges pa
རྒྱུན་རིང	long time	rgyun ring
རྒྱུན་རིང་ཐུང་སྣ་ཚིགས	a varying length of time	rgyun ring thung sna tshigs
རྒྱུན་རིང་ཐུང་སྣ་ཚོགས	a varying length of time	rgyun ring thung sna tshogs
རྒྱུན་རིང་དུ་ཆགས་པ	usual, normal, regular, at all times	rgyun ring du chags pa
རྒྱུན་རིང་གནས་པ	transient	rgyun ring gnas pa
རྒྱུན་རིང་པོ	for a long time	rgyun ring po
རྒྱུན་རིང་བ	long	rgyun ring ba
རྒྱུན་རིང་ཙམ་དུ	for a long time, for some time	rgyun ring tsam du
རྒྱུན་རིང་ལོས	how long a duration?	rgyun ring los
རྒྱུན་རིམ	schedule, time table	rgyun rim
རྒྱུན་ལམ	tradition, custom, moral procedure	rgyun lam
རྒྱུན་ལས	usual/ continuous work, standing committee	rgyun las
རྒྱུན་ལས་ལས་འཛིན	usual/ permanent staff	rgyun las las 'dzin
རྒྱུན་ལས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	standing committee 601	rgyun las u yon lhan khang
རྒྱུན་ལུགས	1) [unbroken] tradition; 2) normal pace/ way of doing something; 3) [arch] rgyu 'grul rgyun lugs bcad pa'i kun spyod ngan pa tradition breaking bad behavior	rgyun lugs
རྒྱུན་ཤིང	firewood that is always available	rgyun shing
རྒྱུན་ཤིང་ཤིང་གཉེར	gsol thab khag gi rgyun shing do dam las tshan zhig	rgyun shing shing gnyer
རྒྱུན་ཤིན་ཏུ་རིང་བ	very long	rgyun shin tu ring ba
རྒྱུན་ཤེས	common sense/ knowledge	rgyun shes
རྒྱུན་གཤིས	character, nature	rgyun gshis
རྒྱུན་གཤིས་སུ་ཞུགས	become part of 1's character/ nature	rgyun gshis su zhugs
རྒྱུན་བཤགས	daily confession [practice / recital]	rgyun bshags
རྒྱུན་བཤགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	seven branches of daily apology	rgyun bshags kyi yan lag bdun
རྒྱུན་བཤགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ	the 7 limbs of daily confession	rgyun bshags kyi yan lag bdun pa
རྒྱུན་བཤགས་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	Daily Apology in Eight Branches [full quotation, Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 168] rgyun bshags yan lag brgyad pa dang bcu	rgyun bshags yan lag brgyad pa
རྒྱུན་སྲིང	rgyun mthud pa	rgyun sring
རྒྱུན་སྲིང་བ	to continue, prolong, extend, stretch, draw out, lengthen, protract	rgyun sring ba
རྒྱུན་སྲོལ	habitual usual	rgyun srol
རྒྱུན་སྲོལ་དམ་པོར་འཛིན་མཁན	orthodox	rgyun srol dam por 'dzin mkhan
རྒྱུན་སྲོལ་མཚོན་ཆ	conventional weapons	rgyun srol mtshon cha
རྒྱུན་སྲོལ་བཟང་པོ	good tradition	rgyun srol bzang po
རྒྱུན་སྲོལ་རང་ལ་བསྟན	1's following tradition/ convention/ custom/ normal procedure rgyun srol rang la bstan nas ma gtogs gro	rgyun srol rang la bstan
མི་ཤེས	not be able to do things except for following tradition/ convention/ custom/ normal procedure rgyun srol rang la bstan nas ma gtogs gro	mi shes
མི་ཤེས་མཁན	1 who cannot do things except for following tradition/ convention/ custom/ normal procedure	mi shes mkhan
རྒྱུན་གསུམ་པ	River Ganges	rgyun gsum pa
རྒྱུན་བསྲིང	1) protracted, prolonged; 2) persistent	rgyun bsring
རྒྱུན་བསྲིང་དམག་འཁྲུག	protracted war	rgyun bsring dmag 'khrug
རྒྱུན་བསྲིང་དམག་འཐབ	protracted war	rgyun bsring dmag 'thab
རྒྱུན་བསྲིངས	constantly maintain it	rgyun bsrings
རྒྱུའི	causal, of or pertaining to a cause	rgyu'i
རྒྱུའི་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	causal affliction	rgyu'i kun nas nyon mongs pa
རྒྱུའི་ཀུན་སློང	causal motivation [in being established as dge tshul or dge slong, the compatible condition of thought/ wish rgyu'i kun slong must be attained, as a thirsty person desires water zhe thag pa nas 1 m...	rgyu'i kun slong
རྒྱུའི་བཀའ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས	causal teachings and commentaries	rgyu'i bka' dang bstan bcos
རྒྱུའི་རྐྱེན	causal condition	rgyu'i rkyen
རྒྱུའི་ཁྱད་པར་སྒྲུབ	a reason for cause which proves a particular cause	rgyu'i khyad par sgrub
རྒྱུའི་ཁྱད་པར་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign proving a particular cause	rgyu'i khyad par sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུའི་རྒྱན	causal ornament [byed po gang yang rung ba zhig gis rgyu byas, 'bras bu dngos shugs gang rung las go zhing shes par byed pa'i rgyan zhig]	rgyu'i rgyan
རྒྱུའི་རྒྱན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 causal ornaments	rgyu'i rgyan bcu drug
རྒྱུའི་རྒྱུད	causal tantra. Syn {gzhi rgyud}	rgyu'i rgyud
རྒྱུའི་རྒྱུན	stream of cause	rgyu'i rgyun
རྒྱུའི་དངོས་པོ	a causal force	rgyu'i dngos po
རྒྱུའི་ཆེད་དུ	"purposive" connective	rgyu'i ched du
རྒྱུའི་ཆོས	causal teachings	rgyu'i chos
རྒྱུའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	causal (aspect of) dharmakaya	rgyu'i chos sku
རྒྱུའི་ཆོས་འཁོར་གསུམ	three turnings /promulgations of the doctrinal wheel, according to the causal vehicle	rgyu'i chos 'khor gsum
རྒྱུའི་སྙོམ་འཇུག	causal meditative concentration	rgyu'i snyom 'jug
རྒྱུའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	causal meditative concentration	rgyu'i snyoms 'jug
རྒྱུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Seed samadhi. The third of the three samadhis. causal samadhi, causal contemplation	rgyu'i ting nge 'dzin
གོཨིང་ཏོ་བེ་ཐེ་སུབསྟནཅེ	matter of the process, SA bsrung ba'i 'khor lo	going to be the substance
རྒྱུའི་རྟ་བབས་བརྒྱད	eightfold causal archway; Def: {sgo phub phyi nang gnyis su them skas bzhi bzhi}	rgyu'i rta babs brgyad
རྒྱུའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {sa dang chu dang me dang rlung dang nam mkha' dang dus so}	rgyu'i rten 'brel
རྒྱུའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་དྲུག	the sixfold causal dependency {rgyu'i rten 'brel}	rgyu'i rten 'brel drug
རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ	cause-oriented approach	rgyu'i theg pa
རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	causal greater vehicle [gd]	rgyu'i theg pa chen po
རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ་བཞི	Four Ways of Cause	rgyu'i theg pa bzhi
རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	three outer vehicles of dialectics [pious attendants {nyan thos kyi theg pa} or s'r vakay na, selfcentred buddhas {rang rgyal gyi theg pa} or pratyekabuddhay na and bodhisattvas {byang chub sems dp...	rgyu'i theg pa gsum
རྒྱུའི་དུས་ན	at the time of the cause	rgyu'i dus na
རྒྱུའི་དུས་སུ	at the time of the cause	rgyu'i dus su
རྒྱུའི་དོན	causal fact	rgyu'i don
རྒྱུའི་ནུས་པ	the power / capacity of the cause	rgyu'i nus pa
རྒྱུའི་དཔེ	dpe rgyan so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can gyi steng gi 602 khyad chos mi 'dra ba dag gi rgyus dpe mi 'dra ba dag dang mtshungs par ston pa'i rgyan zhig	rgyu'i dpe
རྒྱུའི་སྤྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འབྲས་རྟགས	effect sign proving a general cause	rgyu'i spyi sgrub kyi 'bras rtags
རྒྱུའི་བོན	Bon of Cause, four Bon of the cause (phywa gshen theg pa, snang gshen theg pa, 'phrul gshen theg pa, srid gshen theg pa)	rgyu'i bon
རྒྱུའི་བོན་གཞི	four bon of cause	rgyu'i bon gzhi
རྒྱུའི་བྱེད	that has become a cause, excuse	rgyu'i byed
རྒྱུའི་དབང	causal abhisheka	rgyu'i dbang
རྒྱུའི་དབྱངས	the causative vowels	rgyu'i dbyangs
རྒྱུའི་དབྱེ་བ	types of causes	rgyu'i dbye ba
རྒྱུའི་གཙོ་བོ	principal cause	rgyu'i gtso bo
རྒྱུའི་ཚོགས་གྲངས་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete meeting of causes	rgyu'i tshogs grangs ma tshang ba
རྒྱུའི་ཚོགས་གྲངས་ཚང་བ	complete meeting of causes	rgyu'i tshogs grangs tshang ba
རྒྱུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི	analytical causal vehicles	rgyu'i mtshan nyid kyi
རྒྱུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	analytical vehicles	rgyu'i mtshan nyid kyi theg pa
རྒྱུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	having the attributes of being a cause	rgyu'i mtshan nyid can
རྒྱུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པ	causal vehicle of defining characteristics. Syn {rgyu mtshan nyid kyi theg pa}	rgyu'i mtshan nyid theg pa
རྒྱུའི་གཟུགས	causal form, forms of cause; Def. {'byung ba sa chu me rlung bzhi}; Def. {'byung ba chen po bzhi}	rgyu'i gzugs
རྒྱུའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang tsan zhig ste, dpe can la yod pa'i khyad chos rnams kyi rgyu mtshan la brten nas rang dang chos mtshungs pa'i dpe rnams kyi gzugs su bkod pa'i rgyan zhig	rgyu'i gzugs can
རྒྱུའི་ཡི་གེ	seed syllable	rgyu'i yi ge
རྒྱུའི་རིག	science of reasoning	rgyu'i rig
རྒྱུའི་རེག་བྱ	causal texture	rgyu'i reg bya
རྒྱུའི་ལམ་ཤེས	[Tse rig]	rgyu'i lam shes
རྒྱུའི་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	causal heruka [gd]	rgyu'i he ru ka
རྒྱུར	(as) the cause.(kyi-)rgyur-gyur-pa to act as the (primary) cause of	rgyur
རྒྱུར་གྱུར	which will cause	rgyur gyur
རྒྱུར་གྱུར་པ	. . . (kyi) rgyur gyur pa - to act as the (primary) cause of . . .	rgyur gyur pa
རྒྱུར་གྱུར་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	the causal aggregates	rgyur gyur pa'i phung po
རྒྱུར་འགྱུར	serviceable	rgyur 'gyur
རྒྱུར་འགྱུར་པ	which will be the cause of	rgyur 'gyur pa
རྒྱུར་བྱས	causing	rgyur byas
རྒྱུར་བྱས་པ	to be caused, to cause	rgyur byas pa
རྒྱུར་སྨྲ་བ	declare to be the cause	rgyur smra ba
རྒྱུར་སྨྲ་བའི་ལྟ་བ	doctrine of the hetuvadin sect of the tirthika	rgyur smra ba'i lta ba
རྒྱུས	grasp/ clue/ inkling	rgyus
རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	light of doctrine	rgyus kyi snang ba
རྒྱུས་རྐུ་བ	rob a thing knowing all about it beforehand	rgyus rku ba
རྒྱུས་སྐུད	cord made of sinew	rgyus skud
རྒྱུས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya bstod bsngags 'os pa'i don gang yang rung ba zhig 'gog byed dngos po'i rang bzhin gyi gshis lugs sam rang gi ngang tshul yin pa'i rgyu mtshan gyis 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig 'gog pa'i rgyan gyi ...	rgyus 'gog pa
རྒྱུས་སྒྲུབ	form through causes	rgyus sgrub
རྒྱུས་མངའ	familiarity, acquaintance, knowledge	rgyus mnga'
རྒྱུས་མངའ་མེད་མཁན	lay, unprofessional	rgyus mnga' med mkhan
རྒྱུས་མངའ་མེད་པའི་དཀ	difficulties of lack of familiarity/ acquaintance/ knowledge	rgyus mnga' med pa'i dka
རྒྱུས་ཆ	1) knowledge, familiarity * [knowing of] customs; 2) notice, intelligence	rgyus cha
རྒྱུས་གནད	lus kyi rgyus pa'i nang nas gnad che ba rnams te, mjing pa'i chu leb sogs bcu drug mchis so	rgyus gnad
རྒྱུས་པ	muscle, sinew, tendons	rgyus pa
རྒྱུས་བྱུང་བ	caused by	rgyus byung ba
རྒྱུས་མེད	unknown	rgyus med
རྒྱུས་མེད་མཁན	lay, unprofessional	rgyus med mkhan
རྒྱུས་མེད་ཆ་མེད	unfamiliar	rgyus med cha med
རྒྱུས་མེད་པ	uninformed, without a grasp/ the slightest inkling	rgyus med pa
རྒྱུས་ཡོད	knowledge, familiarity, familiar	rgyus yod
རྒྱུས་ཡོད་བྱེད	act as a guide, show some1 around	rgyus yod byed
རྒྱུས་ཡོད་བྱེད་པ	familiarize, introduce	rgyus yod byed pa
རྒྱུས་རུས	muscle and bone	rgyus rus
རྒྱུས་ལེན་བྱེད	guide/ show some1 around	rgyus len byed
རྒྱུས་ལོན	to understand, know	rgyus lon
རྒྱུས་ལོན་པ	understand, know	rgyus lon pa
རྒྱེན	causes, upwards, up, uphill	rgyen
རྒྱེན་རྒྱུ	speech, respiration	rgyen rgyu
རྒྱེན་རྒྱུག་པ	gallop uphill, pass upwards, climb up	rgyen rgyug pa
རྒྱེན་ཆ	jewelry, ornaments	rgyen cha
རྒྱེན་ཆད	upper part of a country, an ascent	rgyen chad
རྒྱོ	have sex	rgyo
རྒྱོ་རྒྱབ་པ	copulate	rgyo rgyab pa
རྒྱོ་བ	cohabit, have sexual intercourse, deflower, ravish	rgyo ba
རྒྱོ་ལས	fornication	rgyo las
རྒྱོགས	gun, missile	rgyogs
རྒྱོང	p brgyangs,, - stretch, extend out, distend, fill 603	rgyong
རྒྱོང་སྐུད	cloth stretching cord	rgyong skud
རྒྱོང་ཁང	cloth stretching piece of wood at the end [shing sgrom]	rgyong khang
རྒྱོང་འགོ	lham gyi snga rting rgyong byed kyi shing	rgyong 'go
རྒྱོང་སྒྲོམ	cloth stretching piece of wood at the end [shing sgrom]	rgyong sgrom
རྒྱོང་བ	{rgyong ba, brgyangs pa, brgyang ba, rgyongs} trans. v.; strike!	rgyong ba
རྒྱོང་ཤིང	thangka's cloth ground and so forth stretching end sticks	rgyong shing
རྒྱོང་གཤར	in sewing clothes etc. as a way of eliminating wrinkles thang sha gcod byed kyi rgyong byas pa'i thog brgyab pa'i gnon tsem gyi hab gshar	rgyong gshar
རྒྱོངས	imp. of {rgyangs}; imp. of {rgyong ba}	rgyongs
རྒྱོན་པ	cover oneself	rgyon pa
རྒྱོབ	throw, SA rgyab pa	rgyob
རྒྱོབ་རྒྱབ	sound of "hit, hit", strike, strike!	rgyob rgyab
རྒྱོབ་རྒྱོབ	Strike! Strike!; x {gshin rje'i skyes bu bsam gyis mi khyab pas sod sod dang rgyob rgyob kyi ngang la ded nas} the Lord of Death's countless henchmen will be pursuing you, crying, "Kill! Kill! Stri...	rgyob rgyob
རྒྱོར་བ	kill	rgyor ba
རྒྱོས	have sexual intercourse, SA rgyo ba	rgyos
རྒྲ་དོན	meaning of the term	rgra don
རྒྲད་པོ	old/ aged man	rgrad po
རྒྲད་མོ	old/ aged woman	rgrad mo
རྒྲོ་བཏགས	superimposition	rgro btags
ལྒ	SA sga, ginger, a tribe, brown ginger	lga
ལྒ་སྐྱ	ginger	lga skya
ལྒ་ཕོ་ཆེ	mystical word, oxide of mercury, medicinal ginger	lga pho che
ལྒ་མིན	demigods	lga min
ལྒ་རློན	fresh ginger	lga rlon
ལྒ་སེར	turmeric	lga ser
ལྒགས་རིགས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	special metals	lgags rigs khyad par can
ལྒང་ངེ	marble white	lgang nge
ལྒང་པ	urinary, bladder, relating to the bladder	lgang pa
ལྒང་པའི་གསང	the bladder gsang gnad	lgang pa'i gsang
ལྒང་ཕུག	urinary, bladder	lgang phug
ལྒང་བ	lgang pa	lgang ba
ལྒང་བུ	bladder	lgang bu
ལྒང་བུག	bladder	lgang bug
ལྒང་སྦུག	lgang phug	lgang sbug
ལྒང་ཞུ	lantern	lgang zhu
ལྒང་ཞུ་དམར་པོའི་སྒྲུང	the tale of the red lantern	lgang zhu dmar po'i sgrung
ལྒང་བཞུ	bladder-like glass place to put a lamp	lgang bzhu
ལྒང་ལི	bladder	lgang li
ལྒམ	pea pod	lgam
ལྒམ་ཕུག	balloon	lgam phug
ལྒའུ་གཤེར	fresh ginger	lga'u gsher
ལྒར་མ་མེས་པོ	patriarch of lgar ma tribe, tribal name	lgar ma mes po
ལྒས	(not in DAS)	lgas
ལྒུན་གྲུབ་གཟུགས་སྒུའི་འོད་གསལ	spontaneously present luminosity of rupak ya	lgun grub gzugs sgu'i 'od gsal
ལྒོ	skin	lgo
ལྒོ་ལྒོ	med. pha ba dgo dgo	lgo lgo
ལྒོ་པ	errant, incorrect, wrong, false, heterodox	lgo pa
ལྒོབ	(not in DAS)	lgob
སྒ	ginger	sga
སྒ་སྐྱ	1) {sga skya} field med.; 2) saddle w/o the usual cushion on top	sga skya
སྒ་ཁེབས	saddle cloth, leather cover or coating of a saddle	sga khebs
སྒ་ཁོག	saddle's nang rgya	sga khog
སྒ་ཁྲལ	sga brgyab pa'i sems can when traveling money len pa'i khral zhig	sga khral
སྒ་འཁོར་བཅས	saddle and tack	sga 'khor bcas
སྒ་གློ	saddle girth	sga glo
སྒ་འགྱུར་སྟན་འགྱུར	saddle and cushion all in disorder/ changing places, everything changing	sga 'gyur stan 'gyur
སྒ་རྒྱག	three year old horse/ mule, saddle a horse etc	sga rgyag
སྒ་རྒྱབ་པ	saddle	sga rgyab pa
སྒ་རྒྱུན	saddle's sha thag	sga rgyun
སྒ་སྒྲིག	equipment of a riding horse	sga sgrig
སྒ་སྒྲོན་པ	saddle a horse	sga sgron pa
སྒ་སྒྲོམ	so that a child can ride etc. tshugs ched on the saddle before and behind btsugs pa'i shing ku ru kha'i sgrom	sga sgrom
སྒ་ཆས	saddlery, tack	sga chas
སྒ་ཆུང	{sga chung gser mgo} field med.	sga chung
སྒ་རྗེ་ཁམས་སྤྲུལ	'jam dbyangs don grub	sga rje khams sprul
སྒ་ཉག	saddle snga ru dang phyi ru gnyis kyi steng gi bar stong	sga nyag
སྒ་ཏིག	{sga tig} med. herb	sga tig
སྒ་ཏིག་ནག་པོ	flower of bitter species of ginger which draws out yellow water of dropsy	sga tig nag po
སྒ་ཏིག་སྨུག་པོ	androsace strigillosa franch., androsace sarmentosa wall.	sga tig smug po
སྒ་སྟན	saddle and cushion	sga stan
སྒ་སྟན་སྲབ་གསུམ	saddle, cushion under it, and bridle	sga stan srab gsum
སྒ་སྟོང	[horse etc.w] empty saddle	sga stong
སྒ་སྟོན་ངག་དབང་ལེགས་པ	1864-1941	sga ston ngag dbang legs pa
སྒ་བསྟད	saddle [horse etc.]	sga bstad
སྒ་ཐག	ropes or straps used in adjusting a saddle	sga thag
སྒ་ཐོད་ལོ	saddle snga ru dang phyi ru round	sga thod lo
སྒ་མཐོངས	saddle snga ru and phyi ru'i ngos	sga mthongs
སྒ་གདན	[saddle &] saddle cloth	sga gdan
སྒ་ལྡེབས	saddle snga ru phyi ru mthud byed g.yas g.yon gyi shing leb ste = sga gshog gam yag shing	sga ldebs
སྒ་པ	young horse just fit for the saddle, yak with a white forehead	sga pa
སྒ་པོ་ཁོང	[has a pungent taste tsha ba]	sga po khong
སྒ་ཕོང	bat, flitter-mouse	sga phong
སྒ་འབོར	cushion on top of a saddle fastened w flat-headed nail of gold/ silver etc	sga 'bor
སྒ་འབོལ	cushion on top of a saddle	sga 'bol
སྒ་འབྱར	sga rang 'grig gi being	sga 'byar
སྒ་སྦུག	former chibs sgyur chen mo'i chibs rags su 'gro mkhan rtse drung gis worn hat	sga sbug
སྒ་མ་རྟ་སྒ	saddle also usable for packs	sga ma rta sga
སྒ་མིག	in the surface of a saddle before and behind kyi stong cha'i khung	sga mig
སྒ་དམར	mostly red {sga smug} field med.	sga dmar
སྒ་སྨུག	ginger field med.	sga smug
སྒ་ཙ	lce tsa flower	sga tsa
སྒ་ཚ	flower of ginger plant used as a stimulant	sga tsha
སྒ་ཚ་བཤུས་རྒྱག་པ	rngul nag thon bzhin par sga bshus pa [Rta khal ngal dub kyis rngul ba'i sga tsa bshus rgyag mi rung] 604	sga tsha bshus rgyag pa
སྒ་ཚྭ	pungent ginger	sga tshwa
སྒ་ཚང	empty space between two saddle wings left and right	sga tshang
སྒ་ཡག	sga'i snga ru'i mdun dang phyi ru'i rgyab nas thon pa'i sga gshog tips	sga yag
སྒ་ར	term	sga ra
སྒ་རི	car, vehicle	sga ri
སྒ་རུ	1) saddle's snga phyi'i mgo; 2) smith's tool; 3) cloud like sga'i snga ru	sga ru
སྒ་རློན	med. sge'u gsher	sga rlon
སྒ་ལག	frame of the saddle, saddle-bow,	sga lag
སདདླེ	tree	saddle
སྒ་ལོ	medicine with 7 ingredients	sga lo
སྒ་ལོག	bucking wild horse throwing off the saddle	sga log
སྒ་ཤ	straps for fastening the travelling baggage to the saddle	sga sha
སྒ་ཤན	saddle's mtha' 'khor la brgyab pa'i gold silver etc. shan cha	sga shan
སྒ་ཤིང	saddle making shing gug gug	sga shing
སྒ་ཤུབས	sga'i phyi thum	sga shubs
སྒ་གཤེར	wet saddle	sga gsher
སྒ་གཤོག	saddle's two left and right	sga gshog
ཝིང	like shing leb leb	wing
སྒ་སང	on the road saddle cinch being loose the saddle yar bkyag bkyag byed pa	sga sang
སྒ་སེར	turmeric, yellow ginger, spice used in cooking meat for the table	sga ser
སྒ་སྲབ	saddle and bridle	sga srab
སྒག་སྒྲེ	belching; {sgag sgre rgyab pa} to belch {sgreg pa rgyab pa}	sgag sgre
སྒག་ཐུང	small silk scarf used in religious services	sgag thung
སྒག་ཐུད	belch from belly bloated by food	sgag thud
སྒག་པ	(tha dad pa bsgags pa, bsgag pa, sgogs,, bind, tie	sgag pa
སྒག་མ	goddess of grace	sgag ma
སྒག་ཚང	the whole, all of	sgag tshang
སྒགས་པ	pf. of {sgog pa}	sgags pa
སྒང	1) high place, prominence, ridge, mound, hill, spur, top; 2) land between two large rivers; 3) above, on; 4) time, occasion; 5) individual months 'thob rgyu'i dbugs sgang; 6) while, in the course o...	sgang
སྒང་སྐྱེས	born from an egg	sgang skyes
སྒང་སྐྱེས་སྒོ་ང་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	born from an egg	sgang skyes sgo nga las skye ba
སྒང་ཁ	everything, all	sgang kha
སྒང་ཁ་ལོགས	everything, all	sgang kha logs
སྒང་ཁུལ	hill spur, SA sgang kha	sgang khul
སྒང་ག	all, everyone	sgang ga
སྒང་གི་ལིང	species of partridge	sgang gi ling
སྒང་རྒྱུད	mt sgang rgyud	sgang rgyud
སྒང་བརྒྱུད	hillside	sgang brgyud
སྒང་ཏོག	Gangtok	sgang tog
སྒང་སྟོན	project byed sgang gi celebration	sgang ston
སྒང་ཐུར	gzugs mo'am gze mo	sgang thur
སྒང་མཐོན་པོ	high hill	sgang mthon po
སྒང་དྲུག	6 districts of khams (skya ra sgang, rab sgang, spo 'bor sgang, dmar khams sgang, tsha sgang, zal mo sgang)	sgang drug
སྒང་དྲུག་སྨད	mdo khams sgang drug	sgang drug smad
སྒང་མདུད	kha btags cha tshang ba gcig la brgyab pa'i protection knot	sgang mdud
སྒང་ནག	zla sgang nag pa	sgang nag
སྒང་པ	person born/ living on a mt ridge	sgang pa
སྒང་པ་བོད	Tibet	sgang pa bod
སྒང་པོ	a ball, ril po	sgang po
སྒང་ཕུག	balloon	sgang phug
སྒང་བ	grow, become full	sgang ba
སྒང་བལ	back wool	sgang bal
སྒང་བུ	ball, pea/ bean pod	sgang bu
སྒང་བྲལ་ཟླ་ཤོལ	gnam stong dag la sgang shar na, zla ba de nyid brtsegs pa dang, sgang bral zal ba lhag par 'dod	sgang bral zla shol
སྒང་འབབ	complete	sgang 'bab
སྒང་འབུར	hillock	sgang 'bur
སྒང་མ	upper	sgang ma
སྒང་རྩ	sgang bleeding nadi	sgang rtsa
སྒང་ཚད	lo tho'i nang du zla ba so sor 'thob rgyu'i dbugs sgang gnyis kyi sgang, Dgun ra'i sgang tshad	sgang tshad
སྒང་ཞིང	sa babs high field	sgang zhing
སྒང་ཟུར་དགོན་པ	monastery in {lhun rtse} Bhutan, Thimphu	sgang zur dgon pa
སྒང་གཟུགས	gzer mo' or gzugs mo	sgang gzugs
སྒང་ཡིན	just	sgang yin
སྒང་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to go along [with a plan]	sgang la 'gro ba
སྒང་ལ་བཞོན་པ	surmount	sgang la bzhon pa
སྒང་ལམ	road on a mt ridge	sgang lam
སྒང་ཤོངས	lows and highs of land, ridges and valleys	sgang shongs
སྒང་གཤགས	means of piercing a bleeding point	sgang gshags
སྒང་གཤོང	sgang and gshong bu	sgang gshong
སྒང་གཤོངས	lows and highs [land], ridges and valleys	sgang gshongs
སྒང་གསུམ	{sgang gsum	sgang gsum
སྒང་གསེབ	[arch] srog chags gze mo	sgang gseb
སྒངས	bank or elevated place on margin of a river, districts in s.e. tibet	sgangs
སྒབ	'gab, 'gebs, lap of a garment, afterwards, end	sgab
སྒབ་ཁུང	part behind knee joint	sgab khung
སྒབ་ཐུང	short skirt	sgab thung
སྒབ་འདྲེ	ghost	sgab 'dre
སྒབ་པ	cover, covering, SA 'gebs pa	sgab pa
སྒབ་མོ	[arch] city person	sgab mo
སྒབ་རྩ	sgab nadi	sgab rtsa
སྒབ་མཚལ	in a house zhal ba'i sked ris 'og gi zhal ba dmar po	sgab mtshal
སྒབ་ཟོར	body weight	sgab zor
སྒམ	box	sgam
སྒམ་ཁྲི	bundle, package	sgam khri
སྒམ་རྒྱག	pack in boxes	sgam rgyag
སྒམ་སྒོ	drawer	sgam sgo
སྒམ་སྒོ་མང	chest of drawers	sgam sgo mang
སྒམ་སྒྲོམ	bin	sgam sgrom
སྒམ་ཆུང	small box	sgam chung
སྒམ་ཆུང་མུ་ཟི་ཡོད་པ་གཅིག	match box	sgam chung mu zi yod pa gcig
སྒམ་མཆོང	vaulting horse [gymnastics]	sgam mchong
སྒམ་པ	deep, profound	sgam pa
སྒམ་པ་པོ	ascetic who meditates	sgam pa po
སྒམ་པོ	full, fully accomplished, one who is deep, prudent, quiet, very wise	sgam po
སྒམ་པོ་མཆོག་སྤྲུལ	the 5th, b. 1757, alias {o rgyan 'gro 'dul gling pa of dvags la sgam po}	sgam po mchog sprul
སྒམ་པོ་ནོར་བུ་རྒྱན་པ	Gampo Norbu Gyenpa. The principal pupil of Rigdzin Jatsön Nyingpo. b1599	sgam po nor bu rgyan pa
སྒམ་པོ་པ	Gampopa, 1079-1153	sgam po pa
སྒམ་པོ་པ་བསོད་ནམས་རིན་ཆེན	Gampopa, Sönam Rinchen, 1079-1153, also known as Dakpo Lhaje, the chief disciple of Milarepa	sgam po pa bsod nams rin chen
སྒམ་པོ་བ་བསོད་ནམས་རིན་ཆེན	Gampopa	sgam po ba bsod nams rin chen
སྒམ་པོ་རི	Gampo mt	sgam po ri
སྒམ་པོ་ཨོ་རྒྱན་འགྲོ་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	1757-? - Gampo Orgyen Drodül Lingpa, also known as Tertön Dechen Dorje (gter ston bde chen rdo rje)	sgam po o rgyan 'gro 'dul gling pa
སྒམ་པོའི་ལྷ་ཆུ་མཁར	Gampo Lha Chukhar	sgam po'i lha chu mkhar
སྒམ་བོ་བ	[Tse]	sgam bo ba
སྒམ་སྦུད	box shaped sbud pa	sgam sbud
སྒམ་ཞུ	lantern in a box, CH lantern	sgam zhu
སྒམ་ལམ	path of meditation	sgam lam
སྒམ་ཤག	wooden crate	sgam shag
སྒམ་ཤུབས	box's outer wrapping	sgam shubs
སྒའུ	amulet	sga'u
སྒར	pitching many tents, camp, encampment, to attach	sgar
སྒར་བཀོད	arrange on the ground, prepare by boiling down, set out an encampment	sgar bkod
སྒར་སྐད	secret word-signals/ passwords of a military encampment	sgar skad
སྒར་གྲྭ	monks tent quarters	sgar grwa
སྒར་གརབ༹	monk going to gather offerings	sgar grva
སྒར་རྒྱག	[en]camp	sgar rgyag
སྒར་ཏོག	Gartok W Tibet	sgar tog
སྒར་འདེབས	[en]camp	sgar 'debs
སྒར་འདེབས་པ	to encamp, pitch a camp	sgar 'debs pa
སྒར་པ	military camp	sgar pa
སྒར་པ་སྐྱིད་པོ	happy campers	sgar pa skyid po
སྒར་དཔོན	Garpön, commissioner of a district {rdzong}	sgar dpon
སྒར་བ	{sgar ba, bsgar ba, bsgar ba, sgor} trans. v	sgar ba
སྒར་འབབ	[en]camp	sgar 'bab
སྒར་མང	respectable men	sgar mang
སྒར་མིང	secret word-signals/ passwords of a military encampment	sgar ming
སྒར་མེ	campfire	sgar me
སྒར་གཙང་པོ	{sgar gtsang po river	sgar gtsang po
སྒར་ས	camp [area]	sgar sa
སྒར་བསངས	ex {karma pa sgar bsangs chen mo} the collected rituals for the offering of bsangs of the karma pa sgar; by the 15th {rgyal dbang karma pa mkha' khyab rdo rje} and other masters	sgar bsangs
སྒར་བསངས་ཆེན་མོ	karma pa sgar	sgar bsangs chen mo
བསངས་ཆེན་མོ	the collected rituals for the offering of bsangs of the karma pa sgar; by the 15th {rgyal dbang karma pa mkha' khyab rdo rje} and other masters	bsangs chen mo
སྒལ	load, the back	sgal
སྒལ་ཀླད	spinal cord	sgal klad
སྒལ་ཁེབས	back cover	sgal khebs
སྒལ་འགེལ	load on the back	sgal 'gel
སྒལ་འགེལ་བ	put on a load	sgal 'gel ba
སྒལ་རྒྱུང	spine	sgal rgyung
སྒལ་རྒྱུད་བསྲང	to sit with the back straight	sgal rgyud bsrang
སྒལ་བཅོས	cure horse etc. saddle sore	sgal bcos
སྒལ་རྟ	pack horse	sgal rta
སྒལ་འདབས	lumbar region	sgal 'dabs
སྒལ་རྣག	spinal cord	sgal rnag
སྒལ་པ	back of man, back of beast of burden, small of the back, croup, crupper, back	sgal pa
སྒལ་པ་ཁྱེར	carry on the back	sgal pa khyer
སྒལ་པ་བསྲང	align the backbone	sgal pa bsrang
སྒལ་པའི་རྩིབ་མ	rib	sgal pa'i rtsib ma
སྒལ་པའི་རུས་པ	backbone	sgal pa'i rus pa
སྒལ་པར་འཁྱེར་བ	carry on one's back	sgal par 'khyer ba
སྒལ་ཕྱུགས	beast of burden	sgal phyugs
སྒལ་འཕང	throw off a load	sgal 'phang
སྒལ་འཕང་བ	throw a load off	sgal 'phang ba
སྒལ་བ	carry a load on one's back, cause a load to be carried on the back of a beast of burden	sgal ba
སྒལ་བོང་བྲེས	an ass's fold	sgal bong bres
སྒལ་འབོགས་པ	take out a load	sgal 'bogs pa
སྒལ་མ	khal phyugs	sgal ma
སྒལ་མིག	wound on the back	sgal mig
སྒལ་རྨ	sore on an animal's back caused by the load	sgal rma
སྒལ་ཚགས	apply medicine to a back wound	sgal tshags
སྒལ་ཚིག་མེད་པ	invertebrate	sgal tshig med pa
སྒལ་ཚིགས	back bone, vertebra	sgal tshigs
སྒལ་ཚིགས་ཀྱི	spinal	sgal tshigs kyi
སྒལ་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་རུས་རྐང	vertebra	sgal tshigs kyi rus rkang
སྒལ་ཚིགས་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 28 vertebrae	sgal tshigs nyi shu rtsa brgyad
སྒལ་ཚིགས་སྲང་བ	a beast of burden whose backbone is straight, not bent by work	sgal tshigs srang ba
སྒལ་ཚིགས་འསང་ལོ	vertebra	sgal tshigs 'sang lo
སྒལ་ཚོགས་ཅན་གྱི་སྲོག་ཆགས	vertebrates	sgal tshogs can gyi srog chags
སྒལ་ཚོགས་མེད་པའི་སྲོག་ཆགས	invertebrates	sgal tshogs med pa'i srog chags
སྒལ་གཞུང	backbone, spine	sgal gzhung
སྒལ་རལ	intractibly bad	sgal ral
སྒལ་རལ་ཉག་རྐྱང	w/o truth au tsugs mthar skyel [ultimate end] [Brda 'ded ji tsam btang yang go med sgal ral nyag rkyang byed pa]	sgal ral nyag rkyang
སྒལ་རིལ་རྒྱག་པ	horse etc rolling back and forth on the ground	sgal ril rgyag pa
སྒལ་རུས	back bone	sgal rus
སྒལ་ཤོར	back wound arising	sgal shor
སྒལ་བསྲང་བ	adjust or balance a load	sgal bsrang ba
སྒི་ཁུང	opening, aperture	sgi khung
སྒིད་ལུག་བདག་ཉིད་བརྙས་པའི་ལེ་ལོ	the laziness of discouraging oneself	sgid lug bdag nyid brnyas pa'i le lo
སྒིད་ལུག་པ	lack of self-confidence	sgid lug pa
སྒིར་མོ	round, orb-like, globular	sgir mo
སྒུ	deceit, bent, foot-stool, elbow, angle	sgu
སྒུ་སྒེར་གྱི་སྐུ་ཆས	[H] private property	sgu sger gyi sku chas
སྒུ་སྒེར་དྲུང་ཆེ	private secretary [h]	sgu sger drung che
སྒུ་སྟེགས	elbow, angle	sgu stegs
སྒུ་དོ	1) sling; 2) water vessel; 3) target	sgu do
སྒུ་རྡོ	sling-string, string that is coiled round a stone for flinging it	sgu rdo
སྒུ་རྡོ་རྒྱག	shoot a sling	sgu rdo rgyag
སྒུ་ཕྱོགས	bent forward	sgu phyogs
སྒུ་བ	stooped/ bent	sgu ba
སྒུ་བོ	stooped/ bent	sgu bo
སྒུ་མོ	sling	sgu mo
སྒུ་རུ་མ	stooped/ bent person/ woman 606	sgu ru ma
སྒུ་རུ་རུ	stooped walking	sgu ru ru
སྒུག	p. {bsgugs} f. {bsgug} imp. {sgugs} to wait for, await	sgug
སྒུག་སྒུག་བྱེད་པ	stoop	sgug sgug byed pa
སྒུག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	cause to lie in wait, cause	sgug tu 'jug pa
ཏོ་ཝཡ	lay	to way
སྒུག་སྡོད	staying waiting	sgug sdod
སྒུག་སྡོད་ཁང	waiting room	sgug sdod khang
སྒུག་སྡོད་བྱེད	wait for	sgug sdod byed
སྒུག་པ	{sgug pa, bsgugs pa, bsgug pa, sgugs} trans. v	sgug pa
སྒུག་པ་པོ	waiter	sgug pa po
སྒུག་པར་བྱེད	one who waits for	sgug par byed
སྒུག་བྱེད	bow string	sgug byed
སྒུག་བཞུགས	waiting [h]	sgug bzhugs
སྒུགས	[a]wait! * sgug pa!	sgugs
སྒུགས་ཤིག	wait, SA sgug pa	sgugs shig
སྒུང	clap, crack, crash, report	sgung
སྒུང་སྦོམ	booby trap, explosive mine	sgung sbom
སྒུད་པོ	father-in-law	sgud po
སྒུད་མོ	wife's mother	sgud mo
སྒུབ་འཇུག་གི་བློ	complete engager	sgub 'jug gi blo
སྒུམ་འཐུ་བ	birds from the ground picking up grass grain etc.	sgum 'thu ba
སྒུམ་མདའ	butt-end of a gun, gun-stock	sgum mda'
སྒུམ་ཙམ	week, feeble or w/o shrewdness/ resourcefulness	sgum tsam
སྒུམ་ཤིང	gun stock	sgum shing
སྒུར	p {bsgur},, 1) bend down, submit to; 2) bear [hunger] * [sgur ba!]	sgur
སྒུར་འཁྱོག	SA sgu	sgur 'khyog
སྒུར་རྒྱབ	bent back	sgur rgyab
སྒུར་སྒུར	stooped people or bent persons	sgur sgur
སྒུར་སྒུར་པོ	bent down shape	sgur sgur po
སྒུར་སྒུར་བྱེད	bend down	sgur sgur byed
སྒུར་ཏེ	writhing with pain	sgur te
སྒུར་རྡོ	sling [stone]	sgur rdo
སྒུར་པོ	1) stooped over/ hunchbacked [person]; 2) bent, not straight[forward]	sgur po
སྒུར་བ	{sgur ba, bsgur ba, bsgur ba, sgur} trans. v	sgur ba
སྒུར་བྱས	bent	sgur byas
སྒུར་སོང	stooped and bent	sgur song
སྒུལ	to move, shake	sgul
སྒུལ་ཀྱོག	jolt	sgul kyog
སྒུལ་སྐྱོད	agitation	sgul skyod
སྒུལ་སྐྱོད་རྒྱག	move	sgul skyod rgyag
སྒུལ་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	move	sgul skyod byed
སྒུལ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	immovable	sgul rgyu med pa
སྒུལ་བ	move, agitate, shake (tha dad pa bsgul ba, bsgul ba, sgul,,	sgul ba
སྒུལ་མ་ཐུབ་པ	immobile	sgul ma thub pa
སྒུལ་རུང་བ	moveable	sgul rung ba
སྒུལ་ཤུགས	impetus	sgul shugs
སྒུལ་ཤུགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	energy producing machine	sgul shugs 'phrul 'khor
སྒེ་ཁུང	window	sge khung
སྒེ་ཁུང་ཉིས་ཧྲལ	window w two panes	sge khung nyis hral
སྒེ་སྒུ་ཅན	crooked	sge sgu can
སྒེ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	types of virtuous practices	sge sbyor gyi rnam pa
སྒེ་མོ	bag, sack	sge mo
སྒེ་གཤེར	zingiber officinale, ginger	sge gsher
སྒེག	charm, grace, graceful, attractive, playful, coquettish, flirtatious	sgeg
སྒེག་འགྲོས	graceful way of moving/ walking	sgeg 'gros
སྒེག་ཆོས	flirting	sgeg chos
སྒེག་ཆོས་ཅན	charming, graceful, elegant, sensual	sgeg chos can
སྒེག་འཆོས	beautiful	sgeg 'chos
སྒེག་འཆོས་ཅན	beautiful, charming, graceful, elegant	sgeg 'chos can
སྒེག་ཉམ་མ	* {skad snyam ma	sgeg nyam ma
སྒེག་ཉམས	elegance, charm	sgeg nyams
སྒེག་ཉམས་ལྡན་པ	delicate	sgeg nyams ldan pa
སྒེག་ལྡན	peacock, charming, graceful, elegant, sensual	sgeg ldan
སྒེག་པ	beautiful and attractive, erotic, boast, brag	sgeg pa
སྒེག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	SA sgeg pa'i rdo rje	sgeg pa rdo rje
སྒེག་པའི་ཉམས	flirtatious air	sgeg pa'i nyams
སྒེག་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	mahayoga master named Lilavajra, Vilasavajra, or Visvarupa	sgeg pa'i rdo rje
སྒེག་མ	charming/ graceful woman	sgeg ma
སྒེག་མོ	attractive, vivacious, coquettish, sensuous girl, beautiful woman	sgeg mo
སྒེག་མོ་མ	goddess of grace	sgeg mo ma
བ༹ཇྲ	coquette Goddess	vajra
སྒེག་མོ་མེ་ལོང་ལ་བལྟ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like a belle observing herself in a mirror	sgeg mo me long la blta ba lta bu
སྒེག་རྫས	perfumery, pomades, articles which are incentives to sensual pleasures	sgeg rdzas
སྒེགས་མ	Charming Goddess (his consort)	sgegs ma
སྒེང་ལ	on, upon	sgeng la
སྒེད་ཆོས	{lus sged chos kyi rnam pa} expression of vanity	sged chos
སྒེའུ	1) small door; 2) window; 3) [arch] ginger 607	sge'u
སྒེའུ་ཁུང	window	sge'u khung
སྒེའུ་ཁུང་གི་ཐེམ་སྟེགས	sill	sge'u khung gi them stegs
སྒེའུ་ཆུང	1) small door; 2) [arch] ginger/ sgog skya med. herb; 3) 'gro ba	sge'u chung
སྒེའུ་གཤེར	ginger	sge'u gsher
སྒེར	individual, private, personal, semiindependent, private, personal	sger
སྒེར་ཁག	private sector	sger khag
སྒེར་གྱི	personal, private	sger gyi
སྒེར་གྱི་རྐང་དངུལ	private shares/ stocks	sger gyi rkang dngul
སྒེར་གྱི་ཁེ་ཕན	private benefit/ personal gain	sger gyi khe phan
སྒེར་གྱི་སྣང་བ	individual perception	sger gyi snang ba
སྒེར་གྱི་ཚོང་ལས	private trade/ commerce/ business	sger gyi tshong las
སྒེར་གྱི་སློབ་གྲྭ	private school	sger gyi slob grwa
སྒེར་གྱིས་བདག་གཉེར	private management	sger gyis bdag gnyer
སྒེར་གྱིས་དབང་དུ་སྒྱུར་བ	privately owned/ ruled	sger gyis dbang du sgyur ba
སྒེར་དངོས	personal belongings/ wealth	sger dngos
སྒེར་ལྔས	1 country under not coming under another's rule but remaining autonomous	sger lngas
སྒེར་གཅོད	dictatorship, dictatorial	sger gcod
སྒེར་གཅོད་དབང་བསྒྱུར	dictatorship	sger gcod dbang bsgyur
སྒེར་གཅོད་སྲིད་གཞུང	dictatorial government	sger gcod srid gzhung
སྒེར་ཆོས་རང་དཔོན	sger khag [private sector] and dgon sde'i las sne'i ming	sger chos rang dpon
སྒེར་མཇལ	private meeting/ interview/ audience [h]	sger mjal
སྒེར་ཉེར་སྟེར་ཚོང	buy and sell goods nearby	sger nyer ster tshong
སྒེར་གཉེར	privately owned/ managed	sger gnyer
སྒེར་གཉེར་ཁེ་ལས	private enterprise	sger gnyer khe las
སྒེར་རྟ	private horse	sger rta
སྒེར་དུ	specially, privately, especially, particularly	sger du
སྒེར་དོན	one's own interest, private or special reason or object	sger don
སྒེར་དོན་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went on private business	sger don du phyin pa
སྒེར་དོན་བཞག་སྒྲུབ	selflessness, casting away private interest to work for others	sger don bzhag sgrub
སྒེར་དོན་བཞག་སྒྲུབ་གྱི་བསམ་པ	selfless thoughts	sger don bzhag sgrub gyi bsam pa
སྒེར་བདག	private owner	sger bdag
སྒེར་སྡེམ	monopoly	sger sdem
སྒེར་སྡེམ་བྱེད	monopolize	sger sdem byed
སྒེར་སྡེམ་མ་རྩ	monopoly capital	sger sdem ma rtsa
སྒེར་སྡེམ་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	monopoly capitalism	sger sdem ma rtsa'i ring lugs
སྒེར་ནོར	private wealth	sger nor
སྒེར་པ	aristocracy, aristocrat	sger pa
སྒེར་དཔོན	master of field servants, like local lord	sger dpon
སྒེར་སྤྱོད	private use	sger spyod
སྒེར་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	use privately	sger spyod byed
སྒེར་ཕན	private profit/ gain	sger phan
སྒེར་ཕྱོགས་ནས	personally	sger phyogs nas
སྒེར་དབང	private ownership, individual rights	sger dbang
སྒེར་དབང་པ་ཆུང་བ	small private owner	sger dbang pa chung ba
སྒེར་དབང་པ་ཆུང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	small private ownership system	sger dbang pa chung ba'i lam lugs
སྒེར་མའི་བོགས་མ	private lease/ contract	sger ma'i bogs ma
སྒེར་བཙན	1) privately owned/ ruled; 2) bka' gtan dmigs bsal can mang po yod pa'i aristocrat	sger btsan
སྒེར་རྩེ	{sger rtse rdzong	sger rtse
སྒེར་ཚོང	private trade/ commerce/ business	sger tshong
སྒེར་འཛིན	monopoly	sger 'dzin
སྒེར་འཛིན་བྱེད	monopolize	sger 'dzin byed
སྒེར་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	appropriate	sger 'dzin byed pa
སྒེར་གཞིས	lords's private pha gzhis/ thab rten du byung ba'i nature	sger gzhis
སྒེར་གཞུང་མེད	neither private nor public	sger gzhung med
སྒེར་བཟུང	monopoly	sger bzung
སྒེར་བཟུང་བྱེད	monopolize	sger bzung byed
སྒེར་བཟུང་མ་རྩ	monopoly capital sger g.yog - servants of the aristocracy sger g.yog - private servant, one who does his own work, servant of independent party or estate	sger bzung ma rtsa
སྒེར་རུ	individual lord's private livestock area	sger ru
སྒེར་ལ་དབང་བ	private ownership, individual rights	sger la dbang ba
སྒེར་ལ་དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	system of private ownership, individual rights	sger la dbang ba'i lam lugs
སྒེར་ལངས	[uprising/ revolt for] independence, independent, able to stand on 1's own two feet	sger langs
སྒེར་ལངས་བྱེད	[rise up/ revolt for] independence, be able to stand on 1's own two feet	sger langs byed
སྒེར་ལོ	produce of a private estate	sger lo
སྒེར་སུ	privately, personally	sger su
སྒེར་སེམས	thought of one's own benefit	sger sems
སྒེར་སེམས་མེད་པ	unselfish, altruistic, w/o selfish ulterior motives	sger sems med pa
སྒེར་སེམས་གཙོར་འཛིན	think primarily/ only of 1's own interests, be selfish	sger sems gtsor 'dzin
སྒེར་སེམས་རིང་ལུགས	egoism	sger sems ring lugs
སྒེར་སོ་སོ	individual	sger so so
སྒེར་སློབ	private school	sger slob
སྒེར་གསོག	collect things for one's own benefit	sger gsog
སྒེར་ལྷ	each one's la 'go ba'i divine protector	sger lha
སྒེས	private, separate, distinct, privately	sges
སྒོ་ཀུན	all directions	sgo kun
སྒོ་ཀུན་གྱི་ཉེན་པ	general crisis	sgo kun gyi nyen pa
སྒོ་ཀུན་འགྲོ	water	sgo kun 'gro
སྒོ་ཀུན་ནས	1) in every respect, by all means, in every way. 2) completely, totally	sgo kun nas
སྒོ་ཀུན་ནས་བསྒྲུབས	completely accomplished	sgo kun nas bsgrubs
སྒོ་ཀུན་ནས་འཆར་འགོད	overall planning	sgo kun nas 'char 'god
སྒོ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	compendium	sgo kun las btus pa
སྒོ་ཀླད	sgo'i thod kyi 'phred shing [piece of wood to be placed over a door]	sgo klad
སྒོ་དཀྱིལ་མ	middle door	sgo dkyil ma
སྒོ་བཀག	so that the inside of a house cannot be seen screen [sgam shag] placed in the doorway	sgo bkag
སྒོ་བཀུམ་པ	shut a door 608	sgo bkum pa
སྒོ་སྐྱེས	(rnying) 1) a shing,...2) rta babs	sgo skyes
སྒོ་སྐྱོང	gate guard	sgo skyong
སྒོ་སྐྱོར	SA sgo spe	sgo skyor
སྒོ་ཁ	doorway	sgo kha
སྒོ་ཁང	entrance into a house, vestibule, porch, portal, small house on the gate,	sgo khang
སྒོ་ཁང་གད་གསུམ	rtse po ta la'i rgyal sgo dang ltag sgo'i ra ba, khang gnyer, gad pa	sgo khang gad gsum
སྒོ་ཁུང	opening of the door, aperture in a door	sgo khung
སྒོ་ཁེབས	door-hanging	sgo khebs
སྒོ་ཁྱམས	courtyard, vestibule, hallway	sgo khyams
སྒོ་ཁྱི	watchdog	sgo khyi
སྒོ་ཁྱིམ	1) aang yig sogs kyi klad du bris nas logs su dgar byed kyi gug rtags; 2) gate house	sgo khyim
སྒོ་ཁྱིམ་ཅན	in a diagram sgo khyim lta bu logs su bkar ba'i rtags yod pa'i ri mo	sgo khyim can
སྒོ་ཁྱུད	gateway, doorway, portals	sgo khyud
སྒོ་ཁྱེ	watchdog	sgo khye
སྒོ་ཁྲ	them tho ste, them dud dang de'i sa khang mi gsum gyi tho	sgo khra
སྒོ་ཁྲལ	customs duty	sgo khral
སྒོ་ཁྲལ་ལས་ཁུངས	customs office	sgo khral las khungs
སྒོ་ཁྲི	for sick person etc. a covered chair that can be carried here and there	sgo khri
སྒོ་འཁད་འདུག	the door sticks	sgo 'khad 'dug
སྒོ་འཁོར	door hinge/ pivot	sgo 'khor
སྒོ་འཁྲིས	doorway	sgo 'khris
སྒོ་འཁྲོལ	sngar btson pa'i ske'i sgo 'khrol skabs sgo 'khrol rta lcag ces rta lcag gzhu srol der zer	sgo 'khrol
སྒོ་གང་ན	in the palace gateway	sgo gang na
སྒོ་གང་ཡང་མ་འགགས	its gateway cannot be blocked in any way	sgo gang yang ma 'gags
སྒོ་གོང་དུ	over the door, one above, the senior, very much	sgo gong du
སྒོ་གྲངས	house #/ address	sgo grangs
སྒོ་གླེགས	board of a door, lintel, framework on the four sides of a door, junc-	sgo glegs
སྒོ་དགག་པ	close a door	sgo dgag pa
སྒོ་དགུ	nine doorways	sgo dgu
སྒོ་འགག	door of the house, doorkeeper	sgo 'gag
སྒོ་འགྲམ	doors; phyug po'i + na - at the doors of the wealthy	sgo 'gram
སྒོ་འགྲམ་ན	at the door	sgo 'gram na
སྒོ་རྒྱག	shut/ close [a door/ business]	sgo rgyag
སྒོ་རྒྱག་པ	close, shut	sgo rgyag pa
སྒོ་རྒྱག་རིང་ལུགས	exclusivism, closeddoor sectarianism	sgo rgyag ring lugs
སྒོ་རྒྱང་ཞག་ཆུའི་སྒྲོན་མ	the gate of the far reaching water lamp	sgo rgyang zhag chu'i sgron ma
སྒོ་རྒྱབ	space behind the door or within the door	sgo rgyab
སྒོ་རྒྱབ་པ	shut a door wind-up	sgo rgyab pa
སྒོ་སྒྲིབ་པ	{rdo chen pos phug pa'i sgo sgrib par byas} placed a great boulder in front of the cave's entrance to conceal it	sgo sgrib pa
སྒོ་བརྒྱ	in a hundred ways	sgo brgya
སྒོ་བརྒྱད	eight doorways	sgo brgyad
སྒོ་ང	egg; (egg)shell	sgo nga
སྒོ་ང་སྐྱེས	egg-born	sgo nga skyes
སྒོ་ང་ཅན	egg, having spawn	sgo nga can
སྒོ་ང་ཆེན་པོ་གཅིག	cosmic egg	sgo nga chen po gcig
སྒོ་ང་སྙོལ	sit on/ incubate eggs	sgo nga snyol
སྒོ་ང་བསྙལ	sat on/ incubated eggs	sgo nga bsnyal
སྒོ་ང་གཏོང	lay eggs	sgo nga gtong
སྒོ་ང་ནས་བྱ་ཕྲུག་འདོན་པ	hatch	sgo nga nas bya phrug 'don pa
སྒོ་ང་ཕྱེད་ཚལ་པ	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {shes pa'i rnam pa gzung ba'i yul dang 'dzin pa'i shes pa gnyis sgo nga gshags pa ltar phyed ma dang/ de'ang rnam pa gzung char bden la shes pa 'dzin char bden par 'dod pa yin...	sgo nga phyed tshal pa
སྒོ་ང་ཕྱེད་ཚལ་བ	Half-Eggists	sgo nga phyed tshal ba
བདེན་པ	Mind Only School of Split Egg Shell sgo nga phyed 'tshal sems tsam rnam	bden pa
སྒོ་ང་རུམ	sit on/ incubate eggs	sgo nga rum
སྒོ་ང་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	egg-born, birth from an egg. {sgong skyes}. one of the {skye gnas bzhi} four types of birth	sgo nga las skye ba
སྒོ་ང་ལས་བྱ	bird from an egg	sgo nga las bya
སྒོ་ང་གཤགས་པ་ལྟར	like a split egg	sgo nga gshags pa ltar
སྒོ་ངའི་དུས་ནས་སྐད་སྨྲའི་དབང	seeing bird	sgo nga'i dus nas skad smra'i dbang
སྒོ་ངའི་སྤྲི་མ	white of an egg	sgo nga'i spri ma
སྒོ་ངའི་སྦུབས	eggshell	sgo nga'i sbubs
སྒོ་ངའི་མཛོད	testicles	sgo nga'i mdzod
སྒོ་ངའི་སེར་རིལ	yolk	sgo nga'i ser ril
སྒོ་ངས་བྲག་རྡུང	rock broken by an egg	sgo ngas brag rdung
སྒོ་ལྔ	five sense doors. five entrances, i.e. eyes, ears, mouth, nose, and touch	sgo lnga
སྒོ་ལྔ་ཚང	dbang po sgo lnga	sgo lnga tshang
ཚང	with five unimpaired senses	tshang
སྒོ་ལྔའི་འཁྲུལ་སྣང	the deluded perceptions of the five senses	sgo lnga'i 'khrul snang
སྒོ་ལྔའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	consciousness of the five senses	sgo lnga'i rnam par shes pa
སྒོ་ལྔའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	sensory cognitions, consciousnesses of the five senses	sgo lnga'i rnam shes
ཕི༹བེ༹་སེནསེ	doors 609	five sense
སྒོ་ལྔའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་པ	the perception	sgo lnga'i rnam shes pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་སེནསེ	doors, cognition of the	of the five sense
ཕི༹བེ༹་སེནསེས	doors	five senses
སྒོ་ལྔའི་དབང་ཤེས	the five sensecognitions	sgo lnga'i dbang shes
སྒོ་ལྔའི་ཡུལ་ཞེན	clinging to / apprehending the five sense objects	sgo lnga'i yul zhen
སྒོ་ལྔའི་ཤེས་པ	consciousnesses/cognitions/perceptions of the	sgo lnga'i shes pa
སྒོ་ལྔས	by / through the five senses	sgo lngas
སྒོ་བཅད	the doorways are closed	sgo bcad
སྒོ་བཅད་པ	close a door	sgo bcad pa
སྒོ་བཅད་རིང་ལུགས	exclusivism, closeddoor sectarianism	sgo bcad ring lugs
སྒོ་ལྕགས	lock	sgo lcags
སྒོ་ལྕགས་རྒྱག	lock a door	sgo lcags rgyag
སྒོ་ལྕགས་རྒྱག་པ	lock	sgo lcags rgyag pa
སྒོ་ལྕགས་རྒྱབ་པ	lock	sgo lcags rgyab pa
སྒོ་ལྕགས་ལྡེའུ་མིག	lock and key	sgo lcags lde'u mig
སྒོ་ལྕགས་ཕྱེ	unlock	sgo lcags phye
སྒོ་ལྕགས་འབྱེད	unlock	sgo lcags 'byed
སྒོ་ལྕིབས	sgo'i lcibs phur,	sgo lcibs
སྒོ་ཆུང	window, small door	sgo chung
སྒོ་ཆེན	great gate	sgo chen
སྒོ་ཆོར	SA sgo spe	sgo chor
སྒོ་མཆོར	vihara &, monastic assembly hall etc. main gate covered front portico	sgo mchor
སྒོ་འཇུག་པ	put in a door, hang a door	sgo 'jug pa
སྒོ་གཉིས	the two media / avenues	sgo gnyis
སྒོ་སྙོད	cummin seed	sgo snyod
སྒོ་གཏན	bolt of a door	sgo gtan
སྒོ་གཏན་རྒྱག	bar/ bolt a door	sgo gtan rgyag
སྒོ་གཏན་རྒྱབ་པ	to bar the door	sgo gtan rgyab pa
སྒོ་གཏན་པ	lock up, bolt, bar	sgo gtan pa
སྒོ་རྟགས	number plate, house number, house number	sgo rtags
སྒོ་རྟགས་ཨང	address [house number]	sgo rtags ang
སྒོ་སྟེན་སྨན་བཅོས	outpatient department	sgo sten sman bcos
སྒོ་བརྟེན་སྨན་བཅོས	outpatient service	sgo brten sman bcos
སྒོ་བརྟེན་སྨན་བཅོས་ཁང	outpatient department/ clinic	sgo brten sman bcos khang
སྒོ་བརྟེན་ཚོང་ཁང	retail sales department	sgo brten tshong khang
སྒོ་བསྟན	bon deity with 18 hands holding weapons of war	sgo bstan
སྒོ་བསྟུན	to conform to	sgo bstun
སྒོ་བསྟུན་ན	according to	sgo bstun na
སྒོ་བསྟུན་ནས	concur with [mss]	sgo bstun nas
སྒོ་བསྟུན་པ	congruent, similar	sgo bstun pa
སྒོ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལས	from all approaches	sgo thams cad las
སྒོ་ཐེམ	threshold, headpiece of a door, door sill	sgo them
སྒོ་ཐེལ	writ of attachment for property	sgo thel
སྒོ་ཐེལ་རྒྱག	attach/ confiscate property	sgo thel rgyag
སྒོ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་མདོ	{sgo mtha' yas pa sgrub pa'i mdo	sgo mtha' yas pa sgrub pa'i mdo
སྒོ་དང་གེའུ་ཁུང་གི་ཤེལ	pane	sgo dang ge'u khung gi shel
སྒོ་དང་རྟ་བབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	ornaments on the gateways and portals	sgo dang rta babs kyi rgyan
སྒོ་དར	scarf attached to the door at time of a marriage in Sikkim	sgo dar
སྒོ་དེབ	register of residences, census book	sgo deb
སྒོ་དྲག་པོ	keen senses	sgo drag po
སྒོ་དྲུག་པ	text name	sgo drug pa
སྒོ་དྲུག་པའི་གཟུངས	'gyur byang med pa	sgo drug pa'i gzungs
སྒོ་དྲུང	near/ at the foot of the door	sgo drung
སྒོ་དྲུང་དུ	near/ at the [foot of the] door/ gate	sgo drung du
སྒོ་དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	came to a door	sgo drung du phyin pa
སྒོ་གདན་ཟུང་ཅན	circular disk with string attached for opening a door	sgo gdan zung can
སྒོ་བདུང་བ	knock at the door	sgo bdung ba
སྒོ་མདོ	'gag outside a door	sgo mdo
སྒོ་འདོགས་ཆོད་པར་མཛད་པ	clear misconceptions [h]	sgo 'dogs chod par mdzad pa
སྒོ་འདྲིག	door frame, window frame	sgo 'drig
སྒོ་རྡུང་བ	to knock at a door	sgo rdung ba
སྒོ་ལྡང	sgo'i ru bzhi'i g.yas g.yon du bslangs pa'i shing, each side of a door	sgo ldang
སྒོ་སྡོམ	close a door	sgo sdom
སྒོ་སྡོམ་རིང་ལུགས	exclusivism, closeddoor sectarianism	sgo sdom ring lugs
སྒོ་བརྡུངས་པ	struck the gates	sgo brdungs pa
སྒོ་བརྡེག་པ	to slam {khang pa'i sgo yang drag du dbye ba dang shugs kyis brdeg pa} open doors violently or slam them shut	sgo brdeg pa
སྒོ་བསྡམས	closed a door	sgo bsdams
སྒོ་བསྡུ་བ	rnam par bshad pa'i sgo bsdu ba	sgo bsdu ba
སྒོ་བསྡོམས་པ	to conceal	sgo bsdoms pa
སྒོ་ན	at the door	sgo na
སྒོ་ནག	dark door where dead body is kept	sgo nag
སྒོ་ནས	due to/ on account of/ by way of/ by means of; in terms of . . . ; from the point of view of . . . ; on the basis of . . . ; determined by . . . ; through a process of . . . ; - through the doorway...	sgo nas
སྒོ་ནས་གཏོང་བ	admit through the door	sgo nas gtong ba
སྒོ་ནས་དོན་པ	brought out by the door	sgo nas don pa
སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་བ	{kyi} + divided in terms of	sgo nas dbye ba
སྒོ་ནོར	livestock	sgo nor
སྒོ་ནོར་ལས་ཁུངས	department/ office of animal husbandry	sgo nor las khungs
སྒོ་གནད	key point of the gate	sgo gnad
སྒོ་རྣམ	single board	sgo rnam
སྒོ་སྣམ་སྙུག་སི	broad cloth of dark yellow color	sgo snam snyug si
སྒོ་པ	door-keeper	sgo pa
སྒོ་པང	door bolt	sgo pang
སྒོ་པུར	foreskin	sgo pur
སྒོ་པོ	outward looks, stature, bodily appearance	sgo po
སྒོ་དཔོན	door keeper, porter, village headman	sgo dpon
སྒོ་སྤང	lintel	sgo spang
སྒོ་སྤེ	projection of the roof of a house above the principal door	sgo spe
སྒོ་ཕར	name for a series of doors	sgo phar
སྒོ་ཕིབས	roofed gateway; {sgo phyi nang gi thod du phub pa'i thog}	sgo phibs
སྒོ་ཕུབ	portal; {sgo phibs}	sgo phub
སྒོ་ཕྱིར་མ་གཏོང་བ	not let out at the door	sgo phyir ma gtong ba
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས	sheep	sgo phyugs
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	cattle corral 610	sgo phyugs kyi ra ba
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་དུད་འགྲོ	domestic animals	sgo phyugs dud 'gro
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་སྨན་བཅོས་ཁང	veterinary clinic	sgo phyugs sman bcos khang
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་སྨན་པ	veterinarian	sgo phyugs sman pa
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་སེམས་ཅན་སྡོད་ཁང	barn	sgo phyugs sems can sdod khang
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་གསོ་མཁན	cattle breeder	sgo phyugs gso mkhan
སྒོ་ཕྱུགས་ཨམ་ཆི	veterinarian	sgo phyugs am chi
སྒོ་ཕྱེ	open a door	sgo phye
སྒོ་ཕྱེ་པ	opened the door	sgo phye pa
སྒོ་འཕར	threshold	sgo 'phar
སྒོ་འཕར་བརྡེག	to slam doors	sgo 'phar brdeg
སྒོ་འཕྱོར	sgo mchor	sgo 'phyor
སྒོ་བ	sentinel	sgo ba
སྒོ་བ་ཁྲོ་བོ	wrathful guardians of the gates	sgo ba khro bo
སྒོ་བ་བརྒྱད	8 guardians	sgo ba brgyad
སྒོ་བ་བཞི	four gate keepers	sgo ba bzhi
སྒོ་བ་ཡབ་ཡུམ	gate keepers in union/ w consorts	sgo ba yab yum
སྒོ་བོ	outward looks, SA sgo po	sgo bo
སྒོ་བྱང	signboard, shop sign	sgo byang
སྒོ་བྱེད་པ	to open, make way; instigate, initiate, start	sgo byed pa
སྒོ་དབྱེ	the door-opener	sgo dbye
སྒོ་འབོར	door's me long gi ldebs la ornament	sgo 'bor
སྒོ་འབྱར	SA sgo spe	sgo 'byar
སྒོ་འབྱེད	grass medicine for eye disease, opening of the gate	sgo 'byed
སྒོ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི	inaugural	sgo 'byed kyi
སྒོ་འབྱེད་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	opening/ inauguration ceremony	sgo 'byed rten 'brel
སྒོ་འབྱེད་གནང	inaugurate, open	sgo 'byed gnang
སྒོ་འབྱེད་པ	open a door	sgo 'byed pa
སྒོ་འབྱེད་བྱེད་པ	inaugurate	sgo 'byed byed pa
སྒོ་འབྱེད་མཛད	inaugurate, open	sgo 'byed mdzad
སྒོ་འབྱེད་མཛད་སྒོ	opening/ inauguration ceremony	sgo 'byed mdzad sgo
སྒོ་འབྱེད་མཛད་པ	inaugurator, opener	sgo 'byed mdzad pa
སྒོ་འབྱེད་ལམ་གཏོད	process of opening up a sacred area and establishing a pilgrimage path [KNT]	sgo 'byed lam gtod
སྒོ་མ	gatekeeper (goddess)	sgo ma
སྒོ་མ་འགག་པ	unconfined	sgo ma 'gag pa
སྒོ་མ་འགགས་པ	unconfined	sgo ma 'gags pa
སྒོ་མ་བསྡམས་པ	unconstrained senses	sgo ma bsdams pa
སྒོ་མ་བཞི	the four female gate keepers [1) {rta gdong ma} the Hook 2) {phag gdong ma} the Noose 3) {seng gdong ma} the Chain 4) {spyang gdong ma} the Bell]	sgo ma bzhi
སྒོ་མང་གྲྭ་ཚང	Gomang College	sgo mang grwa tshang
སྒོ་མང་གརབ༹་ཚང	{sgo mang grva tshang monastic college	sgo mang grva tshang
སྒོ་མང་པོ	many doors, multi-purpose	sgo mang po
སྒོ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ་བཞི	the four yoginis of the gates [white, yellow, red and green Vajra_ cuckoo, goat, lion and serpent]	sgo ma'i rnal 'byor ma bzhi
སྒོ་མེ	Gomeh, in Domey	sgo me
སྒོ་མེ་ལོང་ཅན	lhasa temple door	sgo me long can
སྒོ་མོ	gatekeeper (goddess)	sgo mo
སྒོ་མོ་ཆེ	large door/ gate [usu of castle/ city etc.]	sgo mo che
སྒོ་ཙམ	a little	sgo tsam
སྒོ་རྩ	at the door	sgo rtsa
སྒོ་རྩམ	sprang por sgo rtsam - a little tsampa to the beggars at your door	sgo rtsam
སྒོ་རྩར	near the door, at the door	sgo rtsar
སྒོ་རྩིག་པ	wall up a door	sgo rtsig pa
སྒོ་ཚོང	retail/ door to door sales	sgo tshong
སྒོ་ཚོང་རྒྱག	sell retail/ door to door	sgo tshong rgyag
སྒོ་མཚམས	1) foot, area of the door; 2) cardinal and intermediate directions	sgo mtshams
སྒོ་མཚམས་མ	door protectors, gate keepers; female guardians of the gates	sgo mtshams ma
སྒོ་འཛིན	admission ticket/ pass	sgo 'dzin
སྒོ་ཞིག་བརྒྱུད	to pass through a door	sgo zhig brgyud
སྒོ་བཞི	four series	sgo bzhi
སྒོ་བཞིར	at the four doors / portals /gates	sgo bzhir
སྒོ་ཟོག	domestic animals	sgo zog
སྒོ་ཟོག་སེམས་ཅན	livestock, domestic animals	sgo zog sems can
སྒོ་བཟང་པོའི་གཟུངས	'phags pa sgo bzang po'i gzungs zhes bya ba	sgo bzang po'i gzungs
སྒོ་ཡི་ཡ་ཐེམ	{sgo yi ya them yan chad} right up to the lintels	sgo yi ya them
སྒོ་ཡིག	writing on/ over a door, house #	sgo yig
སྒོ་ཡོལ	curtain, screen door	sgo yol
སྒོ་ར	courtyard	sgo ra
སྒོ་ར་ཁ	gate, arch	sgo ra kha
སྒོ་ར་བ	door keeper, door guard	sgo ra ba
སྒོ་རག་པ	door keeper	sgo rag pa
སྒོ་རིམ་མང་པོ	name for a series of doors	sgo rim mang po
སྒོ་རུ་ཆུག	approach	sgo ru chug
སྒོ་རུ་བསྲུང	guard the gates to the city 611	sgo ru bsrung
སྒོ་ལ་ཁྲ་ཚ	receiver of customs,	sgo la khra tsha
ཏོཨོལ	gatherer	tool
སྒོ་ལ་ཁྲ་ཚ་སྡུད་པ་པོ	collector of tolls	sgo la khra tsha sdud pa po
སྒོ་ལ་ཐག་ཐག་བྱེད་པ	knock on the door	sgo la thag thag byed pa
སྒོ་ལ་རྩི་སྐུད	paint a door	sgo la rtsi skud
སྒོ་ལེབ	door, plank	sgo leb
སྒོ་ལོ	body, face	sgo lo
སྒོ་ལོགས	wall left and right of a door	sgo logs
སྒོ་བཤད	inscription on the door, signboard	sgo bshad
སྒོ་སེང	chink of a door sgo sogs shugs kyis rgyab pa'am de'i sgra slam	sgo seng
སྒོ་སྲུང	guardian of the gate/ gatekeeper; door-keeper, guard	sgo srung
སྒོ་སྲུང་ཁྲོ་བོ་བཅུ	the ten wrathful	sgo srung khro bo bcu
གཏེ	keepers	gate
སྒོ་སྲུང་པ	sentinel	sgo srung pa
སྒོ་སྲུང་བ	guard, sentry	sgo srung ba
སྒོ་སློག	hunting coat of antelope skin	sgo slog
སྒོ་གསུམ	3 behavioral levels, 3 gates, 3 doors (stong pa nyid, mtshan ma med pa, smon pa med pa), 3 media (body, voice, mind), 3 doors (lion for chos sku, elephant for longs sku, sage for sprul sku; silence...	sgo gsum
སྒོ་གསུམ་འཁོར་འདས་རུ་ཤན	separating samsara and nirvana of the three doors	sgo gsum 'khor 'das ru shan
སྒོ་གསུམ་འཁྲུལ་པ	illusion of the three gates	sgo gsum 'khrul pa
སྒོ་གསུམ་གུས་པ་ཆེན་པོས	with great respect of body, speech and mind; with great devotion in thought, word and deed	sgo gsum gus pa chen pos
སྒོ་གསུམ་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	sgo gsum gyi skyon bcu gcig
སྒོ་གསུམ་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་པ་ཞིག	the delusion of his three doors collapsed	sgo gsum gyi 'khrul pa zhig
སྒོ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཉེས་སྤྱོད	negative deeds of the three doors	sgo gsum gyi nyes spyod
སྒོ་གསུམ་ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བས་བསྟེན	serve him with composure of body, speech, and mind	sgo gsum nye bar zhi bas bsten
སྒོ་གསུམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་ཤིགས་པ་གསུམ	the three doors as the three indestructible vajras; three imperishable / indestructible realities sgo gsum bya ba dgu phrug btang ba abandon the nine actions of the three doors	sgo gsum rdo rje mi shigs pa gsum
སྒོ་གསུམ་རུ་ཤན	separation of the three doors	sgo gsum ru shan
སྒོ་གསེང	cracks in / around a door	sgo gseng
སྒོ་བསྲུང་བའི་པན་དི་ཏ	Gate-keeping pandita. At the major monastic institutions in ancient India, it was the custom to nominate competent scholars to the position of defending the view of Buddhism through debate, one at ...	sgo bsrung ba'i pan di ta
སྒོ་བསྲུངས	gate keeper, guardian of the gate	sgo bsrungs
སྒོ་བསྲུངས་བ	door keeper	sgo bsrungs ba
སྒོ་ལྷ	deity staying at the gate	sgo lha
སྒོག	p bsgogs,, take an oath	sgog
སྒོག་སྐྱ	white garlic used in medicine, allium nival jacam	sgog skya
སྒོག་སྔོན	blue species of garlic, allium rubellum	sgog sngon
སྒོག་གཅིག་མ	garlic grown on a single root	sgog gcig ma
སྒོག་བཅུད་གསུམ	3 species of garlic (tsong dmar, sgog skya, sgog sngon)	sgog bcud gsum
སྒོག་ཏིང	mortar	sgog ting
སྒོག་ཏུམ	number of garlic roots bunched in one	sgog tum
སྒོག་གཏུན	pestle for bruising leek	sgog gtun
སྒོག་བཏུན	mortar	sgog btun
སྒོག་ཐལ	ash of {sgog skya} herb	sgog thal
སྒོག་རྡོག	number of garlic roots bunched in one	sgog rdog
སྒོག་པ	garlic, leek, allium	sgog pa
སྒོག་པ་རུག་པ	allium prattii c. h. wright	sgog pa rug pa
སྒོག་པ་ལ་ཕུག་བཟའ་མི་བྱ	not to eat garlic. or radishes	sgog pa la phug bza' mi bya
སྒོག་པོ	one that makes a person swear	sgog po
སྒོག་བཙོང	garlic and onions	sgog btsong
སྒོག་གསིལ	single garlic root or seed	sgog gsil
སྒོགས	imp. of {sgog pa}; imp. of {sgag pa}	sgogs
སྒོང	egg, a country probably kong po, make round balls of dough, SA sgong ba	sgong
སྒོང་སྐྱེ	born out of an egg, oviparous	sgong skye
སྒོང་སྐྱེས	egg-born, egg birth, produced / born from an egg; rebirth through egg	sgong skyes
སྒོང་ཁྲལ	egg gathering tax obligation	sgong khral
སྒོང་རྒྱ	enclosure of the egg shell	sgong rgya
སྒོང་ང	egg	sgong nga
སྒོང་ང་གཏོང	lay eggs	sgong nga gtong
སྒོང་ཆུ	egg white	sgong chu
སྒོང་ཐོག	a medicinal fruit	sgong thog
སྒོང་ཐོག་པ	{sgong thog pa} med. herb	sgong thog pa
སྒོང་པྲི	yolk	sgong pri
སྒོང་སྤྲི	egg-white	sgong spri
སྒོང་སྤྲིས	egg-white	sgong spris
སྒོང་ཕྱེད་ཚལ་བ	half-eggists	sgong phyed tshal ba
སྒོང་བ	(tha dad pa bsgongs pa, bsgong ba, sgongs,, 1) make a pill/ lump; 2) on a fire pile kindling/ fuel etc.	sgong ba
སྒོང་བུ	ball shape, lump, solid form	sgong bu
སྒོང་འབྲས	fried/ scrambled egg [Gold]	sgong 'bras
སྒོང་བཙོས	boil eggs	sgong btsos
སྒོང་བཟོས་ཐོན་རྫས	food made from eggs	sgong bzos thon rdzas
སྒོང་རིལ	lump, ball [of], solid form	sgong ril
སྒོང་ལ	on, above	sgong la
སྒོང་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	SA sgong skye	sgong las skye ba
སྒོང་ཤུན	eggshell [inner skin] 612	sgong shun
སྒོང་ཤུན་མ	very thin like eggshell	sgong shun ma
སྒོངས	make round balls of dough, SA sgong ba	sgongs
སྒོངས་པའམ་སྒོར་མོ	laughing speech or exclamation	sgongs pa'am sgor mo
སྒོངས་ཤིག	make round balls of dough, SA sgong ba	sgongs shig
སྒོད་ཡས	a numeral	sgod yas
སྒོན	envy	sgon
སྒོབ	imp. of {sgab pa}	sgob
སྒོབ་རྒྱབ	(spelling phonetic): to yak, shoot the breeze. [mss]	sgob rgyab
སྒོབ་སྒོབ	unable, deficient, wanting in strength	sgob sgob
སྒོམ	reflection, meditation, contemplation, to think of, practice, cultivation, contemplation. p. {bsgoms} imp. Skt. bhavana, to cultivate, bring forth	sgom
སྒོམ་ཀྱི་རིགས	kind of meditation	sgom kyi rigs
སྒོམ་སྐད	meditation jargon	sgom skad
སྒོམ་སྐྱེས	arising of meditation, birth of meditation practice	sgom skyes
སྒོམ་སྐྱོང་བ	meditating, maintaining the practice, continuing the training	sgom skyong ba
སྒོམ་སྐྱོང་བ་ལ	while practicing	sgom skyong ba la
སྒོམ་སྐྱོན	faulty meditation	sgom skyon
སྒོམ་སྐྱོན་མེད	flawless meditation	sgom skyon med
སྒོམ་ཁང	meditation house, retreat hut	sgom khang
སྒོམ་ཁུང	meditation cavern	sgom khung
སྒོམ་ཁོག	meditational instructions	sgom khog
སྒོམ་མཁན	bearer, ascetic who meditates	sgom mkhan
སྒོམ་མཁན་གྱི་ཤེས	meditating mind	sgom mkhan gyi shes
སྒོམ་མཁན་གྱི་སེམས	meditating mind	sgom mkhan gyi sems
སྒོམ་འཁོར་ཡུག	all-encompassing meditation	sgom 'khor yug
སྒོམ་གྱི་ཁོར་ཡུག	uninterrupted training	sgom gyi khor yug
སྒོམ་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	essential meditation training, identity of the meditation state	sgom gyi ngo bo
སྒོམ་གྱི་རྟེན	meditation stick	sgom gyi rten
སྒོམ་གྱི་མུ་གེ	"meditation famine" Thrangu Rinpoche: weak, no progress	sgom gyi mu ge
སྒོམ་གྱི་མུ་གེ་ཕོག་པ	suffer the 'meditation famine'	sgom gyi mu ge phog pa
སྒོམ་གྱི་དམིགས	something to be cultivated by meditation	sgom gyi dmigs
སྒོམ་གྱི་དམིགས་རྟེན	object of meditation	sgom gyi dmigs rten
སྒོམ་གྱི་ཤོར་ས	strayings from the meditation training	sgom gyi shor sa
སྒོམ་གྲྭ	meditation center, hermit monk [differs from {sgrub grva} in that emphasis in on {mtshan med rdzogs rim}	sgom grwa
སྒོམ་གརབ༹	place meditators live, meditation center, hermit monk	sgom grva
སྒོམ་རྒས	meditation withers	sgom rgas
སྒོམ་རྒྱག་ལུགས	meditative system, practice tradition	sgom rgyag lugs
སྒོམ་རྒྱབ	to practice meditation	sgom rgyab
སྒོམ་རྒྱབ་པ	meditate	sgom rgyab pa
སྒོམ་སྒྲུབ	meditation practice, practice meditation	sgom sgrub
སྒོམ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་པ	practice meditation	sgom sgrub byed pa
སྒོམ་ངོས་བཟུང་བ	to identify meditation practice	sgom ngos bzung ba
སྒོམ་ཆེན	meditator, practitioner; contemplative ascetic; meditator, hermit [full-time practitioner, hermit], advanced meditator; great meditator; fanatic	sgom chen
སྒོམ་ཆེན་པ	1) meditator. 2) great meditators, a great yogi	sgom chen pa
སྒོམ་ཉམས	experience during meditation	sgom nyams
སྒོམ་ཉམས་དྲུག་པ	the Six Meditation Experiences; final words of Jampal Shenyen to Shri Singha	sgom nyams drug pa
སྒོམ་ཉེས་པ	to blunder in meditation	sgom nyes pa
སྒོམ་གཏོར	to shatter meditation. An instruction in Mahamudra designed to break shamatha and push on into vipashyana	sgom gtor
སྒོམ་རྟེན	meditation stick	sgom rten
སྒོམ་རྟེན་སྐེད་ལ་བཙུགས་ཏེ	made him rest his head on a meditation support	sgom rten sked la btsugs te
སྒོམ་སྟོབས	the power of practice	sgom stobs
སྒོམ་ཐག	meditating cord, meditation belt, cord worn round the shoulder and he waist at the time of meditation, 4 inch wide cloth worn by yogi in meditation	sgom thag
སྒོམ་ཐག་འཁྲིལ	fixed by the meditation belt	sgom thag 'khril
སྒོམ་ཐག་ལུས་ལ་བཅིངས	tied his body upright with a meditation-band	sgom thag lus la bcings
སྒོམ་ཐབས	means of meditating	sgom thabs
སྒོམ་དུ་ཁྱེར	continue training	sgom du khyer
སྒོམ་དུ་ངོས་བཟུང	to identify the meditation state as	sgom du ngos bzung
སྒོམ་དུ་བཅུག	send to meditate	sgom du bcug
སྒོམ་དུ་འཇོག་པ	to be composed in meditation	sgom du 'jog pa
སྒོམ་དུ་བཟུང	believe it to be the meditation state, take it as meditation, take meditation to be, to regard as the meditation state	sgom du bzung
སྒོམ་དོན	meditation object	sgom don
སྒོམ་འདྲ་མིན	incorrect look-alike meditation	sgom 'dra min
སྒོམ་སྡེ	1) sgom sde village [R]; 2) practice center	sgom sde
སྒོམ་གནད	key point of meditation	sgom gnad
སྒོམ་པ	bhavana, meditation, creative imagination, conscious cultivation, meditative development, making a living experience of, contemplate, concentrated attention to the nature of things, close attention...	sgom pa
སྒོམ་པ་སྐྱོང་བ	1) meditation; 2) practice meditation, contemplate, imagine, ponder, consecrate; 3) get used to, make a habit of	sgom pa skyong ba
སྒོམ་པ་གོམས་པ	be adept in meditation	sgom pa goms pa
སྒོམ་པ་གྱི་གཞི	basis for the training	sgom pa gyi gzhi
སྒོམ་པ་རྒྱུན་མི་གཅོད་པ	unbroken/ uninterrupted meditation	sgom pa rgyun mi gcod pa
སྒོམ་པ་མཆོག	supreme meditation	sgom pa mchog
སྒོམ་པ་མཇུག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfected training	sgom pa mjug tu phyin pa
སྒོམ་པ་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པ་ཚུལ	method of practicing meditation	sgom pa nyams su len pa tshul
སྒོམ་པ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་དལ	the samadhi mandala of meditation	sgom pa ting nge 'dzin gyi dal
སྒོམ་པ་དག་པ	pure / perfect / correct practice	sgom pa dag pa
སྒོམ་པ་དོན་གྲུབ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras	sgom pa don grub
སྒོམ་པ་པོ	meditator	sgom pa po
སྒོམ་པ་མེད	non-development	sgom pa med
སྒོམ་པ་ཚང	buddhist ascetic who meditates, great meditator	sgom pa tshang
སྒོམ་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པར་བྱས་པ	to persevere in the meditation training	sgom pa la brtson par byas pa
སྒོམ་པ་ལ་བཟླ	to get beyond meditation	sgom pa la bzla
སྒོམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	knowledge/ wisdom resulting from meditation	sgom pa las byung ba'i shes rab
སྒོམ་པའི་ཉམས་མྱོང	meditation experience	sgom pa'i nyams myong
སྒོམ་པའི་རྟེན་གྱི་གང་ཟག་བཞི	CHN	sgom pa'i rten gyi gang zag bzhi
སྒོམ་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ་བཞི	TSE	sgom pa'i thig le bzhi
སྒོམ་པའི་གནད	key point of meditation	sgom pa'i gnad
སྒོམ་པའི་འཕྲང	the ravine of meditation	sgom pa'i 'phrang
སྒོམ་པའི་མན་ངག	meditation instruction	sgom pa'i man ngag
སྒོམ་པའི་ལམ	path of meditation	sgom pa'i lam
སྒོམ་པའི་ལམ་དགུ	nine aspects of the path of cultivation	sgom pa'i lam dgu
སྒོམ་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminating wisdom arising in meditation	sgom pa'i shes rab
སྒོམ་པས་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པ	practical application through meditation	sgom pas nyams su len pa
སྒོམ་པས་སྤང་བར་བྱ་བ	abandoned by meditation, object of abandonment of the path of meditation	sgom pas spang bar bya ba
སྒོམ་པས་སྤང་བྱ	that to be abandoned/ discards through cultivation/ meditation	sgom pas spang bya
སྒོམ་སྤང	cultivation riddance, things to be gotten rid of/ discards through cultivation/ meditation,'riddance meditation	sgom spang
སྒོམ་སྤང་སྐོར་དགུ	the nine-fold abandonment by meditation [sgom spang chen po'i chen po dang, chen po'i 'bring po, chen po'i chung ngu ste chen po'i skor gsum dang, de bzhin du 'bring po'i che 'bring chung skor gsum...	sgom spang skor dgu
སྒོམ་སྤང་བཅུ	the 10 things abandoned by meditation ['dod pa'i sgom spang bzhi dang, gzugs khams kyi sgom spang gsum dang, gzud med kyi sgom spang gsum bcas khams gsum gyi sgom spang thams cad bsdoms pas bcu yod...	sgom spang bcu
སྒོམ་སྤང་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 things abandoned by meditation ['dod khams kyi sgom spang drug dang gzugs khams kyi sgom spang lnga, gzugs med khams kyi sgom spang lnga ste bcu drug mngon pa kun btus las gsungs]	sgom spang bcu drug
སྒོམ་སྤང་འཇུག་པ་གཟུང་རྟོག	TSE	sgom spang 'jug pa gzung rtog
སྒོམ་སྤང་ཉོན་མོངས་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 disturbing emotions to be discarded through the path of cultivation	sgom spang nyon mongs bcu drug
སྒོམ་སྤང་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	disturbing emotions to be discarded through the path of cultivation	sgom spang nyon mongs pa
སྒོམ་སྤང་བདེན་འཛིན	the conception of true existence which is abandoned by a the path of meditation	sgom spang bden 'dzin
སྒོམ་སྤང་ལྡོག་པ་གཟུང་རྟོག	concept of the perceived which is to be discarded through the path of cultivation	sgom spang ldog pa gzung rtog
སྒོམ་སྤང་བཞི་བརྒྱ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 414 things abandoned by meditation	sgom spang bzhi brgya bcu bzhi
སྒོམ་སྤངས	cultivation riddance, ['to be gotten rid of through the path of cultivation'] discards by meditation / riddance meditation	sgom spangs
སྒོམ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་རི་ཁྲོད	Gomchok Hermitage, in Domey	sgom phyogs kyi ri khrod
སྒོམ་ཕྱོགས་རེ་བ	imperfect ways of training, imperfect training	sgom phyogs re ba
སྒོམ་བྱ	object of meditation	sgom bya
སྒོམ་བྱ་སྒོམ་བྱེད་མེད	neither meditator nor meditation	sgom bya sgom byed med
སྒོམ་བྱུང	resulting from meditationtraining, born of meditation; arisen from meditation	sgom byung
སྒོམ་བྱུང་གི་སྟོབས	power of being / having trained	sgom byung gi stobs
སྒོམ་བྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	wisdom which comes forth in meditation	sgom byung gi shes rab
སྒོམ་བྱུང་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	mundane wisdom resulting from meditation	sgom byung 'jig rten pa'i ye shes
སྒོམ་བྱུང་རྟོག་པ	TSE	sgom byung rtog pa
སྒོམ་བྱུང་རྟོགས་པ	realization resulting from [meditation] training	sgom byung rtogs pa
སྒོམ་བྱེད	ascetic who meditates, subject that meditates, meditator, meditator	sgom byed
སྒོམ་བྱེད་པ	to use the training	sgom byed pa
སྒོམ་དབྱངས	meditation song	sgom dbyangs
སྒོམ་འབྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna arising from meditation	sgom 'byung gi shes rab
སྒོམ་འབྲོག	wilderness or solitude where hermits dwell for meditation, Sikkimese holly	sgom 'brog
སྒོམ་སྦྱངས	meditation training	sgom sbyangs
སྒོམ་མིན་པའི་སེམས	state of mind that is not meditation training	sgom min pa'i sems
སྒོམ་མེད	nothing to be meditated upon, nonmeditation, without meditation, SA rnal 'byor rnam bzhi	sgom med
སྒོམ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Yoga of Nonmeditation. The forth of the four yogas of Mahamudra	sgom med kyi rnal 'byor
སྒོམ་མེད་ངང	state of nonmeditation	sgom med ngang
སྒོམ་མེད་ཆུང་ངུ	lesser nonmeditation	sgom med chung ngu
སྒོམ་མེད་ཆེན་པོ	greater nonmeditation	sgom med chen po
སྒོམ་མེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of nonmeditation; the fourth of the four yogas of Mahamudra	sgom med rnal 'byor
སྒོམ་མེད་འབྲིང	medium level of nonmeditation	sgom med 'bring
སྒོམ་མེད་ཡེངས་མེད	undistracted nonmeditation	sgom med yengs med
སྒོམ་ཚུལ	method of training / meditating	sgom tshul
སྒོམ་ཞྭ	meditation hat	sgom zhwa
སྒོམ་ཞབ༹	meditation hat	sgom zhva
སྒོམ་ཞིག་ཞུ	requested meditation instruction	sgom zhig zhu
སྒོམ་བཟླས	meditate on the deity and recite the mantra	sgom bzlas
སྒོམ་ཡན་ལག	a form of ascetic meditation, branch of ascetical meditation sgom yun shi dang snyoms par mdzod let your meditation practice last until your death!	sgom yan lag
སྒོམ་རིམ	bhavana krama, 3 treatises on rim gyis pa by 8th century Indian pandit Kamalasila, meditation stages	sgom rim
སྒོམ་རིམ་བར་པ	Kamalashila's stages of meditation ii	sgom rim bar pa
སྒོམ་ལ་བོག་འདོན་བྱུང་བ	progress in training / meditation	sgom la bog 'don byung ba
སྒོམ་ལ་མྱོང་བ	experience in practice	sgom la myong ba
སྒོམ་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	to dedicate oneself to practice	sgom la gzhol ba
སྒོམ་ལ་ལམ་བྱས	to take the path as the training	sgom la lam byas
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ	process of renunciation taking place on the path of meditation; factor to be renounced on the path of meditation	sgom lam gyi spang bya
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་བྱེད་པ	productions of the path of meditation	sgom lam gyi byed pa
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་བྱེད་པ་དྲུག	TSE	sgom lam gyi byed pa drug
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་ས་དགུ	nine stages of the path of cultivation	sgom lam gyi sa dgu
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱིས་སྤང་བར་བྱ་བ	discards through the path of cultivation	sgom lam gyis spang bar bya ba
སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱིས་སྤང་བྱ	the discards through the path of cultivation	sgom lam gyis spang bya
སྒོམ་ལམ་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 # of the path of cultivation	sgom lam bcu gcig
སྒོམ་ལམ་གཉིས	yhjr two meditation paths [1) {'jig rten pa'i sgom lam} 2) {'jig rten las 'das pa'i sgom lam}	sgom lam gnyis
སྒོམ་ལམ་དུ་བསླངས	to put the training to use	sgom lam du bslangs
སྒོམ་ལམ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ	the path of liberation of the path of meditation	sgom lam rnam grol lam
སྒོམ་ལམ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamudra level of the path of cultivation. Same as the vidyadhara level of Mahamudra sgom lam phyir mi ldog pa'i rtags brgyad the 8 signs of irreversibility on the path of meditation TSE	sgom lam phyag rgya chen po
སྒོམ་ལམ་བར་ཆད་མེད་ལམ	path of meditation gyi ngo skal du gyur pa'i spang bya lhan skyes kyi cha rnams spong ba'i dngos gnyen du gyur pa path of seeing gyi rjes thog du gzhan gyis bar ma bcad par sgrib pa spong ba'o	sgom lam bar chad med lam
སྒོམ་ལམ་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	the union at the summit of the path of meditation sgom lam rtse sbyor gyi spang bya rtog	sgom lam rtse sbyor
པ་བཞི	the four conceptions to be abandoned at the union at the summit of the path of meditation TSE	pa bzhi
སྒོམ་ལུགས	meditative school	sgom lugs
སྒོམ་ལུང	instructions on meditation	sgom lung
སྒོམ་ཤིང	1) gun stock; 2) in meditating aog ma'i stegs	sgom shing
སྒོམ་སྲན	exertion, perseverance in practice, rigorous perseverance, exertion	sgom sran
སྒོམ་སྲན་ཆུན	feeble exertion	sgom sran chun
སྒོམ་གསུམ	3 kinds of meditation	sgom gsum
སྒོམ་བསླབས་པ	teaching to meditate; x {sngon gro byin skyes la kun dga' bos sgom bslabs pas} once, in the past, Ananda was teaching Shrona to meditate	sgom bslabs pa
སྒོམས	creatively attend to, meditation deity practice, deity thought of for propitiation	sgoms
སྒོམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish through training / being adept	sgoms kyi sgrub pa
སྒོམས་པ	contemplate	sgoms pa
སྒོམས་ཤིག	meditate!, cultivate!, experience!	sgoms shig
སྒོའི་འཁོར་གཏན	door bolt	sgo'i 'khor gtan
སྒོའི་ལྕོག	raised place on either side of a door	sgo'i lcog
སྒོའི་རྟིང་པ	hinge	sgo'i rting pa
སྒོའི་ཐེམ་པ	threshold, sill, steps at the entrance of a house	sgo'i them pa
སྒོའི་གནད	key point of the gate	sgo'i gnad
སྒོའི་སྣ་ལྕགས	bolt	sgo'i sna lcags
སྒོའི་རྩ་བ	at the door	sgo'i rtsa ba
སྒོའི་ཡོབ	steps at the threshold	sgo'i yob
སྒོར	sgar ba!, currency unit, melt and set, boil down, turn/ make on a lathe	sgor
སྒོར་རྐྱང	hard currency, cash	sgor rkyang
སྒོར་འཁྱིལ་ལེ	round	sgor 'khyil le
སྒོར་སྒོར	round, circle, orb-like, globular	sgor sgor
སྒོར་སྒོར་འཁྱིལ	forming into an eddy or whirlpool	sgor sgor 'khyil
སྒོར་སྒོར་གཏོང	dupe, trick	sgor sgor gtong
སྒོར་སྒོར་ཕྱེད་ཀ	semi-circle	sgor sgor phyed ka
སྒོར་འཇུག་པ	to embark on	sgor 'jug pa
སྒོར་ལྟེ	center of a circle	sgor lte
སྒོར་ཐིག	pair of compasses	sgor thig
སྒོར་ཐིག་རྒྱག་ཆས	compasses [for making circles]	sgor thig rgyag chas
སྒོར་ཐིག་ཕྱེ་བ	semi-circular	sgor thig phye ba
སྒོར་ཐོན	Open the door!	sgor thon
སྒོར་མཐའ	circumference	sgor mtha'
སྒོར་མཐར	circumference	sgor mthar
སྒོར་ཕོར	wooden bowl with a lid	sgor phor
སྒོར་ཕྱིན	{rab bzang gi sgor phyin nas} went to the house of Subhadra	sgor phyin
སྒོར་བ	boil down, condense by boiling, turn on a lathe	sgor ba
སྒོར་བྲོ	circle dance	sgor bro
སྒོར་དབྱིབས	circle, circular	sgor dbyibs
སྒོར་དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་ལྟེ་བ	center of a circle	sgor dbyibs kyi lte ba
སྒོར་དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	circumference	sgor dbyibs kyi mtha'
སྒོར་དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་སྐོར	circumference of a circle sgor dbyibs kyi mtha' skor grangs tshad pi	sgor dbyibs kyi mtha' skor
སྒོར་དབྱིབས་ཅན	circular	sgor dbyibs can
སྒོར་མེད	without interruption, no break	sgor med
སྒོར་མོ	1) currency unit. 2) round, circular	sgor mo
མ་དགུ	$9.99	ma dgu
སྒོར་མོའི་ཚངས་ཐིག	diameter	sgor mo'i tshangs thig
སྒོར་འཛིན	check, bond	sgor 'dzin
སྒོར་འཛུལ་བ	slip out the door	sgor 'dzul ba
སྒོར་ཞུགས	follower	sgor zhugs
སྒོར་གཞས	throughout Tibet lag gdang sbrel nas gtong ba'i folk zlos gar	sgor gzhas
སྒོར་ཟུར	jiao=.1 yuan	sgor zur
སྒོར་ལ	[R] concerning, about, regarding, w reference to	sgor la
སྒོར་ལུང	gor valley	sgor lung
སྒོར་སྲོལ	currency system	sgor srol
སྒོར་བསླེབས	came to the door	sgor bslebs
སྒོས	1 Sgo ba!; 2) [in] particular, private, special dmigs bsal,	sgos
སྒོས་སྐལ	share of a single person, individual lot	sgos skal
སྒོས་ཁུར	a preta	sgos khur
སྒོས་དགྲ	special/ private enemy	sgos dgra
སྒོས་སྒྲུབ	individual accomplishment	sgos sgrub
སྒོས་བརྒྱུད་གསུམ	Abbr. of {gter gyi sgos chos kyi brgyud pa gsum}	sgos brgyud gsum
སྒོས་ཆོས	specific detail	sgos chos
སྒོས་བསྙེན	individual approach	sgos bsnyen
སྒོས་བསྙེན་བྱ་བ	to perform the specific approach [recitations]	sgos bsnyen bya ba
སྒོས་གདུགས	parasol for one person	sgos gdugs
སྒོས་བདག	sger la bdag pa'am dbang ba	sgos bdag
སྒོས་པ	choose, find the right thing	sgos pa
སྒོས་དཔོན	sger dpon	sgos dpon
སྒོས་སྤྱི	particular and general	sgos spyi
སྒོས་དབང	specific empowerment	sgos dbang
སྒོས་མི	private/particular person	sgos mi
སྒོས་མིང	individual name	sgos ming
སྒོས་ཚ	male descents after grandsons	sgos tsha
སྒོས་ཞག	five planets's individual nyin zhag dag pa [eg count of days passed by the any of the five planets in Aries etc.]	sgos zhag
སྒོས་གཞིས	individual/ particular nature, private estate	sgos gzhis
སྒོས་སུ	particularly, especially	sgos su
སྒྱང	p. bsgyangs - to postpone, to delay	sgyang
སྒྱལ་ཐང	a district in Tibet	sgyal thang
སྒྱིག་གུ	bag, purse	sgyig gu
སྒྱིགས	rubber	sgyigs
སྒྱིགས་ལྷམ	rubber boots	sgyigs lham
སྒྱིང	[p bsgyings sgyings!] {gying} assume a pose, be poised crouching [like a tiger]	sgying
སྒྱིང་བ	yawn, gape	sgying ba
སྒྱིངས་འགྲོ	vajra of Indra 616	sgyings 'gro
སྒྱིད	knee-joint, the calf, be active/ energetic/ diligent	sgyid
སྒྱིད་སྐྱུར	body and mind heavy, lazy, indolent not wanting to do anything * p sgyid bskyur,, experience muscular pains/ cramps in the leg	sgyid skyur
སྒྱིད་ཁུག	hole behind the knees	sgyid khug
སྒྱིད་ཁུག་བརྒྱུད	passing through the hollows of the knees	sgyid khug brgyud
སྒྱིད་ཁུང	hole behind the knees	sgyid khung
སྒྱིད་ཁུང་ཆུ་བ	chu rgyus in the hole behind the knees	sgyid khung chu ba
སྒྱིད་ཁུམ་པ	lazy, idle, indolent	sgyid khum pa
སྒྱིད་ཁྱོལ	one lame in his legs	sgyid khyol
སྒྱིད་འཁུམས་པ	1) sgyid pa'i rtsa 'khums pa; 2) Yid zhum pa	sgyid 'khums pa
སྒྱིད་འཁྲིལ	raised knee, squatting and doing nothing, laziness, languor	sgyid 'khril
སྒྱིད་འཁྲིལ་བ	1) phyu ba'i sgab rkang par 'khril ba; 2) Sgyid pas sgyid par 'khril ba	sgyid 'khril ba
སྒྱིད་འཁྲིས	pus mo 'byar nas 'gro ba'am sgyid sgrim gyis 'gro ba	sgyid 'khris
སྒྱིད་ངན	lazy	sgyid ngan
སྒྱིད་ཉོམས་པ	lazy, idle, indolent	sgyid nyoms pa
སྒྱིད་སྙོམ	lazy	sgyid snyom
སྒྱིད་སྙོམ་པ	discouraged/ procrastinating person	sgyid snyom pa
སྒྱིད་པ	knee joint	sgyid pa
སྒྱིད་པ་གཅོད་པ	lame the knee joint, hamstring a horse	sgyid pa gcod pa
སྒྱིད་པོ	dam po dang sgrim po, Las ka mi sgyid pa, Mi de las ka sgyid po zhig 'dug	sgyid po
སྒྱིད་བུ	hearth, fire-place	sgyid bu
སྒྱིད་དབྲག	between the knees/ calves	sgyid dbrag
སྒྱིད་འབྲེག	former bad law of thog chad gcod	sgyid 'breg
སྒྱིད་མི་ལུག་པར	do not feel disheartened; x {gang dka' dka' dang mang ba yang mi zin snyam du sgyid mi lug par snying rus kyis 'dzin} however long and difficult the teaching may be, do not feel disheartened and wo...	sgyid mi lug par
སྒྱིད་རྩ་གཅོད་པ	sgyid 'breg	sgyid rtsa gcod pa
སྒྱིད་ལ་ངན་པ	lazy, idle, indolent, disheartened	sgyid la ngan pa
སྒྱིད་ལ་ཉེས་པོ	lazy, idle, indolent, disheartened	sgyid la nyes po
སྒྱིད་ལུག	1) discourage, discouragement; 2) sluggishness, procrastination, lazy, idle, indolent, disheartened	sgyid lug
སྒྱིད་ལུག་གི་རང་བཞིན	inertia	sgyid lug gi rang bzhin
སྒྱིད་ལུག་བདག་ཉིད་བརྙས་པའི་ལེ་ལོ	the laziness of discouraging oneself	sgyid lug bdag nyid brnyas pa'i le lo
སྒྱིད་ལུག་པ	feel disheartened	sgyid lug pa
སྒྱིད་ལུག་བྱེད	be lazy/ idle/ indolent/ discouraged	sgyid lug byed
སྒྱིད་ལུག་ལེ་ལོ	sgyid lug skyes pa, g.yul gyi las la mi spro bas sgyid lug tu gyur, Skye bo rnams yun ring por dub cing sgyid lug par gyur pa	sgyid lug le lo
སྒྱིད་ལུགས་ཞུམ་པ་མེད་པ	free from depression	sgyid lugs zhum pa med pa
སྒྱིའུ	bag, purse	sgyi'u
སྒྱིར་རྐང	fringe attached to border of robes or tents	sgyir rkang
སྒྱུ	deceit	sgyu
སྒྱུ་གར་ཚོགས་པ	circus, troupe of performing artists	sgyu gar tshogs pa
སྒྱུ་རྒོད	super illusion	sgyu rgod
སྒྱུ་ཅན	cheat, artful, crafty, cunning	sgyu can
སྒྱུ་བཅས	deceitful; dishonest, mendacious, shifty, lying, untruthful	sgyu bcas
སྒྱུ་ཐབས	ways	sgyu thabs
སྒྱུ་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་རྐུ་བ	rob by producing magical illusions sgyu dang g.yo - deceit and guile	sgyu thabs kyis rku ba
སྒྱུ་འདྲྭ	Magical Net; web of magic; see {sgyu 'phrul 'drwa ba}	sgyu 'drwa
སྒྱུ་འདྲྭ་བ	the magical web	sgyu 'drwa ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	magical display; Syn {dngos snang, rnam 'phrul, dngos byon, sprul pa, yang sprul, rol gar, rtsal snang, mi yi gzugs su byon pa} magical emanation, incarnation;	sgyu 'phrul
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Mayajala Tantras	sgyu 'phrul gyi rgyud
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Samadhi of Magical Illusion	sgyu 'phrul gyi ting nge 'dzin
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྣམ་རོལ	manifestation	sgyu 'phrul gyi rnam rol
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Ocean of Magical Display	sgyu 'phrul rgya mtsho
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud	sgyu 'phrul brgyad cu
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་པ	Eighty Magical Nets. A Mahayoga scripture	sgyu 'phrul brgyad cu pa
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བརྒྱད་པ	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud	sgyu 'phrul brgyad pa
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེན་པོ	The Eight Tantras of the Magic Manifestation that Make the Qualities Perfect sgyu 'phrul chen po zhes bya ba'i rgyud	sgyu 'phrul chen po
ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	{sgyu 'phrul chen po zhes bya ba'i rgyud kyi rgyal po sgyu 'phrul chen po zhes bya ba'i rgyud	kyi rgyal po
རྒྱུད་བརྒྱད་པ	probably the same as sgyu 'phrul brgyad pa sgyu 'phrul chen mo zhes bya pa'i sgrub	rgyud brgyad pa
པའི་ཐབས	n of sadhana sgyu 'phrul chen mo'i 'grel pa yon tan ldan	pa'i thabs
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེན་མོའི་རྒྱུད	{sgyu 'phrul chen mo'i rgyud	sgyu 'phrul chen mo'i rgyud
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲ་བ	1) {sgyu 'phrul dra ba tantra; 2) an emanation of Spyan ras gzigs/ Avalokiteshvara; 3) net of illusion	sgyu 'phrul dra ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བ	web of magic(al display/ illusion)	sgyu 'phrul drva ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	Mayajala, Magical Net, magical net, web of illusion, the net of illusory creation, illusory net; the {zhi khro} mandala 617	sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Web of Magical Illusion	sgyu 'phrul drwa ba chen po
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བའི་སྐོར	the Magical Net Cycle	sgyu 'phrul drwa ba'i skor
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བའི་གར	the web of magical display	sgyu 'phrul drwa ba'i gar
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་འདྲྭ་བ	Magical net, Mayajala. 1) A collective term for the manifestations of enlightenment to tame whoever needs in whichever way is necessary. 2) A collection of tantric scriptures belonging chiefly to M...	sgyu 'phrul 'drwa ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་འདྲྭ་བའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the forms of the Magical Net	sgyu 'phrul 'drwa ba'i phyag rgya
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་འདྲྭ་བའི་ལྷ་སྐུ	the forms of the deities of the Magical Net	sgyu 'phrul 'drwa ba'i lha sku
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	Eight Maya Sections. Basic Mahayoga scriptures. Listed in Chapter 12	sgyu 'phrul sde brgyad
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བླ་མ	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud in 13 chapters, The Supreme Magic Net	sgyu 'phrul bla ma
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་མ	consort of the Buddha	sgyu 'phrul ma
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་མེ་ལོང	Mirror of Magical Display	sgyu 'phrul me long
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་རྩ་བའི	sgyu 'phrul bzhi bcu pa, sgyu 'phrul bla ma, sgyu 'phrul le lag, sgyu 'phrul brgyad pa, lha mo sgyu 'phrul, sgyu 'phrul brgyad cu pa, 'jam dpal sgyu 'phrul)	sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	series of 8 main mahayoga texts (gsang ba snying po	sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ཚེ་དཀར	Gyutrul tsekar	sgyu 'phrul tshe dkar
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ཞི་ཁྲོ	Magical Display of the Peaceful and Wrathful Ones, Skt. Shanti Krodha Mayajala	sgyu 'phrul zhi khro
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ཞི་བ	the peaceful deities according to the Magical Net	sgyu 'phrul zhi ba
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བཞི་བཅུ་པ	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud	sgyu 'phrul bzhi bcu pa
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་རོལ་པ	magical/ illusory (display)	sgyu 'phrul rol pa
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ལམ་རིམ	Progressive Stages of the Path for the Magical Net	sgyu 'phrul lam rim
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ལེ་ལག	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud in 33 chapters	sgyu 'phrul le lag
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་ལེའུ་ལག	Leulag Magical Net. A Mahayoga scripture. Vol. PHA of the Nyingma Gyübum	sgyu 'phrul le'u lag
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་བཤད་རྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Exposition Tantra of the Magical Vajra	sgyu 'phrul bshad rgyud rdo rje
སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་གསང་བ་སྙིང་པོ	{sgyu 'phrul gsang ba snying po	sgyu 'phrul gsang ba snying po
སྒྱུ་མ	1) maya, magical illusion; illusion, magic, magical trick, fantasy, entrails, mirage, wizardry, illusoriness, enchantment, wonderment. 2) small intestine	sgyu ma
སྒྱུ་མ་མཁན	magician cheat, juggler	sgyu ma mkhan
ལེའུ	{sgyu ma mkhan bzang po lung bstan pa'i le'u	le'u
སྒྱུ་མ་ངལ་གསོ	Finding Rest from Illusion	sgyu ma ngal gso
སྒྱུ་མ་ཅན	imposter, one who plays deception	sgyu ma can
སྒྱུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamaya	sgyu ma chen po
སྒྱུ་མ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐོར་རྣམས	the aspects of Mahamaya	sgyu ma chen po'i skor rnams
སྒྱུ་མ་ཆེན་མོ	great illusion - Mahamaya	sgyu ma chen mo
སྒྱུ་མ་ཆེན་མོའི་མ	the mother Great Miracle	sgyu ma chen mo'i ma
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུ	mayopama, phantom-like tableau, like an apparition, like illusion, illusive	sgyu ma lta bu
བུར་ཤེས་པ	to understand that all things are like magic / all phenomena are illusory	bur shes pa
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྐུ	Illusion-like Buddha's Being	sgyu ma lta bu'i sku
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་མཆོད་པ	magical offerings	sgyu ma lta bu'i mchod pa
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Magical samadhi. The second of the three samadhis the nature of which is luminosity and compassion, spontaneous like the light of the sun shining in the sky. See also 'three samadhis.' {kun tu snan...	sgyu ma lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin
ཨབསོརཔཏིཨོན་ཨོན་ཐེ་ཨིལླུསིཨོན	like nature of things	absorption on the illusion
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	immersion in the genuine experience of the illusionlike nature of things; yoga/ yogic approach to the illusion-like nature of things	sgyu ma lta bu'i rnal 'byor
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཚུལ	illusory manner, magical ways	sgyu ma lta bu'i tshul
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་རང་བཞིན	illusory / magical nature	sgyu ma lta bu'i rang bzhin
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་ལམ	magical path	sgyu ma lta bu'i lam
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས	magical mind	sgyu ma lta bu'i sems
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་བསོད་ནམས	merit that is illusory	sgyu ma lta bu'i bsod nams
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུར	illusory	sgyu ma lta bur
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུར་མཐོང་བ	to perceive as illusory	sgyu ma lta bur mthong ba
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟར	as an illusion	sgyu ma ltar
སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟར་གཉིས་མེད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	division of the Middle Way made by {slob dpon mE tri pa}	sgyu ma ltar gnyis med du smra ba
སྒྱུ་མ་དང་འདྲ་བ	like a magical illusion	sgyu ma dang 'dra ba
སྒྱུ་མ་དོན་དམ་པ	[a dbu ma rang rgyud pa school] sgyu ma don dam par 'dod pa'i dbu ma	sgyu ma don dam pa
རང་རྒྱུད་པ	Svatantrika School Asserting Ultimate Illusion	rang rgyud pa
སྒྱུ་མ་པ	illusionist, magician	sgyu ma pa
སྒྱུ་མ་སྤྲུལ་བ	exhibit a false show 618	sgyu ma sprul ba
སྒྱུ་མ་བྱས་པ	to conjure up magic	sgyu ma byas pa
སྒྱུ་མ་བྱེད་པ	a magician	sgyu ma byed pa
སྒྱུ་མ་མེད་པ	free from guile, guileless	sgyu ma med pa
སྒྱུ་མ་རྨི་ལམ	dreams and apparitions sgyu ma rmi lam smig rgyu la sogs pa magical illusion, dream, mirage and so forth	sgyu ma rmi lam
སྒྱུ་མ་ཙམ་དུ	like a magical illusion	sgyu ma tsam du
སྒྱུ་མ་རྩེད་མོ	magical show	sgyu ma rtsed mo
སྒྱུ་མ་རིག་མཁན	magician, illusionist	sgyu ma rig mkhan
སྒྱུ་མ་རིགས་གྲུབ་པའི་དབུ་མ་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {snang ba la spros pa rnam par bcad pa'i yongs gcod don dam bden par 'dod pa ste sangs rgyas bskyangs sogs so} "Those who assert the thorough elimination which eliminates e...	sgyu ma rigs grub pa'i dbu ma pa
སྒྱུ་མ་རིགས་སྒྲུབ་སྨྲ་བའི་དབུ་མ	a Madhyamika who propounds/asserts	sgyu ma rigs sgrub smra ba'i dbu ma
པྲོཨོཕ༹ས་བཡ་མེཨནས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨིལླུསིཨོན	like reasonings. {sgyu ma rigs grub pa'i dbu ma pa} [mss]	proofs by means of illusion
སྒྱུ་མ་ལ་སོགས་འདྲ་བ	like magic and so forth	sgyu ma la sogs 'dra ba
སྒྱུ་མ་བཤིག་པ	which destroys illusion	sgyu ma bshig pa
སྒྱུ་མ་སོགས་དཔེ་བདུན	magical illusion and the other seven analogies	sgyu ma sogs dpe bdun
སྒྱུ་མ་གསུམ	1) {snang ba sgyu ma}. 2) {rmi lam ja} 3) {bar ro ja}	sgyu ma gsum
སྒྱུ་མའི་སྐུ	magical form	sgyu ma'i sku
སྒྱུ་མའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	phantom, apparition	sgyu ma'i skyes bu
སྒྱུ་མའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city of illusion	sgyu ma'i grong khyer
སྒྱུ་མའི་སྔགས	mantra of illusion	sgyu ma'i sngags
སྒྱུ་མའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the play of illusion	sgyu ma'i cho 'phrul
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྟ་གླང	illusory horses and cows	sgyu ma'i rta glang
སྒྱུ་མའི་ལྟད་མོ	spectacular illusion; illusory spectacle	sgyu ma'i ltad mo
སྒྱུ་མའི་སྟོང་གཟུགས	illusory forms of emptiness	sgyu ma'i stong gzugs
སྒྱུ་མའི་ནོར	wealth of illusion	sgyu ma'i nor
སྒྱུ་མའི་ནོར་རྫས	illusory wealth	sgyu ma'i nor rdzas
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of illusion	sgyu ma'i rnal 'byor
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	yogi of illusion	sgyu ma'i rnal 'byor pa
སྒྱུ་མའི་སྣང་བ	appearance of an illusion	sgyu ma'i snang ba
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ	example of illusion	sgyu ma'i dpe
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་དགུ	[TRS 58-4] expl	sgyu ma'i dpe dgu
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་བརྒྱད	the 8 analogies of illusion apparition [8 similies of [Gk-mk] 1) {rmi lam} 2) {brag ca} 3) {dri za'i grong khyer} 4) {mig thor} 5) {smig rgyu} 6) sgyu ma} 7) {gzugs brnyan gyi snang ba} 8) {sprul p...	sgyu ma'i dpe brgyad
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་བརྒྱད་ལྟ་བུ	illusory, magical	sgyu ma'i dpe brgyad lta bu
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་བརྒྱད་དུ་བལྟས་པ	seeing [all the objects of your perception] as in the eight similes of illusion	sgyu ma'i dpe brgyad du bltas pa
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་བཅུ	[TRS 58-3]	sgyu ma'i dpe bcu
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 analogies of illusion [sgyu ma dang, chu zla, mig yor, smig rgyu, rmi lam, sgra brnyan, dri za'i grong khyer, mig 'phrul, 'ja' tson, glog chu bur, me long nang gi gzugs brnyan bcas bcu gnyis]	sgyu ma'i dpe bcu gnyis
སྒྱུ་མའི་དཔེ་རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 analogies of magical illusion sgyu ma'i dpe rnam grangs bcu gnyis CHN	sgyu ma'i dpe rnam grangs bcu gnyis
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྩེད་མོ	the play of magic	sgyu ma'i rtsed mo
སྒྱུ་མའི་ཚུལ	magical, illusive, illusory	sgyu ma'i tshul
སྒྱུ་མའི་ཚུལ་དུ	magically	sgyu ma'i tshul du
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྫས	substances used in magic	sgyu ma'i rdzas
སྒྱུ་མའི་རྫས་སྔགས	substances and incantations used in magic	sgyu ma'i rdzas sngags
སྒྱུ་མའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	illusory experience	sgyu ma'i rang bzhin gyi spyod yul
སྒྱུ་མའི་རོལ་རྩེད	false illusion-like play	sgyu ma'i rol rtsed
སྒྱུ་མའི་ལུས	illusion body	sgyu ma'i lus
སྒྱུ་མའི་ལྷ་སྔགས	magical deity, mantra	sgyu ma'i lha sngags
སྒྱུ་མིའི་རྫས	substance of an illusion	sgyu mi'i rdzas
སྒྱུ་རྩལ	art, magical dexterity, skill, dexterity, (30 handicrafts, 18 music, 7 singing, 9 dancing)	sgyu rtsal
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་མཁས་པ	artist, performer	sgyu rtsal mkhas pa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་འཁྲབ	to do an artistic performance	sgyu rtsal 'khrab
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་འཁྲབ་སྟོན་ཚོགས་པ	performing arts troupe	sgyu rtsal 'khrab ston tshogs pa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	artistry, artistic quality	sgyu rtsal gyi rang bzhin
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་གློག་བརྙན	art film	sgyu rtsal glog brnyan
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་ཅན	person knowing/ displaying ability, art, sport, game, skill of body and speech	sgyu rtsal can
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་སྟོན་ས	1) place where arts/ sgyu rtsal is shown; 2) king's pleasure grove	sgyu rtsal ston sa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	[TRS 65-3];	sgyu rtsal drug cu rtsa bzhi
སི྾ཏཡ	four Crafts, according to the Lalitavistara. include such crafts as flowerarranging, hunting, and knowledge of the languages of many races including spiritual beings	Sixty
ཅྲཕ༹ཙ་ཨས་ཕ༹ློཝེར	arranging, hunting, and knowledge of the languages of many races including spiritual beings]	crafts as flower
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རེ་བཞི	1) 64 Indian arts; 2) 64 arts of sex etc.	sgyu rtsal drug cu re bzhi
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་པ	artist	sgyu rtsal pa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་ཚོགས་པ	performing arts troupe, circus	sgyu rtsal tshogs pa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་ས	royal gardens where feats of arms took place	sgyu rtsal sa
སྒྱུ་རྩལ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	university/ academy of fine arts	sgyu rtsal slob grwa chen po
སྒྱུ་ཟོག	religious deceit	sgyu zog
སྒྱུ་ལས	illusory body	sgyu las
སྒྱུ་ལུང་སྡེ་པ	governor of Jyulung [near Mustang]	sgyu lung sde pa
སྒྱུ་ལུས	illusory body; supreme illusory form	sgyu lus
སྒྱུ་ལུས་འཇིག་པའི་ཚེ	when my illusory body is no more	sgyu lus 'jig pa'i tshe
སྒྱུ་ལུས་བདེ	my illusory body is well	sgyu lus bde
སྒྱུ་ལུས་བདེ་དུས	while your illusory body is healthy	sgyu lus bde dus
སྒྱུ་ལུས་འོད་གསལ་ཟུང་འཇུག	the non-dual state of luminous awareness and the illusory body	sgyu lus 'od gsal zung 'jug
སྒྱུ་ཤོམ	illusory pride/ arrogance yon tan ngoms pa [satisfied?	sgyu shom
སྒྱུ་སེམས	illusory mind	sgyu sems
སྒྱུག་པ	vomit, eject, stain, wait	sgyug pa
སྒྱུག་པོ	father in law	sgyug po
སྒྱུག་འབྱོང	run and jump	sgyug 'byong
སྒྱུག་མོ	mother in law	sgyug mo
སྒྱུག་མོས་བསྲུངས་པ	watched by one's	sgyug mos bsrungs pa
མོཐེར	in-law	mother
སྒྱུར	to change, transform, alter	sgyur
སྒྱུར་བཀོད	strong advice	sgyur bkod
སྒྱུར་བཀོད་བྱེད་པ	transform, re-mold	sgyur bkod byed pa
སྒྱུར་འགྲེལ	rendition	sgyur 'grel
སྒྱུར་བཅོས	reformation, renovation	sgyur bcos
སྒྱུར་བཅོས་གཏོང	reform	sgyur bcos gtong
སྒྱུར་བཅོས་གཏོང་བ	modify	sgyur bcos gtong ba
སྒྱུར་བཅོས་བྱེད	reform	sgyur bcos byed
སྒྱུར་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	reform	sgyur bcos byed pa
སྒྱུར་རྟགས	multiplication sign	sgyur rtags
སྒྱུར་ཐབས	means of multiplying	sgyur thabs
སྒྱུར་འདྲར	{sgyu ma dang 'dra ba}	sgyur 'drar
སྒྱུར་སྤྲུལ་བཀོད་པ་ངོ་མཚར	wondrous creation of emanations	sgyur sprul bkod pa ngo mtshar
སྒྱུར་ཕྱོགས	steer, guide [R]	sgyur phyogs
སྒྱུར་བ	change, transform, translate, alter, correct, revise, cast aside, dissuade, divert, turn, cause to turn, govern, steer, control, multiply, become, SA 'gyur ba, transformation	sgyur ba
སྒྱུར་བྱེད	Vikarin, [the 33'rd year, the Female Earth Pig]	sgyur byed
སྒྱུར་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲངས	multiplier	sgyur byed kyi grangs
སྒྱུར་མ་ལྟ་བུར་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoy as a magical illusion	sgyur ma lta bur spyod pa
སྒྱུར་མ་ལྟར་ཤེས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the knowledge that understands that [everything] is like a magical illusion	sgyur ma ltar shes pa'i shes rab
སྒྱུར་རྩི་ཆེན་པོ	large species of lime	sgyur rtsi chen po
སྒྱུར་རྩིས	multiplication	sgyur rtsis
སྒྱུར་རྩིས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	multiplication sign	sgyur rtsis kyi rtags
སྒྱུར་རྩིས་དགུ་མཐའ་རེའུ་མིག	instructions for multiplication, multiplication table	sgyur rtsis dgu mtha' re'u mig
སྒྱུར་རྩོམ	tr and compose	sgyur rtsom
སྒྱུར་ལམ	way of transformation	sgyur lam
སྒྱེ	bag	sgye
སྒྱེ་སྒུར	crooked	sgye sgur
སྒྱེ་སྒྱུ་སྒྱུར་བ	bent forward and	sgye sgyu sgyur ba
ཧུམཔ	backed	hump
སྒྱེ་སྣོད	large sack	sgye snod
སྒྱེ་ཕྱོགས	bent forward	sgye phyogs
སྒྱེ་བོ	hump-back, 1 of lower classes of officials or noblemen	sgye bo
སྒྱེ་མོ	a bag, sack, bag	sgye mo
སྒྱེ་སྲིང	being at birth	sgye sring
སྒྱེད་པུ	1) hearth stone; 2) three legged hearth/ burner	sgyed pu
སྒྱེད་པུ་གསུམ	thab rdo sum tsom	sgyed pu gsum
སྒྱེད་པོ	hearth-stone	sgyed po
སྒྱེད་བུ	hearth, stones used for outdoor fireplaces	sgyed bu
སྒྱེད་བུ་གསུམ	a tripod/ a makeshift fireplace	sgyed bu gsum
སྒྱེན་པ	be on the move	sgyen pa
སྒྱེའུ	small bag	sgye'u
སྒྱེལ	imp. of {sgyel ba}; p. {bsgyel} to cause to fall down, to knock down	sgyel
སྒྱེལ་བ	(tha dad pa bsgyel ba, bsgyel ba, sgyel,, throw down, over-throw, overturn, knock down	sgyel ba
སྒྱེས་པ	joyous form of tantric male heruka manifestations	sgyes pa
སྒྱོ་སྒྱེ་སྒྱེའུ་གསུམ	large medium and small sacks	sgyo sgye sgye'u gsum
སྒྱོ་བ	1) big sack; 2) [arch] sgro ba	sgyo ba
སྒྱོག་པོ	father in law	sgyog po
སྒྱོགས	catapult, ballista, artillery, cannon	sgyogs
སྒྱོགས་ཀྱི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	war-like machine to shoot darts or stones	sgyogs kyi 'phrul 'khor
སྒྱོགས་འཁོར	cannon carriage	sgyogs 'khor
སྒྱོགས་གྲུ	gun boat, frigate	sgyogs gru
སྒྱོགས་སྟེགས	fire catapult mounting platform	sgyogs stegs
སྒྱོགས་འཐབ	artillery battle	sgyogs 'thab
སྒྱོགས་མདའ	catapult 620	sgyogs mda'
སྒྱོགས་མདེལ	shell	sgyogs mdel
སྒྱོགས་རྡོ	rocks thrown by sling etc. machines &, ballista bolts	sgyogs rdo
སྒྱོགས་མེ	artillery fire	sgyogs me
སྒྱོགས་དམག	artillery force/ corps	sgyogs dmag
སྒྱོགས་རྫོང	fortress, fortification	sgyogs rdzong
སྒྱོང	p bsgyongs,, stuff, fill up, put into	sgyong
སྒྱོང་བ	[arch] purposely hide one's faults	sgyong ba
སྒྱོད་པོ	a small fireplace	sgyod po
སྒྱོར་བ	see nang 'phrod kyi sgyor ba	sgyor ba
སྒྲ་ཀ་ཚན་དབྱངས་གསུམ	the three grammar texts [R]	sgra ka tshan dbyangs gsum
སྒྲ་རྐྱང་པའི་ཚིག	mono-syllabic word	sgra rkyang pa'i tshig
སྒྲ་སྐད	speech, voices and cries, language, tongue, dialect, grammar, sound, inflections	sgra skad
སྒྲ་སྐད་ཀྱི	phonetic	sgra skad kyi
སྒྲ་སྐད་ཆེ་བའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས	become followers of this loudmouth	sgra skad che ba'i rjes su 'brangs nas
སྒྲ་སྐད་རིག་པ	linguistics	sgra skad rig pa
སྒྲ་སྐྱུང་བ	1) make a small sound, say very little; 2) not speak	sgra skyung ba
སྒྲ་སྐྱེད་ཀློག་དུང	loudspeaker	sgra skyed klog dung
སྒྲ་སྐྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	loudspeaker, amplifying equipment	sgra skyed 'phrul chas
སྒྲ་སྐྱེལ	broadcasting	sgra skyel
སྒྲ་སྐྱེལ་འཁོར་ལོ	microphone	sgra skyel 'khor lo
སྒྲ་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	broadcast	sgra skyel byed
སྒྲ་བསྐྱུང་བ	one who speaks few words	sgra bskyung ba
སྒྲ་ཁམས	the capacity of sound	sgra khams
སྒྲ་མཁན	sound-knower, grammarian	sgra mkhan
སྒྲ་གྲག	thunder	sgra grag
སྒྲ་གྲགས	resounding	sgra grags
སྒྲ་གྲགས་སྔགས	sound heard are mantra	sgra grags sngags
སྒྲ་གྲགས་གསུང་གི་འཁྱེར་སོ	audible sounds as the practice of Speech	sgra grags gsung gi 'khyer so
སྒྲ་མགྱོགས	supersonic [aircraft]	sgra mgyogs
སྒྲ་མགྱོགས་གནམ་གྲུ	supersonic aircraft	sgra mgyogs gnam gru
སྒྲ་འགོག་རྒྱུ	sound insulating/ proofing materials	sgra 'gog rgyu
སྒྲ་འགྱུར་གླིང	Translation Temple; one of the minor temples surrounding Samye	sgra 'gyur gling
སྒྲ་འགྱེད	lightning	sgra 'gyed
སྒྲ་རྒྱན	sgra'i rgyan	sgra rgyan
སྒྲ་སྒྱུར	tr, transcribe	sgra sgyur
སྒྲ་སྒྱུར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	{skyes mchog sgra sgyur gyi rgyal po mar pa lo tsA zhes bya ba} the best of all beings, the king of translators known as Marpa	sgra sgyur gyi rgyal po
སྒྲ་སྒྱུར་གླིང	Translation Temple. A temple at Samye	sgra sgyur gling
སྒྲ་སྒྲགས་པ	sound returned by the target when the arrow hits it	sgra sgrags pa
སྒྲ་སྒྲིག	dub/ synthesize sound for movies	sgra sgrig
སྒྲ་སྒྲོག	to sound	sgra sgrog
སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་རྒྱལ་པོ	rakshasa	sgra sgrog rgyal po
སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པར་བྱེད	one who proclaims much, a great self-advertiser	sgra sgrog par byed
སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས	utter the sound [of.), sounding	sgra sgrogs
སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས་པ	produce sounds	sgra sgrogs pa
སྒྲ་བརྒྱ་པ	thunder	sgra brgya pa
སྒྲ་བརྒྱད	8 sounds	sgra brgyad
སྒྲ་བསྒྱུར	translating	sgra bsgyur
སྒྲ་བསྒྱུར་གྱི་ལོ་ཙ་བ	tr	sgra bsgyur gyi lo tsa ba
སྒྲ་བསྒྱུར་མར་པ་ལོ་ཙཱ	{mar pa chos kyi blo gros} 1012-1097	sgra bsgyur mar pa lo tsA
སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས	proclaimed	sgra bsgrags
སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས་པ	rol mo'i sgra bsgrags pa / grags pa - sound of cymbals / instruments resounded	sgra bsgrags pa
སྒྲ་ངན	1) unpleasant sound; 2) the N continent Unpleasant Sound sgra my snyan	sgra ngan
སྒྲ་ངན་ཅན	{sgra ngan can}	sgra ngan can
སྒྲ་ངན་སྤངས	divine singer	sgra ngan spangs
སྒྲ་ངར་ངར་པོ	1) hoarse speech; 2) forceful words	sgra ngar ngar po
སྒྲ་ངེས་པར་སྦྱོར་བ	correct formation or words	sgra nges par sbyor ba
སྒྲ་ཅན	ascending and descending nodes of the Moon, Rahu GD	sgra can
སྒྲ་ཅན་གསང་བ	Rahulagupta	sgra can gsang ba
སྒྲ་གཅན	Rahu[la]	sgra gcan
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཀྱི་རླུང	the prana of Rahu	sgra gcan kyi rlung
སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱི་མཇུག	Rahu's tail	sgra gcan gyi mjug
སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱི་མཇུག་མ	comet's tail	sgra gcan gyi mjug ma
སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱི་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གཟའ་བཞི	the four planets emanated by Rahu	sgra gcan gyi sprul pa'i gza' bzhi
སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱི་རྩ	Rahu nadi	sgra gcan gyi rtsa
སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱི་རླུང	the prana of Rahu	sgra gcan gyi rlung
སྒྲ་གཅན་མཇུག་མ	the tail of Rahu	sgra gcan mjug ma
སྒྲ་གཅན་ལྟ་བུ་འདིས་ཟིན་ན	Going there is like being swallowed up by Rahula, a great eclipse	sgra gcan lta bu 'dis zin na
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཐེབས་པ	shadowing/ eclipse by the planet r' hu la's head or tail	sgra gcan thebs pa
སྒྲ་གཅན་གདོང	Rahu's face	sgra gcan gdong
སྒྲ་གཅན་རྩ་བ	Rahu's intrinsic fundamental motion	sgra gcan rtsa ba
སྒྲ་གཅན་འཛིན	Gautama's son, 1 of sde brgyad	sgra gcan 'dzin
སྒྲ་གཅན་འཛིན་བཟང་པོ	Rahulabhadra	sgra gcan 'dzin bzang po
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཞག་གསུམ	the way Rahu moves in three days tshul 621	sgra gcan zhag gsum
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཟིན	Rahula, important monk follower of the Buddha	sgra gcan zin
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཟླ་བའི་རྩར་སླེབས་པ་ལྟར	like a lunar eclipse, “like Rahula approaching the moon”	sgra gcan zla ba'i rtsar slebs pa ltar
སྒྲ་གཅན་ལུས་འཇོམས	god who subdued sgra gcan	sgra gcan lus 'joms
སྒྲ་གཅན་ལྷ	Rahudeva	sgra gcan lha
སྒྲ་བཅས	indirect breathing which makes sound	sgra bcas
སྒྲ་བཅུ་གཅིག	[Tse]	sgra bcu gcig
སྒྲ་བཅོམ་པ	hat GD	sgra bcom pa
སྒྲ་ཆུང་བ	low voice	sgra chung ba
སྒྲ་ཆེ	far-famed, renowned	sgra che
སྒྲ་ཆེན	great, sound	sgra chen
སྒྲ་ཆེན་པོ	high loud sound	sgra chen po
སྒྲ་ཆེར་གྲགས་པ	well-known, famous	sgra cher grags pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན	literal sgra ji bzhin kho nar mngon par zhen par	sgra ji bzhin
བྱེད་དེ	be attached exclusively to the literal meaning	byed de
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་གྱི་དོན	literal meaning	sgra ji bzhin gyi don
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་ཏུ་ཞིན་པ	literal insistence	sgra ji bzhin tu zhin pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་ཏུ་ཞེན་པ	literal insistence	sgra ji bzhin tu zhen pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་དུ	literally	sgra ji bzhin du
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་དུ་ཞེན་པ	literal insistence	sgra ji bzhin du zhen pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	literal	sgra ji bzhin pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	Also: {sgra ji bzhin ma yin pa}. the not literal, nonliteral. {brjod pa dang don gnyis tha dad yin pa}	sgra ji bzhin pa ma yin pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་པའི་དོན	literal meaning	sgra ji bzhin pa'i don
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་པར	according to the sound, literal[ly]	sgra ji bzhin par
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་པར་ཁས་ལེན་པ	literal claim	sgra ji bzhin par khas len pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ	1) not literal, not explicit / literal [meaning]. 2) implicit meaning	sgra ji bzhin ma yin pa
སྒྲ་ཇི་འཞིན་པའི་དོན	literal meaning	sgra ji 'zhin pa'i don
སྒྲ་འཇུག	1) actual usage of a term; 2) sgra la 'jug pa zhes bya ba'i bstan bcos	sgra 'jug
སྒྲ་འཇུག་པའི་རྒྱུ	mtshan, etymology of the names	sgra 'jug pa'i rgyu
སྒྲ་ཉན་པ	hear sound	sgra nyan pa
སྒྲ་ཉམ་ང་བ	awesome voice	sgra nyam nga ba
སྒྲ་ཉམས་པ	sinking voice, low sound	sgra nyams pa
སྒྲ་ཉིད	voice	sgra nyid
སྒྲ་གཉིས	1) {zin pa}. 2) {ma zin pa}; 1) {zin pa}. 2) {ma zin pa}	sgra gnyis
སྒྲ་སྙན	stringed instrument, wellsounding, agreeable voice, guitar, lute, pleasant sound	sgra snyan
སྒྲ་སྙན་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus the people of Lhasa stringed instruments like the pi wang btang chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khol 'dzin	sgra snyan 'khrol 'dzin
སྒྲ་སྙན་རྒྱུད་གསུམ་པ	three stringed string instrument	sgra snyan rgyud gsum pa
སྒྲ་སྙན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	sitar-like resolve	sgra snyan lta bu'i sems bskyed
སྒྲ་སྙན་པ	pleasant sound	sgra snyan pa
སྒྲ་བརྙན	1) echo; 2) recording; 3) Tibetan lute	sgra brnyan
སྒྲ་བརྙན་གཏོང	play the Tibetan lute	sgra brnyan gtong
སྒྲ་ཏོག	sound of tongue striking mouth roof	sgra tog
སྒྲ་གཏོང	transmit sound	sgra gtong
སྒྲ་རྟགས	phonetic symbols	sgra rtags
སྒྲ་རྟོག	1 sounds / words / names and concepts / thoughts. 2) sound-concept	sgra rtog
སྒྲ་རྟོག་གི་ཡུལ	domain of words and thoughts	sgra rtog gi yul
སྒྲ་རྟོག་གི་ཡུལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	that which can be expressed or conceived sgra thams cad rdzogs par byed pa completes all words	sgra rtog gi yul du gyur pa
སྒྲ་ཐར་ཐར་པ་སྟེར་བའི་བསམ་གཏན	dhyana giving liberation at the end of sound	sgra thar thar pa ster ba'i bsam gtan
སྒྲ་ཐལ་འགྱུར	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	sgra thal 'gyur
སྒྲ་ཐལ་འགྱུར་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Dra thal 'gyur root tantra	sgra thal 'gyur rtsa ba'i rgyud
སྒྲ་མཐའི་དེ་ཉིད	suchness at the end of a sound	sgra mtha'i de nyid
སྒྲ་མཐར	end of [a] sound	sgra mthar
སྒྲ་མཐར་ཐར་པ	liberation at the end of sound sgra mthar thar pa ster ba'i bsam gtan concentration/ dhyana bestowing liberation at the end of sound sgra mthar thar pa ster ba'i bsam gtan concentration, bestowing ...	sgra mthar thar pa
སྒྲ་མཐར་ཐར་པ་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད	at the limit of their sound freedom is granted	sgra mthar thar pa sbyin par byed
སྒྲ་མཐས་ཐར་པ་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད	at the limit of [their] sound freedom/ liberation is granted GD	sgra mthas thar pa sbyin par byed
སྒྲ་མཐུན་དོན་འཕགས	similar word exalted meaning	sgra mthun don 'phags
སྒྲ་མཐུན་པ	brjod bde 'dren pa'i tshul te in speech brjod bde'i ming gzhi'i [base letter] sgra [easily pronounceable base letter sound?]	sgra mthun pa
སྒྲ་དག	clearly [repeated]	sgra dag
སྒྲ་དག་སྒྲོས་གཙང	reading well and clearly	sgra dag sgros gtsang
སྒྲ་དག་པ	pure, clear-voiced	sgra dag pa
སྒྲ་དག་པར་བཏོན་པ	reading with a clear, loud voice	sgra dag par bton pa
སྒྲ་དག་པོ	correct pronunciation	sgra dag po
སྒྲ་དང་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	grammar and poetics	sgra dang tshigs su bcad pa
སྒྲ་དང་ཡི་གེ	grammar and calligraphy	sgra dang yi ge
སྒྲ་དང་ཡི་གེ་ལ་སོགས་པ་བསླབས་པ	studied its languages and scripts	sgra dang yi ge la sogs pa bslabs pa
སྒྲ་དེར	in that sound could be heard	sgra der
སྒྲ་དོག་འཇུག	a word used strictly [ggd]	sgra dog 'jug
སྒྲ་དོག་པའི་དབང་དུ	in the narrow literal sense	sgra dog pa'i dbang du
སྒྲ་དོན	word object [thd]	sgra don
སྒྲ་དོན་མཐུན	TSE	sgra don mthun
སྒྲ་དོན་འདྲེས་འཛིན་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	thought that holds a combined sound and meaning, conception that holds [of holding) the mingled sound and object	sgra don 'dres 'dzin gyi rtog pa
སྒྲ་དོན་འདྲེས་རུང་གི་རྟོག་པ	thought liable to combine sound and meaning	sgra don 'dres rung gi rtog pa
སྒྲ་དོན་སྦྱར་བ	mingling of sound and meaning	sgra don sbyar ba
སྒྲ་དོན་མི་མཐུན	dissimilar sound and object	sgra don mi mthun
སྒྲ་དོན་ཙམ	only the literal meaning	sgra don tsam
སྒྲ་དྲག་པ	1) sound of male consonants; 2) loud sound	sgra drag pa
སྒྲ་དྲག་པོ	sound of a sudden blow, forceful sound	sgra drag po
སྒྲ་གདངས	tone, pitch, tune	sgra gdangs
སྒྲ་གདངས་ཀྱི་མཚན་རྟགས	phonetic symbols	sgra gdangs kyi mtshan rtags
སྒྲ་གདངས་ཀྱི་གཞི་ཁྱོན	range/ register of sound/ voice	sgra gdangs kyi gzhi khyon
སྒྲ་གདངས་མཐོ་དམན	volume of sound	sgra gdangs mtho dman
སྒྲ་གདངས་བཞི	four tones [of mandarin language]	sgra gdangs bzhi
སྒྲ་གདངས་སུ་ཕབ	transcribe/ notate sound	sgra gdangs su phab
སྒྲ་གདངས་གསུངས	sounded	sgra gdangs gsungs
སྒྲ་མདོ་བཞི	the four grammar texts [R]	sgra mdo bzhi
སྒྲ་མདོའི་སྐོར	the collected commentaries and exegetic works concerned with the explanation of the principles of Sanskrit grammar, poetics, metrics, lexicography, and dramaturgy translated from the original Sansk...	sgra mdo'i skor
སྒྲ་འདོན	pronounce	sgra 'don
སྒྲ་རྡུལ	sound particle	sgra rdul
སྒྲ་ལྡན	noisy, crow, cart, arrow	sgra ldan
སྒྲ་ལྡན་ཅན	khrims khang [courthouse? place of legal punishment?]	sgra ldan can
སྒྲ་ལྡན་པར་མ་ནི	cloud	sgra ldan par ma ni
སྒྲ་ལྡན་ལྷ	dbyangs can ma, Sarasvati	sgra ldan lha
སྒྲ་ལྡར	sounding, sonorous	sgra ldar
སྒྲ་སྡུད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	radio, radio set, receiver	sgra sdud 'phrul 'khor
སྒྲ་སྡེབ	1) joining letters, spelling ?	sgra sdeb
སྒྲ་ནས་བྱུང་བའི་མིང་ཚིག	onomatopoeia	sgra nas byung ba'i ming tshig
སྒྲ་གནས	abiding in sound	sgra gnas
སྒྲ་གནས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	concentration of abiding in sound, dhyana of abiding in sound	sgra gnas kyi bsam gtan
སྒྲ་སྣུམ	hair oil	sgra snum
སྒྲ་པ	grammarian	sgra pa
སྒྲ་པར	phonograph record, audio tape/ cd	sgra par
སྒྲ་པར་རྒྱག	audio record	sgra par rgyag
སྒྲ་པར་འདེབས	audio record	sgra par 'debs
སྒྲ་དཔར	phonograph record, audio tape/ cd	sgra dpar
སྒྲ་དཔར་རྒྱག	audio record	sgra dpar rgyag
སྒྲ་དཔར་འདེབས	audio record	sgra dpar 'debs
སྒྲ་སྤྱི	general meaning, general expression, sound generality	sgra spyi
སྒྲ་སྤྱི་རྟོག་པ	verbal generality concept	sgra spyi rtog pa
སྒྲ་ཕབ	audio record	sgra phab
སྒྲ་ཕབ་འཁོར་ལོ	tape recorder	sgra phab 'khor lo
སྒྲ་བ	speech	sgra ba
སྒྲ་བོ་ཆེ	highly reputed	sgra bo che
སྒྲ་བྱུང་གྲགས་པ	terminological suitability	sgra byung grags pa
སྒྲ་བྱུང་ཚད་མ	TSE	sgra byung tshad ma
སྒྲ་བྱུང་ལོ	resounded	sgra byung lo
སྒྲ་བྱེད	sound-maker	sgra byed
སྒྲ་བྱེད་པ	1) make a noise; 2) write[r of] a grammar text sgra byed bu mo yang dag rgyal ba can learned girl who was an Indian doctrinal teacher	sgra byed pa
སྒྲ་བྲལ	isc. beyond language	sgra bral
སྒྲ་བླ	"sound soul", type of individual energy that is also endowed with a protective function, Drala, a class of divine manifestations, SA dgra bla	sgra bla
སྒྲ་བླ་བྱ་ཁྱུང	name of square in lde'u 'phrul sgra bla wer ma dpa' khrom gyi gzhung lore of the Heroic Drala and Werma Hordes	sgra bla bya khyung
སྒྲ་བློ	word concept [thd]	sgra blo
སྒྲ་དབྱངས	pleasing tone, harmony, euphony	sgra dbyangs
སྒྲ་དབྱངས་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of sman bla brgyad	sgra dbyangs rgyal po
སྒྲ་དབྱངས་སྒྲོག	make musical sound	sgra dbyangs sgrog
སྒྲ་དབྱངས་བསྒྲགས་པ	proclaimed in song sgra dbyangs rnam par dag pa gzungs pattern of melodic sound, one of the {byang chub sems dpa'i gzungs bcu gnyis} 12 imprints of patterning, dharani od the Bodhisattva sgra dbyan...	sgra dbyangs bsgrags pa
སྒྲ་དབྱངས་སུ་གྲགས་པ	proclaimed in song; sang	sgra dbyangs su grags pa
སྒྲ་དབྱངས་ལྷ་མོ	goddess svarasvati	sgra dbyangs lha mo
སྒྲ་འབལ་ཅན	an indian religious sect	sgra 'bal can
སྒྲ་འབེབས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	tape recorder	sgra 'bebs 'phrul 'khor
སྒྲ་འབྱིན	draw sound	sgra 'byin
སྒྲ་འབྱིན་ཆེན་པོ	osprey	sgra 'byin chen po
སྒྲ་འབྱིན་པ	resound, groan, cry loudly	sgra 'byin pa
སྒྲ་སྦྱོང	to sound	sgra sbyong
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར	1) grammar text; 2) song kyi 'gyur khug ring thung 'then stangs sogs la bstun pa'i tshig sbyor; 3) Phrad dang rnam dbye rnams rjes 'jug so so'i mthar sbyor stangs, phonetics	sgra sbyor
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་དབྱངས་གསལ	phonetic alphabet	sgra sbyor gyi dbyangs gsal
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	phonetic alphabet	sgra sbyor gyi yi ge
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་རྟོག་པ	conception of connected words	sgra sbyor rtog pa
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་བམ་གཉིས	the two volume grammar text	sgra sbyor bam gnyis
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་བམ་གཉིས་མ	two volume grammar	sgra sbyor bam gnyis ma
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་དབྱངས་གསལ	yi ge phonetic alphabet 623	sgra sbyor dbyangs gsal
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་དབྱངས་གསལ་ཡི་གེ	phonetic alphabet	sgra sbyor dbyangs gsal yi ge
སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་མ	connection of letters	sgra sbyor ma
སྒྲ་མ་ཡིན་པ	sound expressed as a double negative	sgra ma yin pa
སྒྲ་མ་ཡིན་པ་ལས་ལོག་པ	the exclusion of	sgra ma yin pa las log pa
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན	Kurava. continent of Unpleasant Sound. 'Unpleasant Sound' [the northern continent]; Unpleasant Sound Uttarakuru (northern continent); Unpleasant Sound, the continent of Ominous Sound	sgra mi snyan
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་ཀྱི་ཟླ	subcontinent flanking {sgra mi snyan}	sgra mi snyan kyi zla
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི	1 of gling phran brgyad	sgra mi snyan gyi
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ	Long-life practice of the Northern Continent, received in a vision of Guru Padmakara by Drigung Chödrak ('Dri gung rig 'dzin chos kyi grags pa), 17th century	sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི་ཟླ	koorab'a:	sgra mi snyan gyi zla
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་པ	unpleasant sound [the N continent]	sgra mi snyan pa
སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་པའི་མི	those [dwelling on the continent of] Unpleasant Sound	sgra mi snyan pa'i mi
སྒྲ་མི་སྟན	unpleasant sound [the N continent]	sgra mi stan
སྒྲ་མེད	1) soundless consonants [R]; 2) lifeless; 3) w/o sound/words	sgra med
སྒྲ་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྟོན་པ	teaching the Dharma beyond words	sgra med kyi chos ston pa
སྒྲ་མེད་པ	soundless, silent, beyond words, without words	sgra med pa
སྒྲ་མེད་སྤྲིན	cloud without thunder	sgra med sprin
སྒྲ་མེད་ལུས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	through silent gesture	sgra med lus kyi sgo nas
སྒྲ་ཙམ	only a voice	sgra tsam
སྒྲ་ཙམ་གྱི་རྒྱན	bsdus brjod kyi rgyan	sgra tsam gyi rgyan
སྒྲ་ཙམ་ཡང་མི་གྲགས	never even hear of	sgra tsam yang mi grags
སྒྲ་ཙམ་ཡང་མེད	without even a sound	sgra tsam yang med
སྒྲ་ཚད	grammar, logic	sgra tshad
སྒྲ་ཚིག	names; grammar	sgra tshig
སྒྲ་ཚིགས	syllable	sgra tshigs
སྒྲ་ཚིགས་བསྡེབས་པ	literary composition	sgra tshigs bsdebs pa
སྒྲ་ཚུལ	the way of grammar	sgra tshul
སྒྲ་མཚུངས་པ	in speech brjod bde'i ming gzhi'i sgra brjod bde ba	sgra mtshungs pa
སྒྲ་མཚོན་པའི་ཚིག	onomatopoeic words	sgra mtshon pa'i tshig
སྒྲ་འཛིན	the ear	sgra 'dzin
སྒྲ་འཛིན་འཁོར་ལོ	tape recorder	sgra 'dzin 'khor lo
སྒྲ་འཛིན་དབང་མངོན	direct sense perception that apprehends sound	sgra 'dzin dbang mngon
སྒྲ་འཛིན་ཡིད་མངོན	direct mental perception that apprehends sound	sgra 'dzin yid mngon
སྒྲ་ཞི་བ	small soft sound	sgra zhi ba
སྒྲ་གཞུང	primary / principal grammar texts	sgra gzhung
སྒྲ་འོད་ཟེར	sounds, lights, and rays, sound & light & rays	sgra 'od zer
སྒྲ་འོད་ཟེར་གསུམ	sounds & lights & rays in bardo, sgra yis dngangs so, 'od kyis 'jigs so, zer gyis sgrag go	sgra 'od zer gsum
སྒྲ་ཡངས་པའི་དབང་དུ	in the wider sense / connotation	sgra yangs pa'i dbang du
སྒྲ་ཡི་སྡེ	soldiers of the adversary	sgra yi sde
སྒྲ་ཡི་གནས	rna ba	sgra yi gnas
སྒྲ་ཡི་གཞི་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	[Tse]	sgra yi gzhi la gzhol ba
སྒྲ་ཡིག་ཕབ་སྒྱུར	transliterate	sgra yig phab sgyur
སྒྲ་ཡིས་དངངས་སོ	ray of sound in bardo, SA sgra 'od zer gsum	sgra yis dngangs so
སྒྲ་རང་མཚན	{sgra rang mtshan pa} (to take) language/ terms at face value	sgra rang mtshan
སྒྲ་རིག	poetics and grammar, science of grammar	sgra rig
སྒྲ་རིག་པ	science of words, grammar, lexicographer, 1 of rig gnas bcu, science of language	sgra rig pa
སྒྲ་རིག་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	grammatical treatise	sgra rig pa'i bstan bcos
སྒྲ་རླབས	sound wave	sgra rlabs
སྒྲ་རླབས་ལས་བརྒལ་བ	supersonic	sgra rlabs las brgal ba
སྒྲ་ལ་མཁས་པ	grammar, meaning, general formulation	sgra la mkhas pa
སྒྲ་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	practice as sounding	sgra la gzhol ba
སྒྲ་ལན	echo	sgra lan
སྒྲ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from sound / names	sgra las byung ba
སྒྲ་ལས་མྱུར་བའི་གནམ་གྲུ	supersonic aircraft	sgra las myur ba'i gnam gru
སྒྲ་ལས་ཤིན་ཏུ་འདས་པ	utterly beyond words	sgra las shin tu 'das pa
སྒྲ་ལེན་འཁོར་ལོ	radio	sgra len 'khor lo
སྒྲ་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	radio	sgra len 'phrul 'khor
སྒྲ་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	radio [equipment]	sgra len 'phrul chas
སྒྲ་ཤུགས	accent, emphasis	sgra shugs
སྒྲ་ཤུགས་སྟོན་པ	emphasize	sgra shugs ston pa
སྒྲ་ཤུགས་སྤར་ཆེད་ཁ་དཔར	microphone	sgra shugs spar ched kha dpar
སྒྲ་བཤད	etymology, explanation of the etymology [ggd]	sgra bshad
སྒྲ་སིང་ངེ་བ	small clear sound	sgra sing nge ba
སྒྲ་སིལ་སིལ	sound of bell etc.	sgra sil sil
སྒྲ་སེང་རིག་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	god of learning	sgra seng rig pa'i blo gros
སྒྲ་སློབ་ཨར་བཀག་པའི་དུས་བཞི	CHN	sgra slob ar bkag pa'i dus bzhi
སྒྲ་གསང	speech sounds, voice	sgra gsang
སྒྲ་གསང་མཐོ་བ	loud voice	sgra gsang mtho ba
སྒྲ་གསལ	articulate, intelligible	sgra gsal
སྒྲ་གསུམ	TSE	sgra gsum
སྒྲ་བསླབས	studied language {las sgra bslabs} studied language under	sgra bslabs
སྒྲ་ལྷོད་པ	skad sbom [coarse loud voice?] pa'am gdangs dal ba [slow chant]	sgra lhod pa
སྒྲག	call, SA sgrog pa	sgrag
སྒྲག་གི་ས་འུ་ལུང	place where Yeshe Tsogyal was conceived sgrag yang rdzong shel gyi brag phug Crystal Cave of Drag Yangdzong. The retreat place of Padmasambhava's body. Situated between Lhasa and Samye in central T...	sgrag gi sa 'u lung
སྒྲགས	call, SA sgrog pa, together with, jointly, place in tibet	sgrags
སྒྲགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	Drakichö, in Lokha	sgrags kyi chos
སྒྲགས་ཀྱི་དར་ཕུག	sanctuary in rockcavern of tibet 624	sgrags kyi dar phug
སྒྲགས་མདར་བླ་མཚོ	the place where Yeshe Tsogyal was born, central Tibet 25 miles south of Lhasa. Also spelled {sgrags mda' bla mtsho}	sgrags mdar bla mtsho
སྒྲགས་ཡང་རྫོང	Drak Yangdzong, in U	sgrags yang rdzong
སྒྲགས་ཡོངས་རྫོང	{sgrags yongs rdzong}	sgrags yongs rdzong
སྒྲང་བ	enumerate, reckon up separately, upbraid, reproach	sgrang ba
སྒྲན་པ	related, told	sgran pa
སྒྲབ་སྒྲོབ	1) various kinds of things piled together; 2) hypocrisy, charlatanism	sgrab sgrob
སྒྲབ་བེ་སྒྲོབ་བེ	1) various kinds of things piled together; 2) hypocrisy, charlatanism	sgrab be sgrob be
སྒྲའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense-field of sound, sound base/ sphere/ ayatana	sgra'i skye mched
སྒྲའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	origin or root of a word	sgra'i skye gnas
སྒྲའི་ཁམས	sound element	sgra'i khams
སྒྲའི་མགྱོགས་ཚད	speed of sound	sgra'i mgyogs tshad
སྒྲའི་རྒྱན	phonetic ornaments	sgra'i rgyan
སྒྲའི་ང་རོ	Syn {sgra gdangs}	sgra'i nga ro
སྒྲའི་དངོས་ཀྱི་བརྗོད་བྱ	the object directly expressed by the words [ggd]	sgra'i dngos kyi brjod bya
སྒྲའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	method of grammatical union	sgra'i 'jug tshul
སྒྲའི་སྙེ་མ	tones and half tones, soft tones	sgra'i snye ma
སྒྲའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	treatise on grammar	sgra'i bstan bcos
སྒྲའི་དོན	see {sgra don}	sgra'i don
སྒྲའི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	sound particle	sgra'i rdul phran
སྒྲའི་སྡེབ་སྦྱོར	way of combining words's prefix suffix head and tail etc	sgra'i sdeb sbyor
སྒྲའི་གནས་བརྒྱད	the 8 topics of grammar	sgra'i gnas brgyad
སྒྲའི་གནས་བརྒྱད་རྩ་འགྲེལ	{sgra'i gnas brgyad rtsa 'grel	sgra'i gnas brgyad rtsa 'grel
སྒྲའི་རྣམ་བཅད	sound exclusion; discernment of sound	sgra'i rnam bcad
སྒྲའི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	grammar; knowledge of language	sgra'i rnam par rig pa
སྒྲའི་བྱེད་ཅན་དྲུག	the six grammaticfal aspecvts of action [byed pa po, las, byed pa, dgos ched, 'byung khungs, gzhi bcas]	sgra'i byed can drug
སྒྲའི་སྦྱོར་བ	composition	sgra'i sbyor ba
སྒྲའི་རྩོལ་བ་བསྐྱེད	philosophical explanations	sgra'i rtsol ba bskyed
སྒྲའི་ཚེར་མ	disturbing noise	sgra'i tsher ma
སྒྲའི་གཞན་སེལ	verbal exclusion [ggd]	sgra'i gzhan sel
སྒྲའི་ཡན་ལག་ཐུན་མོང་བ་གསུམ	tor three ordinary limbs of grammar [rtsom la mkho ba'i sgra'i yan lag thun mong ba gsum [gzhi yi ge dang, ngo bo tsam brjod pa ming dang, khyad par brjod pa tshig]	sgra'i yan lag thun mong ba gsum
སྒྲའི་ཡུལ་མིན་པ	not [directly] denotable by language [ggd]	sgra'i yul min pa
སྒྲའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟགས་དྲུག	CHN	sgra'i rang bzhin gyi rtags drug
སྒྲའི་རིག་གནས	grammar GD	sgra'i rig gnas
སྒྲའི་རིག་པ	science of language	sgra'i rig pa
སྒྲའི་རིགས	grammar GD	sgra'i rigs
སྒྲའི་ལས་བཅས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	sgra'i las bcas bco brgyad
སྒྲའི་ལས་མེད་དགུ	CHN	sgra'i las med dgu
སྒྲའི་ཤུགས	the power of sound	sgra'i shugs
སྒྲའི་ལྷ	sound deity	sgra'i lha
སྒྲར	(not in DAS)	sgrar
སྒྲར་གྲགས	uttered as sound; resounding; whatever is heard	sgrar grags
སྒྲར་གྲགས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra uttered as sound. Oral transmission of great masters	sgrar grags pa'i rgyud
སྒྲར་གནས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད	the suchness of abiding in sound	sgrar gnas kyi de nyid
སྒྲར་གནས་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྟེར་བར་བྱེད	abiding in their sound yoga is conferred	sgrar gnas rnal 'byor ster bar byed
སྒྲར་སྣང་བ	appearance as sound, 1 of gzugs kyi bye brag tu snang ba bzhi	sgrar snang ba
སྒྲར་སྣང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra manifest as sound [is mind-transmission or both the transmission of mind and symbol]	sgrar snang ba'i rgyud
སྒྲལ	save, SA sgrol ba	sgral
སྒྲལ་བ	to cut; deliver, liberate	sgral ba
སྒྲལ་ལས	deliverance ritual	sgral las
སྒྲས	by / through sound	sgras
སྒྲས་བསྐུལ	make the sound, to sound	sgras bskul
སྒྲས་བརྗོད་ཙམ	mere expression	sgras brjod tsam
སྒྲས་བརྗོད་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས་བྱེ་བ	terminological division [ggd]	sgras brjod rigs kyi sgo nas bye ba
སྒྲས་བརྗོད་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་བ	terminological division sgras brjod rigs kyi dbye ba'i tshad ma	sgras brjod rigs kyi sgo nas dbye ba
སྒྲས་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་བ	terminological division	sgras rigs kyi sgo nas dbye ba
སྒྲིག	p. {bsgrigs} imp. {sgrigs} 1) to arrange, organize, to set up, to put in order, to correct. 2) to form a line, to line up, to set in rows. 3) to put together, to assemble. 4) to compile, to edit, t...	sgrig
སྒྲིག་བཀོད	arrangement, order, layout	sgrig bkod
སྒྲིག་བཀོད་བྱེད	arrange, put in order, lay out, set up	sgrig bkod byed
སྒྲིག་ཁོངས	order, organization, class, rank[s]	sgrig khongs
སྒྲིག་ཁོངས་སུ་ཞུགས་པ	joined the ranks of	sgrig khongs su zhugs pa
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས	[tradition of] discipline, discipline and law, law and order	sgrig khrims
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཉ་ཆད	disciplinary action/ measure	sgrig khrims kyi nya chad
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	sense of discipline	sgrig khrims kyi rang bzhin
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་མི་ལྡན	lacking a sense of discipline sgrig khrims kyi rang bzhin mi ldan pa lack of a sense of discipline	sgrig khrims kyi rang bzhin mi ldan
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་མེད	lacking a sense of discipline	sgrig khrims kyi rang bzhin med
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་འགོ་བ	disciplinarian	sgrig khrims 'go ba
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་དམ་སྲུང	highly disciplined	sgrig khrims dam srung
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ལ་རྩིས་མེད	w/o regard for discipline	sgrig khrims la rtsis med
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ལ་རྩིས་མེད་བྱེད	disregard discipline 625	sgrig khrims la rtsis med byed
སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་སྲུང	observe/ respect discipline/ rules	sgrig khrims srung
སྒྲིག་མཁན	editor, compiler	sgrig mkhan
སྒྲིག་མཁན་གཙོ་བོ	chief editor/ compiler	sgrig mkhan gtso bo
སྒྲིག་བཅོས	readjustment, repair	sgrig bcos
སྒྲིག་བཅོས་བྱེད	readjust, repair	sgrig bcos byed
སྒྲིག་ཆ	preparations, arrangements	sgrig cha
སྒྲིག་ཆ་བྱེད	make preparations/ arrangements	sgrig cha byed
སྒྲིག་ཆས	1) parts and equipment [connected w machines, houses etc]; 2) uniform	sgrig chas
སྒྲིག་ཆས་གྱོན	be in uniform	sgrig chas gyon
སྒྲིག་ཆས་སྤྲས	1) supply/ install parts and equipment [R], equip; 2) be in uniform	sgrig chas spras
སྒྲིག་ཆོག་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	liturgical text outlining the proper method of practicing rites and meditative precepts	sgrig chog sgrub thabs
སྒྲིག་འཇུགས	sgrigs lam dang ldan pa'i mnyam sdeb tshogs pa	sgrig 'jugs
སྒྲིག་འཇུགས་མེད་པ	1) tshogs pa'i spyi sgrigs brtsi khur mi zhu ba; 2) tshogs pa'i nang du ma zhugs pa	sgrig 'jugs med pa
སྒྲིག་སྟངས	the manner / way in which things are set / arranged, style of composition / compiling	sgrig stangs
སྒྲིག་པ	put, place, agree, arrange, put in order, adjust, fit together, join, construct, coordinate, fit, set	sgrig pa
སྒྲིག་པ་པོ	composer, comp[iler, editor	sgrig pa po
སྒྲིག་པོ	fit	sgrig po
སྒྲིག་སྦྱོང	1) assembly, installation; 2) arrange/ produce and practice/ rehearse	sgrig sbyong
སྒྲིག་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	1) assemble, install, set up; 2) arrange/ produce and practice/ rehearse	sgrig sbyong byed
སྒྲིག་སྦྱོར	assembly, installation	sgrig sbyor
སྒྲིག་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	assemble, install	sgrig sbyor byed
སྒྲིག་མེད	disorder, confusion, turmoil	sgrig med
སྒྲིག་མེད་བྱེད	cause disorder/ confusion/ turmoil	sgrig med byed
སྒྲིག་བཙུགས	organization	sgrig btsugs
སྒྲིག་བཙུགས་ཁག	organizations	sgrig btsugs khag
སྒྲིག་བཙུགས་བྱེད	organize a group	sgrig btsugs byed
སྒྲིག་རྩོམ	prepare newly established things etc by phyogs bsdus [put together?],	sgrig rtsom
སྒྲིག་རྩོམ་པར་སྐྲུན	make preparations	sgrig rtsom par skrun
སྒྲིག་འཛུགས	organization	sgrig 'dzugs
སྒྲིག་འཛུགས་ཁག	organizations	sgrig 'dzugs khag
སྒྲིག་འཛུགས་འགོ་བ	disciplinarian	sgrig 'dzugs 'go ba
སྒྲིག་འཛུགས་བྱེད	organize a group	sgrig 'dzugs byed
སྒྲིག་ཞུགས	[monastic] discipline	sgrig zhugs
སྒྲིག་ཞུགས་རྒན་གཞོན	previous/ later times of entering into an order suitable for a task/ the sangha	sgrig zhugs rgan gzhon
སྒྲིག་ཞུགས་བྱེད	enroll, enter the regimen of	sgrig zhugs byed
སྒྲིག་གཞི	structure, way something is organized, composition	sgrig gzhi
སྒྲིག་གཞི་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་སྨྲ་བ	[exponent of] the theory of structural reform	sgrig gzhi bcos bsgyur smra ba
སྒྲིག་ཡིག	[written] tradition/ rules/ regulations or way of accomplishing a task/ work	sgrig yig
སྒྲིག་ལད	defect in fixing gems	sgrig lad
སྒྲིག་ལམ	order, rule, custom, arrangement, according to usage, discipline, etiquette, discipline, law and order	sgrig lam
སྒྲིག་ལམ་དམ་པོ	strict discipline	sgrig lam dam po
སྒྲིག་ལམ་སོགས་དམ་པོ	strict	sgrig lam sogs dam po
སྒྲིག་ལམ་སྲུང	maintain discipline, follow orders, obey rules	sgrig lam srung
སྒྲིག་ལམ་སློབ་པ	discipline	sgrig lam slob pa
སྒྲིག་ལས	setting	sgrig las
སྒྲིག་ལུགས	tradition, code, rule, regulation	sgrig lugs
སྒྲིག་གཤོམ	erecting for exhibition, displaying, showing	sgrig gshom
སྒྲིག་གཤོམ་སྟེགས་བུ	display stand	sgrig gshom stegs bu
སྒྲིག་སྲོལ	tradition, code, rule, regulation	sgrig srol
སྒྲིག་སྲོལ་ལམ་ལུགས	system of law/ rules	sgrig srol lam lugs
སྒྲིགས	1) side by side; 2) Sgrig pa!; 3) properly, by the rules	sgrigs
སྒྲིགས་ཁྲིམས	[tradition of] discipline, discipline and law, law and order	sgrigs khrims
སྒྲིགས་པ	adjust	sgrigs pa
སྒྲིགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	compile books, stitch books, covers	sgrigs par byed pa
སྒྲིགས་པོ	precise	sgrigs po
སྒྲིགས་དབྱུང	sgrigs khongs nas phyir phud pa	sgrigs dbyung
སྒྲིགས་མེད	disorder, confusion, turmoil	sgrigs med
སྒྲིགས་མེད་བྱེད	cause disorder/ confusion/ turmoil	sgrigs med byed
སྒྲིགས་ཙམ	tolerably fit, just fit	sgrigs tsam
སྒྲིགས་འཛུགས་མེད་པ	disorganized	sgrigs 'dzugs med pa
སྒྲིགས་ཞུགས	enter into an order suitable for a task	sgrigs zhugs
སྒྲིགས་ཞུགས་རྒན་གཞོན	elder and younger monks	sgrigs zhugs rgan gzhon
སྒྲིགས་གཞི	charter	sgrigs gzhi
སྒྲིགས་ཡིག	[written] tradition/ rules/ regulations or way of accomplishing a task/ work	sgrigs yig
སྒྲིགས་ལམ	code of behavior, discipline, rules; regulations, dictates, prescripts	sgrigs lam
སྒྲིགས་ལམ་དམ་པོ	strict discipline	sgrigs lam dam po
སྒྲིགས་ལམ་སྲུང	maintain discipline, follow orders, obey rules	sgrigs lam srung
སྒྲིགས་ལུགས	tradition, code, rule, regulation	sgrigs lugs
སྒྲིགས་སྲོལ	tradition, code, rule, regulation	sgrigs srol
སྒྲིན	[sgrin pa! sgrin pa]; 1) (Tha dad pa bsgrin pa, bsgrin pa, sgrin,, compare, match w, contend; 2) learned	sgrin
སྒྲིན་པ	{sgrin pa, bsgrin pa, bsgrin pa, sgrin} trans. v	sgrin pa
སྒྲིན་པོ	skilful, clever, prudent, expert	sgrin po
སྒྲིན་པོའི་གཟེད་དུ་བསྐུར་བ	fallen into	sgrin po'i gzed du bskur ba
ཐེ་ཏྲཔ་ཨོཕ༹་ཤྲེཝད་སེལཕ༹	deception	the trap of shrewd self
སྒྲིབ	pollution, eclipse, cover over, defilement, obscure, SA sgrib pa, to cover, to conceal	sgrib
སྒྲིབ་སྐྱོན	obstacle and defect	sgrib skyon
སྒྲིབ་ཆག	reduction, anything below the average calculation, discount	sgrib chag
སྒྲིབ་གཉིས	two obscurations. Two veils. The obscuration of disturbing emotions and the cognitive obscuration. 1) {nyon mongs pa'i sgrib pa} emotional obscuration}. 2] {shes bya'i sgrib pa} obscuration to know...	sgrib gnyis
སྒྲིབ་གཉིས་ཀུན་སྤངས	utterly abandoned the two obscurations 626 sgrib gnyis kyi gnyen po bdag med gnyis twofold egolessness as the remedy against the two obscurations	sgrib gnyis kun spangs
སྒྲིབ་གཉིས་འདག	the two veils are lifted	sgrib gnyis 'dag
སྒྲིབ་གཉིས་བག་ཆགས་དང་བཅས་པ	the two obscuration along with their habitual tendencies	sgrib gnyis bag chags dang bcas pa
སྒྲིབ་ཐོགས	obscuring; hindrance; obstruction	sgrib thogs
སྒྲིབ་ཐོགས་མེད་པ	transparent	sgrib thogs med pa
སྒྲིབ་དག	1) obscurations purified. 2) pl. obscurations	sgrib dag
སྒྲིབ་དག་ཚོགས་རྫོགས	obscurations are purified, the accumulations perfected	sgrib dag tshogs rdzogs
སྒྲིབ་པ	to defile [a statue]	sgrib pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཀུན་ལས་ཐར་པ	free from all obscuration	sgrib pa kun las thar pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་ལྔ	rgod 'gyod dang, gnod sems, rmugs gnyid, 'dod la 'dun pa, the tsom bcas lnga'o, yang grangs 'dren lugs shig la 'dod chags dang, rmugs pa dang, gnyid dang, 'gyod pa dang, g.yong ba dang, the tsom bc...	sgrib pa lnga
ཨཱིལལ	will 3) {rmugs pa dang gnyis} sloth and torpor 4) {rgod pa dang 'gyod pa} excitement and sense os guilt 5) {the tshom} doubt [Tse] chn]	Ill
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན	obscured (being)	sgrib pa can
སྒྲིབ་པ་གཉིས	the two obscurations (emotional and cognitive)	sgrib pa gnyis
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་རྣམ་པར་སེལ་བ	one of {nye pa'i sras brgyad} Remover of All Hindrances. [the bodhisattva] [Sarva]	sgrib pa thams cad rnam par sel ba
ཎིརབ༹རན	Viskambin	Nirvarana
སྒྲིབ་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	obscured, veiled	sgrib pa dang bcas pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་དང་རྣམ་པར་བྲལ་བ	totally free from obscuration	sgrib pa dang rnam par bral ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	unobscured, free from obscuration	sgrib pa dang bral ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	totally purified of obscuration	sgrib pa rnam par dag pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་སྦྱོང་བ	utterly purified his obscurations	sgrib pa rnam par sbyong ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་སེལ་བ	Nirviranavishkambin	sgrib pa rnam par sel ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་སེལ	Nirvirana-vishkambin	sgrib pa rnam sel
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་སེལ་གྱི་སྤྲུལ་པ	a manifestation of [the Bodhisattva] Sarvanivaranaviskambhin	sgrib pa rnam sel gyi sprul pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་གསལ	nivaranaviskhambin (bodhisattva)	sgrib pa rnam gsal
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྤང་བའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the aspiration of relinquished obscurations [on {sangs rgyas kyi sa}	sgrib pa spang ba'i sems bskyed
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྤངས་པ	removed the obscurations	sgrib pa spangs pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྤངས་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the resolve of abandoning obscurations	sgrib pa spangs pa'i sems bskyed
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྤོང་བའི་ཕྱིར	in order to remove the obscurations	sgrib pa spong ba'i phyir
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཕྲ་བ	subtle obscuration	sgrib pa phra ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་བྱང་བ	purified defilements	sgrib pa byang ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྦྱང	purify obscurations	sgrib pa sbyang
སྒྲིབ་པ་སྦྱང་བ	to purify the obscurations	sgrib pa sbyang ba
སྒྲིབ་པ་མི་མངའ་པའི་མཁྱེན་པ	unobscured knowledge	sgrib pa mi mnga' pa'i mkhyen pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་མི་མངའ་བའི་མཁྱེན་པ	unobscured knowledge [buddhas's wisdom]	sgrib pa mi mnga' ba'i mkhyen pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད	without obscurations	sgrib pa med
སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད་པ	unobscured, unveiled	sgrib pa med pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	unobscured wakefulness	sgrib pa med pa'i ye shes
སྒྲིབ་པ་བཞི	the four obscurations: 1) Lam gyi dgag bya sgrib pa bzhi ste: 1 'dod chen gyi sgrib pa dang, two mu stegs pa'i sgrib pa dang, three nyan thos kyi dman sgrib, four rang rgyal gyi dman sgrib OR; 2) 1...	sgrib pa bzhi
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཟད་པ	the exhaustion of obscuration	sgrib pa zad pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	utterly free from obscuration	sgrib pa yongs su dag pa
སྒྲིབ་པ་གསུམ	see: {mthong ba'i chos la 'phags lam skye ba'i gegs sgrib pa gsum} Three veils hinder the arising of the noble path [within one's stream-ofbeing] within this present lifetime	sgrib pa gsum
པ་གསུམ	chags pa'i sgrib pa dang, thogs pa'i sgrib pa, dman pa'i sgrib pa bcas gsum mam, nyon mongs kyi sgrib pa dang, shes bya'i sgrib pa, las kyi sgrib pa bcas gsum mo]	pa gsum
སྒྲིབ་པ་བསལ	to eliminate obstacles	sgrib pa bsal
སྒྲིབ་པའི་ཐོགས་པ	obstruction of obscurations	sgrib pa'i thogs pa
སྒྲིབ་པའི་མུན་སྟུག	the dense darkness of obscuration	sgrib pa'i mun stug
སྒྲིབ་པར་འགྱུར	to become a hindrance	sgrib par 'gyur
སྒྲིབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	obscure	sgrib par byed pa
སྒྲིབ་སྤོང་བའི་རྒྱུ་ཉིད	which itself is the cause for removing the obscurations	sgrib spong ba'i rgyu nyid
སྒྲིབ་བྱང་བ	purified of their obscurations	sgrib byang ba
སྒྲིབ་བྱེད	moon	sgrib byed
སྒྲིབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དྲི་མ་དགུ	TSE	sgrib byed kyi dri ma dgu
སྒྲིབ་བྲལ	unobscured	sgrib bral
སྒྲིབ་སྦྱོང	Purifying the obscurations. The spiritual practices of clearing away	sgrib sbyong
ཝཧཏ་ཨོབསཅུརེས་ཐེ་སུགཏ	garbha; for example, the meditation and recitation of Vajrasattva according to the 'special preliminaries.'	what obscures the sugata
སྒྲིབ་མེད	without obstacle, unobstructed	sgrib med
སྒྲིབ་མེད་མཐོང་ཤོལ	x ray [machine]	sgrib med mthong shol
སྒྲིབ་བཙོག་ཕོག་པ	contaminate	sgrib btsog phog pa
སྒྲིབ་བཞི	four obscurations *]	sgrib bzhi
སྒྲིབ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	obscured neutral state	sgrib lung ma bstan
སྒྲིབ་ཤིང	invisible by the power of charms or articles	sgrib shing
སྒྲིབ་སེལ	[Nirvirana-Viskambin]; the bodhisattva Sarvanivarana Viskambin. The Purifier of all Hindrances	sgrib sel
སྒྲིབ་གསུམ	three obscurations	sgrib gsum
སྒྲིབས	tainted, compromised	sgribs
སྒྲིབས་པ	build	sgribs pa
སྒྲིབས་པ་ལྔ	five hindrances [1] {'dod pa la 'dun pa} = craving 2] {gnod sems} = maliciousness 3] {rmugs pa dang gnyid} = sluggishness and sloth 4] {rgod pa dan 'gyod pa} = restlessness and guilt 5] {the tshom}...	sgribs pa lnga
སྒྲིབས་པ་བསྲབས	darkness has vanished	sgribs pa bsrabs
སྒྲིབས་པས་བག་ཆགས	habitual pattern of obscuration	sgribs pas bag chags
སྒྲིམ	p. {bsgrims} 1) to concentrate. 2) to twist together	sgrim
སྒྲིམ་ཀློད	tight and loose/ relaxed	sgrim klod
སྒྲིམ་གློད	{sgrim glod med pa} (without) tension or laxity/ looseness	sgrim glod
སྒྲིམ་ཆ	tightness; concentration, fixed attention	sgrim cha
སྒྲིམ་སྟེ་འཇུག་པ	forcibly engaging	sgrim ste 'jug pa
སྒྲིམ་པ	{ppafi: sgrim pa, bsgrims pa, bsgrim pa, sgrims} tha dad pa; 1) apply oneself fully; {rtse gcig tu gzhol ba}, to concentrate, endeavor / take part in	sgrim pa
སྒྲིམ་པོ	1) learned and clever/ intelligent, bright; 2) not loose/ relaxed, tight; 3) twisted, tangled	sgrim po
སྒྲིམ་ལྷོད	tight and loose	sgrim lhod
སྒྲིམ་ལྷོད་འཙམ་པོའི་ཐག་པ	rope between tight and loose	sgrim lhod 'tsam po'i thag pa
སྒྲིམས	imp. of {sgrim pa}	sgrims
སྒྲིམས་གློད	tight and loose	sgrims glod
སྒྲིམས་གློད་རན་པོ	"neither too tight nor too loose"	sgrims glod ran po
སྒྲིམས་ཏེ་འཇུག་པ	forcible engagement	sgrims te 'jug pa
སྒྲིམས་པ	spun, twisted	sgrims pa
སྒྲིལ	{bsgril} 1) to roll, to wind, to wrap, pack. 2) to combine together, to unite, to put together. 3) exchange. {zla sgril} to combine, join]; imp. of {sgril ba}	sgril
སྒྲིལ་ཁ	roll of something, wrapped bundle	sgril kha
སྒྲིལ་ཁྲེ	tape measure	sgril khre
སྒྲིལ་འཁོར	reel	sgril 'khor
སྒྲིལ་སྒྲིལ	wrapped/ rolled/ wound up ril ril	sgril sgril
སྒྲིལ་སྒྲིལ་བཟོ	roll/ wind up	sgril sgril bzo
སྒྲིལ་སྒྲིལ་བཟོ་བ	furl	sgril sgril bzo ba
སྒྲིལ་ཉོ་སྒྲིལ་ཚོང	barter [system]	sgril nyo sgril tshong
སྒྲིལ་ཉོ་སྒྲིལ་ཚོང་བྱེད	barter 628	sgril nyo sgril tshong byed
སྒྲིལ་ཐ	cigarette	sgril tha
སྒྲིལ་འཐེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hoisting machine, winch, windlass	sgril 'then 'phrul 'khor
སྒྲིལ་བ	(tha dad pa bsgril ba, bsgril ba, sgril,, 1) bind, tie, wind/ wrap [around]; 3) envelop; 4) in keeping accounts rang 'khor longs na gnas gong mar bcug pa; 5) roll up; 6) condense	sgril ba
སྒྲིལ་མ	twisted together	sgril ma
སྒྲིལ་གཟོང	kind of gzong [chisel, punch?] for making ear rings etc kyi 'bur sgril	sgril gzong
སྒྲིལ་ཤིང	1) thang ka'i lower stick; 2) CH noodles wrapping stick	sgril shing
སྒྲིལ་ཤོག	wrapping paper	sgril shog
སྒྲིས་ཁྲིམས	rules, regulations of admission	sgris khrims
སྒྲིས་བཅུག་པ	admit, introduce	sgris bcug pa
སྒྲུག	to pick up. {yar sgrug pa} to pick up]	sgrug
སྒྲུག་པ	to collect, gather, pluck, pick up, to compare; {sgrug pa, bsgrugs pa, bsgrug pa, sgrugs} trans. v	sgrug pa
སྒྲུགས	imp. of {sgrug pa}	sgrugs
སྒྲུང	story, fable	sgrung
སྒྲུང་མཁན	one who narrates fables or stories, bards, bard	sgrung mkhan
སྒྲུང་གི་གློག་བརྙན	feature film	sgrung gi glog brnyan
སྒྲུང་གླུ	folk song	sgrung glu
སྒྲུང་རྒྱུད	sgrung gtam byung lugs kyi ngag rgyun	sgrung rgyud
སྒྲུང་ངམ་ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཐུང་ཐུང	anecdote	sgrung ngam lo rgyus thung thung
སྒྲུང་འཆད་པ	relate fables or stories	sgrung 'chad pa
སྒྲུང་གཏམ	folklore, tale	sgrung gtam
སྒྲུང་ཐུང	short story	sgrung thung
སྒྲུང་ཐུང་ཐུང	short story	sgrung thung thung
སྒྲུང་དེབ	novel, fiction	sgrung deb
སྒྲུང་ལྡེའི་གནམ་བོན	heavenly bon po teachers before king di gum btsan po	sgrung lde'i gnam bon
སྒྲུང་པ	raconteur, story teller	sgrung pa
སྒྲུང་པོ	wise	sgrung po
སྒྲུང་དཔེ	story/ folklore book/ pecha	sgrung dpe
སྒྲུང་བ	mix, invent, feign	sgrung ba
སྒྲུང་བབ་པ	rab btags kyi story arising in the mind	sgrung bab pa
སྒྲུང་བབས	inspired story-tellers of tibet	sgrung babs
སྒྲུང་འབབ	descent of a story	sgrung 'bab
སྒྲུང་ཡིག	story book	sgrung yig
སྒྲུང་རིང	long story, novel	sgrung ring
སྒྲུང་རིང་པོ	long story, novel	sgrung ring po
སྒྲུང་ཤོད་པ	1) tell a story of old times; 2) tell stories, lie	sgrung shod pa
སྒྲུང་གཤོད་མཁན	bard story-teller	sgrung gshod mkhan
སྒྲུང་བཤད	fable, legend, tale, story, novel, fiction	sgrung bshad
སྒྲུང་བཤད་པ	raconteur, story teller	sgrung bshad pa
སྒྲུངས	anecdote	sgrungs
སྒྲུངས་བཤད་པ	to tell / relate an anecdote	sgrungs bshad pa
སྒྲུན	imp. of {sgrun pa}	sgrun
སྒྲུན་པ	{sgrun pa, bsgrun pa, bsgrun pa, sgrun} trans. v	sgrun pa
སྒྲུན་མ	protectors	sgrun ma
སྒྲུབ	bring about, produce	sgrub
སྒྲུབ་དཀའ	give/ take a lot of trouble	sgrub dka'
སྒྲུབ་དཀའ་བ	take a lot of trouble, very difficult to propitiate, hard to perform, hard to execute, hard to accomplish, difficult to perfect	sgrub dka' ba
སྒྲུབ་དཀྱིལ	sadhana mandala	sgrub dkyil
སྒྲུབ་སྐུར	superimposition and depreciation	sgrub skur
སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	sadhana cycle	sgrub skor
སྒྲུབ་ཁང	meditation center	sgrub khang
སྒྲུབ་ཁུལ	evasion of duties, pretending to work	sgrub khul
སྒྲུབ་ཁུལ་བྱེད་པ	evade 1's duties, pretend to work	sgrub khul byed pa
སྒྲུབ་ཁོག	sadhana framework	sgrub khog
སྒྲུབ་མཁན	the practitioner, sadhaka	sgrub mkhan
སྒྲུབ་མཁས	one who propitiates	sgrub mkhas
སྒྲུབ་གྭ	practice/ retreat center	sgrub gwa
སྒྲུབ་གྲྭ	retreat center, meditation school, practice center	sgrub grwa
སྒྲུབ་གརབ༹	meditation school, practice center	sgrub grva
སྒྲུབ་གྲོགས	practice companion / partner, retreat-friend	sgrub grogs
སྒྲུབ་གླ	remuneration for propitiating	sgrub gla
སྒྲུབ་དགག	accepting and rejecting	sgrub dgag
སྒྲུབ་དགོས	purpose of establishing, must establish	sgrub dgos
སྒྲུབ་དགོས་རྒྱུ	liability	sgrub dgos rgyu
སྒྲུབ་འགྱགས་གྱི་སྣོན་པ་བྱིན	gave supplies for their retreats	sgrub 'gyags gyi snon pa byin
སྒྲུབ་རྒྱགས	retreat provisions	sgrub rgyags
སྒྲུབ་རྒྱགས་སྦྱར་བ	provided for all my needs 629	sgrub rgyags sbyar ba
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད	practice lineage	sgrub brgyud
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teaching of the practice lineage	sgrub brgyud kyi bstan pa
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད་བརྒྱད	the 8 practice lineages [= {sgrub brgyud shing rta brgyad}	sgrub brgyud brgyad
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད་བཅས	masters of the Practice Lineage	sgrub brgyud bcas
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད་ཉི་མ	khams sprul v, 1781-1847	sgrub brgyud nyi ma
སྒྲུབ་བརྒྱུད་ཤིང་རྟ་བརྒྱད	Eight Practice Lineages	sgrub brgyud shing rta brgyad
སྒྲུབ་ངག	statement of proof [ggd]	sgrub ngag
སྒྲུབ་ངག་ལྟར་སྣང	faulty/ merely apparent proof statement	sgrub ngag ltar snang
སྒྲུབ་ངག་ལྟར་སྣང་གསུམ	the three kinds of faulty/ merely apparent proof statement [rtags tshul gsum ma tsang ba bkod pa don skyon can dang, rtags tshul gsum tsang yang phyi rgol gyis nges rung med pa bkod pa blo skyon ca...	sgrub ngag ltar snang gsum
སྒྲུབ་ངག་ཡང་དག	true proof establishing speech	sgrub ngag yang dag
སྒྲུབ་ངག་ཡན་ལག་གཉིས	the two limbs of proof establishing speech	sgrub ngag yan lag gnyis
སྒྲུབ་ངན	cannot easily be accomplished	sgrub ngan
སྒྲུབ་སྔགས	activation mantra	sgrub sngags
སྒྲུབ་ཆག་འཇགས་གསུམ	khral 'ul sgrub pa, chag yang gtong ba, rang 'jags 'jog pa gsum	sgrub chag 'jags gsum
སྒྲུབ་ཆེན	Drubchen Ceremony. Great accomplishment practice; a sadhana practice undertaken by a group of people which goes on uninterruptedly for seven days. rite of great attainment. mahasadhana, big puja, '...	sgrub chen
མཧ	sadhana, big puja, 7-day practice	maha
སྒྲུབ་ཆེན་བཀའ་བརྒྱད	see {sgrub pa bka' brgyad} sgrub chen bka' brgyad kyi lha tshogs	sgrub chen bka' brgyad
བདུན་བརྒྱ་དང་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 725 deities of the Eight Sadhana Teachings sgrub chen bka' brgyad kyi lha tshogs	bdun brgya dang nyer lnga
ཆེན་གྱི་ཛ་པྲ་དགོངས	sgrub chen bka' brgyad kyi lha tshogs	chen gyi dza pra dgongs
བྱུང་རང་ཤར	terma revealed by rgod kyi ldem 'phru can, gter ston, 1337-1408	byung rang shar
སྒྲུབ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	eight great sadhanas	sgrub chen brgyad
སྒྲུབ་ཆོས	established property, property of the probandum, property to be established [thd]	sgrub chos
སྒྲུབ་མཆོག	supreme practitioner	sgrub mchog
སྒྲུབ་མཆོད	sadhana ritual, puja, practice service, intensive sadhana session(s	sgrub mchod
སྒྲུབ་འཆག	building and destroying, making and dismantling	sgrub 'chag
སྒྲུབ་འཇུག	collective engagement	sgrub 'jug
སྒྲུབ་འཇུག་གི་བློ	complete engager	sgrub 'jug gi blo
སྒྲུབ་འཇུག་གི་བློ་དོན་མཐུན	perceptual knowledge	sgrub 'jug gi blo don mthun
སྒྲུབ་འཇུག་གི་བློ་དོན་མི་མཐུན	conceptionless wrong knowledge	sgrub 'jug gi blo don mi mthun
སྒྲུབ་ཉུང	short practice	sgrub nyung
སྒྲུབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	can accomplish, able to; provable, verifiable	sgrub tu yod pa
སྒྲུབ་གཏོར	accomplishment torma	sgrub gtor
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས	reasoning, argumentation, argument	sgrub rtags
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས་འགོད་པ	to reason	sgrub rtags 'god pa
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས་ལྟར་སྣང	superficial proof	sgrub rtags ltar snang
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	incorrect proof	sgrub rtags phyin ci log pa
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས་ཡང་དག	correct proof	sgrub rtags yang dag
སྒྲུབ་རྟགས་གསལ་འགོད	arguing	sgrub rtags gsal 'god
སྒྲུབ་རྟེན	practice support; thugs rten thugs dam gyi rten - support of one's own practice	sgrub rten
སྒྲུབ་བསྟན	the teachings of the Practice Lineage	sgrub bstan
སྒྲུབ་ཐག་ཉེ	accomplishment is facilitated accepting	sgrub thag nye
སྒྲུབ་ཐག་ཉེ་བ	easy to accomplish	sgrub thag nye ba
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	sadhana; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 67]	sgrub thabs
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་ཀུན་བཏུས	Compendium of Sadhanas, compiled and edited by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and Jamyang Loter Wangpo	sgrub thabs kun btus
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་ཀུན་བཟང	Sadhana of Universal Excellence	sgrub thabs kun bzang
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	The Collection of Sadhanas; famous collection of practices by Loter Wangpo	sgrub thabs kun las btus pa
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་གཏེར་གཞུང	sadhana from the terma text	sgrub thabs gter gzhung
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་བསྡུས་པ	abbreviated / concise sadhana	sgrub thabs bsdus pa
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་རིན་འབྱུང	Source of Jewels, Hundred Sadhanas	sgrub thabs rin 'byung
སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་རིན་འབྱུང་བརྒྱ་རྩ	Hundred Sadhanas, Source of Jewels, a collection of sadhanas gathered and arranged by Jetsün Taranatha	sgrub thabs rin 'byung brgya rtsa
སྒྲུབ་ཐོབ	siddha, accomplished one	sgrub thob
སྒྲུབ་དང་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་འགལ་བ	to practice at odds with the practice	sgrub dang bsgrub bya 'gal ba
སྒྲུབ་དང་བྲལ་བ	1) unattainable. 2) unproven	sgrub dang bral ba
སྒྲུབ་དང་སུན་འབྱིན	propitiating and discomfiting	sgrub dang sun 'byin
སྒྲུབ་དུས	while practising	sgrub dus
སྒྲུབ་འདོགས་ཆོད་པ	to eliminate misconceptions about practice	sgrub 'dogs chod pa
སྒྲུབ་འདོན	khral si ngo sgrub lag 'don gyi sa rten	sgrub 'don
སྒྲུབ་ལྡོག་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	sgrub par gyur pa'i ldog pa rigs gcig pa zhes pa brda la byang ma byang gi individual from first being seen "like this" thinking blo ngang gis skyed nus pa'i thing, like the sound of a bell and sou...	sgrub ldog rigs gcig pa
སྒྲུབ་སྡེ	Sadhana Section	sgrub sde
སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	eight classes of means for attainment in Mahayoga, the Eight Great Sadhanas	sgrub sde brgyad
སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	Syn {bka' brgyad} & {sgrub chen bka' brgyad kyi lha tshogs bdun brgya dang nyer lnga}, {che mchog yon tan}, {rtsa ba'i lha}. 1) {'jam dpal sku}. 2) {pad ma gsung} 3) {yan dag thugs} 4) {phyir pa 'p...	sgrub sde chen po brgyad
སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་བླ་མ	teacher at the retreat center; retreat master. Syn {sgrub dpon}	sgrub sde bla ma
སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་མ	spiritual consort	sgrub sde ma
སྒྲུབ་སྡེའི་བླ་མ	the hermit	sgrub sde'i bla ma
སྒྲུབ་ནུས	the power to perform	sgrub nus
སྒྲུབ་གནས	practice place, meditation center, sacred place [of accomplishment/practice]	sgrub gnas
སྒྲུབ་གནས་དབེན་པ	solitary practice place	sgrub gnas dben pa
སྒྲུབ་གནས་དབེན་པར	solitary practice place	sgrub gnas dben par
སྒྲུབ་པ་དཀའ་བརྒྱད	8 gods who are difficult to propitiate	sgrub pa dka' brgyad
སྒྲུབ་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱད	8 logos deities, 8 principal mahayoga yidams ('jam dpal gshin rje shed, pad ma gsung or rta mgrin, yang dag heruka, bdud rtsi yon tan, rdo rje phur ba or rdo rje bzhun nu ma mo rbod gtong, 'jig rte...	sgrub pa bka' brgyad
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཁྱད་དུ་བྱ་བ	emphasize practice	sgrub pa khyad du bya ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་གོམས་པ	adept in sadhana	sgrub pa goms pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་འགོད་པ	to state evidence / proof	sgrub pa 'god pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་རྒྱག་པ	to practice	sgrub pa rgyag pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	accomplishment establishing path of meditation	sgrub pa sgom lam
སྒྲུབ་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ་ལྔ	[Tse]	sgrub pa sgom lam lnga
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལྔ	CHN	sgrub pa lnga
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great accomplishment; (stage of) great accomplishment; intensive group sadhana practice/ retreat; Great accomplishment	sgrub pa chen po
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	{bka' brgyad}	sgrub pa chen po brgyad
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཉིད	great accomplishment	sgrub pa chen po nyid
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་དགོངས་པ	the intent of the great accomplishment	sgrub pa chen po'i dgongs pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་མཆོག	practice is best	sgrub pa mchog
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཉམས་ལེན	meditation training, sadhana practice	sgrub pa nyams len
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི	of meditation practice	sgrub pa nyams len gyi
སྒྲུབ་པ་ཉམས་སུ་བླང་བ	practice of sadhana	sgrub pa nyams su blang ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་མཐའ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	the culmination of the practice	sgrub pa mtha' ru phyin pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from accomplishing	sgrub pa dang bral ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་སྡེ་དགུ	Nine Sadhana Sections. The Eight Sadhana Teachings in addition to the teachings connected to Guru Vidyadhara. Sometimes the Assemblage of Sugatas is counted as the ninth	sgrub pa sde dgu
སྒྲུབ་པ་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the Eight Sadhana Sections: 'jam dpal sku, pad ma gsung, yang dag thugs, bdud rtsi yon tan, phur pa phrin las, ma mo rbod gtong, 'jig rten mchod stod, dmod pa drag sngags	sgrub pa sde brgyad
སྒྲུབ་པ་སྡེ་དྲུག	Six Sadhana Sections. The phrasing of these six types of scripture differs slightly among the various versions of Chronicles of Padmasambhava's life. In his Narration of the Precious Revelation of ...	sgrub pa sde drug
སྒྲུབ་པ་པོ	1) logical proof established; 2) dharma practitioner	sgrub pa po
སྒྲུབ་པ་བྱས་པ	devoted myself to meditation practice	sgrub pa byas pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་བྱེད་འདོད་ཀྱི་བློ	determination to practice	sgrub pa byed 'dod kyi blo
སྒྲུབ་པ་བྱེད་པ	to practice	sgrub pa byed pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unexcelled practice	sgrub pa bla na med pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་མ་ཡིན་དགག	an probative affirming negation, i.e., a negation that proves something in place of what is negated. (see also dgag pa med dgag). used to describe the two types of negation (dgag pa). [mss]	sgrub pa ma yin dgag
སྒྲུབ་པ་བརྩོན་པ	to exert oneself in the practice	sgrub pa brtson pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་རྫས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད་ལྔ	five articles of sadhana materials: the ali-kali; and the articles for ornaments and attires; articles for food and drink; articles for sacred dance; and the articles for song and music.	sgrub pa rdzas kyi yo byad lnga
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་བག་ཡོད་པར་བྱ་བ	to be careful while practicing	sgrub pa la bag yod par bya ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	embrace the practice	sgrub pa la sbyor ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་མི་སྐྱོ་པ	practice tirelessly	sgrub pa la mi skyo pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	endeavor in practice	sgrub pa la brtson pa
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་ཞུགས	to stay in retreat	sgrub pa la zhugs
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	engage in the practice	sgrub pa la gzhol ba
སྒྲུབ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་རིགས	the nature resulting from practice	sgrub pa las byung ba'i rigs
སྒྲུབ་པ་བསམ་གཏན	meditation practice	sgrub pa bsam gtan
སྒྲུབ་པའི་སྐབས	at the time of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i skabs
སྒྲུབ་པའི་གྲོགས	allies, mystic partners, servants or helpers of any kind in a tantrika's sadhana	sgrub pa'i grogs
སྒྲུབ་པའི་གྲོགས་མཆོག	the best sadhana companion	sgrub pa'i grogs mchog
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དགོངས་པ	intent of accomplishment; [the intent of mastering the accomplishment of siddhis]	sgrub pa'i dgongs pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	the victory banner of practice 632 sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan bsgrengs pa raised the victory banner of practice	sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཙུགས་པ	raised there for three years the victory banner of spiritual practice	sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan btsugs pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཚུགས	raise the victorious banner of spiritual practice	sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan tshugs
སྒྲུབ་པའི་བརྒྱུད	meditative/ practice lineage	sgrub pa'i brgyud
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དངོས་པོ	practice materials	sgrub pa'i dngos po
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ	goal of practice	sgrub pa'i ched du bya ba
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ་གསུམ	[Tse]	sgrub pa'i ched du bya ba gsum
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	sadhana	sgrub pa'i cho ga
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོས	1) proof	sgrub pa'i chos
སྒྲུབ་པའི་མཆོད་པ	the offering of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i mchod pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ	I shall offer you my practice	sgrub pa'i mchod pa 'bul
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཉི་ཤུ	Twenty Commitments concerning the Attainments, according to Anu Yoga. According to Jamgön Kongtrül, shes-bya kun-khyab mdzod, Vol. 2, pp. 185-186, they are as follows. one should not injure the bod...	sgrub pa'i nyi shu
ཤོཨུལད་ནོཏ་དིསྟྲིབུཏེ་ཐེ་ཕེ༹ཨསཏ	offerings of the faithful, one should neither defile the wealth of the precious jewels and the learned, nor drink ale to the point of intoxication, one should not enjoy the female consort of a vajr...	should not distribute the feast
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས	sign of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i rtags
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྟེན	support of practice	sgrub pa'i rten
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence to be proven	sgrub pa'i thal 'gyur
སྒྲུབ་པའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	favorable conditions for accomplishing	sgrub pa'i mthun rkyen
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དམ་ཚིག་ཉི་ཤུ	the twenty samayas of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i dam tshig nyi shu
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དུས	practice period	sgrub pa'i dus
སྒྲུབ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	conduct of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i spyod pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	to embrace the conduct of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i spyod pa la 'jug pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the activity of attainment	sgrub pa'i phrin las
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དབང	sadhana empowerment	sgrub pa'i dbang
སྒྲུབ་པའི་མན་དལ	Practice mandala. The mandala plate placed on the shrine during offerings	sgrub pa'i man dal
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ	practice/ meditation object	sgrub pa'i dmigs pa
སྒྲུབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	TSE	sgrub pa'i dmigs pa bcu gnyis
སྒྲུབ་པའི་རྫས	accomplishment substance	sgrub pa'i rdzas
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཞབས་ཏོག་འབུལ	I offer my practice; to offer the service of realization	sgrub pa'i zhabs tog 'bul
སྒྲུབ་པའི་གཞི	basis for accomplishment	sgrub pa'i gzhi
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག	branches of attainment	sgrub pa'i yan lag
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ལེའུ་གསུམ	3rd period of practice	sgrub pa'i le'u gsum
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ལྷ	to deity to be realized / accomplished	sgrub pa'i lha
སྒྲུབ་པར་དཀའ	hard to achieve	sgrub par dka'
སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	one who accomplishes	sgrub par byed pa
སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཆོས	the practice which accomplishes	sgrub par byed pa'i chos
སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཐབས	the method for accomplishment /to accomplish	sgrub par byed pa'i thabs
སྒྲུབ་པར་མཛད་པ	to accomplish	sgrub par mdzad pa
སྒྲུབ་པོ	the practitioner	sgrub po
སྒྲུབ་པོ་མཆོག	highest stage of consummation	sgrub po mchog
སྒྲུབ་པོད	volume of ritual text	sgrub pod
སྒྲུབ་དཔོན	retreat teacher	sgrub dpon
སྒྲུབ་ཕུག	cave, meditation cave	sgrub phug
སྒྲུབ་ཕྱོགས	affirmation	sgrub phyogs
སྒྲུབ་ཕྲིན	sadhana practice	sgrub phrin
སྒྲུབ་བ་བརས་བརྒྱད	deity {sgrub ba brsa brgyad}	sgrub ba brsa brgyad
སྒྲུབ་བྱ	anything to be propitiated, a god performance	sgrub bya
སྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས	predicate, probandum, property of that to be established TSE	sgrub bya'i chos
སྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ལྷ	deities to be accomplished; [expl. of three types, Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 60]	sgrub bya'i lha
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	evidence	sgrub byed
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the Dharma which brings forth attainment	sgrub byed kyi chos
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonestablishment of the establishing dharma	sgrub byed kyi chos ma grub pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	establishing reasoning, reason, proof	sgrub byed kyi rigs pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལུང་དང་རིགས་པ	the quotation and reasoning that proves it	sgrub byed kyi lung dang rigs pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་མཁྲིས་པ	establishing bile	sgrub byed mkhris pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་སྔ་མ	major premise [in logic]	sgrub byed snga ma
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་གཏན་ཚིགས	verifying axiom; reasoning to prove it	sgrub byed gtan tshigs
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ལྟར་སྣང	superficial proof 633	sgrub byed ltar snang
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ལྡོག་པ་མེད་པ	no reversal of the reason [R]	sgrub byed ldog pa med pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཕི་མ	minor premise [in logic]	sgrub byed phi ma
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཕྱི་མ	minor premise	sgrub byed phyi ma
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་འཕེན་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	proof stating consequence sgrub byed 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur bco	sgrub byed 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་མི་འཕེན་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence that does not state the reason [R] sgrub byed mi 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur gsum the three conequences that do not state the reason [1 rang bzhin ma dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur, dper na, bum pa yo...	sgrub byed mi 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་མེད	cannot be validly proved	sgrub byed med
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཡང་དག	correct proof	sgrub byed yang dag
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཡང་དག་པ	correct proof	sgrub byed yang dag pa
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ལུང	establishing scripture	sgrub byed lung
སྒྲུབ་བླ	yogi, lama, "practice master"	sgrub bla
སྒྲུབ་བླ་མ	retreat teacher	sgrub bla ma
སྒྲུབ་འབྲས	result	sgrub 'bras
སྒྲུབ་འབྲས་ཀྱིས	as a result of this	sgrub 'bras kyis
སྒྲུབ་མི་ཤེས	no idea how to put into practise	sgrub mi shes
སྒྲུབ་རྩོམ	novel	sgrub rtsom
སྒྲུབ་རྩོལ	industry	sgrub rtsol
སྒྲུབ་བརྩོན	great practitioner	sgrub brtson
སྒྲུབ་ཚད	schedule/ rate of progress/ achievement	sgrub tshad
སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས	application	sgrub tshugs
སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས་བཟུང་བ	maintained their meditation practice	sgrub tshugs bzung ba
སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ	x {chos nyan tshul sgrub tshul} how to listen to the Dharma and how to apply it	sgrub tshul
སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ་གྱི་ཐ་སྙད	designations of the ways of establishing	sgrub tshul gyi tha snyad
སྒྲུབ་ཚོང	supply and distribution/ marketing	sgrub tshong
སྒྲུབ་ཚོང་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	supply and marketing coop	sgrub tshong mnyam las khang
སྒྲུབ་རྫས	practice materials, articles; accomplishment substance; practice materials, substances for sadhana	sgrub rdzas
སྒྲུབ་རྫས་ཐུན་མོང་བཅུ་ལྔ	Fifteen Ordinary Sacraments of Empowerment. The fifteen ordinary sacraments and the three profound empowerments together form the eighteen empowerments of Mahayoga. Of these the former include ten ...	sgrub rdzas thun mong bcu lnga
ཐོསེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཅྲོཝན	ornament, diadem, rosary, armor, victory-banner, seals, parasol, vase, food & drink, and the five essences. For their significance see Longchenpa, {phyogs bcu mun sel} pp. 376-379. [GM] sgrub rdzas...	those of crown
བྱུང་ན་འགྲུབ	I will succeed in my practice only if I have the head of a chakravartin king	byung na 'grub
སྒྲུབ་ཞྭ	retreat-master's hat; Rechungpa hat	sgrub zhwa
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང	main text of sadhana	sgrub gzhung
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང་རྒྱས་པ	elaborated sadhana	sgrub gzhung rgyas pa
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང་སྙིང་པོ	heart sadhana	sgrub gzhung snying po
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང་བརྡུས་པ	brief sadhana	sgrub gzhung brdus pa
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང་བསྡུས་པ	brief sadhana	sgrub gzhung bsdus pa
སྒྲུབ་གཞུང་འབྲིང	middle length sadhana	sgrub gzhung 'bring
སྒྲུབ་འཞུང	main texts of sadhana sgrub g.yog - retreat attendant [R] sgrub g.yog - retreat attendant	sgrub 'zhung
སྒྲུབ་རན	cannot easily be accomplished	sgrub ran
སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	way of performing the practice	sgrub lugs
སྒྲུབ་ལོ	superficial practice	sgrub lo
སྒྲུབ་ལོ་བྱེད་པ	practice professedly	sgrub lo byed pa
སྒྲུབ་གཤེན	[a kind of] Bon religion	sgrub gshen
སྒྲུབ་སླ་པ	easy to perform	sgrub sla pa
སྒྲུབས	imp. of {sgrub pa}	sgrubs
སྒྲུབས་ཐབས་སྙིང་པོ་སྐོར་ལྔ	from the terma {grub thob thugs thig}	sgrubs thabs snying po skor lnga
སྒྲུབས་སྡེ	meditative realization	sgrubs sde
སྒྲེ	[arch] lynx, cross breed, mix	sgre
སྒྲེ་བ	uncovered, bare, naked, repeat, put in order, place together, collate	sgre ba
སྒྲེ་བོ	naked, uncovered, bald	sgre bo
སྒྲེ་བྱི	bald	sgre byi
སྒྲེ་མོ	bare ground	sgre mo
སྒྲེ་ལ	btsos nas not rinsed/ cleansed kind of grain used for chang	sgre la
སྒྲེ་ལོག	roll back and forth	sgre log
སྒྲེག	[p bsgregs],, belch	sgreg
སྒྲེག་པ	to belch	sgreg pa
སྒྲེག་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	to belch; {sgag sgre rgyab pa}	sgreg pa rgyab pa
སྒྲེགས	belch	sgregs
སྒྲེགས་སྒྲ	belch	sgregs sgra
སྒྲེགས་པ	foul belch	sgregs pa
སྒྲེང	[R] erect, hoist, lift/ raise high, hold up	sgreng
སྒྲེང་སྒྲེང	firm & well-fixed	sgreng sgreng
སྒྲེང་བ	lift, raise, hold up, erect	sgreng ba
སྒྲེངས	lift, SA sgreng ba	sgrengs
སྒྲེངས་ཤིག	hoisted	sgrengs shig
སྒྲེན་པོ	naked	sgren po
སྒྲེན་མོ	naked	sgren mo
སྒྲེན་མོ་གསུམ	3 destitutions (waterless valley, country without protector, woman without husband)	sgren mo gsum
སྒྲེའུ	small leather sgro snod	sgre'u
སྒྲེའུ་ཆུང	1) small leather sgro snod; 2) [arch] scum bag for penis of bhikshu given to ejaculating in a dream	sgre'u chung
སྒྲེས	sgre ba!	sgres
སྒྲེས་པ	numeral	sgres pa
སྒྲོ	postulation, speculative imputations, debate, SA sgro ba, large feather, elevate, sack, bag	sgro
སྒྲོ་དཀར	1) {sgro ba} tree w white flowers; 2) white feathered bird	sgro dkar
སྒྲོ་བཀུར	embellishment and discredit	sgro bkur
སྒྲོ་རྐང	feather[ed] bottom	sgro rkang
སྒྲོ་སྐུར	assumption and negation, abbr. of sgro 'dogs pa dang sku pa 'debs pa, i.e., decorating with feathers and casting abuse, or, exaggeration and depreciation, affirmation and negation, exaggeration & d...	sgro skur
སྒྲོ་སྐུར་གྱི་རྟོག་པ་ཟློག་པ	refute objecting thoughts	sgro skur gyi rtog pa zlog pa
སྒྲོ་སྐུར་གྱི་མཐར་ལྟུང་བ	fall in to the extremes of exaggeration and denigration	sgro skur gyi mthar ltung ba
སྒྲོ་སྐུར་འདེབས	slander	sgro skur 'debs
སྒྲོ་སྐུར་བསལ་བ	removing / dispelling exaggeration and denigration	sgro skur bsal ba
སྒྲོ་ག	little bubbles in sparkling beverages, ropes used to pack cloth, fetter, cord	sgro ga
སྒྲོ་གུ	attaching cord, string, satrap, ribbon	sgro gu
སྒྲོ་གུ་རྟེན་པ	steel blade of arrow to which feather is attached	sgro gu rten pa
སྒྲོ་གླིང	deliberation	sgro gling
སྒྲོ་གླེང	conversation, debate	sgro gleng
སྒྲོ་གླེང་མཛད་པ	had a debate	sgro gleng mdzad pa
སྒྲོ་རྒྱས་པ	when my feathers grew	sgro rgyas pa
སྒྲོ་ཅན	w feathers, bird	sgro can
སྒྲོ་ལྗང	parrot	sgro ljang
སྒྲོ་གཏོང	peacock feather	sgro gtong
སྒྲོ་བཏགས	superimposition [ggd]	sgro btags
སྒྲོ་བཏགས་སྐུར་འདེབས	Exaggeration and denigration	sgro btags skur 'debs
སྒྲོ་བཏགས་དང་སྐུར་འདེབས	Exaggeration and denigration	sgro btags dang skur 'debs
སྒྲོ་བཏགས་པ	fabricated assertions, inventions, fabrications, imputation, superimposition, projection	sgro btags pa
སྒྲོ་ཐིག	eye on feathers of peacock etc.	sgro thig
སྒྲོ་དོགས་པ	reification	sgro dogs pa
སྒྲོ་གདོང	peacock feather	sgro gdong
སྒྲོ་མདུང	feathered spear w rope for pulling back	sgro mdung
སྒྲོ་མདོངས	sgro thig	sgro mdongs
སྒྲོ་འདགས	superimpositions	sgro 'dags
སྒྲོ་འདུགས་ཀུན་བརྟགས	intellectual reification	sgro 'dugs kun brtags
སྒྲོ་འདོགས	1) imputation, misinterpretation, exaggeration, uncertainty, ascription, hypostatized, misconception, preconceptions, attribution, conceptu- alization]; 2) doubts; 3) superimpositions	sgro 'dogs
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཀུན་བརྟགས	intellectual reification	sgro 'dogs kun brtags
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	exaggerated view / belief	sgro 'dogs kyi lta ba
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	extreme of superimposition	sgro 'dogs kyi mtha'
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཀྱི་མེད་མཐའ	exaggerated	sgro 'dogs kyi med mtha'
ཨེ྾ཏྲེམེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	existence	extreme of non
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་གཅོད	to master completely, to thoroughly understand, vi. to come to master, to come to a true understanding	sgro 'dogs gcod
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་གཅོད་པ	to eliminate false superimpositions [ggd]	sgro 'dogs gcod pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་བཅད	resolve/ clear/ cut/ eradicate misunderstandings/ doubt/ misconceptions	sgro 'dogs bcad
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་བཅད་པ	resolve/ clear/ cut/ eradicate misunderstandings/ doubt/ misconceptions	sgro 'dogs bcad pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཆོད	when uncertainty is cut, come to mastery/ true understanding	sgro 'dogs chod
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཆོད་པ	be free from/ have cut through misconceptions	sgro 'dogs chod pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཆོད་པ་ལྟ་བ	as though cutting off doubt	sgro 'dogs chod pa lta ba
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ	exaggerate the truth, embellish the truth, exaggeration; reification. The extreme view of affirmation, overestimate, exaggerate, misconception, misinterpretation, exaggerate the truth, embellish th...	sgro 'dogs pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ་དང་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པ	to exaggerate or denigrate	sgro 'dogs pa dang skur pa 'debs pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པའི་མཐའ	the extreme of ascription/ exaggeration	sgro 'dogs pa'i mtha'
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	exaggerated conceptions	sgro 'dogs pa'i rnam par rtog pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	exaggerated impression	sgro 'dogs pa'i shes pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to ascribe, impute, exaggerate	sgro 'dogs par byed pa
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་བྱེད	exaggerate	sgro 'dogs byed
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་མ་ཆོད	doubts not cleared up, not clear up uncertainties	sgro 'dogs ma chod
སྒྲོ་འདོགས་མ་ཆོད་པ	have not cleared up uncertainties	sgro 'dogs ma chod pa
སྒྲོ་ལྡན	feathered race, birds, arrow	sgro ldan
སྒྲོ་སྤུ	birds feathers	sgro spu
སྒྲོ་ཕུག	place in Tibet	sgro phug
སྒྲོ་ཕུག་པ	a person, a temple	sgro phug pa
སྒྲོ་ཕུག་པ་ཤ་ཀྱ་སེང་གེ	{sgro phug pa sha kya seng ge	sgro phug pa sha kya seng ge
སྒྲོ་ཕོད	1) feather hat crest; 2) bird's natural feather crest	sgro phod
སྒྲོ་ཕྱགས	feather duster	sgro phyags
སྒྲོ་འཕྲུ	1) bird feather hat crest; 2) bird's natural crest	sgro 'phru
སྒྲོ་བ	a bag; a bag made of skin, hide bag, the bark	sgro ba
སྒྲོ་བ་ཤིང	{sgro ba} med. tree	sgro ba shing
སྒྲོ་མ	lamp according to Allsurpassing realization GD	sgro ma
སྒྲོ་མ་དྲུག	six lamps GD	sgro ma drug
སྒྲོ་མ་བཞི	four lamps GD	sgro ma bzhi
སྒྲོ་བཙེམས་མ	kind of monk's hat	sgro btsems ma
སྒྲོ་རྩེ	feather[ed] tip sgro g.yab - feather fan	sgro rtse
སྒྲོ་གཤོག	1) bird's feathers and wings; 2) water wheel's paddles; 3) shog rgyu'i thug pa dkrug byed [stir/ twirl?] kyi shing 'khor	sgro gshog
སྒྲོ་སོག	quill	sgro sog
སྒྲོ་ལྷུག་མ	a kind of monk's hat	sgro lhug ma
སྒྲོག	fetter/ chain [lit. and fig.]	sgrog
སྒྲོག་བཀྲོལ་བ	1) loosen binding rope[s]; 2) clear away doubt	sgrog bkrol ba
སྒྲོག་གུ	button	sgrog gu
སྒྲོག་གླེང	discussion	sgrog gleng
སྒྲོག་འགྲོས	1) way of tying up w belt, cord, ribbon, rope etc.; 2) way of going in turn/ series	sgrog 'gros
སྒྲོག་ཏུ་ཆུད	chained	sgrog tu chud
སྒྲོག་ཏུ་ཆུད་པ	chained, in shackles	sgrog tu chud pa
སྒྲོག་ཏུ་མ་ཚུད	avoid being caught up in	sgrog tu ma tshud
སྒྲོག་སྟོད	rgyu skar mon gre	sgrog stod
སྒྲོག་ཐག	belt, ribbon, tape; sting, strap, ribbon, belt tape	sgrog thag
སྒྲོག་དུང	bracelets [made of conch]	sgrog dung
སྒྲོག་གདན	triangular patch generally made up of satin on pang gdan (bibu which covers the front of a woman's petticoat)	sgrog gdan
སྒྲོག་གདུང	armlet	sgrog gdung
སྒྲོག་གདུབ	bracelet, bangle, bangle made of cord or straps also of jade	sgrog gdub
སྒྲོག་པ	spreading; {snyan pa sgrog pa} spreading the word of renown	sgrog pa
སྒྲོག་པ་པོ	declaimer, preacher	sgrog pa po
སྒྲོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	blaze about	sgrog par byed pa
སྒྲོག་སྦྱང	announcement, reading a public notice	sgrog sbyang
སྒྲོག་སྨད	rgyu skar mon gru	sgrog smad
སྒྲོག་ཙེ	(CH 1) platform, [tea] table, etc for arranging food etc zas ston; 2) set out zas ston; 3) table, desk sgrog tse khang pa'i nang du bkyag pa move the table in	sgrog tse
སྒྲོག་རྩེ	table, desk; desk, table	sgrog rtse
སྒྲོག་རིལ	button, round button	sgrog ril
སྒྲོག་རིལ་སྒྲོག་པ	button up	sgrog ril sgrog pa
སྒྲོག་རུས	collar bone	sgrog rus
སྒྲོག་རུས་པ	shelter for swans	sgrog rus pa
སྒྲོག་རུས་གཤོངས	hole behind the collar bone	sgrog rus gshongs
སྒྲོག་ལུང	string, strap, ribbon	sgrog lung
སྒྲོག་ལེབ	flat strap/ ribbon	sgrog leb
སྒྲོག་ས་པ	profess, recitation	sgrog sa pa
སྒྲོག་སུམ་ལག	binder/ hobbles for forelegs + 1 hind leg of horse etc	sgrog sum lag
སྒྲོགས	sgrog pa! uttering, proclaim, profess	sgrogs
སྒྲོགས་ལྡན	river	sgrogs ldan
སྒྲོགས་པ	delight, profess	sgrogs pa
སྒྲོགས་པའམ་གསལ་བ	preach	sgrogs pa'am gsal ba
སྒྲོགས་པར་དཀའ་བ	is hard to express	sgrogs par dka' ba
སྒྲོགས་སྦྱང	CM: tshogs 'du'i thog yig rigs sgrobs sbyangs byed pa. [mss] 636	sgrogs sbyang
སྒྲོགས་ཞུམ	scream	sgrogs zhum
སྒྲོང	enumerate, SA sgrang ba	sgrong
སྒྲོང་བ	(tha dad pa bsgrangs pa, bsgrang ba, sgrongs,, calculate	sgrong ba
སྒྲོངས	imp. of {sgrong ba}	sgrongs
སྒྲོད	imp. of {sgrod pa}	sgrod
སྒྲོད་པ	{sgrod pa, bsgrod pa, bsgrod pa, sgrod} trans. v	sgrod pa
སྒྲོན	donning, sgron pa! put on/ out, set/ lay out, [h] build	sgron
སྒྲོན་བསྐལ	bright kalpa {rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas 'jig rten du bjon na sgron bskal zhes grags pa} a kalpa in which a perfect Buddha appears in the world is called a "bright kalpa"	sgron bskal
སྒྲོན་ཁེབས	lamp shade	sgron khebs
སྒྲོན་དགུ	{sgron ma dgu} the nine lamps	sgron dgu
སྒྲོན་ཆས	articles such as butter, oil for lighting lamps in a chapel during the 8 holy days in a month	sgron chas
སྒྲོན་བརྙན	picture/ slide/ movie projector, magic lantern	sgron brnyan
སྒྲོན་ཏེ	having offered	sgron te
སྒྲོན་སྟེགས	lamp stand, beacon	sgron stegs
སྒྲོན་ཐལ	sgron shing ash for making ink	sgron thal
སྒྲོན་ཐུར	phud skyogs - sbreng thur Spoon for amrita and rakta	sgron thur
སྒྲོན་དར	kha btags [h]	sgron dar
སྒྲོན་དེབ	list of people able to give lamps in a town or on a large estate	sgron deb
སྒྲོན་དྲེག	lamp black	sgron dreg
སྒྲོན་དྲེགས	lamp black	sgron dregs
སྒྲོན་སྣག	{sgron me} tree ash ink	sgron snag
སྒྲོན་པ	(tha dad pa bsgron pa, bsgron pa, sgron,, 1) offer [h]; 2) adorn, cover, lay over, adorn, decorate [h]; 3) say [h]; 4) spread on the ground, st/ lay/ put out [h]; 5) burn blaze, light, kindle; 6) b...	sgron pa
སྒྲོན་མ་དགུ	the nine lamps	sgron ma dgu
སྒྲོན་མ་ལྔ	five meats {sha lnga}	sgron ma lnga
སྒྲོན་མ་མཐའ་ཡས	all pervading lamp	sgron ma mtha' yas
སྒྲོན་མ་དྲུག	the Six Lamps, 1) {gnas pa gzhi'i}. 2) {tsit-ta sha'i} 3) {dkar 'jam rtsa'i} 4) {rgyang zhags chu'i} 5) {bar do dus kyi} 6) {mthar thug 'bras bu'i}	sgron ma drug
སྒྲོན་མ་དྲུག་གི	doctrine of the 6 lights (last 6 chapters of zhang zhung snyan rgyud)	sgron ma drug gi
སྒྲོན་མ་དྲུག་གི་གདམས་པ	Instructions on the Six Lights	sgron ma drug gi gdams pa
སྒྲོན་མ་རྣམ་བཞི	the four kinds of lamp [1) {thig le stong sgron} 2) {rig pa dbyings kyi sgron ma} 3) {shes rab rang byung gi sgron ma} 4) {rgyang zhag chu'i sgron ma}	sgron ma rnam bzhi
སྒྲོན་མ་སྣང་བྱེད	Illuminating lamp	sgron ma snang byed
སྒྲོན་མ་སྣང་བྱེད་རྒྱུད	Illuminating lamp tantra	sgron ma snang byed rgyud
སྒྲོན་མ་འབར་བ	the Blazing lamp GD	sgron ma 'bar ba
སྒྲོན་མ་འབར་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the shining lamp, a lamp, lantern, torch	sgron ma 'bar ba'i rgyud
སྒྲོན་མ་བཞི	four lamps [The farsighted lamp of the watery eyes {rgyangs zhag chu'i sgron ma} the lamp of emptiness which is the seminal point {thig le stong pa'i sgron ma} the lamp of the expanse of awareness ...	sgron ma bzhi
སྒྲོན་མ་གསལ་བ	the Pradipodyotana sutra. Text on Guhyasamaja tantra by Chandrakirti	sgron ma gsal ba
སྒྲོན་མའི་བསྐལ་པ	an illumined kalpa [by Buddha's teaching]	sgron ma'i bskal pa
སྒྲོན་མི་ཤིང	torch [of wood]/ cedar med. tree	sgron mi shing
སྒྲོན་མེ	butter, [butter] lamp, light, lantern, torch	sgron me
སྒྲོན་མེ་ལྟ་བུ	torch like [luminosity]	sgron me lta bu
སྒྲོན་མེ་གཟིམས་པ	the torch has died out	sgron me gzims pa
སྒྲོན་མེ་ཤིང	pinus griffithii m'clelland, picea smithiana (wall.) boiss., larix potaninii batal., SA sgron shing	sgron me shing
སྒྲོན་མེད	harmless, innoxious	sgron med
སྒྲོན་མེའི་བསྐལ་པ	the Illumined Age, an illumined aeon, a kalpa where the Precious Jewels appear	sgron me'i bskal pa
སྒྲོན་དམར	lantern, red light 637	sgron dmar
སྒྲོན་གཞི་ཁ	large estate in lhun-tse	sgron gzhi kha
སྒྲོན་ཤིང	fir tree pinus tabulaeformis carr. yew-leaf fir, pinus picea, pinus longifolia in sikkim, cedar torch, pinus silvestris, pinus picea, pine	sgron shing
སྒྲོན་ཤིང་དཀར་པོ	{sgron shing dkar po} white cedar tree	sgron shing dkar po
སྒྲོན་གསལ	{'grel pa sgron gsal} the Pradipoddyotana-Namatika]	sgron gsal
སྒྲོབ	[dignity/ haughtiness], arrogance, pride, pretentiousness, pomposity	sgrob
སྒྲོབ་ཆེ་བ	one with great airs, bumptious, pretentious person, pompous	sgrob che ba
སྒྲོབ་ཆེན	pretentiousness, selfassumption	sgrob chen
སྒྲོབ་བྱེད	be haughty/ arrogant/ proud, pretentious, pompous	sgrob byed
སྒྲོབ་རྫུ་པ	hypocrisy/ charlatanism,	sgrob rdzu pa
སྒྲོམ	stand, rack, frame, trunk, box, large leather box	sgrom
སྒྲོམ་སྐས	stairs w railings	sgrom skas
སྒྲོམ་སྐྱོར	1) wall face etc kyi zon skyor du placed shing khra dang, lcags khra'i sgrom [wood or metal lattice box?]; 2) railing[-like structure]	sgrom skyor
སྒྲོམ་ཆེ་བ	large box or chest	sgrom che ba
སྒྲོམ་ཆེན	pompous, SA sgrob chen	sgrom chen
སྒྲོམ་ཆེན་པོ	of large size/ extent	sgrom chen po
སྒྲོམ་གཏེར	kind of terma of material things, reliquary box of precious substance	sgrom gter
སྒྲོམ་སྟེགས	pylon	sgrom stegs
སྒྲོམ་དུ་བཅུག་པ	to put in a casket	sgrom du bcug pa
སྒྲོམ་མདོ	chakra of air at juncture	sgrom mdo
སྒྲོམ་བུ	1) small, casket, vessel, chest, box [eg for amulet/relic]; 2) spun bcug ste, phar 'then tshur 'tsen byed pa'i thag spyad	sgrom bu
སྒྲོམ་བུའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the box mudra	sgrom bu'i phyag rgya
སྒྲོལ	p {bsgral},, 1) free, deliver[ing], liberate[tion], save; 2) pass, cross [over], transport; 3) destroy; 4) protect	sgrol
སྒྲོལ་དཀར	white tara, goddess, personal female name	sgrol dkar
སྒྲོལ་དཀར་སྤྱན་བདུན	white Tara of the seven eyes	sgrol dkar spyan bdun
སྒྲོལ་དཀར་ཡིད་བཞིན་འཁོར་ལོ	Wishfulfilling Wheel of White Tara sgrol dkar yid bzhin 'khor lo'i sgo nas tshe	sgrol dkar yid bzhin 'khor lo
སྒྲོལ་དཀར་ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wishfulfilling Wheel of White Tara; White Tara	sgrol dkar yid bzhin gyi 'khor lo
སྒྲོལ་དཀར་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་མཆོག	purevision terma of {'bri gung chos rgyal rin chen phun tshogs}	sgrol dkar yid bzhin nor mchog
སྒྲོལ་མཁན	who carries us across	sgrol mkhan
སྒྲོལ་གིངས	killer Gings	sgrol gings
སྒྲོལ་གྲི	[ritual sword of deliverance	sgrol gri
སྒྲོལ་ཆོག	Tara practice	sgrol chog
སྒྲོལ་ལྗང	Shyamatara, Green Tara	sgrol ljang
སྒྲོལ་དུ་སྒྲིག་པ	arrange	sgrol du sgrig pa
སྒྲོལ་འདོན	depending on ko ba [hide boat/ boatmen] and boat/ship cross and get over water	sgrol 'don
སྒྲོལ་པ	to liberate	sgrol pa
སྒྲོལ་བ	to free	sgrol ba
སྒྲོལ་བ་པོ	deliverer, savior	sgrol ba po
སྒྲོལ་བའ་ཞིང་བཅུ	syn. bsgral ba'i zhing bcu; the ten subjects to be liberated, the ten subjects suitable for liberation, acc. to the {phur pa khrag 'thung rtsa ba'i rgyud} they are: 1) those who slander or dishonou...	sgrol ba' zhing bcu
སྒྲོལ་བའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhi of liberating	sgrol ba'i dngos grub
སྒྲོལ་བའི་མཉན་པ	the ferryman who carried us across	sgrol ba'i mnyan pa
སྒྲོལ་བའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of final deliverance	sgrol ba'i dbang phyug
སྒྲོལ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ	boat's oar's	sgrol ba'i shing rta
སྒྲོལ་བའི་སུལ་ཚིག་སྒྲོལ་དཀར	long life deity sgrol dkar yid bzhin 'khor lo	sgrol ba'i sul tshig sgrol dkar
སྒྲོལ་བར་བྱེད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	liberating sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge	sgrol bar byed pa'i shes rab
སྒྲོལ་བར་འོས་པ	{sems can rnams yang dag par sgrol bar 'os pa} capable of liberating all beings	sgrol bar 'os pa
སྒྲོལ་བྱེད	deliverer, boat, ship	sgrol byed
སྒྲོལ་མ	1) [deity] Tara, the Savioress, Goddess Tara [mother who saves us from the suffering of worldly existence]. 2) the consort of Amoghasiddhi	sgrol ma
སྒྲོལ་མ་དཀར་པོ	sitatara, white, chinese princess, yab is spyan ras gzigs	sgrol ma dkar po
སྒྲོལ་མ་དཀར་མོའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	sadhana of White Tara	sgrol ma dkar mo'i sgrub thabs
སྒྲོལ་མ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	Tara mandala	sgrol ma dkyil 'khor
སྒྲོལ་མ་སྐྱིད་འཛོམ	Drölma Kyidzom, wife of Dakpo Drumpa	sgrol ma skyid 'dzom
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཅན	wrathful Tara	sgrol ma khro gnyer can
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཆེ	maha tara, great goddess 638	sgrol ma che
སྒྲོལ་མ་འཇིགས་པ་བརྒྱད་སྐྱོབ	the Tara who saves from the eight fears	sgrol ma 'jigs pa brgyad skyob
སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྗང་གུ	syamatara, green, nepalese princess	sgrol ma ljang gu
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	the 21 Taras	sgrol ma nyi shu rtsa gcig
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཉེར་གཅིག	21 manifestations of goddess sgrol ma	sgrol ma nyer gcig
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཐོན	pray to Tara!	sgrol ma thon
སྒྲོལ་མ་ནོར་སྦྱིན་མ	the wealth giver	sgrol ma nor sbyin ma
སྒྲོལ་མ་དམར་མོ	red sgrol ma sgrol ma rtsa ba'i sngags kyis bstod pa Skt. Ugratara Mulamantra Stotra, T 1725 - Praises to Tara	sgrol ma dmar mo
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཞལ་ཟས་མ	a deity	sgrol ma zhal zas ma
སྒྲོལ་མ་ཞི་མ	sgrol ma in mild aspect sgrol ma g.yul zlog - the Tara who wards off invasions sgrol ma la phyag 'tshal nyi shu rtsa gcig	sgrol ma zhi ma
གིས་བསྟོད་པ	the praise through homage / salutation to the twenty-one Taras	gis bstod pa
སྒྲོལ་མ་གསུང་བྱོན་མ	a Tara statue who spoke	sgrol ma gsung byon ma
སྒྲོལ་མ་གསོང་བྱོན་མ	a deity	sgrol ma gsong byon ma
སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང	Netang Drölma Lhakang; Netang Drölma Lhakang was the main residence of Jowo Atisha in Tibet, and the place where he died in 1054	sgrol ma lha khang
སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་མོ	Tara Goddess. 'Divine Savioress.' A important female bodhisattva of compassion, the one who takes beings across the ocean of samsara. There are twenty-one forms of Tara while the most popular are t...	sgrol ma lha mo
སྒྲོལ་མའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	Tara sadhana	sgrol ma'i sgrub thabs
སྒྲོལ་ལམ	path of liberation	sgrol lam
སྒྲོལ་ཤེར	abbr of sgrol ma 'don rgyu and shes rab snying po	sgrol sher
སྒྲོལ་ཤེས་འཕྲུལ་བོན	bon of magic power who knows how to perform the rites of destruction, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis	sgrol shes 'phrul bon
སྒྲོས	1) talk, discussion, conversation, way of speaking; 2) scar; 3) lips, words; 4) manner, way, custom	sgros
སྒྲོས་བཏགས	exaggerated	sgros btags
སྒྲོས་བཏགས་ཆོས	dharmas that are supposed to exist	sgros btags chos
སྒྲོས་བཏགས་པ	see {sgro 'dogs}	sgros btags pa
སྒྲོས་དག	perfect	sgros dag
སྒྲོས་འདོགས་པ	see {sgro 'dogs}	sgros 'dogs pa
སྒྲོས་པ	quality, essence	sgros pa
སྒྲོས་མི་འདོགས	cannot be cloaked	sgros mi 'dogs
སྒྲོས་མེད	inexpressible	sgros med
སྒྲོས་དམར	red lips	sgros dmar
གརྒྱུད	tantra	grgyud
དརྒོས	best, most noble	drgos
བརྒགས	(not in DAS)	brgags
བརྒད་པ	smile, smile on, SA bgad pa	brgad pa
བརྒལ	1) dispute, controversy; 2) cross over; 3) [pass] beyond, transcend [p {rgal}; 3) [go] over, beyond, surpass[ing], exceed[ing]	brgal
བརྒལ་དཀའ་བ	hard to cross, the ocean	brgal dka' ba
བརྒལ་བསྐྱོད	passing	brgal bskyod
བརྒལ་འགྲོ	boat	brgal 'gro
བརྒལ་བརྟག	1) [put to the] test; 2) examine refute another's thesis w scripture and reasoning	brgal brtag
བརྒལ་བརྟག་རྩོད་པ་བྱས	test, examine	brgal brtag rtsod pa byas
བརྒལ་ནས	to cross over	brgal nas
བརྒལ་པ	enjoined, asked, censured	brgal pa
བརྒལ་བ	1) controversy, dispute; 2) disagree, cross over, transcend, [go] beyond [p f]; 3) surpass[ing], exceed[ing]/ [p f rgal ba, rgol ba]	brgal ba
བརྒལ་བའི་དུས་སྐབས	transition period	brgal ba'i dus skabs
བརྒལ་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unfordable river or lake	brgal mi thub pa
བརྒལ་ལན	objection and reply	brgal lan
བརྒལ་ལན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	to resolve contradictory opinions	brgal lan gyi sgo nas
བརྒལ་ལན་གྱི་རྣམ་གཞག	presentation of objection and reply	brgal lan gyi rnam gzhag
བརྒལ་ལེན	controversy, disputation	brgal len
བརྒལ་ཤིང་བརྟག་པ	dispute and examine	brgal shing brtag pa
བརྒུལ	discipline	brgul
བརྒོལ	dispute, SA rgol ba	brgol
བརྒོལ་བ	disagree, act in opposition, be disposed to contrariety	brgol ba
བརྒྱ	100, complete, utter	brgya
བརྒྱ་སྐོར	about 100	brgya skor
བརྒྱ་ཁ་གཅིག་ཆད	1 short of 100, failing by a small margin	brgya kha gcig chad
བརྒྱ་ཁ་གཅིག་ཆོད	cutting 100 with one cut	brgya kha gcig chod
བརྒྱ་ཁག	100	brgya khag
བརྒྱ་འཁོར	century	brgya 'khor
བརྒྱ་གོ་གཅིག་ཆོད	accomplish 100 things w 1 act, kill many birds w 1 stone	brgya go gcig chod
བརྒྱ་གྲོང	place of a hundred	brgya grong
བརྒྱ་འགྱུར	a hundred fold, many fold	brgya 'gyur
བརྒྱ་འགྱུར་དུ	100/ many fold	brgya 'gyur du
བརྒྱ་བརྒྱ་སྟོང་སྟོང	hundreds and hundreds, thousands and thousands [many] brgya lnga bcu pa zhes bya ba'i bstod pa hundred fifty verses of praise	brgya brgya stong stong
བརྒྱ་བཅུ	80	brgya bcu
བརྒྱ་ཆ	one hundredth part, percentage, percent	brgya cha
བརྒྱ་ཆ་ལྔ་བཅུ	fifty percent	brgya cha lnga bcu
བརྒྱ་ཆ་གཅིག	one percent	brgya cha gcig
བརྒྱ་ཆ་བཅུ	ten percent	brgya cha bcu
བརྒྱ་ཆ་གཉིས	two percent	brgya cha gnyis
བརྒྱ་ཆ་གསུམ	3	brgya cha gsum
བརྒྱ་ཆའི་གྲངས་ཀ	%	brgya cha'i grangs ka
བརྒྱ་ཆའི་རྟགས	% sign	brgya cha'i rtags
བརྒྱ་ཆའི་བསྡུར་ཚད	%	brgya cha'i bsdur tshad
བརྒྱ་ཆའི་འཕུར་ཆག་གི་གྲངས་ཀ	index [of prices etc]	brgya cha'i 'phur chag gi grangs ka
བརྒྱ་ཆའི་ཟིན་ཚད	%	brgya cha'i zin tshad
བརྒྱ་མཆོད	hecatomb of 100 lamps, 100 offerings	brgya mchod
བརྒྱ་མཆོད་ཕུལ་བ	to offer a hundred lamps	brgya mchod phul ba
བརྒྱ་སྟོང	1) many many. 2) hundred and thousand. 3) hundred thousand	brgya stong
བརྒྱ་སྟོང་ཁྲི་འབུམ	one hundred or one thousand or ten thousand or one hundred thousand	brgya stong khri 'bum
བརྒྱ་སྟོང་མང་པོ	thousands of	brgya stong mang po
བརྒྱ་ཐམ་པ	full one hundred, 100	brgya tham pa
བརྒྱ་ཐེམ་པ	100, being full, the limit of a 100 having been reached	brgya them pa
བརྒྱ་དང་བརྒྱད	108	brgya dang brgyad
བརྒྱ་དང་སྟོང་གི་ཆ	100,000th part 639	brgya dang stong gi cha
བརྒྱ་དོད	remuneration to 100 monks for conducting a service	brgya dod
བརྒྱ་འདངས	about a hundred, nearly 100	brgya 'dangs
བརྒྱ་འདངས་པ་ཙམ	about or nearly one hundred	brgya 'dangs pa tsam
བརྒྱ་པ	Syn	brgya pa
བརྒྱ་པོ	consisting of 100	brgya po
བརྒྱ་དཔོན	1) leader of 100; 2) Phreng ba'i mdud pa 'dzin byed nam, thod lcog ???	brgya dpon
བརྒྱ་ཕྱག	100 prostrations [way of punishment or homage]	brgya phyag
བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་གཉིས	1,200	brgya phrag bcu gnyis
བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་ཉི་ཤུ་པ	20th century	brgya phrag nyi shu pa
བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་སྟོང	100,000	brgya phrag stong
བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་ཐལ་བ	over a hundred	brgya phrag thal ba
བརྒྱ་འཕར་ཙམ	more than 100	brgya 'phar tsam
བརྒྱ་བམ	a package of 100	brgya bam
བརྒྱ་བྱིན	lha dbang brgya byin - Mighty Indra	brgya byin
རྒྱ་བྱིན	one of the {phyogs skyong bcu} the ten guardians of the directions; Shakra [the lord of the gods]; Indra	rgya byin
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་དཀར་མོ་དོམ་མགོ་མ	Indr, white, w the head of a brown bear	brgya byin dkar mo dom mgo ma
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་རྐང་འཐུང	shug pa ???	brgya byin rkang 'thung
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་སྐྱེས	raven	brgya byin skyes
ཏུ་སྤྲུལ	Shakra appeared as an emaciated demon	tu sprul
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་གྲོང	residence of indra, celestial metropolis	brgya byin grong
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་དོམ་གདོང	brown bearheaded Indrani, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	brgya byin dom gdong
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་སྤོས	aa ru ra	brgya byin spos
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་སྤྱི་བོ	ant hill, ant's foot	brgya byin spyi bo
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་སྤྲོས	delight of indra, myrabalan arjuna	brgya byin spros
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་མ	celestial queen, wife of indra, (names include 'chi med dbang mo, lha'i btsun mo, legs brjod ma, dbang chen ma, pu lo'i sras mo, bde sogs ma) brgya byin tshangs pa sogs lha rnams Shakra, Brahma, an...	brgya byin ma
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་གཞུ	the bow of Indra, the rainbow	brgya byin gzhu
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལ་འོས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	suitable even for Shakra, king of the gods	brgya byin la 'os pa lta bu
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལ་སོགས་པ	Indra and the other gods	brgya byin la sogs pa
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་བཤད	(mngon owl	brgya byin bshad
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལྷ་ཡི	mtho ris rgyal, lha yi rgyal po, 'jer 'jigs, lha'i rnga can, gtsang byed mgon po, rdo rje can, stobs ldan dgra bo, lha yi bdag, 'chi med rgyal po, legs bris gtso, grags pa'i mu khyud, mchod sbyin b...	brgya byin lha yi
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལྷ་ཡི་དབང་པོའི་མིང	names of indra (mtho ris 'dren pa brgya 'bul stong 'bul mang po byed pa las - than hundreds or thousands of offerings brgya sbyin la sogs phyogs skyong bcu Indra and the other ten World Guardians	brgya byin lha yi dbang po'i ming
བརྒྱ་ཙམ	about one hundred	brgya tsam
བརྒྱ་རྩ	brgya tsar te grangs brgya phyag ... the 100 tormas	brgya rtsa
བརྒྱ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	108	brgya rtsa brgyad
བརྒྱ་རྩ་གཅིག	101	brgya rtsa gcig
བརྒྱ་ཚོ་རྒན་པོ	formerly under a daong??? leader 'go byed mkhan	brgya tsho rgan po
བརྒྱ་འཛིན	that contains 100 objects	brgya 'dzin
བརྒྱ་བཞི	four hundreds offering [lamps, food, tsa tsa, and ngar mi or dri glud de bzhi po so so nas by offering 100 each brgya rtsa re la ritual for eliminating obstacles] brgya bzhi'i cho ga mdo sngags zun...	brgya bzhi
སྒྲིགས་ཆོག་ཏུ་བཀོད་པ	rA ga a sya mchog nyid kyis mdzad pa	sgrigs chog tu bkod pa
བརྒྱ་ཟུར	divided into 100 parts	brgya zur
བརྒྱ་ལ	[even] if rgya brgya lam? [also means this?]	brgya la
བརྒྱ་ལམ	1) main street, road. 2) one in a hundred; rare	brgya lam
བརྒྱ་ལམ་ན་དཀའ་བ	rare	brgya lam na dka' ba
བརྒྱ་ལམ་ཙམ	{mi lus thob pa brgya lam tsam} to gain this human body is one chance in a hundred	brgya lam tsam
བརྒྱ་ལོར	formerly 100 silver srang shog lor	brgya lor
བརྒྱ་ཤི་སྟོང་ལང	100 fall 1000 more rise	brgya shi stong lang
བརྒྱ་ཤེས་གཅིག་རྡུགས	knowing hundred things but lacking one	brgya shes gcig rdugs
བརྒྱ་ཤོག	group of 100	brgya shog
བརྒྱ་ཤོག་ཚོང་རོགས	company	brgya shog tshong rogs
བརྒྱ་ཤོད	abacus	brgya shod
བརྒྱ་བཤིག་སྟོང་འགུགས	getting rid of 100 attracts 1000	brgya bshig stong 'gugs
བརྒྱག	cast, throw, build, do [f {rgyag}	brgyag
བརྒྱག་ཁ	combinations	brgyag kha
བརྒྱག་གིས་བསྒྱུར་བ	possible combinations	brgyag gis bsgyur ba
བརྒྱག་བརྔན	bon god, SA lha bsangs	brgyag brngan
བརྒྱག་པ	ft. of {rgyag pa} 640	brgyag pa
བརྒྱགས	1) provisions, food supply, staples; 2) cast, threw, built, did [p {rgyags}	brgyags
བརྒྱགས་གྲབས་གྱིས་ཤིག	prepare provisions	brgyags grabs gyis shig
བརྒྱགས་བརྔན	[=rgyags rngan] ???	brgyags brngan
བརྒྱགས་ཐེས	provisions	brgyags thes
བརྒྱགས་དང་བཅས་བསྐྱལ་ལོ	provisions and other necessaries are sent	brgyags dang bcas bskyal lo
བརྒྱགས་པ	swollen {nga dregs dang sdig pas brgyags pa} swollen with evil pride and power	brgyags pa
བརྒྱགས་ཕྱེ	foodstuffs, provisions for a journey	brgyags phye
བརྒྱགས་ཕྱེར་ཁག་བཞག་པ	to entrust the provisions and tsampa to a friend	brgyags phyer khag bzhag pa
བརྒྱང	extend, SA brgyang ba, stretch, SA rgyong ba	brgyang
བརྒྱང་བ	will call pull, fill, strike [f rgyong ba]	brgyang ba
བརྒྱང་ཤིང	1) instrument of punishment; 2) 'khums pa 'then byed kyi brgyang shing	brgyang shing
བརྒྱངས	p. of {rgyangs} blocked	brgyangs
བརྒྱངས་སྐམ	brgyangs te skam bcug pa	brgyangs skam
བརྒྱངས་པ	pulled, filled, struck [p rgyong ba]	brgyangs pa
བརྒྱངས་ཕྱག	full prostration	brgyangs phyag
བརྒྱངས་ཤད	rkang lag sogs bsnar brgyangs byed pa'i don	brgyangs shad
བརྒྱད་ཀག	a reproach, rebuke	brgyad kag
བརྒྱད་བཀག	rebuke, reproof, reflection on one's conduct	brgyad bkag
བརྒྱད་བཀུག	thread in eight-fold twists	brgyad bkug
བརྒྱད་སྐྱེད	a kind of bu lon gyi skyed kha: ngo bo for each 50 silver srang each year, custom of giving 8 skyed srang]	brgyad skyed
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི	80,000	brgyad khri
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་ལྔ་སྟོང	695	brgyad khri lnga stong
བཅུ་གོ་ལྔ	85	bcu go lnga
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང་གི་ཆོས	84,000 teachings	brgyad khri bzhi stong gi chos
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང་པོ	eighty four thousand entries	brgyad khri bzhi stong po
བརྒྱད་གྲི	80,000	brgyad gri
བརྒྱད་དགུ་འགྲོ	kind of custom of bu lon gyi skyed kha, whose nature was that for each 100 'bru khal brgyad la skyed 'bru khal 1.	brgyad dgu 'gro
བརྒྱད་འགྱུར	eightfold	brgyad 'gyur
བརྒྱད་བརྒྱ	800	brgyad brgya
བརྒྱད་ཅན	eightfold	brgyad can
བརྒྱད་ཅུ	eighty	brgyad cu
བརྒྱད་བཅུ	80	brgyad bcu
བརྒྱད་བཅུ་འཇལ	payment in 80-fold for stolen property of the clergy	brgyad bcu 'jal
བརྒྱད་ཆ་ལྔ	five eighths	brgyad cha lnga
བརྒྱད་ཆུང	a kind of inferior tea	brgyad chung
བརྒྱད་གཉིས	8th and 28th days of month	brgyad gnyis
བརྒྱད་གཏོར	8th day torma	brgyad gtor
བརྒྱད་སྟོང	8,000	brgyad stong
བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས	Digest of the Prajnaparamita in Eight Thousand Verses	brgyad stong don bsdus
བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ	Eight Thousand Verses; prajnaparamita in eight thousand verses; (T 12)	brgyad stong pa
བརྒྱད་སྟོན	festival on the 8th lunar day of the month	brgyad ston
བརྒྱད་སྣེའི་དམག	sngar bod sa gnas su khral zhing 'don brgyad dam rkang bcu drug rer dmag mi gcig re 'khri srol gyi	brgyad sne'i dmag
བརྒྱད་བསྣོལ	to be at odds with	brgyad bsnol
བརྒྱད་པ	8th	brgyad pa
པ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	{brgyad pa thams cad kyi snying po bsdus pa yid bzhin nor bu brgyad pa thams cad kyi snying po bsdus	pa yid bzhin nor bu
བརྒྱད་པའི་ཆུ་སྐར	8th dbugs thob nyin de nas for 7 days skar ma ri shi mchar zhing chu kun by changing into amrita, chur zhugs na sickness and evil deeds and obscurations 'dag thub zer, khyim zhag nyi bar gyi tshad ...	brgyad pa'i chu skar
བརྒྱད་པའི་ས	'bras bu dang po'i rgyun zhugs zhugs pa'i lam mam mngon rtogs te mthong lam bzod pa brgyad thob pa'i lam yin pa 'di ni dman pa'i sa brgyad kyi nang tshan sa gsum pa'o,... 8th bhumi	brgyad pa'i sa
བརྒྱད་པར	at eight o'clock	brgyad par
བརྒྱད་པོ	the eight, all eight	brgyad po
བརྒྱད་འབུམ	800,000	brgyad 'bum
བརྒྱད་བཞོགས་མ	8 sided ornament, vessel, etc.	brgyad bzhogs ma
བརྒྱད་ཟིལ	Gyezil Dzong	brgyad zil
བརྒྱད་བསླས	rope woven from 8 smaller cords	brgyad bslas
བརྒྱད་ལྷག	eight in excess (rosary has 108 beads)	brgyad lhag
བརྒྱན	[will] ornament[ed], adorn[ed], decorate[d] [p f {rgyan}	brgyan
བརྒྱན་དགོད་པ	arrange ornaments, decorate, adorn, construct or adjust grammatical forms	brgyan dgod pa
བརྒྱན་པ	will adorn[ed]/ decorate[d]/ provide[d] w [p f rgyan pa]	brgyan pa
བརྒྱན་པར་བྱེད	adorn, decorate, provide with	brgyan par byed
བརྒྱན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to adorn, decorate, enhance, ornament, beautify, embellish, grace	brgyan par byed pa
བརྒྱན་པོ	festoon	brgyan po
བརྒྱན་མི་ཚུགས	cannot be improved	brgyan mi tshugs
བརྒྱན་ཚུགས	{bzang pos brgyan mi tshugs} cannot be improved by something good	brgyan tshugs
བརྒྱབ	will cast, throw, build, do [f {rgyag}, {rgyab}?]	brgyab
བརྒྱབ་འགལ	counter/ contrary to	brgyab 'gal
བརྒྱབ་བཅུས	kind of phyur ba ???	brgyab bcus
བརྒྱབ་པ	cast, threw, built [p {rgyag pa}	brgyab pa
བརྒྱབས	p. of {rgyag} and {rgyab}	brgyabs
བརྒྱར	(not in DAS)	brgyar
བརྒྱར་གྱེས	the river Shita	brgyar gyes
བརྒྱལ	faint, become unconscious	brgyal
བརྒྱལ་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	swum	brgyal rgyab zin pa
བརྒྱལ་བ	faint/ unconsciousness; to faint/ fall unconscious	brgyal ba
བརྒྱལ་བོག	faint, become unconscious	brgyal bog
བརྒྱལ་བོག་པ	laid prostrate and unconscious	brgyal bog pa
བརྒྱལ་གཟེར	bug/worm in the blood nadis of the brain [well known disease arising from 'khrugs pa. Symptoms: bad headache sudden fainting, so 'cha' zhing lbu sob can vomiting.	brgyal gzer
བརྒྱལ་སངས	regain consciousness	brgyal sangs
བརྒྱས	by the 100	brgyas
བརྒྱིངས	poised toward	brgyings
བརྒྱུ་བ	[f rgyu]	brgyu ba
བརྒྱུག་པ	ft. of {rgyug pa}	brgyug pa
བརྒྱུགས	race, running a race	brgyugs
བརྒྱུགས་པ	made speed/ gallop [tha dad par p rgyug pa]	brgyugs pa
བརྒྱུངས་པ	the marrow in the backbone	brgyungs pa
བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	indirect primary cause	brgyud kyi rgyu
བརྒྱུད་སྐུལ	brgyud nas skul ma byed pa,...Khong ngo ma ma phrad kyang brgyud skul byas yod,	brgyud skul
བརྒྱུད་ཁུངས	continuous cave	brgyud khungs
བརྒྱུད་ཁྲིད	lineage tri [explanation/ instructions passed down through the lineage	brgyud khrid
བརྒྱུད་གྱི་གསུམ་བླ་མ	gurus of the three lineages	brgyud gyi gsum bla ma
བརྒྱུད་འགལ	indirect oppositeness	brgyud 'gal
བརྒྱུད་འགལ་གཉིས	the two kinds of indirect opposites/ contradictions	brgyud 'gal gnyis
བརྒྱུད་རྒྱུ	indirect cause [one of the {..z skyed byed kyi rgyu}, its own fruition indriectly producing de, that is not itself, but indierectly through something else as a previous fire somewhere else might be...	brgyud rgyu
བརྒྱུད་བརྒྱུགས	a continuous succession	brgyud brgyugs
བརྒྱུད་བསྒྲགས	relayed/ transmi[t a] [ed] broadcast	brgyud bsgrags
བརྒྱུད་ཅན	belong to a family, possessed of descendants, fruitful	brgyud can
བརྒྱུད་ཐོ	lineage list	brgyud tho
བརྒྱུད་དེ	via	brgyud de
བརྒྱུད་འདེབས	lineage supplication	brgyud 'debs
བརྒྱུད་འདྲན	1 of sku sras brgyad	brgyud 'dran
བརྒྱུད་འདྲེན	lead continuously from 1 thing to the next	brgyud 'dren
བརྒྱུད་ནས	indirectly, via, through, by way of	brgyud nas
བརྒྱུད་ནས་བརྒྱུད་དུ	from generation to generation	brgyud nas brgyud du
བརྒྱུད་ནས་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན	rnam grangs brjod pa'i rgyan ???	brgyud nas brjod pa'i rgyan
བརྒྱུད་ནས་གཏོང་བ	transmit	brgyud nas gtong ba
བརྒྱུད་ནས་འདེམས་པ	indirect suffrage	brgyud nas 'dems pa
བརྒྱུད་ནས་རྩུབ་པ	indirect harsh words 642	brgyud nas rtsub pa
བརྒྱུད་ནས་སོང་བ	traversing	brgyud nas song ba
བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage (of transmission)	brgyud pa
བརྒྱུད་པ་དགུ	the 9 lineages	brgyud pa dgu
བརྒྱུད་པ་དགུ་ལྡན	ninefold transmission, nine lineages. To be endowed with the sixfold transmission means the mind, sign, and oral transmissions; as well as the transmissions of compassionate blessings, of dakini ma...	brgyud pa dgu ldan
བརྒྱུད་པ་བཅས་པའི་བླ་མ	lineage masters	brgyud pa bcas pa'i bla ma
བརྒྱུད་པ་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 generations	brgyud pa bcu gsum
བརྒྱུད་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	three great transmissions	brgyud pa chen po gsum
བརྒྱུད་པ་དྲུག	the six lineages	brgyud pa drug
ཨཝརེནེསས	holders, 3) and aural lineage of mundane individuals [1) rgyal ba dgongs pa'i brgyud pa, 2) rig 'dzin brda'i brgyud pa dang, 3) gang zag snyan khung gi brgyud pa] (those three ordinary lineages of ...	awareness
བརྒྱུད་པ་དྲུག་ལྡན	the six transmissions [of Kama and Terma in the Nyingma Tradition]: {rgyal ba dgongs brgyud, rig 'dzin brda brgyud, gang zag snyan brgyud, bka' babs lung bstan, smon lam dbang bskur, mkha' 'gro gta...	brgyud pa drug ldan
བརྒྱུད་པ་རྣམ་ལྔ	the five lineages	brgyud pa rnam lnga
བརྒྱུད་པ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	5 schismatic successions among Indian Buddhists	brgyud pa rnam pa lnga
བརྒྱུད་པ་སྤེལ	increase the breed/ stock	brgyud pa spel
བརྒྱུད་པ་འཛིན་པ	succeed	brgyud pa 'dzin pa
བརྒྱུད་པ་གཞན་གྱིས་ཆོད་པ	{de dang khyed tsho'i bar na nga ma gtogs brgyud pa gzhan gyis chod pa med} Between him and yourselves in the	brgyud pa gzhan gyis chod pa
ལིནེཨགེ་ཐེརེ་ཨིས་ནོ	one but me	lineage there is no
བརྒྱུད་པ་བཞི	1) {bka'i brgyud pa}. 2) {tshig gi brgyud pa} 3) {brda'i brgyud pa} 4) {byin rlabs gyi brgyud pa}	brgyud pa bzhi
བརྒྱུད་པ་གསུམ	three lineages	brgyud pa gsum
ལིནེཨགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨཝརེནེསས	holders, and aural lineage of mundane individuals	lineage of awareness
གྱི་གྱའ་ཡིས་མ་གོས་པ	whose lineage is like a golden chain untarnished by any variance with the samayas	gyi gya' yis ma gos pa
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བཀའ་བབས	lineage transmission	brgyud pa'i bka' babs
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བཀའ་སྲོལ་དྲུག	Six Lineage Traditions. The buddha's mind lineage, the vidyadhara's sign lineage, the oral lineage of great masters, the dakini's entrustment lineage, the empowered aspiration lineage, the yellow p...	brgyud pa'i bka' srol drug
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བཀའ་སྲོལ་གསུམ	the three lineages of the tradition; 1) {zhal nas gsungs pa'i bka' ma} 2) {rjes su gnang ba'i gter ma} 3) {byin gyis brlabs pa'i dag snang}	brgyud pa'i bka' srol gsum
བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཉམས་མྱོང	indirect experience	brgyud pa'i nyams myong
བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཉེ་དུ	collateral relatives	brgyud pa'i nye du
བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཉེར་ལེན	proliferation of the lineage [rang gi rdzas rgyun du rdzas su gtso bor brgyud nas skyed byed de, not actually producing the fruition but indirectly by another cause, indirectly eg, as later firewoo...	brgyud pa'i nyer len
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བར་མ་ཆད་པ	unbroken transmission / lineage	brgyud pa'i bar ma chad pa
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བྱིན་རླབས	the blessings of the lineage [mastery]	brgyud pa'i byin rlabs
བརྒྱུད་པའི་བླ་མ	the masters of the lineage	brgyud pa'i bla ma
བརྒྱུད་པའི་གཞུང	1) the handed-down texts. 2) principal texts of the lineage	brgyud pa'i gzhung
བརྒྱུད་པའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	the history of transmission	brgyud pa'i lo rgyus
བརྒྱུད་པའི་གསོལ་འདེབས	lineage supplication/ prayer	brgyud pa'i gsol 'debs
བརྒྱུད་པར	continually	brgyud par
བརྒྱུད་སྤྲོད	transmission	brgyud sprod
བརྒྱུད་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	pass, pass on	brgyud sprod byed pa
བརྒྱུད་འཕེལ་བ	increase the race or progeny, multiply, increase the family	brgyud 'phel ba
བརྒྱུད་བྱང	lineage record; account of transmission line	brgyud byang
བརྒྱུད་འབོད་ཁ་པར	public telephone	brgyud 'bod kha par
བརྒྱུད་འབྲས	indirect effect [eg, as the last instant of a thing is an indirect effect of the first, with a lot of other causes and effects between]	brgyud 'bras
བརྒྱུད་མ	one belonging to a family, scion, one well acquainted with the secrets, well informed, fruitful, fertile	brgyud ma
བརྒྱུད་མ་རྒྱབ་པ	perpetuate family lineage	brgyud ma rgyab pa
བརྒྱུད་མར	continuously	brgyud mar
བརྒྱུད་མར་འཇུག་པ	continuously	brgyud mar 'jug pa
བརྒྱུད་མར་མཐུད	one moment after the other	brgyud mar mthud
བརྒྱུད་རྩ	heir, successor, inheritor	brgyud rtsa
བརྒྱུད་འཚོང	distribution/ sales via state companies	brgyud 'tshong
བརྒྱུད་འཛིན	lineage holder/ successor/ followers	brgyud 'dzin
བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་ཆོས་བདག	the master who hold the linear transmission	brgyud 'dzin chos bdag
བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་བུ	followers of the lineage	brgyud 'dzin bu
བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་བླ་མ	lineage masters, master who upholds the transmission	brgyud 'dzin bla ma
བརྒྱུད་གཟུང་མཁན	successor	brgyud gzung mkhan
བརྒྱུད་བཟང	good breeding stock	brgyud bzang
བརྒྱུད་ཡས	a number	brgyud yas
བརྒྱུད་ཡིག	record of lineages	brgyud yig
བརྒྱུད་རིམ	the line of transmission	brgyud rim
བརྒྱུད་ལམ	medium	brgyud lam
བརྒྱུད་ལུགས	manner of transmission	brgyud lugs
བརྒྱུད་ཤུལ	inheritance, legacy	brgyud shul
བརྒྱུད་ཤོག	invoice, voucher, bill of lading	brgyud shog
བརྒྱུད་བཤད	indirect explanation/ expression, brda sprod [grammar? explanation etc]	brgyud bshad
བརྒྱུད་སྲོལ	lineage, particular line of transmission	brgyud srol
བརྒྱུད་སྲོལ་ཟིན་པ	inherited the lineage	brgyud srol zin pa
བརྒྱུད་གསུམ	three transmissions	brgyud gsum
བརྒྱུད་གསུམ་གྱི་བླ་མ	gurus of the three lineages	brgyud gsum gyi bla ma
བརྒྱུད་གསུམ་བླ་མ	teachers of the three lineages	brgyud gsum bla ma
བརྒྱུད་གསུམ་བླ་མ་རྣམས	the lamas, masters of the three transmissions	brgyud gsum bla ma rnams
བརྒྱུན	continuity	brgyun
བརྒྱུར་བཀོད	change, alteration, revision, reconstruction, transformation	brgyur bkod
བརྒྱུར་བཀོད་གཏོང	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform	brgyur bkod gtong
བརྒྱུར་བཀོད་བྱེད	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform	brgyur bkod byed
བརྒྱུས	past of rgyu	brgyus
བརྒྱུས་པ	threaded [a thread]	brgyus pa
བརྒྱོ	have sexual intercourse, SA rgyo ba	brgyo
བརྒྱོས	have sexual intercourse, SA rgyo ba 'rga dang 'chi ba - old age and death	brgyos
བལྒོ་བ	soil, stain, defile	blgo ba
བསྒག	make one swear, SA sgog pa	bsgag
བསྒག་པ	SA 'gegs pa, sgog pa	bsgag pa
བསྒགས	make one swear, SA sgog pa	bsgags
བསྒགས་པ	pf. of {sgag pa}	bsgags pa
བསྒང	grow or become full, point of time, moment, instant, conjunction, SA sgang, dngos gzhi	bsgang
བསྒངས	[f sgong] will make dough balls, gather into a mass, conceal	bsgangs
བསྒངས་པ	form into	bsgangs pa
བསྒབ་པ	pf. of {sgab pa}; ft. of {sgab pa}	bsgab pa
བསྒབས	covered, skirt [p {sgab pa} = {'gebs pa}	bsgabs
བསྒར	fix	bsgar
བསྒར་བ	boil down, turn on a lathe. [p f sgar ba, sgor ba ???]	bsgar ba
བསྒུག	fut. of {sgugs} lie in wait	bsgug
བསྒུག་པ	to wait for; ft. of {sgug pa}	bsgug pa
བསྒུགས	wait, SA sgug pa, past of sgug	bsgugs
བསྒུགས་པ	[p {sgugs} lay in wait	bsgugs pa
བསྒུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས་ཅན	subject of the thesis to be established [= dharmin, chos can]	bsgub bya'i chos can
བསྒུར་བ	pf. of {sgur ba}; ft. of {sgur ba}	bsgur ba
བསྒུལ	quake, shake, move, SA sgul ba	bsgul
བསྒུལ་བསྐྱོད	tremulous, shake, tremble	bsgul bskyod
བསྒུལ་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད་པ	move, shake, put in motion	bsgul bskyod byed pa
བསྒུལ་པ	shake, tremble, quake, quiver, SA sgul ba	bsgul pa
བསྒུལ་བ	[p f of {sgul} move, shake, put in motion	bsgul ba
བསྒུལ་ཤུགས	moving/ driving/ motivating force, energy	bsgul shugs
བསྒོ	say, SA sgo ba	bsgo
བསྒོ་གྱུར་གྱི་ལྷག་མ་བཞི	the four excellent ones to be listened to [among the {dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum}, dbyen byed pa dang, de rjes phyogs pa dang, khyim sun 'byin pa dang, bka' blo mi bde ba bzhi	bsgo gyur gyi lhag ma bzhi
བསྒོ་བ	to soil, stain, defile	bsgo ba
བསྒོ་བ་བསྒོས་པ	1) explain what is to be explained; 2) instruct	bsgo ba bsgos pa
བསྒོ་བ་བཅག་པ	disobey, disregard directions	bsgo ba bcag pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	listen to directions, do as directed	bsgo ba rjes su 'jug pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྣ་ལ་གཟོན་པ	not listening to instructions or directions	bsgo ba rna la gzon pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྣམ་པ	sdes, dge 'dun gnas brtan gyis) or (slob dpon gyis, mkhan pos, dge 'dun) or (dge 'dun, gang zag gis, so sor thar pas)	bsgo ba rnam pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of commands to be listened to (those of the sangha, section of the sangha, or senior member of the sangha Or sangha, loppon, and khenpo	bsgo ba rnam pa gsum
བསྒོ་བ་རྣར་མི་ཉན་པ	not listen to instructions	bsgo ba rnar mi nyan pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྣར་གཟོན	in one ear and out the other	bsgo ba rnar gzon
བསྒོ་བ་རྣར་གཟོན་པ	not listen to instructions	bsgo ba rnar gzon pa
བསྒོ་བ་རྣར་གཟོན་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of not listening to instructions [one of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, dge 'dun gyis phyir bcos la dgod pa'i ched du ltung ba gleng ba na not as they have heard giving another...	bsgo ba rnar gzon pa'i ltung byed
བསྒོ་བ་མི་ཉན	disobeying	bsgo ba mi nyan
བསྒོ་བ་མི་ཉན་པ	not listening to instructions or directions	bsgo ba mi nyan pa
བསྒོ་བ་བཞིན་ཉན	follow, do as directed	bsgo ba bzhin nyan
བསྒོ་བ་བཞིན་ཉན་པ	listen to or act as directed or ordered	bsgo ba bzhin nyan pa
བསྒོ་བ་བཞིན་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས	put the instructions into practice	bsgo ba bzhin nyams su blangs
བསྒོ་བ་ལ་མི	not to act according to instruction	bsgo ba la mi
བསྒོ་བ་ལ་མི་ཉན་པ	breach of religious discipline	bsgo ba la mi nyan pa
བསྒོ་ཚིག	words of precepts	bsgo tshig
བསྒོ་ཡས	a number	bsgo yas
བསྒོ་ཡིག	letter/ document of command	bsgo yig
བསྒོང	make round balls of dough, SA sgong ba	bsgong
བསྒོང་བ	ft. of {sgong ba}	bsgong ba
བསྒོངས	make round balls of dough, SA sgong ba, form into, SA bsgangs pa	bsgongs
བསྒོངས་པ	[p sgong ba]	bsgongs pa
བསྒོམ	[f {sgom} will practice/ acquaint/ meditate on	bsgom
བསྒོམ་སྐྱེས	arisen from meditation	bsgom skyes
བསྒོམ་ཁོག	sadhana text /structure	bsgom khog
བསྒོམ་རྒྱུ	meditation object, something to be cultivated	bsgom rgyu
བསྒོམ་རྒྱུ་ཅི་ཡང་མེད	there is nothing to be meditated on	bsgom rgyu ci yang med
བསྒོམ་སྒྲུབ	meditation practice	bsgom sgrub
བསྒོམ་ཉམས	meditation experience	bsgom nyams
བསྒོམ་ཉམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to rive rise to meditation experience	bsgom nyams bskyed pa
བསྒོམ་དུ་མེད་པ	SA bsgom med	bsgom du med pa
བསྒོམ་དུ་ཡོད་མེད	whether or not it is necessary to meditate	bsgom du yod med
བསྒོམ་དོན་གྲུབ་པའི་ལུང	Meditation Accomplishment Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	bsgom don grub pa'i lung
བསྒོམ་འདོད	urge to meditate	bsgom 'dod
བསྒོམ་ནུས	capacity to meditate	bsgom nus
བསྒོམ་པ	ft. of {sgom pa}; cultivation, meditation, meditational development; to train, visualize, imagine, practice; contemplating	bsgom pa
བསྒོམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great meditation, state of total meditation 645	bsgom pa chen po
བསྒོམ་པ་ཐབས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	depending on the skillful means of meditation	bsgom pa thabs la brten pa
བསྒོམ་པ་དོན་གྲུབ	1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	bsgom pa don grub
བསྒོམ་པ་བྱུང་བ	sprung from contemplation	bsgom pa byung ba
བསྒོམ་པ་མེད་པ	without being cultivated in meditation	bsgom pa med pa
བསྒོམ་པ་ཡིན་མིན	space meditation without doubts	bsgom pa yin min
བསྒོམ་པ་ཡིན་མིན་མེད་པའི་ཀློང	1 of klong dgu	bsgom pa yin min med pa'i klong
བསྒོམ་པ་ལ་དགའ་བ	delighting in contemplation	bsgom pa la dga' ba
བསྒོམ་པ་ལ་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna resulting from meditation	bsgom pa la byung ba'i shes rab
བསྒོམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང	arising from meditation	bsgom pa las byung
བསྒོམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	praj¤ resulting from meditating bsgom pa las byung pa'i sems kyis so sor	bsgom pa las byung pa'i shes rab
བརྟག་པ	individual examination arising from meditation bsgom pa las byung pa'i bsod nams bya	brtag pa
བའི་དངོས་པོ	merit which comes from meditation; 1) of the {bsod nams bya ba'i dngos po bzhi} = four kinds of merit	ba'i dngos po
བསྒོམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from meditating training	bsgom pa las byung ba
བསྒོམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna resulting from meditating bsgom pa las byung ba'i bsod nams bya	bsgom pa las byung ba'i shes rab
བསྒོམ་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the practice in which you are experienced / used to / trained in	bsgom pa'i rnal 'byor
བསྒོམ་པའི་དབང	the empowerment of meditator (that of Ratnasambhava	bsgom pa'i dbang
བསྒོམ་པའི་རིམ་པ	practice steps	bsgom pa'i rim pa
བསྒོམ་པའི་ལམ	path of development, path of meditation	bsgom pa'i lam
བསྒོམ་པའི་ལམ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 paths of meditation	bsgom pa'i lam bcu gcig
བསྒོམ་པས་སྤང་བར་བྱ་བ	to be discard through the path of cultivation	bsgom pas spang bar bya ba
བསྒོམ་བྱ	meditation object; that to be cultivated	bsgom bya
བསྒོམ་བྱ་སྒོམ་བྱེད	meditator and meditation object	bsgom bya sgom byed
བསྒོམ་བྱའི་ཆོས	dharmas to be meditated on	bsgom bya'i chos
བསྒོམ་བྱའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi to be practiced	bsgom bya'i ting nge 'dzin
བསྒོམ་བྱའི་ལམ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 paths to be meditated on [one yongs su rtogs pa'i lam dang 3??? path arising from rtzol ba, four producing complete enlightenment, five mngon par rtogs pa la sbyor ba'i lam, six mngon par rt...	bsgom bya'i lam bcu gcig
བསྒོམ་བྱུང	generated by meditation	bsgom byung
བསྒོམ་བྱུང་ཤེས་རབ	knowledge, prajna resulting from meditation	bsgom byung shes rab
བསྒོམ་མ་པའི་རྟགས་ཚད་ལྔ	the five signs of meditation	bsgom ma pa'i rtags tshad lnga
བསྒོམ་མ་མྱོང	never having meditated	bsgom ma myong
བསྒོམ་མི་དགོས	w/o need to be meditated (upon, w/o need of meditation	bsgom mi dgos
བསྒོམ་མིན	flawed ways of meditation practice	bsgom min
བསྒོམ་མེད	non-meditation	bsgom med
བསྒོམ་མེད་ཆོས་སྐུའི་རྒྱལ་ས	Dharmakaya throne of non- meditation	bsgom med chos sku'i rgyal sa
བསྒོམ་མེད་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	luminous continuity of non-meditation	bsgom med 'od gsal gyi 'khor lo
བསྒོམ་དམིགས་ཀྱི་གདིང་ཤོར་བ	loose the confidence of 1's visualization	bsgom dmigs kyi gding shor ba
བསྒོམ་དམིགས་ཀྱི་གདེངས་ཤོར་བ	to loose the confidence of one's visualization	bsgom dmigs kyi gdengs shor ba
བསྒོམ་ཞེས་བྱའོ	this is "meditating"	bsgom zhes bya'o
བསྒོམ་བཟླས	recital of mantra	bsgom bzlas
བསྒོམ་ཡེངས་འདས་པ	beyond meditation and distraction	bsgom yengs 'das pa
བསྒོམ་རིམ་གསལ་འདེབས	reminder for the meditation steps	bsgom rim gsal 'debs
བསྒོམ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	to persevere in meditation training	bsgom la brtson pa
བསྒོམ་ལམ	the paths of meditation (the five paths {lam lnga}	bsgom lam
བསྒོམ་ལུང	general name of a category of Ch'an texts in Tibetan	bsgom lung
བསྒོམས	meditated [p {sgom}	bsgoms
བསྒོམས་སྟོབས	power of meditation [special qualities arising from meditation]	bsgoms stobs
བསྒོམས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ	knowledge that results from practice	bsgoms stobs kyi shes rab
བསྒོམས་པ	SA sgom pa, bsgom pa, to imagine	bsgoms pa
བསྒོམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང	arise from meditation	bsgoms pa las byung
བསྒོམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from practice	bsgoms pa las byung ba
བསྒོམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna born of meditation bsgoms pa las byung ba'i bsod nams bya	bsgoms pa las byung ba'i shes rab
བསྒོམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ལྷའི་མིག	the divine eye resulting from meditation	bsgoms pa las byung ba'i lha'i mig
བསྒོམས་པའི་ལམ	path of practice	bsgoms pa'i lam
བསྒོམས་པར་ཐོབ་པའི་ལམ	the path of accomplishment in meditation	bsgoms par thob pa'i lam
བསྒོམས་པར་བྱ	cultivate! should cultivate	bsgoms par bya
བསྒོམས་པས	by means of cultivating	bsgoms pas
བསྒོམས་པས་སྤང་བར་བྱ་བ	that to be abandoned by meditation	bsgoms pas spang bar bya ba
བསྒོམས་པས་སྤང་བྱ	discards through cultivation	bsgoms pas spang bya
བསྒོམས་པས་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	to become enlightened through cultivation	bsgoms pas 'tshang rgya ba
བསྒོམས་པས་རིམ་གྱིས	by graded meditation, gradual heightened awareness 646	bsgoms pas rim gyis
བསྒོམས་བྱ	object of cultivation/ object	bsgoms bya
བསྒོམས་བྱུང	1) prajna arisen from meditation; 2) arise[n] from meditation	bsgoms byung
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་གི་རྟོག་པ	conceptions/ thoughts arising in meditation	bsgoms byung gi rtog pa
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་གི་རྟོགས་པ	realization that results from meditation training	bsgoms byung gi rtogs pa
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna arising from meditation	bsgoms byung gi shes rab
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ	virtuous born from practice	bsgoms byung dge ba
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom / original wakefulness resulting from meditation training	bsgoms byung ye shes
བསྒོམས་བྱུང་བསོད་ནམས	merit from meditation training	bsgoms byung bsod nams
བསྒོས	commanded, instructed [p {sgo}	bsgos
བསྒོས་པ	pf. of {sgo ba}	bsgos pa
བསྒོས་བ	advice, instructions, commanded [p sgo ba]	bsgos ba
བསྒྱགས	recite, read aloud	bsgyags
བསྒྱིང	[f {sgying} will yawn, gape, stretch out the arms and legs	bsgying
བསྒྱིངས	yawn, gape, SA sgying ba	bsgyings
བསྒྱིངས་པ	yawner	bsgyings pa
བསྒྱུར	1) changed; 2) transformed; 3) turned; 4) averted; 5) banished; 6) performed; 7) translated, interpreted; 8) accomplished [p f {sgyur}	bsgyur
བསྒྱུར་བཀོད	change, alteration, revision, reconstruction, transformation	bsgyur bkod
བསྒྱུར་བཀོད་གཏོང	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform	bsgyur bkod gtong
བསྒྱུར་བཀོད་བྱེད	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform [old tradition to fit new situation]	bsgyur bkod byed
བསྒྱུར་བཀོད་མ་སོང་བ	unmodified, unaltered, uncorrected	bsgyur bkod ma song ba
བསྒྱུར་སྐྲུན	change, alteration, revision, reconstruction, transformation [of old tradition to fit new situation]	bsgyur skrun
བསྒྱུར་སྐྲུན་གཏོང	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform	bsgyur skrun gtong
བསྒྱུར་སྐྲུན་བྱེད	change, alter, revise, reconstruct, transform [old tradition to fit new situation]	bsgyur skrun byed
བསྒྱུར་གྲངས	product [math]	bsgyur grangs
བསྒྱུར་བཅོས	reform, retranslation	bsgyur bcos
བསྒྱུར་བཅོས་འགྲོ	be reformed, retranslated * changed, transformed	bsgyur bcos 'gro
བསྒྱུར་བཅོས་བྱེད	to change, reform, transform	bsgyur bcos byed
བསྒྱུར་ཏེ	interpreted	bsgyur te
བསྒྱུར་དེབ	book that was or is to be translated	bsgyur deb
བསྒྱུར་པ	pf. of {sgyur ba}	bsgyur pa
བསྒྱུར་བ	change, alter, transformation, transforming, multiply in arithmetic, convert, multiply, increase, SA sgyur ba, to dominate, to divert	bsgyur ba
བསྒྱུར་བ་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	covert intention in respect to changing [a famous yi ge ngan pa little known profound meaning ston byed du bsgyur ba, like "snying po med" as "snying por" essenceless to essence]	bsgyur ba ldem dgongs
བསྒྱུར་བ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	[TRS 1344] expl	bsgyur ba ldem por dgongs pa
བསྒྱུར་བ་ལ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	covert intention in respect of interpretation	bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa
བསྒྱུར་བའི་གནས	place of changing	bsgyur ba'i gnas
བསྒྱུར་བོན	translation b"n [From king {khri srong lde'u btzan} to {glang dar ma} panditas sham thabs sngon po can &, rgyal ba'i byang chub zer ba and {gshen sgur klu dga'} etc. nang pa'i chos lugs khag B"n tr...	bsgyur bon
བསྒྱུར་བྱང	bka' bstan mjug gi lo ts'as bsgyur rabs ???	bsgyur byang
བསྒྱུར་མིང	1) changed/ tr name/ word; 2) words w = meaning in different languages	bsgyur ming
བསྒྱུར་མེད	nothing to transform	bsgyur med
བསྒྱུར་རྩིས	multiplication	bsgyur rtsis
བསྒྱུར་ཝར་སླ	easily swayed, changeable, tractable	bsgyur war sla
བསྒྱུར་གཞི	power [math]	bsgyur gzhi
བསྒྱུར་གཞི་ཉིས་རྩིས	square [math]	bsgyur gzhi nyis rtsis
བསྒྱུར་གཞི་སུམ་རྩིས	cube [math]	bsgyur gzhi sum rtsis
བསྒྱུར་བཟོ	change, alter, revise, transform, reconstruct	bsgyur bzo
བསྒྱུར་ཡས	a number	bsgyur yas
བསྒྱུར་ཡིག	tr text	bsgyur yig
བསྒྱུར་བཤད་སྒོམ་གསུམ	translation, teaching and practice	bsgyur bshad sgom gsum
བསྒྱུས	join together, strung	bsgyus
བསྒྱུས་པ	sung, joined together	bsgyus pa
བསྒྱེལ	turn upside down, throw down, SA sgyel ba	bsgyel
བསྒྱེལ་བ	pf. of {sgyel ba}; ft. of {sgyel ba}	bsgyel ba
བསྒྱོང	fill, SA sgyong	bsgyong
བསྒྱོངས	fill, SA sgyong ba	bsgyongs
བསྒྲག	call, SA sgrog pa	bsgrag
བསྒྲག་ཐོ	proclamation [written]	bsgrag tho
བསྒྲག་པ	ft. of {sgrog pa}	bsgrag pa
བསྒྲག་ཕྲང	a jong in tibet	bsgrag phrang
བསྒྲག་ཡིག	proclamation [written]	bsgrag yig
བསྒྲགས	read/ shouted aloud, said, proclaimed	bsgrags
བསྒྲགས་ཀྱི་ཡང་རྫོང	Drag Yangdzong	bsgrags kyi yang rdzong
བསྒྲགས་གཏམ	[by country/ party/ organization a main or important meaning skor yongs grags su bsam 'char bshad nas dril bsgrags dang 'bod skul byed pa'i] proclamation, manifesto, declaration, pronouncement	bsgrags gtam
བསྒྲགས་པ	sung, diffused	bsgrags pa
བསྒྲགས་པ་སྐོར་གསུམ	Bon text	bsgrags pa skor gsum
བསྒྲགས་ཚིག	notice, notification	bsgrags tshig
བསྒྲགས་ཡིག	notice, notification	bsgrags yig
བསྒྲང	to measure	bsgrang
བསྒྲང་པ	enumerate, count up, cause to grow cold	bsgrang pa
བསྒྲང་བ	[f sgrong ba], enumerate, count up, cause grow cold	bsgrang ba
བསྒྲངས	enumerate, SA sgrang ba	bsgrangs
བསྒྲངས་པ	pf. of {sgrong ba}; to calculate	bsgrangs pa
བསྒྲད	1) spread wide apart, spread apart, open wide, [standing with the legs] apart. {rkang pa bgrad de bsdad} sat with his legs spread apart 2) put sideways. See also {bgrad}	bsgrad
བསྒྲད་པ	open wide, SA bgrad pa	bsgrad pa
བསྒྲམ་ཟིན་པ	wound	bsgram zin pa
བསྒྲལ	have crossed over	bsgral
བསྒྲལ་མཆོད	bsgral ba - bsgral ba'i	bsgral mchod
མཆོད་པ	bsgral bstab - liberation offering; liberation offering ceremony	mchod pa
བསྒྲལ་སྟོབ	liberation and the placing	bsgral stob
བསྒྲལ་བསྟབ	bsgral mchod - bsgral ba bsgral ba'i mchod pa - liberation offering; bsgral zhing bstab pa - To liberate and to place	bsgral bstab
བསྒྲལ་བསྟབ་རོལ་གསུམ	destroying him, offering him, and turning him into an object of enjoyment	bsgral bstab rol gsum
བསྒྲལ་བ	pf. of {sgrol ba}; ft. of {sgrol ba}; (to perform the act of) liberation; "liberated" (killed); to liberate; deliver, liberate destruction, to destroy, slay, surmount obstacles	bsgral ba
བསྟབ	liberation offering	bstab
བསྒྲལ་བའི་མཆོད་པ	bsgral mchod bsgral ba - bsgral bstab - liberation offering	bsgral ba'i mchod pa
བསྒྲལ་བའི་ཞིང་བཅུ	ten subjects suitable/ suitable subjects for liberation	bsgral ba'i zhing bcu
བསྒྲལ་བའི་ཞིང་བཅུར་གྱུར་བ	be[come] included within the 10 fields of destruction	bsgral ba'i zhing bcur gyur ba
བསྒྲལ་བའི་ལས་བྱས	Performing the liberation activity	bsgral ba'i las byas
བསྒྲལ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ	boat, oar of a boat	bsgral ba'i shing rta
བསྒྲལ་བྱ	that from which one is to be liberated; who are to be delivered 648	bsgral bya
བསྒྲལ་དབང	empowerment for the deliverance ritual	bsgral dbang
བསྒྲལ་དམིགས	destruction visualization	bsgral dmigs
བསྒྲལ་ཞིང་བསྟབ་པ	bsgral bstab - To liberate and to place	bsgral zhing bstab pa
བསྒྲལ་ཡས	numerical figure	bsgral yas
བསྒྲལ་ལས	kill an enemy by wrathful application of the karma of destroying	bsgral las
བསྒྲིག	come together, will arrange/ compile [f sgrig]	bsgrig
བསྒྲིག་པ	ft. of {sgrig pa}	bsgrig pa
བསྒྲིགས	see {bsgrigs pa}	bsgrigs
བསྒྲིགས་པ	to set in place/ up	bsgrigs pa
བསྒྲིགས་བཙུགས	organization	bsgrigs btsugs
བསྒྲིན་པ	[f p sgrin pa]	bsgrin pa
བསྒྲིན་མི་ཕོད	cannot compete, is not a match for	bsgrin mi phod
བསྒྲིབ	darken, obscure, SA sgrib pa	bsgrib
བསྒྲིབ་པ	to (be) obscure(d)/ veil(ed)/ conceal(ed)/ hidden; isc. to (be) affect(ed)	bsgrib pa
བསྒྲིབ་པ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	obscured neutral [phenomenon]; opp {ma bsgrib pa lung ma bstan} non-obscured neutral [phenomenon]	bsgrib pa lung ma bstan
བསྒྲིབ་བྱ	that which obscures	bsgrib bya
བསྒྲིབ་བྱེད	the obscuring	bsgrib byed
བསྒྲིབ་ལ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{khams gong ma gnyis kyi nyon mongs pa thams cad ni bsgrib la lung ma bstan yin te rgyud ting nge 'dzin gyis khyab pas nyon mongs de dag gis rnam smin yid du mi 'ong ba 'byin mi nus pa'i phyir mi dge	bsgrib la lung ma bstan
སིནཅེ་ཨོནེའས་སྟྲེཨམ	of-being is embraced by samadhi, these disturbing emotions are unable to yield unpleasant ripenings and are, therefore, not nonvirtues.	since one's stream
བསྒྲིབས	clouded, stupefied, obscured, enveloped, veiled, covered, hid/hidden, concealed, masked, shrouded, cloaked, enshrouded	bsgribs
བསྒྲིབས་པ	pf. of {sgrib pa}; covered over	bsgribs pa
བསྒྲིབས་པའི་ལུང་དུ་མི་སྟོན་པ	abstain from obscure predictions	bsgribs pa'i lung du mi ston pa
བསྒྲིབས་པར་བྱས་པ	covered	bsgribs par byas pa
བསྒྲིབས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	= not destined to have the kleshas ???, the kleshas of the form and formless realms 'phags lam gyi gegs su gyur pas zag med = ma bsgribs pa and by not producing the fruition of suffering, not unhap...	bsgribs lung ma bstan
བསྒྲིམ	twist, SA sgrim pa, to remain vigilant, focused, straighten, to sharpen, to concentrate	bsgrim
བསྒྲིམ་ཆེས་པ	Careful, cautious	bsgrim ches pa
བསྒྲིམ་སྟེ་ལྟོས་ལ་ཤོག	observe sharply	bsgrim ste ltos la shog
བསྒྲིམ་པ	[f sgrim pa] will [tightly] hold, squeeze, concentrate (the mind	bsgrim pa
བསྒྲིམས	attention/ endeavor, make it a point/ be careful to; tight; if one holds [the mind]	bsgrims
བསྒྲིམས་ཏེ	concentrated; x {rab tu bsgrims te chos nyon cig} be completely concentrated; that is the way to listen to the teaching	bsgrims te
བསྒྲིམས་ཏེ་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	forceful squeezing attention; 'squeezing' attention, concentrated attention, forceful squeezing attention	bsgrims te 'jug pa'i yid byed
བསྒྲིམས་པ	pf. of {sgrim pa}	bsgrims pa
བསྒྲིལ	combined; in unison, combined	bsgril
བསྒྲིལ་ཅིང་འཁོད་པ	[arch] bde bzhin gnas pa	bsgril cing 'khod pa
བསྒྲིལ་ཐུམ	bundle, package	bsgril thum
བསྒྲིལ་ཐུམ་བྱེད	make/ wrap up a bundle, package	bsgril thum byed
བསྒྲིལ་བ	ft. & pf. of {sgril ba}; to unite, concentrate; to roll up, plaited. Comp {sgril ba}, {'gril ba}	bsgril ba
བསྒྲུག	collect, SA sgrug pa, future of sgrug	bsgrug
བསྒྲུག་པ	[f sgrug pa]	bsgrug pa
བསྒྲུགས་པ	collect, SA sgrug pa	bsgrugs pa
བསྒྲུང	mix, SA sgrung ba	bsgrung
བསྒྲུང་བ	ft. of {sgrung ba}	bsgrung ba
བསྒྲུངས	mix, SA sgrung ba	bsgrungs
བསྒྲུངས་པ	pf. of {sgrung ba}	bsgrungs pa
བསྒྲུན	resound, SA sgrun pa	bsgrun
བསྒྲུན་པ	pf. of {sgrun pa}; ft. of {sgrun pa}	bsgrun pa
བསྒྲུན་ཟླ	rival, match	bsgrun zla
བསྒྲུབ	will accomplish, realize, apply, attain, practice [f sgrub]	bsgrub
བསྒྲུབ་རྒྱུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞི	the four mandalas to be practiced	bsgrub rgyu'i dkyil 'khor bzhi
བསྒྲུབ་ཆོས	the Dharma that attains' syn {sgrub byed kyi chos} the Dharma which brings forth attainment	bsgrub chos
བསྒྲུབ་མཆོད	practice/ establish the mandala and make offerings [bdag mdun bum gsum bsgrub pa'o]	bsgrub mchod
བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་སྟེར	grant to be established	bsgrub tu ster
བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་མེད	cannot be realized	bsgrub tu med
བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་མེད་པ	nothing/ not something to be achieved	bsgrub tu med pa
བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་མཚུངས་པ	n equal in being established	bsgrub tu mtshungs pa
བསྒྲུབ་རྟེན	support of a practice (i.e. long life pills)	bsgrub rten
བསྒྲུབ་ཐབས	method of accomplishment; sadhana; usually {sgrub thabs}	bsgrub thabs
བསྒྲུབ་སྡེ	meditation center	bsgrub sde
བསྒྲུབ་པ	realization, practice, worship, the attainments, establishment, proof [f sgrub pa]	bsgrub pa
བསྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་བཞུགས་པ	residing in [...], engaged in spiritual practice	bsgrub pa la bzhugs pa
བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ངོ་བོ་བཅུ	the 10 essences of establishment	bsgrub pa'i ngo bo bcu
བསྒྲུབ་པའི་དངོས་པོ་བཞི	4 expedients by which sentient beings feel themselves attracted	bsgrub pa'i dngos po bzhi
བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོས	lung gi chos kyi dgongs don ltar sgrub pa nyams len byas nas rgyud la nyams rtogs skye ba'i chos	bsgrub pa'i chos
བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 branches of sadhanas	bsgrub pa'i yan lag bco brgyad
བསྒྲུབ་པའི་རིགས	developed lineage	bsgrub pa'i rigs
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱ	are realized through practice, you should accomplish	bsgrub par bya
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱ་བ	to be attained	bsgrub par bya ba
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱ་བ་ལྔ	the five to be attained [the components, elements,	bsgrub par bya ba lnga
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཆོས	1) the teaching to be practiced; 2) a phenomenon	bsgrub par bya ba'i chos
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to accomplish	bsgrub par byed pa
བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པའི་རིག་པ	valid means of cognition	bsgrub par byed pa'i rig pa
བསྒྲུབ་བའི་ཆོས	predicate of the probandum, predicate	bsgrub ba'i chos
བསྒྲུབ་བོ	accomplish, realize	bsgrub bo
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ	probandum [ggd]	bsgrub bya
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་སྐྱོན་མེད་པ	faultless thesis [depending on a true reason, it can be established, eg sound is impermanent] bsgrub bya sgrub byed gnyis ka ldog pa	bsgrub bya skyon med pa
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་ལྟར་སྣང	though by rtags sbyor it is maintained that the thesis is established dharma and dharmin {chos dang chos can} do not accord or because they are ruled out by perceptual pramana etc., the thesis cann...	bsgrub bya ltar snang
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་དམ་བཅས	to assert strongly, hold tenaciously/ assertively that sometthing (the probandum) is the case. [mss]	bsgrub bya dam bcas
བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་ལྡོག་པ་མེད་པ	among the {chos mi mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang lnga}, {gtan tsigs rig pa}'i sbyor ba way of establishing gyi an example w an incompatible dharma {chos mi mthun pa'i dpe}, since it cannot refute the t...	bsgrub bya ldog pa med pa
དང་ཆོས་ཅན་གྱི་ཚོགས་དོན	a thesis combining dharma and dharmin in which the three modes are complete and which can b established	dang chos can gyi tshogs don
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་སྐྱོན	fault of the thesis	bsgrub bya'i skyon
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	the four distinctions of the probandum bsgrub bya'i rgyal po che ba rang la rnyed - The supreme king of attainments is discovered within yourself	bsgrub bya'i khyad par bzhi
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ངོ་བོ	{nyams len thams cad kyi bsgrub bya'i ngo bo} the essence of what has to be realized at all stages of practice	bsgrub bya'i ngo bo
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས	property of the probandum [ggd]	bsgrub bya'i chos
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	depending on the sgrub byed "sound is impermanent" etc. of 1 bsgrub bya'i chos la dngos and two shugs kyi bsgrub bya'i, of those two different kinds of dharma chos kyi khyad par, the first is imper...	bsgrub bya'i chos kyi khyad par
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས་ཅན	subject of the thesis, subject	bsgrub bya'i chos can
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས་ཅན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	thesis's dharmin does not exist [eg "the dharmin the horns of a rabbit are impermanent."]	bsgrub bya'i chos can ma grub pa
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not establish the dharma to be proved [w a meaning not in accord w the establishing reason, in the case of proving sound is impermanent, like a long pillar, which is not a sound]	bsgrub bya'i chos ma grub pa
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་དོན་མེད་པ	nonexistence of the subject	bsgrub bya'i don med pa
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་གཞི	the subject of the thesis	bsgrub bya'i gzhi
བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་སངས་རྒྱས	a buddhahood to be attained	bsgrub bya'i sangs rgyas
བསྒྲུབ་བྱིའི་དོན	the thesis to be established	bsgrub byi'i don
བསྒྲུབ་བྱེད	establish establishing	bsgrub byed
བསྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	establishing reason	bsgrub byed kyi rigs pa
བསྒྲུབ་མེད་རྩལ་སྤྲུགས་ཆེན་པོ	the unestablished great abruptness	bsgrub med rtsal sprugs chen po
བསྒྲུབ་གཞི	1) object of practice; 2) goal to be accomplished; 4) subject of a thesis to be proved [= dharmin, eg sound in sound is impermanent	bsgrub gzhi
བསྒྲུབ་གཞི་བསླབ་བྱ	ruler to be observed	bsgrub gzhi bslab bya
བསྒྲུབ་ལ་མཁས	skilled in obtaining	bsgrub la mkhas
བསྒྲུབས་པ	achievement [p sgrub pa	bsgrubs pa
བསྒྲུབས་པའི་ཁྱད་ཡོང	there will be some advantage in accomplishing it	bsgrubs pa'i khyad yong
བསྒྲུབས་པའི་རིགས	1) kinds of proof; 2) establishing reasoning	bsgrubs pa'i rigs
བསྒྲུབས་པའི་ལྷ	the deity he accomplished / realized	bsgrubs pa'i lha
བསྒྲུམ	(not in DAS)	bsgrum
བསྒྲུས	blend	bsgrus
བསྒྲེ	repeat, SA sgre ba	bsgre
བསྒྲེ་བ	[f sgre ba]	bsgre ba
བསྒྲེང	raise, lift, SA sgreng ba, uplifted, hoisted, SA btsugs pa	bsgreng
བསྒྲེང་དུ་གསོལ	please hoist [the banner]	bsgreng du gsol
བསྒྲེང་བ	[f sgreng ba] lift, hoist	bsgreng ba
བསྒྲེངས	[p {sgreng} lift, hoist	bsgrengs
བསྒྲེངས་རྒུད	lift and decline	bsgrengs rgud
བསྒྲེངས་པ	[p {sgreng} lift, hoist	bsgrengs pa
བསྒྲེངས་བྱའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	flag that is to be hoisted	bsgrengs bya'i rgyal mtshan
བསྒྲེས	old, aged	bsgres
བསྒྲེས་པ	(to) decay	bsgres pa
བསྒྲེས་ཡས	a number	bsgres yas
བསྒྲོ	debate, SA sgro ba	bsgro
བསྒྲོ་གླེང	discussion	bsgro gleng
བསྒྲོག	fut. of {sgrog}	bsgrog
བསྒྲོག་པ	alt. ft. of {sgrog pa}	bsgrog pa
བསྒྲོགས	call. tie/ chain [p {sgrog}	bsgrogs
བསྒྲོགས་པ	alt. pf. of {sgrog pa}	bsgrogs pa
བསྒྲོད	p. of {sgrod} travel; imp. of {bsgrad pa}	bsgrod
བསྒྲོད་དཀའ་འཁྱོགས་ཀྱི་རི	inaccessible mountain	bsgrod dka' 'khyogs kyi ri
བསྒྲོད་འདོད	will to go	bsgrod 'dod
བསྒྲོད་པ	travel[ler] [p f sgrod pa]	bsgrod pa
བསྒྲོད་བྱ་མིན་པ	unsuitable for sex	bsgrod bya min pa
བསྒྲོད་མིན་གནས	to have sex in an improper place	bsgrod min gnas
བསྒྲོན	cover, light, SA sgron pa, past of sgron	bsgron
བསྒྲོན་པ	pf. of {sgron pa}; ft. of {sgron pa}	bsgron pa
བསྒྲོས	debate, SA sgro ba	bsgros
ང	1) NGA; 2) numerical particle for 50s]	nga
ང་རྐྱང་པ	alone	nga rkyang pa
ང་སྐྱེས	born from speech	nga skyes
ང་ཁོ་ན	only myself, I alone	nga kho na
ང་ཁོ་ན་བསམ	think of 1self alone	nga kho na bsam
ང་ཁོམ	I am versed in	nga khom
ང་ཁྱོད	self and other	nga khyod
ང་མཁྱེན	recognize me	nga mkhyen
ང་གི་ལྷ	{'jam sbyangs dang dbyangs can ma} la'd??	nga gi lha
ང་གི་ལྷ་མོ	??	nga gi lha mo
ང་གེ་ངོ་གེ	unclear speech	nga ge ngo ge
ང་དགུ	59	nga dgu
ང་འགྱོད་པ་བསྐྱེད	I felt regret	nga 'gyod pa bskyed
ང་རྒྱལ	1) pride, egocentric pride, arrogance, conceit, egocentricity, egotism, one of {rtsa nyon drug}. 2) the Iprinciple, literally 'I-king,'. pride; assurance; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rang dang yon ta...	nga rgyal
སེམས་ཁེངས་པ	khengs pa dang dregs pa ste, rang nyid khyad du 'phags par rlom zhing, gzhan la ma gus pa dang sdug bsngal 'byung ba'i rten byed pa rtsa nyon drug gi nang gses shig/ 'jig tshogs la lta ba la brten ...	sems khengs pa
ང་རྒྱལ་སྐྱེ	be arrogant/ conceited/ proud/ agrssive/ competitive	nga rgyal skye
ང་རྒྱལ་སྐྱེད	be arrogant/ conceited/ proud/ agrssive/ competitive	nga rgyal skyed
ང་རྒྱལ་སྐྱེད་པ	be proud	nga rgyal skyed pa
ང་རྒྱལ་ཁེངས་དྲེགས	conceit, pride	nga rgyal khengs dregs
ང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་གླང་བུ་རོག་པོ	khengs dregs can gyi mi glang nag po'i gzugs su bkod pa	nga rgyal gyi glang bu rog po
ང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་དབང	through the power of pride	nga rgyal gyi dbang
ང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་དབང་གིས	in consequence of pride	nga rgyal gyi dbang gis
ང་རྒྱལ་ཅན	proud/ arrogant people [syn: khengs ldan dang, khengs pa, rgyags pa, nga ldan, snyems pa, dregs ldan, dregs pa]	nga rgyal can
ང་རྒྱལ་ཅན་དང་བཅོམ་པ	subdue the arrogant ones	nga rgyal can dang bcom pa
ང་རྒྱལ་གཅོག་པ	break another's pride, humble	nga rgyal gcog pa
ང་རྒྱལ་ཆག་པ	humiliation, breaking one's pride	nga rgyal chag pa
ང་རྒྱལ་ཆེ་བ	puffed up with pride	nga rgyal che ba
ང་རྒྱལ་འཇོམས་པ	humiliate, humble, break the pride of	nga rgyal 'joms pa
ང་རྒྱལ་སྙེམས་པས	puffed up with pride	nga rgyal snyems pas
ང་རྒྱལ་བརྟན་པ	firm pride; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 108]	nga rgyal brtan pa
ང་རྒྱལ་བརྟན་པོ	firm pride; in development stage: Not ordinary pride, but the unshakable confidence that results in complete identification with the deity, and the certainty of being one with the deity's primordia...	nga rgyal brtan po
ང་རྒྱལ་དང་བཅས་པ	be conceited, arrogant	nga rgyal dang bcas pa
ང་རྒྱལ་དང་བྲལ	free of pride	nga rgyal dang bral
ང་རྒྱལ་དྲུག	six types of pride 1) {lhag pa'i nga gyal} excessive pride 2) {nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal} overbearing pride 3) {nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal}	nga rgyal drug
ང་རྒྱལ་བདུན	the seven types of arrogance. 1) {nga rgyal tsam}. 2) {che ba'i nga rgyal} 3) {nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal} 4) {nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal} 5) {mngon pa'i nga rgyal} 6) {cung zar snyam pa'i nga r...	nga rgyal bdun
ང་རྒྱལ་སྤངས	never be proud	nga rgyal spangs
ང་རྒྱལ་སྤངས་པ	to have relinquished pride	nga rgyal spangs pa
ང་རྒྱལ་སྤངས་པ་ཕྱགས་དར་ལྟ་བུ	to cast off all pride, like a sweeper	nga rgyal spangs pa phyags dar lta bu
ང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱོད་པ	involved / indulging in pride, proud	nga rgyal spyod pa
ང་རྒྱལ་ཕྲ་བ	subtle arrogance	nga rgyal phra ba
ང་རྒྱལ་བ	to be arrogant, proud	nga rgyal ba
ང་རྒྱལ་བྱ	becoming conceited	nga rgyal bya
ང་རྒྱལ་མང་བ	to be very proud	nga rgyal mang ba
ང་རྒྱལ་མེད་པ	not proud, humble, not proud	nga rgyal med pa
ང་རྒྱལ་བཟུང	keep the pride of ..	nga rgyal bzung
ང་རྒྱལ་རིགས	to look proud	nga rgyal rigs
ང་རྒྱལ་རློམ	arrogant and proud	nga rgyal rlom
ང་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཀྱང	supreme pride	nga rgyal las kyang
ང་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཀྱང་ང་རྒྱལ	{bdag bas lhag pa las kyang bdag lhag go snyam pa} overbearing / extreme / exceeding pride, pride greater than pride, pride from thinking one is superior to one's superiors, one of the {nga rgyal d...	nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal
ང་རྒྱལ་གསལ་སྣང	as an antidote for ordinary attachment, the pride of thinking I am really such and such a god of the time of fruition &, the environment and inhabitants' gsal snang goms par byed pa	nga rgyal gsal snang
ང་རྒྱལ་གསུམ	three type of pride #	nga rgyal gsum
ང་བརྒྱད	58	nga brgyad
ང་ངུར	duck species, anas casarca	nga ngur
ང་ངེད	I [myself]	nga nged
ང་ལྔ	55	nga lnga
ང་ཅག	we, us, ourselves. Syn {nga tsho}; we, us, ourselves. Syn {nga tsho}; we, us, ourselves. Syn {nga tsho}	nga cag
ང་ཅག་ཡིན	we are	nga cag yin
ང་ཅག་ལ་ཡོད	we have	nga cag la yod
ང་ཅན	my	nga can
ང་ཅན་དུ	with me, in my possession	nga can du
ང་གཅིག	51	nga gcig
ང་ཆེ་ང་བཙན	say no one is greater/ more powerful than me, egotism	nga che nga btsan
ང་ཉིད	I myself 652	nga nyid
ང་གཉིས	2	nga gnyis
ང་གཉིས་མཉམ་དུ	we [two together]	nga gnyis mnyam du
ང་གཉིས་མཉམ་དུ་བསྡད་ཡོད	we two are staying together	nga gnyis mnyam du bsdad yod
ང་ལྟ་བུ་དག	my equals	nga lta bu dag
ང་མཐོ་ན	when I am high, when I rise in position	nga mtho na
ང་དག	we two	nga dag
ང་དང་ཁྱོད་གཉིས	between you and I	nga dang khyod gnyis
ང་དང་ང་འདྲ	me and those like me	nga dang nga 'dra
ང་དང་ང་ཡིར	me and mine	nga dang nga yir
ང་དང་ངའི་ཤེས་བྱ་བ	"I" and its knowable objects	nga dang nga'i shes bya ba
ང་དང་བདག	I and me	nga dang bdag
ང་དང་ཕྲད་པ་རང་གིས	by the mere meeting with me	nga dang phrad pa rang gis
ང་དེས་ཆོག	that is enough for me	nga des chog
ང་དྲེགས	pride {nga dregs dang sdig pas brgyags pa} swollen with evil pride and power	nga dregs
ང་བདག	pride ego, I & ego	nga bdag
ང་བདག་གི་འཛིན་སྟངས་དམ	the tight grip of the ego	nga bdag gi 'dzin stangs dam
ང་བདག་གི་འཛིན་སྟངས་དམ་པོ	the tight grip of ego	nga bdag gi 'dzin stangs dam po
ང་བདག་གཟུང་བ	conceives of an I & and ego	nga bdag gzung ba
ང་བདུན	57	nga bdun
ང་བདེ་སྟེ	as I am quite happy	nga bde ste
ང་བདེ་པོ་ཡོད	I am well	nga bde po yod
ང་བདེན་ང་ཡུས	rang nyid yang dag pa dang bya ba mang po bsgrubs yod ces 'khang ra byed pa	nga bden nga yus
ང་འདི་ལྟར་ཡིན	such as this I am	nga 'di ltar yin
ང་འདྲ་མ	likeness, statue looking like the person himself (especially Guru Rinpoche, a deity	nga 'dra ma
ང་ནི	I, as far as I am concerned	nga ni
ང་རྣམས	we	nga rnams
ང་སྤངས	to have relinquished egoclinging, abbr. of {nga 'dzin spangs pa}	nga spangs
ང་ཕོད	district in kong po	nga phod
ང་ཕོད་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	{nga phod rdo rje rgyal po [kong yul du skyes, man ju rgyal rabs kyis jun gar dus zing lhing 'jags su gtong dus khos byas rjes bzhag pa'i rkyen gyis pe tshes zhes pa'i go	nga phod rdo rje rgyal po
ང་བ	smelling, {dri nga ba}	nga ba
ང་མིན་ཁོ་ཡིན	rang khag gzhan dkri,...Rang 'khri'i las 'gan bzhag nas nga min kho yin gyi khag 'dogs sha stag byas pa	nga min kho yin
ང་མིན་སུ་ཡིན	CM: yang dag pa de nga ma gtogs gzhan su yin snyam pa'i spobs. pa. ¦ nga min su yin snyam pa'i spobs pa byed pa. [mss]	nga min su yin
ང་མེད	without self, without vanity, not	nga med
ཐིནཀིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོནེའས་སེལཕ༹	interest, no "I"	thinking of one's self
ང་མེད་པ	egolessness, no-self	nga med pa
ང་མེད་ལ་ང་འཛིན་པ	belief in / grasping at an 'I' where there is no 'I'	nga med la nga 'dzin pa
ང་མོ	camel	nga mo
ང་ཙམ	slight sense of "I"	nga tsam
ང་བཙན	self-aggrandizing	nga btsan
ང་ཚའི	our	nga tsha'i
ང་ཚོ	we, us	nga tsho
ང་ཚོའི	our	nga tsho'i
ང་འཚེང	self-sufficient, pride, egotism	nga 'tsheng
ང་འཛིན	ego-clinging, holding to a self	nga 'dzin
ང་འཛིན་སྤངས་པ	have relinquished	nga 'dzin spangs pa
ང་བཞི	5	nga bzhi
ང་ཡ་ཨ་ལེ་མི་འོང	I won't come for a little	nga ya a le mi 'ong
ང་ཡམ	1 of sde brgyad	nga yam
ང་ཡི	my, mine, of me, according to me	nga yi
ང་ཡི་དེབ	my book	nga yi deb
ང་ཡི་པ	regard as "my", possessiveness	nga yi pa
ང་ཡི་བ	to regard as "my", possessiveness. {bdag gi pa}; one's belongings, to regard as "my", possessiveness. Syn {bdag gi ba}	nga yi ba
ང་ཡི་བུ	my children	nga yi bu
ང་ཡི་མེད་པ	no sense of 'mine'	nga yi med pa
ང་ཡི་ཡིན	it is mine	nga yi yin
ང་ཡི་རང་བཞིན	my reality	nga yi rang bzhin
ང་ཡིན	I am	nga yin
ང་ཡིན་པ	independence	nga yin pa
ང་ཡིར་བྱ་བ་མེད་པ	no possessiveness	nga yir bya ba med pa
ང་ཡིར་བྱར་མེད་པ	{nga yir bya ba med pa}	nga yir byar med pa
ང་ཡིར་མེད	want of selfishness	nga yir med
ང་ཡིར་མེད་པ	without possessiveness	nga yir med pa
ང་ཡིར་འཛིན	grasp as mine	nga yir 'dzin
ང་ཡིར་འཛིན་པ	self possessive, holding to a "my / mine", possessiveness. Syn {bdag gir 'dzin pa}, {'jig lta}; self possessive, holding to a "my / mine", possessiveness. Syn {bdag gir 'dzin pa}, {'jig lta}	nga yir 'dzin pa
ང་ཡིར་འཛིན་པའི་འཇིག་ལྟ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate view of the transitory which is holding on to one's own	nga yir 'dzin pa'i 'jig lta lhan skyes
ང་ཡིར་འཛིན་མེད	without clinging to one's belongings	nga yir 'dzin med
ང་ཡིས་རྟོགས་པ	I have been understood	nga yis rtogs pa
ང་ཡིས་བྱས་པ	manifesting from me nga ra} -}-intense cold [grang ngar,...Sa sgang nga ra che,...Dgun gyi nga ra bzod pa dka',... ] air I [myself, yell, shoult, cheer	nga yis byas pa
ང་ར	intense cold * air I [myself], yell, shout, cheer	nga ra
ང་ར་ཅན	loud, noisy, roaring, crier, brawler, noisy fellow, rarified, cold	nga ra can
ང་ར་ཐང	place in tibet	nga ra thang
ང་རང	myself, I, I	nga rang
ང་རང་གི་སྣང་བར	in my mind	nga rang gi snang bar
ང་རང་གི་ཡིན	was mine	nga rang gi yin
ང་རང་གི་སེམས་སུ	I thought	nga rang gi sems su
ང་རང་གི་བསམ་པར	I thought	nga rang gi bsam par
ང་རང་གཅིག་པུ	myself alone	nga rang gcig pu
ང་རང་ཆེད་འབོད་བྱས་བྱུང	I was invited	nga rang ched 'bod byas byung
ང་རང་ཚོ	we ourself	nga rang tsho
ང་རང་རེ་གཉིས	either of us	nga rang re gnyis
ང་རི་བོང་མི་སྐད་སྨྲ་བར་སྐྱེས	I was a rabbit who could speak	nga ri bong mi skad smra bar skyes
ང་རུ	place in ancient tibet	nga ru
ང་རོ	cry, emit cries, roar, yell, shout, cheer, full voice, full voice, full and melodious chant; a roar	nga ro
ང་རོ་དཀྱུས་མ	klad kor ram rjes su nga ro ste, sgra'i yi ge'i steng du bris nas sna ldan mtshon byed kyi thig kor	nga ro dkyus ma
ང་རོ་སྒྲོགས་པ	howling, roaring	nga ro sgrogs pa
ང་རོ་ཅན	lion	nga ro can
ང་རོ་བྱིན་པ	crying, bewailing, cry loudly with pain or grief	nga ro byin pa
ང་ལ	to me	nga la
ང་ལ་མཁོ་བ་མེད	I don't want it	nga la mkho ba med
ང་ལ་དགོས	I want, I need	nga la dgos
ང་ལ་དགྲར་འཛིན་ཏེ	considering me an enemy	nga la dgrar 'dzin te
ང་ལ་ནུ	nu ma nga la nu gsungs pa la brten ming yang nga la nu zhes grags	nga la nu
ང་ལ་ཡོད	I have	nga la yod
ང་ལ་སློབ	I learn, teach me	nga la slob
ང་ལན་ཁྱོད་ལན	nyes skyon byung ba'i ngan khag phan tshun phyog res byed,...Las 'gan thad nga lan khyod lan ma yin par phyar ba gru 'degs byed pa	nga lan khyod lan
ང་ལས་ནུ	nga las ngu	nga las nu
ང་ལས་ནུའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	The Fall of King Mandhata	nga las nu'i rtogs brjod
ང་ལས་གཞན་དུ	apart from me, other than me	nga las gzhan du
ང་ཤི	I die, cry of fear with wonder	nga shi
ང་གསུམ	53	nga gsum
ང་ཧ་མ་གོ	I did not understand	nga ha ma go
ང་ལྷག	x {chos 'chad pa'i bla ma las kyang nga lhag snyam pa'i nga rgyal} proudly believing yourself superior to the teacher who is explaining the Dharma	nga lhag
ངག	(ordinary) speech	ngag
དང་སྦྱར་ནས་རྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	dper na bum pa chung ngus chu skyor cig ces pa'i sgra lta bu'o	dang sbyar nas rjod par byed pa
ངག་ཀྱལ	idle gossip, pointless talk, idle talk, gossip {don snying med pa'i skad cha}. {don ldan gyi 'phros mol bzhag nas don med kyi ngag kyal kho na shod kyin sdod pa}. Also {ngag 'khyal}	ngag kyal
ངག་ཀྱལ་པ	idle talk	ngag kyal pa
ངག་ཀྱལ་བ	idle talk, gossip	ngag kyal ba
ངག་བཀོད	1st tech tell about, orders, instructions	ngag bkod
ངག་བཀོད་དང་ལེན	ngag bkod byed pa'i las ka byed lugs byed stangs	ngag bkod dang len
ངག་བཀོད་བྱེད	give orders, instructions	ngag bkod byed
ངག་བཀྱལ	CM: nag kyal dang 'dra. [mss]	ngag bkyal
ངག་ལྐུག་པ	to become dumb	ngag lkug pa
ངག་ལྐུགས་པ	mute	ngag lkugs pa
ངག་སྐད	speaking	ngag skad
ངག་སྐྱོར	recitation	ngag skyor
ངག་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	dpe cha's tshig orally nas skyor ba accompany in singing	ngag skyor byed
ངག་བསྐྱལ	idle gossip/ chatter, vain speech	ngag bskyal
ངག་འཁྱལ	idle gossip/ babbling, nonsense, irrelevant /nonsensical/vain speech; chatter, foolish chatter, pointless talk, talking without purpose. Syn {ngag 'chal}, {don med ngag 'khyal}, {don med pa'i gtam}...	ngag 'khyal
ངག་འཁྱལ་གྱི་གཏེར་སྒོ་ཕྱེ	opening up for the treasury / store-room of idle gossip	ngag 'khyal gyi gter sgo phye
ངག་འཁྱལ་བ	speaking disconnectedly	ngag 'khyal ba
ངག་འཁྱལ་བ་སྤོང་བ	the [virtue of] giving up pointless talk ngag 'khril lus khyug ngag bkod kyi rjes su 'khril zhing - lus bde cag khyug po	ngag 'khyal ba spong ba
ངག་གམ་གསུང་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	speech drop	ngag gam gsung gi thig le
ངག་གི	casual	ngag gi
ངག་གི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ	to take refuge verbally	ngag gi skyabs 'gro
ངག་གི་རྒྱན	figure of speech, rhetorical expression	ngag gi rgyan
ངག་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of Speech, [Syn Manjushri]	ngag gi rgyal po
ངག་གི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of speech	ngag gi sgrib pa
ངག་གི་སྒྲོན་མ	The Lamp of Speech; {brda' yig ngag sgron}	ngag gi sgron ma
ངག་གི་ངེས་ཚིག	definition	ngag gi nges tshig
ངག་གི་མཆོན་ཆ	deity	ngag gi mchon cha
ངག་གི་ཉེས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ་བཞི	four verbal misdeeds 654	ngag gi nyes pa spyod pa bzhi
ངག་གི་བཏང་སྙོམས	casual indifference	ngag gi btang snyoms
ངག་གི་བདེན་འགྲུབ	accomplish true speech	ngag gi bden 'grub
ངག་གི་བདེན་ཚིག	power of true speech	ngag gi bden tshig
ངག་གི་འདབ་མ	tongue	ngag gi 'dab ma
ངག་གི་བརྡ	expression by speech or language	ngag gi brda
ངག་གི་གནས་བརྒྱད	TSE	ngag gi gnas brgyad
ངག་གི་རྣམ་པ	forms of speech, voiced	ngag gi rnam pa
ངག་གི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད	audible words	ngag gi rnam par rig byed
ངག་གི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	TSE	ngag gi rnam par rig byed kyi sgra
ངག་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི	the four speech practices [in Dzogchen]	ngag gi rnal 'byor bzhi
ངག་གི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the domain of speech	ngag gi spyod yul
ངག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	symbolic speech with hand mudras	ngag gi phyag rgya
ངག་གི་བྱེད་ལས	vocal actions	ngag gi byed las
ངག་གི་དབང་པོ	rdo rje brag rig 'dzin i, 1580-1639	ngag gi dbang po
ཡོངས་འཛིན་བི༹ཨིཨི	alias {kun bzang rang byung rdo rje}	yongs 'dzin viii
ངག་གི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of speech; lord / master of speech. [Manjushri]	ngag gi dbang phyug
ངག་གི་དབང་ཕྱུག་གྲགས་པ	Manjushri ngag gi dbang phyug dge legs rgya	ngag gi dbang phyug grags pa
མཚོའི་སྡེ	author of bshes pa'i 'phring yig gi T'i ka	mtsho'i sde
ངག་གི་དབུལ	dumb person, one poor in speech	ngag gi dbul
ངག་གི་མི་དགེ་བ་བཞི	four verbal nonvirtues TSE	ngag gi mi dge ba bzhi
ངག་གི་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་བཞི	four unvirtuous actions of speech, 1) {rdzun smra	ngag gi mi dge ba'i las bzhi
ངག་གི་མི་དགེ་བཞི་པོ	the four verbal nonvirtues	ngag gi mi dge bzhi po
ངག་གི་རྩལ་གསུམ	the three powers of speech [pho rtsal sna dgu'i nang gses, lo rgyus kyis dge thon pa, gtam gyis bzhad gad thon pa, gshags kyis pha rol gnon pa	ngag gi rtsal gsum
ངག་གི་བཞི	the four [misdeeds] of speech	ngag gi bzhi
ངག་གི་རིག་བྱེད་དུ་ཐོན་པ	voiced as audible sounds	ngag gi rig byed du thon pa
ངག་གི་ལས	verbal karma, vocal action	ngag gi las
ངག་གི་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད	all the activities of their speech	ngag gi las thams cad
ངག་གི་ལས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four kinds of verbal action	ngag gi las rnam pa bzhi
ངག་གི་ལས་བཞི	four verbal [unvirtuous] actions {shes bzhin mi bden pa'i rdzun smra ba, pha rol mthun pa dbye ba'i tshig smra ba phra ma, gzhan gyi snying la mi 'thad pa'i tshig ngan pa smra ba tshig rtsub, de gs...	ngag gi las bzhi
ངག་གི་ལས་ལམ	ngag gis byas pa'i las dang las kyi 'jug sgo,... verbal actions	ngag gi las lam
ངག་གི་ལེགས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་བཞི	four good / excellent actions of speech. 1) {brdzun du smra ba spong ba} not telling falsehoods / lies. 2) {tshig rtsub po smra ba spong ba} not using abusive language. 3) {phra mar smra ba spong b...	ngag gi legs par spyod pa bzhi
ངག་གི་ལེགས་པར་སྦྱོད་པ་བཞི	four good/ excellent actions of speech [1) {brdzun du smra ba spong ba - not telling falshoods/ lies 2) {tshig rtsub po	ngag gi legs par sbyod pa bzhi
སྨྲ་བ་སྤོང་བ	not using abusive language 3) {phra mar smra ba spong	smra ba spong ba
བཀྱལ་བ་སྨྲ་བ་སྤོང་བ	not indulging in irrelevant talk	bkyal ba smra ba spong ba
ངག་གི་ལྷ	the divinities of speech {'jam sbyangs dang dbyangs can ma}	ngag gi lha
ངག་གི་ལྷ་མོ	the goddess of speech	ngag gi lha mo
ངག་གིས་བརྗོད་པ	formulated by the voice, voiced	ngag gis brjod pa
ངག་གིས་དབུལ	dumb	ngag gis dbul
ངག་གེ་ངོག་གེ	unclear speaking	ngag ge ngog ge
ངག་གོ	[arch] die	ngag go
ངག་འགོད་པ	statements of speech	ngag 'god pa
ངག་འགྱལ	chatter, idle gossip, nonsensical/ vain speech	ngag 'gyal
ངག་འགྱལ་གྱི་གཏེར་སྒོ་ཕྱེ	opening up for the treasury/store-room of idle gossip	ngag 'gyal gyi gter sgo phye
ངག་འགྲོས	way of speaking	ngag 'gros
ངག་རྒྱན	skad cha'i nyams 'gyur	ngag rgyan
ངག་རྒྱས་པ	too much talking, full and detailed discussion	ngag rgyas pa
ངག་རྒྱུགས	orally sprod/rgyugs len byed pa	ngag rgyugs
ངག་རྒྱུན	traditional saying, legend, proverb, oral tradition	ngag rgyun
ངག་རྒྱུན་ལོ་རྒྱུས	memoir	ngag rgyun lo rgyus
ངག་སྒོ	mouth	ngag sgo
ངག་སྒྲོས	way of speaking	ngag sgros
ངག་ངོག	ngag ge ngog ge	ngag ngog
ངག་སྔགས	the mantra of speech 655	ngag sngags
ངག་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	speech being the mandala of mantra	ngag sngags kyi dkyil 'khor
ངག་ཅལ་ཅོལ	bab col, gang byung bshad pa'i gtam nyog	ngag cal col
ངག་བཅད	silence, + byed, + du sdod, + du bzhugs [h) to stay without speaking [usu. in meditation]	ngag bcad
ངག་བཅད་དུ་སྡོད	[h] stay w/o speaking [usu meditation]	ngag bcad du sdod
ངག་བཅད་དུ་བཞུགས	[h] stay w/o speaking [usu meditation]	ngag bcad du bzhugs
ངག་བཅད་པ	to keep silence {gtam mi smra ba}	ngag bcad pa
ངག་བཅད་བྱེད	[h] stay w/o speaking [usu meditation]	ngag bcad byed
ངག་བཅུག་པ	to give one's word (?); to give one's word	ngag bcug pa
ངག་འཆལ	want of consideration in speaking and acting, irregular speech, senseless, talk nonsense, 1 of mi dge bcu	ngag 'chal
ངག་འཆལ་བ	rave in speech, talk nonsense	ngag 'chal ba
ངག་འཇམ	soft/ pleasant speech/ spoken, verbally polite	ngag 'jam
ངག་འཇམ་པོ	polite speech, gentle words	ngag 'jam po
ངག་འཇམ་པོར་སྨྲ་བ	speak gently	ngag 'jam por smra ba
ངག་འཇམ་ཚིག་མཁས	speaking smoothly and cleverly	ngag 'jam tshig mkhas
ངག་ཉན་མ	21st constellation or lunar mansion	ngag nyan ma
ངག་ཉམས	experience of the voice	ngag nyams
ངག་སྙན	cuckoo, pleasant voice, sweet language, poetry	ngag snyan
ངག་སྙན་པ	a melodious voice, pleasant speech	ngag snyan pa
ངག་སྙན་པོ	a melodious voice, pleasant speech, verbally polite	ngag snyan po
ངག་ཏུ	verbally	ngag tu
ངག་ཏུ་བརྗོད	{ngag tu yang brjod}	ngag tu brjod
ངག་ཏུ་བརྗོད་པ	to recite	ngag tu brjod pa
ངག་ཏུ་ཐོན	Recite!	ngag tu thon
ངག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	verbally formulate	ngag tu smra ba
ངག་གཏམ	speech, verbal communication	ngag gtam
ངག་གཏམ་བྱེད་པ	send a verbal message, give a reply	ngag gtam byed pa
ངག་གཏོག་གཟེངས་བསྟོད	oral praise/ compliment	ngag gtog gzengs bstod
ངག་རྟ	singing gdangs sam dbyangs	ngag rta
ངག་ཐོག	mental, oral, verbal	ngag thog
ངག་ཐོག་གི་རྒྱག་སྐྱོར	verbal support	ngag thog gi rgyag skyor
ངག་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	cram	ngag thog tu 'dzin pa
ངག་ཐོག་གཏུགས་བཤེར	debate, crossexamination	ngag thog gtugs bsher
ངག་ཐོག་ནས	verbally	ngag thog nas
ངག་ཐོག་ནས་ཞུས	reported in speech	ngag thog nas zhus
ངག་ཐོག་ཞུས་པ	reported in speech	ngag thog zhus pa
ངག་དང་མི་ལྡན	secret and unspeakable	ngag dang mi ldan
ངག་དང་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྩོལ་རྟོག	verbal efforts and mental concepts	ngag dang yid kyi rtsol rtog
ངག་དང་ལུས་དང་གཉིས་གའི་ལས	actions of body &/or speech	ngag dang lus dang gnyis ga'i las
ངག་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	that which is expressed in words	ngag du brjod pa
ངག་དོན་གྱི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, mtshon bya dpe can gyi dngos po 'ga' zhig sngon du bkod pa'i go rim bzhin du rjes su bkod pa'i mtshon byed dpe'i dngos po rnams kyis kyang bstan bya don gyi go r...	ngag don gyi dpe
ངག་གདངས	voice, tone	ngag gdangs
ངག་གདམས	rishi	ngag gdams
ངག་གདོན	chanting, daily prayers	ngag gdon
ངག་འདབ	tongue (leaf of speech)	ngag 'dab
ངག་འདོན	chant, recitation	ngag 'don
ངག་འདོན་གྱི་རིམ་པ	liturgical procedure	ngag 'don gyi rim pa
ངག་འདོན་རྒྱས་སྤེལ	arranged for liturgical recitation	ngag 'don rgyas spel
ངག་འདོན་པ	cry, speak, express in words	ngag 'don pa
ངག་འདོན་བྱ་ཚུལ	liturgical text	ngag 'don bya tshul
ངག་རྡུགས་པ	skad cha bshad rgyu rdzogs nas chad pa,...Rtsod lan 'debs ma thub par ngag rdugs pa	ngag rdugs pa
ངག་ལྡན	eloquent	ngag ldan
ངག་ལྡབ་ལྡིབ	after damage to tongue and throat not be able to speak clearly, [one w] speech defect	ngag ldab ldib
ངག་སྡམས་པ	one who controls his speech	ngag sdams pa
ངག་སྡོམ	silence. sm. {ngag bcad}	ngag sdom
ངག་སྡོམ་པ	1) don gnad 'ga' re make a rule of not being allowed to speak; 2) accept discipline of silence	ngag sdom pa
ངག་སྡོམ་པ་བཅད་པ	keep silence	ngag sdom pa bcad pa
ངག་བསྡམས་པ	control one's voice	ngag bsdams pa
ངག་ནས	said	ngag nas
ངག་ནུས	verbal powers	ngag nus
ངག་ནུས་ཐོབ་པ	to gain the ability to perform magic chants	ngag nus thob pa
ངག་གནད	key point of speech	ngag gnad
ངག་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure/ correct speech	ngag rnam par dag pa
ངག་སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་བ	gtam gang byung smra ba'i ham phod can	ngag spyi brtol ba
ངག་ཕྱེད་སྣང་བར་གཟུགས་ཁམས	The form realm, semi-apparent speech	ngag phyed snang bar gzugs khams
ངག་ཕྲིན	abbr. of {ngag dbang phrin las}	ngag phrin
ངག་ཕྲིན་བླ་མ	Ngaktrin Lama. The former life of Samten Gyatso	ngag phrin bla ma
ངག་འཕྲིན	verbal message [ngag thog tu bskur ba'i gnas tshul]	ngag 'phrin
ངག་འཕྲེང་བའི་སྙིང་གཏམ	touching / moving words	ngag 'phreng ba'i snying gtam
ངག་བྱེད	speaker	ngag byed
ངག་བྲེལ	quick speaking	ngag brel
ངག་བླ་བསོད་རྒྱལ	(1856-1926), alias las rab gling pa	ngag bla bsod rgyal
ངག་དབང	a title of learning	ngag dbang
ངག་དབང་ཀུན་དགའ་བཀྲ་ཤིས	16561711	ngag dbang kun dga' bkra shis
ངག་དབང་ཀུན་དགའ་བསྟན་འཛིན	khams sprul iii, 1680-1728; {khams sprul} iii, 1680-1728 ngag dbang kun dga' theg chen dpal 'bar {sa skya khri 'dzin} 1945 ngag dbang kun dga' theg chen dpal 'bar the present {sa skya khri 'dzin} (...	ngag dbang kun dga' bstan 'dzin
ངག་དབང་ཀུན་དགའ་བསོད་ནམས	{'jam mgon a myes zhabs} 1597-ca. 1662	ngag dbang kun dga' bsod nams
མགོན་ཨ་མྱེས་ཞབས	(1597-ca. 1662) alias {ngag dbang kun dga' bsod nams grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po}	mgon a myes zhabs
ངག་དབང་དཀར་བརྒྱུད་རྒྱ་མཚོ	author of {grub dbang shva mo nA thA'i 'khrungs rabs rnam thar gsol 'debs dpag bsam 'khri shing}	ngag dbang dkar brgyud rgya mtsho
ངག་དབང་དཀོན་མཆོག་བསྟན་རྒྱལ	author of {mun sel sgron ma}	ngag dbang dkon mchog bstan rgyal
ངག་དབང་བཀྲ་ཤིས	Auspicious Lord of Speech	ngag dbang bkra shis
ངག་དབང་གྲགས་པ	{yongs 'dzin} 16th cent. Bhutanese gter ston}	ngag dbang grags pa
ངག་དབང་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{se'u la byams mgon} 1647-1732 ngag dbang chos kyi rgyal mtshan {sdings po che cog gra sprul sku} the vi	ngag dbang rgyal mtshan
ངག་དབང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	sdings po cog gra sprul sku vi	ngag dbang chos kyi rgyal mtshan
ངག་དབང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	born in 1924 - Trülshik Rinpoche, Ngawang Chökyi Lodrö, also known as Kunzang Trinley Drodül Tsal (kun bzang phrin las 'dro 'dul rtsal)	ngag dbang chos kyi blo gros
ངག་དབང་ཆོས་གྲགས	1572-1641; 1572-1641, sa skya pa	ngag dbang chos grags
ངག་དབང་སྙན་གྲགས	Ngawang Nyendrak, the 66th throne-holder of Ganden	ngag dbang snyan grags
ངག་དབང་བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ	rdza rong phu bla ma, 1867-1940; {rdza rong phu bla ma} 1867-1940	ngag dbang bstan 'dzin nor bu
ངག་དབང་མཐུ་སྟོབས་དབང་ཕྱུག	sa	ngag dbang mthu stobs dbang phyug
སྐྱ་པ་ཁྲི་ཆེན	biography: shrI sa skya pa sngags 'chang bla ma khri chen rdo rje 'chang ngag dbang mthu stobs dbang phyug drag shul yon tan rgya mtsho bkra shis grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po'i rnam par thar...	skya pa khri chen
དབྱངས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	written by {sde gzhung lung rig sprul sku kun dga' bstan pa'i nyi ma} (1906-?)	dbyangs zhes bya ba
ངག་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ	{nas lung pa}	ngag dbang rdo rje
ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ་བཟང་པོ	18501934. the founder of Tengboche monastery near Mt. Everest	ngag dbang nor bu bzang po
ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{zhabs drung} i, 1594-1651	ngag dbang rnam rgyal
ངག་དབང་དཔལ་ལྡན	{lcags ra chos rje}; {chos rje} b. 1797; chos rje, b. 1797	ngag dbang dpal ldan
ངག་དབང་དཔལ་བཟང	{mkhan po} 1879-1941; mkhan po, 1879-1941. alias {'od gsal rin chen snying po padma las 'brel rtsal}	ngag dbang dpal bzang
ངག་དབང་འཕྲིན་ལས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	16781739 - Ngawang Trinley Gyatso, Kalden Gyatso's re-embodiment	ngag dbang 'phrin las rgya mtsho
ངག་དབང་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{rgya nag rtogs ldan sprul sku}	ngag dbang blo gros rgya mtsho
ངག་དབང་བློ་གྲོས་སྙིང་པོ	ngor	ngag dbang blo gros snying po
ངག་དབང་བློ་བཟང	5th Dalai Lama	ngag dbang blo bzang
ངག་དབང་བློ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	16171682	ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho
ལམ་བ༹	(1617-1682)	lama v
ཁྲིམས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	shel dkar bka' 'gyur bla ma, 1856-1932 ngag dbang mi pham bstan pa'i nyi ma rnam dag chos kyi rgya mtsho 'phrin las	khrims rgyal mtshan
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྡེ	long name of {bstan pa'i nyi ma} {khams sprul} vi, 1849-1907	rnam par rgyal ba'i sde
ངག་དབང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	shar chen	ngag dbang tshul khrims
ངག་དབང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དོན་ལྡན	{gser khang sprul sku}	ngag dbang tshul khrims don ldan
ངག་དབང་ཚེ་རིང	{sngags rams pa}	ngag dbang tshe ring
ངག་དབང་བཟང་པོ	{bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin} 1st, 1546-1615; bde	ngag dbang bzang po
ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡོངས་འཛིན	the first, 1546-1615	chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin
ངག་དབང་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	70th abbot of Ngor of the Khansgar Labrang	ngag dbang yon tan rgya mtsho
ངག་དབང་ལེགས་པ	{sga ston} 18641941	ngag dbang legs pa
ངག་དབང་བསམ་བསྟན	{grub dbang} 1631-1709 ngag dbang bsod nams rgyal mtshan {ngor khang gsar mkhan chen}	ngag dbang bsam bstan
ངག་དབང་ལྷ་མོ	Goddess of Powerful Speech [Sarasvati]. Syn {dbyangs can ma}	ngag dbang lha mo
ངག་དབང་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	rje mkhan po VI, 1670-1730	ngag dbang lhun grub
ངག་དབེན	1) abandon ngag 'chal gtam; 2) isolation of speech	ngag dben
ངག་དབེན་རྡོར་བཟླས	vajra recitation of the solitude of speech	ngag dben rdor bzlas
ངག་དབྱངས	voice	ngag dbyangs
ངག་འབྲེལ་མེད	nonaction of speech	ngag 'brel med
ངག་སྦྱོང་བ	training the speech	ngag sbyong ba
ངག་སྦྱོར	arrangement of speech	ngag sbyor
ངག་མ	speech itself	ngag ma
ངག་མ་ཚང་བ	indistinct speech, defective talk, stupid person	ngag ma tshang ba
ངག་མི་འཆལ་བ	don't speak meaningless talk	ngag mi 'chal ba
ངག་མི་ལྡན	dumb person, one poor at expressing himself	ngag mi ldan
ངག་མེད	state of no speech, speechless	ngag med
ངག་ཙམ	mere verbality/ lip service	ngag tsam
ངག་བཙན	firm promise	ngag btsan
ངག་རྩལ	elocution	ngag rtsal
ངག་རྩུབ་མོ	harsh words	ngag rtsub mo
ངག་ཚད་མ	authentic words	ngag tshad ma
ངག་ཚབ	representation in writing, principal points	ngag tshab
ངག་ཚིག	expressing words	ngag tshig
ངག་མཚམས	seclusion of speech	ngag mtshams
ངག་མཚམས་སྡོམ་པ	refraining from speaking, keeping verbal seclusion, restraining myself to verbal retreat	ngag mtshams sdom pa
ངག་མཚུངས	uniform speech, consistent talk	ngag mtshungs
ངག་འཛིན	ngag skyor	ngag 'dzin
ངག་བཟོ	vocal activities	ngag bzo
ངག་བཟླས	vocal recitation, recitation with voice [audible]	ngag bzlas
ངག་ཡུལ་མིན	ineffable	ngag yul min
ངག་ཡུལ་མིན་པ	ineffable	ngag yul min pa
ངག་བརླང་པོ	shouting	ngag brlang po
ངག་ལ་ནུས་པ་འབར་བ	the blazing of potency in speech	ngag la nus pa 'bar ba
ངག་ལ་ཟིན	memorize	ngag la zin
ངག་ལ་གཟུང་བ	memorize	ngag la gzung ba
ངག་ལན	verbal reply	ngag lan
ངག་ལམ	through words, spoken, uttering, talked, uttered, verbalized	ngag lam
ངག་ལས་ཞུ་བ	apply verbally, pray with words	ngag las zhu ba
ངག་ལུས་སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ངན་ལེན	the negative tendencies of body, speech, and mind	ngag lus sems kyi gnas ngan len
ངག་ཤོར	committing to words, promise	ngag shor
ངག་ཤོར་བ	to blurt out something involuntarily	ngag shor ba
ངག་གཤེར	cross examination, legal deposition	ngag gsher
ངག་གསལ	speak to someone *, lucid/ clear speech	ngag gsal
ངག་གསུང	voice and speech	ngag gsung
ངག་ལྷ་མོ	the goddess of speech	ngag lha mo
ངང	1) Rgyud, nature Don chen bsgrub pa la ngang ring dgos, .Ngang rgyud 'jam na kun gyis brtsi; 2) in the nature, manner, state of, within, -ly; 3) naturally, spontaneously w/o effort 2. present showi...	ngang
ངང་དཀར	goose	ngang dkar
ངང་རྐང	that which waddles	ngang rkang
ངང་སྐྱ	grey teal of tibet	ngang skya
ངང་སྐྱོང	to maintain the continuity	ngang skyong
ངང་སྐྱོང་བ	continuity	ngang skyong ba
ངང་བསྐྱངས	continuing in the state, to settle into	ngang bskyangs
ངང་ཁྱུ	flock of swans/ geese	ngang khyu
ངང་གིས	easily	ngang gis
ངང་གིས་སྐྱེ	will spontaneously arise	ngang gis skye
ངང་གིས་གྲུབ	self-formed	ngang gis grub
ངང་གིས་གྲུབ་པ	spontaneously accomplished	ngang gis grub pa
ངང་གིས་འགོ	make way for	ngang gis 'go
ངང་གིས་འཆར	comes by itself	ngang gis 'char
ངང་གིས་དལ་བ	to relax naturally	ngang gis dal ba
ངང་གིས་བསྡངས	controlled naturally	ngang gis bsdangs
ངང་གིས་རྫོགས	spontaneously consummated	ngang gis rdzogs
ངང་གིས་ཞི་བ	to spontaneously abate	ngang gis zhi ba
ངང་གིས་ཤེས	recognition naturally arose	ngang gis shes
ངང་གིས་ཤེས་པ	to recognize naturally	ngang gis shes pa
ངང་གིས་གསལ	naturally evident	ngang gis gsal
ངང་གྱིས་ཁོང་དུ	imbued with	ngang gyis khong du
ངང་རྒྱུད	temperament, nature, disposition	ngang rgyud
ངང་རྒྱུད་ངན་པ	naturally bad disposition	ngang rgyud ngan pa
ངང་རྒྱུད་འཇམ་པོ	gentle, kind	ngang rgyud 'jam po
ངང་རྒྱུད་ཐུང་ཐུང	short tempered, impatient, intolerant	ngang rgyud thung thung
ངང་རྒྱུད་རྩ་བ་ནས་མེད	w no patience	ngang rgyud rtsa ba nas med
ངང་རྒྱུད་བཟང་པོ	naturally good disposition	ngang rgyud bzang po
ངང་རྒྱུད་རིང	very patient	ngang rgyud ring
ངང་རྒྱུད་རིང་པོ	patient	ngang rgyud ring po
ངང་རྒྱུད་རིང་བ	good-natured	ngang rgyud ring ba
ངང་རྒྱུན	continuous state	ngang rgyun
ངང་སྒུག་བྱེད	wait patiently	ngang sgug byed
ངང་སྒོམ	b"n meditation [sems rtse gcig tu bsgoms pas skabs shig na snang ba rang grol gyi nyams 'char, ting nge 658 'dzin 'du 'bral med pas sgom med dang yengs med du gnas pa byung na ngang sgom tsad du 'k...	ngang sgom
ངང་སྒྲོ	quill of the goose	ngang sgro
ངང་ངན	naturally bad disposition	ngang ngan
ངང་ངུར	swans, ruddy goose, tadorna rutila, sheldrake	ngang ngur
ངང་ཅན	natural capacity, naturally	ngang can
ངང་ཆུ	sa sin dhur dang spyin bsres pa'i skyo ma	ngang chu
ངང་ཆུང་མ	Ngangchungma. The queen of Mutig Tseypo	ngang chung ma
ངང་ཆེན་པོ	the great state, total state	ngang chen po
ངང་འཆལ	vain talk, delirium	ngang 'chal
ངང་ཉིད	the state, very condition of, condition	ngang nyid
ངང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	{ngang nyid las} due to the very nature of . . .	ngang nyid kyis
ངང་ཉིད་སྐྱོང	sustain the condition of	ngang nyid skyong
ངང་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	total condition, total state	ngang nyid chen po
ངང་ཉིད་དུ	in the condition of, in the state of, in the state of	ngang nyid du
ངང་ཉིད་དེ་ལས	from this condition	ngang nyid de las
ངང་ཉིད་ནས	within the state of ..	ngang nyid nas
ངང་ཉིད་རྣལ་མ	authentic condition	ngang nyid rnal ma
ངང་ཉིད་ལས	{ngang nyid kyis} due to the very nature of . . .	ngang nyid las
ངང་ཐུང	impatient. sm. {ngang rgyud thung thung}	ngang thung
ངང་ཐུང་ཐལ་སྐྱོད	impetuosity, rashness	ngang thung thal skyod
ངང་ཐུང་ཐལ་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	act impetuosly/ rashly	ngang thung thal skyod byed
ངང་ཐུང་ཐུང	short-tempered	ngang thung thung
ངང་ཐུང་བྱ	become impatient	ngang thung bya
ངང་ཐུང་འཚབ་འཚུབ	over-anxious	ngang thung 'tshab 'tshub
ངང་འཐེན	phar 'gyangs,...Gra sgrig legs par ma byung bas las 'go 'dzugs rgyu ngang 'then byas song	ngang 'then
ངང་འཐེན་བྱེད	temporarily delay/ halt, postpone	ngang 'then byed
ངང་དངས	{ngang dwangs}	ngang dangs
ངང་དབ༹ངས	inherent limpidness; ginnately unsullied/ limpid; isc. innate lucidity/ clarity	ngang dvangs
ངང་དྭངས	ongoing lucidity, lucid state, luminous state, limpid condition, innately unsullied, innate lucidity	ngang dwangs
ངང་དུ	in the condition of, in the state of, in its continuity	ngang du
ངང་དུ་འཇོག་པ	{rtogs pa'i ngang du 'jog pa} leave the mind in the realization of	ngang du 'jog pa
ངང་དུ་བཞག	rest in the state	ngang du bzhag
ངང་དུ་ལུས	to be stranded in	ngang du lus
ངང་དེ་ཉིད	that state itself	ngang de nyid
ངང་དེར	in that condition, while doing that, in that state, in this state, while, while I was, while I was thus occupied	ngang der
ངང་དེར་བཞག་པ	to remain in that condition, remain in that state	ngang der bzhag pa
ངང་གདངས	natural expression	ngang gdangs
ངང་མདངས	innate inner glow	ngang mdangs
མདངས་ཁྱབ་གདལ་དུ་བསྐྱང	continually rest within luminosity] natural/inherent luminosity/ radiance	mdangs khyab gdal du bskyang
ངང་ནས	while, from within, during, in the presence/ state of, -ly	ngang nas
ངང་གནས	remain continuously in / throughout	ngang gnas
ངང་གནས་པ	to remain in the state of	ngang gnas pa
ངང་པ	1) swan, goose, duck; 2) yellow ochre [color])/ [in the manner of a swan who easily associates without a	ngang pa
མལེ	female relationship, so is the discipline which associates without ties and the skillful means which causes sentient beings to reach the happiness of liberation through compassion and loving kindne...	male
ངང་པ་ཅན	rkang gdub	ngang pa can
ངང་པ་པོ	drake	ngang pa po
ངང་པ་སྤྱིའི་མིང	general term for goose species	ngang pa spyi'i ming
ངང་པ་སེར་ལྡན	sa ser skya 'jam po zhig...Tshon rtsi'i gzhi la sa ngang pa ser ldan byugs na tshon rtsi len bde po yong	ngang pa ser ldan
ངང་པ་གསེར་མདོག	the golden duck, the king of birds {bya'i rgyal po}	ngang pa gser mdog
ངང་པ་གསེར་ལྡན	yellow or golden goose	ngang pa gser ldan
ངང་པའི་རྐང་པ	1) mercury; 2) La phug	ngang pa'i rkang pa
ངང་པའི་སྐད	quack	ngang pa'i skad
ངང་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of evil spirits,	ngang pa'i rgyal po
ངང་པའི་ནགས	grove beyond cuckoo's hill	ngang pa'i nags
ངང་པའི་ཚོགས	flock of wild geese	ngang pa'i tshogs
ངང་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	Bhrama	ngang pa'i shing rta
ངང་བ	waterfowl	ngang ba
ངང་བག་ཡོད	naturally modest	ngang bag yod
ངང་མ་ཐུང	do not be shorttempered	ngang ma thung
ངང་མ་ཤོར་བ	not losing the continuity	ngang ma shor ba
ངང་མོ	goose, duck	ngang mo
ངང་རྩི་མཙོ	ngang rtsi lake [shan rtsa rdzong gi lho rgyud du yod	ngang rtsi mtso
ངང་རྩི་མཚོ	ngang rtsi lake	ngang rtsi mtsho
ངང་ཚུལ	atmosphere, feeling, disposition, mode, character, way of being, nature. context; state of affairs; situation; nature 659	ngang tshul
ངང་ཚུལ་འགོག་པ	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	ngang tshul 'gog pa
ངང་བཞག	self-resting, resting in the continuity [of]	ngang bzhag
ངང་བཞེངས	manifestation of the nature [?]; isc. to experience intuitively [cf. CYDz 87.a.5]	ngang bzhengs
ངང་རིང	good-natured, peaceful and tame, tolerant, patient	ngang ring
ངང་རིང་བ	patient	ngang ring ba
ངང་རིས	design worked in tread	ngang ris
ངང་ལ	in the condition of, in the dimension of	ngang la
ངང་ལ་གནས་པ	remain in the condition	ngang la gnas pa
ངང་ལ་བཞག་གིན	to rest naturally	ngang la bzhag gin
ངང་ལ་བཞག་པ	remain in the state	ngang la bzhag pa
ངང་ལ་རིང་མཙོ	{ngang la ring lake [bod rang skyong ljongs kyi sger rtse rdzong dang 'brong pa rdzong gi mtsams su yod	ngang la ring mtso
ངང་ལ་རིང་མཚོ	{ngang la ring} lake	ngang la ring mtsho
ངང་ལག	banana	ngang lag
ངང་ལས	from within, within the state of	ngang las
ངང་ལས་མི་འདའ	never beyond the condition of	ngang las mi 'da'
ངང་ལུགས	manner of subsistence	ngang lugs
ངང་ལུང་གངས་རི	{ngang lung snow mt [dge rgyas rdzong dang ru thog rdzong gi mtsams su yod pa'i ri zhig yin zhing, el smi 6596 yod	ngang lung gangs ri
ངང་སང	mase ?? as above	ngang sang
ངང་སངས	innately pristine (state)	ngang sangs
ངང་སེར	bya ngur pa	ngang ser
ངང་གསལ	natural luminosity	ngang gsal
ངང་བསྲིང	rgyun ring du gtong ba'am brel 'tshab mi byed pa 'Dod thag mi nye bar ngang bsring gi sgo nas las don sgrub dgos	ngang bsring
ངང་བསྲིང་བ	sustain the continuity	ngang bsring ba
ངད	1) power; 2) scent, fragrance, smell, odor, strong aroma	ngad
ངད་ཅན	fragrant, pleasantly odorous	ngad can
ངད་ལྡན	fragrant, odorous	ngad ldan
ངད་བཟང	good smell	ngad bzang
ངད་གསོད	deodorant	ngad gsod
ངད་གསོད་བྱེད	deodorize	ngad gsod byed
ངད་བསད་པའི་ནད	disease eliminating odors	ngad bsad pa'i nad
ངན	evil, mischief, misfortune, defilement	ngan
ངན་རྐང	sngar khral rgyug thub rgyu lta ci, mdor na so so'i 'tsho ba yang rang 'go mi thon pa'i khyim dud la zer	ngan rkang
ངན་སྐུལ	instigation, incitement	ngan skul
ངན་སྐུལ་བྱེད	instigate, incite	ngan skul byed
ངན་སྐྱུགས	to vomit	ngan skyugs
ངན་སྐྱེས	of low birth, anything produced from soil and manure, planet mars	ngan skyes
ངན་བསྐུལ	instigation, incitement	ngan bskul
ངན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	instigate, incite	ngan bskul byed
ངན་བསྐྱུལ་དཀྲུག་ཤིང	by bad thoughts having encouraged others bka' dza' gcugs phan tshun dbyen sbyor gyi phra ma	ngan bskyul dkrug shing
ངན་ཁྱབ	preta	ngan khyab
ངན་ཁྲེབ	'os 'gan skyur 'jog	ngan khreb
ངན་ཁྲེབ་རྒལ་རལ	work worthy of being done or rang la 'khris pa'i las ka de khag 'dogs sna tshogs kyis rtsa ba nas mi byed pa	ngan khreb rgal ral
ངན་གོམས	bag chags ngan goms - bad habits	ngan goms
ངན་གྲ་སྔོན་བསྒྲིགས	bya ngan bed rgyu'i sngon gra bsgrigs pa	ngan gra sngon bsgrigs
ངན་གྲགས་ཅན	notorious	ngan grags can
ངན་གྲོགས	cohort, accomplice, puppet	ngan grogs
ངན་གྲོས	improper gros Rang don sems la bcangs nas gzhan gnod skyel 'dod kyi ngan gros	ngan gros
ངན་དགུ	very bad omens, all the evil things there are	ngan dgu
ངན་དགུ་སྐྱོང་བ	protects from all miseries	ngan dgu skyong ba
ངན་དགུ་ཐུབ་པ	to overcome every evil, able to subdue all evil	ngan dgu thub pa
ངན་དགུ་ཚང་བ	completely evil/ wicked ngan dgu tshang ba bran g.yog lam lugs completely evil/ wicked system of slavery	ngan dgu tshang ba
ངན་དགུ་ལས་ཚང	completely evil/ wicked ngan dgu las tshang bran g.yog lam lugs completely evil/ wicked system of slavery	ngan dgu las tshang
ངན་འགྱུར	deteriorate, worsen, degenerate	ngan 'gyur
ངན་འགྱུར་བ	degenerate [person]	ngan 'gyur ba
ངན་འགྲོ	'the lower realms', evil destiny, realm of affliction, bad migration/ states [of being] [rgyu mi dge ba'i las che ba mang du bsags nas 'bras bu sdug bsngal che ba kho na myong bar 'gro ba'i ngan so...	ngan 'gro
གཙུག་ཏོར་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་མ	Ushnika vijaya who completely purifies all evil destinies/ lower realms [female divinity], gzungs kyi bye brag cig rgya gar gyi mkhan po dzi na mi tra dang, su rentra bo dhi dang, lo ts' ba bande y...	gtsug tor rnam par rgyal ma
ངན་འགྲོ་བ	a being in the lower realms	ngan 'gro ba
ངན་འགྲོ་གསུམ	the three lower realms [dmyal ba, yi dvags, dud 'gro ste gsum,... the three lower realms [Tserig]	ngan 'gro gsum
ངན་འགྲོའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	miseries/ suffering of the lower realms [ngan song gsum gyi sdug bsngal te, dmyal ba la tsa grang gi sdug bsngal dang, yi dvags la bkres skom gyi sdug bsngal, dud 'gro la bkol spyod kyi sdug bsngal...	ngan 'gro'i sdug bsngal
ངན་འགྲོའི་གནས	the lower realms, unfortunate states	ngan 'gro'i gnas
ངན་འགྲོའི་ལམ	non-virtue	ngan 'gro'i lam
ངན་འགྲོའི་སྲིད་པ	miserable existences	ngan 'gro'i srid pa
ངན་འགྲོའོ་མཐིལ	hell	ngan 'gro'o mthil
ངན་འགྲོར་འདུ་འགྲོ་ལ་ཉེ་བ	to live little better than an animal	ngan 'gror 'du 'gro la nye ba
ངན་འགྲོར་ལྷུང་བ	falling to the lower realms	ngan 'gror lhung ba
ངན་རྒུ	many bad omens	ngan rgu
ངན་རྒུ་ཚང་བ	completely evil/ wicked ngan rgu tshang ba bran g.yog lam lugs completely evil/ wicked system of slavery	ngan rgu tshang ba
ངན་རྒུ་ལས་ཚང	completely evil/ wicked ngan rgu las tshang bran g.yog lam lugs completely evil/ wicked system of slavery	ngan rgu las tshang
ངན་རྒྱབ	accomplice	ngan rgyab
ངན་རྒྱབ་བྱེད་མི	accomplice	ngan rgyab byed mi
ངན་རྒྱུ་ཅན	one who does mischief, one who speaks ill of others	ngan rgyu can
ངན་སྒྲོག་ཕྲ་མ	secretly, having proclaimed others' faults dbyen sbyor byed pa	ngan sgrog phra ma
ངན་ངོན	1) the worst, the least; 2) bare necessities	ngan ngon
ངན་ངོན་ཙམ	just the bare necessities [satisfied with anything], just functional	ngan ngon tsam
ངན་སྔགས	black magic, evil spells	ngan sngags
ངན་སྔགས་མཐུ་གཏད	spells and curses	ngan sngags mthu gtad
ངན་ཅིང་དབུལ་བ	weak and miserable	ngan cing dbul ba
ངན་ཆེན་པོ་བྱས	it has done great mischief	ngan chen po byas
ངན་འཆང	evil/ wicked thoughts	ngan 'chang
ངན་འཆར	plot, scheme, conspiracy	ngan 'char
ངན་ཇུས	evil strategy, conspiracy, plot, machination	ngan jus
ངན་ཇུས་མཉམ་འགོད	conspiring, ploting, engineering a conspiracy, hatching a plot	ngan jus mnyam 'god
ངན་ཇུས་མཉམ་འགོད་བྱེད	conspire, plot, engineer a conspiracy, hatch a plot	ngan jus mnyam 'god byed
ངན་ཇུས་མཉམ་འགོད་བྱེད་མཁན	conspirator, plotter	ngan jus mnyam 'god byed mkhan
ངན་ཇུས་འདིངས	conspire, plot	ngan jus 'dings
ངན་ཇུས་བྱེད	conspire, plot	ngan jus byed
ངན་རྙེད	scabby, itchy, unchaste, libidinous	ngan rnyed
ངན་སྙིགས	1) corruptions of evil smell/stains; 2) time of the five denigrating corruptions	ngan snyigs
ངན་གཏད	evil spell	ngan gtad
ངན་རྟགས	bad sign/ omen	ngan rtags
ངན་རྟོག	negative thought	ngan rtog
ངན་ལྟས	evil omen, bad sign	ngan ltas
ངན་ཐག	opium	ngan thag
ངན་ཐབས	dishonest/ evil means/ methods, deceitful/ treacherous tactics	ngan thabs
ངན་ཐབས་ལ་མགོ་མཁོར	duped by deceitful tactics	ngan thabs la mgo mkhor
ངན་མཐའ	evil end	ngan mtha'
ངན་མཐུ	evil power, the power of evil	ngan mthu
ངན་མཐུན	mi ngan kha mthun	ngan mthun
ངན་འཐུང	scorpion	ngan 'thung
ངན་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	revile a person	ngan du brjod pa
ངན་དུ་སོང་བ	spoiled, worsened, corrupted	ngan du song ba
ངན་དོན	functional, serviceable	ngan don
ངན་དྲེགས	ngan pa and khengs dregs	ngan dregs
ངན་འདེབས་པ	curse, execrate	ngan 'debs pa
ངན་འདྲིས	bad habits/ acquaintance/ practices	ngan 'dris
ངན་སྡུག	bad, mean, sad, sorrowful	ngan sdug
ངན་ན་བ	the bad	ngan na ba
ངན་ནེ་ངོན་ནེ	few and bad/ the worst, bare necessities	ngan ne ngon ne
ངན་ནེ་བ	bad inferior	ngan ne ba
ངན་པ	evil, miserable, mean, bad, unwholesome, ugly, awful, poor, humble, low, terrible, ignoble	ngan pa
ངན་པ་ཁ་སྒྲིག	conspiring, plotting, collaborating	ngan pa kha sgrig
ངན་པ་ཁ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	conspire, plot, collaborate	ngan pa kha sgrig byed
ངན་པ་ཁ་མཐུན	conspiring, plotting, collaborating	ngan pa kha mthun
ངན་པ་ཁ་མཐུན་བྱེད	conspire, plot, collaborate	ngan pa kha mthun byed
ངན་པ་ཁྱུ་འདྲེས	conspiring, plotting, collaborating	ngan pa khyu 'dres
ངན་པ་ཁྱུ་འདྲེས་བྱེད	conspire, plot, collaborate	ngan pa khyu 'dres byed
ངན་པ་དགུ་འཛོམས	the gathering of many inauspicious signs [a certain day of the year]in the 17th day of the 11th month nyin mtshan gcig gi ring la sa bdag ngan pa nyi ma nag chen &, de min pa'i sa bdag ngan pa gzha...	ngan pa dgu 'dzoms
ངན་པ་རྒྱུད་སྐུལ	instigation, incitement	ngan pa rgyud skul
ངན་པ་རྒྱུད་སྐུལ་བྱེད	instigate, incite	ngan pa rgyud skul byed
ངན་པ་རྒྱུས་ཡོད	mi ngan gyis nang gi gnas tshul phyir shod pa	ngan pa rgyus yod
ངན་པ་གཅིག་འདྲ	alike in evil	ngan pa gcig 'dra
ངན་པ་བརྗོད་པ	blaspheme	ngan pa brjod pa
ངན་པ་གཉའ་རེངས	stiff-necked villain 661	ngan pa gnya' rengs
ངན་པ་སྟོབས་ཆུང་ངུ	weak power of evil	ngan pa stobs chung ngu
ངན་པ་དཔུང་བསྡེབས	conspirators, evilminded men who intrigue	ngan pa dpung bsdebs
ངན་པ་བྱས་རྒྱལ	ngan pa byas lang du shor ba,...Rang snang gang dran gyis khrims med ngan pa byas rgyal du song ba	ngan pa byas rgyal
ངན་པ་བྱུང	it proved to be a failure	ngan pa byung
ངན་པ་སྦུག་མཐུན	mi ngan kha mthun nam ngan pa kha mthun ngan pa g.yo can - an evil being	ngan pa sbug mthun
ངན་པ་ལག་འབྲེལ	accomplice, cohort in evil	ngan pa lag 'brel
ངན་པ་ལག་འབྲེལ་གཏོང	act as accomplice	ngan pa lag 'brel gtong
ངན་པ་ལང་ཤོར	mi ngan gyi spyod ngan goms thal	ngan pa lang shor
ངན་པ་སློབ	incite, instigate	ngan pa slob
ངན་པ་བསླབས	incited, instigated	ngan pa bslabs
ངན་པའི་རྒྱབ་རོགས	accomplice	ngan pa'i rgyab rogs
ངན་པའི་ཕྱོགས	dark/ seamy/ evil side	ngan pa'i phyogs
ངན་པའི་ཟས་ཅན	snake	ngan pa'i zas can
ངན་པའི་ཤུབས་ལྡན	turtle	ngan pa'i shubs ldan
ངན་པར	ill, badly	ngan par
ངན་པར་འགྱུར	tu become unwholesome	ngan par 'gyur
ངན་པར་འགྱུར་བ	to be inferior	ngan par 'gyur ba
ངན་པར་འཕྱོ	wallowed	ngan par 'phyo
ངན་པར་བྱས་པ	evil deeds	ngan par byas pa
ངན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to commit evil	ngan par byed pa
ངན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	speak ill of others	ngan par smra ba
ངན་པུ	a bad son	ngan pu
ངན་པོ	mean, evil	ngan po
ངན་དཔེ	a bad example	ngan dpe
ངན་སྤེལ	spreading evil	ngan spel
ངན་སྤེལ་བྱེད	spread evil	ngan spel byed
ངན་སྤོང་སྐྱེས	epithet of sukra, planet venus	ngan spong skyes
ངན་སྤོང་བུ	Venus	ngan spong bu
ངན་སྤོང་འཛིན	Venus	ngan spong 'dzin
ངན་སྤྱོད	bad actions, debauch	ngan spyod
ངན་སྤྱོད་ཅན	evil, malevolent, immoral, wicked	ngan spyod can
ངན་ཕྱིད	spend one's time in evil livelihood	ngan phyid
ངན་ཕྱོགས་རྐྱང་པར་བལྟ་མཁན	pessimist	ngan phyogs rkyang par blta mkhan
ངན་བུ	bdag gam phran	ngan bu
ངན་བྱ་བ	reproached, deceived, cheated	ngan bya ba
ངན་བྱས་ངོ་ཁྱེར	spyod ngan ngo sor khyer ba,...Mig ltos shas rkyen gyi rtsing spyod la 'dzem bag med par ngan byas ngo khyer byed pa	ngan byas ngo khyer
ངན་བྱས་ངོ་སོ	ngan byas ngo khyer	ngan byas ngo so
ངན་བྱུས	evil strategy, conspiracy, plot, machination	ngan byus
ངན་བྱུས་མཉམ་འགོད	conspiring, ploting, engineering a conspiracy, hatching a plot	ngan byus mnyam 'god
ངན་བྱུས་མཉམ་འགོད་བྱེད	conspire, plot, engineer a conspiracy, hatch a plot ngan byus mnyam 'god byed mkhan conspirator, plotter	ngan byus mnyam 'god byed
ངན་བྱུས་འདིངས	conspire, plot	ngan byus 'dings
ངན་བྱུས་བྱེད	conspire, plot	ngan byus byed
ངན་བྱེད	sorcery and black magic	ngan byed
ངན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྔགས	charms for causing mischief to others	ngan byed kyi sngags
ངན་དབང་ནང་གྲོས	mi ngan gyi kha dbang lkog gros	ngan dbang nang gros
ངན་འབྲས	bad karma/ result	ngan 'bras
ངན་འབྲས་འཁོར	receive retribution for 1's misdeeds	ngan 'bras 'khor
ངན་འབྲེལ	bad connection, conspiring, plotting, collaborating for evil	ngan 'brel
ངན་འབྲེལ་འཁོར་བ་མཐའ་ཅན	the wandering in samsara is bound to come to an end even for those who make a bad connection	ngan 'brel 'khor ba mtha' can
ངན་སྦྲེལ	mi ngan lag sbrel	ngan sbrel
ངན་རྨོངས	stupid, deceitful	ngan rmongs
ངན་སྨྲ	notoriety, bad reputation, disgrace	ngan smra
ངན་སྨྲ་བྱེད་པ	to criticize	ngan smra byed pa
ངན་སྨྲས	'bad-mouthing', abuse, slander, put down, use bad language	ngan smras
ངན་སྨྲས་བྱེད	'bad-mouth', abuse, slander, put down, use bad language	ngan smras byed
ངན་ཚིག	accusation	ngan tshig
ངན་མཚང་སྨྲ་བ	to criticize	ngan mtshang smra ba
ངན་མཚངས་སྨྲ་བ	to criticize	ngan mtshangs smra ba
ངན་ཞེན	desire/ attachment to evil deeds	ngan zhen
ངན་བཟོས་མ་བྱས	made useless	ngan bzos ma byas
ངན་བཟོས་མ་བྱས་པ	not reclaimed ngan g.yo - deception, deceit ngan g.yo - deception, deceit, treachery ngan g.yo - hypocrisy, fox, of low caste ngan g.yo can - deceitful, treacherous ngan g.yo dran 'phrul - bsam nga...	ngan bzos ma byas pa
ངན་རིངས་མ	procrastinating, delaying, putting a duty at a distance	ngan rings ma
ངན་རིམས	epidemic	ngan rims
ངན་རུང	feeble	ngan rung
ངན་རུལ	malevolent, rotten, degenerate, decadent	ngan rul
ངན་རུལ་ཆགས	become malevolent/ rotten/ degenerate/ decadent	ngan rul chags
ངན་རུལ་དུ་འགྱུར	become malevolent/ rotten/ degenerate/ decadent	ngan rul du 'gyur
ངན་རེངས	obstinate, stubborn	ngan rengs
ངན་རེངས་པ	diehard	ngan rengs pa
ངན་རོག	SA ngan rnyed	ngan rog
ངན་རོགས	evil cohort/ puppet, accomplice	ngan rogs
ངན་རོལ་མ	prostitute	ngan rol ma
ངན་ལང	bad habit, spoiled [person]	ngan lang
ངན་ལང་དུ་གཏོང	spoil, indulge	ngan lang du gtong
ངན་ལང་དུ་ཤོར	become spoiled	ngan lang du shor
ངན་ལང་ཤོར་བ	indulge	ngan lang shor ba
ངན་ལན	return for evil done to 1	ngan lan
ངན་ལན་གྱིས་བཟང་གྱིས་འཇལ	return evil w good	ngan lan gyis bzang gyis 'jal
ངན་ལན་ངན་གྱིས་འཇལ་བ	return evil w evil	ngan lan ngan gyis 'jal ba
ངན་ལན་ངན་ལྡོན	return bad with bad	ngan lan ngan ldon
ངན་ལན་བཟང་འཇལ	return evil w good	ngan lan bzang 'jal
ངན་ལན་སློག	to respond to evil	ngan lan slog
ངན་ལན་སློག་པ	retort	ngan lan slog pa
ངན་ལན་བསློགས	past of ngan lan slog	ngan lan bslogs
ངན་ལབ	slander, lies	ngan lab
ངན་ལབ་བརྗོད	slander, lie	ngan lab brjod
ངན་ལབ་གཏོང	slander, lie	ngan lab gtong
ངན་ལམ	place name	ngan lam
ངན་ལམ་རྒྱལ་བ་མཆོག་དབྱངས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	ngan lam rgyal ba mchog dbyangs
ངན་ལམ་རྒྱལ་བ་མཆོག་དབྱངས་གྱལྭ་ཆོ	Yang of Nganlam. A close disciple of Guru Rinpoche who attained accomplishment through the practice of Hayagriva and was later incarnated as the Karmapas. Born into the Nganlam clan in the Phen Val...	ngan lam rgyal ba mchog dbyangs Gyalwa Cho
ངན་ལས་རྒྱལ	Venus	ngan las rgyal
ངན་ལས་བྱས་པའི་སྙན་གྲགས	infamous	ngan las byas pa'i snyan grags
ངན་ལས་བྱེད་རོགས	accomplice	ngan las byed rogs
ངན་ཤགས	bad joke	ngan shags
ངན་ཤགས་གཏོང་བ	to bicker, answer back, give lip	ngan shags gtong ba
ངན་ཤི	death from starvation or accident or plague	ngan shi
ངན་ཤི་ཐེབས	die an unpleasant/ painful death	ngan shi thebs
ངན་ཤུགས	power of habits of evil mind, evil force	ngan shugs
ངན་ཤུགས་ཧམ་ཁྱེར	dbang shed kyis brnyas 'phrog...Byings la dbang jus med par kho pas ngan shugs ham khyer gyis bed spyod btang song	ngan shugs ham khyer
ངན་ཤུལ	remants of evil [ways/ thoughts]	ngan shul
ངན་ཤུལ་ད་ཡང་བསྡད	remants of evil [ways/ thoughts] remain even now	ngan shul da yang bsdad
ངན་ཤེད་སྒལ་རལ	bad lazy behavior	ngan shed sgal ral
ངན་ཤོམ	conspiracy	ngan shom
ངན་གཤག	argue, strife	ngan gshag
ངན་གཤགས	argue	ngan gshags
ངན་སེམས	evil intentions {nga'i ngan sems mi shes pa'i thams cad mkhyen pa ga la yong} The Buddha does not know my evil intentions. How can he	ngan sems
བེ་སཻད་ཏོ་བེ་ཨལལ	knowing?	be said to be all
ངན་སེམས་དགུ་ཚང	totally evil/ cruel/ mean	ngan sems dgu tshang
ངན་སེམས་འགྱུར་མེད	incorrigibly evil/ creul/ mean	ngan sems 'gyur med
ངན་སེམས་རྒུ་ཚང	totally evil/ cruel/ mean	ngan sems rgu tshang
ངན་སེམས་རྒྱུན་འཆང	always bear a grudge, have evil/ mean/ nasty thoughts/ intent	ngan sems rgyun 'chang
ངན་སེམས་ཅན	malevolent	ngan sems can
ངན་སེམས་འཆང	bear a grudge, have evil thoughts/ intent	ngan sems 'chang
ངན་སེམས་བྱེད	act cruel/ mean	ngan sems byed
ངན་སེལ	1) ngur ba; 2) water; 3) kusha grass	ngan sel
ངན་སོང	lower realms/ existences	ngan song
ངན་སོང་ཀུན་འདྲེན	leading out of the lower realms, which guides beings up from the lower state of existence	ngan song kun 'dren
ངན་སོང་སྐྱེ་སྒོ་ཆོད	the gates of lower rebirth are shut	ngan song skye sgo chod
ངན་སོང་གི་རྟེན་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the physical form and suffering of the lower realms	ngan song gi rten dang sdug bsngal
ངན་སོང་གི་གནས	the lower states of being	ngan song gi gnas
ངན་སོང་གི་གནས་བཅུ	[TRS 26:2]	ngan song gi gnas bcu
ངན་སོང་འགྲོ་བ	a being in one of the lower realms	ngan song 'gro ba
ངན་སོང་དུ་སྐྱེ་ན	if one is to take birth in the lower realms ngan song du 'gro 'dod pa 'dra ba zhig 'dug - do you want me to go to hell!	ngan song du skye na
ངན་སོང་དུ་ལྟུང	fallen into damnation, send to the lower realms	ngan song du ltung
ངན་སོང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of the three lower realms	ngan song sdug bsngal
ངན་སོང་གནས་གསུམ	the three evil states	ngan song gnas gsum
ངན་སོང་པ	a being in one of the lower realms	ngan song pa
ངན་སོང་སྦྱོང་བ	Purifying the Lower Realms	ngan song sbyong ba
ངན་སོང་སྦྱོང་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of purifying the lower realms	ngan song sbyong ba'i dkyil 'khor
ངན་སོང་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱོང་བ	Sarvadurgati Parishodhana	ngan song yongs su sbyong ba
ངན་སོང་གསུམ	Three lower realms. The worlds of hell beings, hungry ghosts, and animals	ngan song gsum
ངན་སོང་གསུམ་གྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the sufferings of the three evil states / lower realms	ngan song gsum gyi sdug bsngal
ངན་སོང་གསུམ་གྱི་གནས	the three inferior states of existence ngan song gsum gyi gnas su mar la 'gro will descend to the three lower realms ngan song gsum gyi g.yang du lhung ba fall into the abyss of the three lower realms	ngan song gsum gyi gnas
ངན་སོར་སྐྱེ་བ	be born in an inferior place	ngan sor skye ba
ངན་སློང	the humble	ngan slong
ངན་སློང་བ	beggars and poor people 663	ngan slong ba
ངན་སློད	ngan pa'i skyon gyis slod par byed pa'am, 'gos par byed pa,...Blo gsar gzhon nu rnams la bag med rtsing spyod kyi ngan slod ma byed	ngan slod
ངན་སློབ	incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan slob
ངན་སློབ་ཁོག་ཞུགས	incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan slob khog zhugs
ངན་སློབ་ཁོག་ཞུགས་རྒྱག	incitement/ instigation to evil ngan slob khog zhugs rgyag pa'i khrims 'gal - illegal incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan slob khog zhugs rgyag
ངན་སློབ་རྒྱག	incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan slob rgyag
ངན་གསོ	nyams rgud slar gso	ngan gso
ངན་བསླབས	incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan bslabs
ངན་བསླབས་རྒྱག	incitement/ instigation to evil	ngan bslabs rgyag
ངན་ཧྲུལ	inferior and old and tattered/ worn	ngan hrul
ངན་ལྷུང་རུལ་འགྱུར	degenerate and corrupt	ngan lhung rul 'gyur
ངབ	zil lam nus pa,...Me chen gyi ngab la gcar dka', zhag tshil ngab kyis zhen pa log...Chu las rlabs drag cing me las ngab tsha ba	ngab
ངམ	or, even if, or whether, principle of	ngam
དརཀནེསས་ཨནད་ནོན	being	darkness and non
ངམ་དཀར	white color, greyish	ngam dkar
ངམ་དཀར་པོ	white color, greyish	ngam dkar po
ངམ་ཁ	'ol 'gram ste rka chu 'bab sa'i them pa	ngam kha
ངམ་གྲོག	deep ravines with precipitous eroded banks, torrent	ngam grog
ངམ་གྲོག་ཆེན་པོ	poetic name of Tibet	ngam grog chen po
ངམ་ངམ་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	spontaneously	ngam ngam shugs kyis
ངམ་ངམ་ཤུགས་ཤུགས	spontaneously, automatically	ngam ngam shugs shugs
ངམ་ཏ་ར་ཀླུ་གོང	Ngam Tara Lugong; minister of khri srong lde'u btsan	ngam ta ra klu gong
ངམ་མཐོང་ཅན	proud bumptious person, one who assumes the appearance of greatness	ngam mthong can
ངམ་དུར་ཅན	given to gluttony and drinking	ngam dur can
ངམ་ནག་པ	ngam gnag pa	ngam nag pa
ངམ་གནག	dark gray	ngam gnag
ངམ་གནག་པ	black face, angry expression	ngam gnag pa
ངམ་པ	arrogance, ravine	ngam pa
ངམ་བྱེད	black magic	ngam byed
ངམ་རྫོང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Ngamdzong Nyengyu, Oral Transmission of Ngamdzong. Chakrasamvara practices	ngam rdzong snyan brgyud
ངམ་རིང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	ngam ring
ངམ་རུ	{ngam ru gnyan nad disease	ngam ru
ངམ་རོང	two directions gda pa yin pa'i low gshong sa	ngam rong
ངམ་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	zas la dang ga med pa'am zhen pa log pa	ngam la rgyag pa
ངམ་ཤིང	a snake demigod of the nether regions	ngam shing
ངམ་ཤུགས	as a matter of course, by one's own force or accord	ngam shugs
ངམ་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	naturally, involuntary	ngam shugs kyis
ངམ་ཤོད	1) {ngam shod} [place in Lhoka C T]; 2) above and below)	ngam shod
ངམས་སྐྱེན་བྱེད་པ	to brag about one's deeds	ngams skyen byed pa
ངའི	mine, my, my	nga'i
ངའི་གད་མོ	object of laughter, ridiculous nga'i ngan sems mi shes pa'i thams cad	nga'i gad mo
མཁྱེན་པ་ག་ལ་ཡོང	The Buddha does not know my evil intentions. How	mkhyen pa ga la yong
ཅན་ཧེ་བེ་སཻད་ཏོ་བེ་ཨལལ	knowing?	can he be said to be all
ངའི་སྔོན་ཕྱོགས	in front of me	nga'i sngon phyogs
ངའི་རྗེ་བཙུན	my venerable master	nga'i rje btsun
ངའི་ཉེ་ཁོར	around me	nga'i nye khor
ངའི་དང་ག་འགག	my appetite is gone	nga'i dang ga 'gag
ངའི་དྲུང	my presence	nga'i drung
ངའི་དྲུང་དུ	in front of me	nga'i drung du
ངའི་མདུན་དེར	in front of me	nga'i mdun der
ངའི་མདུན་ཕྱོགས	in front of me	nga'i mdun phyogs
ངའི་འདི	this my	nga'i 'di
ངའི་སྣང་བ	my vision	nga'i snang ba
ངའི་ཕྱོགས་སུ	towards me	nga'i phyogs su
ངའི་བུ་སྡུག	my dear son	nga'i bu sdug
ངའི་མིག་སྔར	in front of my eyes	nga'i mig sngar
ངའི་མིང	my name nga'i tshangs par spyod pa yul ring du	nga'i ming
གནས་པར་གྱུར	for perpetuating good and chaste actions nga'i tshangs par spyod pa yul ring du	gnas par gyur
གནས་པར་བགྱུར	Bragma - for perpetuating good and chaste actions	gnas par bgyur
ངའི་ཚོད་ལ	according to my estimation	nga'i tshod la
ངའི་ཡིད་འོང	my charming wife, dearest	nga'i yid 'ong
ངའི་ཡིད་ལ་མི	I do not like it	nga'i yid la mi
ངའི་ཡིད་ལ་མི་འབབ	it does not please me	nga'i yid la mi 'bab
ངའི་ལག་པ་ཁོམ	I am unoccupied	nga'i lag pa khom
ངའི་ལག་པ་ཁོམ་ཡོད	my hands are at leisure	nga'i lag pa khom yod
ངའི་སེམས་སུ	I thought	nga'i sems su
ངའི་ལྷན་དུ	with me	nga'i lhan du
ངའོ་སྙམ་པ	the thought "I"	nga'o snyam pa
ངའོ་སྙམ་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	pride of/ based on egoism	nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal
ངའོ་སྙམ་པའི་རྟོག་པ	the concept of 'I' / 'me'	nga'o snyam pa'i rtog pa
ངར	1) intensity, power, force[ful]; 2) snying stobs and mental power; 3) sharp, forceful, intense, vigorous, abrupt, roar, howl, thrall two volatile [personality]; 4) temper [of metals; 5) be fired up...	ngar
ཕ༹ྲོནཏ	side, forepart; 7) to me	front
ངར་སྐད	sound of roaring of lions growl, roar, a shout, roar, yell	ngar skad
ངར་སྐད་རྒྱག	roar, yell angrily, shout	ngar skad rgyag
ངར་སྐད་རྒྱབ་པ	snarl	ngar skad rgyab pa
ངར་སྐད་སྒྲོག	roar, yell angrily, shout	ngar skad sgrog
ངར་སྐད་ཅན	tiger	ngar skad can
ངར་སྐྱེད	marching, advancing, fired up	ngar skyed
ངར་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	march, advance	ngar skyed byed
ངར་བསྐྱེད	sharpen your attention; bringing forth a sharp and steady quality; Thrangu Rinpoche: = {hur phyung}	ngar bskyed
ངར་བསྐྱེད་ཧུར་ཕྱུང	sharp and alert	ngar bskyed hur phyung
ངར་གླུད	hoarseness and phlegm, effigy of flour and water used as a substitute for ransom during exorcism rituals, substitute effigies, substitute effigy, glud substitute	ngar glud
ངར་འགྱིང	fired-up, stimulated, excited	ngar 'gying
ངར་འགྱིང་བྱེད	fire-up, stimulate, excite	ngar 'gying byed
ངར་འགྲོས	charge, shugs drag gi gom stabs	ngar 'gros
ངར་རྒྱུག	strong and quick	ngar rgyug
ངར་སྒྲ	roar, angry yell, shout	ngar sgra
ངར་སྒྲ་རྒྱག	roar, yell angrily, shout	ngar sgra rgyag
ངར་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག	roar, yell angrily, shout	ngar sgra sgrog
ངར་ངར	dpa' ngom gyi rgod rgod,...Rang tshod ma zin par ngar ngar kho na byas pa	ngar ngar
ངར་ངར་ཁུན་སྒྲ	hoarse groaning	ngar ngar khun sgra
ངར་ངར་འཁུན་སྒྲ	dbugs brtsegs stangs kyi sgra	ngar ngar 'khun sgra
ངར་ངར་རྒོད་རྒོད	mi ngar ma dang rgod po	ngar ngar rgod rgod
ངར་ངར་པོ	1) nature shin tu ngar po; 2) hoarse, husky, wheezing	ngar ngar po
ངར་ངར་ཕད་ཕད	ngar chen po lngas pa'i rnam pa	ngar ngar phad phad
ངར་ངར་བྱེད	be excited/ fired-up, stimulated	ngar ngar byed
ངར་ཅན	intense/ forceful; precise	ngar can
ངར་གཅོག་པ	1) weapon's sharpness zhan dra gtong ba; 2) overcome arrogance	ngar gcog pa
ངར་བཅས་པ	strong; sharp	ngar bcas pa
ངར་ལྕགས	steel magnet	ngar lcags
ངར་ལྕགས་ཀུང་སི	steel company	ngar lcags kung si
ངར་ལྕགས་རྒྱུ་ཆ	raw materials for steel	ngar lcags rgyu cha
ངར་ལྕགས་ལྕགས་ཧྲེང	steel framework/ reinforcement	ngar lcags lcags hreng
ངར་ལྕགས་རྗེན་པ	cast iron	ngar lcags rjen pa
ངར་ལྕགས་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཁེ་ལས	mtallurgical integrated plant/ works	ngar lcags mnyam 'brel khe las
ངར་ལྕགས་ལྟར་སྲ་མཁྲེགས་ཆེ་བ	very hard and solid like steel	ngar lcags ltar sra mkhregs che ba
ངར་ལྕགས་དུམ་བུ	steel ingot/ bar	ngar lcags dum bu
ངར་ལྕགས་གནོན	steel rolling	ngar lcags gnon
ངར་ལྕགས་གནོན་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	steel rolling machine	ngar lcags gnon byed 'phrul 'khor
ངར་ལྕགས་སྤུས་དག	high grade steel	ngar lcags spus dag
ངར་ལྕགས་སྤུས་ཞན	low grade steel	ngar lcags spus zhan
ངར་ལྕགས་མྱུར་དུ་འདོན་ཐབས	high speed steel producing method	ngar lcags myur du 'don thabs
ངར་ལྕགས་བཙིར་གནོན	steel rolling	ngar lcags btsir gnon
ངར་ལྕགས་བཙིར་གནོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	steel rolling machine	ngar lcags btsir gnon 'phrul 'khor
ངར་ལྕགས་བཙོ་སྦྱང	steel smelting	ngar lcags btso sbyang
ངར་ལྕགས་ཞུ་ཐབ	steel smelting furnace	ngar lcags zhu thab
ངར་ལྕགས་བཞུ་ཐབ	steel smelting furnace	ngar lcags bzhu thab
ངར་ལྕགས་བཞུ་བ	smelt, refine	ngar lcags bzhu ba
ངར་ལྕགས་བཞུ་བའི་བཟོ་གྲྭ	steel smelting plant	ngar lcags bzhu ba'i bzo grwa
ངར་ལྕགས་ལུགས་མ	crude steel	ngar lcags lugs ma
ངར་ཆ	1) weapon's [power of] sharpness; 2) mind's intelligence	ngar cha
ངར་ཆེ་བའི་སྐྱོན	too volatile [person] ngar chen g.yu 'brug - Vigorous Dragons, a type of sgra lha	ngar che ba'i skyon
ངར་ཉམས	fired-up, stimulated, excited	ngar nyams
ངར་ཉམས་པ	fired-up, stimulated, excited	ngar nyams pa
ངར་གཏོང	temper [metals]	ngar gtong
ངར་བཏགས	grain ma brngos pa rjen par btags pa	ngar btags
ངར་བཏང	tempered [metals]	ngar btang
ངར་བཏང་བ	temper steel	ngar btang ba
ངར་ཐུང	sharp and short	ngar thung
ངར་དང་བཅས་པ	feisty	ngar dang bcas pa
ངར་དང་བཅས་པའི་རིག་པ་ཡིས	with forceful insight roars	ngar dang bcas pa'i rig pa yis
ངར་དང་སྟོབས	more vigorous	ngar dang stobs
ངར་དུང	shin bone	ngar dung
ངར་གདོང	lag yu dang rkang yu'i bone = lag ngar dang rkang ngar zer	ngar gdong
ངར་འདོན་པ	set on, set against, instigate	ngar 'don pa
ངར་ལྡན	intense/ forceful; precise	ngar ldan
ངར་ལྡུད་པ	1) metal tempered; 2) ngar slong ba'am skul lcag gtong ba [people]	ngar ldud pa
ངར་བརྡུང	tempered	ngar brdung
ངར་སྣབས	mucus of the nose	ngar snabs
ངར་སྣབས་ཅིག་དོར་བ	dropped a piece of snot	ngar snabs cig dor ba
ངར་པ	stalk	ngar pa
ངར་པོ	1) easily excited, volatile. 2) tempered [of metals]. 3) strong, ferocious	ngar po
ངར་ཕྱེ	effigy made of barley flour and butter	ngar phye
ངར་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa mind blazing w strength; 2) Rtsi shing gi lo 'bras kyi yu ba [Lo ma ljang la ngar ba dmar,...Lo ma'i ngar ba] strength, force, hardness, vigor	ngar ba
ངར་བྱེད་པ	bdag tu byed pa'am 'dzin pa	ngar byed pa
ངར་བླུད	valor, strength	ngar blud
ངར་བླུད་པ	temper steel	ngar blud pa
ངར་འབོལ	strong in quality	ngar 'bol
ངར་མ	creamy saffron color? irritable, passionate, impetuous, strong, powerful, hard thu ba, rgod pa	ngar ma
ངར་མ་ཟལ་ཁྲབ	the fur corselet of strength	ngar ma zal khrab
ངར་མི	glud du rdzong ched du 'gru nas rjen btad kyi phyi las bzos pa'i 'dra gzugs shig de'i dmigs yul ni glud des mi nad pa de'i lus srog gi tshab byas te 'chi ba las thar ba'i ched du'o	ngar mi
ངར་མེད	weak, soft	ngar med
ངར་མེད་པའི་གྲི	knife w no temper	ngar med pa'i gri
ངར་འཛིན	ego-fixation, holding the notion of a self, egoism, "I" habit TSE	ngar 'dzin
ངར་འཛིན་གྱི་འཇིག་ལྟ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	ground of arising of the thought "I," having conceived of/ perceived I grasp phenomena as phenomena by rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa	ngar 'dzin gyi 'jig lta lhan skyes
ཏྲནསིཏོརཡ་བེལིཨེཕ༹་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེགོ	clinging	transitory belief of ego
ངར་འཛིན་གྱི་རྟེན་གང་ཟག་གི་བདག	the individual self as the support for egoclinging	ngar 'dzin gyi rten gang zag gi bdag
ངར་འཛིན་གྱི་ཡིད	ego-clinging mind	ngar 'dzin gyi yid
ངར་འཛིན་པ	holds to an 'I' [rang rgyud kyi nga tsam la dmigs nas nga'o snyam du 'dzin pa'i bdag 'dzin	ngar 'dzin pa
ངར་འཛིན་པ་དང་ང་ཡིར་འཛིན་པ	holding to me and mine	ngar 'dzin pa dang nga yir 'dzin pa
ངར་འཛིན་ཕྲ་བ	subtle concept of self	ngar 'dzin phra ba
ངར་འཛིན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate ego-clinging	ngar 'dzin lhan skyes
ངར་ཟན	SA ngar glud	ngar zan
ངར་ར་ར	expression of extreme pain and suffering	ngar ra ra
ངར་ཤ	vigor, vitality	ngar sha
ངར་ཤ་དོད་པོ	energetic, vigorous, vital	ngar sha dod po
ངར་ཤ་སློང་བ	ngar slong ba, stimulate, invigorate	ngar sha slong ba
ངར་ཤུགས	* vigor, energy, enthusiasm, drive, zeal	ngar shugs
ངར་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	vehemently	ngar shugs kyis
ངར་ཤུགས་སྐྱེས	get invigorated/ enthusiastic, worked up, zealous about	ngar shugs skyes
ངར་ཤུགས་ཅན	vehement	ngar shugs can
ངར་ཤུགས་གཅིག་སྒྲིམ	going all out	ngar shugs gcig sgrim
ངར་ཤུགས་གཅིག་སྒྲིམ་བྱེད	go all out	ngar shugs gcig sgrim byed
ངར་ཤུགས་ཆག	lose vigor/ energy/ enthusiasm/ drive/ zeal, be deflated	ngar shugs chag
ངར་ཤུགས་ཉམས་པ	enervate	ngar shugs nyams pa
ངར་ཤུགས་སློང	encourage, stimulate, fire up, invigorate	ngar shugs slong
ངར་ཤུགས་སློང་བྱེད	encourage, stimulate, fire up, invigorate	ngar shugs slong byed
ངར་སེམས	* vigor, energy, enthusiasm, drive, zeal	ngar sems
ངར་སེམས་པ	ego idea	ngar sems pa
ངར་སློང	encourage, stimulate, fire up, invigorate	ngar slong
ངར་སློང་བ	sems shugs skyi bar byed pa'am nga rgyal slong ba	ngar slong ba
ངར་སློང་བྱེད	encourage, stimulate, fire up, invigorate	ngar slong byed
ངར་གསོད་པ	1) eliminate weapon's rno ngar; 2) pacify Dpa' ngar	ngar gsod pa
ངར་ལྷུང	tempered	ngar lhung
ངལ	weary [-iness], hardship, difficulty, toil, fatigue, exhaustion, be tired/ exhausted	ngal
ངལ་རྐེན་པ	kind of disease, white leprosy, weariness, languor	ngal rken pa
ངལ་སྐྱེན་པོ	easy to resolve	ngal skyen po
ངལ་གྲོན་ལ་མ་འཛེམས་པར	not shying away form hardships and expenses	ngal gron la ma 'dzems par
ངལ་ལྕི་འཐིབས	tired & heavy & dull	ngal lci 'thibs
ངལ་ཆད	be tired/ weary	ngal chad
ངལ་ཆད་པ	be prostrate by fatigue	ngal chad pa
ངལ་ཆེད	punished with fatigue, worn out	ngal ched
ངལ་འཇུག་པ	tire, cause to be weary	ngal 'jug pa
ངལ་ལྟོག	hardship and hunger	ngal ltog
ངལ་སྟེགས	resting-places	ngal stegs
ངལ་སྟོང	fruitless effort, labor in vain	ngal stong
ངལ་སྟོང་དུ་འགྱུར	become fruitless effort/ labor in vain	ngal stong du 'gyur
ངལ་བསྟུན་གླ་སྤྲོད	pay in accord w work	ngal bstun gla sprod
ངལ་དུ	fatigue, tiredness, exhaustion	ngal du
ངལ་དུབ	difficult[y], exhaust[ing] [-tion] [ed], tired[ness], wearied, fatigue	ngal dub
ངལ་དུབ་སྟེ	was very tired	ngal dub ste
ངལ་དུབ་ཐང་ཆད	tiredness or exhaustion	ngal dub thang chad
ངལ་སྤངས་བརྩོན་པ	diligent and industrious/ energetic/ untiring	ngal spangs brtson pa
ངལ་ཕོང	fatigued, become tired	ngal phong
ངལ་བ	to tire of	ngal ba
ངལ་བ་ཁྱད་དུ་གསོད	ignoring hardship/ difficulties	ngal ba khyad du gsod
ངལ་བ་ཁྱད་བསད	ignoring hardship/ difficulties	ngal ba khyad bsad
ངལ་བ་ཁྱད་བསད་བྱེད	ignore hardship/ difficulties	ngal ba khyad bsad byed
ངལ་བ་ངལ་སོས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like taking rest	ngal ba ngal sos pa lta bu
ངལ་བ་སྟོང་ཟད	fruitless labor/ effort	ngal ba stong zad
ངལ་བ་སྟོང་ཟད་དུ་འྱུར	fruitlessly labor, work in vain, go down the drain	ngal ba stong zad du 'yur
ངལ་བ་དང	bsdams pa dang, ya nga ba	ngal ba dang
གང་ལ་ཡང་མི་འཛེམ་པར	caught up in such a compulsion, people will do anything, even what is shameful	gang la yang mi 'dzem par
ངལ་བ་སྤངས	renounce aversion to hardship/ difficulty/ fatigue	ngal ba spangs
ངལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	effort {lus ngag gi ngal ba byed pa} effort of body or speech	ngal ba byed pa
ངལ་བ་འབྲས་བཅས	fruitful efforts	ngal ba 'bras bcas
ངལ་བ་འབྲས་མེད	fruitless effort, labor done in vain	ngal ba 'bras med
ངལ་བ་མ་ལེན	don't bother/ take trouble	ngal ba ma len
ངལ་བ་མེད་པ	indefatigable, untiring	ngal ba med pa
ངལ་བ་མེད་པར	indefatigable, untiring	ngal ba med par
ངལ་བ་བཟོད	bear/ endure hardship/ difficulty	ngal ba bzod
ངལ་བས་དུབ	be tired/ exhausted	ngal bas dub
ངལ་མེད	abbr. of {ngal ba med pa}	ngal med
ངལ་རྩོལ	work, labor, manual labor, hard work	ngal rtsol
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ཁེ་དབང	right to work	ngal rtsol gyi khe dbang
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་འགྲན་བསྡུར	labor emulation drive	ngal rtsol gyi 'gran bsdur
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ཉི་མ	work day	ngal rtsol gyi nyi ma
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ཉིན་གྲངས	work day	ngal rtsol gyi nyin grangs
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ནུས་པ	capacity to work	ngal rtsol gyi nus pa
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ནུས་པ་ཤོར	lose capacity/ become unfit to work	ngal rtsol gyi nus pa shor
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	labor force	ngal rtsol gyi nus shugs
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་འཛིན་སྟངས	labor attitude	ngal rtsol gyi rnam 'gyur 'dzin stangs
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ཚོང་ར	labor market	ngal rtsol gyi tshong ra
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་འཚོ་སྲུང	protection of labor	ngal rtsol gyi 'tsho srung
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ལག་རྩལ	labor skills	ngal rtsol gyi lag rtsal
ངལ་རྩོལ་གྱི་ལས་བགོ	division of labor	ngal rtsol gyi las bgo
ངལ་རྩོལ་གླ་པ	hired labor ngal rtsol rgyal srung gyi lus sbyang lam	ngal rtsol gla pa
ངལ་རྩོལ་སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས	labor discipline 666	ngal rtsol sgrig khrims
ངལ་རྩོལ་སྒྲིམ་ཚད	intensity of labor	ngal rtsol sgrim tshad
ངལ་རྩོལ་བསྒྱུར་བཀོད	labor reform/ change	ngal rtsol bsgyur bkod
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཉིན་གྲངས	work days	ngal rtsol nyin grangs
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཉེན་སྲུང	labor insurance	ngal rtsol nyen srung
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཏང	Labor Party	ngal rtsol tang
ངལ་རྩོལ་ལྟ་ཚུལ	labor viewpoint	ngal rtsol lta tshul
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཚད	productivity/ output of labor	ngal rtsol thon skyed kyi nus tshad
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཆོད	productivity/ output of labor	ngal rtsol thon skyed kyi las chod
ངལ་རྩོལ་དུས་ཚིགས	May Day Labor Holiday	ngal rtsol dus tshigs
ངལ་རྩོལ་བདེ་སྲུང	protection of labor	ngal rtsol bde srung
ངལ་རྩོལ་ནུས་ཤུགས	labor force	ngal rtsol nus shugs
ངལ་རྩོལ་ནུས་ཤུགས་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	people in the labor force fulfilling only 1/2 their quota	ngal rtsol nus shugs phyed tsam
ངལ་རྩོལ་པ	worker, laborer	ngal rtsol pa
ངལ་རྩོལ་དཔའ་བོ	labor hero	ngal rtsol dpa' bo
ངལ་རྩོལ་དཔེ་ལྡན	exemplary/ model worker [spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi 'dzugs skrun nang gi sngon thon mi sna'i mtshan snyan mchog tu gyur pa zhig]	ngal rtsol dpe ldan
ངལ་རྩོལ་དཔེ་བཟང	exemplary/ model worker	ngal rtsol dpe bzang
ངལ་རྩོལ་དཔེ་ལེགས	exemplary/ model worker	ngal rtsol dpe legs
ངལ་རྩོལ་བ	worker, laborer	ngal rtsol ba
ངལ་རྩོལ་བྱ་ཡུལ	labor [production] target	ngal rtsol bya yul
ངལ་རྩོལ་བྱང་ཆུབ	experienced/ skilled laborer	ngal rtsol byang chub
ངལ་རྩོལ་བྱེད་དབང	right to work	ngal rtsol byed dbang
ངལ་རྩོལ་སྦྱང་བརྡར	practice through labor	ngal rtsol sbyang brdar
ངལ་རྩོལ་སྦྱང་སོན	experienced/ skilled worker/ laborer	ngal rtsol sbyang son
ངལ་རྩོལ་མི་དམངས	working people	ngal rtsol mi dmangs
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཚོགས་པ	Labor Party [UK]	ngal rtsol tshogs pa
ངལ་རྩོལ་རུ་ཁག	labor brigade	ngal rtsol ru khag
ངལ་རྩོལ་ལས་ཆོད	labor efficiency/ output	ngal rtsol las chod
ངལ་རྩོལ་ཤེད	labor capacity	ngal rtsol shed
ངལ་རྩོལ་སློབ་སྐྱོང	labor education	ngal rtsol slob skyong
ངལ་རྩོལ་སློབ་གསོ	labor education	ngal rtsol slob gso
ངལ་རྩོལ་ལྷགས	surplus from labor, profit for employer	ngal rtsol lhags
ངལ་ཚུགས	bench or seat inviting repose	ngal tshugs
ངལ་ཚེགས	hardship, difficulty, fatigue, weariness	ngal tshegs
ངལ་འཚོ	refreshment	ngal 'tsho
ངལ་འཚོ་བྱེད	restore, reconstruct	ngal 'tsho byed
ངལ་ཞིང་ངུ་བ་པའི་མཐའ	TSE	ngal zhing ngu ba pa'i mtha'
ངལ་ཞིང་དུབ་ནས	being fatigued	ngal zhing dub nas
ངལ་ཞིང་དུབ་པ	has tired you and caused your energy to become scattered	ngal zhing dub pa
ངལ་ཞིང་ཞལ་སྐྱེམས་པ	grew tired and thirsty	ngal zhing zhal skyems pa
ངལ་བཟོད	bear/ endure hardship/ difficulty	ngal bzod
ངལ་ལས	difficult effort/ exertion, work, labor, toil	ngal las
ངལ་ལས་པ	worker, laborer	ngal las pa
ངལ་སོ་སའི་མཁར་རྒྱུག	staff or stick to take rest by leaning on it while travelling	ngal so sa'i mkhar rgyug
ངལ་སོས་པ	v. to rest, rested, restored, refreshed, reinvigorated, rejuvenated	ngal sos pa
ངལ་གསོ	1) taking/ finding rest, rest[ing], repose, ease, relax[ation]; 2) get rested, get one's energy back	ngal gso
ངལ་གསོ་སྐོར་གསུམ	Trilogy of Natural Ease, by Longchen Rabjam	ngal gso skor gsum
ངལ་གསོ་ཁང	rest home	ngal gso khang
ངལ་གསོ་རྒྱག་པ	rest, have a break	ngal gso rgyag pa
ངལ་གསོ་སྒྱག་པ	rest, have a break	ngal gso sgyag pa
ངལ་གསོ་བ	(to (try to) take) rest/ repose/ relax; to refresh (oneself)	ngal gso ba
ངལ་གསོའི་ཁེ་དབང	right to rest	ngal gso'i khe dbang
ངལ་གསོའི་དགོངས་ཁྲོལ	leave of absence, furlough	ngal gso'i dgongs khrol
ངལ་གསོའི་རྒྱག་ཐང	rest area	ngal gso'i rgyag thang
ངལ་གསོའི་དངོས་རྫས	comfort articles	ngal gso'i dngos rdzas
ངལ་གསོའི་འདུན་ས	grove of fruit trees	ngal gso'i 'dun sa
ངལ་གསོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the mudra of resting at ease	ngal gso'i phyag rgya
ངལ་གསོར་གནས་པ	resting	ngal gsor gnas pa
ངལ་གསོས	[p {ngal gso} [got] rested	ngal gsos
ངལ་གསོས་དགའ་བའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས	joyfully rested	ngal gsos dga' ba'i sems kyis
ངལ་གསོས་ཏེ་སྡོད་པ	camp	ngal gsos te sdod pa
ངལ་གསོས་པ	resting	ngal gsos pa
ངལ་བསོ	to rest	ngal bso
ངལ་བསོ་བ	respite, relaxation, take rest, refresh one's self	ngal bso ba
ངལ་བསོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the resting mudra, gesture of ease	ngal bso'i phyag rgya
ངལ་བསོས	refreshed	ngal bsos
ངལ་བསོས་པོ	Vaishravana	ngal bsos po
ངལ་བསོས་བུ	Vaishravana	ngal bsos bu
ངས	1) Syn {nga yis}. 2) interrogative particle for verbs ending in {nga}	ngas
ངས་ཀྱང	And as for me,	ngas kyang
ངས་ཁྱོད་ལ་བཤད་དོ	I have told you	ngas khyod la bshad do
ངས་གོ་ཡ་ལ	as I heard	ngas go ya la
ངས་དང་མ་ངེས	fixed and not fixed, certain and not certain, definite and indefinite ngas ni khyod la thar pa'i thabs bstan gyi {thar pa rang la rags las shes par gyis} I have shown you the methods that lead to l...	ngas dang ma nges
ངས་པ	duration	ngas pa
ངས་བྱས་ན	in my opinion, I think	ngas byas na
ངས་འབྱིན	deliverance	ngas 'byin
ངས་འབྱེད་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four limbs of d d	ngas 'byed yan lag bzhi
ངས་མ་མཐོང	never have I seen	ngas ma mthong
ངས་རྩིས་ཤེས	I understand counting	ngas rtsis shes
ངས་ཤེས	ascertaining consciousness	ngas shes
ངས་ཤེས་བྱུང	I have heard that	ngas shes byung
ངས་སློབ	I teach	ngas slob
ངི	the number '32'	ngi
ངུ	[p ngus],, cry, weep, wail	ngu
ངུ་སྐད	sobbing, weeping, lamenting	ngu skad
ངུ་སྐད་རྒྱག	cry[ing], sob, weep, lament, complain	ngu skad rgyag
ངུ་སྐད་རྒྱག་པ	sob, weep, lament, complain	ngu skad rgyag pa
ངུ་སྐད་རྒྱབ་པ	sob	ngu skad rgyab pa
ངུ་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ	wail	ngu skad chen po
ངུ་སྐད་སྙིང་རྗེ་རྗེ་འདྲ་བ་ཞིག	pitiful cries for help	ngu skad snying rje rje 'dra ba zhig
ངུ་སྐད་འདོན	crying	ngu skad 'don
ངུ་སྐད་འདོན་པ	sob, weep, lament, complain	ngu skad 'don pa
ངུ་མཁན	weeper	ngu mkhan
ངུ་དགོད	laugh and cry together	ngu dgod
ངུ་སྒྲ	weeping sound	ngu sgra
ངུ་ངག	talk while crying	ngu ngag
ངུ་ངུ	teal	ngu ngu
ངུ་དངས	ngu ngag	ngu dngas
ངུ་ཅོ	sound of weeping, lamentation	ngu co
ངུ་ཅོ་དིར	sound of lamentation	ngu co dir
ངུ་ཅོ་དིར་རེ	weeping	ngu co dir re
ངུ་ཅོར	loud weeping/ lamenting	ngu cor
ངུ་སྙིང་འདོད	to feel like crying	ngu snying 'dod
ངུ་སྙིང་འདོད་པ	felt like crying forever	ngu snying 'dod pa
ངུ་གདོང	1) weeping face; 2) Rtag tu ngu grabs byas nas sdod mkhan gyi gdong	ngu gdong
ངུ་འདོད	wishing to cry, going to weep	ngu 'dod
ངུ་རྡོད	cries	ngu rdod
ངུ་བ	cry out	ngu ba
ངུ་བ་པོ	weeper	ngu ba po
ངུ་བོད་དབྱངས	wailing cries	ngu bod dbyangs
ངུ་བྱེད་མ	herb gze ma ra mgo	ngu byed ma
ངུ་བྲོ	painful, depressing	ngu bro
ངུ་བྲོ་བྱུང	felt like crying	ngu bro byung
ངུ་འབོང་ཆེན་པོ	the great screaming	ngu 'bong chen po
ངུ་འབོད	1) lamentation, wailing; 2) Hell of Howling	ngu 'bod
ངུ་འབོད་སཁོར	cried and wept	ngu 'bod skhor
ངུ་འབོད་ཆེ	great wailing hell according to the kalacakra	ngu 'bod che
ངུ་འབོད་ཆེ་བ	the Hell of Loud Wailing, one of the eight hot hells	ngu 'bod che ba
ངུ་འབོད་ཆེན་པོ	maharaurava, loud howling hell, hell great in suffering, 1 of tsha dmyal brgyad, loud shrieking hell	ngu 'bod chen po
ངུ་འབོད་བྱེད	lament, wail	ngu 'bod byed
ངུ་འབོད་ཤོར	cried and wept	ngu 'bod shor
ངུ་མ	to cry, weep	ngu ma
ངུ་མ་དགོད	mixed crying and laughing	ngu ma dgod
ངུ་མ་དབྱངས	plaintive song	ngu ma dbyangs
ངུ་མ་ཤགས	ngu ba dang sbrags nas yus shags rgyag pa	ngu ma shags
ངུ་ཚབ་ཏུ	rather than just wailing	ngu tshab tu
ངུ་ཚམ་མེ་སོང	to run away crying (?)	ngu tsham me song
ངུ་རྫི	loud crying, bawling out, lamenting	ngu rdzi
ངུ་ཞིང་བརྒྱལ	{mi thams cad ngu zhing brgyal lo} all the people wept and fainted	ngu zhing brgyal
ངུ་ཞིང་མཆི་མ་བྱུང	started to weep	ngu zhing mchi ma byung
ངུ་ཞིང་འདུག་པ	weeping bitterly	ngu zhing 'dug pa
ངུ་ཞིང་སྣབས་འབྱིད	wiping away tears	ngu zhing snabs 'byid
ངུ་རུ་འཇུག་པ	cause to weep	ngu ru 'jug pa
ངུ་ལབ	speak while crying	ngu lab
ངུ་ཤུམ	weeping, lamentation	ngu shum
ངུ་ཤུར་ཅན	child that is continually crying	ngu shur can
ངུ་ཤོར	burst into tears, cry	ngu shor
ངུ་ཤོར་བ	burst into tears, cry	ngu shor ba
ངུག་པ	grunt, snore, purr	ngug pa
ངུད་མོ	a sob, wail, cry [smre sngags sam cho nge]	ngud mo
ངུད་མོ་འདེབས་པ	cry, wail, weep, maon	ngud mo 'debs pa
ངུད་མོ་བྱེད་པ	cry out, wail	ngud mo byed pa
ངུབ	worn out	ngub
ངུར	1) type of duck; 2) saffron color; 3) snore, grunt, snort	ngur
ངུར་ཀ	as red as fire, fiery-red	ngur ka
ངུར་སྐད	moo	ngur skad
ངུར་ཁ	orange color	ngur kha
ངུར་ཁ་མ	yellow goose color, orange color	ngur kha ma
ངུར་ཁམ	yellow goose color, orange color	ngur kham
ངུར་སྒྲ་ཅན	pig, cattle	ngur sgra can
ངུར་པ	duck, red wild duck, anas nyroca	ngur pa
ངུར་པ་ཆེན་པོ	sheldrake, celebrated lama	ngur pa chen po
ངུར་པའི་ཤ	yellow goose flesh animal med.	ngur pa'i sha
ངུར་བ	duck? tadora ferruginea pallas, grunt, snore, purr	ngur ba
ངུར་སྨག་གོས	orange-color robe of ordained monk	ngur smag gos
ངུར་སྨིག	saffron	ngur smig
ངུར་སྨིག་གར་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པ	manifested as the saffron-robed [monk]	ngur smig gar gyis rnam par rol pa
ངུར་སྨིག་བགོ་བ	to wear yellow cloth	ngur smig bgo ba
ངུར་སྨིག་འཛིན་པ	saffron-robed monk	ngur smig 'dzin pa
ངུར་སྨྲིག	orange-colored 668	ngur smrig
སཕ༹ཕ༹ྲོན	color	saffron
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གར་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པ་མནིཕེ༹སྟེད་ཨས་ཐེ་སཕ༹ཕ༹ྲོན	robed [monk]. Var. of {ngur mig gar gyis rnam par rol pa}. [mss]	ngur smrig gar gyis rnam par rol pa manifested as the saffron
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གི་རྒྱལ	saffron banner realm	ngur smrig gi rgyal
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གི་ན་བཟའ་ཅན	saffron-robed	ngur smrig gi na bza' can
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གི་རོལ་པ	wearing monks robes	ngur smrig gi rol pa
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གོས	saffron dharma robe	ngur smrig gos
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གོས་ན་བགོས་པ	wearing saffron-colored robes	ngur smrig gos na bgos pa
ངུར་སྨྲིག་གྱོན་པ	to wear the saffroncolored robes	ngur smrig gyon pa
ངུར་སྨྲིག་བགོ་བ	wear yellow cloth ngur smrig rgyal mtshan 'chang ba'i sde rab byung gi sde	ngur smrig bgo ba
ངུར་སྨྲིག་ཅན	saffron-robed	ngur smrig can
ངུར་སྨྲིག་ཆེན་པོ	great buddhist monk	ngur smrig chen po
ངུར་སྨྲིག་འཆང་བ	saffron/ yellow robed, monk [Buddhist]	ngur smrig 'chang ba
ངུར་སྨྲིག་འཛིན་པ	wearer of yellow cloth, buddhist monk	ngur smrig 'dzin pa
ངུས	imp. of {ngu ba}; p. of {ngu}	ngus
ངུས་པ	pf. of {ngu ba}	ngus pa
ངུས་པའི་མཆི་མ	tears that have been shed	ngus pa'i mchi ma
ངུས་ལས་བྱུང	tears	ngus las byung
ངེ	figure 94	nge
ངེ་དོན	definitive meaning GD	nge don
ངེ་བ	cry	nge ba
ངེ་མོ	[arch] dgos pa	nge mo
ངེད	I, we, my, me myself [A]	nged
ངེད་ཀྱི	my, mine	nged kyi
ངེད་ཀྱི་ལས་བསྐོས	appointed by my destiny, fate	nged kyi las bskos
ངེད་ཁོ་ན	I myself, we ourselves	nged kho na
ངེད་ཅ	I, we, my, me myself [A]	nged ca
ངེད་ཅག	us, we, ourselves	nged cag
ངེད་ཅག་ཀུན	we all	nged cag kun
ངེད་ཉིད	I	nged nyid
ངེད་གཉིས	we two, the two of us	nged gnyis
ངེད་གཉིས་འདྲ་སྙམ	we are equal	nged gnyis 'dra snyam
ངེད་དག	we	nged dag
ངེད་རྣམས	we	nged rnams
ངེད་རྣམས་ཀྱི	our	nged rnams kyi
ངེད་རྣམས་སྐྱིད་ཆེས་པ	we have been comfortable	nged rnams skyid ches pa
ངེད་རྣམས་ཚོ	we, us, all of us	nged rnams tsho
ངེད་སྤུན་གསུམ	we 3 brothers	nged spun gsum
ངེད་མ་སྨད	I and my mother	nged ma smad
ངེད་ཚང	my family	nged tshang
ངེད་ཚོ	we	nged tsho
ངེད་ཚོའི	our	nged tsho'i
ངེད་ར	we	nged ra
ངེད་རང	I	nged rang
ངེད་རའི	our	nged ra'i
ངེད་ལ་ཆུ་བླང	Get us some water!	nged la chu blang
ངེན་ཤེད	vengefulness	ngen shed
ངེན་ཤེད་ཆེན་པོ	vengeful	ngen shed chen po
ངེའུ་ཅག	{nged cag} us, we, ourselves	nge'u cag
ངེར་སྐད	growling, roaring	nger skad
ངེར་བ	{nger ba, nger ba, nger ba} trans. v	nger ba
ངེས	mahayoga, infallibility, definite factor, remember, memorize, keep in mind, certainty particle, to be certain, become certain, certainly realize	nges
ངེས་ཁ་རག	place in tibet	nges kha rag
ངེས་ཁྱབ	definite pervasion	nges khyab
ངེས་མཁོ	necessary, essential, indispensable	nges mkho
ངེས་གྲོལ	definitively freed, clear, distinct, bright	nges grol
ངེས་འགྲོ	transmigration	nges 'gro
ངེས་འགྲོ་ཅན	merchant	nges 'gro can
ངེས་རྒྱལ	victory, triumph	nges rgyal
ངེས་རྒྱུ	certainly circulating prana for feeling	nges rgyu
ངེས་སྒྲ	real sound	nges sgra
ངེས་སྒྲིབ	ljang pa	nges sgrib
ངེས་སྒྲུབ	definite accomplishment	nges sgrub
ངེས་སྒྲོགས	emphasis, any proclamation, reading letters or books loudly	nges sgrogs
ངེས་ངེས་ཏིག་ཏིག	nges gsal brtan po	nges nges tig tig
ངེས་ངེས་པོ	1) yid la brtan por 'jags pa; 2) changeless and stable	nges nges po
ངེས་ངོ	ascertainment factor, the true state [of appearances]	nges ngo
ངེས་ངོར	for the ascertainment factor	nges ngor
ངེས་ཅན	certain, definite, sure, resolved, ascertained	nges can
ངེས་ཅན་ཅིག	definitely	nges can cig
ངེས་ཆ	stability	nges cha
ངེས་ཆེར་མེད	it is not quite sure, I do not know for certain	nges cher med
ངེས་འཇུག་པ	assurance, assure	nges 'jug pa
ངེས་འཇོམས	fully subduing an enemy	nges 'joms
ངེས་བརྗོད	1) dharmas individual characteristics expressing word; 2) 1 of the nyi ma'i rta bdun	nges brjod
ངེས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རིག	true sayings or revelations	nges brjod kyi rig
ངེས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རིག་བྱེད	rig veda	nges brjod kyi rig byed
ངེས་ཉམ	certain fall or degeneration	nges nyam
ངེས་ཏན	sure	nges tan
ངེས་ཏིག	guarantee	nges tig
ངེས་གཏན	certainty	nges gtan
ངེས་གཏན་དྲན་གསོས	to remember with certainty, recollect with certainty	nges gtan dran gsos
ངེས་གཏན་མེད་ན	unless it is certain	nges gtan med na
ངེས་གཏན་མེད་པ	incertitude, indefinite	nges gtan med pa
ངེས་གཏན་མེད་པར	w/o certainty, unless it is certain	nges gtan med par
ངེས་རྟོག	certainty	nges rtog
ངེས་རྟོགས	definite understanding, meditation	nges rtogs
ངེས་བརྟགས་པ	definitive investigation, become an object of judgment	nges brtags pa
ངེས་བརྟན	fixed and certain nges brtan yin min rtsad gcod byed pa verify 669	nges brtan
ངེས་བསྟན	the true teachings	nges bstan
ངེས་བསྟན་གྱི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses, 'jig rten la grags pa'i nges pa ston byed dpe'i dngos po 'ga' zhig gis de dang phyogs mtshungs pa'i nges pa bstan bya dpe can gyi dngos po 'ga' zhig la 'bras bu phan gnod g...	nges bstan gyi rgyan
ངེས་བསྟན་གྱི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	nges par bstan pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses rnam grangs gnyis ni, mchog gi nges bstan dang, mchog min nges bstan no	nges bstan gyi rgyan gnyis
ངེས་ཐུབ་པ	we can understand	nges thub pa
ངེས་ཐོབ	real or certain gain	nges thob
ངེས་དག	purification, cleansing	nges dag
ངེས་དང་མ་ངེས	fixed and not fixed, certain and not certain, definite and indefinite	nges dang ma nges
ངེས་དང་མ་ངེས་རྟགས	definite and indefinite signs	nges dang ma nges rtags
ངེས་དོན	nitartha, (certain, definitive, real, absolute, true, direct) meaning, ultimate (aim, truth), certain and true import, immediate or absolute knowledge of the truth, positive (order, instruction), s...	nges don
ངེས་དོན་བཀའ་འཁོར་ཕྱི་མ	last Wheel of Teaching on the definitive meaning	nges don bka' 'khor phyi ma
ངེས་དོན་གྱི	wheel of the doctrine of definitive meaning GD	nges don gyi
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	Dharma Wheel of definitive meaning	nges don gyi chos kyi 'khor lo
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་སྙིང་པོར་གྱུར་པ	which is the essence of the definitive meaning nges don gyi snying por gyur pa mthar	nges don gyi snying por gyur pa
ཐུག་པ	the ultimate essence of the definitive meaning	thug pa
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་མདོ	a sutra of definitive meaning	nges don gyi mdo
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	the sutras of the definitive meaning	nges don gyi mdo sde
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	the vajra and bell of the true meaning	nges don gyi rdor dril
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	definitive guru yoga	nges don gyi bla ma'i rnal 'byor
ངེས་དོན་གྱི་ཨ་ཐུང	the ultimate / true 'atung' nges don bstan pa'i snying po mgon po 'bri gung pa chen po'i gdan rabs chos kyi byung tshul gser gyi phreng ba Account of the Various Masters of the Drigung Kagyü School...	nges don gyi a thung
ངེས་དོན་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate definitive meaning / true meaning	nges don mthar thug
ངེས་དོན་དང་དྲང་དོན	true meaning and expedient meaning, the actual and provisional meaning	nges don dang drang don
ངེས་དོན་དུ	according to the definitive [absolute truth]	nges don du
ངེས་དོན་དོན་དམ་མཇལ་ཕྱག	The true meaning is the ultimate homage of recognition	nges don don dam mjal phyag
ངེས་དོན་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	nt. Tantra of the Summary of Definitive Meaning	nges don 'dus pa'i rgyud
ངེས་དོན་འབྲུག་སྒྲ	refutations of the charges leveled against the tantric works of Nyingmapa at various periods in Tibetan history; by Sogdokpa Lodrö Gyaltsen; {sog bzlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan} (b. 1552)	nges don 'brug sgra
ངེས་དོན་ཙམ	semi-definitive meaning	nges don tsam
ངེས་དོན་ཚད་མ་ལྡན་པ	authentic definitive meaning	nges don tshad ma ldan pa
ངེས་དོན་ལ་རྟོན་པ	reliance on the definitive meaning. [rton pa bzhi'i nang gses shig ste, chos gang zhig rtog ge ba dang nyan thos dang rang sangs rgyas kyi spyod yul las shin tu 'das shing, zab cing rgya che ba'i d...	nges don la rton pa
ངེས་གདུང	anything that gives sure pain	nges gdung
ངེས་འདྲོངས	1) certainty 'drongs pa = apprehend the meaning; 2) Tan tan tig tig	nges 'drongs
ངེས་ལྡན	Syn {nges can}	nges ldan
ངེས་ལྡན་གྱི་དབང་བོ་གསུམ	TSE	nges ldan gyi dbang bo gsum
ངེས་ནས	in terms of kindness	nges nas
ངེས་ནོར་བུ	ultimate jewel	nges nor bu
ངེས་གནས	1) really exist; 2) a kind of bodhicitta	nges gnas
ངེས་གནོད་མཛེས	SK Nisumbha	nges gnod mdzes
ཨལསོ་གུཧྱསམཇ	tantra	also guhyasamaja
ངེས་སྣང	similar things, similarity in things	nges snang
ངེས་པ	had mastered	nges pa
ངེས་པ་འགོག་པའི་སྦྱར་བ	sbyar ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sbyar gzhi dngos po gang rung zhig gi sbyar chos gzhi gcig gi steng kho na la yod pa'i nges pa sbyar zhing, 'on kyang de gcig pur ma zad de 'dra'i rnam pa g...	nges pa 'gog pa'i sbyar ba
ངེས་པ་ལྔ	5 specific features of the Buddha level (individuality of Buddha, his realm, listeners, time of discourse, teaching), 5 certainties (ston pa, chos, 'khor, gnas, dus), SA phun sum tshogs lnga	nges pa lnga
ངེས་པ་ལྔ་དང་བྲལ་བ	TSE	nges pa lnga dang bral ba
ངེས་པ་ལྔ་ལྡན	endowed with the five certainties / fivefold certainty: the certain place is the Densely Arrayed, the certain form is adorned with the marks and signs, the certain teaching is exclusively the Mahay...	nges pa lnga ldan
ངེས་པ་ལྔ་བྲལ	without / lacking the five certainties	nges pa lnga bral
ངེས་པ་ཅན	true meaning [vs dgongs pa can ("literal meaning or figurative teaching"), q ; for example, "guru is everywhere" is figurative alt: literal teaching]	nges pa can
ངེས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་སྦྱར་བ	sbyar ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sbyar gzhi dngos po gang yang rung ba zhig gi sbyar chos rnams kyi nang nas sbyar gzhi dang mi mthun pa'i sgra'i 'jug don rnams bkag ste de dang mthun pa'i ...	nges pa can gyi sbyar ba
ངེས་པ་ཉིད	certainty, specific	nges pa nyid
ངེས་པ་ཉིད་དུ	in reality, truly, really	nges pa nyid du
ངེས་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྲོ་དགོས	ought to go	nges pa nyid du 'gro dgos
ངེས་པ་རྙེད་པ	to gain certainty	nges pa rnyed pa
ངེས་པ་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Definite Essence Tantra. One of The Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	nges pa snying po'i rgyud
ངེས་པ་གཏིང་ཚུགས་པ	attain / establish certainty	nges pa gting tshugs pa
ངེས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all things perceivable and realizable	nges pa thams cad
ངེས་པ་ཐོབ	definitive attainment	nges pa thob
ངེས་པ་ཐོབ་པ་ཐེག་པ་དྲུག	six vehicles of definitive attainment GD	nges pa thob pa theg pa drug
ངེས་པ་ཐོབ་པའི་ཐེག་པ་དྲུག	six vehicles of definitive attainment nges pa dang ma nges par 'gro ba'i phyag	nges pa thob pa'i theg pa drug
རྒྱ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་མདོ	{nges pa dang ma nges par 'gro ba'i phyag rgya la 'jug pa'i mdo nges pa dang ma nges par 'gro ba'i phyag	rgya la 'jug pa'i mdo
ངེས་པ་དོན	true meaning, ultimate, inner [vs drang don]	nges pa don
ངེས་པ་དོན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel of definite meaning nges pa don gyi grub pa'i dbang phyug rje tshul khrims nyi ma dpal bzang po'i rnam par thar pa mdo tsam brjod pa dad gsum nyin byed 'dren pa'i skya	nges pa don gyi 'khor lo
རེངས	the biography of {tshul khrims nyi ma}, founder of {ri rdzong} monastery; compiled by {ri rdzong sras sprul blo bzang tshul khrims chos 'phel} and {tshul khrims rdo rje}; corrected by {phur bu lcog...	rengs
ངེས་པ་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	the sutra section on the real meaning	nges pa don gyi mdo sde
ངེས་པ་དོན་གྱི་ཕྱག	ultimate prostration	nges pa don gyi phyag
ངེས་པ་འདྲེན་པ	to induce certainty [ggd]	nges pa 'dren pa
ངེས་པ་ཕུལ་བྱུང	phul byung gi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, 'jig rten grags tshod las brgal ba'i gtan tshigs kyi nges pa phul byung ston pa'i rgyan zhig	nges pa phul byung
ངེས་པ་བྱུང	to retain	nges pa byung
ངེས་པ་བྱེད་པ	ascertainment, determination, determination	nges pa byed pa
ངེས་པ་མེད	uncertain, unpredictable	nges pa med
ངེས་པ་མེད་པ	may not, not necessarily, spontaneous, is not certain	nges pa med pa
ངེས་པ་མེད་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	uncertain suffering [sdug bsngal drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, sdug bsngal gyi che chung dang, gnas dang, tsad la nges pa med pa	nges pa med pa'i sdug bsngal
ངེས་པ་མེད་པའི་གནས	uncertain/ unfixed place	nges pa med pa'i gnas
ངེས་པ་མེད་པར	indeterminately; (at) random; unpredictably	nges pa med par
ངེས་པ་བཙལ་བ	gain confidence	nges pa btsal ba
ངེས་པ་ཚིག་བཞི	Four Verses of Knowledge, chapter 32 of kun byed rgyal po	nges pa tshig bzhi
ངེས་པ་ཞིག་བྱ	something definite	nges pa zhig bya
ངེས་པ་ཞིག་བྱུང	remember	nges pa zhig byung
ངེས་པ་ལ་གནས་པ	to abide in certainty	nges pa la gnas pa
ངེས་པ་ལ་ཞུགས	having entered the stage where [liberation] is certain, is the path of insight	nges pa la zhugs
ངེས་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	entering the stage of certainty	nges pa la zhugs pa
ངེས་པའི	definitive nges pa'i rgyun zhugs srid pa lan bdun pa	nges pa'i
ངེས་པའི་རྟགས་ལྔ	the five certain signs, [in the bardo of becoming. 1) no foot prints, shadow or sounds from the body. 2) can move unimpeded through matter. 3) have superknowledge. 4) voice not heard by relatives. ...	nges pa'i rtags lnga
ངེས་པའི་སྟོབས་བསྐྱེད་པ	develop the strength of certainty / conviction	nges pa'i stobs bskyed pa
ངེས་པའི་དོན	ultimate truth, SA nges don, definitive meaning	nges pa'i don
ངེས་པའི་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	the sutras of the definitive meaning	nges pa'i don gyi mdo sde
མི་བྱ	you should rely un the sutras of the definitive meaning rather than	mi bya
མེ་བྱ	the true meaning sutras are to be relied on and the provisional meaning sutras are not to be	me bya
ངེས་པའི་དོན་བསྟན་པ	true meaning teachings	nges pa'i don bstan pa
ངེས་པའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi gnas lugs dang chos mtshungs pa'i dpe gcig kho nar nges pa rnyed pa'i rgyan zhig	nges pa'i dpe
ངེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	all things perceivable and realizable	nges pa'i phung po
ངེས་པའི་མྱོང་བ	experience of certainty	nges pa'i myong ba
ངེས་པའི་མྱོང་བ་ཐོན	to gain the experience of certainty in the fact that	nges pa'i myong ba thon
ངེས་པའི་ཚིག	rjes grub ming gi tshig 'grel	nges pa'i tshig
ངེས་པའི་རིགས་པ	the group destined for	nges pa'i rigs pa
ངེས་པའི་ལམ	absolute path	nges pa'i lam
ངེས་པའི་ལུང	definitive scriptures	nges pa'i lung
ངེས་པའི་ཤེས	apodictically certain awareness	nges pa'i shes
ངེས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	certainty, conviction, assurance	nges pa'i shes pa
ངེས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	certain knowledge	nges pa'i shes rab
ངེས་པའི་ས	the assured levels	nges pa'i sa
ངེས་པའི་ས་ལ་གནས་པ	to dwell on the assured levels nges pa'i sa la gnas pa'i byang chub sems	nges pa'i sa la gnas pa
དཔའ་བསད་པ	to murder a bodhisattva dwelling on the assured levels	dpa' bsad pa
ངེས་པར	definitive(ly)/ definite(ly); certainly; surely	nges par
ངེས་པར་ཀུན་སྦྱིན	removal	nges par kun sbyin
ངེས་པར་སྐྱེ་བ	sure produce, infallible results	nges par skye ba
ངེས་པར་སྐྱོན	serious mistake	nges par skyon
ངེས་པར་མཁོ་བ	important, necessary	nges par mkho ba
ངེས་པར་གོད་མཛད	one who really does mischief, epithet of wrathful deity	nges par god mdzad
ངེས་པར་གྲོ	for certain be liberated definitely	nges par gro
ངེས་པར་གྲོལ	liberation is assured. Syn {nges grol}	nges par grol
ངེས་པར་གྲོལ་བ	surely free, definitely liberated	nges par grol ba
ངེས་པར་དགའ་བ	perfect satisfaction, be really pleased	nges par dga' ba
ངེས་པར་དགོས་པ	surely important	nges par dgos pa
ངེས་པར་དགོས་པ་ཡིན་པ	is absolutely necessary	nges par dgos pa yin pa
ངེས་པར་འགུགས	act of bringing under one's own sure possession or power	nges par 'gugs
ཨཉ་ཝིཤེད	for property or person by the exercise of occult powers	any wished
ངེས་པར་འགྱུར	regular occurrence	nges par 'gyur
ངེས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	to be convinced x {'o cag kyang nges par 'gyur bas zhu'o zer} "We could ask for the teaching because we are now convinced,” they said	nges par 'gyur ba
ངེས་པར་འགྲེལ་པ	see {dgongs pa nges 'grel}	nges par 'grel pa
ངེས་པར་འགྲེལ་བ	see {dgongs pa nges 'grel}	nges par 'grel ba
ངེས་པར་འགྲོ་སྒོས	ought to go	nges par 'gro sgos
ངེས་པར་འགྲོ་བ	go to certainty to nirvana or emancipation from the sufferings of the world	nges par 'gro ba
ངེས་པར་རྒྱལ་བ	be completely victorious, bring a certain thing or person under one's command or control	nges par rgyal ba
ངེས་པར་རྒྱུ་བ	certainly moving energy	nges par rgyu ba
ངེས་པར་ལྒེས་པ	ultimate good	nges par lges pa
ངེས་པར་བརྒལ་པ	one who has arrived at a sure conclusion, one who has at- 672 tained to an absolute state, one who has been saved or emancipated nges par dngos grub dam pa 'di bdag gis	nges par brgal pa
ཁྱོད་ལ་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱ	I will definitely give the supreme siddhi	khyod la sbyin par bya
ངེས་པར་གཅོད་པ	cut sure, make certain something that will certainly happen	nges par gcod pa
ངེས་པར་ཆོད	prevent the occurrence of ominous events by means of mystical charms	nges par chod
ངེས་པར་འཇུག་པ	establish firmly	nges par 'jug pa
ངེས་པར་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད	necessarily, definitely, certainly, {nges par du}	nges par 'jog par byed
ངེས་པར་བརྗོད	is described	nges par brjod
ངེས་པར་བརྗོད་པ	is described	nges par brjod pa
ངེས་པར་མཉན་བྱས	anything promised, undertaking	nges par mnyan byas
ངེས་པར་བཏགས་པ	fixated labeling	nges par btags pa
ངེས་པར་རྟོགས་འགྱུར	will surely realize	nges par rtogs 'gyur
ངེས་པར་རྟོགས་པ	{phye ste rtog pa}	nges par rtogs pa
ངེས་པར་རྟོགས་པར་བྱ	discern	nges par rtogs par bya
ངེས་པར་སྟོན་པ	show with assurance	nges par ston pa
ངེས་པར་བརྟན་པ	certainty, state free from sin, state of reality, establish religion or doctrine	nges par brtan pa
ངེས་པར་བསྟན་པ	direct teaching, give sound advice	nges par bstan pa
ངེས་པར་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	{nges par thag chod/ nges par thag bcad pa} - decisive experience of certainty (concerning . . . )	nges par thag gcod pa
ངེས་པར་མཐོང	truly perceiving	nges par mthong
ངེས་པར་མཐོང་བ	right understanding	nges par mthong ba
ངེས་པར་དུ	1) certainly, definitely, for sure, necessary; 2) must, ought to	nges par du
ངེས་པར་དུ་འགྲོ་དགོས	ought to go	nges par du 'gro dgos
ངེས་པར་དུ་ངོ་རྒོལ་བྱེད་དགོས	ought to oppose	nges par du ngo rgol byed dgos
ངེས་པར་གདུང་བ	anything that gives sure pain	nges par gdung ba
ངེས་པར་བརྣགས་པ	be convinced of a thing or occurrence, conviction	nges par brnags pa
ངེས་པར་སྤངས་པ	perfect renunciation	nges par spangs pa
ངེས་པར་བྱ	understand, should be understood	nges par bya
ངེས་པར་བྱ་བ	ascertainment	nges par bya ba
ངེས་པར་བྱས	to achieve certainty	nges par byas
ངེས་པར་བྱུང་བ	definite arising	nges par byung ba
ངེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	fix, settle, establish, make certain	nges par byed pa
ངེས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	ascertaining consciousness	nges par byed pa'i shes pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱིན་པ	deliverance, elimination, emancipation, causing	nges par 'byin pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	bring deliverance	nges par 'byin par byed pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱིན་བ	the act of becoming disillusioned with sams ra GD. nges 'byin	nges par 'byin ba
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང	going forth	nges par 'byung
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of [seeking] deliverance nges par 'byung pa'i lam ston pa la mi 'jigs	nges par 'byung pa'i tshul khrims
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ	1) certainty of release, renunciation, deliverance, emancipation, one of the {'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi rnam pa bcu drug tu phye ba} 16 aspects of the four noble truths. definite escape, getting rid...	nges par 'byung ba
ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	fearless in having shown the path to deliverance [mi 'jigs pa bzhi'i gras shig byang chub phyogs kyi chos rnams kyis rnam par grol ba thob cing gzhan gyis nam yang ma yin par mngon sum du gzigs pa'...	la mi 'jigs pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ་ཉིད	[definite] escape	nges par 'byung ba nyid
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ་དང་བཅས་པ	basis for renunciation nges par 'byung ba rdzogs pa'i byang	nges par 'byung ba dang bcas pa
ཆུབ་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	which makes you proceed towards the deliverance of perfect enlightenment	chub tu 'gro bar byed pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of [seeking] deliverance	nges par 'byung ba'i tshul khrims
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བའི་ཡན་ལག	the aspect of emancipation nges par 'byung ba'i lam ston pa la mi 'jigs	nges par 'byung ba'i yan lag
པ་མི་འཇིགས་པ་བཞི	fearless in having shown the path to deliverance	pa mi 'jigs pa bzhi
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བས	deliverance form samsara	nges par 'byung bas
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བས་བརྟན	based upon certain liberation from samsara	nges par 'byung bas brtan
ངེས་པར་འབྱེད་པ	definite differentiation; to distinguish fully, differentiate thoroughly; definitive analysis; Skt. nirvedha, intellectual penetration, insight	nges par 'byed pa
ངེས་པར་འབྱེད་པའི	rtse mo, bzod pa, 'jig rten pa'i chos kyi mchog cha dang mthun pa), rtse mo, bzod pa, 'jig rten pa'i chos kyi mchog)	nges par 'byed pa'i
ངེས་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་ཆ	aspect / factor of ascertainment	nges par 'byed pa'i cha
ངེས་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་ཆ་དང་མཐུན་པ	4 aids to penetration (dro ba nges par 'byed pa'i cha dang mthun pa in accord w the ascertaining aspect nges par 'byed pa'i cha dang mthun pa Syn {nges 'byed cha mthun} nges par 'byed pa'i cha dang...	nges par 'byed pa'i cha dang mthun pa
རིམ་བཞི	4 distinct orders agreeing with the analytical stages of saintly perfection (dro bar gyur pa	rim bzhi
ངེས་པར་འབྲེལ་བ	definitely connected	nges par 'brel ba
ངེས་པར་སྦྱོར	permanently engaged, fully employed	nges par sbyor
ངེས་པར་མན་ཤོས	absolute majority	nges par man shos
ངེས་པར་མི་འབྱུང	not going forth	nges par mi 'byung
ངེས་པར་མེད་པ	not necessarily	nges par med pa
ངེས་པར་འཛིན་པ	hold to be true	nges par 'dzin pa
ངེས་པར་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས	the attitude of regarding something as certain	nges par 'dzin pa'i sems
ངེས་པར་རྫོགས་པ	definitive perfection; definitively complete nges par rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas rdo rje 'chang chen po nyid gang zag mi yi	nges par rdzogs pa
ཚུལ་བཟུང	He really a perfect Buddha, the Great perfect Vajradhara, come to benefit beings in an ordinary human form	tshul bzung
ངེས་པར་ཞིང་སྐྱོང་མཛོད	be a true protector of the buddha field	nges par zhing skyong mdzod
ངེས་པར་གཟུང་བ	identify with certainty	nges par gzung ba
ངེས་པར་བཟུང	held fast, brought under discipline	nges par bzung
ངེས་པར་ཡིན་པ	absolutely	nges par yin pa
ངེས་པར་ཡོད་དགོས	should make sure	nges par yod dgos
ངེས་པར་ལེགས་པ	definite goodness, i.e. liberation. Syn {nges legs}	nges par legs pa
ངེས་པར་ཤེས	intelligent	nges par shes
ངེས་པར་ཤེས་པ	real conviction	nges par shes pa
ངེས་པར་བཤད་པ	definite explanation	nges par bshad pa
ངེས་པར་སེམས་པ	pacification	nges par sems pa
ངེས་པར་སེམས་པ་བྱེད	ascertain	nges par sems pa byed
ངེས་པར་བསྲེག	(met sos dus	nges par bsreg
ངེས་པར་ལྷུང	sure fall, sin	nges par lhung
ངེས་པས་ལྟོས་པ་འགོག་པའི་རྟགས	reason refuting by certain depdendence [phan tsun spangs 'gal gyi nang gses, having presented a true reason, dgag chos ltos pa dang bcas pa yin pa is refuted, eg, the dharmin a vase, is not depende...	nges pas ltos pa 'gog pa'i rtags
ངེས་པས་དོན་གྱི་བླ་མ	inner/ultimate guru	nges pas don gyi bla ma
ངེས་པས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	suratapariprccha sutra	nges pas zhus pa'i mdo
ངེས་པོ	1) Blo la 'jags po,...Gnas tshul tshang ma sems la nges po byung; 2) Brtan po Chings don mtha' dag tshig thog don 'khel gyi nges po byung ba sure, definite	nges po
ངེས་སྤེལ	real progress	nges spel
ངེས་བ་ལྔ	[TS	nges ba lnga
ངེས་བྱས	transgressions nges byas bcas pa dang rang bzhin transgressions and natural offences [the former are evil deeds caused by transgression of vows, and the latter are the natural evils caused by the f...	nges byas
ངེས་བྱས་ཞེ་དྲུག	46 transgressions	nges byas zhe drug
ངེས་བྱུང	have done a thing thoroughly, to retain	nges byung
ངེས་བྱུང་སྐྱོ་ཤས	weariness and renunciation nges byung dang skyo shas skyes pa sadness and renunciation filled his mind	nges byung skyo shas
ངེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	authenticating logic, authentic elucidation	nges byed kyi tshad ma
ངེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four aspects of ascertainment [4 aspects of the path of joining]	nges byed kyi yan lag bzhi
ངེས་བྱེད་ཆ་མཐུན	conducive to insight; partial concordance with definite differentiation. Syn {nges 'byed cha mthun}	nges byed cha mthun
ངེས་བྱེད་ཆ་མཐུན་བཞི	four factors conducive to insight	nges byed cha mthun bzhi
ངེས་དབང་གིས་འཇུག	operate by the power of ascertainment; [comp with {snang dbang gis 'jug} operate by the power of appearance] [ggd]	nges dbang gis 'jug
ངེས་འབབ	veritable event	nges 'bab
ངེས་འབྱིན	deliverance, elimination, emancipation, causing,	nges 'byin
ངེས་འབྱུང	1) renunciation two definite emergence/liberation; 3) authentic becoming; 4) {nges byung par 'byung ba}; 4) leaving home TSE; 5) [definite] resolution	nges 'byung
ངེས་འབྱུང་སྐྱེས	conceived the urge to escape nges 'byung bskyed pa'i gtam mang po many accounts illustrating the benefits of renunciation	nges 'byung skyes
ངེས་འབྱུང་གི་བློ	attitude of renunciation	nges 'byung gi blo
ངེས་འབྱུང་གི་སེམས་པ	mind of definite emergence, renunciation	nges 'byung gi sems pa
ངེས་འབྱུང་གི་བསམ་པ	attitude of renunciation	nges 'byung gi bsam pa
ངེས་འབྱུང་གིས་བློ་བཅོས་པ	changing one's attitude through renunciation	nges 'byung gis blo bcos pa
ངེས་འབྱུང་སྒྲུབ་པ	establish definite emergence/ resulution [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, mthar phyin pa of mahayana ste, depending on theg chen sems bskyed, for the sake of unurpassable enlightenment the two ...	nges 'byung sgrub pa
ངེས་འབྱུང་སྙིང་རྗེ་དག་སྣང	renunciation, compassion, and pure perception	nges 'byung snying rje dag snang
ངེས་འབྱུང་དྲག་པོ	intense renunciation; deep-felt will to be free	nges 'byung drag po
ངེས་འབྱུང་སྤུ་སུད	'phral 'phral skyes pa'i unstable nges 'byung, phu btab na bser bus khyer 'gro ba'i spu lta bu zhig nges 'byung byang sems yang dag pa'i lta	nges 'byung spu sud
ངེས་འབྱུང་མེད	absence of going forth	nges 'byung med
ངེས་འབྱུང་བཙན	strong determination to overcome samsara	nges 'byung btsan
ངེས་འབྱུང་ལ་བསྐུལ་བ	to inspire the will to be free, spur on to feel renunciation	nges 'byung la bskul ba
ངེས་འབྱེད	definite discrimination, insight	nges 'byed
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆ	the ascertaining aspect	nges 'byed kyi cha
ངེས་འབྱེད་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 ascertainments {nges 'byed yan lag bzhi} each - divided into a greater, middling and lesser stage	nges 'byed bcu gnyis
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཆ་མཐུན	"watershed" factors [of the path of application] that differentiate it [from the path of ordinary beings] and accord with [the path of spiritually superior individuals; Aids to Penetration, partial...	nges 'byed cha mthun
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ	path of ordinary mortal individuals to that of spiritually superior individuals]; isc. "watershed" experiences	from the
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཆ་མཐུན་བཞི	four factors conducive to insight	nges 'byed cha mthun bzhi
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཆ་བཞི་པོ	four factors conducive to insight	nges 'byed cha bzhi po
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཡན་ཆད	factors conducive to and forming part of enlightenment	nges 'byed yan chad
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཡན་ལག	ascertaining limb	nges 'byed yan lag
ངེས་འབྱེད་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four factors conducive to insight; four aspects of ascertainment, four limps of definite discrimination	nges 'byed yan lag bzhi
ངེས་མེད	1) {nges pa med pa}; 2) indefinite, uncertain, undetermined, unified, inexact, unmarked, general, inexact,	nges med
ངེས་མེད་ཀྱི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi gnas lugs dang chos mtshungs pa'i dpe gcig kho 675 nar ma nges par gzhan yang yod par ston pa'i rgyan zhig	nges med kyi dpe
ངེས་མེད་ཀློང	expanse in which everything is indeterminate	nges med klong
ངེས་མེད་དགྲ་འཐབ	guerilla attack/ warfare	nges med dgra 'thab
ངེས་མེད་རྒོལ་རྡུང	guerilla area	nges med rgol rdung
ངེས་མེད་ཅིར་ཡང	all possible kinds	nges med cir yang
ངེས་མེད་ཆལ་ཆོལ	unpredictably and randomly	nges med chal chol
ངེས་མེད་དབེན་པར་སྡོད་པ	living in various distant places	nges med dben par sdod pa
ངེས་མེད་དམག་འཁྲུག	guerilla warfare	nges med dmag 'khrug
ངེས་མེད་དམག་འཐབ	guerilla warfare	nges med dmag 'thab
ངེས་མེད་དམག་འཐབ་རུ་ཁག	guerilla band/ force	nges med dmag 'thab ru khag
ངེས་མེད་དམག་འཐབ་ས་ཁུལ	guerilla warfare area	nges med dmag 'thab sa khul
ངེས་མེད་དམག་རུ	guerilla band/ force	nges med dmag ru
ངེས་མེད་རི་ཁྲོད	no fixed abode, no fixed place of hermitage/ dwelling, indefinite retreat place/ abode	nges med ri khrod
ངེས་སྨོད	curse	nges smod
ངེས་རྩིས	final account, balance sheet, financial report	nges rtsis
ངེས་ཚད	norm, standard	nges tshad
ངེས་ཚིག	[verbal] definition, explanation of a word, contextual etymology, semantic explanation	nges tshig
ངེས་ཚིག་གམ་སྒྲའི་དོན	the verbal definition or literal meaning	nges tshig gam sgra'i don
ངེས་ཚིག་སྒྲ་དོན	verbal definition and literal meaning	nges tshig sgra don
ངེས་ཚིག་དང་བྲལ	beyond verbal definition	nges tshig dang bral
ངེས་ཚིག་འདྲེན་པ	dam bcas pa'i tshig gi sgra don 'dren pa'i lhag bcas kyi sgra zhig	nges tshig 'dren pa
ངེས་ཚོགས	many, multitude	nges tshogs
ངེས་མཛད	1) actualize; 2) to resolve {thugs bskyed}	nges mdzad
ངེས་འཛིན	[arch] older brother	nges 'dzin
ངེས་རྫོགས	definitive perfection	nges rdzogs
ངེས་གཟུང	1) yul gcig la dmigs su bkar ba; 2) nges pa brtan por bzung ba	nges gzung
ངེས་གཟུང་སྒྲ	kind of "ni" [eg Khong ni phul du gyur pa'o	nges gzung sgra
ངེས་གཟུང་བ	to determine, define, certify	nges gzung ba
ངེས་བཟུང	nges gzung	nges bzung
ངེས་ཡམ་ཤུང	place in tibet	nges yam shung
ངེས་རང	we	nges rang
ངེས་རང་གི	our	nges rang gi
ངེས་ལུང	definitive statement	nges lung
ངེས་ལེགས	1) true/ definite goodness, ultimate/ highest good; 2) transcendence; 3) sublime, sublimity [for commentary see mngon mtho: nirvana and enlightenment, buddhahood] gtan du bde ba ste, thar pa dang, ...	nges legs
ངེས་ལེགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	shes rab ste gtso bo bdag med rtogs pa'i shes rab	nges legs kyi rgyu
ངེས་ལེགས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	the happiness of definite goodness	nges legs kyi bde ba
ངེས་ལེགས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ་གསུམ	three fruits of true goodness nges legs thar pa dang thams cad mkhyen	nges legs kyi 'bras bu gsum
ངེས་ལེགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	Diamond Throne of Ultimate Excellence	nges legs rdo rje gdan
ངེས་ལེགས་ལམ་བཟང	The Excellent Path to True Goodness	nges legs lam bzang
ངེས་ཤེས	ascertaining consciousness, determinate awareness, certain knowledge, certainty, confidence, conviction, ascertainment, dignity, assurance, factuality, conclusiveness, reliability, undeniability, t...	nges shes
ངེས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དོན	ascertained meaning	nges shes kyi don
ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེ	become confident	nges shes skye
ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེ་བ	to feel certain, to feel certain about	nges shes skye ba
ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེས	birth of faith, growth of knowledge of reality, full faith in karma	nges shes skyes
ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེས་པ	became confident	nges shes skyes pa
ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	story that engenders confidence	nges shes skyes pa'i lo rgyus
ངེས་ཤེས་བསྐྱེད	inspire confidence, to instill certainty, to develop certainty	nges shes bskyed
ངེས་ཤེས་བསྐྱེད་པ	the arousing of confidence	nges shes bskyed pa
སྐྱེས་སུ་འབད་པ	keep trying until you arouse genuine conviction	skyes su 'bad pa
ངེས་ཤེས་རྙེད་ཐུབ་པ	we can understand	nges shes rnyed thub pa
ངེས་ཤེས་རྙེད་པ	gain certainty	nges shes rnyed pa
ངེས་ཤེས་ཐག་ཆོད	resolved with certainty, decisive certainty, definite assurance	nges shes thag chod
ངེས་ཤེས་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	resolved on with certainty	nges shes thag chod pa
ངེས་ཤེས་ཐུབ་པ	it can be understood from, we can understand	nges shes thub pa
ངེས་ཤེས་དོན་གྲོན་མེ	The Torch of Certainty [explanation on Kagyu ngondro by Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye	nges shes don gron me
ངེས་ཤེས་འདྲོང་པ	to instill confidence	nges shes 'drong pa
ངེས་ཤེས་འདྲོངས	was led to certainty	nges shes 'drongs
ངེས་ཤེས་མི་འབྱུང	not gain the certainty	nges shes mi 'byung
ངེས་ཤེས་མེད་པ	merely conjectural 676	nges shes med pa
ངེས་ཤེས་མེད་པའི་ཉམས་ལེན	a practice that is merely conjectural	nges shes med pa'i nyams len
ངེས་སུ	verb + - be sure to	nges su
ངེས་སུ་བྱ	make sure that	nges su bya
ངེས་སེམས	understanding, belief, faith	nges sems
ངེས་སོ	yes, certainly	nges so
ངེས་སོང	[I] remember, it is certain	nges song
ངེས་སོང་ངམ	Do you remember? Did it stick in your mind?	nges song ngam
ངེས་སྲེག་གི་ཟླ་བ	5th month	nges sreg gi zla ba
ངེས་སྲོལ	law, regulation, rule	nges srol
ངེས་སྲོལ་རང་བཞིན	objective law/ regulation/ rule	nges srol rang bzhin
ངེས་གསང	definitive secret	nges gsang
ངེས་གསང་བསྟན་པའི་འཁོར་ལོའི་སྒྱུར	universal ruler of the doctrine of true secrets	nges gsang bstan pa'i 'khor lo'i sgyur
ངེས་གསལ	resplendent	nges gsal
ངེས་གསལ་བརྟན་པོ	clear, distinct and stable/ definite	nges gsal brtan po
ངེས་བསྲིང	nges par du bskur ba,...Gong gsal gnas tshul rnams nges bsring yod pa zhu	nges bsring
ངོ	1) {ngo bo} essence, nature, the real, actual, 'face'. 2) {zhal} face, front. 3) mood	ngo
ངོ་ཀྲོ	a capitation tax, head-tax	ngo kro
ངོ་དཀར	cheerful, happy, smiling	ngo dkar
ངོ་དཀར་སྟོན	look happy/ pleased, show a cheerful face	ngo dkar ston
ངོ་དཀར་ནག	mood	ngo dkar nag
ངོ་དཀར་པོ	cheerful face	ngo dkar po
ངོ་དཀར་བ	1) cheerful, happy, smiling; 2) dngos chas nang nas cung drag pa	ngo dkar ba
ངོ་ལྐོག	hypocrisy; deceit, deceitful,	ngo lkog
ངོ་ལྐོག་གྱོ་ལྷད	hypocritical and deceptive actions	ngo lkog gyo lhad
ངོ་ལྐོག་བྱེད	be hypocritical/ two faced	ngo lkog byed
ངོ་ལྐོག་བྱེད་པ	to be hypocritical	ngo lkog byed pa
ངོ་ལྐོག་མེད	no hypocrisy, free from deceit, straightforward	ngo lkog med
ངོ་ལྐོག་མེད་པ	without hypocrisy	ngo lkog med pa
ངོ་ལྐོག་མཚུངས་པ	w/o hypocrisy/ deceit	ngo lkog mtshungs pa
ངོ་སྐལ	corresponding, lot, portion, share	ngo skal
ངོ་སྐོག	public & private, open and secret	ngo skog
ངོ་སྐྱེངས	ngo tsha	ngo skyengs
ངོ་སྐྱེད	principal and interest [loan]	ngo skyed
ངོ་བསྐྱོད	go in person, go in	ngo bskyod
ངོ་བསྐྱོད་པ	go or move personally	ngo bskyod pa
ངོ་ཁ	face, presence	ngo kha
ངོ་ཁབས	pags mdog dkyus dang mi 'dra ba skya ther sna tshogs shar ba'i pags nad	ngo khabs
ངོ་ཁར	in front of, the presence of, to [his] face	ngo khar
ངོ་ཁེབས	face covering sang ras sogs, veil	ngo khebs
ངོ་ཁེབས་གྲོ་ཐིག	gdong lpags nag khra'i steng du thon pa'i little bindu	ngo khebs gro thig
ངོ་ཁྲལ	1) allotted government 'khri ba'i khral, paid by Tibetan sger pa'i khyim du zhabs sdod zhu mi med mkhan; 2) Ngo gcog mi nus par byed dgos pa'i las, [head] tax	ngo khral
ངོ་མཁྱེན	know, recognize [h]	ngo mkhyen
ངོ་མཁྱེན་བྱུང་ནམ	did [you] recognize [me]?	ngo mkhyen byung nam
ངོ་འཁོར	master and servants, lord and retinue	ngo 'khor
ངོ་འཁྱེར	gzhan la ngom 'phyar gyi ngo sor 'khyer ba,...Ngan byas ngo 'khyer	ngo 'khyer
ངོ་འཁྲུད་པ	wash one's face	ngo 'khrud pa
ངོ་ག	[arch] snang ngos	ngo ga
ངོ་གྱོགས	cheat	ngo gyogs
ངོ་གྲངས	#, quantity	ngo grangs
ངོ་གྲངས་བཅུ་ཉོས	[they] bought 10	ngo grangs bcu nyos
ངོ་དགའ	1) flattery, sycophancy, bootlicking; 2) politeness	ngo dga'
ངོ་དགའ་ངོ་བསྟོད	1) flattery, sycophancy, boot- licking; 2) politeness	ngo dga' ngo bstod
ངོ་དགའ་ཅན	a hypocrite	ngo dga' can
ངོ་དགའ་སྤྲེལ་ལད	1) flattery, sycophancy, boot- licking; 2) politeness (/ ngo bsrungs nas praise/ flatter	ngo dga' sprel lad
ངོ་དགའ་སྤྲེལ་ལད་ཚ་པོ	flatterer, sycophant, boot-licker	ngo dga' sprel lad tsha po
ངོ་དགའ་ཕྱོགས་འཐེན	ngo la bltas nas phyogs ris byed pa	ngo dga' phyogs 'then
ངོ་དགའི་གཏམ	pleasant speech	ngo dga'i gtam
ངོ་རྒོལ	rising, strike, opposing, struggling against	ngo rgol
ངོ་རྒོལ་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	criticism	ngo rgol skyon brjod
ངོ་རྒོལ་སྒེར་ལངས	uprising, rebellion, insurrection	ngo rgol sger langs
ངོ་རྒོལ་སྒེར་ལངས་བྱེད	conduct uprising/ rebellion/ insurrection	ngo rgol sger langs byed
ངོ་རྒོལ་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	opposition faction/ party	ngo rgol phyogs khag
ངོ་རྒོལ་བྱེད	protest, oppose, stand up against	ngo rgol byed
ངོ་རྒོལ་བྱེད་པ	to attack	ngo rgol byed pa
ངོ་རྒོལ་གསུམ	the three antis	ngo rgol gsum
ངོ་རྒྱ	page	ngo rgya
ངོ་རྒྱུག	by taxpayers owing rta khal mi gsum gyi khral having to do it personally w no substitutes allowed	ngo rgyug
ངོ་ངོས་བཟུང་མེད་པ	not something graspable	ngo ngos bzung med pa
ངོ་ཅག	we, us	ngo cag
ངོ་གཅོག	gzhan gyi re 'dod rtsis med du gtong ba...Grogs po'i ngo gcog ma phod pa	ngo gcog
ངོ་བཅར	calling/ reporting in person [h]	ngo bcar
ངོ་བཅར་ཞུ	call/ report in person [h]	ngo bcar zhu
ངོ་ཆེ	important	ngo che
ངོ་ཆེ་ངོ་ཆུང	favoritism	ngo che ngo chung
ངོ་ཆེན	man of influence	ngo chen
ངོ་ཆེན་གཏོང་བ	1) ngo chen zhu mi gtong ba; 2) Ngo la bltas te don smin gtong ba	ngo chen gtong ba
ངོ་ཆེན་གནང	grant a favor	ngo chen gnang
ངོ་ཆེན་བྱེད་པ	intercede	ngo chen byed pa
ངོ་ཆེན་ཞུ	ask a favor/ to interceed	ngo chen zhu
ངོ་ཆེན་ཞུ་བརྒྱུད	mgo 'dren zhu brgyud	ngo chen zhu brgyud
ངོ་ཆེན་ཞུས	seek reprieve for someone	ngo chen zhus
ངོ་ཆེའི་དཔྲལ་བ	an important man ["wondrous forehead"]	ngo che'i dpral ba
ངོ་ཆོད	ngo shes pa'am ngos 'dzin thub pa	ngo chod
ངོ་མཇལ	meet [in person] [h] 677	ngo mjal
ངོ་གཉིས་མ	dual	ngo gnyis ma
ངོ་གཉིས་མའི་འཐབ་ཇུས	dual strategy	ngo gnyis ma'i 'thab jus
ངོ་མཉམ	equality [of entity]	ngo mnyam
ངོ་ཏི	real crux [KOT]	ngo ti
ངོ་གཏུག	visit, see each other	ngo gtug
ངོ་གཏུག་པར་ཡོང	come to visit/ see	ngo gtug par yong
ངོ་གཏོང་བསུ་ལེན	gnyen sgrig skabs nang mi ngo ma phyin nas mna' ma bsu len byed pa	ngo gtong bsu len
ངོ་རྟགས	ID	ngo rtags
ངོ་རྟགས་གྱི་ཆོག་ཐམས	ID card/ certificate	ngo rtags gyi chog thams
ངོ་རྟགས་གཅོད	identify	ngo rtags gcod
ངོ་རྟགས་ཆོད	be identified	ngo rtags chod
ངོ་ལྟ	1) guard; 2) mirror	ngo lta
ངོ་ལྟོས	principal and retinue	ngo ltos
ངོ་སྟོད	praise to the face of a person, flattery	ngo stod
ངོ་བརྟན་པོ	unchanging face	ngo brtan po
ངོ་བསྟན	to show, flattery. Syn {ngo dga'}	ngo bstan
ངོ་བསྟོད	abundant/ flattering words or, praising someone to his face	ngo bstod
ངོ་བསྟོད་ཀྱི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can las dpe yon tan lhag kyang, dpe can la ngo srung sprel lad ston phyir dpe la gzengs bstod med par phan tshun 'dra mnyam mtshungs mnyam du sbyor ba'i rgya...	ngo bstod kyi dpe
ངོ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	spot	ngo thag chod pa
ངོ་ཐག་ཡག་པོ	really good	ngo thag yag po
ངོ་ཐང	extent of consideration for/ importance given to	ngo thang
ངོ་ཐུག	meet face to face/ in person	ngo thug
ངོ་ཐུག་དྲི་ལན	personally question each other	ngo thug dri lan
ངོ་ཐུག་པ	meet face to face/ in person	ngo thug pa
ངོ་ཐུག་བྱུང་ཡོད་པ་མ་རེད	they have not met	ngo thug byung yod pa ma red
ངོ་ཐུག་བྱེད	meet face to face/ in person	ngo thug byed
ངོ་ཐོ་བ	valuable	ngo tho ba
ངོ་ཐོག	1) real, true, actual. 2) really, truly, actually	ngo thog
ངོ་ཐོག་མ་རེད	not real	ngo thog ma red
ངོ་ཐོག་ཞག	gang brtsi'i skabs de'i ngo thog zhag 'das pa'i khyim zhag steng gzugs bsnan pas grub	ngo thog zhag
ངོ་ཐོན་པ	1) snyan grags byung ba dang, go gnas 'phel ba, gzengs su thon pa; 2) perceivable [by others]; 3) [arch] nan gyis	ngo thon pa
ངོ་མཐོ་བ	1) mang po'i nang nas bzang ba; 2) ngo so che ba	ngo mtho ba
ངོ་མཐོན་པ	earnestly, pressingly, with persistence	ngo mthon pa
ངོ་འཐོན་ཉིད་དུ	immediately	ngo 'thon nyid du
ངོ་དྭངས	clear blue	ngo dwangs
ངོ་དོད	zhabs rten pha gzhis yod kyang, zhabs sdod dngos su ma zhus pa'i ring sprod dgos pa'i dngul khral	ngo dod
ངོ་གདོང	face; look, expression, cast, countenance, visage	ngo gdong
ངོ་གདོང་སྟོན་པ	face	ngo gdong ston pa
ངོ་གདོང་དུ་ཤོད	speak face to face	ngo gdong du shod
ངོ་བདུན་པ	the 7th page	ngo bdun pa
ངོ་མདོག	complexion, facial expression	ngo mdog
ངོ་འདྲ	1) yi ge sogs ngo ma dang 'dra bshus; 2) like the face	ngo 'dra
ངོ་ལྡོག་པ	rebel, turn away one's face, turn one's back on, apostatize	ngo ldog pa
ངོ་ལྡོག་པ་སུས་ནུས	who could turn their back on?	ngo ldog pa sus nus
ངོ་ནག	angry face, countenance	ngo nag
ངོ་ནག་པར་འགྱུར	grow sorrowful, turn dark with fright or pain	ngo nag par 'gyur
ངོ་ནག་པར་འདུག	to sit with a gloomy face	ngo nag par 'dug
ངོ་ནག་པོ	angry, displeased	ngo nag po
ངོ་ནོར་སྦས་བསྐུངས	bzang ngan brje 'phrul dang lkog nyar,...Rtsis 'khri dngos rigs rnams ngo nor sbas bskungs med par rtsis sprod zhu dgos	ngo nor sbas bskungs
ངོ་གནག་པ	wrathful expression	ngo gnag pa
ངོ་གནགས་ཏེ	frowning or becoming gloomy with sorrow	ngo gnags te
ངོ་གནོང	feel [ashamed]	ngo gnong
ངོ་གནོང་བ	be ashamed, unable to show one's face for shame	ngo gnong ba
ངོ་གནོང་མི་དགོས	no need to feel ashamed, fitting, worthy, suitable	ngo gnong mi dgos
ངོ་གནོང་མི་དགོས་པ	no need to feel ashamed, fitting, worthy, suitable	ngo gnong mi dgos pa
ངོ་གནོངས	felt ashamed	ngo gnongs
ངོ་པོ	embodiment	ngo po
ངོ་ལྤགས་འཐུག་པོ	shameless, brazen, indecent	ngo lpags 'thug po
ངོ་སྤྲད	ngo sprod gnang ba - introduce; 1) v. transmit, show, point out. 2) n. transmission	ngo sprad
ངོ་སྤྲད་གྱི	I will give the transmission	ngo sprad gyi
ངོ་སྤྲད་དེ་ཁྲིད་པ	give transmission and instruction	ngo sprad de khrid pa
ངོ་སྤྲད་པ	{ngo sprod pa} direct introduction (to one's true nature)/ pointing out; to introduce/ point out directly	ngo sprad pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད	pointing-out, introduction, transmission, indication, example, illustration. 2) to point out, transmit, bring face to face with, introduce, acquaint. 3) the pointing-out instruction	ngo sprod
གིབེ༹ས་ཐེ་འཔོཨིནཏིང	out instruction' so that the disciple recognizes the nature of mind	gives the 'pointing
ངོ་སྤྲོད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	pointing-out instruction	ngo sprod kyi gdams pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་ཀྱི་མན་ངག	upadesha of introduction	ngo sprod kyi man ngag
ངོ་སྤྲོད་བདུན་པ	Sevenfold Pointingout Instruction	ngo sprod bdun pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་འདེབས་པ	comment upon, explain	ngo sprod 'debs pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་འདེབས་ལུགས	the way of giving	ngo sprod 'debs lugs
ཐེ་པོཨིནཏིང	out instruction	the pointing
ངོ་སྤྲོད་ནི	the pointing out	ngo sprod ni
ངོ་སྤྲོད་གནང	to interpret [a dream]	ngo sprod gnang
ངོ་སྤྲོད་གནང་བ	don dam sems kyi	ngo sprod gnang ba
ངོ་སྤྲོད་རྣམས	pointing out instructions	ngo sprod rnams
ངོ་སྤྲོད་པ	{ngo sprad pa} direct introduction (to one's true nature)/ pointing out; to introduce/ point out directly 678	ngo sprod pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་པའི་བརྡ་བཞི	the four transmission symbols	ngo sprod pa'i brda bzhi
ངོ་སྤྲོད་པའི་རིག་པ	* the awareness shown by the guru	ngo sprod pa'i rig pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་པས	having discovered	ngo sprod pas
ངོ་སྤྲོད་སྤྲད་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of	ngo sprod sprad pa'i rgyud
ངོ་སྤྲོད་སྤྲས་པ	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	ngo sprod spras pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	to point out, introduce, bring face to face with	ngo sprod byed pa
ངོ་སྤྲོད་ལག་འཁྱེར	credential	ngo sprod lag 'khyer
ངོ་ཕན	ma rtsa la phan pa ste, bu lon 'jal mkhan gyis bun bdag la skyed kha sprad pa'i lhag ma ngo bo'am ma rtsa nas gcog rgyur sprad pa der ngo bo la phan pa zer ba'i tshig sdud la ngo phan zer	ngo phan
ངོ་ཕེབས	went in person [h]	ngo phebs
ངོ་ཕེབས་གནང་བ	went in person [h]	ngo phebs gnang ba
ངོ་ཕྲད	be face to face, meet	ngo phrad
ངོ་ཕྲོད	recognition	ngo phrod
ངོ་འཕང	ngo so'i dpangs,...Byas rjes cung zad las med kyang, gzid bzos kyi ngo 'phang mtho ba zhig byung song,...Byas rjes bzang ngan gyi ngo 'phang mtho dma'i khyad par gnam sa'i bar thag lta bu yod	ngo 'phang
ངོ་འཕྲད	meet, meeting in person	ngo 'phrad
ངོ་འཕྲད་པ	{ngo 'phrod pa} to be directly introduced (to one's true nature); to have (something) pointed out directly	ngo 'phrad pa
ངོ་འཕྲད་མ་འབྱུང	we didn't meet	ngo 'phrad ma 'byung
ངོ་འཕྲོད	realized, received transmission, to see, identify, recognize, realize, be introduced, understand, receive transmission. 2) n. realization	ngo 'phrod
ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	{ngo 'phrad pa} to be directly introduced (to one's true nature); to have (something) pointed out directly	ngo 'phrod pa
ངོ་བུ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	entitylessness	ngo bu nyid med pa
ངོ་བོ	1) essence, essential meaning * nature, character, attribute, entity, intrinsic/ central/ essential nature, vital substance, core, being, inmost nature, vitalement, synthesis; 2) principle, existen...	ngo bo
ངོ་བོ་ཀ་དག	originally pure essence, primordially pure essence, the essence pure from the beginning	ngo bo ka dag
སྟོང་པའི་ཆ	... primordially pure essence, primordially pure nature 679	stong pa'i cha
ངོ་བོ་ཀ་དག་གི་ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya of the primordially pure essence	ngo bo ka dag gi chos sku
ངོ་བོ་ཀ་དག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the primordially pure essence	ngo bo ka dag gi ye shes
ངོ་བོ་སྐྱོང	to cultivate the essence	ngo bo skyong
ངོ་བོ་སྐྱོང་བ	to sustain the essence [of mind]	ngo bo skyong ba
ངོ་བོ་ཁྱད་མེད	essentially no difference	ngo bo khyad med
ངོ་བོ་གང་ཞེ་ན	What is the essence? What is the actual principle / 'thing itself'?	ngo bo gang zhe na
ངོ་བོ་གང་ཞེན	What is the essence?	ngo bo gang zhen
ངོ་བོ་གྲུབ	having an identity	ngo bo grub
ངོ་བོ་གྲུབ་བསལ	space of the essence without confirmation or negation	ngo bo grub bsal
ངོ་བོ་གྲུབ་བསལ་མེད་པའི་ཀློང	1 of klong dgu	ngo bo grub bsal med pa'i klong
ངོ་བོ་འགའ་མེད	has nothing substantial about it	ngo bo 'ga' med
ངོ་བོ་འགྱུར	change character/ essence	ngo bo 'gyur
ངོ་བོ་འགྱུར་ནས་ངན་པར་ཆགས	degenerate	ngo bo 'gyur nas ngan par chags
ངོ་བོ་ངེས་པ	Syn {ngo bo ma 'dres pa} determinate with respect to its entity [ggd]	ngo bo nges pa
ངོ་བོ་ངོས་བཟུང	definable entity	ngo bo ngos bzung
ངོ་བོ་ངོས་བཟུང་བ	identify the essence	ngo bo ngos bzung ba
ངོ་བོ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	gzugs can gyi rgyan	ngo bo can gyi rgyan
ངོ་བོ་ཅི་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	1) no established identity whatsoever. 2) an essence that is not made out of anything whatsoever	ngo bo ci yang ma grub pa
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག	1) identical. 2) unique essence	ngo bo gcig
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	to be identical with	ngo bo gcig tu gyur pa
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་ལྡོག་པ་ཐ་དད	same entity but different isolates/ aspects	ngo bo gcig ldog pa tha dad
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་པ	same entity	ngo bo gcig pa
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་པར་གྱུར་པ	which are identical, have same essence	ngo bo gcig par gyur pa
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་ལ	different aspects of the same identity	ngo bo gcig la
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་ལ་ལྡོག་པ་ཐ་དད	distinct distinguishers within [having] the same entity [ggd]	ngo bo gcig la ldog pa tha dad
ངོ་བོ་གཅིག་ལ་ལྡོག་པ་ཐ་དད་པ	different aspects of the same identity, 1 single identity w different aspects	ngo bo gcig la ldog pa tha dad pa
ངོ་བོ་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of the essence, the dharmata	ngo bo chos nyid kyi rigs pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིང་མེད	non-entityness	ngo bo nying med
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	{ngo bo nyid kyis} essence (of being) itself; very essence of . . . ; isc. . . . in its very essence	ngo bo nyid
ཨོཝན	being, substantial, essential nature, entityness, inherent, intrinsic, reality, own-being, sel-existence, own nature, entityness	own
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི	of itself, inherent, natural, intrinsic	ngo bo nyid kyi
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཀུན་བཏགས	inherent / instinctive labeling / imputation	ngo bo nyid kyi kun btags
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐུ	essence kaya; Skt. svabhavikakaya. The 'essence body,' sometimes counted as the fourth kaya, and constituting the unity of the three kayas. Jamgön Kongtrül defines it as the aspect of dharmakaya wh...	ngo bo nyid kyi sku
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གྱེང་བ	natural distraction [sgo lnga'i shes pa lta bu	ngo bo nyid kyi gyeng ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	[dad sogs dge ba'i sems byung bcu gcig	ngo bo nyid kyi dge ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག	inherent application of mindfulness ngo bo nyid kyi dran pa nyer bzhag natural objects of mindfulness [lus tshor sems chos bzhi'i ngo bo la shes rab kyis ji ltar 'byed pa bzhin dran pa nye bar bzha...	ngo bo nyid kyi dran pa nyer bzhag
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དབང	intrinsic force, by the power of the itself / its own nature	ngo bo nyid kyi dbang
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བ	natural nonvirtue	ngo bo nyid kyi mi dge ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚིག་བླ་དབ༹གས	natural name	ngo bo nyid kyi tshig bla dvags
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚིག་བླ་དྭགས	showing only things' khyad gzhi 'dod rgyal gyi word/phrase 680	ngo bo nyid kyi tshig bla dwags
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	inherent characteristic	ngo bo nyid kyi mtshan nyid
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཞི་གནས	shamatha of the essential nature ngo bo nyid kyi g.yeng ba - natural distraction {sgo lnga'i shes pa lta bu}	ngo bo nyid kyi zhi gnas
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	inherent nautrality [khams dang skye mched gzugs can brgyad &, de dang mtsungs ldan gyi yid dang, srog dang, ris mthun pa dang, ming tshig yi ge'i tshogs rnams so	ngo bo nyid kyi lung ma bstan
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	factually, naturally,	ngo bo nyid kyis
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨིཙ་ཨོཝན་སེལཕ༹	nature, by its own	through its own self
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་འཁྲུལ་པ	inherent distortion [ggd]	ngo bo nyid kyis 'khrul pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	existence through its own entity, inherent existence, establish by way of its own entity	ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དགེ་བ	{dad sogs dge ba'i sems byung bcu gcig go} 'Intrinsic virtues' are the eleven virtuous mental states of faith and so forth.	ngo bo nyid kyis dge ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་སྟོང	empty by their very nature	ngo bo nyid kyis stong
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་ཉིད	openness of the nature of existence, emptiness of nature / essence, voidness of nature. one of the {stong pa nyid bcu brgyad} eighteen types of emptiness	ngo bo nyid kyis stong nyid
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ	empty of an essence	ngo bo nyid kyis stong pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	by nature utterly pure	ngo bo nyid kyis rnam par dag pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དབེན་པ	by nature devoid of [such-and-such]	ngo bo nyid kyis dben pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་མི་དགེ་བ	{'dod khams 'dir 'jig lta dang mthar lta de gnyis dang lhan cig pa'i ma rig pa ni, bsgrib la lung ma bstan yin zhing, de gsum las gzhan pa'i rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa dang nye nyon rnams nyes spyod k...	ngo bo nyid kyis mi dge ba
ཨིགནོརནཅེ་ཅོ	existing with these two is 'obscuring and indeterminate'. All other	ignorance co
རོཨོཏ	disturbing emotions and subsidiary disturbing emotions, apart from the three above, motivate negative deeds and are, therefore, 'intrinsic nonvirtues'.	root
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཡོད་པ	inherent existence	ngo bo nyid kyis yod pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{khams dang skye mched gzugs can brgyad dang de dang mtshungs ldan gyi yid dang, srog dbang dang ris mthun pa dang ming tshig yi ge'i tshogs rnams so} 'Intrinsic indeterminates' are the eight	ngo bo nyid kyis lung ma bstan
ཨེལེམེནཙ་ཨནད་སེནསེ	sources with form and the [mental] cognitions concurrent with them, the life faculty, the 'similar class', and the groups of names, words, and syllables.	elements and sense
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ	essence-kaya; svabhavikakaya, entity body, essential body, nature body, nature truth body	ngo bo nyid sku
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ་གཉིས	the two essence kayas/ svabhavikakayas [rang bzhin rnam dag gi sku dang, glo bur rnam dag gi char gyur pa'i sku gnyis	ngo bo nyid sku gnyis
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་གསུམ	the three exceptional feature of the svabhavikakaya	ngo bo nyid sku'i khyad chos gsum
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུའི་མཙན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of svabhavikakaya ['dus ma byas pa dang, dbyer med pa, mtha' gnyis spangs pa, sgrib pa gsum las grol ba, rang bzhin gyis 'od gsal ba bcas lnga	ngo bo nyid sku'i mtsan nyid lnga
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	five characteristics of the svabhavikakaya	ngo bo nyid sku'i mtshan nyid lnga
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ	five attributes of the svabhavikakaya	ngo bo nyid sku'i yon tan lnga
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of essence, [svabhava-shunyata] emptiness of the nature of existence, emptiness of nature, voidness of nature. one of the {stong pa nyid bcu brgyad} eighteen types of emptiness	ngo bo nyid stong pa nyid
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་དང་ལས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	by nature and by deed	ngo bo nyid dang las kyi sgo nas
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་དུ	by nature	ngo bo nyid du
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་དུ་གྲོལ	[to be] liberated into the essence itself	ngo bo nyid du grol
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མི་འདྲ་བ	nonidentical essence	ngo bo nyid mi 'dra ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད	any ontology rejected) essenceless, emptiness, SA rnam thar sgo gsum	ngo bo nyid med
ཨབསེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོཝན	being	absence of own
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་ཉིད	absence of ownbeing	ngo bo nyid med nyid
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	entitynessless- lack of inherent existence, realitylessness, 'non-entityness', essenceless, unreality	ngo bo nyid med pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ་ཉིད	essencelessness [yongs grub kyi ming ste, bdag gi ngo bo nyid du ma grub pa	ngo bo nyid med pa nyid
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	to fully pursue / embrace the absence of identity	ngo bo nyid med pa yongs su tshol ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ་གསུམ	threefold absence of identity	ngo bo nyid med pa gsum
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པན་སྨྲ་བ	those who disclaim the existence of anything as such	ngo bo nyid med pan smra ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of no entityness [nang pa'i grub mtha' smra ba'i bye brag cig ste, chos thams cad bden med du khas len pa'i dbu ma pa rnams so]	ngo bo nyid med par smra ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ལ་འཇོག་པ	setting the mind in the essential nature	ngo bo nyid la 'jog pa
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ལས་བྱུང་བ	arise by their own nature, naturally came to be [nihilist view]	ngo bo nyid las byung ba
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གསུམ	the three natures [kun tu brtags pa'i ngo bo nyid dang, gzhan gyi dbang gi ngo bo nyid, yongs su grub pa'i ngo bo nyid de gsum,... Three essential categories the imaginary {kun rtags} or parikalpit...	ngo bo nyid gsum
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གསུམ་གྱི་རྣམ་གཞག	presentation of the threefold nature	ngo bo nyid gsum gyi rnam gzhag
ངོ་བོ་གཉིས་ལྡན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	dual character/ nature	ngo bo gnyis ldan gyi rang bzhin
ངོ་བོ་གཉིས་མེད	nondual essence	ngo bo gnyis med
ངོ་བོ་གཉིས་བརྩེགས	dual character/ nature	ngo bo gnyis brtsegs
ངོ་བོ་གཉུག་མ	original essence	ngo bo gnyug ma
ངོ་བོ་གཏན་དབབ	to establish identity	ngo bo gtan dbab
ངོ་བོ་སྟོང	empty essence	ngo bo stong
ངོ་བོ་སྟོང་པ	empty essence; devoid of identity	ngo bo stong pa
ངོ་བོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	essence emptiness [one of the {rnam par thar pa'i sgo gsum} = three doors of liberation	ngo bo stong pa nyid
ངོ་བོ་སྟོན་པ	designate	ngo bo ston pa
ངོ་བོ་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	essence showing word	ngo bo ston pa'i sgra
ངོ་བོ་བལྟ་བ	to look into the identity of	ngo bo blta ba
ངོ་བོ་ཐ་དད	different entity [ggd]	ngo bo tha dad
ངོ་བོ་ཐ་དད་པ	individual essences, different natures	ngo bo tha dad pa
ངོ་བོ་ཐིག་ལེ	essence	ngo bo thig le
ངོ་བོ་མཐོང་བ	perceivable essence, seeing the essence	ngo bo mthong ba
ངོ་བོ་དང་ཁྱད་པར	essence and particularities	ngo bo dang khyad par
ངོ་བོ་དང་རྣམ་པ	in nature and in form	ngo bo dang rnam pa
ངོ་བོ་དང་སྣང་ཚུལ	essence and manifestation	ngo bo dang snang tshul
ངོ་བོ་དང་བྱད་པར	essence and particularities	ngo bo dang byad par
ངོ་བོ་དང་བྱེད་ལས	identity and function	ngo bo dang byed las
ངོ་བོ་དལ་བ	the essence / identity which is the freedoms	ngo bo dal ba
ངོ་བོ་བདག་གཅིག་གི་འབྲེལ་བ	the connectedness of single identity	ngo bo bdag gcig gi 'brel ba
ངོ་བོ་བདེན་གྲུབ	truly existent identity	ngo bo bden grub
ངོ་བོ་རྣམ་པ	in nature and in form	ngo bo rnam pa
ངོ་བོ་སྤྲོས་མེད	essence beyond all concepts	ngo bo spros med
ངོ་བོ་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible identity	ngo bo dbyer med
ངོ་བོ་མ་གྲུབ	indefinable, not having an identity	ngo bo ma grub
ངོ་བོ་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཤེས་བྱ	knowledge of nonexistent identity	ngo bo ma grub pa'i shes bya
ངོ་བོ་མ་འདྲེས་པ	determinate with respect to their entity. Syn: ngo bo nges pa [ggd]	ngo bo ma 'dres pa
ངོ་བོ་མ་ཡིན་པ	insubstantiality	ngo bo ma yin pa
ངོ་བོ་མེད	no-identity	ngo bo med
ངོ་བོ་མེད་པ	does not exist, without substance	ngo bo med pa
ངོ་བོ་མེད་པ་ཉིད	essencelessness	ngo bo med pa nyid
ངོ་བོ་མེད་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	the emptiness of essencelssness [stong nyid bcu drug gi nang gses shig ste dngos po med pa'i ngo bo nyid stong pa nyid	ngo bo med pa stong pa nyid
ཨོཕ༹་ནོ	identity	of no
ངོ་བོ་རྫས	substantial essence	ngo bo rdzas
ངོ་བོ་རྫས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	an identity that has substantial existence	ngo bo rdzas su grub pa
ངོ་བོ་ཡེ་དག་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the primordially pure essence	ngo bo ye dag ye shes
ངོ་བོ་རང་བཞིན་ཐུགས་རྗེ	essence, nature, and capacity. The three aspects of	ngo bo rang bzhin thugs rje
ཐེ་སུགཏ	garbha according to the Dzogchen system. Essence is the primordially pure wisdom of emptiness. The nature is the spontaneously present wisdom of cognizance. The capacity is the all-pervasive wisdom...	the sugata
ངོ་བོ་རང་བཞིན་ཐུགས་རྗེ་གསུམ	essence, nature and capacity; the essential nature, natural expression, and compassion	ngo bo rang bzhin thugs rje gsum
ངོ་བོ་ལ	as regards the true essence	ngo bo la
ངོ་བོ་ལ་དཔྱོད་པ	analysis of identity. Syn {gcig dang du bral gyi rigs pa} ngo bo la dpyod pa gcig dang du bral neither singular nor plural so as to analyze the identity ngo bo la dpyod pa gcig du bral gyi gtan	ngo bo la dpyod pa
ཚིགས	the maxims of being neither singular nor plural so as to analyze the identity	tshigs
ངོ་བོ་ལམ་བྱེད	forging the path as/ through/ with the essence (of being)	ngo bo lam byed
ངོ་བོ་སོ་སོ	separate entities	ngo bo so so
ངོ་བོ་གསལ་སྟོང	aware and empty nature	ngo bo gsal stong
ངོ་བོ་གསུམ	{ngo bo nyid gsum}	ngo bo gsum
ངོ་བོའི	essential; of or concerning identity	ngo bo'i
ངོ་བོའི་བསྐལ་དོན	because of subtle ngo bo invisible bskal don te, like an earth atom	ngo bo'i bskal don
ངོ་བོའི་སྒོ་ནས	in terms of identity	ngo bo'i sgo nas
ངོ་བོའི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་བསྡུ	classification in terms of identity	ngo bo'i sgo nas dbye bsdu
ངོ་བོའི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་ན	when classified in terms of identity	ngo bo'i sgo nas dbye na
ངོ་བོའི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་བ	to classify in terms of identity	ngo bo'i sgo nas dbye ba
ངོ་བོའི་མཉམ་བཞག	composure of the natural state	ngo bo'i mnyam bzhag
ངོ་བོའི་དོན	essential meaning	ngo bo'i don
ངོ་བོའི་གནས་ལུགས	essential nature	ngo bo'i gnas lugs
ངོ་བོའི་སྣང་བ	display of essence	ngo bo'i snang ba
ངོ་བོའི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་ན	in nature,	ngo bo'i dbang du byas na
ངོ་བོའི་གཤིས	ultimate being	ngo bo'i gshis
ངོ་བོར	as the essence of; essential	ngo bor
ངོ་བོར་གྱུར་བ	constitute	ngo bor gyur ba
ངོ་བོར་གྲུབ་པ	which has an essence; essentially existent	ngo bor grub pa
ངོ་བོར་བརྟགས་པ	ascriptive [substantive) designation	ngo bor brtags pa
ངོ་བོར་བདག་པ	substantive, designation	ngo bor bdag pa
ངོ་བོར་འདོགས་པ་འཚུལ་བ	investigation of the designation of entities	ngo bor 'dogs pa 'tshul ba
ངོ་བོར་བརྡག་པ	substantive, designation	ngo bor brdag pa
ངོ་བོར་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	Purify as complete as the essence	ngo bor rnam par dag pa
ངོ་བོར་མ་གྲུབ	no identifiable essence	ngo bor ma grub
ངོ་བོས	by nature	ngo bos
ངོ་བོས་སྟོང	devoid of an entity	ngo bos stong
ངོ་བོས་སྟོང་པ	empty of identity	ngo bos stong pa
ངོ་བོས་བྱུང་བ	origination by itself; appeared by itself	ngo bos byung ba
ངོ་བྱའོ	[arch] bstun dgos pa	ngo bya'o
ངོ་འབག	mask	ngo 'bag
ངོ་འབབ་པ	be dejected, discouraged, downcast, bashful	ngo 'bab pa
ངོ་འབྲད	meet	ngo 'brad
ངོ་སྦྱོར་ཡི་གེ	recommendation	ngo sbyor yi ge
ངོ་མ	actual/ really, truly; 1) real, actual, true, actually, really, truly, in person, genuine. 2) original. {rang ngo lta ba ngo ma} actually recognize the very essence	ngo ma
ངོ་མ་ཆོག་པ	unable to resist	ngo ma chog pa
ངོ་མ་ཆོག་པར	not losing face ngo ma chog par khas len byed dgos	ngo ma chog par
བྱུང	[I] had to give my assurance to avoid losing face	byung
ངོ་མ་ཆོག་ལ	not losing face ngo ma chog la khas len byed dgos	ngo ma chog la
ངོ་མ་ཆོད་པ	not be able to identify/ recognize	ngo ma chod pa
ངོ་མ་ཐག་ཆོད	definitively ngo ma dang g.yog po - the family and servants ngo ma dang g.yog po - master and servant	ngo ma thag chod
ངོ་མ་ཕེབས་པ	went in person [h]	ngo ma phebs pa
ངོ་མ་འཕོད་པའི་རིགས་རྣམས	w/o recognizing 1's essence, those not recognizing the essence	ngo ma 'phod pa'i rigs rnams
ངོ་མ་ཟློག་པར	not losing face ngo ma zlog par khas len byed dgos	ngo ma zlog par
ངོ་མ་ཟློག་ལ	not losing face ngo ma zlog la khas len byed dgos byung - [I] had to give my assurance to avoid losing face	ngo ma zlog la
ངོ་མ་རང	really	ngo ma rang
ངོ་མ་རང་ངོ་ལྟ་བ	actually recognize the very essence	ngo ma rang ngo lta ba
ངོ་མ་ཤེས	I am not sure	ngo ma shes
ངོ་མ་ཤེས་པའི་མི	stranger	ngo ma shes pa'i mi
ངོ་མང	many specimens/ peices	ngo mang
ངོ་མའི་རང་བཞིན	ngo thog gi gnas lugs	ngo ma'i rang bzhin
ངོ་མར	actually	ngo mar
ངོ་མི་ཆུང	not unimportant	ngo mi chung
ངོ་མི་ཆོད་པ	indecisive	ngo mi chod pa
ངོ་མི་རྟག་པ	ngo ston stangs dkar nag 'gyur ldog mang ba	ngo mi rtag pa
ངོ་མི་ཕོད་པ	one who listens to or does a thing to please another which he would not otherwise have done, be unable to refuse or oppose	ngo mi phod pa
ངོ་མི་འཚོ་བ	1) not recognize; 2) Ngo srung mi byed pa	ngo mi 'tsho ba
ངོ་མི་བཟློག་པ	Syn {ngo mi chod pa}	ngo mi bzlog pa
ངོ་མི་ཤེས་པ	not knowing or recognizing, unknown, incognito	ngo mi shes pa
ངོ་མི་བསྲུང	shameless	ngo mi bsrung
ངོ་མིག	boldness	ngo mig
ངོ་མིག་ཅན	bold, courageous, daring	ngo mig can
ངོ་མིག་ཆེན་པོ	bold, courageous, daring	ngo mig chen po
ངོ་མེད་ལྐོག་མེད	front and back the same, w/o deception and hypocrisy	ngo med lkog med
ངོ་མེད་ཆོས་པོ	he who is personified by worldliness, name of mara for bon	ngo med chos po
ངོ་མེད་དོན་མེད	ngo so dang don gnyis ka med pa	ngo med don med
ངོ་མེན་བྱེད	receive	ngo men byed
ངོ་དམའ	shame	ngo dma'
ངོ་ཙ	modesty, SA ngo tsha	ngo tsa
ངོ་ཚ	Sense of moral shame	ngo tsha
ངོ་ཚ་ཁ་སྐྱེངས	embarrassed/shameful expression ngo tsha kha skyengs kyis khong khro	ngo tsha kha skyengs
ལངས	anger arising from embarrassment/ conscientiousness	langs
ངོ་ཚ་ཁྲེལ་འདས	w/o shame and conscience/decency	ngo tsha khrel 'das
ངོ་ཚ་ཁྲེལ་མེད	shameless, brazen	ngo tsha khrel med
ངོ་ཚ་ཁྲེལ་ཡོད	a sense of shame and decency	ngo tsha khrel yod
ངོ་ཚ་ཁྲེལ་སེམས	w shame and conscience/ decency	ngo tsha khrel sems
ངོ་ཚ་དགོས་པ	lose face, be disgraced	ngo tsha dgos pa
ངོ་ཚ་ཅན	one who has shame, one who is bashful, coy, shamefaced, shy	ngo tsha can
ངོ་ཚ་ཆེན་པོ	demure	ngo tsha chen po
ངོ་ཚ་ཉོ	disgrace/ shame 1self	ngo tsha nyo
ངོ་ཚ་གཏོང	bud med kyi phyir du la	ngo tsha gtong
ལ་ངོ་ཚ་གཏོང	because of women, many will give up all shame	la ngo tsha gtong
ངོ་ཚ་ལྡན	shy, timid, modest	ngo tsha ldan
བའི་ཕྱིར	for delighting the prudent	ba'i phyir
ངོ་ཚ་པོ	bashful, dishonor	ngo tsha po
ངོ་ཚ་པོ་བཟོ	embarrass	ngo tsha po bzo
ངོ་ཚ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	disgrace	ngo tsha po bzo ba
ངོ་ཚ་སྤྲད་རིན	having caught a thief rang yul du slog skabs 'dzin mkhan gyis rkun por sprod rgyu'i lam rgyags	ngo tsha sprad rin
ངོ་ཚ་བ	to be ashamed, embarrassed	ngo tsha ba
ངོ་ཚ་བའི་གནས	subject of shame/ embarassment	ngo tsha ba'i gnas
ངོ་ཚ་བྱས	blushed, felt shame	ngo tsha byas
ངོ་ཚ་བྱུང	[I] was embarassed	ngo tsha byung
ངོ་ཚ་འབེབ་པ	abash	ngo tsha 'beb pa
ངོ་ཚ་མི་དགོས	need not feel ashamed	ngo tsha mi dgos
ངོ་ཚ་མེད	w/o conscience/ shame, shameless[ness], conscienceless	ngo tsha med
ངོ་ཚ་མེད་པ	shamelessness mibp 90, lack of sense of shame, non-shame, lack of integrity in regard to oneself, impudent	ngo tsha med pa
ངོ་ཚ་སྨིན་པོ	shy, timid, modest ngo tsha sla po	ngo tsha smin po
ངོ་ཚ་ཡོད་པ	shamefulness	ngo tsha yod pa
ངོ་ཚ་རུ་འཇུག	put to shame	ngo tsha ru 'jug
ངོ་ཚ་ལ་མི	shameless	ngo tsha la mi
ངོ་ཚ་ལ་མི་འཛེམ་པ	insensible to shame	ngo tsha la mi 'dzem pa
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས	decency; modesty; propriety, correctness, decorum; selfrespect	ngo tsha shes
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་པ	conscience, sense of shame, [sense of] propriety, conscientious, [sense of] self-respect, decency, conscientious action	ngo tsha shes pa
སེནསེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	respect; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rang la ltos nas kha na ma tho ba la 'dzem pa}	sense of self
བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	for delighting the prudent ngo tsha shes pa rnams bde bar gnas par	bya ba'i phyir
བི༹རྟུཨོཨུས་མེནཏལ་སྟཏེས	rang la ltos nas kha na ma tho ba la 'dzem pa ngo tsha shes pa rnams bde bar gnas par	virtuous mental states
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་པའི་ནོར	wealth of selfrestraint, one of the {'phags pa'i nor bdun} seven greatest riches	ngo tsha shes pa'i nor
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་པར	blush	ngo tsha shes par
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	feel shame	ngo tsha shes par byed pa
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་པས་བརྒྱན་པ	adorned w decency/ conscientiousness	ngo tsha shes pas brgyan pa
ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས་ཤིང་ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་པ	conscientious and decent	ngo tsha shes shing khrel yod pa
ངོ་ཚན	power of mind, ham spobs	ngo tshan
ངོ་ཚབ	substitute, agent, representative	ngo tshab
ངོ་ཚབ་གཏོང	send as agent/ representative	ngo tshab gtong
ངོ་ཚབ་པ	agent	ngo tshab pa
ངོ་ཚབ་བྱེད	act as agent/ representative	ngo tshab byed
ངོ་ཚའི་གནས	that which ought to be an object of shame	ngo tsha'i gnas
ངོ་ཚའི་ཚུལ་ཅན	modest, shame	ngo tsha'i tshul can
ངོ་ཚར་བའི་ཚིག	interjections	ngo tshar ba'i tshig
ངོ་མཚང་འདྲུ་བ	skyon 'don pa	ngo mtshang 'dru ba
ངོ་མཚར	extraordinary!	ngo mtshar
ངོ་མཚར་སྐྱེ་བ	be seized with wonder, be surprised	ngo mtshar skye ba
ངོ་མཚར་སྐྱེས	was struck with wonder	ngo mtshar skyes
ངོ་མཚར་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	amazed	ngo mtshar skyes te
ངོ་མཚར་སྐྱེས་པ	astonished	ngo mtshar skyes pa
ངོ་མཚར་ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཅན	special and wonderful	ngo mtshar khyad 'phags can
ངོ་མཚར་གྱི	wonderful	ngo mtshar gyi
ངོ་མཚར་གྱི་གནད་ཚིག་བདུན	seven statements concerning the key points of wonderment ngo mtshar gyi gsang tshig rnam pa bdun - seven secret exclamation of wonder ngo mtshar lnga ldan 'dzam gling gi nor 'dzin - in 'dzam bu gli...	ngo mtshar gyi gnad tshig bdun
ངོ་མཚར་ཅན	wondrous	ngo mtshar can
ངོ་མཚར་ཆེ	very wondrous	ngo mtshar che
ངོ་མཚར་ཆེ་བ	marvelous things or events or miracles	ngo mtshar che ba
ངོ་མཚར་ཆེ་བའི་ཞལ་གདམས	Great Wondrous Advice, by Shabkar	ngo mtshar che ba'i zhal gdams
ངོ་མཚར་ཆེན་པོ	great wonder	ngo mtshar chen po
ངོ་མཚར་མཆོད་པ	marvelous & extremely rich offering	ngo mtshar mchod pa
ངོ་མཚར་ལྟས	marvelous signs	ngo mtshar ltas
ངོ་མཚར་དང་དད་པ་སྐྱེས་ནས	struck with wonder and faith arose in him	ngo mtshar dang dad pa skyes nas
ངོ་མཚར་དད་པའི་ཕྲེང་བ	the lifestories of the lineage master for the {'dus pa'i mdo dbang}, {'dus pa mdo dbang}	ngo mtshar dad pa'i phreng ba
ངོ་མཚར་དུ་གྱུར	marveled at	ngo mtshar du gyur
ངོ་མཚར་དུ་གྱུར་པ	amazed, amazed,	ngo mtshar du gyur pa
བསྡུས་གརབ༹	elementary class [in logic]	bsdus grva
ངོ་མཚར་རྣད་དུ་བྱུང	how wonderful and marvelous	ngo mtshar rnad du byung
ངོ་མཚར་པད་མའི་དབུས་ན	in the heart of a miraculous lotus	ngo mtshar pad ma'i dbus na
ངོ་མཚར་པོ	1) beautiful face; 2) great wonder	ngo mtshar po
ངོ་མཚར་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	the Marvelous Emanated Scriptures. Lama Shabkar says of his own work: I wrote a work in which I included many of the stories about the Buddha's life, about the way his followers practiced, and abou...	ngo mtshar sprul pa'i glegs bam
ཌྷརྨ་ཨནད་ཨོརྡིནརཡ་ལིཕེ༹	-what should be given up and what should be accomplished. I called this work the Marvelous Emanated Scriptures	Dharma and ordinary life
ངོ་མཚར་ཕུལ་བྱུང	phul byung gi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, 'jig rten grags tshod las brgal ba'i ngo mtshar can gyi khyad chos phul byung ston pa'i rgyan zhig	ngo mtshar phul byung
ངོ་མཚར་བ	amazing, wonderful	ngo mtshar ba
ངོ་མཚར་བའི་ཆིག་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 great words of wander	ngo mtshar ba'i chig chen po brgyad
ངོ་མཚར་བའི་གཏམ་བདུན	{ngo mtshar gyi gsang tshig rnam pa bdun}	ngo mtshar ba'i gtam bdun
ངོ་མཚར་བའི་རྟགས	wondrous signs [at the time of death]	ngo mtshar ba'i rtags
ངོ་མཚར་བའི་ལྟས	miraculous sign, prodigy, miracle	ngo mtshar ba'i ltas
ངོ་མཚར་བའི་ཚིག་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the eight great words of wonder	ngo mtshar ba'i tshig chen po brgyad
ངོ་མཚར་བྱུང་བ	marvels which have arisen	ngo mtshar byung ba
ངོ་མཚར་མི་ཆེ	insignificant	ngo mtshar mi che
ངོ་མཚར་མེད་པ	trivial	ngo mtshar med pa
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་དུ	be surprised at	ngo mtshar rmad du
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	wonder	ngo mtshar rmad du 'gyur ba
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང	how wonderful and marvelous	ngo mtshar rmad du byung
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ	marvelous wonders	ngo mtshar rmad du byung ba
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་བྱུང་བ	marvelous wonders	ngo mtshar rmad byung ba
ངོ་མཚར་རྨད་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས	marvelous wisdom	ngo mtshar rmad byung ye shes
ངོ་མཚར་རྩ་བདུན	seven marvelous pulses	ngo mtshar rtsa bdun
ངོ་མཚར་མཛད་པ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	unending deeds of wonder	ngo mtshar mdzad pa mtha' yas pa
ངོ་འཚལ་བ	understand, know	ngo 'tshal ba
ངོ་འཚོ་བ	ngo srung byed pa,...Rtsa don bzung nas ngo mi 'tsho ba	ngo 'tsho ba
ངོ་འཛིན	flattering, being polite, hypocritical respect, sycophantic	ngo 'dzin
ངོ་འཛིན་པ	to flatter	ngo 'dzin pa
ངོ་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	to authenticate	ngo 'dzin byed pa
ངོ་འཛུམ	smile	ngo 'dzum
ངོ་འཛུམ་དཀར་ནག	"white and black" facial expressions of joy and sorrow	ngo 'dzum dkar nag
ངོ་འཛུམ་གཏིང་གནག	kha 'dzum sems gnag	ngo 'dzum gting gnag
ངོ་འཛུམ་ནག་སྟེ	looking forbiddingly	ngo 'dzum nag ste
ངོ་འཛུམ་གནག	to scowl	ngo 'dzum gnag
ངོ་འཛུམ་པ	cheerful, happy, smiling	ngo 'dzum pa
ངོ་འཛོམས	gdong 'dzoms sam, ngo phrad	ngo 'dzoms
ངོ་རྫུན་རྒྱབ་པ	disguise, put under a false garb, to garble	ngo rdzun rgyab pa
ངོ་རྫུན་བརྗེ་བ	bden pa khungs thub rigs la bzo bcos kyis lhad 'jug pa'am rdzun ma dang brje po rgyag pa	ngo rdzun brje ba
ངོ་ཞལ་ལྟ	see face to face	ngo zhal lta
ངོ་ཞུས་པ	asked to find him innocent	ngo zhus pa
ངོ་ཟིལ	brilliant countenance	ngo zil
ངོ་ཟིལ་ཆེ་བའི་དཔའ་བོ	brilliant warrior	ngo zil che ba'i dpa' bo
ངོ་ཟུམ་པ	show a black face	ngo zum pa
ངོ་ཟློག	ngo slog pa ste re ba byas pa	ngo zlog
ངོ་ཟློག་གི་ཚིག	1) personally argue; 2) promise no hope, make no promises	ngo zlog gi tshig
ངོ་ཟློག་པ	turn the face against, revolt, rebel against, oppose	ngo zlog pa
ངོ་བཟོ་ཐོན	succeed	ngo bzo thon
ངོ་ཡ	rival, opponent	ngo ya
ངོ་ཡོད	present, in person	ngo yod
ངོ་ཡོད་ནས་ཐག་གཅོད	decide in person ngo g.yog - master/ actual family members and servants ngo g.yog - master and servant ngo g.yogs - to cheat	ngo yod nas thag gcod
ངོ་རང	one's nature	ngo rang
ངོ་རང་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature/being/ identity of essence, nature and compassion [syn {'khor 'das spyi bzhi}	ngo rang thugs rje'i bdag nyid
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་གནད་དུ་བརྡེག་པ	the three statements that strike the essential points	ngo rang thog tu gnad du brdeg pa
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་སྤྲ་པ	recognize your nature	ngo rang thog tu spra pa
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་སྤྲད	one is introduced directly to one's own nature, to receive direct introduction	ngo rang thog tu sprad
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་སྤྲད་པ	to be introduced to one's nature, be brought face to face with oneself	ngo rang thog tu sprad pa
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་སྤྲོད་པ	directly discovering one's state	ngo rang thog tu sprod pa
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཕྲོད་པ	recognize the essence in oneself * recognizing one's essence/ nature	ngo rang thog tu 'phrod pa
ངོ་རང་ཐོག་དུ་སྤྲད	direct introduction (direct contact with one's own face)	ngo rang thog du sprad
ངོ་རང་དུ	in the face of, before the eyes	ngo rang du
ངོ་རུ	in the face of, before the eyes, for the benefit of	ngo ru
ངོ་རེ	each, once; once each	ngo re
ངོ་རེ་གནོང	how embarrassing!	ngo re gnong
ངོ་རེ་གནོངས	ngo gnong	ngo re gnongs
ངོ་རོ་སྒྲོག་པ	roar, rage, circlet at top of letter to signify ma	ngo ro sgrog pa
ངོ་ལབ་ཕག་ལབ	ngo thug gi gtam dang rgyab logs kyi gtam	ngo lab phag lab
ངོ་ལེན	'grul pa sogs sne len byed pa	ngo len
ངོ་ལེན་བྱེད	to receive	ngo len byed
ངོ་ལོག	agitation, mutiny, rebellion, rebellion, uprising	ngo log
ངོ་ལོག་མཁན	rebel, mutineer	ngo log mkhan
ངོ་ལོག་འཁྲུག་ཟིང	revolt, rebellion, insurrection	ngo log 'khrug zing
ངོ་ལོག་འཁྲུག་ཟིང་པ	a rebel	ngo log 'khrug zing pa
ངོ་ལོག་འཁྲུག་ཟིང་ལངས	have a revolt/ rebellion/ insurrection break out	ngo log 'khrug zing langs
ངོ་ལོག་གིས་སྲིད་གཞུང་འཕོ་འགྱུར	coup d'etat	ngo log gis srid gzhung 'pho 'gyur
ངོ་ལོག་རྒྱག	rebel, revolt	ngo log rgyag
ངོ་ལོག་རྒྱབ་གཏོད	treachery, treason	ngo log rgyab gtod
ངོ་ལོག་རྒྱབ་གཏོད་བྱེད	commit treachery/ treason	ngo log rgyab gtod byed
ངོ་ལོག་ཅན	seditious, faithless, rebellious	ngo log can
ངོ་ལོག་ཇག་རྐུན	rebel, bandit, outlaw	ngo log jag rkun
ངོ་ལོག་ཇག་པ	rebel, bandit, outlaw	ngo log jag pa
ངོ་ལོག་པ	rebel, renegade, mutineer	ngo log pa
ངོ་ལོག་བྱེད	rebel, revolt	ngo log byed
ངོ་ལོག་ཟིང་འཁྲུག	revolt, rebellion, insurrection	ngo log zing 'khrug
ངོ་ལོག་ཟིང་འཁྲུག་པ	a rebel	ngo log zing 'khrug pa
ངོ་ལོག་ཟིང་འཁྲུག་ལངས	have a revolt/ rebellion/ insurrection break out	ngo log zing 'khrug langs
ངོ་ཤིག	gdong la sme ba lta bu srab mos khyab pa'i pags nad kyi rigs shig	ngo shig
ངོ་ཤུས	copy from the original, exact or true copy	ngo shus
ངོ་ཤེས	Recognition, (ngo 'phrod). In this context it means 'recognizing the nature of one's mind.'	ngo shes
ངོ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དྲན་པ	presence of recognition	ngo shes kyi dran pa
ངོ་ཤེས་ཆགས་པ	become acquainted	ngo shes chags pa
ངོ་ཤེས་ཉེ་པོ	intimate	ngo shes nye po
ངོ་ཤེས་གཏོང	make friends, introduce	ngo shes gtong
ངོ་ཤེས་གཏོང་བ	acquaint	ngo shes gtong ba
ངོ་ཤེས་བཏང་བ	to get acquainted, make someone's acquaintance	ngo shes btang ba
ངོ་ཤེས་ཐུབ	able to recognize	ngo shes thub
ངོ་ཤེས་པ	to recognize; recognition	ngo shes pa
ངོ་ཤེས་པ་ངོར	while recognizing	ngo shes pa ngor
ངོ་ཤེས་པའི་མི	acquaintance, friend	ngo shes pa'i mi
ངོ་ཤེས་པར་གྱིས	recognize!	ngo shes par gyis
ངོ་ཤེས་མ་ཐུབ	not able to recognize	ngo shes ma thub
ངོ་ཤེས་ཙམ་བྱེད	to simply acknowledge	ngo shes tsam byed
ངོ་ཤེས་བཟོས	make acquainted	ngo shes bzos
ངོ་ཤེས་སེ	to recognize well, know so well, knew very well	ngo shes se
ངོ་བཤུས	copy, duplicate	ngo bshus
ངོ་བཤུས་གསུམ་པ	triplicate	ngo bshus gsum pa
ངོ་བཤེས	acquaintance	ngo bshes
ངོ་སུ	ngo su district	ngo su
ངོ་སོ	1) yus sam consideration, appreciation; 2) result, response, reaction	ngo so
ངོ་སོ་གཏོང	make a big deal of	ngo so gtong
ངོ་སོ་བསྟོད	praise	ngo so bstod
ངོ་སོ་བསྟོད་འོས་པ	worthy of praise	ngo so bstod 'os pa
ངོ་སོ་བྱེད་པ	to impress, flatter, gratify, adulate, blandish	ngo so byed pa
ངོ་སོ་མི་འདུག	[he] has no reaction/ appreciation	ngo so mi 'dug
ངོ་སོ་ཡོད་པ	one in rank or position, rise to dignity	ngo so yod pa
ངོ་སྲུང	pretense, phoniness, fawning, keeping face, protecting face, for example, when sponsors want you to do something you think you have to listen	ngo srung
ཏོ་ཐེམ་བེཅཽསེ་ཐེཡ་ཧེལཔ་ཡོཨུ	then you give all your power to them, pretense, phoniness, flattery, crowdpleaser ["protecting the face"], facesaving	to them because they help you
ཐིནཀ་ཡོཨུ་ཧབེ༹་ཏོ་ལིསྟེན་ཏོ་ཐེམ་བེཅཽསེ་ཐེཡ་ཧེལཔ་ཡོཨུ	then you give all your power to them, gzhan gyi sems srung ba	think you have to listen to them because they help you
ངོ་སྲུང་མེད་པ	w/o pretense/ facesaving	ngo srung med pa
ངོ་སྲུངས	regard to the opinion of others, an aiming at applause, bodyguard	ngo srungs
ངོ་བསོ	joy, high title or dignity	ngo bso
ངོ་བསོ་མཐོན་པོ	high title or position, one in exalted position	ngo bso mthon po
ངོ་བསོད་བྱ་བ	to praise one to the face, flatter, eulogize	ngo bsod bya ba
ངོག	place in tibet	ngog
ངོག་གོ	[arch] non no	ngog go
ངོག་ཏུ	amidst	ngog tu
ངོག་ན	[arch] song na	ngog na
ངོགས	1) bank, shore, side; 2) entrance; 3) fort; 4) ford; 5) mountain-side, slope; 6) port	ngogs
ངོགས་ཐོབ	#	ngogs thob
ངོགས་རི་བོ	mountainside	ngogs ri bo
ངོགས་རི་བོའི	mountainside	ngogs ri bo'i
ངོགས་སུ	upon, on the surface 686	ngogs su
ངོད་སེལ་བ	repair damages, redress grievances	ngod sel ba
ངོན་སྐྱུགས	vomit	ngon skyugs
ངོམ	{ngom pa, ngoms pa, ngom pa, ngoms} trans. v.: see {ngom pa}	ngom
ངོམ་ཁྱེར	ngom yus kyi khyer so	ngom khyer
ངོམ་རྒྱག	boast, brag	ngom rgyag
ངོམ་ངོམ	phyir ngom pa'am show off	ngom ngom
ངོམ་ཆུ	ngom chu River	ngom chu
ངོམ་པ	tossing; {g.yu ral legs po ngom pa} tossing your beautiful turquoise manes	ngom pa
ངོམ་པར་དགའ་པོ	like to show off	ngom par dga' po
ངོམ་འཕྱར	in front of others ngom so 'phyar ba	ngom 'phyar
ངོམ་བྱེད	boast, brag	ngom byed
ངོམ་མེད་སྲེད་པ་འཕེལ་བ	to never be satisfied, always wanting more and more	ngom med sred pa 'phel ba
ངོམ་ཚད་དུ་འཐུང་བ	drink one's fill	ngom tshad du 'thung ba
ངོམ་བཟོ	boasting, bragging	ngom bzo
ངོམ་ས	seng ge'i g.yu ral ngom sa - the	ngom sa
པླཅེ་ཝཧེརེ་སྣོཝ	lions toss their turquoise manes	place where snow
ངོམ་སོ	ngom po'am ngom 'phyar,...	ngom so
ངོམས	to show off	ngoms
ངོམས་པ	eaten to satiety, satisfy, satisfy oneself, SA ngom pa, contentment, satisfaction, oblation for quenching thirst of yi dwags, hermit, recluse in wilderness who enjoys contentment	ngoms pa
ངོམས་པ་འཐུང་བ	drink one's fill	ngoms pa 'thung ba
ངོམས་པ་མེད་པ	insatiable	ngoms pa med pa
ངོམས་པ་མེད་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the pain of dissatisfaction	ngoms pa med pa'i sdug bsngal
ངོམས་པར་འགྱུར	thirst will be quenched, desire will be fulfilled	ngoms par 'gyur
ངོམས་པར་བཏུང	drank until satisfied	ngoms par btung
ངོམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	quench	ngoms par byed pa
ངོམས་པར་མེད་པ	insatiably	ngoms par med pa
ངོམས་མི་ཤེས་པ	insatiable; tireless; unflagging, untiring	ngoms mi shes pa
ངོམས་མེད	w/o satisfaction, insatiable	ngoms med
ངོམས་ཚད་འཐུང་བ	drink one's fill	ngoms tshad 'thung ba
ངོམས་ཤིང་ཚིམས	satisfied	ngoms shing tshims
ངོམས་ཤིང་ཚིམས་ནས་འདུག་པ	were satisfied	ngoms shing tshims nas 'dug pa
ངོམས་སེམས	satisfaction, satiation, quenching	ngoms sems
ངོར	in the face of, in person, in front, to / for / with respect to, in response to, on the level of. {kyi ngor} in response to the request of. gi-ngor - vis-à-vis/ in the face of; to me, us	ngor
ངོར་ཀྱི	in response to the request of	ngor kyi
ངོར་ཁང་གསར	(1876-1952) - ngag	ngor khang gsar
དབང་བློ་གྲོས་སྙིང་པོ	alias {ngor pa ngag dbang blo gros snying po gzhan phan mtha' yas pa'i 'od zer}	dbang blo gros snying po
ངོར་ཁང་གསར་ངག་དབང་བློ་གྲོས་སྙིང་པོ	1876-1952	ngor khang gsar ngag dbang blo gros snying po
ངོར་བརྒྱབ་པ	to slam into	ngor brgyab pa
ངོར་ཆེན	1) Ngorchen monastery. 2) lama at Ngorchen	ngor chen
ངོར་ཆེན་ཀུན་དགའ་བཟང་པོ	1382-1444 - Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo, founder of Ngor Ewam Chöden Monastery in Tsang	ngor chen kun dga' bzang po
ངོར་ཆེན་ཀུན་དགའ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	Ngorchen Kunga Lhündrub, who has a vision of Guru Padmasambhava at Mount Kailash	ngor chen kun dga' lhun grub
ངོར་ཆེན་དཀོན་མཆོག་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	14971557; scholar of the Sakyapa tradition	ngor chen dkon mchog lhun grub
ངོར་བལྟས	to ingratiate oneself to others	ngor bltas
ངོར་བལྟ	in accordance with	ngor blta
ངོར་ཐར་རྩེ་མཁན་པོ	rin po che	ngor thar rtse mkhan po
ངོར་སྣང	you manifest to [us]	ngor snang
ངོར་སྣང་བཙན་མོང	{ngor snang btsan mong	ngor snang btsan mong
ངོར་པ	Ngorpa	ngor pa
ངོར་པ་ཀུན་དགའི་བཟང་པོ	see {ngor chen kun dga' bzang po}	ngor pa kun dga'i bzang po
ངོར་ཙུབ་པ	abuse, revile	ngor tsub pa
ངོར་རྩུབ་པ	direct harsh words	ngor rtsub pa
ངོར་རྫོང་གཉིས	ngor and rdzong [dpal ldan sa skya ba'i gsang sngags kyi bstan pa 'dzin mkhan ngor chen kun dga' bzang po dang, rdzong pa kun dga' rnam rgyal gnyis	ngor rdzong gnyis
ངོར་ལུགས	the tradition of the {ngor chen} monastery	ngor lugs
ངོར་ཨེ་ཝམ་ཆོས་ལྡན	Ngor Ewam Chöden, monastery in Tsang	ngor e wam chos ldan
ངོས	form	ngos
ངོས་ཀྱི་བྲག	rocky face	ngos kyi brag
ངོས་བསྐལ	duty	ngos bskal
ངོས་འགལ	direct incompatibility	ngos 'gal
ངོས་རྒྱུད	personally	ngos rgyud
ངོས་ཅག	we, our	ngos cag
ངོས་གཅིག	one side	ngos gcig
ངོས་ཆོད	1) know who/ what it is, recognize; 2) acquaintance, person one knows	ngos chod
ངོས་མཇལ	meet personally/ face to face	ngos mjal
ངོས་མཇལ་ཞུ	meet personally/ face to face ngos mjal zhus nas bka' mol gnang ba having met have a conversation	ngos mjal zhu
ངོས་མཉམ་པ	smooth surface	ngos mnyam pa
ངོས་རྟགས་སྟོན་པ	to reveal	ngos rtags ston pa
ངོས་བརྟག	examine	ngos brtag
ངོས་ཐུག	meet face to face	ngos thug
ངོས་ནས	insofar as	ngos nas
ངོས་ནས་གྱི	because of	ngos nas gyi
ངོས་གནོན	treading on	ngos gnon
ངོས་པོ་མེད་པ	non-existence of things	ngos po med pa
ངོས་སྤྲོད་པ	1) sngar ngo mi shes pa ngo sprod byed pa; 2) gnas lugs mi shes pa ngo sprod pa	ngos sprod pa
ངོས་འཕྲད	ngo ma'am, dngos su 'phrad pa,...Phan tshun ngos 'phrad byung be identified, recognize	ngos 'phrad
ངོས་འཕྲོད་པ	recognize, know, perceive	ngos 'phrod pa
ངོས་བླངས	admitt[ed], accept[ed], acknowledg[ed], confess[ed], recognize[d]	ngos blangs
ངོས་འབྱོར	acknowledgement	ngos 'byor
ངོས་འབྱོར་རྟགས	receipt or sign of having received a thing, original sign or signification	ngos 'byor rtags
ངོས་སྦྱར	to place together	ngos sbyar
ངོས་སྦྱོར	ngo sprod kyi yi ge tham 'byar, introduction, recommendation, acknowledgement	ngos sbyor
ངོས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	letter of introduction/ recommendation	ngos sbyor gyi yi ge
ངོས་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	introduce	ngos sbyor byed pa
ངོས་མ་ཟིན	not recognize	ngos ma zin
ངོས་མ་ཟིན་པ	not recognized / identified	ngos ma zin pa
ངོས་མང་གི་གཟུགས	polyhedron	ngos mang gi gzugs
ངོས་མི་ལེན	deny, not accept/ acknowledge	ngos mi len
ངོས་མི་ལེན་པ	deny	ngos mi len pa
ངོས་མི་ལེན་པའི	denial	ngos mi len pa'i
ངོས་མེད	free in public	ngos med
ངོས་འཛིན	recognize, recognition, acceptance, to understand, know, identify[ication], know [a thing by its characteristics], identify, grasp, understand [yin min nam yag nyes ha go bar byed pa	ngos 'dzin
ངོས་འཛིན་པ	understand, know, to recognize	ngos 'dzin pa
ངོས་འཛིན་བྱེད	think, consider, recognize, accept, identify	ngos 'dzin byed
ངོས་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	v. to think, consider; to identify [as]; acknowledge, recognize the claims of	ngos 'dzin byed pa
ངོས་འཛིན་མེད་པ	unrecognizeable, unidentifiable	ngos 'dzin med pa
ངོས་འཛིན་རྩ་ལ་དཔྱད་པ	identification of the type of pulse	ngos 'dzin rtsa la dpyad pa
ངོས་འཛིན་འོས་པ	should be deemed	ngos 'dzin 'os pa
ངོས་བཞེས	assertion, admission, confession, acceptance, acknowlegement, recignize, identify [h]	ngos bzhes
ངོས་ཟས་དང་ལྐོག་ཟས	front side and back side, revealed and hidden side	ngos zas dang lkog zas
ངོས་ཟིན	see {ngos 'dzin} to be able to recognize, identify, to recognize [one's nature]; pinpoint, identify, recognize	ngos zin
ངོས་ཟིན་དཀའ་བ	difficult to identify/ realize	ngos zin dka' ba
ངོས་ཟིན་པ	to recognize, identify	ngos zin pa
ངོས་ཟིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to identify	ngos zin par byed pa
ངོས་ཟུང	to recognize, identify	ngos zung
ངོས་ཟུང་བ	recognition, recognize, identity, grasp[ed]	ngos zung ba
ངོས་ཟུངས	imp. of to recognize / identity	ngos zungs
ངོས་གཟུང	[f {ngos 'dzin} will grasp/ recognize/ identify/ think/ consider/ accept	ngos gzung
ངོས་གཟུང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	unidentifiable, ungraspable, intangible	ngos gzung rgyu med pa
ངོས་གཟུང་དུ་ཅུང་ཟད་མེད	there is nothing that can be identified	ngos gzung du cung zad med
ངོས་གཟུང་བ	{ngos bzung ba} to identify/ pinpoint; isc. to recognize	ngos gzung ba
ངོས་གཟུང་བྲལ་བ	free of (being) anything identifiable	ngos gzung bral ba
ངོས་གཟུང་མེད	cannot be concretized	ngos gzung med
ངོས་གཟུང་མེད་པ	free from reference point, cannot be ascertained, to transcend all identification	ngos gzung med pa
ངོས་བཟུང	/ [p {ngos 'dzin}; 1) identified, recognized, thought, considered, accepted, identified, grasped; 2) grasping][able] tangible; 3) flattery	ngos bzung
ངོས་བཟུང་རྒྱུ་མེད	impossible to define, unidentifiable	ngos bzung rgyu med
ངོས་བཟུང་རྟགས	1 of gnas bcu gcig	ngos bzung rtags
ངོས་བཟུང་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ	totally unidentifiable	ngos bzung thams cad dang bral ba
ངོས་བཟུང་དང་བྲལ	unidentifiable	ngos bzung dang bral
ངོས་བཟུང་དང་བྲལ་བ	unidentifiable, ungraspable	ngos bzung dang bral ba
ངོས་བཟུང་བ	{ngos gzung ba} to identify/ pinpoint; isc. to recognize 688	ngos bzung ba
ངོས་བཟུང་བྱ	to apprehend	ngos bzung bya
ངོས་བཟུང་མ་བྱུང	lack of definable entity	ngos bzung ma byung
ངོས་བཟུང་མེད	intangible, unidentifiable	ngos bzung med
ངོས་བཟུང་མེད་པ	intangible, ungraspable as a thing, free from grasping. 2) flattery, {mi'i spang} give up flattering others. 3) without something tangible, intangible. {ngo bo ngos bzung med pa} tangible essence	ngos bzung med pa
ངོས་བཟུང་མེད་པ་ངོ་བོ	tangible essence	ngos bzung med pa ngo bo
ངོས་བཟུང་ཡོད	being identifiable	ngos bzung yod
ངོས་ཡངས	breadth	ngos yangs
ངོས་ར	we, our	ngos ra
ངོས་རང	we, our	ngos rang
ངོས་རང་བློ་གྲོས་དམན་པོ་ཡིན	I am of low understanding	ngos rang blo gros dman po yin
ངོས་རང་མི་སེར	our serfs/ people	ngos rang mi ser
ངོས་རེ་ལ	to each	ngos re la
ངོས་རོལ	shore, side, slope	ngos rol
ངོས་ལམ	ngos sbyor dang lam yig, sngar khral 'u lag skul byed kyi lag 'khyer	ngos lam
ངོས་ལེན	acceptance	ngos len
ངོས་ལེན་གྱི་འབོད་སྒྲ	applaud	ngos len gyi 'bod sgra
ངོས་ལེན་གྱི་ཞུ་ཡིག	deposition, official confession	ngos len gyi zhu yig
ངོས་ལེན་པ	admit	ngos len pa
ངོས་ལེན་བྱས་པ	accredited	ngos len byas pa
ངོས་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	acknowledged [fault]	ngos len byed pa
ངོས་ལེན་བྱེད་འོས་པ	acceptable	ngos len byed 'os pa
ངོས་ལེན་མ་བྱེད་པ	reject	ngos len ma byed pa
ངོས་ལེན་མི་བྱེད་པ	disapprove	ngos len mi byed pa
ངོས་ལེན་ཞུ་བ	{skyes nas 'chi ba ma byung gi bar} this lifetime before dying, to admit, recognize	ngos len zhu ba
ངོས་ལོང	self-interested	ngos long
ངོས་ཤུས	copy from the original	ngos shus
ངོས་ཤེས	recognize, identify	ngos shes
ངོས་བཤེར	in person, personally	ngos bsher
ངོས་སུ	openly, frankly	ngos su
ངོས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	facing	ngos su bstan pa
ངོས་སུ་ཤོད་པའི་གཏམ	face to face/ open talk	ngos su shod pa'i gtam
ངྲན་གསོ	remember	ngran gso
གངོས་ངན་པ	{sha chung ba} emaciated	gngos ngan pa
དངགས་ངག	snyan dngags	dngags ngag
དངགས་སྙན	poetry, poem	dngags snyan
དངང་བ	to be out of breath, to pant	dngang ba
དངངས	{shin tu skrag cing dngangs te} startled and terrified	dngangs
དངངས་སྐྲག	great fear, panic, fright, dread	dngangs skrag
དངངས་སྐྲག་སྐྱེས	be afraid of	dngangs skrag skyes
དངངས་སྐྲག་འཇིགས་གསུམ	bewildered, terrified, afraid; intense, overwhelming fear, panic, fear and terror	dngangs skrag 'jigs gsum
དངངས་སྐྲག་བྱེད	fear, dread, panic, be frightened	dngangs skrag byed
དངངས་སྐྲག་མྱོང	panicked	dngangs skrag myong
དངངས་སྐྲགས་དང་བཅས	wild with terror	dngangs skrags dang bcas
དངངས་སྒྲག	panic and fear	dngangs sgrag
དངངས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,; 1) breath suddenly 'tshangs	dngangs pa
དངངས་པ་ལྟར་འགྲེང་བར་འགྱུར	they started up as if afraid	dngangs pa ltar 'greng bar 'gyur
དངངས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	among the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, dge slong la by tho 'tsham pa'i bsam pas yid du produce various fears	dngangs par byed pa'i ltung byed
དངངས་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ	he became frightened	dngangs bar gyur to
དངངས་འཚབ	fright, dread, panic	dngangs 'tshab
དངངས་ཡིད	fear, panic	dngangs yid
དངན་འཐན	misappropriation, breach of trust	dngan 'than
དངན་འཐན་གྱིས་རྐུ་བ	steal by misappropriation or breach of trust	dngan 'than gyis rku ba
དངན་འཐེན་པ	misappropriation, mishandling [of others $/ things]	dngan 'then pa
དངན་པ	[arch] sorcery, evil	dngan pa
དངར	sweet	dngar
དངར་ཁ	gral star	dngar kha
དངར་བ	(tha dad pa,, neat, wellarranged	dngar ba
དངར་རོ	flower nectar	dngar ro
དངར་གསུམ	the three sweets [molasses, honey, sugar]	dngar gsum
དངུད་མོ	sob, wail	dngud mo
དངུལ	silver, money, a rupee, silver colored [syn: gdung byed, mdog dkar, mdog ngan, rin chen gnyis pa]	dngul
དངུལ་ཀོང	silver butter-lamps	dngul kong
དངུལ་རྐྱང	1) [hard] cash; 2) good quality unadulterated silver	dngul rkyang
དངུལ་རྐྱན	goblet made of silver	dngul rkyan
དངུལ་སྐམ	oxide of mercury	dngul skam
དངུལ་སྐར	silver skar ma	dngul skar
དངུལ་སྐར་མ	silver skar ma	dngul skar ma
དངུལ་སྐུ	silver statue 689	dngul sku
དངུལ་སྐུད	1) silver cord/ thread/ wire; 2) {dngul skud med. herb	dngul skud
དངུལ་སྐེད	silver-belt	dngul sked
དངུལ་སྐྱེད	interest on money	dngul skyed
དངུལ་སྐྱོགས	silver cup	dngul skyogs
དངུལ་ཁ	1) treasure[y]; 2) silver mine/ vein	dngul kha
དངུལ་ཁ་འདོན་པ	work a silver mine	dngul kha 'don pa
དངུལ་ཁ་མ	money kha shan [putting, keeping] bowl	dngul kha ma
དངུལ་ཁག	money bag, purse	dngul khag
དངུལ་ཁང	bank, bank	dngul khang
དངུལ་ཁང་གི་འགྲོ་སྟངས	banking	dngul khang gi 'gro stangs
དངུལ་ཁང་བདག་པོ	banker	dngul khang bdag po
དངུལ་ཁུག	purse wallet, money bag, purse for silver coins	dngul khug
དངུལ་ཁོངས་ཁ་སྒྱུར	money giving and receiving bdag khungs sgyur ba	dngul khongs kha sgyur
དངུལ་ཁྱད	silver zho and srang figuring method: 8 Zho + skar ma 7.5 = 7/8 srang; six Zho + six 1/2 + 1/6 = 2/3 srang]	dngul khyad
དངུལ་ཁྲབ	silver armor	dngul khrab
དངུལ་ཁྲལ	tax to be paid in money	dngul khral
དངུལ་འཁྲོལ	dngul lhag 'khrol	dngul 'khrol
དངུལ་གྱི	monetary, pecuniary	dngul gyi
དངུལ་གྱི་ཁ་ཤན	silver mine/ vein	dngul gyi kha shan
དངུལ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	[TRS 102-2]	dngul gyi 'khor lo can
དངུལ་གྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་བ	gave a silver coin to each, distributed silver coins	dngul gyi 'gyed btang ba
དངུལ་གྱི་ཊབ༹ཾ་ཀ	silver tangka-coins	dngul gyi TvaM ka
དངུལ་འགག	silver cup, silver slate	dngul 'gag
དངུལ་འགྱེད	dngul gyi sku 'gyed,...Dge 'dun pa tshor srang gsum gsum byas nas dngul 'gyed gtong ba	dngul 'gyed
དངུལ་འགྲུལ	currency, money order/ exchange/ transfer	dngul 'grul
དངུལ་འགྲུལ་གཏོང	send a money order, change/ transfer money	dngul 'grul gtong
དངུལ་འགྲུལ་གཏོང་གླ	money order fee, exchange rate	dngul 'grul gtong gla
དངུལ་འགྲུལ་གཏོང་བ	sending a money order, changing/ transferring money	dngul 'grul gtong ba
དངུལ་འགྲུལ་འཛིན་ཡིག	money order, bank draft	dngul 'grul 'dzin yig
དངུལ་སྒམ	cash box	dngul sgam
དངུལ་སྒིག	purse to keep silver pieces	dngul sgig
དངུལ་སྒོར	silver currency [$ yuan etc]	dngul sgor
དངུལ་ངན་པོ	bad quality adulterated silver	dngul ngan po
དངུལ་དངོས	money and goods	dngul dngos
དངུལ་བཅོལ	deposit money [in the bank]	dngul bcol
དངུལ་བཅོལ་བའི་འཛིན་ཡིག	bank pass book	dngul bcol ba'i 'dzin yig
དངུལ་ཆད	fine, balance of payments, deficit	dngul chad
དངུལ་ཆད་སྤྲོད	pay a fine	dngul chad sprod
དངུལ་ཆད་སྤྲོད་དགོས	must pay a fine	dngul chad sprod dgos
དངུལ་ཆུ	mercury, quicksilver, semen	dngul chu
དངུལ་ཆུ་གྲང་འདུལ	dngul chu, gsha' dkar, zha nye, mar nag mar khu rnams boiled together in an iron vessel, rdo gzhong grang mo'i steng du bsnur and in cow's urine or star bu'i chus three times washed, good for sbyar...	dngul chu grang 'dul
དངུལ་ཆུ་རྒོད་པོ	dngul chu la dug 'don &, las snon etc ma byas pa, rang bzhin rkyang pa'i ming	dngul chu rgod po
དངུལ་ཆུ་བཏུལ་མ	dngul chu tsha 'dul &, grang 'dul lta bu dug 'don dang las snon tshar ba'i ming	dngul chu btul ma
དངུལ་ཆུ་ཐོགས་མེད	a direct disciple of Situ Rinpoche, Chökyi Jungney, who preserved and transmitted his tradition of Tibetan grammar through his own family lineage. He wrote several important grammar texts, includin...	dngul chu thogs med
དངུལ་ཆུ་ཚ་འདུལ	yellow sulfur mu zi ser po in an iron vessel melted, having poured HG on that w an iron rod/spoon stir and sngon por song ba'i tshe rdo gzhong tshan mor bsnur nas inseparably mixed sngo nag powder,...	dngul chu tsha 'dul
དངུལ་ཆུ་དྷར་མ་བྷ་དྲ	(1772 1851)	dngul chu dhar ma bha dra
དངུལ་ཆོས	mthing shog gi ngos su dngul btul mas written dharma pecha	dngul chos
དངུལ་འཇངས་བརྡུངས	pure beaten silver; ex {dngul 'jangs brdungs kyi glegs ral} a volume of scripture and a sword of pure beaten silver	dngul 'jangs brdungs
དངུལ་འཇོག	deposit money	dngul 'jog
དངུལ་འཇོག་མཁན	depositor	dngul 'jog mkhan
དངུལ་བརྗེས	changing money	dngul brjes
དངུལ་བརྗེས་གཏོང	change money	dngul brjes gtong
དངུལ་བརྗེས་གཏོང་གླ	money changing fee	dngul brjes gtong gla
དངུལ་བརྗེས་འཛིན་ཡིག	check, money order, bank draft	dngul brjes 'dzin yig
དངུལ་གཉེར	treasurer	dngul gnyer
དངུལ་ཊཾ	silver coins	dngul TaM
དངུལ་ཏིག	cerastium arvense l., 1 of 6 kinds of bitters which have healing powers (gser tig, zungs tig, dngul tig, lcags tig, sum bcu tig, gur tig)	dngul tig
མེ་ཏོག་དཀར་པོ་འཆར་བ་ཞིག་སྟེ	ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas mkhris tshad dang sman nad sel	me tog dkar po 'char ba zhig ste
དངུལ་ཏིང	dngul las bzos pa'i yon chab 'bul snod ting phor	dngul ting
དངུལ་ཏིབ	(yul dngul las bzos pa'i ja chang gi snod	dngul tib
དངུལ་ཏེལ	dngul las bcos pa'i nad dmigs sreg byed kyi tel pa ste, nus pas 'bras nad dang, rtsa dkar sogs kyi nad la phan	dngul tel
དངུལ་གཏེར	treasure[y], silver mine	dngul gter
དངུལ་གཏོང	spend money	dngul gtong
དངུལ་བཏང	spent money	dngul btang
དངུལ་རྟ་མིག་མ	silver ingots in the	dngul rta mig ma
ཤཔེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཧོརསེ	hoof	shape of a horse
དངུལ་རྟ་རྨིག་མ	silver ingots [from CH in the shape of a horse's hoof]	dngul rta rmig ma
དངུལ་ལྟིར	silver khog ltir	dngul ltir
དངུལ་སྟོར	spend extravagantly, waste/ squander money	dngul stor
དངུལ་ཐག	silver lung thag	dngul thag
དངུལ་ཐལ	dngul sbrang bshog ltar brdungs nas bsregs pa'i thal ba la zer, ro bska, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas sha ro dang, rmen bu, 'bras nad rnams 'joms, dmu chu skem, dngul chu'i nus pa srung	dngul thal
དངུལ་ཐུམ	rten 'brel dang dga' ston gyi skyes su sprod pa'i dngul ras dkar sogs kyis gtums pa'i thum bu	dngul thum
དངུལ་ཐུར	1) dngul gyi thur ma,...@2 Dngul gyis bzos pa'i khyem bu	dngul thur
དངུལ་དམ	1) silver wine cup dam be [kind of vessel]; 2) silver seal	dngul dam
དངུལ་དུ་ལ་མ	silver ink	dngul du la ma
དངུལ་དུག	poison of silver	dngul dug
དངུལ་དུང	silver horn	dngul dung
དངུལ་དུལ་མ	silver ink 690	dngul dul ma
དངུལ་གདུང	dngul gyis gtums pa'i gdung rten	dngul gdung
དངུལ་མདུང	smin dbrag from the center g.yon ngos su tson gang re measuring &, then upward tshon do measuring at the hairline a blood vessel, if bled good for mig nad &, mig gi rdzi ma byi ba etc	dngul mdung
དངུལ་མདོང	dngul shan brgyab pa'i snod spyad mdong mo	dngul mdong
དངུལ་རྡུལ	powdered silver deity chosen by the patron	dngul rdul
དངུལ་རྡོ	{dngul rdo med. mineral [astringent, cooling, good for mending broken bones and drying chu ser]	dngul rdo
དངུལ་རྡོ་ཚད	50 silver srang	dngul rdo tshad
དངུལ་པར་ཁང	mint	dngul par khang
དངུལ་དཔར་ཁང	mint	dngul dpar khang
དངུལ་སྤྱད	silverware	dngul spyad
དངུལ་སྤྱོད་འཛིན་ཤོག	check draft, money order	dngul spyod 'dzin shog
དངུལ་སྤྲོད	remittance	dngul sprod
དངུལ་སྤྲོད་པ	pay	dngul sprod pa
དངུལ་ཕག	dngul lugs ma sa phag gi dbyibs can	dngul phag
དངུལ་ཕོགས	1) [cash/ silver] salary/ wages; 2) in monastic communities nas money debt btang ba'i skyed thog nas to the monks given money wages	dngul phogs
དངུལ་ཕོར	silver bowl	dngul phor
དངུལ་བུན	loan [money]	dngul bun
དངུལ་བུན་གཏོང	loan [money]	dngul bun gtong
དངུལ་བུན་ལེན	borrow [money]	dngul bun len
དངུལ་བོགས	dngul rkyang 'jal sprod byed pa'i bogs ma	dngul bogs
དངུལ་བྱེད	mercury	dngul byed
དངུལ་བྲན	dngul bed spyod not able tightly holding it in the hands, or srung ba lta bu'i servant ste, avaricious deprecation word	dngul bran
དངུལ་བྲིས	silver btul mas written pecha	dngul bris
དངུལ་འབབ	income	dngul 'bab
དངུལ་འབུམ	1) silver chorten; 2) prajnaparamita written in silver powder	dngul 'bum
དངུལ་འབུལ	offer money	dngul 'bul
དངུལ་འབོར	amount of money	dngul 'bor
དངུལ་སྦྱངས་མ	pure silver	dngul sbyangs ma
དངུལ་སྦྱད	silver implement/ware	dngul sbyad
དངུལ་མེད་ཆགས་པ	bankrupt	dngul med chags pa
དངུལ་མེད་པ	broke (phal skad du)	dngul med pa
དངུལ་དམར་རྐྱང	hard cash	dngul dmar rkyang
དངུལ་རྨིག	bar of silver	dngul rmig
དངུལ་སྨར་རྐྱང	pure silver	dngul smar rkyang
དངུལ་རྩ	vein of silver, finance, capital, endowment fund	dngul rtsa
དངུལ་རྩག་རྩིག	change, coins	dngul rtsag rtsig
དངུལ་རྩའི་སྒེར་སྡེམ་པ་ཉུང་ཤས	financial oligarch	dngul rtsa'i sger sdem pa nyung shas
དངུལ་རྩིས	finance	dngul rtsis
དངུལ་རྩིས་ཀྱི	financial	dngul rtsis kyi
དངུལ་རྩིས་བློན་ཆེན	finance minister	dngul rtsis blon chen
དངུལ་རྩིས་བློན་པོ	Finance Minister	dngul rtsis blon po
དངུལ་རྩིས་ལས་ཁུངས	Finance Ministry	dngul rtsis las khungs
དངུལ་ཚགས	silver-work on other metal, silver plating	dngul tshags
དངུལ་མཛོད	treasury	dngul mdzod
དངུལ་འཛིན	receipt, check, draft	dngul 'dzin
དངུལ་འཛིན་གཏོང	issue a receipt check/ draft	dngul 'dzin gtong
དངུལ་ཞུན་མ	melted silver	dngul zhun ma
དངུལ་ཟིལ	rdo sman gyi rigs shig ste, ro bska, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rus pa gas chag shor ba dang, rdo dug sogs la phan	dngul zil
དངུལ་བཟོ	silversmith	dngul bzo
དངུལ་བཟོ་པ	silver smith	dngul bzo pa
དངུལ་བཟོ་བ	silver-smith	dngul bzo ba
དངུལ་འོ་ཁ་མ	kind of silver color	dngul 'o kha ma
དངུལ་རི་ཀྱི་མདངས	the influence / reflection of the silver mountain	dngul ri kyi mdangs
དངུལ་ལི	1/10 of hon measure	dngul li
དངུལ་ལུགས	currency system	dngul lugs
དངུལ་ལུགས་མ	lugs brgyab pa'i dngul	dngul lugs ma
དངུལ་ལོར	note	dngul lor
དངུལ་ལོར་རྒྱུན་འཁོར	money in circulation	dngul lor rgyun 'khor
དངུལ་ལོར་མ་རྩ	financial capital	dngul lor ma rtsa
དངུལ་ལོར་ཚད་མེད་བཀྲམ་པ	inflation	dngul lor tshad med bkram pa
དངུལ་ལོར་ཚད་མེད་འདོན་པ	inflation	dngul lor tshad med 'don pa
དངུལ་ལོར་ཚད་ཡོལ་འདོན་པ	inflation	dngul lor tshad yol 'don pa
དངུལ་ལོར་ས་བོགས	rent land for money	dngul lor sa bogs
དངུལ་ཤན་མ	nang rgya kha zhabs bcas la dngul shan g.yogs pa'i phor pa	dngul shan ma
དངུལ་ཤོག	silver leaf/ foil	dngul shog
དངུལ་ས	silver ore	dngul sa
དངུལ་སིལ	change, coins	dngul sil
དངུལ་སིལ་མ	change, coins	dngul sil ma
དངུལ་སོགས་སྤྲོད་པ	remit	dngul sogs sprod pa
དངུལ་སྲང	silver coins	dngul srang
དངུལ་གསོག	save money	dngul gsog
དངུལ་བསགས	saved money	dngul bsags
དངུལ་ཧོ་ཀ་མ	very pure silver from CH	dngul ho ka ma
དངུལ་ཧྲོབ	silver bit	dngul hrob
དངུལ་ལྷད་ཅན	adulterated/ alloyed silver	dngul lhad can
དངོ	shore, bank	dngo
དངོ་ཐོག	real, reality	dngo thog
དངོ་པོ	entity	dngo po
དངོ་བཟོ	shoe-maker	dngo bzo
དངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhis of higher perception	dngon par shes pa'i dngos grub
དངོམ	[p dngoms],, be bright/ splendid, boast, show off	dngom
དངོམ་ཆེན་པོ	rtsa chen, very precious	dngom chen po
དངོམ་བརྗིད	brightness, splendor	dngom brjid
དངོམ་པ	brightness, splendor	dngom pa
དངོམ་པོ	bright, splendid, brilliant	dngom po
དངོམས	[p {dngom} was bright/ splendid, boasted, showed off	dngoms
དངོས	explicit, actual, direct	dngos
དངོས་ཀུན	all things	dngos kun
དངོས་ཀུན་བདེན་པར་འདོད་པ	maintain all things to be truly existing	dngos kun bden par 'dod pa
དངོས་ཀུན་མི་བདེན་པར་འདོད་པ	maintain	dngos kun mi bden par 'dod pa
ཨལལ་ཐིངས་ཏོ་བེ་ནོན	truly existing	all things to be non
དངོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	direct primary cause	dngos kyi rgyu
དངོས་ཀྱི་བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས	direct predicate of the thesis	dngos kyi bsgrub bya'i chos
དངོས་ཀྱི་བརྗོད་བྱ	direct signified, actual signified; the directly signified. Syn {sgra don} the object indicated by words. Syn {don spyi} object-universal [ggd]	dngos kyi brjod bya
དངོས་ཀྱི་བརྗོད་བྱེད	the direct signifier. Syn {sgra spyi} term-universal; actual signifier [ggd]	dngos kyi brjod byed
དངོས་ཀྱི་ཉེར་ལེན	mostly self produced continuance of the same substance,	dngos kyi nyer len
དངོས་ཀྱི་དོན	main meaning/ part	dngos kyi don
དངོས་ཀྱི་མ་ངེས	uncertainty/ unreality of things	dngos kyi ma nges
དངོས་ཀྱི་མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས	reasons for the uncertainty/ unreality of things	dngos kyi ma nges pa'i rtags
དངོས་ཀྱི་མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས་བཞི	of signs of ordinary uncertainty. [mthun phyogs la khyab byed mi mthun	dngos kyi ma nges pa'i rtags bzhi
དངོས་སྐྱེས	personal present	dngos skyes
དངོས་སྐྱོང	direct control/ administration	dngos skyong
དངོས་སྐྱོང་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city under direct control/ administration of central government dngos bskyed thugs rje rol pa'i theg pa Way of the Manifestation of Compassion as Actual Visualization	dngos skyong grong khyer
དངོས་ཁམས	physics, physical	dngos khams
དངོས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་འགྱུར་བ	physical change	dngos khams kyi 'gyur ba
དངོས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	physics dngos khams la brten pa'i gso thabs physical therapy	dngos khams kyi rig pa
དངོས་གྱི་བརྗོད་བྱ	explicitly object of expression	dngos gyi brjod bya
དངོས་གྲངས	individual number, enumeration of individual things	dngos grangs
དངོས་གྲུབ	accomplishment. (dngos grub), Skt. siddhi. The attainment resulting from Dharma practice usually referring to the 'supreme accomplishment' of complete enlightenment. It can also mean the 'common ac...	dngos grub
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀུན་འབྱུང	source of all siddhis	dngos grub kun 'byung
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀུན་སྩོལ	who bestows all siddhis	dngos grub kun stsol
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྐལ	the fortune of siddhi	dngos grub kyi skal
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྐལ་བ	the fortune of siddhi	dngos grub kyi skal ba
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	Root of siddhis. The yidam among the Three Roots	dngos grub kyi rtsa ba
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ་ཡི་དམ	yidams the root of siddhi	dngos grub kyi rtsa ba yi dam
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྫས	substance of accomplishment. The shrine articles such as amrita and torma of which a small portion is partaken of on the morning of the last day of a retreat practice. substance of siddhi	dngos grub kyi rdzas
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྐུལ	invoke the siddhis	dngos grub bskul
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྐུལ་བ	to invoke the siddhis	dngos grub bskul ba
དངོས་གྲུབ་གྲུབ་པ	establish siddhi	dngos grub grub pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་དགུ	CHN	dngos grub dgu
དངོས་གྲུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚོ	ocean of obtainments	dngos grub rgyal mtsho
དངོས་གྲུབ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to accomplish the siddhis	dngos grub sgrub pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	the method to accomplish the siddhis	dngos grub sgrub pa'i thabs
དངོས་གྲུབ་བརྒྱད	the 8 [ordinary] siddhis [ral gri dang, ril bu, mig sman, rkang mgyogs, bcud len, mkha' spyod, mi snang ba, sa 'og]	dngos grub brgyad
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཚུལ་གསུམ	the three ways of establishing the siddhis CHN	dngos grub bsgrub pa'i tshul gsum
དངོས་གྲུབ་མཆོག	supreme attainment, supreme siddhi	dngos grub mchog
དངོས་གྲུབ་མཆོག་ཐུན	the supreme and ordinary siddhis	dngos grub mchog thun
དངོས་གྲུབ་མཆོད་རྟེན	a kind of stupa	dngos grub mchod rten
གཏོགས	the siddhis included in the world and beyond the world dngos grub 'jig rten 'das dang 'jig rten	gtogs
གཏོགས་པ	mundane and supramundane accomplishments	gtogs pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་གཉིས	the two siddhis; see {dngos grub rnam gnyis}	dngos grub gnyis
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ	have attained the accomplishment	dngos grub thob
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་པ	to attain siddhi	dngos grub thob pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་པར	attain siddhi	dngos grub thob par
དངོས་གྲུབ་མཐའ་དག	all the siddhis	dngos grub mtha' dag
དངོས་གྲུབ་སྡིངས	plain where enchanted things are obtained or where one's wishes are fulfilled	dngos grub sdings
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྡུ་བ	embody the siddhis	dngos grub bsdu ba
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྡུས	embodiment of the siddhis	dngos grub bsdus
དངོས་གྲུབ་བསྡུས་པ	received the siddhis	dngos grub bsdus pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two kinds of siddhis [ordinary, supreme]	dngos grub rnam gnyis
དངོས་གྲུབ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the 3-fold supreme siddhi, {sku gsung thugs kyi dngos grub}	dngos grub rnam pa gsum
དངོས་གྲུབ་དཔལ་སྟེར	glorious bestower of siddhi	dngos grub dpal ster
དངོས་གྲུབ་དཔལ་འབར	gzhung brgya pa (16th cent); author of {byams pa'i smon lam gyi 'grel pa	dngos grub dpal 'bar
དངོས་གྲུབ་བླ་མེད་བསྒྲུབ་པ	the highest siddhi will be accomplished	dngos grub bla med bsgrub pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་བླང་བ	dngos grub len pa Receiving the accomplishment, requesting the accomplishments	dngos grub blang ba
དངོས་གྲུབ་བླང་བའི་ཆོ་ག	ceremony of receiving the accomplishment	dngos grub blang ba'i cho ga
དངོས་གྲུབ་སྩོལ	grant the siddhis!	dngos grub stsol
དངོས་གྲུབ་རྫས	Substance of accomplishment; substances of accomplishments	dngos grub rdzas
དངོས་གྲུབ་རིལ་བུ	"siddhi pills"	dngos grub ril bu
དངོས་གྲུབ་ལེན	acquire accomplishment, receive siddhi	dngos grub len
དངོས་གྲུབ་ལེན་ཆོག	receiving siddhis	dngos grub len chog
དངོས་གྲུབ་ལེན་པ	dngos grub blang ba Receiving the accomplishment, requesting the accomplishments	dngos grub len pa
དངོས་གྲུབ་གསུམ	the 3-fold supreme siddhi, {sku gsung thugs kyi dngos grub}	dngos grub gsum
དངོས་འགལ	direct opposition	dngos 'gal
དངོས་འགལ་གཅོད་པ	preclusion of one's contradictory [ggd]	dngos 'gal gcod pa
དངོས་འགལ་གཉིས	two types of direct oppositeness #	dngos 'gal gnyis
དངོས་འགོག་པ	refutation of the thesis that things exist in truth	dngos 'gog pa
དངོས་འགོད་གློག་བརྙན	newsreel, documentary film	dngos 'god glog brnyan
དངོས་རྒྱུ	actual cause	dngos rgyu
དངོས་རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་གཅིག	1 causal collection	dngos rgyu tshogs gcig
དངོས་རྒྱུ་ཚོགས་པ་གཅིག	1 causal collection	dngos rgyu tshogs pa gcig
དངོས་རྒྱུད	orthodox	dngos rgyud
དངོས་བརྒྱུད	personally	dngos brgyud
དངོས་བརྒྱུད་ཤུགས་གསུམ	directly, indirectly or by their own strength	dngos brgyud shugs gsum
དངོས་བསྒྲགས	publication, proclamation, declaration	dngos bsgrags
དངོས་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	publish, proclamation, announce	dngos bsgrags byed
དངོས་ངན	emaciated, meager, hidden, concealed	dngos ngan
དངོས་ངན་པ	thin, emaciated	dngos ngan pa
དངོས་ངན་པོ	1) unpleasing color and shape; 2) emaciated	dngos ngan po
དངོས་དངོས་རྗེན་རྗེན	real/ true and nakedly clear, whole truth, candid	dngos dngos rjen rjen
དངོས་དངོས་རྗེན་རྗེན་བཤད	speak the whole truth/ candidly	dngos dngos rjen rjen bshad
དངོས་ཅན་གྱི་རྟེན	concrete material support	dngos can gyi rten
དངོས་ཆས	articles	dngos chas
དངོས་ཆོས	actual phenomenon {dngos po chos} [mss]	dngos chos
དངོས་ཆོས་ལྟར་སྣང	MSS: apparent actual phenomena; apparent and actual phenomena. real and apparent, i.e.,[conventionally] real and false [mss]	dngos chos ltar snang
དངོས་འཇུག	matter of a work, subject matter	dngos 'jug
དངོས་རྗེན	real/ true and nakedly clear, whole truth, candid	dngos rjen
དངོས་རྗེན་ཟོལ་མེད	real/ true and nakedly clear, whole truth, candid	dngos rjen zol med
དངོས་རྗེན་ཟོལ་མེད་བཤད	speak the whole truth/ candidly	dngos rjen zol med bshad
དངོས་རྗེན་བཤད	speak the whole truth/ candidly	dngos rjen bshad
དངོས་ཉམས	in actuality and in vision	dngos nyams
དངོས་ཉམས་རྨི་ལམ	in actuality, in visions, or in dreams; in dreams, in meditation, and in reality	dngos nyams rmi lam
དངོས་ཉམས་སུ	in reality	dngos nyams su
དངོས་ཉིད	the actual, true, real	dngos nyid
དངོས་གཉིན	actual antidote, antidote for solidity	dngos gnyin
དངོས་གཉེན	direct, effective remedy, actual antidote	dngos gnyen
དངོས་གཉེན་དུ་སྤྱོད་པ	to use as a direct antidote	dngos gnyen du spyod pa
དངོས་རྙིང་པ	antique	dngos rnying pa
དངོས་རྙེད	real or substantial gain, obtaining one's object, anxious, thoughtful	dngos rnyed
དངོས་གཏོགས	directly controlled/ subordinated/ regulated	dngos gtogs
དངོས་བཏགས	reality and false labeling, real and false name	dngos btags
དངོས་རྟགས་སྨྲ་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	positivism	dngos rtags smra ba'i ring lugs
དངོས་རྟོགས	1) in terms of dngos rtogs and rtag rtogs: dngos por rtogs pa'i tshad ma, true knowledge ascertaining the individuating characteristics of compounded things; 2) in terms of dngos rtogs and shugs rt...	dngos rtogs
དངོས་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	not really dngos gnas, only seeming to be	dngos ltar snang ba
དངོས་ལྟར་བྱེད་ཐབས	implementation	dngos ltar byed thabs
དངོས་ལྟར་བྱེད་ཐབས་བྱེད	implement	dngos ltar byed thabs byed
དངོས་སྟོབས	power of the thing	dngos stobs
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	factual proof	dngos stobs kyi rtags
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ཞུགས་པའི་རིག་པ	reasoning by the power of fact/ the way things are	dngos stobs kyi zhugs pa'i rig pa
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	knowledge through the power of things themselves / fact / factual reasoning [eg fire is hot) (Abbr of {dngos po stobs zhugs kyi rigs pa}	dngos stobs kyi rig pa
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of the power of fact, reasoning by the power of the things themselves	dngos stobs kyi rigs pa
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་ཞུགས་པ	see {dngos po stobs kyis zhugs pa} [mss]	dngos stobs kyis zhugs pa
དངོས་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བསལ་བ	elimination by the power of the things themselves [among the bsal ba bzhi, dam bca' dang dngos po'i stobs zhugs kyi rtags dang 'gal ba, eg, in maintaining sound to be permanent, refutation by dngos...	dngos stobs kyis bsal ba
དངོས་སྟོབས་རྗེས་དཔག	immediate inference, existential judgment of perception, (we pass to new symbolic formulation of same existent fact, example in recognizing impermanence, we also recognize the concrete nature of th...	dngos stobs rjes dpag
དངོས་སྟོབས་རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཚད་མ	implicit inference	dngos stobs rjes dpag gi tshad ma
དངོས་བསྟན	explicit indicated [object];	dngos bstan
དངོས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	explicitly indicate [ggd]	dngos su bstan pa
དངོས་ཐོ	list of 1's property	dngos tho
དངོས་ཐོག་ཏུ་སྦྱོང	practice, undergo practical training	dngos thog tu sbyong
དངོས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་དགའ་བ	joy of a really attained thing [among dga' ba'i rgyan, ornament showing not just a mere reflection dga' ba skye ba'i rgyu from 694 really seeing a specially exalted form as a fruition obtaining joy]	dngos thob kyi dga' ba
དངོས་མཐུན་རིང་ལུགས	realism	dngos mthun ring lugs
དངོས་མཐོང	clearly see, eyewitness, 1st-hand	dngos mthong
དངོས་མཐོང་བདེན་རྟོགས	having seen truly know	dngos mthong bden rtogs
དངོས་མཐོང་གནས་ཚུལ	eyewitness/ 1st-hand account	dngos mthong gnas tshul
དངོས་མཐོང་གཟུགས་གྲུབ	perceive w the eyes &, a gzugs can that is to be looked at yang grub pa	dngos mthong gzugs grub
དངོས་འཐེན་ནུས་པ	gravity	dngos 'then nus pa
དངོས་དང་སྒྱུ་མ	reality and illusion	dngos dang sgyu ma
དངོས་དང་བརྒྱུད་ནས	directly and indirectly	dngos dang brgyud nas
དངོས་དང་དངོས་མེད	substance and	dngos dang dngos med
དངོས་དང་མཇལ	encounter solidity/ reality	dngos dang mjal
དངོས་དང་མཚུངས	seem alive/ solid/ real	dngos dang mtshungs
དངོས་དང་མཚུངས་པ	sku + - the image seems alive	dngos dang mtshungs pa
དངོས་དང་ཞར་བྱུང	directly and incidentally	dngos dang zhar byung
དངོས་དང་ཡིད་ཀྱིས	real and imaginary	dngos dang yid kyis
དངོས་དང་ཡིད་བྱུང	real and imagined	dngos dang yid byung
དངོས་དང་ཤུགས་ལ་རྟོགས་པ	the explicit and implicit levels of realization [ggd] dngos dug thog ma nas dngos po rang nyid kyi ngo bo dug yin pa btsan dug	dngos dang shugs la rtogs pa
དང	mthang phrom lta bu'o	dang
དངོས་དོད	original text, principal part of a work	dngos dod
དངོས་དོན	real, true, factual, actual, the pith/ reality	dngos don
དངོས་དོན་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	vital point	dngos don gyi snying po
དངོས་དོན་ངོ་མ	fact, actuality	dngos don ngo ma
དངོས་དོན་ངོ་མའི་ཐོག	in fact, actually	dngos don ngo ma'i thog
དངོས་དོན་དང་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	linked w reality, true, factual	dngos don dang zung 'brel
དངོས་དོན་དུ	in actual fact	dngos don du
དངོས་དོན་གནས་སྟངས	real/ actual situation	dngos don gnas stangs
དངོས་དོན་འུད་བཤད	exaggeration	dngos don 'ud bshad
དངོས་དོན་ལ	in fact, actually, really dngos drang yin min gshod pa'am blta ba - confirm	dngos don la
དངོས་དྲན	bona fide	dngos dran
དངོས་དྲི་མ་དེ་གསལ་སངས་རྒྱས	purifying these stains of solidity is buddhahood	dngos dri ma de gsal sangs rgyas
དངོས་བདག	owner/ nature of things	dngos bdag
དངོས་བདག་ཅན	positivist attitude	dngos bdag can
དངོས་བདེན	true, [f]actual, real	dngos bden
དངོས་བདེན་ག་རེ་བཅད	what [they] really decided	dngos bden ga re bcad
དངོས་བདེན་ཞིག་ལས་བཅོས་མ་ཞིག་མིན	a fact and not made up	dngos bden zhig las bcos ma zhig min
དངོས་སྡིག	[arch] evil deeds done by 1self	dngos sdig
དངོས་ནས	in fact, actual[ly], [in] actual[ity], real[ly], tru[ly]	dngos nas
དངོས་ནས་དྲང་གནས	really true, certain	dngos nas drang gnas
དངོས་ནས་བྱས་ན	in fact, actually, really, truly	dngos nas byas na
དངོས་ནས་རེད	it's true	dngos nas red
དངོས་ནས་རེད་བས	is it real?	dngos nas red bas
དངོས་ནས་ལ	in fact, actually, in actuality	dngos nas la
དངོས་གནས	1) real, true, 2) the nature of things. Syn {dngos po'i gnas tshul}; 3) actually, in fact	dngos gnas
དངོས་གནས་ཀྱི	factual	dngos gnas kyi
དངོས་གནས་དྲང་གནས	honest to goodness	dngos gnas drang gnas
དངོས་གནས་པ	the real fact [ggd]	dngos gnas pa
དངོས་གནས་བྱས་ན	really, truly, in fact, actually	dngos gnas byas na
དངོས་གནས་མ་ཡིན	fictitious	dngos gnas ma yin
དངོས་གནས་མ་ཡིན་པ	fiction	dngos gnas ma yin pa
དངོས་གནས་སྨྲ་བ	realism, realist	dngos gnas smra ba
དངོས་གནས་རང	really, truly	dngos gnas rang
དངོས་གནས་ལ	in fact, actually	dngos gnas la
དངོས་རྣམས	all realities	dngos rnams
དངོས་སྣ	ca lag sna kha	dngos sna
དངོས་སྣང	appearance of things / solidity	dngos snang
དངོས་སྣང་རྨི་ལམ	1) in actuality / reality, in dreams, or in visions. 2) in reality, visions, and dreams	dngos snang rmi lam
དངོས་པ	substance	dngos pa
དངོས་པའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of a thing	dngos pa'i rgyu
དངོས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of a thing	dngos pa'i rang bzhin
དངོས་པོ	1) matter, material, things, [objective] entity, real things, substance, property, goods, articles, given thing, functioning thing, fact, thing, phenomenon, existent, thing, any perceivable entity ...	dngos po
དངོས་པོ་ཀུན	all reality/ things	dngos po kun
དངོས་པོ་སྐོར་འདྲེན	cargo/ freight transport	dngos po skor 'dren
དངོས་པོ་སྐོར་འདྲེན་འཁོར་ཚད	cargo/ freight traffic	dngos po skor 'dren 'khor tshad
དངོས་པོ་གྱ་ནོམ་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	to give excellent [material] things	dngos po gya nom pa sbyin pa
དངོས་པོ་འགྲོ་རླབས	waste product	dngos po 'gro rlabs
དངོས་པོ་སྒྲུབ་པ	bring a thing about,	dngos po sgrub pa
སེཏ་ཐིང་ཨོན་ཕོ༹ཨོཏ་ཨོར་ཨ	going, substance, matter	set thing on foot or a
དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད	8 reality states (rnam mkhyen, lam shes nyid, thams cad shes pa nyid, rnam kun mngon rdzogs rtogs pa, rtse mor phyin pa, mthar gyis pa, skad cig ma gcig gis mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa'i sby...	dngos po brgyad
ཨནད་ནོན	things dngos po dngos med par byed pa'i rdzu 'phrul - the miraculous power of making concrete things inconcrete	and non
དངོས་པོ་ཅི་ཞིག	anything	dngos po ci zhig
དངོས་པོ་གཅིག	a [particular] thing	dngos po gcig
དངོས་པོ་བཅུ	ten natures of tantra	dngos po bcu
དངོས་པོ་ཆོས	phenomenon, solidified dharma, dharmas of things	dngos po chos
དངོས་པོ་ཉེ་བར་དགོད་པ	1) tell the nature of things; 2) put implements nearby	dngos po nye bar dgod pa
དངོས་པོ་གཉིས	CHN	dngos po gnyis
དངོས་པོ་གཏན་གནས་ཀྱི་ངེས་སྲོལ	law of the conservation og matter	dngos po gtan gnas kyi nges srol
དངོས་པོ་རྟག་གཅིག་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	to conceive of a thing as being permanent and singular	dngos po rtag gcig tu rtog pa
དངོས་པོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of things [having a nature over and above the five skandhas]	dngos po stong pa nyid
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་ཞུགས་པ	1) when referring to objects: perdure through the force of the things themselves,/the object/the facts; 2) when referring to consciousness e.g. VC, engaging [its object] through the force of facts/...	dngos po stobs kyis zhugs pa
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས	material force	dngos po stobs zhugs
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	reason by power of the things themselves *, reason of material force	dngos po stobs zhugs kyi rtags
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	valid cognition which engages [its object] through the force of the thing itself/fact [mss]	dngos po stobs zhugs kyi tshad ma
དངོས་པོ་སྟོབས་ཤུགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་དཔག	inference proceeding from the power of facts [ggd] dngos po brtan g.yo - animate and inanimate material phenomena	dngos po stobs shugs kyi rjes dpag
དངོས་པོ་ཐད	all things [of good fortune]	dngos po thad
དངོས་པོ་ཐམས་ཅད	totality	dngos po thams cad
དངོས་པོ་མཐོང་བ	to perceive ultimate reality (directly)	dngos po mthong ba
དངོས་པོ་དག་པ	pure thing dngos po dang dngos po med pa gnyis su	dngos po dag pa
ཐིངས་ཨནད་ནོན	things	things and non
དངོས་པོ་དང་དངོས་མེད	thing and	dngos po dang dngos med
དངོས་པོ་དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony with how things are dngos po dang med par gyed pa'i rdzu 'phrul - the miracle of producing things	dngos po dang mthun pa
དངོས་པོ་དང་མཚན་མ	materialism and ideology; Padmasambhava {spyod pa'i phyogs su lta ba ma shor bar mdzod, de shor na dngos po dang mtshan mas bcings nas grol ba'i dus med} Do not let your view slip in the direction ...	dngos po dang mtshan ma
དངོས་པོ་དམ་པ	{sbyin sogs kyi dngos po phyogs re ba min par ris med pa}	dngos po dam pa
དངོས་པོ་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་མ་གྲུབ	have no reality	dngos po de nyid du ma grub
དངོས་པོ་དེ་ལ་དམིགས་པ་ཤེས་པ	conceptual knowledge of things	dngos po de la dmigs pa shes pa
དངོས་པོ་བདག	things involved	dngos po bdag
དངོས་པོ་འདུ་ཤེས་ཅན	possessing perception of things	dngos po 'du shes can
དངོས་པོ་འདྲ་བ	similar things, similarity in things	dngos po 'dra ba
དངོས་པོ་རྣམས	all things	dngos po rnams
དངོས་པོ་སྣ་ཚོགས	multiplicity of material phenomena dngos po phyi snang ba'i yul dngos med	dngos po sna tshogs
ནང་རིག་པའི་སེམས	the concrete / material external perceived objects and the inconcrete / immaterial internal perceiving mind dngos po phyi snang ba'i yul dngos med	nang rig pa'i sems
དངོས་པོ་སྦྱིན་པ	give things	dngos po sbyin pa
དངོས་པོ་མ་ཡིན	not a particular existent	dngos po ma yin
དངོས་པོ་མང་པོ་སྦྱིན་པ	give many things	dngos po mang po sbyin pa
དངོས་པོ་མེད	abstract, not realistic	dngos po med
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པ	{dngos med} is not real; having no/ lacking substance; not actual; isc. intangible	dngos po med pa
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	openness/emptiness of the non-material/	dngos po med pa stong pa nyid
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ནོན	material. one of the {stong pa nyid bco brgyad} 18 types of emptiness, emptiness of the immaterial, emptiness of the inconcrete, substanceless essence	of the non
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པ་ལས་བྱུང	arising from	dngos po med pa las byung
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	originating from something inconcrete / unreal dngos po med pa'i ngo bo nyid stong pa	dngos po med pa las byung ba
ཝཧིཆ་ཧས་ཐེ་ཨེསསེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ནོན	essent dngos po med pa'i ngo bo nyid stong pa	which has the essence of a non
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	openness/ emptiness of the non-material /	dngos po med pa'i stong pa nyid
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་གཟུགས	empty forms without any substantiality	dngos po med pa'i stong gzugs
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན	insubstantial nature	dngos po med pa'i rang bzhin
དངོས་པོ་མེད་པར་འདོད་པ	to regard as inconcrete	dngos po med par 'dod pa
དངོས་པོ་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of things's [true] existence	dngos po smra ba
དངོས་པོ་ཙམ	materialist	dngos po tsam
དངོས་པོ་ཙམ་གྱི་རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་རིག་པ	materialist dialectics [marxism]	dngos po tsam gyi rtsod sgrub rig pa
དངོས་པོ་རྩོམ་བྱེད	building blocks of matter	dngos po rtsom byed
དངོས་པོ་མཚན	experience	dngos po mtshan
དངོས་པོ་མཚན་མ་མེད་པ	nothing that can be characterized as "real"/ having substance	dngos po mtshan ma med pa
དངོས་པོ་མཚུངས	similar things, similarity in things, SA ngos snang dngos po 'tshol ba nas yang dag ye shes right cognition from investigating objects	dngos po mtshungs
དངོས་པོ་འཛིན་པ	materialism	dngos po 'dzin pa
དངོས་པོ་གཞན	the other things [rtags 'jug skabs when dividing into self and other, other, in an action the object: bsgrub bya'i yul or las kyi dngos po &, and the action: bya ba'i las kyi dngos po, eg, by me wi...	dngos po gzhan
དངོས་པོ་གཞན་འགྱུར་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of the transformation of things	dngos po gzhan 'gyur smra ba
དངོས་པོ་གཞན་བཅད་པ	cut off/ decide about things as other	dngos po gzhan bcad pa
དངོས་པོ་བཞི	4 articles of merit, SA bsod nams kyi dngos po bzhi	dngos po bzhi
དངོས་པོ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཅོག	all things [material / substantial]	dngos po yin no cog
དངོས་པོ་ཡིན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of substantiality; to claim that something is / has substantial existence	dngos po yin par smra ba
དངོས་པོ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	thorough investigation of things	dngos po yongs su tshol ba
དངོས་པོ་ཡོད་པ	real, concrete, existence	dngos po yod pa
དངོས་པོ་ཡོད་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	the emptiness of the concrete dngos po yod pa dang dngos po med pa things and non things, existent things	dngos po yod pa stong pa nyid
དངོས་པོ་ཡོད་པར་འདོད་པ	to regard as having substantial existence	dngos po yod par 'dod pa
དངོས་པོ་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	1 who says things are really existent, a realist, realism	dngos po yod par smra ba
དངོས་པོ་རགས་པ	coarse material things	dngos po rags pa
དངོས་པོ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ	1) ordinary substance / content. 2) autonomous thing	dngos po rang rgyud pa
དངོས་པོ་རང་ཉིད	material things/ objects	dngos po rang nyid
དངོས་པོ་རང་ལྡོག	= dngos po rang yin pa'i cha, eg, bum pa dngos po'i ldog pa &, dngos po dang gcig bcas don gcig ming gi rnam grangs so	dngos po rang ldog
དངོས་པོ་རང་བཞིན་དང་བཅས་པ	inherent existence of things dngos po rang bzhin dang bcas par smra	dngos po rang bzhin dang bcas pa
དངོས་པོ་རུང་བ་སྦྱིན་པ	give appropriate/ suitable things	dngos po rung ba sbyin pa
དངོས་པོ་ལ་སྐུར་བ་འདེབས་པ	cast aspersions on things	dngos po la skur ba 'debs pa
དངོས་པོ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	depending on things/ reality / solidity	dngos po la brten pa
དངོས་པོ་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་དངོས་མེད	{bum pa dang ka ba'i spyi lta bu dngos po'i don spyi rnams}	dngos po la brten pa'i dngos med
དངོས་པོ་ལས་འདས་པ་སྨྲ་བ	metaphysics [-ician]	dngos po las 'das pa smra ba
དངོས་པོ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་འདུག་ཚུལ	basic nature of things	dngos po gshis kyi 'dug tshul
དངོས་པོ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	essential nature of things	dngos po gshis kyi gnas lugs
དངོས་པོ་གཤིས་གྱི་དོན	the absolute nature of things	dngos po gshis gyi don
དངོས་པོ་སོ་སོར་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	discrimination of things dngos po gsal ba'i rjes su 'gro ba'i de kho	dngos po so sor rnam par rig pa
ན་ཉིད་གྲུབ་པ	Accomplishment of Thatness to Clearly Encompass Reality	na nyid grub pa
དངོས་པོ་གསུམ	CHN	dngos po gsum
དངོས་པོ་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	substantial inborn wisdom [not separate from the experience of bliss]	dngos po lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes
དངོས་པོའི་དཀར་ཆག	list or register of articles	dngos po'i dkar chag
དངོས་པོའི་སྐུར་མ	nor rdzas kyi skyes	dngos po'i skur ma
དངོས་པོའི་བསྐལ་དོན	rang bzhin gyi bskal don no	dngos po'i bskal don
དངོས་པོའི་ཁེ་ཕན	material welfare/ benefit	dngos po'i khe phan
དངོས་པོའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of a thing	dngos po'i rgyu
དངོས་པོའི་ངོ་བོ	the mode of an entity, the nature of things	dngos po'i ngo bo
དངོས་པོའི་སྔ་ལོགས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	a prior arising of a functional thing	dngos po'i snga logs su byung ba
དངོས་པོའི་ཉེར་ལེན	a substantial cause of functioning thing	dngos po'i nyer len
དངོས་པོའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	material dependency	dngos po'i rten 'brel
དངོས་པོའི་ལྟ་བ	material matters, the view of things, the view of solidity	dngos po'i lta ba
དངོས་པོའི་སྟེར་ཆ	bya dga' sogs la ster ba'i rdzas	dngos po'i ster cha
དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་ཞུགས	material force	dngos po'i stobs zhugs
དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	power dwelling in the nature of the things themselves	dngos po'i stobs zhugs kyi rtags
དངོས་པོའི་སྟོབས་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	understanding by power of things themselves	dngos po'i stobs zhugs kyi rig pa
དངོས་པོའི་ཐོ་གཞུང	particular	dngos po'i tho gzhung
དངོས་པོའི་མཐའ	the limits of phenomena	dngos po'i mtha'
དངོས་པོའི་མཐའ་ལ་དམིགས་པ	in the khyab pa'i dmigs pa bzhi, "'di tsam du zad kyi 'di las gzhan med do" : ji snyed pa'i dngos po'i mtha'a; "'di kho na ltar gnas kyi gzhan du mi gnas so" ji lta ba'i dngos po'i mtha'a; eg "bden...	dngos po'i mtha' la dmigs pa
དངོས་པོའི་མཐའི་དམིགས་པ	conception of the limits of phenomena / extreme of solidity	dngos po'i mtha'i dmigs pa
དངོས་པོའི་དེ་ཁོ	the suchness of things	dngos po'i de kho
དངོས་པོའི་དེ་ཁོ་ཉིད	the nature of things	dngos po'i de kho nyid
དངོས་པོའི་དོན་སྤྱི	a thing's objectimage	dngos po'i don spyi
དངོས་པོའི་གདོན	fever of positivism, demon of solidity	dngos po'i gdon
དངོས་པོའི་བདག་དབང	right of private ownership	dngos po'i bdag dbang
དངོས་པོའི་ལྡོག་པ	dngos po dang tha dad las log pa'i chos, eg, bum pa'i ldog pa	dngos po'i ldog pa
དངོས་པོའི་གནས	8th of the sgra'i gnas brgyad, don gyi dngos gzhi rtogs par byed pa ste, eg brda sprod pa'i gzhung sum cu pa	dngos po'i gnas
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ཚུལ	the nature of things, fact, reality, the way things are, straightforward, genuine	dngos po'i gnas tshul
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ལས་གཞན་པ	something other than the nature of things	dngos po'i gnas tshul las gzhan pa
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ལུགས	the nature of things [ggd]	dngos po'i gnas lugs
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཚན་རིག	physics	dngos po'i gnas lugs kyi tshan rig
དངོས་པོའི་གནས་ལུགས་བསྒོམ་པ	to train in the nature of things	dngos po'i gnas lugs bsgom pa
དངོས་པོའི་རྣམ་པ	aspects/ phenomena of things	dngos po'i rnam pa
དངོས་པོའི་དཔལ་ཡོན	material culture	dngos po'i dpal yon
དངོས་པོའི་དཔེ	among dpe'i rgyan, khyad chos of both example and meaning really alike mi ston &, de'i ngo bo 'dra ba dngos su bstan nas, mtshungs gsal gyi sgra tshig gi mtha' mar 'jog pa'i rgyan zhig	dngos po'i dpe
དངོས་པོའི་སྤྲོས་པ	concept of concreteness	dngos po'i spros pa
དངོས་པོའི་བྱེ་བྲག	an instance of functioning thing	dngos po'i bye brag
དངོས་པོའི་མིང	{bum pa zhes pa'i sgra spyi snang ba lta bu}	dngos po'i ming
དངོས་པོའི་རྨང་གཞི	material basis	dngos po'i rmang gzhi
དངོས་པོའི་ཚུལ	the way things are	dngos po'i tshul
དངོས་པོའི་ཚོ་བ	material well-being	dngos po'i tsho ba
དངོས་པོའི་མཚན་ཉིད	a thing's defining characteristic	dngos po'i mtshan nyid
དངོས་པོའི་ཡིན་ལུགས	the characteristics things have (vs the way they absolutely are	dngos po'i yin lugs
དངོས་པོའི་རང་གི་ངོ་བོ	the very identity of a thing	dngos po'i rang gi ngo bo
དངོས་པོའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of phenomena, sm.: {de kho na nyid}, the nature of things	dngos po'i rang bzhin
དངོས་པོའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	of the nature of things	dngos po'i rang bzhin can
དངོས་པོའི་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པ	the insubstantiality of things dngos po'i rang bzhin med pa'i mya ngan	dngos po'i rang bzhin med pa
ལས་འདས་པ	nirvana of the naturelessness of things, nirvana w/o the nature of things dngos po'i rang bzhin med pa'i mya ngan	las 'das pa
དངོས་པོའི་རང་བཞིན་ལ་རྟོག་པ	ponder the nature of things, expl {yod med snang stong ji ltar du 'dug ces}	dngos po'i rang bzhin la rtog pa
དངོས་པོའི་རིག་གནས	science	dngos po'i rig gnas
དངོས་པོའི་རོགས་རམ	material help/ assistance	dngos po'i rogs ram
དངོས་པོའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	enjoyment of wealth	dngos po'i longs spyod
དངོས་པོའི་གཤིས	reality 698	dngos po'i gshis
དངོས་པོའི་གཤིས་ལ་མེད་པ	not present in the nature of things	dngos po'i gshis la med pa
དངོས་པོའི་གཤིས་ལུགས	the innate nature of things; reality	dngos po'i gshis lugs
དངོས་པོའི་གཤིས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	physics	dngos po'i gshis lugs kyi rig pa
དངོས་པོར	substantially	dngos por
དངོས་པོར་གྱུར་པ	concrete, substantial, material dngos por gyur pa dang dngos por ma	dngos por gyur pa
དངོས་པོར་གྱུར་བའི་སྤྱི་མཚན	generally characterized thing	dngos por gyur ba'i spyi mtshan
དངོས་པོར་གྲུབ	concretely existent	dngos por grub
དངོས་པོར་གྲུབ་པ	concrete/ material existence, existence as a thing established as a real thing, having concreteness	dngos por grub pa
དངོས་པོར་འགྱུར་བའི་སྤྱི་མཚན	generally characterized thing	dngos por 'gyur ba'i spyi mtshan
དངོས་པོར་བཏགས་པ	labeled as concrete	dngos por btags pa
དངོས་པོར་ལྟ་བ	the view of concreteness	dngos por lta ba
དངོས་པོར་འདོད་པ	to regard / believe something to be concrete dngos por rnam par rtog pa'i rang bzhin la	dngos por 'dod pa
མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	clinging to the nature of imagined things	mngon par zhen pa
དངོས་པོར་བྱས་པ	made material, substantial	dngos por byas pa
དངོས་པོར་མ་གྲུབ	not something concrete	dngos por ma grub
དངོས་པོར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	insubstantial	dngos por ma grub pa
དངོས་པོར་མི་ལྟ	not to see as concrete	dngos por mi lta
དངོས་པོར་དམིགས་པ	to see as / regard as being concretely existent	dngos por dmigs pa
དངོས་པོར་སྨྲ་བ	realist; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {snang ba la 'khrul pas khyab par 'dod pa'i rnam rdzun pa man gyis 'khrul pa dang bya byed mtha' dag 'jog pa ni gzhi rten bden grub med par ma shes pa'i phyir dngo...	dngos por smra ba
དངོས་པོར་སྨྲ་བའི་ལུགས	Proponents of Concrete Existence	dngos por smra ba'i lugs
དངོས་པོར་འཛིན་པ	{dngos 'dzin} investing/ to invest (something/ things) with reality/ real existence/ substantial existence; to hold/ conceive of (things/ something) to be real; to reify concepts	dngos por 'dzin pa
དངོས་པོར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to things / solidity	dngos por zhen pa
དངོས་པོར་ཞེན་པ་བཟློག་པ	to revert from the clinging to things as real	dngos por zhen pa bzlog pa
དངོས་པོར་ཞེན་པའི་བག་འཆགས	habitual patterns of attachment to things/ solidity	dngos por zhen pa'i bag 'chags
དངོས་པོར་བཟུང་བ	to take something to be a real thing	dngos por bzung ba
དངོས་པོར་ཡོད་པ	to have concrete existence	dngos por yod pa
དངོས་སྤྱད	implements, tools, material things	dngos spyad
དངོས་སྤྱོད	putting into practice, practical application/ implementation	dngos spyod
དངོས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	put into practice/ application, implement	dngos spyod byed
དངོས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་མཁན	1 who puts into practice/ application/ implements	dngos spyod byed mkhan
དངོས་སྤྲུལ	an actual emanation	dngos sprul
དངོས་ཕན	be useful/ beneficial	dngos phan
དངོས་ཕན་རིང་ལུགས	pragmatism	dngos phan ring lugs
དངོས་ཕེབས	ngo phebs	dngos phebs
དངོས་བོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of real things	dngos bo stong pa nyid
དངོས་བྱུང	real, true	dngos byung
དངོས་བྱོན	approach/ come in person	dngos byon
དངོས་བྲལ	unmanifest embodiment, {kyi 'dus}	dngos bral
དངོས་བྲིས	realism [art]	dngos bris
དངོས་འབྱོར	real and imaginary	dngos 'byor
དངོས་འབྱོར་ཡིད་སྤྲུལ	real and imaginary, actually present and mentally created	dngos 'byor yid sprul
དངོས་འབྱོར་ཡིད་སྤྲུལ་གྱི་མཆོད་པ	real and imagined offerings	dngos 'byor yid sprul gyi mchod pa
དངོས་འབྱོར་ཡིད་སྤྲུལ་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ	present [the glorious lama] with real and imagined offerings	dngos 'byor yid sprul mchod pa 'bul
དངོས་འབྲས	direct effect unmanifest	dngos 'bras
དངོས་འབྲས་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	among snang rung gi 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags, de byung gi 'brel ba la brten nas sgrub byed dngos 'bras med pa'i rtags kyis, gzhi der dngos rgyu yod pa bkag pa, eg, the dharmin smoke du bas dbe...	dngos 'bras ma dmigs pa'i rtags
དངོས་འབྲེལ	real, true {dngos gnas,...Khrims mthun dngos 'brel yin,...Kha nas mi 'gro zer yang dngos 'brel byas na sems la 'gro 'dod chen po 'dug]	dngos 'brel
དངོས་འབྲེལ་དྲང་འབྲེལ	really true/ certain	dngos 'brel drang 'brel
དངོས་སྦྱོང	practical/ applied studies, on the job training	dngos sbyong
དངོས་སྦྱོང་དངོས་སྤྱོད	practical study/ training and application	dngos sbyong dngos spyod
དངོས་སྦྱོང་བ	practical/ applied student, on the job trainee	dngos sbyong ba
དངོས་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	conduct practical/ applied studies, on the job training, practice, study 1st hand	dngos sbyong byed
དངོས་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	practically studied ideas	dngos sbyong byed kyi dgongs pa
དངོས་སྦྱོང་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ	practical/ applied student, on the job trainee	dngos sbyong slob grwa ba
དངོས་སྦྱོར	{dngos su sbyor ba'i mchod pa} actual material (offerings)	dngos sbyor
དངོས་མ	original, natural	dngos ma
དངོས་མ་མཆིས	insubstantial	dngos ma mchis
དངོས་མང	things, articles	dngos mang
དངོས་མང་འགྲེམས་སྟོན་ཚོགས་འདུ	exhibition, expo, fair 699 dngos mang 'grems ston tshogs 'du khang - exhibition hall	dngos mang 'grems ston tshogs 'du
དངོས་མང་བཤམ་སྟོན་ཁང	museum	dngos mang bsham ston khang
དངོས་མང་བཤམས་སྟོན་ཁང	museum	dngos mang bshams ston khang
དངོས་མིང	things and names	dngos ming
དངོས་མིན	inconcrete	dngos min
དངོས་མེད	insubstantial, inconcrete, substanceless, without any concreteness	dngos med
དངོས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	phenomena that are	dngos med kyi chos
དངོས་མེད་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	have nonexistence for own being, inconcrete essence	dngos med ngo bo nyid
མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བ	among the {sher phyin don bdun cu}, having that realized that all dharmas are essenceless in	mthar gyis sbyor ba
དངོས་མེད་རྟོགས	realize unreality/ nonsolidity / non-things	dngos med rtogs
དངོས་མེད་དུ་འདོད་པ	to regard as inconcrete	dngos med du 'dod pa
དངོས་མེད་དུ་འཛིན་པའི་བློ	the notion of perceiving something as being insubstantial	dngos med du 'dzin pa'i blo
དངོས་མེད་ནང་རིག་པའི་སེམས	the inconcrete internal perceiving mind	dngos med nang rig pa'i sems
དངོས་མེད་འཛིན་པ	to fixate on inconcreteness	dngos med 'dzin pa
དངོས་མེད་ཞེན་པ	attachment to the absence of things / unreality / nonsolidity	dngos med zhen pa
དངོས་མྱོང	real/ practical experience	dngos myong
དངོས་སྨྲ	Proponent of True Existence; see also {dngos por smra ba}	dngos smra
དངོས་སྨྲ་བ	Proponent of True Existence, [the first three of the four schools]	dngos smra ba
དངོས་སྨྲའི་སྐྱོན	the defect / shortcoming of proponents of true existence	dngos smra'i skyon
དངོས་གཙང	pure in substance, originally pure, of the first or superior quality	dngos gtsang
དངོས་གཙོ	materialism [-istic]	dngos gtso
དངོས་གཙོ་སྨྲ་བ	materialism [-ist]	dngos gtso smra ba
དངོས་གཙོ་རིང་ལུགས	materialism	dngos gtso ring lugs
དངོས་གཙོའི་རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་རིག་པ	materialistic dialectics	dngos gtso'i rtsod sgrub rig pa
དངོས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས	materialism dngos gtso'i lo rgyus smra ba'i ring lugs historical materialism	dngos gtso'i ring lugs
དངོས་གཙོའི་བསམ་པ	materialistic viewpoint	dngos gtso'i bsam pa
དངོས་འཙིན	fixation on concreteness, holding as real	dngos 'tsin
དངོས་ཚུལ	real/ actual facts	dngos tshul
དངོས་ཚུལ་གསལ་མཐོང	real/ actual facts completely disclosed	dngos tshul gsal mthong
དངོས་མཚན	marks of concreteness	dngos mtshan
དངོས་མཚན་བྲལ	no mark of concreteness	dngos mtshan bral
དངོས་མཚན་མེད་པ	without substantial existence or characteristics	dngos mtshan med pa
དངོས་མཛོད་ཁང	museum	dngos mdzod khang
དངོས་འཛིན	fixation, taking them as real, grasping, identification, holding as one's own, possession of worldly objects	dngos 'dzin
དངོས་འཛིན་སྦྱངས	abandon fixations on concreteness, abandon holding as real	dngos 'dzin sbyangs
དངོས་འཛིན་མཚན་མ	solidifying reality	dngos 'dzin mtshan ma
དངོས་རྫས	merchandise, goods, commodities materials, articles, utensils, things	dngos rdzas
དངོས་རྫས་ཀྱི་རྨང་གཞི	material basis	dngos rdzas kyi rmang gzhi
དངོས་རྫས་མཁོ་སྤྲོད	supplying	dngos rdzas mkho sprod
དངོས་རྫས་མཁོ་སྤྲོད་བྱེད	supply	dngos rdzas mkho sprod byed
དངོས་རྫས་བརྗེ་རེས	flow of merchandise/ goods/ commodities	dngos rdzas brje res
དངོས་རྫས་ས་བོགས	land lease by payment in kind	dngos rdzas sa bogs
དངོས་ཞུགས	participation	dngos zhugs
དངོས་ཞུགས་བྱེད	participate in	dngos zhugs byed
དངོས་ཞེན	{dngos por zhen pa} fixating/ to fixate on (something/ things) as real/ having real existence/ substantial existence; reification; to reify	dngos zhen
དངོས་ཞེན་བཟློག་པ	revert from the clinging to substantiality	dngos zhen bzlog pa
དངོས་གཞི	actual occurrence level, main part/ body / practice, "the actual basis" the actua[ity], principal, actual regular, normal 700	dngos gzhi
དངོས་གཞི་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	the special main part	dngos gzhi khyad par can
དངོས་གཞི་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་གྱི་སེམས་པ་ཐེ་མིནད	frame of the special main part	dngos gzhi khyad par can gyi sems pa the mind
དངོས་གཞི་བརྒྱད	eight types of dhyana	dngos gzhi brgyad
དངོས་གཞི་མིན་པ	unofficial, informal, irregular	dngos gzhi min pa
དངོས་གཞི་དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ	absence of conceptual focus as the main part	dngos gzhi dmigs pa med pa
པརཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	conception	part of non
དངོས་གཞི་དམིགས་མེད	the main part of	dngos gzhi dmigs med
དངོས་གཞི་ཙམ་ཁྱད	ordinary and special main part	dngos gzhi tsam khyad
དངོས་གཞི་ཞི་ལྷག	the shamatha and vipashyana of the main part	dngos gzhi zhi lhag
དངོས་གཞིའི་སྒོ་བྱེད	official inauguration	dngos gzhi'i sgo byed
དངོས་གཞིའི་ཆོ་ག་གསུམ	the three main rituals CHN	dngos gzhi'i cho ga gsum
དངོས་གཞིའི་དུས	once you start the main practice	dngos gzhi'i dus
དངོས་གཞིའི་གནས་སྐབས	1 of the sbyor dngos mjug gsum...Gra sgrig 'thus tshang byas nas dngos gzhi'i gnas skabs su slebs pa	dngos gzhi'i gnas skabs
དངོས་གཞིའི་གནས་པ	the abidance of the main part	dngos gzhi'i gnas pa
དངོས་གཞིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of the main part [of a practice]	dngos gzhi'i rnal 'byor
དངོས་གཞིའི་དམག་དཔུང	regular army	dngos gzhi'i dmag dpung
དངོས་གཞིའི་རྩ་ཐོ	the basic list / notes for [practicing] the main part	dngos gzhi'i rtsa tho
དངོས་གཞིའི་ཡན་ལག	principal practice	dngos gzhi'i yan lag
དངོས་གཞིའི་བསམ་གཏན	possessing actual dhyana, possessing the main practice of meditation	dngos gzhi'i bsam gtan
དངོས་གཞིར་འགྱུར	become regular, become the main principal--	dngos gzhir 'gyur
དངོས་ཟིན་པ	to concretize, be selfish	dngos zin pa
དངོས་ཟོག	goods, commodities, merchandise	dngos zog
དངོས་ཟོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	transport of goods/ commodities/ merchandise	dngos zog skyel 'dren
དངོས་ཟོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་འཁོར	freight train, transport truck	dngos zog skyel 'dren 'khor
དངོས་ཟོག་སྔོན་མངག	order/ contract for goods/ commodities/ merchandise	dngos zog sngon mngag
དངོས་ཟོག་སྔོན་མངག་བྱེད	order/ contract for goods/ commodities/ merchandise	dngos zog sngon mngag byed
དངོས་ཟོག་དོམ་ལེན	buy goods/ commodities/ merchandise on credit	dngos zog dom len
དངོས་ཟོག་དོམ་ལེན་བྱེད	buy goods/ commodities/ merchandise on credit	dngos zog dom len byed
དངོས་ཟོག་འདྲེན་འཁོར	freight train, transport truck	dngos zog 'dren 'khor
དངོས་ཟོག་སྣ་འཛོམས་ཚོང་ཁང	department store dngos zog 'or 'dren gyi gru gzings freighter, cargo ship	dngos zog sna 'dzoms tshong khang
དངོས་ཟོང	goods, commodities, merchandise	dngos zong
དངོས་གཟུགས	form/ body of a thing	dngos gzugs
དངོས་གཟུང་བ	identify [thd]	dngos gzung ba
དངོས་བཟུང	concrete	dngos bzung
དངོས་བཟུང་མེད་པ	ineffable, indescribable, indefinable, inexpressible	dngos bzung med pa
དངོས་ཡག་གོང་འཚམས	quality goods at reasonable prices	dngos yag gong 'tshams
དངོས་ཡུལ	real object	dngos yul
དངོས་ཡོད	concrete, practical reality, substance, defacto	dngos yod
དངོས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	actuality, reality	dngos yod kyi rang bzhin
དངོས་ཡོད་ཉམས་མྱོང	actual experience	dngos yod nyams myong
དངོས་ཡོད་གནས་ཚུལ	actual/ real situation/ condition	dngos yod gnas tshul
དངོས་ཡོད་གནས་ཚུལ་དང་བསྟུན	in accord w actual/ real situations/ conditions	dngos yod gnas tshul dang bstun
དངོས་ཡོད་པ	personally present	dngos yod pa
དངོས་ཡོད་དབང་ཆ	actual power	dngos yod dbang cha
དངོས་ཡོད་རིང་ལུགས	realism	dngos yod ring lugs
དངོས་ར་འཕྲོད	be confronted w proof, become evident	dngos ra 'phrod
དངོས་ར་གསལ་འཕྲོད	be confronted w proof, become evident	dngos ra gsal 'phrod
དངོས་རིག་འདྲེས་མ་སྟོན་ཁང	museum	dngos rig 'dres ma ston khang
དངོས་རིགས	articles	dngos rigs
དངོས་རིགས་རྙིང་པའི་གཉེར་བ	curator	dngos rigs rnying pa'i gnyer ba
དངོས་རིན	price [of goods]	dngos rin
དངོས་རིན་གནས་འཛིན	invoice, bill	dngos rin gnas 'dzin
དངོས་ལ	in person	dngos la
དངོས་ལམ	gzhung lam	dngos lam
དངོས་ལུགས་སྨན་བཅོས་བྱེད་ཐབས	physical therapy	dngos lugs sman bcos byed thabs
དངོས་ལུགས་གསོ་ཐབས	physical therapy	dngos lugs gso thabs
དངོས་ཤིག་ཡིན་ན	if it's real	dngos shig yin na
དངོས་ཤུགས	honest belief in a doctrine, abbr of dngos bstan & shugs bstan	dngos shugs
དངོས་ཤུགས་འགལ་བ	contradictory either directly or indirectly, contradictory because both directly and indirectly	dngos shugs 'gal ba
དངོས་ཤུགས་བརྒྱུད་གསུམ	directly indirectly and other ways gzhan dag brgyud pa	dngos shugs brgyud gsum
དངོས་ཤུགས་བརྒྱུད་གསུམ་ནས	in all kinds of ways directly, and indirectly 701	dngos shugs brgyud gsum nas
དངོས་ཤུགས་མཚུངས་པ	alike whether directly or indirectly	dngos shugs mtshungs pa
དངོས་ཤུགས་ལ་རྟོགས་པ	explicit and implicit realization [ggd] dngos gshi'i ting nge 'dzin dang ldan pa possessing [actual/ the main practice of] samadhi	dngos shugs la rtogs pa
དངོས་གཤིའི་གནས་པ	the main topic/ point	dngos gshi'i gnas pa
དངོས་གཤིས་གློག་བརྙན	documentary film	dngos gshis glog brnyan
དངོས་གཤིས་ཚོད་ལྟ	experiment	dngos gshis tshod lta
དངོས་གཤིས་རིག་པ	physics	dngos gshis rig pa
དངོས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀུན་གྱི	embodiment of all the buddhas	dngos sangs rgyas kun gyi
དངོས་སངས་རྒྱས་སྣང	buddha in person	dngos sangs rgyas snang
དངོས་སམ་བརྒྱུད་དེ	directly or indirectly	dngos sam brgyud de
དངོས་སམ་བརྒྱུད་ནས	directly or indirectly	dngos sam brgyud nas
དངོས་སམ་རྨི་ལམ	dream or real	dngos sam rmi lam
དངོས་སུ	actually/ in actuality/ really	dngos su
དངོས་སུ་ཁྲོམ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	public demonstration	dngos su khrom ston byed pa
དངོས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	{dngos grub} spiritual attainment/ siddhi	dngos su grub pa
དངོས་སུ་སྒྲུབ	realize, materialize, achieve	dngos su sgrub
དངོས་སུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	realize	dngos su sgrub pa
དངོས་སུ་མཇལ་བ	{sangs rgyas dngos su mjal yang} even if you met the Buddha in person	dngos su mjal ba
དངོས་སུ་མཇལ་བྱུང	met in person [h]	dngos su mjal byung
དངོས་སུ་འཇུག	engage w reality	dngos su 'jug
དངོས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	embark upon in actuality	dngos su 'jug pa
དངོས་སུ་བརྗོད་པ	directly signify [ggd]	dngos su brjod pa
དངོས་སུ་རྟོག་ཞིབ་བྱས	investigated 1st hand	dngos su rtog zhib byas
དངོས་སུ་རྟོགས་པ	direct realization, explicit realization; realized directly, realized explicitly, [ggd]	dngos su rtogs pa
དངོས་སུ་བསྟན	thoroughly comprehend	dngos su bstan
དངོས་སུ་འདེམ	elect directly	dngos su 'dem
དངོས་སུ་སྣང་བ	to directly appear [ggd]	dngos su snang ba
དངོས་སུ་འཕངས་པ	directly suggestive, directly suggesting	dngos su 'phangs pa
དངོས་སུ་འཕེན་པ	explicity suggest	dngos su 'phen pa
དངོས་སུ་འཕྲད	directly touch	dngos su 'phrad
དངོས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	materialize	dngos su byung ba
དངོས་སུ་བྱོན	come/ approach in person	dngos su byon
དངོས་སུ་བྱོན་པ	{dngos su bla ma der byon pa ni med pa} it is not that the teacher comes physically	dngos su byon pa
དངོས་སུ་འབྱོན་པ	an actual manifestation, incarnation, emanation	dngos su 'byon pa
དངོས་སུ་འབྱོར་བ	materially present	dngos su 'byor ba
དངོས་སུ་འབྱོར་བའི	material	dngos su 'byor ba'i
དངོས་སུ་འབྱོར་བའི་མཆོད་པ	actual present offerings	dngos su 'byor ba'i mchod pa
དངོས་སུ་སྦྱོར་བ	unite in actuality	dngos su sbyor ba
དངོས་སུ་སྦྱོར་བའི་མཆོད་པ	actual material offerings	dngos su sbyor ba'i mchod pa
དངོས་སུ་མ་སྟོན་པ	tacit	dngos su ma ston pa
དངོས་སུ་མི་སྣང	not appearing visibly	dngos su mi snang
དངོས་སུ་མི་རིག	to not cognize directly [ggd]	dngos su mi rig
དངོས་སུ་མེད་པ	intangible, non-entity	dngos su med pa
དངོས་སུ་བཞུགས	present in person	dngos su bzhugs
དངོས་སུ་བཞུགས་པ	really resides inside	dngos su bzhugs pa
དངོས་སུ་བཞུགས་པའི་དུས་སུ	while we have him here in person, while he was still alive	dngos su bzhugs pa'i dus su
དངོས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	apprehend directly	dngos su bzung ba
དངོས་སུ་ཡོད་མཁན	entity	dngos su yod mkhan
དངོས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	tangible dngos su yod pa las lhag tsam gshod pa exaggerate	dngos su yod pa
དངོས་སུ་ལག་བསྟར་གྱིས་སྦྱོང་བ	practical/ applied studies, on the job training	dngos su lag bstar gyis sbyong ba
དངོས་སུ་ལོག་པར་ཞུགས་པ	perverted engagement in the real	dngos su log par zhugs pa
དངོས་སུ་ལོག་ཞུགས	perverted engagement in the real	dngos su log zhugs
དངོས་སུ་བཤད	tell openly	dngos su bshad
དངོས་སུ་གསལ་གྱུར་པ	witness clearly in person	dngos su gsal gyur pa
དངོས་སུ་གསལ་བ	explain reality	dngos su gsal ba
དངོས་སུ་གསུངས་པ	directly stated	dngos su gsungs pa
དངོས་སློབ	close disciple, direct disciple, personal student, close disciple	dngos slob
དངོས་གསལ	become unobscured and clear	dngos gsal
བངུན་འབུམ	700,000	bngun 'bum
མང་འཁུལ	domain	mnga 'khul
མངག	commission, order, delegate, entrust, dispatch, send	mngag
མངག་བཅོལ	entrusting commissioning w	mngag bcol
མངག་བཅོས	entrusting, commissioning w	mngag bcos
མངག་བཅོས་བྱས	entrusted, commissioned w	mngag bcos byas
མངག་བཅོས་བྱེད	entrust, commission w	mngag bcos byed
མངག་ཆ	bcol gtam	mngag cha
མངག་ཉོ	ordering, buying [in advance], subscribing	mngag nyo
མངག་ཉོ་བྱེད	order, buy [in advance], subscribe	mngag nyo byed
མངག་ཉོའི་གན་རྒྱ	order forms/ contract	mngag nyo'i gan rgya
མངག་གཏམ	talk entrusting/ commissioning w a task	mngag gtam
མངག་གཏམ་ཞུས་པ	verbally entrust/ commission w task	mngag gtam zhus pa
མངག་གཏོང	send [w a commission]	mngag gtong
མངག་གཏོང་ཁང	police station	mngag gtong khang
མངག་གཏོང་བྱེད	send [w a commission]	mngag gtong byed
མངག་གཏོང་བྱེད་པའི་བང་ཆེན	messenger sent [w a commission]	mngag gtong byed pa'i bang chen
མངག་གདམས	recommendations, advice	mngag gdams
མངག་གདམས་བྱེད	recommend, advise	mngag gdams byed
མངག་པ	dispatch, send, entrust, commission, charge, send, delegate	mngag pa
མངག་རྫོང	lan 'phrin and pho nya gtong ba	mngag rdzong
མངག་གཞུག	messenger, servant	mngag gzhug
མངག་གཞུག་ཕོ་མོ	male and female servants	mngag gzhug pho mo
མངགས	commissioned, charged, sent to work, entrusted	mngags
མངགས་འགན	gong nas bkas mngags pa'i las 'gan	mngags 'gan
མངགས་བཅོལ	entrusting commissioning w	mngags bcol
མངགས་ཆེད་ཀྱིས་བ་སྐོས	especially selected	mngags ched kyis ba skos
མངགས་ཉོ	mngag gtam byas nas nyo ba	mngags nyo
མངགས་གཏམ	talk entrusting/ commissioning w a task	mngags gtam
མངགས་གཏམ་ཞུས་པ	verbally entrust/ commission w task	mngags gtam zhus pa
མངགས་གཏོང	send [w a commission]	mngags gtong
མངགས་གཏོང་ཁང	police station	mngags gtong khang
མངགས་གཏོང་བྱེད	send [w a commission]	mngags gtong byed
མངགས་གཏོང་བྱེད་པའི་བང་ཆེན	messenger sent [w a commission]	mngags gtong byed pa'i bang chen
མངགས་པ	an envoy/ to send on a mission; pf. of {mngag pa}; to order, command	mngags pa
མངགས་པ་ཅན	messenger, envoy	mngags pa can
མངགས་བྱ་བྱེད	one executing a mission, commissioner	mngags bya byed
མངགས་འཚོང	gzhan la 'tshong rogs bya rgyur mngags pa	mngags 'tshong
མངགས་གཞུག	{bla ma'i mngags gzhug sogs kyi phyir du 'gro 'ong gi gnas la skyo ba med pa gru lta bu} like a boat, we should never tire of going back and forth to take messages or do other services for him	mngags gzhug
མངགས་གཞུག་བང་ཕྱིན་ཕྱགས་དར	to serve him, carry his messages or even sweep his floor	mngags gzhug bang phyin phyags dar
མངགས་བཞག་པ	make a verbal request, leave orders	mngags bzhag pa
མངགས་རེས་བྱེད	exchange [delegations etc.]	mngags res byed
མངན	curse, necromantic injury	mngan
མངན་བགྲང་བ	enumeration of curses	mngan bgrang ba
མངན་པ	curse, execrate	mngan pa
མངན་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	arrogance	mngan pa'i nga rgyal
མངའ	might, dominion, sway, power	mnga'
མངའ་སྐྱེས	birth from a womb	mnga' skyes
མངའ་ཁུངས	territory	mnga' khungs
མངའ་ཁུལ	subject territory, colony	mnga' khul
མངའ་ཁུལ་གྱི	territorial	mnga' khul gyi
མངའ་ཁོངས	subject territory, colony	mnga' khongs
མངའ་ཁོངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	territorial ocean waters	mnga' khongs rgya mtsho
མངའ་ཁོངས་ཆ་ཚང	territorial integrity	mnga' khongs cha tshang
མངའ་ཁོངས་བར་སྣང	territorial air space	mnga' khongs bar snang
མངའ་སྒྱུར་བ	have mastered a thing, understand thoroughly	mnga' sgyur ba
མངའ་ཆེན་པོ་མངའ་བ	overlordship	mnga' chen po mnga' ba
མངའ་རྗེ་བདག	noble lord	mnga' rje bdag
མངའ་རྙེས་པ	obtain power	mnga' rnyes pa
མངའ་བརྙེས	mastered, attain mastery over	mnga' brnyes
མངའ་བརྙེས་པ	to gain/ acquire	mnga' brnyes pa
མངའ་བསྙེས	bring under control, overpower, master, become an authority on	mnga' bsnyes
མངའ་བསྙེས་པ	1 who has mastered	mnga' bsnyes pa
མངའ་ཐང	power, might, kingdom, domain, dominion, property and land; 1)) dbang thang; 2) dge tshogs bsod nams,...Syn: skal ldan dang, bgo skal, sngon gyi las, sngon byas, sngon bsags, gnam bskos, las bskos,...	mnga' thang
མངའ་ཐང་ཅན	powerful, one in power	mnga' thang can
མངའ་ཐང་འབྱོར་བ	wealth and power	mnga' thang 'byor ba
མངའ་དབ༹གས་རྒྱལ་གསུམ	in lho kha mnga' ris grva tshang, dvags po grva tshang, chos 'khor rgyal grva tshang	mnga' dvags rgyal gsum
མངའ་བདག	1) master, lord, king, ruler, commander, landlord, sovereign. 2) feudal lord, serf owner; King, ruler/ Your Majesty; lord, monarch, ruler, king commander, sovereign, owner, possessor, overlord, chi...	mnga' bdag
མངའ་བདག་ཁོ་རེ	an early Tibetan king	mnga' bdag kho re
མངའ་བདག་ཁྲི་རལ་པ	master king khri ral pa can	mnga' bdag khri ral pa
མངའ་བདག་ཁྲི་རལ་པ་ཅན	master king khri ral pa can	mnga' bdag khri ral pa can
མངའ་བདག་གྲལ་རིམ	class of feudal lords/ serf owners 703	mnga' bdag gral rim
མངའ་བདག་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	three great feudal lords Tibetan govt, monasteries, aristocracy	mnga' bdag chen po gsum
མངའ་བདག་ཉང	a ruler, a saint	mnga' bdag nyang
མངའ་བདག་ཉང་རལ་པ་ཅན	Lord Ralpachen of Nyang. Nyang Ral Nyima Özer	mnga' bdag nyang ral pa can
མངའ་བདག་པོར	as master/ emperor/ ruler	mnga' bdag por
མངའ་བདག་ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ	lord Vajrapa i	mnga' bdag phyag na rdo rje
མངའ་བདག་མེས་གསུམ	Trisong Deutsen, Songtsen Gampo and Ralpachen, the three ancestral kings [of the Dharma]	mnga' bdag mes gsum
མངའ་བདག་མྱང་རལ་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར་ཉང་རལ་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	1124-1192	mnga' bdag myang ral nyi ma 'od zer nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer
མངའ་བདག་འོད་ལྡེ	king, {mnga' bdag 'od lde}	mnga' bdag 'od lde
མངའ་བདག་ཡབ་སྲས	the king and his sons	mnga' bdag yab sras
མངའ་བདག་ཡབ་སྲས་རྗེ་འབངས	present king, his sons, and my disciples	mnga' bdag yab sras rje 'bangs
མངའ་བདག་ལྷ་ལྡེ	son of King Kho Re	mnga' bdag lha lde
མངའ་ལྡན	mistress, sweetheart, secret wife	mnga' ldan
མངའ་ལྡན་མ	mistress, sweetheart, secret wife	mnga' ldan ma
མངའ་སྡེ	state	mnga' sde
མངའ་སྡེ་གཞུང	local government	mnga' sde gzhung
མངའ་སྡེའི་འཐུས་མི	US senator, state/ local representative	mnga' sde'i 'thus mi
མངའ་སྡེའི་དཔོན་པོ	governor	mnga' sde'i dpon po
མངའ་སྡེའི་སྲིད་སྐྱོང	US state governor	mnga' sde'i srid skyong
མངའ་བ	1) to rule; 2) to have, possess	mnga' ba
མངའ་དབང	rule, bring under control/ power, conquer	mnga' dbang
མངའ་དབང་བསྒྱུར	to have empowerment over	mnga' dbang bsgyur
མངའ་དབང་བསྒྱུར་བ	to master, control, have command over / of. See also {dbang bsgyur ba}	mnga' dbang bsgyur ba
མངའ་དབང་བྱེད་པ	give power over	mnga' dbang byed pa
མངའ་དབང་འབྱོར་བ	to bring mastery	mnga' dbang 'byor ba
མངའ་དབུལ	investiture, installation in power; Syn {mnga' gsol}	mnga' dbul
མངའ་དབུལ་བ	to enthrone, invest / install in the seat of power; Syn {mnga' gsol ba}	mnga' dbul ba
མངའ་འབངས	subject	mnga' 'bangs
མངའ་ཚབ	appointed substitutes/ replacements/ representatives/ steward of lord	mnga' tshab
མངའ་ཚབ་གྲལ་རིམ	class of representatives/ stewards of lords	mnga' tshab gral rim
མངའ་ཚིག	plural (form of a word)	mnga' tshig
མངའ་ཚུལ	endowment	mnga' tshul
མངའ་མཚོ	territorial waters	mnga' mtsho
མངའ་མཛད	lord, master	mnga' mdzad
མངའ་མཛད་པ	govern, rule	mnga' mdzad pa
མངའ་འཛིན་མ	she who has power, she who controls her husband	mnga' 'dzin ma
མངའ་ཞབས	a subject, servant	mnga' zhabs
མངའ་ཞབས་པ	subject, SA mnga' 'og	mnga' zhabs pa
མངའ་ཞབས་སུ་བསྡུས	included among the subjects gather the subjects	mnga' zhabs su bsdus
མངའ་ཞུ	(h) enthrone, install in power	mnga' zhu
མངའ་གཞིས	mnga' khongs kyi nature	mnga' gzhis
མངའ་འོག	dominion; x {rang gi mnga' 'og nags na} into his forest lands under his dominion	mnga' 'og
མངའ་འོག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	subject/ subordinate/ dependent/ satellite state	mnga' 'og rgyal khab
མངའ་འོག་ཏུ་བཅུག་པ	dominate	mnga' 'og tu bcug pa
མངའ་འོག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	subjugate	mnga' 'og tu byed pa
མངའ་འོག་ཏུ་བཙུད	annexed	mnga' 'og tu btsud
མངའ་འོག་པ	his subjects	mnga' 'og pa
མངའ་རི	stod mnga' ri - Ngari in western Tibet	mnga' ri
མངའ་རི་གྲྭ་ཚང	Ngari Dratsang; A large Gelukpa monastery built in 1541 under the auspices of the Second Dalai Lama Gendün Gyatso. It stands like a fortress on an eminence dominating the entrance of the Yon Valley	mnga' ri grwa tshang
མངའ་རི་པ	people of Ngari	mnga' ri pa
མངའ་རིས	subject, SA mnga' 'bangs, western province of tibet, area in West Tibet	mnga' ris
མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་དུ་གངས་ཉི་ཤུ	twenty snow mountains of Ngari {thang lha gangs}, {ma mkhar gangs}, {ti se gangs}, {bu le gangs}, {'o de gung rgyal gangs}, {sham po gangs}, {mkhar ri gangs}, {lha rgod gangs}, {pho ma gangs}, {rdo...	mnga' ris skor du gangs nyi shu
མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་དུ་གངས་བྲག་ཉི་ཤུ	20 mountain caves/ snow mts of ngari	mnga' ris skor du gangs brag nyi shu
མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ	the three divisions of Mnga' ris	mnga' ris skor gsum
མངའ་རིས་བསྐོར་གསུམ	[the three parts of mnga' ris [gngas g.ya' mtsho gsum gyis bskor ba'i yul lung khag gsum ste, chos rgyal gyi gdung rgyud nyi ma mgon mnga' ris su byon te chab srid bzung zhing, sras gsum byung ba'i...	mnga' ris bskor gsum
མངའ་རིས་ཁམ་བུ	apricot	mnga' ris kham bu
མངའ་རིས་གྲྭ་ཚང	Ngari Dratsang, in U mnga' ris gter ston gar dbang rdo rje (1640-1685); revealed {zab tig chos dbyings rang grol}	mnga' ris grwa tshang
མངའ་རིས་སྟག་མོ	a famous lama	mnga' ris stag mo
མངའ་རིས་པཎ་ཆེན	tertön; alias {pad ma dbang rgyal}	mnga' ris paN chen
མངའ་རིས་ཤ	{mnga' ris sha} apricot from mnga' ris	mnga' ris sha
མངའ་རིས་སུ་བདག་གིར་མཛད་པ	reigned over Ngari	mnga' ris su bdag gir mdzad pa
མངའ་རིས་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	verse work on the essentials of Mahayana Buddhism by {zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol} 1781-1850	mnga' ris sum cu rtsa brgyad
མངའ་གསོལ	empower[ed], benediction, enthronement	mnga' gsol
མངའ་གསོལ་བ	{dpon du mnga' gsol ba} made him their chief	mnga' gsol ba
མངའ་གསོལ་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	enthroned king	mnga' gsol ba'i rgyal po
མངའ་གསོལ་ཞུ	enthrone, empower	mnga' gsol zhu
མངར	sweet	mngar
མངར་སྐ་ཁ་བ་རོ་བཟང་བ་གསུམ	the three good tastes (sweet, astringent, bitter) mngar ska kha ba ro bzang ba gsum three good flavors: sweet, bitter and astringent mngar skyur lan tshwa kha tsha bska ba sewwt, sour, slaty,bitter...	mngar ska kha ba ro bzang ba gsum
མངར་སྐྱེམས	sweet drink	mngar skyems
མངར་ཁམ	peach	mngar kham
མངར་ཁམ་མེ་ཏོག	peach flower	mngar kham me tog
མངར་བཅུད	saccharin	mngar bcud
མངར་བཅུད་ཆེན་པོ	luscious	mngar bcud chen po
མངར་ཆ	sweet foods/ drinks, sugar[y]	mngar cha
མངར་ཆ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	sugar refinery	mngar cha bzo grwa
མངར་ཆས་བསྟུམས་པའི་མདེའུ	nice outside but nasty/ evil/ deadly inside, sugar coated bullet	mngar chas bstums pa'i mde'u
མངར་ལྡན	honey	mngar ldan
མངར་པོ	sweet	mngar po
མངར་ཕྱུར	sweet phyur ba	mngar phyur
མངར་བ	sweet, delicious	mngar ba
མངར་བར་བྱེད	sweeten, put sugar on	mngar bar byed
མངར་བོ	sweet	mngar bo
མངར་མོ	sweet	mngar mo
མངར་ཚལ	sugar beet	mngar tshal
མངར་ཟས	sweets, sweet foods	mngar zas
མངར་ཟས་ཤིག	cake	mngar zas shig
མངར་རིས་ཁམ་བུ	apricot	mngar ris kham bu
མངར་གསུམ	3 sweet things (molasses, honey, sugar), 3 sweets (bu ram, sbrang rtsi, bye ma ka ra), three sweets (honey, sugar, molasses)	mngar gsum
མངལ	uterus, womb, side of breast from which Buddhas are born, pregnancy	mngal
མངལ་སྐུ	womb-born 705	mngal sku
མངལ་སྐྱེའི་ཁམས་དྲུག་ལྡན་པ	endowed with the six elements of a	mngal skye'i khams drug ldan pa
ཝོམབ	birth	womb
མངལ་སྐྱེས	womb-born	mngal skyes
མངལ་སྐྱེས་ཁམས་དྲུག	wmborn w the khams drug ['dzam bu gling pa'i mi mngal skyes rnams ma'i mngal du tshang bar ldan pa'i khams drug ste pha	mngal skyes khams drug
ལས་ཐོབ་པའི་རུས་པ་དང	rkang, khu ba bcas gsum dang, ma las thob pa'i sha dang, pags pa, khrag bcas drug	las thob pa'i rus pa dang
མངལ་སྐྱེས་ཁམས་དྲུག་ལྡན	having the six places of being born from a womb (the six realms/ lokas)	mngal skyes khams drug ldan
ཝིཐ་ཐེ་སི྾་ཨེལེམེནཙ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཝོམབ	born	with the six elements of a womb
མངལ་སྐྱེས་མངལ་ནས་སྐྱེ་བ	birth from the womb, womb birth	mngal skyes mngal nas skye ba
མངལ་སྐྱེས་གནས་དྲུག	the six places of being born in a womb (the six realms/ lokas)	mngal skyes gnas drug
མངལ་སྐྱོན	diseases w faults of the womb	mngal skyon
མངལ་སྐྲན	woman's menstruation and chu ser gnyis rlung gis bsgril nas becoming swollen	mngal skran
མངལ་ཁ	womb-door	mngal kha
མངལ་ཁུར	the padma	mngal khur
མངལ་ཁྲག	blood from the womb	mngal khrag
མངལ་གྱི་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five stages of gestation; {mngal gyi gnas skabs lnga}	mngal gyi skabs lnga
མངལ་གྱི་སྒོ	the gate of the womb	mngal gyi sgo
མངལ་གྱི་སྒོ་རིགས་དྲུག་གི་བཀག	prevent rebirth in the six realms	mngal gyi sgo rigs drug gi bkag
མངལ་གྱི་དྲི་མས་མ་གོས་པ	unsullied by the impurities of the womb	mngal gyi dri mas ma gos pa
མངལ་གྱི་གནས་སྐབས	gestation, being in the womb	mngal gyi gnas skabs
མངལ་གྱི་གནས་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five phases of being in the womb [mngal du mi lus chags pa'i gnas skabs lnga po	mngal gyi gnas skabs lnga
མངལ་གྱིས་མ་གོས་པ	undefiled by human birth	mngal gyis ma gos pa
མངལ་གྲིབ	birth pollution [btsog grib/ btsog ngad	mngal grib
མངལ་གྲོལ	a child in the womb being born after pregnancy is complete, give birth	mngal grol
མངལ་གྲོལ་བ	birth took place {glang po che'i mngal grol bar 'gyur} the calf will be delivered from the womb of the elephant	mngal grol ba
མངལ་རྒྱ	enclosure of the womb	mngal rgya
མངལ་སྒོ	cervix, womb, wombentrance	mngal sgo
མངལ་སྒོ་དགག་པའི་ཐབས	method for blocking the gate of the womb	mngal sgo dgag pa'i thabs
མངལ་སྒོ་མ་ཁེགས	without closing the door of the womb	mngal sgo ma khegs
མངལ་སྒྲིབ	birth pollution; {mngal grib}	mngal sgrib
མངལ་ཆགས	conceive/ conception in the womb, fetus, embryo	mngal chags
མངལ་ཆགས་མ	pregnant woman	mngal chags ma
མངལ་འཇིག་པ	abort; x {chung ma de la mngal 'jig pa'i rdzas sna tshogs sbyin pas mngal ma 'jig pa} gave his wife many potions to cause her to abort, but nothing happened	mngal 'jig pa
མངལ་འཇུག	enter a womb	mngal 'jug
མངལ་འཇུག་གི་མདོ	Garbhava kranti sutra	mngal 'jug gi mdo
མངལ་འཇུག་པ	Syn {mngal du 'jug pa}	mngal 'jug pa
མངལ་གཏོར	a child engendered in the womb med pa bzo ba, abortion	mngal gtor
མངལ་ཐུར	spoon used in midwifery for extracting a dead child	mngal thur
མངལ་ཐེངས་གཅིག་ལ	in 1 pregnancy	mngal thengs gcig la
མངལ་དུ	womb mngal du skye ba bzung pa nas btsas pa'i	mngal du
བར	phases from conception in the womb to the moment of birth mngal du skye ba bzung pa nas btsas pa'i	bar
མངལ་དུ་ཁྱེའུ་ཆགས་པ	became with child	mngal du khye'u chags pa
མངལ་དུ་འཁྱུག་པ	entering of the soul into new conception	mngal du 'khyug pa
མངལ་དུ་ཆགས་པ	Syn {mngal chags}	mngal du chags pa
མངལ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	SA mngal 'jug pa	mngal du 'jug pa
མངལ་དུ་ཉིང་མཚམས་སྦྱར་བ	connected to a womb	mngal du nying mtshams sbyar ba
མངལ་དུ་ཉིང་མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བ	entering a womb mngal du sbrum dang ldan par gyur pa'i	mngal du nying mtshams sbyor ba
དུས་ན	when she became pregnant	dus na
མངལ་དུ་ཞུགས་ནས	entered the womb of	mngal du zhugs nas
མངལ་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	entered the womb	mngal du zhugs pa
མངལ་དུ་སྲིད་ཆགས་བཞིན་པ	she soon bore a child mngal dug btsas ma thag pa'i phru gur	mngal du srid chags bzhin pa
ཐོན་པའི་ཤུ་ཐོར་ལ་ཟེར་ཞིང	= gzhan du btsa' thor	thon pa'i shu thor la zer zhing
མངལ་ལྡན	pregnant	mngal ldan
མངལ་ལྡན་མ	sbrum ma'am phru gu skye rgyu yod pa'i bud med	mngal ldan ma
མངལ་ན་གནས་པ	dwell in the womb, gestation	mngal na gnas pa
དང་རྒན་པོའི་གནས་དག	the situations of being in the womb, infancy, childhood, youth, young adulthood, full maturity, and old age	dang rgan po'i gnas dag
མངལ་ན་གནས་པའི་དུས	the time of staying in the womb 706	mngal na gnas pa'i dus
མངལ་ནང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ	fetus	mngal nang gi phru gu
མངལ་ནད	woman's womb disease [rtsa ba'i mngal nad lnga &, gzhan rtsa nad sogs rigs 35	mngal nad
མངལ་ནད་ལྔ	the five diseases of the womb [nyal po mang du spyad pa dang, bu btsas rjes su zas spyod log pa sogs las byung ba'i bu snod kyi nad lnga ste, rlung las gyur pa dang, mkhris pa las gyur pa, bad kan ...	mngal nad lnga
མངལ་ནས་སྐྱེ་བ	SA mngal skyes	mngal nas skye ba
མངལ་ནས་ཕྱིར་བཙས	being born, came out of the womb	mngal nas phyir btsas
མངལ་ནས་འབྱུང་བ	born from the womb	mngal nas 'byung ba
མངལ་གནས	embryo, fetus	mngal gnas
མངལ་གནས་ལྔ	{mngal gyi gnas skabs lnga}	mngal gnas lnga
མངལ་སྣོད	womb	mngal snod
མངལ་བ	offensive mouth odor	mngal ba
མངལ་འབྱིན	mngal rlug	mngal 'byin
མངལ་སྦུབས	the confine of the womb, womb	mngal sbubs
མངལ་སྦྲུམ	gestation	mngal sbrum
མངལ་སྦྲུམ་པ	pregnant	mngal sbrum pa
མངལ་བཙས	birth from the mother's womb	mngal btsas
མངལ་འཛིན	for a woman phru gu 'khor ba, conceive, be[come] pregnant	mngal 'dzin
མངལ་འཛིན་པ	conceive, be big with child mngal zla dus rdzogs pas bu zhig skyes after some months, gave birth to a son	mngal 'dzin pa
མངལ་རླུག	abortion, forced delivery	mngal rlug
མངལ་རླུགས	abortion, forced delivery	mngal rlugs
མངལ་རླུགས་པ	abortion	mngal rlugs pa
མངལ་ཤོར	miscarriage, loss of a child before completion of pregnancy	mngal shor
མངལ་བཤོལ	mngal du zla zhag 'phar ma bsdad pa	mngal bshol
མངལ་སྲིན	srin bu ma ra ka in a woman's womb &, aa so ka zhes khros pa'i nad: symptoms mtshan ma za zhing nu ma rgyas la sems 'phyo ba dang skyes pa dang 'phrad 'dod pa sogs feminine disease	mngal srin
མངོགས	imp. of {mngag pa}	mngogs
མངོན	see, envision, observe, be[come] visible/ evident, show, manifest, display, expose, reveal, appear, apparent, manifestation, show, demonstrate, aspect of clarity/ manifestation in perception, befor...	mngon
མངོན་དཀྱིལ	visualization mandala	mngon dkyil
མངོན་ལྐོག	openly perceived and hidden	mngon lkog
མངོན་ཁྱབ	encompassing fully, covering all	mngon khyab
མངོན་བཁྱེན	(H) supernormal knowledge, higher perception clearly know	mngon bkhyen
མངོན་མཁྱེན	- (h) of {mngon shes} supernormal knowledge, clearly knows, higher perception	mngon mkhyen
མངོན་མཁྱེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	Manjushri	mngon mkhyen rgyal po
མངོན་གུ་གྱུར་པ	to actually become	mngon gu gyur pa
མངོན་གྱུར	evident [thd]	mngon gyur
མངོན་གྱུར་གྱི་ཉོན་མོངས	activated / blatant disturbing emotions	mngon gyur gyi nyon mongs
མངོན་གྱུར་འགོག་པ	'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, da lta byed bzhin pa bcos ma'i las kyi dgag bya de, 'gog byed bcos min gyi las khyad par ba zhig gis 'gog par byed pa'i rgyan zhig	mngon gyur 'gog pa
མངོན་གྱུར་བཅུ	the 10 manifestations [bsnyen rdzogs sgrub par mngon gyur bcu tsang dgos pa ste, sangs rgyas mngon gyur, chos mngon gyur, dge 'dun mngon gyur, mkhan po mngon gyur, slob dpon mngon gyur, bsnyen par ...	mngon gyur bcu
མངོན་གྱུར་དུ	evidently, manifest, obvious	mngon gyur du
མངོན་གྱུར་དུ་བྱ་བའི་སླད་དུ	for the purpose of realizing	mngon gyur du bya ba'i slad du
མངོན་གྱུར་དུ་མེད་དོ	w/o realizing/ actualizing	mngon gyur du med do
མངོན་གྱུར་དུ་མེད་པ	unmanifest	mngon gyur du med pa
མངོན་གྱུར་པ	evident	mngon gyur pa
མངོན་དགའ	(pure realm of) Manifest Joy/ Abhirati	mngon dga'
མངོན་དགའ་བ	world of beatitude	mngon dga' ba
མངོན་དགའི་ཞིང	the realm of True Joy; the realm of Manifest Joy	mngon dga'i zhing
དགའི་ཞིང	eastern buddhafield of Manifest Joy	dga'i zhing
མངོན་དགོངས	deliberation, design, premeditated plan	mngon dgongs
མངོན་འགྱུར	manifest, realize, to make really so, SA mngon gyur, become manifest, make manifest, become manifest, concrete, actualized, to be actualized	mngon 'gyur
མངོན་འགྱུར་བ	manifest, actual, evident	mngon 'gyur ba
མངོན་འགྱུར་བྱེད	realize, make really so, actualize, materialize	mngon 'gyur byed
མངོན་འགྱུར་རིང་ལུགས	realism	mngon 'gyur ring lugs
མངོན་འགྲུབ	directly evident	mngon 'grub
མངོན་འགྲོ	pioneer, proceed, go away	mngon 'gro
མངོན་འགྲོ་བ	pioneer, proceed, go away	mngon 'gro ba
མངོན་རྒྱན	Abhisamaya Alamkara; {mngon rtogs rgyan}	mngon rgyan
མངོན་རྒྱུ	the actual cause	mngon rgyu
མངོན་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	visible	mngon rgyu yod pa
མངོན་མངོན་ཀུན་བཏུས	Compendium of Knowledge by Asanga	mngon mngon kun btus
མངོན་བཅོམ	killed, slain, destroyed, fully subdued	mngon bcom
མངོན་བཅོས	killed, slain, destroyed	mngon bcos
མངོན་ཆ་ཆེ་བ	vivid	mngon cha che ba
མངོན་ཆུང	not famous, before others' eyes not clearly perceived, inconspicuous	mngon chung
མངོན་ཆུང་དུ	inconspicuously	mngon chung du
མངོན་ཆུང་བ	not famous, before others' eyes not clearly perceived, inconspicuous mngon chung byas nas gcig pu phyin pa having made [himself] inconspicuous, [he] went alone	mngon chung ba
མངོན་ཆེན	conspicuous, noticeable, evident	mngon chen
མངོན་ཆེན་ཆགས་པ	became evident	mngon chen chags pa
མངོན་ཆོས	scripture on wisdom, philosophy and psychology, abhidharma, metaphysics, knowledge	mngon chos
མངོན་ཆོས་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	the Compendium of Abhidharma composed by Asanga	mngon chos kun las btus pa
མངོན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	Abhidharmapi aka	mngon chos kyi sde snod
མངོན་རྗེས	1) foreword and afterword. 2) Abbr. for mngon sum dang rjes dpag	mngon rjes
མངོན་བརྗོད	1) foreword, introduction. 2) synonyms, synonymics	mngon brjod
མངོན་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	formerly grasped eye consciousness la blue rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir by {rang gi mtshan nyid} grub par snang ba la dbang par byed pa'i habitual patterns lta bu which become the basis of attac...	mngon brjod kyi bag chags
མངོན་བརྗོད་བླ་མའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Unexcelled Utterance	mngon brjod bla ma'i rgyud
མངོན་ཉིད	state of being manifest, manifestation	mngon nyid
མངོན་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	the manifesting, 6th level of a bodhisattva	mngon tu gyur pa
མངོན་ཏེ	this shows that, this is very clear	mngon te
མངོན་རྟགས	[perceptually arising] proof, evidence, sign, mark [of truth], (process of) actualization (in sadhana context), (clear) realization	mngon rtags
མངོན་རྟོགས	clear understanding, iconography, visualization part where iconography is revealed, practice, culture, those with clear comprehension, realization, true realization	mngon rtogs
མངོན་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བཅུ	chn	mngon rtogs kyi khyad par bcu
མངོན་རྟོགས་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	visualization mandala	mngon rtogs dkyil 'khor
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན	Abhisamay la k ra, Ornament of Realization	mngon rtogs rgyan
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གི་དོན་བདུན་བཅུ	70 points of the Ornament of Emergent Realization Abhisamay lamk ra	mngon rtogs rgyan gi don bdun bcu
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བ	the autocommentary on the Ornament of Emergent Realization Abhisamay lamk ra	mngon rtogs rgyan gyi 'grel ba
མངོན་རྟོགས་སྒོམ་པ	visualized mngon rtogs bsgom pa'i rim pa'i rim pa	mngon rtogs sgom pa
མངོན་རྟོགས་མཚོན་བྱེད་བརྒྱད	chn	mngon rtogs mtshon byed brgyad
མངོན་སྟོན	directly reveals	mngon ston
མངོན་བསྟན	clearly shown	mngon bstan
མངོན་བསྟོད	[from joy] actually/ openly praise	mngon bstod
མངོན་ཐོ	eminence	mngon tho
མངོན་མཐོ	heaven, higher forms of life, those of exalted birth or state, high rebirth	mngon mtho
མངོན་མཐོ་ངེས་ལེགས	higher rebirths and liberation	mngon mtho nges legs
མངོན་མཐོ་ངེས་ལེགས་ཀྱི་ལམ	[informal] the path to higher realms and liberation mngon mtho nges legs 'gro la mtshungs	mngon mtho nges legs kyi lam
པར་སྦྱིན	grant impartially to beings the higher realms and true goodness mngon mtho nges legs sgrub pa'i chos the teachings for accomplishing the 'truly high' and the 'definite goodness'	par sbyin
མངོན་མཐོ་ངེས་ལེགས་ཐོབ	You will then certainly gain a high state of being	mngon mtho nges legs thob
མངོན་མཐོ་གཉིས	the two vehicles of higher rebirth {lha mi'i theg pa} and {tshangs pa'i theg pa}	mngon mtho gnyis
མངོན་མཐོ་དང་ངེས་ལེགས	the truly high and definite goodness, [higher realms and liberation]	mngon mtho dang nges legs
མངོན་མཐོ་ལྷ་མའི་གནས	the superior states of the lower realms	mngon mtho lha ma'i gnas
མངོན་མཐོ་ལྷ་མིའི་གོ་འཕང	the higher realms of celestial and human beings	mngon mtho lha mi'i go 'phang
མངོན་མཐོང་པ	see	mngon mthong pa
མངོན་མཐོའི་དགའ་བ	the happiness of the higher realms	mngon mtho'i dga' ba
མངོན་མཐོའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicles of higher rebirth {lha mi'i theg pa} and {tshangs pa'i theg pa} the very high/celestial vehicle ['jig rten pa'i theg pa ste, ngan song gi sdug bsngal las 'phral du thar ba lha mi'i bde...	mngon mtho'i theg pa
མངོན་མཐོའི་བདེ་འབྲས	the pleasant results of the higher realms	mngon mtho'i bde 'bras
མངོན་མཐོའི་ལམ	the path of higher rebirth	mngon mtho'i lam
མངོན་དད	deep faith, true faith	mngon dad
མངོན་དུ	ultimately; [abhi, a Sanskrit emphatic particle], true presence; manifest; 1) really, actually. 2) visible, evident, manifest, apparent. 3) concretely, perceptible, in form, materialized	mngon du
མངོན་དུ་གྱར	actualize	mngon du gyar
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར	realized, materialized, achieved, came true	mngon du gyur
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	Realized. The sixth of the ten bhumis	mngon du gyur pa
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པའི་ས	level of complete manifestation	mngon du gyur pa'i sa
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་བ	come into foreground	mngon du gyur ba
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་བའི་ས	face to face stage	mngon du gyur ba'i sa
མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་ཚེ	when realized, when actualized	mngon du gyur tshe
མངོན་དུ་གྲུབ	realize, materialize, achieve, come true	mngon du grub
མངོན་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	realization	mngon du grub pa
མངོན་དུ་གྲུབ་བྱེད	realize, materialize, achieve, make come true, actualize, make a reality	mngon du grub byed
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར	will realize	mngon du 'gyur
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་པའི་ས	the level of true actualization (the 6th bh mi	mngon du 'gyur pa'i sa
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	realized, actualized, [6'th bhumi], manifest	mngon du 'gyur ba
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ་ཉིད	realization, actualization	mngon du 'gyur ba nyid
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ་བྱེད	mngon du gyur, realization make really so, realize real, concrete, actual the actualized, the actually present	mngon du 'gyur ba byed
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ས	the bhumi of the Realized	mngon du 'gyur ba'i sa
མངོན་དུ་འགྱུར་ཚུལ	realization	mngon du 'gyur tshul
མངོན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to bring about realization	mngon du sgrub pa
མངོན་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	foreword	mngon du brjod pa
མངོན་དུ་བརྙེད་པ	to attain, accomplish, realize 709	mngon du brnyed pa
མངོན་དུ་རྟོགས	realization	mngon du rtogs
མངོན་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	realize in actuality	mngon du rtogs pa
མངོན་དུ་སྟོན་པ	direct teaching	mngon du ston pa
མངོན་དུ་བསྟན་པ	gets at the core of reality	mngon du bstan pa
མངོན་དུ་མཐོང་པ	to see in actuality mngon du 'du byed par med par yongs su	mngon du mthong pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བ	to pass fully beyond suffering without formation	mya ngan las 'da' ba
མངོན་དུ་འདོད	wish for, earnest desire	mngon du 'dod
མངོན་དུ་ལྡང་བ	getting up from one's seat from respect for another, removing, going away	mngon du ldang ba
མངོན་དུ་ཕྱུང་བ	really opens up, manifest, SA mngon phyung, to directly disclose	mngon du phyung ba
མངོན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པ	to fully realized	mngon du phyogs pa
མངོན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པའི་ས	the fully realized stage; sixth bhumi	mngon du phyogs pa'i sa
མངོན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fully realized	mngon du phyogs par byed pa
མངོན་དུ་བྱ	realiz[e][ation], see, perceive, obtain	mngon du bya
མངོན་དུ་བྱ་བ	actualize	mngon du bya ba
མངོན་དུ་བྱ་བའི	tied to action	mngon du bya ba'i
མངོན་དུ་བྱས	made manifest	mngon du byas
མངོན་དུ་བྱས་པ	fully created	mngon du byas pa
མངོན་དུ་བྱེད	to actualize, realize; sm. {mngon du 'gyur ba byed}	mngon du byed
མངོན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	to make evident; actualization, to manifest, realize, actualize, to bring to light, brought to realization, causes realization	mngon du byed pa
མངོན་དུ་བྱེད་པའི་ཐབས	means of realizing	mngon du byed pa'i thabs
མངོན་དུ་འབྱིན་པ	disclose, reveal, make known	mngon du 'byin pa
མངོན་དུ་འབྱོར	realize	mngon du 'byor
མངོན་དུ་འབྱོར་བ	realize	mngon du 'byor ba
མངོན་དུ་མ་འགྱུར་བའི་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	reserve force, potential strength	mngon du ma 'gyur ba'i stobs shugs
མངོན་དུ་མཛད	manifest	mngon du mdzad
མངོན་དུ་མཛད་པ	realized; (h) for {mngon du byed pa}	mngon du mdzad pa
མངོན་དུ་རྫོགས་པ	perfection	mngon du rdzogs pa
མངོན་དུ་བཞག	to apply	mngon du bzhag
མངོན་དུ་བཞག་དྲན་པ	apply mindfulness	mngon du bzhag dran pa
མངོན་དུ་འོང	advent, arrival, coming in	mngon du 'ong
མངོན་དུ་རིག་པ	to concretely recognize	mngon du rig pa
མངོན་དུ་ཤེས་པ	have the idea of, recognize, distinguish, know	mngon du shes pa
མངོན་དུ་སད་པ	(to become) fully evident; (to) actualize(d); actually present	mngon du sad pa
མངོན་དོད	mngon mtshan nam, gzengs thon gyi gsal cha,...Byas rjes mngon dod che ba zhig bzhag pa,...Gyon pa'i tshos gzhi mngon dod chung ba	mngon dod
མངོན་འདུ་བྱེད་མེད	abbr. of {mngon par 'du byed pa med pa}	mngon 'du byed med
མངོན་འདོད	1) admiring, longing, emulating; 2) passion; 3) Aa mra tree)	mngon 'dod
མངོན་འདོད་ཀྱི་རྟོག་པ	conceptions of emulating	mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa
མངོན་འདོད་ཀྱི་དད་པ	faith of desiring to manifest [one of the dad pa gsum, dad yul gyi yon tan de nyid rang rgyud la thob 'dod kyi 'dun pa	mngon 'dod kyi dad pa
མངོན་ནོ	is made known/ evident	mngon no
མངོན་སྣང	{mngon par snang ba} to become fully evident/ manifest; to manifest in full evidence; to predominate	mngon snang
མངོན་པ	conspicuous, visible, evident, obvious manifest[ation], perception, making (or becoming) manifest, be evident, 1.(Tha mi dad pa),, be clear, seen, apprehended; 2) (Aabhi) abhidharma nirvana la mngo...	mngon pa
མངོན་པ་ཀུན་བཏུས	Abhidharma samacchaya by Asanga, Compendium of Abhidharma [one of {bsdus pa'i bstan bcos sdom rnam gnyis}, theg chen thun mong ma yin pa'i mngon pa the higher abhidharma of the mah y na	mngon pa kun btus
ཚོགས་བཤད་པ་ལྡེབ	a commentary of the {kun las btus pa} by {mi pham rgya mtsho} mngon pa kun btus kyi rnam grangs sna	tshogs bshad pa ldeb
ཚོགས་བཤད་པ	a commentary of the {kun las btus pa} by {mi pham rgya mtsho}	tshogs bshad pa
མངོན་པ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	Abhidharma samacchaya by Asanga, Compendium of Abhidharma [1 of {bsdus pa'i bstan bcos sdom rnam gnyis}, theg chen thun mong ma yin pa'i mngon pa the higher abhidharma of the mah y na	mngon pa kun las btus pa
མངོན་པ་ཀུན་ལས་འདུས	Abhidharma samacchaya by Asanga, Compendium of Abhidharma [1 of {bsdus pa'i bstan bcos sdom rnam gnyis}, theg chen thun mong ma yin pa'i mngon pa the higher abhidharma of the mah y na	mngon pa kun las 'dus
མངོན་པ་གོང་མ	the higher (mah y na) tradition of abhidharma, mngon pa kun btus	mngon pa gong ma
མངོན་པ་གོང་མའི་ལུགས	the tradition of the Higher Abhidharma	mngon pa gong ma'i lugs
མངོན་པ་གོང་མར	the higher (mah y na) tradition of abhidharma	mngon pa gong mar
མངོན་པ་གོང་འོག	the higher (mah yana) and lower (hinayana) abhidharma	mngon pa gong 'og
མངོན་པ་གོང་འོག་གཉིས	the higher (mah yana) and lower (hinayana) abhidharma	mngon pa gong 'og gnyis
མངོན་པ་ཆོས	Abhidharma, metaphysics, knowledge mngon pa chos kun las btus pa'i rnam par	mngon pa chos
བཤད་པ	{mngon pa chos kun las btus pa'i rnam par bshad pa} [bstan bcos shig rgya gar gyi slob dpon rgyal ba'i sras kyis mdzad pa, rgya gar gyi mkhan po dzi na mi tra dang, lo ts' ba ye shes sdes bsgyur pa...	bshad pa
མངོན་པ་གཉིས	the two types of Abhidharma; {mngon pa gong 'og}	mngon pa gnyis
མངོན་པ་སྡེ་བདུན	Seven Sections of Abhidharma	mngon pa sde bdun
མངོན་པ་ནས་བཤད་པའི	as explained in the Abhidharma mngon pa nas bshad pa'i gser gyi ri bdun the 7 golden mountains in the abhidharmas chn	mngon pa nas bshad pa'i
མངོན་པ་རྣམས	manifestation	mngon pa rnams
མངོན་པ་པ	abhidharma student/ adherent	mngon pa pa
མངོན་པ་བ	Abhidharma adherent	mngon pa ba
མངོན་པ་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	the definition of mngon pa, realizing things as they are	mngon pa mtshan nyid pa
མངོན་པ་མཛོད	Abhidharmakosha	mngon pa mdzod
མངོན་པ་འོག་མ	the lesser [hinay na] abhidarma	mngon pa 'og ma
མངོན་པ་འོག་མའི་ལུགས	the lesser [hinay na] abhidarma tradition	mngon pa 'og ma'i lugs
མངོན་པ་ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	belief clear and certain	mngon pa yid ches pa
མངོན་པ་རྱིད་ཆེས་པ	belief clear and certain	mngon pa ryid ches pa
མངོན་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	sublime pride * pride of mngon pa, self-respect D, pride D	mngon pa'i nga rgyal
མངོན་པའི་ཆོས	the Abhidharma teachings	mngon pa'i chos
མངོན་པའི་མཆོད་པ	actual offerings	mngon pa'i mchod pa
མངོན་པའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	abhidharmapitaka [lhag pa shes rab kyi bslab pa brjod bya'i gtso bor ston pa gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis kyi nang gtan la phab pa'i sde de dag mngon par bsdus pa'o	mngon pa'i sde snod
གཞལ་གྲངས་སོ་བརྒྱད	chn	gzhal grangs so brgyad
མངོན་པར	directly, very, absolutely, obviously, move toward, directed toward, conspicuously, clearly, manifestly, openly, evidently, entirely, highly, greatly, clearly	mngon par
མངོན་པར་དཀའ་བ	so difficult to notice	mngon par dka' ba
མངོན་པར་བཀོད་པ	to become vividly manifest	mngon par bkod pa
མངོན་པར་སྐངས་ཡོད་པ	aerial space (form)	mngon par skangs yod pa
མངོན་པར་སྐབས་ཡོད	be like space	mngon par skabs yod
མངོན་པར་སྐབས་ཡོད་པ	spatial spacelike, having leisure for piety/ selfsacrifice S, ascetic	mngon par skabs yod pa
མངོན་པར་སྐབས་ཡོད་པའི་གཟུགས	vivid	mngon par skabs yod pa'i gzugs
སྤཅེ	like form/ appearance [kind of dharma ayatana's form, gzhan la thogs par byed pa'i not touchable like empty space and reflections etc, spatial form, like space lam mer snang ba to mind consciousnes...	space
མངོན་པར་བསྐྱེད	remembrance, any thought dawning in mind	mngon par bskyed
མངོན་པར་ཁྱབ་པ	D cover/ encompass well, well- accomplished	mngon par khyab pa
མངོན་པར་ཁྲོ	wrath, terrible mien	mngon par khro
མངོན་པར་མཁྱེན་པ	intelligent	mngon par mkhyen pa
མངོན་པར་འཁྲུགས་པ	raging [river]	mngon par 'khrugs pa
མངོན་པར་གྱུར་པ	become manifest, clear, appeared	mngon par gyur pa
མངོན་པར་གྲུབ་པ	fully established / formed	mngon par grub pa
མངོན་པར་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག	grub pa'i yan lag gnyis, fully established links	mngon par grub pa'i yan lag
མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ	Abhirati, higher/ true joy, E buddha field of Aksobhya, love for, clinging to	mngon par dga' ba
མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ་མེད་པ	w/o manifest/ true/ complete joy	mngon par dga' ba med pa
མངོན་པར་དགའ་བའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the buddhafield, Manifest Joy	mngon par dga' ba'i zhing khams
མངོན་པར་དགའི	of true joy	mngon par dga'i
མངོན་པར་དགའི་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	experience/ apprehend/ realize true joy	mngon par dga'i ba yid la byed pa
མངོན་པར་དགའི་བའི་བསམ་པ	thoughts of/ wishes for/ contemplation of true joy	mngon par dga'i ba'i bsam pa
མངོན་པར་དགའི་བར་བྱེད་པ	produce true joy	mngon par dga'i bar byed pa
མངོན་པར་མགུ་བར་བྱ་བ	D be rendered propitious/ pleased	mngon par mgu bar bya ba
མངོན་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become manifest, be verified, proved, evident	mngon par 'gyur ba
མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ	is produced	mngon par 'grub
མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ་པ	produced	mngon par 'grub pa
མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག	fully establishing links	mngon par 'grub pa'i yan lag
མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ་པའི་སྲིད་པ	fully establishing becoming	mngon par 'grub pa'i srid pa
མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fully establish	mngon par 'grub par byed pa
མངོན་པར་རྒྱལ	pride	mngon par rgyal
མངོན་པར་རྒྱུ་བ	"obviously moving one"	mngon par rgyu ba
མངོན་པར་རྒྱུག་པ	D follow w speed, run after	mngon par rgyug pa
མངོན་པར་སྒྲུབ	well-finished, wellaccomplished	mngon par sgrub
མངོན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ	fully establish, well finished/ accomplished	mngon par sgrub pa
མངོན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་མཁས་པ	to be skilled in fully accomplishing	mngon par sgrub pa la mkhas pa
མངོན་པར་བརྒྱན་པར་བྱས་པ	fully adorned	mngon par brgyan par byas pa
མངོན་པར་བསྒྲུབ་པ	fully accomplishing	mngon par bsgrub pa
མངོན་པར་བསྒྲུབས་པ	produced, practiced	mngon par bsgrubs pa
མངོན་པར་ངེས་མྱང	enjoyment	mngon par nges myang
མངོན་པར་ཆགས	transmigratory existence, fondness, attachment, state of being very much attached	mngon par chags
མངོན་པར་ཆང་ཆུབ་པའི་སྐུ	true enlightenment body	mngon par chang chub pa'i sku
མངོན་པར་ཆལ་དུ	diffused	mngon par chal du
མངོན་པར་ཆལ་དུ་བཀྲམ་པ	spread over	mngon par chal du bkram pa
མངོན་པར་མཆོད	make offering, manifest offerings, honor, reverence	mngon par mchod
མངོན་པར་མཆོད་པ	make offering, manifest offerings, honor, reverence	mngon par mchod pa
མངོན་པར་བརྗོད	indicates	mngon par brjod
མངོན་པར་བརྗོད་པ	articulation	mngon par brjod pa
མངོན་པར་བཏུད	pay homage, bow down	mngon par btud
མངོན་པར་བཏུད་པ	pay homage, bow down out of respect	mngon par btud pa
མངོན་པར་རྟོག་པ	supposition	mngon par rtog pa
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས	Clear Realization, realization, understanding, right discernment/ knowledge, clear comprehension	mngon par rtogs
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ	clear realization; [a short text]. realization, understanding. Syn {mngon rtogs}	mngon par rtogs pa
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	to perform the sadhana	mngon par rtogs pa bsgom pa
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་མཆོག	completely supreme realization	mngon par rtogs pa mchog
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱན	Abhisamay lamk ra, the Ornament of the Realizations [one of the {byams chos sde lnga - five books of Maitreya)	mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan
པ་ཟབ་དོན་གནད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་འོད	a detailed exegesis of the abhisamay'alangk'ara and its commentary by Haribhadra; by {rong ston shes bya kun rig} (13671449) 712	pa zab don gnad kyi zla 'od
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱུད	n. of a text	mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyud
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་མཐའ	one purified and perfected by thorough exercise of right judgement D mngon par rtogs pa'i lam mtha' las byung	mngon par rtogs pa'i mtha'
བའི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	virtuous roots arising from the end of the path of completely supreme realization mngon par rtogs pa'i lam mtha' las byung	ba'i dge ba'i rtsa ba
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་བའི་རྒྱན	Abhisamay lamk ra, the ornament of the realizations	mngon par rtogs ba'i rgyan
མངོན་པར་སྟོན་འོས	suitable to display	mngon par ston 'os
མངོན་པར་བསྟར	carry out, realize, achieve	mngon par bstar
མངོན་པར་བསྟོད་པ	actually/ openly praise	mngon par bstod pa
མངོན་པར་བསྟོད་པའི་གྲགས་པ	enlightening fame D	mngon par bstod pa'i grags pa
མངོན་པར་ཐོབ་བྱེད	which truly accomplishes	mngon par thob byed
མངོན་པར་མཐོ	crisp and clean {gos rnams gsar pa'i dus na mngon par mtho yang rnying zhing hrul por zad par 'gyur} robes when new are crisp and clean; when old, they are tattered and unsighty	mngon par mtho
མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བ	eminent, exalted, become sublime, higher rebirth	mngon par mtho ba
མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བའི་གོ་གནས	exalted position	mngon par mtho ba'i go gnas
མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བའི་སྙན་གྲགས	lofty reputation	mngon par mtho ba'i snyan grags
མངོན་པར་མཐོབ	elevated, high, exalted	mngon par mthob
མངོན་པར་དད་པ	faith	mngon par dad pa
མངོན་པར་དྲངས	one conducted to the path of deliverance D	mngon par drangs
མངོན་པར་གདུང་བ	strongly afflicted	mngon par gdung ba
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱ་བ་མེད་པ	without formation	mngon par 'du bya ba med pa
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱ་བ་མེད་པར་འཇུག་པ	to engage without formation [of karma]	mngon par 'du bya ba med par 'jug pa
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད	actual application, motivational force, accumulation (of karma), effort, application mental preparation, possessing origin, deration, and extinction, sublime ideas, views D	mngon par 'du byed
སུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བ	to pass into nirvana with formation mngon par 'du byed dang bcas pas yongs	su mya ngan las 'da' ba
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་པ	made up, fabricated, perform actions	mngon par 'du byed pa
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་པ་མེད་པ	without formation mngon par 'du byed pa med pa'i mtshan	mngon par 'du byed pa med pa
མ་མེད་པ་ལ་གནས་པ	to abide in the absence of characteristics without formation mngon par 'du byed par yongs su mya	ma med pa la gnas pa
ངན་ལས་འདའ་བ	to completely attain nirvana without effort mngon par 'du byed par yongs su mya	ngan las 'da' ba
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་མེད་པ	w no accumulation (of karma), w/o proper mental preparation, w/o effort/ application	mngon par 'du byed med pa
མངོན་པར་འདུ་མ་བྱས་པ	bya ba ma byas pa	mngon par 'du ma byas pa
མངོན་པར་འདུ་མི་བྱེད	does not get involved	mngon par 'du mi byed
མངོན་པར་འདུ་མཛད་པ	performed, manifested (magical displays)	mngon par 'du mdzad pa
མངོན་པར་འདུད་པ	bow	mngon par 'dud pa
མངོན་པར་འདུལ་འོས་པ	fit for taming/ religious discipline	mngon par 'dul 'os pa
མངོན་པར་འདུས་བྱས	effortful/ conditioned/ compounding/ engaged action	mngon par 'dus byas
མངོན་པར་འདུས་བྱས་པ	effortful/ conditioned/ compounding/ engaged action	mngon par 'dus byas pa
མངོན་པར་འདོད་པ	deep craving	mngon par 'dod pa
མངོན་པར་འདོན་པ	drawing out, bring out, exposing, dragging out	mngon par 'don pa
མངོན་པར་ལྡང	faith	mngon par ldang
མངོན་པར་སྡེ་སྣོད	Abhidharmapi aka	mngon par sde snod
མངོན་པར་གནས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to make fully calm	mngon par gnas par byed pa
མངོན་པར་སྣང་བ	{mngon snang} to become fully evident/ manifest; to manifest in full evidence; to predominate	mngon par snang ba
མངོན་པར་སྤྱོད	wrathful activity/ [yogic] applications	mngon par spyod
མངོན་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	Syn {drag po'i las}	mngon par spyod pa
མངོན་པར་སྤྲོ་བ	enthusiasm, zeal for any work	mngon par spro ba
མངོན་པར་སྤྲོ་བས	gladly	mngon par spro bas
མངོན་པར་ཕྱོགས	visible/ outward side, facade	mngon par phyogs
མངོན་པར་འཕགས	gone or come out of samsara	mngon par 'phags
མངོན་པར་འཕགས་པ	come or gone out of samsara 713	mngon par 'phags pa
མངོན་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ	intuitive realizations, intuition-awakening, bptp 180, intuitions, (the 5 are lotus and moon, communicative letters, eternally present mood, perfect existence with entourage, god as embodied ye she...	mngon par byang chub
མངོན་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	{mngon byang} manifest enlightenment	mngon par byang chub pa
མངོན་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ་ལྔ	Five Awakenings, according to Yoga Tantra. The sequence of visualization through the creation stage is as follows. emptiness {stong pa nyid} the lunar throne {zla gdan} the seed-syllables of buddha...	mngon par byang chub pa lnga
མངོན་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པའི་སྐུ	abhisambodhikaya. The fifth of the five kayas of buddhahood, defined by Jamgön Kongtrül in his Treasury of Knowledge as 'manifold manifestation in accordance with the karma of those to be influence...	mngon par byang chub pa'i sku
མངོན་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པའི་དུས་ཆེན	the great festival of Buddha enlightenment mngon par byang chub pa'i dus chen festival of Buddha's enlightenment [khyad par can gyi dus chen bzhi'i nang gses, hor zla bzhi pa sa ga zla ba'i yar tse...	mngon par byang chub pa'i dus chen
མངོན་པར་བྱང་བ་ལྔ	five aspects of manifest enlightenment	mngon par byang ba lnga
མངོན་པར་བྱུང་བ	fully evolve	mngon par byung ba
མངོན་པར་དབང་བསྐུར་བ	initiation of a monk into dge slong	mngon par dbang bskur ba
མངོན་པར་འབྱུང་བ	perfect renunciation, escape from worldly existence with the resolution to go to nirvana	mngon par 'byung ba
མངོན་པར་སྦྱོད	the karma/ activity of destroying	mngon par sbyod
མངོན་པར་སྦྱོར	full application of meanings in reference to religion	mngon par sbyor
དད་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	for arousing faith in those without it [one of the {phan yon bcu} 10 advantages inherent to the teaching) mngon par ma dad pa rnams mngon par	dad par bya ba'i phyir
མངོན་པར་མི་དགའ་བ	to deeply dislike	mngon par mi dga' ba
མངོན་པར་མི་དགའི	not of true joy	mngon par mi dga'i
མངོན་པར་མི་འདོད་པ	deeply detached	mngon par mi 'dod pa
མངོན་པར་མི་ཞེན་པ	not attached	mngon par mi zhen pa
མངོན་པར་མི་གསལ་བ	utterly dim /obscured	mngon par mi gsal ba
མངོན་པར་བཙོན་པ	assiduity, industry	mngon par btson pa
མངོན་པར་བརྩོན	make an effort	mngon par brtson
མངོན་པར་བརྩོན་པ	deeply involved	mngon par brtson pa
མངོན་པར་མཚོན	realize, materialize, achieve, come true	mngon par mtshon
མངོན་པར་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	truly enlightened	mngon par 'tshang rgya ba
མངོན་པར་མཛད་པ	(h) to attain	mngon par mdzad pa
མངོན་པར་འཛིན	attachment, passionate love	mngon par 'dzin
མངོན་པར་རྫོགས་པ	perfect realization, completely perfect[ed]	mngon par rdzogs pa
མངོན་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	true and complete enlightenment	mngon par rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas
བཞུགས་པ་ཡིན	was a completely perfect Buddha	bzhugs pa yin
མངོན་པར་རྫོགས་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	1) truly and completely enlightened. 2) truly and completely perfected mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa complete perfect enlightenment mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa dang mya ngan las 'das pa...	mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa
སྟོན་པར་འཇུག་པ	to embark on demonstrating [the attainment of] true and complete enlightenment and the total transcendence of suffering mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa dang yongs su mya ngan las 'das pa	ston par 'jug pa
ཡང་དག་པར་སྟོན་པ	to fully demonstrate true and complete enlightenment and the total transcendence of suffering mngon par rdzogs par 'tshang gya ba perfectly and completely enlightened	yang dag par ston pa
མངོན་པར་རྫོགས་པར་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	to be truly and completely enlightened, 714 attain true and complete enlightenment mngon par rdzogs par 'tshang rgya ba perfectly and completely enlightened mngon par rdzogs par 'tshang rgya bar 'g...	mngon par rdzogs par 'tshang rgya ba
བཤད་དོ	the explanation of complete perfect buddhahood/ enlightenment	bshad do
མངོན་པར་རྫོགས་པར་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	attained perfect, complete buddhahood/true and complete enlightenment, completely realized buddhahood, truly and completely enlightened [shes mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas pa [attained] perfect,...	mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas pa
མངོན་པར་ཞེས་པ	super-sensory perception	mngon par zhes pa
མངོན་པར་ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	to belief clear and certain	mngon par yid ches pa
མངོན་པར་རབ་ཏུ	suspends	mngon par rab tu
མངོན་པར་རབ་ཏུ་འཕྱང	hanging down, suspended	mngon par rab tu 'phyang
མངོན་པར་རིག་པ	cognition/ knowing of	mngon par rig pa
མངོན་པར་རིག་པའམ	knowing of	mngon par rig pa'am
མངོན་པར་རིག་པའམ་སྣང་བ	cognition	mngon par rig pa'am snang ba
མངོན་པར་ཤེན་པ	attachment	mngon par shen pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས	the higher perceptions, clearly/ fully know	mngon par shes
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	higher perceptions	mngon par shes pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་ལྔ	five sublime states of perception	mngon par shes pa lnga
དང་སྐྱེ་བ་དྲན་པ	) {rdzu 'phrul gyi mngon par shes pa}	dang skye ba dran pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་དྲུག	six superknowledges/ higher perceptions	mngon par shes pa drug
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ	chn	mngon par shes pa drug cu
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་དྲུག་དང་ལྡན	endowed with the six types of superknowledge	mngon par shes pa drug dang ldan
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་མ་ཉམས་པ	not experience the higher perceptions	mngon par shes pa ma nyams pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་མྱུར་བ་ཉིད	swiftness of higher perception	mngon par shes pa myur ba nyid
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་འི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	the miracles of clairvoyance/ super knowledge/ the higher perceptions	mngon par shes pa 'i rdzu 'phrul
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ	the superknowledges and so forth / and the other qualities 715	mngon par shes pa la sogs pa
སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	bestow the gift of special qualities such as the higher perceptions	sbyin par byed pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས	the higher perception of superknowledge	mngon par shes pa'i mngon shes
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	the activity of superknowledge	mngon par shes pa'i spyod pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	the miracles of clairvoyance, superknowledge	mngon par shes pa'i rdzu 'phrul
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the original wakefulness of the superknowledges	mngon par shes pa'i ye shes
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	cognition of superknowledge	mngon par shes pa'i shes pa
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་བ	true knowledge, truly know	mngon par shes ba
མངོན་པར་ཤེས་བྱ་དྲུག	chn	mngon par shes bya drug
མངོན་པར་སངས་རྒྱས	manifesting enlightenment, SA che ba lnga	mngon par sangs rgyas
མངོན་པར་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	{mngon sangs rgyas} manifest aspect of buddha(hood); actual buddhahood; to awaken; to manifest/ actual buddhahood	mngon par sangs rgyas pa
མངོན་པར་སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཆེ་བ	the greatness of direct enlightenment	mngon par sangs rgyas pa'i che ba
མངོན་པར་སེམས	D samadhi, contemplation, reflection	mngon par sems
མངོན་པར་སེལ	coagulat[e][tion]	mngon par sel
མངོན་པར་སོང	D involved, fully occupied, engrossed in	mngon par song
མངོན་པར་སྲེད་པ	deeply craving	mngon par sred pa
མངོན་པར་སློང་བ	raise fully, develop	mngon par slong ba
མངོན་པར་གསར་པ	quite new	mngon par gsar pa
མངོན་པར་གསལ	fully manifest	mngon par gsal
མངོན་པར་གསལ་བ	1) obvious, evident, fully manifest, manifestly visible 2) utterly illuminated. See also {mngon gsal}	mngon par gsal ba
མངོན་པར་ལྷག་པ	new-comer, new arrival, one just come	mngon par lhag pa
མངོན་པོ	lord, superior, buddha	mngon po
མངོན་སྤྱོད	destroying; subjugation. Syn {drag po}; direct wrathful intervention	mngon spyod
མངོན་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	wrathful fire puja	mngon spyod kyi sbyin sreg
མངོན་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ལས	the activity of 'direct action.'	mngon spyod kyi las
མངོན་སྤྲུལ་པ	manifested	mngon sprul pa
མངོན་སྤྲུལ་སེམས་ཀྱིས	mentally	mngon sprul sems kyis
མངོན་ཕྱུང	revealed, made public	mngon phyung
མངོན་ཕྱུངས	revealing	mngon phyungs
མངོན་ཕྱོགས	towards, forward, straight ahead, moving towards	mngon phyogs
མངོན་ཕྱོགས་ཏེ	from whence?, having gone on, proceeded	mngon phyogs te
མངོན་ཕྱོགས་པ	in the front, ahead, the front side	mngon phyogs pa
མངོན་ཕྲ	deceit, dissimulation	mngon phra
མངོན་བྱ་ལྔ	chn	mngon bya lnga
མངོན་བྱང	{mngon par byang chub pa} manifest enlightenment	mngon byang
མངོན་བྱང་སྐུ	body of awakening	mngon byang sku
མངོན་བྱང་གི་སྐུ	awakened/ enlightened body, the body of awakening GD	mngon byang gi sku
ལས་མ་ག	yos bzhin du gdul bya'i las dang mthun par sna chogs su snang ba ste, sngags rnying ma'i bzhed pa'o,..	las ma ga
མངོན་བྱང་གི་ཐུགས	awakened/ enlightened mind, the mind of awakening/ complete enlightenment	mngon byang gi thugs
མངོན་བྱང་གི་གསུང	the speech of the manifestation of enlightenment [gsung lnga'i ya gyal zhig sgra thams cad rang rig pa'i ngang du lhun gyis grub pas cir yang mi 'gag pa rig pa byin rlabs kyi gsung ni mngon byang g...	mngon byang gi gsung
མངོན་བྱང་ལྔ	the five manifestaions of enlightenment [bskyed rim gyi lha sku'i sgom tsul zhig ste, zla ba las byang chub pa dang, nyi ma las byang chub pa dang, sa bon las byang chub pa dang, phyag mtsan las by...	mngon byang lnga
མངོན་བྱང་ལྔ་བསྐྱེད	visualizing the five manifestations of enlightenment [lha bskyed pa'i tsul zhig ste, padma la sogs pa'i gdan gyi steng du ' li las zla ba dang k' li las nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor gyi bar du lha'i phyag ...	mngon byang lnga bskyed
མངོན་བྱང་རྣམ་ལྔ	fivefold true perfection, fivefold abhisambodhi; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 100]	mngon byang rnam lnga
མངོན་བྱང་བཞི	four awakenings [5	mngon byang bzhi
ཨཝཀེནིངས	the 1st, emptiness [1 the lunar throne {zla gdan} two the seedsyllables of speech {gsung yig 'bru} three the symbolic implements of mind {thugs phyag mtshan} four the perfect body of the deity {sku...	awakenings
མངོན་བྱུང	had the impression that	mngon byung
མངོན་བྱེད	to realize	mngon byed
མངོན་བྱེད་པ	be manifest, make public/ clear, manifest oneself	mngon byed pa
མངོན་བློ་འཕྱར་བ	zhabs 'dren zhu ba	mngon blo 'phyar ba
མངོན་འབྱུང	deliverance	mngon 'byung
མངོན་འབྱུང་རྟེན་པའི་ཚོར་བ	sensations that support deliverance	mngon 'byung rten pa'i tshor ba
མངོན་འབྱུང་བ	histories	mngon 'byung ba
མངོན་སྦྱར	semantics	mngon sbyar
མངོན་མེད་བརྡ་སྟོན	hint	mngon med brda ston
མངོན་རྩ་ལྐོག་འགལ	pretended/ fake compliance/ respect	mngon rtsa lkog 'gal
མངོན་རྩོད་ལྐོག་འཐབ	striving for something publicly and secretly	mngon rtsod lkog 'thab
མངོན་ཚན	(A)/; 1) bun skyed; 2) Rin po che; 3) dong tshe w picture)	mngon tshan
མངོན་ཚུལ	rule, principle, maxim	mngon tshul
མངོན་མཚན	completely clear, evident sign D, conspicuous, outward, open[ly], obvious	mngon mtshan
མངོན་མཚན་ཅན་གྱི་སྤང་བ	the abandoning offence of ... * by desire an unrelated householder la gold, silver etc. borrow at interest or invest for profit	mngon mtshan can gyi spang ba
མངོན་འཚང་རྒྱ	will attain enlightenment	mngon 'tshang rgya
མངོན་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	to achieve enlightenment	mngon 'tshang rgya ba
མངོན་མཛད་པའི་ཉམས	experience of complete realization	mngon mdzad pa'i nyams
མངོན་མཛོད	abhidharma kosa	mngon mdzod
མངོན་རྫོགས་ཁྱབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great, pervasive perfection	mngon rdzogs khyab pa chen po
མངོན་རྫོགས་རྒྱལ	Ngondsok Gyalpo	mngon rdzogs rgyal
མངོན་རྫོགས་རྒྱལ་པོ	Ngöndzok Gyalpo, Truly Perfected King 1) A wrathful manifestation of Samantabhadra. 2) the eleventh of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	mngon rdzogs rgyal po
མངོན་རྫོགས་སྟོན་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the truly perfected 12 (Dzogchen) teachers; see {ston pa bcu gnyis}	mngon rdzogs ston pa bcu gnyis
མངོན་རྫོགས་སངས་རྒྱས	state of perfect enlightenment	mngon rdzogs sangs rgyas
མངོན་ཞེན	taking things as real, cling to reality, clinging to being real	mngon zhen
མངོན་ཞེན་གྱི་གནས	object of attachment	mngon zhen gyi gnas
མངོན་ཞེན་འགག་པ	cessation of attachment	mngon zhen 'gag pa
རེཨལིཏཡ	clinging	reality
མངོན་ཞེན་ང་རྒྱལ་བདེན་ཞེན	selfrighteousness, pride or gross attachment	mngon zhen nga rgyal bden zhen
མངོན་ཞེན་དོད་ཡོན་ལ	gratify yourself w sense pleasures	mngon zhen dod yon la
མངོན་ཞེན་ལྡོག་པ	reverts the clinging to (their) reality	mngon zhen ldog pa
མངོན་ཞེན་ཟློག་པ	revert from attachment to reality	mngon zhen zlog pa
མངོན་གཟིགས	true perception	mngon gzigs
མངོན་རློམ	pride, haughtiness, conceit	mngon rlom
མངོན་རློམ་པ	craving, abrasiveness	mngon rlom pa
མངོན་རློམས	having mind directed to, longing for D	mngon rloms
མངོན་ཤར་བ	to manifest	mngon shar ba
མངོན་ཤེན	settling down in	mngon shen
མངོན་ཤེལ	screen [electronic]	mngon shel
མངོན་ཤེལ་ཐོག	on the screen [electronic]	mngon shel thog
མངོན་ཤེས	superknowledge [thd]	mngon shes
མངོན་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་བརྟགས་པས་ཤེས་པ	understood through clairvoyance	mngon shes kyis brtags pas shes pa
མངོན་ཤེས་མངའ་བ	to be endowed with the superknowledges, possess foreknowledge	mngon shes mnga' ba
མངོན་ཤེས་ལྔ	five superknowledges	mngon shes lnga
མངོན་ཤེས་ཅན	[one] possessing the higher perceptions	mngon shes can
མངོན་ཤེས་དྲུག	the six higher perceptions	mngon shes drug
སུཔེར	knowledges, six supernatural perceptions; six clairvoyant powers; In case of enlightened bodhisattvas, Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {gzhan dag gi skye ba shes pa, 'chi 'pho dang skye ba mngon par shes ...	super
མངོན་ཤེས་དྲུག་ལྡན	possessing the six higher perceptions	mngon shes drug ldan
མངོན་ཤེས་གཤོད་པ	forecast, foretell	mngon shes gshod pa
མངོན་ཤེས་བཤད	prophesy, tell what is known by higher perceptions	mngon shes bshad
མངོན་སངས་རྒྱ་བ	to become / will become truly enlightened	mngon sangs rgya ba
མངོན་སངས་རྒྱས	became truly enlightened	mngon sangs rgyas
མངོན་སུམ	direct perception	mngon sum
ཙད་མ	dper na, gzugs 'dzin mig shes lta bu	tsad ma
མངོན་སུམ་འཁྲུལ་རྒྱུ་ཅན	possessing the cause of confused perception 718	mngon sum 'khrul rgyu can
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་སྒོ་གཟིགས་པ	see the door of manifest (dharmat) (h)	mngon sum gyi sgo gzigs pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་བཅད་ཤེས	bcad shes kyi nang gses, rang 'dren byed mngon sum tsad mas rtogs zin pa de slar yang rtogs pa ste, dbang mngon lnga'i skad cig gnyis pa lta bu dbang mngon gyi bcad shes dang, bum 'dzin mngon sum d...	mngon sum gyi bcad shes
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་རྟོགས་པ	realize by means of a direct perceiver	mngon sum gyi rtogs pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་གནོད་པ	direct harm	mngon sum gyi gnod pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་སྣང་ངོར་གྲུབ་པ	established for the appearance factor of a direct perceiver	mngon sum gyi snang ngor grub pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་སྣང་ཡུལ	appearing object of direct perception	mngon sum gyi snang yul
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	direct field of experience	mngon sum gyi spyod yul
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་ཚད་མ	valid perception [ggd]	mngon sum gyi tshad ma
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	perceptual	mngon sum gyi rang bzhin
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	direct perception	mngon sum gyi shes pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་ཤེས་ཡོན	conceptionless knowledge of direct perception	mngon sum gyi shes yon
མངོན་སུམ་གྱིས	directly, in actuality	mngon sum gyis
མངོན་སུམ་གྱིས་རྟོགས་པ	to realize by means of direct perception	mngon sum gyis rtogs pa
མངོན་སུམ་གྱིས་བསྟར	actually/ really put into practice	mngon sum gyis bstar
མངོན་སུམ་གྱིས་བསལ་བ	refuted by perception [bsal ba bzhi'i gras], dam bca' dang mngon sum gyi myong ba dang 'gal ba, eg, sgra mnyan bya min par 'dod pa lta bu'o	mngon sum gyis bsal ba
མངོན་སུམ་གྱུར་པ	be perceived/ present	mngon sum gyur pa
མངོན་སུམ་འགྲོས་གསུམ	the three kinds of perception	mngon sum 'gros gsum
མངོན་སུམ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱིས་ཞི་བ	pacify by the 8 perceptions ['dul ba las bshad pa'i rtsod pa zhi byed chos bdun gyi nang gses te, de la'ang lung rigs kyi byed pa la brten nas blo rtse gcig tu mthun par gyur pa lta bu rgol phyir r...	mngon sum brgyad kyis zhi ba
མངོན་སུམ་དངོས་པོ	visible thing, perceptible object	mngon sum dngos po
གཞན	tail of the continent and minor tail, Camara and Upacamara mngon sum rnga yab dang rnga yab	gzhan
མངོན་སུམ་རྔ་ཡབ་དཔལ་གྱི་རི་པོ	the glorious mountain on Camara (abode of guru rinpoche)	mngon sum rnga yab dpal gyi ri po
མངོན་སུམ་བཅད་ཤེས	direct subsequent cognition/ cognizer	mngon sum bcad shes
མངོན་སུམ་མཇལ	directly meeting	mngon sum mjal
མངོན་སུམ་མཇལ་བ	meet you again face to face	mngon sum mjal ba
མངོན་སུམ་རྗེན་གཅེར	clear and nakedly unobscured	mngon sum rjen gcer
མངོན་སུམ་རྗེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	naked manifest primal awareness	mngon sum rjen pa'i ye shes
མངོན་སུམ་ཉམས་མྱོང	concrete experience	mngon sum nyams myong
མངོན་སུམ་ཉིད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	to realize in actuality	mngon sum nyid du rtogs pa
མངོན་སུམ་སྙིང་ཏིག	nyingtig of direct perception	mngon sum snying tig
མངོན་སུམ་སྙིང་ཏིག་གི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings on the Heart Essence of Direct Perception. Syn {rdzogs pa chen po}	mngon sum snying tig gi bstan pa
མངོན་སུམ་རྟོག་པ་ཅན	determinate perception [ggd]	mngon sum rtog pa can
མངོན་སུམ་རྟོག་མེད	indeterminate perception [ggd]	mngon sum rtog med
མངོན་སུམ་རྟོགས་པ	directly realized	mngon sum rtogs pa
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར	as if alive / in person	mngon sum ltar
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང	pseudoperception [ggd]	mngon sum ltar snang
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང་བདུན	the seven types of superficial direct perception	mngon sum ltar snang bdun
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	appear as if it were present	mngon sum ltar snang ba
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང་བཞི	the four facsimiles/ counterfeits of direct perception chn	mngon sum ltar snang bzhi
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང་རབ་རིབ་ཅན	dim/ obscured direct perception	mngon sum ltar snang rab rib can
མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་བཞུགས་པ	present as in person	mngon sum ltar bzhugs pa
མངོན་སུམ་མཐོང	seen in actuality	mngon sum mthong
མངོན་སུམ་དང་པོ	direct sense	mngon sum dang po
མངོན་སུམ་དང་བོ་བ	the 1st moment of direct perception	mngon sum dang bo ba
མངོན་སུམ་དུ	actually, really, vividly, directly, fully, before one's eyes directly perceived	mngon sum du
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	be [directly] perceived, be present	mngon sum du gyur pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་འགྱུར	to become directly manifest, become apparent, manifest; be visible, obvious	mngon sum du 'gyur
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་འགྲུབ	realize, achieve, come true, actualize, materialize, establish	mngon sum du 'grub
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་རྟོགས	directly realize	mngon sum du rtogs
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	direct cognition/ realization realize directly	mngon sum du rtogs pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་མཐོང་བ	to experience/ perceive/ cognize directly; to behold in actuality	mngon sum du mthong ba
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་འདུལ་བར་འོས	suitable for taming	mngon sum du 'dul bar 'os
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱ་བ	which is perceptible	mngon sum du bya ba
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱས་པ	made visible	mngon sum du byas pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱོན་ཏེ	appeared in person	mngon sum du byon te
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱོན་པ	coming in reality	mngon sum du byon pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་མ་བྱས་པ	made invisible	mngon sum du ma byas pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	presence	mngon sum du bzhugs pa
མངོན་སུམ་དུ་གསལ་བར་མཐོང་བ	actual sight by personal observation	mngon sum du gsal bar mthong ba
མངོན་སུམ་སྣང་བ	visibly manifest	mngon sum snang ba
མངོན་སུམ་སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པ	direct perception w/o ascertainment	mngon sum snang la ma nges pa
མངོན་སུམ་པ	the direct perception	mngon sum pa
མངོན་སུམ་པའི་སྤྱན་ཉིད	the eye of direct perception	mngon sum pa'i spyan nyid
མངོན་སུམ་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	directly perceived buddhahood	mngon sum pa'i sangs rgyas
མངོན་སུམ་པའི་ལྷའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of the deity of actuality; syn {rdzogs rim}; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 54]	mngon sum pa'i lha'i rnal 'byor
མངོན་སུམ་པར	directly experienced, immediate apprehension, immediate validity, for Vaibhasikas (dbang po (sensory), yid (intellectual), rnal 'byor (mystical))	mngon sum par
མངོན་སུམ་སྤྱན	the eye of direct perception (H)	mngon sum spyan
མངོན་སུམ་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	direct perception	mngon sum spyod yul
མངོན་སུམ་ཕྱོགས་མིན	not forward/ proceeding, unable to succeed, turned back failed, unsuccessful	mngon sum phyogs min
མངོན་སུམ་ཕྱོགས་མིན་པ	not forward	mngon sum phyogs min pa
མངོན་སུམ་བྲས་བུ་སྟོན	fruition will actually manifest	mngon sum bras bu ston
མངོན་སུམ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not directly perceived/ present	mngon sum ma yin pa
མངོན་སུམ་མི་གནས	not appear visibly	mngon sum mi gnas
མངོན་སུམ་མི་བྱེད	cannot be realized	mngon sum mi byed
མངོན་སུམ་མིན་པ	beyond the range of sight, imperceptible, unknown, unintelligible	mngon sum min pa
མངོན་སུམ་མེད	imperceptible, unknown	mngon sum med
མངོན་སུམ་མེད་པ	imperceptible, unknown	mngon sum med pa
མངོན་སུམ་མྱོང་རྟོགས	direct experience	mngon sum myong rtogs
མངོན་སུམ་མྱོང་བ	concrete experience	mngon sum myong ba
མངོན་སུམ་ཙད་འབྲས	fruition of perceptual pramana [myong stobs kyis rang yul ji bzhin rtogs pa ste, dper na, sngo 'dzin dbang mngon la mtson na, sngon po ni gzhal bay dang, sngoon po'i rnam par shar nas sngon po la g...	mngon sum tsad 'bras
མངོན་སུམ་ཙད་མ	perceptual pramana [tsad ma'i nang gses, rtog bral ma 'khrul zhing gsar du mi bslu ba'i shes pa, dper na, bum 'dzin dbang mngon skad cig dang po dang, mngon shes skad cig dang po dang, rnam mkhyen ...	mngon sum tsad ma
མངོན་སུམ་ཚང་མ	direct valid cognizer	mngon sum tshang ma
མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་པ	direct prince / valid cognizer	mngon sum tshad pa
མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་འབྲས	the fruit of the pram a of direct perception, fruition of perceptual pramana	mngon sum tshad 'bras
མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ	direct perception, direct valid cognition, perceptual validating cognition, obvious / manifest proof	mngon sum tshad ma
མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ་བཞི	the four kinds of pram na of direct perception chn	mngon sum tshad ma bzhi
མངོན་སུམ་མཛད	to actualize, realize	mngon sum mdzad
མངོན་སུམ་འཛེམས་མེད	w/o being conscientious/ careful about others, flagrantly/ openly, w/o restraint/ hesitation mngon sum 'dzems med kyi spyod ngan	mngon sum 'dzems med
མང་པོ་བྱས་པ	[they] openly and w/o hesitation did many evil deeds	mang po byas pa
མངོན་སུམ་བཞི	4 valid means of knowledge (dbang po'i mngon sum, yid kyi mngon sum, rang rig pa'i mngon sum, rnal 'byor shes pa'i mngon sum)	mngon sum bzhi
མངོན་སུམ་ཡང་དག	true perception	mngon sum yang dag
མངོན་སུམ་ཡིན་པ་ལྟར་བྱས་ནས	as if she were really there	mngon sum yin pa ltar byas nas
མངོན་སུམ་རིག་མདངས	radiance of actualized awareness	mngon sum rig mdangs
མངོན་སུམ་རིག་པ	direct experience of awareness	mngon sum rig pa
མངོན་སུམ་ལ་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པ	disparage direct perception	mngon sum la skur pa 'debs pa
མངོན་སུམ་ལ་སྐུར་བ་འདེབས་པ	to denigrate perceptible reality	mngon sum la skur ba 'debs pa
མངོན་སུམ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཚད་མ	direct valid cognition and so forth	mngon sum la sogs pa'i tshad ma
མངོན་སུམ་ཤེས་པ	direct knowledge	mngon sum shes pa
མངོན་སུམ་གསལ་རྗེན	clear and naked w/o obscuration, very clear/ evident, beyond a shadow of doubt mngon sum gsal rjen ra phrod byung proved beyond a shadow of doubt	mngon sum gsal rjen
མངོན་སུམ་གསལ་ཐོན	arise very clearly w/o obscuration	mngon sum gsal thon
མངོན་སུམ་གསུམ	three kinds of direct perception	mngon sum gsum
མངོན་སློམས	having the mind direct towards, longing for	mngon sloms
མངོན་གསལ	evident, public, open, appearance, evident, lucid, clear, making known, manifesting	mngon gsal
མངོན་གསལ་གྱིས	obviously, evidently, nakedly appear, lucidly, vividly, manifesting, overtly, openly, publicly	mngon gsal gyis
མངོན་གསལ་ཆེ་བ	obvious, conspicuous, apparent	mngon gsal che ba
མངོན་གསལ་ཆེན་པོ	conspicuous	mngon gsal chen po
མངོན་གསལ་དོད་པོ	blatant	mngon gsal dod po
མངོན་གསལ་དོད་པོ་མེད་པ	inconspicuous	mngon gsal dod po med pa
མངོན་གསལ་འཕྲིན་ཡིག	postcard	mngon gsal 'phrin yig
མངོན་གསལ་མེད་པ	indistinct	mngon gsal med pa
མངོན་གསལ་འཛེམས་མེད	w/o being conscientious/ careful about others, flagrantly/ openly, w/o restraint/ hesitation	mngon gsal 'dzems med
མངོན་གསལ་ཞེ་འགྲས	overt hostility	mngon gsal zhe 'gras
མངོན་གསལ་བཟོ་བ	articulate	mngon gsal bzo ba
མངོལ་གསལ་འདྲི་གཅོད	public trial/ investigation	mngol gsal 'dri gcod
རྔ	da ru - damaru	rnga
རྔ་དཀར	white hairy tail rnga dkar po'i rlung g.yab - fang of white	rnga dkar
ཡཀ	tail or the chowry	yak
རྔ་ཁང	drum storing house	rnga khang
རྔ་ཁོག	rnga khog [si khron zhing chen khongs rnga pa sa khul]	rnga khog
རྔ་ཁྲི	drum stand	rnga khri
རྔ་མཁན	mower, harvester	rnga mkhan
རྔ་གྱབ	fly whisk made from a tail [bung ba skrod dang, gyo byed, rlung gyab, bsil ba stob, bsil byed, bsil yab]	rnga gyab
རྔ་གྱབ་དཔལ་རི	Glorious mt Chamara	rnga gyab dpal ri
རྔ་གྲལ	the row of monks with handheld pole drums	rnga gral
རྔ་སྒྲ	1) sound of drum; 2) buddha rnga sgra	rnga sgra
རྔ་རྔོ་མ་ཐོགས	not able to arise	rnga rngo ma thogs
རྔ་རྔོག	abbr of rnga ma dang rngog,	rnga rngog
ཏཻལ་ཨནད་ཅྲེསཏ	hair of a yak or horse or mule	tail and crest
རྔ་ལྕག	drum head, ??? dusters [made of animal tails]	rnga lcag
རྔ་ལྕགས	drug-rod, bent rod used as a	rnga lcags
དྲུམ	stick 721	drum
རྔ་ཆད་རྔོག་རྡུམ	mane and tail incomplete, example of incompleteness	rnga chad rngog rdum
རྔ་ཆིངས	in mantra rituals drum beating to beat of verses	rnga chings
རྔ་ཆུང	small drum, small camel, young camel	rnga chung
རྔ་ཆུང་རྡུང་བ	beat my small drum	rnga chung rdung ba
རྔ་ཆེན	{chos kyi rnga chen} the great drum of the Dharma	rnga chen
མཆོད་རྔ	big drum	mchod rnga
རྔ་འཆམ	dance done while beating drum	rnga 'cham
རྔ་འཆེམ	drumming, pounding	rnga 'chem
རྔ་མཇུག་ལ	{rnga mjug} pass [bod rang skyong ljongs dpa' shod rdzong khongs kyi la zhig yin zhing, mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos nas smi 4468 yod]	rnga mjug la
རྔ་ཐེར	serge cloth made of camel's hair	rnga ther
རྔ་ཐོགས	to be to able	rnga thogs
རྔ་དར	scarf tied to a drum	rnga dar
རྔ་རྡུང	beat a drum	rnga rdung
རྔ་རྡུང་དར་འཕྱར	1) beat the drum and wave flags; 2) example of something very evident, jubilation, elaborate celebration	rnga rdung dar 'phyar
རྔ་རྡུང་བ	drum	rnga rdung ba
རྔ་རྡུང་བྲོ་གཞས	drumming dancing and singing	rnga rdung bro gzhas
རྔ་རྡུང་ཞབས་བྲོ	beat the drum and dance	rnga rdung zhabs bro
རྔ་སྡུད	harvesting	rnga sdud
རྔ་སྡུད་བྱེད	harvest	rnga sdud byed
རྔ་བརྡ	1) signal w drum; 2) Lha mo 'khrab ran grabs yod dus kyi rnga rol gyi brda gtong	rnga brda
རྔ་བརྡར	gla ba phos mjug ma brdar ba, gla ba 'dod chags langs dus rtag par sa cha nges can zhig la rnga ma rdar gyi yod stabs rngon pa rnams kyis brdar shul der brten nas rnyi btsugs te 'dzin thabs byed pa...	rnga brdar
རྔ་བརྡུང་བ	drum beater	rnga brdung ba
རྔ་བརྡུངས	beat a drum	rnga brdungs
རྔ་བསྡུ	harvesting	rnga bsdu
རྔ་བསྡུ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	harvester machine	rnga bsdu 'phrul 'khor
རྔ་བསྡུ་བྱེད	harvest	rnga bsdu byed
རྔ་པ	1) drummer; 2) person from rnga [Si khron zhing chen bod rigs sa khul rnga khog dang, der sdod mi]	rnga pa
རྔ་དཔོན	chief drummer	rnga dpon
རྔ་ལྤགས	skin of the tail	rnga lpags
རྔ་ཕྱགས	rnga mas bzos pa'i phyags ma	rnga phyags
རྔ་ཕྲུག	baby camel	rnga phrug
རྔ་བ	rnga ba [bod rigs rang skyong	rnga ba
རྔ་བ་ཆེ་བའི་མདོ	sutra of metaphysical nature	rnga ba che ba'i mdo
རྔ་བག	'bri g.yag etc. tail base thad kyi sha rnga bo che} -1) brdung bya'i rnga chen po,...Sngar mi rdung ba'i rnga bo chen pho brang rtse nas brdungs; 2) (met) 'brug sgra'i ming	rnga bag
རྔ་བོ་ཆེ	rnga bo che chen po'i le'u'i	rnga bo che
རྔ་བོ་ཆེ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	'phags pa rnga dbo che chen po'i mdo [bam po lnga pa, rgya gar gyi mkhan po bi tya' ka ra pra bha dang lo bnde dpal gyi lhun pos bsgyur cing lo tsa' ba bnde dpal brtsegs kys zhus pa'o]	rnga bo che chen po'i mdo
རྔ་བོང	camel	rnga bong
རྔ་བྲན	an animal	rnga bran
རྔ་དབྱུག	drum stick	rnga dbyug
རྔ་སྦུག	drum & cymbal	rnga sbug
རྔ་སྦུར	drums and cymbals	rnga sbur
རྔ་མ	camel (hair); tail; hairy tail of an animal	rnga ma
རྔ་མ་དཀར་པོ	white hairy tail	rnga ma dkar po
རྔ་མ་རྒྱས་པ་བྱེད	puffing out the tail	rnga ma rgyas pa byed
རྔ་མ་འདོམས་འོག་དུ་འཇུག་པ	take to one's heels	rnga ma 'doms 'og du 'jug pa
རྔ་མའི་འབྱོར་བ	species of tree	rnga ma'i 'byor ba
རྔ་མུ་ཀུན་ད	kind of drum	rnga mu kun da
རྔ་མོ	medicinal root, camel	rnga mo
རྔ་མོ་ངུད་ཀ	worm with a black head	rnga mo ngud ka
རྔ་མོང	1) camel [= 'khor lo'i mgrin pa dang, dga' byed, mchu 'phyang, mang po sbrel, rlung gnyis 'thung, rlung la dga' ba, lus can]; 2) rnga mong mt [ri bo zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi dpal mgon rdzong...	rnga mong
རྔ་མོང་གི་ཕྲུ	young camel	rnga mong gi phru
རྔ་མོང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ	small camel	rnga mong gi phru gu
རྔ་མོང་ཐང	Ngamong plateau, in Domey	rnga mong thang
རྔ་མོང་ལ་འཁད་པ	sit on the back of a camel	rnga mong la 'khad pa
རྔ་དམར	red drum	rnga dmar
རྔ་རྩིད	cattle's 'jug ma'i spu rtub po [Dbyar dus 'brog sde'i phyugs rigs la rnga rtsid zhol zhol chags yong]	rnga rtsid
རྔ་ཟིང་ཞིག་བྱས་པ	[the drong] raised its tail	rnga zing zhig byas pa
རྔ་ཟོར	demi-god	rnga zor
རྔ་ཟླུམ	round drum	rnga zlum
རྔ་ཟླུམ་ཅན	species of flower, kind of drum resin of boswellia thurifera	rnga zlum can
རྔ་གཟེངས	raising its tail	rnga gzengs
རྔ་བཟོ་བ	drum maker	rnga bzo ba
རྔ་ཡབ	Chamara island [abode of {srin po} also called {rnga yab dka'i gling} in	rnga yab
རིགཛིན་ཌུཔ	sm {rnga lcag} yak tail whisk, the camara continent]	rigdzin Dupa
རྔ་ཡབ་དཀར་པོ	white whisk	rnga yab dkar po
རྔ་ཡབ་གླིང	Chamaradvipa, Chamara continent rakshasa country	rnga yab gling
རྔ་ཡབ་གླིང་པ	Ngayab lingpa	rnga yab gling pa
རྔ་ཡབ་ཅན	shing yongs 'du sa brtol	rnga yab can
རྔ་ཡབ་མཇུག་མ་ཅན	horse, yak	rnga yab mjug ma can
རྔ་ཡབ་དང་རྔ་ཡབ་གཞན	the two subcontinents flanking {dzam bu gling}	rnga yab dang rnga yab gzhan
རྔ་ཡབ་དཔལ་གྱི་རི་པོ	the glorious mountain on Chamara [Abode of Guru Rinpoche]	rnga yab dpal gyi ri po
རྔ་ཡབ་དཔལ་གྱི་རི་བོ	the Glorious mt of Chamara	rnga yab dpal gyi ri bo
རྔ་ཡབ་ཞན	other tail-fan island, 1 of gling phran brgyad	rnga yab zhan
རྔ་ཡབ་གཞན	Upachamara [bartsa'mar:) lho 'dzam bu'i gling gi shar na yod pa'i gling gyog ste, gling phran brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig]	rnga yab gzhan
རྔ་ཡུ	hand-drum handle	rnga yu
སོཨུཐ	east of the Jambu Continent. Chamara is the central of a configuration of nine islands inhabited by savage rakshasas. In the middle of Chamara rises the majestic red colored mountain into the skies...	south
རྔ་རིང	long tail	rnga ring
རྔ་རོལ	marching band	rnga rol
རྔ་རོལ་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	gdan sa che khag gi gling nang du rnga rdung sbug dkrol chog pa dang, smon lam tsugs dus grva pa tsos lha sa'i mi dmangs kyi rim gro sgrub skabs rol cha 'bud dkrol byas 'thus tsogs chen zhal ngor d...	rnga rol 'khrol 'dzin
རྔ་ཤིང	wooden body of a drum	rnga shing
རྔ་ཤོང	kettle drum, music	rnga shong
རྔ་ཤོད	beat the drum and dance	rnga shod
རྔ་ཤོན	rnga khur nas brdungs te 'khrab rgyu'i gar	rnga shon
རྔ་གཤང	drum &, gshang ni dril bu'i dbyibs dang cung zad 'dra ba kha yangs shing ther ther du yod pa'i bon po'i musical instrument	rnga gshang
རྔ་གསང	loud sound of drum[s] [Pha rol gnon par byed pa'i rnga gsang shugs cher sgrog pa]	rnga gsang
རྔ་གསངས	loud beat or roll of the kettle drum	rnga gsangs
རྔ་གསེབ	uncastrated camel	rnga gseb
རྔ་བསངས	loud beat or roll of the kettle drum	rnga bsangs
རྔད་མོ	[arch] dmod mo	rngad mo
རྔན	contempt, disdain	rngan
རྔན་གླ	tips and wages	rngan gla
རྔན་བགྲང	enumerating another's faults	rngan bgrang
རྔན་བགྲོངས	rang la rngan bgrongs Consider your own defects!	rngan bgrongs
རྔན་བསྒྲང་བ	mngan bgrang ba	rngan bsgrang ba
རྔན་ཅན	jeering, disdain	rngan can
རྔན་ཅན་བྱེད་པ	to scoff at, jeer, ridicule	rngan can byed pa
རྔན་ཆན	[arch] brnyas thabs	rngan chan
རྔན་ཆུང	tip	rngan chung
རྔན་ཆེན	jeering, disdain	rngan chen
རྔན་འཐེན	[arch] 1) not pay back wealth borrowed from others; 2) lazy	rngan 'then
རྔན་པ	1) (Tha dad pa brngan pa, brngan pa rngon,, give things in order to deceive *gyu nor gyis brngan pa]; 2) Bya dga' ma gsol ras [Khyod blon po rnams kyi rngan pa la, 'dod yon longs spyod gang dgos st...	rngan pa
རྔན་པ་གཏོང་བ	pay wages, bribe, corrupt	rngan pa gtong ba
རྔན་པ་བྱིན	rewarded [him]	rngan pa byin
རྔན་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	pay wages, bribe, corrupt	rngan pa sbyin pa
རྔན་འཕྱར	angry words	rngan 'phyar
རྔན་འཕྱར་བ	insult, defame	rngan 'phyar ba
རྔབ་རྔུབ	1) dbugs 'then pa; 2) tea etc. hub rgyag pa	rngab rngub
རྔབ་པ	be hungry, crave, desire earnestly, mow, SA rnga ba	rngab pa
རྔབ་ཚ་བ	oppressive	rngab tsha ba
རྔབ་ར	surgical instrument made of horn for drawing blood	rngab ra
རྔབ་རྭ	horn cauteries	rngab rwa
རྔབས་རབ༹	glang dmar po 'og can gyi right horn 'chos pa'i dpangs su sor lnga &, kha sor gsum can khrag rnag chu ser 'jib par byed pa'i dpyad kyi yo byad cig	rngabs rva
རྔམ	1) gleam, splendor; 2) great attachment	rngam
རྔམ་གློག	Awesome Lightning	rngam glog
རྔམ་རྒྱུག	running while twirling vigorously (in dance)	rngam rgyug
རྔམ་རྔམ	threateningly, with dazzling splendor	rngam rngam
རྔམ་རྔམ་འཛིག་རྫིག	frightening, scary rngam rngam 'dzig rdzig gi rngam ston frightening/ scary demonstration	rngam rngam 'dzig rdzig
རྔམ་རྔམ་རྫིག་རྫིག	'jigs nyams dang che nyams	rngam rngam rdzig rdzig
རྔམ་རྔམ་རྫིག་རྫིག་བྱེད་པ	anything tidy and very fine	rngam rngam rdzig rdzig byed pa
རྔམ་ཅན	avaricious, covetous, rageful	rngam can
རྔམ་ཆེ་བ	majestic, splendid, grand, spectacular	rngam che ba
རྔམ་འཇིགས	expression of wrath, splendor, sit in an angry mood	rngam 'jigs
རྔམ་བརྗིད	awesome splendor	rngam brjid
རྔམ་བརྗིད་ཆེ་བ	magnificent, grand	rngam brjid che ba
རྔམ་གཏུམ	fierceness	rngam gtum
རྔམ་སྟབས	drag po'i rnam 'gyur [Pha rol gyi rgol ngan tsang ma rngam stabs chen pos gtor pham gtong ba,...Pha rol zil gyis gnon pa'i rngam stabs ston pa]	rngam stabs
རྔམ་སྟོན	rally, demonstration	rngam ston
རྔམ་སྟོན་སྐད་འབོད་ཁྲོམ་སྐོར	stage a rally, demonstration rngam ston skad 'bod khrom skor byed rally, demonstration	rngam ston skad 'bod khrom skor
རྔམ་སྟོན་ཁྲོམ་སྐོར	rally, demonstration	rngam ston khrom skor
རྔམ་སྟོན་ཁྲོམ་སྐོར་བྱེད	stage a rally, demonstration	rngam ston khrom skor byed
རྔམ་སྟོན་བྱེད	stage a rally, demonstration	rngam ston byed
རྔམ་སྟོན་ཚོགས་ཆེན	political rally	rngam ston tshogs chen
རྔམ་པ	rage at, be furious, devastate, breathe violently, pant for, desire ardently, awesome, impressive	rngam pa
རྔམ་པ་ཕག་མགོ	a deity with the head of a wild boar	rngam pa phag mgo
རྔམ་པའི་ང་རོ	awesome roar	rngam pa'i nga ro
རྔམ་པའི་ཆ་བྱད	'jigs su rung ba'i chas [zlos gar 'khrab pa dang 'cham rgyag pa'i skabs su 'khrab bya'i mi sna'i 'jigs su rung ba'i cha lugs]	rngam pa'i cha byad
རྔམ་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱིས	ravenously devouring, ravenously	rngam pa'i tshul gyis
རྔམ་པོ་ཆེ	'jigs nyams chen po [Pha rol gyi rgol ba zil gyis non pa'i dmag gi dpung tsogs rngam po che bshams 'dug]	rngam po che
རྔམ་གཙིགས	threatening, baring the fangs	rngam gtsigs
རྔམ་གཙིགས་བསྡུ	make threatening expression, bare the fangs	rngam gtsigs bsdu
རྔམ་ཟིལ	{rngam brjid}	rngam zil
རྔམ་གཟིར	demonstration [political or otherwise]	rngam gzir
རྔམ་གཟིར་སྟོན	demonstrate, show [including political]	rngam gzir ston
རྔམ་ལོག	Ngamlok	rngam log
རྔམ་ཤུགས	might, power	rngam shugs
རྔམ་སེམས	ham sems [Gzhan gyi rgyu nor 'phrog 'dod kyi rngam sems byed pa]	rngam sems
རྔམ་སེམས་ཅན	greedy	rngam sems can
རྔམ་གསས	possession by a spirit, occupying of one's body by bod or spirit	rngam gsas
རྔམས	ferocious, height, depth, awesome	rngams
རྔམས་བཅུག་པ	allure	rngams bcug pa
རྔམས་ཆེ	very difficult, causing much hardship	rngams che
རྔམས་བརྗིད	gleaming, splendid	rngams brjid
རྔམས་བརྗིད་དུར་ཁྲོད་རོལ་པའི་ཆས	the awesome attire of a charnel ground dweller	rngams brjid dur khrod rol pa'i chas
རྔམས་མཐུག	thickness	rngams mthug
རྔམས་མཐོ་བ	high, tall, lofty	rngams mtho ba
རྔམས་པ	covetous, majestic	rngams pa
རྔམས་པའི་སེམས	covetousness	rngams pa'i sems
རྔམས་པོ་ཆེ	extremely serious	rngams po che
རྔམས་སུ	in height, in depth	rngams su
རྔའི་སྒྲ	sound of the drum	rnga'i sgra
རྔའི་བྱེ་བྲག་ཅིག	kind of drum	rnga'i bye brag cig
རྔལ་འདོན་པ	cause to sweat or perspire	rngal 'don pa
རྔས	pillow, bolster, SA sngas, type of	rngas
རེདདིཤ་ལོང	horned deer	reddish long
རྔས་བརྗིད	see {rngam brjid}	rngas brjid
རྔས་འབོལ	stuffed cushion, football	rngas 'bol
རྔུ	pain	rngu
རྔུ་ཆུ	perspiration, sweat	rngu chu
རྔུ་བ	dirt in the eyes	rngu ba
རྔུ་མ	rheum in the eye	rngu ma
རྔུགས	(not in DAS)	rngugs
རྔུབ	p. {brngubs} fut. {brngub} imp. {rngubs} to sucking, inhale, breath in	rngub
རྔུབ་དགང་གཞིལ་འཕེན	inhaling & holding & pressing & exhaling	rngub dgang gzhil 'phen
རྔུབ་གཏོང	inhale and exhale, snore	rngub gtong
རྔུབ་པ	draw, inhale, rapid inhale, fast inhalation, draw in, inhale, breathe in, rapid inhalation, SA rlung bsang brgyad	rngub pa
རྔུབ་པ་གཏོང	snore	rngub pa gtong
རྔུབ་དབུགས་པ	inhale, draw breath	rngub dbugs pa
རྔུབ་ར	brdabs 'grams rigs &, chu ser drawing out instrument	rngub ra
རྔུབས	inhale, SA rngub pa	rngubs
རྔུར	[arch] snore	rngur
རྔུར་བ་འཐེན	snore	rngur ba 'then
རྔུལ	perspiration, sweat; sweat	rngul
རྔུལ་ཁ	sweat	rngul kha
རྔུལ་ཁྲག	sweat and blood	rngul khrag
རྔུལ་ཁྲག་གྱི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	wages earned by sweat and blood/ hard work	rngul khrag gyi phogs thob
རྔུལ་གྱི་ཐིགས་པ	drops of sweat	rngul gyi thigs pa
རྔུལ་ཆུ	sweat, river in khams, sweat, perspiration	rngul chu
རྔུལ་ཆུ་ཁྲོམ་ཁྲོམ	covered w sweat/ perspiration	rngul chu khrom khrom
རྔུལ་ཆུ་ཐོན་པ	sweat, perspire	rngul chu thon pa
རྔུལ་ཆུའི་ཐིགས་པ་རྒྱག་གི་འདུག	perspire w drops of sweat	rngul chu'i thigs pa rgyag gi 'dug
རྔུལ་སྟོན	Ngultön, disciple of Kharak Gomchung	rngul ston
རྔུལ་དྲི	sweat stains	rngul dri
རྔུལ་མདའ	place at Derge	rngul mda'
རྔུལ་མདའི་ཆུ	river	rngul mda'i chu
རྔུལ་ནག	perspiration, sweat	rngul nag
རྔུལ་ནག་རྒྱག	sweat, perspire	rngul nag rgyag
རྔུལ་ནག་འདོན་པ	perspire	rngul nag 'don pa
རྔུལ་ནག་ཚད་སྐྱེས	sweat	rngul nag tshad skyes
རྔུལ་ཕྲལ	without	rngul phral
རྔུལ་བ	{rngul ba, rngul ba, rngul ba} intr. v	rngul ba
རྔུལ་དབྱུང	lus la gos dro bas byibs te drod khams kyi snyigs ma way of sweating	rngul dbyung
རྔུལ་འབྱིན	seats	rngul 'byin
རྔུལ་མ	sweat	rngul ma
རྔུལ་ཞམ་མེ་བ	body a little rngul ba'i rnam pa	rngul zham me ba
རྔུལ་གཟན	belonging to the armpit	rngul gzan
རྔུལ་གཟན་གྱི་གཟན	upper garment for absorbing sweat	rngul gzan gyi gzan
རྔུལ་ལེན	underclothes, undershirt, underwear	rngul len
རྔེ་ཅན	[arch] brkam chags can	rnge can
རྔེ་ཆེན	[arch] rnge can	rnge chen
རྔེ་འུ	1) small drum; 2) baby camel	rnge 'u
རྔེགས	{rngegs [clan, place]	rngegs
རྔེད་མོ	[arch] dmod mo	rnged mo
རྔེན་ཅན	[arch] having desire/ passion	rngen can
རྔེའུ	a baby camel	rnge'u
རྔེའུ་ཆུང	small drum	rnge'u chung
རྔོ	1) leprosy ? D, mange, scabies, ringworm etc skin diseases; 2) stir, fry, scramble, fry, roast, parch	rngo
རྔོ་ག	the hunch, hump	rngo ga
རྔོ་རྒོལ	revolt	rngo rgol
རྔོ་རྒོལ་བྱེད་པ	result, resist, oppose, be against	rngo rgol byed pa
རྔོ་རྒྱག	get skin diseases like mange, scabies, ringworm [chi lists it as animal disease]	rngo rgyag
རྔོ་རྔོ་སྲེག་སྲེག	fry	rngo rngo sreg sreg
རྔོ་རྔོ་སྲེག་སྲེག་གི་ཁ་ལག	fried food	rngo rngo sreg sreg gi kha lag
རྔོ་ཐོག་པ	be capable	rngo thog pa
རྔོ་ཐོག་མི་ཐོག	incapable, not able	rngo thog mi thog
རྔོ་ཐོགས	be able/ capable [of]	rngo thogs
རྔོ་ཐོགས་པ	vi. to be able, be capable [of]	rngo thogs pa
རྔོ་ཐོགས་ལགས	sir I can do it	rngo thogs lags
རྔོ་ནད	rngo [animal] disease	rngo nad
རྔོ་ནད་ཟ་ཕྲུག	rngo [animal] disease itching	rngo nad za phrug
རྔོ་ནད་ཟ་ཕྲུག་ཅན	[1] w rngo [animal] disease itching	rngo nad za phrug can
རྔོ་པག	[arch] desire, passion	rngo pag
རྔོ་བ	be able	rngo ba
རྔོ་བག་ཅན	disease of the skin with painful itching, SA rngam bag can	rngo bag can
རྔོ་མ་ཐོག	unable	rngo ma thog
རྔོ་མི་ཐོགས	not able, not competent, incapable	rngo mi thogs
རྔོ་མི་ཐོགས་པ	1) bringing no benefit; 2) w/o [power to	rngo mi thogs pa
རྔོ་བཟོ	sew and make things of leather and skin	rngo bzo
རྔོ་བཟོ་བ	sew and make things of leather and skin	rngo bzo ba
རྔོ་ཡས	#	rngo yas
རྔོ་ལེན་པ	to roast, fry	rngo len pa
རྔོ་ཤུ	* [1] w rngo [animal] disease itching	rngo shu
རྔོག	mane	rngog
རྔོག་དཀར	white mane	rngog dkar
རྔོག་ཅན	having a mane	rngog can
རྔོག་ཆགས	beast w mane	rngog chags
རྔོག་ཆོས་སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ	{rngog chos sku rdo rje [mar pa'i slob ma ka chen bzhi'i nang gses, gzhung bshad chu bo'i rgyun lta bu'i bka' bab yin, khong rab byung dang po'i me byi lor 'khrungs, rab byung gnyis pa'i chu stag l...	rngog chos sku rdo rje
རྔོག་ཆོས་རྡོར	1 of ka can bzhi	rngog chos rdor
རྔོག་སྟན་གྲུམ་རྩེ	kind of bdan	rngog stan grum rtse
རྔོག་སྟན་གྲུམ་ཟེ	rngog stan grum rtse	rngog stan grum ze
རྔོག་སྟེན	gdan grum ze	rngog sten
རྔོག་སྟོན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Ngogtön Chökyi Dorje (1036-1106)	rngog ston chos kyi rdo rje
རྔོག་ལྡན	having a mane	rngog ldan
རྔོག་པ	{rngog pa [disciple of Marpa]	rngog pa
རྔོག་བློ་ལྡན་ཤེས་རབ	{rngog blo ldan shes rab	rngog blo ldan shes rab
རྔོག་མ	mane	rngog ma
རྔོག་མ་ཅན	horse	rngog ma can
རྔོག་ལུགས	the system of {rngog lo tsA ba blo ldan shes rab}	rngog lugs
རྔོག་ལེགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	{rngog lo tsA ba legs pa'i shes rab}	rngog legs pa'i shes rab
རྔོག་ལོ	Translator of Ngog, Ngog Lotsawa, {rngog lo tsA ba legs pa'i shes rab}	rngog lo
རྔོག་ལོ་ཆེན་པོ	great Translator of Ngog master of SautrantikaMadhyamika	rngog lo chen po
ཨོཕ༹་སཽཏྲནཏིཀ	madhyamika]	of sautrantika
རྔོག་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་བློ་ལྡན་ཤེས་རབ	10591109 [ggd]	rngog lo tsA ba blo ldan shes rab
རྔོག་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་ལེགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	b. 1059? - Ngok Lotsawa, Lekpey Sherab, Atisha's translator and disciple	rngog lo tsA ba legs pa'i shes rab
རྔོག་ལོ་ཡབ་སྲས	Ngok Lotsawa and his disciples	rngog lo yab sras
རྔོག་ཤད	horse/ mule gyi ze rngog la 'phur shad rgya pa *ta drel gnyis phan tsun mjing pa bsnol te sos rngog shad rgyag res byed,...Lcags shad khyer te rta drel la rngog shad rgyag pa]	rngog shad
རྔོགས་ཆགས	beast that has a mane	rngogs chags
རྔོགས་ཆགས་དུད་འགྲོ་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	the lord of maned beasts	rngogs chags dud 'gro kyi bdag po
རྔོད	'drid pa'am deceive, beguile	rngod
རྔོད་སྟེགས	yos roasting platform/grill	rngod stegs
རྔོད་འཐག་ཨུ་ལག	serfs for the masters grain rngod 'thag byed dgos pa'i service obligation	rngod 'thag u lag
རྔོད་པ	to parch, to roast, to fry; {rngod pa, brngos pa, brngod pa, rngos} trans. v.; alt. {rngod pa, brngod pa, brngod pa, rngod}	rngod pa
རྔོད་པའི་སྐད	sizzle	rngod pa'i skad
རྔོད་པའི་གཞི	vegetable frying, grain parching etc pan	rngod pa'i gzhi
རྔོད་རྫ	clay vessel for roasting yos /zas	rngod rdza
རྔོད་སླང	yos dang zas roasting place's sla nga	rngod slang
རྔོན	1) rngon pa!; 2) [the] hunt; 3) heist, loot	rngon
རྔོན་ཆ	payment gifts 726	rngon cha
རྔོན་དོར	trousers worn by preliminary performer in Tibetan opera	rngon dor
རྔོན་པ	hunt, pursue, fish, huntsman, hunter, hunter	rngon pa
རྔོན་པ་མོ	hunting woman, huntress	rngon pa mo
རྔོན་པའི་ཁྱི	hound, hunter's dog	rngon pa'i khyi
རྔོན་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	x {rang la rngon pa'i 'du shes} as though they themselves the hunters	rngon pa'i 'du shes
རྔོན་པའི་རྣམ་ཐར	Tibetan opera * song by the preliminary performer = rngon pa	rngon pa'i rnam thar
རྔོན་པའི་བྱ་འགྲོས	Tibetan opera [lha mo'i zlos gar 'khrab pa] by the preliminary performer = rngon pa, 'gying stabs su rtse ba'i bya 'gros	rngon pa'i bya 'gros
རྔོན་པའི་འབག	Tibetan opera [lha mo 'khrab] mask	rngon pa'i 'bag
རྔོན་པའི་ས་འདུལ	Tibetan opera [lha mo'i zlos gar 'khrab pa] by the preliminary performer = rngon pa 'khrab yul gyi faults and transgressions eliminating earth taming ritual	rngon pa'i sa 'dul
རྔོན་པས་འདོན་རྒྱག་པ	in Tibetan opera [lha mo 'khrab] preliminary performer = rngon pa w mda' dar te lus stabs 'gying nyams kyis 'don rgyag pa	rngon pas 'don rgyag pa
རྔོན་པས་གསོད	killed by the hunter; x {rna ba sgra la chags pas ri dvags rngon pas gsod} the stag is killed by the hunter, because its hearing draws it to sounds	rngon pas gsod
རྔོན་རྫས	game animals	rngon rdzas
རྔོབ་པ	to be able	rngob pa
རྔོམ	Syn {rngam}	rngom
རྔོམ་བརྗིད	sit in an angry mood, splendor, magnificence, splendor, stateliness, majesty	rngom brjid
རྔོམ་པ	rngam pa present	rngom pa
རྔོམ་པོ	brilliant	rngom po
རྔོམ་བག	1) terrifying; 2) [arch] desire, passion	rngom bag
རྔོམ་བག་ཅན	grand, majestic, terrible	rngom bag can
རྔོལ་བོན	earliest stage of bon religion, SA yung drung	rngol bon
རྔོས	imp. of {rngo ba}; imp. of {rnga ba}; imp. of {rngod pa}	rngos
རྔོས་ཁྱེར	die from skin diseases	rngos khyer
ལྔ་ཀ	all the five, each of the five	lnga ka
ལྔ་སྐྱེད	way of repaying money	lnga skyed
ལྔ་སྐྱེས	man	lnga skyes
ལྔ་ཁྲི	fifty thousand	lnga khri
ལྔ་ག	all the five, each of the five	lnga ga
ལྔ་འགྱུར	become five	lnga 'gyur
ལྔ་བརྒྱ	500, 500	lnga brgya
ལྔ་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུ	550	lnga brgya lnga bcu
ལྔ་བརྒྱ་ཐ་མ	the last 500 years	lnga brgya tha ma
ལྔ་བརྒྱ་དུས་ཀྱི་ཐམ	period of the last 500 years	lnga brgya dus kyi tham
ལྔ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ	5,000	lnga brgya phrag bcu
ལྔ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་གསུམ	1500 (years)	lnga brgya phrag gsum
ལྔ་བརྒྱའི་གཁོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	w a retinue of five hundred	lnga brgya'i gkhor dang ldan pa
ལྔ་བརྒྱའི་འཁོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	with a following of 500	lnga brgya'i 'khor dang ldan pa
ལྔ་ལྔན་གྱི་ཁྲིད	tri of the five aspects	lnga lngan gyi khrid
ལྔ་ལྔས་བརྒྱན་པ	each decorated w five	lnga lngas brgyan pa
ལྔ་ཅན	fives	lnga can
ལྔ་ཅར	all five together	lnga car
ལྔ་གཅིག	May Day, International Labor Day lnga gcig rgyal spyi'i ngal rtsol dus chen May Day, International Labor Day	lnga gcig
ལྔ་བཅུ	fifty	lnga bcu
ལྔ་བཅུ་ང་གཅིག་པ	fifty-first	lnga bcu nga gcig pa
ལྔ་བཅུ་ཙམ	about 50	lnga bcu tsam
ལྔ་བཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	51	lnga bcu rtsa gcig
ལྔ་ཆ	1/5, 20%	lnga cha
ལྔ་ཆ་གཉིས	2/5, 40%	lnga cha gnyis
ལྔ་ཆ་བཞི	four fifths	lnga cha bzhi
ལྔ་མཆོད	10th month 25th day Tsongkhapa's death day puja	lnga mchod
ལྔ་སྟོང	five thousand, 5,000	lnga stong
ལྔ་སྟོན	fifth festive ceremony generally observed	lnga ston
ལྔ་ཐམ	buddhist monk who does not possess any knowledge of the ritual and contemplative practice of buddhism	lnga tham
ལྔ་དྲུག་འགྲོ	agricultural loan w six measures of grain paid back for five borrowed	lnga drug 'gro
ལྔ་བདོ	5 degenerations (poisons)	lnga bdo
ལྔ་བདོའི་དུས	the time of the spread of the five [denigrating corruptions]	lnga bdo'i dus
ལྔ་ལྡན	1) khag lnga in 1 basis; 2) 1 of the [Glu dbyangs nges pa bdun]; 3) having the five practices; 4) the five aspects; 5) {lnga ldan} city in Khotan (li yul	lnga ldan
ལྔ་ལྡན་ཁྲིད	the Fivefold Mahamudra [of Gyalwa Drigungpa]	lnga ldan khrid
ལྔ་ལྡན་འཇའ་ཟེར་ཐིག་ལེ	bindu w 5colored rainbow light rays	lnga ldan 'ja' zer thig le
ལྔ་ལྡན་འཇུག་པ	beings who have the five colors and perform the three actions; the beings of this dimension have the five elements and only perform the three actions of moving, hovering and flying	lnga ldan 'jug pa
ལྔ་ལྡན་འཇུག་པ་གསུམ	in sgra thal 'gyur	lnga ldan 'jug pa gsum
ལྔ་ལྡན་སྙིང་པོ་འོད་ཀྱི་ལུས	light body of the five essences, rainbow body	lnga ldan snying po 'od kyi lus
ལྔ་སྡེ	{lnga sde bzang po}	lnga sde
ལྔ་སྡེ་བཟང་པོ	Five Excellent Disciples, the first disciples of Buddha Shakyamuni	lnga sde bzang po
ལྔ་བསྡུས	the collection of five	lnga bsdus
ལྔ་པ	a district in Tibet, fifth	lnga pa
ལྔ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Fifth Dalai Lama	lnga pa chen po
ལྔ་པ་ཉིད	the fifth state, death	lnga pa nyid
ལྔ་པའི་དུས	death	lnga pa'i dus
ལྔ་པའི་དོན	the five sciences	lnga pa'i don
ལྔ་པའི་བདག	lord of death	lnga pa'i bdag
ལྔ་པའི་དབྱངས	call of the cuckoo	lnga pa'i dbyangs
ལྔ་པའི་དབྱངས་སྙན	a singing bird	lnga pa'i dbyangs snyan
ལྔ་པའི་ཚེས་ལྔ་ལི་དུས་ཆེན	dragon boat festival	lnga pa'i tshes lnga li dus chen
ལྔ་པའི་ལམ	the way to the fifth state, the way to death	lnga pa'i lam
ལྔ་པར་གྱུར་པ	to be the fifth	lnga par gyur pa
ལྔ་པར་ཕྱིན་པ	death	lnga par phyin pa
ལྔ་པོ	five the five just mentioned	lnga po
ལྔ་ཕུང	the five skandhas	lnga phung
ལྔ་ཕྲུགས	having five limbs each	lnga phrugs
ལྔ་ཕྲུགས་རེ	having five limbs each	lnga phrugs re
ལྔ་བ	flash of lightning	lnga ba
ལྔ་འབུམ	five hundred thousand	lnga 'bum
ལྔ་འབྲེལ	connected together in groups of five	lnga 'brel
ལྔ་རྩེན	game played with five dice, yaksha who is custodian of wealth, one of eight generals of vaisravana	lnga rtsen
ལྔ་ཚན	five sets	lnga tshan
ལྔ་ཚན་ལྔའི་རྫད	five groups of five substances	lnga tshan lnga'i rdzad
ལྔ་ཚན་ལྔའི་རྫས	five groups of five substances	lnga tshan lnga'i rdzas
ལྔ་ཚན་འི་རྫད	five groups of five substance, five substances made of five ingredients	lnga tshan 'i rdzad
ལྔ་ཚིགས	the third watch of night or day, a son of prasenajit, the five joints of the five limbs	lnga tshigs
ལྔ་གཚན་ལྔའི་རྫས	the five groups of five substances	lnga gtshan lnga'i rdzas
ལྔ་བཞི་གཞོན་ནུའི་དུས་ཆེན	May 4, youth day	lnga bzhi gzhon nu'i dus chen
ལྔ་བཞི་ལས་འགུལ	May four movement	lnga bzhi las 'gul
ལྔ་རིག	one who is versed in the five sciences, learned man, scholar	lnga rig
ལྔ་རིག་པ	one having knowledge of the five sciences [fully educated]	lnga rig pa
ལྔ་རིགས་འཆང་བ	hold knowledge of the five sciences	lnga rigs 'chang ba
ལྔ་རེ	fives	lnga re
ལྔ་ལམ	death	lnga lam
ལྔ་ལེན	ancient name of province n.w. part of india, one of 36 sacred buddhist places, five times, be born, assumption of the five aggregates	lnga len
ལྔ་ལོར	sngar five srang paper $	lnga lor
ལྔགས	(not in DAS)	lngags
ལྔགས་སྡེ་གསུམ	CHN	lngags sde gsum
ལྔགས་པ	to suck	lngags pa
ལྔར	in fives	lngar
ལྔར་དབྱེ་བ	divided in five	lngar dbye ba
ལྔས	by five	lngas
ལྔས་རྩེན	1) N lcang lo can buddha field; 2) a yaksha	lngas rtsen
ལྔི	(not in DAS)	lngi
ལྔུམ	not in DAS	lngum
ལྔེ	(not in DAS)	lnge
སྔ	early; adj. comp. of {snga po} before, soon, early	snga
སྔ་རྐང	snga rkang	snga rkang
སྔ་རྐང་ཕྱི་རྐང	earlier and later steps	snga rkang phyi rkang
སྔ་སྐྲག་ཕྱི་སྐྲག	[in beginning/ undertaking an action] produce terror, excessive fear/ anxiety, be always afraid	snga skrag phyi skrag
སྔ་མཁོ	early	snga mkho
སྔ་མཁོ་བཞིན	according as was wanted before, heretofore	snga mkho bzhin
སྔ་གུང	morning and noon	snga gung
སྔ་གོང	previously, before, in the past	snga gong
སྔ་གོང་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	stories of former times	snga gong gi lo rgyus
སྔ་གོང་ནས	previously	snga gong nas
སྔ་གོང་ཡབ	your late father	snga gong yab
སྔ་གོམ་སོར་གནས	old fashioned	snga gom sor gnas
སྔ་གྲོས	anticipate	snga gros
སྔ་གློ	saddle's cinch	snga glo
སྔ་དགོང	morning and evening/ night	snga dgong
སྔ་དགོངས	morning and evening	snga dgongs
སྔ་དགྲ	former enemy	snga dgra
སྔ་མགོ	pillow	snga mgo
སྔ་འགྱུར	Early Translations. The teachings translated before the great translator Rinchen Sangpo, during the reigns of the Tibetan kings Trisong Deutsen and Ralpachen. A synonym for the Old School, the Nyin...	snga 'gyur
སྔ་འགྱུར་ལྔ	the five earliest translations (of Dzogchen Mind Section)	snga 'gyur lnga
སྔ་འགྱུར་ཆེ་བ་དྲུག	Six great qualities. The sixfold greatness of the Early Translations: The sponsor who invited, the place of translation, the translators, the panditas, the offering gifts, and the translated teachings	snga 'gyur che ba drug
སྔ་འགྱུར་རྙིང་མ	Early Translation School, Ngagyur Nyingma 728	snga 'gyur rnying ma
སྔ་འགྱུར་བསྟན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	the Chariot of the Teachings of the Early Translations snga 'gyur theg dgu'i tshogs bshad mdor	snga 'gyur bstan pa'i shing rta
བསྡུས་ནོར་བུའི་ཏམ་བུ་ར	Concise Explanation of the Nine Vehicles, The Jewel Lute, by Shechen Gyaltsab Pema Namgyal snga 'gyur theg pa rim dgu'i rnam gzhag mdor bsdus su brjod pa rin po che'i	bsdus nor bu'i tam bu ra
ཐེམ་སྐས	Concise Exposition of the Nine Vehicles, The Jewel Ladder, by Shechen Gyaltsab Pema Namgyal	them skas
སྔ་འགྱུར་ནང་པ	early translation inner [tantras], maha, anu, and ati	snga 'gyur nang pa
སྔ་འགྱུར་པན་གྲུབ	pandit-siddha attire of the early translation school	snga 'gyur pan grub
སྔ་འགྱུར་པན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཆས	the panditas-siddha attire of the early translation school	snga 'gyur pan grub kyi chas
སྔ་འགྱུར་གསང་སྔགས	the earlier translated tantras, the teachings of the earlier translations, Early Translation School	snga 'gyur gsang sngags
སྔ་འགྱུར་བསང་སྔགས	the earlier translated tantras, the teachings of the earlier translations, early mantra translation school	snga 'gyur bsang sngags
སྔ་འགྱོད་ཕྱི་སྡོམ	repentance, reform, change of heart	snga 'gyod phyi sdom
སྔ་འགྱོད་ཕྱི་སྡོམ་བྱེད	repent, reform, have a change of heart	snga 'gyod phyi sdom byed
སྔ་འགྱོད་ཕྱིས་འདོམས	repentance, reform, change of heart	snga 'gyod phyis 'doms
སྔ་འགྱོད་ཕྱིས་འདོམས་བྱེད	repent, reform, have a change of heart	snga 'gyod phyis 'doms byed
སྔ་འགྲས་ཕྱི་འཁོན	'khon 'gras new and old	snga 'gras phyi 'khon
སྔ་རྒོལ	opponent/ defendant (in debate); holder of initial position to be refuted	snga rgol
སྔ་རྒོལ་དང་ཕྱི་རྒོལ	Syn {snga phyi rgol}	snga rgol dang phyi rgol
སྔ་རྒོལ་ཚར་གཅད་པའི་གནས	the point that defeats the opponent	snga rgol tshar gcad pa'i gnas
སྔ་རྒོལ་ལ་ལྟོས་ཏེ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not established from the viewpoint of the questioner/ challenger	snga rgol la ltos te ma grub pa
སྔ་རྒྱག	premature	snga rgyag
སྔ་རྒྱག་བྱེད	do prematurely	snga rgyag byed
སྔ་བསྒྱུར	Early Translations. See {snga 'gyur}	snga bsgyur
སྔ་སྔ	very early	snga snga
སྔ་སྔོ	vegetables, greens	snga sngo
སྔ་ཆ	early part of the day, morning	snga cha
སྔ་ཆ་འགགས	earlier phase has ceased to be	snga cha 'gags
སྔ་ཆད	Syn {sngon chad}	snga chad
སྔ་ཆབ	water passed around before a religious meeting	snga chab
སྔ་ཆས	implements/ clothes of former times	snga chas
སྔ་ཆོས	earlier date, indistinctness	snga chos
སྔ་མཇལ་མྱོང་བ	had met before	snga mjal myong ba
སྔ་རྗེས	at different times, one after the other	snga rjes
སྔ་རྗེས་ཀྱིས་ཕེབས	left 1 after the other	snga rjes kyis phebs
སྔ་རྗེས་མ་གཏོགས	sooner or later, eventually	snga rjes ma gtogs
སྔ་རྗེས་ཟེར་ཀྱང	though it was said many times	snga rjes zer kyang
སྔ་རྗེས་སུ	at different times, one after the other snga rjes su mi tshang ma shi gi red sooner or later all people will die	snga rjes su
སྔ་ཉིན	the previous day, the day before	snga nyin
སྔ་ཏོག	early crop, first fruit of the harvest	snga tog
སྔ་བཏབ	early sowing/ planting	snga btab
སྔ་རྟིང	earlier and later, steps/ stages, in order, 1 after another	snga rting
སྔ་རྟིང་གིས་འགྲོ	go 1 after another	snga rting gis 'gro
སྔ་རྟིང་དུ	earlier or later, not at the same time	snga rting du
སྔ་རྟིང་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	three successive steps	snga rting rim pa gsum
སྔ་རྟིང་ལོག་པ	wrong/ out of order, reversed order	snga rting log pa
སྔ་ལྟས	foreshadowing/ premonition; forewarnings, presage; early sign, omen; an omen	snga ltas
སྔ་སྟིང་རིམ	earlier and later, steps/ stages, in order, 1 after another	snga sting rim
སྔ་སྟིང་ཤོར	miss a sequence/ time, have ban timing, fail to coincide/ synchronize w	snga sting shor
སྔ་བལྟས་ཕྱི་བལྟས	look/ see earlier and later/ before and behind *, taking past and future into account	snga bltas phyi bltas
སྔ་ཐག་ཕྱི་ཐག་རྒྱག་པ	having tied up by the rope ends mi snga phyi gnyis kyis 'jus [held by the first and last] te lead animals/ people	snga thag phyi thag rgyag pa
སྔ་ཐུན	early morning session [5 to 8 am]	snga thun
སྔ་ཐོག	in the morning, early, in the beginning, at the start	snga thog
སྔ་ཐོག་སྡོད	staying for the time being	snga thog sdod
སྔ་ཐོག་ནས	in advance, beforehand snga thog slob sbyong byas na rig pa gsal - if you study from the start, your understanding will be clear	snga thog nas
སྔ་ཐོགས་ནས་སྒྲ་སྒྲིགས་བྱས་ཟིན	[they] made [their] arrangements/ preparations in advance	snga thogs nas sgra sgrigs byas zin
སྔ་མཐུན་ཕྱི་འདྲེན	carry on ancient/ ancestral traditions	snga mthun phyi 'dren
སྔ་དར	the earlier spreading of the Dharma; Early Spread, early propagation, the first spread, first propagation	snga dar
སྔ་དུས	antiquity, ancient	snga dus
སྔ་དྲགས	[too] early	snga drags
སྔ་དྲོ	morning, a.m.; morning, forenoon, in the morning; 8-10am/ morning/ breakfast	snga dro
སྔ་དྲོ་ཆུ་ཚོད་བཅུ་པ	10 AM 729	snga dro chu tshod bcu pa
སྔ་དྲོ་ཆུ་ཚོད་བཅུ་པ་ཐོག	at 10 AM	snga dro chu tshod bcu pa thog
སྔ་དྲོ་བདེ་ལེགས	good morning	snga dro bde legs
སྔ་དྲོ་ཕྱི་གྲོ	morning and evening	snga dro phyi gro
སྔ་དྲོ་ཕྱི་དྲོ	{snga dro phyi dro gnyis kyi snga dro} this morning rather than tonight	snga dro phyi dro
སྔ་དྲོའི	[of the] morning	snga dro'i
སྔ་དྲོའི་ཆ	morning time	snga dro'i cha
སྔ་དྲོའི་ཆོས་ཁྲིད	morning teaching	snga dro'i chos khrid
སྔ་དྲོའི་ཇ	morning tea	snga dro'i ja
སྔ་དྲོའི་ཐུན	morning session	snga dro'i thun
སྔ་འདོན	advance	snga 'don
སྔ་འདོན་གཏོང	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don gtong
སྔ་འདོན་གཏོང་བ	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don gtong ba
སྔ་འདོན་དུ་གཏོང	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don du gtong
སྔ་འདོན་དུ་གཏོང་བ	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don du gtong ba
སྔ་འདོན་དུ་སྤྲོད	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don du sprod
སྔ་འདོན་དུ་སྤྲོད་པ	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don du sprod pa
སྔ་འདོན་སྤྲོད	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don sprod
སྔ་འདོན་སྤྲོད་པ	make a prepayment/ advance/ down payment	snga 'don sprod pa
སྔ་འདྲེས་གཅིག་གིས་ཉེར་མ་སོང	not the slightest bit (closer to . . . )	snga 'dres gcig gis nyer ma song
སྔ་ན	before, previously	snga na
སྔ་ན་མ་གྲགས	not known before/ in the past	snga na ma grags
སྔ་ན་མ་བྱས	never done before	snga na ma byas
སྔ་ན་མེད་པ	previously nonexistent	snga na med pa
སྔ་ན་མེད་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bde ba 'thob pa'i rgyu sngar byas pa med pa de las 'bras bu sdug bsngal bskyed pa ston pa'i rgyu'i rgyan zhig	snga na med pa'i byed rgyu
སྔ་ན་མེད་ཕྱིར	because it did not exist before	snga na med phyir
སྔ་ནས་ཡོད	always exists	snga nas yod
སྔ་ནས་ཡོད་པ	already there / present	snga nas yod pa
སྔ་ནུབ	eve	snga nub
སྔ་ནུབ་མཚན་མོ	the night before [Gold: last	snga nub mtshan mo
སྔ་རྣམས	those in front	snga rnams
སྔ་སྣུར	* ahead of schedule, advance [payment], short term loan	snga snur
སྔ་སྣུར་བྱེད	give an advance/ short term loan	snga snur byed
སྔ་བསྣུར	* ahead of schedule, advance [payment], short term loan	snga bsnur
སྔ་བསྣུར་བྱེད	give an advance/ short term loan	snga bsnur byed
སྔ་པ	be the first, to come first, to be beforehand, ancient, dawn	snga pa
སྔ་པོ	early, former, in advance	snga po
སྔ་པོ་སྒྲ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	prepare/ arrange in advance	snga po sgra sgrig byed
སྔ་པོ་སྔ་པོ	very early	snga po snga po
སྔ་པོ་ལངས	get up early	snga po langs
སྔ་དཔེ	precedent	snga dpe
སྔ་ཕྱི	1) before and after, early and late, past and future, former later, pastfuture, previous and next. 2) time. 3) time and time again. Syn {dus tshog snga ba dang phyi ba}	snga phyi
སྔ་ཕྱི་ཀུན་ཏུ	from beginning to end, throughout, all the time	snga phyi kun tu
སྔ་ཕྱི་ཀུན་ཏུ་གཉའ་གནོན	oppress all the time	snga phyi kun tu gnya' gnon
སྔ་ཕྱི་གོ་རིམ	order	snga phyi go rim
སྔ་ཕྱི་རྒོལ	{snga rgol and phyi rgol}, questioner and respondent in formal debate	snga phyi rgol
སྔ་ཕྱི་གཅིག་ཆར་པ	simultaneous earlier and later [points of time]	snga phyi gcig char pa
སྔ་ཕྱི་བར་གསུམ	earlier, later and in between	snga phyi bar gsum
སྔ་ཕྱི་བར་གསུམ་དུ	all the time	snga phyi bar gsum du
སྔ་ཕྱི་མེད	w/o sequence, simultaneous, from beginning to end, throughout, all the time	snga phyi med
སྔ་ཕྱི་མེད་པ	atemporal	snga phyi med pa
སྔ་ཕྱི་རིམ་ཅན	[something] having earlier and later stages	snga phyi rim can
སྔ་ཕྱི་རིམ་ཅན་པ	sequential, successive, consecutive, serial	snga phyi rim can pa
སྔ་ཕྱི་རིམ་པ	stage by stage	snga phyi rim pa
སྔ་ཕྱི་ལ་མ་བལྟོས་པར	sooner or later, regardless of when snga phyi la ma bltos par byed dgos sooner or later it must be done	snga phyi la ma bltos par
སྔ་ཕྱི་ལ་མ་བསྟོད་པར	sooner or later, regardless of when snga phyi la ma bstod par byed dgos sooner or later it must be done	snga phyi la ma bstod par
སྔ་ཕྱི་སོ་སོ་ཐ་དད་པའི་སྐད་གཅིག	an instant in which the earlier and later points and separate	snga phyi so so tha dad pa'i skad gcig
སྔ་ཕྱི་གསུམ་མཐོང	astr in calculating tshes chad lhag, by 1 solar day [nyin zhag], tshes zhag ril po gcig and the previous and following days are seen together 'grogs na tshes zhag gcig po = chad &, de las ldog ste ...	snga phyi gsum mthong
སྔ་ཕྱིའམ	anterior, posterior	snga phyi'am
སྔ་ཕྱིའི་རྒོལ་བ	see {snga rgol, phyi rgol}	snga phyi'i rgol ba
སྔ་ཕྱིའི་རྟོག་པ	succession of thoughts	snga phyi'i rtog pa
སྔ་ཕྱིའི་གནས་སྐབས	consecutive situations	snga phyi'i gnas skabs
སྔ་ཕྱིའི་ཤེས་པ	the former and following cognition	snga phyi'i shes pa
སྔ་ཕྱིའི་སྲིད་པ	earlier and later lives/ existences	snga phyi'i srid pa
སྔ་ཕྲོས	early work, first work, the earlier position of a work	snga phros
སྔ་འཕྲོ	remainder from before	snga 'phro
སྔ་འཕྲོས	re zhig, gnas skabs temporarily for a while/ the time being	snga 'phros
སྔ་འཕྲོས་སྡོད་མཁན	[someone] staying for a while	snga 'phros sdod mkhan
སྔ་བ	ancient dawn, very early in the morning	snga ba
སྔ་བར	earlier	snga bar
སྔ་བར་སྒྲོག	early crower, cock	snga bar sgrog
སྔ་བར་འཆོས་པ	previously contrived	snga bar 'chos pa
སྔ་བར་ཕྱི་གསུམ	earlier, later, and in between, all the time	snga bar phyi gsum
སྔ་བར་ལང	get up earlier	snga bar lang
སྔ་བོ	early	snga bo
སྔ་བྱེད	premature	snga byed
སྔ་འབྱོར་ཕྱི་ལོག	gtan khel gyi dus kyi sngon la 'byor zhing phyi tsam du log pa 730	snga 'byor phyi log
སྔ་མ	former, first-named, earlier one, anterior in time or place, first, foremost in a series	snga ma
སྔ་མ་འགགས	the former thought has ceased	snga ma 'gags
སྔ་མ་སྔ་མ	long before	snga ma snga ma
སྔ་མ་སྔ་མས	the previous stages	snga ma snga mas
སྔ་མ་གཉིས	the first two cases in a list	snga ma gnyis
སྔ་མ་ལྟར	like the previous / before	snga ma ltar
སྔ་མ་དང་འདྲ་བ	like before / the former, like the previous	snga ma dang 'dra ba
སྔ་མ་ནས་རྟོགས	premeditated, SA sngar rtogs	snga ma nas rtogs
སྔ་མ་ཕྱི་མ	{lo snga ma phyi ma gnyis kyi snga ma} this year rather than next	snga ma phyi ma
སྔ་མ་ཕྱི་མ་ཁྱད་མེད	no difference between the former and the following	snga ma phyi ma khyad med
སྔ་མ་མ	each former	snga ma ma
སྔ་མ་མ་ཉན	this is not working, the past is useless	snga ma ma nyan
སྔ་མ་བཞིན	as the one gone before, as the earlier one, the same as above, what was written above applies	snga ma bzhin
སྔ་མ་ལས་ཕྱི་མ་སྐྱེ་བ	from the previous, the following arises snga ma las phyi mar gyur ba'i tshe ngo	snga ma las phyi ma skye ba
བོ་མི་འགྱུར་བ་བཅུ	CHN	bo mi 'gyur ba bcu
སྔ་མ་ལས་མང་བ	more than before	snga ma las mang ba
སྔ་མ་ལས་ཡག་པ	better than before	snga ma las yag pa
སྔ་མ་བཤིན་དུ	as before/ in the past/ in former times	snga ma bshin du
སྔ་མ་སྲིད་གཞུང	the former government	snga ma srid gzhung
སྔ་མ་སྲིད་གཞུང་རྙིང་པ	the old former government	snga ma srid gzhung rnying pa
སྔ་མ་སྲིད་གཞུང་རྙིང་པའི་སྐབས	in the time of the former government	snga ma srid gzhung rnying pa'i skabs
སྔ་མའི	former	snga ma'i
སྔ་མའི་ངང་དུ	as before, in the previous condition	snga ma'i ngang du
སྔ་མའི་སྔ་མ	very early time, the earliest	snga ma'i snga ma
སྔ་མའི་རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ	make an example of previous cases or treat things the same way, do as usual for such cases	snga ma'i rjes su dpag pa
སྔ་མའི་དུས	in early times	snga ma'i dus
སྔ་མའི་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་དབང་གིས	due to the power of former habitual tendencies	snga ma'i bag chags kyi dbang gis
སྔ་མའི་ཚུལ	former conduct	snga ma'i tshul
སྔ་མའི་ལམ་ལུགས་སྲོལ	the old or former customs	snga ma'i lam lugs srol
སྔ་མའི་ལས	previous karma	snga ma'i las
སྔ་མའི་སྲོལ	former custom or usage	snga ma'i srol
སྔ་མས་བསྡུས་པ	comprising the former [state]	snga mas bsdus pa
སྔ་མིང	former name/ title	snga ming
སྔ་མིན	quick growing/ early ripening crops	snga min
སྔ་མོ	past, in the past, formerly, before; ancient, past times, previously, formerly	snga mo
སྔ་མོ་སྔ་མོ	long long ago	snga mo snga mo
སྔ་མོ་རྗེས་ཤུལ	relics/ ruins	snga mo rjes shul
སྔ་མོ་ནས	always, all along, long before, from former time	snga mo nas
སྔ་སྨིན	early ripening	snga smin
སྔ་སྨིན་འབྲས	early ripening paddy	snga smin 'bras
སྔ་ཙམ	early, before it is too late	snga tsam
སྔ་ཚར	1) child of former spouse; 2) first/ earlier arising student	snga tshar
སྔ་ཚིག་ཕྱི་འགལ	later words contradicting earlier ones	snga tshig phyi 'gal
སྔ་ཞོག་ཇ	morning tea	snga zhog ja
སྔ་ཞོགས	early morning	snga zhogs
སྔ་ཟ	[arch] earlier time, ancient, previously, breakfast	snga za
སྔ་རབས	ancient [times], former/ earlier generations/ lineage holders	snga rabs
སྔ་རབས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེས་དངོས་མཁས་པ	paleontologist	snga rabs kyi skyes dngos mkhas pa
སྔ་རབས་ཀྱི་མི	forefathers	snga rabs kyi mi
སྔ་རབས་པ	those of ancient times/ former generations, forefathers	snga rabs pa
སྔ་རབས་ཕྱི་འབྱུང	former and later times/ generations	snga rabs phyi 'byung
སྔ་རུ	before, SA sngar	snga ru
སྔ་རོལ	earlier, preceding, before, prior to	snga rol
སྔ་རོལ་གྱི་དུས	earlier time[s]	snga rol gyi dus
སྔ་རོལ་དུ	before, in time past, gone before, prior to	snga rol du
སྔ་ལགས	a return visit or entertainment	snga lags
སྔ་ལངས་ཕྱི་ཉལ	early rising and late to bed, working long hours	snga langs phyi nyal
སྔ་ལངས་ཕྱི་ཉལ་བྱེད	rise early and go late to bed, work long hours	snga langs phyi nyal byed
སྔ་ལམ	early tradition	snga lam
སྔ་ལུས	former structure/ organization/ body	snga lus
སྔ་ལོ	last year	snga lo
སྔ་ལོག་སུ་གྲུབ	nascent	snga log su grub
སྔ་ལོགས	previous time, before, prior to	snga logs
སྔ་ལོགས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	prior arising	snga logs su byung ba
སྔ་ཤ	front of a saddle	snga sha
སྔ་ཤས	very early	snga shas
སྔ་ཤུགས་འདྲེན་པ	accenting of the first syllable	snga shugs 'dren pa
སྔ་ཤུལ	historical ruins/ relics/ site	snga shul
སྔ་ཤོས	earliest	snga shos
སྔ་ས	ancient, previously	snga sa
སྔ་ས་ད་གནས	exist as before	snga sa da gnas
སྔ་ས་ནས	all along	snga sa nas
སྔ་ས་ནས་གྲ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	prepare in advance	snga sa nas gra sgrig byed
སྔ་ས་སྣ་གནས	exist/ remain as before	snga sa sna gnas
སྔ་ས་སྣ་གནས་ཡོང	will be as before	snga sa sna gnas yong
སྔ་སོ	1) in front of; 2) previous time	snga so
སྔ་སོར	1) previously; 2) as before	snga sor
སྔ་སོར་ཆུད	restore rebuild	snga sor chud
སྔ་སོར་ཆུད་ཐབས་བྱེད	try to restore/ rebuild	snga sor chud thabs byed
སྔ་སྲོལ	earlier/ ancient tradition/ way/ style, old fashioned, traditional, usual way	snga srol
སྔ་སྲོལ་ལྟར	according to ancient tradition, the old fashioned way, as usual	snga srol ltar
སྔ་གས་ཕྲེང	mantra chain	snga gsa phreng
སྔ་གསར་གསར	very early	snga gsar gsar
སྔ་བསླབས་ཕྱི་འདོམས	learning from past experience	snga bslabs phyi 'doms
སྔ་ཧར	a kind of tea	snga har
སྔག	be sad	sngag
སྔག་པ	praise, commend, extol, recommend	sngag pa
སྔགས	mantra [glossed as yid skyob pa=manas traya="that which guards the mind"]	sngags
སྔགས་ཀྱི	Mantric. Of or pertaining to Vajrayana	sngags kyi
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	mantra body	sngags kyi sku
སྔགས་ཀྱི་བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས	the development and completion stages of the Mantrayana	sngags kyi bskyed rdzogs
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	four distinctive features of Secret Mantra: unobscured in the area of skillful means {thabs kyi cha la ma rmongs pa} manifold means {thabs mang ba}, without difficulty {dka' ba med pa} and for thos...	sngags kyi khyad par bzhi
སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	the tantras of Secret Mantra	sngags kyi rgyud
སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ	tantric scriptures	sngags kyi rgyud sde
སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འོག་མ	Lower tantras of Mantra. The three sections of tantra: Kriya, Charya, and yoga	sngags kyi rgyud sde 'og ma
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་ཆེན	the roar of mantra	sngags kyi sgra chen
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་ཐོས་པ	hearing the sound of mantra	sngags kyi sgra thos pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ངེས་ཚིག	mantra, definition of; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 198]	sngags kyi nges tshig
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	identity of mantra. [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2,	sngags kyi ngo bo
སྤིརིཏུཨལ་ལིཕེ༹	force. The mantras are taught to be consonants that are the identity of the great bliss of means, and the vowels that are the identity of the knowledge of emptiness. [DILGO KHYENTSE]	spiritual life
སྔགས་ཀྱི་མངོན་བྱང་ལྔ	the fivefold abhisambodhi of Vajrayana; see {mngon byang lnga}	sngags kyi mngon byang lnga
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཆེ་བ་བཞི	the fourfold greatness of Vajrayana	sngags kyi che ba bzhi
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	tantric essence	sngags kyi snying po
སྔགས་ཀྱི་བསྙེན་པ	the mantra recitation	sngags kyi bsnyen pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of Mantrayana	sngags kyi bstan pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་བཙུགས	established the teachings of the mantras	sngags kyi bstan pa btsugs
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	mantrayana, the mantra vehicle	sngags kyi theg pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ཁྱེད་པར་འཕགས	the mantra vehicle is sublime	sngags kyi theg pa khyed par 'phags
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་དྲུག	six vehicles of Mantra	sngags kyi theg pa drug
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞི	the four tantra sections of the mantra vehicle: 1) {bya rgyud}; 2) {sbyod rgyud} 3) {rnal 'byor rgyud} 4) {rnal 'byor bla na med pa'i rgyud}	sngags kyi theg pa'i rgyud sde bzhi
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེགས	Mantra vehicle	sngags kyi thegs
སྔགས་ཀྱི་དག་བྱེད	clarified butter	sngags kyi dag byed
སྔགས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of mantra. The five aspects of Mantra: The thatness of deity is the relative bodhichitta. The thatness of self is the body mandala. The thatness of guhyamantra is the placement of the seed...	sngags kyi de kho na nyid
སེཨེད	syllable.	seed
སྔགས་ཀྱི་འདུལ་བ	Vinaya of Mantra; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 46]	sngags kyi 'dul ba
སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན	the tantric vajra master; a vajra master of Secret Mantra	sngags kyi rdo rje slob dpon
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	Division of Mantra	sngags kyi sde
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	Tantric vows, mantra samvara. Set of twenty-two prohibitions that anyone receiving an empowerment of Yoga tantra or Anuttara yoga tantra must undertake to observe	sngags kyi sdom pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས་བཞི	the four occasions of mantra [gnyid sad pa'i gnas skabs dang, rmi lam gyi gnas skabs dang, gnyid 'thug gi gnas skabs dang, bzhi pa'i gnas skabs bcas bzhi]	sngags kyi gnas skabs bzhi
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྤང་སྐོང	Amendment of Breaches of Secret Mantra sngags kyi spyi don tshangs dbyangs 'brug	sngags kyi spang skong
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	tantric behavior	sngags kyi spyod pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	Mantra mahamudra	sngags kyi phyag chen
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང	mantra garland	sngags kyi phreng
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	mantra garland	sngags kyi phreng ba
སྔགས་ཀྱི་དབང་བཞི་པ	Fourth empowerment of Mantra. Also called the 'precious word empowerment' (tshig dbang rin po che), the purpose of which is to point out the nature of mind	sngags kyi dbang bzhi pa
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོད་པ་གསུམ	CHN	sngags kyi sbyod pa gsum
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཚིག	mantric words	sngags kyi tshig
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ	1) in the form of mantras. 2) type of mantra / recitation	sngags kyi tshul
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་བདུན	CHN	sngags kyi tshul bdun
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཟབ་ལམ	the profound path of Mantra	sngags kyi zab lam
སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཟུངས	force of mantra	sngags kyi gzungs
སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཟེར་ཁ	the rays of the mantra 732	sngags kyi gzer kha
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	five aspects of mantra	sngags kyi yan lag lnga
ཨོཕ༹་གུཧྱ	mantra is the placement of	of guhya
ཐེ་སེཨེད	syllable and the mantra-chain in the center of the heart. The thatness of recitation is the repetition of the root mantra, essence mantra and quintessence mantra. The thatness of emanation and abso...	the seed
སྔགས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	five stages of Vajrayana	sngags kyi rim pa lnga
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལམ	the path of mantra, mantrayana	sngags kyi lam
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	the five stages of the path of Mantra	sngags kyi lam rim pa lnga
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལུགས	the mantric tradition	sngags kyi lugs
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ས་ལམ	the tantric system on the ten stages (dashabhumi) and five paths (pancamarga)	sngags kyi sa lam
སྔགས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	a tantric master	sngags kyi slob dpon
སྔགས་ཀྱི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	Tantric Mending and Purification	sngags kyi gso sbyong
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	tantric deities	sngags kyi lha
སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལྷག་ཆད་ཁ་བསྐང	amend omissions and additions during the mantra recitation	sngags kyi lhag chad kha bskang
སྔགས་ཀྱིས་བསྔོས	dedicated / consecrated by mantra	sngags kyis bsngos
སྔགས་ཀྱིས་བཏབ་པ	blessed / consecrated by mantra	sngags kyis btab pa
སྔགས་ཀྱིས་འདེབས་པ	pronounce a charm against a person or thing	sngags kyis 'debs pa
སྔགས་ཀྱེ་གཐེག་པ	the mantra vehicle	sngags kye gtheg pa
སྔགས་ཀྱེ་དཔེ་ཆ	tantric texts	sngags kye dpe cha
སྔགས་སྐད	sound of reciting mantras	sngags skad
སྔགས་སྐོང	consummate guardian mantra (1991)	sngags skong
སྔགས་སྐྱེས	enchanted growth, born out of charms	sngags skyes
སྔགས་སྐྲག	sudden fear	sngags skrag
སྔགས་འཁོར	mantra circle/ wheel	sngags 'khor
སྔགས་གྲྭ	1) tantra college; 2) mantra student, tantrika monk	sngags grwa
སྔགས་བགྲང་བ	to count mantras	sngags bgrang ba
སྔགས་མགོ	the heads of the letters	sngags mgo
སྔགས་རྒན	elder yogi	sngags rgan
སྔགས་རྒྱ	mantra and mudra	sngags rgya
སྔགས་རྒྱབ	to blow mantras on (something); [SNT used it to describe how Brahma breathed life into the goddess named thig le mchog ma.] [mss]	sngags rgyab
སྔགས་རྒྱུད	1) mantra lineage; 2) a tantra [text]	sngags rgyud
སྔགས་རྒྱུད་སྦྱོར་བ་ཤེས་པ	wellversed in the activities related to mantra and tantra	sngags rgyud sbyor ba shes pa
སྔགས་སྒོམ	train in mantra recitation	sngags sgom
སྔགས་སྒྲ	mantra sound	sngags sgra
སྔགས་སྒྲུབ་ན་ར་མ	Continuous Mantra Practice. Text composed by Padmasambhava on Mahayoga sadhana	sngags sgrub na ra ma
སྔགས་སྒྲུབ་པ	recite mantras	sngags sgrub pa
སྔགས་བརྒྱུད	the transmission of Secret Mantra	sngags brgyud
སྔགས་བསྒྲུབ་པ	accomplished [the power of] mantra	sngags bsgrub pa
སྔགས་ཆང	blessed wine	sngags chang
སྔགས་ཆུ	mantra recitation te phu btab pa'i chu [like a waterfall? you pour water when you do it?? it falls on = blesses the water?]	sngags chu
སྔགས་ཆེན་དམ་ཆོས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	Gelug master	sngags chen dam chos dpal 'byor
སྔགས་འཆང	* mantra-adept [gd] mantra dharin, mantra-holder/ yogi, practitioner/ master	sngags 'chang
སྔགས་འཆང་ཀུན་དགའ་བཀྲ་ཤིས	(16561711) alias {ngag dbang kun dga' bkra shis} 1656-1711 sngags 'chang chen mo kun dga' rin chen	sngags 'chang kun dga' bkra shis
རྣམ་ཐར	srid pa gsum gyi bla ma dpal sa skya pa chen po sngags 'chang ngag gi dbang po kun dga' rin chen gyi rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar rgya	rnam thar
མཚོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	written by {ngag dbang kun dga' bsod nams grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po}	mtsho zhes bya ba
སྔགས་འཆང་སྡོམ་པ	his ordination was that of a mantrika, tantric practitioner	sngags 'chang sdom pa
སྔགས་འཆང་པོ	tantric adept	sngags 'chang po
སྔགས་འཆང་བ	to carry dharani charms about one's self	sngags 'chang ba
སྔགས་འཆང་ཤ་ཀྱ་བཟང་པོ	16th cent. - Sakya Zangpo, Ngakchang, one who rediscovered the text of the History of the Great Stupa of Jarung Khashor (Boudhanath), and restored the stupa itself	sngags 'chang sha kya bzang po
སྔགས་གཉིས	CHN	sngags gnyis
སྔགས་རྙིང་མ	Old School of Secret Mantra; ancient tantra; Old Tantras; the Old Tantras	sngags rnying ma
སྔགས་ཏེ་བསུ་པ	[arch] ched du bsngo ba	sngags te bsu pa
སྔགས་བཏབ་པ	to cast a spell / curse	sngags btab pa
སྔགས་བཏུ་ཆོ་ག	practice yi dam's gyi root mantra and others	sngags btu cho ga
སྔགས་བཏུ་བ	extracts of mantra	sngags btu ba
སྔགས་ཐིག	mantra drop	sngags thig
སྔགས་ཐུན་མོང	common Mantrayana	sngags thun mong
སྔགས་དང་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	mantra and samadhi	sngags dang ting nge 'dzin
སྔགས་དང་མཚན་ཉིད	Mantra and Philosophy. Mantra is synonymous with Secret Mantra or Vajrayana while Philosophy refers to the 'causal vehicles of philosophy:' Hinayana and Mahayana	sngags dang mtshan nyid
སྔགས་དོན	mantra meaning/ interpretation	sngags don
སྔགས་དྲུག	six mantras	sngags drug
སྔགས་དྲུག་ཕྱག་དྲུག་གི་རྒྱུད	the Tantra of Six Mantras and Six Mudras	sngags drug phyag drug gi rgyud
སྔགས་འདེབས	to chant a mantra	sngags 'debs
སྔགས་འདོན་པ	utter lamentation	sngags 'don pa
སྔགས་སྡེ་གསུམ	the three classes of mantra [gsang sngags dang, rig sngags, gzungs sngags te gsum]	sngags sde gsum
སྔགས་སྡོམ	Mantrayana vows	sngags sdom
སྔགས་ནང་པ	the Inner Tantras, Higher Tantras	sngags nang pa
སྔགས་ནང་པ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆེན་པོ	Mahayoga of the inner tantras sngags nang pa la zhugs pa'i gyod zlog reverse regret for entering mantrayana	sngags nang pa rnal 'byor chen po
སྔགས་ནང་པ་གསུམ	Mahayoga, Anu Yoga, Ati Yoga	sngags nang pa gsum
སྔགས་པ	Mantrika, practitioner of tantra * exorcist, weatherman [applied]	sngags pa
སྔགས་པ་གྲ་ཚང	{sngags pa gra tshang tantric college at Sera	sngags pa gra tshang
སྔགས་པ་གྲྭ་ཚང	the tantric college [at Sera]	sngags pa grwa tshang
སྔགས་པ་གརབ༹་ཚང	tantra college	sngags pa grva tshang
སྔགས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འཇོམས	Tantrika Dorje Dudjom. See Dorje Dudjom	sngags pa rdo rje bdud 'joms
སྔགས་པ་བཙུན	tantric priest / monk	sngags pa btsun
སྔགས་པ་མཛད་པ	to be / act as a tantrika	sngags pa mdzad pa
སྔགས་པ་གཞོན་ནུ	young sorcerer	sngags pa gzhon nu
སྔགས་སྤེལ་བ	recite mantras	sngags spel ba
སྔགས་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཁྱད་པར་ལྔ	five distinctions between the outer and inner mantras [according to dropukpa they are the distinctions of view {lta ba} the mode of acquiring ? accomplishment {dngos grub len pa} empowerment {dbang...	sngags phyi nang gi khyad par lnga
སྔགས་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	Ten categories of the outer and inner mantra [as stated in wayman and lessing, mkhas grub rje's fundamentals of the buddhist tantras, pp 272-273, the outer ten are the mandala, contemplation, seal,...	sngags phyi nang gi de nyid bcu
སྔགས་ཕྱི་པ་གསུམ	the three outer sections of secret mantra	sngags phyi pa gsum
སྔགས་ཕྱོགས	mantra series	sngags phyogs
སྔགས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the tantric seven branches	sngags phyogs kyi yan lag bdun
སྔགས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ	the 7 phyogs of mantra	sngags phyogs kyi yan lag bdun pa
སྔགས་ཕྲེང	rosary of mantra, mantra garlands, mantra chain	sngags phreng
སྔགས་བན	tantric monk	sngags ban
སྔགས་བོན	Bönpo Mantrayana	sngags bon
སྔགས་བོན་པ	[arch] recite mantra	sngags bon pa
སྔགས་བྱང	mantra list/ manual	sngags byang
སྔགས་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	Unexcelled Mantra	sngags bla na med pa
སྔགས་བླ་མེད	Unexcelled Mantra	sngags bla med
སྔགས་འབུམ	collection of mantras	sngags 'bum
སྔགས་འབུམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གོ་ཁྲབ	Adamantine Armor, mantras for protection and for repelling obstacles, revealed by Dorje Lingpa	sngags 'bum rdo rje go khrab
སྔགས་མར	blessed butter	sngags mar
སྔགས་དམིགས	visualization while reciting mantra	sngags dmigs
སྔགས་རྨས་པ	doctor of mysticism	sngags rmas pa
སྔགས་བཙུན	tantric priest[s]	sngags btsun
སྔགས་བཙུན་མར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པ་ཅན	ointment for wounds and sores	sngags btsun mar gyi rgyal pa can
སྔགས་ཚང	{sngags grva}	sngags tshang
སྔགས་ཚིག	tantric words, mantra syllables	sngags tshig
སྔགས་འཛིན་པ	carry dharani charms about one's self	sngags 'dzin pa
སྔགས་གཞུང	main scriptures of Vajrayana	sngags gzhung
སྔགས་ཟོར	sorcery	sngags zor
སྔགས་བཟལ	[p sngags bzla]	sngags bzal
སྔགས་བཟླ	to recite mantras	sngags bzla
སྔགས་བཟླ་བ	recitation of mantra	sngags bzla ba
སྔགས་བཟླ་བའི་དམིགས་པ	visualization for reciting the mantra	sngags bzla ba'i dmigs pa
སྔགས་བཟླས	recited mantras	sngags bzlas
སྔགས་བཟླས་པ	recite mantras, recite charms	sngags bzlas pa
སྔགས་ཡིག	mantra syllables	sngags yig
སྔགས་རམས་པ	doctor in mysticism	sngags rams pa
སྔགས་རིགས	Brahman	sngags rigs
སྔགས་རིམ་ཆེན་མོ	great exposition of the stages of mantras	sngags rim chen mo
སྔགས་ལམ	mantra approach	sngags lam
སྔགས་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	the five stages of the path of mantrayana	sngags lam gyi rim pa lnga
སྔགས་ལས་འཕྲོས་པའི་འོད་ཟེར	light rays emanating from the mantra	sngags las 'phros pa'i 'od zer
སྔགས་ལུགས	tradition of mantrayana 734	sngags lugs
སྔགས་བཤད	explaining the Secret Mantra	sngags bshad
སྔགས་སུ་ཞུགས་པ	entered / embraced Vajrayana	sngags su zhugs pa
སྔགས་སྲུང	Vajrayana guardian	sngags srung
སྔགས་སྲུང་ཁྲོས་མའི་རྒྱུད	the Tantra of the Wrathful Protectoress of Mantra; the 18th of the Dzogchen tantras	sngags srung khros ma'i rgyud
སྔགས་སྲུང་མ	Ekajati	sngags srung ma
སྔགས་སྲུང་སྨུག་མཐིང	Dark Blue Guardian of Mantra	sngags srung smug mthing
སྔགས་སྲུང་ཡེ་ཀ་ཛ་ཏིའ	Ekajati, Guardian of Mantrayana	sngags srung ye ka dza ti'
སྔགས་སྲུང་རལ་གཅིག་མ	the SingleBraided Lady, the protectoress of Secret Mantra	sngags srung ral gcig ma
སྔགས་གསར་མ	New Schools of Secret Mantra	sngags gsar ma
སྔགས་གསུམ	three kinds of mantras	sngags gsum
སྔགས་གསོ	Ngakso; sngags kyi gso	sngags gso
སྦྱོང	Tantric Mending and Purification	sbyong
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བདུད་རྩིའི་རོལ་མཚོ	arranged by mchog gyur gling pa, gter ston, 1829-1870. ritual for expiation	gso sbyong bdud rtsi'i rol mtsho
སྔང་བ	sky-like appearances	sngang ba
སྔངས	fear, terror	sngangs
སྔངས་སྐྲག	panic	sngangs skrag
སྔངས་པ	to be terrified	sngangs pa
སྔངས་བྱེད	very fearful, terrific, panicstricken	sngangs byed
སྔངས་མ་སྔངས	to be shocked / terrified, to panic	sngangs ma sngangs
སྔངས་མ་སྔས	be shocked/terrified, panic	sngangs ma sngas
སྔན	formerly, previously, before[hand]	sngan
སྔན་ཆད་མེད་པ	unprecedented	sngan chad med pa
སྔན་དུ	before	sngan du
སྔན་བུ	medicinal herb	sngan bu
སྔབས་པ	[arch] [be] wrathful, angry, furious, enraged	sngabs pa
སྔའ་བསྒྱུར	Ancient translations	snga' bsgyur
སྔའ་འབྲས	early rice	snga' 'bras
སྔར	ancient	sngar
སྔར་སྐྱེས	an elder brother	sngar skyes
སྔར་སྐྱེས་པ	past generations	sngar skyes pa
སྔར་ཁུངས	belonging to the past	sngar khungs
སྔར་ཁུངས་སུ་ཕྱིར་ལོག	to be demobilized - belonging to the past	sngar khungs su phyir log
སྔར་ཁྱན་ལྟར	as usual, in the ordinary course, as formerly	sngar khyan ltar
སྔར་ཁྲིམས	early laws, previous punishment or conviction	sngar khrims
སྔར་འཁོན་ཞེ་འཛིན	'khon 'gras kyi gting nad dam du 'dzin pa	sngar 'khon zhe 'dzin
སྔར་འཁོན་ཞེ་བཞག	'khon 'gras kyi gting nad dam du 'dzin pa	sngar 'khon zhe bzhag
སྔར་འཁྱུད	[arch] 1) previous tradition; 2) previous time[s]	sngar 'khyud
སྔར་འཁྱུར	former custom or usage	sngar 'khyur
སྔར་གང་ཡིན་པ་དེ་ལྟར་དུ་གནས་པ	exist as before	sngar gang yin pa de ltar du gnas pa
སྔར་གི	previous	sngar gi
སྔར་གོམས་པ	previously trained	sngar goms pa
སྔར་གྱི་སྒྲིག་གསོལ	have or avail of a former arrangement or system	sngar gyi sgrig gsol
སྔར་གྱི་རྣམ་སྨིན་ཕུང་པོ	the body, the ripening of former [karmic actions]	sngar gyi rnam smin phung po
སྔར་གྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	old society	sngar gyi spyi tshogs
སྔར་གྱི་བས	than, before	sngar gyi bas
སྔར་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ	former resolution	sngar gyi smon lam
སྔར་གྱི་རྩོད་པ	old quarrels and feuds	sngar gyi rtsod pa
སྔར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	writings of antiquity	sngar gyi yi ge
སྔར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ་སྙིང་པ་རྣམས	old or early records	sngar gyi yi ge snying pa rnams
སྔར་གྱི་ལུས་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	the body seems to resemble one's previous body	sngar gyi lus ltar snang ba
སྔར་གྱི་ལུས་མེད་པར	instead of the former shape	sngar gyi lus med par
སྔར་དགུན་དུས	formerly in winter	sngar dgun dus
སྔར་འགྱུར	Early Translations, usually {snga 'gyur}	sngar 'gyur
སྔར་འགྲོ་མ་མྱོང་བའི་ཡུལ	the unknown land	sngar 'gro ma myong ba'i yul
སྔར་རྒོལ	the proponent, protagonist	sngar rgol
སྔར་རྒྱས	early diffusion, earlier propagation (4th-10th cents.)	sngar rgyas
སྔར་རྒྱུན	customarily, traditionally	sngar rgyun
སྔར་རྒྱུན་ལྟར	as customarily/ traditionally/ usual, like before	sngar rgyun ltar
སྔར་རྒྱུན་ལྟར་འགྱུར	be restored, go back to normal/ what it was before	sngar rgyun ltar 'gyur
སྔར་སྔ་མོ	from ancient times	sngar snga mo
སྔར་བཅོལ	past favors	sngar bcol
སྔར་ཆད	formerly, in the past, preceding	sngar chad
སྔར་འཇགས	given, as before	sngar 'jags
སྔར་འཇགས་འཇོག	leave as before	sngar 'jags 'jog
སྔར་རྗེས་ཅན	one who follows or acts according to precedents	sngar rjes can
སྔར་རྗེས་བཅད་པ	examine the past / don [untrans? meaning? fact[s]?	sngar rjes bcad pa
སྔར་ཉེས	previous fault	sngar nyes
སྔར་རྟོགས	premeditated, thought of before, anything done after much consideration	sngar rtogs
སྔར་ལྟར	like before, as before	sngar ltar
སྔར་ལྟར་འགྱུར	be restored, go back to normal/ what it was before	sngar ltar 'gyur
སྔར་བསྟན་པ	previously taught/ shown	sngar bstan pa
སྔར་འཐམས་པ	[arch] formerly, in the past	sngar 'thams pa
སྔར་འཐུང	anything that is to be drunk first, an early drink	sngar 'thung
སྔར་དང་འདྲ	as before	sngar dang 'dra
སྔར་དང་འདྲ་བ	as before	sngar dang 'dra ba
སྔར་དར	first missionary period (4th10th cents.)	sngar dar
སྔར་དྲངས	formerly invited	sngar drangs
སྔར་དྲངས་པ་ལྟར	As we have quoted before:	sngar drangs pa ltar
སྔར་འདས	those who died before	sngar 'das
སྔར་འདྲིས	known previously	sngar 'dris
སྔར་འདྲིས་ཀྱི	with which he was familiar, previously, formerly	sngar 'dris kyi
སྔར་འདྲིས་ཀྱི་མི་འཕྲད་པ	meet as old friends	sngar 'dris kyi mi 'phrad pa
སྔར་འདྲིས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	a knowledge met with previously	sngar 'dris kyi ye shes
སྔར་འདྲིས་གྲོགས་པོ	old friends	sngar 'dris grogs po
སྔར་སྡང་བ	old grudge, former hatred	sngar sdang ba
སྔར་ན་མ་གྲགས	unprecedented, unheard of, never happened before	sngar na ma grags
སྔར་ནས	previously	sngar nas
སྔར་ནས་བཟུང	always, all along	sngar nas bzung
སྔར་ནས་ཡོད་པའི་མི	aborigines	sngar nas yod pa'i mi
སྔར་གནས་སོར་བཞག	former rank/ position etc sogs rang sor bzhag pa [stay as it is?]	sngar gnas sor bzhag
སྔར་གནོད	aggression, doing mischief without provocation	sngar gnod
སྔར་ཕན	previous, recent, until recently	sngar phan
སྔར་ཕན་ཆད	previous, recent, until recently	sngar phan chad
སྔར་ཕྲོས	early part/ section	sngar phros
སྔར་བ	former, first mentioned	sngar ba
སྔར་བས	more than ever/ before	sngar bas
སྔར་བས་ཀྱང	[better] than before	sngar bas kyang
སྔར་བས་ཀྱང་ཆེ་བ	[even] greater than before	sngar bas kyang che ba
སྔར་བས་ཀྱང་མང་བ	[even] more than before	sngar bas kyang mang ba
སྔར་བས་ཆེ་བ	greater than before	sngar bas che ba
སྔར་བས་མང་བ	more than before	sngar bas mang ba
སྔར་བྱས	past deeds/ actions	sngar byas
སྔར་བྱས་ཀྱི་ལས	[karma of] past deeds/ actions	sngar byas kyi las
སྔར་བྱས་ཀྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	[hi]story of past deeds/ actions	sngar byas kyi lo rgyus
སྔར་བྱས་པ་བཞིན	according to what has been said before	sngar byas pa bzhin
སྔར་བྱས་ལ་བརྩད་གཅོད་མ་མེད	no punishment for past actions [PRC slogan]	sngar byas la brtsad gcod ma med
སྔར་བྱུང	previous, past	sngar byung
སྔར་བྱུང་གོང་མ་རྣམས	the past emperors	sngar byung gong ma rnams
སྔར་བྱུང་ཕྱི་ལྟ	think about previous occurrences	sngar byung phyi lta
སྔར་བྱུང་མ་མྱོང་བ	never heard of before, unprecedented	sngar byung ma myong ba
སྔར་བྱུང་མ་མྱོང་བའི་ལོ་ལེགས	unprecedented good harvest/ yield sngar 'byung khams kyi zag med sdom pa - former undefiling vows which occurred in their [previous] realm	sngar byung ma myong ba'i lo legs
སྔར་མ	sharp, intelligent, quick of apprehension	sngar ma
སྔར་མ་གྲགས་པ	Syn {sngar byung ma myong ba}	sngar ma grags pa
སྔར་མ་བྱས་པ	what was not done before	sngar ma byas pa
སྔར་མུས	previous ---, * as before	sngar mus
སྔར་མུས་བཞིན	as before	sngar mus bzhin
སྔར་མེད	never seen before, unprecedented	sngar med
སྔར་མེད་རྗེས་སུའང་མི་མཐོང་བ	existing only at this moment	sngar med rjes su'ang mi mthong ba
སྔར་མེད་རྙེད	gaining or acquiring what one was without before	sngar med rnyed
སྔར་མེད་པ	unprecedented, unique	sngar med pa
སྔར་མེད་གསར་སྒྲིགས	something not existing before newly made * innovation	sngar med gsar sgrigs
སྔར་མེད་གསར་སྒྲོགས	innovation, new introduction	sngar med gsar sgrogs
སྔར་མེད་གསར་སྤྲོས	something not existing before newly made * innovation	sngar med gsar spros
སྔར་མེད་གསར་བྱུང	what did not exist before but has been introduced	sngar med gsar byung
སྔར་སྨོས་པ་ལྟར	above-mentioned	sngar smos pa ltar
སྔར་ཚིམ	early satisfaction, previous contentment	sngar tshim
སྔར་བཞིན	as before.	sngar bzhin
སྔར་བཞིན་སྐྱེས	restored {gzhon nu'i rkang lag thams cad sngar bzhin skyes nas} the youth's limbs were restored	sngar bzhin skyes
སྔར་བཞིན་ནོ	just as above	sngar bzhin no
སྔར་ཡོད	existed [in the past], formerly	sngar yod
སྔར་ཡོད་མ་མྱོང་བ	unprecedented sngar yod sa gnas sdod chog gi yod pa	sngar yod ma myong ba
མ་རེད	are not allowed in the places where they lived before	ma red
སྔར་ཡོད་སར་སྐྱེལ	send back to the former address	sngar yod sar skyel
སྔར་ཡོད་སར་སྐྱེལ་བ	return	sngar yod sar skyel ba
སྔར་ལམ	previous/ old tradition/ ways	sngar lam
སྔར་ལམ་ལྟར	according to previous/ old tradition/ ways,	sngar lam ltar
སྔར་ལམ་ལས་ལྷག	better/ more than before	sngar lam las lhag
སྔར་ལས	more, even more, still more, than before, than in the past	sngar las
སྔར་ལས་ཀྱང	than, before	sngar las kyang
སྔར་ལས་ཀྱིས་བསྐོས་ཐང	destiny, fate [by earlier karma]	sngar las kyis bskos thang
སྔར་ལས་མང	more than before	sngar las mang
སྔར་ལས་མང་བ	more than before	sngar las mang ba
སྔར་ལས་ལྷག་པ	better than before	sngar las lhag pa
སྔར་ལུགས་སྦུག་འདྲེན	continue w/ resume former transgressions	sngar lugs sbug 'dren
སྔར་ལོ	last year	sngar lo
སྔར་ལོངས	get up first, one who has risen first or early	sngar longs
སྔར་བཤགས་གསར་བཅོས	repentance, change of heart, reform	sngar bshags gsar bcos
སྔར་བཤད་པ	discussed earlier	sngar bshad pa
སྔར་བཤད་པ་ལྟར	as explained earlier	sngar bshad pa ltar
སྔར་བཤད་ཟིན་པ	as has already been explained	sngar bshad zin pa
སྔར་ས་ད་འཇགས	now remaining in its former place	sngar sa da 'jags
སྔར་སོང	as it was before, past, elapsed	sngar song
སྔར་སོང་སྔ་མོ	before, previously, in the past 736	sngar song snga mo
སྔར་སོང་ད་འགྲོ	as it was before now too	sngar song da 'gro
སྔར་སྲོལ	previous tradition/ custom/ convention	sngar srol
སྔར་སྲོལ་ལྟར་བྱེད	act according to previous tradition/ custom/ convention	sngar srol ltar byed
སྔར་སྲོལ་ལད་རྐྱེན	be a condition of harm for/obstacle to former tradition	sngar srol lad rkyen
སྔར་བསགས་པའི་ལས	previously accumulated karma	sngar bsags pa'i las
སྔར་ལྷག	more than before	sngar lhag
སྔས	a bolster, pillow, cushion, too early; pillow, cushion; a pillow	sngas
སྔས་ཁྲི	contrivance to serve the purpose of a pillow	sngas khri
སྔས་མགོ	pillow	sngas mgo
སྔས་འགོ	pillow	sngas 'go
སྔས་རྒྱས	Buddhas	sngas rgyas
སྔས་སྟན	pillow	sngas stan
སྔས་པ	SA snga pa	sngas pa
སྔས་འབོལ	pillow	sngas 'bol
སྔས་སྦྲེལ	sharing the pillow	sngas sbrel
སྔས་མལ	couch of pillows	sngas mal
སྔས་རམས་པ	master's degree holder	sngas rams pa
སྔས་ལ་སྙེས	reclined your head on the pillow	sngas la snyes
སྔས་སུ	beside your bed	sngas su
སྔུན	[arch] in front of	sngun
སྔུན་མ	[arch] 1) former time[s], formerly; 2) previous, before, in the past, preceding; 3) 1st	sngun ma
སྔུན་བསུ	mdun gyi sne 'dren	sngun bsu
སྔུར་སྒྲ	sound of snoring	sngur sgra
སྔུར་སྒྲ་འབྲུག་ལྟར་སྒྲོག	snore like thunder	sngur sgra 'brug ltar sgrog
སྔུར་པ	snoring	sngur pa
སྔུར་པ་རྒྱག	snore	sngur pa rgyag
སྔུར་བ	to snore	sngur ba
སྔེ	end of a rope	snge
སྔེའུ	kind of pulse or peas growing in	snge'u
སྔོ	1) sprout; 2) plant, herb, vegetable, greens; 3) plant grass; 4) blue, green [comp {sngon po}; 5) [arch] faultless; 6) p bsngos,, dedicate, dedication	sngo
སྔོ་དཀར	light blue/ [green]	sngo dkar
སྔོ་སྐྱ	light blue	sngo skya
སྔོ་སྐྱེན	early growth	sngo skyen
སྔོ་ཁུ	phyur khu ste dar ba bskol te phyur ba bton pa'i khu ba	sngo khu
སྔོ་ཁོག	bluish, complexion blue or pale from old age	sngo khog
སྔོ་ཁྲ	painting on a blue body in variegated colors	sngo khra
སྔོ་ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག	sngo bun bun dang phyogs 'dra ba [Rgyang nas bltas pas chu sngo khrig khrig cig mthong byung, Lung pa'i gyas gyon tshang ma na bun sngo khrig khrig cig gis gang 'dug]	sngo khrig khrig
སྔོ་སྒ	1) sngo sga field med; 2) Sga skya [either a field med or saddle w/o cushion on top]	sngo sga
སྔོ་སྒོག	sgog pa [herb ljang pa [sprouts/ leaves?] sngon po	sngo sgog
སྔོ་ངད	aromatic herbs	sngo ngad
སྔོ་རྔད	1) [arch] sngo ngad; 2) kind of vegetable/ herb	sngo rngad
སྔོ་སྔས	sky blue	sngo sngas
སྔོ་ཅེ་རེ	eye faculty shor te like sheep at moment of death mig bgrad stangs lta bu	sngo ce re
སྔོ་བཅད	picture ljang gu &, sngon po, dkar po rnams la ram gyis bcad rgyag pa'i don	sngo bcad
སྔོ་ལྕ་བ	herb lca ba	sngo lca ba
སྔོ་ལྕག་ལྕིག	mixed good and bad plants	sngo lcag lcig
སྔོ་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	lcags kyu med herb	sngo lcags kyu
སྔོ་ཆས	jewelry	sngo chas
སྔོ་ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	sngon chu gtong ba'ang zer, 'bru'i ljang pa sa las tshun gsum bzhi tsam skye dus chu dang po gtong ba	sngo chu gtong ba
སྔོ་ཆུ་ལོ	chu skyur gyi sngo, sngo sman gyi rigs shig ste,	sngo chu lo
སྔོ་ཆུ་སྲིན་སྡེར་མོ	{sngo chu srin sder mo} med herb	sngo chu srin sder mo
སྔོ་ཆོས	on dark blue paper [mthing shog] gold and silver btul mas painted picture	sngo chos
སྔོ་རྗེན	naked	sngo rjen
སྔོ་རྗེན་རྗེན་རྐང་པ	dirty bare feet	sngo rjen rjen rkang pa
སྔོ་ལྗང	bluish-green	sngo ljang
སྔོ་ལྗང་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become green w vegetation	sngo ljang can du 'gyur
སྔོ་ལྗང་ལྗང	blue-green	sngo ljang ljang
སྔོ་ལྗང་ལྗང་གི་མཚོ་ཆུང	a bluegreen little lake sngo ljang lo 'dab rgyas pa'i nags tshal verdant forest w spreading leaves	sngo ljang ljang gi mtsho chung
སྔོ་ཏོག	unripe fruits, green fruits	sngo tog
སྔོ་རྟག་ཏུ་ངུ	rtag tu ngu med herb	sngo rtag tu ngu
སྔོ་སྟག་ཤ	oxytropis microphylla dc.	sngo stag sha
སྔོ་ཐིང་ངེར	pure blue	sngo thing nger
སྔོ་ཐིང་ཐིང	completely green, all green	sngo thing thing
སྔོ་ཐོག་རྩིས་ལེན	by field owner bogs ma chad pa sogs la kha g.yar nas mi ser gyi field, crops dang take all at once by force tradition	sngo thog rtsis len
སྔོ་ཐོབ	crops sngon po'i sgang	sngo thob
སྔོ་མཐིང	azure, dark blue	sngo mthing
སྔོ་མཐིང་མཐིང	completely blue	sngo mthing mthing
སྔོ་འཐོག་རྒྱག་པ	1) in a field pull weeds; 2) Lo tog bsdu ma ran gong nas 'thog pa ste, za 'bru chad skabs smin tsam yod pa rnams bsgrugs [gathered?] nas 'thog pa	sngo 'thog rgyag pa
སྔོ་དག	dark blue	sngo dag
སྔོ་དྭངས	pure blue	sngo dwangs
སྔོ་དུག་མོ་ཉུང	cynanchum forrestii schltr., epilobium palustre l.	sngo dug mo nyung
སྔོ་དེ་བ	herb de ba	sngo de ba
སྔོ་དྲི་ཞིམ	anise; Syn {rdzi ra}	sngo dri zhim
སྔོ་དྲེགས	mire, bluish-green mud	sngo dregs
སྔོ་མདངས	blue tshos gzhi	sngo mdangs
སྔོ་རྡོག	green/ not fully ripened fruit	sngo rdog
སྔོ་ལྡུམ	rtsva sngo ldum bu'i rigs	sngo ldum
སྔོ་ལྡུམ་ལྕམ་པ	herb {sngo ldum lcam pa}	sngo ldum lcam pa
སྔོ་ནག	dark blue	sngo nag
སྔོ་ནེ	bead	sngo ne
སྔོ་སྣེ	ornaments made of colored glass beads	sngo sne
སྔོ་པོ	blue	sngo po
སྔོ་སྤྱི	rtsva sngo	sngo spyi
སྔོ་སྤྱི་བཞུར	herb spyi shur	sngo spyi bzhur
སྔོ་སྤྲིན	ri mor rams kyis mdangs bton pa'i cloud picture	sngo sprin
སྔོ་སྤྲིན་དམན་པ	{sngo sprin dman pa med herb 737	sngo sprin dman pa
སྔོ་ཕྱུར	from dar ba [butter, milk, whey] 1 time boiled good tasting cheese	sngo phyur
སྔོ་ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	smoke 'thul tshul, Thab nas dud pa sngo phyur phyur 'gro ba	sngo phyur phyur
སྔོ་ཕྱུར་རེ	smoke rising [Grong pa yod sar thab dud sngo phyur re gtong ba]	sngo phyur re
སྔོ་ཕྲིག་ཕྲིག	sngo thing nger tsrva'i myu gu gsar pa sngo phrig phrig thon 'dug [Rgyang nas bltas pas chu sngo phrig phrig cig mthong]	sngo phrig phrig
སྔོ་བ	Syn {bsngo ba} to become green	sngo ba
སྔོ་བ་ཧམ་པ	greenish, green tinged	sngo ba ham pa
སྔོ་བུན་ནེ	sngo phyur re'am sngo long nge, Thog kha'i lcags mdong nas du ba sngo bun ne thon pa	sngo bun ne
སྔོ་བོ	green, verdant	sngo bo
སྔོ་སྦྱོར	having the power of curing sudden [glo bur] diseases rno ba'i sngo yi sman gyi sbyar thabs sde tshan gyi ming	sngo sbyor
སྔོ་སྦྱོར་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིག་པ	{sngo sbyor bdud rtsi'i thig pa	sngo sbyor bdud rtsi'i thig pa
སྔོ་མ	[arch] grassy plain	sngo ma
སྔོ་དམར	purple	sngo dmar
སྔོ་སྨན	medicinal herb, vegetable, medicine, medicines from herbs	sngo sman
སྔོ་སྨན་སྤང་རྩི	medicinal vegetable growing in the grass in tibet sngo sman rigs gtso bo brgya bco brgyad - CHN	sngo sman spang rtsi
སྔོ་ཙམ	mere blue [ggd]	sngo tsam
སྔོ་རཙབ༹	green grass	sngo rtsva
སྔོ་རྩྭ	green grass	sngo rtswa
སྔོ་ཚ་བ་གསུམ	CHN	sngo tsha ba gsum
སྔོ་ཚད	cooked vegetables, greens	sngo tshad
སྔོ་ཚལ	edible plants/ vegetables	sngo tshal
སྔོ་ཚལ་ཞིག	spinach	sngo tshal zhig
སྔོ་ཚེར	a kind of barley	sngo tsher
སྔོ་ཚོད	green vegetable [for soup]	sngo tshod
སྔོ་ཚོས	ram gyi ming	sngo tshos
སྔོ་འཛིམ	a kind of mt garlic	sngo 'dzim
སྔོ་རྫབ	color, paint	sngo rdzab
སྔོ་ཞུ་ལེ་བ	grayish-green	sngo zhu le ba
སྔོ་གཟན	green fodder	sngo gzan
སྔོ་བཟོ་བ	leather-worker, shoe-maker	sngo bzo ba
སྔོ་ཡལ་ཡུལ	[color]	sngo yal yul
སྔོ་ཡི	herbal	sngo yi
སྔོ་ཡེར་རེ	pure blue	sngo yer re
སྔོ་ར་མ་སྔོ་རྒོག་མ	ugly, sunburned old crisp	sngo ra ma sngo rgog ma
སྔོ་རི་ལྕགས་ཟམ	sngo ri iron bridge	sngo ri lcags zam
སྔོ་རིགས་སྔགས	ritualistic science	sngo rigs sngags
སྔོ་རིབ	eye disease bar 'grib kyi bye brag cig	sngo rib
སྔོ་རེངས	before dawn when the sky is light blue	sngo rengs
སྔོ་ལ	sngo la mt [mtsho sngon Province mtsho nub sog po, bod, ha sag rigs rang skyong khul tu'u lan rdzong du yod and mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos las smi lnga stong lhag tsam yod	sngo la
སྔོ་ལི་ཤི	primula tangutica pax	sngo li shi
སྔོ་ལུད	1) green manure; 2) manure put in a field after sprouting of crops	sngo lud
སྔོ་ལུད་སྐྱེ་དངོས	crops w green manure/ manure put in field after sprouting	sngo lud skye dngos
སྔོ་ལོ	green leaf	sngo lo
སྔོ་ལོ་ཕྱར	disgrace 1self	sngo lo phyar
སྔོ་ལོང་ངེ	[water] collecting/ puddling	sngo long nge
སྔོ་ལོང་ངེར་འཁྱིལ	[water] collecting/ puddling	sngo long nger 'khyil
སྔོ་ས་སྐྱ་ས	place 1 stays in summer and winter	sngo sa skya sa
སྔོ་སང	sky-blue, also the shade derived from azurite	sngo sang
སྔོ་སངས	light-blue, sky blue, darkskinned, dark color, dark blue or green; clear blue	sngo sangs
སྔོ་སངས་འཁྲི་ཤིང	medicinal plant	sngo sangs 'khri shing
སྔོ་སངས་མཐའ་ཡས	nedicinal plant	sngo sangs mtha' yas
སྔོ་སངས་ལུས	planet Mercury	sngo sangs lus
སྔོ་སི	same as above	sngo si
སྔོ་སི་ལེ་བ	blue/ green color	sngo si le ba
སྔོ་སིང་སིང	dark blue	sngo sing sing
སྔོ་སིར་རེ	1) rtsva dang sngo ldum new sprouts coming up	sngo sir re
སྔོ་སེ	light blue, the lightest shade of azurite blue	sngo se
སྔོ་སེང	sngo skya w just a little white	sngo seng
སྔོ་སེང་སེང	dark blue	sngo seng seng
སྔོ་སེར་དཀར་དམར	blue, yellow, red and white; multi-colored	sngo ser dkar dmar
སྔོ་སེར་དམར་དཀར	blue, yellow, white and red; variegated display	sngo ser dmar dkar
སྔོ་བསངས	pale blue, greenish blue	sngo bsangs
སྔོ་བསངས་མ	1) sky; 2) woman; 3) night	sngo bsangs ma
སྔོ་ཧམ་མེ	1) blue/[green]; 2) poor luster/ complexion [Ngo mdog sngo ham mer phyin 'dug]	sngo ham me
སྔོ་ལྷ་མོ	gentiana spathulifolia maxim. ex kusnez.	sngo lha mo
སྔོག	praise, SA sngag pa	sngog
སྔོག་འདོན	dig up, excavate [-tion], mining, extract by digging	sngog 'don
སྔོག་འདོན་བྱེད	dig [up], excavate, mine, extract by digging	sngog 'don byed
སྔོག་འདོན་བྱེད་པ	to dig	sngog 'don byed pa
སྔོག་འདྲུ	ca lag sngog gsher ram, sngog 'tshol	sngog 'dru
སྔོག་པ	dig, vex, annoy, disturb	sngog pa
སྔོག་བྲུས	dig [up]	sngog brus
སྔོག་འབྲུ་རྒྱབ་པ	rummage	sngog 'bru rgyab pa
སྔོག་གཤེར	investigate [closely], search, inspect [& grangs gsher ba ?]	sngog gsher
སྔོག་གཤེར་འཛིན་བཟུང	search and arrest	sngog gsher 'dzin bzung
སྔོག་གཤེར་འཛིན་བཟུང་བྱེད	search and arrest	sngog gsher 'dzin bzung byed
སྔོགས	annoy, SA sngog pa	sngogs
སྔོགས་པ	churn milk	sngogs pa
སྔོགས་ཤིག	annoy, SA bsngogs pa	sngogs shig
སྔོད་པ	become green, SA sngo ba	sngod pa
སྔོན	formerly, before, previously, beforehand 738	sngon
སྔོན་ཀྱི་མཐའ	[limit of] the past, the [absolute] beginning	sngon kyi mtha'
སྔོན་ཀྱི་རབས	ancient history, legends, former generation	sngon kyi rabs
སྔོན་བཀག	target, schedule, goal, predetermined	sngon bkag
སྔོན་བཀག་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	production target/ schedule	sngon bkag thon skyed
སྔོན་བཀག་དུས་ཚོད	predetermined time	sngon bkag dus tshod
སྔོན་བཀོད	target, schedule, goal, predetermined	sngon bkod
སྔོན་བཀོད་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	production target/ schedule	sngon bkod thon skyed
སྔོན་བཀོད་དུས་ཚོད	predetermined time	sngon bkod dus tshod
སྔོན་སྐྱེས	previously born	sngon skyes
སྔོན་སྐྱེས་པ	elder brother	sngon skyes pa
སྔོན་སྐྱོད	advanced, progressive, forward	sngon skyod
སྔོན་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	advance, progress, go forward	sngon skyod byed
སྔོན་ཁྲིད	introduction to the fundamentals	sngon khrid
སྔོན་གི་ཆོ་གའི་དབྱེ་བ་བཅུ	[TRS 22:5]	sngon gi cho ga'i dbye ba bcu
སྔོན་གི་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་མཐུས	because of the merit you accumulated previously	sngon gi bsod nams kyi mthus
སྔོན་གོམས	former training / habit / practice	sngon goms
སྔོན་གོམས་པའི་རྒྱུས	due to the causes of former habituation	sngon goms pa'i rgyus
སྔོན་གོམས་བག་ཆགས་ངན་པ	[informal] negative tendencies; deeply ingrown	sngon goms bag chags ngan pa
སྔོན་གོམས་བགས་ཆགས་ངན་པ	negative habits formed over so long	sngon goms bags chags ngan pa
སྔོན་གྱི	of old, of the past	sngon gyi
སྔོན་གྱི་སྐྱེས་མཐའ	previous lives	sngon gyi skyes mtha'
སྔོན་གྱི་མཁས་པོ་རྣམས	learned men of former times	sngon gyi mkhas po rnams
སྔོན་གྱི་དགེ་བ	virtuous deeds we have performed in the past sngon gyi dge ba'i rtsa bas bskul ba urged by former roots of virtue	sngon gyi dge ba
སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྔ	five former kings #	sngon gyi rgyal po lnga
སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་བ	past conquerors / buddhas	sngon gyi rgyal ba
སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅད	the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past sngon gyi rjes snyeg rjes yong la rogs ram - catch up w the advanced, help the backward	sngon gyi rgyal ba sras bcad
སྔོན་གྱི་མཐའ	past limit, the past	sngon gyi mtha'
སྔོན་གྱི་དག་ཡིག	earlier now-obsolete orthography	sngon gyi dag yig
སྔོན་གྱི་སྡོད་གནས	former residence/ address	sngon gyi sdod gnas
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས	past lives	sngon gyi gnas
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	superknowledge of former places [of existence]	sngon gyi gnas mngon par shes pa
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་རྗེས	clairvoyance, memory of former lifetimes sngon gyi gnas rjes dran pa'i mngon shes superknowledge that recollects former lives	sngon gyi gnas rjes
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་རྗེས་པ	recollecting previous lives {btags don}	sngon gyi gnas rjes pa
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	the power of recollecting past abodes [gd]	sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa
པའི་སྟོབས	the strength of knowing previous lives. One of the {de bzhin gshegs pa'i stobs bcu} the ten strengths of the buddha; the power of knowledge of the recollection of previous lives sngon gyi gnas rjes...	pa'i stobs
པའི་སྟོབས་སྟོབས་བཅུ	power knowing the recollection of previous lives sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa shes pa Remembrance of past lives. One of the {mngon par shes pa drug} 6 superknowledge sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran p...	pa'i stobs stobs bcu
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་དྲན་པ	recollection of former lives	sngon gyi gnas dran pa
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་རིག་པ	prajna realizing former lives of 1self or others	sngon gyi gnas rig pa
སྔོན་གྱི་གནས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of past lives	sngon gyi gnas shes pa
སྔོན་གྱི་གནོད་སྦྱིན	Dzambhala god of wealth	sngon gyi gnod sbyin
སྔོན་གྱི་དཔེ	precedent	sngon gyi dpe
སྔོན་གྱི་ཕ་མ	has been your parent in previous lives	sngon gyi pha ma
སྔོན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱིས	as a result of karmic propensities established in the past	sngon gyi bag chags kyis
སྔོན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས་སད་ནས	awakened previous propensities	sngon gyi bag chags sad nas
སྔོན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	resulting from the past; effect of past actions	sngon gyi 'bras bu
སྔོན་གྱི་མི་དགེ་བ་གོམས་པ	being habituated to nonvirtue in the past	sngon gyi mi dge ba goms pa
སྔོན་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ	former aspirations	sngon gyi smon lam
སྔོན་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ་ཡོད་པས	because of prayers that were made in the past	sngon gyi smon lam yod pas
སྔོན་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ་ལ་དབང་བ	for whom the prayers had been made	sngon gyi smon lam la dbang ba
སྔོན་གྱི་རབས	former generations	sngon gyi rabs
སྔོན་གྱི་ལས	former karma	sngon gyi las
སྔོན་གྱི་ལས་ཀྱི་བགོ་སྐལ	portion or lot on account of one's former acts 739 sngon gyi las kyis sdig pa kho na la spyod - past actions have been only evil	sngon gyi las kyi bgo skal
སྔོན་གྱི་ལས་ཅི་ཡིན་ཞུས་པ	asked the Buddha what previous karma had brought about these events sngon gyi las dang smon lam dag pa'i	sngon gyi las ci yin zhus pa
མཐུས	by the power of our previous karma and pure prayers	mthus
སྔོན་གྱི་ལས་ཡིན་པ	the previous karma is coming to pass	sngon gyi las yin pa
སྔོན་གྱི་སྲིད་པ	{sngon dus kyi srid pa} life between birth and death as a phase of conditioned existence	sngon gyi srid pa
སྔོན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	former masters/ teachers	sngon gyi slob dpon
སྔོན་གྱི་བསགས་པའི་ལས་དབང་གིས	due to karma accumulated in the past	sngon gyi bsags pa'i las dbang gis
སྔོན་གྱི་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱིས	because of his previous merit	sngon gyi bsod nams kyis
སྔོན་གྱི་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱིས་རྗེས་འབྲངས	his previous merit followed him sngon gyi bsod nams las 'khrungs pa born from previous merit	sngon gyi bsod nams kyis rjes 'brangs
སྔོན་གྱི་ལྷ	asura	sngon gyi lha
སྔོན་གྲལ	front line/ row	sngon gral
སྔོན་གྲུབ་ཆ་རྐྱེན	pre-condition, prerequisite	sngon grub cha rkyen
སྔོན་གླེང	preface, introduction	sngon gleng
སྔོན་དགེ་བ་མ་བསགས་པ	who hasn't created virtue in the past	sngon dge ba ma bsags pa
སྔོན་དགེ་མ་བསགས	without former merit	sngon dge ma bsags
སྔོན་འགོག	stop something happening, prevention, precaution	sngon 'gog
སྔོན་འགོག་གི་བཀག་སྡོམ་གྱི	preventive	sngon 'gog gi bkag sdom gyi
སྔོན་འགོག་བྱེད	stop something happening, prevent, take precautions against/ preventative measures sngon 'gog byed thub na ma 'ongs pa la	sngon 'gog byed
སྐྱོན་ཆ་ནམ་ཡང་འབྱུང་མི་འགྱུར	if one takes preventative measures faults will never arise in future	skyon cha nam yang 'byung mi 'gyur
སྔོན་འགོག་བྱེད་པ	guard against, prevent, keep from	sngon 'gog byed pa
སྔོན་འགྲོ	Ngöndro; preliminary (practice); preliminaries, preliminary practice, preparation, preliminary section; introduction, prerequisite, prelude, primary, the foundations, forerunner, preparatory to, fo...	sngon 'gro
སྔོན་འགྲོ་ཁྲིད་རིམ	sngon 'gro'i khrid yig; guidance manual for the preliminaries	sngon 'gro khrid rim
སྔོན་འགྲོ་སྒོ་འབྱེད་བ	to begin with the preliminary practices	sngon 'gro sgo 'byed ba
སྔོན་འགྲོ་ལྔ	five steps of the preliminary practice	sngon 'gro lnga
སྔོན་འགྲོ་གཏོང་བ	to practice the preliminaries	sngon 'gro gtong ba
སྔོན་འགྲོ་གཏོར་མ	the preliminary torma sngon 'gro thun mong gi blo sbyong rnam	sngon 'gro gtor ma
ཕོ༹ཨུརཕོ༹ལད་མིནད	training; sm. {blo ldog rnam bzhi}	fourfold mind
སྔོན་འགྲོ་པ	beginner	sngon 'gro pa
སྔོན་འགྲོ་བ	pioneer, one gone ahead	sngon 'gro ba
ཆུབ་སྣང་བྱེད་ནོར་བུའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	by {kun gzigs chos kyi snang ba} - the 8th rgyal dbang 'brug pa	chub snang byed nor bu'i sgron me
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ཁྲིད་ཡིག	the guidance text for/ of the preliminaries	sngon 'gro'i khrid yig
ཞལ་ལུང	{sngon 'gro'i khrid yig kun bzang bla ma'i zhal lung}	zhal lung
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	prelude, overture	sngon 'gro'i glu dbyangs
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ངག་འདོན	liturgy for the preliminary practices	sngon 'gro'i ngag 'don
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	precondition, prerequisite	sngon 'gro'i cha rkyen
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ཆུ་གསུམ	CHN	sngon 'gro'i chu gsum
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ཆོས	the preliminaries	sngon 'gro'i chos
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	preliminary practices	sngon 'gro'i rnal 'byor
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་དཔུང་ཚོགས	advance force, vanguard, avant garde	sngon 'gro'i dpung tshogs
སྔོན་འགྲོའི་རུ་དཔུང	advance force, vanguard, avant garde	sngon 'gro'i ru dpung
སྔོན་རྒྱུ	{'di lta bu 'byung ba sngon rgyu ci lags} what acts from long ago caused such … as this	sngon rgyu
སྔོན་རྒྱུ་རྗེས་འབྲས	cause and effect, antecedent and consequent	sngon rgyu rjes 'bras
སྔོན་བསྒོམས་པས་ཐོབ་པ	attained through having formerly trained	sngon bsgoms pas thob pa
སྔོན་བསྒྲགས	forecast, prediction, projection	sngon bsgrags
སྔོན་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	forecast, predict, project	sngon bsgrags byed
སྔོན་དངོས	the preliminary and main practice, preparation and main part. abbr. of {sngon 'gro dang dngos gzhi}	sngon dngos
སྔོན་མངགས	order[ing] in advance	sngon mngags
སྔོན་མངགས་དངོས་ཟོག	ordered merchandise	sngon mngags dngos zog
སྔོན་མངགས་གནང	order[ing] in advance	sngon mngags gnang
སྔོན་གཅོད་དོན་ཚན	pre-requisite, necessary condition	sngon gcod don tshan
སྔོན་ཆགས	'khor ba [samsara?]	sngon chags
སྔོན་ཆད	previously, up to now	sngon chad
སྔོན་ཆད་ནང་བཞིན	as before, all the same, likewise	sngon chad nang bzhin
སྔོན་ཆད་བྱུང་མ་མྱོང་བ	unprecedented	sngon chad byung ma myong ba
སྔོན་ཆད་མེད	unprecedented	sngon chad med
སྔོན་ཆད་མེད་པ	unprecedented	sngon chad med pa
སྔོན་ཆོག	preparatory ritual	sngon chog
སྔོན་ཆོག་བཅུ	the 10 preparatory cho ga [before the buddha was enlightened sangs rgyas mya ngan las ma 'das gong gi bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i sngon gyi cho 740 ga bcu ste, rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas dang rang sangs rg...	sngon chog bcu
སྔོན་ཆོག་ཏུ་གྲགས་པ་བཅུ	CHN	sngon chog tu grags pa bcu
སྔོན་འཇུག	prefix; A term of grammar. Prefix. See {snon 'jug lnga}	sngon 'jug
སྔོན་འཇུག་ལྔ	the five prefix letters [ga da ba ma ' ste lnga po 'di'i rtags la ba pho dang, ga da ma ning, ' mo, ma shin tu mo bcas nang gses dbye ba bzhir phye yod pa]	sngon 'jug lnga
སྔོན་རྗེས	1) before and after, 1st and afterward, former and later, prefix and suffix; 2) in order, 1 after another; 3) sooner or later, eventually; 4) many times, on different occasions	sngon rjes
སྔོན་རྗེས་མིང་གསུམ	prefix, suffix and word sngon rjes g.yas nas min - neither in front, behind nor on the right	sngon rjes ming gsum
སྔོན་རྗེས་སུ	1) before and after, 1st and afterward; 2) in order, 1 after another; 3) sooner or later, eventually; 4) many times, on different occasions	sngon rjes su
སྔོན་བརྗོད	foreword, preface, introduction	sngon brjod
སྔོན་ཏུ	previous to, prior to, before	sngon tu
སྔོན་གཏོར	preliminary torma [offering] ritual	sngon gtor
སྔོན་རྟོགས	foreknowledge, foresight, providence sngon thog brnga bsdu mnyam 'brel 'phrul 'khor - combine harvester	sngon rtogs
སྔོན་ཐོག་ཏུ	in the immediacy of what has always been the case	sngon thog tu
སྔོན་ཐོན	quickly spreading &, chu tshad mtho tsam yod pas mig dper 'os pa'i rigs, advanced progressive, outstanding, foremost	sngon thon
སྔོན་ཐོན་གྱི་བཅད་གྲངས	advanced/ progressive quota/ norm	sngon thon gyi bcad grangs
སྔོན་ཐོན་ངལ་རྩོལ་བཟོ་པའི་ཏང	Progressive Labor Party US	sngon thon ngal rtsol bzo pa'i tang
སྔོན་ཐོན་ཅན	outstanding, advanced, 1st class	sngon thon can
སྔོན་ཐོན་ཉམས་མྱོང	advanced experience/ know-how	sngon thon nyams myong
སྔོན་ཐོན་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་པ	advanced producer, outstanding worker	sngon thon thon skyed pa
སྔོན་ཐོན་ཐོན་སྡེ་ཁག	outstanding unit/ group	sngon thon thon sde khag
སྔོན་ཐོན་དང་འགྲན་བསྡུར	compete w the advanced	sngon thon dang 'gran bsdur
སྔོན་ཐོན་མི་སྣ	advanced/ progressive/ outstanding people/ personnel	sngon thon mi sna
སྔོན་ཐོན་བཟོ་པ	outstanding worker	sngon thon bzo pa
སྔོན་ཐོན་ལ་དཔེ་ལྟ	learn from the example of the advanced	sngon thon la dpe lta
སྔོན་ཐོན་ལག་རྩལ	advanced techniques	sngon thon lag rtsal
སྔོན་ཐོབ	take the lead, reach an advanced state	sngon thob
སྔོན་མཐའ	the past	sngon mtha'
སྔོན་མཐའ་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་ལྟ་བ་བཞི	the four views depending on a past limit/ beginning of samsara	sngon mtha' la brten pa'i lta ba bzhi
སྔོན་མཐོང	foresight, foreknowledge	sngon mthong
སྔོན་དང་ཕྱི་མཐའ	past and future	sngon dang phyi mtha'
སྔོན་དུ	above, previous to, earlier, before, prior to, formerly	sngon du
སྔོན་དུ་འགྲིག་པ	preparation, SA sta gon	sngon du 'grig pa
སྔོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	preceded by	sngon du 'gro ba
སྔོན་དུ་བསྙེན་པ	preparatory recitation	sngon du bsnyen pa
སྔོན་དུ་བསྙེན་པ་བྱེད་པ	prior approximation	sngon du bsnyen pa byed pa
སྔོན་དུ་བཏང་བ	prepare	sngon du btang ba
སྔོན་དུ་ཕྱིན	to go ahead	sngon du phyin
སྔོན་དུ་སྦྱང་བ	formerly trained	sngon du sbyang ba
སྔོན་དུ་བཞག	placed before one	sngon du bzhag
སྔོན་དུ་སོང	to go on ahead	sngon du song
སྔོན་དུ་སོང་བ	prior, previous, past, anterior, antecedent, foregoing, former, precedent, preceding	sngon du song ba
སྔོན་དུའང	long ago	sngon du'ang
སྔོན་དུས	the past, former time	sngon dus
སྔོན་དུས་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ	preceding existence {skye srid dang de nas 'chi ba ma byung gi bar} which is what follows [birth and lasts] until the arrival of death. one of {gnas skabs bzhi}	sngon dus kyi srid pa
སྔོན་དུས་སུ	in the past, before	sngon dus su
སྔོན་དུས་སུ་མཐོང	seen before	sngon dus su mthong
སྔོན་དོན	the past	sngon don
སྔོན་དོན་དྲན	recollect[ion], recall, reflect[ion]	sngon don dran
སྔོན་དོན་དྲན་པ	recollection	sngon don dran pa
སྔོན་དྲན	recollecting the events of former times	sngon dran
སྔོན་འདས་པའི་དུས	the past, bygone	sngon 'das pa'i dus
སྔོན་འདས་པའི་དུས་ན	once upon a time, in the past	sngon 'das pa'i dus na
སྔོན་འདྲིས	previously met	sngon 'dris
སྔོན་འདྲེན་པ	formerly invited	sngon 'dren pa
སྔོན་བརྡ	recently sent letter/ spoken talk * advance notice/ warning, forecasting	sngon brda
སྔོན་བརྡ་གཏོང	give advance notice/ warning, forecast, predict	sngon brda gtong
སྔོན་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	forecast, forewarn	sngon brda gtong ba
སྔོན་བརྡ་བཏང	sent advance notice/ warning, predicted 741	sngon brda btang
སྔོན་ན་མེད	not existing before	sngon na med
སྔོན་ན་མེད་པེ	not existing before	sngon na med pe
སྔོན་ནས	from before/ long ago	sngon nas
སྔོན་ནས་དམིགས་པ	preconceive	sngon nas dmigs pa
སྔོན་ནས་ཚོད་དཔག	estimation, prognosis, speculation, anticipation, foresight	sngon nas tshod dpag
སྔོན་ནས་ཚོད་དཔག་བྱེད	estimate, prognosticate, speculate, anticipate, predict, foretell	sngon nas tshod dpag byed
སྔོན་ནས་ཚོད་གཟིགས	estimation, prognosis, speculation, anticipation, foresight [h]	sngon nas tshod gzigs
སྔོན་ནས་ཚོད་གཟིགས་བྱེད	estimate, prognosticate, speculate, anticipate, predict, foretell [h]	sngon nas tshod gzigs byed
སྔོན་ནས་ཚོར	have forebodings, sense beforehand	sngon nas tshor
སྔོན་ནས་རེ་བ་བྱེད་པ	anticipate	sngon nas re ba byed pa
སྔོན་ནས་བསུས	mgron po sngon nas	sngon nas bsus
བསུས	invite visitors in	bsus
སྔོན་ནས་ཧ་གོ་བ	foresee	sngon nas ha go ba
སྔོན་གནས	previous / former lives / states	sngon gnas
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་གྱི་མངོན་ཤེས	higher perception of remembering former lives	sngon gnas rjes gyi mngon shes
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་དྲན	recollection of former lives sngon gnas rjes dran mkhyen pa'i stobs the power of recollecting former lives	sngon gnas rjes dran
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་དྲན་གྱི་མངོན་ཤེས	the higher perception of remembering former lives	sngon gnas rjes dran gyi mngon shes
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་དྲན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of former lives	sngon gnas rjes dran gyi shes pa
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་སུ	1 of mngon shes lnga	sngon gnas rjes su
སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollecting / remembering of former lives sngon gnas rjes su dran pa'i mngon shes clairvoyance of previous lives	sngon gnas rjes su dran pa
སྔོན་པ	1) livid, bluish [corpse]; 2) before	sngon pa
སྔོན་པ་སུ	in the past	sngon pa su
སྔོན་པོ	1) blue. 2) [with plants] green	sngon po
སྔོན་པོ་སྔོ་ཀྱང	completely and totally blue	sngon po sngo kyang
སྔོན་པོ་བཞིན	blue sky	sngon po bzhin
སྔོན་པོའི་ཚལ	green vegetables	sngon po'i tshal
སྔོན་པོར་འགྱུར	become old and useless, go out of use	sngon por 'gyur
སྔོན་པོར་སོང་བ	become green	sngon por song ba
སྔོན་དཔག	estimation, prognosis, speculation, anticipation, foresight	sngon dpag
སྔོན་དཔག་བྱེད	estimate, prognosticate, speculate, anticipate, predict, foretell	sngon dpag byed
སྔོན་སྤྱད	previously experienced sngon spyad bde sdug chu yi ri mo 'dra your past joys and sorrows are like drawings on water	sngon spyad
སྔོན་ཕམ	previous failures/ defeats	sngon pham
སྔོན་ཕམ་རྗེས་དཔེ	learn from previous failures/ defeats	sngon pham rjes dpe
སྔོན་ཕྱག	rich from the beginning, rich at first, formerly rich	sngon phyag
སྔོན་ཕྱོགས	in front of	sngon phyogs
སྔོན་འཕྲོས	the 1st part/ preface and remainder	sngon 'phros
སྔོན་བུ	{sngon bu} field med	sngon bu
སྔོན་བོད་རྒྱལ་པོ	former Tibetan kings	sngon bod rgyal po
སྔོན་བྱང་ལས་འཕྲོ་ཅན	endowed with the good karma accrued through training in his previous lives	sngon byang las 'phro can
སྔོན་བྱས	previously performed/past task/ work/ action	sngon byas
སྔོན་བྱས་ལ་འདྲི་བརྩད་མེད	no questions about past actions	sngon byas la 'dri brtsad med
སྔོན་བྱས་ལ་རྩད་གཅོད་མི་བྱེད	no questions about past actions	sngon byas la rtsad gcod mi byed
སྔོན་བྱུང	history, ancient account, early events, gone before, previous	sngon byung
སྔོན་བྱུང་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	history of past events	sngon byung gi lo rgyus
སྔོན་བྱུང་འཆར་གཞི	past/ previous plans	sngon byung 'char gzhi
སྔོན་བྱུང་བརྗོད	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	sngon byung brjod
སྔོན་བྱུང་སྲིད	previous existence	sngon byung srid
སྔོན་བྱུས	precautionary strategy/ policy	sngon byus
སྔོན་བྱུས་བྱས	took precautions	sngon byus byas
སྔོན་བྱུས་བྱེད	take precautions	sngon byus byed
སྔོན་བྱོན	1) appeared / occurred in the past, bygone. 2) great savants of the past	sngon byon
སྔོན་བྱོན་པ	something that appeared/ occurred in the past, bygone, predecessor, precursor, forerunner, pioneer	sngon byon pa
སྔོན་འབུམ	a botanical work	sngon 'bum
སྔོན་འབེབས་དོན་སྙིང	assumption, premise, supposition, pre-requisite, precondition	sngon 'bebs don snying
སྔོན་འབྱུང	former and future	sngon 'byung
སྔོན་འབྱོན་པ	predecessor	sngon 'byon pa
སྔོན་སྦྱངས	former training, previous practice; practice from a previous life	sngon sbyangs
སྔོན་སྦྱངས་ཀྱི་ལས་འཕྲོ	Karmic continuity of former practice. The continuity of Dharma practice from the previous life sngon sbyin pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa la	sngon sbyangs kyi las 'phro
སྔོན་སྦྱོང	advance preparation/ study, rehearsal	sngon sbyong
སྔོན་མ	1) previous ones; 2) former[ly], previous, [in the] past	sngon ma
སྔོན་མ་ནང་བཞིན	still, yet	sngon ma nang bzhin
སྔོན་མ་བཞིན	as before, SA gong ma bzhin	sngon ma bzhin
སྔོན་མར	prior	sngon mar
སྔོན་མུས་སུ	in the past	sngon mus su
སྔོན་མེད	unprecedented	sngon med
སྔོན་མེད་བསྡུས་བརྗོད	bsdus brjod kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sdud byed dpe la sngon med pa'i khyad chos dang ldan pa'i khyad gzhi bkod pa des, de dang chos mtshungs pa'i bsdu bya dpe can sngon med cig bsdus te br...	sngon med bsdus brjod
སྔོན་མེད་པ	not existing before	sngon med pa
སྔོན་མེད་གསར་བསྐྲུན	new creation/ invention	sngon med gsar bskrun
སྔོན་མོ	in general sky blue and bye brag mo rigs la sbyor ba'i particular color	sngon mo
སྔོན་མོ་ལྕགས་ཁ	metal-blue horse, special term used to denote the color	sngon mo lcags kha
ཨོཕ༹་ཅེརྟཻན་ཧོརསེས	gray tending to blue	of certain horses
སྔོན་མོ་ཆབ་འདྲན	a medicinal plant for dropsy	sngon mo chab 'dran
སྔོན་མོ་ནས	fresh barley	sngon mo nas
སྔོན་མོ་ལྷོག་ཟན	{sngon mo lhog zan med herb	sngon mo lhog zan
སྔོན་དམར་ཅན	blue and red, purple, epithet of shiva	sngon dmar can
སྔོན་སྨོན་པ	past wishes / aspirations	sngon smon pa
སྔོན་ཙམ	{zla ba gcig gi sngon tsam nas} a month's time prior	sngon tsam
སྔོན་རྩིས	estimation	sngon rtsis
སྔོན་རྩིས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	* budget commission/ committee	sngon rtsis u yon lhan khang
སྔོན་ཚུད	1) not far in the future, [just] beforehand/ in advance; 2) building on merit from former lives	sngon tshud
སྔོན་ཚུད་ནས	beforehand, in advance, ahead of time, in advance, earlier, previously	sngon tshud nas
སྔོན་ཚུད་ནས་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་བྱེད	make preparations in advance	sngon tshud nas gra sgrigs byed
སྔོན་ཚེ	a past life; past life	sngon tshe
སྔོན་ཚོད	future inferring hypothesis, prediction, forecast, estimate	sngon tshod
སྔོན་འཛོམས་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	pre-requisite, necessary condition	sngon 'dzoms rgyu rkyen
སྔོན་གཞན་དུ	Long ago,	sngon gzhan du
སྔོན་བཞིན	as before	sngon bzhin
སྔོན་ཟོན	precautions, care	sngon zon
སྔོན་ཟོན་བྱེད	take precautions/ care	sngon zon byed
སྔོན་ཟླ	last month	sngon zla
སྔོན་གཟིགས	estimation, prognosis, speculation, anticipation, foresight [h]	sngon gzigs
སྔོན་གཟིགས་བྱེད	estimate, prognosticate, speculate, anticipate, predict, foretell [h]	sngon gzigs byed
སྔོན་ཡང་བསོད་ནམས་བྱས་པ	building on merit from former lives. One of the {lha dang mi rnams kyi 'khor lo bzhi} 4 factors of gods and men, 4 states of existence of gods and men	sngon yang bsod nams byas pa
སྔོན་ཡོད	previously exiting	sngon yod
སྔོན་རབས	early/former generations, fore fathers, previous lineage holders, antiquity, ancient history	sngon rabs
སྔོན་རབས་པ	those of early/former generations, fore fathers, previous lineage holders, precursors, ancestors	sngon rabs pa
སྔོན་རོལ	the past	sngon rol
སྔོན་རོལ་ཏུ	in bygone times	sngon rol tu
སྔོན་རོལ་དུ	before	sngon rol du
སྔོན་རོལ་ནས	previously, before	sngon rol nas
སྔོན་ལ	before, previously; first	sngon la
སྔོན་ལ་གང་སབ་བྱེད	struggle, get to be 1st, do all 1 can to advance/ progress	sngon la gang sab byed
སྔོན་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	advance	sngon la 'gro ba
སྔོན་ལ་ཕྱིན	went ahead	sngon la phyin
སྔོན་ལ་བཤད	previously stated, explained before, said before	sngon la bshad
སྔོན་ལས	former karma	sngon las
སྔོན་ལས་ཀྱིས་འཕངས་པ	propelled by past karma	sngon las kyis 'phangs pa
ཕུང་པོ	the body of ripened [karma] which is created by past actions	phung po
སྔོན་ལས་འཕྲལ་རྐྱེན	previous karma or immediate circumstances	sngon las 'phral rkyen
སྔོན་ལས་འཕྲལ་རྒྱེན	former karma and temporary condition	sngon las 'phral rgyen
སྔོན་ལོགས	earlier, preceding	sngon logs
སྔོན་ཤེས	intuition	sngon shes
སྔོན་གཤེགས	those who have gone/died before, martyr	sngon gshegs
སྔོན་གཤེགས་དཔའ་བོ	the warriors who have gone/died before	sngon gshegs dpa' bo
སྔོན་སོང	already, previously, former, previous	sngon song
སྔོན་སོང་ནས	preceded, went before	sngon song nas
སྔོན་སོང་བག་ཆགས	past / former tendencies, tendencies	sngon song bag chags
སྔོན་སོང་ཚིག་གི་ཚབ	the (grammatical article)	sngon song tshig gi tshab
སྔོན་བསགས	former accumulation [of merit]	sngon bsags
སྔོན་བསགས་མཐུ	power due to merits formerly acquired, virtue, piety	sngon bsags mthu
སྔོན་བསགས་འབྲས་བཟང་སྨིན་པ	enjoying the excellent fruition of his past deeds sngon bsags las ngan gyi 'bras bus 'phangs pa - as a result of their past negative actions	sngon bsags 'bras bzang smin pa
སྔོན་བསུ	welcoming, greeting	sngon bsu
སྔོན་བསུ་བ	1) preliminary preparations/ arrangements; 2) invitation; 3) welcome[ing], greeting	sngon bsu ba
སྔོན་བསུ་བྱེད	welcome	sngon bsu byed
སྔོན་བསོད་ནམས་བྱས་པ	who has formerly created merit	sngon bsod nams byas pa
སྔོམ་མིན	not restraining	sngom min
སྔོམས	(not in DAS)	sngoms
སྔོའི་བུ་མོ་སྤུན་བདུན	the 7 sister herbs [gya' kyi ma, stong zil, gangg' chung, hong len, tig ta, bong dkar, spang rtsi do bo bcas bdun]	sngo'i bu mo spun bdun
བྱེད་པའི་དྲང་སྲོང	a sage who lived on fruits and roots	byed pa'i drang srong
སྔོལ	(not in DAS)	sngol
སྔོས	become green, SA sngo ba	sngos
སྔོས་པ	bluish	sngos pa
བརྔ	mow, SA rnga ba	brnga
བརྔ་བསྡུ	crop, produce, yield, harvest	brnga bsdu
བརྔ་བསྡུ་བྱེད	reap, harvest	brnga bsdu byed
བརྔ་བསྡུ་བྱེད་པ	to reap, harvest	brnga bsdu byed pa
བརྔ་བསྡུའི་འདྲུད་འཐེན	harvester brnga bsdu'i 'drud 'then 'phrul 'khor reaper	brnga bsdu'i 'drud 'then
བརྔ་བསྡུའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	harvester machine	brnga bsdu'i 'phrul 'khor
བརྔ་པ	ft. of {rnga ba}	brnga pa
བརྔ་བ	reap	brnga ba
བརྔ་ཡས	a number	brnga yas
བརྔ་གསོག	gathering/ collecting [crops]	brnga gsog
བརྔ་གསོག་བྱེད	gather/ collect [crops]	brnga gsog byed
བརྔད	SA brang, reap grain, tempt	brngad
བརྔད་པ	[arch] search for	brngad pa
བརྔན	reward, {chas kas} w a meal	brngan
བརྔན་ཆ	payment gifts, payment gifts 743	brngan cha
བརྔན་ཆོག	food-giving-ritual	brngan chog
བརྔན་པ	pf. of {rngan pa}; ft. of {rngan pa}; present, gift, reward, payment	brngan pa
བརྔབ་པ	ft. of {rngab pa}	brngab pa
བརྔབས་པ	pf. of {rngab pa}	brngabs pa
བརྔམ	[f rngam]	brngam
བརྔམ་པ	[f rngam pa]	brngam pa
བརྔམས	[p rngam pa]	brngams
བརྔམས་པ	pf. of {rngam pa}	brngams pa
བརྔའ	crops	brnga'
བརྔའ་བྱའི་ལོ་ཏོག	harvest fit for the sickle	brnga' bya'i lo tog
བརྔས	[p rnga ba]	brngas
བརྔས་པ	tempted, entrapped	brngas pa
བརྔུབ	inhale, SA rngub pa	brngub
བརྔུབ་པ	[f rngub pa]	brngub pa
བརྔུབས	inhale, SA rngub pa, drawn in (breath or water), drunk	brngubs
བརྔུབས་པ	[p rngub pa]	brngubs pa
བརྔུལ	sweat, SA rngul ba	brngul
བརྔོ	parch, SA rngod pa	brngo
བརྔོ་བ	ft. of {rngo ba}	brngo ba
བརྔོག་པ	point out faults of others, seek out faults, search out a lost article	brngog pa
བརྔོད	parch, SA rngod pa, reaped, seduce, deceive	brngod
བརྔོད་པ	alt. pf. of {rngod pa}; alt. ft. of {rngod pa}; ft. of {rngod pa}	brngod pa
བརྔོད་བྱའི་ནས	barley to be reaped	brngod bya'i nas
བརྔོན	hunt, SA rngon pa, dividing, SA brngon pa	brngon
བརྔོན་པ	[p f rngon pa]	brngon pa
བརྔོས	parch, SA rngod pa	brngos
བརྔོས་པ	pf. of {rngo ba}; pf. of {rngod pa}	brngos pa
བསྔག	praise, SA sngag pa, annoy, SA bsngogs pa	bsngag
བསྔགས	praise; consecrated, praised, recommended, glorification, recommend, hail, eulogize, glorify, praised, extolled, praiseworthy, blessed	bsngags
བསྔགས་ཀྱི	tantric	bsngags kyi
བསྔགས་རྗོད་བྱེད་པ	praise	bsngags rjod byed pa
བསྔགས་བརྗོད	praise, compliment, exaltation	bsngags brjod
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི	complimentary	bsngags brjod kyi
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་མངའ་བ	has been praised	bsngags brjod mnga' ba
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་པ	to pronounce a mantra	bsngags brjod pa
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་བྱེད	praise, compliment, exaltation	bsngags brjod byed
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་བྱེད་པ	commend	bsngags brjod byed pa
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་ཡོད་དགུ་གཏོང	be showered w praises	bsngags brjod yod dgu gtong
བསྔགས་བརྟགས	praise	bsngags brtags
བསྔགས་བསྟོད	praise. Syn {bsngags brjod}	bsngags bstod
བསྔགས་དེ་དག་པ	1) praiseworthy 1s; 2) blessed [arch] skull cup blessed w Hum ?	bsngags de dag pa
བསྔགས་འདོན་པ	pronounce a magic formula	bsngags 'don pa
བསྔགས་ལྡན	gautama's horse praised, buddha's horse	bsngags ldan
བསྔགས་པ	1) (Tha dad pa,, [a] praise [glorification praised, blessed, recommended, praiseworthy hail, eulogize, glorify, extol, recommend, praise]	bsngags pa
བསྔགས་པ་བརྗོད	proclaim the praises of	bsngags pa brjod
བསྔགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ	to praise	bsngags pa brjod pa
བསྔགས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	praised, eulogized	bsngags pa dang ldan pa
བསྔགས་པ་དེ་དག	praiseworthy ones	bsngags pa de dag
བསྔགས་པ་པོ	praiser, commender	bsngags pa po
བསྔགས་པའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi gnas lugs khyad 'phags ston phyir, mtshon byed dpe la bstod ra btang ba'i sgo nas dpe don phan tshun mtshungs par sbyor ba'i rgyan zhig	bsngags pa'i dpe
བསྔགས་པར་མཛད་པ	praise (h	bsngags par mdzad pa
བསྔགས་པར་འོས་པ	worthy of praise	bsngags par 'os pa
བསྔགས་བ	praise bsngags bya'i brjod gzhir dngos bstan bcu	bsngags ba
བསྔགས་སྨོན་རྒྱལ་པོ	In Chinese ja chin = bsngags smon, ching dynasty emperor ruling from 13th rab byung's fire dragon year to 14ths iron dragon year lcags 'brug lo bar khrir bzhugs]	bsngags smon rgyal po
བསྔགས་འོས	those who are praiseworthy	bsngags 'os
བསྔགས་འོས་སྐྱོ་འོས	object of praise and pity	bsngags 'os skyo 'os
བསྔགས་འོས་དེ་ཡང་རེ་ཞིག	worthy of being praised for awhile	bsngags 'os de yang re zhig
བསྔགས་ཡུལ	the object of praise	bsngags yul
བསྔགས་གསོལ	thanksgiving	bsngags gsol
བསྔམ	(not in DAS)	bsngam
བསྔམས	(not in DAS)	bsngams
རྙེད	pleasure at gaining something and displeasure at not gaining the object of desire; 2) {bde dang mi bde happiness and sadness; 3) {bstod dang	rnyed
སྨད	praise and abused or degrade 4) {snyan dang mi snyan - pleasing and unpleasing speech). [involving disproportionate joy and sorrow at merely incidental benefit and harm.]	smad
བསྔལ་བ	be faint, exhausted	bsngal ba
བསྔས་པ	place the head or body upon a cushion, recline	bsngas pa
བསྔུ	(not in DAS)	bsngu
བསྔུས་འཇོམས	Crushing Hell [one of the {sems can dmyal ba brgyad}, 8 hot hells]	bsngus 'joms
བསྔོ	[f {sngo} will dedicate, transfer, distribute, share, turn over to	bsngo
བསྔོ་བགྲང	ngo grangs tsang ma tsang grangs bsher ba'i tshul,...Mi grangs bsngo bgrang byed pa,...Ra lug ngo grangs gang yod nyin ltar bsngo bgrang byas pa	bsngo bgrang
བསྔོ་རྟེན	1 for the sake of a dead person dedication and aspiration offering; 2) in the house of a serf when a person 744	bsngo rten
དིཨེས་ཐེཨིར་ཨེཨར	ring or tshab dod had to be given to the master	dies their ear
བསྔོ་བ	ex {de la bsngo ba gyis shig} dedicate all your merit to them!	bsngo ba
བསྔོ་བ་སྒོམ་ལམ	among the {sher phyin don bdun cu}, a zag bcas sgom lam, in another sense being made into a wholesome aspect of the path to enlightenment]	bsngo ba sgom lam
བསྔོ་བ་དམ་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {bla na med pa'i byang chub tu dug med pa'i bsngo bas rgyas 'debs pa}	bsngo ba dam pa
བསྔོ་བ་པོ	dedicator	bsngo ba po
བསྔོ་བ་བྱས་པ	dedicated the merit	bsngo ba byas pa
བསྔོ་བ་སྨོན་ལམ	bsngo smon - Dedication prayer	bsngo ba smon lam
བསྔོ་བ་མཛད་པ	dedicated, made dedication	bsngo ba mdzad pa
བསྔོ་བ་ཡོན་བཤད	dedication speech	bsngo ba yon bshad
བསྔོ་བ་གསེར་གྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	Golden Garland of Dedications, by Shabkar	bsngo ba gser gyi phreng ba
བསྔོ་བའི་རྒྱས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཐེབས་པ	to fully seal with dedication	bsngo ba'i rgyas yongs su thebs pa
བསྔོ་བའི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	the Great Seal of Dedication; one of {phyag chen lnga ldan} The Fivefold Mahamudra of the Drigungpas	bsngo ba'i phyag chen
བསྔོ་བས་རྒྱས་འདེབས་པ	sealed by dedication	bsngo bas rgyas 'debs pa
བསྔོ་འབྲེལ་དུ	on behalf of people who had asked for prayers	bsngo 'brel du
བསྔོ་སྨོན	dedication prayer, dedication and aspiration	bsngo smon
བསྔོ་སྨོན་བགྱིད	dedicate (the merit and make aspirations	bsngo smon bgyid
བསྔོ་སྨོན་བགྱིད་བ	dedicate (the merit and make aspirations	bsngo smon bgyid ba
རིམ་པ་དགེ་ཚོགས	an explanation with the appropriate ritual formulae of pariN'amana (bsngo ba) - by the 5th {zhva dmar dkon mchog yan lag} (1525-1583) bsngo bsu rjes dpyod kyi rnam rtog thought that anticipates [fu...	rim pa dge tshogs
བསྔོག	annoy, SA sngog pa	bsngog
བསྔོག་པ	[f sngog pa]	bsngog pa
བསྔོགས	[p sngog]	bsngogs
བསྔོགས་པ	pf. of {sngog pa}	bsngogs pa
བསྔོགས་བཤེར་རྩད་གཅོད	dngos su bsngogs pa'i zhib bsher ???	bsngogs bsher rtsad gcod
བསྔོས	become green, SA sngo ba, resolution, resolve	bsngos
བསྔོས་བསྒྱུར	change one's intention	bsngos bsgyur
བསྔོས་པ	alt. pf. of {rngo ba}; dedicator; pf. of {rngo ba}	bsngos pa
བསྔོས་པས་བསྒྱུར་བ	make firm resolve to go the way of nirvana, final consequences of enlightenment	bsngos pas bsgyur ba
བསྔོས་ཤ	meat butchered on the same day	bsngos sha
བསྔོས་ཤའི་བཤགས་པ	formula of confession and atonement to be recited when one is obliged to take meat butchered on the same day 'sngon - bluish [milk color]	bsngos sha'i bshags pa
ཅ	1) ca; 2) male/ noun particle	ca
ཅ་ག	caution, care. comp. {cag ga}	ca ga
ཅ་ག་དག་པོ	great caution/ care	ca ga dag po
ཅ་གེ	a little, small part	ca ge
ཅ་དགུ	90% chatter, clamor, nonsense; 1) whatever unconnected talk comes out; 2) crowd sound; 3) sound of laughter/ satisfaction	ca dgu
ཅ་ཅིར	bark	ca cir
ཅ་ཅུས	warped, distorted, awry, twisted	ca cus
ཅ་ཅོ	1) chatter, clamor, chirping, inconsequential talk, twittering, noise, noise like the turbulent ocean, exclamation, noisy chatter, yelling. 2) gossiping, babbling. 3) laughter; chirping, blab, tatt...	ca co
ཅ་ཅོ་སྒྲགས་པ	loud[ly] chatter, make loud noise	ca co sgrags pa
ཅ་ཅོ་སྒྲོག	1) cry unclearly, babble, chatter, gossip, twitter. chirp, shout, bawl; 2) pigeon	ca co sgrog
ཅ་ཅོ་སྒྲོགས	expression of love in birds, low or pleasing tone, pigeon	ca co sgrogs
ཅ་ཅོ་སྒྲོགས་པ	{bya 'di rnams kyis shing gi nags la ca co sgrogs pa} the birds in their chirps and cries are saying	ca co sgrogs pa
ཅ་ཅོ་ཅན	talkative, loquacious, chatty, garrulous, talky, gabby	ca co can
ཅ་ཅོ་ཆུང་བ	noiseless, quiet	ca co chung ba
ཅ་ཅོ་ཆེ	babble, confused noise	ca co che
ཅ་ཅོ་བྱེད	chang,.Hang	ca co byed
ཅ་ཅོ་མི་མངའ་བ	not talkative, not speaking noisily, trustworthiness of speech	ca co mi mnga' ba
པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	- about the dharmas taught by the buddha students always attain certainty]	pa bco brgyad
ཅ་ཅོ་མེད་པ	not rash or noisy in speech, free from noise or chatter, without fuss, attribute of buddha	ca co med pa
ཅ་ཅོ་ལབ་གླེང	argue diffusively	ca co lab gleng
ཅ་དར	sheet, blanket, toga, shawl, plaid	ca dar
ཅ་འདོར་བ	discharge excrement	ca 'dor ba
ཅ་སྡེ	CA class [of consonants, ca cha ja nya]	ca sde
ཅ་ན	Ghana	ca na
ཅ་ན་ཏ	Canada	ca na ta
ཅ་ནེ	wooden cup/ bowl	ca ne
ཅ་ནོར	property, wealth, possessions	ca nor
ཅ་པ	the 1 ca in alphabetical order	ca pa
ཅ་ཕྱི	disagreement, not in accordance with	ca phyi
ཅ་འཕྱི	depend on 1 of two and abandon the other	ca 'phyi
ཅ་བ	root, vein	ca ba
ཅ་བོ	wealth and enjoyment	ca bo
ཅ་འབྱིད	[arch] depend on 1 of two and abandon the other	ca 'byid
ཅ་མ་ཟིང	mgo rnyog, yid sun pa Don med rna lcog sun po	ca ma zing
ཅ་མེད་པ	makes no exclamation or noise	ca med pa
ཅ་ཟིང་དགུ་ཟིང	troublesome/ bothersome to do	ca zing dgu zing
ཅ་ཟིང་པོ	muddled head, troublesome/ bothersome	ca zing po
ཅ་ཟིང་པོ་བྱེད	give people problems, be troublesome, bother	ca zing po byed
ཅ་ཟིང་པོ་མ་བཟོས་རོགས་གནག	please don't be a pest	ca zing po ma bzos rogs gnag
ཅ་ཟིང་པོ་བཟོ	give people problems, be troublesome, bother	ca zing po bzo
ཅ་ར་ཁུང	cavity at bottom of neck above where collar bones meet	ca ra khung
ཅ་ར་མ་ར	raving, unconnected talk	ca ra ma ra
ཅ་ར་ར	noise produced by falling of rain in high wind	ca ra ra
ཅ་རི	bug	ca ri
ཅ་རིལ	Amdo Khams same pronunciation of ca and ja	ca ril
ཅ་རེ	1) continually, always; 2) splendid	ca re
ཅ་རེ་ཉ་རེ	few, scattered	ca re nya re
ཅ་ལག	things, object, belongings, stuff, articles, furniture; things, object, be-	ca lag
ཅ་ལག་ཁྱད་ཚར	contraption	ca lag khyad tshar
ཅ་ལག་གི	material	ca lag gi
ཅ་ལག་གོང་ཆེན་པོ	valuables	ca lag gong chen po
ཅ་ལག་ནོར་རྫས	ca lag gra 'grig po	ca lag nor rdzas
ཅ་ལག་ཕན་མེད	junk	ca lag phan med
ཅ་ལག་སོབ་སོབ	sponge	ca lag sob sob
ཅ་ལི་ལིའི་མཚོ	Caribbean Sea	ca li li'i mtsho
ཅ་ལུད	potassium fertilizer	ca lud
ཅ་ལེ་ཅོ་ལེ	w/o connection whatever talk comes out, irregular, inefficient, sloppy, irregular, nonsensical, garbled	ca le co le
ཅ་ལེ་བ	speaking whatever comes out w/o meaning	ca le ba
ཅ་སུའུ་ཆིས	accelerator, cyclotron	ca su'u chis
ཅ་ཨེར	raffle	ca er
ཅག	plural particle	cag
ཅག་ཀྲུམ	cartilage, gristle	cag krum
ཅག་དཀར	quartz	cag dkar
ཅག་ག	take care of	cag ga
ཅག་ག་དག་པོ	careful, orderly, regular, tidy	cag ga dag po
ཅག་ག་བྱེད	take care of, look after	cag ga byed
ཅག་ག་བྱེད་པ	to take care of	cag ga byed pa
ཅག་ག་ཡག་པོ་བྱེད	take good care of	cag ga yag po byed
ཅག་གེ	a little, small portion	cag ge
ཅག་ཅག	eating sound, smacking, crunching	cag cag
ཅག་ཅག་པོ	exact, definite, stable, unchanging	cag cag po
ཅག་ཅག་མི་བྱ	do not crunch so!	cag cag mi bya
ཅག་ཅེར་རེ	closely pressed or crowded in standing or sitting	cag cer re
ཅག་ཅོབ	smacking, crunching	cag cob
ཅག་ཐོན	take good care of	cag thon
ཅག་རྡོ	quartz	cag rdo
ཅག་པོ	miserly	cag po
ཅག་ཙེ	wicker basket	cag tse
ཅག་ཟོན	take care [to avoid harm]	cag zon
ཅག་ཡག	iron hoe	cag yag
ཅང	1) adj. comp. of cang po. 2) Abbr. of {ci yang} anything, everything, whatever. 3) thick sauce made from beans, flour, etc. 4) sound of drum, music	cang
ཅང་ཀེ་ཤག	Chiang Kai Shek	cang ke shag
ཅང་སྐྱོར་གུང་རྒོལ	aiding Chiang Kai Shek and fighting the communists	cang skyor gung rgol
ཅང་གི་སྨྲ་བ	to say nothing, remain silent	cang gi smra ba
ཅང་གི་སྨྲ་བར་འདུག	say nothing, remain silent	cang gi smra bar 'dug
ཅང་གྲུང	clever, intelligent	cang grung
ཅང་ངལ་གཙང་པོ	{cang ngal gtsang po} river	cang ngal gtsang po
ཅང་ངལ་གཏཟང་པོ	{cang ngal gtzang po} river [central shan rtza rdzong, source in its E part and W ngos su brgyugs, flowing into g.yi sbug tsva kha]	cang ngal gtzang po
ཅང་ངེ་ཅོག་གེ	[arch] having gone many miles, stay there	cang nge cog ge
ཅང་ངེ་ཅོང་ངེ	delicate/ weak health	cang nge cong nge
ཅང་ཅང	1) tasteless, dull; 2) w/o conflict	cang cang
ཅང་ཅང་ཁྲུག་ཁྲུག	bcang bcang khrug khrug	cang cang khrug khrug
ཅང་ཅང་ཏེའུ	hand drum	cang cang te'u
ཅང་ཅུ	general	cang cu
ཅང་ཅུན	general	cang cun
ཅང་ཅེ་ཧྲི	Chiang Kai Shek	cang ce hri
ཅང་ཅོང	kind of music w gshang and large bell	cang cong
ཅང་ཆིང	Chiang Ch'ing	cang ching
ཅང་ཏེའུ	hand drum, damaru, [usually made of wood], small drum	cang te'u
ཅང་ཏེའུ་བརྡུང་ཞིང	beating a hand drum	cang te'u brdung zhing
ཅང་པོ	smart, clever, intelligent, skillful	cang po
ཅང་དཔོན	general, Chiang Kai Shek's officers	cang dpon
ཅང་ཕིང	name of commune	cang phing
ཅང་མི་སྟོ	it does not mater, it makes no difference, it is all the same	cang mi sto
ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བ	to say nothing	cang mi smra ba
ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བར	did not know what to say	cang mi smra bar
ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ	grew speechless	cang mi smra bar gyur to
ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བར་འདུག་པ	to remain utterly silent	cang mi smra bar 'dug pa
ཅང་མི་ཤེས་མཁན	one not knowing anything, blockhead, simpleton	cang mi shes mkhan
ཅང་མི་གསུང་བ	to say nothing at all, to remain utterly silent, {cang mi smra ba} [mss]	cang mi gsung ba
ཅང་མེད	nothing whatsoever, having, gaining nothing, not much. Abbr. of {ci yang med pa}; nothing whatsoever, having, gaining nothing, not much	cang med
ཅང་མེད་ཀྱི་བཀག་པ	nihilistic denial	cang med kyi bkag pa
ཅང་མེད་པ	nothingness	cang med pa
ཅང་མེད་ཕྱང་ཆད	totally blank nothingness	cang med phyang chad
ཅང་དམག	Chiang Kai Skek's army	cang dmag
ཅང་ཞི	Kiangsi Province	cang zhi
ཅང་ཞིས	Kiangsi Province	cang zhis
ཅང་ཟག	Chiang Kai Shek's bandits	cang zag
ཅང་ཟག་ཚོགས་ཁག	Chiang Kai Shek's bandit clique	cang zag tshogs khag
ཅང་ཡིའུ	soy sauce, soy	cang yi'u
ཅང་རིག	wise, knowing [everything], prudent, knowledgeable, intelligent	cang rig
ཅང་ཤེས	1) knowing [everything], omniscient; 2) by higher perceptions well informed, w unobstructed discriminative awareness; 3) knowledgeable, intelligent	cang shes
ཅང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྟ	horse that has knowledge; horse that has knowledge, of good breed. [the manner of the allknowing horse who knows everything and swiftly encircles everything in a moment.]	cang shes kyi rta
ཅང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྟ་མཆོག	a superb horse	cang shes kyi rta mchog
ཅང་ཤེས་སྐྱེས་བུ	the wise	cang shes skyes bu
ཅང་ཤེས་པ	all-knowing	cang shes pa
ཅང་སུའུ	Kiangsu Province	cang su'u
ཅང་སེང	Changseng, a class of divine manifestations	cang seng
ཅང་སེང་མགྲོན་ཡག་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen cang seng experts in covering long distances	cang seng mgron yag bcu gsum
ཅང་སེང་ལྕམ་དྲལ	Brothers and Sisters protective deities	cang seng lcam dral
ཅང་སྲིད	1) ci yang srid; 2) Ae srid	cang srid
ཅང་ཧེའུ	hand drum	cang he'u
ཅང་ཧྲི	lecturer, instructor	cang hri
ཅངས་ཀྱིས་འཇུས་པ	[arch] dam por 'jus pa [Dpyang thag la cangs kyis 'jus pa]	cangs kyis 'jus pa
ཅངས་པོ	clever, skillful	cangs po
ཅད	(not in DAS)	cad
ཅད་རྐྱ	strict and solitary	cad rkya
ཅད་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྡ	horse w fake knowledge	cad shes kyi rda
ཅན་ཅིལ	green shell of walnut	can cil
ཅན་ཅེ	teacup (wood or china), small bowl or dish, continually	can ce
ཅན་ཅེར	uninterrupted	can cer
ཅན་ཅོན་དུ	all	can con du
ཅན་ཆེར	[arch] small bowl, tea-cup	can cher
ཅན་ཏེའུ	hand drum	can te'u
ཅན་དྭང	green, unripe	can dwang
ཅན་དུ	with	can du
ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	come to be/ have --	can du 'gyur
ཅན་དྲིལ	hand-bell	can dril
ཅན་ནེ	teacup, small bowl, continually	can ne
ཅན་ཕུ་ཀྲེ	Cambodia	can phu kre
ཅན་མིན	nothing. 2) (Hashang School?)	can min
ཅན་བཞི་རྒྱལ་པོ	incarnation of padma sambhava	can bzhi rgyal po
ཅན་ས	kitchen, fire-place	can sa
ཅབ་ཅབ	1) sound of eating, tasting, smacking the lips; 2) clapping	cab cab
ཅབ་ཅབ་བྱེད	clap	cab cab byed
ཅབ་ཅོབ	sound of tasting, nonsense	cab cob
ཅབ་ཅོབ་སྨྲ་བ	talk nonsense	cab cob smra ba
ཅབ་མ	valve	cab ma
ཅམ	1 slow and relaxed; 2) rbad de'am rtsa ba nas,...Sngar gyi lugs srol ngan pa rnams cam bzhag byed pa,...Las ka 'di cam gyis 'jog dgos	cam
ཅམ་གྱིས	carefully, slowly, quietly	cam gyis
ཅམ་གྱིས་འཇོག་པ	place quietly	cam gyis 'jog pa
ཅམ་གྱིས་བཞག་པ	completely discarded, letting go	cam gyis bzhag pa
ཅམ་ཅམ	walk about	cam cam
ཅམ་འཇོག་བྱེད	give up completely, refrain from, leave [behind]	cam 'jog byed
ཅམ་སྡོད	keep silent, sit still	cam sdod
ཅམ་པ་ཏ་ལོ	mallow	cam pa ta lo
ཅམ་པོ	slow, quiet, careful, gentle, glistening, whole	cam po
ཅམ་པོད	a bunch 747	cam pod
ཅམ་མེ	carefully, slowly, quietly, completely	cam me
ཅམ་མེ་པ	carefully, slowly, quietly, completely	cam me pa
ཅམ་མེ་བ	tranquility, calm, serenity	cam me ba
ཅམ་མེ་ཞོག	let go completely!	cam me zhog
ཅམ་མེ་བཞག་ནས་ཅོག་གེར་བསྒུར	let go completely and it is fully revealed	cam me bzhag nas cog ger bsgur
ཅམ་མེ་བཞག་པ	to completely let go	cam me bzhag pa
ཅམ་ཙེ	cham tse ???	cam tse
ཅམ་བཞག	total letting go	cam bzhag
ཅམ་བཞག་བྱེད	give up completely, refrain from, leave [behind]	cam bzhag byed
ཅམ་བཞག་བྱེད་པ	to let go. Syn {cam 'jog byed pa}	cam bzhag byed pa
ཅའི་ཏན་ས་ཚིགས	power station	ca'i tan sa tshigs
ཅའོ་ཁྲེ	car, sedan	ca'o khre
ཅའོ་དབྱེ་སུའོ	stock exchange	ca'o dbye su'o
ཅའོ་ཧྲོའུ	professor	ca'o hro'u
ཅར	permanently, all together always, continually	car
ཅར་རྒྱག་ཉར་རྒྱག	following 1 after another	car rgyag nyar rgyag
ཅར་བརྡུངས	to flatten out	car brdungs
ཅར་ཕོག	{car phog tu 'bebs pa} (to strike/ focus) directly; (very) precisely; isc. immediate	car phog
ཅར་ཕོག་ཏུ	sudden, immediate, direct	car phog tu
ཅར་མར	1) permanently, all the time, always. 2) continuously, repeatedly, one after another	car mar
ཅར་མར་བཅུ་མཐོང	see 10 one after another	car mar bcu mthong
ཅར་མར་འདིར་སྡོད	lives here permanently	car mar 'dir sdod
ཅར་རས	small apron	car ras
ཅར་རེ	Syn {car mar}	car re
ཅར་ལ་ཐེབས་པ	to distribute, divide	car la thebs pa
ཅར་ལེབ	joined, put together	car leb
ཅལ	noise	cal
ཅལ་གྱུག	rumor, false report	cal gyug
ཅལ་སྒྲ	sound of trees falling in the water etc.	cal sgra
ཅལ་སྒྲོག	idle hearsay	cal sgrog
ཅལ་སྒྲོགས	nonsense	cal sgrogs
ཅལ་སྒྲོས	nonsense	cal sgros
ཅལ་ཅལ	noise	cal cal
ཅལ་ཅོལ	noise, idle talk	cal col
ཅལ་ཅོལ་གཏམ	idle talk, nonsense	cal col gtam
ཅལ་ཅོལ་དུ	impulsively babbling, blathering	cal col du
ཅལ་ཅོལ་མང་པོ་སྨྲ་འདོད	want to make much idle talk	cal col mang po smra 'dod
ཅལ་གཏམ	idle talk, nonsense	cal gtam
ཅལ་འདྲོགས	be frightened by sound [like tree falling in the water] and flee	cal 'drogs
ཅལ་ལེ་ཅོལ་ལེ	unstable, meaningless, pointless, unconnected nonsense/ babble, noise, idle talk	cal le col le
ཅས་ཅུས	crooked, distorted, twisted	cas cus
ཅི	for, what[ever] why, which, where, how much, and so as-as	ci
ཅི་ཀ	[arch] ci ga	ci ka
ཅི་ཀོན་ཆང	machine gun	ci kon chang
ཅི་ཀྲང	head pilot, captain	ci krang
ཅི་ཀྲུང	central Hopei PRC	ci krung
ཅི་ཁུག་རིན་འཇལ	gang khug gi rin 'bab sprod 'jal,...Spus nyos kyi dngos por yul thang ci khug rin 'jal drang 'brel byas pa ???	ci khug rin 'jal
ཅི་ག	[arch] that [which was said], how? [like] what? any	ci ga
ཅི་གར	in what manner, how	ci gar
ཅི་གོ	gang 'dra' ci 'dra Dgos dus med le ci go red	ci go
ཅི་དགའ	whatever one likes	ci dga'
ཅི་དགར	whatever one may wish, at pleasure, what is your pleasure?	ci dgar
ཅི་དགར་བྱས	did what [he] liked	ci dgar byas
ཅི་དགར་ལུས་སྦྱོང	free form exercise [gymnastics]	ci dgar lus sbyong
ཅི་དགུ	all, however many, much there may be	ci dgu
ཅི་དགུ་བྱས	[we] did what/all that could be don	ci dgu byas
ཅི་དགོས	what must I do, what is necessary so that	ci dgos
ཅི་བགྱི	servant, valet	ci bgyi
ཅི་བགྱི་བཀའ་ཉན	kha la nyan pa,...Btang 'gro bzhag sdod ci bgyi bka' nyan byed pa	ci bgyi bka' nyan
ཅི་བགྱི་བ	servant, attendant	ci bgyi ba
ཅི་བགྱིས	how can they affect?	ci bgyis
ཅི་འགྱུས་འདི་འགྱུས	noticing what one is thinning of ci 'gyus 'di 'gyus med par dran med du	ci 'gyus 'di 'gyus
ཡེངས་པ	carried away mindlessly without noticing what you are thinking of	yengs pa
ཅི་འགྲོ	whatever is better/ suitable	ci 'gro
ཅི་རྒོད	wild millet	ci rgod
ཅི་མངོན	from where?	ci mngon
ཅི་ཅིར	without hair on the head, bald head	ci cir
ཅི་ཅོག	all [there is], however many there may be, everything	ci cog
ཅི་ཅོག་ཚང་མ	everything [there is]	ci cog tshang ma
ཅི་བཅོལ་པ	whatever has been promised	ci bcol pa
ཅི་ལྕོགས	whatever possible	ci lcogs
ཅི་ཆ	uncertain, incomprehensible helpless, not knowing what to do	ci cha
ཅི་ཆ་མེད་པ	1) helpless, not knowing what to do. 2) indefinite, incomprehensible; helpless, not knowing what to do; 1) helpless, not knowing what to do. 2) indefinite; incomprehensible	ci cha med pa
ཅི་ཆ་ཡོད་པ	uncertain, incomprehensible helpless, not knowing what to do	ci cha yod pa
ཅི་ཆང	machine gun	ci chang
ཅི་ཆང་ལྕི་བ	heavy machine gun	ci chang lci ba
ཅི་ཆབ	[arch] mthar phyin pa	ci chab
ཅི་ཆིབ	exhaustive, brought to perfection, to the farthest limit	ci chib
ཅི་ཆེད	for what purpose?	ci ched
ཅི་ཆེར	as big/ much as possible	ci cher
ཅི་ཆོག	as [much as]/ whatever you like	ci chog
ཅི་མཆིས	whatever there is. Syn {ci dgu}; whatever there is	ci mchis
ཅི་མཆིས་པ	all, whatever there is	ci mchis pa
ཅི་མཆིས་གསུངས	say whatever there is to say	ci mchis gsungs
ཅི་འཇིགས་མེད	{ci 'jigs med	ci 'jigs med
ཅི་བརྗོད	what has been stated	ci brjod
ཅི་ཉེས	What has befallen?	ci nyes
ཅི་ཉེས་ན	what is the matter?	ci nyes na
ཅི་སྙམ	/(1 what is being thought; 2) why think?	ci snyam
ཅི་སྙེ	how much, how many	ci snye
ཅི་སྙེད	SA snyed	ci snyed
ཅི་རྟགས་པ་ནས་བཟུང	on what evidence have they seized him?	ci rtags pa nas bzung
ཅི་ལྟ	how? in what way?	ci lta
ཅི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན	just as it is	ci lta ba bzhin
ཅི་ལྟ་བུ	what is	ci lta bu
ཅི་ལྟ་བུ་ཉིད	just as it is	ci lta bu nyid
ཅི་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པའི་ཚུལ་ནི	the nature of their ...	ci lta bu yin pa'i tshul ni
ཅི་ལྟར	Syn {gang 'dra}; how, in what way. Syn {gang 'dra} how, in what manner?	ci ltar
ཅི་ལྟར་བྱེད་ན	legs, what is it best to do?	ci ltar byed na
ཅི་སྟ་དེ་ནས	so and so, but if, nevertheless	ci sta de nas
ཅི་སྟེ	1) and so, so that; 2) though, although; 3) if; 3) and that is why	ci ste
ཅི་སྟེ་རྐྱེན་དང་ལྡན་ན	when / if the right conditions are present	ci ste rkyen dang ldan na
ཅི་སྟེ་ཡང	{ci ste yang ci nas kyang dang don gcig}, {Ci ste yang} is equivalent to {ci nas kyang}. [mss]	ci ste yang
ཅི་སྟོ	MG: no harm, doesn't matter. E.g. kho ma yon na'ang ci sto, There is no harm even though he didn't come. CM: no entry. [mss]	ci sto
ཅི་བརྟོལ	1) w/o shame or decency; 2) extreme bragging lying Ham pa tsha po; 3) very stupid	ci brtol
ཅི་ཐུབ	keep as much as possible	ci thub
ཅི་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་བར	as long as possible	ci thub kyi bar
ཅི་ཐོད་ཐོད	what happens happens, in spite of everything	ci thod thod
ཅི་འཐིབས་པ	exhausted, tired	ci 'thibs pa
ཅི་དག	such as, so forth, etc.	ci dag
ཅི་དང་ཅི	no matter what	ci dang ci
ཅི་དང་ཅི་འདོད་པ	whatever you may wish	ci dang ci 'dod pa
ཅི་དང་ཅི་འདྲ	of whatever kind	ci dang ci 'dra
ཅི་དང་ཅིར	whatever	ci dang cir
ཅི་དྲག	whatever is best. 2) what to do? what can be done?; what is best (to do)?; whatever is best	ci drag
ཅི་དྲག་ཏུ་གྱུར	What could he do?	ci drag tu gyur
ཅི་དྲག་འདི་དྲག	what should I do? What is best?	ci drag 'di drag
ཅི་དྲག་ན་སྙམ	What is to be done?	ci drag na snyam
ཅི་དྲག་ཡོད་པའི་ཚེ	did not know what to do	ci drag yod pa'i tshe
ཅི་བདེ	as is comfortable; {lus ci bder 'jog pa} let your body repose as is comfortable	ci bde
ཅི་བདེ་བ	what is good, what pleases, as they like	ci bde ba
ཅི་བདེར	freely	ci bder
ཅི་བདེར་སྤྱོད་པ	at will, uncontrolled	ci bder spyod pa
ཅི་བདེར་བཞུགས	Stay well!	ci bder bzhugs
ཅི་བདེར་ཡན	to roam freely	ci bder yan
ཅི་འདུག	whether it consists in, whether there is, no matter how it is	ci 'dug
ཅི་འདུག་བལྟ	see whether there is	ci 'dug blta
ཅི་འདོད	as much rain as desired	ci 'dod
ཅི་འདོད་གང་འདོད	whatever 1 wants	ci 'dod gang 'dod
ཅི་འདོད་སྟེར་བ	can give what I long for	ci 'dod ster ba
ཅི་འདོད་སྟེར་བའི་སྦྱིན་པ	giving what people desire {ci 'dod ster ba'i sbyin pa 'gag pa'i tshig smra ba} words suggesting that I stop giving what people desire	ci 'dod ster ba'i sbyin pa
ཅི་འདོད་སྟེར་བས་སྨོས་ཤིག	I will give you whatever you wish. Tell me!	ci 'dod ster bas smos shig
ཅི་འདོད་དྲིས་པ	What do you wish?	ci 'dod dris pa
ཅི་འདོད་འདོད	whatever 1 wants	ci 'dod 'dod
ཅི་འདོད་པ	as you like, whatever you please	ci 'dod pa
ཅི་འདོད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attain whatever is desired	ci 'dod pa thob pa
ཅི་འདྲ	Syn {gang 'dra}	ci 'dra
ཅི་འདྲ་གང་འདྲ་མཛད་པ	to whine, "What's happening? What can we do?"	ci 'dra gang 'dra mdzad pa
ཅི་འདྲ་འདུག	how it is	ci 'dra 'dug
ཅི་འདྲ་བ	like what?, similar to what?, of what kind?	ci 'dra ba
ཅི་འདྲ་བ་ཉིད	just as it is	ci 'dra ba nyid
ཅི་འདྲ་བ་ཞིག	{gang 'dra zhig} what kind of. [mss]	ci 'dra ba zhig
ཅི་འདྲ་ཞིག	"what kind of" construction	ci 'dra zhig
ཅི་འདྲ་ཞིག་དགོས	what should it be like	ci 'dra zhig dgos
ཅི་འདྲ་ཞིག་ཡོད	who knows what kind of	ci 'dra zhig yod
ཅི་འདྲ་རེད	how, why	ci 'dra red
ཅི་ནན	Tsinan	ci nan
ཅི་ནར	[arch] by all means, in any case, certainly, how? in what way?	ci nar
ཅི་ནས	{ci nas kyang} by all means/ in any case; at the very least; unquestionably	ci nas
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང	come what may	ci nas kyang
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་གལ་ཆེའོ	is of the utmost importance	ci nas kyang gal che'o
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་དགོས	extremely necessary	ci nas kyang dgos
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་འགྲོ་ངེས་པར་བྱ་དགོས་སོ	It is of the utmost importance	ci nas kyang 'gro nges par bya dgos so
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་བྱེད་དགོས	must by all means be done	ci nas kyang byed dgos
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་འབད་དགོས	we must try very hard, in any case we must try	ci nas kyang 'bad dgos
ཅི་ནས་ཀྱང་འབད་དགོས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ	we must try very hard, in any case we must try	ci nas kyang 'bad dgos pa yin no
ཅི་ནས་ཇི་ལྟ	henceforth	ci nas ji lta
ཅི་ནས་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	as for instance	ci nas ji lta ba
ཅི་ནས་ཡང	by all means, certainly, extremely, exceedingly, in any case	ci nas yang
ཅི་ནི	sugar, white sugar	ci ni
ཅི་ནི་རྒྱག	pour/ use sugar	ci ni rgyag
ཅི་ནུས	try [your] best!	ci nus
ཅི་ནུས་ཀྱིས	as much as possible, SA ji nus kyis, to one's best ability	ci nus kyis
ཅི་ནུས་གང་ནུས	try [your] best! as well as [you] can	ci nus gang nus
ཅི་ནུས་བྱ	do it as much as possible	ci nus bya
ཅི་ནུས་བཟླས་པ	recite as many times as you can	ci nus bzlas pa
ཅི་ནུས་སུ	as much as possible/ you can	ci nus su
ཅི་ནུས་སུ་འབད་དགོས་ཏེ	try to do such things as much as you can	ci nus su 'bad dgos te
ཅི་ནེ་ཡ	Guinea	ci ne ya
ཅི་ནོངས	what has been done amiss?	ci nongs
ཅི་གནས	as long as it lasts / remains	ci gnas
ཅི་གནས་སུ་བཞག	keep as long as it remains, resting in that	ci gnas su bzhag
ཅི་སྣང	no matter what is perceived	ci snang
ཅི་པད	at ease	ci pad
ཅི་སྤྱད་ཀྱང	whatever you experience? whatever you "do"	ci spyad kyang
ཅི་ཕུའུ	jeep	ci phu'u
ཅི་ཕོད	how can that be? try your best!	ci phod
ཅི་ཕྱིར	why? how? for what [reason]?	ci phyir
ཅི་འཕྲོས་མོལ་འཕྲོས	say what they remember	ci 'phros mol 'phros
ཅི་བས་ཀྱང་བདེ	to feel much better	ci bas kyang bde
ཅི་བྱ	What's the use?/ what to do	ci bya
ཅི་བྱ་གར་འགྲོ་སྙམ་སྟེ	Where can I go?	ci bya gar 'gro snyam ste
ཅི་བྱ་སྙམ	dispensable; x {bshad pa ni tshig gi ro yin pas des ci bya snyam ste khyad du bsad} [do not] disregard the way in which the teachings are expressed, as being just the words and therefore dispensable.	ci bya snyam
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་བྲལ	no way to do it, helpless, not knowing what to do	ci bya gtol bral
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་བྲལ་འགྱུར	have no way to do it, be helpless, not know what to do	ci bya gtol bral 'gyur
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་མེད	not knowing what to do	ci bya gtol med
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་མེད་འགྱུར	have no way to do it, be helpless, not know what to do	ci bya gtol med 'gyur
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་མེད་དུ་གྱུར་པ	not knowing what to do	ci bya gtol med du gyur pa
ཅི་བྱ་གཏོལ་མེད་པ	desperate and have no idea what to do; x {bros sa dang gab sa skyabs dang re ltos thams cad zad nas ci bya gtol med pa'i skabs su}	ci bya gtol med pa
ཧོཝ་ཅོཨུལད་སུཆ་ཨ་མོམེནཏ	when there is no place to run to and nowhere to hide, no refuge and no hope, when you are desperate and have no idea what to do	how could such a moment
ཅི་བྱ་བའི་གཏོལ་མེད	not knowing what to do	ci bya ba'i gtol med
ཅི་བྱ་མེད་པ	not know what to do	ci bya med pa
ཅི་བྱར	what about?	ci byar
ཅི་བྱར་ཡོད	what is the point of trying	ci byar yod
ཅི་བྱས	what is the use of?	ci byas
ཅི་བྱས་དྲིས་པ	asked what happened to them	ci byas dris pa
ཅི་བྱུང	whatever occurs	ci byung
ཅི་བྱུང་བ་ཡིན	what has become of him	ci byung ba yin
ཅི་བྱེད	what is the use of?	ci byed
ཅི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་དམ	I wonder what is he doing	ci byed kyi yod dam
ཅི་འབྱོར	whatever one can afford	ci 'byor
ཅི་འབྱོར་པ	whatever you have, possess	ci 'byor pa
ཅི་འབྱོར་བའི་མཆོད་པ	offering of whatever one has, can get	ci 'byor ba'i mchod pa
ཅི་མ་ཡིན	1) rang gar [ordinary?, no big deal?; 2) various activities, whatever 1 likes	ci ma yin
ཅི་མ་རུང	how nice	ci ma rung
ཅི་མི་ཆོག	why isn't that enough?	ci mi chog
ཅི་མི་སྙམ	not thinking anything	ci mi snyam
ཅི་མི་འདྲ	why isn't it like that?	ci mi 'dra
ཅི་མི་ལེགས	why isn't that good?	ci mi legs
ཅི་མེད་ཅང་མེད	nothing at all	ci med cang med
ཅི་མྱུར	as speedily as possible	ci myur
ཅི་སྨོས	what is there to say?	ci smos
ཅི་སྨྲ་བར་བྱེད	what is there to say?	ci smra bar byed
ཅི་ཙམ	how many, how much, how much, as long as	ci tsam
ཅི་ཙམ་བརྟགས་ཀྱང	no amount of careful examination	ci tsam brtags kyang
ཅི་ཙམ་དུ	how far?	ci tsam du
ཅི་ཙམ་ནུས	as many times as possible	ci tsam nus
ཅི་ཙམ་གནས་ཀྱི་བར	as long as one can	ci tsam gnas kyi bar
ཅི་ཙམ་བྱས	how much have you done?	ci tsam byas
ཅི་ཙུག	like what, how? in what way?	ci tsug
ཅི་ཙུག་བྱེད	What shall we do?	ci tsug byed
ཅི་ཙེ	kind of millet, species of grain eaten by the poor	ci tse
ཅི་རྩེ	kind of millet	ci rtse
ཅི་ཚུག	like what, how? In what way?	ci tshug
ཅི་ཚུག་ཟེར་དགོས	how should [I] say it?	ci tshug zer dgos
ཅི་ཚེ	SA ci tse, kind of millet	ci tshe
ཅི་མཚན	of what sex?	ci mtshan
ཅི་མཛད	whatever you do, whatever happens	ci mdzad
ཅི་མཛད་ཁྱེད་མཁྱེན	Whatever you do, you know best	ci mdzad khyed mkhyen
ཅི་མཛད་ཁྱེད་རང་གི་ཤེས	Whatever you do, you know best	ci mdzad khyed rang gi shes
ཅི་མཛད་ཁྱེད་རང་གི་ཤེས་སོ	total surrender	ci mdzad khyed rang gi shes so
ཅི་མཛད་ཁྱེད་ཤེས	that it is up to [him] whatever happens	ci mdzad khyed shes
ཅི་མཛད་ལེགས་མཐོང	see whatever [usu a superior] does as good	ci mdzad legs mthong
ཅི་མཛད་ལེགས་པར་མཐོང་བ	seeing whatever he does as positive	ci mdzad legs par mthong ba
ཅི་ཞིག	what sort of, like what, the 1 which, whatever, a certain	ci zhig
ཅི་ཞིག་ལྟར	1) ji ltar, gang ltar [however, whatever, like, just as, like those which]; 2) [arch] effortlessly accomplish something difficult	ci zhig ltar
ཅི་ཞིག་དྲག	as well as possible	ci zhig drag
ཅི་ཞིག་ན	at a certain point, at some point, there will come a point	ci zhig na
ཅི་ཞིག་བྱ	what is the use?	ci zhig bya
ཅི་ཞིག་བྱེད	what is the use	ci zhig byed
ཅི་ཞིག་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	why, what is it	ci zhig byed rgyu
ཅི་ཞིག་བརྩལ	whatever is there to seek with effort?	ci zhig brtsal
ཅི་ཞུ	reply	ci zhu
ཅི་ཞེ་ན	if [you] ask what	ci zhe na
ཅི་ཞེས་བསྟན་པ	whatever has been demonstrated	ci zhes bstan pa
ཅི་བཞིག	whatever, something, anything	ci bzhig
ཅི་བཞིན	as it is, SA ji bzhin	ci bzhin
ཅི་ཟེར	what does he say?	ci zer
ཅི་ཟེར་ཁ་ལ་ཉན་པ	obedient, subservient; practice whatever you are taught	ci zer kha la nyan pa
ཅི་ཟེར་བ	what does he say	ci zer ba
ཅི་ཟེར་འབིར་བ	what was said to make him tremble	ci zer 'bir ba
ཅི་འང་མེད་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the sensesphere of nothing whatsoever	ci 'ang med pa'i skye mched
ཅི་ཡང	any[thing], whatever, at all all sorts of, somewhat	ci yang
ཅི་ཡང་མཁྱེན་པ	omniscient	ci yang mkhyen pa
ཅི་ཡང་འཆར་བ	{med snang ci yang 'char ba sprul pa'i grong khyer lta bu} as in a city created by magic, there are all sorts appearances but they are not really there	ci yang 'char ba
ཅི་ཡང་རྙེད་མེད	nothing to be found ci yang dran med tham thom tshom 'jog	ci yang rnyed med
ཅི་ཡང་བྱར་མེད	total nonaction	ci yang byar med
ཅི་ཡང་བྱར་མེད་པ	nothing whatsoever to be done / carried out / enacted	ci yang byar med pa
ཅི་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	cannot be established as anything whatsoever	ci yang ma grub pa
ཅི་ཡང་མ་བྱུང	nothing happened, nothing came out of it	ci yang ma byung
ཅི་ཡང་མ་ཡིན	transcend all definitions, is not an object	ci yang ma yin
ཅི་ཡང་མ་ཡིན་པ	to be nothing in and of itself	ci yang ma yin pa
ཅི་ཡང་མི་འགོག	to refute nothing, to not refute anything	ci yang mi 'gog
ཅི་ཡང་མི་དྲན་པར	totally thoughtless / thoughtfree	ci yang mi dran par
ཅི་ཡང་མི་ནུས	not able to do anything, not at all able	ci yang mi nus
ཅི་ཡང་མི་དམིགས་པ	seeing no thing whatsoever	ci yang mi dmigs pa
ཅི་ཡང་མི་སྨྲ་བ	did not respond	ci yang mi smra ba
ཅི་ཡང་མི་ཤེས	a know-nothing, ignoramus, dunce	ci yang mi shes
ཅི་ཡང་མེད	nothingness, none whatsoever	ci yang med
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ	Nothing Whatsoever; {skye mched mu bzhi} {gzugs med pa'i khams bzhi}	ci yang med pa
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ་ལ་ཅིར་ཡང་ཤར་བ	in every way ineffable, yet arising as anything at all	ci yang med pa la cir yang shar ba
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	perceptionsphere of Nothing Whatsoever, the activity field of nothing at all, one of the classes of gods of the {gzugs med pa'i khams} formless realm; realm of nothingness	ci yang med pa'i skye mched
ཐར	the emancipation of the perception-sphere of Nothing Whatsoever 751 ci yang med pa'i skye mched kyi rnam	thar
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	samapatti/ meditation on nothing whatever	ci yang med pa'i snyoms 'jug
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	contemplation/ samadhi of nothing whatsoever	ci yang med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness that is a nihilistic void ci yang med pa'i stong pa phyang chad nihilistic void of nothingness ci yang med pa'i stong pa phyang chad nihilistic and void of nothingness, utterly nihilistic...	ci yang med pa'i stong pa nyid
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཕྱལ་ཆད	utterly nihilistic state of void	ci yang med pa'i stong pa phyal chad
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conception of nothing whatsoever	ci yang med pa'i 'du shes
ཅི་ཡང་མེད་མིན	not completely nonexistent	ci yang med min
ཅི་ཡང་ཟེར	bcom ldan 'das zer ba'i nga	ci yang zer
རྒྱལ་ཅན་དེས་ཅི་ཡང་ཟེར	“Whatever the arrogant one who calls himself Bhagavan says,	rgyal can des ci yang zer
ཅི་ཡང་རིག	Syn {cang rig}, learned, experienced, knowing everything	ci yang rig
ཅི་ཡང་རུང	whatsoever it may be	ci yang rung
ཅི་ཡང་རུང་བ	whatever is permissible, suitable	ci yang rung ba
ཅི་ཡང་ས་ལེ	{ci yang sa le gzigs pa} you who see everything with perfect clarity	ci yang sa le
ཅི་ཡི	What is that.?	ci yi
ཅི་ཡི་དོན་དུ	why? for what reason?	ci yi don du
ཅི་ཡི་ཕྱིར	why? for what reason?	ci yi phyir
ཅི་ཡིན	what?; What!; Why?	ci yin
ཅི་ཡིན་དྲི་བ་མཛད་པ	he asked the men what they were doing	ci yin dri ba mdzad pa
ཅི་ཡིན་འདི་མིན་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	amorphous state of, devoid of qualities	ci yin 'di min lung ma bstan
ཅི་ཡིན་འདི་ཡིན་མེད་པ	that cannot be said to be this or that, nothing in particular	ci yin 'di yin med pa
ཅི་ཡིན་ནམ	I wonder why	ci yin nam
ཅི་ཡིན་ཞུས་པ	asked how [such a marvel] could come to be	ci yin zhus pa
ཅི་ཡིན་ཟེར་བ་ཡིན	What is the use?	ci yin zer ba yin
ཅི་ཡིན་རུང	though it may be	ci yin rung
ཅི་ཡིས	by what?	ci yis
ཅི་ཡིས་ལན	why?, because of what?	ci yis lan
ཅི་ཡོངས་པ་ཤོག	whatever may happen	ci yongs pa shog
ཅི་ཡོད	whatever/ as much as there is, what's the matter?	ci yod
ཅི་ཡོད་ཀྱི་ནོར་ཕུལ	offered me whatever wealth they possessed	ci yod kyi nor phul
ཅི་ཡོད་སྙམ་ན	if you think "it is whatever there is"/"what's the matter?"	ci yod snyam na
ཅི་ཡོད་འདོན	put forth whatever there is/ all 1 has	ci yod 'don
ཅི་རང་དྲག	lamenting how bad something is: how very --	ci rang drag
ཅི་རིགས	all kinds	ci rigs
ཅི་རིགས་པ	1) various, all kinds (; 2) whatever is suitable/ appropriate)/ [a suitable number as suitable, in a due order, as is fit, according to the circumstances]	ci rigs pa
ཅི་རིགས་པ་ཡིས	I shall use whatever means are needed	ci rigs pa yis
ཅི་རིགས་པར	1) whatever is/as suitable/ appropriate; 2) all kinds	ci rigs par
ཅི་རིགས་རིགས་དུ་ཆུག	whatever there is, that is sufficient	ci rigs rigs du chug
ཅི་རིགས་སུ	1) whatever is/as suitable/ appropriate; 2) all kinds	ci rigs su
ཅི་རུ	whither?	ci ru
ཅི་རེ་དྲག	what agony!	ci re drag
ཅི་རོབ	[arch] for what reason, why?	ci rob
ཅི་ལ	why? wherefore? to what?	ci la
ཅི་ལ་ཅི་ལ	why, for what	ci la ci la
ཅི་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	because of what?	ci la brten nas
ཅི་ལ་ཐུག་རུང	whatever may happen to me, at all events, at any rate	ci la thug rung
ཅི་ལ་སྣང	Why does that appear, happen?	ci la snang
ཅི་ལ་ཟེར་ན	if [you] ask why	ci la zer na
ཅི་ལ་ཡང	whatever, anything for whatever	ci la yang
ཅི་ལ་ཡོད	whence?	ci la yod
ཅི་ལགས	why is that?; What is that?	ci lags
ཅི་ལས	from what?	ci las
ཅི་ལིན	Kirin Province PRC	ci lin
ཅི་ལིམ	bowl	ci lim
ཅི་ལོ་གང་ཉན	whatever 1 has is adequate	ci lo gang nyan
ཅི་ཤར	no matter what is felt, no matter how it appears, whatever is experienced, during any type of experience	ci shar
ཅི་ཤར་ཅི་སྣང	no matter how they occur	ci shar ci snang
ཅི་ཤར་ཅི་ཤར	whatever appears and is experienced	ci shar ci shar
ཅི་ཤར་ཡང	whatever you experience	ci shar yang
ཅི་ཤིག	what	ci shig
ཅི་ཤུལ	after whatever has been done	ci shul
ཅི་ཤེས	who knows!	ci shes
ཅི་སྲིད་དུ	how long, as long as	ci srid du
ཅི་སྲིད་དེ	how long, as long as	ci srid de
ཅི་སླད	for what purpose? why?	ci slad
ཅི་གསུང་བཀའ་སྒྲུབ	fulfill his smallest command	ci gsung bka' sgrub
ཅི་གསུང་བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབས	I have done everything he told me	ci gsung bka' bzhin bsgrubs
ཅི་གསུང་བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབས་པ	doing whatever he says	ci gsung bka' bzhin bsgrubs pa
ཅི་གསུང་གི་བཀའ་བསྒྲུབ	following the prescriptions; x {sman pa mkhas pa lta bu mtshan nyid dang ldan pa'i bla mas ci gsung gi bka' bsgrub dam pa'i chos kyi sman btung bas las nyon sdug bsngal gyi nad las drol bar byed dg...	ci gsung gi bka' bsgrub
ཅི་གསུང་གི་བཀའ་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབས་པ	try our best to do whatever he says	ci gsung gi bka' bzhin bsgrubs pa
ཅི་གསུང་སྒྲུབ་པ	obey his every instruction	ci gsung sgrub pa
ཅི་གསུང་ཉན་པ	listen to what[ever]/ all that is taught	ci gsung nyan pa
ཅི་གསུང་དང་དུ་ལེན	teachings, instructions, directions, commands which are given willingly/ joyfully accept/ follow, obedient	ci gsung dang du len
ཅི་གསུང་དང་དུ་ལེན་པ	attentively listen; practice whatever you are taught	ci gsung dang du len pa
ཅི་གསུང་དང་ལེན	teachings, instructions, directions, commands which are given willingly/joyfully accept/ follow, obedient [Dbu khrid kyi las bkod ci gsung dang len byed pa,...Bgres pos ci gsung dang du len]	ci gsung dang len
ཅི་གསུངས་མ་བསྒྲུབས་པ	failing to carry out your words	ci gsungs ma bsgrubs pa
ཅི་བསམ་འགྲུབ	all your wishes will be fulfilled; ... spontaneously appearing	ci bsam 'grub
ཅི་བསམ་ལྟར་འགྲུབ	turn out as 1 wished, have 1's dream come true	ci bsam ltar 'grub
ཅི་བསམས་ལྟར་འགྲུབ	turn out as 1 wished, have 1's dream come true	ci bsams ltar 'grub
ཅི་བསམས་ལྟར་འགྲུབ་པ་ཞིག	a dream come true	ci bsams ltar 'grub pa zhig
ཅིག	1) a, an, some, 1; 2) !	cig
ཅིག་ཀ	(A; 1) a	cig ka
ཅིག་རྐྱང	only one	cig rkyang
ཅིག་གི་ཅིག་ཅོད	resolve 1 by 1	cig gi cig cod
ཅིག་ཅང་བ	simultaneous	cig cang ba
ཅིག་ཅར	at once, simultaneous, instantly, one instant, at the same time. Syn {gcig car}	cig car
ཅིག་ཅར་གྱི་སྒོ་སྒོམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to train in the instantaneous gateway cig car sgo mang po nas yongs su smin	cig car gyi sgo sgom par byed pa
པར་མཛད་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of simultaneously ripening through many different avenues cig car sgo mang po nas yongs su smin	par mdzad pa'i stobs
པར་མཛད་པའི་ཐོབས	the attainment of complete ripening instantly by many means	par mdzad pa'i thobs
ཅིག་ཅར་འཇུག་པ	entering instantaneously cig car 'jug pa rnam par mi rtog pa'i	cig car 'jug pa
བསྒོམ་དོན	the object of thoughtfree training in instantaneous involvement	bsgom don
ཅིག་ཅར་གཉི་གོ་སྒོམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	both	cig car gnyi go sgom par byed pa
ཅིག་ཅར་རྟག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	to enter instantaneously and constantly	cig car rtag tu 'jug pa
ཅིག་ཅར་དང་རྟག་ཏུ	instantly and eternally	cig car dang rtag tu
ཅིག་ཅར་པ	the immediately attained path to liberation	cig car pa
ཅིག་ཅར་བ	instantaneous type, nongradualist	cig car ba
ཅིག་ཅར་བ་ཡི་གང་ཟག	person[s] receptive to the sudden path	cig car ba yi gang zag
ཅིག་ཅར་བའི་རིགས	Instantaneous type. The type of person who does not need to go through progressive stages on the path	cig car ba'i rigs
ཅིག་ཅར་བར	at once, instantly, at the same time instant simultaneous	cig car bar
ཅིག་ཅར་འབྱུང་བ	simultaneous arising	cig car 'byung ba
ཅིག་ཅར་ཞེས	once, equally	cig car zhes
ཅིག་ཅར་ཡོང	come at the same time	cig car yong
ཅིག་ཆར	SA cig car, instantaneous, immediate	cig char
ཅིག་ཆར་འགག་སྟེ	they cease simultaneously	cig char 'gag ste
ཅིག་ཆར་གཅོད་པ	sever with a single stroke	cig char gcod pa
ཅིག་ཆར་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོམ་དོན	the object of training in instantaneous involvement	cig char 'jug pa'i sgom don
ཅིག་ཆར་དུ	simultaneously, suddenly, all at once, altogether; in one fell swoop; at one and the same time	cig char du
ཅིག་ཆར་དུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	occur instantaneously, all at once	cig char du 'khrungs pa
ཅིག་ཆར་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	to realize instantaneously, instantaneous realization	cig char du rtogs pa
ཅིག་ཆར་པ	instantaneous type	cig char pa
ཅིག་ཆར་བ	person who assimilates everything all at once/ proceeds in quantum leaps	cig char ba
ཐེ་ཨིམམེདིཨཏེ་ཏཡྤེ་ཨོཕ༹་པེརསོན་ཝཧོ་ཨུནདེརསྟནདས་ཐེ་མེཨནིང་ཨནད་སིམུལྟནེཨོཨུསལཡ་སེལཕ༹	liberates, the instantaneous type person	the immediate type of person who understands the meaning and simultaneously self
ཅིག་ཆར་བའི་ལམ	non-gradual path	cig char ba'i lam
ཅིག་ཆར་རྫོགས	are simultaneously completed	cig char rdzogs
ཅིག་པར	at once	cig par
ཅིག་བྱས་ན	may, might	cig byas na
ཅིག་ཚར	once, all at once	cig tshar
ཅིག་ཤོས	1) the contrary/ opposite; 2) the other [of a pair]	cig shos
ཅིག་ཤོས་བཀག་པ	refute the contrary/ other of a pair	cig shos bkag pa
ཅིག་ཤོས་སྒྲུབ་པ	establish the contrary/ other of a pair	cig shos sgrub pa
ཅིང	when, after, as, and, bound. Syn {zhing} [used after final g, d, and b] 753	cing
ཅིང་ཁྲ	policemen	cing khra
ཅིང་ཁྲ་ཅི་གསུམ	Shansi-Chahar-Hopei	cing khra ci gsum
ཅིང་ཅི་ལི	CH 1) a flower; 2) any, all whatever	cing ci li
ཅིང་འདུག	verb + cing 'dug -ing progressive tense	cing 'dug
ཅིང་ལི	manager	cing li
ཅིངས	(not in DAS)	cings
ཅིན	Beijing	cin
ཅིན་ཅི་ལི	creeping plant in tsang	cin ci li
ཅིན་ཅུས	Beijing Opera	cin cus
ཅིན་ཅུས་ཟློས་གར	beijing opera	cin cus zlos gar
ཅིན་ཏུང་ས་ཁུལ	Near E	cin tung sa khul
ཅིན་སྡོད	residence in Beijing	cin sdod
ཅིན་སྡོད་དོན་གཅོད་ལས་ཁུངས	resident delegation in Beijing	cin sdod don gcod las khungs
ཅིན་མི་སུའུ	aureomycin	cin mi su'u
ཅིན་ལི	manager	cin li
ཅིའང	whatever there is, anything, whatever	ci'ang
ཅིའང་མི་འཕྲོད་པ	alien, unfitting	ci'ang mi 'phrod pa
ཅིའང་ཤིའི	Kiangsi Province	ci'ang shi'i
ཅིའང་སུའུ	Kiangsu Province	ci'ang su'u
ཅིའི	of what?	ci'i
ཅིའི་ཁྲེའེ	locomotive	ci'i khre'e
ཅིའི་རྒྱུས	why	ci'i rgyus
ཅིའི་རྒྱུས་ན	for what reason, why, wherefore	ci'i rgyus na
ཅིའི་ངོ་བོ	any nature	ci'i ngo bo
ཅིའི་ངོ་བོ་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ	does not possess any nature whatever	ci'i ngo bo yang ma grub
ཅིའི་ངོ་བོར	as any identity whatsoever	ci'i ngo bor
ཅིའི་ངོ་བོར་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	does not possess any nature whatever	ci'i ngo bor yang ma grub pa
ཅིའི་ཆེད	for what reason, for the purpose of what	ci'i ched
ཅིའི་ཆེད་དུ	for what purpose?	ci'i ched du
ཅིའི་ཐད་ནས	by all means	ci'i thad nas
ཅིའི་དོན	Syn {ci'i ched}	ci'i don
ཅིའི་དོན་དུ	in whose interest, for what purpose?	ci'i don du
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར	why, for what, for what purpose?	ci'i phyir
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཁྱོད་འདི	how did you get into this condition?	ci'i phyir khyod 'di
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཁྱོད་འདི་ལྟར་གྱུར	in what manner have you become so?	ci'i phyir khyod 'di ltar gyur
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་དུ	why, what for	ci'i phyir du
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན	if you ask why	ci'i phyir zhe na
ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེས་ན	"why" construction	ci'i phyir zhes na
ཅིའི་ཡུའུ་ཉ	crucian carp	ci'i yu'u nya
ཅིའི་སླད	why, for what reason?	ci'i slad
ཅིའི་སླད་དུ	why?	ci'i slad du
ཅིའི་སླད་དུ་ཞེ་ན	if you ask why/ for what reason?	ci'i slad du zhe na
ཅིའུ་ཅིན་ཧྲན	San Francisco	ci'u cin hran
ཅིའུ་ཚལ	leek, chinese chives	ci'u tshal
ཅིའུ་རི	female demon	ci'u ri
ཅིར	where to, with, SA ci ru	cir
ཅིར་འགྱུར	become everything/ anything	cir 'gyur
ཅིར་འགྱུར་གཏོལ་མེད	not knowing what it will be like	cir 'gyur gtol med
ཅིར་ཅི་རུ	where to? everywhere	cir ci ru
ཅིར་ཅིར	insect sound	cir cir
ཅིར་ཅིར་བྱེད་པ	making a sizzling sound	cir cir byed pa
ཅིར་སྣང	whatever appears	cir snang
ཅིར་སྣང་ཅིར་སྲིད	any animate or inanimate phenomena	cir snang cir srid
ཅིར་སྣང་ཐམས་ཅད	all that appears	cir snang thams cad
ཅིར་སྣང་ཡང	everything that manifests, anything that manifests	cir snang yang
ཅིར་སྣང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	wisdom wheel of whatever is experienced/ appears	cir snang ye shes kyi 'khor lo
ཅིར་སྣང་རང་ཡིན	one's own state of existence manifesting everywhere	cir snang rang yin
ཅིར་སྣང་ལྷ	Appearances are deities	cir snang lha
ཅིར་བ	press, wring, SA 'chir ba	cir ba
ཅིར་མི་རྟོག	not thinking anything	cir mi rtog
ཅིར་མི་བརྟག	one should not judge anything	cir mi brtag
ཅིར་ཡང	everything various, varieties as anything, variously, everywhere, whatever, anything; since; by all means/ everywhere/ with a neg. particle nowhere	cir yang
ཅིར་ཡང་བསྒྱུར	change into anything	cir yang bsgyur
ཅིར་ཡང་བསྒྱུར་དུ་རུང	capable of changing into anything	cir yang bsgyur du rung
ཅིར་ཡང་བསྒྱུར་དུ་རུང་བ	1) can be transformed into anything. 2) can also be exchanged	cir yang bsgyur du rung ba
ཅིར་ཡང་བསྒྱུར་བ	to transform into all kinds of things	cir yang bsgyur ba
ཅིར་ཡང་འཆར	manifest everything	cir yang 'char
ཅིར་ཡང་སྟོན	whatever is displayed/ shows itself/ is taught	cir yang ston
ཅིར་ཡང་སྟོན་པ	to teach / demonstrate any possible thing	cir yang ston pa
ཅིར་ཡང་སྣང	whatever arises/ appears	cir yang snang
ཅིར་ཡང་སྣང་བའི	which can manifest in any possible way	cir yang snang ba'i
ཅིར་ཡང་བླང་མེད	nothing whatsoever to accept	cir yang blang med
ཅིར་ཡང་འབྱུང	manifest without limits	cir yang 'byung
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ	cannot be defined in terms of concreteness	cir yang ma grub
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་འགགས་པ	totally unconfined	cir yang ma 'gags pa
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་ངེས	cannot be determined to be anything whatsoever/ at all	cir yang ma nges
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་སྨྲས་པ	utterly silent	cir yang ma smras pa
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་བཙལ	not seeking anything	cir yang ma btsal
ཅིར་ཡང་མ་གཟིགས་པ	seeing no 'thing' whatsoever	cir yang ma gzigs pa
ཅིར་ཡང་མི་འཛིན	cannot be grasped as anything	cir yang mi 'dzin
ཅིར་ཡང་མི་འཛིན་པ	not holding anything whatsoever. {cir yang mi 'dzin pa'i ngang la mnyam par 'jog pa} to rest evenly in the state of not fixating on anything {bsam gtan khyi pha ro' tu phyin pa}	cir yang mi 'dzin pa
ཅིར་ཡང་མི་འཛིན་པའི་ངང	the state of not fixating on anything cir yang mi 'dzin pa'i ngang la mnyam par 'jog pa - Rest evenly in the state of not 754 fixating on anything [= {bsam gtan khyi pha rol tu phyin pa} cir yang m...	cir yang mi 'dzin pa'i ngang
ཅིར་ཡང་མི་བཟུང	not grasping any ideas	cir yang mi bzung
ཅིར་ཡང་མི་བསམ	nothing on which to reflect	cir yang mi bsam
ཅིར་ཡང་མེད	nowhere	cir yang med
ཅིར་ཡང་གཟུང་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	cannot be apprehended as anything whatsoever	cir yang gzung du mi rung ba
ཅིར་ཡང་གསལ	illuminate/ explain everything all- illuminating/ explaining	cir yang gsal
ཅིར་སྲིད	any animate phenomena	cir srid
ཅིལ	sound of mouse/ locust	cil
ཅིལ་ལི་ཅིལ་ལི	sound of mouse/ locust	cil li cil li
ཅིས	by what?	cis
ཅིས་ཀྱང	at all events, by all means, at any rate	cis kyang
ཅིས་ཀྱང་དགོས་པ་མེད	there is no need of anything	cis kyang dgos pa med
ཅིས་ཀྱང་དྲན་ན	if you remember anything	cis kyang dran na
སོམས	but should they come to mind, reflect on how success and failure come and go	soms
ཅིས་ཀྱང་བྱ་དགོས	should by all means be done	cis kyang bya dgos
ཅིས་ཀྱང་བྱེད	do it by all means	cis kyang byed
ཅིས་ཀྱང་མ་ལན	not natural (?) cis kyang yang dag pa'i lam du 'gro ba yin - can only lead along the authentic path	cis kyang ma lan
ཅིས་ན	if you ask why	cis na
ཅིས་ནུས	as many times as you can	cis nus
ཅིས་མི་འདྲ	why is it different?	cis mi 'dra
ཅིས་མི་ལེགས	is it not simpler?	cis mi legs
ཅིས་ལིན	Kirin Province	cis lin
ཅིས་ཤེ་ན	"why" construction	cis she na
ཅུ	10 (in combinations	cu
ཅུ་གང	CH bamboo juice rtsi medicine	cu gang
ཅུ་ཏི	pig-tail, queue	cu ti
ཅུ་ལི	a fresh apricot. dried apricots	cu li
ཝིལད	growing vegetable in sikkim	wild
ཅུ་ལི་ཏ་གིར	pulp of apricots boiled down to conserve and formed into cakes	cu li ta gir
ཅུག	put, SA 'jug pa	cug
ཅུག་ཅུག	SA cag cag	cug cug
ཅུག་བྱེད	what should i do?	cug byed
ཅུང	gourd, pumpkin, a place, little, slightly	cung
ཅུང་འགག	brass plate or dish	cung 'gag
ཅུང་བསྟེན	to enjoy a small amount	cung bsten
ཅུང་པེང	chang bu	cung peng
ཅུང་པོ	younger brother/ male relative	cung po
ཅུང་མི་འོང	Thrangu Rinpoche: wont exactly be ok	cung mi 'ong
ཅུང་མུན་ནག་པ	slightly dark, slightly dark place	cung mun nag pa
ཅུང་མོ	younger sister/ female relative	cung mo
ཅུང་ཙམ	brief, a bit, a small amount, a little, a few, slightly, trifle, rather, somewhat kyang chud zos su ma gtong	cung tsam
ཅུང་ཙམ་ཅུང་ཙམ་གཞེས་ཤིག	wait a little	cung tsam cung tsam gzhes shig
ཅུང་ཙམ་ན	a short time later	cung tsam na
ཅུང་ཞིག	a little, few, hardly	cung zhig
ཅུང་ཞིག་ན	after a short while	cung zhig na
ཅུང་ཞིག་ནས	after a short while	cung zhig nas
ཅུང་ཞོ	medicinal white stone which cures diarrhea, soma plant useful in diarrhea & phlegm & fever	cung zho
ཅུང་ཞོག	little piece, trifle	cung zhog
ཅུང་ཟད	+ neg - not quite [ggd]	cung zad
ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱང	even in the slightest	cung zad kyang
ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱང་མི	nus not at all able	cung zad kyang mi
ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱང་མེད	without even the slightest	cung zad kyang med
ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱང་མེད་པ	without even a hint of ..	cung zad kyang med pa
ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར	even for the sake of a trifle	cung zad kyi phyir
ཅུང་ཟད་ལྐོག་གྱུར	slightly hidden phenomenon; slightly hidden, slightly hidden phenomena	cung zad lkog gyur
ཅུང་ཟད་སྐྱེས་ཀྱང	even if some small [signs] occur	cung zad skyes kyang
ཅུང་ཟད་ཁྲོ་བ	a little angry	cung zad khro ba
ཅུང་ཟད་རྒོད	a little smiling	cung zad rgod
ཅུང་ཟད་སྒྲུགས་མཛོད	wait a little	cung zad sgrugs mdzod
ཅུང་ཟད་ངལ་གསོ	take a short break	cung zad ngal gso
ཅུང་ཟད་ཅིག	a little bit	cung zad cig
ཅུང་ཟད་ཅིག་སྡོད	wait a little, wait awhile	cung zad cig sdod
ཅུང་ཟད་ཆོག	contentment with a small quantity	cung zad chog
ཅུང་ཟད་ཆོག་འཛིན	{cung zad tsam gyis chog par 'dzin pa}	cung zad chog 'dzin
ཅུང་ཟད་བརྗོད་པ	to explain a little	cung zad brjod pa
ཅུང་ཟད་སྙན་པའི	arrogance of thinking small, mibp 68, starry-eyed sit-atthe-feet of the guru arrogance	cung zad snyan pa'i
ཅུང་ཟད་སྙན་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	pride of hearing a little dharma	cung zad snyan pa'i nga rgyal
ཅུང་ཟད་སྙམ་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	inverted pride; self-abasement; one of the {nga rgyal drug} six types of pride; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {ches khyad par du 'phags pa las bdag cung zad dman no snyam pa}	cung zad snyam pa'i nga rgyal
ཅུང་ཟད་པ	epithet of nagaraja 755	cung zad pa
ཅུང་ཟད་དཔྱད་ངོར	when put under the slightest inspection	cung zad dpyad ngor
ཅུང་ཟད་དཔྱད་པ	even the slightest inspection cung zad dpyad pa rigs shes kyi ngor when put under the slightest scrutiny of intelligent reasoning	cung zad dpyad pa
ཅུང་ཟད་སྤྲོ	I desire to speak a little	cung zad spro
ཅུང་ཟད་ཕྲད་པའི་རྩོལ་བ	the birthplaces of letters thug phrad lhod por byas nas make n effort to speak	cung zad phrad pa'i rtsol ba
ཅུང་ཟད་མ	much, a little, some	cung zad ma
ཅུང་ཟད་མ་བདེ་བ	a little unwell	cung zad ma bde ba
ཅུང་ཟད་མི་བདེ	it is not so easy, somewhat uneasy	cung zad mi bde
ཅུང་ཟད་མིན	is not correct	cung zad min
ཅུང་ཟད་མེད་པ	there is not the slightest bit of	cung zad med pa
ཅུང་ཟད་མེད་པར	did not have the slightest	cung zad med par
ཅུང་ཟད་སྨད	slightly lessen	cung zad smad
ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ	just slightly	cung zad tsam
ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ་ངལ་གསོ	take a short break	cung zad tsam ngal gso
ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ་ན	after a little while	cung zad tsam na
ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ་ཡང	the slightest	cung zad tsam yang
ཅུང་ཟད་བཟུང	hold a little	cung zad bzung
ཅུང་ཟད་ཡ་མཚན	a little surprised, a little astonished	cung zad ya mtshan
ཅུང་ཟད་རེ	the least / slightest	cung zad re
ཅུང་ཟད་ཧ་ལས	a little surprised	cung zad ha las
ཅུང་ཡོ་བ	little slanting	cung yo ba
ཅུང་རི་བོ་ཆེ	Tibet lha mo ba'i tshogs pa thog place where it 1st spread or traditional region	cung ri bo che
ཅུང་རེ་ཙམ་ལས	only a very small amount	cung re tsam las
ཅུང་སེང	cung peng	cung seng
ཅུན	army	cun
ཅུན་ཀྲང	commander of an army, corps	cun krang
ཅུན་བཞི་པ	4th army/ corps	cun bzhi pa
ཅུན་ཟུས	commando	cun zus
ཅུན་ཡུ	military committee	cun yu
ཅུན་ཧྲི	sergeant	cun hri
ཅུའུ	bureau, board, office	cu'u
ཅུའུ་སན་ཞུའེ་ཧྲེ	9-3 association	cu'u san zhu'e hre
ཅུར	to devour, entire	cur
ཅུར་ནི	powder, meal, flour	cur ni
ཅུར་ནིས	ts'ura'ni, a med. powder	cur nis
ཅུར་མིད་པ	devour it all up	cur mid pa
ཅུས	bureau, board, office	cus
ཅུས་ཀྲང	director of a bureau	cus krang
ཅུས་ཙེ	CH shog sgril tha mag 'then byed dang, gang zag	cus tse
ཅེ	Syn {zhe / she}; which	ce
ཅེ་ཅང	jackal	ce cang
ཅེ་ན	if one says so, asks so. Syn {zer na}	ce na
ཅེ་སྤྱང	jackal. Syn {ce cang} A kind of wolf, fox, jackal	ce spyang
ཅེ་སྤྱང་མགོ	disease where wind and blood descend to the knee, symptoms: ngar gdong nas gnyan gong sbal nag gi bar ce spyang gi mgo bo ltar swelling	ce spyang mgo
ཅེ་སྤྱང་ར	horn of the fabulous jackal, a precious stone	ce spyang ra
ཅེ་སྤྱང་རྭ	in India is the predator ce spyang de ce spyang nas ce spyang gzhan gyi bar ma chod pa'i five births na rwa skyes pa de said to be a precious substance, by its power protects against nor phyugs kyi...	ce spyang rwa
ཅེ་སྤྱད	jackal	ce spyad
ཅེ་ཙེ	kind of millet, paspalum scrobiculatum	ce tse
ཅེ་ཙེ་རྒོད	wild millet	ce tse rgod
ཅེ་རྩེ་ཧོ	Chiehtse River PRC	ce rtse ho
ཅེ་རེ	envious, jealous, wide-eyed, w bulging eyes, stare fixedly	ce re
ཅེ་རེ་བ	[very] straight, direct. {rjen ne ce re ba} pure and naked]	ce re ba
ཅེ་རེ་བ་གཅིག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ	staring fixed, fixed stare	ce re ba gcig tu lta ba
ཅེ་རེ་ལ་ལྟ	looking with fixed stare	ce re la lta
ཅེ་རེ་ལོང་བ	completely blind	ce re long ba
ཅེ་ལ	apricot	ce la
ཅེ་ལེ་བ	thar thor	ce le ba
ཅེ་ཧོ་ནད	tuberculosis	ce ho nad
ཅེ་ལྷ་མོ	particular name generally applied to lha mo'i chas kyis spras pa'i Tibetan plays	ce lha mo
ཅེང་ཀེ	kind of knife with thin broad long blade	ceng ke
ཅེམ	p bcems f bces,, chew	cem
ཅེམ་ཅེམ་མ	butterfly {phye ma leb} moth	cem cem ma
ཅེམ་མེ་བ	bright, shining	cem me ba
ཅེམ་ཙེ	scissors	cem tse
ཅེམ་རྩེ	scissor	cem rtse
ཅེའུ	sucking-pipe	ce'u
ཅེའོ	certain. it is said	ce'o
ཅེར	direct. See {cer gyis / cer re}	cer
ཅེར་གྱིས	directly, nakedly, piercingly	cer gyis
ཅེར་གྱིས་ལྟོས	sharply observe, look directly into	cer gyis ltos
ཅེར་གྱིས་བལྟས	to sharply observe, look directly, look directly into	cer gyis bltas
ཅེར་གྱིས་བཞག་པ	to place directly	cer gyis bzhag pa
ཅེར་གྲོལ	direct/ naked/ /instantaneous freedom/ liberation	cer grol
ཅེར་ལྟ	look at directly/ intently	cer lta
ཅེར་ལྟོས	{cer gyis ltos} look directly	cer ltos
ཅེར་བལྟས་པ	to look directly into	cer bltas pa
ཅེར་མཐོང	direct seeing, vision	cer mthong
ཅེར་པུ་པ	Nudist [thd]	cer pu pa
ཅེར་བུ	place in Tibet	cer bu
ཅེར་གཞག	to place directly; direct placement	cer gzhag
ཅེར་གཞག་པ	to place directly	cer gzhag pa
ཅེར་བཞག	to rest in the immediacy of things/ the moment	cer bzhag
ཅེར་ཡང་འཆར	perceiving what ever there is	cer yang 'char
ཅེར་རེ	direct	cer re
ཅེར་རེ་བལྟ	to stare 756	cer re blta
ཅེར་ས	[directly] in its place [as it is]	cer sa
ཅེར་སར་གྲོལ	liberated in its place as it is	cer sar grol
ཅེས	so, thus, (after literally quoted words), quotation marker	ces
ཅེས་བརྗོད	so 1 should say	ces brjod
ཅེས་བརྗོད་དོ	so one should say	ces brjod do
ཅེས་བརྗོད་པ	by uttering "..."	ces brjod pa
ཅེས་དང	this and	ces dang
ཅེས་པ	called. Syn {zhes pa}	ces pa
ཅེས་པ་ལྟར	like that	ces pa ltar
ཅེས་པ་ལྟར་རོ	so it is said	ces pa ltar ro
ཅེས་པ་སྟེ	so it is said	ces pa ste
ཅེས་པ་དང	so it says, and also	ces pa dang
ཅེས་པ་ནས	from this and ..., from suchand-such	ces pa nas
ཅེས་པ་ནི	this, the so-called	ces pa ni
ཅེས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ	these and similar words	ces pa la sogs pa
ཅེས་པའི་བར	up to such-and-such	ces pa'i bar
ཅེས་པས	this means that ..	ces pas
ཅེས་བྱ	are said to be	ces bya
ཅེས་བྱ་སྟེ	the so-called	ces bya ste
ཅེས་བྱ་བ	so-called, called ""	ces bya ba
ཅེས་བྱ་བ་བཞུགས་སོ	ph called -- is contained herein [end of titles]	ces bya ba bzhugs so
ཅེས་བྱ་ཞིང	so-called	ces bya zhing
ཅེས་འབྱུང་བ་ལྟར	as mentioned in suchand-such text	ces 'byung ba ltar
ཅེས་འབྱུང་བ་ལྟར་རོ	as it says there	ces 'byung ba ltar ro
ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ	this word, this speech	ces smras pa
ཅེས་སྨྲས་སོ	thus he said, so he said, so it is said, thus he said	ces smras so
ཅེས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	called such-and-such	ces zhes bya ba
ཅེས་ཟེར	thus she spoke	ces zer
ཅེས་ཟེར་ཏེ	he ordered	ces zer te
ཅེས་སོ	[after end of quotation] thus he sang/ said	ces so
ཅེས་སོགས	such-and-such and so forth	ces sogs
ཅེས་སོགས་མང་དུ་འབྱུང་བ་ལྟར་རོ	as mentioned in this and many other places	ces sogs mang du 'byung ba ltar ro
ཅེས་སོགས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར	like was said / this statement	ces sogs gsungs pa ltar
ཅེས་གསུང་ཏེ	pronounced these words:	ces gsung te
ཅེས་གསུང་པ་ལྟར	As stated	ces gsung pa ltar
ཅེས་གསུང་བས	when he said this	ces gsung bas
ཅེས་གསུངས	as was said	ces gsungs
ཅེས་གསུངས་ཏེ	so he said	ces gsungs te
ཅེས་གསུངས་ནས	having said this	ces gsungs nas
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ	taught	ces gsungs pa
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར	according to these words	ces gsungs pa ltar
ཅེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རོ	so it is said	ces gsungs pa ltar ro
ཅེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ	since this is how it was taught	ces gsungs pa'i phyir ro
ཅེས་གསུངས་པས་སོ	since this is how it was taught	ces gsungs pas so
ཅེས་གསུངས་ཤིང	taught it to be suchand-such, and ..	ces gsungs shing
ཅེས་གསུངས་སོ	so it is said	ces gsungs so
ཅོ་ཀ	bird?, alauda gulgula franklin	co ka
ཅོ་ག	small bird, color skya and sre bo, byi'u mchil pa las cung zad che and making various pleasant sounds, flies directly up and down	co ga
ཅོ་ག་ཀླད་སྨན	med. herb ['bu su hang, bitter, cooling, curing rma 'drub, glo tsad]	co ga klad sman
ཅོ་ག་སྔོན་པོ	blue-crested jay	co ga sngon po
ཅོ་གེར	motionless	co ger
ཅོ་གྲས	colt one year old	co gras
ཅོ་ཅོ	gcen po, jo	co co
ཅོ་ཏོ	[tuft of] hair	co to
ཅོ་ཏོའི་ཧོར་ག	hair plaited and dressed on the crown of the head	co to'i hor ga
ཅོ་ཐོ	[tuft of] hair, hair bound in a lump on top of the head	co tho
ཅོ་དིར	ku co'i sgra dir ba 'ur dir re ba	co dir
ཅོ་དོ	[arch] peak, hair	co do
ཅོ་འདྲི	what does he say	co 'dri
ཅོ་འདྲི་བ	blame, reproach, scoff at, view with, deceive, cheat, immodest behavior, shameless conduct	co 'dri ba
ཅོ་ནི	district in amdo	co ni
ཅོ་ནེ	Choneh, in Domey. a district in Tibet	co ne
ཅོ་ནེ་དགོན་ཆེན	Choneh Monastery	co ne dgon chen
ཅོ་ནེ་བླ་མ་བློ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	dge lugs pa master	co ne bla ma blo bzang rgya mtsho
ཅོ་ནེའི་བསྟན་འགྱུར་དཀར་ཆག	Tenjur catalogue yid bzhin nor bu'i phreng ba [13th water snake yr by kun mkhyen 'jigs med dbang po]	co ne'i bstan 'gyur dkar chag
ཅོ་པ	yearling colt	co pa
ཅོ་བོ	thing [in a household]	co bo
ཅོ་བྲེགས	ze dang rnga uncut two year old rte'u 757	co bregs
ཅོ་འོས	ci rigs, ci rung	co 'os
ཅོ་རེ	sound produced by straining fermented beer	co re
ཅོ་རོ་རོ	SA co re	co ro ro
ཅོ་རོང	ass	co rong
ཅོ་ལགས	mister	co lags
ཅོ་ལི	apricot, SA cu li	co li
ཅོ་ལེ་བ	1) tho re ba small; 2) Cu li	co le ba
ཅོ་ལེ་ཙམ	somewhat, rather	co le tsam
ཅོ་ལོ	prattling, chattering, babbling	co lo
ཅོག	all, plural sign, SA shing thags	cog
ཅོག་ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	see {cog ro klu'i rgyal mtshan}	cog klu'i rgyal mtshan
ཅོག་ཁེབས	table cloth/ cover	cog khebs
ཅོག་གུར	little 1 person tent	cog gur
ཅོག་གེ	direct, straight up	cog ge
ཅོག་གེ་ཙོག་ཙོག	rabbit standing on hind legs	cog ge tsog tsog
ཅོག་གེར	freely	cog ger
ཅོག་གེར་བཞག་པ	leave/ rest freely	cog ger bzhag pa
ཅོག་ཅིག་ཅར	altogether	cog cig car
ཅོག་ཅོག	tsog tsog	cog cog
ཅོག་ཅོག་པ	harvest harming insect w green body and brown head, having short antennae eating rice leaves not able to fly far	cog cog pa
ཅོག་བརྡུང་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	Twenty-one Chogdungs	cog brdung nyi shu rtsa gcig
ཅོག་པ	to have leisure/ freely	cog pa
ཅོག་པུ	sit	cog pu
ཅོག་པུ་པ	one cowering, one sitting down	cog pu pa
ཅོག་པུ་བ	1) someone staying in a small tent; 2) not depending on others tshog por sdod pa po	cog pu ba
ཅོག་པོ	rock, pestle, upright posture	cog po
ཅོག་བུ	small tent, type of penance	cog bu
ཅོག་བུ་པ	in sleep remains in a sitting posture, one who lives in small place, sitting	cog bu pa
ཅོག་བུར	manner of sitting up at night awake	cog bur
ཅོག་ཙེ	CH desk, teapoy, [tea] table	cog tse
ཅོག་རྩེ	CH desk, teapoy, [tea] table	cog rtse
ཅོག་རྩེར	CH [on the] desk/ teapoy/ [tea] table	cog rtser
ཅོག་བརྩེགས	small dining table	cog brtsegs
ཅོག་ཞོག	set aside! Leave it!	cog zhog
ཅོག་ཞོགས	set aside	cog zhogs
ཅོག་གཞག	{cog bzhag} (state of) resting imperturbably/ imperturbable rest/ presence*	cog gzhag
ཅོག་གཞག་ཀློང་གྲོལ	spontaneously liberated, freely resting	cog gzhag klong grol
ཅོག་གཞག་ཏུ་བཞག་པ	to leave freely	cog gzhag tu bzhag pa
ཅོག་གཞག་བཞི	4-fold free resting (of a mountain, appearance, ocean, and awareness	cog gzhag bzhi
ཅོག་བཞག	freely resting	cog bzhag
ཅོག་བཞག་ཆེན་པོ	the great freely resting	cog bzhag chen po
ཅོག་བཞག་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of the great resting	cog bzhag chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
ཅོག་བཞག་བཞི	the four modes of freely resting	cog bzhag bzhi
ཅོག་བཞག་གསུམ	the threefold "freely resting" 1) {ri ba cog bzhag} freely resting mountain. 2) {rgya mtsho cog bzhag} freely resting ocean. 3) {rig pa cog bzhag} freely resting awareness	cog bzhag gsum
ཅོག་རོ	place in tsang dkar	cog ro
ཅོག་རོ་ཀླུ་ཡི	SA ska cog	cog ro klu yi
ཅོག་རོ་ཀླུ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	grammarian	cog ro klu yi rgyal mtshan
ཅོག་རོ་ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་མཙན	{cog ro klu'i rgyal mtshan}	cog ro klu'i rgyal mtsan
ཅོག་རོ་ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Chok-Ro Lui Gyaltsen. Early Tibetan translator of great importance and one of the	cog ro klu'i rgyal mtshan
ཅོག་ལ	{cog la mtshal/ vermillion [good for rtsa dkar gyi nad dang, rus pa chag pa, reg dug bse mog dug nad] cinnabar?	cog la
ཅོག་ལ་བོན	{cog la} bon doctrine	cog la bon
ཅོག་ལ་མ	{cog la ma mtshal/ vermillion * cinnabar?	cog la ma
ཅོག་བཤག	total-presence, immovable presence of fundamental reality [in khregs gcod Cutting through resistance book two GD]	cog bshag
ཅོང	loud wailing; bell, gong	cong
ཅོང་ཅི	small bowl or dish	cong ci
ཅོང་ཅོང	jagged, indented, serrated, kind of thistle	cong cong
ཅོང་བརྡ	signal, [sound] death knell [w bell/ gong]	cong brda
ཅོང་བརྡ་ཞིག་བཏང	[they] sounded the signal/ death knell [w bell/ gong]	cong brda zhig btang
ཅོང་ནད	chronic illness	cong nad
ཅོང་པོ	physically weak	cong po
ཅོང་བ	raise wailings, loud lamentations	cong ba
ཅོང་མོ	thimble, SA lcung mo	cong mo
ཅོང་ཞི	certain stone used in rejuvenation practice	cong zhi
ཅོང་ཞི་འཕྲུལ་ཐལ	cong zhi sran ma tsam bzos nas me thub kyi rdza ma'i 'phrul kong nang blugs shing w a closed mouth and not smoking burned ash, overcomes bad kan skya smug dang, skran etc.	cong zhi 'phrul thal
ཅོང་ཞི་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of cong zhi [pho cong, mo cong, bu cong, bu mo cong, ma ning cong zhi	cong zhi rigs lnga
ཅོང་ཞི་བསིལ་སྦྱོར	g.yu thog yon tan mgon pos mdzad pa'i phyi ma 'phrin las rgyud nang 'khod pa'i med. compound made mostly of cong zhi	cong zhi bsil sbyor
ཅོང་ཞིའི་ཆུ	juice or water of the soma plant	cong zhi'i chu
ཅོང་ཞུ	[arch] cong zhi cong g.yang - cliff w deep ravine underneath	cong zhu
ཅོང་རོང	kind of thistle	cong rong
ཅོང་རོང་ཚེར་མ	kind of thistle	cong rong tsher ma
ཅོང་ལ་སྐྱུར་བ	push down a precipice to kill	cong la skyur ba
ཅོད་པན	1) head ornament, tiara, diadem, crown, the crest, silken crown, ribbons; 2) ear gong rgyan; 3) Longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku'i rigs lnga prog zhu	cod pan
ཅོད་པན་བཀྲོལ་བ	taking off his crown / diadem / coronets	cod pan bkrol ba
ཅོད་པན་གྱི་དབང	tiara empowerment	cod pan gyi dbang
ཅོད་པན་མགྲིན་བཟང་མ	{cod pan mgrin bzang ma [one of the lha mo tshe ring mched lnga]	cod pan mgrin bzang ma
ཅོད་པན་ལྔ་བཅས	wearing the fivecolored tiara	cod pan lnga bcas
ཅོད་པན་དར་དཔྱང	right and left ears gong rgyan gos chen gyis bzos pa'i dar 'dzar	cod pan dar dpyang
ཅོད་འཛིན	holder of the crown	cod 'dzin
ཅོན	(not in DAS)	con
ཅོམ	conquer, SA 'joms pa	com
ཅོམ་ཆུང་བ	[arch] small sgra skad	com chung ba
ཅོར་གང	a mouthful, a gulp, a little	cor gang
ཅོར་ཅིག	mouthful, gulp	cor cig
ཅོར་ཅོར	onomatopoetic word expressive of effervescing, sound of fermenting beer	cor cor
ཅོལ	little sense	col
ཅོལ་བགྲོས་མོལ་བགྲོས	nonsensical, silly [talk]	col bgros mol bgros
ཅོལ་ཆུང	gullible [people], naive, nonsensical, silly, prattle, babbling, childish, timid	col chung
ཅོལ་གཏམ	mindless/ nonsensical talk	col gtam
ཅོལ་པོ	1) foolish, inconsequential; 2) cho med pa	col po
ཅོལ་ལེ	hanging, dangling	col le
ཅོལ་ལེ་བ	lying irregularly or promiscuously	col le ba
ཅོལ་ལོ	snyad brko ba'i gtam,...Bla ma gzhan gyis drag 'dul byas pas gdon des tshur col lo dang bzhad gad sun 'byin byas nas phan pa ma byung	col lo
ཅོལ་གསོལ་འདེབས་འདི	this babbling supplication	col gsol 'debs 'di
ཅོས	by what?	cos
ཅོས་ཀྱང	anything, by all means	cos kyang
ཅོས་ཀྱང་དྲན	remember anything/ by all means	cos kyang dran
གཅག	[f gcog, 'chag] break, be broken, hurt, smash, bash, violate, disobey orders, lower, reduce, deduct, tame, beat down the price	gcag
གཅག་གཏོར	smash	gcag gtor
གཅག་པ	[f gcog pa, 'chag pa] break, be broken, hurt, smash, bash, violate, disobey orders, lower, reduce, deduct, tame, beat down the price	gcag pa
གཅག་མལ	halt in progress [KNT]	gcag mal
གཅགས	to grasp, apprehend; to make remember, make stick in one's mind	gcags
གཅགས་པ	apprehend, grasp, impress, love	gcags pa
གཅགས་པོ	efficient, stingy cheap	gcags po
གཅང	sagacity, cleverness	gcang
གཅང་ངེ་གཅོང་ངེ	sometimes in good health sometimes not snang tshul	gcang nge gcong nge
གཅང་གཅོང	sometimes in good health sometimes not snang tshul	gcang gcong
གཅང་པོ	clever, lively, sprightly, attentive to, regardful of, eloquent, knowing how to speak pleasantly [ngag sgo yangs pa'am, kha 'jam smra mkhas,...Mgron po gnas bdag gcang po 'dzoms na blo bag phebs po...	gcang po
གཅང་པོ་དྲུང་པོ	clever and sagacious	gcang po drung po
གཅད	f. of {gcod}; fut. of {gcod}	gcad
གཅད་རྒྱ	strict retreat	gcad rgya
གཅད་པ	[f gcod pa] will cut	gcad pa
གཅད་བྱ	nails [of hands and feet]	gcad bya
གཅད་སོ	front tooth, incisors	gcad so
གཅད་ལྷུག	poetry & prose, abbr of tshigs bcad dang lhug pa	gcad lhug
གཅན	see {gcan gzan}	gcan
གཅན་སྒོ	[arch] whore house	gcan sgo
གཅན་དོན	rule, regulation	gcan don
གཅན་པ	watchman, guard	gcan pa
གཅན་འཕྲང	border guards	gcan 'phrang
གཅན་འཕྲང་ཆུ	wild beasts, narrow paths, and rivers	gcan 'phrang chu
གཅན་འཕྲང་བ	border guards	gcan 'phrang ba
གཅན་སྦྱང	a jackal	gcan sbyang
གཅན་ཙ	gcan tsa rdzong [in mtso sngon zhing chen rma lho, N Tibet and on the S bank of the rma chu, rules from ma gi thang]	gcan tsa
གཅན་ཚ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gcan tsha
གཅན་ཛན	predator	gcan dzan
གཅན་ཟ	Chenza, in Domey	gcan za
གཅན་ཟན་ཁང	zoo	gcan zan khang
གཅན་གཟན	savage beasts	gcan gzan
གཅན་གཟན་ཁྲ་བོ	striped predator, tiger	gcan gzan khra bo
གཅན་གཟན་ཁྲོ་བ	ferocious & wild animals	gcan gzan khro ba
གཅན་གཟན་གྱི་ཕྲུ་གུ	cub	gcan gzan gyi phru gu
གཅན་གཟན་གྱི་ཚང	den	gcan gzan gyi tshang
གཅན་གཟན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	predatory, brutal, cruel [nature]	gcan gzan gyi rang bzhin
གཅན་གཟན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the beasts; the lion	gcan gzan rgyal po
གཅན་གཟན་རྒྱལ་པོ་སེང་གེ	Lion, the king of beasts	gcan gzan rgyal po seng ge
གཅན་གཟན་ཆེ་དགུ	1) {se dge}. 2) {stag} 3) {gzig} 4) {gung} 5) {spyang ki} 6) {spre'u} 7) {lpa mo} 8) {dred mo} 9) {dom}	gcan gzan che dgu
གཅན་གཟན་ཐ་མ	lowest of the beasts of prey	gcan gzan tha ma
གཅན་གཟན་གདུག་པ	mischievous wild animals	gcan gzan gdug pa
གཅན་གཟན་གཟིག	the leopard of cunning	gcan gzan gzig
གཅན་གཟིགས་ཁང	zoo	gcan gzigs khang
གཅན་རིམ་པ	Pancaraksa, 5 spell goddesses, SA stong chen mo rab tu 'joms ma, gsang sngags chen mo, so sor 'brang ma, bsil ba'i tshal chen mo, rma bya chen mo	gcan rim pa
གཅམ་བསྟོད	bcos ma'i ngo bstod,...Gcam bstod smras pa,...Gcam bstod sgrog pa	gcam bstod
གཅམ་པ	made, talked over, loyal and loving	gcam pa
གཅམ་བུ	1) Gtam bcos ma'am bcos ma'i ngo bstod,...Khyed la gcam bu'i ngo bstod zhus pa min; 2) Bcos ma'am zol sbyor ram false humbleness, servility, flattery, conning, manipulative, lie, false, made up, ar...	gcam bu
གཅམ་བུ་པ	obsequious & insincere person	gcam bu pa
གཅམ་བུ་བ	1 who does not deal straightforwardly, liar, con man, charlatan zol sbyor mkhan	gcam bu ba
གཅམ་བུའི་ཚིག	lies, manipulative words of flattery	gcam bu'i tshig
གཅམ་ཡས	number	gcam yas
གཅམ་གསག	glibly made up flattering lies, flattery, insincere praise	gcam gsag
གཅར་བ	cut out, put out, knocked out, SA bcar ba	gcar ba
གཅལ	meadows	gcal
གཅལ་དུ་བཀྲམ	carpet of meadows	gcal du bkram
གཅལ་དུ་བཀྲམ་པ	having laid out	gcal du bkram pa
གཅལ་བ	spread, display, lay out	gcal ba
གཅལ་མ	1) on the ground rocks shing sogs snyoms por bsgrigs pa'i gzhi,...Rdo gcal,...Pang gcal,...Aar gcal,...(2 Khod snyoms dang chal ma,...Me tog gcal du bkram pa	gcal ma
གཅི	1.(Tha dad pa gcis pa, gci ba, gcis!,, urinate, discharge of urine	gci
གཅི་བ	1.(Tha dad pa gcis pa, gci ba, gcis!,, urinate, discharge of urine	gci ba
གཅི་བྱའི་ཆུ	urine to be discharged	gci bya'i chu
གཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ	nothing whatsoever,	gci yang med pa
གཅིག	1) complete whole; 2) before verbs de'i 1 time, once; 3) 1, a [syn: zla ba, gzugs, 'od dkar can, ri bong can, bse ru]	gcig
གཅིག་ཀ	single, only	gcig ka
གཅིག་ཀྱང	one only, one and the same	gcig kyang
གཅིག་ཀྱང་གནས་སྟངས	seclusion	gcig kyang gnas stangs
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མ་ལུས	entirely	gcig kyang ma lus
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མ་ལུས་པ	all	gcig kyang ma lus pa
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མ་ལུས་པར	all, everything, w/o remainder	gcig kyang ma lus par
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད	not even a single one	gcig kyang med
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད་པ	not any at all	gcig kyang med pa
གཅིག་རྐྱང	mono, single, sole	gcig rkyang
གཅིག་རྐྱེན་གཅིག་བྱེད	being conditions for each other [of benefit, harm etc]	gcig rkyen gcig byed
གཅིག་སྐྱེས་དབང་ལག	chig skyes dbang lag	gcig skyes dbang lag
གཅིག་ཁྲི	10,000	gcig khri
གཅིག་གམ་ཐ་དད	identical with or distinct from	gcig gam tha dad
གཅིག་གམ་དུ་མ	one or many, single or multiple	gcig gam du ma
གཅིག་གི	of one, one's	gcig gi
གཅིག་གི་ཀློང	single dimension 760	gcig gi klong
གཅིག་གི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	among ldog pa can gyi rgyan, ornament showing both example and meaning la thun mong du 'jug rung gi yon tan sgo nas mtshungs kyang, 1 khyad chos is 'dra ba las ldog, showing dissimilarity	gcig gi ldog pa can
གཅིག་གིས	1 single	gcig gis
གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག	to one another	gcig gis gcig
གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་མ་སྒྲིབ་པ	not mutually exclusive	gcig gis gcig ma sgrib pa
གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་ཟ	eating one another	gcig gis gcig za
གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་ལ	exchange	gcig gis gcig la
གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་ལ་བཤུག་པ	barter	gcig gis gcig la bshug pa
གཅིག་གོ་བཅུ་ཆོད	1 will do for 10	gcig go bcu chod
གཅིག་གོ་གཉིས་ཆོད	1 will do for 2, killing two birds w 1 stone, two goals w 1 action	gcig go gnyis chod
གཅིག་གྱང་མ་ལུས་པ	w/o even a single exception	gcig gyang ma lus pa
གཅིག་གྱིས་གཅིག་ལ	each other, 1 another	gcig gyis gcig la
གཅིག་གྱིས་གཅིག་ལ་རོགས་བྱེད	help each other/ 1 another	gcig gyis gcig la rogs byed
གཅིག་གྱུར	identically, unanimously, consistently, unified, coalition, unification, unity	gcig gyur
གཅིག་གྱུར་གྱི་འགོ་ཁྲིད	unified leadership	gcig gyur gyi 'go khrid
གཅིག་གྱུར་གྱི་ཉོ་སྒྲུབ	centralized purchasing	gcig gyur gyi nyo sgrub
གཅིག་གྱུར་འཆར་འགོད	overall/ unified planning	gcig gyur 'char 'god
གཅིག་གྱུར་གཉིས་སུ་མེད	become 1, unification, unity, same as, 1 w	gcig gyur gnyis su med
གཅིག་གྱུར་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པ	become 1, unification, unity, same as, 1 w	gcig gyur gnyis su med pa
གཅིག་གྱུར་ལྟར	as/ like 1/ the same	gcig gyur ltar
གཅིག་གྱུར་དོ་དམ	unified control/ supervision	gcig gyur do dam
གཅིག་གྱུར་སླད	for the sake of unity	gcig gyur slad
གཅིག་གྲོགས་གཅིག་བྱེད	1 helping the other	gcig grogs gcig byed
གཅིག་གྲོལ	freedom in/ as oneness	gcig grol
གཅིག་འགྱུར	become 1, unification, unity, same as, 1 w	gcig 'gyur
གཅིག་འགྱུར་གྱི་འགོ་ཁྲིད	unified leadership	gcig 'gyur gyi 'go khrid
གཅིག་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཉོ་སྒྲུབ	centralized purchasing	gcig 'gyur gyi nyo sgrub
གཅིག་འགྱུར་འཆར་འགོད	overall/ unified planning	gcig 'gyur 'char 'god
གཅིག་འགྱུར་གཉིས་སུ་མེད	become 1, unification, unity, same as, 1 w	gcig 'gyur gnyis su med
གཅིག་འགྱུར་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པ	become 1, unification, unity, same as, 1 w	gcig 'gyur gnyis su med pa
གཅིག་འགྱུར་ལྟར	as/ like 1/ the same	gcig 'gyur ltar
གཅིག་འགྱུར་དོ་དམ	unified control/ supervision	gcig 'gyur do dam
གཅིག་འགྱུར་སླད	for the sake of unity	gcig 'gyur slad
གཅིག་འགྲིལ	Syn gcig sgril	gcig 'gril
གཅིག་འགྲོ	going along [gelong rules]	gcig 'gro
གཅིག་རྒྱ	be able to remain alone	gcig rgya
གཅིག་རྒྱུད	unique transmission (doctrines transmitted from master to one disciple)	gcig rgyud
གཅིག་སྒྲིལ	1) unity, solidarity; 2) unite[d]; 2) {gcig sgril Rdzong	gcig sgril
གཅིག་སྒྲིལ་དུ་བྱ་བ	concentrate exclusively	gcig sgril du bya ba
གཅིག་སྒྲིལ་དོ་དམ	domination, control, rule	gcig sgril do dam
གཅིག་སྒྲིལ་བའི་འཐབས་ཕྱོགས	united front	gcig sgril ba'i 'thabs phyogs
གཅིག་སྒྲིལ་ཚོགས་པ	{gcig sgril tshogs pa	gcig sgril tshogs pa
གཅིག་བརྒྱུད	single lineage [holder]	gcig brgyud
གཅིག་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བཀའ་རྒྱ	restricted to a single lineage holder	gcig brgyud kyi bka' rgya
གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ	Syn {gcig sgril}	gcig bsgril
གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ་དུ་བྱ་བ	concentrate exclusively	gcig bsgril du bya ba
གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ་དོ་དམ	domination, control, rule	gcig bsgril do dam
གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ་བའི་འཐབས་ཕྱོགས	united front	gcig bsgril ba'i 'thabs phyogs
གཅིག་ངར་གཅིག་སློང	gcig gis gcig la ngar slong ba,...Phan tshun gcig ngar gcig slong byas pas las chod chen po byung song	gcig ngar gcig slong
གཅིག་ཅར	simultaneously. Syn {cig car}	gcig car
གཅིག་ཅར་དུ	{gcig char du} simultaneous(ly); all together/ at once	gcig car du
གཅིག་ཅར་བ	a person of the sudden approach	gcig car ba
གཅིག་ཅིག	alone, solitary	gcig cig
གཅིག་ཅོག	one principal, leader, ring leader	gcig cog
གཅིག་གཅིག	one at a time, separately, alone, of the same kind, not different, by one's self, only, solely	gcig gcig
གཅིག་གཅིག་གཉིས་གཉིས	teach a little/ few and clearly w/o additions, omissions and errors	gcig gcig gnyis gnyis
གཅིག་གཅོག	one principal, the leader, ring leader	gcig gcog
གཅིག་བཅུ་བརྒྱ་སྟོང	1, 10, 100, 1000	gcig bcu brgya stong
གཅིག་ལྕོགས	job undertaken by someone at the same time as another, combined positions [skad bsgyur drung yig gcig lcogs: combined interpreter-secretary]	gcig lcogs
གཅིག་ཆག་གཉིས་ལངས	1 after another	gcig chag gnyis langs
གཅིག་ཆར	all at once; alone/ all at once. See also {cig car / cig char}	gcig char
གཅིག་ཆར་འཇུག་པ	simultaneous entering	gcig char 'jug pa
གཅིག་ཆར་དུ	simultaneously; all together, all at once	gcig char du
གཅིག་ཆར་དུ་སྤངས་བ	abandoning all at once	gcig char du spangs ba
གཅིག་ཆར་བ	the path of sudden realization	gcig char ba
གཅིག་ཆོག	1) 1 sufficient for all/ everything, all-purpose, all sufficient; 2) combined positions [skad bsgyur drung yig gcig chog: combined interpretersecretary]	gcig chog
གཅིག་ཆོག་རྒྱལ་པོ	single/ 1 sufficient king, king of teaching who alone is enough	gcig chog rgyal po
གཅིག་ཆོག་ཡིན	this one thing is sufficient	gcig chog yin
གཅིག་ཆོད	(single) incisive/ decisive (point/ stroke)	gcig chod
གཅིག་ཆོད་གཅིག་སྒྲུབ	all sufficient, arbitrary/ unilateral act/ decision	gcig chod gcig sgrub
གཅིག་མཇུག་གཉིས་མཇུག	consecutive 761	gcig mjug gnyis mjug
གཅིག་མཇུག་གཉིས་མཐུད	one after another	gcig mjug gnyis mthud
གཅིག་མཇུག་གཉིས་མཐུད་ཕེབས	arrived 1 after another	gcig mjug gnyis mthud phebs
གཅིག་མཇུག་གཉིས་མཐུད་བྱེད་པ	to follow one after another	gcig mjug gnyis mthud byed pa
གཅིག་འཇགས་གཅིག་ལངས	sa gnas gcig la zhod 'jags dang sa gnas gzhan zhig la zing cha langs pa	gcig 'jags gcig langs
གཅིག་འཇུག་གཉིས་འཇུག་བརྡུང་བ	batter	gcig 'jug gnyis 'jug brdung ba
གཅིག་རྗེས	passage (for one man to pass; fit for one foot only)	gcig rjes
གཅིག་རྗེས་གཅིག	one after another	gcig rjes gcig
གཅིག་རྗེས་གཅིག་ནོན	one after the other, one added upon the next	gcig rjes gcig non
གཅིག་རྗེས་གཉིས་མཐུད	successively, 1 after another	gcig rjes gnyis mthud
གཅིག་རྗེས་གཉིས་མཐུད་ཕེབས	arrived 1 after another	gcig rjes gnyis mthud phebs
གཅིག་ཉིད	alone, de kho na rang, unity, oneness, sameness	gcig nyid
གཅིག་ཉོས་པ་ཡིན	[I] bought 1/ something	gcig nyos pa yin
གཅིག་གཉིས	1 or 2, a few	gcig gnyis
གཅིག་རྙེད་ལྟ་ཚུལ	personal/ individual opinion/ viewpoint	gcig rnyed lta tshul
གཅིག་སྙིང་གཅིག་གཏད	mutual faith/ trust	gcig snying gcig gtad
གཅིག་ཏུ	alone, altogether, single, 1-sided, in/ at 1; 2) specifically	gcig tu
གཅིག་ཏུ་དཀར་བ	utterly pure / virtuous	gcig tu dkar ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་འཁྱིལ་བ	to dwell innately in a/ the single (state of) . . .	gcig tu 'khyil ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	be turned into one uniform state, to integrate into	gcig tu gyur pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བགྲང་བ	counted as one	gcig tu bgrang ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	become 1/ united	gcig tu 'gyur
གཅིག་ཏུ་འགྱུར་བ	will be singular, become one	gcig tu 'gyur ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་སྒྲིམ	to concentrate, to unite / bring together into one	gcig tu sgrim
གཅིག་ཏུ་སྒྲིལ	unite, bring together into 1	gcig tu sgril
གཅིག་ཏུ་སྒྲིལ་བ	unify, unite	gcig tu sgril ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒོངས	collects into one	gcig tu bsgongs
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིམས	concentrated, united, brought together into 1	gcig tu bsgrims
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིལ	united, brought together into 1	gcig tu bsgril
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིལ་བ	adjoin, amalgamate, aggregate	gcig tu bsgril ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་ངེས	truly 1	gcig tu nges
གཅིག་ཏུ་ངེས་པ	be intent on one object, one object for certain	gcig tu nges pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་མངོན་དགའ	totally delighted	gcig tu mngon dga'
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཆད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	singularly expounding nihilism	gcig tu chad par smra ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཉེས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	totally involved in negativity	gcig tu nyes par spyod pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྟན་པ	taught as one / in combination	gcig tu bstan pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་དྲིལ	to merge together	gcig tu dril
གཅིག་ཏུ་དྲིལ་བ	combine	gcig tu dril ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུ	be gathered/ collected together/ concentrated	gcig tu 'du
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་ནས	having come together, being united	gcig tu 'dus nas
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་པ	unify	gcig tu 'dus pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་སམ་ཕྲད་ནས	having joined or being united together	gcig tu 'dus sam phrad nas
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲིལ་བ	to merge/ combine as/ in one; isc. totality of [cf. CYDz, 189.a.4]	gcig tu 'dril ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེ	combine/ mix/ join/ do something together, mingle into 1	gcig tu 'dre
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས	combined/ mixed/ joined/ did something together, mingled into 1	gcig tu 'dres
གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས་པ	merged with	gcig tu 'dres pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་སྡུ་བ	to coalesce/ unite as one	gcig tu sdu ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡམ	unify	gcig tu bsdam
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡམ་པ	tied together	gcig tu bsdam pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུ	gather/ collect together/ concentrate	gcig tu bsdu
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུ་བ	condense	gcig tu bsdu ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུས	united	gcig tu bsdus
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུས་ཀྱང	even if you gathered together	gcig tu bsdus kyang
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུས་ནས	drew together	gcig tu bsdus nas
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུས་པ	unity, unified, combine	gcig tu bsdus pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུས་པའི་ངོ་བོར་གྱུར་པ	the very embodiment	gcig tu bsdus pa'i ngo bor gyur pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡེབས་པ	combined	gcig tu bsdebs pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡོམས་པ	added together	gcig tu bsdoms pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་ན	in one way/ sense; in a word, . . .	gcig tu na
གཅིག་ཏུ་ནག་པ	totally evil	gcig tu nag pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་གནག་པ	utterly negative	gcig tu gnag pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	taken as one, in unison	gcig tu byed pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་བྲལ	1) not as one. 2) {gcig du bral} devoid of being one or many	gcig tu bral
གཅིག་ཏུ་སྦྲེལ	unite, join together, combine into 1	gcig tu sbrel
གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	singularly nonexistent	gcig tu ma grub pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་ངེས	not definite in any aspect	gcig tu ma nges
གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་ངེས་པ	many different	gcig tu ma nges pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not existing as 1/ a single entity, not unified into 1, altogether, alone	gcig tu ma yin pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཚོགས་ནས	having been unified into 1	gcig tu tshogs nas
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཚོགས་པ	unified into one, altogether, alone	gcig tu tshogs pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་མཛེས་པ	one who can perfectly please, a bodhisattva	gcig tu mdzes pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	holding together or to hold together	gcig tu 'dzin pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞུ	say specifically	gcig tu zhu
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞེན་པ	1-sided, biased, partial,	gcig tu zhen pa
ནརྲོཝ	minded, insular, prefer 1 point of view	narrow
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞེན་པའི་བློས་བཏགས	the mental labeling of apprehending as one 762	gcig tu zhen pa'i blos btags
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞེན་པིའ་བློས་བཏགས	the labelings of partial mind	gcig tu zhen pi' blos btags
གཅིག་ཏུ་ཡོད	all existing together, in one place	gcig tu yod
གཅིག་ཏུ་རློམ་པ	be proud of being one with	gcig tu rlom pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་སེམས	faith	gcig tu sems
གཅིག་ཏུ་སེམས་པ	be all attention, pay homage, be respectful, be possessed of faith and respect	gcig tu sems pa
གཅིག་ཏུ་སོང་བ	to become one with	gcig tu song ba
གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྲེས་པ	to mingle, merge into one	gcig tu bsres pa
གཅིག་ཏོ་བསྡུ་གི་ཡོད་པ་རེད	[they] are collecting --	gcig to bsdu gi yod pa red
གཅིག་ལྟར	same, alike	gcig ltar
གཅིག་ལྟར་མ་ཡིན་པ	anomalous	gcig ltar ma yin pa
གཅིག་སྟོང	1,000	gcig stong
གཅིག་བརྟེན་གཅིག་དྲན	association [of ideas]	gcig brten gcig dran
གཅིག་ཐ་དད	identical or distinct, oneness and distinctiveness [ggd]	gcig tha dad
གཅིག་ཐ་དད་སོགས་ཀྱི་བརྟགས་པ	labels of same, different, etc	gcig tha dad sogs kyi brtags pa
གཅིག་ཐག་བཅད་པ	discover one single state, arriving at a single definitive decision or discovery through firsthand personal experience	gcig thag bcad pa
གཅིག་ཐད་ནས	on the 1 hand	gcig thad nas
གཅིག་ཐོག	one state	gcig thog
གཅིག་ཐོག་གཉིས་བརྩེགས	1 [piled/ built] on top of another	gcig thog gnyis brtsegs
གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅད་པ	to decide on one point	gcig thog tu bcad pa
གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་རང་ཕྲད་པ	to encounter the unique state directly	gcig thog tu rang phrad pa
གཅིག་མཐུན	similar, 1 and the same, unanimous, common	gcig mthun
གཅིག་མཐུན་གྱི་སྐད	common/ similar language[s]	gcig mthun gyi skad
གཅིག་མཐུན་གྱི་བྱ་སྤྱོད	concerted/ unanimous action	gcig mthun gyi bya spyod
གཅིག་མཐུན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	unanimity	gcig mthun gyi rang bzhin
གཅིག་མཐུན་གྱི་བསམ་བློ	unanimous idea	gcig mthun gyi bsam blo
གཅིག་མཐུན་དུ་ཡོད	corresponds in meaning	gcig mthun du yod
གཅིག་འཐུས	combined positions/ jobs	gcig 'thus
གཅིག་འཐོབ	expectant, actor, bard	gcig 'thob
གཅིག་དང་གཉིས་ཀྱིས	minute, in detail	gcig dang gnyis kyis
གཅིག་དང་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་རྩིས་པ	make a detailed account of	gcig dang gnyis kyis rtsis pa
གཅིག་དང་ཐ་དད	identical or dissimilar, unitary or separate, same or different	gcig dang tha dad
གཅིག་དང་ཐ་དད་པ	identical or dissimilar	gcig dang tha dad pa
གཅིག་དང་དུ་བྲལ	free from the 1 and the many, free from singular and multiple	gcig dang du bral
གཅིག་དང་དུ་མ	single or multiple	gcig dang du ma
གཅིག་དང་དུ་མའི་སྤྲོས་ལས་འདས	beyond the constructs of 'one' and 'many'	gcig dang du ma'i spros las 'das
གཅིག་དང་གཞན	single and other	gcig dang gzhan
གཅིག་དུ	{gcig dang du ma} single or plural, singular or multiple	gcig du
གཅིག་དུ་འདུས་པ	single embodiment; fuse into one	gcig du 'dus pa
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ	devoid of being 1 or many, things not existing independently, the absence of singularity and plurality	gcig du bral
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of the absence of singularity and plurality	gcig du bral kyi rigs pa
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ་གྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས	the maxim of the absence of singularity and plurality	gcig du bral gyi gtan tshigs
ཐཏ་ནེགཏེས་ཨོནེ་ཨོར་མཉ་སེལཕ༹	entities of individuals [among the {gtan tsigs chen po lnga}, examination of theessence of dharmas, free from 1 and many teaching the gate of liberation of emptiness, as all dhamas like a sprout/	that negates one or many self
པེན་ཧབེ༹་ཨ་ནོན	truly existent dharmin, w/o truly existent 1 or many, that is a khyab byed ma dmigs pa'i reason]	pen have a non
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ་གྱི་དཔྱད་པ	the examination/analysis that negates 1 or many	gcig du bral gyi dpyad pa
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ་གྱི་རིགས་པ	the deductive formula/reasoning that negates 1 or	gcig du bral gyi rigs pa
མཉ་སེལཕ༹	entities of individuals	many self
གཅིག་དུ་བྲལ་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	Syn {don dam rtogs pa}	gcig du bral du rtogs pa
གཅིག་དུ་མ	one or many, unity and multiplicity	gcig du ma
གཅིག་དྲིལ	unified	gcig dril
གཅིག་དྲིལ་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	sadhana style essentialized into a single deity	gcig dril gyi sgrub lugs
གཅིག་དྲིལ་དུ	condensing all points into one	gcig dril du
གཅིག་དྲིལ་བ	combined, combined into one	gcig dril ba
གཅིག་དྲེལ	condense all points into 1	gcig drel
གཅིག་བདེན	true singularity	gcig bden
གཅིག་འདུ	concentrate [-tion], gather scattered things in 1 place	gcig 'du
གཅིག་འདུ་པའི་ནུས་ཤུགས	power of gathering in 1 place	gcig 'du pa'i nus shugs
གཅིག་འདུ་བྱེད	concentrate, centralize	gcig 'du byed
གཅིག་འདུ་བྱེད་པ	concentrate, centralize	gcig 'du byed pa
གཅིག་འདུའི་ཕུང་པོ	united body/ entity	gcig 'du'i phung po
གཅིག་འདུའི་རང་བཞིན	unification, centralization	gcig 'du'i rang bzhin
གཅིག་འདུའི་རིང་ལུགས	centralism	gcig 'du'i ring lugs
གཅིག་འདུའི་ལམ་ལུགས	centralism	gcig 'du'i lam lugs
གཅིག་འདུས	single embodiment	gcig 'dus
གཅིག་འདྲ	identical	gcig 'dra
གཅིག་འདྲ་བ	consistent	gcig 'dra ba
གཅིག་འདྲིལ་བ	combined	gcig 'dril ba
གཅིག་རྡུང་གསུམ་རྒོལ	beat 1 oppose three	gcig rdung gsum rgol
གཅིག་སྡུད	concentration	gcig sdud
གཅིག་སྡུད་འགོ་ཁྲིད	centralized leadership	gcig sdud 'go khrid
གཅིག་སྡུད་པའི་ནུས་ཤུགས	power of gathering in 1 place	gcig sdud pa'i nus shugs
གཅིག་སྡུད་བྱེད	concentrate, centralize	gcig sdud byed
གཅིག་སྡུད་བྱེད་པ	concentrate, centralize	gcig sdud byed pa
གཅིག་སྡུད་བཙོན་སྒར	concentration camp	gcig sdud btson sgar
གཅིག་སྡུད་རིང་ལུགས	centralism	gcig sdud ring lugs
གཅིག་སྡུད་ལམ་ལུགས	centralism	gcig sdud lam lugs
གཅིག་སྡུས	concentrate [-tion], gather scattered things in 1 place, centralization	gcig sdus
གཅིག་སྡུས་འགོ་ཁྲིད	centralized leadership	gcig sdus 'go khrid
གཅིག་སྡུས་པའི་ནུས་ཤུགས	power of gathering in 1 place	gcig sdus pa'i nus shugs
གཅིག་སྡུས་བྱེད	concentrate, centralize	gcig sdus byed
གཅིག་སྡུས་བྱེད་པ	concentrate, centralize	gcig sdus byed pa
གཅིག་སྡུས་བཙོན་སྒར	concentration camp	gcig sdus btson sgar
གཅིག་སྡུས་རིང་ལུགས	centralism	gcig sdus ring lugs
གཅིག་སྡུས་ལམ་ལུགས	centralism	gcig sdus lam lugs
གཅིག་སྡོམ	combine into 1	gcig sdom
གཅིག་བསྡུས	identity, embodiment	gcig bsdus
གཅིག་བསྡུས་པ	combined into one	gcig bsdus pa
གཅིག་ན་ཡང	not even one	gcig na yang
གཅིག་ནས	on the 1 hand [gcig nas---gnyis nas on 1 hand; on the other]	gcig nas
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ	from 1 to another, in succession	gcig nas gcig tu
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ་རྒྱུད་པ	lineal descent or lineal descendant	gcig nas gcig tu rgyud pa
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བརྒྱུད་པ	transmitted from one to another	gcig nas gcig tu brgyud pa
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་ནས	become one our united by succession	gcig nas gcig tu 'dus nas
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡུ་བ	accumulate for each other	gcig nas gcig tu bsdu ba
གཅིག་ནས་གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞེན་པ	successive thoughts combining together gcig nas gcig tu yongs su smin par mdzad	gcig nas gcig tu zhen pa
གཅིག་ནས་རྟོགས་པ	one who deliberates with undivided attention	gcig nas rtogs pa
གཅིག་གནས	bcu longs gong du sgril ba'i rtsis lugs kyi grangs gnas dang po	gcig gnas
གཅིག་སྣེར་གཅིག་འཐུད	continuous	gcig sner gcig 'thud
གཅིག་པ་བཀག་པ	merely not one [ggd]	gcig pa bkag pa
གཅིག་པ་བཀག་པའི་ཐ་དད	the difference that refutes 1	gcig pa bkag pa'i tha dad
གཅིག་པ་གཅིག་རྐྱང	ditto	gcig pa gcig rkyang
གཅིག་པ་ཉིད	sameness, identically gcig pa nyid dang tha dad pa nyid du mi	gcig pa nyid
གཅིག་པ་ཉིད་དུ་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	the conception of unity	gcig pa nyid du rnam par rtog pa
གཅིག་པ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	non-unity, absence of unity	gcig pa nyid med pa
གཅིག་པ་མ་ཡིན	not being single / identical	gcig pa ma yin
གཅིག་པ་བཞི	fourfold sameness #	gcig pa bzhi
གཅིག་པ་བཟོ་བ	equalize	gcig pa bzo ba
གཅིག་པ་རང	just like	gcig pa rang
གཅིག་པའི་ལམ	path of sole progress	gcig pa'i lam
གཅིག་པར	same, uniform, unitary, the one, uniformly	gcig par
གཅིག་པུ	oneness; (as adj.) single/ sole	gcig pu
སིངླེ	handedly, unaided	single
གཅིག་པུ་སྡོད་མཁན	recluse	gcig pu sdod mkhan
གཅིག་པུ་གནས་ས	solitude	gcig pu gnas sa
གཅིག་པུ་བ	solitary, hermit, recluse	gcig pu ba
གཅིག་པུ་དབེན་པ	solitariness, residing alone in retirement	gcig pu dben pa
གཅིག་པུ་དབེན་པ་ན་འདུག	be solitary and alone	gcig pu dben pa na 'dug
གཅིག་པུ་དབེན་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	realization of solitariness	gcig pu dben par spyod pa
གཅིག་པུ་མ	woman alone, single woman	gcig pu ma
གཅིག་པུ་ཡིན་པའི་སེམས་སྡུག	lonesome	gcig pu yin pa'i sems sdug
གཅིག་པུའི་ཀློང	single dimension	gcig pu'i klong
གཅིག་པུར	singly, solo, alone	gcig pur
གཅིག་པུར་གླུ་ལེན་མཁན	soloist	gcig pur glu len mkhan
གཅིག་པུར་སྡད་པ	to live alone	gcig pur sdad pa
གཅིག་པུར་བསྡད་པ	live alone	gcig pur bsdad pa
གཅིག་པུར་གནས	stay by yourself	gcig pur gnas
གཅིག་པུར་གནས་པ	1) solitude, living alone. 2) hermit, recluse	gcig pur gnas pa
གཅིག་པུར་སྤྱོད	realization of aloneness, act alone	gcig pur spyod
གཅིག་པུར་སྤྱོད་པ	to live alone / in solitude	gcig pur spyod pa
གཅིག་པུར་ལུས་པ	forsaken, abandoned, be left alone	gcig pur lus pa
གཅིག་པུས	by just 764	gcig pus
གཅིག་པུས་བསྒྲོད་པའི་ལམ	the path to be journeyed alone, the path of solitary journey	gcig pus bsgrod pa'i lam
གཅིག་པོ	1) alone, individual, isolated; 2) the other 1	gcig po
གཅིག་པོ་པ	solitary mountain from which tsangpo flows	gcig po pa
གཅིག་པོས་ཆོག	it is enough for everything	gcig pos chog
གཅིག་པོས་ཐག་གཅོད	decide alone	gcig pos thag gcod
གཅིག་པོས་བཙན་གཅོད་བྱེད	rule [alone] as a dictator	gcig pos btsan gcod byed
གཅིག་དཔེ་ཀུན་འགེབས	make one example apply in all cases	gcig dpe kun 'gebs
གཅིག་སྤྱོད་ཁྲིམས་ཡིག	local laws independent of larger government units	gcig spyod khrims yig
གཅིག་སྤྱོད་ལམ་སྲོལ	local laws independent of larger government units	gcig spyod lam srol
གཅིག་ཕན་གཅིག་གྲོགས	1 helping the other	gcig phan gcig grogs
གཅིག་འཕར་གཅིག་ཆག	gcig yar 'phar zhing gcig mar chag pa...Khrom thang gcig 'phar gcig chag ci rigs yong	gcig 'phar gcig chag
གཅིག་འཕྲོར་གཅིག་མཐུད	continuously follow/ do	gcig 'phror gcig mthud
གཅིག་བུ	single, one, odd, matchless, alone	gcig bu
གཅིག་བུ་བུར་སྤྱོད	treat like an only child	gcig bu bur spyod
གཅིག་བུ་མ	single mother	gcig bu ma
གཅིག་བུའི་བདག་ཉིད	single master	gcig bu'i bdag nyid
གཅིག་བྱང་གཉིས་དགོས	Once you've got 1 you'll want two	gcig byang gnyis dgos
གཅིག་བྱས	only	gcig byas
གཅིག་བྱས་གཉིས་གྲུབ	accomplish two goals w 1 action	gcig byas gnyis grub
གཅིག་བྱས་ན	perhaps, maybe	gcig byas na
གཅིག་བྱས་ན་དེ་ལྟར་རེད	perhaps/ maybe it is like that	gcig byas na de ltar red
གཅིག་བྱེད	made into one	gcig byed
གཅིག་འབྲེལ་གཉིས་འབྲེལ	chain	gcig 'brel gnyis 'brel
གཅིག་མ་བྱས	unique state which doesn't appear, real condition beyond time	gcig ma byas
གཅིག་མིན	nonidentical	gcig min
གཅིག་མིན་གཉིས་མིན	not 1 not 2, not once not twice, again and again/ many times	gcig min gnyis min
གཅིག་མིན་གཉིས་མིན་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	criticize many times	gcig min gnyis min skyon brjod
གཅིག་ཚད	unit	gcig tshad
གཅིག་ཚན་ཟློས་གར	1 act play	gcig tshan zlos gar
གཅིག་ཚིག	bod yig ltar na the 1st division de ga rang	gcig tshig
གཅིག་ཚོགས	jointly, together	gcig tshogs
གཅིག་ཚོགས་སྡོད	live together	gcig tshogs sdod
གཅིག་མཚུངས	tantamount	gcig mtshungs
གཅིག་མཚུངས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	=ly	gcig mtshungs kyi sgo nas
གཅིག་འཛིན	dictatorial, absolute	gcig 'dzin
གཅིག་འཛིན་སྲིད་དབང	dictatorial rule, absolute power	gcig 'dzin srid dbang
གཅིག་འཛོམས	concentrate [-tion], gather scattered things in 1 place, centralization	gcig 'dzoms
གཅིག་རྫོགས	unique(ly) perfect(ion); perfect(ion) in (its) oneness	gcig rdzogs
གཅིག་རྫོགས་ཀུན་རྫོགས	with that single perfection, all is perfect	gcig rdzogs kun rdzogs
གཅིག་རྫོགས་གཉིས་རྫོགས་ཀུན་རྫོགས	perfection in oneness, perfection in duality, perfection in everything; "perfection in one, perfection in two, perfection in everything"	gcig rdzogs gnyis rdzogs kun rdzogs
གཅིག་བཞེད་པ	sole intent	gcig bzhed pa
གཅིག་ཟླུམ	zla sgril te gathered into a lump	gcig zlum
གཅིག་བཟིང་གཉིས་ཤར	take 1 lose 2, not be able to cope w the whole situation	gcig bzing gnyis shar
གཅིག་ཡིད་གཅིག་ཆེས	phan tshun blo 'khel ba,...Yun ring song mtshams su phan tshun gcig yid gcig ches byung song	gcig yid gcig ches
གཅིག་ཡིན་པ	are one single nature	gcig yin pa
གཅིག་རང	monotonous	gcig rang
གཅིག་རེ་གཉིས་རེ	CM: re gnyis te nyung gnu'i don, "two or fewer," one or two, a couple of. ¦ mi ngan gcig re gnyis re, a couple of bad men/persons. 'gro thengs gcig re gnyis re las med, "[I] did not go more than a ...	gcig re gnyis re
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག	one another, each other	gcig la gcig
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་ལྟོས་ཀྱི་རབ་སྤེལ	increase w 1 depending on another	gcig la gcig ltos kyi rab spel
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་ལྟོས་པ	mutually dependent	gcig la gcig ltos pa
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་འབྲེལ	joined/ attached 1 to another	gcig la gcig 'brel
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཁང་པ	attached houses	gcig la gcig 'brel ba'i khang pa
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་སྦྲེལ	joined/ attached 1 to another	gcig la gcig sbrel
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་སྦྲེལ་བའི་ཁང་པ	attached houses	gcig la gcig sbrel ba'i khang pa
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་མེད	absence of one thing in relation to another thing (nyaya technical term)	gcig la gcig med
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་མེད་པ	mutual nonexistence	gcig la gcig med pa
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་ཟ་བ	eating one another	gcig la gcig za ba
གཅིག་ལ་གཅིག་ཟོས	eating each other; being eaten by others	gcig la gcig zos
གཅིག་ལན་གཉིས་འདེབས	the explanation of 1 answered by the other w/o listening	gcig lan gnyis 'debs
གཅིག་ལན་གཉིས་ལན	tshig re la tshig res lan slog pa,...Sems bzang gis bshad pa'i bslab byar mi nyan par gcig lan gnyis lan bslogs pa	gcig lan gnyis lan
གཅིག་ལབ་རྒྱག	talk to 1self	gcig lab rgyag
གཅིག་ལས་གཅིག་མཚར	one more amazing than the other	gcig las gcig mtshar
གཅིག་ལས་འཕྲོས་པའི་ལུང	a religious work	gcig las 'phros pa'i lung
གཅིག་ལས་མེད	do not exist apart from the one, nothing different from the one	gcig las med
གཅིག་ལས་མེད་པ	not more than one	gcig las med pa
གཅིག་ཤེས་ཀུན་ཁྲོལ	collection of empowerments by Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje	gcig shes kun khrol
གཅིག་ཤེས་ཀུན་གྲོལ	knowing 1 that liberates all, liberate all by knowing 1	gcig shes kun grol
གཅིག་ཤོས	the other, companion, fellowvoyager	gcig shos
གཅིག་བཤད་གཅིག་འཁྲབ་ཀྱི་ལྟད་མོ	show w 1 acting 1 speaking [two man team/ act w 1 speaking behind 1 acting in front] 765	gcig bshad gcig 'khrab kyi ltad mo
གཅིད	1.(Tha dad pa gcis pa, gci ba, gcis!,, urinate, discharge of urine	gcid
གཅིད་པ	discharge urine, make water, piss	gcid pa
གཅིད་བ	1.(Tha dad pa gcis pa, gci ba, gcis!,, urinate, discharge of urine	gcid ba
གཅིན	urine	gcin
གཅིན་གྱི་ཤུགས་དགག་མི་བྱ	impulse to make water must not be suppressed	gcin gyi shugs dgag mi bya
གཅིན་འགག	retention/ blockage of urine	gcin 'gag
གཅིན་འགག་པ་ལ་བརྒྱད	the 8 urine stoppages	gcin 'gag pa la brgyad
གཅིན་འགགས	because of lgang pa dang, rgyu grog gi gnas su rde'u 'phel ba etc, stoppage or urination	gcin 'gags
གཅིན་གཅི་བ	make water	gcin gci ba
གཅིན་གཅི་བ་པོ	one who is making water	gcin gci ba po
གཅིན་གཅིད་པ	make water	gcin gcid pa
གཅིན་བཅུད	urea	gcin bcud
གཅིན་སྙི	because of rlan can yul du rgyun ring sdod pa dang bad tshil 'phel ba etc., rgyun ldan ltar ma yin pa urinating profusely or uncontrollably	gcin snyi
གཅིན་སྙེ	gonorrhoea, disease of kidneys in which urine is frequently and involuntarily discharged	gcin snye
གཅིན་གཏོང་བ	make water, piss	gcin gtong ba
གཅིན་སྟུག	piss and shit	gcin stug
གཅིན་དྲི	smell of urine, foul smell	gcin dri
གཅིན་དྲེག་དྲི་ཆུའི་དྲེག་པ	physician's diagnosis by urine	gcin dreg dri chu'i dreg pa
གཅིན་ནད	disease of the urine, prob. spermatorrhoea	gcin nad
གཅིན་པ	urine [syn: rgyun 'bab, dri chu, mi bskyod pa, rab 'dzag]	gcin pa
གཅིན་པ་གཏོང	urinate	gcin pa gtong
གཅིན་པ་གཏོང་ག	piss	gcin pa gtong ga
གཅིན་པ་གཏོང་བ	urinate	gcin pa gtong ba
གཅིན་པ་གཏོང་ས	urinal	gcin pa gtong sa
གཅིན་པ་གཏོང་སའི	urinary	gcin pa gtong sa'i
གཅིན་ཕྱི་ས	piss and shit	gcin phyi sa
གཅིན་མང	diabetes, making water again and again	gcin mang
གཅིན་བཟེད	urinal, thunder-mug, piss-pot	gcin bzed
གཅིན་ཡང	making water again and again	gcin yang
གཅིན་ལམ	urethra	gcin lam
གཅིན་ལུད	uric fertilizer	gcin lud
གཅིན་ཤ	kind of mushroom	gcin sha
གཅིན་ཤོར	involuntarily/ accidently urinate	gcin shor
གཅིན་སྲི	blockage so that urine only drips out w difficulty	gcin sri
གཅིན་སྲི་བ	pain or smarting in discharging urine	gcin sri ba
གཅིའི་སྨན	clyster	gci'i sman
གཅིའུ	gce'u	gci'u
གཅིའུ་རྨ་བཀྲུ	anal wound cleansing instrument chu mda'a	gci'u rma bkru
གཅིར	press, wring, SA 'chir ba	gcir
གཅིར་བ	(tha dad pa,, press,, squeeze	gcir ba
གཅིར་ཡང	everything, entirely	gcir yang
གཅིལ	spoil, destroy	gcil
གཅིལ་བ	to spoil, to destroy	gcil ba
གཅིས	make water, SA gci ba, piss, SA gcid pa	gcis
གཅིས་པ	pf. of {gci ba}	gcis pa
གཅིས་སྤྲས	look after very carefully	gcis spras
གཅིས་སྤྲས་བྱེད་པ	look after very carefully	gcis spras byed pa
གཅུ	twist, turn, change direction, steer, turn around, screw on/ around w, interfere, meddle with [g.yas bcus pa dang: as soon as he turned right; lag pa gcus song: they twisted his arm]	gcu
གཅུ་སྐོར	screw	gcu skor
གཅུ་གལ	responsibility, important [ce]	gcu gal
གཅུ་ཏི	SA cu ti	gcu ti
གཅུ་དོང	screw box	gcu dong
གཅུ་པོ	crooked	gcu po
གཅུ་བ	(tha dad pa gcus pa, gcu ba, gcus, sgrim pa [concentrate, spin],...,...Lus sha gcus pa,...Gyon pa chur bkrus te gcus pa	gcu ba
གཅུ་ཚེམ	{gcu tshem} way of sewing	gcu tshem
གཅུ་འཛེར	gcus te skyes pa'i shing gi 'dzer pa	gcu 'dzer
གཅུ་རུ་ཚ་པོ	gyong po'am rang shed tsha po	gcu ru tsha po
གཅུག	difference, discord	gcug
གཅུག་མེད	without difference, harmony	gcug med
གཅུག་ལག་ཁང་གི་དུས་སྟོན	1 of 9 dus ston	gcug lag khang gi dus ston
གཅུགས	beloved, dear, compatible	gcugs
གཅུགས་མཁན	g.yo can	gcugs mkhan
གཅུགས་ལྡན	mdza' mthun can	gcugs ldan
གཅུགས་པ	planted, cultivated, acquired, gained, firm	gcugs pa
གཅུགས་པ་སྨྲ་བ	speak according to 1's mind	gcugs pa smra ba
གཅུགས་མེད	enmity/ hostility	gcugs med
གཅུགས་མེད་བྱེད་པ	create enmity/ hostility	gcugs med byed pa
གཅུང	or cung, ri bo che'i bra shis sgo	gcung
གཅུང་དགའ་བོ	Nanda	gcung dga' bo
གཅུང་དོན་ཡོད་དོན་གྲུབ	sngar rgyal po zhig gi chen ma 'das 'og tu sras don grub zer ba lus pa de dang, chun ma'i sras don yod zer ba gnyis mdza' mthun chen po yod kyang, chun mas don yod la rgyal po'i go 'phang 'thob tha...	gcung don yod don grub
གཅུང་པ	name of an opera troupe	gcung pa
གཅུང་པོ	younger male relative, younger brother	gcung po
གཅུང་པོ་དོན་ཡོད་དོན་གྲུབ	name of an opera	gcung po don yod don grub
གཅུང་དབྱིག་གཉེན	the younger brother [of Asanga], Vasubandhu	gcung dbyig gnyen
གཅུང་མོ	younger female relative, younger sister	gcung mo
མཆོད་རྟེན	Tashi Gomang Stupa at Chung Riwoche, in Latö	mchod rten
གཅུད	to forsake, to cast out, to reject, crown of the head, vertex	gcud
གཅུད་པ	turn, turn round, twist, twine, plait, braid, stabilized	gcud pa
གཅུད་བོར	working with zeal & earnestness, forsake, reject	gcud bor
གཅུད་ལ་འབོར་བ	forsake, cast out, reject	gcud la 'bor ba
གཅུན	exerting, pushing oneself, doing very hard work, scrutinize, to focus on, applying	gcun
གཅུན་མཁས་པོ	good trainer/ discipliner	gcun mkhas po
གཅུན་ཐབས་གསུམ	1) {rta dmu rgod ltar gcun}; 2) {rin chen ga ter ltar} three {rgyal po'i btsun mo ltar zhes}.? mo	gcun thabs gsum
གཅུན་པ	reprove, subdue, tame, SA 'jun pa, tensing	gcun pa
གཅུན་མི་ཐུབ་པའ་ཕྲུ་གུ	incorrigible child	gcun mi thub pa' phru gu
གཅུར	pressed into, Will be entangled [f 'jur ba]	gcur
གཅུར་པ	shun, SA 'jur ba, coarse sort of vermicelli	gcur pa
གཅུར་བ	ft. of {'jur ba}; pf. of {gcur ba}; {gcur ba, gcur ba, bcur ba, chur} trans. v	gcur ba
གཅུས	turn, SA gcud pa, to turn	gcus
གཅུས་སྐོ	tap [water], regulator	gcus sko
གཅུས་བསྒྲིམ་བྱེད་སྐམ་པ	wrench	gcus bsgrim byed skam pa
གཅུས་བསྒྲིམ་ཟིན་པ	wound	gcus bsgrim zin pa
གཅུས་བསྒྲིམས་པ	twist	gcus bsgrims pa
གཅུས་ཐིག	lotus petal mu khyud-like line	gcus thig
གཅུས་དུང	gcus gzer gyi gzer gdan	gcus dung
གཅུས་གདན	mo gcus	gcus gdan
གཅུས་པ	interfere, meddle with	gcus pa
གཅུས་ཕུར	bolt	gcus phur
གཅུས་ཕུར་རྒྱག	bolt	gcus phur rgyag
གཅུས་ཕྱོགས	in the direction towards which one has turned	gcus phyogs
གཅུས་བུ	screw [gcus ris can gyi gzer],...Pho gcus,...Mo gcus,... something stowed, something jammed in	gcus bu
གཅུས་བུར	bolt	gcus bur
གཅུས་ཟིན་པ	wrung	gcus zin pa
གཅུས་གཟེར	screw	gcus gzer
གཅུས་གཟེར་རྒྱབ་པ	screw	gcus gzer rgyab pa
གཅུས་གཟེར་སྒྲིམ་བྱེད	screw-driver	gcus gzer sgrim byed
གཅུས་གཟེར་གཅུ་བ	screw in a screw	gcus gzer gcu ba
གཅུས་རིས	1) screw-like pattern/ threads; 2) twisted	gcus ris
གཅུས་རིས་རྒྱག	twist	gcus ris rgyag
གཅུས་རིས་ཐེབས	be twisted	gcus ris thebs
གཅེ	{gce} former Tibetan clan, love, have affection for	gce
གཅེ་བ	to esteem, to hold dear, to love	gce ba
གཅེན	elder brother, first-born	gcen
གཅེན་གྱིས་ལོག་པ	[arch] rtsa ba nas rgyab 'gal du song ba	gcen gyis log pa
གཅེན་གཅུང	brothers	gcen gcung
གཅེན་གཅུང་གི་མནའ་མ	sister-in-law	gcen gcung gi mna' ma
གཅེན་གཅུང་གསོད་མཁན	fratricide	gcen gcung gsod mkhan
གཅེན་གཅུན	Syn {phu na} brothers	gcen gcun
གཅེན་ཐོར	in the mouth after many pustules arise painful disease	gcen thor
གཅེན་པོ	brother, elder brother	gcen po
གཅེན་མོ	oldest[r] sister	gcen mo
གཅེན་མོ་དང་གཅུང་མོ	sisters	gcen mo dang gcung mo
གཅེམ་པོ	slender, thin	gcem po
གཅེའུ	1) Du ba rngub byed sbu gu ring po zhig chimney?; 2) metal suppository funnel	gce'u
གཅེའུ་ཁ་མང	flageolet	gce'u kha mang
གཅེར	directly	gcer
གཅེར་སྐྱོང	take care of, look after	gcer skyong
གཅེར་སྐྱོབ	covering for the body, raiment	gcer skyob
གཅེར་གྱིས་མཐོང་བ	seeing directly, direct vision	gcer gyis mthong ba
གཅེར་གྲོལ	naked/ direct liberation	gcer grol
གཅེར་སྒྲིབ	clothes	gcer sgrib
གཅེར་ལྟ་གཅེར་གྲོལ	self-liberation on arising	gcer lta gcer grol
གཅེར་ལྟོས	look nakedly	gcer ltos
གཅེར་མཐོང	naked perception	gcer mthong
གཅེར་མཐོང་རང་གྲོལ	direct vision of	gcer mthong rang grol
གཅེར་བ	SA bcer	gcer ba
གཅེར་བུ	naked	gcer bu
གཅེར་བུ་གཉེན་གྱི་བུ	Indian school Jain/ rgyal ba pa'i teacher	gcer bu gnyen gyi bu
གཅེར་བུ་པ	Jain ascetics	gcer bu pa
གཅེར་བུ་པ་གཉེན་གྱི་པ	one of the {mu stegs can gyi ston pa drug} six heterodox teachers	gcer bu pa gnyen gyi pa
གཅེར་བུ་པ་གཉེན་གྱི་བུ	Nirgrantho Jiatiputha gcer bu pa la zas sbyin pa'i ltung byed the downfall of giving food to gcer bu pas gcer bu pa la zas sbyin pa'i ltung byed the downfall of giving food to gcer bu pas [w/o some...	gcer bu pa gnyen gyi bu
གིབེ༹་ཕོ༹ཨོད་ཏོ་ནོན	buddhists, ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses]	give food to non
གཅེར་བུ་བ	{gcer bu pa}	gcer bu ba
གཅེར་བུ་མ	naked person/ lady	gcer bu ma
གཅེར་བུ་ལག་རྡུམ	a mischievous armless	gcer bu lag rdum
གཅེར་བུའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	[Indian school of ascetics] w the discipline of nakedness	gcer bu'i brtul zhugs
གཅེར་བུར	nakedness	gcer bur
གཅེར་བུར་འདུག	to be naked	gcer bur 'dug
གཅེར་བུར་ཕྱུང	to strip naked	gcer bur phyung
གཅེར་བུར་འབྱིན་པ	make naked, strip off	gcer bur 'byin pa
གཅེར་བུར་ཞོག	rest in nakedness	gcer bur zhog
གཅེར་མོ	naked woman	gcer mo
གཅེར་འཛིན	nakedly/ perceptually grasp, regard as naked truth gcer 'dzin pa'i g.yo sgyu'i gtam - deceptive talk regarded as naked truth	gcer 'dzin
གཅེར་འཛིན་བྱེད་པའི་གཏམ	talk regarded as naked truth	gcer 'dzin byed pa'i gtam
གཅེར་བཞག	to rest/ settle in the bare state (of)	gcer bzhag
གཅེས	crucial	gces
གཅེས་སྐྱོང	take care, look after, keep	gces skyong
གཅེས་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	take care, look after, keep	gces skyong byed
གཅེས་བསྒྲིགས	collection, anthology	gces bsgrigs
གཅེས་དངོས	pet	gces dngos
གཅེས་གཅེས་པ	show more and more affection, love very much	gces gces pa
གཅེས་ཉར	take care, look after, keep	gces nyar
གཅེས་ཉར་བྱེད	take care, look after, keep	gces nyar byed
གཅེས་ཉོག་ཅན	fondling anything	gces nyog can
གཅེས་བཏུས	the essence/ most important selected, chosen	gces btus
གཅེས་མཐོང་བྱེད	to value, cherish, prize	gces mthong byed
གཅེས་ལྡན	beloved, lovely, dear	gces ldan
གཅེས་ལྡན་ཨ་མ་ལགས་སུ	to [my] dear mother [heading of a letter]	gces ldan a ma lags su
གཅེས་བསྡུས	Syn {gces btus} selected, chosen	gces bsdus
གཅེས་ནོར	snying nor,...Gces nor bdag nyar byed pa	gces nor
གཅེས་པ	dear, beloved, precious, very important, useful, eager, diligent	gces pa
གཅེས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	[to be] crucial	gces pa'i snying po
གཅེས་པའི་མི་ལུས	[this] human body held [so] dear	gces pa'i mi lus
གཅེས་པའི་ལུས	this body I hold so dear	gces pa'i lus
གཅེས་པར་སྐྱོང	to look after, take care of	gces par skyong
གཅེས་པར་བསྐྱངས	past of gces par skyong	gces par bskyangs
གཅེས་པར་བསྐྱངས་པ	dearly cherished	gces par bskyangs pa
གཅེས་པར་བལྟ་བ	regard as dear	gces par blta ba
གཅེས་པར་བྱ་བ	esteem, regard with affection	gces par bya ba
གཅེས་པར་འཛིན	attachments, holding dear, loving, treasuring, be attached, esteem, cling, regard as important	gces par 'dzin
གཅེས་པར་འཛིན་པ	hold dear	gces par 'dzin pa
གཅེས་པར་འཛིན་པའི་མི་ལུས	[this] human body held [so] dear	gces par 'dzin pa'i mi lus
གཅེས་པར་འོས་པ	lovely, lovable	gces par 'os pa
གཅེས་པོ	dear, cherished, valuable, important	gces po
གཅེས་པོ་འདུག	love, like, be fond of	gces po 'dug
གཅེས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	cherish	gces po byed pa
གཅེས་སྤྲས	love, esteem, respect, revere, consider important, have high regard for, take care of	gces spras
གཅེས་སྤྲས་བྱེད	love, esteem, respect, revere, consider important, have high regard for, take care of	gces spras byed
གཅེས་སྤྲས་བྱེད་པ	love, esteem, respect, revere, consider important, have high regard for, take care of	gces spras byed pa
གཅེས་སྤྲས་བཟང་པོ་བྱེད་པ	take good care of	gces spras bzang po byed pa
གཅེས་སྤྲས་སུ་བྱས	hold as dear, esteeming	gces spras su byas
གཅེས་སྤྲས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	cherish	gces spras su byed pa
གཅེས་སྤྲེས	esteem	gces spres
གཅེས་སྤྲེས་བྱེད་པ	hold dear, love, esteem, exert one's self	gces spres byed pa
གཅེས་སྤྲེས་སུ་བྱས	made exertion	gces spres su byas
གཅེས་སྤྲེས་སུ་བྱས་པ	exerted one's self	gces spres su byas pa
གཅེས་ཕྲུག	adopted/ foster children	gces phrug
གཅེས་ཕྲུག་མ	dearly cherished daughter	gces phrug ma
གཅེས་བྱེད	to love, revere, esteem, respect take care of, to praise, hold dearly, value highly, greatly cherished, to look after very carefully.	gces byed
གཅེས་མིང	nicknamed, affectionate name, common name, pet name	gces ming
གཅེས་མེད	careless	gces med
གཅེས་མེད་བྱེད	be careless	gces med byed
གཅེས་ཚགས	attachments- holding dear, loving, treasuring, be attached to, hold dear, love, treasure esteem, cling dearly, regard as important. rtsa ba chen por rtse ba', gtsigs chen po byed pa gces tshags phu...	gces tshags
གཅེས་ཚགས་བྱེད	hold dear, love, treasure, be attached to, esteem, cling dearly to, regard as important, rtsa ba chen por rtse ba', gtsigs chen po byed pa	gces tshags byed
གཅེས་འཛིན	attachments- holding dear, loving, treasuring, be attached to, hold dear, love, treasure esteem, cling dearly, regard as important. rtsa ba chen por rtse ba', gtsigs chen po byed pa	gces 'dzin
གཅེས་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ	possessive 768 gces 'dzin phung po tshogs su bshams offering up the body 1 is attached to gces 'dzin phung po tshogs su bshams offering up the body one is attached to	gces 'dzin chen po
གཅེས་འཛིན་བྱེད	hold dear, love, treasure, be attached to, esteem, cling dearly to, regard as important, rtsa ba chen por rtse ba', gtsigs chen po byed pa	gces 'dzin byed
གཅེས་ལང	gces drags nas chags pa'i ngan goms,...Ha cang byams drags pas gces lang la shor ba,...Phru gu gces lang la btang ba	gces lang
གཅེས་སྲུང	loving, considering important, looking after, guarding, protection, defense, taking care of	gces srung
གཅེས་སྲུང་བྱེད	love, consider important, look after, guard, protect, defend, take care of	gces srung byed
གཅོ་བོ	[arch] crooked	gco bo
གཅོག	[p bcag f gcag],, 1) break, hurt, smash, bash; 2) violate, disobey orders; 3) lower, reduce, deduct	gcog
གཅོག་ཆ	discount, rebate, reduction	gcog cha
གཅོག་ཆ་བྱེད	reduce, discount, diminish	gcog cha byed
གཅོག་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	abate	gcog cha byed pa
གཅོག་ཆ་བྱེད་སླད	in order to reduce/ discount/ diminish	gcog cha byed slad
གཅོག་འཐེན	deduction	gcog 'then
གཅོག་པ	smash, bash, break, deduct, burst, cleave, split, blast, violate	gcog pa
གཅོག་བྱེད	the cutting instrument	gcog byed
གཅོག་རྩིས	1) subtraction; 2) discount/ reduce prices	gcog rtsis
གཅོང	chronic disease, defile	gcong
གཅོང་སྐད	cry of suffering, low fine musical note or voice, cry of sorrow, lamentations, wailing	gcong skad
གཅོང་གྱང	btsan po'am g.yang gzar,...Ri bo gcong ga-yang,...Brag rong gcong g.yang can	gcong gyang
གཅོང་དགུ	nine melodies	gcong dgu
གཅོང་བརྒྱད	eight melodies	gcong brgyad
གཅོང་ཆེན	long lasting chronic illness	gcong chen
གཅོང་ཆེན་སྐྲན་ནད་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 chronic swelling diseases	gcong chen skran nad bcu gcig
གཅོང་ཆེན་སྡེ་དྲུག	the six chronic diseases	gcong chen sde drug
གཅོང་ཆེན་ནད་དྲུག	6 chief chronic diseases (ma zhu ba'i nad, skran, skya rbab, 'or nad, dmu chu, gcong chen zad byed)	gcong chen nad drug
གཅོང་ཆེན་པོ	1) nad tshabs chen po of body and mind; 2) very tattered/ dilapidated [building etc]	gcong chen po
གཅོང་ཆེན་ཟད་བྱེད	phthisis, 1 of 6 chronic diseases, SA gcong chen nad drug	gcong chen zad byed
ལུང་གི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	in the 7th rabjung by zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje composed ma zhu ba'i rgyu las byung ba'i gcong sde bzhi yi recognition and cure, medical dpe tshan]	lung gi 'khri shing
གཅོང་ནད	chronic disease, [consumption, phthisis]	gcong nad
གཅོང་པོ	delicate/ impaired strength/ health, sick	gcong po
གཅོང་བ	excavate, wash out, undermine	gcong ba
གཅོང་མེད	without illness	gcong med
གཅོང་ཞི	SA cong zhi	gcong zhi
གཅོང་ཟོམ	old/ tattered/ dilapidated building etc	gcong zom
གཅོང་རོང	impassable narrow defile, gorge	gcong rong
གཅོང་རོང་གི་ཆུ་བུ	river running / flowing through / in canyon / gorge	gcong rong gi chu bu
གཅོང་རོང་ཆུ	river running in a canyon	gcong rong chu
གཅོད	Chö. Literally 'cutting.' A system of practices based on Prajnaparamita and set down by the Indian siddha Phadampa Sangye and the Tibetan female teacher Machig Labdrön for the purpose of cutting th...	gcod
ཨནད་ཨེགོ	clinging. One of the Eight Practice Lineages of Buddhism in Tibet	and ego
གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྙན་བརྒྱུད་བཞི	the four hearing lineages of chod	gcod kyi snyan brgyud bzhi
གཅོད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	Chö instructions	gcod kyi gdams pa
གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the sufferings of chod	gcod kyi sdug bsngal
གཅོད་ཁྲིད	instruction in Cutting, the Chö practice	gcod khrid
གཅོད་གུར	Chö tent, small tent for a Chö practitioner	gcod gur
གཅོད་རྒྱ	1) dispute/ lawsuit deciding dpyad mtshams document/letter; 2) setting a price for property [taken instead of money owed]; 3) boundary of an area, strict retreat 769	gcod rgya
གཅོད་གཏུབ	thad kar cut [up/ off/ to pieces ['phrul 'khor la brten nas ngar lcags rgyu chas gcod gtub byed pa, sha gcod gtub kyi 'phrul 'khor: meat cutting machine]	gcod gtub
གཅོད་རྟོགས	a number	gcod rtogs
གཅོད་ཐབས	1) way of cutting wood etc; 2) way of deciding/ resolving a project Las don	gcod thabs
གཅོད་འཐོག	cut wood etc and pick fruit	gcod 'thog
གཅོད་གདན་ཐོག་གཅིག་མ	Chö Accomplished in One Sitting, unidentified	gcod gdan thog gcig ma
གཅོད་སྡོམ	vow to refrain	gcod sdom
གཅོད་པ	{bcad pa, gcad pa, chod pa} to cut (through); to undermine/ negate; to demarcate/ outline/ divide	gcod pa
གཅོད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	cakra of cutting unified in the hands, SA 'khor lo bzhi	gcod pa'i 'khor lo
གཅོད་པར་བྱེད	one can reach, one arrives	gcod par byed
གཅོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	cut [asunder/ down], chop off, fell	gcod par byed pa
གཅོད་པིར	(CH ri mor bcad rgyag byed [outlining?] kyi small pir [brush/ pencil]	gcod pir
གཅོད་བ་པོ	cutter	gcod ba po
གཅོད་བྱེད	teeth, knife, hand, king, executioner	gcod byed
གཅོད་བྱེད་པ་ལ	in the practice of chöd/ cutting	gcod byed pa la
གཅོད་བྲེགས་བྱེད་པ	to amputate	gcod bregs byed pa
གཅོད་དབང་བརྒྱ་རྩ	Hundred empowerments of Chö. Chöwang Gyatsa. A collection of one hundred empowerments for the practice of Chö	gcod dbang brgya rtsa
གཅོད་འབྲིག་གི་ཁྲིམས	law where offender's offending hand, foot etc. is cut off	gcod 'brig gi khrims
གཅོད་འབྲེག	cut up and cut off	gcod 'breg
གཅོད་འབྲེག་གི་ཁྲིམས	capital punishment by maiming or beheading	gcod 'breg gi khrims
གཅོད་འབྲེག་པ	make a brief abstract of the grounds of any complaint or application made to a court of justice	gcod 'breg pa
གཅོད་ཚོགས	{gcod kyi tshogs las rin chen phreng ba} by {rang byung rdo rje} {karma pa} III, 1284-1339; texts on the esoteric practices of the gcod tradition. rje rang byung rdo rjes mdzad pa'i gcod kyi tshogs...	gcod tshogs
གཅོད་ཚོགས་རིན་ཆེན་འཕྲེང་བ	the complete liturgy for the practice of the {gcod} tradition	gcod tshogs rin chen 'phreng ba
གཅོད་མཚམས	boundary, line, limit, demarcation	gcod mtshams
གཅོད་མཛད	cut, hew down	gcod mdzad
གཅོད་བཞིན་པ	cutting	gcod bzhin pa
གཅོད་གཟོང	lcags grang mo cutting to pieces gzong	gcod gzong
གཅོད་ཡུལ	Chöyül. Synonymous with Chod	gcod yul
གཅོད་ཡུལ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་གད་རྒྱངས	cho practice revealed by 'jigs med gling pa	gcod yul mkha' 'gro'i gad rgyangs
གཅོད་ལུགས	1) way of cutting wood etc.; 2) Kha mchu sogs thag gcod tshul; 3) chöd lineage of Ma cig lab sgron	gcod lugs
གཅོད་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བདུད་བཞི	the four maras of chöd	gcod lugs kyi bdud bzhi
གཅོད་ལུགས་བདུད་བཞི	4 chief evil spirits (thogs bcas kyi bdud, thogs med kyi bdud, dga' sprod kyi bdud, snyems byed kyi bdud)	gcod lugs bdud bzhi
གཅོམ	pride, haughtiness, arrogance	gcom
གཅོམ་སྐྱུངས	terror-stricken	gcom skyungs
གཅོམ་བསྐྱུངས	1) speak few words; 2) abandon arrogance	gcom bskyungs
གཅོམ་པ	{gcom pa, bcams pa, bcam pa, gcoms} trans. v	gcom pa
གཅོམས	imp. of {gcom pa}	gcoms
གཅོར	scatter, spread, disperse	gcor
གཅོར་བ	(tha dad pa bcar ba, gcar ba, gcor,, 1 reach the shore/ bank. approach near; 2) 'Tshir ba dang brdungs te 'joms pa,...Sgo nga bcar te bcag pa,...Rnag bcar te bton pa,... spread, scatter, disperse	gcor ba
གཅོལ་བ	(tha dad pa,, gtor ba, 'chol du 'jug pa,...Kha col chung ngus mi gcol bar, rgya mtsho bzhin du brling bar bya	gcol ba
བཅ་བཞུགས	bca [h]	bca bzhugs
བཅ་བཞུགས་སྐུ་ཚབ	permanent representative [h]	bca bzhugs sku tshab
བཅ་ལ	goods, things	bca la
བཅག	cut, break, pass, visit, SA 'chag pa, gcog pa, ground, divided, cultivate, till ground, tread, past of gcog	bcag
བཅག་སྐྱོན	damage, breakage	bcag skyon
བཅག་སྐྱོན་བྱེད	damage, break, ruin	bcag skyon byed
བཅག་བཅག	press down w hands or feet	bcag bcag
བཅག་གཏོར	wreckage, destruction	bcag gtor
བཅག་གཏོར་བྱེད	wreck, destroy	bcag gtor byed
བཅག་ཐག	taking care of	bcag thag
བཅག་ནས་འཆིང་བུའི་དུམ་བུ	break into fragments	bcag nas 'ching bu'i dum bu
བཅག་པ	pf. of {gcog pa}; sadness; to abate, reduce [value / amount]	bcag pa
བཅག་མ	stop for a break when travelling, overnight, a day and night	bcag ma
བཅག་མར་བསྡས	stayed overnight	bcag mar bsdas
བཅག་མལ	stop for a break when travelling, way station, rest house	bcag mal
བཅག་ཞག	rest day when travelling	bcag zhag
བཅག་བཞུགས	stop awhile when wearied by travel 770	bcag bzhugs
བཅག་ལྷམ	shoes	bcag lham
བཅགས	subdued; p. of {'chag} trod under, touched with, trod down upon	bcags
བཅགས་གཅོག	breakage	bcags gcog
བཅགས་བཅགས་ནན་ནན	concretely	bcags bcags nan nan
བཅགས་པ	1) broke; 2) walked [h], trod under; 3) touched w (/ [p 'chag pa]	bcags pa
བཅགས་པོ	compressed, compact, packed tight [soil etc]	bcags po
བཅགས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	lay emphasis upon	bcags po byed pa
བཅགས་པོ་བཟོ	compress, compact, pack tight [soil etc]	bcags po bzo
བཅང	grasp, hold, bear in mind [f {'chang}	bcang
བཅང་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	comprising much	bcang rgya chen po
བཅང་རྒྱར་མཛད་པ	apply one's self, bestow pains upon	bcang rgyar mdzad pa
བཅང་བཅང་ཁྲུག་ཁྲུག	way of holding in the hands lag pa nas ..Phyag nas bzung ste bcang bcang khrug khrug mdzad}???	bcang bcang khrug khrug
བཅང་པ	hold, comprising, comprehensive, extensive	bcang pa
བཅང་པོ	artful	bcang po
བཅང་བ	ft. of {'chang ba}	bcang ba
བཅངས	p. of {'chang}	bcangs
བཅངས་པ	pf. of {'chang ba}	bcangs pa
བཅད	1) p. of {gcog}. 2) f. of {'chag} 1) to break, split, cut, cut off from, to break off. 2) to fall, throw, dash down. 3) lost; 1) p. of {gcog}. 2) fut. of {'chag} 1) to break, split, cut, cut off fr...	bcad
བཅད་ཀ	demarcation, boundary line	bcad ka
བཅད་སྐྱེ	nail	bcad skye
བཅད་ཁ	demarcation, boundary line	bcad kha
བཅད་ཁྲ	proclamation establishing a law, written judgement/ decision/ verdict	bcad khra
བཅད་ཁྲ་ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས	announce/ proclaim a [written] judgement/ decision/ verdict	bcad khra khyab bsgrags
བཅད་ཁྲ་ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	announce/ proclaim a [written] judgement/ decision/ verdict	bcad khra khyab bsgrags byed
བཅད་ཁྲ་གཏོང	render a [written] judgement/ decision/ verdict	bcad khra gtong
བཅད་ཁྲ་འདོན	render a [written] judgement/ decision/ verdict	bcad khra 'don
བཅད་གོང	fixed price/ rate	bcad gong
བཅད་གྲངས	fixed #, norm, quota, allotment	bcad grangs
བཅད་རྒྱ	retreat	bcad rgya
བཅད་རྒྱ་དམ་པོ་བྱས་པ	strictly sealed in retreat	bcad rgya dam po byas pa
བཅད་རྒྱག་པ	1) ri mos bcad rgyag pa; 2) Khang pa'i nang bcad rgyag pa	bcad rgyag pa
བཅད་ཅིང་གར་བྱེད	parrot, red tree	bcad cing gar byed
བཅད་བཅད་ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག	stable/ certain/ fixed	bcad bcad khrig khrig
བཅད་གཏམ	resolution, decision	bcad gtam
བཅད་གཏུབ་བྱེད་པ	to cut, chop, make piecemeal of	bcad gtub byed pa
བཅད་དུ་མེད་པ	not cut apart	bcad du med pa
བཅད་དུམ	cut up fragment	bcad dum
བཅད་དོན	object of scrutiny	bcad don
བཅད་དོན་ཐོབ་པ	to obtain the identified object, obtainment of the identified object [ggd]	bcad don thob pa
བཅད་གདོང	face of a wall	bcad gdong
བཅད་ལྡན	kind of fine silk garment [eg me brgya ma, me che ma]	bcad ldan
བཅད་ལྡོག	excluded opposite	bcad ldog
བཅད་བརྡར	having cut up, finely btags pa,...a medicine after bcad brdar, phye bzos	bcad brdar
བཅད་ནས	having cut	bcad nas
བཅད་ནས་སྤྲོད	cede (territory	bcad nas sprod
བཅད་ནས་སྤྲོད་དགོས	must cede (territory	bcad nas sprod dgos
བཅད་པིར	small brush for artistic painting	bcad pir
བཅད་པོ	old, torn, worn out	bcad po
བཅད་འཕྲོ	remainder [of what was cut off]	bcad 'phro
བཅད་འཕྲོད	remainder [of what was cut off]	bcad 'phrod
བཅད་བྱ	what is to be cut off, anything to be killed or slain	bcad bya
བཅད་འབོར	khyon 'bor decided by count	bcad 'bor
བཅད་རྨ	wound made by a weapon	bcad rma
བཅད་ཚད	quota, ration, allowance, limit	bcad tshad
བཅད་ཚོད་ཚོམ	explication, debate, and composition	bcad tshod tshom
བཅད་མཚམས	demarcation, boundary line	bcad mtshams
བཅད་ཟིན་པ	severed parts	bcad zin pa
བཅད་བཟིང་ས་ཁུལ	annexed/ occupied territory	bcad bzing sa khul
བཅད་བཟུང	annexation, occupation, cutting off and seizing	bcad bzung
བཅད་བཟུང་བྱེད	annex, occupy, cut off and seize, unilaterally create a new polity in a larger state	bcad bzung byed
བཅད་ཤུལ་སྐྱེས་པ	hair, nails, etc	bcad shul skyes pa
བཅད་ཤེད	1) decisiveness; 2) determinate/ subsequent cognition/ cognizer {dpyad shes}, pariecinna-jnana]	bcad shed
བཅད་ཤེས	subsequent cognition/ cognizer/ knowledge	bcad shes
བཅད་ཤེས་གཉིས	two types of determinate cognition	bcad shes gnyis
བཅད་ལྷག	remainder after something is cut off [cloth, tree]	bcad lhag
བཅད་ལྷུག	poetry and prose	bcad lhug
བཅད་ལྷུག་སྤེལ་མ	a composition of poetry and prose	bcad lhug spel ma
བཅད་ལྷུག་སྤེལ་མའི་སྙན་ཚིག	1) mixed verse and prose; 2) rim bzhin spel ba'i snyan ngag gi tshig rgyan	bcad lhug spel ma'i snyan tshig
བཅད་ལྷུག་སྤེལ་གསུམ	verse, prose, and their increase [tshigs bcad tshig lhug dang de gnyis lhug spel]	bcad lhug spel gsum
བཅན་བྱོལ	escape	bcan byol
བཅབ	f. of {'chab}; fut. of {'chab}	bcab
བཅབ་པ	1) something hidden; 2) will hide/ conceal	bcab pa
བཅབ་པའི་བསམ་བ	hidden thought	bcab pa'i bsam ba
བཅབས	1) p. of 'chab. 2) secret, hidden, concealed	bcabs
བཅབས་པ	pf. of {'chab pa}	bcabs pa
བཅམ	p. of {'cham}	bcam
བཅམ་བཅམ	trifling, trivial, miscellaneous	bcam bcam
བཅམ་བཅོམ	trivial things, medley,	bcam bcom
ཧོདགེ	podge	hodge
བཅམ་ལྡན་འདད	bhagavat[i]	bcam ldan 'dad
བཅམ་པ	[f gcom pa]	bcam pa
བཅམས་པ	[p gcom pa]	bcams pa
བཅའ	make ready, SA 'cha' ba	bca'
བཅའ་ཀ	implement	bca' ka
བཅའ་ཁྲལ	a tax	bca' khral
བཅའ་ཁྲལ་འགེལ	tax	bca' khral 'gel
བཅའ་ཁྲིམས	law, precept	bca' khrims
བཅའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	power/ effectiveness of the law	bca' khrims kyi nus pa
བཅའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་བློ་འདྲིས	legal advisor/ counsel	bca' khrims kyi blo 'dris
བཅའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	jurisprudence, study of law	bca' khrims kyi rig pa
བཅའ་ཁྲིམས་དང་འགལ་བའི་བྱ་སྤྱོད	illegal act	bca' khrims dang 'gal ba'i bya spyod
བཅའ་ག་འཐག་པ	to oversee one's possessions	bca' ga 'thag pa
བཅའ་དགུ	ca dgu, caution care etc	bca' dgu
བཅའ་འགྲིག	cha tsang - ...Rta sga 'khor bcas bcas 'grig cig ...Go lag bca' 'grig	bca' 'grig
བཅའ་ལྒ	ginger	bca' lga
བཅའ་སྒ	dried ginger, white ginger	bca' sga
བཅའ་སྒྲིག	make preparations/ arrangements	bca' sgrig
བཅའ་སྒྲིག་དགོས་རེད	[we] should make preparations/ arrangements	bca' sgrig dgos red
བཅའ་དངོས	things, goods	bca' dngos
བཅའ་བཅུ	[a set/ group of] 10	bca' bcu
བཅའ་བཅོས	correction	bca' bcos
བཅའ་ཆས	things, goods	bca' chas
བཅའ་འདར	make preparations/ arrangements	bca' 'dar
བཅའ་སྡོད	always remain[ing], permanent residence	bca' sdod
བཅའ་སྡོད་བྱེད	always remain, stay permanently	bca' sdod byed
བཅའ་སྡོད་དམག	permanently stationed/ occupation troops/ army	bca' sdod dmag
བཅའ་སྡོད་དམག་མི	permanently stationed/ occupation troops	bca' sdod dmag mi
བཅའ་བསྡུད	planned/ regulated reduction	bca' bsdud
བཅའ་འཕྲང	declivity, precipice	bca' 'phrang
བཅའ་འཕྲེང	dangerous passage	bca' 'phreng
བཅའ་འཕྲེང་ཟམ་པ	dangerous bridges and passages	bca' 'phreng zam pa
བཅའ་བ	1) drink. 2) notice. 3) cherish. 4) chewable; (prepared) food; intr. ft. of {'cha' ba}	bca' ba
བཅའ་བ་ལྔ	taught in the vinaya, included among dus rung gi sman, and in the world considered a food, its root, stalk, flower, fruit, and leaf	bca' ba lnga
བཅའ་བ་བྱེད	notify, inform	bca' ba byed
བཅའ་བ་བཞིའི་ཁྲིམས	the four decrees of the law	bca' ba bzhi'i khrims
བཅའ་བ་ལུས་ཀྱི་གནད་གསུམ	three supportive essentials of the body: the postures of lion, elephant and sage	bca' ba lus kyi gnad gsum
བཅའ་བྱེད	give notice	bca' byed
བཅའ་གཞི	ritual preparation	bca' gzhi
བཅའ་ཟམ	wood bridge in a narrow path	bca' zam
བཅའ་ཡང	redone, reapplied	bca' yang
བཅའ་ཡིག	constitution, code of law	bca' yig
བཅའ་ཡོས	parched wheat, barley etc	bca' yos
བཅའ་ལག	household articles	bca' lag
བཅའ་སྲུང	guard by continuously remaining, garrison, defend permanently	bca' srung
བཅར	1) near, intimate; close, dear [relationship]. 2) {bcar ba} va. to go to, call on someone high in status (h). 3) to get close to, come in close contact with. 4) squeeze, press, crowd, throng. 5) to...	bcar
བཅར་གྱིས་མནན	press in a press	bcar gyis mnan
བཅར་གྱིས་མནན་པ	forcefully suppress	bcar gyis mnan pa
བཅར་བཅར་པོ	flat	bcar bcar po
བཅར་བརྟེན	present given when calling on someone	bcar brten
བཅར་བདེ་པོ	approachable, accessible	bcar bde po
བཅར་འདུས	came and collected	bcar 'dus
བཅར་ཕོག	CM: (rnying) thad kar ngo sprod pa, to realize directly. E.g., gdams ngag bcar phog gnang ba, [He] directly realized [his teacher's] oral instructions/precepts. [mss]	bcar phog
བཅར་བ	1) spread, scattered, dispersed; 2) close people, friends 772	bcar ba
བཅར་བ་གནང	call on, go for an audience w [h]	bcar ba gnang
བཅར་བ་རྣམས	close people [friends]	bcar ba rnams
བཅར་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	close friend	bcar ba'i grogs po
བཅར་འབྱོར	arrival report	bcar 'byor
བཅར་འབྱོར་བྱུང	[they] have reported [their] arrival	bcar 'byor byung
བཅར་འབྱོར་བྱེད	report 1's arrival	bcar 'byor byed
བཅར་མིག	zhar ba'i mig or mig skyon can	bcar mig
བཅར་བཞུགས	retinue	bcar bzhugs
བཅར་བཞུགས་པ	have a permanent residence	bcar bzhugs pa
བཅར་འོང	to return to	bcar 'ong
བཅར་ལེབ	flat[tened]	bcar leb
བཅལ	weigh, SA 'jal ba	bcal
བཅལ་དུ་བཀྲམ་པ	to blanket the whole place	bcal du bkram pa
བཅལ་བ	1) measured weighted; 2) analyzed appraised; 3) returned [p 'jal ba]; 4) [arch] offer; 5) blood-money	bcal ba
བཅལ་ལུང	waiter for orders, servant	bcal lung
བཅས	1) prepared, built trin, repaired; 2) [along/ together] w [p {'cha} {'chos}	bcas
བཅས་ཁྲིམས	precepts taken	bcas khrims
བཅས་གྲིམས	prescribed rules	bcas grims
བཅས་བཅོས	to correct and modify	bcas bcos
བཅས་བཅོས་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	further paraphernalia	bcas bcos kyi spros pa
བཅས་བཅོས་བྱས	make adjustments, try to correct	bcas bcos byas
བཅས་བཅོས་བྱེད	manipulation or meddling	bcas bcos byed
བཅས་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	to fabricate, correct, alter, contrive, alteration, correction	bcas bcos byed pa
བཅས་བཅོས་མ་བྱེད	do not make adjustments	bcas bcos ma byed
བཅས་བཅོས་མི་བྱ	one should not try to fabricate	bcas bcos mi bya
བཅས་ཆོག	imprecation ritual	bcas chog
བཅས་ཏེ	by applying, accompanied by	bcas te
བཅས་ལྟུང་གི་རྣམ་གཞག	explanation of precepts	bcas ltung gi rnam gzhag
བཅས་རྣམས	(collective)	bcas rnams
བཅས་པའི	including, which accompanies	bcas pa'i
བཅས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བ	production	bcas pa'i skye ba
བཅས་པའི་ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ	moral misdeeds	bcas pa'i kha na ma tho
བཅས་པའི་ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	sins of overt violation of a low or religion	bcas pa'i kha na ma tho ba
བཅས་པའི་ཁྲིམས	precepts taken / pledged	bcas pa'i khrims
བཅས་པའི་ག་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	evildoer	bcas pa'i ga na ma tho ba
བཅས་པའི་གྲིམས	prescribed rules/ discipline	bcas pa'i grims
བཅས་པའི་སྔིག་པ	misdeeds of broken vows	bcas pa'i sngig pa
བཅས་པའི་ལྟུང་བ	deed formally violating ordination	bcas pa'i ltung ba
བཅས་པའི་སྡིག་པ	deed negative/ harmful due to violating formal ordination	bcas pa'i sdig pa
བཅས་པའི་སྡོམ་ཁྲིམས	interdictions and taboos	bcas pa'i sdom khrims
བཅས་པའི་བསླབ་བྱ	prescribed precepts	bcas pa'i bslab bya
བཅས་པའི་བསླབ་གཞི	prescribed precepts [by the teacher like dbyar dgag gso gsum]	bcas pa'i bslab gzhi
བཅས་མཚམས	the prescribed limits [of the rules]	bcas mtshams
བཅས་རང	notification, information, transgression	bcas rang
བཅས་རང་གི་ཉེས་པ	prescribed and natural faults [1 faults prescribed by the Buddha in the vinaya etc like eating after noon two not commended by the B but contradicting to what was by its nature and hence a fault eg...	bcas rang gi nyes pa
བཅས་གཤོམ	preparation, arrangement	bcas gshom
བཅས་བཤམས	arrangement [for shrine]	bcas bshams
བཅས་སུ	with, kind of plural, etc., and such like	bcas su
བཅིག	unity	bcig
བཅིག་ཏུ་འདུག་གོ	a single radiant	bcig tu 'dug go
བཅིང	bind, tie [up], attach, restrict, fetter, tether, be stuck, control bound [f 'ching ba]	bcing
བཅིང་གྲོལ	bondage versus freedom	bcing grol
བཅིང་གྲོལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond bondage and liberation	bcing grol las 'das pa
བཅིང་བ	will bind, tie [up], attach, restrict, fetter, tether, be stuck, control [f 'ching ba]	bcing ba
བཅིངས	. . . ltar bcings (pa) - to be epitomized/ embodied by	bcings
བཅིངས་བཀྱིགས	bound [by ropes etc.]	bcings bkyigs
བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ	emancipation, liberation	bcings bkrol
བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་གཏོང་བ	liberate	bcings bkrol gtong ba
བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་མེད་པ	w neither bondage nor liberation	bcings bkrol med pa
བཅིངས་གྲོལ	bondage and liberation	bcings grol
བཅིངས་གྲོལ་མེད་པ	w neither bondage nor liberation	bcings grol med pa
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ	liberation, be released from bondage	bcings 'grol
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གཏོང	liberate, release from bondage	bcings 'grol gtong
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་བཏང་རྗེས	after liberating [them]	bcings 'grol btang rjes
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་བཏང་བཞིན་པའི་ས་ཁུལ	liberated areas	bcings 'grol btang bzhin pa'i sa khul
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	liberation front	bcings 'grol 'thab phyogs
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག	liberation army	bcings 'grol dmag
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་འཁྲུག	War of Liberation	bcings 'grol dmag 'khrug
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི	liberating troops [dmangs bcings 'grol gtong ba'i ched du rtsa 'dzugs byas pa'i dmag dpung la zer Krung go'i mi dmangs bcings 'grol dmag]	bcings 'grol dmag mi
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ལས་འགུལ	liberation movement/ campaign	bcings 'grol las 'gul
བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ས་ཁུལ	liberated areas	bcings 'grol sa khul
བཅིངས་ཐག	string or rope to bind with, fetter	bcings thag
བཅིངས་ཐག་རྒྱག	bind, fetter, chain	bcings thag rgyag
བཅིངས་ནས་འཁྲིད	abducted, bound and carried off	bcings nas 'khrid
བཅིངས་པ	bound, tied, fastened, bind, SA 'ching ba, embrace, to wear	bcings pa
བཅིངས་པ་བཀྲོལ་བ	set free from bondage	bcings pa bkrol ba
བཅིངས་པ་གྲོལ་བ	untie what is bound, liberation, emancipation	bcings pa grol ba
བཅིངས་པ་གློད	slacken binding	bcings pa glod
བཅིངས་པ་གློད་ན	If you loosen the bonds	bcings pa glod na
བཅིངས་པ་འགྲོལ	liberate bonds/ from bondage, get untied/ unshackled	bcings pa 'grol
བཅིངས་བཙིར	former fingers rgyug dum gyi bar du bsdams btsir byas nas zhu ba len thabs kyi severe punishment ???	bcings btsir
བཅིངས་ཞགས	bonds, fetters, chains	bcings zhags
བཅིངས་ལུམས	a mixture of substances to cure a disease rlan phabs te na sar ras thum byas nas it is said to be like a bcings pa'i lums, w the 12 tsa sel gyi bcings lums there are 20.]	bcings lums
བཅིན	SA cin	bcin
བཅིབ	will ascend/ mount [f {'chib}	bcib
བཅིབ་པ	1) [will] ascend/ mount [f {'chib}; 2) carriage, conveyance	bcib pa
བཅིབ་རེས	chibs res	bcib res
བཅིབས	ascended, mounted [p {'chib}	bcibs
བཅིབས་པ	to mount, ride a horse; pf. of {'chib pa}	bcibs pa
བཅིར་བ	squeeze, press, SA 'chir ba	bcir ba
བཅིལ	depose, banish, SA 'jil ba, expel	bcil
བཅིལ་བ	expelled, banished, abandoned, subjugated, removed, got rid of, abandoned, gave up [p 'jil ba]	bcil ba
བཅུ་ཀ	all 10	bcu ka
བཅུ་སྐོར	1) [about] 10; 2) increase to 10	bcu skor
བཅུ་སྐྱེད	1) 50 silver srang during a year skyed make/ produce???; 2) bring 10 srang	bcu skyed
བཅུ་ཁ	all 10	bcu kha
བཅུ་ཁག	tenth part, tithe	bcu khag
བཅུ་ཁག་འདོན་པ	tithe, take a tenth	bcu khag 'don pa
བཅུ་ཁྲམ	abacus	bcu khram
བཅུ་ཁྲལ	10% cattle assessment	bcu khral
བཅུ་ག	all ten	bcu ga
བཅུ་གལ	importance	bcu gal
བཅུ་གྱུར	ten-fold	bcu gyur
བཅུ་དགུ	nineteen, nineteen	bcu dgu
བཅུ་འགྱུར	tenfold	bcu 'gyur
བཅུ་སྒོར	a round piece of silver worth and stamped 10 srang	bcu sgor
བཅུ་བརྒྱད་བཀར་ཁོངས	one of tibet's state treasuries	bcu brgyad bkar khongs
བཅུ་གཅིག	11	bcu gcig
བཅུ་གཅིག་ཀུན་ཏུ་འོད་ཀྱི་ས	11th bhumi of Universal light, prabhasvara	bcu gcig kun tu 'od kyi sa
བཅུ་གཅིག་གྲངས་ཀ	11 bcu gcig dge sems kun gyi 'khor du 'byung ba - 11 positive functions accompanying every positive attitude bcu gcig dge sems kun gyi 'khor du 'byung ba - 11 positive functions accompanying every ...	bcu gcig grangs ka
བཅུ་གཅིག་པ	eleventh	bcu gcig pa
བཅུ་གཅིག་པོ	all eleven	bcu gcig po
བཅུ་གཅིག་ཞལ	Eleven-faced Avalokiteshvara	bcu gcig zhal
བཅུ་གཅིག་ཤེལ	Chuchik Shel, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	bcu gcig shel
བཅུ་ཆ	one tenth	bcu cha
བཅུ་ཆ་བརྒྱད	20 discount	bcu cha brgyad
བཅུ་ཆ་གཅིག	one tenth	bcu cha gcig
བཅུ་ཆ་གསུམ	3/10 774	bcu cha gsum
བཅུ་ཆའི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	fire puja where 1 does 1/10 of the mantras accumulated (to amend the mantra	bcu cha'i sbyin sreg
བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve, dozen	bcu gnyis
བཅུ་གཉིས་ཅན	dozen	bcu gnyis can
བཅུ་གཉིས་བཅུ་གཉིས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	gross	bcu gnyis bcu gnyis su 'gyur ba
བཅུ་གཉིས་དྲུག་སྣ	by previous service obligation assessment 12 or 'don six soldiers must be sent from a place to the government	bcu gnyis drug sna
བཅུ་གཉིས་བདག་པོ	12 master, sun	bcu gnyis bdag po
བཅུ་གཉིས་པ	twelfth, twelfth	bcu gnyis pa
བཅུ་གཉིས་པོ	all twelve	bcu gnyis po
བཅུ་གཉིས་མ	12 female, woman	bcu gnyis ma
བཅུ་གཉིས་མ་ཆགས་པ	ma'i sa - twelfth bhumi of The Lotus of Detachment	bcu gnyis ma chags pa
བཅུ་གཉིས་མ་ཆགས་མའི་ས	12th bhumi, The lotus of detachment	bcu gnyis ma chags ma'i sa
བཅུ་གཉིས་མིག	12 eyes, gzhon nu w six faces [= Vajrakilaya?]	bcu gnyis mig
བཅུ་གཉིས་མིག་ལྡན	w 12 eyes, gzhon nu w six faces [= Vajrakilaya?]	bcu gnyis mig ldan
བཅུ་གཉིས་འོད་འཕྲོ	12 light emitter, Jupiter	bcu gnyis 'od 'phro
བཅུ་ལྟིར	a vessel holding 10 silver srang worth of chang	bcu ltir
བཅུ་ཐམ་པ	ten	bcu tham pa
བཅུ་ཐེབས	tenfold, group or batch of ten	bcu thebs
བཅུ་དྲུག	16	bcu drug
བཅུ་དྲུག་གྲངས་ཀ	16	bcu drug grangs ka
བཅུ་དྲུག་ཆ	1) the 16th part [day in which the 15 days of lunar waxing are completed] two 1/ 16; 3) the moon	bcu drug cha
བཅུ་དྲུག་བདག་པོ	the full moon, emblic myrobalan	bcu drug bdag po
བཅུ་དྲུག་བདེ་བའི་ཆ་ཤས	maiden of sixteen	bcu drug bde ba'i cha shas
བཅུ་དྲུག་པ	16th	bcu drug pa
བཅུ་དྲུག་འོད་ལྡན	friday, venus	bcu drug 'od ldan
བཅུ་དྲུག་ལོ་ལྡན	sixteen year old youth	bcu drug lo ldan
བཅུ་བདུན	seventeen	bcu bdun
བཅུ་བདུན་གྱི་བར་དུ	until the age of seventeen	bcu bdun gyi bar du
བཅུ་བདུན་པ	17th	bcu bdun pa
བཅུ་ནིང	five years ago [two years ago = na ning, three gzhes ning, four dgu ning, five bcu ning]	bcu ning
བཅུ་པ	the 10th	bcu pa
བཅུ་པ་དང་པོ	the first ten of a series	bcu pa dang po
བཅུ་པའི་གསར་བརྗེ	the October Revolution	bcu pa'i gsar brje
བཅུ་པོ	the/ all 10	bcu po
བཅུ་དཔོན	corporal over ten soldiers, monitor	bcu dpon
བཅུ་ཕོག	allowance every ten days in state monasteries	bcu phog
བཅུ་ཕོགས	pay received every 10 days	bcu phogs
བཅུ་ཕྲག	10s, decade	bcu phrag
བཅུ་ཕྲག་གྲངས་ཀ་བཅུ་ལོན་པ་ཞིག	after 10 years and some more passed	bcu phrag grangs ka bcu lon pa zhig
བཅུ་ཕྲག་ལྔ	fifty	bcu phrag lnga
བཅུ་ཕྲག་བཞི	forty	bcu phrag bzhi
བཅུ་ཕྲག་གསུམ་ཡོད་པའི་ཚོགས	group of 30	bcu phrag gsum yod pa'i tshogs
བཅུ་འཕར་རྩིས་སྟངས	decimal system	bcu 'phar rtsis stangs
བཅུ་བ	SA 'chu ba	bcu ba
བཅུ་བན	mug for keeping wine or beer enough for ten persons	bcu ban
བཅུ་བུད	horse or mule over 10 years old	bcu bud
བཅུ་འབོ	grain measure holding a 'bo [= 10 'bre]	bcu 'bo
བཅུ་མེད	ten's place in a number	bcu med
བཅུ་ཚད	the measure of 10, all 10	bcu tshad
བཅུ་ཚན	the measure of 10, all 10	bcu tshan
བཅུ་རྫ	cooking pot holding 10 bre of grain	bcu rdza
བཅུ་བཞི	fourteen	bcu bzhi
བཅུ་བཞི་སྟོན	festival kept on the 14th day before the full or new moon	bcu bzhi ston
བཅུ་བཞི་པ	14th	bcu bzhi pa
བཅུ་ཟུར	1/10	bcu zur
བཅུ་འོག	body of 10 men under a corporal	bcu 'og
བཅུ་རེ	decade	bcu re
བཅུ་ལོར	1) in his tenth year. 2) notes in the denomination of ten	bcu lor
བཅུ་ཤིང	counting device, a little stick for counting tens [??] rgyug pa phra mo gcig la grangs bcu brtsi	bcu shing
བཅུ་ཤོག	platoon/ squad of 10 [soldiers]	bcu shog
བཅུ་ཤོད	counting pebbles or basin [to put them in]	bcu shod
བཅུ་གསུམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པའི་ས	13th bhumi of the vajra holder	bcu gsum rdo rje 'dzin pa'i sa
བཅུ་གསུམ་པ	13th	bcu gsum pa
བཅུག	to admit into	bcug
བཅུག་བཏོན	deposits and withdrawals	bcug bton
བཅུག་བཏོན་དེབ	bank passbook	bcug bton deb
བཅུག་ནས	thrown into, poured into	bcug nas
བཅུག་པ	resolve in, insert, meddle, interfere, accommodate, dip, let, SA 'jug pa	bcug pa
བཅུག་པ་ཡིན	made to	bcug pa yin
བཅུགས	commanded ordered	bcugs
བཅུགས་མཁན	cheat	bcugs mkhan
བཅུང	(not in DAS)	bcung
བཅུང་པོ	smaller brother	bcung po
བཅུད	vital essence/ quintessence/ distillation/ distilled essence	bcud
བཅུད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	world of living beings, animate world. [the vessel, snod, world, supporting the essence, bcud, beings]	bcud kyi 'jig rten
བཅུད་ཀྱི་སྣོད	receptacle of life, animated nature, world	bcud kyi snod
བཅུད་ཀྱི་མ	organ of taste, tongue	bcud kyi ma
བཅུད་ཀྱི་མི་ལ་ལྟ་ཚུལ	philosophy of life	bcud kyi mi la lta tshul
བཅུད་ཀྱི་མིའི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	philosophy of life	bcud kyi mi'i lta tshul
བཅུད་ཀྱི་ལེན	rasayana, rejuvenation practice	bcud kyi len
བཅུད་ཀྱི་ལེན་སྦྱར་བ	rasayana, rejuvenation practice	bcud kyi len sbyar ba
བཅུད་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཅན	the contents/ inhabitants, sentient beings	bcud kyi sems can
བཅུད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱས	full bloom of youth	bcud kyis rgyas
བཅུད་སྐྱེས	agreeable taste	bcud skyes
བཅུད་འགུགས	soaking up juice, [arch] butter lamp	bcud 'gugs
བཅུད་རྒྱལ	mercury [semen?]	bcud rgyal
བཅུད་ལྔ་ལྡན་པ	bee, poisonous insects	bcud lnga ldan pa
བཅུད་ལྔ་པ	emblic myrobalan	bcud lnga pa
བཅུད་ཅན	nutritious, nutritious	bcud can
བཅུད་ཅིག་ཕོབ	give ... potency	bcud cig phob
བཅུད་ཅིག་སོབ	make potent!, give potency	bcud cig sob
བཅུད་ཆགས་པ	causing of nutrition	bcud chags pa
བཅུད་ཆེ་བ	more nutritious	bcud che ba
བཅུད་མཆོག	supreme extract	bcud mchog
བཅུད་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	that which holds the elixir	bcud brtul zhugs
བཅུད་ཐིགས	drop of nectar	bcud thigs
བཅུད་དག་པ	purity of inner contents	bcud dag pa
བཅུད་དང་ལྡན་གྱུར	fully ripened	bcud dang ldan gyur
བཅུད་དམ་པ	sacred pith	bcud dam pa
བཅུད་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearing as the essence/ inhabitants	bcud du snang ba
བཅུད་དུ་སྣང་བ་འི་ཁམས	1) the nature appearing as the essence; 2) the realm appearing as the inhabitants	bcud du snang ba 'i khams
བཅུད་དུ་སྣང་བའི་ཁམས	the realm of what is manifest as the contents [sentient beings]	bcud du snang ba'i khams
བཅུད་དུ་ཕྱུང་བ	fully ripened	bcud du phyung ba
བཅུད་དུ་བྱ་བ་མེད་པ	without juice	bcud du bya ba med pa
བཅུད་དུ་སྨིན	ripen into maturity	bcud du smin
བཅུད་དྲིལ	quintessence	bcud dril
བཅུད་ལྡན	nutritious	bcud ldan
བཅུད་ལྡན་ཆེ	nether world	bcud ldan che
བཅུད་བསྡུས	collate	bcud bsdus
བཅུད་ནུས	1) essence and power; 2) essential power	bcud nus
བཅུད་གནས	skyu ru ra	bcud gnas
བཅུད་ཕུར	quintessence	bcud phur
བཅུད་ཕྲ་མོ	mild taste, sweet	bcud phra mo
བཅུད་བྲལ་བ	1) w/o essence/ juice / potency; 2) SK consonant w/o vowel	bcud bral ba
བཅུད་བླངས	distilled the essence {rgyal ba thams cad kyi dgongs pa'i bcud blangs} distilled the essence of all the Conqueror's wisdom	bcud blangs
བཅུད་བླུགས་པ	liquid is being poured	bcud blugs pa
བཅུད་སྦྱིན	SA bcud 'dzin	bcud sbyin
བཅུད་མ་ལུས	all essential aspects	bcud ma lus
བཅུད་མི་ལྡན	not w the essence, asura	bcud mi ldan
བཅུད་མེད	not nutritious, insipid	bcud med
བཅུད་མོ་ལྡན	possessed of the essence, sweet, juicy, succulent	bcud mo ldan
བཅུད་སྨིན་པ	ripe, ripeness	bcud smin pa
བཅུད་ཚོར	know the taste/ nutritional value of food	bcud tshor
བཅུད་འཛིན	pine [wood]	bcud 'dzin
བཅུད་འཛིན་མ	cataract, cascade	bcud 'dzin ma
བཅུད་བཞི	the four essences [lus zungs kyi bcud sha dang, rtsi'i bcud mar, shing gi bcud bu ram, 'bru'i bcud chang bcas bzhi]	bcud bzhi
བཅུད་བཟང	1 of a mra'i mchog gi ming	bcud bzang
བཅུད་བཟང་པོ	nectar; x {dug can gyi snod du bcud bzang po blugs pa dang 'dra} like nectar poured into a pot containing poison	bcud bzang po
བཅུད་རིང	long life-essence, divine river	bcud ring
བཅུད་ལེན	rejuvenation practice; extracting the essence; rasayana. One of the eight common siddhis/accomplishments {thun mong gi dngos grub brgyad} extraction of nutrients, [the art of] extracting essence, a...	bcud len
བཅུད་ལེན་གྱི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, power of magic elixir of youth	bcud len gyi dngos
བཅུད་ལེན་གྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	1 of 8 ordinary accomplishments	bcud len gyi dngos grub
བཅུད་ལེན་གྲུབ	class of demi-gods	bcud len grub
བཅུད་ལེན་གྲུབ་པ	be accomplished in rejuvenation practice	bcud len grub pa
བཅུད་ལེན་གྲུབ་པའི་དངུལ་ཆུ	mercury or semen that accomplishes rasayana	bcud len grub pa'i dngul chu
བཅུད་ལེན་དངོས་གྲུབ	siddhi of rasayana	bcud len dngos grub
བཅུད་ལེན་བདེ་བའི་དཔག་བསམ	Wholesome Wish-fulfillment of Rasayana	bcud len bde ba'i dpag bsam
བཅུད་ལོངས	collect this essence!	bcud longs
བཅུན	1) subdued; 2) softened; 3) punished; 4) converted; 5) "twist/ turn" * (/ [p 'jun]	bcun
བཅུན་པ	1) subdued; 2) softened; 3) punished; 4) converted; 5) "twist/ turn"	bcun pa
བཅུམ་པ	pf. of {'jum pa}; to use artifices, to chicane 776	bcum pa
བཅུམས་བཅུམས	chung du btang ba'i brnan tshig ...Mtha' skor nas tshur bcums bcums byas pa,...'Gro dus glag mo bcums bcums red,... use artifices, con	bcums bcums
བཅུར	p. of {'jur} to weigh	bcur
བཅུར་པ	be flattened down, obstruct, block up by snow, SA 'jur ba	bcur pa
བཅུར་བ	1) draw tight, be entangled in [past future]; 2) [will] press[ed]/ put in/ near; 3) be eradicated; 4) be tamed; 5) be flattened down	bcur ba
བཅུས	scooped/ ladled / soaked up [p 'chu]	bcus
བཅུས་དཀྲུག	turning, lathe work	bcus dkrug
བཅུས་དཀྲུག་བཟོ་པ	turner, lathe worker	bcus dkrug bzo pa
བཅུས་པ	draw out water, irrigate, distil, SA bcu ba	bcus pa
བཅེ	[f 'che]	bce
བཅེམ	chew, SA 'chems pa	bcem
བཅེམ་པ	{bcem pa, bcems pa, bcem pa, bcems} trans. v.; ft. of {bcem pa}	bcem pa
བཅེམས	chew, SA 'chems pa	bcems
བཅེམས་པ	pf. of {bcem pa}	bcems pa
བཅེར་བ	to heap or pile up; {bcer ba, bcer ba, bcer ba} trans. v	bcer ba
བཅེར་བུ་པ	naked 1	bcer bu pa
བཅེས	assure, SA 'che ba	bces
བཅེས་ཀ	dear and precious	bces ka
བཅོ	p. bcos 1) to correct, treat [illness], to revive. 2) Syn {bcu} [with {brgyad} and {lnga}	bco
བཅོ་རྒྱག་པ	traditional hair-cutting for horse or donkey colt two years old of mane, tail, spine, etc.	bco rgyag pa
བཅོ་བརྒྱད	eighteen	bco brgyad
བཅོ་བརྒྱད་དྲུག་ཅུ	military obligation of men from age 18 to 30	bco brgyad drug cu
བཅོ་ལྔ	15, fifteen	bco lnga
བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ	religious service on 15th of 1st tibetan month, butter sculpture offering ritual (done on the 15th of the first Tibetan month in Lhasa)	bco lnga mchod pa
བཅོ་ལྔ་པ	15th	bco lnga pa
བཅོ་ལྔའི་ཉི་ཟླ་ལྟར་གྲོལ་བ	liberated like the sun and moon on the 15th day of the month	bco lnga'i nyi zla ltar grol ba
བཅོ་པ	two year old horse or donkey	bco pa
བཅོ་བ	to make, perform; to prepare, manufacture	bco ba
བཅོ་བྱ	the object to be made	bco bya
བཅོ་སེམས	the primary mind	bco sems
བཅོག	to hack	bcog
བཅོག་པ	reduce, cut down	bcog pa
བཅོག་རྩིས	account of calculation of reduction (of pay or allowances)	bcog rtsis
བཅོད་མདོག	yellowish-red	bcod mdog
བཅོན	(not in DAS)	bcon
བཅོན་འཛུལ	invasion	bcon 'dzul
བཅོམ	conquer, subdue, SA 'joms pa, success, victory, triumph, to loot, plunder	bcom
བཅོམ་སྐྱུངས་པ	[arch] utter a little sound of fright	bcom skyungs pa
བཅོམ་བསྐྱུངས་པ	speak in low voice, keep silent	bcom bskyungs pa
བཅོམ་སྒྱུར་བྱེད་པ	renovate	bcom sgyur byed pa
བཅོམ་ཆུང	[arch] small sound	bcom chung
བཅོམ་སྟན་འདས	superabundance	bcom stan 'das
བཅོམ་ལྡན	exalted one, victorious, blessed, triumphant over enemies, Bhagavan	bcom ldan
བཅོམ་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་བ་རིགས་ལྔ	the Bhagavan victorious 1s of the five families [the rulers of the five families [of the mandala: Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, Amoghasiddhi]	bcom ldan rgyal ba rigs lnga
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས	bhagavan, lord, buddha, the victorious, blessed one, exalted one, victoriously transcendent, bcom (conquering 4 maras of organismic being, emotionality, overvalued ideas, and death), ldan (dag pa g...	bcom ldan 'das
ཊྲནསཅེནདེནཏ	Victor, illuminated sub- 777 duer, Bhagavan, Transcendent Lord. Lit. one who has subdued obscurations [bcom], possesses the enlightened attributes [ldan], and has passed into nirvana ['das]. Bhagav...	Transcendent
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀུན་རིག	see {kun rig}	bcom ldan 'das kun rig
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་ཉན་ཐོས	the shravakas of the Blessed One	bcom ldan 'das kyi nyan thos
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན	went to the Buddha	bcom ldan 'das kyi drung du phyin
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་སྔར	in the presence of the Buddha	bcom ldan 'das kyi spyan sngar
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱིས	the Buddha prayed that	bcom ldan 'das kyi smon lam gyis
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་བཞི	the four faces of the Bhagavan	bcom ldan 'das kyi zhal bzhi
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས	by the Buddha, the Buddha said	bcom ldan 'das kyis
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་བཀའ་སྩལ་ཏོ	this was explained by the Bhagavan	bcom ldan 'das kyis bka' stsal to
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་བཀའ་སྩལ་པ	the Bhagavan replied	bcom ldan 'das kyis bka' stsal pa
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་མཁྱེན་ཏེ	the Bhagavan knew this	bcom ldan 'das kyis mkhyen te
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་མཁྱེན་ནས	The Bhagavan knew her thoughts	bcom ldan 'das kyis mkhyen nas
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་གསུངས་པའི་ཆོས	the teachings of the Dharma as taught by the Buddha	bcom ldan 'das kyis gsungs pa'i chos
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་འཁོར་བཅས	the Buddha, accompanied by his assembly bcom ldan 'das rgyal ba shA kya thub pa [Bhagavan jina Shakyamuni] Buddha Shakyamuni, Blessed Conqueror and Sage of the Shakyas bcom ldan 'das 'jam dpal rnon...	bcom ldan 'das 'khor bcas
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ	homage to Bhagavan Manjushri Tikshna bcom ldan 'das mnyan yod na bzhugs pa when the lord Buddha dwelled in Shravasti bcom ldan 'das de ni de bzhin gshegs pa this Bhagavan who is the tathagata, ..	phyag 'tshal lo
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	the Bhagavan tathagata	bcom ldan 'das de bzhin gshegs pa
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་དེ་བཤིན་གཤེགས་པ	Bhagavat Tathagata	bcom ldan 'das de bshin gshegs pa
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Bhagavan Vajrasattva	bcom ldan 'das rdo rje sems dpa'
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་མ	Bhagavati	bcom ldan 'das ma
མདོས་ཨོཕ༹་སིཏའཏཔཏརའཔརའཇིཏའ་ཕོ༹ར་ཨེལིམིནཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོབསྟཅླེས	by {bka' 'gyur ba mgon po bsod nams mchog ldan} bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu	mdos of sit'atapatr'apar'ajit'a for elimination of obstacles
ཕྱིན་པ་ལྔ་བཅུ་པའི་མདོ	[Bhagavati Prajnaparamita Panchashatika Sutra], Fifty Stanza perfection of Wisdom Sutra bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu	phyin pa lnga bcu pa'i mdo
ཕྱིན་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	the Heart Sutra[Bhagavati Prajnaparamita Hridaya] the Sutra of the Heart of Transcendent Knowledge bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don bsdus pa'i tshigs su bcad	phyin pa'i snying po
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་ཆོས་ཉན	listened to the Dharma from the Bhagavan	bcom ldan 'das la chos nyan
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་ཞུས་པས	went to discuss the matter with the Buddha	bcom ldan 'das la zhus pas
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ	Bhagavan Shakyamuni	bcom ldan 'das sha kya thub pa
བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདུས་དཔལ	the heruka	bcom ldan 'dus dpal
བཅོམ་ལྡན་རལ་གྲི	name of a fancied buddha	bcom ldan ral gri
བཅོམ་ལྡན་ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ	Bhagavan Shakyamuni	bcom ldan sha kya thub pa
བཅོམ་ལྡན་ཤ་ཀྱའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the Victorious King of the Shakyas, Buddha	bcom ldan sha kya'i rgyal po
བཅོམ་པ	affected, raid, conquered, subdued, killed, broken down, dispersed, SA 'joms pa	bcom pa
བཅོམ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	the world in the center of this world system	bcom pa dang ldan pa
བཅོམ་པའི་སྤངས་པ	the abandonment of subjugation	bcom pa'i spangs pa
བཅོམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	sweep away, dispel	bcom par byed pa
བཅོམ་འཕྲོག	robbery, looting, plundering	bcom 'phrog
བཅོམ་འཕྲོག་བྱས	[we] wuz robbed	bcom 'phrog byas
བཅོམ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	rob, loot, plunder	bcom 'phrog byed
བཅོམ་འཕྲོག་ཤོར	be robbed/ plundered/ looted	bcom 'phrog shor
བཅོམ་མ	fabrication [krtrima]	bcom ma
བཅོམ་མ་མ་ཡིན་པ	unartificial, not a fabrication	bcom ma ma yin pa
བཅོམ་འཛུལ	invasion	bcom 'dzul
བཅོམ་གཞོག	entrust to someone, leave in someone's charge, commission	bcom gzhog
བཅོམ་ཡོད	looted	bcom yod
བཅོམ་རླག	ancient city of india near agra	bcom rlag
བཅོམ་རླགས	city in ancient india	bcom rlags
བཅོམ་བརླག	Mathura [city in India]	bcom brlag
བཅོམས	conquer, subdue, SA 'joms pa	bcoms
བཅོལ	p. of {'chol} to entrust, enjoin, urge, deposit, store. {sngar bcol} past favors, {da bcol} future success.]; to appoint, entrust, encourage/ to employ	bcol
བཅོལ་འཇོག	entrust to someone, leave in someone's charge, commission	bcol 'jog
བཅོལ་འཇོག་བྱེད	entrust to someone, leave in someone's charge, commission	bcol 'jog byed
བཅོལ་གཏམ་ལེགས་པར་བྱས	to ask to take care of, to leave some things in someone's care, to entrust to someone's care	bcol gtam legs par byas
བཅོལ་གཏམས་ལེགས་པར་བྱས	1) ask someone to take care of something; 2) leave things in someone's care; 3) entrust something to someone's care	bcol gtams legs par byas
བཅོལ་བཏམས	1) entrusting a matter to someone; 2) taking care of things entrusted to 1	bcol btams
བཅོལ་ལྟོགས	SA byus thog	bcol ltogs
བཅོལ་དམ	1) taking care of things entrusted to 1; 2) instructing someone to take care of something	bcol dam
བཅོལ་དམ་དང་བསྐུལ་མ་བྱས	requested and urged	bcol dam dang bskul ma byas
བཅོལ་དམ་དང་བསྐུལ་མ་བྱས་པ	requested and urged	bcol dam dang bskul ma byas pa
བཅོལ་དུ	to confuse, confound, mix up	bcol du
བཅོལ་གདམས	1) taking care of things entrusted to 1; 2) instructing someone to take care of something	bcol gdams
བཅོལ་གདམས་བྱས་པ	told them to do	bcol gdams byas pa
བཅོལ་གདམས་མཛད་པ	entrusted me to the good care of [so-and-so]	bcol gdams mdzad pa
བཅོལ་ལྡམ	taking care of things entrusted to one's charge	bcol ldam
བཅོལ་ནས	having entrusted it	bcol nas
བཅོལ་ནོར	entrusted yaks/ cattle	bcol nor
བཅོལ་པ	what has been promised	bcol pa
བཅོལ་བ	{'chol ba} to enjoin/ entrust/ commission; isc. to require (of)	bcol ba
བཅོལ་བའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	entrusted	bcol ba'i phrin las
བཅོལ་མ	matters and wealth entrusted to 1 by another/ kept for someone else 778	bcol ma
བཅོལ་བཞོག་པ	entrust a thing to another's charge	bcol bzhog pa
བཅོལ་ཡུལ	place of refuge/ shelter/ protection	bcol yul
བཅོལ་ཡུལ་བྱེད	consider as 1's place of refuge/ shelter/ protection	bcol yul byed
བཅོལ་ལེན	taking care of something entrusted to 1	bcol len
བཅོལ་ལེན་བྱེད	take care of something entrusted to 1	bcol len byed
བཅོལ་ལེན་བྱེད་ཐུབ	able to take care of something entrusted to 1	bcol len byed thub
བཅོལ་ས	place of refuge/ shelter/ protection	bcol sa
བཅོས	made, prepare[d], make, build, construct repair, improve, fabricate, alter, modify, change, correct, contrive, pretend, adulterate artificial [p bco, 'chos]	bcos
བཅོས་ཀ	1) means of being made/ produced; 2) employ means to cure disease [medicine, me btza,'ceremonies, etc.]	bcos ka
བཅོས་འགྱུར	Syn {bcos bsgyur}	bcos 'gyur
བཅོས་འགྱུར་གཏོང	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos 'gyur gtong
བཅོས་འགྱུར་བྱེད	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos 'gyur byed
བཅོས་འགྱུར་བྱེད་པ	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos 'gyur byed pa
བཅོས་རྒྱག	revise, reform, correct	bcos rgyag
བཅོས་རྒྱག་ཞུས་དག	correction and proof reading	bcos rgyag zhus dag
བཅོས་སྒྱུར	change, alter[ation], transform[ation] * reforms	bcos sgyur
བཅོས་སྒྱུར་གཏོང	reform, change, transform	bcos sgyur gtong
བཅོས་སྒྱུར་བྱེད	reform, change, transform	bcos sgyur byed
བཅོས་སྒྱུར་བྱེད་པ	reform, change	bcos sgyur byed pa
བཅོས་སྒྲིག	[rnying pa bcos nas bsar pa zhig tu sgrig pa] having altered the old arrangement, set up a new 1, reorganization, adaptation, repair and assembly [machines]	bcos sgrig
བཅོས་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	* having altered the old arrangement, set up a new 1, reorganize, adapt, repair [&] assemble [machines]	bcos sgrig byed
བཅོས་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	adapt	bcos sgrig byed pa
བཅོས་སྒྲིགས	[rnying pa bcos nas bsar pa zhig tu sgrig pa] having altered the old arrangement, set up a new 1, reorganization, adaptation, repair and assembly [machines]	bcos sgrigs
བཅོས་སྒྲིགས་བྱེད	* having altered the old arrangement, set up a new 1, reorganize, adapt, repair [&] assemble [machines]	bcos sgrigs byed
བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	change, alter[ation], transform[ation] * reforms	bcos bsgyur
ཀྱིས་ལྷད་མ་འཇུག	Do not distort anything he says!	kyis lhad ma 'jug
བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་གཏོང	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos bsgyur gtong
བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos bsgyur byed
བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད་པ	change, alter, transform * reform	bcos bsgyur byed pa
བཅོས་འཅིང	1) fabricated bonds; 2) artificially bind	bcos 'cing
བཅོས་ཐབས	1) means of newly making; 2) remedy, cure; 3) help	bcos thabs
བཅོས་ཐབས་མེད	no means of cure, no way to mend matters	bcos thabs med
བཅོས་ཐབས་མེད་པ	incurable, incorrigible, hopeless	bcos thabs med pa
བཅོས་ཐབས་གསུམ	1) {rab lta bas bcos pa}. 2) {'bring spyod lam gyis bcos pa} 3) {tha ma gdams ngag gis bcos pa}	bcos thabs gsum
བཅོས་པ	fabrication	bcos pa
བཅོས་པ་བྱེད་པ	cunning, behaving artfully	bcos pa byed pa
བཅོས་པ་ལས་བྱུང	arising from contrivance, the color malachite green	bcos pa las byung
བཅོས་པའི་ཆང	the juice extracted from	bcos pa'i chang
ཙམཔ་ཨནད་ཡེཨསཏ་ཨིན་བེཨེར	making	tsampa and yeast in beer
བཅོས་པའི་ཆུ	1) piped/ channeled water; 2) pond water	bcos pa'i chu
བཅོས་པའི་ཆོས	fabricated dharmas, artificial dharmas [counterfeit, made up.]	bcos pa'i chos
བཅོས་པའི་འཆིང་བ	fetters of artificiality	bcos pa'i 'ching ba
བཅོས་པའི་མཉམ་བཞག	deliberate meditation	bcos pa'i mnyam bzhag
བཅོས་པའི་ནགས	artificial grove attached to one's residence	bcos pa'i nags
བཅོས་པའི་མ་ནིང	made/ castrated eunuch [vs. natural.]	bcos pa'i ma ning
བཅོས་པའི་ཙྭ	how grape chang etc can be made so that monks can drink it [explained in the vinaya]	bcos pa'i tswa
བཅོས་བུ	not really how things are [made up rumor, artificial fabric]	bcos bu
བཅོས་བུའི་རས	colored cloth 779	bcos bu'i ras
བཅོས་བྱེད	change [transform[ation] alter[ation] modif[ication]	bcos byed
བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	redress	bcos byed pa
བཅོས་མ	artificial[ity], fabrication * artificial, fake, unnatural, false, hypocritical	bcos ma
བཅོས་མ་ཅུང་ཟད་ཕོག་འགྲོ་བ	become, will be	bcos ma cung zad phog 'gro ba
བཅོས་མ་དང་ཡང་དག་པ	artificial and real	bcos ma dang yang dag pa
བཅོས་མ་དང་ཡང་དག་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	artificial and genuine qualities	bcos ma dang yang dag pa'i yon tan
བཅོས་མ་བྱེད་པ	section of tantric school	bcos ma byed pa
བཅོས་མ་མ་ཡིན	unfabricated [unartificial, unfeigned, unadulterated, true and genuine, uncontrived, uncorrected, absolute]	bcos ma ma yin
བཅོས་མ་མ་ཡིན་པ	uncontrived, genuine	bcos ma ma yin pa
བཅོས་མ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་བྱམས་པ	uncontrived love	bcos ma ma yin pa'i byams pa
བཅོས་མ་ཡིན	absolute	bcos ma yin
བཅོས་མ་ཡིན་པ	{bcos med / bcos min} uncontrived; unfabricated; isc. not influenced/ affected	bcos ma yin pa
བཅོས་མའི	artificial	bcos ma'i
བཅོས་མའི་འཆིང་བ	fetters of artificiality	bcos ma'i 'ching ba
བཅོས་མའི་མཉམ་བཞག	deliberate meditation	bcos ma'i mnyam bzhag
བཅོས་མའི་ལྟ་སྤྱོད	artificial view & behavior	bcos ma'i lta spyod
བཅོས་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of fabrication [={bskyed rim} not pejorative, if pejorative = artificial/ fabricated yoga]	bcos ma'i rnal 'byor
བཅོས་མའི་ཕྱོགས་ཞེན	artificial attitude of sectarianism	bcos ma'i phyogs zhen
བཅོས་མའི་བློ	contriving frame of mind	bcos ma'i blo
བཅོས་མས་མ་རེག་པ	totally unfabricated	bcos mas ma reg pa
བཅོས་མི་གཞུག་པ	allow to remain untouched	bcos mi gzhug pa
བཅོས་མིན	{bcos med / bcos ma yin pa} uncontrived; unfabricated; isc. not influenced/ affected	bcos min
བསྟན	showed that [they] were truly pleased	bstan
བཅོས་མིན་སྙིང་རྗེ	uncontrived / natural compassion	bcos min snying rje
བཅོས་མིན་སྙིང་ནས	truly, really, from the bottom of the heart, sincerely bcos min snying nas thigs rje che zhu thank from the bottom of the heart/ sincerely	bcos min snying nas
བཅོས་མིན་དུ་སྐྱེད	comes naturally	bcos min du skyed
བཅོས་མིན་དུ་བཏང	to disgrace (?)	bcos min du btang
བཅོས་མིན་བརྩེ་བ	true love	bcos min brtse ba
བཅོས་མེད	{bcos min/ bcos ma yin pa} uncontrived; unfabricated; isc. not influenced/ affected	bcos med
བཅོས་འཛུགས	reconstruction	bcos 'dzugs
བཅོས་འཛུགས་བྱེད	reconstruct	bcos 'dzugs byed
བཅོས་གཞུང	commentaries	bcos gzhung
བཅོས་ཟིན་པའི་འཆར་ཟིན	revised draft	bcos zin pa'i 'char zin
བཅོས་བཟང	improvement, revision, correction, repair, reform	bcos bzang
བཅོས་བཟང་བྱེད	improve, revise, correct, repair, reform	bcos bzang byed
བཅོས་བཟོ	repair, alteration	bcos bzo
བཅོས་བཟོ་བྱེད	repair, alter	bcos bzo byed
བཅོས་རུང་བ	curable	bcos rung ba
བཅོས་ལས	processing, treating	bcos las
བཅོས་ལས་བྱེད	process, treat	bcos las byed
བཅོས་ལས་མ་བྱེད་པའི	unprocessed, untreated	bcos las ma byed pa'i
བཅོས་ལས་མ་བྱེད་པའི་ཤིང་ཆ	raw/ unprocessed timber	bcos las ma byed pa'i shing cha
བཅོས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	performing a show work	bcos su byed pa
བཅོས་སུ་མེད	cannot be cured	bcos su med
བཅོས་སུ་མེད་པ	nothing to contrive	bcos su med pa
བཅོས་སུ་མེད་པར	SA bcos med	bcos su med par
བཅོས་སླད་མེད་པ	not modified or adulterated, without correcting or tainting, without altering or tainting	bcos slad med pa
བཅོས་བསླད	'correcting and spoiling', altered or spoiled, alteration; adulterate; alter, modify, correct	bcos bslad
བཅོས་བསླད་དང་འཕྲི་བསྣན་མི་དགོས་པ་ཧས་ནོ་ནེཨེད་ཕོ༹ར་བེཨིང་ཕི༹ནེ	tuned or corrected	bcos bslad dang 'phri bsnan mi dgos pa has no need for being fine
བཅོས་བསླད་བྱེད	1) [contrived] alteration; 2) try to correct, improve, alter, [and spoil]	bcos bslad byed
བཅོས་བསླད་བྱེད་པ	contrived alterations, to try to correct, improve, alter, correcting and spoiling	bcos bslad byed pa
བཅོས་བསླད་མེད་པ	uncontrived and uncorrupted/ undistorted; without contrivance and/ or contamination/ tampering	bcos bslad med pa
མཅལ་ལམ	dream (H) 'cings grol - 1) bondage and liberation; 2) be liberated from bondage	mcal lam
ལྕ	excrement, dung	lca
ལྕ་གྱུང	river plain grown carrot [field med herb]	lca gyung
ལྕ་རྒོད	mt. grown carrot [med herb]	lca rgod
ལྕ་སྒ	white ginger	lca sga
ལྕ་བ	carrot	lca ba
ལྕག	1) whip; 2) [comp lcag po]	lcag
ལྕག་ཀྱུའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	hook mudra 780	lcag kyu'i phyag rgya
ལྕག་བསྐུལ	encouragement, urging, prompting	lcag bskul
ལྕག་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	encourage, urge, prompt	lcag bskul byed
ལྕག་གི་ལྕིག་གི	few, scattered	lcag gi lcig gi
ལྕག་རྒྱུག	rod	lcag rgyug
ལྕག་བརྒྱབ	put into shackles	lcag brgyab
ལྕག་ངག	willow twig, osier switch	lcag ngag
ལྕག་དངོ	lash of whip	lcag dngo
ལྕག་ལྕིག	#	lcag lcig
ལྕག་ཐགས	nomad	lcag thags
ལྕག་ཐོགས	one who carries a whip, yak herd, shepherd	lcag thogs
ལྕག་འདེབས	a slap w the whip, encourage, urge, prompt	lcag 'debs
ལྕག་རྡོ	flint, flint stone	lcag rdo
ལྕག་བརྡ	palms clapping sign	lcag brda
ལྕག་པ	to break in [a horse]	lcag pa
ལྕག་པོ	quick, rapid, soon	lcag po
ལྕག་པོ་བྱེད	be quick, hurry up	lcag po byed
ལྕག་པོ་ཤོག	come quickly	lcag po shog
ལྕག་པོད	a girdle	lcag pod
ལྕག་བྱེད	a slap w the whip, urging on, encouragement	lcag byed
ལྕག་བྱེད་པ	to whip	lcag byed pa
ལྕག་དབྱུག	cow etc leading small stick	lcag dbyug
ལྕག་འབྲས	whip cord	lcag 'bras
ལྕག་འབྲེང	lash of whip	lcag 'breng
ལྕག་ཚན	[horse]whip	lcag tshan
ལྕག་ཡུ	handle of a whip	lcag yu
ལྕག་རིལ	slug	lcag ril
ལྕག་ལ་ཚ་ལ་རྒྱབ་པ	weld	lcag la tsha la rgyab pa
ལྕག་ལུང	buckle	lcag lung
ལྕག་ཤད	[horse]whip	lcag shad
ལྕགས	iron, metal, steel, iron trevet, tripod, place 8 miles s.e. of bkra' shis lhun po in tsang, any iron instrument or tool, lock, fetter, shackle	lcags
ལྕགས་ཀུག	iron hook	lcags kug
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	[TRS 102-4]	lcags kyi 'khor lo can
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	enchanted iron horse, magic iron horse, indian railways	lcags kyi 'khrul 'khor
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གར་བུ	iron ball	lcags kyi gar bu
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	a city of iron	lcags kyi grong khyer
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གློ་བ	iron lung	lcags kyi glo ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་མགུ་ཙེ	iron pot	lcags kyi mgu tse
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འཇུར་མིག་ནས་དྲངས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	as if you were being pulled through a hole	lcags kyi 'jur mig nas drangs pa lta bu
ཨིན་ཨ་དྲཝ	plate	in a draw
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གཏེར་ཁ	iron mine	lcags kyi gter kha
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཐུར་མ	iron ladle	lcags kyi thur ma
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཐོ་ལུམ	lump of iron, hammer	lcags kyi tho lum
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་དྲ་མིག	iron trellis, gridiron lcags kyi pha 'ong la dar yug btags pa 'dra - idiom. "like an iron boulder pulled by a silk scarf" [sm. unshakable] lcags kyi pha 'ong la dar yug btags pa 'dra - "(unshakable...	lcags kyi dra mig
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	fabulous mountain	lcags kyi phung po
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	locomotive	lcags kyi 'phrul 'khor
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་མེ་མདག	copper heated/ burned in fire	lcags kyi me mdag
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་བཙའ	rust, rust of iron	lcags kyi btsa'
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཚ་ཚ	red-hot particles of iron flying under the smith's hammer	lcags kyi tsha tsha
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	rust of iron, scoria	lcags kyi tshogs
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གཞོངས་རིང	iron vessel, iron tray or bowl	lcags kyi gzhongs ring
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གཟེར་བུ	iron spikes / nails	lcags kyi gzer bu
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཡོལ་བ	iron curtain	lcags kyi yol ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཤལ་མ་རི	mt. of iron shalmali trees	lcags kyi shal ma ri
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཤལ་མ་ལི	Shalmali of Iron	lcags kyi shal ma li
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཤལ་མ་ལིའི་རི	mt. of iron shalmali trees	lcags kyi shal ma li'i ri
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སལ་མ	hell	lcags kyi sal ma
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སལ་མ་ལི	a forest with leaves like iron spikes	lcags kyi sal ma li
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སིལ་ཁྲིལ	iron bells or rings tied to the necks of donkeys and mules	lcags kyi sil khril
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ	hell of ironcreatures	lcags kyi sems can dmyal ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྲན་མ	small iron round lump	lcags kyi sran ma
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཨེ་སྒྲོམ	iron E box	lcags kyi e sgrom
ལྕགས་ཀྱིས་གཞུ་བ	whip	lcags kyis gzhu ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	[arch] hook, bait, come-on, enticement	lcags kyu
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་རྒྱག	[arch] hook	lcags kyu rgyag
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་སྔོན་མོ	a steel-blue hook	lcags kyu sngon mo
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་འདེབས	[arch] hook	lcags kyu 'debs
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་མ	A kush the hook lady	lcags kyu ma
ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་རིང་པོ	the curlicue script	lcags kyu ring po
ལྕགས་ཀྱུའི་རྒྱ	lcags kyu'i phyag rgya hook mudra	lcags kyu'i rgya
ལྕགས་ཀྱུའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the iron hook mudra	lcags kyu'i phyag rgya
ལྕགས་ཀྱུའི་དབང་དུ་མི་འདུས་པ	could not be restrained even by a hook	lcags kyu'i dbang du mi 'dus pa
ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་སྒྱུར་ཐབས	elephant driver, art of disciplining elephants	lcags kyus sgyur thabs
ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་གདུལ་དཀའ་བ	elephant goaded by desire	lcags kyus gdul dka' ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་གཟུང་བ	hook	lcags kyus gzung ba
ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་འཟིན	caught with bait; {lce ro la chags pas nya mo lcags kyus 'zin} fish are caught with bait, their sense of taste lured by its flavour	lcags kyus 'zin
ལྕགས་ཀྲིང	tin [can]	lcags kring
ལྕགས་ཀྲིན	tin [can]	lcags krin
ལྕགས་དཀར	tin [plate], white metal	lcags dkar
ལྕགས་དཀྲོལ	tshag brgyab pa'i mental tool	lcags dkrol
ལྕགས་སྐམ	metal tongs, pliers, pincers etc.	lcags skam
ལྕགས་སྐུད	wire, iron wire, thing wire made of steel	lcags skud
ལྕགས་སྐུད་སྒྲིམ་པ	1) many iron wires sdeb gcig tu twisted together; 2) wealth and enjoyment collecting and guarding la avidity or avariciousness example	lcags skud sgrim pa
ལྕགས་སྐུད་མེད་པའི་ཏར	wireless telegram, radiogram	lcags skud med pa'i tar
ལྕགས་སྐུལ	to goad	lcags skul
ལྕགས་སྐོར	door's dkri lcags [wrap guide?]	lcags skor
ལྕགས་སྐྱུ	Syn {lcags kyu}	lcags skyu
ལྕགས་སྐྱོག	metal spoon/ ladle/ crucible/ cup/ bowl	lcags skyog
ལྕགས་སྐྱོགས	metal spoon/ ladle/ crucible/ cup/ bowl	lcags skyogs
ལྕགས་ཁ	1) steel grey color; 2) metal bridge kha	lcags kha
ལྕགས་ཁང་མ	byang gter phur pa	lcags khang ma
ལྕགས་ཁབ	iron needle	lcags khab
ལྕགས་ཁབ་ལེན	magnet[ic iron] etc.	lcags khab len
ལྕགས་ཁམས	a nature in in 'byung rtsis	lcags khams
ལྕགས་ཁམས་གསེར་འགྱུར་རྩིས	alchemy to transmute iron into gold	lcags khams gser 'gyur rtsis
ལྕགས་ཁུ	1) molten iron; 2) Aa ru ra'i khu ba' w iron	lcags khu
ལྕགས་ཁེམ	iron shovel 781	lcags khem
ལྕགས་ཁོག	grain cooking pot	lcags khog
ལྕགས་ཁྱི	iron dog [year]	lcags khyi
ལྕགས་ཁྱིམ	iron house	lcags khyim
ལྕགས་ཁྱེམ	1) small metal shovel or spoon; 2) lcags kyi 'jar ma	lcags khyem
ལྕགས་ཁྲ	metal/iron lattice/ grating/ railing/ grill/ bars/ cage	lcags khra
ལྕགས་ཁྲབ	metal armor	lcags khrab
ལྕགས་ཁྲོ	cast iron	lcags khro
ལྕགས་ཁྲོལ	metal sieve/ strainer	lcags khrol
ལྕགས་མཁར	1) metal house; 2) in wrathful applications in the form of the castle of the lord of death gtor zor bzhengs bkod kyi shape 9/[16] sided	lcags mkhar
ལྕགས་གབ་ལེན	{dka' thub} magnetic iron magnet	lcags gab len
ལྕགས་གོང	iron ball	lcags gong
ལྕགས་གོས	coat of mail	lcags gos
ལྕགས་གྲོ	iron kettle, caldron	lcags gro
ལྕགས་གྲོགས་ཤིང	in 'byung rtsis way of figuring enemies and friends	lcags grogs shing
ལྕགས་གླང	Iron-Bull year	lcags glang
ལྕགས་གླེགས	lcags shog	lcags glegs
ལྕགས་དགྲ་མེ	in 'byung rtsis, CH elemental divination, way of figuring enemies and friends	lcags dgra me
ལྕགས་མགར	blacksmith	lcags mgar
ལྕགས་མགུ	iron pot	lcags mgu
ལྕགས་མགོ	iron ladle	lcags mgo
ལྕགས་འགུ	lcags snod kong mo	lcags 'gu
ལྕགས་རྒྱུག	barbell, iron bar	lcags rgyug
ལྕགས་རྒྱུག་འདེགས	lift weights	lcags rgyug 'degs
ལྕགས་སྒམ	trunk, iron chest	lcags sgam
ལྕགས་སྒམ་པར་བུ	small iron box	lcags sgam par bu
ལྕགས་སྒོ	iron door/ gate	lcags sgo
ལྕགས་སྒོར	discus	lcags sgor
ལྕགས་སྒོར་འཕེན	throw the discus	lcags sgor 'phen
ལྕགས་སྒྱིད	trevet, tripod	lcags sgyid
ལྕགས་སྒྱེད	1) lcags kyi thab rdo sum tshom lta bu; 2) three legged stove	lcags sgyed
ལྕགས་སྒྲོ	iron fetters	lcags sgro
ལྕགས་སྒྲོག	1) [iron/ metal] chains/ shackles/ fetters/ treads; 2) on the bottom of boots 'ja' gsu pa'i phar phyin	lcags sgrog
ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་གི་རྒྱ	lcags sgrog gi phyag	lcags sgrog gi rgya
ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	shackle mudra	lcags sgrog gi phyag rgya
ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་མ	the Chain, Chain-lady	lcags sgrog ma
ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་མའི་ལུགས	[among 'phyugs par 'dod pa'i lugs] two bodies of land two in summer 1 in winter 'dod pa'i lugs	lcags sgrog ma'i lugs
ལྕགས་སྒྲོམ	the Iron box. Syn. {hom	lcags sgrom
ལྕགས་སྒྲོལ	iron pan, steel pan	lcags sgrol
ལྕགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 metals	lcags brgyad
ལྕགས་ངར	copper-smith tool mgo skon g.yog sa'i lcags hreng mgo gug can	lcags ngar
ལྕགས་ཅས	ironware, hardware	lcags cas
ལྕགས་གཅུས	iron/ metal screw	lcags gcus
ལྕགས་བཅད་པ་ནང་བཞིན	resolute, decisive, determined, like cutting iron	lcags bcad pa nang bzhin
ལྕགས་ཆས	iron tools or utensils	lcags chas
ལྕགས་ཆས་ཆུང་རིགས	small items of ironware/ hardware	lcags chas chung rigs
ལྕགས་ཆས་སྤྱོད་པའི་དུས་རབས	Iron Age	lcags chas spyod pa'i dus rabs
ལྕགས་མཆོག	gold, iron of superior quality	lcags mchog
ལྕགས་རྗེན	pig iron	lcags rjen
ལྕགས་གཉེར་ར་བ	iron mine	lcags gnyer ra ba
ལྕགས་སྙིགས	iron slag, dross of iron	lcags snyigs
ལྕགས་ཏིག	{lcags tig} field med.	lcags tig
ལྕགས་ཏིག་དཀར་པོ	{lcags tig dkar po} med.	lcags tig dkar po
ལྕགས་ཏིག་རྭ་མགོ	halenia elliptica d. don	lcags tig rwa mgo
ལྕགས་ཏེལ	metal nad dmig cauterizing implement = tel pa [de nad dmig steng brdegs [strike?] na 'bras nad dang, lhen skran sogs la phan]	lcags tel
ལྕགས་གཏུན	iron/ metal mortar and pestle	lcags gtun
ལྕགས་གཏེར	iron ore	lcags gter
ལྕགས་གཏེར་སེར་ནག	hematite iron ore	lcags gter ser nag
ལྕགས་བཏུལ་མ	beat te iron w impurities drawn out	lcags btul ma
ལྕགས་རྟ	iron horse year	lcags rta
ལྕགས་རྟ་ལོའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	war of the iron horse year, Sino-Japanese War of 1894	lcags rta lo'i dmag 'khrug
ལྕགས་རྟུལ	blunt / dull iron	lcags rtul
ལྕགས་སྟག	iron tiger [year]	lcags stag
ལྕགས་སྟེགས	water wheel axle	lcags stegs
ལྕགས་ཐག	chain	lcags thag
ལྕགས་ཐག་བྱེད	chain up	lcags thag byed
ལྕགས་ཐག་ཟམ་པ	iron-link chain bridge	lcags thag zam pa
ལྕགས་ཐབ	stove, SA lcags sgyid, iron stove	lcags thab
ལྕགས་ཐལ	oxide of iron from dipping redhot iron in cow urine	lcags thal
ལྕགས་ཐུམ	iron ladle, any cooking utensil of iron, boiler, saucepan	lcags thum
ལྕགས་ཐུར	1) lcags hril phra la ring ba; 2) metal spoon/ small shovel; 3) screw driver	lcags thur
ལྕགས་ཐོ	iron hammer	lcags tho
ལྕགས་དང་དཀར་ཡོལ་གྱི་སྒྲ	clatter	lcags dang dkar yol gyi sgra
ལྕགས་དམ	can	lcags dam
ལྕགས་དུག	bse bo	lcags dug
ལྕགས་དུམ	ngar lcags broken fragment, steel slab/ ingot	lcags dum
ལྕགས་དོང	iron tube	lcags dong
ལྕགས་དྲ	steel/ wire mesh	lcags dra
ལྕགས་དྲེག	1) heated and beaten iron tshe gog pa'i w/o impurities; 2) a disease [R]; 3) slag	lcags dreg
ལྕགས་གདུང	iron/ metal beam	lcags gdung
ལྕགས་བདར	file	lcags bdar
ལྕགས་མདའ	1) lay noblemen's summer hat; 2) metal spokes/ rod; 3) water wheel center hole nang 'bab pa'i yos tshad snyoms byed kyi lcags mda' sbubs can; 4) iron arrow; 5) knitting needles; 6) metal probe	lcags mda'
ལྕགས་མདའ་སྒྲ་ཅན	arrow, kind of steeltipped arrow that makes a whizzing sound	lcags mda' sgra can
ལྕགས་མདའ་སླ་བ	knitting, embroidery	lcags mda' sla ba
ལྕགས་མདུད	Iron Knot. Syn {nyag rong}	lcags mdud
ལྕགས་མདུད་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Chagdud Tulku; influential Nyingma master in North America	lcags mdud sprul sku
ལྕགས་མདོང	metal pipe[line] 782	lcags mdong
ལྕགས་རྡར་མཉམ་ཟད	iron and polishing stone equally exhausted	lcags rdar mnyam zad
ལྕགས་རྡུལ	'iron particle', measure the size of 7 {rdul phran}	lcags rdul
ལྕགས་རྡོ	shotput, flint stones, iron stone, iron ore	lcags rdo
ལྕགས་རྡོ་དམར་པོ	hematite	lcags rdo dmar po
ལྕགས་རྡོ་སེར་པོ	iron pyrite	lcags rdo ser po
ལྕགས་ལྡེལ	abbr of sgo lcags dang lde mig, door lock & key	lcags ldel
ལྕགས་སྡིག	iron scorpions	lcags sdig
ལྕགས་སྡིགས	iron threat	lcags sdigs
ལྕགས་སྡེར	iron plate	lcags sder
ལྕགས་ནན་ཐར་གསུམ	gzab gzab nan nan...Don gnad gal chen la lcags nan thar gsum gyis gros sdur byed dgos	lcags nan thar gsum
ལྕགས་སྣ་དགུའི་ཕུར་པ	phurpa made out of the nine different metals; , iron only (lcags phur), copper (zangs phur), brass, wood (shing phur), sandal wood (tsandan phur pa) etc	lcags sna dgu'i phur pa
ལྕགས་སྣོད	flask	lcags snod
ལྕགས་པང	lcags leb rectangular and thick	lcags pang
ལྕགས་པར	printing w iron/ metal type, typewriter	lcags par
ལྕགས་པར་རྒྱག	print w iron/ metal type, typewrite	lcags par rgyag
ལྕགས་པར་རྒྱབ་མཁན	typist	lcags par rgyab mkhan
ལྕགས་པར་རྒྱབ་པ	type	lcags par rgyab pa
ལྕགས་པར་འདེབས	print w iron/ metal type, typewrite	lcags par 'debs
ལྕགས་པར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	typewriter	lcags par 'phrul 'khor
ལྕགས་པོ་རི	med. college hill	lcags po ri
ལྕགས་པོད	1) sba thag sogs braided square sash/skirt ska rags; 2) buckle bsgar ba'i [fixed/ turned] sked sdom [belt, cinch???]; 3) ornamented belt	lcags pod
ལྕགས་དཔར	printing w iron/ metal type, typewriter	lcags dpar
ལྕགས་དཔར་རྒྱག	print w iron/ metal type, typewrite	lcags dpar rgyag
ལྕགས་དཔར་འདེབས	print w iron/ metal type, typewrite	lcags dpar 'debs
ལྕགས་དཔར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	typewriter	lcags dpar 'phrul 'khor
ལྕགས་སྤུ	place in tibet	lcags spu
ལྕགས་སྤྲེ	iron monkey year	lcags spre
ལྕགས་ཕག	iron pig year	lcags phag
ལྕགས་ཕག་ལོའི་གསར་བརྗེ	revolution of the iron pig year/ 1911	lcags phag lo'i gsar brje
ལྕགས་ཕུར	iron spike/ peg	lcags phur
ལྕགས་ཕུར་བྲག	Iron Dagger Rock. Situated to the west of Kharchu at Lhodrak	lcags phur brag
ལྕགས་ཕུར་རི	the iron dagger peak	lcags phur ri
ལྕགས་ཕོ	iron male	lcags pho
ལྕགས་ཕོ་རི	name of a hill near the Potala	lcags pho ri
ལྕགས་ཕོད	1) sba thag sogs braided square sash/ skirt ska rags; 2) buckle bsgar ba'i [fixed/ turned] sked sdom [belt, cinch???]; 3) ornamented belt	lcags phod
ལྕགས་ཕོར	iron cup	lcags phor
ལྕགས་ཕྱེ	1) powered iron, iron fillings; 2) Lcags sag brdar ngos brdar med.	lcags phye
ལྕགས་འཕེལ	district of tibet n.e. of kashmir	lcags 'phel
ལྕགས་འཕྲིན	telegram	lcags 'phrin
ལྕགས་འཕྲིན་གཏོང	send a telegram	lcags 'phrin gtong
ལྕགས་བན	metal water vessel/ vase	lcags ban
ལྕགས་བེར་གྱིས་ཐེབས་པའི་ས་སྲན	hard soil which had been broken up with iron bars	lcags ber gyis thebs pa'i sa sran
ལྕགས་བྱ	iron bird year	lcags bya
ལྕགས་བྱི	iron mouse year	lcags byi
ལྕགས་བྱེ	iron fillings	lcags bye
ལྕགས་དབྱི	black lynx	lcags dbyi
ལྕགས་འབྱེད	iron key	lcags 'byed
ལྕགས་འབྲུག	iron dragon year	lcags 'brug
ལྕགས་སྦར	iron rtsva sogs sdud byed sbar mo'i dbyibs can zhig	lcags sbar
ལྕགས་སྦུགས	match-lock made in india	lcags sbugs
ལྕགས་སྦུབས་ཅན	arrow, kind os steeltipped arrow that makes a whizzing sound	lcags sbubs can
ལྕགས་སྦྲུལ	iron-snake year	lcags sbrul
ལྕགས་མག	tinder case	lcags mag
ལྕགས་མིག	leather punch	lcags mig
ལྕགས་མིན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	non-metallic things	lcags min gyi dngos po
ལྕགས་མོ	iron female	lcags mo
ལྕགས་མོ་མགོ་ལོག	Chagmo Golok, in Domey	lcags mo mgo log
ལྕགས་དམར	copper	lcags dmar
ལྕགས་དམར་སྐམ་གཅུན	warning to keep to the straight and narrow Rang snang gang dran gyis by showing the criminal the bloody whip skam gcun squeeze the tongs emphatically educate gtong dgos	lcags dmar skam gcun
ལྕགས་རྨོག	[iron] helmet	lcags rmog
ལྕགས་སྨྱུག	pen	lcags smyug
ལྕགས་སྨྱུག་གི་སྨྱུག	nib	lcags smyug gi smyug
ལྕགས་སྨྱུག་གི་སྨྱུག་རྩེ	pen	lcags smyug gi smyug rtse
ལྕགས་བཙའ	rust	lcags btsa'
ལྕགས་རྩི	metal paint	lcags rtsi
ལྕགས་རྩིབས་ཅན་གྱི་ཨར་འདམ	reinforced concrete	lcags rtsibs can gyi ar 'dam
ལྕགས་རྩེ་རི	an iron-peaked mountain	lcags rtse ri
ལྕགས་ཚ་ཐོག་ཏུ་རྡུང	strike while the iron is hot	lcags tsha thog tu rdung
ལྕགས་ཚ་ཐོག་རྡུང	strike while the iron is hot	lcags tsha thog rdung
ལྕགས་ཚ་ཐོག་རྡུང་བ	strike while the iron is hot	lcags tsha thog rdung ba
ལྕགས་ཚགས	iron sieve	lcags tshags
ལྕགས་ཚན་གཞུ་བ	lash	lcags tshan gzhu ba
ལྕགས་ཞ	helmet	lcags zha
ལྕགས་ཞྭ	iron helmet	lcags zhwa
ལྕགས་ཞིབ	1) iron powder; 2) iron tiger yr; 3) in Tibetan census, fields taxes checking government document	lcags zhib
ལྕགས་ཞུ	1) iron helmet; 2) cast iron vessel	lcags zhu
ལྕགས་ཞུན	refined molten iron	lcags zhun
ལྕགས་ཞོལ	a weapon	lcags zhol
ལྕགས་གཞོག་འཁོར་སྟེགས	milling machine	lcags gzhog 'khor stegs
ལྕགས་གཞོག་བཟོ་པ	milling machine operator	lcags gzhog bzo pa
ལྕགས་གཞོང	1) metal trough; 2) iron basin/ tub [lugs syad making par]	lcags gzhong
ལྕགས་བཞུ	metallurgy, smelting	lcags bzhu
ལྕགས་བཞུ་གཏོང	smelt iron/ metals	lcags bzhu gtong
ལྕགས་ཟངས	iron kettle	lcags zangs
ལྕགས་ཟམ	iron (suspension) bridge; iron bridge	lcags zam
ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཁ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lcags zam kha
ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཆུ་བོ་རི	monastery near lhasa	lcags zam chu bo ri
ལྕགས་ཟམ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	18-19th cent. Chakzam Tulku	lcags zam sprul sku
ལྕགས་ཟམ་བན་གཙང་འདུས་སྡེ	the monastery of {gcung ri bo che} and the affiliates	lcags zam ban gtsang 'dus sde
ལྕགས་ཟེར	nail	lcags zer
ལྕགས་ཟོམ	metal bucket/ tub	lcags zom
ལྕགས་གཟར	metal ladle	lcags gzar
ལྕགས་གཟུར	iron spoon	lcags gzur
ལྕགས་གཟེར	iron/ metal nail	lcags gzer
ལྕགས་གཟེར་རྒྱག	nail	lcags gzer rgyag
ལྕགས་གཟེར་ཐེབས་སོང	rivet, fitted nail, a rivet has been fitted into it	lcags gzer thebs song
ལྕགས་གཟེར་རྩེ་རྣོ་པོ	spike	lcags gzer rtse rno po
ལྕགས་གཟོང	steel chisel/ punch	lcags gzong
ལྕགས་བཟོ	iron-work 783	lcags bzo
ལྕགས་བཟོ་ཁང	smithy	lcags bzo khang
ལྕགས་བཟོ་རྒྱག	do blacksmith work	lcags bzo rgyag
ལྕགས་བཟོ་པ	iron smith, black smith	lcags bzo pa
ལྕགས་བཟོ་བ	blacksmith	lcags bzo ba
ལྕགས་ཡོས	iron rabbit year lcags g.ya' - rust lcags g.ya' - rust, oxide of iron	lcags yos
ལྕགས་ར	place on confines of tibet and china, wall round a house or estate or town	lcags ra
ལྕགས་རའི་ནང་བླུག་པ	encage	lcags ra'i nang blug pa
ལྕགས་རི	border [on cloth]	lcags ri
ལྕགས་རི་མུ་ཁྱུད	the ring of iron mountains [which surrounds Mt. Meru and the four continents.]	lcags ri mu khyud
ལྕགས་རི་མུ་ཁྱུད་ཀྱིས་བསྐོར་བ	the entire complex was enclosed by a wall	lcags ri mu khyud kyis bskor ba
ལྕགས་རི་ར་བ	wall of iron mountains	lcags ri ra ba
ལྕགས་རི་རིང་པོ	Great Wall of CH	lcags ri ring po
ལྕགས་རིགས	metal	lcags rigs
ལྕགས་རིགས་གཏུབ་གཞོག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	metal cutting machine	lcags rigs gtub gzhog 'phrul 'khor
ལྕགས་རིགས་འདྲེས་མ	alloy	lcags rigs 'dres ma
ལྕགས་རིགས་སྣ་ལྔ	the five metals [gold, silver, copper, iron, tin/ pewter]	lcags rigs sna lnga
ལྕགས་རིགས་བྱེ་བྲག་བརྒྱད	the 8 metals	lcags rigs bye brag brgyad
ལྕགས་རིགས་རྩེད་ཆས	metal toys	lcags rigs rtsed chas
ལྕགས་རིགས་བཟོ་ལས	metallurgical industry	lcags rigs bzo las
ལྕགས་རིགས་བསྲེས་མ	alloy	lcags rigs bsres ma
ལྕགས་རིའི་ཁོར་ཡུག	the circle of iron mountains. Syn {phyi'i lugs ri}	lcags ri'i khor yug
ལྕགས་རིལ	1) iron/ steel ball; 2) shot for	lcags ril
ཤོཏ	put	shot
ལྕགས་རོ	scrap metal	lcags ro
ལྕགས་ལ	a district in Tibet	lcags la
ལྕགས་ལམ	railway, railroad	lcags lam
ལྕགས་ལམ་རྐྱང་པ	monorail	lcags lam rkyang pa
ལྕགས་ལམ་སྒྲིག	lay railroad track	lcags lam sgrig
ལྕགས་ལམ་ཆུང་ཆུང	narrow gauge railroad	lcags lam chung chung
ལྕགས་ལམ་གཉིས་གཤིབས་ཅན	two track railway	lcags lam gnyis gshibs can
ལྕགས་ལམ་འདྲིང	lay railroad track	lcags lam 'dring
ལྕགས་ལམ་བློན་ཆེན	railway minister	lcags lam blon chen
ལྕགས་ལམ་མ་ཚིགས	railroad station	lcags lam ma tshigs
ལྕགས་ལམ་མ་ཤིང	railroad tie	lcags lam ma shing
ལྕགས་ལམ་དམག	railway corps	lcags lam dmag
ལྕགས་ལམ་གཞི་རྐྱང	main/ trunk line	lcags lam gzhi rkyang
ལྕགས་ལམ་གཞུང་ཐིག	main/ trunk line	lcags lam gzhung thig
ལྕགས་ལམ་ཟུར་ཐིག	branch/ arterial line	lcags lam zur thig
ལྕགས་ལམ་ཤར་བསྐྱོད	through/ direct traffic	lcags lam shar bskyod
ལྕགས་ལམ་ཤིང་གདན	railroad tie	lcags lam shing gdan
ལྕགས་ལས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	ironworks	lcags las bzo grwa
ལྕགས་ལུག	iron sheep year	lcags lug
ལྕགས་ལུང	metal 'ju lung	lcags lung
ལྕགས་ལེབ	iron/ steel plate, discus	lcags leb
ལྕགས་ལེབ་བཙིར་འཁོར	iron/ steel plate rolling machine	lcags leb btsir 'khor
ལྕགས་ལོང	metal [ear-]rings/ round door handle	lcags long
ལྕགས་ཤད	iron comb	lcags shad
ལྕགས་ཤན	circle	lcags shan
ཅྲམཔ	iron	cramp
ལྕགས་ཤན་རྒྱག	bind w metal binding circle, hoop, hasp, band	lcags shan rgyag
ལྕགས་ཤལ་མ་ལི	one of subdivisions of hell	lcags shal ma li
ལྕགས་ཤལ་མ་ལི་བན	wood of iron bristles	lcags shal ma li ban
ལྕགས་ཤོག	metal sheet/ plate	lcags shog
ལྕགས་ཤོལ	a weapon	lcags shol
ལྕགས་གཤོལ	iron plow	lcags gshol
ལྕགས་སག	file [tool]	lcags sag
ལྕགས་སང	fine net of iron wires	lcags sang
ལྕགས་སེག	lcags sag	lcags seg
ལྕགས་སོ	grain ears cutting metal so mang [blade, sickle?]	lcags so
ལྕགས་སོགས་རྡུང་གདན	anvil	lcags sogs rdung gdan
ལྕགས་སོལ	powdered coal	lcags sol
ལྕགས་སྲེག	fired iron; red-hot iron	lcags sreg
ལྕགས་སླང	iron pan	lcags slang
ཀིལན	drying corn	kiln
ལྕགས་གསུམ་ཐོང་གཤོལ	three pronged plow	lcags gsum thong gshol
ལྕགས་གསོར	piercing lcags kyi gsor	lcags gsor
ལྕགས་བསྲེགས་ཀྱི་ས་གཞི	ground of burning iron	lcags bsregs kyi sa gzhi
ལྕགས་བསྲེས་མ	iron/ steel alloy	lcags bsres ma
ལྕགས་བསྲོ	(smoothing iron	lcags bsro
ལྕགས་ཧོམ	iron fire-pit	lcags hom
ལྕགས་ཧྲང	gun barrel	lcags hrang
ལྕགས་ཧྲུག	dras gtubs kyi metal fragment	lcags hrug
ལྕགས་ཧྲེང	crow bar, iron bar	lcags hreng
ལྕང་དཀར	white willow	lcang dkar
ལྕང་སྐྱ	n. of ngag dbang blo bzang chos ldan, dpal bzang po, place in kham, grey, pale white	lcang skya
ལྕང་སྐྱ་ངག་དབང་ཆོས་ལྡན	16421714 - first Changkya Rinpoche, Ngawang Chöden	lcang skya ngag dbang chos ldan
ལྕང་སྐྱ་སྟག་སྒམ	trunk of tanned tiger skin	lcang skya stag sgam
ལྕང་སྐྱ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Changkya Rinpoche	lcang skya rin po che
ལྕང་སྐྱ་རོལ་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Changkya Rölpa Dorje, teacher of the Emperor of China, -1786 lcang skya rol pa rdo rje ye shes bstan pa'i	lcang skya rol pa rdo rje
ལྕང་སྐྱ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	1717-1786 [ggd]	lcang skya rol pa'i rdo rje
ལྕང་སྐྱ་ཧོ་ཐོག་ཐུ	{lcang skya ho thog thu}	lcang skya ho thog thu
ལྕང་སྐྱའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	by lcang skya rol pa'i rdo rje, grub mtha'i rnam gzhag thub bstan lhun po'i mdzes rgyan	lcang skya'i grub mtha'
ལྕང་ཁུ	green	lcang khu
ལྕང་གླིང་གྲུ་བཞི	small willow grove	lcang gling gru bzhi
ལྕང་ལྕུག	willow branch/twig	lcang lcug
ལྕང་ལྕོང	a craggy steep place, broken country, many ridges etc.	lcang lcong
ལྕང་ནག	black willow	lcang nag
ལྕང་ཕྱིའི་ཉང	place in Tibet	lcang phyi'i nyang
ལྕང་བལ	willow wool	lcang bal
ལྕང་མ	1) willow tree; 2) matted hair	lcang ma
ལྕང་མ་བྲག	place in Tibet	lcang ma brag
ལྕང་མ་མེ་ཏོག	me tog 'char ba'i mdzes rgyan kind of poisonous tree	lcang ma me tog
ལྕང་མའི་ཡལ་ཀ	strip?	lcang ma'i yal ka
ལྕང་རྩགས	place in Tibet	lcang rtsags
ལྕང་ར	grove of willows, poplar grove, willow, poplar 784	lcang ra
ལྕང་ར་རྫོང	district in Tibet	lcang ra rdzong
ལྕང་རློམ	flat basket made of willow twigs	lcang rlom
ལྕང་ལུང་པན་དི་ཏ	mongolian lama lcang lung pan di ta ngag dbang blo	lcang lung pan di ta
བཟང་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	17701846	bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
ལྕང་ལོ	braid, long plaids of hair, braided or matted strands of hair [yogic hair {ral pa}	lcang lo
ལྕང་ལོ་རྒྱག	braid	lcang lo rgyag
ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན	buddha field of Vajradhara	lcang lo can
ལྕང་ལོ་ཆན	buddha field of Vajradhara	lcang lo chan
ལྕང་ལོ་མ	very useful and important medicine	lcang lo ma
ལྕང་ཤིང	willow tree, willow wood	lcang shing
ལྕང་ཤེས	finest breed of horse in Tibet	lcang shes
ལྕང་ཤོས	red willow	lcang shos
ལྕང་སིལ	coolness, shade under willow trees	lcang sil
ལྕང་སོན	willow seed[ling]	lcang son
ལྕང་སོལ	willow charcoal/ ash	lcang sol
ལྕང་སྲེབ	grove of willows, poplars	lcang sreb
ལྕང་གསར	small/ new/ seedling willow	lcang gsar
ལྕང་གསེབ	among willows, park/ grove w willows	lcang gseb
ལྕང་བསིལ	willow shade, cool place under a willow	lcang bsil
ལྕན་ལོ་ཅན	Buddha field of Vajradhara	lcan lo can
ལྕམ	small beam, lath, pole, rafter, spar; 1) wood for making small beam to go on top of a house; 2) [nobleman's] wife, Mrs, madame, lady (h; 3) consort (H	lcam
ལྕམ་དཀྲིས	wrinkled, an ornament	lcam dkris
ལྕམ་དཀྲིས་ཅན	possessed of wrinkles	lcam dkris can
ལྕམ་སྐུ	madame, Mrs [for women of rank]	lcam sku
ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཞབས	Madam, Mrs (high ranked	lcam sku zhabs
ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཨཱིན་རྡ་ར་གྷན་དི	Mme Indira Gandhi	lcam sku In rda ra ghan di
ལྕམ་ཁེབས	house's lcam shing sgrib byed gnam pang	lcam khebs
ལྕམ་ཆུང	middle level young noble woman H	lcam chung
ལྕམ་དྲལ	1) house's lcam shing and rafters; 2) brothers and sisters; 3) consort[s and retinue]	lcam dral
ལྕམ་སྣེ	house's lcam shing gi rtse mo	lcam sne
ལྕམ་པ	1) upright, erect, gentle, polished; 2) ldum bu'i sman	lcam pa
ལྕམ་པ་ཧ་ལོ	{lcam pa ha lo} field med.	lcam pa ha lo
ལྕམ་པོ	upright, in erect position	lcam po
ལྕམ་མེ	celebrated tibetan lady who received atisha with hospitality, bright, glittering	lcam me
ལྕམ་མེ་བ	variegated, shining, dazzling	lcam me ba
ལྕམ་མེར་འཇོག	leave off doing something on the spot, immediately	lcam mer 'jog
ལྕམ་མེར་འཇོག་པ	1) to completely let go. 2) leave off doing something on the spot / immediately	lcam mer 'jog pa
ལྕམ་མོ	sister, abbr. of lcam and sring mo	lcam mo
ལྕམ་ལ་རྒན	{lcam la rgan} Pass	lcam la rgan
ལྕམ་ལེགས་སྨིན	a dakini, lady legs smin	lcam legs smin
ལྕམ་ཤིང	wood for making small beam to go on top of a house	lcam shing
ལྕམ་སིང	a deity	lcam sing
ལྕམ་སྲས	wives and children	lcam sras
ལྕམ་སྲིང	sisters	lcam sring
ལྕམས་མེར་འཇོག	leave off doing on the spot/ immediately	lcams mer 'jog
ལྕི	shit, heaviness, heavy	lci
ལྕི་ཁྲལ	Tibetan govt. gis gyu rtsi ??? gtong dus bsdu ba'i lci khral	lci khral
ལྕི་འཁེང	'khyag pa thebs pa'i lci ba	lci 'kheng
ལྕི་རྒྱབ	lci ba rgyab ste do po [load, servant?] gnyis	lci rgyab
ལྕི་སྒམ	in winter wet manure square sa phag lta bu bzos te and in summer, dried, is burned	lci sgam
ལྕི་ཆོས	heavy rules	lci chos
ལྕི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	the 8 heavy rules [for gelongmas]	lci chos brgyad
ལྕི་རྙང	ox's weight	lci rnyang
ལྕི་ཐང	place to put manure	lci thang
ལྕི་ཐལ	manure ash	lci thal
ལྕི་ཐིབས་ཐིབས	shaking w the weight	lci thibs thibs
ལྕི་འཐིབས་པ	unhappy body and/or mind, bodily defilement	lci 'thibs pa
ལྕི་མདའ	place in tibet	lci mda'
ལྕི་འདག	lci ba brdzis pa'i 'dag pa	lci 'dag
ལྕི་པོ	heavy, ' khyog khag po	lci po
ལྕི་ཕག	{lci sgam - in winter wet manure square sa phag lta bu is made, and in summer, dried, is burned	lci phag
ལྕི་བ	1) dung. 2) heavy, heavier, heaviness. 3) weighty; piss	lci ba
ལྕི་བ་སྐམ་པོ	dried dung of cattle	lci ba skam po
ལྕི་བ་བཏང	released a turd	lci ba btang
ལྕི་བ་ཐག་གེ	cow shit; loud munching noises	lci ba thag ge
ལྕི་བ་བཞི	CHN	lci ba bzhi
ལྕི་བའི་ཕུང་པོ	heap of cow dung	lci ba'i phung po
ལྕི་བའི་བཟོ་ལས	heavy industry	lci ba'i bzo las
ལྕི་བའི་ལས	grievous act	lci ba'i las
ལྕི་མོ	heavy	lci mo
ལྕི་ཚད	weight	lci tshad
ལྕི་ཚད་འཕར	weight, increase in wt.	lci tshad 'phar
ལྕི་ཡང	gravity, severity	lci yang
ལྕི་ཡང་དལ་བྲེལ	in order of importance/ urgency	lci yang dal brel
ལྕི་ཡང་བརྡུར་ཚད	specific gravity	lci yang brdur tshad
ལྕི་ཡེ་རེ	shaking w the weight	lci ye re
ལྕི་ཡོར་ཡོར	shaking w the weight	lci yor yor
ལྕི་ར	enclosure made of manure, or place it is put	lci ra
ལྕི་རློན	fresh dung of cattle	lci rlon
ལྕི་ལེབ	flattened dried manure	lci leb
ལྕིག་ལྕིག	swarming 785	lcig lcig
ལྕིགས་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	the 8 heavy rules	lcigs chos brgyad
ལྕིགས་པ	(tha mi dad pa realize, understand	lcigs pa
ལྕིད	heavy	lcid
ལྕིད་པ	weight, heavy[ness]	lcid pa
ལྕིད་ཕབ་པ	relax and put down something heavy 1 has	lcid phab pa
ལྕིབ་ཐག་གི་ཟ	eat something very tasty	lcib thag gi za
ལྕིབ་ཐག་གེ་ཟ	eat something very tasty	lcib thag ge za
ལྕིབས	pot-cloth, eyelid; gloves/ a shield/ a handle	lcibs
ལྕིབས་ཀྱིས་སླང་ཚ་པོ་བཟུང	held the hot pan w a pot holder	lcibs kyis slang tsha po bzung
ལྕིབས་ཕུར	door's lcibs phur	lcibs phur
ལྕིབས་མོ	thimble	lcibs mo
ལྕུ	turn, SA gcud pa	lcu
ལྕུ་བ	SA gcu ba	lcu ba
ལྕུག་གུ	thin belt/ sash	lcug gu
ལྕུག་ལྕུག	sway	lcug lcug
ལྕུག་ལྕུག་བྱེད་པ	bud repeatedly	lcug lcug byed pa
ལྕུག་མདལ	creeping plant	lcug mdal
ལྕུག་ལྡན་མ	chief prostitute, madam	lcug ldan ma
ལྕུག་པ	flexible, pliant, a supple branch	lcug pa
ལྕུག་ཕྲན	branch twigs of a plant	lcug phran
ལྕུག་མ	/(1 small branch of a vine etc.; 2) elongated, oblong small branch, rod, switch	lcug ma
ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཝིལློཝ་ཨོར་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་པོཔླར	tree; switch; | {lcug lcug byed pa}, to but repeatedly	of a willow or of a poplar
ལྕུག་མ་བཟང་པོ	hemp, marijuana	lcug ma bzang po
ལྕུག་མ་ལྷས་མ	twig, switch	lcug ma lhas ma
ལྕུག་ཟམ	suspension bridge of twisted canes	lcug zam
ལྕུགས	soft, pliable, not hard	lcugs
ལྕུང་ཀ	jack-daw	lcung ka
ལྕུང་ཀར	bya lcung kar - ruby throat	lcung kar
ལྕུང་ག	pyrrhacorax pyrrhocorax himalayanas gould	lcung ga
ལྕུང་མོ	thimble	lcung mo
ལྕུད་པ	SA gcud pa	lcud pa
ལྕུམ	plant used as purgative	lcum
ལྕུམ་དཀར	white species of lcum	lcum dkar
ལྕུམ་སྡོང	lcum tree, leaf gnangs 'char du [on the 3rd day?] skye and edible	lcum sdong
ལྕུམ་བུ	a kind of grass	lcum bu
ལྕུམ་རྩ	plant whose root is used as purgative	lcum rtsa
ལྕུམ་ཤོག	rdza lcum and dug lcum leaf	lcum shog
ལྕུས	turn, SA gcud pa	lcus
ལྕེ	(rasana tongue[-like shape] *, gustatory; 2) [arch] meteoric iron	lce
ལྕེ་ཀྱིགས	frenum of the tongue	lce kyigs
ལྕེ་རྐྱང་བ	stick out the tongue, stretch out the tongue	lce rkyang ba
ལྕེ་སྐྲང	tongue swelling disease	lce skrang
ལྕེ་ཁམས	tongue dhatu/ faculty	lce khams
ལྕེ་བརྒྱ་པ	Varuna, water god	lce brgya pa
ལྕེ་བསྒྲིལ་བ	stick out the tongue, wrap the tongue around something (cow	lce bsgril ba
ལྕེ་གཅོད	punishment of cutting out the tongue	lce gcod
ལྕེ་ཆུང	uvula	lce chung
ལྕེ་ཆུང་བབ་པ	descending uvula disease	lce chung bab pa
ལྕེ་ཆུང་འབབས	inflammation of the uvula	lce chung 'babs
ལྕེ་ཆོད་ཅིག	let his tongue be removed / taken out	lce chod cig
ལྕེ་གཉིས	two-faced, deceitful	lce gnyis
ལྕེ་གཉིས་པ	cheat, double-tongued,	lce gnyis pa
དོཨུབླེ	dealer, two-tongued, snake, parrot, deceitful	double
ལྕེ་གཉིས་བྱེད་པ	be double-tongued, have double dealings	lce gnyis byed pa
ལྕེ་སྙིང་མེད	thunderbolt	lce snying med
ལྕེ་རྟེན	[arch] wrongly attribute faults or conceal/ pretend by deceit	lce rten
ལྕེ་བསྟུན་སེང་གེ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Chetsun Senge Wangchuk	lce bstun seng ge dbang phyug
ལྕེ་ཐེབ	flesh below tongue	lce theb
ལྕེ་ཐེལ	after a child is born yig ris [cursive writing] kyong brkos [inscribed] nang saffron powder btab ste lce la par rgyag byed kyi implement	lce thel
ལྕེ་དིག	lisp, not proficient at speaking	lce dig
ལྕེ་དིག་དིག	lisp, not proficient at speaking	lce dig dig
ལྕེ་དིག་པ	stammer	lce dig pa
ལྕེ་དྲི	dreck on the tongue	lce dri
ལྕེ་དྲེག	dreck on the tongue	lce dreg
ལྕེ་བདེ	ngag smra lce bde dus - while your tongue can still move	lce bde
ལྕེ་བདེ་བདེ	enunciate well	lce bde bde
ལྕེ་བདེ་པོ	eloquent	lce bde po
ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ	{lce bde zhol} [place in gong dkar rdzong]	lce bde zhol
ལྕེ་མདུན	front of the tongue	lce mdun
ལྕེ་འདྲ	fleshy excrescence below the tongue	lce 'dra
ལྕེ་ལྡག	licking	lce ldag
ལྕེ་ལྡག་རྒྱག	lick	lce ldag rgyag
ལྕེ་ལྡག་རྒྱབ་པ	lap, lick	lce ldag rgyab pa
ལྕེ་བརྡབ་པའི་སྒྲ	chuckle	lce brdab pa'i sgra
ལྕེ་སྣང་གསལ་འོད་འབུམ	Tibetan dramatic story	lce snang gsal 'od 'bum
ལྕེ་བསྣར	by those of low rank as a sign of respect for those of high rank stick out the tongue	lce bsnar
ལྕེ་སྤྱང	jackal	lce spyang
ལྕེ་སྤྱང་མིག	eye of jackal	lce spyang mig
ལྕེ་ཕུན་སྟེ་ཟས་མི་ཟ	prohibition against monks eating by licking	lce phun ste zas mi za
ལྕེ་ཕྱུང་སྟེ་ཟས་མི་ཟ	not eating food by licking	lce phyung ste zas mi za
ལྕེ་ཕྲུག	rkan mtshams kyi lce chung	lce phrug
ལྕེ་དབང	lord of speech	lce dbang
ལྕེ་འབབ	lightning	lce 'bab
ལྕེ་འབམ	gnyan nad lce la bab pa rigs spyi	lce 'bam
ལྕེ་འབར་བ	burning flame	lce 'bar ba
ལྕེ་འབིགས	salt	lce 'bigs
ལྕེ་འབུར	eruption on the tongue	lce 'bur
ལྕེ་འབེབས	tongue or flash of lightning	lce 'bebs
ལྕེ་སྦྱང	lce sgrog dgrol ba,...Thabs shes sna tshogs la brten nas lce sbyang byed pa	lce sbyang
ལྕེ་མི་བདེ་བ	not proficient at speaking	lce mi bde ba
ལྕེ་མེད	without tongue, frog	lce med
ལྕེ་མེད་དིག་པ	the tongueless stammers	lce med dig pa
ལྕེ་མྱང་ཚ	1) a kind of salt; 2) a kind of med. tree	lce myang tsha
ལྕེ་མྱང་ཚྭ	alum	lce myang tshwa
ལྕེ་བཙུན་ཆེན་པོ	Great Chetsün. The great master Chetsün Senge Wangchuk. Senge Wangchuk; {lce btsun seng ge dbang phyug}	lce btsun chen po
ལྕེ་བཙུན་སྙིང་ཏིག	Chetsün Nyingtig. One of the most important Dzogchen 786 instructions, based on a transmission from Vimalamitra. Jamyang Khyentse had a vision of Chetsün Senge Wangchuk which inspired him to write ...	lce btsun snying tig
ལྕེ་བཙུན་སེང་གེ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Senge Wangchuk (11th-12th century). Chetsün Senge Wangchuk is counted among the lineage gurus in the transmission of Nyingtig which he received from his root guru Dangma Lhüngyal as well as from Vi...	lce btsun seng ge dbang phyug
ལྕེ་རྩ	base of tongue, root of the tongue	lce rtsa
ལྕེ་རྩ་ཅན	a letter pronounced from the root of the tongue, gutturals (ka, kha, ga nga, 'a, ha, a)	lce rtsa can
ལྕེ་རྩེ	tip of the tongue	lce rtse
ལྕེ་རྩེ་གྱོ་བ	flicker the tip of the tongue lce rtse g.yo ba - loll out the tongue and move it too and fro, fickle, changeable one, epithet of the goddess of fortune	lce rtse gyo ba
ལྕེ་ཚ	ranunculus brotherusii freyn, ranunculus pulchellus c. a. mey.var.sericeus hook. f. et thoms.	lce tsha
ལྕེ་ཞར	instrument for cleaning tongue	lce zhar
ལྕེ་ཞུར	saussurea hieracioides hool, f.	lce zhur
ལྕེ་གཞུང	middle of the tongue	lce gzhung
ལྕེ་བཞར	tongue-scraper	lce bzhar
ལྕེ་ཡི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	gustatory/ tasting consciousness	lce yi rnam par shes pa
ལྕེ་ཡིས་མའི་ནུ་ཏོག་འཛིན	grasping at the breast	lce yis ma'i nu tog 'dzin
ལྕེ་ལག	licking	lce lag
ལྕེ་ལག་རྒྱག་པ	to lick	lce lag rgyag pa
ལྕེ་ལེབ	tongue	lce leb
ལྕེ་ལོ	not a nimble-tongued speaker, stammerer	lce lo
ལྕེ་ཤེས	tongue consciousness; Abbr. of {lce'i rnam par shes pa}	lce shes
ལྕེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	the tongue consciousness element	lce shes kyi khams
ལྕེག	coat of mail for horse	lceg
ལྕེབ	p. lcebs to commit suicide, to take one's life	lceb
ལྕེབ་འདྲེ་མ	butterfly/ moth	lceb 'dre ma
ལྕེབ་པ	kill one's self, commit suicide, used of insects that fly into the flame	lceb pa
ལྕེབ་བྱས་པ	committed suicide	lceb byas pa
ལྕེབ་བྱེད	suicide	lceb byed
ལྕེབས	[p lceb pa],, committed suicide, took 1's life, sought death, lceb pa!	lcebs
ལྕེབས་པ	[p lceb pa],, committed suicide, took 1's life, sought death	lcebs pa
ལྕེའི	[of the] tongue	lce'i
ལྕེའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	tongue base / sphere / source, the tongue [sense) factor / field	lce'i skye mched
ལྕེའི་ཁམས	tongue element / capacity	lce'i khams
ལྕེའི་ཁམས་ཤེས	tongue/ gustatory consciousness/cognition	lce'i khams shes
ལྕེའི་ཁམས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	tongue consciousness element	lce'i khams shes kyi khams
ལྕེའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	gustatory consciousness	lce'i rnam par shes pa
ལྕེའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	the tongue consciousness element / capacity	lce'i rnam par shes pa'i khams
ལྕེའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	gustatory consciousness	lce'i rnam shes
ལྕེའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	tongue consciousness element	lce'i rnam shes kyi khams
ལྕེའི་སྤྱང	jackals	lce'i spyang
ལྕེའི་བད་ཀན	dri ma of the tongue	lce'i bad kan
ལྕེའི་དབང་མངོན	direct gustatory sense perception	lce'i dbang mngon
ལྕེའི་དབང་པོ	tongue faculty, sense of taste	lce'i dbang po
ལྕེའི་དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན	the physical tongue faculty	lce'i dbang po gzugs can
ལྕེའི་དབང་བོ	faculty of tasting	lce'i dbang bo
ལྕེའི་སྦང་མངོན	tongue faculty perception	lce'i sbang mngon
ལྕེའི་རྩེ་མོ་ཅན	letter sounded from the tip of the tongue	lce'i rtse mo can
ལྕེའི་རོ	tongue-taste	lce'i ro
ལྕེའུ་ཆུང	uvula	lce'u chung
ལྕེས་ལྡག	licking	lces ldag
ལྕེས་ལྡག་པ	to lick with the tongue	lces ldag pa
ལྕོ	dung [of cattle]	lco
ལྕོ་ག	bird, SA co ga	lco ga
ལྕོ་གའི་ཡར་སེལ	exorcism upwards of the lark	lco ga'i yar sel
ལྕོ་མོ་ཙབ༹་ཁ	{lco mo tsva kha}	lco mo tsva kha
ལྕོག	corner	lcog
ལྕོག་ཁང	little house on top of another	lcog khang
ལྕོག་ཁེབས	table cloth	lcog khebs
ལྕོག་ག	swallow, lark	lcog ga
ལྕོག་རྒྱག་པ	after grain is harvested in a field, piled up built like the shape of a little house	lcog rgyag pa
ལྕོག་ཅེ	table 787	lcog ce
ལྕོག་ལྕོག	nod	lcog lcog
ལྕོག་ལྕོག་པུ	bulging, protruding, clustered	lcog lcog pu
ལྕོག་ཆུང	small mkhar	lcog chung
ལྕོག་ཆུང་དཀར་མོ	Small White Lark	lcog chung dkar mo
ལྕོག་པ	to be agitated, to shake, to tremble	lcog pa
ལྕོག་པུ	cog pu'am, [small tent?] tshog pu, [mt top]	lcog pu
ལྕོག་པོ	low	lcog po
ལྕོག་བུ	turret of house/ castle, stalk	lcog bu
ལྕོག་ཙེ	table	lcog tse
ལྕོག་རྩེ	table	lcog rtse
ལྕོག་རྩེ་ལ	a mountain in Tibet	lcog rtse la
ལྕོག་རས	piece of cloth put over iron helmet worn in Tibetan war dance	lcog ras
ལྕོག་རི	lcog ri mt	lcog ri
ལྕོག་རིང	long table	lcog ring
ལྕོག་རོ་ཀླུའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	a translator	lcog ro klu'i rgyal mtshan
ལྕོག་ལ་བྲག་ཁུང	a rock cavern on chogla pass in tibet	lcog la brag khung
ལྕོགས	gang lcogs - whichever is appropriate	lcogs
ལྕོགས་པ	be agitated, shaken, tremble, be able	lcogs pa
ལྕོགས་པ་མེད་པ	unable, incapable	lcogs pa med pa
ལྕོགས་པ་བཟོ་བ	enable	lcogs pa bzo ba
ལྕོང	frog in its first stage of development, tadpole	lcong
ལྕོང་མོ	tadpole	lcong mo
ལྕོང་ཤོག་སེར་པོ	yellow utpala	lcong shog ser po
ལྕོངས	undulating, uneven place	lcongs
སཅད་པ	assemblage	scad pa
སཅལ་པ	bestow	scal pa
སཅོལ	bestow	scol
ཆ	aspect, part, quality [thd]	cha
ཆ་ཀ་བ	grasshopper	cha ka ba
ཆ་དཀར	{cha dkar} district	cha dkar
ཆ་རྐྱེན	condition, share of destiny, conditions, circumstances, facilities, factor, base, point	cha rkyen
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ངོ་མ	specific/ concrete conditions	cha rkyen ngo ma
ཆ་རྐྱེན་དངོས	specific/ concrete conditions	cha rkyen dngos
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས	perfect base	cha rkyen phun sum tshogs
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	excellent conditions	cha rkyen phun sum tshogs pa
ཆ་རྐྱེན་མ་འཛོམ་བར	until [they] have what is needed	cha rkyen ma 'dzom bar
ཆ་རྐྱེན་མི་དགོས་པ	unconditional	cha rkyen mi dgos pa
ཆ་རྐྱེན་མི་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར་འཐེན	unconditional withdrawal	cha rkyen mi dgos pa'i phyir 'then
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ཙམ	conditional	cha rkyen tsam
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ཙམ་སྨྲ་བ	conditional theory	cha rkyen tsam smra ba
ཆ་རྐྱེན་ཚུར་སྣང	conditioned reflex	cha rkyen tshur snang
ཆ་རྐྱེན་འཛོམ	implement, complete, have what is needed conditions, circumstances, factors, requisites, facilities (in practice, acquiring food, assembling materials, and so on	cha rkyen 'dzom
ཆ་རྐྱེན་འཛོམས་པོ	well equipped	cha rkyen 'dzoms po
ཆ་ཁ	mang tshig ston byed,...'U bu cha kha mnyam du nas zhing la 'gro ???	cha kha
ཆ་ཁ་ཤས	some parts	cha kha shas
ཆ་མཁན	soothsayer, fortune-teller	cha mkhan
ཆ་ག	1) edge/ border/ hem; 2) mig mtha'i dkri ga,...Mig cha ga can, Byis pa 'di'i mig la cha ga yod	cha ga
ཆ་ག་གཏོང	hem a garment	cha ga gtong
ཆ་ག་གཏོང་བ	hem a garment	cha ga gtong ba
ཆ་ག་འདེབས	hem a garment	cha ga 'debs
ཆ་ག་འདེབས་པ	hem a garment	cha ga 'debs pa
ཆ་ག་པ	locust	cha ga pa
ཆ་ག་བ	grasshopper, patanga japonica I.bul.	cha ga ba
ཆ་ག་འབུ	grasshopper	cha ga 'bu
ཆ་ག་མ	dress with linings on the edge of the sleeve	cha ga ma
ཆ་ག་མེད་པ	robe with plain edge	cha ga med pa
ཆ་གེ་ཆི་གེ	not valuable	cha ge chi ge
ཆ་གྲངས	fractions	cha grangs
ཆ་གྲངས་བཅུ	10 points [in a game]	cha grangs bcu
ཆ་གྲངས་ལྟར་སྣང	improper fraction	cha grangs ltar snang
ཆ་གྲུམ	square rug	cha grum
ཆ་བགོས	dividing up, apportionment	cha bgos
ཆ་བགོས་བརྒྱབ་པ	to apportion	cha bgos brgyab pa
ཆ་བགོས་གཏོང	divide up, apportion	cha bgos gtong
ཆ་བགོས་བྱེད	divide up, apportion	cha bgos byed
ཆ་འགྲིག	pair up, match, be part of a pair	cha 'grig
ཆ་འགྲིག་པོ	well-matched, symmetrical	cha 'grig po
ཆ་འགྲིགས	suit	cha 'grigs
ཆ་འགྲིགས་པ	set	cha 'grigs pa
ཆ་རྒུ	(h) hem/ shoes/ belongings (?)	cha rgu
ཆ་རྒྱག	doubles [in sports]	cha rgyag
ཆ་རྒྱབ	play doubles [in sports]	cha rgyab
ཆ་རྒྱུས	familiarity	cha rgyus
ཆ་རྒྱུས་ཆེན་པོ	very familiar with	cha rgyus chen po
ཆ་རྒྱུས་མེད	not familiar w, not know about, foreign to	cha rgyus med
ཆ་རྒྱུས་ཡག་པོ་ཡོད	know well about, be very familiar w	cha rgyus yag po yod
ཆ་སྒམ	chest, wardrobe, cupboard, cabinet	cha sgam
ཆ་སྒམ་མཆོད་གཤམ	cabinet shrine	cha sgam mchod gsham
ཆ་སྒམ་མཆོད་གཤོམ	'og tu ca lag 'jug snod cha sgam dang, steng du mchod pa bsham sa yod pa'i sgam stegs shig	cha sgam mchod gshom
ཆ་སྒྲིག	pair up, match	cha sgrig
ཆ་སྒྲིག་པ	match, pair, couple, arrange proportionately	cha sgrig pa
ཆ་བསྒྲགས	together/ along w	cha bsgrags
ཆ་བསྒྲིགས	paired up, matched	cha bsgrigs
ཆ་ངན	bad news/ slander	cha ngan
ཆ་ཅན	having parts, 'divisible', denominator of a fraction	cha can
ཆ་ཅི་རིགས་པ	all aspects	cha ci rigs pa
ཆ་གཅིག	1 pair	cha gcig
ཆ་བཅས	divisible, having parts	cha bcas
ཆ་བཅུ	ten parts	cha bcu
ཆ་ཆ	in pairs, two by two	cha cha
ཆ་ཆ་ནས	[arch] khyon yongs nas	cha cha nas
ཆ་ཆད	[arch] dka' tshegs che	cha chad
ཆ་ཆས་བསལ་བ	to split up	cha chas bsal ba
ཆ་ཆུང	equal units, the smaller main unit of measure, also called sor	cha chung
ཆ་ཆེན	large proportional/relative unit of measure	cha chen
ཆ་ཆོ	comp with {ca co}	cha cho
ཆ་ཆོ་མ་ཆོད	nonsense, ridiculous	cha cho ma chod
ཆ་ཆོ་མེད་པ	nonsense, ridiculous	cha cho med pa
ཆ་མཆིས	is definitely	cha mchis
ཆ་མཇེས	symmetrical	cha mjes
ཆ་འཇོག	make an accounting and rely on it, believability, credibility	cha 'jog
ཆ་འཇོག་པ	stick to, adhere to any work, come to a conclusion on any matter	cha 'jog pa
ཆ་འཇོག་འཕེར་བ	honorable, respectable, trustworthy	cha 'jog 'pher ba
ཆ་འཇོག་འཕེར་བའི་ཆིངས་ཡིག	honorable treaty	cha 'jog 'pher ba'i chings yig
ཆ་འཇོག་བྱེད	believe, rely on, make an accounting and rely on it, believability, credibility	cha 'jog byed
ཆ་འཇོག་མེད་པ	unreliable, untrustworthy	cha 'jog med pa
ཆ་ཉམ	combined	cha nyam
ཆ་ཉམས	impaired, degenerated, fallen down, grown worse	cha nyams
ཆ་ཉམས་པ	time of partial eclipse	cha nyams pa
ཆ་གཉིས	two parts, both, a pair, two pairs	cha gnyis
ཆ་གཉིས་དུས	a day	cha gnyis dus
ཆ་གཉིས་ལྡན་པའི་དུས	mtsan phyed kyi dus half a night?	cha gnyis ldan pa'i dus
ཆ་གཉིས་བསྲེ་བ	mix two equal parts, put together two parts	cha gnyis bsre ba
ཆ་གཉིས་བསྲེས་པའི་སྤང་བ	the fault requiring abandonment of [cushion w] more than two parts [of four black]	cha gnyis bsres pa'i spang ba
ཆ་མཉམ	1) full moon; 2) =, neutral; 3) symmetry [-ical] proportionate	cha mnyam
ཆ་མཉམ་དུ་ལྟ	equate, view as being on the same footing/ similar [in regard	cha mnyam du lta
ཏོ	]	to
ཆ་མཉམ་པ	equal, perfectly proportioned, even, regular	cha mnyam pa
ཆ་མཉམ་པའི་ཐེ་ཚོམ	neutral/ equal doubt	cha mnyam pa'i the tshom
ཆ་མཉམ་པོ	a pair of opposites	cha mnyam po
ཆ་མཉམས་གྱིས	by the presence of each equally	cha mnyams gyis
ཆ་སྙམས	to fix on	cha snyams
ཆ་སྙོམ	having equal parts, average	cha snyom
ཆ་སྙོམ་གྱི་གྲང་ཀ	average #	cha snyom gyi grang ka
ཆ་སྙོམ་གྱི་ཡོང་བབ	average income	cha snyom gyi yong bab
ཆ་སྙོམ་གྱིས་བགོས	divide =ly	cha snyom gyis bgos
ཆ་སྙོམས	equal, average	cha snyoms
ཆ་སྙོམས་ཁ་ནའི་རིང་ལུགས	absolute egalitarianism	cha snyoms kha na'i ring lugs
ཆ་སྙོམས་གྱི་ཡོང་བབ	average income	cha snyoms gyi yong bab
ཆ་སྙོམས་གྱིས་བགོས	divide =ly	cha snyoms gyis bgos
ཆ་སྙོམས་བགོད	divide/ distribute =ly	cha snyoms bgod
ཆ་སྙོམས་བགོས	divided/ distributed =ly	cha snyoms bgos
ཆ་སྙོམས་དྲོ་གྲང	average temperature	cha snyoms dro grang
ཆ་སྙོམས་ན	on the average, if it is averaged	cha snyoms na
ཆ་སྙོམས་བྱས་ན	on the average, if it is averaged	cha snyoms byas na
ཆ་སྙོམས་མ་སྙོམས	even and uneven	cha snyoms ma snyoms
ཆ་སྙོམས་རིང་ལུགས	egalitarianism	cha snyoms ring lugs
ཆ་སྙོམས་རིན་གོང	average price	cha snyoms rin gong
ཆ་གཏེར	the moon (which shines partially	cha gter
ཆ་རྟོགས	tshod thig determine measure	cha rtogs
ཆ་སྟ	tweezers	cha sta
ཆ་སྟོན	cha rgyus shod pa	cha ston
ཆ་ཐུན་པ	. . . (dang) cha thun pa - to accord with (the aspect of) . . . ; to be analogous to . . .	cha thun pa
ཆ་མཐུན	aids prospects	cha mthun
ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས	karmic action conducive to ..	cha mthun gyi las
ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	appropriate precepts	cha mthun gyi bslab bya
ཆ་མཐུན་པ	conducive to	cha mthun pa
ཆ་མཐུན་གསུམ	{mtho ris kyi bde ba'i ched du dge ba byed pa bsod nams cha mthun, mya ngan las 'das pa'i ched du dge ba byed pa thar pa cha mthun, sbyor lam pa'i dge ba ni nges par 'byed pa mthong lam gyi rgyu yi...	cha mthun gsum
ཆ་དང་བཅས	w parts, divisible	cha dang bcas
ཆ་དང་བཅས་པའི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	atom/ particle w parts/ divisions	cha dang bcas pa'i rdul phran
ཆ་དང་མཐུན་པ	consequence of a deed	cha dang mthun pa
ཆ་དང་ཡ	[pair and single], odd and even	cha dang ya
ཆ་དེ	SA cha yod pa de	cha de
ཆ་བདག་སྐྱེས	SA chang	cha bdag skyes
ཆ་འདིང	planning	cha 'ding
ཆ་འདྲ	similar to, alike, =, the same	cha 'dra
ཆ་འདྲ་བ	[made] similar to, alike	cha 'dra ba
ཆ་འདྲ་ཙམ	partially, in some measure 789	cha 'dra tsam
ཆ་འདྲེས	mixture, alloy, compound	cha 'dres
ཆ་ལྡན	having parts, divisible	cha ldan
ཆ་བསྡུ་ཡ་བསྡུ	what comes to hand gang thebs, do anything 1 can	cha bsdu ya bsdu
ཆ་བསྡུ་ཡ་བསྡུ་བྱས་ནས	did anything [they] could to -	cha bsdu ya bsdu byas nas
ཆ་བསྡུ་ཡ་བསྡུ་བྱེད	what comes to hand gang thebs, do anything 1 can	cha bsdu ya bsdu byed
ཆ་ནས	aspect, in terms of the aspect of	cha nas
ཆ་ནས་བྱས་ན	from the point of view of, based on	cha nas byas na
ཆ་ནས་མཚོན་ན	"hypothetical" construction	cha nas mtshon na
ཆ་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སེང་གེ	Kadampa scholar, [1109-1169]	cha pa chos kyi seng ge
ཆ་པ་རུ་ཟུར	name of a family	cha pa ru zur
ཆ་པེ་ཆོ་པེ	odds and ends, junk, bits and pieces	cha pe cho pe
ཆ་དཔང	witness in a dispute	cha dpang
ཆ་དཔྱད	physicians's gtar [bleeding] gshag etc. implement like gtsag bu and thur ma	cha dpyad
ཆ་སྤྱད	necessary things, parts	cha spyad
ཆ་ཕྲ	subtle aspects	cha phra
ཆ་ཕྲ་བ	cha shas few/ little miser	cha phra ba
ཆ་ཕྲ་མོ	minute particle	cha phra mo
ཆ་ཕྲན	1) few shas; 2) a mandala line measure	cha phran
ཆ་འཕྲིན	ngag lan Grogs por cha 'phrin bskur ba yin	cha 'phrin
ཆ་བ	adorn, wear, go away, start, leave, donkey	cha ba
ཆ་བ་གསོལ་བ	wear ornaments	cha ba gsol ba
ཆ་བར	going	cha bar
ཆ་བུ	ear-ornament [for animal]	cha bu
ཆ་བེ་ཆོ་བེ	odds and ends, all mixed up, tasteless	cha be cho be
ཆ་བེ་ཆོབ་བེ	odds and ends, all mixed up food [no taste]	cha be chob be
ཆ་བྱད	costumes, thing, implement, instrument	cha byad
ཆ་བྱད་དང་རིགས་འདྲ་བ	corresponding implements	cha byad dang rigs 'dra ba
ཆ་བྱད་དཔྱད	1 of gnas bcu gcig	cha byad dpyad
ཆ་བྱད་སྤྲད	way of dress/ accoutrements, costumes	cha byad sprad
ཆ་བྱེད	dress, clothing, implement, instrument	cha byed
ཆ་དབྱེ་བ	making subdivisions	cha dbye ba
ཆ་འབྲེལ	connected zung 'brel, mnyam gshibs,...Cha sgam cha 'brel,...Dngos zog cha 'brel byas te btsongs pa,... costumes, thing, implement, instrument	cha 'brel
ཆ་སྦྱོར	(dang) cha sbyor/ sbyar ba - to correspond (to)	cha sbyor
ཆ་སྦྲེལ	following in pairs/ two by two	cha sbrel
ཆ་མ་ཆོ	diffusive and just what arises [talk]	cha ma cho
ཆ་མ་མཆིས	matchless, has no equal	cha ma mchis
ཆ་མ་མཆིས་པ	arch. vi. to be uncertain, to be unsure, to not know	cha ma mchis pa
ཆ་མ་འཆིས	be uncertain/ unsure, not know	cha ma 'chis
ཆ་མ་སྙོམས	w partially un= parts	cha ma snyoms
ཆ་མ་རྟོགས	it couldn't be!	cha ma rtogs
ཆ་མ་མཐུན	partially dissimilar/ un=, differing a little	cha ma mthun
ཆ་མ་མཐུན་པ	partly, not equal, differing a little, SA cha snyoms	cha ma mthun pa
ཆ་མ་འདྲ	partially dissimilar	cha ma 'dra
ཆ་མ་འདྲ་བ	partly, not equal, differing a little, SA cha snyoms	cha ma 'dra ba
ཆ་མ་འདྲ་ཙམ	partially dissimilar	cha ma 'dra tsam
ཆ་མ་ཚང	incomplete, inadequate	cha ma tshang
ཆ་མ་ཚང་བ	deficient	cha ma tshang ba
ཆ་མ་ཡིན	[arch] 1) be uncertain/ unsure, not know; 2) improper	cha ma yin
ཆ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not forming a pair, not forming a match, unfit, improper, discordant	cha ma yin pa
ཆ་མིན་གོ་ལོག	improper	cha min go log
ཆ་མིན་ཆ་ལོག	improper	cha min cha log
ཆ་མེད	usu. nothing left to divide; divisible to the point where nothing is left; indivisible; without different facets; unknown; lack of certainty/ foreknowledge; without a clue as to . . .	cha med
ཆ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྡུལ	partless atoms, indivisible particle	cha med kyi rdul
ཧབེ༹་སེལཕ༹	nature]	have self
ཆ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	indivisible particle, atom	cha med kyi rdul phran
ཆ་མེད་འགོག་པའི་རིག་པ	awareness of complete cessation	cha med 'gog pa'i rig pa
ཆ་མེད་གཉིས	the 2-fold partlessness/ partless entities {gzugs mtha' rdul phran cha med}, + {shes pa skad cig cha med}	cha med gnyis
ཆ་མེད་གཏམ	nonsense, irrelevant speech	cha med gtam
ཆ་མེད་དུ	without a trace	cha med du
ཆ་མེད་དུ་ཡལ	completely vanish	cha med du yal
ཆ་མེད་པ	be companionless, be left alone, be without an equal, aimless	cha med pa
ཆ་མེད་བོར	without a trace	cha med bor
ཆ་མེད་དམུས་ལོང	a blind man who doesn't know what's happening	cha med dmus long
ཆ་ཙམ	fraction of, part of, partially, mere	cha tsam
ཆ་ཙམ་མ་ལུས་པ	complete, total 790 cha tsam ma lus pa rtsa med bzo thabs	cha tsam ma lus pa
ཆ་ཙམ་ཡང	even a fraction / the slightest	cha tsam yang
ཆ་ཙམ་ཤེས་ཀྱང	if one knows but a fraction of it, if one knows but a little bit	cha tsam shes kyang
ཆ་ཙེ	SA kha sten, tshig sten	cha tse
ཆ་ཚང	complete, the whole, entire	cha tshang
ཆ་ཚང་གཅིག	pair, set, suit	cha tshang gcig
ཆ་ཚང་དུ	entirely, fully, intact, wholly	cha tshang du
ཆ་ཚང་བ	complete, finished	cha tshang ba
ཆ་ཚང་བ་གཅིག	entirety	cha tshang ba gcig
ཆ་ཚད	proportions, size	cha tshad
ཆ་ཚན	species, division, class	cha tshan
ཆ་ཚོགས	#	cha tshogs
ཆ་མཚུངས	vi. to correspond with, to be congruent with, agree, tally with	cha mtshungs
ཆ་མཚུངས་པ	matching, analogue, correspondent	cha mtshungs pa
ཆ་མཚོན	use/take as an example/ case in point	cha mtshon
ཆ་མཚོན་ན	for example	cha mtshon na
ཆ་མཛེས	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po symmetrical	cha mdzes
ཆ་འཛབས	gyon pa'i zheng and dkyus	cha 'dzabs
ཆ་འཛིན	bearing the implements of ..	cha 'dzin
ཆ་འཛིན་པ	select from among many, pick one out of a number, pair of cymbals	cha 'dzin pa
ཆ་རྫོགས	complete	cha rdzogs
ཆ་བཞག	reckon up	cha bzhag
ཆ་བཞག་ཐུབ	be able to trust/ rely on/ apprehend/ identify	cha bzhag thub
ཆ་བཞག་ན	for example, supposing	cha bzhag na
ཆ་བཞག་ནས	based/ relying/ depending on	cha bzhag nas
ཆ་བཞག་པ	1) rely on, trust, depend on; 2) grasp/apprehend something; 3) recognize, identify	cha bzhag pa
ཆ་ཟུར	fraction	cha zur
ཆ་ཡ	1) cha gcig gi ya; 2) 'Dra gnyis kyi cha dang, cha bral gyi ya (/ complete, whole, in all facets	cha ya
ཆ་ཡི་རྩེ	sublime	cha yi rtse
ཆ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚང་བ	complete, whole in all facets	cha yongs su tshang ba
ཆ་ཡོད་གྱིས	Understand this! Keep it in mind!	cha yod gyis
ཆ་ཡོད་རྒྱུས་ཡོད	rgyus mnga' zhib po yod pa cha g.yos - to stir the aspect of	cha yod rgyus yod
ཆ་ར	himalayan oak	cha ra
ཆ་ར་ཕྲའུ	kind of oak	cha ra phra'u
ཆ་ར་ཕྲེའུ	stunted species of oak	cha ra phre'u
ཆ་རགས	general	cha rags
ཆ་རི	coarse yak hair blanket	cha ri
ཆ་རི་རྩི	sublime	cha ri rtsi
ཆ་རི་སི	steel yard	cha ri si
ཆ་རུ	* [tent] peg, stake	cha ru
ཆ་རུ་ཆབ་སྟོད	former Tibetan government rtse drung's gzan and upper garment	cha ru chab stod
ཆ་རེ	1) some; 2) two each	cha re
ཆ་རོགས	accompaniment, counterpart	cha rogs
ཆ་ལ	in terms of the aspect of, twelve	cha la
ཆ་ལ་བཏགས་པ	imputing onto the parts cha la btags pa'i btags yod kyi dngos po a thing the existence of which is an imputation of its parts, an imputedly existing thing imputed to its parts	cha la btags pa
ཆ་ལ་སྡོད	lived together	cha la sdod
ཆ་ལག	parts/ limbs, implements, instruments, auxiliary [teachings], extras (subsidiary, extra things that come w the practice, portion	cha lag
ཆ་ལག་ཁྲིད	appendix	cha lag khrid
ཆ་ལག་ཆ་ཚང	complete [parts/ set]	cha lag cha tshang
ཆ་ལག་ཆ་ཚང་བའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	complete machine	cha lag cha tshang ba'i 'phrul 'khor
ཆ་ལག་རྙིང་པ	antique	cha lag rnying pa
ཆ་ལག་དང་བཅས་པ	and auxiliary teachings	cha lag dang bcas pa
ཆ་ལག་ཚང	complete [parts/ set]	cha lag tshang
ཆ་ལག་ཚང་བའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	complete machine	cha lag tshang ba'i 'phrul 'khor
ཆ་ལག་བཞི	the four auxiliary deities	cha lag bzhi
ཆ་ལང	pair of symbols	cha lang
ཆ་ལམ	some, for the most part, rather	cha lam
ཆ་ལམ་ཚར་སོང	almost finished	cha lam tshar song
ཆ་ལས	from the side / aspect of ..	cha las
ཆ་ལས་བཏགས་པའི་བཏགས་ཡོད	imputed existence that is an imputation of parts	cha las btags pa'i btags yod
ཆ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from parts	cha las byung ba
ཆ་ལི	coarse blanket of yak hair	cha li
ཆ་ལུ	coarse yak hair blanket	cha lu
ཆ་ལུགས	attire, dress; attributes, attire, costume, fashion, accouterments, dress, style of dress, customary ornaments; behavior; customary	cha lugs
ཆ་ལུགས་ངན་པ	disfigured, badly dressed	cha lugs ngan pa
ཆ་ལུགས་གཉིས	rab 'byung dang rnal 'byor pa	cha lugs gnyis
ཆ་ལུགས་ཕྱག་མཚན་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	[in all their] attires and attributes	cha lugs phyag mtshan sna tshogs pa
ཆ་ལུགས་མཛེས་པ	finely dressed, elegant manner of dressing	cha lugs mdzes pa
ཆ་ལུགས་སོགས་ཇི་ལྟར་འདུག་ཀྱང	however he might appear externally	cha lugs sogs ji ltar 'dug kyang
ཆ་ལེ་ཆོ་ལེ	meaningless/ aimless behavior confused, pall mall, senseless/ babbling talk	cha le cho le
ཆ་ལེ་བ	even(ness) [?]	cha le ba
ཆ་ཤག	part, portion, share	cha shag
ཆ་ཤས	part of shape, part, portion, share, shape of the body, a single thing, partial, the body, limb, single aspect, fraction, proportion, each phenomenon	cha shas
ཆ་ཤས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་ཅན	meditation with a partial support	cha shas kyi rten can
ཆ་ཤས་གྲུབ	species of tree	cha shas grub
ཆ་ཤས་ངན	partially bad, having bad parts, badly shaped	cha shas ngan
ཆ་ཤས་ངན་པ	slightly bad, bad shape, bad parts	cha shas ngan pa
ཆ་ཤས་ལྔ་པ	the 5th parts *]	cha shas lnga pa
ཆ་ཤས་ཅན	having parts, assembly	cha shas can
ཆ་ཤས་ཅན་ཀྱི་ལུས	the part-having body	cha shas can kyi lus
ཆ་ཤས་ཅན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	a physical form that has individual part	cha shas can gyi gzugs can
ཆ་ཤས་གཅིག	a/ 1 part/ portion	cha shas gcig
ཆ་ཤས་མཆེ་གཙིག	hill	cha shas mche gtsig
ཆ་ཤས་མཆེ་རྩིག	hill, heaved-up portion of the earth	cha shas mche rtsig
ཆ་ཤས་འཇིགས	lion	cha shas 'jigs
ཆ་ཤས་དང་བྲལ	without sections	cha shas dang bral
ཆ་ཤས་དུ་མའི་ཚོགས་པ	assembly from many parts	cha shas du ma'i tshogs pa
ཆ་ཤས་སྡེ	moon	cha shas sde
ཆ་ཤས་ནས་གྱང	in even a fraction	cha shas nas gyang
ཆ་ཤས་ནས་ཡང	in even a fraction	cha shas nas yang
ཆ་ཤས་སྤྲོས་པ	fragmenting elaborations	cha shas spros pa
ཆ་ཤས་ཕྲ་མོ་ཅུང་ཟད	mer[est] trace	cha shas phra mo cung zad
ཆ་ཤས་འཕྲའ་བ	subtle and deep intention	cha shas 'phra' ba
ཆ་ཤས་འཕྲོག	share	cha shas 'phrog
ཆ་ཤས་འཕྲོག་པ	sharer	cha shas 'phrog pa
ཆ་ཤས་བྱེད	particles	cha shas byed
ཆ་ཤས་སྦྱང་པ	gold	cha shas sbyang pa
ཆ་ཤས་སྦྱང་བ	gold	cha shas sbyang ba
ཆ་ཤས་སྦྱངས	gold	cha shas sbyangs
ཆ་ཤས་མེད	without parts	cha shas med
ཆ་ཤས་གཟུགས་ཅན	among gzugs can gyi rgyan, ornament showing exemplified meaning gyi cha shas gang yin dpe'i cha shas kyi gzugs su bkod cing, cha shas can gzugs su ma bkod pa	cha shas gzugs can
ཆ་ཤས་རིམ་འཛད	moon's mar ngo	cha shas rim 'dzad
ཆ་ཤས་རིམ་རྫོགས	moon's yar ngo	cha shas rim rdzogs
ཆ་ཤས་ཤིག	part	cha shas shig
ཆ་གཤེན་ཇུ་ཐིག་ཅན	bon gyi nang gses shig	cha gshen ju thig can
ཆ་བཤག	1) rely/ depend on; 2) for example, supposing that	cha bshag
ཆ་སྲོལ	custom	cha srol
ཆ་གསུམ	1) three parts; 2) Zung du gyur pa'i cha gsum; 3) the three part torma ritual [one to phyogs skyong bcu, 1 rigs drug spyi, 1 gdon bgegs]	cha gsum
ཆ་གསུམ་གཏོར་མ	the three part torma ritual	cha gsum gtor ma
ཆ་གསེད	=/ even distribution	cha gsed
ཆ་གསེད་བསྡུ་ལེན	= collection [contributions/ taxes] distribution	cha gsed bsdu len
ཆ་གསེད་བྱེད	distribute =ly, divide in = portions	cha gsed byed
ཆ་གསེས	divide =ly	cha gses
ཆ་གསེས་བགོ་འགྲེམས	=/ proportional assessment	cha gses bgo 'grems
ཆ་བསགས	something w many accumulated parts, mountain, the earth, Kalapa [capital of the kingdom of Shambhala]	cha bsags
ཆ་བསགས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་བྲང་ཆེན་པོ	the great palace of Kalapa	cha bsags kyi pho brang chen po
ཆ་བསགས་པ	many parts accumulated together, earth, mountain, capital of shambhala	cha bsags pa
ཆ་བསལ་བ	eliminating parts	cha bsal ba
ཆ་ཧར	a mongol tribe	cha har
ཆ་ལྷག་མ	residue	cha lhag ma
ཆག	1) [dry] fodder; 2) measure = four fingers; 3) CH in examining the nadis the physician's hand'i srin lag or blta gnas kyi brda, hatch an egg, break, damage, editing, systematizing, decrease, minus,...	chag
ཆག་ཀྱོག	broken	chag kyog
ཆག་ཀྲུམ	piece, fragment	chag krum
ཆག་ཀྲོམ་ལ་སོང	it has gone to pieces	chag krom la song
ཆག་དཀྲུམ	broken, damaged [things]	chag dkrum
ཆག་དཀྲུམ་བྱུང་བ	got broken	chag dkrum byung ba
ཆག་དཀྲུམ་མེད་པ	unbroken, whole	chag dkrum med pa
ཆག་སྐྱ་བ	having only one purpose, pursuing but one aim, unremitting, indefatigable	chag skya ba
ཆག་སྐྱོན	breakage, damage by breaking	chag skyon
ཆག་སྐྱོན་མེད་པ	without break, without defect	chag skyon med pa
ཆག་སྐྱོན་ཤོར	be broken/ damaged	chag skyon shor
ཆག་ཁུག	horse etc fodder giving vessel	chag khug
ཆག་ཁོངས	basket for measuring fodder	chag khongs
ཆག་ག་ཆོག་གེ	things mixed up or thrown together	chag ga chog ge
ཆག་གང	breadth of a fist	chag gang
ཆག་གི་ཆིག་གི	w mixed good and bad	chag gi chig gi
ཆག་གྲུགས	broken, fragments	chag grugs
ཆག་གྲུམ	1) broken to bits, and slightly broken; 2) piece, fragment	chag grum
ཆག་གྲུམ་བདེ་པོ	brittle	chag grum bde po
ཆག་གྲུམ་བྱུང་བ	got broken	chag grum byung ba
ཆག་གྲུམ་མེད་པ	unbroken, whole	chag grum med pa
ཆག་རྒྱག་པ	ngal las byas pas lus po la na zug gtong ba,...Rta bzhon te thag ring du phyin pas chag brgyab pa	chag rgyag pa
ཆག་སྒོ	door, calamity, misfortune, catastrophe, how unfortunate!	chag sgo
ཆག་སྒོ་འཕྲད	to meet misfortune	chag sgo 'phrad
ཆག་སྒོ་བ	doorkeeper	chag sgo ba
ཆག་སྒོ་ཡོང་བ	have bad luck	chag sgo yong ba
ཆག་སྒྲོ་ལ་བབ་པ	destruction	chag sgro la bab pa
ཆག་ཅེ	chag tse	chag ce
ཆག་ཆག	sprinkle water, broken	chag chag
ཆག་ཆག་བཏབ་པ	sprinkled water	chag chag btab pa
ཆུ	...Tho rangs nas langs te khang pa'i phyi nang du chag chag dang gad bdar byed pa	chu
ཆག་ཆག་གདབ་པ	starch, stiffen	chag chag gdab pa
ཆག་ཆག་འདེབས	sprinkle water [to settle the dust]	chag chag 'debs
ཆག་ཆག་འདེབས་པ	sprinkle	chag chag 'debs pa
ཆག་ཆག་པྱ	sprinkle water [to settle the dust]	chag chag pya
ཆག་ཆག་བྱ	sprinkle water [to settle the dust]	chag chag bya
ཆག་ཆག་བྱ་བ	to sprinkle water [in order to settle the dust]	chag chag bya ba
ཆག་ཆག་བྱེད་པ	sprinkle	chag chag byed pa
ཆག་ཆག་ལེགས་པར་འདེབས	sprinkle water copiously	chag chag legs par 'debs
ཆག་ཆག་ལེགས་པར་འདེབས་ལ	to sprinkle water thoroughly	chag chag legs par 'debs la
ཆག་ཆད	rent, break, rupture	chag chad
ཆག་ཆིག	chag gi chig gi	chag chig
ཆག་ཆིངས	yan lag grum pa bcos thabs shig ...Rkang lag chag par chag chings byed pa	chag chings
ཆག་ཆེ	[arch] salt and sdor med pa'i thug pa thin	chag che
ཆག་ཆེན་བཞི	in former Tibetan gov. {khral chag chen po bzhi} [stong rnying bkrus chag ces khral rkang rtsa stong dang bu lon ha cang rnying pa bcas mna' skyel dag 'bud kyis bkrus nas khral chag btang ba &, rgy...	chag chen bzhi
ཆག་ཆོག་ཆོག	brittle	chag chog chog
ཆག་ཉམས	a breach/ violation	chag nyams
ཆག་ཉམས་སྐོང་བའི་ཚོགས་འཁོར	ganachakra for mending breaches	chag nyams skong ba'i tshogs 'khor
ཆག་ཏུ་བཏང་བ	broken	chag tu btang ba
ཆག་གཏོང	reduce, give a concession	chag gtong
ཆག་བཏབ	1) sprinkle water (to settle the dust; 2) monastery etc having examined, to earth taming ceremony etc.	chag btab
ཆག་དུམ	fragment, scrap, bit	chag dum
ཆག་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	rickety	chag mdog kha po
ཆག་འདིང	doubtful, incredible	chag 'ding
ཆག་རྡུང་ཉག་རྡུང	reckless, wanton	chag rdung nyag rdung
ཆག་བརྡུང་ཉག་བརྡུང	w/o distinction/ order, limitless	chag brdung nyag brdung
ཆག་ནག་སྲིད་པ	the black waters	chag nag srid pa
ཆག་ནག་སྲིད་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the original lineage of existence	chag nag srid pa rgyud kyi bon
ཆག་ནས	broke up	chag nas
ཆག་གནས་ཞིག་སྟོང་བཞི	the four aspects of creation, abiding, disintegration and voidness	chag gnas zhig stong bzhi
ཆག་གནས་འཟིག་སྟོང་བཞི	the four [kalpas of] creation, subsistence, destruction and voidness	chag gnas 'zig stong bzhi
ཆག་སྣོད	chang blug snod	chag snod
ཆག་པ	{chag pa, chag pa, chag pa} intr. v.; abated; broken vows, tuft or bunch	chag pa
ཆག་པར་གྱུར་པ	be interrupted	chag par gyur pa
ཆག་པོ	broken [vessel, pot], fragments	chag po
ཆག་ཕད	bag containing grain tied to mouth of animal	chag phad
ཆག་ཕེབས	welcome	chag phebs
ཆག་བུ	little bunch	chag bu
ཆག་བྲོམ	ice	chag brom
ཆག་མེད	w/o break, unremitting, uninterrupted	chag med
ཆག་མེད་པ	uninterrupted, unremitting	chag med pa
ཆག་མེད་འབད་སྒྲུབ	accomplish by continuous great effort	chag med 'bad sgrub
ཆག་མོ	bunch	chag mo
ཆག་ཙེ	small grain	chag tse
ཆག་ཙེ་ཅན	granulous	chag tse can
ཆག་ཚང་ཀུ་བ	pumpkin	chag tshang ku ba
ཆག་ཚང་པ	SA thab kha pa, ma chen, cook	chag tshang pa
ཆག་ཚད	the right measure	chag tshad
ཆག་གཞོང	horse's food trough	chag gzhong
ཆག་བཞག	1) offender; 2) example	chag bzhag
ཆག་ཟིན་པ	broke, broken	chag zin pa
ཆག་འོག	under one's sway	chag 'og
ཆག་ཡང	allowance, concession, reduction	chag yang
ཆག་ཡང་གཏོང	give a concession/ reduction	chag yang gtong
ཆག་ཡང་གཏོང་བ	exempt	chag yang gtong ba
ཆག་རོ	fragments, wreckage	chag ro
ཆག་རོ་བུག་རོ	debris	chag ro bug ro
ཆག་ལོ	chag lotsawa	chag lo
ཆག་ཤིང	splint	chag shing
ཆག་སེ་ཉག་སེ	anything w/o distinction/ order/ limit	chag se nyag se
ཆག་སླ་པོ	fragile	chag sla po
ཆག་ཧྲུག	wreckage	chag hrug
ཨོཕ༹་སོ	tar vows]; attachment, desire, [bondage], to crave, desire, be attracted, greed, lust, attached to, infatuated with, creation, arising, evolution, to appear, arise, change, turn into, exist, have, ...	of so
ཆགས་སྐྱེད	moon	chags skyed
ཆགས་སྐྱོད་བྱེད་པ	act of affecting or agitating the heart or producing sensation of pleasure in it	chags skyod byed pa
ཆགས་འཁྲི	creeping plant of love which entwines	chags 'khri
ཆགས་རྒྱ	[arch] bu lon bda' ba'i dpang rgya	chags rgya
ཆགས་རྒྱག་པ	1) cloth chu chags byed pa; 2) Lteb tshigs rgyag pa	chags rgyag pa
ཆགས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	nothing that remains, is retained	chags rgyu med pa
ཆགས་སྒོ	basis of arising of desire, calamity, misfortune, catastrophe, how unfortunate!	chags sgo
ཆགས་སྒྲིབ	obscuration of desire	chags sgrib
ཆགས་ཅན	attached, passionate, desirous, lustful, sensual, licentious	chags can
ཆགས་བཅས	passionate [deity]. The passionate are, for instance, Hayagriva in union with his consort Varahi.	chags bcas
ཆགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་བློ	desirous frame of mind	chags bcas kyi blo
ཆགས་ཆགས	to make a slopping sound [hitting in the water]	chags chags
ཆགས་ཆེ	strong attachments	chags che
ཆགས་ཆེན་མ	very passionate lady	chags chen ma
ཆགས་ཆོག་ཆོག	tenuous	chags chog chog
ཆགས་འཆག་པ	having washed cloth nem nem gyis 'chag pa	chags 'chag pa
ཆགས་འཇིག	beginning and end, creation and destruction	chags 'jig
ཆགས་འཇོམས	one who has subdued his passions, epithet of buddha	chags 'joms
ཆགས་ཉམས	experience/ violation of impairment of desire	chags nyams
ཆགས་ཉེན	affliction/ infection of desire	chags nyen
ཆགས་ཉེན་ལྟ་བུ	attachment like a disease	chags nyen lta bu
ཆགས་ཉེན་མེད་པར་བྱེད	annihilate the disease of desire	chags nyen med par byed
ཆགས་གཏམ	amorous conversation, words of love, amorous conversation	chags gtam
ཆགས་རྟགས་པ	remain for a long time at one place	chags rtags pa
ཆགས་རྟེན	support/ foundation [of desire]	chags rten
ཆགས་རྟོག་གནས་སྐབས	state of passion	chags rtog gnas skabs
ཆགས་སྟངས	structure, composition, situation	chags stangs
ཆགས་ཐོགས	[desire &] obstruction/ hindrance	chags thogs
ཆགས་ཐོགས་མེད	is limitless	chags thogs med
ཆགས་ཐོགས་མེད་པ	desireless and unobstructed [free from the two obscuration sgrib gnyis]	chags thogs med pa
ཆགས་དང་འཁུ་བའི་སྙིང་མེད	w/o the essence of attachment and avarice	chags dang 'khu ba'i snying med
ཆགས་དང་སྡང་བའི་བློ་སྤོངས	give up aversion, anger and attachment	chags dang sdang ba'i blo spongs
ཆགས་དང་བྲལ	free of attachment	chags dang bral
ཆགས་དང་བྲལ་བ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས	consecration w/o attachment, consecration of passionlessness	chags dang bral ba rab tu gnas
ཆགས་དང་བྲལ་བ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	to fully abide in detachment	chags dang bral ba rab tu gnas pa
ཆགས་དུས	time of passion (met night	chags dus
ཆགས་དྲུམ	passion	chags drum
ཆགས་ལྡང་གཏི་མུག	attachment and delusion	chags ldang gti mug
ཆགས་ལྡང་རྨོངས་གསུམ	passion, aggression and ignorance, passion, aggression and delusion	chags ldang rmongs gsum
ཆགས་ལྡན	having attachment	chags ldan
ཆགས་ལྡན་མ	lustful woman	chags ldan ma
ཆགས་སྡང	attachment and aversion; unstable emotionality; isc. emotional reaction; isc. love-hate relationship	chags sdang
ལོབེ༹	hate relationship;	love
ཨཏཏཆམེནཏ	aversion	attachment
ཆགས་སྡང་གི་རྣམ་རྟོག	thought of either attachment or anger	chags sdang gi rnam rtog
ཆགས་སྡང་ལྔ	five objects of desire and aversion	chags sdang lnga
ཆགས་སྡང་གཏི་མུག	attachment, aggression and delusion, anger and delusion	chags sdang gti mug
ཆགས་སྡང་འཕེལ	tshig phra mo res	chags sdang 'phel
ཀྱང་ཆགས་སྡང་འཕེལ	the slightest word sparks desire or hatred	kyang chags sdang 'phel
ཆགས་སྡང་བར་མ	intermediate like and dislike	chags sdang bar ma
ཆགས་སྡང་བྱེད་པ	to be snared by attachment and aggression	chags sdang byed pa
ཆགས་སྡང་མེད་པ	free from like and dislike	chags sdang med pa
ཆགས་སྡང་རྨོངས	the 3 poisons	chags sdang rmongs
ཆགས་སྡང་རྨོངས་སུམ	attachment,	chags sdang rmongs sum
ཨངེར་ཨནད་ཅློསེ	mindedness	anger and close
ཆགས་སྡང་རྨོངས་གསུམ	desire, anger and delusion, passion, aggression and delusion, desire, anger and stupidity, attachment, hatred and stupidity; attraction, aversion and apathy; passion, aggression and ignorance	chags sdang rmongs gsum
ཆགས་གནས	site, creation and enduring/ existing	chags gnas
ཆགས་གནས་འཇིག་སྟོང་གི་བསྐལ་པ་བཞི	the four aeons of creation, subsistence, destruction and voidness	chags gnas 'jig stong gi bskal pa bzhi
ཆགས་གནས་འཇིག་སྟོང་བཞི	the fourfold creation, subsistence, destruction and voidness	chags gnas 'jig stong bzhi
ཆགས་གནས་འཇིག་སྟོངས	Syn {bskal pa chen po bzhi}, creation, subsistence, destruction, voidness	chags gnas 'jig stongs
ཆགས་གནས་འཇིག་པ	creation, subsistence, and destruction	chags gnas 'jig pa
ཆགས་སྣང	obsess	chags snang
ཆགས་པ	to become, turn into	chags pa
ཆགས་པ་སྐྱེས་སོ	fell in love	chags pa skyes so
ཆགས་པ་ཅན	passionately attached, very lewd, lascivious	chags pa can
ཆགས་པ་ཆེ	very selfish	chags pa che
ཆགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme passion	chags pa chen po
ཆགས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	detached; desireless, detachment	chags pa dang bral ba
ཆགས་པ་རྣམ་པ་བདུན	the 7 kinds of attachment/ creation?	chags pa rnam pa bdun
ཆགས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ	copulate	chags pa spyod pa
ཆགས་པ་བར་མ	intermediate clinging	chags pa bar ma
ཆགས་པ་བྱེད	to feel desire, to desire	chags pa byed
ཆགས་པ་མེད	unattached, desireless	chags pa med
ཆགས་པ་མེད་ཉིད	non attachment	chags pa med nyid
ཆགས་པ་མེད་པ	nonattachment, desirelessness, detachment; unbounded	chags pa med pa
ཆགས་པ་མེད་པའི་སྒོར་འཇུག་པ	to enter the doorway of nonattachment	chags pa med pa'i sgor 'jug pa
ཆགས་པ་ལམ་བྱེད་པ་བཞི	fourfold taking passion as path	chags pa lam byed pa bzhi
ཆགས་པའི་བསྐལ་པ	age when worlds are formed, age of formation, 1 of bskal pa bzhi	chags pa'i bskal pa
ཆགས་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of passion chags pa'i rgyal po'i rgyun kyi rgyal po continuous king of desire	chags pa'i rgyal po
ཆགས་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཙན	the victory banner of lust (met penis	chags pa'i rgyal mtsan
ཆགས་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	male organ, penis	chags pa'i rgyal mtshan
ཆགས་པའི་ཆ་ལུགས	guises of attachment	chags pa'i cha lugs
ཆགས་པའི་དུས	moment of passion / desire	chags pa'i dus
ཆགས་པའི་གདོན་ཅན	having the demon of desire (met having/ drunk w desire	chags pa'i gdon can
ཆགས་པའི་གདོན་ཅན་མ	lustful woman	chags pa'i gdon can ma
ཆགས་པའི་མདངས	glowing with passion	chags pa'i mdangs
ཆགས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of attachment	chags pa'i sdug bsngal
ཆགས་པའི་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་དབང་གིས	because of their proclivities toward attachment	chags pa'i bag chags kyi dbang gis
ཆགས་པའི་རྩ	channel of formation	chags pa'i rtsa
ཆགས་པའི་ཞགས་པས་གཟིར་བ	tormented by the noose of desire	chags pa'i zhags pas gzir ba
ཆགས་པའི་ས	object of desire	chags pa'i sa
ཆགས་པར་གྱུར་པ	lovely, fascinating, charming	chags par gyur pa
ཆགས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	be desired, be created fascinating, enticing	chags par 'gyur ba
ཆགས་པས་མྱོས་པ	intoxicated with love or desire for any object, intoxicated with lust	chags pas myos pa
ཆགས་སྤངས	free from attachment	chags spangs
ཆགས་སྤྱོད	copulate, copulation, fornication	chags spyod
ཆགས་ཕབ	[arch] went, arrived	chags phab
ཆགས་ཕེབས	went	chags phebs
ཆགས་བྱ	object of attachment	chags bya
ཆགས་བྱེད	epithet of the moon	chags byed
ཆགས་བྱེད་མ	passionate lady	chags byed ma
ཆགས་བྱེད་འོད་དཀར	moon	chags byed 'od dkar
ཆགས་བྲལ	free from attachment, lust	chags bral
ཆགས་བྲལ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	passionless/ unattached action	chags bral gyi spyod pa
ཆགས་བྲལ་ལྔ	the five non-attachments to what is on the side of the kleshas [phyogs gcig la chags bral ba, mtha' dag la ..., rtogs pa'i ..., gnon pa'i ..., legs pa ston pa'i ...]	chags bral lnga
ཆགས་བྲལ་སྔོན་སོང	prior detachment chags bral sngon song gi sangs rgyas buddha of prior detachment	chags bral sngon song
ཆགས་བྲལ་སྔོན་སོང་གི་སངས་རྒྱས	the previous unattached buddhas	chags bral sngon song gi sangs rgyas
ཆགས་བྲལ་ཅན	one who is free from passion or attachment	chags bral can
ཆགས་བྲལ་བ	freedom from attachment/ desire/ bondage, indifference	chags bral ba
ཆགས་བྲལ་བར་མ	intermediate detachment	chags bral bar ma
ཆགས་བྲལ་ཡིན་ཀྱང	although he lived free from attachments	chags bral yin kyang
ཆགས་བྲལ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	would be free from attachment	chags bral yongs su smin pa
ཆགས་དབྱིབས	primordial situation/ configuration, structure, composition, bzo lta	chags dbyibs
ཆགས་སྦངས	renounce/ free from attachment/ desire	chags sbangs
ཆགས་སྦྱོར	acts of passion, passionate conduct	chags sbyor
ཆགས་མི་བསྐྱེད	gave rise to no desire	chags mi bskyed
ཆགས་མི་མངའ་ཆང	liquor of desirelessness	chags mi mnga' chang
ཆགས་མི་མངའི་ཆང	liquor of desirelessness	chags mi mnga'i chang
ཆགས་མེད	non-attachment, reversing one's obsession for the world, absence of attachment, non-desire	chags med
ཆགས་མེད་དགོན	Chakmey Monastery, in Kham	chags med dgon
ཆགས་མེད་སྦྱིན་པ་ཐོངས་ཤིག	generously give up ...!	chags med sbyin pa thongs shig
ཆགས་མེད་རི་ཆོས	a famous retreat manual popular in both the rnying ma and bka' brgyud traditions, composed by kar ma chags med ra ga a sya (1613-1678) [tsd]	chags med ri chos
ཆགས་མེད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Chagmey Rinpoche; alias Karma Chagmey Syn {mkhas grub kar ma chags med}	chags med rin po che
ཆགས་རྩེད	love making	chags rtsed
ཆགས་ཚད་ལྡན་པ	authentic	chags tshad ldan pa
ཆགས་ཚིག	SA chags gtam, words of love, amorous conversation	chags tshig
ཆགས་ཚུལ	manner of being produced, peopled	chags tshul
ཆགས་འཚོ	chags gnas 'tsho rten,...So nam pa'i chags 'tsho sa zhing la brten pa	chags 'tsho
ཆགས་ཞན	love	chags zhan
ཆགས་ཞེན	attachment, desire and clinging, desire and attachment	chags zhen
ཆགས་ཞེན་སྐྱེད་ཚད་སྤོངས་ཤིག	reject all craving as it arises!	chags zhen skyed tshad spongs shig
ཆགས་ཞེན་གྱི་འཁྲི་བ་བཅོད་པ	to sever all ties and attachments	chags zhen gyi 'khri ba bcod pa
ཆགས་ཞེན་ཆོད	sever your clingings and cravings	chags zhen chod
ཆགས་ཞེན་འཛིན་གསུམ	attraction, attachment, and fixation	chags zhen 'dzin gsum
ཆགས་བཞིན་པར	x {rnams la chags bzhin par 'chi'o} we die while still attached	chags bzhin par
ཆགས་ཟད	end of desire; exhaustion of attachment	chags zad
ཆགས་ཟིན་པ	became	chags zin pa
ཆགས་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཕྲན	vassal kings	chags 'og gi rgyal phran
ཆགས་ཡུལ	object of desire / attachment	chags yul
ཆགས་ཡུལ་ཕུད་པོ	synthetic desireimage	chags yul phud po
ཆགས་ཡོད	it was	chags yod
ཆགས་རབ	genesis, history of the beginning	chags rab
ཆགས་རབས	history of previous ways of arising, origin, genealogy, ancestry	chags rabs
ཆགས་རབས་ཀྱི་གློག་བརྙན	documentary film	chags rabs kyi glog brnyan
ཆགས་རིམ	structure, composition	chags rim
ཆགས་ལམ	the path of desire/ passion	chags lam
ཆགས་ལམ་གྱི་མན་ངག	esoteric instructions of the path of desire	chags lam gyi man ngag
ཆགས་ལུགས	structure, composition, situation	chags lugs
ཆགས་ལུགས་ཆགས་སྟངས	way of arising and exiting	chags lugs chags stangs
ཆགས་ས	position, site, location, object to which 1 is attached	chags sa
ཆགས་སུ་མི་སྟེར་འཇིག་པའི་འདྲེ	'dre who destroy and do not allow to develop	chags su mi ster 'jig pa'i 'dre
ཆགས་སེམས	desire. Syn {chags zhen}, attachment to, attraction	chags sems
ཆགས་སེམས་ཀྱིས་ཅིངས་པ་རིགས་བཞི	four types of being fettered by attachment	chags sems kyis cings pa rigs bzhi
ཆགས་སེམས་དང་བྲལ་པ	to be free from attachment	chags sems dang bral pa
ཆགས་སེམས་མེད་པ	no longer had any attachment	chags sems med pa
ཆགས་སོགས	desire and so forth [the other disturbing emotions]	chags sogs
ཆགས་སྲེད	attachment, craving	chags sred
ཆགས་སྲེད་ཅན	lecherous, libidinous	chags sred can
ཆགས་སྲོལ	system, structure	Chags srol
ཆགས་སློང	sexy	chags slong
ཆང	[undistilled] intoxicating beverages.. *, chang, [TT/ barley/ home brewed] beer,] alcohol, 'chang	chang
ཆང་བཀུ	wine	chang bku
ཆང་བཀོལ་བ	brew 796	chang bkol ba
ཆང་རྐྱང	vessel for wine. Syn {chang rkyan}	chang rkyang
ཆང་རྐྱན	vessel for wine	chang rkyan
ཆང་སྐད	intoxicated talk	chang skad
ཆང་སྐྱེམས	drinking chang	chang skyems
ཆང་སྐྱོགས	chang ladle	chang skyogs
ཆང་བསྐོལ	bskol ldan te chang &, sngo phyur, tsampa, w molasses mixed and boiled thug pa zhig	chang bskol
ཆང་ཁ་མོ	beer that is very strong or bitter	chang kha mo
ཆང་ཁང	beer house, bar, tavern, place chang is sold, inn, pub, drinking hole	chang khang
ཆང་ཁྱུ	[arch] tshogs pa'am tshogs	chang khyu
ཆང་ཁྱུ་འཚོག	beat with the clenched hand or fist	chang khyu 'tshog
ཆང་ཁྲལ	liquor tax	chang khral
ཆང་ཁྲིམས	drinking rule	chang khrims
ཆང་གར་མ	strong chang	chang gar ma
ཆང་གི་ཀླུམ	wet malt	chang gi klum
ཆང་གི་འཁྱོམ་པ་འདུག	staggering under the influence of beer	chang gi 'khyom pa 'dug
ཆང་གི་ཉིང་ཁུ	spirit, essence of amrita, alcohol	chang gi nying khu
ཆང་གི་ཉེས་པ་དྲུག	[TRS 87-3]	chang gi nyes pa drug
ཆང་གི་ཉེས་པ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	[TRS 88-1] spoken by the Buddha; expl	chang gi nyes pa sum cu rtsa lnga
ཆང་གི་དྲི	x {kha yis chang gi dri la sna dang de yi ro la lce yis myongs} gain a taste for alcohol and become accustomed to drinking	chang gi dri
ཆང་གི་སྣོད	wine-jug	chang gi snod
ཆང་གི་ཕྱ་དར	place where boiled grain is spread for fermentation	chang gi phya dar
ཆང་གི་དབྱེ་བ	different sorts of beer or wine	chang gi dbye ba
ཆང་གི་སྦང་མ	malt from which beer has been brewed	chang gi sbang ma
ཆང་གི་སྦང་མའི་ལུམས	finely ground dry used brewing malt placed on the mouth of wounds to draw out bad blood and chu ser and suppressing rma rgod	chang gi sbang ma'i lums
ཆང་གི་ཚབ་དངུལ	{chang dod}	chang gi tshab dngul
ཆང་གིས་གྱེངས་པ	drunk	chang gis gyengs pa
ཆང་གིས་དྲེགས་པ	intoxication	chang gis dregs pa
ཆང་གིས་མྱོས	drunk	chang gis myos
ཆང་གིས་མྱོས་པ	drunk	chang gis myos pa
ཆང་གིས་བརྫིས་པའི་ཟན	barley dough made w chang	chang gis brdzis pa'i zan
ཆང་གིས་བཟི	get/ be drunk chang gis g.yengs pa - be drunk chang gis g.yos - parched grain taken with wine	chang gis bzi
ཆང་གྲལ	row of seats at a carnival	chang gral
ཆང་མགྲོན	treat with beer or wine	chang mgron
ཆང་འགག	vessel for keeping wine	chang 'gag
ཆང་རྒན	old beer or wine	chang rgan
ཆང་རྒོད	chang 'tsag thengs 1st	chang rgod
ཆང་རྒྱུ	ingredients for making beer, substance of which beer or wine is made	chang rgyu
ཆང་ངི་ཆུང་ངི	trivial things and ideas, odds and ends, jung, bits and pieces, not valuable	chang ngi chung ngi
ཆང་ངེ་ངུང་ངེ	trivial things and ideas, odds and ends, jung, bits and pieces, not valuable	chang nge ngung nge
ཆང་ངེ་ཆུང་ངེ	not valuable	chang nge chung nge
ཆང་དངོས	spirit, wine, alcohol	chang dngos
ཆང་བཅུད	alcohol	chang bcud
ཆང་བཅུད་སྒྲོན་མེ	alcohol lamp	chang bcud sgron me
ཆང་ཆུ་སྲེ་བ	mix beer with water	chang chu sre ba
ཆང་ཆུང	trivial things and ideas, odds and ends, jung, bits and pieces, not valuable	chang chung
ཆང་ཆེམ	intoxicated	chang chem
ཆང་ཆེམ་ཅན	intoxicated person	chang chem can
ཆང་ཆེམས	[arch] tavern	chang chems
ཆང་མཆོད	1) scatter choice intoxicant/ 1st distillation; 2) chang offering; 3) chang drinking [h]	chang mchod
ཆང་ཉམས	SA thog	chang nyams
ཆང་ཉོས་ནས་བཏུང་བ	bought some beer and drank his fill	chang nyos nas btung ba
ཆང་གཉིས་པ	chu gnyis pa brgyab pa'i chang	chang gnyis pa
ཆང་རྙིང	old beer or wine, old wine	chang rnying
ཆང་སྙིགས	powdered chang dvangs snyigs	chang snyigs
ཆང་སྙོལ	cooked grain make into chang rtsi dro sar snyol ba	chang snyol
ཆང་བསྙལ	drunk, make chang	chang bsnyal
ཆང་བསྙལ་བ	the beer fermenting / brewing	chang bsnyal ba
ཆང་ཏིག	vessel for measuring wine	chang tig
ཆང་ལྟིར	chang blug snod khog ltir	chang ltir
ཆང་སྟོན	drinking party, cocktail party	chang ston
ཆང་ཐུབ	drinking being, one subject to decay and destruction	chang thub
ཆང་འཐུང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of drinking liquor among the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, drinking intoxicants, by the carelessness attendant on intoxication gzhan ma dad par byed pa'o	chang 'thung ba'i ltung byed
ཆང་དང་པོ	1st water infusion chang gain	chang dang po
ཆང་དད་ཅན	drunkard, tippler	chang dad can
ཆང་དོ་ལོག	ro bcud ldab log yod pa'i chang dang po	chang do log
ཆང་དོད	silver or other articles with which wine or beer is exchanged	chang dod
ཆང་དྲེགས	drunk	chang dregs
ཆང་འདན	bskol ldan	chang 'dan
ཆང་འདོང	wine-cup	chang 'dong
ཆང་འདོན	wine glass or cup	chang 'don
ཆང་ནད	alcoholism, hangover	chang nad
ཆང་གནས	place of drinking, grog shop	chang gnas
ཆང་སྣོད	vessel for keeping wine, wine glass or cup	chang snod
ཆང་སྣོད་རྟ་མགོ་ཅན	horse head chang container in {jo khang}	chang snod rta mgo can
ཆང་པ	drunkard, alcoholic	chang pa
ཆང་པ་སྟོང	empty hand, someone w nothing to give	chang pa stong
ཆང་པ་སྟོང་བ	open fist, empty hand, nothing to give in charity to the poor	chang pa stong ba
ཆང་སྤགས	1) barley dough made w chang; 2) food eaten Chang dang sbrags nas, meat and vegetables etc.	chang spags
ཆང་ཕབས	dry barm, lees, dry yeast [for making chang]	chang phabs
ཆང་ཕུད	choice intoxicating drinks/ intoxicant, 1st and best distillation	chang phud
ཆང་ཕོག	allowance in beer	chang phog
ཆང་ཕོད	payment in chang	chang phod
ཆང་ཕོར	bowl for beer 797	chang phor
ཆང་བུ	tsampa dough squeezed out between the fingers and offered to ghosts, bit of food given as offering	chang bu
ཆང་བུམ	chang vessel	chang bum
ཆང་བེན	chang vessel	chang ben
ཆང་བོགས	tax paid by bar maids/ owners	chang bogs
ཆང་བྱེད་མ	barmaid	chang byed ma
ཆང་མ	chang seller/ worker, bar maid	chang ma
ཆང་མང་པོ་འཐུང	passion for drinking	chang mang po 'thung
ཆང་མང་པོ་འཐུང་དགོས	necessity to drink	chang mang po 'thung dgos
ཆང་མའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	in Lhasa smon lam tshugs dus Lhasa's chang and aa rag sellers kyis tshogs chen zhal ngor chang and liquor selling chog pa'i dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	chang ma'i 'khrol 'dzin
ཆང་མལ	tavern	chang mal
ཆང་མི་བཏུང	not drink ale, to refrain from drinking alcohol	chang mi btung
ཆང་རྩི	yeast, dry barm, lees	chang rtsi
ཆང་ཚང	1) place chang is sold, bar, tavern; 2) chang warehouse	chang tshang
ཆང་ཚང་ལས་འོང	one who is coming out of a grog shop	chang tshang las 'ong
ཆང་ཚང་ལས་འོང་བ	drunkard	chang tshang las 'ong ba
ཆང་ཚང་ལས་འོངས་པ	coming from a grog shop	chang tshang las 'ongs pa
ཆང་ཚོང	tavern owner, bartender	chang tshong
ཆང་ཚོང་མ	female beer-seller/ barmaid	chang tshong ma
ཆང་ཚོང་མ་ཞིག་གི་ཁྱིམ	an inn; house of a barmaid	chang tshong ma zhig gi khyim
ཆང་འཚོང་མ	woman selling wine, barmaid, beer-selling woman	chang 'tshong ma
ཆང་འཚོང་མའི་ཁང་པ	wine-selling woman's house	chang 'tshong ma'i khang pa
ཆང་འཚོང་མའི་གནས	grogshop kept by a woman, brothel	chang 'tshong ma'i gnas
ཆང་རྫ	beer jug	chang rdza
ཆང་ཞིམ་ནར་ཕྱིན་པ	many years phyin pa'i chang gar ma	chang zhim nar phyin pa
ཆང་གཞས	bod khams kun tu dar ba'i spro skyid dang gsol ston byed pa and gling gar spro gseng gtong skabs chang bkyag nas "bkra shis bde legs" zhu ba'i song name	chang gzhas
ཆང་ཟས	food eaten w chang	chang zas
ཆང་ཟུང	handle [of a bow]	chang zung
ཆང་ཟུངས	crook of a stick, handle	chang zungs
ཆང་བཟང	good wine	chang bzang
ཆང་བཟའ	marriage	chang bza'
ཆང་བཟུང	closed hand, fist	chang bzung
ཆང་ཡིག	contract	chang yig
ཆང་ཡུལ	{chang yul} district	chang yul
ཆང་ར	abbr of chang and a rag, beer & arrack, drinking party	chang ra
ཆང་རག	chang and liquor, alcoholic beverages	chang rag
ཆང་རག་མ་འཐུང་མཁན	non-drinker	chang rag ma 'thung mkhan
ཆང་རག་མང་པོ་འཐུང་མཁན	alcoholic	chang rag mang po 'thung mkhan
ཆང་རག་ཞིག	beer	chang rag zhig
ཆང་རག་བཟོ་ཁང	brewery	chang rag bzo khang
ཆང་རིགས	various kinds of liquor	chang rigs
ཆང་རིན	tip, gratuity	chang rin
ཆང་ལ་འཛེམ་ཞིག	give up wine, abstain from wine	chang la 'dzem zhig
ཆང་ལན་ཆུ་འཇལ	return water for chang, return bad for good	chang lan chu 'jal
ཆང་ཤིང	shrub	chang shing
ཆང་ས	drinking gathering/ party, marriage, wedding	chang sa
ཆང་ས་རྒྱག	marry	chang sa rgyag
ཆང་ས་རྒྱག་པ	marry, get married	chang sa rgyag pa
ཆང་ས་རྒྱབ་པ	marry, wed	chang sa rgyab pa
ཆང་ས་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	married	chang sa rgyab zin pa
ཆང་ས་དངོས་གཞི	marriage ceremony	chang sa dngos gzhi
ཆང་ས་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	arrange for a	chang sa chen po byed pa
གྲེཨཏ་བེཨེར	drinking party	great beer
ཆང་ས་མ་རྒྱབ	maid	chang sa ma rgyab
ཆང་ས་མ་རྒྱབ་པ	bachelor	chang sa ma rgyab pa
ཆང་ས་མ་རྒྱབ་པའི་སྐྱེ་དམན	damsel chang sa ma rgyab par gnas pa'i mi tshe celibacy	chang sa ma rgyab pa'i skye dman
ཆང་ས་མ་བརྒྱབས་པ	unmarried	chang sa ma brgyabs pa
ཆང་སའི	engagement, marital	chang sa'i
ཆང་སའི་ཁ་ཆད་བྱེད་པ	engage	chang sa'i kha chad byed pa
ཆང་སའི་རྗེས་ཀྱི་སྤྲོ་འཁྱབ	honeymoon	chang sa'i rjes kyi spro 'khyab
ཆང་སའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	marriage ceremony	chang sa'i rten 'brel
ཆང་སར་མ་དགའ་བ	misogamy	chang sar ma dga' ba
ཆང་སིང	chang sings	chang sing
ཆང་སིངས	chang sing	chang sings
ཆང་བསླངས	ferment	chang bslangs
ཆངས	pinch of food for offering	changs
ཆངས་པ	SA chang bu	changs pa
ཆངས་བུ	changs pa, pinch of food for offering	changs bu
ཆད	1) shortage, deficit, omission, absence. 2) penalty, fine. 3) vi. to be short, to lack, run out. 4) vi. to be cut off, broken off, to stop, cease, break, break in half, snap, fall apart, destructio...	chad
ཆད་ཀ	chad	chad ka
ཆད་ཁོངས	ma ldangs pa or chad pa'i gras,...Thob skal chad khongs la su su yod,...Sgo khral chad khongs kyi tshong zog .Thob skal ma ldangs pa rnams chad khongs su tho bkag pa	chad khongs
ཆད་མཁན	failure	chad mkhan
ཆད་གྲངས	deficit shortage, negative #	chad grangs
ཆད་གྲངས་མཉམ་པའི་རམ་གྲངས	arithmetical progression	chad grangs mnyam pa'i ram grangs
ཆད་འགེལ	punish/ assign a fine/ penalty for an infraction	chad 'gel
ཆད་འགྱངས་ལེ་འཁོན	chad lus phar 'gyangs kyi 'khon thogs sam ka kor	chad 'gyangs le 'khon
ཆད་བསྒྲགས	special announcement/ notice	chad bsgrags
ཆད་ཅིང་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	interrupted attention	chad cing 'jug pa'i yid byed
ཆད་གཅོད	punishment	chad gcod
ཆད་གཅོས	punishment	chad gcos
ཆད་ཆོད	uninterrupted	chad chod
ཆད་ཉམས	1) zad pa and nyams gud; 2) [arch] meteoric iron, thunder	chad nyams
ཆད་ཉེ	chad ran pa'am chad chog chog ...Srab sa nas rdol chog dang, phra sa nas chad nye	chad nye
ཆད་ལྟ	Nihilism. Literally, 'the view of discontinuance.' The extreme view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the nonexistence of a mind after death	chad lta
ཆད་ལྟ་ཕྱལ་བ	all-pervasive nihilism [mss]	chad lta phyal ba
ཆད་ལྟ་བ	[extreme view of] nihilism/ interruption, negative attitude [often = denying karma and fruition, reincarnation, etc.]	chad lta ba
ཆད་སྟོང	vacancy, nihilistic emptiness	chad stong
ཆད་སྟོང་དུ་གཟུང་བ	grasp nihilistic emptiness	chad stong du gzung ba
ཆད་བརྟན	{chad tho} & {brtan ma}	chad brtan
ཆད་ཐོ	{chad tho bsgrag(s) pa} - (to proclaim) the contract	chad tho
ཆད་ཐོ་བསྒྲགས་པ	to proclaim the contract /covenant	chad tho bsgrags pa
ཆད་མཐའ	one of the {mtha' gnyis}, two extreme views, extreme of nothingness, nihilism, discontinuation, extreme of annihilation	chad mtha'
ཆད་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of the extreme of nihilism	chad mtha' smra ba
ཆད་མཐའ་སེལ་བ	to eliminate the extreme of nihilism	chad mtha' sel ba
ཆད་མཐར་ལྟུང་བ	to fall into the extreme of nihilism	chad mthar ltung ba
ཆད་མཐར་འཛིན་པ	grasp[er of] nihilistic extremism	chad mthar 'dzin pa
ཆད་མཐུད	1) obstacle slar mthud pa; 2) making up a shortage/ deficiency joining, linking, connecting	chad mthud
ཆད་མཐུད་བྱས་ཟིན	[they] finished joining/linking [them] together	chad mthud byas zin
ཆད་མཐུད་བྱེད	1) obstacle slar mthud pa; 2) Gsab cha cessation or continuation join, link, connect, make up a shortage	chad mthud byed
ཆད་མཐུད་མེད་པ	neither ceasing or continuing	chad mthud med pa
ཆད་དུ	completely	chad du
ཆད་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	1 of 12 gsung rab yan lag	chad du brjod pa
ཆད་དོན	promise, agreement	chad don
ཆད་དོན་ལྟར་བྱེད་པ	keep a promise	chad don ltar byed pa
ཆད་དོན་བྱེད་པ	give a promise, make a contract	chad don byed pa
ཆད་མདོ	promise, agreement	chad mdo
ཆད་མདོ་བཙན	powerful command	chad mdo btsan
ཆད་མདོ་བཙན་པ	under powerful command	chad mdo btsan pa
ཆད་ནས	has ceased	chad nas
ཆད་པ	to not have, lack, miss, run out of	chad pa
ཆད་པ་ཅན	convict, offender, convict, one who has been convicted of an offence	chad pa can
ཆད་པ་གཅོད	punish, fine, sentence	chad pa gcod
ཆད་པ་གཅོད་དུ་འཇུག་གི	you will indeed be punished	chad pa gcod du 'jug gi
ཆད་པ་གཅོད་པ	to punish; to execute a punishment	chad pa gcod pa
ཆད་པ་བཅད	punished, fined, sentenced	chad pa bcad
ཆད་པ་ཆད་ལན	khral dang bu lon sogs zha chag byung ba'i chad lan sgrub 'jal	chad pa chad lan
ཆད་པ་ཆོད་ཅིག	may they punish me	chad pa chod cig
ཆད་པ་གཏོང	punish, fine, sentence	chad pa gtong
ཆད་པ་གཏོང་བ	punish, fine, sentence	chad pa gtong ba
ཆད་པ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	as if it had been suddenly cut off	chad pa ltar snang ba
ཆད་པ་ཐོང་མཛོད	(please punish me!	chad pa thong mdzod
ཆད་པ་ཕོག་པ	to punish	chad pa phog pa
ཆད་པ་མ་ཡིན	it is not nothingness	chad pa ma yin
ཆད་པ་མེད་པ	not ceasing, devoid of discontinuation, uninterrupted	chad pa med pa
ཆད་པ་མེད་པ་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	uninterrupted attention	chad pa med pa 'jug pa'i yid byed
ཆད་པ་མེད་པར་འཇུག་པ	uninterrupted engagement, uninterruptedly	chad pa med par 'jug pa
ཆད་པ་མེད་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	perception of uninterrupted engagement, one of the {sems gnas skabs kyi yid byed bzhi}, in the case of the {sems gnas brgyad} uninterruptedly engage the attention	chad pa med par 'jug pa'i yid byed
ཆད་པ་སོག་པ	award punishment, punish in any way 799	chad pa sog pa
ཆད་པའི་ཁྲིམས	tradition of penalties for offenders	chad pa'i khrims
ཆད་པའི་ལྟ་བ	nihilism, the view of interruption	chad pa'i lta ba
ཆད་པའི་སྟོང་པ	vacuum	chad pa'i stong pa
ཆད་པའི་ཐ་མ	{yul gyi mtha' la spyug pa}	chad pa'i tha ma
ཆད་པའི་མཐའ	extreme of nihilism, limitation of nihilistic negation	chad pa'i mtha'
ཆད་པའི་མཐའ་ལས་གྲོལ་བ	to be free from the extreme of nihilism	chad pa'i mtha' las grol ba
ཆད་པའི་མཐའ་སེལ་བ	to eliminate the extreme of nihilism	chad pa'i mtha' sel ba
ཆད་པའི་གནས	1) khrims sa; 2) offender	chad pa'i gnas
ཆད་པའི་བྲིང	{yan lag gcod pa}	chad pa'i bring
ཆད་པའི་དབང	the empowerment of the expositor (Akshobhya	chad pa'i dbang
ཆད་པའི་མྱང་འདས	nihilistic nirvana [mere absence of samsaric suffering uncompleted by benefit for others etc.]	chad pa'i myang 'das
ཆད་པའི་ཚར་གཅད	sentence, punish	chad pa'i tshar gcad
ཆད་པའི་ཚར་གཅད་པ	convict	chad pa'i tshar gcad pa
ཆད་པའི་རབ	Syn {me la bsreg pa dang mgo bcad pa}	chad pa'i rab
ཆད་པའི་ལས	discontinued action	chad pa'i las
ཆད་པའི་ཤིང	person born in wood tiger year	chad pa'i shing
ཆད་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	interrupted attention	chad par 'jug pa'i yid byed
ཆད་པར་ལྟ་བ	nihilistic view	chad par lta ba
ཆད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	nihilist, proponent of interruption, proponent of annihilation (everything arises by itself, not from previous karma, mind arises temporarily and randomly from the four elements, the stream of bein...	chad par smra ba
ཆད་པས་གཅོད་པ	convict, sentence, punish	chad pas gcod pa
ཆད་པས་བཅད་པ	punished {nyes med chad pas bcad pa} punished an innocent one	chad pas bcad pa
ཆད་པོ	rent, torn, worn-out, ragged, tattered	chad po
ཆད་འབུལ	special request, compliments, special presentation, compliments at the commencement of a letter	chad 'bul
ཆད་མ་དམིགས་པ	observed valid cognition	chad ma dmigs pa
ཆད་མར་སྨྲ་བ	Annihilist	chad mar smra ba
ཆད་མིན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་ལྔ	the five continuous knowledges	chad min gyi shes pa lnga
ཆད་མེད	uninterrupted	chad med
ཆད་མོལ་ཡི་གེ	document of command	chad mol yi ge
ཆད་སྨྲ	nihilism	chad smra
ཆད་འཛར	balance/ remainder [of payments]	chad 'dzar
ཆད་འཛིན	debt etc incomplete count chad pa'i 'dzin	chad 'dzin
ཆད་ཡིག	written contract/ agreement/ pact	chad yig
ཆད་ལས	law, legal affairs, prescribing a punishment for an offender	chad las
ཆད་ལས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	precept remediable by stopping [kind of remediable downfall, though a defeat has arisen for a monk, if it was not concealed, it can be remedied &, the way of doing it chad pa las kyi bslab pa is gi...	chad las kyi bslab pa
ཆད་ལས་གྲྭ	court	chad las grwa
ཆད་ལས་ར་བ	khrims gtong place	chad las ra ba
ཆད་ལུས	deficiency	chad lus
ཆད་ལུས་པ	omission	chad lus pa
ཆད་ལུས་མེད་པ	complete, w/o omissions	chad lus med pa
ཆད་ལུས་ཤོར	omit, leave out	chad lus shor
ཆད་སོ	a term, a time-purchase, an agreement	chad so
ཆད་སོ་བཞག་པ	make a [time] agreement]	chad so bzhag pa
ཆད་གསབ	make up a deficiency/ shortage	chad gsab
ཆད་གསབ་བྱེད་པ	make up a deficiency/ shortage	chad gsab byed pa
ཆད་གསོ	chad pa'i kha skong	chad gso
ཆད་གསོར	when person/ animal is exhausted by fatigue, another does the work instead	chad gsor
ཆད་ཧད་པོ	blank	chad had po
ཆད་ལྷག	shortage/ deficit and surplus	chad lhag
ཆད་ལྷག་མེད་པ	without any omission or addition, to do a thing perfectly well, without omitting or adding, without any omission or addition, without omissions or additions, without omitting or adding a single word	chad lhag med pa
ཆན	boiled corn, barley	chan
ཆན་གྲི	1) hooked knife, scissors; 2) potter's ko gri khye bo	chan gri
ཆན་ཐང	Chientang River	chan thang
ཆན་ཐུག	wheat, barley, rice etc. ril mo btsos pa'i soup	chan thug
ཆན་དྲ་ཀིར་ཏི	Chandrakirti; {zla ba grags pa}	chan dra kir ti
ཆན་མདོ་བྱམས་པ་གླིང	{chan mdo byams pa gling} 800	chan mdo byams pa gling
ཆན་པ	1) Rma'i rtsa rgyus gcod byed kyi yo byad cig; 2) [arch] hooked knife, potter's khye bo, scissors, shears	chan pa
ཆན་ཝ	KW	chan wa
ཆན་ཝ་ཁྲི	KW	chan wa khri
ཆན་ལུང	CH Manchu Dynasty aang bzhi pa'i khri lo'i ming ste, gong ma 'dis 13th iron horse yr bod la bka' shag las khungs gsar 'dzugs kyis {bod bzhugs aam ban} and Dalai Lama lhan sbrel gyi zhal bkod ltar T...	chan lung
ཆབ	1) water (h), purifying water, + skyon. 2) power, dominion (h)	chab
ཆབ་ཀྱིས་བསིལ	to bathe in water	chab kyis bsil
ཆབ་དཀར	the White River [school of Bon]	chab dkar
ཆབ་དཀར་དྲག་པོ་སྔགས	1 of bon sgo bzhi	chab dkar drag po sngags
ཆབ་དཀར་དྲག་པོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་བོན	Bon of White Water of Wrathful Mantras	chab dkar drag po sngags kyi bon
ཆབ་རྐྱན	water vessel, brass can/ teapot w long spout	chab rkyan
ཆབ་སྐྱ	whey	chab skya
ཆབ་ཁང	bathroom	chab khang
ཆབ་ཁང་སྒོ	bathroom door	chab khang sgo
ཆབ་ཁུང	1) urethra; 2) drain hole; 3) latrine pit/ canal	chab khung
ཆབ་ཁོལ	boiled water	chab khol
ཆབ་ཁོལ་མ	boiled water	chab khol ma
ཆབ་གླུག	water pot	chab glug
ཆབ་འགོ	ske rags leb mo etc kyi sne 'dzin	chab 'go
ཆབ་སྒོ	1) main door/ gate [h]; 2) khrims sgo	chab sgo
ཆབ་སྒོ་བ	gate guard	chab sgo ba
ཆབ་ཅིག	along with, at same time	chab cig
ཆབ་གཅིག་པར	at the same time	chab gcig par
ཆབ་ལྕེ	thag pa'i 'gugs len gyi chab tse buckle?, clasp	chab lce
ཆབ་ཆ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	chab cha
ཆབ་ཆབ	mediocre, not very good	chab chab
ཆབ་ཆབ་བཅུ་གསུམ	dilettante, person knowing a little about many things but nothing very well	chab chab bcu gsum
ཆབ་ཆེན	excrement (h	chab chen
ཆབ་ཆོབ	hodge-podge	chab chob
ཨེཏཅ་བ༹རིཨོཨུས་ནོན	according kinds mixed together]	etc various non
ཆབ་ཏོག	urinal, bed pan	chab tog
ཆབ་གཏོར	a water torma; ritual text outlining the method for offering water (chu sbyin) and rolled dough pellets (gtor ril)	chab gtor
ཆབ་གཏོར་འཇམ་དཔལ་མ	ritual text by gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje, 16461714	chab gtor 'jam dpal ma
ཆབ་རྟགས	med. diagnosis via urine, urine specimen	chab rtags
ཆབ་སྟན	child's potty	chab stan
ཆབ་སྟོད	rtse drung gi upper garment	chab stod
ཆབ་དྲེལ	Dalai Lama'i gsol thab kyi chu len byed mule	chab drel
ཆབ་གདན	child's potty, diaper	chab gdan
ཆབ་མདོ	chab mdo	chab mdo
ཆབ་མདོ་བྱམས་པ་གླིང	{chab mdo byams pa gling	chab mdo byams pa gling
ཆབ་མདོའི་དགོན་པ	Chamdo Monastery	chab mdo'i dgon pa
ཆབ་འདྲེན་གཞོན་ནུ	variety of med. herb sran ma [bitter-sweet, body heat neutral, as soon as its flower opens, good for dmu chu, chu 'gag 'byin]	chab 'dren gzhon nu
ཆབ་སྡོ	Chamdo district	chab sdo
ཆབ་ནག	{chab nag} monastery [in kongpo E T]	chab nag
ཆབ་ནག་སྲིད་པ་རྒྱུད	1 of bon sgo bzhi	chab nag srid pa rgyud
ཆབ་ནག་སྲིད་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བོན	Bon of Black Water of Tantras of Existence	chab nag srid pa rgyud kyi bon
ཆབ་སྣོད	water vessel	chab snod
ཆབ་པོ	representative of a superior, delegate, commissioner, agent	chab po
ཆབ་བུམ	water vase	chab bum
ཆབ་བུམ་རིལ་བ	(kamandalu kind of water vessel, spyi blugs	chab bum ril ba
ཆབ་བུམ་རིལ་མོ	vessel of consecrated water passed to monks before dispersing [h]	chab bum ril mo
ཆབ་བེ་ཆོབ་བེ	hodge-podge [not dividing into coarse and subtle, good	chab be chob be
ཨནད་བད་ཨེཏཅ་བ༹རིཨོཨུས་ནོན	according kinds mixed together]	and bad etc various non
ཆབ་བྲོམ	[glacial] ice	chab brom
ཆབ་བླུག	monk's spittoon, mouthrinsing vessel	chab blug
ཆབ་བླུགས	a monk's flask [for rinsing of mouth; often enclosed in an embroidered piece of cloth]	chab blugs
ཆབ་འབངས	subject[s], servant, 1 owing allegiance [to a king/ government]	chab 'bangs
ཆབ་མ	1) sash of women of Khams and M silver or tung tsag dkrol ma and 'gron bu'i rgyan can khab shubs etc. kyi glo 'dogs yod pa zhig ornamented belt/ buckle, clasp; 2) lid, valve	chab ma
ཆབ་མིག	fountain, spring (H	chab mig
ཆབ་ཙེ	buckle, clasp	chab tse
ཆབ་གཙང	clean water	chab gtsang
ཆབ་བཙོལ	boiled water [h]	chab btsol
ཆབ་འཙལ	lost!	chab 'tsal
ཆབ་རྩེ	1) on belt or sash flat etc. chab lce buckle, clasp; 2) lid, valve	chab rtse
ཆབ་སྩལ	[arch] suffer harm, be injured	chab stsal
ཆབ་ཚོད	[water] clock, watch	chab tshod
ཆབ་འཚལ	lose!	chab 'tshal
ཆབ་འཚལ་བ	[arch] chud zos su song ba, brlag pa lost	chab 'tshal ba
ཆབ་རྫིང	swimming pool/ pond [h]	chab rdzing
ཆབ་ཞབས	zhabs phyi, mi ser vassal	chab zhabs
ཆབ་ཞུགས	dgon sde khag gi end of summer feast	chab zhugs
ཆབ་ཞོ	milk [h]	chab zho
ཆབ་གཞུག	bath, tibetan bathing festival	chab gzhug
ཆབ་གཞོང	bath tub [h]	chab gzhong
ཆབ་བཞེས་པ	1) drink water; 2) Chu blangs pa; 3) be in the water	chab bzhes pa
ཆབ་གཟན	Tibet kyi rtse drung gi gzan gos chen gyi mtha' lcags can zhig	chab gzan
ཆབ་འོག	under the sway / command of	chab 'og
ཆབ་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ	feudal chief	chab 'og gi rgyal
ཆབ་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	vassal king	chab 'og gi rgyal po
ཆབ་འོག་མངའ་ཁོངས	...Chab 'og gi rgyal phran,...Rang gi chab 'og tu sdud pa,...Chab 'og tu gtogs pa ???	chab 'og mnga' khongs
ཆབ་འོག་ཏུ་བསྡུ་བ	bring or collect under one's power	chab 'og tu bsdu ba
ཆབ་འོག་པ	vassal, subject	chab 'og pa
ཆབ་ཡིག	letter or rim pa gong mas gnang ba'i letter	chab yig
ཆབ་རིག	pervading awareness	chab rig
ཆབ་རིལ	vessel of consecrated water passed to monks before dispersing, water pot	chab ril
ཆབ་རིལ་པ	one who passes through water, SA chag brom	chab ril pa
ཆབ་རིལ་བ	vessel of consecrated water passed to monks before dispersing at tshogs rung chu 'grems mkhan [h]	chab ril ba
ཆབ་རོམ	frozen water, ice	chab rom
ཆབ་ལ་གསོལ	(h) to be drowned	chab la gsol
ཆབ་ལེན	take purifying water, vinaya practice of rinsing mouth before eating	chab len
ཆབ་ལོང	buckle's aa long,...Sked rgyan dngul gyi chab long	chab long
ཆབ་ཤུབས	water vessel blug sa'i vessel	chab shubs
ཆབ་ཤོག	official letter, diploma	chab shog
ཆབ་གཤུག	Bath[ing Festival] [August and September]	chab gshug
ཆབ་སང	evacuation, purging, making water	chab sang
ཆབ་སེར	matter, pus	chab ser
ཆབ་སྲིད	1) chab 'bangs te mnga' 'bangs skyong bar byed pa'i secular government khrims kyi bya gzhag; 2) Gral rim dang, srid tang, spyi tshogs kyi tshogs pa, mi sger bcas kyis rgyal nang and rgyal spyi'i co...	chab srid
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཁེ་དབང	political rights	chab srid kyi khe dbang
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་གོ་རྟོགས	political consciousness/ awareness	chab srid kyi go rtogs
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་གོ་གནས	political position	chab srid kyi go gnas
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་འགོ་ཁྲིད	political leader	chab srid kyi 'go khrid
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་འགོ་ཁྲིད་ཉུང་ཤས	oligarchy	chab srid kyi 'go khrid nyung shas
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཉེས་ཅན	political prisoner/ offender	chab srid kyi nyes can
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཉེས་མིང་ཕོག་མཁན	political prisoner/ offender	chab srid kyi nyes ming phog mkhan
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་གཉའ་གནོན	political oppression/ suppression	chab srid kyi gnya' gnon
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་པ	political consciousness/ awareness	chab srid kyi rtogs pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	political philosophy/ viewpoint	chab srid kyi lta ba
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	political power/ force	chab srid kyi stobs shugs
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཐོབ་ཐང	political rights	chab srid kyi thob thang
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	political struggle	chab srid kyi 'thab rtsod
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	political situation	chab srid kyi gnas tshul
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་དམག་འཐབ	political battle	chab srid kyi dmag 'thab
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	political program/ platform	chab srid kyi rtsa ba
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་རྩ་འཛིན	political program/ platform	chab srid kyi rtsa 'dzin
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་འཚོ་བ	political life/ livelihood	chab srid kyi 'tsho ba
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	political nature/ sense	chab srid kyi rang bzhin
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	political science, politics	chab srid kyi rig pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	political line/ direction/ course	chab srid kyi lam phyogs
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས	political system	chab srid kyi lam lugs
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ལས་འགན	political duty/ task	chab srid kyi las 'gan
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཤུགས་རྐྱེན	political influence	chab srid kyi shugs rkyen
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	political thought	chab srid kyi bsam pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱིས་དམག་སྤྱི་བྱེད	put politics in the lead/ command	chab srid kyis dmag spyi byed
ཆབ་སྲིད་སྐྱོང	rule/ keep in power	chab srid skyong
ཆབ་སྲིད་བསྐྱངས	ruled/ kept in power	chab srid bskyangs
ཆབ་སྲིད་མཁས་པ	political expert, politician	chab srid mkhas pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་མཐུན་ཚོགས་འདུ	political consultative congress/ conference	chab srid gros mthun tshogs 'du
ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་མོལ་ཚོགས་འདུ	political consultative congress/ conference	chab srid gros mol tshogs 'du
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཅུས	political bureau	chab srid cus
ཆབ་སྲིད་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	political power/ force chab srid stobs shugs kyi phyogs khag political clique/ forces	chab srid stobs shugs
ཆབ་སྲིད་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	political front	chab srid 'thab phyogs
ཆབ་སྲིད་པ	politician, statesman	chab srid pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	political economy	chab srid dpal 'byor kyi rig pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་བྱ་བ	political activity/ work/ affairs	chab srid bya ba
ཆབ་སྲིད་འཚོ་བ	political life/ livelihood	chab srid 'tsho ba
ཆབ་སྲིད་ལ་འདས	beyond politics	chab srid la 'das
ཆབ་སྲིད་ལ་འདས་པའི་གནད་དོན	issue beyond politics	chab srid la 'das pa'i gnad don
ཆབ་སྲིད་ལམ་ལུགས	polity	chab srid lam lugs
ཆབ་སྲིད་ལོ་མང་སྐྱོང་པ	ruled/ kept in power for many years	chab srid lo mang skyong pa
ཆབ་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན	political commissar	chab srid u yon
ཆབ་གསང	urine	chab gsang
ཆབ་གསང་རྒྱས་འདུས	excrement and urine	chab gsang rgyas 'dus
ཆབ་གསང་བཏང་བ	make water	chab gsang btang ba
ཆབ་གསང་གནང	urinate, [h] go to the bathroom	chab gsang gnang
ཆབ་གསང་ཕྱིན་པ	urinate	chab gsang phyin pa
ཆབ་གསིལ	piss	chab gsil
ཆབ་གསིལ་བ	discharge urine, make water	chab gsil ba
ཆབས	together	chabs
ཆབས་ཅིག	together, in the same place, at the same time, "together with" clause connective	chabs cig
ཆབས་ཅིག་ཏུ	at the same time, moreover, besides, furthermore	chabs cig tu
ཆབས་ཅིག་ཡོང	[they] came together	chabs cig yong
ཆབས་སྦྲགས	"together with" clause connective	chabs sbrags
ཆམ	to have done with	cham
ཆམ་གྱིས	completely, utterly. Syn {cam gyis} 802	cham gyis
ཆམ་གྱིས་བཞག	give up	cham gyis bzhag
ཆམ་འགྲམས	sha chang dang nyin sleeping etc. kyis cham pa'i nad gzhi 'khrugs par gyur pa'i don	cham 'grams
ཆམ་རྒན	zas spyod mi mthun par bsten pa sogs kyis cham pa'i nad gzhi 'khrugs te nad gzhug ma chod nas rgyun ring du lus la zhen pa'i cham pa'i nad rnying pa zhig	cham rgan
ཆམ་ཅིག	Syn {lhan cig pa}	cham cig
ཆམ་ཆད	destroyed	cham chad
ཆམ་ཆམ	level; pervasive	cham cham
ཆམ་ཆམ་འགྲོ	go for a walk/ stroll	cham cham 'gro
ཆམ་ཆམ་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to walk around	cham cham la 'gro ba
ཆམ་བཇལ	all-pervasive	cham bjal
ཆམ་དུ	continuously, always	cham du
ཆམ་དུ་འབེབས་པ	pouring continually	cham du 'bebs pa
ཆམ་བརྡལ	all-pervasive	cham brdal
ཆམ་ནད	cold, flu, catarrh	cham nad
ཆམ་པ	cold, catarrh, flu	cham pa
ཆམ་པ་རྒྱག	catch a cold/ flu/ catarrh	cham pa rgyag
ཆམ་པ་ལྕི་པོ	severe cold/ flu	cham pa lci po
ཆམ་པ་ཕོག	catch a cold/ flu/ catarrh	cham pa phog
ཆམ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	cooperate	cham po byed pa
ཆམ་ཕབ	defeated, destroyed annihilated	cham phab
ཆམ་མེ	completely, utterly, by degrees, gradually slow, not hasty, not greedy, indifferent to, serene, quiet	cham me
ཆམ་མེ་བ	serene, quiet	cham me ba
ཆམ་མེར་བཞག་པ	letting go	cham mer bzhag pa
ཆམ་ཙེ	zha thul lam zla gam ste ser mo ba phyir bskyod dang nang sdod gnyis ka'i gyon chas dang skya bo nang sdod skabs kyi gyon chas shig	cham tse
ཆམ་བཞག	tranquil state	cham bzhag
ཆམ་ཡངས	pervasive	cham yangs
ཆམ་རིམས	flu epidemic	cham rims
ཆམ་ལ་ཕབ	Syn {char bcad pa}, annihilated, eliminated, abolished, destroyed	cham la phab
ཆམ་ལ་ཕབ་པ	to cast down	cham la phab pa
ཆམ་ལ་ཕབས	conquest	cham la phabs
ཆམ་ལ་ཕོབ་པ	to cast down	cham la phob pa
ཆམ་ལ་འབེབ་པ	leveled	cham la 'beb pa
ཆམས	Comp. with {cham, cam}	chams
ཆམས་ཀྱིས་བཞག་པ	completely let go of	chams kyis bzhag pa
ཆམས་གཅིག་ཏུ	together	chams gcig tu
ཆམས་པ	common cold	chams pa
ཆམས་པ་རྒྱག	catch a cold/ flu/ catarrh	chams pa rgyag
ཆམས་པ་ལྕི་པོ	severe cold/ flu	chams pa lci po
ཆམས་པ་ཕོག	catch a cold/ flu/ catarrh	chams pa phog
ཆམས་པོ	harmonious	chams po
ཆམས་ཚི	allergy; {chams tshi phog pa} to have / get allergies	chams tshi
ཆམས་བཞག	tranquil state, keep quiet	chams bzhag
ཆམས་རིམས	influenza	chams rims
ཆམས་ལ་འབེབས	to defeat, destroy	chams la 'bebs
ཆའི་རྒྱན	among don rgyan, a things nature unsuitable rnam pa nges par gsal ba de; g.yo zol gyis obscured and not manifest made ornament, among which are four kinds:, 'os pa'i cha, mi 'os pa'i cha, smad pa'i...	cha'i rgyan
ཆའོ་ཧྲོའུ	professor	cha'o hro'u
ཆའོ་ཧྲོའུ་གཞོན	associate professor	cha'o hro'u gzhon
ཆར་ཀ་ནག་པོ	form of {gshin rje'i gshed} Yamantaka	char ka nag po
ཆར་དཀོན་པོ	drought	char dkon po
ཆར་སྐྱིབ	shelter from rain	char skyib
ཆར་སྐྱིབས	shelter, pent roof, protection from rain	char skyibs
ཆར་སྐྱེས	sbal ba	char skyes
ཆར་སྐྱོབ	umbrella, roof	char skyob
ཆར་སྐྱོབས	umbrella	char skyobs
ཆར་སྐྱོར	undecided cases, undecided disputes	char skyor
ཆར་ཁེབས	mackintosh, raincoat, cover or dress for protection against rain, rain cloak, house	char khebs
ཆར་གོས	mackintosh, raincoat	char gos
ཆར་གྱི་རྒྱུན	streaming rain	char gyi rgyun
ཆར་གྱི་ཟེགས་མ	soft/ misty rain	char gyi zegs ma
ཆར་གྱེང	lashing rain	char gyeng
ཆར་གྱོགས	house/ garment for rain protection	char gyogs
ཆར་དགའ	that delights in rains	char dga'
ཆར་རྒྱུན	continual rain	char rgyun
ཆར་རྒྱུན་ཟིམ་བུ	soft rain	char rgyun zim bu
ཆར་ཅན	summer, rainy	char can
ཆར་བཅུག་པ	made to be done or worked out	char bcug pa
ཆར་ཆར་རབ་ཏུ་འབེབས	intense rainfall	char char rab tu 'bebs
ཆར་ཆིལ	wavering, fluctuating, pulsating char chil g.yo ba'i chu bo'i rba rlabs - wavering/ fluctuating/ pulsating waves of the river	char chil
ཆར་ཆུ	1) rain and water; 2) rain[-fall/ water]; 3) heavy rain	char chu
ཆར་ཆུ་ཆེན་པོ	deluge	char chu chen po
ཆར་ཆུ་དུས་སུ་འབབ་པ	rains be timely	char chu dus su 'bab pa
ཆར་ཆུ་མེད་པ	drought	char chu med pa
ཆར་ཆེན་པོ	Syn {bla ma char chen po} the great lama Char; disciple of Phadampa Sangye 803	char chen po
ཆར་ཆེན་པོ་བབས་པ	rained heavily	char chen po babs pa
ཆར་ཆེན་བབས	heavy rain	char chen babs
ཆར་ཆེས	SA char pa chen po	char ches
ཆར་གཏོགས	vi. to belong to, to be a part of	char gtogs
ཆར་གཏོགས་པ	belonging to the category of, a part of	char gtogs pa
ཆར་ལྟར་བབ	fall like rain	char ltar bab
ཆར་སྟོན	swallow	char ston
ཆར་སྟོབས	measure of greatness of rain	char stobs
ཆར་བརྟག་ཡོ་བྱད	barometer, meteorological equipment	char brtag yo byad
ཆར་ཐིགས	rain drops, drizzle	char thigs
ཆར་ཐིགས་རྒྱག	drizzle	char thigs rgyag
ཆར་དུ་བསྙིལ་བ	fall like rain	char du bsnyil ba
ཆར་དུས	rainy season, monsoon	char dus
ཆར་དུས་བབས	rain falls in due season	char dus babs
ཆར་དྲག	heavy rain	char drag
ཆར་དྲག་པ	heavy rain, month of heavy rains (july)	char drag pa
ཆར་གདུགས	umbrella	char gdugs
ཆར་གདུགས་ཕུབས	open an umbrella	char gdugs phubs
ཆར་མདངས	"rain shading, an unusual type of sky shading applied with vertical strokes	char mdangs
ཆར་རྡུང	rain beating on the body	char rdung
ཆར་རྡུལ	raindrops, SA char zil	char rdul
ཆར་རྡོ	bon tradition rock required for rain making which kills animals	char rdo
ཆར་ལྡན	summer, rainy	char ldan
ཆར་སྡོད་བྱིའུ	khug rta or 'dag byi'u .Char sdod byi'u skom na yang, sa la 'bab pa'i chu mi 'thung	char sdod byi'u
ཆར་སྣ་རླུང་ཁྲིད	as wind leads the rain, bad conditions precede bad actions	char sna rlung khrid
ཆར་པ	rain [syn: mkha' las bab, gru char, dgung char, rgyun bab, chu'i sa bon, sprin gyi me tog sprin bcud,	char pa
ཆར་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	rain	char pa rgyab pa
ཆར་པ་ཅན	rainy	char pa can
ཆར་པ་ཆུ་གྲོགས	rain is a friend of water [making it increase]	char pa chu grogs
ཆར་པ་ཆེན་པོ	downpour	char pa chen po
ཆར་པ་གཏོང	rain	char pa gtong
ཆར་པ་བབ་པ	rain	char pa bab pa
ཆར་པ་འབབ	rain	char pa 'bab
ཆར་པ་འབབ་པ	rain	char pa 'bab pa
ཆར་པ་འབབ་ཚད	amount of rain/ precipitation	char pa 'bab tshad
ཆར་པ་འབེབས	rain cloud (that causes rain)	char pa 'bebs
ཆར་པ་ཟིམ་ཟིམ	soft/ misty rain	char pa zim zim
ཆར་པ་སིབ་སིབ	soft or fine rain	char pa sib sib
ཆར་པའི་དུས	rainy season	char pa'i dus
ཆར་པའི་དུས་ཆུ	rainwater	char pa'i dus chu
ཆར་པས་སྦངས	wet with rain	char pas sbangs
ཆར་སྤྲིན	rain-cloud	char sprin
ཆར་སྤྲིན་ཅན	cloud containing rain	char sprin can
ཆར་ཕབ	[send] rain	char phab
ཆར་ཕིབས	rain garments	char phibs
ཆར་ཕོབ	rain!	char phob
ཆར་ཕོབས	cause rain	char phobs
ཆར་ཕྲན	little/ small rain	char phran
ཆར་བབས	rainfall	char babs
ཆར་བུ	light rain	char bu
ཆར་འབབ་མཁས་པ	rainmaking lama	char 'bab mkhas pa
ཆར་འབབ་དུས	dbyar	char 'bab dus
ཆར་འབེབ	bring rain; rain-making ritual	char 'beb
ཆར་འབེབས	1) rain maker; 2) Indra; 3) bring rain; 4) rain cloud; 5) prayer for rain	char 'bebs
ཆར་འབེབས་གྲོང་འཇོམས	epithet of indra, name of brgya byin lha	char 'bebs grong 'joms
ཆར་འབེབས་པ	to rain, shower, rainfall, make fall	char 'bebs pa
ཆར་འབོར	amount of rain	char 'bor
ཆར་འབྲུ	a raindrop	char 'bru
ཆར་སྦུད	rain and wind	char sbud
ཆར་མི་ཉེ	cannot approach (the	char mi nye
ཆར་མི་འདྲ	{phan yon snga ma de dang char mi 'dra ste} the benefits of such giving are far greater than those of	char mi 'dra
ཆར་མི་ཕོད	not be matched, not make a fraction of, not equal	char mi phod
ཆར་མི་ཕོད་ཉེ	does not match, equal, make up, approach, would not be matched, will not make up, do not equal even a fraction	char mi phod nye
ཆར་མུན	night and thick rain clouds dark blackness	char mun
ཆར་མེད	ku ru'i yul du char med - in the land of Kuru, no rain fell	char med
ཆར་མེད་སྟེང་འབར	drought	char med steng 'bar
ཆར་མེད་ཐན་པ	drought	char med than pa
ཆར་མེད་ཐོན་པ	drought, rainlessness	char med thon pa
ཆར་མེད་པར	no rain fell	char med par
ཆར་མེད་ལ་ཆར་ཕབས	caused rain to fall during drought	char med la char phabs
ཆར་ཚད	amount of rain	char tshad
ཆར་ཚད་ཆས	rain gauge	char tshad chas
ཆར་ཚད་དཔྱད་ཡོ་བྱད	rain gauge	char tshad dpyad yo byad
ཆར་ཞོད	good and beneficial rain	char zhod
ཆར་ཞོད་ཆེ	very heavy rain	char zhod che
ཆར་ཞོད་ཆེ་སྟབས	a matter of great importance	char zhod che stabs
ཆར་བཞིན་འབེབས་པ	rains down; showers	char bzhin 'bebs pa
ཆར་ཟིམ	soft/ misty rain	char zim
ཆར་ཟིམ་པོ	soft fine rain	char zim po
ཆར་ཟིམ་བུ	drizzle, soft rainfall	char zim bu
ཆར་ཟིམ་ཟིམ	soft or fine rain	char zim zim
ཆར་ཟིལ	rain drops, rain particles, particles of water	char zil
ཆར་ཟིལ་གཏོང་བ	drizzle	char zil gtong ba
ཆར་ཡང་མི་ཕོད	doesn't approach even a fraction; is not match to	char yang mi phod
ཆར་ཡིབ	char pas mi 'bong ba byas nas g.yol ba,...Rgan mo zhig gi khyim du gnas tsang g.yar te char yib byas	char yib
ཆར་རེ	directly	char re
ཆར་རླུང	rainstorm	char rlung
ཆར་རླུང་ཆེན་པོ	tempest	char rlung chen po
ཆར་རླུང་དྲག་པོ	heavy storm	char rlung drag po
ཆར་རླུང་ཚུབས་ཚུབས	squall	char rlung tshubs tshubs
ཆར་ལེན	coping or water tile of a wall 804	char len
ཆར་ཤུགས	amount of rain	char shugs
ཆར་ཤོད	good and beneficial rain	char shod
ཆར་ཤོད་ཆེ་སྟབས	important matter	char shod che stabs
ཆར་སིབ་སིབ	soft or fine rain	char sib sib
ཆར་སིམ་བུ	soft fine rain	char sim bu
ཆར་སླེ	mackintosh, raincoat	char sle
ཆར་སླེའུ	char skyob sle'u' pr phyar ba	char sle'u
ཆར་ལྷགས	rainstorm	char lhags
ཆལ	belly, abdomen, onomatopoeia for a splash	chal
ཆལ་གྱུག	unstable, meaningless, pointless, unconnected nonsense/ babble, noise, idle talk	chal gyug
ཆལ་སྒྲ	continuous roar of words like braking waves	chal sgra
ཆལ་ཅོལ	idle talk, nonsense	chal col
ཆལ་ཆལ	sound of falling oars, sound of falling oars	chal chal
ཆལ་ཆལ་འཁྱོམ	shaking of fluid	chal chal 'khyom
ཆལ་ཆིལ	rba rlabs g.yo tshul, wavering, fluctuating, pulsating, fluctuation, fluctuate	chal chil
ཆལ་ཆེལ	meaningless/ aimless behavior	chal chel
ཆལ་ཆོལ	{don med chal le chol le}, meaningless, aimless, senseless behavior	chal chol
ཆལ་ཆོལ་སྨྲ	talk nonsense	chal chol smra
ཆལ་དུ་བཀྲམ	spread evenly/ all over, distribute uniformly, scatter all over, broadcast	chal du bkram
ཆལ་དུ་བཀྲམས་པ	scattered, strewn over, fully spread, widespread	chal du bkrams pa
ཆལ་རྡབ་པ	slip and stumble	chal rdab pa
ཆལ་བརྡབ	waves chal chil brdab pa	chal brdab
ཆལ་པོ	adulterer	chal po
ཆལ་བ	simplicity	chal ba
ཆལ་བའི་ངང	simplicity	chal ba'i ngang
ཆལ་མ	snyoms po, thang ma Thang chen steng du kha ba chal mar khyab 'dug evenly	chal ma
ཆལ་མར་བཀྲམ	spread evenly/ all over, distribute uniformly, scatter all over, broadcast	chal mar bkram
ཆལ་མར་བརྡལ	spread evenly, distribute uniformly, scatter all over	chal mar brdal
ཆལ་མར་བརྡལ་བ	scatter all over	chal mar brdal ba
ཆལ་མོ	adulteress	chal mo
ཆལ་ལི་ཆིལ་ལི	1) w big waves; 2) big continuous rain	chal li chil li
ཆལ་ལེ་ཆོལ་ལེ	1) not true genuine rnam pa; 2) w mixed good and bad rnam pa; 3) unstable power of apprehension aimless behavior confused, pall mall, essenceless. false, messed up	chal le chol le
ཆས	together	chas
ཆས་ཀ	1) clothes and ornament [style]; 2) materials/ implements/ tools/ requisites/ resources for; 3) grain etc for feeding livestock; 4) a meal, dinner; 5) property; 6) provisions, supplies	chas ka
ཆས་ཁོག	food vessel for cattle etc.	chas khog
ཆས་གུར	dressing tent in dance and theater	chas gur
ཆས་གོས	costume, costume, clothes, garments	chas gos
ཆས་གྱོན	wear/ put on clothes	chas gyon
ཆས་དགོས	necessary to leave	chas dgos
ཆས་དགོས་པར	as it is necessary to depart	chas dgos par
ཆས་འགྲོ	to set out (on a journey)	chas 'gro
ཆས་སྒྱུར	change garments w someone	chas sgyur
ཆས་སྒྱུར་བ	put on, assume another's dress	chas sgyur ba
ཆས་ཅན	attire	chas can
ཆས་ཆོད	SA brnyes pa	chas chod
ཆས་ཏེ	set off [on a journey]	chas te
ཆས་བདུན	[TRS 144-1]	chas bdun
ཆས་ནས	as regards	chas nas
ཆས་ནས་འགྲོ	go on to ...; will go on his way; see {chas 'gro}	chas nas 'gro
ཆས་པ	start off, set out, set forth, depart, prepare for, start, dashing after, set about, SA cha ba	chas pa
ཆས་པྱོན་པ	departed	chas pyon pa
ཆས་སྤྲས་པ	to make up, dress in disguise	chas spras pa
ཆས་བྱོན་པ	departed	chas byon pa
ཆས་མེད་པ	naked, unadorned	chas med pa
ཆས་མཛེས	beautifully attired	chas mdzes
ཆས་རྫུས	impersonation	chas rdzus
ཆས་རྫུས་སྒྲིག	impersonate	chas rdzus sgrig
ཆས་རྫུས་སྤྲས	impersonate	chas rdzus spras
ཆས་ཞུགས	cha lugs spras pa,...zlos gar gyi chas zhugs pa rnams sdings cha'i steng du yong ba	chas zhugs
ཆས་གཟབས་སྤྲད	dress up	chas gzabs sprad
ཆས་བཟོ	set of clothes	chas bzo
ཆས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	send away, dispatch	chas su 'jug pa
ཆས་སུ་བྱ་སྟེ	appearing as 805	chas su bya ste
ཆས་སུ་ཞུགས་པ	among {phyi 'jug}, to a student a blessed red garment etc smad g.yogs gsol, stod g.yogs dgab, gtsug tor bskon pa'o	chas su zhugs pa
ཆི	number 36	chi
ཆི་ཀ	wallet, knapsack, moment of death	chi ka
ཆི་ཀང	cylinder	chi kang
ཆི་ག	wallet, knapsack	chi ga
ཆི་གུ	[arch] what kind is it, what is it like?	chi gu
ཆི་གེ	(M wild horse milk	chi ge
ཆི་ཆི་ཁུར	Tsitsihar	chi chi khur
ཆི་ཆི་ཧར	Tsitsihar	chi chi har
ཆི་ཏྲ	variegated, figured	chi tra
ཆི་དམ	bezoar, 1 of 8 sman bla ritual objects	chi dam
ཆི་བདག་འཇིགས་སུ་རུང་བའི་ཁ	the feared maw of death	chi bdag 'jigs su rung ba'i kha
ཆི་ནང་གསང་བའི་བར་ཆད	outer, inner and innermost obstacles. To explain the outer, inner and innermost obstacles: the outer obstacles are disturbances of the four elements; the machinations of the Mara of the Lord of Dea...	chi nang gsang ba'i bar chad
ཆི་བའི་འོད་གསལ	clear light at death	chi ba'i 'od gsal
ཆི་བི་ཁ	1) a fruit; 2) Ma nu rta skam med, [sweet, body heat neutral, good for bad kan smug ser &, reg dug etc.]	chi bi kha
ཆི་མེད་རྔ་སྒྲའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the deathless awesome king of sounds	chi med rnga sgra'i rgyal po
ཆི་ཡིའུ	gasoline	chi yi'u
ཆི་ཡིའུ་ཏན	gasoline bomb	chi yi'u tan
ཆི་ལི	Chile	chi li
ཆི་ལི་ལི	abound	chi li li
ཆི་ལེ	to remain still	chi le
ཆི་ལེན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	chi len
ཆི་ལེན་རི་བོ	Chi Lien Mts	chi len ri bo
ཆིག	used for gcig as first part of compound numbers	chig
ཆིག་རྐྱ་བ	1 alone, 1 solitary thing	chig rkya ba
ཆིག་རྐྱང	single, alone	chig rkyang
ཆིག་སྐྱ་བ	1 alone, 1 solitary thing	chig skya ba
ཆིག་སྐྱེས	alone growing plant or tree	chig skyes
ཆིག་སྐྱེས་དབང་ལག	herb	chig skyes dbang lag
ཆིག་ཁྲི	10,000	chig khri
ཆིག་གི་དབང	empowerment of the 1	chig gi dbang
ཆིག་རྒྱུ་ཉིས་སྤུན	kind of blanket in the weaving of which one longitudinal thread is crossed by two	chig rgyu nyis spun
ཆིག་སྒྲིལ	unity, united	chig sgril
ཆིག་སྒྲིལ་བཟོ་བ	unite	chig sgril bzo ba
ཆིག་བརྒྱ	100	chig brgya
ཆིག་བརྒྱུད	single lineage, teaching passed on to only 1 person	chig brgyud
ཆིག་ཅར་པ	see also {cig car pa}	chig car pa
ཆིག་ཅར་བ	instantanealist tradition	chig car ba
ཆིག་བཅུ	ten	chig bcu
ཆིག་ཆོད	one (decidedly)	chig chod
ཆིག་སྟོང	1,000	chig stong
ཆིག་ཐུབ	able to do [something] alone, universal panacea	chig thub
ཆིག་ཐུབ་པ	be able to do a thing alone, a plant used in medicine	chig thub pa
ཆིག་དྲིལ	confluence, unity	chig dril
ཆིག་དྲིལ་དུ	concise	chig dril du
ཆིག་དྲིལ་བྱ	combine into one	chig dril bya
ཆིག་དྲིལ་བྱ་བའི་ཚུལ	way of practicing combined into one	chig dril bya ba'i tshul
ཆིག་འདྲིལ	reconcile into 1	chig 'dril
ཆིག་འབུམ	one hundred thousand	chig 'bum
ཆིག་ཚལ	green vegetable, singular [of a word]	chig tshal
ཆིག་ཚུགས	single form, single/ united firmness	chig tshugs
ཆིག་རྫོགས	unique (state of) perfection; uniquely perfect	chig rdzogs
ཆིག་རྫོགས་སུ	complete as one, unified	chig rdzogs su
ཆིག་རྫོགས་སུ་བླངས	received the complete [transmission of such and such] together	chig rdzogs su blangs
ཆིག་རིགས	single kind/ family	chig rigs
ཆིག་ལབ	talking to oneself	chig lab
ཆིག་ལབ་བྱེད་པ	talk to oneself, hold a soliloquy	chig lab byed pa
ཆིག་ཤད	1 stroke at the end of a word/ phrase	chig shad
ཆིགས་སྒྱ	saddle [H]	chigs sgya
ཆིང	bind, tie, fetter	ching
ཆིང་ཀྲེན	Muslim, Islam	ching kren
ཆིང་གོང་མ	Ch'ing Emperor	ching gong ma
ཆིང་དངུལ	indemnity [deriving from treaty]	ching dngul
ཆིང་ཏན	H bomb	ching tan
ཆིང་ཏན་ཚོན་ཆ	[Hydrogen] nuclear weapons	ching tan tshon cha
ཆིང་བ	bind, tie, fetter	ching ba
ཆིང་མེ་སུའུ	penicillin	ching me su'u
ཆིང་མོལ	conference for making treaty	ching mol
ཆིང་ཚལ	green vegetable	ching tshal
ཆིང་ཝང	Chingwang, Prince of the First Order ching wang ngag dbang dar rgyas Chingwang Ngawang Dargye, otherwise known as Ngakyi Wangpo	ching wang
ཆིང་རླངས	hydrogen	ching rlangs
ཆིང་ཤོས	smallest	ching shos
ཆིང་སང	prime minister, phying sang	ching sang
ཆིངས	1) bind! tie! fetter! ['Ching ba!]; 1) agreement's/ document's Zhi chings,...tshong chings,...Chings bzhag rgyal khab,...Chings 'grig pa,...(2 [summary of the] main points, frame, outline, features...	chings
ཆིངས་འགྲིགས	arbitration, mediation, intervention	chings 'grigs
ཆིངས་རྒྱག	intervene, mediate, bound up	chings rgyag
ཆིངས་རྒྱབ་པའི་རྐང་ཆག་པ	bound up broken leg	chings rgyab pa'i rkang chag pa
ཆིངས་དངུལ	indemnity	chings dngul
ཆིངས་དངུལ་སྤྲོད	pay an indemnity	chings dngul sprod
ཆིངས་ལྔ	the five main points	chings lnga
ཆིངས་ཐག	binds, fetters; {chings zhags}	chings thag
ཆིངས་དང་ལོག་ནོན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wheel of Bonds and Suppression. Text belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga composed by Guru Rinpoche	chings dang log non gyi 'khor lo
ཆིངས་དོན་ཡིག་ཁག	treaties	chings don yig khag
ཆིངས་པ	schemata; matrix; to embrace/ encompass	chings pa
ཆིངས་པ་མེད་པ	unattached {khyod la 'chings pa med par chos cis mi byed} You are unattached. Why do you not practice the Dharma?	chings pa med pa
ཆིངས་བྱེད	intervene, mediate	chings byed
ཆིངས་མ	[mdong mo sogs kyi phyi rol gyi sked pa dang mgo mjug nas dam por sdom byed lcags shan sogs,...Zom chings,...Smyug chings,...Mdong mo'i sked chings,...Sam ta'i sked chings,...Dung rgya gling gi ske...	chings ma
ཆིངས་ཞགས	binds, fetters; {chings thag}	chings zhags
ཆིངས་ཡིག	agreement, bond, treaty	chings yig
ཡི་གེ	countries mutually agreeing on and signing a treaty	yi ge
ཆིངས་སུ་བཅིང་བ	bind/ control/ cut the fetters (free	chings su bcing ba
ཆིངས་ཧུ	Chinese title	chings hu
ཆིད་པ	SA phyid pa	chid pa
ཆིན	stringed instrument	chin
ཆིན་ཏན	H bomb	chin tan
ཆིན་ཚལ	vegetable like celery cabbage [bok choy?]	chin tshal
ཆིན་ཝང	CH a rank/ title	chin wang
ཆིབ	[arch] encompassing, covering all, equal, uniform, suitable, mount, ride	chib
ཆིབ་སྒ	saddle	chib sga
ཆིབ་སྒ་བསྟད་པ	lay the saddle on	chib sga bstad pa
ཆིབ་ཆིབ	white mtshon tshul zhig ...Me tog dkar pos skya chib chib tu gang 'dug	chib chib
ཆིབ་པ	[arch] encompassing, covering all, equal, uniform, suitable, mount, ride	chib pa
ཆིབ་ལ་འཆིབས་པ	ride, mount a horse	chib la 'chibs pa
ཆིབས	horse, ride, SA 'chib pa	chibs
ཆིབས་བཀྱག	horse mounting platform	chibs bkyag
ཆིབས་སྐྱེལ	rta bzhon gyi skyel ma, phebs skyel	chibs skyel
ཆིབས་བསྐྱོད	'gro 'ong byed pa [h] Gzigs skor du chibs bskyod gnang ba	chibs bskyod
ཆིབས་བསྐྱོད་གནང་བ	ride, go on a journey	chibs bskyod gnang ba
ཆིབས་ཁ	rta kha	chibs kha
ཆིབས་ཁ་འཁྲིད་པ	lead a horse by the bridle	chibs kha 'khrid pa
ཆིབས་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བ	riding / turning his horse	chibs kha bsgyur ba
ཆིབས་ཁ་ཐུབ	be able to command the bridle/ rule	chibs kha thub
ཆིབས་ཁ་ཐུབ་པ	have command of the bridle, be expert in ruling	chibs kha thub pa
ཆིབས་ཁེབ	horse blanket	chibs kheb
ཆིབས་འགྲོས་རྒྱབ་པ	to amble	chibs 'gros rgyab pa
ཆིབས་སྒ	saddle	chibs sga
ཆིབས་སྒ་སྐྱོན	saddle a horse	chibs sga skyon
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར	journey, visit	chibs sgyur
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་སྐབས	during the journey/ visit	chibs sgyur skabs
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་བསྐྱངས	go, come	chibs sgyur bskyangs
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་གནང	go, come	chibs sgyur gnang
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་གནང་ཞུ་བ	farewell	chibs sgyur gnang zhu ba
ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་ཡང་ཡང་གནང	go/ come frequently	chibs sgyur yang yang gnang
ཆིབས་བསྒྱུར	a visit, journey	chibs bsgyur
ཆིབས་ལྔ་ལྡན	horse on which Gautama rode	chibs lnga ldan
ཆིབས་ལྕག	horse whip [h]	chibs lcag
ཆིབས་ཆག	for the Dalai Lama's horses etc fodder skyel 'dren byed pa'i 'u lag cig	chibs chag
ཆིབས་ཆས	harness, horse equipments	chibs chas
ཆིབས་ཆེན	charger, best horse in the stable	chibs chen
ཆིབས་ཏེ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བགྲོད་པ	riding here and there throughout [the kingdom]	chibs te kun tu bgrod pa
ཆིབས་ཏོག	lama's horse head rgyag rgyu'i tog	chibs tog
ཆིབས་རྟ	horse (h)	chibs rta
ཆིབས་རྟ་འཆིབ	mount/ ride a horse (H	chibs rta 'chib
ཆིབས་སྟེགས	horse mounting platform	chibs stegs
ཆིབས་ཐུར	horse's head piece	chibs thur
ཆིབས་འཐུར	halter	chibs 'thur
ཆིབས་དར་བ	formerly when the Dalai Lama's chibs bsgyur, rta thog tu dar cha 'khur mkhan	chibs dar ba
ཆིབས་དྲེལ	mule	chibs drel
ཆིབས་གདན	saddle cloth [h]	chibs gdan
ཆིབས་འདྲ	chibs gsor	chibs 'dra
ཆིབས་པ	1) a horse. 2) to ride; (h) horse	chibs pa
ཆིབས་པ་འཆིབ	ride a horse [h]	chibs pa 'chib
ཆིབས་པ་ལ་ཞོན་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	to mount upon or ride his horse	chibs pa la zhon nas 'gro ba
ཆིབས་དཔོན	chief groom, chief-groom, muleteer, messenger riding a swift horse who carries official dispatches	chibs dpon
ཆིབས་བ	horse [h]	chibs ba
ཆིབས་བྱམས	phebs byams	chibs byams
ཆིབས་བྱོན	went riding 807	chibs byon
ཆིབས་སྦྱངས་པ	1) trained rider; 2) horse w trained gait	chibs sbyangs pa
ཆིབས་སྦྱོང	sngar Dalai Lama's chibs bsgyur dngos gzhi'i snga nyin tshod lta gra sgrig gi chibs sbyong byed pa	chibs sbyong
ཆིབས་ཞབས	horse changing servant, entourage/ party [on a journey [h]	chibs zhabs
ཆིབས་ཞབས་འགོད	arrive, [h]	chibs zhabs 'god
ཆིབས་ཞབས་འགོད་སྐབས	when [they] arrived, [h]	chibs zhabs 'god skabs
ཆིབས་ཡོབ	stirrup [h] chibs g.yog - groom	chibs yob
ཆིབས་ར	horse corral/ stable [h]	chibs ra
ཆིབས་རགས	rta bzhon gyi phreng star	chibs rags
ཆིབས་རེས	Ganden monastery's mtho rim sku drag rnams la mi ser gyis rta khral re mos kyis gtong ba	chibs res
ཆིབས་རོལ	bzhon pa'i nye 'gram	chibs rol
ཆིབས་ལ་བཅིབས	rode on a horse	chibs la bcibs
ཆིབས་ལས་གཞོལ་ཏེ	having dismounted from his horse	chibs las gzhol te
ཆིབས་ལས་གཞོལ་བ	dismount	chibs las gzhol ba
ཆིབས་བཤོལ	dismount, get off [horse/ train etc.] [h]	chibs bshol
ཆིབས་བཤོལ་གནང	dismount, get off [horse/ train etc.] [h]	chibs bshol gnang
ཆིབས་སྲབ	bridle [h]	chibs srab
ཆིབས་གསེབ	stallion [h]	chibs gseb
ཆིབས་བསུ	1) ride to meet/ welcome/ greet someone arriving; 2) Rta bzhon nas bsu bar 'gro ba	chibs bsu
ཆིམས་ཕུ	Chimphu. The hermitage of caves above Samye in Central Tibet. Guru Rinpoche spent several years there in retreat	chims phu
ཆིའི་ཁྲེ	auto, vehicle	chi'i khre
ཆིའི་ཁྲེ་གཏོང	drive an auto/ vehicle	chi'i khre gtong
ཆིའུ་ཅིར	Churchill	chi'u cir
ཆིར	'chir ba! chints ?? squeezed, wrung, crushed	chir
ཆིར་གྱིས་བཅིར	(A; 1) bar du mnan te btsir ba; 2) Gcus ril bskor te btsir ba	chir gyis bcir
ཆིར་གྱིས་ཆིར	chir gyis bcir	chir gyis chir
ཆིར་ཆིར	mdog dang ri mo khra shig shig	chir chir
ཆིལ	depose, SA 'jil ba	chil
ཆིལ་གྱིས་མནན	press down with some force	chil gyis mnan
ཆིལ་སྒྲོག	ripples, SA chu gnyer	chil sgrog
ཆིལ་ཆིའ	1) waves, flow of water. 2) shiny, glittering [of jewelry]	chil chi'
ཆིལ་ཆིལ	1) wave [movement], flow of water, water boiling; 2) shiny, glittering (of jewelry; 3) sound of great rain falling; 4) rotten	chil chil
ཆིལ་མན	CH bsnyal nas langs pa'i wheat dough	chil man
ཆིལ་མན་མོག་མོག	CH wheat dough rlangs btsos kyi mo mo sob sob	chil man mog mog
ཆིལ་ལེ	shining, glistening	chil le
ཆིས་ཁྲེའེ	auto, vehicle	chis khre'e
ཆིས་ཁྲེའེ་ཆུང་ཆུང	jeep	chis khre'e chung chung
ཆིས་ཁྲེའེ་གཏོང	drive an auto/ vehicle	chis khre'e gtong
ཆུ་ཀ་ལ	water tap/ pipe	chu ka la
ཆུ་ཀ་ལ་སོགས་བཟོ་མཁན	plumber	chu ka la sogs bzo mkhan
ཆུ་ཀྱོང་པོ	hard water	chu kyong po
ཆུ་ཀླུང	river in general, stream, river whose water course is perennial and	chu klung
ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཀྱག་ཀྱོག་འགྲོ་བ	meander	chu klung kyag kyog 'gro ba
ཆུ་ཀླུང་སྐལ་ལྡན་ཤིང་རྟའི་རྒྱུན	'di River Ganges stream yin and in a story by king {skal ldan shing rta}s offering to Vishnu'i ched du ral pa'i nang nas river Ganges phab pa yin ltar ming btags pa	chu klung skal ldan shing rta'i rgyun
ཆུ་ཀླུང་སྐྱེས	tree sesbania aegyptiaca	chu klung skyes
ཆུ་ཀླུང་མགོན	lord of rivers	chu klung mgon
ཆུ་ཀླུང་འགྲམ་རྒྱུད	bank of a large river	chu klung 'gram rgyud
ཆུ་ཀླུང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྗེས་འགྲོ	streams that flowed into the ocean	chu klung rgya mtsho rjes 'gro
ཆུ་ཀླུང་རྒྱས	the river swells up	chu klung rgyas
ཆུ་ཀླུང་ངོས	a river's edge	chu klung ngos
ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཅན	place which is intersected by streams or where there are many rivulets	chu klung can
ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཆེན་པོ	great river/ current	chu klung chen po
ཆུ་ཀླུང་མཐའ་ཡས	the boundless ocean	chu klung mtha' yas
ཆུ་ཀླུང་དག་པ	purified by bathing in a river, tirthika	chu klung dag pa
ཆུ་ཀླུང་བདག	lord of rivers, ocean	chu klung bdag
ཆུ་ཀླུང་དམར	red river, sone river	chu klung dmar
ཆུ་ཀླུང་མཚོ	ocean of the higher realms	chu klung mtsho
ཆུ་ཀླུང་འོད་སྲུང	Nadi Kashyapa, important monk follower of the Buddha	chu klung 'od srung
ཆུ་ཀླུང་འོད་སྲུངས	(n'adikashyapa: Buddha's nye 'khor sthavira 'od srungs che chung gsum nang gi 'bring ba 1 a mu stegs pa later the Buddha zhabs la gtugs his name when he became a shravaka	chu klung 'od srungs
ཆུ་ཀླུང་རབ་མེད	1) unfordable great river; 2) the River of Ashes/ no ford (in the 4th neighboring hell chu bo rab med	chu klung rab med
ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཤིང	SA rnam rgyal shing	chu klung shing
ཆུ་ཀློང	main deep channel of a river	chu klong
ཆུ་དཀྱིལ	middle of a river	chu dkyil
ཆུ་དཀྱིལ་གླིང་ལག	peninsula	chu dkyil gling lag
ཆུ་དཀྲུག་པ	convulsed state of a lake by wind, ruffling or churning of the waters	chu dkrug pa
ཆུ་བཀག	dam, reservoir	chu bkag
ཆུ་བཀག་གཏོང	cut off the water supply	chu bkag gtong
ཆུ་བཀག་གཏོང་བཅུས་ཕུར	hydrant, faucet	chu bkag gtong bcus phur
ཆུ་བཀབ	boil water	chu bkab
ཆུ་རྐ	irrigation ditch	chu rka
ཆུ་རྐེད	middle between upper/ lower part of a river	chu rked
ཆུ་རྐྱང	rdza ma'i nang gi chang bcud bsings zin pa'i shul khu chu rkyang ???	chu rkyang
ཆུ་རྐྱང་འཐུང་ནས	drinking water only	chu rkyang 'thung nas
ཆུ་རྐྱལ	1) swim; 2) water vessel rkyal pa; 3) swimmer gyi mkho spyad rkyal pa	chu rkyal
ཆུ་རྐྱལ་ཁང	swimming pool	chu rkyal khang
ཆུ་རྐྱལ་མཁན	swimmer	Chu rkyal mkhan
ཆུ་རྐྱལ་རྒྱག་པ	to swim	chu rkyal rgyag pa
ཆུ་རྐྱལ་རྫིང་བུ	swimming pool	chu rkyal rdzing bu
ཆུ་སྐད	voice of water, sound of rushing water	chu skad
ཆུ་སྐམ་གཉིས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཐན་ཁེ	amphibious tank	chu skam gnyis spyod kyi than khe
ཆུ་སྐམ་པ	water drying up	chu skam pa
ཆུ་སྐར	minute, water star	chu skar
ཆུ་སྐར་ཆེན་པོ	Mercury	chu skar chen po
ཆུ་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 water stars [mon gre, khrums smad, nam gru, snrubs, chu stod, lag skag]	chu skar bdun
ཆུ་སྐོར	water mill, self-grinding mill	chu skor
ཆུ་སྐྱ	whey	chu skya
ཆུ་སྐྱར	fish-eating water bird {chu skyar [syn: rkang gcig pa, chu can, nya 'bigs byed, mdza' mo]	chu skyar
ཆུ་སྐྱར་ཅན	cadamba tree chu skyar mi smra rkang cig tu brdzus nas	chu skyar can
ཉ་རྣམས་ཟ་བ་ལྟར	He is like a heron who disguises himself by standing silently on one foot, so that he can catch and eat the fish	nya rnams za ba ltar
ཆུ་སྐྱིལ	fill up w water	chu skyil
ཆུ་སྐྱིལ་བ	bank up water	chu skyil ba
ཆུ་སྐྱུར	1) vomit; 2) [pho ba'i nang gi] sour tasting water; 3) rhubarb	chu skyur
ཆུ་སྐྱེགས	coot, water	chu skyegs
ཆུ་སྐྱེས	water-lily; one of {'bras bu'i rta babs brgyad}	chu skyes
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་དཀར	white lotus	chu skyes dkar
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་མངལ	tshangs pa Bhrama?	chu skyes mngal
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་སྔོན་པོ	blue lotus	chu skyes sngon po
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ཅན	pond where lotuses grow	chu skyes can
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་རྟ་རྨིག	{chu skyes rta rmig} med. herb	chu skyes rta rmig
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་བདག	lord of the lotus, sun	chu skyes bdag
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་པ	common lotus	chu skyes pa
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་པད་མ	common lotus	chu skyes pad ma
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་དབང་པོ	1) padma'i bdag po; 2) water god	chu skyes dbang po
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་དབང་ལག	herb {chu skyes dbang lag}	chu skyes dbang lag
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་མ	common lotus	chu skyes ma
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་རྩ་བ	white tuberous root of the lotus	chu skyes rtsa ba
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་རག་དགའ	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	chu skyes rag dga'
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་སྲོག་ཆགས	water animals	chu skyes srog chags
ཆུ་སྐྱོགས	water ladle	chu skyogs
ཆུ་སྐྱོད	neck	chu skyod
ཆུ་སྐྱོན	chu'i gnod pa, flood	chu skyon
ཆུ་སྐྱོབ	1) hat; 2) earth; 3) mt	chu skyob
ཆུ་སྐྱོམ་པ	stir the water	chu skyom pa
ཆུ་སྐྱོར	nya rgyab on top of a house, raised embankment to hold/ channel water	chu skyor
ཆུ་སྐྱོར་བ	to hold water	chu skyor ba
ཆུ་སྐྲན	undigested food essence rtsa mig tu byer te don snod kyi logs su chu ser gyi thum bu chags nas mthar rnag skran dang rnag thum becoming	chu skran
ཆུ་བསྐོལ་པ	boiled water, boiling water	chu bskol pa
ཆུ་བསྐོལ་བ་རྣམས	things boiled in water	chu bskol ba rnams
ཆུ་བསྐྱམས	water dried up	chu bskyams
ཆུ་བསྐྱེད་གློག་ཁང	hydro-electric plant	chu bskyed glog khang
ཆུ་བསྐྱེད་གློག་ཤུགས་ཁང	hydroelectric plant	chu bskyed glog shugs khang
ཆུ་ཁ	river bank	chu kha
ཆུ་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བ	change of the course of a river	chu kha bsgyur ba
ཆུ་ཁ་སྙི	urinate	chu kha snyi
ཆུ་ཁ་སྙི་བ	mkhal ma dang lgang pa'i drod nyams pa las byung ba'i gcin pa yang yang 'dzag pa'i gcin snyi'i nad	chu kha snyi ba
ཆུ་ཁ་དབྲག	river which is divided or branched out	chu kha dbrag
ཆུ་ཁ་ལེབ	clay vessel la 'jam sha 'don byed sha ba'i ko ba dum bu'i ming	chu kha leb
ཆུ་ཁང	bath/ shower house/ room	chu khang
ཆུ་ཁམས	water element, water condition, water element condition	chu khams
ཆུ་ཁམས་རྣམ་དག	totally purified water element	chu khams rnam dag
ཆུ་ཁམས་པ	a water element person	chu khams pa
ཆུ་ཁུག	stream's zur khug ...Rta rgod chu khug tu btsud de bzung ba cove, bay	chu khug
ཆུ་ཁུང	hole into which water goes, sluice, weir	chu khung
ཆུ་ཁུར	cloud	chu khur
ཆུ་ཁུར་ཏུ་འཛིན	that which holds clouds, sky, having clouds for a vehicle, epithet of indra	chu khur tu 'dzin
ཆུ་ཁེབས	cloak worn for protection against rain	chu khebs
ཆུ་ཁོག	stop water from going through something, resist/ repel water	chu khog
ཆུ་ཁོག་གི་རེད་པས	is it water-proof?	chu khog gi red pas
ཆུ་ཁོལ	boiled water, boiling water; boiled water	chu khol
ཆུ་ཁོལ་མ	boiled water	chu khol ma
ཆུ་ཁོལ་ཚ་པོ	boiling-hot water	chu khol tsha po
ཆུ་ཁྱི	water dog year	chu khyi
ཆུ་ཁྱེམ	oar	chu khyem
ཆུ་མཁན	water-man, sailor, boatman	chu mkhan
ཆུ་མཁྲིས	water and bile, fire	chu mkhris
ཆུ་མཁྲེགས	ser ba	chu mkhregs
ཆུ་འཁུར	cloud	chu 'khur
ཆུ་འཁུར་སྣོད	water jug	chu 'khur snod
ཆུ་འཁོར	water wheel	chu 'khor
ཆུ་འཁོར་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	water turbine generator	chu 'khor glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་འཁོར་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	water turbine generator	chu 'khor glog 'don 'phrul chas
ཆུ་འཁོར་བ	turning of a watermill, whirl	chu 'khor ba
ཆུ་འཁོལ	to be boiled	chu 'khol
ཆུ་འཁྱགས	ice	chu 'khyags
ཆུ་འཁྱགས་པ	ice	chu 'khyags pa
ཆུ་འཁྱམ་པ	inundation, flood	chu 'khyam pa
ཆུ་འཁྱིལ	puddle, pool	chu 'khyil
ཆུ་འཁྱིལ་བྱེད	puddle, pool	chu 'khyil byed
ཆུ་འཁྱོགས་པ	any tortuous or meandering river	chu 'khyogs pa
ཆུ་འཁྲི་ཤིང	wave	chu 'khri shing
ཆུ་འཁྲུག	wave, ruffle on surface of water	chu 'khrug
ཆུ་གང	[arch] 1) snying stobs; 2) good; 3) blister	chu gang
ཆུ་གང་འཐོན	get blistered	chu gang 'thon
ཆུ་གར	{chu gar	chu gar
ཆུ་གོས	rain coat	chu gos
ཆུ་གྱི་ཁའི་ཁེབས	leg-graves shaped like crocodile snouts	chu gyi kha'i khebs
ཆུ་གྲང	cold water	chu grang
ཆུ་གྲམ་མཉམ་འཇགས	in disputes both sides gleng rgyu med pa byas pa'i dpe Rtsod gzhi rnams chu gram mnyam 'jags su bzhag nas thag chod pa	chu gram mnyam 'jags
ཆུ་གྲི	small knife/ razor; razor-knife	chu gri
ཆུ་གྲུབ་བྲག་རྡོ	sedimentary rocks	chu grub brag rdo
ཆུ་གྲུམ	varieties of smallpox	chu grum
ཆུ་གྲོག	rivulet, brook, dishwater, rinsings	chu grog
ཆུ་གྲོགས་མ	water friend moather [in 'byung rtsis from among ma bu dgra grogs]	chu grogs ma
ཆུ་གྲོང་ལ	chu grong pass [in N 'bri ru rdzong, el. 4878 m]	chu grong la
ཆུ་གླག	water eagle	chu glag
ཆུ་གླང	Water-Bull year	chu glang
ཆུ་གླང་ནག་པོ	rivulet, dishwater	chu glang nag po
ཆུ་གླིང	islet in a river	chu gling
ཆུ་གློ	lung disease caused by water going into cattle's lungs, du ba bdugs na curable	chu glo
ཆུ་གློག	hydro-electric	chu glog
ཆུ་གློག་ས་ཚིགས	hydro-electric power station	chu glog sa tshigs
ཆུ་གློའི་ནད	lung disease caused by water going into cattle's lungs, du ba bdugs na curable	chu glo'i nad
ཆུ་དགྲ་ས	water enemy place	chu dgra sa
ཆུ་མགོ	source or head of a river, feeding spring	chu mgo
ཆུ་མགོ་གྱེན་ལ་ལོག་པ	river flowing upstream/ back to the source, something that won't happen	chu mgo gyen la log pa
ཆུ་མགྲིན་ཅན	crocodile	chu mgrin can
ཆུ་འགག	lock, water/ sluice gate	chu 'gag
ཆུ་འགགས་པ	stoppage or retention of urine	chu 'gags pa
ཆུ་འགུལ་སྒོ་གཤོག	water turbine	chu 'gul sgo gshog
ཆུ་འགུལ་མ་འཁོར	water turbine	chu 'gul ma 'khor
ཆུ་འགོ	1) river source/ beginning; 2) spring	chu 'go
ཆུ་འགོ་གངས་ཐུག	example of root beginning place greatest or highest	chu 'go gangs thug
ཆུ་འགོ་གྱེན་ལ་ལོག་པ	river flowing upstream/ back to the source, something that won't happen	chu 'go gyen la log pa
ཆུ་འགོ་རྟ་རིང	1 of 37 bon holy places, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	chu 'go rta ring
ཆུ་འགོ་བཙུགས	established source of the river	chu 'go btsugs
ཆུ་འགོག	water/ flood protection	chu 'gog
ཆུ་འགོག་ལག་འདོག་ཆུ་ཚོད	water-proof watch	chu 'gog lag 'dog chu tshod
ཆུ་འགོར	at the source of a river	chu 'gor
ཆུ་འགྱེད་སྒོ་བཀག	sluice gate	chu 'gyed sgo bkag
ཆུ་འགྲམ	bank, coast, shore	chu 'gram
ཆུ་འགྲམ་ན	on the banks of the river	chu 'gram na
ཆུ་འགྲོ	chu 'bab sa'i rka'am yur bu	chu 'gro
ཆུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཤུལ	dry channel or passage of water	chu 'gro ba'i shul
ཆུ་འགྲོ་མ་ཨུར	irrigation canal	chu 'gro ma ur
ཆུ་འགྲོ་སའི་ཡུར་བ	irrigation ditch	chu 'gro sa'i yur ba
ཆུ་འགྲོས་ལྟ་བུ་ལས་སྒྲུབ	streamlined production	chu 'gros lta bu las sgrub
ཆུ་འགྲོས་ལྟ་བུ་ལས་རིམ	streamlined work	chu 'gros lta bu las rim
ཆུ་རྒལ	ford in a river	chu rgal
ཆུ་རྒུན་འབྲུམ	'grape [bras bu'i nang nas chu mngar 'byung ba'i shing tog rgun 'brum]	chu rgun 'brum
ཆུ་རྒོད	turbulent/ wavy/ rushing water/ river	chu rgod
ཆུ་རྒྱག་པ	water, irrigate	chu rgyag pa
ཆུ་རྒྱན	lotus	chu rgyan
ཆུ་རྒྱབ་པ	water	chu rgyab pa
ཆུ་རྒྱལ	leather bag for water, moshug	chu rgyal
ཆུ་རྒྱས	swell, rise [rivers]	chu rgyas
ཆུ་རྒྱས་པ	rise, go up	chu rgyas pa
ཆུ་རྒྱུག	flow[ing/ moving water]	chu rgyug
ཆུ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུག	fluent	chu rgyug rgyug
ཆུ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུག་གི་བོད་སྐད	fluent Tibetan	chu rgyug rgyug gi bod skad
ཆུ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུག་བདེ་ཉམ	fluency	chu rgyug rgyug bde nyam
ཆུ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུག་བདེ་པོ	fluent	chu rgyug rgyug bde po
ཆུ་རྒྱུད	river-bank, shore, coast or chu rgyun 'bab sa'i lung rgyud, water system	chu rgyud
ཆུ་རྒྱུན	rivulets	chu rgyun
ཆུ་རྒྱུན་གཅོད	stop the flow of rivers	chu rgyun gcod
ཆུ་རྒྱུན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like the flow of a river	chu rgyun lta bu'i sems bskyed
ཆུ་རྒྱུན་བྱེད་ལྡོག	adverse current	chu rgyun byed ldog
ཆུ་རྒྱུན་འབབ་ཡུལ	river valley/ basin, stream, place to which a river flows/ descends	chu rgyun 'bab yul
ཆུ་རྒྱུན་བཞིན	uninterrupted continual [lit. like the flow of a river.]	chu rgyun bzhin
ཆུ་རྒྱུས	chu rgyus nadi * ligament, sinew, nerve	chu rgyus
ཆུ་ལྒང	burn/ scald blister between flesh and skin	chu lgang
ཆུ་ལྒང་ཆུ་ཁོལ་མས་བྱུང་བ	blister coming from scalding water	chu lgang chu khol mas byung ba
ཆུ་སྒང	chu bzhi sgang drug	chu sgang
ཆུ་སྒུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	water turbine machine/ generator	chu sgul 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་སྒུལ་མ་འཁོར	water turbine	chu sgul ma 'khor
ཆུ་སྒོ	1) urethra opening; 2) stream closing gate, watergate	chu sgo
ཆུ་སྒོང	water egg, moon	chu sgong
ཆུ་སྒྲ	murmur of a stream	chu sgra
ཆུ་སྒྲོགས	sky	chu sgrogs
ཆུ་བརྒལ	crossed a river	chu brgal
ཆུ་བརྒལ་བ	1) cross/ ford a river; 2) bathe 810	chu brgal ba
ཆུ་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་འདུས	100 rivers/ waters, many but gathered in 1 place	chu brgya zam 'dus
ཆུ་བསྒྱུར་བ	change of the course of a river	chu bsgyur ba
ཆུ་ངད	aqueous vapor	chu ngad
ཆུ་ངན	1) body harming water; 2) chu log; 3) sex juice med	chu ngan
ཆུ་ངན་ལམ་ཞུགས	following the path of bad water, following former bad tradition	chu ngan lam zhugs
ཆུ་ངན་ལམ་བཞུགས	introduction of a bad custom, following a bad usage	chu ngan lam bzhugs
ཆུ་ངན་ལམ་ཤོར	following the path of bad water	chu ngan lam shor
ཆུ་ངོགས	coast, shore, bank riverbank [syn: chu kha, chu 'gram, 'jug ngogs, pha rol tsu rol ngogs]	chu ngogs
ཆུ་ངོས	water surface/ level, sea level	chu ngos
ཆུ་ངོས་ཀྱི་ཐིག	water level/ horizon line	chu ngos kyi thig
ཆུ་དངོ	[arch] chu ngogs, chu 'gram	chu dngo
ཆུ་མངར་མོ	soda, pop	chu mngar mo
ཆུ་རྔམས	width/ depth of the water, a wave	chu rngams
ཆུ་རྔམས་པ	waves	chu rngams pa
ཆུ་སྔོན	1) mtsho sngon Province mgo log, rma stod rdzong gi rong zhig; 2) {chu sngon River [branch of the rma chu river in mtsho sngon Province S of the lake in zhing ha'e rdzong]	chu sngon
ཆུ་སྔོན་མཚོ	the ocean	chu sngon mtsho
ཆུ་བསྔོགས	turbid water, dirty water	chu bsngogs
ཆུ་ཅན	species of water fowl, watery	chu can
ཆུ་ཅུ་གང	med. made from mineral and water	chu cu gang
ཆུ་གཅུ	draw water [w ladle/ bucket	chu gcu
ཆུ་གཅོད་པ	1) block a stream; 2) not let drink	chu gcod pa
ཆུ་གཅོད་ཚད	ship's displacement	chu gcod tshad
ཆུ་བཅུ	draw water [w ladle/ bucket	chu bcu
ཆུ་བཅུད	salt	chu bcud
ཆུ་བཅུས	drew water [w ladle/ bucket	chu bcus
ཆུ་འཅུ	draw water [w ladle/ bucket	chu 'cu
ཆུ་ལྕག	1) herb; 2) sparkling water	chu lcag
ཆུ་ལྕགས་ཟིལ་པ་ཅན	sparkling water	chu lcags zil pa can
ཆུ་ལྕི་རིགས	heavy water	chu lci rigs
ཆུ་ཆག	1) for horses etc. chu ldur and sran chag etc.; 2) in cold water mar bskyar rdzi byed pa; 3) water getting lower/ receding	chu chag
ཆུ་ཆག་པའི་དུས	low water season	chu chag pa'i dus
ཆུ་ཆང་ནང་མཆོད	Water, beer and amrita; refers to sanctified water (bsang chu), feast liquor (tshogs chang) and amrita from the amrita vessel (nang mchod) on the table of the dorje lobpön	chu chang nang mchod
ཆུ་ཆར	rain	chu char
ཆུ་ཆུ	1) sneezing sound [from cold]; 2) rhubarb	chu chu
ཤོར་སོང	said chu chu from the cold	shor song
ཆུ་ཆུང་དུ	6th tibetan month	chu chung du
ཆུ་ཆུང་ནི་ལ	precious stone, gem of fabulous properties containing the essence of water, finest pebble or crystal	chu chung ni la
ཆུ་ཆུན	[arch] water bringing servant	chu chun
ཆུ་ཆེན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	chu chen
ཆུ་ཆོད་པ	1) chu 'bab mtshams chod pa; 2) cross a large river	chu chod pa
ཆུ་ཆོད་འཕྱུག་པ	mistake the hour	chu chod 'phyug pa
ཆུ་འཆིང	[arch] thog phibs or rgya phub	chu 'ching
ཆུ་འཆུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོགས	water ladle	chu 'chu byed kyi skyogs
ཆུ་ཉལ	tank	chu nyal
ཆུ་ཉིན་སྲིབ	chu gzhung phar tshur gyi ri ldebs	chu nyin srib
ཆུ་ཉུང	swallow	chu nyung
ཆུ་ཉོག	tank	chu nyog
ཆུ་ཉོག་མ	muddy or foul water	chu nyog ma
ཆུ་གཉིས	the two water [offerings]	chu gnyis
ཆུ་གཉིས་ཉེར་སྤྱོད	the two waters among the general offerings	chu gnyis nyer spyod
ཆུ་གཉིས་བར	space between two rivers	chu gnyis bar
ཆུ་གཉེར	1) ripples on water, ceaseless action [syn: khrem gnyer, chil sgrog mtsar g.yo, rlabs kyi ri mo]; 2) chu'i do dam pa)	chu gnyer
ཆུ་གཉེར་བཞིན་པའི་དཀ	ceaseless problems	chu gnyer bzhin pa'i dka
ཆུ་མཉམ་པ	fabulous sea beyond klu'i dug bcom ocean	chu mnyam pa
ཆུ་མཉམ་བསྲེས་པ	hydrate	chu mnyam bsres pa
ཆུ་རྙོག	turbid water [syn:'jim pa dang, rnyog pa can, 'dam khu, 'dam rdzab, 'bying byed, mi dvangs]	chu rnyog
ཆུ་རྙོག་པ	muddy water, dirty water	chu rnyog pa
ཆུ་རྙོག་མ	dirty /murky water	chu rnyog ma
ཆུ་རྙོག་མ་ཅན	turbid or muddy water	chu rnyog ma can
ཆུ་རྙོག་མེད	pure water	chu rnyog med
ཆུ་སྙིགས	turbidity stirred up in water by activity, dirty water, used wash water	chu snyigs
ཆུ་སྙིང	precious stone, salt	chu snying
ཆུ་སྙོམས་འཇལ་ཆས	water levelling instrument [irrigation]	chu snyoms 'jal chas
ཆུ་བརྙོགས་པ	troubled/ roiled water	chu brnyogs pa
ཆུ་བརྙོགས་པ་ལས་དངས་པ	clarify roiled water	chu brnyogs pa las dangs pa
ཆུ་བསྙལ	'og gdan gdung ma around water	chu bsnyal
ཆུ་ཏིག་སྔོན་པོ	sometimes from the N arising planet said to be emanation of Rahu	chu tig sngon po
ཆུ་ཏྲེམ	rkang lag gi chu rgyus rnams gyong por gyur te, lus 'dar zhing rengs 'khums su 'gyur ba'i grum bu'i nad rigs shig ..	chu trem
ཆུ་གཏིག་པ	turn into droplets	chu gtig pa
ཆུ་གཏིང	depths	chu gting
ཆུ་གཏིང་ཐུང་བ	shallow water	chu gting thung ba
ཆུ་གཏིང་ཟག་པ	deep water	chu gting zag pa
ཆུ་གཏིང་ཟབ་མོ	deep water	chu gting zab mo
ཆུ་གཏེར	the ocean, sea	chu gter
ཆུ་གཏེར་སྐེ་རགས་ཅན	the earth	chu gter ske rags can
ཆུ་གཏེར་བ	ocean	chu gter ba
ཆུ་གཏེར་མུ་ཁྱུད	island	chu gter mu khyud
ཆུ་གཏེར་བཞི	the four seas	chu gter bzhi
ཆུ་གཏེར་ཟུར	creek of the sea	chu gter zur
ཆུ་གཏེར་ལམ	boat	chu gter lam
ཆུ་གཏེར་བསྲུབས་པ	shaking the ocean	chu gter bsrubs pa
ཆུ་གཏོང	irrigate, water	chu gtong
ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	water	chu gtong ba
ཆུ་གཏོར	1) water torma [liturgy]; 2) sprinkle/ splash/ scatter water	chu gtor
ཆུ་གཏོར་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual of [offering] water torma	chu gtor gyi cho ga
ཆུ་གཏོར་བ	spray, spill water	chu gtor ba
ཆུ་གཏོར་རླངས་འཁོར	water sprinkling truck	chu gtor rlangs 'khor
ཆུ་བཏང་བ	to irrigate	chu btang ba
ཆུ་བཏོན་པ	to bail water	chu bton pa
ཆུ་རྟ	water horse year	chu rta
ཆུ་རྟ་མོ	a medicinal plant stag sha	chu rta mo
ཆུ་རྟགས	urine diagnostic signs of sick person [mdog, lbu ba, spris ma, ku ya, rlangs pa, dri ma, bro ba etc.]	chu rtags
ཆུ་ལྟར	like water, mirage	chu ltar
ཆུ་ལྟར་བཟོ་བ	liquefy	chu ltar bzo ba
ཆུ་སྟག	water tiger year	chu stag
ཆུ་སྟེང་བགྲོད	cross on the water	chu steng bgrod
ཆུ་སྟེང་སྦྱིན	water lily	chu steng sbyin
ཆུ་སྟོད	[Purvasadha], one of the {rgyu skor nyi shu rtsa brgyad}, 28 nakshatras, gods of the constellations. Ashadha. July-August	chu stod
ཆུ་སྟོད་ཀྱིས་ཉ་བ	full moon of july	chu stod kyis nya ba
ཆུ་སྟོད་སྐར་མ	constellation bre chu lha ldam ma	chu stod skar ma
ཆུ་སྟོད་སྐྱེས	planet mars	chu stod skyes
ཆུ་སྟོད་ཉ་བ	6th mo 15th day the star chu stod 'khel ba	chu stod nya ba
ཆུ་སྟོད་ཟླ་བ	the eighth month	chu stod zla ba
ཆུ་ཐག	1) chariot's gnya' sbrel byed rope; 2) plow/ yoke connecting rope; 3) water-mill	chu thag
ཆུ་ཐག་བཅད་པ	1) chu'i rlan skam du bcug pa; 2) block a river	chu thag bcad pa
ཆུ་ཐགས	water mill	chu thags
ཆུ་ཐིག	drop of water, water-drop spray	chu thig
ཆུ་ཐིགས	drop of water	chu thigs
ཆུ་ཐིགས་ཙམ	only a few drops	chu thigs tsam
ཆུ་ཐུབ	water-resistant	chu thub
ཆུ་ཐུབ་ལོ་ཏོག	water-resistant crops	chu thub lo tog
ཆུ་ཐོག	on the/ concerning/ via water	chu thog
ཆུ་ཐོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	shipping/ transport by water	chu thog skyel 'dren
ཆུ་ཐོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	ship/ transport by water	chu thog skyel 'dren byed
ཆུ་ཐོག་འགྲུམ་འགྲུལ	water/ sea travel	chu thog 'grum 'grul
ཆུ་ཐོག་འགྲུམ་འགྲུལ་གྱི་བྱ་བ	water/ sea travel navigation	chu thog 'grum 'grul gyi bya ba
ཆུ་ཐོག་གནམ་གྲུ	sea plane	chu thog gnam gru
ཆུ་ཐོག་མི་ཚང	boat dwellers	chu thog mi tshang
ཆུ་ཐོག་ལུས་རྩལ	water sports	chu thog lus rtsal
ཆུ་ཐོགས་པ	bathe in water	chu thogs pa
ཆུ་ཐོན	marine, aquatic	chu thon
ཆུ་ཐོན་དངོས་རྫས	marine/ aquatic products	chu thon dngos rdzas
ཆུ་ཐོན་བྱ་བ	marine/ aquatic work/ business	chu thon bya ba
ཆུ་ཐོན་ཟ་ཆས	marine/ aquatic food products, sea food	chu thon za chas
ཆུ་ཐོན་ཟམ་པ	byas rjes drin gzo mi byed pa'i dpe,...Bka' drin rjes su dran pa las chu thon zam pa byas pa min	chu thon zam pa
ཆུ་ཐོན་ཟམ་བོར	chu thon zam pa	chu thon zam bor
ཆུ་ཐོར	blister	chu thor
ཆུ་མཐ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	broad side or bank of a river	chu mtha rgya che ba
ཆུ་མཐའ	broad side or bank of a river	chu mtha'
ཆུ་མཐའ་བསིལ་མོ	the cool shallow waters	chu mtha' bsil mo
ཆུ་མཐོངས	space	chu mthongs
ཆུ་འཐག	[water-] mill	chu 'thag
ཆུ་འཐབ	rapids	chu 'thab
ཆུ་འཐུང་ཕོད	sunlight	chu 'thung phod
ཆུ་འཐུང་བ་པོ	one who will drink water, water drinker	chu 'thung ba po
ཆུ་འཐེན	water-mill	chu 'then
ཆུ་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	water-pump	chu 'then 'khor lo
ཆུ་འཐེན་ཐག་དཀྲིས	winch	chu 'then thag dkris
ཆུ་འཐེན་ཐག་དཀྲིས་ལག་འཁོར	windlass	chu 'then thag dkris lag 'khor
ཆུ་འཐེན་པ	drain	chu 'then pa
ཆུ་འཐེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	water pump	chu 'then 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་འཐོར	drops of water/ dew	chu 'thor
ཆུ་འཐོར་གཏམ	speaking and spitting together	chu 'thor gtam
ཆུ་འཐོར་བ	sprinkle	chu 'thor ba
ཆུ་དག	medicinal drug chu dag rim gyis 'phel ba dang skam pa waters by turns increasing and drying away	chu dag
ཆུ་དང་ཅོད་པན་གྱི་དབང	water and crown empowerments	chu dang cod pan gyi dbang
ཆུ་དང་མེ་ཕྲད	water meeting fire [no way they will accord]	chu dang me phrad
ཆུ་དང་ཞེང་དུ་ལྡན་པ	long wide river	chu dang zheng du ldan pa
ཆུ་དང་འོ་མ་འདྲེས་པ	inseparable, mixed well [like water and milk]	chu dang 'o ma 'dres pa
ཆུ་དང་རླབས་བཞིན	like water and its waves (that are no different even when a wave rises from the water)	chu dang rlabs bzhin
ཆུ་དང་ལམ་སོགས་འཛོམས་ས	confluence	chu dang lam sogs 'dzoms sa
ཆུ་དྭངས	gem ke ta ka	chu dwangs
ཆུ་དྭངས་པ	sparkling water	chu dwangs pa
ཆུ་དྭངས་མ	clear / sparkling water	chu dwangs ma
ཆུ་དར	silk	chu dar
ཆུ་དུག	hemlock, poison of water	chu dug
ཆུ་དུག་ནག་པོ	cremanthodium discoideum maxim.	chu dug nag po
ཆུ་དུས	period of water (7-9am, 7-9pm, 9-11pm)	chu dus
ཆུ་དོང	hole w water in it, well, puddle, ditch	chu dong
ཆུ་དྲང	watered, irrigated	chu drang
ཆུ་དྲངས་བྱེད	water strainer 812	chu drangs byed
ཆུ་དྲི	razor-knife	chu dri
ཆུ་དྲི་ཞིམ	perfumed water	chu dri zhim
ཆུ་དྲིས་པ	asked for water	chu dris pa
ཆུ་དྲེག	stones in the water sogs la chags pa'i dreg pa 'jam po	chu dreg
ཆུ་དྲོ་འཇམ	tepid water, slightly warm water	chu dro 'jam
ཆུ་དྲོན	warm water	chu dron
ཆུ་དྲོན་མ	hot or warm water	chu dron ma
ཆུ་དྲོན་སོན་སྦང	soaking seeds in warm water [for fast germination]	chu dron son sbang
ཆུ་གདན	pisspot for a young child	chu gdan
ཆུ་གདོན	water pipe	chu gdon
ཆུ་བདག	god of water, fox	chu bdag
ཆུ་བདག་སྐྱེས	alcohol	chu bdag skyes
ཆུ་བདེ་ཉ་སྐྱིད	good waters happy fish, good place happy people	chu bde nya skyid
ཆུ་མདའ	jet of water jet of water	chu mda'
ཆུ་མདེལ	torpedo	chu mdel
ཆུ་མདོ	mouth of a river, estuary	chu mdo
ཆུ་མདོ་ལ	chu mdo pass	chu mdo la
ཆུ་མདོང	water pipe	chu mdong
ཆུ་འདལ	still water, water moving slowly	chu 'dal
ཆུ་འདལ་བ	1) chu mched pa'am kha gram pa; 2) [arch] slowly moving/ calm water	chu 'dal ba
ཆུ་འདུར	dud 'gro yi 'thung chu la btab nas ster rgyu'i rjen thal	chu 'dur
ཆུ་འདུས་མདོ	mouth of a river, estuary	chu 'dus mdo
ཆུ་འདོད	thirst, wishing for drink	chu 'dod
ཆུ་འདྲ	liquid	chu 'dra
ཆུ་འདྲེན	irrigation, watering	chu 'dren
ཆུ་འདྲེན་འཁོར་ལོ	water wheel - irrigation, watering	chu 'dren 'khor lo
ཆུ་འདྲེན་ལྕགས་གདོང	water pipe	chu 'dren lcags gdong
ཆུ་འདྲེན་གཏོང	irrigate, water [fields]	chu 'dren gtong
ཆུ་འདྲེན་གཏོང་བྱེད	irrigate, water [fields]	chu 'dren gtong byed
ཆུ་འདྲེན་གདོང་རིང	water conduit/ pipe	chu 'dren gdong ring
ཆུ་འདྲེན་སྦུ་གུ	water conducting hole etc.	chu 'dren sbu gu
ཆུ་འདྲེན་ས་ཁུལ	irrigated area	chu 'dren sa khul
ཆུ་འདྲེན་ཨུར་བ	irrigation canal	chu 'dren ur ba
ཆུ་རྡུགས་ཁྱེར	water-fright	chu rdugs khyer
ཆུ་རྡུལ	particles of water, rain drops	chu rdul
ཆུ་རྡུལ་གཅིག	water particle	chu rdul gcig
ཆུ་རྡེའུ	little rocks/ pebbles in the water	chu rde'u
ཆུ་རྡོ	rounded pebbles found in brooks, kind of crystal	chu rdo
ཆུ་རྡོ་གྲང་མོ	cool crystal (used for spectacles)	chu rdo grang mo
ཆུ་རྡོ་ལུང་ལྕགས་ཟམ	iron bridge in Yun Yan Province 'jol rdzong over the zla chu	chu rdo lung lcags zam
ཆུ་ལྡན	{chu ldan} W mt.	chu ldan
ཆུ་ལྡན་མགོ	wood apple tree	chu ldan mgo
ཆུ་ལྡུར	flour and water mixed up together as food of horses, peas or barley flour boiled in water for cattle	chu ldur
ཆུ་སྡོར	thug pa la 'debs rdzas sha mar phyur ba sogs	chu sdor
ཆུ་ནག་མ	Black Water, a place near sde dge dgon chen	chu nag ma
ཆུ་ནང་འགྲོ་བ	paddle	chu nang 'gro ba
ཆུ་ནང་ནས	from the river	chu nang nas
ཆུ་ནང་སྦང་བ	soak, pickle	chu nang sbang ba
ཆུ་ནད	dropsy	chu nad
ཆུ་ནར་ནར་བླུག་པ	pour out water continuously	chu nar nar blug pa
ཆུ་ནིང	years ago	chu ning
ཆུ་ནུབ	sink in the water, drown	chu nub
ཆུ་གནས	aquatic, beings living in water	chu gnas
ཆུ་གནས་འགྱུ་བ	movement of beings who live in water	chu gnas 'gyu ba
ཆུ་གནོན་འཁོར་ལོ	hydraulic press	chu gnon 'khor lo
ཆུ་རྣག	chu ser and pus	chu rnag
ཆུ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	1) {'gyur ba med pa'i chu}. 2) {zhi ba gsal dag gi chu}, 3) {yon tan 'byung ba rgyas pa'i chu}, 4) {chags pa med pa'i chu}, 5) {'dzin med rdzogs pa'i chu}	chu rnam pa lnga
ཆུ་སྣ	river	chu sna
ཆུ་སྣ་གང་ཁྲིད	water led wherever 1 will, not being able to think/ do things for oneself, easily changed in direction, gullible, following blindly	chu sna gang khrid
ཆུ་སྣ་གར་ཁྲིད	water led wherever 1 will, not being able to think/ do things for oneself, easily changed in direction, gullible, following blindly	chu sna gar khrid
ཆུ་སྣ་རྒྱ་མཚོར་སླེབས་པ	river flowing into an ocean	chu sna rgya mtshor slebs pa
ཆུ་སྣ་འདྲེན་པ	irrigate, conduct water	chu sna 'dren pa
ཆུ་སྣེ	end / mouth of a river	chu sne
ཆུ་སྣོད	water pot, pitcher, jug	chu snod
ཆུ་པ	water carrier	chu pa
ཆུ་པད	chu'i srin bu pad pa	chu pad
ཆུ་པིར	water brush, [used for diluting]	chu pir
ཆུ་པོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga like a continuous river	chu po rgyun gyi rnal 'byor
ཆུ་དཔྱད	1) diagnosis by examining urine; 2) kidney stone phyir 'byin thabs kyi dpyad	chu dpyad
ཆུ་དཔྱད་ཟླ་བའི་མེ་ལོང	{chu dpyad zla ba'i me long} [7th rab byung medical shastra by zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje on urine examination]	chu dpyad zla ba'i me long
ཆུ་སྤང	boggy marshy flat, moss	chu spang
ཆུ་སྤེལ	ocean	chu spel
ཆུ་སྤྱོད་ཤ	1 of stobs bskyed gsum, meat of duck	chu spyod sha
ཆུ་སྤྲིན	black cloud	chu sprin
ཆུ་སྤྲིན་པ	cloud	chu sprin pa
ཆུ་སྤྲེ	water monkey year	chu spre
ཆུ་ཕ་གར་ཐོན་ནས	having gone to the opposite shore	chu pha gar thon nas
ཆུ་ཕག	water pig year	chu phag
ཆུ་ཕུག	cavern in a rock at the head of a river or brook 813	chu phug
ཆུ་ཕུགས	water source [where it first comes from]	chu phugs
ཆུ་ཕུད	1) chu'i phud; 2) at dawn on new years chu zom nang chu phud 'jog custom	chu phud
ཆུ་ཕོ	water male	chu pho
ཆུ་ཕྱག་པ	ferryman (one who sweeps over water)	chu phyag pa
ཆུ་ཕྱགས	clothes etc. la chu sib sib cig gtor nas gtsang bdar byed pa	chu phyags
ཆུ་ཕྱར	[arch] wa kha'i chu	chu phyar
ཆུ་ཕྲན	small, lesser river, stream, branch river	chu phran
ཆུ་ཕྲན་རི་ནས	the stream flows down from the mountain	chu phran ri nas
ཆུ་འཕྱོ	1) chu rgyas pa'am lud pa; 2) waves 'phyur ba	chu 'phyo
ཆུ་འཕྲད་པ	rudder, large oar used as rudder	chu 'phrad pa
ཆུ་འཕྲུལ	magical display, illusory, unreal, insubstantial, fantastic, imaginary, display	chu 'phrul
ཆུ་བ	1) large ligament, sinew [behind all the lus kyi lhu tshigs, binding the joints together rgyus pa'i rigs flat and solid, the main ones roughly 16; 2) branch roots	chu ba
ཆུ་བ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 ligaments [one sgyid chu gnyis, two rting chu gnyis, three gru mo'i chu ba gnyis, four mkhrig chu gnyis, four sgal tshigs phan tshun chu ba gnyis, five sgal pa'i nang logs chu ba gnyis, six ...	chu ba bcu drug
ཆུ་བ་ལྡོག་པ	contraction of the sinews	chu ba ldog pa
ཆུ་བ་བཞི	the four rivers	chu ba bzhi
ཆུ་བན	jug, water pot	chu ban
ཆུ་བབ་པའི་ཤུལ	water spot/ stain/ track	chu bab pa'i shul
ཆུ་བར	isthmus, neck of land	chu bar
ཆུ་བལ	wool-like water plants like rtsva bal, mud/ slime	chu bal
ཆུ་བུ་ཤིང	water son wood [from CH 'byung rtsis among ma bu dgra grogs divisions of elements]	chu bu shing
ཆུ་བུག	ai khung, drain hole where water goes	chu bug
ཆུ་བུན	white paint for the face	chu bun
ཆུ་བུམ	water vase	chu bum
ཆུ་བུམ་པ་གང་ལ་བཏབ་ནས	chanted over a vessel of water	chu bum pa gang la btab nas
ཆུ་བུར	1) water bubbles. 2) blisters; a blister	chu bur
ཆུ་བུར་གྱི་ལྦུ་བ	bubbles in water, foam on water	chu bur gyi lbu ba
ཆུ་བུར་གྱི་མིག	fragile eyes	chu bur gyi mig
ཆུ་བུར་གྱི་དམྱལ་བ	Hell of Blisters	chu bur gyi dmyal ba
ཆུ་བུར་ཅན	the Hell of Blisters, one of {grang dmyal brgyad} eight cold hells	chu bur can
ཆུ་བུར་ཅབ	arbuda, cold hell	chu bur cab
ཆུ་བུར་རྡོལ	<nir sbud:> blisters breaking hell	chu bur rdol
ཆུ་བུར་རྡོལ་པ་ཅན	nirarbuda cold hell	chu bur rdol pa can
ཆུ་བུར་རྡོལ་བ	Open Sores Hell [2nd cold hell of 8]	chu bur rdol ba
ཆུ་བུར་རྡོལ་བ་ཅན	Open Sores Hell	chu bur rdol ba can
ཆུ་བུར་བརྡོལ་བ	the Open sores/ blister bursting hell, nirarbuda	chu bur brdol ba
ཆུ་བུར་མིག	the bubbles of the eyes, water-bubbles	chu bur mig
ཆུ་བུར་མིག་གི་ལམ	{tshe 'dir chu bur mig gi lam la} in this life	chu bur mig gi lam
ཆུ་བུར་མིག་གི་ལམ་ལ	on the roads of this life	chu bur mig gi lam la
ཆུ་བེད	chu'i nus pa bed spyod pa, water conservation, damming for water power projects	chu bed
ཆུ་བེད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀ	water conservation work	chu bed kyi las ka
ཆུ་བེད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀའི་གྲུབ་འབྲག	the success of the water conservation work chu bed kyi las ka'i grub 'brag la brten nas - because of the success of the water conservation work chu bed kyi las ka'i grub 'brag la brten nas sa zhing...	chu bed kyi las ka'i grub 'brag
ཆུ་བེད་གློག་ཤུགས	hydroelectric power	chu bed glog shugs
ཆུ་བེད་འགག་མདོའི་ཨར་ལས	water conservation construction project/ damming	chu bed 'gag mdo'i ar las
ཆུ་བེད་ཆུ་འདྲེན	water conservation and irrigation	chu bed chu 'dren
ཆུ་བེད་བྱ་བ	water conservation project	chu bed bya ba
ཆུ་བེད་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	water conservation construction/ damming	chu bed 'dzugs skrun
ཆུ་བེད་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་བྱེད	water conservation construction/ damming	chu bed 'dzugs skrun byed
ཆུ་བེད་བཟོ་བཀོད	water conservation project	chu bed bzo bkod
ཆུ་བེད་གསར་སྐྲུན	water conservation construction chu bed gsar skrun sa cha skam sar byed	chu bed gsar skrun
ཆུ་བེན	water pot	chu ben
ཆུ་བོ	1) river, great water; 2) four	chu bo
ཆུ་བོ་གང་གཱའི་རྒྱུན་ལྟར	like the flow of the Ganges	chu bo gang gA'i rgyun ltar
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན	flowing river	chu bo rgyun
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི	SA ting 'dzin	chu bo rgyun gyi
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	river-like samadhi	chu bo rgyun gyi ting nge 'dzin
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཏིང་འཛིན	lesser samadhi like a flowing river	chu bo rgyun gyi ting 'dzin
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the continuous practice of a river, the river-flow yoga	chu bo rgyun gyi rnal 'byor
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	'steady stream meditation' 814	chu bo rgyun gyi bsam gtan
ཆུ་བོ་རྒྱུན་བཞིན	river-like	chu bo rgyun bzhin
ཆུ་བོ་སྒྲོལ་བའི་མཉན་པ	the ferryman who carried us across the river	chu bo sgrol ba'i mnyan pa
ཆུ་བོ་གཅིག་འདྲེས	unified stream	chu bo gcig 'dres
ཆུ་བོ་གཅོད་པ	to interrupt the flow	chu bo gcod pa
ཆུ་བོ་གཅོད་པའི	river blocking	chu bo gcod pa'i
ཆུ་བོ་ཆེ	a great river	chu bo che
ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	a great river	chu bo chen po
ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	5 great rivers (yangs pa can	chu bo chen po lnga
ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་བོ་བཞི	the four great rivers; {chu bo bzhi}	chu bo chen bo bzhi
ཆུ་བོ་གཉིད་འདྲེས	the uniting of the two streams	chu bo gnyid 'dres
ཆུ་བོ་རྡོལ་བ	flooding	chu bo rdol ba
ཆུ་བོ་བ	chu zag pa or lhung ba	chu bo ba
ཆུ་བོ་བཞི	1) four great rivers; 2) four currents; 3) birth old age, sickness and death	chu bo bzhi
ཆུ་བོ་བཞི་བརྒལ	cross the four great rivers	chu bo bzhi brgal
ཆུ་བོ་རབ་མེད	great unfordable river of hell, river which cannot be forded, river in orissa	chu bo rab med
ཆུ་བོ་རི	Chuwori, seat of Tangtong Gyalpo, in Ü	chu bo ri
ཆུ་བོ་རོ་ཧ་ན	a river of gold	chu bo ro ha na
ཆུ་བོ་སི་ཏ	sita river, tsangpo river	chu bo si ta
ཆུ་བོའི་ཀླུང	river channel	chu bo'i klung
ཆུ་བོའི་ཀློང་འཁོར	whirlpool, eddy, vortex	chu bo'i klong 'khor
ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན	the flow of a river	chu bo'i rgyun
ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the resolve that is like the steady flow of a river	chu bo'i rgyun lta bu'i sems bskyed
ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	produce a mind like a flowing river	chu bo'i rgyun bu'i sems bskyed
ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན་བཞིན	like a flowing stream; like a river's steady flow	chu bo'i rgyun bzhin
ཆུ་བོའི་སྟོད་ཁུལ	upper reaches of a river	chu bo'i stod khul
ཆུ་བོའི་གཞུང་རྒྱས	summer	chu bo'i gzhung rgyas
ཆུ་བོའི་རླབས	waves in water/ of the river	chu bo'i rlabs
ཆུ་བྱ	duck, water-fowl	chu bya
ཆུ་བྱ་དཀར་པོ	swan	chu bya dkar po
ཆུ་བྱ་མཐིང་རིལ	kind of water bird	chu bya mthing ril
ཆུ་བྱི	water-mouse year	chu byi
ཆུ་བྱིན་མ	ganges river	chu byin ma
ཆུ་བྱིའུ	cinchus anclus linnaeus	chu byi'u
ཆུ་བྲུག་པ	overflowing of a river, inundation	chu brug pa
ཆུ་བྲུན	urine and excrement	chu brun
ཆུ་བྲུབ	[arch] 1) water naturally increased, suddenly rose/ flooded; 2) boil water (/ [p chu 'brub]	chu brub
ཆུ་བྲུབ་པ	[arch] 1) water naturally increased, suddenly rose/ flooded; 2) boil water (/ [p chu 'brub]	chu brub pa
ཆུ་བྲུབས་པ	chu brub pa	chu brubs pa
ཆུ་བྲོག	cold water la phye btab pa'i skyo ma	chu brog
ཆུ་བླུག་སྣོད་ཀྱི་ཟོ་བ	water pail/ bucket	chu blug snod kyi zo ba
ཆུ་བླུག་སའི་སྣོད་སྤྱད	pitcher, water jug	chu blug sa'i snod spyad
ཆུ་དབང	water abhisheka	chu dbang
ཆུ་དབང་ལྔ	the five aspects of the water empowerment	chu dbang lnga
ཆུ་དབར	Chubar, in Tsang	chu dbar
ཆུ་དབར་སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ཕོ་བྲང	stod phyogs brin region gyi gnas chen zhig where Milarepa practiced	chu dbar sprul sku'i pho brang
ཆུ་དབུས	central course of a river	chu dbus
ཆུ་དབུས་པ	pali, majjhantiko	chu dbus pa
ཆུ་འབབ	hill-torrent	chu 'bab
ཆུ་འབབ་སྒྲ	sound of a torrent	chu 'bab sgra
ཆུ་འབབ་པའི་སྣེ་མོ	end / mouth of a river	chu 'bab pa'i sne mo
ཆུ་འབབས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	arranged like the flow of a river	chu 'babs su bkod pa
ཆུ་འབི	{chu 'bi} district	chu 'bi
ཆུ་འབུད་ཚད	water displacement	chu 'bud tshad
ཆུ་འབུར	bubble, blister	chu 'bur
ཆུ་འབུར་འབུར	chu long long du 'phyur tshul	chu 'bur 'bur
ཆུ་འབེབས	1) cloud; 2) chu 'bab par byed pa	chu 'bebs
ཆུ་འབོག	[arch] cross water/ a river	chu 'bog
ཆུ་འབོག་ལཧབ༹མ་འབོག	pay little heed to; recklessly ford rivers without taking off their shoes [charge through rivers fully clothed]	chu 'bog lhvam 'bog
ཆུ་འབྱུང	a number	chu 'byung
ཆུ་འབྱེད	swan	chu 'byed
ཆུ་འབྱོ་པ་པོ	one who transfers water from one vessel into another	chu 'byo pa po
ཆུ་འབྲས	rice paddy, irrigated rice paddy	chu 'bras
ཆུ་འབྲུག	water dragon year	chu 'brug
ཆུ་འབྲུབ	[arch] 1) water naturally increasing, suddenly rising/ flooding; 2) boil water (/ [p chu 'brub]	chu 'brub
ཆུ་འབྲུབ་པ	[arch] 1) water naturally increasing, suddenly rising/ flooding; 2) boil water (/ [p chu 'brub]	chu 'brub pa
ཆུ་འབྲུབ་པའི་དུས་སྐབས	high-water/ flood season, summer	chu 'brub pa'i dus skabs
ཆུ་འབྲུབ་པའི་ས་ཁུལ	high-water/ flood area/ region	chu 'brub pa'i sa khul
ཆུ་འབྲུབ་ཚུལ	high-water/ flood situation	chu 'brub tshul
ཆུ་འབྲུམ	chicken pox	chu 'brum
ཆུ་ལྦག	bubbles	chu lbag
ཆུ་ལྦུ	frothy, foamy, frost-covered 815	chu lbu
ཆུ་ལྦུར	water bubbles	chu lbur
ཆུ་སྦུག	water pipe/ tube	chu sbug
ཆུ་སྦུབས	chu 'gro sa'i sbubs	chu sbubs
ཆུ་སྦུར	drifted wood, thin pieces of wood, chips, chaff floating on water,	chu sbur
ཆུ་སྦྱིན	1) chu give or sprod pa; 2) among Chu gtor	chu sbyin
ཆུ་སྦྱིན་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	water offering ritual	chu sbyin gyi cho ga
ཆུ་སྦྱིན་མ	the Ganges River	chu sbyin ma
ཆུ་སྦྲུལ	water snake [year]	chu sbrul
ཆུ་མ	area/ fields under irrigation, water carrier	chu ma
ཆུ་མ་ལྕགས	water mother metal	chu ma lcags
ཆུ་མ་ནི	chu rgyug rgyug dang, ma ni 'dren 'dren te speaking thags thogs med par ???	chu ma ni
ཆུ་མ་རྩི	chu ma rtsi field herb	chu ma rtsi
ཆུ་མ་ལོང	an infant, baby	chu ma long
ཆུ་མང་ལྡན་པ	ocean	chu mang ldan pa
ཆུ་མར་གྱུར་བ	were/ came to be irrigated	chu mar gyur ba
ཆུ་མིག	spring, waterhole, fountain; a spring	chu mig
ཆུ་མིག་ལྐུགས་པ	underground hidden spring	chu mig lkugs pa
ཆུ་མིག་རྒྱ་རྩ	Chumik Gyatsa, Muktinath, in Nepal. See Hundred Springs	chu mig rgya rtsa
ཆུ་མིག་བརྒྱ་རྩ	Chumik Gyatsa, the Hundred Springs [now in Northwest Nepal]	chu mig brgya rtsa
ཆུ་མིག་གཅིག	a skein of, a stream of chu mig dang mtsho dang mtshe'u springs, lakes, and ponds	chu mig gcig
ཆུ་མིག་བརྡོལ་བ	fountain that gushes forth	chu mig brdol ba
ཆུ་མིག་བྱང་ཆུབ	the Spring of Enlightenment	chu mig byang chub
ཆུ་མིག་ལུང	{chu mig lung} hot spring [one day's journey W from Lhasa]	chu mig lung
ཆུ་མེད	waterless	chu med
ཆུ་མེད་སྐྱེས	gze ma ra mgo	chu med skyes
ཆུ་མོ	water female	chu mo
ཆུ་མོ་གླང་གི་ལོ	the year of the Female Water Ox	chu mo glang gi lo
ཆུ་མོ་ཕག	Water-Female-Pig year,	chu mo phag
ཆུ་དམག	navy [sailor]	chu dmag
ཆུ་དམར	{chu dmar} River [N source of the 'bri chu, in W mtsho sngon province]	chu dmar
ཆུ་དམར་པོ	sea of red water where nagas and asuras fight	chu dmar po
ཆུ་དམར་ལེབ	{chu dmar leb rdzong}	chu dmar leb
ཆུ་སྨད	[Uttarasadha] one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad}, 28 Nakshatras gods of the constellations	chu smad
ཆུ་སྨད་སྐར་མ	constellations (phul, sna tshogs, lha ldan ma)	chu smad skar ma
ཆུ་སྨན	med mostly w the nature of the water element	chu sman
ཆུ་སྨྱོན	from spang/ caves suddenly emerging large river, fast flowing river	chu smyon
ཆུ་སྨྱོན་འགྱེད་སྒོ	sluice gate	chu smyon 'gyed sgo
ཆུ་ཙགས་གྲུ་གསུམ	triangular water strainer [described in vinaya]	chu tsags gru gsum
ཆུ་ཙེ་རིང	1 of the tse ring rnam drug	chu tse ring
ཆུ་གཙང	pure water	chu gtsang
ཆུ་གཙང་བ	pure water	chu gtsang ba
ཆུ་གཙང་མ	water	chu gtsang ma
ཆུ་བཙོས	boiling, cooking in water	chu btsos
ཆུ་བཙོས་རྒྱག	boil/ cook in water	chu btsos rgyag
ཆུ་བཙོས་གཏོང	boil/ cook in water	chu btsos gtong
ཆུ་མཙེ	herb	chu mtse
ཆུ་རྩ	1) {chu rtsa field herb med.; 2) chu'i rtsa ba'am, nye 'gram; 3) a lymph nadi or dbang rtsa	chu rtsa
ཆུ་རྩྭ	water grass/ plant	chu rtswa
ཆུ་རྩམ	water with flour, grain mixed with water that is given to horses	chu rtsam
ཆུ་རྩལ	water sports	chu rtsal
ཆུ་རྩི་དཀར་པོ	{chu rtsi dkar po} herb	chu rtsi dkar po
ཆུ་རྩི་དམར་པོ	{chu rtsi dmar po} herb	chu rtsi dmar po
ཆུ་རྩེད	water sports	chu rtsed
ཆུ་ཚྭ	salt from water 816	chu tshwa
ཆུ་ཚགས	strainer, seive [monks have 1 for insects in water etc]	chu tshags
ཆུ་ཚགས་ཀྱིས་རུང་བ	a monk permitted to use filtered water	chu tshags kyis rung ba
ཆུ་ཚགས་གྲུ་གསུམ	triangular filtering sieve, leather water bag	chu tshags gru gsum
ཆུ་ཚགས་ལྔ	five gatherings of water	chu tshags lnga
ཆུ་ཚད	degree, extent, level	chu tshad
ཆུ་ཚད་ཇེ་མཐོར་འགྲོ	standards are rising higher and higher	chu tshad je mthor 'gro
ཆུ་ཚན	hot water spring	chu tshan
ཆུ་ཚན་ཁ	natural hot spring lung pa	chu tshan kha
ཆུ་ཚན་གྱི་ལུམས	hot bath	chu tshan gyi lums
ཆུ་ཚན་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of hot springs	chu tshan rigs lnga
ཆུ་ཚན་རིང་བསྲེལ	in hot springs etc chu las byung ba'i dbang ril emitting light rays, by its power clearing away all gdon nad	chu tshan ring bsrel
ཆུ་ཚན་ལུམས	bathing in natural hot springs as treatment for dreg grum chu ser sogs yan lag zha 'khum rnams	chu tshan lums
ཆུ་ཚོད	1) hour, o'clock. 2) Abhidharma: a period of twenty-four minutes. 3) clock, watch, wrist watch	chu tshod
ཧོཨུར་མེཨསུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཏིམེ་བཡ་ཝཏེར	clock, indian hour, 1/5 of a khyim or 24 minutes, division of time (60 chu srang), watch, clock	hour measure of time by water
ཆུ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་སྲང	second [time]	chu tshod kyi srang
ཆུ་ཚོད་སྐར་ཆ	second [time]	chu tshod skar cha
ཆུ་ཚོད་སྐར་མ	minute [time]	chu tshod skar ma
ཆུ་ཚོད་འཁོར་ལོ	wrist watch	chu tshod 'khor lo
ཆུ་ཚོད་འཁོར་ལོ་འདོགས	wear a watch, clock	chu tshod 'khor lo 'dogs
ཆུ་ཚོད་གཅིག	Abhidharma: one hour, 24 minutes, {60 chu srang}	chu tshod gcig
ཆུ་ཚོད་ཆེན་པོ	clock	chu tshod chen po
ཆུ་ཚོད་འདོགས	wear a watch, clock	chu tshod 'dogs
ཆུ་ཚོད་བུམ་པ	water vessel w a drip hole for measuring time	chu tshod bum pa
ཆུ་ཚོན	water color/ soluble paint	chu tshon
ཆུ་མཚམས	the surface of the ocean [water], shore, bank	chu mtshams
ཆུ་མཚམས་འབྱེད་རི	watershed	chu mtshams 'byed ri
ཆུ་མཚོ	ocean	chu mtsho
ཆུ་མཛོད	reservoir, tank, reservoir, dam	chu mdzod
ཆུ་འཛག	dribbling	chu 'dzag
ཆུ་འཛིན	cloud, water holder, female organ	chu 'dzin
ཆུ་འཛིན་སྐྱེས	cloud-born, thunder, meteoric iron	chu 'dzin skyes
ཆུ་འཛིན་འཁྲིགས་པ	clouds gathered	chu 'dzin 'khrigs pa
ཆུ་འཛིན་པ	cloud	chu 'dzin pa
ཆུ་འཛིན་ཤིང་མི་ཟད་པར་འབྱིན་པ	actualize an inexhaustible field of clouds	chu 'dzin shing mi zad par 'byin pa
ཆུ་འཛུལ་གྲུ	submarine	chu 'dzul gru
ཆུ་འཛུལ་དམག་གྲུ	military submarine	chu 'dzul dmag gru
ཆུ་འཛོམ་ས	confluence of rivers	chu 'dzom sa
ཆུ་རྫ	earthenware water jug/ pot/ pitcher	chu rdza
ཆུ་རྫར་རྫར	sloppy	chu rdzar rdzar
ཆུ་རྫས	marine/ aquatic foods, sea food	chu rdzas
ཆུ་རྫིང	pool	chu rdzing
ཆུ་རྫིང་དུ་སྐྱིལ་བ	collect water in a pond	chu rdzing du skyil ba
ཆུ་རྫིང་བུར་སྐྱིལ་བ	collect water for a pond	chu rdzing bur skyil ba
ཆུ་ཞག	watering of the eyes	chu zhag
ཆུ་ཞག་འཁོར	to have one's eyes water or tear	chu zhag 'khor
ཆུ་ཞབས་སྤྱི་བོར་བརྟན	the excess fluid remains on the top of their heads	chu zhabs spyi bor brtan
ཆུ་ཞིང	MG: irrigated field. [mss]	chu zhing
ཆུ་ཞེང	area	chu zheng
ཆུ་ཞེང་གབ	a circumference like	chu zheng gab
ཆུ་ཞེང་གབ་པ	= width and length	chu zheng gab pa
ཆུ་ཞེང་འགབ་པ	proportionate, symmetrical, beautiful, stately	chu zheng 'gab pa
ཆུ་ཞེང་ཆེ་རུ་ཕྱིན	the width of the river increased	chu zheng che ru phyin
ཆུ་ཞེང་མཉམ་པ	= width and length	chu zheng mnyam pa
ཆུ་ཞེང་མཐའ	circumference	chu zheng mtha'
ཆུ་གཞུག	lower reaches of a river	chu gzhug
ཆུ་གཞུང	river channel/ main current/ middle	chu gzhung
ཆུ་གཞོང	sink	chu gzhong
ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག	the four rivers and eight ridges. The boundaries of Greater Tibet	chu bzhi sgang drug
ཆུ་ཟངས	large copper water container	chu zangs
ཆུ་ཟབ་མཚོ་ཀ	deep water port	chu zab mtsho ka
ཆུ་ཟམ	rivers and bridges	chu zam
ཆུ་ཟིན	when water has been conquered	chu zin
ཆུ་ཟིལ	drops of water/ dew	chu zil
ཆུ་ཟུར	edge of the water, bank, shore	chu zur
ཆུ་ཟུར་པ	one that lives on the bank of a river	chu zur pa
ཆུ་ཟེམ	water tub	chu zem
ཆུ་ཟོམ	pail, bucket	chu zom
ཆུ་ཟོས	waste	chu zos
ཆུ་ཟོས་བོར་བརླགས	waste and loss	chu zos bor brlags
ཆུ་ཟོས་ལ་ཕྱིན་པའི་དངུལ	money that has gone to waste	chu zos la phyin pa'i dngul
ཆུ་ཟླ	the moon reflected in water	chu zla
ཆུ་ཟླ་ལྟར	like the moon in water; like the reflection of the moon in water	chu zla ltar
ཆུ་ཟླའི་གཟུགས	form of the moon in water	chu zla'i gzugs
ཆུ་ཟླུམ་པོ	drop of water	chu zlum po
ཆུ་གཟར	wooden water ladle	chu gzar
ཆུ་བཟང	Chuzang, in Domey	chu bzang
ཆུ་བཟང་དགོན	Chuzang Monastery, Ganden Mingyur Ling (dga' ldan mi 'gyur gling) 817	chu bzang dgon
ཆུ་བཟང་དགོན་པ	protector of the excellent dharma monastery, {chu bzang dgon pa} monastery	chu bzang dgon pa
ཆུ་བཟང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དཔལ་འབྱོར	15781651 - Chuzang Namgyal Paljor, founder of Chuzang monastery in Domey	chu bzang rnam rgyal dpal 'byor
ཆུ་བཟང་པོ	1 of 5 great rivers, SA chu bo chen po	chu bzang po
ཆུ་བཟོམ	bucket, barrel for carrying/ storing water	chu bzom
ཆུ་བཟོམ་པ	portable water cask	chu bzom pa
ཆུ་འོ་གཅིག་འདྲེས	mixed milk and water [indivisible]	chu 'o gcig 'dres
ཆུ་འོག	underwater	chu 'og
ཆུ་འོག་གི་དམ	underwater mud/ sediment	chu 'og gi dam
ཆུ་འོག་རྒྱུ་གྲུ	submarine	chu 'og rgyu gru
ཆུ་འོག་བྲག་རྡོ	underwater rocks, reef	chu 'og brag rdo
ཆུ་འོག་དམག་གྲུ	submarine	chu 'og dmag gru
ཆུ་འོབས	water filled trench/ moat/ pit	chu 'obs
ཆུ་ཡང་སྐམ་པོར་བྱེད་པ་ནུས	can cause even water to become dry	chu yang skam por byed pa nus
ཆུ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན	the eight qualities of perfect water	chu yan lag brgyad ldan
ཆུ་ཡི་ཀ་བ	pillar of water	chu yi ka ba
ཆུ་ཡི་ཀླུང་བཞིན་འབབ་པ	flowing like a river	chu yi klung bzhin 'bab pa
ཆུ་ཡི་སྐྱེ་གནས	fore ????	chu yi skye gnas
ཆུ་ཡི་འཁོར་ལོ	whirlpool	chu yi 'khor lo
ཆུ་ཡི་འགོ་བོ	fountainhead	chu yi 'go bo
ཆུ་ཡི་འགྲམ	riverside, river bank	chu yi 'gram
ཆུ་ཡི་རྒྱན	lotus	chu yi rgyan
ཆུ་ཡི་རྒྱུན	stream of water	chu yi rgyun
ཆུ་ཡི་སྒྲེ་ལོག	chu'i rba rlabs	chu yi sgre log
ཆུ་ཡི་ངོགས	shore, bank	chu yi ngogs
ཆུ་ཡི་སྔགས་པ	shell, monkey	chu yi sngags pa
ཆུ་ཡི་བཅུད	table salt	chu yi bcud
ཆུ་ཡི་ཆུ་བུར	bubble	chu yi chu bur
ཆུ་ཡི་ཆོམ་རྐུན	thief of water, sun	chu yi chom rkun
ཆུ་ཡི་སྙིང་པོ	salt, a tank filled with lotus flowers	chu yi snying po
ཆུ་ཡི་ཐུབ་པ	god of water, animals living in water	chu yi thub pa
ཆུ་ཡི་དུས	period of water	chu yi dus
ཆུ་ཡི་བདག	SA chu bdag	chu yi bdag
ཆུ་ཡི་ནང	in water	chu yi nang
ཆུ་ཡི་སྣང་བ	srin bu pad pa	chu yi snang ba
ཆུ་ཡི་སྣོད་ཆད	water vessel is broken	chu yi snod chad
ཆུ་ཡི་སྤྲེའུ	sram	chu yi spre'u
ཆུ་ཡི་ཕུང་པོ	ocean	chu yi phung po
ཆུ་ཡི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	chu yi rba 'og tu lus bzed pa'am chu bsil snod du blugs te dugs rgyag pa sogs kyis clearing away bile disorders'i dpyad kyi nang tsan zhig	chu yi 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་ཡི་དབང་པོ	lord of water, Jambhala	chu yi dbang po
ཆུ་ཡི་ཙེར་མ	lotus roots	chu yi tser ma
ཆུ་ཡི་ཚེར་མ	lotus plant, flower	chu yi tsher ma
ཆུ་ཡི་འཛུམ་དཀར	froth of water, bubble	chu yi 'dzum dkar
ཆུ་ཡི་རྫིང་བུ	tank, pond	chu yi rdzing bu
ཆུ་ཡི་བཞོན་པ	mount of water, cloud	chu yi bzhon pa
ཆུ་ཡི་ཟེགས་ལྡན	that which contains particles of water, rain, cloud	chu yi zegs ldan
ཆུ་ཡི་ཟེགས་མ	raindrops SA char zil	chu yi zegs ma
ཆུ་ཡི་ཟེར	raindrops	chu yi zer
ཆུ་ཡི་འོད་ཕྲུག་སྔོན་པོ	quick-silver	chu yi 'od phrug sngon po
ཆུ་ཡི་རི་མོ	like drawing on water	chu yi ri mo
ཆུ་ཡི་རི་མོ་བཞིན་དུ	like pictures drawn on water	chu yi ri mo bzhin du
ཆུ་ཡི་རོ	salt	chu yi ro
ཆུ་ཡི་ལང་ཚོ	lotus	chu yi lang tsho
ཆུ་ཡི་ཤིང་རྟ	boat	chu yi shing rta
ཆུ་ཡི་ཤུགས	velocity of water	chu yi shugs
ཆུ་ཡི་སྲིན་པོ	sea monster, crocodile	chu yi srin po
ཆུ་ཡི་སྲིན་པོའི	ocean	chu yi srin po'i
ཆུ་ཡི་སྲིན་པོའི་གྲོང་ཆེ	great city of sea monsters	chu yi srin po'i grong che
ཆུ་ཡི་གསེར	gold	chu yi gser
ཆུ་ཡིས་འཁྱེར	carried away by water	chu yis 'khyer
ཆུ་ཡིས་ཟད	water erosion, erode by water	chu yis zad
ཆུ་ཡིས་ཟད་པའི་ལུང་པ	water eroded area	chu yis zad pa'i lung pa
ཆུ་ཡུར	canal ditch, drain, drainage	chu yur
ཆུ་ཡོས	water rabbit year	chu yos
ཆུ་ཡོས་ལོ	water hare year	chu yos lo
ཆུ་ར	1) water surrounding enclosure/ fence; 2) chu gsog snod water collecting container	chu ra
ཆུ་ར་མ	chu gsog snod water collecting container	chu ra ma
ཆུ་རྭ	water filled trench/ moat/ pit	chu rwa
ཆུ་རག	bulwark	chu rag
ཆུ་རགས	dam, dike, embankment	chu rags
ཆུ་རགས་ཀྱི་དགག་སྒོ	dam's sluice gate	chu rags kyi dgag sgo
ཆུ་རགས་ཁ་ཤོར	burst [of a dam/ dike/ embankment]	chu rags kha shor
ཆུ་རགས་ཟླ་གམ་ཅན	dam w vaulted walls	chu rags zla gam can
ཆུ་རགས་འུ་ལག	tax obligation where 1 has to send dam builder gyi 'ul mi	chu rags 'u lag
ཆུ་རང་འཁོལ	ma bskul dang len gyi dpe	chu rang 'khol
ཆུ་རབ	gtsang po 'phred la brgal nas 'gro sa'i rab lam	chu rab
ཆུ་རབ་ཏུ་འབབ་པ	a violent river	chu rab tu 'bab pa
ཆུ་རས	underpants, [Polish] bathing suit	chu ras
ཆུ་རི	billow	chu ri
ཆུ་རཱི་རཱ	a certain type of relic	chu rI rA
ཆུ་རིགས་བདུན	7 kinds of drinking water	chu rigs bdun
ཆུ་རིང	four years ago	chu ring
ཆུ་རིས	waves/ ripples drawings/ designs of water/ waves, water color painting	chu ris
ཆུ་རིས་མ	1) fine silk brocade w wave design; 2) white scarf zub she chu ris ma	chu ris ma
ཆུ་རིས་ཤིག་ཤིག	rippled, wavy[patterned]	chu ris shig shig
ཆུ་རུག	medicinal root which removes inflammation in bones	chu rug
ཆུ་རུག་པ	cardamine tangutorum o. e. schulz	chu rug pa
ཆུ་རུག་སྦལ་ལག	{chu rug sbal lag} med. herb	chu rug sbal lag
ཆུ་རུད	flood	chu rud
ཆུ་རུབ	flood	chu rub
ཆུ་རོལ་ངོགས	opposite bank of river or lake	chu rol ngogs
ཆུ་རླངས	chu dros pa'i rlangs pa	chu rlangs
ཆུ་རླབས	wave	chu rlabs
ཆུ་རླབས་རྒྱ་མཚོར་ཐིམ་པ་ལྟར	like waves sinking back into the ocean	chu rlabs rgya mtshor thim pa ltar
ཆུ་རླུང	prana of water in kidneys which maintains wetness, is white and gives a feeling of coolness	chu rlung
ཆུ་རློང་འཐེན་པ	dehydrate	chu rlong 'then pa
ཆུ་ལ་བཀྱག	float [on water]	chu la bkyag
ཆུ་ལ་སྐྱུར་བ	throw into the water	chu la skyur ba
ཆུ་ལ་བསྐུར	wasted (thrown down the drain)	chu la bskur
ཆུ་ལ་བསྐུར་བ	thrown away	chu la bskur ba
ཆུ་ལ་གར་རྩེ	mya ngan med shing	chu la gar rtse
ཆུ་ལ་ཆུ་ཐིམ་པ་ལྟར	like water dissolving in water	chu la chu thim pa ltar
ཆུ་ལ་ཆུ་བཞག་པ་ལྟར	like pouring water into water	chu la chu bzhag pa ltar
ཆུ་ལ་མཆོང་བ	dive	chu la mchong ba
ཆུ་ལ་འཆོར་བ	be carried away by water	chu la 'chor ba
ཆུ་ལ་གཏིང་ཟབ	deep bottom of a river	chu la gting zab
ཆུ་ལ་ཐར་བ	get through water	chu la thar ba
ཆུ་ལ་གདིམ	drown	chu la gdim
ཆུ་ལ་གནས	Jambhala	chu la gnas
ཆུ་ལ་སྦང་བ	dip, immerse	chu la sbang ba
ཆུ་ལ་སྦངས་པ	soaked in water	chu la sbangs pa
ཆུ་ལ་མེ་འབར	where one finds fire burning upon the water	chu la me 'bar
ཆུ་ལ་འཛུལ་བ	glide into the water, dive	chu la 'dzul ba
ཆུ་ལ་རླབས་བཞིན	like waves / ripples on water	chu la rlabs bzhin
ཆུ་ལ་ཤོར	be lost in the water, drown	chu la shor
ཆུ་ལྭ	raincoat, mackintosh	chu lwa
ཆུ་ལག	river branch	chu lag
ཆུ་ལན	fetching water	chu lan
ཆུ་ལམ	1) water way/ channel/ pipe; 2) urinary tract; 3) water ways, sea lanes	chu lam
ཆུ་ལམ་གྱི་རྟགས	light house, buoy	chu lam gyi rtags
ཆུ་ལམ་སྟོན་མཁན	pilot of a ship	chu lam ston mkhan
ཆུ་ལམ་སྣ་ཁྲིད	pilot a ship	chu lam sna khrid
ཆུ་ལམ་སྣ་ཁྲིད་པ	pilot of a ship	chu lam sna khrid pa
ཆུ་ལས་སྐྱེས	moon	chu las skyes
ཆུ་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	water-born	chu las skyes pa
ཆུ་ལས་བསྒྲལ་བ	to cross the ocean	chu las bsgral ba
ཆུ་ལས་འབར	top of the sky, meteoric iron	chu las 'bar
ཆུ་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	leech	chu las 'byung ba
ཆུ་ལུང་སྦྱར	irrigates the field	chu lung sbyar
ཆུ་ལུད	water and manure	chu lud
ཆུ་ལུད་འཛོམས་པོ	fertile	chu lud 'dzoms po
ཆུ་ལུབ	water sheep year	chu lub
ཆུ་ལུམས	bathing in natural hot spring or five amritas med. gyi lums etc [good for yan lag zha rengs etc]	chu lums
ཆུ་ལེན	draw/ take water	chu len
ཆུ་ལེན་པའི་བྲན	water bringing servant	chu len pa'i bran
ཆུ་ལོ	aquatic edible plant	chu lo
ཆུ་ལོག	flood	chu log
ཆུ་ལོག་གི་རྩེ	flood crest	chu log gi rtse
ཆུ་ལོག་འགོག	prevent/ control floods	chu log 'gog
ཆུ་ལོག་སྔོན་འགོག	prevent/ control floods	chu log sngon 'gog
ཆུ་ལོག་ཐོན	flood	chu log thon
ཆུ་ལོག་འདྲེན་བྱེད་འགོག་སྒོ	flood inlet gate	chu log 'dren byed 'gog sgo
ཆུ་ལོག་འབབ་ལམ	flood diversion channel/ spillway - flood	chu log 'bab lam
ཆུ་ལོག་འབྱེད	watergate to channel off flood waters	chu log 'byed
ཆུ་ལོག་མར་འཇགས	the flood has receded	chu log mar 'jags
ཆུ་ལོག་བཤང་སྒོ	locks [in water]	chu log bshang sgo
ཆུ་ལོན	1) dam, dike, embankment; 2) bridge	chu lon
ཆུ་ལོའི་རིགས	herb	chu lo'i rigs
ཆུ་ཤྭ	flood [w suddenly emerging forceful water]	chu shwa
ཆུ་ཤིང	2) banana/ plantain (tree) [herbaceous stem in layers like onion dies after fruiting once syn glang po'i lcug ma dang, rgyud rnams 'dzin, 'chi 'bras can, nad kyi 'bras can, mdzod lus, shing 'dzin];...	chu shing
ཆུ་ཤིང་དཀར་པོ	white aconite, aconitum ferox	chu shing dkar po
ཆུ་ཤིང་གབ	circumference like a plantain tree	chu shing gab
ཆུ་ཤིང་གི་མཁར་བ	stick made of chu shing plant	chu shing gi mkhar ba
ཆུ་ཤིང་གི་སྡོང་པོ	the trunk of a plantain tree	chu shing gi sdong po
ཆུ་ཤིང་ལྟ་བུ	like a fragile reed	chu shing lta bu
ཆུ་ཤིང་འོམ་བུ	a kind of wood	chu shing 'om bu
ཆུ་ཤིང་བརླ་ཅན	harlot, prostitute, 1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	chu shing brla can
ཆུ་ཤིང་བརླ་ཅན་མ	woman whose loins resemble the plantain plant	chu shing brla can ma
ཆུ་ཤུ	lus la thon pa'i chu gang or chu bur	chu shu
ཆུ་ཤུགས	stream flowing power, hydraulic power	chu shugs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུལ་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hydroelectric turbine	chu shugs kyi skul byed 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད	hydro electric power generation	chu shugs glog skyed
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད་ཁང	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog skyed khang
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hydro electric power generator	chu shugs glog skyed 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད་བབས་ཚུགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog skyed babs tshugs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད་ས་ཚིགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog skyed sa tshigs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་བསྐྱེད	hydro electric power generation	chu shugs glog bskyed
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་བསྐྱེད་ཁང	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog bskyed khang
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་བསྐྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hydro electric power generator	chu shugs glog bskyed 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་བསྐྱེད་བབས་ཚུགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog bskyed babs tshugs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་བསྐྱེད་ས་ཚིགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog bskyed sa tshigs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན	hydro electric power generation	chu shugs glog 'don
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་ཁང	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog 'don khang
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hydro electric power generator	chu shugs glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་བབས་ཚུགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog 'don babs tshugs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་ས་ཚིགས	hydro electric power generation station	chu shugs glog 'don sa tshigs
ཆུ་ཤུགས་ཐོན་ཁུངས	water/ hydroelectric power [re]sources	chu shugs thon khungs
ཆུ་ཤུར	1) ravine, channel made by running water; 2) chu shur rdzong	chu shur
ཆུ་ཤུལ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	chu shul
ཆུ་ཤེང་གབ	mandala	chu sheng gab
ཆུ་ཤེལ	rock crystal	chu shel
ཆུ་ཤེལ་གཏེར་ཁ	rock crystal mine	chu shel gter kha
ཆུ་ཤེལ་དབང་གི	moon 819	chu shel dbang gi
ཆུ་ཤེལ་དབང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	crystal disk	chu shel dbang gi dkyil 'khor
ཆུ་ཤེལ་དབང་པོ	the moon	chu shel dbang po
ཆུ་ཤེལ་ཞུན་མ	melted crystal, moon	chu shel zhun ma
ཆུ་ཤོ	chu sho med. herb [sour, body heat neutral, by its power rma tshad dang, mes tsig pa'i rma'i tsa dbal sogs 'joms]	chu sho
ཆུ་ཤོངས	drain water!	chu shongs
ཆུ་གཤང	p bshangs shongs!,, boil/ drain water	chu gshang
ཆུ་གཤམ	chu 'dabs sam chu mjug	chu gsham
ཆུ་གཤིས	nature/ kind of water	chu gshis
ཆུ་གཤོ	throw/ pour out water	chu gsho
ཆུ་གཤོ་བ	pour out water	chu gsho ba
ཆུ་གཤོང	chu yod pa'i sa gshong bu	chu gshong
ཆུ་གཤོའི་ཡུར་བུ	drainage ditch/ canal	chu gsho'i yur bu
ཆུ་གཤོས	throw/ pour out water	chu gshos
ཆུ་བཤངས	p gshang,, boiled/ drained water	chu bshangs
ཆུ་བཤལ	[wash], rinse	chu bshal
ཆུ་བཤལ་གཏོང	[wash], rinse	chu bshal gtong
ཆུ་བཤལ་གཏོང་བ	flush, rinse	chu bshal gtong ba
ཆུ་བཤོ་བ	pour out water	chu bsho ba
ཆུ་ས	river mud	chu sa
ཆུ་སིང	chu blugs nas 'tshag pa,...'Bras chu sing rgyag pa,...Bye ma chu sing rgyag pa	chu sing
ཆུ་སུབ་གཏོང་བ	people etc, in water dbugs sub gtong ba	chu sub gtong ba
ཆུ་སེར	lymph, serum [between tshigs mig and sha pags etc. khrag gi snyigs ma and bile essence dvangs ma las byung ba'i orange, thin like water la 'byar bag gi rtsi dang ldan pa; for its excess or exhausti...	chu ser
ཆུ་སེར་དཀར་པོ	{chu ser dkar po} disease [mostly of phlegm and cold wind chu ser disease, symptoms lus g.ya' zhing tshigs mtsams bye ba, pags pa'i steng shu thor lta bu rma 'byung ba zhig]	chu ser dkar po
ཆུ་སེར་སྐྱ་རྦབ	{chu ser skya rbab disease [among the five kinds of skya rbab chu ser shas che ba'i skya rbab ste, symptoms lus g.yo and pags par za phrug lang ba zhig]	chu ser skya rbab
ཆུ་སེར་གདོང་རྩ	{chu ser gdong rtsa bleeding nadi [long tsigs nas ngar gdong ngos su tson do gzhal ba'i sar yod pa'i bleeding nadi, good for chu ser gyi nad dang, pags nad za phrug rma rgan etc]	chu ser gdong rtsa
ཆུ་སེར་བརྡོལ་བ	secretion of liquid	chu ser brdol ba
ཆུ་སེར་ནག་པོ	{chu ser nag po disease	chu ser nag po
ཆུ་སེར་གཤའ་རིང	chu ser gsha' ring disease	chu ser gsha' ring
ཆུ་སོ	bladder, external and internal urinary organs	chu so
ཆུ་སོག་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	drown	chu sog la thim pa
ཆུ་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཙན་བཅུ	the 10 downfalls of water etc	chu sogs kyi sde tsan bcu
ཆུ་སོགས་རྒལ་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	wade	chu sogs rgal nas 'gro ba
ཆུ་སོགས་གཏོར་བའམ་འཐོར་བ	splash	chu sogs gtor ba'am 'thor ba
ཆུ་སྲང	a "minute"	chu srang
ཆུ་སྲང་གཅིག	24 seconds, [Syn {dbugs drug},], a time span defined in astrology as six periods of breaths	chu srang gcig
ཆུ་སྲམ	beaver [srog chags sram gyi bye brag cig]	chu sram
ཆུ་སྲི	only a little urine flows	chu sri
ཆུ་སྲིན	water dragon; Skt. patrana - sea monster, water monster, crocodile	chu srin
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཀེ་ཀེ	place in ancient India	chu srin ke ke
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཀེ་ཀེ་རུ	crocodile	chu srin ke ke ru
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཁྱིམ	the house of Capricorn	chu srin khyim
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཁྱིམ་ཅན	12th month [sun in Capricorn]	chu srin khyim can
ཆུ་སྲིན་གྱི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion, house of Capricorn, [the twelfth]	chu srin gyi khyim
ཆུ་སྲིན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	crocodile standard/ victory banner	chu srin gyi rgyal mtshan
ཆུ་སྲིན་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	crocodile month, snron zla [in the rdo rje mkha' 'gro'i rgyud etc. called chu srin zla]	chu srin gyi zla ba
ཆུ་སྲིན་གྱི་ཡ་ཐེམ	crocodile doorsills	chu srin gyi ya them
ཆུ་སྲིན་མགོ	sea-monster head, {zhi ba dmar mo}	chu srin mgo
ཆུ་སྲིན་རྒྱལ་མཙན	1) ocean; 2) 'Dod	chu srin rgyal mtsan
པའི་ལྷ་ཅྲོཅོདིལེ	totem standard/ banner	pa'i lha crocodile
ཆུ་སྲིན་རྒྱལ་མཙན་ཅན	1) ocean; 2) the Mara Garab Wangchuck	chu srin rgyal mtsan can
ཆུ་སྲིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	a king whose royal standard was a crocodile, epithet of cupid king whose royal standard was a crocodile	chu srin rgyal mtshan
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཆེན་པོ	fish, mythological monster-fish with body like a hill and 18 heads	chu srin chen po
ཆུ་སྲིན་བརྗིད་པའི་ཆས	attribute of resplendent crocodile-design	chu srin brjid pa'i chas
ཆུ་སྲིན་གདོང་ལྷྭམ	crocodile-faced boots worked on the surface	chu srin gdong lhwam
ཆུ་སྲིན་གདོང་ལཧབ༹མ	crocodile-faced boots worked on the surface	chu srin gdong lhvam
ཆུ་སྲིན་བདག	ocean	chu srin bdag
ཆུ་སྲིན་རྡོ་རྗེ་རི་མོའི་བྲན་མོ	goddess who rules over forest of kongpo and can stop the river	chu srin rdo rje ri mo'i bran mo
ཆུ་སྲིན་སྡེར་མོ	medicinal herb useful in leprosy 820	chu srin sder mo
ཆུ་སྲིན་བྱིས་པ་གསོད	river crocodile which carries away and eats children	chu srin byis pa gsod
ཆུ་སྲིན་འབྱུང་གནས	ocean	chu srin 'byung gnas
ཆུ་སྲིན་མོ	makaravaktra (dolphinheaded dakini)	chu srin mo
ཆུ་སྲིན་འཛིན་ཁྲི	throne supported on carved crocodiles	chu srin 'dzin khri
ཆུ་སྲིན་རིགས་ཤིག	alligator	chu srin rigs shig
ཆུ་སྲིན་ཤ་ཀྲ	mythological monster fish	chu srin sha kra
ཆུ་སྲིན་གཤེད	dung spyi	chu srin gshed
ཆུ་སྲིབ	gonorrhea	chu srib
ཆུ་སྲུང	water/ flood protection	chu srung
ཆུ་སྲུབ	convulsed state of a lake by wind, ruffling or churning of the waters	chu srub
ཆུ་སྲེལ	ocean	chu srel
ཆུ་སྲོལ	dried-up bed of river	chu srol
ཆུ་སླང	chu blug snod	chu slang
ཆུ་སླེ	island in water, bank, shore	chu sle
ཆུ་སླེའུ	water resistant phyar ba	chu sle'u
ཆུ་གསུམ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	chu gsum
ཆུ་གསོག	water storage, illness w excess water	chu gsog
ཆུ་གསོག་གཏོང	store water	chu gsog gtong
ཆུ་གསོག་མཐོ་སྟེགས	water storage tower	chu gsog mtho stegs
ཆུ་གསོག་རྫིང་བུ	water storage reservoir/ pond	chu gsog rdzing bu
ཆུ་བསགས་པ	1) in a pond etc. chu bskyil ba; 2) Khog chu bsags pa'i disease	chu bsags pa
ཆུ་བསངས	river's khar gtong ba'i bsangs	chu bsangs
ཆུ་བསིང	chu sing	chu bsing
ཆུ་ཧུབ	sip of water	chu hub
ཆུ་ཧུབ་གང	sip of water	chu hub gang
ཆུ་ལྷ	1) {chu lha} buddha; 2) Varun devi [water- goddess, blue, serpentheaded (one of the {phyogs skyong bcu}, the ten guardians of the directions)W direction protector [syn: mchog sbyin dang, lce brgya ...	chu lha
ཆུ་ལྷ་སྦྲུལ་གདོང	snake-headed Varunadevi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	chu lha sbrul gdong
ཆུ་ལྷ་མོ	water goddess, star mon gru	chu lha mo
ཆུ་ལྷག	excess fluid, tributary	chu lhag
ཆུ་ལྷམ	shoes not harmed by water, rain boots, galoshes	chu lham
ཆུ་ལྷའི་ཕྱོགས	water god direction, W	chu lha'i phyogs
ཆུ་ལྷའི་བུ	water god's son, star ri byi	chu lha'i bu
ཆུ་ལྷའི་ཞགས་པ	snake-noose (weapon of god of water)	chu lha'i zhags pa
ཆུ་ལྷའི་ཤིང	indian tree cratoeva roxburghii, varuna tree, tree of the god of water	chu lha'i shing
ཆུ་ལྷོག	in terms of the four elements, among lhog rigs divided in four like burning gyi thor pa du ma 'byung ba zhig	chu lhog
ཆུག	put, put into, SA 'jug pa	chug
ཆུག་པ	bunch	chug pa
ཆུགས	* entered, undertook, commenced	chugs
ཆུགས་པ	torpor	chugs pa
ཆུང	little, small, young, junior, inferior, poor	chung
ཆུང་སྐབས	minority	chung skabs
ཆུང་གི་ཚད་ལ	according to the size, in size	chung gi tshad la
ཆུང་གྲས	of the small[er] kind, lower ranking, less important	chung gras
ཆུང་གྲས་ཀྱི་ཤ	meat of young animals	chung gras kyi sha
ཆུང་གྲི	small knife	chung gri
ཆུང་གྲོགས	an old friend, friend from the early days	chung grogs
ཆུང་གྲོགས་མ	female childhood companion, gzhon nu'i rtse grogs mo	chung grogs ma
ཆུང་གླུད	ransom rite for the benefit of children, ransoms for children	chung glud
ཆུང་ངུ	a youth. Syn {chung chung}, small, little, the lower	chung ngu
ཆུང་ངུ་དང་ཆེན་པོ	the small and the large	chung ngu dang chen po
ཆུང་ངུ་ནས	from the earliest youth	chung ngu nas
ཆུང་ངུ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	to imagine the small	chung ngu yid la byed pa
ཆུང་ངུན	very little part	chung ngun
ཆུང་ངུའི་ཆུང	very weak	chung ngu'i chung
ཆུང་ངུའི་ཆུང་ངུ	very small, very weak	chung ngu'i chung ngu
ཆུང་ངུའི་དུས་སུ	as a young	chung ngu'i dus su
ཆུང་ངུའི་འདུ་ཤེས	'dod pa'i sas bsdus	chung ngu'i 'du shes
པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་ཆུང་ངུ	lesser conception in the desire realm	pa'i 'du shes chung ngu
ཆུང་ངུའི་ས་བཅུ	the ten lower levels	chung ngu'i sa bcu
ཆུང་ངུར	small, little	chung ngur
ཆུང་ངུས་གྲོལ	gain freedom with little asceticism	chung ngus grol
ཆུང་ངུས་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	be satisfied w little	chung ngus chog shes pa
ཆུང་ངེ	chung ngu'i phyogs,...Dka' ngal chung nge'i ngang nas las ka mang po tsar ba	chung nge
ཆུང་ཆུང	very small, exiguous, little, miniature, minor, paltry, petty, tenuous, trifling, small	chung chung
ཆུང་ཆེས་པ	very small	chung ches pa
ཆུང་འཇུག	kind of tea	chung 'jug
ཆུང་ཉུང	SA khug rta	chung nyung
ཆུང་གཉེན	boys and girls from childhood by their parents bsgrigs pa'i gnyen dan	chung gnyen
ཆུང་ཐ	smallest, last	chung tha
ཆུང་ཐིག	[arch] little, smallest	chung thig
ཆུང་མཐའ	smallest finality, finality of minuteness {chung mtha' rdul phra rab kyi gzugs},]	chung mtha'
ཆུང་དུ	in young ages, little	chung du
ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ	reduce, decrease, become smaller	chung du 'gro
ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	reduce, decrease	chung du 'gro ba
ཆུང་དུ་གཏོང	make smaller	chung du gtong
ཆུང་དུ་བཏང་བ	to alleviate	chung du btang ba
ཆུང་དུ་ན	when he was young	chung du na
ཆུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	decrease	chung du phyin pa
ཆུང་དུ་སོང	diminished	chung du song
ཆུང་དུས	the time 1 was small/ young	chung dus
ཆུང་དུས་ནས	from the time 1 was small/ young	chung dus nas
ཆུང་འདུར	'dur for infants	chung 'dur
ཆུང་འདྲིས	from childhood phan tshul 'dris te bsdebs pa'i bza' tsang 821	chung 'dris
ཆུང་ནས	from infancy	chung nas
ཆུང་གནང	underestimate	chung gnang
ཆུང་ཕུང་བུ	tiny, little, infant	chung phung bu
ཆུང་བ	1) small[er]; 2) few; 3) [be] weak/ feeble; 4) low; 5) young	chung ba
ཆུང་བ་ལ་འདོད་པ་ཉིད	desire for a younger person/ youth	chung ba la 'dod pa nyid
ཆུང་བྱེད	slender, fire	chung byed
ཆུང་འབྲིང་ཆེ	rudimentary, intermediate, and superior; small, middle and large	chung 'bring che
ཆུང་འབྲིང་ཆེ་གསུམ	rudimentary, intermediate, and superior; small, middle and large	chung 'bring che gsum
ཆུང་འབྲིང་ཆེན་པོ	(lesser, medium, and greater)	chung 'bring chen po
ཆུང་འབྲིང་ཆེས	lesser, medium, and greater; inferior, intermediate, mediocre and superior; small, middling and large	chung 'bring ches
ཆུང་མ	1) wife, mate, consort, partner; 2) khyim 'dzin mkhan; 3) younger of two wives	chung ma
ཆུང་མ་གནང	not underestimate	chung ma gnang
ཆུང་མ་བླངས	took a wife	chung ma blangs
ཆུང་མ་རིན་ཆེན་ཟེར་བར་སྐྱེས	was born as Ratnapati, the wife of	chung ma rin chen zer bar skyes
ཆུང་མ་ལས་སྐྱེས་ནས	since I was born	chung ma las skyes nas
ཆུང་མ་ལེན	take a wife	chung ma len
ཆུང་མ་ལེན་པར་བྱེད	take a wife	chung ma len par byed
ཆུང་མ་ལེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to take a wife, marry	chung ma len par byed pa
ཆུང་མ་ལེན་བ	marry	chung ma len ba
ཆུང་མ་བསུ	take / get a wife; x {de tshe chung ma zhig kyang bsu} Then I'll get myself a wife	chung ma bsu
ཆུང་མར་ཁབ་པ	to marry, take one for his wife	chung mar khab pa
ཆུང་མར་འཛིན་པ	take as wife	chung mar 'dzin pa
ཆུང་མར་སློང	ask to marry	chung mar slong
ཆུང་མོས་པ	Buddha Young Aspirant	chung mos pa
ཆུང་རྩག	minor, small stuff	chung rtsag
ཆུང་རྩག་གི་བཟོ་ལས	small-scale industry	chung rtsag gi bzo las
ཆུང་ཚང	Drigung Chungtsang	chung tshang
ཆུང་འཛིན	partial eclipse	chung 'dzin
ཆུང་ཞེལ	[arch] dman pa'am ma rabs, poor, bad	chung zhel
ཆུང་ཟད	hardly, very little, not at all trifling things	chung zad
ཆུང་ཟད་ཀྱང	x {chos kyi tshig don chung zad kyang mi shes pas} you will not have the slightest knowledge of either the words or the meaning of the teaching	chung zad kyang
ཆུང་ཟད་ཐེབས་པ	slightly affected	chung zad thebs pa
ཆུང་རུ	in young ages, little	chung ru
ཆུང་ལས་ཆེར་སྨིན	small causes with big results	chung las cher smin
ཆུང་ལུག	lamb	chung lug
ཆུང་ལུང	a place in Tibet	chung lung
ཆུང་ཤ	mutton, that of a smaller animal	chung sha
ཆུང་ཤོས	smallest, youngest, least, minimum, younger	chung shos
ཆུང་སུག	limbs of a lamb	chung sug
ཆུང་སེ་བ	only little	chung se ba
ཆུང་སྲི	disturber of the small, Sri which torment children	chung sri
ཆུང་གསོ་མདའ་མ	child-bride	chung gso mda' ma
ཆུད	entrapped, locked	chud
ཆུད་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,; 1) tshud pa,...Gnya' gnon bshu gzhog gi 'og tu chud pa,...Dmag gras su chud pa,...Gral du chud pa,..(2 realize, know; 3) be contained/ containable; 4) [arch] farmer, enter, inse...	chud pa
ཆུད་མ་ཟོན	{dam chos chud ma zon} Don't let the holy Dharma go to waste!	chud ma zon
ཆུད་མ་གཟོན	not exhausted, exhaustless	chud ma gzon
ཆུད་མ་གསོན	not exhausted, exhaustless	chud ma gson
ཆུད་མི་ཟ	not waste, not going to/ letting go to waste, strengthen, can never be lost retentiveness (infallibility	chud mi za
ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བ	does not waste, not going to waste, retentiveness, [infallibility], strengthen	chud mi za ba
ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བའི་རྒྱུ	cause of not wasting/ going to waste/ retentiveness/ strengthening	chud mi za ba'i rgyu
ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་པ	which is a cause for not letting [the merit] be wasted	chud mi za ba'i rgyu yin pa
ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བའི་རྫས	substance of no dissipation [thd]	chud mi za ba'i rdzas
ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བར	not letting go to waste	chud mi za bar
ཆུད་འཛའ་བ	be fruitless, be unsuccessful	chud 'dza' ba
ཆུད་འཛའ་བའི་མཚན་མ	the mark of being wasted	chud 'dza' ba'i mtshan ma
ཆུད་ཟ	be used up uselessly, waste, squander, consume	chud za
ཆུད་ཟ་བ	to waste, let go to waste, throw away, dissipate, squander	chud za ba
ཆུད་ཟེས	go to waste, be spoiled	chud zes
ཆུད་ཟོད་པ	be wasted, become barren	chud zod pa
ཆུད་ཟོས	go to waste, be spoiled	chud zos
ཆུད་ཟོས་གྱུར་པ	be wasted	chud zos gyur pa
ཆུད་ཟོས་གཏོང	waste, be wasted, squander	chud zos gtong
ཆུད་ཟོས་གཏོང་པ	waste	chud zos gtong pa
ཆུད་ཟོས་གཏོང་བ	waste, be wasted, squander	chud zos gtong ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་བཏང	wasted, was wasted, squandered	chud zos btang
ཆུད་ཟོས་བཏང་བ	wasted, was wasted, squandered	chud zos btang ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་དུ་བཏང་བ	{chud zos du ma btang} don't waste!	chud zos du btang ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་བྱེད	waste	chud zos byed
ཆུད་ཟོས་བྱེད་པ	waste	chud zos byed pa
ཆུད་ཟོས་མི་འགྱུར	never exhaust, [will] not be wasted	chud zos mi 'gyur
ཆུད་ཟོས་མི་འགྱུར་བ	never exhaust, [will] not be wasted	chud zos mi 'gyur ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་ལ་ངོ་རྒོལ	oppose waste	chud zos la ngo rgol
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་འགྱུར	go to waste	chud zos su 'gyur
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	go to waste	chud zos su 'gyur ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་འགྲོ	be exhausted, be wasted	chud zos su 'gro
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	be exhausted, be wasted	chud zos su 'gro ba
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་གཏོང	waste, be wasted, squander	chud zos su gtong
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་ཕྱིན	go/ went to waste	chud zos su phyin
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་ཕྱིན་པ	go/ went to waste	chud zos su phyin pa
ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	to waste	chud zos su byed pa
ཆུད་གཟན	to waste, squander	chud gzan
ཆུད་གཟན་པ	wasted	chud gzan pa
ཆུད་གཟོན	waste	chud gzon
ཆུད་གཟོན་པ	waste	chud gzon pa
ཆུད་གསན	wasting	chud gsan
ཆུད་གསོན་པ	to waste one's life	chud gson pa
ཆུན	vi. to discipline, control; imp. of {'jun pa}	chun
ཆུན་ཀླག	chun lag	chun klag
ཆུན་གྱི་བྲག་དམར	1 of 37 sacred bon places, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	chun gyi brag dmar
ཆུན་ཐག་སྡོམ་པ	btsas ma brngas te tshar mar sked 'ching rgyag pa'am chun po sdom pa	chun thag sdom pa
ཆུན་ཐུབ	can discipline/ control	chun thub
ཆུན་པ	bunch, bundle together, one that takes care of fields	chun pa
ཆུན་པོ	1) bunch, bundle, bouquet, cluster; 2) tuft, tassel, ornament; 3) strict w, able to discipline	chun po
ཆུན་པོ་ཅན	wreathed	chun po can
ཆུན་འཕྱང	tassels and garlands, cascade	chun 'phyang
ཕ༹ློཝེར	wreath	flower
ཆུན་འཕྱང་བ	wear a wreath of flowers	chun 'phyang ba
ཆུན་བུ	chun po	chun bu
ཆུན་མ	the 2nd wife [gzhon pa]	chun ma
ཆུན་མི་ཐུབ	cannot discipline/ control	chun mi thub
ཆུན་ཙེ	little, small	chun tse
ཆུན་མཛེས་ཅན	lightning	chun mdzes can
ཆུན་ལག	gser gyi gtsug phud ces pa'i bya zhig	chun lag
ཆུབ	Syn {khyab par gnas}, vi. to comprehend, understand [usu. follows thugs su] (h) chub consummate perspicacity, autonomous, total	chub
ཆུམ	'jum pa! shrink, crouch w fear	chum
ཆུམ་ཆུམ	humbly	chum chum
ཆུམ་པ	to shrink, to crouch	chum pa
ཆུམས་པ	[arch] 1) desire, passion; 2) collected, gathered	chums pa
ཆུའམ་རླངས་པ་ཚ་པོས་འཚིག་པ	scald	chu'am rlangs pa tsha pos 'tshig pa
ཆུའམ་རླུང་གིས་འཁྱེར་བ	drift	chu'am rlung gis 'khyer ba
ཆུའི	aqueous	chu'i
ཆུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	water mandala, the mandala of water	chu'i dkyil 'khor
ཆུའི་དཀྱིལ་དུ	in the middle of the river	chu'i dkyil du
ཆུའི་རྐ	gutter	chu'i rka
ཆུའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	water insects, worms, fire	chu'i skye gnas
ཆུའི་ཁ	a river ford	chu'i kha
ཆུའི་ཁམས	the water element, dhatu	chu'i khams
ཆུའི་མཁར་བརྒྱད	the 8 water forts	chu'i mkhar brgyad
ཆུའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	chu'i rba rlabs	chu'i 'khri shing
ཆུའི་འཁྲིལ་ཤིང	creeping plants growing in water	chu'i 'khril shing
ཆུའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	mirage	chu'i 'khrul 'khor
ཆུའི་གད་མོ	cuttle-fish bone, water bubbles	chu'i gad mo
ཆུའི་གྱེན	upstream, against the current	chu'i gyen
ཆུའི་རྒྱ་མཙ	channel of water	chu'i rgya mtsa
ཆུའི་རྒྱ་རྩ	channel of water	chu'i rgya rtsa
ཆུའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the sea, ocean chu'i rgya mtsho chen po gcig tu gyur was an immense ocean	chu'i rgya mtsho
ཆུའི་རྒྱུད	river valley	chu'i rgyud
ཆུའི་རྒྱུན	the flow of a river	chu'i rgyun
ཆུའི་སྒུར་འཁྱོག	pig	chu'i sgur 'khyog
ཆུའི་སྒྲོན་མ	water lamp	chu'i sgron ma
ཆུའི་ཆུ་བུར	water bubble, foam	chu'i chu bur
ཆུའི་འཇིགས་སྐྱོབས	protection from the fears of water	chu'i 'jigs skyobs
ཆུའི་འཇིགས་པ	water damage, flood	chu'i 'jigs pa
ཆུའི་ཉ་ཕྱིས	shell, snail	chu'i nya phyis
ཆུའི་ཉེར་མ	ripples upon water	chu'i nyer ma
ཆུའི་གཉེར་མ	ripples	chu'i gnyer ma
ཆུའི་རྟེན	bladder, SA dbang rten lnga	chu'i rten
ཆུའི་མཐའ་འགྲམ	edge of the water, bank, shore	chu'i mtha' 'gram
ཆུའི་མཐོ་དམན་ཀྱི་ཚད	water level	chu'i mtho dman kyi tshad
ཆུའི་མཐོ་ཚད	water level	chu'i mtho tshad
ཆུའི་དོང	well, spring, pool	chu'i dong
ཆུའི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་སྔོན་འཇུག	hydro	chu'i don ston pa'i sngon 'jug
ཆུའི་དྲ་བ	jujube tree	chu'i dra ba
ཆུའི་དྲོད་ཚད	water temperature	chu'i drod tshad
ཆུའི་འདབ་ཆགས	sprinkle, water-fowl	chu'i 'dab chags
ཆུའི་འདྲེ་ལོག	waves	chu'i 'dre log
ཆུའི་རྡོ་བ	a plant 823	chu'i rdo ba
ཆུའི་ནང་ན་གནས་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	aquatic creature	chu'i nang na gnas pa'i sems can
ཆུའི་གནས་ལུགས	hydrology, hydrography	chu'i gnas lugs
ཆུའི་དཔལ་ཡོན	flow and ebb-tide	chu'i dpal yon
ཆུའི་སྤྲིས་མ	in examining a sick person's urine brtag skabs gcin pa'i khar chags pa'i 'o ma'i kha spris dang 'dra ba'i thing, color &, srab mthug various arise	chu'i spris ma
ཆུའི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་བཞུགས་ནས	as they started to cross over	chu'i pha rol du bzhugs nas
ཆུའི་ཕུང་པོ	rgya mtso	chu'i phung po
ཆུའི་བུད་ཤིང་ཅན	rgod ma kha'i me	chu'i bud shing can
ཆུའི་བྱ་གག	crane gray duck, grey species of duck	chu'i bya gag
ཆུའི་བྱི་བ	sram	chu'i byi ba
ཆུའི་བྱིད་པ	kind of cuttle fish	chu'i byid pa
ཆུའི་འབབ་གཟར	torrent	chu'i 'bab gzar
ཆུའི་རྦ་རླབས	wave	chu'i rba rlabs
ཆུའི་ལྦུ་བ	bubble, foam	chu'i lbu ba
ཆུའི་རྩ	rhubarb roots	chu'i rtsa
ཆུའི་རྩྭ	water moss	chu'i rtswa
ཆུའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of water, {rlen zhing gsher ba}, fluid and moist	chu'i mtshan nyid
ཆུའི་ཝ་པ	aqueduct	chu'i wa pa
ཆུའི་ཞལ་ཏ	chu'i do dam pa	chu'i zhal ta
ཆུའི་ཞལ་ཏ་པ	woman who supplies water to a lady	chu'i zhal ta pa
ཆུའི་གཞི	lake, place filled with fresh water	chu'i gzhi
ཆུའི་ཟེགས་མ	char zil	chu'i zegs ma
ཆུའི་ཟེར་མ	spray	chu'i zer ma
ཆུའི་ཟླ	the moon in water	chu'i zla
ཆུའི་ཟླ་བ	the moon in water	chu'i zla ba
ཆུའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	mirage	chu'i gzugs brnyan
ཆུའི་འོབས	water ditch	chu'i 'obs
ཆུའི་ཡུར་བ	gutter	chu'i yur ba
ཆུའི་རོ་གསུམ	the three tastes of water	chu'i ro gsum
ཆུའི་རླུང	vibration of cohesion, water wind	chu'i rlung
ཆུའི་ལང་ཚོ	lotus	chu'i lang tsho
ཆུའི་ལས་རླུང	the karma- prana/ energy of water	chu'i las rlung
ཆུའི་ལོ་མ	ripples in water	chu'i lo ma
ཆུའི་ཤིང་རྟ	boat, ship	chu'i shing rta
ཆུའི་ས་བོན	char pa	chu'i sa bon
ཆུའི་སྲིན་པོའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	ocean	chu'i srin po'i grong khyer
ཆུའི་སྲེ་མོ	sram	chu'i sre mo
ཆུའོ་རོ	salt	chu'o ro
ཆུར	be drowned, SA chur 'tshi ba, in water	chur
ཆུར་རྐྱལ	to swim	chur rkyal
ཆུར་ཁུ	whey	chur khu
ཆུར་གན་དུ	hard by the water	chur gan du
ཆུར་གྱུར་བ	deliquesce	chur gyur ba
ཆུར་སྒྲོག	duck, water-fowl	chur sgrog
ཆུར་སྒྲོགས	1) chu bya; 2) utpala dkar po	chur sgrogs
ཆུར་བཅུག	put in the river	chur bcug
ཆུར་ཆུར	ri 'gar skye ba'i skyur zas sdong chung zhig	chur chur
ཆུར་མཆོངས	jumping into the water	chur mchongs
ཆུར་འཇུག	duck, water-fowl	chur 'jug
ཆུར་ཉལ	fish	chur nyal
ཆུར་འདྲེས	buffalo	chur 'dres
ཆུར་ནུབ་ཚད	draft of ships	chur nub tshad
ཆུར་གནས	be/ live in the water	chur gnas
ཆུར་སྤྱིངས	[arch] sink in the water	chur spyings
ཆུར་བ	[can] contain	chur ba
ཆུར་བོར་འདུག་པ	dropped / threw in the water	chur bor 'dug pa
ཆུར་མི་འབྱིང	not sink in water	chur mi 'bying
ཆུར་མི་ལྷུང	magic tree	chur mi lhung
ཆུར་རྩེ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of playing in the water [one of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, from wild thoughts play w the body half in the water	chur rtse ba'i ltung byed
ཆུར་འཛུལ	sram	chur 'dzul
ཆུར་འཛུལ་བ	glide into the water, dive	chur 'dzul ba
ཆུར་རིང་བ	dkyus su ring ba	chur ring ba
ཆུར་ལྷུང	sage, expounder of yoga philosophy	chur lhung
ཆུལ་ལ་འབོགས་པ	wade through water	chul la 'bogs pa
ཆུས	establish, gild, plate 1) 'Chu ba!; 2) way/ strategy for doing; 3) CH area/ district; 4) by water	chus
ཆུས་ཀྱི་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	District Committee	chus kyi u yon lhan khang
ཆུས་ཀྲང	chief/ head of a district	chus krang
ཆུས་སྐོར་བའི་རང་འཐག	water wheel/ mill	chus skor ba'i rang 'thag
ཆུས་བསྐོར	water turned/ powered	chus bskor
ཆུས་བསྐོར་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་ཁོར	hydroelectric turbine generator	chus bskor glog 'don 'phrul khor
ཆུས་བསྐོར་འཕྲུལ་ཁོར	hydro-powered turbine	chus bskor 'phrul khor
ཆུས་ཁྱེར	drowning	chus khyer
ཆུས་ཁྱེར་རྐྱལ་རློམ	even drowning proud of his swimming, even if completely conquered think 1 is not	chus khyer rkyal rlom
ཆུས་འཁྱེར	be carried/ swept away by water, drown	chus 'khyer
ཆུས་འཁྲུད	wash off in water	chus 'khrud
ཆུས་འགྱེར	vi. to be carried, swept away by water, drown	chus 'gyer
ཆུས་འཇིག་པ	destruction or devastation from water	chus 'jig pa
ཆུས་འཇིག་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	peak of destruction by water	chus 'jig pa'i rtse mo
ཆུས་འཇིགས་པ	fear of water	chus 'jigs pa
ཆུས་གཏོང་བ	gild, overspread with liquid gold or silver	chus gtong ba
ཆུས་འདེབས་པ	sprinkle water	chus 'debs pa
ཆུས་ནིང	four years ago	chus ning
ཆུས་བསྣུབས	drown	chus bsnubs
ཆུས་བྲན་པ	slightly wet or moisten with water	chus bran pa
ཆུས་སྦང་བ	saturate	chus sbang ba
ཆུས་མི་ཉམས	nam mkha'i thog	chus mi nyams
ཆུས་མི་ཉམས་པ	thunder bolt	chus mi nyams pa
ཆུས་མི་འཚུབ	fish chus g.yengs te - moved by the waves to and fro	chus mi 'tshub
ཆུས་བཤལ	bathing or washing with water	chus bshal
ཆེ་ཀ	chiefly, plurality	che ka
ཆེ་བརྐོས	par shing rko skabs yi ge'i bar gyi sa stong che ba rko byed	che brkos
ཆེ་བསྐྱེད	w great -- ['bad rtson che	che bskyed
བསྐྱེད་བྱས	-they worked w great diligence]	bskyed byas
ཆེ་ཁ	larg[er section/kind]	che kha
ཆེ་ཁག	larger section	che khag
ཆེ་ཁེ་སེ་ལ་ཝ་ཁེ	Czechoslovakia 824	che khe se la wa khe
ཆེ་ཁེ་སེ་ལ་ཝ་ཁེ་ཡ	Czechoslovakia	che khe se la wa khe ya
ཆེ་ཁོ་སེ་ལ་ཝ་ཁེ	Czechoslovakia	che kho se la wa khe
ཆེ་ཁོ་སེ་ལ་ཝ་ཁེ་ཡ	Czechoslovakia	che kho se la wa khe ya
ཆེ་ཁོག	large cattle kyi sha khog	che khog
ཆེ་ཁྱད	greatness	che khyad
ཆེ་ཁྱད་འབྱེད་པ	to see the difference between	che khyad 'byed pa
ཆེ་གེ	so and so [insert relevant name]	che ge
ཆེ་གེ་བ	so and so, by such-and-such name	che ge ba
ཆེ་གེ་མོ	certain, some one, such a one, such a thing, such and such, such a one, such a person, animated beings in general	che ge mo
ཆེ་གེ་མོ་ཁྱོད	such as you are	che ge mo khyod
ཆེ་གེ་མོ་ཞིག་ན	at so and so's place	che ge mo zhig na
ཆེ་གེ་མོ་ཞེས	so and so (instruction to insert your name)	che ge mo zhes
ཆེ་གྲས	large-scale, big, high ranking	che gras
ཆེ་དགུ	upper classes	che dgu
ཆེ་འགྱིང	self-importance	che 'gying
ཆེ་འགྲན	ambition, craving for greatness	che 'gran
ཆེ་འགྲོ་ཆུང་འགྲོ	1) gang thub ci nus .Ca lag rnams sgam nang che 'gro chung 'gro bsdu gsog byed pa,...Dpe cha pod gcig po de ring klog thub min ma nges kyang che 'gro chung 'gro byas nas 'don yong,...(2 Thub tshod ...	che 'gro chung 'gro
ཆེ་རྒུ	upper classes, greatness	che rgu
ཆེ་རྒྱུ	great	che rgyu
ཆེ་རྒྱུད	rgyal rigs etc. mi rgyud lineage	che rgyud
ཆེ་བརྒྱུད	descendants of the eldest son	che brgyud
ཆེ་ཅེ	very biggest	che ce
ཆེ་ཆུང	1) big and small. 2) size, greater and lesser, degree, higher or lower, extent; major and minor; size	che chung
ཆེ་ཆུང་གི་སྟོང་བྱེད་པ	proportion fine to the rank of the person killed	che chung gi stong byed pa
ཆེ་ཆུང་རྗེས་མི་འགྲོ	does not follow the size	che chung rjes mi 'gro
ཆེ་ཆུང་མཉམ་པ	of = size	che chung mnyam pa
ཆེ་ཆུང་སྣ་ཚོགས	of various sizes	che chung sna tshogs
ཆེ་ཆུང་འཚམས་པོ	of a suitable size, just right size	che chung 'tshams po
ཆེ་ཆེ	greatness, influence	che che
ཆེ་ཆེ་སྙན་སྙན	great and famous; great fame	che che snyan snyan
ཆེ་ཆེར	bigger and bigger, more and more	che cher
ཆེ་ཆེར་འགྲོ	increase/ improve more and more	che cher 'gro
ཆེ་ཆེར་རྒན་པ	growing older, becoming more and more an old man	che cher rgan pa
ཆེ་ཆེར་རྒན་མོ	becoming more and more an old woman	che cher rgan mo
ཆེ་ཆེར་འཕེལ་བ	increase further and further	che cher 'phel ba
ཆེ་ཆེས་པ	bigger and bigger, more and more, very big	che ches pa
ཆེ་མཆོག	supremely great, Chemchok heruka, the supreme heruka	che mchog
ཆེ་མཆོག་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Most Supreme Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga; focused on Nectar Quality	che mchog rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
ཆེ་མཆོག་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	Mahottara Heruka, the central figure of the Eight Sadhana Teachings; Chemchok Heruka, the Supreme Heruka	che mchog he ru ka
ཆེ་བརྗོད	extolling the greatness	che brjod
ཆེ་ཉམས	'gying nyams te pride Yar rgyas yong phyir che nyams spangs pa	che nyams
ཆེ་ཉམས་བྱེད་པ	to put on airs	che nyams byed pa
ཆེ་རྟགས	emblem of rank, insignia of status, mark of honor	che rtags
ཆེ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་དུ་གསོལ་བ	presented to him as a symbol of his greatness	che rtags kyi tshul du gsol ba
ཆེ་བསྟོད	eulogizing	che bstod
ཆེ་བསྟོད་ཀྱི་གླུ	songs of praise che bstod gyi dpung dmag ru khag guard of honor	che bstod kyi glu
ཆེ་བསྟོད་གྱི་གསོལ་སྟོན	banquet honoring --	che bstod gyi gsol ston
ཆེ་བསྟོད་བྱེད	praise	che bstod byed
ཆེ་བསྟོད་ཞུ	praise [h]	che bstod zhu
ཆེ་ཐག་ཆེ་བའམ་ཆེ་ཤོས	Khong bu spun rnams kyi che thag de yin	che thag che ba'am che shos
ཆེ་ཐག་ཆོད	immense, very large	che thag chod
ཆེ་ཐབས	arrogance, haughtiness	che thabs
ཆེ་ཐབས་ཅན	proud, arrogant, haughty	che thabs can
ཆེ་མཐོ	supremacy	che mtho
ཆེ་མཐོང	higher regard	che mthong
ཆེ་མཐོའི	supreme	che mtho'i
ཆེ་དང་ཆེ	of course it is	che dang che
ཆེ་དོན	missive, edict	che don
ཆེ་དྲག	too large	che drag
ཆེ་དྲག་ངོས་མེད	Bonpo deity connected with the red light	che drag ngos med
ཆེ་འདུག་པ	it is more than likely that, it is almost certain that	che 'dug pa
ཆེ་འདོད	desire for rank and position/ greatness, ambition, desire for greatness	che 'dod
ཆེ་འདོད་ཅན	ambitious	che 'dod can
ཆེ་འདོད་ཆུང་ཤོར	wanting the great and losing the small	che 'dod chung shor
ཆེ་འདོན	coming to full age, attaining the age of majority	che 'don
ཆེ་ནས	middling barley	che nas
ཆེ་རྣམས	those which were large, the big ones	che rnams
ཆེ་དཔང་པོ	witness in chief	che dpang po
ཆེ་ཕར	far away	che phar
ཆེ་ཕྲ	large and small, various	che phra
ཆེ་ཕྲ་བར་གསུམ	large, small, and middle	che phra bar gsum
ཆེ་བ	an elder; 1) great, big, large. 2) very 3) bigger, greater, larger, supreme, major, higher, greatness, enormous. 4) to prevail; a great man; significance	che ba
ཆེ་བ་ལྔ	the five greatnesses (mngon par sangs rgyas pa'i che ba, bdag nyid chen por, chos kyi dbyings su, de yin pa'i, thams cad nas thams cad du	che ba lnga
ཆེ་བ་ཉིད	greatness	che ba nyid
ཆེ་བ་དྲུག	the 6-fold greatness	che ba drug
ཆེ་བ་འདོན	demonstrate the power of (tummo	che ba 'don
ཆེ་བ་འདོན་པ	pronounced the greatness	che ba 'don pa
ཆེ་བ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four aspects of greatness	che ba rnam pa bzhi
ཆེ་བ་ཞིག	a big 1	che ba zhig
ཆེ་བ་བཞི	the four greatnesses [of the teachings]. 1) {rigs kyi che ba}. 2) {mkhyen kyi che ba}, 3) {nus pa'i che ba}, 4) {grub pa'i che ba}	che ba bzhi
ཆེ་བའི་ང་རྒྱལ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {mtshungs pa las bdag lhag go snyam pa}	che ba'i nga rgyal
ཆེ་བའི་ཆེ་བ	supreme greatness)	che ba'i che ba
ཆེ་བའི་མཆོག	see {che mchog}	che ba'i mchog
ཆེ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད	great personage	che ba'i bdag nyid
ཆེ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	supreme virtues/ qualities	che ba'i yon tan
ཆེ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བདུན	the seven qualities of greatness, seven superior virtues	che ba'i yon tan bdun
ཆེ་བའི་རིག་གནས་སློབ་ཚན་ང	five major subjects	che ba'i rig gnas slob tshan nga
ཆེ་འབྲིང	large and middle-sized	che 'bring
ཆེ་འབྲིང་ཆུང	large, middle, small	che 'bring chung
ཆེ་འབྲིང་ཆུང་གསུམ	elementary, intermediate and highest; great, middle and small	che 'bring chung gsum
ཆེ་མ་ཆུང	neither great nor small	che ma chung
ཆེ་མོ	great	che mo
ཆེ་མོ་བ	wood and stone bzo ba etc. teacher/ master	che mo ba
ཆེ་ཙམ	a little bigger	che tsam
ཆེ་ཙམ་པ	of considerable size, quite big	che tsam pa
ཆེ་ཙི	eggplant	che tsi
ཆེ་ཙུགས	arrogance, haughtiness, glorification, pride	che tsugs
ཆེ་བཙན	majesty	che btsan
ཆེ་བཙན་འགྲན་བྲལ	unrivalled majesty	che btsan 'gran bral
ཆེ་ཚང	Drigung Chetsang	che tshang
ཆེ་ཚད	magnitude	che tshad
ཆེ་ཚུག	[dignified] maturity	che tshug
ཆེ་ཚུགས་བསྐྱུང་སྟེ	swallow your	che tshugs bskyung ste
ཆེ་འཛིན	rang chen por 'dzin pa	che 'dzin
ཆེ་ཞི	[arch] bza' zla'i ming	che zhi
ཆེ་ཞེ	the Elder Sisters, and their retinues; Jamgön Kongtrül: the twelve Tenma goddesses who are loving and affectionate like mothers and daughters and belong to the classes of dümo, nöjin, and menmo	che zhe
ཆེ་ཞེས	instruction to insert someone's name	che zhes
ཆེ་གཞི	witness [who discriminates truth and falsity], testimony	che gzhi
ཆེ་བཞག་ཆུང་སྐྱུར	arranging things in consecutive order, placing larger or smaller things in their respective order	che bzhag chung skyur
ཆེ་བཞག་ཆུང་སྐྱུར་བ	keep everything in proper order	che bzhag chung skyur ba
ཆེ་བཞག་ཆུང་བསྐྱུར	establish the great and leave the small behind	che bzhag chung bskyur
ཆེ་བཞག་ཆུང་བཤོལ	establish the great, leave the small in beginning a project all after bzhag las don 'phar ma zhig gal cher 'dzin pa, Dmigs bsal gyi bya ba 'di thon pas other projects should be dealt w by entirely ...	che bzhag chung bshol
ཆེ་བཞི	witness [who discriminates truth and falsity], testimony	che bzhi
ཆེ་བཞི་ཆུང་བརྒྱད	the four great and 8 lesser schools of the kagyu	che bzhi chung brgyad
ཆེ་ཟད་ལམ་ཟད་མཁན	1 who has exhausted the path of the great [very high/ good: like exhausting dharmata]	che zad lam zad mkhan
ཆེ་འམ	{sgrib pa che 'am} Is it because my obscurations are too dense? che g.yag po - big strong person	che 'am
ཆེ་རིགས	high officials	che rigs
ཆེ་རིགས་དཔོན་ཁག	high officials, dignitaries che rigs dpon khag mjal 'phrad gnang meet high officials/ dignitaries	che rigs dpon khag
ཆེ་རིམ	coarse, the greatest ones	che rim
ཆེ་རུ	to increase, make or become bigger	che ru
ཆེ་རུ་འགྲོ	get bigger/ increased	che ru 'gro
ཆེ་རུ་ཆེ་རུ	grew larger and larger	che ru che ru
ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང	increase, enlarge, add	che ru gtong
ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	amplify, enlarge, magnify	che ru gtong ba
ཆེ་རུ་བཏང་བ	to make bigger / larger, enlarge, broaden, widen	che ru btang ba
ཆེ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	dilate	che ru phyin pa
ཆེ་རུ་མ་སོང་བ	had grown no greater	che ru ma song ba
ཆེ་རེ	blank, stare at, look with fixed eyes	che re
ཆེ་རེ་བལྟས	looking directly, unwaveringly, fixedly, to stare directly, look unwaveringly, look wit fixed eyes	che re bltas
ཆེ་ལ་བརྗིད་པ	big & majestic	che la brjid pa
ཆེ་ལོང	sufficient, excessive, noble. rough/ coarse, just a little of all	che long
ཆེ་ལོང་དུ	approximately, roughly	che long du
ཆེ་ལོང་དུ་བསྡུས་ཏེ་བཤད་ན	to approximate	che long du bsdus te bshad na
ཆེ་ལོང་ཞིག་བརྗོད་ན	roughly speaking	che long zhig brjod na
ཆེ་ལོངས	grown up, adult, many, much	che longs
ཆེ་ལོས	how big?	che los
ཆེ་ཤ	meat of large cattle	che sha
ཆེ་ཤུལ་ཆུང་ཁྲིད	che ba'i zhor la chung ba khrid pa	che shul chung khrid
ཆེ་ཤེལ	magnifying glass	che shel
ཆེ་ཤོད	eldest	che shod
ཆེ་ཤོས	best, maximum, greatest, chief, biggest, most	che shos
ཆེ་ས	1) high rank; 2) of the greater kind	che sa
ཆེ་སར་འདོན་པ	promote to higher rank	che sar 'don pa
ཆེ་སེ་བ	che tsam,...Shes bya che se ba	che se ba
ཆེ་སྲི	disturber of the large	che sri
ཆེད	1) [specifically/ specially] * for [the purpose of], in order to, on account of, because of; 2) Dmigs bkar, rkang btsugs	ched
ཆེད་ཀ	[arch] purpose, goal	ched ka
ཆེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཤད་པ	explain special dharmas, special dharma explanation	ched kyi chos bshad pa
ཆེད་ཀྱི་དོན	1) ched mngags kyi las don; 2) rnam dbye bzhi pa	ched kyi don
ཆེད་ཀྱིས	deliberately, intentionally, calculated, considered, premeditated. See also {ched du}	ched kyis
ཆེད་བསྐུལ	special appeal	ched bskul
ཆེད་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	make a special appeal	ched bskul byed
ཆེད་བསྐོས	special appointment	ched bskos
ཆེད་བསྐོས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་པ	specially appointed researcher	ched bskos brtag dpyad pa
ཆེད་བསྐོས་བྱེད	specially appoint/ set up	ched bskos byed
ཆེད་བསྐོས་མི་སྣ	specially appointed person/ envoys	ched bskos mi sna
ཆེད་བསྐོས་ལས་འགན	special assignment/ duty	ched bskos las 'gan
ཆེད་བསྐོས་གསར་འགྱུར་འགོད་མཁན	special reporter/ correspondent	ched bskos gsar 'gyur 'god mkhan
ཆེད་བསྐྲུན་ཚགས་པར	special edition [of paper/ magazine]	ched bskrun tshags par
ཆེད་མཁས	specialist	ched mkhas
ཆེད་འགན	special responsibility	ched 'gan
ཆེད་འགན་ལེན	take special responsibility	ched 'gan len
ཆེད་འགའ	some, a good number of	ched 'ga'
ཆེད་བསྒྲགས	special announcement/ notice/ communique	ched bsgrags
ཆེད་བསྒྲིགས	special edition/ publication	ched bsgrigs
ཆེད་བསྒྲིགས་དུས་དེབ	special edition/ issue/ supplement	ched bsgrigs dus deb
ཆེད་བསྒྲིགས་བྱེད	specially edit/ publish	ched bsgrigs byed
ཆེད་བསྒྲིགས་ལེ་ཚན	special column [newspaper]	ched bsgrigs le tshan
ཆེད་དངུལ	special funds	ched dngul
ཆེད་མངག	intentional, on purpose, special, specially	ched mngag
ཆེད་མངག་ཏག་ཏག	just wouldn't, turn out just the opposite	ched mngag tag tag
ཆེད་མངགས	specially, exclusively	ched mngags
ཆེད་མངགས་ཀྱི་མི	specially sent person	ched mngags kyi mi
ཆེད་མངགས་ཀྱིས	especially, expressly, purposely, on purpose, specially	ched mngags kyis
ཆེད་མངགས་སྐུ་ཚབ	special representative	ched mngags sku tshab
ཆེད་མངགས་ངོ་ཚབ	special representative	ched mngags ngo tshab
ཆེད་མངགས་གཏང་བ	send any special message	ched mngags gtang ba
ཆེད་མངགས་གནད་ཞུ	special invitation	ched mngags gnad zhu
ཆེད་མངགས་ཕོ་ཉ	special messenger/ envoy	ched mngags pho nya
ཆེད་མངགས་ཞུ་རྒྱུ་མ་བྱུང	I didn't do it on purpose	ched mngags zhu rgyu ma byung
ཆེད་ཅི་ཆེ	[arch] what need/ purpose?	ched ci che
ཆེད་ཆེན	special/ important matter	ched chen
ཆེད་ཆེན་པོ	a special thing, an important business	ched chen po
ཆེད་ཆེར	more and more	ched cher
ཆེད་ཆེར་བྱེད	increase	ched cher byed
ཆེད་བརྗོད	see {ched du brjod pa}	ched brjod
ཆེད་བརྗོད་སྡེ	class of special utterances	ched brjod sde
ཆེད་བརྗོད་པའི་སྡེ	class of scriptures including dbyangs snyan, lung du bstan, tshigs bcad, ched brjod	ched brjod pa'i sde
ཆེད་གཉེར	1) specialized. 2) special	ched gnyer
ཆེད་གཉེར་མཁས་པ	specialist ched gnyer gyi rtsom dang rtsom khrid mi	ched gnyer mkhas pa
སྣ	professional composers and directors	sna
ཆེད་གཉེར་བྱེད	to seek deliberately	ched gnyer byed
ཆེད་གཉེར་རུ་ཁག	specialist unit	ched gnyer ru khag
ཆེད་གཉེར་ལས་བགོས	division of labor into specialties	ched gnyer las bgos
ཆེད་གཏད	special[ly] [-ty] dmigs bkar ched gtad kyis 'phral du thag gcod byas	ched gtad
ཆེད་གཏད་དུ་ཁ་ལན་གཏོང་བ	give a special [verbal] answer 827 ched gtad las 'gan gzab nan gyis byed	ched gtad du kha lan gtong ba
ཆེད་གཏོང	specially sent	ched gtong
ཆེད་གཏོང་སྐུ་ཚབ	special[ly sent] envoy/ representative	ched gtong sku tshab
ཆེད་གཏོང་དུས་དེབ	special issue [magazine]	ched gtong dus deb
ཆེད་གཏོང་གནམ་གྲུ	special[ly sent] airplane	ched gtong gnam gru
ཆེད་གཏོང་མེ་འཁོར	special[ly sent] train	ched gtong me 'khor
ཆེད་གཏོང་མོ་ཏ	special[ly sent] car	ched gtong mo ta
ཆེད་དུ	purposely/ deliberately/ specifically/ intentionally	ched du
ཆེད་དུ་མཁས་པ	specialist	ched du mkhas pa
ཆེད་དུ་གྱི་སྩོལ་བ	goal-oriented effort	ched du gyi stsol ba
ཆེད་དུ་དགོངས་པ	purposeful	ched du dgongs pa
ཆེད་དུ་སྒོམ	deliberate meditation	ched du sgom
ཆེད་དུ་བསྒོམས་པ	to meditate with intentionality	ched du bsgoms pa
ཆེད་དུ་གཅོད་པ	to separate/ isolate/ divide (off) deliberately; to polarize	ched du gcod pa
ཆེད་དུ་རྗོད་པའི་ཚོམས	Udanavarga; (T 326); a collection of verses from the Buddhist canon compiled by Dharmatrata. The Udanavarga is similar in content and style to the famed Dhammapada found in the Pali canon. [MR]	ched du rjod pa'i tshoms
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད	notes: see brjod pa	ched du brjod
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	Special Aphorisms; one of the 12 aspects of excellent speech {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	ched du brjod pa
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པའི	the compilation of the substance of the teaching in verse form	ched du brjod pa'i
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པའི་ཆོམས	ched du brjod pa'i choms	ched du brjod pa'i choms
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པའི་སྡེ	aphorisms, one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}, twelve divisions of the teachings	ched du brjod pa'i sde
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པའི་ཚོམ	verse summary of the essence of the doctrine	ched du brjod pa'i tshom
ཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པའི་ཚོམས	udanavarga	ched du brjod pa'i tshoms
ཆེད་དུ་སྤྲོས	conjure up a thought on purpose, to deliberately project a thought	ched du spros
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ	for the purpose of	ched du bya
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ	1) extraordinary object having thesis/project; 2) Rnam dbye bzhi pa dgos ched object of intent, purposeful action done for	ched du bya ba
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the three great intentional actions	ched du bya ba chen po gsum
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ་དམ་པ	gzhan don du sbyor ba	ched du bya ba dam pa
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་འཇུག་སྒྲུབ	engage in intentional action	ched du bya ba la 'jug pa'i 'jug sgrub
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་ཁྱད་པར	the special quality of intentional action	ched du bya ba'i khyad par
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་བསྒོམ་པ་བཞི	the four specific trainings # ched du bya ba'i nges 'byang sgrub pa purposeful definite mastery ched du bya ba'i nges 'byung sgrub pa purposefully establish renunciation	ched du bya ba'i bsgom pa bzhi
ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱ	specific disciples	ched du bya ba'i gdul bya
ཆེད་དུ་བྱིན་པ	give for, give on account of	ched du byin pa
ཆེད་དུ་འབུལ་བ	specially given/ offered;, special significance/ reason/ meaning	ched du 'bul ba
ཆེད་དུ་མ་དགོངས	w/o deliberate intention	ched du ma dgongs
ཆེད་དུ་མ་དགོངས་པ	w/o deliberate intention	ched du ma dgongs pa
ཆེད་དུ་མ་བལྟོས	without regard for anything else, despite any other factors	ched du ma bltos
ཆེད་དུ་མི་སྤྲོ	do not deliberately try to think	ched du mi spro
ཆེད་དུ་དམིགས་པ	deliberate visualization	ched du dmigs pa
ཆེད་དུ་རྩོལ	deliberate effort	ched du rtsol
ཆེད་དུ་རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ	deliberate effort	ched du rtsol sgrub
ཆེད་དུ་རྩོལ་བ	deliberate effort	ched du rtsol ba
ཆེད་དུ་འཚོལ	to seek eagerly	ched du 'tshol
ཆེད་དུ་འཛིན	attach undue importance	ched du 'dzin
ཆེད་དུ་འཛིན་པ	to reify deliberately/ consciously	ched du 'dzin pa
གོཨལ	oriented fixation regard as special, regard particularly (as, deliberately fixate grasp at particulars, be goal oriented, fixate	goal
ཆེད་དུ་འཛོན	regard as special	ched du 'dzon
ཆེད་དུ་བཟུང	regard (them as special, make a big deal of	ched du bzung
ཆེད་དུ་འཟིན	that there is something special about	ched du 'zin
ཆེད་དུ་བསད་པ	especially killed for oneself 828	ched du bsad pa
ཆེད་དུ་བསམ་ཏེ་སྐྱེ་བས་ན	if intentional thoughts arise	ched du bsam te skye bas na
ཆེད་དོན	1) special significance/ reason/ meaning [used in letters to indicate start of the main subject matter rkang btsugs nas brjod pa'i don te, sngar gzhung yig gong nas 'og la btang ba'i bka' shog sogs...	ched don
ཆེད་པ	spread over	ched pa
ཆེད་སྤེལ་བ	send a special message	ched spel ba
ཆེད་སྤྱོད	for special purposes/ uses	ched spyod
ཆེད་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་འཕྲུལ་སྟེགས	special purpose lathe	ched spyod kyi 'phrul stegs
ཆེད་ཕན་སྨན	med which is a remedy specifically/ exclusively for some ailment	ched phan sman
ཆེད་བོས	specially invited	ched bos
ཆེད་བོས་སྐུ་ཚབ	specially invited specially invited ambassador/ representative/ envoy	ched bos sku tshab
ཆེད་བྲིས	specially written	ched bris
ཆེད་འབུལ	specially given/ offered, special significance/ reason/ meaning, * [h]	ched 'bul
ཆེད་སྦྱོང་ཚན་ཁག	special course	ched sbyong tshan khag
ཆེད་སྦྱོང་སློབ་གྲྭ	professional [graduate] school	ched sbyong slob grwa
ཆེད་དམིགས	ched mngags dmigs su bkar ba,... special [dedication/ consecration]	ched dmigs
ཆེད་དམིགས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	special skill/ knowledge	ched dmigs kyi yon tan
ཆེད་དམིགས་གླེང་བརྗོད	monograph/ treatise on special subject	ched dmigs gleng brjod
ཆེད་དམིགས་གློག་འཕྲིན	special telegraph [-gram]	ched dmigs glog 'phrin
ཆེད་དམིགས་དོན་ཚན	special items [of treaty]	ched dmigs don tshan
ཆེད་བཙུགས	dmigs bkar gyis gsar 'dzugs byas pa	ched btsugs
ཆེད་རྩོམ	thesis, essay, article	ched rtsom
ཆེད་འཛིན	deliberate	ched 'dzin
ཆེད་འཛིན་མེད་པའི་ངང་ལ་ཞོག	rest in the state free from fixation	ched 'dzin med pa'i ngang la zhog
ཆེད་འཛིན་རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ	deliberate effort	ched 'dzin rtsol sgrub
ཆེད་འཛུགས	special founding/ establishing	ched 'dzugs
ཆེད་ཞིབ་མཐའ་གསལ	ched gnyer gyis [special[ized], for the sake of] zhib dpyod mtha' gsal all clarifying close examination	ched zhib mtha' gsal
ཆེད་ཞུ	telling especially, {ched don} [h] ched du smra ba,...tshogs 'du lhan rgyas kyi snyan lam du, ched zhu	ched zhu
ཆེད་བཞིན	according to the program	ched bzhin
ཆེད་བཟོས	ched mngags gsar skrun byas pa	ched bzos
ཆེད་ལ	for that sake; deliberately	ched la
ཆེད་ལས	special task, profession, specialty	ched las
ཆེད་ལས་ཀྱི་འཆར་འགོད་ཁང	special design unit	ched las kyi 'char 'god khang
ཆེད་ལས་ཀྱི་རུ་ཁག	special unit/ brigade	ched las kyi ru khag
ཆེད་ལས་ཀྱི་རོལ་མོ་མཁན	professional musician	ched las kyi rol mo mkhan
ཆེད་ལས་ཡོན་ཏན	special knowledge, professional study	ched las yon tan
ཆེད་ལས་རུ་ཁག	special unit/ brigade	ched las ru khag
ཆེད་ལས་སུ་འགྱུར	become specialized/ professionalized ched las su 'gyur{chem chu - {chem churiver [in mtso sngon Province's mgo log, rma chen rdzong]	ched las su 'gyur
ཆེད་ལས་སུ་བསྒྱུར	specialize, professionalize	ched las su bsgyur
ཆེད་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ	professional/ vocational school	ched las slob grwa
ཆེད་སོ	great object, special reason	ched so
ཆེན་བརྒྱད་གྲུབ་པ	8 common accomplishments/ ordinary siddhis	chen brgyad grub pa
ཆེན་ཆུང	first wife and second wife	chen chung
ཆེན་ཆུན	senior and junior, 1st and later wives	chen chun
ཆེན་ཐགས	[arch] phyugs nad	chen thags
ཆེན་སྣང	magnifier, seeing a thing larger than its real size	chen snang
ཆེན་པོ་འགྱུར་བ	become great, increase, grow up chen po nga gya de tsam lnga 'byung ba lnga ngag lag pa rkang pa rkub 'doms	chen po 'gyur ba
ཡིད་དབང	... ??? five elements, speech, arms, legs, buttocks, genitals, and power of mind	yid dbang
ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	the five great qualities/khyad chos of space	chen po lnga
ཆེན་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	very biggest	chen po chen po
ཆེན་པོ་ཉིད	greatness	chen po nyid
ཆེན་པོ་ཉིད་རྣམ་པ་བདུན	{chen po bdun} the seven superior qualities of Mahayana	chen po nyid rnam pa bdun
ཆེན་པོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the great, immensity, voidness of the great, voidness of immensity [of the ten directions]	chen po stong pa nyid
ཆེན་པོ་བདུན	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {dmigs pa che ba nyid dang ni/ /de bzhin sgrub pa gnyis dag dang/ /ye shes brtson 'grus rtsom pa dang/ /thabs la mkhas par gyur pa dang/ /yang dag sgrub pa chen po dang/ /s...	chen po bdun
ཆེན་པོ་བདུན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	superiority of the seven greatnesses: Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {theg chen gyi sde snod 829 rgya chen po la dmigs pa dang/ rang gzhan gnyis ka'i don sgrub pa dang/ bdag med pa gnyis ka rtogs pa dang...	chen po bdun gyi khyad par
ཆེན་པོ་བདུན་ལྡན	possessing the 7 great ones	chen po bdun ldan
ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་པ	maitreya, asanga	chen po rnam pa
ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the threefold greatness	chen po rnam gsum
ཆེན་པོ་པད་མའི་བསྒོམ་ལུང	text cited in "gradual" mahayoga section of bsam gtan mig sgron	chen po pad ma'i bsgom lung
ཆེན་པོ་མི་མཛེས་པ	abominable	chen po mi mdzes pa
ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four superiorities	chen po bzhi
ཆེན་པོ་ཡི་ཆེན་པོ	very strong	chen po yi chen po
ཆེན་པོ་ཡུན་རིང་པོར་མི་སྐྱོ་བ	the greatness of never tiring even for long stretches of time	chen po yun ring por mi skyo ba
མཆོད་པ་དང་རིམ་གྲོ་བསྐྱེད་དོ	respectfully offered the Buddha a seat and refreshments suitable for a great man	mchod pa dang rim gro bskyed do
ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the three great ones [past, present and future;, (mahamudra, dzogchen, and madhyamaka]	chen po gsum
ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ་ལྡན	endowed with the threefold greatness	chen po gsum ldan
ཆེན་པོ་ཧོར	Mongolia	chen po hor
ཆེན་པོའི	monstrous	chen po'i
ཆེན་པོའི་བདག	great lord/ nature/ soul, big ego	chen po'i bdag
ཆེན་པོའི་བདག་ཉིད	superior personage	chen po'i bdag nyid
ཆེན་པོའི་འདུ་ཤེས	inclusive perception of the form realm	chen po'i 'du shes
ཆེན་པོའི་གནས་སྐབས་སུ་ཕྱིན་པ	reach a great situation	chen po'i gnas skabs su phyin pa
ཆེན་པོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Mahayoga, Great Yoga	chen po'i rnal 'byor
ཆེན་པོའི་པད་མའི་བསྒོམ་ལུང	The Great Padma's Instructions on Meditation	chen po'i pad ma'i bsgom lung
ཆེན་པོའི་ཡང་ཆེན་པོ	greatest of the great	chen po'i yang chen po
ཆེན་པོར	greatly	chen por
ཆེན་པོར་སྐྱེ་བ	grow up, grow tall	chen por skye ba
ཆེན་པོར་གྱུར	gone great	chen por gyur
ཆེན་པོར་གྱུར་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	superior samadhi	chen por gyur pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཆེན་པོས	by the great	chen pos
ཆེན་མ	1st of two wives	chen ma
ཆེན་མང་པོ	many and great	chen mang po
ཆེན་འཛིན་གྱི་རྩོལ་བ	goal-oriented effort	chen 'dzin gyi rtsol ba
ཆེམ	farewell exhortation, last will {sgra lhang lhang grags pa}, {'od lam lam 'phro ba}, glittering thundering, roaring, rumbling, noise	chem
ཆེམ་ཁྲ་སྤྲིང་ངེ	atmospheric phenomena	chem khra spring nge
ཆེམ་ཆུ	{chem chu river	chem chu
ཆེམ་ཆེམ	number, glittering	chem chem
ཆེམ་པ	thunder forth	chem pa
ཆེམ་མེ	1) rumbling roaring; 2) shining, glittering; 3) still[ness], silent [-ce]	chem me
ཆེམ་མེ་བ	1) rumbling roaring; 2) shining, glittering; 3) still[ness], silent [-ce]	chem me ba
ཆེམ་མེར་འདུག་པ	sit still without speaking	chem mer 'dug pa
ཆེམ་ཙེ	small scissors	chem tse
ཆེམ་སེ་ཆེམ	rattling, rumbling	chem se chem
ཆེམས	decrescendo (on cymbals)	chems
ཆེམས་ཆེམས	1) glittering, shining [star]; 2) trembling, shaking; 3) roaring, [rumbling] noise	chems chems
ཆེམས་པ	inform, deliver a message	chems pa
ཆེམས་བཞག་པ	kha chems	Chems bzhag pa
ཆེམས་རིང	extended decrescendo (on cymbals)	chems ring
ཆེམས་སེ་ཆེམ	rattling, rumbling, noise	chems se chem
ཆེམས་སེ་ཆེམས	rattling sound, rumbling	chems se chems
ཆེའང་བཟོད་ཐུབ་པ	be able to accept thje great [among the {sbyor lam nges 'byed cha bzhi}, by attaining realization of grasped object as natureless gsal snang chen po and 'dzin pa subject as natureless gsal snang ch...	che'ang bzod thub pa
ཆེར	more and more	cher
ཆེར་བསྐྱེད	grow strong, strengthen, become bigger/ stronger	cher bskyed
ཆེར་འཁྲོས་པ	very wrathful	cher 'khros pa
ཆེར་གྱིས	more and more, further and further	cher gyis
ཆེར་སྒྲོག	broadcasting	cher sgrog
ཆེར་སྒྲོག་གློག་ཁང	broadcasting station	cher sgrog glog khang
ཆེར་འཇིག	kalpa of destruction	cher 'jig
ཆེར་གཏོང	increase, make bigger	cher gtong
ཆེར་གཏོང་སྒྲ་འཁོར	loudspeaker	cher gtong sgra 'khor
ཆེར་བཏང	to deepen	cher btang
ཆེར་བལྟས	look nakedly at	cher bltas
ཆེར་སྤེལ	enlarge, widen, spread	cher spel
ཆེར་མེད	w/o increase	cher med
ཆེར་འོས་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse a more suitable attitude/a worthier bodhicitta 830	cher 'os sems bskyed
ཆེར་ལོང་དུས	By the time he was of age,	cher long dus
ཆེར་ལོང་ནས	as he grew up,	cher long nas
ཆེར་ལོངས་ནས	now an adult	cher longs nas
ཆེར་སོང	to intensify	cher song
ཆེར་སོང་བ	grew even stronger	cher song ba
ཆེལ་པ	able by one's own power or might	chel pa
ཆེས	extremely, too, so, much more, very, intense, great	ches
ཆེས་ཀྱི་ཚིག་ཐོས་པ་བརྟེན་ནས	accepting on faith	ches kyi tshig thos pa brten nas
ཆེས་དཀོན་པར་སྣང	becomes exceedingly valuable or scarce	ches dkon par snang
ཆེས་ཁྱད་པར	especially	ches khyad par
ཆེས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	especially noble	ches khyad par du 'phags pa
ཆེས་མཁས	very learned	ches mkhas
ཆེས་དགའི་བ	intense joy / bliss	ches dga'i ba
ཆེས་མགྱོགས	very quick, speedy	ches mgyogs
ཆེས་རྒས་པ	old, worn out	ches rgas pa
ཆེས་རྒྱས་པ་སྐྱེ་བ	arise very widely	ches rgyas pa skye ba
ཆེས་སྒྲིན་པ	very prudent or clever	ches sgrin pa
ཆེས་ལྕི་བ	very heavy	ches lci ba
ཆེས་ཆུང་བ	much less	ches chung ba
ཆེས་ཆེ་བ	very great	ches che ba
ཆེས་ཆེར	greatly, widely, very much	ches cher
ཆེས་ཆེར་གོང་དུ་བགྲོད	stepping stones	ches cher gong du bgrod
ཆེས་ཆེར་ཕྱིན	has become much bigger	ches cher phyin
ཆེས་ཆེར་ལྷག་པ	very supremely excellent	ches cher lhag pa
ཆེས་མཆོག	supreme	ches mchog
ཆེས་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	became even greater	ches mchog tu gyur pa
ཆེས་ཉུང་བ	it is very rare	ches nyung ba
ཆེས་ཉེ་བ	very attached, very intimate	ches nye ba
ཆེས་མཐོ	very high	ches mtho
ཆེས་མཐོའི་ཁྲིམས་ཁང	supreme court	ches mtho'i khrims khang
ཆེས་མཐོའི་དཔོན་རིགས	high officials ches mtho'i mi dmangs khrims khang People's Supreme Court PRC ches mtho'i mi dmangs rtog zhib khang People's Supreme Procurator's Office PRC ches mtho'i mi dmangs zhib dpyod khang - ...	ches mtho'i dpon rigs
ཆེས་མཐོའི་ལྷན་ཚོགས	summit conference	ches mtho'i lhan tshogs
ཆེས་འཐུང་བ	drink much	ches 'thung ba
ཆེས་དར་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ	spread very much	ches dar bar gyur to
ཆེས་འདྲ་བ	very similar to	ches 'dra ba
ཆེས་སྡུག	very beautiful/ inferior/ painful	ches sdug
ཆེས་སྡོམ་པ	preserve one's vows very carefully	ches sdom pa
ཆེས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, greatly, so much, believe	ches pa
ཆེས་ཕྲ	subtler and subtler	ches phra
ཆེས་འཕགས་པ	very noble	ches 'phags pa
ཆེས་འབྱོངས	completely mastered	ches 'byongs
ཆེས་མང	rather large, too many	ches mang
ཆེས་མང་བ	rather large, too many	ches mang ba
ཆེས་མི་འོས་པ	very unworthy	ches mi 'os pa
ཆེས་མྱུར	(in the same time as), speedy, very quick, rapid	ches myur
ཆེས་དམན་པ	very low/ humble	ches dman pa
ཆེས་བཞོན་པ	very youthful, very young, youngest	ches bzhon pa
ཆེས་རིང་དུ	very far	ches ring du
ཆེས་རིང་དུ་ཕྱོགས	to be very far from	ches ring du phyogs
ཆེས་ལས་ཆེས་ལྷག	to far exceed the value of	ches las ches lhag
ཆེས་ཤིན་ཏུ	utter, complete	ches shin tu
ཆེས་ཤིན་ཏུ་དམན་པ	extremely low	ches shin tu dman pa
ཆེས་སེམས་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	with increased control over the mind	ches sems dbang du gyur pa
ཆེས་གསང	total secrecy	ches gsang
ཆེས་གསལ་བ	deeply illuminated	ches gsal ba
ཆེས་གསལ་བར་མཛད་པ	to strongly illuminate	ches gsal bar mdzad pa
ཆེས་ལྷག	far superior, greater, very much, extremely, much in excess	ches lhag
ཆེས་ལྷག་པ	in much excess, great deal in excess	ches lhag pa
ཆེས་ལྷག་པར	extremely, excessively, further, furthermore	ches lhag par
ཆོ	essence, fruition, meaningful, sense, meaning, worth	cho
ཆོ་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས	dharmadhatu, expanse of reality	cho kyi dbyings
ཆོ་ག	way of /procedures for accomplishing/ performing a task [eg Sman bcos kyi..Mchod pa'i..Dkyil 'khor gyi..Dga' ston gyi] divide, separate [grangs su sdud pa'i cho ga] ceremonies of purification, meth...	cho ga
ཆོ་ག་མཁན	ritual specialist	cho ga mkhan
ཆོ་ག་ལྔ	five rituals (chanting the ritual melodies, visualizing during the mantra recitation, assuming different hand gestures, playing the drum, dancing)	cho ga lnga
ཆོ་ག་ཅན	cinnamon	cho ga can
ཆོ་ག་བཅུ	10 kinds of religious rites	cho ga bcu
ཆོ་ག་ཉམས་པ	incomplete procedure/ liturgy	cho ga nyams pa
ཆོ་ག་བཏང	the ritual is performed	cho ga btang
ཆོ་ག་བཏང་བ	the ritual is performed	cho ga btang ba
ཆོ་ག་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the ten natures / principles of ritual	cho ga de nyid bcu
ཆོ་ག་བསྡུ	the ritual is drawn to an end	cho ga bsdu
ཆོ་ག་རྣམ་པ	creative acts	cho ga rnam pa
ཆོ་ག་པ	priest	cho ga pa
ཆོ་ག་སྤྱོད་པ	practice the ritual	cho ga spyod pa
ཆོ་ག་ཕུན་སུམ	possessed of good morals 831	cho ga phun sum
ཆོ་ག་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	of good character	cho ga phun sum tshogs pa
ཆོ་ག་ཕྱག་ལེན	ritual tradition, the performance of rituals	cho ga phyag len
ཆོ་ག་བྱང་བཞུས	purification rituals and name burning cho ga bzhin du khas blang pa las thob	cho ga byang bzhus
ཆོ་ག་ཟབ་མོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Profound Mantra Ritual. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	cho ga zab mo sngags kyi rgyud
ཆོ་ག་ཟླ་བ	the 1st month	cho ga zla ba
ཆོ་ག་ལ་གནས་པ	practitioner	cho ga la gnas pa
ཆོ་ག་ཤེས་པ	priest	cho ga shes pa
ཆོ་ག་གསུམ	three rites	cho ga gsum
ཕོ༹རམ་ཨོཕ༹་སེཨེད	syllables {gsung yig bru},	form of seed
ཨནད་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	mind of concentration {thugs bsam gtan}	and the buddha
ཆོ་ག་གསུམ་བསྐྱེད	visualization through the three rituals. Three steps in visualization of a deity: seat with seed syllable, attribute, and deity	cho ga gsum bskyed
ཆོ་གའི	ritual	cho ga'i
ཆོ་གའི་ངང་ཚུལ་ཅན	one naturally of good behavior cho ga'i chings dang mtshams sbyor structure and steps of a ritual	cho ga'i ngang tshul can
ཆོ་གའི་ཐུན	liturgical practice session	cho ga'i thun
ཆོ་གའི་འདོན་འགྲིགས	performance of rites	cho ga'i 'don 'grigs
ཆོ་གའི་སྤྱི་ཆིངས	main points of the procedure/ liturgy	cho ga'i spyi chings
ཆོ་གའི་བྱ་བ	ritual procedures	cho ga'i bya ba
ཆོ་གའི་སྦྱོར་བ་བདུན	seven points of ritual	cho ga'i sbyor ba bdun
ཆོ་གའི་རབས	history of the rite	cho ga'i rabs
ཆོ་གའི་རིམ	liturgical procedure	cho ga'i rim
ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ	Sequence of the ceremony	cho ga'i rim pa
ཆོ་གའི་ལྷན་ཐབས	a collection of texts elucidating a practice	cho ga'i lhan thabs
ཆོ་གར་བྱེད	performing rituals	cho gar byed
ཆོ་གོ	great	cho go
ཆོ་གོ་བཟང་ཤེས་ལྡན་པ	have excellent knowledge of ritual	cho go bzang shes ldan pa
ཆོ་ངེ	lamentation, wailing	cho nge
ཆོ་ངེ་དིར	loud lament	cho nge dir
ཆོ་ངེ་འདེབས་པ	to wail	cho nge 'debs pa
ཆོ་ངེ་འོ་དོད	weep, lament	cho nge 'o dod
ཆོ་ངེས	lamentation, wailing, crying	cho nges
ཆོ་ངོགས	bank, shore, coast	cho ngogs
ཆོ་ལྔ	five doctrines	cho lnga
ཆོ་ཆད	[arch] unsuitable, inappropriate	cho chad
ཆོ་ཉིད་བར་དོ	intermediate state of reality, bardo of dharmata	cho nyid bar do
ཆོ་བལྟས	check the state of affairs	cho bltas
ཆོ་འཐུས་ལག་ཁྱེར་ཐོབ	get a passport, permit	cho 'thus lag khyer thob
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	sems kyi + - the magical play of the mind	cho 'phrul
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་བཅོ་ལྔ	the fifteenth day of the first month	cho 'phrul gyi bco lnga
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ལྟད་མོ	a spectacle of magic	cho 'phrul gyi ltad mo
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	the 1st month of miracles	cho 'phrul gyi zla ba
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་འགྲན	to compete in the power of the magical creation	cho 'phrul 'gran
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་འགྲན་པ	a contest of magical powers	cho 'phrul 'gran pa
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྟན་པ	display of great miracles	cho 'phrul chen po bstan pa
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great miracles	cho 'phrul chen po bzhi
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེན་པོའི་དུས་ཆེན	festival of great miracles [one of the {khyad par can gyi dus chen bzhi}s, 1st month, mchu zla or rta zla 1st-5th day of waxing, annihilating maras, heretics etc. by various miracles called the tim...	cho 'phrul chen po'i dus chen
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་མཆོད་རྟེན	miraculous stupa [one of the {mchod rten cha brgyad}, the Buddha in mnyan yod dze t'a'i grove miracle showing time bzhengs pa'i square stupa w four stories in each direction glo 'bur dang bcas pa'a...	cho 'phrul mchod rten
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་མཆོད་པ	religious service to commemorate buddha's miracles	cho 'phrul mchod pa
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན	perform miracles/ magic	cho 'phrul ston
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན་ཅིང་བདུད་བཏུལ་བ	subduing the devil by exhibiting religious miracles	cho 'phrul ston cing bdud btul ba
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན་པ	to perform miracles, magic	cho 'phrul ston pa
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་བསྟན་པ	{ngo mtshar gyi cho 'phrul bstan pa} to show their wonderful magic	cho 'phrul bstan pa
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་བསྟན་པའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of the Performance of the Miracles	cho 'phrul bstan pa'i rtogs brjod
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three types of miraculous ability {sku rdzu 'phrul gyi cho 'phrul}, body miraculous manifestations {gsung nges su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul}, speech miraculous display of the doctrine {thugs kun brjod ...	cho 'phrul rnam pa gsum
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་བཞི	four miraculous actions related to visualization, empowering flow, initiation, and offerings (ting nge 'dzin gyi cho 'phrul, byin gyis rlabs kyi cho 'phrul, dbang bskur ba'i cho 'phrul, mchod pa'i ...	cho 'phrul rnam bzhi
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་གསུམ	threefold miraculous action	cho 'phrul rnam gsum
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་བཞི	four miracles	cho 'phrul bzhi
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་ཟླ་བ	1st month of miracles [in which in 511 BC the Buddha having displayed various miracles tamed heretics]	cho 'phrul zla ba
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གསུམ	three kinds of spiritual miracles	cho 'phrul gsum
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གསུམ་ལྡན	having the three types of miraculous ability	cho 'phrul gsum ldan
ཆོ་བ	to set on	cho ba
ཆོ་བབ	bzo lta, state of affairs	cho bab
ཆོ་བབས	circumstances, predicament	cho babs
ཆོ་བབས་སྐོར	revenue, income	cho babs skor
ཆོ་འབྲང	high status lineage/ decent/ history	cho 'brang
ཆོ་འབྲང་མའི་རིགས	family extraction/ lineage	cho 'brang ma'i rigs
ཆོ་མི་འདུག	doesn't make [much] sense	cho mi 'dug
ཆོ་མེད	jap chung chung, useless silly, vain, buffoon	cho med
ཆོ་མེད་སྐད་ཆ	tattle	cho med skad cha
ཆོ་མེད་པ	nonsense	cho med pa
ཆོ་མེད་པའི་ལས་ཀ	useless/ meaningless work	cho med pa'i las ka
ཆོ་རབས	history of the paternal lineage, origin myths	cho rabs
ཆོ་རིགས	father's lineage, parents's descent	cho rigs
ཆོ་རིས	descent, sho ngos kyi ri mo thig le	cho ris
ཆོ་རོལ	erroneous, contrary	cho rol
ཆོ་རོལ་མོ་རོལ	spontaneous, unpremeditated; unpredictable; sm. {nges med}, {gang byung ma byung}	cho rol mo rol
ཆོ་ལ་མཁན	dice player	cho la mkhan
ཆོ་ལ་མོས	respect for what is worthwhile	cho la mos
ཆོ་ལེ་བ	way of looking, appearance [Ri mgo tsang mar kha ba skya cho le ba zhig bab 'dug Mi de'i skra lo skya cho le ba zhig 'dug] white like snow mt or old man's hair	cho le ba
ཆོ་ལོ	shrub for yellow dye for clothes, gambling, dice, shrub from dried leaves	cho lo
ཆོ་ལོ་མཁན	dice player	cho lo mkhan
ཆོ་ལོ་འགྱེད	play at dice	cho lo 'gyed
ཆོ་ལོ་པ	dice player	cho lo pa
ཆོ་ལོ་རྩེ	play at dice	cho lo rtse
ཆོ་ལོ་རྩེ་མཁན	dice player	cho lo rtse mkhan
ཆོ་ལོ་རྩེ་བ	play at dice	cho lo rtse ba
ཆོ་ལོ་རིས	diagram, figures on dice	cho lo ris
ཆོ་ལོའི་སྐུགས་པ	bet in a dice game	cho lo'i skugs pa
ཆོ་ལོའི་ཐུལ	be defeated at dice	cho lo'i thul
ཆོ་ལོའི་ས་བོན	dice seed (met cowrie shell (substituted for dice	cho lo'i sa bon
ཆོ་ལོས་ཐུལ་ལོ	one who has lost in dice, play one who has been defeated	cho los thul lo
ཆོག	imp. of {gcog pa} 1) vi. to be allowed, be permitted, may, can. 2) vi. to be able to, be fit to. 3) to be ready, set to do verbal action. 4) indicates assurance or promise [usu. "I will.") 5) imp. ...	chog
ཆོག་ཁྲིགས	ritual arrangement; ritual arrangement; liturgical arrangement; arranged as/ for a ritual	chog khrigs
ཆོག་ཁྲིགས་སུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	ritual arrangement	chog khrigs su bsgrigs pa
ཆོག་གམ	wouldn't it be sufficient	chog gam
ཆོག་གི་མ་རེད	it is not allowed	chog gi ma red
ཆོག་གི་རེད	it is allowed	chog gi red
ཆོག་གེ	suspension	chog ge
ཆོག་གྱུར	sublime	chog gyur
ཆོག་སྒྲིག	liturgical arrangement	chog sgrig
ཆོག་སྒྲིགས	liturgical method	chog sgrigs
ཆོག་བསྒྲིགས	arranged as/ for a ritual	chog bsgrigs
ཆོག་ཆོག	ready [to], on the verge of, in order [to] prepared for, OK for	chog chog
ཆོག་མཆན	an order to approve, government decree / order / ratification	chog mchan
ཆོག་མཆན་བཀོད	to approve, authorize, endorse, sanction	chog mchan bkod
ཆོག་མཆན་བཀོད་པ	gave approval, authorized, sanctioned, endorsed	chog mchan bkod pa
ཆོག་མཆན་འགོད་པ	give approval, authorize, sanction, endorse	chog mchan 'god pa
ཆོག་མཆན་ཐོན་པ	get approval	chog mchan thon pa
ཆོག་མཆན་གནང་བ	Syn {chog mchan 'god pa}, - to approve, ratify	chog mchan gnang ba
ཆོག་མཆན་གནང་མ་བྱུང	it was not approved	chog mchan gnang ma byung
ཆོག་མཆན་ཞུ་བ	ask for approval chog mchan rim pa gong ma nas zhu ba ask approval from higher authorities	chog mchan zhu ba
ཆོག་མཆན་ལག་འཁྱེར	license	chog mchan lag 'khyer
ཆོག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་བཅུ	the 10 things that are not allowed	chog tu med pa bcu
ཆོག་ཐམ	1) approval, authorization; 2) license	chog tham
ཆོག་ཐམས	1) approval, authorization; 2) license	chog thams
ཆོག་འཐུས	bya rung ngam byas 'thus,...Chog 'thus dgongs 'khrol byung permission, approval	chog 'thus
ཆོག་འཐུས་དགོངས་འཁྲོལ	permission, approval	chog 'thus dgongs 'khrol
ཆོག་འཐུས་ལག་ཁྱེར	passport, permit	chog 'thus lag khyer
ཆོག་པ	mi chog - won't suffice	chog pa
ཆོག་པ་བྱུང	is enough, sufficient	chog pa byung
ཆོག་པ་མེད་པ	appetite	chog pa med pa
ཆོག་པའི་བཀའ་མཆན	approval, authorization	chog pa'i bka' mchan
ཆོག་པའི་ལག་ཁྱེར	license, permit	chog pa'i lag khyer
ཆོག་པར་འགྱུར	be enough (to go around	chog par 'gyur
ཆོག་པར་བྱེད	permit, allow	chog par byed
ཆོག་པར་མི་འཛིན་པའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	the diligence of never regarding as enough	chog par mi 'dzin pa'i brtson 'grus
ཆོག་པར་འཛིན་པ	be content with, think it is sufficient	chog par 'dzin pa
ཆོག་ཕྲེང	rituals	chog phreng
ཆོག་མི་ཤེས	knows no end	chog mi shes
ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པ	be discontented, not know ritual	chog mi shes pa
ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	insatiable diligence	chog mi shes pa'i brtson 'grus
ཆོག་རྩེ་བ	dally, jest	chog rtse ba
ཆོག་འཛིན	{chog par 'dzin pa} content, complacent	chog 'dzin
ཆོག་གཞག	SA cog gzhag, chog bzhag	chog gzhag
ཆོག་བཞག	letting be, resting freely, {mi gyo ba}, chokshak	chog bzhag
ཆོག་བཞག་བཞི	4 natural contemplations (ri bo, rgya mtsho, snang ba, rig pa, man ngag, ma bcos)	chog bzhag bzhi
ཆོག་རབས	history of the rite, myths, origin myths	chog rabs
ཆོག་རོགས	help in doing a project/ liturgy	chog rogs
ཆོག་ཤེས	contentment; contentment, meek, content, satisfied, content with what one has, satisfaction, knowledge of ritual; to be content; contentment	chog shes
ཆོག་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ནོང	the wealth of contentment	chog shes kyi nong
ཆོག་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ནོར	the wealth of contentment	chog shes kyi nor
ཆོག་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོ	very content	chog shes chen po
ཆོག་ཤེས་བསྟེན་པ	remain/ keep content	chog shes bsten pa
ཆོག་ཤེས་དང་ཚིམ་པ	{gser gyi ri thob kyang nam shi bar chog shes dang tshim pa med} will never be satisfied even though they obtain a mountain of gold	chog shes dang tshim pa
ཆོག་ཤེས་བདུད་རྩི	ambrosia of contentment	chog shes bdud rtsi
ཆོག་ཤེས་ལྡན	contented, satisfied	chog shes ldan
ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	contented, be content, contentment, be satisfied with	chog shes pa
ཆོག་ཤེས་བྲལ	discontented, dissatisfied 834	chog shes bral
ཆོག་ཤེས་བྲལ་བ	discontented, dissatisfied	chog shes bral ba
ཆོག་ཤེས་མེད	discontented, dissatisfied	chog shes med
ཆོག་ཤེས་མེད་པ	discontent dissatisfied, never content	chog shes med pa
ཆོག་སྲིད	it might be enough	chog srid
ཆོགས	be allowed {'chag}!] break! collection	chogs
ཆོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	ganachakra	chogs kyi 'khor lo
ཆོགས་ཅན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king w a following	chogs can rgyal po
ཆོགས་གཉིས	the two accumulations	chogs gnyis
ཆོགས་མདེལ	ballot	chogs mdel
ཆོགས་མདེལ་བཙུགས	was put to a vote	chogs mdel btsugs
ཆོགས་མདེལ་འཛུགས	put to a vote	chogs mdel 'dzugs
ཆོགས་མ་བསགས་མ	accumulate collections	chogs ma bsags ma
ཆོགས་ཟིང	stir up the senses	chogs zing
ཆོང	variegated semi-precious stone: carnelian?	chong
བ༹རིཨེགཏེད་ཧལཕ༹	precious stone, perhaps cornelian or sardonyx, a gem which cures paralysis	variegated half
ཆོང་ཞི	quarts	chong zhi
ཆོངས	sems la chongs - Keep them in mind!	chongs
ཆོད	[gcod}!],, cut! cut, cut off, be separated, be parted, reach an agreement, settle, be settled, agreed, be able to cover distances (on journeys, etc, go through, cross, parted, separated, severed, r...	chod
ཆོད་ཁྲ	kha mchu 'dums yig	chod khra
ཆོད་གན	written agreement	chod gan
ཆོད་གན་འཇོག	sign/ enter into a [written] agreement	chod gan 'jog
ཆོད་རྒྱག་པ	construct a partition, wall	chod rgyag pa
ཆོད་ཆེ་བ	most effective	chod che ba
ཆོད་ཉིད་བདེན་པ་གཟིགས་པ	to perceive	chod nyid bden pa gzigs pa
ཐེ་ཏྲུཐ་ཨོཕ༹་རེཨལིཏཡ	the reality of what simply is	the truth of reality
ཆོད་གཏམ	thesis, conclusion, inference	chod gtam
ཆོད་དན	kha mchu 'grig pa'i kha chad yig cha	chod dan
ཆོད་དུས་མེད	difficult to cross	chod dus med
ཆོད་དུས་མེད་པ	nyin re'i nyi ma chod	chod dus med pa
དུས་མེད་པ	the days seem endless	dus med pa
ཆོད་དོན	decision, resolution	chod don
ཆོད་འདོམས	thag chod pa'i 'jug 'doms	chod 'doms
ཆོད་སྡོམ	appraisal - appraise	chod sdom
ཆོད་སྡོམ་འགོད	appraise	chod sdom 'god
ཆོད་པ	vulnerable	chod pa
ཆོད་པན་གྱི་དབང	crown empowerment	chod pan gyi dbang
ཆོད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	indirect results	chod pa'i 'bras bu
ཆོད་པར་འགྱུར	will be blocked	chod par 'gyur
ཆོད་ཕན	5-leaved crown for worshipping drag chod ?	chod phan
ཆོད་མ	in a field chu gtong ched khag chung ngu byas pa'i khag re'i ming	chod ma
ཆོད་ཚད	lhongs tshad tshar tshad	chod tshad
ཆོད་ཡིག	written agreement [resolving a dispute]	chod yig
ཆོད་ཡིག་གན་རྒྱ	written agreement	chod yig gan rgya
ཆོད་ཡིག་འབའ་ཅན	kha dan gyi gan rgya 'ba' can nam, 'ba' bzhag pa'i chod yig	chod yig 'ba' can
ཆོད་སེམས	determination, pledge	chod sems
ཆོད་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ	written pledge	chod sems kyi yi ge
ཆོད་སེམས་སྟོན	express determination	chod sems ston
ཆོད་སོ་བདོག་པ	promise, undertake to do a thing	chod so bdog pa
ཆོད་སློག	veto	chod slog
ཆོད་སློག་བྱེད	veto	chod slog byed
ཆོད་སློག་དབང་ཆ	veto power	chod slog dbang cha
ཆོན	a tent; useless	chon
ཆོན་ཆུང	short tent rope	chon chung
ཆོན་ཆེན	long tent rope	chon chen
ཆོན་ཐག	a tent-rope	chon thag
ཆོན་ཕུར	tent peg	chon phur
ཆོན་འབྲིང	middle-length tent rope	chon 'bring
ཆོན་ལ	gratuitously, in vain, for nothing	chon la
ཆོབ	hide, SA 'chab pa	chob
ཆོབ་ཆོབ	eating/ pouring sound	chob chob
ཆོབས་བསྒྱུར་ཆེན་མོ	the great procession (ceremony on the 3rd day of the 4th Tibetan month) chobs bsgyur yar phebs dang tshogs	chobs bsgyur chen mo
ཕེབས	the Procession to the Potala (ceremony in the 10th Tibetan month)	phebs
ཆོམ	1) ['Joms pa!] conquer!; 2) roar [of fire in a battle]; 3) robbery	chom
ཆོམ་ཀུན་སྲུང་བ	protective ritual against bandits and thieves	chom kun srung ba
ཆོམ་རྐུན	robbers	chom rkun
ཆོམ་རྐུན་གྱིས་འཚོ་བ་ཡིན	we make our living by robbing others	chom rkun gyis 'tsho ba yin
ཆོམ་རྐུན་པ	a group of robbers	chom rkun pa
ཆོམ་རྐུན་མ	cauri (purity of mind consciousness)	chom rkun ma
ཆོམ་རྐུན་མེ་ཏོག	thief's flower tree	chom rkun me tog
ཆོམ་སྒྲ	a loud sound like cannon-fire or thunder	chom sgra
ཆོམ་པ	conquer, to be finished, accomplished; {chom pa, chom pa, chom pa} intr. v	chom pa
ཆོམ་པོ	robber	chom po
ཆོམ་པོ་བ	robber, bandit, thief	chom po ba
ཆོམས	{'joms}!] conquer!	choms
ཆོམས་ཀྱིས་ཟས་འཚོལ་བ	live by robbery	choms kyis zas 'tshol ba
ཆོམས་པ	victory	choms pa
ཆོམས་པོ	robber	choms po
ཆོར	(not in DAS)	chor
ཆོར་མཐོང་གི་ས	level of seeing feelings	chor mthong gi sa
ཆོར་བ་གསུམ	the three feelings (positive, negative, and neutral	chor ba gsum
ཆོལ	inconstant, fickle, dice, inconstant, SA cho lo	chol
ཆོལ་ཁ	province, country, province, hole made by a blow, nest	chol kha
ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ	the three provinces	chol kha gsum
ཆོལ་ཁའི	provincial	chol kha'i
ཆོལ་ཁའི་ཕྱོགས་འཛིན	provincialism	chol kha'i phyogs 'dzin
ཆོལ་གྱི་འགྲོ	decayed, degenerate	chol gyi 'gro
ཆོལ་འགྲོ་བ	decayed, become degenerate	chol 'gro ba
ཆོལ་འཐུས	representatives of the [3] provinces	chol 'thus
ཆོལ་པ	wrathful deity sme brtsegs	chol pa
ཆོལ་བ	{'chol ba}	chol ba
ཆོལ་ཟངས	(A; 1) mchil snod; 2) urinal three washbasin bedpan	chol zangs
ཆོལ་བཟང	good custom	chol bzang
ཆོལ་ལེ	confused, disordered	chol le
ཆོལ་ལེ་བ	thick	chol le ba
ཆོལ་གསུམ	the three provinces	chol gsum
ཆོལ་གསུམ་སྤྱི་འཐུས	representatives of the three provinces	chol gsum spyi 'thus
ཆོལ་གསུམ་མི་རིགས	people of the three provinces	chol gsum mi rigs
ཆོས	dharma, elements of existence (general non-critical term), factors of reality, knowable factors, phenomena, mental objects, phenomenal existents, events and meanings, what is experienced, spiritual...	chos
ཆོས་ཀུན	all dharmas	chos kun
ཆོས་ཀུན་གྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	innate nature of all phenomena	chos kun gyi chos nyid
ཆོས་ཀུན་གྱི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	the emptiness of all dharmas, all-encompassing void	chos kun gyi stong pa nyid
ཆོས་ཀུན་གྱི་རྩ་བ	the root of all phenomena	chos kun gyi rtsa ba
ཆོས་ཀུན་གྱི་རྩ་བ་རང་སེམས	your own mind, the root of all phenomena	chos kun gyi rtsa ba rang sems
ཆོས་ཀུན་གྱི་ཡུལ་ཅན	subject of all phenomena, perceiver of all dharmas	chos kun gyi yul can
ཆོས་ཀུན་མཉམ་ཉིད་ཡང་དག་དོན	the real meaning of the equal nature of all things	chos kun mnyam nyid yang dag don
ཆོས་ཀུན་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	all-encompassing void	chos kun stong pa nyid
ཆོས་ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	the imagined nature of things	chos kun brtags kyi mtshan nyid
ཆོས་ཀུན་སྡོམ་པ	the precept for subsuming all phenomena	chos kun sdom pa
ཆོས་ཀུན་གཟིགས་པ	who sees all things	chos kun gzigs pa
ཆོས་ཀུན་ཤེས་ནས	knowing all things	chos kun shes nas
ཆོས་ཀྱི	1) Dharmic. Of or pertaining to the Dharma; religious or pious. 2) objective	chos kyi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	dharmadh tuj¤ na, dharmadhatu wisdom	chos kyi dkyings kyi ye shes
ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	encompassing space (one of the {ye shes lnga}, = five wisdoms/ types of pristine awareness]	wisdom of all
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྐང་པ་བཞི	the four legs of dharma 836	chos kyi rkang pa bzhi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐད	religious terminology	chos kyi skad
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐལ་པ་མེད་པ	a misfortune for Dharma practice {rigs dang stobs 'byor mtho na chos kyi skal pa med} a high caste, power and wealth are a misfortune for Dharma practice	chos kyi skal pa med pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	SA chos sku	chos kyi sku
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་འི་འོད་གསལ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of dharmakaya luminosity	chos kyi sku 'i 'od gsal rnam pa bzhi
ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ	genuine personal awareness of the complete perfection of dharmakaya chos kyi sku yongs su rdzogs pa so so	yang dag par rig pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལ་ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པ	the	chos kyi sku la khyad par med pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	the utterly pure dharmakaya	chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	four	chos kyi sku'i khyad chos bzhi
དྷརྨཀཡ་qཨུཨལིཏིཨེས	sang nge, sa le,	dharmakaya qualities
ཝ་ལེ་ཧྲིག་གེ	transparent, brilliant, bright, wakeful	wa le hrig ge
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of dharmakaya luminosity, [Syn {bar do'i skad cig bzhi pa'i 'od gsal}, {snang ba}, manifestation, {mched pa}, increase, {thob pa}, attainment, {nye bar thob pa}, full attainment]	chos kyi sku'i 'od gsal rnam pa bzhi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱི་མཆེད	phenomenon source	chos kyi skyi mched
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	dharma-ayatana 1 of the {phyi'i skye mched drug}	chos kyi skye mched
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	dharmabase forms, forms of dharma bases, forms belonging to the sphere of mental objects	chos kyi skye mched kyi gzugs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པ	dharma-ayatana [one of the {phyi'i skye mched drug} chos khams bcu drug, field of mental objects, mental object base, mental phenomena, phenomenon-source, the	chos kyi skye mched pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པའི་ཁམས	element producing mental objects chos kyi skye mched pa'i khams kyi	chos kyi skye mched pa'i khams
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	the one aspects of the producing mental objects chos kyi skye mched pa'i khams kyi	phyogs gcig
སིདེད	partiality of the dhatus of the	sided
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པའི་གཟུགས	form for the mental consciousness, forms producing mental objects) [dharm yatanar pa). for becoming the object of the mind ayatana {yid kyi skye mched}, like atoms and the forms of dreams]	chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པའི་གཟུགས་ལྔ	five types of forms producing mental objects, the five dharma-base forms, {bsdus pa las gyur pa'i}, - deducted form, {mngon par skabs yod pa'i}, - spatial form, {yang dag par blangs pa las byung ba...	chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs lnga
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ	dharma park/ grove	chos kyi skyed mos tshal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	SA chos khams	chos kyi khams
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	feature	chos kyi khyad par
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱུ་མཆོག་འབྲོང	following a leader	chos kyi khyu mchog 'brong
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྲི	throne of Dharma	chos kyi khri
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྲི་བཤམས	arrange a dharma throne	chos kyi khri bshams
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཁྲི་བཤམས་པ	prepare the teacher's seat	chos kyi khri bshams pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོང་ལོ	wheel of doctrine	chos kyi 'khong lo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	dharma chakra/ wheel,	chos kyi 'khor lo
ཧེཨརཏ་ཅེནཏེར་དྷརྨ	chakra, wheel of the doctrine	heart center dharma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་སྐོར་བ	Turning the Wheel of Dharma. Figurative expression for giving Dharma teachings	chos kyi 'khor lo skor ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར	turned the wheel of Dharma 837 chos kyi 'khor lo bskor cing bzhugs pa resided while turning the Wheel of the Dharma	chos kyi 'khor lo bskor
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར་བ	turns the Wheel of Dharma	chos kyi 'khor lo bskor ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	the 3-fold dharma chakra/ turnings of the wheel of dharma [by the buddha 1 bka' dang po bden of the four noble truths, bka' bar pa of marklessness, bka' tha ma well distinguishing dharmas]	chos kyi 'khor lo rim pa gsum
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་གསུམ	Three Wheels of the Doctrine: Those of the doctrines which respectively concern the middle way and the four truths, the absence of characteristics, and the definitive meaning	chos kyi 'khor lo gsum
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་གསུམ་པ	three turnings of the doctrinal wheel {dbu ma'i lam	chos kyi 'khor lo gsum pa
གྱི་བདེན	pa},, {bzhi'i chos 'khor}, wheel of the doctrine of the middle way which abandons both extremes concerning the four truths), 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma]	gyi bden
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོའི་མདོ	* the Dharma chakra Sutra	chos kyi 'khor lo'i mdo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	dharma chakra mudras	chos kyi 'khor lo'i phyag rgya
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གེགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	will be a hindrance to the practice of Dharma	chos kyi gegs su gyur pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གོང་མ	high religious leader, the pope	chos kyi gong ma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	dharmakirti, a buddhist philosopher, 1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug	chos kyi grags pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲུ་ཆེན་པོ	the great ship of dharma	chos kyi gru chen po
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲོང་རྡལ	monastery	chos kyi grong rdal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དགའ་སྟོན	a Dharma festival	chos kyi dga' ston
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བགོ་སྐལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	to enjoy one's destined share of the teachings	chos kyi bgo skal la spyod pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བགྲོ་གླེང	religious discussions; proficient in debate	chos kyi bgro gleng
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འགྲེལ་བ	religious ties	chos kyi 'grel ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མོ	'phags pa chos kyi rgya mo [two vol kyi bdag nyid can by buddha Vairochana, explaining bodhisattva sems kyi topics 10 ch. tr from SK, in mdo sde glegs bam za]	chos kyi rgya mo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the ocean of the law, the ocean of dharma[s]	chos kyi rgya mtsho
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ	Dharma king	chos kyi rgyal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Dharma king, Dharmaraja, religious ruler	chos kyi rgyal po
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོར་བསྐུར་རོ	consecrated as Dharma king	chos kyi rgyal por bskur ro
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་ཙབ	dharma regent/ successor [tathagata regent, turning the wheel of dharma]	chos kyi rgyal tsab
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་ཚབ	dharma regent/ successor	chos kyi rgyal tshab
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	1) Situ I Chökyi Gyaltsen: 1377-1448. 2) la stod ding ri ba, b. 1897	chos kyi rgyal mtshan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཙུགས་པ	the banner of the law has been furled	chos kyi rgyal mtshan btsugs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚོན	the banner of the law, the victory banner of dharma	chos kyi rgyal mtshon
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚོན་བཙུགས་པ	the banner of the law has been furled	chos kyi rgyal mtshon btsugs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུགས་ཐོག་མ	preliminary examination	chos kyi rgyugs thog ma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུགས་མཐའ་མ	final examination	chos kyi rgyugs mtha' ma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན	the stream of the Dharma / truth, continuation of the Dharma	chos kyi rgyun
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ	Dharma-doors chos kyi sgo ma brgyad khri bzhi stong the 84000 gates of dharma	chos kyi sgo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་མ་ལུས་པ	all the gates of dharma w/o exception	chos kyi sgo ma lus pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་མོ	{chos kyi sgo mo mtha' yas pa} infinite approaches to the Dharma	chos kyi sgo mo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ལ་འགོད་པར་བྱེད	manifest the gates of dharma, create a gate of dharma	chos kyi sgo la 'god par byed
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ལ་འགོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to bring	chos kyi sgo la 'god par byed pa
ཏོ་ཐེ་ཨེནཏྲནཅེ	way of truth	to the entrance
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོར་ཞུགས་པ	entered the door of Dharma 838	chos kyi sgor zhugs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	loud recitation of religious formula, singing of hymns, preaching of a sermon	chos kyi sgra
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོགས་གླེང་མཛད་པ	preach	chos kyi sgrogs gleng mdzad pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	religious arguments and deductions	chos kyi brgyud pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	= rang bzhin, essence/ nature of dharma[s]	chos kyi ngo bo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	power of teachings	chos kyi dngos grub
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག	master[y] of dharma	chos kyi mnga' bdag
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྔ་ཆེན	the great drum of the Dharma	chos kyi rnga chen
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཅོད་པན	dharma crown, silken crown of dharma	chos kyi cod pan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཆར	the rain of the Dharma	chos kyi char
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཆོད་པན	crown of the five families	chos kyi chod pan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཆོལ་ཁ	from mnga' ris gung to sog la skya bo: U Tsang chos kyi chol kha	chos kyi chol kha
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature/suchness of dharmas, the dharmata of dharmas	chos kyi chos nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	Supreme Attribute; see {chos mchog} {'jig rten gyi chos kyi mchog}, in {sbyor lam}. highest dharmas	chos kyi mchog
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཆོག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	highest dharmas	chos kyi mchog tu 'gyur
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་སྒོ	the entrance door of the Dharma	chos kyi 'jug sgo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེ	lord of dharma	chos kyi rje
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་འབྲང	dharma follower {dge 'dun nyi shu}	chos kyi rjes 'brang
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་འབྲང་བ	dharma follower	chos kyi rjes 'brang ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་འབྲངས	dharma follower	chos kyi rjes 'brangs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	follow religion	chos kyi rjes su 'brang ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	after-effect of the perception of the doctrine	chos kyi rjes su shes pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	dharma practice	chos kyi nyams len
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	chokyi nyima [9th pan chen aer te ni b in the 5th water sheep yr in dvags po, in the earth mouse year by command of emperor kvang zhus gser bum dkrugs, recognized and, in the water dragon year gdan...	chos kyi nyi ma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Chokyi nyima rinpoche	chos kyi nyi ma rin po che
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	the heart of the teaching, essence of text, main substance of doctrine	chos kyi snying po
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཏན་ཁྲིམས་ལྔ	the five constant disciplines of dharma [5 precepts to be guarded lifelong, srog gcod pa, ma byin par len pa, log par g.yem pa, rdzun smra ba, chang 'thung ba, the five disciplines of abandoning th...	chos kyi gtan khrims lnga
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཏིང་སླེབས་པ	reflecting on the virtues of matter and phenomena	chos kyi gting slebs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	spiritual matters	chos kyi lta ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས	the power of the Dharma / truth	chos kyi stobs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས	dharma shastra	chos kyi bstan bcos
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྟོན་པ	recitation of the scripture, remembrance of scripture	chos kyi bston pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཐུ	the power of the Dharma / truth	chos kyi mthu
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དུང	the conch of Dharma, [the throat of a buddha].{gsung chos kyi dung}	chos kyi dung
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the nature of things	chos kyi de kho na nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད	the thatness of dharmas, nature of things, the true nature of all phenomena	chos kyi de nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the suchness of things	chos kyi de bzhin nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེ་བཤིན་ཉིད	the suchness/ thatness of dharmas, [true] nature of things/ all phenomena	chos kyi de bshin nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེད་དཔོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་དཔལ	the dharma guide Yeshe pal	chos kyi ded dpon ye shes dpal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དོན་བཅུ	10 meanings of "dharma" [the knowable {shes bya}, the path {lam}, nirv na {mya ngan las 'das}, objects of mind {yid kyi yul}, merit {bsod nams}, life {tshe}, the scriptures {gsung rab}, material ob...	chos kyi don bcu
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག	true existence of dharmas, phenomenal self[-entity], the ego of dharmas	chos kyi bdag
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་གི་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	one aspect	chos kyi bdag gi phyogs gcig
ཨོཕ༹་ཨོབཇེཅཏ	identity	of object
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་གི་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་རྟོགས་པ	to	chos kyi bdag gi phyogs gcig rtogs pa
རེཨལིཟེ་ཨོནེ་ཨསྤེཅཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོབཇེཅཏ	identity. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {gzung ba'i don rang bzhin med par rtogs pa} chos kyi bdag gi phyogs gcig rtogs pa realize that the grasped object is natureless, realize the 1-sided partiality o...	realize one aspect of object
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཅན	... that imbue phenomena with self-identity	chos kyi bdag can
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature of phenomena, the self of dharmas	chos kyi bdag nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	lord of dharma	chos kyi bdag po
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད	[Dharmanairatmya]; egolessness of phenomena; insubstantiality of phenomena; lack of a self in things; lack of reality in cognizable objects; lack of self of phenomena; no objective identity; non-se...	chos kyi bdag med
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་རྟོགས་པ	to realize the absence of an identity in things	chos kyi bdag med rtogs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་པ	the absence of an identity in things	chos kyi bdag med pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle selflessness of dharmas	chos kyi bdag med phra mo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་རགས་པ	coarse selflessness of dharmas	chos kyi bdag med rags pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་འཛིན	conception of a self of phenomena	chos kyi bdag 'dzin
ཅོནཅེཨིབེ༹་ཨིན་ཏེརམས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	nature of phenomena; conception of a self of phenomena, objective habit	conceive in terms of a self
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་འཛིན་གཉིས	the two graspings of a self-nature of dharmas	chos kyi bdag 'dzin gnyis
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་འཛིན་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle concept of object-identity	chos kyi bdag 'dzin phra mo
གྲསྤིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	nature of phenomena	grasping of a self
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་བཞི	the four kinds of self of dharmas chos kyi bdag rang mtshan gyi grub pa	chos kyi bdag bzhi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩི	nectar of dharma, doctrine of buddha	chos kyi bdud rtsi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩི་མྱོང་བའི་སྐལ་བ	the good fortune of tasting the nectar of his teachings	chos kyi bdud rtsi myong ba'i skal ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མདོ	summary of the Dharma	chos kyi mdo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མདོ་བཞི	the four summaries/ synopses of the dharma {'du byed thams cad ni mi rtag pa'o},, {zag pa dang bcas pa ni sdug bsngal b'o},, {mya ngan las 'das pa ni zhi b'o}, {chos thams cad ni stong zhing bdag m...	chos kyi mdo bzhi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ར	dharma gathering-place chos kyi 'du shes skyed la rtag tu 'bad strive always to develop awareness of the Dharma	chos kyi 'du ra
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འདུན་ས	Dharma gathering	chos kyi 'dun sa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Chökyi Dorje (15th cent.). {dvags po pa} Drubchen Chökyi Dorje, Diamond of the Dharma	chos kyi rdo rje
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	Dharma teaching, set of	chos kyi sde
ཏེཨཆིངས	refers to a specific teaching, a text, monasteries. sde bzhi'i nang gses shig mngon mtho nges legs kyi rgyu	teachings
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ	summary of the Dharma	chos kyi sdom
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་བཞི	The Four Summaries of the Dharma, the four dharma emblems. Syn {chos rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi}. the four seals. Syn {phyag rgya bzhi}. The four main principles of Buddhism. These four main princip...	chos kyi sdom bzhi
ཝིཐ་ཨེགོ	clinging) are suffering; 3) {chos thams cad stong zhing bdag med pa'o}, all phenomena are empty and	with ego
དེབོ༹ཨིད་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity / identityless. 4) {mya ngan las 'das pa ni zhi ba}, nirvana is peace	devoid of a self
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྡོམ་བཞི	four summaries/ emblems of the dharma [= {chos rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi}, {'du byas thams cad mi rtag pa}, = all conditioned things are impermanent {zag bcas thams cad sdug bsngal}, = everything t...	chos kyi bsdom bzhi
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	power of Dharma	chos kyi nus pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གནད	essence of religion	chos kyi gnad
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས་འཚོལ་བ་བཞི	four investigations into the mode of being of dharmas, phenomena [which leads to	chos kyi gnas lugs 'tshol ba bzhi
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར་པརིཇནནས	{yongs shes bzhi},]	the four parijnanas
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	Dharma sections, classification of dharmas, Dharma sections, religious discourse [skillful means in teaching the Doctrine]; Dharma texts	chos kyi rnam grangs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས་དྲུག་བཅུ	Sixty Doctrines. The twelve events of the supreme emanation body in the twelve realms each of which possesses the five perfect accomplishments of place, teacher, retinue, doctrine and time	chos kyi rnam grangs drug bcu
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	1375-1451, founded bo dong pa school, author of 100 volumes	chos kyi rnam rgyal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the light of the Dharma	chos kyi snang ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ་འཕེལ	increase of the light of dharma	chos kyi snang ba 'phel
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	vessel of dharma [capable of dealing w the oral instructions]	chos kyi snod
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད་གྱུར	become a vessel for Dharma	chos kyi snod gyur
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དཔལ་མོ	Tara	chos kyi dpal mo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན	the dharma eye [one of the five eyes, yeshe realizing interdependent arising]	chos kyi spyan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ	religious discipline	chos kyi spyod tshul
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྲིན	cloud of dharma, 10th	chos kyi sprin
སྤིརིཏུཨལ་ལེབེ༹ལ	ye shes	spiritual level
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྲིན་གྱི་ས	Cloud of Dharma stage / bhumi	chos kyi sprin gyi sa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྲིན་པ	Cloud of doctrine, dharmamegha	chos kyi sprin pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	Dharma sections, collection of dharmas	chos kyi phung po
གི་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel of the 84000 divisions of the Dharma chos kyi phung po brgyad khri bzhi stong	gi 'khor lo
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	Dharma seal/ mudra, seal of phenomena/ doctrine [one of the four parts of mahamudra, 1 of the {phyag rgya bzhi}, = four mudras]	chos kyi phyag rgya
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་ལེན	ritual practices	chos kyi phyag len
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕྱེད	see {chos bdag gi phyed}	chos kyi phyed
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	onesidedness	chos kyi phyogs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ	to the Dharma; x {chos kyi phyogs su bsgyur mi gtub} they cannot attune themselves to the Dharma	chos kyi phyogs su
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཕོངས་པར	sacrilegious	chos kyi 'phongs par
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཕོངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become irreligious	chos kyi 'phongs par 'gyur ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	Dharma habit, religious, spiritual tendencies	chos kyi bag chags
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བར་དུ་གཅོད་པ	obstruct the course of nature	chos kyi bar du gcod pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བུ	name of yudhisthira, eldest of 5 pandava brothers	chos kyi bu
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	spiritual activities	chos kyi bya ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་སྲོལ	cult	chos kyi byed srol
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	Dharma-Mati. 1) a past buddha. 2) {gser gling pa}, guru of Atisha. 3) Marpa Lotsawa. 4) Jamyang Khyentse of Dzongsar, the second]. 5) wisdom of the dharma	chos kyi blo gros
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	maternal uncle (1910-1963) of namkhai norbu, epithet of buddha	chos kyi dbang phyug
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིང	dharmadhatu, realm of dharmas, element of dharmas	chos kyi dbying
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིང་ཡི་ཡེ་ཤེས	dharmadh tuj¤ na, dharmadhatu wisdom,	chos kyi dbying yi ye shes
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས	SA chos dbyings, sphere or purview of religion, basic space of phenomena	chos kyi dbyings
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the buddhafield of dharmadhatu	chos kyi dbyings kyi zhing khams
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	dharmadhatu wisdom, wisdom of dharmadhatu, awareness of the expanse of dharma. one of the {ye shes lnga}, five types of pristine awareness; the wisdom of allencompassing space, dharmadhatu wisdom	chos kyi dbyings kyi ye shes
མེད་པ་བསྟན་པའི་ལེའུ	'phags pa dkon mchog brtsegs pa'i mdo chos kyi dbyings kyi rang bzhin dbyer	med pa bstan pa'i le'u
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་དེ་ཁོ་ནའི་དོན	the thatness nature of dharmadhatu chos kyi dbyings las nam yang mi gyo ba never moving/ departing from dharmadhatu chos kyi dbyings las nam yang mi g.yo ba - to never depart from dharmadhatu	chos kyi dbyings de kho na'i don
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་སུ	SA che ba lnga	chos kyi dbyings su
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྟོད་པ	Nagarjuna's Dharmadhatustava, Verses in Praise of Dharmadhatu chos kyi dbyings su sangs rgyas pa'i che	chos kyi dbyings su bstod pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གནས	the source of dharmas, chojung [triangular or like star of David]	chos kyi 'byung gnas
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱོར་པ	dharmic wealth	chos kyi 'byor pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱོར་བ	spiritual activities	chos kyi 'byor ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་གཏམ	words to form a spiritual connection	chos kyi 'brel gtam
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་པ་ཐོབ་པ	snatch up a little bit of religion	chos kyi 'brel pa thob pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	dharmic connection, dharma link	chos kyi 'brel ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བའི་བླ་མ	guru w whom 1 has a dharmic connection	chos kyi 'brel ba'i bla ma
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	the generosity of Dharma [teaching]	chos kyi sbyin pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ་ཆེན་པོ་སྦྱིན་པ	give the great gift of dharma	chos kyi sbyin pa chen po sbyin pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མིག	the Eye of Dharma, the Dharma eye, spiritual eye, enlightened vision	chos kyi mig
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མིག་དྲི་མ་དང་བྲལ་བ	the flawless eye of the Dharma	chos kyi mig dri ma dang bral ba
བྲལ་བ	the flawless and perfect eye of the Dharma	bral ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དམིགས་པ	1) object focus. 2)spiritual aims	chos kyi dmigs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཙོང་རྡལ	chos grva' or monastery	chos kyi tsong rdal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཙས	dyed, colored	chos kyi btsas
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྩ་འཁོར	heart	chos kyi rtsa 'khor
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	the root of dharma	chos kyi rtsa ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ་ཆད་པ་ཡིན་པ	cut off the very root of Dharma	chos kyi rtsa ba chad pa yin pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ་གསུམ	the three perfect measures for the truth	chos kyi tshad ma gsum
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཚིག་དོན	the words and meaning of the teachings, dharma talk	chos kyi tshig don
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	Dhammapada	chos kyi tshigs su bcad pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཚོང་བརྡལ	monastery	chos kyi tshong brdal
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཚོང་དཔོན	divine, priest, one whose profession is religion	chos kyi tshong dpon
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	the definition/ characteristic of dharma[s]	chos kyi mtshan nyid
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ་ཐེ་ནོན	erroneous definition/ characteristic of dharma[s] chos kyi mtshan nyid phyin ci ma log pa incontroversible characteristics of phenomena	chos kyi mtshan nyid phyin ci ma log pa the non
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཚན་མ་རྣམ་པར་འཇིག་པ	to destroy the marks of phenomena chos kyi mtshan ma rnam par 'jig pa completely destroy/ eliminate the characteristics of dharmas	chos kyi mtshan ma rnam par 'jig pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཚུངས་པ	similar[ity of] dharmas	chos kyi mtshungs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྫས	dharmakirti?	chos kyi rdzas
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཞུ་སྣ་དྲོངས	assist them in asking for teachings	chos kyi zhu sna drongs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཞོན་པ་ཅན	shiva	chos kyi bzhon pa can
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	the mere image of dharma	chos kyi gzugs brnyan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་དུ་འགྲོ	it will be no more than a semblance of the real thing	chos kyi gzugs brnyan du 'gro
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	will become a "superficial practitioner."	chos kyi gzugs brnyan du 'gro ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཟུངས	retention of dharma	chos kyi gzungs
ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཟུངས་བརྙན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	will become a superficial practitioner	chos kyi gzungs brnyan du 'gro ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of dharmas	chos kyi bzod pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་ཤེས	acceptance and cognition of the dharmas (of the four truths in the desire realm	chos kyi bzod shes
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འོད	the light of the truth	chos kyi 'od
ཆོས་ཀྱི་འོད་ཟེར	chikyi ozer [in the rab byung time of the 5th M king aol rje to the M letters earlier created by Sakya pandita khu dbon added many yi ge mjug ma can making possible translation of dharma. sakya lama]	chos kyi 'od zer
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡིད་ཆེ	beliefs	chos kyi yid che
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་དབུས	a land where the Dharma flourishes	chos kyi yul dbus
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	spiritual qualities	chos kyi yon tan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རང་སྒྲ	the spontaneous sounds of the dharma	chos kyi rang sgra
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of things	chos kyi rang bzhin
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རང་བཤིན	the nature of dharma[s], the way dharmas really are	chos kyi rang bshin
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	theology	chos kyi rig pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རོ་མཆོག་མྱང་བ	tasting the superior flavor of the Dharma	chos kyi ro mchog myang ba
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལེན	practice of religion	chos kyi lag len
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལས	spiritual work	chos kyi las
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལས་རིགས་པ	religious professional	chos kyi las rigs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལས་གསུམ	three main activities connected with spreading the Dharma: exposition ('chad), debate (rtsod), and composition (rtsom)	chos kyi las gsum
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས་ནང	religious history	chos kyi lo rgyus nang
ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པ	perfect activity/ enjoyment of the dharma	chos kyi longs spyod rdzogs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཤེས་གཉེན	Dharmamitra	chos kyi bshes gnyen
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྲིད	SA chos srid	chos kyi srid
ཆོས་ཀྱིས	by means of religion, through the teaching	chos kyis
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་ཆོས་མི་རྟོགས་པ	dharma cannot conceive dharma	chos kyis chos mi rtogs pa
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་ཆོས་ཚོལ	dharma seeking dharma	chos kyis chos tshol
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་རྙེད་ཚོལ	to seek gain through dharma	chos kyis rnyed tshol
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་གདུལ་བྱ	to be disciplined by religion	chos kyis gdul bya
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུ་བ	comprised of mental objects	chos kyis bsdu ba
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	comprised of mental objects	chos kyis bsdus pa
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་དབུལ་བ	starved for the Dharma	chos kyis dbul ba
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་མིང་ནི་བསྡོམས་པ	dharma names are fetters, dharma is/ dharmas are combined w names	chos kyis ming ni bsdoms pa
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྡུད་པར་བྱེད	completely gather together [by the] dharma[s]	chos kyis yongs su sdud par byed
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྡུད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fully include with the body of teachings	chos kyis yongs su sdud par byed pa
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་བསྲུང་བ	protected by the Dharma	chos kyis bsrung ba
ཆོས་ཀློག	recite read scriptures/ sadhanas etc	chos klog
ཆོས་ཀློང་རྙོག་འགལ	dgongs 'gal lam tshig pa za ba 843	chos klong rnyog 'gal
ཆོས་དཀའ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཟབ་མོ	difficult, vast, and profound dharma	chos dka' rgya chen zab mo
ཆོས་དཀར	bright (elements, white/ virtuous dharma[s]	chos dkar
ཆོས་དཀར་པོ	white dharma	chos dkar po
ཆོས་དཀོན་ཅོག	the dharma jewel; 1) of {dkon mchog gsum} the precious dharma, the Dharma jewel	chos dkon cog
ཆོས་དཀོན་མཆོག	the dharma jewel [having the nature of scripture and realization, bshad pa'i chos dang, sgrub pa'i chos dang, 'bras bu'i chos; 1) of {dkon mchog gsum}	chos dkon mchog
ཆོས་བཀའ	a teaching	chos bka'
ཆོས་བཀའ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་ཟབ་མོ	the vast and profound Dharma teachings	chos bka' rgya chen zab mo
ཆོས་རྐུ་བ	steal in the name of religion, stealing in the name of religion	chos rku ba
ཆོས་སྐད	book language, book language, doctrinal exposition	chos skad
ཆོས་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབང་དུ	in dharma terminology	chos skad kyi dbang du
ཆོས་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབང་དུ་ཤས་ན	explained when using Dharma terminology	chos skad kyi dbang du shas na
ཆོས་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབང་དུ་ཤེས	know in terms of dharma language	chos skad kyi dbang du shes
ཆོས་སྐད་ཁྱད་པར	special language	chos skad khyad par
ཆོས་སྐལ	dharma lot, revelatory teachings that are one's fate to discover	chos skal
ཆོས་སྐལ་མེད་པ	{chos kyi skal pa med pa} a misfortune for Dharma practice	chos skal med pa
ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya, (ultimate, emptiness, dharma) body, (absolute, empty, dimension of, essential, pure fact of) being, primordial contact with the total field of events and meanings, fundamental dimension...	chos sku
རྣམ	pure in being itself, blo bur dri	rnam
བྲལ	pure are regards the removal of incidental stains)	bral
ཨབསོལུཏེ་བ༹ལུཨེ	being, the ultimate, noetic being, spirituality-as-such, presence	absolute value
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	Dharmakaya Samantabhadra	chos sku kun tu bzang po
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཀུན་བཟང	Dharmakaya Samantabhadra	chos sku kun bzang
ཆོས་སྐུ་འགྱུར་མེད	changeless dharmakaya	chos sku 'gyur med
ཆོས་སྐུ་འགྱུར་མེད་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	unchanging mind of dharmakaya	chos sku 'gyur med kyi dgongs pa
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of dharmakaya	chos sku rgyal po
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་པོ་དགོངས་པ	realization of the king of dharmakaya, vision of the king of dharmakaya	chos sku rgyal po dgongs pa
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་དགོངས་པ	the realization of the dharmakaya king	chos sku rgyal po'i dgongs pa
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་གཏན་སྲིད་ཟིན་པ	to gain the most majestic ongoing state of authentic being, dharmakaya	chos sku rgyal po'i gtan srid zin pa
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྩལ	the expression of the dharmakaya king (Syn. rig pa'i rtsal)	chos sku rgyal po'i rtsal
ཆོས་སྐུ་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐུ	viewed ontologically	chos sku ngo bo nyid kyi sku
ཆོས་སྐུ་དངོས	true dharmakaya	chos sku dngos
ཆོས་སྐུ་གཅིག་པོའི་ཡོ་ལངས་བསྐྱང	continuing in the unique state of the Dharmakaya	chos sku gcig po'i yo langs bskyang
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐུ	as a process	chos sku chos kyi ye shes sku
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཉག་ཅིག	the sole dharmakaya	chos sku nyag cig
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཉག་གཅིག	the sole dharmakaya	chos sku nyag gcig
ཆོས་སྐུ་གཏད་མེད་ཀྱི་འཕོ་བ	transference into dharmakaya free from reference point	chos sku gtad med kyi 'pho ba
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་ཅིག	Single sphere of dharmakaya. A symbolic description of dharmakaya being like a single sphere because it is devoid of duality and limitation and defies all 'edges' of conceptual constructs that coul...	chos sku thig le nyag cig
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་གཅིག	the single dharmakaya bindu, circle	chos sku thig le nyag gcig
ཆོས་སྐུ་དག་པ་གཉིས་ལྡན	ngo bo ye dag dang rang bzhin gsal dag	chos sku dag pa gnyis ldan
ཆོས་སྐུ་གདོད་མའི་མགོན་པོ	the dharmakaya Original Protector; {kun tu bzang po} Samantabhadra chos sku gdod ma'i mgon po'am kun to	chos sku gdod ma'i mgon po
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན	dharmakaya great Vajradhara	chos sku rdo rje 'chang chen
དྷརྨཀཡ་བ༹ཇྲ	holder	dharmakaya vajra
ཆོས་སྐུ་སྣང་མཐའ་ཡས	Dharmakaya Amitabha	chos sku snang mtha' yas
ཆོས་སྐུ་སྣང་བ་མཐའ་ཡས	Dharmakaya Amitabha	chos sku snang ba mtha' yas
ཆོས་སྐུ་སྤྲོས་དང་བྲལ	non-complex/ simplicity of / dharmakaya chos sku spros dang bral ba'i rang	chos sku spros dang bral
མདངས	natural radiance of [unconstricted] dharmakaya [simplicity] chos sku spros dang bral ba'i rang	mdangs
ཆོས་སྐུ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	non-complex dharmakaya	chos sku spros bral
ཆོས་སྐུ་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད	Dharmakaya Amitayus	chos sku tshe dpag med
ཆོས་སྐུ་གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ	The groundluminosity/ luminescent ground/ fundamental luminosity of dharmakaya	chos sku gzhi'i 'od gsal
ཆོས་སྐུ་འོད	light of dharmakaya	chos sku 'od
ཆོས་སྐུ་འོད་དཔག་མེད་མགོན	manifest the immeasurable light of dharmakaya	chos sku 'od dpag med mgon
ཆོས་སྐུ་འོད་གསལ	luminosity of/ luminous dharmakaya chos sku 'od gsal rdo rje snying po Dharmakaya the luminous vajra essence chos sku 'od gsal rdo rje snying po'i zhing - Dharmakaya realm of the luminous vajra ess...	chos sku 'od gsal
ཆོས་སྐུ་རང་བབས	[self/ naturally]existing dharmakaya, dharmakaya as it is	chos sku rang babs
ཆོས་སྐུ་རང་བབས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	the realization of dharmakaya naturalness	chos sku rang babs kyi dgongs pa
ཆོས་སྐུ་རང་བྱུང	self/ naturally/ intrinsically- existing dharmakaya, dharmakaya as it is	chos sku rang byung
ཆོས་སྐུ་རང་བྱུང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	selfexisting wakefulness of dharmakaya	chos sku rang byung gi ye shes
ཆོས་སྐུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Chöku Rinpoche; a precious white statue of Buddha Amitabha. It is one of the five image- emanations of Avalokiteshvara that originated miraculously from the milk lake of the Dakini Land of Kharsha ...	chos sku rin po che
ཆོས་སྐུ་སེང་གེའི་བཞུགས་སྟངས	the dharmakaya lion posture	chos sku seng ge'i bzhugs stangs
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཀློང་དུ་དག་པ	purified into the vast expanse of the Dharmakaya	chos sku'i klong du dag pa
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས	special attributes of dharmakaya	chos sku'i khyad chos
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	the four special attributes of dharmakaya {nam mkha' bzhin sang nge}, - open like the sky, {nyi ma bzhin sal le}, - bright like the sun, {me long bzhin wal le}, - clear like a mirror, {mig 'bras bz...	chos sku'i khyad chos bzhi
ཆོས་སྐུའི་དགོངས་པ	attained the realization of dharmakaya	chos sku'i dgongs pa
ཆོས་སྐུའི་རྒྱལ་ས	Royal throne of dharmakaya. 'Dharmakaya throne of nonmeditation.' complete buddhahood	chos sku'i rgyal sa
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ངང	dharmakaya nature/ continuum chos sku'i chos sku longs sku sprul sku	chos sku'i ngang
སོགས་དགུ	the 9 dharmakaya of dharmakaya, dharmakaya of sambhogakaya, ... nirmanakaya and so forth chos sku'i chos sku longs sku sprul sku	sogs dgu
སོགས་དགུ་བཅས་ཉེར་བདུན་དབྱེ་བ	the 27 divisions of the 9 dharmakaya of dharmakaya, dharmakaya of sambhogakaya, ... nirmanakaya and so forth	sogs dgu bcas nyer bdun dbye ba
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of dharmakaya {nam mkha' bzhin sang nge}, - open like the sky, {nyi ma bzhin sal le}, - bright like the sun, {me long bzhin wal le}, - clear like a mirror, {mig 'bras bzhin hrig ge...	chos sku'i chos bzhi
ཆོས་སྐུའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	dharmakaya stupa	chos sku'i mchod rten
ཆོས་སྐུའི་མཆོད་རྟེན་ལྔ	the five types of dharmakaya stupas	chos sku'i mchod rten lnga
ཆོས་སྐུའི་སྙིང་པོ	dharmakaya essence	chos sku'i snying po
ཆོས་སྐུའི་སྙིང་པོའི་དོན	the essential dharmakaya nature/ meaning of dharmakaya	chos sku'i snying po'i don
ཆོས་སྐུའི་རྟེན་ཉི་མ	the sun as the dharmakaya support	chos sku'i rten nyi ma
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the Dharmakaya chos sku'i dus bzhi mnyam pa nyid Dharmakaya 4th time of equality chos sku'i dus bzhi mnyam pa nyid Dharmakaya fourth time of equality. The equality of the four times cho...	chos sku'i lta ba
ཆོས་སྐུའི་གདངས	manifestations of the dharmakaya	chos sku'i gdangs
ཆོས་སྐུའི་སྣང་བ	dharmakaya display	chos sku'i snang ba
ཆོས་སྐུའི་བཙན་ས་ཟིན་པ	to capture the stronghold of dharmakaya, conquer the dharmakaya citadel	chos sku'i btsan sa zin pa
ཆོས་སྐུའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics/ definition of dharmakaya	chos sku'i mtshan nyid
ཆོས་སྐུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of dharmakaya	chos sku'i mtshan nyid lnga
ཆོས་སྐུའི་གཟིགས་སྟངས	the dharmakaya gaze	chos sku'i gzigs stangs
ཆོས་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of dharmakaya luminosity {'od gsal rnam pa bzhi'i ye shes} {snang ba}, {mched pa}, {thob pa}, {thams cad stong pa 'od gsal ba} illumination, proliferation, attainment, luminosity of ...	chos sku'i 'od gsal rnam pa bzhi
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	[primordial] wisdom of dharmakaya	chos sku'i ye shes
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་གསུམ	the threefold dharmakaya wisdom	chos sku'i ye shes gsum
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཡོ་ལང	Syn {chos sku'i ngang}, dharmakaya nature, continuum	chos sku'i yo lang
ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཡོ་ལངས	the state (or nature) of the Dharmakaya	chos sku'i yo langs
ཆོས་སྐུའི་རང་ཞལ	Natural face of dharmakaya	chos sku'i rang zhal
ཆོས་སྐུའི་རང་ཞལ་རྗེན་པ	natural face of naked dharmakaya	chos sku'i rang zhal rjen pa
ཆོས་སྐུའི་རིང་བསྲེལ	relics of the body of reality 845	chos sku'i ring bsrel
ཆོས་སྐུར་གྲོལ	be liberated into dharmakaya	chos skur grol
ཆོས་སྐུར་གྲོལ་བ	to be liberated into dharmakaya	chos skur grol ba
ཆོས་སྐུར་ཤར་བ	arise as the Dharmakaya; x {dran snang thams cad chos skur ma shar bar} until all thoughts and perceptions arise as the Dharmakaya	chos skur shar ba
ཆོས་སྐོར	cycle of teachings	chos skor
ཆོས་སྐོར་དུ་གདམས་པ	give Dharma teachings	chos skor du gdams pa
ཆོས་སྐོར་ཤར་བ	dawn as dharmakaya	chos skor shar ba
ཆོས་སྐྱབས་དཔལ་བཟང	1476-1565	chos skyabs dpal bzang
ཆོས་སྐྱིད	happy Dharma practice	chos skyid
ཆོས་སྐྱེའི་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	{chos kyi skye mched kyi khams kyi phyogs gcig} the one aspects of the element producing mental objects	chos skye'i khams kyi phyogs gcig
ཆོས་སྐྱོང	dharma protectors, dharmapala, guardian of the teachings, defender of the faith, oracle, embodiment of wisdom, protect by justice [keep samaya and make sure teachings are properly practiced]	chos skyong
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་བསྐང་གསོ	rituals of repair and fulfillment for the Dharma protectors	chos skyong bskang gso
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་ཁང	dharmapala shrine	chos skyong khang
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་མགོན་པོ	the lord of dharmapalas, Mahakala	chos skyong mgon po
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་དམ་ཅན	dharma protectors and vow holders	chos skyong dam can
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་དམ་ཅན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the ocean of vowed guardians and dharmapalas	chos skyong dam can rgya mtsho
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་དྲེགས་པ་ལྕམ་སྲིང	terrific female guardian deity	chos skyong dregs pa lcam sring
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་ནོར་ལྷ	Dharma protectors and wealth gods	chos skyong nor lha
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Dharma king, king who upholds the Dharma	chos skyong ba'i rgyal po
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་བའི་བསྲུང་མ	guardians protecting the Dharma	chos skyong ba'i bsrung ma
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་མ་དགོན་ལྕམ་དྲལ	the dharmapalas Mahakala mahakali and their brothers and sisters	chos skyong ma dgon lcam dral
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་མ་ཧ་ཀ་ལ	dharma protector mahakalas [one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad}, 8 outer classes]	chos skyong ma ha ka la
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་བཟང་པོ	{chos skyong bzang po}	chos skyong bzang po
ཆོས་སྐྱོང་སྲུང་མ	dharmapalas and guardian spirits	chos skyong srung ma
བསྡུས་པ	Dharma protectors and guardians comprised of the three classes	bsdus pa
ཆོས་སྐྱོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད	the flawless Dharma / teachings, the infallible Dharma	chos skyon med pa nyid
ཆོས་སྐྱོབ	Dharmatr'ani Indian Vaibhashika master	chos skyob
ཆོས་སྐྱོབས	indian buddhist who taught in china	chos skyobs
ཆོས་བསྐལ་འཆད་པ	to waste the precious opportunity to practice Dharma	chos bskal 'chad pa
ཆོས་བསྐོར	cycle of teachings	chos bskor
ཆོས་ཁང	assembly hall, temple, church etc.	chos khang
ཆོས་ཁམས	field of meaning, dharmanature, thematic reflective aspect of chos dbyings, 7 for mdzod (tshor ba, 'du shes, 'du byed, rnam par rig byed, min), 3 'dus ma byas, 16 for sems tsam pa (tshor ba, 'du sh...	chos khams
ཆོས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་འདུས་མ་བྱས་བརྒྱད	the 8 unconditioned aspects of the dharma element	chos khams kyi 'dus ma byas brgyad
ཆོས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	the unity of the dharma element	chos khams kyi phyogs gcig
ཆོས་ཁམས་དགེ་བ	the pure dharma nature	chos khams dge ba
ཆོས་ཁམས་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 elements/ dhatus of mental objects [according to the mngon pa kun btus tradition, divisions of the dharma ayatana: chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs lnga &, tsor ba/ 'du shes/ 'du byed/ kyi phung p...	chos khams bcu drug
ཆོས་ཁམས་བདུན	the 7 elements / dhatus of mental objects according to the Abhidharmakosha [tsor ba 'du shes 'du byed bcas kyi three skandhas and rnam par rig byed min pa'i gzugs &, 'dus ma byas 3]	chos khams bdun
ཆོས་ཁམས་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	the one aspect of the element of mental objects	chos khams phyogs gcig
ཆོས་ཁུངས་དག་པ	pure uninterpolated religious text	chos khungs dag pa
ཆོས་ཁུངས་བཙུན་པ	authenticity of teachings; a pure source	chos khungs btsun pa
ཆོས་ཁོ་ན་མཛད་པར་འདུག་པ	worked	chos kho na mdzad par 'dug pa
ཕོ༹ར་ཐེ་ཌྷརྨ་སིངླེ	mindedly	for the Dharma single
ཆོས་ཁྲི	1) dharma book stand; 2) throne, platform from which religious teaching or sermons are given	chos khri
ཆོས་ཁྲིད་བགྱིས	had to start the teaching	chos khrid bgyis
ཆོས་ཁྲིམས	religious/ monastic/ dharma laws/ discipline/ rules and regulations/ precepts	chos khrims
ཆོས་ཁྲིམས་པ	person in charge of discipline during a puja	chos khrims pa
ཆོས་ཁྲིམས་མཛད་པ	had been in charge of discipline	chos khrims mdzad pa
ཆོས་བཁོར་བསྐོར་བ	turning of the wheel of dharma, promulgation of the doctrinal wheel	chos bkhor bskor ba
ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར	turn the wheel of the teachings	chos 'khor bskor
ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བ	to turn the wheel of Dharma, promulgation of the doctrinal	chos 'khor bskor ba
ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བའི་དུས་ཆེན	feast of turning the dharma	chos 'khor bskor ba'i dus chen
ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བར་བསྐུལ	We ask that you turn the Wheel of the Dharma	chos 'khor bskor bar bskul
ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བར་བསྐུལ་བ	urge to turn the wheel of dharma	chos 'khor bskor bar bskul ba
ཆོས་འཁོར་གྱི་རྣམ་བཤད	the various turnings of the wheel, or pronouncements of the dharma of lord buddha	chos 'khor gyi rnam bshad
ཆོས་འཁོར་གྱི་རིག་འཛིན	awarenessholders of the doctrinal wheel	chos 'khor gyi rig 'dzin
ཆོས་འཁོར་རྒྱལ	place where 1st dalai lama was born, name of a place northeast of Lhasa	chos 'khor rgyal
ཆོས་འཁོར་རྒྱལ་དགོན་པ	{chos 'khor rgyal dgon pa Monastery	chos 'khor rgyal dgon pa
ཆོས་འཁོར་སྒང	place in tibet	chos 'khor sgang
ཆོས་འཁོར་མཆོད་རྟེན	dharma chakra stupa	chos 'khor mchod rten
ཆོས་འཁོར་གཉིས་པ	Second Turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The teachings emphasizing 'emptiness,' that all phenomena are devoid of a self-entity and true existence	chos 'khor gnyis pa
ཆོས་འཁོར་ཐ་མ	final Turning of the Wheel of Dharma, promulgation	chos 'khor tha ma
ཆོས་འཁོར་དང་པོ	1st turning of the wheel of dharma	chos 'khor dang po
ཆོས་འཁོར་དུས་ཆེན	the great festival where he (turned) the wheel of Dharma	chos 'khor dus chen
ཆོས་འཁོར་གནས	place in tibet	chos 'khor gnas
ཆོས་འཁོར་གནས་གསུམ	three doctrinal centers	chos 'khor gnas gsum
ཆོས་འཁོར་དཔལ་གྱི་ལྷ་ས	lhasa	chos 'khor dpal gyi lha sa
ཆོས་འཁོར་མ	a deity	chos 'khor ma
ཆོས་འཁོར་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	Buddha's three successive turnings of the doctrinal wheel	chos 'khor rim pa gsum
ཆོས་འཁོར་རིམ་པ་གསུམ་བསྟན་པ	turned the wheel of Dharma according to three levels	chos 'khor rim pa gsum bstan pa
ཆོས་འཁོར་ལོ	turning the wheel of Dharma, dharmachakra	chos 'khor lo
ཆོས་འཁོར་གསུམ	1) the three doctrinal centers; 2) three turnings of the wheel of dharma	chos 'khor gsum
ཆོས་འཁོར་གསུམ་པ	Third Turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The last teachings of the Buddha including the sutras on the definitive meaning. The teachings by the Buddha placing emphasis on buddha nature, the unity of lu...	chos 'khor gsum pa
ཆོས་འཁྲིམས་པ	provost-sergeant in larger monasteries, monk supervisor	chos 'khrims pa
ཆོས་གང་ཞིག	a particular thing	chos gang zhig
ཆོས་གོས	robes, dress worn by lamas, clerical garb, religious robe worn by buddhist monk	chos gos
ཆོས་གོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་བདུན	7 suitable material for renunciates' robes chos gos [bal las byas pa, rtsva sha na las byas pa, nyi 'og pa'i gos, ras gos, rtsva zar ma las byas pa, rtsva ko tam pa las byas pa, rtsva du gu las bya...	chos gos kyi rgyu bdun
ཆོས་གོས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོག་མ	strings or bands for fastening a religious robe	chos gos kyi sgrog ma
ཆོས་གོས་ཀྱི་གཏུར་བུ	bag in which a monk puts robes	chos gos kyi gtur bu
ཆོས་གོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	pocket in upper garment of a monk	chos gos kyi snod
ཆོས་གོས་འཁྲུར་འཇུག་གི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment offence of washing? old clothes 'khrur 'jug pa [for an unrelated dge slong ma among the {spang ltung sum cu}	chos gos 'khrur 'jug gi spang ba
ཆོས་གོས་ཅན	w dharma robes	chos gos can
ཆོས་གོས་དང་ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཐོགས་པ	took up the Dharma robes and begging bowl chos gos dang lhung bzed bsnams nas donned his robes, took up his begging bowl	chos gos dang lhung bzed thogs pa
ཆོས་གོས་ནག་པོ	black clerical garb	chos gos nag po
ཆོས་གོས་རྣམ་གསུམ	<ts'ibaram> the three dharma robes [snam sbyar, bla gos, mthang gos]	chos gos rnam gsum
ཆོས་གོས་བྱས་པ་དང་ལྡན	wearing Dharma robes	chos gos byas pa dang ldan
ཆོས་གོས་བྱིན་རླབས	consecration of the Dharma robes	chos gos byin rlabs
སྣེ་མོ་གཅིག་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཕྲག་པ་ག	yon par bkal, sne mo gcig gnyis ka'i lag pa	sne mo gcig yul gyi phrag pa ga
ཆོས་གོས་མཛད་པ	to prepare the dharma robes	chos gos mdzad pa
ཆོས་གོས་ཟླུམ་པོར་བགོ་བ	one dressed	chos gos zlum por bgo ba
ཨིན་ཨ་པེཏཏིཅོཨཏ	like robe	in a petticoat
ཆོས་གོས་གསུམ	the three dharma robes	chos gos gsum
ཆོས་གོས་གསུམ་པ	'triple-robe wearer', {sbyang ba'i yon tan}, 12]. owning only three robes	chos gos gsum pa
ཆོས་གྱང	abyss of dharma	chos gyang
ཆོས་གྱི་སྐུ	dharmakaya	chos gyi sku
ཆོས་གྱི་བགྲོ་གླེང	1) spiritual discussion. 2) Dharma debate	chos gyi bgro gleng
ཆོས་གྱིས་ཁྱུར	dharma followers	chos gyis khyur
ཆོས་གྲ	Dharma assembly	chos gra
ཆོས་གྲྭ	dharma class, school for religious study, open area where religious debates and discussions are held, read the sutras, monastic gatherings	chos grwa
ཆོས་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	major Dharma college	chos grwa chen po
ཆོས་གྲྭ་ལ་གདན་དྲངས	invited to come and read the sutras	chos grwa la gdan drangs
ཆོས་གྲགས	Dharmakirti	chos grags
ཆོས་གྲགས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1450-1506 - seventh Karmapa, Chödrak Gyatso	chos grags rgya mtsho
ཆོས་གྲགས་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དབྱངས	1 of sman bla brgyad	chos grags rgya mtsho'i dbyangs
ཆོས་གྲངས་སྔ་མ	earlier date, indistinctness	chos grangs snga ma
ཆོས་གྲན	dharma assembly	chos gran
ཆོས་གྲལ	x {lus chos gral du bsdad kyang} with only your body physically present in the Dharma gathering	chos gral
ཆོས་གྲུབ་མཐའ	sectarian	chos grub mtha'
ཆོས་གྲོགས	dharma friend, fellow practitioner, monastic roommate, Dharma companion; spiritual companion; fellow practitioner	chos grogs
ཆོས་གྲོལ་ཙེ	after receiving the teachings, when dharmas are liberated	chos grol tse
ཆོས་གྲོལ་ཚེ	after he had received the teachings	chos grol tshe
ཆོས་གླིང་ཐུགས་ནོར	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava	chos gling thugs nor
ཆོས་གླིང་བདེ་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Chöling Dewey Dorje (17th cent.), Ratön Tobden Dorje's main teacher chos gling sprul sku 'jig rten dbang phyug - Chöling Tulku Jigten Wangchuk (18th 848 cent.), a disciple of Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	chos gling bde ba'i rdo rje
ཆོས་དགེ	guru	chos dge
ཆོས་དགེ་བ	Dharma practice	chos dge ba
ཆོས་དགེ་བ་བཅུ	the Dharma of the ten positive actions	chos dge ba bcu
ཆོས་དགེ་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the suchness of virtuous dharmas	chos dge ba rnams kyi de bzhin nyid
ཆོས་མགོ་ཐོན་པ	1) chos kyi bya ba mthar phyin pa; 2) during 1 human life not lose one's renunciate vows	chos mgo thon pa
ཆོས་འགལ་གྱི་བྱ་བ	{sgo gsum chos 'gal gyi bya ba byed tshad} anyone whose every thought, word and deed is contrary to the Dharma	chos 'gal gyi bya ba
ཆོས་འགལ་གྱི་བྱ་བ་བྱེད	act contrary to dharma	chos 'gal gyi bya ba byed
ཆོས་འགལ་གྱི་བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པ	to commit acts that are contrary to the Dharma	chos 'gal gyi bya ba byed pa
ཆོས་འགོ་མཐར་ཐོན་པ	to finish the practices they've begun	chos 'go mthar thon pa
ཆོས་འགོག་པ	[ornament of] hindering dharmas [special dharmas of a thing to be refuted which has a fault contradicting the attempted refutation and proves it instead, among the {'gog pa'i rgyan}/ 'gog par byed ...	chos 'gog pa
ཆོས་འགྲུབ	to accomplish the teachings	chos 'grub
ཆོས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	the vast dharma	chos rgya chen po
ཆོས་རྒྱགས	provisions for practicing dharma	chos rgyags
ཆོས་རྒྱལ	king who rules according to buddhist laws, lord of death, courtesy to great personage, epithet of buddha, dharmaraja, sovereign of the doctrine, dharma king	chos rgyal
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་བཀའ་འབུམ	{chos rgyal bka' 'bum	chos rgyal bka' 'bum
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྐྱེས	name of yudhisthira, name of ajatasatru	chos rgyal skyes
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཁྲི་སྲོང་དེའུ་བཙན	Dharma king Trisong Deutsen	chos rgyal khri srong de'u btsan
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྒྲུབ་ཕུག	the dharmar ja practice cave	chos rgyal sgrub phug
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ངག་གི་དབང་པོ	1736-1807 - Ngakyi Wangpo, Chögyal, Shabkar's main teacher	chos rgyal ngag gi dbang po
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ལྕགས་ཐག་མ	a deity	chos rgyal lcags thag ma
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ	the great King of Dharma chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gamp...	chos rgyal chen po
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མཐུ་སྟོབས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	HRH the king of Sikkim	chos rgyal mthu stobs rnam rgyal
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ནང་སྒྲུབ	the inner practice of the Dharma king	chos rgyal nang sgrub
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ནོར་བཟང	sutras and Indian shastras dpag bsam 'khri shing, Tibet shastras skyes rabs brgya pa etc. discussing the Buddha's 'khrungs rabs rnam thar gzhir bzhag ste bar lam sdings chen tse ring dbang 'dus kyi...	chos rgyal nor bzang
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཕགས་པ	Chögyal Phakpa, nephew of Sakya Pandita: 1235-1280 : 1235-1280. One of the Five Sakya Forefathers	chos rgyal phags pa
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཕུག	Dharma King's Cave, at Yerpa. See under Cave	chos rgyal phug
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་འཕགས་པ	chos rgyal 'phags pa blo gros rgyal mtsan	chos rgyal 'phags pa
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མེས་དབོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	Three Forefather Dharma Kings; three ancestral religious kings, three great "Buddhist" kings of Tibet Songtsen Gampo, Trisong Deutsen, and Tri Ralpachen {srong btsan sgam po, khri srong lde btsan} ...	chos rgyal mes dbon rnam gsum
ཐར་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	byang chub sems dpa' sems dpa' chen po chos rgyal mes dbon rnam gsum gyi	thar rin po che'i phreng ba
རྣམ་ཐར་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་འཕྲེང་བ	an account of the lives of the dharmarajas of Tibet of the 8th century; by {mnga' bdag nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer} (11241192)	rnam thar rin po che'i 'phreng ba
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མེས་དབོན་གསུམ	Songtsen Gampo, Trisong Deutsen and Tri Ralpachen	chos rgyal mes dbon gsum
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མྱ་ངན་མེད	dharmar ja mya ngan med [w/o suffering [. spyi lo'i 3rd century BC having come to the throne waging extensive war in India mostly zhig la dbang sgyur byas mthar saddened b the strife relying on the...	chos rgyal mya ngan med
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཝང	the dharmar ja abhisheka	chos rgyal wang
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཟླ་བ་བཟང་པོ	Suchandra	chos rgyal zla ba bzang po
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ར	na gling pa - See also {rat na gling pa}	chos rgyal ra
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ར་ན་གླིང་པ	the dharmar ja ratna lingpa	chos rgyal ra na gling pa
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རཏ་ན་གླིང་པ	1403-78 Ratna Lingpa, tertön	chos rgyal rat na gling pa
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རིན་ཆེན་ཕུན་ཚོགས	the king of Dharma, Rinchen Püntsok; tertön 849 and reincarnation of {lha sras 'jing yon sad na legs}	chos rgyal rin chen phun tshogs
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious Dharma king	chos rgyal rin po che
ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ	the Dharma king Songtsen Gampo chos rgyal lha rgya ri bkra shis tshe ring	chos rgyal srong btsan sgam po
དཔལ་འབར	18-19th cent. - Lhagyari Tashi Tsering Palbar, Dharma King	dpal 'bar
ཆོས་རྒྱུགས	lessons, tasks imposed by a teacher on his pupil	chos rgyugs
ཆོས་རྒྱུད	religious instructions descending to pupils and their sub-pupils, religious tradition, creed	chos rgyud
ཆོས་རྒྱུད་གཅིག་པ	one confessing ancestral religion	chos rgyud gcig pa
ཆོས་རྒྱུན	current of teaching	chos rgyun
ཆོས་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of	chos rgyun gyi ting nge 'dzin
སྟྲེཨམས	of-dharmas, the ability to remember all streams of knowledge, flowing dharma samadhi	streams
ཆོས་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཏིང་འཛིན	samadhi of	chos rgyun gyi ting 'dzin
ཐེ་སྟྲེཨམ	of-truth	the stream
ཆོས་རྒྱུན་བླ་རབས	the succession of masters in the Dharma lineage	chos rgyun bla rabs
ཆོས་རྒྱུར	religious tradition	chos rgyur
ཆོས་སྒར	religious headquarters/ center/ camp [sometimes in Tibet there were literally nomadic monasteries]	chos sgar
ཆོས་སྒོ	approach to the Dharma,	chos sgo
ཆོས་སྒོ་རྗེས་འགྲོ	pursuing the entranceway to the teachings	chos sgo rjes 'gro
ཆོས་སྒོ་སྟོན	your speech shows the way of Dharma	chos sgo ston
ཆོས་སྒོ་མཐའ་རུ་ཐོན	reach the ultimate goal of the Dharma	chos sgo mtha' ru thon
ཆོས་སྒོར	religious life	chos sgor
ཆོས་སྒོར་ཞུགས	be initiated into religious life, entered the gate of dharma	chos sgor zhugs
ཆོས་སྒོར་ཞུགས་པ	having entered the door of Dharma	chos sgor zhugs pa
ཆོས་སྒྲ	the sound of the Dharma	chos sgra
ཆོས་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	to proclaim the Dharma; to make the Dharma resound; proclaiming the Dharma	chos sgra sgrog pa
ཆོས་སྒྲུབ	to ascertain the dharma of	chos sgrub
ཆོས་སྒྲོག	1) read/ recite the dharma; 2) light of Dharma	chos sgrog
ཆོས་སྒྲོགས་པ	preach	chos sgrogs pa
ཆོས་སྒྲོམ	casket of teachings	chos sgrom
ཆོས་བརྒྱད	8 worldly affairs, 8 dharmas (chos dbyings rnam dag, rnam par mi rtog pa'i ye shes, de gnyis su med pa'i ting nge 'dzin, rnam rtog dang bcas pa'i ye shes, gzugs kyi bye brag tu snang ba bzhi), eigh...	chos brgyad
དང་མི་བདེ	happiness and sadness 3) {bstod dang smad - praise and abused or degrade 4) {snyan dang mi	dang mi bde
སྙན	pleasing and unpleasing speech]	snyan
ཆོས་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	eighty four thousand teachings. Usually {chos phung brgyad khri bzhi stong}	chos brgyad khri bzhi stong
ཆོས་བརྒྱད་ཁྲིམས	law of the eight worldly concerns	chos brgyad khrims
ཆོས་བརྒྱད་རོ་སྙོམས	= taste of the 8 worldly dharmas	chos brgyad ro snyoms
ཆོས་བརྒྱུད	[of dbang lung and khrid] dharma lineage	chos brgyud
ཆོས་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་པ	dharma lineage holder	chos brgyud 'dzin pa
ཆོས་བསྒྱུར་བ	to change practice	chos bsgyur ba
ཆོས་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	necessities for Dharma practice, everything needed to practice the Dharma	chos bsgrub pa'i mthun rkyen
ཆོས་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་བསམ་བློ	conceive of practising Dharma	chos bsgrub pa'i bsam blo
ཆོས་ངེས་པ	true dharma	chos nges pa
ཆོས་མངོན་གྱུར	manifestation of dharma/ Dharma	chos mngon gyur
ཆོས་མངོན་རྟོགས	realize the abhidharma/ manifestation of dharma [having apprehended the 12 limbs of dharma {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}, after sgra spyi te the shravaka kyi don mngon rtogs mostly resolved by hear...	chos mngon rtogs
ཆོས་མངོན་པ	Abhidharma, knowledge, 'actual things', metaphysics	chos mngon pa
ཆོས་མངོན་པ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	abhidharma samuccaya	chos mngon pa kun las btus pa
བཤད་ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	a commentary of the {kun las btus pa}, by {bu ston}	bshad nyi ma'i 'od zer
ཆོས་མངོན་པ་བ	follower of Abhidharma	chos mngon pa ba
ཆོས་མངོན་པ་མཛོད	Vasubandhu's Abhidharma Kosha; the Abhidharma Kosha of Vasubandhu	chos mngon pa mdzod
ཆོས་མངོན་པ་མཛོད་ཀྱི་བཤད་པ	explanation of the Treasury of Abhidharma	chos mngon pa mdzod kyi bshad pa
ཨེ྾པླནཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་Vཨསུབནདུའས་ཨཱབྷིདྷརྨ	kosha	explanation of Vasubandu's Abhidharma
ཆོས་མངོན་པ་ལས	to quote / cite the Abhidharma	chos mngon pa las
ཆོས་མངོན་པའི་མདོ	Abhidharma Sutra	chos mngon pa'i mdo
ཆོས་མངོན་པའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	Abhidharma Pitaka. The 'Collection of Abhidharma Teachings.' See under 'Tripitaka.'	chos mngon pa'i sde snod
ཆོས་མངོན་པའི་མཛོད་ཀྱི་བཤད་པ	an	chos mngon pa'i mdzod kyi bshad pa
ཆོས་མངོན་པའི་གཞུང	abhidharma text	chos mngon pa'i gzhung
ཆོས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ	= tshogs lam, path of accumulation	chos mngon par rtogs pa
ཆོས་མངོན་མཛོད	the [text] Abhidharma-Kosha	chos mngon mdzod
ཆོས་མངོན་གཞུང	abhidharma works, abhidharmakosa has 8 chapters (1 elements phung po, 2 sems semsbyung, 3 world, 4 las, 5 nyon mongs, 6,7,8 factors leading to enlightenment)	chos mngon gzhung
ཆོས་ལྔ	five topics	chos lnga
ཆོས་ཅན	1) the basis of both dharma and reason in syllogism [eg., in establishing by reason of being produced that sound is impermanent, sound is the dharmin &, having both the reason "being produced" and ...	chos can
ནཏུརེ	possessor, possessing the character of. 2) apparitional reality. phenomenal quality of all things. 3) its nature is to, of a such and such nature, 4) Usually {chos ldan} religious, pious, 5) subjec...	nature
ཆོས་ཅན་ཀྱི་མཚན་མ	conditioned attributes; (conceptual attributes of conditioned phenomena)	chos can kyi mtshan ma
ཆོས་ཅན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	the absence of an identity in phenomena	chos can gyi ngo bo ma grub pa
ཆོས་ཅན་གྱི་སྣང་བ	appearances of phenomenal entities	chos can gyi snang ba
ཆོས་ཅན་གྱི་སྣང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད	all perceptions of conditioned phenomena chos can gyi phyogs gcig rtags la ma grub	chos can gyi snang ba thams cad
ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཅོ	extensive w the dharmin [among the {don la ma grub pa'i rtags drug}, the dharmin gyi phyogs gcig rtags la is impossible and so not established, eg the dharmin sound is impermanent, because it is ar...	which is co
ཆོས་ཅན་འགོག་པ	hinder/ be incompatible w the dharmin [among {'gog pa'i rgyan}, dgag bya dngos po gang yang rung ba'i khyad gzhi chos can de, 'gog byed khyad chos kyi rnam pa zur tsam zhig las gzhan ma mthong ba'i...	chos can 'gog pa
ཆོས་ཅན་ཇི་སྙེད་པ	extent of the dharmin, as many dharmins as there are	chos can ji snyed pa
ཆོས་ཅན་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒྲ	subject expression; comp with chos brjod kyi sgra predicate expressions [ggd]	chos can brjod pa'i sgra
ཆོས་ཅན་མཐུན་སྣང	commonly appearing dharmin	chos can mthun snang
ཆོས་ཅན་དང་ཆོས་ཉིད	conditioned and the innate	chos can dang chos nyid
ཆོས་ཅན་ནུས་མེད	powerless subject	chos can nus med
ཆོས་ཅན་སྣང་བ	all visible phenomena	chos can snang ba
ཆོས་ཅན་སྤྱིའི་རྣམ་གཞག	the general presentation of conditioned things	chos can spyi'i rnam gzhag
ཆོས་ཅན་འབའ་ཞིག	mere subject	chos can 'ba' zhig
ཆོས་ཅན་འབའ་ཞིག་པ	merely propounded subject	chos can 'ba' zhig pa
ཆོས་ཅན་འབའ་ཞིག་མ	[mere] subject/ dharmin	chos can 'ba' zhig ma
ཆོས་ཅན་མ	lady of the dharma	chos can ma
ཆོས་ཅན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	non-establishment of the dharmin	chos can ma grub pa
ཆོས་ཅན་མཚན་མ	conditioned phenomena	chos can mtshan ma
ཆོས་ཅན་རང་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པའི་རིགས	* the enlightened family in which apparitional reality naturally abides, the naturally existing gotra (family of the dharmin, the gotra of the dharmin existing as the nature, the dharmin the natura...	chos can rang bzhin du gnas pa'i rigs
ཆོས་ཅན་རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་རིགས	the body of form consisting of the enlightened family in which the apparition of reality naturally abides	chos can rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs
ཆོས་ཅན་རིང	donkey	chos can ring
ཆོས་ཅན་ལ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་ནས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ནོན	establishment of the dharmin due to its being doubtful	chos can la the tshom za nas ma grub pa non
ཆོས་ཅན་ཤེས་བྱ	objects of consciousness	chos can shes bya
ཆོས་ཅིས་མི་བྱེད	Why do you not practice the Dharma? {khyod la 'chings pa med par chos cis mi byed} You are unattached. Why do you not practice the Dharma?	chos cis mi byed
ཆོས་གཅིག་གི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of 1 dharma	chos gcig gi stong pa nyid
ཆོས་གཅོད	low caste person	chos gcod
ཆོས་བཅས་མ	wife, mistress of a house	chos bcas ma
ཆོས་བཅུ	ten qualities / teachings	chos bcu
ཆོས་བཅུ་རྒྱས་པར་སྟོན་པ	to teach the ten principles extensively	chos bcu rgyas par ston pa
ཆོས་བཅུ་པའི་མདོ	dasa dharmaka sutra	chos bcu pa'i mdo
ཆོས་བཅུ་བཞི	14 treatises on Guhyasamaja [by {sangs- rgyas ye shes}	chos bcu bzhi
ཆོས་འཅད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the dharma expounding/ teaching mudra	chos 'cad phyag rgya
ཆོས་ཆས	religious implements, requirements of a religious service, religious dress	chos chas
ཆོས་ཆུང་བརྒྱ་རྩ	byang chub lam gyi sgron ma sogs chos chung brgya rtsa; dpal ldan Atisha's mdzad pa (9821054)	chos chung brgya rtsa
ཆོས་ཆེན	the greater teachings, Mahayana Dharma	chos chen
ཆོས་ཆེན་ཆར་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་འདེབས	the complete raining of the rain of mahayana. the greater teachings, mahayana dharma chos chos bzhin ma spyad na chos kyis slar ngan song du 'gro ba'i rgyu byed unless you practise Dharma according...	chos chen char ni rab tu 'debs
ཆོས་མཆུ	the power of dharma	chos mchu
ཆོས་མཆོག	1) Dharmottara [author of	chos mchog
ཉཡ	bindu- tika]; 2) highest (mun- 852 dane) dharma (/ {nges byed cha mthun bzhi},), {'jig rten pa'i chos kyi mchog},) supreme phenomenon on the path of connection]	nyaya
ཆོས་མཆོག་གི་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	peak of supreme dharma of the path of preparation	chos mchog gi rtse sbyor
ཆོས་མཆོག་གི་ལུགས	position of Dharmottara	chos mchog gi lugs
ཆོས་མཆོག་རྣམས	highest dharmas	chos mchog rnams
ཆོས་མཆོག་པ	one of {sde pa bco brgyad}	chos mchog pa
ཆོས་མཆོག་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་རྟགས	the sign of nonregression from the [state of] Supreme Attribute	chos mchog phyir mi ldog pa'i rtags
སིགན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ནོན	returning supreme dharma	sign of the non
ཆོས་མཆོག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Dharma ratna	chos mchog rin po che
ཆོས་འཆད	Syn {chos bshad}	chos 'chad
ཆོས་འཆད་རྒྱུ	the teaching which is to be expounded	chos 'chad rgyu
ཆོས་འཆད་པ	teach, convey a message, explain religion	chos 'chad pa
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་འདུན་ཁང	place where sermons are delivered	chos 'chad pa'i 'dun khang
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་གནས་དང་སྟོན་པ	where the Dharma is being taught, the teacher	chos 'chad pa'i gnas dang ston pa
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་གནས་དེ་ཉིད	the place where the Dharma is being taught	chos 'chad pa'i gnas de nyid
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	Mudra of expounding the Dharma	chos 'chad pa'i phyag rgya
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་བླ་མ	the teacher who is explaining the Dharma	chos 'chad pa'i bla ma
ཆོས་འཆད་པའི་བླ་མ་དེ་ཉིད	the teacher who teaches	chos 'chad pa'i bla ma de nyid
ཆོས་འཆད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	teaching/	chos 'chad phyag rgya
ཆོས་འཆོང་པ	lord of the faith, buddha, title of honor to scholars, exorcists	chos 'chong pa
ཆོས་ཇི་སྙེད་པ	all possibly existent things	chos ji snyed pa
ཆོས་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	the nature of dharmas	chos ji lta ba
ཆོས་ཇི་ཙམ་ཉན་ཀྱང	no matter how much teaching one hears / receives	chos ji tsam nyan kyang
ཆོས་འཇིག་རྟེན	spiritual and temporal	chos 'jig rten
ཆོས་རྗེ	1) dharma master, religious teacher, title for high lamas and oracles 2) Dharma Lord [of Samye]	chos rje
ཆོས་རྗེ་གོ་རམ་པ	Dharma Lord Gorampa	chos rje go ram pa
ཆོས་རྗེ་གླིང་པ	Chöje Lingpa, tertön, also known as Orgyen Rogje Lingpa (o rgyan rog rje gling pa, 1682-1725)	chos rje gling pa
ཆོས་རྗེ་དགའ་ལྡན	SA dge lugs pa	chos rje dga' ldan
ཆོས་རྗེ་དགའ་ལྡན་པའི་ལུགས	sect founded by tsong khapa chos rje rgyal ba rgod tshang pa mgon po	chos rje dga' ldan pa'i lugs
ཆོས་རྗེ་ངག་དབང་དཔལ་ལྡན	b. 1797	chos rje ngag dbang dpal ldan
ཆོས་རྗེ་དོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Do Rinpoche, Chöje, a teacher from Mangra in Domey	chos rje do rin po che
ཆོས་རྗེ་དོན་གྲུབ་རིན་ཆེན	precious dharma lord who has accomplished the goal	chos rje don grub rin chen
ཆོས་རྗེ་ནག་དཀར	black and white exorcists	chos rje nag dkar
ཆོས་རྗེ་སྤྱིལ་དཀར་བ	1228-1300; stod 'brug pa bka' rgyud master chos rje 'ba' ra ba rgyal mtshan bzang po Barawa (1310-1391). Disciple of Zurphugpa, Shuksebpa and Kodragpa Sönam Gyaltsen	chos rje spyil dkar ba
ཆོས་རྗེ་ས་སྐྱ་པན་དི་ཏ	the DharmaLord Sakya Pandita	chos rje sa skya pan di ta
ཆོས་རྗེ་ས་སྐྱ་བ	the Dharma-lord Sakya Pandita	chos rje sa skya ba
ཆོས་རྗེ་ས་པན	the Dharma-Lord Sakya Pandita	chos rje sa pan
ཆོས་རྗེས་ཤེས་བཟོད	cognition, ensuing cognition, acceptance and ensuing acceptance of the Dharma	chos rjes shes bzod
ཆོས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	mindfulness of the Dharma, one of the {rjes su dran pa drug}, the six recollections, six of the {rjes su dran pa bcu}, ten mindfulnesses. recollection of the Dharma, teachings	chos rjes su dran pa
ཆོས་བརྗོད	ostensible definition as when we point out the impermanence of sound	chos brjod
ཆོས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	dharma expressing word [showing speaker and listener what khyad chos is being talked about, eg, impermanence of sound, vs pillar or vase, abandoning other differences/distinctions]	chos brjod kyi sgra
ཆོས་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒྲ	predicate-expression	chos brjod pa'i sgra
ཆོས་ཉན	listen to the dharma	chos nyan
ཆོས་ཉན་དུ་བཏུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to make oneself able to listen to the Dharma	chos nyan du btub par byed pa
ཆོས་ཉན་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went to listen to [the Buddha teach] the Dharma	chos nyan du phyin pa
ཆོས་ཉན་དུས	while listening to the teachings	chos nyan dus
ཆོས་ཉན་དུས་སྒྲུབ་དུས	whenever you listen to the teaching and whenever you practise	chos nyan dus sgrub dus
ཆོས་ཉན་པ	listen[er] to the dharma	chos nyan pa
ཆོས་ཉན་པ་ལའང	even to listen to the Dharma chos nyan pa'i skabs kyi 'du shes drug the six perceptions at the time of listening to dharma chos nyan pa'i skabs kyi 'du shes drug the six notions [to keep] when list...	chos nyan pa la'ang
ཆོས་ཉན་པའི་འཁོར	the assembly gathered to listen to the teaching	chos nyan pa'i 'khor
ཆོས་ཉན་པའི་དུས་སུ	when listening to the teachings	chos nyan pa'i dus su
ཆོས་ཉན་པའི་བྱ་བ་བཞི	the four actions of listening to dharma	chos nyan pa'i bya ba bzhi
ཆོས་ཉན་པའི་ཚེ	during a teaching	chos nyan pa'i tshe
ཆོས་ཉན་འཕྲོ་ལ་འགྲོ་དགོས་པ	who had been listening to the Dharma, had to go	chos nyan 'phro la 'gro dgos pa
ཆོས་ཉན་ཚུལ་སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ	how to listen to the Dharma and how to apply it chos nyan lo dang sgrub lo byas kyang you might think that you are studying and practising Dharma	chos nyan tshul sgrub tshul
ཆོས་ཉམས་སུ་བླང་པ	commit religious instructions to memory	chos nyams su blang pa
ཆོས་ཉིད	ultimate particular pointinstant, aesthetic object apart from beliefs about it, the real thing at hand, the thing in question, the actuality, the datum, authentic reality, reality, being qua being,...	chos nyid
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	dharmata Samantabhadra	chos nyid kun tu bzang po
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི	natural	chos nyid kyi
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the kayas of dharmata	chos nyid kyi sku
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	the essence of dharmata	chos nyid kyi ngo bo
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐིག	SA thig le drug	chos nyid kyi thig
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of the ultimate nature of phenomena	chos nyid kyi thig le
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དྲན་པ	Dharmata mindfulness	chos nyid kyi dran pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྣང་ཆ	the manifest/ apparent aspect of dharmata	chos nyid kyi snang cha
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	bardo of dharmata	chos nyid kyi bar do
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of dharmata	chos nyid kyi mtshan nyid
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	Luminosity of dharmata	chos nyid kyi 'od gsal
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཞི	Four Enlightened Attributes of Reality. Purity, permanence, bliss and true self. {gtsang rtag bde bdag}	chos nyid kyi yon tan bzhi
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་སྒྲ	natural/ spontaneous/ self- sound of dharmata/ reality	chos nyid kyi rang sgra
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་ངོ་སྐྱོང་བ	continuing in the inherent state of Reality	chos nyid kyi rang ngo skyong ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་མདངས	natural radiance of dharmata	chos nyid kyi rang mdangs
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	characteristics of nature, the nature of things	chos nyid kyi rang bzhin
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	intrinsic awareness	chos nyid kyi rig pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རིགས	the gotra of dharmata	chos nyid kyi rigs
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of intrinsic nature [thd]	chos nyid kyi rigs pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རོན	true nature of things	chos nyid kyi ron
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རོལ	manifestation of the dharmata	chos nyid kyi rol
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	display of dharmata	chos nyid kyi rol pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སེམས	the mind of dharmata	chos nyid kyi sems
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	by nature	chos nyid kyis
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རྙེད	religiousness	chos nyid kyis rnyed
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རྙེད་པ	one who has acquired a religious disposition	chos nyid kyis rnyed pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཐོབ་པ	obtained by nature chos nyid kyis thob pa don dam sems	chos nyid kyis thob pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ནི་ཐོབ་པ	obtained by nature	chos nyid kyis ni thob pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པ	ascertain dharmata/ the nature	chos nyid kyis rnam par nges pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པ	Nonarising dharmata. The nature of things which like space does not come into being as a concrete, apprehensible entity chos nyid khyab gdal chen po'i zhing	chos nyid skye ba med pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་འཁོར་ལོ	dharmata wheel	chos nyid 'khor lo
ཆོས་ཉིད་འགྱུར་མེད	unchanging innate nature	chos nyid 'gyur med
ཆོས་ཉིད་ངང་གི་ཁྲོ་བོ	basic selfnature of the natural wrathful dharmata	chos nyid ngang gi khro bo
ཆོས་ཉིད་མངོན་སུམ	Manifest[ation of] dharmata [visionary appearance of actual reality (one of the {snang ba bzhi}	chos nyid mngon sum
ཆོས་ཉིད་མངོན་སུམ་གི་སྣང་བ	The visionary appearance of direct perception of reality, appearance of the manifestation of dharmata [one of the {snang ba bzhi} the natural state of things as they are primordially pure dharmata ...	chos nyid mngon sum gi snang ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་མངོན་སུམ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	1 of snang ba bzhi, vision of direct perception of reality, the vision of the direct perception of reality	chos nyid mngon sum gyi snang ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཆོས	reality on its own terms	chos nyid chos
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	the nature of dharmata, [unaccountable absolute]	chos nyid ji lta ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྗེས་དྲན	one of the {rjes dran drug}, {rjes su dran pa drug}, - the six mindfulnesses, six of the {rjes su dran pa bcu}, - ten mindfulnesses	chos nyid rjes dran
ཆོས་ཉིད་གཉུག་མ	natural state, circumstances of the external world	chos nyid gnyug ma
ཆོས་ཉིད་མཉམ་པ	the equality of dharmata	chos nyid mnyam pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great equality of dharmata	chos nyid mnyam pa chen po
ཆོས་ཉིད་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཉག་གཅིག	single equality of the innate nature	chos nyid mnyam pa nyid nyag gcig
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྟོགས	realization of dharmata	chos nyid rtogs
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྟོགས་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'phags pa'i ye shes kyis chos rnams kyi ngo bo cir yang ma gzigs pa la chos nyid rtogs pa'i tha snyad mdzad pa yin te}	chos nyid rtogs pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་སྟོང་ཕྱོགས	the empty aspect of dharmata	chos nyid stong phyogs
ཆོས་ཉིད་སྟོང་གསལ	Empty and luminous dharmata	chos nyid stong gsal
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཐོབ་པ	intrinsic achievement	chos nyid thob pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་དག་པའི་སྣང་བ	vision, experience of pure dharmata	chos nyid dag pa'i snang ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་དག་པའི་འོད་གསལ	luminosity of pure dharmata	chos nyid dag pa'i 'od gsal
ཆོས་ཉིད་དག་པའི་ཡེ་གདངས	primordial display of pure dharmata	chos nyid dag pa'i ye gdangs
ཆོས་ཉིད་དང་འགལ་བ	contrary to its nature chos nyid dang chos tha mi dad pa'i phyir - because dharmata and dharmas are not separate	chos nyid dang 'gal ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་དང་ནི་འགལ་བ་མེད	not contradictory/ incompatible w dharmata	chos nyid dang ni 'gal ba med
ཆོས་ཉིད་དང་མི་འགལ་བ	not contradictory / incompatible w dharmata	chos nyid dang mi 'gal ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་དུ	naturally	chos nyid du
ཆོས་ཉིད་དུ་ངེས	guarantees chos nyid du 'dzin pa zad pa'i snang ba the visionary appearance of the cessation of clinging to reality chos nyid du 'dzin pa zad pa'i snang ba the visionary appearance of the cessation...	chos nyid du nges
ཆོས་ཉིད་དུ་འཛིན་པའི་ཟད་པ	visionary appearance of the cessation of clinging to reality	chos nyid du 'dzin pa'i zad pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	dharmata suchness [thatness] as it is ness and term synonymous	chos nyid de bzhin nyid
ཆོས་ཉིད་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ལ་འགོག་པ	cessation in the suchness of dharmata	chos nyid de bzhin nyid la 'gog pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་འི་ཞིང	the dharmata realm of great bliss	chos nyid bde ba chen po 'i zhing
ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཞིང	the dharmata realm of great bliss	chos nyid bde ba chen po'i zhing
ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེན་པ	the truth of reality	chos nyid bden pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེན་པའི་བྱིན་རླབས	the blessings of the truth of dharmata	chos nyid bden pa'i byin rlabs
ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེན་པའི་རིག་གནས	metaphysics	chos nyid bden pa'i rig gnas
ཆོས་ཉིད་འདུ་བྲལ་མེད་པ	beyond unification with ro separation from the real nature, [the nature] dharmata beyond meeting of parting 855	chos nyid 'du bral med pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་རང་སྒྲ	the spontaneous vajra sound of dharmata	chos nyid rdo rje'i rang sgra
ཆོས་ཉིད་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	the sky-like innate nature	chos nyid nam mkha' lta bu
ཆོས་ཉིད་ནི་གྲུབ་པ་ཡིན	dharmata/ the nature is established/ exists	chos nyid ni grub pa yin
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་དག་གི་ཕྱག	one of the {phyag rgya drug} the six mudras [in rituals]	chos nyid rnam dag gi phyag
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་དག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the mudra of completely pure dharmata	chos nyid rnam dag gi phyag rgya
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་དག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	innate pure wakefulness	chos nyid rnam dag gi ye shes
ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣལ་མའི་དོན	genuine fact of isness, reality, dharmata	chos nyid rnal ma'i don
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཕྱིར	since it is its nature	chos nyid phyir
ཆོས་ཉིད་བར་དོ	bardo of dharmata, bardo of the unconditioned. Syn {chos nyid kyi bar do}, the intermediate state of reality; the bardo of reality	chos nyid bar do
ཆོས་ཉིད་དབྱིངས	reality-field, SA chos dbyings, fundamental nature of existence	chos nyid dbyings
ཆོས་ཉིད་མ་བུ	mother and child of dharmata [primordial and the awareness resulting from practice]	chos nyid ma bu
ཆོས་ཉིད་མེད་དགག	#	chos nyid med dgag
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཞི་བ	peaceful ultimate nature	chos nyid zhi ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཞི་བའི་ལྷ་རྒྱུད	anuyoga rare tantra, rare tantra of anuyoga	chos nyid zhi ba'i lha rgyud
ཆོས་ཉིད་གཞི་ལ་འདི་ལྟར་གྲོལ་ནས	having been so liberated into this ground of dharmata/reality	chos nyid gzhi la 'di ltar grol nas
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་ཆེན	vision of extinction of the condition of existence	chos nyid zad chen
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་ཆེན་པོའི་སྣང་བ	1 of snang ba bzhi	chos nyid zad chen po'i snang ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་པ	extinction into reality, (dissolution of all phenomena, exhaustion, cessation) into the ultimate nature, SA snang bzhi, vision of the cessation of phenomenal reality, vision of the consummation of ...	chos nyid zad pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་པའི་སྣང་བ	vision of the exhausting of reality	chos nyid zad pa'i snang ba
དྷརྨཏ	exhaustion, visionary appearance of the cessation of reality	dharmata
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་ས	exhaustion of phenomena in dharmata, exhaustion in the absolute nature of phenomena	chos nyid zad sa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟད་སར་འཁྱོལ་བ	dharmata has been exhausted	chos nyid zad sar 'khyol ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་གཟིགས་ཚུལ	the way of seeing the innate nature	chos nyid gzigs tshul
ཆོས་ཉིད་འོད་གསལ	innate luminosity	chos nyid 'od gsal
ཆོས་ཉིད་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་སྣང་ཆ	the [manifest] aspect of the luminosity/ [luminous manifestations] of dharmata	chos nyid 'od gsal gyi snang cha
ཆོས་ཉིད་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the luminous manifestations of dharmata	chos nyid 'od gsal gyi snang ba
ཆོས་ཉིད་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་བར་དོ	Luminous bardo of dharmata. The period from the moment after dying until emerging in the mental body of the bardo of becoming	chos nyid 'od gsal gyi bar do
ཆོས་ཉིད་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	luminous wisdom of dharmata chos nyid yongs su grub pa'i mtshan nyid - the characteristic of the absolute nature	chos nyid 'od gsal gyi ye shes
ཆོས་ཉིད་རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་རིགས	the naturally existing gotra of dharmata [one of {rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs gnyis} the body of reality consisting of the enlightened family in which reality naturally abides, the naturally present ...	chos nyid rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs
ཆོས་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་རྟོགས	complete realization of dharmata	chos nyid rab tu rtogs
ཆོས་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	full realization of dharmata chos nyid la ma gtogs pa'i chos med pas since there are no dharmas not included within dharmata	chos nyid rab tu rtogs pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་ལམ	way of dharmata	chos nyid lam
ཆོས་ཉིད་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable dharma-nature chos nyid bsal bzhag dang bral pa dharmata free from clearing away or establishing	chos nyid bsam gyis mi khyab pa
ཆོས་ཉིད་བསལ་བཞག་དང་བྲལ་པ	the innate nature which lies beyond something to be added or removed	chos nyid bsal bzhag dang bral pa
ཆོས་ཉོན་ཅིག	listen to this message	chos nyon cig
ཆོས་གཉིས་སུ་གནས	dualistic existence of dharmas	chos gnyis su gnas
ཆོས་གཉིས་སུ་གནས་པ	which remains as two things	chos gnyis su gnas pa
ཆོས་མཉམ་ཉིད	sameness of dharmas	chos mnyam nyid
ཆོས་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	sameness/ equality of dharmas [one taste of samsara and nirvana]	chos mnyam pa nyid
ཆོས་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of sameness of dharmas	chos mnyam pa nyid bcu
ཆོས་སྙམ་སྒྲུབ་པ་པོ	one who has become protected by mystic arts through proficiency in sacred literature	chos snyam sgrub pa po
ཆོས་སྙེད་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	the truth of the extent of dharmas	chos snyed kyi bden pa
ཆོས་གཏམ	dharma discourse	chos gtam
ཆོས་གཏམ་བྱས་པ	talked about Dharma	chos gtam byas pa
ཆོས་གཏེར	Dharma treasures, terma in the form of teachings	chos gter
ཆོས་གཏེར་སྒོ་འབྱེད	reveal terma teachings	chos gter sgo 'byed
ཆོས་གཏོང	bud med kyi phyir du la la	chos gtong
ཆོས་གཏོང་བ	abandon the dharma	chos gtong ba
ཆོས་བཏགས	woven into the continuum	chos btags
ཆོས་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	four seals proving the Dharma, {phyag rgya bzhi},	chos rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi
ཆོས་རྟོལ	pith of a doctrine	chos rtol
ཆོས་ལྟར	"like dharma," imitation dharma, [mss]	chos ltar
ཆོས་སྟབས	strength of the dharma	chos stabs
ཆོས་སྟེགས	dharma shrine [stand], practice table, book-stand	chos stegs
ཆོས་སྟོང་པ	empty	chos stong pa
ཆོས་སྟོན	religious feast, feast of charity to the poor, entertainment given in honor of a saint	chos ston
ཆོས་སྟོན་པ	to teach the Dharma	chos ston pa
ཆོས་སྟོན་པ་ཡོད་པ	there are Dharma teachers	chos ston pa yod pa
ཆོས་སྟོན་པར་མཛད་པ	to teach the Dharma (h)	chos ston par mdzad pa
ཆོས་སྟོན་ཚུལ་ཉེར་དྲུག	the 26 ways of teaching dharma	chos ston tshul nyer drug
ཆོས་སྟོན་མཛད	teach dharma	chos ston mdzad
ཆོས་སྟོན་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན	the 9th section of 10 on dharma festivals and so forth [of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu: grong du rgyu ba'i ltung byed dang, rgyal po'i pho brang du 'dug pa'i ltung byed dang, khyad du gsod ...	chos ston sogs kyi sde tshan
ཆོས་སྟོབས	strength of dharma	chos stobs
ཆོས་བསྟན	taught the Dharma	chos bstan
ཆོས་བསྟན་པ	the Dharma he teaches	chos bstan pa
ཆོས་ཐག	chos po ti'i sked chings te glegs thag the rope/ weave/ mesh of dharma	chos thag
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད	all phenomena; everything	chos thams cad
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature of all things	chos thams cad kyi chos nyid
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of all teachings	chos thams cad kyi snying po
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	nature of things chos thams cad kyi yon tan bkod pa'i	chos thams cad kyi gnas lugs
རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོ	n of sutra chos thams cad kyi yon tan bkod pa'i	rgyal po'i mdo
གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོ	The sutra giving a detailed explanation of the equality of all dharmas, the Samadhiraja chos thams cad kyi rang bzhin mnyam nyid rnam par spros pa ting nge 'dzin	gyi rgyal po'i mdo
དུ་སྟོན་པ	teacher of all dharmas as essenceless chos thams cad ngo bo nyid med pa nyid	du ston pa
སྟོན་པའི་མདོ	the Sutra that Demonstrates the Identitylessness of all Things chos thams cad mngon par byang chub	ston pa'i mdo
པ་ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	fearlessness in the true mastery of all dharmas chos thams cad mngon par byang chub	pa la mi 'jigs pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་འཇུག་པ་མེད་པ	inactivity of all dharmas	chos thams cad 'jug pa med pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	the equality of all dharmas	chos thams cad mnyam pa nyid
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	nothingness with regard to all factors	chos thams cad stong pa nyid
ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity chos thams cad stong zhing bdag med pa - all dharmas are empty and selfless	of a self
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྟོན་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of all dharmas, emptiness of all phenomena, openness of all dharmas, one of the {stong pa nyid bco brgyad}, eighteen types of openness	chos thams cad ston pa nyid
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདག་མེད་པ	all things are w/o self	chos thams cad bdag med pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་བདག་མེད་པ	All dharmas are selfless	chos thams cad ni bdag med pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་བདག་མེད་པའོ	all	chos thams cad ni bdag med pa'o
ཐིངས་ཧབེ༹་ནོ་སེལཕ༹	entity, all dharmas are devoid of a self chos thams cad ni bdag med pa'o chos thams cad la bdag tu leg par 'dzin pa All dharmas are egoless; all dharmas are well grasped as self	things have no self
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་རྣམ་རིག་ཙམ་མོ	All dharmas are only conceptualization/ apprehensions of consciousness	chos thams cad rnam rig tsam mo
པའི་མདོ	The Sutra that Demonstrates the Nonorigination of all Things chos thams cad 'byung ba med par bstan	pa'i mdo
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་གཞི	king dahenatalo of uddiyana, and gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes's view of the natural base of all	chos thams cad gzhi
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡེ་ནས་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	all phenomena primordially perfected	chos thams cad ye nas sangs rgyas pa
ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	that all things by nature possess not even the existence of subtle particles chos thams cad rab tu mi gnas par smra	yang ma grub pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	to apprehend all things as having a selfentity	chos thams cad la bdag tu 'dzin pa
ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་སེམས་ཙམ་མོ	All dharmas are only mind	chos thams cad sems tsam mo
ཆོས་ཐུན	teachings, lecture session, Dharma course	chos thun
ཆོས་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the teaching is that of the great vehicle	chos theg pa chen po
ཆོས་ཐེབས	endowment or things given by a patron for the sake of dharma	chos thebs
ཆོས་ཐེབས་སློང་ཡིག	patron khag gi sa nas chos kyi thebs rtsa slong mo zhu ba'i yi ge	chos thebs slong yig
ཆོས་ཐོག	1) chos grva 'tsog dus; 2) Rgyud kyi 'chad nyan gyi ched du phyogs phan tshun gyi chos grvar 'degs pa'i dus tshod nges can zhig dharma session	chos thog
ཆོས་ཐོབ	one who has become religious, convert to buddhism	chos thob
ཆོས་ཐོབ་པ	received teachings	chos thob pa
ཆོས་ཐོབ་པར་ངེས	must certainly be able to obtain the Dharma	chos thob par nges
ཆོས་ཐོས་རྒྱུ་མི་དགའ་བ	to dislike listening to the teachings	chos thos rgyu mi dga' ba
ཆོས་ཐོས་པ	listen to/ study the dharma	chos thos pa
ཆོས་མཐའ་རུ་འདོན་པ	arrive at the end and scope of religious knowledge	chos mtha' ru 'don pa
ཆོས་མཐུན	in conformity with religion, in harmony with buddhism	chos mthun
ཆོས་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	conditions conducive to dharma	chos mthun rkyen
ཆོས་མཐུན་གྲོགས་པོ	Dharma companions	chos mthun grogs po
ཆོས་མཐུན་སྡོང་གྲོགས	serious practitioners	chos mthun sdong grogs
ཆོས་མཐུན་པ	1) having similar khyad chos; 2) similar doctrine; 3) person acting in accord w dharma; 4) according	chos mthun pa
ཆོས་མཐུན་པའི་དཔེ	example for corresponding features	chos mthun pa'i dpe
ཆོས་མཐུན་པའི་དཔེ་ལྟར་སྣང	mere appearance of an example w according dharmas the proving reason rtags and the thesis bsgrub bya dharmin do not have an according example	chos mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang
ཆོས་མཐུན་དཔེ་ལྟར་སྣང་ལྔ	the five mere appearances of an example w according dharmas	chos mthun dpe ltar snang lnga
ཆོས་མཐུན་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ངག	speech in which expression of rjes khyab and phyogs chos accord	chos mthun sbyor gyi ngag
ཆོས་མཐུན་མ	Dharma sister	chos mthun ma
ཆོས་མཐོང	seeing the truth	chos mthong
ཆོས་འཐོབ	obtain the dharma	chos 'thob
ཆོས་དང་རྐྱེན་གཉིས་བསྡུར་བ	that one's Dharma keeps up with circumstances	chos dang rkyen gnyis bsdur ba
ཆོས་དང་གང་ཟག	the teaching and the person	chos dang gang zag
ཆོས་དང་གྲུབ་མཐའ	teachings and philosophical systems	chos dang grub mtha'
ཆོས་དང་ཅན	pious	chos dang can
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་ཅན	substrata {chos can} of predicates {chos} that inhere in them. [ggd]	chos dang chos can
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་ཅན་གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ	resolve dharma and dharmin chos dang chos can gtan la dbab pa {chos dang chos can gtan la dbab pa [pramana text by the Indian master dze t' ri] chos dang chos nyid rnam par 'byed pa Distinguishing ...	chos dang chos can gtan la dbab pa
བསྟན་བཅོས	The Treatise for Discerning Dharmas and Dharmata	bstan bcos
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་འབྱེད	Dharmadharmadh tuvibhanga distinguishing dharma and dharmata [by Maitreya. according w yogachara by Maitreya, 1 of the {byams chos sde lnga}	chos dang chos nyid rnam 'byed
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་མ་ཡིན་པ	what is true and false	chos dang chos ma yin pa
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་མིན	right and wrong	chos dang chos min
ཆོས་དང་ཆོས་མིན་འབྱེད་པ	to distinguish right from wrong	chos dang chos min 'byed pa
ཆོས་དང་མཇལ	one who has encountered the dharma chos dang 'jig rten gang thad nas whether worldly or spiritual	chos dang mjal
ཆོས་དང་རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པའི་ཆོས	teachings consistent with the truth	chos dang rjes su mthun pa'i chos
ཆོས་དང་བསྟུན་ནས་སྤྱོད་པ	spyod	chos dang bstun nas spyod pa
ལམ་ཆོས་དང་བསྟུན་ནས་སྤྱོད་པ	his conduct is in harmony with the Dharma	lam chos dang bstun nas spyod pa
ཆོས་དང་བསྟུན་ལ་བགྱི་བ	to be in accord with the Dharma	chos dang bstun la bgyi ba
ཆོས་དང་མཐུང་པ	in accord with the Dharma	chos dang mthung pa
ཆོས་དང་མཐུན	in accord w dharma, in accord w truth	chos dang mthun
ཆོས་དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony with the Dharma chos dang mthun pa'i chos la shugs pa the power of true dharma	chos dang mthun pa
ཆོས་དང་གདམས་ངག	{chos dang gdams ngag gi bka' drin thob pa'i bla ma} the teacher through whose kindness you received the Dharma and personal guidance chos dang bden pa dang rigs pa dang theg pa gdags pa rnam par g...	chos dang gdams ngag
ཆོས་དང་ལྡན	religious, spiritual	chos dang ldan
ཆོས་དང་ལྡན་པ	(general name for a bodhisattva)	chos dang ldan pa
ཆོས་དང་འཕྲད་པ	to meet the Dharma	chos dang 'phrad pa
ཆོས་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི	spiritual	chos dang 'brel ba'i
ཆོས་དང་མི་མཇལ་བ	to not encounter / come across the Dharma	chos dang mi mjal ba
ཆོས་དང་མེད་མཁན	infidel	chos dang med mkhan
ཆོས་དང་མེད་པ	impious	chos dang med pa
ཆོས་དང་ཟང་ཟིང	spiritually and materially; {chos dang zang zing phan 'dogs} helping others spiritually and materially; giving both instructions and material things chos dang zang zing dang mi 'jig pa sbyin	chos dang zang zing
ཆོས་དང་རང་དབང	freedom of religion	chos dang rang dbang
ཆོས་དང་རིག་གཞུང	religious and culture	chos dang rig gzhung
ཆོས་དང་ལོག་མཁན	renegade	chos dang log mkhan
ཆོས་དད	religious faith, belief	chos dad
ཆོས་དད་ཀྱི	piety	chos dad kyi
ཆོས་དད་རང་དབང	freedom of religious belief/ worship	chos dad rang dbang
ཆོས་དད་རང་མོས	freedom of religious belief/ worship	chos dad rang mos
ཆོས་དན་ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་འབྱེད	by Maitreya	chos dan chos nyid rnam 'byed
ཆོས་དར	the spread of the Dharma	chos dar
ཆོས་དར་བ	propagate buddhism, place where buddhism was introduced	chos dar ba
ཆོས་དར་བའི་ཡུལ་དབུས་སྐྱེས	to have been born in a central land where the teachings flourish	chos dar ba'i yul dbus skyes
ཆོས་དུ་མ་ལ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཏག་པ	to imagine multiple things to be singular	chos du ma la gcig tu btag pa
ཆོས་དུང	religious conch	chos dung
ཆོས་དོན	religious [affairs/ matters]	chos don
ཆོས་དོན་བཀའ་བློན	Minister of Religious Affairs [TT]	chos don bka' blon
ཆོས་དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ	be devout	chos don du gnyer ba
ཆོས་དོན་འདོད་ཐར་བཞི	teachings, pursuits, pleasures and liberation {phun sum tshogs pa sde bzhi}	chos don 'dod thar bzhi
ཆོས་དོན་རིག་པ	cognizing the nature of things	chos don rig pa
ཆོས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	Committee for Religious Affairs PRC chos drang don la mi rton nges don la	chos don u yon lhan khang
རྟོན	do not rely on the provisional meaning of the dharma. Rely on the true meaning chos drang don la mi rton nges don la	rton
ཆོས་དྲངས་པ	righteous in reference to the laws of buddhism, justice, righteousness	chos drangs pa
ཆོས་དྲན་པ	chos ma dran - didn't think much about the Dharma	chos dran pa
ཆོས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ	application of mindfulness based on (mental) phenomena/ ideas	chos dran pa nye bar gzhag pa
ཆོས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	mindfulness of dharmas	chos dran pa nye bar bzhag pa
ཆོས་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག	applying mindfulness of mental objects 859	chos dran pa nyer bzhag
ཆོས་དྲིན	the kindness of the teachings; thanks to the Dharma	chos drin
ཆོས་དྲུག	Six Doctrines of Naropa. Tummo, illusory body, dream, luminosity, bardo, and phowa. See also 'path of means' (thabs lam)	chos drug
ཆོས་དྲུག་བདུད་རྩི་ཉིང་ཁུ	instructions on the esoteric yogic practices of the six doctrines of Naropa according to the Kamtsang Kagyü tradition; by zhwa dmar chos kyi dbang phyug, 1584-1630, and si tu pan chen chos kyi 'byu...	chos drug bdud rtsi nying khu
ཆོས་དྲེད	even knowing dharma, w/o experience sems gyong du song ba, untamed insensitive, jaded, incorrigible practitioner	chos dred
ཆོས་བདག	disciple entrusted with a teaching	chos bdag
དོཅཏྲིནེ	holders, lord of the Dharma, Doctrine Holder, 2) the self[-entity] of phenomena, {chos kyi bdag}	doctrine
ཆོས་བདག་ཀྱི་ཕྱེད	the half of phenomenal self, [rdul phran cha med]	chos bdag kyi phyed
ཆོས་བདག་གི	of objective self	chos bdag gi
ཆོས་བདག་གླིང་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight Lingpa Doctrine Holders	chos bdag gling pa brgyad
ཆོས་བདག་མེད་པ	absence of an [objective] self of dharmas [one of the two egolessnesses bdag med gnyis, all dharmas lack true existence]	chos bdag med pa
ཆོས་བདག་རིལ་པོར་འཛིན་པ	the full belief in a truly existing phenomenal entity	chos bdag ril por 'dzin pa
ཆོས་བདུན	7-point meditation posture of vairocana, seven characteristic features of the Vairocana posture, SA rnam snang chos bdun, seven characteristics,	chos bdun
ཆོས་བདུན་ལྡན་གྱི་མི	person w the 7 dharmas chos bden pa bzhi'i 'khor lo bcu gnyis the twelve spheres of the four truths of the teachings	chos bdun ldan gyi mi
ཆོས་བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་འཁོར་ལོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 wheels of the four noble truths	chos bden pa bzhi'i 'khor lo bcu gnyis
ཆོས་འདི	existence	chos 'di
ཆོས་འདི་པ	this dharma	chos 'di pa
ཆོས་འདི་མིན་པ	what is not this dharma	chos 'di min pa
ཆོས་འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ	in order to receive these teachings chos 'dul rgya mtsho'i dgongs don gsal bar byed pa tsin ta ma Ni'i 'phreng	chos 'di'i ched du
མཛེས་བློ་གསལ་མགུལ་རྒྱན	a detailed study of the sgo mang system of pedagogical presentation of the Buddhist Vinaya; by {mkhan po blo gros rgya mtsho of bkra shis 'khyil}	mdzes blo gsal mgul rgyan
ཆོས་འདུལ་བ	canon of monastic discipline/ vinaya teaching the chief precepts of discipline ste ={'dul ba lung sde bzhi}	chos 'dul ba
ཆོས་འདོད	son of cupid	chos 'dod
ཆོས་འདོད་པ	maintain/ desire the dharma	chos 'dod pa
ཆོས་འདོན་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	sngar smon lam tshugs dus phyir zhabs brtan du 'gro mkhan grva pa rnams kyis lha sa'i mi dmangs kyi khyim du chos 'don rim gro sgrub par 'gro skyod chog 'thus tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs zhus 'khr...	chos 'don 'khrol 'dzin
ཆོས་འདོན་པ	to recite scriptures, read in monotone a book	chos 'don pa
ཆོས་འདོམས་པ	dharmic admonition	chos 'doms pa
ཆོས་རྡོར	disciple of marpa	chos rdor
ཆོས་ལྡན	name [not honorific]. one who is devout. Syn {chos can}, righteous, pious	chos ldan
ཆོས་ལྡན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བ	[birth] so that one can practice the Dharma	chos ldan gyi skye ba
ཆོས་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	dharma country	chos ldan gyi rgyal khab
ཆོས་ལྡན་རྒྱ་སེ	Tibetan ri mo ba chos ldan zer mkhan gyis ri mo bris and kind of CH silk robe	chos ldan rgya se
ཆོས་ལྡན་ཉི་མ	righteous sun	chos ldan nyi ma
ཆོས་ལྡན་པ	dharma holder	chos ldan pa
ཆོས་ལྡན་མ	dharma holder	chos ldan ma
ཆོས་ལྡན་ཞིང་ཁམས	precious majesty of the religious kingdom	chos ldan zhing khams
ཆོས་ལྡན་རིག་ཀྱི་ཕ་མ་གཉིས	parents of a religious family	chos ldan rig kyi pha ma gnyis
ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས	[hey] Chöden * (h	chos ldan lags
ཆོས་སྡུད	living up to ethical standards	chos sdud
ཆོས་སྡེ	abbey	chos sde
ཆོས་སྡེ་ཁག	spiritual institutions	chos sde khag
ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ	1) a major teaching center. 2) important set of teachings	chos sde chen po
ཆོས་སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ་པ	the three dharma vows	chos sdom pa gsum pa
ཆོས་ན་མར	[arch] 1) in a dharma pecha; 2) Chos rgyun du byed pa entitled to the dharma in the homage to the dharma	chos na mar
ཆོས་ནག་པོ	black/ evil dharma, evil deeds	chos nag po
ཆོས་ནི་མི་འཚེ་བའོ	the Dharma is to do no harm	chos ni mi 'tshe ba'o
ཆོས་ནུས་པ	chos rgya chen po ma nus	chos nus pa
ཆོས་ནོར	1) dharma and wealth; 2) wealth of the noble ones/ dharma	chos nor
ཆོས་གནས་པ་ཉིད	that the teachings remain	chos gnas pa nyid
ཆོས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	rta nag thub bstan mkhan po	chos rnam rgyal
ཆོས་རྣམ་དག་བྱེད་པ	decide to practice Dharma genuinely	chos rnam dag byed pa
ཆོས་རྣམ་དག་འོང་བ	be able to practice Dharma purely	chos rnam dag 'ong ba
ཆོས་རྣམ་པར་གཞག་པ	presentation of the teachings chos rnam 'byed yang dag byang chub kyi	chos rnam par gzhag pa
ཡན་ལག	the true bodhi factor of discerning phenomena chos rnam 'byed yang dag byang chub kyi	yan lag
ཆོས་རྣམས	phenomena/ mental objects, events; dharmas, phenomena; configurations of events and meanings, phenomena, entities	chos rnams
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཀུན	totality	chos rnams kun
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཀུན་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	the essence of all teachings	chos rnams kun gyi snying po
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	the nature of all things chos rnams kyi ni mchog yin chos rnams	chos rnams kyi ngo bo
ཀྱི་ནི་གཙོ་བོ་སྟེ	the most excellent and principal 1 of dharmas chos rnams rkyen la rag las pa'i phyir since dharmas are dependent on conditions chos rnams rkyen la rag las pa'i phyir since all things depend on circ...	kyi ni gtso bo ste
ཆོས་རྣམས་གང་དག	kind of contemplation, literal translation of ye dharma hetu	chos rnams gang dag
ཆོས་རྣམས་སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུར་ཤེས་པ	to understand that all things are like magic / all phenomena are illusory	chos rnams sgyu ma lta bur shes pa
ཆོས་རྣམས་སྒྱུ་མ་རྨི་ལམ་ལྟ་བུ	all phenomena are like dreams and illusions	chos rnams sgyu ma rmi lam lta bu
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད	all phenomena	chos rnams thams cad
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་རྐྱེན་ཡིན	everything is circumstantial chos rnams thams cad de bzhin shes par	chos rnams thams cad rkyen yin
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་བདག་མེད	all dharmas are selfless	chos rnams thams cad ni bdag med
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་བདག་མེད་པ་ཨལལ་ཐིངས་ཨརེ་དེབོ༹ཨིད་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity chos rnams yang dag par so sor rtog pa to correctly discern all things	chos rnams thams cad ni bdag med pa all things are devoid of a self
ཆོས་རྣམས་རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	to fully discern all phenomena	chos rnams rab tu rnam par 'byed pa
ཆོས་རྣམས་རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་མེད་པ	to lack discernment of things chos rnams la sems mnyam pa nyid equality of dharmas and mind	chos rnams rab tu rnam 'byed med pa
ཆོས་སྣང་བའི་སྒོ	door to buddhism chos bsnam pa shin tu rnam par nges pa	chos snang ba'i sgo
ཆོས་པ	practitioner, dharma /very religious person	chos pa
ཆོས་པ་བཟང་པོ	an authentic practitioner	chos pa bzang po
ཆོས་པ་རབ	the foremost practitioner	chos pa rab
ཆོས་པ་རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་གསུམ	x {don gnyer rab 'bring tha gsum las chos pa rab 'bring that gsum 'ong} depending on whether your degree of interest is superior, middling or inferior you will become a superior, middling or inferi...	chos pa rab 'bring tha gsum
ཆོས་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	blo bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, 1581-1659 - Chöpa Rinpoche Lobsang Tenpey Gyaltsen, a famed master in Rekong and Kalden Gyatso's main teacher	chos pa rin po che
ཆོས་པའི་བཙན་སྡུག	lethal poison for practitioners	chos pa'i btsan sdug
ཆོས་པའི་ཟོབ	Dharma charlatan	chos pa'i zob
ཆོས་པའི་ཟོལ	Dharma-charlatan	chos pa'i zol
ཆོས་པའི་བཟོ་ལྟ་ཡོད་པ	outwardly, to look like true Dharma practitioners	chos pa'i bzo lta yod pa
ཆོས་པའི་བཟོ་ལྟ་ཤོར་བ	cease to appear as real Dharma practitioners	chos pa'i bzo lta shor ba
ཆོས་པར་མཐོང་བ	they looked on us as great practitioners	chos par mthong ba
ཆོས་པར་བྱས་པ	lus chos par byas pa outwardly, I appear to be a practitioner of Dharma	chos par byas pa
ཆོས་པས་བསྒྱུར་བ	1 of rdzu 'phrul rnam pa	chos pas bsgyur ba
ཆོས་པོ་ཏི	Dharma scriptures	chos po ti
ཆོས་དཔེ	1) spiritual analogy. 2) Dharma text	chos dpe
ཆོས་དཔེ་ཆ	the Buddhist scriptures	chos dpe cha
ཆོས་དཔོན	Dharma master	chos dpon
ཆོས་སྤང	renunciation of dharma	chos spang
ཆོས་སྤང་གི་ལས	the action of forsaking the Dharma	chos spang gi las
ཆོས་སྤངས	dharma renunciation, abandoning dharmas	chos spangs
ཆོས་སྤངས་ཀྱི་ལས་དང	beginner at dharma renunciation	chos spangs kyi las dang
ཆོས་སྤངས་ཀྱི་ལས་ལྡན	someone who has committed the act of leaving the Dharma	chos spangs kyi las ldan
ཆོས་སྤུན	Dharma brother	chos spun
ཆོས་སྤེལ་མཁན	spreader of dharma, missionary	chos spel mkhan
ཆོས་སྤེལ་མཁན་གྱི	missionary	chos spel mkhan gyi
ཆོས་སྤེལ་བ	spread/ increase [of] dharma	chos spel ba
ཆོས་སྤེལ་ལམ	mission	chos spel lam
ཆོས་སྤོང	forswearing the Dharma teachings	chos spong
ཆོས་སྤོང་གི་ལས	the action of forsaking the Dharma	chos spong gi las
ཆོས་སྤོང་བྱས་པ	having abandoned / rejected the Dharma	chos spong byas pa
ཆོས་སྤྱན་ལྡན་པ	endowed with the eye of the Dharma	chos spyan ldan pa
ཆོས་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཀུན་མཐུན་པ	the general teachings common to all systems	chos spyi khyab kun mthun pa
ཆོས་སྤྱི་པ	Dharma practitioner with only rough understanding	chos spyi pa
ཆོས་སྤྱོགས	dharma sphere/ side/ point of view	chos spyogs
ཆོས་སྤྱོད	meaningful action, ethical behavior	chos spyod
ཆོས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	collected liturgical texts; collection of rituals	chos spyod kyi rim pa
ཆོས་སྤྱོད་བཅུ	the 10 dharma activities	chos spyod bcu
ཆོས་སྤྱོད་ཉེར་མཁོ	necessary Dharma activities chos spyod thams cad kyi man ngag	chos spyod nyer mkho
ཆོས་སྤྱོད་པ	spiritual activities	chos spyod pa
ཆོས་སྤྱོད་པ་བཅུ	the 10 dharma practices	chos spyod pa bcu
ཉི་མ་རང་འཆར	Spontaneously Arising Sun of Happiness, liturgical text arranged for the daily recitation of basic Buddhist practices, by Shabkar	nyi ma rang 'char
ཆོས་སྤྱོབས	infallible dharma	chos spyobs
ཆོས་ཕན་བྱེད	benefit the dharma, perform dharmic benefit	chos phan byed
ཆོས་ཕུགས་སྤྲང་ལ་གཏད	leave your Dharma to a beggar's life; one of {gtad pa bzhi} the four ultimate aims	chos phugs sprang la gtad
ཆོས་ཕུང	divisions of Dharma	chos phung
ཆོས་ཕུང་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	the	chos phung brgyad khri bzhi stong
ཨེཨིགྷཏཡ	four thousand approaches to the Dharma	eighty
ཆོས་ཕུང་བ	84,000 topics	chos phung ba
ཆོས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཆོགས་པ	perfect dharmas, abundance of dharmas	chos phun sum chogs pa
ཆོས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཙོགས་པ	perfection of dharma [one of the five perfections {phun tsogs lnga}, taught as antidote to the 84,000 kleshas are the 84,000 heaps of dharma]	chos phun sum tsogs pa
ཆོས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfection of dharma	chos phun sum tshogs pa
ཆོས་ཕོགས	stock distribution for monastery chos phyir dka' thub bzod pas bzod pa the patience of hearing hardship for the sake of dharma chos phyir dka' thub bzod pas bzod pa the patience of bearing hardship...	chos phogs
ཆོས་ཕྱིར་ལུས་སྲོག་གཏོང་བ	given their bodies and lives for the Dharma	chos phyir lus srog gtong ba
ཆོས་ཕྱོགས	religious [sphere, side, point of view.]. the side of virtue; religious quarters	chos phyogs
ཆོས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	religious activities	chos phyogs kyi bya ba
ཆོས་ཕྱོགས་མ་ཡིན་པ	temporal	chos phyogs ma yin pa
ཆོས་འཕགས	the Buddha Dharmodgata	chos 'phags
ཆོས་འཕེལ	the spread of the Dharma	chos 'phel
ཆོས་འཕེལ་པ	the spread of the Dharma	chos 'phel pa
ཆོས་འཕྲུལ	miraculous manifestation	chos 'phrul
ཆོས་འཕྲུལ་འགྲན་པ	a contest of miraculous abilities	chos 'phrul 'gran pa
ཆོས་འཕྲོ	proliferation/ continuation of dharma	chos 'phro
ཆོས་བོན་གང་ཡིན	either Buddhist or Bönpo	chos bon gang yin
ཆོས་བྱ་བ་ཅོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་མོ	the mental object and deed Samantabhadri	chos bya ba co kun tu bzang mo
ཆོས་བྱ་བ་མོ	female pole	chos bya ba mo
ཆོས་བྱས་པ	practicing the Dharma	chos byas pa
ཆོས་བྱས་པ་རྣམས	those who have practiced the Dharma	chos byas pa rnams
ཆོས་བྱུང	history of Buddhism, source of dharmas [the cervix, the source of the feminine principle, unborn, unceasing, w a nature like the sky; represented by a triangle or crossed triangles]	chos byung
ཆོས་བྱེད	practice religion, live a religious life, join a monastery	chos byed
ཆོས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་བོ	Dharma practitioner	chos byed kyi skye bo
ཆོས་བྱེད་མཁན	one who performs religious service, priest	chos byed mkhan
ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	the practice of Dharma	chos byed pa
ཆོས་བྱེད་བློ་བྱས་པ	intended to practice the Dharma	chos byed blo byas pa
ཆོས་བྱེད་བློའི་ངང	entertaining fantasies about practicing the Dharma	chos byed blo'i ngang
ཆོས་བྱེད་དབང་མེད	powerless to practice the Dharma	chos byed dbang med
ཆོས་བྱེད་དབང་ཡོད་པ	to be able to practice	chos byed dbang yod pa
ཆོས་བྲོ	performed dances	chos bro
ཆོས་བྲོ་འཁྲབ	performed Dharma dances	chos bro 'khrab
ཆོས་བྲོ་རྒྱབ་བ	religious dances were performed	chos bro rgyab ba
ཆོས་བློ་བཤད་བྱེད	explain dharmas and mind	chos blo bshad byed
ཆོས་བློན	chos dad byed mkhan blon po	chos blon
ཆོས་བློན་འགོས་པད་མ་གུང་བཙན	minister of religious affairs, Go Pema Gungtsen [at the time of King Trisong Deutsen] chos blon 'gos pad ma gung btsan dang	chos blon 'gos pad ma gung btsan
ཆོས་དབང	empower w the dharma	chos dbang
ཆོས་དབང་གྲགས་པ	{zhang zhung pa}	chos dbang grags pa
ཆོས་དབྱངས	the melody of the Dharma	chos dbyangs
ཆོས་དབྱིངས	Dharmadhatu, ultimate sphere, totality of being, total field of events and meanings, the sphere of Dharma, field of all events and meanings, reality field, element of [superior] qualities, dharmadh...	chos dbyings
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	The pristine cognition of the expanse of reality, dharmadhatu wisdom [one of the five wisdoms)/ ye shes lnga stong nyid rtogs pa'i ye shes]	chos dbyings kyi ye shes
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	the innate	chos dbyings kyi rang bzhin
ནཏུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨལལ	embracing expanse of reality/ dharmadhatu, the phenomenal nature of dharmadhatu	nature of the all
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཀློང	the expanse of dharmadhatu	chos dbyings klong
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ངོ་བོ་རོ་གཅིག་པ	same taste [in being] dharmadhatu	chos dbyings ngo bo ro gcig pa
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཆོས	ineffability of the facticity of being chos dbyings stong pa nyid kyi gnas lugs field of events and meanings; dharmadhatu, the natural state of emptiness chos dbyings stong pa nyid kyi gnas lugs fi...	chos dbyings chos
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་སྟོབས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	c.17871848 - Chöying Tobden Dorje, a Dzogchen master in Domey	chos dbyings stobs ldan rdo rje
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་བསྟོད་པ	[Nagarjuna's]	chos dbyings bstod pa
ཌྷརྨདྷཏུ	stotra, praise of dharmadhatu	Dharmadhatu
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་འདུས་མ་བྱས	Unconditioned dharmadhatu	chos dbyings 'dus ma byas
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རྡོ་རྗེ	{kar-ma pa} x 16041674 chos dbyings nam mkha'i klong mdzod terma revealed by 'jigs bral bde chen	chos dbyings rdo rje
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རྣམ་དག	total purity of the ultimate dimension of phenomena, 1 of chos brgyad chos dbyings spros bral rig pa'i gzhal yas	chos dbyings rnam dag
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་བློ་བུར་བྲལ་དག	dharmadhatu which has the purity of being free from temporary defilement	chos dbyings blo bur bral dag
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་དབྱིངས	pure actuality of	chos dbyings dbyings
བེཨིང་ཨནད་ཨིཙ་སེལཕ༹	presentation as an allencompassing responsiveness	being and its self
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་མཛོད	the Precious Treasury of Dharmadhatu [one of the {klong chen mdzod bdun} relying on the dgongs pa rtsal of the Longde, Space Collection, presenting the ground, path and fruition of dzogchen, ati, i...	chos dbyings mdzod
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་འོད་གསལ་སྟོང་པ	an allencompassing void w luminous clarity, the luminous emptiness of dharmadhatu	chos dbyings 'od gsal stong pa
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཡུམ་གྱི་ཀློང	dharmadhatu, the space/ expanse of the consort	chos dbyings yum gyi klong
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཡེ་ཤེས	dharmadhatu wisdom [awareness of the expanse of dharma, pristine cognition of the expanse of reality, expanse of qualities wisdom (one of the {ye shes lnga}, = five wisdoms]	chos dbyings ye shes
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	the five wisdoms of dharmadhatu	chos dbyings ye shes lnga
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རང་གྲོལ	zur thams cad mkhyen pa	chos dbyings rang grol
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་དག་པ	the natural purity of dharmadhatu	chos dbyings rang bzhin gyis dag pa
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ལས་མི་གྱོ་བ	not move from/ go beyond dharmadhatu chos dbyings las mi g.yo ba - unmoved from dharmadhatu	chos dbyings las mi gyo ba
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྡུས་པ	[rupakaya] gathered/dissolving into dharmakaya [nirvana or peace]	chos dbyings su bsdus pa
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་སུ་རོ་གཅིག་པ	1 taste as/ within dharmadhatu	chos dbyings su ro gcig pa
ཆོས་དབྱུག	cane	chos dbyug
ཆོས་འབག	religious front/ mask/ show/ lip service	chos 'bag
ཆོས་འབངས	1 mi ser w faith in dharma; 2) monastic mi ser; 3) student of a lama having the three kindnesses {bka' drin gsum} dharma attendants	chos 'bangs
ཆོས་འབྱུང	source of phenomena	chos 'byung
ཆོས་འབྱུང་མཁས་པའི་དགའ་སྟོན	{chos 'byung mkhas pa'i dga' ston} [in the 9th wood mouse year, by dpa' bo gtsug lag phreng ba dharma history of T]	chos 'byung mkhas pa'i dga' ston
ཆོས་འབྱུང་མཁས་པའི་སྒའ་སྟོན	the Dharma history, the Feast for the Learned Ones; n of text	chos 'byung mkhas pa'i sga' ston
ཆོས་འབྱུང་ངོ་མཙར་རྒྱ་མཙོ	{chos 'byung ngo mtsar rgya mtso} [wondrous ocean of the source of dharmas [Taklung Kagyu {stag lung bka' brgyud pa} extensive history composed in the 10th earth mouse year, kha skong dang bcas khy...	chos 'byung ngo mtsar rgya mtso
ཆོས་འབྱུང་ངོ་མཚར་རྒྱ་མཚོ	n of text	chos 'byung ngo mtshar rgya mtsho
ཆོས་འབྱུང་མཐིང་ནག	n of text	chos 'byung mthing nag
ཆོས་འབྱུང་བ་མེད	a mahayana sutra	chos 'byung ba med
ཆོས་འབྱུང་བ་མེད་པའི་མདོ	sarva dharma pravtti nirdesa sutra	chos 'byung ba med pa'i mdo
ཆོས་འབྱུང་བྱིན	personal name	chos 'byung byin
ཆོས་འབྱུང་མ་ཐང	Lower Triangular Plain, at Labchi chos 'byung me tog snying po sbrang rtsi'i	chos 'byung ma thang
ཆོས་འབྱུང་ཞི་བ	personal name chos 'byung rin po che'i gter mdzod thub	chos 'byung zhi ba
བསྟན་གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པའི་ཉི་འོད	Illuminating Sunlight, a Dharma History by Longchen Rabjam 1308-1363/4. Two volumes. The author quotes his name as being Gyalsey Tukchok Tsal (rgyal sras thugs mchog rtsal)	bstan gsal bar byed pa'i nyi 'od
ཆོས་འབྱུང་ལོ་རྒྱུས	religious history	chos 'byung lo rgyus
ཆོས་འབྱོར	1) dharma and 'byor pa [wealth]; 2) spiritual wealth	chos 'byor
ཆོས་འབྲེལ	religious	chos 'brel
ཆོས་འབྲེལ་སྨོན་ལམ་འདེབས་པ	making prayers to create a spiritual link	chos 'brel smon lam 'debs pa
ཆོས་འབྲེལ་ཞུ་བ	to establish a spiritual connection	chos 'brel zhu ba
ཆོས་འབྲེལ་ཞུས་པ	requested teaching to establish spiritual connections, asked for a spiritual connection, asked for a teaching to establish a spiritual connection	chos 'brel zhus pa
ཆོས་སྦས་པ	hidden / concealed teachings	chos sbas pa
ཆོས་སྦུབས	common class	chos sbubs
ཆོས་སྦྱིངས་བསྟོད་པ	Nagarjuna's	chos sbyings bstod pa
ཆོས་སྦྱིངས་ཡེ་ཤེས	dharmadhatu wisdom	chos sbyings ye shes
ཆོས་སྦྱིན	religious gift, religious charity	chos sbyin
ཆོས་སྦྱིན་ཚང་འཛོམས	assembling sangha and patrons	chos sbyin tshang 'dzoms
ཆོས་སྦྱོང་མཆོད་པ	worshipping with recitation of buddhist scriptures	chos sbyong mchod pa
ཆོས་སྦྱོད་བཅུ	the 10 dharma activities CHN	chos sbyod bcu
ཆོས་མ	buddhist nun	chos ma
ཆོས་མ་གཏོགས	other than dharma	chos ma gtogs
ཆོས་མ་བསྟན	didn't teach the Dharma	chos ma bstan
ཆོས་མ་དྲན	didn't think much about the Dharma	chos ma dran
ཆོས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ལས	irreligious work chos mi dge ba rnams kyi de bzhin nyid the suchness of unvirtious dharmas chos mi dge ba rnams kyi de bzhin nyid the suchness of the unvirtuous attributes	chos ma yin pa'i las
ཆོས་མི་འགྱུར་བ་ཉིད	unalterable nature of things chos mi brjed pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa meditation on the aspect of not forgetting dharma[s]	chos mi 'gyur ba nyid
ཆོས་མི་བརྗེད་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	to cultivate the quality of not forgetting the teachings / truth	chos mi brjed pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
ཆོས་མི་ཉན་འདུག	did not listen to the Dharma	chos mi nyan 'dug
ཆོས་མི་སྟོན	I do not teach	chos mi ston
ཆོས་མི་མཐུན	heterogeneity not according w dharma	chos mi mthun
ཆོས་མི་མཐུན་པའི་དཔེ་ལྟར་སྣང	superficial analogy of inconsistent features chos mi mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang lnga the five kinds of example w nonaccording dharmas [bsgrub bya ldog pa med pa, sgrub byed ldog pa med pa dang, bsgr...	chos mi mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang
ཆོས་མི་མཐུན་པའི་སྦྱོར་ངག	expression of a syllogism w incompatible dharma	chos mi mthun pa'i sbyor ngag
ཆོས་མིན	anti-dharma, un-buddhistic, irreligious	chos min
ཆོས་མིན་གྱི་བསམ་སྦྱོར	thoughts and actions contrary to the Dharma	chos min gyi bsam sbyor
ཆོས་མིན་ཆོས་ལྟར་འཆོས་པ	to pretend that a falsehood is a truth; to foist antidharma off as dharma	chos min chos ltar 'chos pa
ཆོས་མིན་དུ་འདྲོ	x {chos kyang chos min du 'dro} it will also be changed into something that is not Dharma at all chos min du spyod rnams dbu 'phang	chos min du 'dro
མཐོ	the practitioners of anti-dharma are exalted	mtho
ཆོས་མིན་སྤྱོད་པ	practice opposed to buddhism	chos min spyod pa
ཆོས་མེ	sacred fire, especially lamps lighted before deities	chos me
ཆོས་མེ་སོད་བཞག	put out that lamp before gods	chos me sod bzhag
ཆོས་མེད	nondharma, not dharmic, unspiritual	chos med
མགོ་མེད་ཇ་སིག་ཏུ་ཡོད་དུས	a state of chaos with no religion, no laws, and no ruler at its head	mgo med ja sig tu yod dus
ཆོས་མེད་སྟོང་ལོག་མཁན	those who,	chos med stong log mkhan
ཨེམཔཏཡ	handed, lack the Dharma; those who, without Dharma, walk emptyhanded	empty
ཆོས་མེད་པ	non-dharma, not dharmic	chos med pa
ཆོས་མེད་པའི་ཡུལ་མཐའ་འཁོབ	a remote place where Dharma was unheard of	chos med pa'i yul mtha' 'khob
ཆོས་མེད་ལག་སྟོང	empty-handed, without Dharma	chos med lag stong
ཆོས་མྱོན	religious frenzy, mad with religion, religious bigot	chos myon
ཆོས་དམིགས	observe dharmas phenomenal focus, conception of dharmas, apprehension of dharmas, dharma visualization	chos dmigs
ཆོས་དམིགས་པ	1) to orient oneself towards the Dharma. 2) the object aimed at / observed	chos dmigs pa
ཆོས་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་སྡེ	miraculous stories [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	chos rmad du byung ba'i sde
ཆོས་སྨན	the medicine of dharma	chos sman
ཆོས་སྨོས	talk about/ mention the dharma	chos smos
ཆོས་སྨྱོ་ཐེབས་པ	chos kyi go don 'khrugs te smyo ba ???	chos smyo thebs pa
ཆོས་སྨྲ	speak of/ expound the dharma give religious teaching	chos smra
ཆོས་སྨྲ་བ	to teach / expound the Dharma; ex {dge bshes chos smra ba} the spiritual friend who teaches the Dharma	chos smra ba
ཆོས་ཙན	dharma pecha tsan pa' or sde tsan	chos tsan
ཆོས་ཙམ་མེད་པ	absolute nonexistence	chos tsam med pa
ཆོས་གཙོར་བྱེད་པ	to emphasize Dharma practice	chos gtsor byed pa
ཆོས་བཙུན	nun	chos btsun
ཆོས་རྩ	= chos gzhis mi rtsa zhes pa	chos rtsa
ཆོས་རྩོད	religious debate	chos rtsod
ཆོས་རྩོད་གནས	1) debating ground. 2) topic of religious dispute	chos rtsod gnas
ཆོས་ཚན	sections of the teaching	chos tshan
ཆོས་ཚིག	1) Dharma term, religious terminology. 2) classical / literary term	chos tshig
ཆོས་ཚིག་རྡོལ	to spontaneously utter dharma words	chos tshig rdol
ཆོས་ཚིག་བརྡོལ	to spontaneously utter words of teaching	chos tshig brdol
ཆོས་ཚིགས	chos dar sa'i yul gyi lte ba ???	chos tshigs
ཆོས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་དབུས	a spiritually central region; a place that is central in terms of the Dharma	chos tshigs kyi yul dbus
ཆོས་ཚིགས་མི་རྟོན་དོན་ལ་རྟོན	do not rely on the words of dharma, rely on the meaning	chos tshigs mi rton don la rton
ཆོས་ཚུལ	1) the way / manner of practicing. 2) religious precepts	chos tshul
ཆོས་ཚུལ་མཐའ་དག	all modes of dharma	chos tshul mtha' dag
ཆོས་ཚོགས	dharma center, religious association, society	chos tshogs
ཆོས་ཚོང་བ	trade in religion	chos tshong ba
ཆོས་ཚོལ་བ	to seek spiritual instruction	chos tshol ba
ཆོས་མཚམས	interlude / intermission in a teaching session	chos mtshams
ཆོས་མཚུངས	comparability	chos mtshungs
ཆོས་མཚུངས་པ	similarity in religion, 1 of 4 mtshungs pa rnam pa	chos mtshungs pa
ཆོས་མཚུངས་པར་འགྱུར	it must be like	chos mtshungs par 'gyur
ཆོས་མཚོ	dharma ocean	chos mtsho
ཆོས་འཚོང་བ	to sell out the teachings	chos 'tshong ba
ཆོས་མཛད	1) to practice the Dharma. 2) people who are practicing the Dharma; general companions on the Dharma path. See also {mched grogs}, {mched grogs chos mdzad}	chos mdzad
ཆོས་མཛད་འདོད་པ	to wish to practice the Dharma	chos mdzad 'dod pa
ཆོས་མཛོད	engage in the quest for the real meaning of life	chos mdzod
ཆོས་འཛིན	Dharma holder	chos 'dzin
ཆོས་འཛོམས	plentiful Dharma	chos 'dzoms
ཆོས་རྫོང	monastery in nye thang	chos rdzong
ཆོས་ཞུ	request the dharma, ask for/ receive teachings	chos zhu
ཆོས་ཞུ་བ	to request / ask for teachings	chos zhu ba
ཆོས་ཞུགས	{chos sgor zhugs}, be initiated into religious life, enter the gate of dharma	chos zhugs
ཆོས་ཞུས	request (or receive) teachings	chos zhus
ཆོས་ཞུས་པ	asked for teachings	chos zhus pa
ཆོས་ཞུས་པ་ཡིན	obtained the teachings; x {dka' ba brgya phrag gi sgo nas chos zhus pa yin} obtained the teachings at the price of hundreds of hardships	chos zhus pa yin
ཆོས་ཞུས་མཚམས་མཛད་པ	receiving teachings and / while doing retreat	chos zhus mtshams mdzad pa
ཆོས་ཞོག	priest craft	chos zhog
ཆོས་གཞན་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒྲ	verbal definition (sound is impermanent)	chos gzhan brjod pa'i sgra
ཆོས་གཞི	endowment for the support of a religious institution	chos gzhi
ཆོས་གཞིས	the nature of dharma[s] sngar dgon pa grva tshang khag gis bdag tu 'dzin pa'i gzhis ka	chos gzhis
ཆོས་གཞིས་མི་རྩ	sngar dgon pa khag gi gzhis kas bdag tu bzung ba'i mi ser	chos gzhis mi rtsa
ཆོས་བཞི་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	catur dharma nirdesa	chos bzhi bstan pa'i mdo
ཆོས་བཞི་པའི་མདོ	the Sutra on Four Principles	chos bzhi pa'i mdo
ཆོས་བཞི་བའི་དབྱངས	personal name	chos bzhi ba'i dbyangs
ཆོས་བཞི་མ	the four dharmas	chos bzhi ma
ཆོས་བཞིན	justice, justly	chos bzhin
ཆོས་བཞིན་བསྐྱངས	{yul phyogs chos bzhin bskyangs} protecting the whole of the land with the Dharma	chos bzhin bskyangs
ཆོས་བཞིན་ཏུ་བསྐྱོང་བ	protect by justice or justly	chos bzhin tu bskyong ba
ཆོས་བཞིན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to practice in accordance with the Dharma	chos bzhin du sgrub par byed pa
ཆོས་བཞིན་ནུས་པ	able to practice in accordance with the Dharma	chos bzhin nus pa
ཆོས་བཞིན་སྤྱད	x {chos chos bzhin ma spyad na chos kyis slar ngan song du 'gro ba'i rgyu byed} unless you practise Dharma according to the Dharma, Dharma itself becomes the cause of evil rebirths	chos bzhin spyad
ཆོས་བཞིན་བྱས་པ	act in accord with the Dharma	chos bzhin byas pa
ཆོས་ཟག་པ་མེད་པ	undefiling qualities	chos zag pa med pa
ཆོས་ཟད	exhaustion of phenomena	chos zad
ཆོས་ཟད་ཀ་དག་གི་སྣང་བ	the experience, manifestation of the primordially pure exhaustion of phenomena	chos zad ka dag gi snang ba
ཆོས་ཟད་ཀློང	the expanse where all phenomena come to exhaustion	chos zad klong
ཆོས་ཟད་ཀློང་དུ	in the sphere/expanse /realm space of exhaustion, totally exhausted	chos zad klong du
ཆོས་ཟད་བློ་འདས	Dharmata Exhaustion Beyond Concepts	chos zad blo 'das
ཆོས་ཟད་བློ་འདས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of exhaustion of phenomena beyond concepts. See {snang ba bzhi}	chos zad blo 'das kyi snang ba
ཆོས་ཟད་བློ་བྲལ	that has exhausted all dharmas and is free from conceptual mind	chos zad blo bral
ཆོས་ཟད་མིང་མེད	state that is beyond labels and in which phenmena resolve	chos zad ming med
ཆོས་ཟབ་ཅིང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ་དམ་པ	the profound and extensive sublime Dharma	chos zab cing rgya che ba dam pa
སྤང་བ	to abandon fear of the profound and extensive teachings chos zab cing rgya che ba la skrag pa	spang ba
ཆོས་ཟབ་མོ	profound truth, profound teachings / Dharma	chos zab mo
ཆོས་ཟབ་མོ་ལ་སྐྲག་པ	fear of the profundity of dharma	chos zab mo la skrag pa
ཆོས་ཟབ་མོ་ལ་སྐྲག་པ་མི་ཀྲ	inauspicious fears of the profundity of dharma chos zab mo la bzod pa'i pha rol tu son	chos zab mo la skrag pa mi kra
ཆོས་ཟམ	Chözam, in Tsari	chos zam
ཆོས་ཟོག	priest craft	chos zog
བའི་ཆོས	dharma sold by a charlatan for honor and position	ba'i chos
ཆོས་གཟུགས་བདག	Dharma-pretender	chos gzugs bdag
ཆོས་གཟུངས	Dharma-dharani	chos gzungs
ཆོས་བཟང	good custom, buddhism, piety, pious, individual, complimentary address for monks	chos bzang
ཆོས་བཟང་བསྐལ་པ	age of good fortune, lucky age in which buddhas appear	chos bzang bskal pa
ཆོས་བཟང་སྤྲིན	1 of 10 bhumis 866	chos bzang sprin
ཆོས་བཟང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Chözang Rinpoche ( 18-19th cent.), abbot of Kyirong Samten Ling	chos bzang rin po che
ཆོས་བཟང་ལྷའི་འདུན་ས	[dome where Indra teaches the Dharma], situated southwest on Mt. Sumeru	chos bzang lha'i 'dun sa
ཆོས་བཟོད	forbearances of the attributes	chos bzod
ཆོས་ཡང་དག་པར་སྡུད་པ	Compendium of the Doctrine [Sutra]. Dharmasamgiti Sutra	chos yang dag par sdud pa
ཆོས་ཡང་དག་པར་ལེན་བཞི	four pure maxims [one {da ltar byung ba la bde la phyi ma la rnam par smin pa sdug bsngal ba}, happiness in this life which ripens into suffering in the next two {da ltar byung ba la sdug bsngal la...	chos yang dag par len bzhi
ཆོས་ཡངས་ཕན་བྱེད	benefit the vast dharma, produce benefits of the vast dharma	chos yangs phan byed
ཆོས་ཡིད་ལ་དྲན་བཞིན་པར་ཤིའོ	I will die with the Dharma on my mind	chos yid la dran bzhin par shi'o
ཆོས་ཡེ་ཟིན	primordially accomplished dharma	chos ye zin
ཆོས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	to fully pursue the Dharma	chos yongs su tshol ba
ཆོས་ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པ་བདུན	seven ways of retaining the Dharma	chos yongs su 'dzin pa bdun
ཆོས་ཡོན་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	church and state jointly, priest and devotee jointly chos g.yang - spiritual wealth	chos yon zung 'brel
ཆོས་ར	debating courtyard, Dharma assembly, Dharma enclosure	chos ra
ཆོས་ར་དགེ་འཕེལ་གླིང	Chöra Gephel Ling, at Labchi	chos ra dge 'phel gling
ཆོས་ར་འགྲིམ་པ	to frequent the debating grounds	chos ra 'grim pa
ཆོས་རྭ	dharma class, school for religious study, open area where religious debates and discussions are held, read the sutras, monastic gatherings	chos rwa
ཆོས་རྭ་ཆེན་པོ	major Dharma college	chos rwa chen po
ཆོས་རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	the individual characteristics of a thing	chos rang gi mtshan nyid
ཆོས་རང་ངོས་ནས་སྟོང་པ	emptiness of dharmas from their own side	chos rang ngos nas stong pa
ཆོས་རང་བཞིན	the nature of dharma[s]	chos rang bzhin
ཆོས་རང་ལས་ཐ་དད་པ	different features	chos rang las tha dad pa
ཆོས་རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	investigation/ analysis/ discrimination of dharmas	chos rab tu rnam par 'byed pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	the correct bodhi factor of fully discerning phenomena. One of the {byang chub kyi yan lag bdun}, seven branches of enlightenment chos rab tu rnam par 'byed pa'i shes rab the knowledge that fully d...	byang chub kyi yan lag
ཆོས་རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་འབྱེད	fully investigate/analyze /discriminate dharmas [see itself, 1 of the {byang chub yan lag bdun}, - the 7 causes of enlightenment]	chos rab tu rnam 'byed
ཆོས་རབ་སྟོན	to fully teach the Dharma	chos rab ston
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	full discernment of dharmas/ things	chos rab rnam par 'byed pa
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད	full discernment of phenomena {so sor rtogs pa'i shes rab kyi lhag mthong} full discernment of dharmas / things	chos rab rnam 'byed
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་བློ	the intellect that fully discerns phenomena	chos rab rnam 'byed kyi blo
ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	the correct bodhifactor of fully discerning dharmas chos rab rnam 'byed yang dag byang	chub kyi yan lag
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པ	discrimination that fully discerns dharmas	chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtog pa
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་སོ་སོར་རྟོགས་པ	personal realization/ discrimination that fully discerns dharmas chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtogs pa'i shes	chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtogs pa
རབ	the prajna of discrimination that fully discerns dharmas chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtogs pa'i shes	rab
རབ་ཀྱི་ལྷག་མཐོང	the insight of discriminating knowledge that fully discerns phenomena chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtogs pa'i shes	rab kyi lhag mthong
ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ལྷག་མཐོང	Abbr. of {chos rab rnam 'byed so sor rtogs pa'i shes rab kyi lhag mthong}	chos rab rnam 'byed lhag mthong
ཆོས་རིག	religious and culture	chos rig
ཆོས་རིགས་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན	holder of both Dharma and family line	chos rigs brgyud 'dzin
ཆོས་རེ་གྱིས	practice some Dharma!	chos re gyis
ཆོས་ལ་དཀར་པ	white/ virtuous dharma	chos la dkar pa
ཆོས་ལ་དཀར་བ	well-disposed toward the Dharma	chos la dkar ba
ཆོས་ལ་བཀོད	established [everyone] in the Dharma	chos la bkod
ཆོས་ལ་བསྐུལ་བ	to urge [someone] to practice the Dharma	chos la bskul ba
ཆོས་ལ་ཁོང་ཁྲོ	hostility towards the Dharma	chos la khong khro
ཆོས་ལ་ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སྒྲིབ	the obscuration of hostility towards the Dharma	chos la khong khro sgrib
ཆོས་ལ་མཁས་པ	versed in religion	chos la mkhas pa
ཆོས་ལ་དག	delight of the dharma	chos la dga
ཆོས་ལ་དགའ	delighting in the Dharma	chos la dga'
ཆོས་ལ་དགའ་བའི་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ	mature in delight of the dharma	chos la dga' ba'i rnam par smin pa
ཆོས་ལ་རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས་པ	be at variance with the Dharma	chos la rgyab kyis phyogs pa
ཆོས་ལ་ང་རྒྱལ་སྤངས་པ	abandonment of pride within the dharma	chos la nga rgyal spangs pa
ཆོས་ལ་ངེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of the truth/ certainty of dharma	chos la nge shes kyi bzod pa
ཆོས་ལ་ངེས་པར་རྟོག་པའི་བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of having certainty in the Dharma	chos la nges par rtog pa'i bzod pa
ཆོས་ལ་ངེས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་པ	the patience of certainty in dharma [emptiness &, egoless or, w/o birth and cessation if those profound meanings are taught the mind is w/o fear and there is patience as in that in that faith and j...	chos la nges shes kyi bzod pa
ཆོས་ལ་མངོན་པར་བརྩོན	exertion in dharma	chos la mngon par brtson
ཆོས་ལ་མངོན་པར་བརྩོན་པ	to apply oneself to the Dharma wholeheartedly	chos la mngon par brtson pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཆོས་མི་ལྟོས་པ	dharma does not depend upon dharma	chos la chos mi ltos pa
ཆོས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	turn to religion, be converted	chos la 'jug pa
ཆོས་ལ་བརྙས་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	the obscuration of disparaging the Dharma	chos la brnyas pa'i sgrib pa
ཆོས་ལ་བསྙོན་པ	instead of bsnyon the actual khyad chos of some thing show another one, showing ornament, among {bsnyon dor gyi rgyan},	chos la bsnyon pa
ཆོས་ལ་རྟོགས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of having certainty in the Dharma	chos la rtogs pa'i bzod pa
ཆོས་ལ་རྟོན་པ	reliance on the Dharma; to count on the teachings	chos la rton pa
ཆོས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	based on the Dharma chos la don gnyer gyis 'dun pa med pa not aspiring to realization of dharma, w/o aspiration for the dharma chos la don gnyer gyis 'dun pa med pa who lacks the interest to pursue...	chos la brten pa
ཆོས་ལ་བདག་མེད་པ	selflessness of dharmas	chos la bdag med pa
ཆོས་ལ་བདག་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the selflessness of dharmas chos la bdag med pa'i ye shes rnam par	chos la bdag med pa'i ye shes
མི་རྟོག་པ	thoughtfree wakefulness [that sees] the absence of self-entity in things chos la 'dun pa drag po'i bag chags kyis as a result of her strong affinity for the Dharma	mi rtog pa
ཆོས་ལ་གནས་པ	abide in religion, clerical person	chos la gnas pa
ཆོས་ལ་གནས་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	the reasons why dharmas exist chos la gnas pa'i rgyu mtshan mi brjed pa - not forgetting the reasons why dharmas exist chos la gnas pa'i rgyu mtshan mi brjed	chos la gnas pa'i rgyu mtshan
པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on not forgetting the reasons why dharmas exist chos la gnas pa'i rgyu mtshan mi brjed	pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
ཆོས་ལ་སྣང་བ་སྒྱུར	turn your mind to religion	chos la snang ba sgyur
ཆོས་ལ་བརྣན་པ	be eager for religious instruction	chos la brnan pa
ཆོས་ལ་དཔྱོད་པ	to discern phenomena. Syn {chos rab rnam 'byed}	chos la dpyod pa
ཆོས་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	SA chos spyod	chos la spyod pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ	blo chos la phyogs pa - my mind is turned toward the Dharma	chos la phyogs pa
ཕྱོགས་པ	inclined toward the Buddhist teachings	phyogs pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་སྤངས་པ	to have abandoned partiality towards the teachings	chos la phyogs 'dzin spangs pa
ཆོས་ལ་བག་ཡོད་པ	conscientiousness in Dharma practice	chos la bag yod pa
ཆོས་ལ་དབང་པ	to master the Dharma teachings; mastery over the teachings	chos la dbang pa
ཆོས་ལ་དབང་བ	power to convey the publication of religion to all creatures at the same time and in every language, SA dbang bcu	chos la dbang ba
ཆོས་ལ་དབང་ཟ	presumptuous about dharma	chos la dbang za
ཆོས་ལ་འབུངས	apply oneself to religion	chos la 'bungs
ཆོས་ལ་སྦྱངས་པ	having practiced Dharma; proficient practitioner	chos la sbyangs pa
ཆོས་ལ་སྦྱོངས་ཤིག	practice the Dharma!	chos la sbyongs shig
ཆོས་ལ་མི་གྱོ	motionlessness of dharmas	chos la mi gyo
ཆོས་ལ་མི་དགའ	dislike of the Dharma	chos la mi dga'
ཆོས་ལ་མི་དགའི	not rejoicing in dharma	chos la mi dga'i
ཆོས་ལ་མུན་པ་མེད	the absence of darkness of dharma 868	chos la mun pa med
ཆོས་ལ་མོས་པ	his heart inclined to Buddhadharma	chos la mos pa
ཆོས་ལ་མོས་པར་བྱེད	be devoted to the dharma	chos la mos par byed
ཆོས་ལ་མོས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to have interest in the teachings	chos la mos par byed pa
ཆོས་ལ་མོས་པས་ས་བོན	the seed of devotion to dharma	chos la mos pas sa bon
ཆོས་ལ་དམིགས་པ	whole of reality	chos la dmigs pa
ཆོས་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་རྙིང་རྗེ	compassion directed at the truth, compassion observing phenomena	chos la dmigs pa'i rnying rje
ཆོས་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion that holds dharmas as focus, compassion w reference to all phenomena [from impermanence realizing prajna resulting compassion]	chos la dmigs pa'i snying rje
ཆོས་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་བྱམས་པ	loving kindness that holds the truth as focus	chos la dmigs pa'i byams pa
ཆོས་ལ་དམེ་གས་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion observing dharmas	chos la dme gas pa'i snying rje
ཆོས་ལ་སྨན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	the notion of the Dharma being medicine	chos la sman gyi 'du shes
ཆོས་ལ་སྨོད་པ	disparage the dharma	chos la smod pa
ཆོས་ལ་བཙུད་པ	introduced the Dharma to [...]	chos la btsud pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	act properly in the dharma, properly produce the dharma	chos la tshul bzhin nyid la byed pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	to correctly understand the truth	chos la tshul bzhin yid la byed pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	entered the Dharma	chos la zhugs pa
ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of the dharmas	chos la bzod pa
ཆོས་ལ་ཡིད་མི་ཕྱོགས་པ	to not feel any inclination for the Dharma	chos la yid mi phyogs pa
ཆོས་ལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེར་འདུ་ཤེས	the notion of the Dharma being precious	chos la rin po cher 'du shes
ཆོས་ལ་ཤེས་བསམ	concern for the Dharma; thoughtfulness of the teachings	chos la shes bsam
ཆོས་ལ་སུགས་པ	indirect dharma	chos la sugs pa
ཆོས་ལ་ལྷད	interpolation in religious works	chos la lhad
ཆོས་ལགས	btsun ma [h]	chos lags
ཆོས་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ་དྲུག	CHN	chos las skyes pa drug
ཆོས་ལས་ཁོན་ཁྲོ་བའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	the obscuration of hostility toward the dharma	chos las khon khro ba'i sgrib pa
ཆོས་ལས་ཆོས་མི་འབྱུང་བ	dharma does not derive from dharma	chos las chos mi 'byung ba
ཆོས་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond being a phenomenon; beyond ordinary phenomena	chos las 'das pa
ཆོས་ལས་བྱུང་བ	1) the arising of dharma, the elements of dharmas; 3) bodhisattva; 4) nun (h	chos las byung ba
ཆོས་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	(general name for a bodhisattva)	chos las 'byung ba
ཆོས་ལས་མི་གྱོ	not moving from the dharma chos las mi g.yo ba - to not depart from Dharma practice / what is true and meaningful	chos las mi gyo
ཆོས་ལས་གཞན་མེད	only the Dharma	chos las gzhan med
ཆོས་ལུགས	1) religious/ dharma doctrine/ tradition/ school/ style/ system/ sect/ denominations; 2) regional and family traditions, style of teaching; 2) a religion	chos lugs
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	religious position; a particular school's philosophy; religious sect	chos lugs kyi grub mtha'
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིག་ལམ	religious discipline	chos lugs kyi sgrig lam
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བྱིད་སྒོ	usual, deep doors	chos lugs kyi byid sgo
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཞེན	sectarianism	chos lugs kyi zhen
ཆོས་ལུགས་གྲུབ་མཐའ	religious sect	chos lugs grub mtha'
ཆོས་ལུགས་བསྒྱུར	conversion	chos lugs bsgyur
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཆེ་ཁག་བཞི	the four main sects in Tibet [Gelukpa, Kagyüpa, Sakyapa, Nyingmapa.]	chos lugs che khag bzhi
ཆོས་ལུགས་དད་པའི་རང་དབང	religious freedom	chos lugs dad pa'i rang dbang
ཆོས་ལུགས་དད་པའི་རང་མོས	religious freedom	chos lugs dad pa'i rang mos
ཆོས་ལུགས་དད་མོས	religious belief	chos lugs dad mos
ཆོས་ལུགས་དད་མོས་ཀྱི་རང་དབང	religious freedom chos lugs don byed u yon lhan khang Committee on Religious Affairs PRC	chos lugs dad mos kyi rang dbang
ཆོས་ལུགས་རྨོངས་དད	blind faith/ superstition	chos lugs rmongs dad
ཆོས་ལུགས་ཚོགས་པ	assembly of dharma schools, combination of dharma traditions	chos lugs tshogs pa
ཆོས་ལུགས་སྲིད་ཇུས	religious policy	chos lugs srid jus
ཆོས་ལུང	dharma teaching, dharma permission blessing	chos lung
ཆོས་ལོག	contraposed predicate, wrong teaching, perverted teaching	chos log
ཆོས་ལོག་པ	false doctrine, heresy	chos log pa
ཆོས་ལོག་བྱེད	commit heresy	chos log byed
ཆོས་ལོངས་སྤྲུལ་གསུམ	dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya	chos longs sprul gsum
ཆོས་ཤིག་མཛད་པ	to practice the Dharma	chos shig mdzad pa
ཆོས་ཤེས	cognition/knowledge/ perception of dharma[s] [the dharmas included in the desire realm 'dod khams kyis bsdus pa'i chos la in terms of the bden bzhi, the four noble truths, by seeing as it is/they a...	chos shes
ཆོས་ཤེས་པ	cognition of dharmas	chos shes pa
ཆོས་ཤེས་པ་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	patient acceptance producing knowledge of a phenomenon	chos shes pa shes pa'i bzod pa
ཆོས་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	4 forbearances of the knowledge of the attributes	chos shes pa'i bzod pa
ཆོས་ཤེས་པར་འདོད	inquiring after religious matter, wishing to know of religion	chos shes par 'dod
ཆོས་ཤེས་བཞི	the four cognitions of dharma chn	chos shes bzhi
ཆོས་ཤེས་བཟོད་པ	receptiveness to the perception of the doctrine	chos shes bzod pa
ཆོས་ཤོད	expound/ teach the dharma/ religion	chos shod
ཆོས་བཤད	Dharma teaching, to preach, to give a sermon	chos bshad
ཆོས་བཤད་ཀུན	all my teachings	chos bshad kun
ཆོས་བཤད་ཀུན་བཟང་མཆོད་སྤྲིན	by Shabkar	chos bshad kun bzang mchod sprin
ཆོས་བཤད་མཁན་པོ	pastor	chos bshad mkhan po
ཆོས་བཤད་པ	Dharma teaching, preach, give a sermon	chos bshad pa
ཆོས་བཤད་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བར་དེ་ལ་སྦྱོར	act according to dharma teaching	chos bshad pa ji lta bar de la sbyor
ཆོས་བཤད་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བར་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	to apply the teachings to the letter	chos bshad pa ji lta bar la sbyor ba
ཆོས་བཤད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing dharma teaching	chos bshad pa dang ldan pa
ཆོས་བཤད་བྱས་པ	taught the Dharma	chos bshad byas pa
ཆོས་བཤད་རྩོམ་པ	to compose a teaching / text	chos bshad rtsom pa
ཆོས་བཤད་གཞན་ཕན་ཉི་མ	Beneficial Sun, by Shabkar	chos bshad gzhan phan nyi ma
ཆོས་བཤད་གཞན་ཕན་ནོར་བུ	Beneficial Jewel, by Shabkar	chos bshad gzhan phan nor bu
ཆོས་བཤད་གཞན་ཕན་ཟླ་བ	Beneficial Moon, by Shabkar	chos bshad gzhan phan zla ba
ཆོས་བཤིན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད	practice according to the dharma, practice properly	chos bshin du sgrub par byed
ཆོས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	to become the reality of	chos su 'gyur ba
ཆོས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	become Dharma practice, turn into Dharma	chos su 'gro ba
ཆོས་སུ་བཏགས་པ	SA chos btags	chos su btags pa
ཆོས་སུ་བརྡར་བཏགས་པ	verbal designations of dharmas	chos su brdar btags pa
ཆོས་སུ་སྣང་བ	phenomenal existence	chos su snang ba
ཆོས་སུ་སྲིད	is produced	chos su srid
ཆོས་སེམས	1) intention/ aspiration to practice Dharma; 2) piety, religiosity	chos sems
ཆོས་སེམས་ཁང་བུ	mountain hermitage, cave used by recluse for meditation	chos sems khang bu
ཆོས་སེམས་ཅན	godly, inclined to religion, pious	chos sems can
ཆོས་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	1) great intention/ aspiration to practice Dharma; 2) very pious, great religiosity	chos sems chen po
ཆོས་སེམས་འདྲེས་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས	Grant your blessing that our minds and the Dharma may become one	chos sems 'dres par byin gyis rlobs
ཆོས་སེམས་མེད་པ	atheistic, godless	chos sems med pa
ཆོས་སོ་ཅོག	phenomena of existence	chos so cog
ཆོས་སོ་ཅོག་ཆོས་ཡོད་ཚད	the nature of all dharmas, emptiness	chos so cog chos yod tshad
ཆོས་སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ	discriminating knowledge of Dharma[s] [dharmas individual characteristics [chos rnams rang rang so so'i mtsan nyid rab tu shes pa:1 of the byang chub sems dpa'i so so yang dag par rig pa bzhi]	chos so so yang dag par rig pa
ཆོས་སོ་སོ་རང་གིས་རིག་པ	individual discrimination of phenomena	chos so so rang gis rig pa
ཆོས་སྲིད	clerical government, ecclesiastical dominion, religious government	chos srid
ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	combined religious and secular/ political	chos srid zung 'brel
ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	country which combines religious and secular/ political, Tibet	chos srid zung 'brel gyi rgyal khab
ཆོས་སྲིད་ལུགས་གཉིས	the traditional political system that combined religious and secular interests	chos srid lugs gnyis
ཆོས་སྲུང	dharma protectors	chos srung
ཆོས་སྲུང་སྡེ	{chos srung ba'i sde}	chos srung sde
ཆོས་སྲུང་སྤྱིའི་གཏོར་འབུལ	general torma offering for the guardians of the Dharma	chos srung spyi'i gtor 'bul
ཆོས་སྲུང་བ	to protect the Dharma, guard the teachings	chos srung ba
ཆོས་སྲུང་བའི་སྡེ	the division of dharma protectors	chos srung ba'i sde
ཆོས་སྲོག	vital essence of dharma	chos srog
ཆོས་གསུང	taught the Dharma	chos gsung
ཆོས་གསུང་བ	preach	chos gsung ba
ཆོས་གསུངས་པ་ལ་མི་ཉན	did not listen to the Dharma	chos gsungs pa la mi nyan
ཆོས་གསུངས་པའི་བསྟན་པ	teachings of the dharma	chos gsungs pa'i bstan pa
ཆོས་གསུངས་པའི་དོན་དྲན	she remembered the teaching	chos gsungs pa'i don dran
ཆོས་གསུངས་བར་ཞུ་བ་ཕུལ་བ	to request the teaching of Dharma	chos gsungs bar zhu ba phul ba
ཆོས་གསུམ	three practices	chos gsum
ཆོས་བསྲང་པ	1 of 7 thams cad yod par smra ba	chos bsrang pa
གཆོད	how much	gchod
བཆུག་རས	enter	bchug ras
མཆད་ཀ	charnel ground, tomb, sepulchre, power of increasing one's size, greatness, killed slain	mchad ka
མཆད་ཀ་པ	{mchad ka pa}	mchad ka pa
མཆད་སྒམ	coffin	mchad sgam
མཆད་གནས	charnel place	mchad gnas
མཆད་པ	tomb, sepulchre, greatness, magical power of increasing one's size at will, killed, slain	mchad pa
མཆད་པ་མེད	entire, perfect 870	mchad pa med
མཆད་པ་མེད་པ	entire, perfect	mchad pa med pa
མཆད་པར་བྱ་བ	greatness, magical power of increasing one's size at will	mchad par bya ba
མཆན	notations, notes, footnote, annotations, side of the breast, crook of the arm, expanding	mchan
མཆན་ཀྱི་མཆིས་བྲང	bosom wife	mchan kyi mchis brang
མཆན་ཀྱི་བུ	bosom child, darling child	mchan kyi bu
མཆན་ཁུག	armpit	mchan khug
མཆན་ཁུང	armpit [syn: mchan 'og, mchan zhabs]	mchan khung
མཆན་ཁུང་གྱོན་ན	in the cleft of his left arm	mchan khung gyon na
མཆན་ཁུང་འོག་འཁྱེར	put under one's arm	mchan khung 'og 'khyer
མཆན་ཁུང་འོག་འཁྱེར་བ	{'dzin pa},] to clip, put under one's arm	mchan khung 'og 'khyer ba
མཆན་ཁུང་འོག་འཛིན་པ	clip, put under one's arm mchan khung g.yon na - in the left of his left arm mchan khung g.yon na - in the crook of his left arm	mchan khung 'og 'dzin pa
མཆན་ཁེབ	dpung rogs	mchan kheb
མཆན་གྱི་མཆིས་བྲང	bosom, wife	mchan gyi mchis brang
མཆན་གྱི་བུ	bosom, child, darling	mchan gyi bu
མཆན་གྱི་བུ་ཕྲུག	darling child	mchan gyi bu phrug
མཆན་འགོད	annotate, edit	mchan 'god
མཆན་འགོད་བཀའ་ལན	yi ger mchan zhus pa'i lan	mchan 'god bka' lan
མཆན་འགྲེལ	[root text w commentary in] notes, footnotes, annotation	mchan 'grel
མཆན་འགྲེལ་ཅན་གྱི་དཔེ་ཆ	pecha w [commentary in] notes, footnotes, annotation	mchan 'grel can gyi dpe cha
མཆན་རྒྱག་པ	1) annotate, make a little commentary; 2) point out faults; 3) edit)	mchan rgyag pa
མཆན་རྒྱབ་པ	comment	mchan rgyab pa
མཆན་བཅུག	crook of arm	mchan bcug
མཆན་བརྗོད	notes, comments, remarks	mchan brjod
མཆན་བརྗོད་བྱེད	make notes, comments, remarks	mchan brjod byed
མཆན་བརྗོད་མེད་གསུངས	say "no comment"	mchan brjod med gsungs
མཆན་ཏུ་བཅུག	insert (foot)notes	mchan tu bcug
མཆན་ཏུ་བཅུག་པ	tu put into a footnote	mchan tu bcug pa
མཆན་དུ	under the arm	mchan du
མཆན་དུ་བགྲེངས	signify	mchan du bgrengs
མཆན་དུ་བཅུག་ནས	to fold your hands across your chest and under armpits	mchan du bcug nas
མཆན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	put into one's bosom	mchan du 'jug pa
མཆན་སྤུ	armpit hair	mchan spu
མཆན་ཕུག	armpit	mchan phug
མཆན་བུ	an apprentice, helper/ minor; apprentice. Syn {mchan 'grel}, annotations	mchan bu
མཆན་བུ་ཀ་བ་དཔལ་བརྩེགས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	mchan bu ka ba dpal brtsegs
མཆན་བུར་བཀོད་པ	annotations	mchan bur bkod pa
མཆན་འབེབས	closing the armpits, to close the armpits, SA rtsa 'dul lnga	mchan 'bebs
མཆན་སྦུག	armpit	mchan sbug
མཆན་མ	breast bosom	mchan ma
མཆན་མ་ལ་འཇུག	put into one's bosom	mchan ma la 'jug
མཆན་རྩེ	armpit	mchan rtse
མཆན་ཞབས	mchan khung 'og ..	mchan zhabs
མཆན་བཟང་སོ་གཉིས	the 32 major marks	mchan bzang so gnyis
མཆན་འོག	armpit, under [the] arm	mchan 'og
མཆན་ཡིག	annotation	mchan yig
མཆམས་མེད་པ	inexpiable mchi} - [p mchis] come, go, appear (eleg) is, will be, say	mchams med pa
མཆི	(tha mi dad pa) mchis pa, mchi ba,, go come say	mchi
མཆི་གུ	rang 'thag gi yas rdo	mchi gu
མཆི་ནར་ཏེ་ཐོན	tears flowed forth continuously	mchi nar te thon
མཆི་བ	(tha mi dad pa) mchis pa, mchi ba,, go come say	mchi ba
མཆི་འབྱིན་འབར་མདེལ	tear gas bomb/ shell/ canister	mchi 'byin 'bar mdel
མཆི་མ	tears; ex {mig nas mchi ma g.yo bzhin} with tears streaming down their faces	mchi ma
མཆི་མ་བཀུ	shed tears	mchi ma bku
མཆི་མ་སྐྱེམ་པ	dry tears	mchi ma skyem pa
མཆི་མ་བསྐུས	x {gos la mchi ma bskus} she smeared some tears on his robes	mchi ma bskus
མཆི་མ་ཁྲ་ཐར	streaming tears	mchi ma khra thar
མཆི་མ་ཁྲིལ་བཞེད	shed tears	mchi ma khril bzhed
མཆི་མ་འཁྲུག་པ	moved to tears	mchi ma 'khrug pa
མཆི་མ་འཁྲུགས	flowing tears, shed tears	mchi ma 'khrugs
མཆི་མ་འཁྲུགས་པ	w flowing tears	mchi ma 'khrugs pa
མཆི་མ་འཁྲུགས་ཤིང	burst into tears	mchi ma 'khrugs shing
མཆི་མ་བསྙིལ	shed tears	mchi ma bsnyil
མཆི་མ་གཏོང	{yi mug mchi ma gtong bzhin gnas so} broke down in tears	mchi ma gtong
མཆི་མ་གཏོང་བ	shed tears, cried, wept, with tears in her eyes	mchi ma gtong ba
མཆི་མ་བཏང་བ	began to cry	mchi ma btang ba
མཆི་མ་ལྟུང་བ	shed tears	mchi ma ltung ba
མཆི་མ་དོར	shedding a tear mchi ma drag tu gtong zhing gsol ba btab	mchi ma dor
མཆི་མ་འདོན	shed tears	mchi ma 'don
མཆི་མ་འདོན་པ	shed tears	mchi ma 'don pa
མཆི་མ་འཕྱི་བ	wipe away tears	mchi ma 'phyi ba
མཆི་མ་འཕྱི་མ	wipe away tears	mchi ma 'phyi ma
མཆི་མ་བྱུང	{mig nas mchi ma byung} were in tears	mchi ma byung
མཆི་མ་བླག་པ	shed tears	mchi ma blag pa
མཆི་མ་འབྱིན་པ	shed tears	mchi ma 'byin pa
མཆི་མ་མང་པོ་ཤོར	many tears poured forth from him	mchi ma mang po shor
མཆི་མ་འཛག	shed tears	mchi ma 'dzag
མཆི་མ་འཛག་པ	dropping of tears mchi ma g.yo ba - mig nas mchi ma dbang med g.yo - unable to contain my tears mchi ma g.yo ba - {mig nas mchi ma g.yo ba} tears fell from their eyes 871 mchi ma g.yo bzhin - mig n...	mchi ma 'dzag pa
མཆི་མ་རིལ་རིལ	drops of tears	mchi ma ril ril
མཆི་མ་ཤོར	shed tears, burst into tears mchi ma lhug mig chu thigs zags pa'i	mchi ma shor
རྣམ་པ	unable to help shedding copious tears	rnam pa
མཆི་མ་ལྷུང་བ	cry, shed tears	mchi ma lhung ba
མཆི་མའི་ཐིག་པ	tear drops	mchi ma'i thig pa
མཆི་མས་གང	{mig mchi mas gang nas ngu ba} bursts into tears, weeping	mchi mas gang
མཆི་མས་བརྣང་བ	be choked with tears, sob violently	mchi mas brnang ba
མཆི་ལག	yes sir, it will do, it will be	mchi lag
མཆིག	a mortar, a pestle	mchig
མཆིག་སྐོར་བ	grind	mchig skor ba
མཆིག་གུ	MG: mill-stone, grinding stone (the one on top). [mss]	mchig gu
མིལལ	stone	mill
མཆིག་པ	(A) skyes pa'i 'bras bu	mchig pa
མཆིག་མ	runner or upper mill-stone	mchig ma
མཆིང	{mching bu}	mching
མཆིང་བུ	1) w various colors &, ljid med pa'i nor bu phal pa * glass ornaments, trinkets; 2) place)	mching bu
མཆིད	1) talk, discourse, speech, discussion [resp]; 2) letter)	mchid
མཆིད་ཀྱིས་བཅད	decided by discussion/ letter	mchid kyis bcad
མཆིད་གང	distance of five fingers	mchid gang
མཆིད་འཇོ་བ	make someone talk/ discuses, pleasant/ beautiful conversation	mchid 'jo ba
མཆིད་འབུལ་བ	talk, have a conversation	mchid 'bul ba
མཆིད་འབོ་བ	(A) beautiful talk	mchid 'bo ba
མཆིད་སྩལ	talk, discourse, speech, discussion [h]	mchid stsal
མཆིད་ཤགས	face to face dispute, argue, debate	mchid shags
མཆིན	liver	mchin
མཆིན་ཀ	liver color	mchin ka
མཆིན་སྐྲན	swollen liver [area]	mchin skran
མཆིན་སྐྲན་ཟུགས་ཆུ	{mchin skran zugs chu disease	mchin skran zugs chu
མཆིན་ཁ	liver color	mchin kha
མཆིན་ཁྲི	diaphragm	mchin khri
མཆིན་གྱ	whitish liver color	mchin gya
མཆིན་གྲུམ་ནག་པོ	{mchin grum nag po disease [mchin nad rigs bco brgyad kyi nang nas lus kun brdung bar snyam and rkang pa bshal la tremble byas tshe na ba dang lus sgur por 'gro ba zhig]	mchin grum nag po
མཆིན་རྒུད	{mchin rgud} disease	mchin rgud
མཆིན་ཆུ	gastric juice	mchin chu
མཆིན་དྲི	midriff, diaphragm	mchin dri
མཆིན་དྲིའི་གསང	8th vertebra diaphragm-connected moxibustion point	mchin dri'i gsang
མཆིན་མདོག	liver color	mchin mdog
མཆིན་རྡོ	basalt (black rock with veins of quartz)	mchin rdo
མཆིན་ནད	liver disease [tsha skyur zas dang drag shul sogs kyis bskyed pa'i mchin nad le brgan dang, ldem bu, dug thabs, chu shor, rkun bu, 'or lhungs, kha lud, gzhung rengs, mchin grum nag po, mchin nad ha...	mchin nad
མཆིན་ནད་རྐུན་བུ	{mchin nad rkun bu disease	mchin nad rkun bu
མཆིན་ནད་ཁ་ལུད	{mchin nad kha lud disease	mchin nad kha lud
མཆིན་ནད་གྲང་བ	{mchin nad grang ba disease [mchin nad rigs bco brgyad kyi nang nas pus mo grang zhing za la ro stod gang snyam byed pa dang, skam glo lu zhing dgye sgur dka' ba zhig]	mchin nad grang ba
མཆིན་ནད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 types of liver disease	mchin nad bco brgyad
མཆིན་ནད་ཆུ་ཤོར	{mchin nad chu shor disease	mchin nad chu shor
མཆིན་ནད་ལྡེམ་བུ	mchin nad bco brgyad kyi nang tshan na ba'i zug rngu mi tshor zhing gnyid yer la zas mi 'dod pa zhig	mchin nad ldem bu
མཆིན་ནད་གཞུང་རེངས	{mchin nad gzhung rengs disease [mchin nad rigs bco brgyad kyi nang tshan rkang lag rengs shing lhu tshigs na ba sogs 'byung ba zhig]	mchin nad gzhung rengs
མཆིན་ནད་འོར་ལྷུངས	{mchin nad 'or lhungs disease	mchin nad 'or lhungs
མཆིན་ནད་ལེ་བརྒན	mchin nad rigs bco brgyad kyi nang tshan rtsib thung gyas gyon thad skrangs shing ro stod gzer ba zhig	mchin nad le brgan
མཆིན་ནད་ཧལ་སྐེམས	{mchin nad hal skems disease	mchin nad hal skems
མཆིན་ནན	liver pressing, keeping the liver in order	mchin nan
མཆིན་ནན་བྱེད་པ	to eat breakfast	mchin nan byed pa
མཆིན་པ	liver, midriff, diaphragm *, a fruit	mchin pa
མཆིན་པ་སྐྱ་རྦབ	{mchin pa skya rbab disease	mchin pa skya rbab
མཆིན་པ་འཁོར་བའི་གསང	a moxibustion point 872	mchin pa 'khor ba'i gsang
མཆིན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	[big liver] negligent	mchin pa chen po
མཆིན་པ་ན་བ	diseased liver	mchin pa na ba
མཆིན་པ་ཞོ་ཤ	{mchin pa zho sha} med. tree	mchin pa zho sha
མཆིན་པ་ཟ་བའི་སྲིན་བུ	liver-eating parasite	mchin pa za ba'i srin bu
མཆིན་པའི་རྩ	liver vein	mchin pa'i rtsa
མཆིན་འབྲས	{mchin 'bras disease	mchin 'bras
མཆིན་སྨུག	maroonish liver color	mchin smug
མཆིན་རྩ་ཆད་རྟགས	mchin pa dang mig 'brel bas nang gi mchin rtsa chad pa'i phyi rtags su mig gyen du ldog la smin ma tshom bur 'khyil bar 'byung ba'i 'chi rtags shig	mchin rtsa chad rtags
མཆིན་ཚ	hepatitis	mchin tsha
མཆིན་ཚད	liver fever	mchin tshad
མཆིན་རི	midriff, diaphragm	mchin ri
མཆིན་གསང	9th vertebra moxibustion point connected w the liver	mchin gsang
མཆིམས	village near bsam yas, tribal family	mchims
མཆིམས་ཕུ	Chimphu	mchims phu
མཆིམས་ཕུ་ཕུག	Chimphu Phuk	mchims phu phug
མཆིམས་ཕུ་བྲག་དམར་དགེ་གོང	Red Rock Cavern of Chimphu	mchims phu brag dmar dge gong
མཆིམས་ཕུ་བྲེ་གུ་དགེའུ	Tregu Cave of Chimphu. A cave at Samye Chimphu	mchims phu bre gu dge'u
མཆིམས་ཕུའི་གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཉེར་ལྔ་ཊྭེནཏཡ	five Great Accomplished Masters of Chimphu. See also {rje 'bangs nyer lnga}	mchims phu'i grub chen nyer lnga Twenty
མཆིམས་ཕུའི་གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཉེར་ལྔ	25 great accomplished masters of chimpu; {rje bdang nyer lnga}, history, ch 4, pp	mchims phu'i grub chen nyer lnga
ཐེ་ཨེ྾ཨཅཏ་ཨེནུམེརཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕི༹ཕ༹ཏཡ	five wise men of yangdzong, the 108 accomplished masters of yerpa and chuwori, the 30 mantra adepts of sheldrak and the 25 d kin s are unknown gdmk)	the exact enumeration of the fifty
མཆིམས་བློ་བཟང་གྲགས་པ	Lobsang Drakpa of Chim	mchims blo bzang grags pa
མཆིམས་བཟའ	princess of mchims who married khri srong lde'u btsan	mchims bza'
མཆིམས་ཤའ་ཀྱ་པྲ་བྷ	Chim Shayaprabha; [was sent to invite Padmasambhava]	mchims sha' kya pra bha
མཆིལ	{mchil ma}	mchil
མཆིལ་ཁྲ	sparrow hawk	mchil khra
མཆིལ་མགོ	fabulous stone resembling sparrow's head	mchil mgo
མཆིལ་རྒན་རྒྱ་བོའི	sgrung Tale of the Old Speckled Sparrow	mchil rgan rgya bo'i
མཆིལ་སྣབས	mucous	mchil snabs
མཆིལ་པ	fishing-hook	mchil pa
མཆིལ་པ་ཡུ་བ་ཅན	hook w handle	mchil pa yu ba can
མཆིལ་པའི་སྒྲུང	Tales of the Sparrow	mchil pa'i sgrung
མཆིལ་པའི་ཤ	sparrow meat animal med.	mchil pa'i sha
མཆིལ་བ	sparrow?, passer montanus linnaeus	mchil ba
མཆིལ་བ་འཐབ་པ	bulbul fight	mchil ba 'thab pa
མཆིལ་མ	saliva, spit, spittle	mchil ma
མཆིལ་མ་གཏོར་ཟིན་པ	spat	mchil ma gtor zin pa
མཆིལ་མ་ལྟར་འདོར་བ	cast out/ repudiate like spit	mchil ma ltar 'dor ba
མཆིལ་མ་ཞིག་མིད་པ	swallow saliva mchil ma g.yug pa - spit mchil ma g.yug srod - spittoon	mchil ma zhig mid pa
མཆིལ་མའི་ཐལ	drops of spit	mchil ma'i thal
མཆིལ་མའི་ཐལ་བ	particles of saliva	mchil ma'i thal ba
མཆིལ་མའི་ཐལ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like spitting in the dirt	mchil ma'i thal ba lta bu
མཆིལ་མའི་སྣོད	spittoon, spitting box	mchil ma'i snod
མཆིལ་མལ	(A) place to stay, sleep	mchil mal
མཆིལ་ལུད	spit [& manure]	mchil lud
མཆིལ་ལྷམ	1) boot, shoe; 2) rab byung gi lham protecting from snakes	mchil lham
མཆིལ་ལྷམ་མཁན	shoemaker, cobbler, seller of boots	mchil lham mkhan
མཆིལ་ལྷམ་གྱི་ཡུ་བ	leg of a boot	mchil lham gyi yu ba
མཆིས	there are; 1) to be, go, there is / are. 2) existential verb used the same as yod pa red. 3) p. of mchi; ((h). yod pa) to have/ is, exists; come	mchis
མཆིས་ཉལ	(A) ra ro ba	mchis nyal
མཆིས་བྲང	housewife, partner, dwelling, abode, domicile, humble residence, bride	mchis brang
མཆིས་བྲང་མ	wife, mistress of the house	mchis brang ma
མཆིས་འབྲང	1) wife; 2) dwelling, abode)	mchis 'brang
མཆིས་མལ	1) dwelling, abode; 2) bed [stead]	mchis mal
མཆིས་རུང	though it may be so	mchis rung
མཆིས་ལགས་པ	be	mchis lags pa
མཆིས་ས་རེ	certainly, indeed, undoubtedly	mchis sa re
མཆིས་སོ་ཆོག	all every[thing][one]	mchis so chog
མཆུ	1) lips, beak; 2) rgyu skar mchu)/*	mchu
མཆུ་རྐང་དམར	w red beak and feet, king of the swans	mchu rkang dmar
མཆུ་སྐྱེས	Venus	mchu skyes
མཆུ་སྒྲོས	SA mchu bsgrigs pa, edge, brim, lip, scar, mark from a wound	mchu sgros
མཆུ་ཅན	having fine lips	mchu can
མཆུ་སྙུང	char sdod byi'u	mchu snyung
མཆུ་ཏོ	lip	mchu to
མཆུ་ཏོ་རྒྱབ་པ	peck	mchu to rgyab pa
མཆུ་ཏོར་བྱུག་ཚོས	lipstick	mchu tor byug tshos
མཆུ་ལྟོ	1) lips; 2) vessel's lips)	mchu lto
མཆུ་ཐོ	lips	mchu tho
མཆུ་རྡོ	beak, bill of a bird	mchu rdo
མཆུ་སྡེ་ལྔ	chapter in sacred book	mchu sde lnga
མཆུ་བརྡ	sign given by moving the lips mchu brdar don med skad cha ma shod don't make meaningless talk/ chatter/ gossip	mchu brda
མཆུ་བརྡར་བ	meaningless verbosity, gossip, talk a lot	mchu brdar ba
མཆུ་ནོན་པ	pointed beak	mchu non pa
མཆུ་རྣོན	sharp beak	mchu rnon
མཆུ་འཕྱང	spout	mchu 'phyang
མཆུ་འཕྱང་བ	long neck hanging down	mchu 'phyang ba
མཆུ་འཕྱོང	spouts, nozzle; one of {'bras bu'i rta babs brgyad}	mchu 'phyong
མཆུ་བ	nya'i mchu ba phug pa pierced the mouths of fish	mchu ba
མཆུ་བ་དམའ་བ	disproportionate lips	mchu ba dma' ba
མཆུ་བ་ལེབ་ལེབ	lips mumbling diligently mchu bim pa ltar dmar ba'i dpe byad minor mark of red lips like a bimpa fruit [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste 'jig rten thams cad gzugs br...	mchu ba leb leb
མཆུ་བིམ་དམར་ལྟ་བུ	Her lips are as red as the bimba fruit	mchu bim dmar lta bu
མཆུ་སྦྲང	(A) flute	mchu sbrang
མཆུ་མེད	one whose lips are very small, one who has no lips	mchu med
མཆུ་དམའ་བ	disproportionate lips	mchu dma' ba
མཆུ་དམར	1) red lips; 2) lord of death	mchu dmar
མཆུ་བཙུམ	close the lips	mchu btsum
མཆུ་འཛུམ་པ	close the lips/ beak	mchu 'dzum pa
མཆུ་ཞེང	length & breadth	mchu zheng
མཆུ་ཟླ	from 16th of the 12th month to the 15th of the 1st,	mchu zla
མཆུ་འོག	moxibustion point under the lips	mchu 'og
མཆུ་རལ	harelip, split lip	mchu ral
མཆུ་རིང	bya mchu ring - hoopoe	mchu ring
མཆུ་རིངས	long-beaked bird, hoopoe, crane, wild boar, long-snout, mosquito	mchu rings
མཆུ་ལ་ཐོགས	carry in the bill or beak	mchu la thogs
མཆུ་ལས་སྐྱེས	Venus	mchu las skyes
མཆུ་ཤྭ	harelip, split lip	mchu shwa
མཆུ་ཤུབས	feed bag for horse etc.	mchu shubs
མཆུ་ཤོ	harelip, split lip	mchu sho
མཆུ་སོར་སྡོམ་པ	sha rngams cung zad srab sar zug pa'i rus pa tshal ba 'don byed kyi skam pa zhig	mchu sor sdom pa
མཆུའི་གཤོང	notch in the upper lip	mchu'i gshong
མཆུས་འཇིབས་པ	suck with the lips	mchus 'jibs pa
མཆེ	canine teeth, fangs	mche
མཆེ་གུག	elephant's tusk	mche gug
མཆེ་གཅིགས	clenched fangs	mche gcigs
མཆེ་སྡེར	teeth and claws of wild animals	mche sder
མཆེ་སྡེར་ཅན་ལ་གཅན་གཟན	predator w fangs and claws	mche sder can la gcan gzan
མཆེ་བ	canine teeth, fangs, tusks [of elephants, pigs etc]	mche ba
མཆེ་བ་དཀར་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of white teeth [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste chos 'dul ba shin tu dkar ba nyid kyis mche ba dkar ba	mche ba dkar ba'i dpe byad
མཆེ་བ་ཅན	/; 1) elephant; 2) [wild] pig; 3) lion; 4) tusked, fanged)	mche ba can
མཆེ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་སྡེ	fanged and tusked animals	mche ba can gyi sde
མཆེ་བ་གཅིག་པ	name of ganapati, son of the goddess uma	mche ba gcig pa
མཆེ་བ་གཆིག་པ	Ganapati [son of the goddess Uma]	mche ba gchig pa
མཆེ་བ་མཉམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of regular teeth	mche ba mnyam pa'i dpe byad
མཆེ་བ་གཏོང་བ	grain seeds putting forth shoots	mche ba gtong ba
མཆེ་བ་སྟོང་ལྔ	SA rnam 'phyo'i bdag po	mche ba stong lnga
མཆེ་བ་སྟོང་ལྡན	having 1,000 teeth, fish	mche ba stong ldan
མཆེ་བ་སྟོབས་ལྡན	having powerful tusks, elephant	mche ba stobs ldan
མཆེ་བ་དུག་ཅན	poisonous fangs/ snake.	mche ba dug can
མཆེ་བ་དྲུག་ལྡན	king of elephants on whom indra rides	mche ba drug ldan
མཆེ་བ་ལྡང་བྱེད	ruminate	mche ba ldang byed
མཆེ་བ་ལྡང་བྱེད་པ	chew the cud	mche ba ldang byed pa
མཆེ་བ་ལྡད་བྱེད་པ	chew the cud	mche ba ldad byed pa
མཆེ་བ་རྣམ་པར་གཙིགས	clenches fangs	mche ba rnam par gtsigs
མཆེ་བ་རྣོ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of sharp teeth.	mche ba rno ba'i dpe byad
མཆེ་བ་གཙིགས་པ	bare the fangs, threaten	mche ba gtsigs pa
མཆེ་བ་ཟླ་ཚེས	sickle-shaped fangs	mche ba zla tshes
མཆེ་བ་ཟླུམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor sign /mark of having round teeth	mche ba zlum pa'i dpe byad
མཆེ་བ་བཟང	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	mche ba bzang
མཆེ་བའི་སྡེ	fanged and tusked animals	mche ba'i sde
མཆེ་གཙིགས	to bear one's fangs, threaten	mche gtsigs
མཆེ་གཙིགས་སྡེར་བགྲད	bare the fangs, and scratch w the claws, threaten, sabre-rattle	mche gtsigs sder bgrad
མཆེ་གཙིགས་པ	show one's teeth, grin	mche gtsigs pa
མཆེད	1) sibling, (relative or spiritual), relative (H); 2) companion, friend; 3) spread/ sweep over, become widespread	mched
མཆེད་གྲོགས	(vajra) siblings and fellow practitioners	mched grogs
མཆེད་གྲོགས་ཆོས་མཛད	vajra relatives and other associates on the path; see {mched grogs} and {chos mdzad}	mched grogs chos mdzad
མཆེད་གྲོགས་དམ་ཚིག	religious brothers, intimate friend	mched grogs dam tshig
མཆེད་གྲོགས་དམ་ཚིག་གཅིག་པ	betrothed brothers	mched grogs dam tshig gcig pa
མཆེད་གྲོགས་མང་པོ་ཚོགས་པར	where many clerical brothers assemble	mched grogs mang po tshogs par
མཆེད་གྲོགས་ལ་དག་སྣང	pure perception of his spiritual friends	mched grogs la dag snang
མཆེད་ལྕམ	brother, sister	mched lcam
མཆེད་ལྕམ་དྲལ	brother and sister	mched lcam dral
མཆེད་ལྕམ་བུ་སློབ	brother and sister disciples	mched lcam bu slob
མཆེད་ཆེ་མིན་པ	very widely spread, very largely	mched che min pa
མཆེད་གཉིས	two brothers	mched gnyis
མཆེད་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	special aphorisms	mched du brjod pa
མཆེད་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa) pervade widely, spread, increase, become many, widen, get bigger, indulge, flare up (about fire), get / fall into, be involved w; 2) [red] diffusive [glow] [Thim rim 'char skabs ...	mched pa
མཆེད་པ་ཉེ་བར	full increase, attainment, full attainment mched pa nye bar mched pa thob pa nye	mched pa nye bar
བར་ཐོབ་པ	increase, full increase, attainment, full attainment mched pa nye bar mched pa thob pa nye	bar thob pa
མཆེད་པ་དམར་ལམ་པའི་སེམས	mind of red increase [in the bardo]	mched pa dmar lam pa'i sems
མཆེད་པ་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྟོང་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the utterly empty luminosity of increase	mched pa shin tu stong pa'i 'od gsal
མཆེད་པད་མར་ལམ་པའི་སེམས	mind of red increase, mind of white appearance	mched pad mar lam pa'i sems
མཆེད་པའི་ཉམས	Experience of increase. The second of the stages of appearance, increase and attainment; {snang mched thob gsum}	mched pa'i nyams
མཆེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	awareness as a spread of light, increase of primordial wisdom, primordial wisdom of progress	mched pa'i ye shes
མཆེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་བཞི་བཅུ	chn	mched pa'i rang bzhin bzhi bcu
མཆེད་པོ	brother	mched po
མཆེད་པོ་རྒན་གཞོན་ཚོ	older and younger brothers	mched po rgan gzhon tsho
མཆེད་པོ་ལྔ	the race that originated from the five early patriarchs of tibet	mched po lnga
མཆེད་མོ	sister	mched mo
མཆེད་ཚུལ	the manner of increase	mched tshul
མཆེད་བཞི	4 divine brothers	mched bzhi
མཆེད་ཟླ	brothers, brother and sister	mched zla
མཆེད་ཡ	spun zla'am spun ya	mched ya
མཆེམས	(not in DAS)	mchems
མཆེར་སྐྲན་ཟགས་ཆུ	water collecting disease arising from swollen spleen	mcher skran zags chu
མཆེར་ནད	spleen disease	mcher nad
མཆེར་པ	spleen [byang khog stod kyi right side, don lnga'i ya gyal zhig ste, its function khrag la sogs pa'i dvangs ma rnams kyi rten byed and zas 'ju ba sogs, the milt]	mcher pa
མཆེར་པ་སྐྱ་རྦབ	{mcher pa skya rbab} disease	mcher pa skya rbab
མཆེར་བ	1 of don lnga	mcher ba
མཆེར་འབྲས	spleen 'bras nad	mcher 'bras
མཆེར་རྩ	rkang pa'i ngar gdong gi rta mthur lta bu nadi connected w the spleen	mcher rtsa
མཆེར་རྩ་ཆད་རྟགས	mcher pa dang mchu 'brel bas nang gi mcher rtsa chad pa'i as external sign the lower lip hangs down la lhen sna nang du rdib par 'gyur ba'i death sign	mcher rtsa chad rtags
མཆེར་གསང	11th vertebra moxibustion point connected w the spleen	mcher gsang
མཆེལ	support, help	mchel
མཆེས་པ	happy advent	mches pa
མཆོ	(not in DAS)	mcho
མཆོ་ཐོ	beak of a bird	mcho tho
མཆོག	* supreme, superior, [most] excellent, eminent, outstanding, foremost, precious, finest, best, highest, sublime. [h]: (in names and titles) at the end	mchog
མཆོག་དཀར	bow	mchog dkar
མཆོག་སྐྱོང	chief protector	mchog skyong
མཆོག་གི	(most) sublime/ excellent; (of the) highest caliber	mchog gi
མཆོག་གི་རྒྱན	chief ornament, pureborn, holy lady	mchog gi rgyan
མཆོག་གི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	a gem, supreme victory banner [see bkra shis rtags brgyad} the eight auspicious signs)	mchog gi rgyal mtshan
མཆོག་གི་ངེས་བསྟན	nges bstan gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, nges pa ston byed dpe'i dngos po 'ga' zhig gis, nges pa bstan bya dpe can gyi dngos po la 'bras bu phan 'dogs ster ba mtshon par byed pa'i rgyan zhig	mchog gi nges bstan
མཆོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	supreme accomplishment; sublime siddhi/ spiritual accomplishment, supreme attainment	mchog gi dngos grub
མཆོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ་མངོན་གྱུར	realized the supreme siddhi	mchog gi dngos grub mngon gyur
མཆོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་པ	attained supreme accomplishment	mchog gi dngos grub thob pa
མཆོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	Syn {sku gsung thugs kyi dngos grub}, 1) {sku'i dngos grub}. 2) {gsung gi dngos grub}, 3) {thugs kyi dngos grub}	mchog gi dngos grub rnam pa gsum
མཆོག་གི་ལྕུག་མ	excellent woman, chief lady of a family	mchog gi lcug ma
མཆོག་གི་ཆོས་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	abide within/ enter into/ consist of the supreme dharma	mchog gi chos la zhugs pa
མཆོག་གི་ཆོས་ལ་ཤུགས་པ	to have entered the sublime Dharma	mchog gi chos la shugs pa
མཆོག་གི་མཆོག	[syn: skyes bu dang, khyu mchog gong ma, gong ma'i gong ma, gya nom pa, glang po, cang shes pa, che shos, chen po, ches che ba, mchog gi mchog stag dang seng ge, dang po, pad ma dkar, dpa' bo, dpon...	mchog gi mchog
མཆོག་གི་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	the ultimate of all sublime [qualities / teachings / masters]	mchog gi mthar thug pa
མཆོག་གི་དང་པོའི	SA kun tu bzang po, rnam par snang mdzad, rdo rje 'chang, rdo rje sems dpa', rdo rje las, rdo rje chos sangs rgyas, the supreme adibuddha	mchog gi dang po'i
མཆོག་གི་དང་པོའི་སངས་རྒྱས	supreme primordial buddha	mchog gi dang po'i sangs rgyas
མཆོག་གི་དམ་པ	sublime, holy one	mchog gi dam pa
མཆོག་གི་དོན་ཆོས་ལ་བདག་མེད་པ	the supreme topic, the egolessness of dharmas	mchog gi don chos la bdag med pa
སུཔྲེམེ་མེཨནིང	the absence of a	supreme meaning
མཆོག་གི་བདག	supreme lord, lord of the best, chief noble/ lama	mchog gi bdag
མཆོག་གི་བདུད་རྩི	the best elixir, a medicine	mchog gi bdud rtsi
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	supreme nirmanakaya [gdul bya thun mong ba'i snang ngor mdzad pa bcu gnyis kyi tshul bstan te 'gro ba 'dul ba'i sku'i rnam par sprul pa'o]	mchog gi sprul sku
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་གཅིག་གི་འདུལ་ཞིང	the domain of influence of a single supreme nirmanakaya mchog gi sprul sku gcig gi 'dul zhing realm to be tamed by a single supreme nirmanakaya	mchog gi sprul sku gcig gi 'dul zhing
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་སྟོང་རྩ	One Thousand Supreme Emanation Bodies	mchog gi sprul sku stong rtsa
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་གསུམ	three supreme emanations [nyangrel nyima "zer, guru chöwang, and rikdzin godemcen see mkhyen brtse on history, pp 41-42 (gdmk)	mchog gi sprul sku gsum
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་པ	supreme emanation	mchog gi sprul pa
མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	supreme nirmanakaya	mchog gi sprul pa'i sku
མཆོག་གི་ཕུར་པ	supreme phurpas; terma phurpa and the phurpa made of meteoric metal	mchog gi phur pa
མཆོག་གི་མ	chief mother, epithet of the goddess sgrol ma	mchog gi ma
མཆོག་གི་ཚལ	bza' shing gi ra ba	mchog gi tshal
མཆོག་གི་ཟུང	the foremost follower of greatness, the two foremost followers of Buddha Shakyamuni	mchog gi zung
མཆོག་གི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་བདུན	supreme seven precious articles [TRS 73-6]	mchog gi rin po che sna bdun
མཆོག་གི་ལས་སྦྱོར	most eminent of the activities	mchog gi las sbyor
མཆོག་གི་སེམས་ཅན	possessing the most sublime attitude	mchog gi sems can
མཆོག་གི་བསམ་པ	excellent thoughts	mchog gi bsam pa
མཆོག་གིས	to his heart's content	mchog gis
མཆོག་གྱུར	best, most, outstanding	mchog gyur
མཆོག་གྱུར་གླིང་པ	Chokgyur Lingpa1829-1870. The great tertön who revealed numerous terma teachings especially the cycle of Lamey Tukdrub Barchey Künsel	mchog gyur gling pa
མཆོག་གྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང	supreme blissful sanctuary	mchog gyur bde chen gling
མཆོག་གྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa	mchog gyur bde chen gling pa
མཆོག་གྱུར་པ	supreme, best, most, outstanding	mchog gyur pa
མཆོག་གྱུར་ལུས	eminent body	mchog gyur lus
མཆོག་གྲུབ	total fulfillment	mchog grub
མཆོག་གླིང་གཏེར་གསར	Chokling Tersar. The collection of termas revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa together with Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye	mchog gling gter gsar
མཆོག་གླིང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Chokling Rinpoche, there are two incarnation lineages. Kela (or Tsikey) Chokling and Neten Chokling, named after the two main monasteries of Chokgyur Lingpa. The second Kela Chokling was named Konc...	mchog gling rin po che
མཆོག་དགའ	sublime joy	mchog dga'
མཆོག་དགའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of supreme joy	mchog dga'i ye shes
ཏོ་ཐེ་པྲིསྟིནེ་ཅོགནིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་སུཔྲེམེ་དེལིགྷཏ་གད	mk)	to the pristine cognition of supreme delight Gd
མཆོག་འགྱུར	{mchog gyur}	mchog 'gyur
མཆོག་འགྱུར་གླིང་པ	{mchog gyur gling pa} {gter ston} 1829-1870	mchog 'gyur gling pa
མཆོག་འགྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	{mchog gyur bde chen gling pa} 1829-1870 Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa, tertön	mchog 'gyur bde chen gling pa
མཆོག་རྒའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of supreme	mchog rga'i ye shes
མཆོག་སྒྱུར	utmost	mchog sgyur
མཆོག་བརྒྱད	[TRS 104-1] panditas; [TRS 72-5] disciples of the Buddha	mchog brgyad
མཆོག་མངའ	complete knowledge	mchog mnga'
མཆོག་ཅན	1 of 27 coincidences in astrology, SA sbyor ba nyer bdun, silver imported from khorasan	mchog can
མཆོག་གཅིག	single supreme ingredient (menstrual blood of a virgin; me tog gi mdas ma phog pa'i khams sam dwangs ma dmar po; the red liquid which has never been struck by the flowery arrow)	mchog gcig
མཆོག་ཆེན་ད་མ་རུ	great supreme damaru; made out of the skulls for two great masters	mchog chen da ma ru
མཆོག་མཆོག	the best, the most, the most excellent of its kind	mchog mchog
མཆོག་ཉལ	#	mchog nyal
མཆོག་ཉིད	excellence, highest possible state, you	mchog nyid
མཆོག་གཉིས	two supreme ones, Nagarjuna & Asanga	mchog gnyis
མཆོག་ཏུ	very, supremely	mchog tu
མཆོག་ཏུ་དཀའ་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Pramuditraja	mchog tu dka' ba'i rgyal po
མཆོག་ཏུ་བཀྲབ	exquisite choice	mchog tu bkrab
མཆོག་ཏུ་བཀྲབས	the chosen	mchog tu bkrabs
མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར	see {mchog}	mchog tu gyur
མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ་ཉིད	eminence, prominence, illustriousness, notability,	mchog tu gyur pa nyid
པྲེ	eminence	pre
མཆོག་ཏུ་དགའ་བ	supreme joy	mchog tu dga' ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	will be eminent	mchog tu 'gyur
མཆོག་ཏུ་འགྲོ	become great, be exalted	mchog tu 'gro
མཆོག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	become great, attain the position of the great, be elevated to an exalted position	mchog tu 'gro ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་རྒྱན་པ	be very well-dressed	mchog tu rgyan pa
མཆོག་ཏུ་མངའ་བ	possessing excellence	mchog tu mnga' ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་དད་པ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	developed great devotion for	mchog tu dad pa skyes te
མཆོག་ཏུ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	to become very prosperous	mchog tu phun sum tshogs pa
མཆོག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར	immutable	mchog tu mi 'gyur
མཆོག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ	the most excellent unchanging and great vajra bliss	mchog tu mi 'gyur bde chen rdo rje
མཆོག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེའི	supreme unchanging great bliss vajra	mchog tu mi 'gyur bde chen rdo rje'i
མཆོག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར་བ	utterly unchanging	mchog tu mi 'gyur ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་བདེ་བ	supreme immutable bliss	mchog tu mi 'gyur ba'i bde ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་མཛེས་པ	lustrous, very handsome, extremely beautiful	mchog tu mdzes pa
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན	to hold in esteem, regard as great	mchog tu 'dzin
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་གཉིས	two types of holding to be paramount	mchog tu 'dzin gnyis
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	hold to be paramount, think [one's view] is much better than others, esteem	mchog tu 'dzin pa
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ་གཉིས	two types of holding to be paramount	mchog tu 'dzin pa gnyis
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	view of grasping as supreme	mchog tu 'dzin pa'i lta ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་བ	hold to be paramount	mchog tu 'dzin ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་ཞི་བ	supreme peace	mchog tu zhi ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་ཟབ་པ	most supreme	mchog tu zab pa
མཆོག་ཏུ་ཡིད་ཐད	very pleasant, exquisite	mchog tu yid thad
མཆོག་ཏུ་ཡིད་འཐད	exquisite, very pleasant	mchog tu yid 'thad
མཆོག་ཏུ་རིང་བ	very remote	mchog tu ring ba
མཆོག་ཏུ་བསམ་པ	well thought of	mchog tu bsam pa
མཆོག་གཏེར	supreme treasure	mchog gter
མཆོག་ཐུན	supreme and ordinary	mchog thun
མཆོག་ཐུན་དངོས་གྲུབ	ordinary and supreme siddhi	mchog thun dngos grub
མཆོག་ཐུན་དངོས་གྲུབ་སྒྲུབས་ཤིག	accomplish the supreme and common siddhis!	mchog thun dngos grub sgrubs shig
མཆོག་ཐུན་མོང	ordinary and extraordinary mchog thun mong gi dngos grub brnyes	mchog thun mong
མཆོག་ཐོབ	magnolia	mchog thob
མཆོག་མཐུན་གྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	ordinary and extraordinary siddhis	mchog mthun gyi dngos grub
མཆོག་དག་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	to embrace all that is the most excellent	mchog dag la sbyor ba
མཆོག་དང་ཐུན་མོང	sublime and more common	mchog dang thun mong
གྲུབ་མ་ལུས་པ་བརྙེས་པའི་མགོན	lord who has attained all the supreme and ordinary siddhis	grub ma lus pa brnyes pa'i mgon
མཆོག་དང་ཕལ་པ	the great and the vulgar	mchog dang phal pa
མཆོག་དམ་པ	especially good/ noble, best of the best	mchog dam pa
མཆོག་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	best, most, outstanding	mchog du 'gyur ba
མཆོག་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་མནའ་མཐུན	holy alliance	mchog du 'gyur ba'i mna' mthun
མཆོག་བདག	the earth, supreme nature, supreme master	mchog bdag
མཆོག་བདེ	fish	mchog bde
མཆོག་འདོད	maintained as supreme, the sun	mchog 'dod
མཆོག་ལྡན	1) #...2) {mngon) gur gum,..	mchog ldan
མཆོག་ལྡན་མགོན་པོ	sprul sku - an embodiment of rdo rje gling pa from lho	mchog ldan mgon po
བྲག	details: rnam thar mgur 'bum dad ldan spro ba bskyed byed	brag
མཆོག་ལྡན་མ	1) bud med mchog; 2) chang, liquor)	mchog ldan ma
མཆོག་གནས	Bhrama	mchog gnas
མཆོག་སྤྲུལ	reincarnated lama/ tulku, supreme emanation, nirmanakaya buddha	mchog sprul
མཆོག་ཕྲན་ད་མ་རུ	lesser supreme damaru; made out of the skull of khenpo's (mkhan po) or dorje lobpön's (rdo rje slob dpon)	mchog phran da ma ru
མཆོག་དབང	supreme/ excellent abhisheka	mchog dbang
མཆོག་དབང་གོང་མ་གསུམ	the three higher supreme abhishekas	mchog dbang gong ma gsum
མཆོག་དབང་གསུམ	three supreme empowerments. The three profound empowerments are also called the three supreme empowerments. They are the secret empowerment (gsang dbang), the wisdom empowerment (sher dbang) and th...	mchog dbang gsum
མཆོག་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ	higher, middling and lower	mchog 'bring tha ma
མཆོག་སྦྱིན	god of water, quicksilver, supreme offering mudra	mchog sbyin
མཆོག་སྦྱིན་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra of supreme generosity [phyag gyas pus mo'i steng gyen du bkan pa	mchog sbyin gyi phyag rgya
མཆོག་སྦྱིན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	gesture made in practicing magic to conjure up ghosts	mchog sbyin phyag rgya
མཆོག་སྦྱིན་མ	{go dum pa} med.	mchog sbyin ma
མཆོག་སྦྱིན་མཛོད	grant me the supreme gift!	mchog sbyin mdzod
མཆོག་སྦྱོར	unite the principal ones, mix the chief ingredients (of a medicine)	mchog sbyor
མཆོག་སྦྱོར་བ	unite the principal ones, mix up the chief ingredients of medicines	mchog sbyor ba
མཆོག་མ	most excellent one	mchog ma
མཆོག་མ་གཉིས	the two bow tips	mchog ma gnyis
མཆོག་མིན་ངེས་བསྟན	nges bstan gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, nges pa ston byed dpe'i dngos po 'ga' zhig gis nges pa bstan bya dpe can gyi dngos	mchog min nges bstan
མཆོག་མོས་པ	supreme aspiration of absolute reality	mchog mos pa
མཆོག་དམན	high or low	mchog dman
མཆོག་དམན་གྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	the higher and lower vehicles [theg pa gnyis, hinay na and mah y na	mchog dman gyi sde snod
མཆོག་དམན་གྱི་དབྱེ་བ	difference of high and low	mchog dman gyi dbye ba
མཆོག་དམན་གྱི་འཛིན་པ	to hold the notion of high and low	mchog dman gyi 'dzin pa
མཆོག་དམན་བར་གསུམ	good and bad/ superior and inferior/ special and ordinary/ high and low [people]/ and in between	mchog dman bar gsum
མཆོག་དམན་འབྲིང་གསུམ	superiors, inferiors, and equals	mchog dman 'bring gsum
མཆོག་དམན་མང་པོ	many people, high and low	mchog dman mang po
མཆོག་དམན་ཡོངས	of all levels	mchog dman yongs
མཆོག་མཛེས	most beautiful, good and beautiful	mchog mdzes
མཆོག་འཛིན	Syn {mchog tu 'dzin ba}	mchog 'dzin
མཆོག་འཛིན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	superiority feeling, idea, concept of superiority	mchog 'dzin gyi 'du shes
མཆོག་འཛིན་གཉིས	two types of holding to be paramount	mchog 'dzin gnyis
མཆོག་བཞི	the four supreme things	mchog bzhi
མཆོག་ཟུང	model pair, the two most excellent amongst buddha's disciples (sariputra and maudgalyayana)	mchog zung
མཆོག་ཟུང་གཉིས	the Suprme Pair [two main disciples of buddha shariputra and maudgaly yana) shes rab kyi mchog sh' ri'i bu dang, rdzu 'phrul gyi mchog mo'u 'gal gyi bu ste gnyis	mchog zung gnyis
མཆོག་འོད	SK grammarian, {mchog srid}	mchog 'od
མཆོག་ཡས	#, puvara	mchog yas
མཆོག་རབ	supreme	mchog rab
མཆོག་ལ་སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to the supreme refuge	mchog la skyabs su 'gro ba
མཆོག་ཤེས	wisdom	mchog shes
མཆོག་སེམས	saint, purified soul, god of water	mchog sems
མཆོག་སྲིད	celebrated sanskrit grammarian, great buddhist sage who composed the pali grammar, 1 of 9 sages who adorned the court of king vikramaditya	mchog srid
མཆོག་སྲེད	a learned Indian Bhramin	mchog sred
མཆོག་གསུམ	3 jewels, the three most precious ones, SA dkon mchog gsum	mchog gsum
མཆོག་གསུམ་གྱི་རྟེན་མདུན་དུ	in the presence of a representation of the Three Jewels	mchog gsum gyi rten mdun du
མཆོག་གསུམ་དཔང་འཕེར	the three jewels mna' dpang la 'dzugs 'pher ba [bear witness to?] mchog gsum rtsa ba gsum la dad gus gyis - have faith and respect in the Three Jewels and the Three Roots.	mchog gsum dpang 'pher
མཆོགས་དག་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	unite the principle ingredients	mchogs dag la sbyor ba
མཆོང	(p {mtshongs} -}-jump, leap, gem [said to cure paralysis = {chong} dkar la sngo mdangs chags pa phyi nang mi sgrib pa zhig ste, nus pas gza' nad dang, gdon gzer sogs la phan	mchong
མཆོང་བསྐྱོད	leap, advancement	mchong bskyod
མཆོང་བསྐྱོད་ཆེན་པོ	Great Leap Forward [campaign]	mchong bskyod chen po
མཆོང་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	leap forward, advance	mchong bskyod byed
མཆོང་འགྲིགས་མིག་མང	checkers	mchong 'grigs mig mang
མཆོང་འགྲིགས་མིག་མངས	checkers	mchong 'grigs mig mangs
མཆོང་འགྲོ	jump/ leap/ dash into, advance	mchong 'gro
མཆོང་རྒྱག	jump, leap, compete in jumping	mchong rgyag
མཆོང་རྒྱག་འགྲན་བསྡུར	jumping competition	mchong rgyag 'gran bsdur
མཆོང་རྒྱག་རྒྱག	jump, leap, compete in jumping	mchong rgyag rgyag
མཆོང་རྒྱག་འཕེན་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩལ	track and field sports, jumping and throwing mchong rgyag 'phen gsum gyi rtsal 'gran compete in track and field sports	mchong rgyag 'phen gsum gyi rtsal
མཆོང་རྒྱག་མིག་མང	checkers	mchong rgyag mig mang
མཆོང་རྒྱག་མིག་མངས	checkers	mchong rgyag mig mangs
མཆོང་རྒྱུག	'phar bzhin bang rtsal glod pa'i 'gro stangs	mchong rgyug
མཆོང་ཆེན་སྡེ་དགུ	nine actions of the great Chong	mchong chen sde dgu
མཆོང་སྟེགས	jumping platform, diving board	mchong stegs
མཆོང་གདུགས	parachute	mchong gdugs
མཆོང་གདུགས་དམབ	airborne troops	mchong gdugs dmab
མཆོང་འདུམ	SA 'dum bu	mchong 'dum
མཆོང་པ	worship	mchong pa
མཆོང་འཕེན་རྩལ་འགྲན	compete in track and field sports	mchong 'phen rtsal 'gran
མཆོང་བ	jump, rush, dash, hop, leap, plunge, pounce, skip, vault, leap up, bathe in water	mchong ba
མཆོང་འབུ	locust	mchong 'bu
མཆོང་འཛིན	storm, assault, rush [attack]	mchong 'dzin
མཆོང་འཛིན་བྱེད	storm, assault, rush [attack]	mchong 'dzin byed
མཆོང་འཛིན་སྦག་སྦག	light machine gun	mchong 'dzin sbag sbag
མཆོང་ཟམ	diving board	mchong zam
མཆོང་ར	field for jumping events	mchong ra
མཆོངས	leap up, SA mchong ba, to jump	mchongs
མཆོངས་འགྲོས	mchong lding way of walking	mchongs 'gros
མཆོངས་རྒྱག་རྒྱག	(p {mtshongs},, jump, leap	mchongs rgyag rgyag
མཆོངས་རྒྱག་ལུས་རྩེད	track and field sports, jumping and throwing	mchongs rgyag lus rtsed
མཆོངས་རྒྱགས་ལུས་རྩལ	track and field sports, jumping and throwing	mchongs rgyags lus rtsal
མཆོངས་རྒྱུག	jumping and running	mchongs rgyug
མཆོངས་སྟེགས	jumping platform, diving board	mchongs stegs
མཆོངས་པ	[p mchong ba] jumped	mchongs pa
མཆོངས་རྩལ	jumping sports events	mchongs rtsal
མཆོངས་རྩལ་གྱི་འགྲན་སྡུར	jumping competition	mchongs rtsal gyi 'gran sdur
མཆོད་ཀོང	lamp	mchod kong
མཆོད་ཁ	charnel ground	mchod kha
མཆོད་ཁང	chapel, temple, shrine room, shrine	mchod khang
མཆོད་ཁང་སྒོ	chapel door	mchod khang sgo
མཆོད་ཁར	sacrificial dances	mchod khar
མཆོད་ཁྲི	offering seat. Syn. dkyil 'khor - mchod stegs - mchod bshams mchod gshom	mchod khri
མཆོད་གམ	shrine box, alter	mchod gam
མཆོད་གར	sacrificial dances	mchod gar
མཆོད་གྱོག	assistant chöpp"n, shrine assistant (at ceremonies) [cho ga gtong mkhan gyi grwa pa'i ja zhu lto gtong sogs kyi las gyog byed mkhan	mchod gyog
མཆོད་གྲལ	row of offerings	mchod gral
མཆོད་སྒམ	shrine box, alter, coffin	mchod sgam
མཆོད་སྒྲོམ	chest for religious articles	mchod sgrom
མཆོད་སྔགས	offering mantra	mchod sngags
མཆོད་ཅན	bowl	mchod can
མཆོད་ཅིང་བཀུར་བ	to venerate and respect	mchod cing bkur ba
མཆོད་ཅིང་བསྟོད་པ	made offerings and praise mchod cing zhabs la phyag 'tshal ba making offerings and bowing to the feet of	mchod cing bstod pa
མཆོད་ལྕོག	Syn {mchod stegs}	mchod lcog
མཆོད་ཆ	shrine objects / articles / materials	mchod cha
མཆོད་ཆ་ལ་གཟོབ་པ་ཡིན	assiduous in religious observances	mchod cha la gzob pa yin
མཆོད་ཆང	chang, liquor (H)	mchod chang
མཆོད་ཆའི་སྐོར	paraphernalia of worship	mchod cha'i skor
མཆོད་ཆས	utensils used in offerings	mchod chas
མཆོད་ཆོག	religious ceremonies	mchod chog
མཆོད་མཆོག	grand religious service, principal service, name of Indra	mchod mchog
མཆོད་མཇལ	religious visit	mchod mjal
མཆོད་མཇལ་ཞུ	1) to the rten gsum having made homage and offering blessing zhu ba; 2) visit a monastery /temple	mchod mjal zhu
མཆོད་བརྗོད	[expression of] worship	mchod brjod
མཆོད་བརྗོད་རབ་གསལ	see {'brug lugs kyi mchod brjod rab gsal}	mchod brjod rab gsal
མཆོད་ཉིད	is worthy of being worshipped	mchod nyid
མཆོད་ཏིང	vessel for offering offering water into	mchod ting
མཆོད་གཏོར	offering torma (mchod gtor), also called sadhana torma (sgrub gtor), is presented to the deities at the time of making offerings.	mchod gtor
མཆོད་གཏོར་འབུལ་བ	to give an offering torma	mchod gtor 'bul ba
མཆོད་གཏོར་འབུལ་ཚུལ	rituals for the propitiation of various protective deities	mchod gtor 'bul tshul
མཆོད་རྟེན་དཀར་པོ	White Stupa, landmark at the border between Domey and China mchod rten bskor ba'i phan yon gyi mdo Sutra on the Benefits of Circumambulating Stupas	mchod rten dkar po
མཆོད་རྟེན་གྱི་འཁོར་ས	stupa's external perimeter	mchod rten gyi 'khor sa
མཆོད་རྟེན་གྱི་ཆ་དབྱེ་བ་བཅུ	[chn]	mchod rten gyi cha dbye ba bcu
མཆོད་རྟེན་གྱི་བང་རིམ	upper pedestal of buddhist votive tomb	mchod rten gyi bang rim
མཆོད་རྟེན་གྱི་རྩེར་དོ་ཤལ་ཕུལ	offered a crystal for the top of a stupa	mchod rten gyi rtser do shal phul
མཆོད་རྟེན་གྱི་སྲོག་ཤིང	pole in a mchod rten	mchod rten gyi srog shing
མཆོད་རྟེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 st pas, GD a deity	mchod rten brgyad
མཆོད་རྟེན་བསྒྲུབ་པ་ཉི་ཤུ	[chn]	mchod rten bsgrub pa nyi shu
མཆོད་རྟེན་བཅུ་གཅིག	[chn]	mchod rten bcu gcig
མཆོད་རྟེན་ཆ་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of stupas [rgyal ba'i mchod rten cha brgyad ces grags pa ste, ston pa'i mdzad pa khyad par can gtso bor gyur pa dag bstan pa'i tshe yul ljongs so so'i skye bo rnams kyis mchod rten brts...	mchod rten cha brgyad
མཆོད་རྟེན་ཆེན་པོ	Great stupa	mchod rten chen po
གྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཐོས་པས་གྲོལ་བ	Liberating History of the Great Stupa Jarung Khashor by Lhatsün Ngönmo (gter ston lha btsun sngon mo, lha dbang rgya mtsho blo gros). Description of the Great Stupa Jarung Khashor, revealed by Saky...	gyi lo rgyus thos pas grol ba
མཆོད་རྟེན་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	[chn]	mchod rten chen po bzhi
མཆོད་རྟེན་འཇིག་པ	destroying a stupa [one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye ba lnga}, = five nearly boundless offenses	mchod rten 'jig pa
མཆོད་རྟེན་ཉི་མ་ལ	in S gam pa rdzong mchod rten nor bu las grub pa bzhengs	mchod rten nyi ma la
མཆོད་རྟེན་རྣམ་དག	Stupa of Great Purity, in front of which prince Gautama renounced the world	mchod rten rnam dag
མཆོད་རྟེན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the Three Stupas [in Nepal, ({'phags pa shing kun}, Swayambhunath, {bya rung kha shor}, Boudhanath, {stag mo lus sbyin}, Namobuddha]	mchod rten rnam gsum
མཆོད་རྟེན་པ	former Indian hinayana grub mtha' smra ba zhig	mchod rten pa
སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་པའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	told him the story of how the stupa of Jarung Khashor had been built and the prayers that were made at that time	smon lam btab pa'i lo rgyus
མཆོད་རྟེན་བྱི་བོ	rtse mo'am tog med pa'i mchod rten	mchod rten byi bo
མཆོད་རྟེན་བྱེད	elephant	mchod rten byed
མཆོད་རྟེན་དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྩིག	pyramid	mchod rten dbyibs kyi rdo rtsig
མཆོད་རྟེན་དམར་པོ	Red Stupa, Samye	mchod rten dmar po
མཆོད་རྟེན་བཞེངས	{rjes su de'i mchod rten bzhengs nas} later he raised a stupa for that [pratyekabuddha] mchod rten la mjug stegs 'cha' zhing 'dug	mchod rten bzhengs
མཆོད་རྟེན་ཤིང	bodhi tree	mchod rten shing
ཕི༹ག	tree	fig
མཆོད་རྟེན་བཤིགས་པ	to destroy a stupa	mchod rten bshigs pa
མཆོད་རྟེན་གསུམ	the three stupas [in nepal, {'phags pa shing kun} swayambhunath, {bya rung kha shor bodhanath, {stag mo lus sbyin} namobuddha)	mchod rten gsum
མཆོད་སྟེགས	trestle, offering table, altar, offering frame	mchod stegs
མཆོད་སྟོད	offering with a hymn of praise	mchod stod
མཆོད་སྟོན	entertainment as a sort of libation given to priests	mchod ston
མཆོད་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	{bcom ldan 'das la mchod ston bsam gyis mi khyab pa byas pa} made innumerable offerings to the Bhagavan	mchod ston byed pa
མཆོད་བརྟེན	{mchod rten} 1) stupa. 2) any object of religious worship [e.g. statue]	mchod brten
མཆོད་བསྟོད	cults of offering and praise to worldly deities	mchod bstod
མཆོད་བསྟོད་བཀུར	to make offerings, prayers, and render service mchod bstod gtor bsngos phrin bcol gyi	mchod bstod bkur
རིམ་པ	collected rituals for the propitiation	rim pa
མཆོད་བསྟོད་གསོལ	to make offerings and praises 881	mchod bstod gsol
མཆོད་ཐབས	offering text, method of worship	mchod thabs
མཆོད་ཐིགས	offering drops [offer drops of ghee into the mouth of lamps offered by others	mchod thigs
མཆོད་ཐིབ	offering-pellets, ampulla containing a mixture of offering articles	mchod thib
མཆོད་ཐེབ་ཀྱི་མ་རྩ	capital for merchandise	mchod theb kyi ma rtsa
མཆོད་ཐེབས	mchod rgyun gyi dmigs thebs te dus mchod lta bu'i ched du bzhag pa'i ma dngul and various things	mchod thebs
མཆོད་ཐོབ	tea butter etc required for offerings kyi thob cha'am tshad gzhi	mchod thob
མཆོད་ལྡན	the sun	mchod ldan
མཆོད་ལྡན་མ	epithet of uma	mchod ldan ma
མཆོད་སྡོང	shrine, tomb, stupa	mchod sdong
མཆོད་སྡོང་ཅན	chu'i bya gag, a kind of water bird	mchod sdong can
མཆོད་སྡོང་ཆེན་པོ	the bodhi tree, the great offering tree	mchod sdong chen po
མཆོད་ནས	lha la mchod gtor bya rgyu'i mchod 'bru'am 'thor nas	mchod nas
མཆོད་གནས	objects to which offerings are made, officiating priest, great object of worship or adoration, something sacred	mchod gnas
མཆོད་གནས་བྱ་བ	to make an object of veneration	mchod gnas bya ba
མཆོད་གནས་མཛད་པ	to act as the court chaplain, be the officiating court priest	mchod gnas mdzad pa
མཆོད་པ་ཁང	1) place puja things are kept; 2) shrine hall)	mchod pa khang
མཆོད་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 offerings	mchod pa brgyad
མཆོད་པ་ཆེན་པ་བཞི	four great cycles of worship	mchod pa chen pa bzhi
མཆོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཕུལ	made great offerings	mchod pa chen po phul
མཆོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཕུལ་བས	as a result of those great offerings	mchod pa chen po phul bas
མཆོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	Four Great Cycles of Worship, introduced by King Muney Tseypo: Vinaya and Abhidharma at Lhasa and Tramdruk, and those of the Sutras and Abhisambodhi i.e. the pitaka of the awareness holders at Samye	mchod pa chen po bzhi
མཆོད་པ་བརྗོད་པ	expressions of reverence	mchod pa brjod pa
མཆོད་པ་གཉིས	chn	mchod pa gnyis
མཆོད་པ་བསྟོད་པ	offerings and praises	mchod pa bstod pa
མཆོད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	respectable mchod pa dang ldan pa'i theg pa chen	mchod pa dang ldan pa
པོའི་ཆོས	the admirable / excellent Mahayana teachings	po'i chos
མཆོད་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	various offerings /pujas	mchod pa sna tshogs
མཆོད་པ་པོ	worshiper, the one who makes offerings	mchod pa po
མཆོད་པ་བྱས་པ	to be deluged with offerings	mchod pa byas pa
མཆོད་པ་བྱེད་འདོད	wished to make an offering	mchod pa byed 'dod
མཆོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	honor	mchod pa byed pa
མཆོད་པ་འབུལ	dngos 'byor yid sprul	mchod pa 'bul
མཆོད་པ་འབུལ་བ	to make offerings	mchod pa 'bul ba
མཆོད་པ་མེད་པ	to have nothing material to offer	mchod pa med pa
མཆོད་པ་བཞི	the four offerings	mchod pa bzhi
མཆོད་པ་ལ་འཇུག	making offerings	mchod pa la 'jug
མཆོད་པ་བཤམས	made preparations for a religious service	mchod pa bshams
མཆོད་པ་གསུམ	the threefold offering: of wealth, service, and practice; {zang zing gi nor} wealth, {lus ngag gi zhabs tog} service [in words and deeds], and {bka' bzhin sgrub pa} practice	mchod pa gsum
མཆོད་པའི་ཁྱད་པར་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of offerings	mchod pa'i khyad par bcu
མཆོད་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	1 of yoga tantra sgom pa cho 'phrul bzhi, to the deities giving homage, offerings and praises	mchod pa'i cho 'phrul
མཆོད་པའི་གཉེར་གཏད	entrustment of worshipers; entrust to the worshipers	mchod pa'i gnyer gtad
མཆོད་པའི་གནས	SA mchod gnas	mchod pa'i gnas
མཆོད་པའི་སྤྲིན	clouds of offerings	mchod pa'i sprin
མཆོད་པའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	offering mudra	mchod pa'i phyag rgya
མཆོད་པའི་འབུལ་བ	worship	mchod pa'i 'bul ba
མཆོད་པའི་ཚིགས	offering liturgy	mchod pa'i tshigs
མཆོད་པའི་རྫས	offering substance / materials	mchod pa'i rdzas
མཆོད་པའི་འོས	suitable to worship	mchod pa'i 'os
མཆོད་པའི་འོས་པ	worthy to be honored {btsun mo blon 'bangs thams cad kyis mchod pa'i 'os yin pa} worthy to be honored by everyone: his wife and ministers and all the people of the land	mchod pa'i 'os pa
མཆོད་པའི་ཡུལ	receptacle for worship	mchod pa'i yul
མཆོད་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	offering/ worship implements	mchod pa'i yo byad
མཆོད་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད་བཤམས་སོ	prepared offerings	mchod pa'i yo byad bshams so
མཆོད་པའི་རས་མ	morsel of offering. The 'morsel of offering' is the pure residual offering.	mchod pa'i ras ma
ཕམ་ཕབ	pha 'bab mchod pa'i rim gro chen po bsgrubs pa used these offerings to propitiate	pham phab
མཆོད་པའི་ལྷ་མོ	offering goddesses GD	mchod pa'i lha mo
མཆོད་པའི་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	the eight offering goddesses [TRS 126-4]	mchod pa'i lha mo brgyad
མཆོད་པའི་ལྷ་མོ་བཅུ་དྲུག	[chn]	mchod pa'i lha mo bcu drug
མཆོད་པར་བརྗོད་པ	SA mchod brjod	mchod par brjod pa
མཆོད་པར་བྱ་བ	to be offered	mchod par bya ba
མཆོད་པར་བྱས	made an offering	mchod par byas
མཆོད་པར་བྱེད	make an offering, offerer	mchod par byed
མཆོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	honored mchod par byed pa dang mchod par bya	mchod par byed pa
བ་དང་མཆོད་པ་མི་དམིགས་པ	have no conception of offerer, thing offered, and act of offering	ba dang mchod pa mi dmigs pa
མཆོད་པར་འབུལ	make an offering (h)	mchod par 'bul
མཆོད་པར་འོས་པ	worthy of offerings/ veneration/ respect/ worship	mchod par 'os pa
མཆོད་པར་འོས་པ་གསུམ	the three who are worthy of veneration {bla ma / mkhan po /} elders]	mchod par 'os pa gsum
མཆོད་དཔོན	person taking care of mandala bestowing and offering making, master of ceremonies, chief of shrine offerings/ procedures, shrinekeeper, chöp"n	mchod dpon
མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ	Dalai Lama's mchod dpon	mchod dpon mkhan po
མཆོད་སྤྱད	bowl [h]	mchod spyad
མཆོད་སྤྲིན	cloud of offerings	mchod sprin
མཆོད་སྤྲིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of offering clouds	mchod sprin rgya mtsho
མཆོད་སྤྲིན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི	oceans of clouds of offerings	mchod sprin rgya mtsho'i
མཆོད་ཕུལ་བ	to make offerings	mchod phul ba
མཆོད་ཕུལ་བྱས་པ	made offerings	mchod phul byas pa
མཆོད་ཕྱིར་ཐོགས	scarf held while making offerings, image of a deity	mchod phyir thogs
མཆོད་ཕྲེང	offering garland; offering verses, chant for making offerings	mchod phreng
མཆོད་བུམ	vessel used in sacrificing	mchod bum
མཆོད་བྱ	respected friends, parents, object of worship	mchod bya
མཆོད་བྱ་དང་མཆོད་བྱེད	giver and receiver, offering and maker of offerings, worshipper and object of worship	mchod bya dang mchod byed
མཆོད་བྱེད	worshipper, maker of offerings	mchod byed
མཆོད་འབུལ	offering. Syn {mchod pa}, making offerings	mchod 'bul
མཆོད་འབུལ་བྱས་པ	made offerings	mchod 'bul byas pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན	performing sacrifices, religious service where sacrifices of small figures are made offering gift, generosity, 1 of rig byed bzhi, make offerings	mchod sbyin
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་སྐྱེས	fire god	mchod sbyin skyes
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་གྱི་རིག	byed, yajur veda of the brahmans	mchod sbyin gyi rig
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་གྱི་རིག་བྱེད	the Sacrificial veda Yajur Veda [rgya gar bram ze'i chos lugs kyi gzhung bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste mtho ris kyi phyir mchod sbyin byed skabs kyi rig sngags dang smon tshig rnams kyi rig byed do	mchod sbyin gyi rig byed
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་གྱིས་ལ	make offerings and be charitable	mchod sbyin gyis la
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་དགྲ	asura	mchod sbyin dgra
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་དགྲ་བོ	asura, demon	mchod sbyin dgra bo
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་རྒྱན	kusha grass 883	mchod sbyin rgyan
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་བརྒྱ་པ	indra since he made 100 offerings	mchod sbyin brgya pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ངན་པ་བྱེད་པ	rendering evil worship and offerings	mchod sbyin ngan pa byed pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ལྔ	the five kinds of yajna [sevice to {tshangs pa} by reading vedas {lha} gods by burnt offerings {mi} by hospitality to persons present {pha ma} satisfying ancestors {'byung po} torma is offered to g...	mchod sbyin lnga
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ཅན	Indra	mchod sbyin can
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ཆེན་པོ་བྱས་པ	making great offerings	mchod sbyin chen po byas pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་འཇོམས	sacrifice destroyer [a yava a, a mohammedan, Shiva (because he destroyed dak ha's sacrifice]	mchod sbyin 'joms
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ཐོངས	give it away, offer it up!	mchod sbyin thongs
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་དུད་པ	brhamin horse offering puja smoke	mchod sbyin dud pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་བདག་པོ	moon	mchod sbyin bdag po
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་འདོན་མ	a mother	mchod sbyin 'don ma
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་གནས	place where sacrifices are performed	mchod sbyin gnas
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་སྤོ	white incense made of the resin of the sal tree	mchod sbyin spo
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་སྤྱོད	performance of yaj¤a sacrifice	mchod sbyin spyod
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ཕྱུགས	the object that is sacrificed in a sacrifice	mchod sbyin phyugs
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་བྱས	one who performs a sacrifice	mchod sbyin byas
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	make someone perform a yaj¤a sacrifice	mchod sbyin byed du 'jug pa
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་སྦྱར	self, SA bdag nyid	mchod sbyin sbyar
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་འཛིན	priests who offer yaj¤a sacrifice	mchod sbyin 'dzin
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ཡན་ལག	glomerous fig tree	mchod sbyin yan lag
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ལས་བྱེད་མཁན	priests who offer yaj¤a sacrifice	mchod sbyin las byed mkhan
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་སྲད་བུ	bhrahmin's cord, phrag mchan bar 'ching byed skud pa rgya gram	mchod sbyin srad bu
མཆོད་སྦྱིན་ལྷག	nectar	mchod sbyin lhag
མཆོད་མི	butter lamp (offering)	mchod mi
མཆོད་མེ	butter lamp	mchod me
མཆོད་མེ་བརྒྱང་བ	put in array lamps as offerings	mchod me brgyang ba
མཆོད་མེ་སྤར་བ	to light a butter lamp	mchod me spar ba
མཆོད་ཚིག	words of praise to a deity	mchod tshig
མཆོད་ཚོགས	assembly of offerings, large accumulation of offerings	mchod tshogs
མཆོད་འཛིན་པ	Indra	mchod 'dzin pa
མཆོད་རྫད་སྣ་ཚོགས	colored banners	mchod rdzad sna tshogs
མཆོད་རྫས	offering articles / materials / substances, objects / things offered to deities	mchod rdzas
མཆོད་རྫས་བཅུ	lha la 'bul rgyu'i mchod pa sna bcu ste me tog dang, 'phreng ba, spos, byug pa, phye ma, na bza'a, rgyan, gdugs, rgyal mtshan, ba dan bcas bcu'o	mchod rdzas bcu
མཆོད་རྫས་སྣ་ཚོགས	colored banners	mchod rdzas sna tshogs
མཆོད་རྫས་བྱིན་རླབས	consecrating the offering articles. [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 85]	mchod rdzas byin rlabs
མཆོད་ཞལ	[eating] bowl, drinking cup	mchod zhal
མཆོད་ཞུ	(h) visit a place of worship (temple, monastery, etc)	mchod zhu
མཆོད་གཞིས	monastic estate	mchod gzhis
མཆོད་བཞེངས་པ	offering torma maker	mchod bzhengs pa
མཆོད་འོས	praiseworthy, venerable, worthy of worship; worthy of offerings	mchod 'os
མཆོད་འོས་སྐྱབས་ཡུལ	worthy objects of offering and refuge	mchod 'os skyabs yul
མཆོད་འོས་གནས	someone / something worthy of honor and respect	mchod 'os gnas
མཆོད་ཡུལ	recipient of offering	mchod yul
མཆོད་ཡོན	drinking water, patron and recipient, patron and priest relationship, remuneration to priest who performs a puja offering and offering water, offering, gift	mchod yon
མཆོད་ཡོན་དམ་གཙང	mchod gnas sam lama and patron's pure samaya	mchod yon dam gtsang
མཆོད་ཡོན་སྦྲེང	sprinkle drinking water mchod g.yog - shrine assistant [at ceremonies] mchod g.yog - assistant shrine master; chöpön assistant; offering servant, assistant offering servants; The chöpön can have on...	mchod yon sbreng
མཆོད་རས	mchod pa'i ras ma - offering morsel; tiny offering. Syn. dpal gyi	mchod ras
མཆོད་རོ	remnants of offerings	mchod ro
མཆོད་རོལ	musical instruments	mchod rol
མཆོད་ཤོམ	alter	mchod shom
མཆོད་ཤོམས	altar	mchod shoms
མཆོད་གཤམ	shrine arrangement	mchod gsham
མཆོད་གཤོམ	mchod bshams - shrine. Syn. dkyil 'khor - mchod khri - mchod	mchod gshom
སྟེགས	mchod bshams	stegs
མཆོད་གཤོམས	altar, shrine	mchod gshoms
མཆོད་བཤམ	alter, shrine, shrine arrangement	mchod bsham
མཆོད་བཤམས	shrine, altar	mchod bshams
མཆོད་ལྷ	offering gods	mchod lha
མཆོད་ལྷས་བརྒྱན་པ	adorned with offering gods	mchod lhas brgyan pa
མཆོན	(not in DAS)	mchon
མཆོར་རྒྱན	jewelry of vanity	mchor rgyan
མཆོར་སྒེག	beautiful and graceful	mchor sgeg
མཆོར་སྒེག་ཅན	wearing/ covered w clothes and ornaments and graceful	mchor sgeg can
མཆོར་ཆས	good /beautiful ornaments and clothes	mchor chas
མཆོར་ཉམས	arrogant about beauty	mchor nyams
མཆོར་པོ	pretty, handsome, neat, elegant, vain, conceited	mchor po
མཆོར་མོ	woman w good/ beautiful ornaments and clothes	mchor mo
མཆོར་ཙྭ་ཁ	salt source in dpal mgon rdzong	mchor tswa kha
མཆོར་མཛེས	beautiful face adorned w beautiful ornaments	mchor mdzes
མཆོར་སོ	the front teeth	mchor so
མཆོས་བསྟོད་བསྐུར	venerate, praise and give service to	mchos bstod bskur
མཆོས་ཤོམས	arrangements/ preparations for offering service 'chag - constitutional walk, to move about 'chag - p. {bcags}, imp. {chogs}, to step on, walk on, visit [usu. follows zhabs) (h) to move around / abo...	mchos shoms
ཨེ྾ཏེནདེད་ཨིན་བེཏྭེཨེན་ཐེ་ཅོནཆ	white teeth, and speaking with the melodious voice of Brahma 'chad pa'i tshul drug - the six kinds of explanations 'chad pa'i tshe - from a theoretical standpoint, critically speaking, from the poi...	extended in between the conch
སལཡནེསས	concealment, mibp 84, obscuring faults to avoid admonishments 'chab pa'i ltung ba - the downfall of concealment 'chab pa'i ltung ba - the downfall regarding secrecy 'chab ba'i ltung ba - the downfa...	slyness
ཨིནཕེ༹རྣོས་ཨོར་རཟོར	sharp blades search for the Dharma until you die 'chi 'thab - fight to the death [having risked one's life letting go of body and mind fiercely fight] 'chi 'thab - fight to the death 'chi dus - the...	infernos or razor
སྟོབས	the power of knowing death and rebirth, transference of consciousness at death and birth; one of {stobs bcu} 'chi 'pho ba dang skye ba mkhyen pa'i	stobs
ཤིག	instead of the poison of death, drink the nectar of wisdom 'chi ba'i dus - when dying 'chi ba'i dus - 1) when dying; 2) the time of death 'chi ba'i dus byas pa - arrive at the time of death 'chi ba...	shig
བཀོད་པ་དྲི་མེད་ནོར་བུ	on uSHN'iSHavijay'a, by kong sprul blo gros	bkod pa dri med nor bu
མཐའ་ཡས	(1813-1899) 'chi med 'phreng - pleasure grove of srin po'i rgyal po 'chi med bu mo - a goddess 'chi med dbang mo - queen of the immortals, a wife of indra, name of brgya byin ma 'chi med tse bum - ...	mtha' yas
པ་ཙམ་དུ་གྱུར་ཏོ	his land was truly equal to the eternal city of the gods 'chi rmas - casualties, dead and wounded 891 'chi tsad pa - the verge of death [one's feet having tripped on a stone, having fallen in a wel...	pa tsam du gyur to
ཨན་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder {rig 'dzin}, and celestial flight {mkha' 'gro} 'chi lugs bzhi - four ways of death [dissolving into space {nam mkha'}, cremation {me dpung}, the manner of an awareness- holder {rig 'dzin}, a...	an awareness
ཨིན་ཐེ་ཨེམཔཏིནེསས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	body of reality, as the space within and without a vase merges when the vase breaks; 2) one passes away like a fire with no more fuel; 3) space is filled with light and one dies like an awareness h...	in the emptiness of the buddha
དིཨེས་ཨས་ཨ་སཀཡ	farer] 'chi sa - place of death 'chi sems - the mind at the moment of death 'chi sems - the thought of death 'chi sems gsum - the frames of mind when dying 'chi sems gsum - CHN 'chi sos khams la dp...	dies as a sky
ལཆང་མ	willow	lchang ma
ལཆང་ལོ་ཆན	buddha field of Vajradhara/ Dorje chang	lchang lo chan
ཇ	tea, tea leaves	ja
ཇ་ཀོ	ja gtum byed kyi ko ba	ja ko
ཇ་ཀོག	leather bag for transporting tea	ja kog
ཇ་དཀར	china teacup	ja dkar
ཇ་དཀྱུས་མ	dkyus ja, weak tea	ja dkyus ma
ཇ་དཀྲུག	twirling stick, tea churning piston	ja dkrug
ཇ་དཀྲུགས་མ	in a vessel put melted butter khar tsampa and & a little salt, over that tea is poured and boiled a little 894	ja dkrugs ma
ཇ་དཀྲོགས་མ	in a vessel is put melted butter khar tsampa and & a little salt, over that tea is poured and boiled a little	ja dkrogs ma
ཇ་སྐྱེམས	tea [drink]	ja skyems
ཇ་བསྐོལ་བ	to boil some tea	ja bskol ba
ཇ་ཁ	tea color	ja kha
ཇ་ཁ་ཡ	bag chung 8 or bag chen 2, 1/ ja 'khor six	ja kha ya
ཇ་ཁང	tea [ware]house/ store/ stall/ parlor, [kitchen]	ja khang
ཇ་ཁབ	tea in leather gtum dus sewing needle	ja khab
ཇ་ཁུ	tea [drink]	ja khu
ཇ་ཁུ་མདོག	tea color [dmar po smug shas phran bu color]	ja khu mdog
ཇ་ཁུ་དམར	red weak dkyus ja rgyug pa mang ba zhig	ja khu dmar
ཇ་ཁུག	tea blug snod, tea bag	ja khug
ཇ་ཁྲ	teapot	ja khra
ཇ་འཁོར	brick tea	ja 'khor
ཇ་འཁོར་དྲུག	bag chung 16 or bag chen four yod pa'i smyug ma'i nang gi ja ring ..Ja 'khor drug drug	ja 'khor drug
ཇ་འཁྱེར་ཡོང་བ	bring some tea to the table	ja 'khyer yong ba
ཇ་གར་པོ	thick/ strong tea	ja gar po
ཇ་མགྲོན	tea party	ja mgron
ཇ་རྒོད	1) bul tog ma btab par bskol ba'i thick tea; 2) tea w/o butter and salt	ja rgod
ཇ་རྒྱབ	do po'i ljid tshad longs pa'i two tea boxes	ja rgyab
ཇ་རྒྱུགས	drinking tea skal ba ..Tshogs la dngos su yong mi thub mkhan rnams la ja rgyugs skyel ba	ja rgyugs
ཇ་སྒམ	leather covered square ja do	ja sgam
ཇ་སྒྲོན	Jadrön, at Nyengya in Domey	ja sgron
ཇ་བརྒྱད་པ	8th or inferior quality of tea	ja brgyad pa
ཇ་མངར་མོ	english style tea with cream and sugar	ja mngar mo
ཇ་བརྔོས	yun ring gdus nas khu ba rang sim du gyur pa'i ja skam po	ja brngos
ཇ་ཆང་གི་འཐུང་རིགས	beverage	ja chang gi 'thung rigs
ཇ་ཆང་མཚར་གླུ	ja 'dren chang 'dren byed skabs kyi skyid glu,...Skyid na ja chang mtshar glu len,...	ja chang mtshar glu
ཇ་མཆོད	scatter or make a tea offering	ja mchod
ཇ་ལྗང	greenish tea-color	ja ljang
ཇ་སྙིགས	stuff in tea	ja snyigs
ཇ་ཏོར	[arch] cloth tent	ja tor
ཇ་བཏག	tea grinder, grinding stone used in kitchen	ja btag
ཇ་ལྟིར	ja blug snod	ja ltir
ཇ་སྟེགས	dining table	ja stegs
ཇ་ཐང	plain tea	ja thang
ཇ་ཐང་མདོག	tea color	ja thang mdog
ཇ་ཐང་པགས་ལོག	dbus khyo ga'i [married?] man's hat	ja thang pags log
ཇ་ཐུག	tea and soup/noodles	ja thug
ཇ་ཐུད་མར་གསུམ	tea [drink] + phyur thud + rtsi mar	ja thud mar gsum
ཇ་ཐུན་གཅིག	ja skol 1 time gi dus tshod	ja thun gcig
ཇ་ཐེབས	monastery khag gi sangha par offered mang ja'i thebs rtsa' or ma rtsa	ja thebs
ཇ་འཐག	tea grinder, grinding stone used in kitchen	ja 'thag
ཇ་དབ༹ངས	black tea [no milk, no sugar]	ja dvangs
ཇ་དྭངས	tea w/o milk etc	ja dwangs
ཇ་དམ	thermos bottle, flask	ja dam
ཇ་དོ	khal mar 'gel rgyu'i tea box	ja do
ཇ་དོས	load of tea carried by beast of burden	ja dos
ཇ་དྲངས	offered me tea	ja drangs
ཇ་བདག	ja bzo tshong sger bdag byed mkhan	ja bdag
ཇ་མདོག	tea color	ja mdog
ཇ་མདོང	churn for tea	ja mdong
ཇ་འདན	in a vessel is put melted butter khar tsampa and & a little salt, over that tea is poured and boiled a little	ja 'dan
ཇ་འདྲེན	tshogs pa lta bur ja gtong ba'am blug pa,...Ja 'dren chang 'dren,...Gsol ja 'dren pa,...	ja 'dren
ཇ་འདྲེན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྣོད	teapot	ja 'dren byed kyi snod
ཇ་ལྡུར	on tsampa tea pouring skyo ma	ja ldur
ཇ་སྡོང	tea plant	ja sdong
ཇ་སྡོར	butter for tea-soup	ja sdor
ཇ་ནག	1) tea w/o butter and salt; 2) a kind of tea	ja nag
ཇ་ནད	disease arising after drinking tea	ja nad
ཇ་པ་ཏི	black tea	ja pa ti
ཇ་པྲ	teapot	ja pra
ཇ་དཔོན	when tea is brought to the sangha overseer of the lag bde ba rnams	ja dpon
ཇ་སྤ་ཏི	a tea good w milk and sugar, pa ti (Indian western tea [leaves]???	ja spa ti
ཇ་སྤྱན་ཤེལ	(CH ja 'bru dang po'i 'og ma	ja spyan shel
ཇ་ཕུད	drinking tea phud	ja phud
ཇ་ཕོགས	ja dngos sprod pa'i phogs	ja phogs
ཇ་ཕོར	tea bowl	ja phor
ཇ་བག	moist tea leaves square box tea box	ja bag
ཇ་བག་ཆུང	1/4 the size of a big one	ja bag chung
ཇ་བག་ཆེན	1) big tea box; 2) Ja 'bru gnyis ?	ja bag chen
ཇ་བོ	teapot	ja bo
ཇ་བླུགས	urn-shaped teapot	ja blugs
ཇ་འབིང	tea pot	ja 'bing
ཇ་འབྲུ	fruit of tea plant	ja 'bru
ཇ་འབྲུ་གཉིས	tea made of ja lo gnyis pa man	ja 'bru gnyis
ཇ་འབྲུ་དང	tea made of ja lo dang po	ja 'bru dang
ཇ་སྦ་ཁག	brick tea	ja sba khag
ཇ་སྦག	brick tea	ja sbag
ཇ་སྦང་བ	in boiling water tea sbang ba	ja sbang ba
ཇ་སྦྱོར	mixture of tea with butter and salt	ja sbyor
ཇ་སྦྱོར་གཅིག	tea 1 time bskol: 'thung ba'i yun	ja sbyor gcig
ཇ་མ	tea maker, cook	ja ma
ཇ་མན	from lho brag etc. poor quality tea	ja man
ཇ་མའོ་ཅན	(CH tea made after tea leaves mche ba btogs nas	ja ma'o can
ཇ་མར	tea and butter, butter for tea	ja mar
ཇ་དམར	reddish tea color	ja dmar
ཇ་ཚྭ་ལས་ཁུངས	ja &, tshva, pags rigs etc. tax/ obligation bsdu len office	ja tshwa las khungs
ཇ་ཚགས	tea strainer	ja tshags
ཇ་ཚགས་གྲོས་མོལ	tea party	ja tshags gros mol
ཇ་ཚལ	tea plantation	ja tshal
ཇ་མཚམས	tea break	ja mtshams
ཇ་ཝ་ལ་ཁེལ	Jawalakhel which is a place in Nepal	ja wa la khel
ཇ་ཞིང	tea field	ja zhing
ཇ་བཞི་ཁྲིག	ja bzhi thig	ja bzhi khrig
ཇ་བཞི་ཐིག	ja 'bru dang bag gcig la = four bag chung = four bzhi thig 895	ja bzhi thig
ཇ་འོད	yellow-red	ja 'od
ཇ་ཡ་ཇུ	kind of tea	ja ya ju
ཇ་ཡུ	kind of tea	ja yu
ཇ་ཡུན	for as long as it takes to drink a cup of tea	ja yun
ཇ་ཡུན་ཙམ	ja'am bza' btung 1 time spyod pa'i yun tshad,...Ja yun tsam du gleng mol byas	ja yun tsam
ཇ་ར	mdo khams kyi yul gru 'gar ca and ja gnyis gdangs gcig tu 'bod pas khyad par 'byed byed kyi brda	ja ra
ཇ་རག	tea-pot	ja rag
ཇ་རིལ	ball of tea	ja ril
ཇ་རོ	tea leaves left in a tea pot, used tea leaves	ja ro
ཇ་ལག་གཉིས	ja ma and ja 'dren mkhan	ja lag gnyis
ཇ་ལན་ཆུ་འཇལ	example of bzang byas ngan lan 'jal ba	ja lan chu 'jal
ཇ་ལུང	handle straps of leather trunk	ja lung
ཇ་ཤང་དབང་ཕྱུག	hypericum hookerianum wight et arn.	ja shang dbang phyug
ཇ་ཤིང	tea plant [med] [bitter sweet, cooling, good for bse mog and tsha ba etc]	ja shing
ཇ་སག	Jasag, title of nobility	ja sag
ཇ་སང	plain decoction of tea	ja sang
ཇ་སིག	[arch] square box for moist tea leaves	ja sig
ཇ་སིག་ཏུ་ཡོད	chaos {chos med khrims med gong na dpon med mgo med ja sig tu yod dus} a state of chaos with no religion, no laws, and no ruler at its head	ja sig tu yod
ཇ་སིལ་མ	tea sil bu or zhib mo	ja sil ma
ཇ་སུན	time when tea is served	ja sun
ཇ་སུན་ཅན	cup of tea, as much as a cup of tea	ja sun can
ཇ་སུན་རེ	ja phor gang tsam re'am nyung zad re	ja sun re
ཇ་སེར	yellow tea from amdo	ja ser
ཇ་སོབ	from lho mon etc ja sob sob poor quality	ja sob
ཇ་སྲིབ་མ	Tibetan style tea with butter and salt churned in	ja srib ma
ཇ་སྲུབ	churn/ mix tea	ja srub
ཇ་སྲུབ་སྣོད་ཀྱི་མདོང་མོ	churn for tea	ja srub snod kyi mdong mo
ཇ་སྲུབ་མ	buttered tea	ja srub ma
ཇ་སྲུས	churn/ mix tea	ja srus
ཇ་གསུར	burned tea offering smoke	ja gsur
ཇ་བསྲུབས	churned/ mixed tea	ja bsrubs
ཇ་བསྲུབས་མ	butter tea; syn {bod ja}	ja bsrubs ma
ཇ་ཧོང	(CH btsod mdog or orange	ja hong
ཇ་ཧོད	yellowish red	ja hod
ཇ་ཧྲིལ	ja rdog rdog, tea lump	ja hril
ཇག	robbing, robbery	jag
ཇག་རྐུན	bandit, brigand	jag rkun
ཇག་རྐུན་ཁྱི་ལ་དོགས་ཟོན་གྱིས	beware of bandits, thieves, and dogs	jag rkun khyi la dogs zon gyis
ཇག་འཁྱམས	bandit, brigand	jag 'khyams
ཇག་འགོ	bandit leader	jag 'go
ཇག་རྒྱག་པ	rob	jag rgyag pa
ཇག་ཆོམ	banditry, highwayman	jag chom
ཇག་ཉུལ	special agent, spy, bandits and spies	jag nyul
ཇག་འདེད་པ་རྣམས	those who were pursuing the robbers	jag 'ded pa rnams
ཇག་པ	brigand, thug, one who terrifies by shouts and gestures, robber	jag pa
ཇག་པ་དང་ཐུག་པ	fall in with robbers	jag pa dang thug pa
ཇག་པ་བྱུང་བ	beset by robbers	jag pa byung ba
ཇག་པ་ལང་ཤོར	hardened robbers/ bandits w long records	jag pa lang shor
ཇག་དཔུང	gang of bandits	jag dpung
ཇག་དཔོན	robbers's leader	jag dpon
ཇག་མྱུལ	special agent, spy, bandits and spies	jag myul
ཇག་དམག	bandit army, PRC term for Kuomintang army	jag dmag
ཇག་གཙོ	bandit leader	jag gtso
ཇག་ཚང	bandit hideout	jag tshang
ཇག་ཚོགས	gang of bandits	jag tshogs
ཇག་ཤོག	bandit's sde shog	jag shog
ཇགས	establish, SA 'jag pa	jags
ཇང་ཏ་ལིང་ཏ	swing	jang ta ling ta
ཇང་དཔོན་ཆུང་བ	major general	jang dpon chung ba
ཇང་དཔོན་ཆེ་བ	colonel general	jang dpon che ba
ཇང་དཔོན་འབྲིང་བ	lieutenant general	jang dpon 'bring ba
ཇང་ཡུས	(CH zas kyi bro ba 'don byed khu ba zhig	jang yus
ཇན་ཅང	athletic hero, sports master	jan cang
ཇན་ཕུའི་ཀྲའེ	Cambodia	jan phu'i kra'e
ཇབ་ཆུང	frivolous, ludicrous, nonsense, ridiculous, silly	jab chung
ཇབ་ཇོབ	poor quality grain, tsampa etc. mixed w impurities	jab job
ཇབ་བེ་ཇོབ་བེ	poor quality grain, tsampa etc. mixed w impurities	jab be job be
ཇམ་དཔལ	SA gshin rje gshed	jam dpal
ཇམ་མུ	Jammu [Indian territory W of Kashmir]	jam mu
ཇའི་ཕུད	tea offering	ja'i phud
ཇའི་ལུད	potash fertilizer	ja'i lud
ཇར་མན	Germany	jar man
ཇལ	place in tibet	jal
ཇི	1) interrogative particle. what, which. 2) whatever, whichever. 3) how much, however, much, many	ji
ཇི་སྐད	what, whatever	ji skad
ཇི་སྐད་ཇ་བ	what name?	ji skad ja ba
ཇི་སྐད་བསྟན	terminology	ji skad bstan
ཇི་སྐད་བསྟན་པ	to encompass everything	ji skad bstan pa
ཇི་སྐད་བསྟན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to practice exactly as told	ji skad bstan pa bzhin du sgrub pa
ཇི་སྐད་དུ	it has been said, as has been said, his words are, in fact it is said, it is said	ji skad du
ཇི་སྐད་དུ་ཤེས་བཤད་པ	[he] spoke/ taught these words	ji skad du shes bshad pa
ཇི་སྐད་སྨྲས་པ་དེ་བཞིན་བྱེད་པ	to do exactly as told	ji skad smras pa de bzhin byed pa
ཇི་སྐད་བཞིན	to the letter, exactly, correctly, precisely	ji skad bzhin
ཇི་སྐད་ཟེར་བ	what[ever] was said	ji skad zer ba
ཇི་སྐད་ཟེར་བ་བཞིན	according to what was said	ji skad zer ba bzhin
ཇི་སྐད་བཤད་པ	as it has been explained 896	ji skad bshad pa
ཇི་སྐད་བཤད་པ་ལ་མོས་པ	trust in what has been explained/ taught	ji skad bshad pa la mos pa
ཇི་སྐད་བཤད་བཞིན་དོན་མིན	not [actually] as was taught/ explained	ji skad bshad bzhin don min
ཇི་སྐད་བཤིན	as it has been explained	ji skad bshin
ཇི་སྐད་གསུངས་པ	as said/ stated/ taught	ji skad gsungs pa
ཇི་སྐད་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར	as said/ stated /taught	ji skad gsungs pa ltar
ཇི་ག	1) what kind of? how much/ many?? [Thabs ji ga byed,...'Bor grangs ji ga yin]; 2) always	ji ga
ཇི་དགུ	all that/ whatever exists, many/ all kinds of things	ji dgu
ཇི་དགུ་གོ་རྒྱུ	1 may hear many things	ji dgu go rgyu
ཇི་འགབ	as 1 likes, whatever is good	ji 'gab
ཇི་སྒྲ	ji	ji sgra
ཇི་ཆེད	for what purpose, why	ji ched
ཇི་འཉེད་པ	as many	ji 'nyed pa
ཇི་རྙེད	all there is, all possible	ji rnyed
ཇི་རྙེད་ཀུན	all possible, all that exists, whatever there is	ji rnyed kun
ཇི་རྙེད་ཀྱི་དོན	the meaning of all that exists	ji rnyed kyi don
ཇི་རྙེད་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	the intelligence of [seeing] all that exists	ji rnyed kyi blo gros
ཇི་རྙེད་པ	all that possibly exists, variously, as many as, actualization as much as there is	ji rnyed pa
ཇི་སྙམ	[he] thought ..	ji snyam
ཇི་སྙམ་དུ	as [he] thought ..	ji snyam du
ཇི་སྙམ་པ	gang sems pa'am gang dran pa,...Rang gis ji snyam pa'i don grub pa	ji snyam pa
ཇི་སྙེད	as much as, as great as, whatever is possible, just about so much, how much, how many, all the many , all possible, all	ji snyed
ཇི་སྙེད་ཀུན	however much there may be, all the possible, all	ji snyed kun
ཇི་སྙེད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of knowing all things; phenomenally omniscient intuition	ji snyed mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་ཅིག	whatever may [arise]	ji snyed cig
ཇི་སྙེད་ཆོས་རྣམས	existing phenomena	ji snyed chos rnams
ཇི་སྙེད་ལྟ་བུ	so much, so many, how many	ji snyed lta bu
ཇི་སྙེད་བསྟན་པ	all that is taught	ji snyed bstan pa
ཇི་སྙེད་དེ་སྙེད	[for] however many... [for] that many	ji snyed de snyed
ཇི་སྙེད་པ	as much as there is; the multiplicity of things; things in (all) their multiplicity	ji snyed pa
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་མཁྱན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	pristine cognition which qualitatively knows phenomena	ji snyed pa mkhyan pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་མཁྱེན	knowledge which knows the quantity of all phenomena	ji snyed pa mkhyen
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་མཁྱེན་པ	seeing as individual (not categorizing thought), wisdom of discriminating all details of phenomena	ji snyed pa mkhyen pa
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of omniscience	ji snyed pa mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge that knows/ discerns/ perceives all that there is/ the multiplicity of things/ of things in (all) their multiplicity	ji snyed pa mkhyen pa'i shes rab
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་དེ་སྙེད་ཅིག	as many as	ji snyed pa de snyed cig
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of seeing all that exists, the wisdom of knowing/ perceiving whatever there is	ji snyed pa gzigs pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of extent	ji snyed pa ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་པ་རིགས	whatever is suitable	ji snyed pa rigs
ཇི་སྙེད་པར་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge that knows/ discerns/ perceives all that there is/ the multiplicity of things/ of things in (all) their multiplicity	ji snyed par mkhyen pa'i shes rab
ཇི་སྙེད་པར་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	{ji snyed par mkhyen pa'i ye shes} timeless awareness of all that there is/ that knows/ discerns/ perceives all that there is/ the multiplicity of things/ of things in (all) their multiplicity/ as ...	ji snyed par gzigs pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	exalted knower of the varieties	ji snyed gzigs pa'i ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordial awareness of quantity. the wisdom of whatever there is/ the extent of dharmas	ji snyed ye shes
ཇི་སྙེད་ཡོད་པ	1) as many as/all there are; 2) all that exists [all the dharmas of the relative]s cad	ji snyed yod pa
ཇི་སྙེད་ཡོད་པ་ཉིད	all that exists [all the dharmas of the relative]s cad	ji snyed yod pa nyid
ཇི་ཏ་བ་བཞིན	faithful, exact	ji ta ba bzhin
ཇི་ལྟ	the nature as it is, things as they are 897	ji lta
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་རྙེད་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	the intelligence of things as they are and of all that exists	ji lta ji rnyed kyi blo gros
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད	nature and extent	ji lta ji snyed
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོའི་མཐའ	the limits of phenomena, i.e. their varieties and their mode of being	ji lta ji snyed kyi dngos po'i mtha'
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ	the aspects of nature and extent	ji lta ji snyed kyi rnam pa
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	the intelligence of things as they are and of all that exists	ji lta ji snyed kyi blo gros
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Abbr. of {gnas lugs ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i ye shes dang shes bya ji snyed pa gzigs pa'i ye shes}. [informal:] the wisdom that knows all that can be known, just as it is	ji lta ji snyed mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་ལྟ་བུ	ji lta ji ltar	ji lta ji lta bu
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་ལྟར	CM: ji 'dra ji 'dra'am gang 'dra gang 'dra. ¦ tshogs 'du'i sar gros sdur ji lta ji ltar byas pa de lta de ltar lag len bstar dgos. It is necessary to put into practice as much as was discussed at t...	ji lta ji ltar
ཇི་ལྟ་ཉིད	as-it-is-ness, the nature as it is	ji lta nyid
ཇི་ལྟ་ན་མ་འོངས་པ	In the future,	ji lta na ma 'ongs pa
ཇི་ལྟ་བ	aesthetic awareness, as it is, in essence, suchness, seeing as it is rather than as it appears, of what kind, (ultimately real), SA ji snyed pa, ji lta, mkhyen gnyis, noumenal, authentic	ji lta ba
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་མཁྱེན་པ	wisdom of knowing the absolute nature of all	ji lta ba mkhyen pa
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	understanding of the noumenal	ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	transcendent knowledge that knows the real nature of things just as it is ji lta ba dang ji snyed pa'i mkhyen cha the knowledge of the nature [as it is] and of [the extent of] all that exists ji lt...	ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i shes rab
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན	[just] as [it is], in accordance with, exactly what it is, [exactly] as proper/ as it should be, [just] as, according to, in the way that, exactly, the same as, like that	ji lta ba bzhin
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་གྱི་གནས་ལུགས	nature of how things are	ji lta ba bzhin gyi gnas lugs
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	realizing it	ji lta ba bzhin mngon du gyur pa
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ	[reality] just/ exactly as it is/ should be	ji lta ba bzhin du
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ་ཡོད་པ་ཉིད	existence according to fact	ji lta ba bzhin du yod pa nyid
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ་རབ་ཏུ་ཤེས་པ	cognition according to fact	ji lta ba bzhin du rab tu shes pa
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ་ཤེས་པ	cognition according to fact	ji lta ba bzhin du shes pa
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་གཟིགས	knowledge which sees the state just as it is	ji lta ba gzigs
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	exalted knower of the varieties, wisdom that sees the nature	ji lta ba gzigs pa'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of nature	ji lta ba ye shes
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་ཤེས་པའི་མཐོང་བ	the seeing of the wisdom of nature	ji lta ba shes pa'i mthong ba
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་ཤེས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	{ji lta bar mkhyen pa'i shes rab} sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge that knows/ perceives reality just as it is/ just how things are/ the real nature of things just as it is	ji lta ba shes pa'i shes rab
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་ཤེས་པའི་ལྷག་མཐོང	the insight of knowing it as it is	ji lta ba shes pa'i lhag mthong
ཇི་ལྟ་བར	according to	ji lta bar
ཇི་ལྟ་བར་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of knowing the nature as it is / things as they are	ji lta bar mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟ་བར་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	{ji lta bar shes pa'i shes rab} sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge that knows/ perceives reality just as it is/ just how things are/ the real nature of things just as it is	ji lta bar mkhyen pa'i shes rab
ཇི་ལྟ་བར་མཐོང	see things as they are	ji lta bar mthong
ཇི་ལྟ་བར་མཐོང་བ	seeing it as it is / exactly	ji lta bar mthong ba
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ	how, what sort of	ji lta bu
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་ཀྱང	however it may be	ji lta bu kyang
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་འདུག	how it is	ji lta bu 'dug
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག	+ [verb] {kyang}= no matter what	ji lta bu zhig
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག་ཀྱང	whether	ji lta bu zhig kyang
ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་ཞེ་ན	how so?	ji lta bu zhe na
ཇི་ལྟ་བུར་ན	how? [mss]	ji lta bur na
ཇི་ལྟ་བུར་གནས	how it remains	ji lta bur gnas
ཇི་ལྟ་ཞེ་ན	how so?	ji lta zhe na
ཇི་ལྟ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of how it is	ji lta ye shes
ཇི་ལྟའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	{ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i ye shes}	ji lta'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of knowing the nature as it is/ things as they are	ji lta'i ye shes mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཇི་ལྟར	1) as, like, just as, how, in what way, like what. 2) however, in any case, anyway. Syn {ji bzhin} exactly, as, just like, actual. Syn {ji 'dra} how; regardless of how	ji ltar
ཇི་ལྟར་གྲགས	however designated	ji ltar grags
ཇི་ལྟར་རྒྱལ་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་རེད	in any case there will be victory	ji ltar rgyal thob kyi red
ཇི་ལྟར་ཇི་སྙེད	things as they are and all that exists	ji ltar ji snyed
ཇི་ལྟར་ཇི་སྙེད་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the light of things as they are and all that exists ji ltar ji snyed kyi snang ba 'byed pa spreading the light of things as they are and all that exists	ji ltar ji snyed kyi snang ba
ཇི་ལྟར་ཇི་སྙེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of quality & quantity	ji ltar ji snyed ye shes
ཇི་ལྟར་འཇུག	1) ga 'dra byas nas byed ...Lag len la ji ltar 'jug ...Lam la ji ltar 'jug; 2) Bod kyi brda sprod shastras rtags 'jug nang sngon rjes so so'i 'jug yul ming gzhi'i yi ge rnams la tshul ji lta bu'i s...	ji ltar 'jug
ཇི་ལྟར་འཇོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ	stay at will, remain for as long as 1 desires	ji ltar 'jod pa bzhin du gnas pa
ཇི་ལྟར་བརྗོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ	to stay at will, to remain for as long as one desires	ji ltar brjod pa bzhin du gnas pa
ཇི་ལྟར་རྟོགས་པ	realizing accordingly ji ltar rtogs pa'i chos rnam par bzhag pa presentation of the qualities of realizing it as it is	ji ltar rtogs pa
ཇི་ལྟར་བརྟགས་པ་དེ་ལྟར་མེད	not as it is imagined	ji ltar brtags pa de ltar med
ཇི་ལྟར་བརྟགས་པད་དེ་ལྟར་མེད	not as 1 labels it	ji ltar brtags pad de ltar med
ཇི་ལྟར་བལྟས་པ	according to how one observes	ji ltar bltas pa
ཇི་ལྟར་བལྟས་པས	due to the way in which one sees things	ji ltar bltas pas
ཇི་ལྟར་བསྟན་པ	what had been taught	ji ltar bstan pa
ཇི་ལྟར་བསྟན་པའི	which has been described	ji ltar bstan pa'i
ཇི་ལྟར་ཐོགས་ཀྱང	in whatever manner impeded or delayed	ji ltar thogs kyang
ཇི་ལྟར་ཐོས་པ་བཞིན	exactly as heard	ji ltar thos pa bzhin
ཇི་ལྟར་དེ	how to be taken?	ji ltar de
ཇི་ལྟར་དེ་ལྟར	in what way... in that way, whatever/however... that... E.g., (from CM): dge rgan gyis jir ltar bsgo ba'i	ji ltar de ltar
ཇི་ལྟར་དྲང	go ba ga 'dra byas nas len dgos,...Tshig la brten nas don dag ji ltar drang,...Mdo'i drang don gyi dgongs pa ji ltar drang	ji ltar drang
ཇི་ལྟར་འདུག་ཀྱང	whatever sort of person he may be	ji ltar 'dug kyang
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་པ་བཞིན	as you wish, as he desired	ji ltar 'dod pa bzhin
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ	to stay at will, to remain for as long as one desires	ji ltar 'dod pa bzhin du gnas pa
སྟོན་པ	display all enjoyments as 1 wishes	ston pa
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་པ་བསིན་དུ་གནས	remain where 1 wishes	ji ltar 'dod pa bsin du gnas
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་པའི་དོན་འགྲུབ་པ	succeed as 1 wishes	ji ltar 'dod pa'i don 'grub pa
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་བཞིན	wherever he wishes to	ji ltar 'dod bzhin
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་བཞིན་བསྟན	taught in accordance with their wishes	ji ltar 'dod bzhin bstan
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་བཤིན	wherever he wishes to	ji ltar 'dod bshin
ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་བསིན་བསྟན	teach wherever 1 wishes	ji ltar 'dod bsin bstan
ཇི་ལྟར་ན	in the following way	ji ltar na
ཇི་ལྟར་གནས་པ	as something is [by its nature]. as something is [by nature]	ji ltar gnas pa
ཇི་ལྟར་སྣང	however he appeared	ji ltar snang
ཇི་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	how(ever) (things) appear	ji ltar snang ba
ཇི་ལྟར་སྣང་བ་གང་ཡང་མེད	are not at all how they seem; have no real existence whatsoever	ji ltar snang ba gang yang med
ཇི་ལྟར་སྣང་ཡང	no matter what you perceive	ji ltar snang yang
ཇི་ལྟར་བ	in a precise way	ji ltar ba
ཇི་ལྟར་བར	exactly	ji ltar bar
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱ	What should one do?	ji ltar bya
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱས་ཀྱང་ཕན་ཏོག་མེད	however you do it it won't do any good	ji ltar byas kyang phan tog med
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱས་ན་དྲག	what should I do?	ji ltar byas na drag
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱུང་ན	How do they originate?	ji ltar byung na
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱུང་བའི་ཚུལ	what had happened	ji ltar byung ba'i tshul
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱེད	what can I do?	ji ltar byed
ཇི་ལྟར་བྱེད་དགོས	how should it be done?	ji ltar byed dgos
ཇི་ལྟར་དབང་པོ་དམན་པ་ཡང	no matter how low your/ one's capacity is	ji ltar dbang po dman pa yang
ཇི་ལྟར་མཚུངས	how they are similar	ji ltar mtshungs
ཇི་ལྟར་འཛུགས	how did it begin?	ji ltar 'dzugs
ཇི་ལྟར་བཞེད་པ་བཞིན	exactly according to his assertion	ji ltar bzhed pa bzhin
ཇི་ལྟར་ཟེར་བ་བཞིན་བྱེད	do as told	ji ltar zer ba bzhin byed
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡང	now matter how / what	ji ltar yang
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན	That's just how it is	ji ltar yin
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན་སྙམ་ན	if wonder why / how	ji ltar yin snyam na
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན་པ	to be just as it really is	ji ltar yin pa
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན་ཡང་རུང	not matter what	ji ltar yin yang rung
ཇི་ལྟར་རིགས་པ	whatever is suitable	ji ltar rigs pa
ཇི་ལྟར་རིགས་པས	according to our possibilities	ji ltar rigs pas
ཇི་ལྟར་རུང་ཞེ་ན	if you ask what is suitable	ji ltar rung zhe na
ཇི་ལྟར་བཤེད་པ་བཞིན	as explained	ji ltar bshed pa bzhin
ཇི་ལྟར་སོང	how it departs, how it moves	ji ltar song
ཇི་ལྟར་གསལ	what this lucidity is like	ji ltar gsal
ཇི་སྟེ	what	ji ste
ཇི་ཐེག་པ	as much as you are able to carry	ji theg pa
ཇི་འདྲ	Syn {ji ltar} how	ji 'dra
ཇི་འདྲ་བ	whatever kind, like what, however	ji 'dra ba
ཇི་འདྲ་ཞིག	"what kind of" construction	ji 'dra zhig
ཇི་འདྲར	how	ji 'drar
ཇི་ནས	as for instance, henceforth	ji nas
ཇི་ནུས	whatever/ as much as 1 can	ji nus
ཇི་ནུས་ཀྱིས	as much as possible, to the utmost	ji nus kyis
ཇི་ཕྱིར	for what purpose, why	ji phyir
ཇི་བྱུང	whatever happens	ji byung
ཇི་མ་ཇི་བཞིན	exactly like that, as it is 899	ji ma ji bzhin
ཇི་མ་སྙམ་པ	indifferent, unconcerned	ji ma snyam pa
ཇི་མ་སྙམ་པ་ལ་སྡོད	remain indifferent/ unconcerned	ji ma snyam pa la sdod
ཇི་མ་སྙམ་པ་ལ་གནས	remain indifferent/ unconcerned	ji ma snyam pa la gnas
ཇི་མ་རུང	exclamatory phrase like alas!	ji ma rung
ཇི་མི་མཇེད་པ	without forgetting anything	ji mi mjed pa
ཇི་མི་སྙམ	not give importance, not pay heed to	ji mi snyam
ཇི་མི་སྙམ་པ	indifferent, unconcerned, not thinking anything at all	ji mi snyam pa
ཇི་མི་སྙམ་པའི་བཟོད་པ	not care	ji mi snyam pa'i bzod pa
ཇི་མི་སྙམ་བཟོད	not care	ji mi snyam bzod
ཇི་ཙམ	however much, slightest, how many, how much, how, what, how long, as much as, how much, just as	ji tsam
ཇི་ཙམ་ཀྱང	no matter how much {ji tsam du dad par byas kyang} no matter how much faith you might place in them	ji tsam kyang
ཇི་ཙམ་མཐོང་ཀྱང	no matter how many [you] see	ji tsam mthong kyang
ཇི་ཙམ་དུ	as much as, no matter how much	ji tsam du
ཇི་ཙམ་འདོད་པ	as long as 1 desires	ji tsam 'dod pa
ཇི་ཙམ་ནས	as soon as, when	ji tsam nas
ཇི་ཙམ་པ་དེ་ཙམ	however much,..that much	ji tsam pa de tsam
ཇི་ཙམ་བྱུང	how many have been got?	ji tsam byung
ཇི་ཙམ་ཡོད་ཀྱང	no matter how many there are	ji tsam yod kyang
ཇི་ཙམ་ཡོད་པ	whatever he has / there is	ji tsam yod pa
ཇི་ཙུག	how, in what manner	ji tsug
ཇི་ཚུག	how, in what way, like what, however, in any case, gang 'dra ji tshug byas na kun la phan pa 'ong however [you] do it benefit will come	ji tshug
ཇི་ཞིག	seldom	ji zhig
ཇི་ཞིག་ལྟར	seldom	ji zhig ltar
ཇི་ཞིག་ནས	after some time	ji zhig nas
ཇི་བཞིན	as regards, just as it is, as it is, how, like what, in its very being, exactly as it is, natural , exactly, in an authentic manner, precisely, just as if, precise, precisely	ji bzhin
ཇི་བཞིན་མཁྱེན་པ	knowledge of things as they are	ji bzhin mkhyen pa
ཇི་བཞིན་གྱི	true character	ji bzhin gyi
ཇི་བཞིན་ངེས་ཤེས	precise knowledge	ji bzhin nges shes
ཇི་བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness; the state of being just as it is; just as it is	ji bzhin nyid
ཇི་བཞིན་རྟོགས	precisely discovers	ji bzhin rtogs
ཇི་བཞིན་རྟོགས་པ	realizing it as it is	ji bzhin rtogs pa
ཇི་བཞིན་དུ	exactly, as, just like, actual; in the way, manner	ji bzhin du
ཇི་བཞིན་དྲན་གསོས	remember precisely	ji bzhin dran gsos
ཇི་བཞིན་ནོ	like that	ji bzhin no
ཇི་བཞིན་པ	as it is, suchness, the authentic condition, state of being just as it is, natural state	ji bzhin pa
ཇི་བཞིན་པར་བཞུགས་པ	remaining in the state of being just as it is	ji bzhin par bzhugs pa
ཇི་བཞིན་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	authentic nonconceptual condition	ji bzhin spros bral
ཇི་བཞིན་བ	SA ji bzhin pa	ji bzhin ba
ཇི་བཞིན་མིན	inauthentic	ji bzhin min
ཇི་བཞིན་མེད་པ	without authenticity	ji bzhin med pa
ཇི་བཞིན་རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	precisely recognized	ji bzhin rang ngo 'phrod pa
ཇི་བཞིན་རིག་པ	precise knowledge of rigpa, precisely recognizes	ji bzhin rig pa
ཇི་བཞིན་ཤུགས་ཨས	he intends to hit	ji bzhin shugs as
ཇི་བཞེས་པ་བཞེས་ཤིག	please take whatever you like	ji bzhes pa bzhes shig
ཇི་འོས	whatever is appropriate / fitting, whatever is right / best	ji 'os
ཇི་ཡང་རུང	as many as/ whichever apply/ are appropriate	ji yang rung
ཇི་ཡོད	whatever/ all that exist	ji yod
ཇི་རིགས་པ	various, all kinds, whatever is suitable/ appropriate	ji rigs pa
ཇི་རོབ	[arch] why, for what reason?	ji rob
ཇི་རོབ་ཏུ	[arch] why, for what reason?	ji rob tu
ཇི་ལ	for what, owing to what	ji la
ཇི་ལིང	Kirin Province	ji ling
ཇི་བཤད་བསྣད་ཀྱང	whatever [he] is told	ji bshad bsnad kyang
ཇི་བཤིན་གྱི	true character	ji bshin gyi
ཇི་བཤིན་ཤུགས་ཨས	he intends to hit	ji bshin shugs as
ཇི་སྲིད	as long as there is . . .	ji srid
ཇི་སྲིད་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	1) as long as you live, as long as it lasts. 2) throughout	ji srid kyi bar du
ཇི་སྲིད་བསྐལ་པ་མ་སྟོངས་པར	for as long as the aeon lasts [hasn't been emptied] 900	ji srid bskal pa ma stongs par
ཇི་སྲིད་འཁོར་བ་མ་སྟོངས་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	for as long as samsara is not emptied, until samsara is emptied	ji srid 'khor ba ma stongs kyi bar du
ཇི་སྲིད་དུ	for as long as	ji srid du
ཇི་སྲིད་དེ་སྲིད	for as long as ... that long ..	ji srid de srid
ཇི་སྲིད་པ	for as long as	ji srid pa
ཇི་སྲིད་བར་དུ	as long as exist	ji srid bar du
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་བའི་བར	as long as 1 lives	ji srid 'tsho ba'i bar
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་བར་བྱའོ	“I will sustain myself through this activity for as long as I live!”	ji srid 'tsho bar bya'o
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་ཡི་བར	as long as I live	ji srid 'tsho yi bar
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་ཡི་བར་དུ	for as long as I live, for the rest of my life ji srid 'tsho yi bar du mi shig pa'i thig le the drop which is indestructible for the duration of life	ji srid 'tsho yi bar du
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོའི་མཐའ་ཅན	for as long as 1 lives, w the limit of 1 life-span	ji srid 'tsho'i mtha' can
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོའི་བའི་བར	for as long as I live, for the rest of my life	ji srid 'tsho'i ba'i bar
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོའི་བར	as long as life lasts	ji srid 'tsho'i bar
ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོའི་བར་དུ	for as long as I live	ji srid 'tsho'i bar du
ཇི་སྲིད་ལས་ཀ་མ་ཚར་བ་གཏོགས	as long as the work is not finished	ji srid las ka ma tshar ba gtogs
ཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱོང	SA mig mi bzang, yul 'khor bsrung	jig rten skyong
ཇིང	chinese term for buddhism	jing
ཇིང་གིར	Gengis Khan	jing gir
ཇིང་གིར་རྒྱལ་པོ	(M) king {jing gir} [b 3rd water horse yr, called them cing, in the fire tiger yr came to the M han chen throne. sog skad du jing: yon tan gir: mang po han: rgyal po, monggol gyi dmag &, chab srid,...	jing gir rgyal po
ཇིང་གིར་ཧན་གྱི་བུ་བཞི	the four sons of Genghis Khan	jing gir han gyi bu bzhi
ཇིན་ཚལ	celery	jin tshal
ཇིས་ན	[arch] cis na	jis na
ཇུ	figure 67	ju
ཇུ་ཏིག	bon mo cord and mo yig	ju tig
ཇུ་ཐིག	bon mo cord and mo yig	ju thig
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཀནོཏ	sortilege, denotes a drawing of lots by threads of different colors, zhang zhung language for "cords", SA shar ba rkya drug, ye srid 'phrul gyi ju thig, ye mkhyen sgra bla'i mngon shes, ye rje smon...	through knot
ཇུ་ཐིག་གི་རྟེན	support for the divinatory faculties	ju thig gi rten
ཇུ་པོ	globular stone used for grinding spices, pestle	ju po
ཇུ་བོ	stone [gtun bu]	ju bo
ཇུ་ཞག་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལས་རྩིས	astrology of the interdependence of actions	ju zhag rten 'brel las rtsis
ཇུ་རུ་ཇ	kind of tea	ju ru ja
ཇུ་ཤེས	kind of satin	ju shes
ཇུགས་ཀོང	crucible for melting gold and silver	jugs kong
ཇུན་གར	(M 1 of the M ao rod kyi sde tsho bzhi	jun gar
ཇུན་གར་དུས་ཟིང	12th fire bird yr by jun gar tshe dbang rab brtan rang sde dmag dpung khrid de Lhasar gu shr'i bstan 'dzin chos rgyal gyi yang tsha lha bzang han killed &, 6th Dalai Lama rjes ma ngag dbang ye shes...	jun gar dus zing
ཇུན་ཝང	celebrated chief	jun wang
ཇུབ་ཕབ	kind of tea	jub phab
ཇུས	1) strategy, policy, scheme; 2) brocade w various pictures/ designs embroidered in gold thread; 3) plan/ intend to	jus
ཇུས་ཀྱི་ཚོད་འཛིན	jus tshod	jus kyi tshod 'dzin
ཇུས་བཀོད	planned, designed, strategized	jus bkod
ཇུས་བཀོད་པ	planner, designer, strategist	jus bkod pa
ཇུས་བསྐུལ་བ	plan, lay out strategies	jus bskul ba
ཇུས་མཁས་པོ	one skillful in means, one full of resources	jus mkhas po
ཇུས་འཁྲི	prevent, prohibit, [try to] stop, express one's opinion, try to take charge of, mind	jus 'khri
ཇུས་འཁྲི་བྱེད	prevent, prohibit, [try to] stop, express 1's opinion, try to take charge of, mind	jus 'khri byed
ཇུས་འགོད	planning, making/ designing/ laying out strategies	jus 'god
ཇུས་འགོད་སྡེ་ཁག	planning/ design unit	jus 'god sde khag
ཇུས་འགོད་པ	planner, designer, strategist	jus 'god pa
ཇུས་འགོད་བྱེད	plan, make/design strategies	jus 'god byed
ཇུས་འགོད་བྱེད་སྟངས	planning/ strategy designing process/ stages/ procedure	jus 'god byed stangs
ཇུས་འགྲོ	thabs lam du 'gro ba [Lkog g.yo ngan jus la jus 'gro ga la yong]	jus 'gro
ཇུས་ངན	intrigue, insidious/ evil schemes, plots	jus ngan
ཇུས་ངན་ལམ་ལྷོངས	carry out/ succeed w evil/ decep[tive strategy/ pan	jus ngan lam lhongs
ཇུས་ཅན	subtle	jus can
ཇུས་ཆེན	great/ big/ important scheme/ strategy/ plan	jus chen
ཇུས་ཉེས	1) wrong/ evil / mistaken plan/ strategy; 2) unfortunate/ unlucky event, tragedy, mishap, obstructing spirits and obstacles	jus nyes
ཇུས་གཏོགས	[Khrung khrung byang du 'phur ba la, phag pas jus gtogs byed don med] prevent, prohibit, [try to] stop, express one's opinion, try to take charge of, mind	jus gtogs
ཇུས་གཏོགས་བྱེད་པ	be in charge of, mind, manage	jus gtogs byed pa
ཇུས་གཏོང	plan, lay out strategies	jus gtong
ཇུས་གཏོང་བ	plan, lay out strategies	jus gtong ba
ཇུས་བཏང་བ	planned, laid out strategies	jus btang ba
ཇུས་བཏིང་བ	plan, strategize	jus bting ba
ཇུས་གདིང་བ	plan, strategize	jus gding ba
ཇུས་བདེ	good/ wholesome way of doing/ gros	jus bde
ཇུས་དཔོན	thabs kyi gros leader 901	jus dpon
ཇུས་བྱེད	plan to	jus byed
ཇུས་མེད་ཇུས་འཁྲི	uncalled for interference/ intervention	jus med jus 'khri
ཇུས་མེད་ཇུས་འཁྲི་བྱེད	interfere/ intervene w/o right	jus med jus 'khri byed
ཇུས་མེད་ཇུས་གཏོགས	uncalled for interference/ intervention [las don nam, gros khongs su the dbang med par rang mtshams the gtogs byed pa,...Rgyal khab gzhan gyi nang srid la jus med jus gtogs byas pa]	jus med jus gtogs
ཇུས་ཚོད	jus kyi tshod 'dzin [Pho rgod pos jus tshod ma zin na, lus 'dom gang dgra la skyel nges yin]	jus tshod
ཇུས་འཚོལ་བ	seek/ study/ try to get a plan	jus 'tshol ba
ཇུས་གཞི	basic/ fundamental plan/ strategy [Las 'go ma btsugs gong nas jus gzhi 'ding ba]	jus gzhi
ཇུས་གཞི་མཉམ་འགོད	joint planning	jus gzhi mnyam 'god
ཇུས་གཞི་གདིང	plan	jus gzhi gding
ཇུས་གཞི་འདོན	plan	jus gzhi 'don
ཇུས་ལེགས	one who has conquered his enemies, hinayana saint, possessed of good manners, propriety of conduct, decent, agreeable, clever, skilled, able, experienced	jus legs
ཇུས་བསླབས་པ	thab jus kyi rig pa bslabs pa	jus bslabs pa
ཇེ	more, figure 97, particle expressing comparative degree, progress, sound, voice, hortative particle, more (for use with adjectives), ...je means more (for use with adjectives)	je
ཇེ་བཀབ་ཇེ་གསལ	however much bsgribs kyang mi 'grib par da dung that much it became clear	je bkab je gsal
ཇེ་ཁ	deed	je kha
ཇེ་ཁྱོད	now you, you first	je khyod
ཇེ་ངན་ཇེ་ངན	worse and worse	je ngan je ngan
ཇེ་ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ	subside	je chung du 'gro
ཇེ་ཆེ	bigger	je che
ཇེ་ཆེ་ཇེ་ཆེ	grew larger and larger	je che je che
ཇེ་ཆེན་པ	an old school lineage	je chen pa
ཇེ་ཆེར	bigger, greater, more	je cher
ཇེ་ཆེར་གྱུར་བ	grow bigger and bigger	je cher gyur ba
ཇེ་ཆེར་ཕྱིན་པ	increased	je cher phyin pa
ཇེ་ཇེ	a little at a time	je je
ཇེ་ཉུང་ངུ་འགྲོ	grow smaller	je nyung ngu 'gro
ཇེ་ཉུང་ཇེ་ཉུང	decrease	je nyung je nyung
ཇེ་ཉེ་ཇེ་ཉེ	closer and closer	je nye je nye
ཇེ་ཉེ་ཇེ་ཉེ་སོང་སྟེ	going nearer and nearer	je nye je nye song ste
ཇེ་ཉེ་ཇེ་ཉེར	nearer and nearer	je nye je nyer
ཇེ་ཉེར	nearer and nearer	je nyer
ཇེ་བརྟན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	become more and more stable	je brtan du gyur pa
ཇེ་བརྟན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	will become more stable	je brtan du 'gyur ba
ཇེ་མཐོ་ཇེ་མཐོ	higher and higher	je mtho je mtho
ཇེ་མཐོ་ཇེ་མཐོར	higher and higher	je mtho je mthor
ཇེ་མཐོར་ཇེ་མཐོར	higher and higher	je mthor je mthor
ཇེ་དང་པོ	the very first	je dang po
ཇེ་ནི་རལ	general [military]	je ni ral
ཇེ་ཕྲ	thinner and thinner, finer and finer	je phra
ཇེ་བས་ཇེ་ཆེར	larger and larger	je bas je cher
ཇེ་བས་ཇེ་ཟབ	more and more profound	je bas je zab
ཇེ་དབུལ་བ	grow poorer, become more and more destitute	je dbul ba
ཇེ་མང	more	je mang
ཇེ་མང་འགྲོ	go on increasing in number	je mang 'gro
ཇེ་མང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	more	je mang du 'gro ba
ཇེ་དམའ་ཇེ་དམར	lower and lower	je dma' je dmar
ཇེ་ཞིག	a little while	je zhig
ཇེ་ཞིག་ན	once, at the time when, after awhile	je zhig na
ཇེ་ཞིག་ནས	at a certain point	je zhig nas
ཇེ་བཟང་ཇེ་བཟང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	grow better and better	je bzang je bzang du 'gro ba
ཇེ་རགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	increasingly coarse	je rags su gyur pa
ཇེ་རིང	ever longer	je ring
ཇེ་གསལ་དུ་སོང	it has become more evident	je gsal du song
ཇེ་ལྷོད་ཇེ་ལྷོད	an increasingly relaxed state	je lhod je lhod
ཇེང	first, earliest, sound, voice	jeng
ཇེན་གིས་ཁན	genghis khan who invited sakya pandita to mongolia	jen gis khan
ཇེམ་ཙེ	scissors (CH	jem tse
ཇེམ་ཚེ	scissors (CH	jem tshe
ཇེམ་ཚེ་ཁའི་ཧེ་བགས	disparity	jem tshe kha'i he bags
ཇེམ་ཚེ་རྒྱག	cut w scissors (CH	jem tshe rgyag
ཇོ	figure 127, SA jo po, jo mo	jo
ཇོ་སྐྱབས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Jokyab Rinpoche; Khenpo Pema Trinley Nyingpo	jo skyabs rin po che
ཇོ་ཁང	Syn {gtug lag khang} major shrine in Lhasa, now houses dowry of Chinese prince Wencheng Kungjo of Emperor Songtsen Gampo. Jowo Temple. Jokhang, famous temple in Lhasa	jo khang
ཇོ་ཁང་རི་ཁྲོད	the Jokhang hermitage of Enchay monastery (dben dgon) at	jo khang ri khrod
གངཏོཀ	Sikkim	Gangtok
ཇོ་རྒན་མ	an old nun	jo rgan ma
ཇོ་རྔོག་འབྲོམ་གསུམ	Atisha jo bo rje, rngog legs pa'i shes rab, and 'brom rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas	jo rngog 'brom gsum
ཇོ་ཇོ	cousin, older brother, elder brother, man's elder brother, elder brother of a male, sir, mr, gentleman, lord, friend, a god	jo jo
ཇོ་ནང	1) Jonang Tradition. 2) Jonang, in Tsang	jo nang
ཇོ་ནང་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཆེན་པོ	the great omniscient master of Jonang	jo nang kun mkhyen chen po
ཇོ་ནང་ཁྲིད་བརྒྱ	a precious collection of texts containing the explanations of the {khrid} for one hundred and eight special precepts of Buddhist practice whose transmissions converged and were collected in the jo ...	jo nang khrid brgya
ཇོ་ནང་དགོན	{jo nang pa} monastery	jo nang dgon
ཇོ་ནང་རྗེ་བཙུན	Taranatha, {jo nang pa} b. 1575 jo nang rje btsun kun dga' grol mchog {kun dga' grol mchog} {jo nang pa} b. 1507 902	jo nang rje btsun
ཇོ་ནང་རྗེ་བཙུན་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Jonang Jetsün jo nang dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan {jo nang dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan [1292 - 1361] jo nang dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan [1292 - 1361] jo nang dol po pa shes r...	jo nang rje btsun chen po
ཇོ་ནང་པ	Jonangpa. p.n. of a sect. [name of a Buddhist school in Tibet]; Taranatha, b. 1575	jo nang pa
ཇོ་ནང་པ་ཀུན་དགའ་གྲོལ་མཆོག	b. 1507	jo nang pa kun dga' grol mchog
ཇོ་ནང་པ་ཏཱ་ར་ནཱ་ཐ	b. 1575	jo nang pa tA ra nA tha
ཇོ་ནང་པའི་ལུགས	Jonangpa School	jo nang pa'i lugs
ཇོ་ནང་བ	Jonangpa school [in 11th century yu mo mi bskyod rdo rje founded the gzhan stong tradition, kun spangs thugs rje brtson 'grus in jo mo founded a monastery, later this lineage including dolpopa sher...	jo nang ba
ཇོ་བོ	Lord/ Atisha; 1) nobleman, man of high rank, lord. 2) elder brother. 3) the Buddha in Lhasa; Lord	jo bo
ཇོ་བོ་སྔགས	lords and tantrikas	jo bo sngags
ཇོ་བོ་སྔགས་པ	lords and tantrikas	jo bo sngags pa
ཇོ་བོ་གཅེན་པོ	older brother	jo bo gcen po
ཇོ་བོ་མཆེད་གཉིས	the two jo bo brothers [statues] [in lha ldan gtsug lag khang and ra mo che the jo bo sh'akya mu ne &, jo bo mi bskyod rdo rje]	jo bo mched gnyis
ཇོ་བོ་ཇ་མ་ལི་དཀར་པོ	White Jowo Jamali. See Jowo Jamali	jo bo ja ma li dkar po
ཇོ་བོ་འཇམ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Manjuvajra	jo bo 'jam pa'i rdo rje
ཇོ་བོ་རྗེ	Atisha	jo bo rje
ཇོ་བོ་རྗེ་དཔལ་ལྡན་ཨ་ཏི་ཤ	glorious lord Atisha	jo bo rje dpal ldan a ti sha
ཇོ་བོ་རྗེ་ལྷ་ཅིག་གི་ཞལ་ནས་ཀྱང	Atisa says:	jo bo rje lha cig gi zhal nas kyang
ཇོ་བོ་རྗེ་ལྷ་གཅིག	single divine lord Atisha	jo bo rje lha gcig
ཇོ་བོ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	lord of great compassion	jo bo thugs rje chen po
ཇོ་བོ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡི་གེ་དྲུག་པ	the six syllables of the Great Compassionate One: om mani padme hung	jo bo thugs rje chen po yi ge drug pa
ཇོ་བོ་དི་པམ་ཀ་ར	Lord Dipamkara [past buddha]	jo bo di pam ka ra
ཇོ་བོ་ཕྱིང་དཀར་བ	a demi-god	jo bo phying dkar ba
ཇོ་བོ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོ	Jowo Jangchub Chenpo, the Great Enlightened Crowned Buddha; at Samye	jo bo byang chub chen po
ཇོ་བོ་དབུ་སྐྲ	a place at the main door of the Jokang	jo bo dbu skra
ཇོ་བོ་མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	the main image in the {jo khang} or {ra sa 'phrul snang} the Buddha image from the Nepali queen of Songtsen Gampo installed at the {jo khang} temple in Lhasa	jo bo mi bskyod rdo rje
ཇོ་བོ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Lord [who is the]	jo bo yid bzhin nor bu
ཝིཤ	fulfilling gem [statue] [Buddha image from the CH queen of songtsen gampo installed at {ra mo che} temple in Lhasa]	wish
ཇོ་བོ་རང་བྱུང་ལྔ་ལྡན	self-arisen image of five	jo bo rang byung lnga ldan
ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ	oath swearing word = jo bo rin po che	jo bo rin po
ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Jowo Shakyamuni, or Jowo Rinpoche, the crowned Buddha of Lhasa, brought to Tibet by King Songtsen Gampo's Chinese wife	jo bo rin po che
ཇོ་བོ་ལུགས	school of Atisha	jo bo lugs
ཇོ་བོ་ཤ་ཀྱ	Jowo Shakya; Lord Shakya. Refers to Shakyamuni. The two brothers. Jowo Shakya, refers to the two statues of Shakyamuni brought to Lhasa by the Chinese and Nepalese wives of Srong btsan sgam po	jo bo sha kya
ཇོ་བོ་ཤཱ་ཀྱ་མུ་ནི	the buddha (in Lhasa)	jo bo shA kya mu ni
ཇོ་བོ་ལྷ་ཁང	Temple of the Crowned Buddha	jo bo lha khang
ཇོ་བོ་ལྷ་གཅིག	Atisha, the Unique	jo bo lha gcig
ཇོ་བོ་ཨ་ཏི་ཤ	Lord Atisha	jo bo a ti sha
ཇོ་བོའི་དབུ་སྐྲ	the Buddha's hair	jo bo'i dbu skra
ཇོ་བོའི་ལམ་སྒྲོན	Atisha's Lamp for the Path of Enlightenment	jo bo'i lam sgron
ཇོ་བོའི་ལམ་སྒྲོན་ལས	in the Lamp for the Path of Enlightenment, Atisha says"	jo bo'i lam sgron las
ཇོ་བོའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྟ་མགྲིན	Hayagriwa	jo bo'i lugs kyi rta mgrin
ཇོ་མོ	queen	jo mo
ཇོ་མོ་ཁ་ནག	snowy mountain in s. tibet near bhutan	jo mo kha nag
ཇོ་མོ་ཁ་རག	great tibetan mountain range	jo mo kha rag
ཇོ་མོ་མཁན་པོ	abbess	jo mo mkhan po
ཇོ་མོ་གངས	lady of glaciers	jo mo gangs
ཇོ་མོ་གངས་དཀར	Mt. Everest	jo mo gangs dkar
ཇོ་མོ་གངས་ཅན་རི	Mt. Everest	jo mo gangs can ri
ཇོ་མོ་གླང་མ	Mt. Everest	jo mo glang ma
ཇོ་མོ་གླང་མ་རི	Lady of Glaciers; Everest	jo mo glang ma ri
ཇོ་མོ་གླིང་གསུམ	CHN	jo mo gling gsum
ཇོ་མོ་གློ་སྡུམ	med. herb {jo mo glo sdum [the leaves sweet, the fruit hot, body heat neutral, glo nad and rus tshad sel]	jo mo glo sdum
ཇོ་མོ་གཉིས	two nuns	jo mo gnyis
ཇོ་མོ་དད་ཅན	a faithful nun	jo mo dad can
ཇོ་མོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཀུན་གྲགས་མ	lady dorje kundrak [notes: (see glossary to \_the rain of wisdom\_]	jo mo rdo rje kun grags ma
ཇོ་མོ་ནང	Jomo Nang; valley of the Jonangpa seat, near {lha rtse rdzong}	jo mo nang
ཇོ་མོ་སྨན་མོ	1248-1283, gter ston who rediscovered one version of 'dra 'bag chen mo	jo mo sman mo
ཇོ་མོ་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	Lady Tsogyal. Also known as Khandro Yeshe Tsogyal, the close disciple of Guru Rinpoche who	jo mo mtsho rgyal
ཇོ་མོ་ལྷ་རི	{jo mo lha ri} mt	jo mo lha ri
ཇོ་མོམ་གངས	lady of glaciers	jo mom gngas
ཇོ་རྩི	- varnish, lacquer	jo rtsi
ཇོ་རྩི་གསེར་ཤོག	varnish, lacquer and gser shog	jo rtsi gser shog
ཇོ་རྫོང	fort & district in tibet	jo rdzong
ཇོ་ལགས	1) elder brother [h]; 2) Tibetan govt. rtse phyag and bla phyag gi nang zan; 3) respectful address to male householder	jo lags
ཇོ་ལགས་སྐུ་ཞབས	gentleman	jo lags sku zhabs
ཇོ་ལུགས་སྒྲོལ་དཀར	White Tara from Atisha's tradition	jo lugs sgrol dkar
ཇོ་ལོག	apostate nun	jo log
ཇོ་ཤ་ཀྱ	abbr. of {jo bo sha kya mu ni}	jo sha kya
ཇོ་ཤ་ཀྱ་མཆེད	the two Jowo Shakyamuni statues [in Lhasa]; twin	jo sha kya mched
ཇོ་ཤ་སྐྱ་མཆེད	jowo and shakya, the two brothers (2 famous buddha statues in lhasa)	jo sha skya mched
ཇོ་སྲས	prince, noble [son]	jo sras
ཇོ་སླང	earthen pan, heating stove	jo slang
ཇོག་ལེན་མེད་པ	free from the alternation of . . .	jog len med pa
ཇོས	(not in DAS)	jos
ཇོས་འགོད	planning, making strategies	jos 'god
མཇངས་པ	wise	mjangs pa
མཇལ	meet, receive, see, seeing, call on (h), have an audience with, be introduced to, (about books) look, glance, study	mjal
མཇལ་དཀའ	hard to meet	mjal dka'
མཇལ་ཁ	audience, admittance	mjal kha
མཇལ་ཁ་གཏོང་བ	grant/ give an audience/ interview	mjal kha gtong ba
མཇལ་ཁ་གནང	grant/ give audience/ interview	mjal kha gnang
མཇལ་ཁ་གནང་བ	to grant admittance, receive in audience, grant/ give interview	mjal kha gnang ba
མཇལ་ཁ་ཞུ	seek/ have an audience/ interview	mjal kha zhu
མཇལ་ཁ་ཞུ་བ	seek/ have an audience/ interview	mjal kha zhu ba
མཇལ་ཁ་ཞུས	sought/ had an audience/ interview	mjal kha zhus
མཇལ་ཁལ	an audience	mjal khal
མཇལ་ཁལ་གནང་བ	to give an audience	mjal khal gnang ba
མཇལ་ཁལ་ཞུས་པ	to request / have an audience	mjal khal zhus pa
མཇལ་བགྲོས	meet and converse	mjal bgros
མཇལ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	1) no visiting [today]. 2) no one left to meet	mjal rgyu med pa
མཇལ་བཅར	audience, visit, call	mjal bcar
མཇལ་བཅར་གནང	visit, call on	mjal bcar gnang
མཇལ་བཅར་གནང་བ	to visit, call on	mjal bcar gnang ba
མཇལ་བཅར་ཞུ	visit, call on	mjal bcar zhu
མཇལ་བཅར་ཞུ་བ	to visit, call on	mjal bcar zhu ba
མཇལ་མཆོད་འབུལ་བྱས་པ	{gnas rten rnams la mjal mchod 'bul byas} made offerings to all the sacred sites and shrines	mjal mchod 'bul byas pa
མཇལ་རྟེན	present or gift presented when seeing/ meeting/ visiting a person	mjal rten
མཇལ་རྟེན་འབུལ	give present/ gift when seeing/ meeting/ visiting a person	mjal rten 'bul
མཇལ་རྟེན་འབུལ་བ	to give a present/ gift when seeing/ meeting/ visiting a person	mjal rten 'bul ba
མཇལ་དར	Tibetan ceremonial scarf, kata (h)	mjal dar
མཇལ་དུ་འགྲོ	go to visit, walking to meet, going to visit	mjal du 'gro
མཇལ་དུ་བྱུང	came to meet with him	mjal du byung
མཇལ་དུ་མི་བཏུབ	cannot get in, cannot obtain admittance	mjal du mi btub
མཇལ་དུ་ཡོད	saw that	mjal du yod
མཇལ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	that still can be seen	mjal du yod pa
མཇལ་དུ་སོང་བ	went to pay homage	mjal du song ba
མཇལ་དུམ	bar 'dum	mjal dum
མཇལ་བདེ་པོ	accessible	mjal bde po
མཇལ་ནས་བཟུང	ever since I met	mjal nas bzung
མཇལ་སྣ	introduction, receiver	mjal sna
མཇལ་སྣ་པ	usher, introducer 904	mjal sna pa
མཇལ་སྣ་བྱས	introduction	mjal sna byas
མཇལ་སྣ་བྱས་པ	to introduce, lead inside	mjal sna byas pa
མཇལ་སྣ་འཚོལ	conduct, usher	mjal sna 'tshol
མཇལ་སྣ་འཚོལ་བ	to conduct, usher	mjal sna 'tshol ba
མཇལ་པའི་སྐལ་པ	{bla ma bzang po dang mjal pa'i skal pa} the good fortune of meeting an excellent teacher	mjal pa'i skal pa
མཇལ་སྤྲོ་པོ	pleasant blta yul, lta yul blo la 'bab po	mjal spro po
མཇལ་ཕྱག	salutation, [prostration on] meeting/ audience/ interview	mjal phyag
མཇལ་ཕྱག་རྟེན	present or gift presented in homage when seeing/ meeting/ visiting a person	mjal phyag rten
མཇལ་ཕྱག་རྟེན་དུ་ཕུལ	on meeting offered him in homage, made as an audience-offering of	mjal phyag rten du phul
མཇལ་ཕྱག་རྟེན་དུ་ཕུལ་བ	meeting, offered him, in homage, made as an audience-offering of	mjal phyag rten du phul ba
མཇལ་ཕྲད་བྱེད་པ	meet, have an interview with	mjal phrad byed pa
མཇལ་འཕྲད	interview, meeting	mjal 'phrad
མཇལ་འཕྲད་མཁན	1 who meets mjal 'phrad dga' spro'i ngang nas gnang	mjal 'phrad mkhan
མཇལ་འཕྲད་དུ་འགྲོ	go to meet	mjal 'phrad du 'gro
མཇལ་འཕྲད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go to meet	mjal 'phrad du 'gro ba
མཇལ་འཕྲད་གནང	to meet (h)	mjal 'phrad gnang
མཇལ་འཕྲད་གནང་བ	meet (h)	mjal 'phrad gnang ba
མཇལ་འཕྲད་པ	1 who meets	mjal 'phrad pa
མཇལ་འཕྲད་བྱུང་བ	met with [each other] mjal 'phrad ma byung bas phan tshun ngo	mjal 'phrad byung ba
མ་འཛིན་སོང	since they had never met they didn't recognize each other	ma 'dzin song
མཇལ་བ	met	mjal ba
མཇལ་བ་ད་ལན་ཙམ་རེད	this may be our only meeting	mjal ba da lan tsam red
མཇལ་བ་ཙམ་གྱིས	by the mere sight of (him)	mjal ba tsam gyis
མཇལ་བ་ལ་ཡིན	had come just to see it	mjal ba la yin
མཇལ་བར་རྐང་བཏད་བྱོན	[he] came specially to meet [him]	mjal bar rkang btad byon
མཇལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	meet, ponder, witness	mjal bar byed pa
མཇལ་བར་ཞུ	request an audience/ interview	mjal bar zhu
མཇལ་བར་ཞུ་བ	ask for an audience	mjal bar zhu ba
མཇལ་མང	grand reception, visit paid by many together	mjal mang
མཇལ་མི	visitors	mjal mi
མཇལ་མྱོང	to meet somebody	mjal myong
མཇལ་དམངས	ordinary person seeking/ having interview	mjal dmangs
མཇལ་ཞུ	1) request an audience. 2) call on to pay respects to. 3) gift given at audience	mjal zhu
མཇལ་ཡང	whenever	mjal yang
མཇལ་ཡིག་མཛོད་གསུམ	Tibetan govt bla dpon che khag gi mgron gnyer dang, drung yig dang, phyag mdzod de gsum	mjal yig mdzod gsum
མཇལ་ལན	return visit/ call	mjal lan
མཇལ་ཤུ	prayer on the occasion of interview/ meeting	mjal shu
མཇིང	[a'jings] center and bottom, depths	mjing
མཇིང་ཀོང	ltag khung gi kong kong, curved bones below nape of neck ??? there aren't any. collar bones?	mjing kong
མཇིང་བསྣོལ	animals pecking each other's necks	mjing bsnol
མཇིང་པ	neck, meadow	mjing pa
མཇིང་པ་མཁྲང་པོ	be spoiled/ willful/ obstinate/ defiant	mjing pa mkhrang po
མཇིང་པ་མཁྲང་བ	be spoiled/ willful/ obstinate/ defiant	mjing pa mkhrang ba
མཇིང་པ་བསྒྲེངས་པ	uplifted neck	mjing pa bsgrengs pa
མཇིང་པ་འཆུས་པ	bent/ twisted neck	mjing pa 'chus pa
མཇིང་པ་སྦོམ་པོ	(thick neck) rude, impolite, defiant, insolent, rebellious	mjing pa sbom po
མཇིང་པའི་ཆུ་ལེབ	ltag mjing gi sha leb mo	mjing pa'i chu leb
མཇིང་པར་ཞོན	boss around, take advantage of someone's disability	mjing par zhon
མཇིང་བ་ཐུང་བ	short neck	mjing ba thung ba
མཇིང་བའི་རྩེའུ	veins of the neck	mjing ba'i rtse'u
མཇིང་སྦྲེལ	yoke together mjing sbrel byas nas rmon mdzo kyis	mjing sbrel
རྨོན་བརྒྱབ་པ	having yoked them together plow with plow dris	rmon brgyab pa
མཇིང་ཡོན	crooked neck	mjing yon
མཇིང་ལྷག	nape of the neck	mjing lhag
མཇིངས་ཟབ	SA klong zab	mjings zab
མཇུག	after, end, last, conclusion, tail, the rest of, to end, hind part, finish, terminate; (end) the rest of; tail	mjug
མཇུག་སྐོར་བ	turn one's back	mjug skor ba
མཇུག་བསྐྱངས	continued	mjug bskyangs
མཇུག་ཁྲུན་ཆོད་པ	decide, resolve [Dmag 'khrug gi mjug khrun thag chod rgyur bsdad yod,...Gyul las mjug khrun gtsang mar chod zin pa,...Las ka 'di'i mjug khrun chod thabs byung ma song,...Phan tshun gyi kha mchu'i m...	mjug khrun chod pa
མཇུག་འཁྱོངས	mthar 'khyol ba'am mthar son pa, finish	mjug 'khyongs
མཇུག་འཁྱོངས་པའི་ལས་འགན	finished project/ task	mjug 'khyongs pa'i las 'gan
མཇུག་འཁྱོངས་བྱས་པའི་ལས་དོན	finished project/ task	mjug 'khyongs byas pa'i las don
མཇུག་གི་དོན	conclusion	mjug gi don
མཇུག་གི་བྱ་བ	concluding actions; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 126]. The concluding actions of the sadhana are to complement the activities. [DILGO KHYENTSE]	mjug gi bya ba
མཇུག་འགྲིལ	[a] wind up, end, close, complete, conclude, finish, terminate, end up	mjug 'gril
མཇུག་འགྲིལ་བ	finish, terminate, end up	mjug 'gril ba
མཇུག་སྒྲིལ	[p bsgril],, [a] wind up, end, close, complete, conclude, finish, terminate, end up	mjug sgril
མཇུག་སྒྲིལ་བ	wind-up	mjug sgril ba
མཇུག་སྒྲོ	lower part, buttocks, tail feathers	mjug sgro
མཇུག་སྒྲོ་ཅན	having tail feathers, peacock 905	mjug sgro can
མཇུག་སྒྲོལ	completion, termination, graduation	mjug sgrol
མཇུག་བསྒྲིལ	ending	mjug bsgril
མཇུག་བསྒྲིལ་གྱི་བརྗོད་ཚིག	epilogue	mjug bsgril gyi brjod tshig
མཇུག་བསྒྲིལ་བ	end	mjug bsgril ba
མཇུག་བསྔོ	(final) dedication	mjug bsngo
མཇུག་བསྔོ་བ	to dedicate at the end, conclude with dedication	mjug bsngo ba
མཇུག་བསྔོ་བ་དམ་པ	the excellent conclusion of dedication mjug bsngo ba'i rgyas yongs su thebs pa at the end, seal the action properly by dedicating the merit mjug bsngo ba'i rgyas yongs su thebs pa the conclusion of...	mjug bsngo ba dam pa
མཇུག་བསྔོས	gone to the extremity, attaining thoroughness in any subject	mjug bsngos
མཇུག་གཅོད	'phro god pa'am bar mtshams 'jog pa	mjug gcod
མཇུག་བསྙེགས	rjes su bdas pa,...Jag pa'i mjug bsnyegs pa,...Drag chas spras nas dgra bo'i mjug bsnyegs pa	mjug bsnyegs
མཇུག་ཏུ	at last, finally; at the end, behind, after; at the end/ afterwards	mjug tu
མཇུག་ཏོ	end, tail	mjug to
མཇུག་སྟེགས་འཆའ་ཞིང་འདུག་པ	to use [a stupa] as a resting place	mjug stegs 'cha' zhing 'dug pa
མཇུག་བརྟུལ	final summary [Bya ba ngan pa'i mjug brtul te bya ba bzang po la 'jug pa	mjug brtul
མཇུག་ཐུད	mu 'thud pa'am 'phro mthud pa	mjug thud
མཇུག་ཐོག་དེར	as soon as	mjug thog der
མཇུག་ཐོག་སུ	at the very end	mjug thog su
མཇུག་ཐོགས	as soon as, right away ['Char gzhi bkod pa'i mjug thod su las grwa btsugs,...Glog 'od mthong ba'i mjug thogs su 'brug sgra thos	mjug thogs
མཇུག་ཐོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	a second 1 as soon as skad cig dang po is over	mjug thogs kyi skad cig ma
མཇུག་ཐོན	finish, complete, reach the end	mjug thon
མཇུག་དོ	bone of the tail	mjug do
མཇུག་དོན	final goal, ultimate meaning	mjug don
མཇུག་གདངས	finale [music]	mjug gdangs
མཇུག་རྡུམ	1) aa gsar tsha po'i dpe; 2) Gzhug gu thung ngu'am rnga mdum pa)	mjug rdum
མཇུག་སྡུད	conclusion	mjug sdud
མཇུག་སྡུད་པར་བྱེད	make a final summary	mjug sdud par byed
མཇུག་སྡོམ	conclusion	mjug sdom
མཇུག་སྡོམ་རྒྱག	conclude, close	mjug sdom rgyag
མཇུག་སྡོམ་བྱེད	conclude, close	mjug sdom byed
མཇུག་སྡོམས	ending	mjug sdoms
མཇུག་བརྡར	gla ba pho'i mjug ma brdar sa, gla ba pho yis sa cha gtan 'khel zhig la rgyun du mjug ma brdar zhing, rngon pas der rnyi btsugs te 'dzin thabs byed pa	mjug brdar
མཇུག་བསྡུ	conclusion	mjug bsdu
མཇུག་བསྡུ་བ	conclude, bring to an end, bring to conclusion (p {mjug bsdus}	mjug bsdu ba
མཇུག་བསྡུ་བའི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	the final summary verses	mjug bsdu ba'i tshigs su bcad pa
མཇུག་བསྡུ་བར་བྱེད་པ	make a final summary	mjug bsdu bar byed pa
མཇུག་བསྡུའི་མཇད་སྒོ	closing ceremony	mjug bsdu'i mjad sgo
མཇུག་བསྡུའི་གཏམ	final words, closing speech	mjug bsdu'i gtam
མཇུག་བསྡུའི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	the final summary verses	mjug bsdu'i tshigs su bcad pa
མཇུག་བསྡུས	(p of {mjug bsdu} concluded, brought to an end/ conclusion	mjug bsdus
མཇུག་བསྡོགས	final summary	mjug bsdogs
མཇུག་བསྡོམས	ended, closed, concluded [p mjug sdom]	mjug bsdoms
མཇུག་བསྡོམས་སྙིང་དོན	final summary of the essential meaning	mjug bsdoms snying don
མཇུག་ནག	1) black tail; 2) crane)	mjug nag
མཇུག་གནོན	mjug mthud pa'am mu mthud pa [Bya ba'i 'go brtsams rjes mthar mjug gnon ma byas na 'brug mgo sbrul mjug tu 'gyur ro	mjug gnon
མཇུག་གནོན་རྒྱབ་གཉེར	rjes gnon rgyab rogs te stobs shugs kha snon gyis rgyab skyor rogs ram byed pa	mjug gnon rgyab gnyer
མཇུག་སྣེ	end, tip	mjug sne
མཇུག་སྣོན	mjug gnon	mjug snon
མཇུག་བསྣར	1) end/ tail brkyangs pa; 2) end of work or 'phro ma yun ring bsnar ba	mjug bsnar
མཇུག་བསྣར་ཏོ	it stretched out its tail	mjug bsnar to
མཇུག་ཕོད	phyugs rigs kyi rnga rtsid	mjug phod
མཇུག་ཕོད་ཅན	comet Ketu du ba mjug ring	mjug phod can
མཇུག་འཕྲོ	remainder	mjug 'phro
མཇུག་བྱང	final note placed before the end of a book, colophon, letter's final summary	mjug byang
མཇུག་མ	1) the last [part/1] [1]; 2) tail)	mjug ma
མཇུག་མ་སྒྲིལ་བ	wag the tail, further progress, final issue of an affair, consequences	mjug ma sgril ba
མཇུག་མ་ཆད་པ	with short tail, tail cut off	mjug ma chad pa
མཇུག་མ་མཐོང་མ་བྱུང	[we] didn't see the last part	mjug ma mthong ma byung
མཇུག་མ་རིང་པོར་བསྣར་བ	stretch out and trail the tail	mjug ma ring por bsnar ba
མཇུག་མའི་རྩེ་མོ	animal's tail tip	mjug ma'i rtse mo
མཇུག་མའི་རིང་ལུགས	being last-ism	mjug ma'i ring lugs
མཇུག་རྩིས	gzhug ma'i rtsis	mjug rtsis
མཇུག་རྩེ	animal's tail tip mjug rtse nag yod pa'i khrung khrung	mjug rtse
མཇུག་མཚམས	at the end of	mjug mtshams
མཇུག་འཛིན	dus me'/ sgra gcan's tail &, its eclipse of the sun and moon	mjug 'dzin
མཇུག་རྫོགས	end, finish, be over	mjug rdzogs
མཇུག་རྫོགས་སྐབས	when it was over	mjug rdzogs skabs
མཇུག་གཞུང	shastra's mjug gi bya ba	mjug gzhung
མཇུག་གཟེང	rnga ma zing zing du slong ba	mjug gzeng
མཇུག་རིང	1 of 9 planets of hindu astronomy	mjug ring
མཇུག་རིངས	comet	mjug rings
མཇུག་ལ	after	mjug la
མཇུག་ལ་འབྲང་བ	follow, SA 'brang ba	mjug la 'brang ba
མཇུག་ལ་སོང་རྣམས	those that went behind	mjug la song rnams
མཇུག་ཤོག	tail feather	mjug shog
མཇུག་ཤོས	the last of all 906	mjug shos
མཇུག་སུག	1) garment's sgab mjug; 2) cha lugs}	mjug sug
མཇུག་སྲིན	hemorrhoids	mjug srin
མཇེ	penis	mje
མཇེ་མགོ	glans penis	mje mgo
མཇེ་རླིག	penis and scrotum	mje rlig
མཇེ་ལངས	erect penis	mje langs
མཇེ་ལངས་པ	erection of the penis	mje langs pa
མཇེ་ཤུབས	condom, membraneous covering or sheath of the penis	mje shubs
མཇེད	suffering, pain	mjed
མཇེད་པ	the world/ universe	mjed pa
མཇོར་བུ	pick ax	mjor bu
མཇོལ	meet, SA mjal ba	mjol
མཇོས	(not in DAS) 'ja span - Japan 'ja tshon ma - a deity 'ja 'od 'khyims - rainbow encircling 'ja 'od ril bu - Rainbow light pill, prepared from the Black Naga's Devil (klu bdud nag po) 'ja lus - rainb...	mjos
ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1813-1899 - Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye, Yönten Gyatso 'jam mgon kong sprul lo gros mtha' yas Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye 'jam mgon chos kyi rgyal po - Syn Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye 'jam mgon cho...	yon tan rgya mtsho
ནམས	alias {ngag dbang kun dga' bsod nams grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po} 'jam mgon a myes zhabs - {ngag dbang kun dga' bsod nams} 1597-ca. 1662 'jam mgon a myes zhabs ngag dbang kun	nams
དགའ་བསོད་ནམས	1597-ca. 1662 'jam mngon - Manjusri 'jam cag ge ba - calm w/o hustle and bustle 'jam chag ge ba - calm w/o hustle and bustle 'jam char - drizzle, light rain 'jam char - drizzle/ light rain 'jam cha...	dga' bsod nams
ཏན་བཀོད་པ	chapter teaching the array of good qualities of the buddha field of Manjushri 'jam dpal gyi sangs rgyas kyi zhing gi yon	tan bkod pa
མ	vikridita-sutra, T. 96 'jam dpal rnam par rol pa'i mdo - Sutra of Manjushri's Perfect Emanation; Skt.	Manjushri
མ	vikridita-sutra, (T 96) 'jam dpal dpa' bo - {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin} iv, 1720-1780 'jam dpal phrin las dbang po - Jampal Trinley Wangpo, another name for Orgyen Drodül Lingpa 'jam dpal dby...	Manjusri
གྱི་སྐོར	explanations of 'jam mgon 'ju mi pham rin po che}'s Manjushri practice - by {mi pham rgya mtsho} and {rdzong sar mkhyen brtse 'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros} 'jam dpal zhi khro - peaceful and wrath...	gyi skor
པའི་རྒྱུད	Manjushri Tantra of Immaculate Wisdom Being. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga 'jam dpal rol - Ma¤jushr -vikri hita, Manjushri Sport Sutra 'jam dpal shes bya kun mkhyen - {bde chen chos 'khor yongs ...	pa'i rgyud
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ	the 7th bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin 'jam dpal shes rab rnon po'i rgyud - Manjushri Tantra of Sharp Intelligence. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga 'jam dpal gshin rje - 1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad...	ye shes snang ba
གེནཏླེ	voiced speakers 'jam dbyangs smra seng - gentle voiced lion of speakers 'jam dbyangs smra seng - see {'jam dbyangs smra ba'i seng ge} 'jam dbyangs bzhad pa - Jamyang Shepa	gentle
བརྩོན་འགྲུས	{'jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson 'grus} pn [born in the 11th century wood mouse year in kan su'u in zha ho sa char, at the age of 21 he went to U, dwelling is khen po of 'bras spungs sgo ma...	brtson 'grus
སཕེརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཕི༹བེ༹	colored rainbow lights 'ja' 'od kha dog - rainbow colors 'ja' 'od gur khang - a dome of rainbow lights 'ja' 'od gur khang - tent of rainbow light 'ja' 'od lnga ldan gyi thig le - rainbow lights in ...	sphere of five
བདག་གི་བར་ལྟ་བ	destructible and impermanent, gathered together from many, viewing the perpetuating five skandhas as a me and a mine 'jig nyen - danger of destruction/ death 'jig nyen las skyob - save from danger ...	bdag gi bar lta ba
སྣང་བ	filling the world and also appearing in the mandala 'jig rten gong ma dag - other worlds [in space] 'jig rten gyi - secular, temporal, worldly 'jig rten gyi kams - [loka-dhatu] world sphere 'jig rt...	snang ba
ཏེ་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	[CHN] 'jig rten gyi khams rgya mtsho - oceanic	te nyer brgyad
རྙེད་པ	1) gain and 2) loss {snyan	rnyed pa
གྲགས་དང་མ་གྲགས	3) fame and 4) disgrace {bstod pa dang smad pa - 5) praise and 6) blame {bde ba dang sdug	grags dang ma grags
བར་ནུས་ཀྱི	You might be able to count all the dust particles in the world 'jig rten gyi gnas nas dag pa - pure of worldly topics 'jig rten gyi gnas nas dag pa'i zhing - fields pure of worldly topics 'jig rten...	bar nus kyi
རྣམ་ཤེས་སྤར་བ	elevation to consciousness of the fields pure of worldly topics 'jig rten gyi gnas nas dag pa'i zhing du	rnam shes spar ba
སྦྱོར་བ	the wealth/ union of worldly	sbyor ba
ཨནད་ཝོརལད	transcending abundance/ perfection 'jig rten 'jig rten min pa yi phun thogs reach worldly and world-transcending perfection 'jig rten 'jig pa - destruction of the world 'jig rten gnyis - [CHN] 'jig...	and world
བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of all worlds as completely unhappy 'jig rten thams cad la mngon par mi dga'	ba'i 'du shes
གྲུབ་ཐམས་ཅད	all accomplishments, worldly and beyond the world 'jig rten dam pa - O holy one of the world 'jig rten dam pa - holy 1 of the world 'jig rten du - in the world 'jig rten du - in the world, on the m...	grub thams cad
ཨོཕ༹་ཝོརལད	transcending [among the five schools of mahasanghikas in the 18 schools of shravaka philosophers] 'jig rten 'das par smra ba'i sde - exponents	of world
སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས	all worldly beings, shravakas and pratyekabuddhas 'jig rten pa las 'das pa - world-transcending 'jig rten pa las 'das pa - supramundane 'jig rten pa' chos kyi mchog - supreme mundane qualities 'jig...	sangs rgyas rnams
ཞི་གནས	shamatha that has gathered together the worldly preparatory stages. [becoming actual dhyana] 'jig rten pa'i nyer bsdogs kyis bsdus pa'i	zhi gnas
རྒྱལ་པོའི་རིགས	if 1 is made a lord of a people in the world, 1 is in the family of kings 'jig rten pa'i rigs kyi dbang du byas na	rgyal po'i rigs
ཨིནཏོ་ཐེ་ཨེམཔཏིནེསས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity 'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan - mundane dhyana, meditation, mundane concentration 'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan - worldly dhyana/ meditation 'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan las na 'phar - rose above the mund...	into the emptiness of a self
མ་ཡིན	are the sun of the Dharma, bringing light into the darkness of the world of outcasts 'jig rten pha rol grub pa - proving future lives 'jig rten pha rol grub pa - Establishing the Existence of the N...	ma yin
ཐོབ་པ	world transcending postmeditation that did not exist before 'jig rten las 'das pa ma yin pa - not beyond this world 'jig rten las 'das pa ma yin pa - not world transcending 'jig rten las 'das pa dm...	thob pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	faith in worldtranscending perfection 'jig rten las 'das pa'i phun sum tshogs pa la	yid ches pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on faith in world-transcending perfection 'jig rten las 'das pa'i dbang - world transcending abhisheka 'jig rten las 'das pa'i mi rtog pa - Def {nyan thos 'gog pa dang rang rgyal zhi'i t...	yid ches pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
པར་དག་པའི་ལམ	the path of completely pure world-transcending wisdom 'jig rten las 'das pa'i rigs - worldtranscending family 'jig rten las 'das pa'i rigs kyi dbang du byas - empower in the family of those beyond ...	par dag pa'i lam
ན་མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིགས	if 1 is empowered in the family of those beyond the world, 1 is of the immovable vajra family 'jig rten las 'das pa'i lam - the supramundane path 'jig rten las 'das pa'i lam - world transcending pa...	na mi bskyod rdo rje'i rigs
ཏྭོ་ཝོརལད	transcending dhyanas; 1) {theg dman gyi bsam gtan} 2) {theg chen...} of hinayana and mahayana] 'jig rten las 'das pa'i bsam gtan gnyis - 1) {theg dman gyi bsam gtan}. 2) {theg chen gyi bsam gtan} '...	two world
གསུམ་གྱི་མགོན་པོ	'bri gung chos rje 'jig rten mgon po - (1143-1217) 'jig rten gsum mgon - lord of the three worlds, Avalokiteshvara 'jig rten gsum mgon - Lord of the Three Worlds; 1) Great master in the Drigung Kag...	gsum gyi mgon po
ལས་འདས་པའི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	supramundane transcendence; the paramitas that transcends worldliness; DC: {gzugs bdag tu lta ba, bdag la gzugs rang bzhin gyis ldan par lta ba, gzugs la bdag rang bzhin gyis yod par lta ba, bdag l...	las 'das pa'i phar phyin
ཅོལླེཅཏིཨོན་ཨས་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	nature 'jig mtha' gnyis - Abbr. of: {'jig lta dang mthar lta gnyis} the belief in the transitory collection and the belief of holding extremes 'jig mtha' gnyis - views of a transitory collection an...	collection as a self
ཡིད	mind completely liberated from the viewpoint of a transitory collection 'jig pa'i sred pa - Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyer spyod yongs su bzung bar sred pa} 'jig par - destroy 'jig par 'gyur - dest...	yid
ཨེ྾ཨིསྟིང་ཨས་ཐེ་ནོན	things I and mine is the prajna of the kleshas.] 'jig tsogs la lta ba - view of a transitory collection 'jig tsogs su lta ba lhan cig skyes pa - the	existing as the non
ཨིནནཏེལཡ་ཅོ	emergent view of a transitory collection as a self nature 'jig tshogs - Transitory collection. Refers to the continuity of the five aggregates 'jig tshogs - realistic-materialistic philosophers, co...	innately co
པེརྨནེནཏ་ཨནད་སེལཕ༹	existing (positing a concrete, self reality based on the no- 923 tions of "i" and "mine")). view of atransitory collection as permanent, futile view, perishable view - (satkagadrsti) futile view, v...	permanent and self
ཧབི༹ང་སེལཕ༹	nature 'jigs stangs - terrifying [aspect] 'jigs ster - inspiring fear, causing danger 'jigs ster - fear-bestowing 'jigs 'thoms - dazed/ paralyzed w fear 'jigs dus - Bhairava and Kalaratri 'jigs dus...	having self
ཨབོཨུཏ་ཅོམཔསསིཨོན	], {byed 'jug pa} to make, cause, enable, {byed du 'jug pa} to make, cause, enable]. {rnam shes yul la 'jug} the consciousness engaged in an object]; induce 'jug dka' ba - difficult to enter 'jug d...	about compassion
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨ་ཧོལེ་ཨིན་ཨ་དྲཝ	plate 'jur mig - wires, wire-drawing hole or vice 'jur mig - a narrow tunnel; a vise, slab 'jur mig - 1) wire drawing die/ narrow tunnel; 2) example of the power of law on evildoers 'jur med - unav...	through a hole in a draw
ཨནད་ཇོཡ	increasing beauty 'jo stegs - milking stool 'jo ster ba - giving delight, charming 'jo mda' - Dege 'jo mda' rdzong [NE Tibet on the w bank of the 'bri chu] 'jo mda' - county in 21th cent Tibet. 'jo...	and joy
བའི་རྗེས་ལ་འཇོགས་པ	the resting/ absorption which follows after insight) 'jog thabs gnyis - 1) two methods of absorption/ resting; 2) {mthong ba'i rjes la 'jogs pa resting/ absorption which follows after insight 'jog ...	ba'i rjes la 'jogs pa
པིཅཀ	axe, tool; a pick-axe 'jor gyis rko ba - turn up with the hoe 'jor lcags - iron of a mattock 'jor po - large mattock, spade 'jor bu - digging pick/ hoe/ mattock 'jor bu - small hoe 'jor bu - 1) hoe...	pick
རྗང	store-room, grain bin	rjang
རྗང་བུ	grain storage place	rjang bu
རྗང་མ	store-room	rjang ma
རྗན་རྗིན	debris	rjan rjin
རྗན་ལྗིན	flotsam, debris	rjan ljin
རྗི	#	rji
རྗིག་རྗིག་གཏོང་བ	threaten	rjig rjig gtong ba
རྗིག་ཉམས	imposing, having power and prestige	rjig nyams
རྗིད་པ	lean	rjid pa
རྗིབ་ལས	service	rjib las
རྗུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་སྐང་པ་བཞི	the four legs of miracle	rju 'phrul gyi skang pa bzhi
རྗུད་ཏོ	weak and emaciated	rjud to
རྗུད་པ	trouble, danger, disadvantage	rjud pa
རྗེ་ཁོལ	master and slave, lord & servant	rje khol
རྗེ་ཁྲི་སྒྲ་སྤུངས་ཅན	early tibetan king	rje khri sgra spungs can
རྗེ་ཁྲི་ཐོག	the reigning king	rje khri thog
རྗེ་མཁན	Khenpo Bodhisattva	rje mkhan
རྗེ་མཁའ་སྦྱོད་ཀྱི་འཕོ་བ་གསུམ	CHN	rje mkha' sbyod kyi 'pho ba gsum
རྗེ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	alias Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	rje mkhyen brtse
རྗེ་གུ་ཎ	Syn Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye; Guna is Syn {yon tan} as in his nam {yon tan rgya mtsho}	rje gu Na
རྗེ་གོང	honorable lord	rje gong
རྗེ་གོང་མ	past saints	rje gong ma
རྗེ་དགེ་འདུན་གྲུབ	founder of tashi lhunpo monastery	rje dge 'dun grub
རྗེ་རྒོད་ཚང་པ	venerable Gotsangpa	rje rgod tshang pa
རྗེ་བརྒྱད་པ	kar ma pa mi bskyod rdo rje	rje brgyad pa
རྗེ་ངན	autocrat, bad ruler	rje ngan
རྗེ་ངར	loin, lower part of the leg, sinew	rje ngar
ཞིང་ཤཔེ་ལིཀེ་ཨ་སྭོརད	blade ngar ba'i rus pa ste, from the wrist to the elbow and the ankle to the knee gyi rus rkang che chung gnyis gnyis yod pa de'o]	zhing shape like a sword
རྗེ་ངར་ཐུང	short parts of arms or legs	rje ngar thung
རྗེ་མངའ་བདག	noble lord; His Majesty	rje mnga' bdag
རྗེ་ཉིད	your lordship, reverence	rje nyid
རྗེ་གཉའ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	King Nyatri Tsenpo	rje gnya' khri btsan po
རྗེ་བསྟན་དམ་པ	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	rje bstan dam pa
རྗེ་བསྟུན་བླ་མ	the jetsun guru, venerable master	rje bstun bla ma
རྗེ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	the Omniscient lord	rje thams cad mkhyen pa
རྗེ་ཐོག་རྩན	early tibetan king	rje thog rtsan
རྗེ་དམ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Phadampa Sangye	rje dam pa rin po che
རྗེ་དྲུང	1) zhabs drung; 2) high noble child ser mo ba (	rje drung
རྗེ་དྲུང་བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་རིང	disciple of	rje drung blo bzang tshe ring
དངུལ་ཆུ་དྷརྨ་བྷདྲ	(1772 1851)	dngul chu dharma bhadra
རྗེ་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	Tsongkhapa; Lord Tsongkhapa	rje bdag nyid chen po
རྗེ་ནཱ་རོ་པ	Naropa	rje nA ro pa
རྗེ་ནེ	{'gags mer} nakedness	rje ne
རྗེ་དཔག	inference / inferential cognizer, [anumana] inferential judgment, inference	rje dpag
རྗེ་དཔོན	lord, master, ruler, principal 1	rje dpon
རྗེ་བ	to barter; {rje ba, brjes pa, brje ba, rjes} trans. v	rje ba
རྗེ་བོ	lord, prinicpal one [= khyab bdag dang, mgo 'dren, mgo dpon, bdag po, 'dren pa, dpon po, dbang phyug dbang byed]	rje bo
རྗེ་བོ་དང་བྲན	master and servant	rje bo dang bran
རྗེ་བྱའི་ནོར	articles of barter	rje bya'i nor
རྗེ་བྲན	lord/master and servants	rje bran
རྗེ་བླ་མ	excellent/ holy guru	rje bla ma
རྗེ་བླ་མ་རྣམས	the lord gurus	rje bla ma rnams
རྗེ་བློན	lord / king and his minister	rje blon
རྗེ་བློན་འབངས	king, minister and vassals	rje blon 'bangs
རྗེ་བློན་འབངས་བཅས	king minister and subjects/ serfs [mi ser]	rje blon 'bangs bcas
རྗེ་དབག	inference/ inferential cognizer, [anuma_na] inferential judgement, inference	rje dbag
རྗེ་འབངས	king / lord and subjects / people; 25 main disciples (of G.R); disciples	rje 'bangs
ཌེཨུཙེན་ཨནད་ཏྭེནཏཡ	four others who 934 were Padmasambhava's principal pupils	Deutsen and twenty
རྗེ་འབངས་གྲོགས་གསུམ	1) chos rgyal khri srong lde'u btsan &, great tr Vairochana, and dakini Yeshe Tsogyal; 2) King, subjects and companion, lord, subject, and friend (	rje 'bangs grogs gsum
རྗེ་འབངས་བརྒྱད	Eight disciples. The eight chief recipients in Tibet of the Eight Sadhana Teachings (bka' brgyad) transmitted by Guru Rinpoche: King Trisong Deutsen, Namkhai Nyingpo, Sangye Yeshe, Gyalwa Cho-yang,...	rje 'bangs brgyad
རྗེ་འབངས་ཉི་ཤུ་ལྔ	the 25 subjects	rje 'bangs nyi shu lnga
རྗེ་འབངས་ཉེར་ལྔ	the King and the	rje 'bangs nyer lnga
ཀིང་ཨནད་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five subjects, the	King and twenty
ཌིསཅིཔླེས་ཨོཕ༹་པདམསམབྷབ༹	in various lists these include Vairotsana; Mandarava; ye shes mtsho rgyal; rgyal ba mchog dbyangs; nam mkha'i snying po; dpal gyi seng ge; ye shes dbyangs; ye shes sde; dpal gyi rdo rje; khri srong...	Disciples of Padmasambhava
རྗེ་འབྲིང་གུང་པ	1143-1217, founder of 'bri gung bka' rgyud tradition, skyob pa 'jig rten mgon po rin chen dpal	rje 'bring gung pa
རྗེ་མ	lady of rank	rje ma
རྗེ་མ་ཆུང	young lady rje mar pa'i bsre 'pho'i gdams ngag ba'i CHN	rje ma chung
རྗེ་མི་ལ	Jetsun Mila	rje mi la
རྗེ་མི་ལ་བཞད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	lord Mila, the Laughing Vajra	rje mi la bzhad pa rdo rje
རྗེ་མོ	mistress, lady	rje mo
རྗེ་ཙོང་ཁ་པ	tsong khapa, name of founder of the Gelugpa sect	rje tsong kha pa
རྗེ་ཙོང་ཁ་པའི་མཛད་ཆེན་བཞི	CHN	rje tsong kha pa'i mdzad chen bzhi
རྗེ་བཙན	[arch] jetsun,? powerful lord, king	rje btsan
རྗེ་བཙན་དམ་པ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, supreme lord, sacred master	rje btsan dam pa
རྗེ་བཙན་དམ་པའི་ལུང	Supreme King Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	rje btsan dam pa'i lung
རྗེ་བཙུན	rje - exalted; exalted one	rje btsun
རྗེ་བཙུན་ཀུན་དགའ་གྲོལ་མཆོག	15071566 - Kunga Drölchok, Jetsün, an eminent master of the Jonang tradition	rje btsun kun dga' grol mchog
རྗེ་བཙུན་སྐལ་ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1607-77 Kalden Gyatso, Jetsün, an influential master in Rekong area	rje btsun skal ldan rgya mtsho
རྗེ་བཙུན་སྐུ་མཚམས་པ	Jetsün Kutsampa, one of Chingkar Donyö Dorje's Dzogchen teachers	rje btsun sku mtshams pa
རྗེ་བཙུན་སྐུ་ཞབས	nuns [from high ranking families]	rje btsun sku zhabs
རྗེ་བཙུན་གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Jetsün Drakpa Gyaltsen, son of Kunga Nyingpo: 1147-1216. One of the Five Sakya Forefathers	rje btsun grags pa rgyal mtshan
རྗེ་བཙུན་གྲགས་པའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང	name of text	rje btsun grags pa'i ljon shing
རྗེ་བཙུན་འགྲོ་བའི་མགོན་པོ	{nga'i bla ma rdo rje 'chang rje btsun 'gro ba'i mgon po de nyid} my teacher, vajradhara, the lord and protector of beings	rje btsun 'gro ba'i mgon po
རྗེ་བཙུན་སྒམ་པོ་པ	Lord Gampopa; the great father of all the Kagyü lineages	rje btsun sgam po pa
རྗེ་བཙུན་སྒྲོལ་མ	Jetsun Tara rje btsun sgrol ma'i sprul pa rgya za kong	rje btsun sgrol ma
རྗེ་བཙུན་འཇམ་པའི་དབྱངས	Manjushri	rje btsun 'jam pa'i dbyangs
རྗེ་བཙུན་འཇམ་དཔལ	supreme noble 1 deity of prajna Manjushri rje btsun ta ra na tha kun dga' snying po 1575-1635 - Taranatha Kunga Nyingpo (1575-1635), the most eminent master of the Jonang tradition.	rje btsun 'jam dpal
རྗེ་བཙུན་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	the Sublime Omniscient One; Taranatha	rje btsun thams cad mkhyen pa
ནའི་རྣམ་ཐར་འདྲ་འབག་ཆེན་མོ	an account of the life of the 8th century rdzogs chen master found in both bka' ma and gter ma transmissions	na'i rnam thar 'dra 'bag chen mo
རྗེ་བཙུན་མཐོང་བ་དོན་ལྡན	Jetsün Meaningful to See, a statue of Milarepa at Chubar 935	rje btsun mthong ba don ldan
རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ	1) skyabs yul gyi che ba brjod pa'i bye brag cig; 2) M khal kha'i bla chen zhig said to be jo nang pa t' ra na tha's reincarnation	rje btsun dam pa
བརྒྱད་བཅུ་མ	Eighty Pieces of Advice to the people of Dingri; (or, in some versions, {... brgya tsa ma} by Phadampa Sangye. See DZ, Vol. 13, pp. 31-6. There are several versions of these teachings. [MR] rje bts...	brgyad bcu ma
རྗེ་བཙུན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན་པོ	an epithet for the personal root guru	rje btsun rdo rje 'chang chen po
རྗེ་བཙུན་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	Vajrayogini	rje btsun rdo rje rnal 'byor ma
རྗེ་བཙུན་ནཱ་རོ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་མ	vajrayogini khecari teachings handed down from Naropa	rje btsun nA ro mkha' spyod ma
རྗེ་བཙུན་དཔལ	honorable sir	rje btsun dpal
རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ	your beneficent reverence	rje btsun byams pa
རྗེ་བཙུན་བླ་མ	lama who is a master and powerful in activity, venerable master	rje btsun bla ma
རླབས་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆར་རྒྱུན	a reverential petition to the Mahaguru Padmasambhava - by ngag dbang blo bzang	rlabs bdud rtsi'i char rgyun
རྗེ་བཙུན་མ	1) principal/ chief lady; 2) [noble] nun reverend lady [h]; 3) goddess; 4) Jetsunma (	rje btsun ma
བརྒྱ་རྩ་བརྒྱད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	{rje btsun ma 'phags ma sgrol ma'i mtshan brgya rtsa brgyad pa zhes bya ba	brgya rtsa brgyad pa zhes bya ba
རྗེ་བཙུན་མི་འགྱུར་དཔལ་སྒྲོན	1699-1769 - Jetsün Mingyur Paldrön, an eminent female master, daughter of Minling Terchen Gyurme Dorje	rje btsun mi 'gyur dpal sgron
རྗེ་བཙུན་མི་ལ	Jetsün Milarepa	rje btsun mi la
རྗེ་བཙུན་ཡིད་བཞིན་འཁོར་ལོ	Tara in the form of bhatt'arika cint'amanicakra	rje btsun yid bzhin 'khor lo
རྗེ་བཙུན་རང་རིག་རས་པ	Jetsun Rangrik Repa	rje btsun rang rig ras pa
རྗེ་བཙུན་རེད་མདའ་བ	Jetsün Rendawa: 1349	rje btsun red mda' ba
རྗེ་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	Lord root guru	rje rtsa ba'i bla ma
རྗེ་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Lord, root guru, Vajradhara rje tshong kha pa'i sras kyi thu bo gsum CHN	rje rtsa ba'i bla ma rdo rje 'chang
རྗེ་བཏཟུན་བྱམས་པ	jutsun Maitreya [the future buddha rnam 'dren lnga pa, now a bodhisattva, nye ba'i sras chen brgyad kyi nang gses shig] rje btzun ma 'phags ma sgrol ma'i mtshan	rje btzun byams pa
བརྒྱ་རཏཟ་བརྒྱད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	{rje btzun ma 'phags ma sgrol ma'i mtshan brgya rtza brgyad pa zhes bya ba [thar lo'i 'gyur, rgyud kyi glegs bam tsha par bzhugs]	brgya rtza brgyad pa zhes bya ba
རྗེ་ཞབས	master and servants	rje zhabs
རྗེ་ཟས	raw food, to eat raw	rje zas
རྗེ་ཟུར་ཆུང་བ་ཤེས་རབ་གྲགས་པ	SA zur chung ba	rje zur chung ba shes rab grags pa
རྗེ་ཟླ་འོད་གཞོན་ནུ	Lord dawoe shonnu	rje zla 'od gzhon nu
རྗེ་ཡབ་སྲས	Tsongkhapa and chief disciples	rje yab sras
རྗེ་ཡབ་སྲས་གསུམ	rje tsong kha pa, rgyal tsab dar ma rin chen, mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang	rje yab sras gsum
རྗེ་ཡི་མགུར་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	rje yi mgur lha bcu gsum
རྗེ་ཡི་དྲིན	atisa	rje yi drin
རྗེ་རང་བྱུང་བ	Third Karmapa	rje rang byung ba
བསྲེ་འློ་དགུ་སྐོར	CHN	bsre 'lo dgu skor
རྗེ་རིགས	ruling class/ nobles * aristocracy, the merchant caste	rje rigs
རྗེ་རིགས་མ	noble/ merchant caste woman	rje rigs ma
རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	epithet of tsong khapa	rje rin po che
རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཉམས་མགུར	Songs of Experience of the Precious Lord, by Tsongkhapa	rje rin po che'i nyams mgur
རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་བསྟོད་ཆེན་བཞི	CHN	rje rin po che'i bstod chen bzhi
རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གདན་ས་འཛིན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས་གཙང་བ་བདུན	{rje rin po che'i	rje rin po che'i gdan sa 'dzin pa 'jam dbyangs gtsang ba bdun
རྗེ་ལ་གུས་པའི་ཞབས་ཏོག	humbly served their lord	rje la gus pa'i zhabs tog
རྗེ་ལ་གསོལ་བ་མི་འདེབས་པའི	{rje la gsol ba mi 'debs pa'i, mi rtog ye shes 'dod pa de, byang bstan phug par nyi sgug 'dra, snang sems 'dres dus de la med} Wishing for primal wisdom beyond the intellect to dawn, / Without ferv...	rje la gsol ba mi 'debs pa'i
སུནཤིནེ་ཨིན་ཨ་ནོརཐ	facing cave. That way, appearances and mind never merge.	sunshine in a north
རྗེ་ལགས	King, Your Majesty, Your Lordship; majesty, your majesty	rje lags
རྗེ་ས	deference, respect	rje sa
རྗེ་སུ་བཟུང་པ	accept [as a master accepts a disciple]	rje su bzung pa
རྗེ་ལྷ	Lord Physician (Gampopa)	rje lha
རྗེ་ལྷ་གཅིག	Your Majesty; {rje lha gcig dgongs mdzod cig} Your Majesty, pay heed!	rje lha gcig
རྗེད	rjed! respect[!] forget[!]	rjed
རྗེད་ངས་ཅན	consulted, forgetful, oblivious	rjed ngas can
རྗེད་ངེས་ཅན	forgetful, oblivious	rjed nges can
རྗེད་ཆུ	draught of oblivion, water of forgetfulness	rjed chu
རྗེད་ཐོ	list of notes, memorandum, journal, notebook	rjed tho
རྗེད་འདེད་བྱེད་པ	trace	rjed 'ded byed pa
རྗེད་རྡོ	memorial stone	rjed rdo
རྗེད་པ	honor, reverence, forget	rjed pa
རྗེད་པར་འོས	worthy of respect/ reverence/ honor, honorable, reverend	rjed par 'os
རྗེད་བྱང	list of goods, luggage	rjed byang
རྗེད་བྱེད	demon that takes away the power of memory, epilepsy	rjed byed
རྗེད་ཟས	meal of forgetfulness, any food that produces oblivion	rjed zas
རྗེན	* naked, raw	rjen
རྗེན་ཅར་དུ་སྟོན་པ	to show, reveal in nakedness	rjen car du ston pa
རྗེན་ཅེ་རེ་བ	naked	rjen ce re ba
རྗེན་ཅེར་དུ	nakedly	rjen cer du
རྗེན་གཅེར་དུ་འཇོག	to leave in its naked condition	rjen gcer du 'jog
རྗེན་ཆར	really, actually	rjen char
རྗེན་ཆར་གྱིས་བལྟས	look directly into it	rjen char gyis bltas
རྗེན་ཆར་གྱིས་བལྟས་པ	look into it directly	rjen char gyis bltas pa
རྗེན་ཆེར	1) real/ true and very/nakedly clear; 2) naked; 3) candid	rjen cher
རྗེན་བཏགས	raw barley or peas ground without being first parched	rjen btags
རྗེན་དུ་བུད་པ	stripped naked	rjen du bud pa
རྗེན་ནེ	nakedly, fresh	rjen ne
རྗེན་ནེ་ཅེ་རེ་བ	pure and naked, bare and wide open, total nakedness, pure, undiluted, utterly unobscured	rjen ne ce re ba
རྗེན་ནེ་གནས་དུས	naked state	rjen ne gnas dus
རྗེན་ནེ་བ	naked, undisguised, obvious to the understanding, manifest	rjen ne ba
རྗེན་པ	naked/ unadorned; (something) in all its nakedness	rjen pa
རྗེན་པའི་ཟས	fresh food	rjen pa'i zas
རྗེན་པའི་རང་ཞལ	naked and innate face	rjen pa'i rang zhal
རྗེན་པར	naked/ unadorned; (something) in all its nakedness	rjen par
རྗེན་པར་འཆར	arise nakedly	rjen par 'char
རྗེན་པར་མཇལ	to nakedly discover	rjen par mjal
རྗེན་པར་འདོན	expose	rjen par 'don
རྗེན་པར་འདོན་པ	strip perfectly	rjen par 'don pa
རྗེན་པར་ཤར་བ	manifest nakedly	rjen par shar ba
རྗེན་པར་སོང་བ	to (be) expose(d)	rjen par song ba
རྗེན་ཕྱེ	unparched barley, pea or wheat four	rjen phye
རྗེན་བཙོས	raw and cooked	rjen btsos
རྗེན་ཞོན	ride bareback	rjen zhon
རྗེན་ཟས	uncooked meal or victuals eat raw	rjen zas
རྗེན་རིགས	victuals that may be eaten raw	rjen rigs
རྗེན་ལ་བུད	strip bare	rjen la bud
རྗེན་ལ་བུད་པ	stripped naked	rjen la bud pa
རྗེན་ལྷག་གིས་བལྟས	look directly into	rjen lhag gis bltas
རྗེན་ལྷང་གིས་བལྟས	look directly into	rjen lhang gis bltas
རྗེའི་འོས་མིན	he was not worthy to be a king	rje'i 'os min
རྗེའུ	dpon chung	rje'u
རྗེའུ་ཚོད	pot	rje'u tshod
རྗེའུ་རིགས	merchant/ bourgeois class; nobility, aristocracy. vais'ya, the merchant or tradesman caste	rje'u rigs
རྗེར	Abbr. of {rje la} or {rje su}	rjer
རྗེས	tracks, footprints, trace/ after; the concluding; 1) after, later, following, that which follows, subsequent, ensuing, afterwards, concluding. 2) imprint, mark, sign left behind, back, trace, track...	rjes
རྗེས་ཀྱི	following post, posterior	rjes kyi
རྗེས་ཀྱི་འདབ་མ	species of tree	rjes kyi 'dab ma
རྗེས་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	concluding activities; concluding actions	rjes kyi bya ba
རྗེས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	concluding section, trace	rjes kyi yan lag
རྗེས་སྐྱེས	younger brother, SA rjes su skyes	rjes skyes
རྗེས་སྐྱེས་ཕུལ་བྱུང	young promising person	rjes skyes phul byung
རྗེས་ཁུགས་པ	recall or find out afterwards	rjes khugs pa
རྗེས་ཁྱབ	pervasion, positive concomitance (or term of...) (of the major premise), positive concomitance	rjes khyab
རྗེས་ཁྱབ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	[reasoning] establishing forward pervasion [ggd]	rjes khyab sgrub byed
རྗེས་ཁྱབ་རྣལ་མ	rtags gsal khyab pa sgo brgyad las rnal ma bzhi'i nang gses, rtags de yin na gsal ba de yin pas khyab pa, EG, What is produced is therefore impermanent	rjes khyab rnal ma
རྗེས་ཁྱབ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	wrong forward pervasion	rjes khyab phyin ci log
རྗེས་ཁྲིད	certainty, sureness	rjes khrid
རྗེས་གྲབས	future preparations, reserves	rjes grabs
རྗེས་གྲབས་དཔུང་སྡེ	reserve forces/ troops	rjes grabs dpung sde
རྗེས་གྲབས་མ་དངུལ	reserve fund/ capital	rjes grabs ma dngul
རྗེས་གྲུབ	a name composed of several words	rjes grub
རྗེས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་མིང	surname	rjes grub kyi ming
རྗེས་གྲུབ་སྒྲ	name ascribed depending on nges tshig or reason	rjes grub sgra
རྗེས་དགོངས	to think of, recollect, remember	rjes dgongs
རྗེས་འགྲོ	1) 1 going behind/ later; 2) similar, like	rjes 'gro
རྗེས་འགྲོ་མཁན	singing bird	rjes 'gro mkhan
རྗེས་འགྲོ་གང་བ	full moon 937	rjes 'gro gang ba
རྗེས་འགྲོ་ལྡོག་ཁྱབ	forward and	rjes 'gro ldog khyab
རྗེས་འགྲོའི་ཁྱབ	rjes khyab	rjes 'gro'i khyab
རྗེས་བསྒྲུབ	grammatical derivative, [forming words/ phrases from a word to express another idea] way of assigning names, depending on dngos po byung ba'i rjes su reason of similarity or connection, EG, calling...	rjes bsgrub
རྗེས་ངན	disaster	rjes ngan
རྗེས་དངོས	real	rjes dngos
རྗེས་བསྔོ	final dedication	rjes bsngo
རྗེས་གཅོད	1) to eradicate, annihilate. 2) oversee, keep watch on. 3) to follow after, pursue	rjes gcod
རྗེས་གཅོད་པ	destroy, blot out, efface a trace, separate, disjoin, follow a trace, come upon the track, follow after	rjes gcod pa
རྗེས་བཅད་པ	1) wipe out footprints; 2) eradicate a disease	rjes bcad pa
རྗེས་བཅས་དགུ	CHN	rjes bcas dgu
རྗེས་བཅོས	correcting, editing, fixing	rjes bcos
རྗེས་བཅོས་བྱེད	correct, edit, fi	rjes bcos byed
རྗེས་ཆགས	anurakta, love, attachment, afterglow, as yoga D196, compassion, aroused with desire, completely passionate	rjes chags
རྗེས་ཆགས་སྐྱེ	eulogy, praise	rjes chags skye
རྗེས་ཆོ་ག	concluding service	rjes cho ga
རྗེས་ཆོག	the concluding part of ritual / liturgy	rjes chog
ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག་སྟེ	ritual in order to pacify transgressions of addition and omission and satisfy the deities, pacifying and enriching fire puja and, offering mandalas and praising, offering torma to the direction pro...	kyi cho ga ste
རྗེས་ཆོག་མཛད	chant the concluding part of liturgy	rjes chog mdzad
རྗེས་ཆོད	1) rtsad bcad nas rnyed pa; 2) [pursue and] catch	rjes chod
རྗེས་འཇུག	1) final consonant [of 10: Ga nga da na ba ma ' ra la sa]; 2) follower, adherents, following, disciple; 3) successor	rjes 'jug
རྗེས་འཇུག་བཅུ	[grammatical]. The ten suffices. The ten letters {ga/ nga/ da/ na/ ba/ ma/ a'/ ra/ la/ sa/} which can be placed after the "name-base"	rjes 'jug bcu
རྗེས་འཇུག་པ	follower	rjes 'jug pa
རྗེས་འཇུག་ཕོ་ཡིག	masculine subsequent consonants [ga da ba sa]	rjes 'jug pho yig
རྗེས་འཇུག་བུ་སློབ	follower student	rjes 'jug bu slob
རྗེས་འཇུག་མ་ནིང	neutral subsequent consonants	rjes 'jug ma ning
རྗེས་འཇུག་ཡིད་ཆེས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to inspire the confidence of disciples	rjes 'jug yid ches bskyed pa
རྗེས་འཇུག་སློབ་མ	followers and disciples	rjes 'jug slob ma
རྗེས་འཇུག་གསར་པ	a new follower	rjes 'jug gsar pa
རྗེས་རྗེས་ལ	long after	rjes rjes la
རྗེས་བརྗོད	imitative words, copy, postscript, written afterwards, afterexpression	rjes brjod
རྗེས་བརྗོད་བཤད	interpret	rjes brjod bshad
རྗེས་ཉམས	experiences coming after meditation	rjes nyams
རྗེས་ཉུལ་བ	1) rjes shul btsal ba; 2) behind advancing troops 1 who carefully watches for enemies and friends	rjes nyul ba
རྗེས་སྙེག	chasing, pursuing, following	rjes snyeg
རྗེས་སྙེག་བྱེད	pursue, go after, catch up, follow	rjes snyeg byed
རྗེས་སྙེག་བྱེད་པ	pursue, go after, catch up, follow	rjes snyeg byed pa
རྗེས་སྙེགས	"to follow after." ¦ rnam thar rjes snyegs. "May I follow [your] example." [mss]	rjes snyegs
རྗེས་སྙེགས་པ	follow after	rjes snyegs pa
རྗེས་སྙོགས	pursue	rjes snyogs
རྗེས་སྙོས	pursue	rjes snyos
རྗེས་བསྙགས	to crave, strive after	rjes bsnyags
རྗེས་བསྙེགས	rjes su bsnyegs pa ste rjes zin par byed pa,...Phru gus pha ma'i rjes bsnyegs nas phyin pa,...Dgra bo bros pa'i rjes su bsnyegs pa	rjes bsnyegs
རྗེས་གཏུགས	chasing, pursuing, following	rjes gtugs
རྗེས་སྟོན་ཨོན་ཅི	tracer atom	rjes ston on ci
རྗེས་བསྟན་གྱི་གདམས་པ	orders, ruling instruction, precept that is left	rjes bstan gyi gdams pa
རྗེས་ཐོག	afterwards	rjes thog
རྗེས་ཐོགས	right after the end	rjes thogs
རྗེས་ཐོན	newly developed	rjes thon
རྗེས་ཐོན་ཡོང	be developed, move forward, advance	rjes thon yong
རྗེས་ཐོབ	subsequent attainment, postmeditation	rjes thob
པོསཏ	meditative period; 2) ensuing; 3) after a period of contemplation, aftermath [of meditative absorption	post
སུབསེqཨུཨེནཏ་ཨཨེསཐེཏིཅ་པོསཏ	immediate stage after a period of contemplation, subsequent attainment, postmeditation experience, subsequent activities, subsequent realization	subsequent aesthetic post
རྗེས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་ཆ་ནས	in terms of the postmeditation	rjes thob kyi cha nas
རྗེས་ཐོབ་དག་པ་ཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the mundane knowledge of postmeditation	rjes thob dga pa jig rten pa'i shes rab
རྗེས་ཐོབ་སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུ	magical postmeditation; post-meditation of seeing all phenomena as illusion. Comp. with {mnyam gzhag mnam mkha' lta bu}	rjes thob sgyu ma lta bu
རྗེས་ཐོབ་སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྟོང་ཉིད	the illusion like emptiness of postmeditation	rjes thob sgyu ma lta bu'i stong nyid
རྗེས་ཐོབ་སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་རྣམ་རོལ	the	rjes thob sgyu ma lta bu'i rnam rol
རྗེས་ཐོབ་པ	the yoga of post meditation	rjes thob pa
རྗེས་ཐོབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	[prshthalatdhajnana]	rjes thob ye shes
རྗེས་མཐུད	pursuing, following after, w no continuing pattern, a succession, additional trace	rjes mthud
རྗེས་མཐུད་མེད་པ	without pursuing / extending [thoughts]	rjes mthud med pa
རྗེས་མཐུན	similitude	rjes mthun
རྗེས་མཐུན་གྱི་ཆོས་དྲུག	the associated six dharmas [dge slob ma'i bsrung bya ste, hold gold etc precious things and cut the pubic hair, dig in the earth, cut grass, eat what is not given and received, gsog 'jog byas pa za...	rjes mthun gyi chos drug
རྗེས་མཐུན་པ	with reference to	rjes mthun pa
རྗེས་མཐུན་པར	w reference to	rjes mthun par
རྗེས་དག་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the mundane know ledge of pure postmeditation	rjes dag pa 'jig rten pa'i shes rab
རྗེས་དྲན	Recollection	rjes dran
རྗེས་དྲན་བསྐུལ་བྱེག	provoking the memory [symbolic script]	rjes dran bskul byeg
རྗེས་དྲན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	provoking the memory (symbolic script)	rjes dran bskul byed
རྗེས་དྲན་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	recollection lineage	rjes dran gi brgyud pa
རྗེས་དྲན་གྱི་གཏེར	treasure of recollection	rjes dran gyi gter
རྗེས་དྲན་ལྔ	five kadampa oral instructions bka' gdams pa'i man ngag lnga	rjes dran lnga
རྗེས་དྲན་དྲུག	six rememberings; 1) {'chi ba rjes dran}. 2) {skyes pa rjes dran} 3) {gtong ba rjes dran} 4) {lha rjes dran} 5) {bar do rjes dran} 6) {chos nyid rjes dran} the six recollections. 1) {lha rjes su dr...	rjes dran drug
རྗེས་དྲན་རྡོ་རིང	commemorative pillar	rjes dran rdo ring
རྗེས་དྲན་བྱེད	commemorate, have a remembrance ceremony	rjes dran byed
རྗེས་དྲན་ཚོགས་འདུ	commemoration meeting/ ceremony/ celebration	rjes dran tshogs 'du
རྗེས་དྲན་ཞུ	commemorate, have a remembrance ceremony	rjes dran zhu
རྗེས་འདེད	pursuit, chasing, pursuing	rjes 'ded
རྗེས་འདེད་གཏོང་བ	to pursue, go after, catch up	rjes 'ded gtong ba
རྗེས་འདེད་བྱེད་པ	pursue track	rjes 'ded byed pa
རྗེས་ནས	again, subsequently	rjes nas
རྗེས་ནི་མ་སླེབས	too late to catch (?)	rjes ni ma slebs
རྗེས་གནང	permission blessing; to grant permission	rjes gnang
རྗེས་གནང་གི་ཆོ་ག	sanskrit grammar	rjes gnang gi cho ga
རྗེས་གནང་གིས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya yid la mi 'dod pa'i bya ba zhig 'gog byed rjes gnang gi tshig 'jam po'i sgo nas de'i grub 'bras yid du mi 'ong ba 'phral la 'byung ba zur gyis bstan te 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig; 'gog pa'i rgya...	rjes gnang gis 'gog pa
རྗེས་གནང་བ	bestowed upon me	rjes gnang ba
རྗེས་གནོན་མཐར་སྐྱེལ	gcig 'phro gcig mthud mtha' 'khyongs byed pa,...Bka' khrims kyi brda 'ded rjes gnon mthar skyel byed pa,...Sngar bting 'char gzhi tsang ma bar lding 'phro can du ma lus par rjes gnon mthar skyel bt...	rjes gnon mthar skyel
རྗེས་གནོན་ཚ་ནན	transgressions and faults gzhigs pa'i severe faults gtong rgyu	rjes gnon tsha nan
རྗེས་སྣང	Ensuing perception. [anu-abhi, anubhanu] permission, postcontemplative appearance	rjes snang
རྗེས་སྣོན	alternate, reserve	rjes snon
རྗེས་སྣོན་ཁོངས་མི	alternate member	rjes snon khongs mi
རྗེས་སྣོན་ཨུ་ཡོན	alternate member	rjes snon u yon
རྗེས་པ	SA rje wa	rjes pa
རྗེས་དཔག	(aanumana inference * deduction, conclusion, conceptual inferential cognizer	rjes dpag
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་བཅད་ཤེས	inferential determinate/ subsequent cognition	rjes dpag gi bcad shes
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཚད་འབྲས	the fruition of inferential pramana/ valid cognition [by power of a reason realize one's object as it is rang yul ji bzhin rtogs pa ste, EG, in inferring sound is impermanent, impermanant sound is ...	rjes dpag gi tshad 'bras
ནེཝ་ནོན	deceptive knowledge of theimpermanence of sound is pramana, which is the fruition of actually realizing the impermanence of sound]	new non
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཚད་མ	inferential valid cognizer/ pramana	rjes dpag gi tshad ma
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཤེས་པ	inferred knowledge/ [pramana], rational understanding	rjes dpag gi shes pa
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ཤེས་ཡོན	rational knowledge	rjes dpag gi shes yon
རྗེས་དཔག་གི་ལྷའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of the imagined deity; syn {bskyed rim}; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 54]	rjes dpag gi lha'i rnal 'byor
རྗེས་དཔག་གིས་བསལ་བ	clear away by inference/ the power of thi things themselves	rjes dpag gis bsal ba
རྗེས་དཔག་བཅད་ཤེས	inferential cognition, inferential subsequent cognizer	rjes dpag bcad shes
རྗེས་དཔག་ཆད་མ	inferential valid cognizer	rjes dpag chad ma
རྗེས་དཔག་གཉིས	the two kinds of inference [1) sgras brjod kyis dbye na, rang don rjes dpag dang, gzhan don rjes dpag ste gnyis; 2) Rtags sbyor gyis dbye na, rjes dpag yang dag dang, rjes dpag ltar snang ste gnyis...	rjes dpag gnyis
རྗེས་དཔག་ལྟར་སྣང	merely apparent inference	rjes dpag ltar snang
རྗེས་དཔག་བྱ་མིན	non-deducible	rjes dpag bya min
རྗེས་དཔག་ཚད་མ	pramana/ valid cognition of inference [rang gi rten depending on a true sign/ reason for one's hidden gzhal bya new nondeceptive zhen rig EG, dngos stobs rjes dpag, tshad ma gnyis kyi nang gses] rj...	rjes dpag tshad ma
དཔྱོད	assumption not supported by valid inference	dpyod
རྗེས་དཔག་ཡང་དག	correct inference rjes dpag yang dag rgol phyi rgol gnyis	rjes dpag yang dag
ཀས་ཁས་ལེན་པའི་དོན་གཞིར་བཟུང	gtan tshigs rig pa'i sbyor ba bkod nas phyi rgol who previously has not cut through doubts realizes the bsgrub bya as it is zhen rig	kas khas len pa'i don gzhir bzung
རྗེས་དཔག་རིགས་ཤེས	inferential rational cognition, inferential validating	rjes dpag rigs shes
རྗེས་དཔག་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་རྟོག་བ	concept resulting from inference	rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog ba
རྗེས་དཔག་ལོག་པ	incorrect inference; opp to {rjes dpag yang dag} correct inference	rjes dpag log pa
རྗེས་དཔག་གསུམ	the three kinds of inference [dngos stobs rjes dpag dang, grags pa'i rjes dpag dang, yid ches rjes dpag ste gsum mo]	rjes dpag gsum
རྗེས་དཔྱོད་པ	to follow; x {sngon song bag chags kyi rjes dpyod pa} to follow tendencies from the past	rjes dpyod pa
རྗེས་སྤྲོད	later repayment	rjes sprod
རྗེས་བར་དུ	until after	rjes bar du
རྗེས་བྱེད་རྣམ་དག	correct / perfect exposition	rjes byed rnam dag
རྗེས་འབྱོར	later arrivals [persons]	rjes 'byor
རྗེས་འབྲང	follower {zhal slob}; followers	rjes 'brang
རྗེས་འབྲང་བཅས་པ	followers	rjes 'brang bcas pa
རྗེས་འབྲང་དང་བཅས་པ	along with his followers	rjes 'brang dang bcas pa
རྗེས་འབྲང་པ	follower, adherent, fascinated by, following after [mindlessly]	rjes 'brang pa
རྗེས་འབྲངས	following after, adhering to, follower, disciple, adherent	rjes 'brangs
རྗེས་འབྲངས་སྐྱེས་བུ	followers	rjes 'brangs skyes bu
རྗེས་འབྲངས་སྐྱོས་བུ	followers	rjes 'brangs skyos bu
རྗེས་འབྲངས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	satellite country	rjes 'brangs rgyal khab
རྗེས་འབྲངས་ཉེས་ཅན	accessory [crime]	rjes 'brangs nyes can
རྗེས་འབྲངས་བྱེད	follow after, adhere to, be a follower/ disciple/ adherent	rjes 'brangs byed
རྗེས་འབྲས	final/ ensuing fruition, result, achievement, accomplishment	rjes 'bras
རྗེས་འབྲེལ	follow-up	rjes 'brel
རྗེས་འབྲེལ་གྱི་དགེ་བ	ensuing virtue, subsequent connected virtue	rjes 'brel gyi dge ba
རྗེས་འབྲེལ་གྱི་མི་དགེ་བ	{nyon mongs pa rnams kyi bag chags rjes 'brel gyi mi dge ba} 'Ensuing nonvirtues' are their habitual patterns.	rjes 'brel gyi mi dge ba
ཨོཕ༹་རོཨོཏ་ཨནད་ཨུཔ	kleshas	of root and upa
རྗེས་འབྲེལ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{sdang ba dang dvangs pa gang yang min pa'i sems kyis brjod pa'i bag chags so}'Ensuing [indeterminates]' are the habitual patterns expressed by a mind that is neither disturbed [unvirtuous] nor luc...	rjes 'brel lung ma bstan
རྗེས་སྦྱོར	anuyoga	rjes sbyor
རྗེས་སྦྲེལ	depending on, based on	rjes sbrel
རྗེས་མ	1) last, final, latter. 2) later, next, afterwards. 3) [of two] the second; afterwards, later	rjes ma
རྗེས་མ་མཇལ་ཡོང	goodbye	rjes ma mjal yong
རྗེས་མ་རྗེས་མ	each later	rjes ma rjes ma
རྗེས་མ་ཟིན་པ	be too late, miss, be unable to catch up w	rjes ma zin pa
རྗེས་མའི	futurity	rjes ma'i
རྗེས་མའི་རྗེས་མ	behind/ later than what is behind/ later, 1 after the next 940	rjes ma'i rjes ma
རྗེས་མར	afterwards, later	rjes mar
རྗེས་མར་མཇལ་སོང	see you later	rjes mar mjal song
རྗེས་མར་ལྡས	[arch] in traversing the path lam bgrod skabs gzhan pa'i rjes su lus pa	rjes mar ldas
རྗེས་མར་ལུས	in traversing a path lam bgrod skabs gzhan pa'i rjes su lus pa or, las ka'i byed tshad mgyogs po ma yin pa the amount remaining?	rjes mar lus
རྗེས་མི་འགྲོ	does not follow	rjes mi 'gro
རྗེས་མི་འབྲང	do not pursue	rjes mi 'brang
རྗེས་མི་འབྲང་བ	do not pursue	rjes mi 'brang ba
རྗེས་མི་འབྲེངས་པ	without pursuing	rjes mi 'brengs pa
རྗེས་མི་འབྲེངས་པར	w/o pursuing	rjes mi 'brengs par
རྗེས་མེད	traceless, no trace; x {zin pa rjes med yin gyi rjes ma gcod} no trace of them remains. Don't run after them!	rjes med
རྗེས་མེད་འཇིག	annihilate, destroy completely	rjes med 'jig
རྗེས་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ	disappear w/o trace	rjes med du 'gro
རྗེས་མེད་པ	ephemeral	rjes med pa
རྗེས་མེད་རང་དག	self purified without leaving a trace	rjes med rang dag
རྗེས་དམག	reinforcement, reserve	rjes dmag
རྗེས་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ	Lord Maitreya	rjes btsun byams pa
རྗེས་བརྩེ	mercy	rjes brtse
རྗེས་བརྩེ་བ	mercy	rjes brtse ba
རྗེས་ཚབ	relief [troops]	rjes tshab
རྗེས་འཚོལ	rjes shul 'tshol ba,...Lag rjes bzang po gang bzhag gi rjes 'tshol byed pa	rjes 'tshol
རྗེས་འཛིན	{rjes su 'dzin pa, rjes bzung, rjes su bzung ba} to take under one's care	rjes 'dzin
རྗེས་འཛིན་བྱེད	accept [disciples], follow, adhere, believe in	rjes 'dzin byed
རྗེས་ཞིབ་བྱེད	retain file for later examination/ reference/ use as evidence	rjes zhib byed
རྗེས་ཞུགས	follower; see {rje 'jug}	rjes zhugs
རྗེས་གཞིག	final dissolution [in development stage meditation [bskyed rim], after gathering the deity's palace into light, gathering one's body too into light/ luminosity rim pa]	rjes gzhig
རྗེས་བཞིན	as later, according to	rjes bzhin
རྗེས་བཞིན་འབྲངས	follow in the footsteps	rjes bzhin 'brangs
རྗེས་ཟིན	to rely upon	rjes zin
རྗེས་ཟིན་པ	catch up overtake	rjes zin pa
རྗེས་ཟིན་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ཐབས	means of catching up/ overtaking	rjes zin par byed pa'i thabs
རྗེས་ཟུངས	followers	rjes zungs
རྗེས་ཟློས	imitation, repeat, repeating after	rjes zlos
རྗེས་ཟློས་དང་ལེན	mutual response rjes zlos tsam byas nas bshad na mi legs having done nothing but repeat 1 doesn't explain well	rjes zlos dang len
རྗེས་གཟུང	rjes su gzung ba - accepted	rjes gzung
རྗེས་བཟུང	{rjes 'dzin, rjes su bzung ba} to take under one's care	rjes bzung
རྗེས་བཟོད	ensuing acceptance	rjes bzod
རྗེས་འོང་སྔོན་དྲན	previously perceive the future	rjes 'ong sngon dran
རྗེས་ཡི་རང	rejoicing	rjes yi rang
རྗེས་ཡི་རངས	rejoice	rjes yi rangs
རྗེས་ཡེ་ཤེས	ensuing cognition, postmeditational wisdom	rjes ye shes
རྗེས་ཡོང	future	rjes yong
རྗེས་ཡོང་སྔོན་ཤེས	know what is to come	rjes yong sngon shes
རྗེས་ཡོང་སྔོན་སླེབས	coming late but arriving first [China started technical development late but will be best]	rjes yong sngon slebs
རྗེས་ལ	after, following	rjes la
རྗེས་ལ་མངོན་རྟོགས	* the subsequent path of completely realizing	rjes la mngon rtogs
རྗེས་ལ་མཇལ་ཡོང	goodbye	rjes la mjal yong
རྗེས་ལ་ཐོབ་པ	see {rjes thob}	rjes la thob pa
རྗེས་ལམ	the future	rjes lam
རྗེས་ལས་ཐོབ་པ	ensuing, subsequently attained	rjes las thob pa
རྗེས་ལུས	backward, fallen behind	rjes lus
རྗེས་ལུས་ཅན	backward, laggard	rjes lus can
རྗེས་ལུས་ཐེབས	fall/ lag behind, be late rjes lus lung pa{rjes la mngon rtogs - [path of meditation ste after the path of seeing] the subsequent path of completely realizing	rjes lus thebs
རྗེས་ཤུལ	[previous bzo dbyibs /sa mal] traces, remains, ruins, legacy	rjes shul
རྗེས་ཤུལ་སྙེག	follow a trail/ track, trace	rjes shul snyeg
རྗེས་ཤུལ་མེད་པ	without a trace	rjes shul med pa
རྗེས་ཤུལ་མེད་པར	without a trace	rjes shul med par
ཅོགནིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨོཕ༹ཕ༹	meditative state, subsequent knowledges 941	cognition of the off
རྗེས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྣང་ཤས	hankering after the ensuing certainty; Thrangu Rinpoche: not to stray into clinging to experiences or/and certainty	rjes shes kyi snang shas
རྗེས་ཤེས་བཟོད་པ	receptiveness to the	rjes shes bzod pa
ཨཕ༹ཏེར	effect of the perception of the	after
རྗེས་སུ	after; afterwards, later; later, after, afterward, then, back, behind [Sanskrit emphatic particle]; later on	rjes su
རྗེས་སུ་རྐང་པ་འཇོག་པ	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba,...Khyod gdong pad ma'i rjes su rkang pa 'jog	rjes su rkang pa 'jog pa
རྗེས་སུ་སྐྱེས	younger brother, deed, act	rjes su skyes
རྗེས་སུ་སྐྱོང་བ	to care for	rjes su skyong ba
རྗེས་སུ་ཁྱོད	statue, representation	rjes su khyod
རྗེས་སུ་དགོངས	give thought to!, think of [us]!	rjes su dgongs
རྗེས་སུ་བགྲོད	gone behind, followed	rjes su bgrod
རྗེས་སུ་འགུགས་པ	recall, summon, order to do according to one's instructions	rjes su 'gugs pa
རྗེས་སུ་འགྱོད	repent	rjes su 'gyod
རྗེས་སུ་འགྱོད་པ་མེད་ཅིང་ཡི་རངས་པ	afterwards, it is rejoiced in without feelings of regret	rjes su 'gyod pa med cing yi rangs pa
རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ	1) go/ travel behind/ after, follow; 2) imitate mtshungs gsal gyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	rjes su 'gro
རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་ལྡོག	engagement and disengagement	rjes su 'gro ldog
རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	to ensue, e.g., {de la de yi rjes su 'gro ba'i yon tan 'byung} [mss]	rjes su 'gro ba
རྗེས་སུ་རྒྱུག་པ	to run after	rjes su rgyug pa
རྗེས་སུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	doing after an order, following, obeying, recover, re-acquire	rjes su sgrub pa
རྗེས་སུ་སྒྲོག་པ་དྲུག	[TRS 44-2]	rjes su sgrog pa drug
རྗེས་སུ་ང་རོ	thig kor written above a letter	rjes su nga ro
རྗེས་སུ་གཅགས་པ	arising of regret	rjes su gcags pa
རྗེས་སུ་གཅོད	knife	rjes su gcod
རྗེས་སུ་གཅོད་པ	to follow (after)/ pursue	rjes su gcod pa
རྗེས་སུ་ཆགས	attachment, fond of, love, with force	rjes su chags
རྗེས་སུ་ཆགས་པ	{rjes chags} to be passionately concerned/ involved (with)	rjes su chags pa
རྗེས་སུ་འཆིང	mtshungs gsal gyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	rjes su 'ching
རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག	pursuit, follow, imitate, continue to function	rjes su 'jug
རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	{rjes su zhugs pa} to be fully immersed/ engaged in; to be fully imbued with; to imbue fully; to follow (after)	rjes su 'jug pa
རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ་གསུམ	3 accesses	rjes su 'jug pa gsum
རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པར་བྱེད	pursuit, follow, imitate, continue to function	rjes su 'jug par byed
རྗེས་སུ་འཇུགས	repentance	rjes su 'jugs
རྗེས་སུ་བརྗོད	1) to repeat, repetition. 2) to merely repeat. 3) subsequent expression. [mss]	rjes su brjod
རྗེས་སུ་བརྗོད་པ	see {rjes su brjod} [mss]	rjes su brjod pa
རྗེས་སུ་སྙིང་རྗེ་བ	to regard with affection	rjes su snying rje ba
རྗེས་སུ་སྙེག	p. {rjes su bsnyegs} to follow, pursue, chase	rjes su snyeg
རྗེས་སུ་སྙོག	following	rjes su snyog
རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པ	subsequent cognition	rjes su rtogs pa
རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	subsequent awareness	rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa
རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པར་བྱ	should ponder on	rjes su rtogs par bya
རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པར་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of succession	rjes su rtogs par shes pa
རྗེས་སུ་ལྟ་བ	to scrutinize critically/ closely; critical scrutiny	rjes su lta ba
རྗེས་སུ་སྟོན་པ	1) explain; 2) mig ston byed pa dang bslab bya byed pa	rjes su ston pa
རྗེས་སུ་སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	{rjes su sugs pa	rjes su ston par byed pa
རྗེས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	n instructions/precepts (left	rjes su bstan pa
རྗེས་སུ་བསྟན་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	(spiritual) miracles based on instruction	rjes su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul
རྗེས་སུ་ཐོས	hearing afterwards, anything heard after	rjes su thos
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པ	faith, harmonious, appropriate, spiritual awareness of reality, decidedly true penetration of the aim because the 4 truths are clearly distinguished, to correspond with	rjes su mthun pa
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པ་ངེས་འབྱེད	regular	rjes su mthun pa nges 'byed
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པའི	a name for Anuyoga	rjes su mthun pa'i
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པའི་ངེས་འབྱེད	consistent discernment	rjes su mthun pa'i nges 'byed
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga that corresponds (with the principle of Atiyoga)	rjes su mthun pa'i rnal 'byor
རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	secondarily associated characteristics	rjes su mthun pa'i mtshan nyid
རྗེས་སུ་མཐོ་རིས	character	rjes su mtho ris
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན	remember, commemorate, remembrance, be mindful	rjes su dran
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollect, remember, commemorate, remembrance, mindfulness	rjes su dran pa
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་བཅུ	10 mindfulnesses	rjes su dran pa bcu
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་དྲུག	the six recollections. {lam rje su dran pa} recollection of the path, {lta ba rje su dran pa} recollection of the view, {bsam gtan rje su dran pa} recollection of the meditation, {lha rje su dran p...	rjes su dran pa drug
རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the deity, {skye gnas rje su dran pa - recollection of the birth place, {gdams ngag rje	rje su dran pa
སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the instructions]	su dran pa
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	incomparable mindfulness 1 of the {bla na med pa drug} =incomparable things	rjes su dran pa bla na med pa
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པར	put in mind of	rjes su dran par
རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པར་བྱེད་པ	be reminded of	rjes su dran par byed pa
རྗེས་སུ་གདམས་པ	has transmitted	rjes su gdams pa
རྗེས་སུ་གདུང་བ	remorse	rjes su gdung ba
རྗེས་སུ་གདུངས་པ	regret	rjes su gdungs pa
རྗེས་སུ་འདེད་པ	after what goes before zin thabs byed pa,...Sngon du 'gro mkhan gyi rjes su 'ded pa	rjes su 'ded pa
རྗེས་སུ་འདོད་པ	right ambition	rjes su 'dod pa
རྗེས་སུ་ལྡན	practiced, habituated	rjes su ldan
རྗེས་སུ་གནང་བ	permission blessing; to grant permission	rjes su gnang ba
རྗེས་སུ་གནང་བའི་བཀའ	speech that has the buddha's assent	rjes su gnang ba'i bka'
རྗེས་སུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Anu Yoga, subsequent yoga. Syn {a nu yo ga}	rjes su rnal 'byor
རྗེས་སུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of Anuyoga, Anuyoga-yana	rjes su rnal 'byor gyi theg pa
རྗེས་སུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ལམ་རིམ	the gradual stages of the Anu Yoga path	rjes su rnal 'byor gyi lam rim
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག	to weigh, deliberate upon	rjes su dpag
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ	to deduce, infer, logically conclude, reason	rjes su dpag pa
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	merely apparent/faulty inference	rjes su dpag pa ltar snang ba
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པའི་ཚད་མ	pramana of inference	rjes su dpag pa'i tshad ma
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པས་གནོད་པ	refuted/ eliminated by inference	rjes su dpag pas gnod pa
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་བའི་ཚད་མ	pramana of inference	rjes su dpag ba'i tshad ma
རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་བྱ	the object inferred	rjes su dpag bya
རྗེས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ	perform, practice, follow, imitate, go in the footsteps of 943	rjes su spyod pa
རྗེས་སུ་འཕྲོག་པ	deprive, plunder, rob, snatch	rjes su 'phrog pa
རྗེས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	do like another, imitate, imitation	rjes su byed pa
རྗེས་སུ་བྱེད་པའི་སྒྲ	tshig gcig saying twice which is not a fault of repetition, do gal gyis brnan pa'i sgra: kye ma kye ma, dge'o dge'o	rjes su byed pa'i sgra
རྗེས་སུ་འབྱུང་བ	feeling, thinking	rjes su 'byung ba
རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང	[p {rjes su 'brangs},, follow [according to], pursue, go after, chase	rjes su 'brang
རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	1) follow after/ behind, pursue, chase; 2) grangs kyi rgyun / Chu tshod rjes 'brang bcas	rjes su 'brang ba
རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས	to join in	rjes su 'brangs
རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པ	1) to be fascinated by. 2) to follow (after)	rjes su 'brangs pa
རྗེས་སུ་འབྲེལ་བ	the later depending on the previous [Bza' las rjes 'brel,...Da lta'i gnas lugs gang ci snga ma'i lo rgyus kyi]	rjes su 'brel ba
རྗེས་སུ་སྦྱོར་བ	preoccupation	rjes su sbyor ba
རྗེས་སུ་མ་འབྲང	do not follow	rjes su ma 'brang
རྗེས་སུ་མི་མཐུན	in contradistinction to another	rjes su mi mthun
རྗེས་སུ་མི་མཐུན་པ	discordant	rjes su mi mthun pa
རྗེས་སུ་མི་འབྲང	not pursue, to not follow it up	rjes su mi 'brang
རྗེས་སུ་མི་དམིགས	1 of mi dmigs pa gsum, not ponder or follow	rjes su mi dmigs
རྗེས་སུ་མི་དམིགས་པ	supreme nonconceptuality	rjes su mi dmigs pa
རྗེས་སུ་མི་འཛིན	not retentive	rjes su mi 'dzin
རྗེས་སུ་མི་འཛིན་པ	not retaining	rjes su mi 'dzin pa
རྗེས་སུ་མྱ་ངན་བྱེད་པ	having remembered previous bad be sad	rjes su mya ngan byed pa
རྗེས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	actually experience	rjes su myong ba
རྗེས་སུ་རྩད་གཅོད	investigated later	rjes su rtsad gcod
རྗེས་སུ་བརྩེ་བ	1) produce compassion; 2) a dance posture	rjes su brtse ba
རྗེས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	searching after, imploring help	rjes su tshol ba
རྗེས་སུ་འཚོ	being supported by another, maintained with sustenance	rjes su 'tsho
རྗེས་སུ་འཚོལ་བ	rim gyis 'tshol nyul byed pa,...Snga ma'i lo rgyus kyi shul rnying rjes su 'tsol ba	rjes su 'tshol ba
རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན	1) follow, adhere, believe in; 2) accept as a follower	rjes su 'dzin
རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	follow, assist, welcome kindly, believe, have the impression of, retain	rjes su 'dzin pa
རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	create a connection with the guidance she had from her teacher	rjes su 'dzin pa'i rten 'brel
རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པར་ཞུས་པ	asked [Tilopa] to accept him as a disciple	rjes su 'dzin par zhus pa
རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པར་ཤོག	care for us always	rjes su 'dzin par shog
རྗེས་སུ་ཞུགས	involved with	rjes su zhugs
རྗེས་སུ་ཞུགས་པ	{rjes su 'jug pa} to be fully immersed/ engaged in; to be fully imbued with; to imbue fully; to follow (after)	rjes su zhugs pa
རྗེས་སུ་གཞིག་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	the meditation of consequent destruction	rjes su gzhig pa'i bsam gtan
རྗེས་སུ་ཟུང	accept	rjes su zung
རྗེས་སུ་ཟུངས	'bral bar med par rjes su	rjes su zungs
ཟུངས	Keep me close to you!	zungs
རྗེས་སུ་གཟུང	safeguarded	rjes su gzung
རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང	helped, take hold of	rjes su bzung
རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་སྟེ	who followed them	rjes su bzung ste
རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	pf. of rjes su 'dzin pa. 1) to take under one's care, care for; 2) accepted (MSS: as a disciple), to ac- cept (MSS: as a disciple), E.g., thugs brtse ba chen pos rjes su bzung, most graciously you ...	rjes su bzung ba
རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ་ཡིན	accepted him	rjes su bzung ba yin
རྗེས་སུ་བཟོད་ཤེས	ensuing acceptance and cognition [of the four truths in the two upper realms]	rjes su bzod shes
རྗེས་སུ་འཟིན་པའ	to be helped	rjes su 'zin pa'
རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང	enjoined, vi. to feel glad, happy, rejoice; rejoice	rjes su yi rang
རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་སྒོམ་ལམ	the path/ way of meditation w rejoicing [a path/way of meditation w defilement zag bcas sgom lam rejoicing in the virtues of self and others, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses]	rjes su yi rang sgom lam
རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་བ	dge ba la rjes su yi rang	rjes su yi rang ba
རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རངས་འོས་པ	admirable	rjes su yi rangs 'os pa
རྗེས་སུ་ཡིད་རང	rejoice	rjes su yid rang
རྗེས་སུ་ཡིད་རང་བ	rejoice	rjes su yid rang ba
རྗེས་སུ་ཡིས་རངས་པ	to rejoice in	rjes su yis rangs pa
རྗེས་སུ་ཡོང་བ	follow, imitate, go in the footsteps of	rjes su yong ba
རྗེས་སུ་ལུ	lag/ fall behind, be late/ backward/ underdeveloped	rjes su lu
རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	1) realize; 2) * subsequent cognition, ensuing cognition [of the four truths]	rjes su shes pa
རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ་བཞི	CHN	rjes su shes pa bzhi
རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	the acceptance of ensuing cognition [of the four truths]	rjes su shes pa'i bzod pa
རྗེས་སུ་བཤད་པ	1) phyis su smras pa; 2) Mjug tu bshad pa	rjes su bshad pa
རྗེས་སུ་སོན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	{char gtogs pa'i lta ba}	rjes su son pa'i lta ba
རྗེས་སུ་སོར	later on, afterwards	rjes su sor
རྗེས་སུ་སླེབས་པ	to fulfill the example [of.]	rjes su slebs pa
རྗེས་སུ་སློབ་པ	to emulate/ train in the example of	rjes su slob pa
རྗེས་སུ་བསྲུང་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	those of dull powers if intoxicated by desirable qualities, mthong ba'i chos la bde bar gnas pa las nyams pa'i skal ba can yin la ma myong na ma yin pa'o, dgra bcom pa drug gi nang gses]	rjes su bsrung ba'i chos can
རྗེས་སོར	rjes ma'am mjug ...Ca lag 'di rjes sor mkho che	rjes sor
རྗེས་སློབ	pupil	rjes slob
རྗོད	imp. of {rjod pa}; p. {brjod} to say, express, speak, utter	rjod
རྗོད་པ	{rjod pa, brjod pa, brjod pa, rjod} trans. v.; to say, pronounce, utter	rjod pa
རྗོད་པ་དང་འཇུག་པ	function of signification and function of application [gram] [ggd]	rjod pa dang 'jug pa
རྗོད་བྱ་ཚིག་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the attribute of expressive words	rjod bya tshig gyi khyad par
རྗོད་བྱེད	expressing [word] content, meaning [the expresser]	rjod byed
རྗོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	expressing words [brda'i dbang gis rang yul go byed kyi mnyan bya'am sgra, ming dang tshig lta bu'o]	rjod byed kyi sgra
རྗོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་གཉིས	CHN	rjod byed kyi sgra gnyis
རྗོད་བྱེད་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞི	four tantrapitakas forming the literary expression of tantra	rjod byed rgyud sde bzhi
རྗོད་བྱེད་སྒྲ	expressing words rjod byed ming gi tha snyad ji ltar btags	rjod byed sgra
རྗོད་བྱེད་ཚིག་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	immaculate words of expression	rjod byed tshig dri ma med pa
རྗོད་བྲལ	ineffable	rjod bral
རྗོད་ཚིག	expressing/ meaning/ telling words, [gram] the predicate	rjod tshig
རྗོད་ལུགས	way of saying/ expressing	rjod lugs
ལྗག་མ	fine satin	ljag ma
ལྗག་མོ་གླིང་ག	state grove in tibet	ljag mo gling ga
ལྗགས	tongue; 1) tongue (h). 2) used to construct honorific	ljags
ལྗགས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	three minor marks of the tongue	ljags kyi dpe byad gsum
ལྗགས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	tongue faculty (H	ljags kyi dbang po
ལྗགས་ཀྱིས་ཆབ་འདོར་བ	spit	ljags kyis chab 'dor ba
ལྗགས་ཀློག	h. of {klog}	ljags klog
ལྗགས་བཀོད	presentation, display, instructions, direction[s] (H	ljags bkod
ལྗགས་བཀོད་གནང	give instruction[s]/ direction[s] (H	ljags bkod gnang
ལྗགས་སྐྱེམས	drink H	ljags skyems
ལྗགས་ཁྲིད	tri, instruction (H	ljags khrid
ལྗགས་གོང	price H	ljags gong
ལྗགས་གྲངས	count, total, #, enumeration H	ljags grangs
ལྗགས་གྲོའི་འུ་ལག	yearly obligation to send serfs/ vassals to the Tibetan govt.	ljags gro'i 'u lag
ལྗགས་གླིང	musical instrument pipe w 7 holes	ljags gling
ལྗགས་བསྔོ	dedication (H	ljags bsngo
ལྗགས་ཆབ	saliva, spittle	ljags chab
ལྗགས་མཆིལ	spittle	ljags mchil
ལྗགས་མཉེན་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	major mark of a supple tongue	ljags mnyen pa'i dpe byad
ལྗགས་བསྙེན་པ	ejaculate charms or mantras	ljags bsnyen pa
ལྗགས་མདུད	knot (H	ljags mdud
ལྗགས་འདྲིལ	w tongue curled back	ljags 'dril
ལྗགས་འདྲིལ་བ	w tongue curled back	ljags 'dril ba
ལྗགས་ནར་མཛད	stretch/ stick out the tongue H	ljags nar mdzad
ལྗགས་པན	hot pepper H	ljags pan
ལྗགས་ཕུ	air breath H	ljags phu
ལྗགས་ཕུ་རྒྱག	blow on, waste, bungle, pump up, inflate H	ljags phu rgyag
ལྗགས་བྲོ	want, desire, experience, smell, taste, savor H	ljags bro
ལྗགས་དབུགས	breath (H	ljags dbugs
ལྗགས་མར	butter (H	ljags mar
ལྗགས་དམར་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of a red tongue	ljags dmar ba'i dpe byad
ལྗགས་སྨིན	[quality] food/ provisions H	ljags smin
ལྗགས་རྩིས་སྐྱོན་པ	to do accounting	ljags rtsis skyon pa
ལྗགས་རྩོམ	to write, compose, author	ljags rtsom
ལྗགས་རྩོམ་གནང་བ	wrote, composed (h)	ljags rtsom gnang ba
ལྗགས་ཚྭ	salt H	ljags tshwa
ལྗགས་རིང་བའི་མཚན་བཟང	major mark of a long tongue	ljags ring ba'i mtshan bzang
ལྗགས་ལན	send a letter H	ljags lan
ལྗགས་ལན་སྐྱོན་པ	to answer	ljags lan skyon pa
ལྗགས་ལན་ཕུལ་བ	to announce	ljags lan phul ba
ལྗགས་ལུང	lung for a pecha, reading/ scriptural transmission H	ljags lung
ལྗགས་ཤིན་དུ་ཏིང་ཞིང་སྲབ་པ	a long and very fine tongue	ljags shin du ting zhing srab pa
ལྗགས་ཤེར	sugar H	ljags sher
ལྗགས་བཤད	commentary, explanation, tri (H	ljags bshad
ལྗགས་བཤད་གནང་བ	comment, explain H	ljags bshad gnang ba
ལྗགས་སྲབ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a fine tongue * H	ljags srab pa'i dpe byad
ལྗང	place west of lhasa, green	ljang
ལྗང་ཀུ	green	ljang ku
ལྗང་དཀར	light green	ljang dkar
ལྗང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགོན་པ	bkra shis monastery in Jang	ljang bkra shis dgon pa
ལྗང་རྐང་གི་བར་མཚམས	spacing of seedlings	ljang rkang gi bar mtshams
ལྗང་སྐྱ	greenish-white, light green	ljang skya
ལྗང་ཁུ	green	ljang khu
ལྗང་ཁྲ	green mottled	ljang khra
ལྗང་གུ	green	ljang gu
ལྗང་དགུན་ཆོས	'jang phu monetary winter assembly	ljang dgun chos
ལྗང་སྔོན	blue-green	ljang sngon
ལྗང་སྔོན་དྲག་པོ	1 of sde brgyad	ljang sngon drag po
ལྗང་ཆེན	deep green; bright green	ljang chen
ལྗང་ཇ	green tea	ljang ja
ལྗང་ཇ་པ་རི	green tea, brick tea	ljang ja pa ri
ལྗང་ཐིང	bright green colored	ljang thing
ལྗང་ཐིང་ངེ་བ	bright green colored	ljang thing nge ba
ལྗང་དུང	solid	ljang dung
ལྗང་དུང་མ	solid, pure	ljang dung ma
ལྗང་འདེམས	seedling selection [for transplanting]	ljang 'dems
ལྗང་འདེམས་བྱེད	select seedlings [for transplanting]	ljang 'dems byed
ལྗང་རྡུང	pure, unalloyed, unadulterated	ljang rdung
ལྗང་སྡོང	stalk of crop sprouts/ leaves	ljang sdong
ལྗང་ནག	blackish-green	ljang nag
ལྗང་པ	1) 1st sprouts of wheat and barley; 2) green, unripe; 3) leaves of barley and oats; 4) silver plate; 5) pure silver	ljang pa
ལྗང་པ་སྐྱེ་བ	sprout	ljang pa skye ba
ལྗང་པ་སྐྱེས་བ	germinate	ljang pa skyes ba
ལྗང་པའི་ཆུན་པོ	bundle of sprouts	ljang pa'i chun po
ལྗང་སྤྲིན	yellow and ram gnyis kyi mdangs bton pa'i cloud picture	ljang sprin
ལྗང་ཕུད	sprouts of new crops btogs nas lam 'grul la sprad de dngul slong rgyag byed small bundle of the sprouts	ljang phud
ལྗང་ཕོན	bundle of sprouts	ljang phon
ལྗང་བུ	1st sprouts [of wheat and barley], seedling, bud,? shoot	ljang bu
ལྗང་བུ་སྐྱེས་བཟང་པོ	flourishing 1st sprouts [of wheat and barley]/ seedling/ bud/? shoot	ljang bu skyes bzang po
ལྗང་བུ་འཐག་སེལ	thinning 1st sprouts [of wheat and barley]/ seedlings/ bud/? shoots	ljang bu 'thag sel
ལྗང་བུ་ལག་འཐེན་གྱིས་སྐྱེ་རོགས	help plants to grow by pulling them up, the wrong kind of/ inappropriate/ stupid help	ljang bu lag 'then gyis skye rogs
ལྗང་མ	Syn {ljang bu}	ljang ma
ལྗང་མོ	ljang mo district	ljang mo
ལྗང་མྱུག	new sprouts/ shoots of crops/ vegetables etc.	ljang myug
ལྗང་དམར	greenish-red	ljang dmar
ལྗང་སྨུག	dark green	ljang smug
ལྗང་ཙ་ལྷ་དབོན	khri song lde btsan gtsug brtan mes aag tsom gyi sras gyim shing kong jo khab tu bzhes rgyu byas na'ang/ before kong jo came to Tibet this prince died rtas drud nas	ljang tsa lha dbon
ལྗང་འཛུགས	transplant [seedlings]	ljang 'dzugs
ལྗང་འཛུགས་རྒྱག	transplant [seedlings]	ljang 'dzugs rgyag
ལྗང་འཛུགས་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	transplanting machine [seedlings]	ljang 'dzugs 'phrul chas
ལྗང་གཤར	boot uppers btang ba'i 'ja' ljang gu	ljang gshar
ལྗང་གཤས	song sung when transplanting rice seedlings	ljang gshas
ལྗང་སེ	light green	ljang se
ལྗང་སེར	greenish-yellow	ljang ser
ལྗང་སེར་ཅན	dur ba grass	ljang ser can
ལྗངས	ljangs [place near Lhasa]	ljangs
ལྗངས་མི་རྣམས	provincial people	ljangs mi rnams
ལྗན་ལྗིན	defilement, filth, dirt, dust, sweepings	ljan ljin
ལྗན་ལྗིན་ཟ་བ	filth, eater, spirits	ljan ljin za ba
ལྗབ	flat, plain, even	ljab
ལྗབ་ལྗབ	large number	ljab ljab
ལྗབ་ལྗབ་པོ	way of joining the hollows of the palms	ljab ljab po
ལྗབ་ལྗིབ	#	ljab ljib
ལྗར་གྱིས་མནན	strongly pressed, tsir gyis	ljar gyis mnan
ལྗར་གྱིས་བསད	dam por non nges byas te bsad pa,...Brag gi 'og tu ri dvags ljar gyis bsad pa	ljar gyis bsad
ལྗར་མནན	strongly pressed, tsir gyis	ljar mnan
ལྗི	heavy	lji
ལྗི་ཏིང	heavy, depressed with a stone	lji ting
ལྗི་པ	1) flea; 2) heavy, weighty	lji pa
ལྗི་བ	flea, heavy, weighty	lji ba
ལྗི་མེད	light, not heavy	lji med
ལྗི་མོ	heavy, flea	lji mo
ལྗིག་གོག	weight	ljig gog
ལྗིད	weight, heavy[ness] [comp ljid po]	ljid
ལྗིད་ག་ཚོད་འདུག	how heavy is it?	ljid ga tshod 'dug
ལྗིད་གང་ཡང་མེད	weightless	ljid gang yang med
ལྗིད་གོག	gravity	ljid gog
ལྗིད་གོག་མེད་པ	weightless	ljid gog med pa
ལྗིད་གོག་ཚ་པོ	heavy, weighty	ljid gog tsha po
ལྗིད་གྲས	heavy class	ljid gras
ལྗིད་ཅན	having weight, heavy	ljid can
ལྗིད་ཅི་ཙམ	what is the weight of	ljid ci tsam
ལྗིད་ཆས	heavy implement	ljid chas
ལྗིད་ཆེ་བ	very heavy	ljid che ba
ལྗིད་ཉམས་པ	of = weight	ljid nyams pa
ལྗིད་མཉམ་པ	of = weight	ljid mnyam pa
ལྗིད་ཏིག་གེ་བ	heavy [feeling]	ljid tig ge ba
ལྗིད་ཏིང	heavy/ depressed feeling	ljid ting
ལྗིད་ཐེག	heavy, able to carry heavy weight	ljid theg
ལྗིད་ཐེག་ཁུར	ljid khyog pa	ljid theg khur
ལྗིད་ཐེག་ཆིའི་ཁྲེ	heavy truck/ vehicle	ljid theg chi'i khre
ལྗིད་ཐེག་རླངས་འཁོར	heavy truck/ vehicle	ljid theg rlangs 'khor
ལྗིད་དུ་གཏོང	add weight, make heavier	ljid du gtong
ལྗིད་འདེགས	lift weights [sport]/ heavy objects	ljid 'degs
ལྗིད་འདེགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	crane, hoist	ljid 'degs 'phrul 'khor
ལྗིད་རྡིག་རྡིག	heavy, sluggish	ljid rdig rdig
ལྗིད་ལྡན	having weight, heavy	ljid ldan
ལྗིད་ནོན	oppressive	ljid non
ལྗིད་གནོན	press down by weight/ force, oppress[ive]	ljid gnon
ལྗིད་པ	heaviness, weight	ljid pa
ལྗིད་པ་དེ་ཙམ་འདེགས་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་མ་རེད	no 1 could lift so/ that much weight	ljid pa de tsam 'degs thub kyi ma red
ལྗིད་པོ	weight, heavy[ness]	ljid po
ལྗིད་ཕབ	sit heavily 946	ljid phab
ལྗིད་བ	heavy	ljid ba
ལྗིད་མེད	light, weightless	ljid med
ལྗིད་མོ	heavy	ljid mo
ལྗིད་ཚད	weight	ljid tshad
ལྗིད་ཚད་འདེགས	lift weight[s]/ something heavy	ljid tshad 'degs
ལྗིད་འཛོམས་ལྟེ་བ	center of gravity	ljid 'dzoms lte ba
ལྗིད་རྫོབ	khur che la sna grangs mang ba, heavy burden w many dissimilar kinds	ljid rdzob
ལྗིད་རྫོབ་ཆེ་བ	awkward, slow, heavy	ljid rdzob che ba
ལྗིད་ཡང	heavy and light, weight	ljid yang
ལྗིད་ཡོར་ཡོར	[so heavy one is] shaking w the weight ljid yor yor ba rnams 'khyer dus shugs	ljid yor yor
སྐྱེད་དགོས	when 1 carries things so heavy 1 is shaking w the weight 1 must shugs skyed	skyed dgos
ལྗིད་ཡོར་རེ་བ	[so heavy 1 is] shaking w the weight	ljid yor re ba
ལྗིད་ཡོར་རེ་བ་དེ་འཁྱེར་ཁག་པོ་ཡོད	have a difficult burden so heavy 1 is shaking w the weight	ljid yor re ba de 'khyer khag po yod
ལྗིད་རིགས	heavy type	ljid rigs
ལྗིད་རིགས་ཀྱི་བཟོ་ལས	heavy industry	ljid rigs kyi bzo las
ལྗིད་སོན	smin phyi ba'am 'gor ba'i grain seed	ljid son
ལྗིབས	1) pot-holder cloth; 2) eye-lid	ljibs
ལྗུར	SA ldur	ljur
ལྗེན	1) MG: va. to penetrate, to enter. 2) Das: to enter, to penetrate; blo la ljen pa, to be perceived, understood; tshon ljen, a dye or color penetrating and remaing fixed in cloth. 3) CM: no entry. [...	ljen
ལྗེན་ལྗེན	rubbish	ljen ljen
ལྗེན་པ	enter, penetrate	ljen pa
ལྗོང་དར	scarf that is used to cover a quiver	ljong dar
ལྗོངས	1) country, province. 2) scenery. 3) land, valley, a large valley, principal or main valley, region, district, province; country	ljongs
ལྗོངས་བཀོད	scenery, landscape	ljongs bkod
ལྗོངས་ཁ་བ་ཅན	the land of snow, Tibet	ljongs kha ba can
ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ	ljongs su 'gro ba ste, on a long road phyi rol tu go to a place just a gyang grags distance..Lug rdzis ra lug bdas nas ljongs rgyu bzhin 'tsho ba	ljongs rgyu
ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ་བ	monk who frequents small towns	ljongs rgyu ba
ལྗོངས་རྒྱུར་བ	holiday after summer rains retreat	ljongs rgyur ba
ལྗོངས་རྒྱུར་བྱོན་པ	holiday after summer rains retreat	ljongs rgyur byon pa
ལྗོངས་ཆེན་པོ	large country	ljongs chen po
ལྗོངས་མཐོ	high place/ valley	ljongs mtho
ལྗོངས་མི	local person	ljongs mi
ལྗོངས་སུ་རྒྱུ་བ	rove about	ljongs su rgyu ba
ལྗོངས་གསུམ	3 districts	ljongs gsum
ལྗོན	tree[s], woods, thicket[s]	ljon
ལྗོན་གྲིབ	shade of a tree	ljon grib
ལྗོན་གྲིབ་འགྲོ་ལམ	tree-shaded streets	ljon grib 'gro lam
ལྗོན་ལྗེན	rubbish	ljon ljen
ལྗོན་པ	paradise, great tree. Syn {ljon shing} thickets. trees, woods	ljon pa
ལྗོན་པ་ལུང	Jonpa land	ljon pa lung
ལྗོན་པ་སེར་པོ	{ljon pa ser po} thang shing [kind of tree]	ljon pa ser po
ལྗོན་པའི་གགས	sublime forest	ljon pa'i gags
ལྗོན་པའི་གྲིབ་བསིལ་ལྡན	tree-shaded	ljon pa'i grib bsil ldan
ལྗོན་པའི་དབང་པོ	"The Greatest of LifeTrees"; the abbreviated name of {dngul chu dbyangs can grub pa'i rdo rje}'s famous grammar text, the {thon mi'i legs bshad sum chu pa'i snying po ljon pa'i dbang po}	ljon pa'i dbang po
ལྗོན་པའི་ཚལ	woods [forests]	ljon pa'i tshal
ལྗོན་པའི་ཡུལ	a land of Gandharvas	ljon pa'i yul
ལྗོན་ཕྱུག་འཁོར་བ	1 of srid pa pho dgu	ljon phyug 'khor ba
ལྗོན་ཕྱུག་འཁོར་བ་རྗེ	lord of plants and of the cycle of existence	ljon phyug 'khor ba rje
ལྗོན་དབང	ljon pa'i dbang po; wishfulfilling tree	ljon dbang
ལྗོན་དམར	copper	ljon dmar
ལྗོན་ཤིང	magic trees found in Dewachen. Syn {ljon pa} thickets, a tree, perennial tree, tree of paradise; a tree; tree	ljon shing
ལྗོན་ཤིང་གི་ཡལ་འདབ	the branch of that tree	ljon shing gi yal 'dab
ལྗོན་ཤིང་ལྡུམ་ར	park or grove w various trees	ljon shing ldum ra
ལྗོན་ཤིང་རྩ་ཆས	branching magic tree	ljon shing rtsa chas
ལྗོན་ཤིང་རྩེ་རྒྱས	branching tree	ljon shing rtse rgyas
ལྗོན་ཤིང་རྫ་བ་ཀ	javaka tree ljon shing rlung gis bskyod pa ltar phyag 'tshal ba - bowed down like willows bending in the wind	ljon shing rdza ba ka
ལྗོབ་ལྗོབ་གི་ཁ་དོག	unclear w various colors mixed	ljob ljob gi kha dog
ལྗོབ་པོ	unclear w various colors mixed	ljob po
སཇོན་ཤིང	tree?	sjon shing
བརྗད་དུ་མིད	indescribable	brjad du mid
བརྗིད	brightness, lustre, splendor, magnificence, dignity, resplendence	brjid
བརྗིད་ཀྱིས་བརྗིད	shines with still greater brightness	brjid kyis brjid
བརྗིད་རྔམས	awesome; awesome	brjid rngams
བརྗིད་ཅན	lustrous, refulgent, very able, accomplished	brjid can
བརྗིད་ཆགས	dignified	brjid chags
བརྗིད་ཆགས་པ	dignified, grand, magnificent, glorious, splendid, majestic, imposing	brjid chags pa
བརྗིད་ཉམས	dignified, grand, magnificent, glorious, splendid, majestic, imposing [ziji gzi brjid kyi rnam 'gyur [no fear, depression, uplifted]	brjid nyams
བརྗིད་ཉམས་ལྡན་པ	grand, splendid, magnificent	brjid nyams ldan pa
བརྗིད་ནོན	overwhelming brilliance so that by gzi brjid an enemy is naturally overcome	brjid non
བརྗིད་པ	(to be) resplendent	brjid pa
བརྗིད་པའི་འགྲོས	walking with a dancing gait	brjid pa'i 'gros
བརྗིད་པའི་སྤྱན	majestic eye 947	brjid pa'i spyan
བརྗིད་པའི་གསུང་དབྱངས	magnificent voice	brjid pa'i gsung dbyangs
བརྗིད་པར	Jipar, in Domey	brjid par
བརྗིད་པོ	dignified, majestic, splendid, brilliant	brjid po
བརྗིད་སྤྲོད	give over charge of an office or duty	brjid sprod
བརྗིད་བག	mthong 'dod po and pleasing .Mi de lus stobs che la bzhin mdzes shing brjid bag dang ldan pa	brjid bag
བརྗུན	lie, falsehood ?brdzun??	brjun
བརྗེ	exchange for, shift, barter [f {rje}	brje
བརྗེ་འགྱུར	[ex]change, substitution, replacement	brje 'gyur
བརྗེ་འགྱུར་མེད་པ	evergreen	brje 'gyur med pa
བརྗེ་འགྲུལ	change, substitution, replacement	brje 'grul
བརྗེ་འགྲུལ་རྒྱག	change, substitute, replace	brje 'grul rgyag
བརྗེ་འགྲུལ་བྱེད	change, substitute, replace	brje 'grul byed
བརྗེ་སྒྱུར	shift	brje sgyur
བརྗེ་འཐེན	removal, withdrawal, replacement [in jobs]	brje 'then
བརྗེ་འཐེན་བྱེད	remove, withdraw, replace [in jobs]	brje 'then byed
བརྗེ་འདྲེན	exchange	brje 'dren
བརྗེ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	exchange	brje 'dren byed
བརྗེ་གནས	store	brje gnas
བརྗེ་པོ	[ex]change [old and new etc]	brje po
བརྗེ་པོ་རྒྱག	MG: to exchange. MSS: syn. for brje po log [mss]	brje po rgyag
བརྗེ་པོ་རྒྱབ་པ	switch	brje po rgyab pa
བརྗེ་པོ་ལག་སྤྲོད	things to be exchanges rin tshab 'phral du sprod pa	brje po lag sprod
བརྗེ་པོ་ལོག	Nyima Tondhup (NT): to exchange [mss]	brje po log
བརྗེ་སྤྲོད	exchange	brje sprod
བརྗེ་སྤྲོད་པའི་ཇ་རྟ	exchanged tea and horses	brje sprod pa'i ja rta
བརྗེ་སྤྲོད་པའི་ཚོང་ཟོག	exchanged merchandise	brje sprod pa'i tshong zog
བརྗེ་སྤྲོད་བྱེད	exchange	brje sprod byed
བརྗེ་འཕྲུལ	mistakenly exchanged	brje 'phrul
བརྗེ་བ	barter, exchange	brje ba
བརྗེ་བ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three changes	brje ba rnam pa gsum
བརྗེ་བོ	making up, compensation by barter	brje bo
བརྗེ་བོ་རྒྱག	barter, exchange	brje bo rgyag
བརྗེ་བོ་བྱེད་པ	exchange, give an equal measure in bartering	brje bo byed pa
བརྗེ་ཚོང	barter, exchange	brje tshong
བརྗེ་མཚམས	taking over office when a new office takes charge of a post from an old officer	brje mtshams
བརྗེ་རེས	change in alternation [change -for --] rotation, taking turns	brje res
བརྗེ་རེས་གཏོང	rotate, take turns	brje res gtong
བརྗེ་རེས་བྱེད	rotate, take turns	brje res byed
བརྗེ་ལེན	[ex]change, substitution, replacement	brje len
བརྗེ་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	change-making machine	brje len 'phrul 'khor
བརྗེ་ལེན་བྱེད	[ex]change, substitute, replace	brje len byed
བརྗེ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	exchange	brje len byed pa
བརྗེ་ལེན་རིན་ཐང	exchange rate	brje len rin thang
བརྗེ་སོར	[ex]change, substitution, replacement	brje sor
བརྗེད	oblivion, honor, forget, SA rjed pa	brjed
བརྗེད་འགྲོ	be[come] forgotten, forget	brjed 'gro
བརྗེད་འགྲོ་བ	become forgotten	brjed 'gro ba
བརྗེད་ང་བའི་འཚོ	danger of forgetting	brjed nga ba'i 'tsho
བརྗེད་ངད	Syn {brjed ngas}	brjed ngad
བརྗེད་ངད་ཅན	person who quickly forgets, forgetful, absent-minded	brjed ngad can
བརྗེད་ངད་ཆེན་པོ	person who quickly forgets, forgetful, absent-minded	brjed ngad chen po
བརྗེད་ངད་པ	forgetful[ness]	brjed ngad pa
བརྗེད་ངད་མེད་པ	non-forgetfulness	brjed ngad med pa
བརྗེད་ངད་ཚ་པོ	person who quickly forgets, forgetful, absent-minded	brjed ngad tsha po
བརྗེད་ངན་པ	bad forgetting [good notions are unclear and forgotten agan and again]	brjed ngan pa
བརྗེད་ངས	forgetful[ness] * absent mindedness	brjed ngas
ཨབསེནཏ	mindedness. Forgetfulness, as	absent
བརྗེད་ངས་ཅན	person who quickly forgets, forgetful, absent-minded	brjed ngas can
བརྗེད་ངས་ཆེན་པོ	person who quickly forgets, forgetful, absent-minded	brjed ngas chen po
བརྗེད་ངས་པ	forgetfulness	brjed ngas pa
བརྗེད་ངས་མེད་པ	non-forgetfulness	brjed ngas med pa
བརྗེད་ངས་ཚ་པོ	absent-minded	brjed ngas tsha po
བརྗེད་ངེས	forgetting	brjed nges
བརྗེད་ངེས་པ	forgetfulness	brjed nges pa
བརྗེད་སྟོར	brjed nas brlags pa'am bor ba	brjed stor
བརྗེད་ཐལ	long forgotten	brjed thal
བརྗེད་ཐོ	mnemonic note memo, notebook	brjed tho
བརྗེད་ཐོ་རྒྱག	write mnemonic notes, memo, in notebook	brjed tho rgyag
བརྗེད་ཐོ་བཏགས	keeping memoranda	brjed tho btags
བརྗེད་ཐོ་བཏགས་པ	keep a memorandum	brjed tho btags pa
བརྗེད་ཐོའི་དེབ་ཡིག	memorandum book	brjed tho'i deb yig
བརྗེད་ཐོའི་ཡིག་ཆ	memorandum	brjed tho'i yig cha
བརྗེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	make forget, cause to forget	brjed du 'jug pa
བརྗེད་གནས་པ	forgetfulness mibp 95	brjed gnas pa
བརྗེད་པ	(tha mi dad pa 1) subside from the mind, forget; 2) [p f rjed pa] extol	brjed pa
བརྗེད་པ་མེད་པ	SA brjed med, without forgetfulness	brjed pa med pa
བརྗེད་པའི་འོས	venerable, worthy of honor	brjed pa'i 'os
བརྗེད་སྤྲོད	give over charge of an office or duty	brjed sprod
བརྗེད་བ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi	brjed ba med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
བརྗེད་བྱང	memo board, mnemonic note	brjed byang
བརྗེད་བྱེད	1) by brjed ngas a disease of confused understanding; 2) memory scattering d"n	brjed byed
བརྗེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གདོན	demon who brings in forgetfulness, demons who cause oblivion, amnesia demons	brjed byed kyi gdon
བརྗེད་སྦྱང་བ	recall to mind what has been forgotten	brjed sbyang ba
བརྗེད་མེད	not slipping	brjed med
བརྗེད་གསོ	dran gso'am dran skul,...Gnangs nyin byed rgyu'i las ka rnams sang nyin brjed gso zhig byed pa,...Brjed dogs yod pa'i rkyen gyis yang yang brjed gso byas	brjed gso
བརྗེན་པ	raw	brjen pa
བརྗེས	[ex]changed, shifted, bartered [p {rje}	brjes
བརྗེས་ངས་ཅན	forgetful	brjes ngas can
བརྗེས་ངེས་པ	forgetfulness {mushitasm it}	brjes nges pa
བརྗེས་པ	[p rje ba]	brjes pa
བརྗོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	SA brjod sgra	brjod kyi sgra
བརྗོད་ཀྱིས་ག་ལ་ལང	it would never suffice to describe	brjod kyis ga la lang
བརྗོད་ཀྱིས་མི་ལང	to defy description	brjod kyis mi lang
བརྗོད་ཀྱིས་མི་ལང་བ	beyond words, indescribable *, however much you say isn't enough	brjod kyis mi lang ba
བརྗོད་དཀའ་བ	hard to express, difficult to describe	brjod dka' ba
བརྗོད་གྱི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond description	brjod gyi yul las 'das pa
བརྗོད་གྱིས་མི་ལང་པ	indescribable	brjod gyis mi lang pa
བརྗོད་སྒྲ	class-member words	brjod sgra
བརྗོད་བཅས	'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, among the {ltung ba phyir bcos}, ltung ba gleng yang skabs mi 'byed na brjod pa dang bcas pa byed dgos pa ste, how?, tse dang ldan pa khyod la dge 'dun gyis brjod pa da...	brjod bcas
བརྗོད་ཉམས	brjod pa'i nyams 'gyur ???	brjod nyams
བརྗོད་ཉམས་ཚིག	bad language, vulgar speech	brjod nyams tshig
བརྗོད་གཏམ	explaining talk or shod rgyu'i skad cha	brjod gtam
བརྗོད་སྟངས	expression	brjod stangs
བརྗོད་དང་བཅས	w its expression	brjod dang bcas
བརྗོད་དུ་མིད	indescribable	brjod du mid
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད	ineffable, SA brjod med	brjod du med
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པ	1) indescribable, inexpressible; 2) w no expressible meaning; 3) a number	brjod du med pa
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	indescribable nature	brjod du med pa'i chos nyid
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པའི་ཉམས	an experience beyond words	brjod du med pa'i nyams
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	indescribable emptiness	brjod du med pa'i stong pa nyid
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པའི་བདག	inexpressible nature	brjod du med pa'i bdag
བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པར	without defining it	brjod du med par
བརྗོད་དོ	said, described	brjod do
བརྗོད་དོན	1) subject matter, topic; 2) as was said:,	brjod don
བརྗོད་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	quintessential subjects, central subjects	brjod don snying po
བརྗོད་བདེ་འདྲེན་པ	to a word suffix des rang ming gi cha shas su 'dren rgyu'i yi ge de, rang dang m f neutral kyi sign mi mtsungs kyang ngag thog nas brjod bde'i dgos pa gtso bor byas nas skabs su gang bab kyi ming g...	brjod bde 'dren pa
བརྗོད་བདེ་བ	1) bde ba speech, oral explanation or brjod tshig	brjod bde ba
བརྗོད་བདེར	explained easily	brjod bder
བརྗོད་འདོད	mere supposition	brjod 'dod
བརྗོད་འདོད་ཀྱི་དཔེ	ornament showing mtshon byed example la faults and virtues which it has, are really like the exemplified thing zhes nan tan gyi sgo nas brjod 'dod yod pa, [one of the ornaments of example	brjod 'dod kyi dpe
བརྗོད་སྡེབ	a sentence	brjod sdeb
བརྗོད་ན	as was said:	brjod na
བརྗོད་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of expression	brjod pa gnyis
བརྗོད་པ་རྟོགས་པ	truly understanding what is expressed	brjod pa rtogs pa
བརྗོད་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	expressible knowledge	brjod pa dang bcas pa'i shes pa
བརྗོད་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྒྲས་ཚིགས	unworthy speech brjod pa ma yin pa'i sgras tshigs su bcad	brjod pa ma yin pa'i sgras tshigs
པ་བརྗོད་པ	express unworthy speech brjod pa ma yin pa'i sgras tshigs su bcad pa brjod pa dang sgyu dang gyos gzhan la nye bar spyod kyis lhag pa'i	pa brjod pa
བསམ་པས་མ་ཡིན་པ	act towards others w/o higher motivation but w unworthy speech, deceit, and guile	bsam pas ma yin pa
བརྗོད་པ་མེད	inexpressible	brjod pa med
བརྗོད་པ་མེད་པ	ex expressible	brjod pa med pa
བརྗོད་པ་ཙམ	just to use a definition	brjod pa tsam
བརྗོད་པ་ཚིག་གི་གསུང	1 of the {gsung lnga} taming whoever can be tamed in appropriate language at the same time teaching the dharma, the words spoken by nirmanakaya zhes Nyingma mantra brda chad	brjod pa tshig gi gsung
བརྗོད་པ་ཟབ་མོ	profound expression	brjod pa zab mo
བརྗོད་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	expressed idea, intend to express	brjod pa yid la byed pa
བརྗོད་པ་ཡིན	it is said, it is related	brjod pa yin
བརྗོད་པ་ཡོད་པ	skad cha bshad rgyu yod pa, explainable	brjod pa yod pa
བརྗོད་པ་ལས	transcend all definitions	brjod pa las
བརྗོད་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of expression	brjod pa gsum
བརྗོད་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	intimate superficial reality	brjod pa'i kun rdzob bden pa
བརྗོད་པའི་སྒྲ	expression	brjod pa'i sgra
བརྗོད་པའི་ཉེས་པ	fault of expression	brjod pa'i nyes pa
བརྗོད་པའི་སྙེ་མ	grouse	brjod pa'i snye ma
བརྗོད་པའི་དཔེ	{dper brjod}, [figures of speech?] [mss]	brjod pa'i dpe
བརྗོད་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	expressible topic, the sphere of activity of expression	brjod pa'i spyod yul
བརྗོད་པའི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of expression	brjod pa'i bag chags
བརྗོད་པའི་ཚིག	expressed words	brjod pa'i tshig
བརྗོད་པའི་ཚིག་བཤད་པའི་གཏམ	explanatory talk	brjod pa'i tshig bshad pa'i gtam
བརྗོད་པའི་ཡུལ	object of explanation	brjod pa'i yul
བརྗོད་པར་དཀའ་བ	hard to describe	brjod par dka' ba
བརྗོད་པར་འདོད་པ	wishing to speak, desire to talk of one's own self, conceit	brjod par 'dod pa
བརྗོད་པར་ནུས་མ་ཡིན	inexpressible	brjod par nus ma yin
བརྗོད་པར་བྱ	expressible	brjod par bya
བརྗོད་པར་བྱ་བ	expressible	brjod par bya ba
བརྗོད་པར་བྱ་བ་མ་ཡིན་པ་ཉིད	inexpressibility	brjod par bya ba ma yin pa nyid
བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to speak, speaker	brjod par byed pa
བརྗོད་བྱ	subject [being talked about/ [to be] presented] [style, content, meaning, expressible [subject], expressive verbal (adhidheya, abhishya, vacgama]	brjod bya
བརྗོད་བྱ་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	the subject the three kinds of tantra or continuity	brjod bya rgyud gsum
བརྗོད་བྱ་ཅན	possessed of meaning, explainable	brjod bya can
བརྗོད་བྱ་རྗོད་བྱེད	expressed and expressing	brjod bya rjod byed
བརྗོད་བྱ་བརྗོད་བྱེད་ལ་བཏགས་པ	imputation of expessor and expressed	brjod bya brjod byed la btags pa
བརྗོད་བྱ་དང་རྗོད་བྱེད	the signified and the signifier [ggd]	brjod bya dang rjod byed
བརྗོད་བྱ་དོན	subject matter	brjod bya don
བརྗོད་བྱ་དོན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པ	the attribute of expressed meaning, distinctions of the subject matter	brjod bya don gyi khyad pa
བརྗོད་བྱ་དོན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	attribute of expressed meaning brjod bya don gyi rnam gzhag gang nas 'byung ba - the origin of the exposition of subject matter	brjod bya don gyi khyad par
བརྗོད་བྱ་དོན་གྱི་དབུ་མ	the subject matter madhyamaka	brjod bya don gyi dbu ma
བརྗོད་བྱ་དོན་དང་ལྡན་པ	meaningful expression	brjod bya don dang ldan pa
བརྗོད་བྱ་ལྡན	child	brjod bya ldan
བརྗོད་བྱ་བྲལ	that cannot be said, indescribable	brjod bya bral
བརྗོད་བྱ་མིན	unexpressed	brjod bya min
བརྗོད་བྱ་གཙོ་བོ	principal subject, theme, thesis	brjod bya gtso bo
བརྗོད་བྱད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	expressive sound	brjod byad kyi sgra
བརྗོད་བྱའི་རྟགས	sign of expression, begging back	brjod bya'i rtags
བརྗོད་བྱའི་དོན	meaning to be expressed	brjod bya'i don
བརྗོད་བྱའི་ཕྱོགས	the female organ	brjod bya'i phyogs
བརྗོད་བྱའི་རབ	fit to be proclaimed, praiseworthy	brjod bya'i rab
བརྗོད་བྱེད	expression/ description; expressive/ descriptive expression; discussion	brjod byed
བརྗོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	discourse	brjod byed kyi sgra
བརྗོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དངོས་ཡུལ	direct objective basis of expressions	brjod byed kyi dngos yul
བརྗོད་བྱེད་སྒྲ་སྤྱི	, [expressive verbal] universal/ abstract qualitative term abhidhanasasbdasamanya	brjod byed sgra spyi
བརྗོད་བྱེད་ཚིག་གི་དབུ་མ	the means of expression, verbal madhyamaka	brjod byed tshig gi dbu ma
བརྗོད་བྲལ	beyond expression in words, inexpressible, beyond explanation	brjod bral
བརྗོད་བྲལ་ཆོས་ཉིད	the indescribable nature of things	brjod bral chos nyid
བརྗོད་བྲལ་བརྗོད་ཇུ་མིད	indescribable	brjod bral brjod ju mid
བརྗོད་མི་བདེ་བ	one who is not able to speak well	brjod mi bde ba
བརྗོད་མི་ལང་བ	{bshad na brjod mi lang ba} fathomless	brjod mi lang ba
བརྗོད་མི་ཤེས་པ	indescribable; inexpressible; inexpressible, indescribable	brjod mi shes pa
བརྗོད་མིན་པ	unexpressed	brjod min pa
བརྗོད་མེད	cannot be expressed by words, inexpressible, ineffable, indescribable	brjod med
བརྗོད་མེད་ཀྱི་བརྗོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great utterance beyond utterance	brjod med kyi brjod pa chen po
བརྗོད་མེད་ཀྱི་རིག་པ་ཟང་ཐལ	an indescribable directly penetrating awareness	brjod med kyi rig pa zang thal
བརྗོད་མེད་ཉིད	inexpressibility	brjod med nyid
བརྗོད་མེད་ཐོབ་པ	attain the inexpressible	brjod med thob pa
བརྗོད་མེད་དོན་གྱི་བཤགས་པ	Ineffable Confession of the Ultimate; the most famous confession in the Nyingmapa school. It starts with the words Om Yeshe Kuchok (OM ye shes sku mchog)	brjod med don gyi bshags pa
བརྗོད་མེད་ལས་བསྒྲེས་པ	recording what is unspeakable	brjod med las bsgres pa
བརྗོད་ཚིག	quotation	brjod tshig
བརྗོད་ཚུལ	way of speaking, expression	brjod tshul
བརྗོད་མཛད	indicating	brjod mdzad
བརྗོད་གཞི	basis of expression, proposition [in logic], subject to be explained	brjod gzhi
བརྗོད་བཟང	good speech, good speaker, good delivery	brjod bzang
བརྗོད་ཡས	a number	brjod yas
བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པ	unspeakable, indescribable, transcends explanation	brjod las 'das pa
བརྗོད་སྲོལ	line of argument, reasoning	brjod srol
བརྗོད་གསལ	1) subject matter, topic, meaning to be expressed; 2) as was said:	brjod gsal
བརྗོད་གསལ་ལྟར་ན	1) subject matter, topic, meaning to be expressed; 2) as was said:	brjod gsal ltar na
བརྗོས་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	quintessential subjects, central subjects	brjos don snying po
ཉ	full moon; 1) the letter nya [used in alphabetical numbering]. 2) fish. 3) tendon, muscle. 4) full moon. 5) Pisces. 6) this letter has not been entered marked words from the TibetanChinese Dictiona...	nya
ཉ་ཀུག	fish hook	nya kug
ཉ་ཀྱུ	iron hook for catching fish	nya kyu
ཉ་རྐྱལ	bladder of a fish	nya rkyal
ཉ་སྐར་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 full moon stars	nya skar bcu gnyis
ཉ་སྐྱོགས	1) able to engender pearls chu skyes 'bu rigs shig; 2) chu bal plant; 3) gills of fish D	nya skyogs
ཉ་སྐྱོབ	oyster	nya skyob
ཉ་ཁྱིམ	Pisces [the sign in the zodiac	nya khyim
ཉ་ཁྱུ	school of fish	nya khyu
ཉ་ཁྱུ་ཤར་དུས	fishing season [when schools of fish appear]	nya khyu shar dus
ཉ་ཁྲ	chu skyar water bird osprey, fishing eagle	nya khra
ཉ་ཁྲབ	nya'i phags par khrab kyi byang bu nang bzhin yod pa de'i ming	nya khrab
ཉ་ཁྲབ་ཅན	waterfall jumping fish = carp D	nya khrab can
ཉ་ཁྲབ་ཆེན	sturgeon D	nya khrab chen
ཉ་ཁྲར	kind of brick tea	nya khrar
ཉ་ཁྲི	3rd son of king gri gum btsan po	nya khri
ཉ་ཁྲིག་ཤིང	{nya khrig} edible/ med. tree	nya khrig shing
ཉ་ཁྲོམ	fish market	nya khrom
ཉ་མཁྲིས	fish bile	nya mkhris
ཉ་ག	1) weight, measure, scale; 2) weight measure of 4.25 ounces, srang; 3) Ri'i har nyag kha; 4) steel yard	nya ga
ཉ་གང	the full moon day	nya gang
ཉ་གང་བ	full moon	nya gang ba
ཉ་གང་ཟླ་བ	full moon	nya gang zla ba
ཉ་གའི་འདེགས་བྱེད་རྒྱ་རྡོ	weight of a steel yard	nya ga'i 'degs byed rgya rdo
ཉ་གུག	fish-hook	nya gug
ཉ་གེ་ཉི་གེ	Syn {nyag nyig}	nya ge nyi ge
ཉ་གེ་ཉིག་གེ	muddy [with water]	nya ge nyig ge
ཉ་གེ་ཉུ་གེ	Syn {nyag nyug}	nya ge nyu ge
ཉ་གེ་ཉོ་གེ	Syn {nyag nyog}	nya ge nyo ge
ཉ་གེ་ཉོག་གེ	muddy [with water]	nya ge nyog ge
ཉ་གྲུ	fishing boat	nya gru
ཉ་གྲོ	Banyan tree	nya gro
ཉ་གྲོ་ཏ	[Skt] banyan or indian fig tree [bod skad du rkang mang zhes bya zhing, de'i sa bon ni yungs dkar gyi bzhi cha tsam yod pa la lo re la yal ga rgyang grags tsam du khyab par skye bar bshad pas shin ...	nya gro ta
ཉ་གྲོ་དྷ	banyan or indian fig tree [SK literally means growing downwards" 951 (fibres descend from itsh branches to the earth and there take root and form new stems	nya gro dha
ཉ་གྲོ་དྷ་ལྟར	like the fig/ bodhi tree	nya gro dha ltar
ཉ་དགྲ་དཀར་མོ	{nya dgra dkar mo} white crane	nya dgra dkar mo
ཉ་མགོ་གྲུ་ཁ	mya mgo boat dock [sne gdong rdzong khongs yar klungs gtsang po'i thog	nya mgo gru kha
ཉ་རྒྱ	fishing net	nya rgya
ཉ་རྒྱབ	1) fish back; 2) housetop pu shu, coping/ covering at the top of a wall (/ D	nya rgyab
ཉ་རྒྱལ	king of the fish, fish bladder	nya rgyal
ཉ་རྒྱས	Syn {nya gang}	nya rgyas
ཉ་རྒྱས་པ	full moon	nya rgyas pa
ཉ་སྒོང	1) fish eggs/ spawn; 2) fish and eggs	nya sgong
ཉ་སྒོང་གཏོང	spawn	nya sgong gtong
ཉ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Great Nirvana; Skt. mahaparinirvana sutra. T 120)	nya ngan las 'das pa chen po'i mdo
ཉ་རྔ	1) fish tail; 2) gun-stock	nya rnga
ཉ་ལྕིབས	fish gills, mother of pearl, kind of oyster, medicinal root which heals scalds and blisters	nya lcibs
ཉ་ལྕིབས་ཀྱི་སྨིན་འགྱུ	head ornaments of [mother of] pearl	nya lcibs kyi smin 'gyu
ཉ་ལྕིབས་ཀྱི་སྨིན་འགྱུར	head ornaments made of mother of pearl used by women of rank in khams	nya lcibs kyi smin 'gyur
ཉ་ལྕིབས་ཁོག་པར་སྨིན་པ	ripened in mother of pearl, pearl	nya lcibs khog par smin pa
ཉ་ལྕིབས་པ་ཕོག	drops of rain falling	nya lcibs pa phog
ཨིནཏོ་ཐེ་མོཨུཐ་ཨོཕ༹་རིབེ༹ར	mussels	into the mouth of river
ཉ་ལྕིབས་པ་ཕོག་གནམ་སྐྱེས	skyi-born	nya lcibs pa phog gnam skyes
པེཨརལ	seed	pearl
ཉ་ལྕིབས་ཕ་ཕོག་ནམ་སྐྱེས	sky born pearl seed, rain-drops	nya lcibs pha phog nam skyes
ཉ་ཆུ	tendon, sinews. Syn {nyva chu}	nya chu
ཉ་ཆེན་ཞི	shark	nya chen zhi
ཉ་ཆེན་ཞིག	whale	nya chen zhig
ཉ་ཆེན་ཡོར་མོ	the great whales	nya chen yor mo
ཉ་མཆིན་གྱི་སྣུམ	cod/ fish liver oil	nya mchin gyi snum
ཉ་མཆིལ	fish hook	nya mchil
ཉ་མཆོང	pull fish out of water	nya mchong
ཉ་མཆོད	worship done on the day of the full moon	nya mchod
ཉ་འཆིང	(met fisherman	nya 'ching
ཉ་འཆོར་བ	fish	nya 'chor ba
ཉ་ཉི་མ་དགའ	fish that likes to stay in the sun	nya nyi ma dga'
ཉ་ཉུང་མཉམ་བསྲེ	full and spare/ good and bad mixed, fish and turnips mixed	nya nyung mnyam bsre
ཉ་ཉེར	# D	nya nyer
ཉ་ཉོར	lazy, sluggish, frail, weak, fragile, fragility indifferent, apathy, lethargy	nya nyor
ཉ་ལྟོ་པ	1) fisherman; 2) Indian mahasiddha Luyipa	nya lto pa
ཉ་སྟོང	the full moon and new moon days, 15th 30th	nya stong
ཉ་སྟོང་བརྒྱད་གསུམ	the full moon, the new moon, the eighth day	nya stong brgyad gsum
ཉ་སྟོང་དུས་དྲུག	the six days such as full moon, new moon etc	nya stong dus drug
ཉ་སྟོན	festival observed on a fullmoon day	nya ston
ཉ་དང་ཉུང་མ་བསྲེས	wanting to have one's cake and eat it too	nya dang nyung ma bsres
ཉ་དང་སྟོང	full moon & new moon	nya dang stong
ཉ་དང་སྦྲུལ་སོགས་ཀྱི་པགས་པ	scale	nya dang sbrul sogs kyi pags pa
ཉ་དུག་པ	herb	nya dug pa
ཉ་དོལ	fishing net	nya dol
ཉ་དོལ་པ	fisherman	nya dol pa
ཉ་དོལ་བ	fisherman [w net]	nya dol ba
ཉ་དོས	load of fish	nya dos
ཉ་དརབ༹	fishing net	nya drva
ཉ་དྲྭ	fishing net	nya drwa
ཉ་དྲི	fishy, stinking	nya dri
ཉ་དྲི་དྲོ་བའི་སྔོ	houttuynia cordata thunb.	nya dri dro ba'i sngo
ཉ་དྲུག	Pleiades, the "6 fish"	nya drug
ཉ་དྲུག་འཛོམས	full moon of the position star smin drug, 10th month 15th day	nya drug 'dzoms
ཉ་དྲུག་ཟླ་བ	10th month, of Pleiades	nya drug zla ba
ཉ་དྲུག་ལ	on the 6th day of the waxing part of the month	nya drug la
ཉ་གདོལ་པ	fisherman	nya gdol pa
ཉ་བདའ	fisherman	nya bda'
ཉ་འདྲ་བ	fishy	nya 'dra ba
ཉ་འདྲིད་ཁ་ཟས	fish head skor byed pa'i zas rigs	nya 'drid kha zas
ཉ་ལྡིང	fish hovering in the water	nya lding
ཉ་ནད	nya nad cattle disease	nya nad
ཉ་ནས་གདའ	[arch] nyams rgud du song ba	nya nas gda'
ཉ་སྣབས	chu bal plant	nya snabs
ཉ་པ	1) fisherman; 2) 8th	nya pa
ཉ་པ་རྣམས	fishermen	nya pa rnams
ཉ་པེ་ཉོ་པེ	1) lazy, inactive, lethargic; 2) muddy, turbid	nya pe nyo pe
ཉ་སྤུ་ཅན	mgo nya dang so sram yin pa'i water living animal	nya spu can
ཉ་སྤྱིན	fish glue	nya spyin
ཉ་ཕག་སྒོང་གསུམ	fish-meat, pork and eggs	nya phag sgong gsum
ཉ་ཕྱིས	mother-of-pearl; mother of pearl/ oyster shell/ oyster	nya phyis
ཉ་ཕྲུག	baby fish	nya phrug
ཉ་འཕྱོ	pull a fish out of the water	nya 'phyo
ཉ་བ	(tha mi dad pa full	nya ba
ཉ་བེ་ཉོ་བེ	slack	nya be nyo be
ཉ་བེ་ཉོབ་བེ	lazy, inactive 952	nya be nyob be
ཉ་བོ	figure, body	nya bo
ཉ་དབོན་ཀུན་དགའ་དཔལ	1300-1380, Sakya philosopher [ggd]	nya dbon kun dga' dpal
ཉ་འབིགས	(met fish hook	nya 'bigs
ཉ་འབིགས་བྱེད	species of water fowl, kind of wild duck	nya 'bigs byed
ཉ་སྦྲིད	mountain shrub	nya sbrid
ཉ་མ	hearer, maiden, young lady, woman, house-wife; a woman	nya ma
ཉ་མ་ཕོ་མོ་རྣམས	the male and female hearers	nya ma pho mo rnams
ཉ་མིག	the one precious drop	nya mig
ཉ་མིག་ཅན	very useful and important medicine	nya mig can
ཉ་མིག་མ	kind of skyin khebs	nya mig ma
ཉ་མིད་ཆེ	large crocodile/ water dragon	nya mid che
ཉ་མིད་ཆེན་པོ	large crocodile/ water dragon	nya mid chen po
ཉ་མོ	fish; {lce ro la chags pas nya mo lcags kyus 'zin} fish are caught with bait, their sense of taste lured by its flavour	nya mo
ཉ་མོ་གངས	mt N of Palpa Nepal	nya mo gangs
ཉ་མོ་འཕྱོ་འདྲ	like fish swimming about	nya mo 'phyo 'dra
ཉ་མོ་གསེར་མིག	the golden-eyed fish	nya mo gser mig
ཉ་མོའི་ཤུལ	SA nya'i sgal pa	nya mo'i shul
ཉ་ཚགས	weel for catching fish	nya tshags
ཉ་ཚང	1) nya lcibs [gills, pearl?] 'dra ba'i chu rtsva zhig; 2) place where many fish live	nya tshang
ཉ་ཚིལ	fish fat	nya tshil
ཉ་ཚེར	fish bones D	nya tsher
ཉ་ཚེས	day in the increasing phase of the month, full moon day	nya tshes
ཉ་ཚོང་པ	fish monger	nya tshong pa
ཉ་འཛིན	1) [catch] fish; 2) fish net/snare/ hook; 3) sram, small water animal	nya 'dzin
ཉ་འཛིན་གྲུ་གཟིངས	fishing boat	nya 'dzin gru gzings
ཉ་འཛིན་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	fish hook	nya 'dzin lcags kyu
ཉ་འཛིན་དབྱུག་པ	fishing pole	nya 'dzin dbyug pa
ཉ་འཛིན་རུ་ཁག	fishing team/ brigade	nya 'dzin ru khag
ཉ་འཛིན་སའི་མཚོ་ཁུག	fishing port	nya 'dzin sa'i mtsho khug
ཉ་རྫིང	fish pond	nya rdzing
ཉ་གཞིབ་གཞིབ	[like] rows of fish	nya gzhib gzhib
ཉ་གཞུག	fish tail	nya gzhug
ཉ་བཞི	4 muscles (2 arms, 2 legs)	nya bzhi
ཉ་ཟན	1) fisherman; 2) water bird that eats fish; 3) aquatic monster crocodile? water dragon?; 4) [dough ball used as] bait	nya zan
ཉ་ཟིན	1) [catch] fish; 2) fish net/snare/ hook; 3) sram, small water animal	nya zin
ཉ་ཟིན་ནས	caught a fish	nya zin nas
ཉ་ཟིན་ས	fishing grounds	nya zin sa
ཉ་ཟེར	number	nya zer
ཉ་ཟླ	full moon	nya zla
ཉ་གཟེབ	basket for fish	nya gzeb
ཉ་བཟུང་མ	bride	nya bzung ma
ཉ་ཡི་ཁྱིམ	house of Pisces	nya yi khyim
ཉ་ཡི་ཁྱིམ་ཅན	2nd month	nya yi khyim can
ཉ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ	SA rnam 'phyo'i bdag po	nya yi rgyal po
ཉ་ཡི་ཏོག	Kamadeva -	nya yi tog
ཉ་ཡིས་འཚོ་བ	fisherman	nya yis 'tsho ba
ཉ་ཡོལ	screen, awning	nya yol
ཉ་ར	care	nya ra
ཉ་ར་ཉོ་རེ	lazy, sluggish, frail, weak, fragile, fragility. indifferent. Syn {nya nyor}	nya ra nyo re
ཉ་ར་བྱེད	look after/ take care of someone	nya ra byed
ཉ་ར་བྱེད་པ	take care of, provide for a person, keep a thing safe	nya ra byed pa
ཉ་རས	fish net	nya ras
ཉ་རི	{nya ri}	nya ri
ཉ་རི་རམ	a special type of relic-pills found in the ashes of accomplished beings after cremation	nya ri ram
ཉ་རིགས	[different kinds of] fish	nya rigs
ཉ་རིགས་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག	dolphin	nya rigs chen po zhig
ཉ་རིགས་གསོ་སྤེལ	fishery	nya rigs gso spel
ཉ་རིད	nya rid tree	nya rid
ཉ་རིལ	calf of the leg	nya ril
ཉ་རུས	1) fish bone; 2) lham gyi rting pa'i 'ja' gnyis pa'i phar phyin	nya rus
ཉ་རེ་ཉོ་རེ	flabby sluggish	nya re nyo re
ཉ་རེ་ཉོ་རེ་ཆུང་ཕུད་པ་ཙམ	just this tiny, tender, podgy thing	nya re nyo re chung phud pa tsam
ཉ་རློན་མིད་ཆེན་པོ	large crocodile/ water dragon	nya rlon mid chen po
ཉ་ལངས	weal arose D	nya langs
ཉ་ལས	work of catching fish, fishing industry	nya las
ཉ་ལས་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	cooperative fishing factory	nya las mnyam 'brel bzo grwa
ཉ་ལས་ཐོན་སྐྱེལ་ཉམ་ལས་ཁང	fishing production cooperative	nya las thon skyel nyam las khang
ཉ་ལེ	bastard, illegitimate	nya le
ཉ་ལེ་ཉི་ལེ	flabby	nya le nyi le
ཉ་ལེ་ཉོ་ལེ	slack	nya le nyo le
ཉ་ལོག	wasting/ shrinking of tendons	nya log
ཉ་ཤ	fish meat	nya sha
ཉ་ཤ་སྐམ་པོ	dried fish [meat]	nya sha skam po
ཉ་ཤི	full and new moon	nya shi
ཉ་ཤི་སྲུང་བ	a watchdog	nya shi srung ba
ཉ་གཤོག	fin of a fish	nya gshog
ཉ་གཤོར་བ	to fish	nya gshor ba
ཉ་བཤང་ཆུ	nya bshang river ['bab chu zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi mtsho sna rdzong gi nub rgyud du yod, chu 'go dmar tshag la nas byung zhing de'i stod rgyud la mdo mkhar gzhung chu dang, smad rgyud la ny...	nya bshang chu
ཉ་བཤོར	catch and kill fish	nya bshor
ཉ་སག	fish scale D	nya sag
ཉ་སུལ	muscular ridges on the legs	nya sul
ཉ་སོག	1) fish's dorsal fin; 2) round pearl; 3) in lake shores, sand and mud living srog chags skogs shun can zhig	nya sog
ཉ་སོན	baby fish, fry	nya son
ཉ་སྲམ	fish and sram [water living mammal]	nya sram
ཉ་གསོ	fish raising, aquaculture	nya gso
ཉ་གསོ་ཁང	fish hatchery	nya gso khang
ཉ་གསོད	to kill fish	nya gsod
ཉ་གསོད་པ	killing fish	nya gsod pa
ཉ་བསད་ཁྱི་སྟེར	kill the fish and five to the dog	nya bsad khyi ster
ཉ་ལྷོག	a disease 953	nya lhog
ཉབ༹	1) leg's rje ngar; 2) Phyugs rigs kyi rkang lag gi pus mo man nas rmig pa'i bar gyi lhu lag	nyva
ཉབ༹་ཀ་བ་བ་སྤུ་སྡོང་པོ	could stand up straight and finally became adult. Lit. 'the shins become (as sturdy as) pillars and the down (on the body) becomes (like) stalks.'	nyva ka ba ba spu sdong po
ཉབ༹་དཀྲིས	leg's nyva dkri byed kyi ras sogs	nyva dkris
ཉབ༹་ཁུག	leg's sgyid khug	nyva khug
ཉབ༹་ཁུག་འབྲེག་པ	a punishment	nyva khug 'breg pa
ཉབ༹་རྒྱབ	leg's nyva ril gyi rgyab	nyva rgyab
ཉབ༹་རྒྱུས	leg's nyva ril gyi rgyus pa	nyva rgyus
ཉབ༹་ཆུ	tendon, sinews	nyva chu
ཉྭ་ཆུ	tendon, sinews	nywa chu
ཉབ༹་འཆུས་པ	leg's nyva 'gyur ba	nyva 'chus pa
ཉབ༹་སྟི	ankle	nyva sti
ཉབ༹་གདོང	leg's ngar gdong	nyva gdong
ཉབ༹་མདུན	leg nyva'i mdun ngar gdong phyogs	nyva mdun
ཉབ༹་འདོན་པ	a punishment	nyva 'don pa
ཉབ༹་འདྲིལ་གཏོང་བ	a punishment	nyva 'dril gtong ba
ཉབ༹་སྦྲིད་པ	leg's nyva ril sbrid pa	nyva sbrid pa
ཉབ༹་གཞུག	arm/leg nyva sha'i gzhug	nyva gzhug
ཉབ༹་བཞི	arm/leg's nyva ril bzhi	nyva bzhi
ཉབ༹་རིལ	arm/ leg's nyva'i sha ril	nyva ril
ཉབ༹་ལོག	gnyan nad nyva la babs te nyva sha ngar gdong du log par gyur pa'i nad cig	nyva log
ཉབ༹་ཤ	arm/leg gi nyva ril sha rgyus	nyva sha
ཉབ༹་ཤ་ཁྱི་ལ་བྱིན	letting the dogs tear at her calves	nyva sha khyi la byin
ཉབ༹་སུལ	rkang pa'i nyva sha	nyva sul
ཉག	notch, indenture, weight measure [of 4.25 ounces]	nyag
ཉག་ཀ	notch, indentation	nyag ka
ཉག་རྐེད	middle part of nyag rong valley	nyag rked
ཉག་རྐྱང	1) solitary; 2) stubborn, obstinate D	nyag rkyang
ཉག་སྐྱག	alone, the only, SA kho na	nyag skyag
ཉག་ཁ་ཤས	a few, single	nyag kha shas
ཉག་ཁྱད	nya ga che chung gi bar khyad rtsi tshul,...Bcu bdun spor do khal gyi brgyad cha bdun,...Bcu gsum spor gang gsum cha sum cha gnyis	nyag khyad
ཉག་ཁྲ་བ	feeble, weak, sickly	nyag khra ba
ཉག་ཁྲམ	notch, indenture, notch	nyag khram
ཉག་ག	notch, indenture	nyag ga
ཉག་ག་ཅན	indented [leaves]	nyag ga can
ཉག་ག་མེད	not indented	nyag ga med
ཉག་ག་མེད་པ	not indented	nyag ga med pa
ཉག་གང	steel yard measure, SA nyag	nyag gang
ཉག་གེ་ཉོག་གེ	wordy, long winded	nyag ge nyog ge
ཉག་ཅིག	1) single, sole, only, that alone, alone. 2) uniform, 3) a little bit, a single bit. 4) certainly, surely, without question, inevitably. Syn {nyag gcig}	nyag cig
ཉག་གཅིག	alone, the only, single, that alone, certainly, surely, unique , unique dimension	nyag gcig
ཉག་གཅིག་ཀློང	one in the unique dimension	nyag gcig klong
ཉག་གཅིག་དགོངས་པ	single state	nyag gcig dgongs pa
ཉག་གཅིག་དགོངས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Single Mind Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	nyag gcig dgongs pa'i rgyud
ཉག་གཅིག་ཏུ	solely	nyag gcig tu
ཉག་གཅིག་ཐིག་ལེ	single sphere	nyag gcig thig le
ཉག་གཅིག་པ	they are one	nyag gcig pa
ཉག་གཅིག་རེད	[that ---] is certain	nyag gcig red
ཉག་ཆུ	nyag river	nyag chu
ཉག་ཆུ་ཁ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	nyag chu kha
ཉག་ཉག	notch, indentation	nyag nyag
ཉག་ཉག་ཅན	notch	nyag nyag can
ཉག་ཉིག	filth, dirt	nyag nyig
ཉག་ཉུག	different kinds, various types. Syn {nya ge nyu ge}	nyag nyug
ཉག་ཉོག	not clear, turbid, confusedly, speaking irrelevantly	nyag nyog
ཉག་ཉོག་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་རིག་པ	obscure/ confused scholastic philosophy	nyag nyog gi mtshan nyid rig pa
ཉག་ཏུ་འདྲེན	spin [wool] J	nyag tu 'dren
ཉག་ཏུ་འདྲེན་པ	draw wool out into threads, spin	nyag tu 'dren pa
ཉག་སྟོད་སྟག་ཚལ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	nyag stod stag tshal
ཉག་ཐག	1) thread, chain, cord; 2) necklace; 3) scale's lung thag	nyag thag
ཉག་ཐག་དག	(lit. chain, thread) ocean	nyag thag dag
ཉག་མཐིལ	nya ga'i mthil lam srang mthil,	nyag mthil
སཅལེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སྟེཨེལ	yard/ balance/ nyag	scale of a steel
ཉག་མདའ	weighing blalance = nya ga'i mda'a	nyag mda'
ཉག་རྡོ	weight of a steel yard/ balance/ nyag	nyag rdo
ཉག་ནོན	[arch] so lta nyul mi	nyag non
ཉག་གནོན	spying, espionage	nyag gnon
ཉག་གནོན་པ	a spy	nyag gnon pa
ཉག་པ	notch, indenture, hole in the nose	nyag pa
ཉག་པོ	'phred kyi kong mo'am, shur shur,...Rked pa nyag po,...Sna nyag ...'Gro lam nyag po gang yod la sa snon brgyab nas sgang gshong cha mnyam bzos pa	nyag po
ཉག་ཕྲ	poor, humble	nyag phra
ཉག་ཕྲ་ཐ་ཞན	complete poverty/ wretchedness/ helplessness/ weakness	nyag phra tha zhan
ཉག་ཕྲ་བ	weak, frail	nyag phra ba
ཉག་ཕྲན	pole, arrow, beam	nyag phran
ཉག་བླ་པད་མ་བདུད་འདུལ	1816-1872	nyag bla pad ma bdud 'dul
ཉག་མ	single, peice, drop small amount	nyag ma
ཉག་མ་གཅིག	a single..	nyag ma gcig
ཉག་མ་གསུམ	three single/ peices of ...	nyag ma gsum
ཉག་མོ	woman	nyag mo
ཉག་ཞབ༹	nyag rong hat	nyag zhva
ཉག་ཞིང	beam of a steel-yard	nyag zhing
ཉག་རེ	piece, drop, small amount, single	nyag re
ཉག་རེ་རེ	apiece D	nyag re re
ཉག་རོང	a district in Tibet	nyag rong
ཉག་ལ་བཀག་པ	gnad la bkar ba,...Nyes can rnams khrims khang du nyag la bkag nas zhu ba len pa	nyag la bkag pa
ཉག་ལེ	{nyag le} place	nyag le
ཉག་ཤིང	balance beam	nyag shing
ཉག་ཤུར	nyag sa'i shur kha,...Shing la nyag shur cig bton pa,...Rtsig pa la nyag shur bzos pa	nyag shur
ཉག་སྲང	scale, balance	nyag srang
ཉང	Nyang Ral Nyima Özer	nyang
ཉང་ཀ	currant	nyang ka
ཉང་ཁྲི	nyang khri rdzong	nyang khri
ཉང་གེ	currant	nyang ge
ཉང་གྲུམ	square carpet, rug	nyang grum
ཉང་དགའ་ཆུ	nyang river	nyang dga' chu
ཉང་ངེ་ཉུང་ངེ	just a little	nyang nge nyung nge
ཉང་ཆབ	the Nyang River; also {nyang chu}	nyang chab
ཉང་ཆུ	nyang river [dbus kyi dvags kong sa khul gyi chu bo zhig ste, sngar bod kyi nyang zhes pa'i rigs rus shig gi tsho pa sdod yul gyi sa cha'i ming la brten nas btags pa'i chu klung zhig	nyang chu
ཉང་ཆུ་སྐྱ་མ	branch of the nyang river	nyang chu skya ma
ཉང་ཆུ་སྐྱ་མོ	feeder river of the nyang chu	nyang chu skya mo
ཉང་ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	{nyang nyi ma'i 'od zer}	nyang nyi ma'i 'od zer
ཉང་ཉུང	ordinary, common, just a little	nyang nyung
ཉང་ཏིང་འཛིན་བཟང་པོ	{rgyal po'i mchod gnas nyang ting 'dzin bzang po} Nyang Tingdzin Zangpo, the teacher most venerated by the king	nyang ting 'dzin bzang po
ཉང་གཏེར་མཚོ་རྒྱལ་ཞུས་ལན	Replies to Questions from Yeshe Tsogyal. Published as "Dakini Teachings", and as "Advice from the Lotus-Born"	nyang gter mtsho rgyal zhus lan
ཉང་སྟོད	the upper nang containing the town of gyang tse	nyang stod
ཉང་ནོན	espionage	nyang non
ཉང་གནོན་རྟོག་ཞིབ	unobtrusively inspect	nyang gnon rtog zhib
ཉང་གནོན་པ	watchman	nyang gnon pa
ཉང་པོ	{nyang po}	nyang po
ཉང་བན་ཏིང་འཛིན་བཟང་པོ	8th cent. Nyang Ben Tingdzin Zangpo, disciple of Vimalamitra and Guru Padmasambhava	nyang ban ting 'dzin bzang po
ཉང་དབེན་ཏིང་འཛིན་བཟང་པོ	disciple of Vimalamitra and Guru Rinpoche	nyang dben ting 'dzin bzang po
ཉང་རྩི་བྲག	yellow fibrous root	nyang rtsi brag
ཉང་ཞིབ	unobtrusively examine	nyang zhib
ཉང་ཡུལ་ཤིང་ནག	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	nyang yul shing nag
ཉང་རལ	mnga' bdag nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer	nyang ral
ཉང་རལ་ཉི་མ	gter ston, sems sde practitioner	nyang ral nyi ma
ཉང་རལ་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	Nyang Ral Nyima Özer. (1124-1192). The first of the Five Tertön Kings and a reincarnation of King Trisong Deutsen. Several of his revealed treasures are included in the Rinchen Terdzö, among which ...	nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer
ཉང་རལ་ཉི་མའི	author of chos 'byung me tog snying po sbrang rtsi'i bcud, a sems sde scholar	nyang ral nyi ma'i
ཉང་རལ་ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	1124-1192	nyang ral nyi ma'i 'od zer
ཉང་རལ་པ་ཅན་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	{nyang ral pa can nyi ma 'od zer	nyang ral pa can nyi ma 'od zer
ཉང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Syn {nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer}. Nyang Ral Nyima Özer	nyang rin po che
ཉང་རོ་བཅམ་པོ་མཁར	{nyang ro bcam po mkhar	nyang ro bcam po mkhar
ཉང་རོ་བཤམ་པོ་མཁར	small town in tsang	nyang ro bsham po mkhar
ཉང་རོང	battlefield where Tibetan people fought 1 of their kings D	nyang rong
ཉང་ལུགས	rdzogs chen sems sde tradition established by the teacher nyang mchog rab gzhon nu	nyang lugs
ཉད་ཉོད	1) bya rmyang; 2) secretly/ from concealment watch (/.	nyad nyod
ཉན་ཁ་ཡང་བ	[pursuit/ continued functioning/ subsequent application] of what someone explained	nyan kha yang ba
ཉན་མཁན	audience, listener	nyan mkhan
ཉན་སྒྲོན	report	nyan sgron
ཉན་སྒྲོན་ཞུ	make a report	nyan sgron zhu
ཉན་བརྒྱུད	Hearing Lineage. The lineage of oral teachings from master to disciple as distinct from scriptural lineage of textual transmission. The Hearing Lineage emphasizes the key points of oral instruction...	nyan brgyud
ཉན་འཆད	listening or teaching x {chos nyan 'chad sgom sgrub gang gi skabs su yang} whenever you are listening to the Dharma, teaching, meditating or practising	nyan 'chad
ཉན་འཆད་བགྱིད་པ	engaging in study and teaching, listening and expounding [the teachings]	nyan 'chad bgyid pa
ཉན་འཆད་སྒོམ་པ	listen, explain and meditate on; x {nyan 'chad sgom pa gang gi dus su yang 'gal ba 'du} every time you listen to it, explain it, or meditate on it the confusion will be multiplied	nyan 'chad sgom pa
ཉན་འཇོག	obeying, heeding	nyan 'jog
ཉན་འཇོག་གཏམ་རྣ་བས་ཉན	the meaning entering into one's mind	nyan 'jog gtam rna bas nyan
ཉན་འཇོག་བྱེད	obey, heed, listen to	nyan 'jog byed
ཉན་སྙིང་འདོད་པོ	nyan snying joyful	nyan snying 'dod po
ཉན་སྙིང་བྲོ་བ	pleasing to the ear, harmonious, pleasant	nyan snying bro ba
ཉན་ཏི	thy, your	nyan ti
ཉན་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	able to receive / hear	nyan tu yod pa
ཉན་རྟོག	surveillance	nyan rtog
ཉན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང	patroling, guarding, security	nyan rtog bde srung
ཉན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང་གི་གྲུ	patrol boat	nyan rtog bde srung gi gru
ཉན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང་བྱེད	patrol, guard	nyan rtog bde srung byed
ཉན་ཐོས	shravaka/ hearer of the teachings	nyan thos
སྟགེ་ཨོཕ༹་Oནཅེ	Returner who will be	stage of Once
སྟགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཎོན	returner who will no longer be reborn into samsara. The final goal is to become an Arhat. These four stages are also known as the 'four results of spiritual practice.'	stage of Non
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག་གསུམ	the three types of shravaka person, 1) {'bras bu rim gyis pa}. 2) {chags bral sngon song} 3) {spang bya gcig car ba}	nyan thos kyi gang zag gsum
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་དགེ་འདུན	the sangha of shravakas	nyan thos kyi dge 'dun
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	shravaka practice	nyan thos kyi sgrub pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the Dharma of shravakas	nyan thos kyi chos
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག	SA theg dman	nyan thos kyi theg
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the shravaka vehicle, vehicle of hearers/disciples	nyan thos kyi theg pa
པའི་རིགས	the type of person truly realizing the vehicle of the shravakas [one of the *{rigs can lnga}*] nyan thos kyi theg pa mngon par rtogs	pa'i rigs
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་པ	follower/ adherent of the shravaka vehicle	nyan thos kyi theg pa pa
ཞུགས་པ	truly enter the shravaka vehicle	zhugs pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པའི་རིགས	the type of person adhering to the vehicle of the shravakas	nyan thos kyi theg pa'i rigs
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པའི་རིགས་ཅན	the type of person adhering to the vehicle of the shravakas	nyan thos kyi theg pa'i rigs can
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	pitaka of the pious attendants	nyan thos kyi sde snod
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ	perception of the yoga of the shravakas [bden bzhi rnam pa bcu drug mngon sum du rtogs pa'i, nyan thos mthong sgom gyi mnyam bzhag ye shes dang dgra bcom pa'i mkhyen pa rnams so	nyan thos kyi rnal 'byor mngon sum
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་འཕགས་པ	shravaka-arya	nyan thos kyi 'phags pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ	the path of cessation gang rung ? in the continuum of a shravaka arhat nyan thos kyi byang chub 'am rang sangs	nyan thos kyi byang chub
རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ	the enlightenment of the shravakas or pratyekabuddhas	rgyas kyi byang chub
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་མི་ཤེས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	chn	nyan thos kyi mi shes pa'i rgyu bzhi
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་པ	the major shravaka schools,	nyan thos kyi rtsa ba'i sde pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་པ	the exertion of the shravakas	nyan thos kyi brtson 'grus pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྦྱོར་སོགས	the path of accumulation, preparation and so forth of the shravakas nyan thos kyi zhi ba'i ting nge 'dzin Shravaka's samadhi of peace	nyan thos kyi tshogs sbyor sogs
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ལས་འབྱུང	the scriptures of the shravakas mention that	nyan thos kyi gzhung las 'byung
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅོ་ལྔ	chn	nyan thos kyi yon tan bco lnga
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་རིགས	the shravaka family	nyan thos kyi rigs
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཅན	those of/having the shravaka family	nyan thos kyi rigs can
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཅན་གང་ཟག	individuals having the shravaka family	nyan thos kyi rigs can gang zag
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ལམ	the shravaka path 956	nyan thos kyi lam
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ལུགས	the tradition of the shravakas	nyan thos kyi lugs
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས	Shravaka bhumi; by Asanga, (T 4036)	nyan thos kyi sa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས་བརྒྱད	eight stages of the shravakas	nyan thos kyi sa brgyad
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས་བདུན	the 7 stages of shravakas 1) *{dkar mo rnam par mthong ba'i sa}* 2) *{rigs kyi sa}* 3) *{mthong ba'i sa}* 4) *{bsrabs pa'i sa}* 5) *{'dod chags dang bral ba'i sa}* 6) *{byas pa'i srung ba'i sa}* 7)...	nyan thos kyi sa bdun
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་སོ་ཐར	individual liberation of the shravakas [rang nyid zhi ba don du gnyer ba'i blos 'jigs skyob dang legs smon tsam ma yin par 'khor ba mtha' dag las nges par 'byung ba'i bsam pas kun nas bslangs pa'i ...	nyan thos kyi so thar
ཉན་ཐོས་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ	Arhats, shravaka arhat	nyan thos dgra bcom pa
ཉན་ཐོས་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 shravakas	nyan thos bcu drug
ཉན་ཐོས་མཆོག་བརྒྱད	chn	nyan thos mchog brgyad
ཉན་ཐོས་མཆོག་གཉིས	Two supreme shravakas. Shariputra and Maudgalaputra. Two close disciples of Buddha Shakyamuni	nyan thos mchog gnyis
ཉན་ཐོས་ཉེ་འཁོར་བཅུ	the 10 shravakas of the Buddha's close retinue [ston pa sh'akya thub pa'i nyan thos nye 'khor bcu ste, sh' ri'i bu dang, mo'u 'gal gyi bu dang, 'od srung chen po dang, kun dga' bo dang, sgra gcan '...	nyan thos nye 'khor bcu
ཉན་ཐོས་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of pious attendants GD	nyan thos theg pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ཐེག་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	hinayana stupa, theg dman	nyan thos theg pa'i mchod rten
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་གཉིས	the two schools of shravakas [bye brag smra ba dang mdo sde pa	nyan thos sde gnyis
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་དྲུག	[TRS 44-6]	nyan thos sde drug
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་པ	shravaka school	nyan thos sde pa
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 schools of shravakas [nyan thos kyi rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi las gyes pa yan lag bco brgyad de, yod smra sde pa bdun dang, phal chen sde pa lnga, gnas brtan sde pa gsum, mang bkur sde pa gsum b...	nyan thos sde pa bco brgyad
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་པ་གཉིས	{nyan thos sde	nyan thos sde pa gnyis
ཉན་ཐོས་སྡེ་བཞི	the four main schools of shravakas	nyan thos sde bzhi
ཉན་ཐོས་པ	SK shravaka	nyan thos pa
ཉན་ཐོས་པའི་སྒོམ	shravaka meditation, meditation of the pious attendants	nyan thos pa'i sgom
ཉན་ཐོས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	shravakayana, the Vehicle of the Hinayana Disciples	nyan thos pa'i theg pa
ཉན་ཐོས་པའི་འདོད་པ	tenets of the shravakas	nyan thos pa'i 'dod pa
ཉན་ཐོས་པའི་ལུགས	tradition of the shravakas	nyan thos pa'i lugs
ཉན་ཐོས་འཕགས་པ	shravaka noble ones	nyan thos 'phags pa
ཉན་ཐོས་མ	shravika, [a female follower of the Hinayana]	nyan thos ma
ཉན་ཐོས་མ་ཆེན་མོ	great female shravaka	nyan thos ma chen mo
ཉན་ཐོས་མི་སློབ་པ	shravaka arhat of perfected renunciation/ realization	nyan thos mi slob pa
ཉན་ཐོས་དམན་པའི་ས་བརྒྱད	[TRS 454]	nyan thos dman pa'i sa brgyad
ཉན་ཐོས་རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་པ་བཞི	the four main schools of the shravakas	nyan thos rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi
ཉན་ཐོས་རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་བཞི	the four main schools of the shravakas	nyan thos rtsa ba'i sde bzhi
ཉན་ཐོས་ཞི་བའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	peaceful gaze of a sravaka	nyan thos zhi ba'i lta stangs
ཉན་ཐོས་རང་རྒྱལ་གཉིས	shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan thos rang rgyal gnyis
ཉན་ཐོས་རང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱོད་ལམ	conduct of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas nyan thos la yod pa dang rjes su mthun pa'i rnam mkhyen gyi rnam pa gsum	nyan thos rang rgyal spyod lam
བཅུ་སོ་བདུན	shravakas yod pa dang rjes su mthun pa'i 37 factors of omniscience	bcu so bdun
ཉན་ཐོས་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	egotistical way of thinking of the shravakas etc.	nyan thos la sogs pa'i yid la byed pa
ཉན་ཐོས་ས་བརྒྱད	the 8 levels of shravakas [seeing the positive, type, eighth, restraint, free from desire, mastery, shravaka, pratyekabuddha list the Tib comp with {nyan thos kyi sa bdun}	nyan thos sa brgyad
ཉན་ཐོས་སློབ་པ	the paths of learning of the shravakas 957	nyan thos slob pa
ཉན་དད་ཆེ་བ	credulous	nyan dad che ba
ཉན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	to make / cause to listen	nyan du 'jug pa
ཉན་དུ་ཡོད་པ	that you can listen to; x {zab mo'i gdams ngag nyan du yod pa 'di re dga'} just be glad that you can listen to his profound instructions	nyan du yod pa
ཉན་དྲུང	telephone receiver	nyan drung
ཉན་འདོད་པ	interested in hearing, respectful [service]	nyan 'dod pa
ཉན་ནོན	espionage, spying	nyan non
ཉན་རྣ	messenger, envoy, ambassador	nyan rna
ཉན་རྣ་པ	eavesdropping[er]	nyan rna pa
ཉན་རྣ་བ	phag nyan, eavesdropper	nyan rna ba
ཉན་རྣ་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	The downfall of eavesdropping	nyan rna byed pa'i ltung byed
ཉན་རྣ་སྦི་གསང	secretly listen to secret talk &, clever in action	nyan rna sbi gsang
ཉན་པ	(Tha dad pa mnyan pa, mnyan pa, nyon,, 1) hear[ing][er], listen[er][ing] to; 2) undertake, promise, accept; 2) suitable, appropriate, acceptable; 3) endangered; 4) studying; 5) undertake, accept ob...	nyan pa
ཉན་པ་རྒྱག་པ	lkog nyan, phag nyan	nyan pa rgyag pa
ཉན་པ་པོ	a person listening; x {nyan pa po pha rol tu phyin pa drug dang ldan par bya'o} a person listening to the teaching should practise the six transcendent perfections	nyan pa po
ཉན་པ་པོ་རྣམས	listeners	nyan pa po rnams
ཉན་པ་པོའི་སྣོད་དག་པ	the purity of the receiving listener	nyan pa po'i snod dag pa
ཉན་པ་མོ	female listener	nyan pa mo
ཉན་པའི་དབང	empowerment for studying	nyan pa'i dbang
ཉན་པའི་ཚུལ	how to listen	nyan pa'i tshul
ཉན་པའི་ཚུལ་གཙོ་ཆེ	the way to listen to the Dharma is important	nyan pa'i tshul gtso che
ཉན་པའི་ལམ	dangerous road/ way	nyan pa'i lam
ཉན་པར་འདོད	wish to listen	nyan par 'dod
ཉན་པོ	1) ear; 2) listener; 3) birthplace of {sh kya rgyal mtshan}	nyan po
ཉན་པོ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	six branches of ?	nyan po yan lag drug
ཉན་ཕན་ཡོ་བྱད	hearing aid	nyan phan yo byad
ཉན་བྱ	object of hearing	nyan bya
ཉན་བྱེད	ear	nyan byed
ཉན་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	listening device, ear phones	nyan byed 'phrul chas
ཉན་བྱེད་དབང་པོ	ear	nyan byed dbang po
ཉན་མི་འདོད་པ	unpleasant to hear, unpleasant to the ear	nyan mi 'dod pa
ཉན་མོངས་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate afflictions	nyan mongs lhan skyes
ཉན་འཚལ	listen! [imp]	nyan 'tshal
ཉན་བཞིན་པ	hearing	nyan bzhin pa
ཉན་ཟིན	have heard	nyan zin
ཉན་ཡིན	yes I shall be able	nyan yin
ཉན་རང	shravakas & pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang
ཉན་རང་གང་ཟག་ཟུང་བཞི	the four pairs of individuals of the shravakas	nyan rang gang zag zung bzhi
ཨནད་པྲཏྱེཀ	buddhas	and pratyeka
ཉན་རང་གི་ཁྱད་པར	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rang rgyal gyi rigs can nga rgyal che bas sangs rgyas dang nyan thos kyis stong pa'i 'jig rten du slob dpon dang 'gran zla med par rang gcig pu byang chub mngon du byed 'd...	nyan rang gi khyad par
ཉན་རང་གི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འགོག་པ་གཉིས	the	nyan rang gi rgyud kyi 'gog pa gnyis
ཏྭོ་ཅེསསཏིཨོནས་ཨིན་ཐེ་མིནད	stream of	two cessations in the mind
ཧེཨརེརས་ཨནད་སེལཕ༹	buddhas {'gog pa gnyis}	hearers and self
ཉན་རང་གི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད	the selflessness of phenomena [according to the realization] of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang gi chos kyi bdag med
ཉན་རང་གི་ཐེག་པ	the shravaka and pratyekabuddha vehicles	nyan rang gi theg pa
ཉན་རང་གི་ལམ	the paths of the shravaka and pratyekabuddha	nyan rang gi lam
ཉན་རང་གཉིས	the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang gnyis
ཉན་རང་འཕགས་པ	noble shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang 'phags pa
ཉན་རང་འཕགས་པའི་དགེ་འདུན	the sangha of noble shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang 'phags pa'i dge 'dun
ཉན་རང་འཕགས་ཚོགས	the noble assembly of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas	nyan rang 'phags tshogs
ཉན་རིགས་པ	worthwhile to listen	nyan rigs pa
ཉན་ཤེས	aural cognition	nyan shes
ཉན་ཤེས་མཁན	1 who can well understand what is listened to	nyan shes mkhan
ཉན་བཤད	explanation and listening, study	nyan bshad
ཉན་བཤད་བྱེད་པ	listen to explanations, study	nyan bshad byed pa
ཉན་ས	shravaka bhumi, levels of hearers, the Shravaka-bhumi, {nyan thos pa'i sa}	nyan sa
ཐེ་ཏེ྾ཏ་ཥྲབ༹ཀ	bhumi, {nyan thos pa'i sa} the Shravaka Stages, Levels of Hearers	the text Shravaka
ཉན་བསམ	gossip	nyan bsam
ཉབ	1) stretch out hand and grasp/ take, reach [to]; 2) gather up	nyab
ཉབ་ཉབ	ca lag len par lag pa rkyong tshul zhig ...Lag pa nyab nyab byas nas bza' btung len	nyab nyab
ཉབ་ཉོབ	lazy, inactice, lethargic, muddy, turbid	nyab nyob
ཉབ་པ	1) stretch out hand and grasp/ take, reach [to]; 2) gather up	nyab pa
ཉབ་པ་ཉོབ་པེ	lazy, inactice, lethargic, muddy, turbid	nyab pa nyob pe
ཉབ་བེ་ཉོབ་བེ	lazy, inactive, indolent	nyab be nyob be
ཉམ	locust, cricket	nyam
མིས	spelling of {nyams}; 4) ?/or (/ power force, strength 958	mis
ཉམ་ཁྲིད	meditation instruction according to the student's experiences	nyam khrid
ཉམ་དགའ	joyous	nyam dga'
ཉམ་དགའ་དགའ་ཙམ	simply present, easy, facile	nyam dga' dga' tsam
ཉམ་དགའ་བ	Syn {nyams dga' ba}	nyam dga' ba
ཉམ་དགའ་རིང་ལུགས	optimism	nyam dga' ring lugs
ཉམ་རྒུད	wane	nyam rgud
ཉམ་ང	despair, anxiety, dread, fear	nyam nga
ཉམ་ང་བ	anxiety, pitiful, pitiable, poor, danger, fear, anxiety, be alarmed	nyam nga ba
ཉམ་ང་བ་ཆུང་བ	good health, balanced constitution	nyam nga ba chung ba
ཉམ་ང་བ་ཉུང	beset with danger	nyam nga ba nyung
ཉམ་ང་བ་ཉུང་བ	less risky	nyam nga ba nyung ba
ཉམ་ང་བ་མེད་པ	intrepid, fearless, unintimidated	nyam nga ba med pa
ཉམ་ང་བར་བྱེད	intimidate	nyam nga bar byed
ཉམ་ང་མེད	intrepid, fearless	nyam nga med
ཉམ་ང་མེད་པ	Abbr. of {nyam nga ba med pa}	nyam nga med pa
ཉམ་ང་ལས་ཐར་བ	relieved/ delivered from anxiety	nyam nga las thar ba
ཉམ་ངའི་འཕྲང	fearful passage, dangerous path	nyam nga'i 'phrang
ཉམ་ཆག	injury, harm	nyam chag
ཉམ་ཆག་ཤོར	be injured/ harmed/ destroyed	nyam chag shor
ཉམ་ཆགས	anti-climax	nyam chags
ཉམ་ཆུང	weak, feeble, timid, humble, innocent, meek	nyam chung
ཉམ་ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ	become more and more destitute	nyam chung du 'gro
ཉམ་ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	grow poorer	nyam chung du 'gro ba
ཉམ་ཆུང་བ	1) humility; 2) poverty; 3) weakness	nyam chung ba
ཉམ་ཆུང་དབང་པོ	bee, fly	nyam chung dbang po
ཉམ་ཉེས	1) loss [of power/ territory] and defeat; 2) damage, degeneration [& suffering]	nyam nyes
ཉམ་ཉེས་གཏོང	inflict suggering/ damage	nyam nyes gtong
ཉམ་ཉེས་བཏང་གིས་བཀག	prevent from inflicting suffering	nyam nyes btang gis bkag
ཉམ་ཏིག	locust, cricket	nyam tig
ཉམ་ཐག	sdug bsngal nyam thag weary of suffering	nyam thag
ཉམ་ཐག་སྐལ་དམན	unfortunate and desolate	nyam thag skal dman
ཉམ་ཐག་ཅན	humility	nyam thag can
ཉམ་ཐག་པ	most destitute	nyam thag pa
ཉམ་ཐག་སྤྲང་པོ	those bereft of everything	nyam thag sprang po
ཉམ་ཐག་དབུལ་ཕོངས	wretched and impoverished, helpless misery	nyam thag dbul phongs
ཉམ་ཐག་མི་འཁྱར	refugee	nyam thag mi 'khyar
ཉམ་ཐིག	cricket J	nyam thig
ཉམ་སྣང	illumination, exhibition, sudden flash, hint	nyam snang
ཉམ་པ	deegeneracy, deterioration, decline, decay, ruin, damage	nyam pa
ཉམ་པ་མེད	does not fade away, unwaning	nyam pa med
ཉམ་པའི་ལམ	bad/ dangerous road	nyam pa'i lam
ཉམ་པར་གཞག་པ	absorption	nyam par gzhag pa
ཉམ་མྱོང	experiential understanding of the nature of the mind	nyam myong
ཉམ་དམན་པ	little capacity/ resourcefulness/ shrewdness, humility, poverty	nyam dman pa
ཉམ་དམས་པ	1) diminished/ impaired power; 2) Spobs pa bcag pa dang bsnad pa	nyam dmas pa
ཉམ་ཚད	[arch] wondrous	nyam tshad
ཉམ་ཞན	humble, weak, lowly, feeble, poor	nyam zhan
ཉམ་ཡོས	locust D	nyam yos
ཉམ་རེ་ཐག	terribly exhausted	nyam re thag
ཉམ་ལེན་དངོས་གཞིའི་ཆ་ལག	part of the main practice	nyam len dngos gzhi'i cha lag
ཉམ་སུ་བླངས	put it into practice	nyam su blangs
ཉམ་སུ་ལེན་ཚུལ	observation	nyam su len tshul
ཉམས	debased	nyams
རེད	I feel that	red
སིགནས	experiences, sign experience	signs
ཉམས་ཀུན	all experiences	nyams kun
ཉམས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོང་ཐབས	method to maintain experiences 959	nyams kyi skyong thabs
ཉམས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས	heart-companions D	nyams kyi grogs
ཉམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	Lamp of Experiences, SA nyams sgron	nyams kyi sgron ma
ཉམས་ཀྱི་ངར་ལྷུང	experience is sharpened	nyams kyi ngar lhung
ཉམས་ཀྱི་ཆང	chang of the mind, religious knowledge D	nyams kyi chang
ཉམས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	ephemeral meditative experience	nyams kyi snang ba
ཉམས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	meditation mood, varieties of experiences	nyams kyi bye brag
ཉམས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག་ཀུན	all the experiences	nyams kyi bye brag kun
ཉམས་ཀྱི་རྩལ་སྦྱོང	developing the strength of experience; as my inner experience unfolds	nyams kyi rtsal sbyong
ཉམས་ཀྱི་ཚད་བྱེད	put to test	nyams kyi tshad byed
ཉམས་ཀྱི་ཚད་བྱེད་པ	try	nyams kyi tshad byed pa
ཉམས་ཀྱི་ཞེན	clinging to the experiences	nyams kyi zhen
ཉམས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	experiential light	nyams kyi 'od gsal
ཉམས་ཀྱི་རིགས	varieties of meditation experiences, various experiences, experiences	nyams kyi rigs
ཉམས་ཀྱི་གཤིས	state of experiences	nyams kyi gshis
ཉམས་སྐྱེ	thought springing up in the mind	nyams skye
ཉམས་སྐྱེ་བ	arise within one's continuum, experience arising	nyams skye ba
ཉམས་སྐྱོང	protection against illusory meditation experiences, to maintain experiences	nyams skyong
ཉམས་བསྐྱང	continue so as to gain some experience	nyams bskyang
ཉམས་བསྐྱང་དུ་བཅུག	continue the practice	nyams bskyang du bcug
ཉམས་ཁྲིད	instruction through personal experience	nyams khrid
ཉམས་འཁྲིད	teaching through experience	nyams 'khrid
ཉམས་གུད	deterioration, decline, decay, recession	nyams gud
ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ	development of experiences, increased experience, SA snang bzhi	nyams gong 'phel
ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	vision of the development of experiences (in vision)	nyams gong 'phel kyi snang ba
ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	snang ba bzhi'i nang gses, lhag mthong gi rig pa rdo rje lu gu rgyud la bltas pas 'od kyi thig le sku ru smin du nye ba nyams snang gong du 'phel bas 'khrul ba'i snang ba nub cing bar do'i ye shes ...	nyams gong 'phel gyi snang ba
ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ་བ	visionary appearance of ever-increasing contemplative experience	nyams gong 'phel ba
ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ་བའི་སྣང་བ	the visionary appearance of ever-increasing contemplative experience GD	nyams gong 'phel ba'i snang ba
ཉམས་གྱུར	face, countenance, air, look	nyams gyur
ཉམས་གྲིབ	veil of samaya violation	nyams grib
ཉམས་གླུ	mgur glu'am sems la 'char tshul gyi glu	nyams glu
ཉམས་དགའ	agreeable/ enjoyable/ pleasant; isc. convincing enough	nyams dga'
ཉམས་དགའ་སྐྱོངས	be happy wherever you go	nyams dga' skyongs
ཉམས་དགའ་དགའ་ཙམ	simply present, easy, facile	nyams dga' dga' tsam
ཉམས་དགའ་སྣང་བ་སྤྲོ་བ	joy	nyams dga' snang ba spro ba
ཉམས་དགའ་པོ	delectable	nyams dga' po
ཉམས་དགའ་བ	delighted, pleased, charmed; delightful pleasing; happy, merry, agreeable, pleasing, enjoyable, charming, peace-giving, delightful, joyful, joyous, pleasant, fascinating; pleasant, delightful	nyams dga' ba
ཉམས་དགའ་རིང་ལུགས	optimism	nyams dga' ring lugs
ཉམས་དགའི་རྒྱངས་གླུ	a song about joyful experiences	nyams dga'i rgyangs glu
ཉམས་དགུ	the nine expressions [of a deity]	nyams dgu
ཉམས་མགུར	song of realization/ spiritual experience	nyams mgur
ཉམས་འགྱིང	che nyams kyi rnam 'gyur	nyams 'gying
ཉམས་འགྱུར	1) face expression, movement. 2) dignified, elegant, refined. 3) appearance, style. 4) decomposition, disintegration	nyams 'gyur
ཉམས་འགྱུར་བསྟན་པ	mi rtag pa'i + - the shadow of impermanence cast upon their faces	nyams 'gyur bstan pa
ཉམས་འགྱུར་འབྲི	describe, depict	nyams 'gyur 'bri
ཉམས་འགྲོ་བ	decayed	nyams 'gro ba
ཉམས་རྒུད	decadence, decay, decline, decrement, downfall	nyams rgud
ཉམས་རྒུད་གཏོང་བ	enervate, enfeeble	nyams rgud gtong ba
ཉམས་རྒུད་དུ་འགྲོ	deteriorate, decline, decay, have a recession/ depression/ slump in business	nyams rgud du 'gro
ཉམས་རྒུད་དུ་གཏོང	deteriorate, undermine, destroy	nyams rgud du gtong
ཉམས་རྒྱས	strength	nyams rgyas
ཉམས་རྒྱུད	mind, experience	nyams rgyud
ཉམས་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱག་བ	intellectually skilled	nyams rgyud la sbyag ba
ཉམས་རྒྱུས	experience, familiarity	nyams rgyus
ཉམས་སྒྲོན	Lamp of Experiences, name of dga' rab rdo rje's oral teaching	nyams sgron
ཉམས་སྒྲོབ	spam bzo'am rdzig nyams	nyams sgrob
ཉམས་བརྒྱད	the 8 nyams	nyams brgyad
ཉམས་ང	despair, SA nyam nga	nyams nga
ཉམས་ང་ལས་ཐར་བ	delivered from anxiety	nyams nga las thar ba
ཉམས་ལྔ	the five experiences	nyams lnga
ཉམས་ཅན	countenance	nyams can
ཉམས་བཅོས	rdzig mdog gi nyams take a pose, assume an air	nyams bcos
ཉམས་ཆག	violation	nyams chag
ཉམས་ཆག་བྱུང་བ	dilapidated, damaged, in ruins, worn out	nyams chag byung ba
ཉམས་ཆག་བཤགས་པ	confess breaches/ violations	nyams chag bshags pa
ཉམས་ཆག་ས	corruption, violation	nyams chag sa
ཉམས་ཆགས	transgression, corruption, decline, decrement	nyams chags
ཉམས་ཆད་པ	feeble, weak	nyams chad pa
ཉམས་ཆུང	1) humble, faint, weak, lowly, feeble, poor, helpless; 2) bee D	nyams chung
ཉམས་ཆུང་བ	humble, faint, weak, lowly, feeble, poor, helpless	nyams chung ba
ཉམས་ཆེན	haughty, conceited	nyams chen
ཉམས་ཆེན་པོ	1) RJY: arrogant. 2) MG, 441: dignified, elegant.	nyams chen po
ཉམས་ཆོད་པོ	skilled at looking whether things are good or bad etc.	nyams chod po
ཉམས་ཆོས	psychic vision teachings, ordinary experiential vision	nyams chos
ཉམས་འཆལ་ངན་སྤྱོད	sgrigs lam sogs nyams shing 'chal ba'i evil behavior	nyams 'chal ngan spyod
ཉམས་བརྗིད	be radiant/ brilliant	nyams brjid
ཉམས་ཉིད་ཚུལ་བཞི	the four modes of sameness GD	nyams nyid tshul bzhi
ཉམས་ཉེས	1) loss [of power/ territory] and defeat; 2) damage, degeneration [& suffering]	nyams nyes
ཉམས་ཉེས་གཏོང	inflict suggering/ damage	nyams nyes gtong
ཉམས་ཉེས་བཏང་གིས་བཀག	prevent from inflicting suffering	nyams nyes btang gis bkag
ཉམས་ཉེས་པར་མཛད	danger of harming	nyams nyes par mdzad
ཉམས་རྟགས	signs of experience	nyams rtags
ཉམས་རྟོགས	experience and realization, understanding, knowledge	nyams rtogs
ཉམས་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of experience and realization	nyams rtogs kyi yon tan
ཉམས་རྟོགས་སྐྱེ་བ	attain experience and realization [spiritual insight]	nyams rtogs skye ba
ཉམས་རྟོགས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	special experience and realization [insight]	nyams rtogs khyad par can
ཉམས་རྟོགས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་སྐྱེས་པ	attained exceptional experiences and realization nyams rtogs khyad par can rgyud la skyes	nyams rtogs khyad par can skyes pa
ཉམས་རྟོགས་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ	perfected experience and realization	nyams rtogs mthar phyin pa
ཉམས་རྟོགས་བྱེད	inquire after, do so as to understand	nyams rtogs byed
ཉམས་རྟོགས་བྱེད་པ	inquire fully into any subject	nyams rtogs byed pa
ཉམས་རྟོགས་འབར་བ	{nyams rtogs 'bar yong} meditation experiences and realization will blaze forth	nyams rtogs 'bar ba
ཉམས་ལྟ་བྱས་པ	gain some personal experience	nyams lta byas pa
ཉམས་སྟབས	1) face expression, movement; 2) dignified, [be] elegant, refined, handsome, comfortable; 3) appearance, style [arts]; 4) decomposition, disintegration, decrease	nyams stabs
ཉམས་སྟོང་གསལ	empty/ luminous awareness	nyams stong gsal
ཉམས་སྟོབས	1) [physical] strength; 2) Che nyams [dignified pose/ hauteur + khengs [arrogance- stobs power ??	nyams stobs
ཉམས་བརྟས	to strengthen, be restored	nyams brtas
ཉམས་བརྟས་པ	1) power of mind increasing; 2) strength and size/flesh; 3) restore, recover, grow well, get up again D	nyams brtas pa
ཉམས་བརྟས་པ་བྱེད	1) power of mind increasing; 2) strength and size/flesh; 3) restore, recover, grow well, get up again D	nyams brtas pa byed
ཉམས་བརྟས་བྱེད་པ	strengthen, restore, recover	nyams brtas byed pa
ཉམས་བལྟ	to gain some experience, see what experience you gain, continue to gain personal experience	nyams blta
ཉམས་བལྟས	continue to gain personal experience	nyams bltas
ཉམས་ཐག	1) miserable, wretched, poor, pathetic, tormented, degenerate, stricken, helpless, worried, pitiable; 3) exhausted, weary; 4) misery, misfortune, suffering	nyams thag
ཉམས་ཐག་པ	1) miserable, wretched, poor, pathetic, tormented, suffering degenerate, stricken, helpless, worried, pitiable; 3) exhausted, weary; 4) misery, misfortune, suffering	nyams thag pa
ཉམས་ཐག་པའི་ང་རོ	doleful cries	nyams thag pa'i nga ro
ཉམས་ཐག་པའི་སེམ་ཅན	wretched beings	nyams thag pa'i sem can
ཉམས་ཐག་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	wretched beings	nyams thag pa'i sems can
ཉམས་ཐག་སྤྲང་པོ	the destitute	nyams thag sprang po
ཉམས་ཐབས	appearance, color, figure	nyams thabs
ཉམས་ཐུག	{nyams thug na} - if the meditative mood is dense	nyams thug
ཉམས་མཐའ་དག	all experiences 961	nyams mtha' dag
ཉམས་འཐུག་པོ	dense meditation-moods	nyams 'thug po
ཉམས་དང་ཁ་མི་བསྲེ་བ	not to converse with violators	nyams dang kha mi bsre ba
ཉམས་དང་ཁ་མི་བསྲེ་བ་བསྲུང	not to converse with such violators GD	nyams dang kha mi bsre ba bsrung
ཉམས་དང་རྟོགས་པ	*{nyams rtogs}*	nyams dang rtogs pa
ཉམས་དང་བ	clear knowledge, bright, vivid appearance D	nyams dang ba
ཉམས་དང་མ་ཉམས	impairment and nonimpairment	nyams dang ma nyams
ཉམས་དོད་པོ	[brjid nyams gsal ba'am arrogance gi rnam 'gyur tshang ba] elegant, dignified, stylish, arrogant/ haughty	nyams dod po
ཉམས་དོད་པོ་བཟོ་བ	liven	nyams dod po bzo ba
ཉམས་དྲོད	blo gdeng ngam nyams rgyus su nyams drod chen po'i las ka byed pa'i	nyams drod
ཉམས་དྲོད་འཛིན་པ	tshod lta ba	nyams drod 'dzin pa
ཉམས་བདེ	feel happy	nyams bde
ཉམས་བདེ་བ	happy, comfortable D	nyams bde ba
ཉམས་འདུས	penis D	nyams 'dus
ཉམས་ལྡན	che ba'i rnam 'gyur dang ldan pa	nyams ldan
ཉམས་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, nang bsam pa'i 'gyur ba la brten nas phyi rol lus kyi rnam 'gyur sgeg pa la sogs pa'i nyams dang ldan pa ston pa'i rgyan zhig ste, nang gses rnam grangs brgyad ni,...	nyams ldan gyi rgyan
ཉམས་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	chn	nyams ldan gyi rgyan brgyad
ཉམས་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	compare different texts	nyams sdur byed pa
ཉམས་སྣང	meditative experience, psychic vision teachings, ordinary experiential vision, vision of practitioners on the path, SA snang gsum, experiences, meditative moods and states, visions of experiences	nyams snang
ཉམས་སྣང་གོང་འཕེལ	Increased Experience. The second of the four visions in Dzogchen practice	nyams snang gong 'phel
ཉམས་སྣང་གོང་འཕེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of increased experience	nyams snang gong 'phel gyi snang ba
ཉམས་སྣང་བན་བུན	seen appearances that are unclear/ unreliable	nyams snang ban bun
ཉམས་སྣང་འབར་བ	the experience blazes	nyams snang 'bar ba
ཉམས་སྣང་ལ	I had a vivid experience	nyams snang la
ཉམས་སྣང་ལ་མཐོང་བ	experienced visions of ..	nyams snang la mthong ba
ཉམས་པ	(Tha mi dad pa,, broken, torn, damaged, hurt spoiled injur[e][d][y], degenera[cy][tion], deteriorat[e][tion], decline, impaired, fall away from, depravity, destroy, ruin, damage, violation [of vows...	nyams pa
ཉམས་པ་ཀུན་གསོ	rebuild/ restore everything at once	nyams pa kun gso
ཉམས་པ་དྲུག	six kinds of degeneration	nyams pa drug
ཉམས་པ་བདུན	the seven types of violators. the seven types of violators	nyams pa bdun
ཉམས་པ་རྣམ་པར་སྤངས་པ	not impaired in any way, have fully relinquished violations	nyams pa rnam par spangs pa
ཉམས་པ་མེད་པ	unwaning, unimpaired, uninjured, does not fade away, does not decline. Syn {nyams med}	nyams pa med pa
ཉམས་པ་ལས་ཀྱང་ཤིན་ཉམས་པ	more degenerate than the lowest of the low	nyams pa las kyang shin nyams pa
ཉམས་པ་སོར་ཆུད	restoration, repair, renovation	nyams pa sor chud
ཉམས་པ་སོས་པ	cured impaired health	nyams pa sos pa
ཉམས་པ་གསུམ	three deteriorations	nyams pa gsum
ཉམས་པ་གསོས་པ	fill to the brim	nyams pa gsos pa
ཉམས་པ་བསོས་པ	repaired damage of things which had been injured, regained strength	nyams pa bsos pa
ཉམས་པའི་རྒྱུ	waste/ scrap materials	nyams pa'i rgyu
ཉམས་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཆ	waste/ scrap materials	nyams pa'i rgyu cha
ཉམས་པའི་ལྕི་བ་བཞི	[TRS 30:2]	nyams pa'i lci ba bzhi
ཉམས་པའི་ཆད་པ	deed that violates samaya 962	nyams pa'i chad pa
ཉམས་པའི་སྣང	experiential vision	nyams pa'i snang
ཉམས་པའི་མ་ནིང	degenerated neuter, impotent, castrated eunuch, useless	nyams pa'i ma ning
ཉམས་པར	alike	nyams par
ཉམས་པར་འགྱུར	corrupted	nyams par 'gyur
ཉམས་པར་འགྱུར་པ	to regress	nyams par 'gyur pa
ཉམས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	grow weak, become deteriorated, degenerate	nyams par 'gyur ba
ཉམས་པར་བྱ	be languid or weary, despond	nyams par bya
ཉམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	deprave, SA nyams su 'jug pa	nyams par byed pa
ཉམས་པོ	injury, damage	nyams po
ཉམས་དཔྱོད	investigate, analyze, test, examine minutely	nyams dpyod
ཉམས་དཔྱོད་པ	investigate, examine minutely	nyams dpyod pa
ཉམས་དཔྱོད་བྱེད	investigate, analyze, test, examine minutely	nyams dpyod byed
ཉམས་སྤྲོ་བ	joy	nyams spro ba
ཉམས་འཕར	spiritual experience	nyams 'phar
ཉམས་བན་བུན	flickering/ hazy experience [like a dream]	nyams ban bun
ཉམས་བྱིངས་ཅན	meditative experiences that involve trance-like immersion	nyams byings can
ཉམས་བྱེད	that which damages, to dignify	nyams byed
ཉམས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	'bras bu yid du mi 'ong ba sgrub pa'i nyams byed kyi rgyu'i byed las ston pa'i rgyan zhig, rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	nyams byed kyi rgyu
ཉམས་བྱེད་པ	produce arrogance	nyams byed pa
ཉམས་བྲོད	experience, taste/ power	nyams brod
ཉམས་བླངས	to assume a formidable stance	nyams blangs
ཉམས་དབྱངས	song of experience	nyams dbyangs
ཉམས་འབར་བ	blazing forth of experience	nyams 'bar ba
ཉམས་འབྲུ་བ	irritate, vex, provoke	nyams 'bru ba
ཉམས་མི་བདེ་བ	ill[-health]	nyams mi bde ba
ཉམས་མེད	unwaning, uncorrupted, never decreases, fails or falls from, unimpaired, undamaged, unspoiled, does not fade away, intact, undeteriorated, w/o decline, w/o degeneration, uninjured, indestructible	nyams med
ཉམས་མེད་པ	1) w/o obscurations of arrogance; 2) w/o faults	nyams med pa
ཉམས་མྱོང	1) experience[/ knowledge purified by familiarization]; 2) enjoyment J	nyams myong
ཉམས་མྱོང་དངོས	actual/ concrete/ personal experience	nyams myong dngos
ཉམས་མྱོང་མངོན་རྟོགས	know by actual perceptual experience	nyams myong mngon rtogs
ཉམས་མྱོང་ཅན	adept, expert, versed	nyams myong can
ཉམས་མྱོང་དང་བསླབ་བྱ	experience and teaching	nyams myong dang bslab bya
ཉམས་མྱོང་བརྡ་ཐབས	methods for having experience	nyams myong brda thabs
ཉམས་མྱོང་སྤེལ་རེས	change of experiences	nyams myong spel res
ཉམས་མྱོང་མེད་པ	inexperienced nyams myong tsam 'dzin pa'i ring lugs empiricism	nyams myong med pa
ཉམས་མྱོང་རིང་ལུགས	empiricism	nyams myong ring lugs
ཉམས་དམན་དུ་གཏོང	weaken	nyams dman du gtong
ཉམས་དམན་པ	weak, feeble, sickly	nyams dman pa
ཉམས་དམའ	degenerating	nyams dma'
ཉམས་དམའ་བ	deteriorate, degenerate	nyams dma' ba
ཉམས་དམས	degenerated	nyams dmas
ཉམས་དམས་པ	Syn {nyams smad pa}	nyams dmas pa
ཉམས་དམས་སུ་གཏོང	ruin, destory, undermine, enfeeble	nyams dmas su gtong
ཉམས་སྨད་པ	1) weakened, tired out, degenerated. 2) wronged, injured, offended	nyams smad pa
ཉམས་སྨོད་པ	humble airs of greatness	nyams smod pa
ཉམས་རྩལ	skill, dexterity [from training]	nyams rtsal
ཉམས་ཚད	to put to the test	nyams tshad
ཉམས་ཚད་བྱ	to gain some experience	nyams tshad bya
ཉམས་ཚོད	temptation	nyams tshod
ཉམས་ཚོད་བལྟ་བ	watch, spy	nyams tshod blta ba
ཉམས་ཚོད་ལེན	test, try, experiment	nyams tshod len
ཉམས་ཚོད་ལེན་པ	test, try, experiment	nyams tshod len pa
ཉམས་མཚར	amazing	nyams mtshar
ཉམས་མཚར་གྱི་ཚུལ་དུ	jokingly	nyams mtshar gyi tshul du
ཉམས་མཚར་བ	wonderful, most beautiful	nyams mtshar ba
ཉམས་ཞན	weak, feeble, powerless	nyams zhan
ཉམས་ཞན་དུ་གཏོང	weaken	nyams zhan du gtong
ཉམས་ཞན་པ	weak, feeble, powerless, weakened, diminished strength, sickly	nyams zhan pa
ཉམས་ཞིབ	study in detail, make a minute inquiry, investigation, testing, examination	nyams zhib
ཉམས་ཞིབ་ཁང	laboratory, research center/ institute	nyams zhib khang
ཉམས་ཞིབ་བརྟག་དཔྱད་རུ་ཁག	prospecting/ research team	nyams zhib brtag dpyad ru khag
ཉམས་ཞིབ་པ	scholar	nyams zhib pa
ཉམས་ཞིབ་བྱེད	study in detail, make a minute inquiry, investigation, testing, examination	nyams zhib byed
ཉམས་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to study in detail, make a minute inquiry	nyams zhib byed pa
ཉམས་ཞེན	clinging to a [meditation] experience; attachment to experiences	nyams zhen
ཉམས་གཞིགས	brtag dpyad	nyams gzhigs
ཉམས་བཞག་པ	dran pa nye bar bzhag pa	nyams bzhag pa
ཉམས་བཞགས	confess failures	nyams bzhags
ཉམས་བཞེས་ཚད་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfection of practice (h)	nyams bzhes tshad du phyin pa
ཉམས་བཟང་ལྡན	elegant, dignified, stylish	nyams bzang ldan
ཉམས་འལ་འོལ	hazy meditation-mood nyams 'al 'ol dang gnyug ma rab rib can a hazy meditation mood or a distorted version of the natural state	nyams 'al 'ol
ཉམས་འུར	gzhan rkyen la ltos nas byed 'dod byung ba,...Gzhan gyis gad mo dgod par mthong dus rang yang nyams 'ur nas gad mo dbang med du shor ba	nyams 'ur
ཉམས་འོག་ཆུད	experience, make an experience of	nyams 'og chud
ཉམས་འོག་ཏུ་ཆུད་པ	grounded in experience	nyams 'og tu chud pa
ཉམས་འོག་ཏུ་མི་ཆུད་པ	not grounded in experience	nyams 'og tu mi chud pa
ཉམས་འོག་ཏུ་འཛུད་པ	understand	nyams 'og tu 'dzud pa
ཉམས་འོག་ཚུད་པ	apprehend, comprehend, mentally perceive/ realize	nyams 'og tshud pa
ཉམས་ཡིག་བརྒྱ་རྩ	nyams yig brgya rtsa	nyams yig brgya rtsa
ཉམས་ཡོད་པ	1) che ba'i rnam 'gyur yod pa; 2) be in possession of	nyams yod pa
ཉམས་རིགས	sign-experiences, experiences	nyams rigs
ཉམས་རིམ་པ་བཞི	four levels of experience	nyams rim pa bzhi
ཉམས་རིམ་བཞི	four stages of experience	nyams rim bzhi
ཉམས་རུལ	corrupt, rotten, degenerate	nyams rul
ཉམས་རེ་དགའ	[we are] overjoyed!	nyams re dga'
ཉམས་ལ་ཤར་བ	experienced	nyams la shar ba
ཉམས་ལས	cooperative/ communual labor/ work	nyams las
ཉམས་ལས་ཁང	cooperative	nyams las khang
ཉམས་ལེན	{nyams su len pa} to apply/ implement/ (put into) practice; to incorporate into (one's) experience; practice/ practical application	nyams len
ཉམས་ལེན་སྐྱོང་ཚུལ	ways to continue the training nyams len mkhan yin par rlom na yang boasting of proficiency in spiritual practice	nyams len skyong tshul
ཉམས་ལེན་གང་ལ་བྱས	What practices have you done?	nyams len gang la byas
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་འགག	principal means/ point of practice	nyams len gyi 'gag
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་གྲྭ	sadhana centers for practice	nyams len gyi sgrub grwa
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་གརབ༹	sadhana centers for practice	nyams len gyi sgrub grva
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་དངོས་གཞི	Main part of practice. Refers to the practice that follows the preliminaries: either yidam practice or, here, the actual practice of Mahamudra or Dzogchen. According to Jigmey Lingpa, 'main part' l...	nyams len gyi dngos gzhi
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་མཐིལ	main point of practice, central point of practice	nyams len gyi mthil
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་མདོ་འགགས	principal means/ point of practice	nyams len gyi mdo 'gags
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་གནད	main points of practice	nyams len gyi gnad
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་གནད་ཟིན་པ	to have grasped the key point of the practice	nyams len gyi gnad zin pa
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱི་རྩལ	the power of practice	nyams len gyi rtsal
ཉམས་ལེན་གྱིས་སླེབས་པ	put into practice [effectively]	nyams len gyis slebs pa
ཉམས་ལེན་དགེ	propitious practice	nyams len dge
ཉམས་ལེན་སྙིང་པོ	essential practice	nyams len snying po
ཉམས་ལེན་ཐུན་འབྲིང	medium length practice session	nyams len thun 'bring
ཉམས་ལེན་གནང་བ	to practice	nyams len gnang ba
ཉམས་ལེན་པ	1) practitioner, 1 w continuum joined to the meaning; 2) measure, survey, explore, inquire into, ascertain the state of D	nyams len pa
ཉམས་ལེན་བྱས་པ	practiced	nyams len byas pa
ཉམས་ལེན་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	practice blessing lineage	nyams len byin rlabs kyi brgyud pa
ཉམས་ལེན་བྱེད	practice, apply, carry out, do sadhana	nyams len byed
ཉམས་ལེན་བྱེད་མཁན	the practitioner	nyams len byed mkhan
ཉམས་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	to apply in practice	nyams len byed pa
ཉམས་ལེན་འབྲལ་མེད	constant practice	nyams len 'bral med
ཉམས་ལེན་མེད་པ	haven't practiced	nyams len med pa
ཉམས་ལེན་མཚམས་བཞག	to finish one's practice session	nyams len mtshams bzhag
ཉམས་ལེན་ཞུ་སྒོ	means of practice	nyams len zhu sgo
ཉམས་ལེན་ལ་འབད་པ	exert oneself in the practice	nyams len la 'bad pa
ཉམས་ལེན་ལ་འབནད་དུ་ཟིན་ཀྱང	if you persevere with diligence in the experience yet	nyams len la 'band du zin kyang
ཉམས་ལེན་ལ་འབུངས	apply yourself to practice	nyams len la 'bungs
ཉམས་ལེན་ལམ་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	the path luminosity of practice	nyams len lam gyi 'od gsal
ཉམས་ལེན་བསྲེ་བ	integration	nyams len bsre ba
ཉམས་ལེན་ཧུར་ཐག་གྱིས	Put all your energy into practice!	nyams len hur thag gyis
ཉམས་ཤར	arise within one's continuum, experience arising	nyams shar
ཉམས་ཤར་གྱི་མགུར	song about my meditation experiences	nyams shar gyi mgur
ཉམས་ཤར་བ	arise within one's continuum, experience arising	nyams shar ba
ཉམས་བཤིག	to destroy meditationmoods	nyams bshig
ཉམས་སད	test, investigation. Syn {nyams tshod}	nyams sad
ཉམས་སད་པ	try, test	nyams sad pa
ཉམས་སད་བྱས་པ	to test, try (someone)	nyams sad byas pa
ཉམས་སུ་སྒྱུར	ruin, destory, undermine, enfeeble 964	nyams su sgyur
ཉམས་སུ་ཆུད་པ	to implement	nyams su chud pa
ཉམས་སུ་འཆར་བ	visionary	nyams su 'char ba
ཉམས་སུ་ཇི་ལྟར་ལེན་པའི་ཚུལ	the way to practice	nyams su ji ltar len pa'i tshul
ཉམས་སུ་འཇུག	ruin, destory, undermine, enfeeble	nyams su 'jug
ཉམས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	injure, spoil, render useless	nyams su 'jug pa
ཉམས་སུ་རྣམ་པ་ཐ་དད	different as far as the aspect of experience is concerned	nyams su rnam pa tha dad
ཉམས་སུ་བླང	to practice	nyams su blang
ཉམས་སུ་བླང་བདེ	easy to practice	nyams su blang bde
ཉམས་སུ་བླང་བ	practice, memorize	nyams su blang ba
ཉམས་སུ་བླངས	to put them into practice	nyams su blangs
ཉམས་སུ་བླངས་པ	practiced, [p {nyams su len pa}	nyams su blangs pa
ཉམས་སུ་བླངས་པའི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	chn	nyams su blangs pa'i chos brgyad
ཉམས་སུ་འབབ་པ	occur in experience	nyams su 'bab pa
ཉམས་སུ་མི་བདེ་བ	unpleasant	nyams su mi bde ba
ཉམས་སུ་མྱང	one's own direct experience	nyams su myang
ཉམས་སུ་མྱངས་བ	experienced, pf. of {nyams su myong ba}	nyams su myangs ba
ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང	1) experience; 2) undergo, suffer D	nyams su myong
ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	1) to experience. 2) to undergo, suffer	nyams su myong ba
ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	the [karmic] result to be experienced	nyams su myong ba'i 'bras bu
ཉམས་སུ་བཞེས་པ	(h) to practice	nyams su bzhes pa
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན	practice, apply, carry out, do sadhana	nyams su len
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་ཐབས	practice method / details	nyams su len thabs
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་ནུས་ན	if you are capable of putting them into practice	nyams su len nus na
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པའི་ཚུལ	the way to practice	nyams su len pa'i tshul
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་བྱེད	practice, apply, carry out, do sadhana	nyams su len byed
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་ཚུལ	how to practise	nyams su len tshul
ཉམས་སུ་ལོངས	practice, imp. of {nyams su len pa}	nyams su longs
ཉམས་སུ་ལོན་པ	to apply the practice	nyams su lon pa
ཉམས་གསུམ	the three meditation experiences (of bliss, clarity, and no thought)	nyams gsum
ཉམས་གསོ	rest[oration], repair, renovation [of violation]	nyams gso
ཉམས་གསོ་སྐྱོན་བསང	nyams pa gso zhing	nyams gso skyon bsang
ཉམས་གསོ་བ	to rest	nyams gso ba
ཉམས་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	repair, mend, restore	nyams gso byed pa
ཉམས་གསོ་ལྷུ་སྒྲིག	nyams gud bskyar bzo dang cha lag sgrig pa,...Yo byad rnying pa skyon can rnams nyams gso lhu sgrig byas te mkho yod kyi dngos por sgyur ba	nyams gso lhu sgrig
ཉམས་གསོས	restoration, rebuilding, mend, repair	nyams gsos
ཉའི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion / house of Pisces	nya'i khyim
ཉའི་ཁྱུ	school, shoal	nya'i khyu
ཉའི་མཆུ་བ་ཕུག་པ	pierced the mouths of fish	nya'i mchu ba phug pa
ཉའི་རྣ་བ	gills	nya'i rna ba
ཉའི་ཚིར	large fish	nya'i tshir
ཉའི་ཟེ་བ	nya'i dpung steng sha'i ze ba	nya'i ze ba
ཉའི་ཤོག་པ	fish fin	nya'i shog pa
ཉའི་གཤོག་པ	fin	nya'i gshog pa
ཉར	1) keep [in mind], hold on to, guard, look after, take care of; 2) deposit, store; 3) remain, stay; 4) oblong; 5)	nyar
ཉར་མཁན	keeper	nyar mkhan
ཉར་ཆོག་པའི་ཡིག་འཛིན	receipt, [carbon] copy	nyar chog pa'i yig 'dzin
ཉར་ཉར	oblong	nyar nyar
ཉར་ཉེར	#	nyar nyer
ཉར་ཉོར	lazy, sluggish, rubbery, spongy, slimy	nyar nyor
ཉར་དུ་ལི་ཁ་ར	place lying between india and tibet	nyar du li kha ra
ཉར་གདོང	shin, shin bone	nyar gdong
ཉར་བ	(tha dad pa nyar ba, nyar ba, nyor,, 1) keep [in mind], hold on to, guard, look after, take care of; 2) deposit, store; 3) remain, stay; 4) tend, take care of; 5) clean [up]; 6) fish pond; 7) [arch...	nyar ba
ཉར་མ	[arch] particles/ spray of water	nyar ma
ཉར་ཚག་བྱེད་པ	retain	nyar tshag byed pa
ཉར་ཚགས	preservation	nyar tshags
ཉར་ཚགས་བྱེད་པ	preserve, keep, take care of	nyar tshags byed pa
ཉར་འཚག	preservation, keeping, taking care of conservation, preservation, storing up hoarding	nyar 'tshag
ཉར་འཚག་བྱེད་པ	preserve, keep, take care of	nyar 'tshag byed pa
ཉར་འཛིན	receipt, carbon copy	nyar 'dzin
ཉར་ཡིག	file copy	nyar yig
ཉར་ཡིག་ཏུ་སྒྲིག	file [away]	nyar yig tu sgrig
ཉར་སྲུང	storage	nyar srung
ཉལ	sleep, lie down	nyal
ཉལ་ཁང	bedroom, dormitory	nyal khang
ཉལ་ཁུག	sleeping bag 965	nyal khug
ཉལ་ཁེབས	bedding, bedspread	nyal khebs
ཉལ་ཁྲི	bed, bunk, couch, bedstead, couch, sofa, bed	nyal khri
ཉལ་མཁན	sleeper	nyal mkhan
ཉལ་གུར	1) sleeping tent; 2) mosquito net	nyal gur
ཉལ་གོས	bedding, counterpane, quilt, blanket	nyal gos
ཉལ་གྱི་ཡོད	i am lying down	nyal gyi yod
ཉལ་གྱིས་འགྲོ	[arch] yal nas 'gro	nyal gyis 'gro
ཉལ་གྲིབ	sensual defilement	nyal grib
ཉལ་འགྲོ	river	nyal 'gro
ཉལ་འགྲོའི་གཏེར	receptacle of rivers, sea	nyal 'gro'i gter
ཉལ་གཅིན	bed-wetting	nyal gcin
ཉལ་གཅིན་གཏོང་བ	wet the bed	nyal gcin gtong ba
ཉལ་ཆས	1) bedding; 2) baggage; 3) sleeping clothes	nyal chas
ཉལ་ཆས་བཟོ་བ	to make a bed	nyal chas bzo ba
ཉལ་འཇོ	bedroll nyal nyal shig shig bye ma'i phung po nyil	nyal 'jo
ཉལ་ཉིལ	filth, dirt	nyal nyil
ཉལ་ཉེལ	capacious, baggy	nyal nyel
ཉལ་ཉོལ	exhausted	nyal nyol
ཉལ་ཏིང་ལ	on the bed D	nyal ting la
ཉལ་ཏེ	lying	nyal te
ཉལ་སྟན	bed	nyal stan
ཉལ་ཐ	opium	nyal tha
ཉལ་ཐ་འཐེན	smoke opium	nyal tha 'then
ཉལ་ཐག	ropes stretched on a frame to support mattress etc. for sleeping	nyal thag
ཉལ་ཐའི་གྱུལ་འགྱེད	opium war	nyal tha'i gyul 'gyed
ཉལ་ཐའི་འཐབ་འཁྲུག	opium war	nyal tha'i 'thab 'khrug
ཉལ་ཐའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	opium war	nyal tha'i dmag 'khrug
ཉལ་ཐུལ	blanket, bedspread	nyal thul
ཉལ་དུ་བཞག་པ	lay or put down	nyal du bzhag pa
ཉལ་དུ་སོང	gone to sleep	nyal du song
ཉལ་དུད	{nyal tha}	nyal dud
ཉལ་དུད་ཀྱི་གྱུལ་འགྱེད	opium war	nyal dud kyi gyul 'gyed
ཉལ་དུད་ཀྱི་འཐབ་འཁྲུག	opium war	nyal dud kyi 'thab 'khrug
ཉལ་དུད་ཀྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག	opium war	nyal dud kyi dmag 'khrug
ཉལ་དུས	bedtime	nyal dus
ཉལ་དོར	pajamas	nyal dor
ཉལ་གདན	mattress	nyal gdan
ཉལ་འདུག་གོ	he slept	nyal 'dug go
ཉལ་ལྡན་མེ་རི	rgod ma kha'i me	nyal ldan me ri
ཉལ་སྡོད	lie down, sleep	nyal sdod
ཉལ་སྡོད་པ	to lie down	nyal sdod pa
ཉལ་སྡོད་བྱེད	lie down, sleep	nyal sdod byed
ཉལ་ནས	asleep nyal nas 'then rgyu'i tha ma nag po opium	nyal nas
ཉལ་ནས་སྡོད་བཞིན	lying	nyal nas sdod bzhin
ཉལ་པོ	village, coition	nyal po
ཉལ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	practice cohabitation nyal po byed pa'i khyim du 'greng ba'i	nyal po byed pa
ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of standing alone [with an unrelated woman] in a nyal po byed pa'i house ?! nyal po byed pa'i khyim du gnas pa'i ltung	ltung byed
ཉལ་སྤོབས	to fall asleep	nyal spobs
ཉལ་འཕྱི	dgong mo nyal 'phyi - goes to sleep late	nyal 'phyi
ཉལ་འཕྱི་བགྱི་བ	to wait to sleep	nyal 'phyi bgyi ba
ཉལ་བ	sleep, lie down	nyal ba
ཉལ་བ་ནང་བཞིན	dormant	nyal ba nang bzhin
ཉལ་བ་ལ་རྟག	steady in lying down, be continually at rest	nyal ba la rtag
ཉལ་བའི་བདེ་བ	happiness of going to sleep	nyal ba'i bde ba
ཉལ་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of sleeping	nyal ba'i rnal 'byor
ཉལ་བའི་ཕྱི་མ	last going to bed	nyal ba'i phyi ma
ཉལ་བའི་རྨི་ལམ་དུ	he had a dream in which	nyal ba'i rmi lam du
ཉལ་བའི་ཚེ	when going to sleep	nyal ba'i tshe
ཉལ་བར་འདོད	wishing to sleep	nyal bar 'dod
ཉལ་བུ	bastard, whoreson, love child	nyal bu
ཉལ་བྱེད	snake	nyal byed
ཉལ་བྱེད་མ	night	nyal byed ma
ཉལ་མལ	your bed	nyal mal
ཉལ་ཞིང་ཟ་བ	sleeping and eating	nyal zhing za ba
ཉལ་གཞུག	in sleeping rkang pa 'jog yul	nyal gzhug
ཉལ་ཟན	quilt	nyal zan
ཉལ་ཟིན་པ	lay, slept	nyal zin pa
ཉལ་གཟན	sleeping cushion, blanket	nyal gzan
ཉལ་ལ་དགའ་བ	adores sleeping	nyal la dga' ba
ཉལ་ལངས	asleep or awake	nyal langs
ཉལ་ལས་ལྡང་བ	rise up from a lying position	nyal las ldang ba
ཉལ་ལེ་ཉིལ་ལེ	unintelligent/ disorderly was of doing	nyal le nyil le
ཉལ་ས	1) bed, couch, berth sleeping place. 2) bedroom, sleeping room; {gzim sa}	nyal sa
ཉལ་ས་གཅིག་ལ་རྨི་ལམ་སོ་སོ	in 1 bedroom different dreams, seemingly 1 but really different	nyal sa gcig la rmi lam so so
ཉལ་སའི་ཁག་མིག	bedroom	nyal sa'i khag mig
ཉལ་སའི་ཁྲི	bed frame, bed stead	nyal sa'i khri
ཉལ་སའི་ཤག	bedroom, dormitory	nyal sa'i shag
ཉལ་སར	in bed	nyal sar
ཉལ་སར་ལུས་པ	bed-ridden	nyal sar lus pa
ཉལ་སློང	1) waking up, awakening; 2) understanding, intellect, [spiritual] knowledge, wisdom	nyal slong
ཉི	1) 2; 2) the sun; 3) the 38th	nyi
ཉི་ཀུང་ཆུ	nyi kung river	nyi kung chu
ཉི་དཀྱིལ	the disk of the sun	nyi dkyil
ཉི་རྐང	sun steps [nyi ma skar ma'i gnas su 'gro ba'i bgrod pa la ltos nas 'jog la, de yang rkang pa drug khyim lo re la lan gnyis 'gro bas rkang pa bcu gnyis su 'gyur la, spyad zin pa dang ma spyad pa'i t...	nyi rkang
ཉི་སྐམ	sun drying	nyi skam
ཉི་སྐམ་གཏོང	sun dry	nyi skam gtong
ཉི་སྐར	rgyu skar in which the sun arises	nyi skar
ཉི་སྐོར	the halo around the sun	nyi skor
ཉི་སྐྱེས	a brahmana, son of the sun	nyi skyes
ཏྭིཅེ	born [caste], bhramin	twice
ཉི་ཁ་ར་ག	Nicaragua	nyi kha ra ga
ཉི་ཁུད	lake in nepal	nyi khud
ཉི་ཁྱིམ	traveller, son-in-law, halo, circle round the sun	nyi khyim
ཉི་ཁྲི	1) 20,000; 2) the Prajnaparamita in 20,000 verses	nyi khri
ཉི་ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང	twenty eight thousand	nyi khri brgyad stong
ཉི་ཁྲི་ལྔ་སྟོང	25,000	nyi khri lnga stong
ཉི་ཁྲི་ལྔ་སྟོང་པ	25000 Stanza Perfection of Wisdom	nyi khri lnga stong pa
ཉི་ཁྲི་ཆིག་སྟོང	twenty-one thousand	nyi khri chig stong
ཉི་ཁྲི་ཆིག་སྟོང་དྲུག་བརྒྱ	21600	nyi khri chig stong drug brgya
ཉི་ཁྲི་སྣང་བ	nt. Elucidation of the [Perfection of Transcendent Knowledge in] Twenty Thousand Stanzas	nyi khri snang ba
ཉི་མཁའ	the space of the sun, the sun and space	nyi mkha'
ཉི་འཁོར	the course of the sun, during a day circling here and there	nyi 'khor
ཉི་འཁྱིམས	'od kor at the edge of the sun	nyi 'khyims
ཉི་གུང	noon, midday. Comp. with {nyin gung}	nyi gung
ཉི་གུར	'od sgor at the edge of the sun	nyi gur
ཉི་གྲིབ	[sun &] shade, overcast, cloudy	nyi grib
ཉི་གྲིབ་ཀྱི་མཚམས	borderline between shade and sunlight	nyi grib kyi mtshams
ཉི་གྲིབ་མཚམས་ཀྱི་མི	fence-sitter, person between sun and shade	nyi grib mtshams kyi mi
ཉི་གྲིབ་ལ་སྡོད	sit in the shade	nyi grib la sdod
ཉི་དགའ	1) joy in the sun/ day; 2) med. herb lcam pa's flower and leaf la bzhed pa zhig gnyis	nyi dga'
ཉི་རྒས	[time of] sunset	nyi rgas
ཉི་རྒས་ཐུན་མཚམས	the time of sunset	nyi rgas thun mtshams
ཉི་སྒྲོལ་བྱེད	male wood monkey year, Tarana, [the 18th year	nyi sgrol byed
ཉི་བརྒྱ	two hundred	nyi brgya
ཉི་ཆ	daytime, sunny part/ side	nyi cha
ཉི་ཆད	nyin grangs kyi kha chad	nyi chad
ཉི་འཆར	sunrise	nyi 'char
ཉི་འཆར་ཁ་རུ	moment of sunrise	nyi 'char kha ru
ཉི་བརྙན	reflection of the sun in water	nyi brnyan
ཉི་ལྟར་སྣང་བྱེད	shine like the sun, produce an imitation of the sun	nyi ltar snang byed
ཉི་སྟོང	2,000	nyi stong
ཉི་སྟོན	1) direction; 2) lotus flower D; 3) tree Terminalia arjuna	nyi ston
ཉི་དག	nyi ma skar gnas de'i steng du slebs pa nas brtsams te nyin de'i tshes longs rdzogs par spyod pa'i grangs yin	nyi dag
ཉི་དྲོད	heat of the sun	nyi drod
ཉི་དྲོས	morning time [8-10 a.m.]	nyi dros
ཉི་གདན	sun seat	nyi gdan
ཉི་གདུགས	umbrella, parasol	nyi gdugs
ཉི་གདུགས་ཀྱི་རྩིབས་མ	spokles of a parasol	nyi gdugs kyi rtsibs ma
ཉི་གདུགས་ཐོགས་པ	king, one over whose head an umbrella is held as a mark of honor	nyi gdugs thogs pa
ཉི་མདངས	sunlight, sunshine, radiance of the sun	nyi mdangs
ཉི་འདེ	[arch] nyi ma lde ba ste, sun's heat and rays lus sro ba	nyi 'de
ཉི་རྡུལ	'sun-particle' {nyi zer gyi rdul}, a particle of dust in a sun beam	nyi rdul
ཉི་རྡུལ་འཚུབས་པ་ལྟར	like swirling particles of dust in a sun beam	nyi rdul 'tshubs pa ltar
ཉི་ལྡོག	solstice	nyi ldog
ཉི་ནུབ	sunset [dus tsod bcu gnyis kyi ya gyal zhig ste bya'i dus tsod	nyi nub
ཉི་ནུབ་ལམ་ཟད	the sun sets and the road stops	nyi nub lam zad
ཉི་སྣང	sunshine	nyi snang
ཉི་ཕྱེད	noon	nyi phyed
ཉི་བར	gang brtsi ba'i tshes zhag de rdzogs	nyi bar
ཉི་བུལ	Rahu eclipse brtag dpyad byed skabs nyi skar la subtracting and adding byed tshul	nyi bul
ཉི་བུལ་བསྲེ	nyi dag and Rahu rtsa ba gnyis kyi coursing mixed	nyi bul bsre
ཉི་མ	day, date, sun, sunday	nyi ma
ཉི་མ་སྐྱེལ་བ	nyi ma 'phul thabs byed pa	nyi ma skyel ba
ཉི་མ་ཁ་ཆུ	dvangs gsal 'od du 'tsher ba'i rdo rigs shig	nyi ma kha chu
ཉི་མ་ཁ་ཤས	a few days	nyi ma kha shas
ཉི་མ་ཁར་སླེབས་པ	on the decline, at the end of 1's rope, on the brink of death/ extinction	nyi ma khar slebs pa
ཉི་མ་འཁྱིམས་པ	circumference of the sun	nyi ma 'khyims pa
ཉི་མ་གང་འཁྱོལ	nyi ma 'phul thabs byed gang thub,...Las rjes 'di yin ston rgyu med par nyi ma gang 'khyol byed pa	nyi ma gang 'khyol
ཉི་མ་གང་པོ	the whole day	nyi ma gang po
ཉི་མ་གང་ཤར	sunflower, helianthus 967	nyi ma gang shar
ཉི་མ་གུང	at noon	nyi ma gung
ཉི་མ་གུང་པ	kun dga' bo las bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i Indian shravaka arhat among {ston pa'i gtad rabs bdun}	nyi ma gung pa
ཉི་མ་གྲིབ	be overcast/ cloudy	nyi ma grib
ཉི་མ་དགའ	name of karna, king of anga, a medicinal plant	nyi ma dga'
ཉི་མ་དགེ་བ	astr good day	nyi ma dge ba
ཉི་མ་འགྲིབ	be overcast/ cloudy	nyi ma 'grib
ཉི་མ་འགྲིབ་པ་ཙམ	so much that the sun was darkened	nyi ma 'grib pa tsam
ཉི་མ་རྒས	the sun sets	nyi ma rgas
ཉི་མ་རྒས་པ	to sun sets	nyi ma rgas pa
ཉི་མ་ངན་པ	time of bad planets and stars	nyi ma ngan pa
ཉི་མ་སྔ་འགྲོ	early morning	nyi ma snga 'gro
ཉི་མ་སྔ་དྲོ	early morning	nyi ma snga dro
ཉི་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	1) the twelve periods of the day. {byi ba}, {glang}, {stag}, {yos}, {'brug}, {sprul}, {rta}, {lug}, {spre'u}, {bya}, {khyi}, {phag}. 2) the twelve gods of the sun	nyi ma bcu gnyis
ཉི་མ་ཆ་འཛིན	partial eclipse of the sun	nyi ma cha 'dzin
ཉི་མ་འཆར	sun is rising	nyi ma 'char
ཉི་མ་འཆར་ཀའི་འོད་ལྟར	like the light of the rising sun	nyi ma 'char ka'i 'od ltar
ཉི་མ་རྗེས་མ	the next day	nyi ma rjes ma
ཉི་མ་གཉིས	two days	nyi ma gnyis
ཉི་མ་རྟག་པ་རེ་བཞིན	the sun as always	nyi ma rtag pa re bzhin
ཉི་མ་རྟིང་མ	the next day	nyi ma rting ma
ཉི་མ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing	nyi ma lta bu'i sems bskyed
སུན	like bodhicitta	sun
ཉི་མ་ཐང	place west of lhasa	nyi ma thang
ཉི་མ་ཐུང་དུས	period of short days, when the day becomes short	nyi ma thung dus
ཉི་མ་དང་ཟླ་བ	a sun and moon	nyi ma dang zla ba
ཉི་མ་དེ་རིང་ནས	from today onward	nyi ma de ring nas
ཉི་མ་དྲོ་པོ	sunny	nyi ma dro po
ཉི་མ་གདུབ་འཛིན	solar eclipse	nyi ma gdub 'dzin
ཉི་མ་བདུན	the 7 suns	nyi ma bdun
ཉི་མ་ལྡན་པའི་རི	mythological mountain beyond southern ocean	nyi ma ldan pa'i ri
ཉི་མ་ལྡེ	nyi ma la bsdad nas lus bsro ba	nyi ma lde
ཉི་མ་ལྡེ་བ	be warmed in the sun	nyi ma lde ba
ཉི་མ་ལྡོག་འགྱུར	solstice	nyi ma ldog 'gyur
ཉི་མ་ལྡོག་ཐིག	tropic [astr]	nyi ma ldog thig
ཉི་མ་ལྡོག་ཐིག་བྱང་མ	Tropic of Cancer	nyi ma ldog thig byang ma
ཉི་མ་ལྡོག་ཐིག་ལྷོ་མ	Tropic of Capricorn	nyi ma ldog thig lho ma
ཉི་མ་ལྡོག་པ	returning of days	nyi ma ldog pa
ཉི་མ་ནག་ཆུང	name of demigod	nyi ma nag chung
ཉི་མ་ནག་ཆེན	name of demigod nyi ma nag chen dang nyi ma nag ching two demigods D	nyi ma nag chen
ཉི་མ་ནུབ	the sun sets, [be] sunset	nyi ma nub
ཉི་མ་ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ན	in the West nyi ma nub nas chos ston pa'i ltung byed downfall of teaching dharma after sunset nyi ma nub nas chos ston pa'i ltung byed downfall of teaching dharma after sunset [ltung byed 'ba' zhig...	nyi ma nub kyi phyogs na
ཉི་མ་ནུབ་པའི་གྲིབ་སོ་ལྟར	as the shadows of the setting sun vanish into darkness	nyi ma nub pa'i grib so ltar
ཉི་མ་ནུབ་ཚེ་བར	until the sun sets/ sunset	nyi ma nub tshe bar
ཉི་མ་སྣང་བ	sunlight	nyi ma snang ba
ཉི་མ་སྤྲིན་བྲལ	sun free from clouds	nyi ma sprin bral
ཉི་མ་སྤྲིན་ལས་དྲོལ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	x {'bras bu'i dus su nyi ma sprin las drol ba lta bu dgos} reach their result, like the sun coming out from behind the clouds	nyi ma sprin las drol ba lta bu
ཉི་མ་ཕར་བཞུད་པ	sunset	nyi ma phar bzhud pa
ཉི་མ་ཕྱི	afternoon	nyi ma phyi
ཉི་མ་ཕྱི་དྲོ	afternoon	nyi ma phyi dro
ཉི་མ་ཕྱི་མ	a future day	nyi ma phyi ma
ཉི་མ་ཕྱེ	[arch] noon	nyi ma phye
ཉི་མ་ཕྱེད	noon; half a day	nyi ma phyed
ཉི་མ་ཕྱེད་ཡོལ	afternoon	nyi ma phyed yol
ཉི་མ་ཕྱེད་ཡོལ་ཙམ་གྱི་དུས་ཚོད	the time of an afternoon	nyi ma phyed yol tsam gyi dus tshod
ཉི་མ་ཕྱེད་ལྷག	more than half the day, early morning until afternoon	nyi ma phyed lhag
ཉི་མ་འཕུལ་བ	las don med par nyi ma gang 'khyol byed pa	nyi ma 'phul ba
ཉི་མ་བར་བ	nyi ma'i dhru ba la rtag longs byin zin pa	nyi ma bar ba
ཉི་མ་བྱང་བགྲོད	the sun's northern declination [dbyar nyi ldog nas bzung nyi ma'i rgyug lam byang phyogs dang je nyer 'gro ba	nyi ma byang bgrod
ཉི་མ་བྱང་བགྲོད་ཀྱི་དཀར་ཕྱོགས་ཝཧིལེ་ཐེ་སུན་ཨིས་ཨིན་ཨིཙ་ནོརཐ	bound 'white interval'	nyi ma byang bgrod kyi dkar phyogs while the sun is in its north
ཉི་མ་བྱེད་ལྷག	more than one half of the sun, from early morning to the afternoon	nyi ma byed lhag
ཉི་མ་འབུད་པ	nyi ma skyel ba	nyi ma 'bud pa
ཉི་མ་འབུམ	one hundred thousand suns	nyi ma 'bum
ཉི་མ་སྦབས་པ	Suryagupta, a successor of the Buddha	nyi ma sbabs pa
ཉི་མ་སྦས	one of the successors of buddha in the hierarchy in india	nyi ma sbas
ཉི་མ་སྦྱང་པའི་རྡོ་ཤེལ	sun-purifying stone	nyi ma sbyang pa'i rdo shel
ཉི་མ་སྦྱངས་པའི་རྡོ	crystal	nyi ma sbyangs pa'i rdo
ཉི་མ་མ་བཞུད་བར	sunrise to sunset	nyi ma ma bzhud bar
ཉི་མ་མང་པོའི་བར་དུ	over many days	nyi ma mang po'i bar du
ཉི་མ་མེ་གྲོགས	phan pa'i mthun 'gyur du 'gro ba'i dpe	nyi ma me grogs
ཉི་མ་མེ་ཏོག	sunflower	nyi ma me tog
ཉི་མ་དམར་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	nyi ma nub rir bzhud tshar ba	nyi ma dmar thag chod pa
ཉི་མ་རྩེ་ཤར	sunrise	nyi ma rtse shar
ཉི་མ་ཚ་མའི་སེར་བུ	haze in the heat of the sun	nyi ma tsha ma'i ser bu
ཉི་མ་འཛད་ཐབས	way of spending the day	nyi ma 'dzad thabs
ཉི་མ་ཞོགས་པ	rising sun	nyi ma zhogs pa
ཉི་མ་གཞོན་ནུ	a deity	nyi ma gzhon nu
ཉི་མ་བཞུད	sun setting	nyi ma bzhud
ཉི་མ་བཞུད་པ	sun setting	nyi ma bzhud pa
ཉི་མ་བཞུད་ལ་ཁད	on the decline, at the end of 1's rope, on the brink of death/ extinction	nyi ma bzhud la khad
ཉི་མ་ཟླ་བ་ཡང་དག་འགྲོགས	tshes gnam gang 968	nyi ma zla ba yang dag 'grogs
ཉི་མ་བཟང་པོ	a good / auspicious day	nyi ma bzang po
ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	sun rays [one of the gu ru mtshan brgyad	nyi ma 'od zer
ཉི་མ་ཡོལ་ལ་ཁད	the sun is nearly down	nyi ma yol la khad
ཉི་མ་རིང་བའི་དུས	the time when the days become long	nyi ma ring ba'i dus
ཉི་མ་རིལ་པོ	the whole day	nyi ma ril po
ཉི་མ་རིལ་འཛིན	total eclipse of the sun	nyi ma ril 'dzin
ཉི་མ་རེ་བཞིན་དུ	day by day	nyi ma re bzhin du
ཉི་མ་རེ་རེ	every day	nyi ma re re
ཉི་མ་ལ་སྒྲོན་མེ	a lamp in sunshine, showing off/ giving advice to an expert	nyi ma la sgron me
ཉི་མ་ལ་ཡོལ་བ	the sun has passed over the hilltop	nyi ma la yol ba
ཉི་མ་ལ་སྲོ་བ	make hot in the sun	nyi ma la sro ba
ཉི་མ་ལུང་དགོན་པ	Nyimalung Monastery, in Domey	nyi ma lung dgon pa
ཉི་མ་ལོག་པ	the sun having transited N or S returning the other way	nyi ma log pa
ཉི་མ་ཤར	east	nyi ma shar
ཉི་མ་ཤར་བ	sunrise	nyi ma shar ba
ཉི་མ་ཤར་བ་ལྟ་བུ	to rise and shine like the sun	nyi ma shar ba lta bu
ཉི་མ་ཤར་བ་ལྟར	{sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa nyi ma shar ba ltar mdzad pa} made the teachings of the Buddha have shine like the sun	nyi ma shar ba ltar
ཉི་མ་སྲོ་བ	nyi drod bsten pa'am nyi ma lde ba	nyi ma sro ba
ཉི་མ་གསལ་བ	brilliant sun	nyi ma gsal ba
ཉི་མ་ཧྲིལ་འཛིན	nyi ma ril 'dzin	nyi ma hril 'dzin
ཉི་མ་ལྷོ་བགྲོད	the sun's southern declination	nyi ma lho bgrod
ཉི་མ་ལྷོ་བྱང་བགྲོད	sun's S and N transit/declination	nyi ma lho byang bgrod
ཉི་མའི	solar	nyi ma'i
ཉི་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	orb / circle / disc of the sun, sun disk	nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor
ཉི་མའི་སྐྱེས་ཁྱིམ	sun's arising house	nyi ma'i skyes khyim
ཉི་མའི་ཁ་ལོ	dawn	nyi ma'i kha lo
ཉི་མའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	charioteers of the sun	nyi ma'i kha lo pa
ཉི་མའི་ཁ་ལོ་བ	the charioteers of the sun (skya rengs	nyi ma'i kha lo ba
ཉི་མའི་ཁོར་ཡུག	surroundings of the sun	nyi ma'i khor yug
ཉི་མའི་ཁྱིམ	sun sphere	nyi ma'i khyim
ཉི་མའི་ཁྱིམ་རྒྱུད	solar system	nyi ma'i khyim rgyud
ཉི་མའི་ཁྱིམ་བཅུ་གཉིས	chn	nyi ma'i khyim bcu gnyis
ཉི་མའི་འཁོར	attendants of the sun	nyi ma'i 'khor
ཉི་མའི་འཁྱིམས་པ	circumference of the sun	nyi ma'i 'khyims pa
ཉི་མའི་གུང	when the sun is at the meridian, midday, noon	nyi ma'i gung
ཉི་མའི་གུར་ཁང	the sun's pavilion, halo of five different colors which surrounds the sun, tent-like mansion of the sun	nyi ma'i gur khang
ཉི་མའི་གློག་ཞུ	sun lamp	nyi ma'i glog zhu
ཉི་མའི་དགུང་ལ	during the day	nyi ma'i dgung la
ཉི་མའི་བགྲོད་པ	the course of the sun	nyi ma'i bgrod pa
ཉི་མའི་རྒྱུ་བ	solar breathing	nyi ma'i rgyu ba
ཉི་མའི་རྒྱུད	1) Buddha's clan; 2) Buddha; 3) descendants of the sun	nyi ma'i rgyud
ཉི་མའི་རྒྱུད་རིམ	solar system	nyi ma'i rgyud rim
ཉི་མའི་ཆ་ཚད	nyi ma'i rgya khyon gyi tshad	nyi ma'i cha tshad
ཉི་མའི་ཆུང་མ	consort of Surya	nyi ma'i chung ma
ཉི་མའི་ཉིན་ཞག་དག་མཚམས	mda' mkha' mtsho yid ri mtshams 6714405 kyi nyin zhag ring la 12 houses la mig klu me skyon 18,382 'khor ro, 'khor thengs re la "khyim lo" siderial year 365.270645 days	nyi ma'i nyin zhag dag mtshams
ཉི་མའི་གཉེན	relatives of the sun, epithet of shakyamuni adityabandhu, epithet of sakyamuni buddha	nyi ma'i gnyen
ཉི་མའི་གཉེན་གྱུར	friend of the sun (met Buddha	nyi ma'i gnyen gyur
ཉི་མའི་སྙིང་པོ	1) the disk / circle of the sun, heart of the sun. Syn {nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor}. 2) Surya-garbha [Buddha]	nyi ma'i snying po
ཉི་མའི་རྟ་བདུན	the 7 horses of the sun	nyi ma'i rta bdun
ཉི་མའི་རྟག་ལོངས	the sun's yul longs	nyi ma'i rtag longs
ཉི་མའི་མཐུ	strength of the sun	nyi ma'i mthu
ཉི་མའི་གདུགས	the umbrella of the sun, the day	nyi ma'i gdugs
ཉི་མའི་མདའ	Kamadeva	nyi ma'i mda'
ཉི་མའི་ལྡིང་ཁང	the divine floating palace of the sun, the region where the deity sun stays	nyi ma'i lding khang
ཉི་མའི་ནག་ཐིག	sun spot	nyi ma'i nag thig
ཉི་མའི་ནུས་པ	solar power/ energy	nyi ma'i nus pa
ཉི་མའི་དཔལ	{nyi ma'i dpal	nyi ma'i dpal
ཉི་མའི་བུ	son of the sun, the planet saturn	nyi ma'i bu
ཉི་མའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of the sun	nyi ma'i bu mo
ཉི་མའི་སྦས	Ravigupta	nyi ma'i sbas
ཉི་མའི་མིང་ཅན	plant calotropis gigantea	nyi ma'i ming can
ཉི་མའི་མེ	fire generated by the sun, SA me gsum	nyi ma'i me
ཉི་མའི་བཙུན་མོ	the wives of the sun	nyi ma'i btsun mo
ཉི་མའི་རྩ	sun nadi	nyi ma'i rtsa
ཉི་མའི་ཞག་གསུམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the sun's three day mandala [nyi ma khyim bcu gnyis bgrod pa'i khyim lo gcig la khyim 969 zhag sum brgya drug cu tham pa, tses zhag sum brgya bdun cu don gcig dang 'dod cha'i gcig nyin zhag sum brg...	nyi ma'i zhag gsum dkyil 'khor
ཉི་མའི་ཟེར	sun's rays	nyi ma'i zer
ཉི་མའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	reflected image of the sun	nyi ma'i gzugs brnyan
ཉི་མའི་འོད	sunlight, sun rays, sun's brilliance	nyi ma'i 'od
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཀོར	rainbow circle of light around the sun	nyi ma'i 'od kor
ཉི་མའི་འོད་སྐོར	circle of light round the sun	nyi ma'i 'od skor
ཉི་མའི་འོད་མཉམ	flower {nyi ma'i 'od mnyam}	nyi ma'i 'od mnyam
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ལྟར་འབར་བ	shines as if lit by the sun nyi ma'i 'od dang nam mkha'i char dang 'dra - as vital as the rays of the sun or as rain from the sky	nyi ma'i 'od ltar 'bar ba
ཉི་མའི་འོད་མདངས	sunshine, sunlight	nyi ma'i 'od mdangs
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	1) sunlight; 2) {nyang ral} sun's rays}	nyi ma'i 'od zer
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར་གྱི་ཁ་དོག	sun's rays color	nyi ma'i 'od zer gyi kha dog
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཤེད	between the sun and the horizon	nyi ma'i 'od shed
ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཤེད་ན	below the sun	nyi ma'i 'od shed na
ཉི་མའི་ཡུལ་ལོངས	the sun's yul longs	nyi ma'i yul longs
ཉི་མའི་རིགས	sun clan, Buddha's clan	nyi ma'i rigs
ཉི་མའི་རིགས་སྐྱེས	born of the race of the sun, name of buddha sakya simha	nyi ma'i rigs skyes
ཉི་མའི་རིགས་འཁྲུངས	born of the race of the sun, name of buddha sakya simha	nyi ma'i rigs 'khrungs
ཉི་མའི་རུས	sun clan * Buddha	nyi ma'i rus
ཉི་མའི་རླུང	sun wind [lte 'og gi ro rkyang gi rtsa rgyud de, rlung sna bug gyas pa nas nus pa zad rim gyis rgyu bas dug gi rlung zhes bya la, thabs kyi rang bzhin gsung rdo rje'i ngo bo ste, zhag re bzhin rlun...	nyi ma'i rlung
ཉི་མའི་ལུས	body of the sun, copper	nyi ma'i lus
ཉི་མའི་ཤིང	plant calotropis gigantea	nyi ma'i shing
ཉི་མའི་སེང་གེའི་འོད	Surya Singha Prabha	nyi ma'i seng ge'i 'od
ཉི་མའི་དྷྲུ་བ	past tshes zla rdzogs mtshams su the sun's monthly coursing combined is called nyi ma'i nges pa = nyi ma'i dhru ba	nyi ma'i dhru ba
ཉི་མའི་ལྷ	type of lha	nyi ma'i lha
ཉི་མའི་ལྷ་མ	wife of the sun	nyi ma'i lha ma
ཉི་མའི་ལྷ་མོ	wife of the sun god	nyi ma'i lha mo
ཉི་མར་སྐམ	to dry in / be exposed to the sun	nyi mar skam
ཉི་མར་སྐམ་པ	dry in the sun, be exposed to the sun	nyi mar skam pa
ཉི་མར་བསྲོ	to warm up in the sun, to lie down in the sun	nyi mar bsro
ཉི་མས་དྲོས་པ	lto bgrangs nyi mas dros	nyi mas dros pa
ཉི་མས་ཚིག་པ	burned by the sun	nyi mas tshig pa
ཉི་མས་འཚིགས་པ	sunburn, torrid	nyi mas 'tshigs pa
ཉི་མས་བཞད	lotus	nyi mas bzhad
ཉི་མས་བཞད་པ	lotus	nyi mas bzhad pa
ཉི་མྱུར	sun near setting, evening	nyi myur
ཉི་ཙེ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	emphemeral hells [dmyal khams bco brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig ste, sgo dang ka ba, thab dang thag pa sogs rtag tu bkol zhing spyod pa'i yul du gyur pa zhig	nyi tse ba'i dmyal ba
ཉི་ཚད་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གདུགས	parasol	nyi tshad skyob byed kyi gdugs
ཉི་ཚི་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	ephemeral hells	nyi tshi ba'i dmyal ba
ཉི་ཚེ	limited duration, very short time	nyi tshe
ཉི་ཚེ་བ	temporary; limited (in extent)	nyi tshe ba
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་རྟོགས་པ	stong nyid nyi tshe	nyi tshe ba'i rtogs pa
བའི་རྟོགས་པ	limited realisation of emptiness	ba'i rtogs pa
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་ཐེག་པ	ephemeral vehicle, hinayana	nyi tshe ba'i theg pa
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་ཐོབ་པ	ephemeral attainment	nyi tshe ba'i thob pa
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་སྤྲོས་པ	temporary / transient constructs	nyi tshe ba'i spros pa
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	occasional hell, local hell, day-life hell, ephemeral hells, individual / ephemeral / occasional hell [where former inhabitant is released when a new one arrives]; an intermediate hell	nyi tshe ba'i dmyal ba
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་སེམས	limited attitude, selfish frame of mind	nyi tshe ba'i sems
ཉི་ཚེ་བའི་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ	ephemeral hell being	nyi tshe ba'i sems can dmyal ba
ཉི་ཚེ་ཝ	ephemeral, single, simple, class of infernal beings, very small, minute, animals that do not live more than a day, very short-lived animate beings	nyi tshe wa
ཉི་ཚེའི་དམྱལ་བ	Syn {nyi tshe ba'i dmyal ba}	nyi tshe'i dmyal ba
ཉི་ཚེའི་སངས་རྒྱས	pratyekabuddha	nyi tshe'i sangs rgyas
ཉི་ཚོད	sun dial	nyi tshod
ཉི་ཚོད་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	clock, sun dial 970	nyi tshod gyi 'khor lo
ཉི་འཛིན	solar eclipse	nyi 'dzin
ཉི་ཞྭ	sunhat. Syn {sho khal}	nyi zhwa
ཉི་ཞལ	sun face	nyi zhal
ཉི་ཞུར	a ray of the sun	nyi zhur
ཉི་གཞུད་ལམ་ཟད	on the decline, at the end of 1's rope, on the brink of death/ extinction	nyi gzhud lam zad
ཉི་གཞོན	the newly arisen sun	nyi gzhon
ཉི་གཞོན་མཚམས་སྤྲིན	orange cloud in newly arisen morning sun	nyi gzhon mtshams sprin
ཉི་ཟེར	sun ray, sunlight	nyi zer
ཉི་ཟེར་གྱི་དུག	sunburn dug	nyi zer gyi dug
ཉི་ཟེར་གྱི་རྡུལ	dust seen flying in the rays of the sun coming through apertures of a window, mote floating in a sunbeam	nyi zer gyi rdul
ཉི་ཟེར་རྡུལ	specks of dust in sun beam	nyi zer rdul
ཉི་ཟླ	1) the sun and moon; 2) circle and crescent top ornament of a stupa	nyi zla
ཉི་ཟླ་སྐར་མ	the sun, the moon, and the stars	nyi zla skar ma
ཉི་ཟླ་སྐར་གསུམ	sun moon and stars	nyi zla skar gsum
ཉི་ཟླ་ཁ་སྦྱོར	Union/coalescence of sun and moon	nyi zla kha sbyor
ཉི་ཟླ་ཁ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Union of Sun and Moon	nyi zla kha sbyor gyi rgyud
ཉི་ཟླ་འཁྱིམས་པ	sun and moon surrounded by a 'ja' gur rainbow tent	nyi zla 'khyims pa
ཉི་ཟླ་གའུ	sun and moon box	nyi zla ga'u
ཉི་ཟླ་གཉིས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	transformed into a sun and a moon	nyi zla gnyis su gyur pa
ཉི་ཟླ་ལྟར་གྲགས	renowned as far as the sun and moon	nyi zla ltar grags
ཉི་ཟླ་ལྟར་གྲགས་པ	renowned like the sun and moon	nyi zla ltar grags pa
ཉི་ཟླ་དབང་པོ	dakini {nyi zla dbang po}	nyi zla dbang po
ཉི་ཟླ་གཞོན་པ	to ride the sun and moon	nyi zla gzhon pa
ཉི་ཟླ་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	high relationship like the sun and moon	nyi zla zung 'brel
ཉི་ཟླ་གཟའ་སྐར	sun, moon, and stars	nyi zla gza' skar
ཉི་ཟླ་གཟའ་འཛིན	eclipse	nyi zla gza' 'dzin
ཉི་ཟླ་ཨོད་ཟེར་ལེགས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Tertön Nyida Özer, Lekden Dorje: 1512-1625	nyi zla od zer legs ldan rdo rje
ཉི་ཟླའི་བགྲོད་པ	the course of the sun and moon	nyi zla'i bgrod pa
ཉི་ཟླའི་ཆས	sun and moon attribute	nyi zla'i chas
ཉི་ཟླའི་གདན	sun and moon seat	nyi zla'i gdan
ཉི་ཟླའི་སྣང་བ	light of the sun and moon	nyi zla'i snang ba
ཉི་ཟླའི་འོད་སྣང	visions like the light of the sun or the moon	nyi zla'i 'od snang
ཉི་གཟེར	sunbeam	nyi gzer
ཉི་འོག	under the sun; 1) the world. 2) China	nyi 'og
ཉི་འོག་གི་གོས	dress of the ancient people from bactria, european cloth	nyi 'og gi gos
ཉི་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ	the western continent or kingdom	nyi 'og gi rgyal
ཉི་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	countries under the sun	nyi 'og gi rgyal khab
ཉི་འོག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	W continent/ kingdom Apar ntaka D	nyi 'og gi rgyal khams
ཉི་འོག་པ	bactria	nyi 'og pa
ཉི་འོད	rays of the sun, sunbeam, light of the sun, sunlight, sunlight	nyi 'od
ཉི་འོད་ཀྱི་གློག་བཞུ	sun lamp	nyi 'od kyi glog bzhu
ཉི་འོད་ཀྱིས་གསོ	sunbathe	nyi 'od kyis gso
ཉི་འོད་འཁྱིལ་བ	the sun [always] shines	nyi 'od 'khyil ba
ཉི་འོད་གྱི་ཐབ	solar furnace	nyi 'od gyi thab
ཉི་འོད་གློག་སྒྲོན	flourescent light	nyi 'od glog sgron
ཉི་འོད་ཕོག	to shine on something	nyi 'od phog
ཉི་ཡོལ	1) sunlight obscuring screen/ awning; 2) parasol	nyi yol
ཉི་རི་ལི་ཡ	Nigeria	nyi ri li ya
ཉི་རེད་རྨ	a wound in the sun bsros nas 'grams pa	nyi red rma
ཉི་ལི་ལི	shrills	nyi li li
ཉི་ལོག	summer and winter solstices	nyi log
ཉི་ཤ	fresh meat	nyi sha
ཉི་ཤར	sunrise, early morning	nyi shar
ཉི་ཤར་བར	until sunrise	nyi shar bar
ཉི་ཤུ	20	nyi shu
ཉི་ཤུ་དགུ	the twenty-ninth day	nyi shu dgu
ཉི་ཤུ་ལྔ	the twenty-fifth day	nyi shu lnga
ཉི་ཤུ་ཅན	score	nyi shu can
ཉི་ཤུ་ཉེ་བར་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	the 10 upakleshas	nyi shu nye bar nyon mongs pa
ཉི་ཤུ་ཉེར་གཅིག	21	nyi shu nyer gcig
ཉི་ཤུ་ཉེར་གཉིས	22	nyi shu nyer gnyis
ཉི་ཤུ་ཐམ་པ	the twenty	nyi shu tham pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པ	the Vimshaka-karika	nyi shu pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ	rab tu byed pa nyi shu pa'i 'grel pa	nyi shu pa'i 'grel pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་ཙིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	phyi rol gyi don 'gog pa nyi shu pa'i tsig le'ur byas pa [slob dpon dbyig gnyen gyis mdzad pa, rgya gar gyi mkhan po dzi na mi tra sogs dang, lo ts' ba ye shes sdes bsgyur pa	nyi shu pa'i tsig le'ur byas pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	the Vimshaka- karika [by Vasubhandu one of the *{pra ka ra na sde brgyad}* the eight prakarana of vasubhandu	nyi shu pa'i tshig le'u byas pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	phyi rol gyi don 'gog pa nyi shu pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa	nyi shu pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa
ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	Twenty Verses;	nyi shu pa'i rab tu byed pa
Vཨིམཤཏིཀ	karika; Vasubandhu, 4th or 5th century nyi shu ma lon par bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i	Vimshatika
ཉི་ཤུ་ཙམ	about twenty	nyi shu tsam
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་དགུ	29	nyi shu rtsa dgu
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	28 nyi shu rtsa brgyad blang dor gyi bshags	nyi shu rtsa brgyad
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ	25	nyi shu rtsa lnga
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	21	nyi shu rtsa gcig
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཉིས	22	nyi shu rtsa gnyis
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་དྲུག	26	nyi shu rtsa drug
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བདུན	27	nyi shu rtsa bdun
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི	24	nyi shu rtsa bzhi
ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གསུམ	23	nyi shu rtsa gsum
ཉི་སེ	twice the length	nyi se
ཉི་སྲེག	sunburn	nyi sreg
ཉི་སྲེག་ཐེབས་པ	get sunburned	nyi sreg thebs pa
ཉི་གསར	rising sun	nyi gsar
ཉི་གསར་ཐུན་མཚམས	time of sun rising	nyi gsar thun mtshams
ཉི་བསྲེགས	sunbathing	nyi bsregs
ཉི་བསྲེགས་གཏོང	sunbathe	nyi bsregs gtong
ཉི་བསྲོས	nyi ma ldes pa'am nyi 'od kyi 'og tu bzhag pa	nyi bsros
ཉི་ཧོང	Japan	nyi hong
ཉི་ཧོང་གི་ཆོས་ལུགས་ཤིག	shinto	nyi hong gi chos lugs shig
ཉི་ཧོང་ཏིང	neon sign	nyi hong ting
ཉི་དྷྲུ	nyi ma'i dhru ba	nyi dhru
ཉིག་ཉིག	loose, slack, lax D weak	nyig nyig
ཉིགས	1) corruption, degeneration, dirt; 2) [arch] clothes	nyigs
ཉིང	1) self, own; 2) re-, again, quint-, innermost, even more, extra-	nying
ཉིང་ཁུ	juice, essence, pith, spirit of wine, real heart, source, yeast, spirit	nying khu
ཉིང་ཁྲི	nyang khri	nying khri
ཉིང་འཁྲུལ	compound/ secondary confusion; double-delusion, fantasies	nying 'khrul
ཉིང་གྱོག	servant's servant	nying gyog
ཉིང་གྲུལ	[arch] rigs ngan	nying grul
ཉིང་དགོས	vital necessity	nying dgos
ཉིང་འགྱངས་ཞག་འགྱངས	delay	nying 'gyangs zhag 'gyangs
ཉིང་སྒོ་ཕུགས	private door of castle	nying sgo phugs
ཉིང་ཏོ	sure, trustworthy D	nying to
ཉིང་ཏོར	[arch] certain, definite, very	nying tor
ཉིང་གཏོར	certain, sure D	nying gtor
ཉིང་བསྡུས	brief	nying bsdus
ཉིང་པོའི་བསྟན་པ	essential teachings (which in this case teach about sugatagarbha); essential teachings [which in this case teach about sugatagarbha]	nying po'i bstan pa
ཉིང་སྤྲུལ	emanation of the third degree, emanation, incarnation	nying sprul
ཉིང་ཕུར	rubbing, grating	nying phur
ཉིང་བྱང	innermost [prophetic guide]	nying byang
ཉིང་བྲན	servant's servant or last in the chain	nying bran
ཉིང་སྦྲུལ	third stage in incarnations	nying sbrul
ཉིང་མ་གཏེར་མའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གསུམ	1) {chos sku 'od med mgon}. 2) {longs sku spyan ras gzigs dbang} 3) {sprul sku 'gro 'dren pad ma 'byung gnas}	nying ma gter ma'i lugs kyi sku gsum
ཉིང་ཚ	great grandson	nying tsha
ཉིང་མཚམས	'brel ba'i mtshams sam tshigs	nying mtshams
ཉིང་མཚམས་སྦྱར་བ	1) to be reborn, reincarnate, continue on, reappearance [after death, of the aggregates of a new life], take rebirth; 2) transmigration, continuation of future lives; 3) be conceived, connected	nying mtshams sbyar ba
ཉིང་མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བ	be reborn, transmigrate	nying mtshams sbyor ba
ཉིང་ཞ	Ningsia Province nying g.yog - own servant nying g.yog - servants of oneself	nying zha
ཉིང་ལག	aspect of an aspect, minor parts of the body	nying lag
ཉིང་ལག་སོར་མོ་ལྔ	thumb and four fingers [mdzub mo, gung mo, srin lag mthe'u chung]	nying lag sor mo lnga
ཉིང་ཤ	1) one's own flesh D; 2) Nye du'i sha; 3) killed nyin mo'i sha	nying sha
ཉིང་ཤ་ཉིང་གིས	ruining oneself	nying sha nying gis
ཉིང་ཤ་ཉིང་གིས་ཟ	ruin oneself	nying sha nying gis za
ཉིང་ཤ་ཉིང་གིས་ཟ་བ	one eating his own flesh	nying sha nying gis za ba
ཉིང་ཤ་ཟ	ruin oneself	nying sha za
ཉིང་ཤའི	Ningsia Province	nying sha'i
ཉིང་སློབ	a pupil's pupil	nying slob
ཉིད་ཀྱི	your	nyid kyi
ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	his own dharma	nyid kyi chos
ཉིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པ	his own emanation	nyid kyi rnam par rol pa
ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ན	{de'i phyir na dang don gcig}, i.e., it is for this/these reason/s. [mss]	nyid kyis na
ཉིད་ཀྱིས་སྤྱད་པ	done by oneself	nyid kyis spyad pa
ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གསུངས་པ་བདེན	what you said is true [h]	nyid kyis gsungs pa bden
ཉིད་འཁྲུལ	compounded/ self-reinforcing confusion; layer upon layer of confusion	nyid 'khrul
ཉིད་འགྲུལ	very low caste	nyid 'grul
ཉིད་ཅག	you pl	nyid cag
ཉིད་གཅིག་པུ་ཡིན་པ	you alone	nyid gcig pu yin pa
ཉིད་ཐུགས	his own primordial state	nyid thugs
ཉིད་དུ	. . . nyid du . . . - . . . is a case of . . . [cf. Chos dbyings mdzod fol. 70a/ b]	nyid du
ཉིད་ཕུར	rubbing, grating	nyid phur
ཉིད་མ་གཏོགས་གཞན	only he and no one else	nyid ma gtogs gzhan
ཉིད་ཡིད	addictive mentality	nyid yid
ཉིད་རང	you, yourself	nyid rang
ཉིད་ལས་མི་གཞན་པའི་འཁོར	the retinue which is not different from himself	nyid las mi gzhan pa'i 'khor
ཉིན	daytime; day	nyin
ཉིན་དཀར	day[time], a lucky day	nyin dkar
ཉིན་རྐུན	thief who steals in the daytime	nyin rkun
ཉིན་སྐར	star that is visible during the day time	nyin skar
ཉིན་སྐར་ཙམ	as rare as seeing a star in the daytime	nyin skar tsam
ཉིན་སྐྱོང	observe vow/ practice for 1 day	nyin skyong
ཉིན་ཁ	all day	nyin kha
ཉིན་ཁ་དཀར་ངོ་དཀར	day time	nyin kha dkar ngo dkar
ཉིན་ཁག་བཏང་དགྱེས་ཕུལ་བ	offered food for one day	nyin khag btang dgyes phul ba
ཉིན་ཁྱོང	one day's entertainment	nyin khyong
ཉིན་མཁོ	daily/ everyday needs	nyin mkho
ཉིན་མཁོའི་དངོས་རྫས	things needed/ used daily	nyin mkho'i dngos rdzas
ཉིན་མཁོའི་ཡོ་བྱད	things needed/ used daily	nyin mkho'i yo byad
ཉིན་འཁལ་ཉིན་འཐག	nyin re bkal ba'i snal ma rnams nyin rer 'thag pa ste, nyin rer brtsams pa'i bya ba rnams nyin rer tshar ba byed dgos pa'i dpe	nyin 'khal nyin 'thag
ཉིན་འཁོར	day trip	nyin 'khor
ཉིན་འཁོར་བ	neighboring	nyin 'khor ba
ཉིན་འཁྱོངས	nyin gang thub pa [allowance for] a whole day	nyin 'khyongs
ཉིན་གང	the whole day	nyin gang
ཉིན་གང་ཐུབ་གཞི	allowance for 1 whole day	nyin gang thub gzhi
ཉིན་གང་པོ	the whole day	nyin gang po
ཉིན་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	daytime yoga	nyin gi rnal 'byor
ཉིན་གི་རིང་ལ	during the day	nyin gi ring la
ཉིན་གུང	midday, noon, noon meal, noon	nyin gung
ཉིན་གུང་ཁ་ལག	lunch	nyin gung kha lag
ཉིན་གུང་རྒྱབ	afternoon	nyin gung rgyab
ཉིན་གུང་སྔོན	forenoon	nyin gung sngon
ཉིན་གུང་བདེ་ལེགས	good afternoon	nyin gung bde legs
ཉིན་གུང་ན	at midday	nyin gung na
ཉིན་གུང་བར	ante meridiem, a.m.	nyin gung bar
ཉིན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	daytime yoga GD	nyin gyi rnal 'byor
ཉིན་གྱི་རིང་ལ	in the day time, during the day, during the day time	nyin gyi ring la
ཉིན་གླ	1 days wages	nyin gla
ཉིན་གླ་རྒྱགས	work for daily wages	nyin gla rgyags
ཉིན་གླ་པ	short term/ daily wage laborer	nyin gla pa
ཉིན་དགུང	noon, mid day, afternoon	nyin dgung
ཉིན་དགུང་གི་ཟ་མ	lunch	nyin dgung gi za ma
ཉིན་དགུང་ལ	at midday	nyin dgung la
ཉིན་འགའ	(during) a few days	nyin 'ga'
ཉིན་འགྱངས་ཞག་འཕུལ	spend the day w no hard work	nyin 'gyangs zhag 'phul
ཉིན་འགྱངས་ཞག་ཞག་ཕུད	delay, procrastinate	nyin 'gyangs zhag zhag phud
ཉིན་བརྒྱ	100 days	nyin brgya
ཉིན་བརྒྱ་དུས་གཅིག་ལ	100 days work in 1, all at once, right away	nyin brgya dus gcig la
ཉིན་བརྒྱའི་གློ་ནད	whooping cough	nyin brgya'i glo nad
ཉིན་ཅིག	one day, once	nyin cig
ཉིན་ཅིག་བཞིན་དུ	daily	nyin cig bzhin du
ཉིན་ཅིག་བཤིན་དུ	daily	nyin cig bshin du
ཉིན་གཅིག	+ ja thug - a day's supply of tea and soup	nyin gcig
ཉིན་གཅིག་གི་སྡོམ་པ	1 day vow	nyin gcig gi sdom pa
ཉིན་གཅིག་སྔོན་ལ	eve	nyin gcig sngon la
ཉིན་གཅིག་ནང་བཞིན	nyi ma gcig nang ltar	nyin gcig nang bzhin
ཉིན་གཅིག་པའི་རིམས	{nyin gcig pa'i rims disease [rims tshad sha la babs pa ste, nad rtags su rngul mang zhing, drod che ba, lus sems lci ba, tsha ba'i nad zug nyin re lan re ldang] ba zhig	nyin gcig pa'i rims
ཉིན་གཅིག་ལོ་སྐྱེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	appearanbce arising in 1 day and lasting a year	nyin gcig lo skyel gyi snang ba
ཉིན་ཆད	1) nyin grangs mang nyung gi kha chad; 2) nyin re'i chad 'bab	nyin chad
ཉིན་ཆས	daily necessities/ requisites	nyin chas
ཉིན་རྗེས་མ	the next day	nyin rjes ma
ཉིན་གཉིས་པ	1) kind of sickness every two days na ba'i 'dar; 2) the second day	nyin gnyis pa
ཉིན་ལྟར	all day long, the whole day, all the time, every day, daily	nyin ltar
ཉིན་ལྟར་ཆོས་ཆས	daily needs for religious service/ practice	nyin ltar chos chas
ཉིན་ལྟར་རེ་བཞིན	all day long, the whole day, all the time, every day, daily	nyin ltar re bzhin
ཉིན་ལྟར་ལས་ཀ་བྱེད	work all day/ daily	nyin ltar las ka byed
ཉིན་སྟར	every day	nyin star
ཉིན་བསྟུད	nyin nas nyin bstud pa ste, nyi ma mang po bar med sbrel ba	nyin bstud
ཉིན་ཐུང་སྐབས	time of short days- winter	nyin thung skabs
ཉིན་ཐུན	day long practice period	nyin thun
ཉིན་ཐེབ	book of days, calendar	nyin theb
ཉིན་ཐོ	daily note of work done/ accounts, diary	nyin tho
ཉིན་མཐར་བྱེད	darkness	nyin mthar byed
ཉིན་དུས	daytime	nyin dus
ཉིན་དེ་ཉིད	that same day	nyin de nyid
ཉིན་དེབ	diary	nyin deb
ཉིན་འདིར	during the day 973	nyin 'dir
ཉིན་ནས	from the day of	nyin nas
ཉིན་སྣང	apparent phenomena of waking state/ experience	nyin snang
ཉིན་སྣང་ཤས	daytime experience	nyin snang shas
ཉིན་པ	day	nyin pa
ཉིན་པའོ	Ningpo	nyin pa'o
ཉིན་པར	during the day, daily	nyin par
ཉིན་པར་རྐུ་བྱེད་པའི་རྐུན་པོ	thief who steals in the daytime	nyin par rku byed pa'i rkun po
ཉིན་པར་གྱི་དུས་སུ	in the daytime	nyin par gyi dus su
ཉིན་ཕོག	daily wages	nyin phog
ཉིན་ཕྱེ་མཚན་ཟུམ	flower that closes at night	nyin phye mtshan zum
ཉིན་ཕྱེད	midday, noon, half a day, six hours	nyin phyed
ཉིན་ཕྱེད་ཡོལ	the time of Aries	nyin phyed yol
ཉིན་ཕྱོགས	place where sunlight mostly shines	nyin phyogs
ཉིན་འཕུལ	way of spending the day	nyin 'phul
ཉིན་བྱེད	1) sun, [light giver] 'maker of day'; 2) mtshal, vermillion D; 3) saffron	nyin byed
ཉིན་བྱེད་སྙིང་པོ	the sun disc	nyin byed snying po
ཉིན་བྱེད་དབང	the sun lord	nyin byed dbang
ཉིན་བྲལ	w/o day	nyin bral
ཉིན་སྦྲེལ	many days mthud pa, many days works accumulated D	nyin sbrel
ཉིན་མའི་གུང	daylight	nyin ma'i gung
ཉིན་མི་གསལ	firefly nyin mis btsigs pa rnams mtshan mo lha 'dres bshigs te - by night the spirits destroyed whatever had been built by men during the day	nyin mi gsal
ཉིན་མེད་མཚན་མེད	without interruption during day and night, continually	nyin med mtshan med
ཉིན་མོ	day, day time, during the day	nyin mo
ཉིན་མོ་དགུང་ཐུན	in the afternoon	nyin mo dgung thun
ཉིན་མོ་འཇིགས	owl	nyin mo 'jigs
ཉིན་མོ་བདེ་ལེགས	kha btags nang mdzod kyi bye brag cig kha btags nang mdzod las rtags brgyad ma, srid zhi bde skyid, nyin mo bde legs, tshe lha ma bcas rigs mi 'dra ba bzhi yod pa'i gsum par tshigs bcad sho lo ka b...	nyin mo bde legs
ཉིན་མོ་ཡིབ	owl	nyin mo yib
ཉིན་མོའི་སྐར་མ་ལས་ཀྱང་དཀོན་པ	an occasion rarer than a star in the daytime	nyin mo'i skar ma las kyang dkon pa
ཉིན་མོའི་གུང	noon	nyin mo'i gung
ཉིན་མོའི་གུང་སྔོན	period before noon (9-11am)	nyin mo'i gung sngon
ཉིན་མོའི་སྒོ	dawn	nyin mo'i sgo
ཉིན་མོའི་སྒོ་ང	egg of the day, dawn	nyin mo'i sgo nga
ཉིན་མོའི་ཐོག་མ	dawn and arising	nyin mo'i thog ma
ཉིན་མོའི་མཐའ	noon, highest limit of the day	nyin mo'i mtha'
ཉིན་མོའི་དང་པོ་ལ	at the beginning of the day	nyin mo'i dang po la
ཉིན་མོའི་དུས་སྒང་ཚང	the whole day	nyin mo'i dus sgang tshang
ཉིན་མོའི་བདག	lord of the day, sun	nyin mo'i bdag
ཉིན་མོའི་བདག་པོ	sun	nyin mo'i bdag po
ཉིན་མོའི་འདྲེན་པ	sun	nyin mo'i 'dren pa
ཉིན་མོའི་ནོར་བུ	gem of the day, the sun	nyin mo'i nor bu
ཉིན་མོའི་བུ	planet saturn, the son of the sun	nyin mo'i bu
ཉིན་མོའི་བུ་བཅོལ་ཁང	creche	nyin mo'i bu bcol khang
ཉིན་མོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	sun	nyin mo'i dbang phyug
ཉིན་མོའི་འབྱུང་གནས	sun	nyin mo'i 'byung gnas
ཉིན་མོའི་རྩེ་མོ	E mt	nyin mo'i rtse mo
ཉིན་མོའི་སློབ་གྲ	day school	nyin mo'i slob gra
ཉིན་མོའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	day school	nyin mo'i slob grwa
ཉིན་མོར	in the day time	nyin mor
ཉིན་མོར་དགའ་བྲལ	owl	nyin mor dga' bral
ཉིན་མོར་བྱེད	shine like the sun	nyin mor byed
ཉིན་མོར་བྱེད་པ	sun	nyin mor byed pa
ཉིན་མོར་མི་འདུ་བ	gathering of people during the day. See {'du ba gsum}	nyin mor mi 'du ba
ཉིན་ཚད	period of a day	nyin tshad
ཉིན་ཚུགས	horseman's 1 day bab tshugs	nyin tshugs
ཉིན་མཚན	days	nyin mtshan
ཉིན་མཚན་ཁོར་མོ་ཡུག	day and night	nyin mtshan khor mo yug
ཉིན་མཚན་ཁོར་ཡུག	continuously, day and night	nyin mtshan khor yug
ཉིན་མཚན་འཁོར་ལོ	cycle of day and night	nyin mtshan 'khor lo
ཉིན་མཚན་མགོ་སྦྲེལ	day and night sbrel mthud	nyin mtshan mgo sbrel
ཉིན་མཚན་གཅིག	1 day and night, 24 hr	nyin mtshan gcig
ཉིན་མཚན་མཉམ་པ	equinox	nyin mtshan mnyam pa
ཉིན་མཚན་ལྟོས་མེད	continuously day and night	nyin mtshan ltos med
ཉིན་མཚན་ཐུན་དྲུག	the six sessions of day and night	nyin mtshan thun drug
ཉིན་མཚན་དུ	day and night	nyin mtshan du
ཉིན་མཚན་དུ་ལན་དྲུག་ཏུ	six times day and NIGHT	nyin mtshan du lan drug tu
ཉིན་མཚན་དུས་ཀུན	[in all times of the] day and night	nyin mtshan dus kun
ཉིན་མཚན་དུས་དྲུག	the six sessions of day and night	nyin mtshan dus drug
ཉིན་མཚན་ཕྱད་པ	constantly day and night	nyin mtshan phyad pa
ཉིན་མཚན་ཕྱེད་མ	midday and midnight	nyin mtshan phyed ma
ཉིན་མཚན་བར་མ་ཆད་པ	continuously day and night	nyin mtshan bar ma chad pa
ཉིན་མཚན་བར་མེད	throughout day and night, around-the-clock	nyin mtshan bar med
ཉིན་མཚན་མེད	constantly, both day and night	nyin mtshan med
ཉིན་མཚན་མེད་པ	constantly, both day and night	nyin mtshan med pa
ཉིན་མཚན་མེད་པར	continually making no difference between day and night	nyin mtshan med par
ཉིན་མཚན་ལན་དྲུག	the six sessions of day and night	nyin mtshan lan drug
ཉིན་མཚན་ལན་དྲུག་ཏེ	the six sessions of day and night	nyin mtshan lan drug te
ཉིན་འཛིན	solar eclipse	nyin 'dzin
ཉིན་ཞག	every day; period from sunrise to sunrise; 'solar day', a day and a night [24 hours], the time it takes for the sun to circumambulate the 4 continents. {yud tsam sum cu}	nyin zhag
ཉིན་ཞག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	circle of solar days, a year [khyim lo gcig gi dus yun te, nyin zhag sum brgya drug cu re lnga dang, chu tshod bcu drug chu srang bcu bzhi bcas yod	nyin zhag dkyil 'khor
ཉིན་ཞག་འགའ	several days	nyin zhag 'ga'
ཉིན་ཞག་གཅིག་གི་སྡོམ་པ	1) bsnyen gnas yan lag brgyad pa; 2) theg chen gso sbyong	nyin zhag gcig gi sdom pa
ཉིན་ཞག་རྟག་ལོངས	the period of a day = 60 chuts"	nyin zhag rtag longs
ཉིན་ཞག་དུས་གཉིས	the two times of a solar day [R]	nyin zhag dus gnyis
ཉིན་ཞག་དུས་གསུམ	the three times of a day	nyin zhag dus gsum
ཉིན་ཞག་པྲུགས་གཅིག	day of 24 hours	nyin zhag prugs gcig
ཉིན་ཞག་ཕྲུགས་གཅིག	1 24 hr day	nyin zhag phrugs gcig
ཉིན་ཞག་ཚོགས་པ	month of 30 days	nyin zhag tshogs pa
ཉིན་ཞག་གཟའ་ལྔ	the way of coursing of the five planets during a day	nyin zhag gza' lnga
ཉིན་ཞག་གསུམ	3 days	nyin zhag gsum
ཉིན་ཞིག	one day	nyin zhig
ཉིན་བཞི་པའི་རིམས	four day rims tshad	nyin bzhi pa'i rims
ཉིན་བཞིན	daily	nyin bzhin
ཉིན་ཟླ	month of 30 days	nyin zla
ཉིན་ཡོལ	daytime yol ba	nyin yol
ཉིན་རང	daybreak, morning twilight D	nyin rang
ཉིན་རང་པོ	the whole day	nyin rang po
ཉིན་རངས	daybreak, morning twilight	nyin rangs
ཉིན་རངས་པ	the whole day	nyin rangs pa
ཉིན་རངས་པར	early in the morning	nyin rangs par
ཉིན་རི	vs grib ri	nyin ri
ཉིན་རིང་སྐབས	the time of long days, summer	nyin ring skabs
ཉིན་རིམ	daily agenda	nyin rim
ཉིན་རེ	daily, every day	nyin re
ཉིན་རེ་ཞག་རེ་ཙམ	nyin zhag re re tsam ste, dus yun thung tsam	nyin re zhag re tsam
ཉིན་རེ་བཞིན	daily, per day daily, every day	nyin re bzhin
ཉིན་རེ་བཞིན་གྱི་བྱ་རྒྱུ	daily activities	nyin re bzhin gyi bya rgyu
ཉིན་རེའི་གྲོས་རིམ	daily agenda	nyin re'i gros rim
ཉིན་རེའི་དགོས་སྤྱད	requirements of every day, daily necessities	nyin re'i dgos spyad
ཉིན་རེའི་ཉི་མ་ཆོད་དུས་མེད་པ	the days seem endless	nyin re'i nyi ma chod dus med pa
ཉིན་རེའི་ཐེ་དེབ	diary	nyin re'i the deb
ཉིན་རེའི་གནས་ལ་བསྡད་པ	continual/ daily flux/ change nyin re'i gnas la bsdad pa'i gnas tshul situation in continual/ daily flux/ change	nyin re'i gnas la bsdad pa
ཉིན་རེའི་ཚགས་པར	daily newspaper	nyin re'i tshags par
ཉིན་རེའི་ལས་རེས	assignement for the day	nyin re'i las res
ཉིན་རེའི་གསར་འགྱུར	daily news[paper]	nyin re'i gsar 'gyur
ཉིན་རེར་ལེ་དབར་སྟོང་ཕྲག	1,000 li a day, tremndous pace	nyin rer le dbar stong phrag
ཉིན་ལག	1) minor/ secondary limbs/ members/ divisions [of the body] [forehead, nose, chin ear, eye etc.]	nyin lag
ཉིན་ལམ	distance 1 has gone/ can go in a day, a day's journey	nyin lam
ཉིན་ལས	1) a day's work; 2) day shift	nyin las
ཉིན་ལུང	nyin phyogs kyi lung pa	nyin lung
ཉིན་ལོ	year [of days] [rang gi rtsis gzhi'i nyin zhag sum cu la nyin zla, de bcu gnyis la lor byas pa'i nyin lo]	nyin lo
ཉིན་ལོང་གཙང་པོ	Nile River	nyin long gtsang po
ཉིན་ཤ	flesh of an animal killed that day	nyin sha
ཉིན་ཤད་མཚན་ཤད	without interruption, day and night	nyin shad mtshan shad
མགྱོགས་པོ་སླེབ	going day and night 1 will arrive quickly	mgyogs po sleb
ཉིན་ཤས	some days, several days	nyin shas
ཉིན་སོ་བ	1) daytime watchman; 2) chameleon	nyin so ba
ཉིན་སྲིབ	gdags srib, nyin ri and grib ri	nyin srib
ཉིན་སྲིབ་ཅན	sporadic, occasional	nyin srib can
ཉིན་སྲིབས	nyin srib	nyin sribs
ཉིན་སློབ	day school	nyin slob
ཉིན་གསར་ཟླ་འགྱུར	nyin re zla rer gnas tshul gsar du 'gyur ba	nyin gsar zla 'gyur
ཉིན་གསུམ་པའི་རིམས	rims tshad tshil la babs pa ste, nad rtags su gnyid che la lus po lci ba dang, mgo, phrag pa, rked pa sogs mi bde ba, nyin re cung bde la nyin gnyis bstud nas na ba zhig	nyin gsum pa'i rims
ཉིན་གསོག་ཟླ་འཇོག	accumulate gradually [by days and months]	nyin gsog zla 'jog
ཉིའུ་ཨུའི	New York	nyi'u u'i
ཉིལ	erode, run down	nyil
ཉིལ་གྱིས་འཕྱང་བ	fell down, hanging down	nyil gyis 'phyang ba
ཉིལ་ཉིལ	ling ling, phrul phrul	nyil nyil
ཉིལ་ཉིལ་དུ་གཏོང་བའི་མིག་ཆུ	dripping tears	nyil nyil du gtong ba'i mig chu
ཉིལ་ཉིལ་བྱེད	trickle, drip, run down, erode	nyil nyil byed
ཉིལ་ཉིལ་བྱེད་པ	trickle, drip, run down, erode	nyil nyil byed pa
ཉིལ་བ	to decay; {nyil ba, nyil ba, nyil ba} intr. v	nyil ba
ཉིལ་བྱེད་པ	trickle down, fall in drops	nyil byed pa
ཉིལ་ལི་ལི	hang/ fall downward [many bits/ strings in a spiral/ twist, or jewelry w many bits and bangles hanging from it] nyil li lir btags pa'i rgyan cha mang po many hanging ornaments tied together, many b...	nyil li li
ཉིལ་ལེ་བ	individual bits falling/ hanging/ trickling, dripping down	nyil le ba
ཉིལ་ལེ་བར་ཞིག་པ་བྱེ་ཕུང	sand dune destroyed by erosion/ dribbling away	nyil le bar zhig pa bye phung
ཉིལ་ལེ་བྱེད་པ	trickle, drip	nyil le byed pa
ཉིས	2, inst. of nyi	nyis
ཉིས་སྐལ	skal ba nyis brtsegs	nyis skal
ཉིས་སྐུལ	khral gcig las rgyug mi dgos par thengs gnyis skul ba	nyis skul
ཉིས་སྐྲ	skra lcang lo nyis gshibs	nyis skra
ཉིས་ཁྲི	20,000	nyis khri
ཉིས་འགྱུར	multiplied by two	nyis 'gyur
ཉིས་རྒྱུ་ཆིག་པ	serge cloth in which 2 threads cross one of which is stretched lengthwise	nyis rgyu chig pa
ཉིས་རྒྱུ་ཆིག་སྤུན	rgyu la rkang gnyis dang spun la rkang gcig yod pa'i snam ras cloth	nyis rgyu chig spun
ཉིས་སྒྲིམ	rkang gnyis bsgrims pa'i skud pa	nyis sgrim
ཉིས་བརྒྱ	200, 200	nyis brgya
ཉིས་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུའི་གདུལ་ཁྲིམས	two hundred and fifty disciplines of the Vinaya	nyis brgya lnga bcu'i gdul khrims
ཉིས་བརྒྱ་དང་ལྔ་བཅུ་ང་དྲུག	256	nyis brgya dang lnga bcu nga drug
ཉིས་ཅ་ལ་གྲྭ	Nicaragua	nyis ca la grwa
ཉིས་སྟོང	2000, 2,000	nyis stong
ཉིས་བལྟའི་མི	person who looks out for the interests of both church and state/ serves two masters	nyis blta'i mi
ཉིས་ཐོག	two story house	nyis thog
ཉིས་ལྡན	dvaparayuga	nyis ldan
ཉིས་ལྡབ	double, duplicate	nyis ldab
ཉིས་ལྡབ་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཆེ་བ	twice as tall 975	nyis ldab tsam gyis che ba
ཉིས་ན	[arch] rnam pa gnyis su na	nyis na
ཉིས་སྣའི་འདོན	sngar bod kyi khral rkang gnyis la 'don gcig re brtsis pa'i 'don	nyis sna'i 'don
ཉིས་པ	second point	nyis pa
ཉིས་འབུམ	2 hundred thousand	nyis 'bum
ཉིས་འབུམ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང	208 thousand	nyis 'bum brgyad stong
ཉིས་འབྲེལ་ཤོག་ལྷེ	lheb gnyis gcig tu 'brel ba'i tho shog	nyis 'brel shog lhe
ཉིས་སྦྲགས	gnyis mnyam du gshibs pa'am bsdebs pa	nyis sbrags
ཉིས་སྦྲེལ	gnyis gcig tu bsdebs pa dang, mnyam du sbrel ba	nyis sbrel
ཉིས་དམིགས་ཆེ་བའི་ཁྱིམ་པའི་འཚོ	great inherent imperfections of the householder's life	nyis dmigs che ba'i khyim pa'i 'tsho
ཉིས་རྨོས	tandem plowing	nyis rmos
ཉིས་རྩེགས	one on top of the other	nyis rtsegs
ཉིས་བརྩིགས	double	nyis brtsigs
ཉིས་བརྩེགས	1 piled on another, 2-story/ layer	nyis brtsegs
ཉིས་ཞོན	riding double on a horse	nyis zhon
ཉིས་ཟློས	twice repeated	nyis zlos
ཉིས་བཟོ	ambivalent	nyis bzo
ཉིས་རི	[arch] ldab gcig	nyis ri
ཉིས་རིམ	having two stages	nyis rim
ཉིས་ལས	1) las ka byed thengs gcig gis 'grig par byed thengs gnyis byas pa; 2) Las ka byed thengs dang pos ma 'grig par bskyar du byed dgos byung ba	nyis las
ཉིས་ལུང	nylon	nyis lung
ཉིས་ཤད	tshigs bcad kyi rkang mtshams dang, tshig lhug gi sde tshan rdzogs mtshams sam, slar	nyis shad
ཉིས་གཤིབ	dual, double	nyis gshib
ཉིས་གཤིབ་པའི་ལྕགས་ལམ	dual/ double railway tracks	nyis gshib pa'i lcags lam
ཉིས་གཤིབ་ལམ་ལུགས	dual/ double track railway system	nyis gshib lam lugs
ཉུ	68	nyu
ཉུ་གུ་སྤང་ལེབ	{nyu gu spang leb} worm	nyu gu spang leb
ཉུ་ཏི	pear	nyu ti
ཉུག	besmear, rub gently, stroke, caress, stretch out, extend [chu nas mgo nyug	nyug
ཡས	stretching 1's head out of the water]	yas
ཉུག་ཉུག	myug myug	nyug nyug
ཉུག་ཉུག་པ	stand out, project	nyug nyug pa
ཉུག་པ	place in tsang, besmear, rub gently, stroke, caress, touch, feel for, protrude, stretch out	nyug pa
ཉུག་བྱེད	bird	nyug byed
ཉུག་རྩ་མེ་ཏོག	Cathusian pink	nyug rtsa me tog
ཉུག་རུམ	a eunuch	nyug rum
ཉུག་རུམ་པ	eunuch [syn: khyim khol dang, 'khrig mi nus, bud med dga' bral, dbang po nyams, 'bras bu dbyung, 'og med, ral gu can, srung ma]	nyug rum pa
ཉུག་རུམ་བཟོ	castrate	nyug rum bzo
ཉུག་རུམ་བཟོ་བ	eunuch of emperors queen's retinue, castrate	nyug rum bzo ba
ཉུགས	nyug pa!	nyugs
ཉུགས་པ	pf. of {nyug pa}	nyugs pa
ཉུང	small, few, lack, to be short of; few/ rarely, seldom	nyung
ཉུང་དཀར	yungs dkar - Mustard seeds	nyung dkar
ཉུང་སྐྱོན	slight defect	nyung skyon
ཉུང་ངུ	few, less, little, small	nyung ngu
ཉུང་ངུ་སྨྲ་བ	person who speaks little	nyung ngu smra ba
ཉུང་ངུར	into few	nyung ngur
ཉུང་ངུར་བསྡུས་པ	condensed, abridged, abbreviated	nyung ngur bsdus pa
ཉུང་ངུར་བྱས་པ	made less, belittled	nyung ngur byas pa
ཉུང་ངེ	less, little, small	nyung nge
ཉུང་ངེ་སྨྲ་བ	speak little	nyung nge smra ba
ཉུང་ཆད	shortage	nyung chad
ཉུང་ཉུང	a few, little, meager, paltry, paucity, scant, small, trifling, few, small amount	nyung nyung
ཉུང་ཉུང་གཏོང	diminish, make smaller	nyung nyung gtong
ཉུང་ཉུང་བཟོ་བ	curtail	nyung nyung bzo ba
ཉུང་མཐའ	a little, few, minimum [price, qulification etc]	nyung mtha'
ཉུང་མཐའ་ལའང	at least	nyung mtha' la'ang
ཉུང་མཐར	at least	nyung mthar
ཉུང་མཐར་མི་སྟོང	at least 1,000 people	nyung mthar mi stong
ཉུང་མཐར་ཡང	at least	nyung mthar yang
ཉུང་དུ	few, less, little, small	nyung du
ཉུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	reduce, decrease	nyung du 'gro ba
ཉུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་མར་ཆག་པ	diminish	nyung du 'gro ba mar chag pa
ཉུང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	reduce, decrease	nyung du gtong ba
ཉུང་དུ་བཏང་བ	detract	nyung du btang ba
ཉུང་དུ་ལྟ་བུའི་རིང་བསྲེལ	miniature relics GD	nyung du lta bu'i ring bsrel
ཉུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	abate, decrease	nyung du phyin pa
ཉུང་དུའམ་ཆུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	dwindle	nyung du'am chung du 'gro ba
ཉུང་དུའམ་ཆུང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	reduce	nyung du'am chung du gtong ba
ཉུང་དུའམ་ཆུང་དུ་བཟོ་བ	diminish	nyung du'am chung du bzo ba
ཉུང་དྲག་པ	short	nyung drag pa
ཉུང་དྲགས་པའི་སྐྱོན	slight fault/ defect	nyung drags pa'i skyon
ཉུང་ལྡན	possessing few	nyung ldan
ཉུང་ཕྱོགས	minority	nyung phyogs
ཉུང་འཕྲི	reduction, diminishing	nyung 'phri
ཉུང་འཕྲི་བྱེད	reduce, diminish, cut down	nyung 'phri byed
ཉུང་བ	little, lack, be short of, rare, few, deficit, fewer, less, not many, minor, grown less, reduced	nyung ba
ཉུང་བ་དང་ཆེས་ཉུང་བ	few and very few	nyung ba dang ches nyung ba
ཉུང་བུ	awl	nyung bu
ཉུང་མ	turnip	nyung ma
ཉུང་མའི་ལོ་མ	turnip leaf, fragrant gum resin	nyung ma'i lo ma
ཉུང་མེད་པ	not less than	nyung med pa
ཉུང་ཙམ	in a small quantity, a little	nyung tsam
ཉུང་ཙམ་ལས་མི་ལེན	take only a little	nyung tsam las mi len
ཉུང་གཞི	turnip root or seeds	nyung gzhi
ཉུང་ཟད	very little	nyung zad
ཉུང་རུ	few, less, little, small	nyung ru
ཉུང་རུམ	nyug rum, darkness	nyung rum
ཉུང་རེ	a little at a time	nyung re
ཉུང་རློན	fresh turnip	nyung rlon
ཉུང་ཤས	a little [bit], few	nyung shas
ཉུང་ཤས་ཙམ	just a little/ few	nyung shas tsam
ཉུང་ཤས་ལས	fewer	nyung shas las
ཉུང་ཤོས	least, minimum, least	nyung shos
ཉུང་ཤོས་བཟོ་བ	minimize	nyung shos bzo ba
ཉུང་གསལ	brief and clear	nyung gsal
ཉུངས་ཀར	oil grain 976	nyungs kar
ཉུངས་པ	nyung drags pa,...Lo thog thar thor las ma skyes pa de sa bon nyungs pa red	nyungs pa
ཉུངས་མ	turnip	nyungs ma
ཉུངས་མ་ཕོ་ཤ	a little cooked/ boiled	nyungs ma pho sha
ཉུངས་མར	white mustard btsir ba'i snum mar	nyungs mar
ཉུངས་གཤེར	a little moist	nyungs gsher
ཉུལ	to roam around, travel about; 1) roaming through, to frolic, to wander. 2) spy, watchman	nyul
ཉུལ་ཉུལ	1) wander; 2) w the hand again and again grope about	nyul nyul
ཉུལ་པ	wanderer, vagabond	nyul pa
ཉུལ་པོ	1) wanderer; 2) searcher, watchman	nyul po
ཉུལ་བ	to roam	nyul ba
ཉུལ་བ་འདོད	wanderer, rover, explorer	nyul ba 'dod
ཉུལ་བྱེད	bird	nyul byed
ཉུལ་མ	a scout/ detective	nyul ma
ཉུལ་མི	1) wanderer; 2) searcher, watchman, spy, detective	nyul mi
ཉུལ་ཞིབ	reconnaissance, espionage	nyul zhib
ཉུལ་ཞིབ་བྱེད	reconnoiter, spy	nyul zhib byed
ཉུལ་ལ་ད་རེས་མེལ་ཙེ་མཛོད	from today onwards act as watchman and spy notes [request to the fringe dakinis	nyul la da res mel tse mdzod
ཉུལ་ལ་ད་རེས་མེལ་ཚེ་མཛོད	from today onwards act as watchman and spy notes	nyul la da res mel tshe mdzod
ཉུལ་ལེ	random negative forces; type of spirit	nyul le
ཉེ	near, figure 98, SA nye ba, "about to/close to" clause connective	nye
ཉེ་སྐོར	nearby, neighborhood, vicinity, those about [us], retinue	nye skor
ཉེ་སྐོར་དུ	around	nye skor du
ཉེ་སྐྱོན	fault of partiality	nye skyon
ཉེ་སྐྱོན་ཕྱོགས་ལྟུང	inclining to one side	nye skyon phyogs ltung
ཉེ་སྐྱོན་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང	fault of partiality	nye skyon phyogs lhung
ཉེ་སྐྱོར	supporting those who are close/ friends and relatives	nye skyor
ཉེ་སྐྱོར་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང	partiality toward those who are close to 1	nye skyor phyogs lhung
ཉེ་སྐྱོར་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་གི་སྐྱོན་ཆ	the fault of partiality toward those who are close to 1	nye skyor phyogs lhung gi skyon cha
ཉེ་ཁལ	neighboring area	nye khal
ཉེ་ཁོར	courtyard of a temple or tomb	nye khor
ཉེ་མཁོ	immediate needs/ necessities	nye mkho
ཉེ་མཁོ་དངོས་རིགས	immediate needs/ necessities	nye mkho dngos rigs
ཉེ་མཁོན	SA nye ring	nye mkhon
ཉེ་མཁོའི་དངོས་རིགས	immediate needs/ necessities	nye mkho'i dngos rigs
ཉེ་མཁོའི་རིགས	immediate needs/ necessities	nye mkho'i rigs
ཉེ་འཁོན	nye ring ste, 'ga' zhig la dgra gshed 'khon 'dzin byed pa'i chags sdang	nye 'khon
ཉེ་འཁོར	attendant, one in waiting, relations, kindred, neighbor, a hell, neighborhood, a disciple of buddha, imminent, retinue, attendants, waiters, special realms of rebirth, surrounding, all around, surr...	nye 'khor
ཉེ་འཁོར་ཀུན་ཏུ	all around, surroundings	nye 'khor kun tu
ཉེ་འཁོར་གི་མིག	ocean between God niya and Uttarakuru	nye 'khor gi mig
ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི	of the surroundings	nye 'khor gyi
ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཁང་པ	a house in the neighborhood	nye 'khor gyi khang pa
ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི་མིག	a great ocean lying between the continents of godaniya and uttara kuru	nye 'khor gyi mig
ཉེ་འཁོར་དུ	around, all around	nye 'khor du
ཉེ་འཁོར་དུ་བལྟས	to look all around	nye 'khor du bltas
ཉེ་འཁོར་ན	near	nye 'khor na
ཉེ་འཁོར་རྣམས	surroundings	nye 'khor rnams
ཉེ་འཁོར་རྣམས་སུ	all around	nye 'khor rnams su
ཉེ་འཁོར་བ	neighboring, supplementary	nye 'khor ba
ཉེ་འཁོར་བ་ཕལ་ཆེར	almost everyone nearby	nye 'khor ba phal cher
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ	supplementary/ neighboring hells	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ་གནས	the neighboring hell regions	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal gnas
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	neighboring hells (me ma mur	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ་བ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 supplementary/ neighboring hells'	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba bcu drug
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ་བ་དྲུག	chn	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba drug
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་དམྱལ་བ་བཞི	the four circles of auxiliary hells, the four surrounding neighboring hells	nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba bzhi
ཉེ་འཁོར་བའི་འམྱལ་བ	supplementary/ neighboring hells	nye 'khor ba'i 'myal ba
ཉེ་འཁོར་ཡུལ་ཁམས	surrounding country	nye 'khor yul khams
ཉེ་འཁོར་ལ	around, in the environs of	nye 'khor la
ཉེ་འཁོར་ལྷག་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the additional 16 neighboring hells	nye 'khor lhag pa bcu drug
ཉེ་གྱོག་འཁྲིས་སྡོད་གྱོག་པོ	...Nye gyog byed pa	nye gyog 'khris sdod gyog po
ཉེ་གྲོགས	close friend, neighbor, fellow creature D	nye grogs
ཉེ་དགའ	1) friend; 2) nye dga' [a king of the nagas] 977	nye dga'
ཉེ་དགའ་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང	liking/ favoritism to friends/ those on 1's own side dga' &, dislike/ prejudice against others	nye dga' phyogs lhung
ཉེ་དགའ་བོ	upanda:a	nye dga' bo
ཉེ་མགོན	help out of kindness	nye mgon
ཉེ་འགྱངས	distance	nye 'gyangs
ཉེ་འགྲམ	close to, near[by], nearly, neighborhood, vicinity	nye 'gram
ཉེ་འགྲམ་གྱི	adjacent	nye 'gram gyi
ཉེ་རྒྱལ	Upatisya	nye rgyal
ཉེ་རྒྱུ	{nye ba'i rgyu} (more) immediat/ intimate/ proximate/ secondary cause	nye rgyu
ཉེ་རྒྱུད	1) close family; 2) nearby places, neighborhood, vicinity	nye rgyud
ཉེ་རྒྱུའི་ལམ	swift path	nye rgyu'i lam
ཉེ་སྒྲིབ	far-sighted	nye sgrib
ཉེ་བརྒྱུད	direct / short lineage; short lineage / transmission; close lineage, short / direct transmission / lineage	nye brgyud
མཚོ	a detailed introduction to the practice of the gcod teachings according to the revelations of bdud 'joms gling pa focusing upon {ma gcig khros ma nag mo}; by {sprul sku padma lung rtogs rgya mtsho}	mtsho
ཉེ་བརྒྱུད་གཏེར་མ	Terma, short lineage of spiritual treasures	nye brgyud gter ma
དཔལ་གཏེར	Amitayus and Hayagriva Combined, sadhana of, by Tangtong Gyalpo	dpal gter
ཉེ་བརྒྱུད་རིང་བརྒྱུད	1) 'brel thag nye ring gang rung brgyud pa; 2) Pha rgyud ma rgyud kyi brgyud pa ring thung; 3) Chos kyi dbang lung man ngag gi brgyud pa ring thung	nye brgyud ring brgyud
ཉེ་བསྒྱུར	trouble, misfortune	nye bsgyur
ཉེ་སྔོན	in the near past, recently, lately	nye sngon
ཉེ་བཅར	ner, close, neighborhood, vicinity	nye bcar
ཉེ་ཆར	recently, lately, at present, very shortly, at the close of, recent	nye char
ཉེ་ཆར་དུ	lately	nye char du
ཉེ་ཆོས	time, usage, neighbor, near	nye chos
ཉེ་ཉོན	Def {thams cad kyang rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa dang nye bas sam / nyon mongs pa chung ba yin pas der bzhag pa'o} associated defilements, secondary afflictions, subsidiary defilements, sub-disturbances	nye nyon
ཉེ་ཉོན་བཅུ	10 subsidiary defilements (khro ba, 'chab pa, ser sna, phrag dog, 'tshig pa, rnam par 'tshe ba, 'khon tu 'dzin pa, sgyu, g.yo, rgyas pa)	nye nyon bcu
ཉེ་ཉོན་ཉི་ཤུ	{nye ba'i nyon mongs pa nyi shu} twenty secondary afflictive emotions	nye nyon nyi shu
ཏྭེནཏཡ་སུབ	disturbances. The 20 klesha associated defilements. 1) {khro ba} anger. 2) {khon du 'dzin pa} enmity, 3) {'tshig pa} gloom. 4) {rnam par 'tshe ba} harming, 5) {phrag dog} envy, 6) {g.yo} dishonesty...	twenty sub
ཉེ་ཉོན་སོགས་ཀྱི་སེམས་བྱུང	mental contents of the upakleshas and so on	nye nyon sogs kyi sems byung
ཉེ་གཉེན	gnyen tshan, gnyen bshes	nye gnyen
ཉེ་གཉེན་དུ	relative, kinsman	nye gnyen du
ཉེ་སྙིང	quintessence	nye snying
ཉེ་བསྙེན	close approach	nye bsnyen
ཉེ་ཏི	pear, SA nyu ti	nye ti
ཉེ་གཏམ་པ	[arch] bza' tshang sgrig pa po	nye gtam pa
ཉེ་ལྟོས	relatives and friends	nye ltos
ཉེ་མཐོང	near-sighted	nye mthong
ཉེ་དག	relations	nye dag
ཉེ་དུ	relatives	nye du
ཉེ་དུ་འབྲེལ་བ	relatives	nye du 'brel ba
ཉེ་དུའི་ཚོགས	your host of kin	nye du'i tshogs
ཉེ་དུས	now-a-days	nye dus
ཉེ་དྲུང	near, in front of	nye drung
ཉེ་དྲུང་དུ་བཅར	went in front of	nye drung du bcar
ཉེ་དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན	coming near	nye drung du phyin
ཉེ་དྲུང་དུ་བསླེབས	to arrive near, to arrive in front of	nye drung du bslebs
ཉེ་གདུང་གཏོང་བ	maul	nye gdung gtong ba
ཉེ་འདབ	1's own people, friends, admirers	nye 'dab
ཉེ་འདབས	nearby, neighborhood, vicinity	nye 'dabs
ཉེ་འདེབས	neighborhood, vicinity, close to	nye 'debs
ཉེ་རྡུང་གཏོང་བ	flog, thrash	nye rdung gtong ba
ཉེ་སྡེ	nye ba'i drug sde ste, like Buddha's 'khor drug sde dang 'dra ba'i nyan thos kyi sde	nye sde
ཉེ་གནས	{bcom ldan 'das kyi nye gnas su gyur to} became the Buddha's disciples	nye gnas
ཉེ་གནས་བགྱིད་པ	to be a disciple	nye gnas bgyid pa
ཉེ་གནས་རྣམས	the circle of disciples	nye gnas rnams
ཉེ་གནས་བྱེད་པ	{rang sangs rgyas zhig gi nye gnas byas} became the disciple of a pratyekabuddha	nye gnas byed pa
ཉེ་གནས་སྨན་པ	a local doctor	nye gnas sman pa
ཉེ་གནས་སུ་བགྱི	become a follower D	nye gnas su bgyi
ཉེ་གནས་སུ་མཆི	become a follower D	nye gnas su mchi
ཉེ་པར་བསྙེན་པ	entails the recitation of mantra and 1-pointed prayerful devotion to a deity that is visualized, further ritual service GD	nye par bsnyen pa
ཉེ་པར་འཕར་འགྲོ	planet, SA sgra gcan	nye par 'phar 'gro
ཉེ་པོ	intimate, close, near	nye po
ཉེ་པོ་བྱེད	approach, come close, have a close relationship	nye po byed
ཉེ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	approach, come close, have a close relationship	nye po byed pa
ཉེ་སྤུན	spun zla nye rigs	nye spun
ཉེ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཕྱིན	to come close to	nye phyogs su phyin
ཉེ་བ	1) yet. 2a) close, near, intimate, close friend. 2b) to be near, to be close, near to each other; to approach. 3) relatives, a relative of [so-and-so].	nye ba
ཉེ་བ་འཁོར	Upali nyan thos nye 'khor bcu'i nang gses, 'dul ba 'dzin pa'i mchog tu gyur pa'o	nye ba 'khor
ཉེ་བ་ཉིད	nearness	nye ba nyid
ཉེ་བ་ཉིད་དུ	nearness	nye ba nyid du
ཉེ་བ་ཉེ་རིང	near and distant relations	nye ba nye ring
ཉེ་བ་གཉེན་ཚན	close relatives and friends	nye ba gnyen tshan
ཉེ་བ་ན	almost, near, nearly	nye ba na
ཉེ་བ་རྣམས	those who are near, near relations	nye ba rnams
ཉེ་བ་རྩ་ལག	relatives	nye ba rtsa lag
ཉེ་བའི	subsidiary	nye ba'i
ཉེ་བའི་ཀ་བའི་གྲོང	1 of India's gnas sum cu rtsa gnyis	nye ba'i ka ba'i grong
ཉེ་བའི་རྐྱེན	mgyogs pa'i mthun grogs	nye ba'i rkyen
ཉེ་བའི་སྐབས	near/ just before --	nye ba'i skabs
ཉེ་བའི་སྐབས་སུ	close to the time of	nye ba'i skabs su
ཉེ་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	close friend	nye ba'i grogs po
ཉེ་བའི་དགའ་བྱེད	{nye ba'i dga' byed	nye ba'i dga' byed
ཉེ་བའི་དགའ་བྱེད་མ	queen of the noijin or yaksha demigods	nye ba'i dga' byed ma
ཉེ་བའི་རྒྱན	subsidiary/ incidental ornaments	nye ba'i rgyan
ཉེ་བའི་རྒྱུ	quickly yong ba'i [growing?] seed/ root, immediate cause	nye ba'i rgyu
ཉེ་བའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	immediate cause	nye ba'i rgyu rkyen
ཉེ་བའི་ལྔ་སྡེ	The Buddha's five shravakas	nye ba'i lnga sde
ཉེ་བའི་ཆར	recently, lately	nye ba'i char
ཉེ་བའི་འཆི་ལྟས	sign of approaching death	nye ba'i 'chi ltas
ཉེ་བའི་འཇིག་ལྟས	sign of approaching death	nye ba'i 'jig ltas
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོང་མོངས་པའི་གློ་བུར་བ	the sudden/ incidental upakleshas	nye ba'i nyong mongs pa'i glo bur ba
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས	upakleshas	nye ba'i nyon mongs
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	subdisturbances, subsidiary defilements, cognate passion	nye ba'i nyon mongs pa
མོངས་པ	ser sna la sogs pa sems kun nas nyon mongs par byed pa rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa dang nye ba'i nyon mongs can gyi sems byung	mongs pa
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཉི་ཤུ	twenty secondary afflictive emotions	nye ba'i nyon mongs pa nyi shu
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དང་བཅས	w the upakleshas	nye ba'i nyon mongs pa dang bcas
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་མེད་པ	w/o the upakleshas	nye ba'i nyon mongs pa med pa
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་ས་མང	base of	nye ba'i nyon mongs sa mang
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་རྨོངས	secondary emotions	nye ba'i nyon rmongs
ཉེ་བའི་བསྙེན་པ	close approach, complete approach, close familiarization	nye ba'i bsnyen pa
ཉེ་བའི་དུས་རབས	modern times/ era	nye ba'i dus rabs
ཉེ་བའི་ལྡེ་མིག	herb sug smel	nye ba'i lde mig
ཉེ་བའི་གནས	neighboring regions	nye ba'i gnas
ཉེ་བའི་གནས་བཞི	chn	nye ba'i gnas bzhi
ཉེ་བའི་གནས་སུ	at a place nearby	nye ba'i gnas su
ཉེ་བའི་རྣ་རྒྱན	ear ornaments beside the earring	nye ba'i rna rgyan
ཉེ་བའི་པི་ལུ	kind of flesh-eating demon	nye ba'i pi lu
ཉེ་བའི་དཔུང་པ	cubit	nye ba'i dpung pa
ཉེ་བའི་བུམ་པ	(1 of 24 minor zodiac signs)	nye ba'i bum pa
ཉེ་བའི་དབྱངས	musical airs/ notes [for help in singing]	nye ba'i dbyangs
ཉེ་བའི་མ་མ	foster mother, wet nurse, stepmother	nye ba'i ma ma
ཉེ་བའི་ཚལ	[nye 'gram gyi] pleasure grove	nye ba'i tshal
ཉེ་བའི་མཚམས་མེད་ལྔ	the five subimmediates	nye ba'i mtshams med lnga
ཉེ་བའི་མཚམས་མེད་པ་ལྔའི་ལས	the	nye ba'i mtshams med pa lnga'i las
ཨཅཏིཨོནས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་སུབ	immediates/ inexpiables	actions of the five sub
ཉེ་བའི་གཞི་ཤེས	the near foundtional knowledge [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, gzhi shes = the great compassion &, prajna which peceives emptiness gang rung gis zin pa'i mkhyen pa 'bras bu'i sher phyin bskyed...	nye ba'i gzhi shes
ཉེ་བའི་རི་མོ	salvinia cuculluta, croton polyandra	nye ba'i ri mo
ཉེ་བའི་རི་མོ་ཅན	med herbs {nye ba'i ri mo can} [Salvinia Cuculluta, Croton polyandra D	nye ba'i ri mo can
ཉེ་བའི་རིན་ཆེན	cushion, carriage, bedding, throne, sword, lamb-skin	nye ba'i rin chen
ཉེ་བའི་རིན་ཆེན་བདུན	the 7 subsidiary precious things/ adjuncts of royalty	nye ba'i rin chen bdun
ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་བདུན	the 7 subsidiary precious things/ adjuncts of royalty	nye ba'i rin po che bdun
ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་བདུན	the seven subsidiary precious things, the seven adjuncts of royalty, 1) {lhvam dar} silk boots. 2) {stan} cushion. 3) {bzhon pa} carriage. 3) {mal cha} bedding. 4) {khri} throne. 5) {ral gri} sword...	nye ba'i rin po che sna bdun
ལམབ	skin; [TRS 74-3]	lamb
ཉེ་བའི་ས	table land, plateau, plains on or by the side of a hill	nye ba'i sa
ཉེ་བའི་སར་གྱུ	become intimate, near	nye ba'i sar gyu
ཉེ་བའི་སྲས	disciple	nye ba'i sras
ཉེ་བའི་སྲས་བརྒྱད	Eight Close Sons: Eight main bodhisattvas. Kshitigarbha, Akashagarbha, Avalokiteshvara, Vajrapani, Maitreya, Sarvanirvarana Viskambin, Samantabhadra and Manjushri	nye ba'i sras brgyad
ཉེ་བའི་སྲས་ཆེན	Buddha's heart sons, the 8 chief bodhisattvas	nye ba'i sras chen
ཉེ་བའི་སྲས་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	8 main bodhisattvas ['jam dbyangs dang, phyag na rdo rje, spyan ras gzigs, sa yi snying po, sgrib pa rnam sel, nam mkha'i snying po, byams pa, kun tu bzang po ste brgyad	nye ba'i sras chen brgyad
ཉེ་བར	1) * absolutely, fully, thoroughly, completely; 2) near, almost, close	nye bar
ཉེ་བར་བཀོད	appropriate arrangement, good design	nye bar bkod
ཉེ་བར་སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆི	I fully take refuge	nye bar skyabs su mchi
ཉེ་བར་བསྐྱོད་པ	blowing	nye bar bskyod pa
ཉེ་བར་བསྐྱོད་པའི་སྐྲ	hair blowing	nye bar bskyod pa'i skra
ཉེ་བར་མཁོ་བ	to require	nye bar mkho ba
ཉེ་བར་འཁྱུད	devotee	nye bar 'khyud
ཉེ་བར་གུས	humbly near, Upanishads	nye bar gus
ཉེ་བར་གོས་མེད	absolutely untainted / unpolluted	nye bar gos med
ཉེ་བར་དགོངས	tale, story, romance	nye bar dgongs
ཉེ་བར་དགོངས་པ	to consider	nye bar dgongs pa
མ་གཏོགས་མི་མཐོང་ལ	drag gza' gsum rang 'gros bul bas, nyi ma'i rgyab nas 'char te mdun du nub pas mtshan phyed la'ang mthong ngo	ma gtogs mi mthong la
ཉེ་བར་རྒྱུ་བ	roam carefree	nye bar rgyu ba
ཉེ་བར་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice	nye bar sgrub pa
ཉེ་བར་བརྒལ་བ	pass over	nye bar brgal ba
ཉེ་བར་བརྒྱུད	direct / short lineage; short lineage / transmission; close lineage. [mss]	nye bar brgyud
ཉེ་བར་ཆགས་པ	1) eclipse D; 2) quarrel D	nye bar chags pa
ཉེ་བར་མཆེད་པ	full increase	nye bar mched pa
ཉེ་བར་མཆོད་པ	honor, respect	nye bar mchod pa
ཉེ་བར་མཇལ	health, image, likeness	nye bar mjal
ཉེ་བར་འཇལ	1) health; 2) image, likeness	nye bar 'jal
ཉེ་བར་འཇལ་བ	sample, SA dpe	nye bar 'jal ba
ཉེ་བར་འཇོག་པ	1) bow w respect; 2) approach; 3) closely resting [4th of the sems gnas dgu, sems rang bzhin gyis rgya che ba las yang yang bsdus te phra bar byas nas 'jog pa close settling, thoroughly resting, cl...	nye bar 'jog pa
ཉེ་བར་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད	1) bow w respect; 2) approach; 3) closely resting	nye bar 'jog par byed
ཉེ་བར་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	1) bow w respect; 2) approach; 3) closely resting	nye bar 'jog par byed pa
ཉེ་བར་ཉོན་མོངས	the subsidiary conflicting emotions GD	nye bar nyon mongs
ཉེ་བར་བསྙེན་པ	full/ close approach, further ritual service [one of *{bsnyen	nye bar bsnyen pa
སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	[Gdmk]	sgrub kyi yan lag bzhi
ཨོཕ༹་མནཏྲ་ཨནད་ཨོནེ	pointed prayerful devotion to a deity that is visualized, further ritual service	of mantra and one
ཉེ་བར་བསྙེན་པའི་དགོངས་པ	the intent of the full approach	nye bar bsnyen pa'i dgongs pa
ཉེ་བར་གཏོད་པ	entrustment	nye bar gtod pa
ཉེ་བར་གཏོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to entrust	nye bar gtod par byed pa
ཉེ་བར་བཏབ་པ	{'chi bdag nad kyis nye bar btab pa'i tshe} when the Lord of Death strikes one down in agony	nye bar btab pa
ཉེ་བར་རྟོགས་པ	inquire into, investigation	nye bar rtogs pa
ཉེ་བར་སྟོན	recommends	nye bar ston
ཉེ་བར་སྟོན་པ	to teach, expound, propagate, to reveal in detail	nye bar ston pa
ཉེ་བར་བརྟེན་པ	enjoying, serving, honoring D	nye bar brten pa
ཉེ་བར་བསྟན	advice, counsel D	nye bar bstan
ཉེ་བར་བསྟན་པ	command, instruct	nye bar bstan pa
ཉེ་བར་བསྟེན་པ	service, attend or take care of, attending to, wait upon, serve	nye bar bsten pa
ཉེ་བར་ཐོབ་པ	full attainment	nye bar thob pa
ཉེ་བར་ཐོབ་པའི	thoroughly realized primordial wisdom	nye bar thob pa'i
ཉེ་བར་ཐོབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	fully realized primordial wisdom	nye bar thob pa'i ye shes
ཉེ་བར་གདུང	afflicted w disease	nye bar gdung
ཉེ་བར་འདུག་པ	fast on prescribed days D	nye bar 'dug pa
ཉེ་བར་འདུས་པ	a comprehensive collection	nye bar 'dus pa
ཉེ་བར་སྡུད་པ	to reinforce	nye bar sdud pa
ཉེ་བར་སྡུས་པ	{nye bar sdu ba} to be reinforced	nye bar sdus pa
ཉེ་བར་བསྡུད་པ	to reinforce	nye bar bsdud pa
ཉེ་བར་བསྡུས་པ	{nye bar sdu ba} to be reinforced	nye bar bsdus pa
ཉེ་བར་གནང་བ	SA bka' lung	nye bar gnang ba
ཉེ་བར་གནས	adulation, flattery D	nye bar gnas
ཉེ་བར་གནས་པ	be close to, be near, in attendance	nye bar gnas pa
ཉེ་བར་སྣང་བ	apparent	nye bar snang ba
ཉེ་བར་སྤྱད་པ	to enjoy, use, utilize, experience, etc, [comp. with {spyad pa}	nye bar spyad pa
ཉེ་བར་སྤྱད་པས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{so sor brtag pa dang nyon mongs can gang yang min pa'i sems kyis longs spyod rnams spyad pa'o} 'Enjoyed indeterminates' are the experience of enjoyments by a frame of mind which is neither analyti...	nye bar spyad pas lung ma bstan
ཉེ་བར་སྤྱོད	supplication	nye bar spyod
ཉེ་བར་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoy	nye bar spyod pa
ཉེ་བར་ཕན	put together D, constructed D, produced D	nye bar phan
ཉེ་བར་ཕན་འདོགས	suits, is fit for	nye bar phan 'dogs
ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ནས	when [they] had arrived/ come near	nye bar phyin nas
ཉེ་བར་འཕར་འགྲོ	(met) Rahu [sgra gcan	nye bar 'phar 'gro
ཉེ་བར་བྱེད	service, veneration D	nye bar byed
ཉེ་བར་བྱེད་པ	enjoy, rejoice	nye bar byed pa
ཉེ་བར་སྦྱོར	friendship, harmony D	nye bar sbyor
ཉེ་བར་སྦྱོར་བ	conquer, deportment	nye bar sbyor ba
ཉེ་བར་སྦྱོར་མ	fulfillment, completion, conclusion	nye bar sbyor ma
ཉེ་བར་མི་རིག	nye bar mi 'gro, khas mi len	nye bar mi rig
ཉེ་བར་མྱུར་བ	very quick	nye bar myur ba
ཉེ་བར་དམིགས	support D	nye bar dmigs
ཉེ་བར་སྨོས	desire to be close	nye bar smos
ཉེ་བར་ཚིམ་ཚོགས	contentment	nye bar tshim tshogs
ཉེ་བར་ཚིམ་ཚོངས	contentment	nye bar tshim tshongs
ཉེ་བར་མཚན་པ	well/highly-adorned	nye bar mtshan pa
ཉེ་བར་མཚོན	starting with	nye bar mtshon
ཉེ་བར་མཚོན་པ	to characterize/ illustrate/ identify precisely/ fully	nye bar mtshon pa
ཉེ་བར་འཚེ	injury	nye bar 'tshe
ཉེ་བར་འཚོ་བ	cure/ treat [a sickness]	nye bar 'tsho ba
ཉེ་བར་ཞི	putting out, forbearance	nye bar zhi
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་པའི་དགེ་བ	{nyon mongs pa spong ba dang, 'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug dang, lhag bcas lhag med kyi myang 'das dang mi gnas pa'i mya ngan las 'das pa rnams so} 'Thoroughly pacifying virtues' are those of abandoning t...	nye bar zhi pa'i dge ba
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བ	thorough subsidence; to thoroughly subside	nye bar zhi ba
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བ་ཐོབ	obtained great peace	nye bar zhi ba thob
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བའི་དགེ་བ	nyon mongs pa spong ba dang, 'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug dang, lhag bcas lhag med kyi myang 'das dang, mi gnas pa'i mya ngan las 'das pa rnams so	nye bar zhi ba'i dge ba
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	gzugs gzugs med la spyod pa'i nyon mongs pa rnams te zhi gnas dang ldan pa'i phyir 'bras bu mi 'byin p	nye bar zhi ba'i lung ma bstan
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ	through pacifying	nye bar zhi bar byed pa
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{gzugs gzugs med na spyod pa'i nyon mongs pa rnams te zhi gnas dang ldan pa'i phyir 'bras bu mi 'byin pa'o,} 'Fully pacified indeterminates' are all the disturbing emotions experienced in the form ...	nye bar zhi bas lung ma bstan
ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	make use of, employ D	nye bar bzhag pa
ཉེ་བར་བཟུང་དུ་གསོལ	please look after me	nye bar bzung du gsol
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པ	take up, conflicting emotions, having to put up with what you have, grasping, seize eagerly, strive for earnestly, aspire to, SA nyer len	nye bar len pa
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པ་བཞི	four graspings/ perpetuators	nye bar len pa bzhi
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི	SA nyer len phung po	nye bar len pa'i
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་རྒྱུ	perpetuating cause	nye bar len pa'i rgyu
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery of taking up the five aggregates	nye bar len pa'i sdug bsngal
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	x {dri za nye bar len pa'i rnam par shes pa bar do na 'khyams pa} a driza, a consciousness on the point of seizing another rebirth, wandering in the intermediate state	nye bar len pa'i rnam par shes pa
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	perpetuating consciousness	nye bar len pa'i rnam shes
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	perpetuating skandhas	nye bar len pa'i phung po
ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	five perpetuating aggregates/ skandhas	nye bar len pa'i phung po lnga
ཉེ་བར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	enjoy [the happiness]	nye bar longs spyod
ཉེ་བར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	Syn {nyams su myong ba} experience	nye bar longs spyod pa
ཉེ་བར་ཤི་བ	appeasing	nye bar shi ba
ཉེ་བར་སྲེག་པར	burn	nye bar sreg par
ཉེ་བར་སྲེག་པར་བྱེད་པ	set fire to, burn	nye bar sreg par byed pa
ཉེ་བྱས	related	nye byas
ཉེ་དབང	name of vishnu	nye dbang
ཉེ་དབང་སོ་གཉིས	devas in Indra's retinue	nye dbang so gnyis
ཉེ་དབང་སོ་གསུམ	chn	nye dbang so gsum
ཉེ་འབྱེད	produce contention/ disputes	nye 'byed
ཉེ་འབྲེལ	friends, connection, kindred, relations	nye 'brel
ཉེ་འབྲེལ་གྱི་བརྩི་མཐོང	near-sighted	nye 'brel gyi brtsi mthong
ཉེ་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རང་དབང	freedom of association	nye 'brel gyi rang dbang
ཉེ་འབྲེལ་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	neighboring country	nye 'brel rgyal khab
ཉེ་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	make close relations/ connection nye 'brel bral ba'i sdug bsngal bskal pa'i	nye 'brel byed
མེ་འོབས་འདྲ	separated from their loved ones, it is as if they were attached to a fire wheel of suffering	me 'obs 'dra
ཉེ་འབྲེལ་འབྲལ་འདུམ་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	zhal lce bcu drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, bza' tshang ya bral song rigs la 'bral rkyen gyi rtsa ba zhib tu bcad de 'gal ba sus byas la nyes chad 'gel lugs kyi khrims	nye 'brel 'bral 'dum gyi zhal lce
ཉེ་སྦས	nyer sbas	nye sbas
ཉེ་མིན་རྒྱང་མིན	neither close nor far	nye min rgyang min
ཉེ་མིན་རིང་མིན	neither close nor far	nye min ring min
ཉེ་མོ་ནས	from near	nye mo nas
ཉེ་མོ་བྱེད་པ	love, be attached to, make near	nye mo byed pa
ཉེ་མོར	near	nye mor
ཉེ་ཚད	nearness, distance	nye tshad
ཉེ་ཚན	relative, kinsman, kindred, relations	nye tshan
ཉེ་ཚལ	artificial grove, garden	nye tshal
ཉེ་ཚིག	secondary word which limits the idea contained in the principal word	nye tshig
ཉེ་ཚེ་བ	1) provincial D; 2) partial, ephemeral [= Nyi tshe	nye tshe ba
ཉེ་ཚེ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	ephemeral hells	nye tshe ba'i dmyal ba
ཉེ་ཚེ་བའི་སངས་རྒྱས	pratyekabuddha, partial buddha	nye tshe ba'i sangs rgyas
ཉེ་ཚེའི་སངས་རྒྱས	SA rang sangs rgyas, pratyeka buddha	nye tshe'i sangs rgyas
ཉེ་ཞོ	damage, mishap, bad fortune, accident, partiality, lack, shortage	nye zho
ཉེ་ཞོ་མེད་པ	without defect, without mishap, filled, complete, without damage	nye zho med pa
ཉེ་ཞོས་དབེན	without disease, healthy	nye zhos dben
ཉེ་ཟུངས	[arch] sex	nye zungs
ཉེ་བཟུང་མ	bride, mistress of the house nye g.yog bya bar - ma, mkhan po, slob dpon, nad pa) nye g.yog bya bar 'dod pa lnga - the five persons worthy of being served [pha, ma, mkhan po, slob dpon, nad pa] nye...	nye bzung ma
ཉེ་རབས	modern times, contemporary	nye rabs
ཉེ་རབས་ཅན	modern, contemporary	nye rabs can
ཉེ་རབས་ཅན་གྱི་གོ་མཚོན	modern weapons	nye rabs can gyi go mtshon
ཉེ་རིག་པ	1) copulation; 2) wash	nye rig pa
ཉེ་རིགས	near relation 982	nye rigs
ཉེ་རིང	prejudice, near and far, distance, partial, biased, close and distant	nye ring
ཉེ་རིང་ཅི་ཙམ་ཡོད	how far is it?	nye ring ci tsam yod
ཉེ་རིང་ཆགས་སྡང	with partiality and prejudice to those close and distant to 1	nye ring chags sdang
ཉེ་རིང་ཆགས་སྡང་བྱེད་པ	to harbor attachment toward some and hatred toward others	nye ring chags sdang byed pa
ཉེ་རིང་ཆེ་བ	to strongly discriminate between beings	nye ring che ba
ཉེ་རིང་ཆེས	very partial	nye ring ches
ཉེ་རིང་སྙོམས	without prejudice, impartial. (Lit. "equally near and far") [mss]	nye ring snyoms
ཉེ་རིང་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་མེད	impartial,	nye ring phyogs lhung med
ཉེ་རིང་བྱེད	act w prejudice/ partiality/ bias	nye ring byed
ཉེ་རིང་བྱེད་པ	to be intimate with some and distant with others	nye ring byed pa
ཉེ་རིང་མ་བྱེད	do not be biased	nye ring ma byed
ཉེ་རིང་མེད	impartial	nye ring med
ཉེ་རིང་མེད་པ	equally, without partiality	nye ring med pa
ཉེ་རིང་མེད་པར་ཀུན་སྐྱོང	impartially protecting/ taking care of all	nye ring med par kun skyong
ཉེ་རུ་གཙང་པོ	{nye ru gtsang po} river	nye ru gtsang po
ཉེ་རེ་རེ	1) experience from momnent to moment; 2) Bzod sran chung ba'am rang tshugs mi thub pa'i rnam pa,...Byis pa'i lus po nye re re,...Nad pa nyam thag nye re re	nye re re
ཉེ་རེག	(A; 1) khrus kyi khyad par; 2) sex	nye reg
ཉེ་རེག་འཐོར་འཐུང་གསུམ	chn	nye reg 'thor 'thung gsum
ཉེ་རེག་པ	wash	nye reg pa
ཉེ་ལམ	short-cut, recently, direct path, close road, shorter road	nye lam
ཉེ་ལམ་འཕོ་བ	the swift path of transference	nye lam 'pho ba
ཉེ་ལམ་འཕོ་བའི་ཁྲིད	instructions on the swift path of transference	nye lam 'pho ba'i khrid
ཉེ་ལོགས	near, in the neighborhood	nye logs
ཉེ་ལོགས་སུ་ཁང་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	house[s] built nearby	nye logs su khang pa brgyab pa
ཉེ་ཤིང	asparagus brachyphyllus turcz., tree whose root is used in medicine, asparagus brachyphyllus, 1 of rtsa ba lnga	nye shing
ཉེ་ཤོས	immediate	nye shos
ཉེ་ས	nearby place	nye sa
ཉེ་སར	nearby	nye sar
ཉེ་སྲས	1) nye ba'i sras chen [brgyad]; 2) 8	nye sras
ཉེ་སྲས་བརྒྱད	nye ba'i sras chen brgyad	nye sras brgyad
ཉེ་སྲས་བསྔགས་བརྗོད	separate verse works in praise of the eight chief bodhisattvas: Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, Vajrapani, Maitreya, Kshitigarbha, Sarvanivarana-Viskambhin, Akashagarbha, and Samantabhadra	nye sras bsngags brjod
ཉེ་གྷེ	nye ghe tribe	nye ghe
ཉེག	[arch] scale, balance	nyeg
ཉེང	[arch] passion/ desire nyams 'gyur	nyeng
ཉེང་བྱེད་པ	glance at an object by lifting up the head a little	nyeng byed pa
ཉེད་དཀའ	rare	nyed dka'
ཉེད་སྐད	cry of suffering	nyed skad
ཉེད་ཉེད	'phur 'phur gtong ba,...Gzugs po'i za phrug yod sar nyed nyed byed pa	nyed nyed
ཉེད་པ	{nyed pa, nyed pa, nyed pa, nyed} trans. v	nyed pa
ཉེན	1) danger, risk, hazard, liability [of -]; 2) disturbed, afflicted, D: sick, emaciated; 3) infected; 4) a relative; 5) [arch] cause/ ground of	nyen
ཉེན་ཀ	danger, risk	nyen ka
ཉེན་ཀ་ཅན	dangerous, risky	nyen ka can
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་མཐོང་མཁན	adventurer/ ist	nyen ka mi mthong mkhan
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་མཐོང་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka mi mthong ba'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་འཛེམ་མཁན	adventurer/ -ist	nyen ka mi 'dzem mkhan
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་འཛེམ་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka mi 'dzem pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་འཛེམས་མཁན	adventurer/ ist	nyen ka mi 'dzems mkhan
ཉེན་ཀ་མི་འཛེམས་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka mi 'dzems pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམ་མེད	fearless adventurous	nyen ka 'dzem med
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམ་མེད་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka 'dzem med pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམ་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka 'dzem med ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམས་མེད	fearless adventurous	nyen ka 'dzems med
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམས་མེད་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka 'dzems med pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་འཛེམས་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen ka 'dzems med ring lugs
ཉེན་ཀ་ཡོད་པ་རེད	there is a danger of -	nyen ka yod pa red
ཉེན་ཀ་ལ་འགྲོལ	get out of danger/ risk	nyen ka la 'grol
ཉེན་ཀོར	near	nyen kor
ཉེན་སྐོར	relative	nyen skor
ཉེན་སྐྱོན་བྱེད་པ	jeopardize	nyen skyon byed pa
ཉེན་ཁ	danger	nyen kha
ཉེན་ཁ་དགེ་འགྱུར	source of danger becoming joy	nyen kha dge 'gyur
ཉེན་ཁ་ཅན	dangerous, risky	nyen kha can
ཉེན་ཁ་ཆེ་ཙམ	may become a source of harm, dangerous	nyen kha che tsam
ཉེན་ཁ་ཆེན་པོར	breakneck	nyen kha chen por
ཉེན་ཁ་དང་སྐྱོན	crisis	nyen kha dang skyon
ཉེན་ཁ་དང་ཁེ	risk and profit	nyen kha dang khe
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་མཐོང་མཁན	adventurer/ -ist	nyen kha mi mthong mkhan
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་མཐོང་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha mi mthong ba'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་འཛེམ་མཁན	adventurer/ ist 983	nyen kha mi 'dzem mkhan
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་འཛེམ་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha mi 'dzem pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་འཛེམས་མཁན	adventurer/ ist	nyen kha mi 'dzems mkhan
ཉེན་ཁ་མི་འཛེམས་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha mi 'dzems pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་མེད་པ	safe	nyen kha med pa
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམ་མེད	fearless adventurous	nyen kha 'dzem med
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམ་མེད་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha 'dzem med pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམ་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha 'dzem med ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམས་མེད	fearless adventurous	nyen kha 'dzems med
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམས་མེད་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha 'dzems med pa'i ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་འཛེམས་མེད་རིང་ལུགས	adventurism	nyen kha 'dzems med ring lugs
ཉེན་ཁ་བཟོ་བ	endanger	nyen kha bzo ba
ཉེན་ཁ་ཡོད་པ་རེད	there is a danger of --	nyen kha yod pa red
ཉེན་ཁ་ལ་འགྲོལ	get out of danger/ risk	nyen kha la 'grol
ཉེན་ཁ་ལས་ཁེ་ཆུང་བས་སྐྱོ	sad because there was more danger than profit	nyen kha las khe chung bas skyo
ཉེན་ཁའི་དུས	crisis	nyen kha'i dus
ཉེན་ཁར་འཇིགས་ནས	having been afraid of the peril	nyen khar 'jigs nas
ཉེན་འགག	nyen kha che sa'i 'gag mdo	nyen 'gag
ཉེན་འགོག་སྐྱོན	nyen ma byung gong nas 'gog pa	nyen 'gog skyon
ཉེན་ཅན	dangerous	nyen can
ཉེན་ཆེན	great risk	nyen chen
ཉེན་རྟོག་ཁང	watchman's/ police' station	nyen rtog khang
ཉེན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང	watchman, police, security guard	nyen rtog bde srung
ཉེན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང་གྲུ་གཟིངས	police/ security boat	nyen rtog bde srung gru gzings
ཉེན་རྟོག་བདེ་སྲུང་བྱེད	watch, police, guard	nyen rtog bde srung byed
ཉེན་རྟོག་པ	watchman, police man, security guard	nyen rtog pa
ཉེན་རྟོག་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	watchman, police, security guard	nyen rtog srung skyob
ཉེན་རྟོག་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་གྲུ་གཟིངས	police/ security boat	nyen rtog srung skyob gru gzings
ཉེན་རྟོག་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	watch, police, guard	nyen rtog srung skyob byed
ཉེན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས	Shravaka-bhumi	nyen thos kyi sa
ཉེན་དོགས	fear of danger	nyen dogs
ཉེན་དོགས་དམ་བསྒྲགས	nyen dogs srung sdom gyi do dam	nyen dogs dam bsgrags
ཉེན་གདའ	there is danger of ...	nyen gda'
ཉེན་བརྡ	alarm, warning signal	nyen brda
ཉེན་བརྡ་རྒྱབ	give an alarm/ warning signal	nyen brda rgyab
ཉེན་བརྡ་གཏོང་བྱེད་ས་ཚིགས	alarm/ warning station	nyen brda gtong byed sa tshigs
ཉེན་བརྡ་སྤྲོད	give an alarm/ warning signal	nyen brda sprod
ཉེན་སྣར་སྐྱོད་པ	moving toward danger, going into harm's way	nyen snar skyod pa
ཉེན་སྣར་བསྐྱོད་པ	continually moving towards danger	nyen snar bskyod pa
ཉེན་པ	(tha mi dad pa; 1) be pained, pinched, pressed [by]; 2) enemy; 3) labor, drudge	nyen pa
ཉེན་པའི་ལམ	dangerous road	nyen pa'i lam
ཉེན་བུ་ཤེད	[arch] snyems byed pa	nyen bu shed
ཉེན་བྱས་ནས	becoming infected	nyen byas nas
ཉེན་བྱུང་བ་རེད	there was a danger	nyen byung ba red
ཨོཕ༹	-	of
ཉེན་ཚབས	danger, risk	nyen tshabs
ཉེན་ཚབས་ཆེན་པོ	deadly	nyen tshabs chen po
ཉེན་མཚན་གྱི་ཆ་ཉེར་གཉིས	chn	nyen mtshan gyi cha nyer gnyis
ཉེན་ཟོན	precautionary measures, martial law nyen zon skor g.yeng - look all around for fear of faults, guard/ sentry patrolling	nyen zon
ཉེན་ཟོན་གྱི་བཀའ	martial law	nyen zon gyi bka'
ཉེན་ཟོན་དོ་དམ	martial law	nyen zon do dam
ཉེན་ཡོད	there is danger of-- nyen g.yol - refuge, shelter, sanctuary nyen g.yol dbang cha - right of asylum/ sanctuary	nyen yod
ཉེན་སྲུང	insurance, security	nyen srung
ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་འགན་སྤྲོད་པ	insure	nyen srung gi 'gan sprod pa
ཉེན་སྲུང་འགྲོ་གྲོམ	insurance premium	nyen srung 'gro grom
ཉེན་སྲུང་སྒྲིག་ཆས	security devices	nyen srung sgrig chas
ཉེན་སྲུང་ལྕགས་སྐུད	safety fuse	nyen srung lcags skud
ཉེན་སྲུང་ཡན་ལག་རུ་ཁར	branch security unit	nyen srung yan lag ru khar
ཉེའི་སྐབས	about to do --	nye'i skabs
ཉེའུ	1) little fish; 2) [arch] transgressor	nye'u
ཉེའུ་གྱི	[arch] bcud tshor/ chor [feelings?]	nye'u gyi
ཉེའུ་ཆུང	small fish	nye'u chung
ཉེའུ་འདོན་པ	1) [arch] mi nyes can glod pa; 2) small animal in watery places srog blu gtong ba	nye'u 'don pa
ཉེར	twenties, affliction (SA mya ngan), SA nye bar, "about to" clause connective, almost	nyer
ཉེར་སྐད	suffering, cry of suffering	nyer skad
ཉེར་བསྐྱོད	suitability D	nyer bskyod
ཉེར་བསྐྲུན	self D	nyer bskrun
ཉེར་ཁོ	daily/ immediate needs/ neccessities nyer kho necessary element/ (pre)requisite	nyer kho
ཉེར་ཁོ་དང་གཏོང་སྒོ	supply and demand	nyer kho dang gtong sgo
ཉེར་ཁོ་བ	necessary element/ (pre)requisite	nyer kho ba
ཉེར་མཁོ	abbr. of {nye bar mkho ba} necessary element/ prerequisite	nyer mkho
ཉེར་མཁོ་མེད་པ་ལས	your actions were not the ones required	nyer mkho med pa las
ཉེར་མཁོ་ལྷག་པར་མཁྱེན་པ	specific knowledge of what is truly important	nyer mkho lhag par mkhyen pa
ཉེར་མཁོའི་འཁོར་ཆས	light engineering goods	nyer mkho'i 'khor chas
ཉེར་མཁོའི་དངོས་ཟོག	consumer goods	nyer mkho'i dngos zog
ཉེར་མཁོའི་བུམ་བཟང	{si tu dbon karma nges legs bstan 'dzin} text of the mtshur lugs of Tibetan astrology {skar rtsis nag rtsis}	nyer mkho'i bum bzang
ཉེར་འཁོད	near	nyer 'khod
ཉེར་དགའ	delight	nyer dga'
ཉེར་དགུ	29, 29th day of month	nyer dgu
ཉེར་དགུ་པ	29th [day]	nyer dgu pa
ཉེར་སྒྱུར	eclipse	nyer sgyur
ཉེར་སྒྲུབ	near-accomplishment	nyer sgrub
ཉེར་བསྒྱུར	unlucky accident	nyer bsgyur
ཉེར་ལྔ་པ	25th	nyer lnga pa
ཉེར་སྔོགས	theme, task	nyer sngogs
ཉེར་བསྔོགས	8 preliminary stages of meditation preparation, SA sta gon	nyer bsngogs
ཉེར་གཅིག་པ	21st	nyer gcig pa
ཉེར་མཆོད	offering	nyer mchod
ཉེར་མཆོད་བདུན	1) {mchod yon}. 2) {'bas bsil} 3) {me tog} 4) {bdug spos} 5) {mar me} 6) {dri chab}	nyer mchod bdun
ཉེར་འཇལ	nye bar 'jal ba	nyer 'jal
ཉེར་ཉེར	dregs, sediment	nyer nyer
ཉེར་གཉིས	22	nyer gnyis
ཉེར་གཉིས་པ	22nd	nyer gnyis pa
ཉེར་བཏུད	bow down 984	nyer btud
ཉེར་བརྟགས	named, labeled	nyer brtags
ཉེར་ཐོབ	intimate/ full/ complete/ profound/ further attainment	nyer thob
ནེཨར	attainment	near
ཉེར་ཐོབ་གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ	ground luminosity of full attainment	nyer thob gzhi'i 'od gsal
ཉེར་ཐོབ་རག་ལམ་པའི་སེམས	mind of	nyer thob rag lam pa'i sems
བླཅཀ་ནེཨར	attainment	black near
ཉེར་དྲུག	26	nyer drug
ཉེར་དྲུག་པ	26th	nyer drug pa
ཉེར་བདུན	27	nyer bdun
ཉེར་ལྡོག	preliminary	nyer ldog
ཉེར་སྡོགས	stages, preliminary stage	nyer sdogs
ཉེར་བསྡུ	dissolving	nyer bsdu
ཉེར་བསྡུའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	practice of dissolution	nyer bsdu'i rnal 'byor
ཉེར་བསྡོགས	preparatory stage	nyer bsdogs
ཉེར་བསྡོགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the special access concentration nyer bsdogs dang dngos gzhi'i ting nge 'dzin - the samadhis of the preparatory and actual stages [of the four dhyanas] nyer bsdogs dang dngos gshi'i ting nge 'dzin ...	nyer bsdogs kyi khyad par
ཉེར་བསྡོགས་བདུན	the 7 preparatory stages	nyer bsdogs bdun
ཉེར་བསྡོགས་མི་ལྕོགས་མེད	capable preparatory stage	nyer bsdogs mi lcogs med
ཉེར་གནས	female organ	nyer gnas
ཉེར་གནས་ཡོ་བྱད	x {khyed kyi nyer gnas yo byad 'dod pa thams cad la bsnyen bskur rnams bdag gis zhu'o} I will give you anything you need or desire for your holy life	nyer gnas yo byad
ཉེར་པ	1) D tan, dress, make soft; 2) J snarl, growl; 3) tarry, stay, linger	nyer pa
ཉེར་སྤྱད	enjoy	nyer spyad
ཉེར་སྤྱད་དབུལ	bring him all he needs	nyer spyad dbul
ཉེར་སྤྱོད	offerings (flowers, incense, lamps, odors, eatables), 7 offering bowls	nyer spyod
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་ལྔ	the five enjoyments. 1) {me tog}. 2) {bdug spos} 3) {mar me} 4) {dri chab} 5) {zhal zas}	nyer spyod lnga
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་བདུན	ting bdun tshar - the seven offering bowls	nyer spyod bdun
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་རྣམ་ལྔ	see {nyer spyod lnga}	nyer spyod rnam lnga
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་སྣ་བདུན	the 7 [outer] enjoyments/ offerings	nyer spyod sna bdun
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་ཚན་རིགས	applied sciences	nyer spyod tshan rigs
ཉེར་སྤྱོད་འཛིན་པ	to experience, perceive	nyer spyod 'dzin pa
ཉེར་བ	tan, curry, dress	nyer ba
ཉེར་བའི་ལེན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	SA nyer len phung po	nyer ba'i len pa'i phung po
ཉེར་བར་སོན་པ	to arrive at	nyer bar son pa
ཉེར་བྱུང	origination	nyer byung
ཉེར་བྱེད	tree	nyer byed
ཉེར་འབྲས	substantial [/ perpetuating cause's] effect	nyer 'bras
ཉེར་འབྲེལ	adherence	nyer 'brel
ཉེར་སྦས	upagupta [shravaka arhat, 4th of the gtad rabs bdun, D: monk who was Ashoka's teacher]	nyer sbas
ཉེར་སྦྱོད	misspelling of {nyer spyod} [mss]	nyer sbyod
ཉེར་མ	red pepper	nyer ma
ཉེར་འཙེ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	the occasional hells	nyer 'tse ba'i dmyal ba
ཉེར་ཚད	1) personal danger D; 2) D image, likeness D	nyer tshad
ཉེར་ཚད་མེད	w/o danger [to health]	nyer tshad med
ཉེར་འཚེ	harm, injury	nyer 'tshe
ཉེར་འཚེ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	the occasional hells	nyer 'tshe ba'i dmyal ba
ཉེར་འཚེ་བར	interruptions	nyer 'tshe bar
ཉེར་འཚོ	spiritual life	nyer 'tsho
ཉེར་འཛིན	bird's beak	nyer 'dzin
ཉེར་ཞི	1) totally subsided, completely pacified, alleviated; 2) D listen to an instruction	nyer zhi
ཉེར་ཞི་བ	1) totally subsided, completely pacified, alleviated; 2) D listen to an instruction	nyer zhi ba
ཉེར་ཞི་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	nirvana of total peace	nyer zhi mya ngan las 'das pa
ཉེར་བཞི	24	nyer bzhi
ཉེར་བཞི་པ	24th	nyer bzhi pa
ཉེར་ལེན	perceptions {rang gi nyer len dbang du ma gyur bar} Without having mastered your own perceptions	nyer len
ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	perpetuating / substantial cause	nyer len gyi rgyu
ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	heaps [parts of an individual], taken on [in various senses]. perpetuating aggregates	nyer len gyi phung po
ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five perpetuating aggregates	nyer len gyi phung po lnga
ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོའི་རྒྱུན	the continuity of the perpetuating skandhas	nyer len gyi phung po'i rgyun
ཉེར་ལེན་གྱིས	on account of	nyer len gyis
ཉེར་ལེན་གཉིས	the two perpetuating [causes] divisions of perpetuating / substantial cause nyer len gyi rgyu: dngos kyi nyer len dang, brgyud pa'i nyer len gnyis so	nyer len gnyis
ཉེར་ལེན་པ	original cause D	nyer len pa
ཉེར་ལེན་ཕུང་པོ	organized psychophysical constituents, psychosomatic constituents arranged into an organism	nyer len phung po
ཉེར་ལེན་བཞི	the four nyer len	nyer len bzhi
ཉེར་གསུམ	23	nyer gsum
ཉེར་གསུམ་པ	23rd	nyer gsum pa
ཉེར་བསགས	accumulate	nyer bsags
ཉེལ་བ	ill, sick	nyel ba
ཉེས	wrongdoing, blame, faults, unwholesome, evil, imperfection, beat, transgressions, crimes	nyes
ཉེས་ཀུན་ཟད་པ	faults will lessen	nyes kun zad pa
ཉེས་བཀོད	punishment, sentence	nyes bkod
ཉེས་བཀོད་གཏོང	punish, sentence	nyes bkod gtong
ཉེས་སྐྱོན	imperfections and defects, harm, injury	nyes skyon
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་ལྐོག་འགེབ	hushing/ covering up faults	nyes skyon lkog 'geb
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་ལྐོག་འགེབ་བྱེད	hush/ cover up faults	nyes skyon lkog 'geb byed
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་འཁེགས་པ་པོ	one who has stopped evils and dangers	nyes skyon 'khegs pa po
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་འདོན	accuse, charge	nyes skyon 'don
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་བྱུང་ཚུལ	disasterous/ wretched/ situation/ condition	nyes skyon byung tshul
ཉེས་སྐྱོན་མེད་པ	flawless	nyes skyon med pa
ཉེས་ཁག	faults/ transgressions	nyes khag
ཉེས་ཁག་དཀྲི་བ	though 1 is faultless accuse of faults/ pass sentence/ punish	nyes khag dkri ba
ཉེས་ཁག་བཀལ་བ	w/o transgression accuse[d] of faults/ crimes	nyes khag bkal ba
ཉེས་ཁག་འགེལ	accuse, blame of faults/ transgressions	nyes khag 'gel
ཉེས་ཁག་ཅི་ཡང་མེད	w/o any faults/ transgressions	nyes khag ci yang med
ཉེས་ཁག་མེད	w/o faults/ transgressions	nyes khag med
ཉེས་ཁག་ལན་སྐྱོན	...Mi 'di la nyes khag ci yang med	nyes khag lan skyon
ཉེས་ཁྲིམས	criminal code	nyes khrims
ཉེས་གྱུར	corrupted	nyes gyur
ཉེས་འགལ	default	nyes 'gal
ཉེས་འགེབས	hide criminal acts/ intent	nyes 'gebs
ཉེས་འགེབས་མཛེས་བཅོས	beautiful facade to hide criminal acts/ intent	nyes 'gebs mdzes bcos
ཉེས་འགེལ	accuse of crimes, blame	nyes 'gel
ཉེས་འགེལ་བའི་ནག་མེད་མི	innocent man who is accused of crimes	nyes 'gel ba'i nag med mi
ཉེས་འགོག	blocking/ preventing/ stopping what is bad	nyes 'gog
ཉེས་འགོག་བྱེད	block/ prevent/ stopp what is bad	nyes 'gog byed
ཉེས་འགོག་ལེགས་སྤེལ	all transgressions cease and all good things increase	nyes 'gog legs spel
ཉེས་སྒྲིབ	defects	nyes sgrib
ཉེས་དངུལ	fine	nyes dngul
ཉེས་ཅན	having faults, transgressions, criminal nyes can gar yod kyi khungs rtsad rnyed	nyes can
ཉེས་ཅན་གཏེ་པོ	criminal ring-leader/ boss, da big cheese	nyes can gte po
ཉེས་ཅན་ལ་གཅོད་པའི་ཁྲིམས	criminal code	nyes can la gcod pa'i khrims
ཉེས་ཅན་ལང་ཤོར	incorrigible criminal	nyes can lang shor
ཉེས་ཅི་ན	what's wrong?	nyes ci na
ཉེས་ཆ	aspect of faults/ transgressions	nyes cha
ཉེས་ཆད	damnation, fine, penalty, surcharge, crime, fine, punishment	nyes chad
ཉེས་ཆད་ཀྱི་ཡུན་ཚད	term of punishment	nyes chad kyi yun tshad
ཉེས་ཆད་འགེལ་བ	punish	nyes chad 'gel ba
ཉེས་ཆད་སྒྲུབ	receive/ undergo punishment	nyes chad sgrub
ཉེས་ཆད་བསྒྲག	pass sentence, render judgement	nyes chad bsgrag
ཉེས་ཆད་གཅོད	punish	nyes chad gcod
ཉེས་ཆད་གཅོད་པ	to punish	nyes chad gcod pa
ཉེས་ཆད་བཅད	punished	nyes chad bcad
ཉེས་ཆད་ཇེ་ཡང་དུ་གཏོང	reduce sentence	nyes chad je yang du gtong
ཉེས་ཆད་གཏོང	punish	nyes chad gtong
ཉེས་ཆད་གཏོང་བ	penalize	nyes chad gtong ba
ཉེས་ཆད་དུ	as punishment for an infraction	nyes chad du
ཉེས་ཆད་དུས་བསྲིང	suspended sentence, probation, repreive	nyes chad dus bsring
ཉེས་ཆད་དྲག་པོ	severe/ heavy punishment	nyes chad drag po
ཉེས་ཆད་ནར་འཐེན	suspended sentence, probation, repreive	nyes chad nar 'then
ཉེས་ཆད་ཞུ	confess, plead guilty	nyes chad zhu
ཉེས་ཆད་བསྲིང	suspend sentence, givce probation/ repreive	nyes chad bsring
ཉེས་ཆེ	great danger	nyes che
ཉེས་ཆེ་རིགས	'dzin bzung dang, bsdams bkyigs, rdeg rdung sogs gang 'os babs bltas kyis byed pa'i khrims	nyes che rigs
ཉེས་ཆེན	evil doers	nyes chen
ཉེས་འཆབ	to hide ones' faults	nyes 'chab
ཉེས་རྟགས	criminal evidence	nyes rtags
ཉེས་ལྟུང	moral fall, sinful deed, degrading actions, scorpion, moral slip, trespass, transgressions	nyes ltung
ཉེས་ལྟུང་གྱིས་ཕོག	has met w a downfall	nyes ltung gyis phog
ཉེས་ལྟུང་བཤགས་སྡོམ	confess previously collected transgressions, and vow not to do it thereafter 986	nyes ltung bshags sdom
ཉེས་སྟོན	statment of 1's crimes	nyes ston
ཉེས་ཐམས་ཅད	all faults/ calamities	nyes thams cad
ཉེས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལུས་འདི་ལ་འདུས	all calamities are gathered together in this body	nyes thams cad lus 'di la 'dus
ཉེས་འཐག	punishment	nyes 'thag
ཉེས་འཐག་གཏོང	punish	nyes 'thag gtong
ཉེས་འཐག་བྱེད	punish	nyes 'thag byed
ཉེས་དུས	period of punishment for crime	nyes dus
ཉེས་དུས་ཐིམ	be over [period of punishment/ sentence for crime]	nyes dus thim
ཉེས་དོན	criminal case/ affair/ matter	nyes don
ཉེས་དོན་སྐོར་གྱི་ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	criminal code/ law	nyes don skor gyi khrims lugs
ཉེས་དོན་གྱི་གྱོད་གཞི	criminal case/ affair/ matter	nyes don gyi gyod gzhi
ཉེས་དོན་གྱི་འགན་འཁྲི	criminal responsibility	nyes don gyi 'gan 'khri
ཉེས་དོན་གྱི་ཆད་གཅོད	criminal punishment	nyes don gyi chad gcod
ཉེས་དོན་ཅན	criminal, offender	nyes don can
ཉེས་དོན་གཏུག་གཤེར	criminal action/ case	nyes don gtug gsher
ཉེས་འདོགས	accuse	nyes 'dogs
ཉེས་འདོན	expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'don
ཉེས་འདོན་བྱེད	expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'don byed
ཉེས་འདོན་ལས་འགུལ	campaign to expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'don las 'gul
ཉེས་འདོམས	penalty	nyes 'doms
ཉེས་འདྲི་ཚོགས་ཆེན	public/ show trial	nyes 'dri tshogs chen
ཉེས་རྡུང	beating	nyes rdung
ཉེས་རྡུང་གཏོང	beat criminals/ offenders	nyes rdung gtong
ཉེས་བརྡུང	beating	nyes brdung
ཉེས་ན	at worst	nyes na
ཉེས་པ	fault	nyes pa
ཉེས་པ་ཁས་མི་ལེན	not to confess fault or guilt	nyes pa khas mi len
ཉེས་པ་ཁས་ལེན	confess faults/ crimes	nyes pa khas len
ཉེས་པ་ཁས་ལེན་བྱེད	confess faults/ crimes, acknowledge guilt	nyes pa khas len byed
ཉེས་པ་གླེང་བ	ex {nyes pa nam yang ma gleng} never broadcast the defects of	nyes pa gleng ba
ཉེས་པ་འགེལ་རྒྱུ	crime, fine	nyes pa 'gel rgyu
ཉེས་པ་འགྱོད་པ	feel remorse	nyes pa 'gyod pa
ཉེས་པ་བརྒྱད	eight shortcomings	nyes pa brgyad
ཉེས་པ་རྔམས་པོ་ཆེ	1) evil deeds tshabs chen po; 2) Khrims chad 'jigs skrag chen po	nyes pa rngams po che
ཉེས་པ་ལྔ	five shortcomings	nyes pa lnga
ཉེས་པ་ཅན	criminal, offender	nyes pa can
ཉེས་པ་བཅབ་པ	hiding one's faults	nyes pa bcab pa
ཉེས་པ་བཅབས	concealed or hidden fault	nyes pa bcabs
ཉེས་པ་སྙོམས་པ	live meritoriously	nyes pa snyoms pa
ཉེས་པ་གཏོང	punish	nyes pa gtong
ཉེས་པ་གཏོང་བ	punish	nyes pa gtong ba
ཉེས་པ་དྲག་པོ	serious transgression	nyes pa drag po
ཉེས་པ་འདྲི་གཅོད	trial, criminal hearing	nyes pa 'dri gcod
ཉེས་པ་སྡོམ་པ	neutralize an evil	nyes pa sdom pa
ཉེས་པ་ནས་གུ་ཡངས	amnesty	nyes pa nas gu yangs
ཉེས་པ་ཕོག	the wages of transgression, retribution	nyes pa phog
ཉེས་པ་ཕོགས	wages of faults, retribution, punishment	nyes pa phogs
ཉེས་པ་བབ་ལྕི	serious transgression	nyes pa bab lci
ཉེས་པ་བྱེད	commit a transgression/ crime	nyes pa byed
ཉེས་པ་བྱེད་པ	commit a crime, sin, trespass, commit a fault	nyes pa byed pa
ཉེས་པ་བྱེད་པའི	oppressive taxgatherer or ruler	nyes pa byed pa'i
ཉེས་པ་བྱེད་པའི་ཤོ་གམ་པ	tyrant	nyes pa byed pa'i sho gam pa
ཨོཔཔྲེསསིབེ༹་ཏ྾	collector	oppressive tax
ཉེས་པ་བླུ	atone for a crime	nyes pa blu
ཉེས་པ་སྦོམ་པོ	great sin, serious fault	nyes pa sbom po
ཉེས་པ་མང་པོའི་རྩ་བ	root of many evils and faults	nyes pa mang po'i rtsa ba
ཉེས་པ་མེད	innocent, guiltless	nyes pa med
ཉེས་པ་མེད་པ	has no flaws	nyes pa med pa
ཉེས་པ་མེད་པ་ཉིད	innocence, faultlessness	nyes pa med pa nyid
ཉེས་པ་མེད་པ་ཞུས	be found faultless {gnyis kar nyes pa med pa zhus} asked that they both be found faultless	nyes pa med pa zhus
ཉེས་པ་མེད་པར་ཐག་བཅད	acquitted	nyes pa med par thag bcad
ཉེས་པ་སྨྲོས་ཅིག	tell [me] the fault/ problem/ what's wrong w you D	nyes pa smros cig
ཉེས་པ་ལས་ལྡོག་པའི་སྟོབས	power of turning away from faults	nyes pa las ldog pa'i stobs
ཉེས་པ་ཤེས	1) recognize a fault; 2) (met skillful	nyes pa shes
ཉེས་པ་བཤགས་པ	rang nongs 'gyod sdom byas pa	nyes pa bshags pa
ཉེས་པ་སླད་འདོམས	punish strictly to avoid recurrence of the crime	nyes pa slad 'doms
ཉེས་པ་སླད་འདོམས་གཅོད	correct, discipline	nyes pa slad 'doms gcod
ཉེས་པ་གསུམ	the three faults: 1) the three medical humors rnam par ma gyur pa'i skabs lus gso bskyed kyi bya ba byed cing, rnam par gyur na lus la gnod cing sun 'byin pa'i zug rngu'i nyes pa gtong ba'i rgyu by...	nyes pa gsum
ཉེས་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཡུལ་གསུམ	chn	nyes pa gsum gyi yul gsum
ཉེས་པ་གསོ་བ	removing faults nyes pa bsam gyis mi khyab pa 'byung ba - will only bring you inconceivable ills	nyes pa gso ba
ཉེས་པའི་སྐྱོན	impurities and defects, failings of immoral acts	nyes pa'i skyon
ཉེས་པའི་ཆ	{khong gi mdzad pa la skyon nam nyes pa'i cha cung zad kyang med do} all his actions are utterly flawless and unerring	nyes pa'i cha
ཉེས་པའི་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five classes of transgressions	nyes pa'i sde lnga
ཉེས་པའི་རྩ་བ	the root of evil, rootcauses of negative actions	nyes pa'i rtsa ba
ཉེས་པར	viciously, faultily	nyes par
ཉེས་པར་གཉན་བྱས	has been promised	nyes par gnyan byas
ཉེས་པོ	ugly	nyes po
ཉེས་དཔྱད་སྣར་སྤྱོད	continually committing mischief or trespasses	nyes dpyad snar spyod
ཉེས་དཔྱོད་སྣར་སྤྱོད	continually committing offenses	nyes dpyod snar spyod
ཉེས་སྤྱད	deprecating holy ones and unpleasant result producing wrongdoing, bad action/ activity/ habit D	nyes spyad
ཉེས་སྤྱོད	unwholesome forms of behavior	nyes spyod
ཉེས་སྤྱོད་ཆེན་པོ	very bad/ negative/ criminal/ vicious actions/ behavior	nyes spyod chen po
ཉེས་སྤྱོད་སྡོམ་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	controlling malpractice GD the discipline of refraining from misdeeds/wrongdoing	nyes spyod sdom pa'i tshul khrims
ཉེས་སྤྱོད་སྡོམས་པ	refrained from misdeeds	nyes spyod sdoms pa
ཉེས་སྤྱོད་སྤང་བའི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ	the 10 virtues of abandoning wrongdoing	nyes spyod spang ba'i dge ba bcu
ཉེས་སྤྱོད་ར་སྤྲོད	spyod ngan gdong gtugs nas bgrang ba	nyes spyod ra sprod
ཉེས་བབས་པ	fault	nyes babs pa
ཉེས་བྱ	fine, penalty	nyes bya
ཉེས་བྱ་བཀལ	impose a fine	nyes bya bkal
ཉེས་བྱས	infractions [in context of so tar vows]; sins; wrong-doing	nyes byas
ཉེས་བྱས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the 112 minor faults of the gelong	nyes byas kyi sde
ཚན་དྲུག	chn	tshan drug
ཉེས་བྱས་བརྒྱ་དང་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 112 infractions [ltung ba sde lnga'i nang gses, nyes byas kyi sde tshan la, gos bgo ba'i tshul bcu dang, 'gro ba'i tshul nyi shu, 'dug pa'i tshul dgu, zas len tshul brgyad, kha zas spyod tshul ...	nyes byas brgya dang bcu gnyis
ཉེས་བྱེད་སྡོམ་པ	to shun wrongdoing	nyes byed sdom pa
ཉེས་བྱེས	infractions [in context of {so tar} vows]	nyes byes
ཉེས་འབྱིན	expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'byin
ཉེས་འབྱིན་བྱེད	expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'byin byed
ཉེས་འབྱིན་ལས་འགུལ	campaign to expose crimes/ wrongdoing	nyes 'byin las 'gul
ཉེས་མིང	name of crime w which someone is charged	nyes ming
ཉེས་མེད	free of hazards	nyes med
ཉེས་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	pardon/ absolve crimes	nyes med du gtong
ཉེས་མེད་བདེ་བར་བཏང	found innocent nyes med nag g.yogs - accuse the innocent	nyes med bde bar btang
ཉེས་དམིགས	bad situations, deplorable situation, vicious state, crime, retribution, shortcomings, reproach, punishment for faults, grave consequences, disadvantage	nyes dmigs
ཉེས་དམིགས་དཔེ་ལྔ	the five examples of the inherent faults [of desirable qualities]	nyes dmigs dpe lnga
ཉེས་རྩད	criminal investigation	nyes rtsad
ཉེས་རྩད་ཆོད་པ	solve a case	nyes rtsad chod pa
ཉེས་ཚབས་ཆེ་ཆུང	great or small transgression	nyes tshabs che chung
ཉེས་ཚོགས	shortcomings	nyes tshogs
ཉེས་མཚོང་འབྱིན	expose, reveal, disclose	nyes mtshong 'byin
ཉེས་འཛུགས	indictment, prosecution	nyes 'dzugs
ཉེས་འཛུགས་བྱས་པ	accused, found at fault	nyes 'dzugs byas pa
ཉེས་འཛུགས་བྱེད་པ	indict, prosecute	nyes 'dzugs byed pa
ཉེས་ཞུ	accuse of/ charge w crimes	nyes zhu
ཉེས་ཡངས	to pardon for an offense, give amnesty	nyes yangs
ཉེས་ར་དངོས་འཕྲོད	khrims 'gal byas pa gsal por ra 'phrod pa	nyes ra dngos 'phrod
ཉེས་ར་འཕྲོད་དངོས	law-breaking khungs skyel dngos rigs	nyes ra 'phrod dngos
ཉེས་ལན	revenge, vengeance	nyes lan
ཉེས་ལན་ཉེས་གཅོད	revenge, vengeance	nyes lan nyes gcod
ཉེས་ལན་ཉེས་གཅོད་སྤྲོད	take revenge/ vengeance	nyes lan nyes gcod sprod
ཉེས་ལན་སྤྲོད	take revenge/ vengeance	nyes lan sprod
ཉེས་ལས	evil deeds, unvirtuous actions	nyes las
ཉེས་ལོ	year of misfortune/ calamity, calamitous harvest	nyes lo
ཉེས་བཤད	faulty speech	nyes bshad
ཉེས་སོ	it is a fault	nyes so
ཉེས་གསུམ	3 humors, rlung, mkhris pa, bad kan,	nyes gsum
ཉེས་གསུམ་འཇོམས་པ	1) arhat; 2) buddha	nyes gsum 'joms pa
ཉོ	carrot, buy	nyo
ཉོ་མཁན	buyer, shopper	nyo mkhan
ཉོ་རྒྱུའི་བརྗེད་ཐོ	shopping list	nyo rgyu'i brjed tho
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ	buying, purchasing	nyo sgrub
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ་གཅིག་བསྡུས	buying/ purchasing in bulk/ up	nyo sgrub gcig bsdus
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ་གཅིག་བསྡུས་བྱེད	buy/ purchase in bulk/ up	nyo sgrub gcig bsdus byed
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	purchasing power	nyo sgrub stobs shugs
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	buy, purchase	nyo sgrub byed
ཉོ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་པ	purchase	nyo sgrub byed pa
ཉོ་བསྒྲུབ	buying, purchasing	nyo bsgrub
ཉོ་བསྒྲུབ་གཅིག་བསྡུས	buying/ purchasing in bulk/ up	nyo bsgrub gcig bsdus
ཉོ་བསྒྲུབ་གཅིག་བསྡུས་བྱེད	buy/ purchase in bulk/ up	nyo bsgrub gcig bsdus byed
ཉོ་བསྒྲུབ་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	purchasing power	nyo bsgrub stobs shugs
ཉོ་བསྒྲུབ་བྱེད	buy, purchase	nyo bsgrub byed
ཉོ་ཅ་རྒྱབ་པ	shop	nyo ca rgyab pa
ཉོ་ཅའི་ཐོ	shopping list	nyo ca'i tho
ཉོ་ཆ	things to be bought	nyo cha
ཉོ་ཆས	things for sale	nyo chas
ཉོ་ཏི	a pear J	nyo ti
ཉོ་སྟོབས	purchasing power	nyo stobs
ཉོ་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	buying, purchasing	nyo thabs byed pa
ཉོ་ཐོ	account, bill, account of goods purchased	nyo tho
ཉོ་སྡུད	buying in bulk/ up	nyo sdud
ཉོ་སྡུད་བྱེད	buy in bulk/ up	nyo sdud byed
ཉོ་པ	buyer, bride	nyo pa
ཉོ་བ	buy, purchase, obtain by payment, take on lease	nyo ba
ཉོ་བའི་ཆེད	for buying	nyo ba'i ched
ཉོ་བྱད	articles for sale	nyo byad
ཉོ་ཚོང	business	nyo tshong
ཉོ་ཚོང་ཁང	commercial exchange office/ bureau, commercial trading cooperative	nyo tshong khang
ཉོ་ཚོང་མགོ་སྙོམས	trade balance	nyo tshong mgo snyoms
ཉོ་ཚོང་འགོ་སྙོམས	nyo tshong mgo thug	nyo tshong 'go snyoms
ཉོ་ཚོང་འགྲེམས་སྟོན་འདུ་ཚོགས	trade exhibition	nyo tshong 'grems ston 'du tshogs
ཉོ་ཚོང་གཉེན་སྒྲིག	marriage of convenience/ for money	nyo tshong gnyen sgrig
ཉོ་ཚོང་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	commercial trading cooperative	nyo tshong mnyam las khang
ཉོ་ཚོང་དྲང་སྙོམས	fair trade	nyo tshong drang snyoms
ཉོ་ཚོང་དྲང་གཞག	fair trade	nyo tshong drang gzhag
ཉོ་ཚོང་སྤྱི་གཉེར་ཁང	department store	nyo tshong spyi gnyer khang
ཉོ་ཚོང་བར་མི	tshong dpang, gnas po, business broker	nyo tshong bar mi
ཉོ་ཚོང་བྱས་པ	traders gather for the market	nyo tshong byas pa
ཉོ་ཚོང་བྱེད	to merchandize	nyo tshong byed
ཉོ་ཚོང་བྱེད་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment offense of buying/ selling	nyo tshong byed pa'i spang ba
ཉོ་ཚོང་ལུགས་མཐུན	fair trade	nyo tshong lugs mthun
ཉོ་ཚོང་ལུའུ	Ministry of Commerce and Trade	nyo tshong lu'u
ཉོ་འཚོང	buy and sell, trade, commerce	nyo 'tshong
ཉོ་འཚོང་འགོ་སྙོམས	nyo tshong mgo thug	nyo 'tshong 'go snyoms
ཉོ་འཚོང་བར་མི	tshong dpang ngam, gnas po	nyo 'tshong bar mi
ཉོ་འཚོང་བྱེད	buy and sell, carry on commerce, trade	nyo 'tshong byed
ཉོ་འཚོང་བྱེད་པ	trade	nyo 'tshong byed pa
ཉོ་འཚོང་བྱེད་པའི་སྤང་བ	spang ltung sum cu'i nang gses, rin po che ma yin pa'i dngos po 'bru sogs gzhan khe spogs byed pa'o	nyo 'tshong byed pa'i spang ba
ཉོ་རོགས	necessary things nyo sgrub byed grogs	nyo rogs
ཉོ་རོགས་བྱེད	buy for someone else	nyo rogs byed
ཉོ་ལོ	inferior animals which cannot carry burdens	nyo lo
ཉོ་ཤ	meat that we buy in a shop	nyo sha
ཉོ་ཤུགས	purchasing power	nyo shugs
ཉོ་ས	place to buy	nyo sa
ཉོག	boiled grain made into powder and made into food [Sran nyog ...Mar nyog ...'O nyog	nyog
ཉོག་ཅན	dirty	nyog can
ཉོག་ཉོག	confused, mixed up	nyog nyog
ཉོག་ཉོག་པ	confused, mixed up	nyog nyog pa
ཉོག་ཉོང	soft, weak maudlin	nyog nyong
ཉོག་པ	1) [khams 'khrugs pa dang go rim 'chol ba] disturbed, messed up; 2) impure, unclear understanding; 3) soiled, dirty)	nyog pa
ཉོག་པའི་ཆི་དྲེགས་ཅན	fouled muddy water	nyog pa'i chi dregs can
ཉོག་པའི་རིག་པ་ཡོད་པའི་མི་ར་ཟི	drunk w a confused mind	nyog pa'i rig pa yod pa'i mi ra zi
ཉོག་པོ	impure, unclear understanding	nyog po
ཉོག་བྱིང	dull/ lethargic/ lazy mind	nyog bying
ཉོག་མ	soiled, dirtied, made unclean	nyog ma
ཉོག་རྫོབ	'dres 'khrugs kyi rnyog rdzob,...Dka' ngal nyog rdzob che ba'i las don	nyog rdzob
ཉོག་སེ་བ	grung po med pa'am dvangs po med pa,...Gtam nyog se ba bshad na go dka',...Chu nyog se ba de 'thung mi nyan	nyog se ba
ཉོགས་པ	lethargy	nyogs pa
ཉོགས་བྱིང	too soft	nyogs bying
ཉོང་མོངས་པ་ཅན	possessing the kleshas, defiled nyongs mong med pa'i ting nge 'dzin meditative absorption that constitutes the absence of afflictive emotions	nyong mongs pa can
ཉོད	food	nyod
ཉོད་པ	food	nyod pa
ཉོད་རོད	[arch] food and clothing	nyod rod
ཉོན	nyan pa! listen!	nyon
ཉོན་སྒྲིབ	obscuration of the kleshas	nyon sgrib
ཉོན་སྒྲིབ་ཀུན་བཏགས	the imputed disturbance-veil	nyon sgrib kun btags
ཉོན་སྒྲིབ་གཉིས	the two disturbanceveils, [kun btags, lhan skyes]	nyon sgrib gnyis
ཉོན་སྒྲིབ་སྤོང་བ	abandon the obscurations of the kleshas	nyon sgrib spong ba
ཉོན་སྒྲིབ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	inherent disturbance-veil	nyon sgrib lhan skyes
ཉོན་བསྒྲིབ	emotional obscurations	nyon bsgrib
ཉོན་ཅིག	Listen!; listen	nyon cig
ཉོན་ཉིད	afflicted mind	nyon nyid
ཉོན་རྟོག་གྲོལ་བ	liberation of thoughts and emotions	nyon rtog grol ba
ཉོན་མ་མོངས་སམ	didn't you have trouble?	nyon ma mongs sam
ཉོན་མོ	nam langs te lag ris mngon pa nas nyi nub lag ris mi mngon par gyur pa'i bar syn: gdugs, bdud 'joms, mdangs gsar, gnas 'jug snang ba ldan, padma bzhad, mun bsal, rtsen dus, gsal snang	nyon mo
ཉོན་མོང	Klesha. Disturbing emotions that agitate one's mind and obscure the buddha nature nyon mong gi sgrib dang shes bya'i sgrib	nyon mong
ཀྱིས་དག་པ	purity resulting from the removal of the obscuration of conflicting emotions and the obscuration covering the knowable nyon mong gi sgrib dang shes bya'i sgrib	kyis dag pa
ཉོན་མོང་པའི་སྒྲིབ	obstructions to liberation	nyon mong pa'i sgrib
ཉོན་མོང་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	afflictive obstructions	nyon mong pa'i sgrib pa
ཉོན་མོང་པའི་ས	'gyod pa, brjed ngas pa, sems g.yengs pa, shes rab 'chal ba, tshul bzhin ma yin pa yid la byed pa, log par mos pa, rgod pa, ma rig pa, bag med pa)	nyon mong pa'i sa
ཉོན་མོང་པའི་ས་ཆེན་བཅུ	10 greater causes of misery (ma dad pa	nyon mong pa'i sa chen bcu
ཉོན་མོངས	Skt. kleshas. Emotions, conflicting/negative/obscuring	nyon mongs
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀུན་བཏགས	intellectually formed delusion	nyon mongs kun btags
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀུན་རྟོག	thoughts of disturbing emotions	nyon mongs kun rtog
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་དྲུག	the six causes of the kleshas	nyon mongs kyi rgyu drug
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscurations due to the passions	nyon mongs kyi sgrib pa
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་གཉེན	remedy against the emotion	nyon mongs kyi gnyen
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་སྙིགས་མ	impurity of conflicting emotions GD	nyon mongs kyi snyigs ma
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	seeds of the kleshas	nyon mongs kyi bag chags
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་ཡིད	SA nyon yid	nyon mongs kyi yid
ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	klista manovijnana	nyon mongs kyi yid kyi rnam shes
ཉོན་མོངས་སྐྱེ་བའི་རྒྱུ་གསུམ	the three causes of the arising of the kleshas	nyon mongs skye ba'i rgyu gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་རྒྱས་པ་བཅུ	chn	nyon mongs rgyas pa bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་སྒྲིབ་པ	veil of conflicting emotions, obscurations due to the passions, emotional obscurations, afflictive obstructions, defilement of misery caused by habits	nyon mongs sgrib pa
ཉོན་མོངས་མངོན་གྱུར	manifest / present disturbance	nyon mongs mngon gyur
ཉོན་མོངས་ལྔ	the five kleshas	nyon mongs lnga
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན	1) possessing suffering; 2) possessing ignorance w thoughts of the kleshas	nyon mongs can
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་ཐེ་ཚོམ	in an individual beings continuum bsdus pa'i the tshom gyi shes pa'o	nyon mongs can gyi the tshom
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་རྣམ་རྟོག	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'dod khams kyi rnam rtog mi dge ba rnams so}	nyon mongs can gyi rnam rtog
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་མ་རིག་པ	addictive misknowledge	nyon mongs can gyi ma rig pa
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་ཡིད	disturbed mind. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {shes pa gang zhig dus rtag tu gsal ba'i rnam par nga'o snyam yid la byed pa'i nga rgyal gyis khengs pa dang ldan pas rlom sems shing ngar sems pa'i bdag ny...	nyon mongs can gyi yid
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་རེག་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of contact having the kleshas	nyon mongs can gyi reg pa gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་ས་མང་དྲུག	chn	nyon mongs can gyi sa mang drug
ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན་གྱི་སེམས	disturbed mind nyon mongs can gyi bsam gzugs bzhi chn nyon mongs can ma yin pa'i rnam rtog Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {dge ba zag bcas dang/ lung ma bstan dang/ zag med kyis bsdus pa'i rnam rtog rnam...	nyon mongs can gyi sems
ཉོན་མོངས་བཅོམ་པའི་དགེ་སློང	dge slong arhat nyon mongs chung ngu sa mang bcu chn	nyon mongs bcom pa'i dge slong
ཉོན་མོངས་ཆུང་ངུའི་ས་པ་བཅུ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {khro dang 'khon 'dzin g.yo phrag dog /'tshig dang 'chab dang ser sna dang/ /sgyu dang rgyags dang rnam 'tshe}	nyon mongs chung ngu'i sa pa bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་ཆུང་ངུའི་ས་མང	sa mang lnga'i nang tshan zhig ste mtshungs ldan grogs kyi sgo nas chung, spang bya'i sgo nas chung, rten rnam shes kyis chung ngur bzhag pa bcas	nyon mongs chung ngu'i sa mang
ཉོན་མོངས་ཆུང་ངུའི་ས་མང་བཅུ	sa mang lnga'i nang tshan zhig ste khro ba dang, 'khon 'dzin, gyo, sgyu, phrag dog 'tshig 'chab pa, ser sna, rgyags pa, rnam par 'tshe ba bcas bcu'o	nyon mongs chung ngu'i sa mang bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་ཆེན་པོའི་ས་མང་དྲུག	the great kleshas's sa mang drug	nyon mongs chen po'i sa mang drug
ཉོན་མོངས་ཉམ་ཐག	tormented by emotionality	nyon mongs nyam thag
ཉོན་མོངས་གཉིས	the two kinds of kleshas	nyon mongs gnyis
ཉོན་མོངས་སྙིགས་མ	corruption/ degeneration of the kleshas [snyigs ma lnga'i nang gses shig ste, chags sdang med pa'i bzang po'i yon tan rnams zad de 'dod chags dang zhe sdang dang phrag dog dang ser sna la sogs pa l...	nyon mongs snyigs ma
ཉོན་མོངས་ཐུལ	rishi nyon mongs dang 'dres dug can lta bu	nyon mongs thul
ཉོན་མོངས་དྲུག	the six kleshas	nyon mongs drug
ཉོན་མོངས་བདུད	devils of passion	nyon mongs bdud
ཉོན་མོངས་ནད་འཇོམས་ཀྱི་སྨན་པ	the physician who cured the disease of the obscuring emotions nyon mongs rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa the dmigs pa of completely abandoning the kleshas nyon mongs rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa	nyon mongs nad 'joms kyi sman pa
ཉོན་མོངས་བསྣར	the consequences of sin	nyon mongs bsnar
ཉོན་མོངས་པ	1) kleshas; 2) klesha[ridden], disturbances, disturbing negative/ conflicting emotion, emotionality; 3) [defilement, passion]; 4) D misery trouble misfortune, pain, affliction; 5) be troubled/ torm...	nyon mongs pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ལྔ	Five disturbing emotions. Anger, desire, delusion, pride and envy nyon mongs pa lnga ye nas dag pa'i rang	nyon mongs pa lnga
བཞིན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	the self-nature of the five passions primordially pure, is the five wisdoms	bzhin ye shes lnga
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན	defiled	nyon mongs pa can
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན་ཀྱི་ཡིད	defiled mind	nyon mongs pa can kyi yid
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་མ་རིག་པ	ignorance with negative emotions	nyon mongs pa can gyi ma rig pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡིད	(emotionally) affected/ biased/ tainted consciousness; isc. I-consciousness/ sense of self	nyon mongs pa can gyi yid
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་སེམས	mind having the kleshas	nyon mongs pa can gyi sems
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཡིད	mind w many virtuous thoughts	nyon mongs pa can ma yin pa'i yid
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དག་རྣམ་བཅོམ་པ	conqueror of the fettering passions	nyon mongs pa dag rnam bcom pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དང་འདྲེས	x {yid la bzung kyang nyon mongs pa dang 'dres na} if you remember the teachings but mix them with your negative emotions nyon mongs pa dang bral ba'i dge slong dge slong arhat nyon mongs pa dang s...	nyon mongs pa dang 'dres
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དུག་ལྔ	five poisons of disturbing emotions Five poisonous kleshas	nyon mongs pa dug lnga
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དུག་གསུམ	Three poisonous emotions. Attachment, anger, and delusion	nyon mongs pa dug gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དྲུག	the six conflicting emotions	nyon mongs pa drug
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་བདག་གི་ཚ་གདུང་སྐྱབས་སུ་གསོལ་ཞུས་པ	pray that you will relieve me of the searing pain of my terrible afflictions	nyon mongs pa bdag gi tsha gdung skyabs su gsol zhus pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་སྤོང་ཀྱི་དམིགས་པ	objects for purifying afflictions	nyon mongs pa spong kyi dmigs pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་སྤོང་བ	abandoning the disturbing emotions	nyon mongs pa spong ba
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་སྤྱོང་བཀི་དམིགས་པ	objects for purifying afflictions	nyon mongs pa spyong bki dmigs pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་སྦྱོང་བའི་དམིགས་པ	objects for purifying afflictions	nyon mongs pa sbyong ba'i dmigs pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་མེད་པ	without emotionality	nyon mongs pa med pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་རགས་པ	strong obscurations	nyon mongs pa rags pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་ལས་ཐར་པའི་དོན་མེད	of no use for being liberated from [the misery of] the kleshas	nyon mongs pa las thar pa'i don med
ཉོན་མོངས་པ་གསུམ	the three kleshas nyon mongs pa'i kun nas nyon mongs pa the bad thought group of bad thoughts nyon mongs pa'i kun nas nyon mongs pa * the bad thought group of bad thoughts nyon mongs pa'i kun nas n...	nyon mongs pa gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ཀུན་སློང་ངན་པ	disturbed unwholesome motivation	nyon mongs pa'i kun slong ngan pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་དགྲ་རྣམས	klesharidden enemies	nyon mongs pa'i dgra rnams
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	by means of the kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i sgo nas
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་སྒྲིབ	or klesh varana The obscuration of conflicting emotions GD	nyon mongs pa'i sgrib
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	veil of disturbing emotions; Mipham Rinpoche: {nyon mongs shin tu drag po rgyun chags pas lam la 'jug mi nus pa nyon mongs pa'i sgrib pa} The 'veil of disturbing emotions' is the inability to enter...	nyon mongs pa'i sgrib pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་སྒྲིབ་བ	obscurations to liberation	nyon mongs pa'i sgrib ba
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་འཆིང་བ	bond of the passions	nyon mongs pa'i 'ching ba
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་སྙིགས་མ	{khyim pa'i dge phyogs rgud byed nyon mongs pa'i snyigs ma} 'degeneration of disturbing emotion' is the decline in the virtues of householders; one of {rtsod dus kyi snyigs ma lnga}	nyon mongs pa'i snyigs ma
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་རྟོག	passion-thought	nyon mongs pa'i rtog
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ལྟ་བ་ལྔ	the five views	nyon mongs pa'i lta ba lnga
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་དྲི་མ་དྲུག	the six defilements of the kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i dri ma drug
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བདུད	Mara of Emotion	nyon mongs pa'i bdud
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བདུད་ཕྲ་མོ	habitual patterns of the kleshas in the continuum of an arhat	nyon mongs pa'i bdud phra mo
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བདུད་རགས་པ	the root and subsidiary kleshas nyon mongs pa'i sdug bsngal mi bzad pa	nyon mongs pa'i bdud rags pa
དང་བཅས་བསྐྱོད་པ	moved by the unendurable pangs of emotionality	dang bcas bskyod pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་རྣམ	emotionally toned response nyon mongs pa'i rnam shes klista(mano)vijnana	nyon mongs pa'i rnam
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བག་ཆགས	traces as regards qualities	nyon mongs pa'i bag chags
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བག་ལ་ཉལ	subtle kleshas, propensities of the kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i bag la nyal
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་བྱེད་ལས་བཅུ	the 10 actions of the kleshas [rtsa ba brtan par byed pa dang, rgyun gnas par byed pa, zhing du sgrub par byed pa, rgyu mthun par sgrub par byed pa, las kyi srid pa mngon par sgrub par byed pa, ran...	nyon mongs pa'i byed las bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་གཞན་དབང	dependency of disturbance	nyon mongs pa'i gzhan dbang
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ཡིད	SA nyon yid	nyon mongs pa'i yid
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	disturbed mental cognition, [one of the eight collections of cognitions	nyon mongs pa'i yid kyi rnam shes
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་རླུང	passion winds, winds (or psychic energies) defiled by the passions	nyon mongs pa'i rlung
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ལམ	path of the kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i lam
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ལམ་གསུམ	the three paths of the kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i lam gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས	the causes of defilement	nyon mongs pa'i sa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་བཅུ	the causes of defilement	nyon mongs pa'i sa bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་ཆེན་བཅུ	the 10 great grounds of the kleshas [ma dad pa lack of faith, 'gyod pa regret/ repentence, brjed nges pa bartering/ vaciollating sems g.yengs pa distraction, changing the mindshes rab z'chal ba, co...	nyon mongs pa'i sa chen bcu
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་ཆེན་པོ་པ	fundamental defilements	nyon mongs pa'i sa chen po pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་པ	disturbance bases	nyon mongs pa'i sa pa
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་མང	fundamental kleshas	nyon mongs pa'i sa mang
ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ	the major disturbance bases	nyon mongs pa'i sa mang chen po
ཉོན་མོངས་པར་འགྱུར	be distressed	nyon mongs par 'gyur
ཉོན་མོངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	get into trouble	nyon mongs par 'gyur ba
ཉོན་མོངས་པས་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས	affliction through disturbance nyon mongs phyogs kyi rten 'brel branches which involve bad thoughts	nyon mongs pas kun nas nyon mongs
ཉོན་མོངས་བག་ཆག	latent disturbances	nyon mongs bag chag
ཉོན་མོངས་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ་གསུམ	chn	nyon mongs 'byung ba'i rgyu gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་པ	w/o the kleshas/ misery	nyon mongs med pa
ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi free from disturbing emotions	nyon mongs med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	the kleshaless samadhi	nyon mongs med pa'i ting 'dzin
ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་པའི་ཡན་ལག་གསུམ	the three limbs of being w/o kleshas	nyon mongs med pa'i yan lag gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་ཚིག	words motivated by the kleshas	nyon mongs tshig
ཉོན་མོངས་ཟད་པ	exhaust the kleshas	nyon mongs zad pa
ཉོན་མོངས་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberation of the passions	nyon mongs rang grol
ཉོན་མོངས་རང་གྲོལ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	the action of spontaneously freeing the disturbances nyon mongs la brten nas byung ba'i dri	nyon mongs rang grol gyi spyod pa
མ་རགས་པ་དྲུག	the six coarse defilements depening on the kleshas [sgyu dang, gyo dang, rgyags pa dang, 'tsig pa dang, 'khon 'dzin dang, rnam 'tse rnams so nyon mongs la brten nas byung ba'i dri	ma rags pa drug
ཉོན་མོངས་གསུམ	three poisons [passion, aggression, and ignorance three roots of evil, desire {raga} or {'dod chags} hatred {dves'} or {zhe sdang} and delusion {moha} or {gti mug} 992	nyon mongs gsum
ཉོན་མོངས་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate affliction, innate affliction, innate delusion	nyon mongs lhan skyes
ཉོན་རྨོངས	trouble, misery, pain	nyon rmongs
ཉོན་ཡིད	disturbed mind [consciousness]	nyon yid
ཨེམོཏིཨོནལལཡ	toned ego-act, emotivelytoned and constituted aspect of mind,	emotionally
ཨེམོཏིཨོནལལཡ་པེརྟུརྦེད་ཨེགོ	centered consciousness, mind of the passions	emotionally perturbed ego
ཉོན་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	Afflicted mind consciousness	nyon yid kyi rnam shes
ཉོན་རེ་མོངས	how tiring! brings nothing but afflictions; increases kleshas	nyon re mongs
ཉོན་ལ	listen	nyon la
ཉོན་ཤེས	abbr of {nyon sgrib dang shes sgrib}	nyon shes
ཉོན་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	the obscurations of defiled mental consciousness/ the kleshas	nyon shes kyi sgrib pa
ཉོབ	feel lethargic/ lazy/ bored	nyob
ཉོབ་ཉོབ	unclear/ weak/ feeble minded, dull languid, listless, boring	nyob nyob
ཉོབ་ཏོ	apathetic	nyob to
ཨེ྾ཨེརྟིཨོན	[arch] food	exertion
ཉོབ་ཐིབས་སེ་བ	khams nyog tshul zhig	nyob thibs se ba
ཉོབ་འཐིབ	rig pa bying nyog	nyob 'thib
ཉོབ་པ	to feel bored	nyob pa
ཉོབ་པོ	dull, lazy	nyob po
ཉོབ་བ	{nyob ba, nyob pa, nyob pa} intr. v	nyob ba
ཉོབ་བཞིན་སྡོད་པ	slump	nyob bzhin sdod pa
ཉོམ	(not in DAS)	nyom
ཉོམ་པོངས་ལྷན་སྦྱེས	innate affliction nyom mongs pa dag rnam bcom pa conqueror of the fettering passions	nyom pongs lhan sbyes
ཉོར	imp. of {nyar ba}; a rectangle	nyor
ཉོར་འགྲོས	'khyar 'khyor gyi 'gro stangs shig	nyor 'gros
ཉོར་བ	destroy Lcags ri'i rtsig pa	nyor ba
ཉོལ	lie down, SA nyal ba, imperfect of nyal	nyol
ཉོས	buy, SA nyo ba, past of nyon	nyos
ཉོས་པ	[p nyo ba] bought	nyos pa
ཉོས་པོ	something [to be] bought	nyos po
ཉོས་མི	slave	nyos mi
ཉོས་འཛིན	bill, invoice	nyos 'dzin
གཉ་པོ	witness, mediator	gnya po
གཉ་པོ་བྱེད	act as witness/ mediator, mediate a dispute	gnya po byed
གཉག	[f gnyog] will want/ desire	gnyag
གཉག་པ	[f gnyog pa] will want/ desire	gnyag pa
གཉག་ཛ་ཉ་ཀུ་མ་ར	Jnana Kumara of Nyag / (ye shes gzhon nu). Jnana Kumara means 'Youthful Wakefulness.' Early Tibetan monk and expert translator who received the Four Great Rivers of Transmission from Padmasambhava,...	gnyag dza nya ku ma ra
གཉག་ཛ་ཉ་ན་ཀུ་མ་ར	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	gnyag dza nya na ku ma ra
གཞོན་ནུ	Jnana Kumara of Nyag. Jnana Kumara means 'Youthful Wakefulness.' Early Tibetan monk and expert translator who received the Four Great Rivers of Transmission from Padmasambhava, Vimalamitra, Vairoch...	gzhon nu
གཉགས	1) gnyags clan; 2) wanted, desired	gnyags
གཉགས་ཁྲི་བཟང་ཡང་སྟོན	bzang yang ston snyags	gnyags khri bzang yang ston
གཉགས་པ	pf. of {gnyog pa}	gnyags pa
གཉང་མ	rnyang ma	gnyang ma
གཉན	lord of trees, deities of the land, god of earth, elk?, ovis ammon linnaeus, sensitive, place in tibet, powerful & fearful, pestilential disease, epidemic, infectious sickness, plague, species of w...	gnyan
ཅླསས་ཨོཕ༹་མིསཆིཨེབོ༹ཨུས་དེམི	gods, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun, class of powerful beings who dominate intermediate space (the layer or atmosphere connecting earth and sky)	class of mischievous demi
གཉན་ཁ	mouth of a wound tsha ngad 'bar shugs	gnyan kha
གཉན་ཁ་མེད	*, kidney gnyan nad disease	gnyan kha med
གཉན་ཁྲ	parti-colored demi-gods	gnyan khra
གཉན་ཁྲོད	haunted grounds	gnyan khrod
གཉན་གྱའ་སྤང་སྐྱེས	nyenya pangkye [one of {ma sang dpun dgu}, 9 masang brothers]	gnyan gya' spang skyes
གཉན་གྱི་བུ	Nirgrantha Jnatiputra; one of {mu stegs kyi ston pa drug} at the time of Buddha Shakyamuni	gnyan gyi bu
གཉན་གྱི་ཝེར་མ་དགྲ་འདུལ	wer ma of the gnyan that subjugate enemies	gnyan gyi wer ma dgra 'dul
གཉན་གླང	pho ba and entrails etc affecting gnyan nad and 'doms pa'i glang thabs shig	gnyan glang
གཉན་རྒོད	powerful wrathful deities belonging to the sde brgyad	gnyan rgod
གཉན་རྒྱ	Nyengya, Shabkar's birth place, in Domey	gnyan rgya
གཉན་ཆེན་ཐང་ལྷ	/(1 {gnyan chen thang lha} mt/ range	gnyan chen thang lha
གཉན་ལྗང	the green demi-gods	gnyan ljang
གཉན་ཐབ་པ	certain medicinal roots (stag sha, mig can, lcags kyu)	gnyan thab pa
གཉན་ཐུབ་པ	{gnyan thub pa}, med. herb [astringent, cooling, by its power	gnyan thub pa
གཉན་ཐོག	Nyentok, in Domey	gnyan thog
གཉན་དུག	1) lhog pa'i disease; 2) rtsi shing having strong poison	gnyan dug
གཉན་དུག་པ	corydalis meifolia	gnyan dug pa
གཉན་འདུལ་པ	root of a plant used in gnyan gzer tsha ba disease	gnyan 'dul pa
གཉན་ནད	externally dug can srin bu parpa ta + internally khrag srin gnyis 'doms pa'i nad very severe, w 18 kinds klad gzer etc.	gnyan nad
གཉན་ནད་འཁྱམ་པོ	throat, lkog ma [chin/ gullet, side of the throat etc.] swelling gnyan nad	gnyan nad 'khyam po
གཉན་པ	1) fierce, cruel. 2) sacred, powerful, strong. 3) severe; strict, exact, rigorous, uncompromising. See also {gnyan, gnyan po}	gnyan pa
གཉན་པ་གྲུབ་ཆེན	Nyenpa Drubchen, founder of Nyenpa Ridzong at Kailash	gnyan pa grub chen
གཉན་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	aspiration like a boatman [self and others together]	gnyan pa lta bu'i sems bskyed
གཉན་པ་རི་རྫོང	Nyenpa Ridzong; a monastery founded by Nyenpa Drubchen {gnyan pa grub chen}, at the feet of an immense cliff that is the dwelling of local protecting deities	gnyan pa ri rdzong
གཉན་པ་གསང་བ	Awesome Secret	gnyan pa gsang ba
གཉན་པའི་གནད	very dangerous place, like brain or heart	gnyan pa'i gnad
གཉན་པོ	1) awesome, momentous, powerful, secret, sacred, 2) strict; serious, weighty, rigid, steadfast, crucial, 3) epidemic, infectious disease; plague, argali, 4) haunted, frightening, fearful, cruel	gnyan po
གཉན་པོ་གསང་བ	The Powerful Secret	gnyan po gsang ba
གཉན་དཔལ་དབྱངས	SA gnyen dpal dbyangs	gnyan dpal dbyangs
གཉན་ཕོ	ram gnyan wild sheep	gnyan pho
གཉན་ཕྲན	small/ subtle gnyan spirit	gnyan phran
གཉན་འཕྲང	critical	gnyan 'phrang
གཉན་འཕྲང་དུས་སྐབས	critical period	gnyan 'phrang dus skabs
གཉན་བུ	kind of rma nad	gnyan bu
གཉན་བོན	Bon of the Nyen	gnyan bon
གཉན་འབུར	boil	gnyan 'bur
གཉན་འབུར་སྐྱེ	get boils	gnyan 'bur skye
གཉན་འབུར་འབྱུང	get boils	gnyan 'bur 'byung
གཉན་འབྲས	{gnyan 'bras disease [bad blood concentrated by wind la lhan skyes kyi srin dang bsdongs nas sha rus rtsa la zhen par gyur pa'i 'bras nad cig]	gnyan 'bras
གཉན་རྩེ་ཐང་ཤོད	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	gnyan rtse thang shod
གཉན་ཚད	gnyan nad and tshad pa combination disease EG gnyan tshad gzer thung ]	gnyan tshad
གཉན་ཚད་རྒྱས་པ	in the mouth of a wound tsha ngad langs pa	gnyan tshad rgyas pa
གཉན་ཞང་ཞུང	{gnyan zhang zhung	gnyan zhang zhung
གཉན་ཞན	high and low classes, strong or weak	gnyan zhan
གཉན་གཟེར་ཚ་བ	a disease	gnyan gzer tsha ba
གཉན་ཡོད	sravasti	gnyan yod
གཉན་རྭ	gnyan wild sheep horn, animal med.	gnyan rwa
གཉན་རིགས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	gnyan nad bab sa'i dbang gis rigs mi 'dra ba bco brgyad [gnyan nad klad gzer, gag pa, gzer thung, gnyan glang, rgyu gzer, me dbal, gnyan rmen bu, nyva log lhog pa, gnyan 'bras, 'dzum ltag dgye, mkh...	gnyan rigs bco brgyad
གཉན་རིམས	infectious diseases [EG 'khyam po dang 'ba' 'bur]	gnyan rims
གཉན་རིམས་གསུམ	three types of epidemic #	gnyan rims gsum
གཉན་ས	rugged country	gnyan sa
གཉན་སྲིན	1) gnyan nad parpa ta &, khrag srin gnyis combination disease; 2) severe so srin disease w intense pain; 3) Rma'i nang dug can srin bu zhugs te swelling and black blood dripping &, intense pain	gnyan srin
གཉན་གསོད	plague killers (btsan dug, shu dag, gla rtsi, a ru)	gnyan gsod
གཉའ	SA snya, nyag	gnya'
གཉའ་ཀོ	hide or leather of a beast's neck	gnya' ko
གཉའ་སྐྱ་རུལ	Nyakyarul, in Domey	gnya' skya rul
གཉའ་ཁོབས	screen to protect the neck attached to a helmet	gnya' khobs
གཉའ་ཁྲི་བསྟན་པོ	'the first ruler of men' in Tibet	gnya' khri bstan po
གཉའ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	king {gnya' khri btsan po}	gnya' khri btsan po
ཊསེནཔོ་ཐེ་ཨཱནཅིཨེནཏ	Nyatri Tsenpo meaning "King of the Throne on the Shoulders. " He was the first king, and was a manifestation of the Bodhisattva Sarvanivaranaviskambhin.	Tsenpo the Ancient
གཉའ་གོང	back of the neck	gnya' gong
གཉའ་རྒན་ཆགས་པ	incidently wealth and enjoyment becoming abundant/ complete	gnya' rgan chags pa
གཉའ་རྒྱབ	castellations, parapet	gnya' rgyab
གཉའ་སྒ	plow mdzo's yoke	gnya' sga
གཉའ་སྒུར	be subjected/ p[ut down	gnya' sgur
གཉའ་བཅག་པ	pride and confidence	gnya' bcag pa
གཉའ་ལྕིབས	gnya' lpags te yoke la dkri rgyu'i cloth/ felt	gnya' lcibs
གཉའ་ཆག	be depressed/ crest-fallen	gnya' chag
གཉའ་ཆག་ཉམས་ཤོར	depressed/ crestfallen	gnya' chag nyams shor
གཉའ་ཆག་པ	be depressed/ crest-fallen	gnya' chag pa
གཉའ་ལྟག	back of the neck	gnya' ltag
གཉའ་དྲག	[arch] rtsub 'gyur	gnya' drag
གཉའ་དྲག་འཁོར	evil spirit	gnya' drag 'khor
གཉའ་གདན	horses, mules etc kyi gnya' ltag protecting cloth, felt etc.	gnya' gdan
གཉའ་ནང	Nyanang, in Latö	gnya' nang
གཉའ་ནང་གྲོད་པ་ཕུག	Belly Cave of Nyanang, one of Milarepa's caves	gnya' nang grod pa phug
གཉའ་ནང་ཤོག་བུ	paper from gnya'	gnya' nang shog bu
གཉའ་གནོན	press down the back of the neck, oppress, coerce	gnya' gnon
གཉའ་གནོན་གཏོང	oppress, coerce	gnya' gnon gtong
གཉའ་གནོན་དུ་མནར	oppress, coerce	gnya' gnon du mnar
གཉའ་གནོན་བྱེད	oppress, coerce	gnya' gnon byed
གཉའ་གནོན་བྱེད་པ	oppress gnya' gnon myong mkhan mi dmangs oppressed masses/ peoples	gnya' gnon byed pa
གཉའ་གནོན་སྨ་འབེབས	btsan gnon gyis ngo smad du 'jug pa	gnya' gnon sma 'bebs
གཉའ་གནོན་འོག་ཏུ་སྡོད་མི་དགོས	not have to remain under oppression	gnya' gnon 'og tu sdod mi dgos
གཉའ་པོ	witness, one that gives evidence	gnya' po
གཉའ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	vouch for, be surety for	gnya' po byed pa
གཉའ་ཕབ་སྒྱིད་འདུག	cringing, servile	gnya' phab sgyid 'dug
གཉའ་བ	back/ nape of the neck	gnya' ba
གཉའ་བ་བརྟུངས	contracted or shortened neck	gnya' ba brtungs
གཉའ་བ་ཧྲངས་པ	ngan pa gnya' rengs,...Phru gu gcun mkhan med pas lang la shor nas gnya' ba hrangs pa	gnya' ba hrangs pa
གཉའ་བོ	1) Dpang po'am khag theg; 2) mag pa dang mna' ma skyel bsu byed mkhan, witness	gnya' bo
གཉའ་བྱེད་པོ	rgyab byed po, helper	gnya' byed po
གཉའ་མ	the female organ	gnya' ma
གཉའ་མི་སྒུར	willful, obstinate	gnya' mi sgur
གཉའ་དམས	pride chag pa, power nyams pa	gnya' dmas
གཉའ་རྩེ	cervical vertebra with its projecting process	gnya' rtse
གཉའ་ཚིག	cervical joint	gnya' tshig
གཉའ་ཚིགས	spinal joints	gnya' tshigs
གཉའ་ཚོག	rgyan dar above back of the neck of plow mdzo	gnya' tshog
གཉའ་ཟུངས་རྒྱུད་མོ	[arch] lcags thag	gnya' zungs rgyud mo
གཉའ་རངས་པ	* stiff necked, stubborn, obstinate, die hard	gnya' rangs pa
གཉའ་རལ་པ་ཅན	{gnya' ral pa can	gnya' ral pa can
གཉའ་རུས	neck bone	gnya' rus
གཉའ་རེངས	obstinate, stubborn, stiffnecked	gnya' rengs
གཉའ་རེངས་པ	stiff necked, stubborn, obstinate	gnya' rengs pa
གཉའ་རེངས་ཞི་བས་འདུལ་དཀའི་མི	stubborn/ unruly person who is hard to tame	gnya' rengs zhi bas 'dul dka'i mi
གཉའ་ལག་བཀུག་པ	tie animal's head and two front legs together w rope to transport	gnya' lag bkug pa
གཉའ་ལམ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gnya' lam
གཉའ་ཤ	flesh of the back of the neck/ throat	gnya' sha
གཉའ་ཤིང	a yoke; {gnyid 'thug po} yoke	gnya' shing
གཉའ་ཤིང་འཛིན	Yoke Holder, {gser ri bdun}. one of the seven rings of mountains surrounding the four continents	gnya' shing 'dzin
གཉལ	1) {gnyal}; 2) gnyal clan	gnyal
གཉལ་པ	native of gnyal	gnyal pa
གཉལ་པ་གྲྭ་ཚང	gnyal dre'u lhas monastery in the S	gnyal pa grwa tshang
གཉལ་ལོ་རོ	{gnyal lo ro} [place in lho brag rdzong, where formerly the people mi rnams kyi nang nas tshong las sam tsong pa nyi tse ba byed mkhan mang ba dang sa thag ring thung gang sar khyab che ba well known]	gnyal lo ro
གཉི	old way of writing {gnyis}	gnyi
གཉི་ག	[arch] both	gnyi ga
གཉི་ག་མིན་པ	which is neither	gnyi ga min pa
གཉི་གའི་ཕྱོགས་དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony with both	gnyi ga'i phyogs dang mthun pa
གཉི་མ	[arch] sun	gnyi ma
གཉི་ཟེར	sunbeam	gnyi zer
གཉི་གཟེར	[arch] sun rays	gnyi gzer
གཉིག	[arch] gcig	gnyig
གཉིག་ཏུ	into one, aimed at one, having only one object in view	gnyig tu
གཉིད	torpor, sleep, fade, drowsiness mibp 99, slumber, SA gzhan 'gyur bzhi, rnyid pa, sleepiness	gnyid
གཉིད་ཀྱི་སྙོམ་པ	[arch] sleep desiring laziness or sleep enjoying sgyid lug	gnyid kyi snyom pa
གཉིད་ཀྱི་ལོག་པ	fall asleep	gnyid kyi log pa
གཉིད་དཀྲོག	wake up, rouse from sleep [by shock/ fright [Gold]	gnyid dkrog
གཉིད་དཀྲོག་པ	wake	gnyid dkrog pa
གཉིད་ཁུ་བཞིན་འགྲོ་མཁན	sleep-walker	gnyid khu bzhin 'gro mkhan
གཉིད་ཁུ་ཟིན་པ	slept	gnyid khu zin pa
གཉིད་ཁུག	to fall asleep	gnyid khug
གཉིད་ཁུག་འགྲབ	drowsy	gnyid khug 'grab
གཉིད་ཁུག་པ	{gnyid kyang mi khug par gyur pa} could not even sleep	gnyid khug pa
གཉིད་ཁུགས་པ	get asleep	gnyid khugs pa
གཉིད་འཁུགས་པ	to fall asleep	gnyid 'khugs pa
གཉིད་སྒྲ	talking in one's sleep	gnyid sgra
གཉིད་སྔུར	snore	gnyid sngur
གཉིད་ཅན	drowsy, sleepy	gnyid can
གཉིད་ཅོག	dozing	gnyid cog
གཉིད་ཅོག་རྒྱག	doze, nod off, go to sleep	gnyid cog rgyag
གཉིད་ཅོག་རྒྱག་པ	doze	gnyid cog rgyag pa
གཉིད་ལྕི་པོ	sleep hard to awake from	gnyid lci po
གཉིད་ཆག	interrupted sleep, roused from slumber	gnyid chag
གཉིད་ཆག་པ	unable to sleep	gnyid chag pa
གཉིད་ཆེ	deep sleep	gnyid che
གཉིད་ཆེ་བ	deep sleep hard to wake from	gnyid che ba
གཉིད་ལྗི་པོ	heavy sleep	gnyid lji po
གཉིད་ཉལ	sleeping	gnyid nyal
གཉིད་ཉལ་བ	to go to sleep	gnyid nyal ba
གཉིད་ཉལ་བའི་ནམ	while sleeping	gnyid nyal ba'i nam
གཉིད་ཉལ་ཡོད་པའི་ནམ	while sleeping	gnyid nyal yod pa'i nam
གཉིད་གཏམ	talking in 1's sleep	gnyid gtam
གཉིད་རྟོག་ཙམ་ཁུག་པ	doze	gnyid rtog tsam khug pa
གཉིད་སྟུག་པོ	sleep hard to wake from [R]	gnyid stug po
གཉིད་ཐིབས་ཐིབས	drowsy, near going to sleep	gnyid thibs thibs
གཉིད་ཐུང་ཐུང	catnap	gnyid thung thung
གཉིད་ཐུང་ཐུང་ཁུག་པ	nap	gnyid thung thung khug pa
གཉིད་ཐུན	session/ period of sleep	gnyid thun
གཉིད་ཐུམ་པ	one uninterrupted portion of sleep	gnyid thum pa
གཉིད་ཐེབས	state/ occasion of sleep	gnyid thebs
གཉིད་ཐེབས་ཆག་པ	break one's sleep	gnyid thebs chag pa
གཉིད་མཐུག་པོ	state of deep sleep	gnyid mthug po
གཉིད་མཐུག་པོར་སོང	fell into a sound sleep	gnyid mthug por song
གཉིད་འཐིབ་པོ	deep sleep	gnyid 'thib po
གཉིད་འཐིབས	be fogged w sleep	gnyid 'thibs
གཉིད་འཐུག་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	bindu of the state of deep sleep	gnyid 'thug skabs kyi thig le
གཉིད་འཐུག་པོ	sleep hard to wake from	gnyid 'thug po
གཉིད་དང་ལྡན་པ	asleep	gnyid dang ldan pa
གཉིད་དུ	asleep	gnyid du
གཉིད་དུ་འགྲོ	go to sleep	gnyid du 'gro
གཉིད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	fall asleep	gnyid du 'gro ba
གཉིད་དུ་ཉལ་བ	go to sleep	gnyid du nyal ba
གཉིད་དུ་ལོག	gti mug gnyid du log - we sleep in ignorance	gnyid du log
གཉིད་དུ་སོང	has gone to sleep	gnyid du song
གཉིད་དུ་སོང་བ	to doze off	gnyid du song ba
གཉིད་དུ་སོང་བའི་རྨི་ལམ་ལ	one night he had a dream	gnyid du song ba'i rmi lam la
གཉིད་དུས	1) night; 2) time 1 is sleeping	gnyid dus
གཉིད་དུས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	luminosity at the time of sleep [a dharma of the completion stage, gnyid kyi shes pa snga ma rnam par dag and again the conceptuons of deream and rlung sbyong byed kyi gnyid snga ma'i rigs like tha...	gnyid dus kyi 'od gsal
གཉིད་འདོད	wishing to sleep	gnyid 'dod
གཉིད་འདོར་ཟས་བརྗེད	w/o sleep and forgetting food	gnyid 'dor zas brjed
གཉིད་འདྲོགས	suddenly be awakened gnyid har sad brgyab pa,...{glo bur 'ur sgra drag po thos pas gnyid 'drogs song	gnyid 'drogs
གཉིད་རྡོལ	somnambulism	gnyid rdol
གཉིད་ནང་འགྲོ་བ	somnambulism gnyid nang dbugs 'then pa'i skad 'ur snore	gnyid nang 'gro ba
གཉིད་པ	(tha mi dad pa be asleep	gnyid pa
གཉིད་བྲོ་པོ	sleepy	gnyid bro po
གཉིད་བྲོ་བ	asleep	gnyid bro ba
གཉིད་མ་ཁུག་པ	not asleep	gnyid ma khug pa
གཉིད་མ་ཁུགས	could not sleep {rgya mtsho la blta bas yengs nas gnyid ma khugs} could not sleep for looking at the sea	gnyid ma khugs
གཉིད་མ་ཐོབ	be sleepless	gnyid ma thob
གཉིད་མ་བྱུང་བ	wakefulness, sleeplessness	gnyid ma byung ba
གཉིད་མ་ཡོང	sleep has not come, I can't sleep	gnyid ma yong
གཉིད་མི་སད	sleep from which 1 doesn't wake up, snake	gnyid mi sad
གཉིད་མེད་རྒྱུད	nondual tantras	gnyid med rgyud
གཉིད་རྨུགས	sleepy; x {ha cang sdud che na gnyid rmugs la sogs pa'i skyon kyang 'jug pa yin} too much concentration also makes you sleepy	gnyid rmugs
གཉིད་རྨུགས་ལེ་ལོ	sleep, dullness and laziness	gnyid rmugs le lo
གཉིད་སྨན	sleeping pills/ medicine	gnyid sman
གཉིད་ཡར	not go to sleep	gnyid yar
གཉིད་ཡུར	go to sleep	gnyid yur
གཉིད་ཡེར	suffer from insomnia	gnyid yer
གཉིད་ལ་ཤོར	to fall asleep 996	gnyid la shor
གཉིད་ལ་ཤོར་བ	go to sleep	gnyid la shor ba
གཉིད་ལབ	talking in one's sleep	gnyid lab
གཉིད་ལབ་རྒྱག	talk in one's sleep	gnyid lab rgyag
གཉིད་ལབ་བྱེད	talk in one's sleep	gnyid lab byed
གཉིད་ལམ	dream	gnyid lam
གཉིད་ལམ་གཏོང	dream	gnyid lam gtong
གཉིད་ལམ་འདྲ་པོ	dreamy	gnyid lam 'dra po
གཉིད་ལམ་ཞེད་སྣང་ཚ་པོ	nightmare	gnyid lam zhed snang tsha po
གཉིད་ལམ་སད	wake up, arouse from sleep	gnyid lam sad
གཉིད་ལས་སད	wake up, arouse from sleep	gnyid las sad
གཉིད་ལས་སློང་བ	wake up, arouse from sleep	gnyid las slong ba
གཉིད་ལོག	asleep	gnyid log
གཉིད་ལོག་འདོད་པ	desire sleep, be sleepy	gnyid log 'dod pa
གཉིད་ལོགས་པ	to fall asleep	gnyid logs pa
གཉིད་ས	bed, place of sleep	gnyid sa
གཉིད་སངས	awake	gnyid sangs
གཉིད་སད	awake	gnyid sad
གཉིད་སད་དེ	awoke	gnyid sad de
གཉིད་སད་པ	to arouse from sleep, wake up	gnyid sad pa
གཉིད་སད་པར་བྱེད་པ	awake	gnyid sad par byed pa
གཉིད་སད་ཙ་ན	when he awoke	gnyid sad tsa na
གཉིད་སད་ཟིན་པ	woke	gnyid sad zin pa
གཉིད་སྲབ	light sleep	gnyid srab
གཉིད་སྲུང	try to keep from going to sleep	gnyid srung
གཉིད་སྲེད	craving/ attachment to sleep	gnyid sred
གཉིད་སླེབས	near going to sleep	gnyid slebs
གཉིད་གསོད་པ	gnyid las slong ba,...Skad btang nas gnyid gsod pa	gnyid gsod pa
གཉིད་ཧབ་སད་རྒྱག་པ	gnyid 'drogs nas awake...Phru gu gnyid hab sad brgyab pas ngus pa	gnyid hab sad rgyag pa
གཉིན	kinsman	gnyin
གཉིན་པོ	antidote	gnyin po
གཉིན་པོར་འགྲོ་བ	to be effective as an antidote	gnyin por 'gro ba
གཉིལ་བ	push down, destroy, exile, SA snyil ba, be desiccated, crumble away, thaw	gnyil ba
གཉིས་ཀ	the two, both	gnyis ka
གཉིས་ཀ་རྒྱུད	ubhayatantra	gnyis ka rgyud
གཉིས་ཀ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of Upa Tantra, [the vehicle whose action is Kriya tantra and view is yoga tantra], {ma ning gi theg pa}; spiritual approach of dual tantra	gnyis ka rgyud kyi theg pa
གཉིས་ཀ་མ་ཐོབ	having neither [meat nor fish]	gnyis ka ma thob
གཉིས་ཀ་ཡིན་མིན་གྱི་མུ་བཞི	the four possibilities of being one, the other, both or neither	gnyis ka yin min gyi mu bzhi
གཉིས་ཀད	SA gnyis ka	gnyis kad
གཉིས་ཀའི་རྒྱུད	Ubhaya tantra	gnyis ka'i rgyud
གཉིས་ཀའི་ཆ	duality	gnyis ka'i cha
གཉིས་ཀའི་ཆ་ལས་གྲོལ་བ	liberation from duality	gnyis ka'i cha las grol ba
གཉིས་ཀའི་ཆ་ལས་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	completely liberated from the two aspects	gnyis ka'i cha las rnam par grol ba
གཉིས་ཀའི་དོན	meaning of both, interests of both parties	gnyis ka'i don
གཉིས་ཀྱི	dual	gnyis kyi
གཉིས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	dualistic things	gnyis kyi dngos po
གཉིས་ཀྱི་གཉིས་སྤྲད་པ	have sex	gnyis kyi gnyis sprad pa
གཉིས་ཀྱི་དོང་བྱེད	produce the pit of duality	gnyis kyi dong byed
གཉིས་ཀྱི་དོན་སྤངས	overcome dualism	gnyis kyi don spangs
གཉིས་ཀྱི་ནང་ནས	whether	gnyis kyi nang nas
གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of duality	gnyis kyi mtshan nyid
གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཚན་བྱེད	produce the characteristics of duality	gnyis kyi mtshan byed
གཉིས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	the two luminosities	gnyis kyi 'od gsal
གཉིས་ཀྱིས་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	two having a dissimilar characteristic	gnyis kyis ldog pa can
གཉིས་སྐྱེ	born of duality	gnyis skye
གཉིས་སྐྱེ་མེད་པ	{bdag dang gzhan gnyis ka las skye ba med pa}	gnyis skye med pa
གཉིས་སྐྱེད་པ་མི་ཟད་པ་ཉིད	non exhaustion of production of duality	gnyis skyed pa mi zad pa nyid
གཉིས་སྐྱེས	Birds, "twice-born,"	gnyis skyes
གཉིས་སྐྱེས་རྒྱལ	moon	gnyis skyes rgyal
གཉིས་སྐྱེས་རྒྱལ་པོ	1) garuda; 2) Bhrama; 3) moon	gnyis skyes rgyal po
གཉིས་ག	both	gnyis ga
གཉིས་གྲོས	tete-a-tete	gnyis gros
གཉིས་དགའི་ཁྱིམ	female organ	gnyis dga'i khyim
གཉིས་རྒོལ་ལས་འགུལ	two "anti" movement	gnyis rgol las 'gul
གཉིས་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུའི་འདུལ་ཁྲིམས	two hundred and fifty disciplines of the Vinaya. The vows of a monk bhikshu {dge slong} explained in the Vinaya Scriptures	gnyis brgya lnga bcu'i 'dul khrims
གཉིས་བརྒྱུད	copper	gnyis brgyud
གཉིས་ཅར	the two [together], both	gnyis car
གཉིས་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	argument concerning having a companion [ggd]	gnyis bcas kyi sbyor ba
གཉིས་ཆ	half	gnyis cha
གཉིས་ཆར	both together	gnyis char
གཉིས་ཆོས	dualistic phenomena	gnyis chos
གཉིས་མཇུག་གསུམ་མཐུད	3rd following after the 2nd [example of continuity]	gnyis mjug gsum mthud
གཉིས་གཉིས	two each	gnyis gnyis
གཉིས་གཉིས་འཁྱུད་པ	sexual union	gnyis gnyis 'khyud pa
གཉིས་གཉིས་སྤྱོད	ngur pa, yellow goose?	gnyis gnyis spyod
གཉིས་གཉིས་ཟུང	pairing, male and female living together gnyis mnyam dgu mnyam gyi rta babs bzo dbyibs of the pediments of the four gates of a divine palace	gnyis gnyis zung
གཉིས་རྟོག	dualistic thinking, dualistic concept, dualistic thought	gnyis rtog
གཉིས་རྟོག་དྲྭ་བ	net of dualistic thought	gnyis rtog drwa ba
གཉིས་རྟོག་བློ	dualistic mind and thoughts 997	gnyis rtog blo
གཉིས་སྟོང	empty of the two [types of self, or of perceiver and the perceived]	gnyis stong
གཉིས་སྟོང་གི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness devoid of duality	gnyis stong gi de kho na nyid
གཉིས་སྟོང་གི་ཤེས་པ	nondual consciousness; [in Chittamatra] {gzung 'dzin gnyis stong gi shes pa rang rig rang gsal}	gnyis stong gi shes pa
གཉིས་སྟོང་ཡེ་ཤེས	nondual wisdom	gnyis stong ye shes
གཉིས་སྟོང་ཤེས་པ	nondual consciousness; {gnyis stong gi shes pa}	gnyis stong shes pa
གཉིས་ཐད་ནས	secondly	gnyis thad nas
གཉིས་ཐོག	2nd floor, 2-story	gnyis thog
གཉིས་ཐོག་སྒང་ལ་སྡོད	live on the 2nd floor	gnyis thog sgang la sdod
གཉིས་ཐོག་པའི་ཁང་པ	2-story house	gnyis thog pa'i khang pa
གཉིས་འཐུང	cow, cattle	gnyis 'thung
གཉིས་འཐུང་དབང་པོ	bull [leading a herd]	gnyis 'thung dbang po
གཉིས་ལྡན	{gnyis ldan gyi dus} age of one half perfection	gnyis ldan
གཉིས་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས	age of one half perfection	gnyis ldan gyi dus
གཉིས་ལྡན་དུས	second age of the present kalpa	gnyis ldan dus
གཉིས་ལྡབ	two-fold, double, twice, for the second time	gnyis ldab
གཉིས་བསྡུས	samsara and nirvana	gnyis bsdus
གཉིས་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the phenomena included within the two [samsara and nirvana]	gnyis bsdus kyi chos
གཉིས་སྣང	1) duality. 2) dualistic perception / experience / phenomena / appearance; the dualitic way of perceiving; dualistic thought	gnyis snang
གཉིས་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་པ	confused dualistic appearance	gnyis snang 'khrul pa
གཉིས་སྣང་གི་རྟོག	hesitation, irresolution, wavering	gnyis snang gi rtog
གཉིས་སྣང་གི་རྟོག་པ	conception of dualistic appearance, dualistic thought	gnyis snang gi rtog pa
གཉིས་སྣང་གི་རྟོག་པ་ལོག་པ	the wrong conceptions od dualistic appearance	gnyis snang gi rtog pa log pa
གཉིས་སྣང་གི་ཤེས་པ	Dualistic knowledge gnyis snang 'gag pa gnyis snang dang	gnyis snang gi shes pa
གཉིས་སྣང་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle dualistic appearance	gnyis snang phra mo
གཉིས་སྣང་བྱུང་ཚོར་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	dualistic thoughts of occurring sensation. Dualistic refers to perceiver and perceived (gzung 'dzin).	gnyis snang byung tshor gyi rtog pa
གཉིས་སྣང་རགས་པ	coarse dualistic appearance	gnyis snang rags pa
གཉིས་བསྣན་ཏེ	adding two on	gnyis bsnan te
གཉིས་པ	second	gnyis pa
གཉིས་པ་ཅན	the second only	gnyis pa can
གཉིས་པ་རྣམས	all the second ones	gnyis pa rnams
གཉིས་པ་མ་ཡིན	there is no second entity	gnyis pa ma yin
གཉིས་པར	second, secondly	gnyis par
གཉིས་པོ	the 2nd, the two [together], both, mutually two	gnyis po
གཉིས་ཕན	benefitting both [self and other], mutually beneficial	gnyis phan
གཉིས་ཕྱོགས	both sides	gnyis phyogs
གཉིས་ཕྲུགས	sets of two	gnyis phrugs
གཉིས་བྲལ	free from duality	gnyis bral
གཉིས་མ་ཕྱེད	not distinguish between	gnyis ma phyed
གཉིས་མིན	not dual	gnyis min
གཉིས་མེད	Nondual Tantra	gnyis med
གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	non-dual being, the	gnyis med kyi rgyud
ཅོནཏིནུཨིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	duality, non-dual tantras	continuity of non
གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་དོན་གསུངས་པ	he taught them about and the meaning of nonduality	gnyis med kyi don gsungs pa
གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་བློ	non-dual awareness, nondual cognition / understanding	gnyis med kyi blo
གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of nonduality, nondual wisdom	gnyis med kyi ye shes
གཉིས་མེད་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	non-dual mandala	gnyis med dkyil 'khor
གཉིས་མེད་གྲུབ་པ	Accomplishment of Nonduality; one of the {grub pa sde bdun} tantric scriptures	gnyis med grub pa
གཉིས་མེད་རྒྱུད	non-dual tantras [of anuttara]	gnyis med rgyud
གཉིས་མེད་ཏིང་ངེ	1 of chos brgyad	gnyis med ting nge
གཉིས་མེད་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	non-dual contemplation of dbyings & ye shes 998	gnyis med ting nge 'dzin
གཉིས་མེད་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in manner) consistent with nonduality*	gnyis med ltar shar ba
གཉིས་མེད་དུ	indivisibly, in a state of nondual union	gnyis med du
གཉིས་མེད་དུ་བསྲེས	inseparably unified, unified inseparably	gnyis med du bsres
གཉིས་མེད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Nyimey Namgyal. Name of a tantric scripture	gnyis med rnam rgyal
གཉིས་མེད་པ	there is no dualism of ..	gnyis med pa
གཉིས་མེད་སྦྱོར་བ	the union of nonduality	gnyis med sbyor ba
གཉིས་མེད་མ་ནིང་གི་རྒྱུད	nondual class	gnyis med ma ning gi rgyud
གཉིས་མེད་ཟུང་འཇུག	non-dual wisdom / unity	gnyis med zung 'jug
གཉིས་མེད་ཡིད	non-dual mind	gnyis med yid
གཉིས་མེད་ཡིད་ཀྱིས	with an undivided /	gnyis med yid kyis
གཉིས་མེད་ཡེ་འབྲེལ	timeless nondual integration	gnyis med ye 'brel
གཉིས་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	non-dual wisdom	gnyis med ye shes
གཉིས་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་རོལ་པའི་ངང	the state / continuity of nondual wisdom display	gnyis med ye shes rol pa'i ngang
ཐེ་པླཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	dual wisdom	the play of non
གཉིས་མེད་གསུང་པ	epithet of buddha,	gnyis med gsung pa
པྲོཔོཨུནདེར་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	dualist doctrine	propounder of non
གཉིས་མེད་གསུང་བ	Buddha	gnyis med gsung ba
གཉིས་མེད་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	Nondual Ati Yoga [Tantra]	gnyis med a ti yo ga
གཉིས་རྩེག	dual	gnyis rtseg
གཉིས་ཚིག	1) rnam dbye dang po'i yan lag ming mtha'i dag gi ming; 2) plural	gnyis tshig
གཉིས་ཚོགས	combination of both [ggd]	gnyis tshogs
གཉིས་འཛིན	1) dualistic grasping/ fixation; 1) grasp the two extremes [of eternalism and nihilism] 2) grasp object and perceiver as different]; 3) hold as being 2; 4) unsure, vacillating)	gnyis 'dzin
གཉིས་འཛིན་ཀུན་རྟོག	dualistic thought	gnyis 'dzin kun rtog
གཉིས་འཛིན་ཀྱི་འཆིང་བ་ལས་འགྲོལ་བ	liberated from bondage to dualistic thinking	gnyis 'dzin kyi 'ching ba las 'grol ba
གཉིས་འཛིན་གྱི་དྲི་མ	stains grasping at duality	gnyis 'dzin gyi dri ma
གཉིས་འཛིན་གྱི་བག་ཆག	habitual tendencies for dualistic fixation	gnyis 'dzin gyi bag chag
གཉིས་འཛིན་ལྟ་བ	to look upon two things as differing	gnyis 'dzin lta ba
གཉིས་འཛིན་མེད་པ	non-duality	gnyis 'dzin med pa
གཉིས་འཛིན་ཨ་འཐས	dualistic grasping	gnyis 'dzin a 'thas
གཉིས་རྫོགས	perfect(ion) in duality	gnyis rdzogs
གཉིས་ཞུ	copied twice, second copy	gnyis zhu
གཉིས་ཟད	non-duality	gnyis zad
གཉིས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པར་བྱ་བ	completely ripened duality	gnyis yongs su smin par bya ba
གཉིས་རིམ་དུ་བཅུག་ནས	a chamber within a chamber	gnyis rim du bcug nas
གཉིས་ལ་དམིགས་པ	conception / perception of duality	gnyis la dmigs pa
གཉིས་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	the birth of duality	gnyis las skye ba
གཉིས་ལས་སད	having [been] awakened gnyis lo drang gzhag phyogs lhung med	gnyis las sad
གཉིས་ཤད	the strokes put after a complete sentence	gnyis shad
གཉིས་ཤུ	20	gnyis shu
གཉིས་སུ	duality	gnyis su
གཉིས་སུ་འཁྲུལ་པ	confusion of duality	gnyis su 'khrul pa
གཉིས་སུ་བགོས་པའམ་གཏུབ་པ	bisect	gnyis su bgos pa'am gtub pa
གཉིས་སུ་བཅག་པ	break off with the fingers and thumb	gnyis su bcag pa
གཉིས་སུ་འདུ་བ	to be included within two [types]	gnyis su 'du ba
གཉིས་སུ་སྣང་བ	dualistic appearance	gnyis su snang ba
གཉིས་སུ་སྣང་བ་མེད་པ	w/o dualistic appearance	gnyis su snang ba med pa
གཉིས་སུ་བྱར་མེད་པ	w/o production of duality/ dualistic action/ being divided in two	gnyis su byar med pa
གཉིས་སུ་བྱུང	they became two, it split into two	gnyis su byung
གཉིས་སུ་དབྱེ་བ	divided in two	gnyis su dbye ba
གཉིས་སུ་དབྱེར་མེད	no dichotomy	gnyis su dbyer med
གཉིས་སུ་མེད	Kalachakra	gnyis su med
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པ	non-duality, nonduality, without duality, nondual	gnyis su med pa
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི	which cannot be reduced to duality	gnyis su med pa'i
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག་སྦྱོར	nondual momentary training/union	gnyis su med pa'i skad cig sbyor
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག་མའི་སྦྱོར་བ་ནོན	dual instantaneous union	gnyis su med pa'i skad cig ma'i sbyor ba non
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་སྐད་གཅིག་གི་སྦྱོར་བ་ནོན	dual momentary training	gnyis su med pa'i skad gcig gi sbyor ba non
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་རྒྱུད	nondual tantra	gnyis su med pa'i rgyud
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness that is the absence of duality [between subject and object] [ggd]	gnyis su med pa'i stong pa nyid
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་དོན	[the meaning of]	gnyis su med pa'i don
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic of non-duality	gnyis su med pa'i mtshan nyid
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	nondual wakefulness	gnyis su med pa'i ye shes
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	non-dual awareness w/o the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism	gnyis su med pa'i shes pa
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པར	indivisibly, inseparably, nondual	gnyis su med par
གཉིས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	dualism	gnyis su smra ba
གཉིས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	consider as two, find a difference between two things	gnyis su 'dzin pa
གཉིས་སུ་ཡོད	dualistic existence 999	gnyis su yod
གཉིས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	dualistic existence	gnyis su yod pa
གཉིས་གསུམ་ཟློས་པ	repetition	gnyis gsum zlos pa
གཉུག	genuine, authentic, innate, ongoing, uninterrupted, perpetual, primordial, original, natural, continuously residing, innate genuine nature, original untouched nature	gnyug
གཉུག་གནས	indigenous, naturally resident. Abbr. of {gnyug mar gnas pa}	gnyug gnas
གཉུག་མ	genuine (nature)	gnyug ma
གཉུག་མ་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	innate thatness	gnyug ma de kho na nyid
གཉུག་མ་རང་བབས	Thrangu Rinpoche: as it is, and its own way / as it flows by itself	gnyug ma rang babs
གཉུག་མ་རབ་རིབ་ཅན	a distorted version of the natural state	gnyug ma rab rib can
གཉུག་མའི	genuine nature	gnyug ma'i
གཉུག་མའི་དགེ་འདུན	the sangha that was already there	gnyug ma'i dge 'dun
གཉུག་མའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	three avenues of genuine being	gnyug ma'i sgo gsum
གཉུག་མའི་ངང	innate state	gnyug ma'i ngang
གཉུག་མའི་ཐོལ་གླུ	spontaneous song of the natural state	gnyug ma'i thol glu
གཉུག་མའི་དེ་ཉིད	innate thatness	gnyug ma'i de nyid
གཉུག་མའི་དོན	genuine, authentic, innate, on-going, uninterrupted, perpetual, primordial, original, natural [state], continuously residing, innate genuine nature, original untouched nature	gnyug ma'i don
གཉུག་མའི་དྲན་པ	natural mindfulness	gnyug ma'i dran pa
གཉུག་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	natural yoga, natural practice	gnyug ma'i rnal 'byor
གཉུག་མའི་འོད་གསལ	luminescent nature	gnyug ma'i 'od gsal
གཉུག་མའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	innate, natural, selfarising, primordially pure insightwisdom	gnyug ma'i ye shes
གཉུག་མའི་རང་ཞལ	the original face of the innate	gnyug ma'i rang zhal
གཉུག་མའི་རང་ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	to see the natural face of original mind, behold the innate simplicity	gnyug ma'i rang zhal mthong ba
གཉུག་མའི་ལུས	body of the natural state [the subtle life grasping wind or dvangs ma'i lus of inseparable mind and wind, continuous from beiginningless samsara to buddhahood]	gnyug ma'i lus
གཉུག་མའི་ཤེས་པ	natural mind, primordial awareness	gnyug ma'i shes pa
གཉུག་མའི་གཤིས	the innate nature	gnyug ma'i gshis
གཉུག་མའི་ས	[arch] charnel ground	gnyug ma'i sa
གཉུག་མའི་སེམས	innate/ continuous/ fundamental mind	gnyug ma'i sems
གཉུག་མའི་ལྷ	innate deity	gnyug ma'i lha
གཉུག་མར་གནས་པ	continuously existing, existing as/within the natural state	gnyug mar gnas pa
གཉུག་དམག	army continuously staying in 1 place	gnyug dmag
གཉུག་སེམས	see {gnyug ma'i sems}	gnyug sems
གཉུག་བསྲིངས	maintaining the natural condition	gnyug bsrings
གཉུང་དཀར	grape-seed	gnyung dkar
གཉུད་མའི་ངང	natural state	gnyud ma'i ngang
གཉུལ	(tha dad pa,, be a watchman, search, examine, spy	gnyul
གཉུལ་བ	{gnyul ba, gnyul ba, gnyul ba, gnyul} trans. v	gnyul ba
གཉེ་བ	a wooer, courter	gnye ba
གཉེ་བོ	[arch] messenger	gnye bo
གཉེ་མ	colon, great gut	gnye ma
གཉེད	torpor	gnyed
གཉེད་པོས་སྤངས་བ	get rid of through a method	gnyed pos spangs ba
གཉེན	relatives {sha'kya 'di rnams nga'i gnyen yin pa} the Sakyans are my people, my relatives	gnyen
གཉེན་ཀ	danger	gnyen ka
གཉེན་སྐོར	gnyen nye 'khor	gnyen skor
གཉེན་སྐྱོང	{dgra 'dul gnyen skyong} take care of your friends and finish off your enemies	gnyen skyong
གཉེན་བསྐྱར་སྒྲིག	remarry	gnyen bskyar sgrig
གཉེན་ཁ	bza' tshang, khyim thab [husband wife, married couple]	gnyen kha
གཉེན་ཁ་བྲལ་བ	1) w/o khyo shug [husband and wife?] bral ba; 2) Mthun grogs rgyab 'gal du song ba	gnyen kha bral ba
གཉེན་ཁར་སླེབས་པ	go as a bride, become a husband	gnyen khar slebs pa
གཉེན་འཁོར	friends and attendants	gnyen 'khor
གཉེན་གན	slong chang gtong nyin bu mna'i khyim phyogs gnyis nas bzhag pa'i gan rgya	gnyen gan
གཉེན་གྱི་སྒྱུག་མོ	mother-in-law by relation	gnyen gyi sgyug mo
གཉེན་གྱི་འཆིངས	bound by friends and family {nga lta bu skal med nor ldan gnyen gyi 'chings pas bsdams} I have the misfortune of being wealthy and am bound by friends and family	gnyen gyi 'chings
གཉེན་གྱི་ཕྱོགས	friends and relations	gnyen gyi phyogs
གཉེན་གྲོགས	friend, make friends gnyen dgu la g.yo byas pa - to deceive close friends	gnyen grogs
གཉེན་འགྲིག་པ	1) mental accord arising; 2) relationship of a married couple	gnyen 'grig pa
གཉེན་སྒྲིག	matrimony, wedlock, marriage	gnyen sgrig
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་གི	wedding	gnyen sgrig gi
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་བཅའ་ཁྲིམས	marriage law	gnyen sgrig bca' khrims
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	marriage ceremony, wedding	gnyen sgrig rten 'brel
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་པ	mate	gnyen sgrig pa
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	bring minds into accord, marry	gnyen sgrig byed pa
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་རང་མོས	unarranged marriage	gnyen sgrig rang mos
གཉེན་སྒྲིག་ལག་ཁྱེར	marriage certificate	gnyen sgrig lag khyer
གཉེན་སྒྲིབ་བག་སྟོན	marriage celebration	gnyen sgrib bag ston
གཉེན་ཅན	polite for gnyen	gnyen can
གཉེན་གཅིག་པོ	single/ only ally	gnyen gcig po
གཉེན་ཉེ	relative 1000	gnyen nye
གཉེན་ཉེ་དུ	spun and mdza' grogs	gnyen nye du
གཉེན་ཉེ་བ	near relations, cousins	gnyen nye ba
གཉེན་ཉེ་བློ་ཕམ	spun and mdza' grogs discouraged	gnyen nye blo pham
གཉེན་ཉེ་འབྲེལ	relatives by blood or marriage connection	gnyen nye 'brel
གཉེན་ཉེ་མོ	near relations, cousins	gnyen nye mo
གཉེན་ཉེ་རིགས	friends	gnyen nye rigs
གཉེན་ཏེ	[arch] bos te	gnyen te
གཉེན་སྟོན	wedding party	gnyen ston
གཉེན་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས་འབྲེལ	bza' tshang dga' mthun gyi las 'brel	gnyen mthun gyi las 'brel
གཉེན་འཐམས་པ	[arch] phan tshun gnyen tshan du sgrig pa	gnyen 'thams pa
གཉེན་དང་སྣག་གི་གཉེན་མཚམས	paternal and maternal relatives	gnyen dang snag gi gnyen mtshams
གཉེན་དུ	friend; friendly, benevolent, helpful	gnyen du
གཉེན་དུ་གཟིར	to gaze upwards	gnyen du gzir
གཉེན་དུ་ལུས་པ	remain uppermost	gnyen du lus pa
གཉེན་འདབ	spun nye du'am gnyen bshes	gnyen 'dab
གཉེན་འདུན	warmth toward relatives, relatives, concord, harmony	gnyen 'dun
གཉེན་ལྡན	{grong khyer gnyen ldan} the city of Bandhumati	gnyen ldan
གཉེན་སྡེ	the aspect of the antidote	gnyen sde
གཉེན་སྡེབ	1) bza' tshang mthun sdeb; 2) gnyen nye sgab mthun byed pa, sngar pha tshan mi rabs bdun brgyud dang ma tshan mi rabs lnga brgyud tshun chad la nye du'am gnyen 'dun zer	gnyen sdeb
གཉེན་རྣམས	the relatives	gnyen rnams
གཉེན་པ	acquisition, helpful factors, friends, kinsman	gnyen pa
གཉེན་པས་བསྲུང་བ	preserved or protected by kinsman	gnyen pas bsrung ba
གཉེན་པོ	[Skt] pratipaksha: remedy, antidote; antidotal technique/ corrective measure, cure; opponent, counteragent, antithesis, factors discordant to	gnyen po
གཉེན་པོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པའི་སྟོབས	Power of the applied antidote	gnyen po kun tu spyod pa'i stobs
གཉེན་པོ་ཀྱིས་བཅོམ་པ	a remedy has routed it	gnyen po kyis bcom pa
གཉེན་པོ་ཁྱུང་གི་སྒྲུབ་པ	Garuda Remedy Sadhana	gnyen po khyung gi sgrub pa
གཉེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་ལ་གོམས་པ	accustomed to the antidote within one's being	gnyen po rgyud la goms pa
གཉེན་པོ་སྒོམ་པ	meditation on antidotes	gnyen po sgom pa
གཉེན་པོ་དངོས་མེད	beyond any antidote	gnyen po dngos med
གཉེན་པོ་ཅི་ཐུལ་གྱིས	counteract them immediately with antidotes	gnyen po ci thul gyis
གཉེན་པོ་ཆིག་ཆོད་ཀུན་གྲོལ	antidote that universally frees	gnyen po chig chod kun grol
གཉེན་པོ་ཉིད	process of counteracting	gnyen po nyid
གཉེན་པོ་སྟོབས་བཞི	the four opponent powers	gnyen po stobs bzhi
གཉེན་པོ་བརྟེན	apply the antidotes	gnyen po brten
གཉེན་པོ་དང་མ་བྲལ་བ	not free from the antidote	gnyen po dang ma bral ba
གཉེན་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུ	vajra-like antidote	gnyen po rdo rje lta bu
གཉེན་པོ་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	covert/ indirect intention of antidote [holy dharma la brnyas pa etc. for the sake of taming the {nyes pa brgyad} teaching the mahayana etc.]	gnyen po ldem dgongs
གཉེན་པོ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	[TRS 1343] expl	gnyen po ldem por dgongs pa
གཉེན་པོ་རྣམ་བྱད་གི་རྟོག་པ	conception of purification by antidotes gnyen po phun sum tshogs pa dang ldan	gnyen po rnam byad gi rtog pa
གཉེན་པོ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རྣམ	knowledge that 1 can overcome one's rang gi mi mthun phyogs,	gnyen po phyogs kyi shes rnam
གཉེན་པོ་འཕྲལ་ཤོར	Temporary straying from the remedy	gnyen po 'phral shor
གཉེན་པོ་བཞི	the four antidotes	gnyen po bzhi
གཉེན་པོ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation of mind-made antidotes	gnyen po yid la byed pa bsgom pa
གཉེན་པོ་ཡོངས་སུ་འགྲིབ་པ	obscuring [the] antidote	gnyen po yongs su 'grib pa
གཉེན་པོ་རི་རྫོང	Nyenpo Ridzong [on the western ridge of Kailash]	gnyen po ri rdzong
གཉེན་པོ་ལ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	covert/ indirect intention of antidote	gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa
གཉེན་པོ་གཤིས་ཤོར	Basic straying from the remedy	gnyen po gshis shor
གཉེན་པོའི་ཁྱད་པར་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing special antidotes	gnyen po'i khyad par dang ldan pa
གཉེན་པོའི་དགེ་བ	remedial virtue [obscurations of kleshas and knowables rnam par sun 'byin pa and thag bsring ba and exertion on the path of abandoning and separating]	gnyen po'i dge ba
གཉེན་པོའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice of the antidote	gnyen po'i sgrub pa
གཉེན་པོའི་ཆོས	antidote dharma, the	gnyen po'i chos
གཉེན་པོའི་རྟོག་པ	concept of an antidote	gnyen po'i rtog pa
གཉེན་པོའི་སྟོབས	obscuration abandoning power of the antidote	gnyen po'i stobs
གཉེན་པོའི་སྟོབས་བཞི	the four powers of the antidote	gnyen po'i stobs bzhi
གཉེན་པོའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on the antidote	gnyen po'i rnam pa bsgom pa
གཉེན་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	the remedy aspect	gnyen po'i phyogs
གཉེན་པོའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཞི་ཤེས	fundamental knowledge which is the antidote [among the sher phyin don bdun cu] gzhi shes accomplished by upaya mahakaruna and emptiness experientially realizing prajna, knowledge serving as an anti...	gnyen po'i phyogs kyi gzhi shes
གཉེན་པོའི་ཕྲལ་ཤོར་དུ་གོལ	deviating into the temporary straying of the remedy	gnyen po'i phral shor du gol
གཉེན་པོའི་དབྱེ་བ	reveal the antidote	gnyen po'i dbye ba
གཉེན་པོའི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	practice a host of antidotes gnyen po'i yan lag bsam gtan bzhi'i yan	gnyen po'i tshogs sgrub
ལག་ཅིག་སྟེ	the antidote for things abandoned in their own places in the four dhyanas [rang sa'i spang bya spong ba'i gnyen po] &, the higher qualities attained by that gnyen po'i yan lag bsam gtan bzhi'i yan	lag cig ste
གཉེན་པོའི་ཡེ་ཤོར	basic straying of the remedy	gnyen po'i ye shor
གཉེན་པོའི་ལམ	the path of antidotes [path serving as obscuration abandoning antidote, mthong sgom gyi bar including the paths of seeing and meditation, up to??]	gnyen po'i lam
གཉེན་པོར་སྐྱབས་པ་བཞིན	Like seeking clemency. gshed mas bdas nas + when dragged before the executioner	gnyen por skyabs pa bzhin
གཉེན་པོར་འགྲོ་བ	be effective as an antidote	gnyen por 'gro ba
གཉེན་པོས་སྤངས་བ	get rid of/abandon through a method	gnyen pos spangs ba
གཉེན་པོས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{dper na so sor ma brtag pa'i sman bsten pa lta bu'o,} 'Remedial indeterminates' are, for instance, applying medicines [for diseases], which have not been diagnosed.	gnyen pos lung ma bstan
གཉེན་དཔང	at a wedding phan tshun gnyis phyogs bar gyi dpang po	gnyen dpang
གཉེན་དཔལ་དབྱངས	tibetan master who taught in the late 8th and early 9th centuries, SA gnyan dpal dbyangs	gnyen dpal dbyangs
གཉེན་ཕྱོགས	close relatives * friends and relatives	gnyen phyogs
གཉེན་འཕྲད	meet parents etc relatives	gnyen 'phrad
གཉེན་བྱེད་པ	marry, become related by marriage, marriage	gnyen byed pa
གཉེན་འབྲེལ	{'grogs pa'i gnyen 'brel} acquaintances	gnyen 'brel
གཉེན་འབྲེལ་གཏོང	propose marriage	gnyen 'brel gtong
གཉེན་འབྲེལ་བ	be related, connected by marriage or friendship	gnyen 'brel ba
གཉེན་བཙལ་བ	make pliable	gnyen btsal ba
གཉེན་ཚན	{ma dang gnyen tshan} mother and other relatives	gnyen tshan
གཉེན་མཛའ་བཤེས	relatives and loved ones	gnyen mdza' bshes
གཉེན་བཞེས	relation, relative, friend	gnyen bzhes
གཉེན་ཟླ	gnyen ya or gnyen phyogs grogs po	gnyen zla
གཉེན་ཡ	relation, friend	gnyen ya
གཉེན་ཡ་གཉིས	the two rivals	gnyen ya gnyis
གཉེན་ཡིག	bride sending and receiving gan yig, marriage certificate	gnyen yig
གཉེན་རིང	distant relative	gnyen ring
གཉེན་རིང་པོ	distant relation	gnyen ring po
གཉེན་ལ་ཁ་ཟས་སྙོམས་པར་བྱེད	dividing food equally with his friend (1 of 4 khyim bya'i spyod pa)	gnyen la kha zas snyoms par byed
གཉེན་ལ་བྱམས་པ་བྱེད་པ	love one's relations gnyen la g.yo byas pa - to deceive close friends	gnyen la byams pa byed pa
གཉེན་ལོག	after a wife has come, the boy and girl w household go to the parents's house for the 1st time	gnyen log
གཉེན་གཤིན	SA gnyen gnyen gshin nye du mdza' mthun,...Phyogs gnyis dbar du gnyen gshin gyi 'brel lam dam zab cig yod	gnyen gshin
གཉེན་གཤིས	family members	gnyen gshis
གཉེན་བཤེས	{mdza' ba'i gnyen bshes} beloved spouses and relatives	gnyen bshes
གཉེན་བཤེས་གྲོགས་མཆེད	brothers and sisters, relatives and friends	gnyen bshes grogs mched
གཉེན་བཤེས་ནོར་རྫས་ཤུལ་དུ་འབོར	you will leave behind relatives, friends and wealth	gnyen bshes nor rdzas shul du 'bor
གཉེན་བཤེས་ཟད་པ	termination of friendship	gnyen bshes zad pa
གཉེན་སྲིད	relatives	gnyen srid
གཉེན་སྲེད	clinging/ attachment to the antidote	gnyen sred
གཉེན་བསླུས་པ	allure, seduce	gnyen bslus pa
གཉེའོ	wooer, courtier	gnye'o
གཉེར	manage, provide [for], look after, work/ strive for	gnyer
གཉེར་ཀ	management, supervision	gnyer ka
གཉེར་ཀ་གཏད	entrust to 1's managers	gnyer ka gtad
གཉེར་ཀ་གཏད་པ	commit a thing to a person's charge, put a person in trust of	gnyer ka gtad pa
གཉེར་ཀ་བྱེད	take care of, supervise, pay attention to	gnyer ka byed
གཉེར་ཁ	take care that, have a commission to	gnyer kha
གཉེར་ཁ་བྱེད་པ	take care that, have a commission to	gnyer kha byed pa
གཉེར་ཁང	store-room	gnyer khang
གཉེར་གཉེར	1) show a wrathful grimace; 2) long fans gnyer gnyer byed pa three Don gnyer	gnyer gnyer
གཉེར་གཏད	to entrust, confide in/ commit to one's care	gnyer gtad
གཉེར་གཏད་པ	to entrust, assign, place in charge	gnyer gtad pa
གཉེར་གཏད་མཛད་པ	entrusted	gnyer gtad mdzad pa
གཉེར་དུ	fully	gnyer du
གཉེར་དུ་བཅོལ	was entrusted to	gnyer du bcol
གཉེར་དུ་བཅོལ་བ	charge, to be the custodian	gnyer du bcol ba
གཉེར་དུ་གཏད	to authorize/ to assign	gnyer du gtad
གཉེར་དུ་གཏད་པ	entrustment	gnyer du gtad pa
གཉེར་དུ་བཟུང	held in entrustment	gnyer du bzung
གཉེར་གདམས	bcol mngag gnyer gtad,...'Phral phugs kyi byed sgo'i rnam gzhag gnyer gdams byed pa	gnyer gdams
གཉེར་པ	caretaker, manager, steward, supervisor [syn: lde mig pa, nang gi gru 'dzin]	gnyer pa
གཉེར་བ	to (be) aspire(d) to	gnyer ba
གཉེར་བའི་ཚོང་ལས	managed trade 1002	gnyer ba'i tshong las
གཉེར་བོན	a bon po entrusted with executing the rites prescribed for obtaining the protection and assistance of the protective deities such as the yul lha	gnyer bon
གཉེར་བོན་གཏོ་ཆེན	bon of protection	gnyer bon gto chen
གཉེར་བྱང་གཏད	entrusted	gnyer byang gtad
གཉེར་བྱང་གཏད་པ	to entrust with	gnyer byang gtad pa
གཉེར་བྱང་འཛིན་པ	take responsibility for	gnyer byang 'dzin pa
གཉེར་བྱེད་པ	tend, SA gnyer ba	gnyer byed pa
གཉེར་མ	wrinkle; ripple	gnyer ma
གཉེར་མ་ཁྱམས་པ	object unfulfilled	gnyer ma khyams pa
གཉེར་མ་ཅན	wrinkled	gnyer ma can
གཉེར་མ་ཅན་བཟོ་བ	crumple	gnyer ma can bzo ba
གཉེར་མ་དངས	defined wrinkles	gnyer ma dangs
གཉེར་མ་མང	with many wrinkles	gnyer ma mang
གཉེར་མའི་གདོང	wrinkled face, monkey	gnyer ma'i gdong
གཉེར་མས་གང་བ	full of wrinkles	gnyer mas gang ba
གཉེར་མེད	uncared for	gnyer med
གཉེར་མོ	custodian	gnyer mo
གཉེར་ཚང	storehouse	gnyer tshang
གཉེར་ཚང་སྒོ	store-house door	gnyer tshang sgo
གཉེར་ཚང་གཏོང་བྱེད	issuing articles from the stores	gnyer tshang gtong byed
གཉེར་འཛིན	monitor, overseer; custodian	gnyer 'dzin
གཉེར་སེམས	pay attention to	gnyer sems
གཉེར་སེམས་ལ་གཟན	to worry	gnyer sems la gzan
གཉེལ་བ	fatigue, tired, get tired	gnyel ba
གཉེས་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ	serve (doing whatever pleases)	gnyes pa sgrub pa
གཉོག	(tha dad pa gnyags pa, gnyag pa, gnyogs,, 1) chew up into small pieces; 2) whip, beat; 3) want, desire	gnyog
གཉོག་པ	to desire; {gnyog pa, gnyags pa, gnyag pa, gnyogs} trans. v	gnyog pa
གཉོགས	gnyog pa!	gnyogs
གཉོད	[arch] price, price of a woman, strength, durability, stoutness	gnyod
གཉོད་ཀ	importance, worth, generous, charitable	gnyod ka
གཉོད་ཀ་ཆུང	unimportant, worthless	gnyod ka chung
གཉོད་ཁ་ཆུང་བ	(A; 1) little shrewdness/ force/ power; 2) {gtong phod chung ba; 3) little patience/ endurance	gnyod kha chung ba
གཉོད་ཅན	strong	gnyod can
གཉོད་ཆུང	weak, feeble	gnyod chung
གཉོད་ཆུང་སྟོབས་ཞན	weak, feeble	gnyod chung stobs zhan
གཉོད་ཆུང་ནུས་མེད	weak, feeble	gnyod chung nus med
གཉོད་པ	to draw, stretch, strain	gnyod pa
གཉོད་མེད	weak	gnyod med
གཉོད་མེད་པ	[arch] w/o patience endurance	gnyod med pa
གཉོན་མོང་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	afflictive obstructions, obstructions to liberation	gnyon mong pa'i sgrib pa
གཉོམ་ཆུང	well-behaved, good, clever	gnyom chung
གཉོས	clan	gnyos
གཉོས་སྟོན་དཔལ་ལྡན་བཟང་པོ	14471507 dnyed sla ba'i thabs de nyid bcu bzhi CHN	gnyos ston dpal ldan bzang po
བཉུག་མའི་ངང	the natural/ innate state	bnyug ma'i ngang
མཉན	boat, skiff, ferry, to listen to	mnyan
མཉན་བརྒྱུད	hearing lineage	mnyan brgyud
མཉན་ཉེས	wrongly hear words	mnyan nyes
མཉན་པ	hear, listen [p f nyan pa]; 2) boatman, ferryman	mnyan pa
མཉན་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicita like a boatman [rang dang sems can thams cad lhan cig tu rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang thob par 'dod pa'i byang chub sems bskyed	mnyan pa lta bu'i sems bskyed
མཉན་པར་འོས་པ	worthy to hear, trustworthy	mnyan par 'os pa
མཉན་བྱ	object of hearing (definition of sound)	mnyan bya
མཉན་ཡོད	Shravasti	mnyan yod
མཉན་ཡོད་ཀྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	the city of Shravasti	mnyan yod kyi grong khyer
མཉན་ཡོད་ཀྱི་ཚོང་པ	a group of merchants from Shravasti	mnyan yod kyi tshong pa
མཉན་ཡོད་རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚལ	the Jeta's Grove near Shravasti {bcom ldan 'das mnyan yod rgyal byed kyi tshal mgon med zas sbyin gyi kun dga' ra ba na bzhugs pa'i tshe} When the Bhagavan was abiding near Shravasti, in the hall o...	mnyan yod rgyal byed kyi tshal
མཉན་ཡོད་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་མཆོད་པ	the showing of miracles at Shravasti	mnyan yod cho 'phrul mchod pa
མཉན་བསམ་བསྒྲུབ་པ	learning, reflection, and meditation	mnyan bsam bsgrub pa
མཉམ	even, =, alike, level, same match, together w, jointly, do -- w --	mnyam
མཉམ་ཀད	SA mnyam ka	mnyam kad
མཉམ་དཀར	colleague, brethren in the same work	mnyam dkar
མཉམ་དཀྲོལ	many kinds of music playing at the same time	mnyam dkrol
མཉམ་སྐྱེས	colleague, brethren in the same work	mnyam skyes
མཉམ་སྐྱེས་མཚེ་མ	twins	mnyam skyes mtshe ma
མཉམ་འཁྱིལ	at the same time 'khyil ba	mnyam 'khyil
མཉམ་གྲགས	resonance	mnyam grags
མཉམ་གྲོས	joint negotiation/ consultation/ discussion	mnyam gros
མཉམ་བགོ	divide up, distribute =ly	mnyam bgo
མཉམ་བགོས	=ly divided	mnyam bgos
མཉམ་འགུལ	moving together	mnyam 'gul
མཉམ་འགུལ་བྱེད	move together	mnyam 'gul byed
མཉམ་འགྱུར་བཀལ་པ	the age next to terminate	mnyam 'gyur bkal pa
མཉམ་འགྲན	rtsal sogs mnyam du 'gran pa	mnyam 'gran
མཉམ་འགྲོ	go together w	mnyam 'gro
མཉམ་འགྲོགས	accompany	mnyam 'grogs
མཉམ་འགྲོགས་བྱས་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	go together	mnyam 'grogs byas nas 'gro ba
མཉམ་འགྲོགས་བྱས་པ	to treat as an equal	mnyam 'grogs byas pa
མཉམ་རྒྱུ	digestion GD	mnyam rgyu
མཉམ་རྒྱུག	mnyam du mgyogs por 'gro ba...Dmigs yul du ma slebs bar mnyam rgyug byed pa	mnyam rgyug
མཉམ་སྒྲིག	arrange/ prepare together, joint/ group undertaking	mnyam sgrig
མཉམ་སྒྲིག་འཕུར་སྐྱོད	group flight	mnyam sgrig 'phur skyod
མཉམ་སྒྲུབ	cooperation	mnyam sgrub
མཉམ་སྒྲུབ་ཁང	cooperative society	mnyam sgrub khang
མཉམ་སྒྲུབ་ཅན	cooperative	mnyam sgrub can
མཉམ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་པ	cooperate	mnyam sgrub byed pa
མཉམ་སྒྲོག	make many sounds at once	mnyam sgrog
མཉམ་སྒྲོག་རོལ་ཆ	symphony	mnyam sgrog rol cha
མཉམ་བསྒྲིགས	arranged/ prepared together, joint/ group undertaking	mnyam bsgrigs
མཉམ་བསྒྲིལ	intertwined, combined, joined	mnyam bsgril
མཉམ་ལྕོགས	able to equalize	mnyam lcogs
མཉམ་འཇོག	contemplation, preserving the equanimity of the mind	mnyam 'jog
མཉམ་འཇོག་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན	dpe can gang zhig dpe'i gzugs su bkod pa des, rang gi ngang tshul dang mi mthun pa'i bya ba byed pa 'os min gyi skyon yod pa dang, bya ba'i yul nyid la'ang skabs gang yin gyi skyon yod pa bcas yul ...	mnyam 'jog gi gzugs can
མཉམ་འཇོག་པ	rest in equanimity, take notice, heed, vigilance, paying attention, concentrating	mnyam 'jog pa
མཉམ་འཇོག་ཚེ	during meditation	mnyam 'jog tshe
མཉམ་འཇོག་ལྷོད་མེད	unrelaxing vigilance	mnyam 'jog lhod med
མཉམ་རྗེས	formal meditation and/ vis-àvis postmeditative awareness	mnyam rjes
མེདིཏཏིཨོན་ཨནད་པོསཏ	meditation; formal	meditation and post
མཉམ་རྗེས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	the practice of contemplation and subsequent	mnyam rjes kyi nyams len
མཉམ་རྗེས་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	the complexities of meditation and post-meditation	mnyam rjes kyi spros pa
མཉམ་རྗེས་གཉིས	meditation and post meditation, meditative equipoise and the experience after it	mnyam rjes gnyis
མཉམ་བརྗེ	equal exchange	mnyam brje
མཉམ་ཉིད	absolute, sameness, equanimity, identity, integration, great equanimity, fundamental alikeness, very sameness, impartiality, evenness, equality, justice, state of absolute iden-	mnyam nyid
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དགོངས	state of equality	mnyam nyid kyi dgongs
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དཔེ	rjod byed sgra gcig la gcod mtshams mi 'dra ba gnyis kyis brjod bya dpe dang dpe can gnyis mtshungs par sbyor ba'i rgyan zhig, dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses	mnyam nyid kyi dpe
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of equality, pristine cognition of sameness	mnyam nyid kyi ye shes
མཉམ་ཉིད་ངག	state of integration	mnyam nyid ngag
མཉམ་ཉིད་ངང	state of integration	mnyam nyid ngang
མཉམ་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five equalities	mnyam nyid lnga
མཉམ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the 10 equalities [chos thams cad mtshan nyid med pa'i mnyam pa nyid dang, mtshan ma med pa'i mnyam pa nyid, mtha' bzhi las skye ba med pa'i mnyam pa nyid, ma skyes pa'i mnyam pa nyid, dben pa'i mn...	mnyam nyid bcu
མཉམ་ཉིད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	enter into/ abide in =ity/ equanimity/ sameness	mnyam nyid du 'jug pa
མཉམ་ཉིད་རྣལ་འབྱོར	1 of rnal 'byor bzhi	mnyam nyid rnal 'byor
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཚུལ་བཞི	four modes of sameness	mnyam nyid tshul bzhi
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཡེ་ཤེས	identity awareness, awareness of equality, equivalent bril- liance, primal awareness of the ultimate identity, knowledge acquired by contemplation (the fact that samsara and nirvana as terminal con...	mnyam nyid ye shes
མཉམ་ཉིད་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	chn	mnyam nyid ye shes lnga
མཉམ་ཉིད་ལ་དགོངས་པ	realization of eqaulity [past buddhas and Shakyamini are dharmakaya &, their buddha activity etc che chung mi mnga' bar having been realized as = nga sngon sangs rgyas rnam gzigs su gyur to zhes pa...	mnyam nyid la dgongs pa
མཉམ་ཉིད་གསུམ	the three =ities	mnyam nyid gsum
མཉམ་ཉེས	balanced state, =ity, equanimity, identity, sameness itself GD	mnyam nyes
མཉམ་གཉིས	two equivalent things	mnyam gnyis
མཉམ་གཉིས་བརྗེ་བའི་གླུད་མདོས	mdos of ransom through the exchange of two equivalent things	mnyam gnyis brje ba'i glud mdos
མཉམ་གཉིས་བསོར	exchange between two equivalent things on the basis of the principles of the glud rites	mnyam gnyis bsor
མཉམ་གཉིས་བསོར་བའི་བར་སེལ	exorcisms in the middle space to resolve conflicts between two equal forces	mnyam gnyis bsor ba'i bar sel
མཉམ་གཉེན་ལྡན་པ	delicacy	mnyam gnyen ldan pa
མཉམ་གཉེར	take care of all =ly, joint stock, cooperative management, partnership 1004	mnyam gnyer
མཉམ་མཉམ	level, very even, smooth	mnyam mnyam
མཉམ་གཏོང་སྤྲོ་སྐྱིད	picnic, party	mnyam gtong spro skyid
མཉམ་གཏོང་སྤྲོ་སྐྱིད་གཏོང	have a picnic/ party	mnyam gtong spro skyid gtong
མཉམ་གཏོང་རོལ་དབྱངས	harmonious/ orchestrated music	mnyam gtong rol dbyangs
མཉམ་གཏོང་རོལ་མོ	symphony	mnyam gtong rol mo
མཉམ་གཏོང་རོལ་མོ་དགུ་པ	9th symphony	mnyam gtong rol mo dgu pa
མཉམ་མཐུན	agreement, unanimity	mnyam mthun
མཉམ་དང་མི་མཉམ	ril bor tshes bsres ma nus bgos pa'i thob nor gzugs me mi mnyam zhing, thig mig mtsho rnams mnyam pa'o, mi mnyam rim min mnyam rim pa, nor mnyam bsnan la mi mnyam phri	mnyam dang mi mnyam
མཉམ་དུ	impartially, together	mnyam du
མཉམ་དུ་བགོ་བཤའ་རྒྱག་པ	=ly divided	mnyam du bgo bsha' rgyag pa
མཉམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to come with, accompany	mnyam du 'gro ba
མཉམ་དུ་སྒྲིག	arrange/ list/ place side by side	mnyam du sgrig
མཉམ་དུ་སྒྲིལ	combine, connect, join, unite	mnyam du sgril
མཉམ་དུ་སྒྲིལ་བ	incorporate	mnyam du sgril ba
མཉམ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	abide in equipoise/ equanimity	mnyam du 'jug pa
མཉམ་དུ་ཐོབ	{dge ba mnyam du thob pa} attain as much merit as	mnyam du thob
མཉམ་དུ་ཐོབ་པར	attain equipoise/ equanimity/ =ity	mnyam du thob par
མཉམ་དུ་བདམས་པ	lay a thing over or by another	mnyam du bdams pa
མཉམ་དུ་སྡུད་པ	to pile up	mnyam du sdud pa
མཉམ་དུ་སྡོད	live together [&/or just] fuck	mnyam du sdod
མཉམ་དུ་བརྡལ་བ	congruency; equal extension/ coextension; to be congruent/ extend equally	mnyam du brdal ba
མཉམ་དུ་གནས་པ	coexist	mnyam du gnas pa
མཉམ་དུ་སྤེལ	promote, develop, spread together	mnyam du spel
མཉམ་དུ་ཕྱིན	went together	mnyam du phyin
མཉམ་དུ་སྦྱར	to join together	mnyam du sbyar
མཉམ་དུ་སྦྲེལ་བ	conjoin	mnyam du sbrel ba
མཉམ་དུ་ཡོང་བ	to go together with, accompany	mnyam du yong ba
མཉམ་དུ་རུབ	1) many combined together; 2) [make a] united/ cooperative effort; 3) cooperation	mnyam du rub
མཉམ་དུ་རུབ་བརྒྱབ	make a united/ cooperative effort	mnyam du rub brgyab
མཉམ་དུ་རུབ་བརྒྱབ་པ	make a united/ cooperative effort	mnyam du rub brgyab pa
མཉམ་དུ་བསྲེ་བ	mix together	mnyam du bsre ba
མཉམ་འདྲེས	mixing together, merging, incorporating	mnyam 'dres
མཉམ་འདྲེས་བྱེད	mix together, merge, incorporate, unite	mnyam 'dres byed
མཉམ་ལྡན་བསྐལ་པ	the kalpa that is continuing	mnyam ldan bskal pa
མཉམ་སྡེབ	collectivization, cooperation, merger	mnyam sdeb
མཉམ་སྡེབ་ཀྱིས	collectively, cooperatively, jointly	mnyam sdeb kyis
མཉམ་སྡེབ་གཞིས་ཀ	collective farm	mnyam sdeb gzhis ka
མཉམ་སྡེབ་རིང་ལུགས	collectivism	mnyam sdeb ring lugs
མཉམ་བརྡལ	{mnyam du brdal ba} congruency; equal extension/ coextension; to be congruent/ extend equally	mnyam brdal
མཉམ་བསྡུད་སྦྱོང་བརྡར	collective training	mnyam bsdud sbyong brdar
མཉམ་བསྡུར	comparison	mnyam bsdur
མཉམ་བསྡུར་བྱེད	compare	mnyam bsdur byed
མཉམ་བསྡོམས	combined, complex, composite	mnyam bsdoms
མཉམ་གནས	residing together, of equal position, cohesion	mnyam gnas
མཉམ་གནས་ཀྱི་རླུང	fire-dwelling wind	mnyam gnas kyi rlung
ཕི༹རེ	dwelling wind	fire
མཉམ་གནས་བྱེད	coexist	mnyam gnas byed
མཉམ་གནས་ཞི་བདེ	peaceful coexistence	mnyam gnas zhi bde
མཉམ་པ	equal(ness); even(ness); alike; to be equal/ alike/ the same (whether or not . . . ); isc. uniform/ impartial; isc. undifferentiated	mnyam pa
མཉམ་པ་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of =ity	mnyam pa kyi ye shes
མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great equanimity, great equality , total equality	mnyam pa chen po
མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཐུགས	the mind/ wisdom of equality	mnyam pa chen po'i thugs
མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་དུས	the time of great =ity	mnyam pa chen po'i dus
མཉམ་པ་བརྗོད་པ	invite impartially	mnyam pa brjod pa
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	equality, equal nature, fundamental a likeness, very sameness, identical, {mnyam nyid} perfect equanimity. Syn {phyam chad}; equanimity; sameness, equalness, evenness, the state of identity, samata...	mnyam pa nyid
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཉམས	experience of =ity	mnyam pa nyid kyi nyams
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་སྒོམ་པ	to cultivate an understanding of equality	mnyam pa nyid kyi rnam pa sgom pa
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of equality, equality wisdom, awareness of sameness, pristine awareness of equalness	mnyam pa nyid kyi ye shes
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	the thought of equality	mnyam pa nyid kyi bsam pa
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་བཅུ	tenfold equality	mnyam pa nyid bcu
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become =ity/ equanimity	mnyam pa nyid du 'gyur ba
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་སོང་བ	become equanimity	mnyam pa nyid du song ba
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྐུ་སཀཡ	like body of equality. Syn {ye shes kyi sku}	mnyam pa nyid nam mkha' lta bu'i sku sky
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ལ་དགོངས་པ	intention directed towards identity	mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་གསུམ	Threefold equality, means being equal to all the buddhas 1) in having perfected the accumulations, 2) in being enlightened, and 3) in accomplishing the welfare of beings	mnyam pa nyid gsum
མཉམ་པ་དང་མི་མཉམ་པ	=ity and in=ity	mnyam pa dang mi mnyam pa
མཉམ་པ་མེད་པ	uneven, unequally	mnyam pa med pa
མཉམ་པ་བཞི	four modes of sameness	mnyam pa bzhi
མཉམ་པ་ལ་བཞག་འཇོག་མེད་པ	neither enters nor leaves meditation, beyond meditating and something placed in meditation	mnyam pa la bzhag 'jog med pa
མཉམ་པའི་སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང	Even crosslegged posture, sama-paryanka	mnyam pa'i skyil mo krung
མཉམ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	supreme equality	mnyam pa'i rgyal po
མཉམ་པའི་ངང	state of equalness, state of equality	mnyam pa'i ngang
མཉམ་པའི་ངང་ཉིད་དུ	in the state of equality	mnyam pa'i ngang nyid du
མཉམ་པའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	sngon 'jug gi shin tu mo ma yig rang nyid 'jug yul gyi ming gzhi dag la sgra dang rtsol ba mnyam pa ste, shin tu lhod pa'i tshul gyis 'jug pa,...Ma	mnyam pa'i 'jug tshul
མཉམ་པའི་དྲི	sman sna tshogs sbyar ba lta bu sbyor tshul gyis dri shas mi che ba'o	mnyam pa'i dri
མཉམ་པའི་སེམས་ཉིད	the equanimity of mind itself, the = nature of mind	mnyam pa'i sems nyid
མཉམ་པར	equally	mnyam par
མཉམ་པར་གྱུར	to be equal, even, same	mnyam par gyur
མཉམ་པར་གྲོལ	equally free	mnyam par grol
མཉམ་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become equal, be equal	mnyam par 'gyur ba
མཉམ་པར་རྒྱུ་བ	breath flows equally through the two nostrils	mnyam par rgyu ba
མཉམ་པར་ཆགས་པ	total passion	mnyam par chags pa
མཉམ་པར་འཇོག་པ	{mnyam par gzhag pa} (formal meditative) equipoise; to rest/ settle in	mnyam par 'jog pa
མཉམ་པར་འཇོག་པར་བྱེད	rest in equanimity/ evenly, place/ settle in meditation	mnyam par 'jog par byed
མཉམ་པར་ཐོབ་ན	if one attains equanimity	mnyam par thob na
མཉམ་པར་བརྡལ་བ	congruency; to be congruent; equal extension; to extend equally	mnyam par brdal ba
མཉམ་པར་བྱས་པ	mtshungs gsal gyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	mnyam par byas pa
མཉམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	make even or level, equalize, divide equally	mnyam par byed pa
མཉམ་པར་མ་བཞག་པ	uncomposed, discomposed mnyam par ma bzhag pa mi mnga' ba the shravakas have temporary meditation and arising from it but the buddhas have no such entering and arising spyod lam bzhi'i dus thams ca...	mnyam par ma bzhag pa
མཉམ་པར་མ་བཞག་པའི་སེམས	a mind not resting in equipoise, uncomposed mind	mnyam par ma bzhag pa'i sems
མཉམ་པར་མ་བཤག་པ	not rest in equanimity/ evenly, not place/ settle in meditation	mnyam par ma bshag pa
མཉམ་པར་ཞོག	rest evenly! [imp]	mnyam par zhog
མཉམ་པར་གཞག	rest in equanimity/ evenly, place/ settle in meditation	mnyam par gzhag
མཉམ་པར་གཞག་པ	equanimity; formal meditative equipoise; to settle in formal meditative equipoise	mnyam par gzhag pa
མཉམ་པར་བཞག	steady placement, resting steadily, remain in balance, equipoise, settling down, remain in equanimous contemplation, equanimity of contemplation, remain composed, keep mind composed, remained in th...	mnyam par bzhag
མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པ	compose the mind to perfect rest for meditation, SA mnyam bzhag, to relax in contemplative equanimity, remain in the equanimity of contemplation	mnyam par bzhag pa
མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པ་དང་ལངས་པ	settling in equanimity or emerging from it	mnyam par bzhag pa dang langs pa
མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པའི་ས	skabs of the mind dwelling in samadhi	mnyam par bzhag pa'i sa
མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པའི་སེམས	mind meditating i samadhi	mnyam par bzhag pa'i sems
མཉམ་པར་རོལ	manifestation of equality	mnyam par rol
མཉམ་པར་བཤག་པ	meditative equipoise	mnyam par bshag pa
མཉམ་པར་བཤག་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not be meditative equipoise	mnyam par bshag pa ma yin pa
མཉམ་པར་བཤག་པར་འཇོག་པ	rest in equanimity, rest evenly, place/ settle in meditation	mnyam par bshag par 'jog pa
མཉམ་པར་བསྲེ	equally integrated	mnyam par bsre
མཉམ་པོ	together	mnyam po
མཉམ་པོ་ཡོད	they are alike or equal or not differing	mnyam po yod
མཉམ་པོར	common	mnyam por
མཉམ་པོར་འོང་བའི་བདུད	personal injurious maras/ demons (who "follow/ come along" with one)	mnyam por 'ong ba'i bdud
མཉམ་སྤྲོ	enjoying together, festive gathering	mnyam spro
མཉམ་སྤྲོ་ཁང	club	mnyam spro khang
མཉམ་སྤྲོ་བྱེད	enjoy together, gather for festivity/ fun/ amusement	mnyam spro byed
མཉམ་སྤྲོ་ཚོགས་འདུ	festival, party 1006	mnyam spro tshogs 'du
མཉམ་སྤྲོ་ཚོགས་འཛོམས	festival, party	mnyam spro tshogs 'dzoms
མཉམ་སྤྲོའི་བྱེད་སྒོ	festive activities	mnyam spro'i byed sgo
མཉམ་བྱུང	simultaneous	mnyam byung
མཉམ་བྱེད	paying in price	mnyam byed
མཉམ་བྲལ	unequalled, matchless, separate from the equality of	mnyam bral
མཉམ་འབྲེལ	co-operative joint, cooperative	mnyam 'brel
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཁེ་ལས	joint enterprise	mnyam 'brel khe las
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྱིས	jointly	mnyam 'brel gyis
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྱིས་མིང་ཐོ་འདོན	jointly nominate	mnyam 'brel gyis ming tho 'don
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྱེན་ལོག	Grand alliance	mnyam 'brel gyen log
ཨནད་ཅོཨུནཏེར	revolutionary Organization	and Counter
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྲོགས་རམ	cooperative/ joint help	mnyam 'brel grogs ram
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྲོས་ཚོགས	joint conference	mnyam 'brel gros tshogs
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་དགའ་སྟོན	joint celebration	mnyam 'brel dga' ston
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་འགག་སྲུང	joint defense	mnyam 'brel 'gag srung
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་རྒྱལ་ཚོགས	United Nations	mnyam 'brel rgyal tshogs
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་བསྒྲགས་གཏམ	joint declaration	mnyam 'brel bsgrags gtam
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་རྔོ་བསྡུ་འཁོར་ལོ	combine harvesting machine	mnyam 'brel rngo bsdu 'khor lo
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་དཔལ་འབྱོར	cooperative economy	mnyam 'brel dpal 'byor
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་སྤྱི་བསྒྲགས	joint communique	mnyam 'brel spyi bsgrags
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	do/act jointly/ combined/ allied	mnyam 'brel byed
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	unite	mnyam 'brel byed pa
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་དམག་དཔུང	allied/ combined forces/ troops	mnyam 'brel dmag dpung
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་སྨན་བཅོས་ཁང	joint clinic	mnyam 'brel sman bcos khang
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ	federation, congress, cooperative	mnyam 'brel tshogs pa
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཚོང་ཁང	consumers cooperative [store]	mnyam 'brel tshong khang
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གཞུང	coalition government	mnyam 'brel gzhung
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་རུ་ཁག	combined team/ unit/ brigade	mnyam 'brel ru khag
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་རོགས་རམ	cooperative/ joint help	mnyam 'brel rogs ram
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ལས་སྣོན་བཟོ་གྲྭ	combined processing factory	mnyam 'brel las snon bzo grwa
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་སྲིད་གཞུང	coalition government	mnyam 'brel srid gzhung
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གསལ་བསྒྲགས	joint statement	mnyam 'brel gsal bsgrags
མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	federation, congress, cooperative	mnyam 'brel lhan tshogs
མཉམ་སྦྱར	to join together	mnyam sbyar
མཉམ་སྦྱར་བྱེད་པ	cohere	mnyam sbyar byed pa
མཉམ་སྦྱོར	Abbr of sangs rgyas thams	mnyam sbyor
ཅད་མཉམ་པར་སྦྱོར་བའི་རྒྱུད	the unified sameness of the continuums of all the buddhas, unity, union unified, united	cad mnyam par sbyor ba'i rgyud
མཉམ་སྦྱོར་རྒྱུད	Samayoga Tantra	mnyam sbyor rgyud
མཉམ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	to breed [different species of animals]	mnyam sbyor byed pa
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ	united, joint, combined, allied, Grand alliance	mnyam sbrel
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་ཁེ་ལས	joint enterprise	mnyam sbrel khe las
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གྱིས	jointly	mnyam sbrel gyis
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གྱིས་མིང་ཐོ་འདོན	jointly nominate	mnyam sbrel gyis ming tho 'don
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གྱེན་ལོག	Grand alliance	mnyam sbrel gyen log
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གྲོགས་རམ	cooperative/ joint help	mnyam sbrel grogs ram
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གྲོས་ཚོགས	joint conference	mnyam sbrel gros tshogs
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་དགའ་སྟོན	joint celebration	mnyam sbrel dga' ston
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་འགག་སྲུང	joint defense	mnyam sbrel 'gag srung
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་རྒྱལ་ཚོགས	United Nations mnyam sbrel rgyal tshogs kyi bde 'jags las 'dzin lhan tshogs - United Nations Security Council	mnyam sbrel rgyal tshogs
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་བསྒྲགས་གཏམ	joint declaration	mnyam sbrel bsgrags gtam
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་རྔོ་བསྡུ་འཁོར་ལོ	combine harvesting machine	mnyam sbrel rngo bsdu 'khor lo
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་དཔལ་འབྱོར	cooperative economy	mnyam sbrel dpal 'byor
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་སྤྱི་བསྒྲགས	joint communique	mnyam sbrel spyi bsgrags
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་བྱེད	do/act jointly/ combined/ allied	mnyam sbrel byed
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་དམག་དཔུང	allied/ combined forces/ troops	mnyam sbrel dmag dpung
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་སྨན་བཅོས་ཁང	joint clinic	mnyam sbrel sman bcos khang
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ	federation, congress, cooperative	mnyam sbrel tshogs pa
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་ཚོང་ཁང	consumers cooperative [store]	mnyam sbrel tshong khang
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གཞུང	coalition government	mnyam sbrel gzhung
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་རུ་ཁག	combined team/ unit/ brigade	mnyam sbrel ru khag
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་རོགས་རམ	cooperative/ joint help	mnyam sbrel rogs ram
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་ལས་སྣོན་བཟོ་གྲྭ	combined processing factory	mnyam sbrel las snon bzo grwa
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་སྲིད་གཞུང	coalition government	mnyam sbrel srid gzhung
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་གསལ་བསྒྲགས	joint statement	mnyam sbrel gsal bsgrags
མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	federation, congress, cooperative	mnyam sbrel lhan tshogs
མཉམ་མེད	unequaled, incomparable, matchless	mnyam med
མཉམ་མེད་ཇོ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	the peerless Atisha	mnyam med jo bo chen po
མཉམ་མེད་ཇོ་བོ་རྗེ	incomparable Atisha	mnyam med jo bo rje
མཉམ་མེད་དྭགས་པོ	{sgam po pa} 1079-1153	mnyam med dwags po
མཉམ་མེད་དབ༹གས་པོ	the peerless Dagpo Rinpoche [Gampopa]	mnyam med dvags po
མཉམ་མེད་དྭགས་པོ་ལྷ་རྗེ	Incomparable Dwagpo Lharje = Gampopa	mnyam med dwags po lha rje
མཉམ་མེད་པོ་ཏོ་བ	the matchless Potowa; disciple of ex {kha rag sgom chung pa rin po che} Karak Gomchung Rinpoche	mnyam med po to ba
མཉམ་མེད་ཙོང་ཁ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	tsong	mnyam med tsong kha pa chen po
ཁ་པ་བློ་བཟང་གྲགས་པ	(13571419) mnyam med shes rab rgyal mtshan Nyamed Sherab Gyaltsen	kha pa blo bzang grags pa
མཉམ་མེད་ལྷ་རྩེ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the first {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin}, {ngag dbang bzang po} 1546-1615	mnyam med lha rtse pa chen po
མཉམ་ཚོགས	a collective	mnyam tshogs
མཉམ་ཚོང	cooperative commerce/ society, consumers' cooperative	mnyam tshong
མཉམ་ཚོང་ཁང	cooperative society, consumers' cooperative	mnyam tshong khang
མཉམ་འཛོམས	many things collected together, congregation, reunion, gathering together	mnyam 'dzoms
མཉམ་འཛོམས་པའི་མི	many people collected together	mnyam 'dzoms pa'i mi
མཉམ་འཛོམས་བྱེད	collect/ gather together, congregate, have a reunion	mnyam 'dzoms byed
མཉམ་འཛོམས་ཚོགས་འདུས	conference, congress, meeting	mnyam 'dzoms tshogs 'dus
མཉམ་རྫོགས	perfect equality	mnyam rdzogs
མཉམ་རྫོགས་ཆེན་པོ	supreme state of equalness and perfection mnyam rdzogs lhun grub thig le chen po equal and perfect great sphere of spontaneous presence mnyam rdzogs lhun grub thig le chen po = and perfect great sp...	mnyam rdzogs chen po
མཉམ་ཞུགས	joint participation	mnyam zhugs
མཉམ་ཞུགས་བྱེད	participate jointly	mnyam zhugs byed
མཉམ་གཞག	meditative equipoise [thd]	mnyam gzhag
མཉམ་གཞག་ངང་ལ་གནས་དུས	while remaining in evenness	mnyam gzhag ngang la gnas dus
མཉམ་གཞག་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མིན	is not the essence of meditative equipoise	mnyam gzhag ngo bo nyid min
མཉམ་གཞག་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐེ་ནོན	dual wisdom of meditation/ meditative equipoise mnyam gzhag nam kha' lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin - the samadhi of sky-like meditation	mnyam gzhag gnyis su med pa'i ye shes the non
མཉམ་གཞག་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	spacelike meditation/ meditative equipoise	mnyam gzhag nam mkha' lta bu
མཉམ་གཞག་མནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	skylike meditation. Comp. with {rjes thob sgyu ma lta bu} magical postmeditation	mnyam gzhag mnam mkha' lta bu
མཉམ་གཞག་སྣང་བཅས	meditation w appearances	mnyam gzhag snang bcas
མཉམ་གཞག་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of meditation/ meditative equipoise	mnyam gzhag ye shes
མཉམ་གཞག་ལ་སྡད་དུས	while meditating	mnyam gzhag la sdad dus
མཉམ་གཞག་ལ་ཟློ་བའི་ཚེ	the time of passing beyond meditative equipoise/ meditation	mnyam gzhag la zlo ba'i tshe
མཉམ་གཞས	chorus mnyam gzhugs can ma yin pa'i mtshungs ldan 'du byed kyi phung bo'i sde tshan	mnyam gzhas
མཉམ་བཞག	1) composure; meditation state, equipoise; meditative equipoise; evenly resting; equanimity, [formal] meditation; period / state of contemplation, the state of even contemplation. 2){mnyam par bzha...	mnyam bzhag
མཉམ་བཞག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	Mudra of equanimity. The hands placed in the gesture of meditation just as Buddha Amitabha	mnyam bzhag gi phyag rgya
མཉམ་བཞག་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མིན	is not the essence of meditative equipoise	mnyam bzhag ngo bo nyid min
མཉམ་བཞག་ཆེན་པོ	great naturalness	mnyam bzhag chen po
མཉམ་བཞག་དང་རྗེས་ཐོབ	meditation and post meditation, meditative equipoise and its aftermath GD	mnyam bzhag dang rjes thob
མཉམ་བཞག་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	sky-like evenness	mnyam bzhag nam mkha' lta bu
མཉམ་བཞག་སྣང་མེད	meditation is devoid of solid perceptions; the meditation is devoid of appearances	mnyam bzhag snang med
མཉམ་བཞག་པ	meditative absorption	mnyam bzhag pa
མཉམ་བཞག་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	construct-free composure; in meditation one is free from conceptual fabrication	mnyam bzhag spros bral
མཉམ་བཞག་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	gesture of equanimity	mnyam bzhag phyag rgya
མཉམ་བཞག་མིན་པ	unconcentrated mnyam bzhag zag med 'jig rten las 'das	mnyam bzhag min pa
པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the supra-mundane knowledge/ praj¤ of undefiled meditation/ meditative equipoise mnyam bzhag zag med 'jig rten las 'das	pa'i shes rab
མཉམ་བཞག་ཡེ་ཤེས	exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise	mnyam bzhag ye shes
མཉམ་བཞག་རིག་པའི་དུས	time of meditative insight	mnyam bzhag rig pa'i dus
མཉམ་བཞུགས་བྱེད་པ	participate	mnyam bzhugs byed pa
མཉམ་བཞེས	cooperation	mnyam bzhes
མཉམ་ཟ	eat together [thun mong du longs spyod pa,...Skyid la kha'i rtsva la mnyam za dang, sdug ko mog gi chu la mnyam 'thung]	mnyam za
མཉམ་ཟ་བྱེད	{rtsam pa thams cad mnyam za byed dgos pa byung ba yin} they had to share all the tsampa equally	mnyam za byed
མཉམ་གཟུང	receiving equally, finishing	mnyam gzung
མཉམ་བཟག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	hands in the meditation mudra	mnyam bzag gi phyag rgya
མཉམ་རུབ	1) many combined together; 2) [make a] united/ cooperative effort; 3) cooperation	mnyam rub
མཉམ་རུབ་ཀྱི	collective	mnyam rub kyi
མཉམ་རུབ་བྱེད	make a united effort, cooperate 1008	mnyam rub byed
མཉམ་རུབ་བྱེད་པ	collaborate	mnyam rub byed pa
མཉམ་རོགས	partnership	mnyam rogs
མཉམ་ལས	cooperation	mnyam las
མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	co-op, cooperative	mnyam las khang
མཉམ་ལས་ཅན	co-op, cooperative	mnyam las can
མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become a coop/ cooperative/ cooperativized	mnyam las can du 'gyur
མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་སུ་བསྒྱུར	cooperativize	mnyam las can su bsgyur
མཉམ་ལས་དམ་ཟབ་བྱེད	cooperate closely	mnyam las dam zab byed
མཉམ་ལས་བྱེད	cooperate	mnyam las byed
མཉམ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	cooperate	mnyam las byed pa
མཉམ་ལས་ཚོགས་པ	cooperative group/ society	mnyam las tshogs pa
མཉམ་ལས་ཚོང་ཁང	cooperative [store]	mnyam las tshong khang
མཉམ་གཤིབ	on = footing/ rank, parallel, living together/ in close association, many put together	mnyam gshib
མཉམ་གཤིབ་གྱིས	together, jointly, in common	mnyam gshib gyis
མཉམ་གཤིབ་ཏུ་བཞག་པ	treat =ly	mnyam gshib tu bzhag pa
མཉམ་གཤིབ་བྱེད	live together, [closely] associate w	mnyam gshib byed
མཉམ་གཤིབ་བྱེད་མ་མྱོང	[I] haven't associated w [him] closely	mnyam gshib byed ma myong
མཉམ་གཤིབས	on = footing/ rank, parallel, living together/ in close association, many put together	mnyam gshibs
མཉམ་གཤིབས་གྱིས	together, jointly, in common	mnyam gshibs gyis
མཉམ་གཤིབས་ཏུ་བཞག་པ	treat =ly mnyam gshibs byas nas mi mang po	mnyam gshibs tu bzhag pa
ཁང་པ་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྡོད་པ	having been put together many people living in 1 house	khang pa gcig tu sdod pa
མཉམ་གཤིབས་བྱེད	live together, [closely] associate w	mnyam gshibs byed
མཉམ་གཤིབས་བྱེད་མ་མྱོང	[I] haven't associated w [him] closely	mnyam gshibs byed ma myong
མཉམ་བཤག་མིན་པ	unconcentrated	mnyam bshag min pa
མཉམ་བསྲེ	mixed together, mixture, compound, alloy	mnyam bsre
མཉམ་བསྲེས	mixed together, mixture, compound, alloy	mnyam bsres
མཉམ་བསྲེས་ཀྱི	medley	mnyam bsres kyi
མཉམ་བསྲེས་དཀར་ནག	mixed black and white	mnyam bsres dkar nag
མཉམ་བསྲེས་ངར་ལྕགས	steel alloy	mnyam bsres ngar lcags
མཉམ་བསྲེས་དངོས་རྫས	mixtures	mnyam bsres dngos rdzas
མཉམ་བསྲེས་བྱེད	mix together, mixture, compound, alloy	mnyam bsres byed
མཉམ་བསྲེས་ལུད་རྫེས	mixed fertilizer	mnyam bsres lud rdzes
མཉམས་གྲིབ	vow breaking	mnyams grib
མཉམས་པོར་བཤིབས	arranged evenly or properly, good arrangement	mnyams por bshibs
མཉམས་བཞག	state of concentration, SA mnyam bzhag	mnyams bzhag
མཉལ་ལམ	dream (h)	mnyal lam
མཉེ	[p mnyes],, tan, rub, massage, work in	mnye
མཉེ་བཏུལ་བྱེད་པ	to soften, tenderize; dar la + - to gently unravel threads of silk	mnye btul byed pa
མཉེ་བཏུལ་བྱེད་ཚུལ	how to make [our minds] pliant	mnye btul byed tshul
མཉེ་བ	to make [dry hide] supple, make soft and pliant, to rub so as to soften	mnye ba
མཉེ་བར་བྱ	will tan, will rub	mnye bar bya
མཉེ་བར་བྱས	tanned, rubbed	mnye bar byas
མཉེ་འབོལ	cushion, pillow	mnye 'bol
མཉེ་བཞིན་པ	tan, rub	mnye bzhin pa
མཉེད་གྲི	leather skinning knife	mnyed gri
མཉེད་པ	(tha dad pa) mnyes pa, mnye ba, mnyes,, tan, rub, massage, work in	mnyed pa
མཉེན	pliant, supple[ness]	mnyen
མཉེན་ལྕུག	soft, pliant, flexible, pliant, flowing	mnyen lcug
མཉེན་ལྕུག་འཁྲིལ་ལྡེམ	graceful, pliant, lithe, and supple [qualities of peaceful deities]	mnyen lcug 'khril ldem
མཉེན་ལྕུག་དང་ལྡན	thin and supple mnyen lcug dang ldan pa'i lcang ma'i yal	mnyen lcug dang ldan
མཉེན་ལྕུགས	flexible	mnyen lcugs
མཉེན་མཉེལ་བ	make soft by tanning	mnyen mnyel ba
མཉེན་མཉེས་གཤིན་པ	caress, fondle	mnyen mnyes gshin pa
མཉེན་པ	flexible, pliable, supple, soft, smooth, mild, tame, compliant	mnyen pa
མཉེན་པའི་ཆུ	soft water	mnyen pa'i chu
མཉེན་པའི་ལུས་སྤྲེའུ་ལྟ་བུ	supple body like a monkey	mnyen pa'i lus spre'u lta bu
མཉེན་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become soft	mnyen par 'gyur ba
མཉེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	make soft, smooth, flexible	mnyen par byed pa
མཉེན་པོ	antidote, soft, pliable, not solid	mnyen po
མཉེན་འབོལ	soft cushion	mnyen 'bol
མཉེན་རྩལ་ལུས་སྦྱོང	calisthenics, gymnastic exercises	mnyen rtsal lus sbyong
མཉེན་ཚན	kindred	mnyen tshan
མཉེན་ལུས་སྲོག་ཆགས	mollusks	mnyen lus srog chags
མཉེན་ཤིང	cork, soft wood	mnyen shing
མཉེན་ཤོག	soft, flexible paper	mnyen shog
མཉེལ་བ	to tan, to dress, to get tired; {mnyel ba, mnyel ba, mnyel ba} intr. v	mnyel ba
མཉེལ་མ་སོང་ངམ	are you tired? [h]	mnyel ma song ngam
མཉེས	mnyed pa! please, delight	mnyes
མཉེས་གྱུར	be pleased	mnyes gyur
མཉེས་གྱུར་ཅིག	be pleased!	mnyes gyur cig
མཉེས་འགོ	Nyego, Started with Pleasure, monastery on the banks of Lake Manasarovar	mnyes 'go
མཉེས་ཐང	village	mnyes thang
མཉེས་དག	toasting, bottoms up [mchod chang gtsang dag mchod pa]	mnyes dag
མཉེས་དག་མཆོད	offer a toast	mnyes dag mchod
མཉེས་པ	CM: 1) mnyed pa'i 'das pa, past tense of {mnyed pa}. 2) (tha mi dad pa): dgyes pa'am rangs pa'i zhe sa, the honorific of to be pleased/glad (dgyes pa) or to rejoice (rangs pa = rjes su yi rangs pa)...	mnyes pa
མཉེས་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to please	mnyes pa sgrub pa
མཉེས་པ་གསུམ	the three ways to please [the lama] 1009	mnyes pa gsum
མཉེས་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་བསྟེན་པ	I have served him in the three ways	mnyes pa gsum gyi sgo nas bsten pa
མཉེས་པའི་ཀོ་བ	tanned leather	mnyes pa'i ko ba
མཉེས་པའི་མཆོད་པ	an offering to please	mnyes pa'i mchod pa
མཉེས་པའི་ཞབས་ཏོག	pleasing service/ attendants	mnyes pa'i zhabs tog
མཉེས་པར་དཀའ	hard to please	mnyes par dka'
མཉེས་པར་འགྱུར	become delighted	mnyes par 'gyur
མཉེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to show esteem; {bsnyen bkur rab tu zhus shing gus pas mnyes par byas} delighted in honoring and showing their esteem	mnyes par byed pa
མཉེས་པོ	like	mnyes po
མཉེས་བྱས	gladdened	mnyes byas
མཉེས་བྱེད	adoration, paying respect	mnyes byed
མཉེས་ཙོར	feelings of joy [Rgyal kha thob pa'i 'phrin bzang gsan nas mnyes tsor chen po gnang gi 'dug ... Mnyam 'brel rgyal tshogs, 'dzam gling dmag chen gnyis pa'i mjug 'gril rjes 1945 lor btsugs pa'i rgyal...	mnyes tsor
མཉེས་ཚོར	[feelings of] joy, pleasure	mnyes tshor
མཉེས་ཚོར་ཆེ་བ	delights in mnyes tshor chen pos dga' bsu zhus pa	mnyes tshor che ba
མཉེས་བཞིན་པ	beloved, love much, be rejoiced at	mnyes bzhin pa
མཉེས་གཤིན	mind zhi &, kun la byams pa, mdza' ba	mnyes gshin
མཉོ	fond, petting	mnyo
མཉོ་མཉོ་ཅན	fondling, petting a child	mnyo mnyo can
མཉོང	experience	mnyong
མཉོས	tribe in tibet	mnyos
རྙ་བ	{rnya ba, brnyas pa, brnya ba, rnyos} trans. v	rnya ba
རྙ་ལོ	species of polygonum	rnya lo
རྙ་སེ་གུ་སེ་ཚ་པོ	cumbersome	rnya se gu se tsha po
རྙང	have diarrhea	rnyang
རྙང་རྙིང	worn-out clothes	rnyang rnying
རྙང་ནག	diarrhea	rnyang nag
རྙང་ནད	diarrhea	rnyang nad
རྙང་པ	diarrhea stool	rnyang pa
རྙང་བ	rinse, suffer from diarrhea	rnyang ba
རྙང་མ	diarrhea stool	rnyang ma
རྙད་ནག	diarrhea	rnyad nag
རྙན	argali	rnyan
རྙན་པ	{rnyan pa, brnyan pa, brnyan pa, rnyon} trans. v	rnyan pa
རྙབ་རྙབ་པ	seize or snatch together	rnyab rnyab pa
རྙབས་པ	stretching out the hand to catch	rnyabs pa
རྙས	SA brnyas pa	rnyas
རྙས་སྐོ་བ	irritate	rnyas sko ba
རྙས་བྱེད་པ	scorn, look down on with contempt	rnyas byed pa
རྙི	snare, trap; snare	rnyi
རྙི་སྐོན་པ	trap	rnyi skon pa
རྙི་རྒྱ	snare, trap	rnyi rgya
རྙི་རྒྱག	snare, trap	rnyi rgyag
རྙི་ཐག	rope used in snare/ trap	rnyi thag
རྙི་ནང་བཅུག་པ	ensnare	rnyi nang bcug pa
རྙི་ནང་གཟུང་བ	entrap	rnyi nang gzung ba
རྙི་འཛུག	set a snare/ trap	rnyi 'dzug
རྙི་འཛུག་པ	lay snares	rnyi 'dzug pa
རྙིང	old, ancient. vi. to be old, worn out	rnying
རྙིང་འགྱུར་ཚབ་དངུལ	depreciation fund	rnying 'gyur tshab dngul
རྙིང་རྒྱུད	the Nyingma Tantras	rnying rgyud
རྙིང་རྗེ་ཅན	compassionate 1s	rnying rje can
རྙིང་གཏོར་གསར་འཛུགས	"destroy the old, start the new"	rnying gtor gsar 'dzugs
རྙིང་བསྟུན་བདེ་སྤྱོད	doing things the old way	rnying bstun bde spyod
རྙིང་པ	ancient, old/ stale	rnying pa
རྙིང་པ་གང་ཡིན་ལ་ཞེན་ཆེན་པོ	conservative	rnying pa gang yin la zhen chen po
རྙིང་པ་བཞི	the four olds	rnying pa bzhi
རྙིང་པ་བཟོ་བ	antiquate	rnying pa bzo ba
རྙིང་ཕུད་གསར་འདོན	1) weed out the old, let the new emerge; 2) metabolism, combustion [biol] (	rnying phud gsar 'don
རྙིང་ཕུད་གསར་འབྱུང	1) weed out the old, let the new emerge; 2) metabolism, combustion [biol] (	rnying phud gsar 'byung
རྙིང་བ	age, wax, old	rnying ba
རྙིང་བ་འགྲོ་ན	if they stay for a long time, overstay their welcome	rnying ba 'gro na
རྙིང་བར་འགྱུར་བ	wear out in a short time	rnying bar 'gyur ba
རྙིང་བར་བྱེད་པ	wear out in a short time	rnying bar byed pa
རྙིང་དབྱུག་གསར་ལེན	destroy the old, establish the new	rnying dbyug gsar len
རྙིང་འབུད་གསར་འདོན	1) weed out the old, let the new emerge; 2) metabolism, combustion [biol] (	rnying 'bud gsar 'don
རྙིང་འབུད་གསར་འབྱུང	1) weed out the old, let the new emerge; 2) metabolism, combustion [biol] (	rnying 'bud gsar 'byung
རྙིང་མ	Nyingma [school],	rnying ma
རྙིང་མ་བཀའ་མ	Nyingma Kama. 'The Oral Transmission of the Old School.' 56 volumes in the expanded edition published by His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche, New Delhi	rnying ma bka' ma
རྙིང་མ་བཀའ་མ་རྒྱས་པ	the Expanded Edition of the Oral Tradition of the Old School, the Collected Transmitted Precepts of the Ancient Tradition	rnying ma bka' ma rgyas pa
རྙིང་མ་བཀའ་མའི་ལུགས་སྐུ་གསུམ	trikaya in the nyingma bka' ma [/ 1) {chos sku gdod ma'i mgon po'am kun bzang po} 2) {longs sku rdo rje 'chang chen po} 3) {sprul sku padma 'byung gnas}	rnying ma bka' ma'i lugs sku gsum
རྙིང་མ་རྒྱུད་འབུམ	Hundred Thousand Nyingma Tantras	rnying ma rgyud 'bum
རེ	edited by Jigmey Lingpa. Various editions exist, but the numbering of the volumes used in this book are from the version in 36 volumes published by His Holiness Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, New Delhi, ...	re
རྙིང་མ་པ	of or belonging to the Nyingma school, old tradition	rnying ma pa
རྙིང་མ་བ	Nyingmapa	rnying ma ba
རྙིང་མ་བའི་ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུ	the 9 yanas of nyingma	rnying ma ba'i theg pa rim dgu
རྙིང་མའི་ཆོས་བྱུང	History of the Nyingmapa School by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje	rnying ma'i chos byung
རྙིང་མའི་ཆོས་འབྱུང	by H.H. Dudjom Rinpoche	rnying ma'i chos 'byung
རྙིང་མའི་ཐེག་པ་རིམ་པ་དགུ	the 9 yanas of nyingma	rnying ma'i theg pa rim pa dgu
རྙིང་མའི་ལུགས	Nyingma tradition	rnying ma'i lugs
རྙིང་མའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	CHN the three roots of nyingma tradition	rnying ma'i lugs kyi rtsa ba gsum
རྙིང་ཚད	old fever, chronic disease	rnying tshad
རྙིང་ཞེན	conservative	rnying zhen
རྙིང་ཞེན་པ	conservative	rnying zhen pa
རྙིང་ཞེན་རིང་ལུགས	conservativism	rnying zhen ring lugs
རྙིང་ཞེན་བསམ་པ	conservative views	rnying zhen bsam pa
རྙིང་རིགས	antiques	rnying rigs
རྙིང་རིགས་ཁང	museum	rnying rigs khang
རྙིང་རིགས་བདག་གཉེར་ཁང	museum [for antiques]	rnying rigs bdag gnyer khang
རྙིང་རུལ	old and rotten	rnying rul
རྙིང་རེ་རྗེ	to take pity upon	rnying re rje
རྙིང་ལུགས	Nyingma tradition	rnying lugs
རྙིང་ཤུལ	relic [of past times]	rnying shul
རྙིང་སྲུང	defending the old, conservative	rnying srung
རྙིང་སྲུང་བྱེད	defend the old, be conservative	rnying srung byed
རྙིང་སྲོལ་སོར་གནས	state in which old customs remain/ are preserved	rnying srol sor gnas
རྙིང་གསར	old and new	rnying gsar
རྙིང་གསོའི་རིང་ལུགས	principle of reintroducing old customs/ habits	rnying gso'i ring lugs
རྙིང་ཧྲུལ	worn out, old and rotten things	rnying hrul
རྙིངས་པ	CM: 1) rnying drags pa. 2) rnying pa dang ' dra. Das: = rengs pa, worn out, dilapidated, cast off. [mss]	rnyings pa
རྙིངས་ཚད་གཉིས	CHN	rnyings tshad gnyis
རྙིད	[p brnyid,/ brnyis],, obtain, wither, fade, shrivel	rnyid
རྙིད་སྐམ	withering, shriveling	rnyid skam
རྙིད་སྐམ་འགྲོ	wither, shrivel	rnyid skam 'gro
རྙིད་པ	[p brnyid,/ brnyis],, obtain, wither, fade, shrivel	rnyid pa
རྙིལ	bunch of ears of corn, the gums	rnyil
རྙིལ་བ	gums	rnyil ba
རྙིས་པ	worn out, become old, faded	rnyis pa
རྙུམ་འཇོམས་པ	oppose	rnyum 'joms pa
རྙེགས	(not in DAS)	rnyegs
རྙེད་དཀའ	so difficult to find, difficult to acquire	rnyed dka'
རྙེད་དཀའ་བ	difficult to find, rare	rnyed dka' ba
རྙེད་བཀུར	riches and honor	rnyed bkur
རྙེད་བཀུར་བུང་བ	gave us offerings and veneration	rnyed bkur bung ba
རྙེད་བཀུར་ལྷག་ཞེན	be attached to respect and honor	rnyed bkur lhag zhen
རྙེད་དོན	object found. [mss]	rnyed don
རྙེད་བདེ་གྲགས་བསྟོད	gain, pleasure, fame and praise	rnyed bde grags bstod
རྙེད་འདོད	inclination for gain	rnyed 'dod
རྙེད་འདོད་པ	desire to gain	rnyed 'dod pa
རྙེད་བརྡ	found ad in the lost and found column	rnyed brda
རྙེད་བརྡ་གཏོང	advertise in the lost and found column for things found	rnyed brda gtong
རྙེད་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	to be supported	rnyed pa dang bcas pa
རྙེད་པ་དང་མ་རྙེད་པ	gain and loss. one of the {'jig rten gyi chos brgyad} the eight worldly dharmas	rnyed pa dang ma rnyed pa
རྙེད་པ་ལས་རྙེད་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད	1 of 5 log par 'tsho ba	rnyed pa las rnyed sgrub par byed
རྙེད་པར་དཀའ	rarely met with	rnyed par dka'
རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་བ	rarely met with	rnyed par dka' ba
རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་བ་མ་ཡིན	it will not be difficult for them to obtain	rnyed par dka' ba ma yin
རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་ཚོད	the difficulty of obtaining	rnyed par dka' tshod
རྙེད་པར་འགྱུར	you will discover	rnyed par 'gyur
རྙེད་མ་ཐུབ	could not find	rnyed ma thub
རྙེད་མ་པ	old tradition	rnyed ma pa
རྙེད་མེད	nothing to be found	rnyed med
རྙེད་ཚོལ	[TRS 32-1]	rnyed tshol
རྙེད་འཚུལ	to pursue for gain	rnyed 'tshul
རྙེད་ལ་གདུ	love of gain	rnyed la gdu
རྙེད་སོན	finding, discovering	rnyed son
རྙེད་སོན་བྱུང	find, discover	rnyed son byung
རྙོག་ཁྲ	problem	rnyog khra
རྙོག་ཁྲ་བསལ་བ	solve	rnyog khra bsal ba
རྙོག་ཁྲ་བསལ་ལམ	solution	rnyog khra bsal lam
རྙོག་དྲ	complication, trouble, problem, confusion, entanglement	rnyog dra
རྙོག་དྲ་ཅན	troublesome, complicated, confused, problematic	rnyog dra can
རྙོག་དྲ་ཆེན་པོ་བཟོ	make a lot of trouble/ problems	rnyog dra chen po bzo
རྙོག་དྲ་མེད་པ	simple, uncomplicated, pure	rnyog dra med pa
རྙོག་དྲ་ཚ་པོ	troublesome, complicated, confused, problematic	rnyog dra tsha po
རྙོག་དྲ་སེལ	straighten out/ clarify troubles/ problems/ confusions/ complications	rnyog dra sel
རྙོག་དྲ་སློང	make complications/ trouble/ problems confusions/ entanglements	rnyog dra slong
རྙོག་དྲ་བསླངས	brew trouble	rnyog dra bslangs
རྙོག་པ	I) Das, 498: {rnyog pa, brnyogs pa, brnyog pa} intr. v. (cf. nyog pa): to disturb, stir up, trouble; to trouble, to stir up; also adj. thick, turbid; chu rnyog pa muddy or dirty water. rnyogs pa ca...	rnyog pa
རྙོག་པ་ཅན	faulty, dirty, turbid, troubled	rnyog pa can
རྙོག་པ་མེད	unsullied	rnyog pa med
རྙོག་ཕྲ	tumult	rnyog phra
རྙོག་བྲལ	free of/ transcending sullying factors/ contamination	rnyog bral
རྙོག་མ	impurity, sullying factor	rnyog ma
རྙོག་མ་ཅན	muddied {rgyal po'i thugs chu rnyog ma can lta bur gyur pa} muddied the king's heart	rnyog ma can
རྙོག་མ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of/ transcending sullying factors/ contamination	rnyog ma dang bral ba
རྙོག་འཛིང	trouble, turmoil, disturbance, intricate, tangled, complicated	rnyog 'dzing
རྙོག་འཛིང་ཆེ་བ	complicated, intricate, difficult	rnyog 'dzing che ba
རྙོག་འཛིང་ལངས	have trouble/ turmoil/ disturbance arise	rnyog 'dzing langs
རྙོག་འཛིང་སེལ	clear up trouble/ turmoil/ disturbance	rnyog 'dzing sel
རྙོག་རྫིང	ravel	rnyog rdzing
རྙོག་རྫོབ	mixed up, confused	rnyog rdzob
རྙོག་ཟིང	trouble, turmoil, disturbance, intricate, tangled, complicated	rnyog zing
རྙོག་ཟིང་ལངས	have trouble/ turmoil/ disturbance arise	rnyog zing langs
རྙོག་ཟིང་སེལ	clear up trouble/ turmoil/ disturbance	rnyog zing sel
རྙོགས་ཁྲ	trouble, problem, disturbance	rnyogs khra
རྙོགས་ཁྲ་བཟོ	to cause problems	rnyogs khra bzo
རྙོགས་ཁྲ་བཤད	to cause troubles	rnyogs khra bshad
རྙོགས་པ	dirt, scum, stain, to become confused	rnyogs pa
རྙོགས་པ་མེད	stainless, clear, purified, washed	rnyogs pa med
རྙོགས་བྲལ	free of/ transcending sullying factors/ contamination	rnyogs bral
རྙོགས་མ	impurity, sullying factor	rnyogs ma
རྙོགས་མ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of sullying factors	rnyogs ma dang bral ba
རྙོགས་མའི་རྫིང	dirty pond	rnyogs ma'i rdzing
རྙོགས་མེད	limpid	rnyogs med
རྙོགས་ཚད	a disease	rnyogs tshad
རྙོགས་ཚད་གཉིས	CHN	rnyogs tshad gnyis
རྙོང	stretch out [hands] trap, snare	rnyong
རྙོང་བ	ensnare, trap, stretch out	rnyong ba
རྙོངས	imp. of {rnyong ba}	rnyongs
རྙོན	imp. of {rnyan pa}	rnyon
རྙོན་མ་ཅན	muddy water	rnyon ma can
རྙོབ	reach	rnyob
རྙོབ་པ	{rnyob pa, rnyob pa, rnyob ba} intr. v	rnyob pa
རྙོས	imp. of {rnya ba}	rnyos
སྙ	SA nyag, gnya'	snya
སྙ་གེ་སྙིགས་གེ	dirt, refuse, residue	snya ge snyigs ge
སྙ་ནང	SA gnya' nang	snya nang
སྙ་ལོ	snya lo med herb	snya lo
སྙ་ལོ་བ	polygonum aviculare l.	snya lo ba
སྙག་པ	SA snyeg pa	snyag pa
སྙགས	music, harmony	snyags
སྙགས་སྙིགས	dirt, refuse	snyags snyigs
སྙགས་བཟླ་ཡང	reciting a mantra	snyags bzla yang
སྙང་སྙོགས	[arch] lazy, [arch] meaningless useless don med dam tha shal [common, ordinary, vulgar, inferior, mundane	snyang snyogs
སྙད	convention, fault, malicious/ false accusation/ imputation/ blame, excuse/ pretext	snyad
སྙད་ཀ	1) convention, malicious/ false accusation/ imputation/ blame, excuse/ pretext, faults, arguments, responsibility/ blame; 2) Kha 'phangs pa'i thabs shes te mere appearance of a reason rgyu mtshan l...	snyad ka
སྙད་རྐོ་བ	affront, agitate, harass, tantalize, tease	snyad rko ba
སྙད་སྐོ་གནང་བ	h. to accuse. See {snyad btsugs pa}	snyad sko gnang ba
སྙད་བརྐོ	seek out useless arguments w others, uselessly seek out/ dig for faults in others	snyad brko
སྙད་བཅོས་བཤད་པ	to bully	snyad bcos bshad pa
སྙད་བརྗོད་བྱེད	abuse, bully	snyad brjod byed
སྙད་སྙོད	speak various words of ill will/ accusation 1012 snyad snyod mang pos sems rtsa dkrug	snyad snyod
པར་བྱེད	by speaking many words of ill will/ accusation --	par byed
སྙད་འདོགས	deprecate someone faultless as having faults,	snyad 'dogs
སྙད་འདོགས་པ	malicious accusation	snyad 'dogs pa
སྙད་པ	relate, report is called	snyad pa
སྙད་ཕྲན་བུ་ཡོད་པའི་དཀར་ཡོལ	piece of china w a small fault	snyad phran bu yod pa'i dkar yol
སྙད་བྱེད་པ	use a pretence or pretext	snyad byed pa
སྙད་མེད་སྙད་དཀྲི	entrap, ensnare the faultless in faults * blame/ accuse where there is no guilt	snyad med snyad dkri
སྙད་མེད་སྙད་དཀྲིས	entrap, ensnare the faultless in faults * blame/ accuse where there is no guilt	snyad med snyad dkris
སྙད་གཙེས	search for faults and attribute faults to the faultless	snyad gtses
སྙད་བཙུགས	[maliciously/falsely] blamed/ accused, used as an excuse/ pretext	snyad btsugs
སྙད་བཙུགས་པ	to accuse	snyad btsugs pa
སྙད་འཚོལ	search for faults *, [maliciously/falsely] blame/ accuse, use as an excuse/ pretext	snyad 'tshol
སྙད་འཛུག་པ	bring an action against, prosecute	snyad 'dzug pa
སྙད་འཛུགས	[maliciously/falsely] blame/ accuse, use as an excuse/ pretext	snyad 'dzugs
སྙད་སེ་སྙོད་སེ	speak various words of ill will/ accusation	snyad se snyod se
སྙན་ཀོར	ear ring	snyan kor
སྙན་སྐད	melodious language	snyan skad
སྙན་སྐུལ་གྲོས་ཤོག	call attention motion	snyan skul gros shog
སྙན་སྐྱོ	[arch] slander	snyan skyo
སྙན་སྐྱོས	rna ba sun po byas pa	snyan skyos
སྙན་བསྐུལ	reminder, urge someone to act [h]	snyan bskul
སྙན་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	remind, urge someone to act [h]	snyan bskul zhu
སྙན་ཁུང	ear-hole; hearing	snyan khung
སྙན་ཁུང་ཐུག་པ	gullible	snyan khung thug pa
སྙན་ཁུང་དུ་བརྒྱུད་པ	Hearing transmission transmitted orally	snyan khung du brgyud pa
སྙན་ཁུང་ཞན	faintest sound audible	snyan khung zhan
སྙན་ཁུང་སྲབ	easily influenced	snyan khung srab
སྙན་ཁུང་སྲབ་པ	believing all 1 hears	snyan khung srab pa
སྙན་གོང་གི་རྒྱན་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ	Skt. Avatamsaka, T. 44	snyan gong gi rgyan phal po che
སྙན་གྱི་གོང་རྒྱན	1) ear ring; 2) mdo sde phal bo che Avatamsaka Sutra	snyan gyi gong rgyan
སྙན་གྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the ears	snyan gyi dpe byad gnyis
སྙན་གྱི་དབང་པོ	ear snyan gyi dbang po cung zad dgongs Heed us! Listen to us! snyan gyi dbang po'i drung du 'di skad	snyan gyi dbang po
སྙན་གྲགས	fame [& glory], renown[ed], reputation, prestige	snyan grags
སྙན་གྲགས་ཀྱི	glorious	snyan grags kyi
སྙན་གྲགས་འགོག་ནུས	that will be the end of his fame	snyan grags 'gog nus
སྙན་གྲགས་སྒྲོག	cry/ shout [something good]	snyan grags sgrog
སྙན་གྲགས་ཅན	celebrity, famous, renowned	snyan grags can
སྙན་གྲགས་ཅན་གྱི་མི	reputed	snyan grags can gyi mi
སྙན་གྲགས་དང་མ་གྲགས	fame and disgrace. one of the {'jig rten gyi chos brgyad} the eight worldly dharmas	snyan grags dang ma grags
སྙན་གྲགས་བྱུང	became famous [h]	snyan grags byung
སྙན་གྲགས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	glorify	snyan grags su 'gyur ba
སྙན་གླུ	melody	snyan glu
སྙན་རྒྱན	ear ring	snyan rgyan
སྙན་རྒྱུད	oral (transmission, instructions, tradition, lineage) snyan rgyud kyi man ngag sprul pa'i legs	snyan rgyud
བམ་ཆེན་མོ	the Great Emanated Scriptures of the Oral Transmission	bam chen mo
སྙན་རྒྱུད་གཅོད	Oral Transmission of Chod by thang stong rgyal po	snyan rgyud gcod
སྙན་རྒྱུད་གདམས་ཁྲིད	oral transmission instructions	snyan rgyud gdams khrid
སྙན་རྒྱུད་སྦས	secret oral transmission	snyan rgyud sbas
སྙན་རྒྱུད་སྦས་པ	secret oral transmission	snyan rgyud sbas pa
སྙན་སྒྲོགས་མ	noble and generous lady	snyan sgrogs ma
སྙན་སྒྲོན	orally asked about situation	snyan sgron
སྙན་སྒྲོན་དགོངས་སྐོར	report, message, notice and discussion of action to be undertaken]	snyan sgron dgongs skor
སྙན་སྒྲོན་པ	1 who orally asks higher authorities about a situation	snyan sgron pa
སྙན་སྒྲོན་ཞུ	report, inform, appraise of	snyan sgron zhu
སྙན་སྒྲོན་ཡིག་ཆ	written report/ message/ notice	snyan sgron yig cha
སྙན་བརྒྱུད	oral lineage, SA snyan rgyud, aural transmission, hearing transmission, person-to-person lineage, oral transmission, oral tradition, contains 2 subsections (rnar rgyud, bshad rgyud)	snyan brgyud
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	orally transmitted instructions, the teachings of the oral lineage	snyan brgyud kyi gdams pa
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་སྐོར་གསུམ	Three Cycles of Oral Lineage; are the three main lineages of the Oral or Whispered Transmission of the Chakrasamvara teachings of the Kagyü Tradition. The three are: 1) The Dakpo Nyengyü (dvags po ...	snyan brgyud skor gsum
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཟམ་པ	the Vajra Bridge Hearing Lineage; Syn {klong sde rdo rje zam pa}	snyan brgyud rdo rje zam pa
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚིག་རྐང	{snyan brgyud rdo rje'i tshig rkang	snyan brgyud rdo rje'i tshig rkang
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་རྡོར་ཟམ	the Vajra Bridge Hearing Lineage; Syn {klong sde rdo rje zam pa}	snyan brgyud rdor zam
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་ཞག་བདུན་མ	terma by Guru Chöwang from the {gu ru gsang 'dus} cycle	snyan brgyud zhag bdun ma
སྙན་བརྒྱུད་བཞི	the four hearing lineages	snyan brgyud bzhi
སྙན་ངག	poetry, kavya speech which is agreeable to the ear, planet, venus, 1 of rig byed bzhi	snyan ngag
སྙན་ངག་མཁན	poet	snyan ngag mkhan
སྙན་ངག་མཁན་པོ	person knowing about poetry	snyan ngag mkhan po
སྙན་ངག་མཁས་དབང	excellent authority on poetry	snyan ngag mkhas dbang
སྙན་ངག་གི	grammatical	snyan ngag gi
སྙན་ངག་གི་སྐྱོན་བཅུ	the 10 faults of poetry	snyan ngag gi skyon bcu
སྙན་ངག་གི་དོན་རྒྱན་སོ་ལྔ	CHN	snyan ngag gi don rgyan so lnga
སྙན་ངག་གི་ལྡོག་རྒྱན་བཅུ	CHN	snyan ngag gi ldog rgyan bcu
སྙན་ངག་གི་སྣང་བ	poetic idea snyan ngag gi zung ldan gtso bo drug CHN	snyan ngag gi snang ba
སྙན་ངག་གི་གཟུགས་རྒྱན་ཉི་ཤུ	CHN	snyan ngag gi gzugs rgyan nyi shu
སྙན་ངག་གི་རིག་གནས	poetics [gd]	snyan ngag gi rig gnas
སྙན་ངག་པ	poet	snyan ngag pa
སྙན་ངག་ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིགས	collection of verse	snyan ngag phyogs bsgrigs
སྙན་ངག་མེ་ལོང	{snyan ngag me long} snyan ngag me long gi dngos bstan gyi	snyan ngag me long
ལེའུ་དང་པོའི་རྒྱན་བཅུ	CHN snyan ngag me long las dngos bstan bcu	le'u dang po'i rgyan bcu
སྙན་ངག་རོ་ལྡན	humorous poem	snyan ngag ro ldan
སྙན་ངང་མཁས་དབང	chief poet, complimentary address to the learned	snyan ngang mkhas dbang
སྙན་ངང་རོ་ལྡན	humorous expression including dge ba'i gtam, 'jam por smra, kha bzang, zhi ba'i tshig, tshig bzang, and legs bshad	snyan ngang ro ldan
སྙན་དངགས	[arch] poetry	snyan dngags
སྙན་བསྔག	poetics	snyan bsngag
སྙན་ལྕག	fame and honor	snyan lcag
སྙན་ལྕོག	ear	snyan lcog
སྙན་ཆ	earrings	snyan cha
སྙན་ཆ་དོད་པོ	changing sounds of a song's melody etc. snyan pa'i nyams dod po	snyan cha dod po
སྙན་མཆོག	ear	snyan mchog
སྙན་འཇམ་རོལ་མོ	light music	snyan 'jam rol mo
སྙན་འཇེགས	polite and gentle	snyan 'jegs
སྙན་འཇེབ	sweet	snyan 'jeb
སྙན་འཇེབས	harmony, euphony	snyan 'jebs
སྙན་འཇེབས་སྒྲ་གདངས	pleasant/ harmonious sound[ing]	snyan 'jebs sgra gdangs
སྙན་བརྗོད	graphic description	snyan brjod
སྙན་མཉམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of moderate length of speech	snyan mnyam pa'i dpe byad
སྙན་སྙན	pleasant/ pleasing snyan snyan gus gus kyis g.yo rgyu sweetly and humble, he is enticing you	snyan snyan
སྙན་སྙན་ལེགས་ལེགས	pleasant to eye and ear	snyan snyan legs legs
སྙན་གཏམ	pleasant talk	snyan gtam
སྙན་གཏོད་པ	bend the ear and listen	snyan gtod pa
སྙན་ཐོ	file, document, bill, record	snyan tho
སྙན་ཐོ་གཅོད	file, [put on] record	snyan tho gcod
སྙན་ཐོའི་རེའུ་མིག	table, schedule	snyan tho'i re'u mig
སྙན་དར	kha btags adorning representations of deities	snyan dar
སྙན་དུ་བརྒྱུད་པ	oral transmission; orally transmitted	snyan du brgyud pa
སྙན་དུ་གསོལ་བ	rna bar zhus pa, Da lo'i byas rjes rnams snyan du gsol ba yin	snyan du gsol ba
སྙན་དུ་ལྷོང་བ	talk reaching the ear	snyan du lhong ba
སྙན་ནང	district in nw tibet	snyan nang
སྙན་ནས་སྙན་དུ་བརྒྱུད་པ	continuous oral transmission; orally transmitted from one person to another	snyan nas snyan du brgyud pa
སྙན་མནན་པ	carefully listen to	snyan mnan pa
སྙན་པ	1) renown, glory, fame, praise; 2) rumor; 3) pleasant; 4) interesting to hear, inspiring	snyan pa
སྙན་པ་སྒྲོག་པ	spreading the word	snyan pa sgrog pa
སྙན་པ་བསྒྲགས་པ	made reputation	snyan pa bsgrags pa
སྙན་པ་དང་མི་སྙན་པའི་སྒྲ	pleasant and unpleasant sound	snyan pa dang mi snyan pa'i sgra
སྙན་པ་སྨྲ་བ	pleasant speech	snyan pa smra ba
སྙན་པ་ཡིན་པ	obscurity	snyan pa yin pa
སྙན་པད	ear rings worn as part of princely accoutrements	snyan pad
སྙན་པའི་སྐད	pleasant voice	snyan pa'i skad
སྙན་པའི་སྒྲ	agreeable voice	snyan pa'i sgra
སྙན་པའི་ངག་གིས	said politely	snyan pa'i ngag gis
སྙན་པའི་ངག་འགྱུར	sweet tone	snyan pa'i ngag 'gyur
སྙན་པའི་ངག་དབྱངས	melodious tones	snyan pa'i ngag dbyangs
སྙན་པའི་རྔ་སྒྲ་གྲགས་པ	the sweet sound of the drum rings out	snyan pa'i rnga sgra grags pa
སྙན་པའི་ཏོག	summit of fame, [yasahketu] the Buddha	snyan pa'i tog
སྙན་པའི་དར་ཕྱོར	raise the banner of renown!	snyan pa'i dar phyor
སྙན་པའི་དཔེ་ཅན	warbling bird, singing bird	snyan pa'i dpe can
སྙན་པའི་བ་དན	the banner of renown	snyan pa'i ba dan
སྙན་པའི་དབྱངས	melodious tone, sweet melody	snyan pa'i dbyangs
སྙན་པའི་དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བརྗོད་པ	chant with a nice tune	snyan pa'i dbyangs kyis brjod pa
སྙན་པའི་ཚིག	sweet words	snyan pa'i tshig
སྙན་པའི་གསུང་དབྱངས	sweet melody	snyan pa'i gsung dbyangs
སྙན་པའི་བསེར་བུ	the wind of rumor	snyan pa'i bser bu
སྙན་པར་གྲགས་པ	praiseworthy	snyan par grags pa
སྙན་པར་བྱེད	that does pleasant things 1014	snyan par byed
སྙན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	affectionate speech. pleasant speech, to talk pleasingly, {bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi}. to speak sweetly, gently spoke	snyan par smra ba
སྙན་པར་སྨྲས་སོང	spoke pleasantly	snyan par smras song
སྙན་པོ	1) renown, glory, fame, praise; 2) rumor; 3) pleasant; 4) interesting [to hear], inspiring	snyan po
སྙན་པོ་མེད་པ	unpleasant to hear, unpleasant to the ear	snyan po med pa
སྙན་ཕོ	wild sheep gnyan male	snyan pho
སྙན་ཕྲ	slander	snyan phra
སྙན་ཕྲ་ཞུ་བ	slander, backbite	snyan phra zhu ba
སྙན་འཕྲིན	[letter of] pleasant/ affectionate words	snyan 'phrin
སྙན་དབང	faculty/organ of hearing snyan dbang nyams pa rnam par spangs	snyan dbang
པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of the faculty of hearing being completely unimpaired	pa'i dpe byad
སྙན་འབུལ	report, appeal, request	snyan 'bul
སྙན་འབུལ་བརྩེ་གཟིགས	please consider/ grant my request	snyan 'bul brtse gzigs
སྙན་འབུལ་ཞུ	make a report/ appeal/ request	snyan 'bul zhu
སྙན་མི་སྙན	pleasant or unpleasant	snyan mi snyan
སྙན་མི་བཟང	Shiva, dbang phyug, Maheshvara	snyan mi bzang
སྙན་མོ	pleasing the ear	snyan mo
སྙན་གཙེར	rna ba sun po	snyan gtser
སྙན་རྩོམ	poetry	snyan rtsom
སྙན་ཚིག	1) pleasant words, sweettalk; 2) poetry, poetic language	snyan tshig
སྙན་ཚིག་གི་རིག་བྱེད	<sam' bed:> Samaveda	snyan tshig gi rig byed
སྙན་ཚིག་གླུ་གཞས	ode	snyan tshig glu gzhas
སྙན་ཚིག་བྱུང	grown out of the	snyan tshig byung
སམ	veda	sama
སྙན་ཚིག་དབྱངས་རྟ	pleasant sung melody snyan tshig g.yo sgyur - deceitful sweet talk	snyan tshig dbyangs rta
སྙན་ཚིག་ལོ་རྒྱུས	1) verse story; 2) history of snyan ngag	snyan tshig lo rgyus
སྙན་ཞུ	appeal. Application	snyan zhu
སྙན་ཞུ་བཀའ་སྐོར	report, message, notice and discussion of action to be undertaken]	snyan zhu bka' skor
སྙན་ཞུ་གཏོང	appeal application, request, report, account, petition	snyan zhu gtong
སྙན་ཞུ་ཕུལ་བ	to send in an application, apply in writing	snyan zhu phul ba
སྙན་ཞུ་བ	applicant, suitor	snyan zhu ba
སྙན་ཞུ་འབུལ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan zhu 'bul
སྙན་ཞུ་འབུལ་བ	present a petition	snyan zhu 'bul ba
སྙན་ཞུ་ཞུ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan zhu zhu
སྙན་རོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	snyan rong
སྙན་ལ་བརྗིད་པ	melodious & majestic	snyan la brjid pa
སྙན་ལ་རིང་བ	gently and lingering	snyan la ring ba
སྙན་ལམ་དུ་ཞུ་དོན	something to ask of you	snyan lam du zhu don
སྙན་ཤལ	1) rna mjug gi sha 'phyang hanging flesh [lobe of the ear?]; 2) ear ring; 3) kha btags adorning representations of deities	snyan shal
སྙན་ཤལ་གྱི་འདོད་གསོལ	presentation of ceremonial scarves	snyan shal gyi 'dod gsol
སྙན་ཤས	rna bar sun gtser	snyan shas
སྙན་ཤིང་འཇེབས་པ	pleasant [& soft/gentle]	snyan shing 'jebs pa
སྙན་ཤོག	1) speak into the ear; 2) [letter of] appeal application, request, report, account, petition, rep	snyan shog
སྙན་ཤོག་བཀའ་སྐོར	report, message, notice and discussion of action to be undertaken]	snyan shog bka' skor
སྙན་ཤོག་གཏོང	appeal application, request, report, account, petition	snyan shog gtong
སྙན་ཤོག་འབུལ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan shog 'bul
སྙན་ཤོག་ཞུ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan shog zhu
སྙན་གཤོག	1) external ear sha leb; 2) Lha mo 'khrab dus lha mo'i ear ring shog khra	snyan gshog
སྙན་སུན	rna ba sun po [Khyed la yang yang snyan sun ma zhus thabs med byung]	snyan sun
སྙན་སུམ	poetry and grammar and spelling	snyan sum
སྙན་སེང	report, petition	snyan seng
སྙན་སེང་ཞུ་བ	report remonstrate	snyan seng zhu ba
སྙན་སྲབ	credulous	snyan srab
སྙན་གསང	giving an [oral] rep[ort/ account to higher authorities	snyan gsang
སྙན་གསང་པོ	able to hear clearly	snyan gsang po
སྙན་གསན	listen eagerly and critically	snyan gsan
སྙན་གསན་བཀའ་སྐོར	report, message, notice and discussion of action to be undertaken]	snyan gsan bka' skor
སྙན་གསན་གཏོང	appeal application, request, report, account, petition	snyan gsan gtong
སྙན་གསན་དབབ་པ	to request	snyan gsan dbab pa
སྙན་གསན་འབུལ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan gsan 'bul
སྙན་གསན་འབེབས	to send out a request, invitation	snyan gsan 'bebs
སྙན་གསན་འབེབས་པ	invitation, invite, call attention	snyan gsan 'bebs pa
སྙན་གསན་ཞུ	appeal application, request, report, account, petition [h]	snyan gsan zhu
སྙན་གསོལ	request	snyan gsol
སྙན་ལྷན་ནེར་གསན	very carefully gzab byas nas listen,	snyan lhan ner gsan
སྙན་ལྷོང་བ	make dear	snyan lhong ba
སྙབ་སྙབ	seize or snatch together	snyab snyab
སྙབ་པ	to smack	snyab pa
སྙམ	might have, think, wonder, consider, feel, imagine, as if, would	snyam
སྙམ་གྱིན	thinking	snyam gyin
སྙམ་དུ	Reflecting that,	snyam du
སྙམ་དུ་དགོངས་པ	think --	snyam du dgongs pa
སྙམ་དུ་ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས	he thought, "…"	snyam du thugs rgyud la skyes
སྙམ་དུ་འཛིན་པ	think --	snyam du 'dzin pa
སྙམ་དུ་ཤེས་པ	know/ understand -	snyam du shes pa
སྙམ་དུ་སེམས་པ	to think	snyam du sems pa
སྙམ་དུ་བསམ	is the thought	snyam du bsam
སྙམ་དུ་བསམ་པ	think --	snyam du bsam pa
སྙམ་ན	one may wonder	snyam na
སྙམ་ནས	with this thought in mind 1015	snyam nas
སྙམ་པ	to wonder	snyam pa
སྙམ་པ་བྱུང	I felt that	snyam pa byung
སྙམ་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	x {chos 'chad pa'i bla ma las kyang nga lhag snyam pa'i nga rgyal} proudly believing yourself superior to the teacher who is explaining the Dharma	snyam pa'i nga rgyal
སྙམ་བྱེད	feel	snyam byed
སྙམ་བྱེད་པ	to feel, think	snyam byed pa
སྙམ་འབྱུང	it may seem that	snyam 'byung
སྙམ་མེ་སྙོམ་མེ	just mouthing words, not really and truly doing it	snyam me snyom me
སྙམ་ཙ་ན	just as he thought that	snyam tsa na
སྙམ་ཟླ་སྤུན	joint-husbands of a woman	snyam zla spun
སྙམས	wondering whether, thinking, to come to the conclusion that, thought, wondered	snyams
སྙལ	put to sleep, lay down	snyal
སྙལ་བ	brew ferment lay, lay anything down, bed a person down, assign a person a couch	snyal ba
སྙལ་སྨིན	fermentation	snyal smin
སྙལ་ཡས	a number	snyal yas
སྙི	trap, SA rnyi	snyi
སྙི་མཁྲེགས	hard and soft	snyi mkhregs
སྙི་སྟེང	neck, nape of neck	snyi steng
སྙི་པོ	soft, loose, smooth, tender, delicate	snyi po
སྙི་ཕུལ	corn of luxuriant growth, abundant harvest	snyi phul
སྙི་བ	soft, smooth, tender, delicate	snyi ba
སྙི་བ་འོ་ཅན	codonopsis convolvulacea kurz	snyi ba 'o can
སྙི་བོ	soft, loose, smooth, tender, delicate	snyi bo
སྙི་མ	[arch] ear of grain, whole grain	snyi ma
སྙི་མོ	1) wet manure; 2) snyi ba med herb; 3) * soft, smooth, tender, delicate	snyi mo
སྙི་ཤང་ཀ་ཏ	mountains in nepal	snyi shang ka ta
སྙི་ཤུན	soft skin	snyi shun
སྙི་སྲ	soft and hard	snyi sra
སྙིག་པ	{snyig pa, bsnyigs pa, bsnyig pa, snyigs} trans. v	snyig pa
སྙིག་མ	exhaust muck	snyig ma
སྙིགས	snyig pa! remainders [when purifying etc], leftovers * degeneration, corrupt, impurities, refuse, leavings, siftings, dregs, sediment, scum * impurity, defilement, [dark age] corruption	snyigs
སྙིགས་སྒམ	rubbish box	snyigs sgam
སྙིགས་ལྔ	five degenerations	snyigs lnga
སྙིགས་དུས	the degenerate age, the age of sin, dark age, present kalpa	snyigs dus
སྙིགས་དུས་བསྐལ་པ	the present kalpa	snyigs dus bskal pa
སྙིགས་དུས་གྱི	of the dark age	snyigs dus gyi
སྙིགས་རྡུལ	rubbish, garbage	snyigs rdul
སྙིགས་པ	1) sink to the bottom; 2) be left over; 3) degenerated, gown worse; 4) impure sediment	snyigs pa
སྙིགས་བྱེད་མ	the god of air in bon	snyigs byed ma
སྙིགས་མ	dreg; (spiritual) degeneration	snyigs ma
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ	five kinds of/ fivefold degeneration; five degenerations: 1] The degeneration of views due to the decline in the virtue of renunciants means wrong views. 2] The degeneration of disturbing emotions ...	snyigs ma lnga
ཨིན་ཐེ་བི༹རྟུཨེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཧོཨུསེ	holders means	in the virtue of house
ཅོཨརསེ	natured minds in which coarseness refers to strong and long-lasting disturbing emotions. 3] The degeneration of times due to the decline in enjoyments means the decreasing Aeon of Strife. 4] The de...	coarse
སྤན་དུཨེ་ཏོ་ཐེ་དེཅླིནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སུསྟཻནིང་ལིཕེ༹	force means a decreasing life span until finally reaching the length of ten years. 5] The degeneration of sentient beings means the decline of body due to inferior shape and lesser size, the declin...	span due to the decline of the sustaining life
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ་དུས	the age of the five corruptions	snyigs ma lnga dus
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ་བདོ	spreading of the five corruptions	snyigs ma lnga bdo
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ་བདོ་བ	increase in the 5 kinds of degenerations	snyigs ma lnga bdo ba
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ་མདོ་བ	[TRS 69-1]	snyigs ma lnga mdo ba
སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ་ནི	5 impurities (tshe'i snyigs, lha ba'i snyigs ma, nyon mongs pa'i snyigs ma, sems can gyi snyigs ma, dus kyi snyigs ma)	snyigs ma lnga ni
སྙིགས་མ་ཤས་ཆུང་བའི་དུས	times of decreasing corruptions	snyigs ma shas chung ba'i dus
སྙིགས་མ་ཤས་ཆེ་བའི་དུས	time of increasing corruptions 1016	snyigs ma shas che ba'i dus
སྙིགས་མའི	residual	snyigs ma'i
སྙིགས་མའི་འགྲོ་འདུལ	tamer of the beings of the dark age	snyigs ma'i 'gro 'dul
སྙིགས་མའི་རྒུད་མདངས	many disease, continual war, untimely rain, bad cattle etc	snyigs ma'i rgud mdangs
སྙིགས་མའི་དུས	'the dark age', the degenerate age Kali yuga	snyigs ma'i dus
སྙིགས་མའི་ལས	{'dod chags las skyes pa'i sgo gsum gyi las} 'depraved actions' which are the three produced through desire	snyigs ma'i las
སྙིགས་མའི་ལུས	kaliyuga, tainted time, evil age	snyigs ma'i lus
སྙིགས་སེལ་བཟོ་ཁང	refinery	snyigs sel bzo khang
སྙིགས་བསགས	precipitate	snyigs bsags
སྙིང	heart, mind, feelings; heart / pith; wish, desire	snying
སྙིང་དཀར	white/ virtuous thoughts	snying dkar
སྙིང་སྐྱ་རྦབ	heart dropsy	snying skya rbab
སྙིང་ཁ	existential self, heart region, throat center, heart	snying kha
སྙིང་ཁ་ཆོས	1 of 'khor lo drug, cakra of dharma at the heart, 1 of 'khor lo bzhi	snying kha chos
སྙིང་ཁམས	heart, courage	snying khams
སྙིང་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ནད	heart disease	snying khams kyi nad
སྙིང་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ནད་ལངས	have heart disease/ a heart attack	snying khams kyi nad langs
སྙིང་ཁམས་ཅན	having power of mind, courage, daring	snying khams can
སྙིང་ཁའི་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra of the heart	snying kha'i 'khor lo
སྙིང་ཁར	on the heart, at heart, at the heart	snying khar
སྙིང་ཁར་སྦྱར	to join at the heart	snying khar sbyar
སྙིང་ཁར་འཚངས	heart-ache	snying khar 'tshangs
སྙིང་ཁུ	quintessence, wine, spirits	snying khu
སྙིང་ཁུང	a moxibustion/ bleeding point	snying khung
སྙིང་ཁུང་རུས་པའི་གཏིང་ནས	from the core of one's heart	snying khung rus pa'i gting nas
སྙིང་ཁུར	nectar	snying khur
སྙིང་ཁོང་རུས་པའི་དཀྱིལ	from the bottom of the heart, deeply sincere	snying khong rus pa'i dkyil
སྙིང་ཁོང་རུས་པའི་གཏིང	from the bottom of the heart, deeply sincere	snying khong rus pa'i gting
སྙིང་ཁོང་རུས་པའི་གཏིང་ནས	in one's bones, from the depths of one's heart	snying khong rus pa'i gting nas
སྙིང་ཁྲག	heart's blood; my heart's blood	snying khrag
སྙིང་ཁྲག་འབྱིན་པ	shed the heartblood	snying khrag 'byin pa
སྙིང་ག	heart center	snying ga
སྙིང་ག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the Dharma wheel of the heart center, [the heart chakra]	snying ga chos kyi 'khor lo
སྙིང་གའི་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས་པ	mental vajra recitation	snying ga'i rdo rje'i bzlas pa
སྙིང་གའི་རྩ་འཁོར	heart [nadi] chakra	snying ga'i rtsa 'khor
སྙིང་གའི་རྩ་འདབ	a nadi	snying ga'i rtsa 'dab
སྙིང་གི	cardiac	snying gi
སྙིང་གི་དཀྱིལ	in the centre of his heart	snying gi dkyil
སྙིང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	heart center	snying gi 'khor lo
སྙིང་གི་རྒྱར་འཆང	kept sealed in the heart	snying gi rgyar 'chang
སྙིང་གི་སྙུན་མནར	heart attack	snying gi snyun mnar
སྙིང་གི་ནོར་བུ	heart-beloved jewel,beloved wealth/ friend nor	snying gi nor bu
སྙིང་གི་བུ	heart son	snying gi bu
སྙིང་གི་བུ་མཆོག	excellent spiritual son	snying gi bu mchog
བུ་མཆོག	my supreme and worthy	bu mchog
སྙིང་གི་མེ་ལོང	Abbr. of {rdo rje sems pa'i snying gi me long gi rgyud}	snying gi me long
སྙིང་གི་བརྩེ་བ	darling	snying gi brtse ba
སྙིང་གི་ཟུངས་ཁྲག་ལྟ་བུ	as the vital blood in my heart	snying gi zungs khrag lta bu
སྙིང་གྱི་བུ	sons of one's heart, children of one's heart	snying gyi bu
སྙིང་གྲོགས	dear friend	snying grogs
སྙིང་དགའ་བ	gladness, cheerfulness, heart's content, joy	snying dga' ba
སྙིང་འགུལ	heart tremors	snying 'gul
སྙིང་འགེམས་པ	stupefied, confounded, depressed	snying 'gems pa
སྙིང་ངེ་བའི་མིར་གྱུར	became very	snying nge ba'i mir gyur
དེཨར་ཏོ	-	dear to
སྙིང་ཅན	fearless, courageous, brave	snying can
སྙིང་གཅུས	mind devious and not straightforward	snying gcus
སྙིང་གཅེས་གཅེས	much beloved, very dear	snying gces gces
སྙིང་བཅག་པ	to break someone's heart	snying bcag pa
སྙིང་བཅང	taken to heart, held dear	snying bcang
སྙིང་བཅང་བྱེད	take to heart, hold dear	snying bcang byed
སྙིང་བཅངས	eagerly/ industriously/ assiduously taken into the mind/ to heart/ held dear	snying bcangs
སྙིང་བཅུད	quintessence, crystallization	snying bcud
སྙིང་ཆ	core	snying cha
སྙིང་ཆ་སྐྱུ་རུ་རུ	apprehensive fear	snying cha skyu ru ru
སྙིང་ཆུ	heart water disease	snying chu
སྙིང་ཆུ་བཞུག	afflicted with dropsy in the pericardium	snying chu bzhug
སྙིང་ཆུང་ཆུང	[small heart) meek, cowardly, timid	snying chung chung
སྙིང་ཆུང་བ	timid, timorous, trembling	snying chung ba
སྙིང་ཆེན་པོ	[big heart] brave, courageous	snying chen po
སྙིང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the dharmachakra of the heart center	snying chos kyi 'khor lo
སྙིང་འཆུ་བ	ravish the mind	snying 'chu ba
སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion; compassionate [one of the nine moods of dance (mind)]	snying rje
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐད	lamentation, cry of compassion 1017	snying rje skad
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐྱེ་བ	love dearly, feel sorry	snying rje skye ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐྱེད	be compassionate	snying rje skyed
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	feeling compassion	snying rje skyes te
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐྱེས་ནས	felt great pity	snying rje skyes nas
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྐྱེས་པ	felt compassion	snying rje skyes pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་བགྱི་བ	to have compassion	snying rje bgyi ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྒོམ་པ	to cultivate compassion	snying rje sgom pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་བསྒོམ་ཚུལ	how to cultivate compassion	snying rje bsgom tshul
སྙིང་རྗེ་བསྒོམས་པ	cultivated compassion	snying rje bsgoms pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཅན	merciful compassionate one	snying rje can
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེ་བ	strong love for all life snying rje che bas gtong phod dang generosity through great compassion	snying rje che ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great compassion. 2) a stage of Mahayoga	snying rje chen po
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་མདོ	Sutra of Entry into Great Compassion [thd]	snying rje chen po la 'jug pa'i mdo
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྟོབས	the power of the great compassion snying rje chen po'i pad ma dkar po'i mdo - {snying rje chen po'i pad ma dkar po'i mdo} snying rje chen po'i dbang du byas pa	snying rje chen po'i stobs
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་སེམས	the attitude/wish of the great compassion	snying rje chen po'i sems
སྙིང་རྗེ་རྗེ	1) expression of unbearable compassion; 2) from extreme joy be kind	snying rje rje
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྙོམས་པ	equalized compassion snying rje dag pa sgrol ba byang chub	snying rje snyoms pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	Liberation Bodhichitta Sadhana of Pure Compassion	sems kyi sgrub pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་དང་ལྡན་པ	compassionate snying rje dang bral stong pa nyid lta ba the view of emptiness without compassion	snying rje dang ldan pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་དྲག་པ	yearning compassion	snying rje drag pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་དྲག་པོ་འཁྲུངས	feeling great compassion for	snying rje drag po 'khrungs
སྙིང་རྗེ་ནས	feeling compassion for	snying rje nas
སྙིང་རྗེ་པད་དཀར་གྱི་མདོ	{snying rje pad dkar gyi mdo	snying rje pad dkar gyi mdo
སྙིང་རྗེ་པད་མ་དཀར་པོའི་མདོ	White Lotus Sutra. Skt. karuna pundarika sutra	snying rje pad ma dkar po'i mdo
སྙིང་རྗེ་པོ	1) pleasing, darling, cute as a button beautiful, lovely, pretty, becoming, nice; 2) alike	snying rje po
སྙིང་རྗེ་པོ་མེད་པ	dull	snying rje po med pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་པོ་བཟོ	decorate	snying rje po bzo
སྙིང་རྗེ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	beautify	snying rje po bzo ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	by Shabkar	snying rje sprul pa'i glegs bam
སྙིང་རྗེ་བ	filled with pity	snying rje ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་བའི་སེམས	compassionate attitude/ wish	snying rje ba'i sems
སྙིང་རྗེ་བྱེད་པ	sympathize	snying rje byed pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་བྲལ	devoid of mercy, cruel	snying rje bral
སྙིང་རྗེ་བྲལ་བ	merciless, compassionless, ruthless	snying rje bral ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་མེད	mercilessness	snying rje med
སྙིང་རྗེ་མེད་པ	merciless, compassionless, ruthless	snying rje med pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་མོ	1) pleasing, darling, cute as a button beautiful, lovely, becoming, nice; 2) alike	snying rje mo
སྙིང་རྗེ་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable compassion, {tshad med bzhi}	snying rje tshad med
སྙིང་རྗེ་རོལ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Compassion Display Tantra. One of the Five Display Tantras among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	snying rje rol pa'i rgyud
སྙིང་རྗེ་རོལ་བ	mahayoga sadhana, mahayoga sgrub thabs	snying rje rol ba
སྙིང་རྗེ་ལ་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	meditate in the samadhi of great compassion	snying rje la snyoms par 'jug pa
སྙིང་རྗེ་གསུམ	the three kinds of compassion [sems can la dmigs pa'i snying rje dang, chos la dmigs pa'i snying rje, dmigs med la dmigs pa'i snying rje bcas so, the three types of compassion {sems can la dmigs pa...	snying rje gsum
པ་མེད་པ	beyond focus]	pa med pa
སྙིང་རྗེའི་སྐད	cries for pity	snying rje'i skad
སྙིང་རྗེའི་མགྲོན	guests (invited out) of compassion	snying rje'i mgron
སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཉམས	by encountering intense suffering compassion internally spreading/ growing brtse nyams ston pa'i rgyan zhig, nyams ldan gyi rgyan gyi nang gses	snying rje'i nyams
སྙིང་རྗེའི་གནས	objects of compassion	snying rje'i gnas
སྙིང་རྗེའི་གནས་སུ་འདུག་པ	pitiful, with feeling of pity and distress	snying rje'i gnas su 'dug pa
སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཕན་ཡོན	the benefits of compassion	snying rje'i phan yon
སྙིང་རྗེའི་དབང	the power of compassion	snying rje'i dbang
སྙིང་རྗེའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	king of compassion, Chenrezig; lord / king of compassion, Chenrezig	snying rje'i dbang phyug
སྙིང་རྗེའི་དམིགས་པ	object of compassion	snying rje'i dmigs pa
སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཡུལ་མཆོག	Supreme Objects of Compassion. Refers to all the sentient beings of the six classes, especially the ones in the lower realms	snying rje'i yul mchog
སྙིང་རྗེའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of compassion	snying rje'i rang bzhin
སྙིང་རྗེའི་སེམས་འཕྲེང་དྲག་སྟེ	felt strong pity for	snying rje'i sems 'phreng drag ste
སྙིང་རྗེའི་བསམ་པ	a compassionate attitude	snying rje'i bsam pa
སྙིང་རྗེའི་ལྷ	Avalokiteshvara	snying rje'i lha
སྙིང་རྗེས	compassionately	snying rjes
སྙིང་རྗེས་སྟོན	to teach with compassion	snying rjes ston
སྙིང་རྗེས་མ་བཟོད	driven by compassion snying rjes zhi la mi gnas pa'i gzhi shes fundamental knowledge which because of samsara does not abide in peace	snying rjes ma bzod
སྙིང་རྗེས་གཟིགས་པ	compassionate gaze	snying rjes gzigs pa
སྙིང་ཉེ	faithfulness	snying nye
སྙིང་ཉེ་བ	dearest to us	snying nye ba
སྙིང་ཉེ་ལགས	former C Tibet lady of the house of middle rank address [h]	snying nye lags
སྙིང་ཏིག	SA snying thig	snying tig
སྙིང་གཏད	to, aiming toward, directed toward	snying gtad
སྙིང་གཏད་པ	trust in rely on, have confidence in	snying gtad pa
སྙིང་གཏམ	heartfelt advice	snying gtam
སྙིང་གཏམ་བྱས་པ	gave them personal advice	snying gtam byas pa
སྙིང་གཏམ་ཤོད	1) speak straightforward talk; 2) speak words of love/affection; 3) give heartfelt advice; 4) reveal 1's innermost thoughts/ feelings; 5) tell a secret	snying gtam shod
སྙིང་གཏམ་སེམས་ལ་ཞོག	keep my	snying gtam sems la zhog
སྙིང་གཏམ་གསེར་གྱི་ཐིག་པ	Drop of Gold, a Heart Advice, by Shabkar snying gtam lhug par smra ba seng ge	snying gtam gser gyi thig pa
སྙིང་སྟོད་དུ་འཚངས	heart seizes	snying stod du 'tshangs
སྙིང་སྟོབས	purity/ immaculacy/ sattva quality	snying stobs
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་རྩ	a nadi	snying stobs kyi rtsa
སྙིང་སྟོབས་གྱེན་འཕྱུར	full of vim and vigor	snying stobs gyen 'phyur
སྙིང་སྟོབས་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	vast courage	snying stobs rgya che ba
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཅན	having courage spirit etc.	snying stobs can
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཆུང	"faint-hearted," timid; lit., "little courage." [mss]	snying stobs chung
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཆེ	great soul, one of great fortitude	snying stobs che
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	bold, brave	snying stobs chen po
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཉམས་བ	dejection	snying stobs nyams ba
སྙིང་སྟོབས་གཏེར	intrepid, courageous	snying stobs gter
སྙིང་སྟོབས་སྤེལ	encourage, spur on	snying stobs spel
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཕུལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	the strength of virtue	snying stobs phul du gyur pa
སྙིང་སྟོབས་མེད་པ	coward	snying stobs med pa
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཞན་པ	weak, fearful, spiritless snying stobs g.yo ba med pa - unwavering in his resolve snying stobs la 'gyur ba yod med brtag	snying stobs zhan pa
པའི་ཕྱིར	to see whether or not he actually has such strength of character	pa'i phyir
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ལ་ཞུས་པ་མ་མཆིས་པ	heroic action / bravery and compassion	snying stobs la zhus pa ma mchis pa
སྙིང་བརྟེ་བའི་ཞིང	field / 1 who is an object of compassion/ kindness	snying brte ba'i zhing
སྙིང་བརྟེ་མེད་པའི་སྟན་བཅོས	thar pa 'thob byed ma yin pa'i bstan bcos	snying brte med pa'i stan bcos
སྙིང་བསྟན་པ	not kept secret	snying bstan pa
སྙིང་ཐག	conviction	snying thag
སྙིང་ཐག་པ	earnest	snying thag pa
སྙིང་ཐག་པ་ནས	sincerely, honestly, from the core of one's heart; from the depths of one's heart, deep-felt, profoundly	snying thag pa nas
སྙིང་ཐག་པ་ནས་འབད་པ	dedicate yourself to it from the very depths of your being	snying thag pa nas 'bad pa
སྙིང་ཐག་པ་ནས་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་པ	praying to him from the very depths of your heart	snying thag pa nas gsol ba 'debs pa
སྙིང་ཐག་རིང་བ	far from the essence, w little affection/ fondness	snying thag ring ba
སྙིང་ཐིག	drops/ bindu of the essence *, straight line in the middle	snying thig
སྙིང་ཐིག་སྐོར་བཞི	Four Cycles of Nyingtig. The chief disciple of Manjushrimitra, the great master known as Shri Singha, divided the Instruction Section into The Four Cycles of Nyingtig: the Outer, Inner, Secret, and...	snying thig skor bzhi
སྙིང་ཐིག་གི་དབང་བཞི	four empowerments of innermost spirituality	snying thig gi dbang bzhi
སྙིང་ཐིག་གི་དབན	bzhi - four empowerments of innermost spirituality [gd]	snying thig gi dban
སྙིང་ཐིག་སྙིང་པོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	practitioner of the essential Heart Essence. 1019 Syn {snying thig snying po'i don la spyod pa'i rnal 'byor pa}	snying thig snying po'i rnal 'byor pa
སྙིང་ཐིག་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོའི་ལམ	the path of the adamantine heart of the Essence of the Mind (Syn. the Dzogchen Upadesha teachings)	snying thig rdo rje snying po'i lam
སྙིང་ཐིག་གནད	pith of the innermost essence	snying thig gnad
སྙིང་ཐིག་པ	a practitioner of the Nyingtig teachings	snying thig pa
སྙིང་ཐིག་མ་བུའི་ཁྲིད་ཡིག	text by Jamgön Kongtrül, in {dam ngag mdzod}, vol Kha, pp. 197	snying thig ma bu'i khrid yig
སྙིང་ཐིག་ཡ་བཞི	4 volumes on snying thig (bi ma snying thig, bi ma yang tig, mkha' 'gro snying tig, mkha' 'gro yang tig)	snying thig ya bzhi
ཨཱུནེ྾ཅེལླེད་སེཅཏིཨོན	the explanatory lineage with scriptures and the hearing	Unexcelled Section
ལིནེཨགེ་ཝིཐོཨུཏ་སཅྲིཔཏུརེས	and concealed them to be revealed as the Nyingtig teachings Vima Nyingtig, and also as the Secret Heart Essence of Vimalamitra (bi ma'i gsang ba snying thig). Longchenpa clarified them in his 51 se...	lineage without scriptures
སྙིང་ཐིག་གསང་བའི་ངག	the secret instructions of the Nyingtig	snying thig gsang ba'i ngag
སྙིང་ཐོབས	spiritual power [gd]	snying thobs
སྙིང་འཐིབས	1 of 7 snying nad	snying 'thibs
སྙིང་འཐིབས་པ	mind unclear/ clouded/ unworkable * be discouraged/ disheartened	snying 'thibs pa
སྙིང་འཐོན་པ་ལྟར་སྡུག་བསྔལ	she mourned as if her heart had been torn out	snying 'thon pa ltar sdug bsngal
སྙིང་དང་འདྲ་བ	most precious, 'like 1's own heart'	snying dang 'dra ba
སྙིང་དུ་འདྲེ་བས་མི་སྡུག	?extremely depressed	snying du 'dre bas mi sdug
སྙིང་དུ་སྡུག་པ	CM: yid du 'ong ba'am 'bab pa/; e.g. mi de kun gyi snying du sdug par 'dzin pa; Das: handsome, charming; MSS: attractive; attracted to, love (AD) [mss]	snying du sdug pa
སྙིང་དུ་འབབ་པ	pleasant	snying du 'bab pa
སྙིང་དོན	essential meaning/ significance, heart of the matter, hub, nucleus	snying don
སྙིང་དོན་དུ་སྡུ་བ	summarize	snying don du sdu ba
སྙིང་དོམ	dom dom [red tassel?] tied to a horse's chest	snying dom
སྙིང་གདོས	courage, power/ capacity of mind	snying gdos
སྙིང་བདེ	cheerful, merry, glad	snying bde
སྙིང་བདེ་བ	gladness, cheerfulness	snying bde ba
སྙིང་བདོམ	ornamental equipments of a riding horse	snying bdom
སྙིང་འདོད	our heart's desire; to really want to	snying 'dod
སྙིང་འདོད་པ	wish, desire, long for	snying 'dod pa
སྙིང་ལྡན	full of substance	snying ldan
སྙིང་སྡུག	sweetheart, girl friend	snying sdug
སྙིང་སྡུག་གི་གྲོགས་སོགས	our loved ones, all we hold dear	snying sdug gi grogs sogs
སྙིང་སྡུག་པ	see snying du sdug pa [mss]	snying sdug pa
སྙིང་སྡུག་སྤོང་བ	jilt	snying sdug spong ba
སྙིང་སྡུག་ཞིག་འདུག	be a general favorite	snying sdug zhig 'dug
སྙིང་སྡུས	synopsis	snying sdus
སྙིང་བརྡར་བའི་སྒྲ	heart murmur	snying brdar ba'i sgra
སྙིང་བསྡུད	summary, outline	snying bsdud
སྙིང་བསྡུས	compendium, concise, summary	snying bsdus
སྙིང་ན་སྟེ་ལེན་འཇལ་བར་འདོད་ནས	the desire to repay this slight	snying na ste len 'jal bar 'dod nas
སྙིང་ན་བ	1) mental disease; 2) unhappy, angry	snying na ba
སྙིང་ནད	1) mental disease; 2) old enmity, grudge; 3) heart disease	snying nad
སྙིང་ནད་ཁ་ལེ་ནག་པོ	1 of 7 snying nad	snying nad kha le nag po
སྙིང་ནད་ཆེན་པོ	deep hatred/ enmity/ grudge	snying nad chen po
སྙིང་ནད་བདུན	the 7 heart/ mental diseases [mya ngan dang sems 'khrugs pa sogs las byung ba'i snying gi nad bdun te, snying 'phyos dang, snying gzer, snying tshad, snying chu, snying 'thibs, snying srin, snying ...	snying nad bdun
སྙིང་ནད་བྱེད	hold an old enmity/ grudge	snying nad byed
སྙིང་ནད་ཟབ་པོ	deep hatred/ enmity/ grudge	snying nad zab po
སྙིང་ནད་ཟུགས་པ	hate	snying nad zugs pa
སྙིང་ནས	from [core of] the heart, sincerely, deep-felt wholeheartedly, really, truly	snying nas
སྙིང་ནས་དགའ་པོ་བྱུང	I really liked it	snying nas dga' po byung
སྙིང་ནས་འགྱོད་པ	regret deeply/ sincerely	snying nas 'gyod pa
སྙིང་ནས་གཅེས་པ	precious	snying nas gces pa
སྙིང་ནས་བརྩེ་བ	dear, beloved	snying nas brtse ba
སྙིང་ནས་བསམ་པ	to consider deeply	snying nas bsam pa
སྙིང་ནོར	dear treasure, jewel of the heart	snying nor
སྙིང་གནོན	1) means of calming anger; 2) punishment for crime	snying gnon
སྙིང་སྣ	various hearts 1020	snying sna
སྙིང་པ	ancient	snying pa
སྙིང་པོ་སྐུ	inner reality of form	snying po sku
སྙིང་པོ་མཁྲེགས་པ	earth, that holds everything, all substances	snying po mkhregs pa
སྙིང་པོ་གང་ལ་ཡང་མི་འདུག	nothing at all has any meaning	snying po gang la yang mi 'dug
སྙིང་པོ་གྲུབ་པ	earlier name of 'jam dpal bshes gnyen	snying po grub pa
སྙིང་པོ་བགྲོངས	recite the essential [mantra]! snying po rgyan las gsungs pa'i phyir bcos nyams su blang bar bya ba nyer lnga CHN	snying po bgrongs
སྙིང་པོ་ལྔ	five potent essences, 5 chief essences (tshwa, shing tog, bu ram, sbrang rtsi, til dmar)	snying po lnga
སྙིང་པོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཟེར	the nail of mantra which is the nucleus	snying po sngags kyi gzer
སྙིང་པོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཟེར་ཆེན	the great stake/ nail of the essence mantra,	snying po sngags kyi gzer chen
སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	endowed with an essence of, is by nature / essence, essential, quintessential	snying po can
སྙིང་པོ་ཆེ	great courage, great power/ capacity of mind	snying po che
སྙིང་པོ་མཆོག	a number	snying po mchog
སྙིང་པོ་མཆོག་གི་མདོ	Supreme Essence Sutra snying po til 'bru tsam yang med pa makes no sense whatsoever	snying po mchog gi mdo
སྙིང་པོ་རྟུལ་ཞུགས	Essence of Discipline	snying po rtul zhugs
སྙིང་པོ་ཐེག་པའི་ཡང་རྩི	a chief work of anuttara	snying po theg pa'i yang rtsi
སྙིང་པོ་དོན	essential truth	snying po don
སྙིང་པོ་དོན་གྱི་བསྟན་པ	teachings of the essential meaning, [Ati Yoga]	snying po don gyi bstan pa
སྙིང་པོ་ལྡན་མ	article that is possessed of some real properties	snying po ldan ma
སྙིང་པོ་བསྡུ་བ	work composed by atisha	snying po bsdu ba
སྙིང་པོ་བསྡུད་འགོད	abridgement	snying po bsdud 'god
སྙིང་པོ་སྤྱི་ཏིའི་རྒྱུད	Essence Chiti Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	snying po spyi ti'i rgyud
སྙིང་པོ་བ་ཛྲ་གུ་རུ	vajra guru essence mantra	snying po ba dzra gu ru
སྙིང་པོ་བྱང་ཆུབ	enlightenment, fundamental state of enlightenment, bodhi of the essence	snying po byang chub
སྙིང་པོ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	the very core of state of pure and total presence	snying po byang chub kyi sems
སྙིང་པོ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	bodhichitta essence	snying po byang chub sems
སྙིང་པོ་བླང་བར་བྱེད་པ	take full advantage; make my life meaningful	snying po blang bar byed pa
སྙིང་པོ་མི་འདུག	there is no meaning in it; it is futile / pointless	snying po mi 'dug
སྙིང་པོ་མེད	empty futility, essenceless	snying po med
སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པ	worthless, null, void, false, hollow, 3rd pandava, insubstantial, futility, without lasting substance	snying po med pa
སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པའི་ནོར་རྫས	vain wealth snying po med pa'i bya ba la nan gyis 'jug	snying po med pa'i nor rdzas
པའི་བློ	urgently we yearn to do senseless things snying po med pa'i lus la chags pa spangs	pa'i blo
སྙིང་པོ་རྩོལ་མེད་བསྟན་པ	the effortless heart doctrine	snying po rtsol med bstan pa
སྙིང་པོ་རྫོགས	complete reality, perfected essence	snying po rdzogs
སྙིང་པོ་བཟླས་པ	to mutter heartmantras	snying po bzlas pa
སྙིང་པོ་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom nature	snying po ye shes
སྙིང་པོ་རིག་པ	inner reality of awareness	snying po rig pa
སྙིང་པོ་ལེན	take advantage of	snying po len
སྙིང་པོ་ལོངས	{mi lus snying po longs} use this human body for what is essential	snying po longs
སྙིང་པོ་ལོན་པ	to utilize, make use of	snying po lon pa
སྙིང་པོ་སོ་སོར	white species of sandal wood, yellow gem, topaz	snying po so sor
སྙིང་པོ་གསུང	inner reality of communication	snying po gsung
སྙིང་པོའི	quintessential; of the heart essence (of . . . )	snying po'i
སྙིང་པོའི་ཁང་པ	recluse's cell or hermitage in the midst of a group of hills	snying po'i khang pa
སྙིང་པོའི་ཁམས	essential element. Syn {bde gshegs snying po}	snying po'i khams
སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Essence Tantra	snying po'i rgyud
སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད་ཕྱི་མ	Subsequent Essence Tantra	snying po'i rgyud phyi ma
སྙིང་པོའི་སྔགས	essence mantra. The short form of the mantra of a yidam de- 1021 ity as opposed to the longer dharani mantra; for example 'om mani padme hung.'	snying po'i sngags
སྙིང་པོའི་བཅུད	quintessence	snying po'i bcud
སྙིང་པོའི་བཅུད་དྲིལ	quintessence	snying po'i bcud dril
སྙིང་པོའི་ཆོས	dharma of the essence	snying po'i chos
སྙིང་པོའི་མཆོག	greatest heart	snying po'i mchog
སྙིང་པོའི་ཉམས་ལེན	essential practices	snying po'i nyams len
སྙིང་པོའི་བསྟན་པ	essential teaching	snying po'i bstan pa
སྙིང་པོའི་ཐེག་པ	quintessential approach, essential vehicle	snying po'i theg pa
སྙིང་པོའི་དེ་ཉིད	suchness of the essence	snying po'i de nyid
སྙིང་པོའི་དོན	essential meaning	snying po'i don
སྙིང་པོའི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	Essence Mahamudra	snying po'i phyag chen
སྙིང་པོའི་དབེན་པ	void, worthless, solitude	snying po'i dben pa
སྙིང་པོའི་གཞི	earth, that holds everything, all substances	snying po'i gzhi
སྙིང་པོའི་ཡང་བཅུད	quintessence	snying po'i yang bcud
སྙིང་པོའི་ལྷ་ཆོས་མཛད་པ	to practice the Dharma, which does have meaning	snying po'i lha chos mdzad pa
སྙིང་པོར་དྲིལ་བ	condensed to the essence	snying por dril ba
སྙིང་པོར་འདྲིལ་བ	condensed to the essence	snying por 'dril ba
སྙིང་པོར་བྱས	put in the center	snying por byas
སྙིང་པོར་འཛིན་པ	grasp what is important/ the essential thing	snying por 'dzin pa
སྙིང་པོར་བཞུགས	as the essence of	snying por bzhugs
སྙིང་པོས་སྟོངས	castor oil plant	snying pos stongs
སྙིང་པོས་དབེན་པ	meaningless, essenceless	snying pos dben pa
སྙིང་སྤོ	do a heart transplant	snying spo
སྙིང་ཕུར་ཐེབས་པ	certain stable mind, penetrate the depths	snying phur thebs pa
སྙིང་ཕྱུང་ལག་མཐིལ་གཞག་པ	the essence placed in the palm of one's hand	snying phyung lag mthil gzhag pa
སྙིང་འཕག	heart beat	snying 'phag
སྙིང་འཕག་མཚམས་ཆད	have a heart attack	snying 'phag mtshams chad
སྙིང་འཕྱོ	heart leapt/ trembled	snying 'phyo
སྙིང་འཕྱོས	{snying 'phyos disease	snying 'phyos
སྙིང་བ	swell	snying ba
སྙིང་བྱང	concise list, quintessential inventory [gd]	snying byang
སྙིང་བྱང་ཆུབ	essence of bodhi	snying byang chub
སྙིང་བྲོ་བ	want to --	snying bro ba
སྙིང་དབུས	middle of the heart/ mind	snying dbus
སྙིང་དབུས་སུ་བཅང	keep in mind	snying dbus su bcang
སྙིང་དབུས་སུ་བཅང་དགོས	[we] should keep [it] in mind	snying dbus su bcang dgos
སྙིང་དབུས་སུ་བཅངས	kept in the heart	snying dbus su bcangs
སྙིང་དབྱིབས	conical shape	snying dbyibs
སྙིང་འབབ་དྲི	agreeable scent	snying 'bab dri
སྙིང་འབྲས	'bras nad snying la babs pa zhig ste	snying 'bras
སྙིང་མ	antique	snying ma
སྙིང་མ་དགའ་སྟེ	in misery	snying ma dga' ste
སྙིང་མ་ཆུང་ཞིག	be not afraid	snying ma chung zhig
སྙིང་མ་རྗེ	1) "cutie" [address; 2) contempt condescension deprecation	snying ma rje
སྙིང་མ་སྡུག	not handsome, not charming, bad people	snying ma sdug
སྙིང་མི་དགའ་ཕྱད་དེ	utter despair	snying mi dga' phyad de
སྙིང་མེད	1) w/o courage, w/o power/ capacity of mind; 2) mind not knowing good and bad	snying med
སྙིང་མེད་ཁོག་སྟོང	hollow, centerless, w/o inner essence	snying med khog stong
སྙིང་མེད་ཕུད་པོ	unfounded fabrication	snying med phud po
སྙིང་མོ་ཆེ	so daring	snying mo che
སྙིང་དམར་པོར་ཟོས	eat a heart raw	snying dmar por zos
སྙིང་རྩ	living heart, root/ nadis/ blood vessels of the heart	snying rtsa
སྙིང་རྩ་ཁོལ	i become depressed (heart veins quiver)	snying rtsa khol
སྙིང་རྩ་འདར	palpitate, tremble [heart]	snying rtsa 'dar
སྙིང་རྩ་ནས	from the bottom of the heart	snying rtsa nas
སྙིང་རྩ་འཕག་གྲངས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electrocardiograph machine	snying rtsa 'phag grangs 'phrul 'khor
སྙིང་རྩ་འཕག་གྲངས་འབྲི་ཤོག	electrocardiograph paper	snying rtsa 'phag grangs 'bri shog
སྙིང་རྩེ	tip or apex of the heart, focus of attention	snying rtse
སྙིང་རྩེས་པ	mercy, compassion	snying rtses pa
སྙིང་བརྩེ	compassionate, benevolence and compassion	snying brtse
སྙིང་བརྩེ་ལྡན	loving, affectionate	snying brtse ldan
སྙིང་བརྩེ་ལྡན་པ	compassionate, loving	snying brtse ldan pa
སྙིང་བརྩེ་བ	loving, affectionate, etc	snying brtse ba
སྙིང་བརྩེ་ཞིང་བྱམས་པ	compassion and kindness	snying brtse zhing byams pa
སྙིང་བརྩེར་ལྡན་པ	full of compassion and love	snying brtser ldan pa
སྙིང་ཚ་བ	unhappiness	snying tsha ba
སྙིང་ཚད	sickness w heat in the heart	snying tshad
སྙིང་ཚབས	feminine disease snying la byer ba'i [disintegrating? disease, divisions snying gi khrag tshabs &, snying gi rlung tshabs why feminine]	snying tshabs
སྙིང་ཚིམ	gratification, satisfaction, consolation, pleasure felt at death of an enemy	snying tshim
སྙིང་ཚིམ་བགྲང་བ	express pleasure at the suffering of others	snying tshim bgrang ba
སྙིང་ཚིམ་བདར་བ	be pleased at the suffering of others	snying tshim bdar ba
སྙིང་ཚིམ་འདེབས་པ	to show pleasure at death of enemy	snying tshim 'debs pa
སྙིང་ཚིམ་པོ	comfortable	snying tshim po
སྙིང་ཚིམས	will have the pleasure of	snying tshims
སྙིང་ཚིལ	fat on the outside of the heart	snying tshil
སྙིང་ཚོམ་པ	[arch] 1) nang 'khor inner retinue; 2) Bkrabs pa chose?	snying tshom pa
སྙིང་འཚངས	heart seizes	snying 'tshangs
སྙིང་འཚུབ	flustered, helter-skelter, restless, agitated	snying 'tshub
སྙིང་ཞི་བ	soft/ peaceful mind	snying zhi ba
སྙིང་ཞོ་ཤ	{snying zho sha med tree	snying zho sha
སྙིང་ཞོས་ཤ	fruit in appearance like the heart	snying zhos sha
སྙིང་གཞོས་ཏེ་སྨྲ	say secretly, communicate a secret	snying gzhos te smra
སྙིང་གཞོས་ཏེ་སྨྲ་བ	speak in confidence	snying gzhos te smra ba
སྙིང་གཞོས་པ	[arch] 1) refresh/ ease the mind; 2) speak secret talk	snying gzhos pa
སྙིང་བཞོས་ཏེ་སྨྲ	reveal a confidential thing	snying bzhos te smra
སྙིང་བཞོས་ཏེ་སྨྲ་བ	speak out a secret	snying bzhos te smra ba
སྙིང་བཞོས་ནས	from the bottom of the heart, sincerely, genuinely 1022	snying bzhos nas
སྙིང་གཟེར	1 of 7 snying nad	snying gzer
སྙིང་རག་མ	[arch] hard hearted	snying rag ma
སྙིང་རི	monastery in tibet	snying ri
སྙིང་རིགས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་རིག་པ	archaeology	snying rigs brtag dpyad rig pa
སྙིང་རིང་བ	w/o affection, fondness, love	snying ring ba
སྙིང་རུལ	rotten-hearted, insensitive,	snying rul
སྙིང་རུས	endeavour; x {chos bdag med la snying rus gang che} the Dharma is nobody's property. It belongs to whoever has the most endeavour	snying rus
སྙིང་རུས་ཀྱིས	persevere; x {gang dka' dka' dang mang ba yang mi zin snyam du sgyid mi lug par snying rus kyis 'dzin} however long and difficult the teaching may be, do not feel disheartened and wonder if it will...	snying rus kyis
སྙིང་རུས་བསྐྱེད	don the armor of fortitude, practice with tenacity	snying rus bskyed
སྙིང་རུས་ཅན	ardent, enthusiast, fervent, zealot	snying rus can
སྙིང་རུས་ཆེན་པོ	diligent, hard working, persevering, w great will power	snying rus chen po
སྙིང་རུས་པ	[bone in the] heart, perseverance, fortitude, will power	snying rus pa
སྙིང་རུས་པའི་ཁུང་ནས	from the depths of (my heart, from the hole in the bone in my heart	snying rus pa'i khung nas
སྙིང་རུས་མེད་པ	no fortitude / perseverance / resilience; ex {snying rus med pa'i mi la sangs rgyas dkon} one without perseverance rarely attains Buddhahood snying rus yod na don rnams 'grub where there's a will t...	snying rus med pa
སྙིང་རེ་རྗེ	how pitiful! I feel pity for ...; xyz is a cause for compassion	snying re rje
སྙིང་རེ་ཚིམ	fulfilled, satisfied	snying re tshim
སྙིང་རེ་ཚིམ་པ	gratify, console, become gratified	snying re tshim pa
སྙིང་རླུང	wind disease where heart w/o reason is sad/ [utterly] depressed	snying rlung
སྙིང་རླུང་སྟོད་འཚངས	great/ intense snying rlung arising	snying rlung stod 'tshangs
སྙིང་རླུང་དྲག་པོ་ལྡན	become indignant	snying rlung drag po ldan
སྙིང་རླུང་ལྡང	wind arising in the heart	snying rlung ldang
སྙིང་བརླགས་པ	destroy 1's memory	snying brlags pa
སྙིང་ལ	into the heart	snying la
སྙིང་ལ་བཀོད	keep in mind	snying la bkod
སྙིང་ལ་ཁུགས	upon the breast	snying la khugs
སྙིང་ལ་གཅེས་པར་ཟུངས	take (it to heart	snying la gces par zungs
སྙིང་ལ་ཆོངས	keep in one's heart	snying la chongs
སྙིང་ལ་ཉལ	god of desire, Kama	snying la nyal
སྙིང་ལ་འདོད་དོ	desired her with all his heart	snying la 'dod do
སྙིང་ལ་ན་ཚ་གཏོང་ཡག	bitter, unpleasant	snying la na tsha gtong yag
སྙིང་ལ་བརྣག	long for, keep in mind	snying la brnag
སྙིང་ལ་བརྣགས	long for	snying la brnags
སྙིང་ལ་འབབ་པ	fully comprehending, appreciating, nectar	snying la 'bab pa
སྙིང་ལ་སིམ	dissolves into the heart	snying la sim
སྙིང་ལགས	lady	snying lags
སྙིང་ལམ	[arch] thoughts	snying lam
སྙིང་ལས	sems khur ram sems khral	snying las
སྙིང་ལས་ཆོངས	take to heart	snying las chongs
སྙིང་ཤིན་ཏུ་ན་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ	that he was making himself sick	snying shin tu na bar gyur te
སྙིང་སོ་ལྟར་བརྩེ་བ	unbearable sympathy, fondness	snying so ltar brtse ba
སྙིང་སྲིན	heart disease from worms	snying srin
སྙིང་སྲོག	heart and srog rtsa	snying srog
སྙིང་གསང	heart moxibustion point snying had pa scattered mind/apprehension, blank mind	snying gsang
སྙིང་ཧུ	SA nying khu	snying hu
སྙིངས་པས་ཉམས་ཐག	degenerated	snyings pas nyams thag
སྙིད་པ	SA rnyid pa	snyid pa
སྙིད་པོ	1) father's younger brother/ male relative; 2) spouse's sibling	snyid po
སྙིད་མོ	1) father's younger sister/ female relative; 2) maternal uncle's wife; 3) spouse's sister	snyid mo
སྙིན་ཏེ	SA snyi bo	snyin te
སྙིན་པ	SA snyi bo	snyin pa
སྙིན་པོ	SA snyi bo	snyin po
སྙིམ་གང	double handful	snyim gang
སྙིམ་པ	2 handsful, measure for liquids and grains	snyim pa
སྙིམ་པ་གང	double handful	snyim pa gang
སྙིམ་པ་འདེགས་པ	join the hands like a bowl	snyim pa 'degs pa
སྙིམ་པོ	2 handsful, measure for liquids and grains	snyim po
སྙིམ་བུ	child's double handful	snyim bu
སྙིམས	beautiful, handsome	snyims
སྙིལ	imp. of {snyil ba}	snyil
སྙིལ་སྡུད་པ	waste amassed wealth	snyil sdud pa
སྙིལ་བ	push down, break down, destroy, expel, banish, exile	snyil ba
སྙུ་ཁྲོག	pen snod, named because smyu gu blug na it makes a "khrog khrog" sound	snyu khrog
སྙུ་གུ	pen	snyu gu
སྙུ་ལས	illusory body	snyu las
སྙུག	pen	snyug
སྙུག་ཁ	1) pen tip; 2) yellow green	snyug kha
སྙུག་གུ	reed-pen	snyug gu
སྙུག་ཅུ་གང	kind of ldum rar skyes pai bamboo from whose rkang pa is made a mad smyug cu gang	snyug cu gang
སྙུག་ལྕག	bkug nas 'gram par gzhu byed flat bamboo	snyug lcag
སྙུག་ལྗང	yellow mostly green	snyug ljang
སྙུག་ལྡོང	bamboo stem	snyug ldong
སྙུག་པ	dip in, immerse	snyug pa
སྙུག་བྱ	kind of bird that lives in bamboo groves	snyug bya
སྙུག་སྦུབས	space inside bamboo	snyug sbubs
སྙུག་མ	reed, [bul]rush, bamboo 1023	snyug ma
སྙུག་མ་མཁན	1) bamboo article maker; 2) arrow maker	snyug ma mkhan
སྙུག་མ་གཞོན་ནུ	fresh bamboo	snyug ma gzhon nu
སྙུག་མའི་ཝ་ཤུ	bamboo gutter	snyug ma'i wa shu
སྙུག་མའི་སེམས	misspelling of {gnyug ma'i sems}	snyug ma'i sems
སྙུག་རྩ	bamboo shoot	snyug rtsa
སྙུག་འཛིན	one holding the reed-pen, writer	snyug 'dzin
སྙུག་གཞོན	young bamboo w/o branches	snyug gzhon
སྙུག་ཟམ	bamboo bridge	snyug zam
སྙུག་བཟོ	wicker work	snyug bzo
སྙུག་ཡོལ	bamboo curtain/ shade	snyug yol
སྙུག་རུམ	place in tibet	snyug rum
སྙུག་ཤིང	bamboo	snyug shing
སྙུག་ཤུན	bamboo skin	snyug shun
སྙུག་སི	dark yellow-color	snyug si
སྙུགས	duration, continuity, time	snyugs
སྙུགས་ཆེན	continual	snyugs chen
སྙུགས་སྦྲུལ	lizard	snyugs sbrul
སྙུགས་རིང	long time/ distance	snyugs ring
སྙུགས་རིང་དུ	for a long time/ distance	snyugs ring du
སྙུགས་སུ	in a long time	snyugs su
སྙུགས་སྲིང	lengthened or continual	snyugs sring
སྙུགས་སྲིངས་ཡུན་ཚད	protracted, lengthened out	snyugs srings yun tshad
སྙུགས་བསྲིང	prolong, make last longer, rgyun skyong ba'am, mu mthud pa, continue	snyugs bsring
སྙུང	disease, illness, sickness	snyung
སྙུང་དྭངས	be cured/ recovered	snyung dwangs
སྙུང་བ	h. to be sick, ache, hurt, ail	snyung ba
སྙུང་བུ	awl, pricker, punch	snyung bu
སྙུང་བྲལ	well, healthy	snyung bral
སྙུང་མེད	well, healthy	snyung med
སྙུང་གཞི	h. ache, sickness	snyung gzhi
སྙུང་གཞི་གཏོང	have pain	snyung gzhi gtong
སྙུང་གཞི་དྭངས	be cured/ recovered	snyung gzhi dwangs
སྙུང་གཞི་གདངས	be cured/ recovered	snyung gzhi gdangs
སྙུང་ཟུག	pain ache [h]	snyung zug
སྙུང་སོང	[he] got sick [h]	snyung song
སྙུང་གསོ	get well [h]	snyung gso
སྙུངས	imp. of {snyung ba}	snyungs
སྙུན	nad kyi zhe sa, Snyun dvangs pa, Sku snyun gyis bzung ba 'dug	snyun
སྙུན་གྱི་གསོལ་སྨན	medicine; herbs for healing	snyun gyi gsol sman
སྙུན་གྱི་གསོས་སྨན	medicine	snyun gyi gsos sman
སྙུན་དྭངས	be cured/ recovered	snyun dwangs
སྙུན་དྭངས་པ	cured from a disease, recovered from an illness, convalescent	snyun dwangs pa
སྙུན་དྲི་བ	to enquire after someone's	snyun dri ba
སྙུན་དྲི་བྷུ་བ	wait on, pay one's respects	snyun dri bhu ba
སྙུན་གདངས	nad dvangs zin pa	snyun gdangs
སྙུན་འདྲི	ask about someone's health	snyun 'dri
སྙུན་འདྲི་བ	inquiry after a person's health	snyun 'dri ba
སྙུན་པ	(tha mi dad pa bsnyun pa, bsnyun pa,, sick [h]	snyun pa
སྙུན་བྲལ	w/o sickness	snyun bral
སྙུན་མེད	well, healthy	snyun med
སྙུན་རྨེད	inquire, inquire after one's health	snyun rmed
སྙུན་རྨེད་པ	[arch] khams bde 'dri ba	snyun rmed pa
སྙུན་གཞི	[cause of] disease	snyun gzhi
སྙུན་གཞི་གཏོང	have pain	snyun gzhi gtong
སྙུན་གཞི་དྭངས	be cured/ recovered	snyun gzhi dwangs
སྙུན་གཞི་གདངས	be cured/ recovered	snyun gzhi gdangs
སྙུན་ཟུག	pain ache [h]	snyun zug
སྙུན་གསོལ་བ	inquire after a person's health	snyun gsol ba
སྙེ	(tha dad pa bsnyes pa, bsnye ba, snyes!,, * 1) lean against, rest on, lie down, recline, repose on; 2) ear/ head of grain	snye
སྙེ་དཀར	diseased ears of corn	snye dkar
སྙེ་ཁ་འགྲིག་པ	in a field all the ears of grain pull up? harvest thon pa	snye kha 'grig pa
སྙེ་ཁྲི	bed	snye khri
སྙེ་ཐང	snye thang	snye thang
སྙེ་ཐང་གླིང་ག	place where atisha lived	snye thang gling ga
སྙེ་ཐང་སྒྲོལ་མ	Tara of Nyethang	snye thang sgrol ma
སྙེ་ཐང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང	Tara Temple of Nyethang; Nyethang Drölma Lhakhang, Tara Temple, where Atisha passed away, in U [Central Tibet]	snye thang sgrol ma lha khang
སྙེ་ཐང་བདེ་བ་ཅན	{snye thang bde ba can monastery	snye thang bde ba can
སྙེ་ཐུན	gatherer of ears of corn	snye thun
སྙེ་ཐོ	in the field grain guarding from harm tho yor	snye tho
སྙེ་མདོ	village in tibet	snye mdo
སྙེ་ནག	sre da ste blight where heads of grain are black w/o grain	snye nag
སྙེ་ཕུ	town in tibet	snye phu
སྙེ་ཕུང	pile of ears of grain	snye phung
སྙེ་འཕྲེང	large grove in tibet	snye 'phreng
སྙེ་བ	(tha dad pa bsnyes pa, bsnye ba, snyes!,, * lean against, rest on, lie down, recline, repose on	snye ba
སྙེ་བོ	gnyen sgrig gi bya ba byed mkhan nam gnyen dpang, [Rgya mo 'un shing kong jo khyod, dka' las byas nas snye bos bkug]	snye bo
སྙེ་འབོལ	pillow, cushion	snye 'bol
སྙེ་འབྲུ	ear of barley	snye 'bru
སྙེ་མ	ears of corn ear of grain, whole grain, unhusked grain	snye ma
སྙེ་མ་ཅན་གྱི་ལོ་ཏོག	grain crops 1024	snye ma can gyi lo tog
སྙེ་མ་མིག་ཅན	ears of corn which have just formed, grains	snye ma mig can
སྙེ་མ་མིག་བླུགས	ear w broken grain 'bru shun gang la khad yod	snye ma mig blugs
སྙེ་མ་ལུས་ལྕེབས	tree pongamia glabra, medicine	snye ma lus lcebs
སྙེ་མ་ལོང་བ	ear of grain w small or no grain	snye ma long ba
སྙེ་མའི་ཕུང་པོ	bunch formed of ears of corn	snye ma'i phung po
སྙེ་མོ	snye mo rdzong	snye mo
སྙེ་མོ་གན་ཇག་བ་གོར	father of Vairotsana {ba gor bE ro tsa na}	snye mo gan jag ba gor
སྙེ་མོ་རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཚལ	valley were Vairochana was born	snye mo rgyal byed tshal
སྙེ་མོ་འཕྲང་རྫོང	fort in snye mo	snye mo 'phrang rdzong
སྙེ་མོ་བ	{snye mo ba} theatrical troupe	snye mo ba
སྙེ་མོ་གཞུ	place nw of lhasa	snye mo gzhu
སྙེ་མོ་ཡོན་བདག	in Tibetan govt snye mo ba theatrical troupe's secretary	snye mo yon bdag
སྙེ་རལ	herb sne'u or yur mo	snye ral
སྙེ་ཤོག	paper from snye mo region	snye shog
སྙེག	SA snyegs pa	snyeg
སྙེག་སྒྲུབ	{snyeg rdeg}	snyeg sgrub
སྙེག་གཏོར	pursue and destroy	snyeg gtor
སྙེག་རྡེག	{snyeg sgrub}	snyeg rdeg
སྙེག་པ	1) RJY: {ppafi: snyeg pa, bsnyegs pa, bsnyeg pa, snyegs} tha dad pa.; to hasten or run (after), to chase after, pursue. 2) Das, 506: i) c. accus. to hasten or run after, to pursue; frq. also with r...	snyeg pa
སྙེག་པར་བྱེད་པ	pursuing	snyeg par byed pa
སྙེག་མ	a pursuer	snyeg ma
སྙེག་མ་ཐུབ	can't reach/ pursue	snyeg ma thub
སྙེག་མི	a pursuer/ one who chases	snyeg mi
སྙེགས	straight, stretched out	snyegs
སྙེགས་པ	hasten after, run after, pursue, overtake, hasten to, strive for, aspire to	snyegs pa
སྙེགས་པར་ཟད	arrive at, exhaust struggle	snyegs par zad
སྙེང་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa bsnyengs pa, bsnyeng ba,, 1) destroy; 2) [arch] stretch out, lengthen, lean; 3) be afraid, fear	snyeng ba
སྙེད	crupper attached to a saddle, much, so many, how many, about, near	snyed
སྙེད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་གུ	saddle's rmed [phyi rur tied rope, crupper] 'bor	snyed kyi pho gu
སྙེད་བཀུར	riches and honor	snyed bkur
སྙེད་ཆུང	saddle's rmed kyi rmed hril/ tsha hril	snyed chung
སྙེད་རྗེ་ཕ་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ	limitless, transcendent compassion	snyed rje pha mtha' bral ba
སྙེད་དུ	as numerous/many as	snyed du
སྙེད་པ	gain, profit, acquire, to pursue	snyed pa
སྙེན	imp. of {snyen pa}	snyen
སྙེན་བརྒྱུད	Hearing Lineage	snyen brgyud
སྙེན་པ	(tha dad pa bsnyen pa, bsnyen pa, snyen!,, having gone to a nearby place and use it, practice * get close to, come near	snyen pa
སྙེན་མ	come, SA snyen pa	snyen ma
སྙེན་སྲིང	near and far	snyen sring
སྙེམ་ཆུང	servile	snyem chung
སྙེམ་པ	(tha mi dad pa bsnyems pa, bsnyem pa,, be proud/ arrogant, boast	snyem pa
སྙེམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བདུད	the demon of pride, [according to Chod practice, one of {bdud bzhi}	snyem byed kyi bdud
སྙེམ་མ	Atopa	snyem ma
སྙེམ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Vajratopa, {rdo rje snyems ma}	snyem ma rdo rje
སྙེམས	pride, conceitedness, [mental inflation], arrogance	snyems
སྙེམས་ཆུང	demure, unpretentious, humble, affable, poor, indigent	snyems chung
སྙེམས་ཆུང་བྱེད་པ	condescend	snyems chung byed pa
སྙེམས་ཐག	{snyems thag gcod pa} - (to experience the collapse/ breaking down of one's) (proud) resistance	snyems thag
སྙེམས་པ	be proud, boast, be arrogant, pride, haughtiness	snyems pa
སྙེམས་པ་ཅན	full of pride, proud	snyems pa can
སྙེམས་པ་མེད་པ	not being complacent	snyems pa med pa
སྙེམས་པས	with grandeur	snyems pas
སྙེམས་བྱེད	1) confused appearances	snyems byed
ཨོཕ༹་ཨེགོ	grasping; 2) a madness and confusion producing demon	of ego
སྙེམས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བདུད	Demon of arrogance	snyems byed kyi bdud
སྙེམས་བྱེད་བདུད	demon of pride	snyems byed bdud
སྙེམས་བྲལ	cowardly, timid	snyems bral
སྙེམས་མ	see rdo rje snyems ma = Vajratopa	snyems ma
སྙེའུ་སྒའུ	sgog pa'i [tie?] rigs shig	snye'u sga'u
སྙེར	snyer ba!	snyer
སྙེར་སྙེར་པོ	wrinkle [up] 1025	snyer snyer po
སྙེར་པོ	wrinkle [up]	snyer po
སྙེར་བ	{snyer ba, bsnyer ba, bsnyer ba, snyer} trans. v	snyer ba
སྙེལ་གསོ་བ	remind, put one in mind of a thing	snyel gso ba
སྙེས	SA snye ba	snyes
སྙེས་ནས་སྡོད་ས	couch	snyes nas sdod sa
སྙེས་འབོལ	pillow	snyes 'bol
སྙོ་བ	SA smyo ba	snyo ba
སྙོག	(not in DAS)	snyog
སྙོག་པ	(tha dad pa I, bsnyogs pa, bsnyog pa, snyogs,, stir, churn, shake, stir [up] * II Bsnyags pa, bsnyag pa, snyogs,, pursue, urge to pay * wish earnestly, crave	snyog pa
སྙོག་མ	CM: chu'i nang du 'dres pa'i rdzas gzhan, "another substance that is mixed in water." [mss]	snyog ma
སྙོགས	1) Snyog pa!; 2) Byis pa; 3) pursue	snyogs
སྙོགས་པ	wish earnestly, crave for, implore, following	snyogs pa
སྙོགས་ཚད	1 of tsha ba'i nad	snyogs tshad
སྙོང	plaster	snyong
སྙོངས	[arch] rub on paint smear, anoint	snyongs
སྙོངས་པ	apply an ointment	snyongs pa
སྙོད	relate, SA snyad pa	snyod
སྙོད་པ	(tha dad pa 1, bsnyad pa, bsnyad pa, snyod,, tell, relate * Bsnyod pa, bsnyod pa, snyod,; 2) nourish, food and drink entering the mouth from the tip of the tongue, spoon feed; 2) * [draw out &] twist	snyod pa
སྙོན	snyon pa!	snyon
སྙོན་དོར	ma nyes kha gyogs	snyon dor
སྙོན་པ	1) RJY: {ppafi: snyon pa, bsnyon pa, bsnyon pa, snyon} tha dad pa; to deny, to disavow dishonestly. 2) MG, 469: va. to deny/disagree/contradict (falsely). 3) CM, 1013: {ppafi: snyon pa, bsnyon pa, ...	snyon pa
སྙོན་མེད	no lie, true, w/o doubt	snyon med
སྙོན་མོངས	SA chags pa	snyon mongs
སྙོན་མོངས་པ	[arch] suffering	snyon mongs pa
སྙོན་འཛུགས	accuse/ implicate falsely	snyon 'dzugs
སྙོབ	to reach by stretching out hand or foot	snyob
སྙོབ་པ	to stretch out, to reach; {snyob pa, bsnyabs pa, bsnyab pa, snyobs} trans. v	snyob pa
སྙོབས	stretch forth, SA snyob pa	snyobs
སྙོབས་པོ	slothful	snyobs po
སྙོམ	weariness, lassitude, laziness, idleness	snyom
སྙོམ་སྒྲིག	adjustment	snyom sgrig
སྙོམ་སྒྲིག་ཁ་གསབ	adjustment	snyom sgrig kha gsab
སྙོམ་སྒྲིག་ཁ་གསབ་བྱེད	adjust, make even	snyom sgrig kha gsab byed
སྙོམ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	adjust, make even	snyom sgrig byed
སྙོམ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	regulate, adjust	snyom sgrig byed pa
སྙོམ་ཆུང	humble, meek	snyom chung
སྙོམ་ཆུང་སྐྱོང་བ	to protect the helpless	snyom chung skyong ba
སྙོམ་ཆུང་ཚུལ་ལྡན	minding 1's own business	snyom chung tshul ldan
སྙོམ་ཆུང་སེམས་ཆུང	humble, meek	snyom chung sems chung
སྙོམ་འཇུག	serenity [thd]	snyom 'jug
སྙོམ་པ	to level, equalize, even, smooth, flatten, plane. 2) demolish, {snyom pa, bsnyams pa, bsnyam pa, snyoms} trans. v.; 3) laziness, idleness	snyom pa
སྙོམ་པར་འཇུག་པ་དྲུག	six sages	snyom par 'jug pa drug
སྙོམ་པོ	=, even, regular	snyom po
སྙོམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	neutralization	snyom byed kyi nus pa
སྙོམ་བྱེད་ནུས་པ	neutralization	snyom byed nus pa
སྙོམ་མེ	{gnas pa snyom me ba} dull type of calm	snyom me
སྙོམ་མེ་བ	dull type	snyom me ba
སྙོམ་མེད	diligent	snyom med
སྙོམ་ལས	laziness, idleness, sloth, neutral activities	snyom las
སྙོམ་ལས་ཀྱི་ལེ་ལོ	laziness of lack of application	snyom las kyi le lo
སྙོམ་ལས་པ	state of inactivity, idleness	snyom las pa
སྙོམ་ལས་བྱེད	be lazy/ idle/ indolent/ indifferent/ careless	snyom las byed
སྙོམ་ལས་འཛིན་པའི་ལེ་ལོ	the laziness of procrastination	snyom las 'dzin pa'i le lo
སྙོམ་ལས་འཛེན་པའི་ལེ་ལོ	the laziness of procrastination	snyom las 'dzen pa'i le lo
སྙོམས་འགྱུར	will be balanced	snyoms 'gyur
སྙོམས་ཆུང	insignificant one	snyoms chung
སྙོམས་འཇུག	samapatti, attainment, realization, absorption, meditative absorption, union, evenness, calmness of mind, equanimity, SA 'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug, 'du shes med snyoms 'jug, unification, meditation sta...	snyoms 'jug
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་སྒྲིབ་པ	1) the obscuration / veil for absorption; obscurations to states of meditative stabilization; obscuration for equilibrium; prevents ability to remain evenly in samadhi {ting nge 'dzin la snyoms par...	snyoms 'jug gi sgrib pa
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་གནས་སྐབས	state of union	snyoms 'jug gi gnas skabs
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་བསམ་གཏན	meditational cause or concentration	snyoms 'jug gi bsam gtan
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་བསམ་གཏན་དགུ	9 dhyanas of equilibrium/ absorption [See {snyoms 'jug dgu}	snyoms 'jug gi bsam gtan dgu
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི་བསམ་གཏན་བཞི	four dhyana states of serenity. The first dhyana is a state with both concept and discernment. The second dhyana is a state without concept but with discernment. The third dhyana is a state without...	snyoms 'jug gi bsam gtan bzhi
སྙོམས་འཇུག་དགུ	the 9 absorptions	snyoms 'jug dgu
སྙོམས་འཇུག་སྒྲིབ་པ	fog enveloping the attainments, incapacity of the mind to function properly with regard to the successful attainment of meditative concentration	snyoms 'jug sgrib pa
སྙོམས་འཇུག་ལྔ	the five kinds of absorption, {rnam thar sgo gsum}, {mthar gnas kyi snyoms 'jug dgu}, {rnam thar brgyad}, {zad par bcu}, {zil gnon brgyad}	snyoms 'jug lnga
སྙོམས་འཇུག་གཉིས	two equilibriums [mthar gyis gnas pa'i [successive?] snyoms 'jug gnyis te, 'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug dang, 'du shes med pa'i snyoms 'jug]	snyoms 'jug gnyis
སྙོམས་འཇུག་བདེ་བ	the bliss of union	snyoms 'jug bde ba
སྙོམས་འཇུག་པ	attainment	snyoms 'jug pa
སྙོམས་འཇུག་བཞི	the four [formless] absorptions [gzugs med skabs kyi snyoms 'jug bzhi ste, nam mkha' mtha' yas skye mched dang, rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched dang, ci yang med pa'i skye mched dang, yod min med mi...	snyoms 'jug bzhi
སྙོམས་འཇུག་ལས་ཉམས་པ	loses the state of serenity	snyoms 'jug las nyams pa
སྙོམས་འཇུགས	[samapatti] absorption	snyoms 'jugs
སྙོམས་དུ་མེད	without an equal	snyoms du med
སྙོམས་འདོད	the wish to be evenminded	snyoms 'dod
སྙོམས་པ	impartial; even and stabilized	snyoms pa
སྙོམས་པ་ཞུགས་པ	settled in meditation	snyoms pa zhugs pa
སྙོམས་པར	balanced	snyoms par
སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	1) equilibrium, [meditative] absorption/ concentration, composure, samapatti; 2) establish equilibrium, remain absorbed; 3) union	snyoms par 'jug pa
སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ་དགུ	9 progressive absorptions (nam mkha' mtha' yas	snyoms par 'jug pa dgu
སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ་དྲུག	[TRS 44-3]	snyoms par 'jug pa drug
སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པའི་རོ	blissful taste of samadhi/ union	snyoms par 'jug pa'i ro
སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	dhyana of union	snyoms par 'jug pa'i bsam gtan
སྙོམས་པར་ཕན་པར་འདོད་པ	wish to benefit [beings] equally	snyoms par phan par 'dod pa
སྙོམས་པར་སྦྱར	unite with	snyoms par sbyar
སྙོམས་པར་ཞུགས	remain in equanimity	snyoms par zhugs
སྙོམས་པར་ཞུགས་པ	pf. of {snyoms par 'jug pa}; meditative absorption	snyoms par zhugs pa
སྙོམས་པས་ཁོད	land of even surface, plains	snyoms pas khod
སྙོམས་པོ	flat, level, smooth, equal, even, uniform	snyoms po
སྙོམས་པོར	evenly	snyoms por
སྙོམས་མེད	un=, uneven, not level	snyoms med
སྙོམས་ཞུག་བདེ	the bliss of union	snyoms zhug bde
སྙོམས་ཞུགས	entering into union, unite, attained	snyoms zhugs
སྙོམས་ཞུགས་ནས	having entered on	snyoms zhugs nas
སྙོམས་ལ་ངུལ་བ	be tired and exhausted	snyoms la ngul ba
སྙོམས་ལས	indolence, unconcern, religious indifference	snyoms las
སྙོམས་ལས་ཅན	lazy person, idle person,	snyoms las can
སྙོམས་ལས་པ	a lazy person	snyoms las pa
སྙོམས་ལས་བྱེད་པ	be lazy, indolent, indifferent	snyoms las byed pa
སྙོམས་ལས་མེད	one who is not lazy, indefatigable, untiring, not idle, unwearied	snyoms las med
སྙོམས་ཤུགས་ནས	having entered on	snyoms shugs nas
སྙོམས་སེམས	1) equanimity w/o passion and aggression; 2) [arch] doubt	snyoms sems
སྙོར	imp. of {snyor ba}	snyor
སྙོར་བ	{snyor ba, bsnyor ba, bsnyor ba, snyor} trans. v	snyor ba
སྙོལ	mgron po mal du snyol - see the visitors to bed!	snyol
སྙོལ་ཏང	chang fermentation crock	snyol tang
སྙོལ་བ	(tha dad pa bsnyal ba, bsnyal ba, snyol,; 1) ferment; 2) go to sleep, lay down, bed; 3) make fall down; 4) hatch [chicks]	snyol ba
སྙོལ་རྫ	chang fermentation crock	snyol rdza
བརྙ་སྐྱི	borrow	brnya skyi
བརྙ་བ	p brnyas,, borrow, seize	brnya ba
བརྙང་བ	[f rnyong ba]	brnyang ba
བརྙངས་པ	pf. of {rnyong ba}	brnyangs pa
བརྙད་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	ex {gzhan gyis rang la brnyad thabs byed na yang} even if someone seeks your humiliation	brnyad thabs byed pa
བརྙད་པ	bsnyad pa	brnyad pa
བརྙན	1) image, replica; 2) borrow	brnyan
བརྙན་སྐྱེལ་གློག་འཕྲིན	TV, phototelegraph, fax	brnyan skyel glog 'phrin
བརྙན་ཏོལ	begin a case or lawsuit	brnyan tol
བརྙན་དེབ	magazine	brnyan deb
བརྙན་པ	borrow, reflected image, statue, picture	brnyan pa
བརྙན་པར	illustrated magazine, pictorial	brnyan par
བརྙན་པོ	1) substitute/ likeness,..[.gzugs brnyan [reflection] Skra brnyan [wig]; 2) borrowing	brnyan po
བརྙན་པོ་གཏོང་བ	borrow	brnyan po gtong ba
བརྙན་པོ་གཏོང་བའི་དངུལ	borrowed money	brnyan po gtong ba'i dngul
བརྙན་པོ་གནང་བ	borrow	brnyan po gnang ba
བརྙན་པོ་གནང་བའི་དངུལ	borrowed money	brnyan po gnang ba'i dngul
བརྙན་པོའི་གོས	borrowed dress, garment marked with figures of the rainbow, reflected	brnyan po'i gos
བརྙན་པོའི་བརྙས	interest for a loan, rent for a thing borrowed	brnyan po'i brnyas
བརྙན་དཔར	illustrated magazine, pictorial	brnyan dpar
བརྙན་འཕྲིན	television	brnyan 'phrin
བརྙབས་པ	diligence, painstaking, to take pains	brnyabs pa
བརྙལ་བཅོས	disdain	brnyal bcos
བརྙས	pha ma rgas khar ma brnyas Don't mistreat your elderly parents	brnyas
བརྙས་བརྐོས་པ	offend	brnyas brkos pa
བརྙས་བཅོས	despise, condemn, w little regard for, taking no account of	brnyas bcos
བརྙས་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	to treat with contempt, scorn	brnyas bcos byed pa
བརྙས་བཅོས་བཤད	to abuse	brnyas bcos bshad
བརྙས་ཆོས	w little regard for, taking no account of	brnyas chos
བརྙས་གཏམ	deprecating/ adversarial talk	brnyas gtam
བརྙས་བཏགས	[p brnyas 'dogs] accused, blamed	brnyas btags
བརྙས་སྟབས	bullying, insulting,and disrespectful	brnyas stabs
བརྙས་ཐབས	bullying, insulting,and disrespectful	brnyas thabs
བརྙས་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	defame, put down	brnyas thabs byed pa
བརྙས་འདོགས	accuse, blame	brnyas 'dogs
བརྙས་པ	(tha dad pa,; 1) forcefully gtong ba,...Brnyas che na ngo rgol che,...Phru gu la brnyas na mi 'grig...Rgyal khab chen pos rgyal khab chung ba la brnyas pa,...2 [p rnya ba]	brnyas pa
བརྙས་པ་བྱེད་པ	show disrespect x {'o skol gyis brnyas pa byas pas zhu mi spobs zer} declared, "I do not dare, because of the disrespect we have shown him."	brnyas pa byed pa
བརྙས་པ་ཤོར	treated with disrespect	brnyas pa shor
བརྙས་པའི་ཁྱད་དུ	contempt	brnyas pa'i khyad du
བརྙས་པའི་ཁྱད་དུ་བསོད་པ	disrespectfulness	brnyas pa'i khyad du bsod pa
བརྙས་པར་བྱེད	one who is not respectful, one devoid of love and regard	brnyas par byed
བརྙས་འཕྲོག	forcefully rob/ plunder all the wealth 1 can, aggression	brnyas 'phrog
བརྙས་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	forcefully rob/ plunder all the wealth 1 can, commit aggression	brnyas 'phrog byed
བརྙས་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་མཁན	1 who forcefully robs/ plunders all the wealth 1 can, aggressor	brnyas 'phrog byed mkhan
བརྙས་སྨད	scorn and slander	brnyas smad
བརྙས་སྨོད	contempt	brnyas smod
བརྙས་སྨོད་བྱེད	despise, downgrade, belittle, depreciate, offend, bully, insult, despise, humiliate, disgrace, shame	brnyas smod byed
བརྙས་གཙེར	insult, shame, disgrace	brnyas gtser
བརྙས་ཚིག	bad bullying insulting words	brnyas tshig
བརྙས་འཚོལ	seek an occasion of thub tshod gtong ba	brnyas 'tshol
བརྙས་ཤིང་སྨོད་པ	contemptuous	brnyas shing smod pa
བརྙས་སེ	contempt, disrespectfully, slightingly	brnyas se
བརྙས་སེམས	attitude grasping others as inferior	brnyas sems
བརྙིངས	age, wax old, SA rnying ba, worn out	brnyings
བརྙིངས་པ	old	brnyings pa
བརྙིད	fade, SA rnyid pa	brnyid
བརྙིས	[p rnyid] wither, shrivel	brnyis
བརྙེད	find, SA rnyed pa	brnyed
བརྙེད་མཁན	founder	brnyed mkhan
བརྙེད་པ	found, obtained	brnyed pa
བརྙེད་ཟིན་པ	found	brnyed zin pa
བརྙེས	arrival, realization, find, SA rnyed pa, discovered, obtained, obtain	brnyes
བརྙེས་གྱུར	obtained	brnyes gyur
བརྙེས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, attain [realization or high level]	brnyes pa
བརྙེས་པ་དམ་པ	richly endowed	brnyes pa dam pa
བརྙོག	stir up, SA rnyog pa	brnyog
བརྙོག་པ	(tha mi dad pa brnyogs pa, brnyog pa,, kha 'dris pa'am kha lang la shor ba,...Rta 'di rtsva ra'i nang gi sngo rtsvar kha brnyogs te rtag par yong gi 'dug ???	brnyog pa
བརྙོགས	stir up, SA rnyog pa	brnyogs
བརྙོགས་པ	pf. of {brnyog pa}	brnyogs pa
བརྙོང	trap, SA rnyong ba	brnyong
བརྙོངས	trap, SA rnyong ba, one promising but not meaning to keep his word, polite in speech but different at heart, convenient, suitable	brnyongs
བརྙོས་པ	[arch] bzung ba grasped	brnyos pa
གསྙིགས་མ	impurity, defilement, what is left when purifying butter	gsnyigs ma
བསྙག་པ	will pursue [f snyog pa]['ded pa]	bsnyag pa
བསྙགས་པ	alt. pf. of {snyog pa}	bsnyags pa
བསྙད	lean against	bsnyad
བསྙད་བརྐོ	teasing, flirting, provoking	bsnyad brko
བསྙད་བརྐོ་བྱེད	tease, flirt, provoke	bsnyad brko byed
བསྙད་བརྐོས	tease[d], flirt[ed], provoke[d]	bsnyad brkos
བསྙད་སྙོད	dispute	bsnyad snyod
བསྙད་བཏགས	blamed, accused, used as an excuse/ pretext for	bsnyad btags
བསྙད་བཏགས་དགོངས་ཞུ	make excuses, shirk [work]	bsnyad btags dgongs zhu
བསྙད་འདོགས	blame, accuse, use as an excuse/ pretext for	bsnyad 'dogs
བསྙད་འདོགས་རྒྱུ་ཟ	blackmail	bsnyad 'dogs rgyu za
བསྙད་འདོགས་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	criticize, blame, accuse	bsnyad 'dogs thabs byed pa
བསྙད་འདོགས་བཙན་འཕྲོག	extortion	bsnyad 'dogs btsan 'phrog
བསྙད་འདོགས་བཙན་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	extort	bsnyad 'dogs btsan 'phrog byed
བསྙད་པ	{ppafi: snyod pa, bsnyad pa, bsnyad pa, snyod} trans. v. to draw out and twist, to tell, to relate; describe; "to spin a yarn"?; told x {lo rgyus bsnyad pa} told what had happened [mss]	bsnyad pa
བསྙད་འཚོལ	criticize, blame	bsnyad 'tshol
བསྙད་གཞི	1) gleng gzhi; 2) Khag 'dogs sa'i rtsa ba	bsnyad gzhi
བསྙན	veneration	bsnyan
བསྙན་དགུ	well-renowned, of great fame	bsnyan dgu
བསྙན་སྒྲུབ་བཟླས་པ	recitations of the approach and accomplishment practices	bsnyan sgrub bzlas pa
བསྙབ་པ	ft. of {snyob pa}	bsnyab pa
བསྙབས་པ	[p snyob pa]	bsnyabs pa
བསྙམ	(not in DAS)	bsnyam
བསྙམ་པ	ft. of {snyom pa}	bsnyam pa
བསྙམས་པ	[p snyom pa]	bsnyams pa
བསྙལ	lay anything down, SA snyol ba, snyal ba	bsnyal
བསྙལ་ཐབས	in letting blood rtsa mi 'gyur and blood letting mig tu 'byung ba'i ched du above and below the letting place tying a string	bsnyal thabs
བསྙལ་བ	{khye'u zhig bsnyal ba} the young son was sleeping	bsnyal ba
བསྙལ་ཚལ	salted vegetable, pickle	bsnyal tshal
བསྙལ་ཟུར	obtuse angle	bsnyal zur
བསྙལ་ཡས	numerical figure	bsnyal yas
བསྙིག་པ	ft. of {snyig pa}	bsnyig pa
བསྙིགས	reaching	bsnyigs
བསྙིགས་པ	pf. of {snyig pa}; to return, restore, deliver up, sediment	bsnyigs pa
བསྙིལ	to throw down, destroy	bsnyil
བསྙིལ་སྡུད་པ	waste amassed wealth	bsnyil sdud pa
བསྙིལ་བ	throw down, destroy, squander	bsnyil ba
བསྙུག	(f {snyug pa} dip, immerse {smyug pa}	bsnyug
བསྙུག་པ	[f snyug pa]	bsnyug pa
བསྙུག་གཞིས་བསྙུན	laid up with an illness	bsnyug gzhis bsnyun
བསྙུགས	filled up dip in, SA snyug pa	bsnyugs
བསྙུགས་པ	pf. of {snyug pa}	bsnyugs pa
བསྙུང	diminish, SA snyung ba	bsnyung
བསྙུང་བསྙུང	make very few/ little	bsnyung bsnyung
བསྙུང་གནས	vow or cho ga [practice] of subsisting on very little food	bsnyung gnas
བསྙུང་བ	ft. of {snyung ba}	bsnyung ba
བསྙུང་གཞི	sickness, pain	bsnyung gzhi
བསྙུང་གཞི་གདངས	cured of disease, convalescent	bsnyung gzhi gdangs
བསྙུངས	reduce, SA snyung ba, slightly laid up, belittled	bsnyungs
བསྙུངས་པ	pf. of {snyung ba}	bsnyungs pa
བསྙུན	be ill, SA snyun pa, laid up, SA bsnyung	bsnyun
བསྙུན་འདྲི	solicitously; enquire after	bsnyun 'dri
སོམེཨོནེའས་ཝེལལ	being	someone's well
བསྙུན་གནས	Fasting-silence. A two day Vajrayana practice of combined silence and fasting based on a sadhana of Lokeshvara	bsnyun gnas
བསྙུན་པ	[f p snyun pa]	bsnyun pa
བསྙུན་རྨེད	'tsams 'dri'i tshig ???	bsnyun rmed
བསྙུན་གསོལ	to inquire about one's health	bsnyun gsol
བསྙུར་བ	[arch] make strong exertion/ effort	bsnyur ba
བསྙུལ་བ	[arch] wash, rinse, cleanse, be rubbed	bsnyul ba
བསྙེ་བ	ft. of {snye ba}	bsnye ba
བསྙེག	pursue, SA snyegs pa	bsnyeg
བསྙེག་པ	[f snyeg pa]	bsnyeg pa
བསྙེགས	to pursue, run after	bsnyegs
བསྙེགས་པ	come nearer and nearer	bsnyegs pa
བསྙེང་བ	ft. of {snyeng ba}	bsnyeng ba
བསྙེངས	afraid, fearful	bsnyengs
བསྙེངས་དང་བྲལ་བ	without hesitation	bsnyengs dang bral ba
བསྙེངས་པ	pf. of {snyeng ba}	bsnyengs pa
བསྙེངས་བྲལ	fearless, intrepid, hero	bsnyengs bral
བསྙེན	approach, draw close to, ally w, service, attending, novice-hood, recitation, befriend	bsnyen
བསྙེན་གཀུར	honor 1029	bsnyen gkur
བསྙེན་བཀུར	respect/ serve, present/ offering given from reverence/ respect	bsnyen bkur
བསྙེན་བཀུར་གྱིས	serve and respect ... !	bsnyen bkur gyis
བསྙེན་བཀུར་དགེ་འདུན་ལ་གནང	give presents to monks	bsnyen bkur dge 'dun la gnang
བསྙེན་བཀུར་བསྔགས་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the lhag ma offence of praising when 1 approaches [by passionate attachment for a woman bsnyen bkur na it is good, expressing such praise, of the {dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum}, among the {sems can la...	bsnyen bkur bsngags pa'i lhag ma
བསྙེན་བཀུར་དང་མཆོད་པ	became honored and respected	bsnyen bkur dang mchod pa
བསྙེན་བཀུར་གནས	worthy of worship and veneration	bsnyen bkur gnas
བསྙེན་བཀུར་བ	was welcomed within by	bsnyen bkur ba
བསྙེན་བཀུར་བྱས	reverence, respect	bsnyen bkur byas
བསྙེན་བཀུར་བྱེད	respect/ serve, give present/ offering from reverence/ respect, support	bsnyen bkur byed
བསྙེན་བཀུར་བྱེད་པ	1) to revere, honor. 2) to serve, attend.	bsnyen bkur byed pa
བསྙེན་བཀུར་ཞིང་མཆོག	sri zhu zhu yul mchog tu gyur pa lama and parents	bsnyen bkur zhing mchog
བསྙེན་བཀུར་ཞུས	{dad pas zla ba gsum bsnyen bkur phun sum tshogs pa zhus} for three months he faithfully offered them gifts and hospitality	bsnyen bkur zhus
བསྙེན་སྐུར	honor	bsnyen skur
བསྙེན་བསྐུར་བྱས	served	bsnyen bskur byas
བསྙེན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ	three indestructible realities of the rites of service and attainment [according to the system of orgyenpa, these are explained as follows training the body through the indestructible reality of th...	bsnyen grub kyi rdo rje gsum
རེཨལིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	mind, there is the branch of great attainment associated w recollection and contemplation {thugs rdo rjes yid la sbyangs ste dran ting sgrub chen gyi yan lag}	reality of the buddha
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	approach and accomplishment, familiarization and accomplishment, recitation practice, 'approach-accomplishment', [sadhana]. rites of service and attainment. familiarization and accomplishment; seva...	bsnyen sgrub
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four aspects of approach and accomplishment	bsnyen sgrub kyi yan lag bzhi
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་བཏང་ཚུལ	the way of performing the approach and accomplishment [recitations]	bsnyen sgrub btang tshul
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ	the three vajras of approach and accomplishment [of Orgyenpa]. {sor sdud bsnyen pa'i yan lag}, {srog 'dzin sgrub pa'i yan lag}, {dran ting sgrub chen gyi yan lag}	bsnyen sgrub rdo rje gsum
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	{bsnyen sgrub kyi yan lag rnam pa bzhi} four phases of approach and accomplishment	bsnyen sgrub rnam pa bzhi
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་རྣམ་བཞི	four aspects of ritual service and attainment	bsnyen sgrub rnam bzhi
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་བཞི	four aspects of approach and accomplishment (bsnyen pa, nye ba'i bsnyen pa, sgrub pa, sgrub pa chen po), four stages in the transformation practice of mahayoga (approach, close approach, accomplish...	bsnyen sgrub bzhi
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ཡན་ལག་གཞི	four branches of approach and accomplishment	bsnyen sgrub yan lag gzhi
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four aspects of approach and accomplishment	bsnyen sgrub yan lag bzhi
ཨོབེ༹ར་ཐེ་ཨལལ	encompassing activities for the welfare of others. [DILGO KHYENTSE]	over the all
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ལ་གནས་པ	do retreat practice	bsnyen sgrub la gnas pa
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ལས་སྦྱོར	Approach accomplishment and activities of application	bsnyen sgrub las sbyor
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ལས་གསུམ	approach, accomplishment and activities	bsnyen sgrub las gsum
བསྙེན་བསྒྲུབ	approach and accomplish	bsnyen bsgrub
བསྙེན་བསྒྲུབ་ལས་གསུམ	approach, accomplishment and activities	bsnyen bsgrub las gsum
བསྙེན་ཅིག	[arch] shog cig	bsnyen cig
བསྙེན་ཅིང་སྒྲུབ་པ	approach and accomplish	bsnyen cing sgrub pa
བསྙེན་ཆེན	great approaching, long sadhana/ yidam practice	bsnyen chen
བསྙེན་དང་སྒྲུབ་པའི་དམིགས་པ	approaching and accomplishing visualizations bsnyen dang sgrub pa'i dmigs pa rnam pa	bsnyen dang sgrub pa'i dmigs pa
བསྙེན་དང་ཉེ་བར་བསྙེན་པ	approach and full approach	bsnyen dang nye bar bsnyen pa
བསྙེན་གནས	upavasatha, person who	bsnyen gnas
ཨོབསེརབེ༹ས་ཨ་ཨོནེ	day, fast, fasting, one who fasts, vow to eat only one meal per day	observes a one
བསྙེན་གནས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the four root precepts + liquor, dances and necklaces, big or high seat, eating after noon yan lag bzhi bcas individual liberation vow proclaimed for a day]	bsnyen gnas kyi sdom pa
བསྙེན་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་གསུམ	the three limbs of the 1 day precepts	bsnyen gnas kyi yan lag gsum
བསྙེན་གནས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	to observe the 8 precepts for one day	bsnyen gnas kyi bslab bya
བསྙེན་གནས་སྡོམ་པ	the vow of the 1 day precepts	bsnyen gnas sdom pa
བསྙེན་གནས་སྡོམ་པ་བསྲུང་བ	to observe the one-day vows	bsnyen gnas sdom pa bsrung ba
བསྙེན་གནས་འབོག་ཆོག	bsnyen gnas vow conferring liturgy yul reverently taken before the master or a sacred image	bsnyen gnas 'bog chog
བསྙེན་གནས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	bsnyen gnas kyi vows and precepts	bsnyen gnas tshul khrims
བསྙེན་གནས་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	8 1 day precepts [against killing, stealing, falsehood, sexual misconduct, and alcohol, the 8 to be renounced by observers of the purificatory fast]	bsnyen gnas yan lag brgyad
བསྙེན་གནས་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	the 8 --[vow of abandoning cutting off life, taking what is not given, impure conduct, false speaking, drinking liquor, big or high seat, songs dances and entertainments, eating after noon srog gco...	bsnyen gnas yan lag brgyad pa
བསྙེན་གནས་ལ་གནས་པ	the 1 day precepts	bsnyen gnas la gnas pa
བསྙེན་གནས་སྲུང་བ	abstain from food, fast, abstinence	bsnyen gnas srung ba
བསྙེན་པ	approach, come near, propitiate a deity, accept, receive, admit, recitation, familiarization, first phase of	bsnyen pa
ཏནཏྲིཅ་པྲཅཏིཅེ	that of reliance on or approach to the master and the tutelary deity where one recites the mantra, reliance	tantric practice
བསྙེན་པ་སྐྱེལ་བ	perform approaching practice	bsnyen pa skyel ba
བསྙེན་པ་གཏོང་བ	perform approaching practice	bsnyen pa gtong ba
བསྙེན་པ་བཞི	the four, approach and so forth {bsnyen pa - approach, {nye	bsnyen pa bzhi
བསྙེན་པ་གསུམ	the three, approach and so forth {sor sdud bsnyen pa'i yan lag}, {srog 'dzin sgrub pa'i yan lag}, {dran ting sgrub chen gyi yan lag} 1031	bsnyen pa gsum
བསྙེན་པའི་སྐབས	the situation of approaching, when approaching	bsnyen pa'i skabs
བསྙེན་པའི་དགོངས་པ	the intention/ vision of approaching	bsnyen pa'i dgongs pa
བསྙེན་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of approaching	bsnyen pa'i rnal 'byor
བསྙེན་པའི་ཚད	the mantra be recited for	bsnyen pa'i tshad
བསྙེན་པའི་ཚུལ	the manner of approaching	bsnyen pa'i tshul
བསྙེན་པའི་ཚུལ་དུ	in the manner of recitation	bsnyen pa'i tshul du
བསྙེན་པའི་གཞི་མ་སྒོ་དགུ	9 base entrances	bsnyen pa'i gzhi ma sgo dgu
བསྙེན་པར་དཀའ་བ	hard to propitiate	bsnyen par dka' ba
བསྙེན་པར་བྱེད	to render services	bsnyen par byed
བསྙེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to approach	bsnyen par byed pa
བསྙེན་པར་མ་རྫོགས་པ	not keeping bhikshu vows [completely] bsnyen par ma rdzogs pa dang lhan cig 'don pa'i ltung byed - [one of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, because of rgod bag thoughts, not completely keepin...	bsnyen par ma rdzogs pa
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་འདོད་མངོན་གྱུར	1 of the {bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i mngon gyur bcu}, rgyu'i kun slong thob 'dod, dus kyi kun slong thob shes, thoughts free from the 'gal rkyen nges pa lnga, and w the {mthun rkyen phun tshogs gsum}, ...	bsnyen par rdzogs 'dod mngon gyur
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་ནས་ལོ་བཅུ་ལོན་པ	having kept the monastic vows for ten years	bsnyen par rdzogs nas lo bcu lon pa
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་པ	to be ordained, consecrated, be ordained into the full order of bhiksu	bsnyen par rdzogs pa
དུ་གྱུར་བ་བཅུ	the 10 manifestations at the time of completing all the precepts	du gyur ba bcu
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་དགེ་སློང	bhikshu who truly keeps the disciplines of the khenpo [preceptor] and loppon	bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i dge slong
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་ཚུལ་བཅུ	the 10 complete precepts	bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i tshul bcu
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་ལས	action of liturgy of keeping the vows completely	bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i las
བསྙེན་པར་རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད	take the full vows of a monk	bsnyen par rdzogs par byed
བསྙེན་ཕུར	recitation dagger / purpa; type of ritual dagger	bsnyen phur
བསྙེན་དམིགས	visualization for the recitation; visualization for the recitation	bsnyen dmigs
བསྙེན་ཚད	recitation specifics / details	bsnyen tshad
བསྙེན་མཚམས	deity approaching practice retreat	bsnyen mtshams
བསྙེན་རྫོགས	ordained	bsnyen rdzogs
བསྙེན་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the full vows of a monk bsnyen rdzogs kyi sbyor ba'i khyad par	bsnyen rdzogs kyi sdom pa
དགོངས་གསུམ	the three intentions arising on the occasion of taking the full vows of a monk	dgongs gsum
བསྙེན་རྫོགས་མཁན་པོ	(aup'adhyaya: giver/ preceptor of the gelong vow	bsnyen rdzogs mkhan po
བསྙེན་རྫོགས་སྡོམ་པ	gelong vow	bsnyen rdzogs sdom pa
བསྙེན་རྫོགས་མཛད་པ	be ordained into the full order of bhiksu	bsnyen rdzogs mdzad pa
བསྙེན་བཟླས	recitation practice	bsnyen bzlas
བསྙེན་ཡིག	manual for recitation	bsnyen yig
བསྙེན་བཤེས	kin	bsnyen bshes
བསྙེན་བསྲིང	SA nye ring	bsnyen bsring
བསྙེམ་པ	ft. of {snyem pa}	bsnyem pa
བསྙེམས	be proud, SA snyems pa	bsnyems
བསྙེམས་པ	[p snyem pa]	bsnyems pa
བསྙེར་བ	ft. of {snyer ba}; pf. of {snyer ba}	bsnyer ba
བསྙེར་མ	wrinkles	bsnyer ma
བསྙེལ	bend	bsnyel
བསྙེལ་ངས	forgetfulness	bsnyel ngas
བསྙེལ་བ	(tha mi dad pa forget [h]	bsnyel ba
བསྙེལ་བ་མི་མངའ	never bewildered; not forgetting, does not forget [mss]	bsnyel ba mi mnga'
བསྙེལ་བ་མི་མངའ་བ	not forgetting [quality of the mind of buddhahood, knowing all dharmas w/o obstruction or attachment, 1 of the 18 exclusive qualities of the buddhas {ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad}	bsnyel ba mi mnga' ba
བསྙེལ་བ་མི་མངའ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	nature	bsnyel ba mi mnga' ba'i chos nyid
བསྙེལ་བ་མེད་པ	without forgetfulness	bsnyel ba med pa
བསྙེལ་བའི་བརྗེད་པ	forgetfulness	bsnyel ba'i brjed pa
བསྙེལ་བྱང	memo board	bsnyel byang
བསྙེལ་མེད	not forgetting, not minding	bsnyel med
བསྙེལ་གསོ	unforgetting refreshment of memory dran gso,...Phyag las gnang rgyu'i rigs sngon tsud nas bsnyel gso byung na yag po yong	bsnyel gso
བསྙེས་པ	[p snye ba] leaned/ rested against	bsnyes pa
བསྙོ	mad, crazy	bsnyo
བསྙོག་པ	ft. of {snyog pa}	bsnyog pa
བསྙོགས	not clear, not sparkling	bsnyogs
བསྙོགས་པ	dkrug pa'i don du go ba'i [p snyog pa] stir up, incite ?	bsnyogs pa
བསྙོངས	convenient, suitable	bsnyongs
བསྙོད	draw out and twist, SA snyod pa	bsnyod
བསྙོད་པ	gso ba'i don du go ba'i [f p snyod pa] spoon feed	bsnyod pa
བསྙོན	deny falsely [p snyon]	bsnyon
བསྙོན་དཀྲི	fussiness, irritable	bsnyon dkri
བསྙོན་དཀྲི་བཙན་ལེན	by false allegations btsan 'phrog byed pa	bsnyon dkri btsan len
བསྙོན་དཀྲི་ཚ་པོ	fussy, irritable	bsnyon dkri tsha po
བསྙོན་ཅན	SA mi srid pa, gzhan la bsnyon to	bsnyon can
བསྙོན་འཇུགས	falsely charge w a fault 1032	bsnyon 'jugs
བསྙོན་ཏོལ	lying/ false explanation	bsnyon tol
བསྙོན་དུ་མེད་པ	undeniable, cannot deny	bsnyon du med pa
བསྙོན་དོར	SA bsnyon can	bsnyon dor
བསྙོན་དོར་གྱི་རྒྱན	[a don rgyan, some thing's real way of being falsely saying it is not don gzhan cung zad khas blangs te so showing ornament, among which are three kinds regarding dharma, period, and nature]	bsnyon dor gyi rgyan
བསྙོན་དོར་གྱི་རྒྱན་གསུམ	the three ornaments of denial and renunciation	bsnyon dor gyi rgyan gsum
བསྙོན་དོར་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	[a gzugs can gyi rgyan, exemplified thing by speaking falsely about perception change is to is not by means of example and nature having been made 1 [one nature w the example? dpe dang ngo bo gcig ...	bsnyon dor gyi gzugs can
བསྙོན་འདིང་བ	falsely attribute logical faults [of saying what is is not etc]	bsnyon 'ding ba
བསྙོན་པ	[f p snyon pa]	bsnyon pa
བསྙོན་པས་ཐོབ་པ	attain by deceit	bsnyon pas thob pa
བསྙོན་བྱེད་པ	assert falsely	bsnyon byed pa
བསྙོན་མི་ནུས་པ	undeniable, cannot deny	bsnyon mi nus pa
བསྙོན་མེད	straightforward, untrue, false	bsnyon med
བསྙོན་མེད་པ	impossible to deny	bsnyon med pa
བསྙོན་ཧམ	lie attributing a fault	bsnyon ham
བསྙོན་ཧམ་མནའ་དག་གི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	[one of the zhal lce bcu drug] if there is false attributions of logical faults [yin pa la min etc.] lha srung dpang du btsugs nas [having called the guardian deities to witness] mna' bkar oath bde...	bsnyon ham mna' dag gi zhal lce
བསྙོབ	stretch forth, SA snyob pa	bsnyob
བསྙོབས	stretch forth, SA snyob pa	bsnyobs
བསྙོམ	make even, SA snyoms pa	bsnyom
བསྙོམ་པ	crazy (?); crazy	bsnyom pa
བསྙོམས	make even, SA snyoms pa	bsnyoms
བསྙོར་བ	sort, sift, divide	bsnyor ba
བསྙོལ་བ	topples	bsnyol ba
བསྙོས	draw out and twist, SA snyod pa	bsnyos
མསྙད	be injured	msnyad
མསྙད་མགོ་ཡོད་པ	have hurt my head	msnyad mgo yod pa
མསྙད་པ	injured	msnyad pa
ཏ	door of admission to all things, figure 9	ta
ཏ་ཀ་རི	weighing scales	ta ka ri
ཏ་ཀུ	crutch, cane, stick w hook	ta ku
ཏ་ཀུང་པའོ་ཚོགས་པར	ta kung pa'o news paper	ta kung pa'o tshogs par
ཏ་ཀྲའི	Ta chai	ta kra'i
ཏ་ཀྲིཏ་ཆེན་པོ	the great sentinels	ta krit chen po
ཏ་གར	a flower, indian city	ta gar
ཏ་གིར	bread	ta gir
ཏ་སྒུར	in mdo khams as sometimes TA and DA have = pronunciation a distinguishing word	ta sgur
ཏ་ཅང	colonel general	ta cang
ཏ་ཆིང	Ta Ching	ta ching
ཏ་ཆིང་སྣུམ་གཏེར	Ta Ching oil field	ta ching snum gter
ཏ་ཇ	chinese tea	ta ja
ཏ་ཏུའོ་ཅི	lighter	ta tu'o ci
ཏ་ཏུའོ་ཅི་མེ་སྦར་བྱེད་ཅིག	lighter ta thA ga ta rin po che'i zhabs la sogs pa	ta tu'o ci me sbar byed cig
རཏ་ནའི་རིགས་རྣམས	the Tathagata Ratnapada and the Tathagatas of the ratna family ta tha' ga ta grub par snang ba la sogs pa	rat na'i rigs rnams
ལས་ཀྱི་རིགས་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	the Tanthagata Siddhyaloka and the countless Tathagatas of the Action Family	las kyi rigs mtha' yas pa
ཏ་ཐའ་ག་ཏ་ཐམས་ཅད	all the Tathagatas ta tha' ga ta shri bE ro tsa na la sogs pa de	ta tha' ga ta thams cad
བཞིན་རིགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་བ་མང་པོ	the Tathagata Shri Vairochana and many other Conquerors of the Tathgata Family	bzhin rigs kyi rgyal ba mang po
ཏ་བདེན་གུ་ཤྲི་ཀུན་དགའ་ཉི་མ	Taden Gushri Kunga Nyima: 1309-1322 (First son of Sangpo Pal's 6th spouse)	ta bden gu shri kun dga' nyi ma
ཏ་སྡེ	the four letters ta tha da na	ta sde
ཏ་ན	bsgral ba - Liberation	ta na
ཏ་ན་ག་ན	uninhibited	ta na ga na
ཏ་པ་ན	Osaka	ta pa na
ཏ་པི་ཧྲི་ཙ	Tapihritsa	ta pi hri tsa
ཏ་པི་ཧྲི་ཟ	principal figure in the lineage of the oral transmission of zhang zhung	ta pi hri za
ཏ་པོ་ཐ	chorten in china	ta po tha
ཏ་བ	iron pan	ta ba
ཏ་བག	plate	ta bag
ཏ་བག་སྐོར་སྐོར	soup plate, round deep plate	ta bag skor skor
ཏ་བེར	fence	ta ber
ཏ་བྱ	{gser rdo} med. mineral [astringent, cooling, cools fever, by its power cures broken bones, good for the eyes]	ta bya
ཏ་དབེན	t' dben	ta dben
ཏ་དབྱི	overcoat	ta dbyi
ཏ་མབུ་ར	tamboura	ta mbu ra
ཏ་མབུ་རའི་ཁོང་རྒྱུད	dron of a tamboura	ta mbu ra'i khong rgyud
ཏ་མ	tree a dark bark and white flowers [Xanthochymus pictorius, or smaller Vitex negundo D	ta ma
ཏ་མ་ལ	xanthochymus pictorius tree, tree vitex nmegundo	ta ma la
ཏ་མ་ལའི་ལོ	flowers for offerings to gods	ta ma la'i lo
ཏ་མ་ལའི་ལོ་མ	leaf of tamala tree	ta ma la'i lo ma
ཏ་མ་ས་ཀི	Damascus	ta ma sa ki
ཏ་མའི་བཅུད	elixir from tamala tree fruit	ta ma'i bcud
ཏ་མིང	(CH ta ming dynasty	ta ming
ཏ་མིང་ཡུང་ལོ	Ming Emperor Yung Lo [who encouraged Tibetan buddhism	ta ming yung lo
ཏ་ཙ	1) 'u su; 2) gser rdo	ta tsa
ཏ་ཚ	{gser rdo} med. mineral [astringent, cooling, cools fever, by its power cures broken bones, good for the eyes]	ta tsha
ཏ་ཚྭ	chinese tea	ta tshwa
ཏ་ཚྭང	chinese tea	ta tshwang
ཏ་ཝེ	senior captain	ta we
ཏ་ཞའོ	senior colonel	ta zha'o
ཏ་ཞི་དབྱང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	Atlantic Ocean	ta zhi dbyang rgya mtsho chen po
ཏ་ཞིས་དབྱང	Atlantic Ocean	ta zhis dbyang
ཏ་ཟིག	iran, persia	ta zig
ཏ་ཟུང	a flower	ta zung
ཏ་ཡས	number in astrology	ta yas
ཏ་ཡིག	the letter ta	ta yig
ཏ་ར་ཀླུ་གོང	Tara Lugong. A minister of King Trisong Deutsen 1033	ta ra klu gong
ཏ་ར་ན་ཐ	Taran tha	ta ra na tha
ཏ་ར་ནི	a flower, a species of rose, rosa glandulifera	ta ra ni
ཏ་ར་ཙེ	(CH small balance	ta ra tse
ཏ་རིམ	Tarim Basin	ta rim
ཏ་རུ་ཀ	turkistan	ta ru ka
ཏ་རེ	certainly, indeed	ta re
ཏ་ལ	the Palmyra tree. palm tree, banana / Palmyra tree; palm tree, banana	ta la
ཏ་ལ་ལ	[arch] lamp, lantern	ta la la
ཏ་ལའི་རྐང་པ	legs erect, human being	ta la'i rkang pa
ཏ་ལའི་རྐང་པ་ཅན	one with palm legs	ta la'i rkang pa can
ཏ་ལའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	be ta tree [de'i 'bras bur khu ba mang bas btung du rung zhing, 'bras bu bza' rung la snum yang 'tsir thub pa, 'bras bu'i pags pa'i tsi sna ni dra ba bzo byed cig yin	ta la'i rgyal po
ཏ་ལའི་འདབ	palm leaf	ta la'i 'dab
ཏ་ལའི་ཕྲེང་བ	fabulous mountain	ta la'i phreng ba
ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ	dalai lama, Dalai Lama	ta la'i bla ma
ཏ་ལའི་ལོ་མ	a palm leaf	ta la'i lo ma
ཏ་ལའི་ལོ་མའི་ཡི་གེ	writing on on palm/ banana leaf	ta la'i lo ma'i yi ge
ཏ་ལི་ཀ	a goddess	ta li ka
ཏ་ལེ	1) beautiful; 2) vivid, sharp, and clear	ta le
ཏ་ལེ་བླ་མ	grand lama of Lhasa	ta le bla ma
ཏ་ལེར་གྱུར་པ	become beautiful	ta ler gyur pa
ཏ་སི་གི་ས	satin	ta si gi sa
ཏ་གསེབ	stallion	ta gseb
ཏ་ཧུང	(CH red silk brocade	ta hung
ཏ་ཧུན	red chinese satin	ta hun
ཏ་ཧྲི	ambassador	ta hri
ཏ་ཧྲི་ཁེན	Tashkent	ta hri khen
ཏ་ཧྲི་ལས་ཁུངས	embassy	ta hri las khungs
ཏྭ་གཞུ་ཅན	one holding a bow made of horn	twa gzhu can
ཏག་གི་ཏིག་གི	w small load/ pack	tag gi tig gi
ཏག་གེ་ཏོག་གེ	w small load/ pack	tag ge tog ge
ཏག་ཏག	1) exact[ly], definitely, w/o mistake [Dpe tshad ltar ring thung tag tag byung 'dug ...Dus thog tu tag tag 'khel song,...Tag tag 'gal zlar 'gyur ba]; 2) knocking, clicking noise [Sgo la tag tag bta...	tag tag
ཏག་ཏག་ཏིག་ཏིག	kha thug 'khel ba'am chad	tag tag tig tig
ཏག་ཏག་རང	exactly	tag tag rang
ཏག་ཏིག	w small load/ pack, phyi tho ste snam bu sogs 'thag byed lag cha zhig	tag tig
ཏག་ཏིག་གིས	surely, definitely, exactly	tag tig gis
ཏག་སེ	playing cards	tag se
ཏག་སེ་རྒྱག	play cards	tag se rgyag
ཏང	a sound [of a guitar], through	tang
ཏང་ཀུ	{tang kun} field med.	tang ku
ཏང་ཀུན	root used for inflammation of heart and fever	tang kun
ཏང་ཀུན་ནག་པོ	cimicifuga foetida l.	tang kun nag po
ཏང་ཀྲུང་དབྱང	Central Committee of the party	tang krung dbyang
ཏང་ཀྲུང་དབྱང་གི་ཆབ་སྲིད་ཅུས	Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the party	tang krung dbyang gi chab srid cus
ཏང་གི་སྐུ་ཚབ	representative/ delegate of the party	tang gi sku tshab
ཏང་གི་སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ཚབ	party register/ membership roll	tang gi skyid sdug tshab
ཏང་གི་གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ལྐས་ཕྱོགས	class line of the party	tang gi gral rim gyi lkas phyogs
ཏང་གི་གྲོན་དངུལ	party expenses	tang gi gron dngul
ཏང་གི་སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས	party discipline	tang gi sgrig khrims
ཏང་གི་སྒྲིག་ཡིག	party constitution/ regulation	tang gi sgrig yig
ཏང་གི་བཅ་ཁྲིམས	party constitution/ regulation	tang gi bca khrims
ཏང་གི་འཐུས་མི	party delegate/ representative	tang gi 'thus mi
ཏང་གི་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	party grouping	tang gi phyogs khag
ཏང་གི་བྱེད་སྒོ་ཉི་མ	Party Day	tang gi byed sgo nyi ma
ཏང་གི་དམིགས་ཡུལ	party program	tang gi dmigs yul
ཏང་གི་རྩ་འཛིན	party platform	tang gi rtsa 'dzin
ཏང་གི་རྩོམ་སྟངས་སྐམ་པོ	party jargon, stereotyped political language	tang gi rtsom stangs skam po
ཏང་གི་ཚགས་པར	party newspaper	tang gi tshags par
ཏང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	party principle/ spirit	tang gi mtshan nyid
ཏང་གི་ཡག་ལག་པུའུ	party branch	tang gi yag lag pu'u
ཏང་གི་ལུའུ	party branch	tang gi lu'u
ཏང་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	party history	tang gi lo rgyus
ཏང་གི་སློབ་གྲྭ	party school	tang gi slob grwa
ཏང་གི་སློབ་གསོ	party education	tang gi slob gso
ཏང་གི་ཧྲུའུ	secretary of a party branch	tang gi hru'u
ཏང་གི་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	party committee	tang gi u yon lhan khang
ཏང་རྒོལ	anti-party	tang rgol
ཏང་རྒོལ་མནའ་འབྲེལ	anti-party alliance	tang rgol mna' 'brel
ཏང་ཏོང	tong tong sound tang nang gi yan lag brgyad pa'i rtsom	tang tong
ཚུལ	party jargon	tshul
ཏང་ནང་དག་ཐེར	party rectification	tang nang dag ther
ཏང་ཕའི	party, clique, faction	tang pha'i
ཏང་ཕྱིའི་མི་སྣ	non-party members	tang phyi'i mi sna
ཏང་བ་ལ	{tang ba la} pass	tang ba la
ཏང་མི	party member	tang mi
ཏང་མི་ངོ་མ	full party member	tang mi ngo ma
ཏང་ཙུང་ཀྲི	party general branch	tang tsung kri
ཏང་ཙུའུ	[group consisting of] leading party members branch	tang tsu'u
ཏང་ཡིག	plain or clear decree or order	tang yig
ཏང་ཡོངས	the whole party	tang yongs
ཏང་ཡོན	party member, communist	tang yon
ཏང་ཡོན་གི་ལག་ཁྱེར	(CH party membership certificate	tang yon gi lag khyer
ཏང་ཡོན་བགྲོས་སོང	(CH veteran party member	tang yon bgros song
ཏང་ལ་ངོ་རྒོལ	anti-party	tang la ngo rgol
ཏང་ལང	tanglang (a sound)	tang lang
ཏང་ལོ	party membership age	tang lo
ཏང་སྲིད	party and government	tang srid
ཏང་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས	party and government offices	tang srid las khungs
ཏང་ཨུ	party committee/ organization	tang u
ཏང་ཨུའི་ལས་ལུགས	party committee system	tang u'i las lugs
ཏད	(not in DAS)	tad
ཏན	dan=100 liters, dan=50kg	tan
ཏན་ཁ	tank	tan kha
ཏན་ཁེ	tank	tan khe
ཏན་གན	{ta na} and {ga na} [see {sbyor sgrol}	tan gan
ཏན་ཏན	careful, definite[ly], certain[ly], sure[ly]	tan tan
ཏན་ཏན་ཏིག་ཏིག	definite certain, positive, indisputable, solid, firm, concrete	tan tan tig tig
ཏན་ཏན་བཟོ་བ	ensure	tan tan bzo ba
ཏན་ཏན་ཡིན་མིན་བརྩད་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	ascertain 1034	tan tan yin min brtsad gcod byed pa
ཏན་ཏན་རང	surely	tan tan rang
ཏན་ཏན་རང་མེད་པ	uncertain	tan tan rang med pa
ཏན་ཏིག	dependable, steady	tan tig
ཏན་ཏིག་བྱེད་པ	fix	tan tig byed pa
ཏན་ཏིག་བཟོ་བ	ratify	tan tig bzo ba
ཏན་ཏྲ་སྡེ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 classes of tantras	tan tra sde bcu drug
ཏན་ཏྲ་སྡེ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 classes of tantra	tan tra sde bco brgyad
ཏན་དུར	cake	tan dur
ཏན་མེ	Denmark	tan me
ཏན་ལུད	nitrogenous manure/ fertilizer	tan lud
ཏན་ཤིན	cookie, cake	tan shin
ཏན་གཤིས	party spirit/ character	tan gshis
ཏན་ཧྲི	television	tan hri
ཏབ་ཏབ་པོར	suddenly, SA tob tob	tab tab por
ཏབ་ཏོབ	[arch] tsab tsub	tab tob
ཏམ	(not in DAS)	tam
ཊམ་ཀ	coins	Tam ka
གོལད་ཏངཀ	coins	gold tangka
ཏཱམ་རྡོ	tam rdo wt of money/ silver [one tam rdo = 50 dngul srang]	tAm rdo
ཏམ་བུ་ར	tamboura	tam bu ra
ཏམ་བུ་རའི་ཁོང་རྒྱུད	drone of a tamboura	tam bu ra'i khong rgyud
ཏམ་བུ་ལ	ti Agnideva bstab bya'i torma	tam bu la
ཊབ༹ཾ་ཀ	dngul gyi TvaM ka - silver	TvaM ka
ཏངཀ	coins	tangka
ཏའི་ཅི་པུར	Tezpur	ta'i ci pur
ཏའི་ཅི་ཡུས	ribbon fish	ta'i ci yus
ཏའི་སི་ཏུ	* Tai Situ rinpoche	ta'i si tu
ཏའི་སི་ཏུ་བྱང་ཆུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{ta'i si tu byang chub rgyal mtshan [phag gru sde srid khri thog dang po 'di rab byung lnga pa'i chu stag lor 'khrungs, spyi lo 1351 lor chos grva chen po rtzed thang rgya cher btab, rab byung drug...	ta'i si tu byang chub rgyal mtshan
ཏའོ་ཅའོ་ཆོས་ལུགས	Taoism	ta'o ca'o chos lugs
ཏའོ་ཏན	guided missile	ta'o tan
ཏའོ་ཏན་རྟེན་གཞི	guided missile base site	ta'o tan rten gzhi
ཏར	cable, telegram	tar
ཏར་ཀ་སྡེ་ལྔ	Five Sophistic Schools	tar ka sde lnga
ཏར་ཁང	telegraph office	tar khang
ཏར་ཏར	smooth or even under pressure	tar tar
ཏར་ཏར་པོ	a shape of the embryo during the early stages of gestation; the sequence being: nur nur po, mer mer po, tar tar po, gor gor po, mkhrang gyur	tar tar po
ཏར་གཏོང	send a cable/ telegram	tar gtong
ཏར་རྡོག	radio tube	tar rdog
ཏར་བུ	SA tsu ka	tar bu
ཏར་ཡིག	cable, telegram	tar yig
ཏར་ལན	answer a cable/ telegram	tar lan
ཏལ	[arch] lamp, torch	tal
ཏལ་རྒྱུགས	straightforwardly/ directly]	tal rgyugs
ཏལ་གདུང	beam between skya gnyis not needing another support	tal gdung
ཏལ་པ	moment	tal pa
ཏལ་པར	instantly, immediately, quickly, completely, quite, thorough	tal par
ཏལ་པར་གཅོད་པ	cut quite through	tal par gcod pa
ཏལ་པར་སོང	go quickly without delay	tal par song
ཏལ་བ	tool with holes in it used by nailers	tal ba
ཏལ་འབིགས་པ	bore through, perforate	tal 'bigs pa
ཏལ་སྦྱིན	[arch] lamp, torch	tal sbyin
ཏལ་མ	straightforwardly/ directly [Lam bar du kar kor med par tal mar phyin,...Khang pa'i nang du gdung ma tal mar btang]	tal ma
ཏལ་མར	instantly, immediately, quickly, completely, quite, thorough	tal mar
ཏལ་མར་འབིགས་པ	bore through, perforate	tal mar 'bigs pa
ཏལ་ཙམ	just a little	tal tsam
ཏི	water, figure 39	ti
ཏི་ཀ	explanation, commentary. sti ga	ti ka
ཏི་ཀ་སི	postage stamp	ti ka si
ཏི་སྐག	indian myna bird	ti skag
ཏི་སྒྲོ་གངས	Tidro Gang	ti sgro gangs
ཏི་སྒྲོ་བྲག་དཀར	White Rock of Tidro	ti sgro brag dkar
ཏི་ཏི	podoces humilis hume	ti ti
ཏི་ཏི་ཐི	DDT	ti ti thi
ཏི་ཏི་ར	partridge	ti ti ra
ཏི་ཏི་རི	byi'u ti ti ri - a quail	ti ti ri
ཏི་ཏི་བྷ	an insect, cochineal	ti ti bha
ཏི་ཏོ	animal te lo	ti to
ཏི་ཏྲིག	small bird, francoline partridge	ti trig
ཏི་ཐུག	bad, mean, silly	ti thug
ཏི་ནག	heath-cock	ti nag
ཏི་པི	cap, hat 1035	ti pi
ཏི་པི་ཅག	tim pi ca horse [kind of fine horse from Kashmir etc]	ti pi cag
ཏི་པུ་རི	modern tippera in east bengal	ti pu ri
ཏི་ཕུ	pigeon, the long-tailed pheasant	ti phu
ཏི་ཕུ་པ	Tiphupa [Indian mahasiddha, said to be reincarnation of MArpa's son Dharmadode	ti phu pa
ཏི་བོ	plover, lapwing	ti bo
ཏི་བྱི	a giant sea-fish, giant salt water fish	ti byi
ཏི་མི	[Skt] king of the fish	ti mi
ཏི་མུ་ས	benincasa cerifera plant, helps with diarrhea, delphinium candelabrum ostenf. var. monanthum (hand.-mazz.) w. t. wang	ti mu sa
ཏི་ཙ	mineral drug, anvil	ti tsa
ཏི་རྩེ	Ti SE Mt. [N of Himalayas nearLake Manasrowarht 22,300 ft beyond the N flanks lives Virudhaka guardian king of the W. Site of contest between Milarepa and a Bon priest	ti rtse
ཏི་ཚ	1) zinc [= sngo chog silvery metal de las sngo ba zhig ste, 'di 'phrul kong byas nas bsregs pa'i dud pas mig nad la phan]; 2) med. mineral [divisions: mdog dkar ser dmar gsum mchis, bsregs thal gyi...	ti tsha
ཏི་ར	corpse	ti ra
ཏི་རས	{ti shi ras pa} the master of the {'ba' rom bka' brgyud pa} tradition	ti ras
ཏི་རུག	indian rupee	ti rug
ཏི་རྱ་ཀ	animal	ti rya ka
ཏི་ལ	sesamum, sesame seed	ti la
ཏི་ལ་ན	Tehran	ti la na
ཏི་ལོ	[Skt] 1) kind of grain; 2) a kind of animal	ti lo
ཏི་ལོ་པ	10 cent. indian sage, tillipa, tilopa	ti lo pa
ཏི་ལོ་ཤེས་རབ་བཟང་པོ	tillop'ada, 9881069	ti lo shes rab bzang po
ཏི་ཤི་རས་པ	Tishi Repa. One of the masters in the Barom Kagyü lineage	ti shi ras pa
ཏི་ཤྲི	Ti-shih. Imperial Preceptor. a position delegated by the Chinese Emperor to outstanding Buddhist masters	ti shri
ཏི་ཤྲི་ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{ti shri kun dga' rgyal mtshan	ti shri kun dga' rgyal mtshan
ཏི་ཤྲི་ཀུན་དགའ་བློ་གྲོས	{ti shri kun dga' blo gros [rab byung lnga pa'i sa phag lor sa skya bdag nyid chen po'i sras su 'khrungs, hor gyi rgyal sar byon nas bu yan rgyal po dang, gi gan rgyal po, ye sun the mur bcas gsum ...	ti shri kun dga' blo gros
ཏི་ཤྲི་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{ti shri rin chen rgyal mtshan ['gro mgon chos rgyal gyi gcung po rin chen rgyal mtshan, 'phags pa rab byung lnga pa'i me bya lor rgyal sa nas bod la log pa'i shul du rgyal po'i dbu bla ti shri lo ...	ti shri rin chen rgyal mtshan
ཏི་ས	ti se snow mt	ti sa
ཏི་སེ	[Skt] snow mt, Ti se snow mt	ti se
ཏི་སེ་ཁྱུང	garuda of tise	ti se khyung
ཏི་སེའ་གངས	Mt. Kailash	ti se' gangs
ཏིག	1) to be sure! well, well! very right!; 2) giant hornet of Sikkim; 3) fluid measure [= five skyogs/ dkar tshad]	tig
ཏིག་ཀུ་རིས	degree [of longitude/ latitude]	tig ku ris
ཏིག་གང	one tig measure	tig gang
ཏིག་གུ	chang vessel/ container	tig gu
ཏིག་ཅིག་མིན་ན	but for a little	tig cig min na
ཏིག་ཏ	stalks of bitter plant gentiana chretta, name of several trees and plants, bitter, gentiana barbata, swertia chirata, gentiana chiretta, gentian	tig ta
ཏིག་ཏ་གསུམ	the three kinds of tig ta herb [rgya tig dang, bal tig, sum cu tig gam lcags tig gsum]	tig ta gsum
ཏིག་ཏིག	1) thigs pa rgyag tshul gyi sgra tsam; 2) careful, definite[ly], certain[ly], sure[ly]' wealthy??	tig tig
ཏིག་པོ	steady, useful	tig po
ཏིག་མེད	uncertain, unsure	tig med
ཏིག་མེན	ribands wound round the felt gaiters that cover the lower part of the legs	tig men
ཏིག་ཙམ	just a little [Bza' bca' la spod sman tig tsam btab.Khyod rang tig tsam sgugs dang nga mgyogs po sleb yong]	tig tsam
ཏིག་ཚ	SA ti tsa	tig tsha
ཏིག་ཚ་ཡང་ཟེར	zinc	tig tsha yang zer
ཏིག་ཡང་ཏིག	eternal, unestablished	tig yang tig
ཏིག་ཧྲུག	sha sti ga hrug hrug	tig hrug
ཏིང	cups made of silver or other metal to hold oblation water, sound of metal, note of cadence introductory to a song	ting
ཏིང་ཀོར་མ	ting la par brgyab pa'i molasses and sugar	ting kor ma
ཏིང་དཀར་ལ	{ting dkar la} pass [S spu hreng rdzong, el. 5230 m]	ting dkar la
ཏིང་ཁྲི	altar	ting khri
ཏིང་ཁྲོལ	sound like beating metal w a hammer	ting khrol
ཏཱིང་གིས	completely, [Notes: onomatopoeia (vctr] suddenly occurred to him	tIng gis
ཏིང་ངེ	clearly	ting nge
ཏིང་ངེ་བ	occurs, deeply	ting nge ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	1) samadhi, meditative concentration mental event/ focus, stabilization, meditative stablization/ absorption/ trance absorption, total involvement, undividedness, deep concentration, holistictness,...	ting nge 'dzin
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི	SA cho 'phrul rnam bzhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala/ sphere of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi dkyil 'khor
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the distinguishing feature of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi khyad par
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	'phags pa ting nge 'dzin gyi 'khor lo zhes bya ba'i mdo	ting nge 'dzin gyi 'khor lo
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་གེགས་ཉེས་པ་ལྔ	the five faults that hinder samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi gegs nyes pa lnga
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Samadhiraja Sutra, King of meditative stabilization sutra [gd] ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po'i mdo [samadhiraja] King of Meditative Stabilization Sutra [GW] ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po'i mdo Samadhir...	ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོ	samadhi raja sutra	ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po'i mdo
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྒོ	doors of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi sgo
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ་ལྔ	the five essences of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi ngo bo lnga
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	the superknowledge of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi mngon par shes pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous action of visualization	ting nge 'dzin gyi cho 'phrul
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྟོབས	the power of samadhi [byang phyogs so bdun gyi stobs lnga'i ya gyal zhig ste, rtag tu rnam par gyeng ba med pa'i ting nge 'dzin. power of concentration, {stobs lnga}.]	ting nge 'dzin gyi stobs
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྟོབས་དྲུག	the six powers establishing shamatha	ting nge 'dzin gyi stobs drug
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་དྲོད	heat of samadhi. Sign of progress or accomplishment in meditation	ting nge 'dzin gyi drod
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	embodiment of contemplation	ting nge 'dzin gyi phung po
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་དབང་པོ	faculty of concentration, {dbang po lnga}	ting nge 'dzin gyi dbang po
རྣམ་པར་གཞག་པ	{ting nge 'dzin gyi mi mthun pa'i phyogs rnam par gzhag pa} ting nge 'dzin gyi mi mthun pa'i phyogs	rnam par gzhag pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཚོགས	in establishing shamatha dgos nges kyi virtuous roots	ting nge 'dzin gyi tshogs
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	meditative abilities	ting nge 'dzin gyi yon tan
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ས	the fifteenth level of samadhi,{bco lnga pa}	ting nge 'dzin gyi sa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་བསླབ་པ	the training of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་རྩེ་བ	{ting nge 'dzin gyis dbang po} ting nge 'dzin gyis rnam par rol pa brgya	ting nge 'dzin gyis rnam par rtse ba
སྟོང	hundreds of thousands of playful actions by samadhi ting nge 'dzin gyis byin gyis brlabs pa'i	stong
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་དགུ	9 contemplations (rin chen kun tu 'phags, shin tu gnas pa, mi sgul ba, phyir mi ldog pa, dkon mchog 'byung gnas, nyi ma'i 'od kyi gzi brjid, don thams cad grub pa, ye shes sgron me, da ltar gyi san...	ting nge 'dzin dgu
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of Absorption [thd]	ting nge 'dzin rgyal po
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོ	Sutra of the King of Samadhi; Skt. Samadhirajasutra, T 127	ting nge 'dzin rgyal po'i mdo
སམདྷིརཇ	sutra, T. 127	Samadhiraja
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས	experienced samadhi	ting nge 'dzin rgyud la skyes
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་བསྒོམས་པ	meditating	ting nge 'dzin bsgoms pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཆེན	the great contemplation	ting nge 'dzin chen
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ	a state of total contemplation, the great contemplation, "mahasamadhi" Skt	ting nge 'dzin chen po
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་འཇུག་ལྡང	entering and arising from samadhi	ting nge 'dzin 'jug ldang
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཉམས་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	at all times dwelling in samadhi w/o degeneration [ma 'dres pa bco brgyad kyi nang gses shig] ting nge 'dzin nyams pa mi mnga' ba having no falts in samadhi [always in ting nge 'dzin, so mi nyams p...	ting nge 'dzin nyams pa mi mnga' ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་དེའི་ངང་དུ་གནས	remain in such states of concentration	ting nge 'dzin de'i ngang du gnas
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three samadhis	ting nge 'dzin rnam pa gsum
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three samadhis [in Mahayoga]. {shes rab 1038 stong pa chen po'i rnal 'byor}, {thabs snying rje sgyu ma}, {phyag rgya phra rags}	ting nge 'dzin rnam gsum
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of samadhi, being involved in that practice	ting nge 'dzin rnal 'byor
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་པ	meditator	ting nge 'dzin pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག	the limb of enlightenment of samadhiu [byang chub yan lag bdun gyi ya gyal	ting nge 'dzin byang chub yan lag
ཞིག་སྟེ	mnyam par bzhag stobs kyis yang dag pa'i shes rab bskyed de nyon mongs rnams spong bar byed pa zhig]	zhig ste
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་སྦྱོང་བ	to cultivate the samadhi	ting nge 'dzin sbyong ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་མི་གྱོ་བའི་ཉམས	experience of unmoving samadhi ting nge 'dzin mi g.yo ba'i nyams - experience of unmoving samadhi ting nge 'dzin rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa the feet of miraculous concentration	ting nge 'dzin mi gyo ba'i nyams
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ཟབ་མོའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	profound mandala of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin zab mo'i dkyil 'khor
ཨེནླིགྷཏེནེད་ཨོནེ	pointed contemplation, one of the {byang chub kyi yan lag bdun} seven branches of enlightenment ting nge 'dzin yan dag byang chub kyi yan	enlightened one
ལག	the limb of enlightenment of samadhi [enlightened 1-pointed contemplation, 1 of the {byang chub kyi yan lag bdun}. = 7 branches of enlightenment] ting nge 'dzin yan dag byang chub kyi yan	lag
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་བསྐུལ་བ	give exhortation to enter samadhi	ting nge 'dzin la bskul ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་ངེས་རྫོགས	definitive perfection in samadhi	ting nge 'dzin la nges rdzogs
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་མངའ་བ	{ting nge 'dzin la brten nas bsags pa}	ting nge 'dzin la mnga' ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་མངའི་བ	{ting nge 'dzin la brten nas bsags pa}	ting nge 'dzin la mnga'i ba
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པ	to compose oneself in samadhi ting nge 'dzin la mnyam par bzhag pa placed or resting evenly in samadhi ting nge 'dzin la snyoms par zhugs pa entered the state of samadhi; entered into samadhi, ente...	ting nge 'dzin la mnyam par bzhag pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་སྙོམས་པར་ཞུགས་སོ	he entered the samadhi that ..	ting nge 'dzin la snyoms par zhugs so
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་མོས་བསྒོམ	devoted meditation on samadhi [in Mahayoga] ting nge 'dzin la mos bsgom dang nges	ting nge 'dzin la mos bsgom
རྫོགས་གཉིས	two Kinds of contemplation, the meditation of devotion and the definitive perfection of perpetual contemplation ting nge 'dzin la mos bsgom dang nges	rdzogs gnyis
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལ་བསླབ་པ	training in contemplation	ting nge 'dzin la bslab pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལས་བཞེངས་པ	emerging from samadhi	ting nge 'dzin las bzhengs pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལས་ལངས་པ	emerged from meditation	ting nge 'dzin las langs pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་སེམས་པ	concentration being	ting nge 'dzin sems pa
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གསུམ	the three samadhis: 1) ma ha yo ga'i bskyed rim rnams ting nge 'dzin gsum gyis khog dbub pa: 1 {de bzhin nyid kyi ting nge 'dzin}., suchness samadhi, two {kun tu snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin}., all-il...	ting nge 'dzin gsum
ཨནད་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེཨེད	syllable. They form the framework for the development stage	and of the seed
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་བར་དོ	the bardo of samadhi meditation	ting nge 'dzin bsam gtan gyi bar do
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ལྷའི་གཟེར	nail of the deities of samadhi	ting nge 'dzin lha'i gzer
ཏིང་ངེར	quietly	ting nger
ཏིང་ཆེན་དགོན་པ	ting chen Monastery [in si khron province dkar mdzes Tibet sde dge rdzong]	ting chen dgon pa
ཏིང་རྗིང	shrew	ting rjing
ཏིང་ཏི་ལིང	snipe	ting ti ling
ཏིང་ཏིང	1) ting ting sound; 2) horse etc. kyi neck ornament clean, well-swept, tinkling/ intensifies adjectives [nag ting ting: completely black]	ting ting
ཏིང་ཏིང་འཁུན་པ	{shing} (probably) the tamarind tree {ting tu ka}	ting ting 'khun pa
ཏིང་ཏིང་གི་སྒྲ	tinkle	ting ting gi sgra
ཏིང་ཏིང་ཅག	cymbals	ting ting cag
ཏིང་ཏིང་ཏིང་ལོ་སྨན	Tingting Tinglomen	ting ting ting lo sman
ཏིང་ཏིང་མ	ting ting sound, che chung byi'u dang 'dra ba'i chu bya zhig	ting ting ma
ཏིང་ཏིང་ཤག	kind of cymbal, little bell moved by the wind	ting ting shag
ཏིང་ཏིང་ཤགས	1) kind of cymbal. 2) wind bell. {ting shags}	ting ting shags
ཏིང་ཏུ་ཀ	tree, prob tamarand	ting tu ka
ཏིང་དི་ལིང	snipe	ting di ling
ཏིང་དུ་ཀ	tree diospyros embryopteris, diospyros glutinosa	ting du ka
ཏིང་བདུན་ཚར	nyer spyod bdun - the seven offering bowls	ting bdun tshar
ཏིང་ནས་སྐྱེས་པ	surged up from deep within me	ting nas skyes pa
ཏིང་པར་མ	ting la par brgyab pa'i molasses and sugar	ting par ma
ཏིང་ཕོར	yon chab 'bul sa'i snod	ting phor
ཏིང་འཛིན	contemplation, samadhi, concentration [yul nges lnga'i nang gses, bden pa dang skyon yon dang zhi rags sogs rang spyi'i mtshan nyid brtag bya'i dngos po la dmigs nas rtse gcig pa'i shes pa rnam gye...	ting 'dzin
ཏིང་འཛིན་སྐྱེ	arising of contemplation	ting 'dzin skye
ཏིང་འཛིན་བསྐྱང	sustain contemplation	ting 'dzin bskyang
ཏིང་འཛིན་འཁོར་ཡུག་ཆེན་པོ	contemplation totally integrated in all circumstances	ting 'dzin 'khor yug chen po
ཏིང་འཛིན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	the component of contemplation	ting 'dzin gyi phung po
ཏིང་འཛིན་གྱི་དབང་པོ	the faculty of concentration	ting 'dzin gyi dbang po
ཏིང་འཛིན་གླང་པོ་དཔལ་མངའ	{ting 'dzin glang po dpal mnga' [one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas}. - the buddhas of the 10 directions]	ting 'dzin glang po dpal mnga'
ཏིང་འཛིན་དགོངས་པ་མི་འགྱུར་གཟེར	plant the stake of unchanging concentration	ting 'dzin dgongs pa mi 'gyur gzer
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of Meditation Sutra, Samadhi King Sutra, the Samadhi Raja Sutra, King of Concentration Scripture; Sutra of the King of Samadhi	ting 'dzin rgyal po
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོ	Sutra of the King of Samadhi	ting 'dzin rgyal po'i mdo
ཏིང་འཛིན་སྒོམ་པ	to train in samadhi	ting 'dzin sgom pa
ཏིང་འཛིན་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation, contemplation	ting 'dzin bsgom pa
ཏིང་འཛིན་བསྒྲུབ	to practice contemplation	ting 'dzin bsgrub
ཏིང་འཛིན་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve samadhis. The four outer contemplations of moving as a spiritual warrior {dpa' bor 'gro ba} of the precious top-ornament {rin po che'i tog} of emanation {rnam par rol pa} and of the basket o...	ting 'dzin bcu gnyis
ཐེ་ཅྲོཝན	jewel and of the array on the summit of the victory banner {yul kun la 'jug pa, mngon pas snang ba}, {gtsug gi nor bu}, {rgyal mtshan rtse mo yongs su bkod pa} and the four secret contemplations of...	the crown
ཏིང་འཛིན་མཆོག	anuyoga branch tantra, branch tantra of anuyoga	ting 'dzin mchog
ཏིང་འཛིན་འཇུག་ལྡང	entering and arising from samadhi	ting 'dzin 'jug ldang
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཉམས་ལྔ	five contemplative experiences [according to Mahayoga ]	ting 'dzin nyams lnga
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཉམས་སྣང	vision of the experience of contemplation	ting 'dzin nyams snang
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཉམས་པ་མེད་པ	in their contemplation [Gd]	ting 'dzin nyams pa med pa
ཏིང་འཛིན་མཉམ་བྲལ	separate from the equality of contemplation	ting 'dzin mnyam bral
ཏིང་འཛིན་མཉམ་བཞག་པ	remaining in the equanimity of samadhi	ting 'dzin mnyam bzhag pa
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྟེན་དུ	as the support for concentration	ting 'dzin rten du
ཏིང་འཛིན་བརྟན་ཅིང	samadhi is stabilized	ting 'dzin brtan cing
ཏིང་འཛིན་བརྟན་པ	to have firm concentration ting 'dzin thun mtshams las 'das pa samadhi that transcends sessions and breaks	ting 'dzin brtan pa
ཏིང་འཛིན་གདེངས་ལྡན	achieving certainty in contemplation	ting 'dzin gdengs ldan
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྣམ་བཞི	4 contemplations, SA gnas pa, mi g.yo ba, mnyam nyid, lhun grub	ting 'dzin rnam bzhi
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྣམ་གསུམ	three samadhis (suchness, illumination, seed-syllable)	ting 'dzin rnam gsum
ཏིང་འཛིན་འཕེལ་བ	to develop contemplation	ting 'dzin 'phel ba
ཏིང་འཛིན་མི་གྭོ་ཝན་ལག་གསུམ	the three constituents of unwavering wholeness	ting 'dzin mi gwo wan lag gsum
ཆོ་གའི་ཝན་ལག	sm. the person. 2] dzi	cho ga'i wan lag
ལྷར་བསྒྲུབ་པ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཝན་ལག	sm. the method. 3] gnyis med bsgrub pa	lhar bsgrub pa thabs kyi wan lag
ངོ་བོའི་ཝན་ལག	sm. the nature]	ngo bo'i wan lag
ཏིང་འཛིན་མི་གྱོ་ཡན་ལག་གསུམ	the five constituents of unwavering wholeness ting 'dzin mi g.yo yan lag gsum - the three constituents of unwavering samadhi / wholeness: 1) {gang gis bsgrub ba pa cho ga'i yan lag} Syn the person....	ting 'dzin mi gyo yan lag gsum
པ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཝན་ལག	sm. the method. 3] gnyis med bsgrub pa ngo bo'i wan	pa thabs kyi wan lag
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྩལ་གྱི་སྐུ	buddha's being of creative samadhi	ting 'dzin rtsal gyi sku
ཏིང་འཛིན་རྩེ་གཅིག	mahayoga action tantra	ting 'dzin rtse gcig
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཚོགས	the prerequisites for samadhi	ting 'dzin tshogs
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཞི་མཆོག་གི་ལམ་སྲོལ	the tradition of the supreme peace of samadhi	ting 'dzin zhi mchog gi lam srol
ཏིང་འཛིན་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of contemplation	ting 'dzin yon tan
ཏིང་འཛིན་རབ་རྟོག	sems med kyi dngos pos sems ldan gyi bya ba byed bsam med bzhin du yod par sgro btags te rab rtog gsal byed kyi bzhin sgra sbyar ba'i sgo nas brjod pa'i rgyan zhig, rab rtog gi rgyan gyi nang gses ...	ting 'dzin rab rtog
ཏིང་འཛིན་རོལ་རྩལ་ཅིར་ཡང་བསྒྱུར	transform the expression of your concentration into all kinds of things ting 'dzin la mos bsgom dang nges rdzogs - devoted application to and truly perfecting samadhi [two kinds of contemplation ac...	ting 'dzin rol rtsal cir yang bsgyur
ཏིང་འཛིན་ལ་གཞོལ	apply contemplation, practice contemplation	ting 'dzin la gzhol
ཏིང་འཛིན་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ་ཐོབ	to attain pliancy in samadhi	ting 'dzin las su rung ba thob
ཏིང་འཛིན་སེམས་དཔའ	samayasattva [sems dpa' sum brtsegs kyi nang gses shig ste, ye shes sems dpa'i thugs kar sa bon nam phyag mtshan bsgom pa'o]	ting 'dzin sems dpa'
སམདྷི	being	samadhi
ཏིང་འཛིན་གསུམ	the three samadhis	ting 'dzin gsum
ཏིང་འཛིན་ལྷའི་གཟེར	the nail of contemplation on the deity [Gd]	ting 'dzin lha'i gzer
ཏིང་བཟོ་མགོ་སྐོན	phor ther mgo skon yang zer te coppersmith's tool	ting bzo mgo skon
ཏིང་ལོ	the moment when glud is delivered to the class of beings to whom it is addressed	ting lo
ཏིང་ཤག	small cymbals	ting shag
ཏིང་ཤགས	two cymbals	ting shags
ཏིང་གསུམ	Syn {ting 'dzin gsum; abbr. of {ting nge 'dzin rnam pa gsum}	ting gsum
ཏིད་ཕྱུང་བ	skyo ba bskyed pa	tid phyung ba
ཏིན	(not in DAS)	tin
ཏིན་དུ་ཀ	[Skt] Indian black walnut	tin du ka
ཏིན་ཙི	electron	tin tsi
ཏིན་ཙི་མོ་གློག་ཅན	negatively charged electron	tin tsi mo glog can
ཏིན་ཙིའི་ཕྲ་མཐོང་ཆེ་ཤེལ	electron microscope	tin tsi'i phra mthong che shel
ཏིན་ཙིའི་སྦུ་གུ	electron tube	tin tsi'i sbu gu
ཏིན་ཙིའི་རྩིས་འཁོར	electronic computer/ calculator	tin tsi'i rtsis 'khor
ཏིབ་རིལ	teapot	tib ril
ཏིམ་པི	goat's leather, kid leather from india	tim pi
ཏིམ་པི་ཅ	horse imported into tibet from india 1041	tim pi ca
ཏིམ་པོམ	owl	tim pom
ཏིམ་བི	funnel	tim bi
ཏིམ་བུ	funnel	tim bu
ཏཱིའུ་གུང་གི་རྩིས	(CH spor thang gi rtsis	tI'u gung gi rtsis
ཏིར་ཡ་ཀ	{byol song} animals	tir ya ka
ཏིར་ཧུ་ཏ	modern tirhut	tir hu ta
ཏིར་ཧུཏ་ཏ	Tirhut [country not far E from yul yang pa can	tir hut ta
ཏིལ	sesame	til
ཏིལ་དཀར	white sesamum	til dkar
ཏིལ་སྐྱེས	sesame oil	til skyes
ཏིལ་གོང་ཕྱུར་བཞིན	over flowing like a	til gong phyur bzhin
སེསམེ	heap	sesame
སེསམུམ	heap	sesamum
ཏིལ་གོང་ཕྱེད་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like an opened sesame pod	til gong phyed pa lta bu
ཏིལ་གྱི་གང་བུ	a heap of mustard seeds	til gyi gang bu
ཏིལ་གྱི་གང་བུ་ཁ་ཕྱེ་བ་ལྟར	as the sesame seeds in an opened pod	til gyi gang bu kha phye ba ltar
ཏིལ་གྱི་གོང་བུ	a heap of mustard seeds	til gyi gong bu
ཏིལ་གྱི་གོང་བུ་ཁ་ཕྱེ་བ་ལྟར	like a sesame pod opening	til gyi gong bu kha phye ba ltar
ཏིལ་གྱི་ཕྱེ	powdered sesamum	til gyi phye
ཏིལ་གྱིས	strongly; syn {ril gyis}	til gyis
ཏིལ་ཅན	palm tree	til can
ཏིལ་བཅས	[arch] sign of death	til bcas
ཏིལ་རྗང	til blug sa'i bang ba	til rjang
ཏིལ་སྙིགས་མ	mixed sesamum, inferior quality of sesamum	til snyigs ma
ཏིལ་རྡུང	til brdungs nas snum 'don pa'i til rdung mkhan	til rdung
ཏིལ་བརྡུང	1 of 11 astrological diagrams, SA byed pa bcu gcig	til brdung
ཏིལ་བརྡུངས	thrashed or beaten sesamum, sesamum grinder	til brdungs
ཏིལ་ནག	black sesamum	til nag
ཏིལ་སྣུ	sesame oil	til snu
ཏིལ་སྣུམ	sesame oil	til snum
ཏིལ་འབྲུ	1) grain of sesame; sesame seed. 2) "grain", "iota" or "ounce" as in "there is not a grain/iota/ounce of truth in that statement..." [mss]	til 'bru
ཏིལ་འབྲུ་ཙམ	{yon tan til 'bru tsam zhig} even a sesame seed's worth of special qualities	til 'bru tsam
ཏིལ་འབྲུ་ཙམ་མེད	not even the slightest	til 'bru tsam med
ཏིལ་འབྲུ་ཙམ་མེད་པ	not at all, not as much as a grain of sesame	til 'bru tsam med pa
ཏིལ་འབྲུ་ཙམ་ཡང	even as much as a mustard seed	til 'bru tsam yang
ཏིལ་སྦྱང	ting rjang	til sbyang
ཏིལ་མ	sesame oil	til ma
ཏིལ་མར	sesame oil, seed oil	til mar
ཏིལ་མར་ཅན	red sandal wood	til mar can
ཏིལ་མར་ར་བ	court, prison	til mar ra ba
ཏིལ་དམར	1 of 5 snying po lnga	til dmar
ཏིལ་དམར་ཁྲལ	tax to be paid in red seasamum	til dmar khral
ཏིལ་ཙམ	the size of a sesame seed	til tsam
ཏིལ་འཙིར	grind/ press sesame seeds to make oil	til 'tsir
ཏིལ་འཚིར་བ་པོ	extractor of sesame oil	til 'tshir ba po
ཏིལ་ལ་མེ་བཞིན	like when fire touches oil	til la me bzhin
ཏིལ་ལི་པ	Tilopa	til li pa
ཏིལ་སེར་ཅན	a medicine, the plant cassia alata, cardiospermum hahcacubum	til ser can
ཏིས་ཆིའུ་རྩེ	skittles, bowling	tis chi'u rtse
ཏུ	dative locative particle [after final GA DA BA like la, du]	tu
ཏུ་སྒྲུབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	can, is able to accomplish	tu sgrub tu yod pa
ཏུ་ཏ	SA ti tsa	tu ta
ཏུ་བརྟགས	to examine minutely / in detail	tu brtags
ཏུ་ནི་ཤེ་ཡ	Tunesia	tu ni she ya
ཏུ་པག	gum, musket, fire-lock, fowlingpiece	tu pag
ཏུ་མེད་པ	impossible to, unable	tu med pa
ཏུ་ཙ	anvil	tu tsa
ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	possible to, able	tu yod pa
ཏུ་རུ་ཀ	1) a kind of incense; 2) former Kashmir gar log rigs, Turks, Turkomans	tu ru ka
ཏུ་རུ་ཀུ	Turks, muslims	tu ru ku
ཏུ་རེ	[arch] 1) suddenly, quickly, clear/ distinct/ vivid; 2) always, constantly; 3) exertion; 4) clear, vivid, and always present in the mind	tu re
ཏུ་ལཱ	a balance, pair of scales	tu lA
ཏུག་གིས	suddenly	tug gis
ཏུག་འགྲིལ་ཆུམ་འགྲིལ	large, heavy sound	tug 'gril chum 'gril
ཏུག་ཆུམ	large, heavy sound	tug chum
ཏུག་ཆེམ	noise of wooden rattle, trotting of horses in distance	tug chem
ཏུག་ཏུག	unclear and faintly heard sound	tug tug
ཏུག་རིང	unclear and faintly heard sound	tug ring
ཏུག་རིད	1) clay drum etc heard from a distance; 2) horse etc moving noise	tug rid
ཏུང	E	tung
ཏུང་ཀྭ	squash	tung kwa
ཏུང་ཀྭས	t'ung kus	tung kwas
ཏུང་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	cawing	tung sgra sgrog pa
ཏུང་ཅིན	Tokyo	tung cin
ཏུང་ཐིང་མཚེའུ	T'ung Ting Lake [in Hunan Province]	tung thing mtshe'u
ཏུང་ནན་ཡ	SE Asia	tung nan ya
ཏུང་པའི་ཁུལ	NE area	tung pa'i khul
ཏུང་པེ	NE area	tung pe
ཏུང་ཙག	(CH tung las bzos pa'i yo byad	tung tsag
ཏུང་རྩིང་དབན་མཚོ་ཁག	Gulf of Tonkin	tung rtsing dban mtsho khag
ཏུང་ཞིང	name of an ethnic group	tung zhing
ཏུང་ཧའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Tung Hai Sea	tung ha'i rgya mtsho
ཏུང་ཧྲེ	manager, director, trustee	tung hre
ཏུན	ton	tun
ཏུན་སྤྱི་ལི	tons and miles kilometers	tun spyi li
ཏུན་ཚད	tonnage	tun tshad
ཏུན་ཧོང	Tun-Huang caves in China	tun hong
ཏུབ་ཏུག	either, or	tub tug
ཏུའི	line, team	tu'i
ཏུའི་ཀྲང	leader/ commander of a team, brigade	tu'i krang
ཏུའི་ཆི་ཏན	gas projectile	tu'i chi tan
ཏུའུ	degree	tu'u
ཏུའེ	team, brigade	tu'e
ཏུའེ་ཀྲང	leader/ commander of a team, brigade	tu'e krang
ཏུའོ་སྨི་ཉ་ཅ	Dominican Republic	tu'o smi nya ca
ཏུར	suddenly	tur
ཏུར་ཀི	Turkey 1042	tur ki
ཏུར་གྱིས་དྲན	suddenly recalled	tur gyis dran
ཏུར་ཆུང	hardly any, nothing definite, little	tur chung
ཏུར་ཏུར	1) clear [Rig pa tur tur po de dran skyen po zhig yong]; 2) sometimes clear sometimes not [Sems la 'char mi 'char gyi nyams tur tur zhig 'dug]; 3) work etc almopst finished [Las mjug]; 4) flash, qu...	tur tur
ཏུར་ཏུར་པོ	1) moving after whatever happens. 2) [sometimes] gloomy turmoil	tur tur po
ཏུར་ཏུར་བྱེད་པ	do work quickly	tur tur byed pa
ཏུར་ཏུར་ཡིད་ལ་དྲན་པ་ན	when a memory [of...] flashes in [your] mind	tur tur yid la dran pa na
ཏུར་ཕོག་པ	slightly affected	tur phog pa
ཏུར་བ	to darn	tur ba
ཏུར་མེན	one at a time in order or in a row	tur men
ཏུར་རེ	clear, distinct	tur re
ཏུར་རེ་བ	clear, firm with regard to perceptions, without omissions or digression	tur re ba
ཏུར་རེ་བཟུང	watch it, keep a sharp eye on it	tur re bzung
ཏུལ་དྲི་ཅན	putrid, of offensive smell	tul dri can
ཏུལ་པ	[arch] laugh	tul pa
ཏུལ་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	hemp, marijuana	tul pa'i 'bras bu
ཏུལ་བ	laugh	tul ba
ཏུས	(not in DAS)	tus
ཏེ	(stop letter) (affix denoting the gerund, finite tense when followed by 'dug or yod, continuative particle), number 99, gerundive connective	te
ཏེ་ཁུང	hole in walls, clothes	te khung
ཏེ་ག་ཙམ	a little	te ga tsam
ཏེ་གེར	te ger [place in upper Tibet	te ger
ཏེ་གོ	Germany	te go
ཏེ་གྱེར	place in upper tibet	te gyer
ཏེ་སྒྲོ	great tibetan mountain range	te sgro
ཏེ་ཇུས	intervention, interference	te jus
ཏེ་ཇུས་བྱེད	intervene, interfere	te jus byed
ཏེ་ཏེ	small drum	te te
ཏེ་གཏོགས	intervention, interference	te gtogs
ཏེ་གཏོགས་བྱེད	intervene, interfere	te gtogs byed
ཏེ་གཏོར་རྦ་གཏོར	scattered, dissipated, destroyed	te gtor rba gtor
ཏེ་པ	wire/ nail die	te pa
ཏེ་པོ	short person	te po
ཏེ་པོར	excellent, noble, intense, strong, very, really, actually	te por
ཏེ་པོར་གཏལ་བ	[arch] nyes rdung very great btab pa	te por gtal ba
ཏེ་པོར་དྲག་པ	really good	te por drag pa
ཏེ་ཕིང་ཡང	Pacific Ocean	te phing yang
ཏེ་ཕུ	pigeon	te phu
ཏེ་ཕུ་པ	Tiphupa, the following life of Dharma Dodey	te phu pa
ཏེ་ཕྱིར	"it is because" [ggd]	te phyir
ཏེ་བས	including --	te bas
ཏེ་བེ	shuttle cock	te be
ཏེ་བོར	constantly, continually	te bor
ཏེ་བྱུས	intervention, interference	te byus
ཏེ་བྱུས་བྱེད	intervene, interfere	te byus byed
ཏེ་རྩེ	seal, stamp	te rtse
ཏེ་ཡི་ཀྲི	Germany te yi kri dmangs gtso 'i spyi mthun rgyal	te yi kri
ཏེ་ལོ	1) skunk; 2) te lo bird animal med [good for poison and klad pas sbyod dug snying babs sel [evil smelling animal about the size of a sre mong]	te lo
ཏེ་ལོ་པ	Tilopa	te lo pa
ཏེ་ལོའི་ཤ	{te lo} meat animal med.	te lo'i sha
ཏེ་སེ	gangs te se - Kailash Snow Mountain	te se
ཏེ་ཧེ་རན	Teheran	te he ran
ཏེ་ཧེ་ལན	Teheran	te he lan
ཏེག་པ	pack up, put up/ in[to]	teg pa
ཏེན་ཅིའུ	tincture of iodine	ten ci'u
ཏེན་རྡོ	iodine	ten rdo
ཏེན་ཙི	electron	ten tsi
ཏེན་ཙི་མོ་གློག་ཅན	negative electron	ten tsi mo glog can
ཏེན་ཙིའི་ཕྲ་མཐོང་ཆེ་ཤེལ	electron microscope	ten tsi'i phra mthong che shel
ཏེན་ཙིའི་སྦུ་གུ	electron tube	ten tsi'i sbu gu
ཏེན་ཙིའི་རྩིས་འཁོར	electronic computer/ calculator	ten tsi'i rtsis 'khor
ཏེབ་བེ	[arch] like snod sder ma	teb be
ཏེབ་ཙག	shing gzhog byed kyi tool	teb tsag
ཏེབ་ཙེ	(CH thebs tse, lto snod cig	teb tse
ཏེའུ	table	te'u
ཏེའུ་ལེ་བ	[Skt] lizard	te'u le ba
ཏེའུ་ལོ	te lo [evil smelling animal about the size of a sre mong]	te'u lo
ཏེའུ་ཤིང	khri chung ngu, square table	te'u shing
ཏེའུ་ཤིང་ཁྲི	square table	te'u shing khri
ཏེལ་གྱི་མེ	cauterization	tel gyi me
ཏེལ་པ	metal nad dmigs sreg byed implement	tel pa
ཏོ་ཀ་ནི	wicker work, vessel for brain	to ka ni
ཏོ་དཀར	white-belly, epithet of rnam sras or kuvera	to dkar
ཏོ་ཏོ་ལིང་ལིང	with a swinging motion	to to ling ling
ཏོ་རེ་ལོང་བཙན	king {to re long btsan}	to re long btsan
ཏོག	1) tip/ top [ornament] [of]; 2) rank signifying hat ornament; 3) essence, essential juice; 4) point	tog
ཏོག་དཀར	name of gautama buddha in tusita heaven before his last incarnation	tog dkar
ཏོག་གེ	grains measuring unit	tog ge
ཏོག་སྒྲ	snapping/ cracking sound 1043	tog sgra
ཏོག་ཅན	pillar with a capital	tog can
ཏོག་ལྕགས	iron of the hoe	tog lcags
ཏོག་ཏི་བློ་གྲོས	pinnacle of wisdom	tog ti blo gros
ཏོག་ཏིལ	bump, swelling [from being hit on the head]	tog til
ཏོག་ཏོག	top most, riches	tog tog
ཏོག་སྟེ	suddenly	tog ste
ཏོག་སྟེ་བླངས་པ	[arch] 1) glo bur du khyer ba; 2) Cha tsang lings te blangs pa	tog ste blangs pa
ཏོག་སྟེ་ལངས	got up suddenly	tog ste langs
ཏོག་ཙ	a little	tog tsa
ཏོག་ཙམ	a little	tog tsam
ཏོག་ཙམ་ཏོག་ཙམ་བྱེད་པ	do bit by bit	tog tsam tog tsam byed pa
ཏོག་ཙམ་མ་གཏོགས	nearly	tog tsam ma gtogs
ཏོག་ཙམ་ཞིག	a little bit	tog tsam zhig
ཏོག་ཙམ་གཞུ་བ	tip	tog tsam gzhu ba
ཏོག་ཙམ་རིང	for a little while	tog tsam ring
ཏོག་ཙམ་སོང་ནས	later	tog tsam song nas
ཏོག་ཙེ	hoe, mattock, pickaxe	tog tse
ཏོག་ཙེ་བརྐོས་པོ	one who digs soil with a hoe	tog tse brkos po
ཏོག་ཙེ་འཚོ་བ	one who lives by hoeing	tog tse 'tsho ba
ཏོག་ཙེས་བསྐོས་པ	to undermine	tog tses bskos pa
ཏོག་བཙུགས་ཁྱེམ་བཙུགས	not do an action in stages but all at once	tog btsugs khyem btsugs
ཏོག་རྩི	gtar khab kyi rigs shig	tog rtsi
ཏོག་རྩེ	a little, a few	tog rtse
ཏོག་ཞབ༹	rank signifying tog yod pa'i hat	tog zhva
ཏོག་ཡུ	handle of a hoe	tog yu
ཏོང	mis-spelling of one thousand	tong
ཏོང་ཁུན	t'ung kus	tong khun
ཏོང་ཏོང	1) che zhing gsal ba'i sgra; 2) tied to neck of donkey etc metal tong tong	tong tong
ཏོང་ཏོང་བྱེད་པ	perforate, make whirling noise with a whip	tong tong byed pa
ཏྭོན་མུན	CH sudden enlightenment buddhist school	twon mun
ཏོབ་ཅི	button	tob ci
ཏོབ་ཅི་རྒྱག	button	tob ci rgyag
ཏོབ་ཏོབ	brel zing, 'jigs snang	tob tob
ཏོབ་ཏོབ་སྨྲ་བ	speak nonsense/ w/o thinking	tob tob smra ba
ཏོའུ	dou=10 liters	to'u
ཏོའུ་ཡིན་ཅི	radio receiver	to'u yin ci
ཏོའུ་ལོ	polecat	to'u lo
ཏོའུ་ཧ་ཕུ	bean curd	to'u ha phu
ཏོར་གྲེ་ཀོ	Torre del Greco in Italy	tor gre ko
ཏོར་པང	hole che ru gtong byed kyi tool	tor pang
ཏོར་མ	an offering cake	tor ma
ཏོལ	suddenly, slebs	tol
ཏོལ་གྱི་མཚུལ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ	1 of ka can bzhi	tol gyi mtshul dbang rdo rje
ཏོལ་བ	arrive at, reach	tol ba
ཏོལ་བུ	Tolhu, the offspring	tol bu
ཏོལ་ཤེས	know unobstructedly	tol shes
ཏྲ	ape	tra
ཏྲག་ཐུང	heruka, blood-drinker (drinks blood of clinging, doubts, duality)	trag thung
ཏྲམ་པ	hard, tough, stiff, species of gout	tram pa
ཏྲི	possessing form or body, anything that has form	tri
ཏྲི་ཀེད	SA ti ked	tri ked
ཏྲི་པ་ཏི	prayer, petition	tri pa ti
ཏྲི་པི་ཏ་ཀ	Skt for {sde snod gsum}; the Three Collections	tri pi ta ka
ཏྲི་པུ་རི	three cities, [grong gsum pa in Sri Lanka of gold, silver and iron in sky air and earth built by Maya fir an asura and burned by Shiva	tri pu ri
ཏྲི་བ	taking up, any object that may be accomplished by religious acts	tri ba
ཏྲི་མ	kind of bee whose sting is very painful	tri ma
ཏྲི་མེར	sweet-scented flower	tri mer
ཏྲི་ཤ་ཀུ་ནེ	3 reasons or signs, holy place in persia	tri sha ku ne
ཏྲི་ཤུ་ལ	[Skt] trishula, trident	tri shu la
ཏྲི་ཤུལ	trident	tri shul
ཏྲིང་ཤི་ཁ	.@? recheck	tring shi kha
ཏྲེ་ཏྲེ་ཧ	dangerous disease of the stomach	tre tre ha
ཏྲེ་ཏྲེ་ཧོ	[Skt] rims smyon pa ste nag po sum sgril gyi ming gzhan zhig	tre tre ho
ཏྲེ་བ་ཅན	colored	tre ba can
ཏྲེ་བོ	tre bo [place si khron zhing chen dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul brag 'go rdzong gi sa cha zhig	tre bo
ཏྲེ་མ	[Skt] 1) sbrang rgod mdung gsum pa; 2) Sre mong	tre ma
ཏྲེ་མ་བུ་ག	[Skt] sbrang chung	tre ma bu ga
ཏྲེ་མེད་དུང་མཛེས	king of tibet of bon period	tre med dung mdzes
ཏྲེ་ལ་ཏ་ཀ	[Skt] sbrang ma chen po	tre la ta ka
ཏྲེ་ཤོད་གངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	place in khams	tre shod gangs kyi ra ba
ཏྲེ་སམ	medicine in shape of powder	tre sam
ཏྲེ་ཧོར	1) {tre hor} [= tre bo]; 2) region of N khams from rong pa tsa to rta'u	tre hor
ཏྲེ་ལྷམ	1) tre bo} region boots; 2) tres sam mam, sman phye	tre lham
ཏྲེམ	zhang zhung skad kyi grum bu'i skad dod cig ste, divisions rtsa trem, rus trem, sha trem, chu trem, trem dkar, trem nag bcas rigs drug]	trem
ཏྲེམ་དཀར	grang ba shas che ba'i grum bu la'o	trem dkar
ཏྲེམ་ནག	{trem nag disease [khrag mkhris tsa ba shas che ba'i grum nad cig]	trem nag
ཏྲེས་སམ	med. fine powder	tres sam
ཏྲོ	(not in DAS)	tro
ཏྲོན	[arch] diligence, industry	tron
ཏྲོན་བྱེད	[arch] be diligent/ industrious	tron byed
ཏྲོན་བྱེད་པ	be diligent, exert oneself	tron byed pa
གཏག	grind, SA 'thag pa	gtag
གཏག་གཏོང	disperse	gtag gtong
གཏག་པ	[arch] gzhan la rdung rdeg gtong ba'am 'tshog pa	gtag pa
གཏག་མ	red-flowering rhododendrons	gtag ma
གཏགས་པ	label, prajñapti	gtags pa
གཏང	give, send, SA gtong ba, to take gtang mkhan chen 'jam dbyangs dpal ldan	gtang
གཏང་སྙོམས	equanimity	gtang snyoms
གཏང་སྙོམས་ཚད་མེད	boundless equanimity	gtang snyoms tshad med
གཏང་བ	ft. of {gtong ba}	gtang ba
གཏང་ཡས	a #	gtang yas
གཏང་ཡིག	'phrin gtam bskur yig	gtang yig
གཏང་རག	thanks[giving] [feast] [chos phyogs kyi legs 'bul lam, drin gso'i yon]	gtang rag
གཏང་རག་ཕུལ་བ	bka' drin gtang rag	gtang rag phul ba
ཕུལ་བ	as a gesture of gratitude he offered 1044	phul ba
གཏད	I) RJY: submit to/ to direct/ to take: 1) to aim, focus, aim, goal. 2) direct towards, place, hand over, deliver, set up, open, establish, entrust. 3) a spell, curse. 4) to surrender sm. {gtod pa}....	gtad
གཏད་དཀར་འགྲོ་བཟང་མ	{gtad dkar 'gro bzang ma}	gtad dkar 'gro bzang ma
གཏད་ཁུང་མེད་པ	w/o a source to rely on/ root source of refuge	gtad khung med pa
གཏད་ཁེལ	settle, determine, decide	gtad khel
གཏད་ཁྲམ	divination chart [mode of	gtad khram
དིབི༹ནཏིཨོན་ཝཧིཆ	determines malign forces. gtad: entrusting khram: crossing/ sealing malign forces]	divination which
གཏད་རྒྱ	sealing ceremonies, mind mandate, mind-mandate transmission, appointment when Padmasambhava commissions a student to discover the gter in the future, entrustment	gtad rgya
གཏད་རྒྱ་མཛད་པ	to give the Mindmandate transmission	gtad rgya mdzad pa
གཏད་རྒྱ་རྫོགས་པ	fulfilled the mindmandate	gtad rgya rdzogs pa
གཏད་རྒྱ་ལུང་བསྟན	prophetic mindmandate transmission	gtad rgya lung bstan
གཏད་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེན	to focus on	gtad gcig tu 'dren
གཏད་གཉེར	entrust a thing	gtad gnyer
གཏད་དེ	offered to	gtad de
གཏད་ནས	always	gtad nas
གཏད་གནང་བྱུང	has actually been delivered	gtad gnang byung
གཏད་པ	1) firmness, steadiness, hold; 2) give [p f gtod pa]	gtad pa
གཏད་པ་མེད	no firmness, it has no hold	gtad pa med
གཏད་པ་ཙམ་བྱ	direct attention	gtad pa tsam bya
གཏད་པ་བཞི	1) the 'Four Aims': Aim your mind at the Dharma. Aim your Dharma practice at simple living. Aim at simple living for your entire life. Aim your death at solitude. 2) the four ultimate aims: Leave y...	gtad pa bzhi
གཏད་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་སྤང་བ	fault requiring abandonment arising from giving? [among the spang ltung sum cu, by a patron given dbyar gyi rnyed pa in the summer retreat use/ enjoy	gtad pa las byung ba'i spang ba
གཏད་པའི་གཏའ	pledge objects	gtad pa'i gta'
གཏད་པས་འགྲུབ	accomplish through concentration	gtad pas 'grub
གཏད་བུན་ལོང་ནེར་གཏད་མེད	hazy and insubstantial	gtad bun long ner gtad med
གཏད་མི་གཏད་མེད	a vacillating person	gtad mi gtad med
གཏད་མེད	w/o aim/ reference point/ *, insubstantial, w/o fixation, w/o target, unsteady, not firm	gtad med
གཏད་མེད་འཁྱམས	to wander aimlessly	gtad med 'khyams
གཏད་མེད་འཆལ་བ	waver, be unsteady, vacillate	gtad med 'chal ba
གཏད་མེད་དུ་བཏང	let go aimlessly	gtad med du btang
གཏད་མོ	reference-point	gtad mo
གཏད་ཚིགས	conclusion, criteria, reasoning	gtad tshigs
གཏད་མཚམས	"the limit of what is held..." see also {thugs rtse gtad mtshams} and {blo rtse gtad mtshams}. [mss]	gtad mtshams
གཏད་འཛིན	grasp as eternal	gtad 'dzin
གཏད་འཛིན་གྱིས་ཆོས	dharmas grasped as eternal	gtad 'dzin gyis chos
གཏད་འཛིན་པ	grasping as eternal	gtad 'dzin pa
གཏད་ཡལ	subsiding of reference points	gtad yal
གཏད་ར	plans	gtad ra
གཏད་རབས	1) 1 to 1 succession; 2) Ston	gtad rabs
གཏད་རབས་བདུན	1 to 1 sucession of 7 arhats ['od srung, kun dga' bo, sha na'i gos can, nye sbas, dh'i ti ka, nag po, legs mthong chen po]	gtad rabs bdun
གཏད་རུལ	rites to eliminate the gtad	gtad rul
གཏད་ལེན	give and receive	gtad len
གཏད་ས	1) blo gtad sa; 2) things giving sa; 3) aiming point, target for arrow, gun, reference point	gtad sa
གཏད་ས་བཞི	the four reference points [among kadampa gong ma'i thud bcud phugs nor bcu: blo phugs chos la gtad, chos phugs sprang la gtad, sprang phugs shi la gtad, shi phugs grog po skam po la gtad]	gtad sa bzhi
གཏད་ས་ཡོད་པ	have reference point, existence of reference point	gtad sa yod pa
གཏད་སོ	(fixed) (objective) reference point; (objective) focal point	gtad so
གཏད་སོ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of conceptions	gtad so dang bral ba
གཏད་སོ་མེད	aimless	gtad so med
གཏན	1) constant, permanent, perpetual,	gtan
གཏན་བཀལ་བ	approve, pass	gtan bkal ba
གཏན་ཁྲ	bka' shog gtan tshigs dang khra ma ...Srid gzhung gi gtan khra yig rigs	gtan khra
གཏན་ཁྲ་བྱེད་རིས	important decrees	gtan khra byed ris
གཏན་ཁྲིམས	established law	gtan khrims
གཏན་འཁེལ	perfectly certain, quite sure, to decide	gtan 'khel
གཏན་འཁེལ་བ	was approved, agreed upon	gtan 'khel ba
གཏན་འཁེལ་བའི་ཚད	fixed #, norm, quota	gtan 'khel ba'i tshad
གཏན་འཁྱིལ	permanently staying	gtan 'khyil
གཏན་འཁྱོལ	constant, phugs 'khyol,...Las ka 'go brtsams nas mjug ma tshar bar 'bad brtson gtan 'khyol snyug bsring byed dgos	gtan 'khyol
གཏན་གྱི	always, permanently, constantly; eternal, abiding, ongoing; everlasting, perpetual, permanent	gtan gyi
གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱབས	permanent refuge	gtan gyi skyabs
གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་དང་སྐྱེལ་མ	my lasting refuge and guide	gtan gyi skyabs dang skyel ma
གཏན་གྱི་གྲོགས	husband, friend, partner for life	gtan gyi grogs
གཏན་གྱི་དོན	phugs kyi don,...Las don gang zhig sgrub kyang gtan gyi don la bsam blo gtong dgos	gtan gyi don
གཏན་གྱི་བདེ་བ	everlasting happiness	gtan gyi bde ba
གཏན་གྱི་འདུན་མ	{nam gzhag gtan gyi 'dun ma} the ultimate aim	gtan gyi 'dun ma
གཏན་གྱི་གནས་ཡུལ	abiding objective environment	gtan gyi gnas yul
གཏན་གྱི་བསམ་བློ	phugs don gyi bsam blo	gtan gyi bsam blo
གཏན་གྲོགས	spouse, husband, wife	gtan grogs
གཏན་གླེང་འཁེལ་བ	adhere resolutely, come to a decision, work steadily	gtan gleng 'khel ba
གཏན་འགག	prohibition	gtan 'gag
གཏན་འགོག	prohibition	gtan 'gog
གཏན་འགོག་བྱེད་པ	to forbid, prohibit	gtan 'gog byed pa
གཏན་རྒྱུག	'u lag dus rtag par las la bkol ba'i 'u lag	gtan rgyug
གཏན་ཆགས	resolved, decided, permanently remaining,...Khug kyog gi yul gru so sor	gtan chags
གཏན་ཆགས་བྱེད	make permanent/ fixed/ established/ stable	gtan chags byed
གཏན་འཆིས	permanent	gtan 'chis
གཏན་འཇག	permanent, enduring, perpetually abiding	gtan 'jag
གཏན་འཇགས	lam yig former Tibetan govt private wares skyel 'dren nam dgos dus de 'phral rta khal skul 'ded chog pa'i permanent permit/ license, permanent, fixed, established, stable	gtan 'jags
གཏན་འཇགས་གླ་པ	dus rgyun du mi tshang nges can zhig nas las gla blangs te g.yog rgyug dgos mkhan	gtan 'jags gla pa
གཏན་འཇགས་རྒྱུ་ནོར	fixed assets	gtan 'jags rgyu nor
གཏན་འཇགས་བྱེད	make permanent	gtan 'jags byed
གཏན་འཇགས་མ་རྩ	fixed capital	gtan 'jags ma rtsa
གཏན་འཇགས་སློབ་གྲ	boarding school	gtan 'jags slob gra
གཏན་ཉམས	permanently lost	gtan nyams
གཏན་ཉེས	x {rang la rang dbang yod pa'i dus 'dir 'dun ma gtan legs dang gtan nyes kyi so mtshams yin pa} our decision at this juncture, when we have the freedom to choose, marks the turningpoint which will ...	gtan nyes
གཏན་སྙོམས་པར	indifferently	gtan snyoms par
གཏན་ཏུ	ever, evermore	gtan tu
གཏན་གཏན	certain, sure	gtan gtan
གཏན་གཏན་ཏིག་ཏིག	certain, sure, very stable	gtan gtan tig tig
གཏན་གཏན་འདུན	permanent goal	gtan gtan 'dun
གཏན་དུ	at all times / always	gtan du
གཏན་དུ་འགྲོགས་རྒྱུ	accompany permanently; could stay with him forever	gtan du 'grogs rgyu
གཏན་དུ་ལྡོག་པ	permanently turned away from	gtan du ldog pa
གཏན་དུ་གནས་པ	constant, everlasting, enduring	gtan du gnas pa
གཏན་དུ་གནས་པའི་མཛའ་མཐུན	everlasting friendship	gtan du gnas pa'i mdza' mthun
གཏན་དུ་སྤངས་པ	eternal abandonment	gtan du spangs pa
གཏན་དུ་བ	eternal smoke, permanent and stable	gtan du ba
གཏན་དུ་བྲལ་བ	always absent	gtan du bral ba
གཏན་དུ་བྲལ་བའི་འདས་མ་བྱས་ཀྱི་ཆ	the uncompoundedness of being permanently free [from discards]	gtan du bral ba'i 'das ma byas kyi cha
གཏན་དུ་མི་སྐྱི་བ	eternal non-birth	gtan du mi skyi ba
གཏན་དུ་མི་འཕོ་བ་ཉེར་གཅིག	never parting closeness	gtan du mi 'pho ba nyer gcig
གཏན་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	living or residing continually	gtan du bzhugs pa
གཏན་དུ་ཟད་པ	eternal exhaustion	gtan du zad pa
གཏན་དུ་ལྷ་སར་སྡོད	always stays in Lhasa	gtan du lha sar sdod
གཏན་དོན	permanent well-being	gtan don
གཏན་བདེ	permanent happiness, everlasting bliss	gtan bde
གཏན་བདེ་བྱང་ཆུབ	the ultimate happiness of enlightenment	gtan bde byang chub
གཏན་བདེན	certain	gtan bden
གཏན་བདེན་རང	certainly	gtan bden rang
གཏན་བདེའི་གོ་འཕང	the level of constant bliss	gtan bde'i go 'phang
གཏན་སྡོད	always stay, residing permanently	gtan sdod
གཏན་སྡོད་སྤོ་འཚོ	nomads w permanent living quarters	gtan sdod spo 'tsho
གཏན་སྡོད་ཕྱི་མི	alien permanent residents	gtan sdod phyi mi
གཏན་སྡོད་བྱེད	always stay, reside permanently	gtan sdod byed
གཏན་སྡོད་དམག	garrison, permanently billeted troops	gtan sdod dmag
གཏན་སྡོད་ཟློས་གར	permanent theater, repertory theater	gtan sdod zlos gar
གཏན་ནས	fully, utterly, entirely, totally etc; constant, permanent, perpetual, everlasting	gtan nas
གཏན་ནས་མ་བྱེད་པ	does not at all do	gtan nas ma byed pa
གཏན་ནས་མ་མྱོང	there never were any	gtan nas ma myong
གཏན་ནས་མེད	utterly none	gtan nas med
གཏན་ནས་མེད་པ	absolutely/ unequivocally nonexistent	gtan nas med pa
གཏན་ནས་ཞི་བ	cease to operate	gtan nas zhi ba
གཏན་གནས	evergreen, everlasting, perpetual	gtan gnas
གཏན་གནས་མི་ནུབ	permanent/ long lasting and not subsiding	gtan gnas mi nub
གཏན་པ	1) lock bolt [for door/ window]; 2) Sngar gyi khrims chas shig	gtan pa
གཏན་པ་རྒྱོབ	bolt/ lock a door/ window	gtan pa rgyob
གཏན་པ་མེད་པ	unstinting	gtan pa med pa
གཏན་པ་མེད་པའི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	unstinting offering great continuous offerings	gtan pa med pa'i mchod sbyin
གཏན་པ་མེད་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ	unstinting offering continuous and extensive gtan pa sre ba med pa'i mchod sbyin drin gsob yong snyam pa'i bsam blo med pa'i mchod sbyin, offering that never craves	gtan pa med pa'i sbyin pa
གཏན་པར་བྱེད་པ	stabilize	gtan par byed pa
གཏན་ཕན	only, alone, absolute, absolutely	gtan phan
གཏན་ཕབ	established instructions	gtan phab
གཏན་ཕུང	which will ruin me permanently	gtan phung
གཏན་ཕེབས	ascertain, establish, transcribe song that puts the view into proper perspective	gtan phebs
གཏན་བུ	sgo gnon te sgo 'phul mi thub pa byed pa'i yo byad	gtan bu
གཏན་བོགས	lo ltar gtan 'jags su sprod len byed pa'i bogs ma	gtan bogs
གཏན་བྲལ	1) completely severed/ w/o/ cut off; 2) thabs + no way to --; 3) impermanent, transitory	gtan bral
གཏན་འབེབས	settled, decided, fixed	gtan 'bebs
གཏན་འབེབས་གྲངས་ཚད	fixed amount	gtan 'bebs grangs tshad
གཏན་འབེབས་བྱེད	settle, decide, resolve, determine, come to a decision, pass [law]	gtan 'bebs byed
གཏན་འབེབས་བྱེད་པ	settle, decide, resolve, determine, come to a decision	gtan 'bebs byed pa
གཏན་འབེབས་རིན་ཐང	fixed value/ price	gtan 'bebs rin thang
གཏན་འབྱུང་བར་མེ	not then exist	gtan 'byung bar me
གཏན་མ	phugs permanent, for a long time	gtan ma
གཏན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	to not exist, never be formed	gtan ma grub pa
གཏན་མིན་པ	not at all	gtan min pa
གཏན་མེད	nothingness, nothing	gtan med
གཏན་མེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	rtags te gsal ba la mi 'jug pa ste, gsal ba de'i mthun phyogs sam mi mthun phyogs gang rung dang, gnyis ka la gtan nas med pa'o	gtan med du 'jug pa
གཏན་མེད་དུ་བཟུང་བ	dismiss as nonexistent	gtan med du bzung ba
གཏན་མེད་པར་འགྱུར	would not exist at all	gtan med par 'gyur
གཏན་ཚིག	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad, logical motivations	gtan tshig
གཏན་ཚིག་ཁུངས་རྡིབ	Semde view that overturns the foundations of logical motivations	gtan tshig khungs rdib
གཏན་ཚིག་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	four great axioms of madhyamaka	gtan tshig chen po bzhi
གཏན་ཚིག་རིག	1 of rig gnas bcu, dialectics	gtan tshig rig
གཏན་ཚིག་རིག་པ	logic	gtan tshig rig pa
གཏན་ཚིགས	reason, logic; axiom; syllogisms 1) proof, evidence. 2) conclusion, deduction, reason, logic, axiom. 3) argument, a standing proposition, logical syllogisms [or arguments]; logical argument, argume...	gtan tshigs
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	where example and meaning gnyis byed las kyi sgo nas mutually ha lam mtshungs kyang, dissimilar reason or, by 1 reason so sor ldog pa, among ldog pa can gyi rgyan	gtan tshigs kyi ldog pa can
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་རིག་གནས	logic. the science of logic / reasoning; the science of logic / reasoning	gtan tshigs kyi rig gnas
གཏན་ཚིགས་མཁར་རུ	a volume measure weighing about 25 to 30 pounds for barley	gtan tshigs mkhar ru
གཏན་ཚིགས་གི་རིག	logic	gtan tshigs gi rig
གཏན་ཚིགས་གི་རིག་གནས	logic	gtan tshigs gi rig gnas
གཏན་ཚིགས་གྲུབ་པ	proven reason	gtan tshigs grub pa
གཏན་ཚིགས་དངོས	an actual valid reason [ggd]	gtan tshigs dngos
གཏན་ཚིགས་ལྔ	five syllogisms / logical axioms according to madhyamaka	gtan tshigs lnga
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	the five great axioms of madhymaka	gtan tshigs chen po lnga
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	Four Great Axioms / Syllogisms of Madhyamaka. 1) The vajra fragments {rdo rje zegs ma}; 2) the production and cessation of the four limits {mu bzhi skye 'gog}; 3) the supreme relativity {rten 'brel...	gtan tshigs chen po bzhi
གཏན་ཚིགས་ལྟར་སྣང	simile of a reason [in which the three modes are not complete, having faullts of being contradictory reason, untrue, or unestablished 'gal ma nges ma grub]	gtan tshigs ltar snang
གཏན་ཚིགས་ལྟར་སྣང་གསུམ	the three fallacious reasons/similes of reasons	gtan tshigs ltar snang gsum
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཐིགས་པ	Hetu-bindu [one of the {tshad ma sde bdun}, 7 treatises on logic by Dharmakirti, deals w the actual # of aspects which necessarily constitutes a valid inferential mark or reason. drop of reasons] r...	gtan tshigs thigs pa
གཏན་ཚིགས་འདྲེན་པ	cite/ give a reason	gtan tshigs 'dren pa
གཏན་ཚིགས་མེད་པར	irrational exposition	gtan tshigs med par
གཏན་ཚིགས་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	argue illogically	gtan tshigs med par smra ba
གཏན་ཚིགས་བཞི	four axioms of mah yoga [4 kinds of realisation {rtogs pa rnam bzhi}: the three purities {dag pa gsum}. the four modes of sameness {nyam nyid tshul bzhi}. and great identity {bdag nyid chen po}	gtan tshigs bzhi
གཏན་ཚིགས་ཡང་དག	true establishing/ valid reason	gtan tshigs yang dag
གཏན་ཚིགས་རིག་པ	science of logic, dialectics, art of reasoning	gtan tshigs rig pa
གཏན་ཚིགས་རིགས་པ	reasoning of grounds	gtan tshigs rigs pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཨིནཕེ༹རེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	obvious objects or their supporting reasons	of inference of non
གཏན་ཚིགས་རིགས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	logic, of the nature of reasoning of grounds of	gtan tshigs rigs pa'i rang bzhin
ཨིནཕེ༹རེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	obvious objects or their supporting reasons	inference of non
གཏན་ཚིགས་ས་བོན	edict's 'char gzhi'am zin bris	gtan tshigs sa bon
གཏན་ཚིགས་གསུམ	the three reasons	gtan tshigs gsum
གཏན་ཞལ	husband and wife	gtan zhal
གཏན་ཞལ་རྣམ་གཉིས	husband and wife, Mr and Mrs. --	gtan zhal rnam gnyis
གཏན་བཞུགས	always stay, residing permanently [h]	gtan bzhugs
གཏན་བཞུགས་བྱེད	always stay, reside permanently [h]	gtan bzhugs byed
གཏན་ཟད	utter exhaustion	gtan zad
གཏན་བཟུང	attain	gtan bzung
གཏན་ཡུལ	homeland	gtan yul
གཏན་ཡུལ་བྱེད	take up abode gtan yongs su mya ngan las mi 'da' ba'i	gtan yul byed
གཏན་བརླག	overthrowing, deposing	gtan brlag
གཏན་བརླག་བྱེད	overthrow, depose	gtan brlag byed
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ	see {gtan la dbab}	gtan la phab
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་དགོས	obliged to conclude that	gtan la phab dgos
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་སྟེ	having settled (it to be . . .)	gtan la phab ste
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པ	ascertained	gtan la phab pa
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པའི་སྡེ	Established set of teachings, teachings in profound doctrines [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} = 12 divisions of the teaching) extensive teachings on dharmas' individual and general charct...	gtan la phab pa'i sde
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པའི་བསྡུ་བ	the Yogachara bhumi Nirnaya Samgraha, one of Asanga's five treatises on the grounds {sa sde lnga}	gtan la phab pa'i bsdu ba
གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པར་བསྟན་པའི་སྡེ	Established set of teachings, teachings in profound doctrines	gtan la phab par bstan pa'i sde
གཏན་ལ་ཕབས	/ 'bebs / dbab pa - (to come to/ reach a) definitive conclusion/ understanding; to codify	gtan la phabs
གཏན་ལ་ཕེབ་པ	be transcribed [about a terma teaching]- transcription of teaching thag bcad de chod pa,...Tshong khrom gyi nyo thang tshang ma nyag srang tshad mas gtan la phebs pa	gtan la pheb pa
གཏན་ལ་ཕེབས	will be established	gtan la phebs
གཏན་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	come to understand, become certain about, to establish certainty	gtan la phebs pa
གཏན་ལ་ཕེབས་ཟིན་པ	transcribed	gtan la phebs zin pa
གཏན་ལ་ཕོབ	resolve, SA gtan la 'bebs pa, establish the knowledge of	gtan la phob
གཏན་ལ་འཕབ	understood, SA gtan la 'bebs pa	gtan la 'phab
གཏན་ལ་འཕེབས	see {gtan la dbab}	gtan la 'phebs
གཏན་ལ་བབས་པ	determine	gtan la babs pa
གཏན་ལ་དབབ	be established [in]	gtan la dbab
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ	/ 'bebs / phabs pa - (to come to/ reach a) definitive conclusion/ understanding; to codify	gtan la dbab pa
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ་བསྡུ་བ	by Asanga yogachara text 1 of the sa sde lnga or rnal 'byor spyod pa'i sa	gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པའི་སྡེ	Established set of teachings, teachings in profound doctrines [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}. = 12 divisions of the teaching]	gtan la dbab pa'i sde
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པར་བསྟན་པ	Syn {gtan la dbab pa'i sde}	gtan la dbab par bstan pa
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པར་བསྟན་པའི་སྡེ	Established set of teachings, teachings in profound doctrines [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}. = 12 divisions of the teaching]	gtan la dbab par bstan pa'i sde
གཏན་ལ་དབབ་བྱ	resolved	gtan la dbab bya
གཏན་ལ་འབབ་པ	to arrive/ come to/ be brought to a definitive conclusion/ understanding	gtan la 'bab pa
གཏན་ལ་འབབས	see {gtan la dbab}	gtan la 'babs
གཏན་ལ་འབབས་པ	to be brought to a definitive conclusion/ understanding	gtan la 'babs pa
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས	resolve conclusively, explained and understood, to ascertain, establish	gtan la 'bebs
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པ	establishment, establish, settle, ascertain, resolve, determine, come to a conclusion, arrive at certainty about, ascertain the real condition, establish, conclude, put in order, understand	gtan la 'bebs pa
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པའི་དཔེ	among dpe'i rgyan, ornament though where dpe don gang yin khyad par 'byed dka', by a true reason gyi nges tshig it is correctly ascertained]	gtan la 'bebs pa'i dpe
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་བྱེད	resolve, determine, settle, decide, come to a decision	gtan la 'bebs byed
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་བྱེད་པ	{gtan la 'bebs pa}	gtan la 'bebs byed pa
གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་ཚུལ	how to establish	gtan la 'bebs tshul
གཏན་ལ་མ་ཕེབ་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	until you have conclusively settled	gtan la ma pheb kyi bar du
གཏན་ལ་མ་ཕེབས	not established	gtan la ma phebs
གཏན་ལེགས	x {rang la rang dbang yod pa'i dus 'dir 'dun ma gtan legs dang gtan nyes kyi so mtshams yin pa} our decision at this juncture, when we have the freedom to choose, marks the turningpoint which will ...	gtan legs
གཏན་ཤིང	door bar	gtan shing
གཏན་སྲིད	permanent domain of Vajradhara, everlasting kingdom, permanent goal	gtan srid
གཏན་སྲིད་ཟིན	accomplish the permanent domain	gtan srid zin
གཏན་སྲིད་ཟིན་པ	to gain/ hold to/ maintain an ongoing/ continuous (state of) authentic being	gtan srid zin pa
གཏན་སྲོལ	theorem	gtan srol
གཏབ་པ	1 of zhing las	gtab pa
གཏབ་ལ་འབེབས་པ	frame of reference	gtab la 'bebs pa
གཏབས	(not in DAS)	gtabs
གཏབས་པ	hang	gtabs pa
གཏམ	1) expression telling, talk, speech, news; 2) Ming grad	gtam
གཏམ་སྐྱེལ	send a message, give orders, communicate orders	gtam skyel
གཏམ་སྐྱེལ་པོ	messenger, post man	gtam skyel po
གཏམ་སྐྱེལ་བ	1) messenger; 2) deliver a message; 3) Nang gtam phyi la shod pa	gtam skyel ba
གཏམ་ཁུངས	historical source, record, document	gtam khungs
གཏམ་ཁུངས་མ	skad cha khungs btsun	gtam khungs ma
གཏམ་འཁྱམས	skad cha khungs med,...Rgyu mtshan 'di yin shod rgyu med pa'i gtam 'khyams la yid ches mi rung	gtam 'khyams
གཏམ་འཁྱར	talk loosely going from 1 thing to another, unfounded/ false story/ rumor/ report, have a rumor/ story going round	gtam 'khyar
གཏམ་གྱི་གླེང་གཞི	skad cha'i 'byung gzhi	gtam gyi gleng gzhi
གཏམ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	gtam gyi don	gtam gyi dngos po
གཏམ་གྱི་ཉེས་པ	erroneous/ mistake talk	gtam gyi nyes pa
གཏམ་གྱི་བདུད་རྩི	meaningful fulfilling talk, talk like amrita	gtam gyi bdud rtsi
གཏམ་གྱི་འབྱུང་གནས	mouth	gtam gyi 'byung gnas
གཏམ་གྱི་གཞི	conversation topic	gtam gyi gzhi
གཏམ་གྱི་ཟློས་གར	theatrical play	gtam gyi zlos gar
གཏམ་གྱི་ཟློས་གར་ཚོགས་པ	drama troupe	gtam gyi zlos gar tshogs pa
གཏམ་གྱོང་པོ	1) khengs dregs kyi skad cha rtsing po,...Nga rgyal gyis rgyud brlams te gtam gyong po sha stag shod,..; 2) Gnya' mi chag pa'i skad cha,...Kho la sdigs stangs ji ltar byas kyang da dung gtam gyong ...	gtam gyong po
གཏམ་གྲགས	fame	gtam grags
གཏམ་གླེང	discussion, conversation	gtam gleng
གཏམ་གླེང་བ	converse, discourse	gtam gleng ba
གཏམ་གླེང་བྱེད	discuss, converse	gtam gleng byed
གཏམ་གླེང་མང་པོ་བྱས་པ	talked a lot	gtam gleng mang po byas pa
གཏམ་གླེང་ཚོགས་འདུ	conference, congress	gtam gleng tshogs 'du
གཏམ་མགྱོགས་པོ	smra lce bde po,...Phru gu de gtam mgyogs por shod thub mkhan zhig red	gtam mgyogs po
གཏམ་འགལ	contradiction	gtam 'gal
གཏམ་དཔེ	...Las don byed sgo gang yod gtam 'go las mjug mtha' 'khyongs byed dgos	gtam dpe
གཏམ་འགྲིག་པ	phan tshun gleng gtam 'dum pa,...Phan tshun rtsod gleng gi gtam 'grig pa'i chod don bzhag song	gtam 'grig pa
གཏམ་རྒྱལ་བ	win a argument/ debate [= kha rgyal ba, rtsod pa thob pa, shags rgyal ba]	gtam rgyal ba
གཏམ་རྒྱུད	story, oral tradition, legend, traditional tales	gtam rgyud
གཏམ་རྒྱུན	sngar gyi shod rgyun	gtam rgyun
གཏམ་སྒྲོས	way of speaking	gtam sgros
གཏམ་བརྒྱུད་མ	[probably equivalent to] gtam rgyud. [mss]	gtam brgyud ma
གཏམ་བསྒྲག་པ	declare, proclaim	gtam bsgrag pa
གཏམ་བསྒྲགས	skad cha bshad pa, yig rigs bklags pa,...Gsar 'gyur nang du gtam bsgrags pa	gtam bsgrags
གཏམ་ངན	spiteful rumours	gtam ngan
གཏམ་ངན་སྐྱེལ་བ	spreading bad news, carrying ill tidings	gtam ngan skyel ba
གཏམ་ངན་ཁྱད་དུ་བསད	cared nothing for people's spiteful talk. gtam ngan dang g.yang sar mchongs pa'i	gtam ngan khyad du bsad
ལས་འདི	this action has ruined my reputation and thrown me into an abyss	las 'di
གཏམ་ངན་པ	bad news	gtam ngan pa
གཏམ་ངན་མི་ཁ	criticism, disapproval, reproach	gtam ngan mi kha
གཏམ་ངོ་ལྐོག་ཅན	inconsistent talk	gtam ngo lkog can
གཏམ་ཅན	crow	gtam can
གཏམ་ཅི་གྲག	1) what talk was heard; 2) all the talk that was heard	gtam ci grag
གཏམ་ཅོལ	meaningless talk, whatever comes out	gtam col
གཏམ་ལྕེབས	gzhan gyi skad cha shod 'phro phrogs te rang gis shod pa,...Gzhan gyis skad cha shod pa'i sgang la gtam lcebs byas nas gros don 'thor rkyen byed	gtam lcebs
གཏམ་ཆ་འདྲི་བ	ask any news	gtam cha 'dri ba
གཏམ་ཆད	1) skad cha'i 'phro skyong ma thub par chad pa,...Thog mar skad cha mang po bshad nas mjug tu gtam chad pa red,..; 2) Rjes kyi byed stangs kha dan,...Phan tshun rogs res bya rgyu'i gtam chad byed pa	gtam chad
གཏམ་འཆལ	baseless rumor/ fabrication, nonsensical talk	gtam 'chal
གཏམ་འཆལ་བྱེད	spread baseless rumor/ fabrications/ lies, nonsensical talk	gtam 'chal byed
གཏམ་འཆལ་ཤོད	spread baseless rumor/ fabrications/ lies, nonsensical talk	gtam 'chal shod
གཏམ་མཇུག་བཅད་པ	1) skad cha'i mjug ma bshad par rang gis mtshams bcad pa; 2) Gzhan gyi gtam mjug shod du ma bcug par mtshams bcad song	gtam mjug bcad pa
གཏམ་འཇམ་པ	speaks gently	gtam 'jam pa
གཏམ་འཇམ་པར་སྨྲ་བ	speak gently	gtam 'jam par smra ba
གཏམ་རྗེས	to follow talks	gtam rjes
གཏམ་རྗོད་ཟློས་གར	modern drama, stage play	gtam rjod zlos gar
གཏམ་བརྗོད	speech, talk	gtam brjod
གཏམ་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་ལེའུ	act	gtam brjod kyi le'u
གཏམ་བརྗོད་ཁྲབ་མཁན	character, heroine gtam brjod khrab mkhan gyi bu'i gtso bo hero	gtam brjod khrab mkhan
གཏམ་བརྗོད་འཁྲབ	put on a play	gtam brjod 'khrab
གཏམ་བརྗོད་ཟློས་གར	theatrical play	gtam brjod zlos gar
གཏམ་བརྗོད་རང་དབང	freedom of speech	gtam brjod rang dbang
གཏམ་ཉོག	meaningless/ useless /subjectless talk	gtam nyog
གཏམ་སྙད་པ	state, inform, give notice, rehearse	gtam snyad pa
གཏམ་སྙན	good news, pleasant/auspicious talk/ conversation/ language	gtam snyan
གཏམ་སྙན་པ	good, joyful news, glad tidings, pleasing conversation	gtam snyan pa
གཏམ་སྙིང་གཏམ	speech	gtam snying gtam
གཏམ་སྟོང	meaningless speech	gtam stong
གཏམ་ཐོན་པ	skad cha shor ba,...Ci 'phros mol 'phros kyi zhor la don gnad che rigs kyi gtam thon pa	gtam thon pa
གཏམ་ཐོས་པ	hearing the news	gtam thos pa
གཏམ་འཐད་པ	spokesman	gtam 'thad pa
གཏམ་དང་གྲགས་པ་འཐོབ་པ	will become a household word	gtam dang grags pa 'thob pa
གཏམ་དང་བྱ་སྤྱོད	words and deeds	gtam dang bya spyod
གཏམ་དུ་གླེང་བ	tell a story, converse, discourse	gtam du gleng ba
གཏམ་དོན	subject of conversation, prestige and wealth	gtam don
གཏམ་དོན་གཉིས་མེད	having neither prestige/ fame or wealth	gtam don gnyis med
གཏམ་དོན་གཉིས་ཡོད	having both prestige/ fame and wealth	gtam don gnyis yod
གཏམ་དོན་འདྲིལ་བ	conversation and its subject/ meaning gcig tu 'dril ba,...Gros bsdur byas pa'i snying po gtam don 'dril ba gal che	gtam don 'dril ba
གཏམ་དྲིས་པ	make inquiry	gtam dris pa
གཏམ་འདོད	vanity, ostentation, liking to hear good things said about 1self	gtam 'dod
གཏམ་འདོད་ཚ་པོ	vain, ostentatious, flashy	gtam 'dod tsha po
གཏམ་འདྲི	skad cha 'dri ba,...Bde 'tshams kyi gnas tshul gtam 'dri byed pa	gtam 'dri
གཏམ་འདྲེ་པ	make conversation, discuss	gtam 'dre pa
གཏམ་འདྲེ་བ	to converse with	gtam 'dre ba
གཏམ་འདྲེས	1) talk not divided up into subjects; 2) [arch] mthun pa'i tshig gis phan tshun smra res byung ba	gtam 'dres
གཏམ་འདྲེས་པ	to make conversation, to discuss	gtam 'dres pa
གཏམ་རྡུགས་པ	talk zad pa,...Sems la sngangs skrag skyes te kha nas gtam rdugs pa	gtam rdugs pa
གཏམ་ལྡིབ	unclear language	gtam ldib
གཏམ་པ	face, fill up, make full, appoint, commission, be security for	gtam pa
གཏམ་པད་མའི་ཚལ་གྱི་ཟློས་གར	rab byung bcu bzhi pas by rdzogs chen dpal sprul 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po snyan ngag gi gtam zhig ste, lha chos dang mthun pa'i gtam pad ma'i tshal gyi zlos gar zhes bya ba brjod bya sngon 'gro'...	gtam pad ma'i tshal gyi zlos gar
གཏམ་པས་རྐུ་བ	rob by speech	gtam pas rku ba
གཏམ་འཕྱར་རྒྱག་གདེང་གསུམ	example of speaking w appropriate softness and harshness	gtam 'phyar rgyag gdeng gsum
གཏམ་བྱས་པ	talked about	gtam byas pa
གཏམ་བྱེད་པ	talk, speak	gtam byed pa
གཏམ་འབྲེལ་ཆགས་པ	talk w/o internal contradiction	gtam 'brel chags pa
གཏམ་མ	a #	gtam ma
གཏམ་མེད་ཁས་ལེན	tacit consent	gtam med khas len
གཏམ་མྱུར་བ	smra lce bde po,...Smra lce bde pos bshad pa'i gtam myur drags pas tshig don ha cang gsal po rang go thub kyi mi 'dug	gtam myur ba
གཏམ་སྨྲ	1) expression telling, talk, speech, news; 2) Ming grad	gtam smra
གཏམ་སྨྲ་བ	to have familiar conversations with	gtam smra ba
གཏམ་རྩུབ	rough/ crude language	gtam rtsub
གཏམ་ཚིག	words, expressions, language	gtam tshig
གཏམ་ཚོགས	collection of messages, rgyal blon dang, bla grva, 'bangs 'khor etc yul mchog dman bar gsum la rang rang gi ngo skal dang 'tsham par spang blang gi bslab bya rnams tshig bcad lhug ci rigs kyis gtam...	gtam tshogs
གཏམ་གཞན་འཕྲོ་བ	skad cha'i rtsa ba las yan lag mched pa,...Zhing las thon skyed kyi gros bsdur byed bzhin du bzo las rgya skyed gtong rgyu'i gtam gzhan 'phro ba	gtam gzhan 'phro ba
གཏམ་གཞི	skad cha'i rtsa ba	gtam gzhi
གཏམ་གཞོན	strong or emphatic speech	gtam gzhon
གཏམ་བཟང	good news/ talk	gtam bzang
གཏམ་བཟང་པོ	good news	gtam bzang po
གཏམ་ཡང་ངེས་མེད	spontaneous words	gtam yang nges med
གཏམ་ཡང་འབྲེལ་མེད	disjointed speech	gtam yang 'brel med
གཏམ་རིང	full length [novel, article etc.]	gtam ring
གཏམ་རླུང་ལ་སྐུར་བ	gzhan zhig brgyud nas skad cha go bar byed pa,...Gcig nas gcig tu brgyud de gtam rlung la skur ba,...Gang byung gis gtam rlung la bskur ba las dngos su bshad pa legs	gtam rlung la skur ba
གཏམ་ལན	[verbal] reply, answer	gtam lan
གཏམ་ལབ་པ	to chat	gtam lab pa
གཏམ་ལབ་མི་ཤེས	{bcom ldan 'das kyi gzi brjid kyis mu stegs rnams gtam lab mi shes zas za mi shes} the brilliance of the Bhagavan was such that the tirthikas could not converse or even remember to eat their food	gtam lab mi shes
གཏམ་ལེགས་པར་བཤད	explaining his problem	gtam legs par bshad
གཏམ་ཤོད	describe it	gtam shod
གཏམ་ཤོབ་ཤོབ་སྨྲ་བ	tell a lie	gtam shob shob smra ba
གཏམ་གཤེར་ཏོ	compared one's speech or what one has said	gtam gsher to
གཏམ་བཤགས་པ	make confession	gtam bshags pa
གཏམ་བཤད	speaking; discourse; talk, chat, conversation	gtam bshad
གཏམ་བཤད་ཀྱི་དབང་ཆ	right of free speech	gtam bshad kyi dbang cha
གཏམ་བཤད་འཕྲོ	talk, speak	gtam bshad 'phro
གཏམ་བཤད་བྱེད་པ	give a talk, make a report	gtam bshad byed pa
གཏམ་བཤེར	1) make a close verbal investigation; 2) Gtam 'gran sdur byed pa	gtam bsher
གཏམ་གསེང་བ	keep information or news secret	gtam gseng ba
གཏམ་གསོང་ཞིག	keep the conversation secret	gtam gsong zhig
གཏམ་བསྲེ་བ	to have conversation with	gtam bsre ba
གཏམ་ལྷུ་འགྲིག་པོ	gtam snga phyi 'brel chags po,...Thog mtha' bar gsum gyi brjod gtam lhu 'grig po byung song	gtam lhu 'grig po
གཏམས	huge number, entirely surrounded by, be filled with	gtams
གཏམས་པ	full, be full, fill up, be born, SA ltams pa, gtam pa	gtams pa
གཏམས་པ་ལེན	take charge of property	gtams pa len
གཏའ	pawn, pledge	gta'
གཏའ་གམ་པ	(A; 1) impaired growth from the time 1 was small, person w no strength; 2) person w debt	gta' gam pa
གཏའ་དངུལ	bail money	gta' dngul
གཏའ་བཅོས	rtsis kyi rim gro'i 'chos thabs shig	gta' bcos
གཏའ་ཉིས་རི་བ	debt gyi dmigs rten rin thang ldab ri ba	gta' nyis ri ba
གཏའ་གཏོར	The captured torma (gta' gtor) is kept until the activity is accomplished after which it is given so the activity is accomplished swiftly and with no delay	gta' gtor
གཏའ་སྡོམ	to bind an entrustment	gta' sdom
གཏའ་མ	pawn, pledge security [for debt]	gta' ma
གཏའ་མ་འདས་པ	bu lon gyi gta' ma kha chad kyi dus las brgal te bun bdag gis za ba	gta' ma 'das pa
གཏའ་མ་ཕྱིར་སྤྲོད	return a pledge/ pawn	gta' ma phyir sprod
གཏའ་མ་བླུ	redeem a pledge/ pawn	gta' ma blu
གཏའ་མ་བླུ་བ	security for a debt	gta' ma blu ba
གཏའ་མའི་རིན་གོང	ransom	gta' ma'i rin gong
གཏའ་མར་འཇུག་པ	pawn, give as a pledge	gta' mar 'jug pa
གཏའ་མར་འཇོག་པ	give as security/ a pledge/ pawn, mortgage something	gta' mar 'jog pa
གཏའ་མར་བཙན་གཟུང་བྱས་པའི་མི	hostage	gta' mar btsan gzung byas pa'i mi
གཏའ་མར་བཞག	gave as security/ a pledge/ pawn, mortgaged something	gta' mar bzhag
གཏའ་མར་བཞག་པ	hypothecate	gta' mar bzhag pa
གཏར	bloodletting	gtar
གཏར་ཀ	drawing bad blood by piercing a bleeding nadi	gtar ka
གཏར་ཀ་རྒྱབ་པ	bleed	gtar ka rgyab pa
གཏར་ཁ	drawing bad blood by piercing a bleeding nadi	gtar kha
གཏར་ཁ་རྒྱག	bleed medically	gtar kha rgyag
གཏར་ཁྲག	blood drawn by medical bleeding	gtar khrag
གཏར་ག	CM: gtar kha dang 'dra. [mss]	gtar ga
གཏར་ག་འདེབས	bleed medically	gtar ga 'debs
གཏར་ག་འདེབས་པ	let out blood from a vein	gtar ga 'debs pa
གཏར་བ	bleed or blister beings in the course of medical treatment	gtar ba
གཏར་དམིགས	nadi bleeding site dmigs, eg from the hairline four fingers mtsog gsang &, from the elbow four fingers na ru thung]	gtar dmigs
གཏར་རྩ	bleeding nadi [rtse chung, snod kha, rtsa bo che, etc 77 in all] 1051	gtar rtsa
གཏར་ཚན་ལེན་པ	ancient Bönpo practice consisting in holding scorching metals or stones in one's hand to demonstrate one's superhuman powers	gtar tshan len pa
གཏར་སྲེག	bleeding and moxibustion	gtar sreg
གཏར་བསྲེག	blood nadi's gtar dmigs steng gtar ba and me btsa'i gsang dmigs steng burn [moxibustion]	gtar bsreg
གཏལ་པོ	ba lang gi lci ba brdzis nas rtsig ldebs dang brag rdo sogs kyi thog leb mor sbyar te dried and used as fuel	gtal po
གཏི་ཁེ	kind of louse	gti khe
གཏི་གཏི	lifted, held up / aloft	gti gti
གཏི་ཐུག	1) small minded, stupid; 2) au tshugs, avaricious, greedy person	gti thug
གཏི་བ	[arch] speaker/ exponent	gti ba
གཏི་མུག	ignorance [not/wrongly realizing the proper/ dharmic way things are]	gti mug
ཅློསེ	mindedness, foggyheadedness, sleepy mindedness, gloom, mental darkness, [one of the three poisons {dug gsum} deeply / intensely dull; {ma rig pa}	close
ཅློསེད	mindedness, foggyheadedness, sleepy mindedness, gloom, mental darkness, [one of the three poisons = {dug gsum} intensely dull	closed
གཏི་མུག་འཁོར་ལོ	ignorance circle [1 pig nose's gab ming; good for gnyan nad, lhog pa'i nad two (met pig]	gti mug 'khor lo
གཏི་མུག་གི་རྟོག་པ་བདུན	the 7 conceptions of ignorance	gti mug gi rtog pa bdun
གཏི་མུག་གི་དུར་ཕག་ནག་པོ	the black charnel pig of ignorance gti mug gi g.yang sa la shes rab kyi lag pas 'dzin pa yin pa - the helping hand of wisdom that pulls one out of the abyss of ignorance	gti mug gi dur phag nag po
གཏི་མུག་གིས་བསླད	corrupted with delusion	gti mug gis bslad
གཏི་མུག་ཅན	ignorant, stupid	gti mug can
གཏི་མུག་ཅན་རྣམས	ignoramuses	gti mug can rnams
གཏི་མུག་གཉིད	torpor of sleep	gti mug gnyid
གཏི་མུག་གཉིད་དུ་ལོག	we sleep in ignorance	gti mug gnyid du log
གཏི་མུག་གཉིས	the two kinds of delusion,	gti mug gnyis
རྨོངས་པ	delusion regarding the cause and effect of actions, de kho na	rmongs pa
ཉིད་ལ་རྨོངས་པ	delusion regarding thatness]	nyid la rmongs pa
གཏི་མུག་བཏང་སྙོམས	'mindless impartiality'	gti mug btang snyoms
གཏི་མུག་བཏང་སྙོམས་པ	stupid indifference	gti mug btang snyoms pa
གཏི་མུག་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from ignorance	gti mug dang bral ba
གཏི་མུག་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra delusion	gti mug rdo rje
གཏི་མུག་པ	ignorance	gti mug pa
གཏི་མུག་བྲལ	entirely free of ignorance	gti mug bral
གཏི་མུག་མུན་པའི་ཁུང་བུ	the dark pit of ignorance	gti mug mun pa'i khung bu
གཏི་མུག་མེད	non-ignorance	gti mug med
གཏི་མུག་མེད་པ	non-deludedness mibp 44, non-delusion	gti mug med pa
གཏི་མུག་མེད་པའི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	the virtuous root of being w/o ignorance	gti mug med pa'i dge ba'i rtsa ba
གཏི་མུག་མེད་པར་གནས་པ	rest in nonignorance	gti mug med par gnas pa
གཏི་མུག་རྨོངས་པའི་ངང་དུ	foolishly, thoughtlessly	gti mug rmongs pa'i ngang du
གཏི་མུག་ཟླ་བ	1st mchu month	gti mug zla ba
གཏི་མུག་རོ་ཉལ	very stupid	gti mug ro nyal
གཏི་མུག་ལས་གྱུར་པའི་རྟོག་པ་བདུན	7 thought states resulting from delusion	gti mug las gyur pa'i rtog pa bdun
གཏི་མུག་ལས་ཡང་དག་པར་འདས་པ	completely transcend ignorance	gti mug las yang dag par 'das pa
གཏི་མུག་ཤས་ཆེ	stupidity	gti mug shas che
གཏི་མུག་ཤས་ཆེ་བ	stolid indifference	gti mug shas che ba
གཏི་མུགས	ignorance	gti mugs
གཏི་ལུག་མེད་པ	non-deludedness	gti lug med pa
གཏི་ལུམ་པ	'dod pas sems myos pa'i mi,...'Dod yon la ha cang gti lum pas ngoms dus med	gti lum pa
གཏིག	fall in drops, SA 'thig pa	gtig
གཏིག་པ	to fall in drops, to drop, to drip; {gtig pa, btigs pa, btig pa, gtigs} trans. v	gtig pa
གཏིགས	fall in drops, SA 'thig pa	gtigs
གཏིགས་པ	a drop	gtigs pa
གཏིགས་པ་རྒྱག	drip, trickle	gtigs pa rgyag
གཏིང	depth; 1) bottom, depths, deepness, underneath. 2) to lay out, spread out. 3) treasure	gting
གཏིང་ཀློ	person from central klo yul S E Tibet	gting klo
གཏིང་སྐྱེས	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gting skyes
གཏིང་གྱོང་ཁ་འཇམ	wild discursive thoughts but soft speech [probably up to something]	gting gyong kha 'jam
གཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi	gting nge 'dzin
གཏིང་ཅན	1) deep minded; 2) deep	gting can
གཏིང་ཆེ	very deep	gting che
གཏིང་ཆེ་བ	very deep	gting che ba
གཏིང་ཉེ་བ	not deep, shallow	gting nye ba
གཏིང་རྟོགས	don gnad kyi mthil lon pa,...Dngos yod kyi gnas lugs gang yin gting rtogs nges shes rnyed pa	gting rtogs
གཏིང་ཐུང་བ	shallow	gting thung ba
གཏིང་མཐའ་མེད་པ	without finite depth or limits	gting mtha' med pa
གཏིང་དུ་འགྲོ	become deeper/ more profound	gting du 'gro
གཏིང་དུ་ནུབ	sink to the bottom	gting du nub
གཏིང་དུ་ནུབ་པ	sink to the bottom 1052	gting du nub pa
གཏིང་དུ་བྱིངས་བ	largely hidden beneath the surface	gting du byings ba
གཏིང་དུ་ཟུག	go into deeply, penetrate	gting du zug
གཏིང་དུ་སིམ	permeate	gting du sim
གཏིང་དུག་ཁ་འཚེར	bad thoughts kha 'dzum	gting dug kha 'tsher
གཏིང་དོན	inner meaning	gting don
གཏིང་དོན་ལེན་པ	don gnad kyi tshod len pa,...Phyogs so so'i bsam tshul gyi gting don len shes byed pa	gting don len pa
གཏིང་དྲོངས་པ	fathomed, penetrated, ascertained	gting drongs pa
གཏིང་མདངས	deep inner glow	gting mdangs
གཏིང་རྡིབ	'og khung du rdib pa,...Mig gting la rdib	gting rdib
གཏིང་རྡོ	1) anchor [stone]; 2) wight stones at the bottom of a fish net	gting rdo
གཏིང་རྡོ་འཐེན་པ	weigh anchor	gting rdo 'then pa
གཏིང་རྡོ་བྱེད་པ	become an anchor	gting rdo byed pa
གཏིང་སྡིབ	hollow, depression	gting sdib
གཏིང་ནད	spite	gting nad
གཏིང་ནད་བྱེད	hold a grudge/ enmity, be hostile	gting nad byed
གཏིང་ནད་ཟིན	hold a grudge/ enmity, be hostile	gting nad zin
གཏིང་ནས	from the depths; x {ngan song gi gting nas mi thar ba'i rgyu byed nges pas} thus you are also quite capable of making sure, that you will never get free from the depths of the lower realms	gting nas
གཏིང་ནས་སྐུལ་བ	arouse from the depth	gting nas skul ba
གཏིང་ནས་འཁྲུགས	stirred up from the depths	gting nas 'khrugs
གཏིང་ནས་འཁྲུངས	{thun mong ma yin pa'i dad pa gting nas 'khrungs} an extraordinary faith arose from the very depth of his being	gting nas 'khrungs
གཏིང་ནས་དགའ་བ	love deeply	gting nas dga' ba
གཏིང་ནས་ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	believe deeply	gting nas yid ches pa
གཏིང་ནོར	wealth needed in the future	gting nor
གཏིང་གནག་ཁ་ཚ	bad thoughts la kha rtsub pa	gting gnag kha tsha
གཏིང་གནག་པོ	person of bad mind	gting gnag po
གཏིང་སྣ	dimension	gting sna
གཏིང་སྣ་གསུམ་པ	3rd dimension	gting sna gsum pa
གཏིང་སྣ་གསུམ་པ་མཐོང་བའི་རི་མོ	3D picture, hologram	gting sna gsum pa mthong ba'i ri mo
གཏིང་དཔག	fathom, measure the bottom	gting dpag
གཏིང་དཔག་དཀའ	deep water	gting dpag dka'
གཏིང་དཔག་དཀའ་བ	hard to fathom/ measure the bottom	gting dpag dka' ba
གཏིང་དཔོག	fathom, take the measure, measure, [fully] penetrate [to the depths]	gting dpog
གཏིང་དཔོག་མེད་པ	fathomless	gting dpog med pa
གཏིང་ཕིགས	realize the depths/ essence get to the heart of the matter	gting phigs
གཏིང་ཕུག་རིང་པོ	CM: 1) zab pa'am sbug thag ring po, profound or deep cavity/hollow. ¦ ri'i khog pa brus pa'i sa sbubs gting phug ring po, "a deep hollow earthen enclosure (sa sbubs) gouged out (brus pa) of the int...	gting phug ring po
གཏིང་ཕྱིན་པ	reach the pith/ essence	gting phyin pa
གཏིང་བ	ft. of {'ding ba}	gting ba
གཏིང་བྱིང	sink to the bottom	gting bying
གཏིང་མ་ཆོད	tshod ma thig pa,...Gnas lugs ngo ma gang yin gting ma chod na gros thag gcod thal byed mi rung	gting ma chod
གཏིང་མི་ཟབ	not deep, shallow	gting mi zab
གཏིང་མི་ཟབ་པ	not deep, shallow	gting mi zab pa
གཏིང་མེད	1) shallow; 2) very deep, bottomless, w no discernible bottom	gting med
གཏིང་མེད་པ	shallow	gting med pa
གཏིང་དམའ་པོ	shallow	gting dma' po
གཏིང་རྨོ	deep plowing	gting rmo
གཏིང་རྩ	gzhi'am phugs,...Pha rol po'i bya spyod bzang ngan gyi gting rtsa rtogs thub kyi red	gting rtsa
གཏིང་ཚད	depth	gting tshad
གཏིང་ཚུག	deeply rooted	gting tshug
གཏིང་ཚུགས	deeply felt	gting tshugs
གཏིང་ཚུགས་བརྟག་དཔྱད	comprehensive/ exhaustive research/ study	gting tshugs brtag dpyad
གཏིང་ཚུགས་བརྟག་དཔྱོད	comprehensive/ exhaustive research/ study	gting tshugs brtag dpyod
གཏིང་ཚུགས་པ	1) lay the foundation [rtsa ba tshugs pa,...Las don rmang gzhi gting tshugs pa zhig byed pa]; 2) compete, reach the end [Go ba gting tshugs pa zhig rnyed thabs byed pa]	gting tshugs pa
གཏིང་ཚོད	guess, estimation	gting tshod
གཏིང་ཚོད་བྱེད	guess, estimate	gting tshod byed
གཏིང་འཚོལ	take the measure, [fully] penetrate [to the depths]	gting 'tshol
གཏིང་གཞལ	fathom, measure the depth	gting gzhal
གཏིང་གཞལ་ནུས	shallow water, fathomable	gting gzhal nus
གཏིང་ཟབ	profound, depth, profundity, deep recesses, deep & profound	gting zab
གཏིང་ཟབ་དུ་འགྲོ	grow/ become deeper/ more profound	gting zab du 'gro
གཏིང་ཟབ་པོ	deep, profound, intensive, very deep, deep	gting zab po
གཏིང་ཟབ་བྱེད	deepen	gting zab byed
གཏིང་ཟབ་མོ	deep, profound, intense	gting zab mo
གཏིང་ཟབ་མོ་བ	deep plowing	gting zab mo ba
གཏིང་འུར	deep roar	gting 'ur
གཏིང་རིང	deep, hard to fathom	gting ring
གཏིང་རིང་ཐང	depth	gting ring thang
གཏིང་རིང་ཐུང	depth {chu 'di gting ring thung dris pa} asked him about the depth of the river	gting ring thung
གཏིང་རིང་པོ	deep; the far depths	gting ring po
གཏིང་རིང་པོ་མེད	shallow	gting ring po med
གཏིང་རིང་བ	deep, deep recesses	gting ring ba
གཏིང་རིང་མེད་པ	shallow	gting ring med pa
གཏིང་སློག	deep plowing/ turning over	gting slog
གཏིང་གསལ	fundamentally luminous, luminous/illuminated to the depths	gting gsal
གཏིང་གསལ་ཆེན་པོ	the great depth of lucidity, the great basic clarity/luminosity	gting gsal chen po
གཏིབ་པ	1) {ppafi: gtib pa, gtibs pa, gtib pa, gtibs} tha dad pa: 2) vi. to gather [for clouds); to be gathering. [mss]	gtib pa
གཏིབས	darkened, SA 'thibs pa	gtibs
གཏིབས་པ	unconscious, mindless, oblivious	gtibs pa
གཏིམ་པ	be dissolved, SA thim pa	gtim pa
གཏིར་མིག	hole for making nails etc.	gtir mig
གཏུ་ལུམ	intoxication, drunkenness	gtu lum
གཏུ་ལུམ་འགྱུར	get drunk	gtu lum 'gyur
གཏུ་ལུམ་ཆགས	get drunk	gtu lum chags
གཏུ་ལུམ་པ	a drunk	gtu lum pa
གཏུག	to meet, reach, touch, join	gtug
གཏུག་ཏུ	{rgyal po'i drung du gtug tu song} decided to bring him before the king to decide the matter by law	gtug tu
གཏུག་པ	{gtug pa, gtugs pa, gtug pa, gtugs} trans. v.; to reach/ arrive at/ come to (a decision/ conclusion) to reach, to touch	gtug pa
གཏུག་འབྲེལ	contact	gtug 'brel
གཏུག་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	establish contact	gtug 'brel byed
གཏུག་སྦྱངས	khrims gtugs kyis true and false sbyangs bsher byed pa	gtug sbyangs
གཏུག་སྦྱངས་པ	supplicate, pray	gtug sbyangs pa
གཏུག་མི	1) khrims la gtug mkhan; 2) Phan tshun gtug mkhan	gtug mi
གཏུག་ལག་ཁང	monastery, vihara	gtug lag khang
གཏུག་བཤེར	lawsuit, charge, prosecution	gtug bsher
གཏུག་བཤེར་གཏོང	sue, charge, prosecute	gtug bsher gtong
གཏུགས	gtug pa!	gtugs
གཏུགས་གྱུར	become ended	gtugs gyur
གཏུགས་པ	{gtugs pa, gtugs pa, gtugs pa} intr. v.; pf. of {gtug pa}	gtugs pa
གཏུང་བྱེད	water	gtung byed
གཏུད	(not in DAS)	gtud
གཏུན	1) pestle; 2) mortar [less common]	gtun
གཏུན་ཁུང	stone mortar	gtun khung
གཏུན་གྱིས་རྡུང་བ	pound with a pestle	gtun gyis rdung ba
གཏུན་རྡུང	pound w pestle	gtun rdung
གཏུན་རྡོ	stone pestle	gtun rdo
གཏུན་པོ	mortar	gtun po
གཏུན་སྤྱད་པ	to use improperly	gtun spyad pa
གཏུན་བུ	a pestle/ a door-knocker	gtun bu
གཏུན་བུས་བརྡུང	to pound with a pestle	gtun bus brdung
གཏུན་འོས	mallet, knocker	gtun 'os
གཏུན་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	use for own profit	gtun la spyod pa
གཏུན་ཤིང	rice etc beating stick/ pestle, la phug	gtun shing
གཏུན་ཤིང་ཅན	evil spirit	gtun shing can
གཏུབ	cut up, cut in pieces, SA 'thub pa	gtub
གཏུབ་གྲི	lever knife, grass cutter	gtub gri
གཏུབ་སྟེགས	cutting machine	gtub stegs
གཏུབ་པ	cut, cut to pieces, cut up, chop, mince, be able, clip, hack, maim, sever, SA 'thub pa	gtub pa
གཏུབ་སྤྱད	implement for cutting up meat etc	gtub spyad
གཏུབ་བྱས	to chop, mince	gtub byas
གཏུབ་བྱེད	cut	gtub byed
གཏུབ་གཞོག	cutting	gtub gzhog
གཏུབ་གཞོག་འཁོར་སྟེགས	cutting machine/ tool	gtub gzhog 'khor stegs
གཏུབ་གཞོག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cutting machine	gtub gzhog 'phrul 'khor
གཏུབ་བཞིན་པ	cutting	gtub bzhin pa
གཏུབས	gtub pa! [p gtub pa] cut up [!], cut into pieces[!]	gtubs
གཏུབས་པ	cut away; pf. of {gtub pa}	gtubs pa
གཏུབས་ཤ	meat cut in pieces	gtubs sha
གཏུམ	wrath	gtum
གཏུམ་རྔམ	terrifying, awesomely fierce	gtum rngam
གཏུམ་རྔམས	awesome wrath	gtum rngams
གཏུམ་རྔམས་ཁྲོ་བ	awesome wrath	gtum rngams khro ba
གཏུམ་ཅན	cruel, fierce	gtum can
གཏུམ་དྲག	fierce, savage, violent	gtum drag
གཏུམ་ལྡན	cruel, fierce	gtum ldan
གཏུམ་པ	1) (Tha dad pa) btums pa, gtum pa, thums,, covered/ wrapped Dngul thum bur thums!; 2) fierce ferocity, cruelness, rage, violence furious, wrath, violence [great anger and power]	gtum pa
གཏུམ་པ་དོམ	the bears of ferocity	gtum pa dom
གཏུམ་པའི་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག	roar furiously	gtum pa'i sgra sgrog
གཏུམ་པའི་ཅ་ལག	enclosure	gtum pa'i ca lag
གཏུམ་པའི་འོད	sun	gtum pa'i 'od
གཏུམ་པོ	fierce; ferocity	gtum po
གཏུམ་པོ་ཆེ	supremely fierce; ferocity	gtum po che
གཏུམ་པོ་རྗེ	a fierce bon deity	gtum po rje
གཏུམ་པོ་དྲེགས་པ་ཀུན་འདུལ	Wrathful Subduer of all Powerful Spirits". A terma discovered within rock by Rigdzin Rölpey Dorje in the 17th century. It deals primarily with Vajrapani, and parts of it are found in various sectio...	gtum po dregs pa kun 'dul
གཏུམ་པོ་ནག་པོ	black species of aconite or wolf's bane	gtum po nag po
གཏུམ་པོ་འབར	arising of warmth in meditation gtum po zhal gsum phyag drug pa wrathful deities like protectors	gtum po 'bar
གཏུམ་པོ་རབ་སྣང	in the Buddha's time in India ka tya rgyal po, who was very fierce but finally tamed by the Buddha	gtum po rab snang
གཏུམ་པོ་ལས་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Ocean of Ferocious Activity	gtum po las rgya mtsho'i rgyud
གཏུམ་པོའི་འོད	fierce light, sun	gtum po'i 'od
གཏུམ་སྤྱོད	wrathful activity, brutal/ savage behavior	gtum spyod
གཏུམ་བ	fold	gtum ba
གཏུམ་མ	epithet of goddess durga	gtum ma
གཏུམ་མེ་འབར་འཛག	blazing and dripping of gtum mo [visualization: a thung blazes at the navel causing ham in head to melt and drip] blazing fierce one, blazing w tummo	gtum me 'bar 'dzag
གཏུམ་མོ	1) wrathful/ fierce female; 2) a nadi; 3) the goddess Uma; 4) the fire/practice of tummo chandali, fierce, fiery	gtum mo
གཏུམ་མོ་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི་ལྡན	fierce one having four wheels	gtum mo 'khor lo bzhi ldan
གཏུམ་མོ་འབར་འཛག	the blazing and dripping through tummo	gtum mo 'bar 'dzag
གཏུམ་མོ་མ་མ	dpal ldan lha mo, fierce goddess	gtum mo ma ma
གཏུམ་མོ་མེའི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཞི	the four characteristics of tummo fire	gtum mo me'i mtshan nyid bzhi
གཏུམ་མོའི་ཆ་ཤས	stick, club	gtum mo'i cha shas
གཏུམ་མོའི་བདེ་དྲོད	the bliss-warmth of tummo	gtum mo'i bde drod
གཏུམ་མོའི་བདེ་དྲོད་འབར	lit the blissful fire of tummo	gtum mo'i bde drod 'bar
གཏུམ་མོའི་མེ	candali root dharma of completion stage, combining the piths of nadi prana and bindu rtsa rlung thig le gnad du bsnun pas from the fierce action of aa thung at the navel blazing w blissful heat, im...	gtum mo'i me
གཏུམ་མོའི་མེ་དམིགས	visualize the fire of tummo	gtum mo'i me dmigs
གཏུམ་ཞིང་རྒོད་པ	obstinate and wild	gtum zhing rgod pa
གཏུམ་རས	wrapper	gtum ras
གཏུམ་ཤོག	wrapper	gtum shog
གཏུམ་སྲས	a female bon deity	gtum sras
གཏུམས	wrapped up	gtums
གཏུམས་པ	[p gtum pa]	gtums pa
གཏུར་བ	rus pa'i thur ma gtur ba - wearing bone hairpins	gtur ba
གཏུར་བུ	buddhist monk's religious wrapper, bag, sack, wallet	gtur bu
གཏུལ	f. of {'dul}	gtul
གཏུལ་བ	(tha dad pa,, 1) emit smoke dud pa gtong ba &, grind, pulverize; 2) Phye ma'i rigs cung zad re dngos	gtul ba
གཏེ་པ	pawn, pledge, bail	gte pa
གཏེ་པོ	1) chief criminal/ conspirator, ringleader; 2) short person; 3) [arch] 'go pa, rje bo	gte po
གཏེ་དཔོན	byed gte, gtso bdag	gte dpon
གཏེ་བ	pawn, pledge, security [for a debt]	gte ba
གཏེ་འབབ	bun gte'i 'bab yong	gte 'bab
གཏེ་མ	pawn, pledge, bail, present	gte ma
གཏེག་ན་ཡངས་པ	when weighed it is found light, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	gteg na yangs pa
གཏེང་པ	debt sprad nas gteng pa tshur len	gteng pa
གཏེད	tear to pieces [usually {btad}?]	gted
གཏེམ	to press	gtem
གཏེམས	(not in DAS), to press	gtems
གཏེམས་པ	SA stems pa, to control, to press	gtems pa
གཏེའུ	gta' ma	gte'u
གཏེར་ཀ	treasure-trove	gter ka
གཏེར་ཀ་ཕྱེ་བ	to reveal the treasure	gter ka phye ba
གཏེར་སྐོར	treasure cycle	gter skor
གཏེར་སྐྱོང	treasure guardian	gter skyong
གཏེར་ཁ	mineral deposits, mine, terma, treasure [chest], treasury, concealed books/ treasures, mine, [place w] mineral deposits	gter kha
གཏེར་ཁ་གོང་མ	early dharma treasure	gter kha gong ma
གཏེར་ཁ་གོང་འོག	Upper and Lower treasures, by Nyang ral Nyi ma 'od zer (12th century) and Guru Chos kyi dbang phyug (13th century)	gter kha gong 'og
གཏེར་ཁ་འདོན	mine mineral deposits	gter kha 'don
གཏེར་ཁ་འབབ	to reveal a treasure	gter kha 'bab
གཏེར་ཁ་འཚོལ་ཞིབ	prospect/ survey for minerals	gter kha 'tshol zhib
གཏེར་ཁ་འོག་མ	later dharma treasure	gter kha 'og ma
གཏེར་ཁའི་ཆས་རིམ	layers of minerals/ a mine 1055	gter kha'i chas rim
གཏེར་ཁའི་སྣེ	outcrop of minerals/ ore	gter kha'i sne
གཏེར་ཁའི་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	mining equipment	gter kha'i 'phrul chas
གཏེར་ཁའི་བཟོ་པོ	miner	gter kha'i bzo po
གཏེར་ཁུང	ore deposit	gter khung
གཏེར་ཁུངས	ore deposit	gter khungs
གཏེར་ཁུལ	place/ region w termas/ treasures/ mineral deposits, mine, mining district	gter khul
གཏེར་ཁུལ་འགོ་པ	mine foreman	gter khul 'go pa
གཏེར་ཁྲོན	mine shaft	gter khron
གཏེར་གྱི་ཁ་བྱང	index of treasures	gter gyi kha byang
གཏེར་གྱི་ཐོན་རྫས	minerals, mineral products	gter gyi thon rdzas
གཏེར་གྱི་བདག	SA rnam thos sras	gter gyi bdag
གཏེར་གྱི་བུམ་པ	vase of bounty, vase of treasure	gter gyi bum pa
གཏེར་གྲུམ	meditative realization of concealed treasure	gter grum
གཏེར་དགུ	treasures	gter dgu
གཏེར་སྒོ	a ter discovering door; the place of concealment of a terma	gter sgo
གཏེར་སྒོ་ཕྱེ	x {ngag 'khyal gyi gter sgo phye} your speech lets loose a rich store of gossip	gter sgo phye
གཏེར་སྒོ་འབྱེད་པ	discover termas	gter sgo 'byed pa
གཏེར་སྒྲུབ	preparatory practice of terma, effectuation of the ter	gter sgrub
གཏེར་སྒྲོམ	treasure bo	gter sgrom
གཏེར་བརྒྱའི་མཚན་སྡོམ་གསོལ་འདེབས	by	gter brgya'i mtshan sdom gsol 'debs
གཏེར་བརྒྱུད	Treasure lineages. The transmission of teachings, hidden as treasures, to be revealed in the future to destined students by a tertön, treasure-revealer	gter brgyud
གཏེར་དངོས	ore, mine, deposit, mineral	gter dngos
གཏེར་དངོས་ཀྱི་སྣུམ	petroleum	gter dngos kyi snum
གཏེར་ཆེན	1) mi mngon pa'i gnas nas chos 'don mkhan gter ston chen po,..; 2) Gter kha chen p.(3 a #	gter chen
ཐར་གསོལ་འདེབས	by Minling Lochen Dharma Shri gter chen gong ma'i khrungs rabs rnam	thar gsol 'debs
གཏེར་ཆེན་འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Syn {rig 'dzin gter bdag gling pa}	gter chen 'gyur med rdo rje
གཏེར་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Great Tertön Dharma King	gter chen chos kyi rgyal po
གཏེར་ཆེན་མཆོག་གྱུར་གླིང་པ	Terchen Chokgyur Lingpa 1829-1870. The great treasure revealer Chokgyur Lingpa. See Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche's The Life and Teaching of Chokgyur Lingpa, Rangjung Yeshe Publications	gter chen mchog gyur gling pa
གཏེར་ཆེན་མཆོག་གླིང	Terchen Chokgyur Lingpa	gter chen mchog gling
གཏེར་ཆེན་རྗེ	lord great terton	gter chen rje
གཏེར་ཆེན་ཉང་རལ	the great Terton {nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer}	gter chen nyang ral
གཏེར་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང་པ	the great tertön Dorje Lingpa [1346-1405]	gter chen rdo rje gling pa
གཏེར་ཆེན་པོའི་སྤྲིན་ཕུང	heaps of clouds of great treasure	gter chen po'i sprin phung
གཏེར་ཆེན་པོའི་བུམ	wishing-pot, 1 of 8 auspicious symbols, inexhaustible treasure vase (symbol of the innumerable qualities of a buddha's body)	gter chen po'i bum
གཏེར་ཆེན་པོའི་བུམ་པ	the vase of great treasure [wishing auspicious treasure vase, 1 of the 8 auspicious signs bkra shis rtags brgyad, symbolizing inexhaustible precious things]	gter chen po'i bum pa
གཏེར་ཆེན་པོའི་མཛོད	the repository of great treasure	gter chen po'i mdzod
གཏེར་ཆེན་བླ་མ	great master and treasure revealer	gter chen bla ma
གཏེར་ཆེན་མི་ཟད་པ་བཞི	Four Inexhaustible Great Treasures. The unbroken lineage of the Three Precious Jewels, the immeasurable great realization of the doctrine, the treasure which brings delight to sentient beings, and ...	gter chen mi zad pa bzhi
གཏེར་ཆེན་ཤེས་རབ་འོད་ཟེར	Terchen Sherab Özer: 1516- Prajna Rasmi, Trangpo Tertön gter chen sangs rgyas gling pa'i bla ma	gter chen shes rab 'od zer
གཏེར་ཆེན་གསུམ	Three Great Tertöns. Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, Jamgön Kongtrül and Chokgyur Lingpa	gter chen gsum
གཏེར་ཆེན་ཧུམ་ནག་འགྲོ་འདུལ	Hum Nag Drodül, another name for Tukchog Dorje	gter chen hum nag 'gro 'dul
གཏེར་ཆོས	the Doctrine of the concealed treasures, terma teaching	gter chos
གཏེར་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like a treasure [among the sems bskyed nyer gnyis, in the 1st bhumi having the paramita of generosity sbyin pa'i phar phyin arousing bodhicitta: by chos dang zang zing gi longs sp...	gter lta bu'i sems bskyed
གཏེར་སྟོན	treasure-finder, tertön, treasure revealer / discoverer; Treasurediscoverer, treasure-masters. teacher of 1056 treasures, tertön, treasure revealer / discoverer of concealed books / teachings. Dhar...	gter ston
གཏེར་སྟོན་གོང་འོག་གཉིས	Nyang Ral Nyima Özer and Guru Chöwang	gter ston gong 'og gnyis
གཏེར་སྟོན་གླིང་པ་དགུ	The 9 lingpa tertons	gter ston gling pa dgu
གཏེར་སྟོན་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྔ	Five Tertön Kings,	gter ston rgyal po lnga
Fཨིབེ༹་ཀིང	Like Tertöns. One list of the Five Tertön Kings contains Nyang Ral Nyima Özer (1124-1192), Guru Chökyi Wangchuk (1212-1270), Dorje Lingpa (1346-1405), Pema Lingpa (1445/501521), and (Padma Ösel) Do...	Five King
ཊྲིསོང་ཌེཨུཙེན་ཝཧོ་ཝེརེ་སུཅཅེསསིབེ༹ལཡ་ཎྱང	ral Nyima Özer, Guru Chöwang, Dorje Lingpa, Orgyen Pema Lingpa, and Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	Trisong Deutsen who were successively Nyang
གཏེར་སྟོན་བརྒྱ་རྩ	the one hundred tertöns	gter ston brgya rtsa
གཏེར་སྟོན་བརྒྱ་རྩའི་རྣམ་ཐར	written by {'jam mgon kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas}; in [RT] Vol 1 gter ston brgya rtsa'i rnam thar don bsdus	gter ston brgya rtsa'i rnam thar
གཏེར་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ	Great treasure revealer	gter ston chen po
གཏེར་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	Three great tertöns are Nyi ma 'od zer, chos kyi dbang phyug, and Rig 'dzin rgod ldem 'phru can. Nyang ral Nyi ma 'od zer (12th century) and Guru Chos kyi dbang phyug (13th century) are known as th...	gter ston chen po gsum
གཏེར་སྟོན་མཆོག་གྱུར་གླིང་པ	(18291870)	gter ston mchog gyur gling pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་དྲི་མེད་གླིང་པ	1700-1775/6 Drimey Lingpa, Tertön, otherwise known as Tekchen Lingpa	gter ston dri med gling pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་བདུད་འཇོམས་གླིང་པ	(b. 1835)	gter ston bdud 'joms gling pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་བདུད་འདུལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	1615-72 Düdül Dorje, Tertön	gter ston bdud 'dul rdo rje
གཏེར་སྟོན་བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	terton Dechen Gyalpo	gter ston bde chen rgyal po
གཏེར་སྟོན་བདེ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Dechen Dorje, tertön, another name of Gampo Orgyen Drodül Lingpa	gter ston bde chen rdo rje
གཏེར་སྟོན་རྣམ་ཐར་འཕྲོད་འཐུད	by Yung Gön Dorje	gter ston rnam thar 'phrod 'thud
གཏེར་སྟོན་དབང་པོའི་སྡེ	Syn {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang po sde. Syn {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang po sde}	gter ston dbang po'i sde
གཏེར་སྟོན་འབྲུག་སྒྲ་རྡོ་རྗེ	author of stobs chen bdud dpung gzhom pa'i gsang sngags	gter ston 'brug sgra rdo rje
གཏེར་སྟོན་མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	Tertön Mingyur Dorje: 1645-1667	gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje
གཏེར་སྟོན་བཟང་པོ་གྲགས་པ	the terton {mang lam ri khrod pa bzang po grags pa}	gter ston bzang po grags pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་རིན་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	1295-1375 Rinchen Lingpa, Tertön	gter ston rin chen gling pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious terton	gter ston rin po che
གཏེར་སྟོན་ས་ལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	18-19th cent. Sala Rinpoche, Tertön, a master from Neuring in central Tibet, 232, 243	gter ston sa la rin po che
གཏེར་སྟོན་སངས་རྒྱས་གླིང་པ	1340-1396	gter ston sangs rgyas gling pa
གཏེར་སྟོན་བསོད་རྒྱལ	1856-1926	gter ston bsod rgyal
གཏེར་སྟོན་བསོད་ནམས་སྙན་གྲགས	1819th cent. - Tertön Sönam Nyendrak See Sönam Nyendrak	gter ston bsod nams snyan grags
གཏེར་སྟོན་ལྷ་བཙུན་སྔོན་མོ	Lhatsün Ngönmo, (lha dbang rgya mtsho blo gros). Revealed the terma of Liberating History of the Great Stupa Jarung Khashor	gter ston lha btsun sngon mo
གཏེར་སྟོན་ཨོ་རྒྱན་གླིང་པ	b. 1323	gter ston o rgyan gling pa
གཏེར་བལྟ་ཤེས་པ	one who knows where treasures can be found	gter blta shes pa
གཏེར་དང་འདྲ་བ	adj like a treasure	gter dang 'dra ba
གཏེར་དུ་སྦས	hide termas	gter du sbas
གཏེར་དུ་སྦས་པ	concealed as a treasure, hid as terma	gter du sbas pa
གཏེར་དུ་སྦེད་པ	conceal as a treasure	gter du sbed pa
གཏེར་དོང	mine shaft	gter dong
གཏེར་གདག	a guardian deity of a treasure/ terma	gter gdag
གཏེར་བདག	master of hidden treasure teachings	gter bdag
གཏེར་བདག་གླིང་པ	brother of Minling Lochen, [1646 - 1714]. tertön 1646 1714, founder of smin grol gling	gter bdag gling pa
གཏེར་བདག་གླིང་པ་འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	the tradition of smin grol gling	gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje
གཏེར་འདོན	mining	gter 'don
གཏེར་འདོན་སྒྲིག་ཆས	mining equipment	gter 'don sgrig chas
གཏེར་འདོན་བྱེད	do mining	gter 'don byed
གཏེར་འདོན་བྱེད་སྒྲིག་ཆས	mining equipment	gter 'don byed sgrig chas
གཏེར་རྡོ	mine ??, ore [deposit]	gter rdo
གཏེར་རྡོ་སྙིགས་མ	slag	gter rdo snyigs ma
གཏེར་རྡོ་འདོན་བྱེད་སྒྲིག་ཆས	mining equipment 1057	gter rdo 'don byed sgrig chas
གཏེར་རྡོའི་སྒྲ་སྡུད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	crystal radio receiver	gter rdo'i sgra sdud 'phrul 'khor
གཏེར་ལྡན་ཆུ་མིག	mineral springs	gter ldan chu mig
གཏེར་ནས་གདན་དྲངས་པ	revealed from terma	gter nas gdan drangs pa
གཏེར་གནས	1) place a mine is; 2) treasury; 3) place a terma [is concealed]	gter gnas
གཏེར་དཔེ	terma scripts	gter dpe
གཏེར་དཔྱད	prospecting	gter dpyad
གཏེར་དཔྱོད	prospecting	gter dpyod
གཏེར་དཔྱོད་བྱེད	prospect	gter dpyod byed
གཏེར་ཕུར	kila dagger from a terma	gter phur
གཏེར་ཕྲན	Minor Tertön, minor revealer of termas; minor tertön; a minor terma treasure	gter phran
གཏེར་བ	to cast away	gter ba
གཏེར་བུམ	{gter gyi bum pa} vase of treasure	gter bum
གཏེར་བྱང	treasure colophon [at the end of a text]) list; treasure colophon, list	gter byang
གཏེར་བྱེ	ore [bearing sands]	gter bye
གཏེར་བྱོན	. . . gi gter byon - hidden treasure teaching revealed/ (re)discovered by . . .	gter byon
གཏེར་འབྱིན	treasure revealer; the discovery of the terma	gter 'byin
གཏེར་འབྱིན་པ	to bring forth/ reveal hidden treasures	gter 'byin pa
གཏེར་འབྱུང	history of the termas, treasury; history of the revelation of a terma; terma narration; history of the revelation	gter 'byung
གཏེར་འབྱུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	Narration of the Precious Revelation of the Terma Treasures by Longchen Rabjam. The historical background for the Khandro Nyingtig. 100 pages. Vol. OM of the mkha' 'gro yang tig. In this work the S...	gter 'byung rin po che'i lo rgyus
གཏེར་འབྱུང་ལོ་རྒྱུས	the history of the revelation of a terma treasure	gter 'byung lo rgyus
གཏེར་སྦུག	treasure-safe	gter sbug
གཏེར་མ	Terma, Hidden Treasure; hidden treasure (teaching); [concealed and rediscovered] treasure, terma; [concealed and rediscovered] treasure, hidden teachings, terma, teachings which have been concealed...	gter ma
གཏེར་མ་ཕུར་པ	terma phurpa	gter ma phur pa
གཏེར་མྱུག	outcrop of minerals/ ore	gter myug
གཏེར་ཚག	{gter tsheg}	gter tshag
གཏེར་ཚབ	substitute for terma	gter tshab
གཏེར་ཚེག	terma tshig %	gter tsheg
གཏེར་ཚེགས	terma sign with two circles separated by a horizontal line, terma sign with 2 dots one on top of the other	gter tshegs
གཏེར་འཚོལ	prospecting	gter 'tshol
གཏེར་འཚོལ་སྒྲིག་ཆས	prospecting equipment	gter 'tshol sgrig chas
གཏེར་འཚོལ་ཉེར་སྤྱོད	prospecting equipment	gter 'tshol nyer spyod
གཏེར་འཚོལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	prospecting machines/ instruments/ equipment	gter 'tshol 'phrul 'khor
གཏེར་འཚོལ་བྱེད	prospect	gter 'tshol byed
གཏེར་ཛར	punctuation mark indicating a gter ma	gter dzar
གཏེར་མཛོད	1) treasury; 2) Rin chen gter mdzod [collection of many sadhanas]	gter mdzod
གཏེར་མཛོད་སྟོངས	the treasury has been emptied	gter mdzod stongs
གཏེར་རྫས	terma object	gter rdzas
གཏེར་རྫུན	fake terma	gter rdzun
གཏེར་ཞབས་བསྡམས་པ	concluded the concealment of the termas	gter zhabs bsdams pa
གཏེར་གཞི	nidhipati and bhumipati, {gter bdag} treasure lord, {gzhi bdag} locality lord]	gter gzhi
གཏེར་གཞུང	the terma root text; the basic text, treasure root text; the treasure root text	gter gzhung
བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Terma root text Sheldam Nyingjang Yishin Norbu. See Sheldam Nyingjang Yishin Norbu	bzhin nor bu
གཏེར་བཞིན	like a treasure	gter bzhin
གཏེར་བཟོ	mine worker	gter bzo
གཏེར་ཡིག	treasure letters	gter yig
གཏེར་རི	mineral deposits, mine	gter ri
གཏེར་རི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	mining machinery	gter ri 'phrul 'khor
གཏེར་རིགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	mineralogy	gter rigs kyi rig pa
གཏེར་རིགས་ལུས་རྫས	mineral fertilizer	gter rigs lus rdzas
གཏེར་ལས	mining industry	gter las
གཏེར་ལས་བཟོ་པོ	mine worker	gter las bzo po
གཏེར་ལུང	prophetic terma text	gter lung
གཏེར་ལེན་པ	discover termas	gter len pa
གཏེར་སྲས་མཆོག་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Tersey Choktrül Rinpoche. A great lama and brother of Samten Gyatso	gter sras mchog sprul rin po che
གཏེར་སྲས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Tersey Rinpoche, Precious Son of the Tertön	gter sras rin po che
གཏེར་སྲུང	terma/ treasure guardian/ protector	gter srung
གཏེར་སྲུང་གཏོར་འབུལ	torma offering to the guardians of the terma 1058	gter srung gtor 'bul
གཏེར་སྲུང་གསོལ་མཆོད	oblation offering to the terma guardian	gter srung gsol mchod
གཏེར་གསར	the New treasures, newly discovered termas	gter gsar
གཏེར་གསར་དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་ཤིང	Wishfulfilling Tree	gter gsar dpag bsam ljon shing
གཏེར་བསྲུང	the guardian deity of the terma, the treasure guardian	gter bsrung
གཏེར་བསྲུང་སྦ་བ	to keep concealed (disease, learning, treasures)	gter bsrung sba ba
གཏོ	{gtog pa} to pluck off, gather, crop, tear out; ransom offerings	gto
གཏོ་དཀར་པོ	white rites	gto dkar po
གཏོ་སྐྱེལ	gto bcos kyi glud rdzongs gnod phyogs gang yin la skyel ba	gto skyel
གཏོ་ཁྲ་བོ	multicolored rites	gto khra bo
གཏོ་དགུ	rites, where dgu simply indicates the plural	gto dgu
གཏོ་མགོ་གསུམ	black rite addressed to sa bdag, klu and gnyan	gto mgo gsum
གཏོ་རྒྱལ་ཡེ་མཁྱེན	supreme bony deity resembling mar me mdzad gto sgrom 'bum tig gi dgongs don lag len khyer bder bkod pa'i gto yi cho ga bkra	gto rgyal ye mkhyen
ཤིས་འཇོ	an explanation of the method for performing the gto rites followed in Tibet; by {'jam mgon 'ju mi pham rgya mtsho} (1846-1912)	shis 'jo
གཏོ་བཅོས	magic ceremony for the purpose of averting misfortune	gto bcos
གཏོ་བཅོས་ཚ་པོ	bstan bshig tsha po,...Mi de su dang mi 'dra ba'i gto bcos tsha po zhig yod	gto bcos tsha po
གཏོ་ཆོག	healing ritual, magical rites for benefit	gto chog
གཏོ་གཉན་གཏད་བཅོས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon that eliminates curses by means of powerful rites	gto gnyan gtad bcos kyi bon
གཏོ་ནག་པོ	black rites	gto nag po
གཏོ་དཔྱད	way of cure using healing rites	gto dpyad
གཏོ་བུ་དོད་དེ	taking compassion or having mercy upon	gto bu dod de
གཏོ་བུ་བུམ་སངས	disciple of shen rab, 1 of sku sras brgyad	gto bu bum sangs
གཏོ་འབུམ	a collection of various gto and mdos rituals [from the famed rediscovered teachings of the past]	gto 'bum
གཏོ་འབོལ་བ	exorcise	gto 'bol ba
གཏོ་དམར་པོ	red rites	gto dmar po
གཏོ་ཟོར	particular type of gtor ma that is hurled against enemies	gto zor
གཏོ་ཡས	exorcism, ritual to avert misfortune; {gto 'bol}	gto yas
གཏོག	p. of {btogs} to pick, to pluck	gtog
གཏོག་པ	grab, pluck, gather, tear out, SA se gol, 'thog pa	gtog pa
གཏོགས་འདོད	1) deity dbang phyug chen po; 2) [arch] desire to take the wealth of another	gtogs 'dod
གཏོགས་འདོད་པ	love, like, wish	gtogs 'dod pa
གཏོགས་འདོད་སྲེ་གདོང	weasel-headed Lobha, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	gtogs 'dod sre gdong
གཏོགས་པ་མ་ཡིན	not included, unincluded	gtogs pa ma yin
གཏོང	let go, pass by; 1) to start, set in motion, to paddle, row, to send out, issue, transmit, dispatch. 2) to let go, dismiss, set loose, send 3) [noun +] verbalizes nominal meaning 4) to make	gtong
གཏོང་མཁན	consignor	gtong mkhan
གཏོང་དགོས་མཆོད་ཆས	articles necessary for ritual	gtong dgos mchod chas
གཏོང་འགུག་བྱེད་པ	to change, move, transfer	gtong 'gug byed pa
གཏོང་རྒྱུ	cause for abandoning	gtong rgyu
གཏོང་རྒྱུ་མ་བྱུང་བ	no reason why it should be considered abandoned	gtong rgyu ma byung ba
གཏོང་སྒོ	1) expenditures; 2) Gtong yul nges pa can la 'char can zang zing gi rgyun gtong ba'i byed sgo [Sngar dge bshes kyi ming btags byed ched du nges par gtong sgo rgya chen po zhig gtong dgos pa]	gtong sgo
གཏོང་སྒོའི་མཆོད་ཆས	dgon sde khag gi nang du gtong sgo gtong skabs su bshams pa'i mchod rdzas	gtong sgo'i mchod chas
གཏོང་ཆེན་པོ	great giving	gtong chen po
གཏོང་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of giving, {rjes su dran pa bcu} / {drug}	gtong rjes su dran pa
གཏོང་ཉུང་ཡོང་མང	trade deficit, adverse trade balance	gtong nyung yong mang
གཏོང་ཐོབ	lose and obtain vows	gtong thob
གཏོང་འཐེན	kha lo sgyur ba,...'Phrul 'khor gtong 'then byed pa	gtong 'then
གཏོང་དེབ	a register for ritual allowances	gtong deb
གཏོང་རྡོ	anchor	gtong rdo
གཏོང་རྡོ་འཐེན་པ	to weigh anchor gtong rdo g.yugs pa - to lower anchor	gtong rdo 'then pa
གཏོང་གནང	gtong [h]	gtong gnang
གཏོང་ཕོད	giving	gtong phod
གཏོང་ཕོད་ཅན	charity, generous	gtong phod can
གཏོང་ཕོད་ཆུང་ངུ	little spirit of giving	gtong phod chung ngu
གཏོང་ཕོད་ཆེ་བ	great capacity for generosity, very generous	gtong phod che ba
གཏོང་ཕོད་པ	be able to give	gtong phod pa
གཏོང་ཕོད་ཡོད་པ	to be generous	gtong phod yod pa
གཏོང་ཕྱུགས	pasture, livestock	gtong phyugs
གཏོང་བ	[the vow] is abandoned	gtong ba
གཏོང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great giving	gtong ba chen po
གཏོང་བ་རྗེས་དྲན	one of the {rjes dran drug}	gtong ba rjes dran
གཏོང་བ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of giving, {rjes su dran pa bcu / drug}; mindfulness of generosity, one of the {rjes su dran pa drug} the six recollections / mindfulnesses, six of the {rjes su dran pa bcu} ten mindfu...	gtong ba rjes su dran pa
གཏོང་བ་གནང	gtong [h]	gtong ba gnang
གཏོང་བ་ལ་གོམས་པ	habit of giving	gtong ba la goms pa
གཏོང་བ་ལུགས	nor kun sbyin par gtong	gtong ba lugs
བ་ལུགས་དང་མཐུན་མོད	in generosity, to give away everything one has is, for a renunciate, this is the correct way to act	ba lugs dang mthun mod
གཏོང་བའི་ངང་ཅན	one who is able to give away in charity	gtong ba'i ngang can
གཏོང་བའི་སྔགས་ཆུ	consecrated water	gtong ba'i sngags chu
གཏོང་བའི་ཆད་དོན་བྱེད་པ	agree about giving	gtong ba'i chad don byed pa
གཏོང་བའི་ནོར	among the {'phags nor bdun}, give material things etc. to another, by accomplishing the accumulations merit and wisdom glang po rin po che dang chos mtshungs pa'o wealth of generosity	gtong ba'i nor
གཏོང་བའི་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས	inspiration of giving, [byin gyis brlabs bzhi]; inspiration of generosity. {in gyis brlabs bzhi}; inspiration of generosity	gtong ba'i byin gyis brlabs
གཏོང་བར་བྱེད་པ	be generous	gtong bar byed pa
གཏོང་བོད་ཅན	charity, generous, endowed with charity	gtong bod can
གཏོང་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	film projector	gtong byed 'phrul 'khor
གཏོང་བློ་ལྡན	generous	gtong blo ldan
གཏོང་དབང	the torma empowerment	gtong dbang
གཏོང་དབྱངས་རིང་བ	skad rta 'then pa'i gdangs ring po	gtong dbyangs ring ba
གཏོང་མང་ཡོང་ཉུང	favorable balance of trade, export surplus	gtong mang yong nyung
གཏོང་ཚུལ	manner of dispensing medicine, way of giving, certain quantity given, dose	gtong tshul
གཏོང་གཞོང	torma vessel/ plate	gtong gzhong
གཏོང་བཞིན་པ	sending	gtong bzhin pa
གཏོང་འི་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས	blessing of giving, {byin gyis brlabs bzhi}	gtong 'i byin gyis brlabs
གཏོང་ཡིག	correspondence, letter	gtong yig
གཏོང་ཡུལ	place a thing is sent	gtong yul
གཏོང་ཡོང	income/ revenue and expenses	gtong yong
གཏོང་ཡོང་ཁ་འཐབ	balance ['go gtug pa] expenses and income	gtong yong kha 'thab
གཏོང་ཡོང་ཁ་འཐབ་ཐུབ	succeed in balancing income and expenses	gtong yong kha 'thab thub
གཏོང་ཡོང་འཁྲོལ་འཁྱིལ	sprod len byung song kha 'thab pa'i lhag ma,...Khe las khag gi gtong yong 'khrol 'khyil gang mang byung ba	gtong yong 'khrol 'khyil
གཏོང་ཡོང་ག་འཛོལ	1) not be able to balance income and expenses; 2) little income and big expenses	gtong yong ga 'dzol
གཏོང་ཡོང་འགལ་འཛོལ	deficit, debt, bankruptcy	gtong yong 'gal 'dzol
གཏོང་ཡོང་འགོ་སྙོམས	income and expenses [sprod len byung song] kha 'thab tu phyin pa	gtong yong 'go snyoms
གཏོང་ཡོང་འགོ་ཐུག	balance income and expenditure	gtong yong 'go thug
གཏོང་ཡོང་རྩིས་ཁྲ	account of what is to be given and received	gtong yong rtsis khra
གཏོང་རག	thanksgiving	gtong rag
གཏོང་རེས	exchange	gtong res
གཏོང་རོགས་གནང	please let me go	gtong rogs gnang
གཏོང་ལ་གོམས་པ	generous	gtong la goms pa
གཏོང་ལུགས	manner of distributing, manner of forgiving	gtong lugs
གཏོང་ལེན	the giving-and-taking [practice of bodhi chitta]; the giving-and-taking [practice of bodhi chitta], a method for developing bodhichitta / receiving and transmitting	gtong len
གཏོང་ལེན་གློག	AC current	gtong len glog
གཏོང་ལེན་གློག་སྐྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	AC current generator	gtong len glog skyed 'phrul 'khor
གཏོང་ལེན་སྡེ་ཚན	transport service	gtong len sde tshan
གཏོང་སེམས	generosity, generous attitude	gtong sems
གཏོང་སེམས་འཆང	to hold a generous attitude, to keep an unattached mind	gtong sems 'chang
གཏོད	[form of gtad] 1) to hand over, to give. 2) to aim at, to direct towards, deliver 3) to found; to steer, direct; to turn to, trust, lean on; to turn to, trust, lean on/ to hand over, deliver, entru...	gtod
གཏོད་པ	confront, giving, entrust, deliver up, hand over, commit to another, bestow, confer, lean against, lean upon, press on, put against, direct, turn	gtod pa
གཏོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	procure	gtod par byed pa
གཏོད་ཕོད	magnanimity, generous (daring to let go)	gtod phod
གཏོད་བྱེད་པ	to transmit [an image, etc.], to direct towards	gtod byed pa
གཏོད་ལ་མནན	to stop, downpress	gtod la mnan
གཏོན	evil spirits	gton
གཏོམ	size	gtom
གཏོམ་པ	to talk, to speak	gtom pa
གཏོམས	imp. of {gtam pa}; imp. of {gtams pa}	gtoms
གཏོམས་པ	filled up, full	gtoms pa
གཏོའི་བཀའ་སྒྲོམ	bon work	gto'i bka' sgrom
གཏོར	toss, throw, scatter, disperse, spread, destroy, wreck, overthrow, break, smash, split, cut, spill, spray, sprinkle, spurt, demolish, crush, annihilate	gtor
གཏོར་སྐམ	old dry torma [dough]	gtor skam
གཏོར་སྐྱོན	damage, destruction	gtor skyon
གཏོར་སྐྱོན་གཏོང	damage, destroy, ruin, spoil	gtor skyon gtong
གཏོར་སྐྱོན་བྱེད	damage, destroy, ruin, spoil	gtor skyon byed
གཏོར་ཁུང	mi gtsang ba and khrus khu sogs 'dor sa'i wa kha	gtor khung
གཏོར་ཁེབ	altar-cloth	gtor kheb
གཏོར་མགྲོན	the guests who receive the torma	gtor mgron
གཏོར་འགག	destroying and blocking, obstructing, defensive attack	gtor 'gag
གཏོར་འགྲེམས	chu sogs scatter and 'grems pa	gtor 'grems
གཏོར་རྒོལ	destroying [in war]	gtor rgol
གཏོར་རྒོལ་གཏོང	destroy	gtor rgol gtong
གཏོར་རྒྱག	throwing torma	gtor rgyag
གཏོར་རྒྱན	butter ornamentation on torma	gtor rgyan
གཏོར་རྒྱབ	offerings of pyramidal shape painted in red and white	gtor rgyab
གཏོར་རྒྱུ	ingredients of torma	gtor rgyu
གཏོར་སྒམ	torma compartment	gtor sgam
གཏོར་བསྔོ	ritual for the offering of bali cakes (gtor ma) to the host of protective deities	gtor bsngo
གཏོར་བསྔོ་ཉེར་མཁོའི་རིགས	required torma rituals gtor bsngos lha bcu gsum gyi gtor 'bul dang 'dod gsol 'phrin bcol bcas nag po 'gro shes - by the 8th {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ngag gi dbang po}	gtor bsngo nyer mkho'i rigs
གཏོར་ཅོག	altar	gtor cog
གཏོར་བཅོམ	destroying and looting, vandalizing	gtor bcom
གཏོར་བཅོམ་བྱེད	destroy and loot, vandalize	gtor bcom byed
གཏོར་ཆས	chab gtor implements	gtor chas
གཏོར་ཆོག	torma liturgy, ritual for torma offering; torma ritual; ritual for torma offering; torma liturgy	gtor chog
གཏོར་འཆམས	torma-offering dance	gtor 'chams
གཏོར་སྟེགས	torma stand bkyag or 3-legged	gtor stegs
གཏོར་དར	scarves placed over offerings	gtor dar
གཏོར་གདན	under a torma 'ding rgyu'i gdan	gtor gdan
གཏོར་གདུགས	parasol spread over a torma	gtor gdugs
གཏོར་འདེབས	broadcast sowing	gtor 'debs
གཏོར་འདེབས་བྱེད་པ	broadcast	gtor 'debs byed pa
གཏོར་ན་འཕྲོ་བ	if scattered it diffuses, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	gtor na 'phro ba
གཏོར་སྣོད	torma trays	gtor snod
གཏོར་པ	to spurt	gtor pa
གཏོར་ཕབ	defeat	gtor phab
གཏོར་ཕབ་གཏོང	[inflict] defeat	gtor phab gtong
གཏོར་ཕུད	select portion of the torma	gtor phud
གཏོར་བ	(tha dad pa,, 1) strew, scatter; 2) tear up, destroy	gtor ba
གཏོར་བུ	1) puja implements etc tsag tsig container; 2) vessel for the three robes	gtor bu
གཏོར་བླུགས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	abhisheka ritual	gtor blugs kyi cho ga
གཏོར་དབང	torma empowerment;[ usually very short]	gtor dbang
གཏོར་འབུལ	torma offering	gtor 'bul
གཏོར་འབུལ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	ritual for offering sacrificial cakes (gtor ma)	gtor 'bul gyi rim pa
གཏོར་འབུལ་འཕྲིན་བཅོལ	selected rituals for propitiating and invoking the aid of various protective deities through the offering of sacrificial cakes (gtor ma	gtor 'bul 'phrin bcol
གཏོར་མ	offering, sacrificial objects, grain cakes, sacrificial objects including zhal zas and gshos bu, dough figure, sacrificial cake, cones made of rtsam pa mixed with butter, colored, and decorated in ...	gtor ma
གཏོར་མ་རྒྱག་པ	w magic mantras overcome an opponent	gtor ma rgyag pa
གཏོར་མ་རྒྱས	crow (delights in offering after cast away)	gtor ma rgyas
གཏོར་མ་བརྒྱ་རྩ	an offering ritual	gtor ma brgya rtsa
གཏོར་མ་བརྒྱ་རྩ་བཏང་བ	perform the offering of the Hundred Tormas gtor ma brgya rtsa'i rnam par bshad pa	gtor ma brgya rtsa btang ba
དང་དཀར་ཆ་བཞིའི་རྣམ་བཤད	explanations of the sa skya pa traditions for performing the rites of the gtor ma brgya rtsa and dkar cha bzhi; by {rta nag thub bstan mkhan po chos rnam rgyal}	dang dkar cha bzhi'i rnam bshad
གཏོར་མ་ཆ་གསུམ	torma offered to direction protectors, spirits, and geks	gtor ma cha gsum
གཏོར་མ་རྡོར་མགོ་མ	torma w half-vajra top	gtor ma rdor mgo ma
གཏོར་མ་སྦྱིན་པ	offer a gtor ma	gtor ma sbyin pa
གཏོར་མ་མི་ནུབ་པའི་སྒྲོན་མ	one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	gtor ma mi nub pa'i sgron ma
གཏོར་མ་བཞེས་ནས	having accepted the offerings	gtor ma bzhes nas
གཏོར་མ་ཟ	crow	gtor ma za
གཏོར་མ་ཟན	oblation of the remnants of a meal to creatures of every description	gtor ma zan
གཏོར་མའི་ཆོ་ག	torma ritual	gtor ma'i cho ga
གཏོར་མས་རྒྱས	raven	gtor mas rgyas
གཏོར་རྨས	damaging and injuring	gtor rmas
གཏོར་ཙག	the tsakli that is fixed at the torma	gtor tsag
གཏོར་རྩམ	barley flour for making torma	gtor rtsam
གཏོར་ཚག	the tshakli that is fixed at the torma	gtor tshag
གཏོར་རྫས	explosives	gtor rdzas
གཏོར་གཞོང	torma plate, vessel	gtor gzhong
གཏོར་ཟ	raven	gtor za
གཏོར་ཟན	torma dough	gtor zan
གཏོར་ཟན་ཟ་བ	eat torma dough	gtor zan za ba
གཏོར་ཟོར	hurling torma	gtor zor
གཏོར་ཟློག	gtor zor dang zlog pa	gtor zlog
གཏོར་བཟློག	exorcist rites	gtor bzlog
གཏོར་ར	torma throwing place	gtor ra
གཏོར་རིལ	rolled dough pellets	gtor ril
གཏོར་རོ	old torma [dough] already offered	gtor ro
གཏོར་བརླག	ruin, destruction, annihilation	gtor brlag
གཏོར་བརླག་གཏོང	ruin, destroy, annihilate	gtor brlag gtong
གཏོར་བརླགས	ruin, destruction, annihilation	gtor brlags
གཏོར་ལུང་ཆེ་ཆུང་གི་རྒྱུད	Major and Minor Torma Tantra. A Mahayoga scripture	gtor lung che chung gi rgyud
གཏོར་བཤིག	Syn {gtor brlags}	gtor bshig
གཏོར་བཤིག་གཏོང་མཁན	destructive	gtor bshig gtong mkhan
གཏོར་བཤིག་གཏོང་བ	blast, destroy, devastate	gtor bshig gtong ba
གཏོར་བཤིག་བཏང་བ	was destroyed	gtor bshig btang ba
གཏོར་བཤིག་པ	saboteur	gtor bshig pa
གཏོར་བཤིག་བྱེད་པ	destroy, wreck	gtor bshig byed pa
གཏོར་བཤིག་བྱེད་བ	to destroy, wreck	gtor bshig byed ba
གཏོར་བཤིགས	ruin, destruction, [scatter &] annihilate	gtor bshigs
གཏོར་བཤིགས་གཏོང་བ	demolish	gtor bshigs gtong ba
གཏོར་བཤིགས་བཏང་བ	was destroyed	gtor bshigs btang ba
གཏོར་བཤིགས་པ	saboteur	gtor bshigs pa
གཏོར་བཤིགས་བྱེད་བ	destroy, wreck	gtor bshigs byed ba
གཏོར་བཤོས	offering torma, food offering	gtor bshos
གཏོར་གསུམ	lham zon pa'i rting pa'i 'ja' thog gi dmar po zur gsum	gtor gsum
གཏོར་གསོས	thumb-sized cakes offered in morning and at noon	gtor gsos
གཏོར་ལྷུང་གཏོང	shoot down	gtor lhung gtong
གཏོལ	division of time	gtol
གཏོལ་དང་བྲལ	completely lost, do not know	gtol dang bral
གཏོལ་དང་བྲལ་བ	lost/ not knowing the way	gtol dang bral ba
གཏོལ་བ	[arch] 1) mtshang 'bru ba,...Kho'i skyon mtshang gtol ba,..; 2) Phigs pa,...Mda' brgyab pas 'ben la ae khung gtol ba	gtol ba
གཏོལ་བྲལ	uncertain, there is no way, unknown, unfamiliar, not knowing	gtol bral
གཏོལ་མ་མཆིས	it is uncertain	gtol ma mchis
གཏོལ་མེད	unknown, stranger, dubious	gtol med
གཏོལ་མེད་པ	w/o certainty	gtol med pa
སུཆ་ཨ་མོམེནཏ	when there is no place to run to and nowhere to hide, no refuge and no hope, when you are desperate and have no idea what to do	such a moment
གཏོས	size, dimension	gtos
གཏོས་ཆེ་བ	great magnitude	gtos che ba
གཏོས་པ	[arch] immeasurable	gtos pa
གཏོས་མེད	immense, boundless	gtos med
གཏོས་ཚད	size, quantity	gtos tshad
བཏག	f. of 'thag pa: to append, attach, label, tack, name, impute, adorn, fix, designate [mss]	btag
བཏག་གྲོལ	liberation through wearing	btag grol
བཏག་པ	examine, SA 'thag pa	btag pa
བཏག་བྱའི་རྒྱན	ornament to be worn	btag bya'i rgyan
བཏག་སོ	'thag chas 'thag sha'i so	btag so
བཏགས	[p {'thag}, {'dogs} 1) grind, crush; 2) weave, bind; 3) fasten, tie; 4) adorn, fix	btags
བཏགས་གྲུབ	nominal existence, establish a name	btags grub
བཏགས་གྲོལ	liberation by wearing	btags grol
བཏགས་ཆོག	an amulet	btags chog
བཏགས་ཆོས	labeled things, dharmas, imputed phenomena, designation	btags chos
བཏགས་ཆོས་སུ	labeled as the phenomena of	btags chos su
བཏགས་ཏུལ་གྱི་སྟེང་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existence in the object designated	btags tul gyi steng nas grub pa
བཏགས་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	imputedly established	btags du sgrub pa
བཏགས་དོན	object labeled/ of labeling process	btags don
བཏགས་བདག	imputed self	btags bdag
བཏགས་ནས་གཞག	imputationally posited [mss]	btags nas gzhag
བཏགས་པ་འཆད	to emphasize	btags pa 'chad
བཏགས་པ་དང་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	nominal and genuine	btags pa dang mtshan nyid pa
བཏགས་པ་བ	only in name	btags pa ba
བཏགས་པ་མིང་གི་རྡོ་རྗེ	the emanated name vajra	btags pa ming gi rdo rje
བཏགས་པ་ཙམ	mere labels	btags pa tsam
བཏགས་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་གཅིག་དང་དུ་མ	mere designations of 1 and many	btags pa tsam gyi gcig dang du ma
བཏགས་པ་ཙམ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	nominal existence	btags pa tsam tu yod pa
བཏགས་པ་ཙམ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	nominal existence	btags pa tsam du yod pa
བཏགས་པ་ལ་མཁས	{dang po bla ma btags pa la mkhas} in the first place, you should take care to check the teacher	btags pa la mkhas
བཏགས་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	designative relative truth	btags pa'i kun rdzob bden pa
བཏགས་པའི་དངོས་པོ	concept, idea	btags pa'i dngos po
བཏགས་པའི་བདག	imputed self/ ego	btags pa'i bdag
བཏགས་པའི་འདུས་མ་བྱས	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyan thos pas 'dus ma byas gsum du bshad pa lta bu}	btags pa'i 'dus ma byas
བཏགས་པར་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ	sophists, exponents of imputed phenomena	btags par smra ba'i sde
བཏགས་པར་ཡོད	nominal existence	btags par yod
བཏགས་མ	'thag chas 'thag	btags ma
བཏགས་མིང	imputing name	btags ming
བཏགས་མིང་གཉིས	name and designation	btags ming gnyis
བཏགས་ཙམ	(prajnaptimatra only imputed	btags tsam
བཏགས་ཙམ་གྱི་ང	merely imputed self	btags tsam gyi nga
བཏགས་ཞི	basis of imputation	btags zhi
བཏགས་གཞི	contents of indexing	btags gzhi
བཏགས་བཞག	imputationally posited. [mss]	btags bzhag
བཏགས་ཟིན་པ	wove, woven	btags zin pa
བཏགས་ཡུལ་གྱི་སྟེང་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existence in the object designated/ basis of designation/ the object that receives designation	btags yul gyi steng nas grub pa
བཏགས་ཡོད	designative existence	btags yod
བཏགས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག	imputedly existent individual	btags yod kyi gang zag
བཏགས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {spyir ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i ngo bor bum pa zhes bya ba rdzas su yod kyang/ bum pa skye ba dang 'gag pa sogs ni blos btags pa'i phyir btags yod do}	btags yod kyi dngos po
བཏགས་ཡོད་ཆོས་གསུམ	the three exemplified/ characterized/ imputed dharmas [existing only as verbal imputations: 1) mtson bya yin pa 2) rang gi mtsan gzhi'i steng du grub pa 3) rang gi mtsan nyid las gzhan pa'i mtson b...	btags yod chos gsum
བཏགས་སུ་རུང་བ	fit to be labelled as	btags su rung ba
བཏང	deviate, give, send, SA gtong ba, past of gtong, past of gtong, abandon, leave it, to be sent by	btang
བཏང་དགྱེས་ཕུལ་བ	offered to each person	btang dgyes phul ba
བཏང་འགྲོ་བཞག་སྡོད	go where 1 is sent and, remain where 1 is put pa'i kha lo sgyur bde ba,[easily directible] [of persons] don..	btang 'gro bzhag sdod
བཏང་སྙོམ	impartiality, equanimity	btang snyom
བཏང་སྙོམ་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable equanimity, limitless impartiality	btang snyom tshad med
བཏང་སྙོམས	neutrality	btang snyoms
ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the 7 limbs or causes of enlightenment] impartiality, indifference, unconcern, even mindedness ignore, disregard, be careless indifferent, impartial [in meditation entering into effortless equanimi...	chub yan lag bdun
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	one of {dbang po lnga}	btang snyoms kyi dbang po
ཨརིསིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཅོམཔླེཏེ་ནོན	thought, power of equanimity	arising of complete non
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཀྱི་སེམས	mind of equanimity	btang snyoms kyi sems
བཏང་སྙོམས་ལྔ	the five kinds of equanimity	btang snyoms lnga
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཅན	indifferent, indolent, apathetic, indifferent	btang snyoms can
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཆེན་པོ	total equanimity, total equanimity	btang snyoms chen po
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཆེན་པོའི་བློ	the attitude of great impartiality	btang snyoms chen po'i blo
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཐ་མལ་པ	an amorphous, ordinary state	btang snyoms tha mal pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing impartiality/ equanimity	btang snyoms dang ldan pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་པ	impartiality, equanimity, 1 who is impartial, mediator	btang snyoms pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ	impartiality without concepts	btang snyoms dmigs pa med pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཙམ་པོ་བ	simple equanimity	btang snyoms tsam po ba
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable impartiality	btang snyoms tshad med
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཚད་མེད་པ	immeasurable equanimity/ impartiality	btang snyoms tshad med pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་མཛད	be impartial/ indifferent, establish equanimity	btang snyoms mdzad
བཏང་སྙོམས་ཡང་དག	enlightened equanimity, true impartiality btang snyoms yang dag byang chub kyi	btang snyoms yang dag
བཏང་སྙོམས་ལ་གནས་པ	rest in impartiality/ equanimity	btang snyoms la gnas pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	[neutral] indifference, undecidedness	btang snyoms lung ma bstan
བཏང་སྙོམས་བཤག	rest in impartiality/ equanimity	btang snyoms bshag
བཏང་སྙོམས་བཤག་པ	rest in impartiality/ equanimity	btang snyoms bshag pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་སུ་གནས	indifferent calm	btang snyoms su gnas
བཏང་སྙོམས་སུ་བྱའོ	one remains in a state of equanimity	btang snyoms su bya'o
བཏང་སྙོམས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	be impartial, establish equanimity, be indifferent	btang snyoms su byed pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་སུ་བཞག་པ	let be, rest in impartiality/ equanimity	btang snyoms su bzhag pa
བཏང་སྙོམས་སེམས	impartial mind	btang snyoms sems
བཏང་སྙོམས་གསུམ	the three kinds of equanimity	btang snyoms gsum
བཏང་བཏང	send/ bestow repeatedly, totally let go/ reject	btang btang
བཏང་བཏང་བྱུང་བྱུང	boasting, exaggeration	btang btang byung byung
བཏང་ཐོ	yig rigs dang things etc gzhan la brdzangs tho ??	btang tho
བཏང་དང་བཞག་པ་མེད་པ	w/o keeping or rejecting	btang dang bzhag pa med pa
བཏང་འདོགས	gather and release [cattle for milking]	btang 'dogs
བཏང་བ	bestow, give, send, to elaborate, to separate, exhale, leave it, to abandon	btang ba
བཏང་བ་ལ་དགའི་བའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	rejoicing in/ action that rejoices in letting go/ rejecting/ giving	btang ba la dga'i ba'i longs spyod
བཏང་བར་གྱུར	be sent/ bestowed/ let go/ rejected	btang bar gyur
བཏང་བྱུང་ཙ་པོ	boast, exaggerate	btang byung tsa po
བཏང་སྨྱོམས	impartiality, equanimity	btang smyoms
བཏང་བཞག	trying to keep or reject, keep or let go, accepting and rejecting; accept and reject; keep or let go, accepting and rejecting	btang bzhag
བཏང་བཞག་པ	to be acquitted, be let go, excused	btang bzhag pa
བཏང་བཞག་བྲལ	free from accepting and rejecting/ keeping and letting go/ adding and subtracting	btang bzhag bral
བཏང་བཞག་བྲལ་བ	free from accepting and rejecting/ keeping and letting go/ adding and subtracting	btang bzhag bral ba
བཏང་བཞག་མེད	w/o keeping or letting go 1064	btang bzhag med
བཏང་བཞག་མེད་པ	w/o keeping or rejecting	btang bzhag med pa
བཏང་བཞག་མེད་པར	not keeping and not sending off; without wavering	btang bzhag med par
བཏང་ཟིན་པ	sent	btang zin pa
བཏང་བཟུང	grasp or reject	btang bzung
བཏང་བཟུང་ཆེན་པོ	larger species of muchilinda flower	btang bzung chen po
བཏང་བཟུང་མེད་པ	w/o grasping or rejecting	btang bzung med pa
བཏང་ཡས	number	btang yas
བཏང་ཡིག	letter, correspondence	btang yig
བཏང་ཡིག་གཏོང	correspond, communicate	btang yig gtong
བཏང་ཤོར	ched du [deliberately, for the sake of] glod pa [relaxed] dang, by nature shor ba,...Nag can btson pa btang shor mi yong ba byed dgos,..	btang shor
བཏང་སེམས	attitude of rejecting/ renouncing	btang sems
བཏད	entrust, bestow, lean upon, SA gtod pa	btad
བཏད་པ	made over, entrusted/ presented to [p gtod]	btad pa
བཏབ	p. and pf. of {'debs}, f. {gdab} 1) to sow, to plant 2) often used as a verbalizer [smon lam 'debs} to offer a prayer 3) va. trans. v. to throw/cast/strike/hit; to project 4) to catch (an illness [...	btab
བཏམ	advice	btam
བཏམ་པ	advice, advise	btam pa
བཏམས་པ	pf. of {gtam pa}	btams pa
བཏའ་བ	[arch] say[er]	bta' ba
བཏི	a large brass dish	bti
བཏིག	fall, drop, SA 'thig pa	btig
བཏིག་པ	[f gtig pa, btigs pa, p gtig pa]	btig pa
བཏིགས	fall, drop, SA 'thig pa	btigs
བཏིགས་པ	drop	btigs pa
བཏིང	lay out, spread, SA 'ding ba	bting
བཏིང་བ	pf. of {'ding ba}	bting ba
བཏིངས	past of 'dings	btings
བཏིངས་པ	spread	btings pa
བཏིབས	gather (like clouds	btibs
བཏུ	collect, SA 'thu ba	btu
བཏུ་བ	gathering; x {byis pa me tog btu ba dang 'dra} like a child gathering flowers	btu ba
བཏུག་པ	reach, SA gtug pa	btug pa
བཏུང	[p {'thung} drink, suck, smoke, eat, be soaked	btung
བཏུང་ཆུ	drinking water	btung chu
བཏུང་འདོད	thirsty	btung 'dod
བཏུང་སྣོད	vessel for drinking tea, chang etc.	btung snod
བཏུང་པ་ལྡུད	he gives him to drink	btung pa ldud
བཏུང་བ	drink	btung ba
བཏུང་བ་སྐོམ་གྱི་གདུང་པ	tormented by thirst	btung ba skom gyi gdung pa
བཏུང་བ་འཐུང	drink any liquid	btung ba 'thung
བཏུང་བ་འདོད	wishing for drink	btung ba 'dod
བཏུང་བ་བཟང་པོ	liquor, alcohol	btung ba bzang po
བཏུང་བའི་རྒྱུ་བརྒྱད	explained in the vinaya thun tshod du rung ba'i a kind of medicine, chu shing &, rice, ku shu go la &, aa shvattha &, au dumb' ra &, pa ri sha ka &, rgun 'bru &, 'bra go bcas kyi chu rnams]	btung ba'i rgyu brgyad
བཏུང་བྱ	drinkable, water	btung bya
བཏུང་ཟིན་པ	drunk	btung zin pa
བཏུངས	drink, SA 'thung ba	btungs
བཏུངས་པ	pf. of {'thung ba}	btungs pa
བཏུད	bend, bow, SA 'dud pa	btud
བཏུད་ནས	having bowed, paid reverence	btud nas
བཏུད་པ	[p 'dud pa], btub pa, 1) bla'am suitable and able to [be] do[ne]; 2) paid homage, bowed to; 3) desire, hope for	btud pa
བཏུད་པར	successively	btud par
བཏུད་མར	in rapid succession	btud mar
བཏུན	(not in DAS)	btun
བཏུབ	cut up, becoming, convenient, practicable, be able, cut into pieces, SA 'thub pa	btub
བཏུབ་པ	fit, proper, becoming convenient, practicable, practical	btub pa
བཏུབས	[p {gtub pa} tore, cut up, was able	btubs
བཏུབས་པ	[p {gtub pa} tore, cut up, was able	btubs pa
བཏུམ	cover, pack, SA 'thum pa	btum
བཏུམ་པ	to wrap round, to envelop	btum pa
བཏུམ་ཕོག	bunch or knot produced by money and the like being tied up in the girdle	btum phog
བཏུམས	cover, SA 'thum pa	btums
བཏུམས་རྒྱ	phyi nas 'thum par byed rgyu'i rgya,...Yig 'phrin khag la shog bu dang, ras kyi btums rgya byas nas phyogs su skur,..	btums rgya
བཏུམས་པ	p. of {'thum}; pf. of {gtum pa}	btums pa
བཏུལ	1) converted, tamed; 2) broke in; 3) subdued, conquered; 4) killed, annihi- 1065 lated; 5) tilled, cultivated [p 'dul ba]	btul
བཏུལ་བཅིལ	taming, softening gold and silver w alloying	btul bcil
བཏུལ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	invincible, invulnerable	btul thabs med pa
བཏུལ་ཐུབ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	impregnable	btul thub rgyu med pa
བཏུལ་བ	p. of {'dul}; pf. of {'dul ba}	btul ba
བཏུལ་ཞུགས	disciplined conduct	btul zhugs
བཏུལ་ཞུགས་མཛད་པ	engage in the practice {'gro ba rnams sgrol ba'i btul zhugs mdzod} engage in the practice that frees all beings from suffering	btul zhugs mdzad pa
བཏུལ་སླ་པོ	vulnerable	btul sla po
བཏུས	collect, gather together	btus
བཏུས་པ	pf. of {'thu ba}; to collect, to gather together	btus pa
བཏེག	lift up, lift, SA 'degs pa, 'deg pa	bteg
བཏེག་བཏེག་བྱེད་པ	haul upwards	bteg bteg byed pa
བཏེག་པ	SA 'degs pa	bteg pa
བཏེགས	set out for lift, SA 'deg pa, past of 'degs	btegs
བཏེགས་ན་འཕར་བ	raises back when lifting [one's foot]	btegs na 'phar ba
བཏེར་སྟོན	Terton	bter ston
བཏོག	[p {'thog}, f 'thog pa] take, carry away, ravish	btog
བཏོག་དེག	[tear out] receipt book	btog deg
བཏོག་པ	p. of {'thog}; ft. of {'thog pa}	btog pa
བཏོགས	[p {'thog}, f 'thog pa] take, carry away, ravish	btogs
བཏོགས་པ	spu btogs pa - plucked out the hairs	btogs pa
བཏོང	[f p gtong] devoted to, giver, forsake, renounce, cast away, abandon, give up, let go	btong
བཏོད	Syn gtod	btod
བཏོད་པ	fasten, tether, newly made [p gtod pa]	btod pa
བཏོན	tear out, release, chant, reveal, draw from, extract [p {'don}	bton
བཏོན་རྒྱ	grain silver etc. 'don sprod byas 'thus kyi bka' rgya	bton rgya
བཏོན་གཏོང	expel, deport	bton gtong
བཏོན་ནས་སྤྲོད	hand over, submit	bton nas sprod
བཏོན་པ	drawn from, extracted, to take out, to take off	bton pa
བཏོར	diffuse, scatter, be strewn, SA 'thor pa, 'thor ba 'toms - 1) pounced, threw 1self on; 2) embraced, hugged	btor
རྟ	horse	rta
རྟ་ཀ	hoof iron, horse shoe	rta ka
རྟ་ཀླད	1) horse's klad pa; 2) Ma na ho, a kind of precious stone (	rta klad
རྟ་དཀར་འགྲོ་བཟང་མ	hi ma la ya'i ri rgyud kyi ri rtse zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi ding ri rdzong gi lho ngos su yod,...Rta dkrogs, rta 'drog 'go bslangs pa,...Byis pas rta dkrogs nas rtsva bzar mi 'jug pa	rta dkar 'gro bzang ma
རྟ་དཀར་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ནང་ཅན	moon	rta dkar chu skyes nang can
རྟ་རྐང	one of {'bras bu'i rta babs brgyad}	rta rkang
རྟ་རྐྱ་པ	one skilled in horsemanship	rta rkya pa
རྟ་རྐྱང་ནག	reddish black horse	rta rkyang nag
རྟ་རྐྱང་པོ	horse w color like a rkyang, wild ass	rta rkyang po
རྟ་རྐྱང་མི་རྐྱང	rogs zla med pa'i dpe	rta rkyang mi rkyang
རྟ་སྐད	neighing	rta skad
རྟ་སྐད་རྒྱག	neigh	rta skad rgyag
རྟ་སྐད་ཐེངས་གསུམ	three horse's neighs	rta skad thengs gsum
རྟ་སྐད་འཚེར	Horse Neigher. Same as Hayagriva (rta mgrin)	rta skad 'tsher
རྟ་སྐུལ་བྱེད	riding crop	rta skul byed
རྟ་སྐྱ་པ	one skilled in horsemanship	rta skya pa
རྟ་སྐྱ་བ	ride a horse	rta skya ba
རྟ་སྐྱིན	large heave animal, budorcas taxicolor	rta skyin
རྟ་བསྐྱོན	conveyance	rta bskyon
རྟ་བསྐྲགས	clattering train of horsemen	rta bskrags
རྟ་ཁ	reins	rta kha
རྟ་ཁ་རྒོད་པོ	srab kyis bkag kyang mi thub par ngar te shor 'gro ba'i rta	rta kha rgod po
རྟ་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བ	rta kha g.yas g.yon du bsgyur ba	rta kha bsgyur ba
རྟ་ཁ་འཐེན	rein in the horse rta kha 'then byed srab mda' med par w/o bridle	rta kha 'then
རྟ་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་བདེ་པོ	horse easy to guide	rta kha lo sgyur bde po
རྟ་ཁ་ལོ་བདེ་པོ	horse easy to guide	rta kha lo bde po
རྟ་ཁ་སྲབ་ཀྱིས་བསྒྱུར་བ	turning, steering a horse with the bridle	rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba
རྟ་ཁ་སྲབ་ཀྱིས་བསྒྱུར་བ་དང་འདྲ	as if steering a horse with the reins; x {yar 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba dang 'dra nges pa de da res gson pa'i skabs 'di nyid yin} the turning point, the only time that ...	rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba dang 'dra
རྟ་ཁ་སླ་པོ	horse easy to guide	rta kha sla po
རྟ་ཁང	stable	rta khang
རྟ་ཁམ་པ	dark yellow horse	rta kham pa
རྟ་ཁལ	horse laden with goods	rta khal
རྟ་ཁལ་ཁྲལ་འུལ	horses and pack animals skul 'ded kyi 'u lag	rta khal khral 'ul
རྟ་ཁལ་འགོ་པ	horses and pack animals 'u lag gtong mkhan gyi 'go pa	rta khal 'go pa
རྟ་ཁལ་མི་གསུམ་གྱི་ཁྲལ	service obligation to send, horses, pack animals, and men	rta khal mi gsum gyi khral
རྟ་ཁེབས	horse blanket	rta khebs
རྟ་ཁྱུ	herd of horses	rta khyu
རྟ་ཁྲ	piebald horse	rta khra
རྟ་ཁྲ་ཐིག	bindu/ spot on a horse	rta khra thig
རྟ་ཁྲལ	horse sending skul gtong gi service obligation	rta khral
རྟ་ཁྲོམ	section of market where ponies and horses are sold	rta khrom
རྟ་འཁོར	horse drawn cart	rta 'khor
རྟ་འཁྲིད་པ་ལ་ཞོན་ནས	rode on horses they brought 1066	rta 'khrid pa la zhon nas
རྟ་གབ༹་པ	horse w white gdong gzhung	rta gva pa
རྟ་གད	horse laugh, laugh like a horse's neigh	rta gad
རྟ་གལ	saddle bag	rta gal
རྟ་གེ	colt	rta ge
རྟ་གོ	coat of mail for a horse	rta go
རྟ་གྲལ	number of horses kept in a row, cavalry in martial array	rta gral
རྟ་གྲས	stable	rta gras
རྟ་གྲི	rtas brdabs pa'i shi rkyen	rta gri
རྟ་གྲོ་དཀར	horse w color 'bru gro'i mdog dkar shas che ba	rta gro dkar
རྟ་གླ	rta glas pa'i gla cha	rta gla
རྟ་གླུད	ransom for the horse	rta glud
རྟ་གློ	1) saddle's glo thag gam, glo len; 2) Rta'i glo ba	rta glo
རྟ་གློད	1) rta kha glod de brgyugs pa; 2) Thag pas btags yod pa'i rta btang ba (	rta glod
རྟ་དགོང་སྒོ་མ	sow's head - Pasa,	rta dgong sgo ma
ལིཨོནའས་ཧེཨད	Srnkhala, snake's head Ghanta)	lion's head
རྟ་དགོང་སྒོ་མ་བཞི	four door guardians beginning with horse's head (horse's head - Ankusa	rta dgong sgo ma bzhi
རྟ་བགད	horse laugh	rta bgad
རྟ་བགད་ཀྱིས་འདེབས་པ	set up a horse laugh	rta bgad kyis 'debs pa
རྟ་མགོ	tango) monastery	rta mgo
རྟ་མགོ་ཅན	boat	rta mgo can
རྟ་མགོ་མ	horse-head. Syn {dga' ba dmar mo}	rta mgo ma
རྟ་མགོ་ལུག་གཞུག	horse's head sheep's tail, things that don't go together	rta mgo lug gzhug
རྟ་མགྱགས་པའི་ཐོག་ལ་ལྕག	high speed, w the greatest urgency	rta mgyags pa'i thog la lcag
རྟ་མགྲིན	Hayagriva [the horse-headed one, the horse-headed deity yi dam]	rta mgrin
རྟ་མགྲིན་དཀར་པོ	white Hayagriva	rta mgrin dkar po
རྟ་མགྲིན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	sadhana of Hayagriva	rta mgrin gyi sgrub thabs
རྟ་མགྲིན་གྱི་རྟ་སྐད་ཐེང་གསུམ	Three Neighs of Hayagriva: [the three continua of ground, path and result]. or alternatively 1) the neigh which arouses the world to the unborn identity of samsara and nirvana. 2) the neigh which o...	rta mgrin gyi rta skad theng gsum
ཝོརལདས་ཨས་ཨ་ཕེ༹ཨསཏ	offering to repay karmic debts {gsod} and 3) the neigh which then enlists the support of beings and binds them under an oath of allegiance	worlds as a feast
རྟ་མགྲིན་གྱི་རྟ་སྐད་ཐེངས་གསུམ	three neighs of Hayagr va	rta mgrin gyi rta skad thengs gsum
རྟ་མགྲིན་གྲུབ་ཐོབ	Hayagriva siddha.	rta mgrin grub thob
སམེ་ཨས་གྱལྭ་ཆོག	yang	Same as Gyalwa Chog
རྟ་མགྲིན་གླིང	Tamdrin Ling, one of the eight main surrounding temples of Samye	rta mgrin gling
རྟ་མགྲིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	Hayagriva, the horsenecked	rta mgrin rgyal po
རྟ་མགྲིན་ནག་པོ	Black Hayagriva; of the extremely wrathful vajra or karma family	rta mgrin nag po
རྟ་མགྲིན་ནའ་ག་ཀླུ་འདུལ	Hayagriva Subjugation of Nagas	rta mgrin na' ga klu 'dul
རྟ་མགྲིན་དམར་པོ	red Hayagriva	rta mgrin dmar po
རྟ་མགྲིན་ཡང་གསང	bon divinity	rta mgrin yang gsang
རྟ་མགྲིན་ཡང་གསང་ལྷ་དགུ	Nyingma assembly of deities	rta mgrin yang gsang lha dgu
རྟ་མགྲིན་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Hayagriva w consort	rta mgrin yab yum
རྟ་མགྲིན་ལས་བྱང	propitiation of the Buddhist tutelary deity Hayagriva	rta mgrin las byang
རྟ་འགྲོས	horse's gait	rta 'gros
རྟ་འགྲོས་མ	kind of horse that canters well	rta 'gros ma
རྟ་རྒན	old horse	rta rgan
རྟ་རྒན་ལམ་རྒྱུས	old horse that knows the way, experienced	rta rgan lam rgyus
རྟ་རྒོད	untamed wild horse	rta rgod
རྟ་རྒོད་དཀྱུས་འཛུད	rta rgod lam gzhung la 'jug pa ste, mi rgod khrims gzhung la 'jur ba'i dpe,...Tshul min log zhugs kyi mi rnams la slob gso btang ste rta rgod dkyus 'dzud byed pa	rta rgod dkyus 'dzud
རྟ་རྒོད་མ	mare	rta rgod ma
རྟ་རྒོད་མ་ཞིག་ཤོར་བ	lost control of his horse	rta rgod ma zhig shor ba
རྟ་རྒྱབ	1) rta'i sgal pa; 2) Rta la 'gel rgyu'i khal (	rta rgyab
རྟ་རྒྱབ་གཅིག	a full load for a horse	rta rgyab gcig
རྟ་རྒྱུག	horse racing, horse race	rta rgyug
རྟ་རྒྱུག་འགྲན་བསྡུར	rta rgyug btang ba'i bang rtsal 'gran bsdur	rta rgyug 'gran bsdur
རྟ་རྒྱུག་རྒྱུག་ས	race track	rta rgyug rgyug sa
རྟ་རྒྱུག་གཏོང	race horses	rta rgyug gtong
རྟ་རྒྱུག་པ	gallop, race	rta rgyug pa
རྟ་རྒྱུག་མི་རྒྱུག	formerly on the 1st month 25th day in lha sa mi rta ring rgyug gi bang rtsal 'gran pa'i dus ston rtsed sna zhig	rta rgyug mi rgyug
རྟ་རྒྱུག་ཞར་འཕེན	bod phyogs kyi yul lung phal cher dbyar dus 'ong skor sogs rten 'brel dus ston dang 'brel rtsal ldan rnams kyis rta'i bang rtsal rgyug pa'i zhor la mda' rtsal 'gran bsdur byed pa'i rtsed sna zhig	rta rgyug zhar 'phen
རྟ་རྒྱུག་བཞིན་དུ་མདའ་འཕེན་པ	shoot an arrow like a running horse	rta rgyug bzhin du mda' 'phen pa
རྟ་རྒྱུགས	to gallop a horse	rta rgyugs
རྟ་རྒྱུགས་གཏོང	race horses	rta rgyugs gtong
རྟ་རྒྱུགས་ནང་བཞིན	gallop	rta rgyugs nang bzhin
རྟ་རྒྱུད	1) rta'i gshis ka; 2) Rta'i rigs rgyud	rta rgyud
རྟ་སྒ	saddle; a saddle	rta sga
རྟ་སྒ་འཁོར	equipments of a riding horse	rta sga 'khor
རྟ་སྒ་འཁོར་ཆ་འགྲིག	equipments of a riding horse	rta sga 'khor cha 'grig
རྟ་སྒ་སྟན་སྲབ་གསུམ	a saddle, a saddleblanket, and a bridle	rta sga stan srab gsum
རྟ་སྒམ	large trunk or chest generally carried on horseback	rta sgam
རྟ་སྒའི་སྔ་རུ	straps for binding things to a saddle	rta sga'i snga ru
རྟ་སྒལ	horse load	rta sgal
རྟ་སྒོ	saddle, entrance for a horse, gateway	rta sgo
རྟ་སྒྱེལ	killing of horses	rta sgyel
རྟ་སྒྲ་གསང་མཐོ་འཚེར་བ	a kind of war cry	rta sgra gsang mtho 'tsher ba
རྟ་སྒྲིལ	mi bsad rta sgril - killing people and slaughtering their horses	rta sgril
རྟ་སྒྲོ	saddle bag, leather bag on horseback	rta sgro
རྟ་སྒྲོག	horse hobbles * (	rta sgrog
རྟ་བརྒྱུགས	to ride a horse	rta brgyugs
རྟ་ང་གནས་ག	village in rta nag, town in rta nag	rta nga gnas ga
རྟ་ངང་པ་གསེར་ལྡན	orangish horse [che ming]	rta ngang pa gser ldan
རྟ་ངར་པོ	kha dgag dka' ba'i rta 1067	rta ngar po
རྟ་རྔ	1) horse's tail; 2) Rta'i rnga ma'i spu rkang,...Lam bu rta rnga'i nyag las phra,...Thugs rje ri rab tsam yod kyang mngon mkhyen rta rnga tsam	rta rnga
རྟ་རྔོག	mane of the horse	rta rngog
རྟ་བསྔགས་ལྡན་བཟང་པོ	horse on which buddha rode	rta bsngags ldan bzang po
རྟ་ཅང་ཤེས	ci yang shes pa'i rta mchog ...Rta cang shes bzhon na lam du bde po yong	rta cang shes
རྟ་ཅན	cart, class of brahmans	rta can
རྟ་གཅོད	break/ warm up a horse	rta gcod
རྟ་གཅོད་པ	to break in a horse	rta gcod pa
རྟ་བཅག	broke/ warmed up a horse	rta bcag
རྟ་ལྕག	horsewhip	rta lcag
རྟ་ལྕག་གི་དངོ	horse whip's 'breng rgyun	rta lcag gi dngo
རྟ་ལྕག་རྒྱག	horsewhip	rta lcag rgyag
རྟ་ལྕག་གཞུ	horsewhip	rta lcag gzhu
རྟ་ལྕག་གཞུ་བ	whip	rta lcag gzhu ba
རྟ་ལྕགས	1) horse shoe; 2) chain for horse's legs (	rta lcags
རྟ་ཆག	horse fodder	rta chag
རྟ་ཆང	mare liquor	rta chang
རྟ་ཆས	riding equipment	rta chas
རྟ་ཆུང	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, constellation	rta chung
རྟ་ཆེན	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	rta chen
རྟ་མཆོག	the supreme steed	rta mchog
རྟ་མཆོག་ཁ་འབབ	{rta mchog kha 'bab River [= rta mchog gtsang po; from the S side of Ti Se Mt, 'brong pa rdzong brgyud nas, yar klungs gtsang po'i chu 'go'am stod rgyud de, 1 of the kha 'bab bzhi]	rta mchog kha 'bab
རྟ་མཆོག་གོང་པ	Height of the Supreme Horse, in Amnye Machen	rta mchog gong pa
རྟ་མཆོག་རྒྱལ་པོ	supreme steed king of horses	rta mchog rgyal po
རྟ་མཆོག་བརྒྱད	8 miraculous horses near lake mapham seen in a vision	rta mchog brgyad
རྟ་མཆོག་ཅང་ཤེས	all knowing good horse [rta bzang po ci yang shes pa]	rta mchog cang shes
རྟ་མཆོག་ལྕག་གིས་བསྐུལ་བ	high speed, w the greatest urgency	rta mchog lcag gis bskul ba
རྟ་མཆོག་ལྟ་བུ	like the perfect horse	rta mchog lta bu
རྟ་མཆོག་གཙང་པོ	{rta mchog gtsang po River [= rta mchog kha 'bab River]	rta mchog gtsang po
རྟ་མཆོག་རིང་པོ་ཆེ	Jewel of horses, the precious horse	rta mchog ring po che
རྟ་མཆོག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	rgyal srid sna bdun gyi ya gyal zhig	rta mchog rin po che
རྟ་མཆོག་རོལ་པ	Supreme Steed Display. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	rta mchog rol pa
རྟ་མཆོག་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Supreme Steed Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. Two versions are found in Vol. HA of Nyingma Gyübum	rta mchog rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
རྟ་མཆོག་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	, one of the {rol pa'i rgyud sde lnga} the five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization. {sgrub sde}	rta mchog rol pa'i skor
རྟ་མཆོག་རོལ་བ	mahayoga sadhana, mahayoga sgrub thabs	rta mchog rol ba
རྟ་ལྗང	the sun	rta ljang
རྟ་ལྗང་ཅན	1) Indra; 2) sun (	rta ljang can
རྟ་ལྗང་དབང་པོ	Lord of the Emerald Steeds, an epithet for the sun	rta ljang dbang po
རྟ་ཉོབ་ཏོ	horse that does not go fast	rta nyob to
རྟ་ཏོག	gold or copper horse's head tog	rta tog
རྟ་གཏུམ་པོ	rta rgyud gyong po'am, gshis ka rtsub po	rta gtum po
རྟ་གཏོང་བ	1) Tibetan govt serfs la rta khral sogs gtong dgos zhes brda gtong mkhan; 2) Rta zhon te zhar 'phen gtong ba (	rta gtong ba
རྟ་སྟན	saddle blanket	rta stan
རྟ་ཐ་ལི	horse of the worst color thal ba'i mdog	rta tha li
རྟ་ཐབ	delegation on horseback with food and drink [KNT]	rta thab
རྟ་ཐུག	stallion	rta thug
རྟ་ཐུལ	aashvadzitra [one of sh'akya thub pa'i 'khor lnga sde bzang po]	rta thul
རྟ་ཐོ་ལོག	small horse	rta tho log
རྟ་ཐོག་གྲོག་གཟིགས	a small person on a horse can see farther than a big 1 on foot	rta thog grog gzigs
རྟ་ཐོག་ལུས་རྩལ	horsemanship	rta thog lus rtsal
རྟ་ཐོག་ལོ	polo	rta thog lo
རྟ་ཐོག་ལོ་རྒྱག	play polo	rta thog lo rgyag
རྟ་མཐུར	rta'i mgo la g.yog pa'i mthur	rta mthur
རྟ་འཐེང	rta rkang kyog	rta 'theng
རྟ་འཐེན	horse-drawn	rta 'then
རྟ་དང་དྲེའུ	horses and mules	rta dang dre'u
རྟ་དང་དྲེའུ་སྒ་བརྒྱབ་པ	saddled horses and mules	rta dang dre'u sga brgyab pa
རྟ་དར	sngar rgyal po dang bla ma sogs phyir 'gro skabs sku srung rta pa rnams kyis sgreng ba'i dar cha	rta dar
རྟ་དྲེལ	horses and mules, pack animals	rta drel
རྟ་དྲེལ་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	lha ldan smon lam gyi dus su khyim grong so so'i nang du rta drel nyar chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	rta drel 'khrol 'dzin
རྟ་དྲེལ་སྒ་འབྱར	saddled horses and mules	rta drel sga 'byar
རྟ་གདོང་གི་རི་བོ	a mountain in Buddhist cosmology {rta rna}	rta gdong gi ri bo
རྟ་གདོང་མ	Ankusa, horse-headed one, 1 of sgo ma bzhi	rta gdong ma
རྟ་གདོང་མེ	great submarine fire in great ocean	rta gdong me
རྟ་བདག	the owner of the horse	rta bdag
རྟ་བདག་བརྒྱད	epithet of the god of wealth	rta bdag brgyad
རྟ་བདུན	the sun	rta bdun
རྟ་བདུན་པ	sun	rta bdun pa
རྟ་བདུན་དབང་པོ	sun	rta bdun dbang po
རྟ་མདའ་འཕེན	shoot an arrow like a running horse,...Dbyar kha 'ong skor gtong dus rta mda' 'phen	rta mda' 'phen
རྟ་མདོངས་ཅན	in the center of a horse's forehead, a white blaze	rta mdongs can
རྟ་འདུར	1) a horse's gait; 2) Dbyangs ga ler 'then pa rta dang, mgyogs myur 'then pa 'dur (	rta 'dur
རྟ་འདུལ་བ	break in or train a horse	rta 'dul ba
རྟ་འདྲོག་པ	shying of a horse 1068	rta 'drog pa
རྟ་འདྲོགས་པ	horse shying from fear	rta 'drogs pa
རྟ་རྡང	rta 'dogs sa'i thag rdang ste rta gdang yang zer	rta rdang
རྟ་ནག	district in tibet, name of place in Tsang area	rta nag
རྟ་ནག་གྱང་ཕུ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	rta nag gyang phu
རྟ་ནག་ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཁན་པོ	chos rnam rgyal	rta nag thub bstan mkhan po
རྟ་ནག་ཕུ་ཆུ	{rta nag phu chu River	rta nag phu chu
རྟ་ནག་རིན་ཆེན་རྩེ	{rta nag rin chen rtse [place in bzhad mthong smon rdzong]	rta nag rin chen rtse
རྟ་གནས	stable	rta gnas
རྟ་རྣ	the Horse Eared, [5th of {gser ri bdun}; the byang rta rna monastery in khams of the {yel pa bka' brgyud} tradition	rta rna
རྟ་རྣ་ཅན	Ashvakarna	rta rna can
རྟ་རྣ་རི	1 of 10 kings of mountains, SA ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu	rta rna ri
རྟ་སྣ་རི	1 of 7 golden mountains	rta sna ri
རྟ་པ	rider, horseman; a horseman	rta pa
རྟ་པ་རྟ་ཞོན	balancing board, see-saw	rta pa rta zhon
རྟ་པའི་དཔུང	cavalry	rta pa'i dpung
རྟ་པོ	horse	rta po
རྟ་ལྤགས	horse's skin, medicinal herb	rta lpags
རྟ་ལྤགས་པ	{rta lpags pa med herb [ro mngar la kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas srin gsod, lha ba'i nang khrag rgyu bar byed, chu ser skem]	rta lpags pa
རྟ་སྤངས	horse dung	rta spangs
རྟ་སྤྱི	rta khal skul gtong las 'gan gyi spyi 'doms	rta spyi
རྟ་ཕག	Hayagriva and Vajra yogini	rta phag
རྟ་ཕག་ཞལ་སྦྱོར	Hayagriva and Varahi in union	rta phag zhal sbyor
རྟ་ཕག་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Wish-fulfilling Gem, Hayagriva and Varahi, revealed by Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	rta phag yid bzhin nor bu
པ་པུན་ད་རི་ཀའི་དོ་ཤལ	Necklace of White Lotuses, text for the practice of	pa pun da ri ka'i do shal
ཐེ་ཝིཤ	fulfilling Gem, Hayagriva and Varahi, by Trülshik Rinpoche rta phag yid bzhin nor bu'i las byang dngos grub rgya mtsho dang zur rgyan 'dod 'byung nor bu bklag chog tu bkod	the Wish
པྲཅཏིཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཝིཤ	fulfilling Gem, Hayagriva and Varahi, by Trülshik Rinpoche	practice of the Wish
རྟ་ཕམ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	the sadhana of Hayagriva and Vajra Varahi which is like a wish fulfilling gems	rta pham yid bzhin nor bu
རྟ་ཕུ	Taphu, near Ganden, in U	rta phu
རྟ་ཕོ	stallion	rta pho
རྟ་ཕོ་ཆེན	1) stallion perfect in power; 2) 'Bras bu phyung ba'i rta (	rta pho chen
རྟ་ཕོ་ཐལ་དཀར	stallion of ash-color	rta pho thal dkar
རྟ་ཕོ་དྲུག་ཕྲོམ	rta mog ro drug steng khra thig can te, de'i rkan gyi khrag gis rma la phan	rta pho drug phrom
རྟ་ཕྱིང	bla chen gyi mchor gos shig	rta phying
རྟ་ཕྱུགས	colt, foal	rta phyugs
རྟ་ཕྲན	colt	rta phran
རྟ་ཕྲུག	foal, young of the horse	rta phrug
རྟ་འཕྱགས་བརྒྱབ་པ	rta gar yod khral du btsan bskul byas pa	rta 'phyags brgyab pa
རྟ་བང་ཅན	swift horse	rta bang can
རྟ་བབ	{rta babs kyi snam bu} pediment (of mansion)	rta bab
རྟ་བབ་ཀྱི་སྣམ་བུ	pediment (of mansion)	rta bab kyi snam bu
རྟ་བབ་བང་རིམ་བརྒྱད	CHN	rta bab bang rim brgyad
རྟ་བབས	arch, pediment; archway, Skt. torana	rta babs
རྟ་བབས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel above the archway	rta babs kyi 'khor lo
རྟ་བབས་ཀྱི་སྣམ་བུ	pediment (of mansion)	rta babs kyi snam bu
རྟ་བབས་བརྒྱད	eight archways	rta babs brgyad
རྟ་བེལ	horse's forelock	rta bel
རྟ་བོང་རིས་མེད	so'i ri mo yal ba'i rta bong rgas song,...Na grangs brtsi rgyu med pa'i rta bong ris med bkol spyod mi byed	rta bong ris med
རྟ་བོན	nasty filth	rta bon
རྟ་བོན་པ	rta'i lag pa'i nang ldebs kyi rva ltar 'bur po can te, nus pas nyva lhog gam nyva log 'joms	rta bon pa
རྟ་བྱ	gser rdo'i ming gi rnam grangs shig	rta bya
རྟ་བྱང་མ	lto bkag pa'i rta,...Rta byang ma'i bang la bsdur ya med	rta byang ma
རྟ་བྲ་བོ	'bru rigs bra bo'i mdog can gyi rta, lus nag cing kha mig gi mtha' yi spu mdog dkar ba zhig	rta bra bo
རྟ་བྲེས	rta la rtsva gzan ster sa'i bres ra	rta bres
རྟ་བྲོ	hayagriva dance	rta bro
རྟ་བླ	'bu rkang lag mang la lus zing po'i rnam pa can zhig	rta bla
རྟ་དབང	grong zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi mtsho sna rdzong khongs mon yul du yod	rta dbang
རྟ་དབང་དགོན་པ	t' la'i bla ma sku phreng lnga pa'i slob ma me rag bla ma blo gros rgya mtshos mon yul du phyag btab pa'i dgon pa zhig ..Rta dbyangs, 1 gdangs ring por 'don pa'i ngag gi dbyangs; 2) Slob dpon dpa' ...	rta dbang dgon pa
རྟ་དབྱངས	asvaghosha, sage, viracharya	rta dbyangs
རྟ་འབྲས་བུ་མ་ཕྱུང་བ	stallion	rta 'bras bu ma phyung ba
རྟ་སྦངས	rta'i aong ril	rta sbangs
རྟ་མ་ཆད་ཙམ	continuous, uninterrupted 1069	rta ma chad tsam
རྟ་མ་བུ	lha gcig rgya bza' 'khrab dus rten 'brel mtshon byed kyi rta ma bu	rta ma bu
རྟ་མེད་དོར་མ	a kind of gos thung	rta med dor ma
རྟ་མོ	mare	rta mo
རྟ་དམག	cavalry	rta dmag
རྟ་དམར་ཅན	fire god	rta dmar can
རྟ་དམུ་རྒོད	untamed rta gyong po	rta dmu rgod
རྟ་དམུ་རྒོད་ལྟར་གཅུན	1 of the {gcun thabs gsum}	rta dmu rgod ltar gcun
རྟ་རྨིག	horse's hoof, plant whose leaves resemble a horse's hoof, solanum melongena, hoof of horse	rta rmig
རྟ་རྨིག་མ	silver ingot shaped as a hoof	rta rmig ma
རྟ་རྨུ་རྒོད	rta dmu rgod rta smug g.yung ldum - viola biflora l.	rta rmu rgod
རྟ་གཙང	pure horse for vedic sacrifices	rta gtsang
རྟ་གཙང་མཆོད་སྦྱིང	brahmanical sacrifice of horse	rta gtsang mchod sbying
རྟ་གཙང་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	an Indian mchod sbyin	rta gtsang mchod sbyin
རྟ་མཙའ་ལུ	rta dmar rting dkar	rta mtsa' lu
རྟ་རྩལ	skill in riding, horsemanship, equestrian sports	rta rtsal
རྟ་ཚག་མངགས་བཏགས	18th century Tibetan srid skyong rta tshag skabs ched du mngags nas btags pa'i gos chen zhig	rta tshag mngags btags
རྟ་ཚག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Tatsak Rinpoche, one of three high lamas who, in turn,	rta tshag rin po che
ཨསསུམེད་ཐེ་ཨོཕ༹ཕི༹ཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་རེགེནཏ	king of Tibet	assumed the office of regent
རྟ་ཚུགས་པོ	rta 'gros ma bang mi rgyug par 'gros tshugs por 'gro mkhan	rta tshugs po
རྟ་འཚུབ་པོ	rta dmu rgod dam gyong po	rta 'tshub po
རྟ་འཚེར	horse neighing, making a noise	rta 'tsher
རྟ་འཚོ་མཁན	horse herder, groom	rta 'tsho mkhan
རྟ་རྫི	stable keeper, one that tends horses, groom	rta rdzi
རྟ་ཞབ༹	Tibetan govt. bla sprul rtse drung etc. winter riding hat	rta zhva
རྟ་ཞལ	Hayagriva	rta zhal
རྟ་ཞུན	good horse	rta zhun
རྟ་ཞོན་པ	rode	rta zhon pa
རྟ་གཞོང	rta la chu ster sa'i gzhong pa	rta gzhong
རྟ་ཟམ	horse bridge, government post station	rta zam
རྟ་ཟམ་པ	post rider	rta zam pa
རྟ་ཟེག་པ	red horse	rta zeg pa
རྟ་ཟོག	livestock	rta zog
རྟ་ཟོག་གི་ཁའི་དྲ་བ	muzzle	rta zog gi kha'i dra ba
རྟ་ཟོག་སེམས་ཅན	livestock	rta zog sems can
རྟ་ཟླ	1) star rta pa month or, cho 'phrul month, lst month; 2) in terms of the Lo skor bcu gnyis the 5th month, and nya skar the mchu month	rta zla
རྟ་གཟུགས་བོང་ཆུང་བ	small horse	rta gzugs bong chung ba
རྟ་བཟང་གིས་ཁྱེར་ནས	his fine horse swiftly carried him	rta bzang gis khyer nas
རྟ་བཟང་ལྕག་བཞིན	whip is necessary to keep even a good horse in order, saying when one person sends remembrances to another	rta bzang lcag bzhin
རྟ་བཟང་པོ	a fine / good horse	rta bzang po
རྟ་འུལ	Tibetan govt gi mi sna skyel bar rdzong skyel lam sa tshigs su brje ba'i rta khral gtong dgos pa der zer, horse corvee tax obligation	rta 'ul
རྟ་འུལ་བསྐུལ་ཆོག་པའི་ལམ་ཡིག	Tibetan govt bzhon rta skul 'ded chog pa'i ngos sbyor lag 'khyer	rta 'ul bskul chog pa'i lam yig
རྟ་འོ་ལ	black horse like 'ol ba bird= wa la	rta 'o la
རྟ་འོན	monastic club fro discussing metaphysics	rta 'on
རྟ་འོལ་བ	black horse like 'ol ba bird= wa la yang zer	rta 'ol ba
རྟ་ཡན་སྲབ་མེད	horse w/o bridle that goes where it likes	rta yan srab med
རྟ་ཡི་དགྲ	1) buffalo; 2) yak; 3) horse's enemy (	rta yi dgra
རྟ་ཡི་མཇུག་མ	medicinal plant	rta yi mjug ma
རྟ་ཡི་བུ	colt	rta yi bu
རྟ་ཡི་ཤུགས	power of a horse	rta yi shugs
རྟ་ཡིས་སྐད་འདོན་པ	horse neighing, making a noise	rta yis skad 'don pa
རྟ་ཡིས་དྲུད་པ	dragged on the ground after falling from their horse	rta yis drud pa
རྟ་ཡོད་དོར་མ	a kind of gos thung rta g.yag mgo sbrel - horse's head on a yak, disparate things joined together rta g.yag mgo sbrel gyi tshul du 'jog mi	rta yod dor ma
རུང	its not right to join things disparately like a horse's head on a yak rta g.yung mo - rta rgyud 'jam po'am, lhing po rta g.yog - to messengers rta g.yog gtong dgos pa'i khral rta g.yog - groom rta ...	rung
རྟ་ར	horse corral, stable	rta ra
རྟ་རྭ	stable	rta rwa
རྟ་རག་པ	rta spu mdog ser skya la dmar mdangs phran bu yod pa ste mdog dkar dmar ser gsum bsres pa lta bu zhig	rta rag pa
རྟ་རིགས་ཡག་པོ	thoroughbred	rta rigs yag po
རྟ་རིང	rnam thar gtong ba'i dbyangs ring ba	rta ring
རྟ་རོ	dead horse	rta ro
རྟ་ལ	Rta Pass [in S gting skyes rdzong, el. 3375 m]	rta la
རྟ་ལ་སྒ་སྟད་པ	saddle a horse	rta la sga stad pa
རྟ་ལ་ཆུ་སྡུད་པ	giving water to a pony	rta la chu sdud pa
རྟ་ལ་ཆུ་བླུད	pour out water into a pail for a horse	rta la chu blud
རྟ་ལ་དྲངས	to sing	rta la drangs
རྟ་ལ་བྱེད་བ	horsemanship	rta la byed ba
རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་ནས	went on horseback	rta la zhon nas
རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་པ	riding horses	rta la zhon pa
རྟ་ལམ	on horseback	rta lam
རྟ་ལམ་གྲོག་མས་འགོག	ant blocking the path of a horse, much rage little strength	rta lam grog mas 'gog
རྟ་ལའི་ཀོང	mythological race	rta la'i kong
རྟ་ལུད	horse manure	rta lud
རྟ་ལོ	horse year	rta lo
རྟ་ལོ་པ	person/ man born in the horse year	rta lo pa
རྟ་ཤ	1) dpyi rus kyi sha; 2) horse meat (	rta sha
རྟ་ཤ་བཙན་གསུམ	three guardians of the {bla ma dgongs 'dus} cycle of {sangs rgyas gling pa}	rta sha btsan gsum
རྟ་ཤད	curry comb	rta shad
རྟ་ཤར	mi hreng dang khal ma sogs 'grul rogs med par shar rgyag 'gro ba'i rta pa	rta shar
རྟ་ཤས	thun mong du bdag pa'i rta	rta shas
རྟ་ཤུ	wound on the seat from having ridden bareback	rta shu
རྟ་ཤུགས	'phrul 'khor sgul shugs kyi tshad gzhi	rta shugs
རྟ་སོ	1) horse's teeth; 2) Ri ldebs su yod pa'i dgon pa sogs kyi lcags ri thur du bang rim byas nas khrid pa'i dbyibs (	rta so
རྟ་སོ་མ	a kind of shel ka ra	rta so ma
རྟ་སྲབ	horse steering srab	rta srab
རྟ་སྲེ	pie-bald horse, epithet of marut or	rta sre
ཐེ་ཝིནད	god 1070	the wind
རྟ་གསར	unbroken horse, young horse first being saddled [sga brgyab ma thag pa'i rta na chung]	rta gsar
རྟ་གསར་སྒ་པ	colt 3 years old newly broken and saddled	rta gsar sga pa
རྟ་གསིར་པོ	skul lcag la ma bltos par rang bzhin gyis mgyogs por 'gro ba'i rta	rta gsir po
རྟ་གསེབ	stallion	rta gseb
རྟ་གསེབ་གཏོང་བ	rta rgod ma la pho rta sbyor ba	rta gseb gtong ba
རྟ་གསོད	oleander nerium odorum	rta gsod
རྟ་གསོར་པོ	naturally swift horse that doesn't need the whip skul lcag la ma bltos par ?	rta gsor po
རྟ་བསུ་མཛུབ་སྐྱེལ	tshur rta yis bsu ba dang, phar mdzub brdas skyel ba ste bsu skyel gyi bya ba mi mthun pa,...Mgron rigs la rta bsu mdzub skyel min par dga' bsu dga' skyel babs 'brel lugs mthun byed dgos	rta bsu mdzub skyel
རྟ་ཧྲག	good/ capable horse	rta hrag
རྟ་ཧྲེངས	wild horse	rta hrengs
རྟ་ལྷིང་པོ	'drog mgo med pa'i rta brling po	rta lhing po
རྟག	eternalism [in philosophical context of {rtag chad}. eternalist views; eternal, permanent, perpetual, everlasting	rtag
རྟག་བཀོད	to state the reason rtag khyab lhun grub kyi bdag nyid can endowed w the nature of being permanent, all-pervading and spontaneously present rtag khyab lhun grub kyi bdag nyid can endowed with the n...	rtag bkod
རྟག་ཁྱབ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	Buddha activity. the spontaneously present	rtag khyab lhun grub kyi phrin las
ཨེབེ༹རླསྟིང་ཨནད་ཨལལ	pervasive activities	everlasting and all
རྟག་འཁྲུས་ཆེ	always washed, assiduity	rtag 'khrus che
རྟག་འགོག་པ	see {brtags 'gog}; [when the nyon mongs cease in meditative cessation]. See also {brtags min 'gog pa} [mss]	rtag 'gog pa
རྟག་འགྲུས	MG: dligience, zeal. [mss]	rtag 'grus
རྟག་རྒྱལ	eternal ruler	rtag rgyal
རྟག་རྒྱུན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	continuous wheel of permanence	rtag rgyun gyi 'khor lo
རྟག་ངུ	see {rtag tu ngu}	rtag ngu
རྟག་དངོས	permanent phenomenon and functioning thing, permanent and real	rtag dngos
རྟག་དངོས་གཉིས	permanent phenomenon and functioning thing	rtag dngos gnyis
རྟག་ཅན	significant	rtag can
རྟག་གཅིག	permanent and 1 [autonamous ego/ selfhood, indestructible, permanent, and partless, = single/ solitary [rang dbang can gyi bdag mi 'jig pa'i rtag pa dang cha med pa'i gcig pu], tshugs thub tu grub ...	rtag gcig
རྟག་གཅིག་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	to conceive of [something as being] permanent and singular	rtag gcig tu rtog pa
རྟག་གཅིག་བདག	permanent, 1, and having selfhood, permanent single ego	rtag gcig bdag
རྟག་གཅིག་རང་དབང་ཅན	eternal, unique and autonomous	rtag gcig rang dbang can
རྟག་གཅིག་རང་དབང་ཅན་གྱི་བདག	permanent, partless, and autonomous self [ggd]	rtag gcig rang dbang can gyi bdag
རྟག་ཆད	Permanent or annihilated. Lasting forever as in an eternalistic point of view or ceasing to exist as in a nihilistic view	rtag chad
རྟག་ཆད་ཀྱི་མཐའ	the limits of permanence and termination, eternalism and nihilism	rtag chad kyi mtha'
རྟག་ཆད་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the extremes of eternalism and nihilism	rtag chad kyi mtha' las 'das pa
རྟག་ཆད་ལྟ་བ	view of eternalism and nihilism	rtag chad lta ba
རྟག་ཆད་དུ་ལྟ་བ	eternalist and nihilist beliefs	rtag chad du lta ba
རྟག་ཆད་མེད་པ	nonexistent as anything that can be (naively) affirmed and/ or negated/ (nihilistically) denied	rtag chad med pa
རྟག་སྙོམས	= homogeneous, uniform	rtag snyoms
རྟག་སྙོམས་ལ	uniformly, equally	rtag snyoms la
རྟག་ཏུ	continual, always, ever, perpetually, continuously	rtag tu
རྟག་ཏུ་ཁོལ	slave, perpetual servant	rtag tu khol
རྟག་ཏུ་འཁྲུལ་པ་མེད་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཨེབེ༹ར	unconfused discipline	rtag tu 'khrul pa med pa'i tshul khrims ever
རྟག་ཏུ་དགའ	always cheerful, every happy, epithet of mahadeva	rtag tu dga'
རྟག་ཏུ་རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་པ	never interrupted, always continuing, constant, continual rtag tu rgyun mi 'chad par slob sbyong	rtag tu rgyun mi 'chad pa
རྟག་ཏུ་ངུ	Sadaparudita, the everweeping bodhisattva, The questions of sadaprarudita [great bodhisattva from the time of buddha dharmodgata whom he met in ghandhavati]	rtag tu ngu
རྟག་ཏུ་རྔུ	Sadaparudita, the everweeping bodhisattva, The questions of sadaprarudita	rtag tu rngu
རྟག་ཏུ་བསྙེན་པ་གསུམ	CHN	rtag tu bsnyen pa gsum
རྟག་ཏུ་སྤྱོད	fire which is always at work	rtag tu spyod
རྟག་ཏུ་བ	eternal, perpetual	rtag tu ba
རྟག་ཏུ་འབབ	name of river sita, river of continual flow	rtag tu 'bab
རྟག་ཏུ་འབྱུང	eternal growth, perpetual growth 1071	rtag tu 'byung
རྟག་ཏུ་སྦྱིན	perpetually giving, always yielding	rtag tu sbyin
རྟག་ཏུ་མ་རིག་བྱ་བྱེད	have perpetual ignorance	rtag tu ma rig bya byed
རྟག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར	inalterability	rtag tu mi 'gyur
རྟག་ཏུ་མི་འདུམ	constantly at variance	rtag tu mi 'dum
རྟག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	forever nonexistent	rtag tu med pa
རྟག་ཏུ་བརྩོན	always assiduous, everapplying	rtag tu brtson
རྟག་ཏུ་ཟ	that eats at all times, horse	rtag tu za
རྟག་ཏུ་ཟས་ནོར་འདུ་བ	the gathering of material resources at all times	rtag tu zas nor 'du ba
རྟག་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	always existent	rtag tu yod pa
རྟག་ཏུ་ལང་ཚོ	epithet of draupadi	rtag tu lang tsho
རྟག་ཏུ་ལང་ཚོ་ལྡན་མ	she who is at all times youthful	rtag tu lang tsho ldan ma
རྟག་ཏུ་གསོལ་བ་ཐོབ་ཅིག	supplicate continuously!	rtag tu gsol ba thob cig
རྟག་གཏུག	constantly phar tshur thug 'phrad,..Dga' po nye po dang phan tshun rtag gtug byed	rtag gtug
རྟག་གཏོར	The perpetual torma (rtag gtor) which is kept for special durations, months and years, in the manner of shrine offering, can be of two types. The first is the sadhana torma (sgrub gtor), also calle...	rtag gtor
རྟག་རྟག	precise, accurate; exactly, accurately	rtag rtag
རྟག་རྟག་མེད་པ	inexact, approximate	rtag rtag med pa
རྟག་རྟོགས	pramana that correctly realizes something to be eternal [true knowledge ascertaining space etc dharmas	rtag rtogs
རྟག་ལྟ	eternalism. The belief that there is a permanent and causeless creator of everything; in particular, that one's identity or consciousness has a concrete essence which is independent, everlasting an...	rtag lta
རྟག་ལྟ་ཐེར་ཟུག་གི་ཞེན་པ	the clinging to the permanence of eternalism	rtag lta ther zug gi zhen pa
རྟག་ལྟ་སྡེ་བཞི	four eternalistic schools	rtag lta sde bzhi
རྟག་ལྟ་བ	eternalists	rtag lta ba
རྟག་བརྟན	everlasting, steady and everlasting	rtag brtan
རྟག་བརྟན་ཐེར་ཟུགས	permanent, stable, and unchanging	rtag brtan ther zugs
རྟག་ཐུབ་པ	eternal, changeless	rtag thub pa
རྟག་མཐའ	Extreme of eternalism	rtag mtha'
རྟག་མཐའ་དང་ཡོད་མཐའ	opposed to {med mtha' dang chad mtha'}	rtag mtha' dang yod mtha'
རྟག་མཐར་འཛིན་པ	eternalistic, eternalism	rtag mthar 'dzin pa
རྟག་དང་ཆད་པ	Eternity and destruction	rtag dang chad pa
རྟག་བདག	permanent self-entity	rtag bdag
རྟག་བདེ་བྱེད	happy at all times, epithet of rnam thos sras	rtag bde byed
རྟག་སྡོད	land steward, overseer	rtag sdod
རྟག་པ	1) eternity, permanence, perpetuity, duration; permanent phenomena, 2) permanent; eternal, lasting, forever,	rtag pa
རྟག་པ་ཁོ་ན	only a permanent phenomenon	rtag pa kho na
རྟག་པ་རྒྱུན	perpetual continuity	rtag pa rgyun
རྟག་པ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	{dus rtag pa rgyun gyi 'khor lo} the time is the everrevolving wheel of eternity	rtag pa rgyun gyi 'khor lo
རྟག་པ་གཅིག་བདེན	permanent 1 and true	rtag pa gcig bden
རྟག་པ་གཅིག་པུ་རང་དབང་ཅན	permanent single and autonomous	rtag pa gcig pu rang dbang can
རྟག་པ་ཉིད	eternalism, eternity	rtag pa nyid
རྟག་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of being eternal [rnam pa thams cad kyi rtag pa &, re 'ga' ba'i rtag pa gnyis]	rtag pa gnyis
རྟག་པ་ཐེར་ཟུག	of permanent changeless nature	rtag pa ther zug
རྟག་པ་དང་ཆད་པ	permanent or discontinuing	rtag pa dang chad pa
རྟག་པ་དང་ཆད་པའི་མཐའ	the extremes of eternalism and nihilism	rtag pa dang chad pa'i mtha'
རྟག་པ་དང་ཆད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	doctrines/ exponents of eternalism and nihilism	rtag pa dang chad par smra ba
རྟག་པ་དང་མི་རྟག་པ	permanent and impermanent	rtag pa dang mi rtag pa
རྟག་པ་དང་མི་རྟག་པར་ལྟ་བ	view of permanence and impermanence	rtag pa dang mi rtag par lta ba
རྟག་པ་མ་ཡིན	non-eternal	rtag pa ma yin
རྟག་པ་མེད་པ	not permanent / lasting	rtag pa med pa
རྟག་པ་སྨྲ་བ	Eternalist	rtag pa smra ba
རྟག་པ་འཛིན་མཁན	he who holds that things are permanent	rtag pa 'dzin mkhan
རྟག་པ་བཞི	the four eternal entities	rtag pa bzhi
ཡིན	neither permanent no impermanent	yin
རྟག་པ་རེ་ཞིག	always, constantly	rtag pa re zhig
རྟག་པ་ཤིང	birch tree	rtag pa shing
རྟག་པ་གསུམ	[TRS 133-4] + Vajrayana expl	rtag pa gsum
རྟག་པའི་ཆོས	lasting phenomena	rtag pa'i chos
རྟག་པའི་ལྟ་བ	eternalism 1072	rtag pa'i lta ba
རྟག་པའི་མཐའ	extreme of permanence [chos rnams rang ngos nas bden par grub par lta ba]	rtag pa'i mtha'
རྟག་པའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent permanence	rtag pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa
རྟག་པའི་བྱེད་པ་བཞི	29th day of the month latter part bkra shis &, gnam stong earlier par rkang bzhi'am bzhi mdo, gnam stong later part byed pa klu, earlier part of the 1st day mi sdug pa ste, these rtag tu nges pas s...	rtag pa'i byed pa bzhi
རྟག་པར	always	rtag par
རྟག་པར་ལྟ་བ	(to view things in terms of) naive realism/ eternalism	rtag par lta ba
རྟག་པར་མཐོང་བ	common, constantly seen	rtag par mthong ba
རྟག་པར་གནས་རྒྱུའི	catalogue	rtag par gnas rgyu'i
རྟག་པར་གནས་རྒྱུའི་ཐོ་ཡིག	list	rtag par gnas rgyu'i tho yig
རྟག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent for permanence [thd]	rtag par smra ba
རྟག་པར་ཚུགས་ཐུབ	self-contained, selfconstituted; syn {rang tshugs thub pa}	rtag par tshugs thub
རྟག་པར་འཛིན་པ	to invest something/ things with eternality/ permanence; to hold something/ things to be eternal/ permanent	rtag par 'dzin pa
རྟག་པར་རེ་བཞིན	always	rtag par re bzhin
རྟག་པོ	often, punctual, prompt	rtag po
རྟག་སྦྱོར	persistence	rtag sbyor
རྟག་སྦྱོར་གྱི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	the diligence of constant application	rtag sbyor gyi brtson 'grus
རྟག་མ	eternity personified, eternal goddess, epithet of durga	rtag ma
རྟག་མ་ཐུབ	does not last forever, never eternal	rtag ma thub
རྟག་མི་འགྱུར	inalterability	rtag mi 'gyur
རྟག་མི་རྟག	permenent or impermanent	rtag mi rtag
རྟག་མི་རྟག་གི་ཕྱོངས	? recheck	rtag mi rtag gi phyongs
རྟག་མི་ཐུབ	not withstand scrutiny	rtag mi thub
རྟག་མིན་འགོག་པ	{brtags min 'gog pa} SNT: said of non-existents such as the horns of a rabbit. [mss]	rtag min 'gog pa
རྟག་མྱོས	epithet of the god of love, inebriates, 1 of rgyal chen ris bzhi	rtag myos
རྟག་མྱོས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the EverEcstatic; one of the {rgyal chen bzhi'i ris} on the second terrace of Mount Sumeru	rtag myos kyi lha
རྟག་སྨིན	continuous ripening	rtag smin
རྟག་སྨྲ	doctrine/ exponent of eternalism/ that something is eternal	rtag smra
རྟག་སྨྲ་བ	doctrine/ exponent of eternalism/ that something is eternal	rtag smra ba
རྟག་སྨྲ་བཞི	the four kinds of eternalists	rtag smra bzhi
རྟག་སྨྲའི་སྟོན་པ་གསུམ	the 34 eternalist teachers CHN	rtag smra'i ston pa gsum
རྟག་ཚུགས	permanently established, regularly/ routinely held	rtag tshugs
རྟག་འཛིན	clinging to permanence	rtag 'dzin
རྟག་འཛིན་མཁན	those who fixate on permanence	rtag 'dzin mkhan
རྟག་འཛིན་ཅན	he who holds that things are permanent	rtag 'dzin can
རྟག་འཛིན་འཆིང་ཐག་བཅད་པ	to cut the ties of clinging to permanence	rtag 'dzin 'ching thag bcad pa
རྟག་འཛིན་ཕྱི་བཤོལ་བྱས་པ	to postpone [practicing], believing that things last	rtag 'dzin phyi bshol byas pa
རྟག་ཞི་པ	epithet of avalokiteshvara and shiva	rtag zhi pa
རྟག་ཞི་བ	eternal peace	rtag zhi ba
རྟག་བཞུགས་པ	dwells permanently	rtag bzhugs pa
རྟག་ཡས	#	rtag yas
རྟག་ཡོད	{rtag tu yod pa, rtag par yod pa}	rtag yod
ཏོ་བེ་ཨེབེ༹ར	present; to exist externally/ permanently	to be ever
རྟག་རེ་འཁོར་བ	constant change	rtag re 'khor ba
རྟག་རེས་འཁོར	constantly recurring, constant change	rtag res 'khor
རྟག་རེས་འཁོར་བ	rtag tu sbyor ba'i zas	rtag res 'khor ba
རྟག་ལོངས	constant coursing [astr, the planets three days coursing rtag tu nges pa]	rtag longs
རྟགས་ཀུན་འབྱུང	all signs arise	rtags kun 'byung
རྟགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	kaya that manifest as a sign	rtags kyi sku
རྟགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་དྲུག	[TRS 143-4]	rtags kyi rgyan drug
རྟགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonestablishment because the essence of the sign/reason is impossible	rtags kyi ngo bo ma grub pa
རྟགས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་པ	verse treatise on grammar by {thon mi sam bho ta}; "The Guide to Signs". Popular abbreviation of {lung du ston pa rtag gi 'jug pa}. See that entry	rtags kyi 'jug pa
རྟགས་ཀྱི་བསྙེན་པ	sign recitation, [reciting until a certain sign occurs indicating the practice is completed]	rtags kyi bsnyen pa
རྟགས་ཀྱི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	drang don gyi rdor dril lam, mtshan ma'i rdor dril rtags kyi phyogs gcig chos can la ma grub	rtags kyi rdor dril
རྟགས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	syllogistic proof of the reason	rtags kyi sbyor ba
རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་གསུམ	three aspects of the proof, [presence in subject, positive pervasion, counter pervasion] Syn {phyogs chos} property of the subject	rtags kyi tshul gsum
རྟགས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	sign luminosity	rtags kyi 'od gsal
རྟགས་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	manifestation of signs	rtags kyi rol pa
རྟགས་ཀྱིས་བསལ་བ	dngos stobs kyis bsal ba'o	rtags kyis bsal ba
རྟགས་ཁོ་ན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	thal 'gyur la bkod tshod kyi sgo nas rtags kho na ma grub pa, dper na, sangs rgyas pa'i ngor, sgra chos can, ma byas pa yin par thal, rtag pa yin pa'i phyir zhes pa'i thal 'gyur lta bu	rtags kho na ma grub pa
རྟགས་ཁྱབ་གྲུབ་ཚུལ་བཞི	CHN rtags khyab gnyis ka khas blangs kyis grub	rtags khyab grub tshul bzhi
རྟགས་ཁྱབ་གཉིས་ཀ་གྲུབ་པ	thal 'gyur dgod yul gyi blo ngor, tshad ma'am khas blangs kyis rtags khyab gnyis ka grub pa'o rtags khyab gnyis ka grub pa'i thal 'gyur	rtags khyab gnyis ka grub pa
རྟགས་ཁྱབ་གཉིས་ཀ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	neither reason or pervasion established [conclusion bkod tshod kyi sgo nas neither reason nor thesis is established [rtags gsal] are established, EG, a buddhist saying: the dharmin sound, is not gz...	rtags khyab gnyis ka ma grub pa
རྟགས་གྲུབ	truly established	rtags grub
རྟགས་འགོད་པ	arrangement of the root evidence [thd]	rtags 'god pa
རྟགས་རྒྱག	make a sign/ mark, signal, mark	rtags rgyag
རྟགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 auspicious signs	rtags brgyad
རྟགས་བརྒྱད་སྤྲིན་རིས	1) rum 'thags kyi ri mo'i rnam grangs shig; 2) kind of silk brocade (	rtags brgyad sprin ris
རྟགས་བརྒྱད་བུམ་གཟུགས	picture of the 8 auspicious signs tshang ba'i ri mo bum pa'i gzugs dbyibs can zhig	rtags brgyad bum gzugs
རྟགས་བརྒྱད་མ	nyin mo bde legs kyi nang gses good quality kha btag	rtags brgyad ma
རྟགས་ངེས	definitely a sign that	rtags nges
རྟགས་མངོན	proof, evidence	rtags mngon
རྟགས་ཅན	having a mark upon it, stained, ominous	rtags can
རྟགས་ཅན་མ	prostitute	rtags can ma
རྟགས་བཅུ	the 10 signs [of practice]	rtags bcu
རྟགས་ཆོས	in syllogism the reason and dharma to be proved	rtags chos
རྟགས་ཆོས་གཅིག་པ	non-establishment because reason and dharma are not different [rtags chos tha dad med nas ma grub pa ste, EG the dharmin sound is impermanent because it is impermanent; ldog pa gcig pas ma grub pa ...	rtags chos gcig pa
རྟགས་ཆོས་དོན་གསུམ	reason, dharma to be established and thesis [rtags zhes pa sgrub byed dang, chos zhes pa bsgrub bya'i chos dang, don zhes pa bsgrub gzhi'am rtsod gzhi bcas gsum mo]	rtags chos don gsum
རྟགས་འཇུག	[grammatical work] rtags kyi 'jug pa	rtags 'jug
རྟགས་འཇུག་པ	gender, making grammatical distinctions	rtags 'jug pa
རྟགས་གཉིས	CHN	rtags gnyis
རྟགས་ལྟར་སྣང	incorrect evidence [ggd]	rtags ltar snang
རྟགས་ལྟར་སྣང་གསུམ	the three counterfeit/ merely apparent reasons	rtags ltar snang gsum
རྟགས་སྟོབས	sgrub byed rtags su bkod pa'i power	rtags stobs
རྟགས་ཐམ	stamp	rtags tham
རྟགས་ཐམ་ཐེབས	leave/ bear an imprint	rtags tham thebs
རྟགས་ཐམ་ཐེབས་ཡོད	leave/ bear an imprint	rtags tham thebs yod
རྟགས་ཐུགས	intimate connection	rtags thugs
རྟགས་ཐེལ	rgya'am thel tshe	rtags thel
རྟགས་ཐོན	to show signs	rtags thon
རྟགས་ཐོན་པ	las gang zhig byas rung de'i rtags sam mtshan ma thon pa	rtags thon pa
རྟགས་ཐོན་བར	until the signs appear	rtags thon bar
རྟགས་དང་ཕྲལ	he deprived them of their insignia	rtags dang phral
རྟགས་དང་ཡོད་པ་ལ	to every one that has the mark	rtags dang yod pa la
རྟགས་དམ	seal	rtags dam
རྟགས་དམ་ཕྲུག	sign and seal	rtags dam phrug
རྟགས་དེ་ལ་ཟེར	asterisk	rtags de la zer
རྟགས་པ	knowledge	rtags pa
རྟགས་པ་བྱེད་པ	draw prognostics from a charmed mirror	rtags pa byed pa
རྟགས་པ་ཞིག་དགོས	proof is necessary	rtags pa zhig dgos
རྟགས་པའང་མི་འདུག	there is even no evidence or mark	rtags pa'ang mi 'dug
རྟགས་དཔེ་ཕྱོགས་གསུམ	reason, example and thesis [gtan tshigs rig pa'i sbyor ba 'god tshul la cha shas gsum ldan gyi three parts of a syllogism 1 phyogs: bsgrub bya'am phyogs what 1 wants to prove two dpe: example perce...	rtags dpe phyogs gsum
རྟགས་སྤུངས་ཀྱི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	many reasons piled together &, dharmin &, gsal ba re re las med pa, EG, the dharmin omniscience, entails as consequence gzhal bya yin pa, because it is realizable by reasoning, existent, and gzhi g...	rtags spungs kyi thal 'gyur
རྟགས་བྱེད་པ	make a mark	rtags byed pa
རྟགས་འབྱུང	signs manifest	rtags 'byung
རྟགས་སྦྱོར	CM: rtags kyi sbyor ba'i bsdus ming. CM: rang gi dam bca' sgrub 'dod kyi bsam pas gzhan la rtags	rtags sbyor
རྟགས་མ	badge, insignia, emblem	rtags ma
རྟགས་མ་གྲུབ	invalid deficient reason, no	rtags ma grub
རྟགས་མ་གྲུབ་པ	establishing reason not established [by assertion or pramana, eg, the dharmin sound, is permanent, because it is not mnyan bya [hearable]. since the reason is not established it is called thal lan ...	rtags ma grub pa
རྟགས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ལྔ	CHN	rtags ma grub pa lnga
རྟགས་མ་ཐོབ་མཁན	medalist	rtags ma thob mkhan
རྟགས་མེད	hermaphrodite	rtags med
རྟགས་ཙམ་གྱི་དུས	the merely symbolic period	rtags tsam gyi dus
རྟགས་ཙམ་འཛིན	who possess the marks [of the present times]	rtags tsam 'dzin
རྟགས་ཙམ་འཛིན་པ	merely symbolic period, based only on outer form	rtags tsam 'dzin pa
རྟགས་ཙམ་འཛིན་པའི་དགེ་སློང	nang rgyud having the external trappings of a bhikshu but internally la bsnyen rdzogs kyi sdom pa mi ldan par	rtags tsam 'dzin pa'i dge slong
རྟགས་ཙམ་འཛིན་པའི་ལེའུ	{rtags tsam 'dzin pa'i le'u} [explains that after the Buddha's parinirvana the period of lasting of the teachings 500 years x 10 and in the last 500 rab tu byung ba'i rtags tsam las mi 'byung ba]	rtags tsam 'dzin pa'i le'u
རྟགས་ཚད	(full) expression/ measure indicative (of) rtags tshad mas grub cing khyab pa khas	rtags tshad
རྟགས་མཚན	1) {rtags} sign, symbol, indication, emblem, reason, characteristic; 2) manifestation, display rtags and mtshan ma signs/ reasons and characteristics	rtags mtshan
རྟགས་མཚན་སྟོན	manifest/ display	rtags mtshan ston
རྟགས་མཚན་ཐོན	be manifested/ displayed	rtags mtshan thon
རྟགས་མཚན་མཚོན	to express a sign or symbol, symbolize	rtags mtshan mtshon
རྟགས་མཚུངས་འདྲེན་པ	noun suffix, rang ming gi cha shas su 'dren rgyu'i ming gzhi'i yi ge de, orally dgos pa gtso bor ma byas par rjes 'jug rang and male/ female and neuter etc rtags mthun pa'i ming gzhi'i yi ge joinin...	rtags mtshungs 'dren pa
རྟགས་མཚོན	to symbolize	rtags mtshon
རྟགས་འཛིན་སེམས	apprehensions of evidence, the cognitions that apprehend the evidence [ggd]	rtags 'dzin sems
རྟགས་འཛིན་སེམས་གཉིས	the two kinds of sign graspng mind [phyogs chos 'jal ba'i rtags 'dzin sems dang, khyab pa 'jal ba'i rtags 'dzin sems te gnyis so]	rtags 'dzin sems gnyis
རྟགས་འཛུགས	make a sign/ mark, signal, mark	rtags 'dzugs
རྟགས་བཞི	The four signs/reasons: Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: 1) gzhan la grag pa'i rjes dpag, 2) 'gal ba brjod pa'i thal 'gyur, 3) rgyu mtshan mtshungs pa'i mgo snyoms, 4) sgrub byed bsgrub bya dang mtshungs p...	rtags bzhi
རྟགས་ཟུར	having many reason presenting fragments	rtags zur
རྟགས་གཟིགས	region in which Bonpos place the origin of their doctrines (Tazikistan)	rtags gzigs
རྟགས་ཡང་ངག	correct sign	rtags yang ngag
རྟགས་ཡང་དག	authentic evidence	rtags yang dag
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་གི་དབྱེ་སྒོ་དྲུག	CHN	rtags yang dag gi dbye sgo drug
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ་ལྔ	CHN	rtags yang dag sgrub tshul lnga
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་གཉིས	the two true signs [1)) bsgrub bya'i chos kyi sgo nas dbye na, 1 dgag rtags yang dag dang, two sgrub rtags yang dag gnyis two Rtad sgrub tshul gyi sgo nas dbye na, 1 don sgrub kyi rtags dang, 2)) t...	rtags yang dag gnyis
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་པ	correct signs. There are three correct signs that establish the pramana of inference {rjes dpag tshad ma'i sgrub byed} There are the sign of result {'bras bu} the sign of nature {rang bzhin} and th...	rtags yang dag pa
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་པ་གསུམ	CHN rtags yang dag tshul gsum tshang ba ste true reason in which the three modes are complete [phyogs chos existent/ established [grub] and having a certain relationship ['brel ba nges pa], EG, fro...	rtags yang dag pa gsum
རྟགས་ཡང་དག་གསུམ	the three true signs/ reasons [1) rtags yang dag la sbyor ba'i sgo nas [divisionsd 1, 'bras bu'i rtags dang, two rang bzhin gyi rtags dang, three ma dmigs pa'i rtad bcas gsum mo 2) Sgrub byed kyi s...	rtags yang dag gsum
རྟགས་ཡིག	manual of signs of practice, label, brand	rtags yig
རྟགས་ཡིན་པས	characterized by	rtags yin pas
རྟགས་ཡོད་པ་ཙམ་ལ	to every one that has the mark	rtags yod pa tsam la
རྟགས་རིག	signs and reasoning, reasoning, science	rtags rig
རྟགས་རིགས	arguments, logical nexus, syllogism	rtags rigs
རྟགས་རིགས་པ	reason, rational cognition	rtags rigs pa
རྟགས་ལ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་ནས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་ནོན	establishment because of doubt about the reason [blo ngor ma grub pa'i rtags gsum gyi ya gyal, rtags de yod med ma nges pa'i rkyen gyis ma grub pa ste, EG, not being sure if there is smoke or mist ...	rtags la the tshom za nas ma grub pa non
ཝཧིཏེ་བ༹པོར	like stuff, has fire, because it has smoke]	white vapor
རྟགས་ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་གསུམ་ལ་འཆར་བ	the signs manifest in your body, speech and mind	rtags lus ngag yid gsum la 'char ba
རྟགས་ལོག	contraposed reason	rtags log
རྟགས་ཤིག	travel permit	rtags shig
རྟགས་ཤིག་བརྒྱབ་པ	put mark	rtags shig brgyab pa
རྟགས་སུ	symbolizing	rtags su
རྟགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	posit as a reason	rtags su bkod pa
རྟགས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	symbolizing	rtags su 'dzin pa
རྟགས་གསལ	disputation	rtags gsal
རྟགས་གསལ་གྱི་ཁྱབ་པ་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	the four pervasion of establishing reason and dharma to be established + four wrong connections	rtags gsal gyi khyab pa sgo brgyad
རྟགས་གསལ་གྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	syllogism [in syllogistic reasoning thesis and reason [bsgrub bya sgrub byed] actually being connected in a syllogistic proof]	rtags gsal gyi sbyor ba
རྟགས་གསལ་གཏོང་བ	1) * having made distinctions in the case debated draw an undesired consequence; 2) philosophical debate	rtags gsal gtong ba
རྟགས་གསུམ	gru shan	rtags gsum
རྟགས་བསལ་བཏང་བ	to examine	rtags bsal btang ba
རྟང	(not in DAS)	rtang
རྟད	(not in DAS)	rtad
རྟན	(not in DAS)	rtan
རྟན་འབྱུང	dependent arising	rtan 'byung
རྟན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་པོ	auspiciousness	rtan 'brel bzang po
རྟན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་པོར་ཁྱེར	using as an auspicious connection	rtan 'brel bzang por khyer
རྟན་ལ་ཕབ	to determine	rtan la phab
རྟབ	1. (Tha mi dad pa brtabs pa, brtab pa,, fear, bred pa, be confused, frightened, startled	rtab
རྟབ་རྟབ	quick performance of work	rtab rtab
རྟབ་རྟབ་པོ	confused, confounded with fear, perplexed	rtab rtab po
རྟབ་རྟབ་ལ	helter-skelter, in haste	rtab rtab la
རྟབ་རྟོབ་པོ	hastily, promptly, at once	rtab rtob po
རྟབ་རྟོབ་ལ	helter skelter	rtab rtob la
རྟབ་པ	1. (Tha mi dad pa brtabs pa, brtab pa,, fear, bred pa, be confused, frightened, startled	rtab pa
རྟབ་བེ་རྟོབ་བེ	1) brel zing gi rnam 'gyur ['Gro 'ong rings pa'i rtab rtob brel zing byed]; 2) fear [Blo rtab rtob gyur pa]	rtab be rtob be
རྟབས་པ	be afraid	rtabs pa
རྟམ	(not in DAS)	rtam
རྟམ་པར་གཏོང་བ	resigning all, thoroughly giving up	rtam par gtong ba
རྟའི་སྐད་སྒྲ	neigh	rta'i skad sgra
རྟའི་ཁྱུ	herd of horses	rta'i khyu
རྟའི་གློ་ཐག	girth	rta'i glo thag
རྟའི་སྒ	saddle	rta'i sga
རྟའི་སྒ་འཁོར	sga chas	rta'i sga 'khor
རྟའི་རྔོག་མ	horse's mane	rta'i rngog ma
རྟའི་ཆུ་རྩམ	flour and water mixed up together as the food of horses	rta'i chu rtsam
རྟའི་ཆོལ་ཁ	chol kha gsum gyi nang gses, rma chu'i khug pa man chad mdo smad rta'i chol kha	rta'i chol kha
རྟའི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	Indian outsider system kyi liberation attaining ritual ste rta stong gis mchos sbyin byed pa lta bu	rta'i mchod sbyin
རྟའི་ཉིན་ལམ	day's journey on horse back	rta'i nyin lam
རྟའི་ཐེག་པ	horse carriage	rta'i theg pa
རྟའི་མཐུར	horse's head covering mthur mgo	rta'i mthur
རྟའི་སྤུ་ཤད་བྱེད་ལག་ཆ	curry comb	rta'i spu shad byed lag cha
རྟའི་བུ	day's journey on horse back	rta'i bu
རྟའི་སྦངས	horse manure	rta'i sbangs
རྟའི་ཚོགས	cavalry	rta'i tshogs
རྟའི་འཛིན	rta'i yig 'dzin	rta'i 'dzin
རྟའི་བཟའ་ཆས	horse fodder	rta'i bza' chas
རྟའི་འུ་ལག	compulsory service for the supply of animals	rta'i 'u lag
རྟའི་ཡོབ	stirrup	rta'i yob
རྟའི་ར་བ	enclosure for horses, stable	rta'i ra ba
རྟའི་རབ༹་ཅོ	horn growing on a horse khyad nor du rtsi ba zhig	rta'i rva co
རྟའི་ཤིང་རྟ	horse-drawn chariot	rta'i shing rta
རྟའི་སྲབ	bridle	rta'i srab
རྟའི་སྲབ་སྐྱོགས	reins	rta'i srab skyogs
རྟའུ	rta'u rdzong [si khron province dkar mdzes Tibet dbus, on the upper nyag chu]	rta'u
རྟར་ཀ	horse shoe	rtar ka
རྟར་ག་གེགས་སེལ	remove obstacles in the	rtar ga gegs sel
མནནེར་ཨོཕ༹་བློཨོད	letting	manner of blood
ཐེ་མནནེར་ཨོཕ༹་བློཨོད	letting	the manner of blood
རྟལ་སྣང	manifestation	rtal snang
རྟས	defend, protect, look after	rtas
རྟས་སྐྱ་སྨྱོན་པ	Tekya Nyönpa, another name for Donyö Dorje	rtas skya smyon pa
རྟས་འདྲེན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	horse-drawn chariot	rtas 'dren pa'i shing rta
རྟས་རྡེབས	thrown by a horse	rtas rdebs
རྟས་པ	SA brta ba	rtas pa
རྟས་པར་བྱེད་པ	make develop, look after	rtas par byed pa
རྟས་འཕྲ་བརྒྱབ་པ	rta'i rkang pas bsnun pa	rtas 'phra brgyab pa
རྟས་འཕྲས་རྒྱབ་ཡོད	kicked by a horse	rtas 'phras rgyab yod
རྟས་གཙང་གི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	vedic sacrificial ceremony	rtas gtsang gi mchod sbyin
རྟས་འཚེར་སྐད་བཏོན་ཡོང	the horse neighed/ made a noise	rtas 'tsher skad bton yong
རྟི་ཀི	colt	rti ki
རྟིག་གི	foal, colt	rtig gi
རྟིང	1) bottom; 2) behind, after, heel (	rting
རྟིང་དཀར	animals's feet rting pa dkar po, white fetlocks?	rting dkar
རྟིང་སྐུལ	urge, push forward, exhort	rting skul
རྟིང་བསྐུལ	earnest entreaty or exhortation	rting bskul
རྟིང་གྲོངས	true friend, bosom friend, associate, companion, comrade, fellow	rting grongs
རྟིང་སྔར	former	rting sngar
རྟིང་ལྕགས	spur	rting lcags
རྟིང་ལྕགས་རྒྱབ་པ	prick with the spur	rting lcags rgyab pa
རྟིང་ཆུ	rting pa'i chu ba	rting chu
རྟིང་འཇུག	remaining part, remainder	rting 'jug
རྟིང་གཉིས	two heels	rting gnyis
རྟིང་དུ	after	rting du
རྟིང་དུ་བཅོས་སོ	they were made afterwards	rting du bcos so
རྟིང་དོག	bad quality lower part of the wool fibers rting rdog lham gyi rting pa'i rdog pa Lham la rting rdog rgyag pa	rting dog
རྟིང་ན	afterwards, after	rting na
རྟིང་གནོན	lham gyi nang sha'i rting pa'i thad kyi kha thum	rting gnon
རྟིང་པ	heel	rting pa
རྟིང་པ་ཚུགས་པ	rting pa sa la brtan por tshugs pa,...Rkang pa'i rting pa tshud pa byung na 'gyel brdabs mi yong	rting pa tshugs pa
རྟིང་པ་ཡངས་པའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of wide heels [sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis kyi nang tshan zhig ste, 'tsho ba la phan btags pa'am srog bsrungs pa nyid kyis rting pa yangs pa]	rting pa yangs pa'i mtshan bzang
རྟིང་པོ	the future	rting po
རྟིང་བལ	hair of the foot of goat or sheep	rting bal
རྟིང་མ	latter, last	rting ma
རྟིང་མ་ཉི་མ	following day	rting ma nyi ma
རྟིང་མ་ལེན་པ	attain victory	rting ma len pa
རྟིང་ལ	after	rting la
རྟིང་ལས་སྐྱེས	younger brother	rting las skyes
རྟིང་ཤགས	tiny cymbals	rting shags
རྟིང་ཤིང	1) dkrug byed 'khor lo'i rkang shing gi mar sne gnyis rten sa; 2) Lham gyi rting pa rgyong byed shing (	rting shing
རྟིང་སོ	afterward, later	rting so
རྟིང་སོར	afterward, later	rting sor
རྟིང་སོར་བྱ་རྒྱུ་ལས་སླ་བ་ཡོང	what comes later will be easy	rting sor bya rgyu las sla ba yong
རྟིང་ལྷམ	'gram skyor med pa'i lham{rting lhan - lham gyi rting pa'i thad kyi mthil lhan	rting lham
རྟིབ་པ	to break or pull down	rtib pa
རྟིབས	break, SA rtib pa	rtibs
རྟིའུ	colt	rti'u
རྟིས་འཇོག་པ	reckon up	rtis 'jog pa
རྟུག་སྐམ	dry excrement	rtug skam
རྟུག་སྐེམ	dry excrement	rtug skem
རྟུག་འགགས	from srin dang thur ser log pa sogs blockage of defecation	rtug 'gags
རྟུག་དྲི	fart	rtug dri
རྟུག་པ	excrement, dirt	rtug pa
རྟུང་བ	make shorter, shorten, contract	rtung ba
རྟུན	SA gtun	rtun
རྟུན་པ	diligence	rtun pa
རྟུན་པའི་སྐྱེད་པ	be diligent	rtun pa'i skyed pa
རྟུན་བུ	[arch] rdo ba	rtun bu
རྟུན་རིལ	trituration bowl	rtun ril
རྟུབ་ངག	harsh words	rtub ngag
རྟུལ	activity, rajas, [2nd of three gunas of samkhya] dull, rtul ba!	rtul
རྟུལ་ཅན་མའི་བུ	1 of 10 incarnations of vishnu	rtul can ma'i bu
རྟུལ་པོ	dull, blunt, stupid	rtul po
རྟུལ་ཕོད	great courage/ spirit, bravery, heroism	rtul phod
རྟུལ་ཕོད་ཅན	w great courage/ spirit, brave, heroic	rtul phod can
རྟུལ་ཕོད་པ	bold, intrepid, courage	rtul phod pa
རྟུལ་ཕོད་པར་སྐྱེས	became a valiant man, bud, germinate, sprout	rtul phod par skyes
རྟུལ་ཕོད་པར་སྐྱེས་སོ	he grew up a valiant man	rtul phod par skyes so
རྟུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	atomic form	rtul phra rab kyi gzugs
རྟུལ་བ	1. (Tha dad pa brtul ba, brtul ba, rtul,, 1) summarize, gather into a place, gather the essence; 2) tame; 3) [arch] effort, exertion; 4) dull, weak, feeble; 2) courage; 3) [arch] soft, gentle (	rtul ba
རྟུལ་བཟང་སྐྱེས	son of rtul can ma, 1 of 10 incarnations of vishnu	rtul bzang skyes
རྟུལ་ཤུགས	Yogic discipline. Additional practices for a tantrika in order to train in implementing the view of Vajrayana during activities; for example Chö practice in frightening places. It can be pursued by...	rtul shugs
རྟེ་ཐུར	foal, colt	rte thur
རྟེན	support(ing element of a mandala); (working) basis; foundation; representation (iso. image/ statute); isc. context (that allows for . . . ); isc. matrix (esp. to distinguish from rten med)	rten
རྟེན་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three mandala of the base, [the three mandalas of {'og gzhi rlung}, {chu}, + {sa}	rten dkyil 'khor rnam gsum
རྟེན་སྐལ	dowry	rten skal
རྟེན་སྐལ་དུ་སྦྱིན	given [to the world of mankind] as a manifestation of good fortune	rten skal du sbyin
རྟེན་བསྐྱེད	visualization of the support (for a prayer, etc.)	rten bskyed
རྟེན་ཁེབས	cover for religious offerings	rten khebs
རྟེན་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	special basis	rten khyad par can
རྟེན་ཁྲི	chapel or cabinet to hold images	rten khri
རྟེན་མཁར	1 rten gsum gnas pa'i khang pa; 2) 'Dre btsan sogs gnas pa'i khang pa	rten mkhar
རྟེན་གམ	tengam. Room of sacred objects	rten gam
རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	nang gi khams	rten gyi khams
རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six elements of the sense organs' support	rten gyi khams drug
རྟེན་གྱི་གང་ཟག	mind, personality, individual possessed of something	rten gyi gang zag
རྟེན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	sku gzugs dang glegs bam mchod rten sogs	rten gyi dngos po
རྟེན་གྱི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote involving elimination of support/ to support	rten gyi gnyen po
རྟེན་གྱི་སྟོབས	power of support (structure); power of support. one of {gnyen po'i stobs bzhi}	rten gyi stobs
རྟེན་གྱི་སྟོབས་ལྷ་གསལ་གདབ་པ	the power of object, which is visualizing the deity	rten gyi stobs lha gsal gdab pa
རྟེན་གྱི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	brten pa'i yon tan gyi sgo nas dpe don gnyis mtshungs kyang, rten sa gnas kyi sgo nas mi 'dra bar so sor ldog pa'i rgyan, ldog pa can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	rten gyi ldog pa can
རྟེན་གྱི་དབང་པོ་བདུན	sems gnas pa'i rten byed pa'i dbang po ste, dbang po gzugs can pa lnga dang, yid dbang dang, srog dbang bcas bdun no	rten gyi dbang po bdun
རྟེན་གྱི་མན་དལ	Shrine mandala. The mandala plate placed on the shrine during offerings	rten gyi man dal
རྟེན་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	rten gral gyi dbus su bsgrigs pa'i rten 'gangs che ba de'o	rten gyi gtso bo
རྟེན་གྱི་རྫས	support substance	rten gyi rdzas
རྟེན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	gnas kyi yan lag	rten gyi yan lag
རྟེན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four aspects of interdependence,	rten gyi yan lag bzhi
རྟེན་གྱི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of interdependence	rten gyi rigs pa
རྟེན་གྲལ	row of religious symbols	rten gral
རྟེན་འགངས་ཅན	rten gnad che ba'am, gtsigs che ba	rten 'gangs can
རྟེན་འགངས་ཆེན	very sacred symbols	rten 'gangs chen
རྟེན་འགྲོ	[arch] kind of musician	rten 'gro
རྟེན་འགྲོའི་ཡུལ་རྐྱེན	postulation [introduction through the agency of ] indefinite circumstances of the external world or beings	rten 'gro'i yul rkyen
རྟེན་ངོ་མཚར་ཅན	wonderful image	rten ngo mtshar can
རྟེན་དངོས	religious objects	rten dngos
རྟེན་ཅན	referring to	rten can
རྟེན་ཅན་གྱི་དབང་པོ་གཉིས	the two organs which are the support of distinguishing male and female [pho mo so sor rtog pa'i rten can du byed pa'i dbang po ste, pho dbang dang, mo dbang ngo]	rten can gyi dbang po gnyis
རྟེན་ཅན་གྱི་ཞི་གནས	shamatha practice w a concrete support	rten can gyi zhi gnas
རྟེན་ཅན་ལ་འཇོག་པ	settling the mind with a concrete support	rten can la 'jog pa
རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྱུང	interdependence	rten cing 'byung
རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྲེལ་པ	SA rten 'brel	rten cing 'brel pa
རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྲེལ་བ	co-conditioning, interdependence	rten cing 'brel ba
རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྲེལ་བར་འབྱུང་བ	Dependent origination	rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba
ཋེ་ཏྭེལབེ༹	fold cycle of causal connections which binds beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuates suffering: ignorance (ma rig pa) gives rise to karmic formations ('du byed), which gives rise to consc...	The twelve
རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྲེལ་འབྱུང	conditioned coproduction	rten cing 'brel 'byung
རྟེན་བཅས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	sense organ/ dbang po extraordinary rten/ support or bdag rkyen/predominant condition of its rang 'bras [own/ intrinsic fruition]	rten bcas kyi dbang po
རྟེན་བཅས་ཀྱི་མིག་དབང	eye sense power which is a basis	rten bcas kyi mig dbang
རྟེན་བཅས་ཞི་གནས	Supported shamatha	rten bcas zhi gnas
རྟེན་ཆས	representations of body speech and mind and articles of worship	rten chas
རྟེན་མཆོད	shrine-offerings; sacred representations / shrine objects	rten mchod
རྟེན་མཇལ	sku gsung thugs kyi rten mthong ba	rten mjal
རྟེན་མཇལ་ཕྱག་མཆོད	lha rten mjal ba, phyag 'tshal ba, mchod me 'bul ba	rten mjal phyag mchod
རྟེན་བརྗེས་པ	to change bodily form / sex	rten brjes pa
རྟེན་ཉིད	the support itself	rten nyid
རྟེན་སྙིང	abbr. of {rten 'brel snying po}	rten snying
རྟེན་གཏད་མེད	free from support and reference point	rten gtad med
རྟེན་གཏོར	torma representing the deity	rten gtor
རྟེན་རྟེན	accurate	rten rten
རྟེན་ཐམས་ཅད	all the sacred shrines and objects	rten thams cad
རྟེན་དང་རྟེན་ཆོས	supporting and supported phenomena 1079	rten dang rten chos
རྟེན་དང་བརྟེན་པ	the base and the based, a thing and its place, the support and that which it supports, the support and the supported [fx body and mind or structure and inhabitants], sanctuaries and sacred objects,...	rten dang brten pa
རྟེན་དང་བརྟེན་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of the base and the based; the mandala and its deities	rten dang brten pa'i dkyil 'khor
རྟེན་དང་བརྟེན་པའི་འབྲེལ་བ	rnam dbye drug pa 'brel ba'i sgra'i nang gses shig ...Khang pa'i steng gi rgyal mtshan,...Gdan steng gi mi	rten dang brten pa'i 'brel ba
རྟེན་དང་བརྟེན་པར་བཅས་པ	the sanctuaries and sacred images	rten dang brten par bcas pa
རྟེན་དང་བྲལ	free from fixation	rten dang bral
རྟེན་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from any basis	rten dang bral ba
རྟེན་དམ་པ	byang chub kyi sems dang ldan pa rten dal 'byor mi lus rin chen thob pa gained a precious support, a free and	rten dam pa
རྟེན་དལ་འབྱོར་ཚང་བའི་མི་ལུས	a human body complete with the freedoms and riches	rten dal 'byor tshang ba'i mi lus
རྟེན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	x {sdug bsngal gsum dang 'brel zhing de dag gi rten du gyur pa'i phyir ro} because they are linked with the three types of suffering and function as their support.	rten du gyur pa
རྟེན་དུ་བྱས་པ	made material, substantial	rten du byas pa
རྟེན་དུ་ཚོགས་པའི	ris su bris dang 'bur du btod lugs su blug pa	rten du tshogs pa'i
རྟེན་དུ་ཚོགས་པའི་ཀུན་བཟང	1 of 3 kun bzang rnam gsum	rten du tshogs pa'i kun bzang
རྟེན་གདན	sku brnyan bzhengs dus thog mar lha bzo bar 'bul ba'i dngos rdzas	rten gdan
རྟེན་མདུང	chos skyong sogs kyi phyag mtshan mdung,.	rten mdung
རྟེན་མདུན་དུ	in the presence of a representation, before a shrine object	rten mdun du
རྟེན་ནས	by means of, through, by way of	rten nas
རྟེན་ནས་བཏགས་པ	dependent imputation [thd]	rten nas btags pa
རྟེན་གནས	1) rten sa'i gnas; 2) rnam dbye bdun pa (	rten gnas
རྟེན་གནས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	rten pa'i gzhi &, supported dharma distinguished &, what supported dharma does or doesn't exist in what support ston par byed pa'i rnam dbye bdun pa'i la don gyi phrad cig ste, EG, in the ocean are...	rten gnas kyi sgra
རྟེན་རྣམས	sacred objects	rten rnams
རྟེན་རྣམས་ལ་མཇལ་བ	paid homage to all the blessed objects	rten rnams la mjal ba
རྟེན་པ	(tha mi dad pa brten pa, brten pa, rten,,1 ltos pa,...'Khar rgyug la brten nas ga ler 'gro ba,...Rgyu dang rkyen la brten nas 'bras bu byung; 2) Gnas pa,...Nya dang sbal lcong chu klung rdzing bur ...	rten pa
རྟེན་པ་བཞི	sm rton pa bzhi, the four reliances	rten pa bzhi
རྟེན་པའི་རྐྱེན	dependent cause	rten pa'i rkyen
རྟེན་པའི་གནས་མེད	without a place of support, never depending upon anything	rten pa'i gnas med
རྟེན་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	active causal force as a support	rten pa'i byed rgyu
རྟེན་པར་འོས་པ	worthy of being followed	rten par 'os pa
རྟེན་ཕུར	stake, peg [ to tie horses or sheep]	rten phur
རྟེན་བྱུང	{rten 'byung}	rten byung
རྟེན་བྱེད	the earth	rten byed
རྟེན་བྱེད་བད་ཀན	supporting phlegm [bad kan gzhan rnams kyi rten gzhi byed cing, byed las chu'i byed las dang 'dra ba, lus kyi rtsa ba'i bad kan lnga'i ya gyal]	rten byed bad kan
རྟེན་བྱེད་མ	earth	rten byed ma
རྟེན་བྲལ	free of/ without support	rten bral
རྟེན་དབང་པོའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six dhatus of the sense faculties, the support [khams bco brgyad kyi nang gses [R]	rten dbang po'i khams drug
རྟེན་འབུལ	gift	rten 'bul
རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ	[gift] presentation group	rten 'bul tshogs pa
རྟེན་འབྱུང	dependent arising	rten 'byung
རྟེན་འབྱུང་ཆོས	interdependently arisen dharmas	rten 'byung chos
རྟེན་འབྱུང་བ	{rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba}	rten 'byung ba
རྟེན་འབྱུང་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉི	12 dependently arising links	rten 'byung yan lag bcu gnyi
རྟེན་འབྱུང་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve aspects of interdependence. The twelvefold cycle of causal connections which binds beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuates suffering: ignorance, karmic formations, consciousness, n...	rten 'byung yan lag bcu gnyis
རྟེན་འབྱུང་བསླུ་མེད	unfailing interdependence	rten 'byung bslu med
རྟེན་འབྲེལ	{rten 'brel ngan pa/ rten 'brel bzang po} - interdependent connection/ connectedness; (in)(auspicious) circumstances; interplay of circumstances	rten 'brel
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཁྱད་པར་ལྔ	five special features of interdependence, interdependence, five special features of	rten 'brel khyad par lnga
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {chos thams cad dpyad na ngo bo ci yang ma grub pa stong pa nyid du gnas kyang snang tsam du ltos nas grub cing brten nas skye ba ni rten 'brel gyi mtshan nyid dam ngo bo}	rten 'brel gyi ngo bo
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཆོས	1) the phenomena that arise in dependent connection. 2) the teachings on dependent origination	rten 'brel gyi chos
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས	reason[ing] of interdep[endence	rten 'brel gyi gtan tshigs
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་གནད	the main point of this incident	rten 'brel gyi gnad
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རྣམ་གཞག	the presentation of dependent origination	rten 'brel gyi rnam gzhag
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ་བསླུ་མེད	unfailing manifestation of interdependence	rten 'brel gyi snang ba bslu med
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་དཔེ་ཆོས་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve analogies for dependent origination	rten 'brel gyi dpe chos bcu gnyis
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྨོན	long life"	rten 'brel gyi smon
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་སྨོན་འདུན	good wishes offered at a celebration like "bet *of luck	rten 'brel gyi smon 'dun
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཚུལ	principle of interdependence	rten 'brel gyi tshul
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {chos thams cad dpyad na ngo bo ci yang ma grub pa stong pa nyid du gnas kyang snang tsam du ltos nas grub cing brten nas skye ba ni rten 'brel gyi mtshan nyid dam ngo bo}	rten 'brel gyi mtshan nyid
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	rten 'brel bcu gnyis yan lag bzhir bsdus pa'i 'phen pa'i yan lag dang, 'phangs pa'i yan lag mngon par 'grub par byed pa'i yan lag mngon par grub pa'i yan lag bcas bzhi'o the four aspects of interde...	rten 'brel gyi yan lag bzhi
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན་གསུམ	the three natures of interdepent arising ['phrad pa'i rang bzhin dang, ltos pa'i rang bzhin, brten pa'i rang bzhin te gsum]	rten 'brel gyi rang bzhin gsum
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of interdependent arising	rten 'brel gyi rigs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གློག་འཕྲིན	congratulatory telegram	rten 'brel glog 'phrin
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་འགྲིག་པ	good or auspicious coincidence	rten 'brel 'grig pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་འགྲིག་པ་བྱུང	created auspicious circumstances for	rten 'brel 'grig pa byung
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྒྲིག་པ	to set in place/ up (auspicious) circumstances (for an eventual outcome)	rten 'brel sgrig pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྒྲིགས་པ	to set in place/ up (auspicious) circumstances (for an eventual outcome)	rten 'brel sgrigs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བརྒྱད་དུ་དབྱེ་བ	CHN	rten 'brel brgyad du dbye ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བསྒོམ	epithet for a pratyeka buddha, SA rang sangs rgyas	rten 'brel bsgom
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བསྒྲིག་པ	[informal] make things work out	rten 'brel bsgrig pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	bkra shis pa'i rtags mtshan bzang po ched du spel zhing 'du byas pa,...Bkra shis bde legs yong ba'i rten 'brel bsgrigs pa	rten 'brel bsgrigs pa
ཨཽསྤིཅིཨོཨུས	- circumstances for an eventual outcome	auspicious
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ངན	bad omens	rten 'brel ngan
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ངན་པ	{ngu ba rten 'brel ngan pa} it is bad luck for you to cry	rten 'brel ngan pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 links of interdependent - arising / origination -	rten 'brel bcu gnyis
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་ལྡོག	progressive and reverse order of the twelve links of dependent origination	rten 'brel bcu gnyis kyi 'jug ldog
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཅུ་གཉིས་ལུགས་འབྱུང	the 12 aspects of interdependence in progressive order	rten 'brel bcu gnyis lugs 'byung
བཟློག	the Twelve Links of Dependent Origination in their progressive and reverse sequence	bzlog
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཆེན་པོ	{bden med sgrub pa'i rigs pa'i rgyal po} the supreme relativity	rten 'brel chen po
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཆེན་པོའི་གཏན་ཚིག་བཞི	the four great axioms of interdependence	rten 'brel chen po'i gtan tshig bzhi
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཆེན་མོའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of the great interdependency [thd]	rten 'brel chen mo'i rigs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཉེས་སེལ	terma by Tertön Sogyal	rten 'brel nyes sel
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གཉིས	the two kinds of interdependent arising	rten 'brel gnyis
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྙིང་པོ	rten snying - essence of causation	rten 'brel snying po
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་རྟོགས་པ	to investigate significant or ominous incidents and draw inferences	rten 'brel rtogs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བསྟོད་པ	Praise of Dependent Arising, by Tsongkhapa	rten 'brel bstod pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཐབས་མཁས	skilled in the means [or methods] of dependent relation. Someone who has realization can have the skill to know what is the correct means to give to a student to help them progress because of the s...	rten 'brel thabs mkhas
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་མཐུ་ཆེན་བསྒྲིག་པ	to create / perfect highly auspicious circumstances	rten 'brel mthu chen bsgrig pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་མདོ་འགྲེལ	text by {mkhas mchog dbyig gnyen zhabs}	rten 'brel mdo 'grel
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྣ་ཚོགས་སྒྲིགས	numerous auspicious signs coincided	rten 'brel sna tshogs sgrigs
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྤྱིའི་སྒྲ་དོན་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	rten 'brel spyi'i sgra don bcu gcig
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཕུག	Cave of Auspicious Coincidence, Tendrel Phuk, at Drak Yerpa	rten 'brel phug
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཕྱོགས་མེད་འཆར་བ	[may] auspicious coincidence arise in all directions	rten 'brel phyogs med 'char ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle dependent origination	rten 'brel phra mo
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	celebrate	rten 'brel byed pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་འབྱུང་ལྡོག	progressive and reverse order of dependent origination	rten 'brel 'byung ldog
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་འབྱུང་བ	Dependent origination. arising in dependent connection. Syn {rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba}	rten 'brel 'byung ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་མེ་སྒྱོགས	gun salute	rten 'brel me sgyogs
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་ཆེན	celebration/ rally	rten 'brel tshogs chen
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ	{rgyu rkyen rten 'brel tshogs pa las glo bur du snang ba sgyu ma lta bu} as in a magic show, things are made to appear by a temporary conjunction of causes, circumstances and connections	rten 'brel tshogs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པའི་སྣང་བ	this appearance of collective coincidence	rten 'brel tshogs pa'i snang ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་མཛད་པ	make favorable conditions	rten 'brel mdzad pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཞུ	convey congratulations, celebrate, congratulate, greet	rten 'brel zhu
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཞུ་བ	to convey congratulations, to celebrate, congratulate, greet	rten 'brel zhu ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཞི	CHN	rten 'brel bzhi
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཟབ་མོ	profound auspicious coincidence/ interdependent arising	rten 'brel zab mo
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཟབ་མོའི་དོན	the meaning of the profound dependent origination	rten 'brel zab mo'i don
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང	good auspices	rten 'brel bzang
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་པོ	a most auspicious omen	rten 'brel bzang po
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་པོར་ཁྱེར	using as an auspicious connection	rten 'brel bzang por khyer
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་བ	auspicious coincidence	rten 'brel bzang ba
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡག་པོ	auspicious event / sign	rten 'brel yag po
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡག་པོ་བྱུང	that was an auspicious sign!	rten 'brel yag po byung
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡན་ལག	SA rten 'brel	rten 'brel yan lag
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve links of interdependent connection/ connectedness	rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	CHN	rten 'brel yan lag bzhi
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡོད	auspicious connections have been created	rten 'brel yod
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་རབ་བདུན	one of the four special systems, basic to the contemplative methods of realization of the {'brug pa bka' rgyud pa}	rten 'brel rab bdun
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of dependent origination	rten 'brel rigs pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	through the combination of	rten 'brel la brten nas
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལུགས་ལྡོག	interdependent links in reverse order [1) ma rig pa 'gag pas 'du byed 'gag 'du byed 'gag pas rnam shes 'gag pa sogs rten 'brel bcu gnyis rim bzhin 'gag pa} -...2) Rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis kyi g...	rten 'brel lugs ldog
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལུགས་འབྱུང	interdependence in proceeding order; the twelve aspects of interdependence in progressive order, mutual dependence in proceeding order, dependent connection with. interdependence in proceeding order	rten 'brel lugs 'byung
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལུགས་བཟློག	interdependence in reverse order	rten 'brel lugs bzlog
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཤེས་པ	one who knows significant incidents, physician	rten 'brel shes pa
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྲིད་པའི་རྩིས་གཏོ	astrological rites to harmonize the interdependence of existence	rten 'brel srid pa'i rtsis gto
རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གསུང་བཤད	congratulatory message/ speech	rten 'brel gsung bshad
རྟེན་མ	support	rten ma
རྟེན་མི་བཅའ	not fix upon	rten mi bca'
རྟེན་མི་བརྟན	unstable basis 1082	rten mi brtan
རྟེན་མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན	our support is the precious human body	rten mi lus rin chen
རྟེན་མེད	unbased, unsupported, supportless, objectless, rootless, homeless, baseless, w/o a concrete support	rten med
རྟེན་མེད་ཀྱི་ཞི་གནས	shamatha practice w/o a concrete support	rten med kyi zhi gnas
རྟེན་མེད་པར	unsupported	rten med par
རྟེན་མེད་ཞི་གནས	Unsupported shamatha. See 'shamatha without support.'	rten med zhi gnas
རྟེན་མེད་ལ་འཇོག་པ	setting the mind w/o concrete support	rten med la 'jog pa
རྟེན་དམན་པ	a lower bodily support [lus rten dma' ba,...Mi las dud 'gro rten dman pa red]	rten dman pa
རྟེན་ཙམ	just an indication [symbolic script]	rten tsam
རྟེན་ཙམ་དངོས	actual indication, symbolic script	rten tsam dngos
རྟེན་གཙོ	holy images	rten gtso
རྟེན་མཚུངས	def gtso 'khor gnyis ka dbang po gcig la brten pa ste mig shes mig dbang la brten pa na de'i 'khor tshor ba yang de la brten pa lta bu'o/	rten mtshungs
རྟེན་མཚུངས་ཀྱི་མིག་དབང	eye sense power which is like a basis	rten mtshungs kyi mig dbang
རྟེན་རྫས	ritual objects which are support of certain forces	rten rdzas
རྟེན་གཞི	foundation; basis, base, foundation, site, source, the one whom we rely upon	rten gzhi
རྟེན་གཞིའི་མཆོག	the supreme foundation of everything	rten gzhi'i mchog
རྟེན་བཞག	place a support	rten bzhag
རྟེན་བཞེངས་པ	sku gsung thugs kyi rten	rten bzhengs pa
བཞེངས་པ	sponsor the making of sacred objects symbolic of the enlightened body, speech, and mind	bzhengs pa
རྟེན་བཟང	excellent body	rten bzang
རྟེན་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	firm in support	rten la brten pa
རྟེན་ལ་རབ་གནས་བྱས་པ	consecrated holy objects	rten la rab gnas byas pa
རྟེན་ལུས	the physical support, the body	rten lus
རྟེན་བཤིག་པ	dkon mchog gi rten bshig	rten bshig pa
རྟེན་ས	supporter	rten sa
ཟས	the sustenance of contact develops the [main] mind and the mental states, the basis	zas
རྟེན་གསུམ	three jewels three [main]	rten gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་སུཔཔོརཙ	images, scriptures, mind (of holy beings)	three supports
རྟེན་གསུམ་དུ་མ	representations of the buddha's body, speech and mind	rten gsum du ma
རྟེན་གསུམ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	consecration of the three shrine objects: statues, scriptures, stupas	rten gsum rab tu gnas pa
རྟེན་གསུམ་ལྷག་གནས	consecration of the triple shrine objects	rten gsum lhag gnas
རྟེན་ལྷ	the shrine images / divinities	rten lha
རྟེམ་ཤུར	shing la shur 'don byed kyi 'bur len zhig	rtem shur
རྟེའ	foal, colt	rte'
རྟེའུ	colt, foal [rta phran dang, rta yi bu, rten thur, thu ru]	rte'u
རྟེའུ་འབྲང་བ	bring forth a colt, foal	rte'u 'brang ba
རྟེའུ་ལོ	te lo	rte'u lo
རྟེའུ་ལོ་གཉིས	two year old colt	rte'u lo gnyis
རྟོ་རྒོད་སྒྲོན་མེ	peacock's crest tree	rto rgod sgron me
རྟོ་ལེ	calf of a dzo, female yak	rto le
རྟོག་དཀར་བ	supervisor, overseer	rtog dkar ba
རྟོག་ཁང	room or place of amusement on the top of a building	rtog khang
རྟོག་གེ	pedant(ry); sophist(ry)	rtog ge
རྟོག་གེ་མཁན	logician	rtog ge mkhan
རྟོག་གེ་མགོ་མཁྲེགས	thick headed logicians [mostly grasping their own view alone as right]	rtog ge mgo mkhregs
རྟོག་གེ་དྲུག	[TRS 44-1]; six [nonBuddhist] philosophers, six nonBuddhist teachers	rtog ge drug
རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་ལྔ	five sophistic schools of extremists [non-buddhist schools: grangs can pa dang, rgyang 'phen pa, bye brag pa, rig pa can pa, gcer bu pa]	rtog ge sde lnga
རྟོག་གེ་རྣམས	intellectuals	rtog ge rnams
རྟོག་གེ་པ	logician [usu deprecatory, meaning person who relies on scripture and reasoning w/o much experience of things as they are through 1083 practice etc. of what the terms really mean]	rtog ge pa
རྟོག་གེ་བ	[speculative] philosopher, dialectician, sophist, logician, intellectual, arguing, reasoning, dialectics, sophists, dogmatist	rtog ge ba
རྟོག་གེ་བ་ལྔ	see {rtog ge sde lnga}	rtog ge ba lnga
རྟོག་གེ་བའི་སྣང་ནོར	the outcome of intellectual analysis	rtog ge ba'i snang nor
རྟོག་གེ་བའི་དཔྱད	intellectual analysis	rtog ge ba'i dpyad
རྟོག་གེ་འབར་བ	madhyamakahrdayavstti tyarkajvala	rtog ge 'bar ba
རྟོག་གེ་སྨྲ་བ	sophistry	rtog ge smra ba
རྟོག་གེ་རིགས་པ	intellectual reasoning, sophistry	rtog ge rigs pa
རྟོག་གེའི་ལྟ་བ	intellectualized view	rtog ge'i lta ba
རྟོག་གེའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	logical/ philosdophical shastyras [gtan tshigs rig pa'i bstan bcos]	rtog ge'i bstan bcos
རྟོག་གེའི་ཐ་སྙད	sophistries of logicians	rtog ge'i tha snyad
རྟོག་གེའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	domain of intellectuals, the reach of the intellect	rtog ge'i spyod yul
རྟོག་གེའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not within the domain of intellectuals	rtog ge'i spyod yul ma yin pa
རྟོག་གེའི་བག་ཆགས	the habit of intellectualizing	rtog ge'i bag chags
རྟོག་གེའི་ཚིག་དོན་བརྒྱད	eight categories of dialectical sophistry	rtog ge'i tshig don brgyad
རྟོག་གེའི་ཚིག་དོན་བཅུ་དྲུག	[TRS 43-4]	rtog ge'i tshig don bcu drug
རྟོག་གེའི་གཞུང	philosophical texts/ tradition [deciding the nature of things merely through abstract reasoning]	rtog ge'i gzhung
རྟོག་གེའི་ཡུལ	the scope of logic	rtog ge'i yul
རྟོག་གེའི་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན	not within the domain of intellectuals / the logical mind	rtog ge'i yul ma yin
རྟོག་གེའི་རིག་པ	theoretical dialectics	rtog ge'i rig pa
རྟོག་གེར་རྟོགས་པའི་ས	the level of conceptual realization [the 1st dhyana bsam gtan dang where there is rtog dpyod]	rtog ger rtogs pa'i sa
རྟོག་གེས་བཏགས་སྤོང	forsaking intellectual labeling	rtog ges btags spong
རྟོག་སྒོམ	intellectual meditation; conceptual (approach to) meditation	rtog sgom
རྟོག་ཅན་པ	a Sophist/ a 'thinker', 'deceiver.'	rtog can pa
རྟོག་བཅས	conceptual, with concepts	rtog bcas
རྟོག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	elements] with concepts	rtog bcas kyi khams
རྟོག་བཅས་ཀྱི་རླུང	the conceptualizing wind	rtog bcas kyi rlung
རྟོག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	conceptual cognition	rtog bcas kyi shes pa
རྟོག་བཅས་སྒོམ་ལམ	conceptual path of cultivation	rtog bcas sgom lam
རྟོག་བཅས་རྟོག་མེད	conceptual and nonconceptual	rtog bcas rtog med
རྟོག་བཅས་རྟོག་མེད་གཉིས	both conceptual and nonconceptual	rtog bcas rtog med gnyis
རྟོག་བཅས་འདུ་ཤེས	conceptual notion	rtog bcas 'du shes
རྟོག་ཆེན་པ	watchman	rtog chen pa
རྟོག་རྗེས་མི་འབྲང	without following any thoughts	rtog rjes mi 'brang
རྟོག་ཉོབ	trivial thoughts	rtog nyob
རྟོག་བཏགས	conceptual labeling	rtog btags
རྟོག་བཏགས་ཀྱི་བློ	attitude of conceptual labeling	rtog btags kyi blo
རྟོག་མཐའ	conceptual limitation(s)	rtog mtha'
རྟོག་དང་རྟོག་མེད	conceptual and nonconceptual	rtog dang rtog med
རྟོག་ལྡན	those with searching minds [ggd]	rtog ldan
རྟོག་གནས	object of intellectual investigation	rtog gnas
རྟོག་སྣང	thoughts and perceptions	rtog snang
རྟོག་པ	vitarka, thought, concept, think, deliberation, selectiveness mibp 102, conceptual division, constructive mental activity, interpretative concepts, dichotomizing intellect, mental projects, cogniti...	rtog pa
རྟོག་པ་སྐྱེ་བ	reflect on a thing, indulge in musings	rtog pa skye ba
རྟོག་པ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	grow doubtful, become hesitant	rtog pa skyes te
རྟོག་པ་ཁྱད་པར་བ	special thought	rtog pa khyad par ba
རྟོག་པ་འཁྲུལ་ཤེས	invalid immediate perception, false cognition, everyday knowledge	rtog pa 'khrul shes
རྟོག་པ་གྱོ་བའི་རླུང	the thoughtmoving winds	rtog pa gyo ba'i rlung
རྟོག་པ་འགྱུ	thought's movement	rtog pa 'gyu
རྟོག་པ་མངོན་སུམ་ལྟར་སྣང་དྲུག	six types of superficial direct conceptions	rtog pa mngon sum ltar snang drug
རྟོག་པ་སྔ་མ	previous thought	rtog pa snga ma
རྟོག་པ་ཅན	conceptual; determinate [perception] [ggd]	rtog pa can
རྟོག་པ་ཅན་གྱི་མངོན་སུམ	determinate perception [ggd]	rtog pa can gyi mngon sum
རྟོག་པ་བཅད་ཤེས	conceptual subsequent cognizer	rtog pa bcad shes
རྟོག་པ་ཆེ་བ	1) great/noble thoughts; 2) rnam rtog che ba [Khang stong rkun ma'i rnam rtog che ba]	rtog pa che ba
རྟོག་པ་བརྗད་ཤེས	conceptual subsequent cognizer	rtog pa brjad shes
རྟོག་པ་བརྗོད	to explain subjects	rtog pa brjod
རྟོག་པ་དང་བཅས	w analysis	rtog pa dang bcas
རྟོག་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	rough mental surveying, a quick mental glance	rtog pa dang bcas pa
རྟོག་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	the aggregates endowed w conception {zag bcas kyi phung po}	rtog pa dang bcas pa'i phung po
རྟོག་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཡིད	a conceptual mind	rtog pa dang bcas pa'i yid
བཅས་པའི་བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོ	the 1st dhyana which possesses both ideas and scrutiny rtog pa dang bcas shing dpyod pa dang	bcas pa'i bsam gtan dang po
རྟོག་པ་དང་དཔྱོད་པ	conception and discernment. ideas and scrutiny	rtog pa dang dpyod pa
ལ་བྱེད་པ་བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པ	the 3rd dhyana which is devoid of ideas and scrutiny rtog pa dang dpyod pa yang med pa yid	la byed pa bsam gtan gsum pa
རྟོག་པ་དང་བྲལ	free from sophistication	rtog pa dang bral
རྟོག་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	without imagination	rtog pa dang bral ba
རྟོག་པ་དོན་མཐུན	thoughts corresponding to reality [rang yul yod pa can gyi rtog bcas kyi shes pa ste, dper na bum 'dzin rtog pa dang, sgra mi rtag par rtog pa lta bu don dang mthun pa'o]	rtog pa don mthun
རྟོག་པ་དོན་མི་མཐུན	objectless thoughts, thoughts not corresponding to reality	rtog pa don mi mthun
རྟོག་པ་བསྡུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Compendium of Conception Tantra. One the Four Major Sections of Yoga Tantra	rtog pa bsdus pa'i rgyud
རྟོག་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	diverse thoughts	rtog pa sna tshogs
རྟོག་པ་འཕྲོ་བ	flow of thought	rtog pa 'phro ba
རྟོག་པ་མ་འདྲེས་པ་དྲུག	CHN	rtog pa ma 'dres pa drug
རྟོག་པ་མེད་པ	no reconsideration	rtog pa med pa
རྟོག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	nonconceptual aggregates, [= 'phags pa'i phung po]	rtog pa med pa'i phung po
པ་བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པ	the second dhyana possessing no ideas but scrutiny alone rtog pa med la dpyod pa tsam dang bcas	pa bsam gtan gnyis pa
རྟོག་པ་རྩད་གཅད་པ	"resolving the thinker" [refers to the examination of "who is wandering in samsara?" the act of investigating who the 'doer' is, the 1 who transmigrates in samsara]	rtog pa rtsad gcad pa
རྟོག་པ་རྩད་བཅད	tracing the root of thinking	rtog pa rtsad bcad
རྟོག་པ་རྩད་བཅད་པ	tracing the root of thinking	rtog pa rtsad bcad pa
རྟོག་པ་བརྩད་བཅད	resolving the thinker	rtog pa brtsad bcad
རྟོག་པ་འོག་འགྱུ	undercurrent of thoughts [aside for the main focus of discursive thought many others that occur on the periphry/ as an undercurrent]	rtog pa 'og 'gyu
རྟོག་པ་ལ་སྣང་བ	[the object that] appears to that conception [ggd]	rtog pa la snang ba
རྟོག་པ་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ཡལ་ག	Branches that Improve Thought, The [thd]	rtog pa la phan pa'i yal ga
རྟོག་པ་ལོག་ཤེས	mistakes caused by wrong conclusions	rtog pa log shes
རྟོག་པའི་དགྲ	a tree	rtog pa'i dgra
རྟོག་པའི་རྒྱུན	stream of thoughts	rtog pa'i rgyun
རྟོག་པའི་བཏགས་པ	imputation by conception	rtog pa'i btags pa
རྟོག་པའི་ལྟ་བ	a view tied to judgment	rtog pa'i lta ba
རྟོག་པའི་ཐབས	analytical thought	rtog pa'i thabs
རྟོག་པའི་དྲ་བ	conceptual net, web of proliferating thoughts	rtog pa'i dra ba
རྟོག་པའི་དྲ་བར་ཆུད་པ	caught in the web of conceptual thinking	rtog pa'i dra bar chud pa
རྟོག་པའི་དྲྭ་བ	conceptual net, web of thoughts	rtog pa'i drwa ba
རྟོག་པའི་སྣ་མི་བསྐྱིལ	do not direct the thought	rtog pa'i sna mi bskyil
རྟོག་པའི་སྣ་མི་བསྐྱེལ	do not direct the thought; don't block the thought	rtog pa'i sna mi bskyel
རྟོག་པའི་སྣང་ཡུལ	appearing object of a thought consciousness; the appearing object of a thought consciousness	rtog pa'i snang yul
རྟོག་པའི་སྤྲོ་བསྡུ	projecting and gathering of thoughts	rtog pa'i spro bsdu
རྟོག་པའི་བྱ་བ	conceptualization	rtog pa'i bya ba
རྟོག་པའི་རྦ་རླབས	the waves of discursive thought	rtog pa'i rba rlabs
རྟོག་པའི་དམིགས་པ	object of [discursive] thought/ conception	rtog pa'i dmigs pa
རྟོག་པའི་སྨྲ	conceptual definitions	rtog pa'i smra
རྟོག་པའི་ཞེན་གཞི	basis of conceptual adherence	rtog pa'i zhen gzhi
རྟོག་པའི་གཟུག་བརྙན	conceptual reflection [thd]	rtog pa'i gzug brnyan
རྟོག་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	conceptual reflection	rtog pa'i gzugs brnyan
རྟོག་པའི་ཡུལ	object to be conceptualized; isc. the realm of thought/ concepts	rtog pa'i yul
རྟོག་པའི་རང་གདངས	projection of thoughts	rtog pa'i rang gdangs
རྟོག་པའི་རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	the 80 innate thoughts	rtog pa'i rang bzhin brgyad cu
རྟོག་པའི་རི་མོ	mental doodles	rtog pa'i ri mo
རྟོག་པའི་ལམ	a path that is just an idea	rtog pa'i lam
རྟོག་པར་འགྱུ་བ	to stir in thought	rtog par 'gyu ba
རྟོག་པར་བྱེད	hypothesize, suppose, conceive, imagine, understand know	rtog par byed
རྟོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	hypothesize, suppose, conceive, imagine, understand know	rtog par byed pa
རྟོག་པས	conditioned by concepts, through concepts	rtog pas
རྟོག་པས་བཏགས་ཙམ	nominal, imputed by thought [ggd]	rtog pas btags tsam
རྟོག་པས་བཏགས་ཙམ་གྱི་ཆོས	phenomenon imputed by thought	rtog pas btags tsam gyi chos
རྟོག་པས་བརྟག	analyze, focus	rtog pas brtag
རྟོག་པས་ཐ་སྙད	thoughts	rtog pas tha snyad
རྟོག་པས་མི་ཕྱེད	cannot be split by thought	rtog pas mi phyed
རྟོག་པས་མི་བརྫི	not be disturbed by thoughts	rtog pas mi brdzi
རྟོག་པས་མི་ཤིག	cannot be destroyed by concepts	rtog pas mi shig
རྟོག་དཔྱོད	described fact, conceptual analysis, analysis, consideration, examination, trial, SA rnam rtog	rtog dpyod
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་གོ་ཡུལ	the intellectual understanding of mere analyzing	rtog dpyod kyi go yul
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་རྗེས	access by means of analysis	rtog dpyod kyi rjes
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	1 of 'jug pa rnam gsum	rtog dpyod kyi rjes su 'jug pa
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད	The mind in pursuit of ideas and scrutiny	rtog dpyod kyi rjes su 'jug pa'i yid
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་མི་གོལ	have not strayed into intellectualizations	rtog dpyod kyi phyogs su mi gol
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་འཇུག	pay thought to, care about	rtog dpyod 'jug
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་གཏོང་བ	identify, discern, recognize as	rtog dpyod gtong ba
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་བཏར་བ	check	rtog dpyod btar ba
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་དང་བཅས་པ	with conception and discernment	rtog dpyod dang bcas pa
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་འདས་པ	beyond analysis	rtog dpyod 'das pa
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་པ	examine anything	rtog dpyod pa
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་སྤྲོ་བ	detailed analysis	rtog dpyod spro ba
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་བྱེད་པ	to analyze. to investigate, examine, study, reflect on, think over, consider, weigh	rtog dpyod byed pa
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་བློ་གྲོས	intelligence for analyzing	rtog dpyod blo gros
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་མི་འཇུག	without making any attempt to analyze	rtog dpyod mi 'jug
རྟོག་བྱ	knowable	rtog bya
རྟོག་བྱེད	knower	rtog byed
རྟོག་བྲལ	free from conceptuality/ thought free, non-conceptual	rtog bral
རྟོག་བྲལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	nonconceptual wakefulness	rtog bral gyi ye shes
རྟོག་བྲལ་མ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་ཤེས་པ	nonconceptual and unmistaken cognition	rtog bral ma 'khrul pa'i shes pa
རྟོག་མ་བྱེད	cannot be conceptualized	rtog ma byed
རྟོག་མེད	non-thought, non-conceptual,	rtog med
ཅོནཅེཔཏ	free, devoid of thoughtconstructions, careless	concept
ཐོཨུགྷཏ	constructions, careless	thought
རྟོག་མེད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign of nondependence	rtog med kyi rtags
རྟོག་མེད་ཀྱི་གནས་པ	the state of thoughtless remaining / calm	rtog med kyi gnas pa
རྟོག་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of no	rtog med kyi rnal 'byor
ཨིདེཨ	construction	idea
རྟོག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	nonconceptual [mental] cognition, nonconceptual consciousness	rtog med kyi shes pa
རྟོག་མེད་འཁྲུལ་ཤེས	non-conceptual confused knowledge [EG due to optical illusions, misfunctioning sense organs etc rather than conceptual error]	rtog med 'khrul shes
རྟོག་མེད་ངོ་བོ	non-conceptual essence	rtog med ngo bo
རྟོག་མེད་ཅན	indeterminate [perception], nonconceptual [ggd]	rtog med can
རྟོག་མེད་མཉམ་པ	non-discursive equality	rtog med mnyam pa
རྟོག་མེད་མཉམ་པའི་ཆོས་ལྔ	five principles of nonconceptual evenness	rtog med mnyam pa'i chos lnga
རྟོག་མེད་གནས	abide in non-thought	rtog med gnas
རྟོག་མེད་པ	concept-free, not forming concepts	rtog med pa
རྟོག་མེད་ཡིད་ཤེས	non-conceptual mental consciousness	rtog med yid shes
རྟོག་མེད་ཡིད་ཤེས་འཁྲུལ་བ	nonconceptual confused mental knowledge [rmi lam gsal snang gi shes pa lta bu]	rtog med yid shes 'khrul ba
རྟོག་མེད་རང་གསལ	Nonconceptual selfcognizance. The basic state of mind that is pointed out by the root guru; free from thoughts and yet naturally cognizing whatever is present	rtog med rang gsal
རྟོག་མེད་ལོག་ཤེས	non-conceptual erroneous knowledge	rtog med log shes
རྟོག་མེད་ཤེས་པ	non-conceptual cognition ]	rtog med shes pa
རྟོག་ཙམ	a little, few, somewhat, rather	rtog tsam
རྟོག་ཙམ་གཞུ་བ	flick	rtog tsam gzhu ba
རྟོག་ཚོགས	(ordinary) thought/ conceptual patterns	rtog tshogs
རྟོག་ཞིག་ཐིག་ལེ་རུ་ཁག	survey/ prospecting team	rtog zhig thig le ru khag
རྟོག་ཞིབ	= [close/ thorough] investigation, examination, inspection, survey	rtog zhib
རྟོག་ཞིབ་ལྟ་སྐོར	inspection tour	rtog zhib lta skor
རྟོག་ཞིབ་གནམ་གྲུ	spy plane	rtog zhib gnam gru
རྟོག་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to check, examine, inspect	rtog zhib byed pa
རྟོག་ཞིབ་སློབ་ཚོགས	research society/ association	rtog zhib slob tshogs
རྟོག་བཟོ	rang 'dod blo bzo'am rig bzo personal invention, fancy, imagination, fabrication	rtog bzo
རྟོག་བཟོར	Syn {rtog pas bzos pa} Syn {gzhung dang ma mthun pa, rang gi blos bzos bzhag pa}	rtog bzor
རྟོག་འི་ཡུལ	scope of logic, domain of reasoning	rtog 'i yul
རྟོག་ཡུལ	object of thought	rtog yul
རྟོགས	rtog pa! realize, understand, comprehend, know, read, think/ understanding [buddhaka], have a full grasp, discovers, make concepts, thorough comprehension/ realization	rtogs
རྟོགས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	nonconceptual yoga / practice	rtogs kyi rnal 'byor
རྟོགས་དཀའ	hard to realize	rtogs dka'
རྟོགས་དཀའ་བ	difficult to realize	rtogs dka' ba
རྟོགས་དཀའ་བའི་གནས	very inaccessible and fearful place	rtogs dka' ba'i gnas
རྟོགས་དཀར	hard to know	rtogs dkar
རྟོགས་ཁག་པོ	sophisticated	rtogs khag po
རྟོགས་འཁྲུལ	realization and illusion 1087	rtogs 'khrul
རྟོགས་གོམས	realization & experience, understanding & familiarization	rtogs goms
རྟོགས་གོམས་སྦྱོར	union of realization & experience	rtogs goms sbyor
རྟོགས་གྲོལ་དུས་མཉམ	simultaneous realization and liberation	rtogs grol dus mnyam
རྟོགས་འགྲོ	number	rtogs 'gro
རྟོགས་འགྲོ་ཆེ་བ	#	rtogs 'gro che ba
རྟོགས་འགྲོ་ཆེན་པོ	great number	rtogs 'gro chen po
རྟོགས་ཆེན	great understanding/ realization	rtogs chen
རྟོགས་ཆོས	the Dharma of realization	rtogs chos
རྟོགས་བརྗོད	1) tales of former lives, jatakas; 2) [auto]biography [avadana]/ history; 3) express realization; 4) rtogs pa brjod pa'i sde	rtogs brjod
རྟོགས་བརྗོད་བརྒྱ་པ	text in bka' 'gyur rtogs brjod rin po che dpag bsam khri	rtogs brjod brgya pa
ཤིང	work of kashmirian poet kshemendra on deeds of buddha in 108 chapters	shing
རྟོགས་དེབ	memorandum book	rtogs deb
རྟོགས་འདོད་ཅན	desirous of knowing or learning, inquisitive	rtogs 'dod can
རྟོགས་ལྡན	Realized person. A title of someone who has realization in Vajrayana practice. Can also refer to a yogimonk in the Drukpa Kagyü lineage	rtogs ldan
རྟོགས་ལྡན་འཁྲུལ་ཞིག	realized yogis, "destroyers of delusion,"	rtogs ldan 'khrul zhig
རྟོགས་ལྡན་ཤཱ་ཀྱ་ཤྲཱི	alias {grub dbang shA kya shrI}	rtogs ldan shA kya shrI
རྟོགས་ལྡན་ཨུ་རྒྱན	bstan 'dzin paternal uncle of Chögyal Namkhai Norbu	rtogs ldan u rgyan
རྟོགས་ནུས་པ	can bring realization	rtogs nus pa
རྟོགས་པ	comprehension, understanding	rtogs pa
རྟོགས་པ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	her realization increased	rtogs pa skyes te
རྟོགས་པ་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	understood	rtogs pa khong du chud pa
རྟོགས་པ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	particular state of knowledge	rtogs pa khyad par can
རྟོགས་པ་འཁོར་ཡུག	steady realization	rtogs pa 'khor yug
རྟོགས་པ་འཁྲུངས་པ	growth of ideas, thought	rtogs pa 'khrungs pa
རྟོགས་པ་རྒྱས་པའི་མདོ	sutra of expanding realization	rtogs pa rgyas pa'i mdo
རྟོགས་པ་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེ་བ	realization will take birth	rtogs pa rgyud la skye ba
རྟོགས་པ་མངོན་གྱུར	having realized	rtogs pa mngon gyur
རྟོགས་པ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	realization of knowledge	rtogs pa mngon du gyur pa
རྟོགས་པ་མངོན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	to realize understanding	rtogs pa mngon du byed pa
རྟོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great / supreme realization	rtogs pa chen po
རྟོགས་པ་མཆོག	real knowledge	rtogs pa mchog
རྟོགས་པ་མཆོག་ལྡན་གྱི་བླ་མ	a supremely realized teacher	rtogs pa mchog ldan gyi bla ma
རྟོགས་པ་འཆར་ཚུལ	how realization arises	rtogs pa 'char tshul
རྟོགས་པ་བརྗོད	The 9 branches of the scriptures + narratives ??	rtogs pa brjod
རྟོགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ	Narratives	rtogs pa brjod pa
རྟོགས་པ་བརྗོད་པའི་སྡེ	<aabad'anam> biographical narratives [ma rtogs pa'i don dpe dang bcas gsal bar ston pa ste dper na, rgyal po tsangs byin gyi sngon gyi byung ba ston pa'i mdo lta bu 'dul ba'i sde snod du gtogs pa'o...	rtogs pa brjod pa'i sde
རྟོགས་པ་གཉིས	two kinds of realisation [: the realisation which is primordially acquired {ye nas chos nyid rang gi rig pas rtogs pa} and the realisation resulting from attainments acquired on the path {lam bsgom...	rtogs pa gnyis
རྟོགས་པ་བརྙེས	obtain the final understanding	rtogs pa brnyes
རྟོགས་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attain realization	rtogs pa thob pa
རྟོགས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	gain realization	rtogs pa dang ldan pa
རྟོགས་པ་དམ་པ	supreme understanding	rtogs pa dam pa
རྟོགས་པ་ལྡན	one must obtain the understanding rtogs pa nam mkha' dang mnyam pa	rtogs pa ldan
རྟོགས་པ་རྣམ་པར་བྱང་བ	[Vyavadatasamaya?] name of a bodhisattva, either Asanga or Maitreya	rtogs pa rnam par byang ba
རྟོགས་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	4 understandings, 1 of gtan tshigs bzhi	rtogs pa rnam bzhi
རྟོགས་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས	perfect realization [the benefit for oneself the perfect quality of realizing knowables, gang zag dang chos la bdag med pa'i stong pa nyid 'phags pa rnams kyi mnyam bzhag so so rang gis mngon sum d...	rtogs pa phun tshogs
རྟོགས་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	the fearlessness of perfect realization	rtogs pa phun tshogs la mi 'jigs pa
རྟོགས་པ་མ་འདྲེས་པ་དྲུག	six unassociated realizations	rtogs pa ma 'dres pa drug
རྟོགས་པ་མེད་པའི	in which there is nothing to understand	rtogs pa med pa'i
རྟོགས་པ་བཞི	CHN	rtogs pa bzhi
རྟོགས་པ་ཟུང་འཇུག	unified realization	rtogs pa zung 'jug
རྟོགས་པ་འོད་གསལ	Luminosity of realization	rtogs pa 'od gsal
རྟོགས་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དབང	wisdom empowerment of realization, [Syn {bzhi pa tshig dbang}	rtogs pa ye shes kyi dbang
རྟོགས་པའི་སྐལ་བ་ཅན	rtogs pa'i 'os su gyur pa'i chos can	rtogs pa'i skal ba can
རྟོགས་པའི་ཁྱད་པར	the special understanding	rtogs pa'i khyad par
རྟོགས་པའི་སྒོ་ཐོབ་པ	attainment of some doorway of realization	rtogs pa'i sgo thob pa
རྟོགས་པའི་ངང་དུ་འཇོག་པ	leave the mind in the realization of	rtogs pa'i ngang du 'jog pa
རྟོགས་པའི་ཆོས	dharma of realization [as in dharma of scripture and]	rtogs pa'i chos
རྟོགས་པའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya of realization	rtogs pa'i chos sku
རྟོགས་པའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	the dharma wheel of the realized, dharmachakra of what has been realized	rtogs pa'i chos 'khor
རྟོགས་པའི་རྗེས་དཔག	judgment of perception	rtogs pa'i rjes dpag
རྟོགས་པའི་སྟོབས	shes rtogs kyi nus rtsal	rtogs pa'i stobs
རྟོགས་པའི་བསྟན་པ	rtogs pa'i chos	rtogs pa'i bstan pa
རྟོགས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle for realization	rtogs pa'i theg pa
རྟོགས་པའི་དོན་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད	understood perfectly what this meant	rtogs pa'i don khong du chud
རྟོགས་པའི་གདེང	confidence of understanding	rtogs pa'i gdeng
རྟོགས་པའི་གདེངས	certainty of knowledge arises	rtogs pa'i gdengs
རྟོགས་པའི་གདེངས་ཆེན	great confidence of realization	rtogs pa'i gdengs chen
རྟོགས་པའི་འདྲ་འབག་ཆེན་མོ	the special instruction on Dzogchen Nyingtig by Drubwang Shakya Shri	rtogs pa'i 'dra 'bag chen mo
རྟོགས་པའི་བློ	blo'i byed pa la brten nas yul la nges pa 'dren pa'i nus pa, EG, vase grasping eye consciousness realizing/perceiving a vase and inference realizing that sound is impermanent, truly knowing the dha...	rtogs pa'i blo
རྟོགས་པའི་བློ་གཉིས	CHN	rtogs pa'i blo gnyis
རྟོགས་པའི་རྩལ་སྣང	the expression of realization	rtogs pa'i rtsal snang
རྟོགས་པའི་འོས་སུ་གྱུར་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	dgra bcom pa drug gi nang gses, gang dull faculties intoxicated by desirable qualities kyang rung mthong ba'i chos bde bar gnas pa las yongs su nyams pa'i skal ba can ma yin la having the fortune o...	rtogs pa'i 'os su gyur pa'i chos can
རྟོགས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	good qualities of realization/ gathered by the three precepts	rtogs pa'i yon tan
རྟོགས་པའི་རང་ཉམས	actual experiences of realization	rtogs pa'i rang nyams
རྟོགས་པའི་རིག་པ	functioning of immediate awareness in intuitive understand- ing, recognition in the state of rigpa	rtogs pa'i rig pa
རྟོགས་པར་དཀའ་བ	hard to understand	rtogs par dka' ba
རྟོགས་པར་གྲོལ	to self-liberate by understanding	rtogs par grol
རྟོགས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	obtain information, convince oneself of a thing	rtogs par 'gyur ba
རྟོགས་པར་བྱ	I will realize	rtogs par bya
རྟོགས་པར་བྱ་བ	{don dam pa ni dad pas rtogs par bya ba yin no} It is through faith that absolute truth is realized	rtogs par bya ba
རྟོགས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	in order to make them understand	rtogs par bya ba'i phyir
རྟོགས་པར་བྱེད	survey	rtogs par byed
རྟོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	generate a direct understanding, teach, demonstrate, convince a person	rtogs par byed pa
རྟོགས་པས་བསྡུས་པ་དྲུག	the six gathered by realization	rtogs pas bsdus pa drug
རྟོགས་སྤྱོད	theory and practice	rtogs spyod
རྟོགས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་པ	to know and to practice	rtogs spyod byed pa
རྟོགས་སྤྱོད་ལ་མཁས་པ	theoretically and practically religious	rtogs spyod la mkhas pa
རྟོགས་བྱ	what is to be realized; object of realization	rtogs bya
རྟོགས་བྱའི་ཡུལ	objective field that can be discerned	rtogs bya'i yul
རྟོགས་བྱེད	realizer	rtogs byed
རྟོགས་འབུལ	offering of 1's realization	rtogs 'bul
རྟོགས་མ་རྟོགས་མེད	neither realized nor unrealized	rtogs ma rtogs med
རྟོགས་མ་ཐུབ་པ་སྨྲ་བ	agnosticism	rtogs ma thub pa smra ba
རྟོགས་ཚག	consciousness, awareness	rtogs tshag
རྟོགས་ཚད	the pinnacle of realization	rtogs tshad
རྟོགས་ཞིབ	thorough inquiry, investigation of minute details	rtogs zhib
རྟོགས་ཞིབ་ལྟ་སྐོར	inspection tour	rtogs zhib lta skor
རྟོགས་ཞིབ་གནམ་གྲུ	spy plane	rtogs zhib gnam gru
རྟོགས་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	check, examine, inspect, survey	rtogs zhib byed pa
རྟོགས་ཞིབ་སློབ་ཚོགས	research society/ association	rtogs zhib slob tshogs
རྟོགས་བཞི	four kinds of realization	rtogs bzhi
རྟོགས་ཡས	a numerical figure	rtogs yas
རྟོགས་རིགས	modes	rtogs rigs
རྟོགས་སླ	easy to know	rtogs sla
རྟོགས་སླ་བ	easy to know	rtogs sla ba
རྟོད	[p brtod] rtod pa! tie, stake, fasten, tether	rtod
རྟོད་ཁ	horse etc tethered in a meadow and grazing 'khor rgya	rtod kha
རྟོད་བརྒྱབ་པ	drive in a stake or peg	rtod brgyab pa
རྟོད་ཐག	horse etc. tethering rope w stake	rtod thag
རྟོད་པ	(tha dad pa brtod pa, brtod pa, rtod,, in a grassy place cattle grazing having been tethered to a stake w long rope grazing, a tethering stake, debate	rtod pa
རྟོད་ཕུར	stake, peg, drang srong phur bu	rtod phur
རྟོད་མེད	of course, certainly	rtod med
རྟོན་པ	place confidence in a person, rely on, adhere to, act in accordance with	rton pa
རྟོན་པ་བཞི	four kinds of reliance [reliance on meaning rather than words, reliance on the doctrine rather than upon individuals, reliance upon pristine cognition rather than on consciousness, and reliance on ...	rton pa bzhi
རྟོལ	imp. of {rtol ba}; 1) to bore holes, to pierce, puncture. 2) to expose, to lay bare / naked. 3) bastard	rtol
རྟོལ་གོག	calf w ma mdzo mo and pha gyag	rtol gog
རྟོལ་གྱག	ko ko gyag: pha gyag and ma mdzo mo bull	rtol gyag
རྟོལ་དྭ	mdzo mo shi ba'i rtol gog	rtol dwa
རྟོལ་ཕོ	male calf w father a bull &, mother a mdzo mo	rtol pho
རྟོལ་བ	to bore, to pierce, to perforate; {rtol ba, brtol ba, brtol ba, rtol} trans. v	rtol ba
རྟོལ་མ་རྟོལ	arrived or not arrived	rtol ma rtol
རྟོལ་མེད	1) cha med, snang med rtol med sems kyis gnas 'dir 'ongs]; 2) uncertain; 3) no way to	rtol med
རྟོལ་མོ	cross back to the yak by breeding an animal three-parts of indian parentage with a pure-bred yak	rtol mo
རྟོལ་མཛོ	pha glang and ma mdzo mo bull	rtol mdzo
རྟོལ་མཛོ་མ	pha glang and ma mdzo mo bsdebs pa las skyes pa'i cow	rtol mdzo ma
རྟོལ་གཟོང	a kind of 'bigs gzong	rtol gzong
རྟོལ་ལེ	ma mdzo mo and pha gyag calf	rtol le
རྟོལ་ཤེས	prescience, intuitive knowledge, knowing without being taught	rtol shes
རྟོལ་ཤེས་པ	know thoroughly	rtol shes pa
རྟོས	(not in DAS)	rtos
ལྟ	[p [b]ltas ltos!] look upon/ at, see, look at, view, seek, observe, gaze, pay attention, watch, regard, believe, should be viewed as	lta
ལྟ་ཀོན	prelude	lta kon
ལྟ་ཀློག	reading	lta klog
ལྟ་ཀློག་བྱེད	read	lta klog byed
ལྟ་སྐུལ	lta zhib dang skul 'ded byed pa	lta skul
ལྟ་སྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	supervise	lta skul byed pa
ལྟ་སྐོར	sightseeing, touring, a tour, visit	lta skor
ལྟ་སྐོར་གྲོས་ཚོགས	visiting, touring, excursion	lta skor gros tshogs
ལྟ་སྐོར་བྱེད་པ	visit	lta skor byed pa
ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ	visiting, touring, excursion	lta skor tshogs pa
ལྟ་སྐྱོང	looking after, caring for	lta skyong
ལྟ་སྐྱོང་པ	guardian, trustee	lta skyong pa
ལྟ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	taking care of, to look after, give consideration	lta skyong byed pa
ལྟ་བསྐོར	visit	lta bskor
ལྟ་བསྐོར་གྲོས་ཚོགས	visiting, touring, excursion	lta bskor gros tshogs
ལྟ་བསྐོར་བ	visitor	lta bskor ba
ལྟ་བསྐོར་ཚོགས་པ	visiting, touring, excursion	lta bskor tshogs pa
ལྟ་བསྐྱོད	going to see/ watch	lta bskyod
ལྟ་ཁང	chapel	lta khang
ལྟ་ཁྲིད	MSS: "instructions in/on the view/vision [of]" E.g., Mi-pham's {dbu ma'i lta khrid zab mo}, "Profound Instructions on/in the View of the Middle." [mss]	lta khrid
ལྟ་མཁན	the watcher, that which observes, supervisor, overseer	lta mkhan
ལྟ་ག་ལ་འགྱུར	de lta bu yong mi srid,...Las ka brtsams tshad tshang ma 'grub pa lta ga la 'gyur	lta ga la 'gyur
ལྟ་གོན	preparation, arrangement	lta gon
ལྟ་གྱི་འདུག	is seeing	lta gyi 'dug
ལྟ་གྱུར	instance of [wrong] view, {lta bar gyur ba}	lta gyur
ལྟ་གྲུབ	views and tenets, lta ba dang grub mtha'	lta grub
ལྟ་དགོངས	realization of the view; the highest view	lta dgongs
ལྟ་དགོངས་ཅན	having the intention of the view, possessing realization of the view	lta dgongs can
ལྟ་དགོངས་གནད	key point of the principle of knowledge	lta dgongs gnad
ལྟ་དགོངས་རྣལ་མ	authentic principle	lta dgongs rnal ma
ལྟ་མགུར	spiritual song, song of the view	lta mgur
ལྟ་རྒྱབ་ལ་དབྱུག	put aside, forget	lta rgyab la dbyug
ལྟ་རྒྱུ	a viewable thing, something to view, watch, observe	lta rgyu
ལྟ་སྒོམ་དུ་རོ་གཅིག	a single taste as to view and meditation	lta sgom du ro gcig
ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད	view, meditation, and conduct	lta sgom spyod
ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པ	view, meditation and conduct	lta sgom spyod pa
ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་འབྲས	view, meditation, action, and fruit	lta sgom spyod 'bras
ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་འབྲས་བུ	view, meditation, conduct, and fruition	lta sgom spyod 'bras bu
ལྟ་སྒྲུབ་པ	propitiate a god, render a god subject to human power	lta sgrub pa
ལྟ་སྒྲེ	anterior or posterior, upper and lower	lta sgre
ལྟ་ངན	inferior view, unfortunate belief, wrong view [thd]	lta ngan
ལྟ་ངན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	based on an unwholesome view	lta ngan gyi sgo nas
ལྟ་ངན་མེད	w/o bad views	lta ngan med
ལྟ་ཅི	no need to mention--, still less -	lta ci
ལྟ་ཅི་དམོད	what need to look at, not to mention.., not only.. but.., forget about.., let alone .., there is no need to talk about..	lta ci dmod
ལྟ་ཅི་སྨོས	not to mention, not only, but; forget about; let alone; there is no talk about; no need to speak of	lta ci smos
ལྟ་ཆུང་ངོ་ཚ	modesty of looking little	lta chung ngo tsha
ལྟ་ཉུལ	seek further * spying, reconnaissance, scouting	lta nyul
ལྟ་ཉུལ་པ	spy, scout	lta nyul pa
ལྟ་ཉུལ་བྱེད	seek further * spy, reconnoiter, scout	lta nyul byed
ལྟ་ཉུལ་བྱེད་པ	spy, explore	lta nyul byed pa
ལྟ་རྟོག	investigate	lta rtog
གཞིག་འགྲེལ	vipashyana investigations and considerations	gzhig 'grel
ལྟ་རྟོག་གི	vigilance	lta rtog gi
ལྟ་རྟོག་ཅན	vigilant	lta rtog can
ལྟ་རྟོག་ཐོང	scrutiny	lta rtog thong
ལྟ་རྟོག་བྱེད་མཁན	a watcher (after rules, realizer of the view	lta rtog byed mkhan
ལྟ་རྟོག་བྱེད་པ	give consideration to, look after	lta rtog byed pa
ལྟ་རྟོག་འཚོ་རྟེན	maintenance	lta rtog 'tsho rten
ལྟ་རྟོགས	care	lta rtogs
ལྟ་རྟོགས་པ	scrutiny, realize the view	lta rtogs pa
ལྟ་རྟོགས་བྱེད་མཁན	a watcher [after rules]	lta rtogs byed mkhan
ལྟ་རྟོགས་བྱེད་པ	look through [arch] book, look after, give consideration to, supervise, oversee, deal w, treat	lta rtogs byed pa
ལྟ་སྟང	gaze, way of looking, eye position	lta stang
ལྟ་སྟང་གསུམ	three gazes (upward chos sku, sideways - longs sku, downward - sprul sku)	lta stang gsum
ལྟ་སྟངས	a yogic gaze, eye-position, manner of looking; a fixed gaze/ to look in a certain manner {lta tshul} view, viewpoint, opinion; gaze	lta stangs
ལྟ་སྟངས་རྙིང་པ	conservative viewpoint/ ideas	lta stangs rnying pa
ལྟ་སྟངས་རྙིང་པ་ཁྱེར	hold conservative viewpoint/ ideas	lta stangs rnying pa khyer
ལྟ་སྟངས་བསྟོད་པ	to raise one's gaze	lta stangs bstod pa
ལྟ་སྟངས་དཔངས་བསྟོད	lift the gaze	lta stangs dpangs bstod
ལྟ་སྟངས་ཕར་བསྒྱུར	to direct the gaze toward	lta stangs phar bsgyur
ལྟ་སྟངས་སྨད	lower the gaze	lta stangs smad
ལྟ་སྟངས་གསུམ	three gazes. 1) {nyen thos zhi ba'i lta stangs} the peaceful gaze of a shravaka. 2) {byang chub sems dpa' lta stangs} the gaze of the bodhisattva. 3) {khro bo'i lta stangs} a gaze of a wrathful deity	lta stangs gsum
ལྟ་ཐུག་བྱེད	sees or meets	lta thug byed
ལྟ་ཐོག་ནས	within the view	lta thog nas
ལྟ་ད་པ	present GD	lta da pa
ལྟ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from views	lta dang bral ba
ལྟ་དང་གསོ་མི་རུང་བ	w the incurable view	lta dang gso mi rung ba
ལྟ་དའི་རྐྱེན	the ego, and the immediate condition GD	lta da'i rkyen
ལྟ་དེབ	magazine, pictorial	lta deb
ལྟ་དེབ་སྔོན་མངག	magazine subscription	lta deb sngon mngag
ལྟ་འདོད་མདོར་བསྟན	name of a text	lta 'dod mdor bstan
ལྟ་འདོད་མེད་པར	w/ o desire for/ maintaining a view	lta 'dod med par
ལྟ་འདོད་ཡོད་པ	desiring/ maintaining a view	lta 'dod yod pa
ལྟ་སྡུག	Sudarsana	lta sdug
ལྟ་ན་སྡུག	1) elegant, beautiful, lovely [to behold]; 2) mt; 3) the city lta na sdug	lta na sdug
ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ	beautiful to look at; elegant	lta na sdug pa
ལྟ་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existing in reliance / dependently, relative existence	lta nas grub pa
ལྟ་སྣང	way of seeing	lta snang
ལྟ་སྣང་མཐོང་ཕྱོགས	individual people's way of viewing/ seeing	lta snang mthong phyogs
ལྟ་སྣང་མ་མཛེས	vulgar	lta snang ma mdzes
ལྟ་སྣང་མ་མཛེས་པ	gruesome	lta snang ma mdzes pa
ལྟ་སྣང་མཛེས་པ	beautiful, lovely, pretty, pleasant	lta snang mdzes pa
ལྟ་སྣང་ལ་མ	squalid	lta snang la ma
ལྟ་སྣང་ལ་མ་མཛེས་པ	eyesore	lta snang la ma mdzes pa
ལྟ་སྣོལ་བ	interchange looks	lta snol ba
ལྟ་པ	theory	lta pa
ལྟ་དཔྱོད	investigation, examination, survey, inspection	lta dpyod
ལྟ་སྤྱོད	ideology, attitude, position	lta spyod
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་མཐུན་པ	of like view and conduct	lta spyod mthun pa
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་རྣམ་དག་གི་མན་ངག	instruction in the completely pure view and action	lta spyod rnam dag gi man ngag
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་དབྱེར་མེད	action inseparable from view	lta spyod dbyer med
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་ཡ་བྲལ་ཏེ	contemplation and consummation being disentangled one from the other	lta spyod ya bral te
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་ལོག་པ	perverted view and conduct	lta spyod log pa
ལྟ་སྤྱོད་གསལ་བྱུང་བར	to clarify [their] ideology/ attitude/ position	lta spyod gsal byung bar
ལྟ་ཕྱོགས	object of sight, view, scene, aspect	lta phyogs
ལྟ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ་ཤོར་བ	to lose the conduct in the view; Padmasambhava: {lta ba'i phyogs su spyod pa ma shor bar mdzod, de shor na dge stong sdig stong nag po kha 'byams bdud kyi lta bar 'gro} Do not let your action slip ...	lta phyogs su spyod pa shor ba
ལྟ་ཕྲེང	SA man ngag lta phreng, The Garland of Views	lta phreng
ལྟ་བ	1) [philosophical] view, orientation, point of view, philosophical position [wrong view / opinion, belief, heresy, speculative theory, ideology], theory, position, stand point, outlook, attitude, p...	lta ba
ལྟ་བ་ཀུན་བཟློག་པ	refute all views	lta ba kun bzlog pa
ལྟ་བ་ཀློང་ཡངས	Tawa Long-Yang. A treasure cycle of the Father Tantra aspect of the Great Perfection revealed by Dorje Lingpa (1346-1405). Tawa	lta ba klong yangs
ལྟ་བ་བཀའ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	the four seals of the view signifying the Buddhas	lta ba bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi
ལྟ་བ་སྐྱོང་བ	preserving/ guard the view	lta ba skyong ba
ལྟ་བ་ཁ་ཚོལ་བསྐུར	philosophize the view	lta ba kha tshol bskur
ལྟ་བ་ཁྱད་པར	{lta ba khyad par}	lta ba khyad par
ལྟ་བ་ཁྱུང་ཆེན་གྱི་ལུང	Great Garuda View Scripture. A tantra belonging the Mind Section of the Great Perfection. A tantra with similar title is found in Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	lta ba khyung chen gyi lung
ལྟ་བ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣ་ལ་འབྱོར	the wealth of continuously hearing the view	lta ba rgyun gyi rna la 'byor
ལྟ་བ་སྒང་དྲིལ་བ	full summation of the view	lta ba sgang dril ba
ལྟ་བ་སྒོམ་པ་སྤྱོད་པ	view, meditation and action	lta ba sgom pa spyod pa
ལྟ་བ་སྒོམ་པ་སྤྱོད་པ་འབྲས་བུ	view, meditation, conduct and fruition. The philosophical orientation, the act of	lta ba sgom pa spyod pa 'bras bu
གྲོཝིང་ཨཅཅུསྟོམེད་ཏོ་ཐཏ	usually in sitting practice, the implementation of that insight during the activities of daily life, and the final outcome resulting from such training. Each of the nine vehicles has its particular...	growing accustomed to that
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ	unwholesome views	lta ba ngan pa
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ལྔ	the five unwholesome views	lta ba ngan pa lnga
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་བཅུ	the 10 ten rootdisturbances	lta ba ngan pa bcu
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་བསྙེན	(-- {ba'i bsnyen pa - root/ principal recitation ???	lta ba ngan pa bsnyen
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ལྟུང	root downfall	lta ba ngan pa ltung
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ལྟུང་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 root downfalls	lta ba ngan pa ltung bcu bzhi
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ལྟུང་བདུན	the 7 root downfalls	lta ba ngan pa ltung bdun
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ཐིག་རླུང་གསུམ	nadi, prana and bindu, channels/ veins, energies and essences	lta ba ngan pa thig rlung gsum
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ཐོ	main/ chief list/ manual	lta ba ngan pa tho
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་དོན	principle of bad views	lta ba ngan pa don
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་བདར་ཆོད	examine bad views thoroughly	lta ba ngan pa bdar chod
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་ནག	blood vessel	lta ba ngan pa nag
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་གནས	the place of bad views, the nadis, channels, veins	lta ba ngan pa gnas
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་གནིད་ལོག	the arteries of sleep	lta ba ngan pa gnid log
ལྟ་བ་ངན་པ་སེལ་བ	clearing away unwholesome views	lta ba ngan pa sel ba
ལྟ་བ་ལྔ	{lta ba ngan pa lnga}	lta ba lnga
ལྟ་བ་གཅོག་པ	two	lta ba gcog pa
ལྟ་བ་ཆག་པ	two	lta ba chag pa
ལྟ་བ་ཆོག་མི་ཤེས	cannot get enough of looking at him	lta ba chog mi shes
ལྟ་བ་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན	holding a view to be paramount 1092	lta ba mchog tu 'dzin
ལྟ་བ་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	holding a view to be paramount, clinging to false views as being superior and ultimate	lta ba mchog tu 'dzin pa
ལྟ་བ་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	view of regarding ideologies/ speculative opinions as some absolute principle; to view/ view of regarding (philosophical) views as supreme (principles) in their own right	lta ba mchog tu 'dzin pa'i lta ba
ལྟ་བ་མཆོག་འཛིན	holding a view to be paramount	lta ba mchog 'dzin
ལྟ་བ་མཇལ་བའི་ཕྱག	homage through meeting the view face to face	lta ba mjal ba'i phyag
ལྟ་བ་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the view	lta ba rje su dran pa
ལྟ་བ་ཉམས་པ	degeneration in view	lta ba nyams pa
ལྟ་བ་ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པ	grasping of (wrong view/ belief	lta ba nye bar len pa
ལྟ་བ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན	defiled/ afflicted/ disturbed view	lta ba nyon mongs can
ལྟ་བ་གཉིས	the two views	lta ba gnyis
ལྟ་བ་སྙིགས་མ	decline in the view	lta ba snyigs ma
ལྟ་བ་སྙེགས་མ	corrupt/ degenerate view	lta ba snyegs ma
ལྟ་བ་རྟོགས་པ	realizing the view, real understanding of the view	lta ba rtogs pa
ལྟ་བ་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate view	lta ba mthar thug
ལྟ་བ་མཐུན་པ	share the same view	lta ba mthun pa
ལྟ་བ་མཐོ་བ	high view, great pride	lta ba mtho ba
ལྟ་བ་མཐོང་བ	insight, see the view	lta ba mthong ba
ལྟ་བ་མཐོན་པོ	high view	lta ba mthon po
གཏོགས་པ་བཞི་བཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	CHN	gtogs pa bzhi bcu rtsa gnyis
ལྟ་བ་ནམ་མཁའ་བས་ཀྱང་མཐོ	{las rgyu 'bras bag phye cas kyang zhib} Although my view is higher than the sky, my attention to actions and their effects is finer than flour. Padmasambhava	lta ba nam mkha' bas kyang mtho
ལྟ་བ་གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དོན	Paltrul Rinpoche: {lta ba gnas lugs kyi don ci tsam rtogs bzhin rgyu 'bras la zhib tu 'gro ba zhig dgos} however fully you have realized in your view the nature of reality, you must pay minute atte...	lta ba gnas lugs kyi don
ལྟ་བ་གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དོན་རྟོགས་པ	realized in your view the nature of reality	lta ba gnas lugs kyi don rtogs pa
ལྟ་བ་རྣམ་དག	true view	lta ba rnam dag
ལྟ་བ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure view	lta ba rnam par dag pa
ལྟ་བ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་གྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the view of the natural state of simplicity	lta ba spros bral gyi gnas lugs
ལྟ་བ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	wrong view	lta ba phyin ci log
ལྟ་བ་ཕྲ་རྟོགས	realize the subtle view	lta ba phra rtogs
ལྟ་བ་འཕོ་འགྱུར	1 of klong dgu	lta ba 'pho 'gyur
ལྟ་བ་འཕོ་འགྱུར་མེད་པའི་ཀློང	space of immutable theory	lta ba 'pho 'gyur med pa'i klong
ལྟ་བ་བག་ལ་ཉལ	latent (wrong view	lta ba bag la nyal
ལྟ་བ་མེད	disregard	lta ba med
ལྟ་བ་མེད་པ	w/ o a view	lta ba med pa
ལྟ་བ་དམན་པ	the lower views	lta ba dman pa
ལྟ་བ་གཙོ་ཆེ	the view is the most important thing	lta ba gtso che
ལྟ་བ་བཙལ་བ	see the view	lta ba btsal ba
ལྟ་བ་འི་ཟག་པ	the defilement of (wrong views	lta ba 'i zag pa
ལྟ་བ་ཡང་དག	correct view; one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} the eightfold noble path	lta ba yang dag
ལྟ་བ་རིམ་འཇུག	enter into the stages of the view	lta ba rim 'jug
ལྟ་བ་ལོག	wrong/ erroneous/ mistaken/ perverted view, heresy, false ideology	lta ba log
ལྟ་བ་ལོག་པ	w/ o faith, devotion etc.	lta ba log pa
ལྟ་བའི་ཀུན་སློང	motivation of the view	lta ba'i kun slong
ལྟ་བའི་ཀློང་གི་བཤགས་པ	Confession of the Expanse of the View lta ba'i mgur mkha' lding gshog rlabs Flight of the Garuda, by Shabkar	lta ba'i klong gi bshags pa
ལྟ་བའི་ཆུ་བོ	river of the view	lta ba'i chu bo
ལྟ་བའི་འཆིང་བ	fetter of (wrong views	lta ba'i 'ching ba
ལྟ་བའི་གཉེན་པོའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐོབ་པ	the antidote for the view which is the attainment of wisdom	lta ba'i gnyen po'i ye shes thob pa
ལྟ་བའི་སྙིགས	perversity in thoughts, religious disbeliefs	lta ba'i snyigs
ལྟ་བའི་སྙིགས་མ	corruption/ degeneration/ impurity of view	lta ba'i snyigs ma
ལྟ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	Core of the View [thd]	lta ba'i snying po
ལྟ་བའི་མཐའ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 59-1]	lta ba'i mtha' brgyad
ལྟ་བའི་མཐའ་ཆོད་པ	to resolve the view	lta ba'i mtha' chod pa
ལྟ་བའི་གདེང	confidence of the view	lta ba'i gdeng
ལྟ་བའི་གདེང་བསྐྱེད་པ	arouse confidence in the view	lta ba'i gdeng bskyed pa
ལྟ་བའི་གནད	key point of the view	lta ba'i gnad
ལྟ་བའི་གནད་བཞི	CHN	lta ba'i gnad bzhi
ལྟ་བའི་གནས	ground of beliefs	lta ba'i gnas
ལྟ་བའི་རྣམ་པ	aspects/ details of the view	lta ba'i rnam pa
ལྟ་བའི་རྣམ་བཞག	presentation/ arrangement/ systemizing the view	lta ba'i rnam bzhag
ལྟ་བའི་བོག་འདོན	helped to enhance my practice	lta ba'i bog 'don
ལྟ་བའི་བྱ་བ	visual activity	lta ba'i bya ba
ལྟ་བའི་འབྱོར་བ	the bond of (wrong views	lta ba'i 'byor ba
ལྟ་བའི་རྦ་རླབས	the flood of (wrong views	lta ba'i rba rlabs
ལྟ་བའི་ཚང་ཚིང	nags tshal tshang tshing ltar 'dzings pa'i lta ba	lta ba'i tshang tshing
ལྟ་བའི་མཚན་མ་སེལ་བ	elimination of characteristics of the view/ views	lta ba'i mtshan ma sel ba
ལྟ་བའི་འཛིན་པ	fixating on a view	lta ba'i 'dzin pa
ལྟ་བའི་རྫོང	the fortress of the view	lta ba'i rdzong
ལྟ་བའི་ཞེན་པ	the bondage of philosophical speculation, attachment to the view	lta ba'i zhen pa
ལྟ་བའི་གཞག་ཐབས་གསུམ	the three ways of presenting the view	lta ba'i gzhag thabs gsum
ལྟ་བའི་ཟག་པ	corruption of view 1093	lta ba'i zag pa
ལྟ་བའི་ཟུག་པ	penetration of the view	lta ba'i zug pa
ལྟ་བའི་ཡང་རྩེ་རྟོགས	the realization of the highest view	lta ba'i yang rtse rtogs
ལྟ་བར་གྱུར་པ	instance of (wrong view	lta bar gyur pa
ལྟ་བར་གྱུར་པའི་འཆིང་བ	the bonds which are wrong views	lta bar gyur pa'i 'ching ba
ལྟ་བར་གྱུར་བ	instance of (wrong view	lta bar gyur ba
ལྟ་བར་བྱས་པ	instance of wrong view	lta bar byas pa
ལྟ་བར་བྱེད་པ	sight, visual faculty	lta bar byed pa
ལྟ་བར་མི་བཟོད་པ	overwhelming to the sight	lta bar mi bzod pa
ལྟ་བར་སོང་བ	wrong view, heresy	lta bar song ba
ལྟ་བས་ཆོག་མི་ཤེས	captivating to behold, cannot get enough of seeing him	lta bas chog mi shes
ལྟ་བས་ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པ	captivating to behold ph cannot get enough of seeing him	lta bas chog mi shes pa
ལྟ་བས་ཐག་བཅད་པ	deciding through the view	lta bas thag bcad pa
ལྟ་བས་མི་ངོམ་པ	not satisfied w a glance	lta bas mi ngom pa
ལྟ་བས་མི་ངོམས	not satisfied with a glance, wishing to look at it more, very handsome shape	lta bas mi ngoms
ལྟ་བས་གཟིངས་པ	rationalism	lta bas gzings pa
ལྟ་བུ	such as, like, similar	lta bu
ལྟ་བུའི་གསེབ་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	enter into	lta bu'i gseb tu 'gro ba
ལྟ་བུར	such as, like, similar	lta bur
ལྟ་བྱེད	eye	lta byed
ལྟ་སྦྱོང	practical experience	lta sbyong
ལྟ་སྦྱོང་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	practical experience, exhibition, show	lta sbyong 'khrab ston
ལྟ་མིན་ལྔ	the five nonconceptual kleshas, the five [disturbances] which are not views, {'dod chags}, {khong	lta min lnga
ལྟ་མེད	invisible	lta med
ལྟ་མེད་རིག་པ་རང་གསལ་ནི	as for invisible	lta med rig pa rang gsal ni
ལྟ་མོ་བ	audience	lta mo ba
ལྟ་མོའི་ལེའུ	scene	lta mo'i le'u
ལྟ་མྱུལ	spying, reconnaissance, scouting	lta myul
ལྟ་མྱུལ་པ	spy, scout	lta myul pa
ལྟ་སྨོས་ཀང་ཅི་དགོས	let alone, what need to speak of	lta smos kang ci dgos
ལྟ་སྨོས་ཀྱང་ཅི་དགོས	let alone--, what	lta smos kyang ci dgos
ནེཨེད་ཏོ་སྤེཨཀ་ཨོཕ༹	-	need to speak of
ལྟ་ཚུལ	eye, vision, view, viewpoint, opinion, viewpoint	lta tshul
ལྟ་ཚོད	test, experiment how things are, survey, trial	lta tshod
ལྟ་ཚོད་བྱེད	test, experiment how things are, survey	lta tshod byed
ལྟ་ཞིག	MSS: like that, in the same way. [mss]	lta zhig
ལྟ་ཞིང་འགྲོ་ཐུབ་པ	who could travel and see	lta zhing 'gro thub pa
ལྟ་ཞིབ	observation, looking over, supervising, direction, examination	lta zhib
ལྟ་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to observe	lta zhib byed pa
ལྟ་ཞོག	let alone, not to mention	lta zhog
ལྟ་བཞག	"let alone/far from" clause connective	lta bzhag
ལྟ་བཞིན	(what is presently being seen	lta bzhin
ལྟ་ཟུར	hip, hop-bone	lta zur
ལྟ་བཟའ་བ	eat, gain one's living	lta bza' ba
ལྟ་འོས་པ	sightly	lta 'os pa
ལྟ་རམ་པ	highest grade of geshe	lta ram pa
ལྟ་རུབ་རྒྱག་པ	many as one sdeb gcig tu [all at once/ together] lta ba	lta rub rgyag pa
ལྟ་ལ	like, as, after the manner of, SA ltar	lta la
ལྟ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	attached to wrong views	lta la chags pa
ལྟ་ལོག	false statement, heresy, wrong view, heresy, heretical doctrine	lta log
ལྟ་ལོག་སྐྱེད་པ	sin	lta log skyed pa
ལྟ་ལོག་ཅན	possess wrong view	lta log can
ལྟ་ལོག་ཏུ་ཤོར་བ	become perverted	lta log tu shor ba
ལྟ་སྲུང	surveillance, supervision, overseeing, watching, looking at, guarding	lta srung
ལྟ་སྲུང་བ	warden	lta srung ba
ལྟག་ཀོར	neck bones	ltag kor
ལྟག་སྐོར	1) clothing etc. kyi mtha' 'gril 'tshems stangs shig; 2) Lam lugs spyi byings dang mi mthun par mtho sa nas bskor te rang don sgrub thabs byed pa; 3) house etc. from the back skor ba; 4) Gzhan la b...	ltag skor
ལྟག་སྐྲ	hair on top of the head/ the temples	ltag skra
ལྟག་ཁུང	curved bones below the nape of the neck	ltag khung
ལྟག་ཁུར	dpon sogs ngom pa [display?],...Dpon po ltag khur gyis gzhan la sdigs mo byed pa	ltag khur
ལྟག་འཁོར་དམག་འཐབ	roundabout warfare, attack from the rear	ltag 'khor dmag 'thab
ལྟག་གི་ཤམ་ཐབ	tiger skin round the waist	ltag gi sham thab
ལྟག་དགྱེ་ལོག	fall on 1's back	ltag dgye log
ལྟག་དགྱེ་ལོག་པའི་ཉེས་སྐྱོན	fault of falling on 1's back	ltag dgye log pa'i nyes skyon
ལྟག་རྒྱབ	hole in the back of the skull for spinal cord, back of anything, behind	ltag rgyab
ལྟག་སྒོ	hole in the back of the skull, back/ side door	ltag sgo
ལྟག་སྒྲེ	hairless mgo bo'i ltag pa [top of the head/ or temples	ltag sgre
ལྟག་སྒྲོག་མ	monk hat sgro btsems ma	ltag sgrog ma
ལྟག་ངོམས	mgo 'dren [protector.patron] yod nyams ston pa,...Mtho snyeg ltag ngoms che na, nam zhig rang tshugs shor yong	ltag ngoms
ལྟག་གཅོད་པ	decapitate, inconstant, fickle, changeable	ltag gcod pa
ལྟག་ལྕིན	puff-ball	ltag lcin
ལྟག་ཆད་བཞིན	like a decapitated head	ltag chad bzhin
ལྟག་ཆུ	1) from pond's back side flowing water; 2) Ltag pa nas mjing pa'i [meadow, neck] bar zug pa'i chu ba leb mo ltag chu chad pa'i rdzing bu'i mthil brdol	ltag chu
བ་ལྟར	as a pond dries up when water ceases running into it	ba ltar
ལྟག་ཆོད	decapitate inconstant, fickle, changeable, merely apparent refutation/ contradiction, wrong answer	ltag chod
ལྟག་ཆོད་འཕེན་པ	assert a contradiction to a universal truth or something wrong	ltag chod 'phen pa
ལྟག་ཉལ	1) gan rkyal du nyal ba; 2) Rtsa snod ka dang, mjing pa'i rtse chung sogs 'phar rtsa dang 'brel ba'i rtsar rgyag byed kyi gtsag bu zhig 1094	ltag nyal
ལྟག་ཐེར	bald	ltag ther
ལྟག་མདུད	hole in the occiput, connection of the brain with the spinal marrow	ltag mdud
ལྟག་སྣེད	in part of the body skyon shor ba	ltag sned
ལྟག་པ	projecting parts at the back of the crown of the head, back part of the neck, nape, upper or back part of anything, rhododendron, upper or back part or side	ltag pa
ལྟག་པ་ཆག་པ	1) gnya' chag pa,...Gzhan gyis gnad la bkar bas ltag pa chag ste zhum zhum bur gnas pa,.; 2) Mgo 'dren brlag pa,...Blo phugs gtod sa'i rgyab rtsa 'thor nas ltag pa chag pa	ltag pa chag pa
ལྟག་པ་མཐོ་བ	mgo 'dren [protector.patron] exists thinking ltag shed khengs dregs chen po	ltag pa mtho ba
ལྟག་པ་ནང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	facing outwards	ltag pa nang du bstan pa
ལྟག་པའི་མདུད་སྒོ	hole in back of skull for spinal cord	ltag pa'i mdud sgo
ལྟག་སྤུ	neck hair, mane of the horse	ltag spu
ལྟག་སྤྲོད	1) [joined] back to back; 2) incompatible, contradictory	ltag sprod
ལྟག་སྤྲོད་བྱས་བསྡད	sat back to back	ltag sprod byas bsdad
ལྟག་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	transpose, put in alternation	ltag sprod byed pa
ལྟག་ཕུ་གྲོས་ལྷས	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	ltag phu gros lhas
ལྟག་འབིག	pierce through	ltag 'big
ལྟག་འབིགས	woodworking tool	ltag 'bigs
ལྟག་མ	words written over others, the uppermost	ltag ma
ལྟག་རྩ	back	ltag rtsa
ལྟག་རྩ་སྒྲེང་སྒྲེང	stiff unbending back	ltag rtsa sgreng sgreng
ལྟག་རྩ་བཟང་པོ	helper, protector patron zab po,...Rang la bden pa med kyang ltag rtsa bzang po yod	ltag rtsa bzang po
ལྟག་ཚུགས	gos 'tshems stangs shig	ltag tshugs
ལྟག་འོག	a temple	ltag 'og
ལྟག་འོག་གོ་བརྗེས	reverse above and below	ltag 'og go brjes
ལྟག་ཡན	clothing hem four fingers tsam gyi mtshams kyi thog ma'i 'tshem bu	ltag yan
ལྟག་རལ	mur gong gi skra gseb tu like a wiggly snake rtsa 'phred nyal can: if bled mgo bo gzer ba &, rna ba na ba &, so la zug rngu phan	ltag ral
ལྟག་རུས	ltag khung bone	ltag rus
ལྟག་ལུང་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Taklung kagy?	ltag lung bka' brgyud
ལྟག་ལོག	turn back, return	ltag log
ལྟག་ཤེད	mgo 'dren [protector patron] ngoms pa'i dbang shed,...Dpon ngan kha 'khyer gyis ltag shed byed pa	ltag shed
ལྟགས་ཆད་ཀྱིས་ཤི	die of starvation	ltags chad kyis shi
ལྟང	mar ltang gcig - a skin bag full of butter	ltang
ལྟང་དཀར	white, pure white	ltang dkar
ལྟང་གཉིས	two bales, whole load	ltang gnyis
ལྟང་ཐོང་ཏེ་ཆ	he does not make a stay here	ltang thong te cha
ལྟང་ཐོང་ཏེ་ཆ་འདུག	he is passing through	ltang thong te cha 'dug
ལྟང་བུག་ཐོང	bore through	ltang bug thong
ལྟང་རྩེ	small leather pouch/ bag	ltang rtse
ལྟང་ཚེ	small leather pouch/ bag	ltang tshe
ལྟངས་སྤྱད	minutely examine	ltangs spyad
ལྟད་མོ	a sight, scene, spectacle, entertainment, fair, play, show, drama, demonstration, acting, performance	ltad mo
ལྟད་མོ་ཁང	place of showing performances, auditorium, theater	ltad mo khang
ལྟད་མོ་མཁན	showman, actor, mimic	ltad mo mkhan
ལྟད་མོ་དགའ་སྤྲོ	delightful spectacles	ltad mo dga' spro
ལྟད་མོ་ཆེ	great display, great entertainment	ltad mo che
ལྟད་མོ་ཆེ་བ	amusing, interesting	ltad mo che ba
ལྟད་མོ་ཆེན་པོ	lively, noisy	ltad mo chen po
ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་མཁན	audience	ltad mo lta mkhan
ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་བ	look at a scene, witness a play or scene, entertainment	ltad mo lta ba
ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་བའི	theater	ltad mo lta ba'i
ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་བའི་ས	place where there is something to be seen of amusement	ltad mo lta ba'i sa
ལྟད་མོ་སྟོན་པ	to act, perform	ltad mo ston pa
ལྟད་མོ་བལྟ་ཁང	theater	ltad mo blta khang
ལྟད་མོ་བལྟ་བ	to see a spectacle to entertain	ltad mo blta ba
ལྟད་མོ་བལྟ་རུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go and visit	ltad mo blta ru 'gro ba
ལྟད་མོ་བསྟན	to give a demonstration of	ltad mo bstan
ལྟད་མོ་སྣ་ཚོགས	different kinds of amusements and entertainments	ltad mo sna tshogs
ལྟད་མོ་པ	spectator, visitor	ltad mo pa
ལྟད་མོ་བ	spectators, audience	ltad mo ba
ལྟད་མོ་མཛོད	take delight in it	ltad mo mdzod
ལྟད་མོ་ཡོད	(you will find the spectacle	ltad mo yod
ལྟད་མོ་ལ་འཚོགས	came together to an entertainment	ltad mo la 'tshogs
ལྟད་མོའི་དགེ་མཚན	innocent amusement, entertainment	ltad mo'i dge mtshan
ལྟད་མོའི་རྣམ་གྲངས	program (of a show	ltad mo'i rnam grangs
ལྟད་མོའི་ཟླ་བ	[9th] festival month, tha skar	ltad mo'i zla ba
ལྟད་མོར་འགྲོ	go to an entertainment	ltad mor 'gro
ལྟན་སྐྱེས་མ་རིག་པ	co-emergent ignorance	ltan skyes ma rig pa
ལྟན་ཅིག་བྱེད་རྐྱེན	co-operative condition/ (non-substantial cause	ltan cig byed rkyen
ལྟན་གཅིག་པ	co-operative	ltan gcig pa
ལྟན་པ	joined together	ltan pa
ལྟན་ཡས	# 1095	ltan yas
ལྟབ	[p bltabs] fold	ltab
ལྟབ་གྲི	clasp knife	ltab gri
ལྟབ་པ	to fold, gather up, to lay or put together	ltab pa
ལྟབ་བྱེད་པ	fold up	ltab byed pa
ལྟབ་མ	fold, plait	ltab ma
ལྟབ་རྩིས	folding	ltab rtsis
ལྟབ་རྩིས་རྒྱག	fold	ltab rtsis rgyag
ལྟབ་རིལ	on a printing wood-block pour ink te paper bzhag pa'i from above pressing implement: printing press?	ltab ril
ལྟབ་ལ་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བའི	folded mudras	ltab la kyi phyag rgya ba'i
ལྟབས	(not in DAS)	ltabs
ལྟམ་ལྟེམ	ltam me ltem me	ltam ltem
ལྟམ་པ	be full, be born	ltam pa
ལྟམ་མེ་ལྟེམ་མེ	1) well filling a vessel; 2) illness sometimes there sometimes ~; 3) not continual	ltam me ltem me
ལྟམ་མེ་ལྟེམ་མེར་གང	1	ltam me ltem mer gang
ལྟམས	vi. to be born	ltams
ལྟམས་པ	be full, be born	ltams pa
ལྟར	as if {rang gi bu mo ltar rgyan gos dang bcas phul} decked her out in fine clothes and jewels as if she were his own daughter and offered her [to the king]	ltar
ལྟར་བཅོས	made like	ltar bcos
ལྟར་བཅོས་པ	sham, imitation	ltar bcos pa
ལྟར་བཅོས་པར་སྣང་ངོ	the semblance	ltar bcos par snang ngo
ལྟར་ཉན་ནས	having heard so, being told so	ltar nyan nas
ལྟར་ཉན་པ	listened w full attention	ltar nyan pa
ལྟར་ལྟར	early stage of the embryo while it is being formed in the womb	ltar ltar
ལྟར་ལྟར་པོ	'a lump', 'fleshy', [third week of the embryo], {mngal gyi gnas skabs lnga}	ltar ltar po
ལྟར་ལྟར་བོ	1) oval, oblong elliptical; 2) pesi, 'a lump', 'fleshy'	ltar ltar bo
ལྟར་ན	according to, in accordance with, as	ltar na
ལྟར་སྣང	{kun spyod ci tsam bzang ba ltar snang yang} however excellent his conduct may appear	ltar snang
ལྟར་སྣང་གི་ཆོས	artificial religious exterior/ image	ltar snang gi chos
ལྟར་སྣང་གི་ལུང་རིགས	superficial scriptures and reasoning	ltar snang gi lung rigs
ལྟར་སྣང་ཆོས་ཟ་བཅས	adopt an artificial religious exterior/ image	ltar snang chos za bcas
ལྟར་སྣང་འཕྲལ་ནད	current or immediate diseases	ltar snang 'phral nad
ལྟར་སྣང་བ	apparently; to appear as though/ to be	ltar snang ba
ལྟར་སྣང་ཙམ	mere appearance	ltar snang tsam
ལྟར་བྱས	just like, as, like	ltar byas
ལྟར་བྱས་ན	according to, in accordance w, as	ltar byas na
ལྟར་བྱས་ནས	just like, as, like	ltar byas nas
ལྟར་བྱེད	make like	ltar byed
ལྟར་མི་བཟོད་པ	overwhelming to the sight; overwhelming to look at	ltar mi bzod pa
ལྟར་མེད	invisible	ltar med
ལྟར་བཞག	let alone = not to speak of	ltar bzhag
ལྟར་གཟིགས	to regard as	ltar gzigs
ལྟར་རོ	like, similarly	ltar ro
ལྟར་གསལ་བ	like the appearance of	ltar gsal ba
ལྟས	[p {lta} see, look at, prognostic, omen, [miraculous] sign	ltas
ལྟས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	science of omens, lta + inst by the view, by looking	ltas kyi rig pa
ལྟས་མཁན	diviner, astrologer	ltas mkhan
ལྟས་ངན	bad/ negative omen	ltas ngan
བྱས་མ་སོང	he didn't say anything but deprecating words	byas ma song
ལྟས་ངན་དགྲ་ཐན	bzlog pa'i sha ba deer that repels bad signs and ill omens	ltas ngan dgra than
ལྟས་ངན་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven types of bad omens	ltas ngan pa bcu gcig
ལྟས་ངན་བྱུང་བ	when bad omens occur	ltas ngan byung ba
ལྟས་ངན་གཟའ་བཞི	CHN	ltas ngan gza' bzhi
ལྟས་ངན་བཟློག་པའི་ཐན་སེལ	exorcism of bodeful portents to remove ill omens	ltas ngan bzlog pa'i than sel
ལྟས་རྟོག	astrology	ltas rtog
ལྟས་བརྟག	to examine	ltas brtag
ལྟས་དང་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	{ngo tshar gyi ltas dang cho 'phrul mang du byung} many marvellous signs and miracles were seen	ltas dang cho 'phrul
ལྟས་རྣམ་པ	omen	ltas rnam pa
ལྟས་པ	diviner, astrologer	ltas pa
ལྟས་མི	witnesses	ltas mi
ལྟས་མོ	a fair	ltas mo
ལྟས་མོ་བལྟ་པ	sightseeing	ltas mo blta pa
ལྟས་ཚར	has seen	ltas tshar
ལྟས་ཟིན	has seen	ltas zin
ལྟས་བཟང	good sign,/ omen	ltas bzang
ལྟས་རིག་པ	science of omens	ltas rig pa
ལྟས་ཤེས	accountant, astrologer	ltas shes
ལྟས་སུ་བལྟ་བའི་བཟོ	examine the signs/ omens	ltas su blta ba'i bzo
ལྟས་སུ་འབྱུང་བ	meet w an accident	ltas su 'byung ba
ལྟི་རི	pitcher	lti ri
ལྟིག་ཐུང	short person	ltig thung
ལྟིངས	unclear	ltings
ལྟིབ་པ	fall through	ltib pa
ལྟིར	1) pitcher/ vessel for tea chang etc * ltir; 2) [arch] full [to the brim]	ltir
ལྟིར་གྱིས་གང་བ	full to the brim	ltir gyis gang ba
ལྟིར་སྒྲས་འཁྲུགས་པ	thundering, exploded	ltir sgras 'khrugs pa
ལྟིར་བ	be distended, rush, roar, roll, inflated, belly	ltir ba
ལྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	ghanavyuha realm?	ltug po bkod pa
ལྟུང	fall, fall down	ltung
ལྟུང་འདོད	wishing to fall, sin, apt to fall	ltung 'dod
ལྟུང་གནས	'og gi 'jig rten	ltung gnas
ལྟུང་བ	1. (Tha mi dad pa ltungs pa, ltung ba,, lhung ba, fall, cause to fall, fall apart, downfall, failing	ltung ba
ལྟུང་བ་སྐྱེད་པ	MSS: "creating a downfall/failing" (based on RYJ ltung ba bskyed pa). [mss]	ltung ba skyed pa
ལྟུང་བ་བསྐྱེད་པའི་རྟེན་བཞི	CHN	ltung ba bskyed pa'i rten bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba brgyad
ལྟུང་བ་བཅུ	the 10 downfalls	ltung ba bcu
ལྟུང་བ་ཆེས་ན་སྨད	the defilement of great downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba ches na smad
ལྟུང་བ་ཐ་དད་པ་ལྔ	the five different kinds of downfalls/ transgressions CHN	ltung ba tha dad pa lnga
ལྟུང་བ་ཐུན་མོངས་མ་ཡིན་པ	extraordinary downfall	ltung ba thun mongs ma yin pa
ལྟུང་བ་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five kinds of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba sde lnga
ལྟུང་བ་ན་སྨན	remedy for downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba na sman
ལྟུང་བ་ཕམ་པའི་སྡེ་བཞི	CHN	ltung ba pham pa'i sde bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་ཕྱིར་བཅོས	countermeasures to downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba phyir bcos
ལྟུང་བ་ཕྱིར་བཅོས་ཀྱི་གཞི་བཞི	the four countermeasures to downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba phyir bcos kyi gzhi bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་ཕྱིར་འཆོས	amend, correct, improve	ltung ba phyir 'chos
ལྟུང་བ་ཕྱིར་འཆོས་པ	retouch	ltung ba phyir 'chos pa
ལྟུང་བ་ཕྲ་མ	subtle downfalls/ transgressions ltung ba phra mo'i yang phra mo med pa w/ o the subtlest of subtle downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba phra ma
ལྟུང་བ་བྱིན་རླབས	blessing of downfalls ltung ba byung shes kyi sde tshan lnga CHN	ltung ba byin rlabs
ལྟུང་བ་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	bslab bya rnams mi shes pa dang, bag med pa dang, nyon mongs mang ba dang, ma gus pa bcas bzhi'o	ltung ba 'byung ba'i rgyu bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་འབྱུང་བའི་སྒོ་བཞི	the four means of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba 'byung ba'i sgo bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་སྦོམ་པོ	coarse downfall	ltung ba sbom po
ལྟུང་བ་མ་འདྲེས་པ	not mixed with sin	ltung ba ma 'dres pa
ལྟུང་བ་རྫས་བདག་བཞི	CHN	ltung ba rdzas bdag bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་བཞི	the four downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba bzhi
ལྟུང་བ་ལས་བསླང	raise up from a slip into sin	ltung ba las bslang
ལྟུང་བ་ལས་བསླང་བ	the arising of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba las bslang ba
ལྟུང་བ་གཤོག་པ	confess a fall	ltung ba gshog pa
ལྟུང་བ་བཤགས་པ	{byang chub sems dpa'i ltung ba bshags pa}	ltung ba bshags pa
ལྟུང་བ་བཤགས་པའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of confessing downfalls/ transgressions ltung ba'i 'khrul pa phra mo kun tu spyod	ltung ba bshags pa'i cho ga
ལྟུང་བའི་གོལ་ས	potential for failure	ltung ba'i gol sa
ལྟུང་བའི་དགག་དབྱེ	divisions of the hinderance of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba'i dgag dbye
ལྟུང་བའི་རྒྱུར་འགྱུར་པ	would lead to a downfall	ltung ba'i rgyur 'gyur pa
ལྟུང་བའི་སྒོ་བཞི	the four means of downfall	ltung ba'i sgo bzhi
ལྟུང་བའི་ངོ་བོ་འཚོལ་བ	ltung ba gleng yang khyad du gsod pa'i gang zag la, ltung ba ngo ma shes pa shes par bya ba'i phyir du ji srid 'tsho'i bar du ltung ba'i ngo bo nyid 'tshol ba chad las kyi tshul gyis sbyin pa'o, 'd...	ltung ba'i ngo bo 'tshol ba
ལྟུང་བའི་སྡེ་ཚན་གཉིས	the two sections of kinds of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba'i sde tshan gnyis
ལྟུང་བའི་རྩ་བ	the root of downfall	ltung ba'i rtsa ba
ལྟུང་བའི་རིས་ལྔ	the five kinds of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba'i ris lnga
ལྟུང་བའི་ཤན	differentiation of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba'i shan
ལྟུང་བའི་ལྷག་མ	the remainder of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung ba'i lhag ma
ལྟུང་བར་འགྱུར་བ	fall, fall off, down, into	ltung bar 'gyur ba
ལྟུང་བར་འགྱུར་བའི	unrighteous actions, unscrupulous principles	ltung bar 'gyur ba'i
ལྟུང་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཆོས	acts or doctrines which cause falling into sin	ltung bar 'gyur ba'i chos
ལྟུང་བས་གོས་པ	stained with sin	ltung bas gos pa
ལྟུང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྡེ	kind of downfall/ transgression	ltung byed kyi sde
ལྟུང་བྱེད་སྡེ་ལྔ	five kinds of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung byed sde lnga
ལྟུང་བྱེད་འབའ་ཞིག་པ	the downfalls [rectified] merely [by confession	ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa
ལྟུང་བྱེད་འབའ་ཞིག་པ་དགུ་བཅུ	the 90 "mere" downfalls for monks	ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu
ལྟུང་འབྲས	the fruition of downfalls/ transgressions	ltung 'bras
ལྟུང་མེད	sinless	ltung med
ལྟུང་མེད་བཞི	CHN 1097	ltung med bzhi
ལྟུང་ཟིན་པ	fell	ltung zin pa
ལྟུང་བཟེད	begging bowl	ltung bzed
ལྟུང་ཤེས	knowledgeable of the transgressions	ltung shes
ལྟུང་བཤགས	confession	ltung bshags
ལྟུང་བཤགས་ཀྱི་སངས་རྒྱས་སོ་ལྔ	35 confession buddhas	ltung bshags kyi sangs rgyas so lnga
ལྟུང་བཤགས་ལྷ་སོ་ལྔ	the 35 deities of confessing downfalls/ transgressions	ltung bshags lha so lnga
ལྟུངས་པ	[p ltung ba]	ltungs pa
ལྟེ	navel-string, umbilical cord, navel, navel center, center, middle, core, hub central, main, principal, real	lte
ལྟེ་ཁུང	socket	lte khung
ལྟེ་མཁྲང	child's lte nad	lte mkhrang
ལྟེ་མཁྲེགས	child's lte nad	lte mkhregs
ལྟེ་འཁོར	1) child's lte nad; 2) the navel center	lte 'khor
ལྟེ་ཐག་བཅད	cut the umbilical cord	lte thag bcad
ལྟེ་གནད	main/ key/ essential central point/ issue	lte gnad
ལྟེ་གནས	center, principal place, capital, main/ key/ essential central point/ issue	lte gnas
ལྟེ་རྣག	pussy infection of infant's cut umbilicus	lte rnag
ལྟེ་པ	navel, SA lte ba	lte pa
ལྟེ་བ	navel, navel-string, umbilical cord, center of a circle, disk center, middle, backbone, central, core	lte ba
ལྟེ་བ་སྐྱེས	Bhrama	lte ba skyes
ལྟེ་བ་འཁོར	the navel chakra	lte ba 'khor
ལྟེ་བ་འཁྱིལ	a medicine	lte ba 'khyil
ལྟེ་བ་གཅོད་པ	cut the umbilical cord, cut out the musk gland of a musk deer	lte ba gcod pa
ལྟེ་བ་ལྟེ་བ	center, principal place, capital, main/ key/ essential central point/ issue	lte ba lte ba
ལྟེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་པ	1 of 'khor lo drug, cakra of emanation at the navel, 1 of 'khor lo bzhi, cakra of emanation at the navel	lte ba sprul pa
ལྟེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	emanation wheel of the navel, the navel center	lte ba sprul pa'i 'khor lo
ལྟེ་བ་བལ་ཅན	spider	lte ba bal can
ལྟེ་བ་གཞུང་རང	lhasa	lte ba gzhung rang
ལྟེ་བ་ཟབ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of a deep navel	lte ba zab pa'i dpe byad
ལྟེ་བ་བཟང	mount tise in ngari lte ba g.yas su 'khyil ba - the navel coiled to the right	lte ba bzang
ལྟེ་བ་རུ	within the center	lte ba ru
ལྟེ་བ་བརླག	lose sight of the main point/ issue	lte ba brlag
ལྟེ་བ་ལས་བྲལ་བའི་ཤུགས	centrifugal force	lte ba las bral ba'i shugs
ལྟེ་བའི	of the naval, central	lte ba'i
ལྟེ་བའི་ཁུང	navel	lte ba'i khung
ལྟེ་བའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	[provincial] capital	lte ba'i grong khyer
ལྟེ་བའི་འགྲམ	at the navel	lte ba'i 'gram
ལྟེ་བའི་དྲི	musk	lte ba'i dri
ལྟེ་བའི་གནས་གཞི	central seat	lte ba'i gnas gzhi
ལྟེ་བའི་པད་མོ	the navel lotus	lte ba'i pad mo
ལྟེ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the navel	lte ba'i dpe byad gnyis
ལྟེ་བའི་རྩ་འཁོར	the chakra of nadis at the navel	lte ba'i rtsa 'khor
ལྟེ་བའི་རྩ་འཁོར་གྱི་མདུད་པ	the knot of nadis at the navel chakra	lte ba'i rtsa 'khor gyi mdud pa
ལྟེ་བའི་འོག་ཏུ	below the navel	lte ba'i 'og tu
ལྟེ་བའི་རེ་དོན	fundamental/ original meaning	lte ba'i re don
ལྟེ་བའི་ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་མེ	coemergent fire of tummo at the navel	lte ba'i lhan skyes kyi me
ལྟེ་བར	at the navel	lte bar
ལྟེ་བར་ཕྱོགས་པའི་ཤུགས	centripetal force	lte bar phyogs pa'i shugs
ལྟེ་འབུར	lte ba phyir 'bur	lte 'bur
ལྟེ་མ	crawling (to go on the belly)	lte ma
ལྟེ་མིག	hole in the center of an object	lte mig
ལྟེ་འོག	1) anus; 2) bladder	lte 'og
ལྟེ་ཡུ	handle of axe	lte yu
ལྟེ་ལེ	polecat	lte le
ལྟེང	through, quite through	lteng
ལྟེང་ཀ	pool, pond; pond/ pool	lteng ka
ལྟེང་རྒྱས	name of a buddha	lteng rgyas
ལྟེང་རྒྱས་འོད་སྲུང	{lteng rgyas 'od srung [sh'akya thub pa'i nye 'khor gnas brtan 'od srung gcen gcung gsum nang gi bgres pa de mu stegs pa'i grub mtha' dor nas sangs rgyas sh'akya thub pa'i zhabs la gtugs te nyan th...	lteng rgyas 'od srung
ལྟེང་པོ	lethargic	lteng po
ལྟེངས་ཀ	pool, pond, spring, disciple of buddha, a buddha	ltengs ka
ལྟེངས་པ	go stagnant, inert, static	ltengs pa
ལྟེབ	pocket, fold [in a garment], folding	lteb
ལྟེབ་གྲི	lteb tshigs brgyab chog pa'i knife	lteb gri
ལྟེབ་འགོ་བདུན་པ	paper lteb tshigs bdun yod pa'i book	lteb 'go bdun pa
ལྟེབ་སྒྲིལ	lteb sgron	lteb sgril
ལྟེབ་སྒྲོན	lteb tshigs rgyag pa,...Kha btad de dag lteb sgron legs par gyis shig	lteb sgron
ལྟེབ་ཆགས	phar lteb tshur lteb	lteb chags
ལྟེབ་པ	(tha dad pa bltabs pa, bltab pa, ltobs,, phar tshur bkug nas ngos gnyis gcig thog gcig rtseg byed pa double down, turn in, fold	lteb pa
ལྟེབ་པའི་ཁྲི་རྩི	folding ruler	lteb pa'i khri rtsi
ལྟེབ་མ	folds, pleats	lteb ma
ལྟེབ་རྩེག	fold, pleat	lteb rtseg
ལྟེབ་རྩེག་རྒྱག་པ	to pile up, to fold	lteb rtseg rgyag pa
ལྟེབ་བརྩིག	folding	lteb brtsig
ལྟེབ་བརྩིག་རྒྱག	fold	lteb brtsig rgyag
ལྟེབ་ཚིགས	phar lteb tshur lteb,...Gos slog bkrus nas nyi mar bskams te lteb tshigs rgyag pa,...Aa mchog lteb tshigs brgyab nas sdod pa	lteb tshigs
ལྟེབས	lteb pa!	ltebs
ལྟེབས་གྲི	penknife	ltebs gri
ལྟེབས་རྩེ	crease	ltebs rtse
ལྟེམ་རྐྱང	1) extended and bend, high and low and 'gyur ldog ste inconstant, unstable; 2) [arch] alone, solitary	ltem rkyang
ལྟེམ་རྐྱང་མེད་པ	stable, constant	ltem rkyang med pa
ལྟེམ་གྱིས་གང་བ	full to the brim	ltem gyis gang ba
ལྟེམ་རྒྱང	humor, whim, caprice	ltem rgyang
ལྟེམ་ལྟེམ	so full that it runs over	ltem ltem
ལྟེམ་པ	state of being full, overflowing	ltem pa
ལྟེམ་པོ	full, inert state	ltem po
ལྟེམ་མེར	fully	ltem mer
ལྟེམ་བསད	has just been killed	ltem bsad
ལྟེམས་ཀྱང་མེད་པ	unceasing	ltems kyang med pa
ལྟེམས་པ	SA stems pa, to control	ltems pa
ལྟེམས་པོ	{ltem po}; "stale", stupefied, dazed, numb, dull, obtuse, unclear, dim,	ltems po
ལྟེས་དབང	velocity, force	ltes dbang
ལྟོ	meal, repast, food, victuals, goat's beard (tragopogon) used as a kitchen vegetable	lto
ལྟོ་ཀླུང	'u bu 'phogs su btsun mo lto klung btab gsung bas	lto klung
ལྟོ་ཀླུང་བདབ་པ	SA lto long btab pa	lto klung bdab pa
ལྟོ་དཀྲིས	pho ba dkri byed	lto dkris
ལྟོ་སྐལ	share of food	lto skal
ལྟོ་སྐུར་པོ་བཏབ	spread scandal	lto skur po btab
ལྟོ་སྐུར་པོ་བཏབ་པ	greatly slander	lto skur po btab pa
ལྟོ་སྐྱ	rice, barley without anything to eat it with, insipid miserable food	lto skya
ལྟོ་བསྐྱུད	forget to eat and drink	lto bskyud
ལྟོ་ཁེངས་པ	1) fat belly; 2) tshon mdog gang yin rung srab mthug dang kha dog gi tshad lon pa	lto khengs pa
ལྟོ་མཁན	lto chas g.yos sbyor mkhan	lto mkhan
ལྟོ་གང་གི་ཟས་ཙམ	food just filling the belly	lto gang gi zas tsam
ལྟོ་གོས	food and clothes, standard of living	lto gos
ལྟོ་གོས་ཀྱི་འགྲོ་སོང	cost of living	lto gos kyi 'gro song
ལྟོ་གོས་ཁོལ་པོ་བྱས	we slave to find food and clothes	lto gos khol po byas
ལྟོ་གོས་ཆོས་གསུམ	food, clothing and Dharma, clothes and reputation	lto gos chos gsum
ལྟོ་གོས་ཆོས་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྐྱངས་པ	supplied with / given food, clothing, and teachings	lto gos chos gsum gyis bskyangs pa
ལྟོ་གོས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན་སྦྱར	provided for the food and clothing	lto gos gnyis kyi mthun rkyen sbyar
ལྟོ་གོས་གཏམ་གསུམ	food clothing and pleasant conversation	lto gos gtam gsum
ལྟོ་གོས་འབྱིད་པ	earn a living	lto gos 'byid pa
ལྟོ་གོས་མི་ཕྱིད	food and dress were not enough	lto gos mi phyid
ལྟོ་གོས་ཚོལ་མཁན	bread winner	lto gos tshol mkhan
ལྟོ་གོས་འཛོམ་པོ	wealthy, rich	lto gos 'dzom po
ལྟོ་གོས་ཡག་པོ	well-off, well-to-do	lto gos yag po
ལྟོ་གྱོ་བ	prepare food	lto gyo ba
ལྟོ་གླ	food and wages, fee for meals	lto gla
ལྟོ་བགྲངས་ཉི་མས་དྲོས་པ	a full stomach, sitting comfortably in the sun	lto bgrangs nyi mas dros pa
ལྟོ་འགེངས	fool, imbecile	lto 'gengs
ལྟོ་འགྲངས་གོས་དྲོས	by food fat belly by clothes lus dros	lto 'grangs gos dros
ལྟོ་འགྲངས་པ	full belly	lto 'grangs pa
ལྟོ་འགྲོ	snake, number 8	lto 'gro
ལྟོ་འགྲོ་དགྲ	eagle, epithet of the conveyer of vishnu	lto 'gro dgra
ལྟོ་རྒྱབ	feed and clothe, food and clothing	lto rgyab
ལྟོ་རྒྱབ་སྐྱིད	food, clothing, and comfort	lto rgyab skyid
ལྟོ་རྒྱབ་རྗེས	after food	lto rgyab rjes
ལྟོ་རྒྱབ་འཚོལ་བ	to go hunting for food and clothes	lto rgyab 'tshol ba
ལྟོ་ཅན	arrow	lto can
ལྟོ་ཆས	food stuff, provisions	lto chas
ལྟོ་ཆས་ཟ་བ	dine, have a meal	lto chas za ba
ལྟོ་ཆས་ལས་སྣོད་བཟོ་གྲྭ	food processing plant	lto chas las snod bzo grwa
ལྟོ་ཆུང	person temperate in eating	lto chung
ལྟོ་ཆེ	having a big belly, voracious	lto che
ལྟོ་ཆེ་བ	large belly, voracious	lto che ba
ལྟོ་འཇུ་བ	constitutional walk for the digestion of food	lto 'ju ba
ལྟོ་ཉོ	procure food	lto nyo
ལྟོ་ཉོ་སྲོག་ཚོང	risks his life in order to procure food	lto nyo srog tshong
ལྟོ་སྙི	excrement	lto snyi
ལྟོ་ལྟོག	poor	lto ltog
ལྟོ་སྟེར	feed	lto ster
ལྟོ་སྟེར་བ	feed	lto ster ba
ལྟོ་ཐབ	hearth to cook food	lto thab
ལྟོ་དུས	meal time	lto dus
ལྟོ་དོད	bza' btung gi dod tshab	lto dod
ལྟོ་འདུན་ཅན	epicure, parasite	lto 'dun can
ལྟོ་ལྡིར	round bellied [thd]	lto ldir
ལྟོ་ལྡིར་ཅན	big bellied	lto ldir can
ལྟོ་ལྡིར་བ	bulbous	lto ldir ba
ལྟོ་སྣུམ་པ	rice-cakes with butter or any oily substance	lto snum pa
ལྟོ་སྣོད	crockery dish	lto snod
ལྟོ་ཕད	knapsack	lto phad
ལྟོ་ཕོགས	salary	lto phogs
ལྟོ་ཕོར	food bowl	lto phor
ལྟོ་ཕྱིད	zas kyis 'dang ba,...Mi tshang ma gos dros lto phyid kyi ngang nas 'tsho ba bde bar skyel ba	lto phyid
ལྟོ་ཕྱོགས་རྟ་གདོང	volcanic fire of southern ocean, SA me gsum	lto phyogs rta gdong
ལྟོ་འཕྱང	sheep	lto 'phyang
ལྟོ་འཕྱེ	reptile, snake	lto 'phye
ལྟོ་འཕྱེ་མགོ་དྲུག	six-headed cobra	lto 'phye mgo drug
ལྟོ་འཕྱེ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahoragas. 'Great serpent', a class of demons	lto 'phye chen po
ལྟོ་བ	1) stomach, belly; 2) food	lto ba
ལྟོ་བ་འགེངས	eaten to one's fill	lto ba 'gengs
ལྟོ་བ་འགེངས་པ	full stomach	lto ba 'gengs pa
ལྟོ་བ་ལྡིར	bulbous, globular bulb	lto ba ldir
ལྟོ་བ་ཕྲལ་བ	split open the belly	lto ba phral ba
ལྟོ་བ་འབྱོར	embrace (join stomachs), look	lto ba 'byor
ལྟོ་བ་སྦོས	belly is swollen	lto ba sbos
ལྟོ་བ་མཚུངས་པ	of equal stomach, having belly of similar size, brother	lto ba mtshungs pa
ལྟོ་བ་བཤལ་བ	purge the bowels	lto ba bshal ba
ལྟོ་བོ་ཆེ་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, large stomach, pot belly	lto bo che ba
ལྟོ་འབོལ་བ	lots of food, wealth	lto 'bol ba
ལྟོ་སྦོས	swollen belly	lto sbos
ལྟོ་མ་ཟ་བ	fast	lto ma za ba
ལྟོ་ཚང	Totsang, in Domey	lto tshang
ལྟོ་ཚང་གཅིག་པ	inmate	lto tshang gcig pa
ལྟོ་ཚད་ལ་ཕབ	food according to measure	lto tshad la phab
ལྟོ་ཚོད	measure of food and drink	lto tshod
ལྟོ་ཟ་རྒྱུ་འདང	food to be just enough 1099	lto za rgyu 'dang
ལྟོ་ཟ་སྟངས	diet	lto za stangs
ལྟོ་ཟ་ནུས	can eat food	lto za nus
ལྟོ་ཟ་རན་པ	time to take food	lto za ran pa
ལྟོ་ཟས	food	lto zas
ལྟོ་ཟས་བཟོ	make food	lto zas bzo
ལྟོ་ཟོ	eat your food!	lto zo
ལྟོ་ཟོས་དང	eat food	lto zos dang
ལྟོ་ཡང་མ་ཟོས	he did not eat anything	lto yang ma zos
ལྟོ་ཡུས་ཅན	conceited, selfish person	lto yus can
ལྟོ་རན	person temperate in eating	lto ran
ལྟོ་རན་པ	1) ran pa, moderate, between much food and little/ good food and bad; 2) the time for eating having come	lto ran pa
ལྟོ་རས	handkerchief, napkin	lto ras
ལྟོ་ལ་བརྣན་པ	eager for food	lto la brnan pa
ལྟོ་ལད་པ	weak belly 1) grod pa ngan lang du shor ba; 2) Zas la bad or not nourishing gyur pa	lto lad pa
ལྟོ་ལན་ཙ	thick cotton cloth used in india for spreading on the floor	lto lan tsa
ལྟོ་ལན་ཚ	thick cloth used in India to spread on the floor	lto lan tsha
ལྟོ་ལོག	SA lto klung	lto log
ལྟོ་ལོང	lto klung, 'u bu 'phogs su btsun mo lto klung btab gsung bas	lto long
ལྟོ་སོན	eating and seed grain	lto son
ལྟོ་སྲིན	worms in the belly	lto srin
ལྟོ་སློང	beg food	lto slong
ལྟོ་སློང་བ	beg food	lto slong ba
ལྟོ་སློང་བའི་སྤྲང་པོ	food alms collecting beggar	lto slong ba'i sprang po
ལྟོ་སློང་བར་འགྲོ	go begging food	lto slong bar 'gro
ལྟོ་ལྷག	leftovers	lto lhag
ལྟོག	starvation, hunger	ltog
ལྟོག་གྲི	starvation, hunger, be hungry	ltog gri
ལྟོག་རྔབས་ཀྱིས་ཟ་བ	gorge	ltog rngabs kyis za ba
ལྟོག་རྔམ་ཅན	ravenous	ltog rngam can
ལྟོག་འདྲེ	demon of hunger	ltog 'dre
ལྟོག་ནས་བཟའ་རྒྱུ་མ་རྙེད་པ	was hungry and could find nothing else to eat	ltog nas bza' rgyu ma rnyed pa
ལྟོག་པ་ཅན	a hungry person	ltog pa can
ལྟོགས	hunger, vi. to be hungry	ltogs
ལྟོགས་ཀྱིས་མནར	suffer from hunger	ltogs kyis mnar
ལྟོགས་བཀྲེས	hunger and thirst	ltogs bkres
ལྟོགས་སྐོམ	hunger and thirst ltogs skom gyi snang ba mi 'byung ba without feeling hunger or thirst	ltogs skom
ལྟོགས་མཁན	hungry person	ltogs mkhan
ལྟོགས་འཁྱགས	cold and hunger	ltogs 'khyags
ལྟོགས་འཁྱོམས	staggering/ disturbed w hunger	ltogs 'khyoms
ལྟོགས་གྲི	starvation	ltogs gri
ལྟོགས་གྲིར་ཤི་བ	die of hunger, starve [to death]	ltogs grir shi ba
ལྟོགས་འགག	starvation	ltogs 'gag
ལྟོགས་འགོག	starvation	ltogs 'gog
ལྟོགས་འགོང	gnod byed 'gong po la smad tshig brjod pa,...Ltogs 'gong snying la zhugs pa	ltogs 'gong
ལྟོགས་རྒྱལ	za rgyur ha cang rngam pa zhig ...Ji tsam bzas kyang ngom rgyu med pa'i mi de ltogs rgyal red	ltogs rgyal
ལྟོགས་སྒུར	bearing hunger	ltogs sgur
ལྟོགས་སྒོམ་རྒྱག་པ	though hungry, bsran thub par byed pa	ltogs sgom rgyag pa
ལྟོགས་རྔབས་ཀྱིས་ཟ་བ	devour	ltogs rngabs kyis za ba
ལྟོགས་རྔམ	great desire for food	ltogs rngam
ལྟོགས་རྔམས	hunger	ltogs rngams
ལྟོགས་རྔམས་ཅན	voracious	ltogs rngams can
ལྟོགས་ཅོར	ltogs skad de, skad cor gyi smad tshig	ltogs cor
ལྟོགས་ཆད	from hunger chad pa or lus pa, starvation	ltogs chad
ལྟོགས་ཉལ	sleep because of hunger	ltogs nyal
ལྟོགས་ཉལ་མ་བྱེད	do not always lie down in regret	ltogs nyal ma byed
ལྟོགས་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	very hungry	ltogs thag chod pa
ལྟོགས་འདྲེ	demon	ltogs 'dre
ལྟོགས་ནས	growing hungry,	ltogs nas
ལྟོགས་ནས་ཤི་བ	to starve to death	ltogs nas shi ba
ལྟོགས་པ	be hungry, make starve hunger hungry	ltogs pa
ལྟོགས་པ་འབོར་བ	suffer a person to be hungry, starve	ltogs pa 'bor ba
ལྟོགས་པ་སློང་སྤྲང	starving beggars	ltogs pa slong sprang
ལྟོགས་པའི་མི	a starving person	ltogs pa'i mi
ལྟོགས་པའི་གཟིར	suffering from hunger	ltogs pa'i gzir
ལྟོགས་པར་འགྱུར	grow hungry	ltogs par 'gyur
ལྟོགས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	grow hungry	ltogs par 'gyur ba
ལྟོགས་པར་བཞུགས་པ	be full of regret (H	ltogs par bzhugs pa
ལྟོགས་སྤྲང	grod pa 'grangs dus med pa'i beggar	ltogs sprang
ལྟོགས་ཕྱུག	hunger/ poverty and wealth	ltogs phyug
ལྟོགས་ཕྱུག་སྙོམས་པ	equalize poverty and wealth [king khri srong lde btsan's son mu ne btsan pos bod 'bangs rnams kyi dbul phyug thengs gsum snyoms par mdzad ces grags]	ltogs phyug snyoms pa
ལྟོགས་འབྱོར་པ	yogin gshe ba'i word	ltogs 'byor pa
ལྟོགས་སྦྲེབས	hunger, famine	ltogs sbrebs
ལྟོགས་མུག	starvation, famine	ltogs mug
ལྟོགས་མེད	non-dependence	ltogs med
ལྟོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign of nondependence	ltogs med kyi rtags
ལྟོགས་ཚིག	anger arising from hunger	ltogs tshig
ལྟོགས་ཚུབ	great desire for food	ltogs tshub
ལྟོགས་གཟེར	pho ba ltogs pa'i pain	ltogs gzer
ལྟོགས་ཤི	starvation, starving to death	ltogs shi
ལྟོགས་ཤི་ཐེབས	to starve to death	ltogs shi thebs
ལྟོགས་ཤི་ཐེབས་པ	starve	ltogs shi thebs pa
ལྟོགས་ཤིང་ངལ་ཡང	even though he was hungry and tired	ltogs shing ngal yang
ལྟོགས་ཤེད	1) ltogs yus shod pa'am great desire for food; 2) Ltogs mkhan gyi lus shed	ltogs shed
ལྟོགས་ཤེད་ཤོར	from hunger lus kyi shed shor ba	ltogs shed shor
ལྟོགས་ཤེས་པ	bkres pa ha go ba ste phru gu dmar 'byar gyis grod pa ltogs pa'i brda ston shes pa	ltogs shes pa
ལྟོགས་སླ	grod pa hunger satisfying ltogs rngam	ltogs sla
ལྟོགས་བསྲན་ཆེ་བ	pho ba ltogs pa bzod thub pa	ltogs bsran che ba
ལྟོགས་ཧྲལ་རྐུན་བྱེད	by starvation steal	ltogs hral rkun byed
ལྟོང་ཀ	groove at the lower end of an arrow to fit it on the bow string	ltong ka
ལྟོང་ག	notch, incision, indentation, a depression	ltong ga
ལྟོང་གཉིས་མ	arrow w two notches	ltong gnyis ma
ལྟོང་སྦྱར	mda'i ltong ga dang gzhu rgyud sbyar ba,...'Phong rtsal can gyis mda' ltong sbyar nas 'ben la phog nges 'phen pa	ltong sbyar
ལྟོངས	summit	ltongs
ལྟོངས་པ	dunce, unlettered person	ltongs pa
ལྟོངས་སུ་འགྱིང	scorn loftily, look down upon with contempt	ltongs su 'gying
ལྟོབ	fold, SA ltab pa	ltob
ལྟོབ་ཆས	food, provisions	ltob chas
ལྟོབས	lteb pa!, provisions and other requisite things	ltobs
ལྟོམས་པ	SA dgos pa, 'dod pa	ltoms pa
ལྟོར	bastard	ltor
ལྟོར་ཞུགས་པ	be in the womb being illegitimately conceived, bastard conception	ltor zhugs pa
ལྟོར་ཤུགས་པ	illegitimate conception	ltor shugs pa
ལྟོལ	calf bred by a yak-bull on a mdzo mo, SA rtol	ltol
ལྟོས	{lta}! look! (neg + -- + par regardless of, disregarding., relation, concern, consideration rely, depend on attendants	ltos
ལྟོས་གྲུབ	dependent existence	ltos grub
ལྟོས་བཅས	1) w retinue/ those on whom one relies/ [his] family, group; 2) dependent, conditioned	ltos bcas
ལྟོས་ཆོས	dependent factor/ phenomenon	ltos chos
ལྟོས་འཆའ་བ	to rely on/ (be) concern (with)	ltos 'cha' ba
ལྟོས་འཇོག	put cease	ltos 'jog
ལྟོས་ཐུབ	trustworthy, reliable; anything you can trust; x {ltos thub chos las 'dug ge ma ni ba} Is there anything you can trust besides Dharma, mani-reciters?	ltos thub
ལྟོས་དང	look! look, see?, look to see	ltos dang
ལྟོས་ན	if you attend	ltos na
ལྟོས་ནས	. . . (la) ltos nas/ par - with respect to/ by relying on . . . ; concerning . . . ; taking . . . into account; from the point of view of . . .	ltos nas
ལྟོས་ནས་གྲུབ་ཅིང	dependent existence, exists in dependence / dependently	ltos nas grub cing
ལྟོས་ནས་བཏགས་པ	dependent	ltos nas btags pa
ལྟོས་ནས་བཏགས་པའི་ཀུན་བཏགས	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {chung ngu la ltos nas chen po/ shar la ltos nas nub tu btags pa lta bu}	ltos nas btags pa'i kun btags
ལྟོས་ནས་གཞག་པ	posited in mutual reliance	ltos nas gzhag pa
ལྟོས་གནས	[object of] reliance, dependency, relativity	ltos gnas
ལྟོས་གནས་གྲུབ་པ	occurrence (of things through reliance/ dependent origina-	ltos gnas grub pa
ལྟོས་པ	ft. of {ltos pa}; {ltos pa, bltos pa, ltos pa} intr. v. dependence, dependent, to look, to rely upon; relational	ltos pa
ལྟོས་པ་མེད་པ	casual, unconcerned, w/ o regard for, not dependent on, disregard, casually, disregarding, continual, w/ o interruption	ltos pa med pa
ལྟོས་པའི	relational	ltos pa'i
ལྟོས་པའི་རྒྱུ	relational/ conditioning cause	ltos pa'i rgyu
ལྟོས་པའི་རིག་པ	relational reasoning, the reasoning of dependency	ltos pa'i rig pa
ལྟོས་པའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of dependency [thd]	ltos pa'i rigs pa
ལྟོས་པར	[neg +] regardless of, disregarding --	ltos par
ལྟོས་པར་བཅས་པ་ཕེབས་བྱུང	he arrived w his retinue	ltos par bcas pa phebs byung
ལྟོས་པས་ངེས་པ་འགོག་པའི་རྟགས	[phan tshun spangs 'gal gyi rtags sbyor gyi nang gses], having presented a dependent rtags, dgag chos nges pa 'gog pa'am ma nges pa sgrub pa ste, eg, the dharmin sngon por 'gyur rung gi white garme...	ltos pas nges pa 'gog pa'i rtags
ལྟོས་སྤགས	meat and rice cooked together	ltos spags
ལྟོས་མི་དགོས	no need to depend upon	ltos mi dgos
ལྟོས་མིན	unrelated, independent, unconditioned	ltos min
ལྟོས་མེད	casually, carefree, dense, continual, without interruption, in a continual stream or flow	ltos med
ལྟོས་མེད་ཀྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས	reasoning from nondependence [ggd]	ltos med kyi gtan tshigs
ལྟོས་མེད་རྒྱབ་བསྐྱུར	w/ o regard/ concern throw away	ltos med rgyab bskyur
ལྟོས་མེད་དུ་གྲུབ་པའི་བྱ་བ་མེད	1 ltos med du ngo bos grub pa med pa unconditioned essences do not exist	ltos med du grub pa'i bya ba med
ལྟོས་མེད་དུ་འབད	strive w/ o interruption	ltos med du 'bad
ལྟོས་མེད་རྡོག་རོལ	rtsis med khyad gsod scorn/ have no regard for	ltos med rdog rol
ལྟོས་གཞི	basis for dependence; factor/ basis on which something is dependent	ltos gzhi
ལྟོས་བཞག	MSS: dependently designated. also bltos bzhag. [mss]	ltos bzhag
ལྟོས་ཤིག	look!, investigate!	ltos shig
ལྟོས་ཤོག	Look!	ltos shog
ལྟོས་ས	condition	ltos sa
ལྟོས་ས་ལྟོས་ཆོས	condition and conditioned dharma, establish by one depending on another	ltos sa ltos chos
ལྟོས་ས་ལྟོས་འཇོག	put cease	ltos sa ltos 'jog
ལྟོས་ས་མེད་པ	unconditional	ltos sa med pa
སྟ་གོན	preliminary ritual; Preparations (lhag gnas) refers to the preliminary ritual (sta gon). The ritual for the land (sa chog) means taking hold of the site. Thus, there are the preparatory ritual for ...	sta gon
སྟ་གོན་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	preview [of a show]	sta gon 'khrab ston
སྟ་གོན་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	prelude liturgy	sta gon gyi cho ga
སྟ་གོན་གྱི་ཆོ་ག་བཞི	liturgy w the four preludes [sadhana w preludes for the sa yi lha mo, dkyil 'khor gyi lha, bum pa, and slob ma]	sta gon gyi cho ga bzhi
སྟ་གོན་འགྲན་བསྡུར	preliminary contest/ heat	sta gon 'gran bsdur
སྟ་གོན་འགྲེམས་སྟོན	preliminary exhibition, preview 1101	sta gon 'grems ston
སྟ་གོན་ཏང་མི	candidate for party membership	sta gon tang mi
སྟ་གོན་བྱས་པ	to make preparations, arrangements	sta gon byas pa
སྟ་གོན་བྱེད་པ	make preparations/ arrangements	sta gon byed pa
སྟ་གྲི	ax, hatchet	sta gri
སྟ་དངོ	ax blade sta ba drug cu rtsa gnyis las sngon mthar	sta dngo
གཏོགས་བ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	gtogs ba bco brgyad
སྟ་ཟུར	hip[s]	sta zur
སྟ་རི	axe, hatchet	sta ri
སྟ་རེ	ax	sta re
སྟ་རེ་ཁ	ltag ral &, mtshog gsang lta bu rus pa srab mo'i steng gi bleeding nadis	sta re kha
སྟ་རེ་ལ	sta re pass	sta re la
སྟ་རེ་སོ་གཉིས་མ	two bladed ax	sta re so gnyis ma
སྟ་རེའི་ལྟག་པ	back of an axe	sta re'i ltag pa
སྟ་རེས་གཤགས་པ	to split with an ax	sta res gshags pa
སྟ་སོ	ax blade	sta so
སྟག	tiger	stag
སྟག་དཀར	white tiger, demi-god of klu	stag dkar
སྟག་རྐྱལ་མཚོ	{stag rkyal mtsho lake	stag rkyal mtsho
སྟག་ཁྲ་པོ	marbled or striped butterfly	stag khra po
སྟག་ཁྲ་བོ	colorful tiger	stag khra bo
སྟག་གི་རྐང་པ	tree or plant	stag gi rkang pa
སྟག་གི་མཇུག་མ	castor oil plant	stag gi mjug ma
སྟག་གི་སྡེར	tiger's claw	stag gi sder
སྟག་གི་ཤམ་ཐབ	tiger-skin around the waist	stag gi sham thab
སྟག་གི་སེན་མོ	tiger's nail, sweet-scented plant	stag gi sen mo
སྟག་གིས་ཟོས་པ	eaten by tigers	stag gis zos pa
སྟག་གོང	nape	stag gong
སྟག་གྲུ་ཁ	gru kha	stag gru kha
སྟག་མགོ་སྦྲུལ་མཇུག	tiger's head, snake's tail, good beginning, poor end	stag mgo sbrul mjug
སྟག་མགོ་མ	Syn {srin mo ser nag} Tigerhead	stag mgo ma
སྟག་མགོ་མེ་འབར	{stag mgo me 'bar}	stag mgo me 'bar
སྟག་ཆས	articles carried by travellers (tinder-case, smoking implements, weapons)	stag chas
སྟག་ཆུང་བུང་བ	bees striped like small tigers	stag chung bung ba
སྟག་ཆུང་དམར་ཁྲ	'bu byang pa dmar khra	stag chung dmar khra
སྟག་སྟན	tiger-skin seat	stag stan
སྟག་སྟོད	kind of tiger-skin upper garment	stag stod
སྟག་ཐུལ	tiger-skin garment	stag thul
སྟག་ཐོག་ནས་འབབ་དཀའ་བ	tiger's back/ position from which it is difficult to get down	stag thog nas 'bab dka' ba
སྟག་དོང	quiver	stag dong
སྟག་དོང་གཟིགས་ཤུབས	quiver for arrows lined with leopard's skin	stag dong gzigs shubs
སྟག་གདོང་དཀར་མོ	white tiger-head. Syn {lcags kyu ma}	stag gdong dkar mo
སྟག་གདོང་ཅན	vyaghravaktia (tigerheaded dakini)	stag gdong can
སྟག་གདོང་མ	Tiger-faced Dakini	stag gdong ma
སྟག་འདྲ་གཟིག་འདྲ	like a tiger like a leopard	stag 'dra gzig 'dra
སྟག་ལྡན	plant solanum jacquini	stag ldan
སྟག་སྡེ	place in tibet	stag sde
སྟག་ནང་བཞིན	tigerish	stag nang bzhin
སྟག་རྣ	son of tri sanku king of sudra class	stag rna
སྟག་སྣེད	lus bsnad pa sgur 'khyog can	stag sned
སྟག་པ	birch-tree, temple [of the head]	stag pa
སྟག་པ་ཤིང	birch wood/ tree	stag pa shing
སྟག་ལྤགས	tiger's skin	stag lpags
སྟག་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་ཤམ་ཐབས	skirt of tiger skin stag phu blo bzang bstan pa'i rgyal	stag lpags kyi sham thabs
སྟག་ཕྲུག	tiger cub	stag phrug
སྟག་བུ་སྙ་གཟིགས	stag ri gnyan gzigs	stag bu snya gzigs
སྟག་བྲག	name of a monastery near Lhasa, name of incarnation who was *regent in Tibet from 1941-1950	stag brag
སྟག་བླ་པད་མ་མ་ཏི	1591-1637	stag bla pad ma ma ti
སྟག་འབྲོས་པའི་སྔགས	charm to make a tiger run away	stag 'bros pa'i sngags
སྟག་སྦྲང	hornet	stag sbrang
སྟག་མ	rhododendron przewalskii maxim., medicinal plant	stag ma
སྟག་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	{stag ma'i me tog} med. tree	stag ma'i me tog
སྟག་མོ	tigress stag mo ltogs pas bu za bar brtsams pa la 'gyod pa med par lus sbyin pa dran - I remember giving my body without regret to prevent a tigress from eating her cubs	stag mo
སྟག་མོ་རྫོང	Takmo Dzong, in Domey. See Tigress Fort	stag mo rdzong
སྟག་མོ་ལུས་བྱིན	Namobuddha [near Khatmandu]	stag mo lus byin
སྟག་མོ་ལུས་སྦྱིན	also known as	stag mo lus sbyin
ཎམོབུདདྷ	Takmo Lüjin, in Nepal	Namobuddha
སྟག་མོས་ཞུས་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Takmo	stag mos zhus mdo
སྟག་མྱོས	1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person	stag myos
སྟག་དམར་ཡག	tiger in its prime	stag dmar yag
སྟག་སྨད	kind of tiger skin skirt	stag smad
སྟག་སྨན་ཟོར་གདོང་མ	{stag sman zor gdong ma}	stag sman zor gdong ma
སྟག་བཙན་གདོང་གཟིགས	{stag btsan gdong gzigs	stag btsan gdong gzigs
སྟག་རྩེ	stag rtse rdzong	stag rtse
སྟག་རྩེ་དགོན	area in Amdo	stag rtse dgon
སྟག་རྩེ་མཚོ	{stag rtse lake	stag rtse mtsho
སྟག་རྩེ་རྫོང	ancient fort east of lhasa	stag rtse rdzong
སྟག་རྩེ་རི་ཆོས	Taktse Richö: Ri chos zab mo grub pa'i bcud len sprang rtsi'i snying po, by stag rtse bya bral ba mi pham phun tshogs shes rab. 28 folios	stag rtse ri chos
ཕམ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཤེས་རབ	stag rtse sku ske	pham phun tshogs shes rab
སྟག་ཚང	tiger's den, place in tibet	stag tshang
སྟག་ཚང་ཕུར་བ	revealed by Ratön Tertön	stag tshang phur ba
སྟག་ཚང་ར་བ	stod well-known hermitage west of lhasa stag tshang ras pa ngag dbang rgya mtsho - (1574-1651)	stag tshang ra ba
སྟག་ཚང་རོང	Tiger's Den Ravine, in Tsari	stag tshang rong
སྟག་ཚང་སེང་གེའི་ཕུག	Lion Cave of Taktsang	stag tshang seng ge'i phug
སྟག་ཚལ་བ	tiger's grove, place in tsang	stag tshal ba
སྟག་ཚེར	salsola collina pall., robus idaeus, solanum xanthocarpum, red raspberry, indian salamin 1102	stag tsher
སྟག་འཚེར	Taktser [place]	stag 'tsher
སྟག་རྫབ	phor pa bzo stag ma wood rdzab	stag rdzab
སྟག་ཞུམ	internally hard like a tiger and externally soft like a cat, mi snying med	stag zhum
སྟག་ཞོན	the Tiger-Riding Lord, [a Dharma protector]; mounted on tigers	stag zhon
སྟག་ཟླ	1st month	stag zla
སྟག་གཟིག	Persia; Iran, Persia, Persian, Persia / Afghanistan	stag gzig
སྟག་གཟིག་ག་བུར	stag gzig camphor *]	stag gzig ga bur
སྟག་གཟིག་མེ་ཏོག	lilium wardii stapf	stag gzig me tog
སྟག་གཟིགས	Iran, persia/ afghanistan	stag gzigs
སྟག་ཡིན	all	stag yin
སྟག་རལ	tiger skin quiver	stag ral
སྟག་རས	kind of chintz with stripes resembling those of a tiger	stag ras
སྟག་རི་གཉན་གཟིགས	early king of tibet	stag ri gnyan gzigs
སྟག་རིས	tiger stripes	stag ris
སྟག་རུས	tiger bones, animal med	stag rus
སྟག་ལུང	Taklung, Matrül (ma sprul), Tsetrül (rtse sprul), and Shabdrung (zhabs drung)	stag lung
སྟག་ལུང་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Taklung Kagyu	stag lung bka' brgyud
སྟག་ལུང་དགེ་བསྙེན	a deity	stag lung dge bsnyen
སྟག་ལུང་དགོན་པ	Taklung Monastery	stag lung dgon pa
སྟག་ལུང་འགྲེལ་ཆེན	{stag lung 'grel chen	stag lung 'grel chen
སྟག་ལུང་སྒང	stag lung sgang mt	stag lung sgang
སྟག་ལུང་ཐང་པ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ	Taklung Tangpa, Tashi Pal; 1142-1210:. Disciple of Phagmo Drupa (11101170). Founded Taklung Monastery (around 1180-1185) and the Taklung tradition	stag lung thang pa bkra shis dpal
སྟག་ལུང་པ	Taklungpa stag lung ma thang ri bo che'i bsangs yig	stag lung pa
དང་གསེར་སྐྱེམས་སྐོར	rituals for the propitiation of the local and mountain deities of ri bo che monastery	dang gser skyems skor
སྟག་ལུང་མ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	gave ordination to Chokgyur Lingpa / alias {stag lung pa ngag dbang bstan pa'i nyi ma}	stag lung ma rin po che
སྟག་ལུང་ཤེལ་གྱི་རི་བོ	Taklung Shelgyi Riwo, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	stag lung shel gyi ri bo
སྟག་ལུང་སངས་རྒྱས་དབོན་པོ	tertön of {thugs sgrub bde gshegs 'dus pa}, terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava	stag lung sangs rgyas dbon po
སྟག་ལོ	1) tiger year; 2) Stag tshang lotsawa	stag lo
སྟག་ལོ་གཞོན་ནུ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	{stag lo gzhon nu brtson 'grus	stag lo gzhon nu brtson 'grus
སྟག་ཤ	1) tiger meat med; 2) med herb	stag sha
སྟག་ཤམ	tiger skin skirt	stag sham
སྟག་ཤམ་ནུས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	1682-? - Taksham Nuden Dorje, also known as Samten Lingpa	stag sham nus ldan rdo rje
སྟག་ཤར	a youth, young man	stag shar
སྟག་ཤིང	birch tree	stag shing
སྟག་ཤུན	fine silk brocade w picture of dragon and clouds rgyu cung zad rtsing ba zhig	stag shun
སྟག་སེང་ཁ་འཕྲོད	meeting/ confrontation of/ lion and tiger two brave men	stag seng kha 'phrod
སྟག་སེང་ཁྱུང་འབྲུག	tiger, lion, garuda, dragon	stag seng khyung 'brug
སྟག་སློག	tiger skin garment	stag slog
སྟག་གསོད་ས་མདའ	tiger killing sa mda'a	stag gsod sa mda'
སྟག་ལྷ་མེ་འབར	tiger-god of burning fire, bon god resembling bdud rtsi 'khyil	stag lha me 'bar
སྟང	manner, style	stang
སྟང་ཀ	manner, style	stang ka
སྟང་སྟབས	dancing postures	stang stabs
སྟང་སྟབས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གར་གྱིས་རོལ	they disport themselves w the consorts in dancing postures	stang stabs phyag rgya gar gyis rol
སྟང་བ	(tha dad pa bstangs pa, bstang ba, stongs,, 1) benefit; 2) rinse	stang ba
སྟང་དབྱལ	progenitors	stang dbyal
སྟང་རྩ	{steng rteg}	stang rtsa
སྟང་ཟིལ	kind of stone (black, golden or silver)	stang zil
སྟངས	manner/ mode/ way of doing; stance; one's perspective of . . . ; stance/ step (in dance)	stangs
སྟངས་ཁ	manner, style, posture	stangs kha
སྟངས་སྟབས	step/ movement (in dance)	stangs stabs
སྟངས་སྟབས་དགུ	CHN	stangs stabs dgu
སྟངས་དཔྱལ	{yab yum} or male and female spouses 'dzoms [gather, abundant glory, union?] [h], steng zhal zhes kyang 'bri rgyun 'dug	stangs dpyal
སྟངས་འཛིན	reveal the distinctions, grasp	stangs 'dzin
སྟད	put/ lay on	stad
སྟད་པ	to put on, to lay on	stad pa
སྟན	meditation session, seat, seat, mat, anything to sit upon, low seat	stan
སྟན་གླིངས་པ	[arch] unpadded felt seat	stan glings pa
སྟན་འགེབས་པ	lay a mat on	stan 'gebs pa
སྟན་གཅིག	discipline of eating only once daily	stan gcig
སྟན་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one sitting	stan gcig tu
སྟན་གཅིག་པ	same seat, someone who keep to his seat	stan gcig pa
སྟན་ཆད་པོ	torn and tattered blanket	stan chad po
སྟན་མཉམ་པོ	equal thrones {brgya byin dang stan mnyam po 'di mi 'os} It is not right that Sakra's throne is equal to mine	stan mnyam po
སྟན་ཐོག་གཅིག་ཉིད་དུ	in that very same session	stan thog gcig nyid du
སྟན་ཐོག་གཅིག་ཏུ	in a single sitting	stan thog gcig tu
སྟན་འཐུག་པོ	thick rug stan dang bzhon pa smad sogs bsod	stan 'thug po
ནམས་ཉམས	to disrespect his mount or seat will spoil your merit	nams nyams
སྟན་བདེ་བ	comfortable seat	stan bde ba
སྟན་འདིང་བ	spread a rug or mat on the ground	stan 'ding ba
སྟན་ནང་ཚངས་ཅན	padded seat	stan nang tshangs can
སྟན་པ	to indicate; see {bstan pa} / {ston pa}	stan pa
སྟན་བྱིན	seat of state	stan byin
སྟན་འབོལ	cushion	stan 'bol
སྟན་ཟླུམ	round seat	stan zlum
སྟན་ལ་འདུག་པ	remaining seated	stan la 'dug pa
སྟན་ལ་འདུག་པ་མིན	do not remain seated	stan la 'dug pa min
སྟན་ལ་འདུག་པའི་ཚུལ་དགུ	CHN	stan la 'dug pa'i tshul dgu
སྟན་ལས་ལྡང་བ	rise from a seat	stan las ldang ba
སྟན་ལས་བཞེངས	rises from the seat	stan las bzhengs
སྟན་ལས་ལངས	get up from a seat	stan las langs
སྟན་ལས་ལངས་ཏེ	rising from his seat	stan las langs te
སྟན་སོགས་སྤན་བརྒྱ་པའི་མདོ	the king of Tibet {lha tho tho ri gnyan rje lha tho tho ri gnyan btsa ma tog dang mnyam du byung ba'i chos [kyi dpe cha] tshan [b?] zhi ???	stan sogs span brgya pa'i mdo
སྟབ	SA rtab, suffer, tolerate, yield	stab
སྟབ་ཀ	place in tibet	stab ka
སྟབ་སེང	sap of a tree	stab seng
སྟབས	1) pose, posture; 2) mode, manner, way; 3) measure; 4) because [of], due to, since; 5) coincidence, circumstance	stabs
སྟབས་ཀ	1) way and means; 2) go skabs dang, phyogs sam, cha	stabs ka
སྟབས་ཀ་ཡག་པ་འཕྲོད་པ	to have the extraordinary good fortune	stabs ka yag pa 'phrod pa
སྟབས་ཀྱིས	because, for, therefore, so	stabs kyis
སྟབས་ཁྲི་བཟུང་མོན་ཁེང	a king of tibet	stabs khri bzung mon kheng
སྟབས་འཁེལ	coincide w, correspond w, come together w	stabs 'khel
སྟབས་འཁེལ་བ	by chance, fortunately	stabs 'khel ba
སྟབས་འཁྲེལ་བ	lucky, fortunate	stabs 'khrel ba
སྟབས་འགྲིག	in doing work arrange time or situation	stabs 'grig
སྟབས་འགྲིག་པ	suitable occasion	stabs 'grig pa
སྟབས་ངན	unlucky, unfortunate	stabs ngan
སྟབས་ངན་ཞིག་ལ	unfortunately	stabs ngan zhig la
སྟབས་ཅིག	simultaneous, together	stabs cig
སྟབས་ཉེས་པ་ཞིག་ལ	unfortunately	stabs nyes pa zhig la
སྟབས་བསྟུན	1) in accord w /favorable; 2) coinciding w	stabs bstun
སྟབས་བསྟུན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	flexibility	stabs bstun gyi rang bzhin
སྟབས་བསྟུན་གྱི་སྲིད་ཇུས	flexible policy, policy according w circumstances	stabs bstun gyi srid jus
སྟབས་དོན	stabs bder btang ba'i yig 'phrin gyi don	stabs don
སྟབས་བདེ	simple, easy, convenient	stabs bde
སྟབས་བདེ་པོ	convenient, handy, sleek, simple, convenient	stabs bde po
སྟབས་བདེ་བ	easy to plant or fix	stabs bde ba
སྟབས་བདེ་བོ	simple	stabs bde bo
སྟབས་བདེ་བྱེད	do simply	stabs bde byed
སྟབས་བདེ་བཟོ	simplify	stabs bde bzo
སྟབས་བདེ་ས་ཁང	simple mud houses	stabs bde sa khang
སྟབས་བདེའི་ཡིག་གཟུགས	simplified PRC CH characters	stabs bde'i yig gzugs
སྟབས་བདེའི་ལམ	shortcut	stabs bde'i lam
སྟབས་བདེར	best compliments, felicitations	stabs bder
སྟབས་བདེར་གཏོང	simplify	stabs bder gtong
སྟབས་སྤེལ	briefly bskur ba	stabs spel
སྟབས་འབུལ	abbreviated offerings	stabs 'bul
སྟབས་མ་ལེགས་པ	unlucky, unfortunate	stabs ma legs pa
སྟབས་མི་བདེ་བ	disadvantage, handicap, inconvenient, inconvenient, unfortunate	stabs mi bde ba
སྟབས་མཚུངས	at the same time	stabs mtshungs
སྟབས་ཡག	fortunately, luckily, lucky, fortunate	stabs yag
སྟབས་ཡག་ནས	fortunately	stabs yag nas
སྟབས་ཡག་པོ	good/ fortunate/ lucky coincidence/ circumstance, thank goodness	stabs yag po
སྟབས་རེ་ཤུ་རེ	right away	stabs re shu re
སྟབས་ལེགས	good manners/ good luck (?); good chance, luck, opportunity	stabs legs
སྟབས་ལེགས་སྐབས་འཁེལ	when good compatible conditions combine and are proper	stabs legs skabs 'khel
སྟབས་ལེགས་པ	fortunately, luckily, good manners	stabs legs pa
སྟབས་ལེགས་པ་ཞིག་ལ	fortunately	stabs legs pa zhig la
སྟབས་ལེགས་ཞིག་ལ	fortunately, luckily	stabs legs zhig la
སྟབས་ལེགས་རིང་ལུགས	opportunism	stabs legs ring lugs
སྟབས་ཤུར	= right away	stabs shur
སྟབས་གཤེགས	walks w the stride of	stabs gshegs
སྟབས་སུ་འགྱིང	to assume a pose	stabs su 'gying
སྟབས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	to be caught in	stabs su tshud pa
སྟབས་གསོལ	ask for good luck	stabs gsol
སྟབས་ལྷོད་བདེ་བ	appropriate/ leisure/ spare time	stabs lhod bde ba
སྟབས་ལྷོད་བདེ་བ་ཞིག་བྱུང་ན	if [we] get some spare time	stabs lhod bde ba zhig byung na
སྟར	SA sta re	star
སྟར་ཀ	almond	star ka
སྟར་ཀ་བྱེད་པ	weigh as much as a tinduka fruit	star ka byed pa
སྟར་སྐོགས	nut-shell	star skogs
སྟར་ཁ	juglans regia l. walnut, walnut	star kha
སྟར་ཁའམ་སྒོ་ངའི་པགས་པ	shell	star kha'am sgo nga'i pags pa
སྟར་ཁའི་ཟ	walnut meat	star kha'i za
སྟར་ག	walnut	star ga
སྟར་གའི་ཤིང	walnut tree	star ga'i shing
སྟར་འགྲིག་པོ	arrangement [in rows strung, fastened]	star 'grig po
སྟར་སྒོ	great tibetan mountain range	star sgo
སྟར་སྒྲིག་གྲལ་སྒྲིག་པ	arrange dividing into four? rows Ru bzhir bgos	star sgrig gral sgrig pa
སྟར་ཆགས	1) continulous[ly]; 2) strung, arranged in rows, fastened together	star chags
སྟར་སྡོང	walnut trunk/ tree	star sdong
སྟར་པ	line, row	star pa
སྟར་པ་བཙུགས	put/ planted in a row/ line	star pa btsugs
སྟར་ལྤགས	walnut skin or shell	star lpags
སྟར་བ	{star ba, bstar ba, bstar ba, stor} trans. v.; to file, to tie fast, to fasten to	star ba
སྟར་བུ	[Hippophae rhamnoides] sour taste	star bu
སྟར་བུའི་ཤིང	walnut tree	star bu'i shing
སྟར་མ	row, line	star ma
སྟར་མོ	axe	star mo
སྟར་ཞུན	berries of hippophae rhamnoides shrub	star zhun
སྟར་ཡུ	axe handle	star yu
སྟར་ལ་བརྒྱུས	to string 1104	star la brgyus
སྟར་ཤིང	walnut tree	star shing
སྟར་སོ	sta re'i kha [a bone?]	star so
སྟི	1) live, stay; 2) rest, relax; 3) honor, show respect	sti
སྟི་ཀ	mouthful sized pieces of meat	sti ka
སྟི་ག	mouthful sized pieces of meat	sti ga
སྟི་སྟང	respect, reverence, honor	sti stang
སྟི་སྟང་ཅན	respected, revered, honored	sti stang can
སྟི་སྟང་བྱེད	show respect, reverence	sti stang byed
སྟི་སྟང་བྱེད་པ	who a person honor	sti stang byed pa
སྟི་གནས	place to stay, home, dwelling	sti gnas
སྟི་བ	rest, repose, refresh one's self, honor, respect	sti ba
སྟི་བའི་གནས	resting place	sti ba'i gnas
སྟིང	(tha dad pa bstings pa, bsting ba, stings,; 1) w disregard and disrespect attribute faults, scold, satirize, rebuke criticize [gently/ indirectly]	sting
སྟིང་བསྐུལ	service	sting bskul
སྟིང་དུ་བཏགས	tied or bound up above	sting du btags
སྟིང་བ	rebuke, scold, abuse	sting ba
སྟིངས	rebuke, SA sting ba	stings
སྟིབ་པ	offer	stib pa
སྟིབས་པ	offer	stibs pa
སྟིམ	1) to drown. 2) totally mingle, blend. 3) to give, distribute. 4) tie down	stim
སྟིམ་པ	enter, penetrate, pervade, be absorbed in, dissolve, SA thim pa	stim pa
སྟིམས	enter, SA stim pa	stims
སྟིས	imp. of {sti ba}	stis
སྟུ	vagina, vulva, woman's private parts	stu
སྟུ་ཀ	vagina, female genitals	stu ka
སྟུ་ཁ	vagina, female genitals	stu kha
སྟུག་གེ་བ	thick	stug ge ba
སྟུག་བསྔལ་གསུམ	three types of misery	stug bsngal gsum
སྟུག་པ	thickness, density, thick, dense, sound, heavy	stug pa
སྟུག་པོ	thick, close, dense	stug po
སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	Ghanavyuha/ (pure realm of) Dense Array	stug po bkod pa
སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Dense Array	stug po bkod pa'i mdo
སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པའི་ཞིང	beautifully arrayed buddha land	stug po bkod pa'i zhing
སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	Gandavyuha Buddha field	stug po bkod pa'i zhing khams
སྟུགས་པ	thick, opaque, solid	stugs pa
སྟུགས་པོ	thick, opaque, solid, dense, really noble, epithet of buddha	stugs po
སྟུང	to shorten, to make smaller, shorter	stung
སྟུང་བ	(tha dad pa bstungs pa, bstung ba, stungs,, shorten, make smaller	stung ba
སྟུངས	shorten!	stungs
སྟུད	imp. of {stud pa}; 1) to do successively. 2) to lengthen	stud
སྟུད་པ	{stud pa, bstud pa, bstud pa, stud} trans. v.; to repeat, to reiterate	stud pa
སྟུད་མར	successively, in succession, 1 after another	stud mar
སྟུན	imp. of {stun pa}. Syn {bstun} to obey / subordinate	stun
སྟུན་ཁུང	mortar	stun khung
སྟུན་པ	to agree, trust; {stun pa, bstun pa, bstun pa, stun} trans. v	stun pa
སྟུན་ཤིང	iron club	stun shing
སྟུབ	cut up, dice	stub
སྟུབ་པ	SA btub pa, cut into pieces	stub pa
སྟུབས་པ	cut to pieces	stubs pa
སྟེ	1) the gerundive connective particle. having / after having. 2) adverbial function. -ing. 3) defining function: where. 4) namely, to wit, videlicet; te/ ste/ de semicolon; colon or m-dash; rather; ...	ste
སྟེ་ཁ	1) axe blade; 2) implement for digging into broken bones in the head	ste kha
སྟེ་ཁ་སོ་གཉིས	implement for digging into the bones of the head	ste kha so gnyis
སྟེ་ཆད་པ	cut off from one another	ste chad pa
སྟེ་ལྟག	ste'u'i ltag pa [top part?]	ste ltag
སྟེ་པོ	axe with its blade athwart the handle	ste po
སྟེ་གཙག	carpenter's wood gzhog byed tool	ste gtsag
སྟེ་གཞོག་རྒྱག་པ	w an axe gzhog rgyag pa Ka gdung bzo rgyu'i shing rough wood ste gzhog rgyag pa	ste gzhog rgyag pa
སྟེ་བཞོག་གཏོང་བ	smooth or hew with the axe	ste bzhog gtong ba
སྟེ་ཡུ	ax-handle	ste yu
སྟེ་ལོང	unsubstantial	ste long
སྟེག	to lift	steg
སྟེག་པ	[arch] 1) coquettish/ playful; 2) beautiful/graceful	steg pa
སྟེགས་ཀ	chu 'khor gyi yan lag cig	stegs ka
སྟེགས་ཀྱི་ཁར	upon a throne	stegs kyi khar
སྟེགས་ཁྲི	foot-stool	stegs khri
སྟེགས་རྒྱུག	chu 'khor gyi yan lag cig	stegs rgyug
སྟེགས་པ	support	stegs pa
སྟེགས་བུ	rest, support, turret, shelf or box on which birds perch, altar, raised seat	stegs bu
སྟེགས་བུ་བཤིག	undercut, pull the rug out from under someone	stegs bu bshig
སྟེགས་དབུས	at the center of a shelf, in the center of an altar	stegs dbus
སྟེགས་དམའ་བ	low table or stand	stegs dma' ba
སྟེགས་ཟམ	las zam	stegs zam
སྟེགས་ཟམ་ལ་བརྒྱུད་པ	hanging bridge on supports	stegs zam la brgyud pa
སྟེགས་སུ	ledge by the gateway, platform	stegs su
སྟེང	upon	steng
སྟེང་རྐང་ཅན	sha ra bha, 8 legged lion	steng rkang can
སྟེང་སྐས	stairs/ ladder to the upper part of a building	steng skas
སྟེང་སྐྱེ་བ	tree	steng skye ba
སྟེང་སྐྱེས	that grows upwards, tree	steng skyes
སྟེང་སྐྱོབ	canopy	steng skyob
སྟེང་བསྐྱེད་མའི་ལུགས	* [wrong astr] tradition maintaining that the seasons occur at the same time on all the four continents	steng bskyed ma'i lugs
སྟེང་ཁང	upper floor/ top-story room/apartment	steng khang
སྟེང་ཁེབས	upper cover, cover	steng khebs
སྟེང་གི	dependent upon, upper	steng gi
སྟེང་གི་བཀོད་པ	superstructure	steng gi bkod pa
སྟེང་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	higher worlds, celestial realms	steng gi 'jig rten
སྟེང་གི་འཇུག་རྟེན	upper world	steng gi 'jug rten
སྟེང་གི་ནམ་མཁའ	the space above	steng gi nam mkha'
སྟེང་གི་སྣ་ཅན	owl	steng gi sna can
སྟེང་གི་ཕྱོགས	zenith	steng gi phyogs
སྟེང་གི་བར་སྣང	space	steng gi bar snang
སྟེང་གི་དབང་པོ	epithet of vishnu	steng gi dbang po
སྟེང་གི་གཞི	upper surface	steng gi gzhi
སྟེང་གོས	garment worn steng du brtsegs nas	steng gos
སྟེང་གྱོགས	thog gam sgang du 'gebs rgyu'i khebs	steng gyogs
སྟེང་གྲིབ	grib nad of planets and d"ns in which brain and blood are mixed	steng grib
སྟེང་རྒྱན	top ornaments	steng rgyan
སྟེང་སྒོ	upper gate, upper door, upper entrance (training with chakras)	steng sgo
སྟེང་སྒོ་རྣམ་གྲོལ	liberation of the upper gate	steng sgo rnam grol
སྟེང་སྒོའི་མན་ངག	instruction associated with the upper gate / door	steng sgo'i man ngag
སྟེང་ངོས	upper side/part, top	steng ngos
སྟེང་གཅལ	bza' tsho steng che mdo sngags theg mchog chos	steng gcal
སྟེང་ཆེན	khyung po steng chen rdzong	steng chen
སྟེང་འཇུག	surmounting letters	steng 'jug
སྟེང་ཏུ	upon	steng tu
སྟེང་ཐོག	top	steng thog
སྟེང་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན	to arrive at the top	steng thog tu phyin
སྟེང་ཐོག་ན	upon, on the roof	steng thog na
སྟེང་ཐོག་ཕན་ཚུན	connecting the tops	steng thog phan tshun
སྟེང་འཐུང	utapala	steng 'thung
སྟེང་འཐུང་དཀར་པོ	white species of	steng 'thung dkar po
སྟེང་དུ	1) upon, on, above, on top of; 2) in and of itself as ..	steng du
སྟེང་དུ་འཁོད་པ	placed above	steng du 'khod pa
སྟེང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	arrive in	steng du 'gro ba
སྟེང་དུ་འཇོག་པ	ascend, climbing	steng du 'jog pa
སྟེང་དུ་འཐོན	fresh shoots of leaves	steng du 'thon
སྟེང་དུ་འདྲེན	drawn upwards, promoted, thrown upwards	steng du 'dren
སྟེང་དུ་འཕུར་བ	fly up, the moon	steng du 'phur ba
སྟེང་དུ་བརྩེགས	piled upwards, one above the other, piled one upon another, piled or built upwards	steng du brtsegs
སྟེང་དུ་ཚུར་བསྡུ	apply to	steng du tshur bsdu
སྟེང་དུ་ཞོན་པ	rode on its back	steng du zhon pa
སྟེང་དུ་བཟུང་བ	to fix presence upon	steng du bzung ba
སྟེང་གདོན	the D"n of the planets, Rahu	steng gdon
སྟེང་རྡུང	pestle	steng rdung
སྟེང་ན	above, on high	steng na
སྟེང་ནས	from [on top of]	steng nas
སྟེང་ནས་སྟེང་དུ	one above the other	steng nas steng du
སྟེང་ནས་སྟེང་དུ་བརྩེགས་ཏེ	in tiers, one above the other	steng nas steng du brtsegs te
སྟེང་ནས་མར	listing them from uppermost to nether	steng nas mar
སྟེང་པ	[arch] forest, trees	steng pa
སྟེང་ཕུར་གཤེར་ལྡན་པི་ཀུ་ཤྲ	moon	steng phur gsher ldan pi ku shra
སྟེང་ཕྱོགས	the direction above, zenith	steng phyogs
སྟེང་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	the upper direction protector steng phyogs 'jig rten mdangs dga'i zhing	steng phyogs skyong
སྟེང་འཕར	waves	steng 'phar
སྟེང་འཕུར	fly up, the moon	steng 'phur
སྟེང་འཕུར་དབང་པོ	epithet of mahadeva	steng 'phur dbang po
སྟེང་འཕུར་གཤེར་ལྡན	moon	steng 'phur gsher ldan
སྟེང་འབར	drought, rainlessness, drought, want of rain	steng 'bar
སྟེང་མ	upper	steng ma
སྟེང་རྩེག	[= stang rtsa] addition piled on a khal do'i [pack load?]	steng rtseg
སྟེང་བརྩེགས	Tibetan woman's upper garment	steng brtsegs
སྟེང་ཞལ	husband and wife	steng zhal
སྟེང་གཟའ་ཕོག་པ	be afflicted w grib nad from planets and d"ns mixed w brain and blood	steng gza' phog pa
སྟེང་འོག	above and below, high and low, upper and lower	steng 'og
སྟེང་འོག་གི་གདོན	demons of the upper and nether regions	steng 'og gi gdon
སྟེང་འོག་གི་རླུང	upper and lower (subtle) energies	steng 'og gi rlung
སྟེང་འོག་འགྱུར	turn topsy turvy/ upside down, be overthrown	steng 'og 'gyur
སྟེང་འོག་སྒྱུར	turn topsy turvy/ upside down, overthrow	steng 'og sgyur
སྟེང་འོག་སྣོར་བ	confound or mix up the upper and lower	steng 'og snor ba
སྟེང་འོག་བར་གསུམ	above below and in between	steng 'og bar gsum
སྟེང་འོག་མེད་པ	has no/ without division into higher or lower	steng 'og med pa
སྟེང་འོག་མེད་པར	w/o above and below/ top or bottom, everywhere	steng 'og med par
སྟེང་འོག་ཚུལ	2 -storied; 2-storied	steng 'og tshul
སྟེང་འོག་སར་ལྲས་པ	looked all over the place steng g.yogs - mantle, upper garment, upper garment of religious mendicant, upper covering	steng 'og sar lras pa
སྟེང་རླུང	upper prana	steng rlung
སྟེང་ལ	above, on high above	steng la
སྟེང་ལ་ཞོན་པ	to ride it [the lion]	steng la zhon pa
སྟེང་ལུད	manure scattered over seed after planting, top dressing of manure/ fertilizer	steng lud
སྟེང་ཤོད	upper and lower	steng shod
སྟེང་ཤོད་བར་གསུམ	upper middle and lower story	steng shod bar gsum
སྟེང་ཤོས	uppermost	steng shos
སྟེང་སོ	upper teeth	steng so
སྟེང་ལྷའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	above the world of the gods	steng lha'i 'jig rten
སྟེངས་པ	smooth	stengs pa
སྟེངས་པོ་ཆེ	Tengpoche (monastery, Khumbhu, Nepal	stengs po che
སྟེན	bedsteads, adhere to, SA sten pa	sten
སྟེན་ཅིག	follow!	sten cig
སྟེན་པ	(tha dad pa bsten pa, bsten pa, sten,, 1) keep, hold; 2) attend/rely/ depend on; 3) stick to	sten pa
སྟེན་བྱེད	faith	sten byed
སྟེན་བྱེད་པ	serve reverentially	sten byed pa
སྟེན་བྱེད་སློབ་མ	the disciple	sten byed slob ma
སྟེན་ཚུལ	the way to rely	sten tshul
སྟེབ	(not in DAS)	steb
སྟེམ་པ	(A; 1) get squeeze[d], press[ed], pinch[ed]; 2) strike, hit, beat; 3) shut, fasten, secure [a door]; 4) hold, support	stem pa
སྟེམས	curse	stems
སྟེམས་པ	to control	stems pa
སྟེའུ	an axe, hatchet	ste'u
སྟེའུ་ཀ་མ	kind of missile	ste'u ka ma
སྟེའུ་ཁ	ax-head	ste'u kha
སྟེའུ་སྟག	sharp arrow	ste'u stag
སྟེའུ་མདུང	ax-lance	ste'u mdung
སྟེའུ་རྩག	axe	ste'u rtsag
སྟེར	give, bestow, grant	ster
སྟེར་སྒོ	aid, contribution, allowance, expenditure, dowry	ster sgo
སྟེར་ཆ	things to be given/ added	ster cha
སྟེར་ཆད	agree [what] to give	ster chad
སྟེར་སྟེར་འཕྲོག་འཕྲོག	give give take take	ster ster 'phrog 'phrog
སྟེར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	make or cause one to give	ster du 'jug pa
སྟེར་འདོད	wishing to give, willing to give	ster 'dod
སྟེར་ཕོད་པ	could part with	ster phod pa
སྟེར་བ	give	ster ba
སྟེར་བའི་ཆེད	for the purpose of giving	ster ba'i ched
སྟེར་སྦྱིན་རྗེས་འབྲང	secret bribery	ster sbyin rjes 'brang
སྟེར་ཚོང	get rid of, dispose of	ster tshong
སྟེར་ལ་མོས་པ	likes to share with others	ster la mos pa
སྟེར་སློང	give and receive	ster slong
སྟེས	manner, style	stes
སྟེས་དབང	ways, means	stes dbang
སྟེས་དབང་གིས	by chance	stes dbang gis
སྟོ	tribe in tibet	sto
སྟོ་ཀ	[arch] small, a little	sto ka
སྟོ་ཐག	rope	sto thag
སྟོ་བ	be a fault	sto ba
སྟོ་ར	circle of dancers	sto ra
སྟོག	(not in DAS)	stog
སྟོང་ཀྱི་ལུགས་གཉིས	two modes of emptiness [gd]	stong kyi lugs gnyis
སྟོང་ཀྱིས	by virtue of	stong kyis
སྟོང་རྐྱང	mere emptiness. Syn {stong sangs}	stong rkyang
སྟོང་རྐྱལ	swim w/o any support	stong rkyal
སྟོང་སྐད	empty talk	stong skad
སྟོང་སྐུད	threads for fine silken garments etc	stong skud
སྟོང་སྐོར	county in 21th cent Tibet.	stong skor
སྟོང་སྐྱུག	nausea	stong skyug
སྟོང་སྐྱུགས	w/o hunger, thirst, etc stong pa lbu ba can vomiting sign of a wind disease	stong skyugs
སྟོང་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་པ	waste time	stong skyel byed pa
སྟོང་བསྐལ	stong pa'i bskal pa	stong bskal
སྟོང་ཁམས	all the worlds	stong khams
སྟོང་ཁམས་ཡོངས་ལ	in all worlds	stong khams yongs la
སྟོང་ཁའི་འབྲུབ་ཆ	autumn floods	stong kha'i 'brub cha
སྟོང་ཁུན	t'ung kus, East CH	stong khun
སྟོང་ཁུན་རྒྱལ་པོ	(CH king of t'ung kus E China	stong khun rgyal po
སྟོང་ཁྱབ་ནག་མོ	a wrathful bon deity	stong khyab nag mo
སྟོང་འཁོར	universal monarch of a 1st or 3rd 1000-fold world realm	stong 'khor
སྟོང་འཁོར་ཞབས་དྲུང	an incarnate lama of stong 'khor monastery in amdo	stong 'khor zhabs drung
སྟོང་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel with a thousand spokes	stong 'khor lo
སྟོང་འཁོར་ལོས་སྒྱུར་རྒྱལ	universal monarch of a 1st or 3rd 1000-fold world realm	stong 'khor los sgyur rgyal
སྟོང་འཁྲུགས	{stong 'khrugs} disease [R]	stong 'khrugs
སྟོང་གི་ཆ	one-thousandth part	stong gi cha
སྟོང་གི་མཚོ་ནག	{stong gi mtsho nag	stong gi mtsho nag
སྟོང་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	a three thousandfold world system	stong gyi 'jig rten
སྟོང་གྱོང	uselessly gyong phog pa	stong gyong
སྟོང་གྲངས	imaginary #	stong grangs
སྟོང་གྲིབ	blood-money defilement	stong grib
སྟོང་གྲོགས	support	stong grogs
སྟོང་གྲོགས་མཛོད	support [us w]	stong grogs mdzod
སྟོང་གྲོང	1000 houses or households	stong grong
སྟོང་རྒྱུག	go and return w/o accomplishing 1's purpose	stong rgyug
སྟོང་བསྒོམ	meditation on emptiness	stong bsgom
སྟོང་ཅན	arrow	stong can
སྟོང་གཅོད	[arch] resolve doubts about is and is not	stong gcod
སྟོང་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 kinds of emptiness	stong bcu drug
སྟོང་བཅུ་བཞི	the fourteen emptinesses	stong bcu bzhi
སྟོང་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 emptinesses	stong bco brgyad
སྟོང་ཆ	no-thing-ness ready to be filled with any structure, on the side of emptiness, empty, vacant, on the side of emptiness	stong cha
སྟོང་ཆད	inert/ nihilistic void (state)	stong chad
སྟོང་ཆམ་མེ	w subsided appearance	stong cham me
སྟོང་ཆམ་མེ་བ	totally empty	stong cham me ba
སྟོང་ཆུང་ངུ	small chiliocosm of 1,000 worlds	stong chung ngu
སྟོང་ཆུང་ངུའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	a small chiliocosm of 1,000 worlds	stong chung ngu'i 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་ཆེན	3rd thousand fold world system	stong chen
སྟོང་ཆེན་རྣལ་འབྱོར	practice of the great emptiness	stong chen rnal 'byor
སྟོང་ཆེན་པོ	millions; "great thousandfold", {stong gsum pa}	stong chen po
སྟོང་ཆེན་པོའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	stong gsum gyi stong chen po'i 'jig rten gyi khams	stong chen po'i 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་ཆེན་མོ་རབ	spell goddess, 1 of 5 gcan rim pa	stong chen mo rab
སྟོང་ཆེན་མོ་རབ་ཏུ་འཇོམས་མ	mahasahasrapramardani	stong chen mo rab tu 'joms ma
སྟོང་ཆེན་རབ་འཇོམས་མ	gzungs chen grva lnga'i nang tshan zhig	stong chen rab 'joms ma
སྟོང་མཆོང	fruitless errand/ task	stong mchong
སྟོང་མཆོད	Thousand-fold offering	stong mchod
སྟོང་མཆོད་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་ཕུལ་བ་མདེ་ཨ་ཐོཨུསནད	fold offering	stong mchod rgya chen po phul ba made a thousand
སྟོང་མཆོད་ཆེན་མོ	the "Great Thousand-fold Offering." stong mchod 'bul snod rag kong stong	stong mchod chen mo
ཕྲག་གཅིག	one thousand brass butterlamps	phrag gcig
སྟོང་ཇི་སྙེད	about a thousand, how many thousands?	stong ji snyed
སྟོང་མཇུག	spo bo stong mjug	stong mjug
སྟོང་མཇུག་མེད་པ	w/o beginning and end	stong mjug med pa
སྟོང་འཇལ་བ	compensation	stong 'jal ba
སྟོང་འཇལ་བྱེད	compensation	stong 'jal byed
སྟོང་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	1st thousandfold world system,	stong 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་རྗེན་ལྷང་ལྷང	empty, vividly marked	stong rjen lhang lhang
སྟོང་ཉམས	the emptiness experience	stong nyams
སྟོང་ཉི་ཤུ	the twenty types of emptiness	stong nyi shu
སྟོང་ཉིད	nothingness, SA stong pa nyid	stong nyid
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of emptiness	stong nyid kyi bag chags
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་ཉི་ཤུ	20 classifications of emptiness	stong nyid kyi dbye ba nyi shu
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གཤིས	the innate disposition which is emptiness	stong nyid kyi gshis
སྟོང་ཉིད་རྒྱས་འདེབས་སུ་ཡེ་ཤོར	basic straying into generalized emptiness	stong nyid rgyas 'debs su ye shor
སྟོང་ཉིད་རྒྱས་འདེབས་སུ་གཤིས་ཤོར	Basic straying into generalized emptiness	stong nyid rgyas 'debs su gshis shor
སྟོང་ཉིད་མངོན་སུམ་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	realize emptiness directly 1108	stong nyid mngon sum tu rtogs pa
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 kinds of emptiness	stong nyid bcu drug
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་གི་དབྱེ་བ	classification of sixteen kinds of emptiness	stong nyid bcu drug gi dbye ba
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་བཞི	CHN	stong nyid bcu bzhi
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	stong nyid bco brgyad
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	the great emptiness	stong nyid chen po
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཉི་ཚེ་བ	limited emptiness (=mere voidness/ absence)	stong nyid nyi tshe ba
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཉི་ཤུ	CHN	stong nyid nyi shu
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཅན	emptiness with a core of compassion	stong nyid snying rje can
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྙིང་རྗེ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable emptiness-compassion stong nyid snying rje dbyer med byang	stong nyid snying rje dbyer med
ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	Bodhichitta of undivided emptiness and compassion	chub kyi sems
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཟུང་འཇུག	unity of emptiness and compassion; the unification of emptiness and compassion	stong nyid snying rje zung 'jug
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྙིང་རྗེའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	the essence of emptiness and compassion,	stong nyid snying rje'i snying po can
ཐེ་ཨེསསེནཏིཨལ་ཨེམཔཏིནེསས	compassion, emptiness having the nature of compassion stong nyid snying rje'i snying po can emptiness imbued with the heart of compassion	the essential emptiness
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྙིང་རྗེའི་ལྟ་བ	the view of emptiness and compassion/ empty compassion	stong nyid snying rje'i lta ba
སྟོང་ཉིད་རྟོགས་པའི་བྱེད་ལས	the function/ result of realization of emptiness	stong nyid rtogs pa'i byed las
སྟོང་ཉིད་སྟོང་ཉིད	voidness of voidness	stong nyid stong nyid
སྟོང་ཉིད་མཐོང་བ	seeing/ perceiving emptiness	stong nyid mthong ba
སྟོང་ཉིད་བདུན	the 7 emptinesses	stong nyid bdun
སྟོང་ཉིད་བདུན་ཅུ	the 70 emptinesses	stong nyid bdun cu
སྟོང་ཉིད་བདུན་ཅུ་པ	Shunyata Saptali?, one of the {rigs tshogs drug} the six logical works of the Madhyamika by Nagarjuna	stong nyid bdun cu pa
སྟོང་ཉིད་དབྱིངས	emptiness the [dharma]dhatu, empty space	stong nyid dbyings
སྟོང་ཉིད་ཚུལ་བཞི	four modes of emptiness	stong nyid tshul bzhi
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཞི་སྦྱོར	fourfold emptiness stong nyid zag pa med pa'i bde chen unconditioned great bliss of emptiness	stong nyid bzhi sbyor
སྟོང་ཉིད་གཟུང་དྲན	recollection of the recognition of emptiness	stong nyid gzung dran
སྟོང་ཉིད་ལ་སྐྲག་པ	fear of emptiness	stong nyid la skrag pa
སྟོང་ཉིད་ལ་གོལ་ས་བཞི	the four strayings regarding emptiness	stong nyid la gol sa bzhi
སྟོང་ཉིད་ལ་མི་སྐྲག་པ	not being afraid of emptiness stong nyid gshis la ye shor du song ba basic straying in the essence of emptiness	stong nyid la mi skrag pa
སྟོང་ཉིད་གཤིས་ཤོར	Basic straying from the essence of emptiness	stong nyid gshis shor
སྟོང་ཉིས་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུ	1250 [monks]	stong nyis brgya lnga bcu
སྟོང་ཉེ	tribal name in tibet	stong nye
སྟོང་ཉོ་སྟོང་ཚོང	empty buying and selling	stong nyo stong tshong
སྟོང་གཉིས	2nd 1,00-fold universe	stong gnyis
སྟོང་གཉིས་པ	the "second thousandfold" [world- system]. Syn {stong gnyis bar ma}	stong gnyis pa
སྟོང་གཉིས་བར་མ	intermediate second thousandfold, [one thousand {stong spyi phud}	stong gnyis bar ma
སྟོང་གཉེན་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	the remedy aspect of emptiness	stong gnyen po'i phyogs
སྟོང་གཉེན་པོའི་བློ	the remedyconcept of emptiness	stong gnyen po'i blo
སྟོང་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of emptiness and compassion	stong snying rje zung 'jug
སྟོང་སྙིང་རྗེའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	emptiness with a "core" of compassion	stong snying rje'i snying po can
སྟོང་སྙེག	1) useless/ meaningless pursuit; 2) for killing a person legally required payment in thousands of gold srang depending on rank]	stong snyeg
སྟོང་སྙེག་པ	for killing a person legally required payment in thousands of gold srang depending on rank]	stong snyeg pa
སྟོང་སྙེད	about a thousand	stong snyed
སྟོང་གཏམ	aimless discussion, empty, meaningless boasting/ exaggerated talk	stong gtam
སྟོང་རྟེན་འབྱུང་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of emptiness and interdependent arising	stong rten 'byung zung 'jug
སྟོང་སྟོང་པོ	sheer emptiness	stong stong po
སྟོང་ཐང	price in 1,000's	stong thang
སྟོང་ཐུན	1) essential exposition, essence commentary, collects the essence of a text, the essential meaning of an expanded or great text, quintessential elucidation / 2) thousand topics	stong thun
བཡ་ཀཡ	drub; 3) résumé‚	by Kay
སྟོང་མཐའ	30th new moon day of the month	stong mtha'
སྟོང་མཐར་སྐུར་འདེབས་ཀྱི་ཞེན་པོ	the clinging of denigrating the extreme of emptiness	stong mthar skur 'debs kyi zhen po
སྟོང་དང་རྟེན་འབྱུང	abbr. of {stong pa nyid dang rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba}	stong dang rten 'byung
སྟོང་དང་པོ	the first thousand-fold world system	stong dang po
སྟོང་དུ་འཇལ	payment of the manslaughter fine	stong du 'jal
སྟོང་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	doctrine / proponent of emptiness	stong du smra ba
སྟོང་དོན	ideological/ abstract issue/ dimension	stong don
སྟོང་གདབ	phan grogs bya'am grogs byed ces pa'i don	stong gdab
སྟོང་འདེད་པ	for killing a person legally required payment in thousands of gold srang depending on rank]	stong 'ded pa
སྟོང་སྡེ	general commanding one thousand soldiers	stong sde
སྟོང་པ	blank [paper	stong pa
སྟོང་པ་གོ་འབྱེད	empty & spacious	stong pa go 'byed
སྟོང་པ་བཅུ་བརྒྱད	18 kinds of emptiness (nang (stong pa nyid), phyi, phyi nang, stong pa nyid, chen po, don dam pa, 'dus byas, 'dus ma byas, mtha' las 'das pa, thog ma dang tha ma med pa dor ba med pa, rang bzhin, c...	stong pa bcu brgyad
སྟོང་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 kinds of emptiness	stong pa bco brgyad
སྟོང་པ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme emptiness	stong pa chen po
སྟོང་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of the great emptiness	stong pa chen po'i rnal 'byor
སྟོང་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་འོད་གསལ	the luminosity of great emptiness	stong pa chen po'i 'od gsal
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	sunyata, emptiness, openness, void, nothingness, pure transcendence, open dimension of being, nothing-as-such with respect to ngo bo, indeterminate relational form of the act of being aware that ma...	stong pa nyid
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view [of] emptiness	stong pa nyid kyi lta ba
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དོན	the meaning/ fact/ reality of emptiness stong pa nyid kyi rnam par thar pa'i sgo the gate of liberation of emptiness	stong pa nyid kyi don
དང་བྲལ་བ	CHN	dang bral ba
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚུལ	the meaning of emptiness	stong pa nyid kyi tshul
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of emptiness; dharmadhatu wisdom	stong pa nyid kyi ye shes
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	in essence empty	stong pa nyid kyi rang bzhin
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་བསྒོམ་པའི་མན་ངག	the oral instructions for meditation on emptiness	stong pa nyid bsgom pa'i man ngag
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 kinds of emptiness	stong pa nyid bcu drug
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 kinds of emptiness [stong pa nyid bcu drug +, dngos po med pa stong pa nyid, ngo bo nyid stong pa nyid]	stong pa nyid bco brgyad
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	the great emptiness	stong pa nyid chen po
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of emptiness	stong pa nyid stong pa nyid
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་དུ་གྱུར	all becomes emptiness	stong pa nyid du gyur
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་དུ་ལྟ་བ	view as empty	stong pa nyid du lta ba
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་དུ་སྦྱངས	purified as emptiness	stong pa nyid du sbyangs
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	1) theory of voidness, doctrine of voidness. 2) proponent of voidness	stong pa nyid du smra ba
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་བཞི	the four kinds of emptiness	stong pa nyid bzhi
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་གཟུགས་སོ	emptiness is form	stong pa nyid gzugs so
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་གསུམ	{med pa'i stong pa nyid/ yod pa'i stong pa nyid/ rang bzhin stong pa nyid}	stong pa nyid gsum
སྟོང་པ་གཉིས་པ	9th or 24th of the month	stong pa gnyis pa
སྟོང་པ་དང་པོ	[the 4th or 19th of the month]	stong pa dang po
སྟོང་པ་ཕྱང་ཆད	view of everything being void	stong pa phyang chad
སྟོང་པ་ཕྱལ་ཆད	empty nothingness, blank emptiness	stong pa phyal chad
སྟོང་པ་མ་ཡིན	[it is] not empty	stong pa ma yin
སྟོང་པ་བཞི	Four levels of emptiness. Emptiness, special emptiness, great emptiness, universal emptiness	stong pa bzhi
སྟོང་པ་བཟོ་བ	empty, evacuate, vacate	stong pa bzo ba
སྟོང་པ་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberated emptiness	stong pa rang grol
སྟོང་པ་ལ་རེག	nothing	stong pa la reg
སྟོང་པ་གསུམ་པ	[the 14th or 29th of the month]	stong pa gsum pa
སྟོང་པའི་བསྐལ་པ	empty kalpa	stong pa'i bskal pa
སྟོང་པའི་བསྐལ་བ	empty kalpa	stong pa'i bskal ba
སྟོང་པའི་ངང	open state, dimension of emptiness, essentiality of voidness	stong pa'i ngang
སྟོང་པའི་ངང་ལས	from within emptiness	stong pa'i ngang las
སྟོང་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	magic of emptiness	stong pa'i cho 'phrul
སྟོང་པའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	empty dharmakaya	stong pa'i chos sku
སྟོང་པའི་ཉམས	experience of emptiness	stong pa'i nyams
སྟོང་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of emptiness 1110	stong pa'i ting nge 'dzin
སྟོང་པའི་གདངས	"dang" energy of emptiness	stong pa'i gdangs
སྟོང་པའི་བྱ་བྱེད	the activity of emptiness	stong pa'i bya byed
སྟོང་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	1) having the characteristic of emptiness; 2) essentially empty	stong pa'i mtshan nyid can
སྟོང་པའི་གཟུགས	form(s)/ expression(s) of emptiness; isc. empty form(s)	stong pa'i gzugs
སྟོང་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	expression/ reflection of emptiness	stong pa'i gzugs brnyan
སྟོང་པའི་གཟུངས་བརྙན	empty forms	stong pa'i gzungs brnyan
སྟོང་པའི་འོད་གསལ	Empty luminosity. The unmanifest aspect of luminosity	stong pa'i 'od gsal
སྟོང་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	exalted wisdom of emptiness	stong pa'i ye shes
སྟོང་པའི་ཡོ་ལང	the manifold display of emptiness; syn {stong pa'i bya byed} the activity of emptiness	stong pa'i yo lang
སྟོང་པའི་རང་རྩལ	natural expression of emptiness	stong pa'i rang rtsal
སྟོང་པའི་རང་གཟུགས	natural form of emptiness	stong pa'i rang gzugs
སྟོང་པའི་ལྷ	deity of emptiness, SA kri ya lha drug	stong pa'i lha
སྟོང་པར	as being empty, that it is void	stong par
སྟོང་པར་གནས་པ	abide as nothing	stong par gnas pa
སྟོང་པར་བྱས་པ	fabricated into some kind of nothing, fabrication into nothing	stong par byas pa
སྟོང་པར་བྱེད་པ	to reduce to nothingness	stong par byed pa
སྟོང་པར་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of emptiness	stong par smra ba
སྟོང་པར་འཛིན་པ	stong 'dzin - clinging to [mind] as being empty	stong par 'dzin pa
སྟོང་པར་རིག	to perceive emptiness	stong par rig
སྟོང་པོ	thousands	stong po
སྟོང་དཔོན	[military] leader of 1000	stong dpon
སྟོང་སྤུར	exaggeration, bombast	stong spur
སྟོང་སྤྱི་ཕུད	1,000 world systems	stong spyi phud
སྟོང་སྤྱི་ཕུད་བདག་པོ	master of 1, 000 world realms	stong spyi phud bdag po
སྟོང་ཕྱམ་མེ་བ	utterly empty, total emptiness	stong phyam me ba
སྟོང་ཕྱམ་མེར	utterly empty, total emptiness	stong phyam mer
སྟོང་ཕྱལ་ཆད	blank emptiness	stong phyal chad
སྟོང་ཕྱོགས	the empty aspect	stong phyogs
སྟོང་ཕྱོགས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཆ	prajna realizing emptiness of true existence	stong phyogs shes rab kyi cha
སྟོང་ཕྲག	1,000	stong phrag
སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་པ	mahayana scriptures comprising a hundred thousand sloka	stong phrag brgya pa
སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	000 methods	stong phrag brgyad cu
སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་བཞི	the 84	stong phrag brgyad cu bzhi
སྟོང་ཕྲག་གཅིག	1,000	stong phrag gcig
སྟོང་ཕྲག་ཉི་ཤུ་ལྔ་པ	The Prajnaparamita in 25,000 Stanzas	stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa
སྟོང་ཕྲག་མང་པོ	hundreds	stong phrag mang po
སྟོང་ཕྲག་གསུམ	3000	stong phrag gsum
སྟོང་འཕྱང་འཕྱང	blank void	stong 'phyang 'phyang
སྟོང་འཕྲོ་བ	sun	stong 'phro ba
སྟོང་བ	ft. of {stong pa}	stong ba
སྟོང་བའི་འོད་གསལ	empty radiant light	stong ba'i 'od gsal
སྟོང་བར་མ	* system of 1 million worlds	stong bar ma
སྟོང་བར་མའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	system of 1 million worlds	stong bar ma'i 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་བུ་ཆུང	stong dpon chung kha	stong bu chung
སྟོང་བྱེད	expenses, expenditure	stong byed
སྟོང་འབྱམས	[in positive sense] vast range of emptiness; [in negative sense] void (state)	stong 'byams
སྟོང་མ	general commanding one thousand soldiers	stong ma
སྟོང་མི་མཇེད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the 3rd 1,000fold saha world	stong mi mjed kyi 'jig rten
སྟོང་མི་ཉིད	non-emptiness	stong mi nyid
སྟོང་མིན་ཉིད	non-emptiness	stong min nyid
སྟོང་མུན	obscure/ nebulous emptiness	stong mun
སྟོང་རྩ	one thousand	stong rtsa
སྟོང་རྩ་རེ་ཙམ	one thousand	stong rtsa re tsam
སྟོང་ཚིག	tongtsik, the words of emptiness	stong tshig
སྟོང་ཚིག་གི་མཆོད་བསྟོད	[in sadhana the repetition of offering and praise after each thousand mantras]	stong tshig gi mchod bstod
སྟོང་ཚེ་རོག་པོ	silver stone, med mineral	stong tshe rog po
སྟོང་ཚོ	total of 1,000	stong tsho
སྟོང་འཛིན	stong par 'dzin pa - clinging to [mind] as being empty	stong 'dzin
སྟོང་ཞིང་གསལ་བ	empty/ open and bright/ luminous	stong zhing gsal ba
སྟོང་གཞི	the basis for being empty	stong gzhi
སྟོང་གཞི་ཆོས་ཅན	the dharmin the basis of emptiness	stong gzhi chos can
སྟོང་བཞི	four modes of emptiness	stong bzhi
སྟོང་བཞི་སྦྱོར	the 4-fold emptiness	stong bzhi sbyor
སྟོང་བཞིན་སྣང	form is in emptiness, appearance while nothingness continues	stong bzhin snang
སྟོང་ཟད	empty and idle	stong zad
སྟོང་ཟད་འགྲོ	be squandered /wasted	stong zad 'gro
སྟོང་ཟད་གཏོང	1) squander, waste; 2) not accomplish 1's goal	stong zad gtong
སྟོང་ཟད་བྱས་པ	squandered	stong zad byas pa
སྟོང་ཟད་བྱེད	1) squander, waste; 2) not accomplish 1's goal	stong zad byed
སྟོང་ཟད་བྱེད་པ	1) squander, waste; 2) not accomplish 1's goal	stong zad byed pa
སྟོང་ཟད་ལ་ཚེ	waste one's life	stong zad la tshe
སྟོང་ཟད་ལ་ཚེ་སྐྱེལ་བ	squander one's life	stong zad la tshe skyel ba
སྟོང་ཟིལ	corydalis meifolia	stong zil
སྟོང་ཟུར	part of 1,000	stong zur
སྟོང་གཟུགས	empty form	stong gzugs
སྟོང་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	signs of 'empty forms'	stong gzugs kyi rtags
སྟོང་གཟུགས་འཆར་ཚུལ་དྲུག	CHN	stong gzugs 'char tshul drug
སྟོང་གཟུགས་མེད་པ་གསལ་སྣང	empty form, the appearance/ luminous apprehension of what does not exist stong gzugs med pa gsal snang gi cho 'phrul - the miracle of empty form, the appearance/ luminous apprehension of what does ...	stong gzugs med pa gsal snang
སྟོང་གཟུགས་བཞིན	as empty form	stong gzugs bzhin
སྟོང་གཟུངས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ་དྲུག	CHN	stong gzungs kyi bde ba drug
སྟོང་འུད	empty boasting	stong 'ud
སྟོང་འུར	purposeless meaningless noise	stong 'ur
སྟོང་ཡལ	to resolve/ resolving/ vanish into emptiness	stong yal
སྟོང་ཡུལ	sense objects, which are inherently empty	stong yul
སྟོང་ར	count totalling 1,000	stong ra
སྟོང་ར་ཅན	count totalling 1, 000	stong ra can
སྟོང་རྭ	1st month of autumn	stong rwa
སྟོང་རི་ཟིལ	corydalis meifolia	stong ri zil
སྟོང་རི་ཟིལ་པ	{stong ri zil pa} med. herb	stong ri zil pa
སྟོང་རི་ཟིལ་བ	corydalis trachycarpa maxim.	stong ri zil ba
སྟོང་ལག་དུ་བཏང་བ	{stong lag du ma btang} don't end up empty-handed	stong lag du btang ba
སྟོང་ལམ	highway, thoroughfare, public road, main road, high road	stong lam
སྟོང་ལུགས་གཉིས	the two modes of emptiness. 1) {rang stong}. 2) {gzhan stong}	stong lugs gnyis
སྟོང་ལུགས་གཉིས་ཀ	Two Modes of Emptiness: Intrinsic emptiness {rang stong} according to which all things of samsara are empty of their own inherent essence, and extrinsic emptiness {gzhan stong} according to which a...	stong lugs gnyis ka
སྟོང་ལོག	return home w/o success	stong log
སྟོང་ལོག་མཁན	one who returns	stong log mkhan
སྟོང་ལོག་ཆུད་ཟོས་སུ་སོང་བ	let go to waste	stong log chud zos su song ba
སྟོང་ལོག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	go empty-handed; {tshe phyi mar stong log tu mi 'gro ba}	stong log tu 'gro ba
དོནའཏ་གོ་ཨེམཔཏཡ	handed to your next life	don't go empty
སྟོང་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	{tshe la stong log ma byed} don't waste your entire lives /	stong log byed pa
སྟོང་ཤོབ	useless, meaningless, false talk	stong shob
སྟོང་གཤོངས	place in lower takpo or dwags sman	stong gshongs
སྟོང་བཤད	empty talk	stong bshad
སྟོང་སང	completely empty, vacuum, nothingness	stong sang
སྟོང་སང་ངེ	appearing as empty [cloudless sky]	stong sang nge
སྟོང་སང་ངེ་བ	utterly empty	stong sang nge ba
སྟོང་སང་སང	vacant	stong sang sang
སྟོང་སངས	transparent and empty; {stong sangs mkha' ltar} like a transparent, empty sky	stong sangs
སྟོང་སོབ	useless, meaningless, nihilistic emptiness	stong sob
སྟོང་སོབ་ཆེན་པོ	very worthless, bloated, sponge-like	stong sob chen po
སྟོང་སོབ་སོབ	useless, meaningless, nihilistic emptiness	stong sob sob
སྟོང་གསལ	emptiness and luminosity, empty brightness/ clarity [R]	stong gsal
སྟོང་གསལ་ཀ་དག	original purity of emptiness & clarity	stong gsal ka dag
སྟོང་གསལ་དགོངས་པའི་གནད་དྲུག	the six main points of realization of luminosity/ emptiness	stong gsal dgongs pa'i gnad drug
སྟོང་གསལ་ངང་ལ་ཞོག་ཅིག	rest in the state of empty cognizance!	stong gsal ngang la zhog cig
སྟོང་གསལ་དབྱིངས	dimension of emptiness and clarity	stong gsal dbyings
སྟོང་གསལ་འཛིན་མེད	nongrasping empty cognizance; nondual, empty, luminous	stong gsal 'dzin med
སྟོང་གསལ་ཡེ་གདངས་ཆེན་པོ	great primordial manifestation of empty cognizance	stong gsal ye gdangs chen po
སྟོང་གསལ་རང་ཅིག་གི་དྲན་པ	self cognizant mindfulness of empty luminosity	stong gsal rang cig gi dran pa
སྟོང་གསལ་རང་དངས	natural clarity of empty luminosity	stong gsal rang dangs
སྟོང་གསལ་རང་གདངས	natural clarity of empty luminosity	stong gsal rang gdangs
སྟོང་གསལ་རང་རིག་གི་དྲན་པ	selfcognizant mindfulness of emptiness and luminosity	stong gsal rang rig gi dran pa
སྟོང་གསལ་རིག་པའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	empty cognizance endowed w a core of awareness, the essential empty and clear awareness	stong gsal rig pa'i snying po can
སྟོང་གསུམ	3000-fold world-system; billion world-systems; three-thousandfold universe; trichiliocosm, third order thousand world system. the threethousand-fold [universe]; 3000-fold	stong gsum
སྟོང་གསུམ་འཁྲུགས་པའི་འགྲམས་བཅོས	rite to repair loss of equilibrium due to disharmonies in the three thousand world systems of the universe	stong gsum 'khrugs pa'i 'grams bcos
སྟོང་གསུམ་གང་བ	{stong gsum gang ba	stong gsum gang ba
ཐོཨུསནད་ཝོརལད	system	thousand world
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	a three thousandfold world-system	stong gsum gyi 'jig rten
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས	billion fold world system	stong gsum gyi 'jig rten khams
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	Threethousandfold universe. The world system of Mount Sumeru and the four continents multiplied a thousand times a thousand times a thousand, adding up to one billion	stong gsum gyi 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་སྟོང་ཆེན་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྲེཨཏ་ཐོཨུསནད	fold of a thousand-fold world system	stong gsum gyi stong chen gyi 'jig rten great thousand
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་སྟོང་ཆེན་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐྲེཨེ	thousandfold universe	stong gsum gyi stong chen gyi 'jig rten three
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་སྟོང་ཆེན་པོ	1000 middle 1000 worlds *R]	stong gsum gyi stong chen po
གྱི་ཁམས	great thousand third-order	gyi khams
སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་སེམས་ཅན	the SBs of the	stong gsum gyi sems can
ཅུབེད་ཐོཨུསནད	fold world systems	cubed thousand
སྟོང་གསུམ་འཇིག་རྟེན	Billion-fold universe	stong gsum 'jig rten
སྟོང་གསུམ་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས	billion fold worlds	stong gsum 'jig rten khams
སྟོང་གསུམ་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	Billionfold universe	stong gsum 'jig rten gyi khams
སྟོང་གསུམ་ཐགས	the 3000-fold universe	stong gsum thags
སྟོང་གསུམ་ཐམས་ཅད	the universe of a billion worlds	stong gsum thams cad
སྟོང་གསུམ་པ	billion-fold universe	stong gsum pa
སྟོང་གསུམ་པ་ཡི་འཇིག་རྟེན	billion-fold worlds	stong gsum pa yi 'jig rten
སྟོང་གསུམ་པོ	billion-fold universe	stong gsum po
སྟོང་གསུམ་མ་མཇེད	billion-fold universe	stong gsum ma mjed
སྟོང་གསུམ་མ་མཇེད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	1000 stong gnyis bar ma worlds	stong gsum ma mjed kyi 'jig rten
སྟོང་གསུམ་མི་མཇེད	the billion-fold universe	stong gsum mi mjed
སྟོང་གསུམ་ཞིང་འདི	this billionfold universe stong gsum rin gyis gzhal med shing tshan dan sbrul gyi snying po sandal wood tree	stong gsum zhing 'di
སྟོང་བསམ	empty wishes [that cannot come true], fantasy, unrealistic utopian thought	stong bsam
སྟོང་བསམ་གྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས	utopian socialism	stong bsam gyi spyi tshogs ring lugs
སྟོང་བསམ་རིང་ལུགས	utopianism	stong bsam ring lugs
སྟོང་ཧང་ཧང	vacant	stong hang hang
སྟོང་ཧད	abrupt emptiness	stong had
སྟོང་ཧད་དེ་བ	empty blankness/ vacant empty state	stong had de ba
སྟོང་ལྷང་ངེར	clear and vivid emptiness	stong lhang nger
སྟོངས	to become empty / to neglect / emptied; imp. of {stang ba}	stongs
སྟོངས་བསྐལ	kalpa w/o buddhas / where nothing exists	stongs bskal
སྟོངས་གྲོགས	ally/ companion	stongs grogs
སྟོངས་ལྔ	5 forces (dad pa, brtson 'grus, dran pa, ting 'dzin, shes rab), 5 bon forces (byams pa, ye shes, zhi ba, sbyin pa, yangs pa)	stongs lnga
སྟོངས་གདབ	CM: phan grogs bya'am grogs byed ces pa'i don. "[stongs gdab has] the meaning of "that which is aided/helped/assisted or that which aids/assists/helps/serves as an auxil- iary." E.g., @ R75: 470.1 ...	stongs gdab
སྟོངས་འདོགས་པ	assist, help	stongs 'dogs pa
སྟོངས་ནས་མེད	nothing left	stongs nas med
སྟོངས་པ	to accompany; pf. of {stong pa}	stongs pa
སྟོངས་མོ	beneficial help	stongs mo
སྟོངས་ཚད	tshad gzhug etc. su 'byung ba'i rlung and bsdong ba'i tshad [compose prepare measure?]	stongs tshad
སྟོངས་ཚད་གསུམ	CHN	stongs tshad gsum
སྟོངས་གཞི	basis, ground of emptiness [emptied, the empty]	stongs gzhi
སྟོངས་སུ་ཉེ་བར	was almost spent, was almost exhausted	stongs su nye bar
སྟོངས་སུ་ཉེ་བར་གྱུར	SA to have become nearly empty	stongs su nye bar gyur
སྟོད	container, world, residence, high, west, top, up, above, upper, higher, fore, former part, load, SA stad pa, name of Far Western Tibet, the upper or higher part	stod
སྟོད་ཀོར	a cloth that surrounds or covers the upper part of one's body	stod kor
སྟོད་ཀྱི་ཏེང་གཉིས	the two celestial kings called "teng" Drigum Tsenpo and Pude Kungyel GD	stod kyi teng gnyis
སྟོད་ཀྱི་སྟེང་གཉིས	2 celestial kings called teng, drigum tsenpo and pude kungyel	stod kyi steng gnyis
སྟོད་ཀྱི་སྟོང་སྡེ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རེ་གཅིག	CHN stod kyi gdung rgyud rgyal po mgon	stod kyi stong sde drug cu re gcig
སྟོད་སྐོར	upper part	stod skor
སྟོད་ཁུང་སྡེ་ལྔ	5 subdistricts in Toilung 1113	stod khung sde lnga
སྟོད་ཁེབས	sleeved vest	stod khebs
སྟོད་ཁོག	upper body	stod khog
སྟོད་ཁོར	waistcoat	stod khor
སྟོད་གག	jacket, waistcoat without sleeves	stod gag
སྟོད་གངས་དཀར་ཕྱོགས	the white snows of Tö	stod gangs dkar phyogs
སྟོད་གངས་རི	the Snow Mountain of Tö, Kailash	stod gangs ri
སྟོད་གངས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Ti Se snow mt	stod gangs rin po che
སྟོད་གུག	body's upper front du gug pa	stod gug
སྟོད་གུང་ཐང	{stod gung thang	stod gung thang
སྟོད་གོས	upper garment	stod gos
སྟོད་གྱོག	blouse	stod gyog
སྟོད་གྱོགས	kind of divine clothing	stod gyogs
སྟོད་གླུ	song of praise	stod glu
སྟོད་དགུར	hunchback	stod dgur
སྟོད་མགུར་བ	bent over; {dgur dgur}	stod mgur ba
སྟོད་འགག	doublet without sleeves	stod 'gag
སྟོད་རྒྱུད	1) Gyuto rgyud stod tantra college; 2) upper part [of a river]	stod rgyud
སྟོད་རྒྱུད་གྲྭ་ཚང	rwa che thog, Gyütö tantric college	stod rgyud grwa tshang
སྟོད་སྒག	monk's vest	stod sgag
སྟོད་སྒར	a district in Tibet	stod sgar
སྟོད་སྒར་དཔོན	commissioners of Tö	stod sgar dpon
སྟོད་སྒལ	back [of the body]	stod sgal
སྟོད་སྒུར་པོ	stooped over	stod sgur po
སྟོད་མང་རི་སྐོར་གསུམ	The Three Lands of Ngari in Tö:. These are 1) Gugey Ya'i Kor (gu ge gya' yi skor), the Slate Land of Gugey; 2) Puhrang Khang gi Kor (spu rang gangs kyi skor), the Snow Land of Puhrang; 3) Ruthop Ch...	stod mnga ri skor gsum
སྟོད་མངའ་རི	Ngari in western Tibet	stod mnga' ri
སྟོད་མངའ་རིས	name of Far Western Tibet	stod mnga' ris
སྟོད་མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ	3 districts in upper tibet	stod mnga' ris skor gsum
སྟོད་བསྔགས	Syn {stod ra}	stod bsngags
སྟོད་ཅིང་བསྔགས་པ	SA stod bsngags	stod cing bsngags pa
སྟོད་ཆ	"upper part", volume one x	stod cha
སྟོད་ཇ	catechu, resin of acacia catechu	stod ja
སྟོད་ཇ་དཀར་པོ	white stod tea	stod ja dkar po
སྟོད་ཇ་དམར་པོ	red stod tea	stod ja dmar po
སྟོད་ཐུང	blouse, shirt, upper garment [short, w sleeves]	stod thung
སྟོད་ཐུང་ཕུ་མེད	waistcoat, vest, singlet	stod thung phu med
སྟོད་འདུལ	regulations of the 'dul ba introduced by kashmirian pandit sakya shri, upper lineage of vinaya brought to tibet by indian scholar named dharmapala	stod 'dul
སྟོད་ནད	disease of the upper body	stod nad
སྟོད་པ	(tha dad pa bstad pa, bstad pa, stod,, 1) prepare; 2) Gtod pa; 3) person from WT; 4) praise, compliment, commend	stod pa
སྟོད་པར་བྱེད	praise, commend	stod par byed
སྟོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	praise, extol	stod par byed pa
སྟོད་ཕུད	upper part of the body uncovered	stod phud
སྟོད་ཕུར	polar star	stod phur
སྟོད་ཕྱག	[arch] sleeve, inner upper garment	stod phyag
སྟོད་ཕྱོགས	region in upper tibet	stod phyogs
སྟོད་དབྱངས	voice of praise	stod dbyangs
སྟོད་འབྲུག་པའི་ཁྲིད་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	CHN	stod 'brug pa'i khrid chen brgyad
སྟོད་འབྲེལ	name of a commentary	stod 'brel
སྟོད་སྨད	upper and lower [part]	stod smad
སྟོད་སྨད་བར	upper, middle, and lower part of the body	stod smad bar
སྟོད་སྨད་བར་ཀུན	all, everything	stod smad bar kun
སྟོད་སྨད་བར་གསུམ	upper lower and middle part	stod smad bar gsum
སྟོད་ཚ་འཚངས་པ	{stod tsha 'tshangs pa} {tsha nad} attacking the upper body	stod tsha 'tshangs pa
སྟོད་ཚིག	praise	stod tshig
སྟོད་འཚང	disease arising from wind entering in the upper body	stod 'tshang
སྟོད་རྫི	wind blowing from the uplands	stod rdzi
སྟོད་གཞས	{stod gzhas zlos gar} [*]	stod gzhas
སྟོད་ཟངས	copper vessel coming from stod mnga' ris etc	stod zangs
སྟོད་གཟུག	sha khog gi stod gzug	stod gzug
སྟོད་གཟེར	pain in the upper body	stod gzer
སྟོད་འོས	commendable, praiseworthy	stod 'os
སྟོད་ཡིག	testimonial letter, certificate of merit stod g.yogs - covering the upper parts, mantle, upper cover, upper garment	stod yig
སྟོད་ར	applause	stod ra
སྟོད་ར་བཏང་བ	to applaud	stod ra btang ba
སྟོད་རས	cotton cloth	stod ras
སྟོད་རས་ལུང་གསུམ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	stod ras lung gsum
སྟོད་རོང	Longchenpa's birth place	stod rong
སྟོད་ལས	'upper activity'; comp. with {smad las}	stod las
སྟོད་ལས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སྒྲུབ་པ	the higher activity of accomplishing enlightenment. [in Kilaya practice]	stod las byang chub sgrub pa
སྟོད་ལུགས	western transmission of vinaya vows (13th cent., shared by sa skya pa and bka' brgyud pa)	stod lugs
སྟོད་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བླ	SA nye brgyud	stod lugs kyi bla
སྟོད་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	masters of the lower zones	stod lugs kyi bla ma
སྟོད་ལུང	district near Lhasa	stod lung
སྟོད་ལུང་གྲམ་བུའི་ཚལ	the Trambu Forest in Tölung	stod lung gram bu'i tshal
སྟོད་ལུང་ཆུ	{stod lung chu} river	stod lung chu
སྟོད་ལུང་བདེ་ཆེན	{stod lung bde chen rdzong	stod lung bde chen
སྟོད་ལུང་སྣང་རྩེ་བ	formerly in stod lung's snang rtse region spreading zlos gar tshogs pa 1114	stod lung snang rtse ba
སྟོད་ལུང་ཕུ་རྩ་གྱེ་མོ	district near lhasa	stod lung phu rtsa gye mo
སྟོད་ལུང་མ་ནི་ལྡན་སྐྱོག	place in toilung	stod lung ma ni ldan skyog
སྟོད་ལུང་ཚལ་བདེ	sub district of to-lung	stod lung tshal bde
སྟོད་ལུང་མཚུར་ཕུ	Tshurpu in Tolung	stod lung mtshur phu
སྟོད་ལུང་མཚོ་སྨད	part of to-lung	stod lung mtsho smad
སྟོད་ལེ	jacket, upper part of a country, kind of half jacket worn by children and lama dancers	stod le
སྟོད་སོག	tartars of bokhara and khotan	stod sog
སྟོད་གསང	= stod gsang phyal mo = lus kyi phug ron gsang	stod gsang
སྟོད་གསང་ཕྱལ་མོ	= phug ron gsang, part of the body	stod gsang phyal mo
སྟོད་གསེར	gold from upper tibet	stod gser
སྟོད་ཧོར	tartars of bokhara and khotan	stod hor
སྟོད་ཧྲེང	naked upper body	stod hreng
སྟོད་ལྷེ	upper divine garment	stod lhe
སྟོད་ལྷོད་ཤིག་ཤིག	well-being happiness and enjoyment in body and mind	stod lhod shig shig
སྟོན	1) autumn; 2) 1 who can demonstrate/ show; 3) banquet, feast; 4) show, point out, teach (/ * manifest[ing], guide! ston pa!	ston
སྟོན་ཀ	autumn	ston ka
སྟོན་ཀ་སྤྱོད	swallow (that pairs in autumn)	ston ka spyod
སྟོན་ཀའི་མཐའ	end of autumn	ston ka'i mtha'
སྟོན་ཀའི་དུས	autumn	ston ka'i dus
སྟོན་ཀའི་སྤྲིན	autumn clouds	ston ka'i sprin
སྟོན་ཀའི་མེ་ཏོག	1) autumn flower; 2) spang rgyan [dkar po]; 3) something easily destroyed	ston ka'i me tog
སྟོན་ཀའི་ཟླ་བའི་མདངས	the glow of the autumn moon	ston ka'i zla ba'i mdangs
སྟོན་ཁ	autumn	ston kha
སྟོན་ཁ་འབྲས་བུའི་མེ་ཏོག	kind of painting found on silk robes etc	ston kha 'bras bu'i me tog
སྟོན་ཁའི་ན་བུན	{tshe ston kha'i na bun las kyang yun thung} life is less enduring than autumn mist ston kha'i me tog 'joms pa'i rtags su ma	ston kha'i na bun
ཚོར་བཞིན	like flowers fading in the autumn	tshor bzhin
སྟོན་ཁྱོད	you, the teacher	ston khyod
སྟོན་མཁན	wise, sage, drawer	ston mkhan
སྟོན་མཁས	one who is able to teach	ston mkhas
སྟོན་འཁོར	teacher and his pupils, teacher & students	ston 'khor
སྟོན་འཁོར་དགོངས་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable minds of teacher and retinue	ston 'khor dgongs pa dbyer med
སྟོན་འཁོར་ཐ་དད་མེད་པ	inseparability of teacher and retinue	ston 'khor tha dad med pa
སྟོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་མོ	saraddevi, goddess of autumn	ston gyi rgyal mo
སྟོན་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	flowers of autumn, alstonia tree, SA kun tu gas	ston gyi me tog
སྟོན་གྱོད	you, the teacher	ston gyod
སྟོན་རྒྱབ	end of autumn	ston rgyab
སྟོན་རྒྱབ་པ	end of autumn tax/ debt collector	ston rgyab pa
སྟོན་མཆོག	supreme teacher, supreme master	ston mchog
སྟོན་མཆོད	autumn puja	ston mchod
སྟོན་མཇུག	end of autumn	ston mjug
སྟོན་མཇུག་ལོ་ཐོག	late autumn crops	ston mjug lo thog
སྟོན་ལྗང	district in tibet	ston ljang
སྟོན་ཉིན་མཚན་མཉམ	autumn equinox	ston nyin mtshan mnyam
སྟོན་གཉིས	2 autumn or harvesting months	ston gnyis
སྟོན་མཉམ	8th month equinox	ston mnyam
སྟོན་ཏ	to present	ston ta
སྟོན་ཏོག	harvest	ston tog
སྟོན་ཏོག་སྡུད	harvest	ston tog sdud
སྟོན་ཐ	inferior-quality teacher	ston tha
སྟོན་ཐ་མ	3rd month of autumn, 9th month	ston tha ma
སྟོན་ཐའི་སྒང་ཚད	3rd month of autumn, 9th month middle	ston tha'i sgang tshad
སྟོན་ཐའི་དབུགས་ཐོབ	3rd month of autumn, 9th month beginning	ston tha'i dbugs thob
སྟོན་ཐོག	harvest	ston thog
སྟོན་ཐོག་སྔ་མ	earlier of two autumn harvest times	ston thog snga ma
སྟོན་ཐོག་སྡུ་བ	gather in the harvest	ston thog sdu ba
སྟོན་ཐོག་སྡུད	harvest	ston thog sdud
སྟོན་ཐོག་ཕྱི་མ	later of two autumn harvest times	ston thog phyi ma
སྟོན་ཐོག་གཞུན་པོ	capital crop	ston thog gzhun po
སྟོན་ཐོབ	produce of the year, harvest, crop	ston thob
སྟོན་དུས	autumn, autumn	ston dus
སྟོན་དོད	feast gtong byed, feast dod du given money etc.	ston dod
སྟོན་འདེབས	autumn planting	ston 'debs
སྟོན་སྡུད	autumn harvest	ston sdud
སྟོན་སྡུད་འོས་ལངས	Autumn Uprising of 1927-8	ston sdud 'os langs
སྟོན་བསྡུ	harvest	ston bsdu
སྟོན་བསྡུས	harvested	ston bsdus
སྟོན་ནམ	autumn night/ sky	ston nam
སྟོན་ནམ་གྱའ་དག་བཞིན	like the immaculate autumn sky	ston nam gya' dag bzhin
སྟོན་ནས	1) newly planted autumn barley; 2) butter, tea etc kyi 'bru 'bab in autumn sprod len byed rgyu	ston nas
སྟོན་གནམ	autumn sky/ weather	ston gnam
སྟོན་པ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	the teacher Samantabhadra	ston pa kun tu bzang po
སྟོན་པ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་གྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of the presence of the particular teacher	ston pa khyad par can gyi 'byor pa
སྟོན་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	to be a great teacher	ston pa rgya che ba
སྟོན་པ་བཅུ	ten bon teachers (zhi ba 'od, 'khor lo dbang sgyur, pad ma ye mdzes, mu la 'od rgyan, khyab brdal chen po, khyab pa bde mchog 'khor lo, gong khri bdal 'od 'bar, bde ba rgyas 'od, bde khyab bde lung...	ston pa bcu
སྟོན་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve teachers	ston pa bcu gnyis
སྟོན་པ་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས	buddha	ston pa bcom ldan 'das
སྟོན་པ་ཉིད	exhibit ston pa thabs mkhas la thugs rje che ba compassionate teacher skilled in means 1115	ston pa nyid
སྟོན་པ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཅན	the compassionate Buddha	ston pa thugs rje can
སྟོན་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	the teacher, the tathagata	ston pa de bzhin gshegs pa
སྟོན་པ་རྡོར་སེམས	the teacher Vajrasattva	ston pa rdor sems
སྟོན་པ་པོ	1) dharma teacher; 2) 1 who shows the path, and makes 1 familiar	ston pa po
སྟོན་པ་སྤང་བ	shed	ston pa spang ba
སྟོན་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས	the perfect teacher	ston pa phun tshogs
སྟོན་པ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	the perfect teacher; one of {phun sum tshogs pa lnga}	ston pa phun sum tshogs pa
ཏུ་བསང་པོ	the perfect teacher is Samantabhadra, the Dharmakaya ston pa phun sum tshogs pa longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku rdo rje sems dpa' where the perfect teacher Vajrasattva, the perfect sambhogakaya ston pa...	tu bsang po
སྣང་བ་མཐའ་ཡས	the perfect teacher the buddha Amitabha ston pa tshad ma'i skyis bur sgrub pa'i	snang ba mtha' yas
གཏམ་བདེ་ཆེན་ཐེམ་སྐས	words proving that the teacher is a perfectly right being. a jeweled staircase reaching the palace of great bliss by bstan dar lha ram pa ston pa tshad ma'i skyis bur sgrub pa'i	gtam bde chen them skas
སྟོན་པ་ཚུག་སྦེད་པ་ཚུག	ston [teach, show] la mi ston te ston pa 'dra mo, sbed pa 'dra mo, [conceal] ???	ston pa tshug sbed pa tshug
སྟོན་པ་བཞི	{rton pa bzhi}	ston pa bzhi
སྟོན་པ་ཡེ་ཤུ	the teacher Jesus ston pa sha kya thun pa'i sku gzugs kyi	ston pa ye shu
རིགས་ལྔ	[TRS 107-5]	rigs lnga
སྟོན་པ་གཤེགས་ལོ	after the death of buddha	ston pa gshegs lo
སྟོན་པ་གཤེན་རབ	Shenrab	ston pa gshen rab
སྟོན་པ་གཤེན་རབས	Shenrab*	ston pa gshen rabs
སྟོན་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	The Buddha	ston pa sangs rgyas
སྟོན་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་ཟླ་བ	the month in which the teacher performed the miracles	ston pa'i cho 'phrul zla ba
སྟོན་པའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	Buddhism	ston pa'i chos lugs
སྟོན་པའི་སྟོན་པ	teacher of teachers	ston pa'i ston pa
སྟོན་པའི་བསྟན་པ	the Buddha's teachings [R]	ston pa'i bstan pa
སྟོན་པའི་རྣམ་ཐར	the Buddha's life	ston pa'i rnam thar
སྟོན་པའི་རྣམ་པར	in the form of a teacher	ston pa'i rnam par
སྟོན་པའི་བཛད་པའི་དུས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great occasions of the teacher	ston pa'i bdzad pa'i dus chen bzhi
སྟོན་པའི་མཛད་པ	the Buddha's actions	ston pa'i mdzad pa
སྟོན་པའི་ཟས་ལ་མྱང་བ	eating the teacher's food	ston pa'i zas la myang ba
སྟོན་པའི་ལས	action of teaching	ston pa'i las
སྟོན་པའི་གསུང་རབ	the excellent speech of the Buddha	ston pa'i gsung rab
སྟོན་པར་བྱེད	show, teach, demonstrate	ston par byed
སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to disclose	ston par byed pa
སྟོན་པར་མཛད་པ	to teach; ability to show, to teach, demonstrate	ston par mdzad pa
སྟོན་དཔྱིད	autumn and spring ston dpyid nyin mtshan mnam pa'i cha the autumn and spring equinox	ston dpyid
སྟོན་བལ	autumn wool	ston bal
སྟོན་བྱུང	autumn	ston byung
སྟོན་བྱེད	expressing; one who demonstrates	ston byed
སྟོན་འབབ	harvest/ agricultural yield/ income	ston 'bab
སྟོན་འབྲས	harvest	ston 'bras
སྟོན་འབྲས་གཏའ་འཇོག	farmers's self imposed field autumn harvest debt gyi dmigs gter 'jog pa	ston 'bras gta' 'jog
སྟོན་འབྲས་ཚར་མ	harvested crops bstar rtsig [shocks or piles of them in rows?]	ston 'bras tshar ma
སྟོན་འབྲིང	medium-quality teacher	ston 'bring
སྟོན་འབྲིང་སྒང་ཚད	the 2nd month of autumn, middle of the 8th month	ston 'bring sgang tshad
སྟོན་འབྲིང་བ	8th month	ston 'bring ba
སྟོན་འབྲིང་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the 2nd month of autumn, 8th month	ston 'bring dbugs thob
སྟོན་མར	autumn butter	ston mar
སྟོན་མིན	(CH buddhist doctrine of hva shang mah' ya na	ston min
སྟོན་མུན	{ston mun ni cig car 'jug pa}; Ch for {cig car pa}, the instantaneous approach; comp {tsen min}; an impartial Tibetan explanation is found in {bsam gtan mig sgron}	ston mun
སྟོན་མུན་ཅིག་ཆར	instantaneous Tonmun system	ston mun cig char
སྟོན་མོ	feast, banquet [and connected show]	ston mo
སྟོན་མོ་བཀྱེ	made an exhibition of	ston mo bkye
སྟོན་མོ་འགྱེད་པ	distribute the dishes in a feast	ston mo 'gyed pa
སྟོན་མོ་བཏང་བ	held a feast	ston mo btang ba
སྟོན་མོ་འདྲེན་པ	serve a feast	ston mo 'dren pa
སྟོན་རྨོས	autumn plowing	ston rmos
སྟོན་སྨིན་ལོ་ཏོག	autumn crops	ston smin lo tog
སྟོན་ཙན	see {ston tsen}	ston tsan
སྟོན་ཙེན་གཉིས	{ston mun} Ch for {cig car pa}, the instantaneous approach and {tsen min} Ch for {rim gyis pa}, the gradual approach	ston tsen gnyis
སྟོན་རྩེན་རྩོད་པ	the struggle about teaching and gradual enlightenment	ston rtsen rtsod pa
སྟོན་ཚུགས	7th month beginning of autumn tshad pa cung zad diminish	ston tshugs
སྟོན་མཚེར	place nomads gather in autumn	ston mtsher
སྟོན་མཛད་པ	to reveal	ston mdzad pa
སྟོན་ཞོ	autumn curds	ston zho
སྟོན་ཟུག	7th month beginning of autumn tshad pa cung zad diminish	ston zug
སྟོན་ཟླ	august moon	ston zla
སྟོན་ཟླ་ཐ་ཆུང	month from mid-oct	ston zla tha chung
ཏོ་མིད	nov, the month of october	to mid
སྟོན་ཟླ་འབྲིང་པོ	8th month, middle month of autumn	ston zla 'bring po
མིད	oct, 8th month of tibetan year (about november)	mid
སྟོན་ཟླ་ར་བ	month from mid-aug to	ston zla ra ba
སྟོན་ཟླ་གསུམ	the three months of autumn, 7th-9th or 5th 7th	ston zla gsum
སྟོན་ར་བ	1st month of autumn	ston ra ba
སྟོན་རྭ་བ	1st month of autumn	ston rwa ba
སྟོན་རབས	succession of bon teachers (mi 'gyur gtsug phud, khri pa'i rab btson, gto rgyal ye mkhyen, gshen rab mi bo)	ston rabs
སྟོན་རའི་སྒང་ཚད	the 1st month of autumn, the 7th month dkyil sgang gi tshad	ston ra'i sgang tshad
སྟོན་རའི་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the 1st month of autumn, the 7th month 1116	ston ra'i dbugs thob
སྟོན་ལས	autumn field work	ston las
སྟོན་གཤོལ	plow for autumn plowing ston gsum gyi ston chen po'i jig rten gyi	ston gshol
སྟོབ་པ	(tha dad pa bstabs pa, bstab pa, stobs,, 1) offer, bestow; 2) feed, put into the mouth	stob pa
སྟོབ་ཚུལ་ཅན	w the manner of proffering	stob tshul can
སྟོབས་ཀུན་སྟོབས	a number stobs kyi 'khor lo bsgyur ba'i rgyal po bzhi - CHN	stobs kun stobs
སྟོབས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ	[TRS 102-2] expl	stobs kyi 'khor los bsgyur ba
སྟོབས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	{kyim bdag stobs kyi sde zhes bya ba} a householder by the name of Balasena	stobs kyi sde
སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendental strength, the paramita of power	stobs kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	the perfection of power	stobs kyi phar phyin
སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	power god, wind god	stobs kyi lha
སྟོབས་ཀྱིས	on the strength of. . . . ; isc. due to . . . / on the basis of . . .	stobs kyis
སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འཆུན	retained by force	stobs kyis 'chun
སྟོབས་སྐྱེད	vitamin	stobs skyed
སྟོབས་སྐྱེད་སྨན	tonic, vitamin	stobs skyed sman
སྟོབས་སྐྱེས	vigor	stobs skyes
སྟོབས་བསྐྱེད་པ	16 qualities of byang chub sems dpa' (dran pa'i stobs bskyed pa, blo gros, rtogs pa, ngo tsha shes pa, bsod nams, gzugs, sbobs, gzungs, longs spyod, lus, sems, rdzu 'phrul,	stobs bskyed pa
སྟོབས་བསྐྱེད་གསུམ	3 producers of bodily vigor (khrus byas, 'o ma, chu spyod sha)	stobs bskyed gsum
སྟོབས་འཁོར	(balam #	stobs 'khor
སྟོབས་འཁོར་ཆེ་བ	#	stobs 'khor che ba
སྟོབས་འགྱེད་པ	contest in strength	stobs 'gyed pa
སྟོབས་འགྲོ	1) mule; 2) pigeon	stobs 'gro
སྟོབས་རྒྱལ	king of strength	stobs rgyal
སྟོབས་རྒྱས	Mighty	stobs rgyas
སྟོབས་རྒྱས་པ	when my strength developed	stobs rgyas pa
སྟོབས་ངན	weak[ness]	stobs ngan
སྟོབས་ལྔ	1) the five powers; 2) the five powers of the 7 points of mind training	stobs lnga
སྟོབས་ཅན	filled with strength	stobs can
སྟོབས་བཅུ	powers, ten Skt. bala; The ten powers of a tathagata: (1) knowing what is possible and what is not possible, (2) knowing the results of actions, (3) knowing the aspirations of men, (4) knowing the ...	stobs bcu
སྟོབས་བཅུ་པ	1) 1 w 10 powers, a buddha; 2) the 10th power	stobs bcu pa
སྟོབས་བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	stobs bcu gsum
སྟོབས་བཅུའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཅན	to master the Ten Strengths	stobs bcu'i bdag nyid can
སྟོབས་ཆུང	song of king bimbisara	stobs chung
སྟོབས་ཆུང་བ	too weak	stobs chung ba
སྟོབས་ཆེ	great strength/ power, powerful	stobs che
སྟོབས་ཆེ་ཆུང	great and small strength, degree of strength	stobs che chung
སྟོབས་ཆེ་བ	powerful, strong	stobs che ba
སྟོབས་ཆེན	Mahabala [Buddha]. great strength	stobs chen
སྟོབས་ཆེན་ཁྱུང་གདོང	eagle-headed Mahabala, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	stobs chen khyung gdong
སྟོབས་ཆེན་ཉོབ་ཏོ	jumbo stobs chen bdud dpung gzhom pa'i gsang	stobs chen nyob to
སྟོབས་ཆེན་ལྡན་པ	having great strength	stobs chen ldan pa
སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	able-bodied	stobs chen po
སྟོབས་ཆེན་ལ	stobs chen pass	stobs chen la
སྟོབས་ཆེར་གཏོང	strengthen	stobs cher gtong
སྟོབས་མཆོག	wonderful strengths	stobs mchog
སྟོབས་འཇིག	epithet of lord of death, indra	stobs 'jig
སྟོབས་ཉམས	weak, dissipated/ diminished/ deteriorated in strength	stobs nyams
སྟོབས་བརྟན	firm strength	stobs brtan
སྟོབས་དང་མངའ་ཐང	1) power and influence. 2) eminent or powerful stobs dang mdangs khyad par 'phags pa	stobs dang mnga' thang
དབང་པོའི་གཞུག་ལྟར་དུ་གྱུར་ཏོ	becaome very strong and gained the constitution of a heroic noble being	dbang po'i gzhug ltar du gyur to
སྟོབས་དང་ལྡན་པ	with might and power	stobs dang ldan pa
སྟོབས་དང་མི་འཇིགས་པ	the [10] powers and [4] fearlessnesses stobs dang rlung stod dbugs rtseg strength and life force drain away	stobs dang mi 'jigs pa
སྟོབས་དང་ལང་ཚོ་རྒྱས་ཤིང	grew in strength and power	stobs dang lang tsho rgyas shing
སྟོབས་དྲུག	the six powers [in shamatha practice] listening, reflecting, recollection, introspection, joyous effort, familiarity	stobs drug
སྟོབས་ལྡན	powerful klu, chieftain, hale, very powerful, epithet of vishnu	stobs ldan
སྟོབས་ལྡན་དགྲ་བོ	Indra	stobs ldan dgra bo
སྟོབས་ལྡན་བསྙེམས	Kamadeva	stobs ldan bsnyems
སྟོབས་ལྡན་ནག་པོ	Black Powerful One. The chief figure in the mandala of Maledictory Fierce Mantra among the Eight Sadhana Teachings	stobs ldan nag po
སྟོབས་ལྡན་ནག་པོ་ཆེ	Black Mahabala, the chief figure of the {rmod pa drag sngags} teachings among the {bka' brgyad}	stobs ldan nag po che
སྟོབས་ལྡན་གནས	under the ground, powerful place, place where naga king stobs ldan lives	stobs ldan gnas
སྟོབས་ལྡན་དཔའ་བོ	alias {rgod kyi lden 'phru can} ?	stobs ldan dpa' bo
སྟོབས་ལྡན་བུ	son of bali	stobs ldan bu
སྟོབས་ལྡན་བུ་ཏིག་གོས་ཅན	gangs sbal	stobs ldan bu tig gos can
སྟོབས་ལྡན་བོངས་ཆུང	strong though small in body	stobs ldan bongs chung
སྟོབས་ལྡན་མ	powerful woman, amazon	stobs ldan ma
སྟོབས་ནུས	power, strength	stobs nus
སྟོབས་སྣོན་དཔུང་གསར	fresh troops, reinforcements	stobs snon dpung gsar
སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེ	title of dharani for causing rain during a drought	stobs po che
སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེ་ཡོངས་སྒྲོལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Powerful Liberation. A scripture belonging to Mahayoga	stobs po che yongs sgrol gyi rgyud
སྟོབས་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཟོལ་བསྟོད	being fooled into praising as having perfect power	stobs phun tshogs kyi zol bstod
སྟོབས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect/ abundant strength	stobs phun sum tshogs pa
སྟོབས་བྲི	decline of bodily strength	stobs bri
སྟོབས་འབྱོར	power and wealth {rigs dang stobs 'byor mtho na chos kyi skal pa med} a high caste, power and wealth are a misfortune for Dharma practice	stobs 'byor
སྟོབས་འབྱོར་ཅན	[people] w [power and and] wealth	stobs 'byor can
སྟོབས་འབྱོར་ཆེ་བ	powerful and flourishing, mighty and prosperous	stobs 'byor che ba
སྟོབས་འབྱོར་གཉིས་ལྡན	powerful and flourishing, mighty and prosperous	stobs 'byor gnyis ldan
སྟོབས་མང་པོ	iron	stobs mang po
སྟོབས་མིག	balksham, #	stobs mig
སྟོབས་མིག་ཆེན་པོ	number	stobs mig chen po
སྟོབས་མེད	debility, frail, strengthless	stobs med
སྟོབས་མེད་པ	feeble	stobs med pa
སྟོབས་མེད་བཟོ་བ	weaken	stobs med bzo ba
སྟོབས་རྩལ་ཅན	robust	stobs rtsal can
སྟོབས་རྩལ་བ	competitor in bodily strength	stobs rtsal ba
སྟོབས་མཚུངས་ཀྱི་རབ་སྤེལ	= force of additions ornament	stobs mtshungs kyi rab spel
སྟོབས་ཞན	little power	stobs zhan
སྟོབས་ཞན་པོ	weak	stobs zhan po
སྟོབས་ཞུགས	face value / final genealogical	stobs zhugs
སྟོབས་བཞི	four powers; [detailed expl., (of Vajrasattva practice) Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 71, 164]	stobs bzhi
སྟོབས་ཟད	weak, dissipated/ diminished/ deteriorated in strength, exhausted, exhaust 1's strength	stobs zad
སྟོབས་བཟང	1) great strength; 2) chang; 3) wind; 4) Vishnu gi phu bo	stobs bzang
སྟོབས་བཟང་གོས་སྔོན་ཅན	Vishnu	stobs bzang gos sngon can
སྟོབས་བཟང་མ	medicinal plant	stobs bzang ma
སྟོབས་ཡས	nebal, #	stobs yas
སྟོབས་རང་གིས	by virtue of its own inherent capacity	stobs rang gis
སྟོབས་ལས	courage, intrepidity	stobs las
སྟོབས་ཤུགས	force, strength, energy, vitality, power, strength	stobs shugs
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་ཁྱབ་ཁོངས	sphere of influence	stobs shugs khyab khongs
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་གས་སྐྱོང	conserving strength	stobs shugs gas skyong
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་ཅན	energetic	stobs shugs can
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་ཆེ་བ	great force/ strength/ power, superiority	stobs shugs che ba
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	powerful, hefty, stalwart	stobs shugs chen po
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing the mighty power of	stobs shugs dang ldan pa
སྟོབས་ཤུགས་སྤེལ་ཡུལ	sphere of influence	stobs shugs spel yul
སྟོབས་ཤེད	power, strength	stobs shed
སྟོབས་སུ་གྱུར་ནས	strengthened	stobs su gyur nas
སྟོབས་སོགས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་རྣམས	the powers and so forth the dharmas of a buddha	stobs sogs sangs rgyas chos rnams
སྟོབས་གསར་དམག་དཔུང	reinforcements	stobs gsar dmag dpung
སྟོབས་ལྷ	god of strength	stobs lha
སྟོར	1) lost, destroyed, scattered; 2) tie! apply!; 3) lose! destroy! scatter!	stor
སྟོར་རྐྱེན	destruction	stor rkyen
སྟོར་ཁུང	1) drain hole, sewer/ drainage/ ditch; 2) filthy thing/ region	stor khung
སྟོར་ནས་ཐལ	he is undone, it is all over with him	stor nas thal
སྟོར་བ	{bu stor ba las sdug bsngal che ba ci la 'byung} what suffering could be greater then losing a child?	stor ba
སྟོར་བརླག	lose, dissipate, exhaust, destroy	stor brlag
སྟོས་པ	[arch] spyin pa ???	stos pa
བརྟ	grew wide/ stout, extended	brta
བརྟ་ཀ	bird, SA co ga	brta ka
བརྟ་བ	grow wide, expand, be copious, abundant, to arise	brta ba
བརྟག	1) [fut. of rtog]. 2) to examine, study, research, to survey	brtag
བརྟག་གྲོལ	group of tantras including nyi zla kha sbyor	brtag grol
བརྟག་གཉིས	2nd sec of Hevajra Mulatantraraja	brtag gnyis
བརྟག་གཉིས་མན་ངག་རྒྱུད	Instruction Tantra of the Two Segments	brtag gnyis man ngag rgyud
བརྟག་གཉིས་བཤད་རྒྱུད	Exposition Tantra of the Two Segments; Sambhuti	brtag gnyis bshad rgyud
བརྟག་ཏུ་བཅུག	examine, investigate, investigation should be continued	brtag tu bcug
བརྟག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	cannot stand up under examination	brtag tu med pa
བརྟག་ཐབས	appraisal and appreciation, examination and criteria	brtag thabs
བརྟག་ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་བཤད	methodology	brtag thabs kyi rnam bshad
བརྟག་ཐབས་པད་མ་དཀར་པོའི་འཆུན་པོ	a reproduction of an incomplete manuscript of a verse work on the appraisal 1118 and appreciation of omens, precious objects, weapons, and other possessions; by {sngags 'chang h'uM ka ra dza ya}	brtag thabs pad ma dkar po'i 'chun po
བརྟག་ཐབས་སྨྲ་བ	methodology	brtag thabs smra ba
བརྟག་དུ་བཅུག	continue examining	brtag du bcug
བརྟག་བདེ་པ	easy to examine	brtag bde pa
བརྟག་ན་དབེན་པ	nonexistent when examined	brtag na dben pa
བརྟག་སྣང	examinable appearances	brtag snang
བརྟག་པ་བརྒྱད	8 kinds of examination	brtag pa brgyad
བརྟག་པ་གཉིས་པ	condensed version/ 2nd section of Hevajra Tantra	brtag pa gnyis pa
བརྟག་པ་མཐར་བཟུང	CM: brtag bya ma nges pa'i mtha' gnyis las/ mtha' gcig nges par bzung ste thag bcad pa. [mss]	brtag pa mthar bzung
བརྟག་པ་མཐར་བཟུང་གི་དཔེ	purely hypothetical/ imaginary example/ metaphor/ analogy	brtag pa mthar bzung gi dpe
བརྟག་པ་རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	8 kinds of examination	brtag pa rnam pa brgyad
བརྟག་པ་ཕྱི་མ	2nd section of brtag gnyis	brtag pa phyi ma
བརྟག་པ་ཞུས་པ	make an investigation	brtag pa zhus pa
བརྟག་པ་གསུམ	the three tests, thos pa sgra'i rig pa, mthong ba yul gyi rig pa, dpyod pa don gyi rig pa	brtag pa gsum
བརྟག་པར་བྱ་བ	make think, make [one] suppose	brtag par bya ba
བརྟག་པར་མི་ནུས	unexaminable	brtag par mi nus
བརྟག་དཔྱད	the analyze; study, research, examination, examination, investigation; mental examination and investigation; see also {brtag dpyod}	brtag dpyad
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཁང	research institute, graduate school	brtag dpyad khang
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཐིག་ལེན	surveying	brtag dpyad thig len
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཐིག་ལེན་པ	surveyor	brtag dpyad thig len pa
བརྟག་དཔྱད་སྡེ་ཚན	research unit/ department	brtag dpyad sde tshan
བརྟག་དཔྱད་པ	researcher, analyst	brtag dpyad pa
བརྟག་དཔྱད་བྱེད	test and ascertain, investigate and analyze, last, study, research, examine	brtag dpyad byed
བརྟག་དཔྱད་བྱེད་པ	investigate, check, diagnose, examine	brtag dpyad byed pa
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཞིབ་འཇུག	research, examine[ation], investigate[ion], analyze [ysis], weigh, deliberate, inquire, check, investigate [and]/ analyze, study, research]	brtag dpyad zhib 'jug
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཞིབ་ནན	examine and analyze thoroughly	brtag dpyad zhib nan
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ལས་ཁུངས	research institute	brtag dpyad las khungs
བརྟག་དཔྱད་སློབ་གྲྭ	graduate school	brtag dpyad slob grwa
བརྟག་དཔྱད་སློབ་མ	graduate student	brtag dpyad slob ma
བརྟག་དཔྱད་ལྷན་ཚོགས	study/ research seminar/ meeting	brtag dpyad lhan tshogs
བརྟག་དཔྱོད	mental examination and investigation	brtag dpyod
བརྟག་དཔྱོད་སྡེ་ཚན	research unit/ department	brtag dpyod sde tshan
བརྟག་དཔྱོད་པ	researcher, analyst	brtag dpyod pa
བརྟག་དཔྱོད་ཞིབ་འཇུག	research, examine[ation], investigate[ion], analyze [ysis], weigh, deliberate, inquire, check, investigate [and]/ analyze, study, research]	brtag dpyod zhib 'jug
བརྟག་དཔྱོད་ཞིབ་ནན	examine and analyze thoroughly	brtag dpyod zhib nan
བརྟག་བ	investigate, examine	brtag ba
བརྟག་བྱ	that which is to be investigated, whatever one examines	brtag bya
བརྟག་བྱ་མིན་འགོག་པ	cessation that cannot be examined by thought	brtag bya min 'gog pa
བརྟག་བྱ་མིན་པ	not to be investigated, cannot be examined by thought	brtag bya min pa
བརྟག་བྱའི་དངོས་པོ	things to be investigated	brtag bya'i dngos po
བརྟག་བྱེད་ཡོ་བྱད	research instruments/ apparatus	brtag byed yo byad
བརྟག་མི་དགོས་ཏེ	examination is superfluous	brtag mi dgos te
བརྟག་མི་ཐུབ	not withstand scrutiny	brtag mi thub
བརྟག་ཚད་ཐིག་ལེན	surveying	brtag tshad thig len
བརྟག་ཚད་ཐིག་ལེན་པ	surveyor	brtag tshad thig len pa
བརྟག་ཞིབ	inspection	brtag zhib
བརྟག་ཞིབ་ཁང	observatory	brtag zhib khang
བརྟག་ཞིབ་མཁས་པ	expert at --	brtag zhib mkhas pa
བརྟག་ཞིབ་ཐིག་ལེན	surveying	brtag zhib thig len
བརྟག་ཞིབ་ཐིག་ལེན་པ	surveyor	brtag zhib thig len pa
བརྟག་ཞིབ་པ	scout	brtag zhib pa
བརྟག་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	explore, observe, survey	brtag zhib byed pa
བརྟག་གཞི	basis of examination/ analysis	brtag gzhi
བརྟག་གཞིག	study, research, examine, investigate, weigh, deliberate, analyze, inquire, check, investigate and analyze examination, investigation, analysis	brtag gzhig
བརྟག་གཞིག་རྟོག་དཔྱོད	investigate by burning, cutting up, and symbols	brtag gzhig rtog dpyod
བརྟག་ཡས	a number	brtag yas
བརྟག་ཤོ	divination dice	brtag sho
བརྟགས	1) investigated, inquired, examined; 2) deliberation; 3) imagination [p, = {rtog}	brtags
བརྟགས་གྲོལ	liberation by examining [the nature of the intermediate state at the time of death]	brtags grol
བརྟགས་འགོག	analytical cessation	brtags 'gog
བརྟགས་བརྟགས	always pointing	brtags brtags
བརྟགས་ན	if one examines this well	brtags na
བརྟགས་ན་དབེན་པ	nonexistent when examined	brtags na dben pa
བརྟགས་པ	examination and criteria, {gtsug bzang ngan gyi brtags pa}; appraisal and appreciation	brtags pa
བརྟགས་པ་དགུ	nine considerations	brtags pa dgu
བརྟགས་པ་གཅིག་པོ	examining could be just one question	brtags pa gcig po
བརྟགས་པ་གཉིས་པ	Condensed version of Hevajra Tantra	brtags pa gnyis pa
བརྟགས་པའི་རིམ་པ	stage of deliberation [sm {bskyed rim]	brtags pa'i rim pa
བརྟགས་པའི་ལུས	conventional body	brtags pa'i lus
བརྟགས་པར་བྱ་བ	to examine	brtags par bya ba
བརྟགས་པས་བཟོད	after long scrutiny	brtags pas bzod
བརྟགས་མིན	cannot be examined [by thought]	brtags min
བརྟགས་མིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation [ the cessation [of the future arising of any object] independent of individual scrutiny ]	brtags min gyi 'gog pa
བརྟགས་མིན་འགོག	see {brtags min gyi 'gog pa}	brtags min 'gog
བརྟགས་ཤིང་བརྟགས་པ	closely/ repeatedly examine	brtags shing brtags pa
བརྟགས་ཤིང་དཔྱད	examine and investigate	brtags shing dpyad
བརྟགས་ཤིང་རྩད་བཅད	examine and explore	brtags shing rtsad bcad
བརྟད	kind of formal curse	brtad
བརྟད་སྐྱེན	speed, quickness	brtad skyen
བརྟད་སྐྱེན་པ	[arch] effort, exertion, speed, quickness	brtad skyen pa
བརྟད་འཇུག་པ	perform kind of formal curse where effigy is buried	brtad 'jug pa
བརྟད་པ	(A; 1) suddenly; 2) new, recent; 3) haste, speed	brtad pa
བརྟན	1) adj. comp. of {brtan po}. 2) p. of {rton} 3) solid, firm, constant, stable, steady, stead fast, firm position, everlasting, self-confidence, to stabilize	brtan
བརྟན་སྐར	fixed star [vs planets]	brtan skar
བརྟན་ཁེལ་བ	to be sure, certain	brtan khel ba
བརྟན་མཁས་ཀྱི་ཡིན་ཏན	steadfast in observing the rules, and learned	brtan mkhas kyi yin tan
བརྟན་མཁས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	steadfast in discipline and learned	brtan mkhas kyi yon tan
བརྟན་གྱི་སྐྱིད	abiding happiness	brtan gyi skyid
བརྟན་གྱོ	inanimate and animate [brtan pa = snod = the vessel = the external world, the support; g.yo ba = bcud= the essence= the inhabitants, sentient beings, all of existence]	brtan gyo
བརྟན་གྱོའི་སྒྲ་ཀུན	all words for the animate and inanimate	brtan gyo'i sgra kun
བརྟན་འགྲོ	proceed step by step, steady advance	brtan 'gro
བརྟན་འགྲོའི་ཡུལ་རྐྱེན	instruction through the agency of indefinite	brtan 'gro'i yul rkyen
བརྟན་ལྔན	drdha buddha	brtan lngan
བརྟན་ཅིང་འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པ	unchanging, invariable, firm and steadfast	brtan cing 'gyur ba med pa
བརྟན་བཅོས་རིག	intelligent	brtan bcos rig
བརྟན་འཇགས	permanent, stable	brtan 'jags
བརྟན་བརྟན	1) thoroughly, w persistence, trying hard [nan tan]; 2) changeless and certain/ fixed stably ongoing [explanation, work, intent]; 3) so solid	brtan brtan
བརྟན་བརྟན་ཏིག་ཏིག	1) deep, motionless, and stable; 2) w/o gaps and distractions [thinking, discussion]	brtan brtan tig tig
བརྟན་བརྟན་བྱས་པ	confused information, perverted skill	brtan brtan byas pa
བརྟན་ཐུབ	attain stability	brtan thub
བརྟན་ཐོབ	mastered, establish confidence, obtain confidence, stabilized	brtan thob
བརྟན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	watch, keep, preserve carefully	brtan du 'jug pa
བརྟན་དུ་མི་ཤིག་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ	forever indestructible bindu	brtan du mi shig pa'i thig le
བརྟན་ལྡན	steadfast, quiet, steady	brtan ldan
བརྟན་གནས	unchanging, invariable, firm and steadfast	brtan gnas
བརྟན་པ	steadfastness	brtan pa
བརྟན་པ་ཀུན་གཞི	ongoing all-ground; [Note: Is not in any Abhidharma, this term is used to explain why {'du shes med pa} (induced unconsciousness) and {'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug} (attainment of the suspension of attitu...	brtan pa kun gzhi
བརྟན་པ་ཀུན་གཤི	ongoing alaya	brtan pa kun gshi
བརྟན་པ་ཐོབ	attain stability	brtan pa thob
བརྟན་པ་ཐོབ་པ	acquire firmness and durability, attainment of stability, stability	brtan pa thob pa
བརྟན་པ་དང་གྱོ་བ	the animate and the inanimate [worlds] brtan pa dang g.yo ba - the animate and the inanimate worlds	brtan pa dang gyo ba
བརྟན་པ་དྲེགས	peacock	brtan pa dregs
བརྟན་པ་སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the inanimate is the world, the vessel	brtan pa snod kyi 'jig rten
བརྟན་པ་འཕྲོག	be robbed of selfconfidence	brtan pa 'phrog
བརྟན་པ་བོག་འབྱིན	perfecting what has been stabilized	brtan pa bog 'byin
བརྟན་པ་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་རྫས་ཡོད	stable unchanging substance / substantial existence	brtan pa mi 'gyur ba'i rdzas yod
བརྟན་པ་མེད་པ	groundless	brtan pa med pa
བརྟན་པ་བཟུང	epithet of lha min	brtan pa bzung
བརྟན་པང་བྱས	stabilize	brtan pang byas
བརྟན་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	the realm of stability, Manjushri	brtan pa'i 'khor lo
བརྟན་པའི་ཆོས	religion, buddhism	brtan pa'i chos
བརྟན་པའི་ཉམས	experience of stability, enduring	brtan pa'i nyams
བརྟན་པའི་ཚད་བཞི	four measures of steadiness; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 178]	brtan pa'i tshad bzhi
བརྟན་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	firm discipline	brtan pa'i tshul khrims
བརྟན་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	stable classification, classification of the inanimate	brtan pa'i rab tu dbye ba
བརྟན་པའི་སེམས་བརྟན	the supported, mind	brtan pa'i sems brtan
བརྟན་པར་གྱུར་པ	has been stabilized	brtan par gyur pa
བརྟན་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become firm	brtan par 'gyur ba
བརྟན་པར་འདྲ	seems to be stable	brtan par 'dra
བརྟན་པར་གནས་པ	last, hold out, abide, continue	brtan par gnas pa
བརྟན་པར་བྱ	become firmly established	brtan par bya
བརྟན་པར་བྱས	stabilize	brtan par byas
བརྟན་པར་བྱས་པ	firmly rooted or established	brtan par byas pa
བརྟན་པར་བྱེད	causes to be established, the establisher, to stabilize	brtan par byed
བརྟན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to stabilize	brtan par byed pa
བརྟན་པར་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་རྫས་ཡོད	substantially existent in the sense of being statically unchanging	brtan par mi 'gyur ba'i rdzas yod
བརྟན་པར་མཛད་པ	stabilized	brtan par mdzad pa
བརྟན་པར་བཞུགས	remain forever	brtan par bzhugs
བརྟན་པོ	w/o change or going back, solid, firm. stable	brtan po
བརྟན་པོ་མེད་པ	instable, shaky	brtan po med pa
བརྟན་པོ་བཟོ་བ	ensure, fasten, fortification, steady, strengthen	brtan po bzo ba
བརྟན་པོར	fixedly	brtan por
བརྟན་པོར་གནས	be firm/ steady/ stable exist firmly/ solidly/ steadily	brtan por gnas
བརྟན་པོར་གནས་པའི་གཞུང	stable government	brtan por gnas pa'i gzhung
བརྟན་པོར་གནས་པའི་གཞུང་སྲིད	stable government	brtan por gnas pa'i gzhung srid
བརྟན་པོར་ཚུགས	establish firmly	brtan por tshugs
བརྟན་པོར་བཟུང	hold/ firmly/ steadily	brtan por bzung
བརྟན་པོར་ལངས	maintain a firm stand, stand firmly	brtan por langs
བརྟན་བྱེད	stabilize	brtan byed
བརྟན་བྱེད་མ	1) a guardian goddess; 2) firm, steady, stable	brtan byed ma
བརྟན་མ	Tenma goddesses [earth goddess syn: bdud la skyengs ster, bden dpang, phag gi shing rta can, ; female protective deities of tibet]	brtan ma
བརྟན་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve tenma goddesses/ sisters	brtan ma bcu gnyis
སེམི	wisdom protectors	semi
བརྟན་མའི་ཁྲམ་མདོས	mdos for redemption from the crosses of the armies of the brtan ma	brtan ma'i khram mdos
བརྟན་མི་བྱེད	not stabilize	brtan mi byed
བརྟན་འཛིན	holding firmly, adhering	brtan 'dzin
བརྟན་འཛིན་བྱེད	hold firmly, adhere to	brtan 'dzin byed
བརྟན་ཞལ	complimentary address, title of respect	brtan zhal
བརྟན་བཞུགས	firmly established	brtan bzhugs
བརྟན་བཞུགས་ཆོ་ག	ceremony for longevity; ceremony for the long life [of a great master]	brtan bzhugs cho ga
བརྟན་བཟུང	holding firmly, adhering	brtan bzung
བརྟན་བཟུང་བྱེད	hold firmly, adhere to	brtan bzung byed
བརྟན་ཡས	bishishta: # brtan g.yo - animate and inanimate world brtan g.yo - the animate and inanimate, [alt.] all of existence; inanimate and animate brtan g.yo'i sgra kun sngags - all the animate and inani...	brtan yas
བརྟན་བརླིང	stable, secure, reliable	brtan brling
བརྟན་བཤིག	skilled at joking	brtan bshig
བརྟན་སྲུང	defence	brtan srung
བརྟན་ལྷིང	changeless, not going back, solid, stable, calm and firm	brtan lhing
བརྟབ་པ	ft. of {rtab pa}	brtab pa
བརྟབས་བརྟབས་པོ	restless fear and anxiety	brtabs brtabs po
བརྟབས་པ	[p rtab pa] was startled/ frightened	brtabs pa
བརྟས	wanes, grow wide, SA brta ba, to arise	brtas
བརྟས་པ	grown up, anything full blown, be delighted, develop, increases	brtas pa
བརྟས་པའི་མཐུས	when they develop	brtas pa'i mthus
བརྟས་བྱེད་པ	grown wide	brtas byed pa
བརྟིབ	break, SA rtib pa	brtib
བརྟིབས	break, SA rtib pa	brtibs
བརྟུང	make less, SA rtung ba	brtung
བརྟུངས	make less, SA rtung ba	brtungs
བརྟུན	to be diligent	brtun
བརྟུན་ངས	[arch] 1) strong effort; 2) arrogant self- sufficiency, just making something up; 3) harm others; 4) great desire	brtun ngas
བརྟུན་ངེས་འཇུག་པ	be self-confident	brtun nges 'jug pa
བརྟུན་ངེས་པ	rash and self-sufficient	brtun nges pa
བརྟུན་པ	assiduity, assiduous	brtun pa
བརྟུམ་པ	power, prowess	brtum pa
བརྟུལ	/ rtul po - dull, blunt; dull	brtul
བརྟུལ་པ	mild, gentle	brtul pa
བརྟུལ་པོ	weaker	brtul po
བརྟུལ་པོ་བ	mild, gentle	brtul po ba
བརྟུལ་ཕོད	courage, bravery, heroism	brtul phod
བརྟུལ་ཕོད་ཁང	abode of a hero, tiger's den	brtul phod khang
བརྟུལ་ཕོད་ཅན	1) courageous two tiger	brtul phod can
བརྟུལ་ཕོད་ཆེ	great courage	brtul phod che
བརྟུལ་བ	deportment, behavior, to conquer, to temper; pf. of {rtul ba}; ft. of {rtul ba}	brtul ba
བརྟུལ་བ་བརྟན་པ	snying stobs 'gyur ba med pa,...Mes rgyal la sha zhen che ba'i dpa' bo brtul ba brtan pa,...Brtul ba'i ngang tshul can,1 rtsol ba'i rang bzhin can,...2 'Jam pa'i ngang tshul can,...Khengs dregs med...	brtul ba brtan pa
བརྟུལ་བའི་ངང་ཚུལ་ཅན	w a disciplined air	brtul ba'i ngang tshul can
བརྟུལ་མ	not blunted	brtul ma
བརྟུལ་མའི་བུ	heaven	brtul ma'i bu
བརྟུལ་མོ	not blunted	brtul mo
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	way of life	brtul zhugs
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ངར	ferocity of mastery, deportment of yogic virtuoso who fearlessly and provocatively applies realizations when interacting with the world	brtul zhugs kyi ngar
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཉེར་གསུམ	23 commitments relating to discipline [according to anuyoga	brtul zhugs kyi nyer gsum
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	{dur khrod chen po brgyad du brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa mdzad} practised extraordinary activity in the eight great charnelgrounds	brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	practice yogic discipline	brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa byed pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	limbs of yogic disciplines [eg giving up dances and garlands, big or high beds and seats, eating after noon etc.]	brtul zhugs kyi yan lag
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་གྲུབ	practice yogic action	brtul zhugs grub
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་གྲུབ་པ	achievement of spiritual practice	brtul zhugs grub pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཅན	ascetic, one who is penitent, maker of penance, sage	brtul zhugs can
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན	view of regarding discipline and conduct as absolute principles;	brtul zhugs mchog tu 'dzin
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	to hold personal rules of deportment to be absolute principles/ as supreme (principles) in their own right	brtul zhugs mchog tu 'dzin pa'i lta ba
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་མཆོག་འཛིན	to hold personal rules of deportment as supreme (principles) in their own right	brtul zhugs mchog 'dzin
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཉེར་ལྔ	[TRS 113-3] from Kalachakra 1122	brtul zhugs nyer lnga
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཐོབ	{dge slong gi brtul zhugs thob} have been ordained and practice asceticism	brtul zhugs thob
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་དམ་པ	true yogic discipline [stable]	brtul zhugs dam pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་དྲག་པོ	intense yogic discipline, ascetic practice	brtul zhugs drag po
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་དྲག་ཤུལ	resolute and wrathful conduct	brtul zhugs drag shul
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་པ	uninhibited practice	brtul zhugs pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་སྤྱོད	perform penitent exercises	brtul zhugs spyod
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་སྤྱོད་པ	the secret action of	brtul zhugs spyod pa
ཐེ་སེལཕ༹	realization process, practice yogic discipline	the self
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་བྱེད་པ	perform penitent exercises, do penance	brtul zhugs byed pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་དབང	any novice monk or disciple of the hinayana school	brtul zhugs dbang
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་མ	mistress of the house	brtul zhugs ma
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་འཛིན་པ	master of tantric disciplines	brtul zhugs 'dzin pa
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ལམ་སློང	resolute conduct as the way	brtul zhugs lam slong
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ལམ་སློང་གི་སྤྱོད་པ	practice of taking yogic disciplines as the path	brtul zhugs lam slong gi spyod pa
བརྟུལ་ཟུར	obtuse angle	brtul zur
བརྟེན	insured; 1) p. of rten. 2) due to, because of, on account of. 3) brten pa the 'based', 'supported', to lean, rely, depend on, pass, establish, enjoy, satisfy, by means of, based, relying, dependent...	brten
བརྟེན་ཁེལ་བ	be sure, absolutely certain	brten khel ba
བརྟེན་ཁྱེལ་བ	be sure, be certain, absolutely certain	brten khyel ba
བརྟེན་བཅས	material, substantial	brten bcas
བརྟེན་ནས	depending on, relying on, through [recourse to], because of	brten nas
བརྟེན་ནས་སྐྱེ་བ	dependently produced	brten nas skye ba
བརྟེན་ནས་སྐྱེས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent arising in dependence on something existing. All such dependent arising are substantial {dngos po} unlike {brten nas btags pa'i rten 'brel} which may be nonsubstantial	brten nas skyes pa'i rten 'brel
བརྟེན་ནས་རྒྱུ	circulate on the basis of	brten nas rgyu
བརྟེན་ནས་དངོས་རབ་སྐྱེ་བ	the dependent strong development of things	brten nas dngos rab skye ba
བརྟེན་ནས་བཏགས་པ	dependently imputed, imputed through connection	brten nas btags pa
བརྟེན་ནས་བཏགས་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	relativistic arguments used by prasangikas	brten nas btags pa'i gtan tshigs
བརྟེན་ནས་བཏགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྱུང	dependent arising of being dependently imputed	brten nas btags pa'i rten 'byung
བརྟེན་ནས་བཏགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent arising that is imputed through connection. For example, in accordance with existence, one imputes the name of nonexistence or in dependence on something large, there is something small	brten nas btags pa'i rten 'brel
མཡ་ཨིནཅླུདེ་ནོན	things]	may include non
བརྟེན་ནས་བརྟགས་པ	dependent labeling	brten nas brtags pa
བརྟེན་ནས་གདགས་པ	dependent designation, relativity	brten nas gdags pa
བརྟེན་ནས་བྱུང་བ	dependent origination	brten nas byung ba
བརྟེན་པ་བཅུད་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཅན	the supported, the contents, sentient beings	brten pa bcud kyi sems can
བརྟེན་པ་ཉིད་དུ་མི་སྲིད་པ	impossibility of the supported	brten pa nyid du mi srid pa
བརྟེན་པ་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the supported is the six dhatus of consciousness	brten pa rnam shes kyi khams drug
བརྟེན་པ་མི་གནས་པ	non-existence of the supported	brten pa mi gnas pa
བརྟེན་པ་གཞིའི་ས	basis of reliance/support [in Nyingma mantra tradition, in the case of the rnal 'byor dang po attained sa gnyis pa [bhumi?], manifestations of realization in this case brten pa since they are the g...	brten pa gzhi'i sa
པྲེཔརཏིཨོན་ཨནད་སོ་ཕོ༹རཐ་ཨིཏ་ཨིས་སོ	called.]	preparation and so forth it is so
བརྟེན་པ་རི་མཚོ་གླིང་གསུམ	the supported mountains, seas, and continents [in Buddhist cosmology {ri rab}, {gser gyi ri bdun}, {rol pa'i mtsho bdun}, {gling bcu gnyis}, {ba tshva'i rgya mtsho chen po}, {mtha'i lcags ri}	brten pa ri mtsho gling gsum
བརྟེན་པའི་ཁམས	supported element/ realm/ dhatu [consciousness rnam par shes pa'i khams]	brten pa'i khams
བརྟེན་པའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six elements of the supported	brten pa'i khams drug
བརྟེན་པའི་ཁྱད་པར་འགྲོ་བའི་ས	superior progress through reliance	brten pa'i khyad par 'gro ba'i sa
བརྟེན་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the essence of the supported	brten pa'i ngo bo nyid
བརྟེན་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on the supported	brten pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
བརྟེན་པའི་སྣང་ཤས	conventional viewpoints	brten pa'i snang shas
བརྟེན་པའི་ལྷ	supported deity	brten pa'i lha
བརྟེན་པར་བྱས	rely upon	brten par byas
བརྟེན་པར་བྱེད	sustain	brten par byed
བརྟེན་པས	1) relying/ depending on, because of, based on, due to, as for	brten pas
བརྟེན་པས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ས	the stage of superior progress through reliance	brten pas khyad par du 'gro ba'i sa
བརྟེན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	enjoy the mudra	brten phyag rgya
བརྟེན་བྱེད	satisfying [body and mind] [holding together and supporting]	brten byed
བརྟེན་ཡུལ	roots, foundation, home, place 1 can depend on	brten yul
བརྟེན་ཡུལ་མེད་པ	has nothing to rest on	brten yul med pa
བརྟེན་རི་མཚོ་གླིང་གསུམ	the supported mountains, seas, and continents {ri rab}, {gser gyi ri bdun}, {rol pa'i mtsho bdun}, {gling bcu gnyis}, {ba tshva'i rgya mtsho chen po}, {mtha'i lcags ri}	brten ri mtsho gling gsum
བརྟེན་ལ་ཚོགས	to present feast-offerings	brten la tshogs
བརྟེན་ས	roots, foundation, home, place 1 can depend on	brten sa
བརྟེན་ས་མེད་པ	rootless, homeless	brten sa med pa
བརྟོགས	insight	brtogs
བརྟོགས་པ	dexterous, SA brtags	brtogs pa
བརྟོགས་མིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	the cessation of the future arising of any object independent of individual scrutiny ???	brtogs min gyi 'gog pa
བརྟོད	(not in DAS)	brtod
བརྟོད་པ	ft. of {rtod pa}; pf. of {rtod pa}	brtod pa
བརྟོད་ཕུར	tethering stake; anchor; fig. fixed point of reference	brtod phur
བརྟོད་ཕུར་འདོན་པ	a pole for tethering	brtod phur 'don pa
བརྟོལ	break-through [ the dark dungeon of.]	brtol
བརྟོལ་བ	ft. of {rtol ba}; leaky; pf. of {rtol ba}	brtol ba
མརྟོགས	realization	mrtogs
བལྟ	[will] see, look, read	blta
བལྟ་དཀའ	difficult vision	blta dka'
བལྟ་སྐོར	tour, inspection, sightseeing visit	blta skor
བལྟ་སྐོར་བྱེད	tour, inspect, sightsee	blta skor byed
བལྟ་སྐྱོང	take care of, look after	blta skyong
བལྟ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	take care of, look after	blta skyong byed
བལྟ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་མཁན	guardian	blta skyong byed mkhan
བལྟ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	guard	blta skyong byed pa
བལྟ་བསྐོར་བྱེད་པ	inspect	blta bskor byed pa
བལྟ་བསྐྱོད	go to see/ watch	blta bskyod
བལྟ་དགོ་པ	a treasure behold??	blta dgo pa
བལྟ་རྒྱུ་དང་ལྟ་མི	the seer and the seen	blta rgyu dang lta mi
བལྟ་ཉུལ་བྱེད་པ	to employ investigations	blta nyul byed pa
བལྟ་རྟོགས	supervision, surveillance, overseeing	blta rtogs
བལྟ་སྟངས་ཕར་བསྒྱུར	fix/ direct 1's gaze	blta stangs phar bsgyur
བལྟ་སྟངས་ཧྲིག་གེ་བཞུགས་པ	she would	blta stangs hrig ge bzhugs pa
སྟཡ་སྟརིང་ཝིཐ་ཝིདེ	open eyes	stay staring with wide
བལྟ་བདེ	easy to read	blta bde
བལྟ་ན་དགོན་པ	a treasure to behold	blta na dgon pa
བལྟ་ན་སྡུག	lta na sdug, Pleasant Sight, sweet to see, look at, behold, one of the seven mountains on top of Mt. Sumeru	blta na sdug
བལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ	beautiful to behold, elegant, a treasure to behold	blta na sdug pa
བལྟ་སྣང་མཛེས་པོ	dinky	blta snang mdzes po
བལྟ་ཕྱོགས	aspect, viewpoint	blta phyogs
བལྟ་བ	be concerned with	blta ba
བལྟ་བ་དང་ཉན་པ	to read and hear [teachings]	blta ba dang nyan pa
བལྟ་བའི་ཆེད	for seeing	blta ba'i ched
བལྟ་བའི་མཐའ	limit of sight, death	blta ba'i mtha'
བལྟ་བར	to regard as	blta bar
བལྟ་བས་ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བ	irritated just by looking	blta bas khong khro ba
བལྟ་བས་ངོམས་པར་མེད་པ	never-tiring sight	blta bas ngoms par med pa
བལྟ་བས་ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པ	insatiable observation	blta bas chog mi shes pa
བལྟ་བས་མི་ངོམས་པ	that one can never gaze upon enough	blta bas mi ngoms pa
བལྟ་བྱ	visible	blta bya
བལྟ་བྱ་ལྟ་བྱེད	observer and observed, watcher and watched, the seer and the seen; watcher and watched	blta bya lta byed
བལྟ་བྱ་ལྟ་བྱེད་མེད་པ	w/o observed and observer	blta bya lta byed med pa
བལྟ་མ་མྱོང	never look	blta ma myong
བལྟ་མི་ཟོད་པ	horrible	blta mi zod pa
བལྟ་མི་བཟོད་པ	could not even bear to look upon	blta mi bzod pa
བལྟ་མོ་ཁང	pavilion	blta mo khang
བལྟ་རྩ	a nadi examined in disease [on the wrist upper side bone protrusion = 'phar rtsa.]	blta rtsa
བལྟ་ཚུལ	viewpoint, standpoint	blta tshul
བལྟ་ཚོད	test	blta tshod
བལྟ་ཚོད་ཀྱི	tentative	blta tshod kyi
བལྟ་ཞིབ	supervision, direction, investigation, examination, survey, inspection 1124	blta zhib
བལྟ་ཟིང་ལྟ་བར་བྱེད་པ	the see and the seer	blta zing lta bar byed pa
བལྟ་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཤལ	looking-glass	blta yul gyi shal
བལྟ་རུ་འོང་པ	came on a friendly visit	blta ru 'ong pa
བལྟ་ཤེད་ཆེ་པོ	however long 1 looks not growing weaker ? ji tsam bltas kyang zha du mi 'gro ba, Tshong khang khag la tshong zog blta shed che po tsar du dngar nas yod ???	blta shed che po
བལྟ་ཤེལ	mirror	blta shel
བལྟབ	fold, SA ltab pa	bltab
བལྟབ་པ	fold [in two], gather, put together [p f]	bltab pa
བལྟབས	fold, SA ltab pa	bltabs
བལྟབས་གུག	bltabs tshigs kyi ri mo = lteb? folded back and forth..??	bltabs gug
བལྟབས་གཉེར	wrinkles in poor lteb tshigs folding	bltabs gnyer
བལྟབས་དྲིལ	folds in cloth etc	bltabs dril
བལྟབས་པ	fold [in two], gather, put together [p f]	bltabs pa
བལྟབས་མ	folds	bltabs ma
བལྟབས་མཛེས	pleats? shirt, gos thung etc. for the sake of aesthetics bltabs [folded? te bzos pa'i ri mo 'bur dod dam, 'bur ris, [in pictures, a pattern?]??	bltabs mdzes
བལྟབས་རིལ	1) pleats two on a wood-block having smeared it w ink place paper	bltabs ril
བལྟམ	be full, be born, SA ltams pa	bltam
བལྟམ་པ	to take birth/ be born (honorific; one of twelve deeds)	bltam pa
བལྟམས	1) [be] born, take birth [h]; 2) filled	bltams
བལྟམས་པ	to take birth/ be born (honorific; one of twelve deeds)	bltams pa
བལྟམས་པའི་ཡུམ་བརྒྱད	the 8 mothers [of birth]	bltams pa'i yum brgyad
བལྟར	(not in DAS), to consider	bltar
བལྟར་བཅུག	one continues to look, allow one to look	bltar bcug
བལྟར་མེད	unperceptively, imperceptible, invisible, unobservable	bltar med
བལྟར་མེད་པ	invisible	bltar med pa
བལྟས	look, SA lta ba, has seen, past of blta, past of lta, deeming, look directly into	bltas
བལྟས་ཁུལ་བྱས་པ	to look pretentiously	bltas khul byas pa
བལྟས་བཅས	relative	bltas bcas
བལྟས་ན	in view of, from the point of view of	bltas na
བལྟས་ནས	concerning, regarding, as to	bltas nas
བལྟས་པ	1) looked at, viewed; 2) (relative viewpoint; 3) perception (/ [p {lta ba}	bltas pa
བལྟས་མེད	absolute	bltas med
བལྟས་ཙ	when you look	bltas tsa
བལྟས་ཟིན་པ	seen	bltas zin pa
བལྟས་ཤིང་བལྟས་པ	look at for a long time/ again and again	bltas shing bltas pa
བལྟོས	la bltos nas - in accordance with	bltos
བལྟོས་ཁུལ་བྱས་པ	look pretentiously	bltos khul byas pa
བལྟོས་གྲུབ	[mutually] dependent existence, relative establishment	bltos grub
བལྟོས་བཅས	conditional, relative, dependent	bltos bcas
བལྟོས་བཅས་གྱི་བདེན་དོན	relative truth	bltos bcas gyi bden don
བལྟོས་བཅས་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	relativism	bltos bcas gyi rang bzhin
བལྟོས་བཅས་པ	NyDh: gces par 'dzin dang 'dra po. to hold dear; to rely on/upon E.g. R75: 226.5 [mss]	bltos bcas pa
བལྟོས་བཅས་སྨྲ་བ	[Einstein's] theory of relativity	bltos bcas smra ba
བལྟོས་ཆོས	dependent dharma [the son is a bltos chos dharma depending on the father, the bltos sa]	bltos chos
བལྟོས་འཇོག	CM: pha ri la bltos nas tsu ri dang/ bu la bltos nas pha zhes 'jog pa, "in relation to the far side of a mountain the near side is posited and in relation to a son 'father' is posited." [mss]	bltos 'jog
བལྟོས་ནས	depending on	bltos nas
བལྟོས་པ	pf. of {ltos pa}; dependent upon	bltos pa
བལྟོས་པ་མེད་པ	lacking dependence. independent, unrelated	bltos pa med pa
བལྟོས་པ་མེད་པ་ཅན	independent	bltos pa med pa can
བལྟོས་པའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of dependency	bltos pa'i rigs pa
བལྟོས་མེད	absolute, independent [unconditional, self- sufficient]	bltos med
བལྟོས་མེད་གྱི་བདེན་དོན	absolute truth	bltos med gyi bden don
བལྟོས་མེད་རང་བཞིན	absoluteness	bltos med rang bzhin
བལྟོས་གཞི	basis of relation. [mss]	bltos gzhi
བལྟོས་བཞག	MSS: dependently designated, E.g., R75: 301.3. relationally posited, E.g., R75: 304.6. See also {ltos bzhag} and {bltos 'jog} [mss]	bltos bzhag
བལྟོས་ས	1) reference point; 2) thing depended on (/ [the son is a bltos chos dharma depending on the father, the bltos sa]	bltos sa
བསྟང	accompany, SA stongs pa	bstang
བསྟང་བ	SA stongs pa	bstang ba
བསྟངས	accompany, SA stongs pa	bstangs
བསྟངས་པ	pf. of {stang ba}	bstangs pa
བསྟད	surface, direction, load, SA stad pa	bstad
བསྟད་པ	facing; pf. of {stod pa}; ft. of {stod pa}	bstad pa
བསྟད་སོ	meditation object, reference point [dmigs yul]	bstad so
བསྟན་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུས	the vajra body of the teachings	bstan kyi rdo rje'i lus
བསྟན་ཀྱི་ལུས	the body of the teachings	bstan kyi lus
བསྟན་དཀའ་བ	hard to explicate	bstan dka' ba
བསྟན་སྐྱོང	keeping the doctrine; bstan pa skyong pa'i dam can	bstan skyong
བསྟན་མཁན	shower, explainer	bstan mkhan
བསྟན་མཁས	steadfastness and learning	bstan mkhas
བསྟན་གྱི	will teach	bstan gyi
བསྟན་གྲུབ་པ	have transmitted	bstan grub pa
བསྟན་དགྲ	enemy of the teachings [harms them] 1125	bstan dgra
བསྟན་འགྱུར	the collection of Indian commentaries upon the Buddha's Words, translated into Tibetan	bstan 'gyur
བསྟན་འགྲོ	the teachings and all beings	bstan 'gro
བསྟན་འགྲོ་དོན	benefit to the teaching and beings	bstan 'gro don
བསྟན་འགྲོ་ཡོངས་ལ	the Dharma and sentient beings	bstan 'gro yongs la
བསྟན་འགྲོ་ལ་ཕན་པ་བྱུང་བ	to serve the Dharma and all beings	bstan 'gro la phan pa byung ba
བསྟན་འགྲོའི་དོན	benefit the Dharma and all beings	bstan 'gro'i don
བསྟན་རྒྱས	spread of the doctrine	bstan rgyas
བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང	Tengye Ling, in Lhasa	bstan rgyas gling
བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང་ལྷ་ཁང	Tengye Ling temple	bstan rgyas gling lha khang
བསྟན་རྒྱས་བློན་པོ	Minister of Trade and Industry	bstan rgyas blon po
བསྟན་རྒྱས་སྨོན་ལམ	snga 'gyur bstan pa rgyas pa'i smon lam chos rgyal dgyes pa'i zhal lung by 'jam mgon 'ju mi pham rgya mtsho, 1846-1912. prayer (pranidhana) for the continued prosperity of the Nyingmapa sect of Tib...	bstan rgyas smon lam
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	Four Special Attributes of the Treatises. The attribute of motivation {kun slong gi khyad par}, the attribute of expressive words {rjod bya tshig gyi khyad par}, the attribute of expressed meaning ...	bstan bcos kyi khyad chos bzhi
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of the shastras	bstan bcos kyi chos bzhi
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་རྩི་མགོ་ལྔ	[TRS 62-4]	bstan bcos kyi rtsi mgo lnga
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་རྩིས་མགོ་ལྔ	the five headings of the shastras	bstan bcos kyi rtsis mgo lnga
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་རྩིས་མགོ་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five headings of the shastras	bstan bcos kyi rtsis mgo yan lag lnga
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་གཉིས	protecting from the cause the kleshas and the three poisons, having the three trainings	bstan bcos kyi yon tan gnyis
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་གཉིས་ཏེ	protecting from the cause the kleshas and the three poisons, having the three trainings [bslab pa gsum: lhag pa tshul khrims, ting nge 'dzin, shes rab] created/ corrected by, and as the fruition be...	bstan bcos kyi yon tan gnyis te
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀློག་པ	read the shastras	bstan bcos klog pa
བསྟན་བཅོས་དགུ	the 9 shastras	bstan bcos dgu
བསྟན་བཅོས་འགོ་རྩོམ	compose a treatise/ shastra	bstan bcos 'go rtsom
བསྟན་བཅོས་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན	the Abhisamayalankara of Asanga bstan bcos chen po mngon rtogs rgyan gyi lus rnam bzhag gi 'grel ba 'jigs med	bstan bcos mngon rtogs rgyan
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོའི་ཞལ་ལུང	by {thub bstan brtson 'grus phun tshogs}	chos kyi dbang po'i zhal lung
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཉེ་སྦྱོར	closely connected to the shastras. bstan bcos gsar rtsom	bstan bcos nye sbyor
བསྟན་བཅོས་ལྟར་སྣང་དྲུག	the six kinds of spurious shastras [1 don med pa'i bstan bcos dang [meaningless/ useless two don log pa'i bstan bcos, wrong meaning three ngan g.yo'i bstan bcos, deceptive four brtse bral gyi bstan...	bstan bcos ltar snang drug
བསྟན་བཅོས་རྣམ་དག་གསུམ	the three pure shastras?	bstan bcos rnam dag gsum
བསྟན་བཅོས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྐོར	section in Tengyur: a collection of miscellaneous shastra and later translations rendered from Sanskrit into Tibetan	bstan bcos sna tshogs kyi skor
བསྟན་བཅོས་བྱེད་མཁན	author of the work	bstan bcos byed mkhan
བསྟན་བཅོས་རྩོམ་མི	writer of a religious work, author	bstan bcos rtsom mi
བསྟན་བཅོས་བརྩམ་པའི་ཚད་གསུམ	[TRS 63-3]	bstan bcos brtsam pa'i tshad gsum
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཚད་མ	the pramana of the shastras	bstan bcos tshad ma
བསྟན་བཅོས་བཞི	the four treatises	bstan bcos bzhi
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཡང་དག་གསུམ	the three kinds of true shastras	bstan bcos yang dag gsum
བསྟན་བཅོས་ལ་གྲགས་པ	renowned to treatises [ggd]	bstan bcos la grags pa
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཤེས་པ་རྣམས	those who know the shastras	bstan bcos shes pa rnams
བསྟན་བཅོས་ལྷན་ཐབས	additions to shastras whose meaning is incomplete	bstan bcos lhan thabs
བསྟན་ཆ་བྱེད	partake of the teachings	bstan cha byed
བསྟན་ཆུས	establishment of the teachings	bstan chus
བསྟན་ཆོས	1) shastra; 2) the teachings of dharma (30 the dharma that is taught (vs experienced	bstan chos
བསྟན་མཆོག་འགྱུར་མེད་གླིང	Sanctuary of the Changeless Supreme Teaching	bstan mchog 'gyur med gling
བསྟན་གཉིས་གྱུང་དྲུང་གླིང	Tennyi Yungdrung Ling	bstan gnyis gyung drung gling
བསྟན་གཉིས་གླིང་པ	gter ston - see {o rgyan bstan gnyis gling pa}	bstan gnyis gling pa
བསྟན་སྙིང	essence of all teachings, essence of the teaching, essential teachings	bstan snying
བསྟན་དང་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན	the benefit of the teachings and of beings	bstan dang 'gro ba'i don
བསྟན་དང་འགྲོལ་ལ་ཕན་ཕྱིར	to benefit the Dharma and sentient beings	bstan dang 'grol la phan phyir
བསྟན་དར	spread of the doctrine	bstan dar
བསྟན་དར་ལྷ་རམ་པ	Tendar Lharampa [author of {ston pa tshad pa'i skyes bur sgrub pa'i gtam bde chen them skas words proving that the teacher is a perfectly right being a jeweled staircase reaching the palace of grea...	bstan dar lha ram pa
བསྟན་དུ་མེད	cannot be defined/ taught, visually shown/ seen	bstan du med
བསྟན་དུ་མེད་པ	cannot be defined/ shown/ taught	bstan du med pa
བསྟན་དུ་ཡོད	be demonstrable	bstan du yod
བསྟན་དུ་ཡོད་པ	be visible, demonstrable	bstan du yod pa
བསྟན་དུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁམས	demonstrable element	bstan du yod pa'i khams
བསྟན་དུས	time of the teaching	bstan dus
བསྟན་དོན	the meaning stated, the intent stated	bstan don
བསྟན་ལྡན	[buddha]	bstan ldan
བསྟན་གནས	place of the teaching	bstan gnas
བསྟན་པ་སྐྱོང	protect the teaching	bstan pa skyong
བསྟན་པ་སྐྱོང་བ	uphold/ protect the teachings	bstan pa skyong ba
བསྟན་པ་འགལ	contradict the teachings	bstan pa 'gal
བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་པ	spreading the Buddhadharma	bstan pa rgyas pa
བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་ཤིང	spread the teaching	bstan pa rgyas shing
བསྟན་པ་རྒྱུས་བཤིག	by familiarity w the teachings destroy them [example of how by being familiar w something can scatter and destroy his own side]	bstan pa rgyus bshig
བསྟན་པ་སྔ་དར	early spread of the teachings/ doctrine. [starting from in the time of gnya' khri btzan po, dbu brnyes pa ; in the time of srong btzan sgam po, srol gtod &, in the time of khri srong lde'u btzan, '...	bstan pa snga dar
བསྟན་པ་ཇི་ཙམ་གནས་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	as long as the doctrine still exist	bstan pa ji tsam gnas kyi bar du
བསྟན་པ་འཇིག་པ	destruction of the teachings [the buddha dharma of scripture and realization]	bstan pa 'jig pa
བསྟན་པ་རྗོགས	recheck ???	bstan pa rjogs
བསྟན་པ་ཉིན་པར་མཛད་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	a person who brings to light the faith bstan pa dag kyang bsrung bar mdzad the teachings are pure and should be kept	bstan pa nyin par mdzad pa'i skyes bu
བསྟན་པ་དང་མི་འགལ་བ	not contradicting the teachings	bstan pa dang mi 'gal ba
བསྟན་པ་དང་བཤད་པ	teachings and explanations	bstan pa dang bshad pa
བསྟན་པ་དམ་པ	supreme teaching	bstan pa dam pa
བསྟན་པ་དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the wealth of the teachings of holy dharma	bstan pa dam pa'i chos kyi 'byor pa
བསྟན་པ་དར་ཁྱབ	spread the dharma	bstan pa dar khyab
བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས	{ser smad mkhas grub} 1493-1568; ser smad mkhas grub, 1493-1568	bstan pa dar rgyas
བསྟན་པ་སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ	the doctrine of the tripitaka	bstan pa sde snod gsum
བསྟན་པ་ནུབ	subsiding of the teachings	bstan pa nub
བསྟན་པ་ནུབ་པ	had his doctrine died out	bstan pa nub pa
བསྟན་པ་གནས	remaining of the teachings	bstan pa gnas
བསྟན་པ་གནས་དང་དེའི་རྗེས་འཇུག	his teachings still exist and can be followed	bstan pa gnas dang de'i rjes 'jug
བསྟན་པ་གནས་པ	the teachings still exist, the doctrine remains extant	bstan pa gnas pa
བསྟན་པ་གནས་པའི་དུས་གསུམ	[TRS 69-3] expl	bstan pa gnas pa'i dus gsum
བསྟན་པ་ཕྱི་དར	the later spread of the doctrine [there are different beginnings. According to the tradition of bu ston rin chen grub the 1st rabjung'i gong gi lo 53rd the water bird year bla chen dgongs pa rab gs...	bstan pa phyi dar
བསྟན་པ་བུ་གཅིག་གི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Single Son of the Doctrine bstan pa bu gcig gi rgyud gser gyi snying	bstan pa bu gcig gi rgyud
པོ་ཉི་མ་རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་བྱེད	liberation by wearing tantra	po nyi ma rab tu snang byed
བསྟན་པ་བོད་དུ་དར་ཚུལ	propagation of the teachings in	bstan pa bod du dar tshul
བསྟན་པ་མ་དར་བ	the doctrine had not yet spread	bstan pa ma dar ba
བསྟན་པ་ཚེ་རིང	sde dge king 16781738	bstan pa tshe ring
བསྟན་པ་མཛད་པ	teach	bstan pa mdzad pa
བསྟན་པ་འཛིན	holder of the teachings	bstan pa 'dzin
བསྟན་པ་འཛིན་པ	holders of the teachings 1127	bstan pa 'dzin pa
བསྟན་པ་ཞུགས་སུ་ཟིན	have taken up the Dharma	bstan pa zhugs su zin
བསྟན་པ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	the entire doctrine	bstan pa yongs rdzogs
བསྟན་པ་རིན་ཆེན	precious teaching	bstan pa rin chen
བསྟན་པ་རིན་ཆེན་དུ་འབོད་པ	the teachings called precious	bstan pa rin chen du 'bod pa
བསྟན་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་ཡོད་པ	there are people who follow the Dharma	bstan pa la 'jug pa yod pa
བསྟན་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་བྱ་བ	engaged w the teachings	bstan pa la 'jug par bya ba
བསྟན་པ་ལ་གནོད་པ	harm to the teachings	bstan pa la gnod pa
བསྟན་པ་ལ་འཛུད་པ	guide into the teaching	bstan pa la 'dzud pa
བསྟན་པ་ལ་ཞུགས	taking up the teachings; x {nga'i bstan pa la zhugs nas rab tu byung bar 'gyur ro gsungs} “After taking up my teachings, he will become a monk,” he said	bstan pa la zhugs
བསྟན་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	to follow the doctrine {bstan pa la ma zhugs na mi phan pa} unless we follow the doctrine it can be of no benefit to us	bstan pa la zhugs pa
བསྟན་པ་ལས་བརྩམས་པ་ཡིན	undertake the action of teaching	bstan pa las brtsams pa yin
བསྟན་པ་སྲུང་བ	to guard the Doctrine	bstan pa srung ba
བསྟན་པ་སྲུང་བར་མཛོད	protect the teachings	bstan pa srung bar mdzod
བསྟན་པ་གསལ་བྱེད	clarify/ illuminate/ spread the teachings	bstan pa gsal byed
བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་བར་བྱ་བ	the teachings should be guarded, the teachings should be kept bstan pa lha gnas gsum du rgyas par gyur	bstan pa bsrung bar bya ba
བསྟན་པའི	which reveals	bstan pa'i
བསྟན་པའི་རྐང་འདྲེན	disgrace for the Buddhadharma; debase the teaching; x {bstan pa'i rkang 'dren pa yin} this will debase the teaching	bstan pa'i rkang 'dren
བསྟན་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wheel of the Doctrine, a name for Manjushri	bstan pa'i 'khor lo
བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	victory banner of the teachings	bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
བསྟན་པའི་སྒོ་ཞུགས་པ	enter the door of the teachings	bstan pa'i sgo zhugs pa
བསྟན་པའི་སྒོར་ཞུགས་པ	to have entered the gate of the Dharma, to have taken up the Dharma	bstan pa'i sgor zhugs pa
བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན	lamp/ holder of the teachings	bstan pa'i sgron
བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	lamp/ holder of the teachings	bstan pa'i sgron me
བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ་བྱེད་པ	illuminate them with the teachings	bstan pa'i sgron me byed pa
བསྟན་པའི་མངའ་བདག	lord of religion	bstan pa'i mnga' bdag
བསྟན་པའི་ལྕགས་རི	the iron mountains of the teachings, gtan tsigs rig pa	bstan pa'i lcags ri
བསྟན་པའི་ཆོས	the dharma of teachings (vs experienced	bstan pa'i chos
བསྟན་པའི་ཆོས་སྲུང	protective deities	bstan pa'i chos srung
བསྟན་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	follow/ pursue the teachings the continued functioning of the teachings	bstan pa'i rjes su 'jug pa
བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	{bstan pa'i nyi ma [the sun of the teachings [The 7th Panchen (aer te ni) Lama born in the 13th rabjung's water tiger year, in the 14th's wood dragon year the 11th Dalai Lama dgung na phra zhing, i...	bstan pa'i nyi ma
བསྟན་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of the teachings	bstan pa'i snying po
བསྟན་པའི་གཏད་རབས་བདུན	the first 7 successors of the teachings	bstan pa'i gtad rabs bdun
བསྟན་པའི་སྟོང	absence of the teachings	bstan pa'i stong
བསྟན་པའི་དུས་བཞི	the four periods of the doctrine	bstan pa'i dus bzhi
བསྟན་པའི་གདམས་ངག	instructions transmitted by	bstan pa'i gdams ngag
བསྟན་པའི་བདག་པོ	the Lord of Dharma	bstan pa'i bdag po
བསྟན་པའི་བདག་པོར་དབང་བསྐུར	empowered him as the holder of the teachings	bstan pa'i bdag por dbang bskur
བསྟན་པའི་ནང་མཛོད	the inner treasury of the teachings, vinaya	bstan pa'i nang mdzod
བསྟན་པའི་གནས་ཚད	the length of time the teachings will endure	bstan pa'i gnas tshad
བསྟན་པའི་གནས་ཚད་མ་རྫོགས་པ	the period during which the doctrine will remain extant has not yet ended	bstan pa'i gnas tshad ma rdzogs pa
བསྟན་པའི་རྣམ་བཞག	rnying ma'i chos 'byung - Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, Its Fundamentals and History, by H.H. Dudjom Rinpoche	bstan pa'i rnam bzhag
བསྟན་པའི་རྣམ་བཞག་ངེས་པ	true presentation of the teachings	bstan pa'i rnam bzhag nges pa
བསྟན་པའི་སྣང་བ	appearance of the teachings	bstan pa'i snang ba
བསྟན་པའི་བབས	the proper sequence of the teaching; x {gong 'og nor nas bzung na bstan pa'i babs dang 'gal} if you remember it out of order, you will mix up the proper sequence of the teaching	bstan pa'i babs
བསྟན་པའི་བབས་དང་འགལ་བ	in contradiction with the order of the teachings	bstan pa'i babs dang 'gal ba
བསྟན་པའི་བབས་ཚུལ	how the teachings were passed on, transmission of the doctrine	bstan pa'i babs tshul
བསྟན་པའི་བྱུང་ཚུལ	the origin of the doctrine, how the teachings originated	bstan pa'i byung tshul
བསྟན་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	{bstan pa'i dbang phyug	bstan pa'i dbang phyug
བསྟན་པའི་སྦྱིན་བདག	the benefactors of the teaching	bstan pa'i sbyin bdag
བསྟན་པའི་བཙས	the protection of the doctrine	bstan pa'i btsas
བསྟན་པའི་རྩ་བ	root of the teachings	bstan pa'i rtsa ba
བསྟན་པའི་རྩ་ལག	friends of religion	bstan pa'i rtsa lag
བསྟན་པའི་ཞབས་འདྲེན	give the doctrine a bad name 1128	bstan pa'i zhabs 'dren
བསྟན་པའི་གཞི	the basis of the teachings, [the sangha of ordained people]	bstan pa'i gzhi
བསྟན་པའི་གཞུང་ཤིང	the main support of the teachings, prajnaparamita	bstan pa'i gzhung shing
བསྟན་པའི་རབས	generations [of succession of] the teachings	bstan pa'i rabs
བསྟན་པའི་ཤིས	religious plays performed in convents	bstan pa'i shis
བསྟན་པའི་སྲོག	life of the teaching	bstan pa'i srog
བསྟན་པའི་སྲོལ་བཏོད	found/ hand over the tradition of the teachings	bstan pa'i srol btod
བསྟན་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད་དམ་པ	supreme luminary of the teachings	bstan pa'i gsal byed dam pa
བསྟན་པར་གྱིས	reveal it	bstan par gyis
བསྟན་པར་བྱ	will teach, must be taught	bstan par bya
བསྟན་པར་བྱ་བ	make intelligible, elucidate bstan par bya ba gsal byed kyi byed rgyu active causal force which elucidates what is to be shown	bstan par bya ba
བསྟན་པར་མི་ནུས	not able to point out	bstan par mi nus
བསྟན་པར་མི་འོས་པ	not worthy to teach/ of the teachings	bstan par mi 'os pa
བསྟན་བྱའི་མི་གཙོ་བོ	leading character, title role	bstan bya'i mi gtso bo
བསྟན་བྱའི་གཙོ་བོ	main topic	bstan bya'i gtso bo
བསྟན་བློན	Minister of Trade and Industry	bstan blon
བསྟན་བློན་དྲུང་ཆེ	Secretary to the Minister of Trade and Industry	bstan blon drung che
བསྟན་མ	furies, witches, female subterranean spirits, SA brtan ma, local female spirits of tibet (12)	bstan ma
བསྟན་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve tenmas, 12 local female spirits [brtan ma]	bstan ma bcu gnyis
བསྟན་མེད	indemonstratible	bstan med
བསྟན་མེད་ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	indemonstrable obstructive form [sound, smell taste and touchables, and the five faculties of the eye and so forth dang	bstan med thogs bcas kyi gzugs
བསྟན་རྩ་འདུལ་བའི་སྲོལ	the vinaya system, the root of the teaching	bstan rtsa 'dul ba'i srol
བསྟན་རྩིས	holders of the teachings of scripture and realization great holy beings, astrology that teaches when they will arise 'byon pa'i lo grangs.	bstan rtsis
བསྟན་ཚིག	arguments	bstan tshig
བསྟན་མཛད	transmitted, started to teach	bstan mdzad
བསྟན་མཛད་བྱུང	show how it was written	bstan mdzad byung
བསྟན་འཛིན	hold[er of] the teachings, teacher, common name	bstan 'dzin
བསྟན་འཛིན་སྐྱེས་ཆེན་དམ་པ	sublime great beings who uphold the teachings	bstan 'dzin skyes chen dam pa
བསྟན་འཛིན་སྐྱེས་བུ	beings who are holders of the teachings. [protectors and guardians]	bstan 'dzin skyes bu
བསྟན་འཛིན་མཁྱེན་རབ་མཐུ་སྟོབས	19th cent. - Tendzin Khyenrab Thutop, the eighth Chakzam Tulku	bstan 'dzin mkhyen rab mthu stobs
བསྟན་འཛིན་གྱི་སྐྱེས་བུ	beings who are holders of the teachings	bstan 'dzin gyi skyes bu
བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Dalai Lama XIV, b 1935	bstan 'dzin rgya mtsho
བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	dr. g's lama friend	bstan 'dzin rgyal mtshan
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	{khams sprul} iv, 1730-1779	bstan 'dzin chos kyi nyi ma
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	Drigung Chung Tsang VI, b 1868	bstan 'dzin chos kyi blo gros
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	(1700-1767) the tenth rje mkhan po of Bhutan	bstan 'dzin chos rgyal
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་དབང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1819th cent. - Tendzin Chöwang Rinpoche, a teacher at Dakla Gampo retreat center	bstan 'dzin chos dbang rin po che
བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་ལྡན	accomplished holder of the teachings	bstan 'dzin don ldan
བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ	jewel-like holder of the teachings	bstan 'dzin nor bu
བསྟན་འཛིན་རྣམ་དག	Lopon Tenzin Namdak Rinpoche	bstan 'dzin rnam dag
བསྟན་འཛིན་པད་མའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{'bri gung che tshang} iv, b. 1770	bstan 'dzin pad ma'i rgyal mtshan
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཕུན་ཚོགས	{dil dmar dge bshes} 18th cent	bstan 'dzin phun tshogs
བསྟན་འཛིན་དབང་རྒྱལ	Tenzin Wangyal	bstan 'dzin dbang rgyal
བསྟན་འཛིན་བཟང་མོ	Tendzin Sangmo, Noble Holder of the Dharma	bstan 'dzin bzang mo
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	{lcags zam pa} vii	bstan 'dzin ye shes lhun grub
བསྟན་འཛིན་ཡེས་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	18-19th cent. - Tendzin Yeshe Lhündrub, the seventh Chakzam Tulku	bstan 'dzin yes shes lhun grub
བསྟན་འཛིན་རབ་རྒྱས	rgyal sras, 16381696 - Bhutanese ruler and religious leader	bstan 'dzin rab rgyas
བསྟན་འཛིན་རིན་ཆེན	{dkar ru grub dbang} b. 1801 Bönpo master	bstan 'dzin rin chen
བསྟན་འཛིན་གསལ་སྒྲོན	holder of the teachings who is a shining lamp	bstan 'dzin gsal sgron
བསྟན་བཞིག	destroying religion, subvert the doctrine, destroyer of the doctrine, obnoxious person	bstan bzhig
བསྟན་ཡོད	visible, demonstrable, showable	bstan yod
བསྟན་ཡོད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	demonstrable form, visible form [forms w color and shape showable as an object of the eye	bstan yod kyi gzugs
བསྟན་ཡོད་ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	demonstrable obstructing form [the form ayatana, visible and showable and obstructing [vase, pillar]	bstan yod thogs bcas kyi gzugs
བསྟན་ཡོད་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	demonstrable non-obstructing form [eg a reflection in a mirror]	bstan yod thogs med kyi gzugs
བསྟན་རབས	generations of the teachings	bstan rabs
བསྟན་རིམ	stages of teachings	bstan rim
བསྟན་རེམ	stages of teachings	bstan rem
བསྟན་ལ་དད་པའི་ཁྱིམ་བདག	lay devotees	bstan la dad pa'i khyim bdag
བསྟན་ལ་གཞོལ	to enter the teaching	bstan la gzhol
བསྟན་ལས་གུས་པ	devotion/ respect for the teachings 1129	bstan las gus pa
བསྟན་ལས་ལྡང	rise from his seat, rise from his seat	bstan las ldang
བསྟན་ཤུགས	power of the teachings	bstan shugs
བསྟན་ཤེལ	biscuit bstan shel bag leb dang mngar zas bzo	bstan shel
བསྟན་བཤད	brief and extensive explanation {mdor bstan} + {rgyas bshad}	bstan bshad
བསྟན་བཤིག	1) destroyer of the teachings; 2) [make a] joke, humor	bstan bshig
བསྟན་བཤིག་པ	subvert religion, clown, SA bstan bzhig	bstan bshig pa
བསྟན་བཤིག་ཚ་པོ	someone who does nothing but make jokes, funny, humorous	bstan bshig tsha po
བསྟན་བཤིག་སློང	make jokes	bstan bshig slong
བསྟན་བཤིག་སློང་མཁན	comedian, jester, clown	bstan bshig slong mkhan
བསྟན་བཤིགས	comedy	bstan bshigs
བསྟན་བཤིགས་ཁྲབ་མཁན	comedian	bstan bshigs khrab mkhan
བསྟན་བཤིགས་ཅན	comical	bstan bshigs can
བསྟན་བཤིགས་སློང་བ	dally	bstan bshigs slong ba
བསྟན་བཤེད	destroyer/ butcher of religion	bstan bshed
བསྟན་སྲིད	religion and politics, religious and secular	bstan srid
བསྟན་སྲིད་སྤྱི་དོན	religious and secular affairs	bstan srid spyi don
བསྟན་སྲུང	guardians of the Buddhadharma; protective deities; the guardians of the teachings	bstan srung
བསྟན་སྲུང་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རྣམ་ཐར	dam can bstan srung rgya mtsho'i rnam par thar pa cha shas tsam brjod pa sngon	bstan srung rgya mtsho'i rnam thar
མེད་ལེགས་བཤད	an account of the origins and iconography of the protective deities of Tibetan Buddhism; by {sle lung rje drung bzhad pa'i rdo rje} (b. 1697)	med legs bshad
བསྟན་སྲུང་དམ་ཅན	protective deities	bstan srung dam can
བསྟན་བསྲུང	guardian of the teachings	bstan bsrung
བསྟབ་བསྟབས	give a gift	bstab bstabs
བསྟབ་པ	[f stob pa]	bstab pa
བསྟབས་པ	pf. of {stob pa}	bstabs pa
བསྟར	ft. of {stor ba}; p. of star	bstar
བསྟར་རྐང་སྙོམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	make even and regular	bstar rkang snyoms par byed pa
བསྟར་སྒྲིག	line up, place in order/ rows/ a series	bstar sgrig
བསྟར་བསྒྲིགས	lined up, placed in order/ rows/ a series	bstar bsgrigs
བསྟར་ཆགས	to keep as a regular matter. | {lo re bzhin bstar chags kyi 'tshogs pa} every year, without fail, they gathered	bstar chags
བསྟར་ཆགས་སུ	regularly, routinely	bstar chags su
བསྟར་ཆགས་སུ་བྱེད	do regularly/ routinely	bstar chags su byed
བསྟར་ཆོག་པ	comprehend, appreciate	bstar chog pa
བསྟར་པ	in a row	bstar pa
བསྟར་ཕྲེང	line, series	bstar phreng
བསྟར་བ	[p f {star} (stor} 1) string, tie, fasten, put into practice, apply, like; 2) [arch] meditate; 3) have	bstar ba
བསྟས	1)probably active form of {'thas}. 2) misspelling of {brtas pa}	bstas
བསྟི	rest, honor, SA sti ba	bsti
བསྟི་ཁང	private house, sanctum	bsti khang
བསྟི་སྟང	respect [speak honorifically and bow etc.]	bsti stang
བསྟི་སྟང་དུ་བྱས་པ	to be honored, respected, revered	bsti stang du byas pa
བསྟི་བསྟང	respect	bsti bstang
བསྟི་གནས	source, a central place, hub; the dwelling place, [here lives.]	bsti gnas
བསྟི་བ	live, stay, rest, refresh 1self, honor [f {sti wa}	bsti ba
བསྟི་མཚུངས	a fellow religious student	bsti mtshungs
བསྟིང	[f {sting ba} rebuke, scold, abuse	bsting
བསྟིང་བ	ft. of {sting ba}	bsting ba
བསྟིང་ཚིག	rebuke, harsh/ abusive/ deprecating words, satire, irony	bsting tshig
བསྟིང་སླད	rebuke, scold, abuse criticism, blame, disparagement, satire, irony	bsting slad
བསྟིངས	rebuke, SA sting ba	bstings
བསྟིངས་པ	pf. of {sting ba}	bstings pa
བསྟིམ	dissolve in, be absorbed in, enter, penetrate, pervade	bstim
བསྟིམ་པ	ft. of {stim pa} to dissolve/ absorb into	bstim pa
བསྟིམས	{bstims pa}	bstims
བསྟིམས་པ	melted x {hum 'od 'bar ba zhig thugs kar bstims} a shining hum melted into her heart	bstims pa
བསྟིར	supine of sti ba	bstir
བསྟིར་བ	rest	bstir ba
བསྟིར་མེད	one of the infernal regions, restlessness	bstir med
བསྟིས	[p {sti wa} live, stay, rest, refresh 1self, honor	bstis
བསྟིས་པ	p. of {sti}; pf. of {sti ba}	bstis pa
བསྟིས་དབང	accidental, by random chance	bstis dbang
བསྟུ	bring together discordant elements, gather in a heap	bstu
བསྟུ་བ	bring together discordant elements, collect in one heap things unlike one another	bstu ba
བསྟུགས་པ	to make lower, to lower	bstugs pa
བསྟུང	[p stung] diminish, be strictly controlled 1130	bstung
བསྟུང་བ	ft. of {stung ba}	bstung ba
བསྟུངས	SA thung ba	bstungs
བསྟུངས་པ	p. of stung. [defilements] diminished, strictly controlled; pf. of {stung ba}	bstungs pa
བསྟུད	[p f of stud pa] repeat, give repeatedly, do in succession, lengthen	bstud
བསྟུད་ན	if it is repeated	bstud na
བསྟུད་ནས་ན་བ	to be always ill	bstud nas na ba
བསྟུད་པ	ft. of {stud pa}; pf. of {stud pa}; p. of stud	bstud pa
བསྟུད་པར	in succession, 1 after another	bstud par
བསྟུད་མ	successively, one after another, repeatedly	bstud ma
བསྟུད་མར	in succession, 1 after another	bstud mar
བསྟུན	agree, SA stun pa, "together with" clause connective, "according to" clause *connective, in accordance with, must be in accordance with	bstun
བསྟུན་མཁས	good at agreeing [with a companion]	bstun mkhas
བསྟུན་བསྟུན་བྱེད་པ	stun gang thub byed pa ste sprel lad 'khrab pa ???	bstun bstun byed pa
བསྟུན་དྲི	blo bstun pa dang gtam 'dri ba	bstun dri
བསྟུན་ནས	according to, while, SA bstun	bstun nas
བསྟུན་པ	[in] agreement	bstun pa
བསྟུན་པའི	which tallies with, according to	bstun pa'i
བསྟུན་པོ	compliant	bstun po
བསྟུམ	to cover, to wrap	bstum
བསྟུམས	[p {bstum} wrapped	bstums
བསྟུམས་པ	anything cut into pieces	bstums pa
བསྟུལ་ཞུག	disciplined conduct	bstul zhug
བསྟེགས	dais	bstegs
བསྟེན	attend, wait upon, respectfully, serve, huddled together, sticking most closely, study with, practice, enjoy, keep close, SA sten pa, to study with a teacher, to check with a doctor, to wear, to fe...	bsten
བསྟེན་བཀུར	attend and revere	bsten bkur
བསྟེན་ཉེས་ན	when used wrongly	bsten nyes na
བསྟེན་འདོད་གནས	the object or person upon which one wishes to rely	bsten 'dod gnas
བསྟེན་ནས	having taken recourse	bsten nas
བསྟེན་པ	/ 1) [p f sten pa]; 2) at the navel a nadi lus 'phel rgyas su 'gro ba'i; 3) serve, attend, follow, depend on; 4) confidence	bsten pa
བསྟེན་པའི་མཆོག	supreme 1 to rely on	bsten pa'i mchog
བསྟེན་པའི་གནས	abode, living place	bsten pa'i gnas
བསྟེན་པའི་བླ་མ་བརྒྱད	the 8 gurus relied on	bsten pa'i bla ma brgyad
བསྟེན་པར་བྱ	relied on, should rely on	bsten par bya
བསྟེན་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཡུལ	worthy to receive the teachings	bsten par bya ba'i yul
བསྟེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to work with	bsten par byed pa
བསྟེན་བྱ	person to follow. Syn {slob dpon}	bsten bya
བསྟེན་བྱ་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	the spiritual teacher to follow	bsten bya dge ba'i bshes gnyen
བསྟེན་བྱ་སློབ་དཔོན	Syn {dge ba'i bshes gnyen} spiritual guide	bsten bya slob dpon
བསྟེན་ཚར་བ	{bla ma bsten tshar nas} from the moment you start to follow him	bsten tshar ba
བསྟེན་འོས	fit to be respected, fit to be served	bsten 'os
བསྟེན་ལུགས	way of observing the cult	bsten lugs
བསྟེར	give, grant, bestow [p f ster ba]	bster
བསྟོངས	[p {stongs} left done, spent, exhausted, [made/ became] empty, accompanied	bstongs
བསྟོངས་པ	[arch] grogs byas pa'am gzhan dang mthun par rjes su 'jug pa	bstongs pa
བསྟོད	[p f stod] praise, compliment	bstod
བསྟོད་བཀུར	praise bstod bkur bsngags gsum gyi sgom lam ga bstod bkur bsngags gsum gyi sgom lam path of cultivation of glorification, reverence, and praise	bstod bkur
བསྟོད་མཁན	admirer	bstod mkhan
བསྟོད་གླུ	praise, compliment, glorification in song	bstod glu
བསྟོད་གླུ་གཏོང	sing a song of praise [about --], sing the praises of	bstod glu gtong
བསྟོད་གླུ་ལེན	sing a song of praise [about --], sing the praises of	bstod glu len
བསྟོད་སྒྲ་བྱེད་པ	praise, compliment	bstod sgra byed pa
བསྟོད་བསྔགས	praise, eulogy, compliment	bstod bsngags
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་ཀྱི་མེ་ཏོག་འཐོར་བ	threw the flowers of compliments	bstod bsngags kyi me tog 'thor ba
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་གཏོང་བ	praise, applaud	bstod bsngags gtong ba
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་པ	praising, singing praise	bstod bsngags pa
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་ཕུལ་བ	eulogize, exalt, extol	bstod bsngags phul ba
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་བྱེད	praise, eulogize, compliment	bstod bsngags byed
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་བྱེད་པ	praise, commend	bstod bsngags byed pa
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་ཞུ	praise, eulogize, compliment	bstod bsngags zhu
བསྟོད་བསྔགས་འོས་པ	admirable 1131	bstod bsngags 'os pa
བསྟོད་ཆེན་བཞི	the four great praises	bstod chen bzhi
བསྟོད་དེ	praised	bstod de
བསྟོད་དོ	be praised bstod 'dod dang mos gus kyi dbang gis	bstod do
བཞག་པ་ཙམ་མ་ཡིན་པ	I do not say so just because I want to praise or honour him	bzhag pa tsam ma yin pa
བསྟོད་པ	praise	bstod pa
བསྟོད་པ་གླུ	song of praise	bstod pa glu
བསྟོད་པ་གླུར་བླངས	Arya Manjushri Nama Samgiti song of praise	bstod pa glur blangs
བསྟོད་པ་དང་སྨད་པ	praise and blame. one of the {'jig rten gyi chos brgyad} the eight worldly dharmas	bstod pa dang smad pa
བསྟོད་པ་དབྱང	song of praise	bstod pa dbyang
བསྟོད་པ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	the offering of praising song	bstod pa dbyangs kyi mchod pa
བསྟོད་པ་དབྱངས་མཆོད་པ	offer a song of praise	bstod pa dbyangs mchod pa
བསྟོད་པའི་ཆ་ལས་སྨད་པ	1 of the {cha'i rgyan}, ornament where by deceptive hypocritical words bstod pa'i khul byas nas really disparaging.	bstod pa'i cha las smad pa
བསྟོད་པའི་ཚིག	expressions of honor	bstod pa'i tshig
བསྟོད་པའི་ཚོགས	name of text	bstod pa'i tshogs
བསྟོད་པའི་མཚུངས་སྦྱོར	[among the {mtshungs sbyor gyi rgyan}, the object 1 desires to praise brjod 'dod bstod yul la w special qualities yon tan khyad par can ldan pa by means of expression brjod pa'i sgo nas equally/ as...	bstod pa'i mtshungs sbyor
བསྟོད་པའི་གཞས	psalm	bstod pa'i gzhas
བསྟོད་པར་འགྲན	vie with one another in uttering praise	bstod par 'gran
བསྟོད་ཕྱག	praise and homage, salutation	bstod phyag
བསྟོད་ཕྱག་བསྟོད་པ་དང	prostration and praise	bstod phyag bstod pa dang
བསྟོད་བྱེད་པ	praise, commend	bstod byed pa
བསྟོད་དབྱངས	Syn {bstod glu}	bstod dbyangs
བསྟོད་དབྱངས་སྒྲོགས	praised with song	bstod dbyangs sgrogs
བསྟོད་མིང	respectful name, honorific name, praise	bstod ming
བསྟོད་སྨད	praise and blame/ denunciation	bstod smad
བསྟོད་ཚིག	words of praise [= bsngags pa brjod dang, che brjod, mchod tsig bstod pa smra, mtho bar bya, gzengs bstod pa, legs smra]	bstod tshig
བསྟོད་ཚོགས	collection of hymns	bstod tshogs
བསྟོད་འོས	laudable, commendable, praiseworthy	bstod 'os
བསྟོད་འོས་པ	praiseworthy	bstod 'os pa
བསྟོད་ཡིག	letter/ document adorned w praise, certification of merit, testimonial letter	bstod yig
བསྟོད་ར	Syn {bstod bsngags}	bstod ra
བསྟོད་ར་གཏོང་བ	to praise, commend	bstod ra gtong ba
བསྟོད་ར་བྱེད་པ	praise, commend	bstod ra byed pa
བསྟོད་རས་བྱེད་པ	praise, compliment	bstod ras byed pa
བསྟོད་རེས	mutual praise	bstod res
བསྟོབ	feed, SA stob pa	bstob
བསྟོར་བཤིག་གཏོང	to destroy	bstor bshig gtong
ཐ	THA [bod yig gsal byed bcu pa 'di'i nga ro 'don tshul la skye gnas so dang, byed pa lce rtze, nang gi rtzol ba mgrin pa phye ba dang, phyi'i rtzol ba srog chen sgra med, ming gzhi'i ma ning gi yi g...	tha
ཐ་ཀ་ལ་མ་ཀན	Takla Makan Desert	tha ka la ma kan
ཐ་ཀོ	a fruit, species of walnut	tha ko
ཐ་སྐར	1) 9th month; 2) tharka, tha skar, Ashvini [one of rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad syn: rta ldan dang, dbyu gu, gsal ba'i bu mo, 9th month, Ashvini = 1 of 28 nakshatras gods of the constellations	tha skar
ཐ་སྐར་གྱི་བུ་གཉིས	the two sons of tha skar [nye dbang so gnyis kyi nang gses, tha skar gyi bu gnyis te, tha skar gyi lha dang, gzhon nu'i lha	tha skar gyi bu gnyis
ཐ་སྐར་གྱི་བུ་གཞོན་ནུ་གཉིས	the two "young sons of stas Takakas.". the two "young sons of star tabar" [?]	tha skar gyi bu gzhon nu gnyis
ཐ་སྐར་གྱི་ཟླ	october	tha skar gyi zla
ཐ་སྐར་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	month of acvina	tha skar gyi zla ba
ཐ་ཁབ	needle	tha khab
ཐ་ཁུག	pipe, tobacco pouch	tha khug
ཐ་འཁོར	border, edge, circumference	tha 'khor
ཐ་ག་ན	a name	tha ga na
ཐ་ག་པ	a weaver	tha ga pa
ཐ་གི	[arch] 1) zhi ba; 2) Cung zad; 3) Snying po; 4) Rgyang tsam dang, mtha' tsam gyi bar	tha gi
ཐ་གུ	cord, rope, string, twine	tha gu
ཐ་གུ་བཅག་པ	broken rope	tha gu bcag pa
ཐ་གུའི་ལྟོ་ཅན	Vishnu	tha gu'i lto can
ཐ་གུས	talking with two foreigners; rope, cord/ humble (?)	tha gus
ཐ་གུས་ལྕི	under the weight of chains, bound by ropes	tha gus lci
ཐ་གུས་ལྕེས	x {mi gzhi ngan pa'i zol sbyor tha gus lces} shallow-tongued men with evil natures	tha gus lces
ཐ་གེ	just a little	tha ge
ཐ་གེ་རེ་འཐུང	drink just a little	tha ge re 'thung
ཐ་གོག	fallow; {zhing ga tha gog} fallow field 1132	tha gog
ཐ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	ordinary mind	tha gyi shes pa
ཐ་གྲུ	largeness, spaciousness, abundance, plenty, extent, width, breadth	tha gru
ཐ་གྲུ་ཀུན་ལ	over the whole extent	tha gru kun la
ཐ་གྲུ་ཆེ་བ	very wide, spacious, extensive	tha gru che ba
ཐ་གྲུ་ཡངས་པ	vast extent	tha gru yangs pa
ཐ་རྒོད	1) uncultivated wild ground; 2) wild, savage, mischievous, bad, improper, vulgar, unprincipled; 3) bad, worst, least; 4) obtuse, rounded off	tha rgod
ཐ་རྒྱོད	obtuse, rounded off	tha rgyod
ཐ་ཅད	base, sordid, vile	tha cad
ཐ་གཅིག་ཏུ	consistently, always, continually, definitely, consistently, always, on 1 side, aside	tha gcig tu
ཐ་གཅུང	younger sibling	tha gcung
ཐ་ཆ	1) wild, vulgar, improper; 2) very bad, mean, worst, lowest, last, vile	tha cha
ཐ་ཆད	1) wild, vulgar, improper [Spyod ngan tha chad,...Bu tha chad]; 2) very bad, mean, worst, lowest, last, vile)	tha chad
ཐ་ཆད་པ	lowly {shin tu tha chad pa'i tshul du yod pa} adopted very lowly lifestyles	tha chad pa
ཐ་ཆད་རིགས་ངན	outcasts, harijans	tha chad rigs ngan
ཐ་ཆུང	little one. the last month. 1) the last month [in each season]. 2) Little One. ex. {dpyid zla tha chung} the third month of spring. the last month [in each season]. the youngest	tha chung
ཐ་ཇི་ཁེ་སི་ཏན	Tadjikstan	tha ji khe si tan
ཐ་སྙད	Designations	tha snyad
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོའི་ཆོས་ཉད	the nature of conventional things	tha snyad kyi dngos po'i chos nyad
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature of conventional things	tha snyad kyi dngos po'i chos nyid
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the conventional nature	tha snyad kyi chos nyid
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	conventional truth; conventional truth. Syn {kun rdzob bden pa}	tha snyad kyi bden pa
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་འདོད་ཚུལ	conventional way of maintaining	tha snyad kyi 'dod tshul
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་བརྡ	conceptual terminology	tha snyad kyi brda
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	[actual] conventional situation [as it is]	tha snyad kyi gnas tshul
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གཞག	conventional postulation/ presentation	tha snyad kyi rnam gzhag
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the sphere of conventional experience	tha snyad kyi spyod yul
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་བློ	designated by convention	tha snyad kyi blo
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ལག	[texts of] the worldly sciences	tha snyad kyi gtsug lag
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་ཚིག	words of sophistry	tha snyad kyi tshig
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་གཞི	ming dang grags pa'i rda'i gzhi	tha snyad kyi gzhi
ཐ་སྙད་ཀྱི་གཤི	conventional ground/ basis	tha snyad kyi gshi
ཐ་སྙད་མཁན་པོ	1) person attached to mere [nice sounding/ extensive] verbiage; 2) person who 1st assigns a name	tha snyad mkhan po
ཐ་སྙད་གྱི་ཡུལ	object of definitions	tha snyad gyi yul
ཐ་སྙད་གྲུབ་པ	Establishment of the Conventional [thd]	tha snyad grub pa
ཐ་སྙད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign/reason proving the expression [tha snyad 'ba' zhig establishing true reason sgrub kyi rtags yang dag: rtags chos la mtshan mtshon gyi 'brel ba establishing reason [grub pa'i gtan tshigs], EG, ...	tha snyad sgrub kyi rtags
ཐ་སྙད་ལྔ་ལྔན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བོ	person w the five conventional existences ['dul bar bshad pa'i mi tha snyad lnga ldan ni 1 mi yin pa dang, two smra shes pa, three don go ba, four shes pa rang bzhin du gnas pa, five ma ning sogs m...	tha snyad lnga lngan gyi skye bo
ཐ་སྙད་ལྔ་ལྡན་གྱི་མི	person w the five conventional attributes	tha snyad lnga ldan gyi mi
ཐ་སྙད་གཅིག་པ	of the same nomenclature, a school of doctrine	tha snyad gcig pa
ཐ་སྙད་འཇལ་བློ	tha snyad 'jal ba'i blo	tha snyad 'jal blo
ཐ་སྙད་སྙད་ལྔ་ལྡན་གྱི་མི	person possessing the five conventional attributes	tha snyad snyad lnga ldan gyi mi
ཐ་སྙད་བཏགས་པ	common parlance	tha snyad btags pa
ཐ་སྙད་སྟོན་བྱེད	1) hand; 2) letter; 3) ming tshig	tha snyad ston byed
ཐ་སྙད་དད་པ	distinct, different	tha snyad dad pa
ཐ་སྙད་དུ	conventionally	tha snyad du
ཐ་སྙད་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	[vjavaharasiddha] conventional status	tha snyad du grub pa
ཐ་སྙད་དུ་ཡོད་པ	conventionally existent; [vjavajarikasat] conventional existence	tha snyad du yod pa
ཐ་སྙད་གདགས་པ	designation, label, labeling, imputation	tha snyad gdags pa
ཐ་སྙད་བདེན	denotatively designatively propositionally true	tha snyad bden
ཐ་སྙད་བདེན་པ	conventional truth, [Syn {kun rdzob bden pa}	tha snyad bden pa
ཐ་སྙད་འདོགས་པའི་བློ	conventionally ascriptive intellect	tha snyad 'dogs pa'i blo
ཐ་སྙད་པ	one who plays at dice, one who lays stakes at play	tha snyad pa
ཐ་སྙད་པ་མཁས་པ	knowing conventionalities	tha snyad pa mkhas pa
ཐ་སྙད་པ་མི་མཁས་པ	not knowing conventionalities	tha snyad pa mi mkhas pa
ཐ་སྙད་པའི	vjavaharita, conventional	tha snyad pa'i
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་དོན་རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པ	an inference of a conventional meaning	tha snyad pa'i don rjes su dpag pa
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་བློ	conventional cognition/ awareness/ knowledge	tha snyad pa'i blo
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་པ	conventional validating cognition	tha snyad pa'i tshad pa
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མ	* conventional validating cognition	tha snyad pa'i tshad ma
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མའི་བློ	conventional validating cognition	tha snyad pa'i tshad ma'i blo
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མའི་ཤེས་པ	conventional validating cognition	tha snyad pa'i tshad ma'i shes pa
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་རིགས་ཤེས	conventional rational cognition	tha snyad pa'i rigs shes
ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	[vjavaharikajnana] conventional cognition	tha snyad pa'i shes pa
ཐ་སྙད་དཔྱོད་པའི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of analyzing conventional things tha snyad spyod pa'i tshad mas grub pa established by conventional reasoning	tha snyad dpyod pa'i rigs pa
ཐ་སྙད་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the conventional sphere	tha snyad spyod yul
ཐ་སྙད་བྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ་བཞི	designations, four ways of making, four ways of making designations	tha snyad byed pa'i tshul bzhi
ཐ་སྙད་བྲལ་བ	devoid of words	tha snyad bral ba
ཐ་སྙད་དབྱེ	writer tha snyad 'ba' zhig sgrub kyi rtags yang	tha snyad dbye
དག	valid reason which proves (the thesis) for (the case where the predicate is) only its object of definition	dag
ཐ་སྙད་སྦྱར་བ	to be called / named	tha snyad sbyar ba
ཐ་སྙད་མེད་པ	conventionally nonexistent	tha snyad med pa
ཐ་སྙད་ཙམ	mere stipulation, denotation, designation, proposition, interpretation, conversational counters, nominal sense, the very expressions	tha snyad tsam
ཐ་སྙད་ཚད་མ	conventional reasoning/ pramana	tha snyad tshad ma
ཐ་སྙད་ཚད་མ་ལྷན་བཅས	conventional conceptual analytic mind	tha snyad tshad ma lhan bcas
ཐ་སྙད་ཚིག	conventional word[s]	tha snyad tshig
ཐ་སྙད་མཛད་པ	symbolically referred to; to name, define [as]	tha snyad mdzad pa
ཐ་སྙད་གཞན	other expressions	tha snyad gzhan
ཐ་སྙད་རིག་གནས	conventional sciences	tha snyad rig gnas
ཐ་སྙད་རིག་པ	terminology tha snyad la bden mtshan mar 'dzin pa grasping designations as truly existing [distinguishing] marks tha snyad la bden mtshan mar 'dzin pa taking hold of designations as being [distingu...	tha snyad rig pa
ཐ་སྙད་ལ་སྤྱོད་པིའ་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of conventional experience	tha snyad la spyod pi' rigs pa
ཐ་སྙད་ལ་མི་མཁས་པ	lack of skill in designation	tha snyad la mi mkhas pa
ཐ་སྙད་ལ་མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པ	taking hold of designations are being [distinguishing] marks	tha snyad la mtshan mar 'dzin pa
ཐ་སྙད་ལས་འདས	to transcend definitions	tha snyad las 'das
ཐ་སྙད་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the conventional	tha snyad las 'das pa
ཐ་སྙད་ཤེས	knowledge of words	tha snyad shes
ཐ་སྙད་གསུམ	the three kinds of conventionality	tha snyad gsum
ཐ་སྙད་གསུམ་ལྡན	fulfillment of the three basic requisites: {smra shes don go shes pa rang bzhin gnas} able to speak; comprehend; being of sound mind tha snyad gsum ldan}-. posessing the three kinds of conventional...	tha snyad gsum ldan
ཐ་ཐོར	a few here and there	tha thor
ཐ་དད	distinct [ggd]	tha dad
ཐ་དད་ཀྱང་མཚུངས	similar while different	tha dad kyang mtshungs
ཐ་དད་དུ	separate	tha dad du
ཐ་དད་དུ་འགྱུར	become separate/ different	tha dad du 'gyur
ཐ་དད་དུ་གཏོང	[make] separate	tha dad du gtong
ཐ་དད་དུ་སྣང	although they appear separate 1134	tha dad du snang
ཐ་དད་དུ་སྣང་ཡང	although they appear to be different	tha dad du snang yang
ཐ་དད་དུ་དབྱེ	synthetically, differentially	tha dad du dbye
ཐ་དད་དུ་དབྱེ་ན	if differentiated	tha dad du dbye na
ཐ་དད་དུ་མི	not being different, not admitting of differentiation	tha dad du mi
ཐ་དད་དུ་མི་འཇུག་པ	non differing	tha dad du mi 'jug pa
ཐ་དད་དུ་མེད	not separate entities	tha dad du med
ཐ་དད་དུ་མེད་པ	not separate	tha dad du med pa
ཐ་དད་དོན་མིན	non-diversity	tha dad don min
ཐ་དད་འདབ	species of tree	tha dad 'dab
ཐ་དད་པ	distinction, separated, not mixed up together, manifold	tha dad pa
ཐ་དད་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ང་རྒྱལ	pride of difference tha dad pa nyid du rnam par rtog pa conceive of differences	tha dad pa nyid kyi nga rgyal
ཐ་དད་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of difference	tha dad pa bzhi
ཤེས་མི་མངའ་བ	having no difference of perception ['khor 'das kyi chos rnams la bden dngos kyi blang dor gyi dri ma mi mnga' ba, ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig	shes mi mnga' ba
ཐ་དད་པ་ཡང་དག་པར་ཤེས་པ	truly know differences	tha dad pa yang dag par shes pa
ཐ་དད་པའི་མཐའ	limitation of separateness	tha dad pa'i mtha'
ཐ་དད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conception / perception of difference	tha dad pa'i 'du shes
ཐ་དད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་མི་མངའ་བ	having no difference of perception ['khor 'das kyi chos rnams la bden dngos kyi blang dor gyi dri ma mi mnga' ba, ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig about the dharmas of samsara and nir...	tha dad pa'i 'du shes mi mnga' ba
ཐ་དད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་མེད་པ	[the tathagata] has no perception of an [inherently existent] difference [between samsara and nirvana]. they are w/o diverse cognitions GD	tha dad pa'i 'du shes med pa
ཐ་དད་པའི་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-existence of difference	tha dad pa'i ma yin pa
ཐ་དད་པའི་མིང	{'dus pa'i ming las ldog pa ste/ bum pa 'di rnams ni/ gser dang/ dngul dang/ zangs kyi bum pa'o/ /zhes khyad gzhi gcig las/ bye brag tha dad par snang ba'i sgra spyi lta bu}	tha dad pa'i ming
ཐ་དད་པར	different	tha dad par
ཐ་དད་ཕྲེང་ལྡན	SA thar nu	tha dad phreng ldan
ཐ་དད་མ་ཡིན	not broken apart	tha dad ma yin
ཐ་དད་མ་ཡིན་པ	not different, w/o difference	tha dad ma yin pa
ཐ་དད་མིན	not different	tha dad min
ཐ་དད་མེད	no difference	tha dad med
ཐ་དད་མེད་པ	do not differ [sems -Notes: realization level--their minds are one; practice level--they do not quibble]	tha dad med pa
ཐ་དད་ཚིག་འདྲའི་སྦྱར་བ	sbyar gzhi dngos po gnyis kyi sbyar chos rnams phan tshun mtshungs par sbyor byed kyi tshig 'dra la gcod mtshams mi 'dra ba'i dbang gis don tha dad ston pa'i rgyan zhig, sbyar ba'i rgyan gyi nang g...	tha dad tshig 'dra'i sbyar ba
ཐ་དད་རིགས	kinds of difference, different kinds	tha dad rigs
ཐ་དམ་ཚིག	tha tshig, dam tshig: kha chad tshig dan, khas blangs dam bca'	tha dam tshig
ཐ་དོན	separate, different, to differ, separateness, separation, variety, difference, diversity	tha don
ཐ་དོན་དོན་མིན	non-diversity	tha don don min
ཐ་དོན་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conception/ perception of difference	tha don pa'i 'du shes
ཐ་ན	or even	tha na
ཐ་ན་མ་ནི་འབྲུ་གཅིག་འདོན་ཀྱང	reciting even a single mani	tha na ma ni 'bru gcig 'don kyang
ཐ་ན་ཚུན་ཆད	even just to	tha na tshun chad
ཐ་ན་ཡན་ཆད	or even just	tha na yan chad
ཐ་ནའི་མུ་ཏིག	stone ma na hu	tha na'i mu tig
ཐ་པག	plate	tha pag
ཐ་པི་ཐུ་པི	confusion, disorder	tha pi thu pi
ཐ་སྤག	dish/ plate [sder ma] zhabs ra can; Lung pa spar mo gang la dpon po tha spag gang	tha spag
ཐ་སྤྲིན	herb {tha sprin}	tha sprin
ཐ་བ	1) anger, rage, agression; 2) kleshas; 3) hard, solid, stiff, hard, firm, rigid; 4) rough, harsh, abusive, bad, {rengs pa} {nying tha ba} = hard fields]	tha ba
ཐ་བ་སྐྱ་ཆགས	lo mang rengs pa'i field color	tha ba skya chags
ཐ་བ་ངན་པ	suffering, wrong view and kleshas	tha ba ngan pa
ཐ་བ་ཐུལ	losened the hardness {sdig pa'i tha ba thul la bsod nams kyi sa bon thob} losen the hardness of negativity and sow the seeds of merit	tha ba thul
ཐ་བ་སྤངས་པ	abandoned rigidity [misdeeds] 1135	tha ba spangs pa
ཐ་བག	plate	tha bag
ཐ་བེ	a medicinal plant terminalia tomentosa	tha be
ཐ་བྲལ	non-separateness, nonduality	tha bral
ཐ་འབན	cast-off clothes, rags thrown out	tha 'ban
ཐ་མ	Finally,	tha ma
ཐ་མ་ཀ་རྡབས	ash tray	tha ma ka rdabs
ཐ་མ་ཁ	tobacco, cigarettes	tha ma kha
ཐ་མ་ཁ་འཐེན	smoke tobacco/ cigarettes	tha ma kha 'then
ཐ་མ་ག	official seal, warrant, SA tha mag	tha ma ga
ཐ་མ་བསྒྲལ་མཆོད	the final - part [of the feast] is the liberation offering	tha ma bsgral mchod
ཐ་མ་ངེས་པ་དོན་གྱི་ཆོས	the final teachings on absolute truth / the definitive meaning Syn {bka' tha ma}	tha ma nges pa don gyi chos
ཐ་མ་ཅི་ཞིག་འགྱུར	what will result in the end?	tha ma ci zhig 'gyur
ཐ་མ་ཅི་ཤིག་འགྱུར	what will happen? what will be the end?	tha ma ci shig 'gyur
ཐ་མ་གདམས་ངག་གིས་བཅོས་པ	one of the {bcos thabs gsum}	tha ma gdams ngag gis bcos pa
ཐ་མ་འདིར	to a particular place	tha ma 'dir
ཐ་མ་མེད་པ	for all time	tha ma med pa
ཐ་མ་ཚོང་མཁན	tobacco salesperson	tha ma tshong mkhan
ཐ་མ་ཟང་ཟིང་གི་འབུལ་བ	the lowest way is by material offerings. Paltrul Rinpoche: {rgyu zas longs spyod la sogs pa'i gtong phod kyi sgo nas bla ma mnyes par byed} to please your teacher by giving him material goods, food...	tha ma zang zing gi 'bul ba
ཐ་མ་ལ	at last, finally	tha ma la
ཐ་མ་ལས	at the least, at all events, in any case	tha ma las
ཐ་མ་ལུས	having a natural human body; {lus tha mal du gnas pa}	tha ma lus
ཐ་མག	tobacco, cigarettes	tha mag
ཐ་མག་འཐེན	smoke tobacco/ cigarettes	tha mag 'then
ཐ་མག་འཐེན་མཁན	smoker	tha mag 'then mkhan
ཐ་མག་རྡབས	ash tray	tha mag rdabs
ཐ་མག་ནག་པོ	opium tha ma'i cha mthun gyi kun sbyor lnga tha ma'i cha mthun lnga	tha mag nag po
ཐ་མའི་ཆ་མཐུན་ལྔ	khams tha ma'i cha mthun nam 'dod khams kyi kun sbyor lnga ste * TSE	tha ma'i cha mthun lnga
ཐ་མའི་ཡང་ཐ་མ	the lowest of the low	tha ma'i yang tha ma
ཐ་མའི་རིན་ཆེན་ལྔ	1) {shel}. 2) {dza la dzA ti} 3) {Do hi ta} 4) {mching bu} 5) {nung bu ljang gu}	tha ma'i rin chen lnga
ཐ་མའི་སེམས	final mind	tha ma'i sems
ཐ་མར	lastly, ultimately, at the end to the utmost, at the end, lastly, finally	tha mar
ཐ་མར་གལ་ཆེ་བའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion which is important at the end	tha mar gal che ba'i snying rje
ཐ་མར་དགེ་བ	final benefit; thog mar	tha mar dge ba
ཐ་མལ	original, ordinary	tha mal
ཐ་མལ་གྱི	(in the) ordinary/ usual/ conventional (sense)	tha mal gyi
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་འཆི་བ	TSE	tha mal gyi 'chi ba
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	ordinary perception	tha mal gyi snang ba
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་སྣང་ཞེན	appearance and conception of ordinariness	tha mal gyi snang zhen
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་ཞེན་པ	mind desiring and attached to ordinary things	tha mal gyi zhen pa
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་རིག་པ	ordinary awareness	tha mal gyi rig pa
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	ordinary mind	tha mal gyi shes pa
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་རྗེན་པ	naked ordinary mind	tha mal gyi shes pa rjen pa
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་རྗེན་པ་ལ	in the nakedness of true ordinary mind tha mal gyi shes pa gnyug ma so ma lhug	tha mal gyi shes pa rjen pa la
ཐ་མལ་གྱི་སེམས	ordinary mind	tha mal gyi sems
ཐ་མལ་བཅོས་མེད	ordinary uncontrived state	tha mal bcos med
ཐ་མལ་གཉིས་འཛིན་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	ordinary dualistic thoughts / concepts	tha mal gnyis 'dzin gyi rtog pa
ཐ་མལ་དུ་ལུས་པ	to remain an ordinary person	tha mal du lus pa
ཐ་མལ་ནད་མེད	1 of gnas bcu gcig	tha mal nad med
ཐ་མལ་སྣང་བ	ordinary/ worldly appearance	tha mal snang ba
ཐ་མལ་སྣང་ཞེན	clinging to ordinary perception. TSE	tha mal snang zhen
ཐ་མལ་སྣང་ཞེན་འགོག་པ	which stops clinging to ordinary experience 1136 tha mal snang zhen 'gog pa'i rnam dag the total purity which stops the clinging to ordinary experience	tha mal snang zhen 'gog pa
ཐ་མལ་པ	[dkyus ma dang, phal pa, rang bzhin pa,...Mi tha mal pa,...Bya ba tha mal pa,...Bsam blo tha mal pa,...Ras cha 'di spus tha mal pa'i gras red,...Deng skabs gzugs khams bde nyen gnyis bral tha mal p...	tha mal pa
ཐ་མལ་པའི་ཁྲོད	place of ordinary people	tha mal pa'i khrod
ཐ་མལ་པའི་ངར་རྒྱལ	pride of ordinariness	tha mal pa'i ngar rgyal
ཐ་མལ་པའི་སྣང་བ	ordinary appearance	tha mal pa'i snang ba
ཐ་མལ་པའི་ཚུལ་ལས་རིང་དུ་འདས	far from the ways of ordinary people	tha mal pa'i tshul las ring du 'das
ཐ་མལ་པར	vulgarly	tha mal par
ཐ་མལ་བ	ordinary, common, vulgar, low class, petty, tha mal pa	tha mal ba
ཐ་མལ་བའི་ཕྱོགས	average, inferior	tha mal ba'i phyogs
ཐ་མལ་བར་འགྱུར	become common, vulgar, low-class	tha mal bar 'gyur
ཐ་མལ་བླུན་པོའི་ཤེས་པ	ordinary mind of a fool	tha mal blun po'i shes pa
ཐ་མལ་མ་དག་པའི་སྣང་བ	ordinary, impure perception	tha mal ma dag pa'i snang ba
ཐ་མལ་མ་དག་པའི་སྣང་བ་འདི་མི་བལྟ་བར	do not consider the teachings and so on as ordinary and impure	tha mal ma dag pa'i snang ba 'di mi blta bar
ཐ་མལ་རྨོངས་པ	ordinary stupid person	tha mal rmongs pa
ཐ་མལ་ཞེན་སྣང	ordinary appearances of attachment	tha mal zhen snang
ཐ་མལ་རང་གར་བསྡད་པ	just being casual	tha mal rang gar bsdad pa
ཐ་མལ་རང་འགྲོས	natural movement	tha mal rang 'gros
ཐ་མལ་ལུས་པ	to remain ordinary	tha mal lus pa
ཐ་མལ་ཤེས་པ	ordinary awareness, ordinary mind, normal consciousness	tha mal shes pa
ཐ་མལ་ཤེས་རབ	ordinary wisdom	tha mal shes rab
ཐ་མལ་སེམས	ordinary mind, petty mind	tha mal sems
ཐ་མས	at least	tha mas
ཐ་མས་ན་མས	usual, customary	tha mas na mas
ཐ་མི་ཁའི་ཉེས་དམིགས	tobacco's harmful physiological effect	tha mi kha'i nyes dmigs
ཐ་མི་དད་པ	not separate/ different/ individual	tha mi dad pa
ཐ་ཚིག	oath	tha tshig
ཐ་ཚིག་བསྒྲགས	gave/ shout a warning	tha tshig bsgrags
ཐ་ཚིག་བོར་བ	not keep a promise	tha tshig bor ba
ཐ་ཚིག་ཡི་གེ	ma go ma thos zer sa med pa'i brda sprod	tha tshig yi ge
ཐ་ཚིགས	samaya	tha tshigs
ཐ་ཚིགས་མིང	the name "samaya"	tha tshigs ming
ཐ་ཞན	poor, inferior, low quality	tha zhan
ཐ་ཞིང	1) field w poor yield; 2) last field to Dbyar bsnyal bslang byed	tha zhing
ཐ་འོག་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་པོ	one of sku lnga rgyal po	tha 'og chos rgyal po
ཐ་ཡན་ཆི	Thayenchi, Hermit's Meditation Cavern at Tseshung in Domey	tha yan chi
ཐ་ར་ཐོ་རེ	wide asunder, wide	tha ra tho re
ཐ་ར་ར	clouds of assembled warriors, the black poison	tha ra ra
ཐ་ར་རའི་ཆུ་ཐིགས	scattered water droplets	tha ra ra'i chu thigs
ཐ་རང་འགྲོས	natural movement	tha rang 'gros
ཐ་རམ	1) bad; 2) kind of ram bu growing along roads and in wild fields [ro mngar la bska ba, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas 'khru ba gcod, 'brum nag dang, mes tsig pa'i rma gso, glo lu ba 'jags par byed]; 3) ram...	tha ram
ཐ་རམས	[arch] gtams pa	tha rams
ཐ་རས	mountain peak near maratika where namkhai norbu dreamed	tha ras
ཐ་རུ	utmost limit	tha ru
ཐ་རེ་ཐོ་རེ	few, scattered, sparse	tha re tho re
ཐ་རེ་ཐོ་རེའི་ལོ་འབྲས	sparse harvest/ crops	tha re tho re'i lo 'bras
ཐ་རེ་ཐོར་རེ	sporadic	tha re thor re
ཐ་རོ་མཙོ	1{tha ro mtso} Lake [in N 'brong pa rdzong]	tha ro mtso
ཐ་རོ་མཚོ	{tha ro mtsho} Lake	tha ro mtsho
ཐ་ལི	a tin plate	tha li
ཐ་ལི་མཐའ་བཞི	horse/ mule thal mdog four year old	tha li mtha' bzhi
ཐ་ལི་མ	Tarim Basin	tha li ma
ཐ་ལི་མུ་གཤོང་ས	Tarim Basin	tha li mu gshong sa
ཐ་ལེ་ཟུག	(M dbyar kha khal kha zug phyu pa'i stod du gyon rgyu'i stod	tha le zug
ཐ་ལོང	red cloth	tha long
ཐ་ཤལ	bad, inferior, despicable, base. vulgar, common ordinary, dull, mundane [appearance], conventional [view] {snang shas tha shal}. = conventional vieweven more ordinary than tha mal] dull	tha shal
ཐ་ཤལ་དག	common people	tha shal dag
ཐ་ཤལ་པ	an inferior	tha shal pa
ཐ་ཤལ་བ	bad, inferior, contemptible, evil, despicable, base	tha shal ba
ཐ་ཤལ་བའི་སྣང་ཤས	conventional view	tha shal ba'i snang shas
ཐ་ཤལ་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	[bad, inferior, contemptible, evil, despicable, base] behavior	tha shal ba'i spyod pa
ཐ་སོན	sa tha ma'i son	tha son
ཐ་སྱད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign proving the expression	tha syad sgrub kyi rtags
ཐག	1) distance, distant, a great distance; 2) [vb+ma+--] as soon as; 3) texture, weave, web	thag
ཐག་སྐས	thag pa la dpyang ba'am 'khyud de 'gro sa'i skas ka	thag skas
ཐག་སྐུ	woven image	thag sku
ཐག་ཁྲ་སྤྲུལ་མཐོང	be helpless, be very afraid of	thag khra sprul mthong
ཐག་ཁྲ་སྤྲུལ་མཐོང་བ	mistaking a spotted string for a snake	thag khra sprul mthong ba
ཐག་ཁྲ་སྦྲུལ་མཐོང	seeing a mottled robe as a snake	thag khra sbrul mthong
ཐག་ཁྲ་ལ་སྤྲུལ་མཐོང་བ	see a multicolored rope as a snake	thag khra la sprul mthong ba
ཐག་ཁྲ་ལ་སྦྲུལ་མཐོང་བ	seeing a mottled robe as a snake	thag khra la sbrul mthong ba
ཐག་ཁྲ་ལ་སྦྲུལ་དུ་འཛིན་པ	perceiving a mottled robe as a snake	thag khra la sbrul du 'dzin pa
ཐག་ཁྲ་ལ་སྦྲུལ་དུ་འཛིན་པ་བཞིན	like believing that a robe is a snake	thag khra la sbrul du 'dzin pa bzhin
ཐག་མཁན	a weaver	thag mkhan
ཐག་འཁྱུད་མེ་ཏོག	vine, trailing plant	thag 'khyud me tog
ཐག་གི་ཐུག་གི	1) w the hands etc reg tsam thug tsam byed stangs [Nad pa la thag gi thug gi ma mang.Rgas 'khogs la phru gus thag gi thug gi sun po ma bzo.Gcig gis gcig la thag thug med pa]; 2) Thug thug mang tshu...	thag gi thug gi
ཐག་གིས	completely	thag gis
ཐག་གིས་ཆོད	certain, sure	thag gis chod
ཐག་གུ	thin/ short rope	thag gu
ཐག་གེ	roared with laughter	thag ge
ཐག་གྲུ	breadth, width, extent, size	thag gru
ཐག་འགྱངས	far, distant	thag 'gyangs
ཐག་འགྱངས་པོ	far, distant	thag 'gyangs po
ཐག་འགྲམ	human palate, swelling of the tongue, palate	thag 'gram
ཐག་རྒྱ	gang byung 'gro 'ong mi chog par bar mtshams gcod byed kyi thag rgya.Ltad mo ston yul gyi mtha' skor du thag rgya btang ba.Bkag sdom thag rgya	thag rgya
ཐག་རྒྱང	rope	thag rgyang
ཐག་རྒྱང་གང་དོ་ཙམ	about fifty yards; lit, "the distance of two rope lengths," corresponding to approximately ten arm spans, or 150 feet	thag rgyang gang do tsam
ཐག་རྒྱངས་གང་དོ་ཙམ	about fifty yards; lit, "the distance of two rope lengths," corresponding to approximately ten arm spans, or 150 feet	thag rgyangs gang do tsam
ཐག་སྒུལ་འདྲ་གཟུགས	puppet	thag sgul 'dra gzugs
ཐག་སྒུལ་འདྲ་གཟུགས་ཚོགས་ཁག	puppet clique	thag sgul 'dra gzugs tshogs khag
ཐག་སྒུལ་འདྲ་གཟུགས་སྲིད་གཞུང	puppet government	thag sgul 'dra gzugs srid gzhung
ཐག་སྒྲ	clapping sound	thag sgra
ཐག་ཅི་ཙམ	how far	thag ci tsam
ཐག་ཅོད་པ	to handle, deal with, treat	thag cod pa
ཐག་ཅོད་པའི་ངེས་ཤེས	decisive conviction	thag cod pa'i nges shes
ཐག་ཅོད་བྱེད་པ	to resolve, settle	thag cod byed pa
ཐག་གཅད	cut off, tormented	thag gcad
ཐག་གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ	deciding on one point, 1 of 3 tshig gsum gnad du brdeg pa	thag gcig thog tu
ཐག་གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅད	one definitively decides upon this unique state	thag gcig thog tu bcad
ཐག་གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅད་པ	to decide on one thing	thag gcig thog tu bcad pa
ཐག་གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཆད	not remaining in doubt	thag gcig thog tu chad
ཐག་གཅིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཆོད་པ	deciding on one thing	thag gcig thog tu chod pa
ཐག་གཅོད	decision to decide, to settle, to make a decision, decide, resolve, solve, determine, ascertain, define, settle, decisive, to handle, deal with, treat	thag gcod
ཐག་གཅོད་མཁན	arbitrator	thag gcod mkhan
ཐག་གཅོད་ཐུབ་པའི་རང་བཞིན	deciseivness	thag gcod thub pa'i rang bzhin
ཐག་གཅོད་ནོར་བ	misjudge	thag gcod nor ba
ཐག་གཅོད་པ	1) decide, put an end to, determine, define, handle, deal with, treat [gtan 'khel byed pa dang, nges nges byed pa.Sang nyin 'gro rgyur thag gcod pa.Don gnad ji yod tsang ma thag bcad zin. Tshogs 'd...	thag gcod pa
ཐག་གཅོད་བྱེད	[make a] decision, decide, settle, [re]solve, determine, ascertain, define, handle, deal w, treat	thag gcod byed
ཐག་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	to solve, settle	thag gcod byed pa
ཐག་གཅོད་དམག་འཐབ	decisive battle	thag gcod dmag 'thab
ཐག་གཅོད་དམིགས་ཡུལ	determination	thag gcod dmigs yul
ཐག་བཅད	[made a] decision, decided, settle, [re]solved, determined, ascertained, defined, handled, dealt w, treated	thag bcad
ཐག་བཅད་དུ་འཇུག	be set to resolve	thag bcad du 'jug
ཐག་བཅད་པ	1) decide, settle, ascertain, resolve [p {thag gcod pa}; 2) torment; 3) free from, ascertain, make decision	thag bcad pa
ཐག་བཅད་ཟིན་པ	decided, finished	thag bcad zin pa
ཐག་བཅར	{sems thag bcar pa} determination, resolution. {blo thag rbad bcad} determination, resolution	thag bcar
ཐག་བཅུག་པ	[arch] annihilate	thag bcug pa
ཐག་ལྕིབས	thag pa sogs mkhregs po'i rigs 'tshem dus dgos pa'i lcibs mo che ba'i ming	thag lcibs
ཐག་ཆགས	instinct	thag chags
ཐག་ཆད་པ	sever, decide, SA thag gcod pa	thag chad pa
ཐག་ཆིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཆོད་པ	decide on 1 thing/ resolve all at once [way of practice in ka dag khregs chod [objects are not transformed, and not defiled by grasping and fixation, w/o abandoning and antidotes, awareness/ insigh...	thag chig thog tu chod pa
ཐག་ཆོད	1) be decided, settled resolved; 2) * so much/ very much/ the best; 3) certainly/ definitely; 4) conviction, decision; 5) Decide [on that]!	thag chod
ཐག་ཆོད་ཀྱི་མྱོང	decisive experience	thag chod kyi myong
ཐག་ཆོད་དགོས	must resolve, must settle decisively	thag chod dgos
ཐག་ཆོད་རྒྱས་ཐེབས	having the seal of this certainty	thag chod rgyas thebs
ཐག་ཆོད་ཐད་རིང་འགྲོན་པོ	far reaching conviction	thag chod thad ring 'gron po
ཐག་ཆོད་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indeterminable	thag chod thabs med pa
ཐག་ཆོད་ནས	having resolved this	thag chod nas
ཐག་ཆོད་པ	blo thag chod pa - saw clearly	thag chod pa
ཐག་ཆོད་པའི་ངེས་ཤེས	decisive conviction. [confident] knowledge that follows a definite understanding, clear-cut	thag chod pa'i nges shes
ཐག་ཆོད་པོ	decisive	thag chod po
ཐག་ཆོད་ཕྱིན་ཆད	to understand	thag chod phyin chad
ཐག་ཆོད་ལགས	to be supremely confident	thag chod lags
ཐག་ཆོད་གསལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་པ	pronounce	thag chod gsal bsgrags byed pa
ཐག་ཆོད་ལྷིང་པོ	stable resolution [stable way of resolving the root meaning. disputes about two sides resolving	thag chod lhing po
སྐོར་ལ་ཨིས་ནོཏ་ཧེལྟེར	skelter/, agitated unstable	skor la is not helter
ཐག་བཆར	* determination, resolution	thag bchar
ཐག་མཆོང	rope jumping/ skipping	thag mchong
ཐག་མཆོང་རྒྱབ་པ	skip	thag mchong rgyab pa
ཐག་ཇེ་ཉེར	more near to	thag je nyer
ཐག་ཉེ	Notes: see sgrub thag nye	thag nye
ཐག་ཉེ་འགྱངས་ཀྱི་ཚད	distance	thag nye 'gyangs kyi tshad
ཐག་ཉེ་པོ	near, close by	thag nye po
ཐག་ཉེ་བ	proximity, imminent, near, in the neighborhood	thag nye ba
ཐག་ཉེ་བའི་ལམ	shorter road	thag nye ba'i lam
ཐག་ཉེ་རིང་ཀུན་ཏུ	everywhere	thag nye ring kun tu
ཐག་ཉེ་རུ	closer, nearer	thag nye ru
ཐག་ཉེ་རུ་འགྲོ	go/ [be]come closer, nearer	thag nye ru 'gro
ཐག་ཉེའི	from the area of	thag nye'i
ཐག་ཉེར	nearby	thag nyer
ཐག་ཉེར་འགྲོ་བ	to approach	thag nyer 'gro ba
ཐག་ཉེར་སོང	approached	thag nyer song
ཐག་རྙི	ropes and trappers' nets	thag rnyi
ཐག་རྙི་ཕྲ་མོས་ཟིན་པ	gets entangled in a net	thag rnyi phra mos zin pa
ཐག་གཏོང་བ	to tap, knock	thag gtong ba
ཐག་བསྟུངས་པ	1) shorten a rope; 2) Dus dang lam thag nye ru btang ba	thag bstungs pa
ཐག་ཐག	tap, to knock	thag thag
ཐག་ཐག་རྒྱག	tap, knock	thag thag rgyag
ཐག་ཐག་གཏོང་བ	tap	thag thag gtong ba
ཐག་ཐིག	thag pa dang thi gu; thag pa ring thung phra sbom spyi ming	thag thig
ཐག་ཐུག	thag gi thug gi	thag thug
ཐག་ཐུག་འབྱུང	to spring forth	thag thug 'byung
ཐག་ཐོག	during, as long as, whilst, quite	thag thog
ཐག་འཐག	weaving	thag 'thag
ཐག་འཐེན་འགྲན་བསྡུར	tug-of-war	thag 'then 'gran bsdur
ཐག་འཐེན་ཐོང་གཤོལ	plow pulled by a rope	thag 'then thong gshol
ཐག་འཐེན་ལུས་རྩལ	tug of war	thag 'then lus rtsal
ཐག་གདང	thag rgyang btang ba'i 'gel gdang	thag gdang
ཐག་མདུང	spear attached to a sling	thag mdung
ཐག་བསྡོགས	brkyangs pa'i thag pa tshur dril ba'i thag bsdogs	thag bsdogs
ཐག་ན	proponent of Svatantrika	thag na
ཐག་སྣེ	end of a rope	thag sne
ཐག་པ	1.Tha mi dad par 'jug pa'i 'thag pa'i 'das pa, 2.Sdom byed zhags pa.Bal thag ...Lcags thag ...Rtsid thag ...Ras thag ...'Dogs khyi thag pas btags pa.Rtsva sar rta khal rnams thag pas brtod.Gru gzin...	thag pa
ཐག་པ་བཀྲོལ	loosened the tension in her loom / rope	thag pa bkrol
ཐག་པ་རྒྱག	tie, bind	thag pa rgyag
ཐག་པ་ཆད་པ	1) broken rope; 2) Rgyun chad pa Lag sne gtong dngul gyi thag pa chad pa; 3) 'Brel ba chad pa Bar 'dum 'grig rgyu'i thag pa chad pa	thag pa chad pa
ཐག་པ་ཆད་པ་མཐུད་པ	add a piece to a string when a part of it has broken off	thag pa chad pa mthud pa
ཐག་པ་འཆིང	tie, bind	thag pa 'ching
ཐག་པ་བཏགས་པའི་མདུང	spear w rope to pull it back	thag pa btags pa'i mdung
ཐག་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཆད་པ	cut like a rope	thag pa lta bu chad pa
ཐག་པ་འཐེན་པ	1) pull a rope; 2) improper union between a man and woman	thag pa 'then pa
ཐག་པ་འདོགས	tie, bind	thag pa 'dogs
ཐག་པ་ནར་ནར་འཐེན་པ	pull a rope steadily	thag pa nar nar 'then pa
ཐག་པ་ཕྲ་པོ	cord	thag pa phra po
ཐག་པ་སྦོམ་པོ	cable	thag pa sbom po
ཐག་པ་བཞི་བསླས	rkya bzhi leb mor bslas pa'i thag pa	thag pa bzhi bslas
ཐག་པ་གསུམ	3 fetters (mi g.yengs pa'i dran thag bsring, ma bcos pa'i ngang thag bsring, mi skyod pa'i gzugs thag bsring)	thag pa gsum
ཐག་པའི་སྙེ་མ་ལོགས་གཅིག	the other end of the rope thag pa'i steng nas mchong rgyag pa'i	thag pa'i snye ma logs gcig
རྩེད་མོ	rope jumping/ skipping	rtsed mo
ཐག་པའི་སྣེ་མོ	end/ tip of a rope	thag pa'i sne mo
ཐག་པའི་སྦྲུལ་བཞིན	a rope as a snake	thag pa'i sbrul bzhin
ཐག་པས་འཁྱིག་པ་པོ	one who binds with a rope	thag pas 'khyig pa po
ཐག་པས་བཏགས་གྱུར་པ	be attached or tied by a rope 1139	thag pas btags gyur pa
ཐག་པས་འཐེན་པ	tow	thag pas 'then pa
ཐག་པས་སྡམ་པ	bound with a rope	thag pas sdam pa
ཐག་པས་སྦྱིག་པ	tie with a rope	thag pas sbyig pa
ཐག་དཔྱོང	rope hanging down	thag dpyong
ཐག་དབང་པོ	nose sense, the nose faculty	thag dbang po
ཐག་རྦད་བཅད	resolve, cut completely	thag rbad bcad
ཐག་སྦད་བཅད	resolve, cut completely	thag sbad bcad
ཐག་མ	soft, fine	thag ma
ཐག་མ་གཅོད	Don't make decisions!	thag ma gcod
ཐག་མ་ཆོད་པ	pending	thag ma chod pa
ཐག་མི་རིང་བ	not a long distance	thag mi ring ba
ཐག་མིག	mesh of a net	thag mig
ཐག་ཚད	measuring tape, ruler	thag tshad
ཐག་ཟམ	rope bridge	thag zam
ཐག་ཟོ	rope work	thag zo
ཐག་བཟང	w/o any gaps	thag bzang
ཐག་བཟང་རིས	epithet of lord of lha min	thag bzang ris
ཐག་བཟང་རེས	splendid robe	thag bzang res
ཐག་བཟངས་རིས	Vemacitra, Splendid Robe	thag bzangs ris
ཐག་བཟངས་རེས	Vemacitra, Splendid Robe	thag bzangs res
ཐག་བཟོ	rope making	thag bzo
ཐག་ཡིད་རིང	1 of drang srong bdun	thag yid ring
ཐག་རན	fibre from bark of trees	thag ran
ཐག་རིང	from a long distance, distance, distant, distant, far	thag ring
ཐག་རིང་གི	remote	thag ring gi
ཐག་རིང་གི་གཏམ	accounts of bygone events	thag ring gi gtam
ཐག་རིང་གི་ཡུལ་ལ	far away	thag ring gi yul la
ཐག་རིང་གི་ལམ	faraway places	thag ring gi lam
ཐག་རིང་འགྲོན་པོ	long-distance traveller	thag ring 'gron po
ཐག་རིང་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	foreign lands	thag ring rgyal khams
ཐག་རིང་རྒྱུགས་རྩལ	marathon	thag ring rgyugs rtsal
ཐག་རིང་ཐུང	distance in general	thag ring thung
ཐག་རིང་ཐུང་ག་འདྲ་འདུག	how far is it?	thag ring thung ga 'dra 'dug
ཐག་རིང་དུ	far, remotely, at a distance, farther	thag ring du
ཐག་རིང་ན	far, remotely, at a distance	thag ring na
ཐག་རིང་ནས	from a distance, from afar	thag ring nas
ཐག་རིང་ནས་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་པ	remote control	thag ring nas kha lo sgyur pa
ཐག་རིང་པོ	long distance, far away, distant	thag ring po
ཐག་རིང་པོ་གྲག་པ	far-famed	thag ring po grag pa
ཐག་རིང་དཔུང་འཇུག	thag ring du dpung dmag gtong 'jug	thag ring dpung 'jug
ཐག་རིང་འཕྲིན་ཡིག་རིག་པ	telecommunication	thag ring 'phrin yig rig pa
ཐག་རིང་མོ	long distance, far away, distant	thag ring mo
ཐག་རིང་ཚད་འཛིན	remote control	thag ring tshad 'dzin
ཐག་རིང་ལ	far, remotely, at a distance	thag ring la
ཐག་རིང་ས་ཕྱོགས	distant places	thag ring sa phyogs
ཐག་རིས་ཀྱི་རས	tapestry	thag ris kyi ras
ཐག་ལུང	gdang thag gi sne 'gugs thag sa cha gnyis bar gyi ring tshad dam	thag lung
བར་ཁྱོན	...Sa thag le dbar khri phrag gis chod pa	bar khyon
ཐག་སྲིང་བའི་གཉེན་པོ	rnam grol gyi lam dang po sdug bsngal la chos shes ma gtogs pa de yan chad kyi khyad par gyi lam ste thob pa thag sring ba'o, gnyen po bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste	thag sring ba'i gnyen po
ཐག་བསྲིང	keep far from / remote, distant	thag bsring
ཐག་བསྲིང་གི་གཉེན་པོ	far-abandoning antidote	thag bsring gi gnyen po
ཐག་བསྲིང་བ	prolongation/ extension	thag bsring ba
ཐག་བསྲིང་བའི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote involving prolongation/ extension	thag bsring ba'i gnyen po
ཐག་བསྲིང་བྱེད་པ	to prolong/ extend	thag bsring byed pa
ཐག་བསྲིངས	keep far from, remote, distant	thag bsrings
ཐྭག	the cracking	thwag
ཐགས	1) Ras snam sogs kyi thags .Ras thags.Snam bu'i thags; 2) Gral lam star. tshems kyi thags. texture, weave, web	thags
ཐགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	any stuff with which to weave, warp	thags kyi rgyu
ཐགས་ཀྱི་སྤུན	woof	thags kyi spun
ཐགས་བཀྲོལ	loosen the knots in the loom	thags bkrol
ཐགས་རྐང	bkal btags kyi bar gseng hral zhib	thags rkang
ཐགས་ཁྲི	loom	thags khri
ཐགས་མཁན	spider, weaver, fence of thorny plants	thags mkhan
ཐགས་མཁན་འབུ	spider	thags mkhan 'bu
ཐགས་འཁྲུགས་པ	thags kyi rgyu spun [warp and woof of weaving] 'dzings pa	thags 'khrugs pa
ཐགས་གྲུ་བུ	balls of thread	thags gru bu
ཐགས་རྒྱུད	thags skud kyi gzhung skud	thags rgyud
ཐགས་གཅད་ཏུ་འཇུག་པའི་སྤང་བ	renunciation of resolutely entering	thags gcad tu 'jug pa'i spang ba
ཐགས་ཆས	weaving implements	thags chas
ཐགས་བཇང་རིས	. see ...bzang	thags bjang ris
ཐགས་རྗེས་འཛིན་པར་ཞུ	please accept [this] request	thags rjes 'dzin par zhu
ཐགས་བཏགས	wove [cloth]	thags btags
ཐགས་སྟེགས	loom	thags stegs
ཐགས་ཐོགས	hindrance, impediment	thags thogs
ཐགས་འཐག་མཁན	weaver	thags 'thag mkhan
ཐགས་འཐག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པའི་སྤང་བ	abandonment offense of cloth weaving	thags 'thag tu 'jug pa'i spang ba
ཐགས་འཐག་པ	weave, weaver	thags 'thag pa
ཐགས་འཐག་པའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cloth weaving machine	thags 'thag pa'i 'phrul 'khor
ཐགས་འཐག་སའི་ར་བ	place weaving is done	thags 'thag sa'i ra ba
ཐགས་དྲུབས་མ	ri mo btags yod pa'i dar gos sogs	thags drubs ma
ཐགས་གནས	place weaving is done	thags gnas
ཐགས་སྣལ་མ	thread/ yarn for weaving	thags snal ma
ཐགས་སྤུན	thread stretched crosswise in weaving	thags spun
ཐགས་ཕྱོགས	policy, line	thags phyogs
ཐགས་བྲན་པ	thags kyi rgyu skud bran 'then byed pa.Ras dang snam rigs 'thag pa'i sngon la snal ma thags bran dgos	thags bran pa
ཐགས་བྲན་བྱེད་པ	begin the warp	thags bran byed pa
ཐགས་མ	weaver	thags ma
ཐགས་གཞི	texture	thags gzhi
ཐགས་ཟངས་རིས	vemacitri (name of an asura prince)	thags zangs ris
ཐགས་བཟང་བ	bar mtshams ral 'grig pa. tshems thags bzang ba	thags bzang ba
ཐགས་བཟང་རིས	Splendid Fabric, one of {rgyal po bzhi'i ris} Abodes of the Four Kings [of demigods] 1140	thags bzang ris
ཐགས་ར	weaver's shop, place weaving is done	thags ra
ཐགས་རན	attached, tied, bound, fastened	thags ran
ཐགས་ལས་བྱེད་མཁན	weaver	thags las byed mkhan
ཐགས་སེ་ཐག	flapping	thags se thag
ཐགས་བསངས་རིས	[the buddha/ sage/ thub pa in the abode of pretas] OR ??? {lha ma yin gyi gnas} Vemacitra, splendid robe, sage/buddha of the jealous gods ??	thags bsangs ris
ཐགས་ལྷོད་མ	loose weave	thags lhod ma
ཐང	plain, flatlands; plain, steppe, soup, flat area, prairie, broth, flatlands	thang
ཐང་ཀ	Tangka Skt pata. A painting on cloth	thang ka
ཐང་ཀློག་སྒྲ	colloquial and literary language	thang klog sgra
ཐང་དཀར	{drag srong thang dkar rgod po} the sagely white eagle	thang dkar
ཐང་དཀར་རྒོད་པོ	white eagle	thang dkar rgod po
ཐང་དཀྱིལ	{long ba thang dkyil lus pa} blind men lost in the middle of a plain	thang dkyil
ཐང་དཀྱིལ་དུ	in the middle of a plain	thang dkyil du
ཐང་རྐྱལ	skin bag in which parched flour meal is prepared for eating	thang rkyal
ཐང་སྐམ་ལ་སླེབས	get ashore	thang skam la slebs
ཐང་སྐུ	thangka, painting on cloth	thang sku
ཐང་སྐུ་ལ་བལྟས་པ	looked at the painting	thang sku la bltas pa
ཐང་སྐྱ	place near lhasa	thang skya
ཐང་ཁ	thang ga, Tibetan hanging scroll painting, picture [of a yidam]	thang kha
ཐང་ཁུག	small skin ban	thang khug
ཐང་ཁུག་གོན	be duped/ tricked/ deceived thang khug g.yogs - dupe, trick, deceive	thang khug gon
ཐང་ཁྲག	blood-like sap of thang shing	thang khrag
ཐང་ཁྲམ	[arch] lag 'dzin khyim yig	thang khram
ཐང་ཁྲུང	bastard, SA thang chu	thang khrung
ཐང་ཁྲོམ	thorn apple, dhattura, datura	thang khrom
ཐང་ག	thangka, Tibetan scroll painting	thang ga
ཐང་གི་སྦྱོར་བ	nad gang yang thog mar smin sdud 'byed pa la nus pa rno myur ldan pa ro'i las byed pa shas che ba thang gi sde ste, sman gang chol tsam brdungs nas chur skol ba'i khu ba khong du bsten dgos pa zhig	thang gi sbyor ba
ཐང་གི་ཙི་ཙི	field shrew	thang gi tsi tsi
ཐང་གི་སྲིན་བུ	earthworm	thang gi srin bu
ཐང་གྱེ	plain, steppe	thang gye
ཐང་གྱེར	vast plain, large thangka	thang gyer
ཐང་འགའ	sometimes	thang 'ga'
ཐང་འགའ་འཕྲད་པ	momentary	thang 'ga' 'phrad pa
ཐང་འགོ	1) thang ga'i 'go; 2) Klung thang gi stod phyogs	thang 'go
ཐང་རྒྱལ་སྙན་རྒྱུད	Oral Transmission of Thangtong Gyalpo (in volume one of Chögyal Namkhai Norbu's klong gsal teachings)	thang rgyal snyan rgyud
ཐང་སྒྲོན	thang shing torch	thang sgron
ཐང་ངི་ཐུང་ངི	not long, various kinds of short things, little bits and pieces	thang ngi thung ngi
ཐང་ངེ་ཐིང་ངེ	hesitation	thang nge thing nge
ཐང་ཅིག	second	thang cig
ཐང་ཅིག་འགྲོ་མྱོང	[I] went once	thang cig 'gro myong
ཐང་ཅིག་ཙམ་དུ་བར་ཆད་བྱེད་པ	create only a moment's/ minute's hindrance	thang cig tsam du bar chad byed pa
ཐང་གཅིག	thang cig	thang gcig
ཐང་གཅོད	thang sha gcod pa	thang gcod
ཐང་གཅོད་པ	tire, fatigue	thang gcod pa
ཐང་བཅད	stingy	thang bcad
ཐང་ཆད	tired; vi. to be tired / fatigued / worn out	thang chad
ཐང་ཆད་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	indefatigable	thang chad rgyu med pa
ཐང་ཆད་ཅིང་ཉམ་ཐག་པ	were exhausted	thang chad cing nyam thag pa
ཐང་ཆད་བཅུག་པ	fag	thang chad bcug pa
ཐང་ཆད་དེ་བ	dka' las khag tsam byung ba.Dka' las byung nas thang chad de bar gyur pa	thang chad de ba
ཐང་ཆད་མདོག	weary	thang chad mdog
ཐང་ཆད་པ	be tired [syn: ngal ba dang, chad pa, nyon mongs, dub pa	thang chad pa
ཐང་ཆད་པའི	exhaustion, weary	thang chad pa'i
ཐང་ཆད་པའི་དབུགས་འཐེན་པ	pant	thang chad pa'i dbugs 'then pa
ཐང་ཆད་པོ	tedious, tiresome, wearisome	thang chad po
ཐང་ཆད་པོ་བཟོ་བ	tire	thang chad po bzo ba
ཐང་ཆུ	gum, decoction	thang chu
ཐང་ཆུ་དྭངས་མ	turpentine	thang chu dwangs ma
ཐང་ཆུ་ཤིང	thang shing	thang chu shing
ཐང་ཆུང་གཙང་པོ	river in tibet	thang chung gtsang po
ཐང་ཆུས་བྱུགས	to spread a decoction	thang chus byugs
ཐང་ཆེན	square; large plain / steppe. a [town] square	thang chen
ཐང་ཆེན་བང་རྩལ་འགྲན་བསྡུར	crosscountry race thang chen g.yul 'byed dmag - army in the field	thang chen bang rtsal 'gran bsdur
ཐང་ཆོད་པ	fatigue, wearied, tired 1141	thang chod pa
ཐང་ཇུ	an emperor of tang china	thang ju
ཐང་འཇལ	survey, map, plan of a place	thang 'jal
ཐང་སྟེང་གྲུ་ཁ	{thang steng gru kha} boat landing	thang steng gru kha
ཐང་སྟོང	wilderness, desert, an empty plain	thang stong
ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ	Thangtong Gyalpo, 1361-1485	thang stong rgyal po
ཐང་སྟོང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Oral Transmission of Tangtong Gyalpo	thang stong snyan brgyud
ཐང་སྟོང་མེད་པ	constant / without fluctuation	thang stong med pa
ཐང་སྟོད་མེད་པ	constant, without fluctuation	thang stod med pa
ཐང་ཐང	1) taught tight tense; 2) hard, solid, stiff; 3) healthy well; 3) Ma chag pa'am ma grums pa.Lcags snod thang thang	thang thang
ཐང་ཐུང	little bits and pieces, short pieces	thang thung
ཐང་ཐུང་ཞིག	little bits and pieces, short pieces	thang thung zhig
ཐང་ཐེ་ཇུང	emperor whose daughter married srong btsan sgam po about 633 AD	thang the jung
ཐང་ཐེར	virgin/ uncultivated land	thang ther
ཐང་དུ	in the opinion of, SA thang yig tu, in extent	thang du
ཐང་དུ་འཁྱམས་པ	wandering the plains	thang du 'khyams pa
ཐང་དུ་ལྷུག	one is instantly relaxed	thang du lhug
ཐང་སྡེར	vast plain	thang sder
ཐང་ནག	black thangka	thang nag
ཐང་པ	plains dwellers	thang pa
ཐང་པོ	healthy, well, tense, tight, firm, taut [Zam pa de thang po mi 'dug ...Gzugs po thang po 'dug]	thang po
ཐང་པོ་ཆེ	1) sol nag thang po che [place in 'phyongs rgyas rdzong, 1 of the bod khri skor bcu gsum]; 2) great plain	thang po che
ཐང་ཕུ	{thang phu}	thang phu
ཐང་ཕྲོམ	medicinal herb of white and black species	thang phrom
ཐང་ཕྲོམ་དཀར་པོ	{thang phrom dkar po} [ro bska la kha zhing tsa, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas gag lhog 'josam ?, Glang thabs gsod, ro tsa bar byed, dug shas che]	thang phrom dkar po
ཐང་ཕྲོམ་ཁྲ་བོ	{thang phrom khra bo} med. herb [ro kha la bska zhing tsa ba, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas long srin 'joms, gag lhog la phan, dug shas che]	thang phrom khra bo
ཐང་ཕྲོམ་ནག་པོ	{thang phrom nag po med herb [ro kha la bska zhing tsa, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas srin nad dang lhog pa la phan, dug shas che]	thang phrom nag po
ཐང་བྲང	in a houseless plain pa'i sder thang, place to stay for the night, encampment	thang brang
ཐང་དབྱེ	sa thang a long way from a village	thang dbye
ཐང་འབྲུ	ceder nuts	thang 'bru
ཐང་སྦྱོར་སྡེ་ཚན	thang gi sbyor ba	thang sbyor sde tshan
ཐང་སྦྲུལ	desert snake	thang sbrul
ཐང་མ	1) level, even, spread out evenly/ extensively 'Bru 'bras thang mar brdal nas nyi ma la bskams pa; 2) hard, solid bar lam sku gzugs thang ma yin shag	thang ma
ཐང་མ་སྒྲོན་ཤིང	larch tree	thang ma sgron shing
ཐང་མ་མེ་སྒྲོན	epithet of bon deity resembling byams pa	thang ma me sgron
ཐང་མར	balsam, tar	thang mar
ཐང་མར་བརྡལ	extensive, "spreads down over the plains," spread evenly/ extensively	thang mar brdal
ཐང་མར་བརྡལ་བ	lit. "spread down over the plains", extensive	thang mar brdal ba
ཐང་མར་བྲལ་བ	lit. spread down over the plains / extensive	thang mar bral ba
ཐང་མེད	unhealthy, unwell	thang med
ཐང་མྱུལ	wandering as [they] like	thang myul
ཐང་དམར	thang shing gi bye brag cig	thang dmar
ཐང་སྨན	1) gdus [boiled down juice/ essence] med.; 2) herb not growing in mt peaks and high places but mostly in plains	thang sman
ཐང་སྨུག	1) bya rgod thang smug; 2) a kind of thang shing	thang smug
ཐང་ཙྭ	kind of salt made from rotted thang shing root or bits of wood	thang tswa
ཐང་ཙམ	a moment yud tsam, a little while, soon	thang tsam
ཐང་ཙམ་སོང་ནས	after awhile	thang tsam song nas
ཐང་ཙི	resin/ gum tsi	thang tsi
ཐང་ཚྭ	salt obtained from a dry place, quarried salt	thang tshwa
ཐང་ཚད	a standard tangka size	thang tshad
ཐང་ཞིང	field in a flatland/ plain	thang zhing
ཐང་ཞུ	bla chas summer hat	thang zhu
ཐང་གཞལ	survey, map, rin thang [price] 'jal ba [Ca lag 'di'i rin thang gzhal ba]	thang gzhal
ཐང་གཞི	market price, the going rate/ price	thang gzhi
ཐང་གཞི་ཆག	reduction of the cost price	thang gzhi chag
ཐང་གཞིའི་གནས་ཚུལ	market price, the going rate/ price, situation of the market	thang gzhi'i gnas tshul
ཐང་ཟན་ཙང	(CH {thang zan tsang	thang zan tsang
ཐང་ཟན་ཚང	(CH) {thang zan tshang} [thang rgyal rabs skabs ho nan yan hri zhan du chu khyi lor 'khrungs, chung ngu nas rab tu byung zhing mtshan la shyan tzang zhes gsol, dgung lo nyer dgu pa nas nub phyogs k...	thang zan tshang
ཐང་ཡང	decoction	thang yang
ཐང་ཡངས་པ	wide field	thang yangs pa
ཐང་ཡངས་པོ	square	thang yangs po
ཐང་ཡིག	a certain dakini script, termas of religious history and biography, chronicle, Gd: title	thang yig
ཐང་ཡིག་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five chronicles [lo pan bka' thang, btzun mo bka' thang, rgyal po bka' thang, blon po bka' thang, lha 'dre bka' thang bcas lnga'o. texts by {o rgyan gling pa}	thang yig sde lnga
ཐང་རག	cedar	thang rag
ཐང་རིན	market rate/ price	thang rin
ཐང་རེ	once	thang re
ཐང་ལ	Thang, a pass in Domey	thang la
ཐང་ལ་འཕང	thrown to the ground	thang la 'phang
ཐང་ལ་འཕངས	thrown to the grown [ground?]	thang la 'phangs
ཐང་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཞིང་ག	field in a flatland/ plain thang la g.yug - ATG: to throw on the ground. Syn. sa la g.yug. [mss]	thang la yod pa'i zhing ga
ཐང་ཤ་གཅོད་པ	leather etc rlan skam du bcug ste 'then zhing 'khum rgyu med par bzo ba.Ko ba brgyangs te kham khum gyi thang sha gcod pa	thang sha gcod pa
ཐང་ཤ་དོད་པོ	gzugs khams thang po.Mi 'di thang sha dod po zhig 'dug	thang sha dod po
ཐང་ཤད	grva pas phyag 'tsal ba'i dod dam, tsab	thang shad
ཐང་ཤིང	pine	thang shing
ཐང་ཤིང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	cone	thang shing gi 'bras bu
ཐང་ཤིང་མདའ་འཛིན	junip[er tree	thang shing mda' 'dzin
ཐང་ཤིང་ནག་པོ	{thang shing nag po} tree	thang shing nag po
ཐང་ཤིང་སྣུམ	snum tsi from thang shing	thang shing snum
ཐང་ཤིང་ལོ་མ	pine needles etc.	thang shing lo ma
ཐང་གཤོངས	basin [place]	thang gshongs
ཐང་སག	district in phan yul	thang sag
ཐང་ལྷ	[byang gnyan chen thang lha ste gzhi bdag cig] Tangla Mts, a diety	thang lha
ཐང་ལྷོད	tight & loose, the fit of clothing	thang lhod
ཐང་ལྷོད་མེད་པ	unflagging even, neither strict nor mild	thang lhod med pa
ཐང་ལྷོད་རན་པོ	between tight and loose	thang lhod ran po
ཐད	1) concerning about. 2) aspect, respect, side. 3) the direction straight forward, whole, all than a piece of cloth	thad
ཐད་ཀ	1) right in front of, drang thad; 2) nearby, around about; 3) straight, direct; 4) level of	thad ka
ཐད་ཀ་ཐད་ཀར་བྱེད་པ	the temporary doing of	thad ka thad kar byed pa
ཐད་ཀའི་སྤྱི	horizontal universal [ggd]	thad ka'i spyi
ཐད་ཀའི་རི་བོ	surrounding/ confronting mts	thad ka'i ri bo
ཐད་ཀར	straightforwardly/ directly; isc. patently	thad kar
ཐད་ཀར་བརྐྱངས	stretch out straight	thad kar brkyangs
ཐད་ཀར་བརྐྱངས་པ	well stretched	thad kar brkyangs pa
ཐད་ཀར་བསྐྱངས་པ	to sustain with immediacy	thad kar bskyangs pa
ཐད་ཀར་བརྒྱངས	to stretch straight out	thad kar brgyangs
ཐད་ཀར་ངོ་སྤྲོད	direct revelation	thad kar ngo sprod
ཐད་ཀར་རྔུབ	fast inhalation (could be direct or indirect)	thad kar rngub
ཐད་ཀར་གཏད	gaze directly ahead	thad kar gtad
ཐད་ཀར་བལྟ	to gaze directly, gaze directly ahead	thad kar blta
ཐད་ཀར་དུ	directly	thad kar du
ཐད་ཀར་འཕྲད	to stretch apart	thad kar 'phrad
ཐད་ཀར་བབས་པ	one's equal	thad kar babs pa
ཐད་ཀར་བོགས་གཏོང་བྱས	lease hold directly	thad kar bogs gtong byas
ཐད་ཀར་མ་ཡིན་པ	indirect	thad kar ma yin pa
ཐད་ཀར་བཤད་པ	direct explanation	thad kar bshad pa
ཐད་ཀྱ	straight on, just so, like that, so	thad kya
ཐད་དགུ	a number	thad dgu
ཐད་སྒྱུར	don thob la ma brtsis par skad dod ltar thad kar sgyur ba	thad sgyur
ཐད་བསྒྱུར	change the direction	thad bsgyur
ཐད་གཏོགས	dngos su gtogs pa	thad gtogs
ཐད་དང་བརྒྱུད	directly and indirectly	thad dang brgyud
ཐད་དུ	directly in front of; towards/ straight towards	thad du
ཐད་དུ་འགྲོ་བར་འོས་པ	worthy of being approached	thad du 'gro bar 'os pa
ཐད་དུ་འདོང་བ	going directly	thad du 'dong ba
ཐད་དུ་གཟས་པ	be about to, be on the point of, prepare to	thad du gzas pa
ཐད་དུ་ལྷགས	approached, came to, came up to	thad du lhags
ཐད་དོ	remnant of sheep carcass	thad do
ཐད་དྲང	face to face, straight [line]/ [ahead]	thad drang
ཐད་དྲང་དུ	in a straightforward manner	thad drang du
ཐད་དྲང་ན	directly ahead	thad drang na
ཐད་ནས	from the point of view of	thad nas
ཐད་དཔྱངས	drang thad du btags pa'i dpyangs thag	thad dpyangs
ཐད་ཕུར་གནས་གྲུ	helicopter	thad phur gnas gru
ཐད་ཕུར་གནས་པ	helicopter	thad phur gnas pa
ཐད་མ	proof, evidence/ logical	thad ma
ཐད་མ་སྡེ་བདུན	Syn {tshad ma'i bstan bcos sde bdun}	thad ma sde bdun
ཐད་ཚོར	direct perception [mig gis dngos su mthong ba dang, yid kyis dngos su dran pa]	thad tshor
ཐད་མཚམས	skabs su bab pa'i mtshams. Las khur rang thog babs pa'i thad mtshams	thad mtshams
ཐད་སོ	direct, straight[forward]	thad so
ཐད་སོར་དྲང་གཏམ་བཤད་ན་གོ་བདེ	If 1 explains in straightforward language it is easy to understand	thad sor drang gtam bshad na go bde
ཐད་སོར་འཕྲོད་པ	in front of each other	thad sor 'phrod pa
ཐན	portent/ augury	than
ཐན་ཀྭ	musk melon	than kwa
ཐན་ཀོར	1) neighborhood, vicinity, surrounding[s] [.Khang pa'i than kor la chu yur dang, rtsva shing tsal zhing yod]	than kor
ཐན་སྐད	bad omen sgrog pa'i skad	than skad
ཐན་སྐོར	vassal, feudatory chief, surrounding country	than skor
ཐན་སྐྱོན	drought damage	than skyon
ཐན་བསྐུར	send a reply	than bskur
ཐན་ཁེ	tank	than khe
ཐན་ཁེ་འཁོར་ལོ	tank [military]	than khe 'khor lo
ཐན་འགོག	drought prevention	than 'gog
ཐན་འགྱེད་པ	inauspicious talk, 'phrin ngan bskur ba	than 'gyed pa
ཐན་ལྟས	bad omen	than ltas
ཐན་ཐུན	just a little/ few	than thun
ཐན་ཐུབ	drought resistant	than thub
ཐན་ཐུབ་ལོ་ཏོག	drought resistant crops	than thub lo tog
ཐན་འདྲེ	1) bad omen giving 'dre; 2) crop harming drought causing 'dre	than 'dre
ཐན་པ	1) drought; 2) bad omen	than pa
ཝེཨཐེར	heat, drought	weather
ཐན་པའི་ས་ཁུལ	dry weather/ drought region	than pa'i sa khul
ཐན་སྤྲིན	clouds which are a bad omen	than sprin
ཐན་བྱ	bird of drought, bird of ominous appearance and cry	than bya
ཐན་བྱུང	1) drought occurring for crops; 2) bad talk being heard	than byung
ཐན་བྱུར	chags sgo and inauspicious	than byur
ཐན་ཙི	blanket	than tsi
ཐན་འོག	drought prevention	than 'og
ཐན་ལན་ལྕགས་ལམ	Tien-shui-Lanchow RR	than lan lcags lam
ཐན་སེལ	exorcism of bodeful portents	than sel
ཐན་སོན་རླུང	carbonic acid gas	than son rlung
ཐབ	kitchen range, cooking stove, canteen, hearth, stove, fireplace, stove, fireplace	thab
ཐབ་ཀ	stove, hearth, fireplace	thab ka
ཐབ་ཀ་པ	cook	thab ka pa
ཐབ་ཀ་བ	thab tu me gtong mkhan / zas gyo mkhan [= phyag tshang ba, ma byan, 'tshad byed pa, zan ma, zas gnyer, zas byed, gyos dpon, gyos ma, lag bde, lag bde'i dpon po]	thab ka ba
ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	cooking/ kitchen utensils	thab kyi yo byad
ཐབ་ཀྱི་ས་ཙིག	earth [med] from the middle of a hearth earth	thab kyi sa tsig
ཐབ་སྐམ	fire pincers	thab skam
ཐབ་སྐོར་ཀྱི་གྲལ་ནས	[taken away] from your home and companions	thab skor kyi gral nas
ཐབ་སྐྱེལ	escorting picnic	thab skyel
ཐབ་ཁ	hearth, fireplace	thab kha
ཐབ་ཁ་པ	cook	thab kha pa
ཐབ་ཁག	different kinds of hearth	thab khag
ཐབ་ཁང	* kitchen	thab khang
ཐབ་ཁུང	fireplace, hearth / fire pit	thab khung
ཐབ་ཁོངས	people who eat together in the same kitchen/ unit	thab khongs
ཐབ་ཁྲོ	cauldron, large bell-metal vessel to cook food	thab khro
ཐབ་མཁས	skillful means	thab mkhas
ཐབ་གུར	kitchen tent	thab gur
ཐབ་གྲིབ	hearth defilement	thab grib
ཐབ་མགོ	fire wood 'bud place sgo'i phyogs	thab mgo
ཐབ་འགྲམ	near the hearth/ stove	thab 'gram
ཐབ་སྒོ	firewood 'bud sa'i sgo	thab sgo
ཐབ་སྒྱིད	hearth, cooking tripod	thab sgyid
ཐབ་སྒྱེད	thab rdo	thab sgyed
ཐབ་སྒྲོམ	box for utensils and plates, chest or basket with kitchen utensils	thab sgrom
ཐབ་ཅས	cooking/ kitchen utensils	thab cas
ཐབ་ཆི	button	thab chi
ཐབ་ཆུང་མེ་ཚ	small hearth hot fire, looks small/ weak but very powerful	thab chung me tsha
ཐབ་ཆེན	large hearth, furnace	thab chen
ཐབ་ཆེས་ཕྲས	[arch] great battle	thab ches phras
ཐབ་གཉེར	cook, ja ma, furnace operator	thab gnyer
ཐབ་ཐབ	flapping noise	thab thab
ཐབ་ཐིབ	large number	thab thib
ཐབ་གདན་ཆ	kitchen implements and gdan cha	thab gdan cha
ཐབ་འདྲེ	'dre of the hearth	thab 'dre
ཐབ་རྡོ	stones for building a hearth	thab rdo
ཐབ་རྡོ་སུམ་ཙོམ	sgyed pu sum tsugs	thab rdo sum tsom
ཐབ་སྣོད	cooking pots	thab snod
ཐབ་ཕྱིས	table etc. phyis bdar gtong byed kyi cloth	thab phyis
ཐབ་བི་ཐིབ་བི	1) clouds gathering and piling up [sprin 'thibs pa dang, gangs chen po 'thul ba'i tshul,...Gnam thab bi thib bi'i dkyil nas kha ba thab bi thib bir bab pa]; 2) Rig pa mi gsal ba'i tshul,...Shes pa ...	thab bi thib bi
ཐབ་བེ་ཐིབ་བེ	cloudy [weather] diy [for persons]	thab be thib be
ཐབ་མིག	stove burners [zas snod 'dzugs sa'i thab kyi khung bu]	thab mig
ཐབ་མིག་གསུམ་ཡོད་པའི་ལྕགས་ཐབ	three burner metal stove	thab mig gsum yod pa'i lcags thab
ཐབ་ཚགས	go thal 'bab sa'i tshags	thab tshags
ཐབ་ཚང	kitchen, cook house	thab tshang
ཐབ་ཚང་སྒོ	kitchen door	thab tshang sgo
ཐབ་ཚི	button	thab tshi
ཐབ་ཚུགས	khyim 'dzin gyi 'tsho thabs sam, 'tsho rten	thab tshugs
ཐབ་འཛིན་པ	khyim tshang btsugs te 'tsho skyong byed pa	thab 'dzin pa
ཐབ་གཞོབ	Bönpo concept that the foul smell from the burning of an impure object [e.g. a leper's corpse] which will confuse and anger local gods	thab gzhob
ཐབ་རེ	to allow	thab re
ཐབ་ལ	thab la pass	thab la
ཐབ་ལ་གནས་པའི་ལྷ	hearth god	thab la gnas pa'i lha
ཐབ་ལས	cooking	thab las
ཐབ་ལས་དང་ཟས་ཀྱི	culinary	thab las dang zas kyi
ཐབ་ཤིང	firewood for cooking	thab shing
ཐབ་ཤོར	1) khyim shor ba'am, empty house; 2) raw meat etc thab nang shor ba	thab shor
ཐབ་ཤོར་མེད་པ	stalemate	thab shor med pa
ཐབ་གཤོབ	bonpo concept that the foul smell from the burning of an impure object [e.g. a leper's corpse] will confuse and anger the local deities	thab gshob
ཐབ་སྲི་ངོ་ནག	black face sri of the hearth	thab sri ngo nag
ཐབ་གསུར	smoke of food bsregs pa [burned/ roasted] in a hearth	thab gsur
ཐབ་བསངས་ཐབ་ཁྲུས	clean and wash a kitchen	thab bsangs thab khrus
ཐབ་བསུ	places near or far thab brgyab ste tea etc. 'dren pa'i phebs bsu	thab bsu
ཐབ་ལྷ	deity presiding over the hearth	thab lha
ཐབ་ལྷ་སེ་ཤར	a hearth god	thab lha se shar
ཐབས	means, method [thd]	thabs
ཐབས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	representation of a mandala used in practice [sand painting, grain pile mandalas = brda'i dkyil] upaya mandala [lam gzugs brnyan thabs mandala, rdul tshon dang, ras bris dang, tshom bu'i dkyil 'kho...	thabs kyi dkyil 'khor
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཁ་ན	just on the opportunity, in the nick of time	thabs kyi kha na
ཐབས་ཀྱི་མཁས་པ	capability in skillful means	thabs kyi mkhas pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	methodical tantras	thabs kyi rgyud
ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	tantric vehicle of means. see {nang pa thabs kyi rgyud kyi thegs pa} or {nang pa thabs kyi theg pa}	thabs kyi rgyud kyi theg pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་སྒོ	bya ba'i thabs shes kyi phyogs	thabs kyi sgo
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ངེས་པའི་ལམ	definitive path of skillful means [according to Anuyoga two esoteric instructions of the path of skillful means according to anuyoga book 1, p. 000. [Gd]	thabs kyi nges pa'i lam
རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བའི་ལམ་གཉིས	[two Paths, according to anuyoga] the definitive path of skillful means and the liberating path of discriminative aware ness respectively [Gd] thabs kyi nges pa'i lam dang shes rab	rnam par grol ba'i lam gnyis
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཆ	the method aspect	thabs kyi cha
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ལ་མ་རྨོངས་པ	(Mantras are unobscured in the area of skillful means GD	thabs kyi cha la ma rmongs pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of upaya, tentra yana [bsnyen sgrub las sbyor sogs thabs extensive and many &, thabs la ma rmongs pa dang, thabs la dka' ba med pa sogs phar phyin theg pa las khyad par 'phags pas thabs kyi...	thabs kyi theg pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great vehicle of skillful means	thabs kyi theg pa chen po
ཐབས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	the conduct of skillful means [in Anu yoga] 1 of {spyod pa gsum}	thabs kyi spyod pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	upayaparamits [pha rol tu phyin pa bcu'i nang gses shig ste, dge ba'i rtsa ba mang nyung ci bsags pa cung zad yan chad kyang sems can thams cad dang thun mong du byas shing bla na med pa'i byang ch...	thabs kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	1) tasks easy to accomplish byed phyogs; 2) waxing period of the moon	thabs kyi phyogs
ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྩ	a nadi	thabs kyi rtsa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྫས	upaya substances	thabs kyi rdzas
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཞགས་པ	Skillful Lasso. Also known as Concise Lotus Garland (pad mo phreng ba'i don bsdus pa), this scripture functions as a support for rituals to attain accomplishment. See Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras thab...	thabs kyi zhags pa
ཐབས་ཀྱི་ལམ	path of skillful means	thabs kyi lam
ཐབས་ཀྱིས	skilfully	thabs kyis
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོང་བ	protect by various means, attend to	thabs kyis skyong ba
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po zhig 'gog byed 'grub dka'i don zhig sgrub par skul ba'i thabs shes kyis refuting rgyan, 'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses	thabs kyis 'gog pa
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་འཇལ་བ	draw or acquire somehow or other another's property	thabs kyis 'jal ba
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཟིན	{dge ba thabs kyis zin te} embrace the virtue with a skillful means	thabs kyis zin
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཟིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to embrace with skillful means	thabs kyis zin par byed pa
ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཡང་དག་ཟིན་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna that embraces reality w skillful means thabs kyis yongs su zin pa'i byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i chos completely embracing dharmas according w the side of enlightenment through skil...	thabs kyis yang dag zin pa'i shes rab
ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོ	shanty	thabs skyo po
ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོའི་གནས་སྟང	pitiful condition	thabs skyo po'i gnas stang
ཐབས་སྐྱོ་བོ	abject, bleak, dismal, despair, despicable	thabs skyo bo
ཐབས་ཁི་ཐེག་པ	upaya yana	thabs khi theg pa
ཐབས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	possessing particular skillful means	thabs khyad par can
ཐབས་མཁས	circumspect, ingenious, resourceful, skillful, expedient, clever, skilled, skilled in means, ingenious	thabs mkhas
ཐབས་མཁས་ཀྱི་ནང་ནས	cleverly, skillfully	thabs mkhas kyi nang nas
ཐབས་མཁས་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	internally skillful in buddha dharma 'grub pa and externally ripening beings completely reveal the dharma	thabs mkhas kyi phar phyin
ཐབས་མཁས་ཀྱི་དབུ་ཁྲིད	skillful leadership	thabs mkhas kyi dbu khrid
ཐབས་མཁས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	thabs mkhas kyi tshogs sgrub
ཐབས་མཁས་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelvefold ingenuity	thabs mkhas bcu gnyis
ཐབས་མཁས་འཇམ་པོས	with skill and gentleness	thabs mkhas 'jam pos
ཐབས་མཁས་དྲག་པོ	wrathful skillful means	thabs mkhas drag po
ཐབས་མཁས་དྲུག	sixfold ingenuity	thabs mkhas drug
ཐབས་མཁས་པ	skillful in means; skillful expediency	thabs mkhas pa
ཐབས་མཁས་པའི་ཉེ་བའི་གཞི་ཤེས	[tse]	thabs mkhas pa'i nye ba'i gzhi shes
ཐབས་མཁས་པའི་མདོ	'phags pa thabs mkhas zhes bya ba'i mdo [bam po gnyis]	thabs mkhas pa'i mdo
ཐབས་མཁས་པོ	skillful, clever, ingenious	thabs mkhas po
ཐབས་མཁས་སྦྱོར་བ	[sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses] knowing when it is and is not the time/ juncture to manifest skillful means	thabs mkhas sbyor ba
ཐབས་མཁས་སྦྱོར་བ་བཅུ	the 10 timely applications of skillful means	thabs mkhas sbyor ba bcu
ཐབས་མཁྱེན་པ	capable in upaya	thabs mkhyen pa
ཐབས་གང་གིས	by whatever skillful means	thabs gang gis
ཐབས་གང་དྲག	what can i possibly do now?, what is the best means?	thabs gang drag
ཐབས་གྲོལ	means and liberation	thabs grol
ཐབས་གྲོལ་གྱི་ལམ	the paths of means and liberation thabs rgya che ba gsang sngags kyi kun	thabs grol gyi lam
སློང	the immense means of the secret mantra attitude thabs rgya che ba gsang ba sngags kyi	slong
ཐབས་རྒྱུད	tantras of skillful means	thabs rgyud
ཐབས་སྒྲུབ	finding means to accomplish something	thabs sgrub
ཐབས་བརྒྱ་ཇུས་སྟོང	[by] all kinds of means, 100 means 1000 strategies	thabs brgya jus stong
ཐབས་བསྒྲུབ	I will find a way	thabs bsgrub
ཐབས་ངན	devious/ evil means	thabs ngan
ཐབས་ཅན	skillful, clever, ingenious	thabs can
ཐབས་ཅིག	together [w]	thabs cig
ཐབས་ཅིག་ཏུ	together [w]	thabs cig tu
ཐབས་གཅིག	( . . . dang) thabs gcig - (to be) congruent/ consistent with . . .	thabs gcig
ཐབས་གཅིག་ཏུ	together/ in the company of	thabs gcig tu
ཐབས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཞུགས་པ	was dwelling in the company of	thabs gcig tu bzhugs pa
ཐབས་ཆག	shift, makeshift, surrogate	thabs chag
ཐབས་ཆག་པ	all chance of [attaining Buddhahood] is ruined, nothing is of any use	thabs chag pa
ཐབས་མཆོག	the supreme method, most eminent means	thabs mchog
ཐབས་མཆོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོའི་ལུགས	the system of the supreme method of the Vajra Essence	thabs mchog rdo rje snying po'i lugs
ཐབས་མཆོག་ཤེས་པ	knowing the supreme means	thabs mchog shes pa
ཐབས་ཇི་ལྟར་བྱ	how shall I?	thabs ji ltar bya
ཐབས་ཇུས	ways and means to accomplish tasks, strategy, plans, tactics, policies	thabs jus
ཐབས་ཇུས་ཀྱི	tactical	thabs jus kyi
ཐབས་ཇུས་སྔོན་འགོད	planning	thabs jus sngon 'god
ཐབས་ཇུས་གཏན་འབེབས	decision, settling on a plan	thabs jus gtan 'bebs
ཐབས་ཇུས་འདྲི་ཡུལ	counselor, adviser	thabs jus 'dri yul
ཐབས་ཇུས་མེད་སྐྱོན་འཛུགས	harm directly w/o using tactics	thabs jus med skyon 'dzugs
ཐབས་ཇུས་འཛོལ	miscalculate, have a plan fall through	thabs jus 'dzol
ཐབས་ཇུས་ཟབ་མོ	far-sighted plan/ strategy	thabs jus zab mo
ཐབས་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	the 21 upayas	thabs nyi shu rtsa gcig
ཐབས་ཉིད་དུ་རུང་བ	in accord w upaya	thabs nyid du rung ba
ཐབས་གཉིས་མཉམ་སྤྱོད	using 2/ all means together to get something	thabs gnyis mnyam spyod
ཐབས་རྙིང	old methods/ ways	thabs rnying
ཐབས་རྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	upaya and the great compassion	thabs rnying rje chen po
ཐབས་རྙེད	find skillful means to	thabs rnyed
ཐབས་སྙིང་རྗེ་སྒྱུ་མ	means, the magical compassion, apparition of compassion which is skillful means; One of {ting nge 'dzin gsum}	thabs snying rje sgyu ma
ཐབས་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	[skillful] means as great compassion thabs steng sgo'i man ngag dang 'og sgo'i	thabs snying rje chen po
མན་ངག་གཉིས	Two Esoteric Instructions of the Path of Skillful Means in Anu Yoga. Esoteric instructions associated with the upper doors. or centers of the body and the lower door. or secret center of the body r...	man ngag gnyis
ཐབས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	the ultimate method	thabs thams cad kyi mthar thug pa
ཐབས་འཐོལ་བྱེད	try to find	thabs 'thol byed
ཐབས་དག	abrupt	thabs dag
ཐབས་དག་ཏུ་འཁྲི་བཙན་བཅད	abruptly cut strong attachments	thabs dag tu 'khri btsan bcad
ཐབས་དང་ལྡན་པའི་ལས་ཀྱི་སྐབས	a situation of action possessing skillful means thabs dang ldan pa'i las yid la byed pa apprehension/ idea of skillful action	thabs dang ldan pa'i las kyi skabs
ཐབས་དང་བྲལ	1) no way to do--; 2) no	thabs dang bral
ཆོཨིཅེ་བུཏ་ཏོ་དོ	--	choice but to do
ཐབས་དང་སྦྱར	to be resourceful	thabs dang sbyar
ཐབས་དང་ཤེས་རབ	means and knowledge; Skt. prajna and upaya. Buddhahood is attained by uniting means and knowledge; in Mahayana, compassion and emptiness, relative and ultimate bodhichitta. In Vajrayana, means and ...	thabs dang shes rab
ཐབས་དང་ཤེས་རབ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable means and knowledge	thabs dang shes rab dbyer med
ཐབས་དང་ཤེས་རབ་བཟུང་འཇུག	union of upaya and prajna	thabs dang shes rab bzung 'jug
ཐབས་དུ་མས	aided by	thabs du mas
ཐབས་དེའི་གདམས་ངག་གྱིས་ཟིན་པ	use the method of following his advice	thabs de'i gdams ngag gyis zin pa
ཐབས་དྲིས་རྩིས	{rgyal pos blon 'bangs la thabs dris rtsis byas pa} the king consulted his ministers	thabs dris rtsis
ཐབས་བདེ་བ	easy {'jug pa'i thabs bde ba} easy to enter thabs bde ba chen po dang shes rab	thabs bde ba
སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ཟུང་དུ་འབྲེལ་བ	the union of Great Bliss as Skillful Means and Emptiness as Prajna thabs bde ba chen po dang shes rab	stong pa nyid zung du 'brel ba
ཐབས་རྡུགས	have no way to, have exhausted all means to	thabs rdugs
ཐབས་རྡུགས་པ	ocean, anything poisonous or mischievous	thabs rdugs pa
ཐབས་ལྡན	possessing skillful means	thabs ldan
ཐབས་སྡུག	pitiful, wretched	thabs sdug
ཐབས་སྡུག་ཅན	piteous	thabs sdug can
ཐབས་སྡུག་པ	shameless evil intentions	thabs sdug pa
ཐབས་སྡུག་པོ	destitute, miserable, wretched, incapable, hopeless, blundering	thabs sdug po
ཐབས་རྣམ་པ་གང	all kinds/ every kind of method/ means	thabs rnam pa gang
ཐབས་སྣ་ཚོགས	various methods, various means	thabs sna tshogs
ཐབས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས	by any other means they could devise	thabs sna tshogs kyis
ཐབས་པས་མ་དམིགས	without reliance upon the methods of practice	thabs pas ma dmigs
ཐབས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན་ལྔ	the [1st] five paramitas that are the aspect of means	thabs phyogs kyi phar phyin lnga
ཐབས་འཕྲུལ	many devious methods/ means /stratagems 'phrul thabs [creative/ mechanical power?] thabs 'phrul sna tshogs kyis gzhan mgo	thabs 'phrul
མ་སྐོར	deceive others by various devious means	ma skor
ཐབས་བྱུང	action born	thabs byung
ཐབས་བྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	{thabs la brten pa'i thabs byung} the insight which arises as a result of practising the skilful means	thabs byung gi shes rab
ཐབས་བྱུས	ways and means to accomplish tasks, strategy, plans, tactics, policies	thabs byus
ཐབས་བྱེད	try to do --	thabs byed
ཐབས་བྱེད་ཀྱི	try to do --	thabs byed kyi
ཐབས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་པ་རེད	trying to do -	thabs byed kyi yod pa red
ཐབས་བྲལ	no choice, no way	thabs bral
ཐབས་བྲལ་བའི་དཀའ་ངལ	fix	thabs bral ba'i dka' ngal
ཐབས་བློ་ཞེ་བསྐྱེད	thabs dang blo gros gting nas bskyed pa	thabs blo zhe bskyed
ཐབས་སྦྱོར	apply skillful means	thabs sbyor
ཐབས་མ་རྙེད་པ	x {sems can mang po'i re ba rdzogs pa'i thabs ma rnyed pa} not having obtained the means to fulfill the wishes of many beings	thabs ma rnyed pa
ཐབས་མ་ཡིན	unskillful in means	thabs ma yin
ཐབས་མ་ཡིན་པ	lack of [skill in] means thabs ma yin pa rnam par spangs pa completely abandon unskillful means	thabs ma yin pa
ཐབས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་རིང་བའི་གཞི་ཤེས	TSE	thabs ma yin pa'i ring ba'i gzhi shes
ཐབས་མང	many skillful means	thabs mang
ཐབས་མང་དཀའ་བ་མེད་པ	it is rich in methods and without difficulties	thabs mang dka' ba med pa
ཐབས་མང་བ	manifold means [Gd]	thabs mang ba
ཐབས་མི་ཤེས་པ	no way to not knowing skilful means for	thabs mi shes pa
ཐབས་མིན	frustration	thabs min
ཐབས་མེད	no way around, unavoidable	thabs med
ཐབས་མེད་པ	no way to	thabs med pa
ཐབས་བཙན་པོ	1) las ka byed stangs tan teg; 2) drag po'i las thabs	thabs btsan po
ཐབས་རྩོལ	attempt	thabs rtsol
ཐབས་བརྩོན	work hard/ strive for, try hard	thabs brtson
ཐབས་བརྩོན་བྱེད	work hard/ strive for, try hard	thabs brtson byed
ཐབས་ཚུལ	form, fashion, way, manner	thabs tshul
ཐབས་ཚུལ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	extraordinary methods	thabs tshul khyad par can
ཐབས་འཚོལ	1) make plans/ strategies, look for ways to; 2) seek, try to get, aspire to	thabs 'tshol
ཐབས་འཚོལ་བ	resort, seek for an opportunity or means	thabs 'tshol ba
ཐབས་འཚོལ་བྱེད	try to find	thabs 'tshol byed
ཐབས་རྫས	upaya substance	thabs rdzas
ཐབས་གཞན་གང་གིས་ཀྱང	no other method can	thabs gzhan gang gis kyang
ཐབས་གཞན་མ་རྙེད་དེ	had no way to	thabs gzhan ma rnyed de
ཐབས་གཞི	plan, strategy, program	thabs gzhi
ཐབས་ཟད	have exhausted all means so that there are none left/ no way to do what 1 wants	thabs zad
ཐབས་ཟབ	excellent/ best means	thabs zab
ཐབས་ཟབ་མོ	profound skilful means	thabs zab mo
ཐབས་ཟླ	wife	thabs zla
ཐབས་བཟང	good/ auspicious means	thabs bzang
ཐབས་ཡང་དག་བཟུང་བ	hold true upaya	thabs yang dag bzung ba
ཐབས་ཡིན་ནོ་ལེགས་སོ	[the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas exclaim:] 'It is the way!' [and that you reply:] 'Yes, how wonderful!'	thabs yin no legs so
ཐབས་ཡོད་པ་མ་རེད	there is no way to	thabs yod pa ma red
ཐབས་ཡོད་པ་རེད	it can be done	thabs yod pa red
ཐབས་རེམ	verb + thabs rem - to try hard to do the verb	thabs rem
ཐབས་ལ	by seeking to, in the method of	thabs la
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས	expert in the methods 1148	thabs la mkhas
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པ	to be skilled in the means of	thabs la mkhas pa
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི	be skilled in the means of	thabs la mkhas pa'i
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་སྤྱོང་པ	be skilled in the means of abandoning	thabs la mkhas pa'i spyong pa
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་མཛད་པ	ingenuity	thabs la mkhas pa'i mdzad pa
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་མཛད་སྤྱོད	his way of doing things as his skilful methods	thabs la mkhas pa'i mdzad spyod
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	be skilled in the means of dividing	thabs la mkhas pa'i rab tu dbye ba
ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པར་བྱ	you should be skillful [at it]	thabs la mkhas par bya
ཐབས་ལ་ལྟོས་པ	depending on upaya	thabs la ltos pa
ཐབས་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཐབས་བྱུང	which arises as a result of practising the skilful means	thabs la brten pa'i thabs byung
ཐབས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	practice upaya, apply skillful means	thabs la sbyor ba
ཐབས་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་སླུ་བ	deceived about skillful means	thabs la rab tu slu ba
ཐབས་ལམ	1) plan, strategy, way to do, techniques; 2) path of mantrayana; 3) [Skt] upaya marga, path of skillful means; 4) transmission	thabs lam
ཐབས་ལམ་གཉིས	the two paths of means [in Mahayoga]. {steng sgo}, {'og sgo}	thabs lam gnyis
ཐབས་ལམ་གཏུམ་མོ	the skillful path of tummo, the inner heat	thabs lam gtum mo
ཐབས་ལམ་ན་རོ་ཆོས་དྲུག	path of means as the Six Doctrines of Naropa	thabs lam na ro chos drug
ཐབས་ལམ་རྣམ་གཉིས	Two Paths of Skillful Means, according to Mahayoga. Esoteric instructions associated respectively with the upper doors. or centers of the body {steng sgo} and the lower door. or secret center of th...	thabs lam rnam gnyis
ཐབས་ལམ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of path of Means thabs lam gsang sngags mngon du gyur [he] accomplished the techniques of the secret mantra	thabs lam rigs lnga
ཐབས་ཤས	means, method	thabs shas
ཐབས་ཤེས	method, way, means, means and wisdom, means and knowledge, method and prajna	thabs shes
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྫས	Substances of skillful means and wisdom. Food (bza' ba) has the nature of skillful means (thabs kyi rang bzhin) and drinks (btung ba) have the nature of wisdom (shes rab gyi rang bzhin)	thabs shes kyi rdzas
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ལག་ཆ	device	thabs shes kyi lag cha
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ལམ	recourse	thabs shes kyi lam
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཀྱིས	expediently	thabs shes kyis
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་བཟོ་བ	devise	thabs shes kyis bzo ba
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཁ་སྦྱོར	union of means and knowledge	thabs shes kha sbyor
ཐབས་ཤེས་གྲུབ་པ	Accomplishment of Means and Knowledge	thabs shes grub pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བའི་ལྷ	the prajna and upaya deities of the sgyu 'phrul dra ba	thabs shes sgyu 'phrul drva ba'i lha
ཐབས་ཤེས་གཉིས	upaya and prajna [thabs snang ba'i cha dang, shes rab stong pa'i cha gnyis so]	thabs shes gnyis
ཐབས་ཤེས་གཉིས་མེད	in which method and prajna are not dual	thabs shes gnyis med
ཐབས་ཤེས་བཏོན	came up w a way/ means to	thabs shes bton
ཐབས་ཤེས་སྟོན་པ	tackle	thabs shes ston pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཐུགས་འདུན	mna' ma [h]	thabs shes thugs 'dun
ཐབས་ཤེས་བདག་ཉིད	= {dpal dus kyi 'khor lo}	thabs shes bdag nyid
ཐབས་ཤེས་འདོན	come up w a way/ means to	thabs shes 'don
ཐབས་ཤེས་ལྡན་པ	possessed of resources	thabs shes ldan pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་པ	Syn {thabs la mkhas pa}	thabs shes pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་པ་ལ་མཁས་པ	wise in skillful means	thabs shes pa la mkhas pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་འཕྲོད་པ	correct procedure	thabs shes 'phrod pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་བྱེད	vb + thabs shes byed, to try/seek to do {verbal action}. ¦ NTCKT,43; KCI, 31: nga tshos sems 'dul ba'i thabs shes byed kyi yod pas, since we are seeking to control the mind... [mss]	thabs shes byed
ཐབས་ཤེས་བྱེད་པ	try	thabs shes byed pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་མི་ཟད་པ་བཏང་བའི་མཐར	at the end of their ceaseless trying	thabs shes mi zad pa btang ba'i mthar
ཐབས་ཤེས་མེད	there is no way to --	thabs shes med
ཐབས་ཤེས་མེད་པ	impossible, can do nothing about it, can't be helped	thabs shes med pa
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཚོགས་གཉིས	two Provisions of skillful means and discriminative awareness [the provisions through which the enlightened family of inner growth {rgyas 'gyur gyi rigs}. is attained, according to the Supreme cont...	thabs shes tshogs gnyis
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཟུང་འཇུག	the union of upaya and prajna	thabs shes zung 'jug
ཐབས་ཤེས་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	1) union of upaya and prajna; 2) upaya/ bodhicitta and prajna/ emptiness ya ma bral ba	thabs shes zung 'brel
ཐབས་གསར	new ways/ methods	thabs gsar
ཐམ	credentials	tham
ཐམ་ཀ	1) seal; 2) sealed letter/ document [Bka' tham rin po che spyi bor phebs pa]	tham ka
ཐམ་ཀ་དམར་པོ	red seal	tham ka dmar po
ཐམ་ཁ	seal	tham kha
ཐམ་ཁ་རྒྱབ་པ	seal	tham kha rgyab pa
ཐམ་ག	a seal, sign	tham ga
ཐམ་ཐམ	uncorrected, scattered, dispersed	tham tham
ཐམ་ཐམ་བྱེད་པ	SA 'tham pa	tham tham byed pa
ཐམ་ཐུམ	sleep [description of sleep-consciousness is drawn in, dark and sleepy	tham thum
ཐམ་ཐུམ་རྨི་ལམ་ན	in a light sleep	tham thum rmi lam na
ཐམ་ཐོམ	tham me thom me	tham thom
ཐམ་པ	complete, full. used with numbers that are even multiples of ten	tham pa
ཐམ་པ་ཚང་བ	no less than	tham pa tshang ba
ཐམ་ཕྲན	[arch] metal nail	tham phran
ཐམ་འབྱར་མ	w government seal [Bka' yig tham 'byar ma.'Dzin shog tham 'byar ma]	tham 'byar ma
ཐམ་མེ་ཐོམ་མེ	dizziness, feel dizzy [R]	tham me thom me
ཐམ་མེ་བ	uncorrected, scattered, dispersed	tham me ba
ཐམ་མཚལ	vermillion for sealing	tham mtshal
ཐམ་ཡུ	tham ga'i yu ba/ handle	tham yu
ཐམ་ལག	oral instructions	tham lag
ཐམ་ལན	instruction	tham lan
ཐམས	[arch] hole	thams
ཐམས་སྐྱོབ	Vishvabhu [3rd buddha of this aeon]	thams skyob
ཐམས་མཁྱེན་པ	all-knowing, omniscient, all-knowledge, omniscience, [Syn buddhahood]	thams mkhyen pa
ཐམས་ཅང	all	thams cang
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀུན	all	thams cad kun
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཐ་མ	last/ worst of all	thams cad kyi tha ma
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཐམས	everything out of the whole	thams cad kyi thams
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཐམས་ཅད	tsang ma thams cad.Mi thams cad kyi thams cad	thams cad kyi thams cad
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་མཐའ་མ	last of all	thams cad kyi mtha' ma
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་མཐར་ཐུག	the ultimate point of all	thams cad kyi mthar thug
ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་དང་པོ	first of all [Bkra shis rtags brgyad thams cad kyi dang po rin po che'i gdugs.Rgyal srid sna bdun thams cad kyi dang po 'khor lo rin po che.Gza' thams cad kyi dang po gza' nyi ma]	thams cad kyi dang po
ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱོབ	<bishvabhukra> [one of sangs rgyas dpa' bo bdun] Visvabhu} [3rd buddha of this kalpa, 4th universal buddha before shakyamuni, last of previous aeon	thams cad skyob
ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱོབས	3rd of 6 earthly buddhas	thams cad skyobs
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱན་པའི་སྤྱན	all knowing eye	thams cad mkhyan pa'i spyan
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་ཉིད	omniscience	thams cad mkhyen nyid
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	omniscient one, omniscience (3 types are gzhi shes, knowledge of foundation; rnam shes, knowledge of emergent character of mentality; lam shes, knowledge of the path), omniscient, all-knower, epith...	thams cad mkhyen pa
བྱས་པ	{thams cad mkhyen pa grub pa'i tsig le'ur byas pa} [rgya gar gyi slob dpon dge srung gis brtsams pa'i pramana text thams cad mkhyen pa grub pa'i tshig le'ur	byas pa
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ་ཉིད	sarva-jnana, omniscience, seeing all dharmas as they are	thams cad mkhyen pa nyid
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ་གསུམ	Syn {mkhyen gsum}	thams cad mkhyen pa gsum
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་གོ་འཕང	the level of omniscience	thams cad mkhyen pa'i go 'phang
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་སྤྱན	the eye of omniscience	thams cad mkhyen pa'i spyan
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	omniscient wisdom-knowledge	thams cad mkhyen pa'i ye shes
ཐམས་ཅད་དགོངས་སྤྱོད	universal state	thams cad dgongs spyod
ཐམས་ཅད་སྒྲོལ	buddha	thams cad sgrol
ཐམས་ཅད་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	universal dharmaraja	thams cad chos rgyal
ཐམས་ཅད་ཉིད	totality, whole phenomenal existence	thams cad nyid
ཐམས་ཅད་རྟོགས	epithet of buddha	thams cad rtogs
ཐམས་ཅད་སྟོང་པ	universal emptiness, all empty [stong pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ... the empowerment of word and meaning is received through which this coemergent delight is united w total emptiness [Gd- mk]	thams cad stong pa
ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to recognize that everything is empty and illusory	shes par byed pa
ཐམས་ཅད་སྟོང་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the luminosity of universal emptiness	thams cad stong pa'i 'od gsal
ཐམས་ཅད་མཐོང	all-seeing, epithet of buddha	thams cad mthong
ཐམས་ཅད་དང་མཐུན	concordant, agreeing or in harmony with all	thams cad dang mthun
ཐམས་ཅད་དང་མཐུན་པ	harmonious	thams cad dang mthun pa
ཐམས་ཅད་དང་ནམ་མཁའི་ལས	from universal space	thams cad dang nam mkha'i las
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	all entirely	thams cad du
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ལམ	[the power of knowing] the paths pursued by all GD thams cad du 'gro ba'i lam mkhyen pa'i	thams cad du 'gro ba'i lam
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	complete unobstructibility	thams cad du thogs pa med pa
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་མ་ཕམ་པ	total invincibility	thams cad du ma pham pa
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་རུང	capability of becoming everything	thams cad du rung
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་སོང་བ	omnipresent, universal thams cad bdag gis byas so snyam du	thams cad du song ba
སེམས་པ	thinking: “Everything is created by me!”	sems pa
ཐམས་ཅད་འདུལ	Sarvajit, the twenty-first year of the {rab byung} Syn {me mo phag}	thams cad 'dul
ཐམས་ཅད་འདུས་ཀྱང	though all without exception be gathered	thams cad 'dus kyang
ཐམས་ཅད་བསྡོམས་ན	all together, in total	thams cad bsdoms na
ཐམས་ཅད་ནས	from all	thams cad nas
ཐམས་ཅད་ནས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	in the totality of, absolute thams cad nas thams cad du sangs rgyas	thams cad nas thams cad du
པ་མེད་པའི་ཆེ་བ	the greatness of	pa med pa'i che ba
ཐེ་ཨབསོལུཏེ་ནོན	existence of enlightenment	the absolute non
ཐམས་ཅད་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	#	thams cad rnam par 'byed pa
ཐམས་ཅད་རྣམ་འབྱེད	renouncing everything, giving up every thing	thams cad rnam 'byed
ཐམས་ཅད་སྣང་བ	everything manifests	thams cad snang ba
ཐམས་ཅད་པ	all	thams cad pa
ཐམས་ཅད་པའི	under any and all circumstances	thams cad pa'i
ཐམས་ཅད་སྤངས་པ	giving up everything	thams cad spangs pa
ཐམས་ཅད་དབང་དུ་མཛད་པའི	universal empowerment thams cad dbang du mdzad pa'i ting nge 'dzin - all-magnetizing samadhi	thams cad dbang du mdzad pa'i
ཐམས་ཅད་འབྱུང་བའི	. . . from which everything arises	thams cad 'byung ba'i
ཐམས་ཅད་མི་རྟག་འཆི་བའི་རྒྱུ	everything impermanent is subject to death	thams cad mi rtag 'chi ba'i rgyu
ཐམས་ཅད་མིག	universal eye	thams cad mig
ཐམས་ཅད་དམིགས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	since all is w/o conception	thams cad dmigs su med pa'i phyir
ཐམས་ཅད་ཚེ	at all times, also, frequently	thams cad tshe
ཐམས་ཅད་རྫོགས་པ	contain the totality of phenomena	thams cad rdzogs pa
ཐམས་ཅད་གཟིགས	epithet of avalokiteshvara	thams cad gzigs
ཐམས་ཅད་གཟིགས་པ	buddha, omniscient,	thams cad gzigs pa
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	all without exception	thams cad yongs su rdzogs pa
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་པར	'od bsrungs pa, chos bsrang pa, gos dmar can, rnam par phye te smra ba, mang du thos pa la sbyangs pa, mulasarvastivada)	thams cad yod par
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	sarvaastiivaada [one of the four main schools of Vinaya in india, those who hold that all dharamas exists in all the three times.- one of rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi, one of sde pa bco brgyad	thams cad yod par smra ba
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ་བདུན	7 sections of sarvastivadin school (sa ston pa	thams cad yod par smra ba'i sde bdun
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་སྨྲ	one of the {rtsa ba'i sde bzhi} of Shravakayana, one of the four major Vinaya schools	thams cad yod smra
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་སྨྲ་བདུན	the 7 schools of the Vaibhashikas	thams cad yod smra bdun
ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་སྨྲའི་སྡེ་པ	followers of Sarvastivadin	thams cad yod smra'i sde pa
ཐམས་ཅད་རང་སར་གྱེས	all proceeded to their own places	thams cad rang sar gyes
ཐམས་ཅད་ལ	at all times 1151	thams cad la
ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་གཅེས་པ	it is always essential	thams cad la gces pa
ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་བཟོད་པ	all-enduring	thams cad la bzod pa
ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་འདས	passed beyond all, out of the reach of all	thams cad las 'das
ཐམས་ཅད་ཤེས་པ་ཉིད	omniscience	thams cad shes pa nyid
ཐམས་ཆད་སྟོང་པ	the completely empty	thams chad stong pa
ཐམས་ཉིད	totality	thams nyid
ཐམས་འདུལ	Sarvajit, [the 21st year, female fire pig]	thams 'dul
ཐམས་པ	lock together, hold fast with the arms, stick fast	thams pa
ཐམས་ཡོད་སྨྲ	Sarvastivada [one of four major shravaka schools]	thams yod smra
ཐམས་སུ་བཅུག་པ	put in a hole/ prison	thams su bcug pa
ཐམས་སེ་ཐམ	menaces	thams se tham
ཐའ་སི	Tass	tha' si
ཐའ་སི་གསར་འགྱུར་ཁང	Tass News Agency	tha' si gsar 'gyur khang
ཐའི་ཀུའུ་དབྱིབས་ཅན	Taiku type	tha'i ku'u dbyibs can
ཐའི་ཇི	(M former title/ rank	tha'i ji
ཐའི་པིང་ཐེན་གོ	T'ai Ping Rebellion period	tha'i ping then go
ཐའི་དབན	Taiwan	tha'i dban
ཐའི་ཛི	title of descendants of jen gis khan	tha'i dzi
ཐའི་ཝན	Taiwan	tha'i wan
ཐའི་ཡུལ	Thailand	tha'i yul
ཐའི་རིགས	Siamese, Thai	tha'i rigs
ཐའི་ལན་ཨ	Thailand	tha'i lan a
ཐའི་ཤང་ལོའུ་ཀྱུན	(CH supreme principal lord/ master	tha'i shang lo'u kyun
ཐའུ	capsule, peach	tha'u
ཐའེ་གོ	Thailand	tha'e go
ཐའེ་ཆིའུ	table tennis, ping pong	tha'e chi'u
ཐའེ་ཏིང	table lamp	tha'e ting
ཐའེ་པེ	Taipei	tha'e pe
ཐར་སྐད་ཟླ་བ	9th tibetan month	thar skad zla ba
ཐར་གྱིས	by liberation	thar gyis
ཐར་གྱིས་ཞག་པ	[arch] ngos 'jam zhing 'jur mdud med pa	thar gyis zhag pa
ཐར་གྱུར་པ	die	thar gyur pa
ཐར་གྲོལ	freedom	thar grol
ཐར་གླིང་སྒར	small sherpa monastery in	thar gling sgar
ཐེ་སོལུ	khumbu region of nepal	the solu
ཐར་འགྱུར	be liberated	thar 'gyur
ཐར་ཆ	1) aspect of ewnlightenment; 2) that which accords with enlightenment)/ [the paths of accumulation and preparation]	thar cha
ཐར་ཆགས	rim pa	thar chags
ཐར་ཆུང་པ	small well	thar chung pa
ཐར་ཆེན	euphorbia kozlowii prok.	thar chen
ཐར་ཐབས	the means of gaining liberation	thar thabs
ཐར་ཐར	very freely	thar thar
ཐར་ཐར་དུ	continuously	thar thar du
ཐར་ཐར་དུ་མཆེད	spread very freely	thar thar du mched
ཐར་ཐུག་གི་ཞི་གནས	stable tranquillity	thar thug gi zhi gnas
ཐར་ཐོ	square hammer	thar tho
ཐར་ཐོར	scattered, separated, a few here and there, not together, sparse	thar thor
ཐར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	set at liberty, acquit	thar du 'jug pa
ཐར་མདོ	'phags pa thar pa chen po phyogs su rgyas pa 'gyod tsangs kyis sdig sbyangs te sangs rgyas su grub pa rnam par bkod pa zhes bya ba'i mdo bam po gnyis dang sho lo ka brgyad cu gnyis pa rgya nag gi '...	thar mdo
ཐར་མདོ་བསྡུས་པ	formula of confession and atonement to be recited when one is obliged to take meat butchered on the same day	thar mdo bsdus pa
ཐར་འདོད	[who] wishes to be liberated	thar 'dod
ཐར་འདོད་རྩེ་གཅིག་པ	one-pointed yearning to be set free	thar 'dod rtse gcig pa
ཐར་བསྡུས	'phags pa rtogs pa chen po	thar bsdus
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒྱས་པའི་མདོ	mah'amokshas'utra	yongs su rgyas pa'i mdo
ཐར་ནུ	medicinal root used as purgative	thar nu
ཐར་པ	1) liberation, nirvana, release, freedom, emancipation, deliverance; 2) be free [vimoksha/ moksha]. [bcings pa las grol ba ste 'khor bar 'ching byed las dang nyon mongs gnyis yongs su spangs pa syn...	thar pa
ཐར་པ་གླིང་རིན་ཆེན་སྡིངས	Tarpa Ling Rinchen Ding, in Tsang	thar pa gling rin chen sdings
ཐར་པ་ཆ་མཐུན	Syn {thar pa'i cha dang mthun pa} aids to liberation. conducive / aids to the extinction of the outflows, [the attainment of the arhat]	thar pa cha mthun
མོཀས	bhagiya [moks.a-bhaagiiya]	moksa
ཐར་པ་ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་ལམ	paths/ actions conducive to liberation {tshogs lam} [& {sbyor lam}	thar pa cha mthun gyi lam
ཐར་པ་ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས	karma that is conducive to liberation; embracing the virtuous actions with renunciation and bodhichitta	thar pa cha mthun gyi las
ཐར་པ་ཆེན་པོ	[tseg] thar pa chen po'i phyogs tu rgyas pa'i	thar pa chen po
ཐར་པ་ཐོབ་པ	be saved, emancipated	thar pa thob pa
ཐར་པ་འཐོབ་པའི་ལམ	the path of attaining liberation	thar pa 'thob pa'i lam
ཐར་པ་འཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར་བ	liberation will be attained	thar pa 'thob par 'gyur ba
ཐར་པ་དང་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	liberation and omniscience	thar pa dang thams cad mkhyen pa
ཐར་པ་དོན་དུ་གཉེར་ཅིག	strive for liberation!	thar pa don du gnyer cig
ཐར་པ་འདོད་པའི་གདུལ་བྱ	students desiring liberation	thar pa 'dod pa'i gdul bya
ཐར་པ་མྱང་འདས་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕང	liberation the level of nirvana	thar pa myang 'das kyi go 'phang
ཐར་པ་གཞོན་ནུ	a bon arch-devil	thar pa gzhon nu
ཐར་པ་རང་ལ་རགས་ལས་ཤེས་པར་གྱིས	but you should know that liberation depends upon yourself	thar pa rang la rags las shes par gyis
ཐར་པ་ལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཤུགས་པ	enter completely into liberation	thar pa la kun tu shugs pa
ཐར་པ་གསུམ	Three types of liberation. The three types of emancipation of the shravaka, pratyekabuddha, and bodhisattva	thar pa gsum
ཐར་པ་ཨི་ཆ་དང་མཐུན་པ	Syn {thar pa cha mthun}	thar pa i cha dang mthun pa
ཐར་པའི་རྒྱུའི་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five dharmas that are cuses of liberation [tshogs lam gyi yan lag lnga]	thar pa'i rgyu'i chos lnga
ཐར་པའི་རྒྱུར་གྱུར་པ	the cause of liberation	thar pa'i rgyur gyur pa
ཐར་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	the lamp of liberation	thar pa'i sgron me
ཐར་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ་ནུབ་པ	the subsiding of the lamp of liberation	thar pa'i sgron me nub pa
ཐར་པའི་ཆ	the aspect of liberation	thar pa'i cha
ཐར་པའི་ཆ་མཐུན་པ	conducive to liberation	thar pa'i cha mthun pa
ཐར་པའི་ཆ་དང་མཐུན་པ	[what is] conducive to deliverance [= {thar pa'i cha mthun}	thar pa'i cha dang mthun pa
ཐར་པའི་ཆ་དང་མཐུན་པའི་དགེ་བ	virtue according w liberation thar pa'i cha dang mthun pa'i dge ba'i rtsa	thar pa'i cha dang mthun pa'i dge ba
བ་མེད་པ	w/o the virtuous roots according w liberation	ba med pa
ཐར་པའི་ཐབས	the means of emancipation	thar pa'i thabs
ཐར་པའི་ཐབས་བསྟན	teaching the means of liberation	thar pa'i thabs bstan
ཐར་པའི་མཐུན་པ	in accord w liberation	thar pa'i mthun pa
ཐར་པའི་སྡེ	the group of liberation [sde bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste] performing actions in accord w dharma/ liberation	thar pa'i sde
ཐར་པའི་ཕན་ཡོན	the benefits of liberation	thar pa'i phan yon
ཐར་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	inclination for liberation, metaphysical conclusions of religion, resolution for liberation from miseries, determination for obtaining nirvana	thar pa'i blo gros
ཐར་པའི་ལམ	the path to liberation	thar pa'i lam
ཐར་པའི་ལམ་སྟོན	{bla ma thar pa'i lam ston} the teacher showing the path to deliverance	thar pa'i lam ston
ཐར་པའི་ལམ་སྟོན་པ	shows us the way to liberation; x {rgyal ba'i bka' dang bstun nas thar pa'i lam ston pa de las lhag pa'i thugs rje ci yang med} shows us the way to liberation taught by the conqueror. What greater ...	thar pa'i lam ston pa
ཐར་པའི་ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ	to follow / step on to the path of emancipation	thar pa'i lam du 'gro
ཐར་པའི་ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to progress toward liberation	thar pa'i lam du 'gro ba
ཐར་པའི་ལམ་སྣ་ཟིན་ཐབས	embark upon the path of liberation	thar pa'i lam sna zin thabs
ཐར་པའི་སྲོག་རྩ	the life vein of liberation	thar pa'i srog rtsa
ཐར་པའི་སྲོག་རྩ་གཅོད	cutting the lifevein of liberation	thar pa'i srog rtsa gcod
ཐར་པར་འགྱུར	become liberated	thar par 'gyur
ཐར་པར་བྱས་པ	having become	thar par byas pa
ཐར་པོ	old, worn out	thar po
ཐར་པོ་སོང	has become old, SA thar song	thar po song
ཐར་དཔག	[large] plate, dish, platter	thar dpag
ཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་ལམ	Path of consummation. The fifth of the five path and the state of complete and perfect enlightenment	thar phyin pa'i lam
ཐར་བ	cross, be freed, be liberated, absolved, escape, get through, be able to pass	thar ba
ཐར་བར་དཀའ་བ	it will be hard to escape from it	thar bar dka' ba
ཐར་བར་འགྱུར་བ	become free	thar bar 'gyur ba
ཐར་བར་བྱེད	freedom	thar bar byed
ཐར་བར་བྱེད་པ	make free, liberate, save	thar bar byed pa
ཐར་བྱེད་དྲིལ་བུ	a form of sgrol ma	thar byed dril bu
ཐར་བྱེད་དྲིལ་བུ་ལྗང་མོ	goddess of the destructive green bell	thar byed dril bu ljang mo
ཐར་བྲང་བདབ	pitched his tent, encamped	thar brang bdab
ཐར་མ	grol zin pa.Nad thar ma.Lha 'brum thar ma	thar ma
ཐར་མ་བཏབ	inescapable	thar ma btab
ཐར་མི་ཐར	make it/ or not to be able to pass through a difficult dangerous place	thar mi thar
ཐར་མེད	no escape	thar med
ཐར་རྩེ	a monastery, residence of ngor lama in tsang	thar rtse
ཐར་ཞག	[arch] ngos 'jam pa -	thar zhag
ཐར་གཟོང	silversmith's tool	thar gzong
ཐར་རེ་ཐོར་རེ	scattered, dispersed, break to pieces, to smash, crush	thar re thor re
ཐར་རེ་ཐོར་རེར	sparsely	thar re thor rer
ཐར་རེ་ལོང་ངེ	{thar re}. = spread out, {long nge}. = stand still	thar re long nge
ཐར་ལམ	'khor ba las thar pa'i lam ste, nges 'byung gi bsam pas zin pa'i lam	thar lam
ཐར་ལམ་དགོད	establishing on the path to liberation	thar lam dgod
ཐར་ལམ་དགོད་པ	was established on the path to freedom	thar lam dgod pa
ཐར་ལམ་དངོས	the actual paths of liberation, {mthong lam} {sgom lam} {mi slob lam}	thar lam dngos
ཐར་ལམ་ལྔ	tsogs lam dang, sbyor lam, mthong lam, sgom lam, mi slob lam bcas lnga	thar lam lnga
ཐར་ལམ་གཉིས	the two paths of liberation {thar pa cha mthun}. {thar lam dngos}.]	thar lam gnyis
ཐར་ལམ་ལམ་འགྲོ་བཅུ	[TRS 24:6]	thar lam lam 'gro bcu
ཐར་ལམ་གསལ་བྱེད	tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi tsig le'ur byas pa'i rnam bshad thar lam phyin ci ma log par gsal bar byed pa zhes pa'i bsdus ming, rgyal tsab dar ma rin chen gyis mdzad pa'i tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi 'grel ba	thar lam gsal byed
ཐར་ལེགས་པ	purified, one who has acquired the means to escape sufferings	thar legs pa
ཐར་ཤུལ	Tharshul, in Domey	thar shul
ཐར་ས	place of refuge, means of escape	thar sa
ཐར་ས་མི་འདུག	there is no escape	thar sa mi 'dug
ཐར་ས་མེད	no escape	thar sa med
ཐར་ས་མེད་པ་བཟོ་བ	entrap	thar sa med pa bzo ba
ཐར་ས་མེད་པའི་ལམ	disaster, doom, catastrophe	thar sa med pa'i lam
ཐར་སའམ་སླེབས་མེད་པ	inaccessible	thar sa'am slebs med pa
ཐར་སོང	has become old, worn out, has been saved, has escaped	thar song
ཐར་སོན་པ	attained thoroughness, gone to perfection	thar son pa
ཐལ	arrive at, imply, it would then be the case that, trumpet flower, too much, too fast, it follows that	thal
ཐལ་ཀ་རྡོ་རྗེ	medicinal fruit	thal ka rdo rje
ཐལ་ཀར	white elephant with six tusks, leader elephant	thal kar
ཐལ་དཀར	white elephant, SA thal kar	thal dkar
ཐལ་བཀྱོད	adventurous/ daring risky advance	thal bkyod
ཐལ་སྐད	1st in conducting Dharma debate Manjusri's seed syllable dh'i: yig skad mthon por sgrog pa'i skad	thal skad
ཐལ་སྐྱོད	make a risky advance, act rashly/ blindly/ impulsively	thal skyod
ཐལ་སྐྱོན	fault of excess, exceeding the measure, deviation	thal skyon
ཐལ་ཁ	ash color, gray	thal kha
ཐལ་འཁུམས	tshad las brgal ba dang tshad ma zin pa. Gzhung sger gyi 'gro song gang btang tsang mar thal 'khums kyi hang zom med pa.Rgyu mtshan khungs thub gzhir bzung gis thal 'khums med par rtsod gleng byed pa	thal 'khums
ཐལ་གོང	the flesh in between the	thal gong
ཤོཨུལྡེར	blades [phrag tshigs nas mjing tshigs bar gyi cha shas]	shoulder
ཐལ་གོང་རྒྱས་པ	strong/broad chested	thal gong rgyas pa
ཐལ་གོང་རྒྱས་པའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of a strong chest [sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste, sman la sogs pa byin pas thal gong rgyas pa 1154	thal gong rgyas pa'i mtshan bzang
ཐལ་གྱིས	suddenly	thal gyis
ཐལ་གྱུར་པ	Prasangika [see {dbu ma thal gyur pa}. the "Consequentialist" system/school of madhyamika, founded by buddhapalita and disseminated by chandrakirti, a consequentialist, a mahyamika who mainly state...	thal gyur pa
ཐལ་གྲོལ	unhindered	thal grol
ཐལ་འགྱུང	consequence, contradictory	thal 'gyung
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ཁྱབ་པ་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	[tse]	thal 'gyur khyab pa sgo brgyad
ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཆོས་གསུམ	the three dharmas of an [established [undesired] consequence	thal 'gyur gyi chos gsum
ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་དམ་བཅའ	thesis of the indirect proof	thal 'gyur gyi dam bca'
ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལན	when the phyi rgol [respondent in debate] points out an undesired consequence, the thesis stater [snga] rgol] gives an answer trying to refute/ eliminate the fault. though refuting a valid conseque...	thal 'gyur gyi lan
ཐལ་འགྱུར་སྒོ་བརྒྱད་སློང་ཚུལ	the way of presenting the 8 consequences	thal 'gyur sgo brgyad slong tshul
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ལྟང་སྣང	counterfeit consequence, counterfeit comegence	thal 'gyur ltang snang
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ལྟར་སྣང	merely apparent [undesired] consequence [can bve answered/ refuted because the reason is unestablished, or not universally applicable, or the pervasion entails a contradiction]	thal 'gyur ltar snang
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ལྟར་སྣང་བཞི	the four kinds of merely apparent consequence	thal 'gyur ltar snang bzhi
ཐལ་འགྱུར་པ	Prasangika, "consequentialist [system of madhyamika] [founded by buddhapaalita and disseminated by candrakirti, a consequentialist, a mahyamika who mainly states refutations of an opponents asserti...	thal 'gyur pa
ཐལ་འགྱུར་བ	consequence	thal 'gyur ba
ཐལ་འགྱུར་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Talgyur Root Tantra. The chief Dzogchen tantra of the Instruction Section (man ngag sde)	thal 'gyur rtsa ba'i rgyud
ཐལ་འགྱུར་བཞི	four consequences	thal 'gyur bzhi
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ཡང་དག	lan gyis bzlog mi nus pa'i thal ba 'phen pa'i ngag ste, thal 'gyur 'god yul gyi blo ngor rtags dang khyab pa grub cing, dam bca' la tsad mas bsal ba 'bab pa'i rtad ston pa'i thal ngag rnam dag go	thal 'gyur yang dag
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ཡང་དག་གཉིས	the two kinds of valid consequence [sgrub byed 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur dang, sgrub byed mi 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur te gnyis so]	thal 'gyur yang dag gnyis
ཐལ་རྒྱུགས	1) go w/o obstruction [Nya mo chu'i nang du thod thug med par thal rgyugs su 'gro ba]; 2) go without examining/ looking over/ considering [Ma brtags pa'i 'gro stangs.'Gro lam bde min la ma bltas pa...	thal rgyugs
ཐལ་སྒྲ	clapping, applause	thal sgra
ཐལ་སྒྲ་རྡེབ	clap, applaud	thal sgra rdeb
ཐལ་སྒྲ་ཞིག་བསྒྲགས	to make noise by clapping the hands	thal sgra zhig bsgrags
ཐལ་སྒྲོ	sack full of ashes	thal sgro
ཐལ་ངག	indirect argument	thal ngag
ཐལ་སྔོན	bluish gray	thal sngon
ཐལ་ལྕག	in the palm of the hand brgyab pa'i lcag	thal lcag
ཐལ་ལྕག་རྒྱབ་པ	slap on the cheek, give a box on the ear	thal lcag rgyab pa
ཐལ་ལྕག་གཞུ་བ	slap, spank	thal lcag gzhu ba
ཐལ་ཆ	excessive, extreme, fault	thal cha
ཐལ་ཆུ	lye, ash-water used for making tea	thal chu
ཐལ་ཆེ་བ	too	thal che ba
ཐལ་ཆེ་བའི་དམངས་གཙོ	extreme democracy	thal che ba'i dmangs gtso
ཐལ་ཆེན	human ashes [one of the {phyugs}/ {byugs} {pa'i rdzas gsum} = three smeared substances]	thal chen
ཐལ་ཆེན་གྱི་ཆུ་བོ་རབ་མེ	[one of {nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba}	thal chen gyi chu bo rab me
ཐལ་ཆེན་བ	desperately, serious, disastrous	thal chen ba
ཐལ་ཆེས་པ	(to go to) the other extreme; (to be) overly confident/ presumptuous	thal ches pa
ཐལ་ཆེས་པར་འགྱུར	absence of connection, no adherence	thal ches par 'gyur
ཐལ་ཆོས	predicate of the indirect proof	thal chos
ཐལ་ཉོར	rtsig khug tu spungs pa'i thal ba	thal nyor
ཐལ་ཏྲེས	hemidesmus indicus, indian sarsaparilla	thal tres
ཐལ་ཐག	bread baked in ashes	thal thag
ཐལ་ཐལ	#	thal thal
ཐལ་ཐལ་དུ	continuously	thal thal du
ཐལ་ཐུང	different lengths, one object projecting beyond another	thal thung
ཐལ་ཐོགས་མེད་པ	unhindered {thal thogs med pa skud pa 'di lta bur gyur cig} may it be as unhindered as this thread	thal thogs med pa
ཐལ་ཐོལ་དུ	exactly	thal thol du
ཐལ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	{thal byung}	thal du byung ba
ཐལ་དྲགས་པ	1) insufficient; 2) excessive, exaggerated, unbridled, extreme	thal drags pa
ཐལ་དྲེག	long accumulated dust	thal dreg
ཐལ་དྲེས	a medicinal plant, medicinal flower of the lily species, anantamula	thal dres
ཐལ་དྲེས་སྨན	medicinal plant	thal dres sman
ཐལ་མདོག	ash-colored. Syn {thal dkar}	thal mdog
ཐལ་རྡུལ	powdered ash, dust	thal rdul
ཐལ་རྡུལ་དཀར་པོ་ཆགས་ཚུལ	white dust arising	thal rdul dkar po chags tshul
ཐལ་རྡུལ་སེལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གློག་ཆས	vacuum cleaner, electric air filter	thal rdul sel byed kyi glog chas
ཐལ་བརྡབ	clap, applaud	thal brdab
ཐལ་བརྡབ་པ	clap with the hands	thal brdab pa
ཐལ་པོ	ex. {dran rtag thad rzes med du gtad yal}	thal po
ཐལ་སྤབས	dust which has accumulated for a long time	thal spabs
ཐལ་ཕོད	sweeping, throwing away ashes; throw away ashes, sweeping	thal phod
ཐལ་ཕྱགས	broom, dusting rag	thal phyags
ཐལ་ཕྱགས་རྒྱག	dust	thal phyags rgyag
ཐལ་ཕྱིན	penetration	thal phyin
ཐལ་ཕྱིན་བཞི	four penetrations [in Vajrakilaya teachings]	thal phyin bzhi
ཐལ་ཕྱིར	"it follows because" [ggd]	thal phyir
ཐལ་ཕྱོགས	victorious party in debate, party victorious in a metaphysical disputation	thal phyogs
ཐལ་འཕེན་མི	reasoner	thal 'phen mi
ཐལ་བ	[prasanga] consequence	thal ba
རེདུཅཏིཨོན་ཨད་ཨབསུརྡུམ	argument. 2) ashes, crematory ashes. 3) dust, dirt, particles, powder. 4) [prasanga] transgression. 5) to go or pass by / beyond / through. 6) to be over, done, past, elapsed. 7) one of {phyag rgya...	reduction ad absurdum
ཐལ་བ་དཀར་པོ	sna tha la bsre rgyu'i shing thal	thal ba dkar po
ཐལ་བ་སྐྱ་ཆགས	white dust arising [Bsgrigs bkod kyi yo byad rnams la rdul phyis ma brgyab pas thal ba skya chags su khebs pa]	thal ba skya chags
ཐལ་བ་སྐྱོབ	Thalwa that Protects, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba skyob
ཐལ་བ་འགམ་པ	lick the dirt	thal ba 'gam pa
ཐལ་བ་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 star-systems, 13 dimensions beyond our galaxy, SA thal ba'i dbyangs, thal ba 'dzin, thal ba skyob, thal ba brdal, thal ba'i be con, thal ba'i rgyun, rab tu thal bas khyab, thal ba'i sgra, thal b...	thal ba bcu gsum
ཐལ་བ་ཆིལ་ཆིལ	thal rdul lang tshul zhig ...Gad chu ma gtor na gad bdar byed dus thal ba chil chil lang yong	thal ba chil chil
ཐལ་བ་བརྡལ	Arrayed Thalwa, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba brdal
ཐལ་བ་པ	NyDh: thal 'gyur ba dang don gcig. Prasangika. R75: 212.5. [mss]	thal ba pa
ཐལ་བ་འཕེན་པ	fling/ point out a[n undesired] consequence] [to refute a pha	thal ba 'phen pa
ཐལ་བ་བུན་བུན	thal ba long long.Rlangs 'khor phyin shul du thal ba bun bun du lang yong	thal ba bun bun
ཐལ་བ་འཛིན	Thalwa that Supports, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba 'dzin
ཐལ་བ་ཞིབ་ཞིབ	powdered ash	thal ba zhib zhib
ཐལ་བ་རླུང་བསྐུར	rtsa med du 'gro ru 'jug pa'i dpe.Dgra bo'i mi rta tsang ma thal ba rlung bskur bzhin du rtsa med du song 'dug	thal ba rlung bskur
ཐལ་བ་གསུམ	Three consequences that according to NyDh flow from....: 1) 'phags pa'i mnyam bzhag ye shes dngos po 'jig rgyur thal ba; 2) tha snyad bden pa rigs pa'i dpyad bzod du thal ba; 3) don dam pa'i skye b...	thal ba gsum
ཐལ་བའི་རྒྱུན	Thalwa of Continuity, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba'i rgyun
ཐལ་བའི་སྒྲ	Sound of Thalwa, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba'i sgra
ཐལ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	a kind of sandal wood	thal ba'i snying po
ཐལ་བའི་བེ་ཅོན	Thalwa Staff, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba'i be con
ཐལ་བའི་དབྱངས	Melody of the Thalwa, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba'i dbyangs
ཐལ་བའི་རྩེད་མོའི་བྱིས་པ་འདྲ	like a child playing in the ashes	thal ba'i rtsed mo'i byis pa 'dra
ཐལ་བའི་རླུང	Wind of Thalwa, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	thal ba'i rlung
ཐལ་བར	in consequence	thal bar
ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར	connection, SA thal 'gyur pa	thal bar 'gyur
ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	consequence, reduction	thal bar 'gyur ba
ཨད་ཨབསུརྡུམ	argument, [fault] necessarily follows, falling into an error/ fault [De ltar au tsugs byas na skyon du thal bar 'gyur]	ad absurdum
ཐལ་བར་རློག	smash, crush, pulverize	thal bar rlog
ཐལ་བར་རློག་པ	smash, crush	thal bar rlog pa
ཐལ་བར་བརླག	smashed to dust	thal bar brlag
ཐལ་བར་བརླག་པ	1) smashed to dust/ atoms; 2) crushed rock mt	thal bar brlag pa
ཐལ་བར་བརླག་པའི་དགྲ་དམག	crushed army	thal bar brlag pa'i dgra dmag
ཐལ་བར་བརླགས	[p {thal bar rlog} smashed to dust/ atoms, crushed, pulverized	thal bar brlags
ཐལ་བྱི	cat-squirrel	thal byi
ཐལ་བྱུང	consequence, come/ arise suddenly, . thogs med du byung ba [snyung bu rnon pos pang leb thal byung du phug nas bug pa 'don pa]	thal byung
ཐལ་བྱུང་འགྲོ	have the consequence	thal byung 'gro
ཐལ་བྱུང་འགྲོ་བ	1) go w/o obstruction; 2) warrior, hero	thal byung 'gro ba
ཐལ་བྱུང་དུ	unhindered {khab rnon pos zab cing skud pa thal byung du 'gro ba} reach as deeply as the needle and move as unhindered as this thread	thal byung du
ཐལ་བྱུང་དུ་ཕོག་པའི་ཉི་འོད	suddenly penetrating sun light	thal byung du phog pa'i nyi 'od
ཐལ་བྱུང་བ	penetrate everything unhindered	thal byung ba
ཐལ་བྱུང་ཡང་དག	correct consequences	thal byung yang dag
ཐལ་བྲེས་སྨན	a vegetable medicine	thal bres sman
ཐལ་འབྱིན	all-piercing	thal 'byin
ཐལ་འབྱིན་དུ་བརྟོལ་བ	laying bare to the core	thal 'byin du brtol ba
ཐལ་འབྱུང་དུ་འགྲོ	act without ceremony or disguise	thal 'byung du 'gro
ཐལ་འབྱུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go straight forward	thal 'byung du 'gro ba
ཐལ་འབྱུར་ཡང་དག	correct consequence	thal 'byur yang dag
ཐལ་འབྱོར	untenable consequence	thal 'byor
ཐལ་སྦྱར	joined palms	thal sbyar
ཐལ་མ	through and through	thal ma
ཐལ་མར	straight through; through	thal mar
ཐལ་མོ	"palm", length of the palm and fingers	thal mo
ཐལ་མོ་ཁ་གྱེན་བསྟན	palms facing upwards	thal mo kha gyen bstan
ཐལ་མོ་འགོད	to clasp one's hands together in a show of respect or *devotion	thal mo 'god
ཐལ་མོ་རྡབ་པ	applaud, clap one's hands	thal mo rdab pa
ཐལ་མོ་རྡེབ་པ	clap 1's hands, applaud	thal mo rdeb pa
ཐལ་མོ་རྡོབ	clapper	thal mo rdob
ཐལ་མོ་བརྡབ	clap (your hands	thal mo brdab
ཐལ་མོ་བརྡབས	clap hands	thal mo brdabs
ཐལ་མོ་བརྡབས་པ	to applaud	thal mo brdabs pa
ཐལ་མོ་སྣན་པ	slap on the cheek, box on the ear	thal mo snan pa
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར	with hands joined together, to join palms together	thal mo sbyar
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཏེ	folded his hands in prayer	thal mo sbyar te
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཏེ་གསོལ་པ	clasped his hands together and entreated	thal mo sbyar te gsol pa
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ནས་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་པ	praying with joined palms	thal mo sbyar nas gsol ba 'debs pa
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་བ	fold the hands in devotion	thal mo sbyar ba
ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱོར་བ	whirl with the fingers joining the palms of the hands in devotion or out of respect	thal mo sbyor ba
ཐལ་མོའི་རྡེབ་སྒྲ	sound of clapping/ applause	thal mo'i rdeb sgra
ཐལ་མོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	[respectful] mudra of joined palms	thal mo'i phyag rgya
ཐལ་སྨན	ash med. [bad kan rang rgyud can gyis bskyed pa'i grang ba'i nad gtso cher sel ba'i phyir lan tsva dang cong zhi lta bu me la nus ldan bsregs pa'i thal ba]	thal sman
ཐལ་ཙྭ	ash salt [shing sna dang ldum sogs ashes las bzos pa'i tsva rigs te, ro lan tsa la tsa ba, zhu rjes drod, nus pas grang ba sel, pho ba sbos pa 'joms kind of salt made from shing sna dang ldum etc ash]	thal tswa
ཐལ་འཙུབ	thal ba'i 'tsub long.	thal 'tsub
ཐལ་ཚྭ	burnt salt	thal tshwa
ཐལ་ཚང	place/ hole to throw away dust/ ashes, bathroom [Gold]	thal tshang
ཐལ་ཚན	hot ashes	thal tshan
ཐལ་ཚན་གྱི་ཆུ་བོ་རབ་མེད	the unfordable river of ashes [one of the {nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba}	thal tshan gyi chu bo rab med
ཐལ་འཚུབ	dust storm	thal 'tshub
ཐལ་ཞག	thal rdul gyi mdangs zhag whirling in the air	thal zhag
ཐལ་ཟིང་འགལ་འཛོལ	ha cang dpa' thal che drags pa'i 'gal 'khrul	thal zing 'gal 'dzol
ཐལ་ཡས	aeld #	thal yas
ཐལ་རང	svatantrika and prasangika	thal rang
ཐལ་རླུང	dusty wind, dust storm	thal rlung
ཐལ་རླུང་རྒྱག	be a dusty wind/ dust storm	thal rlung rgyag
ཐལ་ལ་ཚལ	place in nyag rong	thal la tshal
ཐལ་ལ་འཚུབས་འཚུབས	dusty	thal la 'tshubs 'tshubs
ཐལ་ལན	thal 'gyur gyi lan	thal lan
ཐལ་ལན་རྣམ་ཐར་སྒོ་བཞི	the four answers for escaping from undesirable consequences [when the opponent attempts to establish unwanted consequences which have thal 'gyur ltar snang gi rigs bzhi, the four kinds of answers f...	thal lan rnam thar sgo bzhi
ཐལ་ལུས	phar thal tshur lus kyis 'khyar ba [scatter, distribute? error, excess], too much and too little	thal lus
ཐལ་ལུས་མེད་པ	neither too much or too little	thal lus med pa
ཐལ་ལུས་ཧེ་བག་མེད་པ	very much w/o excess and insufficiency	thal lus he bag med pa
ཐལ་ལེ	straight on, forthwith	thal le
ཐལ་ལེ་བ	1) unobscured and unobstructed, totally open and free; 2) not indirect/ crooked; 3) very light color	thal le ba
ཐལ་ལེར	freely	thal ler
ཐལ་ལོ	it is over, it is finished	thal lo
ཐལ་ཤོག	ash-colored paper [from snye mo rdzong low quality]	thal shog
ཐས	(not in DAS)	thas
ཐི	figure 40	thi
ཐི་གུ	rope, string	thi gu
ཐི་གུ་ཁྲ་ཆུང	thin vari-colored rope	thi gu khra chung
ཐི་གུ་སྣེ་ཤོར	las don 'thus shor gyi dpe	thi gu sne shor
ཐི་ཆིན	violin	thi chin
ཐི་རྡོག	interference, intervention	thi rdog
ཐི་རྡོག་བྱེད	interfere, intervene	thi rdog byed
ཐི་བ	sandpiper, stock dove, plover, lapwing, SA the ba	thi ba
ཐི་བའི་མདོག	sngo skya color	thi ba'i mdog
ཐི་བྱ	swallow, pigeon	thi bya
ཐི་བྱ་ཚང་ལ་འཇུག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like a swallow entering its nest	thi bya tshang la 'jug pa lta bu
ཐི་ར	market place, crowded place	thi ra
ཐི་རི་པོ་ལི	Tripoli	thi ri po li
ཐི་ཤོ་ལེགས	thi sho legs [de sho legs dang klu sman mer mo gnyis kyi sras, 12th bod rgyal pa; 1 of sa'i legs drug] 1158	thi sho legs
མརྐིང	string, like in {bzhi thig} is like {bzhi cha} a quarter, drawing, outline, layout, outline, the drawing of mandalas; a drop	marking
ཐིག་ཀོར	round picture	thig kor
ཐིག་རྐྱལ	powder bag for chalk line	thig rkyal
ཐིག་སྐུད	thread, yarn, straight line	thig skud
ཐིག་སྐོར	0	thig skor
ཐིག་སྐོར་འོག	below 0 [temperature]	thig skor 'og
ཐིག་སྐོར་འོག་གི་དུའུ་བཅུ་ཕྲག	in the 10s below 0 [temperature]	thig skor 'og gi du'u bcu phrag
ཐིག་སྐོར་འོག་གི་དྲོད་ཚད	below 0 [temperature]	thig skor 'og gi drod tshad
ཐིག་སྐོར་ཡན	above 0 [temperature]	thig skor yan
ཐིག་སྐོར་ཡན་གྱི་དྲོད་ཚད	above 0 [temperature]	thig skor yan gyi drod tshad
ཐིག་ཁང	proportional grid of exactly positioned lines	thig khang
ཐིག་མཁན	sawyer	thig mkhan
ཐིག་གུ	lesser cords	thig gu
ཐིག་གུ་བཏགས་པ	tied a string	thig gu btags pa
ཐིག་འགྲེལ	text explaining a layout thig rgyag byed kyi thig sa blug snod powder bag for chalk line	thig 'grel
ཐིག་སྒྱེ	thig sa blug snod kyi khug chung	thig sgye
ཐིག་སྒྲོམ	yi ge'i thig rtsa. Yi ge'i thig sgrom	thig sgrom
ཐིག་ལྔའི་ཕུའུ་ཙི	the five lines of the musical staff	thig lnga'i phu'u tsi
ཐིག་བཅད	demarcation [sa mthsams thig bcad lan tshogs: border demarcation commission]	thig bcad
ཐིག་ཆེན	major proportional class	thig chen
ཐིག་ཉག་གཅིག	unique sphere, SA thig le nyag gcig	thig nyag gcig
ཐིག་ཉིས་ཚེགས་ཅན	with two dots at the end of each line	thig nyis tshegs can
ཐིག་དྲུང	proportions	thig drung
ཐིག་གདབ་པ	thig skud kyis thig rgyag pa	thig gdab pa
ཐིག་འདེབས་པ	draw a line	thig 'debs pa
ཐིག་འདེབས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ཤིང	ruler, wooden straightedge, yard stick	thig 'debs byed kyi thig shing
ཐིག་ནག	[the hell called] Black Lines, The Black Thread Hell. {tsha dmyal brgyad}. one of the {sems can dmyal ba brgyad} eight hot hells	thig nag
ཐིག་པ	1. (Tha mi dad pa) know or be able to grasp the measure [Tshod thig pa]; 2) accurate [mo divination, prophesy etc.] droplet {thigs pa}	thig pa
ཐིག་པ་རྒྱག་པ	leak	thig pa rgyag pa
ཐིག་པ་ཆུང་ཆུང	driblet	thig pa chung chung
ཐིག་པོ	don thog tu 'khel ba'i thig pa	thig po
ཐིག་དཔེ	diagram	thig dpe
ཐིག་སྤྱད	thig rgyag byed kyi yo chas	thig spyad
ཐིག་ཕོར	carpenter's thig skud kyi snod snag bum	thig phor
ཐིག་ཕྲན	discs of light, dot[s], smaller sphere, minor bindu/ circle	thig phran
ཐིག་འབུམ	sea, ocean	thig 'bum
ཐིག་མ	1) Bkal btags rigs la yod pa'i thig le'i ri mo. Btags ma dkar po thig ma can; 2) Tshos ma thig le'i ri mo can	thig ma
ཐིག་དམར	equator	thig dmar
ཐིག་ཙམ	a little, about the size of a line, a drop	thig tsam
ཐིག་རྩ	khang pa dang yo byad lha sku sogs bzo skrun byed par thig gdab tshul bshad pa'i dpe cha'i ming	thig rtsa
ཐིག་རྩ་བསླབ་པ	to study the proportions	thig rtsa bslab pa
ཐིག་རྩམ	thig rgyag byed kyi phye	thig rtsam
ཐིག་རྩིས	geometry	thig rtsis
ཐིག་ཚད	proportions of a figure laid out with the aid of lines	thig tshad
ཐིག་ཚད་རྒྱག་པ	survey [land]	thig tshad rgyag pa
ཐིག་ཚད་འཇལ་བ	taking measurement	thig tshad 'jal ba
ཐིག་ཚད་བྱེད་པ	to proportion	thig tshad byed pa
ཐིག་ཚད་འབྲིང་པོ	middle line	thig tshad 'bring po
ཐིག་ཚད་རོབ་ལེན	proportions of a figure laid out w the aid of lines	thig tshad rob len
ཐིག་ཚད་ལེན་པ	survey [land]	thig tshad len pa
ཐིག་ཚོན	lines and colors	thig tshon
ཐིག་ཡིག	art manuals on drawing, art manual	thig yig
ཐིག་རལ	rngon pa sogs 'khrab dus gyon rgyu rked pa nas thur du dpyong pa'i thi gu khra bo'i dra ba	thig ral
ཐིག་རིས	1) btags ma sogs kyi thig le'i ri mo; 2) Thig brgyab pa'i ri mo	thig ris
ཐིག་རིས་ཀྱི་རྩིས	ri mo la brten nas rgyag pa'i rtsis	thig ris kyi rtsis
ཐིག་ལི	thig le	thig li
ཐིག་ལེ	1) anusvara; 2) 0; 3) [vital] essence; 4) bindu; 5) spheres/ circles * drop, dot *, spot, ring, nimbus; 6) center; 8) colored mark on the forehead between the eyes; 10) sperm, semen; 11) seminal po...	thig le
ཨོཕ༹་ལིགྷཏ་ཨིན་ཨཱལལ	surpassing realisation [Gd] [tserig]	of light in All
གྲོཨུཔ	patterned by bag-chags, pure potency with no structure of its own, empty nature of the energy, eye on peacock's feather, female monthly discharge, luminous sphere of 5 colors of the rainbow represe...	group
ཐིག་ལེ་ཀུན་གསལ	nt. [Tantra of the] AllIlluminating Bindu	thig le kun gsal
ཐིག་ལེ་ཀུན་གསལ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of	thig le kun gsal chen po'i rgyud
ཐེ་གྲེཨཏ་ཨཱལལ	illuminating Sphere	the Great All
ཐིག་ལེ་དཀར་པོ	white sphere	thig le dkar po
ཐིག་ལེ་དཀར་དམར	white and red seminal points [Gd]	thig le dkar dmar
ཐིག་ལེ་ཁུ་བ	semen, virile, seed	thig le khu ba
ཐིག་ལེ་ཁྲ་བོ་ཅན	spotted deer	thig le khra bo can
ཐིག་ལེ་དགུ་པ་ཉམས་ཀྱི་འཕྱོང	higher esoteric practices	thig le dgu pa nyams kyi 'phyong
ཐིག་ལེ་འགྱུར་མེད	Unchanging sphere; the primordial ground of the single sphere of dharmakaya that is free from angles or corners. synonym for sugata essence	thig le 'gyur med
ཐིག་ལེ་སྒྲོན་མ	1 of sgron ma bzhi, light of the thigle	thig le sgron ma
ཐིག་ལེ་ལྔ་བྱ	make the five dots.	thig le lnga bya
ཐིག་ལེ་ལྔ་ཙོམ	dkyil du thig le gcig dang de'i phyogs bzhir thig le re yod pa	thig le lnga tsom
ཐིག་ལེ་ཅན	spotted, concentrated in spots, complete, special, zero, naught	thig le can
ཐིག་ལེ་གཅིག	universal sphere/ edgeless expanse	thig le gcig
ཐིག་ལེ་བཅུ་དྲུག	Sixteen Spheres, of the Kadampa Tradition	thig le bcu drug
ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེ	total sphere, total thigle	thig le che
ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Sphere, total sphere, [maha bindu]; the great hypersphere	thig le chen po
ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེན་པོ་གཅིག་གི་ལྟ་བ	thu bo rajahasti's view of the single total sphere	thig le chen po gcig gi lta ba
ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲུག	six total spheres	thig le chen po drug
ཐིག་ལེ་མཆོག་མ	STN (oral comm.): name of a goddess in a Hindu myth of how Brahma got 4 heads. [mss]	thig le mchog ma
ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་ཅིག	single sphere; single bindu, the uniform bindu, the sole sphere [of the nature] Syn {chos sku} the single circle, sole bindu	thig le nyag cig
ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་གཅིག	unitary creative energy, single essence, single circle, unique unbounded sphere, unique sphere, unique essence, single sphere, unique thigle	thig le nyag gcig
ཐིག་ལེ་ཉིས་རྩེགས	two dots one on top of the other	thig le nyis rtsegs
ཐིག་ལེ་སྟོང་སྒྲོན	lamp of empty thigle	thig le stong sgron
ཐིག་ལེ་སྟོང་པའི་སྒྲོན་མ	empty bindu lamp, the lamp of emptiness which is the seminal point	thig le stong pa'i sgron ma
ཐིག་ལེ་ཐིག་ཕྲན	major and minor spheres/ circles/ bindus	thig le thig phran
ཐིག་ལེ་འཐེན	impregnate, fertilize	thig le 'then
ཐིག་ལེ་དང་ཐིག་ཕྲན	major and minor bindus thig le dang thig phran gyis brgyan pa adorned with disks of light thig le dang thig phran gyis brgyan pa adorned w disks of light	thig le dang thig phran
ཐིག་ལེ་དྲུག	6 total spheres (chos nyid kyi thig le, dbyings kyi, dbyings rnam par dag pa'i, ye shes chen po'i, kun tu bzang po'i, lhun gyis gnas pa'i), six spheres, six fundamental aspects to understand & prac...	thig le drug
ཐིག་ལེ་དྲུག་པ	Vishnu	thig le drug pa
ཐིག་ལེ་བདེ་བ་ཀློང་གི་རྒྱུད	Essence Tantra of the Expanse of Bliss. A Mahayoga scripture	thig le bde ba klong gi rgyud
ཐིག་ལེ་བརྡལ་བའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the realm	thig le brdal ba'i zhing khams
ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	pervading circle	of all
ཐིག་ལེ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three bindus	thig le rnam pa gsum
ཐིག་ལེ་དབབ་བཟུང	seminal retention	thig le dbab bzung
ཐིག་ལེ་དམར་པོ	[tse]	thig le dmar po
ཐིག་ལེ་འཛགས་པ	khu ba rang bzhin du shor ba, dripping bindu	thig le 'dzags pa
ཐིག་ལེ་ཟླུམ་པོ	spherical thigle	thig le zlum po
ཐིག་ལེན	survey [land]	thig len
ཐིག་ལེན་རུ་ཁག	survey team	thig len ru khag
ཐིག་ལེའི་ཀློང	expansive sphere	thig le'i klong
ཐིག་ལེའི་ཀློང་ན་བཞུགས་པ	sits in a sphere of bindus	thig le'i klong na bzhugs pa
ཐིག་ལེའི་སྟོང་པའི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of emptiness which is the sphere	thig le'i stong pa'i sgron ma
ཐིག་ལེའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of the vital essence	thig le'i rnal 'byor
ཐིག་ལེའི་སྣ	snake	thig le'i sna
ཐིག་ལེའི་འབར་འཛག	blazing and secretion of seminal points [Gd]	thig le'i 'bar 'dzag
ཐིག་ལེའི་ཡི་གེ	a certain dakini script	thig le'i yi ge
ཐིག་ལེའི་ལུས	leopard, snake	thig le'i lus
ཐིག་ལེར	inside a thigle	thig ler
ཐིག་ཤིང	ruler for ruling lines, a level,	thig shing
ཐིག་ཤུབས	Tibetan opera rgya lu chas kyi phor shubs	thig shubs
ཐིག་ས	thig khug nang gi sa	thig sa
ཐིགས	Syn {thig}	thigs
ཐིགས་གཏོར	sprinkle	thigs gtor
ཐིགས་པ	drop, sprinkle, throw in, dew, dribble, a drop of liquid	thigs pa
ཐིགས་པ་རྒྱག	to drip	thigs pa rgyag
ཐིགས་པ་རྒྱག་པ	drip	thigs pa rgyag pa
ཐིགས་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	dribble, drip, leak	thigs pa rgyab pa
ཐིགས་པ་བླངས་བ	collect drops	thigs pa blangs ba
ཐིགས་པ་ཙམ	such a little gift {sbyin pa thigs pa tsam la 'bras bu cher thob pa} obtained such a great result from such a little gift	thigs pa tsam
ཐིགས་པ་འཛག་པ	trickle	thigs pa 'dzag pa
ཐིགས་པ་རེ་རེ	in drops, by drops	thigs pa re re
ཐིགས་པ་རེ་རེ་ནས	from every drop	thigs pa re re nas
ཐིགས་པ་བསགས་པའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the dropcollecting ocean	thigs pa bsags pa'i rgya mtsho
ཐིགས་ཙགས	khang thog nas thigs pa rgyag sar bya rgyu'i bcos tsags. Char dus ma shar gong nas ao kha thigs tshad nan tan byed dgos	thigs tsags
ཐིགས་གཟར	dropping	thigs gzar
ཐིགས་བཟེད	thigs pa bzed sa'i snod spyad	thigs bzed
ཐིགས་རལ་འཕྲུལ་འཕྲུལ	much-torn clothing etc	thigs ral 'phrul 'phrul
ཐིགས་ལེན	survey [land]	thigs len
ཐིགས་ས	drops of water 'gog byed kyi sa	thigs sa
ཐིང	spread, SA 'ding ba	thing
ཐིང་ཀྲང	head of a department/ office/ agency of provincial govt	thing krang
ཐིང་གི	line or succession of noblemen in tibet	thing gi
ཐིང་ཐིང	essential aspects of things and actions showing tshig grogs shig [Mtsan mo nag thing thing du mi long rta long la bzhon te gyang sar kha gtad nas rgyug pa.Ri khrod 'jam thing thing zhig la gcig pur...	thing thing
ཐིང་བ	{thing ba, things pa, thing ba} intr. v.; ft. of {thing ba}	thing ba
ཐིང་དབྱང	Dong Duong S Vietnam	thing dbyang
ཐིང་མོང་འགག་སྲུང	common defense	thing mong 'gag srung
ཐིང་ཡུག	h'ar'isa: #	thing yug
ཐིང་རིལ	thing ril water bird [white w red legs and pleasant call]	thing ril
ཐིང་ལི	(CH) {thing li med. herb [nus pas tsad pa 'jags pa dang, dri chu 'byin pa, lud pa sel ba sogs la phan]	thing li
ཐིང་ཤིང	a dye	thing shing
ཐིངས	lay out, SA 'ding ba	things
ཐིངས་པ	[p thing ba]	things pa
ཐིད་ཡུག	a number	thid yug
ཐིན་ཅིན	Tientsin	thin cin
ཐིན་མོང་ཞིང་ར	collective farm	thin mong zhing ra
ཐིབ་ཅུ	button	thib cu
ཐིབ་ཅུ་རྒྱག	button	thib cu rgyag
ཐིབ་ཐིབ	dense, dark, thick [clouds, fog]	thib thib
ཐིབ་པ	very dark, dense, obscure, dark	thib pa
ཐིབ་པོ	dense, dark, thick [clouds, fog]	thib po
ཐིབ་བུ	dark[ness]	thib bu
ཐིབ་བུའི་མཚན་མོ	dark night	thib bu'i mtshan mo
ཐིབ་བྲག	pick pockets	thib brag
ཐིབ་བྲག་རྒྱག	pick pockets	thib brag rgyag
ཐིབ་བྲག་པ	pickpocket	thib brag pa
ཐིབ་བྲག་བྱེད	pick pockets	thib brag byed
ཐིབས	darkened, SA 'thibs pa, obfuscation	thibs
ཐིབས་ཀྱིས	directly	thibs kyis
ཐིབས་ཀྱིས་ནོན་པ	under the influence of	thibs kyis non pa
ཐིབས་པོ	grib ma stug po. Shing nags thibs po'i nang du 'dzul nas 'gro lam nor	thibs po
ཐིབས་མོ	dense, dark	thibs mo
ཐིབས་སེ	clouds/ darkness gathering, snow/ rain falling etc	thibs se
ཐིབས་སེ་ཐིབ	(to gather) in throngs/ throng (together) densely/ thickly	thibs se thib
ཐིམ	dissolve [rdor sems 'od du zhu nas	thim
བདག་ཉིད་ལ་ཐིམ་པར་གྱུར	vajrasattva melts into light, which dissolves into me]	bdag nyid la thim par gyur
ཐིམ་ལྔ	five stages	thim lnga
ཐིམ་ཐབས	means of draining [swamp]	thim thabs
ཐིམ་ཐིམ	a number	thim thim
ཐིམ་པ	(tha mi dad pa) [Chu bye ma'i nang du thim pa] disappear, imbibed, absorbed, sink into, dissolve, sibside	thim pa
ཐིམ་པའི་རྩ	a nadi	thim pa'i rtsa
ཐིམ་ཕུ	Thimphu [capital of Bhutan]	thim phu
ཐིམ་ཕུག	Thimphu [capital of Bhutan]	thim phug
ཐིམ་བུ	1) Chang jar gsham gyi ai khung. Mgo rdza ma'i nang du bcug thim bu la chas bkag pa ste, mi tsang mas ha go ba'i skad cha de khyod kyis da dung ma shes pa gang red ces gshe ba'i gtam; 2) lo tog brn...	thim bu
ཐིམ་མེ	ex {gding med par thim me}	thim me
ཐིམ་འཙང	chang jar thim bu 'gog byed kyi paper/ hemp	thim 'tsang
ཐིམ་རིམ	dissolution stages; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 173]	thim rim
ཐིམ་ལ་མ་རྨུགས	dissolved w/o obscurity, dissolved but unobscured	thim la ma rmugs
ཐིམ་ལ་མ་རྨུགས་པ	indwelling/ inwardly directed but not dull	thim la ma rmugs pa
ཐིམ་ལ་མ་རྨུགས་པའི་དགོངས་པ	dissolved yet unobscured mind	thim la ma rmugs pa'i dgongs pa
ཐིམ་ལུགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 dissolutions [1) {thugs rje thugs rje la thim pa}. 2) ye shes ye shes la thim pa}. 3) 'od 'od ph thim pa}. 4) sku sku la thim pa}. 5) {gnyis med gnyis med la thim pa}. 6) {mtha' grol mtha' gr...	thim lugs brgyad
ཐིམ་ལུགས་རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	eight modes of dissolution	thim lugs rnam pa brgyad
ཐིམས་པ	dissolve	thims pa
ཐིའི་ཚའོ་སྦྱང་བ	have drills, be drilling	thi'i tsha'o sbyang ba
ཐིའུ	a bud	thi'u
ཐིར	bell	thir
ཐིར་བཏང་བ	chu tshod sogs kyi ting ting gi sgra bsgrags pa	thir btang ba
ཐིར་བརྡའི་ཆུ་ཙོད	thir brda sgrog rgyu yod pa'i chu tshod	thir brda'i chu tsod
ཐིལ	TGM: a term meaning "hill" E.g., Surmang Dudtsi Til {zur mang bdud rtsi thil}, the seat of the Trungpa tulkus. "The Surmang Hill of Amrita." [mss]	thil
ཐིལ་ཆུང	place in tibet	thil chung
ཐིལ་སྟོན	fathom a secret, enter into the depth of a conversation or expression	thil ston
ཐུ	number 70, spittle	thu
ཐུ་པ	sleeve	thu pa
ཐུ་པ་སྤྲུགས	abruptly brushed off the bottom of his chuba	thu pa sprugs
ཐུ་པི་ལི	(M M soldier's hat	thu pi li
ཐུ་པོ	bad [Khyi thu po. Mi thu po.Khrims thu po]	thu po
ཐུ་བ	pluck or collect flowers, SA thu lu btab pa, able, powerful, capable of, malicious, wicked, vicious, SA 'thu ba	thu ba
ཐུ་བ་སྤྲུགས	abruptly brushed off the bottom of his chuba	thu ba sprugs
ཐུ་བོ	elder brother, chief, senior, quarrel, poison, gruel made of barley flour	thu bo
ཐུ་བོ་རའ་ཛ་ཧ་སྟི	the elder Rajahasti; early Dzogchen master	thu bo ra' dza ha sti
ཐུ་བྱ་བ	spit out of scorn or contempt at anybody	thu bya ba
ཐུ་མི	of place thu mi sam bho ta was born bod thon yul gyi clan	thu mi
ཐུ་མི་སམ་བྷོ་ཏ	{thu mi sam bho ta}	thu mi sam bho ta
ཐུ་མེད	1) (M) 1 of the sog po ao rod tso bzhi; 2) no way/ choice not to [Mi shod thu med. Khas mi len thu med]	thu med
ཐུ་མེད་ཨལ་ཐན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of mongolia who patronized buddhism	thu med al than rgyal po
ཐུ་མོ	feirce, vicious, severe [Nad thu mo.Khyi thu mo.Khrims thu mo.Bka' khra gtan tsigs thu mo che]	thu mo
ཐུ་ཡུག་འགོམ་ཡུག	to step over the scriptures	thu yug 'gom yug
ཐུ་རུ	1) shing bu'i thur ma; 2) rgya ma chung chung	thu ru
ཐུ་རེ	uninterrupted	thu re
ཐུ་ལ	phyu pa'i thu ba. Bang med kyang thu la gzengs gzengs	thu la
ཐུ་ལུ	down, spittle	thu lu
ཐུ་ལུ་བཏབ་པ	spit, throw spittle	thu lu btab pa
ཐུ་ལུ་འདེབས་པ	spit	thu lu 'debs pa
ཐུ་ལུ་ནག་པོ	withered flower	thu lu nag po
ཐུ་ལུ་ལུ	thur du 'bab tshul dang, gyen du 'phyur tshul zhig ...Kha ba skya thu lu lu babs.Du ba sngo thu lu lu 'phyur.Spos kyi dri zhim thu lu lu khyab pa	thu lu lu
ཐུ་ལུད	spit, +{rgyab} +{'debs} to spit	thu lud
ཐུ་ལུད་རྒྱག	spit	thu lud rgyag
ཐུ་ལུད་འདེབས	spit	thu lud 'debs
ཐུ་ལུད་འདེབས་པ	spit	thu lud 'debs pa
ཐུ་ལུམ	a lump of metal	thu lum
ཨིརོན	shod club	iron
ཐུ་ལེ་སྒང་མ	bod chas kyi thu ba steng ma	thu le sgang ma
ཐུ་ལེ་ནང་མ	bod chas kyi thu ba nang ma	thu le nang ma
ཐུ་གཤམ	bottom of 1's clothes/ chuba	thu gsham
ཐུག	1) dgon sde khag gi khang thog gi rgyan zhig; 2) uncastrated ram or billy goat * meet, rest/ depend on, touch, reach, get into [a fight/ clash]. up to, until, knock against, run into, come across, ...	thug
ཐུག་ཀར་གཉན་པོ་ལྷའི་གཞུང	lore of the powerful thugkar deities	thug kar gnyan po lha'i gzhung
ཐུག་སྐྱོན	accident	thug skyon
ཐུག་སྐྱོན་བྱུང	have an accident	thug skyon byung
ཐུག་ཁོག	thug pa skol snod rdza ma	thug khog
ཐུག་གི་བར	until, up to	thug gi bar
ཐུག་གྱེན་མང་པ་ལམ་ཁ་འདིར་འདུག	this road has many hilly parts	thug gyen mang pa lam kha 'dir 'dug
ཐུག་རྒྱུགས	thug pa'i skal ba gtong rgyugs	thug rgyugs
ཐུག་སྒྲ	great noise	thug sgra
ཐུག་རྔ	lha khang gi thog kha'i thug bzo byed kyi rnga rtsid	thug rnga
ཐུག་ཅོམ	booming, thunder	thug com
ཐུག་ཆད	agreement	thug chad
ཐུག་ཆོམ	/ 'choms - a great noise; dreadful noise	thug chom
ཐུག་ཆོམ་བྱུང་བ	there was a roar of thunder	thug chom byung ba
ཐུག་མཆོད	thug pa 'thung skabs kyi mchod pa	thug mchod
ཐུག་འཆོམས	great noise	thug 'choms
ཐུག་ལྗང	lha khang gi thog kha'i thug nag skud pa ljang gu can	thug ljang
ཐུག་ཐལ	thug pa'i kha thal	thug thal
ཐུག་ཐུག་བྱེད་པ	dab	thug thug byed pa
ཐུག་ཐུབ	[arch] btsan thabs	thug thub
ཐུག་དམ	(h) Samaya/ commitment	thug dam
ཐུག་དར	thog kha'i thug dang dar lcog	thug dar
ཐུག་བདེ་པོ	approachable, accessible	thug bde po
ཐུག་སྡོར	materials for soup [meat. bones etc]	thug sdor
ཐུག་ནག	support of the protective deities very common on the roofs of monasteries in Tibet	thug nag
ཐུག་ནས་འདིར་ཡོང་བ	came here after meeting	thug nas 'dir yong ba
ཐུག་སྣོད	cauldron	thug snod
ཐུག་པ་འགྲིམ་པ	make barley gruel, soup, cook	thug pa 'grim pa
ཐུག་པ་འཐུང་བའི་ཧུབ་སྒྲ	slurping sound of drinking soup	thug pa 'thung ba'i hub sgra
ཐུག་པ་གདུ་བ	make up into a broth	thug pa gdu ba
ཐུག་པ་བག་ཐུག	tibetan type of noodles	thug pa bag thug
ཐུག་པ་མན་ཆིལ	(CH lheb gtubs noodles	thug pa man chil
ཐུག་པ་མེད	there is no certainty 1163	thug pa med
ཐུག་པ་མེད་པ	endless, w/o reaching a limit, there is no certainty [as to]	thug pa med pa
ཐུག་པ་མེད་པར་འགྱུར	possibility of the fallacy of ad infinitum	thug pa med par 'gyur
ཐུག་ཕུད	thug pa'i phud mchod	thug phud
ཐུག་ཕྲད	connection	thug phrad
ཐུག་ཕྲད་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the great samadhi which liberates on being encountered	thug phrad chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
ཐུག་ཕྲད་རྣམ་གསུམ	threefold encounter: dbang shes/ dbang po/ yul gsum	thug phrad rnam gsum
ཐུག་ཕྲད་ཚོགས་འདུ	meeting, mixer	thug phrad tshogs 'du
ཐུག་ཕྲད་ལམ་དུ་ཁྱེར	bring whatever you encounter [meet] to the path	thug phrad lam du khyer
ཐུག་འཕྲད	visit, meeting, interview, whatever is encountered	thug 'phrad
ཐུག་འཕྲད་དུ	directly	thug 'phrad du
ཐུག་འཕྲད་དུ་ངོ་ཤེས་འཕྲད་པ	the direct ability to recognize their identity upon encounter	thug 'phrad du ngo shes 'phrad pa
ཐུག་འཕྲད་དུས་ཚོད	date	thug 'phrad dus tshod
ཐུག་འཕྲད་བྱུང་བ	confront, encounter	thug 'phrad byung ba
ཐུག་འཕྲད་བྱེད	visit, meet, interview	thug 'phrad byed
ཐུག་འཕྲད་ཡོང་མཁན	visitor	thug 'phrad yong mkhan
ཐུག་འབྲས	{thug 'bras} animal med	thug 'bras
ཐུག་མེད	infinite regress [ggd]	thug med
ཐུག་མེད་དུ	endlessly	thug med du
ཐུག་རྩམ	thug pa'i kha thal	thug rtsam
ཐུག་ཚད	capacity	thug tshad
ཐུག་ཚོམ	flagstaff with flag	thug tshom
ཐུག་མཚམས	phan tsun phrad pa'i mtshams	thug mtshams
ཐུག་གཟར	thug pa blug byed gzar bu	thug gzar
ཐུག་ཡས	1) endless; 2) #	thug yas
ཐུག་རག	to reach, arrive at	thug rag
ཐུག་རེག	touching	thug reg
ཐུག་རེག་ཡོད་པ	be touchable/ tangible	thug reg yod pa
ཐུག་ལྷག	left over porridge, stew	thug lhag
ཐུགས	(enlightened) mind	thugs
ཐུགས་ཀ	heart center, center of the chest	thugs ka
ཐུགས་ཀ་ནས	from his heart	thugs ka nas
ཐུགས་ཀ་རུ	in the heart [center]	thugs ka ru
ཐུགས་ཀའི་ས་བོན	the seed in the heart center	thugs ka'i sa bon
ཐུགས་ཀར	at the heart	thugs kar
ཧོལདས	-	holds
ཐུགས་ཀར་འཁྱུད་རྒྱ	the mudra embraced at the heart	thugs kar 'khyud rgya
ཐུགས་ཀུན་བརྗོད་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous communication	thugs kun brjod pa'i cho 'phrul
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དགོངས	wish and intent	thugs kyi dgongs
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	wish and intent	thugs kyi dgongs pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་བཞེས	wish	thugs kyi dgongs bzhes
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་བཤེས	wish	thugs kyi dgongs bshes
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	the tantra dealing with noeticness or spirituality [one of the {rtsa rgyud sde lnga'i nang tshan}. the five basic Mahayoga tantras which are concerned with the five aspects of buddhahood	thugs kyi rgyud gsang ba 'dus pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	heart practice, the sadhana of the mind	thugs kyi sgrub pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	siddhi of mind	thugs kyi dngos grub
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བཅུད	quintessence of the Mind	thugs kyi bcud
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བཅུད་དུ་མཛད་པ	make the essence of his heart, keep in high esteem [h]	thugs kyi bcud du mdzad pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཏི་ལ་ཀ	Syn {snying thig, thugs kyi thig le}	thugs kyi ti la ka
གང་པ	a cubit high crystal stupa, representing their mind	gang pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	ye shes kyi snying po	thugs kyi thig le
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དམ་བཅའ	spiritual pledge or vow	thugs kyi dam bca'
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག	compassionate pledges, SA thugs dam	thugs kyi dam tshig
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཅུ	[TRS 1173]	thugs kyi dam tshig gsum bcu
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature of mind thugs kyi bden gnas lho brag mkhar chu power place of Guru Rinpoche's mind 1164	thugs kyi bdag nyid
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	[citta vajra] indivisible mind	thugs kyi rdo rje
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྲུལ་པ	incarnation of a deity	thugs kyi sprul pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	buddha activity of mind	thugs kyi phrin las
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva of mind thugs kyi byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' gsum (tse Rig thugs kyi byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' gsum the three types of Sublime Words through the blessings of his mind	thugs kyi byang chub sems dpa'
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	mind mirror	thugs kyi me long
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ཆེམས	heartfelt last words	thugs kyi zhal chems
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་གཟུངས་མ	spiritual consort	thugs kyi gzungs ma
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་བཟླས་པ	mental recitation	thugs kyi bzlas pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྲས	heart-son	thugs kyi sras
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྲས་མོ	spiritual daughter	thugs kyi sras mo
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་གསང་བ	the secret of mind	thugs kyi gsang ba
ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	Bonpo deity of mind	thugs kyi lha
ཐུགས་ཀྱིས་དགོངས	to agree to thugs kyis byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' gsum the three bka' of blessing of mind [thugs ting nge 'dzin gyis byin gyis brlabs pa dang, thugs thugs rjes byin gyis brlabs pa dang, thugs bden ...	thugs kyis dgongs
ཐུགས་ཀྱིས་བྱིན་བརླབས་བཀའ་གསུམ	the three bka' of blessing of mind [one thugs ting nge 'dzin gyis byin gyis brlabs pa, two thugs thugs rjes byin gyis brlabs pa, three thugs bden pas byin gyis brlabs pa]	thugs kyis byin brlabs bka' gsum
ཐུགས་ཀྱིས་མ་བཐོད་པ	unable to bear	thugs kyis ma bthod pa
ཐུགས་ཀྱིས་མ་བཟོད་པ	unable to bear	thugs kyis ma bzod pa
ཐུགས་དཀར	sincerity	thugs dkar
ཐུགས་དཀར་བ	white heart, sincerity, 360 bonpo gods	thugs dkar ba
ཐུགས་དཀར་མེ་མཉམ	dom mkhris	thugs dkar me mnyam
ཐུགས་དཀར་ཡེ་ཤེས	1 of 7 bon sages, 1 of drang srong bdun	thugs dkar ye shes
ཐུགས་དཀྱིལ	[tse]	thugs dkyil
ཐུགས་དཀྱེལ	blo khog and snying stobs	thugs dkyel
ཐུགས་དཀྲུག་པ	disturb the mind	thugs dkrug pa
ཐུགས་བཀོད	advice	thugs bkod
ཐུགས་སྐྱེད	thugs bskyed	thugs skyed
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད	kindness, concern [h]	thugs bskyed
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་དམ་བཅའ	vow and aspirations	thugs bskyed dam bca'
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་པ	* develop the mind set on supreme enlightenment	thugs bskyed pa
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassable intention thugs bskyed ma yengs par mdzad 'tshal do not let your thoughts wander	thugs bskyed bla na med pa
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་སྨོན་ལམ	prayers and aspirations	thugs bskyed smon lam
ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་སྨོན་ལམ་གནང་བ	made prayers and aspirations	thugs bskyed smon lam gnang ba
ཐུགས་ཁ་གཅིག་ཆེ་བ	dear, ?	thugs kha gcig che ba
ཐུགས་ཁ་གཅིགས་ཆེ་བ	dear treasured [H]	thugs kha gcigs che ba
ཐུགས་ཁ་གཙིགས་ཆེ་བ	dear treasured [H.]	thugs kha gtsigs che ba
ཐུགས་ཁག	[h] khag	thugs khag
ཐུགས་ཁབ་གསང	brang gzhung dkar nag mtshams nas gyen du tson gang bcal, de nas gyas gyon gnyis su tson re dang phun re bcal, de'i steng tson gang bcal ba'i sar yod pa'i glo bu thugs khab kyi stong pa'i gsang sa ...	thugs khab gsang
ཐུགས་ཁུར	responsibility	thugs khur
ཐུགས་ཁུར་གནང	be concerned w/ over, care for [h]	thugs khur gnang
ཐུགས་ཁུར་སྣོམ་པ	1) do khur byed pa; 2) 'Gan len pa	thugs khur snom pa
ཐུགས་ཁུར་བྱེད་པ	care for, be concerned with	thugs khur byed pa
ཐུགས་ཁུར་གཙོར་བཞེས	las 'gan rkang len.Las don 'di'i skor la khong rang gis thugs khur gtsor bzhes gnang ba	thugs khur gtsor bzhes
ཐུགས་ཁུར་ཟབ་བཤེས	profound concern [h]	thugs khur zab bshes
ཐུགས་ཁུར་བཤེས	be concerned w/ over, care for [h]	thugs khur bshes
ཐུགས་ཁེངས	satisfied	thugs khengs
ཐུགས་ཁེངས་པ	to be satisfied	thugs khengs pa
ཐུགས་ཁྱད	difference, distinction [h]	thugs khyad
ཐུགས་ཁྲག	heart-blood	thugs khrag
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ	1) sems ngal. thugs khral tshad med gnang ba; 2) Sems sdug Bzhed don 'ga' zhig rkyen dbang gis ma grub pas thugs khral gnang ba red; 3) unhappness / regret at seeing the falts of others [sems khral...	thugs khral
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་མཛད	showed signs of grief	thugs khral gyi rnam pa mdzad
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ་བགྱིད་པ	to be upset	thugs khral bgyid pa
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ་གནང་བ	experience unhappiness/ regret [at the faults of others vs remorse]	thugs khral gnang ba
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ་ཡོད	be concerned about	thugs khral yod
ཐུགས་ཁྲལ་ལ་བཀོད་པ	made upset	thugs khral la bkod pa
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ	Syn {thugs khral}	thugs khrel
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་མཛད	showed signs of grief	thugs khrel gyi rnam pa mdzad
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་བགྱིད་པ	be upset	thugs khrel bgyid pa
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་བ	be ashamed	thugs khrel ba
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	to upset [him]	thugs khrel ba byed pa
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་ཡོད	be concerned about	thugs khrel yod
ཐུགས་ཁྲེལ་ལ་བཀོད་པ	made upset	thugs khrel la bkod pa
ཐུགས་ཁྲོས་པ	enraged	thugs khros pa
ཐུགས་མཁའ་འགྲོ	his mind the dakini	thugs mkha' 'gro
ཐུགས་མཁྱེན	fore-knowledge, form of abject entreaty (like I appeal to your honor's heart), knowledge of a higher kind, prophetic sight	thugs mkhyen
ཐུགས་འཁུར	concern, care	thugs 'khur
ཐུགས་འཁུར་ཆེ་བཞེས	accept responsibility	thugs 'khur che bzhes
ཐུགས་འཁྲལ	anxiety, worry, agony	thugs 'khral
ཐུགས་འཁྲལ་གནང་བ	to worry, be anxious	thugs 'khral gnang ba
ཐུགས་འཁྲལ་མ་གནང	please don't worry	thugs 'khral ma gnang
ཐུགས་འཁྲུགས	agitation of the mind	thugs 'khrugs
ཐུགས་འཁྲུགས་ཏེ	Annoyed, 1165	thugs 'khrugs te
ཐུགས་འཁྲུགས་པས	agitated	thugs 'khrugs pas
ཐུགས་གལ	importance	thugs gal
ཐུགས་གལ་ཆེན་པོ	of great importance	thugs gal chen po
ཐུགས་གོམས་པའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	the practice of a Great Being	thugs goms pa'i bdag nyid chen po
ཐུགས་གྱལ	pride [h] {nga rgyal}	thugs gyal
ཐུགས་གྱེང	{thugs khral	thugs gyeng
ཐུགས་གྱོ	mental agitation	thugs gyo
ཐུགས་དགའ་བ་མེད་པ	displeasure	thugs dga' ba med pa
ཐུགས་དགེས	delight	thugs dges
ཐུགས་དགེས་བཞིན	with great delight	thugs dges bzhin
ཐུགས་དགོངས	intention, realization, aspiration [h] {dgongs pa}	thugs dgongs
ཐུགས་དགོངས་བཅད	to decide upon	thugs dgongs bcad
ཐུགས་དགོངས་འཆལ	consider this in your heart	thugs dgongs 'chal
ཐུགས་དགོངས་བཏང	thought to himself	thugs dgongs btang
ཐུགས་དགོངས་བཏང་བ	he thought	thugs dgongs btang ba
ཐུགས་དགོངས་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པར་འགྱུར་རོ	all your wishes will be realized	thugs dgongs mthar phyin par 'gyur ro
ཐུགས་དགོངས་མཐོ་བ	wise	thugs dgongs mtho ba
ཐུགས་དགོངས་དག	apology	thugs dgongs dag
ཐུགས་དགོངས་དག་ཞུ་བ	to apologize	thugs dgongs dag zhu ba
ཐུགས་དགོངས་པ་རྫོགས་པ	fulfill the intention, to fulfill my Guru's wisdom intentions	thugs dgongs pa rdzogs pa
ཐུགས་དགོངས་འཚལ	consider this is your heart	thugs dgongs 'tshal
ཐུགས་དགོངས་ལ	considered to, he thought, thought to himself --	thugs dgongs la
ཐུགས་དགོངས་ལོངས	fulfill the intentions	thugs dgongs longs
ཐུགས་དགྱེས་པ	thugs shin tu dgyes pa greatly pleased	thugs dgyes pa
ཐུགས་དགྱེས་པའི་རྟགས་སུ	in approval	thugs dgyes pa'i rtags su
ཐུགས་དགྱེས་པར་གྱིས	have joy in your hearts!	thugs dgyes par gyis
ཐུགས་དགྱེས་ཕྱིར	to please you	thugs dgyes phyir
ཐུགས་མགུ་བ་མ་ཡིན	do not honor, are not pleased with	thugs mgu ba ma yin
ཐུགས་འགན	(h) for {las 'gan} responsibility	thugs 'gan
ཐུགས་འགྱོད	[h] {'gyod pa} regret, contrition, regret, remorse	thugs 'gyod
ཐུགས་རྒྱལ	h. of {nga rgyal}	thugs rgyal
ཐུགས་རྒྱལ་དོན་མེད་བཞེངས་པ	uselessly get angry	thugs rgyal don med bzhengs pa
ཐུགས་རྒྱལ་བཞེངས་པ	getting angry	thugs rgyal bzhengs pa
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད	wisdom, transmission, heartmind continuum	thugs rgyud
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་བསྐལ་བ	inspired	thugs rgyud bskal ba
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ	invoke, incite, inspire	thugs rgyud bskul
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་བ	to activate the transmission	thugs rgyud bskul ba
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་གཅིག་ཏུ་སོང་བ	[their] minds become inseparable	thugs rgyud gcig tu song ba
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་གཅིག་པ	of identical mind stream	thugs rgyud gcig pa
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་རྟོགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	{thugs rgyud rtogs pa'i ye shes rang rgyud la skyes pa} consist of giving birth to the wisdom of the teacher's realization within yourself	thugs rgyud rtogs pa'i ye shes
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་ན	{bla ma dam pa'i thugs rgyud na bzhugs pa} present within the sublime master's mind thugs rgyud byang chub kyi sems dang	thugs rgyud na
ལྡན་པ	to have bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenment, in his stream-of-being thugs rgyud byang chub sems kyis gang	ldan pa
ཐུགས་རྒྱུས	h. of {rgyus}	thugs rgyus
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ	mind-sadhana	thugs sgrub
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	heart sadhanas	thugs sgrub skor
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་བཀོལ་བྱང	Daily Practice Manual of Tukdrub	thugs sgrub rgyun gyi bkol byang
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་གཏེར་གཞུང	The terma root text of Tukdrub (Barchey Künsel); terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	thugs sgrub gter gzhung
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་བདེ་གཤེགས་འདུས་པ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {stag lung sangs rgyas dbon po}	thugs sgrub bde gshegs 'dus pa
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སེལ	terma by Chokgyur Lingpa and Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo; Tukdrub Barchey Künsel	thugs sgrub bar chad kun sel
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་ཡང་སྙིང་འདུས་པ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by Ratna Lingpa	thugs sgrub yang snying 'dus pa
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་ཡང་འདུས	Tukdrub Yangdü	thugs sgrub yang 'dus
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	1) terma by Chokgyur Lingpa. 2) yangter by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	thugs sgrub yid bzhin nor bu
ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་གསང་འདུས་གནད་ཡིག	Vital Manual of the Heart Practice of the Assemblage of Secrets	thugs sgrub gsang 'dus gnad yig
ཐུགས་བརྒྱུད	the transmission of enlightened mind	thugs brgyud
ཐུགས་བརྒྱུད་བསྐུལ་བ	[tse]	thugs brgyud bskul ba
ཐུགས་ངན	grief, sorrow, affliction	thugs ngan
ཐུགས་ངལ་བ	1) discouragement [Pham nyes byung yang thugs ngal ma gnang]; 2) suffering occuring [Mdza' grogs gshegs pas thugs ngal mdzad pa]	thugs ngal ba
ཐུགས་ངོ་མཁྱེན་པ	to be acquainted	thugs ngo mkhyen pa
ཐུགས་མངའ་ལྟར	as you [h] know	thugs mnga' ltar
ཐུགས་མངོན་སུམ་པས་འདུལ་བ	instruction by the direct perception of buddhamind [Gd]	thugs mngon sum pas 'dul ba
ཐུགས་ལྔ	five aspects of mind, [Syn {ye shes lnga}. Five Kinds of Buddha-Mind. See the entry under five kinds of pristine cognition. Syn {ye shes lnga} 1) {chos kyi dbyings kyi ye shes} / {chos sku rnam par...	thugs lnga
ཐུགས་ཅ་ཟིང་པོ	sun po [sad anxious? dislike] .Khyed rang la thugs ca zing po zhus song.De 'dra thugs ca zing po ma gnang	thugs ca zing po
ཐུགས་ཅག	care	thugs cag
ཐུགས་བཅང་པོ	artful	thugs bcang po
ཐུགས་བཅད་པ	sems dkrugs pa. Bab col gyi snyad snyod mang pos khong gi thugs bcad pa ma legs	thugs bcad pa
ཐུགས་བཅུད	heart essence	thugs bcud
ཐུགས་བཅུད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	teaching which is the quintessence of his enlightenment	thugs bcud kyi gdams pa
ཐུགས་བརཅེ་པ	compassion	thugs brce pa
ཐུགས་ཆས	(h) to believe	thugs chas
ཐུགས་ཆུད	blor nges pa'am, khong du tsud pa.Phyag dpe 'di'i nang don mtha' dag khong gi thugs chud zin pa thugs chen chos sde bla ma pad ma ba	thugs chud
ཛྲ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {gar dbang zhig po gling pa}	dzra
ཐུགས་ཆེས	benevolent/ confident	thugs ches
ཐུགས་ཆེས་གནང	thank you, thanks	thugs ches gnang
ཐུགས་ཆེས་པ	belief, faith [h] [Ngas las 'gan bsgrub thub pa der khong thugs ches pa gnang ste mnyes po byung song]	thugs ches pa
ཐུགས་ཆོད	decisive	thugs chod
ཐུགས་ཆོད་པོ	mind is made up/ decided [h]	thugs chod po
ཐུགས་ཆོས་སྐུ	his mind the Dharmakaya	thugs chos sku
ཐུགས་མཆོག་དགྱེས	very gladly	thugs mchog dgyes
ཐུགས་རྗེ	compassion, power, benevolence, kindness * {rtsal}/ {gdangs}, mercy, good heart, responsiveness, energy, compassionate energy/ quality/ expression, karuna, [ever responsive] energy, [merciful w] gr...	thugs rje
ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐཏ	-the actual action whereas thugs rje is being generous, accommodating, snying rje is more feeling pity or sorry for someone (vctr). {rtsal}, {gdangs}. grace, compassion [h] {snying rje}. mercy, goo...	the fruition of that
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	omnipresent compassion, all-pervasive compassion	thugs rje kun khyab
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of all-pervasive compassion, {gzhi gnas kyi ye shes gsum}. the wisdom of	thugs rje kun khyab kyi ye shes
ཐུགས་རྗེ་བསྐྱེད་དུ	show your compassion	thugs rje bskyed du
ཐུགས་རྗེ་འགགས་མེད	unobstructed compassion, uninterrupted potentiality of energy, unceasing potentiality of energy	thugs rje 'gags med
ཐུགས་རྗེ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ཐག་པ	continuous cord of compassion, [Syn {rdo rje sems dpa'i sna thag} 1167	thugs rje rgyun gyi thag pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མངའ་བ	kind	thugs rje mnga' ba
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཅན	kind one	thugs rje can
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཅེན	kind 1	thugs rje cen
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ	great is the compassion of ...	thugs rje che
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ་ཞུ	be obliged, be grateful	thugs rje che zhu
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ་ཞུ་བ	to thank, be obliged to / grateful	thugs rje che zhu ba
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Compassionate One, Mahakarunika; Avalokiteshvara; Syn {spyan ras gzigs}; The Lord of Great Compassion	thugs rje chen po
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ཁ་སར་པ་ནི	mahakarunika in the Khasarpani Lokeshvara thugs rje chen po 'khor ba dong sprugs	thugs rje chen po kha sar pa ni
གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Great Compassionate One who Dredges the Depths of Samsara	gyi rgyud
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་འགྲོ་བ་ཀུན་གྲོལ	{byang gter}; terma revealed by {rgod kyi ldem 'phru can} {gter ston} 1337-1408	thugs rje chen po 'gro ba kun grol
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་འགྲོ་བ་ཀུན་སྒྲོལ	Great Compassionate One who liberates all Beings, sadhana focused upon Avalokiteshvara, from the Northern Termas revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	thugs rje chen po 'gro ba kun sgrol
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཞལ	Elevenheaded Great Compassionate One;	thugs rje chen po bcu gcig zhal
Eལེབེ༹ན	faced Great Compassionate one	Eleven
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཤལ	11-faced great compassionate 1 [spyan ras gzigs bcu gcig zhal]	thugs rje chen po bcu gcig shal
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་ལྡན་པ	endowed w great compassion	thugs rje chen po dang ldan pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	mahakarunika, i.e. Avalokiteshvara; mahakarunika, i.e. Avalokiteshvara from the Jangter	thugs rje chen po yid bzhin nor bu
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐུ	Mahakarunikaya. The 'embodiment of great compassion,' Avalokiteshvara	thugs rje chen po'i sku
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་གཏོར་རྒྱུད	anuyoga rare tantra, rare tantra of anuyoga	thugs rje chen po'i gtor rgyud
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་བོ	[tse]	thugs rje chen bo
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེའོ	thank you!	thugs rje che'o
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in a manner) consistent with the greatness of mind/ innate responsiveness*	thugs rje ltar shar ba
ཐུགས་རྗེ་དང་བྱིན་རླབས་དམ་པ	sublime compassion and blessings	thugs rje dang byin rlabs dam pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་དང་སྨོན་ལམ	{bla ma'i thugs rje dang smon lam gyi stobs} the power of the teacher's compassion and prayers	thugs rje dang smon lam
ཐུགས་རྗེ་སྣ་ཚོགས	manifold compassion	thugs rje sna tshogs
ཐུགས་རྗེ་དཔལ་བཟང	{mus chen rab 'byams pa}	thugs rje dpal bzang
ཐུགས་རྗེ་བྱམས་མ	epithet of skye dgu'i bdag mo	thugs rje byams ma
ཐུགས་རྗེ་བྱིན་རླབས	transmission of compassionate blessing, empowering energy	thugs rje byin rlabs
ཐུགས་རྗེ་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	transmission of Compassionate Blessing. Syn {bka' babs lung bstan brgyud pa}	thugs rje byin rlabs kyi brgyud pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མ་ཆུང	don't let your compassion be small	thugs rje ma chung
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མ་བཏང་ཞིག	w your compassion do not abandon me	thugs rje ma btang zhig
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མེད	uncompassionate, merciless, ruthless [h]	thugs rje med
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མྱུར་བ	the grace is swift	thugs rje myur ba
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མཛད་པ	show mercy, behave kindly	thugs rje mdzad pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	be compassionate, be merciful	thugs rje 'dzin pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཞུ	thank	thugs rje zhu
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཟུང་འཇུག་འགགས་མེད	temperament compassionate united inseparable unobstructed	thugs rje zung 'jug 'gags med
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཟུངས་ཤིག	look upon/ regard/ think w compassion	thugs rje zungs shig
ཐུགས་རྗེ་གཟིགས	please	thugs rje gzigs
ཐུགས་རྗེ་གཟུང	extended his kindness	thugs rje gzung
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ལེགས་འབུལ	thanksgiving	thugs rje legs 'bul
ཐུགས་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཐེག་པ	Way of Compassionate Bodhisattvas	thugs rje sems dpa'i theg pa
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ལྷུག་པར་ཐོབ་བོ	received grace abundantly	thugs rje lhug par thob bo
ཐུགས་རྗེའི	endowed with the potentiality of energy	thugs rje'i
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	iron hook of compassion	thugs rje'i lcags kyu
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་འཆར་ཚུལ	the way of arising of compassion	thugs rje'i 'char tshul
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་འཆར་ཚུལ་མ་འགགས་པ	the ceaseless arising of compassion thugs rje'i 'char tshul ma 'gags pa sprul pa'i	thugs rje'i 'char tshul ma 'gags pa
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་འཆར་གཞི་རྩལ	the mode/ basis of the arising of compassion is [as] power/ display/ manifestation	thugs rje'i 'char gzhi rtsal
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་འཇུག་པ	compassionate deeds/ activity	thugs rje'i 'jug pa
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཉི་འོད	rays of compassion; ex {thugs rje'i nyi 'od gang nas 'char} who will bathe us in rays of compassion?	thugs rje'i nyi 'od
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་མཐུ་མངའ	endowed with the power of compassion	thugs rje'i mthu mnga'
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་དྲིན་དུ་བསམས་ནས	thought about the loving compassion	thugs rje'i drin du bsams nas
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད	compassionate. snying rje'i rang gzugs, nature of compassion	thugs rje'i bdag nyid
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རྣམ་འཕྲུལ	their compassion manifest	thugs rje'i rnam 'phrul
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	compassionate activities	thugs rje'i phrin las
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བྱིན་རླབས	blessings of compassion	thugs rje'i byin rlabs
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རིག	rigpa endowed with the potentiality of energy	thugs rje'i rig
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རོལ་རྩལ	rolpa and tsal energies of the potentiality of one's state	thugs rje'i rol rtsal
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	by the power of grace	thugs rje'i shugs kyis
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ལྷ	appellation of avalokiteshvara	thugs rje'i lha
ཐུགས་རྗེས	with compassion	thugs rjes
ཐུགས་རྗེས་དགོངས་པར་མཛོད	consider w kindness	thugs rjes dgongs par mdzod
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་བཀའ	1 of the thugs kyis byin brlabs bka' gsum	thugs rjes byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka'
ཐུགས་རྗེས་འཛིན	please, look upon/ consider [me] w kindness!	thugs rjes 'dzin
ཐུགས་རྗེས་འཛིན་པ	accept w kindness [R]	thugs rjes 'dzin pa
བཀའ་འདྲིན་ཐིས་ཨིས་ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐཏ	-the	bka' 'drin this is the fruition of that
ཐུགས་རྗེས་ཟིན་པ	be kindly affected towards a person	thugs rjes zin pa
ཐུགས་རྗེས་ཟུངས	accept me kindly	thugs rjes zungs
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས	{kun mkhyen khyed rnams kyis thugs rjes gzigs la} Allknowing ones! Look upon us with mercy!	thugs rjes gzigs
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས་པ	skyabs 'jug thugs rjes	thugs rjes gzigs pa
གཟིགས་པར་ཞུ	under your spiritual protection and compassionate attention [may I ...]	gzigs par zhu
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས་རོགས་གནང	please, look upon/ consider me w kindness!	thugs rjes gzigs rogs gnang
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས་ཤིག	please, look upon/ consider me w kindness!	thugs rjes gzigs shig
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིངས	Look [upon] on me w kindness!	thugs rjes gzings
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟུང	extended his kindness	thugs rjes gzung
ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟུང་དུ་གསོལ	hold on to me with your compassion!	thugs rjes gzung du gsol
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བཟུང	holding us with his compassion; x {bla ma'i thugs rjes bzung zer ba de} when we speak of the teacher holding us with his compassion	thugs rjes bzung
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བཟུང་བ	to accept [us] with [your] kindness	thugs rjes bzung ba
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བཟུང་འཙལ	accept through compassion	thugs rjes bzung 'tsal
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བཟུང་ཞིག	seize me w compassion!	thugs rjes bzung zhig
ཐུགས་རྗེས་བཟུང་ཤིག	think / look upon / regard / seize me with compassion	thugs rjes bzung shig
ཐུགས་རྗེས་སུ་བསྟན་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the miracle of thugs rjes su bstan pa [nyon mongs 'dul ba'i gnyen po ston pa, cho 'phrul gsum gyi ya gyal zhig]	thugs rjes su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul
ཐུགས་ལྗགས་སྤྱན་གསུམ	skyes chen dam pa kha shas kyi sku gdung bzhu ba na, snying dang lce mig gsum ma tsig par lus pa thugs gsung sku mtshon byed kyi gdung rten	thugs ljags spyan gsum
ཐུགས་བརྗེད་ཤོར་བ	forgetfulness, leave off	thugs brjed shor ba
ཐུགས་ཉམས	thought, soul, manner	thugs nyams
ཐུགས་ཉམས་བླངས་པ	v. practiced	thugs nyams blangs pa
ཐུགས་ཉམས་འབར	their spirits were exhilarated	thugs nyams 'bar
ཐུགས་ཉམས་ལ་ཤར་བ	that had arisen from his inner experience	thugs nyams la shar ba
ཐུགས་ཉམས་སུ་བཞེད་པ	meditated, practiced; h for ex {nyams su len pa}	thugs nyams su bzhed pa
ཐུགས་ཉམས་སུ་བཞེས	to practice	thugs nyams su bzhes
ཐུགས་ཉམས་སུ་བཞེས་པ	to practice, [Syn {nyams len}	thugs nyams su bzhes pa
ཐུགས་ཉིད	nature of the mind, SA sems nyid, absolute condition of the mind	thugs nyid
ཐུགས་ཉེ་བ	close to [him]	thugs nye ba
ཐུགས་ཉེ་བའི་སློབ་མ	close disciple, heart son	thugs nye ba'i slob ma
ཐུགས་གཉེར	'dun pa'am, don gnyer	thugs gnyer
ཐུགས་གཉེར་བ	'dun pa'am, don gnyer	thugs gnyer ba
ཐུགས་མཉེལ་བ	tired mentally	thugs mnyel ba
ཐུགས་མཉེས	h. of {mnyes po} pleasing	thugs mnyes
ཐུགས་མཉེས་ཆེན་པོ་མཛད	accorded full hospitality	thugs mnyes chen po mdzad
ཐུགས་མཉེས་པ	pleasing	thugs mnyes pa
ཐུགས་མཉེས་པ་བྱུང	he was very pleased	thugs mnyes pa byung
ཐུགས་མཉེས་པར་བྱེད	gladden the hearts of	thugs mnyes par byed
ཐུགས་མཉེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fulfill, satisfy	thugs mnyes par byed pa
ཐུགས་སྙུང་བའི་མི	people that are disagreeable, people annoying to others	thugs snyung ba'i mi
ཐུགས་བསྙེལ	forget	thugs bsnyel
ཐུགས་བསྙེལ་བ	forget	thugs bsnyel ba
ཐུགས་ཏིག	heart essence	thugs tig
ཐུགས་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the mind samadhi miracle [sangs rgyas kyi cho 'phrul gsum gyi nang gses, thugs rjes su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul	thugs ting nge 'dzin gyi cho 'phrul
པའི་བཀའ	by devas, nagas yakshas etc kyis each one's sngags smras pa it is like being blessed by hte Buddha [sangs rgyas kyis byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka'i nang gses shig] thugs ting nge 'dzin gyis byin gyis ...	pa'i bka'
པའ་མདོ	{thugs ting nge 'dzin byis byin gyis brlabs pa' mdo}	pa' mdo
ཐུགས་གཏད	to pay attention, direct one's mind	thugs gtad
ཐུགས་གཏད་པ	pay attention	thugs gtad pa
ཐུགས་གཏད་འཚལ	pay close attention	thugs gtad 'tshal
ཐུགས་གཏན་འཁེལ	[h] gten 'khel] settle, decide, determine, decide, resolve	thugs gtan 'khel
ཐུགས་གཏར་འཚལ	pay close attention	thugs gtar 'tshal
ཐུགས་གཏེར	mind treasure	thugs gter
ཐུགས་གཏོང་བ	muse, meditate, reflect	thugs gtong ba
ཐུགས་བཏང་བ	he thought	thugs btang ba
ཐུགས་རྟེན	thugs dam gyi rten - practice support; support of one's own practice. Syn. sgrub rten	thugs rten
ཐུགས་རྟེན་ཏུ	to uphold the Buddha's mind	thugs rten tu
ཐུགས་བརྟག	[h] mo phyva do mo divination	thugs brtag
ཐུགས་བརྟག་ཞུས་པ	do mo divination	thugs brtag zhus pa
ཐུགས་བསྟན	teachings of the mind	thugs bstan
ཐུགས་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	1) gtan khel ba.Mtshon cha khyer nas 'thab 'dzing bya rgyur thugs thag chod pa; 2) Re ba chad pa.Blo kha ma khug kyang thugs thag chod mi 'dug	thugs thag chod pa
ཐུགས་ཐིག	heart essence thugs thugs rjes byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' by devas, nagas yakshas etc kyis each one's sngags smras pa it is like being blessed by the Buddha thugs thugs rjes byin gyis brlabs pa'i b...	thugs thig
ཐུགས་ཐུབ	self-sufficient, not caring	thugs thub
ཐུགས་ཐུབ་ཏུ་སྤྱད་པ	autonomous longs spyad pa	thugs thub tu spyad pa
ཐུགས་ཐོན་གྲོ་བ	heart is torn out	thugs thon gro ba
ཐུགས་ཐོན་འགྲོ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	as if his heart was being torn out	thugs thon 'gro ba lta bu
ཐུགས་མཐུན	[h mos mthun] acceptance, approval, agreement	thugs mthun
ཐུགས་མཐུན་གནང	* accept, approve, agree	thugs mthun gnang
ཐུགས་མཐུན་ཞལ་འཆམ	sems mthun and kha 'cham pa	thugs mthun zhal 'cham
ཐུགས་དང་འགལ་བ	to displease thugs dang 'gal ba'i las mi 'byung bar	thugs dang 'gal ba
བསྲུང་བ་ལ་མཁས་པ	skillfully avoiding anything that would displease him	bsrung ba la mkhas pa
ཐུགས་དང་འཐད་པ	something that pleases him	thugs dang 'thad pa
ཐུགས་དྭངས	LKh: this term means to ask another person to be compassionate, to have understanding and to forgive "to forgive and forget," "to conciliate, to appease" See {dgongs dwangs}. [mss]	thugs dwangs
ཐུགས་དམ	= {thugs kyi dam tshig} 1) [h] samaya, spiritual pledge or vow; 2) [h] [experience &] realization; 3) [h] {yi dam}; 4) practice, meditation, meditative commitment [Gd [daily/ yidam] practice, sadha...	thugs dam
ཐུགས་དམ་ཀྱི་མཐིལ་སོ	attention	thugs dam kyi mthil so
ཐུགས་དམ་བཀང་རྫས	do a ceremony as per vow	thugs dam bkang rdzas
ཐུགས་དམ་སྐོང	may x's wishes be fulfilled, appease, pacify	thugs dam skong
ཐུགས་དམ་སྐོང་བ	1) to mend the samaya with; to fulfill the sacred bond with ... 2) to fulfill the wishes of. 3) samaya mending	thugs dam skong ba
ཐུགས་དམ་སྐྱབས་འོག་ནས་མ་འདོར	do not leave me w/o the protection of your spiritual practice, never remove us from the protection of your practice	thugs dam skyabs 'og nas ma 'dor
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐང	may the wishes be fulfilled, may their wishes be fulfilled, appease, pacify	thugs dam bskang
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐང་བ	{/ skong ba} to fulfill the sacred bond (with . . . )	thugs dam bskang ba
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐང་བྱེད	mend/amend their samayas	thugs dam bskang byed
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐང་རྫས	to do a ritual fully according to your vow	thugs dam bskang rdzas
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐངས	fill to the brim	thugs dam bskangs
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐུལ	incite into action your	thugs dam bskul
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐུལ་བ	invoke someone's aspiration	thugs dam bskul ba
ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐུལ་བའི་གསལ་འདེབས	a reminder to invoke someone's aspiration (h)	thugs dam bskul ba'i gsal 'debs
ཐུགས་དམ་གོང་འཕེལ	experience and realization increasing more and more in 1's continuum	thugs dam gong 'phel
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་ཉམས་སད་པ	try the degree of a person's devotion or spiritual progress	thugs dam gyi nyams sad pa
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་རྟེན	practice support; support of one's own practice. Syn. thugs rten, sgrub rten	thugs dam gyi rten
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་ལྟེ་བ	core of personal practice	thugs dam gyi lte ba
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་མཐིལ	the core of the practice	thugs dam gyi mthil
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་བོགས་འདོན	enhancement of the practice	thugs dam gyi bogs 'don
ཐུགས་དམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	procedures of practice 1170 thugs dam gyi rim pa mang du gnang performed many daily practices	thugs dam gyi rim pa
ཐུགས་དམ་རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ	arouse attention	thugs dam rgyud bskul
ཐུགས་དམ་བཅའ་བ	take an oath, make a vow	thugs dam bca' ba
ཐུགས་དམ་བརྟག་པ	do mo divination	thugs dam brtag pa
ཐུགས་དམ་དུ་བཞེས་འཚལ	h. practice, apply in your experience	thugs dam du bzhes 'tshal
ཐུགས་དམ་ཕྲེང་བ	practice mala	thugs dam phreng ba
ཐུགས་དམ་འཕེལ་ཡོང	meditation will flourish	thugs dam 'phel yong
ཐུགས་དམ་ཚིག་གི	verbal commitment to sustain the root and branch samayas, SA phyag rgya	thugs dam tshig gi
ཐུགས་དམ་ཚིག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	thugs dam tsig gi phyag rgya'i rnal 'byor	thugs dam tshig gi phyag rgya
ཐུགས་དམ་མཛད	practiced their sadhana	thugs dam mdzad
ཐུགས་དམ་མཛོད	please bless me	thugs dam mdzod
ཐུགས་དམ་ཞྭ་མོ	meditation hat	thugs dam zhwa mo
ཐུགས་དམ་ཞལ་བཞེས་ལྟར་གནང་བ	dam bca' ..	thugs dam zhal bzhes ltar gnang ba
ཐུགས་དམ་ཟབ་བདུན	terma of {'od gsal sgyu ma}, gar dbang zhig po gling pa	thugs dam zab bdun
ཐུགས་དམ་གཟབ	focus on practice, focus your mind	thugs dam gzab
ཐུགས་དམ་ལ་བཞུགས་པ	remain in meditation, meditate [h]	thugs dam la bzhugs pa
ཐུགས་དམ་སྲུང་འཁོར་མཛད	performed sadhana and set up a boundary of protection	thugs dam srung 'khor mdzad
ཐུགས་དལ་དུས	when at leisure, with the mind at ease	thugs dal dus
ཐུགས་དོག་མི་དགོས	don't worry	thugs dog mi dgos
ཐུགས་དོགས	* doubt, fear, apprehension	thugs dogs
ཐུགས་དྲན	* remind, recollect, remember, refresh the memory, commemorate, consciousness	thugs dran
ཐུགས་དྲན་ཉམས་པ	became unconsciousness [h]	thugs dran nyams pa
ཐུགས་དྲན་རྙེད	regained consciousness	thugs dran rnyed
ཐུགས་དྲན་མེད་དུ་ཐིམ་པ	lose one's memory or senses	thugs dran med du thim pa
ཐུགས་བདེ	happy, cheerful	thugs bde
ཐུགས་བདེ་པོ	comfortable, happy, content, satisfied, at ease [h]	thugs bde po
ཐུགས་བདེན	{dgongs dag thugs bden zhu ba} to apologize	thugs bden
ཐུགས་འདུན	longing, yearning	thugs 'dun
ཐུགས་འདུན་གནང	consider	thugs 'dun gnang
ཐུགས་འདུན་མཛད་པ	produce longing	thugs 'dun mdzad pa
ཐུགས་འདོད	['dod pa [h] desire, assert	thugs 'dod
ཐུགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra mind; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 37]	thugs rdo rje
ཐུགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ	mystic rdo rje sems dpa', living up to one's capacity to deal with situations authentically	thugs rdo rje rnal
ཐུགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	cittavajrayoga thugs rdo rjes yid la sbyangs ste dran ting	thugs rdo rje rnal 'byor
སྒྲུབ་ཆེན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	training the mind through the indestructible reality	sgrub chen gyi yan lag
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	mind, there is the branch of great attainment associated w recollection and contemplation [Gd]	of the buddha
ཐུགས་ནང་གཤིན་པ	very affectionate love letters	thugs nang gshin pa
ཐུགས་ནས་འདོན་པ	(h) to recite by heart	thugs nas 'don pa
ཐུགས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure/ excellent mind	thugs rnam par dag pa
ཐུགས་སྣང	attention, concern [h]	thugs snang
ཐུགས་སྣང་སྐྱོ་བ	yid snang skyo ba, sadness [h] thugs snang skyo bas spyan chab bsil ba weep w sadness [h]	thugs snang skyo ba
ཐུགས་སྣང་མེད་པ	w/o attention/ concern	thugs snang med pa
ཐུགས་སྣང་གཤིན་པ	minds in harmony, deep concern [h]	thugs snang gshin pa
ཐུགས་དཔག་མེད	infinite grace	thugs dpag med
ཐུགས་དཔག་མཛད་པ	show mercy	thugs dpag mdzad pa
ཐུགས་དཔལ་བེའུ	heart-orb	thugs dpal be'u
ཐུགས་སྤྲུ	mind emanation	thugs spru
ཐུགས་སྤྲུལ	mind emanation	thugs sprul
ཐུགས་སྤྲོ	1) party, festival, celebration, banquet; 2) happiness, joy	thugs spro
ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་བཏང་བ	to have amusement, throw a picnic	thugs spro btang ba
ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་གནང	give a party	thugs spro gnang
ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་བ	be cheerful, be merry	thugs spro ba
ཐུགས་ཕན	benefit [h]	thugs phan
ཐུགས་ཕན་གསོ་བ	to help, be of advantage	thugs phan gso ba
ཐུགས་ཕན་གསོས	be useful/ beneficial [h]	thugs phan gsos
ཐུགས་ཕམ	disappointment	thugs pham
ཐུགས་ཕྱག་མཚན	mood	thugs phyag mtshan
སཡམབོལིཅ་ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	mind [Gd]	symbolic of buddha
ཐུགས་ཕྱུང	discouraged	thugs phyung
ཐུགས་ཕྱུང་ཞིང	was discouraged	thugs phyung zhing
ཐུགས་ཕྲད	immediately	thugs phrad
ཐུགས་འཕྲེང	to be attracted, felt sad	thugs 'phreng
ཐུགས་འཕྲེང་གཏན་ནས་གནང	to worry	thugs 'phreng gtan nas gnang
ཐུགས་འཕྲོག	thugs dgyes pa'i don Yul ljongs kyi bkod pa mdzes pas thugs 'phrog pa	thugs 'phrog
ཐུགས་བག	[arch] zhus pa gnang ba	thugs bag
ཐུགས་བག་ཕེབས་པ	blo'i tshugs ka bde zhing lhod pa	thugs bag phebs pa
ཐུགས་བྲེལ	busy, frenzied, hurried [h]	thugs brel
ཐུགས་བྲེལ་ཆེན་པོ	urgent affairs	thugs brel chen po
ཐུགས་བྲེལ་གནང	be busy, frenzied, hurried [h]	thugs brel gnang
ཐུགས་བྲེལ་མ་མཛད	be busy, frenzied, hurried [h]	thugs brel ma mdzad
ཐུགས་བློ་ཁེངས	be fully satisfied	thugs blo khengs
ཐུགས་བློ་ཁེལ་པོ	[h] trust, have confidence in rely on	thugs blo khel po
ཐུགས་བློས་ཁེལ་པོ	[h] trust, have confidence in rely on	thugs blos khel po
ཐུགས་བློས་གང་ཆོད	as much as you can	thugs blos gang chod
ཐུགས་བློས་གང་ཆོད་དེ་གནང	give as much as you can	thugs blos gang chod de gnang
ཐུགས་འབྱུང	heartfelt	thugs 'byung
ཐུགས་འབྱུང་བ	will take it to heart that 1171 thugs 'byung ba'i gsung sna tsogs 'don uttered many heartfelt words of grief thugs 'byung ba'i gsung sna tshogs 'don uttered many heartfelt words of grief	thugs 'byung ba
ཐུགས་མ་གྱེལ་བ	1) sems lhod yangs med pa; 2) Mi brjed pa	thugs ma gyel ba
ཐུགས་མ་བདེ	agitated	thugs ma bde
ཐུགས་མ་བདེ་སྟེ	was most unhappy	thugs ma bde ste
ཐུགས་མ་བདེ་བ	unhappily	thugs ma bde ba
ཐུགས་མ་ཟིན་པ	not be graciously inclined	thugs ma zin pa
ཐུགས་མ་ཡེངས་པར་གཏོར	direct your mind w/o wavering	thugs ma yengs par gtor
ཐུགས་མ་རངས་པ	sems la ma bab pa'am, mi mos pa	thugs ma rangs pa
ཐུགས་མད	thugs bden zhes pa ste, rang gi nyes skyon ngos len pa'i don. Rang nyid kyis 'grig mi 'dug pas thugs mad lags	thugs mad
ཐུགས་མི་བསྙེལ་བར	not forgetting, not forgetful	thugs mi bsnyel bar
ཐུགས་མུག	fed up, weary	thugs mug
ཐུགས་མུག་པ	felt dismay, weary, sad, depressed, crestfallen, dejected	thugs mug pa
ཐུགས་མོས	wish, desire [h]	thugs mos
ཐུགས་སྨད་པ	be lowly, be meek	thugs smad pa
ཐུགས་སྨོན	1) aspiration, supplication, wish [h] smon lam]; 2) yearning, inclination, longing, zeal, strong interest	thugs smon
ཐུགས་སྨོན་འདེབས་པ	supplicate [h]	thugs smon 'debs pa
ཐུགས་རྩེ	loving kindness, compassion, affection	thugs rtse
ཐུགས་རྩེ་གཏད་མཚམས	MSS: probably (h) of {blo rtse gtad mtshams} See infra. "the limit of what is held in mind/the limit of what is thought/acceptable." "demarcation of the thought". see also {gtad mtshams} and {blo r...	thugs rtse gtad mtshams
ཐུགས་རྩོལ	* quick[ly], soon	thugs rtsol
ཐུགས་བརྩེ	compassion, loving kindness; affectionate love	thugs brtse
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བ	affection, compassion[ate], merciful	thugs brtse ba
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བའི་སྒོ་ནས	with great kindness	thugs brtse ba'i sgo nas
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བའི་དང	w loving kindness, mind	thugs brtse ba'i dang
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བའི་བྱིན་རླབས	[you have his] blessings, given with great tenderness	thugs brtse ba'i byin rlabs
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བས་མ་འདོར	never cease to care for	thugs brtse bas ma 'dor
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བས་གཟིགས	out of your great kindness,	thugs brtse bas gzigs
ཐུགས་བརྩེ་ཞིང་བྱམས་པ	had great love and compassion for	thugs brtse zhing byams pa
ཐུགས་བརྩེའི་འོད་ཟེར	the light of your love	thugs brtse'i 'od zer
ཐུགས་བརྩོན	[h] brtson 'grus] exertion, endeavor, effort	thugs brtson
ཐུགས་ཚ་པོ	bka' bkyon drag po gnang shag shag gi thugs gnyan po	thugs tsha po
ཐུགས་ཚ་ཕྱོང་ངེ་བ	her heart was troubled	thugs tsha phyong nge ba
ཐུགས་ཚ་བ	* embarrassed, self- respect, shame decency	thugs tsha ba
ཐུགས་ཚིམ་ནས	satisfied	thugs tshim nas
ཐུགས་ཚིམ་པ	was content	thugs tshim pa
ཐུགས་མཚེར་བ	thugs zhum pa	thugs mtsher ba
ཐུགས་འཚེར་གནང་བ	to be annoyed, vexed	thugs 'tsher gnang ba
ཐུགས་འཚེར་བ	be grieved, to fear	thugs 'tsher ba
ཐུགས་མཛངས	had in mind	thugs mdzangs
ཐུགས་མཛངས་པ	had in mind	thugs mdzangs pa
ཐུགས་མཛེམ་མ་གནང	you are welcome, don't mention it, not at all	thugs mdzem ma gnang
ཐུགས་འཛེགས	shyness [h] thugs 'dzems gnang nas zas za 'dod	thugs 'dzegs
ཀྱང་མ་བཟས་པ	being shy/ apprehensive not eat even though 1 wants to	kyang ma bzas pa
ཐུགས་འཛེམས་གནང་བ	be shy/ apprehensive	thugs 'dzems gnang ba
ཐུགས་འཛེམས་མ་གནང	don't be shy/ apprehensive	thugs 'dzems ma gnang
ཐུགས་ཞི་བའི་དུས	when his anger has abated	thugs zhi ba'i dus
ཐུགས་ཞིབ་གནང	look at [h]	thugs zhib gnang
ཐུགས་ཞེན	clinging [h]	thugs zhen
ཐུགས་གཞོལ་བ	intend to practice	thugs gzhol ba
ཐུགས་བཞེད	1) aspiration, plan, ideas mtha' dag; 2) desire	thugs bzhed
ཐུགས་བཞེད་པ	desired	thugs bzhed pa
ཐུགས་བཞེས་ལ་འདི་བཞེས	take this to heart!	thugs bzhes la 'di bzhes
ཐུགས་ཟིན་པ	{bla ma de'i zhal mjal zhing thugs zin pa zhig byed dgos} I must meet this lama and become his disciple	thugs zin pa
ཐུགས་ཟིན་མ་བྱུང་ཡང	I might not have pleased you	thugs zin ma byung yang
ཐུགས་གཟུ་བོ	honest mind	thugs gzu bo
ཐུགས་བཟུང་བ	{bla ma'i thugs bzung ste} be receptive to your teacher	thugs bzung ba
ཐུགས་ཡམས་འབར	[their] spirits were exhilarated	thugs yams 'bar
ཐུགས་ཡིད་གཅིག་འདྲེས	mingling one's mind w [his] mind, mixing one's mind w the [guru's]	thugs yid gcig 'dres
ཐུགས་ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	blo 'khel ba.Drang bden gyi mi la thugs yid ches pa	thugs yid ches pa
ཐུགས་ཡིད་གཉིས་མེད	inseparability of state & one's mind, inseparability of my mind and his state	thugs yid gnyis med
ཐུགས་ཡིད་བྱུང་བ	disheartened	thugs yid byung ba
ཐུགས་ཡིད་དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་གྱུར་པ	to unite our minds with his	thugs yid dbyer med du gyur pa
ཐུགས་ཡིད་དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་འདྲེས	your mind will merge completely with his	thugs yid dbyer med du 'dres
ཐུགས་ཡིད་དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་འདྲེས་པ	that my mind and yours may merge as one	thugs yid dbyer med du 'dres pa
ཐུགས་ཡིད་བསྲེས་པ	mix [your] mind w the mind [of ...]	thugs yid bsres pa
ཐུགས་རབ	prajna	thugs rab
ཐུགས་རབ་གཞུངས་པ	mind supremely clear/ competent/ learned	thugs rab gzhungs pa
ཐུགས་རིག	prajna, understanding, knowledge, insight	thugs rig
ཐུགས་རིག་པའི་ཀློང	the space of his awareness	thugs rig pa'i klong
ཐུགས་རུས	exertion, endeavor, effort	thugs rus
ཐུགས་རེ	hope [h]	thugs re
ཐུགས་ལ་སྐྱེས	felt in his heart	thugs la skyes
ཐུགས་ལ་མཁོ་བ	slob dpon la yon ci mnyes 'bul bas thugs la gang mkho ba	thugs la mkho ba
གསུངས་ཤིག	master, what can I offer you in return for what you have taught me?	gsungs shig
ཐུགས་ལ་འཁྲུངས་པ	came into his mind	thugs la 'khrungs pa
ཐུགས་ལ་དགོངས	realized, reflected, pondered	thugs la dgongs
ཐུགས་ལ་མངའ་བ	sems la nges pa'am, sems la yod pa.Gnas lugs tsang ma thugs la mnga' ba	thugs la mnga' ba
ཐུགས་ལ་བཏགས	accept [-ed] you have been kind to me, have accepted me	thugs la btags
ཐུགས་ལ་བཏགས་པ	been taken to heart, [by.]	thugs la btags pa
ཐུགས་ལ་ཐོབས་ཤིག	please keep me in your heart	thugs la thobs shig
ཐུགས་ལ་དེ་ལྟར་ཞོག	keep this in your mind	thugs la de ltar zhog
ཐུགས་ལ་དེ་ལྷར་ཞོག	keep this in mind, also, may you keep in mind	thugs la de lhar zhog
ཐུགས་ལ་འདི་བཞེས	take this to heart! thugs la 'dug pas 'di ni ha cang thub chos	thugs la 'di bzhes
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོགས	sems la 'jog pa.Ma bsnyel bar thugs la 'dogs par zhu	thugs la 'dogs
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོགས་པ	interest oneself in, take care of	thugs la 'dogs pa
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོགས་པ་ཞུ	please remember me w kindness	thugs la 'dogs pa zhu
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོགས་པར་ཞུ	please think of us kindly	thugs la 'dogs par zhu
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོངས་པར་ཞུ	please think of us kindly	thugs la 'dongs par zhu
ཐུགས་ལ་འདོན་པ	read silently	thugs la 'don pa
ཐུགས་ལ་ཕོག་པ	sems la gnod pa.Dgon pa'i khyi la bzhus na bla ma'i thugs la phog yong	thugs la phog pa
ཐུགས་ལ་འབབ་པ	yid la 'thad pa'am, 'gro ba. Mi tsang ma'i thugs la 'bab pa	thugs la 'bab pa
ཐུགས་ལ་མི་འདོགས་སྐབས་མ་མཆིས	it is impossible for me not to be in your mind	thugs la mi 'dogs skabs ma mchis
ཐུགས་ལ་མི་འདོགས་སྐབས་མ་མཚིས	it is impossible for me not to be in your mind thugs la mi 'bab pa'i bya ba byed ma	thugs la mi 'dogs skabs ma mtshis
མྱོང་བ	I have never done anything to displease him	myong ba
ཐུགས་ལ་ཞོག	Keep this in your heart!	thugs la zhog
ཐུགས་ལ་ཤར	he realized	thugs la shar
ཐུགས་ལས	1) 'phrin las; 2) Sems khur ram, sems khral.Las don 'grub song bas thugs las gnang mi dgos	thugs las
ཐུགས་ལོན་པ	blo tsod lon pa.'Grogs yun ring bas khong gi thugs lon pa	thugs lon pa
ཐུགས་ཤེས་པ	believe, know one's mind	thugs shes pa
ཐུགས་གཤིས	disposition, character, nature	thugs gshis
ཐུགས་བཤེད	aspiration	thugs bshed
ཐུགས་བཤེད་པ	desired	thugs bshed pa
ཐུགས་བཤེས་ལ་འདི་བཤེས	take this to heart!	thugs bshes la 'di bshes
ཐུགས་བཤོལ་བ	[intend to] practice	thugs bshol ba
ཐུགས་སང	free/ leisure time	thugs sang
ཐུགས་སངས་རྒྱས	his mind the buddha	thugs sangs rgyas
ཐུགས་སུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	see thugs la 'khrungs pa [mss]	thugs su 'khrungs pa
ཐུགས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	think well of, approve of, be agreeable, pleasant, delightful, pleasure	thugs su 'gro ba
ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད	realized	thugs su chud
ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད་པ	keep in mind	thugs su chud pa
ཐུགས་སུ་འཐད་པ	sems la 'os shing 'bab pa. Khong gi rnam 'gyur la bltas na skad cha de thugs su 'thad pa 'dra po 'dug	thugs su 'thad pa
ཐུགས་སུ་པྱོན་ཅིང	[the guru] accepts you in his heart	thugs su pyon cing
ཐུགས་སུ་ཕེབས	pleasing	thugs su phebs
ཐུགས་སུ་ཕྱོན་པ	pleasing	thugs su phyon pa
ཐུགས་སུ་བྱོན་ཅིང	[the guru] accepts you in his heart	thugs su byon cing
ཐུགས་སུ་བྱོན་པ	pleasing	thugs su byon pa
ཐུགས་སུ་འབྱོན་པ	keep in mind	thugs su 'byon pa
ཐུགས་སུ་མ་བྱོན་ནམ	haven't these entered your mind?	thugs su ma byon nam
ཐུགས་སུ་མ་ཤོང་བ	could not tolerate	thugs su ma shong ba
ཐུགས་སུ་མ་ཤོང་བའི་རྣམ་པ	had not tolerated	thugs su ma shong ba'i rnam pa
ཐུགས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	thugs la mnga' ba'am, mkhyen pa	thugs su tshud pa
ཐུགས་སུན	displeased, upset	thugs sun
ཐུགས་སུན་པ	disappointing	thugs sun pa
ཐུགས་སུན་ཕྱུང	irritate	thugs sun phyung
ཐུགས་སུན་མ་ཕྱུང་བ	never irritated	thugs sun ma phyung ba
ཐུགས་སུན་ཞུས་པ	made irritated [sun po bzos pa]	thugs sun zhus pa
ཐུགས་སེམས	mind, wish, thought[s] [h]	thugs sems
ཐུགས་སེམས་འཚབས་པ	to be agitated	thugs sems 'tshabs pa
ཐུགས་སེམས་བཟང་པོ	good thoughts/ wishes [h]	thugs sems bzang po
ཐུགས་སེམས་ཤོར་བ	to admire; fall in love	thugs sems shor ba
ཐུགས་སོས	consoled, offer condolences, cheer up	thugs sos
ཐུགས་སྲས	a heart-son	thugs sras
ཐུགས་སྲས་ཀུན་དགའ	(1062-1124) - in the tradition of pha dam pa sangs rgyas	thugs sras kun dga'
ཐུགས་སྲས་དགུ	nine heart-sons	thugs sras dgu
ཐུགས་སྲས་རྗེ་འབངས་གྲོགས་གསུམ	the	thugs sras rje 'bangs grogs gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་ཧེཨརཏ	disciples: the king, the subject and the friend [King Trisong Deutsen, Vairotsana and Yeshe Tsogyal]	three heart
ཐུགས་སྲས་སྙིང་གི་བུ་དགུ	heart disciples of Padmasambhava	thugs sras snying gi bu dgu
ཐུགས་སྲོ	heat, passion, wrath, anger	thugs sro
ཐུགས་སྲོག	Spiritual life-force. The seed syllable usually in the heart center of the deity	thugs srog
ཐུགས་གསལ་སྟོང	the empty brilliance of your realized mind	thugs gsal stong
ཐུགས་གསལ་མེ་ལོང	heart-mirror of the deity	thugs gsal me long
ཐུགས་གསོ་བ	console, comfort, refresh the mind	thugs gso ba
ཐུགས་གསོ་བའི་གཏམ་སྙན་གསོལ	say pleasant words of comfort/ consolation	thugs gso ba'i gtam snyan gsol
ཐུགས་གསོའི་མཇལ་དར	kha btags given as means of consolation/ comfort	thugs gso'i mjal dar
ཐུགས་གསོས	consoled, offer condolences, cheer up	thugs gsos
ཐུགས་བསམ	h. of {bsam blo} thought	thugs bsam
ཐུགས་བསམ་གཏོང་བ	think, meditate, consider	thugs bsam gtong ba
ཐུགས་བསོས	offered condolences	thugs bsos
ཐུགས་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	he ru ka rol pa'i skor	thugs he ru ka rol pa'i skor
ཐུགས་ལྷན་ནེ	thugs dvangs gsal gyi rnam pa.Brel zing gi 'gal rkyen med pas thugs lhan ner gnas pa	thugs lhan ne
ཐུགས་ལྷོད་ལྷོད་གྱིས	relax!	thugs lhod lhod gyis
ཐུང	drink {'thung}. [comp {thung thung} curtail, short[er], smaller	thung
ཐུང་སྐྱེལ	1) sa tsigs nas sa tsigs sam, sa thag thung sa nas thung sar skyel dgos pa'i khral 'ul; 2) Skyel ma thung ngu	thung skyel
ཐུང་ང	three years old	thung nga
ཐུང་ངུ	diminutive, short	thung ngu
ཐུང་ངུ་འགྲོ་བ	become shorter	thung ngu 'gro ba
ཐུང་ངུ་མ	{thung ngu ma} nadi	thung ngu ma
ཐུང་ཐུང	short	thung thung
ཐུང་ཐུང་དང་གྱོང་པོ	stocky	thung thung dang gyong po
ཐུང་མཐའ	pistol	thung mtha'
ཐུང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	shorten	thung du gtong ba
ཐུང་མདའ	pistol, revolver, pistol	thung mda'
ཐུང་མདའ་དལ་རྒྱག	free pistol shooting marksmanship event	thung mda' dal rgyag
ཐུང་མདའི་ཤུབ	holster	thung mda'i shub
ཐུང་བསྡུ་བ	concluding the practice	thung bsdu ba
ཐུང་པོ	[Skandha] aggregate	thung po
ཐུང་བ	short, low in size, of small dimensions, brief, 1 of dbyibs gzugs brgyad	thung ba
ཐུང་བ་བཞི	4 shortnesses (mgrin thung, rkang thung, rgyab thung, rje ngar)	thung ba bzhi
ཐུང་མིན	long, not short	thung min
ཐུང་མོང་གི་རྣལ	sngon 'gro gtor ma, bza' ba zas, gtung ba skom, spyod lam rgyun)	thung mong gi rnal
ཐུང་མོང་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་ལྔ	5 sorts of ordinary ascetics (nang nub chos spyod kyi rnal 'byor	thung mong gi rnal 'byor lnga
ཐུང་མོང་མ་ཡིན	extraordinary, specific and defining, special	thung mong ma yin
ཐུང་སྨན	liquid medicine	thung sman
ཐུང་ཝེ་སུའུ	isotope	thung we su'u
ཐུང་སི	(CH interpreter, bilingual person, tr	thung si
ཐུངས་གཅང་པོ	alert, perky	thungs gcang po
ཐུངས་ཐུངས	drinking more and more	thungs thungs
ཐུད	hollow of a pillar, coagulated milk,	thud
ཐུད་སྒྲོམ	milk cheese packing box	thud sgrom
ཐུད་ཐུད	#	thud thud
ཐུད་གདར་མ	square thud of mixed butter and cheese	thud gdar ma
ཐུད་ཕོར	thud blug pa'i snod kha gcod rang 'grigs	thud phor
ཐུད་སྦྲུ་བ	thud pressing or gyo ba [shaking?]	thud sbru ba
ཐུད་ཙོ་པོ	delicious thud w butter cheese and much sugar mixed	thud tso po
ཐུད་ལུད	spittle	thud lud
ཐུད་ལུད་རྒྱག	spit	thud lud rgyag
ཐུད་ལེབ	milk cheese cake	thud leb
ཐུད་ཤོར་བ	careless, erring, blundering, negligent	thud shor ba
ཐུན	{thun rdzas} power substance	thun
ཐུན་ཀྱང་མེད་དོ	without necessarily having to resort to sessions of practice	thun kyang med do
ཐུན་ཀྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the preliminary that goes before each session	thun kyi sngon 'gro
ཐུན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	one of sku lnga rgyal po	thun gyi rgyal po
ཐུན་གྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	session preliminary	thun gyi sngon 'gro
ཐུན་གྱི་མཐར	at the end of a session	thun gyi mthar
ཐུན་གྱི་དུས	during meditation sessions	thun gyi dus
ཐུན་གྱི་ཕྱེད་ཆར	in the half session / half of the session	thun gyi phyed char
ཐུན་གྱིས་སྦྱང	must be applied in a session	thun gyis sbyang
ཐུན་སྒོམ	[tse]	thun sgom
ཐུན་ངང་མ་མོ	mother of the arch devil, long-armed devil	thun ngang ma mo
ཐུན་དངོས་གཞི	main part or middle of a session/ thun	thun dngos gzhi
ཐུན་བཅད	chos mtshams sdod skabs smra ba dang mi gzhan dang thug 'phrad spong ba	thun bcad
ཐུན་ཆུང	short sessions, not as extensively	thun chung
ཐུན་ཆེན	360 minute period	thun chen
ཐུན་ཆོས	teachings on how to practice a session	thun chos
ཐུན་གཏོང་བ	mtshams thun bzhag nas lang ba	thun gtong ba
ཐུན་གཏོར	torma used as ritual weapon	thun gtor
ཐུན་སྟོད	beginning/first part of the session, the 1st half of the meditation period	thun stod
ཐུན་ཐར	{nan tan du bya}. - scrutinize it earnestly	thun thar
ཐུན་ཐི	(sog gos chen tson khra zhig 1174	thun thi
ཐུན་ཐུན	tso tso'am, sde tsan sde tsan	thun thun
ཐུན་ཐོང་གི་མཆོད་པ་ལྔ	the ordinary five offerings; 1) {me tog}. 2) {bdug spos}. 3) {mar me}. 4) {dri chab}. 5) {zhal zas}. = {thun mong gi te bar spyod lnga}	thun thong gi mchod pa lnga
ཐུན་མཐར	at the end of the meditation session	thun mthar
ཐུན་དང་ཐུན་མཚམས	sessions and breaks / between sessions	thun dang thun mtshams
ཐུན་དོང	thun gyis 'brab sa'i 'brub khung / hole	thun dong
ཐུན་དྲུག	six periods. The six periods of day and night. Khenpo Könchok Mönlam says that it was the Indian tradition to do six sessions within a 24 hour duration, while in Tibet four sessions were more popul...	thun drug
ཐུན་དྲུག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoge of the six sessions [thun bzhi'i steng du mtshan gyi cha stod dang cha smad gnyis bsnan pas dus drug tu bsgom pa'i bskyed rdzogs kyi nyams len]	thun drug rnal 'byor
ཐུན་དྲུག་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	[tse]	thun drug bla ma'i rnal 'byor
ཐུན་གདངས	session tune	thun gdangs
ཐུན་མདའ	magical arrow to shoot people or devils	thun mda'
ཐུན་བསྡུ་པ	conclude the session	thun bsdu pa
ཐུན་བསྡུ་བ	concluding the practice	thun bsdu ba
ཐུན་སྣོད	tün container	thun snod
ཐུན་པ	cling to, adhere	thun pa
ཐུན་ཕྱེད	1) sman gyi thun phyed; 2) Nyin mtshan gyi thun phyed	thun phyed
ཐུན་ཕྲན	180 minute period	thun phran
ཐུན་བར	between the individual sessions of day and night	thun bar
ཐུན་བར་དུ	inbetween sessions	thun bar du
ཐུན་བྲབ	thun brabs	thun brab
ཐུན་བྲབ་པ	cast or throw enchanted articles, perform magical rites with enchanted articles, magically slay people	thun brab pa
ཐུན་བྲབས	yungs kar gyi thun gyis brabs pa'am, gtor ba	thun brabs
ཐུན་འབྲིང	medium length practice session	thun 'bring
ཐུན་འབྲུ	ears left after the grain is harvested [lo tog brngas zin pa'i shul gyi snye ma]	thun 'bru
ཐུན་སྦྱོར	mtshan mo	thun sbyor
ཐུན་མ	relating to the watch of the night	thun ma
ཐུན་མང་སྐད	the common spoken chinese	thun mang skad
ཐུན་མིན	exclusive, not common, extraordinary, uncommon, particular, not shared, not ordinary, specific, unique, unusual [tse]	thun min
ཐུན་མིན་གྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	Special preliminaries. Taking refuge, arousing bodhichitta, recitation and meditation of Vajrasattva, mandala offerings, and guru yoga. For further details see 'Torch of Certainty,' Shambhala Publi...	thun min gyi sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མིན་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་བརྒྱད	tatagathas's exclusive dbang phyug brgyad [R	thun min gyi dbang phyug brgyad
ཐུན་མིན་སྔགས	uncommon Mantrayana	thun min sngags
ཐུན་མིན་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the special preliminaries; Syn {sngon 'gro 'bum bzhi}	thun min sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མིན་ནང་གི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	Special inner preliminaries	thun min nang gi sngon 'gro
ཏིམེས་ཨོནེ	hundred thousand	times one
ཐུན་མིན་གསང་སྔགས་སྤྱིའི་ལུགས	the specific system of the general Secret Mantra	thun min gsang sngags spyi'i lugs
ཐུན་མོང	1) general, common, communal, collective, public, ordinary, regular, shared, both, together; 2) Shadharana, [the 44th year, the male iron dog] lcags khyi lo	thun mong
ཐུན་མོང་གན་རྒྱ	[mi kun gyis rtsi 'jog dgos pa'i [which all must respect]{thun	thun mong gan rgya
མོང་གི་འཁོར་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four ordinary assemblies [of monks, nuns, novice monks, and novice nuns[Gd][tse]	mong gi 'khor rnam pa bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་གི	ordinary/ usual; typical	thun mong gi
ཐུན་མོང་གི་འཁོར་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four ordinary assemblies [monks, nuns, novice monks, and novice nuns [Gdmk] [tserig]	thun mong gi 'khor rnam pa bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་གསུམ	three common classes of means for attainment [of maha^ yoga. Ma^tari^ [-a ] the liberating sorcery {ma mo rbo gtong}. Mundane choto" {'jig rten mchod bstod}. and Maledictory mantra traknga {drag sn...	thun mong gi sgrub sde gsum
ཐུན་མོང་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	ordinary spiritual attainments/ siddhis	thun mong gi dngos grub
ཐུན་མོང་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ་བརྒྱད	8 common siddhis [1) {nam mkhar 'gro ba dngos grub}. 2) {sa 'og gi gter mthong ba'i dngos grub}. 3) {gser 'gyur rtsi'i dngos grub}. 4) {rkang 'gyog gi dngos grub}. 5) {ral gri'i dngos grub}. 6) {mi...	thun mong gi dngos grub brgyad
མཐར་ཐུག་མཆོག་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	that common accomplishment are used to connect with the ultimate supreme accomplishment	mthar thug mchog la sbyor ba
ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	general preliminaries	thun mong gi sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྔོན་འགྲོ་བཞི	four [ordinary] foundations	thun mong gi sngon 'gro bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཆོས	(bsam gtan bzhi, tshad med bzhi, gzugs med pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa bzhi, mngon par shes pa lnga)	thun mong gi chos
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཐེག་པ	common/ general vehicle [path common to mahayana and hinayana. sometimes path in common w outsiders like the Hindus]	thun mong gi theg pa
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	the three common vehicles [gsang sngags rnying ma'i lugs kyi nyan thos rang rgyal byang sems gsum	thun mong gi theg pa gsum
ཐུན་མོང་གི་འཐབ་རྩོད	common struggle thun mong gi dam tshig nyi shu rtsa	thun mong gi 'thab rtsod
ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ	the general Tripitaka [of the Hinayana]	thun mong gi sde snod gsum
ཐུན་མོང་གི་པཱུ་ཛ་ལྔ	Syn {pu dza lnga} / {nyer spyod lnga}	thun mong gi pU dza lnga
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཕུར་པ	ordinary purpa; a	thun mong gi phur pa
མན	made purpa	man
ཐུན་མོང་གི་འཕྲོད་འབྱོར	public health	thun mong gi 'phrod 'byor
ཐུན་མོང་གི་བློ་སྦྱོང་རྣམ་པ་བཞི་གེནེརལ་ཕོ༹ཨུརཕོ༹ལད་མིནད	training; sm. {blo ldog rnam bzhi}	thun mong gi blo sbyong rnam pa bzhi general fourfold mind
ཐུན་མོང་གི་འཚོ་བ	collective life/ livelihood	thun mong gi 'tsho ba
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཞིང་གྲོང	collective farm	thun mong gi zhing grong
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཞིང་པ	collective farmer	thun mong gi zhing pa
ཐུན་མོང་གི་རང་བཞིན	common/ collective/ ordinary nature	thun mong gi rang bzhin
ཐུན་མོང་གི་རིག་གནས་བཞི	four common sciences [these are the arts {bzo rig gnas}. or s'ilpavidya^., grammar {sgra'i rig gnas}. or s'abdavidya^., medicine {gso ba'i rig gnas}. or cikitsavidya^., and logic {gtan tshigs kyi r...	thun mong gi rig gnas bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་གི་རེ་འདུན	common/ collective hope/ desire	thun mong gi re 'dun
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ལམ	common path, standard path	thun mong gi lam
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ལས	ordinary action/ karma [tshe bsod rgyas pa sogs 'jig rten la phan gdags pa'i las]	thun mong gi las
ཐུན་མོང་གི་ལས་བཞི	four common karmas	thun mong gi las bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་གི་བསམ་ཚུལ	common/ ordinary ideas/ attitudes/ views	thun mong gi bsam tshul
ཐུན་མོང་གིས	together, jointly, collectively	thun mong gis
ཐུན་མོང་གིས་བདག་གཉེར་བྱེད་པ	together/ jointly/ collectively manage	thun mong gis bdag gnyer byed pa
ཐུན་མོང་དངོས་གྲུབ	common miraculous powers (passing through walls, vanishing in crowd, able to appear young though old)	thun mong dngos grub
ཐུན་མོང་དངོས་གྲུབ་བརྒྱད	the 8 ordinary siddhis [ril bu dang, mig sman dang, sa 'og dang, ral gri dang, nam mkhar 'phur ba dang, mi snang dang, 'chi ba med pa dang, nad 'joms te brgyad	thun mong dngos grub brgyad
ཐུན་མོང་སྔོན་འགྲོ	general preliminaries	thun mong sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become collectivized	thun mong can du 'gyur
ཐུན་མོང་ཆོས	samsara	thun mong chos
ཐུན་མོང་མཉམ་སྒྲུབ	accomplish =ly for self and others.	thun mong mnyam sgrub
ཐུན་མོང་ལྟ་སྟངས	collective point of view	thun mong lta stangs
ཐུན་མོང་ལྟ་ཚུལ	collective point of view	thun mong lta tshul
ཐུན་མོང་ཐེག་པ	general vehicles, the common vehicles	thun mong theg pa
ཐུན་མོང་ཐེག་པའི་ལུགས	the system of the common vehicles	thun mong theg pa'i lugs
ཐུན་མོང་ཐོག་ནས	together, jointly, collectively thun mong dang khyad par gyi sngon 'gro - general and special preliminaries thun mong dang mchog gi dngos grub common/ ordinary and supreme siddhis thun mong dang mc...	thun mong thog nas
ཐུན་མོང་དུ	collectively, jointly, together	thun mong du
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་འགོ་ཀྲིད་བྱེད	lead jointly	thun mong du 'go krid byed
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་འགྱུར	become public/ common, collectivized	thun mong du 'gyur
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་བསྒྱུར	collectivize	thun mong du bsgyur
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་ངལ་རྩོལ་བྱེད	do collective labor	thun mong du ngal rtsol byed
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	general teaching, generally taught	thun mong du bstan pa
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་སྤྱོད	be in use commonly	thun mong du spyod
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་བཤད་པ	as generally explained	thun mong du bshad pa
ཐུན་མོང་དུ་གསར་རྩོམ་བྱེད་པ	collectively invent/ create	thun mong du gsar rtsom byed pa
ཐུན་མོང་མདོ་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དབུ་མ	the Middle Way of the general Sutra system	thun mong mdo lugs kyi dbu ma
ཐུན་མོང་སྡེ་ཁག	a collective	thun mong sde khag
ཐུན་མོང་ནས	together, jointly, collectively	thun mong nas
ཐུན་མོང་པའི་བུམ་དབང	common vase empowerment	thun mong pa'i bum dbang
ཐུན་མོང་དཔལ་འབྱོར	collectivized economy	thun mong dpal 'byor
ཐུན་མོང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་མཎ་ཌལ	the general nirmanakaya mandala	thun mong sprul sku'i maN Dal
ཐུན་མོང་ཕྱི་དང་ནང	outer and inner general preliminaries for the path	thun mong phyi dang nang
ཐུན་མོང་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the general outer and inner preliminaries	thun mong phyi nang gi sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་ཕྱི་ནང་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the general outer and inner preliminaries	thun mong phyi nang sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་ཕྱིའི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the ordinary outer preliminaries	thun mong phyi'i sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་བ	general, common	thun mong ba
ཐུན་མོང་བའ་སྲུང་འཁོར	general protection circle	thun mong ba' srung 'khor
ཐུན་མོང་བའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	[tse]	thun mong ba'i bdag rkyen
ཐུན་མོང་བའི་མ་ངེས་པ	uncertainty because og being in common [one of the two uncertain reasons, mthun phyogs and mi mthun phyogs both 'jug pa, eg, sgra mi rtag pa la, mthun dpe vase sogs la 'jug cing, mi mthun dpe space...	thun mong ba'i ma nges pa
ཐུན་མོང་བའི་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	the general stages of the path	thun mong ba'i lam gyi rim pa
ཐུན་མོང་བའི་སྲུང་འཁོར	gsang sngags rgyud sde bzhi thun mong du bsgom rgyu'i srung 'khor	thun mong ba'i srung 'khor
ཐུན་མོང་བུད་མེད	prostitute	thun mong bud med
རྫོགས	the uncommon development and completion stages of the Mantrayana	rdzogs
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན	unusual quality	thun mong ma yin
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པ	exclusive, not common, extraordinary, uncommon, particular, not shared, not ordinary, specific, unique, unusual [tse]	thun mong ma yin pa
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པ་ཨི་བདག་རྐྱེན	the unshared dominant condition	thun mong ma yin pa i bdag rkyen
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའ་ཆོས	special teachings thun mong ma yin pa' dran pa nye bar	thun mong ma yin pa' chos
གཤགས་པ	extraordinary objects of mindfulness	gshags pa
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའ་སྲུང་འཁོར	extraordinary protection circle	thun mong ma yin pa' srung 'khor
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི	extraordinary	thun mong ma yin pa'i
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཁྱོད་ཆོས	distinctive specialty	thun mong ma yin pa'i khyod chos
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	the extraordinary perspective	thun mong ma yin pa'i grub mtha'
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་རྒྱུ	uncommon cause	thun mong ma yin pa'i rgyu
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	the special preliminaries thun mong ma yin pa'i sngon 'gro bzhi po - the four special preliminaries; Syn {sngon 'gro 'bum bzhi}	thun mong ma yin pa'i sngon 'gro
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཆོས	extraordinary teachings	thun mong ma yin pa'i chos
གཞག་པ	extraordinary [objects of] mindfulness thun mong ma yin pa'i dran pa nye bar	gzhag pa
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	uncommon empowering condition	thun mong ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen
རྣམ་པ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་དགུ	[tse]	rnam pa sum cu rtsa dgu
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	extraordinary definition/ characteristic[s]	thun mong ma yin pa'i mtshan nyid
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	extraordinary qualities	thun mong ma yin pa'i yon tan
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྲུང་འཁོར	extraordinary protection circle	thun mong ma yin pa'i srung 'khor
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་བ	[asadharana] uncommon	thun mong ma yin ba
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་བའི་རྒྱུ	[asadharanahetu] uncommon cause	thun mong ma yin ba'i rgyu
ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་རཏ་ན་བདུན	the 7 extraordinary jewels ratna [1) {'khor lo}. 2) {btsun mo}.; 3) {dmag dpon}. 4) {khyim bdag}. 5) {gling chen}. 6) {rta mchog}. 7) {nor bu}	thun mong ma yin rat na bdun
ཐུན་མོང་མན་ཡིན་པའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	uncommon empowering condition	thun mong man yin pa'i bdag rkyen
ཐུན་མོང་མིན	special; extraordinary	thun mong min
ཐུན་མོང་མིན་ཉིད	what is not shared with	thun mong min nyid
ཐུན་མོང་མིན་པ	exclusive, not common, extraordinary, uncommon, particular, not shared, not ordinary, specific, unique, unusual [tse]	thun mong min pa
ཐུན་མོང་མིན་པའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས	distinctive specialty	thun mong min pa'i khyad chos
ཐུན་མོང་མིན་པའི་དཔེ	uncommon example [dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can mdzes chos kyi yon tan ha cang mtsar drags pas, mtsungs chos la 'gran zlar 'os pa'i dpe gzhan ma rnyed par rang gi 'dra dper rang nyid ...	thun mong min pa'i dpe
ཐུན་མོང་མིན་པའི་མ་ངེས་པ	uncertaity of not being in common [ma nges pa'i rtad gnyis kyi ya gyal, gang la rtags su song ba'i rgol bas mthun phyogs dang mi mthun phyogs gang rung la rtags yod par ma mthong ba ste, sgra mi rt...	thun mong min pa'i ma nges pa
ཐུན་མོང་རྩ་འཛིན	common program	thun mong rtsa 'dzin
ཐུན་མོང་ཚོང་ར	common market	thun mong tshong ra
ཐུན་མོང་རིག་གནས་བཞི	four common sciences [Gd]	thun mong rig gnas bzhi
ཐུན་མོང་རིག་པ	nang rig pa phud pa'i outer and inner ordinary precepts	thun mong rig pa
ཐུན་མོང་རིང་ལུགས	collectivism	thun mong ring lugs
ཐུན་མོང་རེ་སྨོན	spyi'i re 'dun	thun mong re smon
ཐུན་མོང་ལ་དབང་བ	collectively owned	thun mong la dbang ba
ཐུན་མོང་ལ་དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	collective ownership	thun mong la dbang ba'i lam lugs
ཐུན་མོང་ལས་དོན	spyi'i las don	thun mong las don
ཐུན་མོང་ལས་བཞིའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the enlightened deeds of the four general activities 1178	thun mong las bzhi'i phrin las
ཐུན་མོང་ས	unclaimed grounds, public gardens, place for public sports and athletic exercises	thun mong sa
ཐུན་མོངས་གི་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	28 common commitments [of Maha^yoga/anu yoga [Gdmk]	thun mongs gi nyi shu rtsa brgyad
ཐུན་མོངས་གི་སྡོམ	common rules thun mongs dang khyad par gyi sngon 'gro - general and special preliminaries	thun mongs gi sdom
ཐུན་མོངས་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཁྲིད་ཡིག	general outer and inner guide	thun mongs phyi nang gi khrid yig
ཐུན་མོངས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	uncommon empowering condition	thun mongs ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen
ཐུན་སྨད	second/ ending part of the session	thun smad
ཐུན་སྨད་པ	the latter part of the meditation period	thun smad pa
ཐུན་ཙོད	dus kyi cha ste nyin thun gsum, mtshan thun gsum lta bu	thun tsod
ཐུན་ཙོད་ཀྱི་སྨན	thun tsod du rung ba'i sman	thun tsod kyi sman
ཐུན་ཙོད་དུ་རུང་བའི་སྨན	'dul ba las bshad pa'i sman bzhi'i gras snga dro nas mtshan mo'i thun tsod tsun chad du byin gyis brlabs shing, skom pa'i nad sel ba la gtso bor gnang ba'i sman bcas ldan dge slong gis thun tsod ky...	thun tsod du rung ba'i sman
ཐུན་ཚེགས	SA phran tshegs	thun tshegs
ཐུན་ཚོད	hour	thun tshod
ཐུན་ཚོད་དུ་རུང་བའི་སྨན	[tse]	thun tshod du rung ba'i sman
ཐུན་ཚོད་ལས་འདས་པ	transgression of a period	thun tshod las 'das pa
ཐུན་མཚམས	postmeditation (activity) between formal practice sessions	thun mtshams
ཐུན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the practice during breaks, inter-session yogas	thun mtshams kyi rnal 'byor
ཐུན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བདུན	seven types of practice during breaks	thun mtshams kyi rnal 'byor bdun
ཐུན་མཚམས་རྟོགས	cannibal demon that longs for gloom betwixt day and night to be able to search for prey	thun mtshams rtogs
ཐུན་མཚམས་སྟོབས	rakshasa, srin po	thun mtshams stobs
ཐུན་མཚམས་རྣམས	break in a retreat	thun mtshams rnams
ཐུན་མཚམས་རྣམས་སུ	inbetween sessions	thun mtshams rnams su
ཐུན་མཚམས་བྲལ་བ	beyond sessions and breaks	thun mtshams bral ba
ཐུན་མཚམས་སུ	during the breaks thun mtshams su zangs mdog dpal ri'i	thun mtshams su
སྨོན་ལམ་འདོན	at the close of practice, chant the aspiration of glorious	smon lam 'don
ཅོཔཔེར	colored mountain	copper
ཐུན་མཚོན	weapon that is fixed or stuck on	thun mtshon
ཐུན་རྫས	power substance, articles for sorcery	thun rdzas
ཐུན་གཞུག་ངན་ན	if the session does not end well	thun gzhug ngan na
ཐུན་བཞི	four sessions [1) {thor thun}. = {nam ma langs gong la}. 2) {snga thun}. = {ja bzhes tshar nas}.; 3) {phyi thun}. = {ba ra ba chi tshar song}. 4) {srod thun}. = {dgong dag bzhes lag bzhes tshar dus}	thun bzhi
ཐུན་བཞི་པ	4th lunar crescent, 4th day	thun bzhi pa
ཨཕ༹ཏེར་ཕུ༹ལལ་ཨོར་ནེཝ	moon	after full or new
ཐུན་བཞིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the "4 session practice", the yoga of the four periods of the day	thun bzhi'i rnal 'byor
ཐུན་ཟོར	yungs kar gyi thun gtor ma la gzer ba'i gtor zor	thun zor
ཐུན་བཟུང་བ	to keep sessions	thun bzung ba
ཐུན་རྭ	a power object used as a weapon to drive the opponent mad	thun rwa
ཐུན་རབ༹	{thun snod} tün horn	thun rva
ཐུན་རུ	thun rva	thun ru
ཐུན་རེར	in each session	thun rer
ཐུན་ལོང	common 1179	thun long
ཐུན་སུམ་པ	the third watch of night or day	thun sum pa
ཐུན་གསུམ་པ	one who meditates 3 times a day, lunar crescent on 3rd day after new or full moon, night	thun gsum pa
ཐུན་གསེང	intervals	thun gseng
ཐུབ	1) Buddha; 2) be able to, can, may, maybe, last, withstand, be possible, suffice to {bsod nams kyi ma thub}. = the merit was insufficient]	thub
ཐུབ་དཀའ	hard to best / overcome	thub dka'
ཐུབ་མཁན	capable	thub mkhan
ཐུབ་ཆི	button	thub chi
ཐུབ་ཆུ	button	thub chu
ཐུབ་ཆེད	rash, overbearing	thub ched
ཐུབ་ཆེན	great sage / mighty ones	thub chen
ཐུབ་ཆེན་པོ	durable, lasting	thub chen po
ཆོས་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	text by Mipham Rinpoche	chos pad ma dkar po
ཐུབ་ཆོག་བྱིན་རླབས་གཏེར་མཛོད	liturgical method for invoking the blessings of Shakyamuni buddha; by 'jam mgon 'ju mi pham rgya mtsho, 1846-1912	thub chog byin rlabs gter mdzod
ཐུབ་ཆོད	courage	thub chod
ཐུབ་ཆོད་ཅན	outcast [arch] mi 'os pa'i action	thub chod can
ཐུབ་མཆོག	the Supreme Sage, [Syn Buddha]	thub mchog
ཐུབ་མཆོག་དོན་ཀུན་གྲུབ	supreme sage and achiever of all goals [Buddha Shakyamuni]	thub mchog don kun grub
ཐུབ་བལྟ	{tshe phyi ma'i lam sna 'dren thub blta} I will do my best to guide you on the path of the next life	thub blta
ཐུབ་བསྟན	Buddha's teaching, buddhism	thub bstan
བསྟན་གསལ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེ	great pioneers who illuminate the Buddha's teachings	bstan gsal ba'i shing rta che
ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཙོ	thub bstan rgya mtso [t' la'i bla ma sku phreng bcu gsum pa 'di rab byung bco lnga pa'i me byi lor dvags po glang mdun du 'khrungs, sa yos lor 'jam dbyangs gong ma kvang zhus bka' phab pa ltar gser...	thub bstan rgya mtso
ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	thub bstan rgya mtsho	thub bstan rgya mtsho
ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་གྲགས	{'dul ba gzhi bcu bdun gyi spyi don thub bstan gser gyi rgyal mtshan mdzes par byed pa'i legs bshad nor bu'i phreng ba and spyir bstan gyi don rnam par bshad pa 'dul gzhung mdzes pa'i rgyan phreng}...	thub bstan chos grags
ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་གླིང	Tubten Chöling, monastery in Shar Khumbhu, Nepal. Seat of Trülshik Rinpoche	thub bstan chos gling
ཐུབ་བསྟན་འཇམ་དཔལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	name of Reting Rinpoche	thub bstan 'jam dpal ye shes
ཐུབ་བསྟན་དར་རྒྱས	the spreading and flourishing of the Sage's teachings	thub bstan dar rgyas
ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག	The Jangter Monastery, Nyingmapa	thub bstan rdo rje brag
ཐུབ་བསྟན་དབང་མོ	Mistress of the Sage's teachings	thub bstan dbang mo
ཐུབ་བསྟན་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	{rdzogs chen mkhan po} 1920-1979	thub bstan brtson 'grus
ཐུབ་བསྟན་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཕུན་ཚོགས	author of {bstan bcos chen po mngon rtogs rgyan gyi lus rnam bzhag gi 'grel ba 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po'i zhal lung}	thub bstan brtson 'grus phun tshogs
ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཡངས་པ་ཅན	seat of the Sharmapas [Karma Kagyü]	thub bstan yangs pa can
ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་བཤད་རྒྱ་མཚོ	bco brgyad khri chen xviii, 1920	thub bstan legs bshad rgya mtsho
ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཤད་སྒྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	rag mgo mchog sprul, 1890-1973. alias padma kun bzang rang grol	thub bstan bshad sgrub rgya mtsho
ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལྷ་ཆེན	Sakya (sa skya) monastery, tshang (gtsang) province of central Tibet, chief monastery of the Sakyapa	thub bstan lha chen
ཐུབ་ཐབས་མེད	impossible	thub thabs med
ཐུབ་དྲུག	six Munis	thub drug
ཐུབ་ལྡང	to become stronger	thub ldang
ཐུབ་པ་དགོངས་གསལ	text name	thub pa dgongs gsal
ཐུབ་པ་རྒྱུད	buddha-proclaimed "existential" pursuits	thub pa rgyud
ཐུབ་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the Muni's tantric vehicles	thub pa rgyud kyi theg pa
ཐུབ་པ་ཆེ	great sage, epithet of buddha	thub pa che
ཐུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great mighty 1s/ sage	thub pa chen po
ཐུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོས་ཀྱང	for, as the Great Sage himself said	thub pa chen pos kyang
ཐུབ་པ་ཉིད	sage	thub pa nyid
ཐུབ་པ་དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད	chief tatagatha of kriya tantra/bya rgyud	thub pa dam tshig gsum bkod
ཐུབ་པ་དྲུག	the six munis/ sages [dbang po brgya thub pa'i shal skyin . 1) {brgya byeen. 2) {shaag thub}, {shaakya thub pa}.; 3) {kha 'bar}. 4) {seng rab}. 5) {thag bzang}. 6) {chos rgyal}. sm.{dbang po brgya ...	thub pa drug
ཐུབ་པ་གནས་བཅུས་བསྐོར་བ	picture of Buddha w retinue of 16 arhats	thub pa gnas bcus bskor ba
ཐུབ་པ་བྱུང	succeeded in	thub pa byung
ཐུབ་པ་མ་རི་ཙེ	the sage of Marici; {brang srong ma ri tse }	thub pa ma ri tse
ཐུབ་པ་མེད་པ	unconquerable	thub pa med pa
ཐུབ་པ་བཟོ་བ	enable	thub pa bzo ba
ཐུབ་པ་ཡིན	we can	thub pa yin
ཐུབ་པ་རབ་མཆོག	a buddha, pravara muni, a tathagata	thub pa rab mchog
ཐུབ་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	Buddha's name	thub pa sangs rgyas
ཐུབ་པ་ཨི་དབང་པོ	the King / Lord of Sages	thub pa i dbang po
ཐུབ་པའི་དགོངས་པ	the realization of the sages	thub pa'i dgongs pa
ཐུབ་པའི་དགོངས་པ་རབ་ཏུ་གསལ་བ	work on lam 'bras by sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan, 1182-1251	thub pa'i dgongs pa rab tu gsal ba
ཐུབ་པའི་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	by sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan	thub pa'i dgongs pa rab gsal
ཐུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of the Victors	thub pa'i rgyal po
ཐུབ་པའི་རྗེས་སྐྱེས་སྲས	sons born of the Buddha	thub pa'i rjes skyes sras
ཐུབ་པའི་བསྟན	buddhism	thub pa'i bstan
ཐུབ་པའི་གནས	hermitage	thub pa'i gnas
ཐུབ་པའི་བུ	SA khug rta	thub pa'i bu
ཐུབ་པའི་དབང་པོ	the King/ lord of sages	thub pa'i dbang po
ཐུབ་པའི་ཞལ་སྐྱིན	Buddha's representative/ sku tshab/ statue [elegant]	thub pa'i zhal skyin
ཐུབ་པས་གསུངས་པ	taught by the Sage	thub pas gsungs pa
ཐུབ་བ	skirt, coat-flap	thub ba
ཐུབ་དབང	King of the Sages / Subduer, Buddha, Munindra; an epithet of the Buddha. [munindra] king of subduer / sages. Buddha; Buddha	thub dbang
ཐུབ་དབང་གི་བསྟན་པ	Buddha's teaching, buddhism	thub dbang gi bstan pa
ཐུབ་དབང་མཐོང་གྲོལ་མ	Byams pa mthong grol ma	thub dbang mthong grol ma
ཐུབ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	lord of sages Vajradhara	thub dbang rdo rje 'chang
ཐུབ་དབང་ཞབས་རྗེ	footprints of the Buddha	thub dbang zhabs rje
ཐུབ་དབང་གསུང་སྐྱེས	born of the Buddha's speech	thub dbang gsung skyes
ཐུབ་མིན	aptitude	thub min
ཐུབ་མེད	invincible	thub med
ཐུབ་ཙམ	minimally sufficient nus tsam mam glags rnyed tsam	thub tsam
ཐུབ་ཙམ་གྱི་ཡོ་བྱད་སྤུས་ཞན	poor quality articles that are minimally sufficient	thub tsam gyi yo byad spus zhan
ཐུབ་ཚད	capability	thub tshad
ཐུབ་ཚད་ལས་བརྒལ	overload the capacity of	thub tshad las brgal
ཐུབ་ཚོད	btsan po dbang yod, bullying	thub tshod
ཐུབ་ཚོད་གཏོང་མཁན	bully	thub tshod gtong mkhan
ཐུབ་ཚོད་གཏོང་བ	to bully, insult. Syn {brnyas bcos byed}	thub tshod gtong ba
ཐུབ་ཚོད་དོན་མེད་བཏང་བ	uselessly bully/ insult	thub tshod don med btang ba
ཐུབ་ཚོད་མ་མཛད	do you not care for us?	thub tshod ma mdzad
ཐུབ་བཞུགས	sitting cross-legged like buddha	thub bzhugs
ཐུབ་བཟོད	durable	thub bzod
ཐུབ་ལུང	button hole	thub lung
ཐུབ་གསུང	the Buddha's teaching	thub gsung
ཐུབ་ཨེ་འོང	will I be able to	thub e 'ong
ཐུབས་མཚན	mood	thubs mtshan
ཐུམ	anything packed in a bag, parcel, anything wrapped up	thum
ཐུམ་ཀློག	gzhung go rim med par 'ur 'don byed pa'i ming 1181	thum klog
ཐུམ་ཁྲེས	package, bundle wrapped in cloth etc.	thum khres
ཐུམ་རྒྱ	thum bu'i ske la btab pa'i seal/ stamp]	thum rgya
ཐུམ་རྒྱག	wrap, encase, sheathe	thum rgyag
ཐུམ་ཏི	anything cut into pieces, anything cut into pieces	thum ti
ཐུམ་ཐུམ	khud du dril ba'i small parcel/ bundle ['Bru thum thum.Dngul thum thum]	thum thum
ཐུམ་ཐུམ་རྣལ་མེད	1 of srid pa pho dgu	thum thum rnal med
ཐུམ་ཐུམ་རྣལ་མེད་རྗེ	awakened lord of the dmu	thum thum rnal med rje
ཐུམ་པ	a while, a moment	thum pa
ཐུམ་པོ	khud du dril ba'i small parcel/ package/ bundle	thum po
ཐུམ་པོ་རྒྱག་པ	wrap a parcel	thum po rgyag pa
ཐུམ་འཕྲས	[arch] having just gone to sleep, light sleep	thum 'phras
ཐུམ་བུ	1) Khud du dril ba'i small parcel, bundle [Shog thum.Ras thum.Dngul thum]; 2) large spoon, ladle	thum bu
ཐུམ་རིལ་གྱིས་སོང	[arch] inseparably mixed	thum ril gyis song
ཐུམ་གསུམ་པ	sug smel herb	thum gsum pa
ཐུམས	spoon, ladle, piece of cloth, linen, cover, covering, wrapper of a book or parcel	thums
ཐུམས་རྒྱབ་པ	put a cover round a thing, wrap up	thums rgyab pa
ཐུམས་ཅན	having a cover, packed	thums can
ཐུའུ་ཀྭན	1) (CH) {thu'u kwan} tulku [aa mdo dgon lung dgon pa gyi dge lugs pa'i sprul sku]; 2) (M) king {thu'u kwan} [t' yon hor rgyal rabs]	thu'u kwan
ཐུའུ་ཀབ༹ན་གྲུབ་མཐའ	grub mtha' thams cad kyi khungs dang 'dod tshul ston pa legs bshad shel gyi me long	thu'u kvan grub mtha'
ཐུའུ་ཀྭན་གྲུབ་མཐའ	CM: grub mtha' thams cad kyi khungs dang 'dod tshul ston pa legs bshad shel gyi me long zhes bya ba thu'u kun sku phreng gsum pa blo bzang chos kyi nyi mas rab byung bcu gsum pa'i lcags bya lor brt...	thu'u kwan grub mtha'
ཅོམཔོསེད་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཨཱིརོན	bird year of the thirteenth cycle by Losang Chokyi Nyima, the third emanation of Thu'u Kwan. From here, CM goes on to list the topics covered. [mss]	composed in the Iron
ཐུའུ་བཀྭན	thu'u kvan	thu'u bkwan
ཐུའུ་མུན་གཙང་པོ	T'u man Chiang River	thu'u mun gtsang po
ཐུའུ་མེ་སུའུ	terramycin	thu'u me su'u
ཐུའུ་སི	(CH yon ming ching dynasty gsum gyi ring la NW and SW regions du btsud pa'i small people kyi 'go pas mi rabs nas mi rabs bar du rgyud 'dzin byas pa'i dpon gnas	thu'u si
ཐུའོ་ལ་ཅི	tractor, bulldozer	thu'o la ci
ཐུའོ་ལ་ཅི་འཁོར་ལོ	tractor	thu'o la ci 'khor lo
ཐུའོ་ལ་སི	trust [company]	thu'o la si
ཐུའོ་ལུའོ་ཚི་ཅི	Trotsky	thu'o lu'o tshi ci
ཐུར	down[hill][ward], a declivity * spoon	thur
ཐུར་ཁྱབ	[tse]	thur khyab
ཐུར་ཁྱབ་རྣལ་མ	what has the gsal ba necessarily has the rtags [EG what is impermanent is necessarily produced rtags gsal khyab pa sgo brgyad las rnal ma bzhi'i nang gses]	thur khyab rnal ma
ཐུར་ཁྱབ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	wrong downward pervasion [tserig] from the [rtags gsal khyab pa sgo brgyad], among the {khyab pa phyin ci log pa bzhi}: gsal ba de na, rtags de ma yin pas khyab, eg, if it is permanent, it is neces...	thur khyab phyin ci log
ཐུར་གྱེན	down[hill] and up[hill], slope	thur gyen
ཐུར་གྲིབ	a thur ma [stick] of 7 divisions, used to measure the length of the sun's shadow, as a means of determining length of day, solstices etc	thur grib
ཐུར་བགྲོད	water	thur bgrod
ཐུར་མགོ	tip of a spoon, halter	thur mgo
ཐུར་མགོ་ཙམ	spoon measure	thur mgo tsam
ཐུར་འགོ	bridle without bit, halter	thur 'go
ཐུར་འགྲིལ	rbab tu shor ba'am, thur du 'gril ba	thur 'gril
ཐུར་འགྲོ	water	thur 'gro
ཐུར་འགྲོད	runs downward, water	thur 'grod
ཐུར་འགྲོའི་སྨན	downward going med [lus kyi lte 'og man gyi nad rnams thur phyogs su gzhol zhing 'gro ba'i sa chu'i rang bzhin shas cher las byung ba aa ru mchu ring gi mchu lta bu nang gi nyes pa rnams bkru zhing...	thur 'gro'i sman
ཐུར་ཅི	Turkey 1182	thur ci
ཐུར་བརྗོད་མ	ri skegs bird	thur brjod ma
ཐུར་ཐག	halter rope	thur thag
ཐུར་ཐུར	downward	thur thur
ཐུར་མཐའ	end of halter rope	thur mtha'
ཐུར་དུ	downwards, downhill	thur du
ཐུར་དུ་གུག་པ	declination	thur du gug pa
ཐུར་དུ་དགུག	push down	thur du dgug
ཐུར་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	descend	thur du 'gro ba
ཐུར་དུ་བསྟན་པ	facing down	thur du bstan pa
ཐུར་དུ་མནན	to push down	thur du mnan
ཐུར་དུ་སྤུབ་པ	plunge head long downwards	thur du spub pa
ཐུར་དུ་བབས་པ	moving downwards	thur du babs pa
ཐུར་དུ་ཟུག་པ	projects downwards	thur du zug pa
ཐུར་དུ་སེལ་བའི་རླུང	the downwardclearing wind	thur du sel ba'i rlung
ཐུར་མདའ	beam of scales	thur mda'
ཐུར་རྡོ	weight stones for scales	thur rdo
ཐུར་ནས་ཐུར་དུ	down and down	thur nas thur du
ཐུར་པོ	lowest part	thur po
ཐུར་དཔྱད	in diseases like snying chu and mig nad bar 'grib, lus externally thur ma brgyab pas clearing away inner diseases, treatment after having diagnosed by perception or inference	thur dpyad
ཐུར་ཕྱོགས་སུ་འཕྱང་བ	hanging down	thur phyogs su 'phyang ba
ཐུར་འཕྱང	hanging down	thur 'phyang
ཐུར་བུ	foal, colt, filly	thur bu
ཐུར་འབབ	1) going/ flowing downward; 2) water	thur 'bab
ཐུར་མ	a stick, chopstick, spoon; spoon	thur ma
ཐུར་མ་བརྒྱ་པ	umbrella	thur ma brgya pa
ཐུར་མ་པ	in the final kalpa thur mas zas btsal te person of the kalpa of famine	thur ma pa
ཐུར་མའི་དཔྱད	acupuncture	thur ma'i dpyad
ཐུར་མའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	yogic exercise of drawing a slender implement up the urethra in order to cultivate the ability to draw the winds and tigle upward	thur ma'i phyag rgya
ཐུར་མའི་རང་གྲིབ་བདུན	astr 7 part thur ma stick's rang grib bdun	thur ma'i rang grib bdun
ཐུར་མས་འཐུང་བའམ་ཟ་བ	spoon	thur mas 'thung ba'am za ba
ཐུར་མོང་མ་ཡིན	uncommon empowering condition	thur mong ma yin
ཐུར་ཚད	amount of slope	thur tshad
ཐུར་ཞོ	pair of scales	thur zho
ཐུར་གཟར་འབབ་པ	come down from a steep place	thur gzar 'bab pa
ཐུར་རུ	foal, colt, filly	thur ru
ཐུར་རེ	[arch] lam sang ngam, 'phral ma	thur re
ཐུར་ལ	downward	thur la
ཐུར་ལ་རྒྱབ་པ	cast down into	thur la rgyab pa
ཐུར་ལ་རྒྱུགས	flowing downward	thur la rgyugs
ཐུར་ལ་རྒྱུགས་འགྲོ	flowing downward	thur la rgyugs 'gro
ཐུར་ལམ	down hill street, steep descent, horizontal road, sloping road that leads alongside a hill	thur lam
ཐུར་ཤིང	pole	thur shing
ཐུར་སེལ	downward clearing/ voiding [wind/ prana] {rlung thur sel} of excretion /reproduction [Gdmk]	thur sel
དོཝནྭརད	voiding wind, corresponds to eliminative and reproductive system, purgation, clears downward passage, cause of excrement, downward clearing energy or wind, assists secretion, seat in genital center...	downward
ཐུར་སེལ་གྱི་རླུང	downward-voiding wind	thur sel gyi rlung
ཐུར་སེལ་རླུང	"downward-clearing wind" [lus kyi rtsa ba'i rlung lnga'i ya gyal gzhang dkar nag la gnas pa zhig ste, byed las skyes pa'i khu ba dang, bud med kyi zla mtsan, bshang ba dang gcin pa, mngal du phru g...	thur sel rlung
ཐུར་སྲང	ounce of silver	thur srang
ཐུར་ལྷུང	water	thur lhung
ཐུལ	1) 'Dul [ba]! Subdue!; 2) in long-ago Tibetan name for herd of cattle w a certain #; 3) tame[d], egg, spontaneous	thul
ཐུལ་སྐྱེས	arise abruptly	thul skyes
ཐུལ་གོག	ragged blanket	thul gog
ཐུལ་གྱིས	suddenly. Syn {skad cig ma}	thul gyis
ཐུལ་གྱིས་སྐྱེས	suddenly/ instantly arising/ born	thul gyis skyes
ཐུལ་གྱིས་འཆར་བ	arise suddenly	thul gyis 'char ba
ཐུལ་གྱིས་བྱོན	arrived suddenly	thul gyis byon
ཐུལ་གླུ	spontaneous song	thul glu
ཐུལ་ཅིག	restrain	thul cig
ཐུལ་ཆེ	sbom pa, rags pa [thick, coarse, gross], rgya che ba [extensive, big]	thul che
ཐུལ་ཆེ་བའི་གཟུགས་པོ	thick/ fat/ bulging body	thul che ba'i gzugs po
ཐུལ་ཆེ་བའི་ས	vast area	thul che ba'i sa
ཐུལ་དེ་མིན	besides that way of converting people	thul de min
ཐུལ་པ	cloak, dress made of the skins of animals, fur coat	thul pa
ཐུལ་པོ	fur coat	thul po
ཐུལ་བ	be controlled	thul ba
ཐུལ་བ་བཀྲིད་དྲང་གི་ཁྲོ་བོ	the dreaded bon deity who leads or drags the subdued straight onward	thul ba bkrid drang gi khro bo
ཐུལ་བ་འདུག	[he] will tame [them]	thul ba 'dug
ཐུལ་བྱུང	instantly, abruptly, suddenly	thul byung
ཐུལ་བྱུང་དུ	suddenly, all of a sudden	thul byung du
ཐུལ་འོག་ཏུ་འཇུག	keep a tight hand over a person, discipline one	thul 'og tu 'jug
ཐུལ་འོག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	keep under one's power	thul 'og tu 'jug pa
ཐུལ་རེ་ལྡང	rises and swirls	thul re ldang
ཐུལ་ལུ	common sheep skin dress	thul lu
ཐུལ་ལེ	rising swirling diffusing, hovering, issuing * impressive	thul le
ཐུལ་ལེ་བ	diffused, issuing [a scent / fragrance]	thul le ba
ཐུས	sdud pa! sgrug pa! ['thu ba!], = 'thus	thus
ཐུས་ཀ	ultimate. Syn {mthar thug}	thus ka
ཐུས་ཉི་ས	Tunisia	thus nyi sa
ཐུས་བཏུ	collect, SA 'thu ba	thus btu
ཐུས་པ	bad	thus pa
ཐུས་འཕྲེང་གནང་མི་དགོས	don't worry	thus 'phreng gnang mi dgos
ཐུས་མི	assemblage of men	thus mi
ཐེ་ཁོངས	grangs su gtogs pa'i gras	the khongs
ཐེ་ཁྱིམ	SA the se, principal wife of the se	the khyim
ཐེ་མཁན	1 who interferes/ tries to take charge w/o right to do so	the mkhan
ཐེ་གི	tha gi	the gi
ཐེ་གི་ཟད	[arch] rgyang tsam	the gi zad
ཐེ་གེ	small ankle bones = "knee" bones of goat etc.	the ge
ཐེ་ཆུང	smallest toe	the chung
ཐེ་ཆོ་ལོ	kind of pawns with drawn figures used in ancient times for divination and as markers in games	the cho lo
ཐེ་ཇུས	interference	the jus
ཐེ་སྙད	conventional	the snyad
ཐེ་གཏོགས	intervene, interfere, try to take charge of, prohibit	the gtogs
ཐེ་གཏོར་དགུ་གཏོར	fragmented, scattered	the gtor dgu gtor
ཐེ་རྟོག	scruple, doubt, uncertainty, hesitation	the rtog
ཐེ་པ	pertaining to, applied to, be of use	the pa
ཐེ་པེད	shuttlecock	the ped
ཐེ་བ	include, to belong, appertain to, to occupy one's self; {the ba, the ba, the ba} intr. v	the ba
ཐེ་བག་མེད་པ་མཛེམ	shun w/o involvement	the bag med pa mdzem
ཐེ་བོ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	the bo
ཐེ་བོང	thumb	the bong
ཐེ་བྱུས	intervene, interfere, try to take charge of, prohibit	the byus
ཐེ་བྱུས་བྱེད་པ	meddle	the byus byed pa
ཐེ་བྲང	people from the spo bo region of Tibet from whom Nyatri Tsengpo descended	the brang
ཐེ་འབག	involvement	the 'bag
ཐེ་འབག་མེད་པ་འཛེམ	shun without involvement	the 'bag med pa 'dzem
ཐེ་འབུམ་ཕྲག་གཉིས	2 billion	the 'bum phrag gnyis
ཐེ་མ	last	the ma
ཐེ་མི་ཐེ	included and not included	the mi the
ཐེ་མི་ཚོམ	doubtless	the mi tshom
ཐེ་མེད	shuttle cock	the med
ཐེ་མོ	seal, signet, stamp	the mo
ཐེ་ཙོམ	doubt [rang yul la blo rtse gnyis su 'jug pa'i nyon mongs can gyi shes pa, EG sgra rtag gam mi rtag snyam pa dang, du ldan gyi la la me yod dam med snyam pa lta bu ste rtsa nyon drug gi ya gyal zhi...	the tsom
ཚོམ	doubt[ing] [one of four types of cognition. [+1,38] - 1 of the six root disturbances. [vichikitsa] indecision, uncertainty, hesitation, suspicion, dilemma, perplexed	tshom
ཐེ་ཙོམ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒྲ	or/ ? particle [don gyi khyad par la brtag cing dri ba la 'jug pa'i phrad gzhan dbang can gam sogs bcu gcig ...Gam...Khyed la smyu gu yod dam]	the tsom la 'jug pa'i sgra
ཐེ་ཙོམ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་ན	question introducing NA [Sa bon 'di btab na skye'am mi skye]	the tsom la 'jug pa'i na
ཐེ་བཙུགས	promising	the btsugs
ཐེ་ཚེ	seal, stamp	the tshe
ཐེ་ཚོགས	interfere, intervene, prohibit, try to take charge of	the tshogs
ཐེ་ཚོགས་དོན་མེད་བྱེད་མི་རུང	useless interference is wrong	the tshogs don med byed mi rung
ཐེ་ཚོམ	Doubt, [as one of the six root disturbances.] indecision, uncertainty, hesitation, suspicion, dilemma, perplexed, doubts, hesitancy, indecisiveness, irresolution, vacillation, wavering.; + za ba - ...	the tshom
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཀྱི་སྒྲོ་འདོགས	speculative doubt	the tshom kyi sgro 'dogs
ཐེ་ཚོམ་སྐྱེ	have doubts/ suspicious/ apprehensions	the tshom skye
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་གྱོད་གཞི	dogs gnad bsal rgyur bsdad pa'i kha mchu'i rigs	the tshom gyi gyod gzhi
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་སྒྲིབ	SA sgrib pa lnga	the tshom gyi sgrib
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	sins of doubt	the tshom gyi sgrib pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote for doubt	the tshom gyi gnyen po
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་དོགས་སེལ	to clear up any hesitations; x {the tshom gyi dogs sel la sogs pa dri zhing sgro 'dogs thams cad gcod pa} ask questions to clear up any hesitations and doubts	the tshom gyi dogs sel
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་གནས	doubtful points	the tshom gyi gnas
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་དཔེ	phan tshun mtshungs chos ha cang 'dra ches pas dpe don so sor ngos ma zin par sems the tshom du gyur tshul ston pa'i rgyan zhig, dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig the tshom gyi blo 'jug pa tsam yang mi	the tshom gyi dpe
སྲིད་པ	there is no possible doubt	srid pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱིས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya dbye ba mi phyed pa'i the tshom gyi don gnyis, 'gog byed dngos yod kyi rgyu mtshan yang dag gi sgo nas so sor nges pa rnyed nas cig shos 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig, 'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses...	the tshom gyis 'gog pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ངང་དུ་ལུས་པ	to be stranded in doubt	the tshom ngang du lus pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གཅོད་པ	cut through doubt	the tshom gcod pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གཅོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	cut through doubt	the tshom gcod par byed pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གཅོམ་པ	conquer doubt	the tshom gcom pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་བཅོམ་པ	overcoming doubt	the tshom bcom pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཆུང	very few doubts	the tshom chung
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན	defiled doubt	the tshom nyon mongs can
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཐམས་ཅད་གཅོད་པ	cutting through all doubts	the tshom thams cad gcod pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་དག་ནི་མི་གཅོད	not cut through doubt	the tshom dag ni mi gcod
ཐེ་ཚོམ་དྲ་བ	the net of doubt	the tshom dra ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་རྣམ་པར་སེལ་བ	fully clearing away doubts	the tshom rnam par sel ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་སྤོང་བ	abandon doubt	the tshom spong ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཕུལ་བྱུང	'jig rten grags tshod la 'byung mi srid pa'i the tshom gyi gzhi phul byung ston pa'i rgyan zhig, phul byung gi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	the tshom phul byung
ཐེ་ཚོམ་བྱེད	doubt, suspect, hesitate	the tshom byed
ཐེ་ཚོམ་མི་ཟ་བ	have no doubts/ uncertainty [concerning]	the tshom mi za ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་མེད	certain, undoubtedly; without doubts, not remaining in doubt	the tshom med
ཐེ་ཚོམ་མེད་པ	Syn {gdon mi za ba} certain. Syn {gdon mi za ba}	the tshom med pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་མེད་པའི་ངང་ཉིད	[while] free from doubt	the tshom med pa'i ngang nyid
ཐེ་ཚོམ་མེད་པར	undoubtedly	the tshom med par
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཞིག་ཟོས	were perplexed	the tshom zhig zos
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ	to doubt, suspect	the tshom za
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་ནས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of not establishing doubt	the tshom za nas ma grub pa gsum
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་པ	to entertain doubts	the tshom za pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་བ	be in doubt	the tshom za ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་བ་རྣམས	scrupulous irresolute persons	the tshom za ba rnams
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟ་བར་དོན	the meaning of being consumed by doubt	the tshom za bar don
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཟོས་པ	to give rise to doubt	the tshom zos pa
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཡང་གཅོད་པར་འགྱུར	completely cut through doubt	the tshom yang gcod par 'gyur
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒྲ	or/ ? particle	the tshom la 'jug pa'i sgra
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་ན	question introducing NA	the tshom la 'jug pa'i na
ཐེ་ཚོམ་ལོག་གེ་བ	yid gnyis byed bzhin pa. 'Gro dang mi 'gro'i skor da dung the tshom log ge bar bsdad yod	the tshom log ge ba
ཐེ་ཚོམ་གསུམ	[tse]	the tshom gsum
ཐེ་ཚོམ་བསལ་བ་རྟོགས་པ	realize the clearing away of doubt	the tshom bsal ba rtogs pa
ཐེ་ཚོམས	indecision, mibp 74, SA the tshom	the tshoms
ཐེ་ཝན	Taiwan	the wan
ཐེ་བཞུ	black silk hat	the bzhu
ཐེ་འན	heaven	the 'an
ཐེ་འན་ནུ	lord of heaven	the 'an nu
ཐེ་རང	class of demons, set of demons	the rang
ཐེ་རང་མིག་གཅིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	fabulous kingdom of one-eyed giants	the rang mig gcig pa'i rgyal khams
ཐེ་རེ	straight, upright, firm, smooth	the re
ཐེ་རེ་ཐིང	draw the carpet smooth	the re thing
ཐེ་རེ་ཐེན	draw the carpet smooth	the re then
ཐེ་རེག	relation of ownership	the reg
ཐེ་རེལ	incomplete, defective, unfinished	the rel
ཐེ་ལེ	swallow [bird]	the le
ཐེ་ལེ་ལེ	evil-hearted, vicious	the le le
ཐེ་ཤལ	base	the shal
ཐེ་སེ	king of sa bdag residing in the nether regions	the se
ཐེ་སེ་གྲུམ་བུ	one of the minor chiefs of sa bdag	the se grum bu
ཐེ་ཨུ	special committee	the u
ཐེག	imp. of {'degs pa} [TC]; imp. of {'degs} Syn {thegs} to bear, to go	theg
ཐེག་ཁུག	carpet bag, knapsack theg gling kar ma 'gro don mthar phyin 1700-1775/6 - Tekchen Lingpa, Karma Drodön Tarchin, disciple of Rigdzin Tukchok Dorje	theg khug
ཐེག་གླིང་འགྲོ་དོན་མཐར་ཕྱིན	alias {dri med gling pa}	theg gling 'gro don mthar phyin
ཐེག་གཅིག་གི་ཚུལ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of the way of a single vehicle	theg gcig gi tshul du smra ba
ཐེག་ཆུང	hinayana, small/ lesser vehicle [nyan rang gi theg pa]	theg chung
ཐེག་ཆུང་སྐྱེས་བ	the arising of the mahayana	theg chung skyes ba
ཐེག་ཆུང་སྐྱེས་བུ	beings of the lesser vehicle	theg chung skyes bu
ཐེག་ཆུང་རྣམ་རྩོད	follower of theg dman	theg chung rnam rtsod
ཐེག་ཆེན	mahayana, greater vehicle, superior spiritual pursuit, supreme comprehensive approach, Great Vehicle	theg chen
ཐེག་ཆེན་ཀྱི་བཀའ	the [buddha's] teachings of the mahayana	theg chen kyi bka'
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྐྱེས་བུ	a Mahayana person	theg chen skyes bu
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བཀའ	the Mahayana teaching	theg chen gyi bka'
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བཀའ་བསྡུ	a week after the Buddha's death rgyal po'i khab kyi in the S on bi ma sambha ba'i mt 100,000 sons of the victorious one gathered and by 'jam dpal gyis the abhidharma &, byams pas the vinaya, phyag ...	theg chen gyi bka' bsdu
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བཀའ་སྤྱི	general teachings of the great vehicle [thd]	theg chen gyi bka' spyi
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	the cessation of the mahayana	theg chen gyi 'gog pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	TSE theg chen gyi nges 'byed cha mthun thabs kyis khyad par du byas pa'i sems dpa'i don mngon rtogs te, thar pa cha mthun rdzogs rjes su byung ba'i mngon rtogs kyi rigs su gnas shing bden pa mngon ...	theg chen gyi sgrub pa sgom lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ཆོས་མངོན་པ	mahayana abhidharma	theg chen gyi chos mngon pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ཆོས་སྨྲ་བ	proponents of Mahayana	theg chen gyi chos smra ba
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ཐར་པ་ཆ་མཐུན	[sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses] omniscience in one's continuum sgrub par mkhas pa'i in the continuum of the bodhisattva chos mngon rtogs so]	theg chen gyi thar pa cha mthun
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་མདོ	the Mahayana sutras	theg chen gyi mdo
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	mahayana-pitaka	theg chen gyi sde snod
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་རིགས	Mahayana type / potential	theg chen gyi rigs
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་རིགས་ཅན	possessing the Mahayana potential, of the Mahayana type	theg chen gyi rigs can
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ལམ	the path of mahayana [the knowledge of mahayana making one cross to the enlightenment of the mahayana or the knowledge of having done so	theg chen gyi lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five paths of mahayana [byang chub sems dpa'i lam lnga ste, theg chen gyi tsogs lam dang, sbyor lam, mthong lam, sgom lam, mi slob lam	theg chen gyi lam lnga
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	proceeding on the Mahayana path	theg chen gyi lam du 'gro ba
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ལུང་རིགས་འཛིན་པ	holder of the scriptures and reasoning of Mahayana	theg chen gyi lung rigs 'dzin pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ས་བཅུ	the 10 bhumis/ levels of the greater vehicle/ mahayana	theg chen gyi sa bcu
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་ས་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 Mahayana levels	theg chen gyi sa bcu gsum
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་བཞི	the four kinds of arousing bodhicitta of mahayana [mos pas spyod pa dang, lhag bsam dag pa, rnam par smin pa, sgrib pa spangs pa'i sems bskyed	theg chen gyi sems bskyed bzhi
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་གསུང་རབ	the Mahayana teachings 1186	theg chen gyi gsung rab
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	Mahayana concentration. one of the {'jig rten las 'das pa'i bsam gtan gnyis}	theg chen gyi bsam gtan
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན་བཞི	the four dhyanas of mahayana	theg chen gyi bsam gtan bzhi
ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ	the three concentrations of mahayana [1) {sgyu ma lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin}. 2) {dpa' bar 'gro ba'i ting nge 'dzin}.; 3) {rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin}	theg chen gyi bsam gtan gsum
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒོམ་ལམ	the path of meditation of mahayana [theg chen gyi rjes la mngon rtogs]	theg chen sgom lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་བྱེད་པ	TSE	theg chen sgom lam gyi byed pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice/ establish the mahayana [relying on arousing bodhicitta for the sake of unsurpassable enlightenment perofrm action of establishing the two benefits	theg chen sgrub pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་པ་བཅུ་གསུམ	[tse] theg chen sgrub pa la rang dbang du 'jug	theg chen sgrub pa bcu gsum
པའི་རྒྱུ་སྤྱན་ལྔ	[tse] theg chen sgrub pa las phyir mi ldog pa'i	pa'i rgyu spyan lnga
རྒྱུ་ཡོངས་སུ་མི་ངལ་བ	[tseg]	rgyu yongs su mi ngal ba
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བ	that for the sake of which mahayana practice is done	theg chen sgrub pa'i ched du bya ba
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་པའི་གམིགས་པ	[tse] theg chen sgrub pa'i dmigs pa bcu gcig [tse]	theg chen sgrub pa'i gmigs pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་བསྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ་གསུམ	the three actions establishing the mahayana	theg chen bsgrub kyi bya ba gsum
ཐེག་ཆེན་ངེས་འབྱེད་ཆ་མཐུན	aspects conducive to the discriminatio/ penetratiopn of mahayana [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, sems can la dmigs pa'i rnam pa khyad par ba dang ldan &, sgom byung gtso bor gyur pa'i mos spyo...	theg chen nges 'byed cha mthun
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྔགས	Mantrayana, Mantrayana	theg chen sngags
ཐེག་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ་ཀུན་བཀྲས་པ	{theg chen chos rje kun bkras pa} [sa skya'i bla ma chos rje kun dga' bkra shis rgyal mtshan 'di nyid rab byung drug pa'i sa mo glang la 'khrungs, rang lo re bzhi pa rab byung bdun pa'i chu mo sbru...	theg chen chos rje kun bkras pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་གཉིས	the two mahayana/ greater vehicles	theg chen gnyis
ཐེག་ཆེན་ཐར་པ་ཆ་མཐུན	bla med byang chub tu bgrod pa'i lam gang zhig rnam byang dbang po'i ngo bor ma gyur pa'i gnas skabs kyi lam mo, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	theg chen thar pa cha mthun
ཐེག་ཆེན་ཐུགས་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	follower of the yogacara school theg chen thun mong ma yin pa'i mngon	theg chen thugs rje sems dpa'
ཐེག་ཆེན་མཐོང་ལམ	the Mahayana path of seeing	theg chen mthong lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་གདམས་ངག	the oral instructions of mahayana	theg chen gdams ngag
ཐེག་ཆེན་མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན	Maitreya's "ornament of the mahayana sutras," 1187	theg chen mdo sde rgyan
ཐེག་ཆེན་མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན	Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras	theg chen mdo sde'i rgyan
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྡེ་གཉིས	the two Mahayana sections: {sems tsam dang dbu ma}	theg chen sde gnyis
ཐེག་ཆེན་བསྡུས་པ	Mahayanasamgraha, the collection of the greater vehicle [by asanga], one of {bsdus pa'i bstan bcos sdom rnam gnyis}	theg chen bsdus pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Yogas of the Greater Vehicle	theg chen rnal 'byor
ཐེག་ཆེན་པ	adherent of mahayana	theg chen pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་པ་གཉིས	the two mahayanas [in mahayana rigs nges ma nges gnyis OR rgyu pha rol tu phyin pa &, 'bras bu rdo rje theg pa]	theg chen pa gnyis
ཐེག་ཆེན་པའི་ལམ་གཉིས	the two paths of mahayana	theg chen pa'i lam gnyis
ཐེག་ཆེན་པའི་ལུགས	the Mahayana system	theg chen pa'i lugs
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྤྱིའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གསུམ	trikaya in the mahayana in general [1) {chos sku rdo rje 'chang chen}. 2) {longs sku rgyal ba rigs lnga}.; 3) {sprul sku sha kya thub pa}	theg chen spyi'i lugs kyi sku gsum
ཐེག་ཆེན་འཕགས་པ	a Mahayana noble person	theg chen 'phags pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	Unexcelled Greater Vehicle	theg chen bla na med pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་བློ་སྦྱོང	Mahayana mindtraining	theg chen blo sbyong
ཐེག་ཆེན་བློ་སྦྱོང་གི་སྡོམ་པ	the	theg chen blo sbyong gi sdom pa
མ	training	Mahayana precepts of mind
ཐེག་ཆེན་སྦྱོར་ལམ	path of preparation of mahayana [rang rgyu theg chen tshogs lam gyi rjes su skyes pa'i theg chen gyi don mngon rtogs	theg chen sbyor lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	[tse]	theg chen mos pa sgom lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་མྱང་འདས	TSE	theg chen myang 'das
ཐེག་ཆེན་ཚོགས་ལམ	the path of accumulationof mahayana [three bskal pa grangs med tshogs gnyis mtha' yas pa bsags nas rnam mkhyen rang rgyud la bsgrub pa la mkhas pa'i sems dpa'i rgyud kyi chos mngon rtogs]	theg chen tshogs lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་གཞི་ཤེས	[tse]	theg chen gzhi shes
ཐེག་ཆེན་ལ་དད་པ་སྒོམ་པའི་མདོ	Mahayana presada Prabhavana Sutra	theg chen la dad pa sgom pa'i mdo
ཐེག་ཆེན་ལམ	the Mahayana path theg chen lam gyi rtsa ba sems bskyed pa - the root of the Mahayana path is to develop bodhichitta	theg chen lam
ཐེག་ཆེན་ལས	according to the Mahayana	theg chen las
ཐེག་ཆེན་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing the bodhicitta of mahayana [dmigs pa sems can thams cad la dmigs nas rnam pa sdug bsngal rgyu 'bras gnyis dang bral nas bde ba rgyu 'bras gnyis dang ldan pa rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas kyi go ...	theg chen sems bskyed
ཐེག་ཆེན་སེམས་ཙམ་པ	Mahayana onlymind school of philosophy	theg chen sems tsam pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་གསུང་རབ	the Mahayana teachings	theg chen gsung rab
ཐེག་ཆེན་གསོ་སྦྱོང	mahayana posadha [rten householders and monastics gis yul pratimoksha vows ldan nam rten gyi drung nas, kun slong byang chub sems kyis cho ga sngar byon pa'i sangs rgyas byang sems kyi rnam thar gy...	theg chen gso sbyong
ཐེག་ཆེན་གསོ་སྦྱོང་གི་སྡོམ་པ	mahayana posadha vow [bsam pa byang chub sems bskyed kyi rtsis zin pa'i sbyor ba bsnyen gnas yan lag brgyad pa bsrung zhing sha bza' ba spangs pa'o	theg chen gso sbyong gi sdom pa
ཐེག་ཆེན་ལྷ	Mahayana deities	theg chen lha
ཐེག་མཆོག	the supreme vehicle	theg mchog
ཐེག་མཆོག་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི	[tse]	theg mchog 'khor lo bzhi
ཐེག་མཆོག་གླིང	a monastery in lhasa	theg mchog gling
ཐེག་མཆོག་ཆོས	the Dharma of the supreme vehicle	theg mchog chos
ཐེག་མཆོག་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	n of Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche	theg mchog bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
ཐེག་མཆོག་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	19th cent. - Tekchok Tenpey Nyima, second incarnation of Shabkar	theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma
ཐེག་མཆོག་བསྟན་པའི་རྣམ་པ	the kinds of teaching of the mahayana	theg mchog bstan pa'i rnam pa
ཐེག་མཆོག་ཐོས་པ	hear[er of] the supreme vehicle 1188	theg mchog thos pa
ཐེག་མཆོག་རྡོ་རྗེ	karma pa xiv - (17971867)	theg mchog rdo rje
ཐེག་མཆོག་མཛོད	{theg mchog mdzod}	theg mchog mdzod
ཐེག་མཆོག་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེའི	of the supreme vehicle the great perfection	theg mchog rdzogs pa che'i
ཐེག་བསྡུས	name of text; Compendium of the Great Vehicle, Mahayanasamgraha by Asanga. [mahaayaanasam.graha] by Asanga, Compendium of the Greater Vehicle	theg bsdus
མཧཡན	samgraha [by asanga]	mahayana
ཐེག་པ་གོང་མ	higher vehicle	theg pa gong ma
ཐེག་པ་གོང་མའི་གཞུང་ལས་གསུངས	the Mahayana scriptures state that	theg pa gong ma'i gzhung las gsungs
ཐེག་པ་དགུ	9 yanas/ vehicles [pious attendants {nyan thos kyi theg pa}. or s'ra^vakya^na., self-centred buddhas {rang rgyal ba'i theg pa}. or pratyekabuddhaya^na., bodhisattvas {byang chub sems dpa'i theg pa}...	theg pa dgu
ཐེག་པ་ལྔ	five vehicles [Gd-mk]. 1) {lha dang mi 'i thegs pa}. 2) nyan thos kyi theg pa}. 3) rang byang chub kyi theg pa}. 4) {byang chub sems spa'i theg pa}. 5) {gsang ba bla na med pa'i theg pa}	theg pa lnga
ཐེག་པ་གཅིག་གི་ཚུལ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	teaching in the manner of a single vehicle	theg pa gcig gi tshul du smra ba
ཐེག་པ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཤད་པ	teaching in the manner of a single vehicle	theg pa gcig tu bshad pa
ཐེག་པ་གཅིག་པ	unique vehicle. [ekayana] unique vehicle	theg pa gcig pa
ཐེག་པ་གཅིག་པུ	solitary vehicle	theg pa gcig pu
ཐེག་པ་ཆིང་བ་འབའ་ཞིག	only, exclusively, uniquely the hinayana	theg pa ching ba 'ba' zhig
ཐེག་པ་ཆུང་ངུ	the lesser vehicles	theg pa chung ngu
ཐེག་པ་ཆུང་ངུ་པ་གཉིས	the two lesser vehicles [shravakas and pratkekabuddhas]	theg pa chung ngu pa gnyis
ཐེག་པ་ཆུང་ངུའི་རྣམ་གཞག	the presentation of the lesser vehicle	theg pa chung ngu'i rnam gzhag
ཐེག་པ་ཆུང་གནུ་པ་གཉིས	a presentation of Hinayana	theg pa chung gnu pa gnyis
ཐེག་པ་ཆུང་བ	[hiinayaana] lesser vehicle	theg pa chung ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ	enduring, forbearing	theg pa che
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང	Greater and lesser vehicles, mahayana and hinayana	theg pa che chung
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང་གི་ཁྱད་པར	the distinctions between the greater and lesser vehicles / Mahayana and Hinayana	theg pa che chung gi khyad par
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང་གི་སྡེ་སྣོད	the collections/ pitakas of the greater and lesser vehicles {sde snod gsum}	theg pa che chung gi sde snod
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང་རྣམས	the greater and lesser vehicles / Mahayana and Hinayana	theg pa che chung rnams
ཐེག་པ་ཆེ་ལ་ཞུགས་པའི་གང་ཟག	anyone who has entered the Mahayana	theg pa che la zhugs pa'i gang zag
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahayana, the Greater Vehicle, [Mahayana]; greater approach/ Mahayana; [Mahayana] supreme, comprehensive approach, universal / great vehicle	theg pa chen po
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཀུན་བསྡུས་པ	summarizing the entire Mahayana	theg pa chen po kun bsdus pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གྲུབ་པ	proving / establishing the Mahayana	theg pa chen po grub pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གྲུབ་པའི་སྐབས	the situation of establishing the mahayana	theg pa chen po grub pa'i skabs
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་འགོག་པ	to deny the Mahayana	theg pa chen po 'gog pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ	mahayanottara tantra shastra mahayana theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma'i bstan	theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྒོམས་ན	if 1 meditates on the great vehicle	theg pa chen po bsgoms na
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྒོམས་པ	trained in the Mahayana theg pa chen po nyid rnam par dbye ba the divisions of the mahayana	theg pa chen po bsgoms pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གཉིས	the two aspects of mahayana	theg pa chen po gnyis
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་མཐའ་དག	the entire Mahayana theg pa chen po dang dman pa la mos pa - devotion to the greater and lesser vehicles theg pa chen po dang dman pa la mos pa - aspiring towards the greater and lesser vehicles	theg pa chen po mtha' dag
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན	mah'ay'anas'utr'alangk'ara by Asanga	theg pa chen po mdo sde'i rgyan
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྡུས་པ	Mahaayaanasamuccaya	theg pa chen po bsdus pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྡུས་པའི་འགྲེལ་བ	the Mahayana samuccaya commentary, the collected commentaries of mahayana	theg pa chen po bsdus pa'i 'grel ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ	the distinctions / features of the Mahayana	theg pa chen po rnam par dbye ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་པ	[mahayana] universalist	theg pa chen po pa
པ་བྱང་ཆུབ་གཞུང་ལམ	by kong	pa byang chub gzhung lam
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་སྐྱོ་བ	being discouraged with the Mahayana	theg pa chen po la skyo ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	the action of mahayana	theg pa chen po la spyod pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་མོས་པ	devotion to the mahayana	theg pa chen po la mos pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	dweller in the mahayana	theg pa chen po la zhugs pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོ་བ	taking full delight in the Mahayana	theg pa chen po la rab tu spro ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལས་ལྡོག་པ	reverse from the mahayana	theg pa chen po las ldog pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལས་མི་གྱོ་བ	not move from the mahayana 1190 theg pa chen po las mi g.yo ba - unwavering from the Mahayana	theg pa chen po las mi gyo ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བཤད་པའི་ཆོས	the dharma explaining the mahayana	theg pa chen po bshad pa'i chos
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གསང་སྔགས	the Secret Mantra of the Greater Vehicle	theg pa chen po gsang sngags
གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཅུ	[tse] theg pa chen po'i rgyan bla ma'i bstan	gyi mtshan nyid bcu
བཆོས	Mahaayanaottaratantra-shastra theg pa chen po'i rgyud bla ma'i bstan	bchos
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཆོས	Mahayana teachings. The Buddha's teachings comprised of the second and third turning of the wheel of Dharma as well as the commentaries upon them by the great scholars of India and Tibet	theg pa chen po'i chos
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཆོས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	the extensive Mahayana teachings	theg pa chen po'i chos rgya chen po
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྟོགས་པ	realization according to the Greater Vehicle	theg pa chen po'i rtogs pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྟོགས་རིགས	the kinds of realization of mahayana	theg pa chen po'i rtogs rigs
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Mahayana sutras	theg pa chen po'i mdo
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ་ཆོས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཐེ་ཨོཅེཨན	like sutra teachings of the Greater Vehicle theg pa chen po'i mdo chos rgya mtsho the dharma ocean of the mahayana sutras	theg pa chen po'i mdo chos rgya mtsho the ocean
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ་སྡེ	the mahayana sutras	theg pa chen po'i mdo sde
ལེའུར་བྱས་བ	mahayana sutralamkara karika theg pa chen po'i mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig	le'ur byas ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན	mahayana sutralamkara karika	theg pa chen po'i mdo sde'i rgyan
ཅན་གྱི་དོན་རྟོགས་པ	realizing the meaning of the profound intent of the Mahayana sutras theg pa chen po'i mdo shin tu rgyas pa	can gyi don rtogs pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	pitakas of the greater vehicle	theg pa chen po'i sde snod
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣམ་པར་གཞག་པ	a presentation of the Greater Vehicle theg pa chen po'i rnam par gzhag pa presentation/ postulation of the great vehicle	theg pa chen po'i rnam par gzhag pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣམ་གཞག	{theg pa chen po'i rnam par gzhag pa} a presentation of the Greater Vehicle	theg pa chen po'i rnam gzhag
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་བློ	the Mahayana attitude	theg pa chen po'i blo
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་གཞུང་ལུགས	the scriptural tradition of the Mahayana	theg pa chen po'i gzhung lugs
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིགས	Mahayana potential	theg pa chen po'i rigs
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལམ	the path of mahayana	theg pa chen po'i lam
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	the Mahayana stages of the path	theg pa chen po'i lam gyi rim pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལམ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	is connected with the path of the Great Vehicle	theg pa chen po'i lam dang 'brel ba
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད	instigator of the Mahayana system	theg pa chen po'i srol 'byed
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་གསང་སྔགས	Secret Mantra of the greater vehicle. Vajra- yana when regarded as a part of Mahayana	theg pa chen po'i gsang sngags
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོར་ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་པ	generates the compassionate heart of the Mahayana.	theg pa chen por thugs bskyed pa
ཐེག་པ་ཆེས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	the especial loftiness of mahayana	theg pa ches khyad par du 'phags pa
ཐེག་པ་གཆིག་པ	[ekayana] unique vehicle	theg pa gchig pa
ཐེག་པ་མཆོག	supreme vehicle theg pa mchog gi bstan pa'i bdag po would hold the teachings of the highest vehicle	theg pa mchog
ཐེག་པ་གཉིས	/ the two vehicles [1) theg chen dang, theg chung; 2) Rgyu mtshan nyid kyi theg pa dang, 'bras bu sngags kyi theg pa	theg pa gnyis
ཐེག་པ་གཉིས་པོ	the two vehicles [hinayana and mahayana]	theg pa gnyis po
ཐེག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་རྩེ་རྒྱལ	the victorious mountain peak of all the vehicles (to enlightenment) (i.e. Dzogchen)	theg pa thams cad kyi rtse rgyal
ཐེག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་སྟོན་པ	teacher of all the vehicles	theg pa thams cad ston pa
ཐེག་པ་ཐུན་མོང	the general vehicles	theg pa thun mong
ཐེག་པ་ཐུན་མོང་གི་ཤེས་བྱ	the objects of knowledge according to the general vehicles	theg pa thun mong gi shes bya
ཐེག་པ་ཐུན་མོང་བའི་ལུགས	the system of the general vehicles	theg pa thun mong ba'i lugs
ཐེག་པ་ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པ	extraordinary vehicle [tse]	theg pa thun mong ma yin pa
ཐེག་པ་མཐོ་དམན	Higher or lower vehicles. Same as 'greater and lesser vehicles.'	theg pa mtho dman
ཐེག་པ་དང་མཐུན་པ	in accordance with the vehicles	theg pa dang mthun pa
ཐེག་པ་དྲུག	six vehicles	theg pa drug
ཐེག་པ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	the two vehicles/ yanas	theg pa rnam pa gnyis
ཐེག་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three vehicles [hinayana, mahayana, vajrayana	theg pa rnam pa gsum
ཐེག་པ་བག་ཡོད	be careful of the vehicle	theg pa bag yod
ཐེག་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	the unsurpassable vehicle	theg pa bla na med pa
ཐེག་པ་དམན	Hinayana	theg pa dman
ཐེག་པ་དམན་པ	Hinayana. The vehicles focused on contemplation of the four noble truths and the twelve links of dependent origination for the sake of individual liberation	theg pa dman pa
ཐེག་པ་དམན་པས་འགྲོ་བ	proceeding by means of the lesser vehicles	theg pa dman pas 'gro ba
ཐེག་པ་གཞན	other vehicles	theg pa gzhan
ཐེག་པ་འོག་མ	Lower vehicles. Compared to Vajrayana, the lower are the vehicles of shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas	theg pa 'og ma
ཐེག་པ་འོག་མ་ལྟར	as is the practice in the lower vehicles	theg pa 'og ma ltar
ཐེག་པ་འོག་མ་རྣམས	adherents of the lower vehicles	theg pa 'og ma rnams
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུ	the 9 vehicles	theg pa rim dgu
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུའི་དམ་པའི་ཆོས	the sacred teachings of the nine gradual vehicles	theg pa rim dgu'i dam pa'i chos
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུའི་བོན	Nine Ways of Bon	theg pa rim dgu'i bon
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུའི་རྩ་དབང	elaborate initiation connected with tshogs chen 'dus pa	theg pa rim dgu'i rtsa dbang
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུའི་རྩེ་མོ	the pinnacle of the nine successive vehicles	theg pa rim dgu'i rtse mo
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་པ་དགུ	9 vehicles	theg pa rim pa dgu
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་པ་དགུའི་ཆོས	the teachings of the nine gradual vehicles	theg pa rim pa dgu'i chos
ཐེག་པ་རིམ་འཛེག	gradually ascending through the vehicles theg pa rim 'dzeg go rim ma 'tshol bar 'gro	theg pa rim 'dzeg
ཐེག་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	entering the vehicles	theg pa la zhugs pa
ཐེག་པ་ལ་ཞོན་པ	mount a carriage	theg pa la zhon pa
ཐེག་པ་གཤན	other vehicles	theg pa gshan
ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana	theg pa gsum
ཐེག་པ་གསུམ་ག	all three vehicles	theg pa gsum ga
ཐེག་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཆོས	the teachings of the three vehicles	theg pa gsum gyi chos
ཐེག་པའི་ཆོས	Mahayana	theg pa'i chos
ཐེག་པའི་མཆོག	the supreme vehicle 1192	theg pa'i mchog
ཐེག་པའི་སྟོབས	1 of 10 spiritual strengths of a bodhisattva	theg pa'i stobs
ཐེག་པའི་མཐར་ཐུག་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེ	the ultimate vehicle the great perfection	theg pa'i mthar thug rdzogs pa che
ཐེག་པའི་དོན་མཐོང་བ	see the meaning of the vehicle	theg pa'i don mthong ba
ཐེག་པའི་དོན་མ་མཐོང་བ	not see the meaning of the vehicles	theg pa'i don ma mthong ba
ཐེག་པའི་དབང་པོ	horse/ mule	theg pa'i dbang po
ཐེག་པའི་རྩེ་རྒྱལ	victorious summit of the vehicles	theg pa'i rtse rgyal
ཐེག་པའི་བཞོན་པ	one who mounts chariots	theg pa'i bzhon pa
ཐེག་པའི་རིམ	the stages of the vehicles	theg pa'i rim
ཐེག་པའི་རིམ་པ	the stages of the vehicles	theg pa'i rim pa
ཐེག་པའི་རིམ་པ་དགུ	nine gradual vehicles; nine stages of the vehicle	theg pa'i rim pa dgu
ཐེག་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	the unsurpassable vehicle	theg bla na med pa
ཐེག་འབྲིང་སྐྱེས་བུ	person of the intermediate vehicle	theg 'bring skyes bu
ཐེག་དམན	lower vehicles; inferior spiritual approaches	theg dman
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	the cessation of hinayana	theg dman gyi 'gog pa
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	hinayanapitakas	theg dman gyi sde snod
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་ལམ་ཤེས	understanding of the Hinayana path	theg dman gyi lam shes
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་ལུགས	the Hinayana system	theg dman gyi lugs
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་ལུང་རིགས་འཛིན་པ	holder of the scriptures and reasoning of the lesser vehicles	theg dman gyi lung rigs 'dzin pa
ཐེག་དམན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	Hinayana concentration. one of the {'jig rten las 'das pa'i bsam gtan gnyis}	theg dman gyi bsam gtan
ཐེག་དམན་གྲུབ་མཐའ་གཉིས	the two doctrines of hinayana [vaibhashikas and sautrantikas)	theg dman grub mtha' gnyis
ཐེག་དམན་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of arhats of the hinayana [nyan thos kyi mi slob pa and rang sangs rgyas kyi mi slob pa]	theg dman dgra bcom pa gnyis
ཋེག་དམན་སྡེ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 schools of hinayana [nyan thos sde pa bco brgyad	Theg dman sde pa bco brgyad
ཐེག་དམན་པ	Hinayana adherent, Hinayana follower, individualist	theg dman pa
ཐེག་དམན་པའི་སྡེ་བཞི	the four schools of hinayana	theg dman pa'i sde bzhi
ཐེག་དམན་འཕགས་པ	[tse]	theg dman 'phags pa
ཐེག་དམན་གཞི་ཤེས	[tse]	theg dman gzhi shes
ཐེག་དམན་ས་བརྒྱད	the 8 levels of hinayana [dkar po rnam par mthong ba'i sa, rigs kyi sa, brgyad pa'i sa, mthong ba'i sa, bsrabs pa'i sa, 'dod chags dang bral ba'i sa, byas pa bsrung ba'i sa, byas pa rtogs pa'i sa]	theg dman sa brgyad
ཐེག་རྩེ	the Peak of Vehicles. Syn {rang bzhin rdzogs pa chen po}	theg rtse
ཐེག་རྩེའི་བསྟན་པ	the doctrine of the summit of vehicles	theg rtse'i bstan pa
ཐེག་བརྩེའི་བསྟན་པ	the doctrine of the summit of vehicles	theg brtse'i bstan pa
ཐེག་ཚད	[carrying] capacity, load, deadweight [in ships]	theg tshad
ཐེག་ཚད་བཀང	fill/ load to capacity	theg tshad bkang
ཐེག་ཚུལ	various yanas/ vehicles	theg tshul
ཐེག་ཚོད	a load as much as one man can carry	theg tshod
ཐེག་བཚེའི་བསྟན་པ	the doctrine of the summit of vehicles	theg btshe'i bstan pa
ཐེག་རིམ	theg pa'i rim pa	theg rim
ཐེག་རིམ་དགུ	the nine gradual vehicles	theg rim dgu
ཐེག་ལམ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three paths of the vehicles	theg lam rnam gsum
ཐེག་གསུམ	the three vehicles [hinayana, mahayana, vajrayana]	theg gsum
དམན་པ	hinayana adherent/ follower [nyan rang gi gang zag	dman pa
ཐེག་གསུམ་གྱི་རྟོགས་རིགས	the kinds of realization of the three vehicles	theg gsum gyi rtogs rigs
ཐེག་གསུམ་གྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ	the enlightenment of the three vehicles	theg gsum gyi byang chub
ཐེག་གསུམ་རྟོགས་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	single kind of realization of the three vehicles	theg gsum rtogs rigs gcig pa
ཐེག་གསུམ་རྟོགས་རིགས་ཐ་དད	different kinds of realization of the three vehicles	theg gsum rtogs rigs tha dad
ཐེགས	(not in DAS)	thegs
ཐེགས་ཆེན	large commentary	thegs chen
ཐེགས་པ	{thegs pa, thegs pa, thegs pa} intr. v	thegs pa
ཐེགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྡུས་པ	summarizing the Mahayana	thegs pa chen po bsdus pa
ཐེང	down, downward. times	theng
ཐེང་ཀྭན	celebrated chinese buddhist scholar 1193	theng kwan
ཐེང་གེ་རི་ནོའུར	(M gnam mtsho	theng ge ri no'ur
ཐེང་པོ	* lame, hobbling, limping, crippled	theng po
ཐེང་བ	(tha mi dad pa thengs pa, theng ba,, reach/ complete the required #	theng ba
ཐེང་བུ	lame, hobbling	theng bu
ཐེང་མོ	cards used in prognostications (mo)	theng mo
ཐེངས	time, time (as in one time), with numbers, the nth time	thengs
ཐེངས་ཁ་ཤས་སུ	a few times	thengs kha shas su
ཐེངས་འགའ	sometimes	thengs 'ga'
ཐེངས་འགར	a few more times	thengs 'gar
ཐེངས་བརྒྱད་པ	the eighth time something took place	thengs brgyad pa
ཐེངས་གཅིག	once	thengs gcig
ཐེངས་གཉིས	twice, second occasion, two times	thengs gnyis
ཐེངས་གཉིས་ཙམ	for the second time	thengs gnyis tsam
ཐེངས་དང་པོ	the 1st time	thengs dang po
ཐེངས་འདིར	this time	thengs 'dir
ཐེངས་པ	[p theng ba]	thengs pa
ཐེངས་མ	time[s], occasion, occurrence	thengs ma
ཐེངས་མ་མང་པོ	many times	thengs ma mang po
ཐེངས་མང	many times	thengs mang
ཐེངས་མང་མཐོང་བ	see many times	thengs mang mthong ba
ཐེངས་མང་པོ	many times	thengs mang po
ཐེངས་གསུམ	thrice	thengs gsum
ཐེད	remains of corpse of animal killed by predator	thed
ཐེད་པོ	old and torn	thed po
ཐེད་བོར	1) yal bar bor ba'am, have little/ no concern regard for; 2) Lhag ro gyugs pa	thed bor
ཐེད་ལ་བསྐྱུར་བ	yal bar dor ba	thed la bskyur ba
ཐེན	a little while, a moment, push, pull drag, deduct, subtract, smoke	then
ཐེན་ཀའོ	(CH for placing in a liquor crock's mouth zangs kyi snod	then ka'o
ཐེན་ཀྲུའུ	then khru'i region [kan su'u zhing chen khongs bod rigs rang skyong rdzong zhig 1950 lo'i zla five tses six la then kru'u rang skyong sa khul btsugs, 1954 lor then kru'u bod rigs rang skyong sa khu...	then kru'u
མ	June 1950 then kru'u rang skyong sa khul btsugs, in 1954 then kru'u became bod rigs rang skyong sa khul, in 1955 it became a rang skyong rdzong, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung aan yon kren du yod, th...	May
ཐེན་ཁྱེར	strained [relations], discord, disagreement, dissension	then khyer
ཐེན་ཁྱེར་འགྱུར	become strained [relations], come into discord/ disagreement/ dissension	then khyer 'gyur
ཐེན་ཁྱེར་ཆགས	become strained [relations], come into discord/ disagreement/ dissension	then khyer chags
ཐེན་ཁྱེར་གཏོང	strain [relations], cause discord/ disagreement/ dissension	then khyer gtong
ཐེན་ཅིན	Tientsin	then cin
ཐེན་ཅེར	[arch] always, continuously, uninterruptedly, eternally, permanently	then cer
ཐེན་ཆེན་གྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five Mahayana paths	then chen gyi lam lnga
ཐེན་ཆེར	[arch] always, continuously, uninterruptedly, eternally, permanently	then cher
ཐེན་པ	(A) desire, attachment [khyim la then zhing 'dug]	then pa
ཐེན་པའི་མིང	word for drawing	then pa'i ming
ཐེན་ཕིང	scales	then phing
ཐེན་མེད	SA sha tsha med pa	then med
ཐེན་ཧྲན་རི་བོ	T'ien shan Mt	then hran ri bo
ཐེན་ཨན་མུན	Tien an men square	then an mun
ཐེན་ཨན་མུན་ཐང་ཆེན	Tien an men square	then an mun thang chen
ཐེན་ཨན་མོན	Tien an men square	then an mon
ཐེན་ཨན་མོན་ཐང་ཆེན	Tien an men square	then an mon thang chen
ཐེབ	full. thebs, thumb	theb
ཐེབ་ཀྱུ	[tse]	theb kyu
ཐེབ་ཀྱུས	dough triangles. Small doughtriangles	theb kyus
ཐེབ་ཆུང	little finger	theb chung
ཐེབ་ཆེན	thumb	theb chen
ཐེབ་འཇུ	button	theb 'ju
ཐེབ་ཐེབ	staggered	theb theb
ཐེབ་པ	[p] thebs pa	theb pa
ཐེབ་མོ	thumb	theb mo
ཐེབ་རྩེ	(CH a kind of small vessel	theb rtse
ཐེབ་ལུང	button hole	theb lung
ཐེབས	1) series, order, succession; 3) plant {sa bon thebs pa}. = to plant/ sow a seed]; 4) contribution, monastic endowment [Notes: Mchod thebs. Gtong thebs this term refers to a particular method of fu...	thebs
སུཔཔོརཏ་ཨ་པརྟིཅུལར་ཡེཨརལཡ་པྲོགྲམ	summer retreat, an annual chakrasa vara practice, or whatever it would be stipulated, however, that the monastery could spend only the interest, not the principal, of the donation so the monastery,...	support a particular yearly program
ཐེ་ཡེཨརལཡ་ཨིནཏེརེསཏ་པཡྨེནཙ	-which would be put towards the designated	the yearly interest payments
མོནསྟིཅ་པྲོགྲམ	-and the term of the loan were specified in advance, w the businessman assuming all risks (and rewards) at the end of the term of the loan, the entire principal would be repaid, to be loaned out ag...	monastic program
པརྟིཅུལར་ཡེཨརལཡ་པྲོགྲམ	-summer retreat, an annual Chakrasa vara practice, or whatever; the monastery could spend only the interest, of the donation so the monastery, in turn, would lend the endowment to a businessman. Th...	particular yearly program
བེ་པུཏ་ཏོཝརདས་ཐེ་དེསིགནཏེད་མོནསྟིཅ་པྲོགྲམ	-at the end of the term of the loan, the entire principal would be repaid, and loaned out again] phugs kyi dmigs rten	be put towards the designated monastic program
ཐེབས་ཀྱུ	pellets [on a torma]	thebs kyu
ཐེབས་རྒྱུ	supplication (fulfilled)	thebs rgyu
ཐེབས་ངེས	precise capacity	thebs nges
ཐེབས་བཅག	lag thogs po bzos pa ...Blo mi 'dra ba bkal nas, thebs chu 'dra ba bcag byung	thebs bcag
ཐེབས་ཆག	minimally adequate, the bare minimum, not really good 1194 thebs chag tsam las med pa'i lto gos food and clothing no better than merely adequate	thebs chag
ཐེབས་ཆི	button	thebs chi
ཐེབས་ཇ	party when planting is finished in a field	thebs ja
ཐེབས་ན་རབ	if rightly understood then that will be the best, it is right, that will do	thebs na rab
ཐེབས་པ	received; {thebs pa, thebs pa, thebs pa} intr. v	thebs pa
ཐེབས་པ་ན	when it is present	thebs pa na
ཐེབས་པད	kicking toy of feathers etc	thebs pad
ཐེབས་པར་བྱ	must be applied	thebs par bya
ཐེབས་སྦྱར	establish/ deposit in capital endowment for continuous offerings/ pujas etc., fund, trust, foundation	thebs sbyar
ཐེབས་སྦྱར་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt offering endowment depository office	thebs sbyar las khungs
ཐེབས་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྔོན་ལ་བཏང	Place before you the unshakable vajra of no dissuasion. start with the vajra of unswerving determination	thebs med rdo rje sngon la btang
ཐེབས་རྩ	capital endowment for continuous offerings/ pujas etc., fund, trust, foundation	thebs rtsa
ཐེབས་རྩའི་མ་རྐང	original/ foundation capital [gtong rtsa'am, tshong rtsa]	thebs rtsa'i ma rkang
ཐེབས་རྩིས་ལ་ཕྱིན་པ	after business bankruptcy giving [= brtsis here] all 1's possessions to creditor[s]	thebs rtsis la phyin pa
ཐེབས་རང	class of demon	thebs rang
ཐེབས་རེ	1) every time; 2) a little	thebs re
ཐེབས་རེ་བྱེད་པ	do successively	thebs re byed pa
ཐེབས་ལུང	clothing etc. sum byed kyi srog lung	thebs lung
ཐེབས་གསུམ	three times	thebs gsum
ཐེམ	pegs	them
ཐེམ་སྐས་ཀྱི་གདང་བུའི་རིམ་པ	steps, rungs of a ladder	them skas kyi gdang bu'i rim pa
ཐེམ་སྐས་ཀྱི་བང་རིམ	stairs	them skas kyi bang rim
ཐེམ་སྐས་ཐེམ་པ	stairs	them skas them pa
ཐེམ་ཁ	sgo'i them pa'i steng	them kha
ཐེམ་ཁུང	sgo'i them pa'i 'og gi khung bu	them khung
ཐེམ་ཐོ	registered, permanent residence, address # on a house	them tho
ཐེམ་དུད	household, family [Rgya khyab tu dril bsgrags byas nas them dud tsang mar gsal por shes su 'jug dgos]	them dud
ཐེམ་དེབ	mi tsang them pa gang yod kyi tho bkod pa'i deb yig	them deb
ཐེམ་པ	1) door/ gate's ya them and ma them, threshold [of door/ gate]; 2) staircase, stairs, flight of steps; 3) [rungs of a] ladder	them pa
ཐེམ་པ་འགལ་བ	cross the threshold	them pa 'gal ba
ཐེམ་པའི་སྒང་གི་བྱིའུ	little bird/ mouse on a threshold, uncertain	them pa'i sgang gi byi'u
ཐེམ་པའི་སྒང་གི་རིལ་མ	dung pellet on a threshold, uncertain them pa'i sgang gi ril ma ltar 'grul pa 'gro dang mi 'gro da lta brtan brtan mi 'dug [where they will end up as uncertain as the case of] a dung pellet on a th...	them pa'i sgang gi ril ma
ཐེམ་སྤང	1) rang gi sdod khang gi sgo'i phyir gyar du mi 'jug pa'i oral instructions etc.; 2) place in S Tibet [mtso sna rdzong, mon yul sbrang nang tsho drug gi nang tshan zhig ste, yul de'i nags khrod cig...	them spang
ཐེམ་ཕུག	Thimpu	them phug
ཐེམ་བུ	stopping, closing, shutting up	them bu
ཐེམ་བུ་ཁ	gri bar sman 'debs byed kyi yo byad sman thur zhig	them bu kha
ཐེམ་བུ་གློད	pulling out the stoppers	them bu glod
ཐེམ་བུ་བཏང	took out (all the stoppers	them bu btang
ཐེམ་བེར་ནེམ་བེར	thronged, filled with	them ber nem ber
ཐེམ་བྱང	inscription above a door/ gate	them byang
ཐེམ་འབེན	shing la thog mar rgyag byed kyi 'bur len	them 'ben
ཐེམ་རྨང	rtsa ba of a gate/ door threshold	them rmang
ཐེམ་རྩ	SA sgo them gyi rtsa ba	them rtsa
ཐེམ་ཚངས	family, household	them tshangs
ཐེམ་རྫོང	{them rdzong} [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs mtsho nub sog rigs dang bod rigs dang ha sag rigs gsum gyi rang skyong khul gyi shar rgyud dang mtsho sngon po'i nub 'gram du yod]	them rdzong
ཐེམ་ཞིང	terraced field	them zhing
ཐེམ་ཟུར	threshold	them zur
ཐེམ་ཡིག	inscription/ address #s above the door/ gate of a house	them yig
ཐེམ་རིམ	several steps of a staircase	them rim
ཐེམས	fulfilled	thems
ཐེམས་པ	[p 'them pa]	thems pa
ཐེམས་ཡིག	memorial	thems yig
ཐེའུ	1) seal; 2) flower bud; 3) small hammer	the'u
ཐེའུ་ཆུ	(CH {the'u chu} 1195	the'u chu
ཐེའུ་ཆུང	little finger	the'u chung
ཐེའུ་བྲང	1 of sde brgyad	the'u brang
ཐེའུ་ཙེ	seal	the'u tse
ཐེའུ་རང	devils	the'u rang
ཐེའུ་རང་དམར་སེལ	red exorcism for the the'u rang	the'u rang dmar sel
ཐེའུ་རང་ལག་པ	{the'u rang lag pa med herb [among best and lesser qualkity herb dbang po lag pa, the lesser]	the'u rang lag pa
ཐེར	class of demons, bare, denuded	ther
ཐེར་ཀེ་ཡར་འཐེན་པ	push the cart up	ther ke yar 'then pa
ཐེར་སྐུད	slender wool thread	ther skud
ཐེར་གེ	carriage, cart, flatbed, pedicab	ther ge
ཐེར་གཏོད	exposure, laying bare	ther gtod
ཐེར་གཏོད་བྱེད	expose, lay bare	ther gtod byed
ཐེར་ཐག་ཐེར་གེའི་ཐག་པའམ	khal do tying rope	ther thag ther ge'i thag pa'am
ཐེར་ཐེར	snod kha yangs pa	ther ther
ཐེར་འདོན	exposing, laying bare	ther 'don
ཐེར་འདོན་དག་འབུད	expose and reveal/ tell ther 'don dag 'bud byed pa'i byas nyes exposed and revealed crimes	ther 'don dag 'bud
ཐེར་འདོན་བྱེད	expose, lay bare ther 'don byed pa'i nyes can gyi skyon exposed faults of the criminal[s]	ther 'don byed
ཐེར་འདྲ	fake woolen cloth	ther 'dra
ཐེར་པོ	vegetable frying, grain parching etc pan	ther po
ཐེར་ཕྲུག་འཇམ་གོས	good quality soft Tibetan wool clothing	ther phrug 'jam gos
ཐེར་བག	bza' chas sgrig sa'i sder ma zhabs ra can zhig	ther bag
ཐེར་བུམ་ཆེན་པོ	10 billion	ther bum chen po
ཐེར་འབུམ	one billion, 1,000,000,000	ther 'bum
ཐེར་འབུམ་ཆེན་པོ	ten million	ther 'bum chen po
ཐེར་འབུམ་ཕྲག་ལྔ	five billion	ther 'bum phrag lnga
ཐེར་འབུམ་ཕྲག་གཅིག	one billion	ther 'bum phrag gcig
ཕྲག་དགུ	1 billion 900 million ther 'bum phrag gcig dang dung phyur	phrag dgu
ཕྲག་བརྒྱད	1 billion 800 million ther 'bum phrag gcig dang dung phyur	phrag brgyad
ཐེར་འབུམ་ཕྲག་དྲུག་ཅུ	sixty billion	ther 'bum phrag drug cu
ཐེར་སྦག	coarse kind of serge	ther sbag
ཐེར་མ	[thin] woolen cloth * serge, flannel	ther ma
ཐེར་མ་རྫུན་མའམ	fake woolen cloth	ther ma rdzun ma'am
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦ་ཚལ	completely destroyed/ torn out, shredded to pieces, broken	ther tshal sba tshal
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦ་ཚལ་གཏོང	completely destroy/ tear out/up, shred, break	ther tshal sba tshal gtong
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦ་ཚལ་བཟོ	completely destroy/ tear out/up, shred, break	ther tshal sba tshal bzo
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦར་ཚལ	completely destroyed/ torn out, shredded to pieces, broken	ther tshal sbar tshal
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦར་ཚལ་གཏོང	completely destroy/ tear out/up, shred, break	ther tshal sbar tshal gtong
ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦར་ཚལ་བཟོ	completely destroy/ tear out/up, shred, break	ther tshal sbar tshal bzo
ཐེར་རྫུན	fake woolen cloth	ther rdzun
ཐེར་ཟུག	1) {'gyur ba med pa} unchanging, permanent, enduring 2) Syn {ther zug pa} /	ther zug
ཐེར་ཟུག་འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པ	permanent and changeless	ther zug 'gyur ba med pa
ཐེར་ཟུག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	permanently abiding [tse]	ther zug tu gnas pa
ཐེར་ཟུག་ཐེར་ཟུག	very stable/ permanent	ther zug ther zug
ཐེར་ཟུག་པ	continuous shashvatas	ther zug pa
ཐེར་གཟན	gzan made of thin woolen cloth	ther gzan
ཐེར་གཟན་དམར་པོ	red plaid shawl	ther gzan dmar po
ཐེར་གཟུགས	tightly	ther gzugs
ཐེར་སྲབ	thin woolen cloth	ther srab
ཐེལ	seal	thel
ཐེལ་ཁ	gsang gnas = moxibustion point	thel kha
ཐེལ་རྒྱག	affix a seal/ stamp, sign	thel rgyag
ཐེལ་རྒྱག་པ	affix a seal/ stamp, sign	thel rgyag pa
ཐེལ་གཏོང་ལུང་སྒྱུར	tham 'dzin gtong ba &, bka' lung sgyur ba	thel gtong lung sgyur
ཐེལ་བ	cemetery ash/ ointment, arrive	thel ba
ཐེལ་མ	leather strap	thel ma
ཐེལ་ཙེ	seal, stamp	thel tse
ཐེལ་ཙེ་ཁ་ལ་བརྒྱབ་པ	put a seal on the mouth	thel tse kha la brgyab pa
ཐེལ་ཙེ་འགོག་པ	destroy a seal/ stamp	thel tse 'gog pa
ཐེལ་ཙེ་རྒྱག	affix a seal/ stamp, sign	thel tse rgyag
ཐེལ་ཙེ་ལག་སྐོར	many people jointly gan rgya 'jog skabs all sign de phab pa'i the'u	thel tse lag skor
ཐེལ་ཙེའི་རྒྱ་བཤིག་པ	destroy a seal/ stamp	thel tse'i rgya bshig pa
ཐེལ་ཙེའི་རྒྱས་བཏབ་པ	seal w a seal	thel tse'i rgyas btab pa
ཐེལ་ཙེས་མནན་པ	seal w a seal	thel tses mnan pa
ཐེལ་རྩེ	stamp, seal	thel rtse
ཐེལ་ཚེ	seal, stamp	thel tshe
ཐེལ་སེ	seal, stamp	thel se
ཐེལ་སེ་འགོག་པ	destroy a seal/ stamp	thel se 'gog pa
ཐེལ་སེ་རྒྱག	affix a seal/ stamp, sign	thel se rgyag
ཐེལ་སེ་ལག་སྐོར	many people jointly gan rgya 'jog skabs all sign de phab pa'i the'u	thel se lag skor
ཐེལ་སེའི་རྒྱ་བཤིག་པ	destroy a seal/ stamp	thel se'i rgya bshig pa
ཐེལ་སེའི་རྒྱས་བཏབ་པ	seal w a seal	thel se'i rgyas btab pa
ཐེལ་སེས་མནན་པ	seal w a seal	thel ses mnan pa
ཐེས	[p the]	thes
ཐེས་པ	SA the ba	thes pa
ཐེས་མེད་པ	[arch] w/o need/ purpose	thes med pa
ཐོ	1) [mnemonic] list, note[book], register, index, catalogue, record, [Ming tho, Zin tho. Brjed tho. Nyin tho]; 2) [Rdo tho. Mtshams tho] cairn [as sign/ indicator]	tho
ཐོ་ཀོར	1) near[by]; 2) khor yug, spit, button ???	tho kor
ཐོ་དཀར་གླིང	{yul chen bcu drug}. a subcontinent in this world	tho dkar gling
ཐོ་བཀོད་པ	pf. of to register	tho bkod pa
ཐོ་སྐོར	near[by]	tho skor
ཐོ་འཁོར	1) near[by]; 2) khor yug, spit, button ??? (?	tho 'khor
ཐོ་གར	the Turkomans, Tukhara	tho gar
ཐོ་གར་མདའ་དཔོན	Manchu Dynasty high military rank	tho gar mda' dpon
ཐོ་འགོད	listing, registering	tho 'god
ཐོ་འགོད་སྙན་སེང	registration	tho 'god snyan seng
ཐོ་འགོད་པ	to register, make a record	tho 'god pa
ཐོ་འགོད་རེའུ་མིག	ming tho sogs 'god sa'i	tho 'god re'u mig
ཐོ་འགྲོལ	to take in the {rgyal tho}	tho 'grol
ཐོ་རྒྱག	to make a list, record	tho rgyag
ཐོ་ཅོ	jocular talk, nonsense, chatter	tho co
ཐོ་ཅོ་མཁན	a braggart	tho co mkhan
ཐོ་ཅོ་ཅན	senseless talker	tho co can
ཐོ་ཅོ་བྱས	laughed at	tho co byas
ཐོ་ཅོ་བྱས་པ	chattered about	tho co byas pa
ཐོ་ཅོ་བྱེད	talk nonsense, foolish	tho co byed
ཐོ་ཅོ་བྱེད་པ	speak nonsense, meaningless words	tho co byed pa
ཐོ་ཅོར་སྨྲས་པ	babble forth	tho cor smras pa
ཐོ་ཆུང	small hammer, cock of a gun, soldering stick	tho chung
ཐོ་ཆེན	smith's large hammer	tho chen
ཐོ་ཆོ	SA tho co	tho cho
ཅང་གོམས་པ་མ་ཡིན་ནམ	Your Majesty! Do not talk so rashly and do not talk nonsense!	cang goms pa ma yin nam
ཐོ་ཆོ་ཅན	senseless talker	tho cho can
ཐོ་ཆོ་སྙེན་ཚིག	speak gently by concealing one's anger	tho cho snyen tshig
ཐོ་ཆོ་སྙེན་ཚིག་ཡ་སྒྲ	speak with dissimulation	tho cho snyen tshig ya sgra
ཐོ་ཆོ་བྱེད	talk nonsense, foolish	tho cho byed
ཐོ་ཆོར་སྨྲས་པ	babble forth	tho chor smras pa
ཐོ་ཆོས	dharma cairns	tho chos
ཐོ་མཆོད	tho yor lhar mos nas de la mchod gtor 'bul ba'i cho ga zhig	tho mchod
ཐོ་ཐུག་པ	1) sudden/ incidental meeting; 2) phan tshun dngos ra 'phrod pa [be confronted w truth, become evident?]; 3) touching	tho thug pa
ཐོ་ཐོ	touching	tho tho
ཐོ་ཐོ་རི་གཉན་བཙན	deity tho tho ri gnyan btsan	tho tho ri gnyan btsan
ཐོ་ཐོ་རི་སྙན་ཤལ	= deity tho tho ri gnyan btsan	tho tho ri snyan shal
ཐོ་ཐོ་རེག་རེག་མེད	untouched	tho tho reg reg med
ཐོ་དེབ	register	tho deb
ཐོ་རྡོ	stone boundary	tho rdo
ཐོ་ལྡེབ	list	tho ldeb
ཐོ་པོ	1) pile of earth and rocks etc in human form; 2) border showing pile of rocks	tho po
ཐོ་ཕྱི	love, sky, near, nearby, side, beside. Syn {tho kor} / {nye 'khor du} / {gzhogs su} / {tho khor}	tho phyi
ཐོ་ཕྲུག	small hammer	tho phrug
ཐོ་འཕག	kind of hammer	tho 'phag
ཐོ་བ	[large] hammer, pestle, cudgel	tho ba
ཐོ་བ་བཀོད་པ	to set up the {rgyal, tho}	tho ba bkod pa
ཐོ་བ་མགར	black smith's hammer	tho ba mgar
ཐོ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག	sledge-hammer	tho ba chen po zhig
ཐོ་བ་དང་ཏོག་རྩེ	hammers	tho ba dang tog rtse
ཐོ་བ་སྤུད་པ	hammer and bellows	tho ba spud pa
ཐོ་བ་སྦུད་པ	hammer and bellows	tho ba sbud pa
ཐོ་བ་ར་མགོ	"goat head" nail making hammer	tho ba ra mgo
ཐོ་བས་རྡུང་བ	beat with a hammer, hammer, forge	tho bas rdung ba
ཐོ་འབྲི	make a list/ record, take notes register, enroll	tho 'bri
ཐོ་འབྲི་བ	register, make out a list or catalogue	tho 'bri ba
ཐོ་མི་བཙམ་པ	avoid causing harm	tho mi btsam pa
ཐོ་མི་བརྩམ་པ	to avoid causing harm	tho mi brtsam pa
ཐོ་བཙམས་པ	mtho 'tsham pa	tho btsams pa
ཐོ་འཙམ་པ	mtho 'tsam pa	tho 'tsam pa
ཐོ་གརྩེགས	in tiers, tiered	tho grtsegs
ཐོ་བརྩེགས	tiers	tho brtsegs
ཐོ་བརྩེགས་སུ	in tiers	tho brtsegs su
ཐོ་བརྩོམ	proselytize	tho brtsom
ཐོ་ཚོམ་གྱི་དོགས་སེལ	clearing doubts	tho tshom gyi dogs sel
ཐོ་འཚམ་པ	contempt, scorn, scoffer, jeer, sneer at, mock	tho 'tsham pa
ཐོ་འཚམས་པ	contempt, scorn, scoffer, jeer, sneer at, mock	tho 'tshams pa
ཐོ་འཛུགས་པ	to set up the	tho 'dzugs pa
ཐོ་གཞུང	bya ba dang dngos po'i tho bstar chad su bkod pa'i yig cha.Rdzong gi gtong yong byed sgo rnams sngar gyi tho gzhung gzhir bzung nas byas yod	tho gzhung
ཐོ་བཞག་པ	to set up the {rgyal tho}	tho bzhag pa
ཐོ་བཞི	four stories	tho bzhi
ཐོ་ཟུར	corner or marginal note	tho zur
ཐོ་ཡིག	[mnemonic] list, notes, catalog, register, manual	tho yig
ཐོ་ཡིག་ལོགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	make a separate list of things	tho yig logs su bkod pa
ཐོ་ཡོར	a stone-pile (used to mark boundaries); stone pyramid, heap of stones	tho yor
ཐོ་ཡོར་ནག་པོ	To-yor Nagpo	tho yor nag po
ཐོ་རང	early morning	tho rang
ཐོ་རངས	dawn, break of day, daybreak, very early morning	tho rangs
ཐོ་རངས་ཀྱི་དུས་སུ	early in the morning	tho rangs kyi dus su
ཐོ་རངས་སྐར་ཆེན	large dawn star = Venus	tho rangs skar chen
ཐོ་རངས་སྐྱ་རེང་དང་པོའི་ཙེ	at the 1st moment of dawn	tho rangs skya reng dang po'i tse
ཐོ་རངས་ཁར	towards dawn	tho rangs khar
ཐོ་རངས་སྔ་བ	before dawn	tho rangs snga ba
ཐོ་རངས་ལྡང་དང	crowing before dawn (1 of 4 khyim bya'i spyod pa)	tho rangs ldang dang
ཐོ་རངས་རྣལ་འབྱོར	practice of the morning 1197	tho rangs rnal 'byor
ཐོ་རངས་སྣང་བ	tomorrow	tho rangs snang ba
ཐོ་རངས་མ་རིག་གཉིད་སྐྲོག	arousing at dawn from the sleep of ignorance	tho rangs ma rig gnyid skrog
ཐོ་རི་སྙན་ཤལ	name of king tho tho ri gnyan btsan	tho ri snyan shal
ཐོ་རིལ	round hammer	tho ril
ཐོ་རུ	two year old colt	tho ru
ཐོ་རུ་བཀོད་པ	enlist, record	tho ru bkod pa
ཐོ་རེ	tomorrow	tho re
ཐོ་རེ་བ	a few, a little while	tho re ba
ཐོ་རེ་ཙམ	somewhat, rather, little while	tho re tsam
ཐོ་རེ་ལོང་ངེ་བ	CM: thar thor dang cher mi gsal ba, scatter and not very clear. ¦ lo rgyus tho re long nge ba zhig las bshad rgyu mi 'dug, Scattered and unclear, history cannot be explained. Q: What is "tho re lon...	tho re long nge ba
ཐོ་རེངས	dawn	tho rengs
ཐོ་རེངས་ཀྱི་ཐུན	dawn session	tho rengs kyi thun
ཐོ་རེངས་ཁ	at dawn	tho rengs kha
ཐོ་རེངས་ཤིག	one early morning	tho rengs shig
ཐོ་ལ་ཅི	tractor	tho la ci
ཐོ་ལུ་ཐར་གླིང་སྒར	small sherpa monastery in the solu-khumbu region of nepal	tho lu thar gling sgar
ཐོ་ལུམ	hammer, lump of metal	tho lum
ཐོ་ལུས	iron ball	tho lus
ཐོ་ལེ	suddenly	tho le
ཐོ་ལེ་ཀོར	ha shig	tho le kor
ཐོ་ལེ་འདེབས་པ	spit	tho le 'debs pa
ཐོ་ལེན	make a list, take notes, register, enroll	tho len
ཐོ་ལེན་པ	make a list, take notes, register, enroll	tho len pa
ཐོ་ལེར་བྱུང་བ	suddenly occurring	tho ler byung ba
ཐོ་ལོག	horse etc. small and short [mule, hinny???]	tho log
ཤེ	ass, flummel	she
ཐོ་ཤོ་ལེགས	tribe in tibet	tho sho legs
ཐོ་བཤེར	yi ger bltas nas tshang min bsher ba	tho bsher
ཐོ་སུབ	cancel, write off, delete	tho sub
ཐོ་སོ	(M mar, butter, oil	tho so
ཐོ་ཧུན	pale-white, grey color	tho hun
ཐོ་ཨང	account #	tho ang
ཐོག	uppermost, about, with regard to, on, on top of, up, above, over, roof, cover, top, architectural summit, fruit, produce, fortune, wealth, property, red fruit, head, thunderbolt, lightning, grind, ...	thog
ཐོག་དཀར	opening for smoke in a roof	thog dkar
ཐོག་སྐོར	retinue	thog skor
ཐོག་ཁ	top/ roof of a house [Kha ba bab na thog khar 'bab, 'grul pa yong na sgo rtsar yong]	thog kha
ཐོག་ཁང	a multi-storied building, terrace	thog khang
ཐོག་ཁར	on, upon	thog khar
ཐོག་གིས་གསོད་པ	dying from a thunderbolt, be killed by lightning	thog gis gsod pa
ཐོག་གུ	[arch] fruit, point, tip, edge	thog gu
ཐོག་གུ་ཅན	9 stories high/ fruit-bearing	thog gu can
ཐོག་གེང	a thunderbolt which falls and destroys	thog geng
ཐོག་གྱབ	mdun du gyang sogs med pa'i thog khebs	thog gyab
ཐོག་གྱབ་མེད་པ	roofless, open air	thog gyab med pa
ཐོག་གྱོགས	upper cover, roof	thog gyogs
ཐོག་གྲངས་པ	be the leader of, lead against, lead forward, conduct	thog grangs pa
ཐོག་འགེལ	put up a roof	thog 'gel
ཐོག་འགེལ་བ	put a roof on a house, finish an enterprise, judgments	thog 'gel ba
ཐོག་འགོག་ཟངས་མདའ	lightning rod	thog 'gog zangs mda'
ཐོག་རྒོད	much/ great thunder/ lightning	thog rgod
ཐོག་རྒྱག	1) sudden [De ring glo bur thog rgyag tu kho slebs byung]; 2) thunderbolt/ lightning falling [Gnam lcags lhung ba.Mgo bor thog rgyag]	thog rgyag
ཐོག་རྒྱག་པ	thunder, rattle, suddenly	thog rgyag pa
ཐོག་རྒྱན	roof ornament	thog rgyan
ཐོག་རྒྱབ་པ	striking with lightning	thog rgyab pa
ཐོག་རྒྱུག	1) wood parts of a roof, rafters etc.; 2) coming w lightning-like suddenness	thog rgyug
ཐོག་རྒྱུགས་སུ	suddenly, like a bolt of lightning	thog rgyugs su
ཐོག་སྒྲ	1) loud thunder; 2) sound on top of a house	thog sgra
ཐོག་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་མཚོན	thunderbolt	thog brgya byin mtshon
ཐོག་ཅག	veranda	thog cag
ཐོག་གཅིག་མ	1 story building	thog gcig ma
ཐོག་ལྕགས	lightning-bolt	thog lcags
ཐོག་ལྕོག	housetop center and corner lcog chung	thog lcog
ཐོག་ཆོད	excelled, see {khrom thog kun chod} was the very best	thog chod
ཐོག་རྗེ་ཐོག་བཙན	{thog rje thog btsan}	thog rje thog btsan
ཐོག་ཉམས	experience of attainment	thog nyams
ཐོག་ཏུ	upon/ towards; (directly) in the immediacy of; exactly; amidst, upon, in, on, on top of, into, above, over, through, with, when. see also {thog}	thog tu
ཐོག་ཏུ་ཁེལ	come to fruition; x {de ltar 'das ma 'ongs kyi rtog tshogs mang po thog tu khel dus med cing} such dreams about the past and the future will never come to fruition	thog tu khel
ཐོག་ཏུ་གྲོལ	liberated directly	thog tu grol
ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅད	decide	thog tu bcad
ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ	to directly continue	thog tu bca'
ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ་བ	gaining	thog tu bca' ba
ཐོག་ཏུ་དྲན་པ	embraced by mindfulness	thog tu dran pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕབ་པ	to communicate the real meaning	thog tu phab pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕོག་པ	relevant	thog tu phog pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་འཕྲོད་པ	recognizing	thog tu 'phrod pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་བབ	encounter, sudden	thog tu bab
ཐོག་ཏུ་བབ་པ	{thog tu 'bebs pa} to (be of) immediate concern/ concern for the moment	thog tu bab pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་བབས	to descend on one, happen to one	thog tu babs
ཐོག་ཏུ་བབས་པ	befall, happen to oneself	thog tu babs pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་བྲིས་པ	written on top of	thog tu bris pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་འབབ	bring what you want; x {bsam pa'i thog tu mi 'bab 'dod 'dun skyungs} they will never bring what you want. Limit your desires and aspirations	thog tu 'bab
ཐོག་ཏུ་འབབ་པ	encountered sudden	thog tu 'bab pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་འབབས་པ	encountered, sudden	thog tu 'babs pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་འབེབས་པ	{thog tu bab pa} to (be of) immediate concern/ concern for the moment	thog tu 'bebs pa
ཐོག་ཏུ་མ་ཁེལ	fail to bring into, not directly get in	thog tu ma khel
ཐོག་ཏུ་མི་ཁེལ	not hit on the point, miss the point	thog tu mi khel
ཐོག་ཏུ་ཤོར་བ	straying into	thog tu shor ba
ཐོག་གཏུགས	relationships between	thog gtugs
ཐོག་ལྟར	lightning-quick	thog ltar
ཐོག་ལྟར་བྱུང་བ	strikes like lightning	thog ltar byung ba
ཐོག་ཐ་བར་གསུམ	first & last & middle, initial & final & intermediate	thog tha bar gsum
ཐོག་ཐག	[Mtshan thog thag tu bsgugs pa.Lam gyi thog thag tsang mar bde bgrod byung.Mtshan thog thag tu ngu zhing bsdad] during [all of], as long as, throughout, quite, all, from beginning to end, w/o excep...	thog thag
ཐོག་ཐོག	1) sound like hitting a rock w a hammer; 2) [arch] 1st	thog thog
ཐོག་ཐོག་ན	in the very beginning	thog thog na
ཐོག་མཐའ	beginning to/& end, 1st and last, from above to below, all, w/o exception	thog mtha'
ཐོག་མཐའ་འགྱུར་མེད	w/o beginning, end or change, entirely changeless	thog mtha' 'gyur med
ཐོག་མཐའ་གཉིས	the first and the last	thog mtha' gnyis
ཐོག་མཐའ་དུས་མེད	no beginning or end	thog mtha' dus med
ཐོག་མཐའ་བར	beginning, middle, end	thog mtha' bar
ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་མེད	without beginning, middle, or end	thog mtha' bar med
ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ	at all times, from beginning to end, from first to last [lit. beginning, end, middle]	thog mtha' bar gsum
ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ་དུ	all the time	thog mtha' bar gsum du
ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ་དུ་དགེ་བ	good at the beginning middle and end [tse] thog mtha' bar gsum du 'bad brtson lhod	thog mtha' bar gsum du dge ba
ཐོག་མཐའ་དབུས་མེད	w/o beginning, middle, or end	thog mtha' dbus med
ཐོག་མཐའ་མེད་པ	beginningless and endless	thog mtha' med pa
ཐོག་མཐའ་མེད་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	beginningless obscuration	thog mtha' med pa'i sgrib pa
ཐོག་མཐའ་མེད་པའི་དུས	time w/o beginning and end 1199	thog mtha' med pa'i dus
ཐོག་མཐའ་ཚང་མ	from beginning to end	thog mtha' tshang ma
ཐོག་དང་དྲག་ཆར	thunder shower	thog dang drag char
ཐོག་དུ	on the basis of; right within; right on; right with	thog du
ཐོག་དུ་ཚང་བ	to be contained within	thog du tshang ba
ཐོག་དྲག་པོ	much/ great thunder/ lightning	thog drag po
ཐོག་དྲངས	[Kho rang gis thog drangs pa'i mi lnga brgya tham pa.Rta gcig gis thog drangs nas rta mang po bshar.Bzo pas thog drangs pa'i ngal rtsol mi dmangs, p. of {thog 'dren} led/ headed by	thog drangs
ཐོག་དྲངས་པ	led [by]	thog drangs pa
ཐོག་དྲུང	far and near [time], upper and lower, above and below, high and low	thog drung
ཐོག་མདའ	thunderbolt	thog mda'
ཐོག་མདེལ	gnam lcags thunderbolt, meteor?	thog mdel
ཐོག་འདམ	mud/ concrete [to be] put on the roof of a building	thog 'dam
ཐོག་འདྲེན	to lead, direct	thog 'dren
ཐོག་འདྲེན་པ	be at the head, lead	thog 'dren pa
ཐོག་རྡིབ	roof of a house falling	thog rdib
ཐོག་རྡིབ་པ	roof gives way	thog rdib pa
ཐོག་རྡུག་མེད་པ	unobstructed, penetrating	thog rdug med pa
ཐོག་རྡོ	thog brgyab shul gyi rdo	thog rdo
ཐོག་ལྡན	thunder	thog ldan
ཐོག་བརྡིབས	have the roof fall in	thog brdibs
ཐོག་ནས	along, above, more than, via, from on top of	thog nas
ཐོག་གནས་བཟོ་པ	casual worker	thog gnas bzo pa
ཐོག་པ	brandish, wield, hold up	thog pa
ཐོག་པ་མེད	unobstructed, unhindered, not obstructed	thog pa med
ཐོག་པང	1) ceiling [on the inner surface of a building pang leb bsgrigs pa'i thog]; 2) tshem bu 'khor lo'i sgang gi lag gdan gyi shing	thog pang
ཐོག་པའི་ཀ་དག་ཆེན་པོ	primordial great alpha purity, primordial purity of the beginning	thog pa'i ka dag chen po
ཐོག་དཔངས	khang pa'i nang logs mtho tshad	thog dpangs
ཐོག་ཕིབས	roof	thog phibs
ཐོག་ཕུད	first fruit (as an offering), offering of first fruits of harvest	thog phud
ཐོག་ཕུབ	ceiling	thog phub
ཐོག་བབས	surprise	thog babs
ཐོག་བབས་ཆེན་པོ	supreme and innate (state of) immediacy	thog babs chen po
ཐོག་བབས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of the great (lightning-like suddenness	thog babs chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
ཐོག་བབས་ཆེན་པོའི་སེམས་ཉིད་ལ	within the mind of the great (lightning-like suddenness	thog babs chen po'i sems nyid la
ཐོག་བབས་པ	[surprise] lightning-strike, thunderbolt	thog babs pa
ཐོག་བབས་སུ	sudden, direct	thog babs su
ཐོག་བབས་སུ་འབྱོན	arrive quickly	thog babs su 'byon
ཐོག་བབས་སུ་འབྱོན་པ	approach suddenly like lightning	thog babs su 'byon pa
ཐོག་བུ	[arch] 'bras bu	thog bu
ཐོག་བུར	upper bolt	thog bur
ཐོག་བོར	[arch] thog nyams pa	thog bor
ཐོག་བྱུང	suddenly, arisen suddenly	thog byung
ཐོག་དབུབ	roof, covering, ceiling	thog dbub
ཐོག་འབབ་པ	lightning descending	thog 'bab pa
ཐོག་འབུབས	dome (of mansion)	thog 'bubs
ཐོག་འབུབས་པ	put up a roof	thog 'bubs pa
ཐོག་འབེབས	direct entry into understanding	thog 'bebs
ཐོག་མ	* beginning, primordial, origin[al], initially, at 1st [occurrence of], what is uppermost, the upper end, the uppermost place	thog ma
ཐོག་མ་སྐྱེས	first born, eldest brother, brahman caste	thog ma skyes
ཐོག་མ་ཁ་ནར	first of all	thog ma kha nar
ཐོག་མ་ཁོ་ན	first of all	thog ma kho na
ཐོག་མ་ཁོ་ནར	1st of all	thog ma kho nar
ཐོག་མ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཀ་དག	the primordial purity of the very beginning	thog ma nyid kyi ka dag
ཐོག་མ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དག	primordial alphapurity	thog ma nyid kyi dag
ཐོག་མ་ཉིད་ནས	from the very beginning/ 1st	thog ma nyid nas
ཐོག་མ་ཉིད་ནས་བཟུང	from the very beginning/ 1st	thog ma nyid nas bzung
ཐོག་མ་དང་ཐ་མ་མེད་པ	beginningless and endless	thog ma dang tha ma med pa
ཐོག་མ་དང་ཐ་མེད་པ	beginningless and endless thog ma dang tha med pa stong pa nyid beginningless endless emptiness thog ma dang mtha' ma med pa'i stong pa	thog ma dang tha med pa
ཐོག་མ་ནས	from the beginning	thog ma nas
ཐོག་མ་ནས་དག་པ	pure from the beginning	thog ma nas dag pa
ཐོག་མ་ནས་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	primordial nirvana	thog ma nas mya ngan las 'das pa
ཐོག་མ་ནས་བཟུང	from the very beginning/ 1st	thog ma nas bzung
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པ	beginningless	thog ma med pa
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པའི་འཁོར་བ	beginningless samsara, samsara without beginning 1200	thog ma med pa'i 'khor ba
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པའི་དུས	time without beginning	thog ma med pa'i dus
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པའི་དུས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས	basic space of beginningless time	thog ma med pa'i dus kyi dbyings
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པའི་དུས་ནས	since time w/o beginning, from beginningless time	thog ma med pa'i dus nas
ཐོག་མའི	primal, original; basic, initial, first; of or pertaining to the / a beginning, introductory, inceptive	thog ma'i
ཐོག་མའི་ཀ་དག	primordial alpha-purity	thog ma'i ka dag
ཐོག་མའི་སྐབས	in the beginning, at 1st	thog ma'i skabs
ཐོག་མའི་སྐར་མ	1) astr star in which a job begins; 2) 1st constellation of the {rgyu skar nyer brgyad} {3 Skar ma zhig	thog ma'i skar ma
ཐོག་མའི་མགོན	primordial lord	thog ma'i mgon
ཐོག་མའི་མགོན་པོ	original guide	thog ma'i mgon po
ཐོག་མའི་མགོན་པོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	the primordial lord Samantabhadra thog ma'i mgon po kun tu bzang po Original Lord Samantabhadra	thog ma'i mgon po kun tu bzang po
ཐོག་མའི་རྒྱུ་ཆ	raw material	thog ma'i rgyu cha
ཐོག་མའི་ཉིན་ཚད	length of the day when a planet etc 1st enters an astr house	thog ma'i nyin tshad
ཐོག་མའི་མཐའ་མེད་པ	beginningless, limitless in the past	thog ma'i mtha' med pa
ཐོག་མའི་དུས	in the beginning, at 1st	thog ma'i dus
ཐོག་མའི་དཔྱད་ཞིབ	preview	thog ma'i dpyad zhib
ཐོག་མའི་འཕྲུལ་གཞི	initial ground of confusion	thog ma'i 'phrul gzhi
ཐོག་མའི་བྱེད་པ	first rites, duties at the outset	thog ma'i byed pa
ཐོག་མའི་བྱེད་པོ	cause, seed	thog ma'i byed po
ཐོག་མའི་དབྱིངས	original basic space; basic space as/ at the source	thog ma'i dbyings
ཐོག་མའི་དབྱིངས་བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	[the] primordial space [of/,] sugatagarbha	thog ma'i dbyings bde bar gshegs pa'i snying po
ཐོག་མའི་མ་ཡིག	1st draft	thog ma'i ma yig
ཐོག་མའི་མ་རིག་པ	primordial ignorance [bdag tu rmongs pa'i ma rig pa]	thog ma'i ma rig pa
ཐོག་མའི་སྨན་བཅོས	1st medical examination	thog ma'i sman bcos
ཐོག་མའི་རྩོམ	1st literary work/ composition	thog ma'i rtsom
ཐོག་མའི་གཞི	primordial basis	thog ma'i gzhi
ཐོག་མའི་གཞིའི་གནས་ལུགས	primordial ground nature	thog ma'i gzhi'i gnas lugs
ཐོག་མའི་ཡུལ་མི	aborigine	thog ma'i yul mi
ཐོག་མའི་རི	shar ri	thog ma'i ri
ཐོག་མའི་ལོ་མ	newly opened [tree] leaf	thog ma'i lo ma
ཐོག་མའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the Primordial Buddha, Adibuddha	thog ma'i sangs rgyas
ཐོག་མར	first	thog mar
ཐོག་མར་སྐྱེས་པ	1) bhramin; 2) oldest sibling/ child	thog mar skyes pa
ཐོག་མར་གལ་ཆེ་བའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion which is important at the beginning	thog mar gal che ba'i snying rje
ཐོག་མར་དགེ་བ	initial benefit; bar du	thog mar dge ba
ཐོག་མར་འབྱེད	initiate, introduce, at 1st, from the beginning, foremost	thog mar 'byed
ཐོག་མེད	beginningless	thog med
ཐོག་མེད་ཀྱི་མཁྱེན་པ	beginningless knowing	thog med kyi mkhyen pa
ཐོག་མེད་དུས	from beginningless time, primordially	thog med dus
ཐོག་མེད་དུས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཁམས་དགེ་བ	*	thog med dus kyi chos khams dge ba
བི༹རྟུཨོཨུས་ཌྷརྨ	nature of beginningless time	virtuous Dharma
ཐོག་མེད་དུས་ཀྱི་མུན་ཆེན	great darkness of beginningless time	thog med dus kyi mun chen
ཐོག་མེད་དུས་ཀྱི་མུན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Great darkness of beginningless time. Primordial ignorance perpetuated in the minds of sentient beings	thog med dus kyi mun pa chen po
ཐོག་མེད་དུས་ནས	from beginningless time thog med dus nas nga ni khyod kyi mgon - I have been yur protector from beginningless time	thog med dus nas
ཐོག་མེད་ནས	MSS; from beginningless time. [mss]	thog med nas
ཐོག་མེད་ཟློས་གར་འཁྲབ་ར	thang sder lta bu'i zlos gar do ra	thog med zlos gar 'khrab ra
ཐོག་མེད་རང་བཞིན་གནས་པ	beginningless natural presence, naturally present since beginningless time	thog med rang bzhin gnas pa
ཐོག་མེད་ཨི་སྤྱི་གཞི	the primordial common ground	thog med i spyi gzhi
ཐོག་བཙེགས	khang thog khang brtsegs	thog btsegs
ཐོག་བཙེགས་ཁང་ཆེན	large building w many stories	thog btsegs khang chen
ཐོག་རྩེ	roof	thog rtse
ཐོག་རྩེག	story	thog rtseg
ཐོག་རྩེགས་གཅིག་ལྷག	more than one floor in size	thog rtsegs gcig lhag
ཐོག་བརྩེག	storey of house	thog brtseg
ཐོག་བརྩེགས	khang thog khang brtsegs	thog brtsegs
ཐོག་བརྩེགས་ཁང་ཆེན	large building w many stories	thog brtsegs khang chen
ཐོག་བརྩེགས་གསུམ་ཅན	3-storied	thog brtsegs gsum can
ཐོག་ཚ་དཔའ་བོ	section of sa skya ruling family	thog tsha dpa' bo
ཐོག་ཚད	story	thog tshad
ཐོག་ཚད་མ	wall-sized	thog tshad ma
ཐོག་རྫིས	stamping	thog rdzis
སྤྱོད	fearlessly practicing the yogic discipline of stamping on them]	spyod
ཐོག་རྫིས་ཀྱི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	the yogic discipline of stamping on them [calamity and fear]	thog rdzis kyi brtul zhugs
ཐོག་རྫིས་གཏོང་བ	beating earth on roof	thog rdzis gtong ba
ཐོག་བརྫི	1) despise, condemn; 2) have little regard for, take no account of; 3) w/o care for disaster do just as 1 likes	thog brdzi
ཐོག་བརྫིས	to directly subjugate	thog brdzis
ཐོག་ཟེར	thunderbolt	thog zer
ཐོག་ཟློག	1) thog gi gnod pa sel ba; 2) white stone w no color variations	thog zlog
ཐོག་ཡན་ཆད་དུ	from then onward	thog yan chad du
ཐོག་ཡོལ	1) thog ldebs kyi yol ba; 2) canopy	thog yol
ཐོག་རས	nang thog la bkab pa'i ras = gnam gdan	thog ras
ཐོག་རི་འཇོམས	thunder, the weapon of Indra	thog ri 'joms
ཐོག་རིམ	story of a building	thog rim
ཐོག་རིམ་ལྔ་པ	5th story	thog rim lnga pa
ཐོག་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	three stories	thog rim pa gsum
ཐོག་རུས	bones of being killed by lightning	thog rus
ཐོག་ལ	on, over, upon	thog la
ཐོག་ཤས	by field owner the harvest of the sharecropper dividing pa'i 'bab	thog shas
ཐོག་ཤོག	roofing paper	thog shog
ཐོག་ས	storey of house	thog sa
ཐོག་ས་གཉིས་པ	second floor	thog sa gnyis pa
ཐོག་སེར	hail and thunderbolts	thog ser
ཐོག་སེར་རྒོད	severe hail and thunderbolts	thog ser rgod
ཐོག་སོ	story, level	thog so
ཐོག་སོ་བརྒྱད	eight storeys	thog so brgyad
ཐོག་ལྷུང་བ	roof of a house/ thunderbolt falling	thog lhung ba
ཐོགས	carry; x {gdugs dang mkhar ba mtshon thogs dang} who carry canes, weapons and parasols	thogs
ཐོགས་འགག	obstacle, hindrance, obstruction	thogs 'gag
ཐོགས་སྒྲིབ	obscuring obstruction	thogs sgrib
ཐོགས་བཅག	obstructive	thogs bcag
ཐོགས་བཅས	with obstruction or impediments	thogs bcas
ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	obstructive matter	thogs bcas kyi dngos po
ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་བདུད	obstructed demons	thogs bcas kyi bdud
ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	obstructive physical forms	thogs bcas kyi gzugs
ཐོགས་བཅས་ཀྱི་ལུས	obstructive body	thogs bcas kyi lus
ཐོགས་བཅས་བདུད	substantial demons, obstructible. obstructed demons	thogs bcas bdud
ཐོགས་བཅས་རགས་པ	[tse]	thogs bcas rags pa
ཐོགས་ཐུག་མེད་པ	without hindrance / obstruction, unobstructed	thogs thug med pa
ཐོགས་མཐའ	thogs bcas kyi mtha'a	thogs mtha'
ཐོགས་དྲངས་པ	headed by	thogs drangs pa
ཐོགས་རྡུག་མེད་པ	unobstructed, penetrating, unhindered, w/o difficulty	thogs rdug med pa
ཐོགས་རྡུགས་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from obstruction	thogs rdugs dang bral ba
ཐོགས་བརྡུགས	hindrance	thogs brdugs
ཐོགས་བརྡུགས་མེད	= {thogs pa med}/{thogs med}	thogs brdugs med
ཐོགས་བརྡུགས་མེད་པ	w/o difficulty, unhindered	thogs brdugs med pa
ཐོགས་པ	1) to hold, brandish. 2) to impede. 3) obstruction, resistance, obstacle, impediment. Syn {thogs thung med pa} 4) to strike, stumble, run against, to be hindered, impeded, delayed; to be impeded, o...	thogs pa
ཐོགས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	obstructed	thogs pa dang bcas pa
ཐོགས་པ་ཕན་ཚུན་དང་བཅས་པ	mutually obstructive	thogs pa phan tshun dang bcas pa
ཐོགས་པ་མི་མངའ	totally unhindered	thogs pa mi mnga'
ཐོགས་པ་མི་མངའི	having no obstruction	thogs pa mi mnga'i
ཐོགས་པ་མེད	limitless, SA chen po lnga,	thogs pa med
ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	not limited by material obstacles [ggd]	thogs pa med pa
ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པའི	unobstructed	thogs pa med pa'i
ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	beginningless wisdom	thogs pa med pa'i ye shes
ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པར	without delay	thogs pa med par
ཐོགས་པ་གསུམ	depending on the eye etc the khams bco brgyad phye ba three obstructions/ types of obstructiveness [1) sgrib pa'i thogs pa, 2) yul la thogs pa, 3) dmigs pa la thogs ste gsum]	thogs pa gsum
ཐོགས་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of obstruction	thogs pa'i sgrib pa
ཐོགས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of materiality	thogs pa'i 'du shes
ཐོགས་པའི་རེག་པ	reg pa'i tsogs drug po las mig gi 'dus te reg pa la sogs pa thogs bcas kyi dbang po lnga la brten pa'o, dper na mig gi 'dus te reg pa ni, mig gi dbang po dang gzugs dang mig gi rnam shes gsum 'dus ...	thogs pa'i reg pa
ཐོགས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	be obstructed	thogs par 'gyur ba
ཐོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	v. to impede	thogs par byed pa
ཐོགས་སྦྱོར་མོས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ས	the level of earnest aspiration that corresponds to the paths of accumulating and joining	thogs sbyor mos spyod kyi sa
ཐོགས་མའི་མགོན་པོ	primal lord protector; Samantabhadra	thogs ma'i mgon po
ཐོགས་མེད	indestructible; unhindered. Syn {thongs gshol} imp of {gtong} 1) not obstructive, unhindered, unimpeded, without difficulty. 2) Asanga	thogs med
ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་བདུད	unobstructed demons	thogs med kyi bdud
ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	unobstructible form	thogs med kyi gzugs
ཐོགས་མེད་སྐུ་མཆེད	Asanga and his brother	thogs med sku mched
ཐོགས་མེད་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	unobstructed ayatanas	thogs med skye mched
ཐོགས་མེད་དུ་ཤེས་པ	know unobstructedly	thogs med du shes pa
ཐོགས་མེད་བདུད	insubstantial, unobstructable demons	thogs med bdud
ཐོགས་མེད་པ	unobstructed, unhindered	thogs med pa
ཐོགས་མེད་སྤྱན	unhindered vision/ sight	thogs med spyan
ཐོགས་མེད་ཤེས་རབ	unobstructed prajna	thogs med shes rab
ཐོགས་རེག	[tse] thogs reg dang bcas pa'i dngos po touchable obstructive thing	thogs reg
ཐོང	1) [gtong ba!] abandon! let go!; 2) [arch] plow	thong
ཐོང་ཀ	breast	thong ka
ཐོང་སྐལ	sa zhing gi bogs ma	thong skal
ཐོང་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	products	thong skyed kyi dngos po
ཐོང་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ཐབས་ཚུལ	productive methods	thong skyed kyi thabs tshul
ཐོང་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	struggle for production	thong skyed kyi 'thab rtsod
ཐོང་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་འདོད་པོ	productive morale	thong skyed kyi 'dod po
ཐོང་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationships of production	thong skyed kyi 'brel ba
ཐོང་ཁ	thong ga	thong kha
ཐོང་ཁོར	dense, thick	thong khor
ཐོང་མཁན	plowman	thong mkhan
ཐོང་ག	1) chest [Stag mo rdung dus thong ga nas ma 'dzin]; 2) Sa bogs	thong ga
ཐོང་གོས	clothes in a leather trunk	thong gos
ཐོང་ལྕགས	iron of the plough share, share of tibetan plough, SA gshol	thong lcags
ཐོང་ཐིང་རྒྱལ་མོ	Tonting Gyalmo, Gaurishankar. See Azure Queen Mountain	thong thing rgyal mo
ཐོང་ཐོང	age, lang tso dar bab	thong thong
ཐོང་པ	1) three year old stallion/ ram; 2) plow[man]	thong pa
ཐོང་པའི་འཆང་བཟུང	plough, hold the plough	thong pa'i 'chang bzung
ཐོང་པའི་ལོ	juvenile years	thong pa'i lo
ཐོང་པོ	plough	thong po
ཐོང་སྤུ	mane of the camel	thong spu
ཐོང་བ	(tha mi dad pa gtong ba dang don mthun gyi bya byed tha mi dad pa'i las tshig cig ste, gzhan la skad btang nas thos pa la skad thong ba dang, skad btang nas ma thos pa la skad ma thong ba, khrims b...	thong ba
ཐོང་མི་བ	[arch] 1) gsod par 'dod pa; 2) gshed ma	thong mi ba
ཐོང་མྱི	[arch] dgra sha len par yong mkhan gyi mi	thong myi
ཐོང་ཙེར	three year old colt/ sheep	thong tser
ཐོང་རྩ	ske stong tsa ra khung nas gyen du tson gang gzhal ba'i sar yod pa'i gtar rtsa zhig ste, de gtar na snying la tsa ba zhugs pa dang, glo lu ba, dbugs gtong mi bde ba sogs la phan	thong rtsa
ཐོང་རྩེ	brang khog gi mgo	thong rtse
ཐོང་འཛིན	1) plowman; 2) Tibetan lam yig thog tu rta khal skul 'ded chog 'thus rdzong dpon gyis bkod pa'i mchan 'dzin	thong 'dzin
ཐོང་ཞིག	let him send	thong zhig
ཐོང་ཞིག་འཛིན	yokes the plow 1203	thong zhig 'dzin
ཐོང་འོག	lus kyi thong ga ste below the chest	thong 'og
ཐོང་གཤོལ	plow	thong gshol
པློཨུགྷ	share, plough	plough
ཐོང་གཤོལ་ཅན	one who ploughs, tiller of the soil thong gshol lcags gnyis 'khor gnyis ma plow w two wheels and plowshares	thong gshol can
ཐོང་གཤོལ་ལྕགས་གཉིས་མ	doubleshared plough	thong gshol lcags gnyis ma
ཐོང་སོ	plowshare tip	thong so
ཐོངས	abandoning. {skyur la thongs} cast away; (imp. gtang) send, dispatch!/let go; let go/ throw	thongs
ཐོངས་འཛིན	receipt	thongs 'dzin
ཐོད	1) head wrapper, turban; 2) above, over; 3) head- ornament, crown; 4) skull; 5) skull-cup] [Skt] kapala; 5) forehead	thod
ཐོད་ཀོར	1) yi ge'i thod kyi klad skor; 2) hat worn n Tibetan opera= Lha mo 'khrab	thod kor
ཐོད་དཀར	opening for smoke in a roof	thod dkar
ཐོད་དཀར་པོ	white skull	thod dkar po
ཐོད་དཀར་བོང་མིག	ram with a white head with circles of black hairs around the eyes	thod dkar bong mig
ཐོད་དཀྲིས	1) mgo dkris pa; 2) substance to be wrapped around the head	thod dkris
ཐོད་སྐམ	a dried skull; dry skulls	thod skam
ཐོད་སྐམ་གྱི་དབུ་རྒྱན	skull crown, crown of dry skulls	thod skam gyi dbu rgyan
ཐོད་སྐམ་གྱི་དབུ་རྒྱན་ལྔ	the five skulls of the crown	thod skam gyi dbu rgyan lnga
ཐོད་སྐམ་གྱི་དབུ་བརྒྱན	his head is crowned by dry skulls	thod skam gyi dbu brgyan
ཐོད་སྐམ་ལྔ	five dry skulls	thod skam lnga
ཐོད་སྐམ་པོ	dry skull	thod skam po
ཐོད་སྐམ་རིགས་རྒྱན	head ornament of five dry skulls	thod skam rigs rgyan
ཐོད་ཁེབས	cover, outside cover, hood	thod khebs
ཐོད་ཁྲག	skull filled w blood	thod khrag
ཐོད་འཁུར	bka' rtsi spyi 'khur byed pa. bka' don thod 'khur dang len gyis las don hur brtson byed pa	thod 'khur
ཐོད་དགུ་རུས་དགུ	nine skulls and nine bones	thod dgu rus dgu
ཐོད་རྒལ	1) w stages skipped/ out of order, bypass [gradual steps], skip the grades; 2) All-surpassing realization of spontaneous presence [gd]; 3) [instantaneous] passing over, by passing [lit. to for the ...	thod rgal
སཏར	-thod - forehead; rgal - transcending; so, "transcending from the level of the forehead or peak]	str
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	[tse]	thod rgal gyi snyoms 'jug
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	the equanimity of thogal	thod rgal gyi snyoms par 'jug pa
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་ཐིག་ལེ་ཐིག་ཕྲན	Major and minor circles of thogal	thod rgal gyi thig le thig phran
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་དམ་ཚིག	the samaya of thogal	thod rgal gyi dam tshig
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་གདམས་པ	instruction in Direct crossing/ thogal	thod rgal gyi gdams pa
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	the atoms of thogal	thod rgal gyi rdul phran
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	Tögal experiences / visions	thod rgal gyi snang ba
ཐོད་རྒལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ་བཞི	Four visions of Tögal	thod rgal gyi snang ba bzhi
ཐོད་རྒལ་ཆེ་བ	angry, wrathful	thod rgal che ba
ཐོད་རྒལ་དུ་སྙིང་ལ་བབས་པ	direct awakening [of the view] in the heart	thod rgal du snying la babs pa
ཐོད་རྒལ་དུ་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	w/o relying on meditation on steps of samadhi/ ting 'dzin or meditation mnyam par 'jog pa' meditate in a way transcending them	thod rgal du snyoms par 'jug pa
ཐོད་རྒལ་བ	skipping-the-grades type, practicer of thod rgal, a person who is in the state sometimes but loses it when a strong secondary cause arises, the person who jumps over the stages and sometimes finds ...	thod rgal ba
ཐོད་རྒལ་བའི་རིགས	Skipping the grades type. People whose qualities of experience and realization increase or decrease without sequential order	thod rgal ba'i rigs
ཐོད་རྒལ་ཚུལ	the discipline of the crossing over practice. 1) {don dngos gzhi rang rgyud la ji ltar gzhugs tshul} the main section concerning the manner of abiding of ones nature. 2) {de nyid nyams len gyis mng...	thod rgal tshul
ཐོད་རྒྱན	head ornament	thod rgyan
སྐུལལ	garland, head-garland. lit. hearth of skulls, skull ornament	skull
ཐོད་རྒྱལ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ་བཞི	four visions of Tögal practice	thod rgyal kyi snang ba bzhi
ཐོད་རྒྱལ་དུ	crowning assault	thod rgyal du
ཐོད་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྙོམས་འཇུག	the equanimity of thogal	thod rgyal du snyoms 'jug
ཐོད་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྙོམས་འཇུག་པ	the equanimity of thogal	thod rgyal du snyoms 'jug pa
ཐོད་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྙོམས་འཇུགས་པ	the equanimity of thogal	thod rgyal du snyoms 'jugs pa
ཐོད་སྒོར	Tibetan lha lcam tsho'i hat-like head ornament of pearls	thod sgor
ཐོད་སྒྱེད	a skull-stand; skull-stand, hearth of skulls	thod sgyed
ཐོད་བརྒལ་བ	"passing over," [meditative absorbtion in which 1 1st passes through the four dhyanas and four arupyas then back]	thod brgal ba
ཐོད་རྔ	skull-drum	thod rnga
ཐོད་ཅོག	topknot	thod cog
ཐོད་བཅིངས	turban	thod bcings
ཐོད་ཆ	upper part/ level	thod cha
ཐོད་ཆང	Liquor from the skull; refers to the amrita kapala and the feast liquor kapala; also called vessel for Liquor (ma da na'i snod - chang snod)	thod chang
ཐོད་ཆིངས	cloth to be wrapped around the head, turban	thod chings
ཐོད་མཆོངས	jump upward	thod mchongs
ཐོད་མཆོངས་རྒྱག་པ	jump upward	thod mchongs rgyag pa
ཐོད་གཏུགས	counterbalancing	thod gtugs
ཐོད་གཏུགས་བྱེད	counterbalance	thod gtugs byed
ཐོད་ཐུག	1) thad kar phrad pa; 2) Ra 'phrod pa; 3) touch heads (	thod thug
ཐོད་ཐུན	skull tün	thod thun
ཐོད་ཐོད	SA su	thod thod
ཐོད་པ	1) Kapala skull; 2) merit, luck *, a dry skull, skull-cup, cranium, death's head [tse] [Skt]	thod pa
ཐོད་པ་དཀར་པོ	good luck/ merit	thod pa dkar po
ཐོད་པ་སྐམ་རློན་རྙིང་གསུམ	three severed heads: a dried-up one, a rotten one, and a fresh one	thod pa skam rlon rnying gsum
ཐོད་པ་སྐོམ་པོ	dry skulls	thod pa skom po
ཐོད་པ་བསྐམས་རློན	(garlands of) dried and fresh skulls	thod pa bskams rlon
ཐོད་པ་ངན་པ	bad luck/ merit	thod pa ngan pa
ཐོད་པ་ཅང་ཏེའུ	skull cup and a chang	thod pa cang te'u
ཐོད་པ་ཅན	Chakrasamvara	thod pa can
ཐོད་པ་ལྟག་སྤྲོད	skull damarus with skulls joined together at their back	thod pa ltag sprod
ཐོད་པ་རྡོའི་ངོས་ལྟ་བུ	on the forehead like a stone	thod pa rdo'i ngos lta bu
ཐོད་པ་བུམ་རིལ	complete / whole skull	thod pa bum ril
ཐོད་པ་བོར་ཆོག་མ	to cast aside once and for all; x {da res kyi skye ba 'dir thod pa bor chog ma zhig byas chog} this gives you an opportunity here and now in this very life to cast rebirth aside once and for all	thod pa bor chog ma
ཐོད་པ་བོར་ཆོག་མ་བྱས་ཆོག	to lose one's life	thod pa bor chog ma byas chog
ཐོད་པ་མཚན་ངན	a skullcup with evil properties	thod pa mtshan ngan
ཐོད་པ་རློན་པ	freshly severed human head	thod pa rlon pa
ཐོད་པ་ཨི་དབུ་རྒྱན	skull crown	thod pa i dbu rgyan
ཐོད་པང	steng la gyog rgyu'i pang leb	thod pang
ཐོད་པའི་ཁང་པ	mansion of skulls	thod pa'i khang pa
ཐོད་པའི་དུམ་བུ	Skull Pieces	thod pa'i dum bu
ཐོད་པའི་སྣོད	skull vessels	thod pa'i snod
ཐོད་པའི་ཕྲེང་བ	a garland of skulls	thod pa'i phreng ba
ཐོད་པའི་དབང	skull cup initiation [abhisheka]	thod pa'i dbang
ཐོད་པའི་དབུ་རྒྱན	skull crown	thod pa'i dbu rgyan
ཐོད་པས་མ་འཆུན	dbang du ma 'dus pa'i don [Bu de thod pas ma 'chun]	thod pas ma 'chun
ཐོད་དཔང	hairline or forehead	thod dpang
ཐོད་ཕོར	skull cup, vessel "wheel ??	thod phor
ཐོད་ཕྲེང	1) mi mgo'i thod pa las dras pa'i rus phreng; 2) garland of skulls/ human heads	thod phreng
ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Tötreng Tsal. The secret name of Guru Rinpoche and also the long Guru Rinpoche mantra in the context of Trinley Nyingpo 1205	thod phreng rtsal
ཐོད་འཕྲེང་རྩལ	name of guru pema	thod 'phreng rtsal
ཐོད་བུམ	a skull with a vase	thod bum
ཐོད་དབྱུག	skull-ornamented mace	thod dbyug
ཐོད་མོ་ཁོར	conch shell species	thod mo khor
ཐོད་མོ་ཁོར་གྱི་ཕྱེ་མ	lime wash for walls	thod mo khor gyi phye ma
ཐོད་གཙུགས	topknot	thod gtsugs
ཐོད་རྩ	vena frontalis	thod rtsa
ཐོད་ཚལ	skull fragments	thod tshal
ཐོད་ཞལ	skull cup	thod zhal
ཐོད་རས	turban	thod ras
ཐོད་རུས	skull	thod rus
ཐོད་རློན	fresh skull	thod rlon
ཐོད་རློན་པ	wet/ fresh skull	thod rlon pa
ཐོད་ལ	atop	thod la
ཐོད་ལ་སྤང་རི་འདུག	above there is a meadow	thod la spang ri 'dug
ཐོད་ལེ་ཀོར	alabaster, {tho le kor, {ha shig ???	thod le kor
ཐོད་ལེ་དཀར	chalk, conch shell species	thod le dkar
ཐོད་ལེ་དཀར་གྱི	powder	thod le dkar gyi
ཐོད་ལེ་དཀར་གྱི་ཕྱེ་མ	lime wash	thod le dkar gyi phye ma
ཐོད་ལེ་སྐོད	alabaster	thod le skod
ཐོན	landed	thon
ཐོན་ཀ	greenish-blue	thon ka
ཐོན་ཀྲང	regimental commander	thon krang
ཐོན་སྐོར	sa zhing gi thon 'bab rtsi lugs.Bod kyi zhing kha sa 'bring nas lo rer ston 'bras thon skor bcu gnyis 'bab tsam re thon srol 'dug	thon skor
ཐོན་སྐྱེད	production, growth, output, production	thon skyed
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	productive power/ productivity	thon skyed kyi stobs shugs
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	productive power/ forces	thon skyed kyi nus shugs
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚོད	productivity	thon skyed kyi tshod
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས་འགན	production quota/ obligation	thon skyed kyi las 'gan
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཆད	productivity, production rate	thon skyed kyi las chad
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་མཁས་པ	production expert	thon skyed mkhas pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་གོང་འཕེལ	development/ improvement/ advance in production	thon skyed gong 'phel
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་འགྲན་བསྡུར	labor emulation, production race	thon skyed 'gran bsdur
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རྒྱུ་ཆས	means of production	thon skyed rgyu chas
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ངལ་རྩོལ	production labor	thon skyed ngal rtsol
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་སྔོན་ཐོག་མཁན	outstanding worker/ producer	thon skyed sngon thog mkhan
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་སྔོན་ཐོག་པ	outstanding worker/ producer	thon skyed sngon thog pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཆག	decrease in production/ output	thon skyed chag
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཆུང་ངུ་བ	small producer thon skyed mchongs bskyod chen po the great leap forward in production	thon skyed chung ngu ba
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་འཆར་གཞི	production plan	thon skyed 'char gzhi
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཉམས་མྱོང	production experience	thon skyed nyams myong
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་མཉམ་ལས	cooperative production	thon skyed mnyam las
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	production cooperative	thon skyed mnyam las khang
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	productive power/ productivity	thon skyed stobs shugs
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་དང་བྲལ	to be diverted from production	thon skyed dang bral
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་དོ་དམ	production supervision/ control	thon skyed do dam
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ནུས་ཤུགས	productive power/ forces	thon skyed nus shugs
ཕྱོགས་ལ་རྣམ་གཉིས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	the similar class is universal and the dissimilar class both existing and not [from the phyogs chos gtan tshigs dgu, 1 of the dngos kyi ma nges pa'i rtags bzhi, rtags de gsal ba de'i mthun phyogs i...	phyogs la rnam gnyis su 'jug pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་སྤེལ་བ	increase production thon skyed spel ba dang mkha sprod 'gan	thon skyed spel ba
ལེན	develop production and guarantee supply	len
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བྱ་རིམ	production process	thon skyed bya rim
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	produce thon skyed byed stangs srid gzhung med	thon skyed byed
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་པ	produce	thon skyed byed pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཚུལ	way of production 1206	thon skyed byed tshul
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ལུགས	way of production	thon skyed byed lugs
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་འབྲེལ་བ	mi rnams kyis dngos po'i rgyu chas thon skyed byed pa'i brgyud rim nang chags pa'i spyi tsogs kyi 'brel ba la zer, der thon skyed rgyu chas dbang ba'i lam lugs kyi rnam pa dang, mi rnams kyis thon ...	thon skyed 'brel ba
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-productive	thon skyed ma yin pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་མེད་པ	infertile	thon skyed med pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཡོ་བྱད	means of production thon skyed yo byad dbang ba'i lam lugs system of ownership of the means of production/ capital goods	thon skyed yo byad
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཡོད་པ	fertile	thon skyed yod pa
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁག	production team	thon skyed ru khag
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཆེན	large division of production team/ work brigade	thon skyed ru chen
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་དཔུང	production team/ unit, work brigade	thon skyed ru dpung
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རོགས་རེས	mutual assistance in production	thon skyed rogs res
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ལ་བཞུགས	begin/ participate in production	thon skyed la bzhugs
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ལག་ཆ	implements/ tools of production	thon skyed lag cha
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ལག་རྩལ	production skill/ technique	thon skyed lag rtsal
ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ལུས་རྩལ	production skill/ technique	thon skyed lus rtsal
ཐོན་སྐྱེས	resources	thon skyes
ཐོན་སྐྱོད	departure	thon skyod
ཐོན་བསྐྱེས	progress, development	thon bskyes
ཐོན་ཁུངས	resources, how they are obtained	thon khungs
ཐོན་ཁུངས་ཀྱི་ཅ་ལག	resource articles	thon khungs kyi ca lag
ཐོན་གྲངས	amount/ rate/ level of production, yield, output	thon grangs
ཐོན་གྲངས་རྩི	calculate amount/ rate/ level of production/ yield/ output	thon grangs rtsi
ཐོན་གྲངས་རྩི་བའི་བཟོ་གྲྭ	piecework wages	thon grangs rtsi ba'i bzo grwa
ཐོན་གྲངས་བརྩིས་པའི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	piecework wages	thon grangs brtsis pa'i phogs thob
ཐོན་རྒྱུ	will reach [a certain age]	thon rgyu
ཐོན་སྒོ	source	thon sgo
ཐོན་སྒོ་བྱེད	utilize, exploit [resources]	thon sgo byed
ཐོན་དངོས	products	thon dngos
ཐོན་ལྕག	departing whipping	thon lcag
ཐོན་ཆས	products	thon chas
ཐོན་ཆེ	high yield	thon che
ཐོན་ཆེ་ལོ་ཏོག	high yield crops	thon che lo tog
ཐོན་རྗེས	after finishing	thon rjes
ཐོན་སྟངས	entrance stance (in dance)	thon stangs
ཐོན་སྟོན	farewell feast	thon ston
ཐོན་བརྟན་འབབ་ཆེ	stable high yield [crops]	thon brtan 'bab che
ཐོན་ཐི	{thun thi	thon thi
ཐོན་པ	left [such and such place]	thon pa
ཐོན་པའི	emersion	thon pa'i
ཐོན་པའི་རེས་ལ	at the time of	thon pa'i res la
ཐོན་པར་གྱིས	to bring forth	thon par gyis
ཐོན་དཔུང	regiment	thon dpung
ཐོན་སྤེལ	increasing production/ output	thon spel
ཐོན་སྤེལ་གྲོན་ཆུང	increase production and decrease expenses	thon spel gron chung
ཐོན་སྤེལ་གཏོང	increase production/ output	thon spel gtong
ཐོན་སྤེལ་སྤྱོད་མཁས	increase production and decrease expenses	thon spel spyod mkhas
ཐོན་སྤེལ་བྱེད	increase production/ output	thon spel byed
ཐོན་ཕྱག	taking leave, bidding farewell, farewell salutation/ prostrations	thon phyag
ཐོན་ཕྱག་ཞུ་བ	say goodbye, take leave	thon phyag zhu ba
ཐོན་འཕེལ	increasing production/ output	thon 'phel
ཐོན་འཕེལ་གྲོན་ཆུང	increase production and decrease expenses	thon 'phel gron chung
ཐོན་འཕེལ་གཏོང	increase production/ output	thon 'phel gtong
ཐོན་འཕེལ་སྤྱོད་མཁས	increase production and decrease expenses	thon 'phel spyod mkhas
ཐོན་འཕེལ་བྱེད	increase production/ output	thon 'phel byed
ཐོན་བབ	turned out, expelled	thon bab
ཐོན་བུ	1) scoop; 2) [arch] another's wife and 'grogs pa las skyes pa'i child	thon bu
ཐོན་བུ་བཙས་པ	[arch] dang por gsar du btsas pa	thon bu btsas pa
ཐོན་འབབ	yield, harvest	thon 'bab
ཐོན་འབོར	output, yield	thon 'bor
ཐོན་འབྲས	product	thon 'bras
ཐོན་མི	1) snye mo thon zer ba'i yul; 2) thon la gnas pa'i mi	thon mi
ཐོན་མི་སམ་བྷོ་ཏ	minister of srong btsan sgam po who framed tibetan characters, Thumi Sambhota	thon mi sam bho ta
ཡི་གེའི་སྲོལ་བཏོད	For the first time a Tibetan alphabet was introduced by Thonmi sambhota thon mis gsar du bzos pa'i bod yig drug the six Tibetan letters created by Thu mi Sambhota	yi ge'i srol btod
ཐོན་ཚད	output, yield, production level	thon tshad
ཐོན་ཚད་ཀྱི་རིན་གོང	output, yield/ production value	thon tshad kyi rin gong
ཐོན་ཚད་འགན་ལེན	responsibility for output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad 'gan len
ཐོན་ཚད་གཏན་འཁེལ	fixed/ set output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad gtan 'khel
ཐོན་ཚད་མཐོ་པོ	high output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad mtho po
ཐོན་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ	high output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad mthon po
ཐོན་ཚད་བསྡམས་གྲངས	gross/ total output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad bsdams grangs
ཐོན་ཚད་དམའ་པོ	low output/ yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad dma' po
ཐོན་ཚད་ལས་བརྒལ	exceed quota for yield/ [amount/ rate/ level] of production	thon tshad las brgal
ཐོན་མཚམས་སུ	at the time of, time of coming out, at the time of his departure	thon mtshams su
ཐོན་རྫས	products, produce	thon rdzas
ཐོན་རྫས་ཀྱི་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon rdzas kyi brje res
ཐོན་རྫས་ཀྱི་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon rdzas kyi ma gnas
ཐོན་རྫས་ཀྱི་ཚད་གཞི	specifications/ standards for products	thon rdzas kyi tshad gzhi
ཐོན་རྫས་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output 1207	thon rdzas kyi rin thang
ཐོན་རྫས་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon rdzas kyi rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་རྫས་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon rdzas brje res
ཐོན་རྫས་སྤུས་ཞེར	low quality/ inferior goods	thon rdzas spus zher
ཐོན་རྫས་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon rdzas ma gnas
ཐོན་རྫས་མང་དྲགས་པ	surplus of production	thon rdzas mang drags pa
ཐོན་རྫས་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output	thon rdzas rin thang
ཐོན་རྫས་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon rdzas rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་རྫོངས	'gro khar sprod rgyu'i lag rtags	thon rdzongs
ཐོན་ཟོག	products, produce	thon zog
ཐོན་ཟོག་ཀྱི་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon zog kyi brje res
ཐོན་ཟོག་ཀྱི་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon zog kyi ma gnas
ཐོན་ཟོག་ཀྱི་ཚད་གཞི	specifications/ standards for products	thon zog kyi tshad gzhi
ཐོན་ཟོག་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output	thon zog kyi rin thang
ཐོན་ཟོག་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon zog kyi rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་ཟོག་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon zog brje res
ཐོན་ཟོག་སྤུས་ཞེར	low quality/ inferior goods	thon zog spus zher
ཐོན་ཟོག་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon zog ma gnas
ཐོན་ཟོག་མང་དྲགས་པ	surplus of production	thon zog mang drags pa
ཐོན་ཟོག་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output	thon zog rin thang
ཐོན་ཟོག་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon zog rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་ཟོང	products, produce	thon zong
ཐོན་ཟོང་ཀྱི་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon zong kyi brje res
ཐོན་ཟོང་ཀྱི་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon zong kyi ma gnas
ཐོན་ཟོང་ཀྱི་ཚད་གཞི	specifications/ standards for products	thon zong kyi tshad gzhi
ཐོན་ཟོང་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output	thon zong kyi rin thang
ཐོན་ཟོང་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon zong kyi rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་ཟོང་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of products	thon zong brje res
ཐོན་ཟོང་སྤུས་ཞེར	low quality/ inferior goods	thon zong spus zher
ཐོན་ཟོང་མ་གནས	cost of goods/ products	thon zong ma gnas
ཐོན་ཟོང་མང་དྲགས་པ	surplus of production	thon zong mang drags pa
ཐོན་ཟོང་རིན་ཐང	value of products/ output	thon zong rin thang
ཐོན་ཟོང་རིན་ཐང་བསྡམས་འབོར	total value of products/ output	thon zong rin thang bsdams 'bor
ཐོན་ཡུལ	place things come from/ are produced/of origin	thon yul
ཐོན་ཡོན	member of an organization	thon yon
ཐོན་ལས	industry	thon las
ཐོན་ལས་ཁག་གི་བཟོ་པ	workers in [various] industries	thon las khag gi bzo pa
ཐོན་ལས་རྗེས་གྲབས་དཔུང་སྡེ	industrial reserves	thon las rjes grabs dpung sde
ཐོན་ལས་མ་རྩ	industrial capital	thon las ma rtsa
ཐོན་ལས་བཟོ་པ	industrial workers	thon las bzo pa
ཐོན་ལས་བཟོ་ཚོགས	industrial labor union	thon las bzo tshogs
ཐོན་ལས་གསར་བརྗེ	industrial revolution	thon las gsar brje
ཐོན་ལེགས	abundant/ good production	thon legs
ཐོན་ས	place things come from/ are produced/of origin	thon sa
ཐོན་སོང	{glu dbyangs rang shugs kyis thon song} songs spontaneously arose	thon song
ཐོན་གསར	new invention/ product	thon gsar
ཐོན་གསར་གི་གོ་ལག	new weapons	thon gsar gi go lag
ཐོན་གསལ	as appeared in [such and such source]	thon gsal
ཐོབ	'debs pa!	thob
ཐོབ་ཀྱག་གོ་ཀྱག	suddenly	thob kyag go kyag
ཐོབ་ཀྱི་འཇལ་བ	setting a price for the dharma. extortion by threats and accusations [of greediness]. {log 'tsho lnga}	thob kyi 'jal ba
ཐོབ་ཀྱིས་འཇལ་བ	draw or acquire somehow or other another's property, 1 of 5 log par 'tsho ba	thob kyis 'jal ba
ཐོབ་དཀའ	hard to attain	thob dka'
ཐོབ་དཀའི	hard to attain	thob dka'i
ཐོབ་སྐལ	allotment, legacy	thob skal
ཐོབ་སྐལ་གྱི་ཤ	1's allotted portion of meat	thob skal gyi sha
ཐོབ་ཁ་མ	immediately, as soon as he attained	thob kha ma
ཐོབ་ཁུངས	inclusion under a certain sde khag gi mnga' 1's place/ group/ section/ constituency	thob khungs
ཐོབ་ཁྲལ	income tax	thob khral
ཐོབ་མཁན	recipient	thob mkhan
ཐོབ་ག	SA thob lo	thob ga
ཐོབ་གྱུར	attained	thob gyur
ཐོབ་གྲངས	total [attained], quotient	thob grangs
ཐོབ་རྒྱལ	to gain and win, a district with a monastery in tsang, despoil, pillage, plunder	thob rgyal
ཐོབ་རྒྱལ་བྱེད་པ	despoil, pillage, plunder	thob rgyal byed pa
ཐོབ་རྒྱུ	anything to be got like income or profit	thob rgyu
ཐོབ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	available	thob rgyu yod pa
ཐོབ་ཅི	button	thob ci
ཐོབ་ཅེས	so gaining	thob ces
ཐོབ་ཆ	all that is to be attained, reward, pay, share, due, the share which one gets, quota	thob cha
ཐོབ་ཆི	button	thob chi
ཐོབ་ཆི་རྒྱག	button	thob chi rgyag
ཐོབ་ཆུ	button	thob chu
ཐོབ་འཇལ	solicit	thob 'jal
ཐོབ་འཇལ་བྱེད་པ	swindle [and con], solicit	thob 'jal byed pa
ཐོབ་ཉམས	experience of attainment	thob nyams
ཐོབ་ཏུ་རེ་བ་ལགས་པ	I hope to obtain	thob tu re ba lags pa
ཐོབ་རྟགས	mark of honor	thob rtags
ཐོབ་ཐ་མག	immediately	thob tha mag
ཐོབ་ཐང	rights, status, position, a share, treatment. position gained, rank, official rank, received what is suitable	thob thang
ཐོབ་ཐང་ཐོག་ནས	rightful	thob thang thog nas
ཐོབ་ཐང་དང་རིམ་པ	rank and title	thob thang dang rim pa
ཐོབ་ཐང་དང་ལོ་རྒྱུས	qualifications and background, curriculum vitae	thob thang dang lo rgyus
ཐོབ་ཐང་མེད	not have the right to -	thob thang med
ཐོབ་ཐང་ཞུ་མཁན	claimant	thob thang zhu mkhan
ཐོབ་ཐང་ཤོར་བ	forfeit	thob thang shor ba
ཐོབ་ཐང་གཤོད་པ	claim	thob thang gshod pa
ཐོབ་ཐོ	byung tho	thob tho
ཐོབ་དོགས་ཤོར་དོགས	fear ful of winning fearful of losing, indecisive	thob dogs shor dogs
ཐོབ་འདོད	expectation, longing for	thob 'dod
ཐོབ་འདོད་པ	who wishes to attain	thob 'dod pa
ཐོབ་ལྡན་མ	skar ma mon gre	thob ldan ma
ཐོབ་ནས	will attain 1208	thob nas
ཐོབ་ནོར	1) bgo bya'i grangs bgod byed kyis bgos pa'i ci thob kyi grangs; 2) So sor thob pa'i rgyu nor gyi skal pa	thob nor
ཐོབ་རྣམས	attainments	thob rnams
ཐོབ་པ་ཉིད	attainment	thob pa nyid
ཐོབ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་ནུས་པ	capable of attainment	thob pa nyid du nus pa
ཐོབ་པ་གཉིས	the two attainments [1) {skye ba la dbang thob pa}. 2) {'jug pa la dbang thob pa}	thob pa gnyis
ཐོབ་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་འོད་གསལ	the great empty luminosity of attainment	thob pa stong pa chen po'i 'od gsal
ཐོབ་པ་དང་རྒྱལ་བ	gain and win	thob pa dang rgyal ba
ཐོབ་པ་དང་འབྲེལ	having a close adherence, closely connected, consequent on	thob pa dang 'brel
ཐོབ་པ་མེད་པ	non-acquisition, to be devoid of, to never reach one's destination, one will never attain	thob pa med pa
ཐོབ་པ་མེད་པར་སྣང	cannot help but manifest	thob pa med par snang
ཐོབ་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	realized primordial wisdom	thob pa zhes bya ba'i ye shes
ཐོབ་པ་ལ་རྟོག་པ	to ponder the attainment, expl {'bras bu la 'dzin pa}	thob pa la rtog pa
ཐོབ་པ་གསུམ	threefold attainment	thob pa gsum
ཐོབ་པའི་ཁྱད་པར	particulars of attainment, special attainment	thob pa'i khyad par
ཐོབ་པའི་ཆ	allotted portion	thob pa'i cha
ཐོབ་པའི་ཉམས	the experience of attainment	thob pa'i nyams
ཐོབ་པའི་འབོར་གྲངས	total [attained], quotient	thob pa'i 'bor grangs
ཐོབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Syn {snang ba thob pa'i ye shes} the reached pristine cognition, the achieving wisdom, achievement of 1209 {mthong lam}; wisdom of attainment, {snang mched thob gsum gyi ye shes}. the reached prist...	thob pa'i ye shes
ཐོབ་པའི་རང་བཞིན་བདུན	the 7 natures of attainment	thob pa'i rang bzhin bdun
ཐོབ་པའི་ལམ	path of attainment	thob pa'i lam
ཐོབ་པར	to attain	thob par
ཐོབ་པར་བྱ	will attain, should be attained	thob par bya
ཐོབ་པར་བྱ་བ	be attained	thob par bya ba
ཐོབ་པར་བྱའོ	I will achieve	thob par bya'o
ཐོབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	attain	thob par byed pa
ཐོབ་པར་ཤོག	may it be attained	thob par shog
ཐོབ་པས་ཕམ་པ	overcome by attainment	thob pas pham pa
ཐོབ་ཕྱིར་འཇལ་བ	[TRS 31-5]	thob phyir 'jal ba
ཐོབ་བ	about to attain	thob ba
ཐོབ་བྱ	object of attainment, that which is to be attained; factor to be attained / acquired; object of attainment / acquisition	thob bya
ཐོབ་བྱ་ཐོབ་བྱེད	what is to be attained and the attainer	thob bya thob byed
ཐོབ་བྱ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	the unexcelled attainment	thob bya bla na med pa
ཐོབ་བྱའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition to be attained	thob bya'i 'bras bu
ཐོབ་བྱེད	factor of attainment	thob byed
ཐོབ་དབང	sovereignty	thob dbang
ཐོབ་དབང་སྤྲོད་པ	entitle	thob dbang sprod pa
ཐོབ་དབང་གཤོད་པ	assert	thob dbang gshod pa
ཐོབ་མ་སྐྱེས	elder brother	thob ma skyes
ཐོབ་མ་ཐག	as soon as he attained	thob ma thag
ཐོབ་མེད	nonattainment/ transcendent	thob med
ཐོབ་མྱོང	received	thob myong
ཐོབ་ཚིར	turn of getting, claim, right, due right of succession	thob tshir
ཐོབ་ཚུལ	the means of attainment	thob tshul
ཐོབ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་སྐལ་བ	share, portion	thob tshod kyi skal ba
ཐོབ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་འོས་འབབ	receiving what is suitable	thob tshod kyi 'os 'bab
ཐོབ་མཚམས	sdom pa'i thob mtshams the exact point when we receive the vow	thob mtshams
ཐོབ་ཞྭ	personal hat	thob zhwa
ཐོབ་ཟིན་པ	already attained	thob zin pa
ཐོབ་འོས་པ	deserve	thob 'os pa
ཐོབ་ཡིག	repertory, index, list of teachings received	thob yig
ཐོབ་རིམ	stages of obtaining abhishekas dbang lung etc. pa	thob rim
ཐོབ་ལོ	vanity, false show	thob lo
ཐོབ་ཤ	contest, scramble	thob sha
ཐོབ་ཤག་ཤག	thob rkyang gi gdeng tshod Rgyal kha rang la thob shag shag byed pa	thob shag shag
ཐོབ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གོ་བ	you know that you have received it	thob shes kyi go ba
ཐོབ་ཤོར	winning and losing, loss and gain	thob shor
ཐོབ་ཤོར་མ་བརྩིས་པ	taking no account of winning and losing/ loss and gain	thob shor ma brtsis pa
ཐོབ་བཤགས	hab thob dang kha gshags 'gyed pa	thob bshags
ཐོབ་ས་ཐོབ་ཁུངས	'bab sa 'bab khungs	thob sa thob khungs
ཐོབ་སྲོལ	right of succession, claim or title or right founded on an old custom	thob srol
ཐོབས	imperfect of 'debs	thobs
ཐོམ	oblivious, undecided; imp. of {'dam pa}	thom
ཐོམ་བུ	large spoon, ladle	thom bu
ཐོམ་མེ་བ	ex {ci yang dran med thom me ba}	thom me ba
ཐོམ་ཡོ་རེ་བ	"spaced out", dull, blank, thoughtless,	thom yo re ba
ཐོམ་ཡོར	idiot, fool	thom yor
ཐོམ་ལུས་པ	stood there trembling	thom lus pa
ཐོམས	[arch] soms shig	thoms
ཐོམས་པ	SA 'thoms pa, confused, SA 'thom pa	thoms pa
ཐོའུ་ཀྭན	last emperor of tartar dynasty	tho'u kwan
ཐོའུ་ཀབ༹ན	thu'u kvan	tho'u kvan
ཐོར	1) to lose. 2) to collapse, fall in. 3) to spread out, scatter, disperse. p. of {'thor}	thor
ཐོར་ཁོད	a mongol tribe	thor khod
ཐོར་གོད	1 of the sog po ao rod tso bzhi	thor god
ཐོར་མགོ	commencement of the dawn, morning	thor mgo
ཐོར་ཅོག	* plaited tuft of hair, toupet, topknot	thor cog
ཐོར་ཅོག་མ	plaited tuft of hair	thor cog ma
ཐོར་ཆ་འཐུ་བ	pick up things strewn about	thor cha 'thu ba
ཐོར་ཆགས	registered, entered into the list	thor chags
ཐོར་ཆོས	1) zhogs pa dus yun thung ngu zhig la 'tsogs pa'i chos ra; 2) Chos phran bu	thor chos
ཐོར་ཏོ	1) hair bound like a gtsug tor/ topknot; 2) [arch] tip	thor to
ཐོར་ཐུན	dawn session	thor thun
ཐོར་ཐོར་འགྱེད་པ	scattering about everywhere 1210	thor thor 'gyed pa
ཐོར་ནག	thor pa nag po, brum nag	thor nag
ཐོར་ནད	1) gzhung gi sa bcad che ba'i khongs su ma gtogs pa'i kha thor du gnas pa'i nad skad 'gags pa sogs le'u bcu dgu'i spyi ming zhig; 2) small-pox, [skin disease w] pimple, pustule	thor nad
ཐོར་སྣམ	thor god nas thon pa'i snam bu	thor snam
ཐོར་པ	small pox, pimples, pustule, pimple	thor pa
ཐོར་པ་སྐྱེ	get pimples/ pustules	thor pa skye
ཐོར་པ་ཆུང་ཆུང	rash	thor pa chung chung
ཐོར་པའི་ན་ཚ	acne	thor pa'i na tsha
ཐོར་འཕྲོ	remnant, remains of something scattered/ destroyed	thor 'phro
ཐོར་བ	small-pox, [skin disease w] pimple, pustule	thor ba
ཐོར་བུ	class of diseases, miscellaneous writings	thor bu
ཐོར་བུ་ཐོར་བུ	tha re tho re nyung ngu tso tso yod pa. Shing bu thor bu thor bu. Rtsom yig thor bu thor bu	thor bu thor bu
ཐོར་བུ་སྣ་ཚོགས	miscellaneous	thor bu sna tshogs
ཐོར་བུར་གནས	scattered localities	thor bur gnas
ཐོར་འབུར	{thor 'bur} skin disease	thor 'bur
ཐོར་མ	few, minor, small, insignificant,scattered ones	thor ma
ཐོར་མ་གཅིག	a bit	thor ma gcig
ཐོར་མོ	growing fat of cows, goats in consequence of sterility	thor mo
ཐོར་ཙམ	just a few, tha re tho re tsam	thor tsam
ཐོར་གཙུག	turban, luxuriant locks dressed neatly on the crown of the head, SA thor tshugs	thor gtsug
ཐོར་ཚུགས	plaited hair bound up on the head in a spiral, plaited tuft of hair, toupee, luxuriant locks dressed neatly on the crown of the head, topknot	thor tshugs
ཐོར་ཚུགས་ཉིས་བརྩེགས	double topknot	thor tshugs nyis brtsegs
ཐོར་ཚུགས་སུ་བཅིང་བ	pulled to form a topknot	thor tshugs su bcing ba
ཐོར་ཞིག	collapsed, crumbled	thor zhig
ཐོར་ཡན	'brum bu dang me dbal lta bu ma yin pa thor rims kyi bye brag cig	thor yan
ཐོར་རེ་གཏོང	scatter, disperse	thor re gtong
ཐོར་རེ་ལྡང	rises and swirls	thor re ldang
ཐོར་རེ་བ	a little	thor re ba
ཐོར་རེ་བ་གོ	understand a little	thor re ba go
ཐོལ	spontaneous, sudden	thol
ཐོལ་སྐྱེས	free-rising, arises suddenly, appearing suddenly	thol skyes
ཐོལ་སྐྱེས་རྦད་གཅོད	abrupt cutting of sudden thoughts	thol skyes rbad gcod
ཐོལ་གྱིས	suddenly, all at once	thol gyis
ཐོལ་གྱིས་འཆར་བ	to arise suddenly	thol gyis 'char ba
ཐོལ་གྱིས་བྱུང་བ	(to) spring/ burst forth suddenly	thol gyis byung ba
ཐོལ་གླུ	spontaneous song	thol glu
ཐོལ་ཐོལ	erupting	thol thol
ཐོལ་དེ་སྐྱེས་པ	as soon as it arises	thol de skyes pa
ཐོལ་པ	additional	thol pa
ཐོལ་བ	what has come forth, what has been raised, elevated	thol ba
ཐོལ་བྱུང	arisen, begun suddenly, instantly, abruptly, spontaneously	thol byung
ཐོལ་བྱུང་འགྱོད་བཤགས	sudden repentance	thol byung 'gyod bshags
ཐོལ་བྱུང་དུ	suddenly, all of a sudden	thol byung du
ཐོལ་བྱུང་བློ་རྡེག	suddenly strike a thought	thol byung blo rdeg
ཐོལ་རེ་ལྡང	rises and swirls	thol re ldang
ཐོས	1) study, learn[ing], listening; 2) hear, listen; 3) philosophical studies; 4) tribal name for a Tibetan ancestral clan	thos
ཐོས་གྲོལ	* 1) that which liberates through hearing, "Liberation through hearing"; 2) be liberated just by hearing the dharma; 2) bar do thos grol	thos grol
ཐོས་གྲོལ་ཆེན་མོ	from {zab chos zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol} revealed by {kar ma gling pa} 14th cent	thos grol chen mo
ཐོས་རྒྱ	extent of learning	thos rgya
ཐོས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ངུ	ignorant, little learning	thos rgya chung ngu
ཐོས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	small scope extent of learning	thos rgya chung ba
ཐོས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	inaudible	thos rgyu med pa
ཐོས་སྒྲོག	1) shravaka; 2) raven; 3) hearer proclaimer	thos sgrog
ཐོས་སྒྲོགས	crow, hearer, follower of hinayana school	thos sgrogs
ཐོས་ཆུང	of little experience, ignorant, of less understanding, little learning	thos chung
མི་དཔོག	w little learning 1 will not penetrate to the profound depths of the texts/ tradition	mi dpog
ཐོས་མཆོག	skar ma mon gre	thos mchog
ཐོས་རྟུལ	less read, imperfectly informed	thos rtul
ཐོས་དུས	clan among ancient tibetans	thos dus
ཐོས་དོན	the actual meaning of what he had been taught	thos don
ཐོས་ལྡན	learned man, learned	thos ldan
ཐོས་ལྡན་སྐྱེས	Mercury	thos ldan skyes
ཐོས་ལྡན་པ	mkhas pa	thos ldan pa
ཐོས་ལྡན་དབང	zla ba	thos ldan dbang
ཐོས་ལྡན་དབང་པོ	mkhas pa chen po	thos ldan dbang po
ཐོས་ནས	hearing	thos nas
ཐོས་ནོར	wealth of learning 1211	thos nor
ཐོས་སྣང	go ba'i tshul lugs. Thag ring nas thos snang byung ba'i gnas tshul la nges tan rang med	thos snang
ཐོས་པ་དགའ	= Milarepa joyful learning/ to hear	thos pa dga'
ཐོས་པ་ཅན	Syn {thos ldan}	thos pa can
ཐོས་པ་ཆུང	those who have received few teachings	thos pa chung
ཐོས་པ་ཆུབ་པ	perfect in learning	thos pa chub pa
ཐོས་པ་ཆེ་བ	very learned	thos pa che ba
ཐོས་པ་ཆེན	a very learned person	thos pa chen
ཐོས་པ་ཉུང་ངུ	of little learning	thos pa nyung ngu
ཐོས་པ་ཉུང་བ	of little learning	thos pa nyung ba
ཐོས་པ་མཉམ་མེད་ལས་བྱུང	arising from matchless hearing	thos pa mnyam med las byung
ཐོས་པ་བརྟག་པའི་ཙིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	{thos pa brtag pa'i tsig le'ur byas pa	thos pa brtag pa'i tsig le'ur byas pa
ཐོས་པ་དང	on hearing	thos pa dang
ཐོས་པ་དང་གྲོལ	Syn {thos grol}	thos pa dang grol
ཐོས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	well versed in thos pa dang bsam pa dang bsgom pa las	thos pa dang ldan pa
བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་པ་གསུམ	the three knowledges arising from hearing, contemplating, and meditating	byung ba'i shes pa gsum
ཐོས་པ་དང་བསམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	arising from hearing and contemplating thos pa dam bsam rgyan la rdol thabs su	thos pa dang bsam pa las byung ba
སྨྲ་བ་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ	someone who just says whatever comes out might say	smra ba kha cig na re
ཐོས་པ་དོན་དམ་པ	[tse]	thos pa don dam pa
ཐོས་པ་དྲན་པ	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	thos pa dran pa
ཐོས་པ་པོ	hearer	thos pa po
ཐོས་པ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད	immeasurable learning	thos pa dpag tu med
ཐོས་པ་བྱས་པའི་དགེ་མཚན	virtuous qualities produced by hearing/ learning	thos pa byas pa'i dge mtshan
ཐོས་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassable hearing (learning	thos pa bla na med pa
ཐོས་པ་བླ་མེད	absolute comprehension, fully understanding	thos pa bla med
ཐོས་པ་མང་བ	having heard much, very learned	thos pa mang ba
ཐོས་པ་མི་བརྗེད་པར་འཛིན་པའི་གཟུངས	retention w/o forgetting of what 1 has heard	thos pa mi brjed par 'dzin pa'i gzungs
ཐོས་པ་དམན	people of little learning	thos pa dman
ཐོས་པ་ཙམ	mere learning, merely hearing	thos pa tsam
ཐོས་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	the mere sound of	thos pa tsam gyis
ཐོས་པ་འཛིན་པ	embrace the teachings	thos pa 'dzin pa
ཐོས་པ་བཞིན	as reported	thos pa bzhin
ཐོས་པ་ལ་གོམས་པ	familiar w learning	thos pa la goms pa
ཐོས་པ་ལ་མོས་པ་རྒྱས་པ	w great devotion to learning	thos pa la mos pa rgyas pa
ཐོས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminative awareness born of study [gdmk] prajna/ knowledge resulting from learning/ listening /studying {shes rab gsum}	thos pa las byung ba'i shes rab
ཐོས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ས	the leval arising from hearing/ learning, thepath of accumulation [= mos pas spyod pa'i sa]	thos pa las byung ba'i sa
ཐོས་པ་ལེགས	follower of the hinayana school	thos pa legs
ཐོས་པ་ལྷུར་ལེན	dedicated study	thos pa lhur len
ཐོས་པ་ཨི་སྟོབས	power of hearing, {stobs drug}	thos pa i stobs
ཐོས་པ་ཨི་ཤེས་རབ	the knowledge of learning	thos pa i shes rab
ཐོས་པའི་སྒོ	organ of hearing	thos pa'i sgo
ཐོས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharmas of hearing/ learning	thos pa'i chos
ཐོས་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of listening, power of hearing, first of the {stobs drug}	thos pa'i stobs
ཐོས་པའི་ཐ་སྙད	designation of hearing	thos pa'i tha snyad
ཐོས་པའི་ནོར	wealth of learning	thos pa'i nor
ཐོས་པའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfection of learning	thos pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa
ཐོས་པའི་གཟུངས	retention w/o forgetting of what 1 has heard	thos pa'i gzungs
ཐོས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	virtuous qualities produced by hearing/ learning	thos pa'i yon tan
ཐོས་པའི་ལམ	1) rna thos tsam las mthong yul las 'das pa'i lam; 2) Shi ba	thos pa'i lam
ཐོས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the intelligance of study/in studying, the knowledge of learning [= {thos pa las byung ba'i shes rab}gsung rab kyi tshig mkhan slob dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyi ngag las nyan pa dang, blo la 'dzin pa d...	thos pa'i shes rab
ཐོས་པར་བརྗོད	express intelligibly	thos par brjod
ཐོས་པས་གྲོལ་བ	liberation through hearing, through hearing become liberated	thos pas grol ba
ཐོས་པས་ཅི་ཕན	what use is learning?	thos pas ci phan
ཐོས་པས་ཆོག་པར་འཛིན་སྤོང་བ	the abandonment of knowing by leaning what is enough	thos pas chog par 'dzin spong ba
ཐོས་པས་དྲེགས་པ	arrogant on account of learning	thos pas dregs pa
ཐོས་པས་ནི་སེམས་ལ་བག་ཆགས	by learning within the mind are habitual patterns	thos pas ni sems la bag chags
ཐོས་པས་བློ་སྦྱང	to train one's mind through study / hearing teachings	thos pas blo sbyang
ཐོས་བྱུང	arisen from hearing from the spiritual friend of scriptural pramana sgra spyi tsam gyi nges pa rnyed pa	thos byung
ཐོས་བྱུང་གི་རྟོག་པ	apprehension/ realization arisen from hearing	thos byung gi rtog pa
ཐོས་བྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	knowledge/ prajna arisen from hearing	thos byung gi shes rab
ཐོས་བྱུང་རྟོག་པ	apprehension/ knowledge arisen from hearing [tse]	thos byung rtog pa
ཐོས་བྱེད	ear	thos byed
ཐོས་དབང	learned	thos dbang
ཐོས་འབྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	wisdom arisen from hearing	thos 'byung gi shes rab
ཐོས་མང	Syn {thos ldan}	thos mang
ཐོས་མྱོང་བ	have heard before	thos myong ba
ཐོས་ཚད	all that is heard	thos tshad
ཐོས་ཚད་ཐམས་ཆད	all that was heard	thos tshad thams chad
ཐོས་ཚོད	heard and understood	thos tshod
ཐོས་འཛིན	ear	thos 'dzin
ཐོས་འཛིན་རྒྱན	ear ornament	thos 'dzin rgyan
ཐོས་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	in dependence on hearing (learning	thos la brten nas
ཐོས་ལ་མོས་པ	devotion to	thos la mos pa
ཐོས་ལ་སོགས་པ	hearing and so forth	thos la sogs pa
ཐོས་ལོ	hearsay, hearing without understanding, superficial way	thos lo
ཐོས་ལོ་དང་གོ་བ་ཙམ	hearsay and theory	thos lo dang go ba tsam
ཐོས་ཤིང་དོན་གོ་བ	hear and learn/ understand the meaning	thos shing don go ba
ཐོས་ཤུགས	audition	thos shugs
ཐོས་སོ་ཅོག	all that was heard	thos so cog
ཐོས་བསམ	study and reflection, hearing and contemplating	thos bsam
ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་དོན	the meaning of what one has listened to and reflected upon	thos bsam gyi don
ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་མིག	the eye of analysis (hearing and contemplating	thos bsam gyi mig
ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་ཡུལ	{thos bsam gyi yul gsung rab rin po che} the precious and excellent teachings as the material for study and reflection	thos bsam gyi yul
ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་ལུགས	analytical school	thos bsam gyi lugs
ཐོས་བསམ་གྱི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna of hearing and contemplating (analysis thos bsam gyi shes rab bskyed pa'i don what 1 has understood through the superior knowledge of listening and reflecting thos bsam gyi shes rab bskyed p...	thos bsam gyi shes rab
ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ	(learning, contemplating, and meditating), listen & read, reflect, meditation	thos bsam sgom
ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་གསུམ	hearing contemplating and meditating; 1) {thos pas sgro 'dogs bcad pa}. 2) {bsam pas rnam par nges pa} 3) {sgom pas gtan la dbab pa}. learing, contemplating and meditationg, study, examination and ...	thos bsam sgom gsum
ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་གསུམ་གྱིས་ཤིག	study, reflect, and meditate! thos bsam sgom gsum byed pa'i skal pa	thos bsam sgom gsum gyis shig
ཐོས་བསམ་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཆོད་པ	by learning and contemplation resolve doubt thos bsam bsgoms pa'i yon tan thams cad - all the qualities of knowledge, reflection and meditation thos bsam rnam par rgyal ba'i gling Thösam Nampar Gya...	thos bsam sgro 'dogs chod pa
ཐོས་བསམ་ཕྱོགས་མེད	impartial hearing and contemplating (analysis	thos bsam phyogs med
ཐོས་བསམ་བྱས	studied and contemplated	thos bsam byas
ཐོས་བསམ་བྱས་པ	heard and contemplated	thos bsam byas pa
ཐོས་བསམ་བྱེད་པ	study and reflect on that	thos bsam byed pa
ཐོས་བསམ་གསུམ	listening, pondering, and meditating	thos bsam gsum
ཐྲིག་ཐྲིག	[sound like] the creaking of shoes	thrig thrig
མཐང	the lower part of the body	mthang
མཐང་ག	1) lower part; 2) front of woman's hips and lower waist)	mthang ga
མཐང་གོས	lower robe sewn in pieces aantarbas:	mthang gos
མཐང་སྤྲད་པ	have sex	mthang sprad pa
མཐང་སྤྲད་པ་ཙམ	just on the point of embracing	mthang sprad pa tsam
མཐང་སྦྱར་བ	have sex	mthang sbyar ba
མཐང་མེད	no doubt	mthang med
མཐང་ཤམ	lower garment, skirt, petticoat	mthang sham
མཐངས	all	mthangs
མཐངས་ཀྱིས་ཚོར་བ	perceived by all, heard by all	mthangs kyis tshor ba
མཐད་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ཆེ་མོ	the great books on philosophy	mthad nyid kyi gzhung che mo
མཐན་ཉིད་རིག་པ	dialectics	mthan nyid rig pa
མཐན་ཐུག	ultimate	mthan thug
མཐམས་སྦྱོར་ངན་པ	a negative state of mind	mthams sbyor ngan pa
མཐམས་མེད་པ་ལྔ	five boundless offenses	mthams med pa lnga
མཐའ	extreme [thd]	mtha'
མཐའ་ཀྱིས་བསྐོར་བ	flanked by	mtha' kyis bskor ba
མཐའ་ཀླས	limitless, boundless	mtha' klas
མཐའ་ཀླས་པ	boundless; limitless, infinite	mtha' klas pa
མཐའ་བཀག	give counter-arguments; syn {mtha' gcun}	mtha' bkag
མཐའ་སྐུད	clothes thangkas etc kyi gong gsham mthar btang ba'i cord	mtha' skud
མཐའ་སྐོར	all round, whole circumference, the perimeter about	mtha' skor
མཐའ་སྐོར་གྱི་ནང་ན་རྦད་དེ་བཅད	cut off from all sides mtha' skor gyi phyogs thams cad las rnam	mtha' skor gyi nang na rbad de bcad
པར་རྒྱལ་བ	victorious in all directions	par rgyal ba
མཐའ་སྐོར་དུ	in the surrounding area, all around	mtha' skor du
མཐའ་སྐོར་བ	go round the confines of a place mtha' skor byas nas dgra bo rtsa med du	mtha' skor ba
མཐའ་སྐོར་བྱེད	surround	mtha' skor byed
མཐའ་སྐོར་ལམ་ཆེན	phyi nas bskor ba	mtha' skor lam chen
མཐའ་སྐྱེལ་བ	las ka byed 'phro ma bzhag par mjug skyel ba	mtha' skyel ba
མཐའ་སྐྲོད	drive out, expel, evict	mtha' skrod
མཐའ་སྐྲོད་གཏོང་བ	drive out, expel, evict	mtha' skrod gtong ba
མཐའ་བསྐོར	circumference, emptiness free from the four extremes	mtha' bskor
མཐའ་བསྐོར་དུ	in the surrounding area, all around	mtha' bskor du
མཐའ་བསྐོར་བ	encircle, encompass, surround	mtha' bskor ba
མཐའ་བསྐོར་བའི་ལྕགས་རི་རིང་པོ	surrounding long fence mtha' bskor byas nas dgra bo rtsa med du	mtha' bskor ba'i lcags ri ring po
མཐའ་བསྐོར་བྱེད	surround	mtha' bskor byed
མཐའ་བསྐོར་བྱེད་བའི་དམག་དཔུང	surrounding army	mtha' bskor byed ba'i dmag dpung
མཐའ་བསྐོར་ལམ་ཆེན	phyi nas bskor ba	mtha' bskor lam chen
མཐའ་ཁུལ	border region 1214	mtha' khul
མཐའ་ཁོབ	border, outskirts, 1 of 8 unhappy states, primitive regions, uncivilized border	mtha' khob
མཐའ་ཁོབ་ཀྱི་མི	barbarians, hicks TSE tribal/ border people	mtha' khob kyi mi
མཐའ་ཁོབ་གློ་པ	Lhopa tribesmen, Lhopas from the barbarian borderlands	mtha' khob glo pa
མཐའ་ཁྱབ་པར	up to the edges	mtha' khyab par
མཐའ་ཁྱོལ་བ	thorough	mtha' khyol ba
མཐའ་ཁྲོལ་བ	to take (something) to its conclusion; reach the limit (of something)	mtha' khrol ba
མཐའ་འཁོངས་བྱེད་པ	to persist, adhere to, insist on	mtha' 'khongs byed pa
མཐའ་འཁོབ	border, outskirts, 1 of 8 unhappy states, border country, wilderness, boondocks	mtha' 'khob
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཀྱི་ཀླ་ཀློ	people inhabiting the outlying territories; x {mtha' 'khob kyi kla klo rnams kyang rang bzhin mi gzugs lta bur yod kyang blo las su ma rungs pas dam pa'i chos kyi phyogs su bsgyur mi gtub} these pe...	mtha' 'khob kyi kla klo
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་པ	kalpas without Dharma; SA {mun pa'i bskal pa}	mtha' 'khob kyi bskal pa
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཀྱི་མི	being uncivilized [one of the {mi khom pa brgyad - 8 adversities (pratyanta-janapadam)	mtha' 'khob kyi mi
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཀླ་ཀློ	to belong to a primitive border tribe	mtha' 'khob kla klo
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་པ	being born as a barbarian [one of the {mi khom pa	mtha' 'khob tu skyes pa
མཐའ་འཁོབ་པ	barbarians	mtha' 'khob pa
མཐའ་འཁོབ་བོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	country of barbarians	mtha' 'khob bod kyi yul
མཐའ་འཁོབ་བོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཞེས་གྲགས	was called "the border country of Tibet"	mtha' 'khob bod kyi yul zhes grags
མཐའ་འཁོབ་མུན་པའི་གླིང	dark barbarian country	mtha' 'khob mun pa'i gling
མཐའ་འཁོབ་ཡུལ	barbarian's country, any country where buddhism has not penetrated	mtha' 'khob yul
མཐའ་འཁོབ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the thirtytwo border countries	mtha' 'khob sum cu rtsa gnyis
མཐའ་འཁོར	{mtha' skor}, mtha' 'khyol} 1 seeing through (to the end), carrying through to completion	mtha' 'khor
མཐའ་འཁོར་གྱི་ནང་ན་རྦད་དེ་བཅད	cut off from all sides	mtha' 'khor gyi nang na rbad de bcad
མཐའ་འཁོར་དུ	in the surrounding area, all around mtha' 'khor byas nas dgra bo rtsa med du	mtha' 'khor du
མཐའ་འཁོར་བྱེད	surround	mtha' 'khor byed
མཐའ་འཁོར་ལམ་ཆེན	phyi nas bskor ba	mtha' 'khor lam chen
མཐའ་འཁྱོངས	Syn {mtha' 'khyol}	mtha' 'khyongs
མཐའ་འཁྱོངས་བྱེད་པ	to persist in, adhere to, insist on	mtha' 'khyongs byed pa
མཐའ་འཁྱོལ	1) seeing through [to the end], carrying through to completion	mtha' 'khyol
མཐའ་འཁྱོལ་བ	+ neg. - to abandon	mtha' 'khyol ba
མཐའ་འཁྱོལ་བྱེད	reach/ see through to the end of an action	mtha' 'khyol byed
མཐའ་གེབས་པ	radish leaf, rule, regulation	mtha' gebs pa
མཐའ་གྲལ	gral gshams - gshams gral Back central space - The area directly in front of the mandala, and facing the vajra master	mtha' gral
མཐའ་གྲུ	vast, extensive, big, width, extent, size	mtha' gru
མཐའ་གྲོགས	friend to the limit of life, spouse	mtha' grogs
མཐའ་གྲོལ	free[dom]/ liberation from extremes	mtha' grol
མཐའ་གྲོལ་ཀློང་ཡངས	vast openness/ space/ expanse free from extremes	mtha' grol klong yangs
མཐའ་གྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ	great liberation from all limits	mtha' grol chen po
མཐའ་གྲོལ་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in a manner) consistent with freedom from limitation/ (limiting) extremes*	mtha' grol ltar shar ba
མཐའ་གྲོལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	author of {gting skyes dgon pa byang sprul sku'i 'khrungs rabs rnam thar} biographies of the successive embodiments of the gting skyes dgon pa byang lamas	mtha' grol rdo rje
མཐའ་གྲོལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of freedom from extremes, unbound wisdom	mtha' grol ye shes
མཐའ་དགག	terminate with a counterargument	mtha' dgag
མཐའ་འགེགས	mtha' gcod pa'am, resolve	mtha' 'gegs
མཐའ་འགྲིལ	skirts or edge of a gown or vestment tied up	mtha' 'gril
མཐའ་རྒྱ	total height	mtha' rgya
མཐའ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	outer ocean	mtha' rgya mtsho
མཐའ་རྒྱན	hem ornamentation for clothing [fur etc]	mtha' rgyan
མཐའ་རྒྱས་པ	to finish	mtha' rgyas pa
མཐའ་སྒོར	circumference	mtha' sgor
མཐའ་སྒྲིལ་བ	mtha' 'jags sam, mtha' nas bsgril te sew,...Gyon chas kyi mtha' sgril ba	mtha' sgril ba
མཐའ་བརྒྱད	eight limits / extremes. Often {spros pa'i mtha' brgyad}	mtha' brgyad
མཐའ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	skye 'gag rtag chad/ 'gro 'ong/ gcig tha dad	mtha' brgyad kyi spros pa
མཐའ་ངོམ	edge, outskirts	mtha' ngom
མཐའ་ངོས	bashfulness, modesty	mtha' ngos
མཐའ་མངོན་མི་ཐུབ་པ	endless, limitless 1215	mtha' mngon mi thub pa
མཐའ་ཅན	words ending in n, m, r, l, branch	mtha' can
ཇོཨིནེད་ཨཕ༹ཏེར་ཐེ་ནམེ	base and ending the name. For instance, a name which is {sa mtha' can} will have either a suffixed or a post-suffixed sa following the	joined after the name
ནམེ	base	name
མཐའ་ཅན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	is brought to an end	mtha' can du byed pa
མཐའ་ཅན་དྲུག	chn	mtha' can drug
མཐའ་གཅག་ཏུ	1 sidedly	mtha' gcag tu
མཐའ་གཅིག	[take a fixed position on/ for] 1 side/ extreme, top, peak, summit	mtha' gcig
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ	unequivocally, one-sidedly, categorically	mtha' gcig tu
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྐྱུར	cast aside	mtha' gcig tu bskyur
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་ཆད་པ	1-sided nihilism, unqualified nothingness	mtha' gcig tu chad pa
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་མ་ངེས་པ	not ascertain/ fix 1- sidedly/ not certainly/ w/o qualification	mtha' gcig tu ma nges pa
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	to hold to any one/ a single version	mtha' gcig tu 'dzin pa
མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཟུང་བ	generalize, grasp 1-sidedly, hold w/o qualification	mtha' gcig tu bzung ba
མཐའ་གཅིག་པ	of one opinion, unanimous	mtha' gcig pa
མཐའ་གཅིག་པའི་རང་བཞིན	absolute[ness]	mtha' gcig pa'i rang bzhin
མཐའ་གཅིག་སྨྲ་བ	say definitely/ w/o reservation/ w/o qualification exponent of 1 extreme	mtha' gcig smra ba
མཐའ་གཅིད	[take a fixed position on/ for] 1 side/ extreme	mtha' gcid
མཐའ་གཅུན	counter-arguments	mtha' gcun
མཐའ་གཅོད	to verify, decide; pedagogical exegesis	mtha' gcod
མཐའ་གཅོད་པ	to conclude	mtha' gcod pa
མཐའ་གཅོད་པའི་ཕྱིར	in order to settle it definitely, to come to a conclusion or decision	mtha' gcod pa'i phyir
མཐའ་བཅད	outlining along an outer edge	mtha' bcad
མཐའ་ལྕགས	form of a mirror	mtha' lcags
མཐའ་ཆགས	living at the border or edge, border of a robe	mtha' chags
མཐའ་ཆགས་རི་མོ	brocade designs for robe linings, borders of cloth	mtha' chags ri mo
མཐའ་ཆད	lowly	mtha' chad
མཐའ་ཆུམས	mtha' nas gathered	mtha' chums
མཐའ་ཆོད	cut the root of doubt and fear [about truth, resolve, decide, be convinced, fully embrace	mtha' chod
མཐའ་ཆོད་པ	resolve, fully embrace	mtha' chod pa
མཐའ་མཇུག	[slad ma'am 'byung 'gyur,...Gral bstar gyi mtha' mjug...Yig phreng de'i mtha' mjug la yod pa'i yi ge, ...Phyi lo'i mtha' mjug tu tshur log yong] [at the] end, last, afterward	mtha' mjug
མཐའ་མཇུག་ཏུ	at the end/ last, afterward, finally	mtha' mjug tu
མཐའ་འཇགས	gos sogs kyi mtha' chags sam, mtha' 'gril	mtha' 'jags
མཐའ་ཉི	sun at the end of summer and winter	mtha' nyi
མཐའ་གཉིས	the two extremes/ extreme notions/ finalities * 1) two sides; 2) externalism and nihilism, samsara and nirvana)	mtha' gnyis
བེཨིང་ཨནད་ནོན	being. or subject and object respectively {yod med and bzung 'dzin}	Being and non
Oཪ་བེཨིང་ཨནད་ནོན	being {yod med OR subject and object / gzung 'dzin} (gd) (tse)	OR Being and non
མཐའ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the two extremes (x and not-x), a view of the two extremes	mtha' gnyis kyi lta ba
མཐའ་གཉིས་རྣམ་འགྲོལ	completely liberated from the two extremes mtha' gnyis rnam par spangs pa'i tshul the way of completely abandoning the two extremes	mtha' gnyis rnam 'grol
མཐའ་གཉིས་སྤང་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	1) MSS: "The conduct/practice that abandons the two extremes" 2) CM: rab tu byung ba rnams kyi 'tsho ba rgyas drags pa dang/ zhan drags pa'i mtha' gnyis su ma lhung ba ste/ 'dod pa bsod nyams kyi m...	mtha' gnyis spang pa'i spyod pa
ཨེཨིཐེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྭོ་ཨེ྾ཏྲེམེས་ཨོཕ༹་རེནུནཅིཨནཙ	excessivly expansive livelihood or excessively impoverished [livelihood], that is, the abandonment of the two extremes which consist of desiring alms and practicing austerities." [mss]	either of the two extremes of renunciants
མཐའ་གཉིས་སྤང་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	not fall into the two extremes of renunciates's livelihood rgyas drags pa &, zhan drags pa , 'dod pa bsod nyams kyi mtha' and lassitude	mtha' gnyis spang ba'i spyod pa
མཐའ་གཉིས་སྤངས	hermaphrodite who is neither man nor woman	mtha' gnyis spangs
མཐའ་གཉིས་སྤངས་པ	abandonment of the two extremes	mtha' gnyis spangs pa
མཐའ་གཉིས་བྲལ་བ	free from the two extremes (x and not-x, madhyamaka)	mtha' gnyis bral ba
མཐའ་གཉིས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བའི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote for engaging in the two extremes	mtha' gnyis la sbyor ba'i gnyen po
མཐའ་གཉིས་སུ་གྱེས	split into two extremes	mtha' gnyis su gyes
མཐའ་གཉིས་སུ་དོགས་པ	doubt	mtha' gnyis su dogs pa
མཐའ་གཉིས་སུ་མ་ལྷུང་བ	not falling into the two extremes	mtha' gnyis su ma lhung ba
མཐའ་གཉིས་སུ་ལྷུང་བ	falling into the two extremes	mtha' gnyis su lhung ba
མཐའ་གཉིས་སེལ་བ	Eliminating the Two Extremes	mtha' gnyis sel ba
མཐའ་མཉམ	boundless	mtha' mnyam
མཐའ་མཉམ་པའི་དབྱིབས	equilateral figure	mtha' mnyam pa'i dbyibs
མཐའ་རྙེད་དཀའ	herb gze ma ra mgo	mtha' rnyed dka'
མཐའ་གཏུགས་པ	ultimate, come to the ned	mtha' gtugs pa
མཐའ་གཏུགས་ས	ultimate basis	mtha' gtugs sa
མཐའ་རྟེན	final letters yi ge'i rjes 'jug [Ga nga da na ba ma ' ra la sa 1216	mtha' rten
མཐའ་རྟེན་གྱི་དབང	support"	mtha' rten gyi dbang
མཐའ་རྟེན་གྱི་མན་ངག	oral instructions of final support	mtha' rten gyi man ngag
མཐའ་རྟེན་ཚེ་དབང	longevity empowerment for final support GD	mtha' rten tshe dbang
མཐའ་རྟེན་བཞི	four consolidations [these are the three unmoving states {mi 'gul ba gsum}, the three presences {sdod pa gsum} the three attainments {thob pa gsum}, and the four assurances {gding bzhi} all accordi...	mtha' rten bzhi
ཤེས་བླ་མ	(gdmk)	shes bla ma
མཐའ་ལྟག	mtha' ma gang yin gyi ltag ma ste de'i gong ma	mtha' ltag
མཐའ་ལྟེབ་པ	turn in the edge	mtha' lteb pa
མཐའ་སྟོང་པ	{spyod pa legs nyes kyi mtha' stong pa} went beyond all actions, good or bad	mtha' stong pa
མཐའ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the beyond extremes	mtha' stong pa nyid
མཐའ་བརྟེན	flanked	mtha' brten
མཐའ་བརྟེན་གྱི་ཆོ་ག་ཕྱི་མ་བཞི	chn	mtha' brten gyi cho ga phyi ma bzhi
མཐའ་བརྟེན་ནས	by his side, flanked	mtha' brten nas
མཐའ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from all extremes	mtha' thams cad dang bral ba
མཐའ་ཐའ་ཡས་པ	boundless, countless, endless, infinite, boundless	mtha' tha' yas pa
མཐའ་ཐིག	mtha' la brgyab pa'i thig ris...Dkyil 'khor gyi mtha' thig...Dpe cha'i mtha' thig	mtha' thig
མཐའ་ཐུག་པ	ultimate	mtha' thug pa
མཐའ་ཐུམ	gos kyi mtha' 'gril	mtha' thum
མཐའ་མཐར་ཐུག་ས	limit[ation]	mtha' mthar thug sa
མཐའ་འཐུག	thicker towards the edge	mtha' 'thug
མཐའ་དག	countless/ unlimited	mtha' dag
མཐའ་དག་ཐམས་ཅད་དེ	all the.. [many]	mtha' dag thams cad de
མཐའ་དག་དོན་རྟོགས	[totally] realize the meaning [of everything] mtha' dag gdos bcas sa rdo ri brag sogs	mtha' dag don rtogs
མཐའ་དག་པ	full complement	mtha' dag pa
མཐའ་དག་མིན	plural sign	mtha' dag min
མཐའ་དག་རྫོགས་པ	in completeness, in their entirety; the exhaustion of all, finished	mtha' dag rdzogs pa
ཨལལ་ཐེ	-, all the -- are finished	all the
མཐའ་དག་གཟུགས་ཅན	dpe can don gyi yan lag dang yan lag can mtha' dag dpe'i yan lag dang yan lag can gyi gzugs su bkod pa'i rgyan zhig, gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	mtha' dag gzugs can
མཐའ་དང་མཉམ	boundless	mtha' dang mnyam
མཐའ་དང་བྲལ་བ	beyond all concepts	mtha' dang bral ba
མཐའ་དང་དབུས་མེད	free from/ w/o fringe/ limit and center	mtha' dang dbus med
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད་པ	enter into the mind of the equanimity of buddhahood w/o center or limit	mnyam pa nyid thugs su chud pa
མཐའ་དམ	difference separating ruler and subject	mtha' dam
མཐའ་དམ་ཚིག	difference separating ruler and subject	mtha' dam tshig
མཐའ་དོན	las don resolving ultimate meaning/ point/ pith	mtha' don
མཐའ་དྲུག	six limits. The views of the expedient and definitive meaning, the implied and the not implied, the literal and the not literal. Together with the 'four modes' they form the indispensable keys for ...	mtha' drug
ཕོ༹ཨུར་དེཕི༹ནིཏིབེ༹་མེཨནིང་ཕི༹བེ༹་ལིཏེརལ་ཨེ྾པྲེསསིཨོན་སི྾་ནོན	literal expresion Or the six "views" 1 {drang don - literal meaning two {nges don - true meaning three {dgongs pa can - implied four {dgongs pa can ma yin pa - not implied five {sgra ji bzhin pa - ...	four definitive meaning five literal expression six non
བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ	not explicit) (gd-mk)	bzhin ma yin pa
མཐའ་དྲུག་ཚུལ་བཞི	Six limits and four modes. The indispensable keys for unlocking the meaning of the tantras. The six limits are the views of the 1) expedient meaning (drang don), 2) definitive meaning (nges don), 3...	mtha' drug tshul bzhi
མཐའ་འདུམ	mthar thug gi bar 'dum,...Mi mthun pa thams cad kyi mtha' 'dum par byas pa	mtha' 'dum
མཐའ་འདུལ	border taming	mtha' 'dul
མཐའ་འདུལ་གྱི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་བཞི	chn mtha' 'dul dang yang 'dul gyi gtsug lag	mtha' 'dul gyi gtsug lag khang bzhi
མཐའ་འདུལ་བ	conquer or convert the people on the frontier	mtha' 'dul ba
མཐའ་འདུལ་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	border taming temple	mtha' 'dul gtsug lag khang
མཐའ་འདུལ་ལྷ་ཁང	border taming temples	mtha' 'dul lha khang
མཐའ་འདུས	temples built by Songtsen Gampo 1217	mtha' 'dus
མཐའ་འདེད	mthar ma thug bar 'ded pa'am rtsad gcod pa	mtha' 'ded
མཐའ་འདོམས	mtha' mjug tshang bar 'dus pa	mtha' 'doms
མཐའ་རྡུལ	<aupabartta:> #	mtha' rdul
མཐའ་སྡུད	protective ritual; often related to the four elements	mtha' sdud
མཐའ་སྡུད་པ	to bring to an end/ conclusion	mtha' sdud pa
མཐའ་སྡོམ	conclusion, closing, final summary	mtha' sdom
མཐའ་སྡོམ་པ	wind-up	mtha' sdom pa
མཐའ་བརྡུལ	a number	mtha' brdul
མཐའ་བསྡོམས	conclusion	mtha' bsdoms
མཐའ་བསྡོམས་ཀྱི་གྲོས་ཆོད	final resolution	mtha' bsdoms kyi gros chod
མཐའ་བསྡོམས་གན་རྒྱ	final agreement/ contract [a'gyur ldog mi 'byung ba'i phyir thag gcod kyi bris dan]	mtha' bsdoms gan rgya
མཐའ་ནས་སྐོར་བ	to surround, encircle	mtha' nas skor ba
མཐའ་ནས་བསྐོར་བའི་གངས་རི	surrounding snow mts	mtha' nas bskor ba'i gangs ri
མཐའ་མནན	{srid pa'i mtha' mnan} to overcome / suppress the extreme of samsara	mtha' mnan
མཐའ་སྣང	a number of 28 figures	mtha' snang
མཐའ་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ	number of twentynine figures	mtha' snang chen po
མཐའ་སྣེ	zur mtha'a, sne mo	mtha' sne
མཐའ་པ	1 living at the end of something	mtha' pa
མཐའ་དཔྱད	theorize the depth	mtha' dpyad
མཐའ་དཔྱད་པ	conclude	mtha' dpyad pa
མཐའ་དཔྱོད	make an [in depth] appraisal/ analysis examination, inspection [of difficult points]	mtha' dpyod
མཐའ་དཔྱོད་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཚར་གཅོད་དོཨུབཏ	eliminating examination mtha' dpyod pas gzhung don zab mo la	mtha' dpyod the tshom tshar gcod doubt
ལུང་དང་རིགས་པ་སྦྱར	by analysis relate the profound sense of the text/ tradition to scripture and reasoning	lung dang rigs pa sbyar
མཐའ་དཔྱོད་བྱེད	make an [in depth] appraisal/ analysis examination, inspection [of difficult points]	mtha' dpyod byed
མཐའ་སྤངས	give up the last remnant	mtha' spangs
མཐའ་སྤྱད	analyzed	mtha' spyad
མཐའ་ཕུད་པ	end up with	mtha' phud pa
མཐའ་དཕྱོད	critical critique	mtha' dphyod
མཐའ་བེར	kind of lasso with which the body of an enemy is entangled	mtha' ber
མཐའ་བེར་རྒྱག	lasso	mtha' ber rgyag
མཐའ་བྲལ	free of/ beyond extremes [where dualities seem "prevalent"]/ limit(ation)s [where there is no specific reference to dualities]; limitless/ boundless	mtha' bral
མཐའ་བྲལ་དབུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	the great madhyamaka free from extremes	mtha' bral dbu ma chen po
མཐའ་བྲལ་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great perfection free of limitation	mtha' bral rdzogs pa chen po
མཐའ་དབུས	border & center	mtha' dbus
མཐའ་དབུས་ཀུན་ཏུ	at the frontiers and in the interior, everywhere	mtha' dbus kun tu
མཐའ་དབུས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	everywhere	mtha' dbus thams cad du
མཐའ་དབུས་ཕྱོགས	border & center & direction	mtha' dbus phyogs
མཐའ་དབུས་ཕྱོགས་བྲལ	beyond any border & center & direction	mtha' dbus phyogs bral
མཐའ་དབུས་མེད	uncircumscribed	mtha' dbus med
མཐའ་དབུས་མེད་པ	free from fringe and center, w/o limit or center	mtha' dbus med pa
མཐའ་དབུས་སུ་ཁྱབ་པ	had spread everywhere	mtha' dbus su khyab pa
མཐའ་འབུད	banishment, extradition, expelled	mtha' 'bud
མཐའ་འབུད་གཏོང་བ་ཉེས་ཅན	banished criminal	mtha' 'bud gtong ba nyes can
མཐའ་འབྱམས	1) limitless; 2) tsarmam #	mtha' 'byams
མཐའ་འབྲས	final/ ultimate fruition/ result, gain, outcome, end	mtha' 'bras
མཐའ་མ	at least	mtha' ma
མཐའ་མ་འཁྱོལ	abandon work before completion	mtha' ma 'khyol
མཐའ་མ་འཁྱོལ་བ	to abandon before completion	mtha' ma 'khyol ba
མཐའ་མ་འཁྱོལ་བར་དུ	until completion	mtha' ma 'khyol bar du
མཐའ་མང	many sides/ extremes	mtha' mang
མཐའ་མང་གི་དབྱིབས	polygon	mtha' mang gi dbyibs
མཐའ་མའི	peremptory, ulterior, ultimate	mtha' ma'i
མཐའ་མའི་རྒྱལ་ཁ	final/ ultimate victory	mtha' ma'i rgyal kha
མཐའ་མའི་ཐག་གཅོད	ultimatum	mtha' ma'i thag gcod
མཐའ་མའི་མཐའ	extreme	mtha' ma'i mtha'
མཐའ་མའི་ནན་ཚིག་བརྡ་ཡིག	ultimatum	mtha' ma'i nan tshig brda yig
མཐའ་མའི་འབྲས	final result	mtha' ma'i 'bras
མཐའ་མའི་འབྲས་བུ	final result	mtha' ma'i 'bras bu
མཐའ་མར	surrounding	mtha' mar
མཐའ་མི	border people, barbarians	mtha' mi
མཐའ་མེད	without limitations, boundless, unlimited, without end	mtha' med
ནེཨིཐེར་ཨ་སུཕ༹ཕི༹྾་ཨོར་ཨ་པོསཏ	suffix joined to	neither a suffix or a post
ཐེ་ནམེ	base	the name
མཐའ་མེད་འཁོར	revolves without end	mtha' med 'khor
མཐའ་མེད་དུ	ad infinitum, eternity	mtha' med du
མཐའ་མེད་པ	endless	mtha' med pa
མཐའ་མེད་པའི་ཚེ	eternal life	mtha' med pa'i tshe
མཐའ་མེད་མ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་བ	myriad beings, each one once our mother	mtha' med ma gyur 'gro ba
མཐའ་མེད་མུ་མེད	mtha' rdzogs rgyu med pa	mtha' med mu med
མཐའ་དམག	foreign invasion	mtha' dmag
མཐའ་སྨུག་རྫོང་དམར་དགོན་པ	Thamug Dzongmar Gönpa, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong 1218	mtha' smug rdzong dmar dgon pa
མཐའ་བཙན་པ	secure future, eventually for good	mtha' btsan pa
མཐའ་རྩ་བ	phag mo gru pa	mtha' rtsa ba
མཐའ་ཚད	horizon, limit	mtha' tshad
མཐའ་ཚར	snam ras etc kyi kha tshar/ phud tshar	mtha' tshar
མཐའ་མཚམས	borders, frontier, remote	mtha' mtshams
མཐའ་མཚམས་བརྟན་སྲུང	securely guard the borders	mtha' mtshams brtan srung
མཐའ་མཚམས་ས་ཁུལ	border region	mtha' mtshams sa khul
མཐའ་མཚམས་ས་ཐིག	country's borders's dbye mtshams sa thig	mtha' mtshams sa thig
མཐའ་འཛིན	limits	mtha' 'dzin
མཐའ་རྫོགས	sum total	mtha' rdzogs
མཐའ་རྫོགས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	endless, limitless	mtha' rdzogs rgyu med pa
མཐའ་ཞན	worst	mtha' zhan
མཐའ་གཞི	4 extremes	mtha' gzhi
མཐའ་བཞི	four results / ends: {skyes pa'i mtha' 'chi ba, 'dus pa'i mtha' 'bral ba, 'byor ba'i mtha' rgud pa, mtho ba'i mtha' ltung ba} birth ends in death, meeting ends in separation, prosperity ends in dec...	mtha' bzhi
མཐའ་བཞི་དང་བྲལ	beyond the 4 limits	mtha' bzhi dang bral
མཐའ་བཞི་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	free from complexities of the four extremes	mtha' bzhi spros bral
མཐའ་བཞི་བྲལ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom free from the four extremes	mtha' bzhi bral ba'i ye shes
མཐའ་བཞི་ལས་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བ	victorious in the 4/ all directions	mtha' bzhi las rnam par rgyal ba
མཐའ་བཞིའི་སྐྱེ་འགོག	refutation of the arising of phenomena from any of the four extremes	mtha' bzhi'i skye 'gog
མཐའ་བཞིའི་སྐྱེ་བ	chn	mtha' bzhi'i skye ba
མཐའ་བཞིའི་བླ་སྨན་དགུ	the 9 doctors from the four directions	mtha' bzhi'i bla sman dgu
མཐའ་བཞིའི་དམིགས་བཏད	make a reference point of the four extremes	mtha' bzhi'i dmigs btad
མཐའ་བཞིར་རྒྱས་པ	one who expands even unto the four limits of the universe, epithet of cakravarti raja	mtha' bzhir rgyas pa
མཐའ་བཞིར་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བ	one who has conquered everywhere mtha' bzhis ma bsdus pa med pa'i phyir 'khor ba las yid 'byung bar bya'o - since nothing transcends these four results, one should develop weariness for samsara	mtha' bzhir rnam par rgyal ba
མཐའ་ཟད	wear out	mtha' zad
མཐའ་ཡས་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the beyond extremes	mtha' yas stong pa nyid
མཐའ་ཡས་རྣམ་བཀོད	enormous	mtha' yas rnam bkod
མཐའ་ཡས་པ	limitless	mtha' yas pa
མཐའ་ཡས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	the notion of infinity	mtha' yas pa'i 'du shes
མཐའ་ཡས་པར	infinitely	mtha' yas par
མཐའ་ཡས་པར་གྲགས་པ	boundlessly glorious	mtha' yas par grags pa
མཐའ་ཡས་མ	ocean, name of goddess dpal ldan lha mo	mtha' yas ma
མཐའ་ཡས་མུ་མེད	without end, without limits	mtha' yas mu med
མཐའ་ཡས་རྩ	medicinal plant, vegetable medicine	mtha' yas rtsa
མཐའ་ཡས་འོད	a tathagata	mtha' yas 'od
མཐའ་ཡི	foreign	mtha' yi
མཐའ་ཡུལ	a country not 1's own	mtha' yul
མཐའ་རས	piece, goods, imported from border countries	mtha' ras
མཐའ་རུ	in/ at the end, finally, at last, ultimately, lastly at the end, when finished, on the rim border, edge, limit, conclusion, closing, final summary	mtha' ru
མཐའ་རུ་འཁྱོལ་བ	be completed	mtha' ru 'khyol ba
མཐའ་རུ་ཐོན	chos sgo + - reach the ultimate goal of the Dharma	mtha' ru thon
མཐའ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfecting	mtha' ru phyin pa
མཐའ་ལ	Syn {mthar}	mtha' la
མཐའ་ལ་དགའ་བ	experiencing the joy of solitude	mtha' la dga' ba
མཐའ་ལ་འདུས་པ	nga'i + - they gathered round me	mtha' la 'dus pa
མཐའ་ལ་སྤྱུག་པ	banish into the neighboring country	mtha' la spyug pa
མཐའ་ལ་རེག་པ	reach the end	mtha' la reg pa
མཐའ་ལམ་བསྐོར་ཏེ	surrounded mtha' las rgal ba'i mya ngan las 'das pa nirvana surpassing extremes/ limitations	mtha' lam bskor te
མཐའ་ལས་འདས	beyond limitations / extremes	mtha' las 'das
མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond extremes, limitations. {sdug bsngal mtha' las 'das pa} extreme suffering, totally transcending all limitations; free from the extremes; transcending limitations	mtha' las 'das pa
མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	nothingness with regard to transcending extremes	mtha' las 'das pa stong pa nyid
མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པ་སྟོང་པ་གཉིད	voidness/ emptiness of the beyond extremes	mtha' las 'das pa stong pa gnyid
མཐའ་ལས་འདས་པར	free from the extremes	mtha' las 'das par
མཐའ་ལོགས་སུ	on the brink	mtha' logs su
མཐའ་སོ	'gram so'i mtha' ma	mtha' so
མཐའ་སྲུང	border guard	mtha' srung
མཐའ་སྲུང་དམག་དཔུང	frontier/ border defense troops	mtha' srung dmag dpung
མཐའ་གསལ	wholly clear, illuminated	mtha' gsal
མཐའ་གསལ་མཐིལ་མཐོང	come to light, become publicly known/ revealed	mtha' gsal mthil mthong
མཐའ་གསེབ	SA mtha' yi bar	mtha' gseb
མཐའ་ལྷས	frill	mtha' lhas
མཐའི	remote	mtha'i
མཐའི་ཀླས་པ	limitlessness	mtha'i klas pa
མཐའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of the ultimate, outer ocean	mtha'i rgya mtsho
མཐའི་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	surrounding regions/ countries/ kingdoms	mtha'i rgyal khams
མཐའི་གཉིས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བའི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote applied to/ uniting the two extremes	mtha'i gnyis la sbyor ba'i gnyen po
མཐའི་ཐུག་པ	ultimate	mtha'i thug pa
མཐའི་དྲི་མ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 stains of extremes	mtha'i dri ma bco brgyad
མཐའི་ནོར	treasures of the border country	mtha'i nor
མཐའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	horizon/ boundary of the ultimate	mtha'i mu khyud
མཐའི་དམག	border war, invading armies	mtha'i dmag
མཐའི་དམག་ཕུང	border army	mtha'i dmag phung
མཐའི་ཡས	limitless	mtha'i yas
མཐའི་ཡུལ་ཁམས	ultimate sphere	mtha'i yul khams
མཐའི་སོ་ཁ་སྲུང་བ	sa mtshams srung 'dzin byed pa	mtha'i so kha srung ba
མཐར	Finally,	mthar
མཐར་དཀྲོལ	liberation	mthar dkrol
མཐར་སྐྱེལ	ways, lead to a bad end	mthar skyel
མཐར་སྐྱེལ་བ	[see through] to its ultimate end, complete	mthar skyel ba
མཐར་སྐྱོལ	completion	mthar skyol
མཐར་སྐྲོད	abolition	mthar skrod
མཐར་སྐྲོད་གཏོང	drive out, expel, evict, banish, pursue	mthar skrod gtong
མཐར་སྐྲོད་གཏོང་བ	abolish mthar skrod gtong byed gnam gru fighter/ pursuit plane	mthar skrod gtong ba
མཐར་སྐྲོད་བྱེད	drive out, expel, evict, banish, pursue	mthar skrod byed
མཐར་སྐྲོད་དམག་གྲུ	destroyer [ship]	mthar skrod dmag gru
མཐར་འཁོལ	Syn {mtha' 'khyol}	mthar 'khol
མཐར་འཁྱོལ	final support, "back support", supportive teachings, reach/ see through to the end of an action	mthar 'khyol
མཐར་འཁྱོལ་བ	culminate, succeed	mthar 'khyol ba
མཐར་གྱི་གདིང་ཚན་ཅན	set in their ways	mthar gyi gding tshan can
མཐར་གྱིས	by degrees, gradually, at length	mthar gyis
མཐར་གྱིས་གནས་པ	1 of snyoms par 'jug pa dgu	mthar gyis gnas pa
མཐར་གྱིས་གནས་པའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	the successive equilibriums, {snyoms 'jug dgu}abidings in equipoise/ stations [bsam gtan bzhi dang gzugs me bzhi sogs kyi gnas re re nas rim pa mthar chags su bgrod de rang lam gyi mnyam bzhag la s...	mthar gyis gnas pa'i snyoms 'jug
མཐར་གྱིས་པ	gradual, successive, subsequent, consecutive, serial, succeeding, sequential	mthar gyis pa
མཐར་གྱིས་པ་ཡི་བྱ་བ	gradual activity	mthar gyis pa yi bya ba
མཐར་གྱིས་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	gradual activity/ engagement/ union	mthar gyis pa'i sbyor ba
མཐར་གྱིས་བཞག་པ	1) gradually establish, gral bsgrigs pa; 2) (A) 'jur mdud med pa} mthar gyis slong ba'i bsod snyoms pa grong mthar chags su slong ba'i bhikshu lta bu'o	mthar gyis bzhag pa
མཐར་གྱུར	corpse	mthar gyur
མཐར་གྱུར་པ	reach the end	mthar gyur pa
མཐར་དགོད་པ	add, place at the end	mthar dgod pa
མཐར་རྒྱས	greatly increase mthar mngon par rdzogs pa sangs rgyas	mthar rgyas
མཐར་ཆགས	complete text (symbolic script)	mthar chags
མཐར་ཆགས་པ	in succession, one after another	mthar chags pa
མཐར་ཆགས་པར	in succession, 1 after another	mthar chags par
མཐར་གཏུགས	pha rol tshu rol gyi bar mtshams, reach the end, end, final, last, ending w, final, ultimate, conclusive consequence, completion of an act, to the very limits, sooner or later, in the end/ long run	mthar gtugs
མཐར་གཏུགས་ནས་བཤད་ན	in the final analysis	mthar gtugs nas bshad na
མཐར་ལྟ	{'jig ltas bzung ba'i bdag de nyid rtag pa'am chad par lta ba} belief in extremes	mthar lta
མཐར་ལྟ་བ	eternalistic +/ or nihilistic view of a transitory collection as a self, belief in extremes	mthar lta ba
མཐར་ཐུག	absolute, final [thd]	mthar thug
མཐར་ཐུག་སྐྱེལ་སོ	the ultimate destination	mthar thug skyel so
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་གྲུབ་དོན	ultimate result/ attainment	mthar thug gi grub don
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	the ultimate illusory body	mthar thug gi sgyu lus
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་དོན	ultimate meaning	mthar thug gi don
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་བདེ་མཆོག	ultimate supreme bliss	mthar thug gi bde mchog
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་བདེ་བ	ultimate bliss/ happiness	mthar thug gi bde ba
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་ཕན་པ	ultimate benefit	mthar thug gi phan pa
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་བར་དུ	until reaching the end	mthar thug gi bar du
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་བྱང་ཆུབ	Final enlightenment	mthar thug gi byang chub
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་འབྲས་བུ	ultimate fruition/ result	mthar thug gi 'bras bu
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་དམིགས་ཡུལ	ultimate end/ goal/ objective	mthar thug gi dmigs yul
མཐར་ཐུག་གི་འོད་གསལ་ཆོས་སྐུ	ultimate luminosity dharmak ya	mthar thug gi 'od gsal chos sku
མཐར་ཐུག་རྙེད་དོན	conclusion, outcome, result	mthar thug rnyed don
མཐར་ཐུག་སྙིང་པོ	ultimate essence	mthar thug snying po
མཐར་ཐུག་ཏུ	Syn {mthar thug}	mthar thug tu
མཐར་ཐུག་གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱབས	permanent and everlasting protection	mthar thug gtan gyi skyabs
མཐར་ཐུག་ཐར་པ་ཐོབ་པ	the ultimate attainment of liberation	mthar thug thar pa thob pa
མཐར་ཐུག་ཐེག་པ་གཅིག	the 1 ultimate vehicle mthar thug thob bya bla na med pa sangs	mthar thug theg pa gcig
རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕང	the ultimate attainment of unexcelled buddhahood; the unsurpassable attainment, buddhahood mthar thug don kyi gdams pa gnad kyi me	rgyas kyi go 'phang
མཐར་ཐུག་བསྡོམས་དོན	the ultimate meaning gathered into 1	mthar thug bsdoms don
མཐར་ཐུག་པ	attributes of gods of the highest heaven, carried to the limit as regards quality	mthar thug pa
མཐར་ཐུག་པ་མེད	inexhaustible	mthar thug pa med
མཐར་ཐུག་པ་མེད་པ	not to be got through	mthar thug pa med pa
མཐར་ཐུག་པ་མེད་པའི་སྐྱོན	fault of infinite regress	mthar thug pa med pa'i skyon
མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་མངོན་རྟོགས	ultimate realization/ omniscience	mthar thug pa'i mngon rtogs
མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་གནས	topic/ place/ existence of the ultimate	mthar thug pa'i gnas
མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་ལམ	path of the ultimate 1221	mthar thug pa'i lam
མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་ཤེས་པ	knowledge/ awareness of the ultimate, ultimate knowledge/ awareness	mthar thug pa'i shes pa
མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་ས	level of the ultimate	mthar thug pa'i sa
མཐར་ཐུག་པར་གཤེགས་པ	go to the end	mthar thug par gshegs pa
མཐར་ཐུག་དཔྱོད་པའི་རིགས་ཤེས	ultimacyanalytic rational cognition; ultimacyanalytic, ultimacy-anaytic rational cognition; ultimacy-analytic	mthar thug dpyod pa'i rigs shes
མཐར་ཐུག་འབྲས་བུའི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of final fruition	mthar thug 'bras bu'i sgron ma
མཐར་ཐུག་མི་བསླུས་བའི་དོན	meaning of ultimate incontrovertibility	mthar thug mi bslus ba'i don
མཐར་ཐུག་མེད་པ	not going to the limit, not thorough	mthar thug med pa
མཐར་ཐུག་ཚད	limit, restriction	mthar thug tshad
མཐར་ཐུག་རིགས་ངེས་པ	[final] genealogical determinism [atyantagolranigat)	mthar thug rigs nges pa
མཐར་ཐུག་གཤིས་ཀྱི་རང་ཞལ	the real face of the ultimate nature	mthar thug gshis kyi rang zhal
མཐར་ཐོ	brdung bya'i dngos spyad khod snyoms zhun mthar 'don byed kyi implement	mthar tho
མཐར་ཐོན་པ	fully crossed or passed over the limit, perfect holy person	mthar thon pa
མཐར་མཐར་སྐྱོལ	carrying through, persistence, perseverance	mthar mthar skyol
མཐར་མཐུད་པ	subjoin	mthar mthud pa
མཐར་དོན	final interest for self emancipation	mthar don
མཐར་སྡུད་པ	to bring to an end/ a finish	mthar sdud pa
མཐར་ནན	insisting	mthar nan
མཐར་ནན་བྱེད	insist	mthar nan byed
མཐར་ནི་ངེས་པར་འཇིག	is finally going to fail, will perish in the end	mthar ni nges par 'jig
མཐར་གནས་གྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག་དགུ	the nine successive equilibriums, {snyoms 'jug dgu}	mthar gnas gyi snyoms 'jug dgu
མཐར་གནས་སྙོམས་འཇུག་དགུ	the 9 successive equilibriums, {snyoms 'jug dgu}	mthar gnas snyoms 'jug dgu
མཐར་གནས་པ	barber	mthar gnas pa
མཐར་གནས་བཞི	SK consonants [YA RA LA WA] ..Wa...Pa...La...Ta ?	mthar gnas bzhi
མཐར་སྣང	final visions, what appears finally	mthar snang
མཐར་སྤྱུག	thag ring gi pha mtha' la skrod pa Mi ngan rnams lung pa'i mthar spyug pa	mthar spyug
མཐར་སྤྱུག་པ	banish into the neighboring country	mthar spyug pa
མཐར་ཕུར	drive out, expel, evict, banish, pursue	mthar phur
མཐར་ཕུར་གཏོང	drive out, expel, evict, banish, pursue mthar phur gtong byed gnam gru fighter/ pursuit plane	mthar phur gtong
མཐར་ཕུར་བྱེད	drive out, expel, evict, banish, pursue	mthar phur byed
མཐར་ཕུར་དམག་གྲུ	destroyer [ship]	mthar phur dmag gru
མཐར་ཕྱིན	conclusion GD goal, final, ultimate, accomplish, perfect, perfectly attain, master, complete, carry to the end perfected, fulfilled, attained perfect, accomplished, gone to the end, carried to the ...	mthar phyin
མཐར་ཕྱིན་བསྒྱུར	change radically	mthar phyin bsgyur
མཐར་ཕྱིན་དམ་པ	the sublime goal	mthar phyin dam pa
མཐར་ཕྱིན་དུ་གཏོང	carry through to the end, complete, do to the nth degree	mthar phyin du gtong
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ	one who has arrived at a sure conclusion, one who has attained to an absolute state, one who has been saved or emancipated, reached the extreme limit, reach the end, complete, perfected one, saint,...	mthar phyin pa
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ་བསྙད	gone to the extremity, attaining thoroughness in any subject	mthar phyin pa bsnyad
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་གྲུབ་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	chn	mthar phyin pa'i grub rtags brgyad
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཉམས	the experience of perfect stability, the experience of perfection	mthar phyin pa'i nyams
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་རྟགས་བཞི	[TRS 121-1] mthar phyin pa'i byang chub sems dpa' perfected bodhisattva, bodhisattva who has reached the goal [continuously dwelling on the 10th bhumi] mthar phyin pa'i byang chub sems dpa' perfect...	mthar phyin pa'i rtags bzhi
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་ལམ	Path of fulfillment.	mthar phyin pa'i lam
སམེ་ཨས་ཐེ་འཔཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོ	learning.'	Same as the 'path of no
མཐར་ཕྱིན་པར	thoroughly, completely, exhaustively TSE	mthar phyin par
མཐར་ཕྱིན་བྱེད	carry through to the end, complete, do to the nth degree	mthar phyin byed
མཐར་ཕྱིན་ཤོག	may it be perfected!	mthar phyin shog
མཐར་འཕྱིན་པ	find fulfillment	mthar 'phyin pa
མཐར་བྱེད	to destroy, eliminate, abolish, finish; destroy	mthar byed
མཐར་བྱེད་པ	end a work, destroy, put an end to, demolish	mthar byed pa
མཐར་འབྱིན	eradicated, going to the limit	mthar 'byin
མཐར་འབྱོལ	flee to the end 1222	mthar 'byol
མཐར་འབྲས	final fruition. Syn {mthar thug gi 'bras bu} mthar 'bras la nges par 'byung ba'i khyad	mthar 'bras
མཐར་མ་འཁྱོལ་མཁན	failure	mthar ma 'khyol mkhan
མཐར་མ་ཐུག་པའི་ཤེས་པ	knowledge/ awareness of a bodhisattva noble one	mthar ma thug pa'i shes pa
མཐར་མ་ཕྱིན་པ	fail	mthar ma phyin pa
མཐར་མ་ཕྱིན་པར	until perfection has been reached, while perfection has not been reached	mthar ma phyin par
མཐར་འཛིན	holding to extremes	mthar 'dzin
མཐར་འཛིན་གྱི	absolutist	mthar 'dzin gyi
མཐར་འཛིན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	extremist view	mthar 'dzin gyi lta ba
མཐར་འཛིན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཞིག་པ	destroy all extremism	mthar 'dzin thams cad zhig pa
མཐར་འཛིན་པ	(holding to) absolutism/ some final limit; to take something to be a final limit/ an end in itself; to think in terms of/ believe in absolutes/ limiting views; to reify/ conceptualize limits	mthar 'dzin pa
མཐར་འཛིན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	to view/ view of adhering to philosophical extremes/ absolutist positions; a belief involved in extremes, belief ultimate, the view that all phenomena inherently exists, the belief of holding extre...	mthar 'dzin pa'i lta ba
མཐར་ཞག་འགའ་ཤིག་གི་བར་དུ	for the next few days	mthar zhag 'ga' shig gi bar du
མཐར་ཟད	final	mthar zad
མཐར་ཟད་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ	SK consonant ksha	mthar zad kyi yi ge
མཐར་ཟིན་པ	sky	mthar zin pa
མཐར་ཡོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	final transformation	mthar yongs su 'gyur ba
མཐར་ཡོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ་དམིགས་པ	perceive a final transformation	mthar yongs su 'gyur ba dmigs pa
མཐར་ལམ	1) mthar lam district; 2) path of finality)/GD	mthar lam
མཐར་ལམ་པ	those who dwell on the final path	mthar lam pa
མཐར་སོན	attained	mthar son
མཐར་སོན་པ	perfected	mthar son pa
མཐར་སོན་ཚེ	when completing	mthar son tshe
མཐར་ལྷུང	fall into decay, degenerate, deteriorate	mthar lhung
མཐལ	(not in DAS)	mthal
མཐས	approaching	mthas
མཐས་ཀླས	SA mtha' klas	mthas klas
མཐས་ཀླས་པ	immeasurable	mthas klas pa
མཐས་གླས་པ	border, limit	mthas glas pa
མཐས་གཏུགས	reach the end/ limit	mthas gtugs
མཐིང	1) a blue stone, lapis lazuli, azurite; 2) azure, dark/ deep/ mountain/ sky blue, black)	mthing
མཐིང་སྐྱ	light blue	mthing skya
མཐིང་ཁ	deep blue, azure blue, light blue, blue	mthing kha
མཐིང་ཁའི་ཀློང་ན	in a blue dimension	mthing kha'i klong na
མཐིང་ཁར	as blue color	mthing khar
མཐིང་ཁར་ཤར	manifests as blue color	mthing khar shar
མཐིང་ཁྲ	silk w blue ground and white pictures	mthing khra
མཐིང་ག	deep blue, azure	mthing ga
མཐིང་ག་ཁྱབ་ཆེན	great encompassing blue	mthing ga khyab chen
མཐིང་གི	an ancient dynasty	mthing gi
མཐིང་གི་ཞལ་བཟང་མ	{mthing gi zhal bzang ma} on S side of ding ri rdzong	mthing gi zhal bzang ma
མཐིང་རྒྱུས	a kind of stone used medicinally	mthing rgyus
མཐིང་སྔོན	dark blue med. mineral	mthing sngon
མཐིང་ཆུ	a light watery paint made from azurite	mthing chu
མཐིང་ཆེན	tshon chen sngon po	mthing chen
མཐིང་མདོག	blue color	mthing mdog
མཐིང་རྡོ	superior steel of bluish red color	mthing rdo
མཐིང་ནག	dark blue	mthing nag
མཐིང་འབྲུ	deepest azure-colored paint	mthing 'bru
མཐིང་དམར	violet	mthing dmar
མཐིང་དམར་ཅོད་པན	purple crown	mthing dmar cod pan
མཐིང་ཚོན	blue-colored	mthing tshon
མཐིང་ཞུན	a place on the tibetanchinese frontier	mthing zhun
མཐིང་འོད	blue light	mthing 'od
མཐིང་འོད་འབར་མ	blazing blue light	mthing 'od 'bar ma
མཐིང་རིལ	thing ril	mthing ril
མཐིང་རིལ་གྱོ་མོ	thing ril	mthing ril gyo mo
མཐིང་རིལ་ཅོ་མོ	tringa ochropus linnaeus	mthing ril co mo
མཐིང་རིལ་མཆུ	rma gting shin tu ring por lus pa'i zug rngu 'don byed kyi skam pa chu bya mthing ril gyi mchu 'dra ba zhig	mthing ril mchu
མཐིང་ཤིང	indigo plant, monolith of turquoise	mthing shing
མཐིང་ཤུན	sulphate of copper	mthing shun
མཐིང་ཤུལ	medium blue azurite	mthing shul
མཐིང་ཤོག	black paper	mthing shog
མཐིང་གསལ	brilliant deep blue	mthing gsal
མཐིང་ཧྲིལ	smaller bird	mthing hril
མཐིན་ག	deep blue	mthin ga
མཐིམ་ཟིན་པ	sunken 1223	mthim zin pa
མཐིའུ	little hammer, little toe, SA mthe'u	mthi'u
མཐིལ	depths/ center; pith/ core	mthil
མཐིལ་ཀོ	lham mthil gyi ko ba	mthil ko
མཐིལ་དཀོར	foundation, endowment of a monastery	mthil dkor
མཐིལ་གྱི་ཞལ་བ	floor	mthil gyi zhal ba
མཐིལ་བཅོལ་བ	to take as the core (of)	mthil bcol ba
མཐིལ་གཏད	{'di kho na la nyams len gyi mthil gtad de 'bad pa} concentrate on and make it the very foundation of your practice	mthil gtad
མཐིལ་རྟོལ	expose, lay bare, poke a hole in	mthil rtol
མཐིལ་སྟོན	expose, reveal, lay bare	mthil ston
མཐིལ་སྟོན་པ	enter into the depth of a conversation or expression, fathom a secret	mthil ston pa
མཐིལ་སྟོན་བྱེད	expose, reveal, lay bare	mthil ston byed
མཐིལ་བརྟོལ	1) bottom of a vessel; 2) nyes can gyi mtshang brtol ba)	mthil brtol
མཐིལ་མཐའ	vessel/ river gting mtha'	mthil mtha'
མཐིལ་དུ་བཟུང་བ	hold as the main point	mthil du bzung ba
མཐིལ་དུའང་གནས་པ	to abide in	mthil du'ang gnas pa
མཐིལ་དྲེག	dirt at the bottom of a vessel	mthil dreg
མཐིལ་འདོན	expose, reveal, lay bare	mthil 'don
མཐིལ་འདོན་བྱེད	expose, reveal, lay bare	mthil 'don byed
མཐིལ་ཕབ་པའི་དོན	anything final to establish	mthil phab pa'i don
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན	mthar phyin	mthil phyin
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་བསྒྱུར	change radically	mthil phyin bsgyur
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་དམ་པ	the sublime goal	mthil phyin dam pa
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་དུ་གཏོང	carry through to the end, complete, do to the nth degree	mthil phyin du gtong
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་པ	reach the end/ other side, become perfect, perfection, fulfilled, the end mthil phyin pa ngo shes pa'i gnad gsum the three piths of recognizing the ultimate	mthil phyin pa
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་པའི་གྲུབ་རྟགས་བརྒྱད	chn	mthil phyin pa'i grub rtags brgyad
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཉམས	the experience of perfect stability, the experience of perfection mthil phyin pa'i byang chub sems dpa' perfected bodhisattva, bodhisattva who has reached the goal	mthil phyin pa'i nyams
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ལམ	knowledge of the buddhas, [path of] perfection/ reaching the goal	mthil phyin pa'i lam
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་པར	thoroughly, completely, exhaustively TSE	mthil phyin par
མཐིལ་ཕྱིན་བྱེད	carry through to the end, complete, do to the nth degree	mthil phyin byed
མཐིལ་མི་རེག་པ	unfathomable deep bottom,...Brtson 'grus ldan na gzhung don gyi dgongs pa'i mthil mi reg pa gang yang ma red	mthil mi reg pa
མཐིལ་མེད	baseless	mthil med
མཐིལ་ཞལ	floor	mthil zhal
མཐིལ་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	to reach the final goal	mthil la phebs pa
མཐིལ་ཤིང	floor	mthil shing
མཐིལ་སོ	central. {bstan don mthil so} topic of teachings	mthil so
མཐིལ་ལྷན	boots's rdog pa'i lhan pa	mthil lhan
མཐིལ་ལྷམ	rkang pa'i mthil tsam 'khor ba'i lham zhig	mthil lham
མཐུ	force or power of an inherent nature, innate energy, capacity, resource, magic powers, conjuring, sorcery, black magic, power, glamour, witchcraft	mthu
མཐུ་རྐྱེན་གྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	please perform favorable actions	mthu rkyen gyi phrin las
མཐུ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྟན་པ	display vast power	mthu rgya chen po bstan pa
མཐུ་རྒྱག	perform sorcery, curse	mthu rgyag
མཐུ་རྒྱབ་མཁན	sorcerer	mthu rgyab mkhan
མཐུ་རྒྱས་བྱེད	to make black magic	mthu rgyas byed
མཐུ་བསྒྱིངས	roaring expressive of one's might and prowess	mthu bsgyings
མཐུ་བསྒྲགས	sun	mthu bsgrags
མཐུ་ངན་འདེབས་པ	curse by means of witchcraft	mthu ngan 'debs pa
མཐུ་སྔགས	sorcery	mthu sngags
མཐུ་སྔགས་རྒྱག་པ	chant incantations	mthu sngags rgyag pa
མཐུ་ཅན	powerful mthu can dbang sdus snying po Wangdü Nyingpo: 1765-1806	mthu can
མཐུ་ཆེ	very powerful, great power	mthu che
མཐུ་ཆེ་བ	the great power of; x {rgyal po bsod nams kyi mthu che bas} because of the great power of the king's merit	mthu che ba
མཐུ་ཆེན	Great magician [name given to Milerepa from his guru marpa)	mthu chen
མཐུ་ཆེན་ཀྲ་ཏི་སྔགས་འཆང	Trati Ngakchang, also known as the Mad Yogi of Kongpo (kong smyon), disciple of Rigdzin Tukchog Dorje	mthu chen kra ti sngags 'chang
མཐུ་ཆེན་ཐོབ	[Syn Vajrapani]	mthu chen thob
མཐུ་ཆེན་པོ	great power	mthu chen po
མཐུ་ཆེན་མི་དགུ	nine sorcerers	mthu chen mi dgu
མཐུ་ཆོས	teachings on magical powers	mthu chos
མཐུ་ཉམས	weaken	mthu nyams
མཐུ་གཏད	power, strength, force, black magic [mantra], cast spells	mthu gtad
མཐུ་གཏེར	treasure of power	mthu gter
མཐུ་གཏོང་བ	cast magic spells, bewitch	mthu gtong ba
མཐུ་སྟོབས	power and strength	mthu stobs
མཐུ་སྟོབས་ཀུན་ལྡན	almighty	mthu stobs kun ldan
མཐུ་སྟོབས་གླིང་པ	(1858-1914) - gter ston	mthu stobs gling pa
མཐུ་སྟོབས་བདག་པོ	phyag na rdo rje	mthu stobs bdag po
མཐུ་སྟོབས་ནུས་པ	power and strength	mthu stobs nus pa
མཐུ་སྟོབས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous powers	mthu stobs rdzu 'phrul
མཐུ་ཐོབ	1) attain power; 2) buddha mthu thob)	mthu thob
མཐུ་ཐོབ་པ	attain[ment of] power 1224	mthu thob pa
མཐུ་ཐོབ་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	completely ripened attainment of power	mthu thob pa yongs su smin pa
མཐུ་ཐོབས	efficiency	mthu thobs
མཐུ་དང་སྟོབས	magic, witchcraft	mthu dang stobs
མཐུ་དང་དྲག་རྩལ	powerful	mthu dang drag rtsal
མཐུ་དང་ལྡན་པ	powerful, mighty	mthu dang ldan pa
སྨྲ་བ	though mighty spoke sweetly to all	smra ba
མཐུ་དང་ནུས་པ	energy and power	mthu dang nus pa
མཐུ་དམ་པ	abundant/ perfect power	mthu dam pa
མཐུ་འདེབས་པ	cast magic spells, bewitch	mthu 'debs pa
མཐུ་ལྡན	powerful	mthu ldan
མཐུ་བསྡོངས་དཔུང་བསྡོངས	power and dpung shugs mnyam bsdongs byed pa	mthu bsdongs dpung bsdongs
མཐུ་ནུས	power	mthu nus
མཐུ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four powers	mthu rnam pa bzhi
མཐུ་པ	mthu gtad rgyag mkhan	mthu pa
མཐུ་པོ	a sorcerer	mthu po
མཐུ་དཔལ	1) power and brilliance/ glory or mastery; 2) buddha mthu dpal)	mthu dpal
མཐུ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཟོལ་བསྟོད	bstod yul dpe can la rang nyid nus mthu'i khyad par lhag 'dod kyi rgyags pa ste nga rgyal med kyang, yod pa ltar du smad de don du dpe mthu ldan gzhan zhig bkod nas de dang mtshungs pa'i mthu phun ...	mthu phun tshogs kyi zol bstod
མཐུ་བ	clod (of earth) (?)	mthu ba
མཐུ་བ་ཆེ	very powerful	mthu ba che
མཐུ་བོ	magician, wizard, witch	mthu bo
མཐུ་བོ་ཆེ	one versed in mysticism, exorcist, lama	mthu bo che
མཐུ་བོ་ཆེ་མི་བཞི	Four Great Sorcerers	mthu bo che mi bzhi
མཐུ་བྱད	evil sorcerer's power and byad stems	mthu byad
མཐུ་བྱིན	power and blessing	mthu byin
མཐུ་བྲི་བ	weakening/ declining power/ strength	mthu bri ba
མཐུ་བྲི་བ་མི་རྒན་པ	old man of declining strength	mthu bri ba mi rgan pa
མཐུ་དབང	power	mthu dbang
མཐུ་མེད	powerless, feeble, unable, no choice	mthu med
མཐུ་མེད་པ	powerless, helpless, w/o means to, no choice bu to mthu med pa 'gan 'khri yod kyang sgrub	mthu med pa
པའི་ཐབས་མེད	powerless so that even though they had a plan there was no way to accomplish it	pa'i thabs med
མཐུ་མོ་ཆེ	a preta	mthu mo che
མཐུ་མོ་ཆེའི་ཡི་དབ༹གས	powerful preta	mthu mo che'i yi dvags
མཐུ་དམན་པ་དད་ལྡན	those with faith but little power	mthu dman pa dad ldan
མཐུ་བཙན	power	mthu btsan
མཐུ་རྩལ	power	mthu rtsal
མཐུ་རྩལ་ཆེ་བ	great power and skill	mthu rtsal che ba
མཐུ་རྩལ་སྙེམས་པས	proud of one's strength	mthu rtsal snyems pas
མཐུ་རྩལ་སྟོབས	vital strength	mthu rtsal stobs
མཐུ་རྩལ་ནུས་པ	power, strength and ability	mthu rtsal nus pa
མཐུ་རྩལ་ནུས་པས	power, strength and skill mthu yi mtshan nyid rnam par dbye ba the divisions of the characteristics/ definition of power	mthu rtsal nus pas
མཐུ་ཡོད་པ	have great power, effective, efficacious, potent	mthu yod pa
མཐུ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	owing to	mthu la brten nas
མཐུ་ལས	by means of	mthu las
མཐུ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	springs from mthu las byung ba'i ting nge 'dzin samadhi arising from power mthu las byung ba'i ting nge 'dzin samadhi arising from power [sangs rgyas kyi rdzu 'phrul gyi stobs las byung ba'i ting n...	mthu las byung ba
མཐུ་སེར་གཏད	conjuring, raising tempests, exorcising ghosts	mthu ser gtad
མཐུག	1) thick; 2) abundant [forest/ sleep][comp mthug po]	mthug
མཐུག་རྔམས	dpangs tshad	mthug rngams
མཐུག་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	thicken	mthug tu gtong ba
མཐུག་འདེབས	thick/ close sowing	mthug 'debs
མཐུག་པ	thick, thick, dense, SA 'thug pa	mthug pa
མཐུག་པོ	1) thick. 2) deep [usu. with sleep]	mthug po
མཐུག་པོ་བཟོ་བ	fatten	mthug po bzo ba
མཐུག་པོའི་སྡེ	SK aspirated consonants	mthug po'i sde
མཐུག་པོར	thickly	mthug por
མཐུག་འཕྲི་སྲབ་སྣོན	=ization, balancing	mthug 'phri srab snon
མཐུག་འཕྲི་སྲབ་སྣོན་བྱེད	=ize, balance	mthug 'phri srab snon byed
མཐུག་ཚད	thickness	mthug tshad
མཐུག་ལོས	density	mthug los
མཐུག་སྲབ་གི་ཚད	thickness	mthug srab gi tshad
མཐུང་བྱེད	SA gur gum	mthung byed
མཐུད	to join two ends, see {mthud nas} joined, connected, continued	mthud
མཐུད་ཀ	supplement, subsidy	mthud ka
མཐུད་རྒྱབ་པ	join	mthud rgyab pa
མཐུད་རྒྱུག་དབྱུག་པ	stick used in relay races	mthud rgyug dbyug pa
མཐུད་རྒྱུག་རྩལ་འགྲན	relay races	mthud rgyug rtsal 'gran
མཐུད་དམ	two pieces of paper sbyar ba'i mthud mtshams su brgyab pa'i the'u [small hammer? seal?]	mthud dam
མཐུད་ནས	continuing, following	mthud nas
མཐུད་པ	continue, follow (tha dad pa),, connect, join	mthud pa
མཐུད་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	machine for piecing things together	mthud byed 'phrul 'khor
མཐུད་འབྲེལ	adjoining	mthud 'brel
མཐུད་སྦྱོར	join, piece together, graft	mthud sbyor
མཐུད་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	join, piece together, graft	mthud sbyor byed
མཐུད་མ	1) Gra bsgrigs nas bzhag pa'i dngos rigs; 2) Lhan pa Gyon pa rnying par mthud ma khag mang brgyab pa	mthud ma
མཐུད་མེད	SA 'thud med	mthud med
མཐུད་ཚབ	substitute, fill-in	mthud tshab
མཐུད་ཚབ་བྱེད	substitute, fill-in	mthud tshab byed
མཐུད་མཚམས	gaps between things following each other	mthud mtshams
མཐུད་མཚུངས	joint	mthud mtshungs
མཐུད་འཛིན	succeed	mthud 'dzin
མཐུད་འཛུགས་གཉིས་ལྡན་འབྲས	two harvest rice	mthud 'dzugs gnyis ldan 'bras
མཐུད་སྲུང	relief [of troops]	mthud srung
མཐུད་སྲུང་བྱེད	relieve [troops]	mthud srung byed
མཐུན	[be] corresponding (colors), compatible, conducive, favorable, harmonious, agreeable, according, appropriate, consistent, amicable, [be] in harmony/ [in] accord/ agreement/ conformity w	mthun
མཐུན་རྐྱན་འཛོམས་པོ	abundant things?	mthun rkyan 'dzoms po
མཐུན་རྐྱེན	supportive/ productive circumstance 1225	mthun rkyen
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ཁྱེར་འོང	we will take good care of you	mthun rkyen khyer 'ong
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི	the wheel of four favorable things, the four favorable conditions [1 {gnas pa} be a god or human two {brten pa - follow a spiritual friend three {smon pa} -}-aspire for {bdag nyid kyi blo chos} -}-...	mthun rkyen 'khor lo bzhi
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་གང་དགོས	necessary favorable conditions	mthun rkyen gang dgos
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་གྱི་ཕྱིན་ལས	(please perform) favorable actions	mthun rkyen gyi phyin las
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་རྒྱས་པ	spread the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen rgyas pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་རྒྱས་པའི་ལས	action of spreading the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen rgyas pa'i las
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་སྒྲུབ་པ	establish the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen sgrub pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་བསྒྲུབས་ནས་ཆས་པ	gather the requisites [for his journey]	mthun rkyen bsgrubs nas chas pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ལྔ	the five favorable conditions [for renunciation [rab tu byung ba la mthun rkyen lnga dang ldan dgos pa ste, yul mchog gsum dang mkhan slob bzhugs pa dang, rgyud tshogs su ma tshang zhing sdom ro me...	mthun rkyen lnga
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་དང་ལྡན་པ	having the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen dang ldan pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་རྣམས	all he needed	mthun rkyen rnams
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་སྤེལ	increase the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen spel
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཕེལ	increase favorable conditions, flourish w favorable conditions/ requisites	mthun rkyen 'phel
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་བྱེད	to cooperate, help, befriend	mthun rkyen byed
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་བྱེད་པ	assist in, help to	mthun rkyen byed pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་སྦྱར	gave me all I needed	mthun rkyen sbyar
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་མ་འཛོམས་པ	favorable conditions/ necessary things are not gathered/ available	mthun rkyen ma 'dzoms pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ཚོགས	favorable conditions are present	mthun rkyen tshogs
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ཚོགས་གསོག་པ་ལྔ	chn	mthun rkyen tshogs gsog pa lnga
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཚོགས	gather the requisites/ favorable conditions	mthun rkyen 'tshogs
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཛོམ་པ	altogether successful	mthun rkyen 'dzom pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཛོམ་པོ	successful through a favorable concurrence of circumstances	mthun rkyen 'dzom po
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཛོམས་པ	everything needed is at hand	mthun rkyen 'dzoms pa
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཛོམས་པའི་གནས	a place where all necessary things are available	mthun rkyen 'dzoms pa'i gnas
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་འཛོམས་པོ	abundant things?; having all the necessities of life	mthun rkyen 'dzoms po
མཐུན་རྐྱེན་གསོལ་སྐལ	food, clothing, gnas mal etc. kyi cha rkyen gsol ras gnang ba'i skal ba	mthun rkyen gsol skal
མཐུན་གྱུར	attuned to	mthun gyur
མཐུན་གྲོགས	1) friend of like mind; 2) helpful friend [Syn: dkar nye dang, blo dkar ba, snying sdug mdza' bshes]	mthun grogs
མཐུན་གྲོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	friendly nation	mthun grogs rgyal khab
མཐུན་གྲོགས་ཅན	amiable	mthun grogs can
མཐུན་གྲོགས་ཚོགས་པ	club	mthun grogs tshogs pa
མཐུན་གྲོས	agreement	mthun gros
མཐུན་གྲོས་ཆིངས་ཡིག	treaty	mthun gros chings yig
མཐུན་གྲོས་ཆོད་ཡིག	agreement, accord	mthun gros chod yig
མཐུན་གྲོས་བྱེད	* consult, deliberate, discuses	mthun gros byed
མཐུན་འགྱུར	1) rogs ram dang mthun rkyen du 'gyur ba; 2) gcig mthun du 'gyur ba)	mthun 'gyur
མཐུན་འགྱུར་མཛད་པ	to be friendly, concordant, well-wishing, to add their best wishes	mthun 'gyur mdzad pa
མཐུན་འགྱུར་ཡི་གེ	letter of recommendation	mthun 'gyur yi ge
མཐུན་འགྲིག	arrange/ negotiate for peace/ friendship/ harmony	mthun 'grig
མཐུན་འགྲིག་བྱེད	arrange/ negotiate for peace/ friendship/ harmony	mthun 'grig byed
མཐུན་རྒྱེན་ལྔ	the five favorable conditions	mthun rgyen lnga
མཐུན་སྒྲིག	reconciliation	mthun sgrig
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ	unity [thun mong gi phugs re'am las 'gan legs 'grub byed ched nus shugs gcig sdud kyis mnyam du sgril ba]	mthun sgril
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	unity--criticism CH slogan	mthun sgril skyon brjod
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་འཐབ་རྩོད	united struggle	mthun sgril 'thab rtsod
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད	unite	mthun sgril byed
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད་པ	to unite, rally	mthun sgril byed pa
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་མེད	disunited, discordant	mthun sgril med
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་ལས་སྐྱོང་ལྷན་ཚོགས	solidarity council mthun sgril las 'dzin u yon lhan tshogs solidarity council	mthun sgril las skyong lhan tshogs
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་གཤོག་ཁ	ally, alliance 1226	mthun sgril gshog kha
མཐུན་སྒྲིལ་གཤོག་ཁ་ཆེན་པོ	the great alliance [Lhasa red guard group]	mthun sgril gshog kha chen po
མཐུན་བསྒྲིགས	1) gnyen bsgrigs; 2) Bar 'dum)	mthun bsgrigs
མཐུན་ཅན	gentle, peace	mthun can
མཐུན་ཆ	in agreement / conformity / harmony	mthun cha
མཐུན་འཇུག	1) bring about agreement/ harmony/ friendly relations; 2) in accord w others	mthun 'jug
མཐུན་འཇུག་པ	cause to agree, fit in, bring in accordant elements	mthun 'jug pa
མཐུན་འཇུག་བྱེད	bring about agreement/ harmony/ friendly relations	mthun 'jug byed
མཐུན་དུ	similar, same	mthun du
མཐུན་འདུམ	mutually according 'dum sgrig	mthun 'dum
མཐུན་སྡེབ	bsam blo mthun zhing mnyam du 'grogs pa	mthun sdeb
མཐུན་སྡེབས	harmonize	mthun sdebs
མཐུན་ནོ	is similar	mthun no
མཐུན་སྣང	shared / common perception	mthun snang
མཐུན་སྣང་གི་དངོས་པོ	the things of shared/ common perception	mthun snang gi dngos po
མཐུན་སྣང་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	establish shared/ common perception	mthun snang du grub pa
མཐུན་པ	to be in agreement, to agree	mthun pa
མཐུན་པ་ཉིད	conformity, make conform to	mthun pa nyid
མཐུན་པ་སྤུན་བཞི	the four good companions [sngon byung bya gong ma sreg dang, ri bong, spre'u, glang chen bzhis rgan gzhon brtsi bkur byas pas de'i yul du bde skyid byung ba'i lo rgyus kyi picture	mthun pa spun bzhi
མཐུན་པ་འབྱེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	quarreling between friends	mthun pa 'byed par byed pa
མཐུན་པ་མིན	does not concur with	mthun pa min
མཐུན་པའི་རྐྱེན	favorable conditions	mthun pa'i rkyen
མཐུན་པའི་གྲོགས	friends of great mental affinity	mthun pa'i grogs
མཐུན་པའི་རྒྱན	tshig phrad kyang sogs tshig don snga phyi	mthun pa'i rgyan
མཐུན་པའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	wished for blessings	mthun pa'i dngos grub
མཐུན་པའི་ཆོས	compatible/ noncontradicting things	mthun pa'i chos
མཐུན་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	favorable coincidence/ conditions, right juncture	mthun pa'i rten 'brel
མཐུན་པའི་དོན་དམ	conducive ultimate. Syn {rnam grangs don dam}	mthun pa'i don dam
མཐུན་པའི་དོན་དམ་པ	conducive ultimate, accountable absolute	mthun pa'i don dam pa
མཐུན་པའི་སྡེ	equal rank, same class	mthun pa'i sde
མཐུན་པའི་དཔེ	a good example, a way that may be followed	mthun pa'i dpe
མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས	harmonious elements/ factors	mthun pa'i phyogs
མཐུན་པའི་བུམ་པ	burned paper etc.te btsugs na rlung khrag 'thabs pas gzer ba dang, phyi skran mtha' dag treating	mthun pa'i bum pa
མཐུན་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	rang 'dra skyed par byed pa'i rgyu	mthun pa'i byed rgyu
མཐུན་པའི་སྨན	a med. suitable for the disease	mthun pa'i sman
མཐུན་པའི་ཡུལ་དུ་གནས་པ	living in a land of harmony, one of the {lha dang mi rnams kyi 'khor lo bzhi} four states of existence of gods and men. to stay in a favorable area	mthun pa'i yul du gnas pa
མཐུན་པའི་ཡུལ་ན་གནས་པ	be a conducive object, dwell in favorable places [god or human), {lha dang mi rnams kyi 'khor lo bzhi}	mthun pa'i yul na gnas pa
མཐུན་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	implements of livelihood for a bhikshu according w the vinaya	mthun pa'i yo byad
མཐུན་པའི་རླུང	favorable [following] wind	mthun pa'i rlung
མཐུན་པའི་རླུང་དང་འགྲོགས་ན	if the wind blows fair	mthun pa'i rlung dang 'grogs na
མཐུན་པའི་ལས	agreeable work	mthun pa'i las
མཐུན་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	conducive posadha	mthun pa'i gso sbyong
མཐུན་པར	favorable, according, harmonious	mthun par
མཐུན་པར་སྐྱེས	younger brother	mthun par skyes
མཐུན་པར་སྐྱེས་པ	similar extraction	mthun par skyes pa
མཐུན་པར་གྱུར	favorable	mthun par gyur
མཐུན་པར་གྱུར་པ	conducive to	mthun par gyur pa
མཐུན་པར་གྱུར་པའི་ཡུལ	a favorable place	mthun par gyur pa'i yul
མཐུན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱུ	cause of concordant understanding	mthun par rtogs pa'i rgyu
མཐུན་པར་སྣང་བ	similar culture	mthun par snang ba
མཐུན་པར་བྱ	act in accord with	mthun par bya
མཐུན་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིན	for the sake of staying harmony	mthun par bya ba'i phyin
མཐུན་པར་བྱེད་པ	make agree, bring to agreement, reconcile, be in sympathy with, make treaty, come to terms, come to agreement	mthun par byed pa
མཐུན་པར་སྨིན་བྱེད	ripen in accordance, consistent ripening	mthun par smin byed
མཐུན་པར་རྩེ་བ	playing without disagreement 1227	mthun par rtse ba
མཐུན་པས་འགྲོགས	to get harmoniously	mthun pas 'grogs
མཐུན་པོ	friendly, compatible, harmonious, one, alike, similar	mthun po
མཐུན་པོ་མེད་པ	hostile	mthun po med pa
མཐུན་པོར་འགྲོགས	remain in harmony with ... !	mthun por 'grogs
མཐུན་དཔེ	rtags gsal gyi sbyor ba 'god skabs bsgrub bya nges pa'i ched du bkod pa'i mtshungs dpe'am rang dang rigs mthun gyi dpe	mthun dpe
མཐུན་དཔེ་ལྟར་སྣང	* counterfeit of a concordant example	mthun dpe ltar snang
མཐུན་དཔེ་ཡང་དག	true concordant example	mthun dpe yang dag
ཀྱི་ཡ་གྱལ	rtags chos gnyis ldan gyi chos mthun sbyor gyi dpe ste, bsgrub bya nges pa'i sngon du rjes khyab dngos su nges pa'i gzhir gyur pa, byas rtags kyis sgra mi rtag par sgrub pa'i mthun dper bum pa bkod...	kyi ya gyal
མཐུན་སྤྱོར	friendship	mthun spyor
མཐུན་ཕྱོགས	pro, similar class, harmonious factor. similar class	mthun phyogs
ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	the similar class never existing and the dissimilar class always du 'jug pa mthun phyogs la gtan med mi mthun	phyogs la khyab byed du 'jug pa
ཐེ་མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ནོན	eternal sometimes arises from effort and sometimes not] mthun phyogs la gtan med mi mthun	the mi mthun phyogs non
མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཡོད་པ	exist in the similar class [bsgrub bya'i chos kyi mthun phyogs la yod pa, dper na, byas pa rtags su bkod nas mi rtag par sgrub pa'i tshe byas pa de mi rtag pa'i mthun phyogs la yod pa lta bu,...	mthun phyogs la yod pa
མཐུན་བྱེད	phyogs gnyis mthun par byed pa	mthun byed
མཐུན་འབྲེལ	social intercourse, alliance, goodwill, liaison, diplomacy	mthun 'brel
མཐུན་འབྲེལ་གྱི	diplomatic	mthun 'brel gyi
མཐུན་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་སྟངས	diplomacy	mthun 'brel byed stangs
མཐུན་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	join in social intercourse	mthun 'brel byed pa
མཐུན་སྦྱོར	phan tshun mthun pa'i las la sbyor ba,...Bzo zhing gnyis bar la mthun sbyor gyi las ka yag po byed pa,...Bya spyod nor ba la mthun sbyor ma byed,...= nye bar sbyor ba dang, mthun phyogs, mtshams sb...	mthun sbyor
མཐུན་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	regulate, balance, adjust	mthun sbyor byed
མཐུན་སྦྲེལ	friendship, friendly, cordial relations, good will	mthun sbrel
མཐུན་མི་མཐུན	thought, actions, speech, cha lugs etc in accord and not mthun mi mthun phyogs gnyis ka la gtan	mthun mi mthun
མེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	from the phyogs chos gtan tshigs dgu, an thun mong min pa'i ma nges pa'i rtags: mthun phyogs and mi mthun phyogs of the reason and	med du 'jug pa
ཐེསིས་ཨརེ་བོཐ་ནོན	existent, EG the dharmin sound is permanent, because it is hearable [mnyan bya], like a vase and space, "mnyan bya" de sgra rtag par sgrub pa'i mthun phyogs never exists in space &, and likewise th...	thesis are both non
བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	from the phyogs chos gtan tshigs dgu las, 1 of the dngos kyi ma nges pa'i rtags bzhi: rtags de gsal ba de'i mthun phyogs dang mi mthun phyogs gnyis ka la khyab par yod pa: EG, the dharmin sound is ...	byed du 'jug pa
པ་གཉིས་གཉིས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	from the phyogs chos gtan tshigs dgu 1 of the dngos kyi ma nges pa'i rtags bzhi: rtags de gsal ba de'i mthun phyogs la khyab 1228 ma khyab gnyis ka &, mi mthun phyogs la'ang khyab ma khyab gnyis ka...	pa gnyis gnyis su 'jug pa
མཐུན་མིན	not in harmony, incompatible, disagreement	mthun min
མཐུན་མོང	thun mong	mthun mong
མཐུན་མོང་ཁང	Friendship Hospital	mthun mong khang
མཐུན་མོང་གན་རྒྱ	phan tshun mnyam 'brel gyi chod don gan rgya	mthun mong gan rgya
མཐུན་མོང་པ	ordinary, usual, general, common	mthun mong pa
མཐུན་མོང་བའི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	common preliminaries	mthun mong ba'i sngon 'gro
མཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	uncommon preliminaries	mthun mong ma yin pa'i sngon 'gro
མཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	uncommon empowering condition	mthun mong ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen
མཐུན་རྩིས	astrological calculation for marriage	mthun rtsis
མཐུན་ཚོགས	ordinary las don zhig 'phel rgyas gtong ched du btsugs pa'i mang tshogs kyi tshogs pa,...Zhing pa'i mthun tshogs	mthun tshogs
མཐུན་རྫས	applicable ritual objects and substances, favorable objects suitable to propitiate specific deities, ritual objects for propitiation of the divine guardians	mthun rdzas
མཐུན་ཟབ	close friendship	mthun zab
མཐུན་ཟླ	compatible helper, companion, spouse	mthun zla
མཐུན་གཟུགས	byad dbyibs sogs gzhi mthun gyi gzugs	mthun gzugs
མཐུན་ལམ	amicable relationship	mthun lam
མཐུན་ལམ་བྱེད	make friends establish friendship/ good will/ cordial relations	mthun lam byed
མཐུན་ལམ་འཛུགས་པ	to join in social intercourse	mthun lam 'dzugs pa
མཐུན་གཤིབས་བྱེད་པ	to get along with	mthun gshibs byed pa
མཐུན་སྲིན	ring finger	mthun srin
མཐུར	straps or rope for a horse's head to which another rope is tied to fasten him	mthur
མཐུར་མགོ	bridle	mthur mgo
མཐུར་འགོ	srab las gzhan pa'i rgyun du mgo la bskon rgyu zhig	mthur 'go
མཐུར་འགོ་སྣ་ཐག	horse/ mule la g.yog rgyu'i mthur 'go and mdzo/ gyag la g.yog rgyu'i nose rope	mthur 'go sna thag
མཐུར་ཐག	horse/ mule gyi mthur 'gor tied rope, reins, rope for tying horse etc.	mthur thag
མཐུར་མདའ	reins, halter, rope tied to the muzzle of a horse	mthur mda'
མཐུར་མ	spoon	mthur ma
མཐུས་རྐུ	steal others's things by force	mthus rku
མཐུས་རྐུ་བ	rob by means of incantations, rob violently one's property	mthus rku ba
མཐུས་སྒོ་ཚང་དུ	improvement	mthus sgo tshang du
མཐུས་སྒོ་ཚང་དུ་འགྲོ	be improved	mthus sgo tshang du 'gro
མཐུས་སྒོ་ཚང་དུ་གཏོང	improve	mthus sgo tshang du gtong
མཐུས་སྒོ་ཚང་བ	perfect, excellent	mthus sgo tshang ba
མཐུས་བཏབ་པ	{sdig pa'i mthus btab nas} consumed by the power of evil	mthus btab pa
མཐུས་འཕྲོག	take others wealth by force	mthus 'phrog
མཐུས་འཕྲོག་པའི་རྒྱུ་ནོར	wealth taken by force	mthus 'phrog pa'i rgyu nor
མཐུས་བྱིན	gift of power	mthus byin
མཐུས་བརྩིར་བ	be subdued, overpowered by witchcraft	mthus brtsir ba
མཐུས་ཤོར	loss/ waste of time	mthus shor
མཐེ་ཆུང	little finger, little toe	mthe chung
མཐེ་ཆེན	thumb, big toe	mthe chen
མཐེ་རྗེས	thumb print	mthe rjes
མཐེ་པ	little finger	mthe pa
མཐེ་བོ	thumb	mthe bo
མཐེ་བོ་ཅན	thumb-size realm	mthe bo can
མཐེ་བོང	thumb, big toe	mthe bong
མཐེ་བོང་རྗེས་ཀྱི་མཛུབ་མོ	forefinger	mthe bong rjes kyi mdzub mo
མཐེ་བོང་སྟོན་པ	thumb	mthe bong ston pa
མཐེ་བོང་ལག་སྐྱེས	Tibetan govt. tax obligation whereby in some regions zhing bsran mthe bong lag par skyes tshad kyis in the the owner's fields 1 had to go and gather ears of grain	mthe bong lag skyes
མཐེ་བོའི་ལྟོ་གང	thumb's dpangs zheng gi tshad	mthe bo'i lto gang
མཐེ་མོ	thumb	mthe mo
མཐེ་གཟེར	drawing pin, thumbtack	mthe gzer
མཐེ་འུ	Syn {mtheb chung}	mthe 'u
མཐེབ	the big toe	mtheb
མཐེབ་ཀོར	[men's] thumb ring	mtheb kor
མཐེབ་ཀྱུ	button, symbol resembling a finger which is placed with the torma	mtheb kyu
མཐེབ་སྐྱུ	dough by the thumb kong kong bzos pa'i gtor gsos kyi mtheb skyu tepkyu	mtheb skyu
མཐེབ་གུང་རྡེབ་པ	snapping thumb and gung mo	mtheb gung rdeb pa
མཐེབ་གྲི་བ	others's aam phrag nang gi ca lag thabs kyis stealer	mtheb gri ba
མཐེབ་ཆུང	little finger	mtheb chung
མཐེབ་ཆེན	thumb, big toe	mtheb chen
མཐེབ་གཉིས	two thumbs	mtheb gnyis
མཐེབ་དྲས	gzhan gyi aam phrag gi thief	mtheb dras
མཐེབ་པྲ	mo divination using the thumb	mtheb pra
མཐེབ་སྤྲོད་པ	put the finger to the bow string	mtheb sprod pa
མཐེབ་མོ	finger	mtheb mo
མཐེབ་བཙིར	mtheb mos shugs kyis btsir	mtheb btsir
མཐེབ་རྩེ	tip of the thumb	mtheb rtse
མཐེབ་ཚིགས་དབུས་མ	2nd joint of the thumb	mtheb tshigs dbus ma
མཐེབ་ཚོན	thumb's dpangs zheng gi tshad	mtheb tshon
མཐེབ་སྲིན	[thumb and] ring-finger	mtheb srin
མཐེབ་ལྷེ	shuttlecock [hit w feet]	mtheb lhe
མཐེབ་ལྷེ་རྒྱག	play w shuttlecock [hit w feet]	mtheb lhe rgyag
མཐེའུ	little hammer, little toe, little finger	mthe'u
མཐེའུ་ཆུང	the small finger	mthe'u chung
མཐོ་བཀའ་དམའ་བརྩི	the lower subordinates itself to the higher	mtho bka' dma' brtsi
མཐོ་ཁྱད	height, highness	mtho khyad
མཐོ་ཁྲིམས་ཁང	supreme court	mtho khrims khang
མཐོ་གང	span from thumb to middle finger extended	mtho gang
མཐོ་གང་གི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment violation of a mtho span [R ]	mtho gang gi spang ba
མཐོ་གང་བ	a finger-span (thumb to middle finger) in size	mtho gang ba
མཐོ་གང་བ་ཙམ	one finger-span in size	mtho gang ba tsam
མཐོ་གང་བའི་ཇིམ་སྐུ	clay figure 1 mtho span tall	mtho gang ba'i jim sku
མཐོ་གང་བའི་ཚད	finger span in size	mtho gang ba'i tshad
མཐོ་གང་ཙམ	one finger-span in size	mtho gang tsam
མཐོ་གང་ལོངས་པ	span, measure by the hand with extended fingers	mtho gang longs pa
མཐོ་གོང	little triangular receptacle into which effigy of enemy is placed	mtho gong
མཐོ་གྲང་ས་ཁུལ	frigid/ arctic/ tundra zone/ region	mtho grang sa khul
མཐོ་གྲས	high level, upper strata	mtho gras
མཐོ་གྲས་སློབ་གྲྭ	upper school	mtho gras slob grwa
མཐོ་དགོན་བསམ་གཏན་ཆོས་གླིང	Todung monastery in Solu	mtho dgon bsam gtan chos gling
མཐོ་རྒྱབ	earnest money	mtho rgyab
མཐོ་རྒྱབ་པ	give earnest money	mtho rgyab pa
མཐོ་བརྒྱད	eight palms	mtho brgyad
མཐོ་བརྒྱབ་པ	ring thung la mtho tshad brgyab pa	mtho brgyab pa
མཐོ་ངག	grandiloquence, high speech with little meaning	mtho ngag
མཐོ་མཆོང	high jump	mtho mchong
མཐོ་འཇལ་བ	span, measure by the hand with fingers extended	mtho 'jal ba
མཐོ་ཉམས་ཅན	lofty	mtho nyams can
མཐོ་གཉིས	2 spans	mtho gnyis
མཐོ་སྙེག	1) go gnas gong ma gong mar snyeg 'dod byed pa}...'Dod chen mtho snyeg byed mkhan la, spyir phan lhag bsam spu tsam med; 2) Mgo 'dren nam, rgyab gnyer mtho bo 'tshol ba,...Rang mgo rang 'don ma thu...	mtho snyeg
མཐོ་སྙེམས	arrogant pride in high position	mtho snyems
མཐོ་ཏིམ་ཞིབ་ཕྲ	high precision	mtho tim zhib phra
མཐོ་ཏིམ་ཞིབ་ཕྲའི་ཐོན་རྫས	high precision products	mtho tim zhib phra'i thon rdzas
མཐོ་ཐབ	blast furnace	mtho thab
མཐོ་ཐུབ་དམའ་ཐུབ	flexible able to go up and down	mtho thub dma' thub
མཐོ་དོ	2 spans, distance of two spans	mtho do
མཐོ་འདོད	ambition	mtho 'dod
མཐོ་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ	ambitious	mtho 'dod chen po
མཐོ་འདོད་ཚ་པོ	ambitious	mtho 'dod tsha po
མཐོ་ལྡིང	Toding, in Tö	mtho lding
མཐོ་ལྡིང་བ	people from Toding	mtho lding ba
མཐོ་གནོན	high pressure/ tension/ voltage	mtho gnon
མཐོ་གནོན་གློག་སྐུད	high tension electric wire	mtho gnon glog skud
མཐོ་གནོན་གློག་སྒྱུར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	high voltage transformer	mtho gnon glog sgyur 'phrul chas
མཐོ་གནོན་གློག་ཤུགས	high voltage electric power	mtho gnon glog shugs
མཐོ་གནོན་འདུལ་ཐབས	high pressure/ handed/ steam- roller tactics	mtho gnon 'dul thabs
མཐོ་གནོན་དམག་ས	high pressure position [in war]	mtho gnon dmag sa
མཐོ་པོ	high, tall, high	mtho po
མཐོ་པོར་སླེབ་པ	tower	mtho por sleb pa
མཐོ་སྤྱོད	lta ba'am snang ba mthon po'i rtsing spyod	mtho spyod
མཐོ་བ	high, tall, uplifted, exalted, senior, hammer, elevation, prominence, height, lofty, raised, hammer, 1 of dbyibs gzugs brgyad	mtho ba
མཐོ་བ་ཏོག	stone used as a hammer	mtho ba tog
མཐོ་བ་དང་དམའ་བ	concave and convex [for shapes]	mtho ba dang dma' ba
མཐོ་བ་གནོན་པ	lower what is high, bring down, humble	mtho ba gnon pa
མཐོ་བ་རི་ལྟར	like a tall mt	mtho ba ri ltar
མཐོ་བའི་ཁང་རྩེག	tall building	mtho ba'i khang rtseg
མཐོ་བའི་མཐའ་ལྟུང་བ	rise ends in fall	mtho ba'i mtha' ltung ba
མཐོ་བའི་རྦ་རླབས	big waves	mtho ba'i rba rlabs
མཐོ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	noble qualities	mtho ba'i yon tan
མཐོ་བའི་རིན་གོང	high price	mtho ba'i rin gong
མཐོ་བའི་ཤིང	tall tree	mtho ba'i shing
མཐོ་བའི་ས	high place	mtho ba'i sa
མཐོ་བའི་སེམས་པ	lofty thoughts	mtho ba'i sems pa
མཐོ་བར་བྱ་བ	eulogize, flatter, praise, exalt	mtho bar bya ba
མཐོ་བར་བརྩེགས་པ	1 of 10 great mountains, SA ri bo chen po bcu, lofty mountain in uttara kuru	mtho bar brtsegs pa
མཐོ་བར་སེམས་པ	think highly of, extol	mtho bar sems pa
མཐོ་དབང	moon	mtho dbang
མཐོ་འབྱར་དམའ་རྡུང	mtho sra sprel lad 'khrab pa dang, nyam chung la thub tshod byed pa'i gtam dpe	mtho 'byar dma' rdung
མཐོ་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ	superior, average and low	mtho 'bring tha ma
མཐོ་མྱེབ་ཡེ	try to get up	mtho myeb ye
མཐོ་དམན	height, high & low, height, levels	mtho dman
མཐོ་དམན་ཅན	having high and low	mtho dman can
མཐོ་དམན་མཉམ་པ	of equal height	mtho dman mnyam pa
མཐོ་དམན་སྣ་ཚོགས	various levels	mtho dman sna tshogs
མཐོ་དམན་བར་ཀུན་ལ	for all those of high, low, and middle stations	mtho dman bar kun la
མཐོ་དམན་མེད་པ	w/o high and low	mtho dman med pa
མཐོ་དམའ	concave and convex, [w] high and low protuberances and depressions elevated or base, sloping, curving, bumpy, uneven, elevated, [basic] height, volume [sound], level	mtho dma'
མཐོ་དམའ་སྙོམས་པ	=ize high and low	mtho dma' snyoms pa
མཐོ་བཙམས་པ	try to harm, inflict injury	mtho btsams pa
མཐོ་བརྩམས་པ	to try to harm, inflict injury	mtho brtsams pa
མཐོ་བརྩེགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ	phyag mchod gsol 'debs kyi rten tshogs zhing sgom tshul zhig ste, gtso bo'i steng gi nam mkhar gcig thog tu gcig brtsegs nas bzhugs pa'i rnam pa	mtho brtsegs kyi tshul
མཐོ་ཚད	1) height; 2) Lag mtho'i tshad; 3) tall)	mtho tshad
མཐོ་ཚད་གཞལ་རྒྱུའི་འཕྲུལ་ཆ	altimeter	mtho tshad gzhal rgyu'i 'phrul cha
མཐོ་ཚད་རིང་ཐུང་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	measure the height of	mtho tshad ring thung la rgyag pa
མཐོ་ཚད་ལ་འཇིགས་དངང་སྐྱེས་པ	acrophobia	mtho tshad la 'jigs dngang skyes pa
མཐོ་མཚམས	evil design, mischievous mind or intention, brewing mischief	mtho mtshams
མཐོ་འཚམ་པ	1) strive to rival; 2) inflict harm)	mtho 'tsham pa
མཐོ་འཚམས་པའི་ནུས་པ་ཟད	lost power to inflict harm	mtho 'tshams pa'i nus pa zad
མཐོ་གཞལ་བ	span, measure by the hand with the fingers extended	mtho gzhal ba
མཐོ་ཡང་ཆེན་པོ	big and tall	mtho yang chen po
མཐོ་ཡོར	tho yor	mtho yor
མཐོ་རིམ	high level	mtho rim
མཐོ་རིམ་ཉམས་ཞིབ་ཁང	advanced research institute	mtho rim nyams zhib khang
མཐོ་རིམ་དབང་སྒྱུར	ruling power elite	mtho rim dbang sgyur
མཐོ་རིམ་མི་སྣ	the upper strata people mtho rim mi sna rnams lhan cig tu gros	mtho rim mi sna
མོལ་བྱས	the upper strata people consulted/ discussed together mtho rim zhing las thon skyed mnyam las	mol byas
མཐོ་རིམ་ལམ་དག	paths to the higher states of beings	mtho rim lam dag
མཐོ་རིམ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཅན	high level intellectuals	mtho rim shes yon can
མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲ	college	mtho rim slob gra
མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ	institution of higher learning, university, college	mtho rim slob grwa
མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་བ	senior primary school	mtho rim slob grwa chung ba
མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་འབྲིང་བ	senior secondary school	mtho rim slob grwa 'bring ba
མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གསོ	higher education	mtho rim slob gso
མཐོ་རིས	1) higher existences, Higher realms, high rebirth. 2) heavenly realms	mtho ris
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of gods and human beings	mtho ris kyi 'jig rten
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་རྟེན	a support/ body of the higher realms	mtho ris kyi rten
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་དང་བདེ་བ	the physical form and happiness of the higher realms	mtho ris kyi rten dang bde ba
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་གནས	the heavens	mtho ris kyi gnas
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་མཚོ	lake of heaven	mtho ris kyi mtsho
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་ཡོན	gzugs bzang, longs spyod che, shes rab phun tshogs, dbang phyug ldan, nad med, shin tu tshe ring ba)	mtho ris kyi yon
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བདུན	the seven virtues of a high rebirth {tshe ring ba, nad med pa, gzugs bzang ba, skal pa bzang ba, rigs mtho ba, nor mang ba, shes rab che ba bdun} long life, good health, a beautiful physical form, ...	mtho ris kyi yon tan bdun
མཐོ་རིས་ཀྱི་ལུས་རྟེན	a bodily support of the higher realms	mtho ris kyi lus rten
མཐོ་རིས་ཀླུང	celestial river, river of the mandakini	mtho ris klung
མཐོ་རིས་གྲགས	barber	mtho ris grags
མཐོ་རིས་དགེ་བ	happiness/ virtue of the higher realms (of gods/ humans)	mtho ris dge ba
མཐོ་རིས་རྒྱལ	name of brgya byin lha	mtho ris rgyal
མཐོ་རིས་ཐར་པ	the higher realms and liberation	mtho ris thar pa
མཐོ་རིས་ཐར་པའི་གནས	the freedom of the superior realms	mtho ris thar pa'i gnas
མཐོ་རིས་ཐོབ	Jupiter	mtho ris thob
མཐོ་རིས་དང་བྱང་གྲོལ་སྐྱེད་པ	produce the higher realms, enlightenment, and emancipation	mtho ris dang byang grol skyed pa
མཐོ་རིས་འདྲེན་པ	ruler of the higher realms, Indra	mtho ris 'dren pa
མཐོ་རིས་གནས	Syn 1) {sa bla}. 2) {sum rtsen}	mtho ris gnas
མཐོ་རིས་གནས་བཅུ	chn	mtho ris gnas bcu
མཐོ་རིས་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three higher realms	mtho ris rnam gsum
མཐོ་རིས་རྣམས	gods including the planet rahu	mtho ris rnams
མཐོ་རིས་སྣང་བྱེད	Rahu	mtho ris snang byed
མཐོ་རིས་བུ་མོ	daughter of the higher realms, goddess	mtho ris bu mo
མཐོ་རིས་བྱེད་པོ	happiness/ virtue	mtho ris byed po
མཐོ་རིས་སྨད་འཚོང་ལགས་མྱོས་སྐྱེས	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	mtho ris smad 'tshong lags myos skyes
མཐོ་རིས་སྨན་པ	physician of the gods	mtho ris sman pa
མཐོ་རིས་ཡོན་ཏན་བདུན	1) {rigs ldan}. 2) {gzugs bzang} 3) {longs spyod che ba} 4) {shes rab phun sum tshogs} 5) {dbang phyag che ba} 6) {nad med pa} 7) {tshe ring ba}	mtho ris yon tan bdun
མཐོ་རིས་རླུང	heavenly breeze	mtho ris rlung
མཐོ་རིས་སུ	to the higher realms	mtho ris su
མཐོ་རིས་སུ་སྐྱེ་ན	if one is to take birth in the higher realms	mtho ris su skye na
མཐོ་རིས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to the higher realms	mtho ris su 'gro ba
མཐོ་རིས་སུ་གཤེགས་པ	had died and gone to heaven	mtho ris su gshegs pa
མཐོ་རིས་སུ་གཤེགས་སོ	died and went to heaven	mtho ris su gshegs so
མཐོ་རིས་གསུམ	Three higher realms. The worlds of human beings, demigods or asuras, and gods or devas. These realms are more pleasant than the lower realms of animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings, but are not p...	mtho ris gsum
མཐོ་རིས་ལྷ	the heavenly/ celestial gods	mtho ris lha
མཐོ་རིས་ལྷ་མིའི་བདེ་བ	the happiness of gods and humans in the higher realms	mtho ris lha mi'i bde ba
མཐོ་རིས་ལྷ་མིའི་གནས	the higher realms of gods or men	mtho ris lha mi'i gnas
མཐོ་རིས་ལྷའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of the gods in the higher realms/ heavens	mtho ris lha'i 'jig rten
མཐོ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	improve, raise, heighten, elevate, increase	mtho ru gtong ba
མཐོ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	improve, raise	mtho ru phyin pa
མཐོ་རུ་མི་སྟེར་ཉེན་པའི་སྐྱོན་སེལ	exorcism of the negativities that do not allow one to rise	mtho ru mi ster nyen pa'i skyon sel
མཐོ་རུ་མི་སྟེར་དམའ་བའི་འདྲེ	'dre who drag down and do not allow to rise	mtho ru mi ster dma' ba'i 'dre
མཐོ་རེ་ཙམ	span in length	mtho re tsam
མཐོ་རླབས	upsurge	mtho rlabs
མཐོ་རླབས་ལངས	have an upsurge	mtho rlabs langs
མཐོ་ལ་བརྗིད་པ	lofty and majestic	mtho la brjid pa
མཐོ་ལོངས	span, measure by the hand with extended fingers	mtho longs
མཐོ་ཤོས	highest	mtho shos
མཐོ་བཤད	grandiloquence, high speech with little meaning	mtho bshad
མཐོ་ས	high place, plateau	mtho sa
མཐོ་སར་འཛིན་པ	climb [up], ascend	mtho sar 'dzin pa
མཐོ་སར་འཛེག་པ	climb, ascend, climb up	mtho sar 'dzeg pa
མཐོ་སློབ་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན	faculty	mtho slob kyi sde tshan
མཐོ་སློབ་ནས་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ	graduate	mtho slob nas mthar phyin pa
མཐོ་སློབ་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	university	mtho slob gtsug lag khang
མཐོང	see, notice, perceive, experience, realize, witness, have insight, notice, sight, vision, the seen, perceived, experienced, great view, insight, be attached, hang onto, full moon day, esteem, status	mthong
མཐོང་ཀ	chest, breast	mthong ka
མཐོང་དཀའ་ཐུབ་པ	achieve what is difficult to see	mthong dka' thub pa
མཐོང་དཀའི་ཐུབ་པ	achieve what is difficult to see	mthong dka'i thub pa
མཐོང་ཁ	chest, breast	mthong kha
མཐོང་འཁོར	field of vision	mthong 'khor
མཐོང་ག	chest, breast	mthong ga
མཐོང་ག་ནས་འཛིན	seize by the breast	mthong ga nas 'dzin
མཐོང་གྱེལ	mthong yul	mthong gyel
མཐོང་གྲོལ	liberation by sight, which liberates upon being seen	mthong grol
མཐོང་གྲོལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Tongdröl Dorje, the previous Trülshik Rinpoche	mthong grol rdo rje
མཐོང་གྲོལ་མ	attain liberation just by seeing [truth, guru, buddha statue etc.	mthong grol ma
མཐོང་དགའ	feels happy in seeing, pleasing to sight	mthong dga'
མཐོང་དགའ་ཐོས་དགའ	delightful to see, delightful to hear	mthong dga' thos dga'
མཐོང་འགྱུར	visible, able to behold	mthong 'gyur
མཐོང་འགྱུར་ཕྱིར	have been able to behold, because they are visible	mthong 'gyur phyir
མཐོང་འགྲོལ་ཆེན་མོ	Great Stupa that Liberates on Sight	mthong 'grol chen mo
མཐོང་རྒྱ	extent (great or small) of what is seen, field of vision	mthong rgya
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	narrow minded	mthong rgya chung chung
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	1) mostly w/o virtues/ good qualities; 2) narrow place; 3) limited outlook; 4) near sighted)	mthong rgya chung ba
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	open to all sides, vast view	mthong rgya che ba
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་རི་བོ	a mountain open to all sides	mthong rgya che ba'i ri bo
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	broad minded	mthong rgya chen po
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཐོས་རྒྱ	seen and heard, have knowledge/ experience of	mthong rgya thos rgya
མཐོང་རྒྱ་ཐོས་རྒྱ་མེད	not have seen and heard of, not have knowledge/ experience of	mthong rgya thos rgya med
མཐོང་རྒྱ་མེད་པ	1) w/o knowable qualities; 2) very small object of seeing)	mthong rgya med pa
མཐོང་རྒྱ་མཛེས་པོ	scenic	mthong rgya mdzes po
མཐོང་རྒྱའི	visual mthong rgyu dang 'tshor rgyu yod pa palpable	mthong rgya'i
མཐོང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	imperceptible, invisible, latent	mthong rgyu med pa
མཐོང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པར་ཆགས་པ	disappear	mthong rgyu med par chags pa
མཐོང་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	visible	mthong rgyu yod pa
མཐོང་རྒྱུན	visual transmission. The visual transmission is the direct passing on of the knowledge of how to make tormas etc. by a physical demonstration	mthong rgyun
མཐོང་སྒོམ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ	the discards of (the paths of) insight and cultivation	mthong sgom gyi spang bya
མཐོང་ངོ	gazing	mthong ngo
མཐོང་སྔོན	blue	mthong sngon
མཐོང་ཆུང	contempt, scorn disdain	mthong chung
མཐོང་ཆུང་ཁྱད་གསོད	contempt, scorn, disdain mthong chung gi khyad gsod gzhan la rang nyid kyi mtho snyems kyi nga	mthong chung khyad gsod
མཐོང་ཆུང་གཏོང་བ	despise	mthong chung gtong ba
མཐོང་ཆུང་བྱེད	have contempt/ scorn/ disdain, look down on, discriminate against	mthong chung byed
མཐོང་ཆུང་བྱེད་པ	scorn	mthong chung byed pa
མཐོང་ཆུང་བྱེད་པའི་དགྲ་བོ	contemptuous enemy	mthong chung byed pa'i dgra bo
མཐོང་ཆེན	regard, esteem	mthong chen
མཐོང་ཆེན་པོ	regard, esteem, consideration, place importance on	mthong chen po
མཐོང་ཆེན་བྱེད	regard highly, esteem	mthong chen byed
མཐོང་ཆོས	actions of this life (?); the present, this lifetime, {mthong ba'i chos}	mthong chos
མཐོང་ཆོས་མངོན་གསུམ	have result in same lifetime	mthong chos mngon gsum
མཐོང་ཆོས་བདེ་གནས་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five paths for abiding in happiness in this life TSE	mthong chos bde gnas kyi lam lnga
མཐོང་ཆོས་བདེར་གནས	abiding in happiness in this life	mthong chos bder gnas
མཐོང་ཆོས་བདེར་གནས་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five paths for abiding in happiness in this life (Tserig) [tshe 'dir bde bar gnas pa'i lam nam mkha' mtha' yas kyi dngos 1232 gzhi'i snyoms 'jug dang, rnam shes mtha' yas kyi dngos gzhi'i snyom...	mthong chos bder gnas kyi lam lnga
མཐོང་ཆོས་མྱོང་འགྱུར	[karmic fruition] to be experienced in this lifetime	mthong chos myong 'gyur
མཐོང་ཆོས་མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	karma done in this lifetime that will ripen in that same life, karma/ an action to be experienced in this lifetime TSE	mthong chos myong 'gyur gyi las
མཐོང་ཆོས་ཞི	person who has attained the path of seeing who attains peace/nirvana in that very life [nonreturner certain to attain nirvana	mthong chos zhi
མཐོང་ཆོས་ཞི་བ	attain the peace of nirvana within the dharmas of seeing	mthong chos zhi ba
ཨབིདིང་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	returning [dge 'dun nyi shu'i nang gses	abiding in the fruition of non
མཐོང་ཆོས་ལ་མེད	w/o evident qualities	mthong chos la med
མཐོང་ཆོས་ལ་ཞི	pacify evident qualities/ this life	mthong chos la zhi
མཐོང་ཆོས་སུ	in this lifetime [as opposed to a future life], the present. Syn {mthong ba'i chos}	mthong chos su
མཐོང་ཉམས	visual experience [not actual / not sleep]	mthong nyams
མཐོང་ཉམས་སུ་ཕྱིན་པ	[his] esteem declined	mthong nyams su phyin pa
མཐོང་སྙིང་འདོད་པ	tell the essence of what 1 saw	mthong snying 'dod pa
མཐོང་རྟོགས	see & recognize	mthong rtogs
མཐོང་ཐིང་རྒྱལ་མོ	Gaurishankar, in Nepal. See Azure Queen Mountain	mthong thing rgyal mo
མཐོང་ཐུབ	possible to see	mthong thub
མཐོང་ཐོབ	one who has attained correct views	mthong thob
མཐོང་ཐོབ་པ	[one who has] attained [the path of] seeing/ correct views TSE	mthong thob pa
མཐོང་ཐོས	see and hear, seen and hear, have knowledge/ experience of	mthong thos
མཚར་བའི་ལྟད་མོ	wondrous show which is not of objects of seeing and hearing	mtshar ba'i ltad mo
མཐོང་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the sphere of seeing and hearing	mthong thos kyi yul las 'das pa
མཐོང་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of seeing and hearing	mthong thos kyi shes pa
མཐོང་ཐོས་རྙོག་བཟོ	spyod yul thams cad la zing cha slong ba confusing the public	mthong thos rnyog bzo
མཐོང་ཐོས་དོགས་གསུམ	see, hear and yid kyis dogs pa	mthong thos dogs gsum
མཐོང་ཐོས་དྲན་རེག	seeing, hearing, touching or remembering	mthong thos dran reg
མཐོང་ཐོས་དྲན་རེག་ཀུན་སྒྲོལ	total liberation of seeing hearing touching and remembering	mthong thos dran reg kun sgrol
མཐོང་ཐོས་སྣོམ་མྱོང་བཞི	four [sensations] of seeing hearing smelling and tasting gd	mthong thos snom myong bzhi
མཐོང་ཐོས་མེད	not see and hear/ seen and hear/ have knowledge/ experience of	mthong thos med
མཐོང་ཐོས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	things that are seen and heard	mthong thos su gyur pa
མཐོང་ཐོས་བསམ་ཚུལ	impression	mthong thos bsam tshul
མཐོང་མཐའ	field of vision	mthong mtha'
མཐོང་མཐོང	obvious	mthong mthong
མཐོང་མཐོང་བ	obvious	mthong mthong ba
མཐོང་དང་མཚུངས	just like seeing	mthong dang mtshungs
མཐོང་དུ་མེད་པ	not perceivable	mthong du med pa
མཐོང་དུག	a poison working just by seeing it, envy	mthong dug
མཐོང་དོགས་མེད	gzhan mthong gi the tshom med pa Kho rang nga rgyal che drags nas nyam chung rnams mthong dogs med	mthong dogs med
མཐོང་དོད་པོ	good looking, handsome, appealing	mthong dod po
མཐོང་དྲན	impression	mthong dran
མཐོང་ལྡན	Ajatasatru, son of king Bimbisara	mthong ldan
མཐོང་ན་དགའ	very handsome, of beautiful form	mthong na dga'
མཐོང་ན་དགའ་བ	Delightful To See; {bskal pa mthong na dga' ba la sangs rgyas bye ba phrag brgyad cu byung} during the kalpa Delightful To See, eight hundred million Buddhas appeared	mthong na dga' ba
མཐོང་ནས	When he saw	mthong nas
མཐོང་སྣང	apparent phenomena manifesting in one's perceptions	mthong snang
མཐོང་སྣང་འཁྲུལ	optical illusions	mthong snang 'khrul
མཐོང་སྣང་གི་སྤྲུལ	phantom, apparition	mthong snang gi sprul
མཐོང་སྣང་བྱུང་བ	seem	mthong snang byung ba
མཐོང་སྣང་ལ	saw; had a vision of seeing that	mthong snang la
མཐོང་སྣང་ལ་མ་མཛེས་པ	sinister	mthong snang la ma mdzes pa
མཐོང་སྣང་ལེགས་པོ་བྱུང་བ	had excellent visions	mthong snang legs po byung ba
མཐོང་པ	see	mthong pa
མཐོང་སྤང	[nyon mongs kun btags kyi cha dang shes sgrib rags pa] "insight/seeing-riddance", things to be abandoned through insight, object of 1233 abandonment of the path of seeing	mthong spang
མཐོང་སྤང་ཀུན་སྦྱོར་གསུམ	kun tu sbyor ba gsum to be abandoned by the path of seeing ['jig lta kun btags kyis thar ba la skrag nas 'gro mi 'dod kun sbyor dang, tshul khrims dang brtul zhugs mchog 'dzin gyis lam ma yin pa la...	mthong spang kun sbyor gsum
མཐོང་སྤང་བརྒྱ་དང་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 112 things to be abandoned by the path of seeing [a'dod pa'i mthong spang bden pa bzhi po re re'i spang bya phra rgyas bcu re bcu re brtsis pas bzhi bcu dang, khams gong ma gnyis su khong khro ...	mthong spang brgya dang bcu gnyis
མཐོང་སྤང་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 88 things to be abandoned by seeing [a'dod khams kyi mthong spang so gnyis dang, gzugs khams kyi mthong spang nyer brgyad, gzugs med khams kyi mthong spang nyer brgyad bcas khams gsum na khyon ...	mthong spang brgyad cu rtsa brgyad
མཐོང་སྤང་སྤངས་པ	thing abandoned on the path of seeing mthong spang rdzas 'dzin rtog pa dgu TSE	mthong spang spangs pa
མཐོང་སྤངས	{mthong lam gyi spang bya} process of renunciation taking place on the path of seeing; factor to be removed on the path of seeing	mthong spangs
མཐོང་སྤངས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	the disturbances to be abandoned through the path of insight	mthong spangs kyi nyon mongs pa
མཐོང་ཕུལ་ཆུང་བ	tiniest thing visible	mthong phul chung ba
མཐོང་ཕྱག	offering the hand to each other on meeting, handshake	mthong phyag
མཐོང་ཕྱོགས	way of appearing/ being seen, prejudice, discrimination	mthong phyogs
མཐོང་ཕྱོགས་བྱེད	look w prejudice, discriminate	mthong phyogs byed
མཐོང་ཕྱོགས་ཡང་དག་པ	genuine way of being seen	mthong phyogs yang dag pa
མཐོང་བ	to consider {rang thams cad mkhyen par mthong ba} he considers himself omniscient	mthong ba
མཐོང་བ་ཆུ་སྤྱིའི་བརྟག་ཚུལ་དགུ	chn	mthong ba chu spyi'i brtag tshul dgu
མཐོང་བ་དོན་ལྡན	name of buddha image the sight of which brought merit to anyone	mthong ba don ldan
མཐོང་བ་དོན་ཡོད	seeing accomplishes all/ possesses the goal 1) seeing connected w the meaning/ goal; 2) buddha {mthong ba don yod}; 3) address for Dalai Lama)/zhig	mthong ba don yod
མཐོང་བ་པོ	person	mthong ba po
མཐོང་བ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassable seeing [of truth]	mthong ba bla na med pa
མཐོང་བ་བླ་མེད	perceiving the supreme truth	mthong ba bla med
མཐོང་བ་མེད་མཐོང་བ	seeing the unseeable	mthong ba med mthong ba
མཐོང་བ་མེད་པ	fatalist	mthong ba med pa
མཐོང་བ་ཙམ་གྱིས	by merely seeing [him] mthong ba tsam gyis bsam gtan rgyud la	mthong ba tsam gyis
སྐྱེས་སོ	as soon as she saw, she spontaneously entered a deep meditation	skyes so
མཐོང་བ་ཞིག་ཡོད	if there exists a witness	mthong ba zhig yod
མཐོང་བ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ན	if there is one that has seen it	mthong ba zhig yod na
མཐོང་བ་ཡི་ཆོས་ལ	in this very life	mthong ba yi chos la
མཐོང་བ་རབ་དག	completely pure seeing	mthong ba rab dag
མཐོང་བ་ལ་སོགས	sight objects, etc	mthong ba la sogs
མཐོང་བའི་སྐབས	opportunity of seeing	mthong ba'i skabs
མཐོང་བའི་དངོས་པོ	visible things	mthong ba'i dngos po
མཐོང་བའི་ཆོས	phenomena in one's immediate perception	mthong ba'i chos
ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	the misdeeds of this present life and lives to come mthong ba'i chos bde ba la reg par gnas	na ma tho ba
མཐོང་བའི་ཆོས་འདི་ཉིད་ལ	these dharmas of seeing within this very life mthong ba'i chos la bde bar gnas pa abiding in happiness in this life mthong ba'i chos la bde bar gnas pa'i	mthong ba'i chos 'di nyid la
བསམ་གཏན	1) the meditation of abiding in happiness in this life; 2) the	bsam gtan
སམདྷིས་ཨོཕ༹་ཅོམཔླེཏེ་ནོན	thought and cessation) mthong ba'i chos la bde bar gnas pa'i	samadhis of complete non
གེགས་སྒྲིབ་པ་གསུམ	Three veils hinder the arising of the noble path within this present lifetime; Mipham Rinpoche: {ngan song gsum lha min sgra mi snyan du skyes pa lta bu rten gyi dbang gis lam mi skye ba rnam smin ...	gegs sgrib pa gsum
ལས་འདའ་བ	attaining nirvana within this very life, peace, nirvana, completely liberating from samsara	las 'da' ba
མཐོང་བའི་རྗེས་ལ་འཇོག་པ	resting after insight	mthong ba'i rjes la 'jog pa
མཐོང་བའི་ཉམས	experience of knowledge	mthong ba'i nyams
མཐོང་བའི་ཐ་སྙད	designation of seeing	mthong ba'i tha snyad
མཐོང་བའི་དམ	truly reliable seeing	mthong ba'i dam
མཐོང་བའི་དུག	sight poisons, poisons which are visible as such	mthong ba'i dug
མཐོང་བའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on the aspect of seeing	mthong ba'i rnam pa bsgom pa
མཐོང་བའི་སྤོང་བྱ	that to be abandoned by seeing	mthong ba'i spong bya
མཐོང་བའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	range of vision	mthong ba'i spyod yul
མཐོང་བའི་དབང་གིས	by the faculty/ power of seeing	mthong ba'i dbang gis
མཐོང་བའི་ཡུལ	object to be perceived/ of perception; isc. outlook	mthong ba'i yul
མཐོང་བའི་ལམ	Syn {mthong lam; before the eyes of; Path of Insight Syn {mthong lam} before the eyes of. path of vision. Syn {mthong lam} path of insight. before the eyes of	mthong ba'i lam
མཐོང་བའི་ལས་དང་སྟོན་པའི་ལས	action of seeing and action of teaching	mthong ba'i las dang ston pa'i las
མཐོང་བའི་ས	the level of seeing TSE	mthong ba'i sa
མཐོང་བར་གྱུར	was seen	mthong bar gyur
མཐོང་བས་གྲོལ་བ	the mere sight of whom beings liberation	mthong bas grol ba
མཐོང་བས་སྒྲོལ	deliverance at sight	mthong bas sgrol
མཐོང་བས་ཐོབ་པ	"attainer through insight", {dge 'dun nyi shu}. [Candidate to	mthong bas thob pa
མཐོང་བས་སྤང་བ	Syn {mthong spang}	mthong bas spang ba
མཐོང་བས་སྤང་བར་བྱ་བ	{mthong spang}	mthong bas spang bar bya ba
མཐོང་བས་སྤང་བྱ	"insightriddance," things to be abandoned on the path of seeing	mthong bas spang bya
མཐོང་བས་སྤང་བྱ་བཞི	the four discards through insight	mthong bas spang bya bzhi
མཐོང་བྱ	the object to be seen	mthong bya
མཐོང་བྱ་མཐོང་བྱེད	someone seeing and something seen	mthong bya mthong byed
མཐོང་བྱེད	the method of seeing, that which sees; {mkhris pa mthong byed}	mthong byed
མཐོང་བྱེད་མཁྲིས་པ	bile of seeing [one of the lus kyi rtsa ba'i mkhris pa lnga'i ya gyal, dwelling in the eye, itss function having looked at external objects, makeing them be seen	mthong byed mkhris pa
མཐོང་བྱེད་མིག་རྩ	mur gong gi gshong na gnas pa'i mig gi rtsa gnyan zhig	mthong byed mig rtsa
མཐོང་མ་མྱོང	i have never yet seen	mthong ma myong
མཐོང་མ་མྱོང་བ	never seen	mthong ma myong ba
མཐོང་མེད	not to be perceived; intangible	mthong med
མཐོང་མེད་མཐོན་བ	seeing the unseeable	mthong med mthon ba
མཐོང་མྱོང་བ	have seen before	mthong myong ba
མཐོང་ཚད་ལ་དམིགས་པ	what one has understood	mthong tshad la dmigs pa
མཐོང་ཚུལ	when he saw, as he saw	mthong tshul
མཐོང་ཚུལ་ལ	in the viewpoint of	mthong tshul la
མཐོང་ཚོར	see and hear	mthong tshor
མཐོང་ཟིན	seen	mthong zin
མཐོང་ཟིན་པ	saw	mthong zin pa
མཐོང་བཟོས	gzigs bzos	mthong bzos
མཐོང་བཟོས་བདག་རྐྱེན	good result skyes	mthong bzos bdag rkyen
མཐོང་ཡུལ	object of seeing, field of vision	mthong yul
མཐོང་ཡུལ་གྱི་བར་ཐག	distance of the object seen	mthong yul gyi bar thag
མཐོང་རག་གི་བར་དུ	as long as they could see	mthong rag gi bar du
མཐོང་ལ་མ་མཐོང་བ	indistinct, unclear, ambiguous	mthong la ma mthong ba
མཐོང་ལམ	path of seeing [lam lnga'i nang gses, rnam par grol ba'i 'jug ngogs gang zhig de kho na nyid sngar ma mthong ba gsar du mthong zhing 'phags pa'i sar phyin par byed pa dang, chos nyid ji lta ba bdag...	mthong lam
མཐོང་ལམ་སྐད་ཅིག་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 moments of the Path of insight {chos bzod} {chos shes} {rjes bzod} {rjes shes} for each of the four noble truths)	mthong lam skad cig bcu drug
མཐོང་ལམ་སྐད་ཅིག་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 moments of the Path of insight {chos bzod} {chos shes} {rjes bzod} {rjes shes} for each of the four noble truths)	mthong lam skad cig ma bcu drug
མཐོང་ལམ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ	process of renunciation taking place on the path of seeing; factor to be removed on the path of seeing	mthong lam gyi spang bya
མཐོང་ལམ་གྱི་སྤངས་བྱ	process of renunciation taking place on the path of seeing; factor to be removed on the path of seeing	mthong lam gyi spangs bya
མཐོང་ལམ་གྱི་བཟོད་པ་བརྒྱད	eight degrees of patient acceptance pertaining to the path of seeing	mthong lam gyi bzod pa brgyad
མཐོང་ལམ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 knowledges of the path of seeing	mthong lam gyi shes pa brgyad
མཐོང་ལམ་གྱིས་སྤང་བྱ	to be abandoned through the path of insight, "insight-riddance"	mthong lam gyis spang bya
མཐོང་ལམ་དང་སྒོམ་ལམ	the paths of seeing and meditation, {'phyags pa slob pa'i lam}	mthong lam dang sgom lam
མཐོང་ལམ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ	the path of liberation of the path of seeing	mthong lam rnam grol lam
མཐོང་ལམ་བར་ཆད་མེད་ལམ	mthong lam gyi ngo skal du gyur pa'i spang bya kun brtags kyi cha rnams spong ba'i dngos gnyen du gyur pa'i lam bzod pa brgyad de, sbyor lam gyi rjes thog tu gzhan gyis bar ma bcad par sgrib pa spo...	mthong lam bar chad med lam
མཐོང་ལམ་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	bsdus sgom rab tu gyur pa gang zhig letting go of grasping as truly existent what is to be abandoned by the path of seeing from producing the antidote, thus realizing the truth of mahayana, sher ph...	mthong lam rtse sbyor
བ་བཞི	TSE mthong lam 'od gsal las langs pa'i rjes la	ba bzhi
དམིགས་པ་འབྲས་བུ་སྐྱེ་བའི་ས	the level which gives birth to the result with respect to the aftermath of inner radiance on the path of insight mthong lam 'od gsal las langs pa'i rjes la	dmigs pa 'bras bu skye ba'i sa
པའི་སྤང་བྱ	what is to be abandoned in those who have the face of wisdom of the path of seeing	pa'i spang bya
མཐོང་ལམ་རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བའི་ས	1st bh mi, of the path of seeing, "supremely joyful	mthong lam rab tu dga' ba'i sa
མཐོང་ལམ་རབ་ཏུ་དག་པའི་ས	the first ground [first Bodhisattva bhumi / level], the Path of Insight mthong lam shes bzod skad cig bcu drug - TSE	mthong lam rab tu dag pa'i sa
མཐོང་ལས་ཆེ	he will probably have seen it	mthong las che
མཐོང་ལུགས	way of viewing a thing, notion, theory, opinion	mthong lugs
མཐོང་ཤེས་བྱ	path of vision	mthong shes bya
མཐོང་ས	field of vision	mthong sa
མཐོང་སར	in sight	mthong sar
མཐོང་སར་ཡལ	Syn {gcer gyis grol}	mthong sar yal
མཐོང་གསལ	clearly seen [objects]	mthong gsal
མཐོངས	opening/ gap, hole [for smoke], pavilion, platform, open gallery, expanse, depth, vision, view, empty space, house's rgya mthongs)	mthongs
མཐོངས་ཀ	silk ornaments, fringes on the borders of paintings, fringes on the borders of paintings	mthongs ka
མཐོངས་ཁ	platform on a flat roof	mthongs kha
མཐོངས་ཁུང	skylight or smoke-hole in a house	mthongs khung
མཐོངས་གྱོགས	rgya mthongs kyi cover	mthongs gyogs
མཐོངས་རྒྱན	canopy, gnam rgyan	mthongs rgyan
མཐོངས་རྒྱུག	nomad tent's mthongs 'byed byed kyi rgyug pa	mthongs rgyug
མཐོངས་ཆུང་ཆུང	Probabaly a variant spelling of mthong chung chung: MG: low esteem. [mss]	mthongs chung chung
མཐོངས་ཆེ་བ	dome	mthongs che ba
མཐོངས་ཆེན་པོ	Var. spelling of mthong chen po: MG: high esteem. [mss]	mthongs chen po
མཐོངས་འཇུག	thangka etc. kyi gong gsham gyi mthongs 'jug	mthongs 'jug
མཐོངས་ཐིག	mthongs g.yog byed kyi re lder btags pa'i small cord	mthongs thig
མཐོངས་པ	to lose one's senses	mthongs pa
མཐོངས་ཡངས	open, roofless	mthongs yangs
མཐོངས་ཡངས་རྡོ་སོལ་གཏེར་ཁ	open pit coal mine	mthongs yangs rdo sol gter kha
མཐོན	lofty, exalted	mthon
མཐོན་ཀ	blue gem of great value, 1 of 5 celestial gems, azure, sky-blue	mthon ka
མཐོན་ཀ་ཆེན་པོ	blue gem of great value	mthon ka chen po
མཐོན་ག	1) Mthing ga, sky blue, azure; 2) sapphire) 1236	mthon ga
མཐོན་ཏེ	coming out successfully, surmounted, climbed up	mthon te
མཐོན་ཐི	bzang gos shig	mthon thi
མཐོན་མཐིང	dark blue, sapphire	mthon mthing
མཐོན་མཐིང་རྒྱལ་མོ	Azure Queen Mountain, known in Nepal as Gaurishankar	mthon mthing rgyal mo
མཐོན་མཐིང་རལ་པ	dark blue hair	mthon mthing ral pa
མཐོན་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་བྲལ	completely passes beyond being shown	mthon pa yongs su bral
མཐོན་པའི་ཐོབ	high attainment	mthon pa'i thob
མཐོན་པོ	{la kha mthon po} high, wide mountain pass	mthon po
མཐོན་པོ་སྒང	{mthon po sgang} mt	mthon po sgang
མཐོན་པོ་ཐམས་ཅད་མི་རྟག་སྟེ་ལྷུང	all things that are high are impermanent and fall	mthon po thams cad mi rtag ste lhung
མཐོན་པོའི་ལྷ	epithet of vishnu	mthon po'i lha
མཐོན་པོར་བཏེག་པ	1) gong du bkur ba'i don; 2) gyen du bkyag pa)	mthon por bteg pa
མཐོན་པོར་རློམ	puffed up	mthon por rlom
མཐོན་མོ	high, elevated, deep, tall, lofty, rngams che ba	mthon mo
མཐོར	overhead, above	mthor
མཐོར་གཏོང	raise, send up, increase	mthor gtong
མཐོར་འཐུང	washing the mouth with a potion of water	mthor 'thung
མཐོར་འདེགས	raising, sending up, elevating	mthor 'degs
མཐོར་འདེགས་བྱེད	raise, send up, elevate	mthor 'degs byed
མཐོར་ནས	from overhead, above	mthor nas
མཐོར་འཕེན་མེ་རྒྱགས	anti-aircraft gun	mthor 'phen me rgyags
མཐོར་འཕེན་མེ་སྒྱོགས	anti-aircraft gun	mthor 'phen me sgyogs
མཐོར་འཕེན་མེ་མདའ་སྦག་སྦག	antiaircraft machine gun	mthor 'phen me mda' sbag sbag
མཐོར་འཕྱུར	lift raise	mthor 'phyur
མཐོར་ཞུ	petition, appeal to [superiors, courts etc.]	mthor zhu
མཐོལ	to confess, openly admit	mthol
མཐོལ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa) say/ tell openly, avow; 2) confess [faults openly]	mthol ba
མཐོལ་ཚངས	confess [& purify]	mthol tshangs
མཐོལ་ཚངས་བྱེད་པ	make confession	mthol tshangs byed pa
མཐོལ་ཞིང་བཤགས་པ	to deeply apologize for, confess, openly admit	mthol zhing bshags pa
མཐོལ་ལོ	I admit!	mthol lo
མཐོལ་ལོ་བཤགས	confess	mthol lo bshags
མཐོལ་ལོ་བཤགས་སོ	I openly admit/ confess/ speak out	mthol lo bshags so
མཐོལ་བཤགས	[open] confession	mthol bshags
མཐོལ་བཤགས་བྱས	made confession	mthol bshags byas
མཐོལ་བཤགས་འབུལ	confess [h]	mthol bshags 'bul
མཐོས	high, elevated	mthos
མཐོས་པ	[very] high/ elevated 'tha - 1) reasonable, suitable, logical, admissible [reason]; 2) cause, justification [.] 'tha - logical, reasonable, proper, suiting, admissible, reason, because, justificati...	mthos pa
ཅོནཕ༹ླིཅཏ	free, free from strife, one of the 28 classes of gods in the {'dod khams} desire realm. [Yama] the Aviha Gods, The conflict Free, Lord without combat, heaven 'without combat', free of fighting with...	conflict
ད	+ nas - from now. now, at present, just, directly, immediately, forthwith, instantly	da
ད་ཀ	sky-travellers (an understanding awareness travelling over the spaciousness of reality), SA mkha' 'gro ma	da ka
ད་ཀ་རྒྱབ	shoe a horse	da ka rgyab
ད་ཀ་རྒྱབ་པ	shoe a horse	da ka rgyab pa
ཌཱ་ཀི	see {mkha' 'gro}, {mkha' 'gro ma}	DA ki
ད་ཀོ	[arch] da ni	da ko
ད་ཀོ་ཤ	sandalwood island	da ko sha
ད་རྐྱ	da [alone]	da rkya
ད་རྐྱང	1) da [alone]; 2) region of Amdo and Kham gru 'gar TA and DA gnyis kyi sgra gdangs gcig tu 'bod pas khyad par 'byed byed kyi tshig	da rkyang
ད་སྐུ་ན་བྱོན	you are growing older now	da sku na byon
ད་ཁ	horse-shoe, [just] now, presently like this, this very moment, as soon as, immediately after, [just/ exactly] that	da kha
ད་ཁ་རྒྱབ་པ	to shoe a horse	da kha rgyab pa
ད་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	a son of king mu khri btsan po	da khri btsan po
ད་ག	that same	da ga
ད་ག་ནང་བཞིན་གྱི	similarly	da ga nang bzhin gyi
ད་ག་ཙམ	just that, like that	da ga tsam
ད་ག་རང	just that, exactly	da ga rang
ད་ག་རང་དགོས	want/ need just/ exactly that	da ga rang dgos
ད་ག་རང་རེད	exactly, right, correct	da ga rang red
ད་ག་རེད	that's exactly it	da ga red
ད་ག་སེ	1) say whatever meaingless nonsense comes out, not really so ['Char gzhi zhib gsal ma bting bar las 'go da ga se btsugs na mi 'grig]; 2) like that)	da ga se
ད་ག་སེ་བྱུང་བ	fluke	da ga se byung ba
ད་གང	now what	da gang
ད་གི	a little while/ some time ago	da gi
ད་གི་ནས	from before now, some time ago	da gi nas
ད་གི་ནས་ཕྱིན་སོང	left some time ago	da gi nas phyin song
ད་གིན	just, just now, a moment ago	da gin
ད་གིན་ནས	already	da gin nas
ད་གོང	further, more, still	da gong
ད་དགོང	tonight	da dgong
ད་དགྲ	present enemy	da dgra
ད་འགྲིག་ག	that's enough	da 'grig ga
ད་རྒན	{da rgan disease	da rgan
ད་རྒན་ནང་གུག	{da rgan nang gug} wind disease [nad sgal gzhung gi brgyungs par zhugs pa zhig. symptoms: ske bstungs and brang du bsdus te ro stod 'bur ba etc]	da rgan nang gug
ད་རྒན་ཕྱི་དགྱེ	{da rgan phyi dgye} wind disease [sgal gzhung gi brgyungs par zhugs pa zhig ste, symptoms: brang 'bur zhing gnya' ba bstungs la ltag pa dgye ba etc occur]	da rgan phyi dgye
ད་སྒའ་མོ	that is good	da sga' mo
ད་སྒོས	now, this time, in particular	da sgos
ད་སྔ	before, in the past	da snga
ད་སྔའི་འཛིན་སྐྱང་སྐབས	in previous administrative terms	da snga'i 'dzin skyang skabs
ད་སྔོན	before, previous[ly], in the past	da sngon
ད་སྔོན་ཐེངས་གཅིག	once before	da sngon thengs gcig
ད་ཅི	sickle hook	da ci
ད་ཅི་ནས	from before now, some time ago	da ci nas
ད་ཅི་ནས་ད	lta phan la from lately until now	da ci nas da
ད་ཅི་བསམ	What do you think then?	da ci bsam
ད་བཅོལ	future success	da bcol
ད་ཆ	in future, henceforth, now, at present	da cha
ད་ཆར	recently	da char
ད་ཆུ	mercury, synthetic cinnabar	da chu
ད་ཆུ་ཚྭ	mtshal tshwa	da chu tshwa
ད་ཆོག	1) da 'grigs; 2) kind of bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i cho ga, sngon chog gi rjes su bcas pa'i gsol bzhi'i las 'khor dang bcas pa after the teacher's death to the present du byed pa'i bsnyen par rdzogs pa...	da chog
ད་ཆོག་ལྟ་བུ	then, now	da chog lta bu
ད་ཉིད	Syn da {lta nyid du}	da nyid
ད་གཉིས་འགྱུར་ཙམ་ཞིག	one twice as large as that	da gnyis 'gyur tsam zhig
ད་ཏྲིག	medicinal tree * tamarind ? (B"n devil	da trig
ད་རྟག	permanence	da rtag
ད་ལྟ	now, at the present	da lta
ད་ལྟ་གང་ན་གནས	where is it now?	da lta gang na gnas
ད་ལྟ་འགྲོ་རན་འདུག	now it is time to go	da lta 'gro ran 'dug
ད་ལྟ་འཆད	it is now explained	da lta 'chad
ད་ལྟ་ཉིད	{da lta'i dus nas} moment by moment; isc. in the very/ (ever-)present moment	da lta nyid
ད་ལྟ་ཉིད་ཏུ	immediately, at once	da lta nyid tu
ད་ལྟ་ཉིད་དུ	right now	da lta nyid du
ད་ལྟ་ཉིད་ནས	from this very moment on, immediately, from this moment on	da lta nyid nas
ད་ལྟ་དང་མ་འོངས་པ	present and future	da lta dang ma 'ongs pa
ད་ལྟ་ནས	from now, already	da lta nas
ད་ལྟ་པ	1 of dus gsum	da lta pa
ད་ལྟ་ཕན་ཆད	up until now	da lta phan chad
ད་ལྟ་ཕྲལ་དུ	presently, immediately	da lta phral du
ད་ལྟ་འཕྲལ་དུ	directly, immediately at once, this instant	da lta 'phral du
ད་ལྟ་བ	1) the/at present; 2) present tense	da lta ba
ད་ལྟ་བའི་དུས	the present time	da lta ba'i dus
ད་ལྟ་མན་ཆད	hereafter from now	da lta man chad
ད་ལྟ་མྱུར་དུ	at once	da lta myur du
ད་ལྟ་ཡང	Now again,	da lta yang
ད་ལྟ་རང	right now	da lta rang
ད་ལྟ་ལམ་སང	at once	da lta lam sang
ད་ལྟའི	the present	da lta'i
ད་ལྟའི་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད	clear-cut nowness	da lta'i khregs chod
ད་ལྟའི་དགྲ	present enemy	da lta'i dgra
ད་ལྟའི་ཆར	for the present, as it is now	da lta'i char
ད་ལྟའི་ཆར་འདིར་སྡོད་རྩིས་ཡིན	for the present [we] plan to stay here	da lta'i char 'dir sdod rtsis yin
ད་ལྟའི་ཆོ་ག་ངེས་པ་ལྔ་བྲལ	[TRS 23:1]	da lta'i cho ga nges pa lnga bral
ད་ལྟའི་མཐའ	the present	da lta'i mtha'
ད་ལྟའི་དུས	the time of the present, the present	da lta'i dus
ད་ལྟའི་དུས་ནས	{da lta nyid} moment by moment; isc. in the very/ (ever-)present moment da lta'i dus la ma chags ma thogs pa'i ye	da lta'i dus nas
ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་འཇུག་པ	at the present time enter into the vision of undivided unobstructed wisdom [at present in all the 10 directions, know all dharmas that arise, 1 of the {sangs rgyas kyi ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad}	shes gzigs pa 'jug pa
ད་ལྟའི་བར	until this day	da lta'i bar
ད་ལྟའི་རིག་པ	the present awareness	da lta'i rig pa
ད་ལྟའི་རིག་པ་སྐད་ཆིག་མ	present moment of awareness	da lta'i rig pa skad chig ma
ད་ལྟའི་ཤེས་པ	immediate present awareness, mind of nowness, consciousness of the present moment	da lta'i shes pa
ད་ལྟའི་ཤེས་རིག	present wakefulness	da lta'i shes rig
ཚབ	the representative of all the buddhas of the present	tshab
ད་ལྟའི་སེམས	present awareness, present mind	da lta'i sems
ད་ལྟའི་སེམས་ཉིད	your present mind	da lta'i sems nyid
ད་ལྟའི་སྲིད་པ	present samsara/ government	da lta'i srid pa
ད་ལྟར	nowadays; now; abbr. of {da lta du}	da ltar
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	current experience/ actions	da ltar gyi dngos po
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་དུས་ལ	in respect of the present	da ltar gyi dus la
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་སྣང་བ	daily vision	da ltar gyi snang ba
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་བྱ་བ	current experience/ actions	da ltar gyi bya ba
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་ཚིག	present tense	da ltar gyi tshig
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	the present wakefulness, mind	da ltar gyi shes pa
བ་ཅན	your present mind with its myriad of thought-forms 1244	ba can
ད་ལྟར་གྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddha[s] of the present	da ltar gyi sangs rgyas
ད་ལྟར་བ	Syn {da lta ba} the present, now	da ltar ba
ད་ལྟར་བར་དུ	until now	da ltar bar du
ད་ལྟར་བྱུང་བ	presence of mind, grown for the current age	da ltar byung ba
ད་སྟེ	from this time, henceforth	da ste
ད་སྟེ་ཞག་བདུན་ན	in one week's time	da ste zhag bdun na
ད་ཐུག	until now, up to now	da thug
ད་ཐེངས	the present time	da thengs
ད་མཐའ	final d/ Tibet ['di nyid in the 9th century by king khri ral pa can skad gsar bcad byed skabs zor yang ba'i ched du dor nas da char brda rnying ma gtogs 'bri srol med...Da...Da... that is good fina...	da mtha'
ད་དར	Tartar	da dar
ད་དུ་ར	Aka: da dhu ra. GC: Dhattura, the white thorn apple (used as a poison). the fruit of the Datura Alba. See MWW, 508. [mss]	da du ra
ད་དུང	we continue to	da dung
ད་དུང་ཐོང	give still more	da dung thong
ད་དུང་ནོར་མི་འཕེལ་བ་ནི་མི་འདུག	we do not need to increase our wealth	da dung nor mi 'phel ba ni mi 'dug
ད་དུང་ཚར་མི་སོང	not yet finished	da dung tshar mi song
ད་དུང་ཡང	again yet	da dung yang
ད་དུང་ཡང་སྐྱར་དུ	a second time	da dung yang skyar du
ད་དུང་ཡང་བླ་མ་བསྟེན་དགོས་སོ	You still need to follow a teacher	da dung yang bla ma bsten dgos so
ད་དུང་ལས་ཀ་བྱེད	still working	da dung las ka byed
ད་དུས་དེ་རིང་ནས	from today onward	da dus de ring nas
ད་དེ	still, SA da rung	da de
ད་དྲག	that is good, obsolete letter da after na ra la	da drag
ད་དྲིལ	damaru & bell	da dril
ད་དྲུ་འཇོམས	med Cassia alata	da dru 'joms
ད་གདོད	henceforth/ from now on; at this point	da gdod
ད་འདྲས་མ་ལབ	don't talk like that	da 'dras ma lab
ད་སྡོད	late, last, at the back, behind, to the rear	da sdod
དཱ་ན	Skt. for {sbyin pa} giving, generosity	dA na
དཱ་ན་ཤཱི་ལ	an Indian pandita invited to Tibet during the reign of Trisong Deutsen	dA na shI la
ད་ནང	presently, lately, today, this morning, just now	da nang
ད་ནང་ཀླགས	read just now	da nang klags
ད་ནང་གི་འཚོ་བ	this day's meal	da nang gi 'tsho ba
ད་ནངས	in the morning	da nangs
ད་ནས	from now on/ this day forth	da nas
ད་ནས་ཕྱིན་ཆད	from now on	da nas phyin chad
ད་ནས་ཟུང	henceforth	da nas zung
ད་ནས་བཟུང	from now on	da nas bzung
ད་ནས་བཟུང་ཏེ	From now on	da nas bzung te
ད་ནས་བཟུང་སྟེ	from now on	da nas bzung ste
ད་ནི	as for now	da ni
ད་ནི་མི་དགོས་སོ་སྙམ་དུ	the idea that they are no longer necessary	da ni mi dgos so snyam du
ད་ནུ་ཀ་རི	a flower	da nu ka ri
ད་ནུ་སྐ་རི	{da nu ska ri} flower	da nu ska ri
ད་ནུབ	this evening	da nub
ད་ནུའི་བུ	asura	da nu'i bu
ད་ཕན	until now, previous[ly], past, henceforth	da phan
ད་ཕན་ཐ་མ་འཐེན་གི་མེད	from now on [I] won't smoke	da phan tha ma 'then gi med
ད་ཕན་ཐ་མ་འཐེན་པ་མེད	until now [I] didn't smoke	da phan tha ma 'then pa med
ད་ཕྱིན	from now on, henceforth, later on, afterwards	da phyin
ད་ཕྱིན་ཆད	from now on	da phyin chad
ད་ཕྲུག	orphan	da phrug
ད་བ	herb {da ba} [yielding acrid drug used for worms, bony growths and diseases, and as mouthwash]	da ba
ད་བར	until now, hitherto, so far, until now	da bar
ད་བུར	[arch] burning place or tsha sreg gi gnas	da bur
ད་བེར	SA ta ber, mda' ber	da ber
ད་བྱིད	lizard	da byid
ད་བྱིད་དཀར་པོ	bya rgod sug pa bird	da byid dkar po
ད་མ་རུ	hand drum, damaru; tympan, drum	da ma ru
ད་མ་རུ་དང་དྲིལ་བུ	da dril - Damaru and bell	da ma ru dang dril bu
ད་མ་སི་ཁ	Damascus	da ma si kha
ད་མུས	now	da mus
ད་མོད	at once	da mod
ད་ཙམ	about now	da tsam
ད་ཙུག	now what	da tsug
ད་ཙུག་བྱེད	now what to do, what is to be done	da tsug byed
ད་ཙེ	orphan	da tse
ད་ཚང་དགོན	da tshang monastery [in si khron great region 'bar khams rdzong, last of 108 founded by Tsongkhapa's pupil tsa kho ngag dbang grags pa, dgon brgya rtsa brgyad da tshang song gsungs nas da tshang du...	da tshang dgon
ད་ཚུག	now what? what to do? 1245	da tshug
ད་ཚུག་བྱེད	now what? what to do?	da tshug byed
ད་ཚུན་བར་དུ	until now	da tshun bar du
ད་ཚུར	alum	da tshur
ད་ཚོད	the present	da tshod
ད་མཚམས	the present dus skabs	da mtshams
ད་ཞག	today, these days	da zhag
ད་གཟོད	Now (at last)!	da gzod
ད་གཟོད་གོ་བྱུང	completely understand	da gzod go byung
ད་གཟོད་ནས	after this, from now on	da gzod nas
ད་གཟོད་ནས་གང	after this, from now on	da gzod nas gang
ད་གཟོད་ནས་བཟུང	MG: sm. da phyin. da phyin : from now on, henceforth. [mss]	da gzod nas bzung
ད་གཟོད་ཤེས་བྱུང	completely know	da gzod shes byung
ད་འུ	suddenly, instantly	da 'u
ད་འུར	suddenly, instantly	da 'ur
ད་འོ་ན	well, now then	da 'o na
ད་འོད	moreover, still	da 'od
ད་ཡང	even now	da yang
ད་ཡོད	ready-made	da yod
ད་ཡོད་གནས་ཚུལ	present/ current situation	da yod gnas tshul
ད་ར	buttermilk *, headless ghost]	da ra
ད་ར་ཁ་ཆེ	(M dbang che ba	da ra kha che
ད་ར་ད	{da ra da	da ra da
ད་རང	1) this morning; 2) present time mtshams 'dzin [Da rang byed ran song]	da rang
ད་རང་གི་ཤེས	attentive in the present moment	da rang gi shes
ད་རང་གི་ཤེས་པ	present wakefulness	da rang gi shes pa
ད་རངས	this morning	da rangs
ད་རན	this time	da ran
ད་རབས	present generation, contemporary, modern	da rabs
ད་རིང	today	da ring
ད་རུ	cream, buttermilk	da ru
ད་རུ་སྐྲོག་པ	churn cream	da ru skrog pa
ད་རུང	still, yet, as usual still, still more	da rung
ད་རུང་ཡང	again and again	da rung yang
ད་རེ	today, presently	da re
ད་རེང	this morning	da reng
ད་རེས	right now	da res
ད་རེས་ཙམ	unique opportunity	da res tsam
ད་རེས་ལས	until now	da res las
ད་ལ་རིང་བ	slow and long	da la ring ba
ད་ལན	this time	da lan
ད་ལན་ཀྱང	this time, as well	da lan kyang
ད་ལན་ཙམ	just this once, only on this occasion; {mjal ba da lan tsam red} this may be our only meeting	da lan tsam
ད་ལམ	nowadays, recently	da lam
ད་ལི	rhododendron anthopogonoides maxim., flowers of ba lu plants	da li
ད་ལིས	{da lis med. tree [w light yellow fragrant flower dwarf rhododendron w fragrant leaves used medicinally for phlegm, gonorrhoea, and to give longevity]	da lis
ད་ལེན	there	da len
ད་ལོ	this year	da lo
ད་ལོངས	get up now	da longs
ད་ཧྲིག	a medicinal vegetable (tamarind?), devil for bonpo	da hrig
ད་དྷ་ཕ་ལ	kapettha tree	da dha pha la
ད་དྷུ་ར	variant of da du ra, see "da du ra" for more detail. Dhattura, white thorn apple. [mss]	da dhu ra
ད་ཨ་ཨུ་ཏ་པ་ལ	medicinal plant	da a u ta pa la
དྭ	metal element, 1 of spar kha brgyad	dwa
དབ༹	CH dva trigram	dva
དྭ་རྒོད	arisaema costatum (wall.) martius	dwa rgod
དབ༹་ལྕགས	(CH spar kha'i bye brag cig	dva lcags
དྭ་ཕྲུག	orphan, foundling	dwa phrug
དབ༹་ཕྲུག	child whose parents die soon after it is born	dva phrug
དབ༹་ཕྲུག་ཁ་སེར	small child whose parents died soon after it was born	dva phrug kha ser
དབ༹་ཕྲུག་བུ	the young orphan	dva phrug bu
དྭ་བ	plant yielding an acrid drug	dwa ba
དབ༹་བ	1) field herb; 2) rgya gro ma	dva ba
དྭ་ཚུར	vinegar of dwa wa plant	dwa tshur
དྭ་ལས་བ་དུར	mongol name of son of king mi dbang pho la bsod nams stob rgyas, real name was 'gyur med rnam rgyal	dwa las ba dur
དྭ་ལི	pulse	dwa li
དབ༹་ལིས	SK 'dab ma can, med. herb	dva lis
དག་བསྐྱེལ་བྱེད	prove, proof, show evidence	dag bskyel byed
དག་ཁ	used for de kha in tsang	dag kha
དག་ག་དོག་གེ	uneven, anything placed not quite on a level	dag ga dog ge
དག་གུ	powder	dag gu
དག་གེ་དོག་གེ	uneven[ly]	dag ge dog ge
དག་གྱུར་པ	become pure	dag gyur pa
དག་གྲོལ་དུ་ལྟ་བ	the view of pure liberation	dag grol du lta ba
དག་འགྲེལ	commentary on orthography	dag 'grel
དག་འགྲོ་བ	purge	dag 'gro ba
དག་སྒྲོག	pure utterance/ proclamation	dag sgrog
དག་ཅི	mint, aromatic plant, mentha royliana	dag ci
དག་བཅོས	correction	dag bcos
དག་བཅོས་བྱེད	correct	dag bcos byed
དག་ཆ	spelling	dag cha
དག་ཆ་སྐྱོར	spell	dag cha skyor
དག་ཆ་སྐྱོར་བ	spell	dag cha skyor ba
དག་ཆ་སྐྱོར་ཟིན་པ	spelt	dag cha skyor zin pa
དག་ཆ་ནོར་བ	misspell	dag cha nor ba
དག་ཆའི་འགྲེལ་པ	commentary on orthography	dag cha'i 'grel pa
དག་ཆེན	great purity	dag chen
དག་མཆན	having corrected rtsis rgyag note that is made	dag mchan
དག་བརྗོད	correct expression, right spelling	dag brjod
དག་གཉིས	the two purities	dag gnyis
དག་མཉམ	equal(ness and) purity	dag mnyam
དག་མཉམ་ཆེན་པོ	great purity and equality, great purity and great evenness	dag mnyam chen po
དག་མཉམ་བདེན་པ	the truths of purity and equality. A term used by Kh. Namdrol (of NNI) within the context of anuttarayoga tantra to refer to the aspects of appearance and emptiness, or conventional and ultimate tr...	dag mnyam bden pa
དག་མཉམ་བདེན་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparability of (the truths) of innate purity and equalness	dag mnyam bden pa dbyer med
དག་མཉམ་དབྱེར་མེད	{dag mnyam bden pa dbyer med} inseparability of (the truths) of innate purity and equalness	dag mnyam dbyer med
དག་ཏུ་མཛད	purify	dag tu mdzad
དག་ཏེར	correction, rectification, clean up [corruption] editing	dag ter
དག་ཏེར་དང་བཅས་རྒྱས་པར་སྤེལ	widely increase w correction	dag ter dang bcas rgyas par spel
དག་ཏེར་བྱེད	correct, rectify, clean up [corruption], edit, improve	dag ter byed
དག་ཏེར་བྱེད་པ	correct, rectify, clean up [corruption], edit, improve	dag ter byed pa
དག་ཏེར་བྱེད་པའི་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	activity of correction/ rectification/ clean up [corruption]/ editing/ improvement	dag ter byed pa'i kun spyod
དག་ཏེར་མུ་མཐུད་བྱེད	continuously rectify	dag ter mu mthud byed
དག་ཏེར་ལེགས་བཅོས	rectification and reformation	dag ter legs bcos
དག་ཏེར་གསུམ	the three improvements [organizational consilidation, ideological education, and rectifying style of work]	dag ter gsum
དག་སྟེར	become clean, purified	dag ster
དག་ཐེབ	set down as a pure text, text which provides confirmation, confirmatory text	dag theb
དག་ཐེར	correction, rectification, clean up [corruption] editing, improvement	dag ther
དག་ཐེར་དང་བཅས་རྒྱས་པར་སྤེལ	extensively revised	dag ther dang bcas rgyas par spel
དག་ཐེར་བ	make clean	dag ther ba
དག་ཐེར་བྱེད	correct, rectify, clean up [corruption], edit, improve	dag ther byed
དག་ཐེར་བྱེད་པ	rectify, reorganize, make clean	dag ther byed pa
དག་ཐེར་བྱེད་པའི་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	activity of correction/ rectification/ clean up [corruption]/ editing/ improvement	dag ther byed pa'i kun spyod
དག་ཐེར་མུ་མཐུད་བྱེད	continuously rectify	dag ther mu mthud byed
དག་ཐེར་ལེགས་བཅོས	rectification and reformation	dag ther legs bcos
དག་ཐེར་གསུམ	the three improvements [organizational consilidation, ideological education, and rectifying style of work]	dag ther gsum
དག་དུག	old bad tattered clothes	dag dug
དག་དོག	uneven[ly]	dag dog
དག་དོན	symbolical meaning	dag don
དག་དྲན	{dag pa dran pa}	dag dran
དག་གནས་གཙང་མའི་རིས	Suddhavasa	dag gnas gtsang ma'i ris
དག་སྣང	Pure vision. The transmission within the pure experience of a master from another enlightened being. One of the six or nine lineages of the Nyingma School	dag snang
དག་སྣང་ཁོ་ན་བྱ་དགོས	always maintain pure perception	dag snang kho na bya dgos
དག་སྣང་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	visionary lineage	dag snang gi brgyud pa
དག་སྣང་རྒྱ་ཅན	terma by the 5th Dalai Lama	dag snang rgya can
དག་སྣང་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	work by {zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol} 1781-1850	dag snang sprul pa'i glegs bam
དག་སྣང་བྱེད་པ	{lhag par yang dad pa dang dag snang byed dgos pa yin pa} strengthen your pure perception of him and increase your faith	dag snang byed pa
དག་སྣང་འབའ་ཞིག་སྦྱང་དགོས་ཏེ	train yourself to have only pure perception	dag snang 'ba' zhig sbyang dgos te
དག་སྣང་སྦྱང་བ	train in sacred outlook	dag snang sbyang ba
དག་སྣང་སྦྱོངས	cultivate pure perception	dag snang sbyongs
དག་སྣང་ཡེ་ཤེས་དྲྭ་བ	terma revealed by {bdud 'joms gling pa} gter 1247 ston, b. 1835; see also {gnas lugs rang byung} dag snang ye shes drva ba las gnas lugs rang byung gi rgyud rdo rje'i snying po - a systematic prese...	dag snang ye shes drwa ba
དག་སྣང་རིག་འཛིན་སྲོག་སྒྲུབ	terma by {lha btsun nam mkha' 'jigs med rtsal}	dag snang rig 'dzin srog sgrub
དག་པ	a pure virgin	dag pa
དག་པ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	the paradise of Khechara	dag pa mkha' spyod
དག་པ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་ཞིང་ཁམས	pure celestial realm	dag pa mkha' spyod zhing khams
དག་པ་སྒྱུ་ལུས	Pure illusory body. The form of a deity	dag pa sgyu lus
དག་པ་ཅན	possessing purity	dag pa can
དག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great purity	dag pa chen po
དག་པ་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	the pure bardo of dharmata [experienced by enlightened beings]	dag pa chos nyid kyi bar do
དག་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་གཞན་དབང	'phags pa rnams kyi rjes thob la bden med sgyu ma'i tshul du snang ba	dag pa 'jig rten pa'i gzhan dbang
དག་པ་འཇུག་པ	enter into purity	dag pa 'jug pa
དག་པ་ཉིད	state of being pure, purification	dag pa nyid
དག་པ་གཉིས	two purities. The purity resulting from the removal of the obscuration of conflicting emotions and the obscuration covering the knowable {nyon mong gi sgrib dang shes bya'i sgrib kyis dag pa}. Syn ...	dag pa gnyis
དག་པ་གཉིས་ལྡན	possessing the two purities; two-fold purity; possessing the twofold purity, {rang bzhin gyis rnam par dag pa}, {glo bur gyi dri ma dag pa}. with the two fold purity	dag pa gnyis ldan
དག་པ་གཉིས་ལྡན་གྱི་བྲལ་འབྲས	result of freedom endowed with the twofold purity	dag pa gnyis ldan gyi bral 'bras
དག་པ་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in a manner) consistent with purity*	dag pa ltar shar ba
དག་པ་དམ་པ	sgrib pa gnyis kyi dngos gnyen du spyod pa	dag pa dam pa
དག་པ་དྲན་པ	pure recollection, recollection of symbolism, [one of {dag gsal brtan gsum}	dag pa dran pa
དག་པ་བདུན	sevenfold purity. Same as the seven branches {yan lag bdun}: Prostrating, making offerings, confessing, rejoicing, requesting to turn the Wheel of the Dharma, beseeching not to pass into nirvana, a...	dag pa bdun
དག་པ་གནས	pure lands	dag pa gnas
དག་པ་ཕ་རོལ་འགྲོ	pure death/ other shore dag pa byed pa'i byang chub sems dpa' bodhisattvas who are in the course of purification	dag pa pha rol 'gro
དག་པ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	the lamp of pure space	dag pa dbyings kyi sgron ma
དག་པ་མ་ཡིན	impure	dag pa ma yin
དག་པ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་སྒོ	the pure gate of nirvana	dag pa mya ngan las 'das pa'i sgo
དག་པ་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པ	emphasizing purity [Kriya]	dag pa gtso bor byed pa
དག་པ་ཞིང	pure field	dag pa zhing
དག་པ་ཞིང་སྦྱོང	cultivate pure lands	dag pa zhing sbyong
དག་པ་གཞན་གྱི་དབང	pure dependency	dag pa gzhan gyi dbang
དག་པ་གཞན་དབང	pure dependent phenomena	dag pa gzhan dbang
དག་པ་བཞི	the four purities [of all phenomena for tathagatas {rten}/{lus}, {dmigs pa}, {thugs}/ {sems}, {ye shes}	dag pa bzhi
དག་པ་གཟིགས་པ	pure vision	dag pa gzigs pa
དག་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྒོ	pure gate of wisdom	dag pa ye shes kyi sgo
དག་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རླུང	pure prana of wisdom	dag pa ye shes rlung
དག་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག	washed completely clean	dag pa yongs su dag
དག་པ་རབ་འགྱུར	become completely pure	dag pa rab 'gyur
དག་པ་རབ་འབྱམས	infinite, allencompassing purity	dag pa rab 'byams
དག་པ་རབ་འབྱམས་འོག་མིན་ཞིང་ཨཱཀནིཤཏ་རེཨལམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	encompassing purity	dag pa rab 'byams 'og min zhing Akanishta realm of all
དག་པ་རབ་འབྱམས་འོག་མིན་ཞིང་ཨཱཀནིཤཐ་རེཨལམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	encompassing purity	dag pa rab 'byams 'og min zhing Akanishtha realm of all
དག་པ་རིག་པ	pure consciousness	dag pa rig pa
དག་པ་རིག་འཛིན	Pure vidyadharas; appear in the bardo of dharmata	dag pa rig 'dzin
དག་པ་ཤེལ་རི	Pure Crystal Mountain, in Tsari	dag pa shel ri
དག་པ་ས་གསུམ	the three pure bhumis, * no pride at all, perfect 3-fold purity	dag pa sa gsum
དག་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	pure Buddhas	dag pa sangs rgyas
དག་པ་གསུམ	the three purities [in kriya tantra: (lha dang dkyil 'khor dag pa, rdzas dang long spyod dag pa, sngags dang ting 'dzin dag pa)- to fundamentals, pt 4, axiom of mah yoga purity of the outer world {...	dag pa gsum
དག་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལུས་འབུལ	offer the body w the three purities CHN	dag pa gsum gyi lus 'bul
དག་པའི་ཀུན་གཞི	pure all-ground	dag pa'i kun gzhi
དག་པའི་ཀློང	vast expanse of primordial purity	dag pa'i klong
དག་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	disk of purity, immaculate orb, moon	dag pa'i dkyil 'khor
དག་པའི་སྐྱེ་སྲིད	a pure rebirth	dag pa'i skye srid
དག་པའི་ཁམས	mercury, quick silver	dag pa'i khams
དག་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	realm of purity	dag pa'i 'khor lo
དག་པའི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	pure illusory body [way of meditating in the perfecting stage rdzogs rim meditation symbolized by the 12 analogies of illusion {sgyu ma'i dpe bcu gnyis} on the mandala of wisdom w the supported kayas]	dag pa'i sgyu lus
དག་པའི་ཆོས	the qualities of purity, pure dharma[s]	dag pa'i chos
དག་པའི་མཆོད་པ	pure offering/ homage	dag pa'i mchod pa
དག་པའི་མཐའ་ཅན	queen's palace	dag pa'i mtha' can
དག་པའི་བདག་ཐོབ	attain the pure nature	dag pa'i bdag thob
དག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་བཞི	the four pure correct conceptions	dag pa'i 'du shes bzhi
དག་པའི་རྡོ་དཀར	white/ clear crystal	dag pa'i rdo dkar
དག་པའི་རྡོ་བ	cleansing stone or crystal	dag pa'i rdo ba
དག་པའི་སྣང་བ	SA dag snang	dag pa'i snang ba
དག་པའི་དབྱིངས་སྒྲོན	SA dbyings kyi sgron ma, sgron ma bzhi	dag pa'i dbyings sgron
དག་པའི་དབྱིངས་སྒྲོན་མ	light of pure space	dag pa'i dbyings sgron ma
དག་པའི་ཞིང	a pure realm	dag pa'i zhing
བུདདྷས་ཏེཨཆ་ཨིན་སམབྷོག	kaya form	Buddhas teach in Sambhoga
དག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	pure realm	dag pa'i zhing khams
དག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས་སུ་གཤེགས་པ	gone on to the pure realms	dag pa'i zhing khams su gshegs pa
དག་པའི་ཞིང་གི་སྣོད་བཅུད་རྣམས	the worlds and inhabitants of the pure realms dag pa'i zhing du rnam shes spar ba sending the consciousness to a pure realm	dag pa'i zhing gi snod bcud rnams
དག་པའི་ཞིང་དུ་འཕེན་པ	{sha de 'brel bar gsol nas rnam shes dag pa'i zhing du 'phen pa yin} by eating their flesh he was making a link with their consciousness, which he could then transfer to a pure Buddhafield	dag pa'i zhing du 'phen pa
དག་པའི་ཞིང་དུ་གཤེགས་པ	departed for the pure realms	dag pa'i zhing du gshegs pa
དག་པའི་ཞིང་བདེ་བ་ཅན	heaven of amitabha	dag pa'i zhing bde ba can
དག་པའི་ཞིང་ནས་མཇལ	we may all meet in a Pure Realm	dag pa'i zhing nas mjal
དག་པའི་ཞིང་སྦྱོང་བ	Cultivate pure realms	dag pa'i zhing sbyong ba
དག་པའི་གཞན་དབང	pure paratantra	dag pa'i gzhan dbang
དག་པའི་གཟུགས	pure form [vs that of the desire realm]	dag pa'i gzugs
དག་པའི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	8 qualities of purity	dag pa'i yan lag brgyad
དག་པའི་ལུང་གི་དཔྱད་གསུམ	pure scriptural authority endowed with three types of scrutiny	dag pa'i lung gi dpyad gsum
དག་པའི་སེམས	pristine mind	dag pa'i sems
དག་པའི་ལྷ	MSS: divine purity, pure divinity; pure dieties. [mss]	dag pa'i lha
དག་པར་འཁྲུ་བ	wash clean	dag par 'khru ba
དག་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become clean, purified	dag par 'gyur ba
དག་པར་བྱས	made clean, cleansed	dag par byas
དག་པར་བྱེད	cleanse, purify	dag par byed
དག་པར་བྱེད་པ	make clean, cleanse, purify	dag par byed pa
དག་པར་འཚོ་བ	lead a pure virtuous life	dag par 'tsho ba
དག་པར་མཛད་པ	to purify; to make/ render immaculate/ pure	dag par mdzad pa
དག་པར་རབ་ཏུ་སླུ་བ	be completely deceived about purity	dag par rab tu slu ba
དག་པོ	correct, without error, accurate, precise, exact	dag po
དག་པོའི་མཚོ་ཆེན་བཞི	the four pure great lakes CHN	dag po'i mtsho chen bzhi
དག་ཕུད	gave proof/ testimony, prove, testify, speak/ reveal the truth	dag phud
དག་ཕུད་བྱེད	gave proof/ testimony	dag phud byed
དག་བྱེད	1) white; 2) water; 3) fire; 4) river; 5) kusha grass; 6) wind; 7) wind god; 8) med. aa ru ra	dag byed
དག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ	5th month	dag byed kyi zla ba
དག་བྱེད་བཞི	four holy rivers (sindhu, puksu, sita, ganga) 1249	dag byed bzhi
དག་དབྱིངས་ལོངས་སྐུ	{rang snang longs sku}	dag dbyings longs sku
དག་འབུད	give proof/ testimony	dag 'bud
དག་འབུལ	kha gtad la bden pa sprad pa,...Ngas nor song khyod kyis bshad pa de bden pa rang yin zhes dag 'bul byas pa	dag 'bul
དག་འབྱེད	correction, revision	dag 'byed
དག་འབྱེད་བྱེད	correct, revise	dag 'byed byed
དག་སྦྱངས	purify	dag sbyangs
དག་སྦྱོར	holy combination, exact coincidence	dag sbyor
དག་མ	1) clay ko ba snyol snod; 2) pure w/o adulterants (	dag ma
དག་མ་དིག	smra brjod bde po rang med pa	dag ma dig
དག་རྫས	soap	dag rdzas
དག་རྫོགས་སྨིན་གསུམ	purifying perfecting and ripening	dag rdzogs smin gsum
དག་ཞིང	pure land, pure dimension	dag zhing
དག་ཞུ	1) 'gro song khungs skyel zhu ba; 2) true and false khungs skyel zhu ba	dag zhu
དག་ཡིག	spelling [book]	dag yig
དག་ཡིག་མཁས་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས	{dag yig mkhas pa'i 'byung gnas}	dag yig mkhas pa'i 'byung gnas
དག་ཡིག་ངག་སྒྲོན	verse orthographical dictionary by {dpal khang lo tsA ba}	dag yig ngag sgron
དག་ཡིག་ཟ་མ་ཏོག	dag yig rin chen za ma tog	dag yig za ma tog
དག་ར	species of garlic	dag ra
དག་རང་རེད་ལབ་པ	affirm dag las g.yo - not holy, profane	dag rang red lab pa
དག་ཤ་ལེན་པ	avenge	dag sha len pa
དག་ཤིང	toothpick	dag shing
དག་བཤེར	zhu dag and zhib 'jug ...Yig rigs rtsom sgyur gang byas tshang mar dag bsher gzab nan gtong dgos	dag bsher
དག་ས	pure bhumis [where the subtle obscurations of knowables are abandoned shes sgrib phra ma]	dag sa
དག་སེལ	clear accusations, make faults	dag sel
ཨནད་ཏྲནསྒྲེསསིཨོནས་ནོན	existent, give evidence/ explanation to prove 1's righteousness, defend in court	and transgressions non
དག་སེལ་བྱེད	clear accusations, make	dag sel byed
ཕཽ༹ལཙ་ཨནད་ཏྲནསྒྲེསསིཨོནས་ནོན	existent, give evidence/ explanation to prove 1's righteousness, defend in court	faults and transgressions non
དག་སེལ་བྱེད་མཁན	lawyer, counsel	dag sel byed mkhan
དག་གསལ	clear accusations, make faults	dag gsal
དག་གསལ་གཉེན་པོ་གསུམ	purity, clarity and remedy	dag gsal gnyen po gsum
དག་གསལ་བརྟན་གསུམ	purity, vividness and stability, {dag pa dran pa}, {snang ba gsal ba}, {nga rgyal brtan pa}	dag gsal brtan gsum
དག་གསལ་བྱེད	clear accusations, make	dag gsal byed
དག་གསལ་བྱེད་མཁན	lawyer, counsel	dag gsal byed mkhan
དག་གསལ་བྱེད་པའི་དབང་ཆ	right to defend 1self in court	dag gsal byed pa'i dbang cha
དག་བསང	to purify	dag bsang
དགས	sunny slope of mountain	dags
དགས་པ	cracked	dags pa
དྭགས	bright, open, cheerful appearance of a place	dwags
དབ༹གས་ཀོང	S Tibet dvags po and nying khri region kong po	dvags kong
དྭགས་ཀོང	dwags po and kong po regions	dwags kong
དབ༹གས་བརྒྱུད	Gampopa's lineage	dvags brgyud
དྭགས་སྟོད	upper or higher portion of dwags po	dwags stod
དབ༹གས་སྟོད	upper dvags po region	dvags stod
དྭགས་སྟོད་ཛ་དཀར	Dzakar, in Upper Dagpo	dwags stod dza dkar
དབ༹གས་པོ	region in Southern Central Tibet	dvags po
དྭགས་པོ	{dwags po} region in S C Tibet	dwags po
དྭགས་པོ་བཀའ་རྒྱུད	section of bka' rgyud pa school	dwags po bka' rgyud
དྭགས་པོ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	subdivision of bka' brgyud following sgam po pa, Dakpo Kagyü tradition	dwags po bka' brgyud
དབ༹གས་པོ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Dwakpo Kagyu [kagyu lineage from mar pa lo tz' ba, mi la ras pa, dvags po lha rje then widely spreading]	dvags po bka' brgyud
དབ༹གས་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Dakpo Tashi Namgyal	dvags po bkra shis rnam rgyal
དྭགས་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Dakpo tashi namgyal	dwags po bkra shis rnam rgyal
དྭགས་པོ་དགའ་ལྡན་རབ་བརྟན	Dagpo Ganden Rabden	dwags po dga' ldan rab brtan
དབ༹གས་པོ་དགའ་ལྡན་རབ་བརྟན	Dagpo Ganden Rabden dvags po sgom chen ngag dbang grags	dvags po dga' ldan rab brtan
དབ༹གས་པོ་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Dakpo Nyengyü, Oral Transmission of Gampopa	dvags po snyan brgyud
དྭགས་པོ་ཐར་རྒྱན	Jewel Ornament of Liberation	dwags po thar rgyan
དབ༹གས་པོ་ཐར་རྒྱན	Jewel Ornament of Liberation	dvags po thar rgyan
དབ༹གས་པོ་པ	Dakpopa; Gampopa	dvags po pa
དྭགས་པོ་པ	Gampopa	dwags po pa
དྭགས་པོ་བཤད་སྒྲུབ་གླིང	Dagpo Shedrup Ling	dwags po bshad sgrub gling
དྭགས་པོ་བྷྲུམ་པ	Dagpo Drumpa	dwags po bhrum pa
དྭགས་པོ་ལྷ་རྗེ	Gampopa, {sgam po pa}	dwags po lha rje
དབ༹གས་པོའི་གསུང་འཐོར་འབུམ	{dvags po'i gsung 'thor 'bum}	dvags po'i gsung 'thor 'bum
དྭགས་ཕོར	wooden cups turned in dwags po	dwags phor
དབ༹གས་ཕོར	bowl/ cup from dvags po	dvags phor
དབ༹གས་སྨད	lower dvags po region	dvags smad
དྭགས་སྨད་རྒྱལ་རྟ་མགོ	Gyaltago, in Lower Dagpo	dwags smad rgyal rta mgo
དབ༹གས་ཞྭ	Gampopa crown, Dakpo hat	dvags zhwa
དབ༹གས་ཡུལ	region of dvags po'	dvags yul
དབ༹གས་ལ་སྒམ་པོ	Dakla Gampo, in Dakpo	dvags la sgam po
དྭགས་ཤོག	daphne paper manufactured in dwags po	dwags shog
དབ༹གས་ཤོག	good quality thick paper from dvags po	dvags shog
དྭགས་སླེ	striped woollen wrapper cloth manufactured in dwags po	dwags sle
དབ༹གས་སླེའུ	phyar ba from dvags po	dvags sle'u
དབ༹གས་ལྷ་སྒམ་པོ	residence of Je Gampopa	dvags lha sgam po
དང་ཀྱོག	dbu khyud de rje btsun sa pan gyis; dang khyog ni like an elephant's trunk's aa yin la, de yang yi ge'i dang por 'jug pas de ltar btad par gsungs, la las sngags kyi dbur aom yig 'god srol yod pa bz...	dang kyog
དང་ཁ	1) desire food, be hungry, appetite; 2) stomach, digestion; 3) thanka	dang kha
དང་ཁྱད་པར	different from	dang khyad par
དང་ཁྱད་མེད	x {chos ma thos pa dang khyad med} no different from not having heard the teaching at all	dang khyad med
དང་འཁྲིལ་པ	to embrace (sexually)/ clasp closely	dang 'khril pa
དང་ག	1) desire food, be hungry, appetite; 2) stomach, digestion; 3) thanka	dang ga
དང་ག་བདེ་བ	great desire for food, hunger [syn: grod che dang, chog med pa, lto che, tshim med]	dang ga bde ba
དང་ག་མི་བདེ	want of appetite	dang ga mi bde
དང་ག་ཡི་ག་འབྱེད་པ	restore the appetite	dang ga yi ga 'byed pa
དང་འགལ་བ	contrary to	dang 'gal ba
དང་འགྲོགས	joined eachother	dang 'grogs
དང་རྒྱབ་འགལ	contrary to, contradictory, conflicting with	dang rgyab 'gal
དང་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པ	accordant with, harmonious with; in accordance with	dang rgyu mthun pa
དང་སྒོམ	be accustomed to, cultivate	dang sgom
དང་བཅས་པ	together with	dang bcas pa
དང་ཆབས་ཅིག	"together with" clause connective	dang chabs cig
དང་ཆས་པ	to set forth, depart	dang chas pa
དང་ཉེ་བ	near	dang nye ba
དང་གཉིས	dang + # means the ones just mentioned by name, not two more	dang gnyis
དང་མཉམ་དུ	"together with" clause connective	dang mnyam du
དང་མཉམ་པ	to equal that of the	dang mnyam pa
དང་གཏེར་བརྒྱུད	Treasure/ terma lineages	dang gter brgyud
དང་རྟོག་གེང་རྣམས	narrow-minded people and intellectuals	dang rtog geng rnams
དང་སྟབས་བསྟུན	according to, in accordance with, "coincidental" *construction	dang stabs bstun
དང་བསྟུན	according to, in accordance with	dang bstun
དང་བསྟུན་པ	to conform with; in conformity with	dang bstun pa
དང་བསྟོད	1) joyful/ devoted praise; 2) gzab gzengs,...Mi 'ga' zhig ca lag la dang bstod chen po yod,...Gyon pa la dang bstod tsha po byed kyi yod	dang bstod
དང་ཐོག	at first, initially	dang thog
དང་ཐོག་གི་དཔྱད་གཞིའི་ཡིག་ཆ	original materials, primary data	dang thog gi dpyad gzhi'i yig cha
དང་ཐོག་ནས	at the beginning, at first, firstly	dang thog nas
དང་མཐུད	then, after that	dang mthud
དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony / accordance with	dang mthun pa
དང་དང་དོད་དོད	las don la gzab pa'i hur brtson gyi tshul,...Bya ba dang dang dod dod kyi sgo nas byas na 'thus shor nyung	dang dang dod dod
དང་དུ	readily	dang du
དང་དུ་བླང	[p of dang du len pa} eagerly grasped, earnestly applied oneself to, took on, undertook, accepted	dang du blang
དང་དུ་བླང་བ	receive a command or missive with readiness, do work with earnestness	dang du blang ba
དང་དུ་བླང་བྱ	[f dang du len pa} will eagerly grasp, earnestly apply oneself to, take on, undertake, accept	dang du blang bya
དང་དུ་བླངས	MG: p. of dang du len [mss]	dang du blangs
དང་དུ་མི་ལེན	does not accept, does not apprehend	dang du mi len
དང་དུ་བཞེས	accept, assume/ undertake voluntarily, volunteer [h]	dang du bzhes
དང་དུ་ལེན	to accept, to assume, undertake voluntarily, to volunteer; to accept	dang du len
དང་དུ་ལེན་པ	respond, answer, apprehension	dang du len pa
དང་དུ་ལོངས	take on, volunteer	dang du longs
དང་དོད་ཆེན་པོ	very stylish/ fashionable, dang bstod style, fashion	dang dod chen po
དང་དོད་ཚ་པོ	very stylish/ fashionable	dang dod tsha po
དང་དྲགས	inconsistent	dang drags
དང་འདོད་ཚ་པོ	flair	dang 'dod tsha po
དང་འདོད་ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ	enthusiastic, longing and confident faith	dang 'dod yid ches kyi dad pa
དང་འདྲ	you will be like	dang 'dra
དང་ལྡན	devotion to, have, possess, be endowed with	dang ldan
དང་ལྡན་པ	possessed of, provided with, possessing, having	dang ldan pa
དང་པོ	before, first, the beginning, best, earliest (with respect to number, time, rank), outset, first, first of all, initially, at the start, first stage	dang po
དང་པོ་ཁོ་ན་ནས་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	since from the very 1st it did not exist	dang po kho na nas med pa'i phyir
དང་པོ་ཁོ་ན་ནས་བརྩམས་པ	begin from the very 1st	dang po kho na nas brtsams pa
དང་པོ་ལྔ	the first five	dang po lnga
དང་པོ་ཉིད་དུ	in the first place, above all, at the very commencement	dang po nyid du
དང་པོ་ཉིད་ནས	from the very first	dang po nyid nas
དང་པོ་གཉིས	the two first	dang po gnyis
དང་པོ་ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་ཚུལ	the way of 1st arousing bodhicitta	dang po thugs bskyed tshul
དང་པོ་དང་རྐྱང	beginning, primordial and solitary	dang po dang rkyang
དང་པོ་དང་ཐ་མ	the first and the last	dang po dang tha ma
དང་པོ་ནས	first and foremost, from the beginning	dang po nas
དང་པོ་ནི	first is	dang po ni
དང་པོ་པ	beginner, novice practitioner	dang po pa
དང་པོ་སྤྱི་ཕུད་སྟོང་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the 1st main thousand-fold world	dang po spyi phud stong gi 'jig rten
ཕོ༹ཨུར	continent worlds]	four
ཕི༹རསཏ་མཻན་ཐོཨུསནད	fold world [1000	first main thousand
དང་པོ་བླ་མ་བརྟགས་ལ་མཁས་པ	in the beginning, skillfully examine the teacher	dang po bla ma brtags la mkhas pa
དང་པོ་སྦྱོར་བ	initial joining	dang po sbyor ba
དང་པོ་སྦྱོར་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of primordial union	dang po sbyor ba'i ting nge 'dzin
བཡ་ནོན	dual union of upaya and prajna = sbyor ba]	by non
དང་པོ་མི་འཇིག	primordial indestructible	dang po mi 'jig
དང་པོ་ལ	the first has	dang po la
དང་པོ་སངས་རྒྱས	1st/ primordial buddha [Kalachakra]	dang po sangs rgyas
དང་པོ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	first arousal of bodhicitta [on the path of the sons of the victorious one bslab pa'i first arouse the wish for supreme enlightenment]	dang po sems bskyed pa
དང་པོ་གསལ	nam langs pa	dang po gsal
དང་པོའི	initial	dang po'i
དང་པོའི་མགོན་པོ	primordial protector	dang po'i mgon po
དང་པོའི་མགོན་པོ་འོད་མི་འགྱུར	the original protector Changeless Light, Samantabhadra 1252	dang po'i mgon po 'od mi 'gyur
དང་པོའི་རྒྱུ	original cause	dang po'i rgyu
དང་པོའི་སྒྲ	preceding word, context	dang po'i sgra
དང་པོའི་ཉིན་པར	on the very first day	dang po'i nyin par
དང་པོའི་གཏམ་དེ	who started the rumor?	dang po'i gtam de
དང་པོའི་གཏམ་དེ་སུས་ཟེར	who spoke the first rumor	dang po'i gtam de sus zer
དང་པོའི་རྟུལ་ཅན	bride, maiden, girl at puberty	dang po'i rtul can
དང་པོའི་དུས་ཉིད་དུ	in the very first time	dang po'i dus nyid du
དང་པོའི་བདག	noble man, first person (grammar)	dang po'i bdag
དང་པོའི་རྡུལ་ཅན	wife, mistress of the house	dang po'i rdul can
དང་པོའི་འོད་གསལ	1st luminosity, primordial protector	dang po'i 'od gsal
དང་པོའི་སངས་རྒྱས	1) primordial [adi] buddha; 2) Vajradhara/ Kalachakra	dang po'i sangs rgyas
དང་པོར	first of all	dang por
དང་པོར་སྐྱེ་བ	1st-arisen	dang por skye ba
དང་པོར་འཁྲུངས	newly opened tree leaves	dang por 'khrungs
དང་པོར་བདེ	happy from the beginning	dang por bde
དང་ཕན	benefit	dang phan
དང་ཕྱུར	100 million	dang phyur
དང་ཕྱོགས་མཚུངས་པ	in accordance with	dang phyogs mtshungs pa
དང་ཕྲད་པ	met with	dang phrad pa
དང་འཕྲང	to meet	dang 'phrang
དང་འཕྲད་པ	met, met with	dang 'phrad pa
དང་འཕྲལ་བ	divided from	dang 'phral ba
དང་བ	faith {sems dang ba drag pos} her mind filled with faith	dang ba
དང་བ་སྐྱེ་བ	to develop confidence	dang ba skye ba
དང་བ་ཉིད	purity	dang ba nyid
དང་བ་དག	inner purity	dang ba dag
དང་བ་འདྲེན	uplift	dang ba 'dren
དང་བ་འདྲེན་པ	inspire, enthuse, uplift	dang ba 'dren pa
དང་བ་རབ	complete purity	dang ba rab
དང་བའི་དད་པ	lucid confidence, mibp 39, sincere faith, clear faith	dang ba'i dad pa
དང་བའི་ཤུགས	power of interest	dang ba'i shugs
དང་བའི་ཤུགས་དྲག་པོ	strong power of interest	dang ba'i shugs drag po
དང་བའི་སེམས	pure intention	dang ba'i sems
དང་བའི་གསལ་བ	be cheerful, of open countenance, of bright appearance dang ba'i lhag par bya ba don du mi	dang ba'i gsal ba
དང་བར་གྱུར་པའི་དམིགས་པ	concept/ perception of becoming pure	dang bar gyur pa'i dmigs pa
དང་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་མཚན་མ	characteristics of becoming pure	dang bar 'gyur ba'i mtshan ma
དང་བས་ཀུན་ནས་ལེན	accept, assume/ undertake voluntarily, volunteer	dang bas kun nas len
དང་བས་སྨོན་ལམ་བརྗོད་པ	expressed	dang bas smon lam brjod pa
ཐིས་ཝིཤིང	prayer	this wishing
དང་བྲལ	be free from, separate from	dang bral
དང་བླང	received	dang blang
དང་བླངས	received, assert, promised, voluntary acceptance	dang blangs
དང་བླངས་ཁྲག་འབུལ་རུ་ཁག	voluntary blood donation brigade	dang blangs khrag 'bul ru khag
དང་བླངས་ཐོག	voluntary	dang blangs thog
དང་བླངས་དོན	volunteer	dang blangs don
དང་བླངས་པ	volunteer	dang blangs pa
དང་བླངས་བྱེད	volunteer	dang blangs byed
དང་བླངས་དམག	volunteers	dang blangs dmag
དང་འབྲལ་བ	separated from	dang 'bral ba
དང་འབྲལ་མེད	never separate from	dang 'bral med
དང་འབྲེལ	related to, joined with, "together with" connective	dang 'brel
དང་འབྲེལ་ནས་བཤད་པ	explaining in the context of	dang 'brel nas bshad pa
དང་འབྲེལ་བ	connected with, linked to	dang 'brel ba
དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་འགྲན་བསྟུར	competition in	dang 'brel ba'i 'gran bstur
དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་འགྲན་བསྡུར	competition in	dang 'brel ba'i 'gran bsdur
དང་སྦྱར	joined/ connected with	dang sbyar
དང་སྦྱར་བ	to apply to . . . ; in conjunction with . . .	dang sbyar ba
དང་སྦྲགས	SA sbrags	dang sbrags
དང་མ་བྲལ	[remain] inseparable from	dang ma bral
དང་མི་མཐུན་པ	in disagreement/ disharmony with ..	dang mi mthun pa
དང་མི་འདྲ་བ	to bear no similarity to . . .	dang mi 'dra ba
དང་མི་འབྲལ་ཤོག	May we never be separate from	dang mi 'bral shog
དང་དམག	volunteer army	dang dmag
དང་ཙེ	a field-terrace	dang tse
དང་ཚུགས	[arch] immediately preceding, as soon as	dang tshugs
དང་ཚེ	a field-terrace	dang tshe
དང་མཚུངས	like, similar to, equal to	dang mtshungs
དང་མཚུངས་ལྡན	concurrent with	dang mtshungs ldan
དང་མཚུངས་པ	which resembles; {lha yi yul dang mtshungs pa} which resembles a celestial realm	dang mtshungs pa
དང་ཞེན	dang dod,...Lto gos la dang zhen byed	dang zhen
དང་ཟས་མ་ཟ	do not eat with a doubt, do not entertain doubt	dang zas ma za
དང་ར	stable for cattle	dang ra
དང་རྭ	[arch] ra skor ram rva ba	dang rwa
དང་རུ	dang rus	dang ru
དང་རུས	sgrog rus,...'Phur 'dod byi'u dang rus chag Bya rgod kyi dang rus las bzos pa'i gling bu	dang rus
དང་རེ་སྤྲོ	JScott (in a Milarepa song): "cheerful and bright." Probably a spell- 1253 ing error for {dwang re spro}. See infra. [mss]	dang re spro
དང་ལ	1) spring[like pond]; 2) at the beginning; 3) a tract of land abounding in springs	dang la
དང་ལ་ཆེ	[arch] inexplicable	dang la che
དང་ལེན	dang du len pa'i bsdus tshig receive, {dang blang}	dang len
དང་ལེན་གྱིས	voluntarily. [mss]	dang len gyis
དང་ལེན་པ	work with earnestness, receive a command with readiness	dang len pa
དང་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	respond, answer	dang len byed pa
དང་ལེན་ཞུ་བ	accept	dang len zhu ba
དང་སེམས	joy	dang sems
དང་སེམས་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing pure mind/ the mind of faith	dang sems dang ldan pa
དང་བསམ་འདུས་པ	mna' ma len pa'i tradition, nga'i nor dang khyod kyi nor dbye ba med par 'dus nas 'tsho ba'i bza' tshang	dang bsam 'dus pa
དང་ལྷན་རྒྱས	together with	dang lhan rgyas
དྭང་ག	appetite	dwang ga
དྭང་ག་དགག	lose 1's appetite	dwang ga dgag
དྭང་ག་བདེ་བ	good appetite	dwang ga bde ba
དྭང་ག་འབྱེད	gain appetite	dwang ga 'byed
དྭང་ག་ལེན	gain appetite	dwang ga len
དྭང་བླངས	SA dang len	dwang blangs
དབ༹ང་བླངས	volunteer	dvang blangs
དྭང་མ	clear	dwang ma
དབ༹ང་མ་སིང་ངེ་ལྷན་ནེ	clear, lucid and quiet	dvang ma sing nge lhan ne
དབ༹ང་མ་སིང་ངེ་ལྷན་ནེ་གནས་པ	remain clear, lucid and quiet	dvang ma sing nge lhan ne gnas pa
དྭང་སང	clear	dwang sang
དྭང་གསལ	limpid & clear	dwang gsal
དངས	purifying	dangs
དངས་ག	appetite	dangs ga
དངས་བཅུད་འདུས་པ	gather the pure essence	dangs bcud 'dus pa
དངས་ཆ	limpid aspect/ quality	dangs cha
དངས་པ	clear, subtle [thd]	dangs pa
དངས་པ་ཉིད	purity, clarity	dangs pa nyid
དངས་པོར	brightly	dangs por
དངས་བའི་དད་པ	pure faith	dangs ba'i dad pa
དངས་བའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས	with a pure mind	dangs ba'i sems kyis
དངས་མ	goodness {zas zos pa'i dangs ma} the goodness in the food eaten	dangs ma
དངས་འཚབ	panic	dangs 'tshab
དངས་གཞུག	to settle down and clarify	dangs gzhug
དངས་ར	yard, courtyard	dangs ra
དངས་རེ་སྤྲོ	{a re dga' dangs re spro} what great joy! how delightful!	dangs re spro
དངས་སང་ངེ་བ	limpidly pristine	dangs sang nge ba
དངས་སངས་སུ	in its limpid pristineness	dangs sangs su
དངས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	to render more gentle	dangs su 'jug pa
དངས་སེང་ངེ	clear	dangs seng nge
དྭངས	1) adj. comp. of {dwang ma}. 2) vi. to clear up, away; luster, brightness; clear, pure; sparkling, clear, pure, bright, transparent, refined, brilliant, limpid; transparent	dwangs
དབ༹ངས	brilliant	dvangs
དྭངས་ཀྱི	spontaneously	dwangs kyi
དབ༹ངས་ཁ	appetite	dvangs kha
དབ༹ངས་ཁ་འགག་པ	to lose one's appetite	dvangs kha 'gag pa
དབ༹ངས་ཁ་བྱེ་བ	to regain / improve one's appetite	dvangs kha bye ba
དྭངས་ཁྲག	blood, serum	dwangs khrag
དྭངས་ལྔ	5 purities	dwangs lnga
དྭངས་བཅུད	essence	dwangs bcud
དྭངས་ཆ	clarity, brightness, purity	dwangs cha
དབ༹ངས་ཆ	limpid aspect/ quality	dvangs cha
དྭངས་ཆེན་པོ	very glittering	dwangs chen po
དབ༹ངས་སྙིགས	essence and dross [defilement, residue [opposite of essence]	dvangs snyigs
དྭངས་སྙིགས	refine, separate the pure part from the refuse, purify	dwangs snyigs
དྭངས་སྙིགས་འབྱེད	1) to refine. 2) separate the pure part from the refuse	dwangs snyigs 'byed
དྭངས་སྙིགས་འབྱེད་པའི་རླུང	refining wind	dwangs snyigs 'byed pa'i rlung
དྭངས་སྙིགས་སོ་སོར་ཕྱེས་པ	separate the pure essence from the dross	dwangs snyigs so sor phyes pa
དྭངས་པ	clean & polished glare, SA dwangs, revive spirit, become limpid	dwangs pa
དབ༹ངས་པ	pristine; isc. clear/ limpid; isc. subtle	dvangs pa
དྭངས་པའི་དད་པ	clear faith	dwangs pa'i dad pa
དབ༹ངས་པའི་ནམ་མཁའ	clear sky	dvangs pa'i nam mkha'
དྭངས་པའི་འོད	pure lights	dwangs pa'i 'od
དྭངས་པར་མཛོད	purify pure treasury	dwangs par mdzod
དྭངས་པོ	very clear	dwangs po
དྭངས་པོ་ཉིད	brightness, lustre, glare, clearness	dwangs po nyid
དྭངས་པོ་མེད་པ	not clear, not sparkling	dwangs po med pa
དབ༹ངས་སྤྲོ	rapturous	dvangs spro
དབ༹ངས་སྤྲོ་བ	rapturous, delighted	dvangs spro ba
དྭངས་བ	essence, clarity, brightness, purity	dwangs ba
དབ༹ངས་འབྱེད་པ	differentiating	dvangs 'byed pa
དྭངས་མ	essence, juice, sap, sperm, pure [part/ essence], chyle, elements in their refined state, GD refined, true, real	dwangs ma
དབ༹ངས་མ	subtle (vital) essence	dvangs ma
དྭངས་མ་དཀར་དནར	the white and red essences	dwangs ma dkar dnar
དྭངས་མ་དཀར་དམར	the white and red essences	dwangs ma dkar dmar
དྭངས་མ་ལྔ	the five essences	dwangs ma lnga
དྭངས་མ་ལྔ་འདུས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	a sphere consisting of the five essences	dwangs ma lnga 'dus kyi thig le
དྭངས་མ་དྲུག	six pure-essences	dwangs ma drug
དབ༹ངས་མ་འབྱེད་པ	un/ nondifferentiating 1254	dvangs ma 'byed pa
དབ༹ངས་མ་ཟུང་སྦྱོར	union of male and female bindu	dvangs ma zung sbyor
དྭངས་མ་འོད	pure essence of light	dwangs ma 'od
དྭངས་མའི་མདུད་པ	pure knot	dwangs ma'i mdud pa
དྭངས་མི་འདུག	it has no brightness	dwangs mi 'dug
དྭངས་སྨན	maiden	dwangs sman
དབ༹ངས་གཙང	free from faults	dvangs gtsang
དྭངས་གཙང	pure, clean	dwangs gtsang
དྭངས་གཙང་གི་རང་བཞིན	pure, clean, unmixed, of the nature of purity	dwangs gtsang gi rang bzhin
དབ༹ངས་རྩེ	yang rtse .Dpa' bo'i dvangs rtse,...Dpung khrod kyi dvangs rtse rnams dmag la byon	dvangs rtse
དྭངས་ཞེན་ཅན	amateur dvangs ra g.yu mtso - {dvangs ra g.yu mtso lake [in shan rtsa rdzong] dvangs ra g.yu mtsho - {dvangs ra g.yu mtsho lake	dwangs zhen can
དྭངས་རེ་སྤྲོ	[we are] full of joy!	dwangs re spro
དྭངས་ཤེལ	crystal clear	dwangs shel
དབ༹ངས་ཤེལ	crystal clear inside and out	dvangs shel
དྭངས་ཤེལ་མེ་ལོང	code of directions for government officials	dwangs shel me long
དབ༹ངས་ཤེལ་མེ་ལོང	crystal mirror of the law	dvangs shel me long
དབ༹ངས་སང	w/o disturbance/ turbulence	dvangs sang
དྭངས་སང	utterly fresh and pure, clear	dwangs sang
དབ༹ངས་སང་ངེ་བ	limpidly pristine	dvangs sang nge ba
དབ༹ངས་སངས་སུ	in its limpid pristineness	dvangs sangs su
དྭངས་སིང་ངེ་བ	utterly fresh and pure	dwangs sing nge ba
དབ༹ངས་སིང་ངེ་བ	free from dirt and defilement	dvangs sing nge ba
དྭངས་སེང་ངེ	utterly fresh, pure	dwangs seng nge
དྭངས་སྲོག	vital essence of purity of the five elements, 1 of srog gsum	dwangs srog
དྭངས་གསལ	clear, pure, transparent, transparent clarity, lucidity; subtly limpid and clear; subtle limpid clarity	dwangs gsal
དབ༹ངས་གསལ	brilliant	dvangs gsal
དྭངས་གསལ་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	transparent body	dwangs gsal gyi gzugs can
དྭངས་གསལ་སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད་པ	sparkling and clear and without obscuration	dwangs gsal sgrib pa med pa
དྭངས་གསལ་རྙོགས་བྲལ	purity, clarity and limpidity	dwangs gsal rnyogs bral
དྭངས་གསལ་དུས་ཚིགས	pure brightness (the 5th solar term)	dwangs gsal dus tshigs
དབ༹ངས་གསལ་ཕྱད་དེ་སང་ངེ	brilliantly clear and vividly cognizant	dvangs gsal phyad de sang nge
དྭངས་ལྷ་སྒམ་པོ	residence of Je gampopa	dwangs lha sgam po
དད	to have faith, belief	dad
དད་བཀུར	faith and respect, worship	dad bkur
དད་གུས	faith and veneration [faith sees good qualities and devotion remembers kindness]	dad gus
དད་གུས་ཀྱིས་གསོལ་བ་གདབ	pray with faith and devotion	dad gus kyis gsol ba gdab
དད་གུས་གྱིས	have faith and respect	dad gus gyis
དད་གུས་ཅན	devoted	dad gus can
དད་གུས་ཆེ་བ	great faith and respect	dad gus che ba
དད་གུས་དག་སྣང	faith, devotion, and pure perception	dad gus dag snang
དད་གུས་ལྡན	faithful, loyal, devout, respectful	dad gus ldan
དད་གུས་སྤྲོ་གསུམ	in body dad, in speech gus, in mind spro	dad gus spro gsum
དད་གུས་བྱེད	have faith and respect/ reverence	dad gus byed
དད་གུས་བྱེད་པ	devote	dad gus byed pa
དད་གུས་བྱེད་འོས་པ	venerable	dad gus byed 'os pa
དད་གུས་ཞུ	have faith and respect/ reverence [h]	dad gus zhu
དད་འགུས་དང་ལྡན་པ	faith and reverence	dad 'gus dang ldan pa
དད་ཅན	faithful ones, faithful people	dad can
དད་ཅན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕོ་མོ	faithful men and women	dad can gyi skye bo pho mo
དད་ཅན་ཕོ་མོ	faithful men and women	dad can pho mo
དད་ཅན་སྦྱིན་བདག	faithful patrons	dad can sbyin bdag
དད་ཅན་ཡོན་དག	faithful patrons	dad can yon dag
དད་ཅན་ཡོན་བདག	faithful patrons	dad can yon bdag
དད་ཅིང་གུས་པ	filled with faith	dad cing gus pa
དད་ཅིང་གུས་པས	with veneration	dad cing gus pas
དད་ཅིང་མགུ་ནས	had faith in dad cing don du gnyer ba na 'bad pa'i	dad cing mgu nas
ཕྱིར་རོ	If there is faith and aspiration, there will then be effort	phyir ro
དད་ཅིང་བསུང་པ	sweet and fragrant	dad cing bsung pa
དད་ཆགས་ཅན	faith	dad chags can
དད་ཆེ་བ	great craving and attachment	dad che ba
དད་གཏོང	devoted and generous	dad gtong
དད་གཏོང་བློ་གྲོས་མཆོག་མངའ་བ	devoted, generous and intelligent	dad gtong blo gros mchog mnga' ba
དད་གཏོང་ཤེས་རབ	trusting, generous and intelligent; faith, generosity, and wisdom	dad gtong shes rab
དད་ཐོབ	1 who has attained faith	dad thob
དད་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ	faith and compassion	dad dang snying rje
དད་དད་གུས་གུས	great faith and devotion dad dam 'pho 'gyur med pa'i grogs mchog - loosely, "[My] dear, unchanging friend..." A form of salutation used in correspondence. [mss]	dad dad gus gus
དད་དམ་འཕོ་མེད་ཀྱི་འདུན་པ	love with unflagging faith and unflinching devotion	dad dam 'pho med kyi 'dun pa
དད་འདུན	mind intent/devoted and respectful	dad 'dun
དད་འདུན་མེད་པ	faithless, irreverent, unbelieving	dad 'dun med pa
དད་འདུས	dad mos kyis 'dus pa	dad 'dus
དད་འདོན	faith and hope	dad 'don
དད་ལྡན	faithful people, faith, those who have faith	dad ldan
དད་ལྡན་སྐྱེས་བུ	the believing, the faithful	dad ldan skyes bu
དད་ལྡན་ཡོན་བདག	faithful householders	dad ldan yon bdag
དད་པ	willingness to participate, believe in, confidence, trust, faith, mibp 38, creed, devotion, three kinds (dang ba'i dad pa, yid ches pa'i dad pa, phyir mi ldog pa'i dad pa), SA yid khyed shes kyi da...	dad pa
དད་པ་སྐྱེ་བ	to conceive any faith in	dad pa skye ba
དད་པ་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	arouse faith	dad pa skyed par byed pa
དད་པ་སྐྱེས	{yid dad pa chen po skyes nas} great devotion arose in her mind	dad pa skyes
དད་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	felt faith, faith grew	dad pa skyes pa
དད་པ་བསྐྱེད	arouse faith	dad pa bskyed
དད་པ་གྱིས	have faith!	dad pa gyis
དད་པ་འགྱུར་པ	will develop faith	dad pa 'gyur pa
དད་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of faith CHN	dad pa lnga
དད་པ་ཅན	[gang zag -- people of faith]	dad pa can
དད་པ་འཆང	x {dad pa rnam pa bzhi'i nang nas mi ldog pa'i dad pa 'chang} of the four types of faith, aim for faith that is irreversible	dad pa 'chang
དད་པ་ཇེ་འཕེལ	increasing faith	dad pa je 'phel
དད་པ་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	faith-follower dad pa rjes su 'brang ba} -}-	dad pa rjes su 'brang ba
དད་པ་ཉིད	faith, love, devotion	dad pa nyid
དད་པ་བརྟན	steadfast trust, unwavering trust	dad pa brtan
དད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attain faith	dad pa thob pa
དད་པ་ཐོབ་སོང	they obtained faith	dad pa thob song
དད་པ་དག་སྣང་སྦྱང	learn to have faith in him and see him with pure perception dad pa dang dga' ba dang blo'i rgyu faith, joy, and the cause of mind, the cause of a mind w faith and joy dad pa dang don du gnyer ba ni...	dad pa dag snang sbyang
དད་པ་དམ་ཚིག་ཅན	faithful ones with pure samaya	dad pa dam tshig can
དད་པ་ལྡན་པ	faithful dad pa ni mos pa dang yid ches pa'o Faith is veneration and trust	dad pa ldan pa
དད་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three faiths	dad pa rnam gsum
དད་པ་ཕལ་ཆེན	great faith	dad pa phal chen
དད་པ་བྱ་བལ་མ	chu bal, lip service w/o great faith	dad pa bya bal ma
དད་པ་བྱེད	have faith/ believe in	dad pa byed
དད་པ་བྱེད་པ	believe in	dad pa byed pa
དད་པ་འབུལ་བ	offer of faith	dad pa 'bul ba
དད་པ་མི་བྱེད་པ	unflagging faith	dad pa mi byed pa
དད་པ་མེད་པ	cynicism; cynical	dad pa med pa
དད་པ་བཞི	the four faiths [dang ba'i dad pa dang, 'dod pa'i dad pa, yid ches pa'i dad pa, phyir mi ldog pa'i dad pa]	dad pa bzhi
དད་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	form an attitude of/ engage in/ arouse faith	dad pa yid la byed pa
དད་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	completely ripened faith	dad pa yongs su smin pa
དད་པ་ཡོད་པ	to possess faith dad pa g.yo ba - stirred by faith	dad pa yod pa
དད་པ་རབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	felt great faith	dad pa rab tu skyes te
དད་པ་ལ་གནས	with the courage of one's convictions dad pa la sogs pa dge ba'i chos su snang	dad pa la gnas
དད་པ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ	phenomena of faith and so forth	dad pa la sogs pa'i rnam pa
དད་པ་ལེན་དུ་བཅུག	receive faith	dad pa len du bcug
དད་པ་ལོག	lose 1's faith	dad pa log
དད་པ་ལོག་པ	impaired faith, want of faith, a person without faith	dad pa log pa
དད་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of faith	dad pa gsum
དད་པ་ཨི་རྗེས་འབྲང་བ	faith-follower; one of {dge 'dun} 20 dad pa i rjes 'brang ba} -}-	dad pa i rjes 'brang ba
དད་པ་ཨི་སྟོབས	the force of faith	dad pa i stobs
དད་པ་ཨི་དབང་པོ	the power of faith, faith faculty	dad pa i dbang po
དད་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང	faith followers	dad pa'i rjes 'brang
དད་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང་གི་གང་ཟག	persons who are faith followers	dad pa'i rjes 'brang gi gang zag
དད་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང་བ	faith-follower	dad pa'i rjes 'brang ba
དད་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	one of the stages of a buddhist monk who is a sravaka	dad pa'i rjes su 'brang ba
དད་པའི་རྟགས་མཚན	sign/ symbol of faith	dad pa'i rtags mtshan
དད་པའི་རྟེན་བྱས་པ	became objects of reverence	dad pa'i rten byas pa
དད་པའི་སྟོབས	the force of faith	dad pa'i stobs
རྒྱའི་མདོ	'phags pa dad pa'i stobs bskyed pa la 'jug pa'i phyag rgya zhes bya ba'i mdo dad pa'i stobs bskyed pa la 'jug pa'i phyag	rgya'i mdo
དད་པའི་ནོར	the wealth of faith [among the {'phags nor bdun}, faith in karma and fruition, day and night since it leads one on the path of virtue, it is like a precious wheel]	dad pa'i nor
དད་པའི་གནས	{dad pa'i gnas sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa la mi dad na} if you had no faith in the buddha's teachings	dad pa'i gnas
དད་པའི་དབང་པོ	the power/faculty of faith [among the {byang phyogs so bdun gyi dbang po lnga} faith in the four noble truths]	dad pa'i dbang po
དད་པའི་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of faith	dad pa'i 'byor pa
དད་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱིས	because of faith	dad pa'i tshul gyis
དད་པའི་ཡུལ་གསུམ	CHN	dad pa'i yul gsum
དད་པའི་ལམ་སྲོལ	cult	dad pa'i lam srol
དད་པའི་ཤུགས	energy of faith	dad pa'i shugs
དད་པའི་ས	level/ object of faith	dad pa'i sa
དད་པའི་གསལ་འདེབས	an aid for your devotion	dad pa'i gsal 'debs
དད་པར་འགྱུར	become faithful	dad par 'gyur
དད་པར་བྱས	arouse faith	dad par byas
དད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to place faith in {ji tsam du dad par byas kyang} no matter how much faith you might place in them	dad par byed pa
དད་པས་གུག་པ	bent as in reverence, bend in salutation	dad pas gug pa
དད་པས་ཕུལ་བའི་བསོད་ནམས	the merit of offering with devotion	dad pas phul ba'i bsod nams
དད་པས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཞིང	bowed down to him with devotion	dad pas phyag 'tshal zhing
དད་པས་མོས་པ	devoted interest, {dge 'dun nyi shu}	dad pas mos pa
དད་པས་མོས་པོ	one of the twenty stages which a buddhist monk attains to in the sravakas	dad pas mos po
དད་པོའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of faith	dad po'i ye shes
དད་འབུལ	present[ation] offering given out of faith	dad 'bul
དད་འབུལ་དད་བཞེས	blos bslangs kyis phul ba'i dad rdzas 'bul bzhes	dad 'bul dad bzhes
དད་འབུལ་ཞུ	give present[ation]/ offering out of faith [h]	dad 'bul zhu
དད་མོས	faith, aspiration and devotion	dad mos
དད་མོས་ཆེན་པོ	deep faith	dad mos chen po
དད་མོས་པ	[one with] faith and devotion [faith in dharma and aspiration/devotion]	dad mos pa
དད་མོས་ཚད་མེད	boundless worship/ faith	dad mos tshad med
དད་བརྩོན	faithful and diligent	dad brtson
དད་བརྩོན་སྙིང་སྟོབས	faith, diligence and fortitude	dad brtson snying stobs
དད་ཚུལ་ངན་པ	bad manner of faith	dad tshul ngan pa
དད་ཚུལ་བཟང་བ	good manner of faith	dad tshul bzang ba
དད་རྫས	things offered by faith	dad rdzas
དད་ཞེན	faith and sha zhen	dad zhen
དད་བཞིན་དུ	in faith	dad bzhin du
དད་ཟས	food offered from faith, the food of faith	dad zas
དད་ལོག	losing one's faith	dad log
དད་ལོག་ཅན	[1] having lost faith	dad log can
དད་ལོག་བྱེད	lose faith	dad log byed
དད་སེམས	attitude of faith	dad sems
དད་སོགས་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five powers, faith and so forth	dad sogs dbang po lnga
དད་སློབ	faithful disciple	dad slob
དན	permanent, changeless	dan
དན་ཁྲ	white danda [among the three varieties of the medicinal tree dan da, white, black, and variegated: the variegated, by its power diseases of nondigestion are purged downward]	dan khra
དན་གོང	(CH clay ril bu for throwing 'phen byed gzhu, child's ball	dan gong
དན་གྲོགས	helper, reliable/ trustworthy friend	dan grogs
དན་ཉེག	dialect of amdo, precious, important	dan nyeg
དན་ཏ	fruit yielding a medicinal drug	dan ta
དན་ཏིག	Dentig, in Domey	dan tig
དན་རྟགས	proof	dan rtags
དན་ཐུ་ལི་ཀ	kind of grass which grows as quickly as it is cut	dan thu li ka
དན་ད	fruit of med. tree Croton euphorbia	dan da
དན་ད་ལི	a sieve	dan da li
དན་ད་ཨུ་ཏ་པ་ལ	medicinal plant	dan da u ta pa la
དན་དི་མ	musical instrument	dan di ma
དན་དྲ	castor oil plant	dan dra
དན་འདྲ	medicinal fruit, castor-oil plant	dan 'dra
དན་པ་རྙེད་པ	attain evil	dan pa rnyed pa
དན་བག	{dan bag} hamlet [below Drepung monastery]	dan bag
དན་མྲག	Denmark	dan mrag
དན་རོག	fruit of med. tree Croton euphorbia	dan rog
བཡ་ཨིཙ་པོཝེར་དིསེཨསེས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	digestion are purged downward]	by its power diseases of non
དན་རོགས	helper, reliable/ trustworthy friend	dan rogs
དན་སིམས	evil minded	dan sims
དན་སོང	lower existences/ states	dan song
དན་སོང་སྲོག་ཆགས	the miserable creatures in the lower states	dan song srog chags
དན་སོང་གསུམ	three lower states	dan song gsum
དན་ཧྲི་གློག་བརྙན	TV	dan hri glog brnyan
དབ	(not in DAS)	dab
དབ་དིབ	unclear sound, ngag ldab ldib	dab dib
དབ་དོབ	1) btsun gzhon bag med pa ste, chos mi klog cing, sgrigs khrims mi srung ba, 'khrug 'dzing byed par dga' ba'i grva pa dar ma; 2) shugs rtsal ldan pa'i nyams 'gyur,...Bu dab be dob be	dab dob
དབ་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	holy combination, exact coincidence	dab pa'i sbyor ba
དབ་བེ་དོབ་བེ	1) btsun gzhon bag med pa ste, chos mi klog cing, sgrigs khrims mi srung ba, 'khrug 'dzing byed par dga' ba'i grva pa dar ma; 2) shugs rtsal ldan pa'i nyams 'gyur,...Bu dab dob	dab be dob be
དམ	holy, brave, excellent, real, solid, reliable, can be counted upon, question mark, supreme, strictly enforced, bound fast, fit or suitable to be bound by promise, bound under an oath, question part...	dam
དམ་ཁ	seal	dam kha
དམ་ཁ་རྒྱབ་པ	seal, stamp	dam kha rgyab pa
དམ་ག	SA tham kha	dam ga
དམ་གྲིབ	[broken] samaya pollution	dam grib
དམ་འགལ	violate samaya	dam 'gal
དམ་རྒྱ	Syn {dam kha} Syn {dam tshig gi phyag rgya} samaya mudra 1257	dam rgya
དམ་རྒྱ་ཅན	sealed	dam rgya can
དམ་རྒྱ་བྱེད་པ	to take a vow	dam rgya byed pa
དམ་བསྒྲགས	restriction	dam bsgrags
དམ་བསྒྲགས་གཏོང	keep secret, restrict	dam bsgrags gtong
དམ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	keep secret, restrict	dam bsgrags byed
དམ་བསྒྲིམ	enforcing	dam bsgrim
དམ་བསྒྲིམ་བྱེད	enforce	dam bsgrim byed
དམ་ངག	instructions	dam ngag
དམ་ཅན	faithful protectors {dam can rnams la grogs mdzod cig ces bstan pa'i srung mar gnyer gtad cing skos so} appointed the faithful protectors as his companions to protect the doctrine	dam can
སམཡ	bound, vow-holders. protectors; oath-bound one; ex. {chos skyong dam can rgya mtsho} the ocean of vowed guardians and dharmapalas	samaya
དམ་ཅན་མགར་བ་ནག་པོ	the samaya holder Garwa nakpo (black smith) [dam can ra zhon, a worldly protector]	dam can mgar ba nag po
དམ་ཅན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	holy dharma raja Yama	dam can chos rgyal
སྔོན་མེད་ལེགས་བཤད	an account of the origins and iconography of the protective deities of Tibetan Buddhism; by {sle lung rje drung bzhad pa'i rdo rje} (b. 1697)	sngon med legs bshad
དམ་ཅན་རྡོ་རྗེ	tantric deity, SA rdor legs	dam can rdo rje
དམ་ཅན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལེགས་པ	the protective deity rdo rje legs pa	dam can rdo rje legs pa
བརྒྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ	the samaya bound Vajrasadhu's retinue of 360 tsen spirits CHN	brgya drug cu
དམ་ཅན་སྤྱི་གཏོར	by Minling Terchen Terdag Lingpa	dam can spyi gtor
དམ་བཅའ	to commit oneself, vow, intention, thesis, dedication, promise, act of promising, sacrament, oath, oath, author's promise, author's statement of purpose to his readers, commitment	dam bca'
དམ་བཅའ་སྒྲུབ་ནུས	able to do what one is told	dam bca' sgrub nus
དམ་བཅའ་བཅུ	the 10 promises	dam bca' bcu
དམ་བཅའ་འཇོག	make a vow/ pledge/ promise, take an oath, swear	dam bca' 'jog
དམ་བཅའ་ཕུལ	vowed	dam bca' phul
དམ་བཅའ་བ	promise, vow, thesis	dam bca' ba
དམ་བཅའ་བའི་སྟོབས	power of resolution	dam bca' ba'i stobs
དམ་བཅའ་འབུལ	administer an oath/ vow [h]	dam bca' 'bul
དམ་བཅའ་འབུལ་བ	give assurance, make a promise	dam bca' 'bul ba
དམ་བཅའ་འབུལ་བཞེས	act of taking an oath/ vow, being sworn in [h]	dam bca' 'bul bzhes
དམ་བཅའ་འབུལ་བཞེས་གནང	take an oath/ vow, be sworn in [h]	dam bca' 'bul bzhes gnang
དམ་བཅའ་འབུལ་བཞེས་མཛད	take an oath/ vow, be sworn in [h]	dam bca' 'bul bzhes mdzad
དམ་བཅའ་བཞག	made a vow, pledge, promise, took an oath, swore	dam bca' bzhag
དམ་བཅའ་བཞག་པ	1) make vow/ promise/ express thesis; 2) rtsod grva'i rigs lam gyi rang rang gi yig cha la brten nas phyogs snga bkod pa'am grub mtha'i bzhed pa khas len pa	dam bca' bzhag pa
དམ་བཅའ་བཞི	four assurances	dam bca' bzhi
དམ་བཅའ་བཞེས	take an oath [from], swear in, administer an oath [h]	dam bca' bzhes
དམ་བཅའ་ལ་ནང་འགལ	MSS: internally contradictory theses (R75: 147) [mss]	dam bca' la nang 'gal
དམ་བཅའ་ལེན	take an oath [from], swear in, administer an oath	dam bca' len
དམ་བཅའ་ཤོར	break 1's promise/ oath/ word	dam bca' shor
དམ་བཅའ་ལྷག་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	tshig previously vowed snga ma dam bcas pa de'i gsal byed dam, sgrub byed du tshig phyi ma clarifying or practicing later words 'dren pa'i lhag bcas ??? kyi sgra 'di'i nang la divisions: [dbye ba '...	dam bca' lhag bcas kyi sgra
དམ་བཅའི་ཚིག	samaya, oath, promise, vow	dam bca'i tshig
དམ་བཅས	vow	dam bcas
དམ་བཅས་ནས་སྨོད་པ	1) violate a vow; 2) Sems thag bcad nas 'phya smod byed pa (	dam bcas nas smod pa
དམ་བཅས་པ	promise	dam bcas pa
དམ་བཅས་པ་དང་མི་འགལ་བ	not to violate one's promise	dam bcas pa dang mi 'gal ba
དམ་ཆབ་ཅའ	promise	dam chab ca'
དམ་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	yama, lord of death, tutelary deity of grand lama of bkra' shis lhun po	dam chen chos rgyal
དམ་ཆོས	noble doctrine, holy dharma	dam chos
དམ་ཆོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་བརྩེགས་པ	the holy dharma book, the Ratnakuta	dam chos dkon mchog brtsegs pa
དམ་ཆོས་དགོངས་པ་ཡང་ཟབ	terma revealed by {rin chen phun tshogs} {'bri gung pa} 1509-1557	dam chos dgongs pa yang zab
དམ་ཆོས་དགོངས་པ་ཡོངས་འདུས	a collection of texts from the cycle revealed by {spo bo gter ston bdud 'dul rdo rje} (1615-1672)	dam chos dgongs pa yongs 'dus
དམ་ཆོས་བསྒྲུབ་པར་བྱ་བ	the holy dharma should be practiced, act of practicing the holy dharma	dam chos bsgrub par bya ba
དམ་ཆོས་ཆེར་གཟུང	greater grasp of holy dharma	dam chos cher gzung
དམ་ཆོས་པད་དཀར	the White lotus sutra, saddharma pundarika sutra	dam chos pad dkar
དམ་ཆོས་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	saddharma pundarika sutra dam chos pad ma dkar po'i mdo Saddharma Pundarika Sutra. 'The Sutra of the White Lotus of the Sacred Dharma.' Famous Mahayana scripture	dam chos pad ma dkar po
དམ་ཆོས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	{sngags chen} Gelug master	dam chos dpal 'byor
དམ་ཆོས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་སྙིང་ཐིག	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {bdud 'dul nus ldan rdo rje} dam chos yid bzhin nor bu thar pa rin po	dam chos sprul sku'i snying thig
ཆེའི་རྒྱན	Jewel Ornament of Liberation; by Gampopa dam chos yid bzhin nor bu thar pa rin po	che'i rgyan
དམ་ཆོས་ཡུན་རིང་གནས་པ	abiding of the holy dharma for a long time	dam chos yun ring gnas pa
དམ་ཆོས་ལེགས་གཤགས་པ	good confession of holy dharma	dam chos legs gshags pa
དམ་ཆོས་བཤད་པ	to expound the sacred Dharma dam chos gser 'od dam pa'i rnga sgra Sublime Drumbeat of the Golden Radiance, by Shabkar	dam chos bshad pa
དམ་ཆོས་གསེར་འོད་དམ་པའི་རྔ་སྒྲ	by Shabkar	dam chos gser 'od dam pa'i rnga sgra
དམ་ཉམས	v spoiling the samaya	dam nyams
དམ་ཉམས་ཀྱི་ལས་རྣམས	violations of duty	dam nyams kyi las rnams
དམ་ཉམས་པའི་མདོ་བཞི	[TRS 120-6]	dam nyams pa'i mdo bzhi
དམ་ཏོག	tightening of restrictions/ law	dam tog
དམ་ཐིག	[out]line of samaya	dam thig
དམ་དུ	tightly	dam du
དམ་དུ་འཁྱུད	clasp tightly	dam du 'khyud
དམ་དུ་འགྲོ	become tighter/ stricter	dam du 'gro
དམ་དུ་བཅིང་པ	well-bound, bound tightly	dam du bcing pa
དམ་དུ་ཆོངས	Hold as sacred!	dam du chongs
དམ་དུ་གཏོང	become tighter/ stricter, tighten	dam du gtong
དམ་དུ་བྱིང	{'khor ba'i 'dam du bying} sunk in the mire of samsara	dam du bying
དམ་དུ་འཛིན	to hold as supreme	dam du 'dzin
དམ་དུ་བཟུང་བ	hold tightly, hold fast	dam du bzung ba
དམ་དུམ	1) [broken to] pieces; 2) a few a little, various	dam dum
དམ་དུམ་དུ་བཅད	cut to pitches	dam dum du bcad
དམ་དེ་འདྲ	such a thing as	dam de 'dra
དམ་དེམ	promise, vow, oath, pledge, thesis, true cessations, disputation, assertion, claim	dam dem
དམ་དེམ་པ	[arch] proclaimed, asserted, vowed	dam dem pa
དམ་དོག	do dam lhod po dang yangs po min pa ...Sgrigs khrims nyams 'chal du mi 'gro ba'i dam dog nan tan byed pa,...Mi spyod ngan la dam dog chen po byas pa	dam dog
དམ་དོན	diligence, meticulousness, care	dam don
དམ་དོན་བྱེད	do w diligence/ meticulousness/ care	dam don byed
དམ་དོམ	(A) assertion, vow, trying hard to be careful [Khyed rang gis bka' mngags gnang ba thams cad ngas 'phral du dam don zhus chog ...Dmangs kyi khe phan dang dngos su 'brel ba'i las don yin phyin dam d...	dam dom
དམ་དྲག	tightening restrictions/ law	dam drag
དམ་དྲག་བྱེད	tightening restrictions/ law/ security	dam drag byed
དམ་འདོགས	make promise/ vow of samaya	dam 'dogs
དམ་ལྡན	those who keep samaya	dam ldan
དམ་ལྡན་དུ	faithfully	dam ldan du
དམ་སྡོམ	samayas and vows	dam sdom
དམ་སྣག	stamp pad w ink	dam snag
དམ་པ	1) good, the best, most superior, excellent; 2) the late, the deceased [h] [Pha dam pa,...Slob dpon dam pa,...Rgyal po dam pa]; 3) comp [Dam po] narrow, tight[ness]; 4) holy, sacred, perfect, conse...	dam pa
དམ་པ་ཀུན་དགའ	Dampa Kunga. The Indian master Phadampa Sangye who brought the teachings of Shije to Tibet	dam pa kun dga'
དམ་པ་སྐུ་གཉིས	the holy/authentic two kayas	dam pa sku gnyis
དམ་པ་ཁྲེལ་བའི་རྒྱུ	It would surely displease the holy ones	dam pa khrel ba'i rgyu
དམ་པ་ཁྲེལ་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	behavior that would shame sublime beings	dam pa khrel ba'i spyod pa
དམ་པ་གོང་མ	past sages	dam pa gong ma
དམ་པ་གོང་མའི་ཕུག་ནོར་བཅུ	ten cardinal treasures of the past saints	dam pa gong ma'i phug nor bcu
དམ་པ་གོང་མའི་ཕུགས་ནོར་བཅུ	ten cardinal treasures of the past saints: {gtad pa bzhi} the four ultimate aims; {bud bsnyegs thob gsum} casting oneself out, taking, and finding; and {rdo rje gsum} the three 'diamond-hard resolu...	dam pa gong ma'i phugs nor bcu
དམ་པ་དགྱེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	behavior that would please sublime beings	dam pa dgyes pa'i spyod pa
དམ་པ་ཆོས	dam pa'i chos	dam pa chos
དམ་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབུ་བརྙེས	This was the beginning of Dharma in Tibet dam pa chos dran pa nye bar bzhag pa Mindfulness of the Excellent Doctrine Sutra	dam pa chos kyi dbu brnyes
དམ་པ་མཆོག	a holy teacher	dam pa mchog
དམ་པ་ཏོག་དཀར	the holy white tip [Buddha dga' ldan yid dga' chos 'dzin na bzhugs pa'i dus kyi mtshan]	dam pa tog dkar
དམ་པ་བསྟེན	following holy persons	dam pa bsten
དམ་པ་ཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར་པ	to excel	dam pa thob par 'gyur pa
དམ་པ་དེ	the sublime master	dam pa de
དམ་པ་དྲུག	the six excellencies	dam pa drug
དམ་པ་དྲུག་ལྡན	possessing the six excellencies	dam pa drug ldan
དམ་པ་རྣམས	worthy persons, saintly people, holy ones	dam pa rnams
དམ་པ་མི་ལྡན	unholy	dam pa mi ldan
དམ་པ་རིགས་བརྒྱ	42 peaceful and 58 wrathful deities	dam pa rigs brgya
དམ་པ་ལ་བསྟེན་པ	to follow worthy people, holy persons	dam pa la bsten pa
དམ་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	1) holy/ true buddhahood; 2) Phadampa sanje	dam pa sangs rgyas
དམ་པ་གསུམ	the three excellencies {sbyor ba sems bskyed},-{dngos gzhi dmigs med},-{rjes bsngo ba}	dam pa gsum
དམ་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩིས་ཟིན་པ	embraced by the three excellences; to enhance it with the three supreme methods	dam pa gsum gyi rtsis zin pa
དམ་པ་ཨི་ཆོས	Syn {dam chos} dam pa i chos dran pa nye bar bzhag pa Mindfulness of the Excellent Doctrine Sutra	dam pa i chos
དམ་པ་ཨི་དོན	ultimate, real sense	dam pa i don
དམ་པ་ཨི་བདག	true identity	dam pa i bdag
དམ་པའི་སྐུ་དྲིན	true/ holy kindness	dam pa'i sku drin
དམ་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ	holy being	dam pa'i skye bo
དམ་པའི་གྲིབ་བསིལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessed of the grateful shade of sanctity	dam pa'i grib bsil dang ldan pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས	holy/ true/ excellent dharma	dam pa'i chos
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ཞུགས་པ	to have entered the gate of the sacred Dharma	dam pa'i chos kyi sgo zhugs pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the sacred Dharma dam pa'i chos kyi snang ba dang dral ba there is no presence of the Dharma	dam pa'i chos kyi bstan pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབུ་བརྙེས	the Dharma first appeared in Tibet	dam pa'i chos kyi dbu brnyes
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྨན	the medicine of the Dharma; x {dam pa'i chos kyi sman rang gis btung ste nyams su ma blang na nad pa zhig gi sngas su sman dang sman yig grang med pa yod kyang rang gis sman ma btung na nad la mi p...	dam pa'i chos kyi sman
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཌྷརྨ	that is to say, not putting it into practice-is like having innumerable medications and prescriptions beside your bed but never touching them. That will never cure your disease	of the Dharma
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ལམ	the highway of the sacred Dharma	dam pa'i chos kyi gzhung lam
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྲོལ་བཏོད	established Buddhism in Tibet	dam pa'i chos kyi srol btod
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་དགོངས་པ་གཅིག་པ	see dgongs gcig	dam pa'i chos dgongs pa gcig pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་བསྒྱུར	translated the authentic Dharma	dam pa'i chos bsgyur
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་དང་མི་འགལ་བ	{rang rgyud dam pa'i chos dang mi 'gal ba zhig byed dgos} it is essential to avoid doing anything which conflicts with the authentic Dharma	dam pa'i chos dang mi 'gal ba
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་དར་བའི་ས་ཕྱོགས	an area where the sacred Dharma flourishes Dam pa'i chos dran pa nye bar gzhag pa mdo sde dran pa nye bar bzhag pa shloka [1036, vol 49 tr ba tsab lo ts' ba] dam pa'i chos dran pa nye bar gzhag pa ...	dam pa'i chos dar ba'i sa phyogs
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་འདུལ་བ	the canon of monastic discipline	dam pa'i chos 'dul ba
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་རྣམས	sublime experiences	dam pa'i chos rnams
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་པད	celebrated mahayana scripture known as the Lotus Sutra	dam pa'i chos pad
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་པད་དཀར་པོའི་མདོ	Sutra of the White Lotus of the Holy Dharma; Saddharma-pundarika-sutra	dam pa'i chos pad dkar po'i mdo
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ་མདོ	the White Lotus Sutra [13 vol 27 ch, tr pandita su rendra bodhi and lo ts' ba bande sna nam ye shes sde and zhus pa] 1260	dam pa'i chos pad ma dkar po mdo
བ་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Saddharmapun.d.ari-ka na-ma maha-ya-nasu-tra; A Holy Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The White Lotus Sutra" dam pa'i chos pad ma dkar po'i mdo saddharma pundarika sutra	ba theg pa chen po'i mdo
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཚུལ་བཞིན་སྒྲུབ་པ	to practise according to those true teachings	dam pa'i chos tshul bzhin sgrub pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་འཛིན་པ	holder of holy dharma	dam pa'i chos 'dzin pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཟབ་མོ་ཉན་པ	to listen to the profound Dharma	dam pa'i chos zab mo nyan pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཡོངས་སུ་བཟང་བ	to fully embrace the sacred Dharma	dam pa'i chos yongs su bzang ba
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	precious Teaching	dam pa'i chos rin po che
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་སྐུར་བ་བཏབ་པ	slandered the sacred teachings	dam pa'i chos la skur ba btab pa
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་མོས་པ་སྐྱེ་བ	aspiring to the authentic Dharma	dam pa'i chos la mos pa skye ba
དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	to enjoy the sacred Dharma; [= to practice Dharma]	dam pa'i chos la longs spyod pa
དམ་པའི་རྗེས་ཟིན	guided by enlightened ones	dam pa'i rjes zin
དམ་པའི་དོན	ultimate, real sense, absolute [meaning]	dam pa'i don
དམ་པའི་དོན་ངོར	from the standpoint of ultimate truth	dam pa'i don ngor
དམ་པའི་དོན་དུ	from the standpoint of ultimate truth	dam pa'i don du
དམ་པའི་དོན་ནི་གྲུབ་པ	the absolute truth is what is established	dam pa'i don ni grub pa
དམ་པའི་བདག	true identidy	dam pa'i bdag
དམ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	ultimate realization, holy conduct, true/ absolute/ perfect action	dam pa'i spyod pa
དམ་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	pious inclination, holy intention	dam pa'i blo gros
དམ་པའི་ཚུལ	noble intention	dam pa'i tshul
དམ་པའི་ཞལ་གདམས	ultimate/ holy oral instructions	dam pa'i zhal gdams
དམ་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	1) reflection of the Victorious 1; 2) good bzo tsam,...Dam pa'i gzugs brnyan ston pa tsam las don du mi tha shal ba zhig red holy reflection, reflection of truth, reflection of the absolute	dam pa'i gzugs brnyan
དམ་པའི་ཡང་རྩེ	pinnacle of sacredness	dam pa'i yang rtse
དམ་པའི་རིག་ཅན་ལྔ	CHN	dam pa'i rig can lnga
དམ་པའི་རིག་ཅན་དྲ་མ་ལྔ	CHN	dam pa'i rig can dra ma lnga
དམ་པའི་རིགས་ཅན་དྲ་ལྔ	Five holy sages	dam pa'i rigs can dra lnga
དམ་པའི་རིགས་ཅན་དྲ་མ་ལྔ	the buddha after nirvana 28 years 'das pa na ri ma la ya gnam lcags yod pa'i rtser by the lord of secret Vajrapani all the se-	dam pa'i rigs can dra ma lnga
དམ་པའི་ལམ	holy/ true path	dam pa'i lam
དམ་པའི་ལུགས	holy tradition	dam pa'i lugs
དམ་པའི་གསུང	ex {mdo dang dam pa'i gsung} the sutras and the instructions of the past sages	dam pa'i gsung
དམ་པའི་ལྷ་ཆོས	the sublime teachings, the divine Dharma; ex {dam pa'i lha chos la spyod bzhin} practicing the divine Dharma	dam pa'i lha chos
དམ་པའི་ལྷ་ཆོས་བྱེད	longs to practice the blessed Dharma	dam pa'i lha chos byed
དམ་པའི་ལྷ་ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	to practice the sublime Dharma	dam pa'i lha chos byed pa
དམ་པོ	tight, firm, strict, strong, narrow, close, intimate	dam po
དམ་པོ་བཅིང་བ	fasten	dam po bcing ba
དམ་པོ་མ་ཡིན	not strong-willed, not strict, relaxed	dam po ma yin
དམ་པོ་ཟིན་པ	grip	dam po zin pa
དམ་པོ་གཟུང་བ	clench	dam po gzung ba
དམ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	tighten	dam po bzo ba
དམ་པོར་བྱེད་པ	making firm, tight, strict	dam por byed pa
དམ་པོར་འཛིན་པ	hold firmly, seize securely	dam por 'dzin pa
དམ་སྤྲིང་ངེ་བ	finely-tuned [TD]	dam spring nge ba
དམ་ཕྲུག	seal, seal	dam phrug
དམ་ཕྲུག་ཕབ	seal w a seal	dam phrug phab
དམ་བག	{dam bag} hamlet [below Drepung monastery]	dam bag
དམ་བི	wine jar	dam bi
དམ་བེ	kha dog la lto che ba'i vase, liquor container	dam be
དམ་བེ་གང	kha dog la lto che ba'i vase, liquor container	dam be gang
དམ་འབི	kha dog la lto che ba'i vase, liquor container	dam 'bi
དམ་འབྱར	custom, usage, official practice, affixing a seal, letter to which a seal has been fixed	dam 'byar
དམ་འབྱར་བའི་ཕྱག་བྲིས	stamped/ sealed letter	dam 'byar ba'i Phyag bris
དམ་མི་དུམ་མི	piecemeal, scattered pieces	dam mi dum mi
དམ་མོ	dam po	dam mo
དམ་ཙིག་གསུམ་བཀོད	1) among thub dbang the sage's body speech and mind samaya bkod pa'i rgyal po; 2) abiding in the three vows [khri la mi nyal ba, chang mi 'thung ba, phyag rgya 'dra ba mi za ba: do not eat food in ...	dam tsig gsum bkod
དམ་གཙང	1) unsullied vows . 2) Damtsang, Shabkar's family branch	dam gtsang
དམ་གཙང་མཆེད་གྲོགས	Dharma friends with pure samaya; the Dharma brothers with whom I had pure connections; spiritual brothers whose samaya is pure	dam gtsang mched grogs
དམ་རྩི	gum, glue, paste	dam rtsi
དམ་ཚགས	close, detailed, careful	dam tshags
དམ་ཚི	'byar rtsi dam po'i rigs Shing leb gnyis kyi srubs bar dam tshis sbyor ba	dam tshi
དམ་ཚིག	Sacred commitment	dam tshig
ཅརེཕུ༹ལལཡ་ཨས་ཨོནེའས་ལིཕེ༹	force. [DILGO KHYENTSE]	carefully as one's life
དམ་ཚིག་ཀི་ཐིག	[out]line of samaya	dam tshig ki thig
དམ་ཚིག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	samaya mandala/ realm, visualized and meditated on mandala of self and front visualization	dam tshig dkyil 'khor
དམ་ཚིག་བཀོད་པ	Arrangement of Samaya; One of Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	dam tshig bkod pa
དམ་ཚིག་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱུད	the Tantra of the Array of Samayas	dam tshig bkod pa'i rgyud
དམ་ཚིག་སྐོང་བའི་རྒྱུན་བཤགས	Daily Confession for Mending Samayas	dam tshig skong ba'i rgyun bshags
དམ་ཚིག་ཁྲུས་ལུང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Ocean of Cleansing Sacred commitment. Name of a tantric scripture on purification of samaya, the vows of Vajrayana practice	dam tshig khrus lung rgya mtsho
དམ་ཚིག་གི་ཁ་ཕྲུ་བཏབ	samaya spitting	dam tshig gi kha phru btab
དམ་ཚིག་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	realm of samaya	dam tshig gi 'khor lo
དམ་ཚིག་གི་སྤང་བྱའི་དགྲ་བཞི	the four enemies of samaya that are to be renounced CHN	dam tshig gi spang bya'i dgra bzhi
དམ་ཚིག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	samaya mudra/ seal [The seal of commitment (one of the {phyag rgya bzhi}	dam tshig gi phyag rgya
དམ་ཚིག་གི་རྩ་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 root samayas dam tshig gi rtsa ba bcu bzhi dang mthun	dam tshig gi rtsa ba bcu bzhi
པའི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	the 8 branch samayas according w the 14 root samayas CHN	pa'i yan lag brgyad
དམ་ཚིག་གི་འཛས	samaya substance	dam tshig gi 'dzas
དམ་ཚིག་གི་རྫས	samaya substance	dam tshig gi rdzas
དམ་ཚིག་གི་རྫས་ཤ་ལྔ	the samaya substances of the five meats [human, dog, cow, elephant, horse) chn]	dam tshig gi rdzas sha lnga
དམ་ཚིག་གི་སེལ	stain of conflicting samayas	dam tshig gi sel
དམ་ཚིག་དགུ	[TRS 114-3] from {mngon brjod bla ma}	dam tshig dgu
དམ་ཚིག་མགའ་འགྲོ་མ	samaya dakini	dam tshig mga' 'gro ma
དམ་ཚིག་སྒྲོལ་མ	samaya tara, SA don yod grub pa	dam tshig sgrol ma
དམ་ཚིག་ཅན	loyal	dam tshig can
དམ་ཚིག་གཅིག་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the residual of one samaya	dam tshig gcig pa'i lhag ma
དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 commitments of kriy tantra [not to abandon the three precious jewels {dkon mchog gsum} he enlightened mind {byang chub sems} -he mantras {sngags} -he seals {phyag rgya} -he vajra and bell {rdo r...	dam tshig bcu gcig
དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་བཞི	fourteen commitments of Yoga Tantra, see fourteen basic violations of the commitments; [TRS 114-4]	dam tshig bcu bzhi
དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen commitments of Yoga Tantra. equivalent to the eleven commitments of Kriya tantra, with the addition of the commitments not to drink water in a locality inhabited by violators of commitment...	dam tshig bcu gsum
དམ་ཚིག་ཉིད	promise solemnly undertaken	dam tshig nyid
དམ་ཚིག་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	the 28 samayas [of Mahayoga, 3 {rtsa ba'i} and 25 {yan lag gi dam tshig}	dam tshig nyer brgyad
དམ་ཚིག་གཉན་པ	rigid vow, solemn oath	dam tshig gnyan pa
དམ་ཚིག་ཏི་རྫས	SA dam rdzas dam tshig thams cad kyi nyams chag skong ba'i lung bshags pa thams cad	dam tshig ti rdzas
ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the {dri ma med pa'i bshags rgyud}; short: {bshags rgyud}	kyi rgyud dri ma med pa'i rgyal po
དམ་ཚིག་འདྲལ་བ	break a promise	dam tshig 'dral ba
དམ་ཚིག་རྡོར་དྲིལ	samaya, vajra, and bell	dam tshig rdor dril
དམ་ཚིག་ལྡན་པ	faithful, know how to keep the samayas	dam tshig ldan pa
དམ་ཚིག་ལྡན་པར	faithfully	dam tshig ldan par
དམ་ཚིག་སྡོམ་པ་གཙང་བ	kept pure vows and samaya	dam tshig sdom pa gtsang ba
དམ་ཚིག་རྣམ་དག་པ	completely pure samaya	dam tshig rnam dag pa
དམ་ཚིག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	samaya yoga	dam tshig rnal 'byor
དམ་ཚིག་པ	pledge being	dam tshig pa
དམ་ཚིག་དཔའ	samaya being, commitment aspect of a deity	dam tshig dpa'
དམ་ཚིག་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	doctrinal seal, samaya mudra, the four rgyud sde's in- 1262 dividual extraordinary hand mudras	dam tshig phyag rgya
དམ་ཚིག་འཕེན	sneer at the samaya; x {rngon la yang dag spro bas dam tshig 'phen} full of joy [at the catch], they sneer at the samaya	dam tshig 'phen
དམ་ཚིག་མེད་པ	unfaithful, untrustworthy	dam tshig med pa
དམ་ཚིག་གཙང་མ	1) not breaking dharma vows/ samaya; 2) 'jug rten gyi mdza' bshes blo nye phan tshun dbar 'khon 'gras ma zhugs pa	dam tshig gtsang ma
དམ་ཚིག་རྩ་བའི་ལྟུང་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	The downfalls of the 14 root samayas CHN	dam tshig rtsa ba'i ltung ba bcu bzhi
དམ་ཚིག་གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང	the samaya [visualized] celestial palace	dam tshig gzhal yas khang
དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	four commitments, med pa (nothingness, non-existent), 'chal ba (presence, no gaps in being), lhun grub (self-perfected, not contrived), gcig pu (unique center of universe, unitary experience), med ...	dam tshig bzhi
དམ་ཚིག་ལ་གནས་པ	abide in samaya	dam tshig la gnas pa
དམ་ཚིག་ཤོར་བ	to lose one's samayas	dam tshig shor ba
དམ་ཚིག་སེམས་དཔའ	samayasattva [among bskyed rim sems dpa' gsum brtsegs, visualized deity in a sadhana]	dam tshig sems dpa'
དམ་ཚིག་སྲུང་བ	to observe the samayas	dam tshig srung ba
དམ་ཚིག་གསལ་བཀྲ	Clarification of Commitments by Lilavajra	dam tshig gsal bkra
དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ	the three samayas	dam tshig gsum
དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད	1) among thub dbang the sage's body speech and mind samaya bkod pa'i rgyal po; 2) abiding in the three vows; 3) the set/ display of the three samayas	dam tshig gsum bkod
དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Arrangement of the Three Samayas	dam tshig gsum bkod kyi rgyud
དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད་པ	the set/ display of the three samayas	dam tshig gsum bkod pa
དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	tris mayavyuha raja dam tshig bsrung mtshams las 'das pa transcending the borderline between keeping and breaking the samayas	dam tshig gsum bkod pa'i rgyal po
དམ་འཛིན	Damdzin. A name for Murub Tseypo, the second son of Trisong Deutsen	dam 'dzin
དམ་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	{mu rub btsad po}; the second son of King Trisong Deutsen	dam 'dzin chos kyi blo gros
དམ་འཛིན་བྱེད	adhere to/ grasp firmly, be persistent	dam 'dzin byed
དམ་རྫས	1) samaya substance te blessed by mantra; 2) Dam bca' can la mkho ba'i nor rdzas	dam rdzas
དམ་རྫས་ལྔ	five sacramental/ samaya substances	dam rdzas lnga
དམ་རྫས་བརྟེན་པ	taking samaya substances (drinking)	dam rdzas brten pa
དམ་རྫི	do dam dang rdzi gsang,...'Gyur ldog che ba'i gnas tshul rnams la dam rdzi gang gzab byed pa	dam rdzi
དམ་རྫིང	pond where rain water collects	dam rdzing
དམ་བཞག་པ	[arch] gnyer pa	dam bzhag pa
དམ་བཞིན	according to samaya	dam bzhin
དམ་ཟབ	intimate, close	dam zab
དམ་བཟུང	strict observance, keeping 1's word	dam bzung
དམ་བཟུང་བྱེད	observe strictly, keep 1's word	dam bzung byed
དམ་ཡེ	samayasattva and jnanasattva	dam ye
དམ་ཡེ་ཐ་དད་པ	difference of samayasattva and jnanasattva	dam ye tha dad pa
དམ་ཡེ་དབྱེར་མེད	1) primordially inseparable from samaya/the absolute; 2) inseparability of samayasattva and jnanasattva	dam ye dbyer med
དམ་ཡེ་བསྲེས	1) primordially mixed w samaya/the absolute; 2) mixture of samayasattva and jnanasattva	dam ye bsres
དམ་ཡེ་བསྲེས་པ	intermingled samaya and wisdom [beings]	dam ye bsres pa
དམ་ལ་བཀར	bind [demon] under oath	dam la bkar
དམ་ལ་བཏག་པ	to bind under oath / to a commitment	dam la btag pa
དམ་ལ་བཏགས	bound under oath	dam la btags
དམ་ལ་བཏགས་པ	bind under oath	dam la btags pa
དམ་ལ་ཐོག	tighten [a knot], draw tight, bind in samaya	dam la thog
དམ་ལ་འདོགས་པ	exorcise demons, bind demons under solemn oath	dam la 'dogs pa
དམ་ལ་གནས་པ	abide by one's own promise or words	dam la gnas pa
དམ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	enter into/ remain in 1's oath, samaya khas len la 'dzul ba 1263	dam la zhugs pa
དམ་ལ་བཞག་པ	to bind under oath / to a commitment	dam la bzhag pa
དམ་ལ་གཟིར	be tormented by 1's oath	dam la gzir
དམ་ལས་ཉམས	violate 1's oath	dam las nyams
དམ་ལས་ཉམས་པ	to violate a commitment	dam las nyams pa
དམ་སེལ	samaya lapse	dam sel
དམ་སྲག་རྫོང	place in tibet	dam srag rdzong
དམ་སྲི	demons; samaya violator, transgressor; evil spirit; a demon; Damsi. samaya violator, transgressor, {dam tshig la gnod pa'i sri}. damsi demons. nine sibling spirits who have violated their commitments	dam sri
པླགུཨེ་ཨནད་ཅཏཏླེ	disease, sri of vowbreakage	plague and cattle
དམ་སྲིའི་ལིང་ག	effigy for the samaya demon	dam sri'i ling ga
དམ་སྲིས	evil force	dam sris
དམ་སྲིས་རྒྱུད་དཀྲུགས	being disturbed by samaya violator demon/spirit, [being led astray] by tamsis	dam sris rgyud dkrugs
དམ་སྲུང་བ	keep one's word or vow	dam srung ba
དམ་ལྷོད	tight[ness] and loose[ness]	dam lhod
དམས	induce, assemble, explain, SA 'dom pa	dams
དའ་ན་ཤིའ་ལ	D nash la [indian pandit 1 of the {drin can lo pan gsum}	da' na shi' la
དའ་ཚང	good, fine, handsome	da' tshang
དའི་དུས་སུ	at that time	da'i dus su
དའི་རེ་འདོད་ལ	in his present wish	da'i re 'dod la
དྭའི་ཆིང་བ་དུར	{dwa'i ching ba dur	dwa'i ching ba dur
དྭའི་འཆིང་བ་དུར	mongolian king who reigned over tibet for 7 years	dwa'i 'ching ba dur
དའུ	kind of fever	da'u
དའུ་བུ་ཚ	orphan boy	da'u bu tsha
དྭའུ་བུ་ཚ	orphan	dwa'u bu tsha
དའེ་གོ	Germany	da'e go
དའེ་ཡིའི་ཀྲོ	Germany	da'e yi'i kro
དའོ་ཏན	guided missile	da'o tan
དར	1) flag, banner; 2) silk[en] [clothing/ brocade]; 3) ice, freezing of water; 4) ceremonial scarf, kata; 5) sash, scarf; 6) grow, rise, flourish, [be[come] [wide]spread/ popular, be propagated/ [wel...	dar
དར་ཀར་གྱི་གཟན	white silken shawl	dar kar gyi gzan
དར་ཀོས	silk clothes, garments	dar kos
དར་དཀར	white silken scarves	dar dkar
དར་སྐུད	silk thread, stong skud	dar skud
དར་སྐུད་བཅོས་འཐེན	silk reeling	dar skud bcos 'then
དར་ཁ་འགྲིགས་པ	ice ..	dar kha 'grigs pa
དར་ཁ་ཆགས་པ	the ice setting firm	dar kha chags pa
དར་ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ལྔ	five-colored silk	dar kha dog sna lnga
དར་ཁྱབ	increase and become pervasive, dissemination, spreading	dar khyab
དར་ཁྱབ་ཆེན་པོ	popular, widespread, flourishing	dar khyab chen po
དར་ཁྱབ་གཏོང	increase and become pervasive, disseminate, spread, diffuse	dar khyab gtong
དར་ཁྲ	variegated/ w colored figures silk garment/ cloth and brocade	dar khra
དར་ཁྲུ	small square/ triangular flag (originally silk	dar khru
དར་གུད	flourish and weaken/ decline, ups and downs, prosperity and adversity	dar gud
དར་གུད་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 stages of flourishing and weakening [dbugs len, mngal gnas, lus rdzogs, btsas pa, khrus byed, gos gyon, las byed, dar ba, gud pa, na ba, shi ba, dur zhugs]	dar gud bcu gnyis
དར་གོས	silk clothing, silk and brocade	dar gos
དར་གྱི་གོས	silk dress	dar gyi gos
དར་གྱི་ཅོད་པན	silk-ribboned tiara	dar gyi cod pan
དར་གྱི་ཆས་གོས་ལྔ	five silk garments: the ribbons, silk scarf, silken crown, silken shawl, and skirt.	dar gyi chas gos lnga
དར་གྱི་ཆུན་པོ	bundle of silk scarves	dar gyi chun po
དར་གྱི་ཆོས་གོས	five silk garments	dar gyi chos gos
དར་གྱི་ཆོས་གོས་ལྔ	five silken dharma garments	dar gyi chos gos lnga
དར་གྱི་སྟོད་གྱོགས	silken shawl/ upper garment dar gyi stod g.yogs - silken shawl, upper garment	dar gyi stod gyogs
དར་གྱི་མདུད་པ	a silk cord	dar gyi mdud pa
དར་གྱི་ན་བཟའ་ལྔ	[TRS 143-6]	dar gyi na bza' lnga
དར་གྱི་ཕོ་ལོང་བརྡབ་པ་ཙམ	no more than a flash, going down and bouncing straight up again like a silk ball 1264	dar gyi pho long brdab pa tsam
དར་གྱི་འབུ	silkworm	dar gyi 'bu
དར་གྱི་སྲིན་བུ	silkworm	dar gyi srin bu
དར་གྲུ	sail boat	dar gru
དར་གྲོང	Dardrong, in Domey	dar grong
དར་རྒན	(M dmangs kyi gzhung la byas rjes bzhag nas level/ rank attained	dar rgan
དར་རྒན་བྱིན	(M dbang cha chen po	dar rgan byin
དར་རྒུད	flourish and weaken/ decline, ups and downs, prosperity and adversity	dar rgud
དར་རྒུད་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 stages of flourishing and weakening	dar rgud bcu gnyis
དར་རྒུད་སྣ་ཚོགས	times of wealth and times of hardship	dar rgud sna tshogs
དར་རྒྱལ	development, progress	dar rgyal
དར་རྒྱལ་འགྲོ	be developed, make progress	dar rgyal 'gro
དར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཤོག་ཐུ	17th cent. - Dar Gyalpo Shokthu, a Mongolian king, son of Gushri Khan	dar rgyal po shog thu
དར་རྒྱས	progress, success; development, progress, spread and flourish, widespread, growing; spread and flourish; widespread, growing	dar rgyas
དར་རྒྱས་གོང་འཕེལ	prosperous	dar rgyas gong 'phel
དར་རྒྱས་གླིང	monastery in upper tibet	dar rgyas gling
དར་རྒྱས་འགྲོ་བ	grow	dar rgyas 'gro ba
དར་རྒྱས་ལ	dar rgyas pass [S gam pa rdzong]	dar rgyas la
དར་རྒྱས་ལིང	monastery in upper Tibet	dar rgyas ling
དར་རྒྱས་སུ་མཛད་པ	(h) to spread and make flourish	dar rgyas su mdzad pa
དར་སྒ	walnut tree	dar sga
དར་ལྔ	5-colored ribbons	dar lnga
དར་ཅིག	thang cig, moment	dar cig
དར་ཅོག	dar lcog	dar cog
དར་ཅོག་སོགས་བསླང་བ	hoist	dar cog sogs bslang ba
དར་གཅིག	little while, a moment, for a little while, for a moment	dar gcig
དར་ལྕེ	silk tongues hanging down	dar lce
དར་ལྕོག	prayer flag, sail	dar lcog
དར་ལྕོག་དཀར་པོ	white prayer-flag	dar lcog dkar po
དར་ལྕོག་རླུང་བསྐྱོད	prayer flag in the wind [example of unsteady thoughts &, by others being incited to evil]	dar lcog rlung bskyod
དར་ཆ	flag, banner, flag	dar cha
དར་ཆ་དཀར་པོ	white flag [of truce]	dar cha dkar po
དར་ཆ་སྒྲེང་མཁན	flag/ color bearer	dar cha sgreng mkhan
དར་ཆ་སྒྲེངས	hoist a flag/ banner	dar cha sgrengs
དར་ཆ་དམར་པོ	red flag, the *people's commune, and the Socialist Main Line	dar cha dmar po
དར་ཆ་དམར་པོ་གསུམ	three red flags [great leap forward, comundes, socialist main line]	dar cha dmar po gsum
དར་ཆ་དམར་པོའི་ཚོགས་པ	Red Flag Party	dar cha dmar po'i tshogs pa
དར་ཆ་འཛུག	hoist a flag/ banner dar cha g.yugs - wave a flag	dar cha 'dzug
དར་ཆགས	freeze	dar chags
དར་ཆགས་པ	frozen over with ice	dar chags pa
དར་ཆགས་པའི་གྲངས་ཚད	freezing time/ season	dar chags pa'i grangs tshad
དར་ཆུ	upper branch of the rma chu [in mtso sngon great region mgo log, in dar lag rdzong]	dar chu
དར་ཆེན	long prayer flag; a sail	dar chen
དར་ལྗང་ཁྲའི་གོས	green mottled silk dress	dar ljang khra'i gos
དར་བཏགས་པ	1) kha btags 'dogs pa; 2) Gos chen thags btags pa	dar btags pa
དར་རྟགས	signal/ marker flag	dar rtags
དར་ཐང	monastery in {mgo log}	dar thang
དར་ཐོད	dar gyi la thod	dar thod
དར་མཐིང་ཁྲའི་གཟི་ལྡིར	patterned blue silken scarf	dar mthing khra'i gzi ldir
དར་འཐག	silk weaving	dar 'thag
དར་འཐག་བུ་མོ	daughter of a silkweaver dar dang rin chen rgyan gyis mdzes adorned with silks and jewel ornaments	dar 'thag bu mo
དར་དམ	red banner [given as prize in CH]	dar dam
དར་དམ་འཛིན་མཁན	red banner winner	dar dam 'dzin mkhan
དར་དིར	unclear and pleasant sound [bees humming]	dar dir
དར་དིར་སྒྲོག	bee	dar dir sgrog
དར་དིར་བསྒྲགས་པ	humming [of bees]	dar dir bsgrags pa
དར་གདན	silk cushion	dar gdan
དར་མདོ	{dar rtse mdo} town [in E Tibet where brick tea is imported	dar mdo
དར་རྡོ	grinding stone	dar rdo
དར་ལྡི	silk tassels, prayer flag of various colors w spreading cords	dar ldi
དར་ལྡིང	silk tassels, prayer flag of various colors w spreading cords	dar lding
དར་བརྡ	flag signals	dar brda
དར་སྣ	silken ribbons, strips of silk	dar sna
དར་སྣ་ལྔ	five-colored silk	dar sna lnga
དར་པང	1) dar gyi pang khebs; 2) Lha'i mdun du g.yogs pa'i dar	dar pang
དར་པོ	great spreading, adult, [prayer] flag	dar po
དར་པོ་ཆེ	Syn {dar chen}	dar po che
དར་པོ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	very large [long prayer] flag/ sail	dar po shin tu che ba
དར་དཔྱང	silk scarf	dar dpyang
དར་དཔྱངས	narrow ribbon-like piece of silk, silk scarves on flagstaff	dar dpyangs
ཕི༹བེ༹	colored pieces of silk	five
དར་དཔྱངས་ཀྱི་དབང	silk crown abhisheka	dar dpyangs kyi dbang
དར་སྤེལ	spread, develop, promote, popularize 1265	dar spel
དར་སྤེལ་གཏོང	spread, develop, promote, popularize	dar spel gtong
དར་སྤེལ་གཏོང་བ	develop	dar spel gtong ba
དར་སྤེལ་དུ་གཏོང	spread, develop, promote, popularize	dar spel du gtong
དར་ཕུང	many prayer flags together	dar phung
དར་ཕོད	1) gyen du bslangs pa, hanging i dar gyi phon po; 2) rngon pa'i 'bag gi rna ba L and R du btags pa'i tshar phod	dar phod
དར་ཕྱེད	youth	dar phyed
དར་འཕན	silk hangings	dar 'phan
དར་འཕེར	spread, develop, promote, popularize	dar 'pher
དར་འཕེར་གཏོང	spread, develop, promote, popularize	dar 'pher gtong
དར་འཕེར་དུ་གཏོང	spread, develop, promote, popularize	dar 'pher du gtong
དར་འཕྱར	brandish/ wave flags/ banners	dar 'phyar
དར་འཕྲུ	dar tshon fastened on the peak of a helmet	dar 'phru
དར་བ	{dar ba, dar ba, dar ba} intr. v.; 1) to flourish; be spread, propagated, be well developed, popular, unfolded, become widespread; grow, rise, be well developed. 2) butter milk	dar ba
དར་བབ	youthful age	dar bab
དར་བབ་མ	maiden	dar bab ma
དར་བབས	youth	dar babs
དར་བའི་ཆང	wine from fermented whey, wine of whey or curds	dar ba'i chang
དར་བའི་དུས་སྐབས	time of developing/ progress/ vogue	dar ba'i dus skabs
དར་བའི་མདོག	radiant health; {dar ba'i mdog kyang nad kyis 'phrog} radiant health is carried off by illness	dar ba'i mdog
དར་བུ	ras sngon srab mo	dar bu
དར་བུབས	whole piece of silk-stuff rolled together	dar bubs
དར་བེར་ལྷབ་ལྷུབ	silk cloak unnecessarily large with flowing sleeves	dar ber lhab lhub
དར་བོ	youthful	dar bo
དར་དབྱངས	silk ribbon or scarf	dar dbyangs
དར་འབུ	silkworm	dar 'bu
དར་འབོག	Tibetan gov gi dpon rigs che ba'i sngon 'gro mgron gnyer gyis lag tu 'khyer rgyu'i silk robe gyi 'bog hril ring po zhig	dar 'bog
དར་མ	1) grown-up, adult, person in the prime of life 16-30, the age of manhood, over 40 ??, time of enjoying desirable qualities; 2) Dar Ma	dar ma
དར་མ་གླག	bya glag, eagle	dar ma glag
དར་མ་ཏ་མ	SK chos nyid 'dzin	dar ma ta ma
དར་མ་མདོ་སྡེ	11th cent. - Dharma Dodey, Marpa's son	dar ma mdo sde
དར་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Darma Wangchuck	dar ma dbang phyug
དར་མ་རིན་ཆེན	successor of tsong kha pa, also known as rgyal tshab rje	dar ma rin chen
དར་མའི་སྟོབས	strength of full-grown man	dar ma'i stobs
དར་མའི་འདེམས་དབང	adult franchise	dar ma'i 'dems dbang
དར་མའི་ལུས	youthful body	dar ma'i lus
དར་མི་ཆགས་པའི་གྲུ་ཁ	ice-free port	dar mi chags pa'i gru kha
དར་མོ	adult, [prayer] flag	dar mo
དར་མོ་ཆེ	Syn {dar chen}	dar mo che
དར་མོ་སྨན་རམས་པ	physician dar mo sman rams pa blo bzang chos	dar mo sman rams pa
དར་དམང	raw silk	dar dmang
དར་དམང་པ	raw silk	dar dmang pa
དར་དམར	Red Flag [Magazine]	dar dmar
དར་དམར་འགྲན་བསྡུར	red flag emulation	dar dmar 'gran bsdur
དར་སྨན	alum [sa mtshur white and black]	dar sman
དར་ཙམ	a moment, very short time, about a moment	dar tsam
དར་བཙག	filter/ sifting cloth	dar btsag
དར་རྩ	a nadi	dar rtsa
དར་རྩེ་མདོ	[town in eastern Tibet]	dar rtse mdo
དར་ཚགས	silk/ cloth strainer	dar tshags
དར་ཚགས་རྒྱག	strain/ sift w silk/ cloth strainer	dar tshags rgyag
དར་ཚིལ	fat of youthful growth, grain, cheese	dar tshil
དར་ཚུར	alum, salt mixed with ordinary	dar tshur
རོཅཀ	salt to color it white, salt purifier	rock
དར་ཚོན	colored sand	dar tshon
དར་ཚོན་གི་གོས	multicolored silks	dar tshon gi gos
དར་ཚོན་སྣ་ལྔ	five-coloured silken pennants	dar tshon sna lnga
དར་ཚོན་འབྲེག	cut the ribbon	dar tshon 'breg
དར་མཚུར	alum	dar mtshur
དར་འཛིན	egocentricity	dar 'dzin
དར་འཛིན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	co-emergent egocentricity	dar 'dzin lhan skyes
དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པ	{bdag gis dam chos kho na dar zhing rgyas pa zhig mdzad dgos} he felt that he too should concern himself wholly with spreading the doctrine 1266	dar zhing rgyas pa
དར་ཞོ	buttermilk bsnyal ba'i curds	dar zho
དར་ཟབ	plush, fine silk; silk brocade; satin/ brocade	dar zab
དར་ཟབ་གྱི་གོས	robed in rich silk	dar zab gyi gos
དར་ཟམ	mi phyugs etc can go back and forth 'khyag zam	dar zam
དར་ཡ་ཀན	medicinal herb astragalus tongolensis ulbr.	dar ya kan
དར་ཡབ	silk fan	dar yab
དར་ཡུག	dar gos bubs tshang	dar yug
དར་ཡུག་བརྐྱངས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	Like extended banners	dar yug brkyangs pa lta bu
དར་ཡུལ	place where something, spread, flourished	dar yul
དར་ཡོལ	1) na tshod dar ma las yol tsam; 2) Dar gyi yol ba	dar yol
དར་ར	buttermilk, whey	dar ra
དར་རས	1) silk cloth; 2) cloth of a prayer flag/ sail; 3) gauze	dar ras
དར་རི་མོ་ཅན	dar gos w various pictures CH figured satin	dar ri mo can
དར་ལ	satin cloth for protection against frost	dar la
དར་ལ་མཉེ་བཏུལ་བྱེད་པ	to tenderize silk yarn, gently unravel threads of silk	dar la mnye btul byed pa
དར་ལ་བབ	vi. to be in the prime of life	dar la bab
དར་ལ་བབ་པ	be in the prime of life	dar la bab pa
དར་ལ་བབ་པའི་དུས	* 30-50 the prime of life	dar la bab pa'i dus
དར་ལ་བབ་མ	maiden, girl	dar la bab ma
དར་ལ་བབས	youthful	dar la babs
དར་ལག	county in 21th cent Tibet.	dar lag
དར་ལམ	path on ice	dar lam
དར་ལའུ	[arch] dar srab mo	dar la'u
དར་ལས་འཇམ་པ	softer than silk	dar las 'jam pa
དར་ལིང	dar gos, ling zhes pa'i gru'u rtse shin tu srab mo zhig	dar ling
དར་ལེན་མ	a deity	dar len ma
དར་ལོ	rising year	dar lo
དར་ཤ	in the entrails gi sha srab po	dar sha
དར་ཤམ	1) silk sham bu/ sham thabs, skirt	dar sham
དར་ཤམས	silk garment	dar shams
དར་ཤིང	mulberry medicinal fruit, flagstaff, morus serrata roxb. mast	dar shing
དར་ཤོག	silk paper	dar shog
དར་གཤེག་གྲུ་གཟིངས	ice/ cutter/ breaker	dar gsheg gru gzings
དར་སང	sang of dar gos	dar sang
དར་སར་བྱེད་པ	keep observances where religion flourishes	dar sar byed pa
དར་སེང་དཀར་མོ	the splendid snow lion	dar seng dkar mo
དར་སོ	common practice that has previously spread	dar so
དར་སྲི	mi dar ma shi ba'i sri	dar sri
དར་སྲིན	silk worm	dar srin
དར་སྲིན་གྱི་འབུ་སོབ	cocoon of silk worm	dar srin gyi 'bu sob
དར་སྲིན་ཉལ་འབུ	chrysalis of silk worm	dar srin nyal 'bu
དར་སྲོལ	common, widespread practice	dar srol
དར་བསུས	increasing activity	dar bsus
དར་བསླས	silk thread bslas ma'i rigs	dar bslas
དར་ཧན	(M high rank {dar han}	dar han
དར་ཧྲུག	1) dar gos tshal bu; 2) small flag/ banner	dar hrug
དར་དྷི	SA ku sha	dar dhi
དལ	[arch] mandala [comp {dal po} slow, sluggish, weak, w/ have free time, [at] leisure, not busy, free, smooth, freeflowing, gentle, relaxed, freedom	dal
དལ་རྐང	slowly walking, astrological calculations	dal rkang
དལ་སྐབས	leisure	dal skabs
དལ་ཁ	1) rims nad or, infectious disease; 2) harm slowly leisure	dal kha
དལ་ཁོད་སྙོམས	uniform mandala	dal khod snyoms
དལ་ཁོད་སྙོམས་པ	uniform mandala	dal khod snyoms pa
དལ་ཁོམ	leisure, free time	dal khom
དལ་ཁོམ་བྱུང་ན	if [I] get the time	dal khom byung na
དལ་ཁོམ་མེད་པ	without leisure or rest	dal khom med pa
དལ་གྱིས	slowly, softly, gently, slowly	dal gyis
དལ་གྱིས་འགྲོ	walk slowly	dal gyis 'gro
དལ་གྱིས་འཇུག	inhale slowly	dal gyis 'jug
དལ་གྱིས་གཏེམ	to slowly press	dal gyis gtem
དལ་གྱིས་ཕྱིན་པ	to slowly proceed father	dal gyis phyin pa
དལ་གྱིས་བབ་པ	the slow descender, Ganga in the himalayas, sluggish/ glacial stream, slowly flowing	dal gyis bab pa
དལ་གྱིས་འབབ་པ	name of ganges river in himalaya, sluggish stream, glacial stream	dal gyis 'bab pa
དལ་གྱིས་ལངས	slowly got up	dal gyis langs
དལ་མགྱོགས	pace, speed	dal mgyogs
དལ་འགྲོ	1) [slow-moving] river; 2) white swan; 3) Saturn; 4) tortoise; 5) go slowly (	dal 'gro
དལ་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུན	the stream of a slowflowing river	dal 'gro'i rgyun
དལ་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུན་བཞིན	meandering (as great rivers of the plains flow sluggishly)	dal 'gro'i rgyun bzhin
དལ་འགྲོས	slow gait (in dance)	dal 'gros
དལ་འགྲོས་ལྷོ	planets' rim pa'i phyi rkang from their beginning place kha lhor phyogs te motion of the dal ba/ 'gros	dal 'gros lho
དལ་རྒྱུ	slowly moving, sluggish stream 1267	dal rgyu
དལ་བརྒྱད	the eight freedoms, {mi khoms brgyad dang bral ba}, {mi khoms pa brgyad}	dal brgyad
དལ་བརྒྱད་འབྱོར་བཅུ	eight freedoms and ten riches	dal brgyad 'byor bcu
དལ་ཅིག	once, a moment, a while, for awhile	dal cig
དལ་ཅིག་འཇོག	leave for awhile	dal cig 'jog
དལ་ཅིག་བཞུགས	remained for awhile	dal cig bzhugs
དལ་ཆགས་པ	free-flowing	dal chags pa
དལ་འཇམ་འབོལ	at leisure & relaxed & comfortable	dal 'jam 'bol
དལ་རྟེན	human body (slowly evolved site)	dal rten
དལ་རྟེན་མི་ལུས	human life	dal rten mi lus
དལ་སྟེར་བྱེད	night	dal ster byed
དལ་ཐོག་འཇུག་པ	attack and disperse an enemy	dal thog 'jug pa
དལ་དག	each of the planets counted from their arising star rang 'gros kyis in addition to their coursing in the celestial houses +/- dal ba'i rkang longs as required	dal dag
དལ་དལ	at ease/ leisurely	dal dal
དལ་དལ་ཁོམ་ཁོམ	at ease/ leisurely	dal dal khom khom
དལ་དལ་ལྷོད་ལྷོད	at ease/ leisurely and relaxed	dal dal lhod lhod
དལ་དུ་བཅུག	allow to be quiet	dal du bcug
དལ་དུ་ཆུག	let be	dal du chug
དལ་དུ་ཕངས་པ	work assiduously, study assiduously, not be lazy, not be indolent	dal du phangs pa
དལ་འདོད་སྐྱིད་འདོད	desiring leisure and happiness	dal 'dod skyid 'dod
དལ་སྡོད	leisure, free time	dal sdod
དལ་སྡོད་བྱེད	have leisure/ free time	dal sdod byed
དལ་པོ	1) slow. 2) having free time at leisure, not busy	dal po
དལ་པོ་བྱེད་པ	slow	dal po byed pa
དལ་པོའི་ངོས	gradually, in slow course, smoothly	dal po'i ngos
དལ་པོར་ཕྱིན་པ	crawl	dal por phyin pa
དལ་སྤྱོད	coursing of the dal ba ['gros]	dal spyod
དལ་འཕུལ	1) lhod lhod byas te nyi ma skyel ba; 2) Dal gyis 'phul te 'ded pa	dal 'phul
དལ་བ	slowness, ease, quietness, leisure, the [8] freedoms	dal ba
དལ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 freedoms	dal ba brgyad
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ནོན	freedom of being born in hell, as a hungry ghost a beast, a long lived god, or barbarian, in wrong views, nor in a time without buddhas, nor as an idiot without speech]	from the non
དལ་བ་སྟེར	night	dal ba ster
དལ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	the complete freedoms	dal ba phun sum tshogs pa
དལ་བ་མེད	[I'm] not free	dal ba med
དལ་བབས	the slow descender, Ganga in the Himalayas, any sluggish or glacial stream	dal babs
དལ་བའི་རྟེན	human existence	dal ba'i rten
དལ་བའི་ལྷ་ལྡན	chariot-shaped constellation	dal ba'i lha ldan
དལ་བའི་ལྷ་ལྡན་མ	the motion star/ rgyu skar snar ma	dal ba'i lha ldan ma
ཕི༹བེ༹་སྟར	gods	five star
དལ་བར	at ease, possessing leisure/ the [8] freedoms	dal bar
དལ་བར་སྐྱེ་བ	be born w the freedoms	dal bar skye ba
དལ་བར་དགའ་བ	to like doing things slowly, not rashly	dal bar dga' ba
དལ་བར་འགྲོ	Saturn	dal bar 'gro
དལ་བར་སྡོད་པ	sit still, be at ease	dal bar sdod pa
དལ་བར་མ་འདུག	don't be idle	dal bar ma 'dug
དལ་བར་མ་སྡོད	don't be idle	dal bar ma sdod
དལ་བུ	slow	dal bu
དལ་བུའི་གྱུར་བ	slow change	dal bu'i gyur ba
དལ་བུས	slowly/ gently	dal bus
དལ་བུས་འགྲོ་མ	she who moves slowly	dal bus 'gro ma
དལ་བུས་རྔུབ	gently inhale	dal bus rngub
དལ་བུས་བཏང	exhale gently	dal bus btang
དལ་བུས་སོང་བ་ལས	slowly staggering on,	dal bus song ba las
དལ་བོན	a bon sect	dal bon
དལ་བོན་ལུ་གུ	bon of epidemics	dal bon lu gu
དལ་བྱས	gently, by degrees	dal byas
དལ་འབབ	1) flow slowly; 2) river	dal 'bab
དལ་འབབ་རྣམ་གཞི	4 great glacial rivers (indus, ganges, pakshu, oxus)	dal 'bab rnam gzhi
དལ་འབབ་མཛོད	ocean	dal 'bab mdzod
དལ་འབྱོན	flowing in a low stream	dal 'byon
དལ་འབྱོར	the freedoms and favors [dal: the 8 freedoms {mi khoms brgyad dang bral ba} -being free from the non- freedom of being born in hell, as a hungry ghost a beast, a long lived god, or bar- 1268 barian...	dal 'byor
ཅོནདིཏིཨོནས་ཕོ༹ར་ཌྷརྨ་པྲཅཏིཅེ	free of the eight leisureless states, and with ten factors of good fortune	conditions for Dharma practice
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	a precious human existence, complete with the eighteen freedoms and favorable conditions / riches	mi lus rin po che
དལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་གྲུ་བོ་ཆེ	this great vessel-this life with its freedoms and riches	dal 'byor gyi gru bo che
དལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རྟེན	support/ possessor of the freedoms and favors, the human body	dal 'byor gyi rten
དལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་མི་ལུས	Free and well-favored human form. A human existence endowed with the eight freedoms and ten riches	dal 'byor gyi mi lus
ཐིས་ཕ༹ྲེཨེ་ཨནད་ཝེལལ	endowed human birth	this free and well
དལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་མི་ལུས་ཐོབ་པ	the freedoms and favorable conditions you gained by your human birth	dal 'byor gyi mi lus thob pa
དལ་འབྱོར་བཅུ	the 10 freedoms and favors CHN	dal 'byor bcu
དལ་འབྱོར་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the eighteen freedoms and riches	dal 'byor bco brgyad
བེཨིང་ཕ༹ྲེཨེ་ཨནད་ཝེལལ	favored	being free and well
དལ་འབྱོར་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ཚང་བ	the possession of all eighteen freedoms and riches {dam chos kyi snod du rung ba'i rten khyad par can} The special support, [which makes one] a suitable vessel for the sacred teachings	dal 'byor bco brgyad tshang ba
དལ་འབྱོར་ཆོས་ལྡན་གྱི་ལུས	body endowed with the freedoms and riches in which one can practice the Dharma	dal 'byor chos ldan gyi lus
དལ་འབྱོར་མཆོག་ཐོབ	obtained the supreme freedoms and riches	dal 'byor mchog thob
དལ་འབྱོར་རྙེད་དཀའ	the difficulty of finding the freedoms and endowments	dal 'byor rnyed dka'
དལ་འབྱོར་རྙེད་དཀའ་བའི་ཁྲིད	teachings on the freedoms and advantages that are difficult to find	dal 'byor rnyed dka' ba'i khrid
དལ་འབྱོར་རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་བ	the difficulty of finding the freedoms and favors, the freedoms and favors so difficult to find	dal 'byor rnyed par dka' ba
དལ་འབྱོར་རྟེན	support/ possessor of the freedoms and favors, the human body	dal 'byor rten
དལ་འབྱོར་དོན་ཆེན	the great benefit of the freedoms and favors	dal 'byor don chen
དལ་འབྱོར་དོན་ལྡན་མཛད་པ	to give real meaning to the freedom and potential of their lives	dal 'byor don ldan mdzad pa
དལ་འབྱོར་མི་ལུས	free and well-favored human birth	dal 'byor mi lus
དལ་འབྱོར་མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན	jewel-like human body, free and well-favored	dal 'byor mi lus rin chen
དལ་འབྱོར་ཚང་བ	the pure freedoms and favors	dal 'byor tshang ba
དལ་འབྱོར་རིན་ཆེན	precious opportunity of human life	dal 'byor rin chen
དལ་འབྱོར་ལུས་རྟེན་གྱི་འབྱོར་བ་བཅུ	the 10 riches of the human body possessing the freedoms and favors	dal 'byor lus rten gyi 'byor ba bcu
དལ་སྦྱིན་མ	night	dal sbyin ma
དལ་མ	dancing woman	dal ma
དལ་མོ	chine, loin	dal mo
དལ་མོས	take one's time	dal mos
དལ་བཙོང	to carry on compulsory trade	dal btsong
དལ་ཚོང	one selling articles at his own residence	dal tshong
དལ་འཛིན	flowing in a low stream	dal 'dzin
དལ་འཛིན་རྒྱལ	king of the rakshasas	dal 'dzin rgyal
དལ་འཛིན་ལྟོ་དགའ	the lover of mandodari	dal 'dzin lto dga'
དལ་འཛིན་གནས་བཟང	the superb mansion of heaven dal zhing g.yo ba - placid flow	dal 'dzin gnas bzang
དལ་ཟབ	slowly & deeply	dal zab
དལ་ཡངས	calm and tranquil; {dal yangs yan lag brgyad kyi yon tan ldan} calm and tranquil and possessing the eight qualities	dal yangs
དལ་ཡམ	epidemic disease, plague	dal yam
དལ་ཡམས	pestilence of the worst kind, infectious disease	dal yams
དལ་རླུང	soft wind 1269	dal rlung
དལ་ལ་འཁྱུག་པ	moves gently and quickly	dal la 'khyug pa
དལ་ལ་རྒྱུན་རིང་བ	very long and slow	dal la rgyun ring ba
དལ་ལ་འཇམ་པའི	slow and melodious	dal la 'jam pa'i
དལ་ལ་སྙོམས་པ	slowly and evenly	dal la snyoms pa
དལ་ལ་རིང་བ	slow & long	dal la ring ba
དལ་ལ་ལྷོད་པའི	slow and relaxed	dal la lhod pa'i
དལ་ལངས་ནད་གཞི	mngon gsal cher med par langs pa'i nad gzhi	dal langs nad gzhi
དལ་ལས	hobby, pastime	dal las
དལ་ལེ	attentive	dal le
དལ་ཤིག་ཤིག	slow, leisure[ly]	dal shig shig
དལ་ལྷོད	relaxed and at ease, relaxes	dal lhod
དལ་ལྷོད་འཇམ	slow & relaxed & melodious	dal lhod 'jam
དས	(not in DAS)	das
དས་གུས་དང་མོས་པ་ཆེར་འཕེལ་བ	their respect and devotion grew	das gus dang mos pa cher 'phel ba
དས་འཕུལ	sngon 'jug da	das 'phul
དི	this	di
དི་ཀི	assemblage	di ki
དི་ཀུན་སྣང་དབ༹ང་བ་ཅན	lha min mtsho di skad bdag gis thos pa dus gcig na ewam maya shrutam ekasmin samaye di skad bdag gis thos pa dus gcig na "Once upon a time I heard this spoken,"	di kun snang dvang ba can
དི་གར	this, here	di gar
དི་གར་ཅི	what is this? What have we here?	di gar ci
དི་ཏི	drunk	di ti
དི་དི་གུ་གུ	a kind of bya thi ba	di di gu gu
དི་པམ་ཀ་ར་ཤྲི་ཛ་ཉའ་ན	in the explanation of D pankara shr	di pam ka ra shri dza nya' na
དི་མར	certain worm or insect	di mar
དི་བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness	di bzhin nyid
དི་རི་རི	(to) resound; (to set up) a humming/ low murmuring	di ri ri
དི་ཤེ་ས་ག་ཡོ་ལ	Discesa Gaiola near Naples in Italy	di she sa ga yo la
དི་ཧི	drunk	di hi
དིག	large kettle, washing/ brewing copper	dig
དིག་སྐད	stammering, speaking w/o clear words	dig skad
དིག་སྙན	pigeon	dig snyan
དིག་གཏམ	stammered words	dig gtam
དིག་དིག	rub-a-dub, rat-tat	dig dig
དིག་པ	1) reeling, staggering, intoxicated; 2) stammer, stutter	dig pa
དིང་ཁྲི	descendant of gnya' khri btsan po	ding khri
དིང་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	{ding khri btsan po}	ding khri btsan po
དིང་དིང	sound of the drum, laughing aloud	ding ding
དིང་ཕོན	superior kind of chinese satin embroidered with needle	ding phon
དིང་ཕྱིན་ཆད	henceforth	ding phyin chad
དིང་འཛིན་རྩེ་གཅིག	mahayoga tantra of activity	ding 'dzin rtse gcig
དིང་འུར	sound, noise	ding 'ur
དིང་རི	extensive tableland n.e. of nepal	ding ri
དིང་རི་གླང་འཁོར	Tingri Langkhor	ding ri glang 'khor
དིང་རི་གླང་འཁོར་དགོན	Langkhor monastery [in ding ri rdzong in the 2nd fire ox lha bla ma byang chub 'od kyi tsa bo rtze sdes zhi byed tradition founder pha dam pa sangs rgyas kyi bzhugs yul du founded]	ding ri glang 'khor dgon
དིང་རི་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་པ	the Eighty Pieces of Advice to the People of Dingri, by Phadampa Sangye	ding ri brgyad cu pa
དིང་སང	nowadays, abbr of de ring and sang, today and tomorrow, just now	ding sang
དིད	be chased	did
དིན་དྷུ་སྐྱེས	native of sindhu, horses imported from sindhu	din dhu skyes
དིམ	fragments, be drowned, sink	dim
དིམ་ཆུ་རྒྱག	go/ sink under water	dim chu rgyag
དིམ་ཆུ་རྒྱག་པ	swim	dim chu rgyag pa
དིམ་པ	sink	dim pa
དིམས	fragments, be drowned, sink	dims
དིམས་པ	fragments, be drowned, sink	dims pa
དིའི་དོན་དུ	Syn {de'i phyir}	di'i don du
དིའི་བསོད་ནམས་ཅི་འདོད་དྲིས་པ	What merit do you wish to gain from this?	di'i bsod nams ci 'dod dris pa
དིའོ་ཞེས	this is what it is	di'o zhes
དིར་དིར	sound like humming bees	dir dir
དིར་མ་ཞིམ་པོ	fragrant, good to smell	dir ma zhim po
དིར་རེ་བ	lab gleng mang ba'i tshul,...Lkog lab dir re ba byung	dir re ba
དིལ་མགོ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	rab gsal zla ba, 1910-91; {rab gsal zla ba} 1910-91 dil dmar dge bshes bstan 'dzin phun	dil mgo mkhyen brtse
དིས་གོ་ཀྲུའུ་ཡིས	imperialism	dis go kru'u yis
དིས་བབས	{dus bab}	dis babs
དུ	1) dat -loc particle [after final ng, d, n, m, r, &; 2) to, at, on, in; 3) (comp +-comparative; 4) how much/ many [each time]/ long; 4) Sol du 'khyud gsum gyi du ni ma 'ongs pa'i don	du
དུ་ཀུ་ལའི་གོས	silk cloth	du ku la'i gos
དུ་ཀུ་ལའི་རས	silk-cloth	du ku la'i ras
དུ་སྐད	howl	du skad
དུ་ཁ	smoky [color]	du kha
དུ་ཁའི་ཚོར་བ	suffering, pain	du kha'i tshor ba
དུ་ཁུག	pipe	du khug
དུ་ཁུང	chimney	du khung
དུ་གྱུར་པ	become	du gyur pa
དུ་གྲགས	is called	du grags
དུ་གྲོལ	liberated as	du grol
དུ་འགྲོ	place from which smoke emanates 1270	du 'gro
དུ་མཆིས	1) however much there is; 2) how many?	du mchis
དུ་ཐག	tobacco	du thag
དུ་ཐལ	tobacco/ cigarette ash	du thal
དུ་ཐུབས་ཉམས་སུ་བཞེས	practice(d in the du thub	du thubs nyams su bzhes
དུ་དག	how many?	du dag
དུ་དག་གཅིག	how many there are	du dag gcig
དུ་དུ	how many?	du du
དུ་དྲེག	soot	du dreg
དུ་བདུག	1) burn incense; 2) smoke	du bdug
དུ་བདུག་སྦུབས་ཅན	grib rlung na skabs 'di'i nang du rlung kha gnon byed rlung bdug btab ste kha dang sna khung la incense burning implement w a vase shape cover	du bdug sbubs can
དུ་མདོག	smoke colored, of ... color	du mdog
དུ་འདུས་པ	comprised of, included within	du 'dus pa
དུ་འདོད་པ	believed to be, regarded as	du 'dod pa
དུ་བསྡུས	gathered, included, abridged	du bsdus
དུ་བསྡུས་ཏེ	condensed into	du bsdus te
དུ་སྤྲིན	smoke-like cloud	du sprin
དུ་ཕོད་ཅན	comet Encke	du phod can
དུ་བ	1) smoke; 2) tobacco; 3) proletarians	du ba
དུ་བ་འགྲོ་ཁུང	smoke hole	du ba 'gro khung
དུ་བ་ཅན	smoky	du ba can
དུ་བ་མཇུག་རིང	Ketu, comet Encke [among the 10 planets gza' bcu, shar gyi du ba mjug ring, arising house chu smad, rtag pa'i coursing = with the sun, 'gros bzhi rtzom pa'i rkang pa'i khyad kyis 'char ba ste, rim ...	du ba mjug ring
དུ་བ་འཇུག་རིང	comet, long tail of smoke planet	du ba 'jug ring
དུ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	the smoke like luminosity	du ba lta bu
དུ་བ་འཐུལ་བ	raise smoke	du ba 'thul ba
དུ་བ་ལྡ་བུ	the smoke like luminosity	du ba lda bu
དུ་བ་ན་བུན	smoke and mist	du ba na bun
དུ་བ་གནམ་གཏོང	householders who light fires	du ba gnam gtong
དུ་བ་གནམ་གཏོང་གི་ཁྲལ	tax obligation on all householders in a region who light fires	du ba gnam gtong gi khral
དུ་བ་པ	very poor people, proletarians, "smoke people"	du ba pa
དུ་བ་འཕྱར	emit smoke	du ba 'phyar
དུ་བ་མི་ཟད་པ	a bon hell	du ba mi zad pa
དུ་བ་མོ་འབབ་པ་བཞིན	like smoke that disappears in wisps	du ba mo 'bab pa bzhin
དུ་བ་འཚུབས	hornet	du ba 'tshubs
དུ་བ་རལ་བ	soot	du ba ral ba
དུ་བའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	1) cloud; 2) fire; 3)	du ba'i skye gnas
སྨོཀེ	birthplace	smoke
དུ་བའི་ཁ་དོག	smoky color [one of the {yan lag gi kha dog brgyad}	du ba'i kha dog
དུ་བའི་ཏོག	a comet	du ba'i tog
དུ་བའི་དྲེག་པ	soot	du ba'i dreg pa
དུ་བའི་མདོག་བཟང	1 of 'od bdun pa	du ba'i mdog bzang
དུ་བས་འཆི	horned scorpion	du bas 'chi
དུ་བྱུང་བ	appear as	du byung ba
དུ་མ	numerous; many, manifold, various, innumerable. myriad. multiple	du ma
དུ་མ་མཇུག་རིང	comet (the long smoketailed)	du ma mjug ring
དུ་མ་ཉིད	composite, complexity	du ma nyid
དུ་མ་ཉིད་མ་ཡིན་པ	not be many	du ma nyid ma yin pa
དུ་མ་དང་མི་རྟག་པ	multiplicity and impermanence	du ma dang mi rtag pa
དུ་མ་རང་གྲོལ	natural freedom of diverse nature/ qualities	du ma rang grol
དུ་མ་རོ་གཅིག	one taste of diverse nature/ qualities; one taste underlying diversity; isc. the many being of one taste	du ma ro gcig
དུ་མར	many	du mar
དུ་མས	with many	du mas
དུ་མེད་རྡོ་སོལ	smokeless coal - anthracite	du med rdo sol
དུ་མེད་པ	. . . du med pa - not (something) to be . . .	du med pa
དུ་སྨུག	brown	du smug
དུ་ཚག	du ro 'don sa'i snod	du tshag
དུ་ཞག	morning and evening smoke haze, smoky odor	du zhag
དུ་ཞིག	about how much	du zhig
དུ་ཟད	{. . . du zad} to come/ boil down to . . . ; to be/ amount to nothing more than . . .	du zad
དུ་ཡོད	1) ci yod two how many?	du yod
དུ་ཡོད་པ	that you can listen to; x {zab mo'i gdams ngag nyan du yod pa 'di re dga'} just be glad that you can listen to his profound instructions	du yod pa
དུ་རུ	how much, what extent	du ru
དུ་རུ་ཀ	durushka 1) kind of perfume; 2) Shug pa tshan dan tree [which a tradition says is a big shug sdong [juniper?]	du ru ka
དུ་རེ་བ	rgyun chags pa	du re ba
དུ་ལུང	Dulung, at Nyanang, in Latö	du lung
དུ་སམ	drinks	du sam
དུ་ཧར་ནག་པོ	celebrated chinese astronomer	du har nag po
དུག	1) poison [syn: [ka ko la dang, 'joms byed ster, nag po brtsegs, be'u'i lte ba, tshangs pa'i bu, rab tu gsa]; 2) (met) the kleshas	dug
དུག་ཁ་ཚེག	outwardly nice but inwardly evil	dug kha tsheg
དུག་གི་བྱུག་པ་ཅན	arrow	dug gi byug pa can
དུག་གི་མེ་ཏོག	blue lotus, plant vangueria spinosa, linum usitatissimum	dug gi me tog
དུག་གི་སྨན་པ	physician using poisonous drugs dug gi gtso bor 'dod chags zhe sdang gtig mug gsum bcom pas dug gis mi tshugs - since I have overcome the principal poisons of desire, hatred, and ignorance, poison ...	dug gi sman pa
དུག་གི་མཚོན་ཆ	poisoned weapon, poisonous snake	dug gi mtshon cha
དུག་གིས་ཁ་ཟས་སྦྱར་བ	prepared poisoned food	dug gis kha zas sbyar ba
དུག་གིས་བྱུག་པ་ཅན	whatever has been poisoned or besmeared with poison	dug gis byug pa can
དུག་གིས་བསད་པ	to poison	dug gis bsad pa
དུག་འགོག་མགོ་ཤུབས	gas mask	dug 'gog mgo shubs
དུག་འགོག་ངོ་བག	gas mask	dug 'gog ngo bag
དུག་འགོག་ངོ་འབག	gas mask	dug 'gog ngo 'bag
དུག་འགོག་རྫས་ཆ	anti-toxin	dug 'gog rdzas cha
དུག་ལྔ	five poisons (nga rgyal, 'dod chags, zhe sdang, phrag dog, gti mug)	dug lnga
དུག་ལྔ་རང་གྲོལ	the natural liberation of the five poisons	dug lnga rang grol
དུག་ལྔའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	emotions of the five poisons	dug lnga'i nyon mongs pa
དུག་ལྔའི་རྟོག་པ་དང་འདྲེས	a mind full of the five poisons	dug lnga'i rtog pa dang 'dres
དུག་སྔགས	poison charm, mantra to protect against poison	dug sngags
དུག་ཅན	poisonous	dug can
དུག་ཅན་གྱི་སྣོད	the pot containing poison	dug can gyi snod
དུག་ཅན་གྱི་བྱ་བ	poisonous action	dug can gyi bya ba
དུག་ཅན་ལྟ་བུའི་སྐྱོན	like a pot with poison in it	dug can lta bu'i skyon
དུག་ཅན་གནས	poisonous place, ocean	dug can gnas
དུག་ཅན་མཚོ	ocean	dug can mtsho
དུག་ཅུ་ནས	early barley	dug cu nas
དུག་གཅོང་གྲང་སྦྱོར	innumerable from jewels minerals etc las sbyor ba byas pa'i dug la tsha ba 'byung mi srid cing grang bar 'gyur bas der dug nad grang sbyor zhes zer	dug gcong grang sbyor
དུག་གཅོང་ཚ་སྦྱོར	countless meat, essences, herbs etc las sbyor ba byas pa'i dug la tsha sbyor gyi dug tu 'gyur bas na, called dug nad tsha sbyor	dug gcong tsha sbyor
དུག་བཅོམ	epithet of buddha	dug bcom
དུག་བཅོམ་པ	overcome poison	dug bcom pa
དུག་ལྕེ	having a poisonous tongue [snake]	dug lce
དུག་ཆགས	mischievous	dug chags
དུག་ཆེན	strong poison, arsenic	dug chen
དུག་འཇིལ	destroy/ neutralize poison	dug 'jil
དུག་འཇོམས	twining shrub used as antidote against poison, muispermum cordifolium	dug 'joms
དུག་འཇོམས་ལྡན	golden eagle which vishnu is said to ride	dug 'joms ldan
དུག་ཉུང	holarrhena antidysenterica, kurchi, conessi bark	dug nyung
དུག་གཉིས	CHN	dug gnyis
དུག་གཉེན	antidote for poison	dug gnyen
དུག་ཏི	so, thus, in this manner	dug ti
དུག་གཏོང	poison [someone/ thing]	dug gtong
དུག་བཏང	poisoned	dug btang
དུག་སྟངས་གསུམ	three postures [according to the penetration of sound {sgra thal 'gyur} ngb vol 10, the posture of the lion which rests in the buddhabody of reality frees 1 from all fears of bewilderment and enabl...	dug stangs gsum
དུག་སྟེར་ཆག་ཚད	sufficient quantity of poison administered to a person	dug ster chag tshad
དུག་ཐབས	{dug thabs disease [not really dug nad but w similar symptoms pho mchin mi bde and not being able to disgest food, emaciated body, blackened skin]	dug thabs
དུག་ཐུབ་པ	dug rigs 'gog thub pa'am, dug gis gnod pa byed mi thub pa	dug thub pa
དུག་དང་འདྲེས་པ	mixed w poison	dug dang 'dres pa
དུག་དང་མནོལ་བཙོག་ཤོར་བའི་ཟས	poisoned, polluted, or dirty food	dug dang mnol btsog shor ba'i zas
དུག་དང་སྦྱར	{rma bya'i zas thams cad dug dang sbyar nas sbyin pa} all the food given to the peacock was poisonous	dug dang sbyar
དུག་དྲག་པ	virulent poison	dug drag pa
དུག་མདའ	poisoned arrow, arrow	dug mda'
དུག་མདའ་བསྣུན	shooting a poisoned arrow	dug mda' bsnun
དུག་འདོན་མ་བྱས་པ	un-neutralized	dug 'don ma byas pa
དུག་ནག	bad poison	dug nag
དུག་ནད་གསུམ	CHN	dug nad gsum
དུག་སྣ་དགུ	nine poisons	dug sna dgu
དུག་པ	{zas kyis dug pa} poisoned by food	dug pa
དུག་པོ	coat, garment, dress, old tattered clothing	dug po
དུག་སྤྲུལ་གྱི་གླིང	island of poisonous snakes	dug sprul gyi gling
དུག་ཕོག	be poisoned	dug phog
དུག་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་དགུ	900 million	dug phyur phrag dgu
དུག་འཕྲོག	herb med. antidote to snake poison, counter poison	dug 'phrog
དུག་དབལ	the power of poison	dug dbal
དུག་འབུ	poisonous insect	dug 'bu
དུག་འབུ་ཕྲ་མོ	disease microbes	dug 'bu phra mo
དུག་འབུའི་འཁྲུག་ཐབས	bacteriological warfare	dug 'bu'i 'khrug thabs
དུག་འབུའི་དམག	bacteriological warfare	dug 'bu'i dmag
དུག་སྦྱོར་བ	1) poison [food etc]; 2) make poison	dug sbyor ba
དུག་སྦྲང	mosquito	dug sbrang
དུག་སྦྲུལ	poisonous snake	dug sbrul
དུག་སྦྲུལ་སྦྲམ་ཆེན་ཟངས་མིག་ཅན་སྭརྨིང་ཝིཐ་ཧུགེ་པོཨིསོནོཨུས་སེརཔེནཙ་ཝིཐ་ཅོཔཔེར	colored eyes	dug sbrul sbram chen zangs mig can swarming with huge poisonous serpents with copper
དུག་མུན	black poison	dug mun
དུག་མེད་བོང་ང་གསུམ	the three kinds of bong nga [dkar po, dmar po, ser po]	dug med bong nga gsum
དུག་མོ་ཉིང་ཏི་ཤོང་ནོར	fruit of the tree of little poison	dug mo nying ti shong nor
དུག་མོ་ཉུང	med. herb [bitter, cooling, by its power mkhris pa'i nad dang, tsa 'khru gcod pa sogs la phan syn: bcad skye dang, spu can, be'u can, ri yi phreng ba, shing skya]	dug mo nyung
དུག་མོ་ཉུང་གི་འབྲུ	fine-fruiting barley	dug mo nyung gi 'bru
དུག་རྨ	wound that is hard to cure	dug rma
དུག་སྨན	1) med curing dug nad/ poison; 2) deadly poison	dug sman
དུག་རྩ	species of aconite	dug rtsa
དུག་རཙབ༹	1) poisonous plant; 2) herb bong nag	dug rtsva
དུག་རྩེ	rags, tatters	dug rtse
དུག་ཚལ	rags of old clothes	dug tshal
དུག་ཚེ	excrement	dug tshe
དུག་མཚོན	diseases arising from weapons and poisons	dug mtshon
དུག་འཚོ་བྱེད	shang shang te'u bird	dug 'tsho byed
དུག་འཛིན	poison holder, snake, naga	dug 'dzin
དུག་རྫས	toxin	dug rdzas
དུག་ཝ	bcos dka' ba'i ske sogs kyi wa ba	dug wa
དུག་བཞིན་སྤོངས	reject ... like poison!	dug bzhin spongs
དུག་ཟན	poison eater, peacock	dug zan
དུག་ཟིན	precaution against poison	dug zin
དུག་ཟིན་བྱེད	take precautions against poison	dug zin byed
དུག་གཟེར	pedicularis megalantha don	dug gzer
དུག་རབ༹་ཅན	1) [poisonous] bee [having bee poison?]; 2) bee	dug rva can
དུག་རྭ་ཅན	insect having a poison sting	dug rwa can
དུག་རབ་འཇོམས	lotus, that which destroys the effect of poison, poison destroying tree mimosa sirissa	dug rab 'joms
དུག་རོ	dug gi nad ro	dug ro
དུག་རོ་གཏིང་འདོན	na tsha yod tshad phyir 'don pa'am, bya ngan yod tshad phyir ther 'don byed pa	dug ro gting 'don
དུག་རོ་སློང་བ	dug gi nad ro slong ba	dug ro slong ba
དུག་རླངས	1) poison moisture [former idea of snake poison as wet breath]; 2) Sbyar dug las byung ba'i rlang pa)	dug rlangs
དུག་ལས་བརྒལ	herb bong nga dkar po 1272	dug las brgal
དུག་ལོ	poisonous leaf, banyan tree ficus religiosa	dug lo
དུག་ལོ་ཅན	alstonia tree	dug lo can
དུག་ལོ་ལྗོན་པའི་མདོ	bon religious work	dug lo ljon pa'i mdo
དུག་ལོག	dress	dug log
དུག་ལོག་ཁྲུས་ཁང	laundry	dug log khrus khang
དུག་ལོག་གི་མཐའ་ཤན	hem	dug log gi mtha' shan
དུག་ལོག་གྱོན་བ	dress	dug log gyon ba
དུག་ཤ	rotten meat	dug sha
དུག་ཤིང	poisonous tree	dug shing
དུག་ཤེལ	that which neutralizes the effect of poison, epithet of mahadeva, medical author of ancient india, fruit of emblic myrobalan	dug shel
དུག་ཤོག	poisonous paper, daphne bark paper arsenicated to prevent its being eaten by moth	dug shog
དུག་ཤོར་བ	invisible poison arising	dug shor ba
དུག་སུམ	the three poisons	dug sum
དུག་སུམ་རྟོག་པ	thoughts arising from the three poisons; x {rjes thob dug sum rtog pa'i 'dul sbyong 'di} between meditation sessions, learn to control in this way all thoughts arising from the three poisons	dug sum rtog pa
དུག་སེལ	1) a med. herb; 2) make w/o poison; 3) formerly great lamas etc not drinking tea until the giver drank a little; 4) [arch] poison overcoming sman pa; 4) disinfect sterilize	dug sel
དུག་སེལ་གློག་ཞུན	heat/ sun lamp	dug sel glog zhun
དུག་སེལ་བྱེད	MG: to disinfect, to sterilize. [mss]	dug sel byed
དུག་སེལ་སྨན	antidote for poison	dug sel sman
དུག་སེལ་སྨན་རྫས	disinfectant	dug sel sman rdzas
དུག་སེལ་འོད	the star ri byi	dug sel 'od
དུག་སེལ་སེར་པོ	an herb	dug sel ser po
དུག་སོ	fang	dug so
དུག་སློག	1) wear, put on; 2) [skin] clothing	dug slog
དུག་སློག་སྐམ་ཐག	clothes line	dug slog skam thag
དུག་སློག་གྱི་ནང་ཤ	lining of clothing	dug slog gyi nang sha
དུག་སློག་གྱོན་པ	clothe	dug slog gyon pa
དུག་སློག་འཚེམ་མཁན	clothier dug slog g.yon - wear/ put on clothing	dug slog 'tshem mkhan
དུག་གསུམ	Three poisons. Desire, anger, and delusion	dug gsum
དུག་གསུམ་གྱིས་ཀུན་ནས་བསླང	motivated by any of the three poisons	dug gsum gyis kun nas bslang
དུག་གསུམ་ཉོན་མོངས	the three poisons and the obscuring emotions	dug gsum nyon mongs
དུག་གསུམ་དག་པ	pure of the three poisons	dug gsum dag pa
དུག་ཧ་ལ་ཧ་ལ	deadly poisonous drug	dug ha la ha la
དུགས	1) heat, warmth, light a fire; 2) revenge; 3) grudge, rancor; 4) substance curing cures indigestion etc, diseases w multiple cause disease but mostly of phlegm nad dmigs steng sbyar ba'i don te, di...	dugs
དུགས་ཁང	[arch] 1) bath-house; 2) kitchen, roasting house	dugs khang
དུགས་པ	[make] warm, light, kindle	dugs pa
དུགས་པོ	ordinary (?)	dugs po
དུང	1) conch shell; 2) horn instrument; 3) conch medicine)/ [pungent, cool melting, by its power good for rnag skem pa dang, rnag 'gyings pa 'bigs, rus tsad sel, 'bras 'joms, chu ser dang dmu chu skem,...	dung
དུང་དཀར	sea shell, symbol of blessedness of turning to the right	dung dkar
དུང་དཀར་འཁོར་ལོ	smin mtshams kyi rtsa'i 'khor lo	dung dkar 'khor lo
དུང་དཀར་དགོན་པ	Dongkar Monastery	dung dkar dgon pa
དུང་དཀར་ཡས་འཁྱིལ	white conch coiled to the right dung dkar g.yas 'khyil - conch coiled to the right dung dkar g.yas 'khyil - conch coiled to the right [one of the {bkra shis rtags brgyad} dung dkar g.yas 'khyil - c...	dung dkar yas 'khyil
དུང་དཀར་རག་གཤོག	conch-shell trumpet or vessel mounted with brass	dung dkar rag gshog
དུང་དཀར་རག་གཤོག་མ	musical horn rag gi gshog ldan	dung dkar rag gshog ma
དུང་དཀར་གཤོག་པ་ཅན	kind of monastery assembly conch	dung dkar gshog pa can
དུང་དཀར་བཤག་པ	Dungkar Shagpa, in Domey	dung dkar bshag pa
དུང་སྐད	sound of the conch-shell trumpet	dung skad
དུང་སྐྱོང	a naga king	dung skyong
དུང་ཁང	conch shell chamber (euphemism for cranium)	dung khang
དུང་ཁྲ	sgra bla White Hawk	dung khra
དུང་ཁྲག	1) klad khrag [brain blood]; 2) kapala of blood	dung khrag
དུང་མཁན	SA dung bzo ba	dung mkhan
དུང་འཁོར	conch-shell ornament worn on wrist by tibetan women	dung 'khor
དུང་འཁྱིལ་རི་མོ	conch picture	dung 'khyil ri mo
དུང་གི་ཐོར་ཅོག	{dung gi thor cog} [Indian physicians bi byi dga' byed and lha tho ri snyan btsan gyi sras mo lha lcam yid kyi rol cha gnyis kyi sras su born in the 3rd century, from youth from his father learning...	dung gi thor cog
དུང་གི་ཐོར་ཅོག་ཅན	4th cent. AD tibetan physician	dung gi thor cog can
དུང་གི་ལྡེམ་ཤིང	birch tree	dung gi ldem shing
དུང་གི་ལྡེམ་ཤིང་དཀར་པོ	hard white conch	dung gi ldem shing dkar po
ཏྲེཨེ་ཏོ་མཀེ་ཨིམགེས་ཝཧོསེ་ཝོཨོད་རེསེམབླེས་ཨ་ཅོནཆ	shell in appearance	tree to make images whose wood resembles a conch
དུང་གི་ཚོགས	series of conch-shells	dung gi tshogs
དུང་གི་ལག	arm adorned with the conchshell	dung gi lag
དུང་གི་ལག་འཁོར	conch-shell ornament worn on wrist by tibetan women	dung gi lag 'khor
དུང་གྱས་འཁྱིལ	conch coiled to the right	dung gyas 'khyil
དུང་རྒྱ་གླིང	horn and rgya gling	dung rgya gling
དུང་སྒྲུབ	100 million recitations	dung sgrub
དུང་ངེ	constant, continual	dung nge
དུང་ངེ་བ	continual	dung nge ba
དུང་ཅན་མ	a mkha' 'gro ma, sprite, thief's flower tree	dung can ma
དུང་ཆེན	long trumpet	dung chen
དུང་ཆེན་མེ་ཏོག	kind of flower	dung chen me tog
དུང་ཆོལ	shell used in the place of dice	dung chol
དུང་ཆོས	1) small white conch; 2) article needed for vase practice etc.	dung chos
དུང་ཆོས་དང་གཟུང་ཐག་རྡོ་རྗེ	articles for {bum sgrub} etc.	dung chos dang gzung thag rdo rje
དུང་མཆོག	SA dung dkar g.yas 'khyil	dung mchog
དུང་མཆོད	conch shell	dung mchod
དུང་ཏི་སྒོ་ང	origin egg	dung ti sgo nga
དུང་གཏོང་བའི་བརྡ	signal given by blowing horn	dung gtong ba'i brda
དུང་ཐག	khron thag	dung thag
དུང་ཐལ	burnt conch dust animal med.	dung thal
དུང་དུག	poison of the conch-shell	dung dug
དུང་དུང	staggering, reeling, wavering	dung dung
དུང་དུང་བྱེད	stagger, reel	dung dung byed
དུང་དུང་བྱེད་པ	yearn	dung dung byed pa
དུང་མདོག་ཅན	possessed of conchshell color	dung mdog can
དུང་འདྲ	"conchlike" med. [mineral shaped like a white conch, by its power broken bones are joined, and mercury bound]	dung 'dra
དུང་རྡོ	fossil-shell	dung rdo
དུང་ལྡན་ཐལ་བའི	1 of thal ba bcu gsum	dung ldan thal ba'i
དུང་ལྡན་ཐལ་བའི་ལྷ	Deity of the	dung ldan thal ba'i lha
ཋལྭ་ཝཧོ་ཧས་ཐེ་ཅོནཆ	Shell	Thalwa Who has the Conch
དུང་བརྡ	signal given by blowing horn	dung brda
དུང་རྣ	conch ear-ring	dung rna
དུང་པ	trumpeter	dung pa
དུང་པན	(CH kind of wash-basin	dung pan
དུང་དཔོན	musician in a puja in charge of the long trumpet {dung chen}	dung dpon
དུང་ཕན	(CH kind of wash-basin dung phur phrag brgyad dang bye ba	dung phan
ཕྲག་དྲུག	860 million	phrag drug
དུང་ཕོར	conch-shell with perfume	dung phor
དུང་ཕྱུར	one hundred million, 100 millions	dung phyur
དུང་ཕྱུར་གཅིག	100,000,000	dung phyur gcig
དུང་ཕྱུར་བཅུ	billion	dung phyur bcu
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་དགུ	900 million dung phyur phrag dgu dang bya ba phrag	dung phyur phrag dgu
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད	eight hundred million	dung phyur phrag brgyad
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་ལྔ	five hundred million	dung phyur phrag lnga
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་གཅིག	one hundred million disciples	dung phyur phrag gcig
ཕྲག་བདུན	270 million	phrag bdun
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་དྲུག	600 million dung phyur phrag drug dang bye ba	dung phyur phrag drug
ཕྲག་གཉིས	620 million	phrag gnyis
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་བདུན	seven hundred million	dung phyur phrag bdun
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་བདུན་དང་ཕྱེད	750 million dung phyur phrag bdun dang bye ba	dung phyur phrag bdun dang phyed
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་བཞི	400 million	dung phyur phrag bzhi
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་གསུམ	300 million	dung phyur phrag gsum
ཕྲག་ལྔ	350 million dung phyur phrag gsum dang bye ba	phrag lnga
ཕྲག་བཞི	340 million dung phyur phrag gsum dang bye ba brag	phrag bzhi
དུང་ཕྱུར་ཟུར	part of 100 million	dung phyur zur
དུང་ཕྲེང	garland of skulls	dung phreng
དུང་འཕྱར	100 million	dung 'phyar
དུང་འཕྱུར	100 million	dung 'phyur
དུང་བ	(tha mi dad pa dungs pa, dung ba,, zhen chags pa'am 'phreng ba,...Gnyen bshes phan tshun 'bral mi phod par sems brtse zhing dung ba,...Phan tshun phu nu lta bur brtse zhing dungs pa	dung ba
དུང་བན	(CH kind of wash-basin	dung ban
དུང་བར	decently	dung bar
དུང་བར་ཆད	difficulty	dung bar chad
དུང་བུད	to blow [a horn]	dung bud
དུང་དབྱི	white lynx	dung dbyi
དུང་འབུ	animals with shells	dung 'bu
དུང་འབུད	1) a nadi; 2) play a horn	dung 'bud
དུང་འབུད་པ	blow a shell	dung 'bud pa
དུང་འབྲས	kind of stone which joins fracture	dung 'bras
དུང་དམར	1) [like a] white conch two skull cup of blood	dung dmar
དུང་ཚང	family	dung tshang
དུང་ཚེར་མ་ཅན	dung gi kha tsher ma'i rnam par yod pa	dung tsher ma can
ཨོནེ་ཝིཐ་བྲིསཏླེ	like excrescences	one with bristle
དུང་མཚོ་དཀར་མོ	a great white	dung mtsho dkar mo
ཨོཅེཨན་ཨབོཨུནདིང་ཨིན་ཅོནཆ	shells	ocean abounding in conch
དུང་མཚོ་རས་པ	Dungtso Repa, First. Dungtso Repa, Second	dung mtsho ras pa
དུང་མཚོ་རས་པ་སྔ་མ	1267-1329? - Dungtso Repa, the earlier	dung mtsho ras pa snga ma
དུང་མཚོ་རས་པ་ཕྱི་མ	14th cent. Dungtso Repa, the later	dung mtsho ras pa phyi ma
དུང་ཞིང	a piece of land as a remuneration for the {dung dpon}	dung zhing
དུང་ཡལ	disappear, vanish	dung yal
དུང་ཡས་འཁྱིལ	conch coiled to the right	dung yas 'khyil
དུང་ཡིག	conch shell letters written in white ink dung g.yas 'khyil - SA dung dkar g.yas 'khyil dung g.yas 'khyil - conch [picture] coiling to the right	dung yig
དུང་རབ༹	deer horn	dung rva
དུང་རྭ་བ་ཅན	horned conch-shell or	dung rwa ba can
དུང་ལ	dung pass [between dpal 'bar rdzong and spo bo chu mdo smi 6145 above sea level.]	dung la
དུང་ལུང	a sacred place in tibet	dung lung
དུང་ལོ་ལྗོན་པའི་མདོ	a bon religious work	dung lo ljon pa'i mdo
དུང་ལོང	conch [ear]-ring	dung long
དུང་ཤིང	= dwa lis tree	dung shing
དུང་སེམས	kindness	dung sems
དུང་སོ་འཁོར་མ	her teeth were like rows of tiny conch shells	dung so 'khor ma
དུངས་པ	pf. of {dung ba}; love	dungs pa
དུད	gray	dud
དུད་ཁ	1) tshos gzhi kham nag, smoke color; 2) family, household	dud kha
དུད་ཁུ	du ba'i khu ba	dud khu
དུད་ཁུག	tobacco pouch	dud khug
དུད་ཁུང	chimney	dud khung
དུད་གྲངས	number of houses, census of households	dud grangs
དུད་འགྲོ	animal, beast, brute, "moving on four limbs". animal	dud 'gro
དུད་འགྲོ་རྔོག་ཆགས	animals	dud 'gro rngog chags
དུད་འགྲོ་གཉིས	CHN	dud 'gro gnyis
དུད་འགྲོ་བཏགས་རྒྱུའི་ཐག་པ	tether	dud 'gro btags rgyu'i thag pa
དུད་འགྲོ་འདྲེས་པ	an animal of mixed breed, a cross, mongrel	dud 'gro 'dres pa
དུད་འགྲོ་ནང་བཞིན	beastly	dud 'gro nang bzhin
དུད་འགྲོ་བྱིང་ན་གནས་པ	'animals living in the depths' {rgya mtsho chen po sogs la gnas} inhabit the great oceans	dud 'gro bying na gnas pa
དུད་འགྲོ་འབད་པ	breed cattle	dud 'gro 'bad pa
དུད་འགྲོ་ལ་བླུན་རྨོངས	animals suffer stupidity and dullness	dud 'gro la blun rmongs
དུད་འགྲོ་གསོ་བ	feed a beast	dud 'gro gso ba
དུད་འགྲོ་གསོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of killing animals	dud 'gro gsod pa'i ltung byed
དུད་འགྲོ་ཨི་སྐྱེ་གནས	birthplace as an animal	dud 'gro i skye gnas
དུད་འགྲོའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	animal birthplace	dud 'gro'i skye gnas
དུད་འགྲོའི་མདུན་གྱི་རྐང་པ	forefoot	dud 'gro'i mdun gyi rkang pa
དུད་འགྲོའི་ནད་བཅོས་ཐབས་ཀྱི	veterinary	dud 'gro'i nad bcos thabs kyi
དུད་འགྲོའི་ཡུལ	animal realm	dud 'gro'i yul
དུད་འགྲོའི་རླིད་བུ	entire skin of an animal	dud 'gro'i rlid bu
དུད་འགྲོར་གྱུར་པ	become an animal	dud 'gror gyur pa
དུད་རྒན	old smoke residue	dud rgan
དུད་སྒོ	smoke-hole	dud sgo
དུད་སྔོན	bluish smoke color	dud sngon
དུད་གཅིག་མ	in a region not more than 1 house	dud gcig ma
དུད་ཆང	serf	dud chang
དུད་ཆུང	khral rten sa cha med pa'i g.yog rgyug dud tshang chung ngu	dud chung
དུད་ཆུང་རྟེན་ཡོད	subjects dud tshang chung ngu khral rten yod pa	dud chung rten yod
དུད་སྟོངས	dissipating smoke	dud stongs
དུད་ཐོ	record of [# of] families/ households	dud tho
དུད་ཐོར	ruin, destruction	dud thor
དུད་དུ་འབུལ	give/ offer in place of	dud du 'bul
དུད་དུད་ཀུ་ཀུ	dove	dud dud ku ku
དུད་དྲེག	soot	dud dreg
དུད་མདེལ	smoke bomb	dud mdel
དུད་ནག	opium	dud nag
དུད་པ	Syn {du ba} smoke, dark-gray; smoke; {dud pa, dud pa, dud pa} intr. v	dud pa
ཏོ་ཐེ་ཨེཡེ	lashes	to the eye
དུད་པ་འཁྱིམས	encircling fog	dud pa 'khyims
དུད་པ་སྔོན	smoke preceding the flames	dud pa sngon
དུད་པ་སྔོན་འཐུལ	before blazing tongues of flame smoke 'thul ba	dud pa sngon 'thul
དུད་པ་བྱ་བལ་མ	in slow-flowing water growing like bal thag herb nal nal chu'i 1275 khar g.yeng ba'i algae, drawing chu ser from burns	dud pa bya bal ma
དུད་པའི་སོལ་བ་མ	Syn {dud sol ma}, Düsolma	dud pa'i sol ba ma
དུད་དཔག	fight or dispute among householders, soldiers recruited from among villagers	dud dpag
དུད་བལ	dud dreg broken as if torn	dud bal
དུད་རྩི	wisp of smoke, soot	dud rtsi
དུད་ཚང	household, family, clean person/ house	dud tshang
དུད་ཚོ	grong tsho	dud tsho
དུད་འཚོ	village, hamlet	dud 'tsho
དུད་རླངས	steam and smoke	dud rlangs
དུད་ལམ	smoke hole, chimney	dud lam
དུད་སུན	smell of smoke	dud sun
དུད་སོལ་མ	Vetali, a female protector	dud sol ma
དུད་གསུམ་གྲོང་ཚ	three family village	dud gsum grong tsha
དུད་བསུང	1) smoke-stains; 2) good smelling smoke	dud bsung
དུན་ཅན	diligent	dun can
དུན་བཏགས་པའི་ཆོས	imaginary phenomenon	dun btags pa'i chos
དུན་པ	great diligence, assiduity	dun pa
དུན་ལས	fragrant precious stone, amber	dun las
དུབ	be tired/ fatigued	dub
དུབ་ཅན	fatigue	dub can
དུབ་མཇུག་རིང	comet	dub mjug ring
དུབ་པ	to be worn out/ weary/ fatigued	dub pa
དུབ་པ་མེད་པ	tireless	dub pa med pa
དུབ་ལིན	Dublin	dub lin
དུབས	very probably	dubs
དུབས་སུ	[arch] dus su	dubs su
དུམ	part, portion, section, piece, fragment, crevice	dum
དུམ་སྐྱེ་མ	khandaroha, name of a yogini or dakini	dum skye ma
དུམ་གྲུགས	shattered	dum grugs
དུམ་ཅུ་པ་སུམ་རྟགས	abbr. of work on alphabet	dum cu pa sum rtags
དུམ་གཅིག	in 1 piece	dum gcig
དུམ་བཅད	split	dum bcad
དུམ་བཅད་དུ་ཁྲིད	to elope	dum bcad du khrid
དུམ་བཅད་དུ་ཁྲིད་པ	made off with	dum bcad du khrid pa
དུམ་ཆུང	small pitches, little bit	dum chung
དུམ་དུམ	stub	dum dum
དུམ་པ	piece, fragment	dum pa
དུམ་པ་སྟེ	somewhat, it being a little	dum pa ste
དུམ་པོ	large piece, fragment	dum po
དུམ་བུ	part, portion, section, piece, fragment, crevice	dum bu
དུམ་བུ་ཅན	fractional	dum bu can
དུམ་བུ་གཉིས་སུ་གཅོད་པ	intersect	dum bu gnyis su gcod pa
དུམ་བུ་དང་པོ	Part I [of a sutra]	dum bu dang po
དུམ་བུ་མང་པོ་ཅན	composite	dum bu mang po can
དུམ་བུ་མིན	entire	dum bu min
དུམ་བུ་གསུམ	3 parts, triple division	dum bu gsum
དུམ་བུ་གསུམ་པ	SA dur byid	dum bu gsum pa
དུམ་བུར	piecemeal	dum bur
དུམ་བུར་གྱུར་པ	divided into parts	dum bur gyur pa
དུམ་བུར་དགེས་པ	divide into pieces, cut up, cut open	dum bur dges pa
དུམ་བུར་བགོད	divide into pieces, dismember	dum bur bgod
དུམ་བུར་གཅོག་པ	break into pieces, break, cut to pieces	dum bur gcog pa
དུམ་བུར་གཅོད	cut into pieces, sever, disrupt	dum bur gcod
དུམ་བུར་གཅོད་པ	break, cut to pieces	dum bur gcod pa
དུམ་བུར་བཅད་པ	to partition, fragment, reduce or become reduced to pieces or components, dissolve, break up, crumble, decompose, disintegrate	dum bur bcad pa
དུམ་བུར་བཅད་པའི་རྣམ་པ	broken to pitches	dum bur bcad pa'i rnam pa
དུམ་བུར་འཐུབ་པ	a splitter	dum bur 'thub pa
དུམ་བུར་འཐུབ་པ་པོ	one who cuts into pieces	dum bur 'thub pa po
དུམ་བུར་གནས་པ	to remain fragmented	dum bur gnas pa
དུམ་བུར་བྱས་ནས	cut it into pieces	dum bur byas nas
དུམ་བུར་བྱེད་པ	break, cut to pieces, divide	dum bur byed pa
དུམ་བུར་གཤོག་པ	cut into pieces	dum bur gshog pa
དུམ་བུར་གསིལ་བ	cut to pieces	dum bur gsil ba
དུམ་བུར་བསིལ་ཏོ	cut into pieces	dum bur bsil to
དུམ་བྲག	rock-cavern	dum brag
དུམ་སྦོམ	fragmentation bomb/ grenade	dum sbom
དུམ་ཙམ་སྡོད	wait just a short whole	dum tsam sdod
དུམ་ཞིག	a piece, fragment	dum zhig
དུམ་ཡང	head workman, one who supervises work	dum yang
དུམ་རེ	1) cung zad re; 2) every piece/ part	dum re
དུམ་རེ་ཡེངས་པ	occasional wandering	dum re yengs pa
དུམ་སུ་འཇུག་པ	take birth, enter into the womb	dum su 'jug pa
དུའང	see du	du'ang
དུའང་གསུངས་ལ	though it is also said	du'ang gsungs la
དུའི་བཅུ	10 KW hrs/ degrees	du'i bcu
དུའི་ལིའུ་ཅང	Tuliu River	du'i li'u cang
དུའུ	KW hour, degree	du'u
དུའུ་ཕུག	(CH kind of bza' bca	du'u phug
དུར	tomb, grave, funeral	dur
དུར་རྐུན	grave robber	dur rkun
དུར་རྐོ་བ	dig a grave	dur rko ba
དུར་ཁ	yellow-orange	dur kha
དུར་ཁང	tomb, crypt	dur khang
དུར་ཁུང	grave, tomb	dur khung
དུར་ཁུང་རྐོ	dig a grave	dur khung rko
དུར་ཁུང་རྐོ་མཁན	grave digger	dur khung rko mkhan
དུར་ཁྲིད་མཁའ་འགྲོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 charnel ground dakinis CHN	dur khrid mkha' 'gro brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད	charnel ground	dur khrod
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཆས	charnel ground ornaments	dur khrod kyi chas
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཆས་བརྒྱད	the eightfold charnel ground attire	dur khrod kyi chas brgyad
ཚལ་བརྒྱད	the 8 groves right of the charnel ground stupas CHN	tshal brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་མཆོད་རྟེན་བརྒྱད	the stupas in the 8 great charnel grounds CHN	dur khrod kyi mchod rten brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ནགས་གསེབ་ཏུ་བཏོན་ནོ	exiling them to a forest cemetery dur khrod kyi dbus su skes pa'i shing	dur khrod kyi nags gseb tu bton no
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་རས	shroud	dur khrod kyi ras
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཁུ་བྱུག་རོལ་པའི་མདོ	Scripture of the Play of the Cuckoo Bird of the Charnel Ground. An Anu Yoga scripture	dur khrod khu byug rol pa'i mdo
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཁུ་བྱུག་རོལ་བ	anuyoga root tantra	dur khrod khu byug rol ba
དུར་ཁྲོད་མཁའ་འགྲོ་བརྒྱད	the eight dakinis of the charnel grounds	dur khrod mkha' 'gro brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད་དགའ་བའི་ཚལ	Joyful Grove charnel ground	dur khrod dga' ba'i tshal
དུར་ཁྲོད་བརྒྱད	Eight charnel grounds: 1) Cool Grove, Sitavana (bsil ba tshal), in the east. 2) Perfected in Body (sku la rdzogs) to the south. 3) Lotus Mound (pad ma brtsegs) to the west. 4) Lanka Mound (lan ka b...	dur khrod brgyad
ནོརཐ	west. 8) World Mound ('jig rten brtsegs) to the north-east. There are also numerous other lists of charnel grounds	north
པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 clouds above the 8 great charnel grounds CHN dur khrod brgyad kyi steng gi sprin chen	po brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆས	charnel-ground ornaments	dur khrod chas
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆས་བརྒྱད	the 8 charnel ground ornaments	dur khrod chas brgyad
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆེན་པོ	tshang 'khrigs pa, 'bar 'khrigs pa, keng rus can, bkra shis tshal or bsil ba'i tshal, mun pa nag po, ki li ki lir sgra sgrog pa, ha ha rgod pa)	dur khrod chen po
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 121-3]	dur khrod chen po brgyad
ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་མཛད	practice of extraordinary activity in the eight great	kyi spyod pa mdzad
ཆརྣེལ	grounds	charnel
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆེན་པོ་མེ་རི་འབར་བ	the great charnel ground Blazing mountain	dur khrod chen po me ri 'bar ba
དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆེན་པོའི་བརྒྱད	the 8 great charnel grounds dur khrod du gnas pa'i rnal 'byor grub	dur khrod chen po'i brgyad
ཐོབ་བརྒྱད	the 8 charnel ground	thob brgyad
དྭེལླིང་སིདདྷ	yogins CHN dur khrod du gnas pa'i phyogs skyong	dwelling siddha
དུར་ཁྲོད་བདག་པོ	citipati, lord of cemetery, 2 skeletons	dur khrod bdag po
དུར་ཁྲོད་པ	charnel ground dweller	dur khrod pa
དུར་ཁྲོད་བ	charnel ground	dur khrod ba
དུར་ཁྲོད་མ	epithet of goddess dpal ldan lha mo, smasana (purity of ear consciousness)	dur khrod ma
དུར་ཁྲོད་རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམས་པ	to wander through cemeteries and mountain solitudes	dur khrod ri khrod 'grims pa
དུར་ཁྲོད་བསིལ་བ་ཨི་ཚལ	cool grove charnel ground	dur khrod bsil ba i tshal
དུར་འཁྲོད	sky burial site, charnel ground	dur 'khrod
དུར་གྱི་མཆད་པ	ro sbed sa	dur gyi mchad pa
དུར་གླ	charnel ground sa gla	dur gla
དུར་རྒན	las dang bya ba gang la'ang ru nga nyams myong che ba'i mi'i bla dvags kyi ming	dur rgan
དུར་རྒྱགས	the food of [your] funeral	dur rgyags
དུར་རྒྱས	food which is given to a dying man	dur rgyas
དུར་སྒམ	coffin	dur sgam
དུར་སྒོ	Bon gshin po'i dur sgo 'gog byed kyi liturgy	dur sgo
དུར་སྒྲོམ	coffin	dur sgrom
དུར་ཆུ	the river of death	dur chu
དུར་མཆོད	offering made on the day of taking a corpse to the charnel ground	dur mchod
དུར་ཏེ་རྒྱུག་པ	run towards a place or object, hasten to	dur te rgyug pa
དུར་སྟོད	upper dbu	dur stod
དུར་ཐོད	skull in a charnel ground	dur thod
དུར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	bury, inter, put in the grave	dur du 'jug pa
དུར་རྡོ	stones piled over one's grave or place of cremation	dur rdo
དུར་གནས	charnel ground	dur gnas
དུར་སྤྱང	hyena, grave-wolf, species of hyena that digs out dead bodies to devour them 1277	dur spyang
དུར་ཕྱུར་ཕྲག་དགུ	900,000,000	dur phyur phrag dgu
དུར་བ	straw used for mats in India. weed, weeds, to run	dur ba
དུར་བ་དཀར་པོ	blue or white flowering dur ba, panicum dactylon, other white species of dur ba	dur ba dkar po
དུར་བ་རྩ	kusha grass	dur ba rtsa
དུར་བས	herbs, 1 of 8 sman bla ritual objects	dur bas
དུར་བས་འཆི	scorpion	dur bas 'chi
དུར་བིན	spy-glass	dur bin
དུར་བོན	kind of Bon po	dur bon
དུར་བྱ	birds of death; a paring-axe, a hoe, vulture	dur bya
དུར་བྱ་རྒྱབ་དཀར	brahminy kite with white back	dur bya rgyab dkar
དུར་བྱང	epitaph on a tomb	dur byang
དུར་བྱིད	{dur byid purgative root, a field herb med [sweet, heating, by its power curing rma rul, nad tsha, grang gnyis ka sbyang syn: kun rjes 'byung, dum bu gsum pa, dor byed ma, mda' 'joms, rdul can, phu...	dur byid
དུར་བྱིད་སྨན	medicinal root, SA mda' 'joms	dur byid sman
དུར་བྱེད	plant croton polyandrum	dur byed
དུར་སྦྱང	epitaph on a tomb	dur sbyang
དུར་མེ	the flame of death	dur me
དུར་མཙེད	place to take/ cremate a corpse	dur mtsed
དུར་ཚུན	food offered to the dead	dur tshun
དུར་མཚེད	place for burying dead bodies	dur mtshed
དུར་ཡུ	outside, beyond, foreign	dur yu
དུར་ལེན	sort of vampire	dur len
དུར་ཤིང	the trees of death	dur shing
དུར་གཤེན་མཚོན་ཆ་ཅན	{dur gshen mtshon cha can} B"npo	dur gshen mtshon cha can
དུར་ས	tomb, grave	dur sa
དུར་སྲི	charnel grounds spirit/demon/ vampire	dur sri
དུར་སྲུང་བ	charnel ground guard	dur srung ba
དུལ	vi. 1) to be tamed, disciplined	dul
དུལ་གནས	place of conversion, place of one's discipline	dul gnas
དུལ་པོ	tame, peaceful, disciplined	dul po
དུལ་བ	controlled, tamed, disciplined, soft, tame, gentle, easy, mild, be pulverized, become fine/ powdery	dul ba
དུལ་བ་པ	tamer, discipliner	dul ba pa
དུལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	subduing	dul ba byed pa
དུལ་བ་འཛིན	obedient, holding to discipline, one who observes rules of vinaya	dul ba 'dzin
དུལ་བ་ཞི་བ་ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བ	selfcontrolled, tranquil, and has pacified deception	dul ba zhi ba nye bar zhi ba
དུལ་བ་ལ	early buddhist sage and author	dul ba la
དུལ་བ་ལེགས	good discipline	dul ba legs
དུལ་བ་བསླབས་པ་ལ་འགལ་བ	gone against the training to tame	dul ba bslabs pa la 'gal ba
དུལ་བ་ལྷ	vinitadeva	dul ba lha
དུལ་བར་འདོད	courage	dul bar 'dod
དུལ་མ	1) young girl/ woman; 2) able to be tamed [by upaya and prajna]; 3) water-color; 4) powdered	dul ma
དུལ་མོ	tender-mouthed, tame, manageable, tractable	dul mo
དུས	kyi dus su - while	dus
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏེན་ནོན	concurrent formations. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rgyu dang 'bras bu byung nas 'gags pa 'das pa dang, ma byung ba ni ma 'ongs pa dang, byung ba ma 'gag pa ni da ltar ba'o,}	of the ten non
དུས་ཀུན	all times	dus kun
དུས་ཀུན་ཏུ	Syn {dus gtan tu}	dus kun tu
དུས་ཀྱང་ཐུང	1) short time; 2) though the time is short	dus kyang thung
དུས་ཀྱི	seasonal	dus kyi
དུས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་སློང	the motivation of time [dge tshul slong sgrub skabs, bsam pa'i mthun rkyen las dus kyi kun slong thob shes pa dgos pa ste, sdom pa 'bog pa'i cho ga las gsol ba song nas las brjod pa gsum gyi tha ma...	dus kyi kun slong
དུས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	indivisible time moments	dus kyi skad cig ma
དུས་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་དོན	because of long interruption not be able to realize [like other lives]	dus kyi bskal don
དུས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	special time, special occasion	dus kyi khyad par
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལྡོག	change	dus kyi 'khor ldog
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ཕྱོགས	general trend/ course of development	dus kyi 'khor phyogs
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	Kalachakra [anuttara tantra or its yidam whose ground path and fruition presentation have outer, inner, and other {dus sbyor} connections therefore called the wheel of time [syn: khams gsum 'khor l...	dus kyi 'khor lo
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་རྒྱུད	kalacakra tantra	dus kyi 'khor lo rgyud
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོའི	mtshan adibuddha (a particular one) dus kyi 'khor lo'i brtul zhugs nyer lnga the five disciplines of Kalachakra CHN	dus kyi 'khor lo'i
དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོའི་བསྟན་པ	the teaching of Kalachakra	dus kyi 'khor lo'i bstan pa
དུས་ཀྱི་དགག་དབྱེ	among dgag dbye, done at a certain time summer zla ba gsum rdzogs pa'i 15th day la dgag dbye should be done dbyar snga ma if khas blangs, on the full moon of dbyug pa, middle month of autumn {tha s...	dus kyi dgag dbye
དུས་ཀྱི་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	the changes of time	dus kyi 'gyur ldog
དུས་ཀྱི་འགྱུར་བ	the changing times, becoming more modern	dus kyi 'gyur ba
དུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	cycle of the year	dus kyi rgyal po
དུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན	continuity of time	dus kyi rgyun
དུས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	by means of time	dus kyi sgo nas
དུས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས་ཕྱེ་བའི་ལས་གསུམ	CHN	dus kyi sgo nas phye ba'i las gsum
དུས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ཚད	tshad gzhi for measuring length of periods of time	dus kyi cha tshad
དུས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ཤས	divisions of time	dus kyi cha shas
དུས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	dus tshod rtsi thabs	dus kyi cho ga
དུས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	death	dus kyi chos nyid
དུས་ཀྱི་འཇལ་བྱེད་བདུན	the 7 measures of time	dus kyi 'jal byed bdun
དུས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	one who behaves or changes according to the occasion	dus kyi rjes su 'gro ba
དུས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བའི་ཙན་དན	yellow sandal	dus kyi rjes su 'brang ba'i tsan dan
དུས་ཀྱི་སྙིགས་མ	{longs spyod rgud pa dus kyi snyigs ma 'bru rnams ro nus chung zhing mi smin pa sogs so} 'degeneration of era' is the decline in enjoyments, that grain is less savory and nutritious, fails to ripen...	dus kyi snyigs ma
དུས་ཀྱི་བསྙེན་པ	recitation for a certain period of time	dus kyi bsnyen pa
དུས་ཀྱི་ཐ་མ	1) the time of the five denigrating corruptions; 2) the time of death	dus kyi tha ma
དུས་ཀྱི་ཐུང་མཐའ	the smallest limit of time, {skad cig cha med}	dus kyi thung mtha'
དུས་ཀྱི་ཐུང་བ	brief time	dus kyi thung ba
དུས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ལ	in limited time	dus kyi mtha' la
དུས་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱུར་པ	reach the end of [1's] time, die	dus kyi mthar gyur pa
དུས་ཀྱི་དུམ་བུ་བཞི	the four fragments of time CHN	dus kyi dum bu bzhi
དུས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	sun, lord of time	dus kyi bdag po
དུས་ཀྱི་གནས	revolution of the seasons, year	dus kyi gnas
དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་གཉིས	[CHN]	dus kyi spyod lam gnyis
དུས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	Kalayukta, [the 52nd year of the {rab byung} the Male Earth Horse]	dus kyi pho nya
དུས་ཀྱི་འཕོ་འགྱུར	changing times	dus kyi 'pho 'gyur
དུས་ཀྱི་བར	during, momentary	dus kyi bar
དུས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་པོ	producer of time, the sun	dus kyi byed po
དུས་ཀྱི་དབང	the power of the passage of time	dus kyi dbang
དུས་ཀྱི་དབྱིད་པ	staff of time, death dus kyi sbyin sreg gi mchod sbyin ma	dus kyi dbyid pa
ཆག་པ་མཛོད་ཟེར་རོ	I ask only that you make burnt offerings in a timely fashion	chag pa mdzod zer ro
དུས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	tenses	dus kyi sbyor ba
དུས་ཀྱི་མེ་ཏོག	mthing, {dus kyi me tog} mineral med.	dus kyi me tog
དུས་ཀྱི་རྩ	time nadi [nadi of the body]	dus kyi rtsa
དུས་ཀྱི་བརྩི་ཚུལ	manner of counting time	dus kyi brtsi tshul
དུས་ཀྱི་ཚད་པ	measure of time, time's duration	dus kyi tshad pa
དུས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས	summons by the angel of death	dus kyi tshigs
དུས་ཀྱི་ཞགས་པ	the noose of time, time of death	dus kyi zhags pa
དུས་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ	temporal month	dus kyi zla ba
དུས་ཀྱི་རླུང	prana of time	dus kyi rlung
དུས་ཀྱི་ཤན	zhag gi shan	dus kyi shan
དུས་ཀྱིས་འཆུ་བ	[arch] dbang gis sdud pa	dus kyis 'chu ba
དུས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ་གསུམ	inclusion of the three times	dus kyis bsdus pa gsum
དུས་ཀྱིས་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་ཉིད	the immeasurableness of time	dus kyis dpag tu med pa nyid
དུས་ཀྱིས་བྱས་པ	produced by time, temporal/ timely action	dus kyis byas pa
དུས་དཀབས	occasion	dus dkabs
དུས་དཀབས་ཟ་ངེ་ཟིང་ངེ	unrest	dus dkabs za nge zing nge
དུས་བཀག	* set a time, schedule 1279	dus bkag
དུས་བཀག་གོང་ནས་ལས་འགན་འགྲུབ་པ	accomplish/ finish work ahead of schedule	dus bkag gong nas las 'gan 'grub pa
དུས་བཀག་སྔོན་དུ	ahead of schedule	dus bkag sngon du
དུས་བཀག་ལྟར	on schedule	dus bkag ltar
དུས་བཀག་བྱེད	* set a time, schedule	dus bkag byed
དུས་བཀག་བཙོན་འཇུག	prison term	dus bkag btson 'jug
དུས་སྐག	evil hour, inauspicious time	dus skag
དུས་སྐད་ཅིག	moment	dus skad cig
དུས་སྐབས	1) time, era, period. 2) chance, opportunity	dus skabs
དུས་སྐབས་རྙིང་པའི	antique	dus skabs rnying pa'i
དུས་སྐབས་དང་མཚུངས་པ	up-to-date	dus skabs dang mtshungs pa
དུས་སྐབས་དེ་ནས་བཟུང	from that time on	dus skabs de nas bzung
དུས་སྐབས་འདིར	right now, when	dus skabs 'dir
དུས་སྐབས་མཚམས་མེད	w/o borders of time [w/o years, months, days etc]	dus skabs mtshams med
དུས་སྐབས་གསར་པ	new era/ opportunity	dus skabs gsar pa
དུས་སྐྱེས	berberis vulgaris, SA skyer shing	dus skyes
དུས་སྐྱེས་ཤིང་སེར	{dus skyes shing ser} med. tree	dus skyes shing ser
དུས་བསྐལ	kalpa of destruction	dus bskal
དུས་ཁུག་པ	return to earthly existence	dus khug pa
དུས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	holy day	dus khyad par can
དུས་ཁྲིམས	time discipline	dus khrims
དུས་ཁྲིམས་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	the 8 limbs of time discipline	dus khrims yan lag brgyad
དུས་ཁྲིམས་ལ་གནས་པ	keep bsnyen gnas vows	dus khrims la gnas pa
དུས་མཁྱེན	time knower, astrologer	dus mkhyen
དུས་འཁོར	Kalachakra. period, cycle of time	dus 'khor
དུས་འཁོར་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	periodic, cyclical	dus 'khor gyi rang bzhin
དུས་འཁོར་ཆོས་འབྱུང	history of the Kalachakra practice by {jo nang pa kun mkhyen tA ra na thA}	dus 'khor chos 'byung
དུས་འཁོར་བསྡུས་རྒྱུད	Abbrevated Kalachakra Tantra {mchog gi dang po'i sangs rgyas las phyung ba'i rgyud kyi rgyal po dpal dus kyi 'khor lo'i bsdus pa'i rgyud}[R]	dus 'khor bsdus rgyud
དུས་འཁོར་པན་དི་ཏ	celebrated mongolian lama dus 'khor spyi don dri med 'od rgyan {dus 'khor spyi don dri med 'od rgyan} dus 'khor spyi don dri med 'od rgyan {dus 'khor spyi don dri med 'od rgyan} [by nor bzang rgya ...	dus 'khor pan di ta
དུས་འཁོར་སྦྱོར་བ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	six branches of practice according to Kalachakra	dus 'khor sbyor ba yan lag drug
དུས་འཁོར་རྩ་རྒྱུད	the Root Tantra of Kalachakra	dus 'khor rtsa rgyud
དུས་འཁོར་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Kalachakra Root Tantra	dus 'khor rtsa ba'i rgyud
དུས་འཁོར་རཏཟ་རྒྱུད	the Root Tantra of Kalachakra [12,000 shlokas, but in Tibet there is only a fragment dbang mdor bstan ma gtongs ma 'gyur] dus 'khor rdzogs rim sbyor ba'i yan lag	dus 'khor rtza rgyud
དུས་འཁོར་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རོལ་མཚོ་བདུན	the 7 lakes surrounding Mt. Meru [Kalachakra]	dus 'khor lugs kyi rol mtsho bdun
དུས་འཁྲུགས	time of turmoil	dus 'khrugs
དུས་འགའ་ཞིག་ན	sometimes	dus 'ga' zhig na
དུས་འགའ་རེ	sometimes	dus 'ga' re
དུས་འགོ	initial/ beginning [stage]	dus 'go
དུས་འགོར	at the initial/ beginning [stage]	dus 'gor
དུས་འགྱངས	postponement, delay	dus 'gyangs
དུས་འགྱངས་ཆད་ལུས	delayed/ overdue payment	dus 'gyangs chad lus
དུས་འགྱངས་པ	postponement, delay	dus 'gyangs pa
དུས་འགྱངས་ཤོར	be delayed, overdue, fall behind time	dus 'gyangs shor
དུས་འགྱངས་སུ་གཏོང	postpone, delay	dus 'gyangs su gtong
དུས་འགྱངས་སུ་བཏང	postponed, delayed	dus 'gyangs su btang
དུས་འགྱུར	amount of time there is, change of season/ times/ period/ era/ circumstances of	dus 'gyur
དུས་འགྱུར་བ	change of time, fresh provision	dus 'gyur ba
དུས་འགྲིག	arrange a time	dus 'grig
དུས་འགྲིག་པ	arrange a time	dus 'grig pa
དུས་རྒྱུན	always	dus rgyun
དུས་རྒྱུན་དུ	at all times	dus rgyun du
དུས་རྒྱུན་གནས་པ	permanent, enduring, perpetually abiding	dus rgyun gnas pa
དུས་རྒྱུན་རིན་གོང་ལས་ཆུང་བ	cut-rate	dus rgyun rin gong las chung ba
དུས་རྒྱུར་སྨྲ་བ	Proponent of Time Being the Cause [thd]	dus rgyur smra ba
དུས་སྒོ	tshe skabs kyi mtshams	dus sgo
དུས་སྒོ་སྔོན་བཀག	setting [up] a time/ schedule	dus sgo sngon bkag
དུས་བརྒྱ་ཟ་མ	{dus brgya za ma gcig yin} this is your one meal in a hundred chances	dus brgya za ma
དུས་བརྒྱད	the 8 times [of human life: being in the womb, birth, infancy, childhood, youth, maturity, old age, decrepitude]	dus brgyad
དུས་བརྒྱུད	succession of time 1280	dus brgyud
དུས་ངན	crisis	dus ngan
དུས་ངན་སྙིགས་མ	the age of dregs	dus ngan snyigs ma
དུས་ངེས	[set/ settle on] a definite time	dus nges
དུས་ངེས་ཅན	scheduled, at regular times/ intervals	dus nges can
དུས་ངེས་ཅན་གྱི་དཔེ་དེབ	periodical, magazine	dus nges can gyi dpe deb
དུས་ངེས་པ	[set/ settle on] a definite time	dus nges pa
ཅོམཔ་ཝིཐ་ཡུལ་ངེས་པ	spatially determinate [ggd]	comp with yul nges pa
དུས་ངེས་པ་མེད་པ	uncertain time, no particular time	dus nges pa med pa
དུས་ངེས་པ་མེད་པར	at uncertain times/ no particular time	dus nges pa med par
དུས་ངེས་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	posadha at fixed times	dus nges pa'i gso sbyong
དུས་མངོན	Kalachakra and the Abhidharmakosha, temporal manifestation	dus mngon
དུས་ལྔ	the five seasons [dgun, winter dpyid, spring sos, from the middle of the 4th to 6th rainy season when plants revive] month dbyar, summer ston autumn	dus lnga
དུས་ལྔ་བརྒྱ	Five-hundred year period. Periods of each five hundred years. The Buddhadharma is said to last ten such periods	dus lnga brgya
དུས་སྔ	autumn	dus snga
དུས་སྔ་ཕྱི	past and future	dus snga phyi
དུས་སྔ་རབས	antiquity, ancient	dus snga rabs
དུས་ཅན	a flower	dus can
དུས་ཅན་ཀྲ་ཏན	time bomb	dus can kra tan
དུས་ཅིག་ཅར	all at once, suddenly	dus cig car
དུས་ཅིག་ན	once, one day	dus cig na
དུས་ཅུང་ཟད	[just] a short time	dus cung zad
དུས་ཅུང་ཟད་ཅིག	a short time	dus cung zad cig
དུས་གཅིག	in a moment	dus gcig
དུས་གཅིག་ཏུ	at the same time, all at once, simultaneously; instantly; simultaneously	dus gcig tu
དུས་གཅིག་དུ	at 1/ the same time, all at once	dus gcig du
དུས་གཅིག་ན	at a certain time, once upon a time	dus gcig na
དུས་གཅིག་འབྱུང་བ་ཡོད་པ	may occur simultaneously	dus gcig 'byung ba yod pa
དུས་གཅིག་ལ	at the same time	dus gcig la
དུས་བཅད	time limit, deadline	dus bcad
དུས་བཅད་བྱེད	set a time limit/ deadline	dus bcad byed
དུས་ཆད་པ་མེད	timely, time without interruption, continually	dus chad pa med
དུས་ཆད་པ་མེད་པ	in proper time	dus chad pa med pa
དུས་ཆད་མེད	w/o interruption/ break, ceaseless, continuous	dus chad med
དུས་ཆད་མེད་པ	w/o interruption/ break, ceaseless, continuous	dus chad med pa
དུས་ཆར	seasonal rain	dus char
དུས་ཆུང	from CH astrology, khe bzhi la dus chung gcig &, dus chung 24 khe go six nyin zhag 1 gi tshad du nges	dus chung
དུས་ཆེན	a great holy day; festival, holiday, occasion, holy day, celebration; holy day, festival, holiday, celebration; solar terms	dus chen
དུས་ཆེན་དགེ་བ	000 merits	dus chen dge ba
དུས་ཆེན་དགེ་བ་འབུམ་འགྱུར	days when one work of merit produces 100	dus chen dge ba 'bum 'gyur
དུས་ཆེན་གཏོང	celebrate a holiday/ ceremonial occasion dus chen gtong{dus thim - expire, be finished [period of time, contract]	dus chen gtong
དུས་ཆེན་དྲུག	CHN	dus chen drug
དུས་ཆེན་བཞི	4 great periods of time	dus chen bzhi
དུས་ཆེན་གསུམ་འཚོམས	CHN	dus chen gsum 'tshoms
དུས་ཆེན་གསུམ་འཛོམས	holiday on Saga month, 4th, 15th day,	dus chen gsum 'dzoms
དུས་ཆོས	nature of time	dus chos
དུས་ཆོས་འགྱུར	die, pass away	dus chos 'gyur
དུས་མཆོད	periodic offerings, funeral ceremonies, death anniversary, offering presented on prescribed occasions, memorial service, religious service observed at certain prescribed periods, funeral ceremonies...	dus mchod
དུས་ཇི་ཙམ	for however long	dus ji tsam
དུས་ཇི་སྲིད	for however long	dus ji srid
དུས་ཇི་སྲིད་པ	for however long	dus ji srid pa
དུས་མཇུག	end of an era	dus mjug
དུས་མཇུག་ཏུ	at the end of the era	dus mjug tu
དུས་ཉིད	time	dus nyid
དུས་ཉིད་ན	in the very moment	dus nyid na
དུས་ཉིད་ནས	+ verb - in the very course of ... verb	dus nyid nas
དུས་ཉེ་བའི་ཆ	nye ba'i dus skabs	dus nye ba'i cha
དུས་གཉིས་ཐོག་མ	first two periods of time (5-7am, 5-7pm)	dus gnyis thog ma
དུས་མཉམ	at/ for the same time as, contemporary	dus mnyam
དུས་མཉམ་གྱི	contemporary	dus mnyam gyi
དུས་མཉམ་གྱི་རྟེན	simultaneous basis	dus mnyam gyi rten
དུས་མཉམ་དུ	at the same time, simultaneously	dus mnyam du
དུས་མཉམ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	occur simultaneously	dus mnyam du byung ba
དུས་མཉམ་དུ་འབྱུང	occur simultaneously	dus mnyam du 'byung
དུས་མཉམ་པ	contemporary, simultaneous, at the same time	dus mnyam pa
དུས་མཉམ་བྱུང་བ	coincide	dus mnyam byung ba
དུས་མཉམ་བཟོ་བ	synchronize	dus mnyam bzo ba
དུས་མཉམ་ལ	simultaneously	dus mnyam la
དུས་རྙིང་པའི	ancient	dus rnying pa'i
དུས་སྙིགས	degenerated age	dus snyigs
དུས་སྙིགས་མ	the dark age	dus snyigs ma
དུས་གཏན	always, all the time, forever	dus gtan
དུས་གཏན་འཁེལ	scheduled, at regular times/ intervals	dus gtan 'khel
དུས་གཏན་དུ	always, all the time, forever	dus gtan du
དུས་གཏུགས	tshe skabs rang la slebs ran pa'am dus tshod zad ran pa	dus gtugs
དུས་གཏོར	offering torma offered on fixed occasions	dus gtor
དུས་བཏབ	set a time	dus btab
དུས་བཏབ་པ	1) when the time has come; 2) fix a time	dus btab pa
དུས་བཏབ་བོ	set a date, fix a time	dus btab bo
དུས་བཏབ་མ	passionate woman	dus btab ma
དུས་རྟག	always, all the time, forever	dus rtag
དུས་རྟག་ཏུ	always, constantly	dus rtag tu
དུས་རྟག་དུ	often, constantly	dus rtag du
དུས་རྟག་པ	always, continuously, eternity	dus rtag pa
དུས་རྟག་པ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the time is	dus rtag pa rgyun gyi 'khor lo
དུས་རྟགས	indication of time	dus rtags
དུས་སྟབས	at the time when	dus stabs
དུས་སྟབས་སུ	{nyi ma shar ba dang dus stabs su} at sunrise, as the sun rose	dus stabs su
དུས་སྟོན	periodical feast, ceremony, festival, holiday, festival	dus ston
དུས་སྟོན་གྱི	festive	dus ston gyi
དུས་སྟོན་དགུ	9 buddhist festivals (dus ston chen po, btsas ston, ral bu 'brel pa'i dus, gtsug hud gyi dus ston, lo lnga'i dus ston, lo drug gi dus ston, gcug lag khang gi dus ston, dga' ston, dus ston byed pa)	dus ston dgu
དུས་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ	1 of 9 dus ston	dus ston chen po
དུས་སྟོན་གཏོང	celebrate a holiday/ ceremonial occasion	dus ston gtong
དུས་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	1 of 9 dus ston	dus ston byed pa
དུས་སྟོན་བརྩི་སྲུང་བྱེད་པ	commemorate	dus ston brtsi srung byed pa
དུས་བརྟན་གྱི་བདེ	everlasting happiness	dus brtan gyi bde
དུས་བརྟན་གྱི་བདེ་བ	eternal welfare	dus brtan gyi bde ba
དུས་བརྟན་པ	stable in time	dus brtan pa
དུས་བསྟུན	in accord w the time[s]/ era	dus bstun
དུས་བསྟུན་འགྱུར་བཅོས	[make] changes/ reforms in accord w the time[s]/ era	dus bstun 'gyur bcos
དུས་ཐག	length of time	dus thag
དུས་ཐམས་ཅད	always	dus thams cad
དུས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	chos gnas pa nyid	dus thams cad du yongs su grub pa
དུས་ཐམས་ཅད་པ	ever-present	dus thams cad pa
དུས་ཐིག	coincide w	dus thig
དུས་ཐིམ	expire, be finished	dus thim
དུས་ཐུག་པ	reach the time	dus thug pa
དུས་ཐུང	short time	dus thung
དུས་ཐུང་གླ་པ	day-wage/ piece/ temporary worker	dus thung gla pa
དུས་ཐུང་སྦྱོང་བརྡར་འཛིན་གྲྭ	short term training class	dus thung sbyong brdar 'dzin grwa
དུས་ཐོག	previously arranged/ appointed time, on time/ schedule, punctually, the right time, opportunely	dus thog
དུས་ཐོག་ཏུ	1) regularly. 2) at the right time, opportunely	dus thog tu
དུས་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཐག་གཅོད	make decisions at the right time	dus thog tu thag gcod
དུས་ཐོག་གཏོང་བ	scheduling	dus thog gtong ba
དུས་ཐོག་གཏོང་བའི་གནམ་གྲུ	scheduled airplane/ flight	dus thog gtong ba'i gnam gru
དུས་མཐའ	end-age	dus mtha'
དུས་མཐའ་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	time-finality instant, smallest moment	dus mtha' skad cig ma
དུས་མཐའ་ཨི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	the instant of	dus mtha' i skad cig ma
ཏིམེ	finality, the ultimate time fraction, (1/75 2nd, smallest moment	time
དུས་མཐའ་ཨི་ཆ་མེད	partless time-finality	dus mtha' i cha med
དུས་མཐའ་ཨི་མེ	the fire at end of the kalpa	dus mtha' i me
དུས་མཐའ་ཨི་རླུང	the wind at the end of the kalpa	dus mtha' i rlung
དུས་མཐའི་སྐད་ཅིག	finality of time	dus mtha'i skad cig
དུས་མཐའི་སྐད་ཅིག་པ	smallest conceivable division of time	dus mtha'i skad cig pa
དུས་མཐའི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	the instant of	dus mtha'i skad cig ma
དུས་མཐའི་སྐད་ཅིག་ལ	in a single instant dus mtha'i skad cig la rdzogs par bstan transmitting them in their entirety in a single instant	dus mtha'i skad cig la
དུས་མཐའི་བསྐལ་པ	the kalpa at the end of time	dus mtha'i bskal pa
དུས་མཐའི་ཆ་མེད	partless time-finality	dus mtha'i cha med
དུས་མཐའི་མེ	the fire at end of the kalpa [that destroyes the universe in 7 days]	dus mtha'i me
དུས་མཐའི་རླུང	kalpa wind	dus mtha'i rlung
དུས་མཐར	at the end of time	dus mthar
དུས་ད་ལྟ་བ	present tense	dus da lta ba
དུས་ད་ན	henceforth, from this time forward	dus da na
དུས་ད་ནས	from this moment on	dus da nas
དུས་དང་གཏམ་གྱི་གཞི	basis for talk and time	dus dang gtam gyi gzhi
དུས་དང་བསྟུན	[be] appropriate/ in keeping/ in accord w the times	dus dang bstun
དུས་དང་བསྟུན་ནས	appropriately/ in keeping/ in accord w the times	dus dang bstun nas
དུས་དང་བསྟུན་པ	appropriate/ in keeping/ in accord w the times, up to date, timely, opportune, seasonable	dus dang bstun pa
དུས་དང་མཐུན་པ	timely, opportune	dus dang mthun pa
དུས་དང་དུས་མིན་བསྡུས་པའི་གཞི	ltung ba bcabs ma bcabs bye brag tu 'chad pa dus dang dus min bsdus pa 'byung ba'i gzhi zhes pa ste, gzhi ltung ltung min gyi rnam dbye shes shing dran nus pa'i dge slong kho nas, bsam pa gsang 'do...	dus dang dus min bsdus pa'i gzhi
དུས་དང་དུས་སུ	timely and pertinent	dus dang dus su
དུས་དང་གནས་སྐབས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	always in every situation	dus dang gnas skabs thams cad du
དུས་དང་རྣམ་པ	constantly	dus dang rnam pa
དུས་དང་རྣམ་པ་ཀུན	at all times and on all occasions	dus dang rnam pa kun
དུས་དང་རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་དུ	often	dus dang rnam pa kun du
དུས་དང་རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	at all times/ always	dus dang rnam pa thams cad
དུས་དང་རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	at all times and on all occasions	dus dang rnam pa thams cad du
དུས་དང་མི་མཐུན་པ	not timely/ opportune, out of date dus dang mi sbyor bar rnam par grol ba 1 of 20 sravaka monk stages	dus dang mi mthun pa
དུས་དུས	from time to time, occasionally, sometimes	dus dus
དུས་དུས་ལ	from time to time, occasionally, sometimes	dus dus la
དུས་དུས་སུ	at times, sometimes, occasionally 1282	dus dus su
དུས་དེ་ཉིད་དུ	at that very moment	dus de nyid du
དུས་དེ་སྙེད་ཀྱི་རིང་ལ	during all of that time	dus de snyed kyi ring la
དུས་དེ་ནས་བཟུངས་སྟེ	from that day forth	dus de nas bzungs ste
དུས་དེ་ཙ་ན	at that time	dus de tsa na
དུས་དེ་ཙམ་ཞིག་ན	at that moment	dus de tsam zhig na
དུས་དེ་རིང་ནས	since time immemorial	dus de ring nas
དུས་དེ་རིང་ནས་བཟུང	from this very day	dus de ring nas bzung
དུས་དེ་སྲིད	for that period of time	dus de srid
དུས་དེང་ནས	from now on	dus deng nas
དུས་དེབ	publications, periodical, magazine	dus deb
དུས་དེབ་འཕར་མ	supplement[ary issue] to a periodical/ journal	dus deb 'phar ma
དུས་དེར	then, at this time	dus der
དུས་དོན	current events/ affairs	dus don
དུས་དྲན	anniversary, commemoration	dus dran
དུས་དྲན་དགའ་སྟོན	memorial celebration	dus dran dga' ston
དུས་དྲུག	1) three times each day and night; 2) the six seasons [spring rains [reviving] summer autumn, winter, late winter Dpyid, sos ka, dbyar, ston, dgun, dgun smad bcas drug]	dus drug
དུས་བདག	master of time, sun	dus bdag
དུས་བདེ་འཇགས	time of peace and happiness	dus bde 'jags
དུས་བདེ་པོ	peaceful, quiet, calm	dus bde po
དུས་བདེ་བ	good times	dus bde ba
དུས་བདེ་ཞོད་འཇགས	time of peace and happiness	dus bde zhod 'jags
དུས་བདེ་ས་འཇམ	gentle time w/o strife	dus bde sa 'jam
དུས་འདའ	wasting their time	dus 'da'
དུས་འདའ་བ	to pass one's time; to spend one's time; to use ones time	dus 'da' ba
དུས་འདའ་བར་བྱེད	to pass time; dus {'das} p. of {dus 'da'}	dus 'da' bar byed
དུས་འདས	passed/ elapsed [time]	dus 'das
དུས་འདས་པ	passed {zhag bdun gyi dus 'das pa'i tshe} when seven days had passed	dus 'das pa
དུས་འདི་ཙམ་ཤིག་ན	for as long a time as that	dus 'di tsam shig na
དུས་འདི་ལགས	this is the time!	dus 'di lags
དུས་འདི་སྲིད་ཅིག་ཏུ	for as long a time as that	dus 'di srid cig tu
དུས་འདིར	here and now	dus 'dir
དུས་འདེབས་པ	fix a time	dus 'debs pa
དུས་ལྡན	one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [staviras], [arhats]	dus ldan
པའི་གནས་བརྟན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 (staviras) or (arhants), said to live in Jambuling]	pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug
དུས་ལྡན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	temporal	dus ldan gyi rang bzhin
དུས་ལྡན་ཆེན་པོ	in the N continent of Uttarakuru, bh ra dv ja in the E continent of Videha, mah k lika	dus ldan chen po
དུས་ལྡན་མ	woman in menstruation	dus ldan ma
དུས་སྡུད་པ	from the 1st to 5th hour	dus sdud pa
དུས་ན་དགའ་བ	1 of 10 great mountains, SA ri bo chen po bcu, mountain in uttara kuru	dus na dga' ba
དུས་ནམ་ཞིག	when	dus nam zhig
དུས་ནམ་ཡང	ever	dus nam yang
དུས་ནའང	as long as	dus na'ang
དུས་ནས	. . . dus (nyid) nas - even as . . .	dus nas
དུས་གནའ་རབས	antiquity, ancient	dus gna' rabs
དུས་གནའ་རབས་ཀྱི་ཆས་གོས	costumes of ancient times	dus gna' rabs kyi chas gos
དུས་གནས	current situation	dus gnas
དུས་རྣམ་ཀུན་ཏུ	always	dus rnam kun tu
དུས་རྣམ་པ་ཀུན	time without interruption, at all times, all times, always	dus rnam pa kun
དུས་རྣམས	seasons	dus rnams
དུས་བསྣུར་བ	shift the time	dus bsnur ba
དུས་པ	wept	dus pa
དུས་པ་རིན་པོ་ཏོག	mahasannipatarat naketudharani	dus pa rin po tog
དུས་པོ་ཆེ	[arch] great avarice/ grasping	dus po che
དུས་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	immeasurable time dus dpag tu yod pa dang dpag tu med pa - measurable and immeasurable time	dus dpag tu med pa
དུས་དཔོག	Seer	dus dpog
དུས་སྤུར་བ	pass time quickly	dus spur ba
དུས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཆོགས་པ	the perfect time	dus phun sum chogs pa
དུས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	1) the time for taming having come; 2) the time when human beings have lives of 120 years; 3) rtag pa rgyun gyi 'khor lo; 4) /the perfect time [one of the phung sum tshogs pa lnga]	dus phun sum tshogs pa
དུས་ཕྱི་བཞིན་ན	at a later period, sometime afterwards	dus phyi bzhin na
དུས་ཕྱིར་ནུད་པ	dus 'gyangs pa,...Mjug sgril dus phyir nud pa	dus phyir nud pa
དུས་ཕྱིས	these days, recently	dus phyis
དུས་ཕྱིས་འབྱུང་བ	to manifest in the future	dus phyis 'byung ba
དུས་ཕྱིས་ཞིག་ན	some future day	dus phyis zhig na
དུས་ཕྱིས་ཡུལ	after some time	dus phyis yul
དུས་ཕྱིས་ཤིག་ན	at a later time	dus phyis shig na
དུས་ཕྱིས་སུ	later, in later times	dus phyis su
དུས་འཕུལ་བ	waste time	dus 'phul ba
དུས་འཕྱི	'gyangs pa	dus 'phyi
དུས་བབ	1) timely, opportune. 2) situation, circumstance, condition, state	dus bab
དུས་བབ་ཀྱི་སྤྲུལ	timely emanation	dus bab kyi sprul
དུས་བབ་ཀྱིས་དེད	pe pressed/ pushed by circumstances/ the situation	dus bab kyis ded
དུས་བབས	char dus su babs pa - rain falls in due season	dus babs
དུས་བབས་ཀྱི་སྤྲུལ	timely emanation	dus babs kyi sprul
དུས་བབས་ཀྱིས་དེད	pe pressed/ pushed by circumstances/ the situation	dus babs kyis ded
དུས་བབས་པ	at the appropriate time	dus babs pa
དུས་བབས་པར	at the appropriate time	dus babs par
དུས་བྱ	1) migratory bird; 2) set a time	dus bya
དུས་བྱས་པ	1) die; 2) fix/set a time	dus byas pa
དུས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	explained in the vinaya chos ldan gyi don eg the meaning of dge 'dun spyi'i lha tshon sogs tshe ston pas gnang ba yin snyam du dus dran byas nas reg pa	dus byin gyis brlabs pa
དུས་བྱེད	dus kyi byed po	dus byed
དུས་བྱེད་དུ་ཉེ་བས	when he was near dying	dus byed du nye bas
དུས་དབྱངས	Kalachakra and the arising of the vowels [in astrology]	dus dbyangs
དུས་དབྱིག	1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person	dus dbyig
དུས་འབྱུང་ངེས	the three times and five elements indicate that the 35 principal dzogchen tantras are widely spread in 1283 this dimension, SA thal ba'i rgyun in sgra thal 'gyur	dus 'byung nges
དུས་འབྱོར་པ	junction of periods, time	dus 'byor pa
དུས་འབྲས་བུ་ཡོད་པ	dus tshod 'phro brlag tu ma song ba	dus 'bras bu yod pa
དུས་འབྲེལ་གསོ་སྦྱོང	posadha at a fixed time	dus 'brel gso sbyong
དུས་སྦལ་གྱི་ཁོག	interior of the body of a tortoise	dus sbal gyi khog
དུས་སྦྱོར	particular time in which a man is born, zodiac	dus sbyor
དུས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རླུང	dujor prana [characteristic that in 1 day the prana 21,600 times goes in and out]	dus sbyor gyi rlung
དུས་སྦྱོར་པ	astrologer	dus sbyor pa
དུས་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	hour in which a man is born	dus sbyor byed pa
དུས་མ་ངེས་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	not posadha at a fixed time [among {mthun pa'i gso sbyong}, like the 15th of each month, 1 auspicious posadha, two reversing harm, three reconciling quarrels.]	dus ma nges pa'i gso sbyong
དུས་མ་འདྲེས་པ	Syn {dus nges pa} temporally determinate; comp with yul	dus ma 'dres pa
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པ	wrong time, untimely	dus ma yin pa
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར	not eating at the prescribed time	dus ma yin par
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར་འཆི་པ	untimely death	dus ma yin par 'chi pa
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར་འཆི་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of dying before the time comes	dus ma yin par 'chi ba'i sdug bsngal
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཟ	eating at the wrong time	dus ma yin par za
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཟ་བ	eating at the wrong time	dus ma yin par za ba
དུས་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཟ་བའ་ཨི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of eating at the wrong time [among the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, between noon and dawn on this continent {skya rengs} dus rung gi sman te zas za ba'o]	dus ma yin par za ba' i ltung byed
དུས་མའི་མེ	fire at the end of time	dus ma'i me
དུས་མི་མཉམ་པ	different time	dus mi mnyam pa
དུས་མི་གདའ་བ	we have been unable to	dus mi gda' ba
དུས་མི་རིང་བ	shortly	dus mi ring ba
དུས་མིན	{dus ma yin pa} inappropriate time, untimely, inopportune, unfortunate	dus min
དུས་མིན་གྱི་དགག་དབྱེ	untimely dgag dbye [among {dgag dbye}; in the three summer months if gnas pa'i mthun rkyen are incomplete or, 'gal rkyen nye bar gnas pa, when a month or six weeks have passed, dgag dbye is OK	dus min gyi dgag dbye
དུས་མིན་འཆི	untimely death	dus min 'chi
དུས་མིན་འཆི་བ	untimely death	dus min 'chi ba
དུས་མིན་ཤེས་པ	one who knows fixed times, cock, astrologer	dus min shes pa
དུས་མེ	1) planet dus me; 2) the fire at the end of the kalpa	dus me
དུས་མེད	no occasion, endless, time never arrives, never	dus med
དུས་མེད་དུ	outside of time (to avoid crossover with ye nas)	dus med du
དུས་མྱུར་བ	time quickly runs away	dus myur ba
དུས་དམན་པ	time of the waning moon	dus dman pa
དུས་ཙ་ན	when, at the time of, while	dus tsa na
དུས་བཙོན	prison term/ sentence	dus btson
དུས་རྩེན	Kamadeva	dus rtsen
དུས་ཚང	{dus tshod tshang}	dus tshang
དུས་ཚད	measure of/ allotted time, set time, schedule	dus tshad
དུས་ཚད་ཀྱིན་སྔོན་དུ	ahead of schedule	dus tshad kyin sngon du
དུས་ཚད་ཐིམ	expire, be finished	dus tshad thim
དུས་ཚིགས	solar terms, seasons; season, solar terms; season, quarter [of year], time period, solar terms, seasons	dus tshigs
དུས་ཚིགས་ཀུན་འགྲོ	'jol mo bird	dus tshigs kun 'gro
དུས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་རིན་ཁྱད	seasonal price fluctuations	dus tshigs kyi rin khyad
དུས་ཚིགས་ལྔ	the five dus tshigs [dbyar phyi ma khas len shes pa'i ched du 'dul gzhung las dus tshigs lngar dbye ba ste, hor zla bcu pa'i tshes bcu drug nas hor zla gnyis pa'i tshes bco lnga'i bar zla ba hril p...	dus tshigs lnga
དུས་ཚིགས་ཅན	menstruating woman	dus tshigs can
དུས་ཚིགས་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 divisions of times [the months, dgun ra ba, dgun 'bring, dgun tha chung, dpyid ra ba, dpyid 'bring, dpyid tha chung, dbyar ra ba, dbyar 'bring, dbyar tha chung, ston ra ba, ston 'bring, ston...	dus tshigs bcu gnyis
དུས་ཚིགས་ཉེར་བཞི	the 24 dus tshigs [dpyid zug kha ba char ldog srin bu 'gul, dpyid mnyam, nam mkha'i mdangs gsal, 'bru char, dbyar zug bri ba gang, rmon 'debs, dbyar nyi ldog tsa chung, tsa chen, ston zug bsil 'gug...	dus tshigs nyer bzhi
དུས་ཚིགས་སྙེར་བཞི	the four seasons	dus tshigs snyer bzhi
དུས་ཚིགས་དྲུག	the six seasons	dus tshigs drug
དུས་ཚིགས་བཞི	the four seasons	dus tshigs bzhi
དུས་ཚིགས་གསར་བ	change of time, season, fresh provision, produce of the year	dus tshigs gsar ba
དུས་ཚིགས་གསུམ	the three seasons [winter spring, heat/rain [dgun, dpyid, dbyar bcas ston gyi]	dus tshigs gsum
དུས་ཚེས	date, time	dus tshes
དུས་ཚེས་གཏན་འཁེལ་བ	[set/ settle on] a definite time	dus tshes gtan 'khel ba
དུས་ཚོད	time [to]	dus tshod
དུས་ཚོད་འགྱངས	be overdue, delayed, late	dus tshod 'gyangs
དུས་ཚོད་འགྱངས་འཐེན	delay, postponement	dus tshod 'gyangs 'then
དུས་ཚོད་འགྱངས་འཐེན་བྱས	delayed, postponed	dus tshod 'gyangs 'then byas
དུས་ཚོད་འགྱངས་འཐེན་བྱེད	delay, postpone	dus tshod 'gyangs 'then byed
དུས་ཚོད་འགྱངས་བ	defer	dus tshod 'gyangs ba
དུས་ཚོད་འགྲིག་པ	the time suits	dus tshod 'grig pa
དུས་ཚོད་སྒྲིག་པ	time	dus tshod sgrig pa
དུས་ཚོད་ངེས་ཅན	scheduled, at regular times/ intervals	dus tshod nges can
དུས་ཚོད་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 two hour periods of the day [named for the animals of the chinese zodiac chn]	dus tshod bcu gnyis
དུས་ཚོད་ཉེར་བཞི	the 24 dus tshod	dus tshod nyer bzhi
དུས་ཚོད་ཉེས་པ	evil hour, bad time	dus tshod nyes pa
དུས་ཚོད་ཏག་ཏག	sharp	dus tshod tag tag
དུས་ཚོད་ཏག་ཏག་ལ	punctual	dus tshod tag tag la
དུས་ཚོད་གཏན་འཁེལ	scheduled, at regular times/ intervals	dus tshod gtan 'khel
དུས་ཚོད་འདི་ལ	at this particular time	dus tshod 'di la
དུས་ཚོད་ནོར་བ	wrong time, inauspicious hour	dus tshod nor ba
དུས་ཚོད་ཕྱི་འགྱངས	delayed, postponed	dus tshod phyi 'gyangs
དུས་ཚོད་ཕྱི་འགྱངས་ཤོར	be delayed, postponed, fall behind schedule	dus tshod phyi 'gyangs shor
དུས་ཚོད་བྱེད	set a time	dus tshod byed
དུས་ཚོད་སྨྲ་བ	rooster	dus tshod smra ba
དུས་ཚོད་རྩི	count/ keep a record of time	dus tshod rtsi
དུས་ཚོད་རྩིས	counted/ kept a record of time	dus tshod rtsis
དུས་ཚོད་རྩིས་པའི་གླ	hourly wage	dus tshod rtsis pa'i gla
དུས་ཚོད་རྩིས་པའི་ཕོགས	hourly wage	dus tshod rtsis pa'i phogs
དུས་ཚོད་རྩིས་པའི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	hourly wage	dus tshod rtsis pa'i phogs thob
དུས་ཚོད་འཛིན་བྱ	rooster	dus tshod 'dzin bya
དུས་ཚོད་རྫོགས་པ	expire	dus tshod rdzogs pa
དུས་ཚོད་ཟད་ཕྱིན་པ	elapse	dus tshod zad phyin pa
དུས་ཚོད་བཟོ	set a time	dus tshod bzo
དུས་ཚོད་བཟོས་པ	make an appointment	dus tshod bzos pa
དུས་ཚོད་ཡོལ	be passed/ finished/ expired [time]	dus tshod yol
དུས་ཚོད་ཡོལ་བ	not in time	dus tshod yol ba
དུས་ཚོད་ལ་བྱེད	do on time	dus tshod la byed
དུས་ཚོད་ལྷག་མ	overtime	dus tshod lhag ma
དུས་མཚན	kalaratri (hindu goddess on whom vajrayogini tramples), king of kalinga, descendant of chakravarti raja	dus mtshan
དུས་མཚམས	1) border of two periods; 2) period, stage, epoch	dus mtshams
དུས་མཚམས་རེས་འཁོར	period, cycle	dus mtshams res 'khor
དུས་མཚུངས	at the same time, contemporary w	dus mtshungs
དུས་མཚུངས་པ	at the same time	dus mtshungs pa
མཚུངས་པ	contemporaneous/ contemporary (with)	mtshungs pa
དུས་མཚུངས་པར	at the same time	dus mtshungs par
དུས་མཚུངས་སུ	at the same time	dus mtshungs su
དུས་འཚུབས	time of turmoil	dus 'tshubs
དུས་མཛོད་པོ་ཏི་བསེ་རུ	a work upon genealogy	dus mdzod po ti bse ru
དུས་འཛིངས	dus 'doms pa,...Las ka khag mang dus 'dzings byung bar brten brel ba che tsam 'dug	dus 'dzings
དུས་འཛིན	the lord of death	dus 'dzin
དུས་འཛོམ་པ	synchronicity; synchronous (with one another)	dus 'dzom pa
དུས་རྫོགས་པ	when the time was ripe, [at the end of full period of gestation]	dus rdzogs pa
དུས་ཞབས	the dark age	dus zhabs
དུས་ཞིག་ལ	sometime	dus zhig la
དུས་གཞན	1) other times; 2) other Kalachakra	dus gzhan
དུས་གཞན་དུ	at other times	dus gzhan du
དུས་གཞན་དུ་འབྱུང	to manifest in some other moment	dus gzhan du 'byung
དུས་གཞན་ཞིག	another time	dus gzhan zhig
དུས་གཞན་ལ་དགོངས་པ	the intention directed towards other times	dus gzhan la dgongs pa
དུས་བཞི	4 moments (eating, sitting, walking, sleeping), 4 seasons (dbyar, dgun, ston, dpyid), 4 times (nang, nub, nyin, mtshan), four universal eons (rdzogs ldan, sum ldan, gnyis ldan, rtsod ldan), four pe...	dus bzhi
དུས་བཞི་སྔ་མ་དང་ཕྱི་མ	the earlier and later four times	dus bzhi snga ma dang phyi ma
དུས་བཞི་མཉམ་ཉིད	fourth time of equality	dus bzhi mnyam nyid
དུས་བཞི་མཉམ་པ	the changeless ground of the three times	dus bzhi mnyam pa
དུས་བཞི་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Fourth time of great equality	dus bzhi mnyam pa chen po
དུས་བཞི་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	the fourth time of equality	dus bzhi mnyam pa nyid
དུས་བཞི་མཉམ་སྦྱོར་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the equality of the four times	dus bzhi mnyam sbyor kyi ye shes
དུས་བཞི་ཕྱི་མ	the four subsequent periods [the lasting of the teachings of rigden Drakpa for 1800 years, divided into four equal parts of 450 called rim bzhin rdzogs ldan, gsum ldan, gnyis ldan, rtzod ldan, whic...	dus bzhi phyi ma
དུས་བཞི་སངས་རྒྱས་མཉམ་སྦྱོར	the four periods of equalizing the enlightened ones	dus bzhi sangs rgyas mnyam sbyor
དུས་བཞིའི་གྲངས	x {bdag gi lus ni dus bzhi'i grangs su gnas kyang} my body, even if it should last through innumerable seasons	dus bzhi'i grangs
དུས་བཞིའི་འགྱུར་བ	the changes of the seasons	dus bzhi'i 'gyur ba
དུས་བཞིའི་འགྱུར་བས	through the change of the 4th season	dus bzhi'i 'gyur bas
དུས་བཞིའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	SA dus bzhi'i lha mo	dus bzhi'i rgyal mo
དུས་བཞིའི་ཕང་ལོ	4 times wheel, cycle of years	dus bzhi'i phang lo
དུས་བཞིའི་འཕང་ལོ་ལྟར	like the cycle of the 4 seasons	dus bzhi'i 'phang lo ltar
དུས་བཞིའི་མེ་ཏོག	flowers of the four seasons	dus bzhi'i me tog
དུས་བཞིའི་མེ་ཏོག་བཞི	the four flowers of the four seasons CHN dus bzhi'i rtsa la khams lnga'i 'byung ba	dus bzhi'i me tog bzhi
བརྩི་ཚུལ་གཅོ་ལྔ	[CHN]	brtsi tshul gco lnga
དུས་བཞིའི་ལྷ་མོ	goddesses presiding over the 4 seasons (dpyid kyi rgyal mo sku mdog dkar, dbyar sngon mo, ston ser mo, dgun nag)	dus bzhi'i lha mo
དུས་ཟད་ཐབས་བྲལ	at the end of 1's rope, hopeless situation	dus zad thabs bral
དུས་ཟིང	time of battle, disturbance, unrest, turmoil, conflict	dus zing
དུས་ཟིན་པ	cried	dus zin pa
དུས་ཟླ	month [syn: 'jal byed dang, nyin zhag tsogs pa, dbugs skyes, lo yi cha shas, lo yi mdzod, lo yi yan lag bcas so]	dus zla
དུས་གཟེར	1) depending on corrected days and months rtsis 'phro'i aang grangs, a year's dus rtags table/ diagram; 2) Dbugs sgang gis during a year showing where the sun abides, and so sa la dus bzhi'i 'gyur ...	dus gzer
དུས་བཟང	holy day	dus bzang
དུས་བཟང་པོ	auspicious occasion, religious holiday	dus bzang po
དུས་བཟང་བའི་སྐབས	heyday	dus bzang ba'i skabs
དུས་བཟང་བཞི	CHN	dus bzang bzhi
དུས་ཡང་ཡང	over and over again	dus yang yang
དུས་ཡིག་ཅན	learned	dus yig can
དུས་ཡུན	duration, duration, time	dus yun
དུས་ཡུན་འགོར	take time, elapse [time]	dus yun 'gor
དུས་ཡུན་འཇལ་བྱེད་བདུན	CHN	dus yun 'jal byed bdun
དུས་ཡུན་རིང་པོ	a long time, long-term, protracted, prolonged	dus yun ring po
དུས་ཡུན་རིང་པོར	for a long time	dus yun ring por
དུས་ཡུན་ཧ་ཅང་གི་རིང་པོ	eon	dus yun ha cang gi ring po
དུས་ཡུན་ལྷོད་པོ	leisure	dus yun lhod po
དུས་ཡོལ་བ	1) time having come and passed/ subsided; 2) passing of the seasons * be out of season/ outmoded/ outdated	dus yol ba
དུས་རབས	century, times, age, epoch, era, period	dus rabs
དུས་རབས་ཀྱི་དུས་མཚམས་དབྱེ	opening a new age	dus rabs kyi dus mtshams dbye
དུས་རབས་ཀྱི་དུས་མཚམས་དབྱེ་བའི	epoch making dus rabs kyi dus mtshams dbye ba'i don	dus rabs kyi dus mtshams dbye ba'i
སྙིང་ལྡན་པའི་དོན་ཆེན	epoch making significance	snying ldan pa'i don chen
དུས་རབས་སྔོན་མ	antiquity, ancient times	dus rabs sngon ma
དུས་རབས་ཉི་ཤུ་པ	20th century	dus rabs nyi shu pa
དུས་རབས་བར་མ	middle ages, medieval	dus rabs bar ma
དུས་རབས་བར་མའི	medieval	dus rabs bar ma'i
དུས་རབས་འབྱེད	open a new era	dus rabs 'byed
དུས་རབས་མང་པོ	many centuries	dus rabs mang po
དུས་རབས་རིམ་བྱུང་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	general history	dus rabs rim byung gi lo rgyus
དུས་རིག	knowledge of time	dus rig
དུས་རིང	long time	dus ring
དུས་རིང་དུ	more protracted	dus ring du
དུས་རིང་པོ	long delayed	dus ring po
དུས་རིམ	stage, period	dus rim
དུས་རིམ་ལས་བརྒལ	go beyond its/ a certain period	dus rim las brgal
དུས་རུང་གི་སྨན	med. given at the proper time	dus rung gi sman
དུས་རེ་ཞིག	for a [short] time	dus re zhig
དུས་རེ་ཞིག་ནས	after some time	dus re zhig nas
དུས་རེ་ཤིག་པ	a [short] time	dus re shig pa
དུས་རེ་སིག་པ	a [short] time	dus re sig pa
དུས་རླབས	wave of time, ebb and flow of time	dus rlabs
དུས་རླུང	monsoon	dus rlung
དུས་ལ་དགའ་བ	that delights in time, epithet of the sun	dus la dga' ba
དུས་ལ་ལྟོས་པ	to rely upon time	dus la ltos pa
དུས་ལ་བབ	the time has come	dus la bab
དུས་ལ་བབ་པ	the time is ripe/ has come for ..., the time arrived when .. 1286	dus la bab pa
དུས་ལ་བབ་པར་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ	occur at just the right time	dus la bab par rab tu sbyor ba
དུས་ལ་བབ་སོང	it came down to the time	dus la bab song
དུས་ལ་བབས	the time has come! be the right time	dus la babs
དུས་ལ་བབས་པ	the time to [do verb] has come	dus la babs pa
དུས་ལ་བབས་པར་རིག་ནས	seen that it is ripe for	dus la babs par rig nas
དུས་ལ་བབས་ཡོད་ན	when the time is ripe	dus la babs yod na
དུས་ལ་དབབ་པ	bab/ 'bab pa - the time is ripe/ has come for . . . ; to be time for . . .	dus la dbab pa
དུས་ལ་འབབ་པ	/ bab/ dbab pa - the time is ripe/ has come for . . . ; to be time for . . .	dus la 'bab pa
དུས་ལ་ལ	sometimes	dus la la
དུས་ལ་སོགས་པའི་དབྱེ་བ	the divisions of time and so forth	dus la sogs pa'i dbye ba
དུས་ལན་གཅིག	once, one day	dus lan gcig
དུས་ལན་ཡང	never	dus lan yang
དུས་ལའང་ཡེ་ཤེས་མ་བསྒྲིབས་པ	time too does not obscure wisdom	dus la'ang ye shes ma bsgribs pa
དུས་ལས་འགྱངས	be delayed, overdue, fall behind time	dus las 'gyangs
དུས་ལས་སྔ་བ	ahead of time/ schedule	dus las snga ba
དུས་ལས་འདས་པ	going beyond 1's time, death	dus las 'das pa
དུས་ལས་མ་ཡོལ་བ	timely	dus las ma yol ba
དུས་ལས་མི་འདའ	timely (not passing up the time)	dus las mi 'da'
དུས་ལས་མི་འདའ་བ	not go past the proper time	dus las mi 'da' ba
དུས་ལས་མི་ཡོལ་བ	w/o delay	dus las mi yol ba
དུས་ལས་ཡོལ་བ	be past, of time or youth	dus las yol ba
དུས་ལས་ཡོལ་བ་མེད་པ	timely	dus las yol ba med pa
དུས་ལོག	bad times; fault of time	dus log
དུས་ཤར་བའི་སྐབས	when, wait, until	dus shar ba'i skabs
དུས་ཤར་བའི་སྐབས་སུ	by the time	dus shar ba'i skabs su
དུས་ཤེས	astrologer	dus shes
དུས་ཤེས་པ	astronomer, astrologer	dus shes pa
དུས་ཤེས་པ་ཉིད	temporal awareness	dus shes pa nyid
དུས་བཤོལ	prolong, procrastinate, delay	dus bshol
དུས་སང	next year	dus sang
དུས་སང་རྣམ་པར་ཀུན་ཏུ	always, all the time	dus sang rnam par kun tu
དུས་སུ	. . . kyi dus su - at the time/ on the occasion of . . . ; in the context of . . .	dus su
དུས་སུ་སྐྱེ་བ	mature, born or grown at the proper time	dus su skye ba
དུས་སུ་ཐོབ་པ	get at the opportune time or hour	dus su thob pa
དུས་སུ་འདྲི་བ	dus su gtam 'dri ba	dus su 'dri ba
དུས་སུ་རྡོལ་ནས	at birth	dus su rdol nas
དུས་སུ་བསྡོམས་པ	able to give timely counsel	dus su bsdoms pa
དུས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ	timely action	dus su spyod pa
དུས་སུ་བབ་པ	the time has come	dus su bab pa
དུས་སུ་བབ་པར་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ	occur at just the right time	dus su bab par rab tu sbyor ba
དུས་སུ་བབས	the time has come! be the right time	dus su babs
དུས་སུ་བབས་པ	in due season; ex. {char +} rain falls in due season	dus su babs pa
དུས་སུ་འབབས་པ	timely	dus su 'babs pa
དུས་སུ་འབྱོར་བ	1) come on time; 2) the time when the sun comes into the 12 houses	dus su 'byor ba
དུས་སུ་སྦྱིན་པ	timely giving	dus su sbyin pa
དུས་སུ་སྦྱོད་པ	timely action	dus su sbyod pa
དུས་སུ་སྨིན	ripen on time, occur at the right time	dus su smin
དུས་སུ་འོས་པ	suiting the occasion, opportune	dus su 'os pa
དུས་སུ་རུང་བ	timely	dus su rung ba
དུས་སུམ	three times	dus sum
དུས་སླེབས་ནས	be the time, when, wait until	dus slebs nas
དུས་གསུམ	the three times [of past, present and future]; always; {'das pa, lta da pa, ma 'ongs pa}	dus gsum
དུས་གསུམ་ཀུན་མཁྱེན	knower of the three times	dus gsum kun mkhyen
དུས་གསུམ་སྐྱེ་མེད	where the 3 times are unborn	dus gsum skye med
དུས་གསུམ་མཁྱེན་པ	epithet of buddha	dus gsum mkhyen pa
དུས་གསུམ་གྱི	of/ throughout the three times	dus gsum gyi
དུས་གསུམ་འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པ	unchanging throughout the three times	dus gsum 'gyur ba med pa
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བ	Victorious Ones of the three times	dus gsum rgyal ba
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅས	the victorious ones of the three times and their sons	dus gsum rgyal ba sras bcas
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བ་གསུམ	CHN	dus gsum rgyal ba gsum
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྤྱི་སྒྲུབ	from the {rig 'dzin yongs 'dus} terma by {mnga' ris paN chen padma dbang rgyal rdo rje}	dus gsum rgyal ba'i spyi sgrub
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡབ་གཅིག	the single father of the buddhas of the three times	dus gsum rgyal ba'i yab gcig
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་འཁོར	continuously throughout the three times	dus gsum rgyun gyi 'khor
དུས་གསུམ་མཉམ་ཉིད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	realize the equality of the three times	dus gsum mnyam nyid du rtogs pa
དུས་གསུམ་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	the equality of the three times	dus gsum mnyam pa nyid
དུས་གསུམ་གཏོགས་པ	belonging to the three points of time	dus gsum gtogs pa
དུས་གསུམ་དུ	in the three times	dus gsum du
དུས་གསུམ་དུས་མེད	timelessness beyond the three times	dus gsum dus med
དུས་གསུམ་བདེ་གཤེགས	Sugatas of the three times	dus gsum bde gshegs
དུས་གསུམ་རྣམ་གཞག	tense dus gsum phyogs bcu'i rgyal ba sras dang	dus gsum rnam gzhag
བཅས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and the three times	bcas pa thams cad
དུས་གསུམ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	bodhisattva of past, present and future	dus gsum byang chub sems
དུས་གསུམ་མཚམས	3 junctions of time	dus gsum mtshams
དུས་གསུམ་བཞུགས	who are present throughout the three times	dus gsum bzhugs
དུས་གསུམ་སངས་རྒྱས	the Düsum Sangye supplication to Padmasambhava 1287	dus gsum sangs rgyas
པྲཡེར	The prayer by Chokgyur Lingpa starting with Buddha of the three times	prayer
དུས་གསུམ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཐམས་ཅད	all the Buddhas of past, present and future	dus gsum sangs rgyas thams cad
དུས་བསྲིང	delay, postpone	dus bsring
དེ	1) that [R]; 2) = ste after final DA [R], {ste}, [R] where, namely, to wit, videlicet [sbyar yul gang yang rung ba'i ming dngos su tshig zin du yod med ji ltar rung, de'i ma mthar sbyor ba'i thag r...	de
དེ་ཀ	that, the very same, that very, that itself, itself, simply	de ka
དེ་ཀ་སྐབས་སུ	in a moment, instantly	de ka skabs su
དེ་ཀ་ལྟར	just so	de ka ltar
དེ་ཀ་ཙམ་དུ	barely	de ka tsam du
དེ་ཀ་ཡོད	indeed, that is so	de ka yod
དེ་ཀ་རང	just/ no other than that	de ka rang
དེ་ཀ་ལགས	just that	de ka lags
དེ་ཀའི་ནང་དུ	just so, exactly in that state, position	de ka'i nang du
དེ་ཀས་ཀྱང་ཡོང་མོད	that will do / suffice / be enough	de kas kyang yong mod
དེ་ཀུན	those, all those	de kun
དེ་ཀོ	that very	de ko
དེ་སྐད	like that	de skad
དེ་སྐད་ཁས་འཆེ་བ	promise this, pretend this, put forth such a thesis	de skad khas 'che ba
དེ་སྐད་ཅིས་གསོལ་པ	asked the Buddha [sutra]	de skad cis gsol pa
དེ་སྐད་ཅེས	after quoted speech	de skad ces
དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་བཀའ་སྩལ་པ	replied by Buddha	de skad ces bka' stsal pa
དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་བྱ	these words, like this	de skad ces bya
དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་ཟེར	said [it like] this, such an explanation	de skad ces zer
དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་གསོལ་པ	asked to [Buddha]	de skad ces gsol pa
དེ་སྐད་བརྗོད་སོང	[he] said it like that	de skad brjod song
དེ་སྐད་དུ	as is said	de skad du
དེ་སྐད་དུ་གྲགས་སོ	known like this	de skad du grags so
དེ་སྐད་དུ་བཤད་དེ	it is explained in these terms / like this	de skad du bshad de
དེ་སྐད་མ་བྱེད	don't do that	de skad ma byed
དེ་སྐད་གསུངས	{bcom ldan 'das kyis de skad gsungs so byas pa} told him what the Buddha had said	de skad gsungs
དེ་སྐབས	by that time	de skabs
དེ་ཁ	just that, SA de ka	de kha
དེ་ཁ་རང	just/ no other than that	de kha rang
དེ་ཁར	on top of/ in addition to that	de khar
དེ་ཁུལ	[aound/ in] there/ that place/ that area [gzhan phyogs kyi sa khul]	de khul
དེ་ཁོ་ན	That, suchness, {de kho na nyid} that itself, only that	de kho na
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	1) not mixed w other; 2) the ultimate way things are, emptiness; 3) that itself, only that	de kho na nyid
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐབས	the situation of suchness	de kho na nyid kyi skabs
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	thatness sadhana 1288	de kho na nyid kyi sgrub pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	suchness offering	de kho na nyid kyi mchod pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of thatness	de kho na nyid kyi ting nge 'dzin
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the 10 natures of suchness CHN	de kho na nyid kyi de nyid bcu
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	understanding of thatness	de kho na nyid khong du chud pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་གྱི་མཆོད་པ	suchness offering	de kho na nyid gyi mchod pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་མཆོག་གི་དོན	the supreme goal/benefit/ object suchness	de kho na nyid mchog gi don
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཉག་ཅིག	the single thatness	de kho na nyid nyag cig
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of thatness, contemplation of Reality, tathata samadhi	de kho na nyid ting nge 'dzin
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་རྟོགས་པ	realization of thatness	de kho na nyid rtogs pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ལྟ་བ	view of the real/ suchness	de kho na nyid lta ba
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་སྟོན་པ	teaching thatness	de kho na nyid ston pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	the Tattvaprakasha sutra	de kho na nyid bstan pa'i mdo
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་དུ	in reality	de kho na nyid du
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	existence in suchness	de kho na nyid du grub pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་དུ་ངེས་པ	refer to the same condition	de kho na nyid du nges pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་དུ་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	the fully established reality, absolute reality / thatness / nature, Syn {yang dag pa'i mtha'}	de kho na nyid du yongs su grub pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་བསྡུས་པའི་དཀའ་འཀྲེལ	{de kho na nyid bsdus pa'i dka' 'krel}	de kho na nyid bsdus pa'i dka' 'krel
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་བསྡུས་པའི་དཀའ་འགྲེལ	{de kho na nyid bsdus pa'i dka' 'grel}	de kho na nyid bsdus pa'i dka' 'grel
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་བཞི	the 4-fold thatness [kriya {bskyed rim} chn]	de kho na nyid bzhi
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཡེ་ཤེས	the pristine cognition of reality	de kho na nyid ye shes
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	completely conceptualize suchness	de kho na nyid rab tu rtog pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	completely realize suchness de kho na nyid la sgyu ma lta bu yongs su	de kho na nyid rab tu rtogs pa
ཚོལ་བ	completely acquire illusionlike suchness	tshol ba
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ལ་འཇུག	enter into suchness	de kho na nyid la 'jug
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ལ་རྟོག་པ	to ponder reality, expl {grub mtha' la 'dzin pa}	de kho na nyid la rtog pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་ཤུགས་པ	completely enter into/ abide in suchness	de kho na nyid la rab tu shugs pa
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་གསུམ	three realities [secret nucleus as explained in s ryaprabh simha's commentary p 4719, pp two 3: the uncreated reality which is the causal basis of the mandala, the resultant reality which is the sp...	de kho na nyid gsum
ཨེནླིགྷཏེནེད་མིནད	realities, the three according to the secret nucleus book 2]	enlightened mind
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉེར་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of thatness	de kho na nyer kyi ting nge 'dzin
དེ་ཁོ་ན་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	single suchness	de kho na de bzhin nyid
དེ་ཁོ་ན་བཞིན་དུ	exactly as	de kho na bzhin du
དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཤེས་པ	know suchness knowledge of suchness	de kho na shes pa
དེ་ཁོ་ནའི་དོན་གྱི་ཚུལ	the way of suchness	de kho na'i don gyi tshul
དེ་ཁོངས	that jurisdiction, included in that	de khongs
དེ་ཁོན་ཉིད	thatness	de khon nyid
དེ་ག	just that	de ga
དེ་ག་ཁང་པ	that house over there	de ga khang pa
དེ་ག་ནང་བཞིན	[just] like that	de ga nang bzhin
དེ་ག་ཟེར	said to be like that	de ga zer
དེ་ག་རང	that very, just so	de ga rang
དེ་ག་རེ་ཟེར་ཡིན	what is it called	de ga re zer yin
དེ་ག་རེད	these are	de ga red
དེ་གར	there, in that place, there	de gar
དེ་གར་འགྲོ་ཙུག	what she is doing?	de gar 'gro tsug
དེ་གར་འགྲོ་ཙུག་བྱེད	where she is going	de gar 'gro tsug byed
དེ་གར་བཅར་རྩིས་ཡིན	I was planning to go there myself	de gar bcar rtsis yin
དེ་གས་འཐུས	to count as fulfilling the requirement	de gas 'thus
དེ་དགོང	de ring dgong mo	de dgong
དེ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི	in a particular proof	de sgrub kyi
དེ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་འགལ་བའི་རྟགས	contradictory (invalid) reason in a proof de sgrub kyi chos kyi ming gi rnam grangs	de sgrub kyi 'gal ba'i rtags
དེ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས	deficient (invalid) reason in a proof	de sgrub kyi ma grub pa'i rtags
དེ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས	indefinite (invalid) reason in a proof	de sgrub kyi ma nges pa'i rtags
དེ་སྔ	in the past, formerly, before	de snga
དེ་སྔོན	previous time, before that, previously	de sngon
དེ་ཅི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན	Why is that?	de ci phyir zhe na
དེ་ཅི་ལགས	Why is that?	de ci lags
དེ་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན	ancient "because", if it is asked why that is so, why so?, how so?	de ci'i phyir zhe na
དེ་རྗེས	Later,	de rjes
དེ་རྗེས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ལྷག་མ	the lhag ma offense of adhering [to disputes]	de rjes phyogs kyi lhag ma
དེ་རྗེས་གཞི་ནས	not until then, only after that	de rjes gzhi nas
དེ་རྗེས་སུ	subsequently	de rjes su
དེ་ཉིད	Thatness. The nature of phenomena and mind	de nyid
ཐེ་སུབ	divisions of the second case. 4) principle, field	the sub
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱང	precisely	de nyid kyang
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	las dang, bya ba so sor 'byed kyang, ming tshig gang rung gi gzhi gcig la sbyor ba'i tshe, bya las ngo bo tha mi dad par bya ba gcig la sbyar nas go dgos par brten, bya yul de nyid bya ba'i rang bz...	de nyid kyi sgra
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དོན་ཅན་ཚིག་ཕྲད	sometimes su bstan bya others in addition	de nyid kyi don can tshig phrad
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར	de rang gi don du	de nyid kyi phyir
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མོད	de ma thag	de nyid kyi mod
དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚེ	in that case	de nyid kyi tshe
དེ་ཉིད་དགོངས་དོན་ཚུལ	the way of knowing suchness	de nyid dgongs don tshul
དེ་ཉིད་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	be attached to suchness	de nyid mngon par zhen pa
དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the 10 natures of mantra	de nyid bcu
དེ་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	the great suchness	de nyid chen po
དེ་ཉིད་མཆོག	supreme suchness	de nyid mchog
དེ་ཉིད་བརྗོད་པའི་དཔེ	example and meaning phan tshun khyad chos 'dra che bas nor nyen yod mod, however ma 'dres ma 'khrul bar dpe don gyi gnas lugs so sor nges pa ston pa'i rgyan zhig, among dpe'i rgyan	de nyid brjod pa'i dpe
དེ་ཉིད་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ	the 25 principles (of samkhya	de nyid nyi shu rtsa lnga
དེ་ཉིད་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 true principles [of Samkhya]	de nyid nyer lnga
དེ་ཉིད་གཉིས	the two natures: {kun nyon} and {rnam byang}	de nyid gnyis
དེ་ཉིད་རྟོགས་འབྲིང	pratyekabuddha	de nyid rtogs 'bring
དེ་ཉིད་ཐོབ་པ་བཅུ	the ten true acquaintances	de nyid thob pa bcu
དེ་ཉིད་མཐོང་བ	insight into reality. Syn {don dam pa'i bden pa mthong ba}	de nyid mthong ba
དེ་ཉིད་དུ	in just that, that very, at the same moment	de nyid du
དེ་ཉིད་དེ་ཉིད་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 true principles (of Samkhya de nyid de yin no shes bya bar ni nges par	de nyid de nyid nyer lnga
མི་གཟུང་ངོ	certainty does not arise that this itself/suchness is that	mi gzung ngo
དེ་ཉིད་དོན	the meaning/ goal of suchness	de nyid don
དེ་ཉིད་བདེན་ན	If this is the truth	de nyid bden na
དེ་ཉིད་འདི་ཡིན་ནོ	that itself is this, suchness is this	de nyid 'di yin no
དེ་ཉིད་བསྡུས་པ	gather into suchness	de nyid bsdus pa
དེ་ཉིད་རྣམ་བཞི	4 conditions of breathing	de nyid rnam bzhi
དེ་ཉིད་རྣམ་བཞིའི	SA rlung sbyor lnga	de nyid rnam bzhi'i
དེ་ཉིད་རྣམ་བཞིའི་རླུང་སྦྱོར	practice of prana of the 4 characteristic conditions	de nyid rnam bzhi'i rlung sbyor
དེ་ཉིད་རྣམ་གསུམ	three characteristic conditions	de nyid rnam gsum
དེ་ཉིད་སྣང་བ	the appearances/ manifestations of suchness	de nyid snang ba
དེ་ཉིད་མ་མཐོང་བ	1 who does not see suchness, {so so skye bo},-ordinary person)	de nyid ma mthong ba
དེ་ཉིད་སྨྲ་བ	one who speaks the truth	de nyid smra ba
དེ་ཉིད་ཟབ་མོ་མཐོང	see the profundity of suchness	de nyid zab mo mthong
དེ་ཉིད་གཟིགས་པ	the seer of reality	de nyid gzigs pa
དེ་ཉིད་བཟང་རྟོགས	realize the excellence of suchness	de nyid bzang rtogs
དེ་ཉིད་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of suchness	de nyid ye shes
དེ་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	{chos thams cad kyi de nyid rab tu rtogs pa} has realized / supreme realization of the nature of all phenomena	de nyid rab tu rtogs pa
དེ་ཉིད་རིག་པ	awareness of/ insight into suchness	de nyid rig pa
དེ་ཉིད་ལས	from the same text just quoted; from the same text [as just mentioned]; from the same [abovementioned text]	de nyid las
དེ་ཉིད་ཤེས་པ	{chos kyi de nyid shes pa} to know what the Dharma is really about	de nyid shes pa
དེ་ཉིད་ཤེས་བྱ་མཐའ་དག	all the knowables of suchness	de nyid shes bya mtha' dag
དེ་ཉིད་གསུམ་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	meditation of the three principles (Om ah hum	de nyid gsum gyi bsam gtan
དེ་ཉིན	that day	de nyin
དེ་ཉིས་འགྱུར་རོ	two times that number	de nyis 'gyur ro
དེ་སྙེད	so/ that many/ much	de snyed
དེ་སྙེད་ཅིག	so much, so many, how many	de snyed cig
དེ་ཏིང	the samadhi of suchness	de ting
དེ་རྟིང་ལ	after that	de rting la
དེ་རྟོགས	realizing this	de rtogs
དེ་ལྟ	like/ as much/ many as/ such as that, thus, so, similar	de lta
དེ་ལྟ་ལྒས་སོ	[Lord] so be it	de lta lgas so
དེ་ལྟ་ཉིད་དུ	precisely, just so	de lta nyid du
དེ་ལྟ་ན	like that, in that way, so, thus	de lta na
དེ་ལྟ་བ	thus	de lta ba
དེ་ལྟ་བས་ན	for this reason, therefore, thus, therefore, this being so, consequently, that being so	de lta bas na
དེ་ལྟ་བུ	of that kind, such, of that manner	de lta bu
དེ་ལྟ་བུ་བྱུང་པའ་ཨི་སྡེ	stories of previous events as examples, parables {gsung ran yab lag bcu gnyis}	de lta bu byung pa' i sde
དེ་ལྟ་བུ་བྱུང་པའི་སྡེ	the section of Parables	de lta bu byung pa'i sde
དེ་ལྟ་བུ་བྱུང་བ	Parables; one of {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	de lta bu byung ba
དེ་ལྟ་བུ་བྱུང་བའི་སྡེ	stories of previous events as examples, parables	de lta bu byung ba'i sde
དེ་ལྟ་བུའི	such as this, this	de lta bu'i
དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ངང་ལ	in this condition	de lta bu'i ngang la
དེ་ལྟ་བུར་ཡོད་པ	be like that, be so	de lta bur yod pa
དེ་ལྟ་བྱུང	parables; see {de lta bu byung pa'i sde}	de lta byung
དེ་ལྟ་མ་ཡིན་ན	if it is not so	de lta ma yin na
དེ་ལྟ་མིན་པར	MSS: otherwise (R75:146) [mss]	de lta min par
དེ་ལྟ་མོད་ཀྱི	though indeed it is like that	de lta mod kyi
དེ་ལྟ་ཡང	and yet, despite	de lta yang
དེ་ལྟ་ཡིན་བཞིན་དུ	while that is so, that being so	de lta yin bzhin du
དེ་ལྟ་ལ	although	de lta la
དེ་ལྟར	according to that, in accordance w/ like that, that being so	de ltar
དེ་ལྟར་བསྐྱངས་པས	while training in this way	de ltar bskyangs pas
དེ་ལྟར་གྱིས་ཤིག	do accordingly	de ltar gyis shig
དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ	be like that, be so	de ltar gyur pa
དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ནས	saw what he had done	de ltar gyur pa mthong nas
དེ་ལྟར་ཉིད་དུ	precisely	de ltar nyid du
དེ་ལྟར་ལྟ་བ	think of/ view like that	de ltar lta ba
དེ་ལྟར་དུ	like that	de ltar du
དེ་ལྟར་འདུག་ན	if that is the case	de ltar 'dug na
དེ་ལྟར་ན	according to that, in accordance w that, like that, that being so	de ltar na
དེ་ལྟར་ནའང	see de ltar na yang. [mss]	de ltar na'ang
དེ་ལྟར་བ	thus	de ltar ba
དེ་ལྟར་བྱ	then you should do so	de ltar bya
དེ་ལྟར་བྱུང་བ	arise like that, stories of previous events as examples, parables	de ltar byung ba
དེ་ལྟར་བྱེད	do like that, do according	de ltar byed
དེ་ལྟར་མ་ཉན་ན	if you don't lissten in that way de ltar ma nyan na snod kha sbubs pa'i	de ltar ma nyan na
སྟེང་དུ་བཅུད་བླུགས་པ་དང་འདྲ	otherwise you will be like an upside-down pot on which liquid is being poured	steng du bcud blugs pa dang 'dra
དེ་ལྟར་མ་བྱས	if not, or else	de ltar ma byas
དེ་ལྟར་མ་བྱས་ན	otherwise	de ltar ma byas na
དེ་ལྟར་མ་བྱས་པ	fail to do that	de ltar ma byas pa
དེ་ལྟར་མ་ཡིན	that is not the case, it isn't like that	de ltar ma yin
དེ་ལྟར་མ་ཡིན་པར	instead of	de ltar ma yin par
དེ་ལྟར་མིན	That's wrong!	de ltar min
དེ་ལྟར་ཡང	even though, though it is like that	de ltar yang
དེ་ལྟར་ཡིན་ཏེ	it is just so	de ltar yin te
དེ་ལྟར་ཡིན་མོད་ཀྱི	though indeed it is like that	de ltar yin mod kyi
དེ་ལྟར་ལགས་སོ	so be it de ltar shes pa'i phan yon bstan pas mjug	de ltar lags so
བསྡུ་བ	to summarize by showing the benefit of understanding in this way de ltar shes pa'i phan yon bstan bas mjug	bsdu ba
དེ་ལྟར་བཤད་པ་ནི	this explanation	de ltar bshad pa ni
དེ་ལྟར་བསམ་ཙ་ན	while so thinking	de ltar bsam tsa na
དེ་ལྟས	since it is like that, in view of that, depending on that, looked at that way	de ltas
དེ་སྟ་བུ་བྱུང་བའི་སྡེ	narratives of former events as examples [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis - 12 divisions of the teachings]	de sta bu byung ba'i sde
དེ་སྟེ	[arch] after having done/ doing that, there, namely that, precedes specification (depends on context 'on te	de ste
དེ་ཐད	for that, also therefore	de thad
དེ་ཐོག་ཏུ	from the start, in that state itself	de thog tu
དེ་མཐའ	round that	de mtha'
དེ་མཐར	Afterwards	de mthar
དེ་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཤེས	seeing this I came to know, from this I saw	de mthong ste shes
དེ་དག	plural	de dag
དེ་དག་ཀུན	all those	de dag kun
དེ་དག་གི	their	de dag gi
དེ་དག་གི་སྟེང་ན	above these	de dag gi steng na
དེ་དག་གིས	all these	de dag gis
དེ་དག་སྔོན་འགྲོའི་ཆོས་ཡིན་པ	the preliminaries are just preliminary	de dag sngon 'gro'i chos yin pa
དེ་དག་ནི	these, they	de dag ni
དེ་དག་རྣམས་ནི	for them	de dag rnams ni
དེ་དག་མི་ལྡན	when this is not the case	de dag mi ldan
དེ་དག་མཚན་མར	in consequence of that	de dag mtshan mar
དེ་དང	w that, that and	de dang
དེ་དང་ཆ་འདྲ་བའ	corresponding to that	de dang cha 'dra ba'
དེ་དང་ཉེ་བ་ལྔ	associated to {mtshams med lnga} [TRS 29:5]	de dang nye ba lnga
དེ་དང་དུས་མཉམ་དུ	simultaneously with that	de dang dus mnyam du
དེ་དང་དེ	that particular 1291	de dang de
དེ་དང་དེ་ལྟར་སྤྱོད་པ	behaving in the manner most suitable to the situation	de dang de ltar spyod pa
དེ་དང་དེ་དག	in all aspects	de dang de dag
དེ་དང་དེ་དག་ལ	in all aspects	de dang de dag la
དེ་དང་དེར	that particular	de dang der
དེ་དང་དེར་འཚམས་པ	exactly in accordance with	de dang der 'tshams pa
དེ་དང་འདྲ་བ	like that, equal to that, in harmony with that	de dang 'dra ba
དེ་དང་འདྲ་བར	it is the same for; x {'o na khyod kyi sems kyang de dang 'dra bar gsungs pa} well, it is the same for your mind, said [the Buddha]	de dang 'dra bar
དེ་དང་ཕྲད་པ	meeting w/ encountering that	de dang phrad pa
དེ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from that	de dang bral ba
དེ་དང་འཚམ་པ	in conformity with it	de dang 'tsham pa
དེ་དང་འཚམས་པ	in accord w that	de dang 'tshams pa
དེ་དང་ཧ་ལམ་འདྲ་བ	nearly like that	de dang ha lam 'dra ba
དེ་དུ	there	de du
དེ་དུས	at that time, then, at this time	de dus
དེ་དུས་དེ་ནས	from that time on	de dus de nas
དེ་དུས་དེ་མིན	later words contradicting earlier	de dus de min
དེ་དུས་སུ་འོས་པ	as suited the occasion	de dus su 'os pa
དེ་དེ	exactly that	de de
དེ་དེ་བཞིན	de ga rang red [Dngos yod kyi gnas tshul gang gsungs pa de de bzhin no]	de de bzhin
དེ་དེ་བཞིན་ནེ	well, it is just so, exactly	de de bzhin ne
དེ་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ	“This is as it should be,”	de de bzhin no
དེ་དེག	those	de deg
དེ་དོན	for that	de don
དེ་བདེན་པར་ངེས་སམ	is it quite certain that this is true?	de bden par nges sam
དེ་འདྲ	like that, thus, such, similar, so, like that	de 'dra
དེ་འདྲ་མཐོང	seen like that, seen so	de 'dra mthong
དེ་འདྲ་ནང་བཞིན	as before, all the same, likewise	de 'dra nang bzhin
དེ་འདྲ་ཕངས	such a loss, so great a damage	de 'dra phangs
དེ་འདྲ་བ	such, so	de 'dra ba
དེ་འདྲ་བ་ཞིག	[1] like that	de 'dra ba zhig
དེ་འདྲ་མ	like that	de 'dra ma
དེ་འདྲ་མ་བྱས	if not, or else	de 'dra ma byas
དེ་འདྲ་མ་བྱས་ན	otherwise	de 'dra ma byas na
དེ་འདྲ་སོང་ཙ་ན	hence	de 'dra song tsa na
དེ་འདྲར་ཡོང་ཙམ	because of that, because it was like that	de 'drar yong tsam
དེ་འདྲོག	[arch] right away, as soon as that happened	de 'drog
དེ་ལྡན	possessing/ like that	de ldan
དེ་ན	there, in that place, therein, also, thereafter, after that, thence	de na
དེ་ན་ལོ་ཤས་བཞུགས་པ	[he] stayed there a few years	de na lo shas bzhugs pa
དེ་ནས	from there/ that/ your end, then, after that, now (new paragraph	de nas
དེ་ནས་དུས་རེ་ཞིག་གི་ཚེ	then on occasion	de nas dus re zhig gi tshe
དེ་ནས་དྲིས་བཞིན	as [you] wrote from there	de nas dris bzhin
དེ་ནས་འདི་སྐད	then for instance, then like this, then so	de nas 'di skad
དེ་ནས་ནམ་ཞིག	A little later,	de nas nam zhig
དེ་ནས་ནི	previous and later actions mtshams sbyor gyi phrad,...Mi gzhan btang bar ma zad de nas ni kho rang yang phyin song	de nas ni
དེ་ནས་ཕན་ཆད	henceforth, henceforward	de nas phan chad
དེ་ནས་ཕྱག་དྲིས་གནང་དོན་བཞིན	as [you] wrote from there	de nas phyag dris gnang don bzhin
དེ་ནས་བྱུང	it arose from that	de nas byung
དེ་ནས་བརྩམས་ཏེ	beginning, from here, from that time	de nas brtsams te
དེ་ནས་བཟུང	since that time, from then onwards	de nas bzung
དེ་ནས་ཡང	once again, following that, then, afterwards	de nas yang
དེ་ནི	as for that	de ni
དེ་ནི་སྔོན	Long ago,	de ni sngon
དེ་ནུབ	that night	de nub
དེ་རྣམས	those	de rnams
དེ་རྣམས་ནི	all of them / those	de rnams ni
དེ་རྣམས་སུ	with / at them	de rnams su
དེ་པ	one of that place, there, thither	de pa
དེ་པས་ཀྱང	even more than that	de pas kyang
དེ་པོ	well, excellent	de po
དེ་དཔེར་བྱས་ནས	taking this for a sample	de dper byas nas
དེ་ཕན་ཅད་མ་འགྲོ	do not go any further than that place	de phan cad ma 'gro
དེ་ཕན་ཆད	later assemblies after that, yul dus nges can de phan chad,...Yul de phan chad kho tsho'i yin,...Dus tshod de phan chad 'das pa'i dus yin	de phan chad
དེ་ཕོ	rooster	de pho
དེ་ཕོ་མཚའ་ལུ	red cock	de pho mtsha' lu
དེ་ཕྱིན་ཆད	since, since that time, ever since	de phyin chad
དེ་ཕྱིན་ཆད་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	the lineage of transmission from this point	de phyin chad kyi brgyud pa
དེ་ཕྱིར	on that account; for that reason	de phyir
དེ་འཕྲལ	immediately, at once, as soon as	de 'phral
དེ་འཕྲལ་དུ	at once	de 'phral du
དེ་འཕྲལ་མར	at once, right away, immediately de 'phral brtsams ma brtags bsams tshul	de 'phral mar
དེ་ལྟར་བྱེད་ན་སྐྱོན་ཆ་ཡོང	if its right away without thinking like that, it'll have faults	de ltar byed na skyon cha yong
དེ་འཕྲོས	the remainder/ part remaining, after that time [Dngul gzhung 'bul lag 'byor byung zhing, de 'phros rnams khyod tshos nyar na 'grig]	de 'phros
དེ་བ	cock, swertia marginata schrenk., medicinal herb	de ba
དེ་བ་ས་ར	learned singhalese nun 1292	de ba sa ra
དེ་བའི་ཁར	in the hope of	de ba'i khar
དེ་བར	bar mtshams of space or time	de bar
དེ་བས	especially, particularly, even more, more, still more than that, consequently, in this way, thus	de bas
དེ་བས་ཀྱང	even more than that	de bas kyang
དེ་བས་ན	therefore, hence, thus, so then, accordingly, therefore, consequently, now then, so	de bas na
དེ་བས་བཟུང	from that time	de bas bzung
དེ་བི	devi, goddess	de bi
དེ་བི་ཀོ་ཏ	ancient city in india	de bi ko ta
དེ་བོར་ལ་ཐོང	let that alone, give it up	de bor la thong
དེ་བྱར	acting in some way	de byar
དེ་བྱིངས	de min spyi byings, ... Der yod zhing ga'i of 100 just five la sngo tshal btab &, de byings all bza' 'bru btab	de byings
དེ་བྱིངས་བོད་ལ་ཡོད་པ་རེད	the rest are in Tibet	de byings bod la yod pa red
དེ་བྱུང་གི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationship of origination	de byung gi 'brel ba
དེ་བྱུང་ན	when this happens	de byung na
དེ་བྱུང་འབྲེལ	connection of this arising from that	de byung 'brel
དེ་དབང་དུ	according to that	de dbang du
དེ་དབང་དུ་གཞིག་ན	if we go according to that	de dbang du gzhig na
དེ་འབའ་ཞིག	that alone	de 'ba' zhig
དེ་འབྱུང་འབྲེལ	relation of origination [ggd]	de 'byung 'brel
དེ་འབྲེལ	connected with that	de 'brel
དེ་མ	one of that place, one of those	de ma
དེ་མ་ཁད	except for that	de ma khad
དེ་མ་ལྕོགས་ན	if not able to do that	de ma lcogs na
དེ་མ་ཉིད	not that, not the same	de ma nyid
དེ་མ་ཉིད་དུ	immediately, at once	de ma nyid du
དེ་མ་གཏོགས	except for that	de ma gtogs
དེ་མ་ཐག	at once	de ma thag
དེ་མ་ཐག་རྐྱེན	immediately preceding condition, antecedent factor	de ma thag rkyen
དེ་མ་ཐག་ཏུ	immediately	de ma thag tu
དེ་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་དགོས་བྱུང	ha d to leave immediately/ at once	de ma thag tu 'gro dgos byung
དེ་མ་ཐག་པ	immediate, subsequent	de ma thag pa
དེ་མ་ཐག་པའི་རྐྱེན	{de ma thag rkyen} immediate preceding cause, resultant condition; resultant condition	de ma thag pa'i rkyen
དེ་མ་ཐག་པའི་ལམ	quick path	de ma thag pa'i lam
དེ་མ་ཐག་པར	in the very moment of, as soon as	de ma thag par
དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད	subsequent mind	de ma thag yid
དེ་མ་ཐག་ལམ་སང	'Bod mi 'byor ba'i dus de ma thag tu phyin pa yin,...Skabs dang po'i las grva grub pa'i de ma thag tu skabs gnyis pa'i las 'go btsugs pa yin	de ma thag lam sang
དེ་མ་ཐུག་ཏུ	abrupt	de ma thug tu
དེ་མ་ཐོངས	irregardless (?)	de ma thongs
དེ་མ་འདྲོག	[arch] right away, as soon as	de ma 'drog
དེ་མ་ཡིན་པ	besides, other than that	de ma yin pa
དེ་མ་ཡིན་ལ་དེར་འཛིན་པ	the reification of what things seem to be but are not	de ma yin la der 'dzin pa
དེ་མ་ལགས	not that, not the same	de ma lags
དེ་མན་ཆད	below/ after that	de man chad
དེ་མིན	and, as well as, other, another, moreover, besides, else, otherwise, unless, besides that	de min
དེ་མིན་འདི་མིན	not in the proper place	de min 'di min
དེ་མིན་རྣམས	those excepted	de min rnams
དེ་མིན་པས	that not being so, being without it	de min pas
དེ་མིན་ཞུ་རྒྱུ་མེད	I have nothing else to say	de min zhu rgyu med
དེ་མུ	de'i ngang dang, de lta nang bzhin [Mi gsod me rgyag gi rtsing spyod gang byas de mur gtan nas bzod sgom mi rung,...Tshul min gyi bsam blo de mur bzhag nas legs bcos ma btang na rang nyid la phan p...	de mu
དེ་མུར	de mu	de mur
དེ་མོ	necessity	de mo
དེ་མོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	bod kyi rgyal po Demo Rinpoche, the regent of Tibet	de mo rin po che
དེ་མོ་ལ	de mo pass [between kong po and spo yul]	de mo la
དེ་མོ་ཧོ་ཐོག་ཐུ	blo bzang thub bstan 'jigs med rgya mtsho	de mo ho thog thu
དེ་ཙ་ན	at the, that time	de tsa na
དེ་ཙམ	as/ so much/ many/ as that, that much/ many	de tsam
ཨས	- so many]	as
དེ་ཙམ་གལ་མི་ཆེའོ་སྙམ་པ	are not that important de tsam gyis chog par 'dzin pa la chags pa - desire / attachment to grasping just that as enough	de tsam gal mi che'o snyam pa
དེ་ཙམ་ལྔ	the five subtle elements	de tsam lnga
དེ་ཙམ་ཉིད་ན	in this same condition	de tsam nyid na
དེ་ཙམ་དུ་མ་ཟད	not only that, furthermore, moreover, in addition; but that's not all,	de tsam du ma zad
དེ་ཙམ་དུ་ཟད་པ	just that, only that [kind]	de tsam du zad pa
དེ་ཙམ་ན	then, at that time, at about that time	de tsam na
དེ་ཙམ་མ་བྱུང་ན	failing this, . . .	de tsam ma byung na
དེ་ཙམ་མི་ཐོབ	expression to signify that you will not get so much	de tsam mi thob
དེ་ཙམ་ཡང	even such simple things	de tsam yang
དེ་ཙམ་ལས	x {'dir de tsam las ma spros} Here I will not elaborate further than this on these [topics].	de tsam las
དེ་ཙུག	so, in that manner, thus	de tsug
དེ་ཙུག་བྱོས་ཤིག	do it so	de tsug byos shig
དེ་ཙུག་ལགས	how is it, how is that, what is it like	de tsug lags
དེ་ཙོ	those	de tso
དེ་རྩིས	accordingly, in keeping w	de rtsis
དེ་ཚུག	1) like that; 2) {de gang	de tshug
དེ་ཚུལ	in this regard	de tshul
དེ་ཚེ	at this time	de tshe
དེ་ཚོ	those, those	de tsho
དེ་ཚོས	by those who	de tshos
དེ་མཚུངས	in the same way, similarly, like that in the same manner, resemblance, concerning the sense faculties	de mtshungs
དེ་མཚུངས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	sense powers, powers similar to that [rang 'bras dbang shes kyi extraordinary support or predominant condition du gyur pa ma yin pa, in sleep the five senses mig rna sna lce lus]	de mtshungs kyi dbang po
དེ་མཚུངས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	sense form, form similar to that	de mtshungs kyi gzugs
དེ་མཚུངས་བྱེད	do in the same/ a similar way	de mtshungs byed
དེ་འཚམས་ནས	LKh: syn {de mjug la}. [mss]	de 'tshams nas
དེ་འཛིན	acceptance	de 'dzin
དེ་ཝ	{de ba} deva +? today med tree?	de wa
དེ་ཝི	Skt. For {lha mo}	de wi
དེ་ཝི་ཀོ་ཏི	lha mo mkhar zhes pa ste, bod lho phyogs rtsa ri'i gnas kyi ming	de wi ko ti
དེ་ཞག	these days, recently the other day, the past few days	de zhag
དེ་ཞག་འདིར་འབྱོར་བ་རེད	[he] came here recently	de zhag 'dir 'byor ba red
དེ་བཞིན	Syn {de mtshungs} that itself, that [pronounced]. like that, likewise, similarly, in the same way, so, also, further; further; correspondingly, in like manner, in like fashion, analogously	de bzhin
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	Suchness, Skt. tattva. Synonym for emptiness or the 'nature of things,' dharmata, it can also be used to describe the unity of dependent origination and emptiness	de bzhin nyid
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི	purity of the essential condition of emptiness, SA chos dbyings ye shes	de bzhin nyid kyi
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	essence of suchness [=emptiness of emptiness]	de bzhin nyid kyi ngo bo nyid
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	offering of suchness	de bzhin nyid kyi mchod pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of suchness; meditative absorption of suchness	de bzhin nyid kyi ting nge 'dzin
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དག་པ	1 of 3 dag pa gsum de bzhin nyid kyi mtshan nyid du yod pa exist as authentic suchness/ the definition of suchness / the characteristics of suchness	de bzhin nyid kyi dag pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the essential nature	de bzhin nyid kyi ye shes
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཏིང	chos sku, stong pa, 'chi kha bar do 1294	de bzhin nyid ting
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	contemplation of reality with rnam thar gsum de bzhin nyid tha dad pa'i rang bzhin ma	de bzhin nyid ting nge 'dzin
ཡིན་པ	not of a nature different from suchness de bzhin nyid tha dad pa'i rang bshin ma	yin pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དུ་རོ་གཅིག་པ	of 1 taste w suchness	de bzhin nyid du ro gcig pa
གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	suchness that is naturally pure from the beginning	gyis rnam par dag pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་བདག	dharmadhatu, the true/holy nature, nature/ lord of suchness	de bzhin nyid bdag
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ནི་རྣམ་བདུན	the 7 kinds of suchness	de bzhin nyid ni rnam bdun
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure suchness	de bzhin nyid rnam par dag pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་སྣང་བ་ཉིད	the appearance of suchness	de bzhin nyid snang ba nyid
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དབྱིངས	space of suchness de bzhin nyid dmigs kyi bsam gtan {mtshan ma med pa'i zhi gnas so}	de bzhin nyid dbyings
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དམིགས་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom that perceives suchness	de bzhin nyid dmigs ye shes
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དམིགས་བསམ་གཏན	meditation on suchness [from bhumi 1 to 10 bodhisattvas dharmadhatu empty meaning in every bhumi meditating with ye shes kyi khyad par gyis rim par]	de bzhin nyid dmigs bsam gtan
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ལ་དམིགས་པ	perceive/ focus on / conceive of suchness	de bzhin nyid la dmigs pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་གསུམ	1) {nam mkha' 'gog pa gnyis}. 2) Jamgön Kongtrül's def: {chos nyid la khyad par med kyang chos can rten tha dad pa'i sgo nas gsum du gzhag pa ste, 'di ltar chos dge ba rnams kyi de bzhin nyid, chos...	de bzhin nyid gsum
དེ་བཞིན་སྙིང་པོ	tathagatagarbha	de bzhin snying po
དེ་བཞིན་དུ	in the same way	de bzhin du
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་བདེན་སྲིད	it might be true after all	de bzhin du bden srid
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ་ཉིད	existing like that, resting in suchness, existing as suchness	de bzhin du gnas pa nyid
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ཡོད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	soexisting emptiness, emptiness existing as suchness	de bzhin du yod pa'i stong pa nyid
དེ་བཞིན་ནོ	well, it is just so, exactly	de bzhin no
དེ་བཞིན་གནས	resting/ existence like that/ as suchness	de bzhin gnas
དེ་བཞིན་གནས་པ	resting/ existence like that/ as suchness	de bzhin gnas pa
དེ་བཞིན་བྱའོ	{phu bo gsungs na bdag gis de bzhin bya'o} if my older brother asks me to do this, I will act accordingly	de bzhin bya'o
དེ་བཞིན་བྱེད་པ	to do accordingly	de bzhin byed pa
དེ་བཞིན་བླ་མ་དགེ་འདུན་ཏེ	the teacher is also the sangha	de bzhin bla ma dge 'dun te
དེ་བཞིན་མིན	not accordingly, differently	de bzhin min
དེ་བཞིན་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	because such an entity does not exist, because it does not have that, because suchness would	de bzhin med pa'i phyir
བེ་ནོན	existent	be non
དེ་བཞིན་དམིགས་པ	seeing things as they are	de bzhin dmigs pa
དེ་བཞིན་འོངས་པ	tathagata	de bzhin 'ongs pa
དེ་བཞིན་ཡིན་ན	if it is like this	de bzhin yin na
དེ་བཞིན་ཡོང་གིས	equally	de bzhin yong gis
དེ་བཞིན་ཡོད	so exist, likewise exist, exist as suchness	de bzhin yod
དེ་བཞིན་ཤོག	let it be so de bzhin gshegs mkhyen bla med go 'phang - the unsurpassable level of knowledge of the tathagatas de bzhin gshegs mkhyen bla med go 'phang - the unsurpassable level of the knowledge of...	de bzhin shog
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་དགེའི་ཞི་གནས	Shamatha that delights the tathagatas. The shamatha state at the first bhumi which is embraced with insight into emptiness	de bzhin gshegs dge'i zhi gnas
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་དགེའི་བསམ་གཏན	the good meditation of the tathagatas	de bzhin gshegs dge'i bsam gtan
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་དགྱེས་ཞི་གནས	Shamatha that delights the tathagatas. The shamatha state at the first bhumi which is embraced with insight into emptiness	de bzhin gshegs dgyes zhi gnas
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་ཉིད	buddhahood	de bzhin gshegs nyid
ཏཐགཏ	hood	tathagata
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	tathagata, intrinsically inhering buddhahood, the very thrust of being towards being, he who is gone, those who have come through, gone to nirvana, gone like that, gone like those other ones, Trans...	de bzhin gshegs pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ལྔ	the five tathagatas	de bzhin gshegs pa lnga
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the tathagata de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi sku gsung thugs kyi gsang chen gsang ba 'dus pa shes bya ba brtag pa'i rgyal po	de bzhin gshegs pa rjes su dran pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་དྲི་མེད་ཟླ་འོད	name of a buddha	de bzhin gshegs pa dri med zla 'od
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་དྲུག	the five buddhas + Vajrasattva / Vajradhara; [TRS 137-4] 5chn	de bzhin gshegs pa drug
པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	{de bzhin gshegs pa bdun gyi sngon gyi smon lam gyi khyad par rgyas pa theg pa chen po'i mdo} de bzhin gshegs pa bdun gyi sngon gyi smon lam gyi khyad par rgyas pa theg	pa chen po'i mdo
རྣམ་གྲངས	{de bzhin gshegs pa rnams kyi sangs rgyas kyi zhing gi yon tan brjod pa'i chos kyi rnam grangs} [tr by the indian khenpos dzi na mi tra and d' na sh'i la &, the tr monk ye shes sde and zhus pa'i md...	rnam grangs
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་མ་བྱུང་བ	where no tathagata has come de bzhin gshegs pa ma byung ba i sku la	de bzhin gshegs pa ma byung ba
ངན་སེམས་ཀྱིས་ཁྲག་ཕྱུང་བ	to draw blood from the body of a tathagata with evil intent de bzhin gshegs pa ma byung ba'i sku la	ngan sems kyis khrag phyung ba
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་བཞི	the four tathagatas	de bzhin gshegs pa bzhi
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཟླ་འོད་དྲི་མེད	the tathagata Da" drime	de bzhin gshegs pa zla 'od dri med
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་རིགས་ལྔ	tathagatas of the five families	de bzhin gshegs pa rigs lnga
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ལ་ངན་སེམས་ཀྱིས	by maliciousness to a tathagatha de bzhin gshegs pa la ngan sems kyis	de bzhin gshegs pa la ngan sems kyis
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཨི་སྙིང་པོ	the tathagata essence, [buddha nature, enlightened essence]	de bzhin gshegs pa i snying po
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཨི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	the ten powers of a tathagata, {stobs bcu}	de bzhin gshegs pa i stobs bcu
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི	sarvatathagata guhya mahaguhya kosaksa yuanidhadi pamahaprata pasadhana tantra jnanascaryad yuticakro, 1 of 5 mtshams med pa	de bzhin gshegs pa'i
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐུ	a statue of the Buddha de bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems kyi	de bzhin gshegs pa'i sku
ཁྲག་ཕྱུང	causing a tathagata to bleed de bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems kyis	khrag phyung
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་འཁོར་བཞི	the four retinues of the tathagata [male and female getsuls &, gelongs]	de bzhin gshegs pa'i 'khor bzhi
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the Tathagata's Dharma Wheel	de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos kyi 'khor lo
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	the tathagata's dharmakaya	de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos sku
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	a stupa for the Tathagata	de bzhin gshegs pa'i mchod rten
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཉིང་པོ	tathagata essence, tathagatagarbha de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying rje chen po	de bzhin gshegs pa'i nying po
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	tathagatagarbha/ "buddha nature" [sutra context] potential/ heart essence for attaining (state of) suchness [Dzogchen context] potential/ heart essence that consitutes attaining (state of) suchness	de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	possessing the tathagata-essence	de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po can
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	the 10 powers of a tathagata,	de bzhin gshegs pa'i stobs bcu
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་བསྟན་པ	the tathagata's teaching [of scripture and realization] de bzhin gshegs pa'i thugs rje chen po so	de bzhin gshegs pa'i bstan pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the tathagata [ultimate vehicle of mahayana]	de bzhin gshegs pa'i theg pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་དྲིལ་བུ	kind of ghanta/ bell de bzhin gshegs pa'i rnam pa thams cad the omniscience of the tathagatas de bzhin gshegs pa'i rnam pa thams cad	de bzhin gshegs pa'i dril bu
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མི་འཇིག་པ་བཞི	the four fearlessnesses of a tathagata	de bzhin gshegs pa'i mi 'jig pa bzhi
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མིང་གི་སྐུ	the body of what is called a tathagata	de bzhin gshegs pa'i ming gi sku
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཙན་དཔེ	the major and minor marks of a tathagata [sangs rgyas kyi sku gzugs mtsan bzang so gnyis dang dpe byad brgyad cu] de bzhin gshegs pa'i mtshan gyi rnam	de bzhin gshegs pa'i mtsan dpe
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཚན་དཔེ	the major and minor marks of a tathagata	de bzhin gshegs pa'i mtshan dpe
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གཟུགས་སྐུ	the tathagata's rupakaya/ form-body [appearing from the viewpoint of those to be tamed sangs rgyas kyi sku bzhin lag can gyi rnam par shar ba]	de bzhin gshegs pa'i gzugs sku
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གཟུངས་ལྔ	[TRS 80-1] de bzhin gshegs pa'i yi ge brgya pa Hundred Syllables of the Tathagatas de bzhin gshegs pa'i ye shes kyi snying po - Wisdom essence of the tathagatas. Same as sugatagarbha de bzhin gsheg...	de bzhin gshegs pa'i gzungs lnga
བ་བཅུ	the single power of wisdom of the tathagata, being divided into 12? de bzhin gshegs pa'i ye shes kyi stobs gcig nyid mkhyen yon gyi sgo nas dbye	ba bcu
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་རིགས	the tathagata family	de bzhin gshegs pa'i rigs
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ས	the level of a tathagata 1297	de bzhin gshegs pa'i sa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྲས	son of the tathagata, bodhisattva de bzhin gshegs pa'i gsang ba bsam gyis	de bzhin gshegs pa'i sras
མི་ཁྱབ་པ་བསྟན་པ	{de bzhin gshegs pa'i gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyab pa bstan pa} de bzhin gshegs pa'i gsang ba bsam gyis	mi khyab pa bstan pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	{zhi gnas lhag mthong zung du 'brel ba'o}	de bzhin gshegs pa'i bsam gtan
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པོ	transcendent one	de bzhin gshegs po
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་བའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	the dharmakaya of the tathagata	de bzhin gshegs ba'i chos sku
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་བའི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the tathagata	de bzhin gshegs ba'i bstan pa
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་རིགས་སྐྱེ་བ	birth in the family of the tathagatas	de bzhin gshegs rigs skye ba
དེ་བཞིན་བཤེགས་པ	tathagata	de bzhin bshegs pa
དེ་བཞིན་བཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	buddha nature, tathagatagarbha	de bzhin bshegs pa'i snying po
དེ་ཟུག	SA de tsug	de zug
དེ་འུར	on any day, at some future time	de 'ur
དེ་འོག	Some afterwards,	de 'og
དེ་ཡང	furthermore, moreover, namely, that is to say,	de yang
དེ་ཡང་གོང་དུ	in the past	de yang gong du
དེ་ཡང་བསྡུ་ན	if one shortens it still more, if it is further abridged	de yang bsdu na
དེ་ཡང་མ་རེད	neither	de yang ma red
དེ་ཡན	also that, preceding it	de yan
དེ་ཡན་ཆད	also that, preceding it	de yan chad
དེ་ཡན་ཆད་ནི	up to this point	de yan chad ni
དེ་ཡི་རྒྱུ	caused by that	de yi rgyu
དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོ	as a result of having such an existence	de yi ngo bo
དེ་ཡི་སྟོབས	on the strength of that	de yi stobs
དེ་ཡི་དོན་གྱིས	due to that fact	de yi don gyis
དེ་ཡི་འོག་ཏུ	below that	de yi 'og tu
དེ་ཡིན	this is it	de yin
དེ་ཡིན་ན	if it is so	de yin na
དེ་ཡིན་པ	that which discloses its selfnature	de yin pa
དེ་ཡིན་པའང་སྲིད	after all it might be this man, it might be he	de yin pa'ang srid
དེ་ཡིན་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཆེ་བ	the	de yin pa'i sangs rgyas pa'i che ba
གྲེཨཏནེསས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེནླིགྷཏེནམེནཏ་ཐཏ་དིསཅློསེས་ཨིཙ་སེལཕ༹	nature	greatness of enlightenment that discloses its self
དེ་ཡིན་པས	that being so	de yin pas
དེ་ཡིན་ཚ་ན	when/ since that is so	de yin tsha na
དེ་ཡིས་ཆར་ཡང་མི་ཕོད	does not match/ measure up to/ equal even a fraction of that	de yis char yang mi phod
དེ་ཡོ	all [those]	de yo
དེ་རག	nye char, kha sang	de rag
དེ་རང	that [1] itself	de rang
དེ་རང་ཡིན	that is just the thing, exactly, to be sure, exactly so, it is just so	de rang yin
དེ་རང་ཡིན་པ	agree exactly with	de rang yin pa
དེ་རང་ལས	only, just	de rang las
དེ་རིང	now, this day, today, today	de ring
དེ་རིང་ཁ་རྩང	yesterday	de ring kha rtsang
དེ་རིང་ཁ་སང	yesterday	de ring kha sang
དེ་རིང་ཉིད་ནས	today	de ring nyid nas
དེ་རིང་ནངས་པ	{de ring nangs pa gnyis kyi de ring} today rather than tomorrow	de ring nangs pa
དེ་རིང་ནས་བཟུང	from today onwards	de ring nas bzung
དེ་རིང་ཕན་ཆད	before and after today	de ring phan chad
དེ་རིང་བྱུང་བ	fresh occurrence, today's outcome, produce, experience	de ring byung ba
དེ་རིང་སང	nowadays	de ring sang
དེ་རིང་སང་ཉིན	1) today and tomorrow; 2) tomorrow	de ring sang nyin
དེ་རིང་སོང་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཟད	later our wealth will be gone	de ring song la longs spyod zad
དེ་རུ	into that, there, into that place, thither, that way, then, at that time	de ru
དེ་རེད་ནི་རེད	something that is not properly done (w neg	de red ni red
དེ་ལ	in this regard/ that is to say ..	de la
དེ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	because of/ depending on that	de la brten nas
དེ་ལ་ཐོག་མར	before that, prior to that,... [mss]	de la thog mar
དེ་ལ་དེར་སྟོན	display the (means to the being to be tamed	de la der ston
དེ་ལ་དེར་སྣང	display the (means to the being to be tamed	de la der snang
དེ་ལ་འདིར	this is, here is; to introduce the contents of a book / topic	de la 'dir
དེ་ལ་གནས	just stay with that	de la gnas
དེ་ལ་བྱ་བ	acting in some way	de la bya ba
དེ་ལ་མིང་ཅི་འདོགས	what is it called	de la ming ci 'dogs
དེ་ལ་སྩོགས་པ	[arch] that and so forth	de la stsogs pa
དེ་ལ་སོགས	that and so forth	de la sogs
དེ་ལ་སོགས་པ	that and so forth [gcig gtso bor bton nas de byings sogs sgras bsdus pa]	de la sogs pa
དེ་ལན་དེ་འཇལ	tshur byed stangs la dpags nas give such and such an answer	de lan de 'jal
དེ་ལའང	furthermore	de la'ang
དེ་ལས	rather; than that, from that	de las
དེ་ལས་ཀྱང	more than that	de las kyang
དེ་ལས་ཀྱང་གཞན	other than that 1298	de las kyang gzhan
དེ་ལས་ཅིར་འགྱུར་ཞེ་ན	"If you ask: 'What will come from that?...'" or "If you ask: 'What is the consequence of that?...'" E.g., R75: 321.1 [mss]	de las cir 'gyur zhe na
དེ་ལས་ལྡང་སྟེ་འཆིའོ	one can die only after having emerged from these states	de las ldang ste 'chi'o
དེ་ལས་ལྡོག	contrary to [that]	de las ldog
དེ་ལས་ལྡོག་སྟེ	the opposite, opposite	de las ldog ste
དེ་ལས་ལྡོག་པའི	opposed to that, contrary to that	de las ldog pa'i
དེ་ལས་དབྱེ་ན	if 1 divides/ classifies that	de las dbye na
དེ་ལས་གཞན	rather, on the other hand, oppositely	de las gzhan
དེ་ལས་གཞན་ཀུན	for all others	de las gzhan kun
དེ་ལས་གཞན་དུ	contrary to this, conversely	de las gzhan du
དེ་ལས་གཞན་ན	"in other than that..." [mss]	de las gzhan na
དེ་ལས་གཞན་པ	other than [that]	de las gzhan pa
དེ་ལས་གཞན་ཡང	besides that, apart from that	de las gzhan yang
དེ་ལས་གཟོབས	beware of it, be on your guard against it	de las gzobs
དེ་ལས་བཟློག་པ	the opposite of that	de las bzlog pa
དེ་ལས་ཡག་བ	better	de las yag ba
དེ་ལས་གཤན་དང་གཤན་མེད	other than that and not other	de las gshan dang gshan med
དེ་ལས་ལྷག་པའི	greater	de las lhag pa'i
དེ་ལས་ལྷག་མ	remaining portion of it	de las lhag ma
དེ་ལུགས་ཀྱིས	act in accordance with them	de lugs kyis
དེ་ལུང་དེ་ཉིད	the true meaning of the scriptures	de lung de nyid
དེ་ལོ	that year	de lo
དེ་ཤོ	a tribe in tibet	de sho
དེ་ཤོ་ལེགས	son of ae sho legs and rmu lcam bra ma na, 11th king of Tibet 1 of the sa'i legs drug	de sho legs
དེ་གཤེགས	tathagata, thus-gone	de gshegs
དེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	tathagatagarbha/ "buddha nature" [sutra context] potential/ heart essence for attaining (state of) suchness [Dzogchen context] potential/ heart essence that consitutes attaining (state of) suchness	de gshegs snying po
དེ་གཤེགས་སྲས་བཅས	Tathagatas and their sons. The buddhas who have gone (gata) to the state of dharmata suchness (tatha). Their sons are the bodhisattvas on the ten bhumis	de gshegs sras bcas
དེ་བཤིན	likewise, further, like that = de bzhin	de bshin
དེ་སོགས	having these just listed as chief examples, and so forth, and the like	de sogs
དེ་སྲིད	until then, till/ during that time [ji	de srid
སྲིད་དེ་སྲིད	as long as-- for so long--]	srid de srid
དེ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	for so long a time	de srid kyi bar du
དེ་སྲིད་དུ	for that long, [as long as ...] that long de gsum gyi ngo bo dngos brgyud kyi bla	de srid du
མ་རྣམས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ	I prostrate to those three lineage gurus of authentic essence	ma rnams la phyag 'tshal lo
དེ་ཧ	One of the eight sub-continents	de ha
དེ་ལྷག	more than that, better than that	de lhag
དེང	these days, nowadays, today	deng
དེང་སྐབས	nowadays	deng skabs
དེང་གི་ཆ	at present, as it is now	deng gi cha
དེང་གི་ཆར	at present, as it is now	deng gi char
དེང་གི་དུས	present time or age	deng gi dus
དེང་དུས	present time, nowadays, these days, current/ modern [times]	deng dus
དེང་དུས་ཀྱི	current	deng dus kyi
དེང་དུས་ཀྱི་ཁང་པ	modern house	deng dus kyi khang pa
དེང་དུས་ཀྱི་གནས་སྟངས	the current situation	deng dus kyi gnas stangs
དེང་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	modern society	deng dus kyi spyi tshogs
དེང་དུས་ཅན	modern, up to date	deng dus can
དེང་དུས་དང་མཐུན་པ	modern, up to date	deng dus dang mthun pa
དེང་འདིར	even now; at this very moment; here and now	deng 'dir
དེང་ནས	from today, from now on, henceforth	deng nas
དེང་ནས་བཟུང	from now on	deng nas bzung
དེང་ཕན	before/ after the present time	deng phan
དེང་ཕན་ཆད	before/ after the present time	deng phan chad
དེང་ཕྱིན་ཆད	henceforth	deng phyin chad
དེང་བ	go [away], disperse, be gone	deng ba
དེང་རྩིས་ཆེ་ལ་གནའ་རྩིས་ཆུང་བ	placing more stress on the present than the past	deng rtsis che la gna' rtsis chung ba
དེང་རྩེ	midday	deng rtse
དེང་རྩེན	steng thog na	deng rtsen
དེང་ཡོད	what exists now, current	deng yod
དེང་རབས	modern times, contemporary age	deng rabs
དེང་རབས་ཀྱི་བཟོ་བཅོས་རིང་ལུགས	modern revisionism	deng rabs kyi bzo bcos ring lugs
དེང་རབས་ཅན	modern	deng rabs can
དེང་རབས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	be modernized	deng rabs can du 'gyur
དེང་སང	nowadays, these days, SA ding sang, at present, for the present, these days, nowadays	deng sang
དེང་སང་མེད་པ	extinct	deng sang med pa
དེང་སང་ལྷ་རྗེ	physician of the present day	deng sang lha rje
དེངས	['dong ba!] disperse, go [away], be gone	dengs
དེངས་པ	go, go away, old, stale, worn, dissolve	dengs pa
དྭེངས	(not in DAS)	dwengs
དེད	to drive (a herd), to herd, eliminate	ded
དེད་དོ	escaped	ded do
དེད་འདྲེན	a large number	ded 'dren
དེད་འདྲེན་ཆེན་པོ	a really large number	ded 'dren chen po
དེད་ནས	chased	ded nas
དེད་པ	{'ded pa} to banish/ eliminate; to follow/ pursue/ chase; isc. to trace back	ded pa
དེད་པའི་དབང་གིས	by being pursued, by being driven, by being herded, by being steered, by being guided	ded pa'i dbang gis
དེད་དཔོན	1) guide seafaring. 2) captain	ded dpon
དེད་དཔོན་མཁས་པ	capable steersman, competent guide	ded dpon mkhas pa
དེད་དཔོན་འཁོར་ལོ	sovereign, ruler	ded dpon 'khor lo
དེད་དཔོན་དགའ་བའི་སྡེ་ཞེས	a seafarer by the name of Priyasena ded dpon rgya mtsho'i gling nas lag stong	ded dpon dga' ba'i sde zhes
དུ་ཕྱིར་འོང་བ	a seafaring merchant	du phyir 'ong ba
རེཏུརྣིང་ཧོམེ་ཨེམཔཏཡ	handed from an island of jewels	returning home empty
དེད་དཔོན་ནོར་ཆེན	Captain Mahadhana	ded dpon nor chen
དེད་དཔོན་ནོར་ཆེན་ཞེས་པ	a captain called Mahadhana	ded dpon nor chen zhes pa
དེད་དཔོན་བཟང་པོ	Depon Zangpo; who requested the Buddha not to pass into nirvana	ded dpon bzang po
དེད་དབོན	helmsman, pilot	ded dbon
དེན་དུས	currently, these days	den dus
དེན་པོ	(A1) kyal ka; 2) The'u rang	den po
དེན་ཕན	henceforth, henceforward	den phan
དེན་མག་ལུང་པའི་མི་དང་སྐད་ཡིག	danish	den mag lung pa'i mi dang skad yig
དེན་རླུང	pushing down (part of kumbhaka)	den rlung
དེབ	book; manual	deb
དེབ་ཀྱི་བཟོ་ལྟ་དང་ཚད	format	deb kyi bzo lta dang tshad
དེབ་ཀྱི་ཤོག་ལྷེ	book paper/ pages	deb kyi shog lhe
དེབ་ཀློག་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	bookmark	deb klog mtshams kyi rtags
དེབ་བཀློགས	read a book	deb bklogs
དེབ་སྐྱེལ	registration	deb skyel
དེབ་སྐྱེལ་གཏང་ཡིག	registered letter	deb skyel gtang yig
དེབ་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	register, record	deb skyel byed
དེབ་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་པ	register	deb skyel byed pa
དེབ་ཁང	chancery, government office	deb khang
དེབ་འཁྱོལ་མ	don gnad gang rung deb thog tu 'khod yod pa rnams	deb 'khyol ma
དེབ་ཆུང	leaflet	deb chung
དེབ་གཏེར	annals, chronicle, records	deb gter
དེབ་ཐེར	anal, chronicle, records, documents, records, catalogues, registers, lists, books	deb ther
དེབ་ཐེར་དཀར་པོ	White Annals	deb ther dkar po
དེབ་ཐེར་མཁན	keeper of the archives, librarian	deb ther mkhan
དེབ་ཐེར་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Ocean Annals written by Drag Gon Shabdrung, brag dgon zhabs drung	deb ther rgya mtsho
དེབ་ཐེར་སྔོན་པོ	Blue annals (by {'gos klo tsa ba gzhon nu dpal} ['gos lo ye bzang rtse ba gzhon nu dpal, 8th fire monkey to earth dog, dge lugs ma dar gong gi grub mtha' so so dang, brgyud pa'i lo rgyus, bstan rts...	deb ther sngon po
དེབ་ཐེར་དམར་པོ	Red Annals	deb ther dmar po
དེབ་པ	accounts cast into one place or shape, poultice, cataplasm	deb pa
དེབ་སྤུས་ལེགས	good quality/ deluxe/ hard cover book	deb spus legs
དེབ་བྲིས	write a book	deb bris
དེབ་སྦྱོར	composition, syntax	deb sbyor
དེབ་ཚོང་ཁང	book seller	deb tshong khang
དེབ་མཛོད་ཁང	library	deb mdzod khang
དེབ་ཡིག	deb tu bcings pa'i yi ge 1300	deb yig
དེབ་ཤོག	book paper/ pages	deb shog
དེབ་གསལ	deb tu 'khod pa,...Sngon byung lo rgyus deb gsal bden min dbye 'byed brtag dpyad bzab nan byed dgos /deb gsal sgrigs chug gzhung khra'i nang du gsal zhing lam lugs dang yang mthun pa	deb gsal
དེབས་ཡུ	handle of an awl	debs yu
དེམ་ཙི	a small, narrow bridge, footbridge	dem tsi
དེམ་ཚི	a small, narrow bridge, footbridge	dem tshi
དེམ་ཚེ	(CH chu rab brgal yul rkang stegs a small, narrow bridge, footbridge	dem tshe
དེའང	de la . . . - in this regard/ that is to say . . .	de'ang
དེའི	of that	de'i
དེའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས	therefore	de'i rkyen gyis
དེའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་ཨེ་ཡིན	perhaps because of that	de'i rkyen gyis e yin
དེའི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	at tha very moment / instant	de'i skad cig ma
དེའི་སྐབས	1) in that [future] case; 2) at that [past] time	de'i skabs
དེའི་སྐབས་སུ	at that occasion	de'i skabs su
དེའི་སྐོར	about that, that cycle	de'i skor
དེའི་སྐོར་ལ	of that order, with respect to that, also of that subject	de'i skor la
དེའི་སྐྱེས་བུའི་བསྡུ་བ	from two to 7 divisions abbreviated, grong du 'gro ba = grong 'gro rnam dbye gnyis pa bsdus pa	de'i skyes bu'i bsdu ba
དེའི་གོང་དུ	before that	de'i gong du
དེའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	therefore, on that account	de'i rgyu rkyen
དེའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	the reason is this	de'i rgyu mtshan
དེའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་གང་ཡིན་ཞེ་ན	Why?; why is this you might ask	de'i rgyu mtshan gang yin zhe na
དེའི་སྒང་ལ	1) dus tshod de'i thog la; 2) De'i skabs la	de'i sgang la
དེའི་ངང་ནས	during that	de'i ngang nas
དེའི་ངང་ལ	at that time, in this condition, during this state	de'i ngang la
དེའི་ངོ་བོར་སྣང་བ	manifestations/ appearances of that nature, manifest as the essence of that, appear in the sur-	de'i ngo bor snang ba
དེའི་ཆེ	at that time	de'i che
དེའི་ཆོས་ཅན	possessed of that virtue, its attributes, of that quality	de'i chos can
དེའི་མཆེད	his brother (in reference to king)	de'i mched
དེའི་འཇུག་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three entrances to the liberating path	de'i 'jug pa rnam gsum
དེའི་རྗེས་ལ	then de'i rjes la thob pa shes bya mtha' yas pa'i	de'i rjes la
ཡུལ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ལམ	the postmeditation of that is the path of wisdom, the perceiver of limitless objects	yul can gyi ye shes kyi lam
དེའི་རྗེས་སུ	later, after	de'i rjes su
དེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པའི་དགེ་འདུན་ཡོད་པ	the existence of monastic order [one of the {gzhan 'byor lnga - five events occurring through others, five circumstantial endowments)	de'i rjes su 'jug pa'i dge 'dun yod pa
དེའི་ཉིན་པར	on that day	de'i nyin par
དེའི་གཉེར་ཅི་ཡོད	what was the meaning of that?	de'i gnyer ci yod
དེའི་སྙན་དུ	to his praise, to his hearing	de'i snyan du
དེའི་སྟེང་དུ	in addition to that {tshad ma} reasoning	de'i steng du
དེའི་སྟེང་དུ་བཞག	relax in it	de'i steng du bzhag
དེའི་སྟེང་ན	in addition to that {tshad ma}reasoning {'thad pa},-{rigs pa} - at that time ???	de'i steng na
དེའི་ཐོག་ལ	in addition to	de'i thog la
དེའི་དམ་ཆོས་གསུང་པ	the presence of the Dharma	de'i dam chos gsung pa
དེའི་དུས་ན	At the time, de'i dus yongs su mya ngon las mi 'da' ba at that time not having attained complete nirvana de'i dus yongs su mya ngon las mi 'da' ba'i	de'i dus na
དེའི་དུས་ལ	at that time	de'i dus la
དེའི་དུས་སུ	It was at this time that	de'i dus su
དེའི་དོན་གྱིས	for that reason	de'i don gyis
དེའི་དོན་དུ	for that purpose/ reason	de'i don du
དེའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཡིན་པ	is the nature of that, is his ego	de'i bdag nyid yin pa
དེའི་ནང་ན	within/ among	de'i nang na
དེའི་ནང་ནས	from out of these	de'i nang nas
དེའི་གནས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to that place	de'i gnas su 'gro ba
དེའི་ཕར་ལ	beyond	de'i phar la
དེའི་ཕྱི་ཉིན་ལ	on the following day	de'i phyi nyin la
དེའི་ཕྱིར	because of that/ this; for that/ this reason . . .	de'i phyir
དེའི་ཕྱིར་དུ	for this purpose	de'i phyir du
དེའི་ཕྱིར་ན	because of that/ this; for that/ this reason . . .	de'i phyir na
དེའི་བར་ལ	on the way,	de'i bar la
དེའི་དབང་གིས	swayed by these	de'i dbang gis
དེའི་མིང་ཡང་མེད	such a thing does not exist	de'i ming yang med
དེའི་མོད་ལ	at that time, during that time, the moment after	de'i mod la
དེའི་ཚུལ	that principle	de'i tshul
དེའི་ཚེ	at that time, then	de'i tshe
དེའི་ཚེ་ན	at that moment	de'i tshe na
དེའི་མཚན་མོ	in that night	de'i mtshan mo
དེའི་རྫས	requisites for this purpose	de'i rdzas
དེའི་གཞི་ལས	based thereon	de'i gzhi las
དེའི་འོག་ཏུ	after that	de'i 'og tu
དེའི་འོག་མ	the one following after that, the second in turn, one below or under another person, subordinate, inferior	de'i 'og ma
དེའི་འོག་ལ	under that 1301	de'i 'og la
དེའི་ལས་ཀྱིས	by those actions de'i las ci yin dge slong rnams kyis zhus	de'i las kyis
དེའི་ལས་ནི	This is the karma that gave rise to all that occurred:	de'i las ni
དེའི་ཤམ་དུ	under it, underneath that	de'i sham du
དེའི་ཤུལ་དུ	in the meanwhile, while that (was going on)	de'i shul du
དེའི་གཤམ	beneath it, under it	de'i gsham
དེའི་གཤི་ལས	from the nature of that, naturally	de'i gshi las
དེའི་ས་པ	someone on that particular stage	de'i sa pa
དེའི་སང	the day after	de'i sang
དེའུ	1) hill ?; 2) [arch] near quick, 1 day, some future time, small, ? quick	de'u
དེའུ་དུས་སུ	meanwhile	de'u dus su
དེའུ་འབུར	mound, hill	de'u 'bur
དེའུ་མིན་ན	cung zad min na,...Me mda' kha shor nas de'u min na mi la phog song	de'u min na
དེའུ་མིན་ན་ཕོག	did hit him almost	de'u min na phog
དེའུ་མིན་ན་ཤི་སོང	almost died de'u dmar dge bshes bstan 'dzin phun	de'u min na shi song
དེའུ་དམར་ཟབ་རྒྱས་ཆོས་གླིང	in the 12th rabjung by de'u dmar dge bshes bstan 'dzin phun tshogs in mdo khams go 'jo'i gser kha ru chag founded dvags po bka' brgyud monastery	de'u dmar zab rgyas chos gling
དེའུ་ཚིག་ཙམ	but for that	de'u tshig tsam
དེའུ་ར	little, almost, one day, some future time	de'u ra
དེའུ་རེ	cung zad tsam re'am, tog tsam re,...De'u re min na ga-yang sar lhung song	de'u re
དེར	Thereafter,	der
དེར་རྟེན	therefore, so, thereupon, hence	der rten
དེར་བརྟེན	therefore, because of that	der brten
དེར་ཐལ	so far so good	der thal
དེར་འདུས	gathering there	der 'dus
དེར་འདུས་པ་ཡིན	will be included in it	der 'dus pa yin
དེར་སྣང་བའི་སེམས་ཙམ	mind-only appearing as that/ then	der snang ba'i sems tsam
དེར་ཕྱིན	went there	der phyin
དེར་བས་སོ	no more than just that	der bas so
དེར་མ་ཟད	furthermore, not only that	der ma zad
དེར་འཛིན	fixation	der 'dzin
དེར་འཛིན་གྱི་རྐྱེན	fixating condition	der 'dzin gyi rkyen
དེར་ཞེན་གྱི་བདེན་པར་རྟོག་པ	conceptions of true existence attached to that, attachments at that time conceiving of true existence	der zhen gyi bden par rtog pa
དེར་ཟད་དོ	no more than just that	der zad do
དེར་ཡོད	who were present there	der yod
དེར་ཤར	appear as them	der shar
དེར་སོང	gone thither	der song
དེར་སོང་ན	if it comes to that point	der song na
དེར་སོང་མོད་པས	when he had gone thither	der song mod pas
དེར་སླེབས་ཙ་ན	in the event of arrival there, while arriving	der slebs tsa na
དེར་གསལ	as mentioned, as stated therein, according to that	der gsal
དེར་གསལ་ལ་དེར་འཛིན་མེད་པ	while acknowledging what is, do not hold it as that	der gsal la der 'dzin med pa
དེས	1) by/ because (of that; 2) that will do	des
དེས་ཀོ	[arch] des ni	des ko
དེས་ཆོག	that is enough, that will do	des chog
དེས་རྗེས་སུ་ཟིན་པར་འཇུག་པ	by that beginning to follow/ being accepted	des rjes su zin par 'jug pa
དེས་ན	consequently	des na
དེས་ན་དེའི་ཕྱིར	that then, on that very account then	des na de'i phyir
དེས་ནི་ཟད་བྱས་རྒྱལ་བ	the victorious ones who had exhausted that, as for Suraha buddha the exhaustion producing victorious one	des ni zad byas rgyal ba
དེས་པ	my lord, Suraha buddha, fine, brave, noble, chaste, peaceful, gentle one, great gentleness, of excellent nature	des pa
དེས་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	noble birth	des pa skyes pa
དེས་པ་ཉིད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	speak gently/ nobly	des pa nyid du smra ba
དེས་པ་འདྲེན་པ	lead gently the leader Suraha buddha	des pa 'dren pa
དེས་པའི་རང་བཤིན་ཅན	having a noble/ gentle nature	des pa'i rang bshin can
དེས་པས་ཞུས་པ	{des pas zhus pa} [one vol tr Indian Khenpo dzi na mi tra &, he tr monk ye shes sde etc. and zhus pa]	des pas zhus pa
དེས་བ	therefore	des ba
དེས་མ་ཚད	not only that	des ma tshad
དེས་མ་ཟད	Syn {des ma tshad}	des ma zad
དེས་ཚབ་རུང	it may be replaced by this	des tshab rung
དེས་ལེགས	that is good	des legs
དེས་ཤེས་གཏིང་ནས་རྙེད་པ	because of that attaining total knowledge	des shes gting nas rnyed pa
སེནཏེནཅེ	ending particle	sentence
དོ་ཀར་ཁ	light blue	do kar kha
དོ་ཀེ	hair lock/ style w luxuriant locks neatly on the crown of the head	do ke
དོ་ཀེར	hair lock/ style w luxuriant locks neatly on the crown of the head, thor tshugs, thor cog 1302	do ker
དོ་ཀེར་ཅན	person binding the hair like a gtsug tor	do ker can
དོ་སྐོར	ldab 'gyur, ldab gcig	do skor
དོ་ཁག	do bdag dang khag theg byed mkhan	do khag
དོ་ཁང	storehouse, warehouse	do khang
དོ་ཁུར	CM: sems khur ram do snang. E.g. spyi pa'i khe phan la do khur chen po byed pa. 2) MG: concern; do khur byed (va.), to show concern. [mss]	do khur
དོ་ཁུར་མི་བྱེད་པ	indifferent, unconcerned	do khur mi byed pa
དོ་འཁུར	concern sems khur, do snang	do 'khur
དོ་འཁུར་བྱེད་པ	be responsible for	do 'khur byed pa
དོ་འཁུར་མི་བྱེད་པ	indifferent, unconcerned	do 'khur mi byed pa
དོ་གར་ཁ	light blue	do gar kha
དོ་གལ	[gnad 'gag gam 'gan,...Dgra btul rgyal len thub min gyi do gal che skabs gzab nan byed gal che] importance, weight, important, weighty, emphasis, stress	do gal
དོ་གལ་ཆེ་བ	important	do gal che ba
དོ་གལ་ནན་ཏན	gal che zab nan	do gal nan tan
དོ་གལ་བྱེད	attach importance/ weight, emphasize, stress	do gal byed
དོ་དགོང	tonight	do dgong
དོ་དགོངས	this evening	do dgongs
དོ་རྒྱག་པ	do po bzo mkhan, do po rgyag mkhan	do rgyag pa
དོ་རྒྱབ	dgal bya'i do po tshad longs pa gnyis	do rgyab
དོ་ཅོག	all	do cog
དོ་ལྕགས	do po 'ching byed kyi lcags shan	do lcags
དོ་ཆས	do po'i chas ka [Khyed rang gis 'khyer rgyu'i ca lag rnams do chas yag po byed dgos]	do chas
དོ་ཆས་བྱེད	pack	do chas byed
དོ་ཆོད	go chod pa'am go 'pher ba, intelligent and useful [for]	do chod
དོ་མཉམ	an equal, a match	do mnyam
དོ་སྙོམས	equalize, balance	do snyoms
དོ་དམ	commission, charge, superintendence	do dam
དོ་དམ་ཆུས	surveillance unit	do dam chus
དོ་དམ་པ	supervisor, overseer, authorized person, manager	do dam pa
དོ་དམ་བྱེད	put in the charge of, to take care of, to supervise	do dam byed
དོ་དམ་བྱེད་རྒྱུར་བཅོལ	put under the guardianship/ trusteeship of	do dam byed rgyur bcol
དོ་དམ་བྱེད་པ	manage, run, supervise, superintend	do dam byed pa
དོ་དམ་འཛིན་སྲུང	operating, running	do dam 'dzin srung
དོ་དམ་འཛིན་སྲུང་བྱེད	operate/ run [business etc.]	do dam 'dzin srung byed
དོ་དམ་གཞན་བཅོལ	gzhan la mngags nas do dam byed du bcug pa	do dam gzhan bcol
དོ་དམ་སློབ་གསོ	management training	do dam slob gso
དོ་དམ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	government, administration	do dam u yon lhan khang
དོ་དོ་ཏན་ཏན	carefully and meticulously	do do tan tan
དོ་བདག	don gyi bdag po'am ngo ma	do bdag
དོ་བདག་དངོས	do bdag ngo ma,...Lam zur nas bsgrugs pa'i dngos po rnams brlag mkhan do bdag ngo ma'i lag tu bskyal ba	do bdag dngos
དོ་བདག་ལེ་འཁྲི	do bdag dang le thogs pa'i mi ngo ma	do bdag le 'khri
དོ་མདོ	[arch] night	do mdo
དོ་རྡོ་བ	see {do bsdo ba}; to be antagonistic	do rdo ba
དོ་བསྡུར	rivalry	do bsdur
དོ་བསྡོ	adversary, rival	do bsdo
དོ་བསྡོ་བ	adversaries, rivals	do bsdo ba
དོ་ན་དམ་པ	the ultimate	do na dam pa
དོ་ནན	careful and meticulous/ thorough, effective, exact, serious, precise	do nan
དོ་ནན་པོ	careful and meticulous/ thorough, effective, exact, serious, precise	do nan po
དོ་ནུབ	this very night	do nub
དོ་ནོན་པ	equalizing of the load	do non pa
དོ་སྣང	attention, interest, notice, observation, to notice	do snang
དོ་སྣང་ཅན	attentive, careful, observant	do snang can
དོ་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་གཞི	object of great attention, central attraction	do snang chen po byed gzhi
དོ་སྣང་བྱེད	pay attention to, have concern for, heed, note	do snang byed
དོ་སྣང་བྱེད་པ	to pay attention to	do snang byed pa
དོ་སྣང་བྱེད་འོས་པ	remarkable	do snang byed 'os pa
དོ་སྣང་མ་བྱེད་པ	disregard	do snang ma byed pa
དོ་སྣང་མེད	w/o attention, concern, awareness	do snang med
དོ་སྣང་མེད་པ	w/o attention, concern, awareness	do snang med pa
དོ་པ	helper, assistant, servant, person who loads animals	do pa
དོ་པོ	assistant, servant, load for a beast of burden, burden, load, pack, package, parcel, a load	do po
དོ་པོ་ཁུར་མཁན	porter	do po khur mkhan
དོ་པོ་རྒྱག	put together/ wrap up a package/ bundle do po brgyab nas mdzod khang la 'jug pa - having put together/ wrap up a package/ bundle put it in the store house	do po rgyag
དོ་པོ་འཇུག་ཁང	storehouse, warehouse	do po 'jug khang
དོ་པོ་ཕབ་པ	unload	do po phab pa
དོ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	pack	do po bzo ba
དོ་པོའི་འཁོར་ལོ	truck	do po'i 'khor lo
དོ་ཕོག	effect	do phog
དོ་ཕོག་གཏོང	have an effect, harm do phog btang mi chog pa'i gna' rdzas ancient things 1 ought not to harm	do phog gtong
དོ་ཕོག་བྱེད	have an effect [Gold]	do phog byed
དོ་ཕྲུག	orphan	do phrug
དོ་འཕུར་བྱས	about to fly	do 'phur byas
དོ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, power able to; 2) an herb	do ba
དོ་བ་རྫོང	a district in lho brag	do ba rdzong
དོ་བའི་ཏོག་མ	artichoke root, potato 1303	do ba'i tog ma
དོ་བའི་རྟོག་མ	root of artichoke, potato	do ba'i rtog ma
དོ་བོ	bags, loads, package	do bo
དོ་བླང་བ	to beg for food [ggd]	do blang ba
དོ་མ	tshab ma	do ma
དོ་མ་གལ	w/o attention/ concern	do ma gal
དོ་མ་ཡིན	unequalled, matchless	do ma yin
དོ་མི་ལྟ་བ	matchless, incomparable, unequaled	do mi lta ba
དོ་མིན	matchless, incomparable, unequaled	do min
དོ་མེད	matchless, incomparable, unequaled	do med
དོ་མོ	[arch] purpose	do mo
དོ་མོད	to day	do mod
དོ་བརྩོན	conscientiousness, seriousness	do brtson
དོ་བརྩོན་བྱེད	be conscientious, serious	do brtson byed
དོ་ཚད	do po gcig longs pa'i tshad	do tshad
དོ་འཚོང	sdeb tshong byed pa ste, tshong zog do po byas nas 'tshong ba	do 'tshong
དོ་ཞག	this day, presently, today	do zhag
དོ་ཞག་ལོ་དུས	* today, presently, within 1 or two days, soon	do zhag lo dus
དོ་ཟན	[arch] mching bu	do zan
དོ་ཟླ	comrade, consort, fellow, party in a lawsuit	do zla
དོ་ཟླ་མེད	w/o match, rival, comrade, balancing part	do zla med
དོ་ཟླ་མེད་པ	w/o match, rival, comrade, balancing part	do zla med pa
དོ་ཡ	pair	do ya
དོ་ཡ་གཅིག	one of the two of a pair, half a load	do ya gcig
དོ་ཡ་སྙོམ་ཆེད་དུ	in order to balance	do ya snyom ched du
དོ་ཡ་སྙོམ་པ	balance, match	do ya snyom pa
དོ་ཡ་མེད	w/o rival counterpart, balancing part	do ya med
དོ་ར	meeting ground, dancing ground; dance floor (in dance)	do ra
དོ་རེ	two each	do re
དོ་ལ་མདོ	{do la mdo} [place in chab mdo rdzong]	do la mdo
དོ་ལི	a palanquin/ sedan chair; palanquin; sedan chair, palanquin; a palanquin	do li
དོ་ལོ	ear-rings, sog byil gyi mjug rgyan turquoise like blue stone, necklace	do lo
དོ་ལོག	srin bu do log - centipede	do log
དོ་ལོག་ལྡབ་འགྱུར	'Bru tshva do log byas nas brje sgyur byed pa	do log ldab 'gyur
དོ་ཤཱ་ལཱ	shawl, wrapper	do shA lA
དོ་ཤལ	necklace, necklace	do shal
དོ་ཤལ་ཅན	one wearing a necklace, a residence of vaijayanta	do shal can
དོ་ཤལ་དོ་ཤལ་ཕྱེད	garlands and pendants	do shal do shal phyed
དོ་ཤལ་ཕྱེད་པ	half/ short necklace [khug pa med pa = 'phyang phrul, brang gi rgyan, se mo do]	do shal phyed pa
དོ་ཤི	shi la khad byas pa', cung min na shi ba,...Kho bo ni don 'di'i ched du do shir gyur	do shi
དོ་ཤི་དོ་ཆད	near death, about to be dead/ broken down	do shi do chad
དོ་ཤོ	Dosho, in Domey	do sho
དོ་སེ	now, at present	do se
དོ་གསོད	gsod du nye ba'am, de'u gsod dam, gsod la khad	do gsod
དོ་ཧ	the spontaneous spiritual songs of the Indian mahasiddhas and other accomplished masters	do ha
དོ་ཧ་སྐོར་གསུམ	Three Cycles of Dohas, T 2263	do ha skor gsum
དོ་ཧ་མཛོད	SK collection of siddhas's experiential songs, Doha-kosha	do ha mdzod
དོ་ཧ་ལས་ཀྱང	says in his Dohas:	do ha las kyang
དོ་ཧ་གསུམ	the three collections of dohas	do ha gsum
དབོ༹་བ	[arch] 1) vegetable dvo ba; 2) orphan	dvo ba
དབོ༹་རྫོང	dvo ba rdzong	dvo rdzong
དོག	[comp dog po} narrow, tight	dog
དོག་དཀྲི	skud pa'i dog pa lag par dkri ba'i ming	dog dkri
དོག་དོག	1) solid, bulky; 2) bump/ rise on a flat surface; 3) straightforward [speech]	dog dog
དོག་པ	confine(ment)/ restriction	dog pa
དོག་པ་མེད	not narrow, wide	dog pa med
དོག་པ་མེད་པ	doubtless	dog pa med pa
དོག་པའི་སྙེ་མ	flower shoots or buds	dog pa'i snye ma
དོག་པོ	confine(ment)/ restriction 1304	dog po
དོག་པོ་མི་འདུག	it is not narrow	dog po mi 'dug
དོག་པོར	densely, thickly	dog por
དོག་པོར་ཁྱབ་པ	filled up w	dog por khyab pa
དོག་མ	front, fore	dog ma
དོག་མེར་མེར	tangible yet indistinct	dog mer mer
དོག་མོ	1) narrow[ness] capsule, pod, bundle, skein; 2) the earth, front, fore; 3) dense, thick	dog mo
དོག་མོའི་ས	the solid earth	dog mo'i sa
དོག་ལེ	iron pan with a handle	dog le
དོག་ས	rong khung dog sa - a narrow gorge	dog sa
དོགས	1) vi. to have doubts, apprehensions, be suspicious to question. 2) [v+-] fears, apprehensions. 3) {dogs pa} fear, doubt, uncertainty, suspicion, concern, misgiving, worry	dogs
དོགས་སྐྲག	dogs pa dang skrag snang - ..	dogs skrag
དོགས་ཁ་པོ	mdogs kha po	dogs kha po
དོགས་འགས	scrupulously, doubtfully	dogs 'gas
དོགས་ཅན་མི་ཡན	dogs zon byed dgos pa'i mi	dogs can mi yan
དོགས་གཅོད	clarification of doubts, resolving uncertainty, review, to clarify, polish understanding, check it out, the act of removing or clearing up doubts, suspicions, uncertainty	dogs gcod
དོགས་གཅོད་པ	to cut through hesitation	dogs gcod pa
དོགས་གཅོད་བྱེད	clarify/ resolve [doubt/ uncertainty], review, polish understanding, check it out	dogs gcod byed
དོགས་ཆོད་པ	clear the fears/ doubts of mind	dogs chod pa
དོགས་མཐའ	limit of doubt	dogs mtha'
དོགས་དང་བྲལ་བ	fearless	dogs dang bral ba
དོགས་འདྲི	doubts and questions, questions in regard to doubt/ apprehensions/ suspicions	dogs 'dri
དོགས་འདྲི་བྱེད	ask questions in regard to doubt/ apprehensions/ suspicions	dogs 'dri byed
དོགས་འདྲོག	shrink w fear, dgos pa	dogs 'drog
དོགས་གནད	problem, question	dogs gnad
དོགས་གནས	point of doubt, question, problem, issue	dogs gnas
དོགས་སྣང	the tshom gyi snang ba'am bsam pa,...Las ka de ga 'dra byed min nga la dogs snang ma byung	dogs snang
དོགས་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, be in doubt/ suspicious, have fears/ misgivings, be afraid of/ apprehensive; 2) doubt, apprehension, misgiving, suspicion, fear	dogs pa
དོགས་པ་སྐྱེ	get suspicious, have doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa skye
དོགས་པ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	his suspicion aroused	dogs pa skyes te
དོགས་པ་ཁོང་ལོང	"an internally arising doubt" [mss]	dogs pa khong long
དོགས་པ་སྔོན་བསུ	sngon nas dogs zon gyi bsam blo gtong ba,...Dka' ba'i gnas la dogs pa sngon du bsus nas dgag sgrub byed pa	dogs pa sngon bsu
དོགས་པ་གཅོད་པ	removal of doubts	dogs pa gcod pa
དོགས་པ་ཆེར་སྐྱེས་སོ	became furiously jealous	dogs pa cher skyes so
དོགས་པ་འཆར	get suspicious, have doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa 'char
དོགས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	with apprehension dogs pa dang bcas phrag dog gi sems la	dogs pa dang bcas pa
དགའ་བ་མེད	a mind full of distrust and jealousy is never at ease	dga' ba med
དོགས་པ་འདྲི	doubts and questions, questions in regard to doubt/ apprehensions/ suspicions	dogs pa 'dri
དོགས་པ་བྱས	got suspicious, had doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa byas
དོགས་པ་བྱེད	get suspicious, have doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa byed
དོགས་པ་མེད	w/o doubt/ suspicion/ misgivings/ fears	dogs pa med
དོགས་པ་ཟ	get suspicious, have doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa za
དོགས་པ་ཟ་བ	suspect	dogs pa za ba
དོགས་པ་སློང	get suspicious, have doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa slong
དོགས་པ་བསལ་བ	clear doubts	dogs pa bsal ba
དོགས་པ་བསླངས	got suspicious, had doubts/ apprehensions/ fears/ misgivings	dogs pa bslangs
དོགས་པའི་ཉམ་ང་བ	dread of suspicion	dogs pa'i nyam nga ba
དོགས་པོ་མེད་པ	spacious, capacious	dogs po med pa
དོགས་དཔྱོད	clarification/ removal of doubts/ suspicion/ uncertainty, resolving uncertainty, review, clarify, polish, understanding, check it out	dogs dpyod
དོགས་དཔྱོད་མཁན	detective, secret agent	dogs dpyod mkhan
དོགས་དཔྱོད་པ	clarification/ removal of doubts/ suspicion/ uncertainty, resolving uncertainty, review, clarify, polish, understanding, check it out, detective, secret agent	dogs dpyod pa
དོགས་སྤོང	abandon doubts	dogs spong
དོགས་མེད	1) w/o doubt; 2) impossible [Yong srid pa'i skabs med pa [Mthong dogs med,...Bros dod med,...Mi gsod dogs med,...Khyi 'dzing yang khyi lpags ral dogs med]	dogs med
དོགས་ཚོམ	doubt	dogs tshom
དོགས་གཞི	point of doubt	dogs gzhi
དོགས་ཟོན	caution, vigilance, carefulness [dgra bor rtag tu dogs zon byas na nges med tshur rgol byung yang bya dka' byed gtad mi yong]	dogs zon
དོགས་ཟོན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	caution, vigilance, carefulness	dogs zon gyi rang bzhin
དོགས་ཟོན་གྱིས	beware of; {jag rkun khyi la dogs zon gyis} beware of bandits, thieves, and dogs	dogs zon gyis
དོགས་ཟོན་བགྱི་བ	to take care	dogs zon bgyi ba
དོགས་ཟོན་ཅན	mindful 1305	dogs zon can
དོགས་ཟོན་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད	arouse great[er]/ heighten 1's caution/ vigilance	dogs zon che bskyed
དོགས་ཟོན་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད་བྱེད	arouse great[er]/ heighten 1's caution/ vigilance	dogs zon che bskyed byed
དོགས་ཟོན་ཆེན་པོ	very cautious	dogs zon chen po
དོགས་ཟོན་པ	caution, vigilance, carefulness, lta rtog byed mkhan	dogs zon pa
དོགས་ཟོན་བྱེད	be cautious, take precautions, be vigilant, be on 1's guard	dogs zon byed
དོགས་ཟོན་བྱེད་པ	to be alert to danger	dogs zon byed pa
དོགས་ཟོན་ཚ་པོ	very cautious dogs zon g.yel med - unrelenting anxiety	dogs zon tsha po
དོགས་གཟབ	caution, vigilance, carefulness	dogs gzab
དོགས་གཟབ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	caution, vigilance, carefulness	dogs gzab gyi rang bzhin
དོགས་གཟབ་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད	arouse great[er]/ heighten 1's caution/ vigilance	dogs gzab che bskyed
དོགས་གཟབ་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད་བྱེད	arouse great[er]/ heighten 1's caution/ vigilance	dogs gzab che bskyed byed
དོགས་གཟབ་ཆེན་པོ	very cautious	dogs gzab chen po
དོགས་གཟབ་པ	caution, vigilance, carefulness, lta rtog byed mkhan	dogs gzab pa
དོགས་གཟབ་བྱེད	be cautious, take precautions, be vigilant, be on 1's guard	dogs gzab byed
དོགས་གཟབ་ཚ་པོ	very cautious dogs gzab g.yel med - unrelenting anxiety	dogs gzab tsha po
དོགས་ཡུལ	object of fear/ apprehension	dogs yul
དོགས་ཡོད་པ	involve the risk of, to have the danger of	dogs yod pa
དོགས་སེལ	clear away doubts	dogs sel
དོགས་སློང	become consumed by doubt	dogs slong
དོགས་སློངས་པ	raise scruple, doubt, make another apprehensive	dogs slongs pa
དོགས་གསལ་པ	clarification/ clearer of doubts, resolving uncertainty, review, clarify, polish understanding, check it out	dogs gsal pa
དོགས་གསལ་བ	remove doubt	dogs gsal ba
དོགས་གསལ་བྱེད	clarify/ resolve [doubt/ uncertainty], review, polish understanding, check it out	dogs gsal byed
དྭོགས་འཆར	doubt, suspicion, fear	dwogs 'char
དྭོགས་པ	doubt	dwogs pa
དྭོགས་པ་སྐྱེས་འོས་པ	fishy	dwogs pa skyes 'os pa
དྭོགས་པ་ཅན	suspicious	dwogs pa can
དྭོགས་པ་ཟ་བ	suspect	dwogs pa za ba
དྭོགས་པ་ཟ་འོས་པ	dubious	dwogs pa za 'os pa
དྭོགས་པ་ཡོད་པའི་མི	suspect	dwogs pa yod pa'i mi
དྭོགས་མེད	doubtless	dwogs med
དྭོགས་ཟོན	precaution, suspicion	dwogs zon
དྭོགས་ཟོན་ཅན	scrupulous, watchful	dwogs zon can
དོང	deep hole, pit, trench, ditch, depth, deepness, profundity, go, proceed, SA 'dong ba, pit in ground	dong
དོང་ཀ	karnikara, Pterospermum acerifolium, med. tree/ fruit	dong ka
དོང་རྐ	underground watercourse, well	dong rka
དོང་ཁ	kind of radish	dong kha
དོང་ཁའི་འབྲུ	medicinal fruit	dong kha'i 'bru
དོང་ཁུང	deep hole, well	dong khung
དོང་ག	karnikara, Pterospermum acerifolium, med. tree/ fruit	dong ga
དོང་ག་བ	cassia fistula, pterosperinum acerifolium, purging cassia	dong ga ba
དོང་གི་ཁར་འགྲེང་ནས	standing at the mouth of the pit	dong gi khar 'greng nas
དོང་གི་ནང	interior of a pit	dong gi nang
དོང་ཅན	deep, full of trenches	dong can
དོང་ཆུ	well water	dong chu
དོང་ཉལ	snake	dong nyal
དོང་རྙི	pit, trap	dong rnyi
དོང་རྙི་རྐོ	dig an animal pit trap	dong rnyi rko
དོང་སྟེ	having proceeded, SA song ste	dong ste
དོང་དུ་བྲུབས	[arch] dong du mnan pa	dong du brubs
དོང་འདྲེ	ghost	dong 'dre
དོང་འདྲེ་ནང་བཞིན	ghostly	dong 'dre nang bzhin
དོང་ནས་སྤྲུགས	to completely reverse, to completely reverse	dong nas sprugs
དོང་ནས་སྤྲུགས་པ	to dredge/ stir up (something) (from its depths)	dong nas sprugs pa
དོང་ནས་ཕྱིན་པ	to appear before [him]	dong nas phyin pa
དོང་པ	padlock, quiver	dong pa
དོང་པ་འཇུག་པ	put a padlock on	dong pa 'jug pa
དོང་པོ	tube, any hollow cylindrical vessel, bamboo tube	dong po
དོང་སྤྲུགས	to stir the depths, overturn; to stir the depths; 1) overturning the depths. 2) Shitro practice	dong sprugs
དོང་སྤྲུགས་རིགས་བསྡུས	the condensed family of Nrak dongtruk; [cf na rak dong sprugs]	dong sprugs rigs bsdus
དོང་སྤྲོགས	shaken from its depths	dong sprogs
དོང་བ	tube proceed, go, quiver	dong ba
དོང་བྲུབས	put in a hole	dong brubs
དོང་མེད	not deep, shallow	dong med
དོང་མོ	ldong mo ??	dong mo
དོང་ཙང་ཆུ	dong tshang river [in mtso sna rdzong, mon yul]	dong tsang chu
དོང་ཙེ	coin	dong tse
དོང་རྩེ	copper coin, SA dong tse	dong rtse
དོང་ཚེ	coin	dong tshe
དོང་ཟེ	wasp	dong ze
དོང་རུལ	btson khang full of sha rul 'bu rul sa rul etc.; hole nyam nga dri ma can	dong rul
དོང་ལ་བཅུག་པ	put in a hole	dong la bcug pa
དོང་ལམ	hole, tunnel, subway	dong lam
དོང་ལམ་དམག་འཐབ	tunnel/ underground warfare, subway	dong lam dmag 'thab
དོངས	'dong ba!, quiver	dongs
དོངས་པ	quiver	dongs pa
དོད	equivalent, substitute; alternative; replacement, fill-in, stand-in, alternate	dod
དོད་སྐད	alternate/ equivalent/ substitute term	dod skad
དོད་བསྐོས་པ	tshab bsko gzhag byas pa	dod bskos pa
དོད་སྒྲིལ	dod dngul du 'bebs pa	dod sgril
དོད་སྒྲིལ་སྤོམ་སྤྲོད	spom tshod kyi dod dngul sprod pa,...Lo 'khor gyi dgos 1306 cha tshang ma 'dod sgril spom sprod byed pa	dod sgril spom sprod
དོད་དངུལ	money instead of/ in recompense for something	dod dngul
དོད་ཐུབ	be able to substitute for	dod thub
དོད་དུ	as an equivalent/ substitute, in place of, instead of	dod du
དོད་པ	reproduced	dod pa
དོད་པའི་ཁམས	desire realm	dod pa'i khams
དོད་པའི་ལྷ	god of the desire realm	dod pa'i lha
དོད་པོ	1) substitute for, instead of; 2) shape, rnam pa etc. clearly depicted	dod po
དོད་པོར་བྱས	represented, acted as a representative	dod por byas
དོད་ཡོད་རྡོ་སོལ	bituminous/ soft coal	dod yod rdo sol
དོད་ཡོལ	smoke screen	dod yol
དོན་ཀུན	general welfare, public good, all benefits/ goals	don kun
དོན་ཀུན་གྲུབ	SA don grub	don kun grub
དོན་ཀུན་གྲུབ་པ	Siddartha	don kun grub pa
དོན་ཀུན་གྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	accomplish all goals/ benefits	don kun grub par byed pa
དོན་ཀུན་འགྲུབ་པ	accomplish all goals/ benefits	don kun 'grub pa
དོན་ཀུན་སྒྲུབ་པ	one who performs public service	don kun sgrub pa
དོན་ཀུན་རྟོགས	realize omniscience	don kun rtogs
དོན་ཀུན་སྣང་བ	experience omniscience, the appearance of all phenomena/ benefits	don kun snang ba
དོན་ཀུན་བྱེད	produce all goals / benefits	don kun byed
དོན་ཀུན་རྫོགས	all purposes are achieved	don kun rdzogs
དོན་ཀུན་རྫོབ	provisional meaning, requiring interpretation	don kun rdzob
དོན་ཀུན་ཤེས	be omniscient	don kun shes
དོན་བཀོད་པ	to establish the true meaning	don bkod pa
དོན་ལྐོག་གྱུར	hidden object [ggd]	don lkog gyur
དོན་ལྐོག་ན་མོ	"hidden" object [ggd]	don lkog na mo
དོན་བསྐོར་བ	among bskor ba'i rgyan, ornament showing bskor bya gcig gi gnas lugs, skor byed don gcig ming gi 1307 rnam grangs mi 'dra ba mang pos yang yang skyar zlos kyi tshul	don bskor ba
དོན་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	to realize true knowledge	don khong du chud pa
དོན་ཁྲིད	essential instruction; essential guidance text	don khrid
དོན་མཁར་མདའ	{don mkhar mda'} [place in 'phyongs rgyas rdzong where some Tibetan kings had bang so]	don mkhar mda'
དོན་འཁེལ	achieve 1's purpose/ aim/ goal, realize 1's hopes	don 'khel
དོན་གང	why?	don gang
དོན་གང་གིས	wherefore	don gang gis
དོན་གི་ལམ་རིམ་བེའུ་བུམ་སྔོན་པོ	Ultimate Graded Path Blue Lapis / Beryl Vase, composed by Geshe Potowa (Po to ba), 1031-1105, a great Kadampa Master	don gi lam rim be'u bum sngon po
དོན་གོ	comprehend	don go
དོན་གོ་བ	to understand, comprehend the meaning	don go ba
དོན་གོ་བར་ཟད	mere intellectual understanding	don go bar zad
དོན་གོ་བྱེད	intelligibility don goms pa can gyi dbang mngon tshad	don go byed
དོན་གྱི	ultimate/ actual/ true/ real; . . . of ultimate reality; in the ultimate sense	don gyi
དོན་གྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	the actual all-ground, ultimate alaya [bde gshegs snying po]	don gyi kun gzhi
དོན་གྱི་ཀླ་ཀློ	ultimate barbarians	don gyi kla klo
དོན་གྱི་སྐབས	ultimate refuge, occasion of the ultimate	don gyi skabs
དོན་གྱི་ཁོག་ཕུབ་པ	penetrate into the real import	don gyi khog phub pa
དོན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	brten pa lta bur snang ba'i chos te, eg a vase's being produced, impermanent, etc. and pretty and not pretty etc the subject's particular dharmas	don gyi khyad par
དོན་གྱི་གྱུད	tantra as the spiritual development of man	don gyi gyud
དོན་གྱི་དགོངས་པ	dynamic meaning	don gyi dgongs pa
དོན་གྱི་རྒྱན	in SE India the usual 35 don rgyan of speech	don gyi rgyan
དོན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	tantra as spiritual development	don gyi rgyud
དོན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	ultimate essence; essence in the ultimate sense	don gyi ngo bo
དོན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ་རིག་པ	awareness of the absolute essence	don gyi ngo bo rig pa
དོན་གྱི་དངོས	actual things	don gyi dngos
དོན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་འཚོལ་བ	investigation of actual things,	don gyi dngos po 'tshol ba
དོན་གྱི་དངོས་གཞི	main part of the chapter	don gyi dngos gzhi
དོན་གྱི་ཆ	objective factor in the object [ggd]	don gyi cha
དོན་གྱི་ཆ་རྣམས	all the meanings	don gyi cha rnams
དོན་གྱི་ཆ་རགས	general meaning	don gyi cha rags
དོན་གྱི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	prefix suffix and word comprising the meaning	don gyi 'jug tshul
དོན་གྱི་རྗེས་སུ	access by understanding the true meaning	don gyi rjes su
དོན་གྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	1 of 'jug pa rnam gsum	don gyi rjes su 'jug pa
དོན་གྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད	the mind in pursuit of truth	don gyi rjes su 'jug pa'i yid
དོན་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essential meaning, SA don snying	don gyi snying po
དོན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	real view	don gyi lta ba
དོན་གྱི་ཐོབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	profound certainty	don gyi thob pa chen po
དོན་གྱི་དོན	meaning of a meaning, real import, 1 of don rnam pa gsum	don gyi don
དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ	bdag po ngo ma'am gtso bo	don gyi bdag po
དོན་གྱི་མདོ	main point	don gyi mdo
དོན་གྱི་མདོར་དྲིལ	summary of the meaning	don gyi mdor dril
དོན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of objects/ the meaning	don gyi 'du shes
དོན་གྱི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	ultimate vajra and ghanta	don gyi rdor dril
དོན་གྱི་སྡེ	search through many things that have been heard and guard against collecting errors, 1 of the sde bzhi,	don gyi sde
དོན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁའ	sky in the ultimate sense (of the term/ word)	don gyi nam mkha'
དོན་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	the actual condition	don gyi gnas tshul
དོན་གྱི་རྣམ་བཅད	import of the meaning, meaning elimination [thd]	don gyi rnam bcad
དོན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	aspects of the meaning	don gyi rnam pa
དོན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	ultimate yoga	don gyi rnal 'byor
དོན་གྱི་རྣལ་མ	authentic state	don gyi rnal ma
དོན་གྱི་སྤྱི	general sense, ordinary meaning, common object	don gyi spyi
དོན་གྱི་བྱ་བ་བསྒྲུབ་པ	true accomplishment, accomplishment of the goal/ benefit	don gyi bya ba bsgrub pa
དོན་གྱི་དབང	ultimate empowerment	don gyi dbang
དོན་གྱི་དབང་རྟགས	the sign of the ultimate empowerment	don gyi dbang rtags
དོན་གྱི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་ན	from the perspective of reality, in terms of the ultimate/ the meaning /benefit	don gyi dbang du byas na
དོན་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་སྟོབས	the power of aspiration for the goal	don gyi smon lam gyi stobs
དོན་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	essence of the thesis	don gyi gtso bo
དོན་གྱི་རྫོགས	fulfills all aims	don gyi rdzogs
དོན་གྱི་གཞན་སེལ	the elimination of other of the ultimate	don gyi gzhan sel
དོན་གྱི་གཟན་སེལ	the elimination of other of the ultimate	don gyi gzan sel
དོན་གྱི་གཟུངས	true / ultimate dharani	don gyi gzungs
དོན་གྱི་འོག་མིན	Ultimate Akanishta. The realm of dharmakaya	don gyi 'og min
དོན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	actual clear light	don gyi 'od gsal
དོན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	True wisdom. The wisdom which is the unity of awareness and emptiness introduced through the fourth empowerment. actual wisdom, genuine pristine cognition, the ultimate / real wisdom; real knowledg...	don gyi ye shes
དོན་གྱིས་གོ་བ	understand by the meaning itself [mostly, w/o commentary]	don gyis go ba
དོན་གྱིས་རྟོགས་པ	to realize by implication, understood by implication [ggd]	don gyis rtogs pa
དོན་གྱིས་མི་ཟིན	not governed by the true meaning	don gyis mi zin
དོན་གྲགས་པ་ཉིད	the well-known meaning, the truth of opinion	don grags pa nyid
དོན་གྲུབ	achieve 1's purpose/ aim/ goal, realize 1's hopes, success	don grub
དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign proving the meaning	don grub kyi rtags
དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག་གཉིས	the two samayas that establish the goal	don grub kyi dam tshig gnyis
དོན་གྲུབ་པ	to accomplish one's pursuits	don grub pa
དོན་དགུ་པ	Adherents of the 9 categories	don dgu pa
དོན་དགོངས་པ་ཅན	possessing realization of the meaning	don dgongs pa can
དོན་འགངས་ཆེན	important meaning or object	don 'gangs chen
དོན་འགལ	oppositeness, factual, opposite meaning	don 'gal
དོན་འགྱུར	1) 'char can gyi las don and gnas tshul las newly 'gyur ba; 2) Skad rigs gcig gi don snying skad rigs gzhan zhig tu sgyur ba tending to the factual	don 'gyur
དོན་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཐེ་ཚོམ	among doubts, rang yul don mthun du grasping true blo skyed par byed pa'i w doubt, eg, is sound permanent or impermanent, mostly thinking impermanent]	don 'gyur gyi the tshom
དོན་འགྲུབ་གྲོལ་མ	Döndrub Drölma, Allaccomplishing Savioress	don 'grub grol ma
དོན་འགྲེལ	description	don 'grel
དོན་འགྲེལ་བ	elucidate the meaning, explain the meaning	don 'grel ba
དོན་འགྲེལ་རི་མོ	illustration, illustrated explanation	don 'grel ri mo
དོན་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	immense benefit, immense benefit	don rgya chen po
དོན་རྒྱན	ornaments of sense	don rgyan
དོན་རྒྱས་པ	extensive presentation [clear and detailed]	don rgyas pa
དོན་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད	be very useful	don rgyas par byed
དོན་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	exert a beneficial influence	don rgyas par byed pa
དོན་རྒྱུད	" meaning of tantric treatise"; tantra of meaning	don rgyud
དོན་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་པ	realization of the absolute lineage	don rgyud kyi rtogs pa
དོན་རྒྱུད་པ	ultimate lineage	don rgyud pa
དོན་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེ་བ	inner understanding	don rgyud la skye ba
དོན་སྒོ་ནས	by means of/ in terms of the meaning	don sgo nas
དོན་སྒོམ	to experience the state	don sgom
དོན་སྒྱུར	free translation	don sgyur
དོན་སྒྲ་ཇི་བཤིན་མ་ཡིན་པ	the meaning is not like the words	don sgra ji bshin ma yin pa
དོན་སྒྲ་ཇི་བཤིན་ཡོངས་རྟོག་ན	if 1 completely conceptualizes the meaning according to the words	don sgra ji bshin yongs rtog na
དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྟགས	proposition establishing true reason [rtags chos la mtshan mtshon gyi 'brel ba ma grub pa'i reason, eg, the dharmin sound is impermanent, because it is produced, sign proving the meaning]	don sgrub kyi rtags
དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	the benefit which can be accomplished	don sgrub tu yod pa
དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཐུབ་མཁན	efficacious	don sgrub thub mkhan
དོན་སྒྲུབ་པ	attain one's aim, obtain a blessing, gain one's object	don sgrub pa
དོན་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	prove the meaning, establish the goal / meaning/ benefit, practice the sense, be successful	don sgrub par byed pa
དོན་བརྒྱུད	actual transmission	don brgyud
དོན་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་འཕོ་བ	to transfer the wisdom of the actual transmission	don brgyud kyi ye shes 'pho ba
དོན་བརྒྱུད་གཏད་པ	to entrust the true lineage, real transmission	don brgyud gtad pa
དོན་བསྒྱུར	alter the meaning	don bsgyur
དོན་བསྒྱུར་ཡིན	diminished, changed	don bsgyur yin
དོན་ངེས་པ	true meaning, ascertain the object 1309	don nges pa
དོན་ངེས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ་ཉིད	uncertainty of the meaning / object	don nges pa ma yin pa nyid
དོན་ངོ་མ	fact, reality, truth	don ngo ma
དོན་དངོས	facts, reality, truth	don dngos
དོན་དངོས་ཐོག	in fact/ reality/ truth	don dngos thog
དོན་དངོས་མཚོན་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	realism	don dngos mtshon pa'i ring lugs
དོན་དངོས་སུ	actually, in fact	don dngos su
དོན་མངའ་བ	possess the meaning	don mnga' ba
དོན་མངོན་རྟོགས	completely realize the meaning, the path of preparation	don mngon rtogs
དོན་མངོན་དུ་བྱ	to realize an aim	don mngon du bya
དོན་ལྔ	[TRS 105-4]; the 5 vital organs heart, liver, kidney, spleen, lungs; the five [sense] objects, {gzugs}, {sgra}, {dri}, {ro}, {reg bya}, the five solid organs, the five viscera	don lnga
དོན་ལྔ་པོ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter into/ engage w the five sense objects	don lnga po la 'jug pa
དོན་ཅན	1) MG: meaningful, having purpose/ significance. 2) DAS: = don ldan i) meaningful, useful, profitable, expedient. ii) enjoying an advantage. iii) having a certain sense. [mss]	don can
དོན་ཅི	what's the use of it?	don ci
དོན་ཅི་ཡོད	what's the use, why	don ci yod
དོན་གཅིག	synonym[ous], 71	don gcig
དོན་གཅིག་གི་ཚིག	synonym	don gcig gi tshig
དོན་གཅིག་ཉིད་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter into the single meaning	don gcig nyid la 'jug pa
དོན་གཅིག་ན་ཡང་མ་རྨོངས	it has the same goal but it is free from all confusion	don gcig na yang ma rmongs
དོན་གཅིག་པའི་མཐའ	limitation of single identity	don gcig pa'i mtha'
དོན་གཅིག་མིང་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས	synonymity [ggd]	don gcig ming gi rnam grangs
དོན་གཅིག་ལ་མིང་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས	equivalent and synonymous [ggd]	don gcig la ming gi rnam grangs
དོན་གཅིག་ལས་མ་འདས་པ	not go beyond the single meaning	don gcig las ma 'das pa
དོན་གཅིག་གསལ་བྱེད	ornament explaining by 1 gsal byed bya ba'i rnam grangs du ma'i sgo nas gsal bya don gcig gi gnas lugs gsal bar byed pa, among gsal byed kyi rgyan	don gcig gsal byed
དོན་གཅོག་ཁང	office	don gcog khang
དོན་གཅོད	1) official [usu sent to another locality]; 2) representatives of the Dalai Lama in different areas of India	don gcod
དོན་གཅོད་ཁང	office, bureau, bureau office	don gcod khang
དོན་གཅོད་པ	1) las don resolve/ decide; 2) Las don resolver, decider, establisher	don gcod pa
དོན་གཅོད་ལས་ཁུངས	office/ bureau of official [usu sent to another locality]/ representatives of the Dalai Lama in different areas of India	don gcod las khungs
དོན་བཅུ	ten topics	don bcu
དོན་ཆུང	{don re chung} has been of little use	don chung
དོན་ཆུང་བ	having little meaning	don chung ba
དོན་ཆེ་བ	great value, preciousness	don che ba
དོན་ཆེད་ཕྱིར	for the benefit of	don ched phyir
དོན་ཆེན	great, vast objective; great, vast objective, important matter, affair	don chen
དོན་ཆེན་འགག	crucial point	don chen 'gag
དོན་ཆེན་སྒྲུབ་པའི་གནས	a unique chance to accomplish something meaningful	don chen sgrub pa'i gnas
དོན་ཆེན་ཉིད	that which brings about the great aim	don chen nyid
དོན་ཆེན་པོ	great/ vast objective, important matter don chen po mthong ba yid la byed pa apprehension seeing the great objective	don chen po
དོན་ཆེན་པོར་འགྱུར་བ	be a great objective, be an important matter	don chen por 'gyur ba
དོན་ཆེན་ལེགས་རྟོགས	realize an excellent great point	don chen legs rtogs
དོན་ཆོས	real property; to exist objectively [ggd]	don chos
དོན་འཆུགས་པ	mistaken aim	don 'chugs pa
དོན་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	authentic sense don ji lta bar ming du mngon par zhen	don ji lta ba
པའི་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	conceptualization attached to the ultimate nature as names	pa'i rnam par rtog pa
དོན་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	what ultimately is so	don ji bzhin pa
དོན་ཇི་བཤིན་གྱི་དོན	the meaning as it is	don ji bshin gyi don
དོན་མཇལ་བ	understand the meaning	don mjal ba
དོན་འཇལ་བ	don shes par byed pa	don 'jal ba
དོན་རྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	express a meaning	don rjod par byed pa
དོན་བརྗོད	express/ tell the meaning	don brjod
དོན་བརྗོད་སྙན་ངག	epic/ narrative poem	don brjod snyan ngag
དོན་བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	express/ tell the meaning	don brjod par byed pa
དོན་ཉན	(Khampa dialect) "good enough" (RT)	don nyan
དོན་ཉམས་པ	failure, ill-success, decrease of interest or importance	don nyams pa
དོན་ཉིད	messages	don nyid
དོན་ཉིད་རྣམ་སྦྱང	to realize all goals	don nyid rnam sbyang
དོན་ཉིད་ཡིན	it is precisely the meaning of	don nyid yin
དོན་ཉུང་བ་བྱ་བ་ཉུང་བ	having few desires and things	don nyung ba bya ba nyung ba
དོན་ཉུང་ཚིག་མང	little meaning, many words	don nyung tshig mang
དོན་གཉིས	1) the two objectives / aims, twofold purpose, two benefits: benefit of oneself {rang don} benefit of others {gzhan don}. 2) two types of meaning: {drang don} expedient meaning [requiring interpret...	don gnyis
དོན་གཉིས་བསྒྲུབས	have established the two benefits 1310	don gnyis bsgrubs
དོན་གཉིས་ཅན	ambiguous	don gnyis can
དོན་གཉིས་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ	have attained the twofold goal	don gnyis mthar phyin pa
དོན་གཉིས་ལྡན་པ	possessing the two benefits [for self and other]	don gnyis ldan pa
དོན་གཉིས་ལྡན་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	buddhahood endowed with the two benefits	don gnyis ldan pa'i sangs rgyas
དོན་གཉིས་སྤྱོད་པ	perform the two benefits	don gnyis spyod pa
དོན་གཉིས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect[ion of] the two benefits	don gnyis phun sum tshogs pa
དོན་གཉིས་འབྱོར་བ	obtain/ the wealth of the two benefits	don gnyis 'byor ba
དོན་གཉིས་མཛད	fulfill / produce the two benefits	don gnyis mdzad
རློབས	grant your blessing that my aspirations and those of others be accomplished	rlobs
དོན་གཉེར	effort; x {don gnyer chen pos dka' tshegs tsha grang thams cad khyad du bsad de nyan dgos} listen to the teachings, with great effort, ignoring heat, cold and all other trials	don gnyer
དོན་གཉེར་ཅན	zealous, painstaking	don gnyer can
དོན་གཉེར་དུ་སོང་བ	go on state business {rgyal po phyogs gzhan gcig tu don gnyer du song ba} the king had to go away for a time on state business	don gnyer du song ba
དོན་གཉེར་བ	aspire, try to, strive for, aspiration, seeker of, person w wish/ desire for, manager, supervisor, overseer	don gnyer ba
དོན་གཉེར་བྱས	interested; x {chos la don gnyer ma byas na chos rtsa ba nas mi 'grub} if you are not at all interested in the Dharma there will be no results at all	don gnyer byas
དོན་གཉེར་བྱེད་པ	interest; x {chos la don gnyer byed pa yon tan thams cad kyi rten gzhi yin} your interest in the Dharma is the basis of what you will achieve	don gnyer byed pa
དོན་གཉེར་མུ་ཐུད་བྱས	worked continuously for	don gnyer mu thud byas
དོན་གཉེར་མེད་པ	x {chos la don gnyer med pa} failing to apply yourself to the Dharma	don gnyer med pa
དོན་སྙིང	1) the main point, essence, the heart of a matter. 2) significance, purpose	don snying
དོན་སྙིང་ལྔ	the five essdential organs [lus kyi don dvangs ma'i support and form and so forth the yul lnga'i don byed pa po lnga: snying, glo ba, mchin pa, mcher ba, mkhal ma]	don snying lnga
དོན་སྙིང་པོ	gist	don snying po
དོན་སྙིང་འབྱིན་པ	draw out a summary, the sum & substance	don snying 'byin pa
དོན་སྙིང་མེད་པ	have no hearts; ex {khog pa na don snying med pa} have no hearts in their chests	don snying med pa
དོན་གཏོང་བ	bestow/ forsake benefit/ the meaning/ the goal, abandon reality	don gtong ba
དོན་རྟོགས	realized, comprehended, understand the meaning	don rtogs
དོན་རྟོགས་པ	follow, comprehend the meaning, reflect on the sense of a term or subject, to understand the true meaning	don rtogs pa
དོན་ལྟ	meaning, point of something	don lta
དོན་ལྟར	in the sense that	don ltar
དོན་ལྟར་ན	[he/ it] said	don ltar na
དོན་ལྟར་བཤད	tell it as it is/ was heard	don ltar bshad
དོན་སྟོང	internal organs and cavities	don stong
དོན་སྟོང་གི་ཚིག	word of empty meaning, nonsense, meaningless expression	don stong gi tshig
དོན་སྟོང་པ	objectless, unfulfilled purpose, void of meaning, for nothing	don stong pa
དོན་སྟོང་རིང་ལུགས	nihilism	don stong ring lugs
དོན་སྟོན་པ	decipher, mean, signify	don ston pa
དོན་སྟོན་ཟིན་པ	meant	don ston zin pa
དོན་བརྟག་རྩིས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon which examines data on the basis of astrology	don brtag rtsis kyi bon
དོན་ཐག་གཅོད	settle a case, pass judgement	don thag gcod
དོན་ཐག་གཅོད་མཁན	one commissioned	don thag gcod mkhan
དོན་ཐག་ཆོད་ནས	after having understood	don thag chod nas
དོན་ཐད་ཀར	literal meaning	don thad kar
དོན་ཐམས་ཅད	all meanings	don thams cad
དོན་ཐམས་ཅད་གྲུབ	in whom there is the fulfillment of every purpose, name of a magic spell	don thams cad grub
དོན་ཐམས་ཅད་གྲུབ་པ	name of buddha	don thams cad grub pa
དོན་ཐམས་ཅད་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	accomplish all [1's] purposes/ all benefits don thams cad rnam pa thams cad du	don thams cad sgrub par byed pa
དོན་ཐོག	put into practice	don thog
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁེལ	put into practice, apply, carry out, implement	don thog tu 'khel
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁེལ་བ	put into practice, applied, effectively carried out, implemented	don thog tu 'khel ba
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁེལ་བར་དཀའ་ངལ	problems in putting into practice/ applying/ carrying out/ implementing	don thog tu 'khel bar dka' ngal
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁེལ་བར་དཀའ་ངལ་ཡོང	face problems in putting into practice/ applying/ carrying out/ implementing	don thog tu 'khel bar dka' ngal yong
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁྱོལ	put into practice, apply, carry out, implement	don thog tu 'khyol
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁྱོལ་བ	put into practice, applied, effectively carried out, implemented 1311	don thog tu 'khyol ba
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁྱོལ་བར་དཀའ་ངལ	problems in putting into practice/ applying/ carrying out/ implementing don thog tu 'khyol bar dka' ngal yong face problems in putting into practice/ applying/ carrying out/ implementing	don thog tu 'khyol bar dka' ngal
དོན་ཐོག་ཏུ་བབས་པ	the truth (of these verses) struck me	don thog tu babs pa
དོན་མཐའ་དག	all the fundamental points	don mtha' dag
དོན་མཐུན	[arch] 1) tshong pa; 2) Mgron po, factually concordant, same/ compatible in purpose	don mthun
དོན་མཐུན་རྗེས་འབྲང	x {lam 'grogs kyi tshong pa don mthun rjes 'brang dang bcas nas byon pa} along the way they came upon a group of merchants, who then followed in their wake.	don mthun rjes 'brang
དོན་མཐུན་རྣམས	companions	don mthun rnams
དོན་མཐུན་པ	1) the same meaning/ object for different terms; 2) Bsdu ba'i nang gses shig ste gzhan rnams don gang la sbyar ba de la rang yang gnas nas de dang mthun par slob pa'o, agreement/ sameness/ compatib...	don mthun pa
དོན་མཐུན་པ་ཉིད	correspondence w the object, agreement in purpose	don mthun pa nyid
དོན་མཐུན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to participate	don mthun par byed pa
དོན་མཐུན་སྤྱོད་པ་དང	action consistent with don mthun bsrung zhing bskyabs pa'i 'brel	don mthun spyod pa dang
བ་ཡོད་དེ	I have protected and guarded these men	ba yod de
དོན་མཐོང་འགྱུར	visible object, object that becomes seen	don mthong 'gyur
དོན་འཐུན་པ	consistency between words and deeds	don 'thun pa
དོན་དག	1) meaning. 2) purpose, cause 3) matter, affair, affairs	don dag
དོན་དག་ཆུང་ཆུང	a small matter	don dag chung chung
དོན་དག་ཆེན་པོ་མེད་པ	without some important object or business	don dag chen po med pa
དོན་དག་ཐག་ཆོད	finally deciding or determining any matter	don dag thag chod
དོན་དག་སྤྱི་པ	common purpose/ cause	don dag spyi pa
དོན་དག་མེད་པ	meaningless, senseless, aimless; absurd	don dag med pa
དོན་དག་ལ	for the benefit of	don dag la
དོན་དང	pure meaning/ object	don dang
དོན་དང་བཅས་པ	meaningful	don dang bcas pa
དོན་དང་བཅས་པ་ཉིད	meaningfulness, significance, authenticity, benefit	don dang bcas pa nyid
དོན་དང་བསྟུན	suited to one's intention or object	don dang bstun
དོན་དང་མཐུན་པ	SA don mthun pa	don dang mthun pa
དོན་དང་ལྡན་པ	meaningful, authentic, significant	don dang ldan pa
དོན་དང་ལྡན་པར་བྱ	to make realize the purpose	don dang ldan par bya
དོན་དང་སྤྲོད་པ	explain, describe	don dang sprod pa
དོན་དང་བྲལ་བ	meaningless, useless, not significant, unauthentic	don dang bral ba
དོན་དང་ཡི་གེ	meaning and words/ writings	don dang yi ge
དོན་དང་ཤེས་པ	the object and the consciousness	don dang shes pa
དོན་དམ	ultimate (reality)	don dam
དོན་དམ་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	ultimate (level of) truth	don dam kyi bden pa
དོན་དམ་དཀོར་བདུན	the 7-fold absolute	don dam dkor bdun
དོན་དམ་སྐོར་བདུན	seven cycles of the ultimate; {don dam bden pa dkor bdun}	don dam skor bdun
དོན་དམ་བསྐྱེད	ultimate mindgeneration	don dam bskyed
དོན་དམ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	ultimate substance; the real thing	don dam gyi dngos po
དོན་དམ་གྱི་བདེན་པ	ultimate truth, absolute truth, "truth of sublime meaning", ultimate level of truth	don dam gyi bden pa
དོན་དམ་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	ultimate condition, the way things really are, the natural state of the absolute	don dam gyi gnas tshul
དོན་དམ་གྱི་རྩལ་འབྱོངས་པ	harnessed the power of the absolute	don dam gyi rtsal 'byongs pa
དོན་དམ་གྲུབ་པར་འདོད་པ	wishing to accomplish / establish the ultimate	don dam grub par 'dod pa
དོན་དམ་ངེས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	definitive vehicle of ultimate reality	don dam nges pa'i theg pa
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས	ultimate dharmadhatu	don dam chos kyi dbyings
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་སྐུའི་ངོ་བོ	ultimate dharmakaya essence	don dam chos sku'i ngo bo
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་སྐྱུའི་དོ་བོ	ultimate dharmakaya essence	don dam chos skyu'i do bo
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་གྱི་དབྱིངས	ultimate dharmadhatu	don dam chos gyi dbyings
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་ཉིད	ultimate nature, absolute dharmat	don dam chos nyid
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	guru of absolute dharmat / the ultimate nature	don dam chos nyid kyi bla ma
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་པ	receiving the holy dharma	don dam chos pa
དོན་དམ་ཆོས་དབྱིངས	ultimate dharmadhatu; the absolute, dharmadhatu	don dam chos dbyings
དོན་དམ་གཉིས	CHN	don dam gnyis
དོན་དམ་བསྙེན་པ	Paramartha Seva	don dam bsnyen pa
དོན་དམ་རྟོགས་པ	realization of the absolute 1312	don dam rtogs pa
དོན་དམ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	intelligence realizing the ultimate, {shes rab gsum}	don dam rtogs pa'i shes rab
དོན་དམ་སྟོང་ཉིད	{don dam pa stong pa nyid}, emptiness of the absolute	don dam stong nyid
དོན་དམ་དུ	actually	don dam du
དོན་དམ་དུ་གྲུབ་པ་གསུམ	CHN	don dam du grub pa gsum
དོན་དམ་དུ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཆོས	ultimately established phenomenon	don dam du grub pa'i chos
དོན་དམ་དུ་འགོག་པ	absolute cessation don dam de kho na nyid kyi snang ba the experience of ultimate thatness, appearance of ultimate suchness don dam de kho na nyid kyi snang ba the experience of ultimate thatness	don dam du 'gog pa
དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ	absolute truth [one of the two truths, Vaibhashika: whatever bcom pa or blos cha shas so sor bsal ba na rang 'dzin gyi blo 'dor du mi rung ba'i chos cha med gnyis dang, Sautrantikas: sgra rtog gis ...	don dam bden pa
དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ་དཀོར་བདུན	7 aspects of the spiritual wealth of ultimate truth	don dam bden pa dkor bdun
དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of ultimate truth, {rnam grangs pa'i don dam}, {rnam grangs ma yin pa'i don dam}	don dam bden pa gnyis
དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ་བཞི	CHN	don dam bden pa bzhi
དོན་དམ་གནས་ལུགས	the true natural state	don dam gnas lugs
དོན་དམ་རྣམ་གཉིས	rnam grangs pa dang de bzhin nyid	don dam rnam gnyis
དོན་དམ་རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པ	fully realizing the ultimate [- sm bka' tha ma]	don dam rnam par nges pa
དོན་དམ་པ	ultimate (reality)	don dam pa
དོན་དམ་པ་སྟོང་ཉིད	emptiness of being ultimate	don dam pa stong nyid
དོན་དམ་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	* a nature of things of nirvana is not established	don dam pa stong pa nyid
དོན་དམ་པ་བདེན་པ	ultimate/ absolute truth don dam pa'i ka dag gi ye shes chen po great wisdom of ultimate primordial purity	don dam pa bden pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	absolute relative/ concealer truth yang dag kun rdzob, the true relative	don dam pa'i kun rdzob
དོན་དམ་པའི་སྐྱབས	the refuge/ occasion of the absolute	don dam pa'i skyabs
དོན་དམ་པའི་དགེ་བ	ultimate virtue	don dam pa'i dge ba
དོན་དམ་པའི་དགེ་སྦྱོང	arhat	don dam pa'i dge sbyong
དོན་དམ་པའི་དགེ་སློང	among the dge slong lnga, stream enterer to arhat the four pairs or 8 kind of beings	don dam pa'i dge slong
དོན་དམ་པའི་འགོག་པ	absolute cessation	don dam pa'i 'gog pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་བསྔོ་བ	three worlds completely pure bsngo ba	don dam pa'i bsngo ba
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཆོས	[dharmas beyond mind, speech, thought, and expression] dharmas of the absolute	don dam pa'i chos
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཆོས་མངོན་པ	absolute abhidharma, manifestation of the dharmas of the absolute [in the continuum of the noble ones impermanence etc 16 perceptually realized prajna w rjes 'brang]	don dam pa'i chos mngon pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་རྟོགས་ཚུལ	realized the absolute truth	don dam pa'i rtogs tshul
དོན་དམ་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the absolute [Jonangpa teaching: rang rig rang gsal free from all complexities, perfect establishment w/o relativity, truly exists as the absolute = chos nyid = chos dbyings = de bzhin...	don dam pa'i stong pa nyid
དོན་དམ་པའི་བདེན་པ	absolute/ ultimate truth	don dam pa'i bden pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་བདེན་པའི་ཡུལ་ཅན	the perceiver of absolute truth	don dam pa'i bden pa'i yul can
དོན་དམ་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	absolute bodhicitta	don dam pa'i byang chub kyi sems
དོན་དམ་པའི་མི་དགེ་བ	{'khor ba'o} 'Ultimate nonvirtue' is samsara.	don dam pa'i mi dge ba
དོན་དམ་པའི་མཙན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of the absolute [inexpressible, non-dual, not an object of concepts, 1 taste, markless; brjod du med pa dang, gnyis su med pa, rtog ge'i yul min pa, ro gcig pa, mtsan nyid ...	don dam pa'i mtsan nyid lnga
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཚུལ	the manner of the absolute	don dam pa'i tshul
དོན་དམ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of the absolute	don dam pa'i mtshan nyid
དོན་དམ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of the absolute don dam pa'i 'og min chos kyi dbyings	don dam pa'i mtshan nyid lnga
རྣམ་དག་གི་ཕོ་བྲང	the pure Dharmadhatu palace of ultimate Akanishta don dam pa'i 'og min chos kyi dbyings	rnam dag gi pho brang
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཡིད	absolute mind	don dam pa'i yid
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	ultimate/ absolute wisdom, wisdom/ pristine cognition of the absolute	don dam pa'i ye shes
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཆེ་བ་ཉིད	the greatness of ultimate wakefulness	don dam pa'i ye shes kyi che ba nyid
དོན་དམ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter into absolute wisdom, enter into the wisdom of the absolute	don dam pa'i ye shes la 'jug pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་རིག་པ	understanding/ awareness/ insight of the absolute	don dam pa'i rig pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{nam mkha' dang brtag min 'gog pa'o} 'Ultimate indeterminates' are space and cessation not due to discrimination.	don dam pa'i lung ma bstan
དོན་དམ་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	arouse absolute bodhicitta	don dam pa'i sems bskyed pa
དོན་དམ་པའི་སྲུང་འཁོར	the protection circle of the absolute, wisdom protection circle	don dam pa'i srung 'khor
དོན་དམ་པའི་ལྷ	the ultimate deity	don dam pa'i lha
དོན་དམ་པར	who was no other than	don dam par
དོན་དམ་པར་གྲུབ་པ	ultimate existence ultimately established, establish as absolute	don dam par grub pa
དོན་དམ་པར་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	the essencelessness/ the non-entity of the absolute	don dam par ngo bo nyid med pa
དོན་དམ་པར་དོན་བྱེད་མི་ནུས	ultimately unable to function / perform a function / operate	don dam par don byed mi nus
དོན་དམ་པར་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ	truly / ultimately painful	don dam par sdug bsngal ba
དོན་དམ་པར་དམིགས་སུ་མེད་པ	ultimately unobservable	don dam par dmigs su med pa
དོན་དམ་པར་ཡོད་པ	ultimately existent	don dam par yod pa
དོན་དམ་པས་བསྡུས་པ	included within the absolute, summarized as the absolute	don dam pas bsdus pa
དོན་དམ་དཔྱོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning that investigates the ultimate don dam dpyod byed kyi rigs pas dpyad	don dam dpyod byed kyi rigs pa
དོན་དམ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	ultimate (attitude of) bodhicitta/ awakened mind	don dam byang chub kyi sems
དོན་དམ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཨུལྟིམཏེ་མིནད	generation, arouse absolute bodhicitta	don dam byang chub kyi sems bskyed ultimate mind
དོན་དམ་བྱང་ཆུབ་གྱི་སེམས	absolute bodhichitta; corresponds to the realization of emptiness	don dam byang chub gyi sems
དོན་དམ་བྱང་སེམས	ultimate bodhimind, absolute bodhicitta, enlightened mind	don dam byang sems
དོན་དམ་བློ་ཡི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མིན	ultimate reality is not an object of the mind	don dam blo yi spyod yul min
དོན་དམ་དབྱིངས	ultimate space, space of the absolute	don dam dbyings
དོན་དམ་མྱང་འདས་པ	the absolute, nirvana	don dam myang 'das pa
དོན་དམ་ཚད་མ	absolute pram na	don dam tshad ma
དོན་དམ་ཚུལ	the manner of the absolute, the way the absolute is	don dam tshul
དོན་དམ་མཚན་མེད	absolute free of concepts don dam yul can gyi rjes su yi rang sgom	don dam mtshan med
དོན་དམ་ཡེ་ཤེས	absolute wisdom, wisdom of the absolute	don dam ye shes
དོན་དམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	absolute wisdom bindus	don dam ye shes kyi thig le
དོན་དམ་རང་རིག་ཆེན་པོ	ultimate great	don dam rang rig chen po
དོན་དམ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པའི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning that deals w the absolute	don dam la spyod pa'i rigs pa
དོན་དམ་ཤེས་པ	awareness of/ know[ledge of]/ being aware of the absolute don dam shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa ultimate transcendent knowledge don dam shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa Ultimate transcendent kno...	don dam shes pa
དོན་དམ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the natural condition of the ultimate essence	don dam gshis kyi gnas lugs
དོན་དམ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ངོ་སྤྲོད་གནང་བ་གབེ༹་ཐེ་པོཨིནཏིང	out instruction to the ultimate mind essence; introduced me to mind's absolute nature	don dam sems kyi ngo sprod gnang ba gave the pointing
དོན་དམ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse absolute bodhicitta [w yongs 'dzin dam pa: transmission of perfect buddhahood, rjes sgrub dam pa: the two accumulations gathering countless things into 1, rtogs pa dam pa: realization percei...	don dam sems bskyed
དོན་དམ་གསང་ཆིན་གི་འཕོ་བ	ultimate phowa of the great secret don dam lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes ni {don dam lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes ni, tshogs bsags sgrib pa dag pa'i lag rjes dang, rtogs ldan bla ma'i byin rlabs kho n...	don dam gsang chin gi 'pho ba
དོན་དུ	for, in order to, so that he is able to work for, which leads to, for the good of, for the sake of, on account of, in order to, in the place of, instead of, purposive connective, in reality	don du
དོན་དུ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	false conception of the object/ meaning/ reality	don du kun tu rtog pa
དོན་དུ་ངེས་པ	which means that	don du nges pa
དོན་དུ་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to the meaning/ sense objects	don du mngon par zhen pa
དོན་དུ་ཆུང་འགྲོ	ill-success, decrease of interest or importance	don du chung 'gro
དོན་དུ་ཆུང་འགྲོ་བ	failure	don du chung 'gro ba
དོན་དུ་གཉེར	striving	don du gnyer
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་ཅིག	ex {thar pa don du gnyer cig} strive for liberation!	don du gnyer cig
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ	pursue [thd]	don du gnyer ba
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ་སྒྲུབ་པ	fulfillment of aspiration	don du gnyer ba sgrub pa
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ་མེད་ཉིད་དང	lack of effort don du gnyer ba la phyogs med pa'i phyir - because of impartial aspiration	don du gnyer ba med nyid dang
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བའི་ཀུན་སློང་གིས	the attitude of pursuing	don du gnyer ba'i kun slong gis
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བྱ	purposeful object [ggd]	don du gnyer bya
དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བྱ་བཞི	the four things to pursue [chos, don, longs spyod, thar pa]	don du gnyer bya bzhi
དོན་དུ་མཐོང་བ	see the meaning/ reality/ truth/ sense objects	don du mthong ba
དོན་དུ་མདུད་པ་འགྲོལ་བ	cut the knot	don du mdud pa 'grol ba
དོན་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearing, manifesting as sense objects	don du snang ba
དོན་དུ་སྣང་བའི་རྣམ་པ	the image perceived as an object	don du snang ba'i rnam pa
དོན་དུ་བག་ཆགས	the tendency for/ habitual patterns of sense objects	don du bag chags
དོན་དུ་བྱ་བ	something concrete in relation to which one must act	don du bya ba
དོན་དུ་བྱས་པ	to bring about something	don du byas pa
དོན་དུ་བྱོན་པ	{sems can gyi don du byon pa} come to benefit beings	don du byon pa
དོན་དུ་མའི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	cognizance/ conceptualization of many objects	don du ma'i rnam par rig pa
དོན་དུ་མི་འགྱུར་བ་མི་འོང	cannot be anything but beneficial	don du mi 'gyur ba mi 'ong
དོན་དུ་མི་གཉེར་བ	disinterest, apathy, unconcern, impassivity	don du mi gnyer ba
དོན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	to invest things with ultimate meaning	don du 'dzin pa
དོན་དེ་ཉིད	this condition	don de nyid
དོན་དེ་དང་སྦྱར་ན	implicit meaning	don de dang sbyar na
དོན་དེ་དྲན་པ	maintain the presence of this condition	don de dran pa
དོན་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	true suchness, the	don de bzhin nyid
མེཨནིང	- suchness	meaning
དོན་དེ་ལ་སོམས	do thing over the meaning of this	don de la soms
དོན་དྲང་ཚིག་ནན	energetic speaking in a true/ good cause	don drang tshig nan
དོན་དྲང་ཚིག་བཙན	straightforwardly expressed la khungs dang 'brel ba'i tshig btsan pa	don drang tshig btsan
དོན་དྲིལ་བ	concise	don dril ba
དོན་དྲུག་པ	Adherents of the Six Categories; proponent of the six principles	don drug pa
དོན་བདུན་ཅུ	{mngon rtogs rgyan}	don bdun cu
དོན་བདུན་བཅུ	the seventy topics in {mngon rtogs rgyan}	don bdun bcu
དོན་མདོར་བསྟན་པ	brief summary, briefly teach the meaning	don mdor bstan pa
དོན་མདོར་བསྡུས་པ	abbreviated sense / meaning	don mdor bsdus pa
དོན་འདི་ལྟ་བུ་ལ	in this regard	don 'di lta bu la
དོན་འདུན་པ	earnest desire for ultimate reality	don 'dun pa
དོན་འདོད་པ	1) establisher of profit/ gain; 2) beggar	don 'dod pa
དོན་འདྲ	mean the same thing	don 'dra
དོན་འདྲིལ	concise	don 'dril
དོན་ལྡན	having achievement, meaningful, worthwhile. possessing a great objective. Syn {don dang ldan pa}; meaningful, worthwhile	don ldan
དོན་ལྡན་དུ་གྱུར་ཅིག	achieve, possess the great objective	don ldan du gyur cig
དོན་ལྡན་བྱེད་པ	makes proper use of	don ldan byed pa
དོན་ལྡོག	meaning isolate	don ldog
དོན་སྡུད་པ	summarized /abridged meaning	don sdud pa
དོན་སྡོམ་དུ་བྱས་པ	summarizes	don sdom du byas pa
དོན་བསྡུ	summarize the meaning	don bsdu
དོན་བསྡུ་བ	concluding the topic	don bsdu ba
དོན་བསྡུས	an anuyoga text, Fundamental Meaning	don bsdus
དོན་བསྡུས་ཚིག་རྒྱས	summarized meaning la tshig dang yi ge rgyas pa	don bsdus tshig rgyas
དོན་བསྡུས་རབ་གསལ	clear summary	don bsdus rab gsal
དོན་ནི་ཐོབ་བྱ	the goal to be attained	don ni thob bya
དོན་གནད	1) essential truth, importance. 2) issue, question, matter; essential truth	don gnad
དོན་གནད་རྣམས	real reasons	don gnad rnams
དོན་གནན་ལྡན་པ	significant	don gnan ldan pa
དོན་གནས	CM: don la gnas pa'i bsdus tshig. [mss]	don gnas
དོན་གནེར	aspire, try to, strive for, work for/ toward, endeavor, work hard, comprehend, realize, ?? management, supervision, exert oneself in	don gner
དོན་རྣམ	aspect of meaning	don rnam
དོན་རྣམ་ངེས	{mi pham rgya mtsho'i don rnam par nges pa shes rab ral gri}	don rnam nges
དོན་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས་དང་ལྡན་པ	having 2-fold meaning	don rnam pa gnyis dang ldan pa
དོན་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	3 kinds of significations (tshig 'bru'i don, don gyi don, khams kyi don) 1315 don rnam par nges pa shes rab ral gri work by {mi pham rgya mtsho} {'jam mgon 'ju mi pham} (1846-1912)	don rnam pa gsum
དོན་སྣང་བ	experience/ appearance of the meaning/ reality	don snang ba
དོན་སྣོད	khog pa'i nang khrol don lnga &, snod = six	don snod
དོན་སྣོད་སྤྱི་གསང	15th back vertebra don snod thun mong dang 'brel ba'i moxibustion point [me btsa'i gsang: der me btsa' bzhag na don snod du it is good for all grang ba zhugs pa'i nad and particularly grang rlung]	don snod spyi gsang
དོན་པ	come out, go out, emit, give off, send out, flow, bring out, SA 'don pa	don pa
དོན་པོ	meaning; the real meaning	don po
དོན་དཔོག་པ	inferred meaning	don dpog pa
དོན་དཔོག་མ་དཔོག	meaning comprehensible or not	don dpog ma dpog
དོན་དཔོགས་པ	to fathom the meaning	don dpogs pa
དོན་དཔྱོད་པ	analyze[r of] the object/ essential meaning	don dpyod pa
དོན་སྤྱི	abstract object [only established from the viewpoint of abstract thought, exaggerated aspect or simulacrum of the object appearing to the mind, eg, vase appearing to mental conception, among spyi]	don spyi
དོན་སྤྱི་རྟོག་པ	abstract concept	don spyi rtog pa
དོན་སྤྱི་ཙམ	general idea	don spyi tsam
དོན་སྤྱི་ཙམ་སུ་འགྱུར	become generalized	don spyi tsam su 'gyur
དོན་སྤྱིའི་སྒོ་ནས་གོ་བ	having an abstract notion	don spyi'i sgo nas go ba
དོན་སྤྱིའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of general conception, emptiness of conceptions of meaning generality	don spyi'i stong pa nyid
དོན་སྤྱིའི་ཚུལ	{stong nyid don spyi'i tshul du rtogs pa} some general understanding of emptiness	don spyi'i tshul
དོན་སྤྱོད་སྔོན་གནང	pioneer investigator, first person to inquire into any subject or case	don spyod sngon gnang
དོན་སྤྱོད་རྟོག་པ	thought of meaningful conduct, conception of purposeful activity	don spyod rtog pa
དོན་སྤྱོད་པ	1) accomplish benefit; 2) present the meaning o the oral instructions to others [bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi]	don spyod pa
དོན་སྤྱོད་པ་ཉིད	meaningful conduct, purposeful activity	don spyod pa nyid
དོན་ཕན	1) [be of] benefit/ advantage/ use [to a/the goal]; 2) brag zhun	don phan
དོན་ཕན་གང་ཡན་མེད	w/o any benefit	don phan gang yan med
དོན་ཕིགས་པ	realize completely	don phigs pa
དོན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect benefit, complete meaning	don phun sum tshogs pa
དོན་ཕྱྭ	important activities	don phywa
དོན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	ultimate mahamudra	don phyag rgya chen po
དོན་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ	correct meaning /object	don phyin ci ma log pa
དོན་ཕྱིར	for the sake of	don phyir
དོན་བྱ་བ་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	don bya ba rnam pa bcu gcig
དོན་བྱས	act for the benefit of	don byas
དོན་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་འགྱུར	know the particular[s of the] meaning	don bye brag tu shes par 'gyur
དོན་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	know the particular[s of the] meaning	don bye brag tu shes par byed pa
དོན་བྱེད	causing knowledge, creating meaning, benefitting, accomplishing the good, working for the good of others, affairs [mi rigs don byed u yon lhan khang: nationalities affairs commisssion]	don byed
དོན་བྱེད་ཁང	office, bureau, chancellery	don byed khang
དོན་བྱེད་ཁྲུའུ	office, bureau, chancellery	don byed khru'u
དོན་བྱེད་ནུས་སྟོང་གི་ཆོས	phenomena that are empty of the ability to perform a function	don byed nus stong gi chos
དོན་བྱེད་ནུས་པ	ability of fulfill a function, power to produce effects, [readiness to do something] [ggd]	don byed nus pa
དོན་བྱེད་ནུས་པའི་རྫས་ཡོད	substantially existing things that are/ in the sense of being able to perform a function	don byed nus pa'i rdzas yod
དོན་བྱེད་ནུས་པར་མེད་པ	dysfunctional	don byed nus par med pa
དོན་བྱེད་ནུས་པས་སྟོངས་པ	empty of the power to perform a function don byed snang can gyi dbang mngon	don byed nus pas stongs pa
ཚད་མ	pramana of sensory perception of a power to produce a function don byed snang can gyi dbang mngon	tshad ma
དོན་བྱེད་པ	to bring benefit/ assure the welfare of ...; to act for the sake / welfare of	don byed pa
དོན་བྱེད་མི་ནུས	unable to function	don byed mi nus
དོན་བྱེད་མི་ནུས་པ	unable to perform a function/ create [knowledge], not function	don byed mi nus pa
དོན་བྱེད་ཨུ་ཡོན	executive officer, administrative official	don byed u yon
དོན་བྲལ་ཚིག	meaningless words, ravings	don bral tshig
དོན་དབང	essential empowerment	don dbang
དོན་འབའ་ཞིག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྟགས	truth establishing sign/ reason don 'ba' zhig sgrub kyi rtags yang dag the genuine sign of having established [only] truth, genuine truth- establishing reason	don 'ba' zhig sgrub kyi rtags
དོན་འབྲས	essential meaning, success, achievement, result, outcome	don 'bras
དོན་འབྲས་མེད་པ	fruitless	don 'bras med pa
དོན་འབྲུབ	probe effective	don 'brub
དོན་སྦྱོར	phrad dang divisions this and that don la 'jug tshul	don sbyor
དོན་སྦྱོར་རྟོག་པ	fixated thoughts in which terms are not joined to things in reality rtog pa, eg 'dzin pa'i rtog pa thinking who is this man riding the horse? &, thoughts rising in sgom byung, kind of rtog pa	don sbyor rtog pa
དོན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	objectless, unfulfilled purpose, void of meaning, for nothing	don ma grub pa
དོན་མ་མཐོང་བ	not see the meaning/ benefit, not see the goal	don ma mthong ba
དོན་མ་ནོར	true meaning	don ma nor
དོན་མ་ནོར་བ	correct meaning, precise meaning	don ma nor ba
དོན་མང་བས	on account of much business	don mang bas
དོན་མི་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཐེ་ཙོམ	doubt that is not the object [among doubts, grasping a wrong conceptualization incompatible with one's object and so producing doubt, eg, doubting whether sound is permanent, mostly thinking perman...	don mi 'gyur gyi the tsom
དོན་མི་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཐེ་ཚོམ	doubt not tending to fact, doubt tending to the	don mi 'gyur gyi the tshom
དོན་མི་འགྱུར་གྱི་བྲེ་ཚོམ	doubt tending to the non-factual	don mi 'gyur gyi bre tshom
དོན་མི་འགྲུབ	prove ineffective	don mi 'grub
དོན་མི་གཉེར་བ	disinterest	don mi gnyer ba
དོན་མི་མཐུན་པ	contrary sense, opposite meaning, going against the purpose of	don mi mthun pa
དོན་མི་འདུག	it has no sense	don mi 'dug
དོན་མི་དམིགས་པ་རྟོགས་པ	realization w/o conceptualization of reality / objects	don mi dmigs pa rtogs pa
དོན་མི་འཛིན	forgetting the meaning; x {tshig 'dzin la don mi 'dzin pa} remembering the words but forgetting the meaning	don mi 'dzin
དོན་མི་ཟ	there is no shadow of doubt	don mi za
དོན་མི་ཤེས	incapable of grasping their meaning	don mi shes
དོན་མིན	there is no point in	don min
དོན་མེད	futile [-ity], vain, meaningless, useless, aimless, pointless, w/o purpose/ reason	don med
དོན་མེད་ཁ་བརྡར	meaningless/pointless explanation	don med kha brdar
དོན་མེད་འཁོར་བའི་འཆིང་བ	bonds that shackle one to the futile cycle of existence	don med 'khor ba'i 'ching ba
དོན་མེད་གྲོས་སྣ	pointless introduction/ discussion	don med gros sna
དོན་མེད་འགྱུར	will be pointless	don med 'gyur
དོན་མེད་ངལ་བ	laboring senselessly/ in vain	don med ngal ba
དོན་མེད་འཆལ་བ	futile and meaningless	don med 'chal ba
དོན་མེད་གཏམ	vain, idle talk	don med gtam
དོན་མེད་གཏམ་རྙིང	meaningless talk	don med gtam rnying
དོན་མེད་རྟོགས	realize meaninglessness/ futility, realize no reality	don med rtogs
དོན་མེད་རྟོགས་པ	to realize as being meaningless	don med rtogs pa
དོན་མེད་སྟོང་ཟད	just meaningless emptiness, spend 1's time to no purpose/ accomplishing nothing	don med stong zad
དོན་མེད་དུ	senselessly	don med du
དོན་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ	become meaningless/ useless, go to waste/ for naught	don med du 'gro
དོན་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	rove for no purpose don med rnam g.yeng - {don med rnam g.yeng gi ngang nas mi tshe zad pa} my life runs out in meaningless distractions	don med du 'gro ba
དོན་མེད་པ	senseless	don med pa
དོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད	uselessness, meaninglessness	don med pa nyid
བེནེཕི༹ཅིཨལ་ཨནད་ནོན	beneficial	beneficial and non
དོན་མེད་པ་མི་སྣང་བ་ཉིད	meaningless non- appearance, useless nonappearance	don med pa mi snang ba nyid
དོན་མེད་པའི་བྱ་བ་རྩོམ་པ	began the pointless task	don med pa'i bya ba rtsom pa
དོན་མེད་པར	useless, meaningless	don med par
དོན་མེད་པར་མི་འགྱུར	not be useless, not be meaningless, not be w/o benefit	don med par mi 'gyur
དོན་མེད་རྩོད་སློང	unprovoked quarrel	don med rtsod slong
དོན་མེད་བཞིན་དུ	without seeing the use of it, without understanding the purpose	don med bzhin du
དོན་མེད་རང་བཤིན་བདག་ལྟ	the futile view of nature and selfhood	don med rang bshin bdag lta
དོན་མེད་ལག་རྩེད་རྩེ་བ	fiddle	don med lag rtsed rtse ba
དོན་མེད་ལས	useless actions	don med las
དོན་དམིགས་པ	intend a benefit or profit for another person	don dmigs pa
དོན་སྨིན	put into practice, applied, effectively carried out, implemented, success, achievement, result, outcome, son pa	don smin
དོན་སྨེས	wisdom	don smes
དོན་སྨོས	tell the meaning, what is called the meaning	don smos
དོན་སྨྲ	abbr. of {phyi don du smra ba}	don smra
དོན་སྨྲ་སྡེ་གཉིས	two schools that are exponents of external objects, the vaibhashikas and sautrantikas, the two schools of Sautrantikas	don smra sde gnyis
དོན་སྨྲ་བ	1) explain the meaning; 2) exponents of external objects	don smra ba
དོན་ཙམ	mere haeceity	don tsam
དོན་ཙམ་དུ	whose only aim is, for the mere purpose of	don tsam du
དོན་གཙོ་བོ	1) fundamental/ principal meaning, main point, essence/ heart of a matter, significance; 2) purpose	don gtso bo
དོན་རྩ	main point, basic meaning 1317	don rtsa
དོན་རྩ་བ	1) fundamental/ principal meaning, main point, essence/ heart of a matter, significance; 2) purpose	don rtsa ba
དོན་རྩ་མེད་པ	dmigs yul med pa,...Sger gyi don du gzhan la rtsod pa 'dzugs pa'i don rtsa med pa	don rtsa med pa
དོན་ཚན	article, points, clause, items [of treaty/ contract las ka, don gyi sde tshan	don tshan
དོན་ཚན་བཅུ་བདུན་ཆིངས་ཡིག	The 17 points Agreement	don tshan bcu bdun chings yig
དོན་ཚན་སོ་གཉིས	the 32 points	don tshan so gnyis
དོན་ཚུལ	the way of the meaning	don tshul
དོན་ཚོལ་བ	search for/ look for the meaning	don tshol ba
དོན་མཚན	article, points, clause, items [of treaty/ contract las ka, don gyi sde tshan	don mtshan
དོན་མཚུངས་པ	similarity to objects/ in meaning	don mtshungs pa
དོན་མཚོན	represent	don mtshon
དོན་མཛད	to bring benefits	don mdzad
དོན་མཛད་པ	to ensure/ bring benefit the welfare of . . .	don mdzad pa
དོན་འཛིན	remembering the meaning; x {don 'dzin la tshig mi 'dzin pa} remembering the meaning but forgetting the words	don 'dzin
དོན་ཞགས	tantric manifestation of avalokiteshvara	don zhags
དོན་གཞན	factually other, interest for others, objectively separate	don gzhan
དོན་གཞན་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱན	ornament presenting another object [ornament where some thing being maintained has been presented as thesis, don gzhan zhig of the same/ similar kind is presented as proving reason, 8 divi-	don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan
དོན་གཞན་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of ornament presenting another object	don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan brgyad
དོན་གཞན་གྱིས་འགོག་པ	refutation by another object	don gzhan gyis 'gog pa
དོན་གཞན་གྱིས་བསྟན	show by other objects	don gzhan gyis bstan
དོན་གཞན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	become another meaning	don gzhan du gyur pa
དོན་གཞན་ལ་དགོངས་པ	the intention directed towards other meanings [all dharmas are natureless ces pa lta bu sgra ji bzhin pa ma yin pa]	don gzhan la dgongs pa
དོན་གཞན་བསལ	clear away other meanings	don gzhan bsal
དོན་བཞག	remain in the condition of	don bzhag
དོན་ཟབ	profound meaning	don zab
དོན་ཟབ་པ	of deep meaning	don zab pa
དོན་ཟབ་ཚིག་གསལ	the words or letters expressing a profound point are easy to understand	don zab tshig gsal
དོན་གཟིགས	1) to look after the welfare. 2) Arthadarsin [buddha]	don gzigs
དོན་བཟང	good news	don bzang
དོན་བཟང་པོ	truly excellent in meaning	don bzang po
དོན་བཟང་བ	excellent meaning	don bzang ba
དོན་བཟང་ཚིག་བཟང	good news well expressed	don bzang tshig bzang
དོན་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	bon text don yang dag sgrub pa'i bya ba byed perform actions that accomplish true benefit don yang dag sgrub pa'i bya ba byed pa to act for the accomplish of a true purpose	don bzang ye shes snying po'i rgyud
དོན་ཡང་དག་པ	the true meaning, genuine benefit	don yang dag pa
དོན་ཡང་དག་པ་གསལ་བ	to fully clarify the intent	don yang dag pa gsal ba
དོན་ཡིད་ལ་དྲན་བཞིན་པ	Keep the meaning in mind!	don yid la dran bzhin pa
དོན་ཡིད་ལ་སོམས	reflect on their meaning!	don yid la soms
དོན་ཡོད	meaningful, useful, accomplishes, worthwhile, have real existence	don yod
དོན་ཡོད་གྲུབ	Amoghasiddhi	don yod grub
དོན་ཡོད་གྲུབ་པ	Amoghasiddhi, accomplishing what is meaningful	don yod grub pa
དོན་ཡོད་རྒྱལ་པོ	Amogha Raja, important monk follower of the Buddha	don yod rgyal po
དོན་ཡོད་པ་དང་མེད་པར་མཐོང	see the existence and nonexistence of objects, see what is meaningful and meaningless/ beneficial and useless	don yod pa dang med par mthong
དོན་ཡོད་པ་དོན་ཡོད་པ་ཉིད	the meaningfulness of what is meaningful	don yod pa don yod pa nyid
དོན་ཡོད་པ་སྣང་བ་ཉིད	experience of what is meaningful, appearance of what is beneficial don yod pa'i zhags pa'i cho ga zhib mo'i	don yod pa snang ba nyid
དོན་ཡོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to take full advantage	don yod par byed pa
དོན་ཡོད་འབྲས་བུ	medicinal fruit effective against worms	don yod 'bras bu
དོན་ཡོད་ཞགས་པ	Amogha Pasha. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga also known as Meaningful Lasso Tantra	don yod zhags pa
དོན་ཡོད་ཞགས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Meaningful Lasso Tantra. A tantra focused on Avalokiteshvara; belongs to Kriya Yoga and is also known as Amogha Pasha	don yod zhags pa'i rgyud
དོན་ཡོད་ཞགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	'phags pa don yod zhags pa'i snying po zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo,	don yod zhags pa'i snying po
དོན་རང་མཚན	ontological objects	don rang mtshan
དོན་རང་མཚན་གྱི་གཞན་སེལ	objective exclusion	don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel
དོན་རང་མཚན་ལ་མི་སླུ་བ	nondeceptive with respect to specifically characterized phenomena [ggd]	don rang mtshan la mi slu ba
དོན་རབ་ཏུ་འབྱེད་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	the dhyana of discerning the real	don rab tu 'byed pa'i bsam gtan
དོན་རབ་དང	the completely pure meaning /object	don rab dang
དོན་རབ་འབྱེད་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	meaning revealing samadhi	don rab 'byed pa'i bsam gtan
དོན་རིག	cognition of external objects, apprehension of an external object [ggd]	don rig
དོན་རིག་གྱིས	Understand the true meaning!	don rig gyis
དོན་རེ་ཆུང	has been of little use	don re chung
དོན་བརླིང་པ	firm meaning	don brling pa
དོན་ལ	in actuality/ truth/ actual fact; truly/ actually/ really; in the ultimate sense	don la
དོན་ལ་ཁར	a pass at the upper end	don la khar
དོན་ལ་མཁས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	you are not learned in the meaning	don la mkhas pa ma yin pa
དོན་ལ་འཇུག	concern oneself with the meaning of, undertake the actual practice	don la 'jug
དོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	to have the meaning of, to mean	don la 'jug pa
དོན་ལ་རྟོན་པ	1) the essence of the intended meaning cha 'jog pa; 2) reliance on the meaning	don la rton pa
དོན་ལ་ལྟ་ན	in truth, in fact, really, surely, indeed don la ltos nas ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs	don la lta na
དོན་ལ་ནི	(Whereas in fact	don la ni
དོན་ལ་གནས་པ	I) CM: 1) dngos yod gnas lugs dang mthun pa, "what actually exists concords with [its] mode of abiding" or "the concordance of what actually exists with [its] nature/mode of abiding." 2) kha chad l...	don la gnas pa
དོན་ལ་རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	ascertain the meaning /object /goal	don la rnam par nges par byed pa
དོན་ལ་ཕན་འདོགས་པ	be of benefit to the goal	don la phan 'dogs pa
དོན་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	discover the true meaning	don la phebs pa
དོན་ལ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	the essence of the reason or dharmin rtags or chos can &, their relationship etc. is impossible or not established [among the ma grub pa'i gtan tsigs gsum]	don la ma grub pa
དོན་ལ་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས་དྲུག	the six kinds of non establishment of don by reasons [rtags kyi ngo bo ma grub pa, chos can gyi ngo bo ma grub pa, gzhi rtags kyi 'brel ba ma grub pa, rtags kyi phyogs gcig chos can la ma grub pa, ...	don la ma grub pa'i rtags drug
དོན་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not existing in reality, do not exist in reality [ggd]	don la mi gnas pa
དོན་ལ་མི་རྨོངས་པ	not deluded about reality /benefit /the meaning	don la mi rmongs pa
དོན་ལ་མེད	does not really exist	don la med
དོན་ལ་མེད་ལ་སྣང་བ	apparent, yet nonexistent in actuality	don la med la snang ba
དོན་ལ་མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པ	taking hold of (distinguishing marks of objects, fixate the characteristics of objects	don la mtshan mar 'dzin pa
དོན་ལ་ཞུགས	NyDh: an idiom meaning "to be meaningful" E.g, R75: 216.5. [mss]	don la zhugs
དོན་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་སྤྱི	real universal; see also {don spyi} [ggd] don la g.yeng ba - change or divert the thoughts from the 3 causes which disturb the mind	don la yod pa'i spyi
དོན་ལ་སེམས་པ	think of the meaning, wish for the goal	don la sems pa
དོན་ལས	from the real meaning	don las
དོན་ལས་རིང	always keeps one far from the real meaning	don las ring
དོན་ལས་ལོང་པ	to stray from the true meaning	don las long pa
དོན་ལོག་པར་བཟུང་ན	to mistake the meaning	don log par bzung na
དོན་ཤེས	knowledge of the meaning	don shes
དོན་ཤོར་བ	to lose the true meaning	don shor ba
དོན་གཤན་གྱིས་བསྟན	show by another object	don gshan gyis bstan
དོན་གཤན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	become something else	don gshan du gyur pa
དོན་བཤད་པ	explanation of the meaning	don bshad pa
དོན་སེམས་པ	thought of the meaning, wish for the goal	don sems pa
དོན་སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ	correct discrimination of objects/meaning 1319 [knowing all the divisions of dharmas, 1 of the so so yang dag par rig pa bzhi]	don so so yang dag par rig pa
དོན་སོན	success, achievement, result, outcome	don son
དོན་གསང	(name of a text)	don gsang
དོན་གསལ་པོ་མེད་པ	equivocal	don gsal po med pa
དོན་གསལ་མེ་ལོང	Radiant Mirror, a life story of Padmasambhava by Pema Lingpa (1450-1521). Tibetan title: u	don gsal me long
རྒྱན་སློབ་དཔོན་པད	ma 'byung gnas kyi 'khrungs rabs chen mo zhes bya ba sangs rgyas bstan pa'i byung khung mun sel sgron me las rnam thar don gsal me long. A terma text in two volumes revealed at Samye by Pema Lingpa...	rgyan slob dpon pad
དོན་གསལ་ཚིག་གསལ	meaning and words are clear and easy to understand	don gsal tshig gsal
དོན་གསུམ	three stages, three points	don gsum
དོན་བསམས	thought, having thought	don bsams
དོབ	cannon	dob
དོབ་དོབ	nonsense, athletic or warrior monk, one who dresses tying his breeches above the knees, bhutanese, stuff	dob dob
དོབ་པ	pf. of {do ba}	dob pa
དོམ	bear, selenarctos thibetanus g. cuvier, tawny bear, ursus pruinosus of blyth, selenarctos thibetanus	dom
དོམ་མཁྲིས	bearbile rtsi med. [bitter, cooling, by its power rtsa kha sdom, rma rul ba gso, bshal gcod, sha'u skye bar byed]	dom mkhris
དོམ་ཆགས་བུ་ལོན	[outstanding] debt	dom chags bu lon
དོམ་དམ	ultimate	dom dam
དོམ་དོམ	tied on neck and chest of riding horse/ mule of noblemen of rank rnga ma dmar po'i tshom bu'i rgyan [Snying dom,...Aog dom]	dom dom
དོམ་དོམ་ཉིས་བརྩེགས	on horses of noblemen of dpon rigs rim bzhi yan chad dom dom steng 'og nyis sprags	dom dom nyis brtsegs
དོམ་གདོང་ཅན	rksavaktra, bear-headed dakini	dom gdong can
དོམ་འདྲ་པོ	bearish	dom 'dra po
དོམ་འདྲེ	'dre of bears	dom 'dre
དོམ་ནག	1) black bear; 2) khyi dom nag	dom nag
དོམ་པགས	bear skin	dom pags
དོམ་ཕྲུག	[dom] bear cub	dom phrug
དོམ་ཚང	bear lair	dom tshang
དོམ་ཚང་རོང	Bear's Den Ravine, in Tsari	dom tshang rong
དོམ་ར	screen, shade	dom ra
དོམ་ལེན	take on a debt	dom len
དོམ་ཤ་རྒྱ་བོ	speckled bear	dom sha rgya bo
དོམ་བྷི་པ	Dombhi Heruka	dom bhi pa
དོམས་མེད	insatiable	doms med
དོར	1) 'Dor ba!; 2) a pair [of plow animals] [Cha sbrel,...Rmon dor gcig ...Glang dor gcig ...Spang mthing tshon gyi dor gnyis yin,...Ya gnyis dor du bsdebs pa] [p {'dor} rejected, discarded, abandoned...	dor
དོར་ཁ	2 oxen on one yoke	dor kha
དོར་གྲངས	depending on pairs of plow animals figure the extent of a field	dor grangs
དོར་མཇུག་རྐང་པར་མ་བཅིངས་པ	loose trouser ends that don't bind the legs	dor mjug rkang par ma bcings pa
དོར་རྟ	part of trowsers which covers private parts	dor rta
དོར་སྟབས	dancing posture, strident posture like a champion	dor stabs
དོར་ཐུང	underpants, under shorts	dor thung
དོར་ནས	having abandoned	dor nas
དོར་བ	pf. of {'dor ba}; ft. of {'dor ba}; to throw, cast away, eliminate, remove, discard, reject, abandon, ignore, throw away, throw out, dump, dispose of, dispense with, dismiss, spurn. See {blang dor}	dor ba
དོར་བ་མེད	absence of giving up	dor ba med
དོར་བ་མེད་པ	non-rejection	dor ba med pa
དོར་བ་མེད་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness	dor ba med pa stong pa nyid
དོར་བར་གྱུར	left, cast out	dor bar gyur
དོར་བར་བྱ་བ	reject, discard, abandon, renounce	dor bar bya ba
དོར་བྱ	to be rejected	dor bya
དོར་བྱེད་པ	[arch] g.yo byed pa	dor byed pa
དོར་བྱེད་མ	SA dur byid sman	dor byed ma
དོར་མ	breeches, trowsers, pants, short garment	dor ma
དོར་རིང	long pants	dor ring
དོར་ལེ	a demon	dor le
དོར་ལྷུག་མ	loose trousers	dor lhug ma
དོལ	[arch] fish net/ trap, fisherman ??	dol
དོལ་གྱི་གདོང་སྣ	village in dol	dol gyi gdong sna
དོལ་གཅོད	resolve w/o doubt	dol gcod
དོལ་གཅོད་པ	split, cleave	dol gcod pa
དོལ་ཆོད	1) focus the mind/ attention, eliminate indecision/ distraction/ hesitations/ doubts, become w/o indecision/ undistracted/ focused; 2) EG Rkang pa'i dreg rtsa, to get blood from little bleeding nad...	dol chod
དོལ་ཆོད་དུ	w/o interruption/ losing attention dol chod du byas nas mthar thug legs 'grub byung ba - having done it w focus/ concentration there was a successful result	dol chod du
དོལ་ཆོད་དུ་སློབ་བྱོང་བྱེད	study w/o interruption/ losing attention	dol chod du slob byong byed
དོལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྫོང	head quarters of dol	dol rnam rgyal rdzong
དོལ་པ	native of dol 1320	dol pa
དོལ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	celebrated lama of dol	dol pa rin po che
དོལ་པོ་པ	Dolpopa [thd]	dol po pa
དོལ་པོ་པ་ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	12921361, Jonang scholar [ggd]	dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan
དོལ་པོ་བ་ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཙན	Dolpopa [jonangpa and exponent of shentong, b 5th water drgon yr, d 6th iron ox, khong dang po sakya chos brgyud pa yin kyang, dgung lo 31 jo nang du phebs nas kun spangs pa'i slob ma mkhas btzun y...	dol po ba shes rab rgyal mtsan
དོལ་པོ་བ་ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Dolpopa	dol po ba shes rab rgyal mtshan
དོལ་བུ	silk thread trap/snare [for fish]	dol bu
དོལ་བུ་བ	{dol bu ba}	dol bu ba
དོལ་བོན	sect of bon	dol bon
དོལ་རྫོང	see dvo rdzong	dol rdzong
དོས	1) a load, bundle, bag, bale, package [usu for animals], things to be taken somewhere; 2) fish-net	dos
དོས་ཀྱི་ཚད	SA dos tshad	dos kyi tshad
དོས་སྐྱེལ	transport goods, work as a porter	dos skyel
དོས་སྐྱེལ་མཁན	transporter of goods, porter, coolie	dos skyel mkhan
དོས་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	transport/ ship/ truck goods, work as a porter	dos skyel 'dren
དོས་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport/ ship/ truck goods, work as a porter	dos skyel 'dren byed
དོས་ཁང	storehouse, warehouse	dos khang
དོས་ཁལ	load carrying beast of burden	dos khal
དོས་འཁྱེར་སྣུམ་འཁོར	truck	dos 'khyer snum 'khor
དོས་འགེལ་བ	carrying/transporting loads	dos 'gel ba
དོས་འགེལ་བའི་ཁལ་མ	load carrying/ transporting beast of burden	dos 'gel ba'i khal ma
དོས་རྒྱབ	relay of packed animals, guard in charge of loads who walks behind	dos rgyab
དོས་རྒྱབ་པ	loads overseer	dos rgyab pa
དོས་ཆད	kher chad, kher rkyang, [alone, solitary?	dos chad
དོས་ཆས་རྒྱག་པ	pack things in loads [for pack animals] and get them ready for transport	dos chas rgyag pa
དོས་ཆེ	SA 'bor che ba, pong sa che ba	dos che
དོས་དྲག	strenuous, urgent, impatient, calling for inquiry	dos drag
དོས་དྲག་པ	hard compulsory service, severe in exacting compulsory service, feudal lord	dos drag pa
དོས་དྲག་པོ	tshabs chen po, great pain	dos drag po
དོས་དྲག་པོའི་ན་ཙ	painful disease	dos drag po'i na tsa
དོས་འདེད་པ	1) load, bundle, bag, bale, package [usu for animals] supervisor/ overseer/ person in charge	dos 'ded pa
དོས་འདྲེན	transport/ ship/ truck goods, work as a porter	dos 'dren
དོས་འདྲེན་མཁན	transporter of goods, porter, coolie	dos 'dren mkhan
དོས་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport/ ship/ truck goods, work as a porter	dos 'dren byed
དོས་འདྲེན་རླངས་འཁོར	truck, lorry	dos 'dren rlangs 'khor
དོས་པ	one who carries loads, coolie	dos pa
དོས་པོ	a load, bundle, bag, bale, package [usu for animals]	dos po
དོས་པོ་འཁྱེར་མཁན	coolie	dos po 'khyer mkhan
དོས་པོ་འཁྱེར་གླ	freightage dos po sog 'or 'dren ched 'phrul 'khor zhig - crane	dos po 'khyer gla
དོས་དཔོན	leader of caravan of loads	dos dpon
དོས་ཕྱར	dos 'gebs phyar ba	dos phyar
དོས་བུ་རྒྱབ་པ	bundle	dos bu rgyab pa
དོས་འབོགས་པ	unload	dos 'bogs pa
དོས་ཚད	weight that can be carried by man or beast	dos tshad
དོས་མཚམས་རང་བཞིན	timely nature	dos mtshams rang bzhin
དོས་འཛིན	identification	dos 'dzin
དོས་ར	loading dock/ place, warehouse	dos ra
དྲ	1) often used for {'dra}. 2) net, network, grate, lattice	dra
དྲ་ཀྱ	saucer	dra kya
དྲ་ཁེབས	net cover	dra khebs
དྲ་གྲི	cutter, blade, knife	dra gri
དྲ་འགོ་རྟེན་མཁན	dra pang gi sne rten mkhan	dra 'go rten mkhan
དྲ་རྒྱ	trap, net, snare	dra rgya
དྲ་རྒྱས	progressing	dra rgyas
དྲ་སྒྱེ	cord net bag	dra sgye
དྲ་ཅི	flat basket	dra ci
དྲ་བཅད	outlining on patched monk's robes	dra bcad
དྲ་ཆུང	small net bag	dra chung
དྲ་དྲྭ་བ	garland interwoven	dra drwa ba
དྲ་དྲུབ	cutting [cloth] and sewing	dra drub
དྲ་གདན	leather etc dra sa'i 'og gi pang leb	dra gdan
དྲ་པ	a thick paisa	dra pa
དྲ་པང	paper cutting board	dra pang
དྲ་སྤྱད	scissors	dra spyad
དྲ་ཕད	bag of net-cloth	dra phad
དྲ་ཕྱེད	1) on walls ldebs su painted sham bu'i sgang gi picture; 2) hanging pendants [on offering substance ornamental garlands; 3) half necklace	dra phyed
དྲ་བ	1) [f 'dra ba]; 2) offering substance rgyan phreng nar dpyangs khug pa can; 3) snare, grate, lattice, net[work], web, garland, necklace, chain, tailor, small copper coin cut, lop, prune, borrow a s...	dra ba
ནེཏ	work, web	net
དྲ་བ་འཁྲིལ་བ	SA dra mig grol ba	dra ba 'khril ba
དྲ་བ་འཁྲོལ་བ	undo/ unravel a net	dra ba 'khrol ba
དྲ་བ་ཅན	latticed, grated, spider, coat of mail, gourd	dra ba can
དྲ་བ་ཅན་མ	clever and skillful woman	dra ba can ma
དྲ་བ་ཉ་གང	net full of fish	dra ba nya gang
དྲ་བ་དྲ་ཕྱེད	laced curtains or ornamental silken frills, hangings embroidered and with pendant strings	dra ba dra phyed
དྲ་བ་དྲ་ཕྱེད་ལྟར་བྲེས་པ	spread out like a lattice	dra ba dra phyed ltar bres pa
དྲ་བ་འདྲལ་བ་པོ	one who tears asunder a grating or lattice	dra ba 'dral ba po
དྲ་བ་འཛིན	fisherman, one who holds or uses fishing net 1321	dra ba 'dzin
དྲ་བ་འཛིན་པ	fisherman	dra ba 'dzin pa
དྲ་བའི་རྐང་ལྡན	web-footed, goose, duck, swan	dra ba'i rkang ldan
དྲ་བའི་རྐྱང	webbed feet	dra ba'i rkyang
དྲ་བའི་རྐྱང་ལྡན	w webbed feet	dra ba'i rkyang ldan
དྲ་བའི་ཐག་པ	rope of string of a net or trap	dra ba'i thag pa
དྲ་བའི་མིག	SA dra mig	dra ba'i mig
དྲ་བའི་གཞི	field of garlands	dra ba'i gzhi
དྲ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to cut, slice, pare	dra bar byed pa
དྲ་མ	nobility (generally applied to licchabi race of vaisali), experienced, practiced, learned, board or slate for counting and writing figures upon	dra ma
དྲ་མ་དྲངས	[arch] dmag drangs pa	dra ma drangs
དྲ་མ་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླིང	a fancied continent or island	dra ma sprul pa'i gling
དྲ་མིག	mesh, openings in nets	dra mig
དྲ་མིག་ཅན་གྱི་ཁེབས	net cover	dra mig can gyi khebs
དྲ་མིག་པོ་ལོ	tennis	dra mig po lo
དྲ་མིད་རྣམ་དག་ལྷ་ཁང	sacred shrine in tsang	dra mid rnam dag lha khang
དྲ་ཚགས	latticed strainer/ sieve	dra tshags
དྲ་ཚགས་སུ་བཙགས་པ	strain in a latticed strainer	dra tshags su btsags pa
དྲ་གཞན	exalted and common	dra gzhan
དྲ་ཟུ	a ladle	dra zu
དྲ་ཡ	enemy, foe, opponent, rival, adversary, antagonist	dra ya
དྲྭ	net, garlands [jala, network, veil, web, filigree, grating, lattice, lattice work, garland on divine palace]	drwa
དྲྭ་ཏིང	an instruments consisting of nine different gongs	drwa ting
དྲྭ་ཕྱེད	lattice-work; hanging tassels; ornamented frieze (of mansion)	drwa phyed
དརབ༹་ཕྱེད	ornamented frieze (of mansion)	drva phyed
དྲྭ་བ	latticework; web/ lattice; looped chains; garland, interwoven; net, network, veil, web, filigree, grating, lattice, lattice-work; net, jala	drwa ba
དརབ༹་བ	web/ lattice; looped chains	drva ba
དྲྭ་བ་གཅོད་པ	to cut the net	drwa ba gcod pa
དརབ༹་བ་དྲ་ཕྱེད	loops and pendants	drva ba dra phyed
དརབ༹་བ་དརབ༹་ཕྱེད	latticework (Skt. hara dhahara)	drva ba drva phyed
དྲྭ་བ་དྲྭ་ཕྱེད	fringed network, garlands and pendants of a divine palace	drwa ba drwa phyed
དྲྭ་བར་གཞུག	to leave in the net	drwa bar gzhug
དྲྭ་མ་ལྔ	Five Eminent Ones. In the transmission of Anu Yoga	drwa ma lnga
དརབ༹་མ་ལྔ	Five Eminent Ones. The vidyadhara sangha who received the first Anu Yoga teachings in this world	drva ma lnga
དྲྭ་མ་མཆེད་དགུ	sgra bla named Nine Drama Brothers	drwa ma mched dgu
དྲྭ་མིག	squares, web	drwa mig
དརབ༹་མིག	book 'jug snod wood sgrom gyi drva mig	drva mig
དྲག	1) vi. to get well, recover. 2) subjugating; adj. comp. of {drag po} rite of wrath. subjugating, one of the {phrin las rnam bzhi} the four activities. 3) the post, any parcels or goods conveyed by ...	drag
དྲག་དཀྱུས	noble/ better and common/ ordinary, higher and lower	drag dkyus
དྲག་རྐང་ཞི་དལ	the three wrathful planets's rkang 'dzin and two peaceful planets's dal rgyus	drag rkang zhi dal
དྲག་སྐྱུགས	emetic [made into pills it forcefully causes vomiting]	drag skyugs
དྲག་སྐྱེད	recovery, recuperation, healing, getting better	drag skyed
དྲག་སྐྱེད་ཀྱི	recuperative	drag skyed kyi
དྲག་སྐྱེད་ཕྱིན་པ	recuperate	drag skyed phyin pa
དྲག་སྐྱེས	growing better, is improving, better, well done	drag skyes
དྲག་སྐྱོད	marching forward, advancing forcefully/ vigorously/ militantly	drag skyod
དྲག་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	march forward, advance forcefully/ vigorously/ militantly	drag skyod byed
དྲག་བསྐྱོད	marching forward, advancing forcefully/ vigorously/ militantly	drag bskyod
དྲག་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	march forward, advance forcefully/ vigorously/ militantly	drag bskyod byed
དྲག་འཁོར	drag po'i 'khor lo	drag 'khor
དྲག་ག	better, nicer	drag ga
དྲག་གིས	firmly	drag gis
དྲག་གིས་དད	believe firmly	drag gis dad
དྲག་གྲས	better [sort of --], higher class, classier	drag gras
དྲག་འགྱུར་སྤེལ	to increase the strength of the pressure	drag 'gyur spel
དྲག་རྒོལ	violent uprising, rebellion	drag rgol
དྲག་སྒྲུབ	wrathful practice, destroying [one of the four karmas]	drag sgrub
དྲག་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	do wrathful practice, destroying * work w great urgency, go all out	drag sgrub byed
དྲག་བསྒྲུགས	selecting/ picking the best	drag bsgrugs
དྲག་བསྒྲུགས་རྒྱག	select/ pick the best	drag bsgrugs rgyag
དྲག་བསྒྲུགས་བྱེད	select/ pick the best	drag bsgrugs byed
དྲག་སྔགས	exhorting/ subjugating/ wrathful mantra	drag sngags
དྲག་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	CHN	drag sngags kyi lha srin sde brgyad
དྲག་སྔགས་དམོད་པ	Maledictory Fierce Mantra. Syn {dmod pa drag sngags}	drag sngags dmod pa
དྲག་སྔགས་རོལ་མོ་ཡུངས་ཐུན	wrathful mantra, music, and charmed substances	drag sngags rol mo yungs thun
དྲག་ཅན	strong, vehement	drag can
དྲག་གཅོད	torture, force, harsh treatment	drag gcod
དྲག་གཅོད་བྱེད	torture, use force, treat harshly	drag gcod byed
དྲག་ཆར	heavy rain, downpour, rainstorm 1322	drag char
དྲག་ཆར་རླུང་འཚབ	raging storm	drag char rlung 'tshab
དྲག་ཆས	military equipment/ uniforms, arms, weapons or gsar brje'i rigs lam gyi	drag chas
དྲག་ཆས་སྤྲས	armed with	drag chas spras
དྲག་ཆས་སྤྲས་པ	armed/ equipped w	drag chas spras pa
དྲག་ཆས་འབུལ	hand over/ lay down weapons	drag chas 'bul
དྲག་ཆས་ལེན	disarm	drag chas len
དྲག་ཆེད	the 8 chos skyong	drag ched
དྲག་ཆེན	fierce one	drag chen
དྲག་མཆོང	fierce charge/ attack	drag mchong
དྲག་མཆོང་བྱེད	fiercely charge/ attack	drag mchong byed
དྲག་འཇིང	indra's horse	drag 'jing
དྲག་འཇུན	khrims drag pos bcun te bslab bya rgyag pa,...Khrims 'gal mi srun pa'i rigs la drag 'jun byed pa	drag 'jun
དྲག་སྙེག	fierce pursuit	drag snyeg
དྲག་སྙེག་བྱེད	fiercely pursue	drag snyeg byed
དྲག་ཏུ	intensely, strongly, firmly, with great energy, violently, fiercely, earnestly, energetically	drag tu
དྲག་ཏུ་རྒོད་པ	{drag tu rgod pa} charnel ground [R], fiercely wrathful	drag tu rgod pa
དྲག་ཏུ་འཐེན་པ	pull violently, pull with great force	drag tu 'then pa
དྲག་ཏུ་ཕེབ་རོགས་ཞེས་བསྐུལ	earnestly asked [him] to come	drag tu pheb rogs zhes bskul
དྲག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	ameliorate	drag tu phyin pa
དྲག་ཏུ་བབ་པའི་ཆུ་བོ	violently flowing river	drag tu bab pa'i chu bo
དྲག་གཏུམ	very wrathful	drag gtum
དྲག་གཏུམ་ཁྲོས་རྔམས	(very fierce, wrathful, and awesome)	drag gtum khros rngams
དྲག་དལ	rtsub po and lhod dal	drag dal
དྲག་དུ	violently	drag du
དྲག་འདེམས	selecting/ picking the best	drag 'dems
དྲག་འདེམས་རྒྱག	select/ pick the best	drag 'dems rgyag
དྲག་འདེམས་བྱེད	select/ pick the best	drag 'dems byed
དྲག་རྡུང	powerful/ telling blow	drag rdung
དྲག་རྡུང་བྱེད	strike a powerful/ telling blow	drag rdung byed
དྲག་རྡེག	powerful/ telling blow	drag rdeg
དྲག་རྡེག་བྱེད	strike a powerful/ telling blow	drag rdeg byed
དྲག་སྡེབས	excellent or mtho gras mnyam sdong byed pa	drag sdebs
དྲག་བརྡུང	powerful/ telling blow	drag brdung
དྲག་བརྡུང་བྱེད	strike a powerful/ telling blow	drag brdung byed
དྲག་བསྡམ	strongly tighten up	drag bsdam
དྲག་ན	hard rain	drag na
དྲག་ནད	serious illness	drag nad
དྲག་གནོན	onslaught	drag gnon
དྲག་གནོན་བྱེད	violently overcome, suppress, repress	drag gnon byed
དྲག་གནོན་བྱེད་པ	repress, suppress drag rno rdo rje'i sder mos rgyab nas bsad - grasped with his strong sharp talons and killed him	drag gnon byed pa
དྲག་སྣགས	subjugating mantras. Mantras of wrathful deities	drag snags
དྲག་པ	(Tha mi dad pa,, better, nicer, powerful, severe, noble, of noble birth, a nobleman, nobility, gentry, clear away disease, strong, forceful, good, vip, important person, chief high, exalted/ superi...	drag pa
དྲག་པ་འདུད་པ	unbending, unwearied application	drag pa 'dud pa
དྲག་པའི་ཆོས་པ	practitioner of fierce deities	drag pa'i chos pa
དྲག་པའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	male prefix ba &, suffix pho yig ga da ba sa ming gzhi dag la sgra dang rtsol ba drag par 'jug pa	drag pa'i 'jug tshul
དྲག་པའི་ཐོད	epithet of ganges river	drag pa'i thod
དྲག་པར	stronger	drag par
དྲག་པར་འགྱུར་བ	to become a nobleman	drag par 'gyur ba
དྲག་པར་བྱེད་པ	raise to nobility	drag par byed pa
དྲག་པོ	1) Raudra, (54th year, the male iron monkey; 2) deity dbang phyug chen po; 3) 11; 2) wrathful mantra and dharani; 2) strong, force * fierce, wrathful, powerful, ardent, intense, forceful rites, imm...	drag po
དྲག་པོ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	forceful wheelholder	drag po 'khor lo can
དྲག་པོ་མངོན་སྤྱོད	wrathful action [using offering substances and mantra annihilate geks and enemies]	drag po mngon spyod
དྲག་པོ་མངོན་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ལས	the subjugating activity of 'direct action.'	drag po mngon spyod kyi las
དྲག་པོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Wrathful Mantra Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga; focused on Maledictory Fierce Mantra	drag po sngags kyi rgyud
དྲག་པོ་བཅུ་གཅིག	among the 33 gods 11 wrathful ones [ma skyes, rkang gcig 'phel, 'jog po, drag po, brtzon 'grus ldan, 'phrog byed, bde 'byung, mig gsum pa, gzhan las rgyal, dbang ldan, sa gsum pa]	drag po bcu gcig
དྲག་པོ་ཆེ	violent or radical healing methods	drag po che
དྲག་པོ་ནུས་ལྡན་རྩལ	same as yongs dge	drag po nus ldan rtsal
དྲག་པོ་དཔལ་སློག་ཅན	a bon deity	drag po dpal slog can
དྲག་པོ་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྒྱུད་ཆེན	great tantra of miraculous ferocity	drag po rdzu 'phrul rgyud chen
དྲག་པོ་གཟའ	Wrathful Rahulas	drag po gza'
དྲག་པོ་བཟློག་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	tantra of the fierce wheel that repels negativities drag po rang 'byung rang shar chen po'i	drag po bzlog pa'i 'khor lo
དྲག་པོ་རབ་གཏུམ	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	drag po rab gtum
དྲག་པོ་ལ	for the wrathful [palace / buddhafield]	drag po la
དྲག་པོ་སུམ་བསྒྲིལ	Combined Sadhana of the Three Wrathful Ones	drag po sum bsgril
དྲག་པོ་ཨི་འཁོར་ལོ	wrathful wheel	drag po i 'khor lo
དྲག་པོ་ཨི་མཚོན་འཁོར	wrathful weapon wheel	drag po i mtshon 'khor
དྲག་པོའི	isc. forbidding 1323	drag po'i
དྲག་པོའི་འཁོར་ལོ	wrathful wheel	drag po'i 'khor lo
དྲག་པོའི་གོ་མཚོན	military weapons	drag po'i go mtshon
དྲག་པོའི་གྱེན་ལངས	armed uprising	drag po'i gyen langs
དྲག་པོའི་ངེས་ཤེས	strong conviction, immediacy, ardent, intense, forceful rites, destroying drag po'i nges shes} strong conviction, immediacy, ardent, intense, forceful rites, destroying [one of the {phrin las	drag po'i nges shes
དྲག་པོའི་ཉེར་སྤྱོད	iteems needed for subjugating ritual	drag po'i nyer spyod
དྲག་པོའི་ཉེས་ཆད	serious/ severe punishment	drag po'i nyes chad
དྲག་པོའི་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	military power	drag po'i stobs shugs
དྲག་པོའི་ཐབ་རྩོད	armed struggle	drag po'i thab rtsod
དྲག་པོའི་ཐེ་གཏོགས	military/ armed intervention	drag po'i the gtogs
དྲག་པོའི་ཐོད	the river Ganges	drag po'i thod
དྲག་པོའི་ནད	serious illness	drag po'i nad
དྲག་པོའི་གནས་གཞི	military base/ installation	drag po'i gnas gzhi
དྲག་པོའི་རྣམ་པ	violent/ fierce appearance	drag po'i rnam pa
དྲག་པོའི་དཔོན་རིགས	military leaders	drag po'i dpon rigs
དྲག་པོའི་དཔྱད	pags pa sogs 'dral ba dang, rus pa sogs gcod pa, sha dang rus pa'i nang gi zug rngu sogs 'drud pa, khong pa'i nang du mde'u shor ba sogs phyir 'byin pa lta bu'o	drag po'i dpyad
དྲག་པོའི་དཔྱད་པ་བཞི	CHN	drag po'i dpyad pa bzhi
དྲག་པོའི་སྤྱོད་པ	1) spyod pa rtsub po; 2) Dka' ngal dang du blangs pa / wrathful action	drag po'i spyod pa
དྲག་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	waning phase of the month after 16th	drag po'i phyogs
དྲག་པོའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	wrathful action	drag po'i phrin las
དྲག་པོའི་འཕྲིན་ལས	wrathful activity	drag po'i 'phrin las
དྲག་པོའི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	wrathful fire offering	drag po'i sbyin sreg
དྲག་པོའི་སྦྱོད	wrathful action	drag po'i sbyod
དྲག་པོའི་མིག	a fabulous animal, tree eloeocarpus ganitrus whose berry is used for rosaries	drag po'i mig
དྲག་པོའི་མིག་ཅེས་བྱ་བ	called Raudraksa, Fierce Eyes	drag po'i mig ces bya ba
དྲག་པོའི་གཙུག་རྒྱན	epithet of the moon	drag po'i gtsug rgyan
དྲག་པོའི་མཚོན་འཁོར	wrathful weapon wheel	drag po'i mtshon 'khor
དྲག་པོའི་གཟུགས	1) Rahu; 2) moon	drag po'i gzugs
དྲག་པོའི་འོས་ལངས	armed uprising	drag po'i 'os langs
དྲག་པོའི་ལས	wrathful activity, subjugating action	drag po'i las
དྲག་པོའི་ལས་བདུན	CHN	drag po'i las bdun
དྲག་པོའི་ཤུགས་འགྲོ	that which moves with vehement speed like a shooting arrow	drag po'i shugs 'gro
དྲག་པོའི་སྲིད་གཞུང	military government	drag po'i srid gzhung
དྲག་པོར་འགྱུར	become militant/ radical	drag por 'gyur
དྲག་པོར་སྦྱོང་བ	1) give a strong purgative; 2) skilled in military strategy; 3) study intensely	drag por sbyong ba
དྲག་པོས	intensely; wrathfully	drag pos
དྲག་པོས་གཞུང་འཛིན	military coup	drag pos gzhung 'dzin
དྲག་དཔུང	armed forces	drag dpung
དྲག་དཔོན	general, leader of troops, officers, military officials	drag dpon
དྲག་སྤྱོད	wrathful/ violent/ militant activity/ actions/ behavior	drag spyod
དྲག་སྤྱོད་སྤོང་བ	non-violent, abandon wrathful/ violent/ militant activity/ actions/ behavior drag spyod spong ba'i spyi tshogs ring	drag spyod spong ba
དྲག་བབ	heavy rain	drag bab
དྲག་འབབ་ཆུ་རྒྱུན	forcefully descending stream	drag 'bab chu rgyun
དྲག་མོ	1) fierce woman; 2) goddess Uma; 2) wrathful goddess	drag mo
དྲག་དམག	army, troops, soldiers	drag dmag
དྲག་ཙུབ་བསྐལ་པ	the rough age, the rude age, this present time period, SA snyigs dus bskal pa	drag tsub bskal pa
དྲག་བཙན	1) drag and btsan pa; 2) Gtso drag	drag btsan
དྲག་བཙན་ལྷག་འཁུར	kha drag dbang btsan kha 'khyer gyis khengs dregs byed pa	drag btsan lhag 'khur
དྲག་རྩལ	wrathful, possessing wrathful power, martial/ military skills	drag rtsal
དྲག་རྩལ་ཅན	possessing the powers of deities	drag rtsal can
དྲག་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བརྡར	military training	drag rtsal sbyong brdar
དྲག་རྩུབ	harshness, sternness, brutality, ruthlessness	drag rtsub
དྲག་རྩུབ་བྱེད	be harsh/ stern/ brutal/ ruthless	drag rtsub byed
དྲག་རྩོལ	great effort/ exertion	drag rtsol
དྲག་ཚང་ཆོང་ཅན	in whom are all manner of perfections	drag tshang chong can
དྲག་ཚད	intensity	drag tshad
དྲག་ཞན	superior and inferior, high and low, exalted and common; strong and weak, rich and poor, superior and inferior	drag zhan
དྲག་གཟའ་བཞི	the four wrathful planets [called wrathful because they are g.yas kyi yan lag tu 'gyur ba Mars, Jupiter, Saturn]	drag gza' bzhi
དྲག་གཟའ་གསུམ	the three wrathful planets	drag gza' gsum
དྲག་འོང	SA drag	drag 'ong
དྲག་ཡང་ཀོ་བཙན	sger chos drag btsan	drag yang ko btsan
དྲག་ཡོད	A term of grammar. Drag is a	drag yod
སཡནོཉམ་ཕོ༹ར་ཨ་པོསཏ	suffix {yang 'jug}; something which is {drag yod} is a	synonym for a post
ཝོརད་ཝཧིཆ་ཧས་ཨ་པོསཏ	suffix	word which has a post
དྲག་རིགས	the nobility	drag rigs
དྲག་རིགས་མི་ཚང	the better/ higher families	drag rigs mi tshang
དྲག་རླུང	fierce breathing (fast indirect inhalation, hold kumbhaka; exhale slowly with AH sound or rapidly without AH sound)	drag rlung
དྲག་ལས	subjugating activity	drag las
དྲག་ཤུགས	impetuous	drag shugs
དྲག་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་དབང་སྒྱུར་མཁན	terrorist	drag shugs kyis dbang sgyur mkhan
དྲག་ཤུལ	fury; furious [one of the nine moods of dance (speech)]	drag shul
དྲག་ཤུལ་ཁྲིམས་འཆལ	w intense ascetic discipline	drag shul khrims 'chal
དྲག་ཤུལ་གྱི་ཉམས	experience of anger [by meeting w an unpleasant objec mang du khro ba 'phel ba'i rnam 'gyur drag nyams showing ornament, among nyams ldan gyi rgyan]	drag shul gyi nyams
དྲག་ཤུལ་ཅན	1) wrathful, fierce, terrible, cruel, powerful, savage; 2) roaring; 3) powerful; 4) (Augaha?; 5) w mocking laughter Buddha zhal bzhugs skabs kyi khrims bdag cig ston pa'i zhal slob tu gyur pa'o	drag shul can
དྲག་ཤུལ་ཆེ	fierce, terrible, heroic, chivalrous	drag shul che
དྲག་ཤུལ་ཆེ་བ	1) great strength; 2) very wrathful	drag shul che ba
དྲག་ཤུལ་སྟབས་བཅས	w wrathful stance/ bearing 1324	drag shul stabs bcas
དྲག་ཤུལ་གཟི་བརྗིད	w rngams brjid	drag shul gzi brjid
དྲག་ཤུལ་འོད་འབར	brilliant very great wrathful force	drag shul 'od 'bar
དྲག་ཤོས	best most noble/ superior, title for Bhutanese aristocracy	drag shos
དྲག་གཤེད	group of fierce gods	drag gshed
དྲག་བཤལ་སྨན	strongly downward purging med.	drag bshal sman
དྲག་སེང	guru drakpo and senge dongchen	drag seng
དྲག་སོང	has improved, become better	drag song
དྲག་སྲིད	military government	drag srid
དྲག་སྲོང་ཐང་དཀར་རྒོད་པོ	the sagely white eagle	drag srong thang dkar rgod po
དྲག་གསུམ	the three wrathful planets	drag gsum
དྲག་གསུམ་རྐང་འཛིན	go don nyi bar dang 'dra	drag gsum rkang 'dzin
དྲག་གསུམ་དལ་བ	on the day to be calculated the three wrathful planets by their rang 'gros from the house of Aries yul gyi chu tshod however many were coursed, dal dag cung zad ma grub pa'i	drag gsum dal ba
བར་ན་གནས་པས་སོ	called	bar na gnas pas so
དྲག་ལྷགས	strong wind	drag lhags
དྲགས	be in excess/ too much/ over the limit, very, much, greatly, very much, strongly, intensely [che drags: too big]	drags
དྲགས་པ	. . . drags pa - to be too much of/ overly . . .	drags pa
དྲགས་པའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་རེད	"too much of" construction	drags pa'i rkyen gyis red
དྲགས་བྱེད	rock	drags byed
དྲགས་རིམ	sufficient	drags rim
དྲང	1) adj. comp. of {drang po}. 2) f. of {'dren}; lead	drang
དྲང་མཁན	1) mediator; 2) judge	drang mkhan
དྲང་འཁྱོག	rainbow	drang 'khyog
དྲང་འགྲོ	arrow	drang 'gro
དྲང་ང་ཤག་ཚུལ	supposed author of kun byed rgyal po and other sems sde works	drang nga shag tshul
དྲང་ངེས	suggestive-explicit meaning,	drang nges
ཕི༹གུརཏིབེ༹	literal meaning, provisional and definitive teachings	figurative
དྲང་ངེས་གཉིས	provisional meaning and true meaning	drang nges gnyis
དྲང་ངེས་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	the expedient meaning, the real meaning and the indirect meaning; x {drang nges ldem dgongs kyi gsung sna tshogs pa brda' ma 'phrod par bzung na tshig dang don du 'dzol} if you remember the teachin...	drang nges ldem dgongs
བཅོས་ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ	{drang nges rnam par 'byed pa'i bstan bcos legs bshad snying po drang nges rnam 'byed kyi dka' 'grel rtsom 'phro legs bshad snying po'i yang snying - an explanation of general and real significatio...	bcos legs bshad snying po
པ་གཟུར་གནས་བློ་གསལ་དགའ་སྟོན	detailed annotations of explanation to the {legs bshad snying po} of {tsong kha pa}; by {tre hor dge bshes rta mgrin rab brtan}	pa gzur gnas blo gsal dga' ston
དྲང་ངེས་ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ	[text by tshong kha pa showing for the sutras drang nges 'byed tshul piths of the view] {drang nges legs bshad snying po/ the essence of the explanation of the provisional and true meanings	drang nges legs bshad snying po
དྲང་ཅི	flat basket	drang ci
དྲང་སྙོམས	khog drang, fair, even, just equitable	drang snyoms
དྲང་ཏིག་ཐད་ཀ	straight line	drang tig thad ka
དྲང་གཏམ	plain language	drang gtam
དྲང་གཏམ་བཤད་པ	to be frank, honest	drang gtam bshad pa
དྲང་ཐད	not crooked, straight	drang thad
དྲང་ཐད་དུ	straightforwardly/ in a forthright manner	drang thad du
དྲང་ཐིག	straight line	drang thig
དྲང་དན་ངེས་དན	expedient & the definitive meanings	drang dan nges dan
དྲང་དོན	expedient meaning	drang don
ཅུལྟུརལལཡ	conditioned meaning, indicative meaning, conventional meaning, indirect meaning, provisional meaning	culturally
དྲང་དོན་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བརྡ་ཕྱ	conventional homage of the gesture	drang don kun rdzob brda phya
དྲང་དོན་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བརྡ་ཕྱག	The expedient meaning is the conventional homage of the gesture drang don bskyed rim gyi dam tshig samayas of the development stage of expedient meaning; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 149]	drang don kun rdzob brda phyag
དྲང་དོན་གྱི་མདོ	sutra of the provisional meaning	drang don gyi mdo
དྲང་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	the sutras on the expedient meaning	drang don gyi mdo sde
དྲང་དོན་གྱི་ཕྱག	relative prostration drang don nges don gyi mtshan nyid mi 'dra ba brgyad - the 8 dissimilar characteristics of the provisional and true meanings CHN	drang don gyi phyag
དྲང་དོན་དང་ངེས་དོན	[TRS 135-6] long expl	drang don dang nges don
དྲང་དོན་དུ	according to the provisional [relative truth]	drang don du
དྲང་དོན་རྡོར་དྲིལ	summary of mtshon byed rtags	drang don rdor dril
དྲང་དོན་ལ་མི་རྟོན	do not rely on the provisional meaning (but on the true 1325 meaning [one of the four [non] reliances) 1 of the [mi] rton pa bzhi, for unripened students in whom sadness with samsara has arisen and...	drang don la mi rton
དྲང་བདེན	honesty, sincerity, true	drang bden
དྲང་བདེན་གྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	righteous struggle	drang bden gyi 'thab rtsod
དྲང་བདེན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	sense of justice/ righteousness	drang bden gyi 'du shes
དྲང་བདེན་གྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག	righteous war drang bden gyi sangs rgyas pa rnams true buddhists	drang bden gyi dmag 'khrug
དྲང་བདེན་གྱི་བསམ་པ	righteousness, honesty, decency, uprightness	drang bden gyi bsam pa
དྲང་བདེན་ཐོག་ནས	sincerely	drang bden thog nas
དྲང་བདེན་ཟོལ་མེད	honest, real, genuine	drang bden zol med
དྲང་ལྡན	just, honest	drang ldan
དྲང་ལྡན་གྱི་འཐབ་འཛིན	just struggle	drang ldan gyi 'thab 'dzin
དྲང་པའི་དོན	expedient/ assumed /interpretable /literal /provisional meaning, meaning requiring interpretation	drang pa'i don
དྲང་པའི་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	sutras of the provisional meaning	drang pa'i don gyi mdo sde
དྲང་པུར་གྱིས	do it straight	drang pur gyis
དྲང་པོ	erect	drang po
དྲང་པོ་འགྲེངས	to stand upright	drang po 'grengs
དྲང་པོ་དྲང་གཞག	abandoning partiality	drang po drang gzhag
དྲང་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པ	injustice	drang po ma yin pa
དྲང་པོ་མ་ཡོ	clearly upright	drang po ma yo
དྲང་པོ་མིན་པ	dishonest, SA ldem po, corrupt, not upright, crooked	drang po min pa
དྲང་པོ་ལུགས་མཐུན	righteous/ straightforward action in accord w the tradition	drang po lugs mthun
དྲང་པོར	honestly, justly, fairly, equitably	drang por
དྲང་པོར་འགྲེང	to lift straight, stand up straight	drang por 'greng
དྲང་པོར་ཅོག་བཞག	letting be straightforwardly	drang por cog bzhag
དྲང་པོར་འཇོག་པ	place correctly, put straight	drang por 'jog pa
དྲང་པོར་འདོད་པ	wishing frankly	drang por 'dod pa
དྲང་པོར་གནས	to always remain whole	drang por gnas
དྲང་པོར་སྨྲ་བ	speak plainly, be candid, speak the truth	drang por smra ba
དྲང་པོར་གཤེགས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of going straightforwardly	drang por gshegs pa'i dpe byad
དྲང་པོར་བཤད	speak honestly/ justly/ fairly/ equitably	drang por bshad
དྲང་པོར་སྲང་བ	straightened out	drang por srang ba
དྲང་པོར་སྲོང	make straight	drang por srong
དྲང་པོར་བསྲང	very straight	drang por bsrang
དྲང་དཔོན	judge	drang dpon
དྲང་ཕྱོགས	side of truth/ honesty/ rightness/ equity	drang phyogs
དྲང་བ	honesty and sincerity	drang ba
དྲང་བ་དྲང་མ་མགུར	Trangwa Trangmagur. One of {ma sang dpun dgu} Nine Masang Brothers	drang ba drang ma mgur
དྲང་བའི་དོན	provisional meaning, SA drang don	drang ba'i don
དྲང་བའི་དོན་གྱི་མདོ་སྡེ	provisional meaning sutras	drang ba'i don gyi mdo sde
དྲང་བའི་གནས	the particular topic	drang ba'i gnas
དྲང་བོར་བཞུགས་པ	upright in posture	drang bor bzhugs pa
དྲང་འབྲལ་བའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	true/ truthful story	drang 'bral ba'i lo rgyus
དྲང་འབྲེལ	true, truthful, honest, just, actual, real	drang 'brel
དྲང་འབྲེལ་ཁྲིམས་འདོམས	entirely controlled by drang po'i khrims righteous discipline etc.	drang 'brel khrims 'doms
དྲང་མ	just, honest, righteous	drang ma
དྲང་མོ	fair	drang mo
དྲང་ཚུགས	immovable by other conditions, self- controlled, honest and firm	drang tshugs
དྲང་ཚུགས་ལྡན་པའི་འགོ་ཁྲིད	honest and firm leader	drang tshugs ldan pa'i 'go khrid
དྲང་གཞག	fair, just, equitable, true/ straightforward	drang gzhag
དྲང་གཞག་ལུགས་མཐུན	according to the true/ straightforward lugs	drang gzhag lugs mthun
དྲང་བཞག་གི་བཟོས་སྒོ	settlement, good arrangement, returning a favor	drang bzhag gi bzos sgo
དྲང་འོས	just, honest, righteous	drang 'os
དྲང་ལམ	straight road, short road, not deviating from the direct course, upright	drang lam
དྲང་ལུང	limited terms of provisional scriptures	drang lung
དྲང་བཤད	true/ honest speech	drang bshad
དྲང་སེམས	honesty, justice, fairness, truth	drang sems
དྲང་སོ	Drangso, in Tsang	drang so
དྲང་སོའི་ཟུང་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ	Trangso Sungkar Chödeh, in Tsang	drang so'i zung dkar chos sde
དྲང་སྲོང	Rishi, an Indian sage	drang srong
ཧེརྨིཏ	saint, rishi, sage, (straightforward/ righteous one)	hermit
དྲང་སྲོང་ཁ་ཏོན་བྱེད་པ	sages who recite evil spells	drang srong kha ton byed pa
དྲང་སྲོང་ཁྲོས་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Wrathful Sage King; seventh of {ston pa bcu gnyis}; the seventh of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	drang srong khros pa'i rgyal po
དྲང་སྲོང་ཁྲོས་པའི་ཉམས	wrathful deity [expression]	drang srong khros pa'i nyams
དྲང་སྲོང་གི་གདུག་སྟངས	the posture of the rishi	drang srong gi gdug stangs
དྲང་སྲོང་གི་འདུག་སྟངས	rishi posture drang srong gi nad 'chos pa'i sman dpyad	drang srong gi 'dug stangs
གསོ་བ་རིག་པ་རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་བདུན	a treatise on the principles of Tibetan medicine and medical treatment	gso ba rig pa rin chen sna bdun
དྲང་སྲོང་རྒྱས་པ	{drang srong rgyas pa	drang srong rgyas pa
དྲང་སྲོང་རྒྱས་པས་ཞུས་པ	{drang srong rgyas pas zhus pa	drang srong rgyas pas zhus pa
དྲང་སྲོང་ཆེན་པོ	great rishi/ sage, Buddha	drang srong chen po
དྲང་སྲོང་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 125-5]	drang srong chen po brgyad
དྲང་སྲོང་མཆོག	exalted seer	drang srong mchog
དྲང་སྲོང་འཇིག་རྟེན་མིག་སྔར	{drang srong 'jig rten mig sngar} [Indian philosopher very well trained in logic. He had sex w his own daughter and said there are earlier and later births and composed a text of 100,000 shlokas, s...	drang srong 'jig rten mig sngar
དྲང་སྲོང་འཇིག་རྟེན་མེད	rishis w/o worldliness	drang srong 'jig rten med
དྲང་སྲོང་རྙིང་པ	old sage	drang srong rnying pa
དྲང་སྲོང་ཐེག་པ	Way of the Ascetic Sages, way of the ascetics, 1 of 'bras bu'i bon	drang srong theg pa
དྲང་སྲོང་བདུན	great bear constellation, 7 sages in bon (drang srong khri lde 'od, lhang lhang btsug, thag yid ring, thugs dkar ye shes, dgung rum ye shes, 'od gsal 'bar, rdzu 'phrul ye shes)	drang srong bdun
དྲང་སྲོང་གནས	rishi abode, forest	drang srong gnas
དྲང་སྲོང་སྣོད	begging bowl	drang srong snod
དྲང་སྲོང་ཕུར་བུ	a star	drang srong phur bu
དྲང་སྲོང་བྱ་རྒྱལ་རྒོད་པོ	a royal white eagle	drang srong bya rgyal rgod po
དྲང་སྲོང་མེ་ཏོག	aster gossypiphorus ling	drang srong me tog
དྲང་སྲོང་སྨྲ་བ	1) straightforward speaker; 2) speak straightforwardly	drang srong smra ba
དྲང་སྲོང་མཛེས་པ	{drang srong mdzes pa	drang srong mdzes pa
དྲང་སྲོང་ཞོ་འཐུང	rishi Curd Drinker	drang srong zho 'thung
དྲང་སྲོང་གཟའ་ལྔ	the five rishi planets	drang srong gza' lnga
དྲང་སྲོང་གཟེགས་ཟན	gzegs zan pa	drang srong gzegs zan
དྲང་སྲོང་འུག་པ	the rishi Ugpa	drang srong 'ug pa
དྲང་སྲོང་རི	1 of 10 kings of mountains, SA ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu	drang srong ri
དྲང་སྲོང་རིགས་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of rishis (Das	drang srong rigs bcu
དྲང་སྲོང་སེར་སྐྱ	CM: sngar rgya gar gyi drang srong ser skya zhes bya ba ral pa ser skya yod pa mngon shes lnga dang ldan pa zhig byung, "The Kapilavastu ascetics of ancient India who had matted hair, were yellowis...	drang srong ser skya
དྲང་སྲོང་ལྷུང་པ	Sarnath	drang srong lhung pa
དྲང་སྲོང་ལྷུན་བ	1 of 36 sacred buddhist places, sarnath	drang srong lhun ba
དྲང་སྲོད་བྱིན	gift of rishis	drang srod byin
དྲངས	[p 'dren] draw up	drangs
དྲངས་ཁྲི	phebs byams, litter, sedan chair	drangs khri
དྲངས་འགྲེམ	to bring up and spread out	drangs 'grem
དྲངས་ཆུ	water in trenches/ canals	drangs chu
དྲངས་པ	brought	drangs pa
དྲད་ཆག	sran ma zhib mo btags pa'i rta drel gyi chag	drad chag
དྲད་དྲད	phar tshur yang yang drad pa,...Sa la yang yang drad drad kyis rkang lag rmas pa Rta drel gyis rkang lag drad drad byas nas sa la shur thon 'dug	drad drad
དྲད་པ	shoe	drad pa
དྲན	to think, - of, remember, recall, be mindful, remind, have an idea of, be concerned with, about, long for. vi. to recollect, remember, recall, to miss	dran
དྲན་སྐུལ	dus su dran du 'jug pa'i [encouragement/ impetus] ...Srid don slob sbyong gi dran skul 'debs pa,...'Khar rnga brdungs nas mi rnams la dran skul gtong ba, reminder	dran skul
དྲན་སྐུལ་གཏོང	remind	dran skul gtong
དྲན་སྐུལ་ཐ་ཚིག	skul lcag gi nan tshig reminder, notice, warning	dran skul tha tshig
དྲན་སྐུལ་ཐ་ཚིག་གཏོང	skul lcag gi nan tshig send a reminder/ notice/ warning	dran skul tha tshig gtong
དྲན་སྐུལ་ཐ་ཡིག	skul lcag gi nan tshig reminder, notice, warning	dran skul tha yig
དྲན་སྐུལ་ཐ་ཡིག་གཏོང	skul lcag gi nan tshig send a reminder/ notice/ warning	dran skul tha yig gtong
དྲན་སྐུལ་འདེབས	remind	dran skul 'debs
དྲན་སྐུལ་བྱེད	remind	dran skul byed
དྲན་སྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	recall to the mind	dran skul byed pa
དྲན་སྐྱེན་པ	things quickly arising in the mind	dran skyen pa
དྲན་སྐྱེན་པོ	things quickly arising in the mind	dran skyen po
དྲན་སྐྱོར	recite by heart	dran skyor
དྲན་བསྐུལ	reminder	dran bskul
དྲན་བསྐུལ་གཏོང	remind	dran bskul gtong
དྲན་བསྐུལ་འདེབས	remind	dran bskul 'debs
དྲན་བསྐུལ་བ	remind a person, refresh the memory	dran bskul ba
དྲན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	remind	dran bskul byed
དྲན་འགྲོ	arrow, straight shot	dran 'gro
དྲན་རྒྱ	scheme	dran rgya
དྲན་རྒྱ་ཅན	scheming	dran rgya can
དྲན་རྒྱུ	thought, something to think of	dran rgyu
དྲན་རྒྱུ་དགོས་པོ	imaginative, clever	dran rgyu dgos po
དྲན་རྒྱུ་རྒོད་པོ	1) mi dran dgu dran tsha po; 2) Bsam pa dran 'phrul skyen po [quick, clever, capable]	dran rgyu rgod po
དྲན་རྒྱུ་མང་པོ	in mind 'char sgo sna mang ba	dran rgyu mang po
དྲན་རྒྱུན	flow of mindfulness	dran rgyun
དྲན་བརྒྱལ	faint, lose consciousness	dran brgyal
དྲན་མཆོག་རྗེ	dearest sir 1327	dran mchog rje
དྲན་མཆོག་བླ་མའི་འཕོ་བ	the guruphowa of supreme recollection	dran mchog bla ma'i 'pho ba
དྲན་བརྗེད་ཆེ་བ	absence of mind prevails	dran brjed che ba
དྲན་ཉམས	unconscious	dran nyams
དྲན་ཉམས་པ	unconscious, senseless, faint recollection, weak-minded	dran nyams pa
དྲན་ཉེ	{dran pa nye bar bzhag pa'i mdo}	dran nye
དྲན་ཉེར	{dam pa'i chos dran pa nye bar gzhag pa} The Supreme Dharma of the Application of Mindfulness; Saddharmanusmrityupastana, (T 287)	dran nyer
དྲན་ཉེར་གཞག	applications of mindfulness, attentiveness, (four are lus, tshor ba, sems, chos)	dran nyer gzhag
དྲན་གཉེར་གཞག་བཞི	4 essential recollections	dran gnyer gzhag bzhi
དྲན་ཏིང	mindfulness and concentration, recollection and contemplation	dran ting
དྲན་ཏིང་སྒྲུབ་ཆེན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	the	dran ting sgrub chen gyi yan lag
གྲེཨཏ་ཨཅཅོམཔླིཤམེནཏ	branch of mindfulness and samadhi. One of {bsnyen sgrub rdo rje gsum}	great accomplishment
དྲན་གཏམ་གསར་བསྐྱེད	not remaining w 1's previous agreement bskyar nas dran pa'i gtam gsar du spel ba	dran gtam gsar bskyed
དྲན་རྟགས	memorial/ commemorative medal	dran rtags
དྲན་རྟེན	remembrance, memorial, souvenir, thing used as a reminder	dran rten
དྲན་རྟེན་འཇོག	leave something as a [remembrance, memorial, souvenir, reminder]	dran rten 'jog
དྲན་རྟེན་རྡོ་རིང	commemorative pillar	dran rten rdo ring
དྲན་རྟེན་ས་ཡིག	autograph	dran rten sa yig
དྲན་རྟོག	thought; thought, thoughtactivity; thought, thought-activity, thinking, thought process; thoughts, thinking, thought process; a thought	dran rtog
དྲན་རྟོག་གི	conceptual (patterns of) . . .	dran rtog gi
དྲན་རྟོག་གི་བསམ་བརྗོད	conceptual patterns of thought and speech	dran rtog gi bsam brjod
དྲན་རྟོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅན	with a myriad	dran rtog sna tshogs can
ཨོཕ༹་ཐོཨུགྷཏ	forms	of thought
དྲན་རྟོག་རང་གྲོལ	self liberation of thoughts	dran rtog rang grol
དྲན་སྟོང	all thoughts appear as emptiness, thought- emptiness	dran stong
དྲན་ཐོ	mnemonic note, memoirs, reminder notes	dran tho
དྲན་ཐོ་བཀོད	start to writhe down notes	dran tho bkod
དྲན་ཐོ་བཀོད་པ	to write down notes, to write down notes	dran tho bkod pa
དྲན་ཐོ་རྒྱག	write/ keep mnemonic notes/ memoirs	dran tho rgyag
དྲན་ཐོ་རགས་ཙམ	brief notes	dran tho rags tsam
དྲན་འཐོར་བསྐྱར་སོས	regain consciousness after having fainted	dran 'thor bskyar sos
དྲན་དང་ཤེས་བཞིན	mindfulness and alertness	dran dang shes bzhin
དྲན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	be reminded of, put in mind of	dran du 'jug pa
དྲན་དྲི	the beam of a pair of scales	dran dri
དྲན་འདུན	remembrance and determination	dran 'dun
དྲན་འདུན་བག་ཆགས	habitual thoughts	dran 'dun bag chags
དྲན་འདོད	urge to be mindful	dran 'dod
དྲན་རྡུགས	forget, not be able to remember	dran rdugs
དྲན་སྣང	thoughts and perceptions; x {dran snang thams cad chos skur ma shar bar} until all thoughts and perceptions arise as the Dharmakaya	dran snang
དྲན་པ	to bear in mind	dran pa
དྲན་པ་བསྐྱེད་པ	generating mindfulness	dran pa bskyed pa
དྲན་པ་འཁྲུལ་བ	confused mind	dran pa 'khrul ba
དྲན་པ་བརྒྱལ	faint, lose consciousness	dran pa brgyal
དྲན་པ་བརྒྱལ་བ	to lose one's senses, fall unconscious	dran pa brgyal ba
དྲན་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	mindfully meditate [non- distractedly]	dran pa bsgom pa
དྲན་པ་མངོན་དུ་བཞག་པ	applying mindfulness	dran pa mngon du bzhag pa
དྲན་པ་གཅིག་པ	single recollection. Syn {phyag rgya gcig pa}	dran pa gcig pa
དྲན་པ་འཆལ་བ	deranged mindfulness 1328	dran pa 'chal ba
དྲན་པ་འཇོག་པ	mind resting 1 pointedly, mindful resting, rest in mindfulness	dran pa 'jog pa
དྲན་པ་འཇོམས	subduer of desire, epithet of buddha, name of arhat	dran pa 'joms
དྲན་པ་བརྗེད་པ	to forget	dran pa brjed pa
དྲན་པ་ཉམས་པ	weak-minded, unconscious, senseless faint recollection sems la dran rgyu med par gyur	dran pa nyams pa
དྲན་པ་ཉམས་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	unwaning recollection	dran pa nyams pa mi mnga' ba
ཝེཨཀ	mindedness, w/o faint recollection	weak
དྲན་པ་ཉམས་པ་མེད་པ	in their recollection w/o weak-mindedness/ faint recollection	dran pa nyams pa med pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ	applications/ objects of mindfulness	dran pa nye bar gzhag pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ་བཞི	the four applications/ objects of mindfulness [R]	dran pa nye bar gzhag pa bzhi
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ་གསུམ	the three applications of mindfulness	dran pa nye bar gzhag pa gsum
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞགས་པ	applications/ objects of mindfulness	dran pa nye bar gzhags pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	to rest/ settle fully in/ application of mindfulness	dran pa nye bar bzhag pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ་བཞི	4-fold awareness	dran pa nye bar bzhag pa bzhi
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ་གསུམ	the three mindfullnesses of the tathagata	dran pa nye bar bzhag pa gsum
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པའི་མདོ	'phags pa dam pa'i chos dran pa nye bar bzhag pa'i mdo * the Sutra of the Application of Mindfulness	dran pa nye bar bzhag pa'i mdo
དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཤག་པ	applications/ objects of mindfulness	dran pa nye bar bshag pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བར་བཞག་པ	applications/ objects of mindfulness	dran pa nyer bar bzhag pa
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག	pillar of mindfulness, mindful equanimity	dran pa nyer gzhag
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག་བཞི	four essential recollections [body {lus dran pa nyer gzhag} or k yasm tyupasth na, of feeling {tshor ba dran pa nyer gzhag} or vedan sm tyupasth na, of mind {sems dran pa nyer gzhag} or cittasm tyu...	dran pa nyer gzhag bzhi
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག	application of mindfulness, smrityupasthana, pillar of mindfulness, mindful equanimity	dran pa nyer bzhag
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག་བཞི	four applications of mindfulness, four essential recollections. The essential recollections of body {lus dran pa nyer gzhag} of feeling {tshor ba dran pa nyer gzhag}, of mind {sems dran pa nyer gzh...	dran pa nyer bzhag bzhi
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག་གསུམ	CHN	dran pa nyer bzhag gsum
དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཤགས	pillar of mindfulness, mindful equanimity	dran pa nyer gshags
དྲན་པ་རྙེད	regain one's senses, become conscious	dran pa rnyed
དྲན་པ་རྙེད་པ	1) regain one's senses, become conscious; 2) child's 1st becoming conscious	dran pa rnyed pa
དྲན་པ་བརྟན་པོ་མེད་པའི་ནད	amnesia	dran pa brtan po med pa'i nad
དྲན་པ་ཐོར	to become unconscious, to faint	dran pa thor
དྲན་པ་མཐུ་ཆུང་བ	brjed ngas che ba	dran pa mthu chung ba
དྲན་པ་འཐོར་བ	to suffer long amnesia	dran pa 'thor ba
དྲན་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	mindful dran pa dang tshor be med pa'i gnas	dran pa dang ldan pa
དྲན་པ་དང་ཤེས་བཞིན	mindfulness and inspection	dran pa dang shes bzhin
དྲན་པ་དང་ཤེས་བཤིན	mindfulness and introspection	dran pa dang shes bshin
དྲན་པ་དྲྭ་ཕྱེད	fringed network, pendants and nets	dran pa drwa phyed
དྲན་པ་དྲུག	the six types of mindfulness {brtsol bcas 'du byed kyi dran pa}, {brtsol bcas kyi} -}-/ {gnyug ma'i}-, {rang gsal gyi}-, {chos nyid kyi}-, {khyab brdal kyi}-, {ye shes kyi}	dran pa drug
དྲན་པ་ནམ་མཁའ	8th cent	dran pa nam mkha'
གུརུ་པདམསམབྷབ༹འས་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five main disciples	Guru Padmasambhava's twenty
དྲན་པ་རྣམ་བཀོད	heart dharmachakra	dran pa rnam bkod
དྲན་པ་མ་ཡེངས	undistracted presence	dran pa ma yengs
དྲན་པ་མི་གནས་པ	sems nang du mi gnas pa,...Sems gzhan du 'phros nas dran pa mi gnas pa	dran pa mi gnas pa
དྲན་པ་མེད་པ	coma, unconsciousness	dran pa med pa
དྲན་པ་མེད་པར	absent-mindedly	dran pa med par
དྲན་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	the mere thought of (him	dran pa tsam gyis
དྲན་པ་རྩེ་གཅིག་པ	one-pointed mindfulness	dran pa rtse gcig pa
དྲན་པ་གཞན	other types of mindfulness	dran pa gzhan
དྲན་པ་གཞུངས་པ	quickness of apprehension, good capacity	dran pa gzhungs pa
དྲན་པ་བཞི	the four reminders [free and well favored human body, death, sufferings of samsara, karmic cause and effect]	dran pa bzhi
དྲན་པ་ཡང	pure memory	dran pa yang
དྲན་པ་ཡང་དག	true memory	dran pa yang dag
དྲན་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་གྲགས་པ	smrtijnanakirti	dran pa ye shes grags pa
དྲན་པ་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberated memory	dran pa rang grol
དྲན་པ་བརླག་པ	sems stor ba,...Glo bur 'jigs skrag gis dran pa brlag pa	dran pa brlag pa
དྲན་པ་སོས་པ	regain consciousness	dran pa sos pa
དྲན་པ་གསལ	clear/ refresh 1's memory	dran pa gsal
དྲན་པ་གསལ་མི་གསལ	half conscious, blurred, indistinct	dran pa gsal mi gsal
དྲན་པ་གསོ	[Phru gur bslab bya brgyab nas sngar byung dbul phongs sdug bsngal gyi dran pa gso ba] remind, refresh the memory, help to arouse the recollection, regain consciousness, be revived	dran pa gso
དྲན་པ་གསོ་བ	[Phru gur bslab bya brgyab nas sngar byung dbul phongs sdug bsngal gyi dran pa gso ba] remind, refresh the memory, help to arouse the recollection, regain consciousness, be revived	dran pa gso ba
དྲན་པ་གསོ་མན	truth serum, smelling salts	dran pa gso man
དྲན་པའི་ཀ་བ	glans penis, male organ	dran pa'i ka ba
དྲན་པའི་ཁྲོན་པ	female organ	dran pa'i khron pa
དྲན་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	heart chakra	dran pa'i 'khor lo
དྲན་པའི་དགྲ	1) buddha; 2) the deity phyug chen po	dran pa'i dgra
དྲན་པའི་སྙེ་མ	divine singer	dran pa'i snye ma
དྲན་པའི་རྟོག་པ	conceptions/ thoughts of memory	dran pa'i rtog pa
དྲན་པའི་སྟོབས	[one of byang phyogs so bdun and stobs lnga brjed nges sogs kyis mi rdzi ba'i mindfulness power/ strength of mindfulness	dran pa'i stobs
དྲན་པའི་དབང་པོ	1) (met) learned; 2) [in the {Byang phyogs so bdun} 1 of the {dbang po lnga}, not forgetting the four truths] the faculty of mindfulness/ recollection	dran pa'i dbang po
དྲན་པའི་ཚེ་བཟུང	embrace with mindful presence	dran pa'i tshe bzung
དྲན་པའི་གཟུགས	handsome woman, beauty	dran pa'i gzugs
དྲན་པའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of mindful presence	dran pa'i rang bzhin
དྲན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	epithet of kamadeva	dran pa'i shing rta
དྲན་པའི་སོ	watchman (usually {so} is similar to {sa}	dran pa'i so
དྲན་པར་འགྱུར	regain consciousness, be 1self again	dran par 'gyur
དྲན་པར་འགྱུར་པ	recover one's senses, be oneself again	dran par 'gyur pa
དྲན་པས་སྐྱོང་བ	sustain presence of mind	dran pas skyong ba
དྲན་པས་ཁྱབ	embrace with presence of mind	dran pas khyab
དྲན་པས་འདུལ་བ་སྦྱིན་པ	bestow taming through mindfulness	dran pas 'dul ba sbyin pa
དྲན་པས་མ་ཟིན	mindless, lose one's senses; lose one's senses	dran pas ma zin
དྲན་པས་ཟིན་ཙམ	with at least enough mindfulness	dran pas zin tsam
དྲན་པས་གཟུང	to keep presence of	dran pas gzung
དྲན་པས་ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་བསྒྲིམས	maintaining sharp presence	dran pas hril gyis bsgrims
དྲན་པོ	not forgetting mind	dran po
དྲན་འཕྲུལ	dran rgyu rgod pa'i thabs 'phrul trickery	dran 'phrul
དྲན་བ	light	dran ba
དྲན་བྱུང	come back to mind	dran byung
དྲན་བྱེད	recollection	dran byed
དྲན་བྲིས་པ	write down from memory	dran bris pa
དྲན་དབང	power of memory, the faculty of memory	dran dbang
དྲན་མ	mind, memory	dran ma
དྲན་མ་དྲན་མེད	neither remembered nor forgotten	dran ma dran med
དྲན་མ་བཟང	good memory	dran ma bzang
དྲན་མིག	type of awareness that constitutes a "mnemic engagement" with the ground of reality	dran mig
དྲན་མེད	unconsciousness, without thinking, no thought, mindlessly, ab- 1330	dran med
སེནཏ	minded, mindless way, forgotten	sent
དྲན་མེད་ཉིད་དུ་བརྒྱལ	fell unconscious and lay senseless	dran med nyid du brgyal
དྲན་མེད་དུ་འགྱེལ	fall down unconscious	dran med du 'gyel
དྲན་མེད་དུ་འགྱེལ་བ	swoon	dran med du 'gyel ba
དྲན་མེད་དུ་བརྒྱལ	vi. to faint, to lose consciousness	dran med du brgyal
དྲན་མེད་དུ་བརྒྱལ་ཞིང	fainted dead away	dran med du brgyal zhing
དྲན་མེད་དུ་བརྒྱལ་ལོ	fainted dead away	dran med du brgyal lo
དྲན་མེད་དུ་ཐིམ	pass into unconsciousness	dran med du thim
དྲན་མེད་པ	unconscious	dran med pa
དྲན་ཙམ་བྱ	remain aware	dran tsam bya
དྲན་རྩི	watchfulness	dran rtsi
དྲན་རྩིས	watchfulness	dran rtsis
དྲན་ཚ་ན	at the time of previous las don again arising in the mind	dran tsha na
དྲན་ཚད་ཤོད་པ	say what one perceives/ remembers w/o making anything up	dran tshad shod pa
དྲན་ཚུལ	impression	dran tshul
དྲན་ཚོར	understand	dran tshor
དྲན་འཛིན	fixated mindfulness	dran 'dzin
དྲན་འཛིན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་བྲེང་ངེ	the tense flow of fixated mindfulness	dran 'dzin gyi rgyud breng nge
དྲན་འཛིན་ཆད་ལས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	lus chad mi thob pa'i rigs la phyis 'doms dran 'dzin gyi ched du rgyu nor gyi chad las 'gel len byed lugs kyi khrims, 1 of the zhal lce bcu drug	dran 'dzin chad las kyi zhal lce
དྲན་འཛིན་མེད་པ	being out of one's senses	dran 'dzin med pa
དྲན་རྫི	watchfulness	dran rdzi
དྲན་བཞིན	1) sems la nges bzhin/ 'jags bzhin; 2) not forgetting	dran bzhin
དྲན་རིག	awake-ness, wakefulness, cognizance	dran rig
དྲན་རིག་ཡེ་རེ་འདུག་ན	when awareness remains lucidly clear	dran rig ye re 'dug na
དྲན་རིག་ས་ལེ་བ	lucid presence of mind	dran rig sa le ba
དྲན་རིག་ཧུར་རེ	intensely mindful	dran rig hur re
དྲན་རུང་བ	memorable	dran rung ba
དྲན་ལས	from memory, from consciousness, conscious state	dran las
དྲན་ཤ	meat of an animal that was slaughtered 3 days ago	dran sha
དྲན་ཤེས	alertness, mindfulness, awareness, "mindful and conscientious.". memory	dran shes
དྲན་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	ability to memorize	dran shes kyi nus pa
དྲན་ཤེས་ཉམས་པ	unconscious, faint alertness	dran shes nyams pa
དྲན་ཤེས་བརྟན་པོ	good memory	dran shes brtan po
དྲན་ཤེས་བག་ཡོད	mindful, attention and care; x {dran shes bag yod dang ldan pas nyan} be mindful and listen with attention and care	dran shes bag yod
དྲན་སེམས	mindfulness, the mind of memory, perceiving mind, love, affection, attachment	dran sems
དྲན་སོགས་ཡོན་ཏན་འཕེལ་བྱེད	increase the good qualities of mindfulness and so on	dran sogs yon tan 'phel byed
དྲན་སོས	1) regain consciousness; 2) remember something forgotten, refresh the memory	dran sos
དྲན་གསོ	recollection, restore awareness, refresh one's memory, remembrance, a commemoration, remembrance	dran gso
དྲན་གསོ་སྐུལ	remind	dran gso skul
དྲན་གསོ་ཁང	memorial hall	dran gso khang
དྲན་གསོ་གཏོང	remind	dran gso gtong
དྲན་གསོ་གཏོང་མཁན	reminder	dran gso gtong mkhan
དྲན་གསོ་གཏོང་བ	remind	dran gso gtong ba
དྲན་གསོ་བ	recall, recollect	dran gso ba
དྲན་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	commemorate, recall, recollect	dran gso byed pa
དྲན་གསོའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	memorial stupa	dran gso'i mchod rten
དྲན་གསོའི་རྡོ་རིང	memorial pillar, monument	dran gso'i rdo ring
དྲན་གསོའི་ཚུལ	way of reminding	dran gso'i tshul
དྲན་གསོའི་ཚོགས་འདུ	memorial/ commemorative meeting	dran gso'i tshogs 'du
དྲན་གསོས	to remember	dran gsos
དྲན་གསོས་ཐུབ	able to remember	dran gsos thub
དྲན་གསོས་པ	to recollect	dran gsos pa
དྲན་བསམ	(recollection and) ordinary thought processes/ thinking	dran bsam
དྲན་བསམ་གྱི	purposeful/ deliberate . . .	dran bsam gyi
དྲན་བསམ་སྔ་མ	previous thought	dran bsam snga ma
དྲན་བསམ་ཕྱོགས་འཛིན	limited predication of thought	dran bsam phyogs 'dzin
དྲན་ཧད་ཀྱི་ཟིན	remembering all on a sudden	dran had kyi zin
དྲན་ཧད་ཀྱི་ཟིན་པ	sudden recollection	dran had kyi zin pa
དྲབ	1) khang pa'i lcam shing thog 'grems pa'i drab shing; 2) in the bottom of a leather boat 'grems pa'i shing	drab
དྲལ	p. of {'dral}	dral
དྲལ་ལྕམ	khang pa'i dral ma &, lcam shing	dral lcam
དྲལ་ཏེ་གཤེགས	die and rot	dral te gshegs
དྲལ་པོ	ming po, gcen po grain split by beating	dral po
དྲལ་ཕྱམ	dral lcam	dral phyam
དྲལ་ཕྱམས	spar. Syn. {dral lcam; khang pa'i dral ma, lcam shing} roof woodwork	dral phyams
དྲལ་བ	ft. of {'dral ba}; pf. of {'dral ba}	dral ba
དྲལ་བུ	bell	dral bu
དྲལ་མ	gral ma, above a house's lcam, gral gshibs 'jog pa'i shing	dral ma
དྲལ་ཙེ	kind of courier or messenger	dral tse
དྲལ་ཚེ	(CH Chinese emperor yar snyan gsan phul ba'i zhu shog	dral tshe
དྲལ་བཤགས	shing bshags gtubs byas pa'i dral ma 1331	dral bshags
དྲལ་ཧྲིལ	hril mo wood dral ma	dral hril
དྲས	cloth cut out for making a robe or coat, SA dra ba	dras
དྲས་འཁོར	sewing machine	dras 'khor
དྲས་རྒྱག་པ	1) teacher attributing faults	dras rgyag pa
ཏོ་པུཔིལས་ཅོཔིཨེས་ཨོཕ༹་ལེཏཏེར	forms; 2) cut material for clothes etc.	to pupils copies of letter
དྲས་ཐག་ཐེ་ཚོམ	in study if dras is not resolved by discussion it must be resolved	dras thag the tshom
དྲས་མཐུད	cutting and joining	dras mthud
དྲས་དྲུབ་མ	applique thangka, tshem bu ba	dras drub ma
དྲས་གདན	leather etc cutting place's 'og gdan	dras gdan
དྲས་པ	[p 'dra ba]	dras pa
དྲས་སྤྱད	clothes, paper etc copying	dras spyad
དྲས་སྦྱར	cutting and pasting/ joining	dras sbyar
དྲས་སྦྱར་རྒྱག་པ	gos chen lhu bsgrigs te thang sku bzo ba lta bu, cut and paste/ join	dras sbyar rgyag pa
དྲས་སྦྱར་བྱེད	cut and paste join	dras sbyar byed
དྲས་ཟུས	medical treatment implement	dras zus
དྲས་གཟོང	by a gold smith threads of gold and silver la 'bur hril big and small making implement	dras gzong
དྲས་ཤིང་དྲུབ་པ་བསྒོས་ནས	cut them, stitch them and put them on	dras shing drub pa bsgos nas
དྲས་ཧྲུལ	scraps of material	dras hrul
དྲི	odor, smell, scent, ordure, SA dri ma, perfume	dri
དྲི་དཀུ	fragrant or bad smell	dri dku
དྲི་སྐྱེ་མ	produced of smell, kind of insect come into existence from dirt or moisture and heat	dri skye ma
དྲི་ཁ་བ	dri bro ba	dri kha ba
དྲི་འཁོར	changing or fading of color of a dress by use or age	dri 'khor
དྲི་འཁྱེར	smell carrier, wind	dri 'khyer
དྲི་གླུད	rjen brngos gang rung gi flour dough la bzos pa'i glud dmigs yul su yin gyi kha dris bsgos pa	dri glud
དྲི་བགོས་པ	saffron	dri bgos pa
དྲི་མགྱོགས	strong scent, incense	dri mgyogs
དྲི་འགྱུར	sal tree	dri 'gyur
དྲི་ང་བ	bad-smelling	dri nga ba
དྲི་ང་བ་མེད	free from bad smell	dri nga ba med
དྲི་ང་བ་མེད་པ	odorless	dri nga ba med pa
དྲི་ངད	fragrance, scent, aromatic, good smelling	dri ngad
དྲི་ངད་ངན་པ	evil smell producing odiferous power	dri ngad ngan pa
དྲི་ངད་འཇམ་པ	very agreeable scent, virtue, laudable merit, qualification	dri ngad 'jam pa
དྲི་ངད་ཞིམ་པོ	fragrance producing odiferous power	dri ngad zhim po
དྲི་ངན	foul, bad smelling, smelly, stinking	dri ngan
དྲི་ངན་ཁ་བ	stink	dri ngan kha ba
དྲི་ངན་པ	bad smell, stench, offensive smell	dri ngan pa
དྲི་ངན་པ་དུལ་བ	suppression of stench	dri ngan pa dul ba
དྲི་ངན་ཕོག་པ	clothes soiled with spots and bad smell	dri ngan phog pa
དྲི་ངན་ས་འགེབས	bad actions covering the earth, covered in bad actions	dri ngan sa 'gebs
དྲི་ངའི་འདབ་ཆགས	hoopoe	dri nga'i 'dab chags
དྲི་ལྔ	/ the five fragrances	dri lnga
དྲི་ཅན	fragrant, good smelling	dri can
དྲི་ཅན་ལྟེ་བ	pod of musk	dri can lte ba
དྲི་བཅས	dirty, impure, stained	dri bcas
དྲི་བཅས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	defiled suchness	dri bcas de bzhin nyid
དྲི་བཅས་རྣམ་རྫུན་པ	defilement maintaining false- aspectarians/image	dri bcas rnam rdzun pa
དྲི་བཅས་རྣམ་བརྫུན	false image mind only school asserting the defiled to be false dri bcas rdzun pa'i sems tsam rnam rdzun	dri bcas rnam brdzun
དྲི་བཅུད་སྣར་ལེན་པ	smell a scent	dri bcud snar len pa
དྲི་ཆབ	fragrant water, perfumed water; perfume; perfumed water	dri chab
དྲི་ཆབ་མ	[offering] goddess of perfume	dri chab ma
དྲི་ཆིལ་ཆིལ	rotten stench, stinks	dri chil chil
དྲི་ཆུ	urine	dri chu
དྲི་ཆུ་གསིལ	urinate	dri chu gsil
དྲི་ཆུ་གསིལ་བ	make water, piss	dri chu gsil ba
དྲི་ཆུ་བསིལ	urinate	dri chu bsil
དྲི་ཆུ་བསིལ་བ	urinate	dri chu bsil ba
དྲི་ཆུའི་སྣོད	bladder	dri chu'i snod
དྲི་ཆུའི་བུངས་ཆེ	great quantity of urine	dri chu'i bungs che
དྲི་ཆུའི་ལམ	urethra	dri chu'i lam
དྲི་ཆེན	shit; excrement, stool	dri chen
དྲི་ཆེན་རྙང་མ	watery shit	dri chen rnyang ma
དྲི་མཆོག	excellent smell, sweet scent, fragrance	dri mchog
དྲི་མཆོག་རབ	chang	dri mchog rab
དྲི་གཉིས	the two types of smell, {zhim pa}, {dri nga ba}	dri gnyis
དྲི་མཉམ་པ	of =/ the same odor	dri mnyam pa
དྲི་གཏུགས	by means of dri ba phugs gtugs pa	dri gtugs
དྲི་བཏུལ	suppression of stench	dri btul
དྲི་ཐིག	stain, dirty spot	dri thig
དྲི་འཐུལ་བ	dri ma 'tshub pa,...Chang dri 'thul ba suppression of stench	dri 'thul ba
དྲི་དང་ཕྲེང་བ	scents & garlands	dri dang phreng ba
དྲི་དང་འཕྲེང་བས་མཆོད་པ	worshipping with offerings of garlands and frankincense	dri dang 'phreng bas mchod pa
དྲི་དུག	foul, bad smelling, smelly, stinking	dri dug
དྲི་དོན	problem, question	dri don
དྲི་དྲི་བཟང	perfume water	dri dri bzang
དྲི་དྲུག	six smells [zhim pa, nga ba, mnyam pa, lhan cig skyes pa, sbyar byung, gyur pa las 'byung ba'i dri] OR six defilements [feeling superior to one's teacher, lack of regard for teacher and dharma, neg...	dri drug
དྲི་བདུན	the 7 odors	dri bdun
དྲི་ལྡན	fragrant	dri ldan
དྲི་ལྡན་སྐུ་བསངས	purifying the body w fragrant substances	dri ldan sku bsangs
དྲི་ལྡན་པ་བདུན	7 bon smells	dri ldan pa bdun
དྲི་ལྡན་མ	place in ancient india	dri ldan ma
དྲི་ནོག	stains and filth on body and clothes	dri nog
དྲི་མནམ་པ	bad smelling	dri mnam pa
དྲི་མནམས	sensed a scent	dri mnams
དྲི་སྣམ	to smell, notice a smell	dri snam
དྲི་སྣོམ	to smell, notice a smell	dri snom
དྲི་སྣོམ་པ	smell, inhale an odor	dri snom pa
དྲི་བསྣམས	[p {dri snam} smelled, sniffed inhaled an odor	dri bsnams
དྲི་བསྣོམས་པ	to smell the scent	dri bsnoms pa
དྲི་ཕོག	clothes soiled with spots and bad smell	dri phog
དྲི་བ	ft. of {'dri ba}; questions	dri ba
དྲི་བ་གཏོང	?, ask ?s dri ba mtha' gang rung du lung ma bstan	dri ba gtong
དྲི་བ་དྲི	to ask questions, to question	dri ba dri
དྲི་བ་དྲི་ལན	question and answer	dri ba dri lan
དྲི་བ་དྲི་ལན་གྱི་ཚུལ་དུ	in the form of questions and answers	dri ba dri lan gyi tshul du
དྲི་བ་དྲིས་ལན	question and answer	dri ba dris lan
དྲི་བ་འདོན	raise a ?	dri ba 'don
དྲི་བ་འདོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚབ་ཚིག	interrogative pronouns	dri ba 'don byed kyi tshab tshig
དྲི་བ་འདྲི་བ	ask a question	dri ba 'dri ba
དྲི་བ་འདྲིས་པ	interview	dri ba 'dris pa
དྲི་བ་རྣ་བ་ལ་གཟོན་པ	not give the actual straightforward answer	dri ba rna ba la gzon pa
དྲི་བ་ཞུ	?, ask ?s	dri ba zhu
དྲི་བ་བཞི	CHN	dri ba bzhi
དྲི་བ་ལ་ཡང་དག་པར་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	truly answer a ?	dri ba la yang dag par lung bstan pa
དྲི་བ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	answer a ?	dri ba lung bstan pa
དྲི་བ་ལེན	?, ask ?s, interrogate	dri ba len
དྲི་བ་ལོག་པ	yang dag pa min pa'i dri ba ???	dri ba log pa
དྲི་བའི་དངོས་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	the essential meaning w which I have become familiar	dri ba'i dngos don snying po
དྲི་བའི་ཕྱིར	because of asking/ becoming familiar	dri ba'i phyir
དྲི་བར་བྱ	[be] asked	dri bar bya
དྲི་བར་སླར་འདྲི	tshur dri ba byas don slar yang phar 'dri ba	dri bar slar 'dri
དྲི་བོ	enchanter, sorcerer, magician, enchantress, witch	dri bo
དྲི་བྲལ	free from bad smell, that which is not soiled, blameless, without any defect	dri bral
དྲི་བྲོ	smell	dri bro
དྲི་བླང་བ	smell	dri blang ba
དྲི་འབབ	nose	dri 'bab
དྲི་མ	defilements	dri ma
དྲི་མ་ཀུན་ཟད་ནས	after all impurities have been put off	dri ma kun zad nas
དྲི་མ་དཀུ	bad smell	dri ma dku
དྲི་མ་དཀུ་བ	fragrant or bad smell	dri ma dku ba
དྲི་མ་བཀྲུས་པ	wash away defilement	dri ma bkrus pa
དྲི་མ་ཁ	smell	dri ma kha
དྲི་མ་ཁ་བྱུང	a smell arose	dri ma kha byung
དྲི་མ་ཁ་ཟིན་པ	stank	dri ma kha zin pa
དྲི་མ་འཁོར་བ	1) nag nog gis gos pa,...(2 covered in bad small	dri ma 'khor ba
དྲི་མ་གློ་བུར་བ	temporary defilements / stains	dri ma glo bur ba
དྲི་མ་འགག་པ་ལྔ	CHN	dri ma 'gag pa lnga
དྲི་མ་འགགས་པའི་ནད	disease conflicting w the downward voiding prana and stopping defecation	dri ma 'gags pa'i nad
དྲི་མ་རྒྱག་པ	rul sungs kyi g.ya' skyon ngang gis 'khor ba, have an [rotten] odor/ stench, stink	dri ma rgyag pa
དྲི་མ་རྒྱག་པའི་ཤ་རྙིང	stinking old meat	dri ma rgyag pa'i sha rnying
དྲི་མ་ངན་པ	fetid, malodorous, smelly, stench	dri ma ngan pa
དྲི་མ་ངན་པོ	stink	dri ma ngan po
དྲི་མ་ཅན	rat, mouse, filthy, dirty, sluttish	dri ma can
དྲི་མ་ཆགས་པ	1) covered in dirt/ filth; 2) defiled by faults and transgressions	dri ma chags pa
དྲི་མ་དག་པ	{rang gi sems kyi dri ma dag pa} purifying the defilements of your mind	dri ma dag pa
དྲི་མ་དག་པ་མེད་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not deny possibility of purification	dri ma dag pa med pa ma yin pa
དྲི་མ་དང་བཅས་པ	with smell or stain or defilement	dri ma dang bcas pa
དྲི་མ་དང་བྲལ	bleached, cleansed	dri ma dang bral
དྲི་མ་དང་བྲལ་བ	immaculate, clean,	dri ma dang bral ba
དེབོ༹ཨིད་ཨོཕ༹	-	devoid of
དྲི་མ་དེ་བསལ་སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས	when their stains are purified, their buddhahood is revealed	dri ma de bsal sangs rgyas dngos
དྲི་མ་དྲུག	1) the six defilements; 2) six faults abandoned by shravakas	dri ma drug
དྲི་མ་དྲུག་པོ་འདི་སྤང་དགོས	avoid these six stains	dri ma drug po 'di spang dgos
དྲི་མ་ལྡན	menstruating woman	dri ma ldan
དྲི་མ་ལྡན་མ	voluptuous woman	dri ma ldan ma
དྲི་མ་སྡུག་པོ	bad smell, foul smell 1333	dri ma sdug po
དྲི་མ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	total purification of defilement	dri ma rnam par dag pa
དྲི་མ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of filth	dri ma rnam gsum
དྲི་མ་སྣོམ་པ	savor, scent, smell	dri ma snom pa
དྲི་མ་ཕྱིས་པ	1 of 4 ma ma	dri ma phyis pa
དྲི་མ་ཕྲ་མོ	the most subtle defilements	dri ma phra mo
དྲི་མ་འཕྱི་བའི	woman who attends to an infant's cleanliness	dri ma 'phyi ba'i
དྲི་མ་འཕྱི་བའི་མ་མ	child's wet nurse	dri ma 'phyi ba'i ma ma
དྲི་མ་བྲལ	SA dri bral	dri ma bral
དྲི་མ་བྲོ་པ	to smell a scent	dri ma bro pa
དྲི་མ་བྲོ་བ	smell odors, dri ma ldang ba	dri ma bro ba
དྲི་མ་བློ་བུར་བ	momentary defilement	dri ma blo bur ba
དྲི་མ་མི་མངའ	not touched by filth, unblemished, thoroughly pure	dri ma mi mnga'
དྲི་མ་མི་མངའ་བ	completely pure, unaffected by filth, undefiled	dri ma mi mnga' ba
དྲི་མ་མེད	has no impurities	dri ma med
དྲི་མ་མེད་ཀྱིས་བྱིན་པས་ཞུས་པ	{dri ma med kyis byin pas zhus pa	dri ma med kyis byin pas zhus pa
དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	pure in heart	dri ma med pa
དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Immaculate Essence, Tantra of the Flawless Essence	dri ma med pa snying po'i rgyud
དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་བཞི་དང་ལྡན་པ	the Four Pristine Qualitities	dri ma med pa bzhi dang ldan pa
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་སྒྲོན་མ	immaculate lamp	dri ma med pa'i sgron ma
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of spotlessness	dri ma med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་མདོ	Stainless Sutra	dri ma med pa'i mdo
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	undefiled wisdom {sems rab tu dang ba dri ma med pa'i ye shes ni byang chub kyi rgyu yin} a perfectly clear mind, with pure and undefiled wisdom, is the cause of enlightenment	dri ma med pa'i ye shes
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་རིག་པ	immaculate awareness	dri ma med pa'i rig pa
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	undefiled wisdom	dri ma med pa'i shes rab
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	undefiled wisdom and awareness	dri ma med pa'i shes rab ye shes
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་བཤགས་རྒྱུད	dam tshig thams cad kyi nyams chag skong ba'i lung bshags pa thams cad kyi rgyud dri ma med pa'i rgyal po; short: {bshags rgyud}	dri ma med pa'i bshags rgyud
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	Vimalamitra	dri ma med pa'i bshes gnyen
དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ས	immaculate stage	dri ma med pa'i sa
དྲི་མ་མེད་པར	bleached, cleansed dri ma med par grags pas bstan pa 'phags pa dri ma med par grags pas bstan pa zhes bya ba'i mdo * Vimalakirti Nirdesha Sutra, The Sutra Taught by Vimalakirti dri ma med par grags...	dri ma med par
དྲི་མ་མེད་པར་བྱས	washed	dri ma med par byas
དྲི་མ་ཞིམ་པོ	sweet smell, nice smell, aromatic, fragrant dri ma sa g.yog - stains/ filth covering the ground, defilement by faults [rang skyon sbas bskungs byas pa'i dpe Rang skyon zol 'gebs dri ma sa g.yog ma ...	dri ma zhim po
དྲི་མ་སུན་ཕྱུང	bleached, cleansed	dri ma sun phyung
དྲི་མ་སུན་ཕྱུང་བ	washed	dri ma sun phyung ba
དྲི་མ་གསུམ	the three defilements	dri ma gsum
དྲི་མ་བསངས	removed the dirt or stain	dri ma bsangs
དྲི་མའི་བློ	defiled mind	dri ma'i blo
དྲི་མར་བཅས་པ	defiled	dri mar bcas pa
དྲི་མས་ནོགས་པ	blemished, stained, spoiled	dri mas nogs pa
དྲི་མས་མ་གོས་པ	unsullied by the impurities	dri mas ma gos pa
དྲི་མས་མ་བསླད	not defiled by impurities	dri mas ma bslad
དྲི་མི་མཉམ་པ	not of uniform smell	dri mi mnyam pa
དྲི་མི་ཞིམ་པ	bad smell, stink, offensive smell	dri mi zhim pa
དྲི་མེད	1) spotless, immaculate, stainless, spotless, clear, faultless, free from impurity, unblemished, pure, flawless; 2) lhang tsher med. mineral; 2) brass	dri med
དྲི་མེད་ཀུན་དགའ	terton born in 1347	dri med kun dga'
དྲི་མེད་ཀུན་ལྡན	{dri med kun ldan	dri med kun ldan
དྲི་མེད་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་གསུམ	the three stainless faculties	dri med kyi dbang po gsum
དྲི་མེད་དཀར་གཙང	purely clean w/o dirt	dri med dkar gtsang
དྲི་མེད་སྐྱོན་གྱིས་མ་གོས	Syn {phyal ba}; a totally deluded view [of not understanding cause and effect	dri med skyon gyis ma gos
དྲི་མེད་ཁམས	the immaculate (buddhanature	dri med khams
དྲི་མེད་གྲགས་པ	Vimalakirti	dri med grags pa
དྲི་མེད་གླིང་པ	{gter ston} 18th cent alias {theg gling 'gro don mthar phyin}	dri med gling pa
དྲི་མེད་ཆུ	water dri med dag pa'i sems tsam rnam rdzun	dri med chu
དྲི་མེད་ལྡན	{dri ma med pa}	dri med ldan
དྲི་མེད་བརྡ་ཤར	Drimey dashar	dri med brda shar
དྲི་མེད་ནོར་བུ	pure gem	dri med nor bu
དྲི་མེད་རྣམ་ལྔ	CHN	dri med rnam lnga
དྲི་མེད་རྣམ་རྫུན་པ	the [doctrine of] spotlessness of the [mind only] false aspectarians	dri med rnam rdzun pa
དྲི་མེད་པ	undefiled	dri med pa
དྲི་མེད་པད་མའི་རྫིང་འགྲམ་དུ	on the banks of the Lotus Pond	dri med pad ma'i rdzing 'gram du
དྲི་མེད་བླ་སྒྲུབ	{yang gter dri med bla sgrub} by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	dri med bla sgrub
དྲི་མེད་བློ་གྲོས	flawless intelligence dri med blo'i ting nge 'dzin sgom pa meditate in the samadhi of undefiled mind	dri med blo gros
དྲི་མེད་དབྱིངས	immaculate space, [={chos kyi dbyings}, {sems kyi rang bzhin}	dri med dbyings
དྲི་མེད་མི་རྟོག་བློ་མཆོག	supreme	dri med mi rtog blo mchog
དྲི་མེད་མིག	flawless eyesight	dri med mig
དྲི་མེད་ཟླ	stainless moon, Vimalacandra buddha	dri med zla
དྲི་མེད་གཟིགས	celebrated chinese buddhist scholar	dri med gzigs
དྲི་མེད་འོད	faultless light realm	dri med 'od
དྲི་མེད་འོད་རྒྱན	a text	dri med 'od rgyan
དྲི་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	Syn {'phags pa'i mnyam bzhag gi ye shes}	dri med ye shes
དྲི་མེད་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	glo bur gyi dri ma med pa	dri med yongs grub
དྲི་མེད་རིགས་པ	flawless / faultless reasoning	dri med rigs pa
དྲི་མེད་ཤེལ་གོང	Pure Crystal Sphere medical treatise by dil dmar bstan 'dzin phun tshogs in 18th century	dri med shel gong
དྲི་མེད་ཤེལ་གྱི	like a flawless crystal	dri med shel gyi
དྲི་མེད་ཤེལ་གྱི་ས	bon po'i 10th bhumi	dri med shel gyi sa
དྲི་མེད་ཤེས་པ	stainless intelligence	dri med shes pa
དྲི་མེད་གཤེས་གཉེན	vimalamitra	dri med gshes gnyen
དྲི་མེད་གཤེས་བསྙེན	misspelling of {dri med bshes gnyen}. Vimalamitra, a great Indian pandita who, together with Guru Padmasambhava and Vairochana, brought the Dzogpa Chenpo teachings to Tibet	dri med gshes bsnyen
དྲི་མེད་བཤགས་རྒྱུད	Stainless Confession Tantra	dri med bshags rgyud
དྲི་མེད་བཤགས་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Tantra of the Immaculate King of Confession	dri med bshags rgyud kyi rgyal po
དྲི་མེད་བཤེས་གཉེན	Vimalamitra. A Great Perfection master who was invited to Tibet by King Trisong Deutsen. One of the three main forefathers of the Great Perfection teachings, especially Nyingtig, in Tibet	dri med bshes gnyen
དྲི་མེད་གསུམ	the three stainless faculties	dri med gsum
དྲི་མེད་ལྷུན་པོ	lama of rnying ma pa	dri med lhun po
དྲི་མོ	she mule, enchantress, witch	dri mo
དྲི་རྨེད	1) gtam 'dri ba; 2) 'tshams 'dri byed pa	dri rmed
དྲི་ཙམ་གྱི་ཟས	food of mere smells	dri tsam gyi zas
དྲི་གཙང	pure fragrance	dri gtsang
དྲི་གཙང་ཁང	lotus	dri gtsang khang
དྲི་རྩད	query	dri rtsad
དྲི་བརྩུང	[arch] sweet fragrance, smell as nose object	dri brtsung
དྲི་ཚིག	? word	dri tshig
དྲི་འཚོང་བའི་གནས	place where perfumes are sold	dri 'tshong ba'i gnas
དྲི་འཛིན	1) nose; 2) goat; 3) smell grasper	dri 'dzin
དྲི་འཛིན་སྐྱེས	SA sna'i rnam shes	dri 'dzin skyes
དྲི་འཛིན་ཁང	gtsang khang, gandhola	dri 'dzin khang
དྲི་འཛིན་དབང་མངོན	smell grasping sense perception	dri 'dzin dbang mngon
དྲི་འཛིན་ཡིད་མངོན	mental perception of smell	dri 'dzin yid mngon
དྲི་རྫས	fragrant bark of feronia elephantum	dri rdzas
དྲི་རྫི་ལྡན	fragrant breeze, wind with odors of flowers	dri rdzi ldan
དྲི་ཞིབ་དཀར	clear and definite instruction or direction	dri zhib dkar
དྲི་ཞིམ	fragrance, sweet smell, scent, saffron, perfume	dri zhim
དྲི་ཞིམ་དཀར་པོ	white fragrance, white sandalwood	dri zhim dkar po
དྲི་ཞིམ་གྱི་ཆུ	scent 1335	dri zhim gyi chu
དྲི་ཞིམ་ལྗོན་པ	fragrant tree, aa ga ru	dri zhim ljon pa
དྲི་ཞིམ་བཏགས	exuding fragrance, white sandalwood	dri zhim btags
དྲི་ཞིམ་འཐུལ་བ	smell a fragment smell	dri zhim 'thul ba
དྲི་ཞིམ་ལྡན	fragrant, 3rd month	dri zhim ldan
དྲི་ཞིམ་ལྡན་དུས	time of fragrance, spring	dri zhim ldan dus
དྲི་ཞིམ་པ	sweet smell, agreeable smell, sweet fragrance, saffron	dri zhim pa
དྲི་ཞིམ་པ་ང་བ་བར་མ	pleasant, unpleasant, and indifferent odors	dri zhim pa nga ba bar ma
དྲི་ཞིམ་པ་དང་ང་བ	pleasant and bad smells	dri zhim pa dang nga ba
དྲི་ཞིམ་པར་བྱས་པ	pleasant-smelling	dri zhim par byas pa
དྲི་ཞིམ་པོ	sweet perfume, scent, perfumery	dri zhim po
དྲི་ཞིམ་བྱས	perfumed, scented	dri zhim byas
དྲི་ཞིམ་ཟླ	spring	dri zhim zla
དྲི་ཞིམ་ལུས་དམར	fragrant red body, saffron	dri zhim lus dmar
དྲི་ཞིམ་ཨ་མྲ	1 of a mra'i mchog gi ming	dri zhim a mra
དྲི་ཞོན	wind	dri zhon
དྲི་བཞི	four odors	dri bzhi
དྲི་བཞོན	mount of odor, wind	dri bzhon
དྲི་ཟ	scent eater, gandharva	dri za
དྲི་ཟ་སྐྱེས	divine singer	dri za skyes
དྲི་ཟ་ལྗོན་པ་རྟ་མགོ་ཅན	{dri za ljon pa rta mgo can gandharva king dri za nye bar len pa'i rnam par shes pa	dri za ljon pa rta mgo can
བར་དོ་ན་འཁྱམས་པ	a driza, a consciousness on the point of seizing another rebirth, wandering in the intermediate state	bar do na 'khyams pa
དྲི་ཟ་དྲི་ལ་སྣོམ་ཞིང་འདྲོ་བ	a driza roaming in search of the odour of food	dri za dri la snom zhing 'dro ba
དྲི་ཟ་པ་ཅན	haughty spirits	dri za pa can
དྲི་ཟ་བའི་རིགས་ཅན	belong to the class of 'scent-eaters'	dri za ba'i rigs can
དྲི་ཟ་ཟུར་ཕོད་ལྔ་པ	one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad} the eight outer classes	dri za zur phod lnga pa
དྲི་ཟ་ཨི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	gandharva city, fairy castle	dri za i grong khyer
དྲི་ཟ་ཨི་བུ་མོ	celestial gandharva-girl musicians	dri za i bu mo
དྲི་ཟའི་གྲོང	mirage, cloud-land, faerie	dri za'i grong
དྲི་ཟའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city of gandharvas, fairy castle, gandharva city, [illusory phenomenon], mirage; castles in the air	dri za'i grong khyer
དྲི་ཟའི་གླུ	songs, songs of Gandharvas	dri za'i glu
དྲི་ཟའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	gandharva song	dri za'i glu dbyangs
དྲི་ཟའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of the Gandharvas	dri za'i rgyal po
དྲི་ཟའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	scent-eating consciousness	dri za'i rnam shes
དྲི་ཟའི་བུ་མོ	gandharva maiden, celestial girl musicians	dri za'i bu mo
དྲི་ཟའི་དབང་པོ	king of the gandharvas	dri za'i dbang po
དྲི་ཟའི་དབྱངས་སྙན	pleasant song of the gandharvas	dri za'i dbyangs snyan
དྲི་ཟའི་ཡུལ	domains of gandharvas	dri za'i yul
དྲི་ཟའི་ལག་པ	castor oil plant	dri za'i lag pa
དྲི་བཟང	1) fragrant smell, perfume [water]; 2) saffron	dri bzang
དྲི་བཟང་སྐྱེས	born of fragrance, insect, rose bug	dri bzang skyes
དྲི་བཟང་ཁང་པ	lotus	dri bzang khang pa
དྲི་བཟང་ན་གི	nya khrab can gyi phyi'i rus pa skogs lta bu de'o	dri bzang na gi
དྲི་བཟང་པོ	sweet smell	dri bzang po
དྲི་བཟང་དབང་པོ	musk deer	dri bzang dbang po
དྲི་བཟང་བཞི	CHN	dri bzang bzhi
དྲི་ཡི་གོས་ཅན	musk	dri yi gos can
དྲི་ཡི་ཐོད	musk	dri yi thod
དྲི་རབ	chang	dri rab
དྲི་རོ	smell and taste	dri ro
དྲི་རོ་རེག་བྱ་གསུམ་གྱི་བདག་ཉིད	has the nature of smell, taste, and texture	dri ro reg bya gsum gyi bdag nyid
དྲི་ལ་འཁོར	bee, that which roves round fragrance	dri la 'khor
དྲི་ལན	question-and-answer format	dri lan
དྲི་ལན་རྒྱག	answer, reply	dri lan rgyag
དྲི་ལན་འདེབས	answer, reply	dri lan 'debs
དྲི་ལེན	1) nose; 2) wind	dri len
དྲི་ཤིམ	w a fragrant/ pleasing smell	dri shim
དྲི་ཤོག	exam, questionnaire	dri shog
དྲི་ས	'smell eater'	dri sa
དྲི་གསུམ	the three kinds of smell	dri gsum
དྲི་བསུང	good smell, fragrance	dri bsung
དྲིང	looking to, care, regard, dependence upon, SA drin, bltos pa	dring
དྲིང་འཇོག་པ	depend on others, gzhan gyi stobs la lta ba,	dring 'jog pa
དྲིང་དང་བཅས་པ	w care/ regard / dependence	dring dang bcas pa
དྲིད	p. of {'drid}	drid
དྲིན	kindness, favor, grace, [acts of] benefit	drin
དྲིན་སྐྱོང	give kindness	drin skyong
དྲིན་འཁོར་བ	to repay a kindness	drin 'khor ba
དྲིན་འཁོར་བར་ཐལ	kindness is repaid	drin 'khor bar thal
དྲིན་གྱིས	owing to the kindness of	drin gyis
དྲིན་གྱིས་སྐྱོང	to look after with kindness, to be kind to	drin gyis skyong
དྲིན་ཅན	kind, gracious, benevolent, benefactor	drin can
དྲིན་ཅན་རྗེ	gracious lord	drin can rje
དྲིན་ཅན་དེ་དག་ཐམས་ཅད	all those who have been so kind	drin can de dag thams cad
དྲིན་ཅན་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	gracious root teacher	drin can rtsa ba'i bla ma
དྲིན་ཅན་ལོ་པན་གསུམ	the three kind translator pandits [at the time of Trisong Deutsen, dzi na mi tra dang, da' na sh'i la, and Tibetan zhang ye shes sde]	drin can lo pan gsum
དྲིན་ཅན་ཤ་སྟག་ཡིན	all are so kind	drin can sha stag yin
དྲིན་ཆུང་བཏང་བ	give little kindness/ benefit [to someone who should get it]	drin chung btang ba
དྲིན་ཆེ	very kind	drin che
དྲིན་ཆེ་བ	very kind, great boon, greatest benefactor	drin che ba
དྲིན་ཆེ་བར་བསམས་ནས	thinking of his great kindness	drin che bar bsams nas
དྲིན་ཆེ་ཤོས	great benefactor, kindest, principal benefactor	drin che shos
དྲིན་ཆེན	very kind, great kindness	drin chen
དྲིན་ཆེན་པོས་བསྐྱངས	raised us with the greatest possible kindness	drin chen pos bskyangs
དྲིན་ཆེན་བླ་མ	gracious guru	drin chen bla ma
དྲིན་ཆེན་བླ་མ་རྣམས	loving masters drin chen bla ma sangs rgyas dngos	drin chen bla ma rnams
མཐོང་ཡང	I see that my kind teacher is a real Buddha	mthong yang
དྲིན་རྗེད་པ	forget kindness received, unmindful of obligations	drin rjed pa
དྲིན་དང་ལྡན་པའི་བླ་མ	the kind teacher	drin dang ldan pa'i bla ma
དྲིན་དུ་ཚོར	vi. to understand, perceive, be aware of someone's kindness, be grateful	drin du tshor
དྲིན་དུ་གཟོ་བ	show gratitude {bde ba thams cad bla ma'i byin rlabs lags pas drin du gzo bar mdzod} All happiness is the teacher's blessing, so always remember his kindness. Atisa	drin du gzo ba
དྲིན་དུ་བཟོ	felt grateful; see also {drin gzo, drin gsob}	drin du bzo
དྲིན་དྲན	"remembrance of kindness", gratitude	drin dran
དྲིན་དྲན་པ	remembering their kindness	drin dran pa
དྲིན་བྱེད་པ	look after out of kindness	drin byed pa
དྲིན་མི་གཟོ་བ	ingratitude	drin mi gzo ba
དྲིན་མོ་ཆེ	so very kind	drin mo che
དྲིན་ཚོར་བ	See {drin du tshor} [mss]	drin tshor ba
དྲིན་བཞག་མི་དྲན་པ	no sense of gratitude	drin bzhag mi dran pa
དྲིན་གཟོ	repay kindness, show gratitude, be grateful	drin gzo
དྲིན་གཟོ་བགྱི་བ	to repay a kindness	drin gzo bgyi ba
དྲིན་གཟོ་ཅན	grateful	drin gzo can
དྲིན་གཟོ་བ	[intention to] repay kindness	drin gzo ba
དྲིན་གཟོ་བའི་སེམས	gratitude	drin gzo ba'i sems
དྲིན་བཟང་པོས་སྐྱོང	favors	drin bzang pos skyong
དྲིན་བཟང་པོས་སྐྱོང་བ	support by benefits	drin bzang pos skyong ba
དྲིན་བཟོ་འདོད་པ	wishing to repay their kindness	drin bzo 'dod pa
དྲིན་འོག་ཏུ་གནས	indebted	drin 'og tu gnas
དྲིན་ཡུས་བཤད་པ	drin byas rabs bgrangs pa'am, drin gyis bskyangs pa yin zhes yus bshad pa ???	drin yus bshad pa
དྲིན་ལ་རྩོད་པ	ungrateful, unappreciative, thankless	drin la rtsod pa
དྲིན་ལག་རྡོ་བརྡུང	beat the kind hand w a rock	drin lag rdo brdung
དྲིན་ལན	repay kindness, show gratitude	drin lan
དྲིན་ལན་འཇལ	repay kindness/ a favor	drin lan 'jal
དྲིན་ལན་འཇལ་བ	repay kindness/ a favor	drin lan 'jal ba
དྲིན་ལན་འཇོལ	repay kindness	drin lan 'jol
དྲིན་ལན་འཇོལ་བ	to repay kindness	drin lan 'jol ba
དྲིན་ལན་དུ	in return for kindness	drin lan du
དྲིན་ལན་པ	be grateful drin lan gzhal gyis 'khor thabs med pa unrepayable kindness	drin lan pa
དྲིན་ལན་གཞལ་གྱིས་མི་འཁོར་བ	cannot repay his kindness	drin lan gzhal gyis mi 'khor ba
དྲིན་ལན་གཟོ	repay kindness, show gratitude, be grateful	drin lan gzo
དྲིན་ལན་གཟོ་བ	remember/ return kindness	drin lan gzo ba
དྲིན་ལན་ལོག་འཇལ	evil return for good done, ingratitude, ungrateful return for a service done, to not repay kindness	drin lan log 'jal
དྲིན་ལན་ལོག་འཇལ་བྱེད	be ungratefulness, fail to repay kindness/ a favor	drin lan log 'jal byed
དྲིན་ལན་ལོག་པ	ingratitude, ungratefulness	drin lan log pa
དྲིན་ལན་ལོན	return kindness	drin lan lon
དྲིན་ལན་སློག་པ	repay kindness	drin lan slog pa
དྲིན་ལན་གསབ	return kindness	drin lan gsab
དྲིན་ལན་གསོ	repay kindness	drin lan gso
དྲིན་ལན་བསབས	returned kindness, gratitude shown	drin lan bsabs
དྲིན་ལོག	ungratefulness, failure to repay kindness/ a favor	drin log
དྲིན་ལོག་པ	reverse a favor, return evil for god, ingratitude	drin log pa
དྲིན་ལོག་བྱེད	be ungratefulness, fail to repay kindness/ a favor	drin log byed
དྲིན་ཤེས་པ	drin gyis bskyangs pa understand, kindness, favor, grace	drin shes pa
དྲིན་གསབ	Syn {drin lan}	drin gsab
དྲིན་གསོ	repay kindness	drin gso
དྲིན་གསོབ་པ	return a kindness	drin gsob pa
དྲིན་གསོབ་ཕྱིར	In order to repay the kindness	drin gsob phyir
དྲིན་བསམ་པ	kind thoughts	drin bsam pa
དྲིབ་ཤིལ	{dril bu gsil} small bell, {dril bu gyer kha}	drib shil
དྲིམ	stump, trunk of a tree or plant, pollarded	drim
དྲིའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	smell ayatana	dri'i skye mched
དྲིའི་བཅུད	flower, lotus, fragrant essence (of camphor etc	dri'i bcud
དྲིའི་སྙིང་པོ	sandalwood	dri'i snying po
དྲིའི་དབྱེ་བ་དྲུག	six defilements [feeling superior to one's teacher, lack of regard for teacher and dharma, neglect of religious observances chos la don gnyer med/, mind wandering in external objects sems phyi yul ...	dri'i dbye ba drug
དྲིའི་ཤིང་རྟ	chariot of odor, wind	dri'i shing rta
དྲིའི་སྲས་པོ	kind of insect believed to grow from smell	dri'i sras po
དྲིའུ	young mule, SA dre, drel phrug	dri'u
དྲིལ	essentialize, concentrate, essentialize, sum up, tighten up, summarize, wrap; 1) abbr. of {dril bu}. 2) p. of {'dril} 3) Syn {sgril} bell, essentialize, concentrate, essentialize, sum up, tighten u...	dril
དྲིལ་ཁང	bell tower, belfry	dril khang
དྲིལ་སྒྲ	sound of a bell ringing. z	dril sgra
དྲིལ་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	chime	dril sgra sgrog pa
དྲིལ་སྒྲུབ	combined means of attainment; combined sadhana	dril sgrub
དྲིལ་སྒྲོག་པ	resound everywhere, sound/ ring a bell	dril sgrog pa
དྲིལ་སྒྲོག་ས	courthouse	dril sgrog sa
དྲིལ་སྒྲོགས	place of justice, ring the bell, publish by ringing a bell	dril sgrogs
དྲིལ་སྒྲོགས་པ	publish by ringing a bell	dril sgrogs pa
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས	proclamation	dril bsgrags
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་ཁྱབ་ས	propaganda net[work]	dril bsgrags khyab sa
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་པ	propagandist, publicist, advertising agent	dril bsgrags pa
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	make a sound like a ringing bell, advertise, proclaim, propagate, announce, publicize, propagandize	dril bsgrags byed
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་པ	propagate, publicize	dril bsgrags byed pa
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་དམག་འཁྲུག	propaganda war	dril bsgrags dmag 'khrug
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་ཟློས་གར	propaganda show/ play	dril bsgrags zlos gar
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་ཡིག་རིས	publicity/ propaganda materials	dril bsgrags yig ris
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་རི་མོ	propaganda poster/ picture	dril bsgrags ri mo
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་རུ་ཁག	propaganda team	dril bsgrags ru khag
དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་ལག་ཆ	propaganda tool	dril bsgrags lag cha
དྲིལ་ཅོང	(CH big bell	dril cong
དྲིལ་ལྕེ	bell striker/ tongue	dril lce
དྲིལ་ཆུང	small bell	dril chung
དྲིལ་ཆེན	gong	dril chen
དྲིལ་སྟེགས	bell stand	dril stegs
དྲིལ་གདན	dril bu 'jog sa'i 'og gdan	dril gdan
དྲིལ་བརྡ	alarm, warning/ signal given w bell	dril brda
དྲིལ་བརྡ་གཏོང	give alarm, warn/ signal w bell	dril brda gtong
དྲིལ་བརྡ་བཏང་བ	to ring the bell as a signal	dril brda btang ba
དྲིལ་ཕྱིས	1) lus kyi dreg pa phyis pa; 2) Spags phyis; 3) (A; 1) fire; 2) Stan	dril phyis
དྲིལ་བ	to roll/ twirl/ spin; to roll/ coil up; to blend	dril ba
དྲིལ་བ་ལ	in a nutshell	dril ba la
དྲིལ་བུ	ghanta, bell	dril bu
དྲིལ་བུ་དཀྲོལ	ring a bell	dril bu dkrol
དྲིལ་བུ་གྱེར་ཁ	small bell	dril bu gyer kha
དྲིལ་བུ་བཏགས་ཆོག་པའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	bell tying allowed 'khrol 'dzin [at the time of smon lam Lhasa people's horses etc, can have neck ornament [usu only nobles] tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin]	dril bu btags chog pa'i 'khrol 'dzin
དྲིལ་བུ་བརྡུང	ring a bell	dril bu brdung
དྲིལ་བུ་པ	Drilbupa or Vajraghantapada,	dril bu pa
ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨེཨིགྷཏཡ	four Mahasiddhas of India	one of the eighty
དྲིལ་བུ་མ	bell goddess	dril bu ma
དྲིལ་བུ་ཞབས་ལུགས	the system of the mahasiddha Ghantapada dril bu yi g.yer kha - open-mouthed little bells that dangle from the bone ornaments dril bu g.yer kha ma - small bell attached	dril bu zhabs lugs
ཏོ་ནེཅཀ་ཨོཕ༹་ལྷས་ལཔ	dog as an ornament	to neck of lhasa lap
དྲིལ་བུ་སོགས་བཀྲོལ་བ	ring	dril bu sogs bkrol ba
དྲིལ་བུ་གསིལ	ring a bell	dril bu gsil
དྲིལ་བུ་གསིལ་བ	ring a bell	dril bu gsil ba
དྲིལ་བུའི་རྒྱ	bell mudra	dril bu'i rgya
དྲིལ་བུའི་སྒྲ	ding-dong	dril bu'i sgra
དྲིལ་བུའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	bell mudra	dril bu'i phyag rgya
དྲིལ་བུར་བཅས་པ	w a ghanta	dril bur bcas pa
དྲིལ་དབང	combined empowerment	dril dbang
དྲིལ་ཡེར	little bells	dril yer
དྲིལ་ཡེར་གྱི་དྲ་བ	like little bells dril g.yer - dril bu and g.yer kha dril g.yer - small bells dril g.yer gyi dra ba - bro pa gzhas ma'i sked par dkri bya g.yer kha'i do shal	dril yer gyi dra ba
དྲིས	inquire, ask. p. of {'dri}; asked; imp. of {'dri ba}	dris
དྲིས་བགོས	tainted, contaminated	dris bgos
དྲིས་ཐོ	gtam dris pa'i note	dris tho
དྲིས་ནས	having asked	dris nas
དྲིས་པ	pf. of {'dri ba}	dris pa
དྲིས་པ་གཏན་ལ་ཕབ	decision of questions	dris pa gtan la phab
དྲིས་པའི་ཐོ	SA skad cha dris pa'i tho	dris pa'i tho
དྲིས་པའི་བརྡ་རྙིང	obsolete word being asked	dris pa'i brda rnying
དྲིས་བ	ask interrogate	dris ba
དྲིས་མ	one who has asked, having asked	dris ma
དྲིས་ལན	epistles, letters, replies, answer to a question	dris lan
དྲིས་ལན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	to respond to a question	dris lan gyi sgo nas
དྲིས་ལན་རྒྱག	answer, reply to a ?	dris lan rgyag
དྲིས་ལན་འདེབས	answer, reply to a ?	dris lan 'debs
དྲིས་ལན་ལྡོན་པ	answer, reply to a ?	dris lan ldon pa
དྲིས་ལན་རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	dris lan rnam grangs bcu gcig
དྲིས་ལན་དབང་ཕྱུག	master of answers	dris lan dbang phyug
དྲིས་ལན་སློག་པ	answer, reply to a ?	dris lan slog pa
དྲུ་གུ	1) pho long ste, ball of thread/ string/ yarn; 2) dru gu	dru gu
དྲུ་བུ	ball [of thread/ string/ yarn], clue	dru bu
དྲུ་བུ་འཛིངས་པ	clew of a thread mixed up or confused	dru bu 'dzings pa
དྲུ་མ	coral	dru ma
དྲུ་དམར	kind of high quality turquoise	dru dmar
དྲུག་དཀར	two sorts of turquoise	drug dkar
དྲུག་སྐྱེས	1 of the {glu dbyangs nges pa bdun}	drug skyes
དྲུག་ཁྲི	60,000	drug khri
དྲུག་གི་སྨན	aconite, poison used as medicine	drug gi sman
དྲུག་གྲངས་ཀ	six [syn: 'gro ba, rgyan, dus, phyod glang, bro ba, mtshams, bzang po, ro]	drug grangs ka
དྲུག་འགོ	{drug 'go bleding nadi [gru mo'i nang from the corner measuring four fingers mchin pa dang connected bleding nadi, if bled good for mchin nad &, glo tshad etc.]	drug 'go
དྲུག་འགྱོགས	[TRS 142-3]	drug 'gyogs
དྲུག་སྒྲ	article (pa, ba, ma, po, bo, mo)	drug sgra
དྲུག་བརྒྱ	600, 600	drug brgya
དྲུག་ཅུ	sixty	drug cu
དྲུག་ཅུ་སྐོར	vrhaspati cycle, cycle of sixty years	drug cu skor
དྲུག་ཅུ་ཐམ་པ	60	drug cu tham pa
དྲུག་ཅུ་མ	1) the 15 direction protectors, 'jigs byed kyi bka' sdod 'chi bdag las gshin la offer torma; four karmas bcol ba'i liturgy; 2) Rtsam pa drug cu ma: rngod 'thag rgyag skabs 'bru khal drug phar sprad...	drug cu ma
དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	sixty two	drug cu rtsa gnyis
དྲུག་ཅུ་རེ་གཅིག	61	drug cu re gcig
དྲུག་གཅིག་བྱིས་པའི་དུས་ཆེན	June 1: Children's Day	drug gcig byis pa'i dus chen
དྲུག་ཆ	1/6	drug cha
དྲུག་ཆ་གཅིག	one sixth	drug cha gcig
དྲུག་ཏུ་མཉེ	to rub with great energy	drug tu mnye
དྲུག་ལྟིར	container holding six srang of chang blug chog sa'i khog ltir	drug ltir
དྲུག་སྟོང	6 thousand	drug stong
དྲུག་ཐུལ	drug ltir	drug thul
དྲུག་དྲུག	each has six, 6 each	drug drug
དྲུག་བདུན	June 7 [1968] [when CH are alleged to have executed a group of Tibetan in Lhasa]	drug bdun
དྲུག་བདུན་འགྲོ	custom: in spring 'bru bun khal six btang nas in the autumn receiving 7 skyed kha	drug bdun 'gro
དྲུག་མདོ	end of the spine [syn: rgyab kyi rgyud 'dzin drug med pa]	drug mdo
དྲུག་མདོ་བ	follower	drug mdo ba
དྲུག་ལྡན་མ	epithet of goddess gauri	drug ldan ma
དྲུག་སྡེ	six classes	drug sde
དྲུག་ནམ	[arch] 1/6	drug nam
དྲུག་པ	the Sixfold One, the Sixth Buddha, Syn Vajradhara	drug pa
དྲུག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	6th buddha great Vajradhara	drug pa rdo rje 'chang
དྲུག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན	6th buddha great Vajradhara	drug pa rdo rje 'chang chen
དྲུག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན་པོ	6th buddha great Vajradhara [5th of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	drug pa rdo rje 'chang chen po
དྲུག་པ་ཙེས་བཞི	6th month 4th day feast [of turning the wheel of dharma of the four noble truths when Lhasa's mi ser customarily go to make offerings at neighboring monasteries]	drug pa tses bzhi
དྲུག་པ་ཚེས་བཞི	the fourth of the sixth month (ceremony on the 4th day of the 6th Tibetan month)	drug pa tshes bzhi
དྲུག་པ་སེང་གེ	Shasta singha [the 6th buddha, the lion]	drug pa seng ge
དྲུག་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཚབ	Sixth Buddha Regent	drug pa'i rgyal tshab
དྲུག་པའི་ཚིག	genitive	drug pa'i tshig
དྲུག་པར	sixthly	drug par
དྲུག་པོ	all six [together]	drug po
དྲུག་བྲལ་སུམ་ལྡན་གྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས	authentic treatise	drug bral sum ldan gyi bstan bcos
དྲུག་འབུམ	600,000	drug 'bum
དྲུག་འབུམ་ཅིག་ཁྲི	610 thousand	drug 'bum cig khri
དྲུག་འབུམ་ཉི་ཁྲི	620 thousand	drug 'bum nyi khri
དྲུག་མེད་པ	end of the spine	drug med pa
དྲུག་དམར	kind of turquoise w a red cast	drug dmar
སུཔཔོསེད་ཏོ་བེ་ཨོནེ	sixth part red in tint	supposed to be one
དྲུག་ཞོ	six mule loads of barley grain for one zho	drug zho
དྲུག་ཤས	1/6	drug shas
དྲུང	1) root; 2) near, in front of, i the presence of [h]; 3) attendant	drung
དྲུང་དཀྱུས	Tibetan govt gi shod drung dkyus ma	drung dkyus
དྲུང་དཀྱུས་མ	inferior official, common clerk	drung dkyus ma
དྲུང་འཁོར	lay officials under the government of tibet, official clerks, private secretaries, personal assistants, secretary or clerk, service, lay official (in traditional Tibetan government)	drung 'khor
དྲུང་འཁོར་ཆེན་པོ	high official	drung 'khor chen po
དྲུང་གྲགས་པ	names of officials under phagmo grub hierarchy	drung grags pa
དྲུང་ཆ་ཐོན	brighten up	drung cha thon
དྲུང་ཆེ	secretary	drung che
དྲུང་ཆེ་སྐུ་འབྲིང	deputy secretary	drung che sku 'bring
དྲུང་ཆེ་སྐུ་གཞོན	under secretary	drung che sku gzhon
དྲུང་ཆེ་དང་པོ	1st secretary	drung che dang po
དྲུང་ཆེ་ཕྱག་སྦྲེལ	joint secretary	drung che phyag sbrel
དྲུང་ཆེ་ལས་རོགས	deputy secretary	drung che las rogs
དྲུང་ཆེན	great secretary	drung chen
དྲུང་གཏོགས	belonging to the near retinue	drung gtogs
དྲུང་དུ	in[to] the presence of, near to, before	drung du
ལགས་ཀྱི་དྲུང་དུ་ཏོ་ཊཤི	la]	lags kyi drung du to Tashi
དྲུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go near to	drung du 'gro ba
དྲུང་དུ་བསྙེན་ནས	go to him	drung du bsnyen nas
དྲུང་དུ་བསྟན	to show to	drung du bstan
དྲུང་དུ་དེང་བ	to approach 1339	drung du deng ba
དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན	went to {bcom ldan 'das kyi drung du phyin nas zhus pa} went to the Buddha and said	drung du phyin
དུ་ཕྱིན་ཏེ	he went to see the Bhagavan	du phyin te
དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་ནས	went to	drung du phyin nas
དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went to	drung du phyin pa
དྲུང་དུ་སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་པ	{rang sangs rgyas kyi drung du smon lam btab pa} made this prayer of aspiration in front of the Pratyekabuddha	drung du smon lam btab pa
དྲུང་དུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཚུལ	presence	drung du yod pa'i tshul
དྲུང་དུ་སླེབས་པ	appeared in front of	drung du slebs pa
དྲུང་དུ་བསླེབས	arrived in front of	drung du bslebs
དྲུང་དུ་བསླེབས་སོང	find oneself in front of	drung du bslebs song
དྲུང་དུ་ལྷགས	{rgyal po'i drung du lhags nas zhus pa} went before the king and said	drung du lhags
དྲུང་དྲག	superior rank of officials	drung drag
དྲུང་ན	in front of	drung na
དྲུང་ན་སྐྱོད་པ	mdun na 'don nam drung 'khor	drung na skyod pa
དྲུང་ན་མོ	imminent, very near, close to, impending	drung na mo
དྲུང་ནམ་མཁའ་བཟང་པོ	a govt secretary of lhasa	drung nam mkha' bzang po
དྲུང་ནས	from the presence/ before/ near	drung nas
དྲུང་ནས་ཕྱུང	to get rid of, give up completely, annihilate, obliterate	drung nas phyung
དྲུང་ནས་འབྱིན	drawn from near	drung nas 'byin
དྲུང་ནས་འབྱིན་པ	to be entirely/ completely uprooted	drung nas 'byin pa
དྲུང་གནས	1) nearby, in the neighborhood; 2) rank in Tibetan government	drung gnas
དྲུང་གནས་པ	companion, associate	drung gnas pa
དྲུང་པ	1) attendant [h]; 2) in some monasteries the 1st rank of geshe; 3) Spun zla [brothers, siblings, relatives] [h]; 4) Sir, reverend; 5) near, before, in the presence of	drung pa
ཨཻདེ	de-camp	aide
དྲུང་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1) Trungpa Rinpoche; 2) btsun pa from the lineage of a high noble [h]	drung pa rin po che
དྲུང་པོ	prudent, sensible, judicious, wise	drung po
དྲུང་པོ་འཕེལ་བ	lucidity	drung po 'phel ba
དྲུང་སྤྱི	(Das) civil officers in general [mss]	drung spyi
དྲུང་ཕུངས	chop the roots	drung phungs
དྲུང་འབྱིན་གྱི་ཙུལ	uprooting it altogether	drung 'byin gyi tsul
དྲུང་འབྲིང་བ	middle class official	drung 'bring ba
དྲུང་རྩིས	secular and monastic officials in the traditional Tibetan *government	drung rtsis
དྲུང་འཚོ	physician	drung 'tsho
དྲུང་འཚོ་བ	physician	drung 'tsho ba
དྲུང་ཡིག	secretary, clerk, official	drung yig
དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེ་མོ་བ	1) Tibetan govt yig tshang las khungs kyi las 'gan 'khri ba'i rtse drung mkhan sde'i rank having; 2) Las khungs che khag gi head secretary, secretary general	drung yig che mo ba
དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ	four heads of the Yigtsang Office in traditional *Tibetan government	drung yig chen mo
དྲུང་ཡིག་པ	clerk, writer	drung yig pa
དྲུང་རམས་པ	lowest degree in buddhist literature	drung rams pa
དྲུང་སོང་ངེ	brightens up	drung song nge
དྲུངས	root disease, tree disease	drungs
དྲུངས་ནས་ཕྱང	exterminated from the root, radically cured	drungs nas phyang
དྲུངས་པ	bright, sparkling, clarified, clear, beer	drungs pa
དྲུངས་པོ	bright, sparkling	drungs po
དྲུངས་ཕྱུང	CM: (rnying) rtsa ba bton ba, to tear out [from]/ draw from/ extract [from] the root. [mss]	drungs phyung
དྲུངས་བྱེད	gem which purifies water	drungs byed
དྲུད	dragged	drud
དྲུད་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	tractor	drud 'then 'khor lo
དྲུད་འཐེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	tractor	drud 'then 'phrul 'khor
དྲུད་དྲུད	pelican	drud drud
དྲུད་པ	{rta yis drud pa} dragged on the ground after falling from their horse	drud pa
དྲུད་ཚུལ	'hauling' motion (in dance)	drud tshul
དྲུབ་པ	(tha dad pa drubs pa, drub pa, drubs,, sew [f 'drub]	drub pa
དྲུབས	imp. of {drub pa}	drubs
དྲུབས་པ	sewn	drubs pa
དྲུམ་པ	have a strong desire, long, languish, pine for, passion	drum pa
དྲུལ	rotted [p 'drul]	drul
དྲུལ་བ	rot	drul ba
དྲུལ་བྲལ	free from rot	drul bral
དྲུས	imp. of {'dru ba}	drus
དྲུས་རྒྱག་པ	yos sgye mo'i nang blugs nas rdog brdzis btang ste yos lpags bshu ba	drus rgyag pa
དྲུས་པ	dug [up]	drus pa
དྲུས་པོ	g.yag na so bzhi pa	drus po
དྲུས་མ	millet	drus ma
དྲུས་བཞག	mo phyugs la sbyor sprod byed pa'i dus shar ba	drus bzhag
དྲུས་ལོག་རྒྱག་པ	phyugs rigs la sbyor sprod byed pa'i dus tshod yang bskyar 'char ba	drus log rgyag pa
དྲེ	dre demon *, mule	dre
དྲེ་ཕོ	mule	dre pho
དྲེ་བོ	1) dral ma; 2) male 'dre demon; 3) elbow	dre bo
དྲེ་མོ	female 'dre demon	dre mo
དྲེ་ཧོ	thermo-nuclear	dre ho
དྲེག	[f 'dreg] will shave/ cut hair, dirt, filth, soot	dreg
དྲེག་འཁྲུ	laundering, do laundry	dreg 'khru
དྲེག་གྲུམ	gout, podagra, feeling of lameness in the limbs 1340	dreg grum
དྲེག་འགོས་སྐྱོན་ཤོར	dreg nag gis 'gos pa dang skyon chags pa	dreg 'gos skyon shor
དྲེག་ལྡན	coating of dirt on anything	dreg ldan
དྲེག་ནད	dreg disease * gout	dreg nad
དྲེག་པ	dirt, filth, soot	dreg pa
དྲེག་པ་འཁོར	become dirty, collect dirt	dreg pa 'khor
དྲེག་པ་ཅན	dirty	dreg pa can
དྲེག་པ་ཆགས	become dirty, collect dirt	dreg pa chags
དྲེག་བལ	soot gi ral pa	dreg bal
དྲེགས	conceit, pride, haughtiness, arrogance, insolence, viciousness; tyranny; - Syn {rgyags pa}; conceit, pride, haughtiness, arrogance, insolence, viciousness; tyranny; - Syn {rgyags pa; 1) vi. to beco...	dregs
དྲེགས་སྔགས་དམོད་པ	1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad	dregs sngags dmod pa
དྲེགས་ཉམས	arrogant, haughty, proud, conceited [pride and arrogance gyi nyams]	dregs nyams
དྲེགས་སྙེམས	mind full of pride	dregs snyems
དྲེགས་ལྡན་མ	young woman	dregs ldan ma
དྲེགས་པ	Haughty spirit. A certain type of malevolent spirit	dregs pa
དྲེགས་པ་ཀུན་འདུལ	Tamer of All Haughty Spirits. The chief figure in the mandala of Mundane Worship	dregs pa kun 'dul
དྲེགས་པ་ཅན	haughty spirits	dregs pa can
དྲེགས་པ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 kinds of pride	dregs pa bco lnga
དྲེགས་པ་འཇོམས་པ	vanquish their conceit	dregs pa 'joms pa
དྲེགས་པ་ཐུལ་བའི	w tamed haughtiness, taming drekpas	dregs pa thul ba'i
དྲེགས་པ་འདུལ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Taming Haughty Spirits. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga; focused on the section of Mundane Worship dregs pa spangs nas thams cad la gus pa	dregs pa 'dul ba'i rgyud
ཁྱུ་མཆོག་རབ༹་ཆད་པ་ལྟ་བུ	Like a bull with broken horns, we should abandon arrogance and respect everyone dregs pa spangs pa khyu mchog rva chad	khyu mchog rva chad pa lta bu
དྲེགས་པ་ཕྲ་མོ	minor spirits	dregs pa phra mo
དྲེགས་པ་ཚར་བཅད	annihilate haughtiness	dregs pa tshar bcad
དྲེགས་པའི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 classes of proved ones	dregs pa'i sde brgyad
དྲེགས་པའི་སྡེ་དཔོན་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 Chieftains; belonging under {'jig rten mchod bstod} dregs pas rgyags shing rab tu zhi ba dang	dregs pa'i sde dpon sum cu
བྲལ་བ་ཡིན	the arrogance born of pride that will keep you from peace and contentment	bral ba yin
དྲེགས་བྱེད	devil	dregs byed
དྲེགས་མེད་ཁེངས་བསྐྱུངས	humble and modest	dregs med khengs bskyungs
དྲེགས་ཚིག	arrogant and full of pride word	dregs tshig
དྲེགས་ཚོགས	hosts of violent deities	dregs tshogs
དྲེད	red or snow bear, ursus isabellinus, ursus artcos	dred
དྲེད་ཅན	unfeeling	dred can
དྲེད་ཏོ	sgal ral tsha po	dred to
དྲེད་རྡབ་ཤོར	slip	dred rdab shor
དྲེད་པ	contempt/ disgust	dred pa
དྲེད་པོ	evasive, lazy, idiot, insensitive, stubborn person, savage, wild, rough, savage	dred po
བྲུཏེ	like and irreligious, yellow male bear	brute
དྲེད་པོ་བཞི	CHN	dred po bzhi
དྲེད་ལྤགས	bear skin	dred lpags
དྲེད་ཕོ	dred mong bear boar	dred pho
དྲེད་མ	tough/ rough/ stubborn woman	dred ma
དྲེད་མོ	1) dred mong bear sow; 2) Dred mong bear [large bear like grizzly [Us brown to yellowish or reddish 1 of the {{gcan gzan che dgu}; 2) 1 who has gone astray from righteousness or the religious life;...	dred mo
དྲེད་མོང	Dremong, brown bear	dred mong
དྲེད་ཚང	bear's den	dred tshang
དྲེད་ཟ	lion	dred za
དྲེན	(not in DAS) dren pa byed pa bslob pa'i 'khor lo Wheel of Training Producing Recall [thd]	dren
དྲེའུ	young bear, young or small mule	dre'u
དྲེའུ་ཁལ	mule laden with goods	dre'u khal
དྲེའུ་རྔོག	kind of stuffed seat, mattress, thick-haired carpet, mane of a mule, spotted seat, cushion, kind of long haired cloth	dre'u rngog
དྲེའུ་རྟ་རྐང་གསུམ	{dre'u rta rkang gsum	dre'u rta rkang gsum
དྲེའུ་རྟ་རྐྱང་གསུམ	mules, horses, and donkeys/ wild asses	dre'u rta rkyang gsum
དྲེའུ་དྲེལ	[young or small] mule	dre'u drel
དྲེའུ་ལག	in traveling drel pas bdag bzung gi drel; 2) tsho gcig	dre'u lag
དྲེའུ་སྲེ་བ	breed mules, breed mules	dre'u sre ba
དྲེལ	mule, full grown mule	drel
དྲེལ་རྒྱ་མོ	black mule mouth and eyes gi mtha' white	drel rgya mo
དྲེལ་རྒྱབ་གསུམ	3 mule loads	drel rgyab gsum
དྲེལ་ལྕགས	mule-shoe	drel lcags
དྲེལ་རྗེས་པ	person who goes after mules 1341	drel rjes pa
དྲེལ་གདང	stall for mule, rope for tethering mules	drel gdang
དྲེལ་པ	1) mule driver; 2) journey where many mules are led	drel pa
དྲེལ་པ་ལག་དོ	mule loader	drel pa lag do
དྲེལ་དཔོན	chief-groom, muleteer, messenger riding a swift horse who carries official dispatches	drel dpon
དྲེལ་འཚོ་མཁན	mule tender/ herder	drel 'tsho mkhan
དྲེལ་རྫི	mule tender/ herder	drel rdzi
དྲེལ་ར	stall for mule, rope for tethering mules	drel ra
དྲེལ་ལ་ཁལ་འགེལ་མཁན	mule loader	drel la khal 'gel mkhan
དྲེལ་སག	mule hip skin made into tooled leather w designs/ pictures	drel sag
དྲེལ་གསོན	mule	drel gson
དྲེས་འབྲུ	seeds of grass	dres 'bru
དྲེས་འབྲུམ	seeds of grass	dres 'brum
དྲེས་མ	mixed	dres ma
དྲེས་མ་གེ་ཤར	filaments of dres ma	dres ma ge shar
དྲེས་མ་མེ་ཏོག	tulip	dres ma me tog
དྲེས་མའི་གེ་སར	dres ma flower, tulip	dres ma'i ge sar
དྲེས་ཤུན	rope made of dres ma grass	dres shun
དྲོ	1) provisions to be carried in travelling, lunch, meal; 2) time particle; 3) [comp {dron mo}/ {dro po} warm; 4) heat, the hot time of the day; 5) lunch, meal	dro
དྲོ་རྐྱལ	lam chas blug snod rkyal ba	dro rkyal
དྲོ་སྐྱིད	[warm &] pleasant/ happy	dro skyid
དྲོ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་འཚོ་བ	happy life	dro skyid kyi 'tsho ba
དྲོ་ཁ	phyogs su 'gro dus kyi lam rgyags	dro kha
དྲོ་ཁང	green-house, hot-house	dro khang
དྲོ་ཁུལ	temperate zone	dro khul
དྲོ་ཁུལ་བྱང་མ	N temperate zone	dro khul byang ma
དྲོ་ཁུལ་ལྷོ་མ	S temperate zone	dro khul lho ma
དྲོ་གྲང	temperature, heat and cold	dro grang
དྲོ་གྲང་ལྟ་ཆས	thermometer	dro grang lta chas
དྲོ་གྲང་བརྟག་ཆས	thermometer	dro grang brtag chas
དྲོ་གྲང་དཔྱད་ཆས	thermometer	dro grang dpyad chas
དྲོ་གྲབས	NyDh: "about to" khong zhi dro byed kyi 'dug, "He is about to die." NB. NyDh spelled it dro, but MG (ET) spells it grabs. I think these are the same term. [mss]	dro grabs
དྲོ་ཆི་ལེ་བ	way of arising of heat and happiness	dro chi le ba
དྲོ་འཇམ	tepid, gentle warmth	dro 'jam
དྲོ་འཇམ་ཉི་མ	warm, gentle sun shine	dro 'jam nyi ma
དྲོ་བཏབ	have lunch/ a meal	dro btab
དྲོ་བཏབ་པ	lunch	dro btab pa
དྲོ་རྟེན	lam rgyags kyi dod dngul	dro rten
དྲོ་ཐིང་ཐིང	way of arising of heat of fire, sun etc. 'Khyags dus nyi mar bsros pas dro thing thing byas byung	dro thing thing
དྲོ་ཐོན་པ	breakfast or za ma bzas tshar ba	dro thon pa
དྲོ་དོད	comfortable accommodation of travellers	dro dod
དྲོ་དྲོ	the warmth	dro dro
དྲོ་འདེབས་པ	serve lunch/ a meal while traveling	dro 'debs pa
དྲོ་འདྲེན་པ	serve lunch/ a meal while traveling	dro 'dren pa
དྲོ་པོ	warm	dro po
དྲོ་བ	{dro ba, dros pa, dro ba} intr. v.; ft. of {dro ba}; to be warm, warm, warmer	dro ba
དྲོ་བ་ནོན་པོ	very acrid taste, pungent	dro ba non po
དྲོ་བ་རྣོན་པོ	very acrid taste, pungent	dro ba rnon po
དྲོ་བའི་དུས	1) day and evening etc; 2) spring and sos ka season; 3) the time it takes to eat a meal	dro ba'i dus
དྲོ་བའི་ཡི་གེ་བཞི	SK sha class consonants	dro ba'i yi ge bzhi
དྲོ་བའི་ས་ཁུལ	temperate zone	dro ba'i sa khul
དྲོ་བའི་ས་ཁུལ་བྱང་མ	N temperate zone	dro ba'i sa khul byang ma
དྲོ་བའི་ས་ཁུལ་ལྷོ་མ	S temperate zone	dro ba'i sa khul lho ma
དྲོ་བར་གྱུར་པ	to (have) develop(ed) meditative warmth	dro bar gyur pa
དྲོ་བར་གྱུར་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	occasion of becoming warm	dro bar gyur pa'i gnas skabs
དྲོ་སྦྱོར	morning	dro sbyor
དྲོ་མོ	warm, hot, happy	dro mo
དྲོ་ཚད	temperature	dro tshad
དྲོ་ཟས	breakfast	dro zas
དྲོ་ཡ	drod rten sa	dro ya
དྲོ་ཡོལ	lunchtime yol ba [spend?]	dro yol
དྲོ་ལམ་གཅིག	the time of one meal's journey, [about three hours journey]	dro lam gcig
དྲོ་ལུག	phyogs 'grul skabs killed sheep	dro lug
དྲོ་ཤ	meat eaten in travelling	dro sha
དྲོ་ས	warm place	dro sa
དྲོ་སོབ་སོབ	dro thing thing	dro sob sob
དྲོ་གསུམ	3 meals	dro gsum
དྲོ་ཨོར་གྲོ་ཤོད	Droshö, in Tö, Mangyul	dro or gro shod
དྲོག	suddenly/ incidentally arising food drink or enjoyment [= grog]	drog
དྲོག་སྐད	raven and bya khra calls as sign of coming food and wealth	drog skad
དྲོག་སྐམ་ཉ་རྒྱ	nets cast in a dry riverbed; x {phyi tshes grab shom drog skam nya rgya 'dra} your future projects and plans are like nets cast in a dry riverbed	drog skam nya rgya
དྲོག་ཕཡབ༹	grog phyva med. diagnosis	drog phyva
དྲོགས	packed up, made into a parcel	drogs
དྲོང	lead!	drong
དྲོང་ཆོག་པ	those who conduct village ceremonies	drong chog pa
དྲོང་པོ	erect	drong po
དྲོང་པོར	aright	drong por
དྲོང་མ	large basket provided with lid and carried on the back	drong ma
དྲོང་ལང	erection	drong lang
དྲོང་སྲོང	sage, rishi	drong srong
དྲོངས	lead! {'dren}!	drongs
དྲོངས་ཤིག	Lead!	drongs shig
དྲོད	1) heat, warmth	drod
དྲོད་ཀྱི་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	peak of heat	drod kyi rtse sbyor
དྲོད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of heat	drod kyi ye shes
དྲོད་སྐྱེད་བྱེད	[hot] herb pi pi ling 1342	drod skyed byed
དྲོད་སྐྱེས	born from heat	drod skyes
དྲོད་བསྐུལ་གལྐོག་ཁང	thermal-electric plant	drod bskul glkog khang
དྲོད་ཁང	hot-house, green-house, incubator	drod khang
དྲོད་ཁུག	body etc. dros pa [heated, grown warm]	drod khug
དྲོད་ཁྲིད་ནུས་པ	heat conductivity	drod khrid nus pa
དྲོད་ཁྲིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	heat conductivity	drod khrid byed kyi nus pa
དྲོད་གྱུར་པ	degree of heat	drod gyur pa
དྲོད་གྲང	heat and cold	drod grang
དྲོད་གྲང་གཏོང་རྒྱུ	heating and cooling system	drod grang gtong rgyu
དྲོད་རྒྱུན	warm current	drod rgyun
དྲོད་ཅན	warm	drod can
དྲོད་ཅན་བསྟེན་པ	to take something warm	drod can bsten pa
དྲོད་ཆུང	1) little/ lesser heat; 2) person w little confidence/ realization	drod chung
དྲོད་ཆེན	1) great heat; 2) great experience/ realization; 3) great confidence	drod chen
དྲོད་ཇ	lunch	drod ja
དྲོད་འཇམ	1) warm and soft; 2) tepid/ lukewarm	drod 'jam
དྲོད་ཉུལ	matching one's desires, in accordance with design	drod nyul
དྲོད་གཏོང	heat, warm up	drod gtong
དྲོད་རྟགས	signs, - of accomplishment, proficiency [in practice]	drod rtags
དྲོད་རྟགས་གློ་བུར་བ	momentary signs of "warmth" / progress	drod rtags glo bur ba
དྲོད་དུགས	inflammation from heat	drod dugs
དྲོད་དུགས་བྱ	to apply a warm tug remedy	drod dugs bya
དྲོད་འདོན་ཚད	amount of heat generated	drod 'don tshad
དྲོད་ལྡན	warm	drod ldan
དྲོད་པ	warm, lukewarm	drod pa
དྲོད་ཕེབས་དུས	time when heat comes, spring	drod phebs dus
དྲོད་འབེབས	spring	drod 'bebs
དྲོད་མེ་སྟག་ཙམ་པ	body's warmth like a spark	drod me stag tsam pa
དྲོད་མེད	1) w/o heat; 2) w/o confidence, experience of realization	drod med
དྲོད་སྨན	stimulant	drod sman
དྲོད་སྨན་རྒྱལ་པོ	prince of digestive stimulants, SA tsi hra ka	drod sman rgyal po
དྲོད་སྨན་ནར་མོ	herb pi pi ling	drod sman nar mo
དྲོད་སྨན་བཟང་པོ	cardamom, smaller species of cardamom)	drod sman bzang po
དྲོད་སྨན་བཟང་པོ་གསུམ	3 medicinal stimulants (piper longu	drod sman bzang po gsum
དྲོད་སྨན་རིལ་མོ	herb pho ba ris	drod sman ril mo
དྲོད་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	peak of heat	drod rtse sbyor
དྲོད་ཚད	warmth of feeling at its peak, temperature	drod tshad
དྲོད་ཚད་ཆ་སྙོམས	mean temperature	drod tshad cha snyoms
དྲོད་ཚད་ཆག	lower temperature	drod tshad chag
དྲོད་ཚད་ཆེ་བ	great heat/ realization	drod tshad che ba
དྲོད་ཚད་མཉམ་པའི་རིམ་པ	stratosphere	drod tshad mnyam pa'i rim pa
དྲོད་ཚད་རྙེད	accomplished by heat and moisture	drod tshad rnyed
དྲོད་ཚད་ལྟ་ཆས	thermometer	drod tshad lta chas
དྲོད་ཚད་བརྟག་ཆས	thermometer	drod tshad brtag chas
དྲོད་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ་ལས་བརྒལ་བ	superhigh temperature	drod tshad mthon po las brgal ba
དྲོད་ཚད་དཔྱད་ཆས	thermometer	drod tshad dpyad chas
དྲོད་ཚད་དཔྱོད་ཆས	thermometer	drod tshad dpyod chas
དྲོད་ཚད་འཕར	raise temperature	drod tshad 'phar
དྲོད་ཚད་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of spiritual maturity	drod tshad shes pa
དྲོད་འོངས	coming of the hot season, summer	drod 'ongs
དྲོད་འོངས་དུས	springtime	drod 'ongs dus
དྲོད་ཡལ་བ	vanishing of warmth	drod yal ba
དྲོད་རིག་པ	science of mysticism, wellversed in measures	drod rig pa
དྲོད་རླངས	moisture/ mist etc. arising from heat, warm air	drod rlangs
དྲོད་རླངས་ཀྱི་ལྕགས་དོང	warm/ hot air pipe/ duct	drod rlangs kyi lcags dong
དྲོད་རླངས་ཀྱི་ཐབ	warm/ forced air furnace	drod rlangs kyi thab
དྲོད་རླུང	wind making hot weather descend	drod rlung
དྲོད་ཤུགས	power of heat	drod shugs
དྲོད་ཤེར་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	birth from heat and moisture	drod sher las skye ba
དྲོད་ཤེས་པ	tshod lon pa,...Na tsha 'di phyis su drag thub min gyi drod mi shes ???	drod shes pa
དྲོད་གཤེར	heat and moisture, perspiration	drod gsher
དྲོད་གཤེར་སྐྱིས	born from heat and moisture	drod gsher skyis
དྲོད་གཤེར་སྐྱེས	moisture-sprung, born out of heat and humidity	drod gsher skyes
དྲོད་གཤེར་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	birth from heat and moisture	drod gsher las skye ba
དྲོད་གཤེར་ལས་སྐྱེས	birth from heat and moisture, insect, produced by heat and moisture	drod gsher las skyes
དྲོད་གཤེར་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	born from heatand-moisture (insects etc	drod gsher las skyes pa
དྲོད་སྲུང་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	radiator	drod srung 'phrul chas
དྲོད་སླེབས	newly arisen hot weather	drod slebs
དྲོད་གསུམ	the three hots	drod gsum
དྲོད་ལྷགས	season/ time when it is too/very hot	drod lhags
དྲོན་ཆེན	very warm	dron chen
དྲོན་འཇམ	lukewarm, tepid	dron 'jam
དྲོན་འཇུག	brdzus [miraculously] te 'jug pa dang lhad 'jug pa...Skad cha la tshig dron bcug ste dkrug shing rgyag pa	dron 'jug
དྲོན་པ	warm	dron pa
དྲོན་པོ	SA dro bo	dron po
དྲོན་མ	tepid/ lukewarm	dron ma
དྲོན་མོ	MG: = dron 'jam & dro 'jam, warm, lukewarm. [mss]	dron mo
དྲོན་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	peak of heat	dron rtse sbyor
དྲོན་ཚད	temperature	dron tshad
དྲོན་ཞོ	heat emitting new curds	dron zho
དྲོན་ཤ	just killed meat	dron sha
དྲོལ	'dral ba! tear down/ to p[eices/ asunder! rip up/ open!	drol
དྲོལ་བ	{nyi ma sprin las drol ba lta bu} like the sun coming out from behind the clouds	drol ba
དྲོལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to cure; x {nad las drol bar byed} cure yourself of the diseases	drol bar byed pa
དྲོས	'dra ba!, noon, midday	dros
དྲོས་ཁག་པོ	hard to heat 1343	dros khag po
དྲོས་ཆེན	nyin dgung ma zin gong very hot	dros chen
དྲོས་ཇ	lunch	dros ja
དྲོས་འཇམ	1) warm and soft; 2) tepid/ lukewarm	dros 'jam
དྲོས་ན	when it is getting warm	dros na
དྲོས་པ	1) heated, grown warm; 2) cut cloth to make a dress (/ [p dro ba]	dros pa
དྲོས་བྱེད་པ	talking about how to	dros byed pa
གདག	self, the light, day	gdag
གདག་རྐྱེན	condition of labeling	gdag rkyen
གདག་གི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the suchness of labeling	gdag gi de kho na nyid
གདག་པ	/ 'dogs/btags/ thogs pa - to apply/ attach (a label); to designate/ label; to refer to	gdag pa
གདག་གཞི	basis of designation; labeling basis, {btags don}	gdag gzhi
གདག་ཡུལ	object of labeling/ designation (process)	gdag yul
གདགས	tag, fasten on, label, bind, attach, SA 'dogs pa	gdags
གདགས་རྐྱེན	condition of labelling/ imputing	gdags rkyen
གདགས་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	{gdags khri btsan po} [son of mer khri btsan po and gdags lha dkar mo, 6th king of T, 1 of the gnam gyi khri bdun]	gdags khri btsan po
གདགས་གྲུབ	designative status	gdags grub
གདགས་ཆོས	doctrine that one should be attached to	gdags chos
གདགས་པ	1) [f 'dogs pa]; 2) Ming gi tha snyad designation, imputation; imputed, labelled	gdags pa
གདགས་པ་ཉིད	title	gdags pa nyid
གདགས་པའི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	two kinds of fastened ornaments	gdags pa'i rgyan gnyis
གདགས་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	a major Abhidharma text	gdags pa'i bstan bcos
གདགས་པའི་གཞི	plain self, givenness	gdags pa'i gzhi
གདགས་གཞི	labeling basis, {btags don}; basis of designation [ggd]	gdags gzhi
གདགས་གཞིའི་ངོས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existence from the side of the basis of designation	gdags gzhi'i ngos nas grub pa
གདགས་གཞིའི་སྟེང་ནས་གྲུབ	existence right w the bases of designation	gdags gzhi'i steng nas grub
གདགས་གཞིའི་སྟེང་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existence in the basis of designation	gdags gzhi'i steng nas grub pa
གདགས་ཡོད	imputedly existent	gdags yod
གདགས་སྲིབ	1) physician and patient; 2) when examining nadis: sor mo'i yar zur don lnga'i nadis = gdags &, mar zur snod drug gi nadis = srib; 3) breath moving in and out	gdags srib
གདགས་སྲིབས	1) physician and patient; 2) when examining nadis: sor mo'i yar zur don lnga'i nadis = gdags &, mar zur snod drug gi nadis = srib; 3) breath moving in and out	gdags sribs
གདགས་སྲོག	additional vital essence, new symbol in the form of a seed syllable conferred on the deity upon conversion, 1 of srog gsum	gdags srog
གདང	1) long rope pegged to the ground rope and [multiple] cattle['s noses]; 2) chicken house ramp? ['phred du btang ba'i shing]; 3) clothes etc. stand/ rack/ pegs/; 4) rail; 5) rungs of a ladder; 6) p ...	gdang
གདང་ག	nesting boxes for chickens	gdang ga
གདང་ཆུ	gang chu river	gdang chu
གདང་ཐག་འཕྲུལ་མིག་བཅུ་འབྱར་བ	a number of horse mules, donkeys etc. tying rope lung bcu 'byar ba	gdang thag 'phrul mig bcu 'byar ba
གདང་འདྲེན	to summon, call, invite, to transport, carry	gdang 'dren
གདང་ཕུར	1) in a house clothes etc hanging pegs; 2) gdang 'dzin byed kyi peg	gdang phur
གདང་བ	(tha dad pa gdangs pa, gdang ba, gdongs,, phye ba * gape, open [wide]	gdang ba
གདང་བུ	1) rungs of a ladder; 2) place to hang things in a house (/[Gos..Khyim bya..Phur ba..Yig]	gdang bu
གདང་ཡས	a number	gdang yas
གདང་ར	cattle rdang la tying place	gdang ra
གདང་རོལ	chanting and musical notations	gdang rol
གདང་ལ	gdang pass	gdang la
གདང་ཤིང	clothes etc. 'gel sa'i pegs, rack, stand	gdang shing
གདངས	1) tone, pitch. 2) tune, melody 3) p. of {gdang} chant, slow formal chant. 3) manifestation, open, lustrous, refection, projection, tone, accent, voice, complexion, radiance, luster, open, gaping, ...	gdangs
གདངས་ཀྱི་འགྱུར་ཁུག	melody, tune	gdangs kyi 'gyur khug
གདངས་ཀྱིས	with the sounding of	gdangs kyis
གདངས་སྐད	tone, voice	gdangs skad
གདངས་དགག་མེད	Unobstructed nature. One of the three aspects of the sugatagarbha: essence, nature and expression	gdangs dgag med
གདངས་འགག་པ་མེད་པ	unobstructed nature	gdangs 'gag pa med pa
གདངས་འགག་མེད	unobstructed expression	gdangs 'gag med
གདངས་སྒྲིག་པ	skad gdangs mthun par sdeb pa	gdangs sgrig pa
གདངས་ངག་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	having special instructions, [mahayana rigs can of enlightenment lam cha tshang ston pa'i sutras and shastras]	gdangs ngag khyad par can
གདངས་ཆག་པ	tone of voice/ pitch	gdangs chag pa
གདངས་སྙན	music, harmony, melody	gdangs snyan
གདངས་སྙན་པི་ཝང་གླིང་བུ	Melodious Lute and Flute, by Shabkar	gdangs snyan pi wang gling bu
གདངས་སྙན་པོ	pleasant melody	gdangs snyan po
གདངས་མཐོ	soprano	gdangs mtho
གདངས་འདུར	in monastic assembly very slow/long syllabled chanting style; kha 'don shar mar 'don par 'dur zer	gdangs 'dur
གདངས་པ	open wide, gape, SA gdang ba, sos pa, sangs pa, drag pa, recover from illness	gdangs pa
གདངས་བྱེད་པ	make music	gdangs byed pa
གདངས་དབྱངས	musical notations	gdangs dbyangs
གདངས་སྦོམ་ཕྲ	low and high tone	gdangs sbom phra
གདངས་མ	distillate, extract	gdangs ma
གདངས་མེད་པའི་གཞས	singsong	gdangs med pa'i gzhas
གདངས་མཚམས	rhythm	gdangs mtshams
གདངས་གཞས	song	gdangs gzhas
གདངས་ཡིག	musical notations	gdangs yig
གདངས་རང་བཞིན	lustrous selfmanifestation	gdangs rang bzhin
གདངས་རིང	long tone	gdangs ring
གདངས་གསུངས	sounded	gdangs gsungs
གདངས་གསུམ	three radiances (ngo bo, rang bzhin, thugs rje)	gdangs gsum
གདད	(not in DAS)	gdad
གདན	1) place something rests; 2) seat/ throne, bolster, level, seat, low seat, mattress, mat, cushion, residence, monastery, stage, throne	gdan
གདན་སྐྱེལ་བ	conduct, accompany	gdan skyel ba
གདན་ཁེབས	mat / cushion	gdan khebs
གདན་ཁྲི	throne, high seat	gdan khri
གདན་ཁྲི་སྟོངས་པ	empty seat, vacancy, job	gdan khri stongs pa
གདན་ཁྲི་གཞན་ལ་སྤྲོད	abdicate, renounce [the throne]	gdan khri gzhan la sprod
གདན་གྲུམ་རྩེ	square carpet used for sitting upon	gdan grum rtse
གདན་ཅོག	seat[s] and table	gdan cog
གདན་ལྕོག	abbr of gdan dang lcog tse, cushion and a small table	gdan lcog
གདན་ཆ	cushion 1) seat, place to sit; 2) ya min pa'i gdan	gdan cha
གདན་ཆས	seat, place to sit	gdan chas
གདན་ཆེན་གསལ་བ	radiant & spacious thrones	gdan chen gsal ba
གདན་གཉེར	nor bu gling ga and rtse pho brang nang gi person who controls and offers seats, provide/ offer a seat	gdan gnyer
གདན་བཏིང་བ	spread a rug	gdan bting ba
གདན་སྟག་འཇབ	tiger-skin rug lined with satin placed on a stuffed cushion for the use of great men	gdan stag 'jab
གདན་བརྟིང་བ	to spread cushions, lay out a seat	gdan brting ba
གདན་ཐོག	gdan thog mt	gdan thog
གདན་ཐོག་ལུས་རྩལ	tumbling	gdan thog lus rtsal
གདན་ཐོབ	seat [in legislature/ an organization]	gdan thob
གདན་འཐུས	gdan sa khag gi 'thus mi ste, las don che gras deciding government dpon rigs kyi mnyam du gdan sa se 'bras dga' gsum gyi 'thus mi yang yong dgos pa der zer	gdan 'thus
གདན་དོན	matter	gdan don
གདན་དྲངས	invited to Tibet	gdan drangs
གདན་དྲངས་པ	revealed [a terma]	gdan drangs pa
གདན་དྲངས་ཞུ	invite[d], took [h]	gdan drangs zhu
གདན་གདིང་བ	monk's mat	gdan gding ba
གདན་འདེགས	gzhi bskyas nas 'gro ba'am gzhis spos nas 'gro ba	gdan 'degs
གདན་འདེགས་པ	take leave, withdraw, depart	gdan 'degs pa
གདན་འདྲན་པ	(past - drangs) to invite, go to meet, to escort	gdan 'dran pa
གདན་འདྲེན	act of inviting (h). invitation, {gdan drangs}	gdan 'dren
གདན་འདྲེན་དུ་གཏོང་བ	invite [h]	gdan 'dren du gtong ba
གདན་འདྲེན་པ	to bring	gdan 'dren pa
གདན་འདྲེན་ཞུ	invite, take [h]	gdan 'dren zhu
གདན་འདྲེན་ཞུ་བ	request, ask, invite	gdan 'dren zhu ba
གདན་བརྡབ	rug folded	gdan brdab
གདན་པ	one seated on a cushion, chairman	gdan pa
གདན་ཕེབས	arrive	gdan phebs
གདན་གཙང	Clean table cloth	gdan gtsang
གདན་ཞུ	call and summon for las don etc, invitation, taking [h]	gdan zhu
གདན་ཞུ་ཞུ	invite, take	gdan zhu zhu
གདན་ཞུ་ཞུས	invited, took	gdan zhu zhus
གདན་ཞུའི་ཡི་གེ	letter to call and summon/invite for las don etc, invitation [h]	gdan zhu'i yi ge
གདན་ཞུས་ལྟར	as invited, by/ according to the invitation of	gdan zhus ltar
གདན་བཞི	the Four Seats, Catuhpitha, [Anuttara mother tantra]; Catuhpitha, four stages, the Four Seats, Catuhpitha, [Anuttara mother tantra]	gdan bzhi
གདན་རབས	succession of abbots in a monastery	gdan rabs
གདན་ལ	on the ground	gdan la
གདན་ལ་འཁོད	sit down 1345	gdan la 'khod
གདན་ལ་བཏིང	lay/ put down something to sit on [p gdan la 'ding[s]	gdan la bting
གདན་ལ་བརྟན	put on the ground	gdan la brtan
གདན་ལ་བདེ་བར་བཞུགས	sit down comfortably	gdan la bde bar bzhugs
གདན་ལ་འདིང	lay/ put down something to sit on	gdan la 'ding
གདན་ལ་འདིངས	lay/ put down something to sit on	gdan la 'dings
གདན་ལ་བཞུགས	seated on the rug	gdan la bzhugs
གདན་ལས་བཞེངས་པ	to stand up {bla ma gdan las bzhengs pa'i tshe rang nyid kyang stan la mi 'dug par 'phral du ldang ba} stand up at once whenever he does, instead of just remaining seated	gdan las bzhengs pa
གདན་ས	monastic seat/ center	gdan sa
གདན་ས་ཐེལ	gdan sa mthil	gdan sa thel
གདན་ས་མཐིལ	capital of country where government is located, chief residence of a ruler	gdan sa mthil
གདན་ས་གསུམ	the three great monasteries of the Gelukpa sect (Sera, Drepung, and Ganden)	gdan sa gsum
གདན་གསུམ	3 divine seats in anuyoga	gdan gsum
གདན་གསུམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of the three seats [the body's skandhas, dhatus and ayatanas abude in/as the gdan gsum tshang ba'i dkyil 'khor; the skandhas and dhatus are the seat of gshegs pa and gshegs ma, ayatanas sem...	gdan gsum dkyil 'khor
གདན་གསུམ་ཚང་བ	three seats of completeness	gdan gsum tshang ba
གདན་གསུམ་ཚང་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	Three seats of completeness. The three seats (gdan gsum) are the aggregates and elements as the seat of male and female tathagatas, the sense-bases as the seat of the male and female bodhisattvas, ...	gdan gsum tshang ba'i dkyil 'khor
གདན་གསུམ་ཚང་བའི་ལྷ	three seats of completeness, deities of. The deities of the three seats of completeness are: 1) The skandhas (aggregates) and dhatus (elements) are the seat of the male and female tathagatas. 2) Th...	gdan gsum tshang ba'i lha
གདབ	[f {'debs} will throw/ cast/ hit/ plant/ sow, f verbifier	gdab
གདབ་པ	1 of 11 astrological diagrams, put, sow, give, SA 'bul, byed pa bcu gcig, 'debs pa	gdab pa
གདབ་ཕུར	stabbing dagger / purpa	gdab phur
གདབ་མ	petal	gdab ma
གདབ་དམིགས	gdab par bya ba'i dmigs yul	gdab dmigs
གདབ་ཡས	#	gdab yas
གདབས	[p 'debs]	gdabs
གདམ	Syn {'dems}	gdam
གདམ་ཀ	choice, election, to choose, to elect, choosing, selecting	gdam ka
གདམ་ཀ་རྒྱག	select, choose	gdam ka rgyag
གདམ་ཀ་རྒྱབ་པ	prefer	gdam ka rgyab pa
གདམ་ཀ་བྱེད	select, choose	gdam ka byed
གདམ་ཀ་ཡིན་པ	optional	gdam ka yin pa
གདམ་ཁ	choice, select[ion][ing], choose[ing]	gdam kha
གདམ་ཁ་རྒྱག	select, choose	gdam kha rgyag
གདམ་ཁ་བྱེད	select, choose	gdam kha byed
གདམ་ཁ་མ་ནོར་བ	undeniable conclusion	gdam kha ma nor ba
གདམ་ག	choice, election, choose, elect, choosing, selecting	gdam ga
གདམ་ག་རྒྱག	select, choose	gdam ga rgyag
གདམ་ག་བྱེད	select, choose	gdam ga byed
གདམ་ང	either way as 1 likes, optional, left to 1's choice	gdam nga
གདམ་ང་ཅན	not certainly any 1 way [eg 'phreng phreng, 'phrin phrin]	gdam nga can
གདམ་ངག	oral instructions, advice, counsel	gdam ngag
གདམ་ངག་བསྐུལ	requested the [other ministers'] opinions	gdam ngag bskul
གདམ་ངག་ནོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	receive advice	gdam ngag nod par byed pa
གདམ་པ	[f 'doms pa] advise	gdam pa
གདམ་པའི་གཅུད	essence-instructions	gdam pa'i gcud
གདམ་པའི་བཅུད	essence-instructions	gdam pa'i bcud
གདམ་བྱ	[object] to be chosen	gdam bya
གདམ་བྱའི་དབང་ཆ	bdam bya'i dbang cha	gdam bya'i dbang cha
གདམ་བྱའི་མི་སྣ	candidates	gdam bya'i mi sna
གདམ་དབང	{gdam dbang lag na yod pa} the choice is now in your hands	gdam dbang
གདམ་གསེས	selection, choice	gdam gses
གདམ་གསེས་རྒྱག	select, choose	gdam gses rgyag
གདམ་གསེས་བྱེད	select, choose	gdam gses byed
གདམས	buddha's precepts "advices". Syn {gdem}; taught, to instruct, teach, give instruction / teaching / advice; to instruct, teach, give instruction / teaching / advice	gdams
གདམས་སྐོར	cycle/ set of instruction/ teachings	gdams skor
གདམས་ཁ	advice	gdams kha
གདམས་ཁྲིད	instructional teachings	gdams khrid
གདམས་ངག	instructions, teaching, advice, counsel, directions, formal instructions	gdams ngag
གདམས་ངག་གི་གནད་མཐོང་བ	to have understood the key points of oral instruction	gdams ngag gi gnad mthong ba
གདམས་ངག་གི་གཞུང	tradition of instruction	gdams ngag gi gzhung
གདམས་ངག་བཅུ	10 instructions	gdams ngag bcu
གདམས་ངག་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 instructions	gdams ngag bcu gcig
གདམས་ངག་ཇི་ལྟར་སྟོན་ཚུལ	how an instruction should be given	gdams ngag ji ltar ston tshul
གདམས་ངག་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the instructions	gdams ngag rje su dran pa
གདམས་ངག་རྗེས་སུ་སྟོན་པ	subsequent teacher of the instructions	gdams ngag rjes su ston pa
གདམས་ངག་རྗེས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	subsequent teaching of the instructions	gdams ngag rjes su bstan pa
གདམས་ངག་བརྗེད་པ	forgetting the quintessential teaching	gdams ngag brjed pa
གདམས་ངག་ཉན	listen to his instructions; x {ma yengs bla ma'i gdams ngag nyan} listen to his instructions without distraction gdams ngag nyams len par mkho ba zab khrid mtha' dag gi sngon 'gro' i ngag 'don gyi ...	gdams ngag nyan
རླབས་འདྲེན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	{phyag chen	rlabs 'dren pa'i shing rta
གདམས་ངག་ཉོན	{gnas lugs ma rtogs bar du thos pa dgos pas bla ma'i gdams ngag nyon} Until you realize the natural state, you need to learn, so listen to his instructions. Atisa	gdams ngag nyon
གདམས་ངག་སྟོན་པ	give sound advice	gdams ngag ston pa
གདམས་ངག་བསྟན	gives instructions; x {zab mo'i gdams ngag bstan} he gives us his profound instructions	gdams ngag bstan
གདམས་ངག་འདོམས་པ	explain precepts	gdams ngag 'doms pa
གདམས་ངག་སྣ་ཚོགས་འཁོར་ལོ	major klong sde tantra	gdams ngag sna tshogs 'khor lo
གདམས་ངག་འབོགས་པ	gdams ngag ston pa, confer instructions/ advice	gdams ngag 'bogs pa
གདམས་ངག་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	giving the instructions	gdams ngag sbyin par byed pa
གདམས་ངག་གཙོ་བོ་ལྔ	the five chief instructions	gdams ngag gtso bo lnga
གདམས་ངག་སྩོལ་བར་མཛད	bestow the instructions [h]	gdams ngag stsol bar mdzad
གདམས་ངག་སྩོལ་བར་མཛད་པ	to bestow the instructions [h]	gdams ngag stsol bar mdzad pa
གདམས་ངག་མཛོད	Dam-ngak Dzö, Damngak Dzo. The 'Treasury of Oral Instructions.' A collection of 13 volumes containing the essential teachings of the Eight Practice Lineages. One of the 'Five Treasuries' by Jamgön ...	gdams ngag mdzod
གདམས་ངག་བཞག་པ	present the instructions	gdams ngag bzhag pa
གདམས་ངག་ཟབ་མོ	profound teaching	gdams ngag zab mo
གདམས་ངག་གསེར་གྱི་རི་བོ	Mountain of Gold, by Shabkar	gdams ngag gser gyi ri bo
གདམས་གཏེར	instruction terma	gdams gter
གདམས་དག་མཛོད	the treasury of instructions	gdams dag mdzod
གདམས་པ	pf. of {'doms pa}; 1) to exhort, advise, nyan par gdams pa, advise to listen 2) instructions, instructional teachings; advice, instruction of. Syn {gdam ngag}	gdams pa
གདམས་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	infinite teachings	gdams pa rgya mtsho
གདམས་པ་སྒོམས	train in the pithinstructions!	gdams pa sgoms
གདམས་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	practicing the instructions	gdams pa bsgom pa
གདམས་པ་གནང་བ	has given instructions	gdams pa gnang ba
གདམས་པ་སྨྲ་བ	give advice, counsel, make suggestions	gdams pa smra ba
གདམས་པ་ཞིག་ཞུ	we pray give advice	gdams pa zhig zhu
གདམས་པ་ཟབ་མོ	profound upadesha	gdams pa zab mo
གདམས་པའི་ཅ་ལག	additional advice	gdams pa'i ca lag
གདམས་པའི་གཅུད	essence-instructions	gdams pa'i gcud
གདམས་པའི་བཅུད	essence-instructions	gdams pa'i bcud
གདམས་པའི་གནད	key points of instruction, vital points of the oral instructions	gdams pa'i gnad
གདམས་པའི་ས་བཅད	outline for instructions	gdams pa'i sa bcad
གདམས་པར་ཤར་བ	arose as a pith instruction	gdams par shar ba
གདམས་པས་ཟིན	embraced by [the] oral instructions	gdams pas zin
གདམས་ཟབ	profound instruction	gdams zab
གདམས་ཟབ་གནད་འདུས	profound essential instructions, profound & essential instructions	gdams zab gnad 'dus
གདམས་ཟིན་པ	chose, chosen	gdams zin pa
གདམས་ཡུལ	the objects of instructions, person who is being instructed 1347	gdams yul
གདའ	1) exist, be ['dug gam yod pa,...Dpa' yang dag pa'i mi zhig gda',...Gzugs gzhi bde po gda' lags,...{bkram}; 2) put out, exhibit, display, cover, distribute	gda'
གདའ་གུང	the congregating of monks for midday meal	gda' gung
གདའ་བ	dus mi gda' ba - we have been unable to	gda' ba
གདའ་མོ	yod aa'am 'dug aa, ...Mi de la yon tan bzang po gda' mo [shows question??]	gda' mo
གདའ་ཞི	the congregating of monks for midday meal	gda' zhi
གདར	polish, smooth out	gdar
གདར་མ	long rectangle	gdar ma
གདར་ཤ	intermediate membrane	gdar sha
གདར་ཤ་གཅད	to definitively discover	gdar sha gcad
གདར་ཤ་གཅད་པ	to definitively determine, to definitively understand	gdar sha gcad pa
གདར་ཤ་གཅོད་པ	become resolved about	gdar sha gcod pa
གདར་ཤ་བཅད	become resolved about	gdar sha bcad
གདར་ཤ་ཆོད	finely honed discernment gdar sha legs par bcad la phu thag chod	gdar sha chod
གདལ	expands into, to spread, permeate, expand, diffuse, all-pervading, - pervasive; to spread, permeate, expand, diffuse; all-pervading, - pervasive	gdal
གདལ་ཁ	spread, scope, pervasion	gdal kha
གདལ་གཏམ	talk spreading from 1 to another	gdal gtam
གདལ་པོ	(A) instigate, provoke [fights, animosity dkrug shing rgyag pa]	gdal po
གདལ་བ	all-pervading	gdal ba
གདལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	enlightenment	gdal ba chen po
གདལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་ཞིང	the	gdal ba chen po kun khyab kyi zhing
གདལ་བ་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ས	the all-pervading level of dharmata	gdal ba chos nyid kyi sa
གདལ་བའི	infinite	gdal ba'i
གདས	imp. of {gdas pa}	gdas
གདས་པ	said, stated	gdas pa
གདས་བྲག	a glacier rock	gdas brag
གདིང	lay out, spread, SA 'ding ba	gding
གདིང་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ་བ	to lay the basis in the immediacy of freedom	gding grol thog tu bca' ba
གདིང་བཅའ	syn {gdengs bca'} gain confidence	gding bca'
གདིང་བཅའ་བ	to base one's confidence on/ gain confidence in	gding bca' ba
གདིང་ཐོབ་པ	to attain confidence, discover/ discovery of indwelling confidence	gding thob pa
གདིང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	attained confidence	gding du gyur pa
གདིང་པ	special cloth to sit on for gelong and getsül	gding pa
གདིང་བ	carpets, clothes, sitting mat; sitting mat	gding ba
གདིང་བ་ལས་གྱུར་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	CM: ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu pa bcu'i nang gses/ gding ba las gyur pa'i ltung byed de/ gtsug lag khang du rang gi gding ba'i 'og tu bting ba'i rtswa dang lo ma la sogs pa rjes su ma bsdus pa/ [mss]	gding ba las gyur pa'i ltung byed
གདིང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	gding ba downfall [among the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, in the vihara under one's gding ba put grass and leaves etc. rjes su ma bsdus pa]	gding ba'i ltung byed
གདིང་ཙན་ཅན	set in their ways, {gding} confidence, perverted sense of confidence, hard confidence, unchanging, unshakeable, stubborn	gding tsan can
གདིང་ཚན་ཅན	set in their ways, preverted/ hard confidence, unchanging, unshakeable, stubborn [Notes. {gding}= confidence, negative or positive [Vctr]	gding tshan can
གདིང་བཞི	four Assurances (4th and last of the consolidations according to allsurpassing realisation {thod rgal}. which consists according to {khrid yig ye shes bla ma}. of 1) The assurance that, though one ...	gding bzhi
གདིང་བཞི་ཚད་ལ་འཁྱོལ	perfect the four confidences	gding bzhi tshad la 'khyol
གདིངས	confidence	gdings
གདིངས་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ་བ	gaining confidence in liberation	gdings grol thog tu bca' ba
གདུ་གུ	bracelets and anklets	gdu gu
གདུ་བ	boil, stir up together, mingle, mix up, mix up drugs, covet, hanker after	gdu ba
གདུ་བུ	ring, bracelet, ring for the wrist or the ankle	gdu bu
གདུ་བུ་འཁྲོལ་བ	gser gyi gdu bu 'khrol	gdu bu 'khrol ba
གདུ་བུ་བརྒྱན་ཅན	ornamented with bangles	gdu bu brgyan can
གདུ་བུས་བསྡམས་པ	wear bracelets and anklets	gdu bus bsdams pa
གདུག	dangerous, poison[ous], hostile, malevolent, cruel, wicked, vicious, savage, deleterious, harmful, evil [comp {gdug pa}	gdug
གདུག་ཅན	evil doers	gdug can
གདུག་ཅིང་གཏུམ་པ	deadly rage	gdug cing gtum pa
གདུག་དྲི	bad smell, fart	gdug dri
གདུག་འདྲེ	malicious demon	gdug 'dre
གདུག་འདྲེའི་སྦུད་པ	pha ba dgo dgo, ga bu thud gsob	gdug 'dre'i sbud pa
གདུག་པ	noxious; malevolent; vicious; dangerous, evil, poison, mischievous, dangerous, poisonous, harmful, vi-	gdug pa
གདུག་པ་ཀླུ	Vicious Nagas	gdug pa klu
གདུག་པ་ཅན	cruel, wicked, vicious, savage, harmful, malicious	gdug pa can
གདུག་པ་གཉུག་མར་གནས་པ	possessing/ consciousness sharing demon	gdug pa gnyug mar gnas pa
གདུག་པའི་ང་རོ	wild hideous screams	gdug pa'i nga ro
གདུག་པའི་དྲི་མ	deleterious smell	gdug pa'i dri ma
གདུག་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	mischievous spirit	gdug pa'i bdag nyid
གདུག་པའི་བསམ་པ	evil ideas/ thoughts	gdug pa'i bsam pa
གདུག་པའི་ལྷ	mischievous god	gdug pa'i lha
གདུག་པོ	vicious, poisonous	gdug po
གདུག་སྤྱོད	bad behavior	gdug spyod
གདུག་སྦྲུལ	vicious snake	gdug sbrul
གདུག་མ	fierce woman	gdug ma
གདུག་རྩུན	ferocity, malice, spite	gdug rtsun
གདུག་རྩུབ	terrifying; cruelty, ferocity, viciousness, savagery	gdug rtsub
གདུག་རྩུབ་ཅན	cruel, ferocious, savage	gdug rtsub can
ཤོར	with my had temper, I abuse my	shor
གདུག་སེམས	viciousness, cruelty	gdug sems
གདུག་གསོད	[cruelly] kill/ murder	gdug gsod
གདུག་གསོད་གཏོང	[cruelly] kill/ murder	gdug gsod gtong
གདུགས	umbrella, 1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person, parasol, any canopy or awning, midday, noon, parasols	gdugs
གདུགས་ཀྱི་གུད	ribs of an umbrella	gdugs kyi gud
གདུགས་དཀར	Skt. Sitatapatra, White Umbrella, a manifestation of the Buddha who protects against all kinds of obstacles	gdugs dkar
གདུགས་དཀར་གྱི་གཟུངས	Skt. Sitatapatra dharani	gdugs dkar gyi gzungs
གདུགས་དཀར་ཅན་གྱི་མདོས་ཆོག	bcom ldan 'das ma gdugs dkar mo can gyi mdos chog gi lag len ra ma Na yi sgyu 'phrul : a method for the ritual of the	gdugs dkar can gyi mdos chog
གདུགས་དཀར་ཅན་མ	sitatapatra, bodhisattva who protects from all harm	gdugs dkar can ma
གདུགས་དཀར་མོ	sit'atapatr'a	gdugs dkar mo
གདུགས་དཀར་ཟློག་སྒྱུར	depending on vidya mantra rgyal mo gdugs dkar gyi mdo chog, obstacle eliminating ritual	gdugs dkar zlog sgyur
གདུགས་བསྐོར	spinning parasol	gdugs bskor
གདུགས་ཁང	[arch] sangha bath house, kitchen??	gdugs khang
གདུགས་ཁེབས	birch tree	gdugs khebs
གདུགས་འཁོར	astr ri mo zhig	gdugs 'khor
གདུགས་མཆོག་དམ་པ	1 of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas}, buddhas of the 10 directions	gdugs mchog dam pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏེན་དིརེཅཏིཨོནས	one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas} the buddhas of the ten directions	of the ten directions
གདུགས་ཏོག	top parasol	gdugs tog
གདུགས་ཐོགས་པ	hold[er of] a parasol	gdugs thogs pa
གདུགས་དང་རྒྱལ་མཚན	canopies and banners gdugs dang rnga yab sogs rgyal po'i longs	gdugs dang rgyal mtshan
སྤྱོད་དང་བྲལ་བ་མཐོང་བ	saw that the accountrements of kingship, the white whisk and the rest, had nothing enjoyable about them	spyod dang bral ba mthong ba
གདུགས་དན	white parasol which keeps away heat of evil desires 1349	gdugs dan
གདུགས་ཕུབ	opened an umbrella/ parasol	gdugs phub
གདུགས་ཕུབ་པ	open an umbrella/ parasol	gdugs phub pa
གདུགས་འབུབ	umbrella/ parasol, parachute	gdugs 'bub
གདུགས་འབུབས	open an umbrella/ parasol	gdugs 'bubs
གདུགས་དམག	paratrooper [corps]	gdugs dmag
གདུགས་ཚོད	1) noon; 2) lunch	gdugs tshod
གདུགས་མཚན	day and night	gdugs mtshan
གདུགས་ཞབས	(h) parasol	gdugs zhabs
གདུགས་ཡུ	parasol/umbrella handle	gdugs yu
གདུགས་རིམ	1) gdugs brtsegs pa'i rim pa ste; 2) as a stupa has gdugs rim pa 13	gdugs rim
གདུགས་རེ	[arch] daily	gdugs re
གདུགས་ཤེར་སེང་གསུམ་གྱི་བཟློག་པ	recitation of gdugs dkar + shes rab snying po + mkha' 'gro ma seng ge'i gdong pa can	gdugs sher seng gsum gyi bzlog pa
གདུང	1) body / remains of a dead person, bone, bones, remains, family. 2) progeny, descendants, lineage, descent line 3) {gdung ba} longing, warmth, tenderness, sympathy, affection, devotion, torture, a...	gdung
ཅོལོརེད་པེཨ	size to mustard-seed ones, large hard relics, exceptional remains of fully enlightened beings, funerary mounds, afflictions	colored pea
གདུང་སྐས	stairs cut into a single beam te [= bod skas = bya skas]	gdung skas
གདུང་སྐྱོབ	umbrella	gdung skyob
གདུང་ཁང	chamber containing the remains of a dead person	gdung khang
གདུང་ཁེབས	beams projecting over the capital of a column	gdung khebs
གདུང་འཁོར	gdung ma bzhi sne sprad pa'i gru bzhi 'khor ma	gdung 'khor
གདུང་འཁོར་མོ	perpetual desire	gdung 'khor mo
གདུང་གང	Syn {pur khang}	gdung gang
གདུང་གྲུ	raft	gdung gru
གདུང་རྒྱུད	[family] lineage, descent, line [h]	gdung rgyud
གདུང་རྒྱུད་ཡོད	his descendants still exist	gdung rgyud yod
གདུང་སྒྲོམ	coffin, corpse box	gdung sgrom
གདུང་བརྒྱུད	descendants	gdung brgyud
གདུང་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན་པ	upholding lineage	gdung brgyud 'dzin pa
གདུང་ཆེན	major relic-pill	gdung chen
གདུང་མཆོད	ceremony for the remains of a dead person	gdung mchod
གདུང་ཏལ་མ	in a large room where pillars 'dzud mi dgos par tal mar gtong ba'i long beam	gdung tal ma
གདུང་རྟེན	reliquary; tomb, stupa	gdung rten
གདུང་ཐལ	corpse ash	gdung thal
གདུང་དང་རིང་བསེལ	relics	gdung dang ring bsel
གདུང་དུང་སེ་དུང	yearns	gdung dung se dung
གདུང་འདེགས	pedestal [stand, base, rest]	gdung 'degs
གདུང་འདེབས	pedestal	gdung 'debs
གདུང་ལྡན	kind, merciful, compassionate	gdung ldan
གདུང་པ	beam, piece of timber	gdung pa
གདུང་པས་གཟིར	tormented by longings	gdung pas gzir
གདུང་བ	(tha mi dad pa) gdungs pa, gdung ba,, 1) suffering and opressive heat and gzir ba, torment[ed], suffer[ing], anguish, torment, be tormented [Yid mya ngan gyis gdungs,...Nyi ma'i tsha zer gis gdungs...	gdung ba
གདུང་བ་དྲག་པོ	{'bras bu med pa'i gdung ba drag po'i 'bad rtsol} fierce and fruitless effort	gdung ba drag po
གདུང་བ་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of desire	gdung ba sdug bsngal
གདུང་བ་མེད་པ	unafflicted, without troubles, without anxiety, free from sufferings	gdung ba med pa
གདུང་བ་ཞི	desire subsides	gdung ba zhi
གདུང་བ་བཟང་པོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	gdung ba bzang po
གདུང་བ་ཡིད་མི་བདེ	the unhappiness of desire	gdung ba yid mi bde
གདུང་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Dungwa Rinpoche, heir of Mindroling, 230	gdung ba rin po che
གདུང་བའི་སྐད	plaintive voice, doleful cry	gdung ba'i skad
གདུང་བའི་དབྱངས	melodious song of heartfelt longing	gdung ba'i dbyangs
གདུང་བའི་དབྱངས་ཀྱིས	with a yearning tone of voice	gdung ba'i dbyangs kyis
གདུང་བའི་འོད་འབྱིན	emitter of tormenting rays, sun	gdung ba'i 'od 'byin
གདུང་བའི་ལས	the karma of desire	gdung ba'i las
གདུང་བར་བྱེད	causes pain, afflicts, make sad, distress	gdung bar byed
གདུང་བྱ	water	gdung bya
གདུང་བྱེད	sun, drought, a tree	gdung byed
གདུང་བྱེད་མ	epithet of river yamuna	gdung byed ma
གདུང་དབྱངས	song of longing grief	gdung dbyangs
གདུང་འབར་ཆེ	than pa	gdung 'bar che
གདུང་འབུལ་དུ་ཕུལ་བ	presented as an offering to the reliquary	gdung 'bul du phul ba
གདུང་འབོད	intensive invocation	gdung 'bod
གདུང་འབོད་ཡི་གེ	petition	gdung 'bod yi ge
གདུང་སྦྱོང་བ	purify the remains of a dead person 1350	gdung sbyong ba
གདུང་མ	beam	gdung ma
གདུང་མ་བཀལ་བ	beam placed over it, set or put on, hang up	gdung ma bkal ba
གདུང་མ་བརྒྱད	the 8 beams	gdung ma brgyad
གདུང་ཙན	relative	gdung tsan
གདུང་འཙོབ་པ	successor	gdung 'tsob pa
གདུང་ཚན	a relative	gdung tshan
གདུང་ཚིག	words of suffering / sadness	gdung tshig
གདུང་འཚོབ	inheritor, successor	gdung 'tshob
གདུང་འཚོབ་པ	successor	gdung 'tshob pa
གདུང་འཚོབ་པོ	the first-born	gdung 'tshob po
གདུང་འཛིན	rigs rgyud family lineage hold[er]	gdung 'dzin
གདུང་འཛིན་པའི་སྲས	son who will continue the family	gdung 'dzin pa'i sras
གདུང་ཞུགས་ཕུལ	cremated corpse	gdung zhugs phul
གདུང་ཟམ	log bridge	gdung zam
གདུང་རབས	[family] line of descent, lineage	gdung rabs
གདུང་རབས་ལྷ་ཁང	temple of lineal succession, in the Potala	gdung rabs lha khang
གདུང་རིགས	family lineage	gdung rigs
གདུང་རིགས་ལྔ	the five family lineages???	gdung rigs lnga
གདུང་རིང	1) long beam; 2) long lineage	gdung ring
གདུང་རིང་བསྲེལ	tiny pearl-like relics	gdung ring bsrel
གདུང་རུས	1) bones of a deceased person. 2) lineage, descent line	gdung rus
གདུང་ཤིང	silver fir abies webbiana	gdung shing
གདུང་ཤུགས	fervent devotion, powerful yearning, anguish	gdung shugs
གདུང་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ	supplicated w intense longing	gdung shugs kyis gsol ba btab pa
གདུང་ཤུགས་སྒྲིལ	make a united effort	gdung shugs sgril
གདུང་ཤུགས་དྲག་པོ	intense longing,	gdung shugs drag po
དེཨེཔ	felt	deep
གདུང་ཤུགས་དྲག་པོས	fervently	gdung shugs drag pos
གདུང་སེམས	great distress	gdung sems
གདུང་སེམས་སྐུལ	arouse/ incite/ encourage [compassion, love, fervor, warmth, tenderness, anguish, loving]	gdung sems skul
གདུང་སེམས་མཉམ་སྐྱེ	sympathy	gdung sems mnyam skye
གདུང་སེམས་མཉམ་བྱེད	sympathy	gdung sems mnyam byed
གདུང་སེམས་བྱེད་པ	sympathize with	gdung sems byed pa
གདུང་སེལ	to dispel longing	gdung sel
གདུང་སྲས	son of the clan	gdung sras
གདུང་བསབས་པ	family lineage ma chad pa byas pa	gdung bsabs pa
གདུངས	[p {gdung} suffered from, was tormented/ in anguish/ overwhelmed, grieve, be miserable	gdungs
གདུངས་པ	pf. of {gdung ba}; grieve, miserable	gdungs pa
གདུངས་དབྱངས	song of lamentation	gdungs dbyangs
གདུད་པ	love, longing; ft. of {'dud pa}	gdud pa
གདུད་པའི་སྨན	medicine from concentrated substances	gdud pa'i sman
གདུབ	bracelet, anklet, bangle, ring	gdub
གདུབ་ཀོར	bracelet, bangle, anklet	gdub kor
གདུབ་སྐོར	finger ring	gdub skor
གདུབ་པ	frugal, temperate?	gdub pa
གདུབ་བུ	bracelets and anklets	gdub bu
གདུབ་སིལ	jingling of anklets and bracelets	gdub sil
གདུམ	a piece	gdum
གདུམ་པོ	SA gtum po, piece, SA dum	gdum po
གདུལ	subdue, SA 'dul ba	gdul
གདུལ་དཀའ	duspradharsa [Buddha]; difficult to subdue gdul dka' rnams drag pos tshar bcad pa wrathfully uprooting those who are difficult to train	gdul dka'
གདུལ་དཀའ་བ	difficult to subdue, hard to restrain or tame	gdul dka' ba
གདུལ་སྐལ་ལྡན་པ	fortunate student	gdul skal ldan pa
གདུལ་བ	SA 'dul ba	gdul ba
གདུལ་བ་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of instruction of the Supreme Emanation Body	gdul ba rnam bzhi
གདུལ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	objects that are to be suppressed (bsigs pa, smad pa, bskad pa, slar bsdum pa, spang ba)	gdul ba'i dngos po
གདུལ་བའི་དངོས་པོ་ལྔ	[bsdigs pa, smad pa, bsnyad pa, slar bsdum pa, spang ba, mi 'jigs pa]	gdul ba'i dngos po lnga
གདུལ་བའི་རིགས་པ	those capable of conversion	gdul ba'i rigs pa
གདུལ་བར་བྱ་བ	disciple {gdul bya}	gdul bar bya ba
གདུལ་བྱ	disciple, student, someone to be tamed / trained, a tamable being, {'dul}; conquering, taming, disciple, student, someone to be tamed; conquering, taming, disciple, student, trainee. one to be tame...	gdul bya
གདུལ་བྱ་རྟག་འཛིན་ཅན	disciples clinging to permanence	gdul bya rtag 'dzin can
གདུལ་བྱ་དུས་བབ	the time of taming has arrived	gdul bya dus bab
གདུལ་བྱ་གདུལ་བར་དཀའ་བ	those who are difficult to tame 1351 gdul bya 'dun par byed pa'i chos ston pa the teacher of the dharma who instructs those who are to be tamed	gdul bya gdul bar dka' ba
གདུལ་བྱ་འདུལ་བའི་དུས་ལ་བབས	the time to care for others	gdul bya 'dul ba'i dus la babs
གདུལ་བྱ་འདྲེན་པ	{rang re ma dag pa'i gdul bya 'dren pa'i ched du} in order to guide us, his disciples, impure as we are,	gdul bya 'dren pa
གདུལ་བྱ་དབང་དུ་མཛད	overpowering those who require training	gdul bya dbang du mdzad
གདུལ་བྱ་སྨིན་པ་གསུམ	threefold ripening of disciples; of nature, faculty, and thought (khams dbang po bsam pa)	gdul bya smin pa gsum
གདུལ་བྱ་གཞན་སྣང	the other appearances of those who are to be tamed	gdul bya gzhan snang
གདུལ་བྱ་ལམ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	the gate by which students enter the path	gdul bya lam la 'jug pa'i sgo
གདུལ་བྱ་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings to convert	gdul bya sems can
གདུལ་བྱའི་སྐལ་བ	condition of students	gdul bya'i skal ba
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཁམས་དབང་བཞི	four degrees of excellence of students	gdul bya'i khams dbang bzhi
གདུལ་བྱའི་གང་འདོད་སྒོ་ཕྱེ་བ	to open the gate to all that beings desire	gdul bya'i gang 'dod sgo phye ba
གདུལ་བྱའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཤིང	the field of student's being	gdul bya'i rgyud kyi shing
གདུལ་བྱའི་དོན	the benefit of students	gdul bya'i don
གདུལ་བྱའི་དོན་དུ	for the benefit of students	gdul bya'i don du
གདུལ་བྱའི་སྣང་ངོར	you appeared to beings	gdul bya'i snang ngor
གདུལ་བྱའི་དཔལ་དུ་ཤར་བ	beamed benefit upon all beings	gdul bya'i dpal du shar ba
གདུལ་བྱའི་བློ་མུན་སེལ	disperse the darkness in the minds of beings	gdul bya'i blo mun sel
གདུལ་བྱའི་དབང་པོ	the powers of students	gdul bya'i dbang po
གདུལ་བྱའི་དབང་པོའི་བྱེ་བྲག	distinctions of the powers of students	gdul bya'i dbang po'i bye brag
གདུལ་བྱའི་གཞན་སྣང	the appearance of other to those to be tamed	gdul bya'i gzhan snang
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཡུལ	those to be tamed, disciples	gdul bya'i yul
གདུལ་བྱའི་རེ་བ་ཡིད་བཞིན་དུ་བཀོད་བ	to present that hoped for by students	gdul bya'i re ba yid bzhin du bkod ba
གདུལ་བྱིའ་རྒྱུད	the being of those to be tamed	gdul byi' rgyud
གདུལ་བྱེད	the one who trains / tames	gdul byed
གདུལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miracles of taming	gdul byed kyi cho 'phrul
གདུལ་ཞིང	realm / world to be tamed, field of conversion, domain of influence, {'dul zhing}; realm of influence, realm / world to be tamed, field of conversion, domain of influence, {'dul zhing}	gdul zhing
གདུལ་ཡ	trainee, aspirant	gdul ya
གདུས	stir up, SA gdu ba	gdus
གདུས་ཁུ	preparation by combining together several ingredients	gdus khu
གདུས་ཁྲུ	juice extracted by boiling	gdus khru
གདུས་ཐང	long boiled essence of medicine, tea, stock etc.	gdus thang
གདུས་པ	[p gdu ba] 1) boiled [down]; 2) was attached to, desired, craved	gdus pa
གདེག	lift up, lift, SA 'degs pa, 'deg pa	gdeg
གདེག་པ	[f 'degs pa] will lift/ raise/ support/ weigh/ serve	gdeg pa
གདེང་ཁེལ་བ	repose confidence, confident, certain	gdeng khel ba
གདེང་འཁེལ་བ	load, SA 'khel ba	gdeng 'khel ba
གདེང་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ	1 of 3 tshig gsum gnad du brdeg pa	gdeng grol thog tu
གདེང་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ	one continues directly with confidence in liberation	gdeng grol thog tu bca'
གདེང་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ་བ	gain confidence in liberation	gdeng grol thog tu bca' ba
གདེང་རྒྱག	contemplate, consider	gdeng rgyag
གདེང་ཆ	stage [theater]	gdeng cha
གདེང་ཆུད་པ	deep understanding	gdeng chud pa
གདེང་ཆུབ་པ	gain confidence	gdeng chub pa
གདེང་འཆོས	gain confidence	gdeng 'chos
གདེང་འཇོག་པ	make an accounting and rely on it [cha 'jog pa] figure/ set the price [having set out wares rin gong 'di tsam khug yong bsam pa'i gdeng 'jog pa]	gdeng 'jog pa
གདེང་འཇོག་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ	a high appraisal gdeng 'jog tshad mthon po zhig byas [they] gave a high appraisal	gdeng 'jog tshad mthon po
གདེང་ཐུབ་པ	be sure, have confidence	gdeng thub pa
གདེང་ཐུབ་པའི་ལམ་གྲོགས	traveling companion in whom 1 can have confidence	gdeng thub pa'i lam grogs
གདེང་ཐོབ་པ	become confident, take courage, be reassured	gdeng thob pa
གདེང་དུ་འགྱུར་པ	to achieve certainty	gdeng du 'gyur pa
གདེང་དུ་འཆར་བ	to take with confidence; [in neg. sense] to presume	gdeng du 'char ba
གདེང་དྲོད	confidence	gdeng drod
གདེང་དྲོད་རྙེད	attain full confidence	gdeng drod rnyed
གདེང་ལྡན་པ	have confidence	gdeng ldan pa
གདེང་བ	(tha dad pa gdengs pa, gdeng ba, gdengs,, threaten, menace, brandish, wave, flap, raise	gdeng ba
གདེང་མེད	uncertain	gdeng med
གདེང་ཚད	faith/ confidence	gdeng tshad
གདེང་ཚད་རྙེད་པ	was confident that	gdeng tshad rnyed pa
གདེང་ཚོད	confidence, assurance	gdeng tshod
གདེང་ཚོད་མེད	not confident	gdeng tshod med
གདེང་ཚོད་མེད་པའི་ལས་ཀ	work 1 is not confident of	gdeng tshod med pa'i las ka
གདེང་བཞི	4-fold confidence	gdeng bzhi
གདེང་ཡོད	have confidence, I am confident	gdeng yod
གདེང་གསུམ	1) {lta ba'i gdeng, stong pa nyid}. 2) {sgom pa'i gdeng} 3) {spyod pa'i gdeng}	gdeng gsum
གདེངས	gdeng ba! [p gdeng] face front, surface, confidence before, was confident/ assured	gdengs
གདེངས་ཀ	expanded hood of the cobra	gdengs ka
གདེངས་ཀ་ཅན	fabulous hooded dragon	gdengs ka can
གདེངས་ཀ་བདུན་པ	7 hoods, king of the nagas	gdengs ka bdun pa
གདེངས་ཀ་ལྡན	hooded snake	gdengs ka ldan
གདེངས་ཀ་འཛིན	hooded snake	gdengs ka 'dzin
གདེངས་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཅའ་བ	gaining confidence in liberation	gdengs grol thog tu bca' ba
གདེངས་གྲོལ་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཆའ་བ	gaining certainty in the state of self-liberation, SA gdeng grol thog tu bca'	gdengs grol thog tu 'cha' ba
གདེངས་ཅན	1) 8 [= naga]{gding ba - 1) [f 'ding ba] will [put/ spread on the ground, scatter,sprinkle, strew]; 2) [among the {'tsho ba'i yo byad bcu gsum} given for gnas mal bskyab pa &, length three cubits a...	gdengs can
གདེངས་ཅན་བདག་པོ	king of nagas	gdengs can bdag po
གདེངས་ཅན་འདྲེན་པ	king of nagas	gdengs can 'dren pa
གདེངས་ཅན་དབང	ananta naga, king of the serpents	gdengs can dbang
གདེངས་ཅན་དབང་པོ	king of nagas	gdengs can dbang po
གདེངས་ཅན་ལྷ་མོ	vasuki, chieftainess of the snakes, goddess with dragon's tail, ninth lunar mansion, scorpio	gdengs can lha mo
གདེངས་བཅའ་བ	to continue confidently	gdengs bca' ba
གདེངས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	three great certainties (ngang ma byas pa, rang bzhin ma bcos pa, bdag nyid chen po lhun grub)	gdengs chen po gsum
གདེངས་ཆོད་ངེས་པ	really achieve certainty	gdengs chod nges pa
གདེངས་ཐོབ་པ	to discover/ discovery of indwelling confidence	gdengs thob pa
གདེངས་དང་ལྡན	to achieve certainty	gdengs dang ldan
གདེངས་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་པོ	shiva	gdengs ldan rgyal po
གདེངས་པ	[p gdeng ba] deserve/ enjoy confidence, be faithful, be trustworthy	gdengs pa
གདེངས་ཚད	perfection of confidence	gdengs tshad
གདེངས་སུ་ཆུད་པ	to understand thoroughly	gdengs su chud pa
གདོག	have, possess, be existent	gdog
གདོང	1) face; 2) in front/ the presence of, before; 3) [sending something] by/ through/ w someone [Bang chen rdo rje'i gdong zhu yig rten dang bcas pa phul yod] {cha chen}.) clan, face, countenance, fro...	gdong
གདོང་དཀར	1) white face; 2) smiling expression; 3) {gdong dkar} [place in stod lung bde chen rdzong]	gdong dkar
གདོང་སྐམ	dry hollow face indicating thievishness	gdong skam
གདོང་སྐར	Rahu gyi gdong thad kyi skar ma	gdong skar
གདོང་སྐྱ	pale face	gdong skya
གདོང་བརྐོས	wood-block gi zur gdong gi kha byang brkos ma	gdong brkos
གདོང་བསྐྱོད	take the lead, be the vanguard	gdong bskyod
གདོང་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	take the lead, be the vanguard	gdong bskyod byed
གདོང་ཁ	face, the front	gdong kha
གདོང་ཁེབས	veil	gdong khebs
གདོང་ཁྲ་མ	1 of sman bla brgyad	gdong khra ma
གདོང་ཁྲག་གིས་སྦགས་པ	his face covered with blood	gdong khrag gis sbags pa
གདོང་གི	facial	gdong gi
གདོང་གི་གཉེར་མ་སྟོན་པ	frown	gdong gi gnyer ma ston pa
གདོང་གི་བསྙེར་མ	wrinkles of forehead	gdong gi bsnyer ma
གདོང་གི་ཕྱོགས	the cheek	gdong gi phyogs
གདོང་གི་དབྱིབས	feature	gdong gi dbyibs
གདོང་གི་རྩེ	the snout, pointed part of the face	gdong gi rtse
གདོང་གི་ཚོན་རིས	facial make-up [usu for actors]	gdong gi tshon ris
གདོང་གི་ཡ་མ	concavity between eyes and ears	gdong gi ya ma
གདོང་གུད་དུ་སྒྱུར་བ	not showing the face head on but turning it to the side ['Khon pa'i mi dang phrad dus gdong gud du sgyur ba]	gdong gud du sgyur ba
གདོང་གྱོགས	blindfold	gdong gyogs
གདོང་གྲུ	boat made from a carved out log	gdong gru
གདོང་གྲོགས	friend	gdong grogs
གདོང་གློད་པ	from shame throwing 1's face on the ground	gdong glod pa
གདོང་རྒྱོང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཤིང	boots's -	gdong rgyong byed kyi shing
གདོང་སྒྱུར	change expression	gdong sgyur
གདོང་ངན	1) monkey; 2) male fire monkey yr Durmukha, [30th year]	gdong ngan
གདོང་ལྔ་པ	1) dbang phyug chen po; 2) lion	gdong lnga pa
གདོང་སྔོན་ལ	gdong sngon pass [in si khron zhing chen, dkar mdzes, 'ba' thang rdzong]	gdong sngon la
གདོང་བཅུ་པ	king of the rakshasas	gdong bcu pa
གདོང་ཆང	wine that is sent for the refreshment of a respectable party when coming to a place	gdong chang
གདོང་ཆུ་ལ་སྐྱུར	be disgraced	gdong chu la skyur
གདོང་ཆུ་ལ་སྐྱུར་བ	lose face	gdong chu la skyur ba
གདོང་ཆུང	dejected, disheartened	gdong chung
གདོང་ཆེན	1) big face; 2) Dpral ko mthug po &, shameless; 3) Rtsis mthong chen po	gdong chen
གདོང་ཆེན་ཅན	shameless person, shameless 1353	gdong chen can
གདོང་ཆེན་བཞི	four animal heads	gdong chen bzhi
གདོང་མཆི་མས་གང	weeping	gdong mchi mas gang
གདོང་མཆོང	charge/ attack [enemy]	gdong mchong
གདོང་མཆོང་དུང་བརྡ	horn/ bugle signal for charge/ attack [enemy]	gdong mchong dung brda
གདོང་མཆོང་པ	vanguard, pathbreaker, pioneer	gdong mchong pa
གདོང་མཆོང་བྱེད	charge/ attack [enemy]	gdong mchong byed
གདོང་རྗེན་དུ་སྡོད་པ	sit with unveiled face	gdong rjen du sdod pa
གདོང་གཏུག་པ	conflict with	gdong gtug pa
གདོང་གཏུགས་པ	meeting face to face	gdong gtugs pa
གདོང་ལྟས	flattery, adulation, hypocrisy, insincerity	gdong ltas
གདོང་ལྟས་བྱེད	to ingratiate oneself	gdong ltas byed
གདོང་སྟད	just opposite	gdong stad
གདོང་སྟོན	facing	gdong ston
གདོང་སྟོན་པ	show 1's face, show up, make an appearance ...Phru gu 'ga' shas kyis 'grul pa gsar pa slebs dus	gdong ston pa
གདོང་སྟོན་མ་བྱུང	she didn't show up	gdong ston ma byung
གདོང་སྟོན་མི་ཤེས	be disgraced	gdong ston mi shes
གདོང་སྟོན་མི་ཤེས་པ	lose face	gdong ston mi shes pa
གདོང་བརྟན་པོ	[firm face] faithful, a person who doesn't turn his back on his friends	gdong brtan po
གདོང་ཐད	.. skar ma	gdong thad
གདོང་ཐུག	1) meet face to face; 2) [suddenly] meet, collide	gdong thug
གདོང་ཐུག་ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ	having met, don rtsa ra sprod byed pa	gdong thug khungs skyel
གདོང་ཐུག་རྒྱག	1) meet face to face; 2) [suddenly] meet, collide	gdong thug rgyag
གདོང་ཐུག་བརྒྱབ	to have an accident	gdong thug brgyab
གདོང་ཐུག་ཐེབས	1) meet face to face; 2) [suddenly] meet, collide	gdong thug thebs
གདོང་ཐུག་པ	1) meet face to face; 2) [suddenly] meet, collide	gdong thug pa
གདོང་ཐུག་པའི་མོ་ཏ	colliding cars	gdong thug pa'i mo ta
གདོང་ཐུག་ཚོགས་འདུ	unplanned/ ad hoc conference/ meeting	gdong thug tshogs 'du
གདོང་ཐོག་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Dongtok Tulku, {gdong thog sprul ming ngag dbang theg mchog bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan} gdong thog sprul ming ngag dbang theg	gdong thog sprul sku
མཆོག་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Dongtok Tulku	mchog bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
གདོང་ཐོག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Sakya master (20th cent)	gdong thog rin po che
གདོང་མཐོང་བ་ཙམ་གྱིས	simply through seeing his face	gdong mthong ba tsam gyis
གདོང་དང་གདོང	face to face	gdong dang gdong
གདོང་དང་གདོང་གཏུགས་ནས	direct/ face to face	gdong dang gdong gtugs nas
གདོང་དང་གདོང་ནས	direct/ face to face	gdong dang gdong nas
གདོང་དར	blindfold. pu ti'i gdong ngos su gdags bya gos chen sogs kyis bzos pa'i gdong rtags	gdong dar
གདོང་དར་བཅིང	tie the blindfold	gdong dar bcing
གདོང་དྲུག	ganges river which has 6 sources, epithet of kartika, the son of mahadeva	gdong drug
གདོང་དྲུག་པ	deity dbang phyug chen po's son gdong drug	gdong drug pa
གདོང་མདོག	face color	gdong mdog
གདོང་འདྲེ	ghost	gdong 'dre
གདོང་ལྡོག་པ	1) mdza' brtse'i rnam 'gyur log pa,...Bya spyod ngan pas khrel nas dga' nye blo dkar gyi gdong ldog pa; 2) tshur yong bzhin du phar log pa,...Dgra bor 'thabs pas gdong ldog tu bros song,...Na tsha ...	gdong ldog pa
གདོང་བསྡུས་པ	bzhin bsdus nas showing anger khro gnyer bstan pa	gdong bsdus pa
གདོང་ནག	sullen	gdong nag
གདོང་ནག་པོ	glum	gdong nag po
གདོང་ནག་པོ་སྟོན	show a black face/ angry expression, sulk	gdong nag po ston
གདོང་ནག་པོ་སྟོན་པ	sulk	gdong nag po ston pa
གདོང་ནས་བཟློག་པ	LKh: "to turn around," "to make face the other way." [mss]	gdong nas bzlog pa
གདོང་གནག་སྟོན་པ	scowl	gdong gnag ston pa
གདོང་སྣ་གཏད་པ	face/ go toward [Rang yul la gdong sna gtad nas log]	gdong sna gtad pa
གདོང་པ	Syn {gdong}	gdong pa
གདོང་པ་ནག	black face, angry, sulking	gdong pa nag
གདོང་ལྤགས	skin of the face	gdong lpags
གདོང་ལྤགས་མཐུག་པོ	person w thick skinned face, thick skinned, able to withstand embarrassment	gdong lpags mthug po
གདོང་སྤུ	face hair	gdong spu
གདོང་སྤྲད་པ	meet face to face	gdong sprad pa
གདོང་ཕྱི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རས	cloth for wiping the face	gdong phyi byed kyi ras
གདོང་ཕྱིས	1) wash the face; 2) face wiping cloth	gdong phyis
གདོང་ཕྱོགས	to turn the face towards	gdong phyogs
གདོང་ཕྲད་པ	meet [face to face]	gdong phrad pa
གདོང་བན	(CH khrus spyad	gdong ban
གདོང་འབག	mask	gdong 'bag
གདོང་འབྱིད	1) wipe 1's face w a cloth; 2) cloth for wiping the face gdong phyi byed kyi ras	gdong 'byid
གདོང་དམར	red face, a cannibal, hobgoblin	gdong dmar
གདོང་དམར་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	the red-faced region	gdong dmar can gyi yul
གདོང་དམར་པོ	1) red faced, color of anger or shame	gdong dmar po
གདོང་དམར་བ	1) family name; 2) red faced	gdong dmar ba
གདོང་དམར་བོད་ཀྱི	tibet	gdong dmar bod kyi
གདོང་དམར་བོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	country of redfaced demons	gdong dmar bod kyi yul
གདོང་དམར་ཡུལ	region of red faces	gdong dmar yul
གདོང་སྨད་པ	downcast face	gdong smad pa
གདོང་སྨེ	freckle-faced	gdong sme
གདོང་རྩལ་ཆེན་པོ	[skillful face] thick skinned, able to withstand embarrassment	gdong rtsal chen po
གདོང་ཚན	ngo tsha mtsher snang	gdong tshan
གདོང་ཚན་ཅན	dpral ko mthug po'am, ngo tsha 'dzem bag chung ba,...Gdong tshan can gyi mi tshos gang yang byas yong,...Ming gi rnam grangs la skyengs pa med dang, gnong med, dpral ko can, spyi brtol can, 'tsher ...	gdong tshan can
གདོང་འཛར	dharma volume 'i mtshan yig 'khod pa'i 'dzar	gdong 'dzar
གདོང་འཛིན	eclipse	gdong 'dzin
གདོང་ཞི	brahma	gdong zhi
གདོང་ཞུ	rim brgyud kyis ma zhus par zhu yul gtso bo de rang gi mdun du rang nyid kyis thad kar zhus pa,...Snga phyi'i bde sdug yong rkyen tshang ma don gyi bdag po ngo ma rang gi sku mdun du gdong zhu mtha...	gdong zhu
གདོང་གཞི	complexion	gdong gzhi
གདོང་གཞི་མིག་བརྒྱད	many people 'dzoms pa'i don,...Don dag de'i skor 1354 nga rang tsho gdong bzhi mig brgyad kyis gros thag bcad pa yin no	gdong gzhi mig brgyad
གདོང་བཞི་པ	Bhrama	gdong bzhi pa
གདོང་ཟླུམ་པ	round face, religious person	gdong zlum pa
གདོང་ཟློག	turning away the face of	gdong zlog
གདོང་ཡིག	letters on a book cover	gdong yig
གདོང་ཡིག་གི་རྒྱ	among the rgya rim pa bdun, glegs bam mi 'khrug par byed pa'i rtags te gdong 'dzar gdong g.yogs - blindfold gdong g.yogs bcing ba - [tie the] blindfold [in abhisheka among phyi 'jug, pupils seeing ...	gdong yig gi rgya
གདོང་རས	face, true nature	gdong ras
གདོང་རས་ཀྱིས་འཕྱིད་པ	wipe 1's face w a cloth	gdong ras kyis 'phyid pa
གདོང་རིང	long face	gdong ring
གདོང་རིས	face, true nature	gdong ris
གདོང་ལ	in front, in advance	gdong la
གདོང་ལ་གྱོན་རྒྱུའི་འབག	mask	gdong la gyon rgyu'i 'bag
གདོང་ལ་ཆུ་ཟིལ་བཏབ	splash water on the face	gdong la chu zil btab
གདོང་ལ་དེད་པ	push forward, press forward, urge on, haul a culprit before the judge	gdong la ded pa
གདོང་ལ་མིག་ཀྱང་ཡང་ཡང་བལྟ	gaze yearningly, again and again	gdong la mig kyang yang yang blta
གདོང་ལེན	resistance, scout	gdong len
གདོང་ལེན་པ	going forward	gdong len pa
གདོང་ལེན་དཔུང་ཚོགས	vanguard team, Pioneers [Communist Youth Group]	gdong len dpung tshogs
གདོང་ལེན་བྱེད	go forward, be in the vanguard/ lead/ fore, face, encounter, take the lead, give a reception [party for guests]	gdong len byed
གདོང་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	resist	gdong len byed pa
གདོང་ལེན་རུ་ཁག	vanguard team, Pioneers [Communist Youth Group]	gdong len ru khag
གདོང་ལེན་རུ་མི	member of vanguard team	gdong len ru mi
གདོང་ཤ་མི་ལ་བྱིན	she will beg without shame or embarrassment,	gdong sha mi la byin
གདོང་ཤིང	boots's gdong rgyong byed kyi shing	gdong shing
གདོང་ཤེལ	mirror	gdong shel
གདོང་གཤིས	expression of the face	gdong gshis
གདོང་གཤེར	cross examination, SA ngag gsher	gdong gsher
གདོང་བཤེར་ར་སྤྲོད	dngos su gdong thug nas ra sprod byed pa,...Phan tshun gnyis kyi bshad tshul 'gal 'dzol che bas gdong bsher ra sprod mi byed thabs med byung	gdong bsher ra sprod
གདོང་སེམས	enthusiasm	gdong sems
གདོང་བསུ	personally greet/ welcome/ receive someone who has arrived	gdong bsu
གདོང་བསུས	personally greeted/ welcomed/ received someone who arrived	gdong bsus
གདོང་བསུས་ཏེ་ཁྱིམ་དུ་སླེབས་པ	welcomed them and brought them to the house	gdong bsus te khyim du slebs pa
གདོང་ལྷགས	mdun phyogs nas rgyag pa'i rlung,...Gdong lhags rgyag dus gru skul dka'	gdong lhags
གདོངས	imp. of {gdang ba}	gdongs
གདོངས་ལྔ	mi 'jigs + - fearless lions	gdongs lnga
གདོངས་དོན	spirit, essence substance	gdongs don
གདོངས་ལྡན་རྨ་བྱ	peacocks	gdongs ldan rma bya
གདོད	primordial [comp. {gdod ma} primeval, primitive	gdod
གདོད་ཀྱི	first, at first, previously, before	gdod kyi
གདོད་དཀྱེས་སྲོག་ཆགས	protozoa	gdod dkyes srog chags
གདོད་ནས	from the [very] beginning/ 1st, primordial[ly], basic, original, primal, at 1st	gdod nas
གདོད་ནས་ཀ་དག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	original wisdom of primordial purity gdod nas sku gsum dbyer med chen po great primordial indivisibility of the three kayas	gdod nas ka dag gi ye shes
གདོད་ནས་སྟོང་པ	primordially empty	gdod nas stong pa
གདོད་ནས་དག་པ	pure from the beginning, primordial purity, pure from the beginning, primitive purity, primordially pure	gdod nas dag pa
གདོད་ནས་རྣམ་དག་ཞིང	primordially completely pure buddha field	gdod nas rnam dag zhing
གདོད་ནས་མ་སྐྱེས	unborn since the beginning	gdod nas ma skyes
གདོད་ནས་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	primordial unborn-ness/ non- arising [of all dharmas in the absolute]	gdod nas ma skyes pa
གདོད་ནས་མ་གྲུབ	primordially nonexistent	gdod nas ma grub
གདོད་ནས་བཞུགས་པ	primordially present	gdod nas bzhugs pa
གདོད་ནས་བཟང་པོ	basic goodness	gdod nas bzang po
གདོད་ནས་བཟང་བ	basic goodness	gdod nas bzang ba
གདོད་ནས་ཡོངས་དག	primordial purity	gdod nas yongs dag
གདོད་ནས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་པ	primordial spontaneous presence	gdod nas lhun grub pa
གདོད་ནས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་པའི	primordially selfexisting /spontaneously present	gdod nas lhun grub pa'i
གདོད་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	primordial yoga	gdod pa'i rnal 'byor
གདོད་པོ	tart	gdod po
གདོད་བྲལ	primordially [completely] free from	gdod bral
གདོད་མ	beginning, primordial, original, the first, previously, before	gdod ma
གདོད་མ་ཀ་དག་གི་དབྱིངས	original space of primordial purity	gdod ma ka dag gi dbyings
གདོད་མ་ནས	primordially, from the beginning/ 1st, at 1st	gdod ma nas
གདོད་མ་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	primordially exist	gdod ma nas grub pa
གདོད་མ་ནས་དག་པ	pure from the beginning	gdod ma nas dag pa
གདོད་མ་ནས་ཡོད་མ་མྱོང་བ	primordially nonexistent	gdod ma nas yod ma myong ba
གདོད་མ་གཞི	ground of primordial being	gdod ma gzhi
གདོད་མ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	primordial true nature, natural state of the primordial essence	gdod ma gshis kyi gnas lugs
གདོད་མའི	primordial, original, primeval	gdod ma'i
གདོད་མའི་ཀ་དག་ཆེན་པོ	great original state, great primordial purity	gdod ma'i ka dag chen po
གདོད་མའི་ཀུང་ཧྲི	primitive commune 1355	gdod ma'i kung hri
གདོད་མའི་གྲོལ་གཞི	original ground of liberation	gdod ma'i grol gzhi
གདོད་མའི་དགོན་པ	primordial protector/ lord, adi buddha	gdod ma'i dgon pa
གདོད་མའི་མགོན	primordial lord	gdod ma'i mgon
གདོད་མའི་མགོན་པོ	primordial lord (unity of structure and function, the outcome of man's persistent attempt to give meaning to his experience), Adinatha, primordial buddha	gdod ma'i mgon po
གདོད་མའི་ངང	primordial state	gdod ma'i ngang
གདོད་མའི་དུས	in the beginning, at first	gdod ma'i dus
གདོད་མའི་ནགས་ཚལ	primeval/ virgin forest	gdod ma'i nags tshal
གདོད་མའི་གནས་ལུགས	original condition, primordial nature / state / condition, original nature	gdod ma'i gnas lugs
གདོད་མའི་གནས་ལུགས་རང་བཞིན	selfmanifest original nature	gdod ma'i gnas lugs rang bzhin
གདོད་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the primordial yoga, atiyoga, primordial yoga of rdzogs chen, Atiyoga	gdod ma'i rnal 'byor
གདོད་མའི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	primitive society	gdod ma'i spyi tshogs
གདོད་མའི་དབྱིངས	primordial space. [mss]	gdod ma'i dbyings
གདོད་མའི་དབྱིངས་སུ་གྲོལ་བ	be liberated into primordial space	gdod ma'i dbyings su grol ba
གདོད་མའི་མི	primitive man	gdod ma'i mi
གདོད་མའི་གཞི	primordial ground, Primordial ground	gdod ma'i gzhi
གདོད་མའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordial awareness	gdod ma'i ye shes
གདོད་མའི་སངས་རྒྱས	earliest buddha	gdod ma'i sangs rgyas
གདོད་ལས་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	unborn / uncreated since the beginning	gdod las ma skyes pa
གདོན	malevolent influence; demon, demonic / negative force, harmful / evil spirit / influence, madness. {'don}; demon/ certainty; a demon	gdon
གདོན་བཀྲོལ	Relinquishing Harmful Influences	gdon bkrol
གདོན་ཁྲིགས	{'don khrigs} ritual text	gdon khrigs
གདོན་གྱི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	eight classes of gdon	gdon gyi sde brgyad
གདོན་གྱིས་འདེབས་པ	be harassed by a demon	gdon gyis 'debs pa
གདོན་གྱིས་འཛིན	be possessed by a d"n	gdon gyis 'dzin
གདོན་གྱིས་ཟིན་པ	fall under the influence of negative forces	gdon gyis zin pa
གདོན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	possessed by evil spirits	gdon gyis brlabs pa
གདོན་གྱིས་བརླམས་པ	possessed by evil spirits	gdon gyis brlams pa
གདོན་བགེགས	d"ns and obstructing spirits	gdon bgegs
གདོན་བགེགས་འབྱུང་པོ	evil spirits	gdon bgegs 'byung po
གདོན་བགེགས་འབྱུང་པོ་མི་མ་ཡིན	malevolent spirits	gdon bgegs 'byung po mi ma yin
གདོན་ཆེན	major gdon	gdon chen
གདོན་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	eighteen great gdon	gdon chen bco brgyad
གདོན་སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	80,000 evil influences	gdon stong phrag brgyad bcu
གདོན་དང་འགྲུལ་སྣ	negative forces associated with certain visitors or articles	gdon dang 'grul sna
གདོན་འདྲེ	Syn {gdong 'dre} f. of {'don} demon evil spirit, demonic / negative force, harmful / evil spirit / influence, madness. "don demon". see also {gdon mi za ba}	gdon 'dre
གདོན་ནད	1) sickness and dons; 2) don diseases [inflicted by lha klu gza' btsan etc like gza' grib, mdze nad]	gdon nad
གདོན་གནོད	harm of d"ns	gdon gnod
གདོན་པ	[f 'don pa] harmful, pray[er], supplication	gdon pa
གདོན་ཕཡབ༹	don mo divination	gdon phyva
གདོན་ཕྱྭ	divination about provocations by negative energies	gdon phywa
གདོན་ཕྲན	minor gdon	gdon phran
གདོན་བྱ	SA gdon bya'i 'don pa	gdon bya
གདོན་མི་བགྱི	why not help?	gdon mi bgyi
གདོན་མི་འཚལ་བར	undoubtedly, indubitably	gdon mi 'tshal bar
གདོན་མི་ཟ	there is no doubt that, w/o [a] doubt, certain, unquestionable	gdon mi za
གདོན་མི་ཟ་བ	doubtless, certainly, there	gdon mi za ba
ཨིས་ནོ་དོཨུབཏ་ཐཏ	-	is no doubt that
གདོན་མི་ཟ་བར	undoubtedly, indubitably	gdon mi za bar
གདོན་མི་ཟ་བར་བྱ་དགོས་པ	certainly it must be done	gdon mi za bar bya dgos pa
གདོན་ཚོགས	hostile hosts	gdon tshogs
གདོན་ཞུགས	be possessed by an evil spirit/ d"n	gdon zhugs
གདོན་ཞུགས་པ	possessed, obsessed; influenced / controlled / dominated by an evil spirit	gdon zhugs pa
གདོན་ཟ་བ	to entertain misgivings	gdon za ba
གདོན་ཟོག	bar chad yong ba'i nor rdzas	gdon zog
གདོན་རིགས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 kinds of prayers	gdon rigs bco brgyad
གདོན་ལ་གཏོར་མ་སྟེར་བ	offering of torma to evil spirits	gdon la gtor ma ster ba
གདོན་སྲི	sri arising at the time of harm by dons	gdon sri
གདོན་གསུམ	the three kinds of d"ns	gdon gsum
གདོམས	'dam pa!, thom	gdoms
གདོལ	{gdol pa} / {gdol rigs}	gdol
གདོལ་པ	outcaste; outcast, lower caste, untouchables; lower caste people, barbarians, 2) vile, lowly, base	gdol pa
གདོལ་པ་གྱུང་པོ	base outcastes	gdol pa gyung po
གདོལ་པའི་དྲང་སྲོང་གཏམ	Words of the Outcaste Rishi	gdol pa'i drang srong gtam
གདོལ་སྤྱོད	lowly, base behavior; base, low behavior/ frivolous	gdol spyod
གདོལ་བའི་རིགས	1 of rigs bzhi, sudra caste	gdol ba'i rigs
གདོལ་མ	outcast	gdol ma
གདོལ་རབས	fisherman class	gdol rabs
གདོལ་རིགས	lowest castes, untouchables	gdol rigs
གདོས	anything having material form	gdos
གདོས་བཅས	having material substance; material, having solid form, {rdos} substance, materiality, matter	gdos bcas
གདོས་བཅས་ཀྱི་རྟེན	material basis	gdos bcas kyi rten
གདོས་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	material body	gdos bcas kyi phung po
གདོས་བཅས་མ་གྲུབ	nothing material exists	gdos bcas ma grub
གདོས་བཅས་སུ་གྲུབ	they have no substance	gdos bcas su grub
གདོས་བཅས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ་མེད	these things are nothing material	gdos bcas su grub pa med
གདོས་ཆེ་བ	1) very heavy; 2) large sized	gdos che ba
གདོས་ཐག	continuity of corporeality	gdos thag
གདོས་ཐག་བཅད	decisively made up his mind	gdos thag bcad
གདོས་ཐག་ཆོད	cuts the ties	gdos thag chod
གདོས་པ	solidity	gdos pa
གདོས་པ་ཐག་གཅོད་ཀྱི་བོན	bon that severs the ties with material things	gdos pa thag gcod kyi bon
གདོས་པ་འཛིན་པ	holder of the boat, steersman of a vessel	gdos pa 'dzin pa
གདོས་པོ	rope, cord	gdos po
གདོས་བུ	sail of a boat, balls made of tough or soft materials to ward off sleep, oar	gdos bu
གདོས་བུ་བཙུག་པ	set sail, fix the sail on the mast	gdos bu btsug pa
གདོས་བུ་གཟུགས་ཅན	anything having material form	gdos bu gzugs can
གདོས་བྲལ	rainbow-like subtle form, immaterial	gdos bral
གདོས་མེད	immaterial, without substance / form	gdos med
གདོས་ཚད	measure of size and weight	gdos tshad
གདོས་སུ་ཆེ་བ	1) very heavy; 2) large sized	gdos su che ba
དད་ཀི	dakini	dda ki
དད་མ་རུ	tympan, drum	dda ma ru
དདན་དདི	the beam	ddan ddi
བདག	atman, ego, self, one's self, I, master, solid matter, person, self-identity, one's own state, state, substance, true state, identity	bdag
བཏུང་སློང་ཟེར་བ	”Feed me! I am starving ! Give me drink! I am thirsty!”	btung slong zer ba
བདག་རྐྱེན	1) governing condition, conditioning in oneself, adhipatipratyaya. empowering condition. reward, award, ruling factor, dominant condition, empowering condition {bdag po'i rkyen}, {rkyen bzhi}, 2) p...	bdag rkyen
བདག་རྐྱེན་དུ་གནང	[give a] reward/ award	bdag rkyen du gnang
བདག་རྐྱེན་དུ་སྩལ	[give a] reward/ award [h] 1357	bdag rkyen du stsal
བདག་རྐྱེན་གནང	[give a] reward/ award	bdag rkyen gnang
བདག་རྐྱེན་སྩལ	[give a] reward/ award [h]	bdag rkyen stsal
བདག་སྐལ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	(sense of) individuality	bdag skal pa dang ldan pa
བདག་སྐྱབས་མཆི	I take refuge	bdag skyabs mchi
བདག་སྐྱབས་དང་བྲལ་ལོ་ཞེས	I have no one to save me!	bdag skyabs dang bral lo zhes
བདག་སྐྱིད་གཞན་སྨོན	be [a source of ] happiness for 1self and of aspiration for others	bdag skyid gzhan smon
བདག་སྐྱེ	production from self [Samkhya view]	bdag skye
བདག་སྐྱེད	production in oneself	bdag skyed
བདག་སྐྱེས	1) production from self (Samkhya view; 2) liquor; 3) lizard; 4) child; 5) bhramin; 6) Bhram	bdag skyes
བདག་སྐྱོང	care and protection, looking after	bdag skyong
བདག་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	take care of, protect, look after	bdag skyong byed
བདག་བསྐྱེད	1) ego/ self creator, Bhram; 2) self- visualization	bdag bskyed
བདག་གི	my, mine, one's own	bdag gi
བདག་གི་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of self. One of {sngags kyi yan lag lnga} bdag gi mgron du rgyal ba 'khor bcas	bdag gi kho na nyid
ཕེབས་དགོས་ཞུས་པ	said he would be most pleased if the Buddha and his attendants would come to his house for a feast bdag gi rgyud tha dad par ma mthong not see 1's own being as different	phebs dgos zhus pa
བདག་གི་ངོ་བོ	its own identity	bdag gi ngo bo
བདག་གི་རྗེས་སུ	who follow me	bdag gi rjes su
བདག་གི་ལྟ་བ་བཅུ	the 10 self-oriented views	bdag gi lta ba bcu
བདག་གི་ཐད	before me/ in front of me	bdag gi thad
བདག་གི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the thatness of self	bdag gi de kho na nyid
ཐེ་པླཅེམེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེཨེད	syllable and	the placement of the seed
ཐེ་མནཏྲ	chain in the center of the heart. The thatness of recitation is the repetition of the root mantra, essence mantra and quintessence mantra. The thatness of emanation and absorption is the emanating ...	the mantra
ལིགྷཏ་རཡས་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་སེཨེད	syllable.	light rays from the seed
བདག་གི་དོན་བདག་གི་བར་འཛིན་པ	grasp ego as 1's own	bdag gi don bdag gi bar 'dzin pa
བདག་གི་བདག་ཉིད་དུ་ཡོད་པ	x. [mss]	bdag gi bdag nyid du yod pa
བདག་གི་གནས	{mtshan de bzhin bdag gi gnas su skyel na} and each night bring her back home to me	bdag gi gnas
བདག་གི་གནས་པ	substantial foundation	bdag gi gnas pa
བདག་གི་སྤྱི་བོར	above my head	bdag gi spyi bor
བདག་གི་ཕོགས	1) 1's own salary; 2) 1's own doctrine's phogs ??? [phyogs? side?]	bdag gi phogs
བདག་གི་བ	what pertains to the self	bdag gi ba
བདག་གི་བ་མེད	an epithet of buddha	bdag gi ba med
བདག་གི་བ་མེད་པ	without egoism	bdag gi ba med pa
བདག་གི་བར་འཛིན་པ	grasp as one's own	bdag gi bar 'dzin pa
བདག་གི་མ	a goddess	bdag gi ma
བདག་གི་མེད་པ	egoless	bdag gi med pa
བདག་གི་སྨྲ་བ	1) exponent of self; 2) 1's own doctrine	bdag gi smra ba
བདག་གི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	1) the effort of ego; 2) 1's own effort	bdag gi brtson 'grus
བདག་གི་ཚིག་ལ་གསོན	do listen to my word bdag gi mtshan nyid du kun brtags pa the false conception of ego	bdag gi tshig la gson
བདག་གི་གཞི	self-base	bdag gi gzhi
བདག་གི་ཡིན	it is mine	bdag gi yin
བདག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྫོགས	perfect 1's wisdom bdag gi ye shes rdzogs par byang chub	bdag gi ye shes rdzogs
པར་གྱུར	having perfected 1's wisdom, become enlightened	par gyur
བདག་གི་ལ་བརྣབ་སེམས་པ	to crave for one's own [f ex status]	bdag gi la brnab sems pa
བདག་གི་ལུས་ལ་གནོད་ཀྱང་དགའ	am happy even if my body comes to harm	bdag gi lus la gnod kyang dga'
བདག་གི་ཤེས་པ	one's own consciousness	bdag gi shes pa
བདག་གིར	mine	bdag gir
བདག་གིར་ལྟ་བ	view of "mine"	bdag gir lta ba
བདག་གིར་བ	independence	bdag gir ba
བདག་གིར་བྱ	ascription	bdag gir bya
བདག་གིར་བྱ་བ	1) grasp at "mine"; 2) take possession/ control of; 3) claim as 1's own	bdag gir bya ba
བདག་གིར་བྱ་བ་མེད་པ	not grasping at "mine"	bdag gir bya ba med pa
བདག་གིར་བྱས་པ	promised, undertaken, attachment	bdag gir byas pa
བདག་གིར་བྱེད	1) ego-grasping; 2) take possession/ control of; 3) claim as 1's own	bdag gir byed
བདག་གིར་བྱེད་པ	to take possession of, take control of, claim ownership over	bdag gir byed pa
བདག་གིར་བྱེད་མི་ཆོག་པའི་སྤྱི་ས	common land that 1 should not take possession/ control of	bdag gir byed mi chog pa'i spyi sa
བདག་གིར་འཛིན	1) grasp at "mine"; 2) take possession/ control of; 3) claim as 1's own	bdag gir 'dzin
བདག་གིར་འཛིན་པ	1) grasp at "mine"; 2) take possession/ control of; 3) claim as 1's own	bdag gir 'dzin pa
བདག་གིར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to "mine"	bdag gir zhen pa
བདག་གིས་མངོན་ཤེས་བདེན་པ	I am omniscient; this is the truth	bdag gis mngon shes bden pa
བདག་གིས་གཏམ་དུ	as I have been told	bdag gis gtam du
བདག་གིས་གཏམ་དུ་ཐོས་ནས	as I have learned	bdag gis gtam du thos nas
བདག་གིས་བསྟན	I have taught	bdag gis bstan
བདག་གིས་བྱེད་པར་གྱུར	x {btsun mo rnams byis pa 'di'i ma bdag gis byed par gyur ces thams cad yid smon byas pa} each one of the queens wished to be the child's mother	bdag gis byed par gyur
བདག་གིས་ལུས་སྨད	stomach	bdag gis lus smad
བདག་རྒྱུད	1's own continuum of [body &] mind/ awareness	bdag rgyud
བདག་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five skandhas of 1's continuum	bdag rgyud kyi phung po lnga
བདག་རྒྱུད་བྱིན་གྱི་རློབས	may they bless me	bdag rgyud byin gyi rlobs
བདག་སྒྲ	possessing word such as {can, ldan, pa, po, ma, mo} as in {btags pa pa}; possessing word such as {can}, {ldan}, pa, po, ma, mo. as in {btags pa pa}	bdag sgra
བདག་དངོས	property, possessions	bdag dngos
བདག་ཅག	we, us, ourselves	bdag cag
བདག་ཅག་གི་སྟོན་པ	our teacher	bdag cag gi ston pa
བདག་ཅག་རྣམས	us	bdag cag rnams
བདག་ཅེས་བྱ་བ	I the so-named	bdag ces bya ba
བདག་གཅིག་གི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationship of single identity	bdag gcig gi 'brel ba
བདག་གཅིག་འབྲེལ	[ggd] relation of identical nature, relation of essential identity, related as the same essence, related through being one entity, single entity relationship, related through being one entity	bdag gcig 'brel
བདག་གཅེས	gces spras,...Rgyal khab kyi rgyu dngos rigs la rnam kun bdag gces lhod med byed pa,... self-importance, maintenance, upkeep, taking care of	bdag gces
བདག་གཅེས་ཉམས་གསོ	maintenance and repair	bdag gces nyams gso
བདག་གཅེས་བྱེད	maintain, keep up, take care of	bdag gces byed
བདག་གཅེས་བྱེད་པ	cherish, take good care of	bdag gces byed pa
བདག་གཅེས་འཛིན	self-cherishing	bdag gces 'dzin
བདག་གཅེས་བཟོ་བཅོས	maintenance and repair	bdag gces bzo bcos
བདག་བཅོལ	"I charge you"	bdag bcol
བདག་ཆེན	1) {bdag nyid chen po}. 2) Dagchen; title of the head lama of the Sakyapa sect	bdag chen
བདག་ཆེན་དབང་འདུས་སྙིང་པོ	Dagchen Wangdü Nyingpo (1765-1806), the 33rd throne holder of Sakya	bdag chen dbang 'dus snying po
བདག་ཆེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the head lama of the Sakya sect [with all spiritual powers and temporal 1s, which at times have been great syn: {gong ma} {gdag chen}	bdag chen rin po che
བདག་མཆོག་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	the nature/ definition of an excellent being	bdag mchog gi mtshan nyid
བདག་འཇག	cushion seat and small table	bdag 'jag
བདག་འཇུག	(ritual of) self-empowerment	bdag 'jug
བདག་འཇུག་གཞན་ལ་དབང་མ་བསྐུར་གོང་སེལཕ༹	abhisheka before empowering others	bdag 'jug gzhan la dbang ma bskur gong self
བདག་ཉམས་པ	1 of 6 nyams pa	bdag nyams pa
བདག་ཉིད	I, great being, being, lord, "atman itself." great being, lord, sovereign, [- Syn {rang bzhin} nature, identity, entity, personification, nature, oneself, myself, himself, themselves, possess. see ...	bdag nyid
བདག་ཉིད་ཀུན་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	so that 1 will become omniscient	bdag nyid kun shes par bya ba'i phyir
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱང་བསོད་པར་བྱེད	bdag nyid kyi dgongs pa	bdag nyid kyang bsod par byed
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	1's realization/ vision	bdag nyid kyi dgongs pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཆོག	supreme 1 among beings, supreme nature	bdag nyid kyi mchog
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ་མཆོག་ཏུ་འཛིན	grasp the view of ego/ nature as supreme bdag nyid kyi don bshin du gshan gyi don	bdag nyid kyi lta ba mchog tu 'dzin
ལ་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ	being w/o sadness that 1s own benefit is also that of others	la skyo ba med pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར	for oneself	bdag nyid kyi phyir
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of 1's generosity	bdag nyid kyi sbyin pa'i phyir
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡང་དག་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ	1s true aspiration	bdag nyid kyi yang dag pa'i smon lam
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཡང་དག་སྨོན་ལམ	1's true aspiration	bdag nyid kyi yang dag smon lam
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	1) 1's own enlightenment; 2) the nature of buddhahood bdag nyid kyi sangs rgyas kyi dgongs pa	bdag nyid kyi sangs rgyas
ཐོབ་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of attaining realization of the nature of buddhahood	thob pa'i phyir
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སེམས	1's mind bdag nyid kyi sems la kun nas nyon	bdag nyid kyi sems
མོངས་པ་མེད་པ	absence of all kleshas within 1's mind	mongs pa med pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སོ་སོ་རང་གི་རིག་པ	1's selfarising wisdom	bdag nyid kyi so so rang gi rig pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	by me, by oneself bdag nyid kyis sangs rgyas kyi chos yongs	bdag nyid kyis
སུ་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད	bdag nyis kyis completely ripen the Buddhadharma	su smin par byed
བདག་ཉིད་སྒྲོག	1) praise 1self; 2) raven	bdag nyid sgrog
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག	(relationship of) lesser-togreater extension	bdag nyid gcig
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་པ	single identity	bdag nyid gcig pa
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་པའི་འབྲེལ་བ	genitive of a single nature	bdag nyid gcig pa'i 'brel ba
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	single nature ignorance; ignorance of single identity	bdag nyid gcig pa'i ma rig pa
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་པུའི་མ་རིག་པ	nonrecognition of awareness that seems/ is virtually the same as/ identical to (the ground of being itself)	bdag nyid gcig pu'i ma rig pa
བདག་ཉིད་གཅིག་འབྲེལ	relationship of single identity	bdag nyid gcig 'brel
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེ	magnanimous, generous, one with broad views and principles, total state of one's self	bdag nyid che
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེ་ལྟ་དོན་ཆེན	the great goal of being a mahatma	bdag nyid che lta don chen
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེ་བ	mahatma, great being	bdag nyid che ba
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན	mahatma, great beings	bdag nyid chen
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	Mahatma. One of noble nature, exceedingly wise, etc	bdag nyid chen po
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས	Great Beings	bdag nyid chen po rnams
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་ལྟ་བ	vairochana's view of the total state	bdag nyid chen po'i lta ba
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་བདག	the nature of a great being	bdag nyid chen po'i bdag
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་བསམ་པ	the thought of a great being	bdag nyid chen po'i bsam pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོར	SA che ba lnga bdag nyid chen por sangs rgyas pa che ba - the greatness of enlightenment in the totality of one's state	bdag nyid chen por
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་མོ	[4] bdag nyid mchog tu nges par 'dzin pa yid	bdag nyid chen mo
ལ་བྱེད་པ	apprehension of good or bad?	la byed pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཇི་བཞིན་དུ	taken in due order	bdag nyid ji bzhin du
བདག་ཉིད་ཇི་བཤིན་དུ	taken in due order	bdag nyid ji bshin du
བདག་ཉིད་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག	follow after the nature	bdag nyid rjes su 'jug
བདག་ཉིད་རྟོགས་པ	1) self enlightenment; 2) realize the nature	bdag nyid rtogs pa
བདག་ཉིད་དག་པ	pure nature	bdag nyid dag pa
བདག་ཉིད་དང་ནི་གཤན་དག	1self and others	bdag nyid dang ni gshan dag
བདག་ཉིད་དོན་ཡང་མི་འདོར	even the meaning/ benefit of 1self/ ego is not rejected	bdag nyid don yang mi 'dor
བདག་ཉིད་འདུག་པ	existence of a nature	bdag nyid 'dug pa
བདག་ཉིད་གནས་པ	the existence of self/ nature	bdag nyid gnas pa
བདག་ཉིད་པ་སྙེམས	[pride or arrogance: could be either good "vajra"of master or bad of ego, check context	bdag nyid pa snyems
བདག་ཉིད་མི་ཤེས་པ	not know 1self/ the nature	bdag nyid mi shes pa
བདག་ཉིད་རྩ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the root mandala of the lord [of the mandala]	bdag nyid rtsa ba'i dkyil 'khor
བདག་ཉིད་འཛིན་པ	grasping a nature	bdag nyid 'dzin pa
བདག་ཉིད་ཞེན་པས་འཆིང་བ	are bound	bdag nyid zhen pas 'ching ba
བཡ་ཐེཨིར་ཕི༹྾ཨཏིཨོནས་ཨོན་སེལཕ༹	identity	by their fixations on self
བདག་ཉིད་ཡིན་པ	be the nature/ ego/ master/ a great being	bdag nyid yin pa
བདག་ཉིད་རང་བཞིན	true nature or fundamental condition	bdag nyid rang bzhin
བདག་ཉིད་ལ་ཡང་གནོད་པར་བྱེད	harm 1self as well	bdag nyid la yang gnod par byed
བདག་ཉིད་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	rise from 1self/ the lord	bdag nyid las 'byung ba
བདག་ཉིད་ལེགས་པར་བསླབས་པ	1) well train 1self, well learn the nature	bdag nyid legs par bslabs pa
བདག་ཉིད་གསོ་བ་བྱེད་པ	were able to maintain themselves	bdag nyid gso ba byed pa
བདག་ཉིད་ལྷར་གསལ	visualize 1self as the deity	bdag nyid lhar gsal
བདག་ཉིས་གཅིག་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	single nature ignorance	bdag nyis gcig pa'i ma rig pa
བདག་ཉེར	taking custody, looking after	bdag nyer
བདག་ཉེར་གཅེས་སྐྱོང	{bdag nyer gces skyong} Library Dharamsala	bdag nyer gces skyong
བདག་ཉེར་བྱེད	take custody of, look after	bdag nyer byed
བདག་ཉེས་ན	if harm is done to me	bdag nyes na
བདག་གཉིས	the two kinds of self[hood] selfhood of individuals gang zag gi bdag pudgal tma [nyid] and of phenomena chos kyi bdag [nyid] dharm tma	bdag gnyis
བདག་གཉིས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of the two kinds of self	bdag gnyis kyi rang bzhin
བདག་གཉིས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་ཀུན་རྟོག	conceptual thinking that apprehends the twofold identity	bdag gnyis su 'dzin pa'i kun rtog
བདག་གཉེར	management, supervision	bdag gnyer
བདག་གཉེར་དོ་དམ	management, supervision, taking charge, administration	bdag gnyer do dam
བདག་གཉེར་པ	manager, supervisor, administrative personnel	bdag gnyer pa
བདག་གཉེར་བྱེད	manage, supervise, take charge	bdag gnyer byed
བདག་གཉེར་བྱེད་པ	manage, run	bdag gnyer byed pa
བདག་གཉེར་བྱེད་ལུགས	way of management, supervision, taking charge, administration	bdag gnyer byed lugs
བདག་གཉེར་མི་སྣ	manager, supervisor, administrative personnel	bdag gnyer mi sna
བདག་གཉེར་ས་ཁུལ	administrative district	bdag gnyer sa khul
བདག་སྙིང་འདི་རྗེན་ཟས	to eat one's heart out	bdag snying 'di rjen zas
བདག་ཏུ་ང་རྒྱལ	egotism	bdag tu nga rgyal
བདག་ཏུ་ང་རྒྱལ་བ	the pride of ego	bdag tu nga rgyal ba
བདག་ཏུ་བཏགས་པ	imput[ation of] a self	bdag tu btags pa
བདག་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	ego-conception, "conceptualize as being a self- entity"	bdag tu rtog pa
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ	atmadarshana, belief in a self, insight into self	bdag tu lta ba
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་བསྐྱེད	create the view of ego	bdag tu lta ba bskyed
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of creating the view of ego	bdag tu lta ba bskyed pa'i phyir
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་བསྐྱེད་མི་དགོས	1 need not create the view of ego	bdag tu lta ba bskyed mi dgos
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་བཅུ	ten types of selforiented views, types of self-oriented views, ten; the ten self-oriented views	bdag tu lta ba bcu
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 views of ego bdag tu lta ba dang srog tu lta bar 'gyur the view of ego and the view of life occur 1360	bdag tu lta ba nyi shu
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བ་ནོར་བ་ཙམ	the mere error of the view of ego bdag tu lta ba la sogs pa dang mtshungs	bdag tu lta ba nor ba tsam
པར་ལྡན་པ	similarly having the view of ego etc	par ldan pa
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བའི་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་དགག་པ	refute the wrong view of ego	bdag tu lta ba'i phyin ci log dgag pa
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བའི་ཤགས་པས་ཟིན་པ	the sudden grasp of the view of ego	bdag tu lta ba'i shags pas zin pa
བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བས་ཐར་པ	liberation from the view of ego	bdag tu lta bas thar pa
བདག་ཏུ་མ་བཟུང་བ	undomesticated	bdag tu ma bzung ba
བདག་ཏུ་དམིགས་པ	the concept of/ perceiving ego	bdag tu dmigs pa
བདག་ཏུ་དམིགས་པ་ནི་ཉེས་པ	the concept of ego is a fault	bdag tu dmigs pa ni nyes pa
བདག་ཏུ་དམིགས་ཤིང་འདོགས་པར་བྱེད	becoming afraid because of conceptions of ego	bdag tu dmigs shing 'dogs par byed
བདག་ཏུ་རྨོངས་པ	ego-stupidity	bdag tu rmongs pa
བདག་ཏུ་རྨོངས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	the stupid ignorance of ego	bdag tu rmongs pa'i ma rig pa
བདག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	1) adhering to a self; 2) exponents of ego/ a self	bdag tu smra ba
བདག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པ	grasping of adhering to a self	bdag tu smra ba nye bar len pa
བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	{bdag 'dzin} 1) holding to a self, ego-fixation, clinging, conception of self; conception of self; belief in a self, conception of self, holding to a self, ego-fixation, clinging, conception of sel...	bdag tu 'dzin pa
ཨནད་སེལཕ༹	nature, fixate upon self-identity	and self
བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་རྟག་ཉེར་ཤི	completely pacify the eternalism of ego grasping [rtags?]	bdag tu 'dzin pa'i rtag nyer shi
བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པའི་རྟེན	the support of ego grasping bdag tu 'dzin pa'i rten nye bar len pa'i	bdag tu 'dzin pa'i rten
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the support of ego grasping, the five perpetuating skandhas	phung po lnga
བདག་ཏུ་ཞེན་པ	ego-attachment	bdag tu zhen pa
བདག་ཏུ་གཟུང	cling to ego	bdag tu gzung
བདག་ཏུ་བཟུང	be owned by	bdag tu bzung
བདག་ཏུ་བཟུང་བ	{bdag tu 'dzin pa} to impute/ hold to have/ misconstrue as having identity; isc. perception based on the assumption of identity; to perceive as though there were identity	bdag tu bzung ba
བདག་ཏུ་རློམ་པ	1) haughtiness about 1self; 2) ego- supposition	bdag tu rlom pa
བདག་ཏུ་ལོག་པར་འཛིན་པ	wrongly grasp an ego	bdag tu log par 'dzin pa
བདག་ཏུ་སྲེད་པ	ego-craving	bdag tu sred pa
བདག་རྟག་གཅིག་རང་དབང་བ	w a selfnature eternal, 1 and autonomous	bdag rtag gcig rang dbang ba
བདག་རྟག་པ་གཅིག་པུ་བ	eternal solitary nature	bdag rtag pa gcig pu ba
བདག་རྟག་པ་གཅིག་པུ་རང་དབང་ཅན	the permanent, singular and self-contained	bdag rtag pa gcig pu rang dbang can
བདག་རྟག་པར་ལྟ་བ	to view selfidentities as permanent	bdag rtag par lta ba
བདག་རྟོག	concept of a self-entity	bdag rtog
བདག་ལྟ	belief in a self	bdag lta
བདག་ལྟ་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 kinds of view of ego	bdag lta nyi shu
བདག་ལྟ་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 kinds of view of ego	bdag lta nyer lnga
བདག་ལྟ་གཉིས	the two kinds of view of ego [of individuals and dharmas, to be refuted by reasoning]	bdag lta gnyis
བདག་ལྟ་བཞི	the 4-fold extreme views of self [According to ngushul khen rinpoche, the 10 aspects of renunciation/ realization of the 10 bodhisattva levels??? ]	bdag lta bzhi
བདག་ལྟའི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of the view of ego [one of the {bag chags bzhi} four kinds of habitual patterns. having produced the biased dualization of self and other ris su bcad nas producing the view of ego...	bdag lta'i bag chags
བདག་སྟོད་པ	praising one's self	bdag stod pa
བདག་བསྟོད	praise 1self, self-praise	bdag bstod
བདག་བསྟོད་གཞན་སྨོད	praise 1self and disparage others	bdag bstod gzhan smod
བདག་ཐོན་བདག་གཅེས	take good care of	bdag thon bdag gces
བདག་ཐོབ	one's own share of property	bdag thob
བདག་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་དབང་ཆ	right of individual ownership	bdag thob kyi dbang cha
བདག་ཐོབ་དབང་ཆ	right of individual ownership	bdag thob dbang cha
བདག་དང་མཁའ་མཉམ་སེམས་ཅན	1self and sentient beings as limitless as space	bdag dang mkha' mnyam sems can
བདག་དང་འཁོར་རྣམས	yourself and the whole retinue bdag dang chung ma dang bu bshes	bdag dang 'khor rnams
བདག་དང་ཆོས	self and phenomena	bdag dang chos
བདག་དང་བདག་གི་བར་ལྟ་བ	the incidental view of me and mine	bdag dang bdag gi bar lta ba
བདག་དང་བདག་གིར	me and mine bdag dang bdag 'dra las ngan sems can	bdag dang bdag gir
རྣམས	me and those with evil karma like me,	rnams
བདག་དང་ཕ་མ	myself and my parents	bdag dang pha ma
བདག་དང་མཚུངས་པའི་སེམས	mind equal to ego ???	bdag dang mtshungs pa'i sems
བདག་དང་གཞན	self and other	bdag dang gzhan
བདག་དང་གཞན་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion for self and others	bdag dang gzhan dang snying rje
བདག་དང་གཞན་བདེ་བ	bdag dang gzhan la phan bde byed pa 'bras bu	bdag dang gzhan bde ba
བདག་དང་གཤན	self and other	bdag dang gshan
བདག་དང་གཤན་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	equality of self and others bdag dang gshan mnyam pa'i sems nyid the nature of mind, in which self and other are equal	bdag dang gshan mnyam pa nyid
བདག་དང་གཤན་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion for 1self and others	bdag dang gshan dang snying rje
བདག་དང་གཤན་བདེ་བ	bdag dang gshan la phan bde byed pa 'bras bu	bdag dang gshan bde ba
བདག་དང་གཤན་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ཆེད	for the sake of benefitting 1self and others	bdag dang gshan la phan pa'i ched
བདག་དང་སེམས་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	the equality of ego and mind	bdag dang sems mnyam pa nyid
བདག་དང་སྲོག	self and life	bdag dang srog
བདག་དམ་པ	self-sacred	bdag dam pa
བདག་དམ་པའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent sublime identity	bdag dam pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa
བདག་དམ་བྱེད	agree take a case, accept a petition	bdag dam byed
བདག་དམ་ཚིག་སེམས་དཔའ	oneself as the samaya sattva	bdag dam tshig sems dpa'
བདག་དི་གཞི	the basis of/ object said to be a ego/ self	bdag di gzhi
བདག་དུ་གཟིང	grasp at "mine," take possession/ control of	bdag du gzing
བདག་དུ་བཟུང	Syn {bdag gir byed}	bdag du bzung
བདག་དོན	self-benefit [one of the two benefits for self and others.]	bdag don
བདག་དོན་ཉེར་གཅིག	[TRS 115-4] samayas from {rdo rje gsal bkra}	bdag don nyer gcig
བདག་དོན་ཉེར་གཉིས	the 22 benefits for 1self	bdag don nyer gnyis
བདག་དོན་ཏུ	as the benefit for 1self	bdag don tu
བདག་དོན་བདག་གཅེས	be concerned w or work for 1's own benefit	bdag don bdag gces
བདག་དོན་ནུས་པ	to accomplish one's objective	bdag don nus pa
བདག་དོན་ལ་མི་ཆགས་པ	not desiring benefit for 1self	bdag don la mi chags pa
བདག་མདུན་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the self and front mandalas	bdag mdun dkyil 'khor
བདག་འདྲ	people like ourselves	bdag 'dra
བདག་ལྡན	had by 1self, wife	bdag ldan
བདག་ནི་སངས་རྒྱས་སུ་འགྱུར་རོ	1self becomes buddha	bdag ni sangs rgyas su 'gyur ro
བདག་སྣང	subjective/ self-induced/	bdag snang
བདག་པ	{bdag pa, bdag pa, bdag pa} intr. v.; to fumigate, burn incense, swing the censer, 2) the burning of incense, perfume, frankincense; 3) a spouse	bdag pa
བདག་པའི་རྐྱེན	1) the appearances; 2) the possessive condition	bdag pa'i rkyen
བདག་པས་ཆེས་ལྷག་པར་བྱམས་པ	by nature supremely kind/ gentle	bdag pas ches lhag par byams pa
བདག་པས་གཞན་གཅེས	that others were dearer than myself; to treat others as more important than oneself, cherish others more than oneself	bdag pas gzhan gces
བདག་པས་གཞན་གཅེས་ཀྱི་བློ	to hold others dearer than oneself / yourself	bdag pas gzhan gces kyi blo
བདག་པོ་རྐྱེན	decisive condition, possessive condition	bdag po rkyen
བདག་པོ་རྒྱག	keep, take care of, look after, pay attention to, watch, control	bdag po rgyag
བདག་པོ་རྒྱག་ཐུབ	be able to control	bdag po rgyag thub
བདག་པོ་དང་ཡུལ་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	genitive of owner and object	bdag po dang yul gyi 'brel ba
བདག་པོ་སྤྲོད	1) keep [control of]; 2) take care of, look after; 3) watch pay attention to	bdag po sprod
བདག་པོ་སྤྲོད་ཐུབ	be able to control	bdag po sprod thub
བདག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to take possession of, reign over	bdag po byed pa
བདག་པོ་མ་རྒྱབ་པ	disown	bdag po ma rgyab pa
བདག་པོ་མེད་པ	abandoned, deserted, forsaken, ownerless	bdag po med pa
བདག་པོ་རྩ་བ་ནས་མ་རྒྱག	paid no attention at all	bdag po rtsa ba nas ma rgyag
བདག་པོ་རྩ་བ་ནས་མ་སྤྲད	paid no attention at all	bdag po rtsa ba nas ma sprad
བདག་པོ་ས	personifying word [end possessing word such as {can}, {ldan}, OR pa, po, ma, mo (as in {btags pa pa}	bdag po sa
བདག་པོའི་རྐྱེན	dominant/ controlling condition	bdag po'i rkyen
བདག་པོའི་རྐྱེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of ruling condition	bdag po'i rkyen brgyad
བདག་པོའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་མ	1) bride; 2) lady of the house	bdag po'i brtul zhugs ma
བདག་པོའི་འབྲས་བུ	Dominant result. The ripening of karma that shows itself in the surrounding environment	bdag po'i 'bras bu
བདག་པོའི་རྩ	bdag po nadi	bdag po'i rtsa
བདག་སྤྲོད	exercise ownership/ control, taking care of, looking after, keeping, paying attention to	bdag sprod
བདག་སྤྲོད་བྱེད	exercise ownership/ control, take care of, look after, keep, pay attention to	bdag sprod byed
བདག་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	handle, deal with, treat	bdag sprod byed pa
བདག་བས་གཞན་གཅེས	others are dearer than oneself	bdag bas gzhan gces
བདག་བས་གཞན་གཅེས་པིའ་བློ	attitude that others are more important than 1self	bdag bas gzhan gces pi' blo
བདག་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ་བའི་རིམ་པ	the stage	bdag byin gyis brlab ba'i rim pa
ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	blessing	of self
བདག་བྱེད	belongs to	bdag byed
བདག་དབང	[perform] self-abhisheka, sovereignty, right of ownership	bdag dbang
བདག་དབང་བསྐུར	to empower oneself	bdag dbang bskur
བདག་དབང་ཅན	independence	bdag dbang can
བདག་དབང་མིན	vassal	bdag dbang min
བདག་དབང་ཚང་མ	the whole selfabhisheka, complete sovereignty	bdag dbang tshang ma
བདག་འབྲས	subjective result	bdag 'bras
བདག་མ་མཆིས་པ	there is no ego [though 1 looks at each of the five skandhas and their components] 1362	bdag ma mchis pa
བདག་མེད	1) ownerless; 2) egoless)/ [anatman, non- self, non-ego, egoless[ness], devoid of ego, lack of selfentity, selfless[ness], no-self, non-entity; ownerless, self and non-self]	bdag med
ནོཏ	self, nonentitativeness, non-existence of an ontological principle, without any individuality of its own, (two aspects are chos kyi bdag med, gang zag gi bdag med), (realization that the constituti...	not
བདག་མེད་ཀུན་བཟང	1 of 3 kun bzang rnam gsum, ye grol ye sangs rgyas pa	bdag med kun bzang
བདག་མེད་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	devoid of a truly existent entity, egoless and essenceless	bdag med kyi ngo bo nyid med pa
བདག་མེད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	view of selflessness	bdag med kyi lta ba
བདག་མེད་ཀྱི་དོན་དམ་རྣམ་གཉིས	two meanings/ kinds of egolessness [of individuals {gang zag gi bdag med} or pudgala nair tmya and of phenomena {chos kyi bdag med} or dharma nair tmya]	bdag med kyi don dam rnam gnyis
བདག་མེད་ཀྱི་དོན་རྣམ་གཉིས	the 2-fold	bdag med kyi don rnam gnyis
ཏྲུཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེགོལེསསྣེསས་ཨུབྷཡ	nair tmya non selfhood of individuals gang zag gi bdag med pudgalanair tmya and chos kyi bdag med dharmanair tmya	truth of egolessness ubhaya
བདག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	egoless awareness/ knowledge	bdag med kyi shes pa
བདག་མེད་བཀྲག་མེད	1) pallid, pale, wan; 2) dull, lackluster, lifeless	bdag med bkrag med
བདག་མེད་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	celestial realms of great bliss [5 wrathful buddha-fields]	bdag med mkha' spyod
བདག་མེད་འཁྲུལ་པ	mistaken belief in a self	bdag med 'khrul pa
བདག་མེད་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra of egolessness [bliss maintaining chakra, (5th chakra, us w 28 nadi-petals]	bdag med gi 'khor lo
བདག་མེད་གི་དོན་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two natures of selflessness. {gang zag gi bdag med}, {chos kyi bdag med}	bdag med gi don rnam gnyis
བདག་མེད་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	egoless great bliss chakra in the head	bdag med gyi 'khor lo
བདག་མེད་ངོ་བོ	lacking substance	bdag med ngo bo
བདག་མེད་དངོས་པོ་ཉིད	the very "substance" of the sugatas	bdag med dngos po nyid
བདག་མེད་ལྔ	the five egolessnesses [= the five amritas, (urine, excrement, blood, semen and brains.]	bdag med lnga
བདག་མེད་མཆོག་གི་བདག	the supreme identity of identitylessness	bdag med mchog gi bdag
བདག་མེད་གཉིས	two [fold] self/ egolessnesses [1 {gang zag gi bdag med} =	bdag med gnyis
ཋེ་ཨིནཧེརེནཏ་ཨབསེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity in the individual person as well as in all phenomena	The inherent absence of a self
ལཅཀ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	entity; two selflessness. 1) {gang zag gi bdag med} selflessness of the person. 2) {chos kyi bdag med} selflessness of things. the two egoless states; both the nonexistence of the individual self a...	lack of a self
བདག་མེད་གཉིས་ཀ	the two types of egolessness	bdag med gnyis ka
བདག་མེད་གཉིས་རྟོགས	realization of the two types of egolessness	bdag med gnyis rtogs
བདག་མེད་གཉིས་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་མཁྱེན་པ	the knowledge of realizing the twofold identitylessness bdag med gnyis rtogs kyi mkhyen pa knowledge realizing the two egolessnesses	bdag med gnyis rtogs kyi mkhyen pa
བདག་མེད་བཏང་སྙོམས	1) pleasure, pain and indifference; 2) pleasant, painful and indifferent/ neutral	bdag med btang snyoms
བདག་མེད་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	transcendent knowledge realizing the nonexistence of self, the prajna that realizes nonself	bdag med rtogs pa'i shes rab
རེཨལིཟེས་ནོན	self	realizes non
བདག་མེད་དོན་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two egolessnesses	bdag med don rnam gnyis
བདག་མེད་བདེན་པ	the truth of egolessness	bdag med bden pa
བདག་མེད་ནོར	unclaimed property	bdag med nor
བདག་མེད་གནས	"the higher realms."; the higher realms	bdag med gnas
བདག་མེད་རྣམ་གཉིས	two types of nonindividuality	bdag med rnam gnyis
བདག་མེད་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen aspects of the four noble truths	bdag med rnam pa bcu drug
བདག་མེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	consort of Hevajra [kye rdo rje]	bdag med rnal 'byor ma
བདག་མེད་པ	egoless[ness], selfless[ness] [the opposite or lack of ego and self, what does not correspond with that. one of the 16 aspects of the four noble truths.]	bdag med pa
བདག་མེད་པ་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ	true realization of egolessness	bdag med pa mngon par rtogs pa
བདག་མེད་པ་མཆོག་གི་བདག་ཉིད	the supreme identity of identitylessness 1363	bdag med pa mchog gi bdag nyid
བདག་མེད་པ་ཉིད	egolessness, identitylessness, nonexistence of a self	bdag med pa nyid
བདག་མེད་པ་གཉིས	the two egolessnesses [of individuals and dharmas]	bdag med pa gnyis
བདག་མེད་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་རྟོགས་པ	realization of the two types of egolessness	bdag med pa gnyis ka rtogs pa
བདག་མེད་པ་དྲིས་པའི་མདོ	The Sutra of the Inquiry of the Noble 1 Dakmepa, 'phags pa bdag med pa dris pa zhes bya ba'i mdo,	bdag med pa dris pa'i mdo
བདག་མེད་པ་བདག	[apprehending] the nonself as self	bdag med pa bdag
ཅི་ལོག	within egolessness wrongly thinking, "it is an ego"	ci log
བདག་མེད་པའི་ལྟ་བ	the view of egolessness	bdag med pa'i lta ba
བདག་མེད་པའི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the reality of identitylessness	bdag med pa'i de kho na nyid
བདག་མེད་པའི་དོན	egolessness, the meaning of egolessness, the benefit of egolessness	bdag med pa'i don
གྱི་དོན	"Egolessness" is simply a false conception	gyi don
བདག་མེད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception/ conception of non-self/ egolessness	bdag med pa'i 'du shes
བདག་མེད་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditation on [the phenomena of] egolessness	bdag med pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
བདག་མེད་པའི་མཚུངས་པ་ཉིད	the equality of egolessness	bdag med pa'i mtshungs pa nyid
བདག་མེད་པའི་ས	ownerless/ unclaimed land	bdag med pa'i sa
བདག་མེད་པར	selflessness	bdag med par
བདག་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of egolessness	bdag med par smra ba
བདག་མེད་ཕྱག་ཆེན	egoless mahamudra [mahamudra of bliss/ emptiness]	bdag med phyag chen
བདག་མེད་ཕྱེད་དང་གཉིས	"one and a	bdag med phyed dang gnyis
ཧལཕ༹་ནོ	self." {gang zag gi bdag med} + {chos bdag gi phyed}; gang zag gi bdag med	half no
བདག་མེད་ཕྲ་རགས	coarse and subtle egolessness [individuals not existing/being established as 1) rang rkya	bdag med phra rags
ཐུབ་པའི་རྫས་ཡོད་སེལཕ༹	sufficient substances and 2) rang bzhin gyis ma grub pa not inherently/concretely existing [accounts vary somewhat]	thub pa'i rdzas yod self
བདག་མེད་མ	1) Dagmema/ Dhupa; 2) Dakmema	bdag med ma
བདག་མེད་མ་ལྷ་མོ	Nairatmya Devi	bdag med ma lha mo
གོདདེསས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	ego. The consort of Hevajra	goddess of non
བདག་མེད་སྨན	the medicine of egolessness, amrita	bdag med sman
བདག་མེད་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of egolessness	bdag med smra ba
བདག་མེད་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of self and selfless	bdag med zung 'jug
བདག་མེད་འོད་གསལ	great bliss luminosity	bdag med 'od gsal
བདག་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	1) egoless wisdom; 3) the wisdom of self and selfless	bdag med ye shes
བདག་མེད་རགས་པ	coarse selflessness	bdag med rags pa
བདག་མེད་ལ་ངེས་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	arising of certainty about egolessness	bdag med la nges pa skyes pa
བདག་མེད་ལ་ངེས་པ་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	not arising of certainty about egolessness	bdag med la nges pa mi skye ba
བདག་མེད་ལ་བདག་འཛིན་པ	belief in / grasping at a 'self' where there is no 'self'	bdag med la bdag 'dzin pa
བདག་མེད་ལིང་སྐྱུར	completely/ totally get rid of	bdag med ling skyur
བདག་མེད་གསུམ	the three aspects of	bdag med gsum
སུགཏ	essence, {gzhi dus kyi rang bzhin rnam dag}, the natural purity at the time of the ground. {'bras dus kyi glo bur bral dag}, the purity of freedom from momentary [stains] at the time of fruition. {...	sugata
བདག་མེད་ལྷ་མོ	Nairatmya Devi, [consort of Hevajra]	bdag med lha mo
བདག་མོ	1) the lady of the house. 2) title for wife of the head lama of Sakya and other religious teachers. 3) sovereign, {bdag po} "lord"	bdag mo
བདག་མོ་ཆེན་མོ	a goddess	bdag mo chen mo
བདག་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	1's passing beyond suffering	bdag mya ngan las 'das pa
བདག་དམན་པ	humility, low self-esteem [in the example a bad quality] bdag rmongs pa'i khar sdig can grogs kyi	bdag dman pa
བདག་སྨྲ	Abbr. of {bdag tu smra ba}	bdag smra
བདག་སྨྲ་བ་ལེན་པ	attachment to the word "self"	bdag smra ba len pa
བདག་ཚུར་མཐོང	ego-fixated	bdag tshur mthong
བདག་མཚན	1) 1's own name; 2) the characteristics of self	bdag mtshan
བདག་འཛིན	{bdag tu 'dzin pa} pa to impute/ hold to have/ misconstrue as having identity; isc. perception based on the assumption of identity; to perceive as though there were identity	bdag 'dzin
བདག་འཛིན་ཀུན་བཏགས	imputed egoclinging	bdag 'dzin kun btags
བདག་འཛིན་འཁྲུལ་པ	1) mistaken belief in a self; 2) the confusion of ego-grasping	bdag 'dzin 'khrul pa
བདག་འཛིན་གོམས་པའི་བག་ཆགས	the tendency of habituated ego-clinging	bdag 'dzin goms pa'i bag chags
ཏེནདེནཅཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཧབིཏུཨཏེད་ཨེགོ	clinging; 2) habitual patterns arising from familiarity	tendency of habituated ego
ཝ་ཨེགོ	grasping	w ego
བདག་འཛིན་བཅད་པ	to destroy egoclinging	bdag 'dzin bcad pa
བདག་འཛིན་འཇིག་ལྟ	ego grasping view of a transitory collection	bdag 'dzin 'jig lta
བདག་འཛིན་ཉོན་མོངས	ego-clinging and the obscuring emotions	bdag 'dzin nyon mongs
བདག་འཛིན་གཉིས	the two kinds of ego grasping	bdag 'dzin gnyis
བདག་འཛིན་ཐབ་མི	supervisor, manager	bdag 'dzin thab mi
བདག་འཛིན་པ	supervisor, manager	bdag 'dzin pa
བདག་འཛིན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	instinctive selfhabit	bdag 'dzin lhan skyes
བདག་ཞེན	{bdag tu zhen pa} to fixate on identity (of the individual personality) and/ or phenomena	bdag zhen
བདག་གཞན	oneself and others, yourself and others. 2) itself and something else / other	bdag gzhan
ཐེ་ཅསེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	abhisheka regarding the doer byed pa po and bya ba'i yul the doer chief and ordinary and action of doing are things included within oneself and, bya yul and bya las are things included within other]	the case of self
བདག་གཞན་གཉིས་ཀ་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	arising from both itself and from something other	bdag gzhan gnyis ka las skye ba
བདག་གཞན་གཉིས་མེད	non-dual self and other	bdag gzhan gnyis med
བདག་གཞན་གཉིས་མེད་པ	non-dual self and other	bdag gzhan gnyis med pa
བདག་གཞན་མཉམ་བརྗེ	equality and exchange of self and other [the bodhicittas that equalize and exchange self and other.]	bdag gzhan mnyam brje
བདག་གཞན་མཉམ་པ	equality of self and other [wishing that oneself and all other sentient beings alike or equally are happy and not unhappy.]	bdag gzhan mnyam pa
བདག་གཞན་བདེ་སྡུག་རྗེས་ཤིག	give up your happiness in exchange for others' suffering!	bdag gzhan bde sdug rjes shig
བདག་གཞི	labeling basis	bdag gzhi
བདག་གཞོན་པས	as i am still young	bdag gzhon pas
བདག་གཟུང	ego-grasping, grasp[er at] ego/ "mine," taking possession/ control of	bdag gzung
བདག་གཟུང་བྱེད	Syn {bdag gir byed}	bdag gzung byed
བདག་གཟུང་བྱེད་པ	occupy	bdag gzung byed pa
བདག་བཟུང	{bdag tu bzung ba} to impute/ hold to have/ misconstrue as having identity; isc. perception based on the assumption of identity; to perceive as though there were identity	bdag bzung
བདག་བཟུང་བྱེད	ego-grasping, grasp[er at] ego/ "mine," take possession/ control of	bdag bzung byed
བདག་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	completely ripened nature/ ego	bdag yongs su smin pa
བདག་ཡོད	existence of a self	bdag yod
བདག་ཡོད་ཀུན་བཟང	1 of 3 kun bzang rnam gsum, sems nyid kyi gnas lugs	bdag yod kun bzang
བདག་ཡོད་པ	the existence of ego/ a self bdag rang gi ngo bos grub pa med pa'i	bdag yod pa
བདག་རང་དབང་ཅན	self-contained selfentity	bdag rang dbang can
བདག་རིག་བྱེད་པ	subjective understanding	bdag rig byed pa
བདག་ལ་ཆགས་པ	self-attachment	bdag la chags pa
བདག་ལ་བརྙད་པ	self-contempt	bdag la brnyad pa
བདག་ལ་གཏོལ་མེད	I am without knowledge of it	bdag la gtol med
བདག་ལ་བདག་མེད་པར་གཟུང་བ	grasp egolessness as ego [grammatically could be the reverse]	bdag la bdag med par gzung ba
བདག་ལ་འདོད་པ་གང་ཡང་མེད	I do not want anything in return	bdag la 'dod pa gang yang med
བདག་ལ་ཕན་འདོད	desire self-benefit	bdag la phan 'dod
བདག་ལ་བྱམས་པ	kindness to 1self	bdag la byams pa
བདག་ལ་མི་འཛེམ་པ	1's own evil conduct la rna gis not be concerned w appearances of propriety	bdag la mi 'dzem pa
བདག་ལ་བརྩེར་དགོངས	kindness to 1self 1365	bdag la brtser dgongs
བདག་ལ་སྲེད་པ	ego-craving	bdag la sred pa
བདག་ལ་གསན	receive/ listen to ego	bdag la gsan
བདག་ལས	[produced] from itself	bdag las
བདག་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	arising from itself; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {zhes pa'i don ni/ dngos po rnams rgyu'i dus na yod pa kho na skye'i med pa ni mi skye ste/ dper na/ til la til mar snga nas yod pa'i rgyu mtshan gyis ...	bdag las skye ba
བདག་ལས་བྱུང	self-born one, epithet of kamadeva	bdag las byung
བདག་ལས་མ་ཡིན	not from itself	bdag las ma yin
བདག་ལས་མི་སྐྱེ	does not arise from itself bdag las gzhan gces kyi byang chub sems - bodhicitta for whom others are more important than 1self bdag las gzhan gces kyi byang chub sems - bodhicitta for whom others ar...	bdag las mi skye
བདག་ཤེས་རིག་གི་སྐྱེས་བུ	the self maintained by Samkhya	bdag shes rig gi skyes bu
བདག་སོགས	I and others	bdag sogs
བདག་སོགས་འགྲོ་ཀུན	I and all beings	bdag sogs 'gro kun
བདག་སྲུང	self-defense/ preservation	bdag srung
བདག་སྲུང་བ	guard one's self, live as a hermit	bdag srung ba
བདག་སྲུང་བྱེད་པ	conserve	bdag srung byed pa
བདག་སྲེད	cherishing of a self-entity	bdag sred
བདག་སྲོག་གཅོས་པ	suicide	bdag srog gcos pa
བདགས་པ	give, hinder	bdags pa
བདགས་ཡོད	imputedly exist	bdags yod
བདང་དགོང	last night, evening	bdang dgong
བདང་སྙོམས	even mindedness	bdang snyoms
བདན	(not in DAS)	bdan
བདམ	choose	bdam
བདམ་པ	ft. of {'dam pa}	bdam pa
བདམ་བྱའི་དབང་ཆ	* right to vote/ choose leaders, franchise	bdam bya'i dbang cha
བདམ་གསེས	selection	bdam gses
བདམ་གསེས་བྱེད	select	bdam gses byed
བདམས	past of 'dems	bdams
བདམས་ཉོ	choose/ pick and buy	bdams nyo
བདམས་སྙིགས	bdams te khyer ba'i lhag snyigs ???	bdams snyigs
བདམས་ཐོན	having chosen ming thon pa, elected	bdams thon
བདམས་ཐོན་པ	winner of an election	bdams thon pa
བདམས་ཐོན་བྱུང	was elected	bdams thon byung
བདམས་ཐོན་ལག་ཁྱེར	certification for the winner of an election	bdams thon lag khyer
བདམས་པ	pf. of {'dam pa}	bdams pa
བདའ	Syn {'ded}	bda'
བདའ་དར	lance, little flag fastened to an arrow with silk ribbons of five different colors, an arrow wrapped in a scarf	bda' dar
བདའ་འདེད	1) urge to pay a debt ?? bu lon 'ded pa .'Bru dngul bu lon len rgyu bda' 'ded byed pa ?]; 2) eradicate	bda' 'ded
བདའ་བ	1) tasty, delicious; 2) will drive [out], go behind; 3) will urge to pay; 4) will eradicate, persecute	bda' ba
བདར	SA bda' bar, gla, invocation	bdar
བདར་རྡོ	whetstone	bdar rdo
བདར་སྤོས	powdered incense	bdar spos
བདར་བ	(tha dad pa bdar ba, bdar ba, bdor,; 1) arrange [troops]; 3) say explain; 4) grind [flour]; 5) rub, scrub, polish; 6) file; 7) whet	bdar ba
བདར་ཟད་ཐེབས་པ	by much grinding, make very thin/ fine	bdar zad thebs pa
བདར་ཤ	membrane	bdar sha
བདར་ཤ་གཅོད་པ	{brdar sha gcod pa, gdar sha gcod pa} to refine one's experience (of) with great precision; to see with great precision; isc. to see through/ pare away	bdar sha gcod pa
བདར་ཤ་བཅད	{brdar sha bcad}	bdar sha bcad
བདར་ཤ་ཆོད	Syn {brdar sha chod}	bdar sha chod
བདར་ཤ་ཆོད་པ	having examined, decide	bdar sha chod pa
བདར་ཤ་ལེགས་པར་བཅད	to become fully resolved about	bdar sha legs par bcad
བདལ་གླ	wages for bringing/ transporting something	bdal gla
བདལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great vastness	bdal pa chen po
བདལ་བ	spread, SA rdal ba	bdal ba
བདལ་བ་ཆོས་ཉིད	expanding reality	bdal ba chos nyid
བདལ་འབུམ	bon religious work	bdal 'bum
བདས	[p bda'],, 1) drove out; 2) went behind; 3) bore away; 4) collected, urged [repayment]; 5) eradicated	bdas
བདས་པ	dragged	bdas pa
བདུ	(not in DAS)	bdu
བདུ་ཕྲག་སྔོན་མ	the previous week	bdu phrag sngon ma
བདུ་མེད	female	bdu med
བདུག	[fill w] scent, burn incense	bdug
བདུག་རྣམ་དག	completely pure incense	bdug rnam dag
བདུག་པ	(tha dad pa bdugs pa, bdug pa, bdugs,, [burn] incense, swing censer	bdug pa
བདུག་སྤས	incense	bdug spas
བདུག་སྤོས	incense	bdug spos
བདུག་སྤོས་འཐུལ	odors of incense arise	bdug spos 'thul
བདུག་སྤོས་མ	Dhupa, [female bodhisattva, offering goddess]. incense goddess	bdug spos ma
བདུག་སྤོས་ཤིང	1) incense tree; 2) fragrant tree good for incense; 3) nonprickly himalayan juniper	bdug spos shing
བདུག་སྤྱད	burn incense, swing censer	bdug spyad
བདུག་སྦོས་སྤྲིན་བཞིན་གཏིབ	incense passes along like clouds 1366	bdug sbos sprin bzhin gtib
བདུག་རྫས	incense [substance purifies contamination and uncleanliness	bdug rdzas
བདུག་རྫས་ལོག་འདྲེན་ཀུན་འཇོམས	the incense substance Destroyer of Misguiding Forces; [from the byang gter	bdug rdzas log 'dren kun 'joms
བདུག་ཤིང	incense tree [esp deodar, juniperus excelsa]	bdug shing
བདུགས	imp. of {bdug pa}; p. of {bdug}; enveloped	bdugs
བདུགས་པ	[fill with] scent, burned incense	bdugs pa
བདུགས་ཕྱུང་བ	give off incense, cense	bdugs phyung ba
བདུང	(tha dad pa bdungs pa, bdung ba, bdungs,; 1) bend, pull [the string of a bow], shoot an arrow; 2) beat, strike	bdung
བདུང་བ	beat, SA rdung ba	bdung ba
བདུང་མ་བཀལ་བ	beam placed over it, set or put on, hang up	bdung ma bkal ba
བདུང་མི་གཅོད་པ	not leave off beating	bdung mi gcod pa
བདུངས	imp. of {bdung ba}	bdungs
བདུངས་པ	1) bent; 2) beat	bdungs pa
བདུད	demon [thd]	bdud
ཨོནེའས་ཨོཝན་ཨེགོ	clinging and preoccupation with the eight worldly concerns. Generally, there are four maras or obstructions to practice of the Dharma: those of defilements, death and the aggregates, and the godly ...	one's own ego
བདུད་ཀྱི	monstrous	bdud kyi
བདུད་ཀྱི་ཁྲམ་མདོས	mdos of redemption from the crosses of the bdud	bdud kyi khram mdos
བདུད་ཀྱི་དགའ་མ	the concubine of kamadeva	bdud kyi dga' ma
བདུད་ཀྱི་དགྲ	enemy of Mara, Buddha	bdud kyi dgra
བདུད་ཀྱི་སྒྱུ	Mara's trickery	bdud kyi sgyu
བདུད་ཀྱི་སྒྱུ་འདུལ་བ	to subdue the trickery of Mara	bdud kyi sgyu 'dul ba
བདུད་ཀྱི་སྒྱུ་མ	through Mara's delusions	bdud kyi sgyu ma
བདུད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the evil views of demons	bdud kyi lta ba
བདུད་ཀྱི་ཐིབས་ཀྱིས་ནོན་པ	struck by Mara's dullness	bdud kyi thibs kyis non pa
བདུད་ཀྱི་བདག	lord/ king of the maras	bdud kyi bdag
བདུད་ཀྱི་བདུད	mara of maras, Buddha	bdud kyi bdud
བདུད་ཀྱི་མདའ་ལྔ	the five arrows of Mara	bdud kyi mda' lnga
བདུད་ཀྱི་སྡེ	[hordes of] m ras	bdud kyi sde
བདུད་ཀྱི་གནས	place of maras [gzhan 'phrul dbang byed heaven, one of the six realms of the desire gods {'dod lha rigs drug}	bdud kyi gnas
བདུད་ཀྱི་བར་ཆད	mara's obstacles	bdud kyi bar chad
བདུད་ཀྱི་བུ	son of the god of sensuality	bdud kyi bu
བདུད་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ	damsels of mara (sred ma, dga' byed ma, dga' spyod ma)	bdud kyi bu mo
བདུད་ཀྱི་དབང་འགྲོ	fall under the power of Mara	bdud kyi dbang 'gro
བདུད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	realm of mara	bdud kyi yul
བདུད་ཀྱི་རིས	abode of the maras	bdud kyi ris
བདུད་ཀྱི་ལས	the work of Mara	bdud kyi las
བདུད་ཀྱི་ལས་ལ་ཡང་དག་པར་འདས་པ	to pass completely beyond the reach Mara's actions	bdud kyi las la yang dag par 'das pa
བདུད་ཀྱི་གཤེད་ཆེན	Dükyi Shechen, Slayer of Demons. One of the 12 manifestations of Guru Rinpoche {rnam 'phrul bcu gnyis}	bdud kyi gshed chen
བདུད་ཀྱི་བཤོལ་འདེབས	devils' obstruction, hindrances on the way of deliverance	bdud kyi bshol 'debs
བདུད་ཀྱི་གསང་ཚིག	secret teaching of the maras	bdud kyi gsang tshig
བདུད་ཀྱིས་མི་ཆོད	cannot be interrupted by demons	bdud kyis mi chod
བདུད་ཁ་འབངས་སུ་བསྒྱུར་བའི་མདོས	the deer that vanquishes the bdud	bdud kha 'bangs su bsgyur ba'i mdos
བདུད་ཁྱབ་པ་ལག་རིང	long-armed devil	bdud khyab pa lag ring
བདུད་དགའ་རབ་དབང་ཕྱུག	the mara Garab wangchuck	bdud dga' rab dbang phyug
མདའ་ལྔ	the five flower? arrows of the mara Garab Wangchuck	mda' lnga
བདུད་མགོན	maranatha	bdud mgon
བདུད་མགོན་སེང་གེའི་གདོང་ཅན	Lionfaced Dügön; name of terma protector	bdud mgon seng ge'i gdong can
བདུད་མགོན་སེང་གདོང	protective deity	bdud mgon seng gdong
བདུད་རྒན	mara	bdud rgan
བདུད་རྒྱལ	the king of the Maras	bdud rgyal
བདུད་སྒྲོལ་བ	expel the devil	bdud sgrol ba
བདུད་ལྔ	five maras	bdud lnga
བདུད་ལྔ་པ	1) the 5th mara (met) the devaputra mara lha'i bu'i bdud dam the mara {dga' rab dbang phyug}; 2) the five maras [According to anuyoga: 1) the demon which causes insecurity through divisive thoughts...	bdud lnga pa
བདུད་ལྔ་སྤང་བ	the five m ras to be renounced	bdud lnga spang ba
བདུད་ལྔ་བཟློག་པ	[TRS 115-3]	bdud lnga bzlog pa
བདུད་ཅུ་དོན་གཉིས	two over seventy, 72 bdud bcom sde brgyad bran du khol ba crushes demons, and binds the eight classes of spirits in servitude	bdud cu don gnyis
བདུད་ཆས	devil-dress	bdud chas
བདུད་འཇོམས	defeater of Mara	bdud 'joms
རྩིའི་རོལ་མཚོ	a detailed introduction to the practice of the gcod teachings according to the revelations of bdud 'joms gling pa focusing upon {ma gcig khros ma nag mo}; by {sprul sku padma lung rtogs rgya mtsho}	rtsi'i rol mtsho
བདུད་འཇོམས་གླིང་པ	Dujom Lingpa : 1835-1903. Also {khrag 'thung bdud 'joms gling pa}	bdud 'joms gling pa
བདུད་འཇོམས་ཉིན	the mara taming day	bdud 'joms nyin
བདུད་འཇོམས་དྲག་སྔགས་གླིང་པ	{gter ston} 1871-1936 or 7	bdud 'joms drag sngags gling pa
བདུད་འཇོམས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1903-1987	bdud 'joms rin po che
བདུད་འཇོམས་ཤིང	plant that destroys the bdud, a legendary flower that grows on the top of mount Meru	bdud 'joms shing
བདུད་རྗེ	lord of the bdud	bdud rje
བདུད་རྗེ་འབར་བ	blazing lord of devils	bdud rje 'bar ba
བདུད་བཏུལ	subdue/ tamer of the demon Mara	bdud btul
བདུད་འཐུལ	he who has subdued the evil one, epithet of buddha	bdud 'thul
བདུད་དང་མུ་སྟེགས་ལྷ་སྲིན	heathens, demons, gods and spirits	bdud dang mu stegs lha srin
བདུད་དང་མཚུངས	devil-like	bdud dang mtshungs
བདུད་འདུལ	he who has subdued the evil one, epithet of buddha, subduer of the bdud, translation into Tibetan of ge khod's name in zhang zhung language	bdud 'dul
བདུད་འདུལ་ཀར་མ་གུ་རུ	Düdül Karma Guru, a wrathful form of Guru Padmasambhava	bdud 'dul kar ma gu ru
བདུད་འདུལ་སྔགས་པ་གླིང	Mara-Taming Mantra Temple. A temple at Samye	bdud 'dul sngags pa gling
བདུད་འདུལ་གདན	kusha grass, seat made of kusha grass	bdud 'dul gdan
བདུད་འདུལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Dudul Dorje [a Karmapa ]	bdud 'dul rdo rje
བདུད་འདུལ་ནུས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	tertön of {dam chos sprul sku'i snying thig}	bdud 'dul nus ldan rdo rje
བདུད་འདུལ་ཕུག	Düdül Phuk, at Labchi. Cave of the Subjugation of Mara	bdud 'dul phug
བདུད་འདུལ་མ	Subduer of Mara, Düdülma. Dakini teacher	bdud 'dul ma
བདུད་སྡིག་ཅན	mara the sinner, kamadeva	bdud sdig can
བདུད་སྡེ	hosts of Mara	bdud sde
བདུད་སྡེ་དཔུང་བཅས	together w a host of maras	bdud sde dpung bcas
བདུད་ནག་འབར་བ	bon god resembling manjushri	bdud nag 'bar ba
བདུད་གནས	abode of Mara	bdud gnas
བདུད་རྣམ་བཞི	4 demonic aspects, SA bdud bzhi	bdud rnam bzhi
བདུད་པོ	devil; {'chi bdag bdud po kho} that devil, the Lord of Death	bdud po
བདུད་པོ་ཡབ་རྗེ་ནག་པོ	Düpo Yabje Nagpo	bdud po yab rje nag po
བདུད་དཔུང	host/ army of maras	bdud dpung
བདུད་ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་བ	the harm of mara	bdud phyir rgol ba
བདུད་བོན་ཆུ་ལྕགས	bon of the bdud	bdud bon chu lcags
བདུད་བྲལ་མ	next to {dbu ma} channel	bdud bral ma
བདུད་བློན	evil ministers	bdud blon
བདུད་མོ	demoness, she-mara, female demon, witch	bdud mo
བདུད་མོ་བཞི	four demonesses	bdud mo bzhi
བདུད་རྩི	amrita	bdud rtsi
བདུད་རྩི་དཀྱིལ་བ	Amrita Pooler	bdud rtsi dkyil ba
བདུད་རྩི་སྐྱེས	producing nectar, yellow myrobalan plant	bdud rtsi skyes
བདུད་རྩི་འཁྱིལ་པ	Amrita Pooler	bdud rtsi 'khyil pa
བདུད་རྩི་འཁྱིལ་བ	vajramrta	bdud rtsi 'khyil ba
བདུད་རྩི་གངས་ཤམ	{bdud rtsi gangs sham} med. herb	bdud rtsi gangs sham
བདུད་རྩི་ལྔ	the five amritas	bdud rtsi lnga
བདུད་རྩི་ལྔ་འབབ་པའི་རྩ	nadi from which the five amritas descend	bdud rtsi lnga 'bab pa'i rtsa
བདུད་རྩི་ལྔ་ལུམས	fragrant juniper, elixir prepared of a decoction of five holy plants (ba lu, mtshe ma, kham pa, 'om bu), bath with infusion of 5 plants	bdud rtsi lnga lums
བདུད་རྩི་ཅན་གྱི	sur kar, stag pa, spen dkar, nya sbrid)	bdud rtsi can gyi
བདུད་རྩི་ཅན་གྱི་ཤིང་ལྔ	five aromatic plants used in the bsang fumigation rite (shug pa	bdud rtsi can gyi shing lnga
བདུད་རྩི་ཆར་ལྡན	raining nectar, moon	bdud rtsi char ldan
བདུད་རྩི་ཆེན་པོ	great nectar	bdud rtsi chen po
བདུད་རྩི་ཆོས་སྨན	amrita made from eight basic herbs, one thousand lesser ones, Dharma medicine	bdud rtsi chos sman
བདུད་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ	yeast, essence of nectar bdud rtsi snying po yan lag brgyad pa	bdud rtsi snying po
གསང་བ་མན་ངག་གི་རྒྱུད	the Tantra of the Oral Instructions of the 8 Limbs of the Essence of Amrita bdud rtsi snying po yan lag brgyad pa	gsang ba man ngag gi rgyud
དང་འགྲེལ་བ་མུན་སེལ་སྒྲོན་མ	a detailed commentary on the fourth of the "four medical tantras" (rgyud bzhi); by {ngag dbang dkon mchog bstan rgyal}	dang 'grel ba mun sel sgron ma
བདུད་རྩི་གཏེར་མཛོད	{bdud rtsi gter mdzod} end of the 7th rabjung by zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje a collection of medicines [from the dvags and kong regions [sman pa rnams bsdus te] from discussion composed [bka' bgro...	bdud rtsi gter mdzod
བདུད་རྩི་གཏོང་བ	to dispense the elixir of immortality	bdud rtsi gtong ba
བདུད་རྩི་ཐབ་སྦྱོར	a goddess	bdud rtsi thab sbyor
བདུད་རྩི་ཐབས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ཕྱག	one of the {phyag rgya drug} the six mudras [in rituals] bdud rtsi thabs sbyor gyi phyag rgya mudra of using the amrita upaya bdud rtsi thabs sbyor gyi phyag rgya mudra of using the amrita upaya [o...	bdud rtsi thabs sbyor gyi phyag
བདུད་རྩི་ཐུན་མཚམས	auspicious conjunction of time	bdud rtsi thun mtshams
བདུད་རྩི་འཐུང་བ་བཞིན	like drinking nectar; x {tshig gi bdud rtsi 'thung ba bzhin} drink in the words like nectar	bdud rtsi 'thung ba bzhin
བདུད་རྩི་སྡིག་གདོང	scorpion-headed Amrta, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	bdud rtsi sdig gdong
བདུད་རྩི་སྣ་ལྔ	the five amritas [offering substanes of mantrayana: dri chen dang, dri chu, rakta, mam sa, rdo rje'i zil pa [arch] samaya of anuttara Yoga tantra (excrement, urine, blood, semen and brains]	bdud rtsi sna lnga
བདུད་རྩི་པད་མོའི་གཙུག་བྱ་བ	called Asutapadmacuda, Crowned by Lotuses	bdud rtsi pad mo'i gtsug bya ba
བདུད་རྩི་སྤྲོ	moon	bdud rtsi spro
བདུད་རྩི་བུམ་ཆེན	Great Vase of Amrita [Great medicinal tantra composed in the 8th century by the great master of Uddiyana padma 'byung gnas, a profound means for curing gnyan nad. To benefit the future, it was conc...	bdud rtsi bum chen
བདུད་རྩི་བུམ་པ་མ	a bon goddess who resembles buddhist goddess of the ocean	bdud rtsi bum pa ma
བདུད་རྩི་བུམ་བཟང	/ {bdud rtsi bum bzang}	bdud rtsi bum bzang
བདུད་རྩི་འབེབས་སྦྱངས	a meditation where from the body of the guru as Vajrasattva wisdom amrita flows cleansing evil deeds and obscurations	bdud rtsi 'bebs sbyangs
བདུད་རྩི་མ	1 of sman bla brgyad	bdud rtsi ma
བདུད་རྩི་མྱང་བ	gsung gi bdud rtsi	bdud rtsi myang ba
མྱང་བ	to savor the nectar of his words / speech	myang ba
བདུད་རྩི་དམར་པོ	a demon	bdud rtsi dmar po
བདུད་རྩི་སྨན	deity {bdud rtsi sman}, amrita medicine	bdud rtsi sman
བདུད་རྩི་སྨན་གྲུབ	medicines of realization	bdud rtsi sman grub
བདུད་རྩི་སྨན་སྒྲུབ	nectar-elixir	bdud rtsi sman sgrub
བདུད་རྩི་སྨུག་པོ	cure for brain congestion	bdud rtsi smug po
བདུད་རྩི་འཛག	mara licker, tongue	bdud rtsi 'dzag
བདུད་རྩི་འཛག་པ	pouring nectar, satire, sweet mellifluous tongue or language	bdud rtsi 'dzag pa
བདུད་རྩི་ཞག	amrita oil	bdud rtsi zhag
བདུད་རྩི་ཟ	gods who subsist on nectar	bdud rtsi za
བདུད་རྩི་ཟས	1) food of amrita; 2) {bdud rtsi zas}; 3) deity {bdud rtsi zas	bdud rtsi zas
བདུད་རྩི་ཟེགས་པ	amrita drops, moonbeams	bdud rtsi zegs pa
བདུད་རྩི་འོད	moon	bdud rtsi 'od
བདུད་རྩི་འོད་ལྡན	w amrita light; 1) medicinal herb = rtag tu ngu; 2) the moon	bdud rtsi 'od ldan
བདུད་རྩི་ཡལ་བར་མ་དོར	do not let this nectar dissipate	bdud rtsi yal bar ma dor
བདུད་རྩི་ཡོན་ཏན	1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad	bdud rtsi yon tan
བདུད་རྩི་རིལ་བུ	amrita pills	bdud rtsi ril bu
བདུད་རྩི་རོལ་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང	Major and Minor Nectar Display. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	bdud rtsi rol pa che chung
བདུད་རྩི་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	one of the {rol pa'i rgyud sde lnga} the five tantras which are additions to the Sadhana Section{sgrub sde}	bdud rtsi rol pa'i skor
བདུད་རྩི་རོལ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Nectar Display Tantra. One of the Five Display Tantras among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	bdud rtsi rol pa'i rgyud
བདུད་རྩི་རོལ་བ	mahayoga sadhana, mahayoga sgrub thabs bdud rtsi las 'khrungs pa'i lha mo shin tu	bdud rtsi rol ba
བདུད་རྩི་ལོ་མ	{bdud rtsi lo ma med herb	bdud rtsi lo ma
བདུད་རྩི་གསུམ	the three amritas	bdud rtsi gsum
བདུད་རྩི་གསུམ་སྦྱོར	medicine with 3 ingredients	bdud rtsi gsum sbyor
བདུད་རྩི་གསེར་ལྡན	aa ru ra, myrobalan tree	bdud rtsi gser ldan
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཀ་པ་ལ	amrita vessel represents a human skull filled with amrita	bdud rtsi'i ka pa la
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཁང་པ	hermitage, retreat in the solitudes of hills	bdud rtsi'i khang pa
བདུད་རྩིའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of amrita	bdud rtsi'i rgya mtsho
བདུད་རྩིའི་སྒོ	the mouth	bdud rtsi'i sgo
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆར་བབས	a rain of ambrosia fell	bdud rtsi'i char babs
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན	Continuous Stream of Amrita	bdud rtsi'i chu rgyun
བདུད་རྩིའི་སྙིང་པོ	1) essence, juice; 2) alcoholic spirit/ wine [vs. lees etc. of alcoholic beverage making]; 3) essence of amrita	bdud rtsi'i snying po
བདུད་རྩིའི་གཏེར	a treasure trove of ambrosia	bdud rtsi'i gter
བདུད་རྩིའི་རྟེན	support of amrita, mouth	bdud rtsi'i rten
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིག་པ	Drop of Amrita, by Shabkar	bdud rtsi'i thig pa
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིག་པ་གསང་བ	Secret Drop of Elixir [thd]	bdud rtsi'i thig pa gsang ba
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིགས་པ	a drop of amrita	bdud rtsi'i thigs pa
བདུད་རྩིའི་སྤྲིན་ཕུང	cloud-bank of amrita	bdud rtsi'i sprin phung
བདུད་རྩིའི་བ་གམ	celestial castle	bdud rtsi'i ba gam
བདུད་རྩིའི་འབྱུང་གནས	1) moon; 2) [for a] month[ly]; 3) 1 a count of not more than a month; 4) semen (/ monthly	bdud rtsi'i 'byung gnas
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཚེ་བུམ	life vase of amrita	bdud rtsi'i tshe bum
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟས	nourishing essence of food	bdud rtsi'i zas
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟས་ཅན	1) w food of amrita; 2) lunar eclipse; 3) gods	bdud rtsi'i zas can
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟས་མཆོག	supreme food of amrita [divine anti-death potion]	bdud rtsi'i zas mchog
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟེགས	drops of nectar	bdud rtsi'i zegs
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟེགས་མ	1) little drops of medicine etc; 2) moonlight; 3) amrita drops	bdud rtsi'i zegs ma
བདུད་རྩིའི་འོད	moon	bdud rtsi'i 'od
བདུད་རྩིའི་འོད་ཅན	1) moon; 2) [for a] month[ly]; 3) 1 a count of not more tha a month; 4) semen	bdud rtsi'i 'od can
བདུད་རྩིའི་རིལ་བུ	nectar pill	bdud rtsi'i ril bu
བདུད་རྩིར་གྱུར་པ	turning into nectar	bdud rtsir gyur pa
བདུད་རྩིས	by nectar	bdud rtsis
བདུད་རྩིས་གང་བ	full of/ fill w amrita	bdud rtsis gang ba
བདུད་རྩིས་མཚན	1) moon; 2) month; 3) 1 a count of not more tha a month; 4) semen	bdud rtsis mtshan
བདུད་རྩིས་མཚུངས	nectar-like	bdud rtsis mtshungs
བདུད་རྫས	nutrient	bdud rdzas
བདུད་ཞུགས	entry of Mara [gets into people or situations]	bdud zhugs
བདུད་གཞོམ་པ	he who has vanquished the devil	bdud gzhom pa
བདུད་བཞི	the four maras [klesha mara, skandha mara, mrityu (lord of death) mara nyon mongs pa'i bdud dang, phung po'i bdud, 'chi bdag gi bdud, devaputra (son of the gods) lha'i bu yi bdud] 1370	bdud bzhi
བདུད་བཞི་ཕྲ་མོ	four subtle maras	bdud bzhi phra mo
བདུད་བཞི་རགས་པ	four coarse maras	bdud bzhi rags pa
བདུད་རིགས	[class of] maras	bdud rigs
བདུད་ལ་སྐྱེངས་སྟེར	bestowing shame in the maras, the 12 tenmas {brtan ma}	bdud la skyengs ster
བདུད་ལ་སྐྱེངས་པ་སྟེར་མཛད་མ	goddess called bstan ma who keeps certain demons under terror	bdud la skyengs pa ster mdzad ma
བདུད་ལ་ལྷར་བསམ	think a mara is a god [count someone who harms one as a friend.]	bdud la lhar bsam
བདུད་ལས་རྒྱལ་བ	1) victorious over Mara; 2) sun; 3) Buddha	bdud las rgyal ba
བདུད་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	complete victory over Mara	bdud las rnam rgyal
བདུད་ཤོར་བ་གཞོན་ནུ	Youthful Escaper Mara; a name of Padmasambhava	bdud shor ba gzhon nu
བདུད་སྲིན	maras and rakshasas [doers of	bdud srin
ཧརམ་ཨནད་ཕ༹ླེཤ	eating rakshasas]	harm and flesh
བདུན་ཀ	week	bdun ka
བདུན་སྐྱེད	previously for each 50 silver srang each produced yearly taking 7 as bu lon	bdun skyed
བདུན་ཁྲི	seventy thousand	bdun khri
བདུན་ཁྲི་བདུན་སྟོང	seventy seven thousand	bdun khri bdun stong
བདུན་གྱི་བདུན	seven of seven; syn. for the sun	bdun gyi bdun
བདུན་གྱི་བདུན་པ	sun	bdun gyi bdun pa
བདུན་འགྱུར་གཉིས	fourteen	bdun 'gyur gnyis
བདུན་བརྒྱ	700, 700	bdun brgya
བདུན་བརྒྱད་འགྲོ	7 becoming 7	bdun brgyad 'gro
བདུན་ཅུ	70	bdun cu
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་དགུ	79	bdun cu don dgu
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་བརྒྱད	78	bdun cu don brgyad
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་ལྔ	75	bdun cu don lnga
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་གཅིག	71	bdun cu don gcig
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་གཉིས	72	bdun cu don gnyis
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་དྲུག	76	bdun cu don drug
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་བདུན	77	bdun cu don bdun
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་བཞི	74	bdun cu don bzhi
བདུན་ཅུ་དོན་གསུམ	73	bdun cu don gsum
བདུན་ཅུ་པ	seventieth	bdun cu pa
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་དགུ	79	bdun cu rtsa dgu
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	78	bdun cu rtsa brgyad
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	76	bdun cu rtsa lnga
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	71	bdun cu rtsa gcig
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	72	bdun cu rtsa gnyis
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	seventy six	bdun cu rtsa drug
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན	77	bdun cu rtsa bdun
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	74	bdun cu rtsa bzhi
བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	73	bdun cu rtsa gsum
བདུན་གཅིག	one week	bdun gcig
བདུན་བཅུ	70	bdun bcu
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་དགུ	79	bdun bcu don dgu
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་བརྒྱད	78	bdun bcu don brgyad
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་ལྔ	75	bdun bcu don lnga
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་གཅིག	71	bdun bcu don gcig
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་གཉིས	72	bdun bcu don gnyis
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་དྲུག	76	bdun bcu don drug
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་བདུན	77	bdun bcu don bdun
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་བཞི	74	bdun bcu don bzhi
བདུན་བཅུ་དོན་གསུམ	73	bdun bcu don gsum
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་དགུ	79	bdun bcu rtsa dgu
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	78	bdun bcu rtsa brgyad
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	76	bdun bcu rtsa lnga
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	71	bdun bcu rtsa gcig
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	72	bdun bcu rtsa gnyis
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	76	bdun bcu rtsa drug
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་བདུན	77	bdun bcu rtsa bdun
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	74	bdun bcu rtsa bzhi
བདུན་བཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	73	bdun bcu rtsa gsum
བདུན་ཇུས	conference, consultation	bdun jus
བདུན་གཉིས	two weeks	bdun gnyis
བདུན་གཉིས་རེར་ཐེངས་གཅིག	bi-weekly	bdun gnyis rer thengs gcig
བདུན་སྟོང	7000, 7,000	bdun stong
བདུན་སྟོང་ལྔ་བརྒྱ	520	bdun stong lnga brgya
བདུན་སྟོང་ལྔ་བརྒྱ་ཉི་ཤུ	7	bdun stong lnga brgya nyi shu
བདུན་བསྟོད	rkang bdub	bdun bstod
བདུན་མཐོ་བ	seven protuberances. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	bdun mtho ba
བདུན་མཐོ་བའི་མཙན་བཟང	major mark of 7 protuberances [one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mthan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} = the 30 marks of a great being. by giving extensive food and drink the backs of the arms and legs, the tops ...	bdun mtho ba'i mtsan bzang
བདུན་མཐོ་བའི་མཚན་བཟང	excellent mark of seven protuberances	bdun mtho ba'i mtshan bzang
བདུན་དུ་བགྱིས་པ	in the presence of an assembly	bdun du bgyis pa
བདུན་དུ་བསྡར་བ	wait for a favor, hope	bdun du bsdar ba
བདུན་ལྡན	perfumery	bdun ldan
བདུན་རྣམ་དག	the 7 pure actions	bdun rnam dag
བདུན་པ	seventh	bdun pa
བདུན་པར	seventhly	bdun par
བདུན་པོ	the seven	bdun po
བདུན་ཕྲག	a group of seven, a week, 7 days, week	bdun phrag
བདུན་ཕྲག་གཉིས	fortnight	bdun phrag gnyis
བདུན་ཕྲག་གཉིས་རེར	fortnightly	bdun phrag gnyis rer
བདུན་ཕྲག་བདུན	49	bdun phrag bdun
བདུན་ཕྲག་གསུམ	3 weeks	bdun phrag gsum
བདུན་འབུམ	700,000	bdun 'bum
བདུན་ཙར་གཅིག	a week 1371	bdun tsar gcig
བདུན་ཙིགས་བཟུང་བ	weekly offering after someone dies, for 7 weeks [phrag nam shar la]	bdun tsigs bzung ba
བདུན་བཙས	child born in the seventh month	bdun btsas
བདུན་རྩི་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	{bdun rtsi rol pa'i skor}	bdun rtsi rol pa'i skor
བདུན་ཚིག	stroke every 7 syllables indicating foot of verse	bdun tshig
བདུན་ཚིགས	weekly virtuous acts (for the deceased	bdun tshigs
བདུན་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	weekly virtuous acts [for the deceased]	bdun tshigs kyi dge ba
བདུན་ཚིགས་བཟུང་བ	do weekly virtuous acts (for the deceased	bdun tshigs bzung ba
བདུན་ཟུར	1) opponent; 2) very much conflicting; 3) of mouse and so forth 12 year cycles the 7th	bdun zur
བདུན་རེ	weekly	bdun re
བདུན་རེའི	weekly	bdun re'i
བདུན་རེའི་ནང་དུ	each week	bdun re'i nang du
བདུན་གསུམ	twenty-one	bdun gsum
བདུན་གསུམ་འགྱུར	until it becomes three times seven	bdun gsum 'gyur
བདུབ་པ	ft. of {'bubs pa}	bdub pa
བདུར་བ	belong to a class	bdur ba
བདུས	assembled, SA 'dus ba	bdus
བདེ	adj. comp. of {bde po} ease, happiness, pleasure, bliss, well-being, enjoyment, peace, easy, convenient, well, comfortable; happiness, pleasure, bliss,	bde
བདེ་ཀྱི་ལེ་བ	utter bliss, [mode of {bde nyams}	bde kyi le ba
བདེ་ཀྱི་ལེར	blissful	bde kyi ler
བདེ་ཀྱེ་གསང་གསུམ	Cakrasamvara, Hevajra and Guhyasamaja	bde kye gsang gsum
བདེ་སྐྱིད	joy & happiness, peace, comfort, glory, happiness, well-being, felicity, happiness, joy, well-being	bde skyid
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི	glorious	bde skyid kyi
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ་གསར་དུ་ཤར་བ	a	bde skyid kyi nyi ma gsar du shar ba
ནེཝ་སུན་ཨོཕ༹་ཧཔཔིནེསས་ཨནད་ཝེལལ	being dawned	new sun of happiness and well
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་དཔལ	prosperity and happiness	bde skyid kyi dpal
བདེ་སྐྱིད་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of peace, comfort and happiness	bde skyid rgyal po
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཅན	having peace/ comfort and happiness/ joy/ well- being	bde skyid can
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཉི་མ་འཆར	the sun of happiness will shine	bde skyid nyi ma 'char
བདེ་སྐྱིད་སྙན་གསུམ	happiness, wellbeing, and renown	bde skyid snyan gsum
བདེ་སྐྱིད་སྙན་གསུམ་ཆེ་བ	much happiness, comfort, and renown	bde skyid snyan gsum che ba
བདེ་སྐྱིད་དར་བ	arising/ spreading of situation of occasion of happiness.	bde skyid dar ba
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན	having peace/ comfort and happiness/ joy/ well- being	bde skyid ldan
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པ	having peace/ comfort and happiness/ joy/ well-being	bde skyid ldan pa
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ	perfectly satisfactory	bde skyid phun sum
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	happy	bde skyid phun sum tshogs pa
བདེ་སྐྱིད་མྱོང་བ	experience happiness and bliss	bde skyid myong ba
བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལྷ་དང་འགྲན་པ	matched the happiness of celestial beings	bde skyid lha dang 'gran pa
བདེ་སྐྱེད	happiness, joy, well-being	bde skyed
བདེ་སྐྱོང	bliss-sustainer, guardian of happiness, skull; skull; bliss-sustaining. Same as kapala	bde skyong
བདེ་སྐྱོང་འཁོར་ལོ	bliss-sustaining chakra situated at the base of the trunk	bde skyong 'khor lo
བདེ་སྐྱོང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	bliss maintaining wheel, chakra, [fifth chakra]	bde skyong gi 'khor lo
བདེ་ཁོད	safe [journey/ arrival etc] level [ground]	bde khod
བདེ་ཁོད་སྙོམས	[make] level	bde khod snyoms
བདེ་ཁོད་སྙོམས་པོ	level, even, flat	bde khod snyoms po
བདེ་ཁོད་བསྙམས	made level, leveled	bde khod bsnyams
བདེ་ཁོད་མི་སྙོམས་པོ	not [level, even, flat], bumpy	bde khod mi snyoms po
བདེ་ཁྱབ་བདེ་ལུང	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu	bde khyab bde lung
བདེ་ཁྲིལ་ལེ	vivid pleasure	bde khril le
བདེ་འཁོད	safe * level	bde 'khod
བདེ་འཁོད་སྙོམས	[make] level	bde 'khod snyoms
བདེ་འཁོད་སྙོམས་པོ	level, even, flat	bde 'khod snyoms po
བདེ་འཁོད་བསྙམས	made level, leveled	bde 'khod bsnyams
བདེ་འཁོད་མི་སྙོམས་པོ	not [level, even, flat], bumpy	bde 'khod mi snyoms po
བདེ་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	devoid of a truly existent entity	bde grub kyi ngo bo nyid med pa
བདེ་དགའ	joyful pleasure	bde dga'
བདེ་དགའ་ཡ་ལེ་བ	bliss and joyfulness	bde dga' ya le ba
བདེ་དགེ	happiness, joy bde dge dam pa mi zad 'byung gnas source of inexhaustible true happiness	bde dge
བདེ་དགེ་དམ་པ་མི་ཟད་འབྱུང་གནས་སོཨུརཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་སུབླིམེ་ནེབེ༹ར	ending wellbeing	bde dge dam pa mi zad 'byung gnas source of sublime never
བདེ་དགྱེས	Chakrasamvara and Hevajra	bde dgyes
བདེ་བགྲོད	cross w/o obstacle	bde bgrod
བདེ་འགྲོ	pleasant existences, happy existences, state of happiness, going to happiness, kingdom of heaven	bde 'gro
བདེ་འགྲོ་ཅན	heavenly, celestial	bde 'gro can
བདེ་འགྲོ་མཐོ་རིས	happy higher realms	bde 'gro mtho ris
བདེ་འགྲོ་དང་ངན་འགྲོ	good and bad rebirth bde 'gro dang ngan 'gror 'gro ba'i thabs means of good and bad rebirth bde 'gro dang ngan 'gror 'gro ba'i thabs la	bde 'gro dang ngan 'gro
རབ་ཏུ་སླུ་བ	the complete deception of means of good and bad rebirth	rab tu slu ba
བདེ་འགྲོ་གནས	"the higher realms"	bde 'gro gnas
བདེ་འགྲོ་ཚིགས་བཟང	gods	bde 'gro tshigs bzang
བདེ་འགྲོ་གསུམ	three realms of good destiny	bde 'gro gsum
བདེ་འགྲོད	safe journey 1372	bde 'grod
བདེ་འགྲོད་བྱུང	it was a safe journey	bde 'grod byung
བདེ་འགྲོའི་གནས	happy realms	bde 'gro'i gnas
བདེ་འགྲོའི་ལམ	path to the higher realms, virtue	bde 'gro'i lam
བདེ་སྒུག་སྙན་ཞུ	petition	bde sgug snyan zhu
བདེ་ཅག་འཁྱུག་པོ	lightly easily and happily [physical work, attitude], lively, alert, bustling	bde cag 'khyug po
བདེ་ཅན	happy	bde can
བདེ་ལྕག་འཁྱག་པོ	nimble, quick, flexible	bde lcag 'khyag po
བདེ་ལྕག་འཁྱུག་པོ	nimble, agile, quick	bde lcag 'khyug po
བདེ་ཆག	lightly easily and happily	bde chag
བདེ་ཆམ་མེ	{bde phyam me} serene/ tranquil bliss	bde cham me
བདེ་ཆམ་མེ་བ	gradual, serene, clear, resplendent happiness/ bliss	bde cham me ba
བདེ་ཆས	simple, convenient clothing	bde chas
བདེ་ཆེན	1) mahasukha, great bliss; 2) Dechen; 1) De chen [ruled by stag rtze rdzong 2) region in NW Yun Nan great region where it meets si khron great region sa cha 'dabs 'brel yin, gzhogs E is the 'bri ch...	bde chen
བདེ་ཆེན་ཀུན་ནས་བདེ	the greatest of great bliss	bde chen kun nas bde
བདེ་ཆེན་སྐུ	great blissful body	bde chen sku
བདེ་ཆེན་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	celestial realms of great bliss [5 wrathful buddha-fields]	bde chen mkha' spyod
བདེ་ཆེན་འཁོར་ལོ	[crown] chakra of great bliss	bde chen 'khor lo
བདེ་ཆེན་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	bliss maintaining wheel, chakra, [fifth chakra, usually has 28 nadi-petals]	bde chen gi 'khor lo
བདེ་ཆེན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	great bliss wheel, chakra	bde chen gyi 'khor lo
བདེ་ཆེན་གྱི་ཞིང	the realm of great bliss	bde chen gyi zhing
བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང	Dechen Ling [Geluk monastery in Yun Nan great region in 'jol rdzong]	bde chen gling
བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	Dechen Lingpa, tertön, ancestor of Thekchen Lingpa	bde chen gling pa
བདེ་ཆེན་དགོན	Dechen Gönpa, in Domey	bde chen dgon
བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	Dechen gyalpo	bde chen rgyal po
བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ་རྩལ	b. 1736 - Dechen Gyalpo Tsal, tertön. See Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	bde chen rgyal po rtsal
བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མོ	queen of great bliss	bde chen rgyal mo
བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡོངས་འཛིན	the 7th bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin 'jam dpal shes bya kun mkhyen mi pham ye shes snang ba	bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin
དབང་པོ	viii bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ngag gi	dbang po
དཔའ་བོ	the 4th, 1720-1780 bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ye shes	dpa' bo
བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་སྒྲོན	Sukha Dharma. Dechen Chödrön; consort of Chokgyur Lingpa	bde chen chos sgron
བདེ་ཆེན་ཏིང་འཛིན	unqualified pure pleasure samadhi, SA ting 'dzin	bde chen ting 'dzin
བདེ་ཆེན་རྟག་པ་འགྱུར་མེད	the permanent and unchanging great bliss	bde chen rtag pa 'gyur med
བདེ་ཆེན་ཐིག་ལེ	total bliss related to thigle	bde chen thig le
བདེ་ཆེན་དུང་ཁང	bone-mansion of great bliss	bde chen dung khang
བདེ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས་པ	vajra recitation of great bliss	bde chen rdo rje'i bzlas pa
བདེ་ཆེན་པ	great happiness, one in great happiness	bde chen pa
བདེ་ཆེན་པད་མ་ཆོས་སྡིངས	monastery of the {bo dong} tradition in spo rong} western Tibet	bde chen pad ma chos sdings
བདེ་ཆེན་ཕུག	Dechen Phuk, the Cave of Great Bliss, in Tsang bde chen phyag rgya chen po mahasukha mahamudra [in Kagyu practice {mthil grol} placing buddha in the palm of your hand or {phyag rgya chen po}, the i...	bde chen phug
བདེ་ཆེན་འབར	blazing w mahasukha	bde chen 'bar
བདེ་ཆེན་འབར་བའི་གདམས་པ	the instruction in how to make the great bliss blaze forth	bde chen 'bar ba'i gdams pa
བདེ་ཆེན་སྨོན་ལམ	aspiration for rebirth in Sukhavati written by {karma chags med} (17th cent)	bde chen smon lam
བདེ་ཆེན་རྫོང	once seat of Kyisho Depa	bde chen rdzong
བདེ་ཆེན་ཞིང	field of mahasukha. [Sukhavati, western buddha field of Amitabha]	bde chen zhing
བདེ་ཆེན་ཟུང་འཇུག	union, unity of bliss and emptiness	bde chen zung 'jug
བདེ་ཆེན་བཟླས	mahasukha recitation	bde chen bzlas
བདེ་ཆེན་བཟླས་པ	mahasukha recitation	bde chen bzlas pa
བདེ་ཆེན་འོད་གསལ	great bliss luminosity	bde chen 'od gsal
བདེ་ཆེན་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of great bliss	bde chen ye shes
བདེ་ཆེན་རོ་བརྒྱད	8 tastes of mahasukha	bde chen ro brgyad
བདེ་ཆེན་རོལ་པ	to play the great bliss	bde chen rol pa
བདེ་ཆེན་རླུང་བཟླས	prana recitation of great bliss	bde chen rlung bzlas
བདེ་ཆེན་ལམ་བཟང	the excellent path og great bliss	bde chen lam bzang
བདེ་མཆོག	samvara (yi-dam) (for bonpo has 3 faces and 6 arms), cakrasamvara, important tantric deity	bde mchog
བདེ་མཆོག་འཁོར་ལོ	Chakrasamvara	bde mchog 'khor lo
བདེ་མཆོག་གི་རྫོགས་རིམ་ལྔ	the five sampannakramas of Chakrasamvara; 1)	bde mchog gi rdzogs rim lnga
ཐེ་སྟགེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	blessing {bdag byin rlabs kyi rim pa}, vishva-vajra ?? sna tshogs rdo rje'i.., nor bu 'gengs [fill satisfy] pa'i... dza lan dha ri'i.., [inconceivable] bsam mi khyab kyi	the stage of self
བདེ་མཆོག་གི་རྫོགས་རིམ་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	the five sampannakramas of Chakrasamvara	bde mchog gi rdzogs rim rim pa lnga
བདེ་མཆོག་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	the hearing lineage of Chakrasamvara. Syn {ras chung snyan brgyud}	bde mchog snyan brgyud
བདེ་མཆོག་སྙིང་པོ	Samvarasara; = Manjushrimitra	bde mchog snying po
བདེ་མཆོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Chakrasamvara, the Vajra Being	bde mchog rdo rje sems dpa'
བདེ་མཆོག་ཕོ་བྲང	the palace of Chakrasamvara, on Kailash	bde mchog pho brang
བདེ་མཆོག་ཕྱག་གཉིས་པ	Chakrasamvara w two arms	bde mchog phyag gnyis pa
བདེ་མཆོག་མ	{bya rdzi gsal le'i bu mo bde mchog ma} woman called Samvari, daughter of sale the chicken farmer; built the Boudha Stupa	bde mchog ma
བདེ་མཆོག་ལའུ་ཡི་པ	Luyipa tradition of Chakrasamvara [mahasiddha] bde mchog lU hi pa'i lugs kyi dkyil chog rnal 'byor gyi dbang phyug lu hi pa'i bzhed srol dpal 'khor lo bde mchog gi dkyil chog sin du'i klung chen khyu	bde mchog l'u yi pa
མཆོག་ཁ་འབབས	the method for the mandala and initiation of the l'uip'ada	mchog kha 'babs
ཏྲདིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཆཀྲསམབ༹ར	by {ngor pa ngag dbang blo gros snying po gzhan phan mtha' yas pa'i 'od zer}	tradition of Chakrasamvara
བདེ་མཆོག་ལུའི་ཡི་པ	Chakrasamvara in the tradition of Luhipa bde mchog sangs rgyas mnyam sbyor Samvara (Sarva)buddha Samayoga;	bde mchog lu'i yi pa
བདེ་མཆོག་ལྷ་ལྔ	the five deity mandala of Chakrasamvara	bde mchog lha lnga
བདེ་མཆོག་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ	sadhana	bde mchog lha bcu gsum
བདེ་མཆོག་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ་མ	the Thirteen Deities of Chakrasamvara's Mandala	bde mchog lha bcu gsum ma
བདེ་མཆོག་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	co-emergent/ yab yum Chakrasamvara	bde mchog lhan skyes
བདེ་འཇགས	tranquil[ity], calm[ness], stability, peace, safe[ty], security, law and order	bde 'jags
བདེ་འཇགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	stable society	bde 'jags kyi spyi tshogs
བདེ་འཇགས་ཆིངས་ཡིག	security treaty	bde 'jags chings yig
བདེ་འཇགས་ཡོན	public security man bde 'jags las 'dzin tshogs 'du chings yig [UN] Security Council	bde 'jags yon
བདེ་བརྗོད	felicitous expression	bde brjod
བདེ་ཉམས	very pleasant experience, bliss experience	bde nyams
བདེ་ཉོ་དྲང་ཚོང	tshur rin gong bde po byas te nyo ba dang phar drang po byas te 'tsong ba	bde nyo drang tshong
བདེ་ཏིང་ངེ་བ	[pure] bliss[ful]	bde ting nge ba
བདེ་སྟོང	bliss/ emptiness, bliss and emptiness [mantrayana perceiver mahasukha and object emptiness]	bde stong
བདེ་སྟོང་སྐབས་སུ་ཁ་སྦྱོར་བཞི	the fourfold union at the time of blissful emptiness	bde stong skabs su kha sbyor bzhi
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ཀྲུང	with legs in the posture of empty bliss / blissful emptiness	bde stong gi dkyil krung
པོསྟུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་བླིསས	emptiness	posture of bliss
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	cross-legged	bde stong gi skyil krung
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་ཉམས་མྱོང	experience of bliss/ emptiness	bde stong gi nyams myong
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་རྟོགས་པ	realization of blissemptiness	bde stong gi rtogs pa
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་འོད་གསལ	luminosity of bliss and emptiness	bde stong gi 'od gsal
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of blissemptiness	bde stong gi ye shes
བདེ་སྟོང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐྱེད་པ	arouse the primal wisdom of bliss and emptiness	bde stong gi ye shes skyed pa
བདེ་སྟོང་ཉམས་འབར	blazing experience of bliss/ emptiness	bde stong nyams 'bar
བདེ་སྟོང་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	equality of bliss and emptiness [bde union and equality that does not fall into fragments or partiality.]	bde stong mnyam pa nyid
བདེ་སྟོང་ཏིང་འཛིན	the samadhi of blissful emptiness / bliss and emptiness	bde stong ting 'dzin
བདེ་སྟོང་ཕྱག་ཆེན	the mahamudra of bliss and emptiness	bde stong phyag chen
ཀྱི་ངང	blissful and empty state of coemergent wisdom according to Mahamudra	kyi ngang
བདེ་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible bliss and emptiness	bde stong dbyer med
ཨནད་རེཨལིཟཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་བླིསས	emptiness 1374 bde stong dbyer med du sbyor ba'i gnad the key point of how to merge bliss with emptiness	and realization of bliss
བདེ་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	union, unity of bliss and emptiness	bde stong zung 'jug
བདེ་སྟོང་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་ལྷ་སྐུ་འགྲུབ	establish the divine kayas of luminous bliss and emptiness	bde stong 'od gsal gyi lha sku 'grub
བདེ་སྟོང་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of empty bliss / blissful emptiness; primordial wakefulness that is blissful yet empty	bde stong ye shes
བདེ་སྟོང་རོལ་པའི་འོད་ཟེར	light rays of the play of bliss/ emptiness bde stong longs spyod rdzogs sku sambhogakaya of empty bliss / blissful emptiness	bde stong rol pa'i 'od zer
བདེ་སྟོང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་སྐུ	the sambhogakaya of bliss emptiness	bde stong longs spyod rdzogs sku
བདེ་སྟོང་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of bliss emptiness inseparable from beginningless time until now	bde stong lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes
བདེ་བརྟེན	tranquility calm, stability, peace	bde brten
བདེ་ཐང	plains, flatlands; health	bde thang
བདེ་ཐང་སྟོབས་ལྡན	hale and hearty, strong and healthy	bde thang stobs ldan
བདེ་ཐང་ལ་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	protect health	bde thang la srung skyob
བདེ་ཐབས	method of pleasure	bde thabs
བདེ་འཐུང	1) bliss drinking; 2) lightning; 3) amrita	bde 'thung
བདེ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	pleasure and pain	bde dang sdug bsngal
བདེ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དེ་རྒྱུ	the cause of that pleasure and pain ??	bde dang sdug bsngal de rgyu
བདེ་དང་ཕན་སྦྱོར་ཕྱིར	because of being connected w happiness and benefit	bde dang phan sbyor phyir
བདེ་དང་མི་ལྡན	not possessing happiness/ bliss	bde dang mi ldan
བདེ་དྭངས	good	bde dwangs
བདེ་དུས	when I was healthy	bde dus
བདེ་དོག	good and bad/ pleasure and pain	bde dog
བདེ་དོན	welfare	bde don
བདེ་དྲོད	blissful heat, blissful warmth,	bde drod
བདེ་དྲོད་ཉམས	the experience of blissful warmth	bde drod nyams
བདེ་དྲོད་གཏུམ་མོ	tummo's blissful warmth	bde drod gtum mo
བདེ་དྲོད་བྱུང་བ	bliss-warmth blazed forth	bde drod byung ba
བདེ་བདེ	happiness, joy	bde bde
བདེ་བདེ་ལྡན་ལྡན	sure certain	bde bde ldan ldan
བདེ་བདེ་ལྷོད་ལྷོད	safe and sound	bde bde lhod lhod
བདེ་བདེ་ལྷོད་ལྷོད་དུ་འབྱོར	arrive safe and sound	bde bde lhod lhod du 'byor
བདེ་འདུས	Assemblage of Sugatas; {bde gshegs 'dus pa}	bde 'dus
བདེ་འདུས་ཞི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Assemblage of Peaceful Sugatas	bde 'dus zhi rgyud
བདེ་འདོད	to desire happiness; pleasureseeking	bde 'dod
བདེ་འདོད་པ	who wishes happiness	bde 'dod pa
བདེ་ལྡན	heavens	bde ldan
བདེ་ལྡན་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of sukhavati heaven	bde ldan dbang phyug
བདེ་ལྡན་འབྲས་འབྱུང	happiness of heaven	bde ldan 'bras 'byung
བདེ་ལྡན་མ	lady of happiness	bde ldan ma
བདེ་ལྡན་མ་ཞེས	by the name Ksemavati	bde ldan ma zhes
བདེ་ལྡན་མ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	'phags pa bde ldan ma lung bstan pa'i mdo [70 shlokas, mdo sde vol Tsa]	bde ldan ma lung bstan pa
བདེ་ལྡན་ཞིང	Sukhavati, the blissful realm	bde ldan zhing
བདེ་སྡུག	happiness and suffering	bde sdug
བདེ་སྡུག་གི་རྟེན་སེམས	mind, the support for pleasure and pain	bde sdug gi rten sems
བདེ་སྡུག་གི་སྣང་བ	experiences of pleasure, pain	bde sdug gi snang ba
བདེ་སྡུག་གྲགས་དམས	happiness and suffering, praising and degrading	bde sdug grags dmas
བདེ་སྡུག་ངོ་མ་ཟིན་པར	not recognizing the nature of happiness and suffering	bde sdug ngo ma zin par
བདེ་སྡུག་བརྗེས་པ	ex {bdag gzhan bde sdug rjes shig} give up your happiness in exchange for others' suffering!	bde sdug brjes pa
བདེ་སྡུག་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	to undergo joy and sorrow	bde sdug nyams su myong ba
བདེ་སྡུག་གཉིས	joy and sorrow	bde sdug gnyis
བདེ་སྡུག་སྙན་སེང	remonstrance	bde sdug snyan seng
བདེ་སྡུག་བཏང་སྙོམས	pleasure, pain and indifference; pleasant, painful and indifferent / neutral	bde sdug btang snyoms
བདེ་སྡུག་ལྟ	look after the welfare of	bde sdug lta
བདེ་སྡུག་གནས་སྟངས	condition of life/ livelihood bde sdug spel mar myong byed kyi las actions which cause alternating experiences of pleasure and pain	bde sdug gnas stangs
བདེ་སྡུག་ཚོར་བ	pleasant or painful sensations	bde sdug tshor ba
བདེ་སྡུག་ཞུ	report 1's problems	bde sdug zhu
བདེ་སྡུག་རང་མཚན་པ	the individuating characteristics of joy and sorrow	bde sdug rang mtshan pa
བདེ་སྡུག་སོ་མ་ཟིན་པར	not recognizing the nature of happiness and suffering	bde sdug so ma zin par
བདེ་སྡོས་ལས་བརྩོན	living happily and working diligently	bde sdos las brtson
བདེ་ནང	Security and Home Ministry [bde 'jags and nang srid]	bde nang
བདེ་གནས	easiness, fitness	bde gnas
བདེ་སྣང	blissful feeling	bde snang
བདེ་སྣང་འབོལ་ལེ་བ	a immense feeling of bliss	bde snang 'bol le ba
བདེ་པོ	comfortable, convenient, healthy, nimble, agile, peaceful, safe, fine, fit, sound, well, in good health	bde po
བདེ་པོ་བཟོ་མཁན	wholesome	bde po bzo mkhan
བདེ་སྤྱོད	1) prosper; 2) Decho [a name of Khacho Wangpo literally, "easily travelling", sm {mkha' spyod} ("sky traveler"]; 3) pleasure, enjoyment; 4) toilet	bde spyod
བདེ་ཕྱམ་མེ	{bde cham me} serene/ tranquil bliss	bde phyam me
བདེ་བ	sukha, pleasure, feeling of pleasantness, optimal functioning, comfort- 1375 able, pure pleasure, happiness, relief, comfortable way, pleasant, well-being, easy	bde ba
བདེ་བ་སྐྱེད་པ	produce happiness, arouse bliss	bde ba skyed pa
བདེ་བ་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	produce happiness, arouse bliss	bde ba skyed par byed pa
བདེ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	1) visualize happiness/ virtue; 2) develop bliss bde ba bskyed pa dang gdung bar byed	bde ba bskyed pa
བདེ་བ་ཁྲི་ལེར་འཆར་བ	to experience sheer bliss	bde ba khri ler 'char ba
བདེ་བ་རྒྱས་འོད	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu	bde ba rgyas 'od
བདེ་བ་ཅན	the Blissful Realm / Buddhafield	bde ba can
བདེ་བ་ཅན་གྱི	world of bliss	bde ba can gyi
བདེ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་བཀོད་པ	sho lo ka sum cu pa [tr by pandita d' na sh'i la and the	bde ba can gyi bkod pa
ཏྲནསླཏོར	monk ye shes sde etc]	translator
བདེ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	sukhavati	bde ba can gyi 'jig rten
བདེ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the Blissful Realm, Sukhavati	bde ba can gyi zhing khams
བདེ་བ་ཅན་དུ་སྨོན་ལམ་འདེབས་པ	to make aspirations for [rebirth] in the Blissful Realm	bde ba can du smon lam 'debs pa
བདེ་བ་ཅན་སྨོན་ལམ	Prayer for taking rebirth in Sukhavati, by Karma Chagmey Raga Asya	bde ba can smon lam
བདེ་བ་ཅན་ལྷ་ཁང	Sukhavati Temple, at Yama Tashikhyil in Domey	bde ba can lha khang
བདེ་བ་ཆུང་བ	lesser joy, small pleasure	bde ba chung ba
བདེ་བ་ཆེན	great bliss, mahasukha	bde ba chen
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great bliss, mahasukha	bde ba chen po
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཤི་བ	limitless peace of mahasukha	bde ba chen po mtha' yas shi ba
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐུ	Mahasukhakaya, body of supreme bliss	bde ba chen po'i sku
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of the great bliss [of the wisdom of undefiled bliss emptiness]	bde ba chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལྟ་བ	kukuraja and shrisimha's view of the great bliss	bde ba chen po'i lta ba
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་འོད་ཟེར	the light rays of great bliss	bde ba chen po'i 'od zer
བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of great bliss	bde ba chen po'i ye shes
བདེ་བ་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	to experience bliss / happiness / pleasure	bde ba nyams su myong ba
བདེ་བ་ཉེ་བར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་བསམ་པ	the intent to gain happiness bde ba nye bar sgrub pa'i bsam pa thought of fully accomplishing happiness/ bliss	bde ba nye bar sgrub pa'i bsam pa
བདེ་བ་བརྙེས་པ	having attained happiness/ bliss, buddha	bde ba brnyes pa
བདེ་བ་སྟོབས་ལྡན	powerful bliss	bde ba stobs ldan
བདེ་བ་ཐང	bde ba thang} Bhutan	bde ba thang
བདེ་བ་ཐོབ་པ	become happy, attain nirvana, gain happiness	bde ba thob pa
བདེ་བ་འཐོབ	attain happiness/ bliss	bde ba 'thob
བདེ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	endowed with happiness	bde ba dang ldan pa
བདེ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པའི་རྣམ་པ	[the aspect of possessing] bliss	bde ba dang ldan pa'i rnam pa
བདེ་བ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	pleasure and pain. one of the {'jig rten gyi chos brgyad} the eight worldly dharmas	bde ba dang sdug bsngal
བདེ་བ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དག་གི་རྒྱུ	the cause of happiness and suffering/ pleasure and pain bde ba dang phan pa nye bar sgrub pa completely establish happiness and benefit bde ba dang phrod par dgongs pa nyid the intention/ vision of...	bde ba dang sdug bsngal dag gi rgyu
བདེ་བ་དང་མི་འབྲལ་བའི་རྣམ་པ	[the aspect of] non- separation from bliss	bde ba dang mi 'bral ba'i rnam pa
བདེ་བ་དང་ཡིད་བདེ་བ་མང་བ	there is much happiness and mental joy	bde ba dang yid bde ba mang ba
བདེ་བ་དམ་པ	great happiness	bde ba dam pa
བདེ་བ་ནས་བདེ་བར་སོང་ཆོག	I shall be going from one happiness to the next	bde ba nas bde bar song chog
བདེ་བ་ནི་རླུང་གསེབ་ཀྱི་མར་མེ་འདྲ་Hཨཔཔིནེསས་ཨིས་ལིཀེ་ཨ་བུཏཏེར	lamp flickeringg in the wind bde ba ni gshan gyi bde ba med na med there is no happiness w/o the happiness of others	bde ba ni rlung gseb kyi mar me 'dra Happiness is like a butter
བདེ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect happiness	bde ba phun sum tshogs pa
བདེ་བ་ཕྲ་བཀོད་ཀྱི་ལུང	Jewel Studded Bliss Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	bde ba phra bkod kyi lung
བདེ་བ་འཕྲལ་བཀོད	1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	bde ba 'phral bkod
བདེ་བ་འཕྲུལ་བཀོད	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras	bde ba 'phrul bkod
བདེ་བ་མ་ཆེན	chief cook in large monastery	bde ba ma chen
བདེ་བ་མང་བ	[there is] much happiness	bde ba mang ba
བདེ་བ་མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	'actions that produce pleasant experiences' {bsam gtan gsum pa man chad du rnam smin 1376 bde ba myong ba'i rgyu byed pa'i dge ba'o} virtues which create the cause that ripens into pleasurable expe...	bde ba myong 'gyur gyi las
བདེ་བ་མྱོང་བ	enjoy	bde ba myong ba
བདེ་བ་མྱོང་བར་བྱེད	what causes to enjoy happiness	bde ba myong bar byed
བདེ་བ་མྱོང་བྱེད	that create pleasant experiences	bde ba myong byed
བདེ་བ་ཞིག་འོང	it is "smooth sailing", meditation practice is simple and easy to maintain	bde ba zhig 'ong
བདེ་བ་བཞི	the four joys bde ba yang ma yin sdug bsngal ba yang	bde ba bzhi
མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཚོར་བ	feeling w neither pleasure nor pain	ma yin pa'i tshor ba
བདེ་བ་རབ་འབྱམས	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum, infinite bliss	bde ba rab 'byams
བདེ་བ་རབ་འབྱམས་ཀྱི་ལུང	Allencompassing Bliss Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	bde ba rab 'byams kyi lung
བདེ་བ་རུ་བཞུགས་དང	may you remain well!	bde ba ru bzhugs dang
བདེ་བ་རོ་མྱང་མེད་ཉིད	absence of the taste of happiness/ bliss	bde ba ro myang med nyid
བདེ་བ་ལ་འགོད	place in a state of happiness	bde ba la 'god
བདེ་བ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	hedonism	bde ba la chags pa
བདེ་བ་གཤལ་དུ་མེད་པ	immeasurable happiness	bde ba gshal du med pa
བདེ་བའི་ཀུ་ཅོ	roar of bliss	bde ba'i ku co
བདེ་བའི་ཀློང	dimension of bliss	bde ba'i klong
བདེ་བའི་ཁྲུས	water	bde ba'i khrus
བདེ་བའི་མཁྱེན་པ	blissful wisdom	bde ba'i mkhyen pa
བདེ་བའི་གླུ	song of joy	bde ba'i glu
བདེ་བའི་དགའ་སྟོན	merry festival	bde ba'i dga' ston
བདེ་བའི་དགོངས་པ་ཉིད	intention of happiness, vision of bliss	bde ba'i dgongs pa nyid
བདེ་བའི་རྒྱུ	cause of happiness	bde ba'i rgyu
བདེ་བའི་ངང	the state of bliss/ happiness	bde ba'i ngang
བདེ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	every kind and source of happiness you have	bde ba'i dngos po
བདེ་བའི་ཆོས་ལ་གནས་པ	enjoying the quality of peace	bde ba'i chos la gnas pa
བདེ་བའི་མཆོག	god sambara	bde ba'i mchog
བདེ་བའི་ཉམས	experience of pleasurable sensation, experience of bliss, experience of pleasurable sensation, experience of pleasure, sensation of pleasure	bde ba'i nyams
བདེ་བའི་རྟགས་དགུ	9 bon signs of durability (mnan na 'bol, gteg na yangs pa, bskor na 'khor ba, bkug na mnyen pa, bzhag na sdod pa, bshig na nyil pa, gtor na 'phro ba, bsdud na 'dril ba, reg na 'jam pa)	bde ba'i rtags dgu
བདེ་བའི་སྟན	comfortable seat	bde ba'i stan
བདེ་བའི་དུས	the time of happiness/ bliss	bde ba'i dus
བདེ་བའི་དོན	gift of fortune	bde ba'i don
བདེ་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	blissful vajra	bde ba'i rdo rje
བདེ་བའི་བརྡ	sign of pleasure in which one experiences a sensation of joy united to the presence of mind, SA brda bzhi, Da of pleasure	bde ba'i brda
བདེ་བའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent bliss	bde ba'i pha rol tu phyin pa
བདེ་བའི་དབང་པོ	faculty for pleasure	bde ba'i dbang po
བདེ་བའི་འབྱུང་གནས	source of becoming happy, paradise	bde ba'i 'byung gnas
བདེ་བའི་སྦྱར་བ	requisites of happiness	bde ba'i sbyar ba
བདེ་བའི་འཚོ་ཆས	comfortable pillow	bde ba'i 'tsho chas
བདེ་བའི་གཞི	seat of happiness	bde ba'i gzhi
བདེ་བའི་ཡུན་རིང	time of happiness	bde ba'i yun ring
བདེ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of happiness/ bliss goodness	bde ba'i rang bzhin
བདེ་བའི་རོ	enchanting taste	bde ba'i ro
བདེ་བའི་ལམ་དུ	peacefully	bde ba'i lam du
བདེ་བའི་ལུས	human body	bde ba'i lus
བདེ་བའི་ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ	the excellent thought of happiness/ bliss/ goodness	bde ba'i lhag pa'i bsam pa
བདེ་བར	in good cheer	bde bar
བདེ་བར་འཁོད	arrange oneself comfortably	bde bar 'khod
བདེ་བར་གྱུར	became easier	bde bar gyur
བདེ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག	be happy, farewell	bde bar gyur cig
བདེ་བར་གྱུར་པ	joy, become happy/ blissful	bde bar gyur pa
བདེ་བར་འཆར་བ	to feel pleasant	bde bar 'char ba
བདེ་བར་གཏོང་བ	let another be happy	bde bar gtong ba
བདེ་བར་འཐབ	son of dhrtarastra, chief adversary of pandava brothers	bde bar 'thab
བདེ་བར་བསྡད	to sit at ease, sat down comfortably	bde bar bsdad
བདེ་བར་གནས	abides easily, accomplished easily	bde bar gnas
བདེ་བར་གནས་མཆོག	supreme place of bliss [head chakra]	bde bar gnas mchog
བདེ་བར་གནས་པ	1) place/ existence/ topic of bliss; 2) rest in bliss	bde bar gnas pa
བདེ་བར་གནས་སོ	remained happy	bde bar gnas so
བདེ་བར་ཕེབས	may you travel happily	bde bar phebs
བདེ་བར་ཕྱིན་པ	gone to be happy, gone to a place of safety	bde bar phyin pa
བདེ་བར་བྱ	1) good action; 2) produce bliss	bde bar bya
བདེ་བར་བྱེད	that which makes happiness	bde bar byed
བདེ་བར་བྱེད་པ	produce[r of] happiness	bde bar byed pa
བདེ་བར་བྱོན་ལགས་སམ	have you been well?	bde bar byon lags sam
བདེ་བར་འབྱར་པ	well-made, elegant, handsome	bde bar 'byar pa
བདེ་བར་མྱོས	intoxicate	bde bar myos
བདེ་བར་འཚོ	live happily, live without illness	bde bar 'tsho
བདེ་བར་མཛད་པ	brought joy {'jig rten kun bde bar mdzad pa} brought joy to all the world	bde bar mdzad pa
བདེ་བར་ཞུ	melt into pleasure	bde bar zhu
བདེ་བར་བཞུགས	to sit comfortably, sit down comfortably, staying quietly	bde bar bzhugs
བདེ་བར་བཞུགས་པ	to be well	bde bar bzhugs pa
བདེ་བར་བཞུགས་ཤིག	be happy, farewell	bde bar bzhugs shig
བདེ་བར་འོངས་སམ	welcome	bde bar 'ongs sam
བདེ་བར་རོལ་པ	were at play in the delights of love, took his pleasure; {thams cad la bde bar rol pa} took his pleasure with each and every one	bde bar rol pa
བདེ་བར་ལོག་པར་འཛིན་པ	grasping at wrong pleasure	bde bar log par 'dzin pa
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས	blissfully-gone	bde bar gshegs
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the sugata	bde bar gshegs kyi bstan pa
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པ	Sugata	bde bar gshegs pa
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐུ	kaya of the sugatas	bde bar gshegs pa'i sku
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་ཁྲུ	cubit of the sugata	bde bar gshegs pa'i khru
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་ཁྲུ་གང	cubit of the sugata	bde bar gshegs pa'i khru gang
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	Skt sugatagarbha; sugata-essence, buddha nature, enlightened essence, essence for attaining experience of bliss 1377	bde bar gshegs pa'i snying po
བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པའི་དབང་པོ	goddess of earth	bde bar gshegs pa'i dbang po
བདེ་བར་བཤེགས་པ	sugata [blissfully gone.]	bde bar bshegs pa
བདེ་བར་བཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	sugatagarbha, buddha nature	bde bar bshegs pa'i snying po
བདེ་བར་སླེབས	arrived safely	bde bar slebs
བདེ་བར་སླེབས་པ	safely arrived	bde bar slebs pa
བདེ་བས	convenient bde bas gyen spyod pa ste sems rgya	bde bas
ཆུང་བས	by bliss 1 is elevated and [conceptual] mind diminishes	chung bas
བདེ་བས་ཕོངས་པ	deprived by/ of bliss/ happiness [see context??]	bde bas phongs pa
བདེ་བས་འཕོངས་པ	deprived of happiness	bde bas 'phongs pa
བདེ་བས་མི་འཕྲོགས	not be ravished away by bliss	bde bas mi 'phrogs
བདེ་བྱེད	bliss/happiness/health producer [met) 1) naga 2) saffron 3) weapon of Indra 4) a kind of crocodile/water dragon 5) penis 6) physician 7) time of curing/recreation 8) hong len or ser tshos, a medici...	bde byed
བདེ་བྱེད་དུས	happiness producing time, spring	bde byed dus
བདེ་བྱེད་བརྩེགས་པ	Enchanting Mound	bde byed brtsegs pa
བདེ་བྱེད་ཚོགས	class of fiends attending on shiva	bde byed tshogs
བདེ་བྱེད་གཞི་ཐོགས	deity	bde byed gzhi thogs
བདེ་བྱེད་སྲས	youngest son of mahesvara	bde byed sras
བདེ་བླག	with ease	bde blag
བདེ་བླག་ཉིད་དུ	easily	bde blag nyid du
སྙོམས་ངང་ངོ་དག	purifying happiness and suffering and hopes and	snyoms ngang ngo dag
ཕེ༹ཨརས་ཨིན་ཐེ་སཕེརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོནེ	taste	fears in the sphere of one
བདེ་བླག་ཏུ	easily, quickly, conveniently, w little effort, w/o problems	bde blag tu
བདེ་བླག་ཏུ་ཁྱེར་བ	easily bring/ practice	bde blag tu khyer ba
བདེ་བླག་ཏུ་ཐོབ་པ་མ་ཡིན	not obtained easily	bde blag tu thob pa ma yin
བདེ་བླག་ཏུ་ཤེས་པ	easily know	bde blag tu shes pa
བདེ་འབྱམས	infinite bliss	bde 'byams
བདེ་འབྱིན	happiness giver, virtue	bde 'byin
བདེ་འབྱུང	Shiva	bde 'byung
བདེ་འབྱུང་དལ་བའི	followers of mahadeva	bde 'byung dal ba'i
བདེ་འབྱུང་དལ་བའི་ཚོགས	cowry	bde 'byung dal ba'i tshogs
བདེ་འབྱུང་གཙུག་རྒྱན	crest ornament of Shiva, the moon	bde 'byung gtsug rgyan
བདེ་འབྱོར	pleasures and wealth	bde 'byor
བདེ་མི་ཟད	inexhaustible bliss, not only bliss	bde mi zad
བདེ་མིན	not happy, hell bde min sdug min myong 'gyur gyi las 'actions that produce neither pleasant nor painful experiences' {bsam gtan gsum pa yan chad kyi khams gong ma myong 'gyur gyi las so} actions th...	bde min
བདེ་མེ་རེ	serenely blissful; Thrangu Rinpoche: diffusive bliss, not very clear	bde me re
བདེ་མེད	w/o happiness, hell	bde med
བདེ་མོ	peaceful	bde mo
བདེ་མོ་ཡོད	he is well	bde mo yod
བདེ་མོར	easily	bde mor
བདེ་སྨོན	rnam dag bde chen zhing gi smon lam; prayer (pranidhana) to be reborn in the Sukhavati paradise of Amitabha buddha; by {karma chags med mkhas grub r'a ga a syas} (17th cent) bde smon gyi spyi bshad...	bde smon
སེམས་དཔའི་མྱུར་ལམ	a detailed commentary on the bde chen smon lam of karma chags med rin po che; by {O rgyan bstan 'dzin nor bu}	sems dpa'i myur lam
བདེ་རྩ	root of happiness, basic/ fundamental welfare	bde rtsa
བདེ་རྩལ	athletic talent	bde rtsal
བདེ་རྩལ་འཁྱུག་པོ	quick and strong body	bde rtsal 'khyug po
བདེ་རྩལ་ཅན	athletic, healthy	bde rtsal can
བདེ་རྩལ་ལྡན	athletic, healthy	bde rtsal ldan
བདེ་རྩལ་ལྡན་པ	athletic, healthy	bde rtsal ldan pa
བདེ་ཞད	delighted laughter	bde zhad
བདེ་ཞིང་སྐྱིད་པ	enjoys happiness and	bde zhing skyid pa
བདེ་ཞིང་སྐྱིད་པའི་ཐབས	the means to generate happiness	bde zhing skyid pa'i thabs
བདེ་ཞིང་སྐྱིད་པར་ཤོག	may they be joyous and happy!	bde zhing skyid par shog
བདེ་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to judge	bde zhib byed pa
བདེ་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt office looking after the livelihood of subjects/ serfs	bde zhib las khungs
བདེ་ཞུས	good wishes	bde zhus
བདེ་ཞུས་སྨོན་ལམ	farewell prayer	bde zhus smon lam
བདེ་ཞུས་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་མགུར	song of good wishes	bde zhus smon lam gyi mgur
བདེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness bde bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems	bde bzhin nyid
ཀྱིས་ཁྲག་འབྱིན་པ	to draw blood from a tathagata's body with evil intent bde bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems	kyis khrag 'byin pa
སྟེགས་འཆའ་ཞིང་འདུག་པ	to use a stupa of the Sugatas as a resting place	stegs 'cha' zhing 'dug pa
བདེ་གཟར	time of war or internal dissension, disturbed state of a country	bde gzar
བདེ་ཡངས	1) happy/ blissful and vast/ open; 2) courtyard	bde yangs
བདེ་བརླིང་དུ	peaceful, tranquil, calm	bde brling du
བདེ་ལ་བཀོད	having produced the capability of happy existence/ blissful resting [thub pa byas pa]	bde la bkod
བདེ་ལ་འགོད་པ	to establish in happiness	bde la 'god pa
བདེ་ལ་བག་ཡོད	1) careful about bliss; 2) conscientious about happiness	bde la bag yod
བདེ་ལག་ཏུ	easily	bde lag tu
བདེ་ལམ་མེ་བ	serenely blissful	bde lam me ba
བདེ་ལེགས	1) goodness, happiness, wellbeing, welfare, auspiciousness, good fortune. 2) well, fine	bde legs
བདེ་ལེགས་ཅན	w auspiciousness, chicken	bde legs can
བདེ་ལེགས་བརྗོད་པ	benediction, expression of blessing	bde legs brjod pa
བདེ་ལེགས་ཉི་མ	pan chen, 16th cent	bde legs nyi ma
བདེ་ལེགས་ཤོག	to you all happiness and fortune!	bde legs shog
བདེ་ལེགས་སུ་གྱུར་ཅིག	blessing be to him	bde legs su gyur cig
བདེ་ལེགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	has become blessed	bde legs su gyur pa
བདེ་ཤེས	felicitous knowledge	bde shes
བདེ་ཤོས	1) simplest; 2) happiest; 3) best; 4) most blissful	bde shos
བདེ་གཤགས་པའི་བླ་མ	sugata guru	bde gshags pa'i bla ma
བདེ་གཤེགས	sugata, [Buddha]. Sugatas	bde gshegs
བདེ་གཤེགས་ཀུན་འདུས	embodiment of all the sugatas	bde gshegs kun 'dus
བདེ་གཤེགས་ཀྱི་རིགས	tathagata potential	bde gshegs kyi rigs
བདེ་གཤེགས་རྒྱ་བོ་པ	= zur chung shes rab grags pa [Nyingma teacher]	bde gshegs rgya bo pa
བདེ་གཤེགས་ངོ་བོ	sugata-essence	bde gshegs ngo bo
བདེ་གཤེགས་དངོས་པོ་ཉིད	the very "substance" of the sugatas	bde gshegs dngos po nyid
བདེ་གཤེགས་མཆེད་བརྒྱད	sman bla etc.the 8 sugata brothers ???.	bde gshegs mched brgyad
བདེ་གཤེགས་མཆོད་རྟེན	sugata stupa	bde gshegs mchod rten
བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	sugata-essence, buddha nature, essence of the sugatas, buddha nature	bde gshegs snying po
བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	the five dharmas of sugatagarbha [??] bde gshegs snying po'i chos drug gzung 'dzin la sogs pa'i rtog pa med pa - the six dharmas of sugatagarbha without conceptualizations/ discursive thoughts of s...	bde gshegs snying po'i chos drug
ཏྲནསཅེནདིང་ནོན	affirming negation by its luminous nature, having the characteristic of individual and personal knowledge of its own nature {rang gi ngo bo so so rang gis rig pa} bde gshegs snying po'i chos drug g...	transcending non
བདེ་གཤེགས་བསྟན་པ	sugata teacher	bde gshegs bstan pa
བདེ་གཤེགས་ཐམས་ཅད	all Sugatas	bde gshegs thams cad
བདེ་གཤེགས་འདུས་པ	Assemblage of Sugatas	bde gshegs 'dus pa
བདེ་གཤེགས་འདུས་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Root Tantra of the Assemblage of Sugatas. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga found in Vol. OM and AH of the Nyingma Gyübum. See also Assemblage of Sugatas bde gshegs 'dus pa'i bka'...	bde gshegs 'dus pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
བདེ་གཤེགས་འཕགས་པའི་ཞིང	field of the noble sugatas bde gshegs sman bla bE dur ya'i 'od gyi	bde gshegs 'phags pa'i zhing
བདེ་གཤེགས་ཞི་ཁྲོ	the peaceful and wrathful sugatas	bde gshegs zhi khro
བདེ་གཤེགས་རིགས་ལྔ	Five families of sugatas. The five families or aspects of victorious ones; Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi	bde gshegs rigs lnga
བདེ་གཤེགས་སྲས་པོ	Sugatas' Offspring, sugata suta. Bodhisattva	bde gshegs sras po
བདེ་སིང་ངེ་བ	void and immaculate bliss	bde sing nge ba
བདེ་སེང་ངེ	a sect	bde seng nge
བདེ་སོགས་བདག	name of brgya byin lha, epithet of indra	bde sogs bdag
བདེ་སོགས་ནང་གི་བེམ་པོ	inner physical manifestations of bliss and so forth	bde sogs nang gi bem po
བདེ་སོགས་མ	name of brgya byin ma, celestial queen, wife of indra	bde sogs ma
བདེ་སྲུང	security	bde srung
བདེ་སྲུང་བྱེད་པ	protect, safeguard	bde srung byed pa
བདེ་སྲུང་དམག་མི	security guard/ force, National Guard [US]	bde srung dmag mi
བདེ་སྲུང་ཟ་ཁང	eating hall for security guard/ force/ National Guard [US], special diet cafeteria	bde srung za khang
བདེ་སྲུང་རུ་ཁག	security unit/ brigade	bde srung ru khag
བདེ་གསལ་མི་རྟོག	pleasure & clarity &	bde gsal mi rtog
བདེ་གསལ་མི་རྟོག་པ	bliss, clarity, and nonthought. Three temporary meditation experiences. Fixation on them plants the seeds for rebirth in the three realms of samsara. Without fixation, they are adornments of the th...	bde gsal mi rtog pa
བདེ་གསལ་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཉམས	the experiences of bliss, luminosity, and nonthought	bde gsal mi rtog pa'i nyams
བདེ་གསལ་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཉམས་གསུམ	three temporary experiences of bliss, clarity,	bde gsal mi rtog pa'i nyams gsum
ཨནད་ནོ	thought 1379	and no
བདེ་གསལ་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	blissful, radiant, and non discursive samadhi	bde gsal mi rtog pa'i ting nge 'dzin
བདེ་ལྷག་ལྷག	extremely joyful	bde lhag lhag
བདེ་ལྷམ་མེ་བ	suffused with bliss	bde lham me ba
བདེ་ལྷིང	peaceful, tranquil, calm	bde lhing
བདེ་ལྷིངས	peaceful, tranquil, calm	bde lhings
བདེ་ལྷོད	comfortable and relaxed [body light and easy, mind relaxed]	bde lhod
བདེ་ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གནས	relaxed and sitting at ease	bde lhod kyis gnas
བདེག	quake, tremble	bdeg
བདེགས	(not in DAS)	bdegs
བདེན	true, right, authentic, real, genuine, verifiable [comp {bden po}	bden
བདེན་ཁ་བྱིན་པ	tell someone the truth [about]	bden kha byin pa
བདེན་གྲུབ	true existence, "established as being real". truly existent	bden grub
བདེན་གྲུབ་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ	empty of true existence	bden grub kyis stong pa
བདེན་གྲུབ་འགོག་པའི་རིག་པ	understanding that refutes true existence	bden grub 'gog pa'i rig pa
བདེན་གྲུབ་ཏུ་གཟུང་བ	grasp[ed as] true existence	bden grub tu gzung ba
བདེན་དགའ	joy of truth	bden dga'
བདེན་རྒྱབ	bden pa'i rgyab skyor,...Khrims dpon gyis bden rgyab byas byung ???	bden rgyab
བདེན་ངེས	{kho'i bsam par bcom ldan 'das kyis bshad pa de bden nges} Now he thought, “What the Buddha said is certainly the truth.	bden nges
བདེན་དངོས	real and true (substantial existence)	bden dngos
བདེན་དངོས་བཀག་པའི་སྟོང་ཉིད	emptiness of refuting a true or concrete existence	bden dngos bkag pa'i stong nyid
བདེན་དངོས་མེད་ཀྱང་སྣང་བ	1) concretized existence appearing even though it does not exist; 2) appearing	bden dngos med kyang snang ba
བདེན་ཅན་སྤོབས་ཆེ	the great confidence of truth	bden can spobs che
བདེན་ཆིག་འགྲུབ	establish what is true	bden chig 'grub
བདེན་ཆུང་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen minor truths: Suffering {sdug bsngal}, impermanence {mi rtag pa}, emptiness {stong pa}, selflessness {bdag med pa}, origin of suffering {kun 'byung ba}, production {rab tu skye ba}, causal ...	bden chung bcu drug
བདེན་གཉིས	the two truths; {kun rdzob} + {don dam}, relative and ultimate]	bden gnyis
བདེན་གཉིས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་གཞི	1) the objects distinguished by the two truths; 2) the basis of distinguishing the two truths	bden gnyis kyi dbye gzhi
བདེན་གཉིས་ཅིག་ཅར་དུ་གཟིགས་པ	instant/ sudden vision of the two truths bden gnyis mnyam par sbyar ba'i ye shes the wisdom that joins the two truths in equality	bden gnyis cig car du gzigs pa
བདེན་གཉིས་དབྱེར་མེད་ལྷག་པའི་ཆོས	the excellent dharma of the inseparability of the two truths bden gnyis dbyer med lhag pa'i chos sku	bden gnyis dbyer med lhag pa'i chos
བདེན་གཉིས་ཟུང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	unification of the two truths	bden gnyis zung du chud pa
བདེན་གཉིས་ཟུང་དུ་ཆུད་ཚུལ	the way in which the two truths are unified	bden gnyis zung du chud tshul
བདེན་གཉིས་ཟུང་དུ་མ་ཆུད་པ	nonunification of the two truths	bden gnyis zung du ma chud pa
བདེན་གཉིས་ཟུང་ཤུག	unification of the two truths	bden gnyis zung shug
བདེན་གཉིས་རོ་གཅིག་པ	1 taste of the two truths	bden gnyis ro gcig pa
བདེན་གཉིས་ལ་རྨོངས་པ	stupidity about the two truths	bden gnyis la rmongs pa
བདེན་གཉིས་སོ་སོར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to the two truths as separate	bden gnyis so sor zhen pa
བདེན་ཏེ	it is true that	bden te
བདེན་གཏམ	straightforward talk	bden gtam
བདེན་སྟོང	empty of true existence/ nature	bden stong
བདེན་སྟོབས	power of the truth	bden stobs
བདེན་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	the blessing of the power of truth bden stobs kyis byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' the word with the blessing of the power of truth [one of the three words blessed by mind [h] {thugs kyis byin brlabs bk...	bden stobs kyis byin gyis brlabs pa
བདེན་ཐུབ	honest, true	bden thub
བདེན་མཐའ	MG: the truth; vi. - gsal, to see the truth. [mss]	bden mtha'
བདེན་མཐའ་གསལ	see the truth	bden mtha' gsal
བདེན་མཐའ་གསལ་བ	justify	bden mtha' gsal ba
བདེན་མཐུས	by the power of truth	bden mthus
བདེན་མཐོང	insight into the truth, to realize the truth	bden mthong
བདེན་དོན	truth-indices, exist in fact	bden don
བདེན་དོན་འགྱུར་མེད	changeless principle	bden don 'gyur med
བདེན་དོན་འགྲུབ་པ	to come true	bden don 'grub pa
བདེན་དོན་དུ་སྲོག་གཏོང	die for principles, martyr 1self	bden don du srog gtong
བདེན་དོན་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	points of truth, twelvefold, twelve aspects of the meaning of the truth	bden don rnam pa bcu gnyis
བདེན་དོན་འཚོལ	seek truth	bden don 'tshol
བདེན་བདེན	very true indeed, certainly	bden bden
བདེན་བདེན་པ	completely real	bden bden pa
བདེན་བདེན་འཛིན	the belief that "truth" exists as such	bden bden 'dzin
བདེན་མདོག་མེད	talk that is not credible	bden mdog med
བདེན་ནོ	true, truth	bden no
བདེན་པ་མངོན་རྟོགས	realizing the truth [newly perceiving truth on the path of seeing]	bden pa mngon rtogs
བདེན་པ་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་དུས	the time of true realization/ realizing the truth	bden pa mngon par rtogs pa'i dus
བདེན་པ་ཉིད	truth	bden pa nyid
བདེན་པ་གཉིས	Two truths. Relative truth and ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the seeming, superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the real, true and unmistaken mode. These ...	bden pa gnyis
བདེན་པ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of the two truths	bden pa gnyis kyi de kho na nyid
བདེན་པ་གཉིས་མེད	indivisibility of the two truths	bden pa gnyis med
བདེན་པ་ལྟར་འོང་བ	{kho'i rdzun de bden pa ltar 'ong ba yin pa} those lies of his come true	bden pa ltar 'ong ba
བདེན་པ་མཐོང་བ	direct perception of truth/ true nature	bden pa mthong ba
བདེན་པ་མཐོང་བས་གྲོལ་བ	liberation by seeing the truth	bden pa mthong bas grol ba
བདེན་པ་དག་སྐྱེལ	prove one's innocence/ righteousness/ truth	bden pa dag skyel
བདེན་པ་དག་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	prove one's innocence/ righteousness/ truth bden pa dang po gsum gyi rnam pa bcu	bden pa dag skyel byed
བདེན་པ་དང་རིགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ	you speak the truth: your words are truly wise	bden pa dang rigs pa brjod pa
བདེན་པ་བདར	speak truly, tell the truth, determine who is telling the truth	bden pa bdar
བདེན་པ་བདར་བ	speak truly, tell the truth, determine who is telling the truth	bden pa bdar ba
བདེན་པ་བདེན་འཁྱོལ	true and got to the truth [of the matter]	bden pa bden 'khyol
བདེན་པ་བདེན་ཐུབ	very straightforward, right to the point, just, honest, true	bden pa bden thub
བདེན་པ་བདོར	give a command	bden pa bdor
བདེན་པ་བརྡར	invoke the truth of	bden pa brdar
བདེན་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	four noble truths [the truth of suffering {sdug bsngal gi bden pa} or duhkhasatya, the truth of the origin of suffering {kun 'byung ba'i bden pa} or samudayasatya, the truth of its cessation {'gog ...	bden pa rnam bzhi
བདེན་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible two truths	bden pa dbyer med
བདེན་པ་དབྱེར་མེད་ཆེན་པོ	the great inseparability of the [two] truths, [view of dbu ma thal 'gyur pa]	bden pa dbyer med chen po
བདེན་པ་མེད་པ	untrue, unjust, corrupt, depraved	bden pa med pa
བདེན་པ་སྨྲ་བ	tell the truth, veracious	bden pa smra ba
བདེན་པ་བཞི	four truths: Mipham: {sdug bsngal gyi bden pa dang, kun 'byung gi bden pa dang, 'gog pa'i bden pa dang, lam gyi bden pa'o} the truth of suffering, the truth of origin, the truth of cessation, and t...	bden pa bzhi
བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	the [1st] turning of the wheel of dharma of the four noble truths	bden pa bzhi'i chos 'khor
བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་དོན	principle of the 4 noble truths	bden pa bzhi'i don
བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་མདོ	Sutra of the four Noble Truths [vol. Sa]	bden pa bzhi'i mdo
བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen topics implied in the four noble truths, 16 aspects of the four truths	bden pa bzhi'i rnam pa bcu drug
བདེན་པ་བཞིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	yogin of the four noble truths	bden pa bzhi'i rnal 'byor pa
བདེན་པ་བཞིར་གསུངས་ཏེ	four truths are taught	bden pa bzhir gsungs te
བདེན་པ་ར་སྤྲོད	verify the truth [in terms of actuality/ experience]	bden pa ra sprod
བདེན་པ་ལ་མཁས་པར་བྱ་བ	to become learned in what is true [the four noble truths]	bden pa la mkhas par bya ba
བདེན་པ་ལ་འཇུག	enter into/ abide in truth	bden pa la 'jug
བདེན་པ་སོ་སོ་ལ	for each Truth	bden pa so so la
བདེན་པའི	factual 1381	bden pa'i
བདེན་པའི་ཁྲིམས	strict justice, discipline of the truth	bden pa'i khrims
བདེན་པའི་ངག	truthful speech, crow	bden pa'i ngag
བདེན་པའི་དངོས་པོ་མེད་པའི་སྒྱུ་མ	illusion w/o truly existent things/ true solidity-reality	bden pa'i dngos po med pa'i sgyu ma
བདེན་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	true reasoning, maxim	bden pa'i gtan tshigs
བདེན་པའི་སྟོབས་བརྗོད་པ	proclaiming the power to the truth	bden pa'i stobs brjod pa
བདེན་པའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	follow the truth bden pa'i mthu mthong rgyun tu zhugs	bden pa'i brtul zhugs
པའི་འབྲས་བུ་ཐོབ་བོ	seeing the power of truth, she obtained the fruit of	pa'i 'bras bu thob bo
བདེན་པའི་དེ་ཉིད	true suchness, suchness of truth	bden pa'i de nyid
བདེན་པའི་དོན	the true meaning	bden pa'i don
བདེན་པའི་སྡེ	{blon po bden pa'i sde zhes bya ba} the minister Satyasena	bden pa'i sde
བདེན་པའི་ནུས་པ	impact of truth	bden pa'i nus pa
བདེན་པའི་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	inspiration/ blessing of truth	bden pa'i byin gyis brlabs pa
བདེན་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	the power of truth	bden pa'i dbang phyug
བདེན་པའི་སྨྲང	proclamation of the power of the truth, proclamation of the truth, smrang which declares the power of the truth	bden pa'i smrang
བདེན་པའི་སྨྲང་གིས་བཀྲོལ	communicating by the proclamation of the truth	bden pa'i smrang gis bkrol
བདེན་པའི་ར་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	convince	bden pa'i ra sprod byed pa
བདེན་པའི་རང་བཞིན	reality, actuality, truth	bden pa'i rang bzhin
བདེན་པར	honestly, truly	bden par
བདེན་པར་གྲུབ་པ	truly established	bden par grub pa
བདེན་པར་རྟོག་པ	thinking ... as truly existent	bden par rtog pa
བདེན་པར་འདོད་པ	to regard as / believe to be real	bden par 'dod pa
བདེན་པར་མ་གྲུབ	not truly established/ existent	bden par ma grub
བདེན་པར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	to not possess true existence	bden par ma grub pa
བདེན་པར་མེད་པ	nonexistent as true entities	bden par med pa
བདེན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	1) exponent of true existence; 2) speaker of truth	bden par smra ba
བདེན་པར་འཛིན	to hold as true / factual, believe in	bden par 'dzin
བདེན་པར་འཛིན་པ	to invest with truth/ authenticity/ true existence	bden par 'dzin pa
བདེན་པར་ཞེན	believe in the reality of	bden par zhen
བདེན་པར་ཞེན་པ	to fixate upon something as true / truly existent	bden par zhen pa
བདེན་པར་ཡོད་པ	truly existent	bden par yod pa
བདེན་པར་བཤད	speak honestly	bden par bshad
བདེན་པར་བསམས་ནས	thinking this to be true	bden par bsams nas
བདེན་པས་སྟོང	empty of reality/ true existence	bden pas stong
བདེན་པས་མཐའ་འཁྱོལ	1) complete life working w/o deception; 2) attain victory, the true way of existing [mtha' 'khyol = final/ back support]	bden pas mtha' 'khyol
བདེན་པོ	true & just man	bden po
བདེན་དཔང	witness, testimony	bden dpang
བདེན་དཔང་ང་མོ	true/ infallible proof/ testimony	bden dpang nga mo
བདེན་དཔང་ལྕགས་ལྟ་བུ	iron-clad proof	bden dpang lcags lta bu
བདེན་དཔང་ཐུབ་པ	to be attested by	bden dpang thub pa
བདེན་དཔང་བྱེད་མཁན	notary public	bden dpang byed mkhan
བདེན་བ་མཐོང་བ	see truly	bden ba mthong ba
བདེན་བྲལ	southwest direction, void of truth, unjust	bden bral
བདེན་བྲལ་བདག་པོ	lord of the Dendrel, king of the rakshasas [srin po]	bden bral bdag po
བདེན་བྲལ་ཕྱོགས	southwest quarter	bden bral phyogs
བདེན་བྲལ་གཙོ་བོ	chief of the Dendrel, king of the rakshasas [srin po]	bden bral gtso bo
བདེན་དབང	tenma [one of 12 female guardian spirits of T]	bden dbang
བདེན་འབྲས་ཀྱིས	as a result	bden 'bras kyis
བདེན་འབྲེལ	straightforwardly and properly, true, factual	bden 'brel
བདེན་མ་གྲུབ	(to be) found not to have ever had true existence	bden ma grub
བདེན་མེད	{bden pa med pa} untrue; lacking/ to lack true existence/ nature	bden med
བདེན་མེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་དོན་ཙམ	lack of true existence w meaning only as a mere word	bden med kyi sgra don tsam
བདེན་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཅན	insubstantial, lacking true existence	bden med kyi rnam can
བདེན་མེད་སྒྱུ་མ་ལྟ་བུ	unreal like magic, illusion	bden med sgyu ma lta bu
བདེན་མེད་འཇའ་ཚོན་འདྲ	as unsubstantial as rainbows	bden med 'ja' tshon 'dra
བདེན་མེད་གཏམ་ཟད	mere talk w/o truth/ substance [you couldn't hope to win a debate, court case]	bden med gtam zad
བདེན་མེད་དཔའ་འཁུམས	afraid because 1's position is untrue/ unjust	bden med dpa' 'khums
བདེན་སྨྲ	speaker of truth, rishi	bden smra
བདེན་སྨྲ་བ	one who speaks the truth	bden smra ba
བདེན་ཚིག	truth, truthful expression, true words, solemn asseveration 1382	bden tshig
བདེན་ཚིག་བཀའ་བསྒོས་སྲུང་བ	protective ritual with the protective utterance of truth	bden tshig bka' bsgos srung ba
བདེན་ཚིག་གི་སྨོན་པ་གྲུབ་པ	the power of prophecy	bden tshig gi smon pa grub pa
བདེན་ཚིག་གྲུབ	one who has spoken nothing but truth during several births	bden tshig grub
བདེན་ཚིག་འགྲུབ	establish the truth/ true words	bden tshig 'grub
བདེན་ཚིག་བརྗོད	bsod nams kyi bden	bden tshig brjod
ཚིག་བརྗོད་པ	declared the truth of his merit	tshig brjod pa
བདེན་ཚིག་བརྗོད་ནས	declares the truth, speaking words of truth	bden tshig brjod nas
བདེན་ཚིག་བདར	swear 1's words are true	bden tshig bdar
བདེན་ཚིག་བཤད	speak the truth	bden tshig bshad
བདེན་ཚུལ	the way of truth	bden tshul
བདེན་འཛིན	mistaking things as having a true existence	bden 'dzin
བདེན་འཛིན་ཀུན་བཏགས	artificial/ false conception of true existence	bden 'dzin kun btags
བདེན་འཛིན་ཀུན་བརྟགས	grasping the true existence of an incidental imputation/ theoretical construct	bden 'dzin kun brtags
བདེན་འཛིན་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle grasping at true existence [subtle awareness of dualistic appearance of subject object or grasping/fixation	bden 'dzin phra mo
བདེན་འཛིན་ཞིག་ན	if the illusion is destroyed	bden 'dzin zhig na
བདེན་འཛིན་རགས་པ	blatant grasping to the reality of ..	bden 'dzin rags pa
བདེན་འཛིན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate conception of true existence	bden 'dzin lhan skyes
བདེན་འཛིན་ཨ་འཐས་ཐེར་ཟུག	strong grasping to solidity of phenomena	bden 'dzin a 'thas ther zug
བདེན་རྫུན	truth or falsity	bden rdzun
བདེན་རྫུན་དཀར་ནག	good and bad talk and action	bden rdzun dkar nag
བདེན་རྫུན་གང་ཡིན་མི་ཤེས	when you can't tell what's true or false	bden rdzun gang yin mi shes
བདེན་རྫུན་དབྱེ་བྱེད	discern true and false/ truth and lies	bden rdzun dbye byed
བདེན་རྫུན་རེས་འཇོག་གི་ཞེན་པ	the clinging of alternating truth and falsehood	bden rdzun res 'jog gi zhen pa
བདེན་ཞིང་རིགས་སམ་སྙམ	Is this true or not?	bden zhing rigs sam snyam
བདེན་ཞེན	{bden par zhen pa} to fixate on (something) as true/ truly existent; to invest with truth/ true existence	bden zhen
བདེན་ཞེན་ཆུང	little attachment to the reality of	bden zhen chung
བདེན་ཞེན་དབང་གྱུར	individual sentient being	bden zhen dbang gyur
བདེན་ཞེན་མེད་པ	no attribution of sense of reality	bden zhen med pa
བདེན་བཞི	the four noble truths [sdug bsngal, suffering, kun 'byung, origin, 'gog pa, cessation, lam, path]	bden bzhi
བདེན་བཞི་ཆོས་འཁོར	the turning of the wheel of dharma of the four noble truths	bden bzhi chos 'khor
བདེན་བཞི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen aspects of the four [noble] truths	bden bzhi rnam pa bcu drug
བདེན་བཞི་མི་རྟག་བཅུ་དྲུག	[TRS 39-6] bden bzhi'i chos 'khor bskor skabs kyi	bden bzhi mi rtag bcu drug
བཟླས་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 recitations on the occasion of turning the wheel of dharma of the four noble truths	bzlas ba bcu gnyis
བདེན་བཞིའི་དོན་ལ་རྨོངས་པ	ignorant of the meaning of the four noble truths bden bzhi'i rnam pa mi rtag sogs bcu	bden bzhi'i don la rmongs pa
བདེན་ཡུས་བཤད་པ	bden pa yod tshul gyi yus bdar ba, ???...Phan 'dogs sogs byas tshul gyi bden yus bshad pa	bden yus bshad pa
བདེན་ཤགས་བདར་བ	bden pa yod pa'i yus bshad pa ???	bden shags bdar ba
བདེན་བཤེར	vie in telling it as it is	bden bsher
བདེན་གསོལ	apology	bden gsol
བདེན་གསོལ་ཞུ	apologize	bden gsol zhu
བདེའི་རྒྱུ	cause of bliss	bde'i rgyu
བདེའོ	How delightful!	bde'o
བདེར	1) whichever you like; 2) at your pleasure; 3) bde la [je bder 'gyur: become more and more level]	bder
བདེར་བགྲོད	go/ cross to non-obstruction	bder bgrod
བདེར་གནས	{bde bar gnas pa} blissful repose; resting in a stable experience of bliss	bder gnas
བདེར་གནས་རྐྱེན་གྱི་གཞི་ལྔ	the five bases conditioned by peaceful resting [of the 17 objects of taming ? 'dul ba gzhi bcu bdun las, one of the nine bases of keeping the precepts bslab pa bsrung ba'i gzhi dgu = {bde bar gnas ...	bder gnas rkyen gyi gzhi lnga
བདེར་འཚོ	health, well-being, hygiene, sanitation	bder 'tsho
བདེར་བཞག་པ	to rest at ease	bder bzhag pa
བདེར་རློམ	bde po yin khul byed pa,...Rtag tu yid bder rlom gyi tshul du bsdad pa	bder rlom
བདེར་རློམ་པ	boast of one's good fortune	bder rlom pa
བདེར་གཤེགས	sugata, SA bde gshegs	bder gshegs
བདེར་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	sugatagarbha	bder gshegs snying po
བདེར་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ་གསུམ	the three	bder gshegs snying po gsum
ཨསྤེཅཙ་ཨོཕ༹་སུགཏ	essence,	aspects of sugata
བདོ	rampant, widespread	bdo
བདོ་འཕྲོ	on the increase	bdo 'phro
བདོ་བ	(tha mi dad pa 1) spread, grow, increase; 2) abundance, exuberance, abound; 3) rage, be rampant; 4) occur; 5) be vividly present; 6) hurt	bdo ba
བདོག	1) have; 2) be in possession of; 3) be existent; 4) possessions	bdog
བདོག་དངོས	things, possessions	bdog dngos
བདོག་པ	possessions; there is, to get or take possession of, to stow away, to house. to have, possess	bdog pa
བདོག་པ་ཀུན་གཏོང	renounce everything	bdog pa kun gtong
བདོག་པ་ཀུན་ཡོངས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	completely renounce everything	bdog pa kun yongs su gtong ba
བདོག་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	giving	bdog pa sbyin pa
བདོར	imp. of {bdar ba}	bdor
བདོལ	1) arrange! [troops]; 3) say! explain!; 4) grind! [flour]; 5) rub! scrub! polish; 6) file!; 7) polish!; 7) whet!; 8) expand!	bdol
བདྲ་དོན་རྟགས་གསུམ	symbol, meaning and sign. The three principles of symbol, meaning and sign are described in this way: 'Meaning' is the indivisible essence of cognizance and emptiness. 'Symbol' is the pure nature a...	bdra don rtags gsum
བདྲུ་བ	wash	bdru ba
མདག	impure	mdag
མདག་འཁོར་བའི་སྒོ	impure gate of samsara	mdag 'khor ba'i sgo
མདག་པ	unburnt bricks; glowing embers/ live coals	mdag pa
མདག་པ་ས་བདུན	1st 7 of the {sa bcu} {mdag pa} unburnt bricks	mdag pa sa bdun
མདག་མ	glowing embers, live or burning coals	mdag ma
མདག་མའི་དོང	pit for keeping live coals	mdag ma'i dong
མདག་མིགས་དྲུག་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི	scenes of the impure worlds of the six classes of beings	mdag migs drug 'jig rten gyi
མདག་མེ	glowing embers, cinders	mdag me
མདང	last night; yesterday; yesterday evening, last night mdang ba - place of cremation	mdang
མདང་སྐྱེས་བྱིས་པ	baby born last night, just born	mdang skyes byis pa
མདང་གི་རྨི་ལམ	last night's dream	mdang gi rmi lam
མདང་དགོང	yesterday/ last evening night	mdang dgong
མདང་ནུབ	yesterday/ last evening night	mdang nub
མདང་བ	place of cremation	mdang ba
མདང་བའི་གནས	place of cremation, place where the burning of the dead takes place	mdang ba'i gnas
མདང་མ	cinder, ember	mdang ma
མདང་སང	these days, yesterday	mdang sang
མདང་སང་རང་ཡོང་བ་ཡིན	came only yesterday	mdang sang rang yong ba yin
མདང་སུམ	last night	mdang sum
མདང་སོང	last night	mdang song
མདངས་བཀྲ་བ	shining w various colors	mdangs bkra ba
མདངས་བཀྲག	Syn {bkrag mdangs}	mdangs bkrag
མདངས་བཀྲག་མེད	pallid, pale, of wan complexion, dull, lackluster, lifeless	mdangs bkrag med
མདངས་སྐྱ་ལྷག་གེ་བ	pale/ pallid face, lusterless	mdangs skya lhag ge ba
མདངས་སྒྱུར	color transforming bile	mdangs sgyur
མདངས་སྒྱུར་མཁྲིས་པ	color changing bile [one of lus kyi rtsa ba'i mkhris pa lnga, abiding in the liver [function: food essence etc'i lus zungs kyi colors changing]	mdangs sgyur mkhris pa
མདངས་ངན	bad-looking, dull complexion	mdangs ngan
མདངས་ཅན	of fresh appearance	mdangs can
མདངས་ཆགས་པ	{sku mdog dkar la dmar ba'i mdangs chags pa} his complexion is white, tinged with red	mdangs chags pa
མདངས་བཏོན་པ	good color su btang ba, shine	mdangs bton pa
མདངས་དང་ལྡན་པ	shone; x {byis pa de me 'od ltar mdangs dang ldan pas 1384 ming yang me skyes zhes grags} because the youth's face shone like fire, he became known as Jyotiska, Fire Born	mdangs dang ldan pa
མདངས་འདོན	shine	mdangs 'don
མདངས་འདོན་པ	shine	mdangs 'don pa
མདངས་ལྡན	face, brightness, luster	mdangs ldan
མདངས་ཕོག་པ	shining {me shel la nyi ma'i mdangs phog pa} the sun shining upon the cystals	mdangs phog pa
མདངས་ཕྱེ་བ	tshon mdangs kyis ri mo'i nyams 'don pa	mdangs phye ba
མདངས་འཕྲོ	radiate the light	mdangs 'phro
མདངས་འཕྲོག	predators of the complexion	mdangs 'phrog
མདངས་འཕྲོག་པ	faded lustre, brightness dimmed	mdangs 'phrog pa
མདངས་འབར་བ	glittering	mdangs 'bar ba
མདངས་མི་སྣུམ་པ	lusterless/ dull [complexion]	mdangs mi snum pa
མདངས་མེད	dull appearance, not bright, ugly, dull appearance, bad complexion	mdangs med
མདངས་དམར	ruddy complexion	mdangs dmar
མདངས་འཚེར་ལྷག་གེ་བ	brilliantly shining	mdangs 'tsher lhag ge ba
མདངས་འཛིན	gleaming	mdangs 'dzin
མདངས་བཟང	bright color, good complexion, most subtle part of the semen	mdangs bzang
མདངས་བཟང་བ	1) lustrous; 2) w Snying stobs ngar)	mdangs bzang ba
མདངས་འོད	glow, shine	mdangs 'od
མདངས་ཡེལ་ཡེལ	clear, light, bright	mdangs yel yel
མདངས་ཡོད	fresh	mdangs yod
མདངས་རིས	tshon ris kyi rnam 'gyur zhig	mdangs ris
མདངས་སལ་སལ	brilliant, well-lighted	mdangs sal sal
མདངས་སུམ	last night	mdangs sum
མདངས་གསལ	lustrously clear	mdangs gsal
མདངས་གསོ་བ	cure loss of luster of the complexion	mdangs gso ba
མདན་བཀོད་པ	kind of poison used in medicine	mdan bkod pa
མདན་ཁང	kind of poison used in medicine	mdan khang
མདན་པ	cheek, jaw	mdan pa
མདའ	1) arrow; a fiery dart, gun, firelock, 2) lower part of valley. Syn {mdo}; 3) the lower terrace of a plateau	mda'
མདའ་ཀྱོག་པོ་ཡོད་མེད་ལྟ་བུ	see if arrow is crooked or not	mda' kyog po yod med lta bu
མདའ་བཀྲ	arrow	mda' bkra
མདའ་སྐད་གླིང་བསྒྱུར	words of shooting arrows becoming those of playing the flute, false words becoming true	mda' skad gling bsgyur
མདའ་སྐར	shooting star	mda' skar
མདའ་སྐྱེན་པོ	skill in archery	mda' skyen po
མདའ་བསྐྱོད	bow	mda' bskyod
མདའ་ཁུང	loophole, quiver	mda' khung
མདའ་མཁན	arrow smith	mda' mkhan
མདའ་འཁྱམས	'phar mda'a	mda' 'khyams
མདའ་གང	arrow-length	mda' gang
མདའ་གང་ཙམ	an arrow's length {de'i spyi bor mda' gang tsam gyi steng gi nam mkhar} suspended in space, an arrow's length above her head	mda' gang tsam
མདའ་གྲོང	quiver	mda' grong
མདའ་གླུ	song sung when shooting arrows	mda' glu
མདའ་རྒྱག	to shoot an arrow	mda' rgyag
མདའ་རྒྱག་སྐབས་ལེན་པའི་གླུ	song sung when shooting arrows	mda' rgyag skabs len pa'i glu
མདའ་རྒྱག་པ	shoot arrows	mda' rgyag pa
མདའ་རྒྱང	range of an arrow shot	mda' rgyang
མདའ་རྒྱང་གང	a bow-shot length	mda' rgyang gang
མདའ་རྒྱང་འཕེན	mda' rgyang nas 'phen pa [shoot/ impel]	mda' rgyang 'phen
མདའ་རྒྱན	1) in archery contests 'jog pa'i rgyan; 2) adornment attached to an arrow)	mda' rgyan
མདའ་རྒྱབ་མཁན	archer	mda' rgyab mkhan
མདའ་རྒྱབ་པ	shoot an arrow	mda' rgyab pa
མདའ་རྒྱལ	SA mda' tsha zhan bsdur nas rgyal ba	mda' rgyal
མདའ་རྒྱལ་བ	win an archery contest	mda' rgyal ba
མདའ་རྒྱུག	SA mda' tsha zhan gyi rgyug len pa	mda' rgyug
མདའ་རྒྱུད	bowstring	mda' rgyud
མདའ་རྒྱུས	{mda' rgyus} med. herb ['bras bu dmar po byu ru dang 'dra ba sne nag po can ming gzhan dmar ru mgo nag zer ba ste, ro kha bska, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas rtsa kha 'byed, mngal nas bu 'byin, mo nad '...	mda' rgyus
མདའ་སྒོ་གྲུ་ཁ	mda' sgo dock [yun nan zhing chen gyi rgyal thang rdzong gi shar ngos 'bri chu'i 'gram du yod pa'i gru kha zhig	mda' sgo gru kha
མདའ་སྒྱོགས་འཕེན	open fire	mda' sgyogs 'phen
མདའ་སྒྲོ	feathers of an arrow	mda' sgro
མདའ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to shoot an arrow	mda' brgyab pa
མདའ་ལྔ་པ	w five arrows, Kama	mda' lnga pa
མདའ་གཅིག་གིས་གླ་བ་གཉིས་གསོད	kill two birds w 1 stone, kill two musk deer w 1 arrow	mda' gcig gis gla ba gnyis gsod
མདའ་ལྕགས	arrowhead	mda' lcags
མདའ་ཆར	rain of arrows, strafing	mda' char
མདའ་ཆར་རྒྱག	rain down arrows, strafe	mda' char rgyag
མདའ་ཆར་ཕེན	rain down arrows, strafe	mda' char phen
མདའ་ཆར་འཕེན་དབྱུག	rain down arrows, strafe	mda' char 'phen dbyug
མདའ་ཆུ	river in the lower part of a valley	mda' chu
མདའ་ཆུ་ལ	mda' chu Pass [S rdza yul rdzong]	mda' chu la
མདའ་ཆེ	lance	mda' che
མདའ་ཆེན	1) big arrow; 2) spear)	mda' chen
མདའ་འཆར་འཕེན་དབྱུག	strafing	mda' 'char 'phen dbyug
མདའ་འཇོམས	1) Sarah; 2) herb, medicinal root *)	mda' 'joms
མདའ་ཉེ་འབེན་རྒྱང་མེད་པ	the arrow is not near, the target not far	mda' nye 'ben rgyang med pa
མདའ་སྙུག	arrow shaft	mda' snyug
མདའ་རྟེན	bow	mda' rten
མདའ་ལྟན	bow	mda' ltan
མདའ་ལྟར་འཕེན	to exhale the air like an arrow	mda' ltar 'phen
མདའ་ལྟོ་བ	bow	mda' lto ba
མདའ་ལྟོང	notch in an arrow	mda' ltong
མདའ་སྟན	bow	mda' stan
མདའ་སྟོང	notch at the end of an arrow which is placed against the bowstring	mda' stong
མདའ་བསྟན	deer	mda' bstan
མདའ་དར	arrow w scarf/ silk streamers [arrow banner, ceremonial arrow having ribbons of different colors fastened to it (used eg in weddings) mda' la dar tshon sna lnga dang, me long sogs btags pa'i mda' d...	mda' dar
མདའ་དར་རྩེ་ལྔ	1) a kind of scarf arrow in goddess play lha mo 'khrab, Tibetan opera; 2) scarf arrow ltong kha lnga pa) mda' dar g.yob - beckon with a silk arrow	mda' dar rtse lnga
མདའ་དོང	quiver	mda' dong
མདའ་དོང་གི་དར	scarf used to cover a quiver	mda' dong gi dar
མདའ་མདུང	arrow-spear	mda' mdung
མདའ་མདེའུ	arrow's [metal] tip	mda' mde'u
མདའ་མདོང	bow-holder	mda' mdong
མདའ་རྡོ	by hand power thrown/ shot arrows/ stones	mda' rdo
མདའ་རྡོས་བསྡིགས་པ	having shot mda' rdo arouse fear	mda' rdos bsdigs pa
མདའ་གནམ་རྒྱུད་དུ་འཕངས་པ	shoot an arrow upwards	mda' gnam rgyud du 'phangs pa
མདའ་སྣོད	quiver	mda' snod
མདའ་བསྣུན	archer	mda' bsnun
མདའ་པ	archer	mda' pa
མདའ་དཔོན	provincial commander	mda' dpon
མདའ་དཔོན་ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན	Changlochen, a provincial commander (mda' dpon)	mda' dpon lcang lo can
མདའ་དཔོན་ཆེ་བ	brigadier	mda' dpon che ba
མདའ་ལྤགས	gourd	mda' lpags
མདའ་ཕུ	place in tibet	mda' phu
མདའ་ཕེན་པ	shoot	mda' phen pa
མདའ་ཕྱེད་བྱས་པ	arrow w sharp semicircular head	mda' phyed byas pa
མདའ་འཕང	an arrow-shot	mda' 'phang
མདའ་འཕངས	an arrow shot	mda' 'phangs
མདའ་འཕངས་པ	shoot an arrow	mda' 'phangs pa
མདའ་འཕེན	1) shoot an arrow [syn: rgyud las grol ba dang, rgyud las 'phos, drag po'i shugs 'gro]; 2) (met) bow)	mda' 'phen
མདའ་འཕེན་པ	cast an arrow	mda' 'phen pa
མདའ་འཕེན་བཞིན་པ	shooting	mda' 'phen bzhin pa
མདའ་བ	parapet	mda' ba
མདའ་བོ་ཆེ	big arrow	mda' bo che
མདའ་འབེན	target	mda' 'ben
མདའ་སྦྱིན	autumn	mda' sbyin
མདའ་མང་གི་འབེན	common target	mda' mang gi 'ben
མདའ་མོ	arrow, arrow-lot, a kind of fortune telling by shooting of arrows	mda' mo
མདའ་མོ་ཆེ	iron club, crowbar, lance, large arrow	mda' mo che
མདའ་མྱུག་སྲང་བ	straight arrow, bamboo arrow	mda' myug srang ba
མདའ་རྩལ	skill in archery	mda' rtsal
མདའ་རྩལ་འགྲན	contend in archery mda' rtse mo gyen du bstan te 'phangs pa - shoot an arrow upwards	mda' rtsal 'gran
མདའ་རྩེད	archery	mda' rtsed
མདའ་རྩེད་རྩེས་པ	to do archery	mda' rtsed rtses pa
མདའ་ཚ་ཁ་ལྟ་བ	contend in archery	mda' tsha kha lta ba
མདའ་ཚད	an arrow's length	mda' tshad
མདའ་ཚད་མ	[thing of ] arrow's-length	mda' tshad ma
མདའ་ཚན་ཆེན་པོ	skilled archer	mda' tshan chen po
མདའ་འཛིན	1) juniper; 2) quiver)	mda' 'dzin
མདའ་རྫས	ammunition	mda' rdzas
མདའ་གཞས	archery songs	mda' gzhas
མདའ་གཞི	county in 21th cent Tibet.	mda' gzhi
མདའ་གཞིས	an estate given to a general while he is in office	mda' gzhis
མདའ་གཞུ	bow and arrow	mda' gzhu
མདའ་གཞུ་ཐོགས་པ	carrying bows and arrows	mda' gzhu thogs pa
མདའ་ཟ	bow	mda' za
མདའ་ཟས་ཅན	bow	mda' zas can
མདའ་ཟུག་པ	mda' rgyag yul la phog nas gting la zug pa	mda' zug pa
མདའ་ཟོ	(yul) small tsampa measuring vessel	mda' zo
མདའ་བཟོ་བ	arrow-maker	mda' bzo ba
མདའ་ཡབ	1) on top of a building's gyang rtsig [walls?] pu shu [parapet, railing, fence], nya skyor, nya rgyab [coping on top of wall?; 2) gold, copper, etc. bird feathers, balcony (of divine palace) (balus...	mda' yab
མདའ་ཡིག	1) for high Tibetan govt officials travelling horses, supplies and people to request tax/ service obligations, in 1386 advance, written on a red cloth mdar btags nas gtong ba'i yi ge; 2) arrow-like...	mda' yig
མདའ་ར	archery range	mda' ra
མདའ་རབ༹	archery ground	mda' rva
མདའ་ལ་འུག་མ	(A) headless arrow	mda' la 'ug ma
མདའ་ལམ	arrow way	mda' lam
མདའ་ལུང་ཆུ	{mda' lung river ['bab chu zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi rdza yul rdzong gi nub rgyud dang lho yul@gyi shar rgyud du 'bab,..	mda' lung chu
མདའ་ཤུབ	quiver	mda' shub
མདའ་ཤུབས	quiver, case for keeping arrows	mda' shubs
མདའ་ཤུལ་སྒྲོ་འཛིན	gcig gi shul gcig gis 'dzin pa'i dpe	mda' shul sgro 'dzin
མདའ་ཤེས་གཞུ་ཉོས	know the arrow, bought the bow, confidently perform action	mda' shes gzhu nyos
མདའ་གཤོག	arrow feathers	mda' gshog
མདའ་བཤད	in taking a wife an arrow w streamers, mda' dar, the wife's door kyi gong bar gzer	mda' bshad
མདའ་སེལ	exorcism by means of arrows	mda' sel
མདའ་གསང	mda' gsang [mi lus kyi brang khog gyas gyon bar du yod pa'i phug ron gsang sogs,..	mda' gsang
མདའ་གསས	arrow deities	mda' gsas
མདའ་གསིར་པ	whirl an arrow	mda' gsir pa
མདའ་གསུམ་པ	confluence of three valleys	mda' gsum pa
མདའི་མདེའུ	bullet, buzzing arrow	mda'i mde'u
མདིང་ཤིང	spear shaft	mding shing
མདིལ་རྩེ	arrow tip/ head	mdil rtse
མདུང	1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person, dart, harpoon, javelin, spear, lance, pike, 1 of srin po'i rgyal po, stake	mdung
མདུང་བསྐོར	brandish a spear	mdung bskor
མདུང་བསྐོར་བ	brandish a spear, whirl a spear	mdung bskor ba
མདུང་ཁྱིམ	tent using three spears as poles, spear-rack	mdung khyim
མདུང་མཁན	spear/ pike man	mdung mkhan
མདུང་གི་ཡུ་བ	spear handle	mdung gi yu ba
མདུང་རྒྱག	spear	mdung rgyag
མདུང་རྒྱབ	spear, sting	mdung rgyab
མདུང་རྒྱབ་པ	sting	mdung rgyab pa
མདུང་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	stung	mdung rgyab zin pa
མདུང་བརྒྱབ་པ	speared	mdung brgyab pa
མདུང་ཅན	evil spirit	mdung can
མདུང་ཅན་མ	female worshipper of the shakti principle	mdung can ma
མདུང་ཏོག	point of a spear	mdung tog
མདུང་ཐུང	short spear	mdung thung
མདུང་ཐུང་འཛིན	epithet of kartikeya, youngest son of mahadeva	mdung thung 'dzin
མདུང་ཐུང་ལག་ཏུ་ཐོགས	holding a short spear in the hand	mdung thung lag tu thogs
མདུང་ཐོགས	deity dbang phyug chen po	mdung thogs
མདུང་དར	lance with a little flag at the top	mdung dar
མདུང་དོར	(A) rtsed mo'i rgyan 'gyed pa mdung nang bzhin shugs bskyod byed pa - dart	mdung dor
མདུང་པ	spear/ pike man	mdung pa
མདུང་བ	sting, pierce with a spear	mdung ba
མདུང་མ	beam	mdung ma
མདུང་མཙོ	mdung lake [aa mdo rdzong gi lho rgyud]	mdung mtso
མདུང་རྩེ	spearhead, point of a spear / lance	mdung rtse
མདུང་རྩེ་དཀར་པོ	{mdung rtse dkar po} ned. mineral [ro mngar, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rus chag sbyor, klad skyon sel, mig nad bar 'gribs la phan,..	mdung rtse dkar po
མདུང་རྩེ་སྨུག་པོ	{mdung rtse smug po} med. mineral smug nag [bcag tse mdung so ltar dum bur 'gyur ba zhig ste, ro bska, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rus chag sbyor, mig gsal, klad par rmas skyon shor ba sogs la phan,..	mdung rtse smug po
མདུང་རྩེ་གསུམ	trident	mdung rtse gsum
མདུང་རྩེ་གསུམ་པ	epithet of mahadeva, sect of tirthika, 1 of srin po'i rgyal po	mdung rtse gsum pa
མདུང་རྩེའི་སོ	1) blade of a spear-head; 2) yan lag gi rnam gsang piercing tool)	mdung rtse'i so
མདུང་ཚུགས	firmly, fiercely	mdung tshugs
མདུང་ཚུགས་སུ	penetrating(ly)/ piercing(ly)	mdung tshugs su
མདུང་མཚོ	mdung lake	mdung mtsho
མདུང་འཛིན	hornet	mdung 'dzin
མདུང་ཞགས	spear w long rope on the handle	mdung zhags
མདུང་ཟོ་བ	spear maker	mdung zo ba
མདུང་ཟླ་ཚེས་མ	spear w sickle/ crescent shaped tip	mdung zla tshes ma
མདུང་བཟོ་པ	maker of lances	mdung bzo pa
མདུང་ཡུ	shaft of a lance	mdung yu
མདུང་ཤིང	shaft of a lance	mdung shing
མདུད	Syn {mdud pa}	mdud
མདུད་ཁྱིམ	pole tent	mdud khyim
མདུད་དོར་བ	lay a wager	mdud dor ba
མདུད་འདྲ	disease of the membrum virile	mdud 'dra
མདུད་པ	(Tha mi dad pa),, ; 1) [tie a] knot, connection of strands/ nadis; 2) tie together	mdud pa
མདུད་པ་བཀྲོལ་བ	the knot untied	mdud pa bkrol ba
མདུད་པ་འགྲོལ	untie a knot/ bond	mdud pa 'grol
མདུད་པ་རྒྱག་པ	tie a knot	mdud pa rgyag pa
མདུད་པ་རྒྱབ	tied a knot	mdud pa rgyab
མདུད་པ་བརྒྱབ	tie a knot	mdud pa brgyab
མདུད་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	tie a knot	mdud pa brgyab pa
མདུད་པ་ཅན	knotty	mdud pa can
མདུད་པ་བཅད་པ	disconnect	mdud pa bcad pa
མདུད་པ་སྙིང་པ	wealth	mdud pa snying pa
མདུད་པ་ཐེབས་པ	constrict	mdud pa thebs pa
མདུད་པ་མདུད་ནས་མཐུད་པ	tied together w knot following knot	mdud pa mdud nas mthud pa
མདུད་པ་འདེབས་པ	tie a knot	mdud pa 'debs pa
མདུད་པ་བོར	tie a knot	mdud pa bor
མདུད་པ་བོར་བ	tie a knot	mdud pa bor ba
མདུད་པ་མེད	free from knots	mdud pa med
མདུད་པ་ཞིག་པ	self/ naturally untied knot	mdud pa zhig pa
མདུད་པ་བཞི	4 bonds (brnab sems, gnod sems, tshul khrims dang brtun zhugs mchog tu 'dzin pa)	mdud pa bzhi
མདུད་པ་བཤིག	untie a knot/ bond	mdud pa bshig
མདུད་པར་བཟུང	malice	mdud par bzung
མདུད་འཛིན	grasp the knot in a mala	mdud 'dzin
མདུད་རྫོངས	forms of the knots	mdud rdzongs
མདུད་ལོག་རྒྱག་པ	knot that is hard to untie	mdud log rgyag pa
མདུན	presence of, fore-part, front[-side of a thing], vis-a-vis, in the neighborhood of	mdun
ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲོནཏ	side of a thing, the vis-à-vis; in the presence of	the front
མདུན་སྐོར	class of official staff, court	mdun skor
མདུན་སྐོར་གྱིས	turned in front of the body	mdun skor gyis
མདུན་སྐྱེད	production in front of one	mdun skyed
མདུན་སྐྱོད	preliminaries, preparations, going forward, advancing, progressing, improving	mdun skyod
མདུན་སྐྱོད་གླུ	marching songs	mdun skyod glu
མདུན་སྐྱོད་གླུ་གཤས	marching songs	mdun skyod glu gshas
མདུན་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	do preliminaries/ preparations, go forward, advance, progress, improve	mdun skyod byed
མདུན་སྐྱོད་བྱེད་པ	advance, go forward, progress	mdun skyod byed pa
མདུན་སྐྱོད་མི་སྣ	progressives	mdun skyod mi sna
མདུན་བསྐྱེད	front visualization	mdun bskyed
མདུན་བསྐྱོད	preliminaries, preparations, going forward, advancing, progressing, improving	mdun bskyod
མདུན་བསྐྱོད་གླུ་གཤས	marching songs	mdun bskyod glu gshas
མདུན་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	do preliminaries/ preparations, go forward, advance, progress, improve	mdun bskyod byed
མདུན་བསྐྱོད་མི་སྣ	progressives	mdun bskyod mi sna
མདུན་ཁང	(A) place one is	mdun khang
མདུན་མཁར	in the sky in front of me	mdun mkhar
མདུན་འཁོར	aristocracy, waiting servant	mdun 'khor
མདུན་གྱི་སྙིང་གསང	front heart moxibustion point	mdun gyi snying gsang
མདུན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁའ	in the sky/ space before me/ in front	mdun gyi nam mkha'
མདུན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁའ་ལ	in the heavens before him	mdun gyi nam mkha' la
མདུན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁར	in the sky before me	mdun gyi nam mkhar
མདུན་གྱི་གཞི	the field in front of someone	mdun gyi gzhi
མདུན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་དཔའ	the wisdom being before you	mdun gyi ye shes sems dpa'
མདུན་གྱི་ས་སྒར	outpost position	mdun gyi sa sgar
མདུན་གྱི་སོ་པ	reconnaissance soldier, point man, advance guard, spy	mdun gyi so pa
མདུན་གྱོག	servant who says near the master	mdun gyog
མདུན་གྲལ	front line[s],/ row	mdun gral
མདུན་གྲོས	council, assembly	mdun gros
མདུན་བགྱིས	in the presence of an assembly	mdun bgyis
མདུན་འགྱེལ་རྒྱབ་མཐུད	in the front of a battle field fighters shi 'phral du rgyab snon byed mkhan gyis mu mthud nas 'dzing ba	mdun 'gyel rgyab mthud
མདུན་འགྲོའི་དཔུང་དམག	advance party/ patrol, vanguard [military]	mdun 'gro'i dpung dmag
མདུན་འགྲོའི་དམག་མི	advance party/ patrol, vanguard [military]	mdun 'gro'i dmag mi
མདུན་རྒྱབ	front and back	mdun rgyab
མདུན་ངོས	front side	mdun ngos
མདུན་ངོས་སུ	forward, facing in front	mdun ngos su
མདུན་ངོས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	facing towards	mdun ngos su bstan pa
མདུན་ཅོག	table in front of a seat	mdun cog
མདུན་ལྕོག	table in front of deity	mdun lcog
མདུན་ཆབ	prince's garments w hanging	mdun chab
ཨིན་ཕ༹ྲོནཏ་ཏྭོ་རིབབོན	like pieces of brocade	in front two ribbon
མདུན་མཆོང	leap forward, advance, progress	mdun mchong
མདུན་མཆོང་རྒྱག	leap forward, advance, progress	mdun mchong rgyag
མདུན་མཆོང་ཆེན་པོ	Great Leap Forward	mdun mchong chen po
མདུན་མཆོང་བྱེད	leap forward, advance, progress	mdun mchong byed
མདུན་མཆོང་དམག་མི	advance party/ patrol, vanguard [military]	mdun mchong dmag mi
མདུན་ཇུས	conference, consultation	mdun jus
མདུན་འཇོག	offering, present	mdun 'jog
མདུན་ཐང	the ground/ area in front	mdun thang
མདུན་ཐད	in front, in front of oneself	mdun thad
མདུན་ཐབས	1) married couple's livelihood/ householder life]; 2) mistress of the house, wife bride)	mdun thabs
མདུན་དུ	in front of, in the presence of, in the face of, via/ through [kho'i mdun du yio ga gtong rogs: please send a letter w him]	mdun du
མདུན་དུ་སྐྱོད	do preliminaries/ preparations, go forward, advance, progress, improve	mdun du skyod
མདུན་དུ་བསྐྱོད	do preliminaries/ preparations, go forward, advance, progress, improve	mdun du bskyod
མདུན་དུ་དགྲམ	place before you	mdun du dgram
མདུན་དུ་འགྲོ	do preliminaries/ preparations, go forward, advance, progress, improve	mdun du 'gro
མདུན་དུ་བཅར	go in the presence of	mdun du bcar
མདུན་དུ་མཆོང་བ	lunge	mdun du mchong ba
མདུན་དུ་བསྙུར་བ	move forward, move toward oneself	mdun du bsnyur ba
མདུན་དུ་འཐེན་པ	pull towards	mdun du 'then pa
མདུན་དུ་སྡོད	be confronted/ faced w	mdun du sdod
མདུན་དུ་བསྡར	hope, expect or wait for a favor	mdun du bsdar
མདུན་དུ་གནས་པ	abide in front	mdun du gnas pa
མདུན་དུ་བསྣུར་བ	move forward, towards oneself	mdun du bsnur ba
མདུན་དུ་བོས་པ	called [me] into his presence	mdun du bos pa
མདུན་དུ་བྱས་པའི་དགེ་བ	dge ba mchog gsum gyi rten mdun du byas te make offering/ puja, virtue by being done in a (holy) presence	mdun du byas pa'i dge ba
མདུན་དུ་བྱས་པའི་མི་དགེ་བ	{'tshe ba'am lta ngan gyi sgo nas lha rten byed cing mchod sbyin ngan pa byed pa mdun du byas pa'i mi dge ba} 'Nonvirtues done in a presence' are, based on hostility or an unwholesome view, to take...	mdun du byas pa'i mi dge ba
མདུན་དུ་བྱས་པའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{'tshe ba'am lta ngan ma yin pa'i lha'i rten gang rung byed pa dang, der skye bo rnams la bsod nams dang bsod nams min pa mi skye bar rang ga ba'i las byed pa'o,} 'Indeterminates done in a presence...	mdun du byas pa'i lung ma bstan
མདུན་དུ་བྱས་པས་དགེ་བ	{mchog gsum gyi rten mdun du byas te mchod pa byed pa} 'Virtues done in a presence' are [for instance] to make offerings in 1388 the presence of a representation of the Three Jewels.	mdun du byas pas dge ba
མདུན་དུ་བྱོན	went there to meet him	mdun du byon
མདུན་དུ་བྱོན་པ	came before him	mdun du byon pa
མདུན་དུ་འབོད	calls to the presence	mdun du 'bod
མདུན་དུ་དམིགས	to visualize in front of oneself	mdun du dmigs
མདུན་དུ་ལྷགས	be confronted/ faced w	mdun du lhags
མདུན་དྲུང་གི	in front of	mdun drung gi
མདུན་དྲུང་དུ	in front of	mdun drung du
མདུན་དྲུང་དུ་བསླེབས	to arrive in front of	mdun drung du bslebs
མདུན་བདར	in the presence of an assembly	mdun bdar
མདུན་བདར་དཔུང་དམག	advance party/ patrol, vanguard [military]	mdun bdar dpung dmag
མདུན་བདར་དམག་མི	advance party/ patrol, vanguard [military]	mdun bdar dmag mi
མདུན་མདུན་དུ	forefront, very front, frontier	mdun mdun du
མདུན་ལྡབ	in Tibetan opera /lha mo 'khrab a step to the front	mdun ldab
མདུན་ན	in front, before, ahead	mdun na
མདུན་ན་འདོན	minister, magistrate, judge, high functionary	mdun na 'don
མདུན་ན་མོ	close retinue, personal attendant	mdun na mo
མདུན་ནས	in front of	mdun nas
མདུན་ནས་ཁྲིད	pull me from ahead	mdun nas khrid
མདུན་ནས་བསུ་བ	anticipate, receive, welcome, invite	mdun nas bsu ba
མདུན་ནས་བསུས	; x {'jigs pa'i mun nag gis mdun nas bsus} in front a terrifying black darkness rushes toward you	mdun nas bsus
མདུན་སྣེ	front tip	mdun sne
མདུན་ཕྱོགས	facing, fore	mdun phyogs
མདུན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	anterior	mdun phyogs kyi
མདུན་ཕྱོགས་འགྲོ་བ	forge	mdun phyogs 'gro ba
མདུན་ཕྱོགས་སུ	in front of	mdun phyogs su
མདུན་བྱུས	conference, consultation	mdun byus
མདུན་མ	wife, things, concerns	mdun ma
མདུན་མ་གླེང་བ	discuss, converse	mdun ma gleng ba
མདུན་ཟུར	front corner	mdun zur
མདུན་ཡིག	secretary	mdun yig
ཧེཨད	dress, turquoise that a tibetan woman wears on her forehead	head
མདུན་རི	mt in front	mdun ri
མདུན་རོལ	front side	mdun rol
མདུན་རོལ་ན	in front of	mdun rol na
མདུན་ལ	before forth, in front, before, ahead	mdun la
མདུན་ལ་འཁྱོག་པ	bent forward	mdun la 'khyog pa
མདུན་ལམ	1) road in front; 2) future situation	mdun lam
མདུན་ལེགས	good frontage	mdun legs
མདུན་ལོགས	foreside, front side	mdun logs
མདུན་ཤོག	1) yi ge'i deb kyi mdun ngos phyogs; 2) pecha's shog ldeb kyi front side)	mdun shog
མདུན་ས	society, committee, association	mdun sa
མདུན་ས་བཤུགས་པ	sit in committee	mdun sa bshugs pa
མདུན་སར	in the presence of	mdun sar
མདུན་སར་བཞུགས་པ	sit in committee	mdun sar bzhugs pa
མདུན་སོ	1) front teeth; 2) punishment inflicted by court/ king)	mdun so
མདུན་སྲུང	guard in one's presence/ in front of one	mdun srung
མདུན་བསུ	anticipating, receive, reception, welcome, invite	mdun bsu
མདུན་བསུ་བ	to entertain x {ma 'ongs pa nyon mongs kyi mdun bsu ba} to entertain emotions about the future	mdun bsu ba
མདུན་བསུས	advanced to receive a party	mdun bsus
མདུར	cantor	mdur
མདེའུ	arrowhead, bullet, pebble, pill, pellet; arrowhead; bullet; pebble, pill, pellet	mde'u
མདེའུ་སྒམ	ammunition box	mde'u sgam
མདེའུ་དམ	gun belt, cartridge case	mde'u dam
མདེའུ་བྱིའུ་སྙིང་མ	arrowhead shape	mde'u byi'u snying ma
མདེའུ་ཟུར་བཞི་པ	arrow with 4-bladed head	mde'u zur bzhi pa
མདེའུ་ཟུར་བཞི་མ	four sided arrowhead shape	mde'u zur bzhi ma
མདེའུ་གསོར	carpenter's tool gsor	mde'u gsor
མདེའུ་བསེར	see if arrow is crooked or not	mde'u bser
མདེལ	bullet, shell	mdel
མདེལ་ཁུག	quiver	mdel khug
མདེལ་འཁོར་ཆུང་བ	revolver	mdel 'khor chung ba
མདེལ་འགོག་ས་དང	trench, bunker [military]	mdel 'gog sa dang
མདེལ་ཆར	rain of bullets, strafing	mdel char
མདེལ་ཐུབ	bullet-proof	mdel thub
མདེལ་ཐུབ་རླངས་འཁོར	bullet-proof car	mdel thub rlangs 'khor
མདེལ་པར	Tibetan gun's mdel ril lugs rgya sa'i par	mdel par
མདེལ་རིལ	quiver zha nyes bzos pa'i mde'u ril	mdel ril
མདེལ་ལམ	trajectory [of a bullet]	mdel lam
མདེལ་ཤུགས	firepower	mdel shugs
མདེལ་ཤུགས་དྲ་བ	cross-fire, barrage	mdel shugs dra ba
མདེལ་ཤུགས་འཛོམས་ས	point at which firepower is concentrated	mdel shugs 'dzoms sa
མདེལ་ཤུབས	quiver	mdel shubs
ཅྲོསསིང	place/ confluence, crossroads, junction; 3) in summary, briefly, abbreviated point; 4) discourse, * [summarizing many topics]; 5) prudence (6) credibility (7) house etc. kyi phyi'am mda'a, inside a...	crossing
མདོ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	compendium of the sutras	mdo kun las btus pa
མདོ་དཀོན་མཆོག་བརྩེགས་པ	Jewel Mound Sutra	mdo dkon mchog brtsegs pa
མདོ་ཁ	summary, essence of the words	mdo kha
མདོ་ཁམས	eastern tibet, amdo province, East Tibet	mdo khams
མདོ་ཁམས་སྒང་དྲུག	smad mdo khams sgang drug	mdo khams sgang drug
མདོ་ཁམས་པ་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	{khams sprul} vi, 1849-1907	mdo khams pa bstan pa'i nyi ma
མདོ་ཁམས་དམད་ནས	in Lower Kham	mdo khams dmad nas
མདོ་ཁམས་སྨད	Domey	mdo khams smad
མདོ་ཁམས་སྨད་ནས	Domey	mdo khams smad nas
མདོ་ཁམས་གསུམ	chn	mdo khams gsum
མདོ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	DoKhyentse Yeshe Dorje	mdo mkhyen brtse ye shes rdo rje
མདོ་དགེ་རྒྱས	Sutra on the Furtherance of Virtue	mdo dge rgyas
མདོ་དགེ་འདུན	sngar lha ldan smon lam skabs gdan sa gsum gyi sgrig khongs la dngos su ma 'dzul ba'i tshogs khang gi mdo na bzhugs pa'i btsun gral	mdo dge 'dun
མདོ་དགོངས་འགྲེལ	commentaries on the sutras	mdo dgongs 'grel
མདོ་དགོངས་པ་ངེས་འགྲེལ	Sutra of the Definitive Explanation of the Intent [thd]	mdo dgongs pa nges 'grel
སམདྷིནིརྨོཅན	sutra	Samdhinirmocana
མདོ་དགོངས་པ་ངེས་པར་འགྲེལ་པ	commentary of the true intention of the sutras	mdo dgongs pa nges par 'grel pa
མདོ་དགོངས་པ་འདུས་པ	1) summary of the meaning of the sutras; 2) de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi thugs gsang ba'i ye shes don gyi snying po rdo rje bkod pa'i rgyud rnal 'byor grub pa'i	mdo dgongs pa 'dus pa
མདོ་འགག	1) house's bar khyams = colonnade, porch foyer etc; 2) confluence of roads, streams etc.; 3) essential (/ summarized meaning)	mdo 'gag
མདོ་འགགས	condensed/ concentrated/ an abridgement	mdo 'gags
མདོ་རྒྱན	ornament for the Mahayana Sutra	mdo rgyan
མདོ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དམ་པ	Sutra of the Sublime Victory Banner	mdo rgyal mtshan dam pa
མདོ་རྒྱུད	Sutra and Tantra. Sutra refers to the teachings of both Hinayana and Mahayana. Tantra refers to Vajrayana. Sutra means taking the cause as path. Tantra means taking the result as path	mdo rgyud
མདོ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ས་ལམ	the bh mis and paths of the sutras and tantras	mdo rgyud kyi sa lam
མདོ་རྒྱུད་དགོངས་པ	meaning of the sutras and tantras	mdo rgyud dgongs pa
མདོ་རྒྱུད་ཉེར་གཅིག	the 21 sutras and tanttras [za ma tog bkod pa dang - pad ma snying po'i mdo, zhal bcu gcig pa'i mdo, bcu gcig zhal gyi gzungs, don yod zhags pa, don zhags phyi ma, pad ma mchog dbang bsgyur 'khor l...	mdo rgyud nyer gcig
མདོ་རྒྱུད་བསྟན་བཅོས	sutras, tantras, and commentaries	mdo rgyud bstan bcos
མདོ་རྒྱུད་བསྟན་པ	explanations of sutra & tantra, 1 of 3 bka' drin	mdo rgyud bstan pa
མདོ་རྒྱུད་ཐམས་ཅད་ནས	all sutras and tantras	mdo rgyud thams cad nas
མདོ་རྒྱུད་ནས་བཤད་པ	described in the sutras and tantras	mdo rgyud nas bshad pa
མདོ་རྒྱུད་མན་ངག	sutra, tantra and pith instructions	mdo rgyud man ngag
མདོ་རྒྱུད་མན་ངག་གསུམ	sutras, tantras and oral instructions	mdo rgyud man ngag gsum
མདོ་རྒྱུད་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཛོད	Precious Treasury of Sutra and Tantra, by Chöying Topden Dorje	mdo rgyud rin po che'i mdzod
མདོ་རྒྱུད་སེམས་གསུམ	sutra (of anu yoga), tantra (mah yoga), and mind (section of ati yoga)	mdo rgyud sems gsum
མདོ་སྒྱུ་སེམས་གསུམ	1) sutra, illusion, and mind; 2) the mdo dgongs pa 'dus pa; rgyud sgyu 'phrul drva ba, dpal gsang ba snying po, and the sems mdo bco brgyad	mdo sgyu sems gsum
མདོ་སྒྲོག་པ	read the buddhas teachings	mdo sgrog pa
མདོ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ	Sutra of Prajnaparamita in Eight Thousand Verses	mdo brgyad stong pa
མདོ་སྔགས	Sutra and Mantra. Sutra refers to the teachings of both Hinayana and Mahayana. Mantra refers to Vajrayana. Sutra means taking the cause as path. Tantra means taking the result as path	mdo sngags
མདོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	the four distinctions between sutra and mantra chn	mdo sngags kyi khyad par bzhi
མདོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གྲྭ་ཚང	monastic college of s tra and tantra	mdo sngags kyi grwa tshang
མདོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	the texts/ traditions of s tra (and mantra)	mdo sngags kyi gzhung
མདོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལུགས	sutra and tantra traditions	mdo sngags kyi lugs
མདོ་སྔགས་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	bod sprul (1907-1959) - bod pa sprul sku	mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyi ma
མདོ་སྔགས་བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ	{'khrul zhig} 1923 or 4-; 'khrul zhig, 1923 or 4	mdo sngags bstan 'dzin nor bu
མདོ་སྔགས་གནད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	essential instructions of the sutras and tantras	mdo sngags gnad kyi gdams pa
མདོ་སྔགས་རྣམས	monks and tantrikas	mdo sngags rnams
མདོ་སྔགས་མཛོད	Treasury of Sutra and Tantra, by Chöying Topden Dorje	mdo sngags mdzod
མདོ་སྔོབ	benediction to the host for his entertainment	mdo sngob
མདོ་ཅན	prudent	mdo can
མདོ་ཆིངས	summary, brief outline	mdo chings
མདོ་ཆུ	mdo river	mdo chu
མདོ་ཆེན	director, head, chief mdo chen po kun tu rgyu ba dang kun tu rgyu ba ma yin pa dang mthun pa'i	mdo chen
བ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	{mdo chen po gzugs can snying bos bsu ba zhes bya ba}	ba zhes bya ba
མདོ་སྙིང	summary, main points, essence	mdo snying
མདོ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་དམ་པ	Sutra of the Sacred Absorption [thd]	mdo ting nge 'dzin dam pa
མདོ་ཏིང་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	Sutra of King-like Concentration; Samadhiraja-sutra	mdo ting 'dzin rgyal po
མདོ་བཏུས	abridgement	mdo btus
མདོ་སྟོད	1) the Khams region, the Amdo region	mdo stod
མདོ་མཐིང	mineral green, malachite	mdo mthing
མདོ་དང་ཆོས་མངོན་འདུལ་བ	sutra abhidharma and vinaya	mdo dang chos mngon 'dul ba
མདོ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས	sutras and treatises	mdo dang bstan bcos
མདོ་དང་དམ་པའི་གསུང	the sutras and the instructions of the past sages	mdo dang dam pa'i gsung
མདོ་དང་མདུད	valleys or hills	mdo dang mdud
མདོ་དར་མ	a kind of music	mdo dar ma
མདོ་དོན	fundamental meaning	mdo don
མདོ་དོན་ཆེ་ཆུང	that which is important and that which is not; what is truly important	mdo don che chung
མདོ་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	fundamental point	mdo don snying po
མདོ་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག	dran nyer - Sutra on the Application of Mindfulness	mdo dran pa nyer bzhag
མདོ་མདུད	unifying principle [?]	mdo mdud
མདོ་སྡུད་པ	abridgement, summary	mdo sdud pa
མདོ་སྡེ	"sets of discourses", the s tras, sutra, collection of s tras, kangyur	mdo sde
མདོ་སྡེ་དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྲིན	The Cloud of Jewels Sutra	mdo sde dkon mchog sprin
མདོ་སྡེ་བསྐལ་བཟང	Sutra of the Good Aeon	mdo sde bskal bzang
མདོ་སྡེ་ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་བྱས་པ	recitation of the sutras; recite sutras mdo sde gang dag 'bras bu la 'jug pa'i phyir bstan pa nges pa'i don bcu gsum - chn	mdo sde kha ton du byas pa
མདོ་སྡེ་དགོངས་པ	early mahayana sutra followed by asanga and vasubandhu	mdo sde dgongs pa
མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན	Ornament of the Sutras	mdo sde rgyan
མ	Asanga, 4th century	Maitreya
མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	Commentary on the Ornament of the Sutras, by Stiramati, (T 4034)	mdo sde rgyan gyi 'grel bshad
མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་གྱི་བཤད་པ	S tr la k rabh sya mdo sde rgyan gyi bshad pa [Suutraalamkaara-bhaasya] one of the {pra ka ra na sde brgyad} the eight Prakarana of Vasubhandhu	mdo sde rgyan gyi bshad pa
མདོ་སྡེ་མཆོད་པ	Sutra Offering	mdo sde mchod pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ཐར་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Sutra of Great Liberation mdo sde dang 'dul ba dang chos mngon	mdo sde thar pa chen po
མདོ་སྡེ་རྣམས	sautrantikas	mdo sde rnams
མདོ་སྡེ་པ	Traditionist	mdo sde pa
མདོ་སྡེ་པད་དཀར	White Lotus Sutra	mdo sde pad dkar
མདོ་སྡེ་པའི་གཞུང	the texts/ tradition of the Sautrantikas	mdo sde pa'i gzhung
མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ	Sautrantika Madhyamaka; {gzhan ngor phyi rol gyi don tha snyad tsam du khas len pa rags pa phyi'i dbu ma pa} tha snyad du phyi rol gyi don yod par 'dod pa ste legs ldan 'byed sogs so	mdo sde spyod pa'i dbu ma
མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་པ	sautrantika madhyamika	mdo sde spyod pa'i dbu ma pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	sutra tradition of the paramitas	mdo sde pha rol tu phyin pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ཕར་ཕྱིན	sutra tradition of the paramitas	mdo sde phar phyin
མདོ་སྡེ་བྲག	dodeda monastery in Bhutan	mdo sde brag
མདོ་སྡེ་འབུམ་ཕྲག་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པ	not teach the 100,000 sutras, teach the many 100,000's of sutras mdo sde sbyod pa'i dbu ma rang rgyud	mdo sde 'bum phrag du ma bstan pa
མདོ་སྡེ་སྨྲ་བ	Sautrantikas	mdo sde smra ba
མདོ་སྡེ་ཟ་མ་ཏོག་བཀོད་པ	the Sutra Designed like a Jewel Chest	mdo sde za ma tog bkod pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ཟ་མ་ཏོག་གི་སྙིང་པོ	bod rje tho tho ri gnyan btsan gyi thugs dam gnyan po gsang bar grags pa'i nang tshan bod la thog mar byung ba'i mdo sde zhig thu mis bod yig gsar gtod byas rjes gzhi nas bod yig tu bsgyur	mdo sde za ma tog gi snying po
མདོ་སྡེ་ཟབ་མོ	profound sutras	mdo sde zab mo
མདོ་སྡེ་ལ་སོགས་པ	the sutras and so forth	mdo sde la sogs pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ལང་ཀར་གཤེགས་པ	the Lankavatara S tra	mdo sde lang kar gshegs pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ལས་བརྒྱ་པ	karmasataku sutra	mdo sde las brgya pa
མདོ་སྡེ་ལས་བརྒྱ་བ	Sutra on the Many Kinds of Actions	mdo sde las brgya ba
མདོ་སྡེ་ལུང་སྡེ་བཞི	lung gcig las 'phros pa dang, bar ma, ring mo, phran tshogs te bzhi	mdo sde lung sde bzhi
མདོ་སྡེ་ས་བཅུ	sutra of the ten bhumis	mdo sde sa bcu
མདོ་སྡེ་ས་བཅུ་པ	dasa bhumika sutra	mdo sde sa bcu pa
མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན	Mah yana-S trala kara by Maitreya	mdo sde'i rgyan
མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན་གྱི་བཤད	explanation of	mdo sde'i rgyan gyi bshad
ཐེ་མཧ་ཡན	S trala kara	the Mah yana
མདོ་སྡེའི་རྒྱན་གྱི་བཤད་པ	Explanation on the Ornament of the Sutras, by Vasubandhu (T 4026)	mdo sde'i rgyan gyi bshad pa
མདོ་སྡེའི་མཆོད་པ	by king mu ne btsan po at Samye btsugs pa'i dus mchod chen po zhig	mdo sde'i mchod pa
མདོ་སྡེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པ	followers of scripture	mdo sde'i rjes su 'brangs pa
མདོ་སྡེའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	S tra-pi aka, "collection of discourses," [one of the {sde snod gsum} (tserig) lhag pa ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab pa gtso bor ston pa, gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis kyi nang nas mdo'i sde dang, dbyangs...	mdo sde'i sde snod
མདོ་སྡེའི་དབུ་མ	Sautrantikamadhyamaka	mdo sde'i dbu ma
མདོ་སྡོང་པོ་བཀོད་པ	Sutra Arrayed Like a Tree	mdo sdong po bkod pa
མདོ་བསྡུས་པ	abbreviated/ summary of the main point TSE	mdo bsdus pa
མདོ་ན	at the lower end of the valley	mdo na
མདོ་རྣམས་སུ	in all the sutras	mdo rnams su
མདོ་པ	Dopa, in Domey	mdo pa
མདོ་སྤྱི	Tibetan govt administrator of Khams [& Amdo]	mdo spyi
མདོ་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ	Avatamsaka Sutra	mdo phal po che
མདོ་ཕྱོགས	the sutra side / point of view	mdo phyogs
མདོ་ཕྲུག	steed, street-wise kid	mdo phrug
ཀིད་ཝཧོ་ཨིས་སྟྲེཨེཏ	wise VCTR	kid who is street
མདོ་བ	excellent horse	mdo ba
མདོ་བོ་ལུང	valley	mdo bo lung
མདོ་སྦུག	house's/rooms' interior and exterior	mdo sbug
མདོ་མང	collection of religious works	mdo mang
མདོ་མང་ལྕགས	carved iron, lit. "many junctions iron": hooks, buckles, ornaments	mdo mang lcags
མདོ་མི་དམའ་བ	of no mean ability	mdo mi dma' ba
མདོ་མེད	imprudent, fickle-minded, thoughtless, gullible	mdo med
མདོ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	maha parinirvana sutra	mdo mya ngan las 'das pa chen po
མདོ་མྱང་འདས	irvana Sutra	mdo myang 'das
མདོ་མྱང་འདས་ཆེན་པོ	Sutra of the Great Transcendence of Suffering [thd]	mdo myang 'das chen po
མདོ་སྨད	Domey, another name for Amdo	mdo smad
མདོ་སྨད་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ	Tashi Kyil monastery in Domey	mdo smad bkra shis 'khyil
མདོ་སྨད་ཆོས་འབྱུང	mdo smad chos 'byung deb ther rgya mtsho zhes bya ba,	mdo smad chos 'byung
མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	Tibetan govt administrator of Khams [& Amdo]	mdo smad spyi khyab
མདོ་སྨད་དབུས་གཙང	Domey, U, and Tsang	mdo smad dbus gtsang
མདོ་སྨད་ཚོ་ཆེན་ཞེ་དགུ	forty-nine tribes of Domey mdo smad g.yer mo thang - Yermo Thang in Domey, one of the Three Ranges of Dokham	mdo smad tsho chen zhe dgu
མདོ་ཙམ	short in brief	mdo tsam
མདོ་ཙམ་བརྗོད	say briefly	mdo tsam brjod
མདོ་ཙམ་བརྗོད་པ	say briefly	mdo tsam brjod pa
མདོ་ཙམ་བསྟན	teach briefly	mdo tsam bstan
མདོ་ཙམ་བསྟན་ན	in short, to speak briefly	mdo tsam bstan na
མདོ་ཙམ་བསྟན་པ	teach briefly	mdo tsam bstan pa
མདོ་ཙམ་སྡུ་བ	contract, abridge, epitomize, give only the main points	mdo tsam sdu ba
མདོ་ཙམ་སྨོས	speak briefly	mdo tsam smos
མདོ་ཙམ་སྨོས་ན	in short, to speak briefly	mdo tsam smos na
མདོ་ཙམ་སྨྲ	speak briefly	mdo tsam smra
མདོ་ཙམ་སྨྲ་ན	in short, to speak briefly	mdo tsam smra na
མདོ་ཙམ་ཞུས	speak briefly	mdo tsam zhus
མདོ་ཙམ་ཞུས་ན	in short, to speak briefly	mdo tsam zhus na
མདོ་ཙམ་བཤད་ན	to speak/ explain briefly	mdo tsam bshad na
མདོ་ཙམ་གསུང	speak/ explain/ tell briefly	mdo tsam gsung
མདོ་ཙམ་གསུང་ན	to speak/ explain/ tell briefly	mdo tsam gsung na
མདོ་རྩའི་འགྲེལ་ཆེན	Mikyö Dorje's Great Commentary on the Summary of Discipline	mdo rtsa'i 'grel chen
མདོ་འཛིན	counter beads of a mala	mdo 'dzin
མདོ་འཛིན་པ	carpenter, stage manager	mdo 'dzin pa
མདོ་རྫི	wind blowing at open places where rivers meet	mdo rdzi
མདོ་གཞེར་སྤྲེལ་ཆུང	Dosher Trelchung. A minister of King Trisong Deutsen; also spelled Dershey Trelchung (sder bzhed sprel chung)	mdo gzher sprel chung
མདོ་བཞི་སྡོམ་དང་ལྔ	Four Scriptures and the Summation. The major scriptures of Anu Yoga. Listed in Chapter 12	mdo bzhi sdom dang lnga
མདོ་བཞིན་དུ	in harmony w the sutras	mdo bzhin du
མདོ་བཞིན་དུ་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས	follow[ers of] the sutras	mdo bzhin du rjes su 'brangs
མདོ་འི་སྡེ	general teachings [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} twelve divisions of the teachings)	mdo 'i sde
མདོ་ཡི་སྡེ་སྣོད	Sutra Pitaka	mdo yi sde snod
མདོ་ཡི་སྡེ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharma of the sutras and so forth mdo g.yas g.yon - on either side of the valley	mdo yi sde la sogs pa'i chos
མདོ་རུ	contract, abridge, epitomize, give only the main points	mdo ru
མདོ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharma of the sutras and so on	mdo la sogs pa'i chos
མདོ་ལམ	sutra teachings, according to the teachings of the sutras	mdo lam
མདོ་ལས	the sutras say:	mdo las
མདོ་ལས་ཀྱང	the sutras say: (introduces a quote)	mdo las kyang
མདོ་ལས་ཀྱང་ཞེས་གསུངས	As one of the sutras says:	mdo las kyang zhes gsungs
མདོ་ལས་ཇི་སྐད་འབྱུང་བ་བཞིན	according to the sutra	mdo las ji skad 'byung ba bzhin
མདོ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་མཆོད་རྫས་བཅུ	the 10 offering substances occurring in the sutras chn mdo las byung ba'i ming gi rnam grangs	mdo las byung ba'i mchod rdzas bcu
མདོ་ལས་མོས་པའི་ཕན་ཡོན་ལྔ	the five benefits of devotion described in the sutras chn	mdo las mos pa'i phan yon lnga
མདོ་ལས་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ	you should understand from the sutras	mdo las shes par bya'o
མདོ་ལས་གསུངས	the sutras say	mdo las gsungs
མདོ་ལི	sedan chair, conveyance for carrying sick people	mdo li
མདོ་ལུགས	Sutra system	mdo lugs
མདོ་ལུང	elevated teaching?, message	mdo lung
མདོ་ལུང་ལྔ	five scriptures and transmissions of anuyoga	mdo lung lnga
མདོ་ལེ	sedan-chair	mdo le
མདོ་ལོན་ཞུ་བཅད་ཀྱི་ཁྲིམས	{mdo lon zhu bcad kyi khrims} [srong btsan sgam pos bod du lag bstar byas pa'i khrims yig cig ste bden rdzun dbye 'byed skabs kha drag zhan gnyis rtsod na drag pa mi skyengs shing zhan pa yi mi 'ch...	mdo lon zhu bcad kyi khrims
མདོ་ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་པོ	Skt. Prajnaparamita hridaya, T. 21	mdo shes rab snying po
མདོ་སེམས་ཐུན་མོང་བ	common to both Sautrantika and Chittamatra [ggd]	mdo sems thun mong ba
མདོ་སོགས་རྣམ་པའི་བྱེ་བྲག	particular aspects of the sutras and so forth mdo sogs la zhugs pa'i 'gyod pa zlog pa eliminate the repentance abiding in the s tras and so forth GD	mdo sogs rnam pa'i bye brag
མདོ་གསུམ	bifurcation, split, divergence; {kha brag, gsum mdo kha}	mdo gsum
མདོ་གསུམ་པ	confluence of three valleys	mdo gsum pa
མདོག	color, cast, appearance; pretense; color; 1) color. 2) appearance, cast, looks 3) to pretend act like 4) kha po, seems like, appears to be	mdog
མདོག་དཀར	white color	mdog dkar
མདོག་དཀར་པོ	fair	mdog dkar po
མདོག་དཀར་པོ་བཟོ་བ	bleach	mdog dkar po bzo ba
མདོག་སྐྱ་ཞིང་ལུས་རིད་པར་གྱུར	became thin and wan	mdog skya zhing lus rid par gyur
མདོག་སྐྱོ	poor color, poor complexion	mdog skyo
མདོག་ཁ	color	mdog kha
མདོག་ཁ་པོ	1) [after a verb] mostly finished; 2) [after Khyad chos] similar / alike, looks like [a/ it will] -- [char gtong kha po 'dug: it looks like it will rain]	mdog kha po
མདོག་ཁ་མོ	1) [after a verb] mostly finished; 2) [after Khyad chos] similar/ alike, looks like [a/ it will] --	mdog kha mo
མདོག་ཁྲ་ཤིག་གེ་བ	color flashing/ gleaming [esp w op effect like tiger stripes or leopard spots]	mdog khra shig ge ba
མདོག་འགྱུར	natural change of color	mdog 'gyur
མདོག་སྒྱུར	change color, dye	mdog sgyur
མདོག་བསྒྱུར	change the complexion or color, to change color	mdog bsgyur
མདོག་ངན་པ	bad complexion, ugly	mdog ngan pa
མདོག་ལྔ་པ	{mdog lnga pa}	mdog lnga pa
མདོག་ཅན	white sandalwood, having a fair complexion	mdog can
མདོག་ཅན་ལྕགས་བཞུ	non-ferrous metallurgy	mdog can lcags bzhu
མདོག་ཅན་ལྕགས་རིགས	non-ferrous metals	mdog can lcags rigs
མདོག་ཅན་མི་རིགས	colored/ non-white races	mdog can mi rigs
མདོག་ཅན་མིའི་རིགས	colored/ non-white races	mdog can mi'i rigs
མདོག་ཅན་མིའི་རིགས་རྒྱུད	colored/ nonwhite races 1393	mdog can mi'i rigs rgyud
མདོག་གཅིག་པ	1) the same color; 2) raven)	mdog gcig pa
མདོག་ཉམས་པ	bkrag mdangs yal ba,...Lto skya gos hral gyis mdog nyams par gyur pa	mdog nyams pa
མདོག་ཉིས་པོ	ugly	mdog nyis po
མདོག་ཉེས	ugly [colored] tshon [kha] ma legs pa	mdog nyes
མདོག་ཉེས་པོ	ugly	mdog nyes po
མདོག་མཉམ་པ	of uniform or same color	mdog mnyam pa
མདོག་མདོག	"pretend" particle mdog mdog bcos pa'i tshul lam khul someone who does not know pretending to know	mdog mdog
མདོག་འདྲ་བ	of uniform or same color	mdog 'dra ba
མདོག་ལྡན	1) herb; 2) gold)	mdog ldan
མདོག་ནག	dark	mdog nag
མདོག་ནག་ལྕགས་རིགས	black metals	mdog nag lcags rigs
མདོག་སྣུམ	glossy	mdog snum
མདོག་སྣུམས	glossy complexion	mdog snums
མདོག་བུ་པ	a raven	mdog bu pa
མདོག་སྦྱིན	species of sandalwood	mdog sbyin
མདོག་མ་བསྒྱུར་བ	do not alter their colors	mdog ma bsgyur ba
མདོག་མ་བྱེད	don't pretend to --	mdog ma byed
མདོག་མི་སྡུག་པ	be ugly [skin]	mdog mi sdug pa
མདོག་མེད	colorless	mdog med
མདོག་མེད་སྐྱེས	hemp, marijuana	mdog med skyes
མདོག་དམར	red color	mdog dmar
མདོག་མཚུངས་པ	uniform color, same color	mdog mtshungs pa
མདོག་མཛེས	beautiful color	mdog mdzes
མདོག་མཛེས་མེ་ཏོག	beautifully colored flower	mdog mdzes me tog
མདོག་ལེགས	beautiful color	mdog legs
མདོག་ཤོར	lose color, fade mdog shor yong	mdog shor
མདོག་གསལ	species of gall, complexion clearing bile	mdog gsal
མདོག་གསལ་མཁྲིས་པ	{mdog gsal mkhris pa} disease [rtsa ba'i mkhris pa lnga'i ya gyal, pags la gnas pa zhig, byed las lus kyi pags pa'i mdog gsal zhing dang bar byed pa yin	mdog gsal mkhris pa
མདོག་གསལ་ནད	mdog gsal disease	mdog gsal nad
མདོག་གསེར	gold, golden color	mdog gser
མདོང་མ	lay robe / dress	mdong ma
མདོང་མོ	churn [tea milk etc stirring / churning vessel]	mdong mo
མདོང་དམར་པོ་ཆགས་པ	to blush	mdong dmar po chags pa
མདོང་གསོལ	(A)/; 1) ngo dga' byed pa [flatter/ be polite]; 2) straightforward talk	mdong gsol
མདོངས	star, blaze, appearance, form of the face, white spot, blaze, star on the forehead of a horse or cow, eye in peacock's feather, SA mdangs	mdongs
མདོངས་ཅན	animal w blaze on forehead	mdongs can
མདོངས་མཐའ་ཅན	peacock	mdongs mtha' can
མདོངས་ལྡན	peacock	mdongs ldan
མདོངས་པ	1) blind. 2) forehead	mdongs pa
མདོངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	get blind, be made blind	mdongs par 'gyur ba
མདོངས་སེལ་བ	star ri byi	mdongs sel ba
མདོངས་གསོལ	mdong gsol	mdongs gsol
མདོངས་གསོལ་བ	very bright, resplendent, refulgent, make a prayer before the image of a deity, congratulate, wish joy to another mdod ma'i sangs rgyas kun tu bzang po Adi/ primordial buddha Samantabhadra	mdongs gsol ba
མདོན་པ	mdon mthod	mdon pa
མདོམ	measure equal to 6 feet	mdom
མདོམས	measure equal to 6 feet	mdoms
མདོམས་ཀྱི་སྦ་བ	private parts	mdoms kyi sba ba
མདོམས་ཀྱི་སྦ་བ་སྦུབས་སུ་ནུབ་པ	private parts hidden in a sheath	mdoms kyi sba ba sbubs su nub pa
མདོའི་ཆུ་བབས་བཞི་རྫོགས	four rivers of the s tra which gathers all intentions [see four great rivers of the transmitted precepts) (gd-mk)	mdo'i chu babs bzhi rdzogs
མདོའི་ཐེག་པ	Sutrayana	mdo'i theg pa
མདོའི་སྡེ	s tra, the s tras [1st of gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis, for the same of taming students rgyas bsdus bcad lhug ci rigs kyi sgo nas sutras teaching vari- ous topics collected in the hinayana S tra Pi aka	mdo'i sde
མདོའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	S tra pitaka GD	mdo'i sde snod
མདོའི་སྡེ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharma of the s tras so forth	mdo'i sde la sogs pa'i chos
མདོའི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	Sutra Mahamudra. The Mahamudra system based on the prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing shamatha and vipashyana and the progressive journey through the five paths and ten bodhisattva bhumis	mdo'i phyag chen
མདོར	joined	mdor
མདོར་བསྟན	summary, synopsis; briefly stated; brief explanation; summary, synopsis, briefly stated, brief explanation	mdor bstan
མདོར་བསྟན་པ	explain in brief	mdor bstan pa
མདོར་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན	is briefly presented mdor bstan tsam zhus pa yin} -}	mdor bstan pa yin
མདོར་སྡུད	abbreviate, summarize, abridge	mdor sdud
མདོར་བསྡུ	subsumed	mdor bsdu
མདོར་བསྡུ་ཏེ	concisely, abridged	mdor bsdu te
མདོར་བསྡུ་ན	could be condensed into	mdor bsdu na
མདོར་བསྡུ་བ	abridge, summarize	mdor bsdu ba
མདོར་བསྡུས	condensed form, abridgment, briefly, collectively, abbreviation, curt, brevity, brief, concise, tart, succinct, abbreviated, brief, concentrated, very concise, in brief	mdor bsdus
མདོར་བསྡུས་ཏེ	to summarize	mdor bsdus te
མདོར་བསྡུས་ཏེ་བཤད་པ	explain briefly	mdor bsdus te bshad pa
མདོར་བསྡུས་ན	in short, in brief, in summary	mdor bsdus na
མདོར་བསྡུས་ནས་བཤད་ན	in short, in brief, in summary	mdor bsdus nas bshad na
མདོར་བསྡུས་པ	concise, abridged, abbreviated; to abridge / summarize	mdor bsdus pa
མདོར་བསྡུས་བྱས་པ	to abridge	mdor bsdus byas pa
མདོར་བསྡུས་སྨོས	in short, in brief, in summary	mdor bsdus smos
མདོར་བསྡུས་ཙམ	in a limited way	mdor bsdus tsam
མདོར་བསྡུས་ཤིང་དོན་གསལ་བ	brief and clear	mdor bsdus shing don gsal ba
མདོར་ན	in conclusion	mdor na
མདོར་སྨོས	stating briefly	mdor smos
མདོར་བཤད	briefly explain	mdor bshad
མདོས	framework of threads cross formed of two small sticks the ends of which are connected by colored strings, thread-cross exorcism ritual, a tantric ritual involving structures of sticks with colored ...	mdos
མདོས་ཀྱི་སྨྱུག་དྲ	mdos skud dkri sa'i smyug sgrom ste nam mkha' mtshon byed cig	mdos kyi smyug dra
མདོས་དཀྲིས	mdos fence made of woolen threads of different colors	mdos dkris
མདོས་གླུད	thread-cross rituals; to dispel obstacles and misfortune	mdos glud
མདོས་བརྒྱབ་པ	for enemies and obstructing spirits etc. torma and associated substances kyi glud [ransom] rdzongs [farewell present] btang ba [one thing or 2?]	mdos brgyab pa
མདོས་ཆ་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བརྡེག་གཏོ	gto rituals that strike the interdependence of ritual objects	mdos cha rten 'brel brdeg gto
མདོས་གཏོ	cross thread ceremony	mdos gto
མདོས་བརྡ་སྤྱོད་པ	briefly/ write in abbreviated form brda sprod pa [abbreviated grammar?]	mdos brda spyod pa
མདོས་འཕངས་པ	make, cast [ransom throwing torma and associated substances against enemies and obstructing spirits]	mdos 'phangs pa
མདོས་ཟོར	offering of mdos and throwing torma	mdos zor
མདོས་ཡས	thread cross healing ritual w mdos and associated substances	mdos yas
མདོས་རིས	thread picture, embroidery	mdos ris
ཐུག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	...Tsa sdor med pa'i bag thug 'dag de 'thung mkhan gyi dang gar mi 'gro 'dag khang - sand castles. Syn bye ma'i khang bu 'dag gu - 1) kind of noodle; 2) porridge 'dag gu - pap, pulp 'dag chal - 1) ...	thug pa lta bu
ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་འཇུག	entry into the perception of the wisdom which is unobstructed and unimpeded in respect of the past 'das pa'i dus la ma chags ma thogs pa'i ye	shes gzigs pa 'jug
ཅོནཏེ྾ཏ་ཨོཕ༹་དིསཅུསསིང་མི	pham's (and the Nyingma's) view on the relationship between gang zag gi bdag med and chos kyi bdag med. Acc. to this view, gang zag gi bdag med and chos kyi bdag med are 'das mi phye ba. The upshot...	context of discussing Mi
ཧོཨུསེ	years, each planet's three day mthun lo dang, according to cycles of 60 years how many have passed and, in the present year where it exists etc., an important ground of not mixing details] 'das lo ...	house
ཐར་དད་པའི་སྤུ་ལོང	the relation of the story of sangs rgyas chos 'dzom, incarnation of the precious Avalokiteshvara who visited hells and paradises for seven days and came back from death 'di - it, this it, the, near...	thar dad pa'i spu long
ཨས་སུཆ	and-such 'dir - here 'dir - here/ now, this 1 'dir - here, here, here, at this, in our case, here instead, in a particular, so now, to this point 1401 'dir bgrod pa 'bras bu'i theg pa - the fruitio...	as such
ཀརྨ	formations, habitual tendencies. mental exertion, thought formation. Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {ma rig pa'i dbang gis kun gzhi la las kyi sa bon 'debs par byed pa 'du byed kyi byed las, kun gzhi'i sten...	karma
མཚུངས་ལྡན་མ་ཡིན་པའི	-}; the two kinds of formations, {mtshungs ldan 'du byed}, {mtshungs ldan ma yin pa'i 'du byed} 'du byed rnam dag - totally purified mental formations 'du byed rnams 'jug pa mi rung ba'i phyir beca...	mtshungs ldan ma yin pa'i
གཐེརིང	place 'du long - turbulent [crowd], noise, clamor, tumult 'du long - to amass; business; clamor, noise 'du shes - perception [of characteristics] [as 'du shes phung po of phung po lnga], concept, i...	gathering
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	present mental factors Kun 'gro lnga [, by which awareness discriminates characteristics not common to all objects by the power of how things are [dngos stobs]. thought concept[ion], idea, aggregat...	of the five ever
ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	present mental factors Kun 'gro lnga [, by which awareness discriminates characteristics not common to all objects by the power of how things are [dngos stobs]. thought concept[ion], idea, aggregat...	the five ever
ཕ༹ླཏཏེནེད	out conception; def {dran pa med par sems shor ba} means that your mind strays into being oblivious 'du shes med - imperceptive 'du shes med snyoms 'jug - attainment of induced unconsciousness 'du ...	flattened
ནོར་ནོན	perception/conception [one of the four formless realms {gzugs med skye mched mu bzhi}, after thinking 'there is nothing at all' and so perceiving, one thinks 'even that is sickness and pain and I s...	nor non
ནོཏ་ནོན	existent. This is dwelling at 'du shes med 'du shes med min skye	not non
མཆེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཐར	the emancipation of the perception-sphere of neither conception nor nonconception 'du shes med 'du shes med min skye	mched kyi rnam thar
གེཙ་ཨེབེ༹ར	subtler until even always being without perception becomes 'du shes med 'du shes med min gyi skye	gets ever
ཐེ་ལོང	lived gods have no opportunity to practise the Dharma because they spend their time in a state of mental blankness 'du shes med pa - [samapatti of] nonperception 'du shes med pa - 1) without/ devoi...	the long
ཨས་ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུརྟེཨེན་ནོན	concurrent formations. induced unconsciousness,	as one of the fourteen non
སམཔཏཏི་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	perception; 2) conceptionless equilibrium ** 'du shes med pa'i snyoms 'jug - 1) the	samapatti of non
པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན	sphere of neither conception nor nonconception 'du shes med min gyi skye mched - the ayatana where perception is not nonexistent [the ayatana/ activity/ realm field of neither perception/ conception	perception
ཤེས་བསྐྱེད་པར་བྱའོ	noble one, you should think of yourself as someone who is sick; chos la sman gyi 'du shes	shes bskyed par bya'o
བསྐྱེད་པར་བྱའོ	of the Dharma as the remedy; dge ba'i bshes gnyen la sman pa mkhas pa'i 'du shes bskyed	bskyed par bya'o
པར་བྱའོ	of your spiritual friend as a skilful doctor; nan tan nyams su len pa ni nad nye bar 'tsho ba'i 'du shes	par bya'o
པ་མིན་ནོ	is free from coarse conceptions but not from the subtle 'du shes log pa - with wrong ways of thinking 'du shes log pa - wrong ways of thinking 'du shes shing - thinking, holding a notion 'du shes s...	pa min no
དོཨུབཙ་ཅླེཨརེད་ཨུཔ	he's a spy] 'dug - 1) meal; 2) there is/ are/ was; 3) sit 'dug - to be, was; sit; sit, there is, there are, to be, was, sit; sit/ stay 'dug - 1) sit [down]/ remain/ stay; 2) be/ is; 3) have; 3) [au...	doubts cleared up
པེརསོན	por suffering producing reason mya ngan byed pa'i rtags?] 'dun khang - hall, room for meetings 'dun khang - 1) assembly/ meeting hall; 2) lodging/ living place three storehouse 'dun khang - pavilio...	person
དཔྱོད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhis of aspiration, effort, wishing, and examination 'dun pa dang mtshungs par ldan pa - having the same wish 'dun pa drag po - very diligent 'dun pa drag por byed pa - produce strong aspir...	dpyod pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཏུརྣིང	point which will determine our fate, for better or worse, far into the future 'dun ma 'debs pa - give advice 'dun ma byed pa - take a resolution 'dun ma legs pa - excellent circumstances and mutual...	turning
སླེབས	having trotted off the came before me 'dur phye drag pa - very fine flour 'dur phye zhel pa - course flour 'dur ba - trot, run in a trot 'dur ba - {'dur ba, 'dur ba, 'dur ba} intr. v.; to trot, the...	slebs
ཐེ་Vཨིནཡ	Ocean, by Tsongkhapa 'dul ba mngon pa - Vinaya and Abhidharma 'dul ba mngon pa - 1) manifest the vinaya; 2) vinaya and abhidharma 'dul ba nyid - vinaya 'dul ba nyid - Vinaya 'dul ba stod lugs - the...	the Vinaya
ཐེ་གྲེཨཏ་མེརིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	body {sku bsod nams chen pos 'dul ba} taming by the direct perception of buddhamind {thugs mngon sum pas 'dul ba} taming by inconceivable miraculous abilities {rdzu 'phrul bsam gyis 'dul ba rnam pa...	the great merit of the buddha
བཡ་Vཨིཤ	khadeva {sa ga'i lha}; 'dul ba, vol shu, in the Derge Edition, 'dul ba 'dzin pa - monk/ vinaya holder [having completed his novitiate, a monk who has the two qualities of stably keeping his vows co...	by Visha
སི྾་སུཔེར	knowledges {mngon shes drug}. Conversion through the great miraculous power of his inconceivable Qualities and Activities which are the various magical displays of the deeds of his Three Secrets {g...	six super
བའི་འགྲེལ་པ	Vinaya-gamottaravishes.agamaprashnavr.tti, by Kalya-n.amitra {dge legs bshes gnyen}; 'DUL BA, Vol DZU, in the Derge Edition, 'dul ba lung zhu ba - request for the teaching of the vinaya [= 'dul ba ...	ba'i 'grel pa
པ་རང་གི་རྣམ་པར་བཤད་པ	Vinayasu-travr.ttyabhidha-nasvavya-khyana, by Gun.aprabha {yon tan 'od}; "An Explanation of my Own," being a Text Written in Commentary to "The Sutra on Vowed Morality," 'DUL BA, Vol ZHU, in the De...	pa rang gi rnam par bshad pa
བརྗིད་རབ་ཏུ་འབར་བའི་མདོ	Glorious biography of Tonpa Shenrab 'dus pa rin po che'i rgyud gzer mig - Bon text 'dus pa lugs gnyis - the two systems of Guhyasamaja [Arya Nagarjuna and sangs rgyas ye shes.] 'dus pa lugs gnyis -...	brjid rab tu 'bar ba'i mdo
མེ	ngag De (man ngag sde), the Instruction Section 'dus pa'i nad - combination illness 'dus pa'i nad - combination illness [caused by disorder of wind, bile and phlegm together, eg. bad kan smug po.] ...	Men
ཡོད་དོ	All conditioned things arise from a cause 'dus byas thams cad mi rtag pa - All that is compounded is impermanent 'dus byas dang 'dus ma byas - Compounds and noncompounds 'dus byas dang 'dus ma byas...	yod do
ཝིཐ་ཨ་བོ༹ཝེལ	sing (go, de, mdo) 'dogs pa - {'dogs pa, btags pa, gdags pa, thogs} trans. v.; 1) to bind, fasten, tie, tie to; 2) to put on, wear (ornaments). 3) to apply / attach a label; impute, designate, labe...	with a vowel
གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	One pointed vajra mudra 'dod rgyal gyi sgra - the word "conceit." 'dod rgyal gyi sgra - the word "conceit." [exclusively selfish desire w/o reason or rationale.] 'dod rgyal gyi ming - the name of c...	gi phyag rgya
བསྐྱེད་ལས་ནི་མི་དགེ་བའོ	That which is produced by desire, anger and delusion is nonvirtue. 'dod chags zhen pa - desire and attachment 'dod chags bzhi - the four passions (CHN 1419 'dod chags bzhi - 4 passions (gzugs, dbyi...	bskyed las ni mi dge ba'o
ཝིཤེད	for/ desirable 'dod 'jo'i ba - cow yielding all desires (cow that gives milk at pleasure) 'dod 'jo'i ba - magical cow that provides all that is wished for/ desirable	wished
ཐཏ་ཨིས་ཝིཤེད	for/ desirable 'dod 'jo'i ba mo - a wish-granting cow 'dod 'jo'i bum bzang - wishing vase 'dod nyon - kleshas of the desire realm 'dod nyon - kleshas of the desire realm [5 root + 20 upakleshas] 'd...	that is wished
པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of not finding desired things even if 1 looks for them 'dod pa'i nyes dmigs shes pa - know the faults of desire 'dod pa'i ta la - cuckoo as messenger of spring 'dod pa'i bstan bcos - ...	pa'i sdug bsngal
ཅོམམོན་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder of the desire realm 'dod pa'i rig 'dzin - awareness-holder in the Desire realm 'dod pa'i rig 'dzin - awareness-holder in the Desire realm [a fruition of tantric practice: When one attains th...	common awareness
མི་འོང	[TSE] 'dod pas 'khyud pa'i lus 'khyog cing 'dzum	mi 'ong
ཞིང་སྨྲ་བར་བྱེད	writhing and smiling in the embrace of desire 'dod pas ngo sgrib - by strong desire obscuring shame 'dod pas dregs pa - intoxicated with love or desire for any object 'dod pas gdung - yid 'dod pas ...	zhing smra bar byed
སློང་ཟེར་དུ་འོང་བ་རྣམས	anyone pleading to be given what they are mentally dying for 'dod pas mnar - {phan tshun 'dod pas mnar nas phug pa zhig tu rol} drawn together by mutual desire, they disported themselves in a cave ...	slong zer du 'ong ba rnams
སྐྱེས་པའི་སྡོམ་པ་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡོད	the gods in the desire and form [realms] can give rise to the vow born from dhyana 'dod gzugs can - possessing a body of desire, god 'dod gzugs can - body of desire 'dod gzugs med kyi khams - the r...	skyes pa'i sdom pa skye ba yod
དེསིརེད	qualities, enjoyments, five sensual pleasures, object of sensual pleasure, pleasures, sense pleasures; sense pleasures 'dod yon - Sense-pleasures 'dod yon - sensory enjoyments 'dod yon - {'dod pa'i...	desired
ཤོརཏཅོམིངས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེནསེ	pleasures 'dod yon nyes dmigs - defects of the objects of desire 'dod yon dpal 'byor phun sum tshogs pa where all were prosperous and enjoyed the greatest good fortune 'dod yon spyad pa - to enjoy ...	shortcomings of the sense
ཐེ་ཨསསེམབལཡ་ཨོཕ༹་སེནསེ	pleasures 'dod yon la rol pa - enjoying sensepleasures 'dod yon longs spyod - luxuries and possessions 'dod rogs - sweetheart 'dod la 'dun - intend[ed] desire 'dod la ma chags - not attached to des...	the assembly of sense
ཐེ་ཨཱབོདེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཋིརཏཡ	three {ri rab kyi steng na gnas} live at the top of Mount Sumeru 'dod lha drug dang bsam gtan bzhi'i gnas	the Abode of the Thirty
རིས	the abodes of the six kinds of desire gods and those of the four dhyanas 'dod lha rigs drug - [TRS 26:3]; {'dod lha drug}. six levels of the gods of desire 'dod lha rigs drug - six classes of desir...	ris
ཐེ་སེ྾	organ 'doms - induce, explain, private parts, SA 'dom pa 'doms - genitals; teach, instruct; {gdams}. penis, organ. 1) to teach, explain, show. 2) to assemble, gather 3) to exhort, urge 4) to select...	the sex
ཨེཏཅ	- having a white face marking on the left and white hair on the chin gyon nas said to be auspicious ridden by a beggar? slong mo ma 'dre bkol - disciple of padma sambhava 'dre skas - a wooden beam ...	etc
གུཨིདེས	-the lama and the Three Jewels 'dren mkhan rje - my lord and guide 1430 'dren mkhan bla ma dkon mchog - the lama and the Three Jewels, your guides, 'dren 'khor - carriage 'dren gla - freight/ trans...	guides
རྡ་དཀྲུག	tattling	rda dkrug
རྡ་དུ་ར	[Skt] thang phrom	rda du ra
རྡ་བ	one of 36 border countries of india	rda ba
རྡ་དབན	(CH large chinaware	rda dban
རྡ་རམ་ས་ལ	Dharamsala	rda ram sa la
རྡ་ལབ་ལྕེ	(M winter khal kha zug chuba's above rgyu'i skin upper covering that is worn	rda lab lce
རྡ་ས	Dharamsala	rda sa
རྡག་གེ་རྡོག་གེ	lumps that are not really big{rdag ge rdog ge'i rde'u mang po	rdag ge rdog ge
ལམ་དེ་ལ་ཡོད་པས་འགྲོ་མི་བདེ	since that road has many lumps/ stones it isn't easy to travel	lam de la yod pas 'gro mi bde
རྡག་སྒྲ་རྡིག་སྒྲ	1) sound of walking; 2) particular sound of things falling	rdag sgra rdig sgra
རྡང	gdang	rdang
རྡང་ཐག	hitching/tethering rope for animals	rdang thag
རྡང་འཕེན་པ	in travelling places where horses/ mules are tied up rdang rgyag pa	rdang 'phen pa
རྡང་བུ	1) stake for an animal tethering rope; 2) skas 'dzeg gi gdang bu	rdang bu
རྡབ	1) vi. to band / hit against. 2) to clap, applaud	rdab
རྡབ་སྒྲ	sound of clapping of the hands, clap	rdab sgra
རྡབ་ཆལ	[arch] ['gyel ba] send out	rdab chal
རྡབ་ཆལ་བ	slip and stumble	rdab chal ba
རྡབ་འཆལ	stumbling, tripping, falling	rdab 'chal
རྡབ་ཐུག	collision	rdab thug
རྡབ་ཐུག་བྱུང་བ	collide	rdab thug byung ba
རྡབ་རྡོབ	newest/ littlest monk in the monastery *, dusting	rdab rdob
རྡབ་རྡོབ་གཏོང	dusting	rdab rdob gtong
རྡབ་པ	beat, clap hands, bang, fold, pile one upon another	rdab pa
རྡབ་བེ་རྡོབ་བེ	1) newest/ littlest monk in the monastery; 2) teenagers 14-17 / mang pos ngal tshol byed kyi 'dug	rdab be rdob be
རྡབ་ཞོགས	'ur langs pa	rdab zhogs
རྡབ་གསིགས་གཏོང	cause trouble, disturbance	rdab gsigs gtong
རྡམ	(not in DAS)	rdam
རྡར	file/ grind, sharpen [metal]	rdar
རྡར་འཁོར	sharpening wheel	rdar 'khor
རྡར་རྡོ	sharpening stone	rdar rdo
རྡར་རྡོ་རྒྱག་པ	1) whet on a sharpening stone; 2) deceive by soft speech	rdar rdo rgyag pa
རྡར་བ	adjust, pray, grind, sharpen, inspect, file, SA bdar ba	rdar ba
རྡར་ཚན	dozen	rdar tshan
རྡལ	scattered, separated	rdal
རྡལ་གླ	transportation fee [Lha sa nas phag ri bar gyi rdal gla rnams grangs tsang sprad pa]	rdal gla
རྡལ་ཆུ	rdal river	rdal chu
རྡལ་བ	spread, stretch out, include	rdal ba
རྡི་རྡི་གུ་གུ	rdi rdi gu gu bird	rdi rdi gu gu
རྡི་རང་རྫོང	rdi rang rdzong city [in mtso sna rdzong khongs mon yul]	rdi rang rdzong
རྡིག	1) cattle; 2) Ja skol snod zangs rdig lta bu sogs	rdig
རྡིག་སྒྲ	1) sound of strong treading/walking feet; 2) sound of things falling	rdig sgra
རྡིག་ར	woman's silver sash ornament	rdig ra
རྡིགས་པ	beat	rdigs pa
རྡིང་ཁང	canopy 1432	rding khang
རྡིབ	vi. to fall down, collapse, crumble, cave in	rdib
རྡིབ་སྐྱོན	fall down	rdib skyon
རྡིབ་སྐྱོན་བྱུང་སོང	[it] fell down	rdib skyon byung song
རྡིབ་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, fall to pieces, give way, break down	rdib pa
རྡིབ་བ	{rdib ba, rdib pa, rdib pa} intr. v	rdib ba
རྡིབས	crumble, SA rdib pa	rdibs
རྡིས་ཚ	Dhitsa, in Domey	rdis tsha
རྡུ་ཕྲ་རབ	indivisible atomic particles	rdu phra rab
རྡུ་བ	rdu ba med. herb [khrag gcod par phan]	rdu ba
རྡུག	[p brdugs,, conquer, subdue, overcome, destroy, wreck, bad, sad, shielding	rdug
རྡུག་པ	conquer, worst, devastate, wreck, undo	rdug pa
རྡུགས	bad, sad	rdugs
རྡུགས་གྱོང	loss	rdugs gyong
རྡུགས་ཐོགས	obstruction	rdugs thogs
རྡུགས་པ	{rdugs pa, rdugs pa, rdugs pa} intr. v	rdugs pa
རྡུགས་ཤོས	worst, most inferior	rdugs shos
རྡུང	to beat, strike, hit. to knock [one doors]. a small mound, hillock	rdung
རྡུང་ཁ	having mutually touched foreheads 'dzing tshul	rdung kha
རྡུང་ཁ་རྒྱག་པ	collide, knock	rdung kha rgyag pa
རྡུང་ཁར	on the point of crushing	rdung khar
རྡུང་མཁན	beater, striker, fighter	rdung mkhan
རྡུང་མགར	blacksmith	rdung mgar
རྡུང་སྒྲ	bang	rdung sgra
རྡུང་གཏག	drubbing, sound thrashing, beating	rdung gtag
རྡུང་གཏག་གཏོང	beat, strike, bump, mutually touching foreheads 'dzing tshul, give a beating	rdung gtag gtong
རྡུང་འཐག	rdzog and grind into powder	rdung 'thag
རྡུང་རྡེག	beat strike, blow	rdung rdeg
རྡུང་རྡེག་ཉེས་གཏག	hit each other	rdung rdeg nyes gtag
རྡུང་རྡེག་གཏོང	beat strike, give blows	rdung rdeg gtong
རྡུང་རྡེག་གཏོང་བ	strike, attack	rdung rdeg gtong ba
རྡུང་རྡེག་བཏང	beat struck, gave blows	rdung rdeg btang
རྡུང་རྡེག་དྲག་པོ་ལན་འགའ་བཏང	struck w telling blows	rdung rdeg drag po lan 'ga' btang
རྡུང་གནོན	forging [metal]	rdung gnon
རྡུང་བ	collide, beat, nail, strike, hit, knock, drub, break to pieces, smash, assault, bang, smite	rdung ba
རྡུང་བྱ་བ	he who is to be beaten	rdung bya ba
རྡུང་བྱས་པ	him who was beaten	rdung byas pa
རྡུང་བྱེད	stick, striker	rdung byed
རྡུང་བྱེད་པ	he who is beating	rdung byed pa
རྡུང་བྲལ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	became free from all the disturbing passions	rdung bral rnams kyi mchog
རྡུང་རྩི	he is very likely to strike	rdung rtsi
རྡུང་འཚོག་པ	cudgel	rdung 'tshog pa
རྡུང་རྫོག	beat strike, blow	rdung rdzog
རྡུང་རྫོག་ཉེས་གཏག	rdung rdzog ha cang chen po phog 'dug, hit each other	rdung rdzog nyes gtag
རྡུང་རྫོག་གཏོང	beat strike, give blows	rdung rdzog gtong
རྡུང་བཟོ	forging, smithy	rdung bzo
རྡུང་བཟོ་བྱེད	forge metal	rdung bzo byed
རྡུང་རེས	coming to blows, fighting	rdung res
རྡུང་རེས་བྱེད	come to blows, fight	rdung res byed
རྡུང་རེས་བྱེད་པ	fight, quarrel	rdung res byed pa
རྡུངས	{rdung}! beat!	rdungs
རྡུངས་ཤིག	beat him, strike him	rdungs shig
རྡུམ	[comp rdum rdum] short, blunt, maimed, limbless	rdum
རྡུམ་རྡུམ	short, blunt	rdum rdum
རྡུམ་རྡུམ་བྱེད	abbreviate	rdum rdum byed
རྡུམ་པའི་མཇུག་མ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁྱི	dog w a	rdum pa'i mjug ma yod pa'i khyi
ཅུཏ	off tail	cut
རྡུམ་པའི་ལག་རྐང	mutilated/ cut off arms and legs	rdum pa'i lag rkang
རྡུམ་པོ	headless, without the top	rdum po
རྡུམ་བྱེད	maim, mutilate	rdum byed
རྡུམ་བྱེད་པ	mutilate, anything mutilated, maimed	rdum byed pa
རྡུའུ་ཡ་ཙི	bean sprouts	rdu'u ya tsi
རྡུལ	the dust	rdul
རྡུལ་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཤ་ཟ	1) phyag dar khrod kyi 'dre; 2) gdon 'dre rlung 'khor tsub ma'i nang gi 'dre	rdul khrod kyi sha za
རྡུལ་གྱི་ཁ་དོག	dust color [yan lag gi kha dog brgyad kyi nang gses shig]	rdul gyi kha dog
རྡུལ་གྱི་ཁ་ལོ་བ	wind	rdul gyi kha lo ba
རྡུལ་གྱི་གྲངས་དང་མཉམ་པ	as great as the number of atoms in the universe	rdul gyi grangs dang mnyam pa
རྡུལ་གྱི་ཆུ	cow	rdul gyi chu
རྡུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of dust, camphor	rdul gyi snying po
རྡུལ་གྱི་ཐིག་ལེ་དཀར་པོ	moon	rdul gyi thig le dkar po
རྡུལ་གྱི་རྩ	rdul nadi	rdul gyi rtsa
རྡུལ་གྱི་ལམ	the female organ	rdul gyi lam
རྡུལ་གྱིས་འགྲིབ་པ	{nyi ma rdul gyis 'grib pa bzhin gyur} the sun dimmed as if obscured by dust	rdul gyis 'grib pa
རྡུལ་ཅན	dusty, in menstruation	rdul can
རྡུལ་ཅན་མའི་བྱ	son of parashurama	rdul can ma'i bya
རྡུལ་བཅས་མ	matured/grown woman	rdul bcas ma
རྡུལ་ཆ་མེད	partless atom, indivisible particle	rdul cha med
རྡུལ་འཆང	bee, pollen holder	rdul 'chang
རྡུལ་འཇིབ་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	vacuum cleaner	rdul 'jib 'phrul chas
རྡུལ་འཇོམས	destroyer of dust, water	rdul 'joms
རྡུལ་ཉལ	bee, sleeper in dust	rdul nyal
རྡུལ་སྙིང	atom	rdul snying
རྡུལ་སྟོབས་ཅན	cadamba tree	rdul stobs can
རྡུལ་ཐལ་བར་རློག་པ	crush something to powder	rdul thal bar rlog pa
རྡུལ་ཐུལ	dust arises	rdul thul
རྡུལ་འཐུལ་བ	dust and grit arising 1433	rdul 'thul ba
རྡུལ་དང་སྐད་ཅིག་ཆ་མེད	indivisible atom and instant	rdul dang skad cig cha med
རྡུལ་དང་སྐད་ཅིག་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	1) to conceive of as being an atom and instant. 2) to realize as being an atom and instant	rdul dang skad cig du rtogs pa
རྡུལ་དང་བྲལ་བ	w/o dust/ even a particle of	rdul dang bral ba
རྡུལ་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	atomically established	rdul du grub pa
རྡུལ་དུ་རློག	reduce to dust, destroy, annihilate, crush	rdul du rlog
རྡུལ་དུ་རློག་པ	{rdul du brlag pa} to crush to dust	rdul du rlog pa
རྡུལ་དུ་བརླག་པ	{rdul du rlog pa} to crush to dust	rdul du brlag pa
རྡུལ་དུ་བརླག་རྫས	sustances for destruction	rdul du brlag rdzas
རྡུལ་དུ་བརླགས་པ	{rdul du rlog pa} to crush to dust	rdul du brlags pa
རྡུལ་དྲལ་ཡང་དག་བསགས	pure cluster realm	rdul dral yang dag bsags
རྡུལ་ལྡན	night	rdul ldan
རྡུལ་ལྡན་མིག	buffalo, dusty eyes	rdul ldan mig
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་མོ	fine particle/ dust	rdul phra mo
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རགས	subtle and coarse atoms	rdul phra rags
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ	subatomic particle	rdul phra rab
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	atomic energy	rdul phra rab kyi nus shugs
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་ཀྱི་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapons	rdul phra rab kyi mtshon cha
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་གྱི་གོ་མཚོན	nuclear weapons	rdul phra rab gyi go mtshon
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་གྱི་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapons	rdul phra rab gyi mtshon cha
རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་ལུས་མེད	tiny invisible particle	rdul phra rab lus med
རྡུལ་ཕྲན	[minute] particle, atom, molecule, particle the size of 7 {rdul phra rab}, dust, powder types in the realm of desire	rdul phran
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་གོ་མཚོན	nuclear weapons	rdul phran go mtshon
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་འགས་མདེལ	atomic bomb	rdul phran 'gas mdel
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་གཅིག	clump of 7 rdul phra rab	rdul phran gcig
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་ལྡན	a particle with parts, divisible atom	rdul phran cha ldan
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་མེད	partless particle	rdul phran cha med
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་མེད་དང་ཆ་ཡོད	reducible or irreducible particles	rdul phran cha med dang cha yod
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་ཤས	the smallest fragments of matter	rdul phran cha shas
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་དུ་དེངས	{lus rdul phran du dengs nas sangs rgyas pa yin pa} his body dissolved into infinitesimal particles and he attained Buddhahood	rdul phran du dengs
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་དུ་གནས་པ	to exist [only] atomically [ggd]	rdul phran du gnas pa
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་དུས་རབས	atomic age	rdul phran dus rabs
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ནུས་པོ	atomic energy	rdul phran nus po
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ནུས་ཤུགས	atomic energy	rdul phran nus shugs
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ནུས་ཤུགས་བློན་ཆེན	minister for atomic energy	rdul phran nus shugs blon chen
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཕྱིར་འཕྲོའི་ཕུང	atomic pile/ reactor	rdul phran phyir 'phro'i phung
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆ་མེད	indivisible minute particle	rdul phran phyogs kyi cha med
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle particle / atom	rdul phran phra mo
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་འབར་མདེལ	atomic bomb	rdul phran 'bar mdel
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapons	rdul phran mtshon cha
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་བཞིན་དུ	{brag de rdul phran bzhin du 'thor} turned the boulder into dust	rdul phran bzhin du
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་བཞིན་དུ་བརླག	ground to dust	rdul phran bzhin du brlag
རྡུལ་ཕྲན་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པ	natureless atom	rdul phran rang bzhin med pa
རྡུལ་འཕྱགས་པ	sweep out dust	rdul 'phyags pa
རྡུལ་འཕྱང	reduced to dust	rdul 'phyang
རྡུལ་འཕྲན་མོ	minutest particle	rdul 'phran mo
རྡུལ་བར་མེད	the spacelessness of atoms	rdul bar med
རྡུལ་བྱབ་པ	sweep off dust and dirt	rdul byab pa
རྡུལ་བྲལ	clear, dust-free; immaculate	rdul bral
རྡུལ་བྲལ་དྲི་མེད	1) w/o dust/ stains; 2) Buddha {rdul bral dri med}	rdul bral dri med
རྡུལ་བྲལ་ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the desireless and undefiled luminosity	rdul bral zag pa med pa'i 'od gsal
རྡུལ་མ	dust	rdul ma
རྡུལ་མི་ཐུལ་བར	minutest particles, menstrual discharge	rdul mi thul bar
རྡུལ་མི་ཐུལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	lay the dust	rdul mi thul bar byed pa
རྡུལ་མེད	w/o dust, liberation	rdul med
རྡུལ་དམར	vermillion powder	rdul dmar
རྡུལ་ཙམ	the least	rdul tsam
རྡུལ་ཙམ་མེད	not in the slightest; not even an iota (of); not a shred of . . . ; isc. not at all	rdul tsam med
རྡུལ་ཙམ་མེད་པ	not even an atom, utterly impossible	rdul tsam med pa
རྡུལ་ཙམ་ཡང	even one bit	rdul tsam yang
རྡུལ་བཙེགས	mt.	rdul btsegs
རྡུལ་ཚུབ	raise, whirl up dust, raise dust, whirling cloud of dust	rdul tshub
རྡུལ་ཚོགས	nuclear	rdul tshogs
རྡུལ་ཚོགས་གཟུགས་ནུས་རིག་གནས	nuclear physics	rdul tshogs gzugs nus rig gnas
རྡུལ་ཚོན	paint powder, colored stone dust, powdered colors	rdul tshon
རྡུལ་ཚོན་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of colored powder	rdul tshon dkyil 'khor
རྡུལ་ཚོན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	colored sand mandala	rdul tshon gyi dkyil 'khor
རྡུལ་མཚོན	nuclear weapons	rdul mtshon
རྡུལ་འཚུབ་པ	dust arising	rdul 'tshub pa
རྡུལ་རྫས	constituents of a particle. Syn {rdul phran}	rdul rdzas
རྡུལ་རྫས་བརྒྱད	the 8 particular constituents	rdul rdzas brgyad
རྡུལ་རྫས་བརྒྱད་འདུས	collections of the 8 particular constituents [coarse/ gross objects composed of the {rdul rdzas brgyad} 8 particular constituents of the desire realm, rdul phra rab lta bu'i gzhi gcig la, earth, wa...	rdul rdzas brgyad 'dus
རྡུལ་རྫས་དྲུག	the six particular substances	rdul rdzas drug
རྡུལ་རྫས་དྲུག་འདུས	agglutination of the six particular constituents	rdul rdzas drug 'dus
རྡུལ་བཞིན་འཐག	grind to dust	rdul bzhin 'thag
རྡུལ་གཟན	blouse, travelling cloak against dust	rdul gzan
རྡུལ་བཟངས	fine dust	rdul bzangs
རྡུལ་རགས་པ	coarse/ gross objects composed of the {rdul rdzas brgyad} 8 particular constituents	rdul rags pa
རྡུལ་ལ་བཅས་མ	young girl, maiden, damsel	rdul la bcas ma
རྡུལ་ལོང་ལོང	rdul 'tsub lang stangs	rdul long long
རྡུལ་སློང	raise dust	rdul slong
རྡུལ་བསལ	stainless realm	rdul bsal
རྡེ	SA rde'u	rde
རྡེ་དཀར	white pebble	rde dkar
རྡེ་འགག	lgang pa'i gnas su from stones forming and swelling urine stopping disease	rde 'gag
རྡེ་བ་ད་རུ	cedar	rde ba da ru
རྡེག	to hit, strike, beat; smite, smash	rdeg
རྡེག་ཅིང་སྤྱོད་པ	woman la btsan po dbang yod kyis spyod pa	rdeg cing spyod pa
རྡེག་ཆ	knife	rdeg cha
རྡེག་ཆ་མཁན	smith	rdeg cha mkhan
རྡེག་ཆོས	dance	rdeg chos
རྡེག་ཆོས་པ	to dance	rdeg chos pa
རྡེག་འཆའ་བ	1) unstable, exhausted crooked walking gom tshugs mi brtan par khyar khyor 'gro ba; 2) 'Dred brdab; 3) Kha bub log cing 'gyel ba	rdeg 'cha' ba
རྡེག་འཆོས་པ	rdeg 'cha' ba	rdeg 'chos pa
རྡེག་པ	(tha dad pa brdegs pa, brdeg pa, rdegs!,, beat, strike, smite, hit, slash, stab	rdeg pa
རྡེག་པ་མེད་པ	not beating, SA dge sbyong gi chos	rdeg pa med pa
རྡེག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	[ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses] in anger strike or undertake/try to strike another bhikshu	rdeg pa'i ltung byed
རྡེག་པར་བྱེད་པ	strike	rdeg par byed pa
རྡེག་བཙོག་པ	pelt mud at, cast filth	rdeg btsog pa
རྡེག་འཚོག	corporal punishment, a beating	rdeg 'tshog
རྡེག་འཚོགས	getting a beating	rdeg 'tshogs
རྡེག་ཤུགས	thrust	rdeg shugs
རྡེགས	beat, SA rdeg pa	rdegs
རྡེགས་པ	beat, SA rdeg pa	rdegs pa
རྡེང	uppermost	rdeng
རྡེབ	1) to beat against, bang / hit against 2) to clap, applaud	rdeb
རྡེབ་ད་རུ	deodar, species of cedar	rdeb da ru
རྡེབ་རྡེབ	sprug sprug gtong ba	rdeb rdeb
རྡེབ་པ	{rdeb pa, brdabs pa, brdab pa, rdobs} trans. v.; to throw down with a clap	rdeb pa
རྡེབས	rdeb pa!	rdebs
རྡེབས་པ	SA, rdab pa, throw down with a clap, fling down, knock down, throw to and fro, toss about, stumble	rdebs pa
རྡེའུ	1) little stone, pebble; 2) counting w pebbles; 3) a kind of disease [eg .Pho rde'u,.Mo rde'u]; 3) musket ball, bullet	rde'u
རྡེའུ་བཅུད་ལེན	eat enchanted pebbles instead of food	rde'u bcud len
རྡེའུ་ཆགས་པ	concrescence of a calculus	rde'u chags pa
རྡེའུ་ཆང་བྲན	pimples on face from excessive drinking	rde'u chang bran
རྡེའུ་ཆང་བྲན་པ	chang making magic stone [chang bsnyal ba ma langs na sngags brgyab pa'i rde'u zhig glum gyi nang du bcug ste yang bskyar bsnyal bas mgyogs po lang yong zer ba'i thabs bcos shig..	rde'u chang bran pa
རྡེའུ་འདོན་པ	removing of stone	rde'u 'don pa
རྡེའུ་པར	bullet mould	rde'u par
རྡེའུ་འབུར་ཐོན	spyi byings dang mi 'dra ba	rde'u 'bur thon
རྡེའུ་ཞོ་བྲན་པ	curd making stone	rde'u zho bran pa
རྡེའུ་གསུམ་དོར་བ	oath taking words	rde'u gsum dor ba
རྡེལ	pebble, bullet, musket ball	rdel
རྡེལ་དཀར	white pebbles	rdel dkar
རྡེལ་ཁྲ	colored pebble	rdel khra
རྡེལ་འགྲམ	counting with pebbles	rdel 'gram
རྡེལ་དྲུག	system of divination, alternate spelling of lde'u 'phrul, "six pebbles"	rdel drug
རྡེལ་མདའ	thag pa'i khug par having poured pebbles, shoot like a bow	rdel mda'
རྡེལ་བུ	little pebbles 1435	rdel bu
རྡེལ་རྩིས	way of calculating w stones/pebbles and sticks [rtsis rgyag pa,..	rdel rtsis
རྡོ	rock, stone; stone, rock	rdo
རྡོ་ཀ་མ་རུ	marble	rdo ka ma ru
རྡོ་ཀ་མ་རུ་པ	marble	rdo ka ma ru pa
རྡོ་ཀ་ཤུ་ཁ	ka shu kha stone [gser quality showing rdo nag po zhig gser zhig rdo ka shu kha la brdar tsam byas na gser gyi spus ka legs nyes brtag thub	rdo ka shu kha
རྡོ་ཀོ་བྱེ	{rdo phag mgo} mineral med.	rdo ko bye
རྡོ་ཀྱག	staircase	rdo kyag
རྡོ་ཀླད	medicinal stone	rdo klad
རྡོ་དཀར་གོང	kind of white stone	rdo dkar gong
རྡོ་དཀར་པོ	white transparent crystal	rdo dkar po
རྡོ་དཀྲུག་རྒྱག	tattle	rdo dkrug rgyag
རྡོ་བཀོད	stone inscription	rdo bkod
རྡོ་བཀྱག	stone staircase	rdo bkyag
རྡོ་རྐོ་བ	rdo la ma ni sogs gzungs sngags dang, chos dpe sna tsogs rko mkhan	rdo rko ba
རྡོ་སྐས	stone staircase (in dance)	rdo skas
རྡོ་སྐུ	stone statue	rdo sku
རྡོ་སྐྱག	stone stairs	rdo skyag
རྡོ་སྐྱུར	rdo skyur med mineral	rdo skyur
རྡོ་སྐྱེས	brag zhun	rdo skyes
རྡོ་སྐྲན	steatite, soapstone, kind of steatite	rdo skran
རྡོ་སྐྲས	flight of stone steps	rdo skras
རྡོ་བརྐོས	stone sculpting/ engraving	rdo brkos
རྡོ་བརྐོས་པ	stone mason/ sculptor/ engraver	rdo brkos pa
རྡོ་ཁ	vein in a stone, subject matter	rdo kha
རྡོ་ཁང	stone house	rdo khang
རྡོ་ཁབ་ལན	magnet	rdo khab lan
རྡོ་ཁབ་ལེན	magnet * lodestone???]	rdo khab len
རྡོ་ཁབ་ལེན་གྱི་ནུས་པ	magnetic pole rdo khab len gyi nus shugs khyab kongs magnetic field	rdo khab len gyi nus pa
རྡོ་ཁུང	quarry	rdo khung
རྡོ་ཁེབས	stone cover	rdo khebs
རྡོ་ཁོག	stoneware, stone pottery	rdo khog
རྡོ་ཁོག་ལ	rdo khog pass	rdo khog la
རྡོ་ཁྲ་མགོ	{rdo khra mgo} rock med.	rdo khra mgo
རྡོ་མཁན	stone mason	rdo mkhan
རྡོ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	18001859? - Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje, the mind emanation of Jigmey Lingpa	rdo mkhyen brtse ye shes rdo rje
རྡོ་མཁྲིས	gallstone	rdo mkhris
རྡོ་འཁྱམས	'phen mkhan su yin rtsad mi chod pa'i lag rdo	rdo 'khyams
རྡོ་གད་རྒྱག་པ	separate stones and grain	rdo gad rgyag pa
རྡོ་གུ	1) little stone; 2) [arch] little mortar	rdo gu
རྡོ་གྲུབ་ཆེན	dodrup chen	rdo grub chen
རྡོ་གྲུབ་ཆེན་དགོན་པ	{rdo grub chen} Monastery [grub chen dgon gyi gdan sa'i thog mar yar lung padma bkod ces pa khams kyi byang wa shul gser tha'i stod yar lung gi sa char rab byung bcu bzhi pa'i lcags rta lor, rdo gr...	rdo grub chen dgon pa
རྡོ་གྲུབ་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	1865-1926 Do Drubchen, Third, Tenpey Nyima	rdo grub bstan pa'i nyi ma
རྡོ་འགྱོགས	rdo yar pang par 'degs pa'i game	rdo 'gyogs
རྡོ་རྒོད	hard rock	rdo rgod
རྡོ་རྒྱབ་པ	throw stones at	rdo rgyab pa
རྡོ་རྒྱུད	soft stones like soapstone, chalk	rdo rgyud
རྡོ་རྒྱུས	{rdo rgyus} mineral med. [ro tsha la phan pa'i rdo zhig	rdo rgyus
རྡོ་རྒྱུས་བྱ་བལ་མ	{rdo rgyus bya bal ma} rdo sman [brdungs na bya rgod kyi spu ltar 'byung ba zhig ste, ro bska, zhu rjes drod, nus pas chu rgyus rengs 'khums gyur pa dang, chu rgyus rmas pa la phan	rdo rgyus bya bal ma
རྡོ་སྒང	si khron zhing chen khongs rnga ba, pass in 'dzam thang rdzong gi la zhig	rdo sgang
རྡོ་སྒམ	rock sgrom snod	rdo sgam
རྡོ་སྒྱོགས	rgyang du 'phen pa'i rdo'i sgyogs mda'	rdo sgyogs
རྡོ་སྒྱོས	cannon, stone thrower	rdo sgyos
རྡོ་རྔ་རོང	grong rdal zhig yun nan zhing chen gyi sa dam 'jang rigs rang skyong rdzong gi nub rgyud 'bri chu'i 'gram du yod, grong rdal 'di'i 'gram du gru kha zhig yod	rdo rnga rong
རྡོ་ཅན	rocky	rdo can
རྡོ་གཅལ	rdo bcos te gcal mar bkram pa'i sa gzhi stone floor/ pavement	rdo gcal
རྡོ་གཅོག་བྱེད	break/ smash rocks	rdo gcog byed
རྡོ་བཅག	break stone	rdo bcag
རྡོ་བཅལ	rdo bcos te gcal mar bkram pa'i sa gzhi stone floor/ pavement	rdo bcal
རྡོ་བཅུད	bitumen	rdo bcud
རྡོ་ཆར	1) hail; 2) thunder	rdo char
རྡོ་ཆས	stone implements, stoneware	rdo chas
རྡོ་ཆས་ཀྱི་དུས་རབས	stone age	rdo chas kyi dus rabs
རྡོ་ཆས་ཀྱི་དུས་རབས་རྙིང་པ	old stone age	rdo chas kyi dus rabs rnying pa
རྡོ་ཆས་ཀྱི་དུས་རབས་གསར་པ	new stone age 1436	rdo chas kyi dus rabs gsar pa
རྡོ་ཆུ	1) water running through rocks; 2) chu tshan sogs kyi gting drod kyi rdo zhu nas chu ru babs pa chu dang bsdongs nas phyi ru thon pas rlangs pa yal ba dang chu las bye nas rdo gzhan gyi ngos su chu...	rdo chu
རྡོ་ཆུ་དགོན་པ	Dochu Monastery, in Latö	rdo chu dgon pa
རྡོ་ཆེན	rock	rdo chen
རྡོ་ཆེན་པོ	boulder	rdo chen po
རྡོ་མཆོད	cairns	rdo mchod
རྡོ་འཆང	hand-sized stone, stone	rdo 'chang
རྡོ་ཇ	rdo ja tree	rdo ja
རྡོ་འཇུག	sacred buddhist place	rdo 'jug
རྡོ་འཇོག	ancient city in panjab	rdo 'jog
ཨིནདེསྟྲུཅཏིབླེ་རེཨལིཏཡ	vajra-scepter, indestructible, adamantine	indestructible reality
རྡོ་རྗེ་དཀྱིལ་དཀྲུངས	vajra posture	rdo rje dkyil dkrungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཀོད་པ	vajra structure	rdo rje bkod pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྐུ	the body of indestructible reality TSE	rdo rje sku
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྐུའི་མཚོན་དཔེ་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	rdo rje sku'i mtshon dpe bcu gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	meditative posture, vajra posture, vajrasana; vajra posture	rdo rje skyil krung
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་གསུམ	rtsa rlung thig le'i rdo rje'i skyil krung gsum,..	rdo rje skyil krung gsum
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཁུ་ཚུར	"vajra fists"	rdo rje khu tshur
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཁྱུང་གཤོག	vajra-tipped wings	rdo rje khyung gshog
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཁྲག་འཐུང	{dpal yang dag}	rdo rje khrag 'thung
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཁྲོ་བོའི་སྙེམས་པ	the pride of vajra wrath; the vajra pride of a wrathful deity	rdo rje khro bo'i snyems pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Vajra dakini	rdo rje mkha' 'gro
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཁོར་ལོ	bde mchog, Chakrasamvara	rdo rje 'khor lo
རྡོ་རྗེ་གང་བ	hand sized vajra	rdo rje gang ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་གུར	Vajra Dome which is the Instruction Tantra of the Two Discernments (brtag gnyis man ngag rgyud)	rdo rje gur
ངག་རྒྱུད	Instruction Tantra of the Two Segments, Vajra Canopy	ngag rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་གྱུ་སྒྲོན་མ	a deity	rdo rje gyu sgron ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲི་གུ	Hevajra, kye rdo rje	rdo rje gri gu
རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲི་གུག	name of dgyes pa rdo rje, name of he ba dzra, epithet of heruka	rdo rje gri gug
རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲོ་ལོད	Dorje Drolö, wrathful emanation of Guru Rinpoche	rdo rje gro lod
རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲོགས་པོ	Vajra friend. A fellow practitioner with whom one shares the sacred link of having the same master, practice or having received teaching together	rdo rje grogs po
རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང	Darjeeling	rdo rje gling
རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང་པ	(1346-1405); gter ston	rdo rje gling pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང་ཕུག་གི་གནས	a cave called the Place of the Vajra	rdo rje gling phug gi gnas
རྡོ་རྗེ་མགུར	Songs, vajra	rdo rje mgur
རྡོ་རྗེ་མགོན་པོ	vajra protectors	rdo rje mgon po
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་ཁྲམ	crossed-vajra	rdo rje rgya khram
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་གྲམ	vajra-cross, crossed vajras	rdo rje rgya gram
པོསྟུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་སིཏཏིང་ཅྲོསས	legged	posture of sitting cross
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་གྲམ་འགྲོས	crossed vajras gait (in dance)	rdo rje rgya gram 'gros
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་མདུད	vajra knot	rdo rje rgya mdud
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	vajra king; during a	rdo rje rgyal po
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་དབང	the empowerment of the king of indestructible reality	rdo rje rgyal po'i dbang
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	standard of victory, buddhist folded flag, the demon naraka	rdo rje rgyal mtshan
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཅན	name of brgya byin lha	rdo rje can
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཅོད་པ	rdor gcod - the vajracchedik'a n'ama prajny'aparamit'a into Tibetan	rdo rje gcod pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཅུའི་སྙིང	a sutra	rdo rje bcu'i snying
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཅུའི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of 10 vajra	rdo rje bcu'i snying po
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཅོམ	killed by the vajra of indra	rdo rje bcom
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་མ	Vajra Hook Lady 1437	rdo rje lcags kyu ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྕམ་དྲལ	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje lcam dral
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆང་ཡབ་ཡུམ	a diety	rdo rje chang yab yum
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆུ	vajra water	rdo rje chu
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས	dharmavajra (aspect of rdorje-'chang), adibuddha for bka' brgyud pa	rdo rje chos
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གླུ	hymns of buddhist tantricism	rdo rje chos kyi glu
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་གྲོན	a diety	rdo rje chos gron
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་སྒྲོན	a deity	rdo rje chos sgron
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་བདུན	7 venerable sermons of vairotsana	rdo rje chos bdun
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆེད	vajra friends	rdo rje mched
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆེད་ལྕམ་དྲལ	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje mched lcam dral
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆེད་དང་ལྕམ་བྲལ	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje mched dang lcam bral
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆེད་པོ	vajra friend	rdo rje mched po
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆོག	a bird	rdo rje mchog
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Vajra Holder. Vajradhara	rdo rje 'chang
ཨིནདིབི༹སིབླེ་ཨུནིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་པྲེ	reflective nonthematic and the reflectivethematic in experience, established through byin gyis rlabs of samantabhadra, transition from absolute to relative (he wears ornaments), he taught phyag na ...	indivisible unity of the pre
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་གི་རྒྱལ་ཚབ	Regent of Vajradhara	rdo rje 'chang gi rgyal tshab
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན	famous chant of the Kagyü lineage beginning with these words	rdo rje 'chang chen
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཇིགས་བྱེད	terrifying tutelary deity, manifestation of 'jam dpal	rdo rje 'jigs byed
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཉི་མ	1) rdo rje nyi ma'i mdo; 2) bodhisattva rdo rje 'od; 3) Buddha rdo rje nyi ma)	rdo rje nyi ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་འགྲེལ	sems 'grel skor gsum gyi nang tsan, dgyes pa rdo rje'i rgyud brtag pa gnyis pa dus 'khor ltar du 'grel ba, phyag na rdo rjes brtsams,..	rdo rje snying 'grel
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོ	gsang sngags kyi snying bcud,..	rdo rje snying po
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	tantric sutra	rdo rje snying po rgyan gyi rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྕེ་འབབ་པ	dharani used as a protection	rdo rje snying po rdo rje lce 'bab pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོའི་གཟུངས	'phags pa rdo rje'i snying po'i mdo'i gzungs bam po gcig pa, rgya gar gyi slob dpon sh'i lendra bo dhi dang, lo ts' ba bande ye shes sdes zhus te skad gsar bcad kyis bcos pa'o,..	rdo rje snying po'i gzungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་ཞུས་ལེའུ་གཅིག	a sutra	rdo rje snying zhus le'u gcig
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙེམ་མ	Vajratopa; Vajra Topa	rdo rje snyem ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙེམས་མ	consort of rdo rje sems dpa'	rdo rje snyems ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྟ་སྐད་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	neighing of the vajra horse; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 206]	rdo rje rta skad kyi dgongs pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	vajra-like samadhi/contemplation rdo rje lta bu zhes bya ba'i ting nge 'dzin Adamantine, Concentration called Vajropamo nama samadhih	rdo rje lta bu ting nge 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཀློང	vajra space	rdo rje lta bu'i klong
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྐུ	vajra-like buddha's being	rdo rje lta bu'i sku
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Vajra-like samadhi. The final stage of the tenth bhumi which results in buddhahood	rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གཉིས	TSE	rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	vajra-like contemplation	rdo rje lta bu'i ting 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་གནས་བདུན	TSE	rdo rje lta bu'i gnas bdun
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	TSE	rdo rje lta bu'i sems bskyed
རྡོ་རྗེ་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་དབང	empowerment of vajra discipline [6th dbang in spyod rgyud]	rdo rje brtul zhugs kyi dbang
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐུགས	vajra mind	rdo rje thugs
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ	Vajra Vehicle, Vajrayana, vehicle of indestructible reality, the vajra vehicle [of Secret Mantra]	rdo rje theg pa
བེ༹ཧིཅླེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨིནདེསྟྲུཅཏིབླེ་རེཨལིཏཡ	[tserig]	vehicle of indestructible reality
བདུད་རྩིའི་རོལ་མཚོ	arranged by mchog gyur gling pa, gter ston, 18291870	bdud rtsi'i rol mtsho
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	the two parts of vajrayana, {thub pa rgyud kyi theg pa}, {thabs kyi rgyud kyi theg pa}	rdo rje theg pa rnam pa gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པའི་ཉམས་རྟོགས	experiences and realizations of Vajrayana	rdo rje theg pa'i nyams rtogs
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པའི་དམ་ཚིག	Vajrayana samayas rdo rje theg pa'i sbom po'i ltang ba sngags lugs kyi bsrung bya'i sbom po brgyad	rdo rje theg pa'i dam tshig
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པའི་རྩ་བའི་ལྟུང་བ	sngags lud kyi bsrung bya'i rtsa ltung bcu bzhi,..	rdo rje theg pa'i rtsa ba'i ltung ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	summit of vajrayana, [man ngag rdzogs pa chen po]	rdo rje theg pa'i rtse mo
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	preliminaries for the Vajrayana path rdo rje thegs pa'i dkyil 'khor gyi cho ga mandala rituals of vajrayana	rdo rje theg pa'i lam gyi sngon 'gro
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐོ་བ	TSE	rdo rje tho ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང	Vajra Tötreng. 'Vajra Garland of skulls.' One of Padmasambhava's names	rdo rje thod phreng
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Dorje thotreng tsal	rdo rje thod phreng rtsal
རྡོ་རྗེ་དང་ནོར་བུའི་ཏོག	vajra and jewel	rdo rje dang nor bu'i tog
ཏོཔ	ornament	top
རྡོ་རྗེ་དམ་ཚིག	vajra samaya, commitments of indestructible reality	rdo rje dam tshig
རྡོ་རྗེ་དརབ༹་བ	Vajra Net; text name	rdo rje drva ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་དྲག་པོ་རྩལ	Dorje Drakpo Tsal. "Wrathful Vajra Power." A wrathful form of Guru Rinpoche and one of the 'twelve manifestations.'	rdo rje drag po rtsal
རྡོ་རྗེ་དྲག་པོ་རྩལ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྐོར	Teaching Cycle of Dorje Drakpo Tsal	rdo rje drag po rtsal kyi chos skor
རྡོ་རྗེ་དྲག་རྩལ	Dorje Draktsal. Same as 'Dorje Drakpo Tsal.'	rdo rje drag rtsal
རྡོ་རྗེ་དྲིལ་བུ	indian buddhist sage	rdo rje dril bu
རྡོ་རྗེ་དྲོད་ལོ	Dorje Drolö. A wrathful form of Padmasambhava; especially for subduing evil forces and concealing termas for the welfare of future generations	rdo rje drod lo
རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	Bodhgaya	rdo rje gdan
རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན་པ	Buddha	rdo rje gdan pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང་གསུམ	CHN rdo rje gdan pa pha jo rta mgrin rgyal	rdo rje gdan pa che chung gsum
རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན་བཞི	1) the four vajra seats; 2) four vajra seats tantra)	rdo rje gdan bzhi
རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན་བཞིའི་རྒྱུད	Four Vajra Seats Tantra	rdo rje gdan bzhi'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འཇོམས	Dorje Dudjom. Same as Dorje Dudjom Tsal	rdo rje bdud 'joms
རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འཇོམས་རྩལ	Dorje Dujomtsal	rdo rje bdud 'joms rtsal
རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་རྩི	Vajramrita, {bla med he ru ka}, the chief figure of the wrathful herukas of the ratna family	rdo rje bdud rtsi
རྡོ་རྗེ་བདེ་ཁྲོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Indestructible Blissful Wrath. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje bde khros kyi rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	gter ston	rdo rje bde chen gling pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་མདུད	indestructible knot	rdo rje mdud
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྡུལ	diamond-powder	rdo rje rdul
རྡོ་རྗེ་བསྡམས	vajra hand-clasp	rdo rje bsdams
རྡོ་རྗེ་ནག་མོ	tantric goddess	rdo rje nag mo
རྡོ་རྗེ་ནོར་བུ	sexuality	rdo rje nor bu
རྡོ་རྗེ་གནས་བདུན	7 abiding conditions of indestructible reality	rdo rje gnas bdun
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣམ་འཇོམས	Vajra Subjugator. A Mahayana sutra	rdo rje rnam 'joms
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣམ་འཇོམས་ཀྱི་གཟུངས	special dharani	rdo rje rnam 'joms kyi gzungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་པ	Vajra Vidharana. "The Vajra Conqueror". A deity practiced for the removal of contamination and negativity	rdo rje rnam par 'joms pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་པའི་གཟུངས	the Vajra Vidarana dharani rdo rje rnam par 'joms pa'i gzungs zhes bya ba'i rim par phye ba'i rgya cher 'grel pa gsal ba'i sgron me - {rdo rje rnam par 'joms pa'i gzungs zhes bya ba'i rim par phye ...	rdo rje rnam par 'joms pa'i gzungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	Vajrayogini	rdo rje rnal 'byor ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣོན་པོ	Vajratiksna, "vajra-sharp", an epithet of Manjushri; Vajra Sharpness	rdo rje rnon po
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣོན་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Sharpness Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje rnon po'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་པད་མ	a bodhisattva	rdo rje pad ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་དཔལ་སྒྲོན	name of ayo mkha' 'gro	rdo rje dpal sgron
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤུན	vajra siblings, vajra brother	rdo rje spun
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤུན་གྲོགས	bla ma gcig gi mdun nas sngags kyi dbang mnyam du zhus pa'i mched grogs	rdo rje spun grogs
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤུན་སྲིང	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje spun sring
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤུན་སྲིང་རྣམས	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje spun sring rnams
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤྱན་གཅིག	Ekajati	rdo rje spyan gcig
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྤྱན་གཅིག་མ	Vajra One-Eyed 1439	rdo rje spyan gcig ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕ་ཝམ	SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	rdo rje pha wam
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕ་ཝམ་གདོང	bat-headed Vajra	rdo rje pha wam gdong
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕ་ལམ	diamond, diamond from earth & water whose qualities relate to 4 indian castes, diamond, 1 of rin chen nor bdun	rdo rje pha lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕག་མོ	Vajra Varahi	rdo rje phag mo
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕུར་པ	Dorje Phurba, or Vajra Kilaya, the Heruka of the karma family	rdo rje phur pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕུར་བ	Vajrakila [1) kila dagger; 2) divine sceptre; 3) Vajrakilaya [Bla med rgyud kyi yi dam zhig	rdo rje phur ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕྱི་ནུར་འགྲོས	Vajra stride rdo rje phra mo thogs pa med pa zhes	rdo rje phyi nur 'gros
བྱ་བའི་གཟུངས	{rdo rje phra mo thogs pa med pa zhes bya ba'i gzungs} [rigs kyi khro bo khro mo'i rgyud kyi gras shig 'gyur byang med pa, rgyud 'bum glegs bam wa par bzhugs pa'o, rdo rje phra mo thogs pa med pa zhes	bya ba'i gzungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕྲེང་བ	Vajra Garland, the bshad rgyud of Guhyasamaja	rdo rje phreng ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཕྲེང་བ	Vajr'avali	rdo rje 'phreng ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་བེ་ཅོན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Pestle Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje be con gyi rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་བྱིན	Vajra gift	rdo rje byin
རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག	Dorje Drag	rdo rje brag
རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག་དགོན་པ	{rdo rje brag Monastery	rdo rje brag dgon pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག་རིག་འཛིན	padma phrin las the second (1640?-1718)	rdo rje brag rig 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག་རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ	Vidyadhara of Dorje Drak rdo rje brag rig 'dzin pad ma 'phrin las lama of the byang gter tradition	rdo rje brag rig 'dzin chen po
རྡོ་རྗེ་དབང་ཕྱུག	Vajrapani, phyag na rdo rje}	rdo rje dbang phyug
རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱངས་ཅན	Sarasvati of the Vajra family	rdo rje dbyangs can
རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱིངས	Vajradhatu	rdo rje dbyings
རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of the indestructible expanse	rdo rje dbyings kyi dkyil 'khor
དབང་བསྐུར	the empowerment for the grand vajradhatu mandala	dbang bskur
རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ	{rdo rje dbyings kyi dbang phyug ma}	rdo rje dbyings kyi dbang phyug ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་འབར	Vajrajvala	rdo rje 'bar
རྡོ་རྗེ་འབར་བ་ཅན	Vajrajvala [R]dur khrod chen po brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig..	rdo rje 'bar ba can
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྦ་རླབས	vajra wave	rdo rje rba rlabs
རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་བསྐྱོད་པ	Vajra Akshobhya	rdo rje mi bskyod pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་ཕྱེད་པའི་དབང	the indestructible vajra abhisheka rdo rje mi g.yo ba - Vajra Achala, one of the four patron deities of the Kadampa	rdo rje mi phyed pa'i dbang
རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་ཤིགས་པ་གསུམ	the three indestructible vajras	rdo rje mi shigs pa gsum
རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་ཤིགས་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ	deity of the three indestructible vajras	rdo rje mi shigs pa gsum gyi lha
རྡོ་རྗེ་མི་ཤིགས་པའི་ཆོས	the indestructible vajra nature	rdo rje mi shigs pa'i chos
རྡོ་རྗེ་མེ་ལྕེ	hell where flames of fire resemble point of rdo rje, vajra flame hell according to the kalacakra	rdo rje me lce
རྡོ་རྗེ་མེ་རིའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Blazing Vajra Mountain	rdo rje me ri'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་མེ་ལོང	Vajra Mirror; text name	rdo rje me long
རྡོ་རྗེ་མེ་ལོང་གི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Mirror Tantra	rdo rje me long gi rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་མོའི་བུ	Vajriputra. one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen staviras / arhats, in Tamradvipa	rdo rje mo'i bu
བརྟན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the sixteen [staviras]/ [arhants]	brtan bcu drug
རྡོ་རྗེ་དམྱལ་བ	vajra hell	rdo rje dmyal ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཙུན་མོ	vajra queen	rdo rje btsun mo
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་དགུ	religious gter ma	rdo rje rtse dgu
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་དགུ་པ	9 pointed vajra [dbus su rva gcig phyi rol tu rva brgyad kyis bskor ba'i rdo rje zhig..	rdo rje rtse dgu pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་དགུ་འོད་འབར་བ	a gleaming	rdo rje rtse dgu 'od 'bar ba
ནིནེ	pointed vajra	nine
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་བརྒྱ་པ	hundred-pronged vajra	rdo rje rtse brgya pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་ལྔ	five-pronged vajra	rdo rje rtse lnga
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་ལྔ་པ	five-pronged vajra	rdo rje rtse lnga pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་གཅིག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	One pointed vajra mudra	rdo rje rtse gcig gi phyag rgya
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་གཅིག་པ	single-pronged vajra 1440	rdo rje rtse gcig pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་མོ	The Vajra Peak Tantra; {gsang ba rnal 'byor chen po'i rgyud rdo rje rtse mo} Skt. Vajrasekharamahaguhya-yogatantra, (T 480)	rdo rje rtse mo
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྩེ་མོའི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Pinnacle Tantra. One the Four Major Sections of Yoga Tantra rdo rje rtse mo'i dbang rim nyer gnyis CHN	rdo rje rtse mo'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚིག	vajra words, phrase of indestructible reality	rdo rje tshig
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚིག་རྐང་དྲུག	Six Vajra Lines. The supplication to Guru Rinpoche called Düsum Sangye	rdo rje tshig rkang drug
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚིག་གི་གསོལ་འདེབས	Vajra Verse Supplication. Same as Düsum Sangye	rdo rje tshig gi gsol 'debs
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན	vajra holder, scepter-bearer, (emphasizes the operational reflectivethematic aspect of being within being, mipham (having the power to conquer the mire of samsara and nirvana), holder of the vajra	rdo rje 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	vajra holder, Vajradhara; holder of indestructible reality	rdo rje 'dzin pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པའི་ས	level of Vajra Holder, [13th bhumi]	rdo rje 'dzin pa'i sa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཞོན་ནུ	Vajrakumara, dorje phurba, Vajrakilaya	rdo rje gzhon nu
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞད་པ	Vajrahasya or Vajrahasa, Indian master who wrote a	rdo rje bzhad pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞི	four vajras	rdo rje bzhi
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞི་བསྐྱེད	visualization of the four vajras [way of visualization, stong nyid bsgoms nas pad nyi la sogs pa'i gdan gyi steng du zla nyi sa bon las 'od zer 'phros; slar 'dus pa las lha'i sku rdzogs par bskyed ...	rdo rje bzhi bskyed
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞི་ཆོག	ritual of the four vajras	rdo rje bzhi chog
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཟམ་པ	gsang sngags rnying ma'i rgyud sde zhig	rdo rje zam pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཟེགས་མ	the vajra fragments/slivers	rdo rje zegs ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཟླས་པ	vajra retention	rdo rje zlas pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཟེགས་མ	vajra fragments: {rgyu	rdo rje gzegs ma
ལ་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་ནས་འགོག་པ	myu gu skye na bdag las sam gzhan las sam gnyis ka las sam rgyu med las kye zhes dpyad pas rigs ngor gang las kyang mi skye bas skye med du sgrub pa'o}	la rnam par dpyad nas 'gog pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཟེགས་མའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	Vajra particle/slivers reasoning	rdo rje gzegs ma'i gtan tshigs
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཟའ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག	samaya of the vajra meal	rdo rje bza' ba'i dam tshig
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཟེགས་མའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	the reasons of the vajra slivers	rdo rje bzegs ma'i gtan tshigs
རྡོ་རྗེ་བཟླས་པ	TSE	rdo rje bzlas pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the indestructible / vajra wisdom body rdo rje g.yu sgron - sman btsun chen mo rdo rje g.yu sgron ma - Dorje Yudr”n	rdo rje ye shes kyi sku
རྡོ་རྗེ་ར་གུར	enclosure of vajras	rdo rje ra gur
རྡོ་རྗེ་ར་བ	Dorje Rawa, at Labchi. See Adamantine Rampart	rdo rje ra ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་རྭ་བ	Vajra Prong	rdo rje rwa ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་རབ་འཇོམས	Vajra Conqueror	rdo rje rab 'joms
རྡོ་རྗེ་རབ་ཏུ་གསང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Most Secret Vajra Tantra. One of the Twentyfive Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana rdo rje ri rab chen po'i rtse mo'i khang pa	rdo rje rab tu gsang ba'i rgyud
བརྩེགས་པའི་གཟུངས	{rdo rje ri rab chen po'i rtse mo'i khang pa brtsegs pa'i gzungs} rdo rje ri rab chen po'i rtse mo'i khang pa	brtsegs pa'i gzungs
རྡོ་རྗེ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the divinities of the Vajra family	rdo rje rigs kyi lha tshogs
རྡོ་རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	rdo rje pha lam	rdo rje rin po che
རྡོ་རྗེ་རོ་ལངས་མ	lha mo dbyangs can ma drag tu khros pa'o,..	rdo rje ro langs ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལམ	the indestructible path	rdo rje lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལས	karmavajra (aspect of rdo rje 'chang), adibuddha for bka' brgyud pa	rdo rje las
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལས་བྱས་པ	made of vajras / diamonds	rdo rje las byas pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལས་བྱས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་གདན	the Vajra Seat made of diamond	rdo rje las byas pa rdo rje'i gdan
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ	vajra chains, the essential manifestation of the primordial state of rigpa, awareness as expanse of reality manifesting in the form of spheres of light 1441	rdo rje lu gu
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	vajra chain, indestructible chains of light	rdo rje lu gu rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད་མའི་རྟོག་པ	bon text	rdo rje lu gu rgyud ma'i rtog pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུང་བསྟན	indestructible prophetic declarations / prophecies	rdo rje lung bstan
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུས	vajra body, adamantine body, vajra body, human body with rtsa, chakras, rlung, thigle	rdo rje lus
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of the vajra body	rdo rje lus kyi dkyil 'khor
རྡོ་རྗེ་ལེགས་པ	vajrasadhu, epithet of a tutelary deity	rdo rje legs pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཤིང	thunderbolt tree	rdo rje shing
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཤོགས་པ	indestructible wings	rdo rje shogs pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཤོག་པ	vajra wings	rdo rje gshog pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་གཤོགས་པ	indestructible wings	rdo rje gshogs pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ས	indestructible level	rdo rje sa
རྡོ་རྗེ་ས་བླའི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Above Earth Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje sa bla'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་ས་གཞི	the vajra base	rdo rje sa gzhi
རྡོ་རྗེ་ས་འོག་གི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Under Earth Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje sa 'og gi rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས	Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་པ་ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	rdo rje sems pa nam mkha' che
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Vajrasattva, [vajrabeing], state of commitment to what is indestructible [phyag gyas rdo rje snying khar gsor zhing, gyon pas dril bu dku la brten pa, zhabs gnyis skyil mo krung gis bzhugs pa, sku ...	rdo rje sems dpa'
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཁོང་སེང་གི་ལམ	Inner Path of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa' khong seng gi lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་གླུའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Song of Vajrasattva rdo rje sems dpa' sgyu 'phrul dra ba'i	rdo rje sems dpa' glu'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	SA sgyu 'phrul drwa ba rdo rje sems dpa' snying gi me long Heart Mirror of Vajrasattva, [one of the 18 rdzogs chen tantras]	rdo rje sems dpa' sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་སྙིང་གི་མེ་ལོང	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	rdo rje sems dpa' snying gi me long
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་བདེ་བ་ཆེ	Vajrasattva of great bliss	rdo rje sems dpa' bde ba che
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ	SA mi nub pa'i rgyal mtshan	rdo rje sems dpa' nam mkha' che
པ་ཞལ་འདོན་དུ་མཛད་པ	was reciting the lines begining, "Vajrasattva, vast as the sky. . . " rdo rje sems dpa' nam mkha'i mtha' dang	pa zhal 'don du mdzad pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་གསང་ལམ	the secret pathway of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa' gsang lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཁོང་སེང་གི་ལམ	inner path of Vajrasattva rdo rje sems dpa'i sgyu 'phrul drwa ba the Magical Net of Vajrasattva, n of tantra; also {rdo rje sems dpa'i sgyu 'phrul drva ba}, {rdo rje sems dpa' sgyu 'phrul drwa ba} ...	rdo rje sems dpa'i khong seng gi lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་དྲིལ་བུ	1) Vajrasattva's ghanta; 2) kind of ghanta)	rdo rje sems dpa'i dril bu
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the practice of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa'i rnal 'byor
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྣ་ཐག	the pathway of Vajrasattva, [- Syn {rdo rje sems dpa'i gsang lam}, {thugs rje rgyun gyi thag pa}	rdo rje sems dpa'i sna thag
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྲུལ་པ	an emanation of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa'i sprul pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཡི་གེ་བརྒྱ་པ	Hundred Syllables of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa'i yi ge brgya pa
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་གསང་ལམ	the secret pathway of Vajrasattva; secret path of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa'i gsang lam
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའི་གསེང་ལམ་ཆེ	the great secret path of Vajrasattva	rdo rje sems dpa'i gseng lam che
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་མ	vajra being (fem)	rdo rje sems ma
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྲིན་པོ	Vajraraksha, [Syn Vajrasattva]	rdo rje srin po
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྲོག་ཐིག	general name for namkhai norbu's cycle of mandarava terma teachings	rdo rje srog thig
རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན	vajra master; [detailed expl. of qualifications, Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 145]	rdo rje slob dpon
རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང	vajra master empowerment	rdo rje slob dpon gyi dbang
རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་ལས་བཞི	CHN rdo rje slob dpon gyis mtshan nyid bshad	rdo rje slob dpon gyi las bzhi
སྐབས་ཀྱི་ནང་གི་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	CHN	skabs kyi nang gi de nyid bcu
རྡོ་རྗེ་སློབ་དཔོན་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ་ལྡན	a vajra master endowed with the ten principles [of Secret Mantra]	rdo rje slob dpon de nyid bcu ldan
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསང་བ	the Buddha Vajraguhya	rdo rje gsang ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསང་བ་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Indestructible Secret Teaching. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rdo rje gsang ba bstan pa'i rgyud
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསང་བ་གསུམ	three vajrasecrets. The three vajra-secrets refer to Vajra Body, Vajra Speech, and Vajra Mind. [CNR]	rdo rje gsang ba gsum
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུང	speech vajra	rdo rje gsung
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ	three vajras. The three Vajras: The vajra (i.e. indestructible) body, speech and mind of Buddhahood 1442	rdo rje gsum
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ་གྱི་ངོ་བོར	as the identity of the three vajras	rdo rje gsum gyi ngo bor
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ་གྱི་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	Service and attainment of the three indestructible realities [tradition of orgyenpa rinpoche book 2, p -	rdo rje gsum gyi bsnyen sgrub
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ་གྱི་གསང་བ	the secrets / mysteries of the three vajras. sku'i	rdo rje gsum gyi gsang ba
གསང་བ	the secret of body, gsung gi	gsang ba
ཀྱི་གསང་བ	the secret of mind	kyi gsang ba
རྡོ་རྗེ་གསོར	brandish the vajra	rdo rje gsor
རྡོ་རྗེའ	CHN	rdo rje'
རྡོ་རྗེའི	vajra; indestructible, immutable, adamantine, unchanging, changeless	rdo rje'i
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཀློང	vajra dimension	rdo rje'i klong
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐུ	vajra body; body of indestructible reality; vajra embodiment / form / body	rdo rje'i sku
མ་ཚུགས	his vajra body, unharmed by the fire	ma tshugs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	vajra posture, vajra	rdo rje'i skyil krung
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཁུ་ཚུར	vajra fist	rdo rje'i khu tshur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གད་མོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve kinds of vajra laughter	rdo rje'i gad mo bcu gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གད་མོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 great laughters of indestructible reality rdo rje'i gad mo chen po bcu gnyis twelve great laughters of indestructible reality	rdo rje'i gad mo chen po bcu gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གར་རྒྱ	vajra dance and mudra	rdo rje'i gar rgya
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གར་མཛད	to perform vajra dances	rdo rje'i gar mdzad
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གིང་ཀ་ར	the Vajra Gingkara; emanation of Palchen Heruka	rdo rje'i ging ka ra
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གུར	pavilion of vajras	rdo rje'i gur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླུ	song of the vajra, vajra songs	rdo rje'i glu
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླུ་བླངས་པ	sang vajra songs	rdo rje'i glu blangs pa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	vajra songs	rdo rje'i glu dbyangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླུ་དབྱངས་བླངས	sang vajra songs	rdo rje'i glu dbyangs blangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླུ་ཞིག	the song of the vajra	rdo rje'i glu zhig
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མགུར	vajra song	rdo rje'i mgur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྒྲ	indestructible sound	rdo rje'i sgra
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	vajra melody / tune	rdo rje'i sgra dbyangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ངང་ཉིད	vajra state	rdo rje'i ngang nyid
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྔགས	vajra mantra	rdo rje'i sngags
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དབྱངས	the sound of vajra mantra	rdo rje'i sngags kyi dbyangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྔགས་སྒྲ	the sound of the vajra mantra	rdo rje'i sngags sgra
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལྕེ	vajra thunderbolt	rdo rje'i lce
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆར	1) hail; 2) thunder)	rdo rje'i char
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆིངས	vajra theme/ paradigm	rdo rje'i chings
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆུ་འཐུང	drinking the vajra water	rdo rje'i chu 'thung
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆོས་བདུན	Seven vajra qualities. Emptiness externally is 1) solid, firm, and unbreakable, internally 2) the core and 3) without hollowness, 4) not cutable into pieces, 5) not possibly split asunder or destro...	rdo rje'i chos bdun
སེབེ༹ན་སོ	called vajra attributes [rdo rje'i chos bdun] of the abiding nature of reality. The other attributes are invulnerability [mi chod pa], indestructibility [mi shigs pa], authenticity [bden pa], stabi...	seven so
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མཆུ་ཅན	epithet of ganapati, epithet of garuda, raven, tutelary deity	rdo rje'i mchu can
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མཆེད	vajra friends	rdo rje'i mched
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མཆེད་ལྕམ	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje'i mched lcam
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མཇུག་མ	dog, god	rdo rje'i mjug ma
རྡོ་རྗེའི་འཇིམ་པ	mortar composed of pulverized cement of marvelous properties	rdo rje'i 'jim pa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཏོག	on top is a vajra	rdo rje'i tog
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གཏུན	knocker made of precious stones	rdo rje'i gtun
རྡོ་རྗེའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	vajra discipline	rdo rje'i brtul zhugs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་དབང	empowerment for [accomplishing] vajra discipline. Syn {phyir mi ldog pa slob dpon gyi dbang}. an empowerment belonging to Yoga tantra	rdo rje'i brtul zhugs kyi dbang
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐུགས	vajra mind	rdo rje'i thugs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐེག་པ	vajrayana, the vajra vehicle	rdo rje'i theg pa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐེག་པ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	the two parts of vajrayana, [R]	rdo rje'i theg pa rnam pa gnyis
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐེམ་སྐས	vajra staircase; approach runway (in dance)	rdo rje'i them skas
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐོག	2nd chapter of kye rdo rje'i rgyud	rdo rje'i thog
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དམ་ལྡན	one who maintains the vajra samaya	rdo rje'i dam ldan
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དམ་ཚིག	vajra samaya	rdo rje'i dam tshig
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དམ་བཞིན	according to vajra commitment	rdo rje'i dam bzhin
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གདངས	dang energy of vajra	rdo rje'i gdangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གདན	Vajrasana, [- sm Bodhgaya]	rdo rje'i gdan
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གདན་བཞི	TSE	rdo rje'i gdan bzhi
རྡོ་རྗེའི་འདུག་སྟངས	rdo rje skyil krung	rdo rje'i 'dug stangs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྡེ	Army of thunderbolts, force of thunderbolts	rdo rje'i sde
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྤུན་གྲོགས	vajra brothers and sisters	rdo rje'i spun grogs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཕོ་ཉ	sacred support	rdo rje'i pho nya
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཕོ་ཉ་མོ	consort	rdo rje'i pho nya mo
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དབང་བསྐུར	vajra empowerment	rdo rje'i dbang bskur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དབང་བསྐུར་བ	conferring the empowerment of the vajra	rdo rje'i dbang bskur ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དབྱིངས	vajradhatu; vajra/ immutable basic space	rdo rje'i dbyings
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དབྱུག་པ	vajra staff	rdo rje'i dbyug pa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྦ་རླབས	wave of the vajra (yantra yoga concluding exercise)	rdo rje'i rba rlabs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མྱལ་བ	Vajra Hell. The lowest hell of Incessant Pain	rdo rje'i myal ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་དམྱལ་བ	vajra hell	rdo rje'i dmyal ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྨོན་ལམ	gsang sngags kyi smon lam	rdo rje'i smon lam
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཙིག་གསང	sngags kyi tshig sogs zab cing brling ba'i tshig	rdo rje'i tsig gsang
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚྭ་ཚྭ	vajra sparks	rdo rje'i tshwa tshwa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚིག	precious word, truth, word of buddha	rdo rje'i tshig
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚིག་རྐང	Vajra Verses written by thang stong rgyal po	rdo rje'i tshig rkang
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚིག་དྲུག	Six Vajra Lines	rdo rje'i tshig drug
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚིགས་གསུམ	3 vajra verses; SA ngo rang thog tu sprod pa, thag gcig thog tu chod pa, gdengs grol thog tu 'cha' ba	rdo rje'i tshigs gsum
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཚེ	very long life, immortality	rdo rje'i tshe
རྡོ་རྗེའི་མཚན	vajra name	rdo rje'i mtshan
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཟིལ་བ	semen	rdo rje'i zil ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཟེགས	thunder	rdo rje'i zegs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཟེགས་མ	thunderbolts	rdo rje'i zegs ma
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཟོམ	point of the rdo rje	rdo rje'i zom
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གཟུངས་མ	Vajra consort. A spiritual attendant in Vajrayana practice	rdo rje'i gzungs ma
རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས་པ	the Vajra recition	rdo rje'i bzlas pa
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཡི་གེ	vajra script / letters / syllables	rdo rje'i yi ge
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ར་གུར	enclosure of vajras	rdo rje'i ra gur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ར་བ	vajra fence	rdo rje'i ra ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རབ༹	in the four directions of a divine palace the central horn w/o chu srin, rdo rje'i dbus rva &, the direction horns coming from the mouts of chu srin, phyogs rva	rdo rje'i rva
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྭ་གུར	srung 'khor surrounded by vajra enclosure/ encircling ring of vajras	rdo rje'i rwa gur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རབ༹་གུར	srung 'khor surrounded by vajra enclosure/ encircling ring of vajras	rdo rje'i rva gur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རབ༹་བ	Adamantine Rampart	rdo rje'i rva ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྭ་བ	vajra enclosure, encircling ring of vajras	rdo rje'i rwa ba
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རི	1) [vajra] fence; 2) the seven mts.: khor yug gi me ri, = rta gdong me	rdo rje'i ri
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིག་འཛིན	the awareness-holders of indestructible reality	rdo rje'i rig 'dzin
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིགས	Vajra family. One of the five families	rdo rje'i rigs
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིགས་ཀྱི	mystical charms	rdo rje'i rigs kyi
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	mysticism	rdo rje'i rigs kyi snying po
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུས	vajra body / form	rdo rje'i lus
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུས་གྱུར	who has the vajra body	rdo rje'i lus gyur
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སོར་གདུབ	rdo rje yod pa'i ring	rdo rje'i sor gdub
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྲུང་འཁོར	vajra / indestructible protection circle	rdo rje'i srung 'khor
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྲོག	vajra-like vitality	rdo rje'i srog
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྲོག་ཐིག	adamantine essence of life	rdo rje'i srog thig
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྲོག་ཤིང	the vajra life-pillar	rdo rje'i srog shing
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སློབ་དཔོན	vajra master	rdo rje'i slob dpon
རྡོ་རྗེའི་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང	vajra master empowerment; empowerment of the master of indestructible reality	rdo rje'i slob dpon gyi dbang
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གསུང	speech vajra	rdo rje'i gsung
རྡོ་རྗེའི་གསུང་འཁྲུལ་མེད	unmistaken vajra speech	rdo rje'i gsung 'khrul med
རྡོ་རྗེར་གུར	enclosure with walls of dorje figures	rdo rjer gur
རྡོ་རྗེས་གསུང	TSE	rdo rjes gsung
རྡོ་ཉི་མ	{rdo nyi ma} mt	rdo nyi ma
རྡོ་མཉེན	alabaster, soft stone	rdo mnyen
རྡོ་སྙིང	1) skad cha'i don gnad snying po; 2) Rdo'i snying po; 3)	rdo snying
རྡོ་སྙུག	lead pencil	rdo snyug
རྡོ་ཏིང	retreatants and monastic college's signal giving stone drum	rdo ting
རྡོ་གཏུན	stone mortar	rdo gtun
རྡོ་རྟ་གྲོ་མོ	name of square in lde'u 'phrul	rdo rta gro mo
རྡོ་སྟེགས	stone platform	rdo stegs
རྡོ་ཐ	tobacco 1444	rdo tha
རྡོ་ཐག	tobacco	rdo thag
རྡོ་ཐལ	lime stone, ashes, calcined stone, chalk	rdo thal
རྡོ་ཐལ་རྡོ	lime stone	rdo thal rdo
རྡོ་ཐལ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of stone powder [dkar po 'o ma khag, sngo skya phug ron ske, skya bo go bo'i rgyab, dmar skya rta glo kha, sngo nag char sprin mdog bcas lnga	rdo thal rigs lnga
རྡོ་ཐེམ	stone stair	rdo them
རྡོ་ཐེའུ	1) stone mason's rdo gcig byed kyi little hammer; 2) stone seal	rdo the'u
རྡོ་ཐོ	stone hammer	rdo tho
རྡོ་དམ	cement	rdo dam
རྡོ་དུགས	warmth from heated stone	rdo dugs
རྡོ་དུམ	fragments of stone	rdo dum
རྡོ་དུས་ཐུག	to the last extremity	rdo dus thug
རྡོ་དོན	essential meaning	rdo don
རྡོ་དྲིལ	abbr. of {rdo je and dril bu}	rdo dril
རྡོ་དྲིལ་བ	fallen rocks	rdo dril ba
རྡོ་དྲེག	1) fragments of broken rock; 2) pieces of rdo pha bong med.	rdo dreg
རྡོ་དྲེག་དམར་པོ	rdo pha bong med. and broken peices of red rock me tog ris su chags pa [ro bska, nus pa snyoms, dug nad dang, tsad pa rnying pa sel] rdo dreg dmar po} - pha bong dang brag gi ngos sogs la chags pa'...	rdo dreg dmar po
རྡོ་འདམ	cement	rdo 'dam
རྡོ་འདྲ་པོ	stony	rdo 'dra po
རྡོ་རྡུག	poison of stone	rdo rdug
རྡོ་རྡེག	to stone	rdo rdeg
རྡོ་བརྡོས	stone carving/ engraving, pictures/ letters carved on rocks	rdo brdos
རྡོ་ནག	lugs kong bzo byed kyi rgyu cha rdo zhig	rdo nag
རྡོ་ནར་མོ	long rock	rdo nar mo
རྡོ་སྣག	graphite	rdo snag
རྡོ་སྣུམ	petroleum, oil, rock-oil	rdo snum
རྡོ་སྣུམ་གྱི་ཁྲོམ་པ	oil well	rdo snum gyi khrom pa
རྡོ་སྣུམ་གྱི་སྙིགས་མ	pitch, tar	rdo snum gyi snyigs ma
རྡོ་སྣུམ་གྱི་གཏེར་ཁ	oil field	rdo snum gyi gter kha
རྡོ་སྣུམ་གྱི་གཏེར་སྣ	oil seepage	rdo snum gyi gter sna
རྡོ་སྣུམ་ཆགས་རིམ	oil zone/ strata/ pool	rdo snum chags rim
རྡོ་སྣུམ་རྗེན་པ	crude oil rdo snum dwangs snyigs dbye ba'i bzo	rdo snum rjen pa
རྡོ་སྣུམ་དྭངས་བྱེད་སྒྲིག་ཆས	petroleum refinery equipment	rdo snum dwangs byed sgrig chas
རྡོ་སྣུམ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	diesel engine	rdo snum 'phrul 'khor
རྡོ་སྣུམ་བཙོ་སྦྱང	refine	rdo snum btso sbyang
རྡོ་སྣུམ་བཙོ་སྦྱང་བྱེད་པ	smelt	rdo snum btso sbyang byed pa
རྡོ་སྣུམ་བཟོ་ལས	oil industry	rdo snum bzo las
རྡོ་པར	lithograph	rdo par
རྡོ་པིར	lead pencil	rdo pir
རྡོ་སྤུངས	pile of stones as offering	rdo spungs
རྡོ་སྤོས	rdo pos mineral med.	rdo spos
རྡོ་སྤྱིལ	stone small building/ cottage	rdo spyil
རྡོ་ཕ་བོང	large rock, boulder	rdo pha bong
རྡོ་ཕག་མགོ	rdo phag mgo mineral med.	rdo phag mgo
རྡོ་ཕུང	heap of stones piled as offerings in places where there are lha rten	rdo phung
རྡོ་ཕུད	offering of stones or earth when a house is built	rdo phud
རྡོ་ཕྱེ	gravel	rdo phye
རྡོ་འཕངས་ཏེ་བསད་པ	threw a stone [at the horse] and killed it	rdo 'phangs te bsad pa
རྡོ་འཕེན་འཕེན་བྱེད	throwing a pebble; x {bla ma'i thugs rjes gzigs zer nas re chen po byed cing rang gis mi dge ba'i las du ma bsags de'i 'bras bu myong mi dgos par bla ma'i thugs rjes dag pa'i zhing khams su rdo 'ph...	rdo 'phen 'phen byed
རྡོ་བ	rock, stone	rdo ba
རྡོ་བའི་ནད	brag zhun rtsi med. ??	rdo ba'i nad
རྡོ་བའི་བུ	tsin rtsi coming from the mts.	rdo ba'i bu
རྡོ་བལ	asbestos	rdo bal
རྡོ་བིས	Dobi, in Marnang (mar nang), Domey	rdo bis
རྡོ་བོན	revealed bon	rdo bon
རྡོ་བྱེའུ་མགོ	{rdo bye'u mgo} stone med	rdo bye'u mgo
རྡོ་བྲག	large rock, brag gong	rdo brag
རྡོ་བྲུབ་ཆེན་དགོན་པ	{rdo brub chen} Monastery rdo bla 'jigs med skal bzang chos kyi blo	rdo brub chen dgon pa
རྡོ་བླངས་པ	removed a rock	rdo blangs pa
རྡོ་དབྱུགས	sling stone	rdo dbyugs
རྡོ་འབུམ	heap of stones w mani carvings/paintings etc.	rdo 'bum
རྡོ་འབུམ་ཉག་ཁ	Dobum Nyagkha, in Domey	rdo 'bum nyag kha
རྡོ་རྦབ	loose stones rolling down	rdo rbab
རྡོ་སྦལ	sbal pa rdo zan, pho bar rdel chags yod pas de'i zas su rdo za bar grags	rdo sbal
རྡོ་སྦིས	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rdo sbis
རྡོ་སྦོམ	large rock	rdo sbom
རྡོ་དམར་ཞབས་དྲུང་མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	b. 1675	rdo dmar zhabs drung mi 'gyur rdo rje
རྡོ་རྨེ་རྣོན་པོ	epithet of 'jam dbyangs	rdo rme rnon po
རྡོ་སྨན	mineral/rock medicines	rdo sman
རྡོ་སྨན་གཅོ་བོ་སོ་བཞི	CHN	rdo sman gco bo so bzhi
རྡོ་སྨྱུག	lead pencil	rdo smyug
རྡོ་ཙུགས	ha shig lta bu rdo mnyen gyi rigs las bzos pa'i rdo tsugs mar me'i drod la bsros nas nad dmigs steng brdeg dgos pa zhig	rdo tsugs
རྡོ་ཙོག	rdo tsog tsog	rdo tsog
རྡོ་རྩི	1) gyu rtsi,...Rdza khog la rdo rtsi gtong ba; 2) Rdo zho'am rdo thal,...Gyang gi phyi ngos dang nang ngos gnyis la rdo rtsi legs par btang ba	rdo rtsi
རྡོ་རྩིག་རྡོ་ཡི་རྩིག་པ	khang pa'i lcags rir rdo rtsig brgyab pa	rdo rtsig rdo yi rtsig pa
རྡོ་ཚད	unit of 50 srang in Tibetan currency 1445	rdo tshad
རྡོ་ཚན	heated rocks, by sun or fire	rdo tshan
རྡོ་ཚིག	1) words of the essential pith; 2) unchanging words	rdo tshig
རྡོ་ཚེར་མ	brambles and stones	rdo tsher ma
རྡོ་མཚན	Dotsen, in Tsari	rdo mtshan
རྡོ་རྫོང	Drukpa Kagyü monastery	rdo rdzong
རྡོ་ཞབ༹	formerly a person having put on a stone hat mig ril phyir 'bur ba'i tshe skam pas 'then nas 'don pa'i khrims chas shig	rdo zhva
རྡོ་ཞིབ	gravel	rdo zhib
རྡོ་ཞུན	bitumen, mineral, pitch	rdo zhun
རྡོ་ཞོ	[used to soften leather] [slaked/ quick] lime	rdo zho
རྡོ་གཞུ་བ	stone	rdo gzhu ba
རྡོ་གཞོང	stone trough	rdo gzhong
རྡོ་གཞོང་ལ	rdo gshong pass [E smin gling rdzong]	rdo gzhong la
རྡོ་གཞོད	mallet for breaking stones	rdo gzhod
རྡོ་ཟན	rock eating frog	rdo zan
རྡོ་ཟམ	stone bridge	rdo zam
རྡོ་གཟོང	stone carving chisel	rdo gzong
རྡོ་བཟོ	masonry	rdo bzo
རྡོ་བཟོ་བ	stone mason, mason	rdo bzo ba
རྡོ་བཟོ་བྱེད	work as a stone mason	rdo bzo byed
རྡོ་འམ་ཤིང་ལེབ	table	rdo 'am shing leb
རྡོ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ	finest turquoise	rdo yi rgyal po
རྡོ་ཡི་ཆར	ser ba	rdo yi char
རྡོ་ཡི་རྩིག་པ	stone wall [khang pa'i lcags rir rdo rtsig brgyab pa]	rdo yi rtsig pa
རྡོ་ཡི་ཟས་ཅན	a pigeon	rdo yi zas can
རྡོ་ར	{rdo rje'i ra ba} vajra fence	rdo ra
རྡོ་རབ༹	vajra fence / wall	rdo rva
རྡོ་རྭ	Syn {rdo rje'i rva ba} vajra fence	rdo rwa
རྡོ་རམས་པའི་དགེ་བཤེས	gdan sa so so'i tshogs chen rdo gcal du mtshan nyid dam bca' 'jog pa'i dge bshes	rdo rams pa'i dge bshes
རྡོ་རིང	* monument, stone pillar/ tablet, obelisk, rdo ring noble family	rdo ring
རྡོ་རིང་གི་ཡི་གེ	inscription on a monument, stone pillar/ tablet, obelisk rdo ring pa kun spangs chen po kun	rdo ring gi yi ge
བཟང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	1449-1524 sa skya pa lama	bzang chos kyi nyi ma
རྡོ་རིང་པད་མ་ཅན	the long rock w a lotus	rdo ring pad ma can
རྡོ་རིལ	rdo ril ril	rdo ril
རྡོ་རུ་འགྱུར་བ	petrify	rdo ru 'gyur ba
རྡོ་རུས་གཏུག་པ	rkang gcog tse rdo dang rus pa gtug dgos pa ltar lag len nan tan byed dgos pa'i don,..	rdo rus gtug pa
རྡོ་རུས་གཏུགས	[unremitting) perseverance	rdo rus gtugs
རྡོ་རུས་ཐུག་པ	complete and conclusive rdo rus thug pa kho thag ma chod kyi bar - until it is settled with complete and conclusive certainty	rdo rus thug pa
རྡོ་རུས་སྤྲོད་པ	rdo dang rus pa thug tu 'jug pa,...Lam lugs rnying pa bsgyur bcos rdo rus sprod pa bzhin byed dgos,..	rdo rus sprod pa
རྡོ་རུས་འཕྲོད་པ	to reach a definite conclusion	rdo rus 'phrod pa
རྡོ་རློག་པ	reduce to powder	rdo rlog pa
རྡོ་ལ་ཁ	place in nepal	rdo la kha
རྡོ་ལ་བྲིས་པ	the drawing on stone	rdo la bris pa
རྡོ་ལ་མེ་འབར	where one finds fire coming from stones	rdo la me 'bar
རྡོ་ལ་ཞབས་རྗེས་བཞག་པ	left footprints in the rock	rdo la zhabs rjes bzhag pa
རྡོ་ལ་གསེར་ཞུན	1 of 5 earlier translated sems sde tantras, earlier translated sems sde tantra, Gold Refined from Ore, 1 of snga 'gyur lnga, 1 of 82 sems phran according to sog bzlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan	rdo la gser zhun
རྡོ་ལ་གསེར་ཞུན་གྱི་ལུང	Pure Gold on Stone Scripture. A tantra belonging the Mind Section of the Great Perfection. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	rdo la gser zhun gyi lung
རྡོ་ལག་བརྒྱུད	lineage like passing a stone from hand to hand	rdo lag brgyud
རྡོ་ལས	masonry	rdo las
རྡོ་ལེབ	slate, slab of stone, slab	rdo leb
རྡོ་ལོག་རིན་གྱིས་ཉོས་ཡོང	gets hit by lots of stones	rdo log rin gyis nyos yong
རྡོ་ཤིང་སྤྱི་པ	sngar rdo bzo shing bzo'i spyi pa	rdo shing spyi pa
རྡོ་ཤེལ	crystal	rdo shel
རྡོ་ཤོ	1) rang byung gi rdel bu gru bzhi rtsis rdel gtong byed cig; 2) rock mo phyva 'debs spyad cig)	rdo sho
རྡོ་སའི་སྨན	medicines from stone and earth	rdo sa'i sman
རྡོ་སེམས	{rdor sems}	rdo sems
རྡོ་སེམས་སྙིང་གི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Heart of Vajrasattva	rdo sems snying gi rgyud
རྡོ་སོལ	1) coal; 2) chu tshan 'khol byed kyi rdo	rdo sol
རྡོ་སོལ་རྐོ་ཁུང	coal pit	rdo sol rko khung
རྡོ་སོལ་མཁྲེགས་པོ	hard coal, anthracite	rdo sol mkhregs po
རྡོ་སོལ་འཁུད་པའི་སྒྲིག་ཆས	coal mining equipment	rdo sol 'khud pa'i sgrig chas
རྡོ་སོལ་གྱི་སྣུམ	coal oil	rdo sol gyi snum
རྡོ་སོལ་སྔོག་འདོན	coal mining	rdo sol sngog 'don
རྡོ་སོལ་སྔོག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	coal mining equipment	rdo sol sngog 'don 'phrul 'khor
རྡོ་སོལ་སྔོག་འདོན་བྱེད	mine coal	rdo sol sngog 'don byed
རྡོ་སོལ་ཆགས་རིམ	coal seam	rdo sol chags rim
རྡོ་སོལ་གཏེར་ཁ	coal mine	rdo sol gter kha
རྡོ་སོལ་གཏེར་ལས	coal mining industry	rdo sol gter las
རྡོ་སོལ་ཞུན་པ	low-grade coal	rdo sol zhun pa
རྡོ་སོལ་ཡོད་ས	coal field	rdo sol yod sa
རྡོ་སོལ་སེར་ནག	brown coal	rdo sol ser nag
རྡོ་སོལ་སོབ་སོབ	bituminous [soft] coal 1446	rdo sol sob sob
རྡོ་སོལ་སྲེག་ཐབ	coke oven	rdo sol sreg thab
རྡོ་སོལ་བསྲེགས་མ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	coking factory	rdo sol bsregs ma bzo grwa
རྡོ་སྲོལ་སྲེག་པ	smelt, refine	rdo srol sreg pa
རྡོ་གསེག	little stones	rdo gseg
རྡོ་གསོབ་གསོབ	soft rock	rdo gsob gsob
རྡོ་གསོལ	1) coal; 2) chu tshan 'khol byed kyi rdo	rdo gsol
རྡོ་གསོལ་རྐོ་ཁུང	coal pit	rdo gsol rko khung
རྡོ་གསོལ་མཁྲེགས་པོ	hard coal, anthracite	rdo gsol mkhregs po
རྡོ་གསོལ་འཁུད་པའི་སྒྲིག་ཆས	coal mining equipment	rdo gsol 'khud pa'i sgrig chas
རྡོ་གསོལ་གྱི་སྣུམ	coal oil	rdo gsol gyi snum
རྡོ་གསོལ་སྔོག་འདོན	coal mining	rdo gsol sngog 'don
རྡོ་གསོལ་སྔོག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	coal mining equipment	rdo gsol sngog 'don 'phrul 'khor
རྡོ་གསོལ་སྔོག་འདོན་བྱེད	mine coal	rdo gsol sngog 'don byed
རྡོ་གསོལ་ཆགས་རིམ	coal seam	rdo gsol chags rim
རྡོ་གསོལ་གཏེར་ཁ	coal mine	rdo gsol gter kha
རྡོ་གསོལ་གཏེར་ལས	coal mining industry	rdo gsol gter las
རྡོ་གསོལ་ཞུན་པ	low-grade coal	rdo gsol zhun pa
རྡོ་གསོལ་ཡོད་ས	coal field	rdo gsol yod sa
རྡོ་གསོལ་སེར་ནག	brown coal	rdo gsol ser nag
རྡོ་གསོལ་སྲེག་ཐབ	coke oven	rdo gsol sreg thab
རྡོ་གསོལ་བསྲེགས་མ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	coking factory	rdo gsol bsregs ma bzo grwa
རྡོ་ཧྲིལ	cobblestone	rdo hril
རྡོ་ཧྲུག	small stones, gravel, pebbles	rdo hrug
རྡོ་ཧྲོག	stone a little bigger than rdo hrub	rdo hrog
རྡོག	bead	rdog
རྡོག་དཀར་བ	supervisor, overseer	rdog dkar ba
རྡོག་ཁ	individual [bits/ pieces]	rdog kha
རྡོག་ཁྲིས	burden	rdog khris
རྡོག་ཁྲེད	burden; {rdog khred 'khyer ba} to carry a burden	rdog khred
རྡོག་ཁྲེས	cloth-wrapper	rdog khres
རྡོག་ཁྲེས་སྐུར	load, burden	rdog khres skur
རྡོག་ཁྲེས་ཁྱེར	carry a burden	rdog khres khyer
རྡོག་ཁྲེས་འཁུར	carry a burden	rdog khres 'khur
རྡོག་ཁྲེས་འཁྱེད	carry a burden	rdog khres 'khyed
རྡོག་ཁྲེས་ལྗིད་པོ	heavy load	rdog khres ljid po
རྡོག་འགྲིལ་བ	enumerate exactly, scrutinize carefully	rdog 'gril ba
རྡོག་རྒྱག	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog rgyag
རྡོག་རྒྱག་པ	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog rgyag pa
རྡོག་རྒྱག་གཞུ	kick	rdog rgyag gzhu
རྡོག་རྒྱག་གཞུ་བ	kick	rdog rgyag gzhu ba
རྡོག་རྒྱག་བཞུས	kicked	rdog rgyag bzhus
རྡོག་སྒྲ	sound of a step	rdog sgra
རྡོག་སྒྲ་རྒྱག་པ	strike the feet on the ground	rdog sgra rgyag pa
རྡོག་བརྒྱབ་བཞུས	buck	rdog brgyab bzhus
རྡོག་གཅིག་མེད	there is not a single 1	rdog gcig med
རྡོག་ལྕག	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog lcag
རྡོག་ཆས	baggage	rdog chas
རྡོག་རྟིང་རྒྱག་པ	strike the heels on the ground	rdog rting rgyag pa
རྡོག་ཐོ	men or cattle lifting their feet, striking of tread or the clatter of hooves rdog tho brgyab kyis drel gyi rkang pa	rdog tho
སྐྲངས་སོང	by the striking of their hooves the mule's legs became swollen	skrangs song
རྡོག་ཐོན	leaving a place for good	rdog thon
རྡོག་ཐོན་པ	set out on a journey, leave a place for good	rdog thon pa
རྡོག་ཐོན་བྱེད	set out on a journey, leave a place for good	rdog thon byed
རྡོག་མཐིལ	sole of the boot	rdog mthil
རྡོག་འདེགས	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog 'degs
རྡོག་རྡོ	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog rdo
རྡོག་རྡོག	1) snying po; 2) ril ril [small solid] pieces/ lumps; 3) lham gyi sna mgo'i yar tsam gyi phar phyin solid, bulky, bump/ rise on a flat surface, straightforward [statements/ speech]	rdog rdog
རྡོག་རྡོག་ཅན	lumpy rdog rdog snying por 'dril thub pa dgos 2) Ril ril, gser rdog rdog gcig...Spags rdog rdog gcig; 3) Lham gyi sna mgo'i yar tsam gyi phar phyin	rdog rdog can
རྡོག་སྣ	front of the boot sole	rdog sna
རྡོག་པ	a footstep; step, footstep, kick, to step, to pace, to walk	rdog pa
རྡོག་པ་རྒྱག་པ	1) put a sole on shoes; 2) by walking or kicking strike [w] the boots, strike the heel	rdog pa rgyag pa
རྡོག་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	stamp on the ground with the feet, kick	rdog pa rgyab pa
རྡོག་པ་རྙིང་པ	old shoe patched on the sole	rdog pa rnying pa
རྡོག་པ་འབོར་བ	step, pace, walk	rdog pa 'bor ba
རྡོག་པོ	a grain of corn, sand, sugar, a drop of rain, a piece	rdog po
རྡོག་ཕྱིས	zhal ba 'byid byed [wipe the face?]	rdog phyis
རྡོག་ཕྲེད	burden, load	rdog phred
རྡོག་མ	each	rdog ma
རྡོག་ཙམ	just [a] little	rdog tsam
རྡོག་ཙམ་རྡོག་ཙམ	only a little bit	rdog tsam rdog tsam
རྡོག་རྩ	main point/ idea	rdog rtsa
རྡོག་རྩ་སྒྲིལ	consolidate, unite, put things in a nutshell	rdog rtsa sgril
རྡོག་རྩ་གཅིག་ཏུ་དྲིལ་བའི་ནུས་པ	uniting/ consolidating power	rdog rtsa gcig tu dril ba'i nus pa
རྡོག་རྩ་གཅིག་དྲིལ	united, consolidated	rdog rtsa gcig dril
རྡོག་རྩ་གཅིག་དྲིལ་བྱེད་པ	unite, consolidate	rdog rtsa gcig dril byed pa
རྡོག་ཚིག	the main point, subject matter	rdog tshig
རྡོག་རྫི་གཏོང་བ	trample	rdog rdzi gtong ba
རྡོག་རྫི་བཏང་བའི་མི	down-trodden	rdog rdzi btang ba'i mi
རྡོག་རྫིས	trampling/ stepping/ stamping on	rdog rdzis
རྡོག་རྫིས་གཏོང	trample/ step/ stamp on	rdog rdzis gtong
རྡོག་རྫིས་གཏོང་བ	stamp, tread, step on	rdog rdzis gtong ba
རྡོག་བརྫིས	trampling/ stepping/ stamping on	rdog brdzis
རྡོག་བརྫིས་གཏོང	trample/ step/ stamp on	rdog brdzis gtong
རྡོག་ཞོ	the price of 1 sho each	rdog zho
རྡོག་རོལ	1) trample under the feet; 2) pay no regard to/ not care about	rdog rol
རྡོག་རོལ་གཏོང	trample underfoot	rdog rol gtong
རྡོག་རོལ་དུ་གཏོང	waste, spoil, crush, smash	rdog rol du gtong
རྡོག་ལེབ	flat piece	rdog leb
རྡོག་ཤད	kick, a name for the striking of feet, horse's hooves etc., feet covering, by walking or kicking strike the boots/ heel on the road/ ground	rdog shad
རྡོང་ནད	itch, scab	rdong nad
རྡོངས་པ	SA sdong ba	rdongs pa
རྡོད	millstone, point, root, single, individual	rdod
རྡོད་པ	fry roast	rdod pa
རྡོབ་རྡོབ	Dobdops, guard-monks	rdob rdob
རྡོབ་པ	give, offer, SA 'phul ba 1447	rdob pa
རྡོབས	imp. of {rdeb}; imp. of {rdeb pa}	rdobs
རྡོམ་ཆང	many persons who drink wine together, stone	rdom chang
རྡོམ་པོ	maimed, mutilated	rdom po
རྡོའི་སྙིང་པོ	emerald	rdo'i snying po
རྡོའི་ཐུབ་པ	stone Buddha	rdo'i thub pa
རྡོའི་ཐོ་ཐོ་བཅུག་པ	put boundary marks of piled stones	rdo'i tho tho bcug pa
རྡོའི་སྨན	medicinal stones	rdo'i sman
རྡོའི་རྩ་རིས	rdo srubs	rdo'i rtsa ris
རྡོའི་བརྩིག་པ	stone wall	rdo'i brtsig pa
རྡོའི་རག་ཆེན་པོ	a high stone wall	rdo'i rag chen po
རྡོའི་གསེག་མ	rdo hrug, rdo zhib	rdo'i gseg ma
རྡོར	SA rdar ba	rdor
རྡོར་གྱུར	be fossilized	rdor gyur
རྡོར་གྱུར་བ	fossilized	rdor gyur ba
རྡོར་གླིང	Darjeeling	rdor gling
རྡོར་གླིང་རྡོར་སེམས	teachings relating to a practice focusing upon Vajrasattva / revealed from their place of concealment by {gter chen rdo rje gling pa}	rdor gling rdor sems
རྡོར་མགོ	vajra head; on a torma	rdor mgo
རྡོར་རྒྱལ	dorgyal	rdor rgyal
རྡོར་གཅོད	'phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rdo rje gcod pa, prajny'ap'aramit'a vajracchedik'a; Vajracchedik'a n'ama prajny'aparamit'a	rdor gcod
རྡོར་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Vajrasattva, the lord of all the mandalas	rdor rje sems dpa'
རྡོར་རྗེའི་གནས་ཆེན	vajra sacred places [of India]	rdor rje'i gnas chen
རྡོར་ཏིང	vajralike samadhi [rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin]	rdor ting
རྡོར་དྲིལ	vajra and ghanta	rdor dril
རྡོར་དྲིལ་མིང་གསུམ་གྱི་དབང	vajra, bell and name empowerments	rdor dril ming gsum gyi dbang
རྡོར་ཕུར་བཙུགས	au tsugs tsha po'i [very earnest/ energetic] don rdor brag 'rig 'dzin chen po kun bzang 'gyur med lhun grub - Kunzang Gyurme Lhündrub, sixth Rigdzin Chenpo of Dorje Drak	rdor phur btsugs
རྡོར་བྲག་རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ	Dordrag Rigdzin Chenpo; Pema Trinley (16411718), a reincarnation of Nanam Dudjom Dorje (sna nam bdud 'joms rdo rje)	rdor brag rig 'dzin chen po
རྡོར་བྲག་གསུང་རྒྱུན	the oral transmission of Dorje Drag Monastery	rdor brag gsung rgyun
རྡོར་དབྱིངས	vajradhatu. Syn {rdo rje dbyings}	rdor dbyings
རྡོར་སྨིན་གཉིས	rdo rje brag and smin grol gling	rdor smin gnyis
རྡོར་འཛིན་གུ་ཧྱ་སྒང་པ	12-13th cent. - Dordzin Guhya Gangpa, sent by Drigung Jigten Gönpo to Kailash	rdor 'dzin gu hya sgang pa
རྡོར་འཛིན་མགོ་བོ་ཆེ	12-13th cent. Dordzin Gowoche, sent by Drigung Jigten Gönpo to Tsari	rdor 'dzin mgo bo che
རྡོར་འཛིན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Dordzin Rinpoche, Drigung representative at Kailash	rdor 'dzin rin po che
རྡོར་ཟམ	{snyan brgyud rdor zam} the Vajra Bridge Hearing Lineage; Syn {klong sde rdo rje zam pa}	rdor zam
རྡོར་བཟླས	vajramantra repetition	rdor bzlas
རྡོར་རབ༹	horn/ point of a vajra	rdor rva
རྡོར་རྭ	{rdo rje rwa ba} vajra enclosure	rdor rwa
རྡོར་ལེགས	{rdo rje legs pa} Vajrasadhu	rdor legs
རྡོར་སེམས	1) Abbr. of {rdo rje sems dpa'};	rdor sems
རྡོར་སེམས་སྒོམ་བཟླས	the visualization and recitation of Vajrasattva	rdor sems sgom bzlas
རྡོར་སེམས་བསྒོམ་བཟླས	meditation and recitation of Vajrasattva [gsang sngags lugs kyi sdig sgrib sbyong ba'i cho ga zhig	rdor sems bsgom bzlas
རྡོར་སེམས་སྙིང་གི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Heart of Vajrasattva	rdor sems snying gi rgyud
རྡོར་སེམས་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	Syn smin gling rdor sems	rdor sems thugs kyi sgrub pa
རྡོར་སེམས་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	terma revealed by {gar dbang rdo rje} {mnga' ris gter ston} 1640-1685	rdor sems thugs kyi me long
རྡོར་སེམས་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Vajrasattva of Great Bliss. A name for Vajrasattva	rdor sems bde ba chen po
རྡོར་སེམས་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Vajrasattva with his consort	rdor sems yab yum
རྡོར་སེམས་རིགས་ལྔ་རྒྱན་གཅིག	Sole Ornament of the Five Families of Vajrasattva, revealed by Ratön Tertön	rdor sems rigs lnga rgyan gcig
རྡོལ	spread, SA rdal ba, to spontaneously utter	rdol
རྡོལ་ཆོས	vulgar manners / behavior	rdol chos
རྡོལ་གཏམ	unthinking silly talk, saying whatever comes out	rdol gtam
རྡོལ་ཐབས	method of spontaneity, letting whatever happens happen	rdol thabs
རྡོལ་ཐབས་སྨྲ་བ	1) disordered] hurried speech, unstructured anxiously talking; 2) [arch] confused, silly speech, some1 who thoughtlessly says whatever comes out	rdol thabs smra ba
རྡོལ་ཐབས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	to rave; to speak off the top of one's head/ impulsively/ thoughtlessly	rdol thabs su smra ba
རྡོལ་ཐོར	eruption	rdol thor
རྡོལ་པ	cobbler	rdol pa
རྡོལ་བ	to open; come out, break forth from, gush forth, issue from, come up, sprout, shoot; spread; appear suddenly; {rdol ba, rdol ba, rdol ba} intr. v	rdol ba
རྡོལ་བུག	rdol ba'i bu ga	rdol bug
རྡོལ་བོན	naturally developed bon	rdol bon
རྡོལ་གཟེར	instrument for boring metal	rdol gzer
རྡོས	chain, material, SA sa gdos	rdos
རྡོས་གང་བ	stony	rdos gang ba
རྡོས་བཅས	corporeal/ material/ solid matter rdos bcas sha khrag lus ni mi brtan pa the material body of flesh and blood is unstable	rdos bcas
རྡོས་ཆུང་ཆུང་གི་ལུས	small body rdos chung chung zhig las med kyang	rdos chung chung gi lus
སྙིང་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག	though only small he had great courage	snying stobs chen po 'dug
རྡོས་ཆེ་བ	large	rdos che ba
རྡོས་ཐག་བཅད	eliminate or cut off all concepts	rdos thag bcad
རྡོས་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	cut off attachment, decisiveness	rdos thag chod pa
རྡོས་པ	{rdos pa, rdos pa, rdos pa} intr. v.; to break, burst, flow out	rdos pa
རྡོས་བྱས	material, physical	rdos byas
རྡྱུན་ཆོད	interrupt	rdyun chod
ལྡ་གུ	discourse, speech, conversation, speak, talk[ative]	lda gu
ལྡ་གུ་ཅན	talkative	lda gu can
ལྡ་གུ་གཏོང	discourse, converse, speak, talk	lda gu gtong
ལྡ་གུ་ལབ་པ	talk	lda gu lab pa
ལྡ་ཅི་སྨོས	no need to mention	lda ci smos
ལྡ་ལྡི	a fringe or tassel	lda ldi
ལྡ་མ་ལྡེབས	uneven, sloping	lda ma ldebs
ལྡ་མན	couple of small kettledrums one hanging in front the other behind	lda man
ལྡ་འུ	enigma, riddle, puzzling question	lda 'u
ལྡ་རི་ལྡུ་རི	very hot	lda ri ldu ri
ལྡ་ལི	Dehli	lda li
ལྡག	[p bldags, f bldag ldog!],, lick	ldag
ལྡག་གུ	1) kind of noodle/ soup/ porridge; 2) [arch] bean, pea	ldag gu
ལྡག་རྒྱག	masturbate	ldag rgyag
ལྡག་ཆལ	washing articles/ substances	ldag chal
ལྡག་ལྡེག	moving, swaying, shaking	ldag ldeg
ལྡག་པ	1) (Tha dad pa bldags pa, bldag pa, ldogs,, lick[/slurp up]; 2) porridge, gruel, soup, noodles	ldag pa
ལྡག་རྩི	washing articles/ substances	ldag rtsi
ལྡང	arise, emerge, get up, rise, - up, send forth, stand, - up; emergence, rising up. Syn {langs} vi. to be sufficient / enough, surface p. of {ldeng} arise, emerge, get up, rise, - up, send forth, sta...	ldang
ལྡང་ཀ་སྐ	lion sha ra bha, 8 legged lion	ldang ka ska
ལྡང་སྐོ་སྐ	[arch] lion sha ra bha, 8 legged lion	ldang sko ska
ལྡང་དགྲ	hated / bitter enemy	ldang dgra
ལྡང་མགོ	the yarn-beam	ldang mgo
ལྡང་རྒྱུ	circulating-to-arouse prana for seeing	ldang rgyu
ལྡང་ངི་ལྡིང་ངི	1) soar, float, hover; 2) work here and there, drift; 3) drift, twinkle, sway, shake	ldang ngi lding ngi
ལྡང་ངེས	sufficient	ldang nges
ལྡང་དུབ་གཟེར	pain 'phar ldang byed pa'i disease	ldang dub gzer
ལྡང་ལྡིང	1) ldang ma lding; 2) ldang ngi lding ngi	ldang lding
ལྡང་བ	rise, get up, flow up, suffice, be sufficient, enough, SA 'dang pa, to jump out of, to regard, arose	ldang ba
ལྡང་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect manifestation	ldang ba phun sum tshogs pa
ལྡང་བ་ཡང་བ	at the time of arising get up	ldang ba yang ba
ལྡང་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of reemergence; comp {bsdu ldang}	ldang ba'i rnal 'byor
ལྡང་བར་འགྱུར	raises up	ldang bar 'gyur
ལྡང་བར་བྱེད་པ	raise up, raise up	ldang bar byed pa
ལྡང་མ་ལྡང	whether something is enough/ suffices or not	ldang ma ldang
ལྡང་མ་ལྡང་ལྟ	see whether something is enough/ suffices or not	ldang ma ldang lta
ལྡང་མ་ལྡིང	(bird sweeps and soars (cloud} floats	ldang ma lding
ལྡང་མིན	insufficient	ldang min
ལྡང་ཚད	1) enough for /complete amount/#; 2) long dka' ba,...Aar po'i dgos chas ldang tshad byas byung	ldang tshad
ལྡང་འཛིན	animosity, hatred	ldang 'dzin
ལྡང་ཟུག	in sickness re 'phar ldang byed tshul [way of taking the pulse ...Sbrum ma phru gu skye nad kyi na zug ldang ba	ldang zug
ལྡང་ལ	gdang pass	ldang la
ལྡང་ལྷ་ཁྲ་མོ་བྲག	Dangla Thramo Drak, in Dagpo	ldang lha khra mo brag
ལྡངས	ldang	ldangs
ལྡངས་པ	[p ldang ba]	ldangs pa
ལྡངས་པའི་ཚོད	measure of sufficiency, being just what is wanted	ldangs pa'i tshod
ལྡངས་ལུགས	manner of rising, manner of rising	ldangs lugs
ལྡད་རྒྱག་པ	chew the cud	ldad rgyag pa
ལྡད་པ	to chew; {ldad pa, bldad pa, bldad pa, ldod} trans. v	ldad pa
ལྡད་མཛད་པ	[arch] ston mo bshams pa	ldad mdzad pa
ལྡན་དཀར	bye'u ldan dkar - magpie	ldan dkar
ལྡན་དཀར་ཕོ་བྲང	ldan dkar Palace	ldan dkar pho brang
ལྡན་དཀར་མ	Denkarma / - Eight century Tibetan palace; home of an important collection of Tibetan translations catalogued early in ninth century by several leading translators	ldan dkar ma
ལྡན་ཁོག	cheeks	ldan khog
ལྡན་གྲོལ	abbr. of tshul khrims dang ldan pa rtog pa dang grol ba	ldan grol
ལྡན་གྲོལ་གཉིས	* possession and liberation	ldan grol gnyis
ལྡན་གཅིག་པ	eating only 1 meal a day GD	ldan gcig pa
ལྡན་ལྕག	slap on the face	ldan lcag
ལྡན་ལྕགས	blow on the cheek, box on the ear	ldan lcags
ལྡན་ཐོབ	previously attained thing existing continually in 1's continuum	ldan thob
ལྡན་པ་ལྔ	the five possessions (dang ba'i sems, gus pa'i lus, snyan pa'i sgra, gtsang ba'i zas, mdzes pa'i rgyan)	ldan pa lnga
ལྡན་པ་པོ	possessor, one that has, one who is able, a person of ability, one with qualifications	ldan pa po
ལྡན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	nonassociated compositional factor- nonconcurrent formation	ldan pa ma yin pa'i 'du byed
ལྡན་པ་གསུམ	CHN	ldan pa gsum
ལྡན་པའི	possessing	ldan pa'i
ལྡན་པའི་དངོས་པོ	an object of attachment	ldan pa'i dngos po
ལྡན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	concurrent formations	ldan pa'i 'du byed
ལྡན་པའི་ནང་ནས	w, having, in the manner of	ldan pa'i nang nas
ལྡན་པའི་ནད	disease arising from imbalance of two humors	ldan pa'i nad
ལྡན་པའི་མ་ཐོབ་པ	in Vaibhashika system a dharma in the continuum of an individual continuously possessed bzlog zla'i rdzas gcig la 'jog	ldan pa'i ma thob pa
ལྡན་པའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	dpe can don gyi support and supported lhan cig tu 'grogs pa bzhin du the example's support and supported yang phan tshun ldan pa'am, 'grogs par ston pa'i rgyan zhig, among gzugs can gyi rgyan	ldan pa'i gzugs can
ལྡན་པའི་སོ	cheek-tooth, molar tooth	ldan pa'i so
ལྡན་པར	junction with	ldan par
ལྡན་པར་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	nonassociated compositional factor- nonconcurrent formation	ldan par ma yin pa'i 'du byed
ལྡན་པས	on the basis of	ldan pas
ལྡན་པོ	fitting, proper, suitable	ldan po
ལྡན་བུ	fire fly	ldan bu
ལྡན་བྱ་དཀའི་ཁྱད་པར	distinctive features of difficult constructions [poetics], geometric poetry [w lines read in two directions [ardhabhrama], zigzagging [gomutrika], and lines read in all directions [sarvatobhadra]	ldan bya dka'i khyad par
ལྡན་འབྲེལ	conjunction-relation	ldan 'brel
ལྡན་མ	district of Kham	ldan ma
ལྡན་མ་རྩེ་མང	Denma Tsemang; supreme among the fastest calligraphers of Padmasambhava	ldan ma rtse mang
ལྡན་མིན	non-concurrent formation; nonconcurrences	ldan min
ལྡན་མིན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	nonconcurrent functional things	ldan min gyi dngos po
ལྡན་མིན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	ornament where the exemplified don gyi support and supported both, dpe'i dngos po mi mthun pa gnyis together in one object mi ldan pa'am, mi 'grogs pa'i gzugs can du byas pa, among gzugs can gyi rgyan	ldan min gyi gzugs can
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད	situation(al paradigm) (dissociated from form or consciousness)	ldan min 'du byed
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཞི	nonconcurrent formation basis	ldan min 'du byed kyi gzhi
བ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 non-associated compositional factors	ba bcu bzhi
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 nonassociated compositional factors	ldan min 'du byed bcu bzhi
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་ཉེར་གཉིས	the 22 nonassociated compositional factors CHN	ldan min 'du byed nyer gnyis
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་ཉེར་བཞི	twenty-four	ldan min 'du byed nyer bzhi
ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་ཉེར་གསུམ	the 23	ldan min 'du byed nyer gsum
ལྡན་མོ	female possessor, owneress, female ibex	ldan mo
ལྡན་རྩེ	Denma Tsemang	ldan rtse
ལྡན་ཚད	1) all that exists, have all; 2) not tsha ba alone, having another sdong zla too, eg. tsha ba rlung ldan	ldan tshad
ལྡན་ཚུལ	the way in which something is possessed	ldan tshul
ལྡན་ཡུལ	a village in tsang near tanag	ldan yul
ལྡན་སོ	cheeks and teeth	ldan so
ལྡབ	p bldabs f bldab,, repeat, fold up	ldab
ལྡབ་སྐལ	ldab 'phar gyi skal ba	ldab skal
ལྡབ་སྐྱོར	repeat, do again	ldab skyor
ལྡབ་སྐྱོར་དུ་ཤོད་པ	repeatedly say/ speak	ldab skyor du shod pa
ལྡབ་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	repeat, do again	ldab skyor byed
ལྡབ་གྲངས	multibles	ldab grangs
ལྡབ་འགྱུར	1) recited two times; 2) Ldab nas ldab tu zlos pa,...Za 'bru thon 'bor ldab 'gyur du 'phar ba,...Slob grva ba'i mi 'bor sum ldab 'gyur ba	ldab 'gyur
ལྡབ་བཅུ	tenfold	ldab bcu
ལྡབ་ཆག་པ	gnyis char chag pa,...Ma gnas ldab chag pa	ldab chag pa
ལྡབ་ལྡིབ	uncertain, dubious/ indistinct; silly talk, tittle-tattle	ldab ldib
ལྡབ་ལྡོབ	indolence, dullness, drowsiness, a hasty, volatile manner	ldab ldob
དྲོཝསཡ	[iness]; 2) hasty, volatile [manner]	drowsy
ལྡབ་སྣོན	add two x	ldab snon
ལྡབ་པ	to do again, to repeat, afresh, again; {ldab pa, bldabs pa, bldab pa, ldobs} trans. v	ldab pa
ལྡབ་བི་ལྡིབ་བི	talk blocked or unclear/ silly	ldab bi ldib bi
ལྡབ་བེ་ལྡོབ་བེ	soft smooth delicate supple	ldab be ldob be
ལྡབ་མ	repetition	ldab ma
ལྡབ་ཚོང	sell at double original price	ldab tshong
ལྡབ་ལོག	two times/double/ twice [the],	ldab log
ལྡབ་ལོག་འཕར	double	ldab log 'phar
ལྡབས་ཕྱོར	large number	ldabs phyor
ལྡམ་ཁུ	dirty water, water sullied with impurities	ldam khu
ལྡམ་ལྡམ	very idle, slothful	ldam ldam
ལྡམ་ལྡུམ	mean, pitiful	ldam ldum
ལྡམ་ལྡེམ	dubious, uncertain	ldam ldem
ལྡམ་བུ	muddy water	ldam bu
ལྡམ་མེ་ལྡེམ་མེ	a little moving/ swaying ldam me ldem me byas te lus 'gro ba move uncertainly/ w a little swaying	ldam me ldem me
ལྡམ་མེ་ལྡེམ་མེ་བྱེད	a little moving/ swaying	ldam me ldem me byed
ལྡམ་མེ་ལྡེམ་མེར་གྱོ་བ	a little moving/ swaying	ldam me ldem mer gyo ba
ལྡའུ་མགོ་དཀར	minister of king ru la skyes	lda'u mgo dkar
ལྡར་ལྡར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	languid	ldar ldar du 'gyur ba
ལྡར་ལྡུར	very hot	ldar ldur
ལྡར་བ	be weary/ tired, faint, languid, wet, damp, idiot, unclear mind	ldar ba
ལྡས་པ	left, lost	ldas pa
ལྡི་རི་རི	rattling of thunder	ldi ri ri
ལྡིག	quiver, shudder, shiver, stammer	ldig
ལྡིག་ལྡིག	not untidy/ sloppy	ldig ldig
ལྡིག་པ	fall/ sink through	ldig pa
ལྡིགས	quiver, SA ldig pa, creaking sound, sound expressive of groaning under a heavy weight	ldigs
ལྡིང	float, glide, soar, flow, drift about, hover. vi. to hover, circle	lding
ལྡིང་ཀ	pond	lding ka
ལྡིང་རྐྱལ	above a water wheel btags pa'i yos blug snod kyi rkyal pa	lding rkyal
ལྡིང་སྐོར	fly in a circle, hover	lding skor
ལྡིང་སྐོར་རྒྱག	fly in a circle, hover	lding skor rgyag
ལྡིང་སྐྱོགས	large copper ladle	lding skyogs
ལྡིང་སྐྱོངས	large copper ladle	lding skyongs
ལྡིང་བསྐོར	floating in a circle in the sky	lding bskor
ལྡིང་ཁ	SA lting kha	lding kha
ལྡིང་ཁག	platoon	lding khag
ལྡིང་ཁག་མགོ་པ	tsho pa'i mgo pa	lding khag mgo pa
ལྡིང་ཁང	canopy, [bower]; a bower, the leafy canopy, [bower]	lding khang
ལྡིང་ཁུག	small silken bag worn as talisman	lding khug
ལྡིང་ཁྲི	seat	lding khri
ལྡིང་འཁོར	soar/float in circles	lding 'khor
ལྡིང་གུར	ceremonial tent, canopy, silk curtains above	lding gur
ལྡིང་གྱབ	canopy	lding gyab
ལྡིང་གྲུ	glider, blimp, zeppelin, sea plane, helicopter, VTOL aircraft	lding gru
ལྡིང་འགྲོས	strut, steps	lding 'gros
ལྡིང་ཐག	canopy rope	lding thag
ལྡིང་དཔོན	officer over 50 soldiers, lieutenant	lding dpon
ལྡིང་བ	(tha mi dad pa ldings pa, lding ba,, be swimming, floating, suspended, floating, soaring	lding ba
ལྡིང་ཚོ	tsho shog, the 50 soldiers under a {lding dpon}	lding tsho
ལྡིང་བཞིན	adrift	lding bzhin
ལྡིང་ཟངས	large copper caldron	lding zangs
ལྡིང་འོག	soldier under a {lding dpon} = leader of 50	lding 'og
ལྡིང་ཤུར་གནམ་གྲུ	glider, blimp, zeppelin, sea plane, helicopter, VTOL aircraft	lding shur gnam gru
ལྡིང་ཤེས	science of flight	lding shes
ལྡིང་ཤེས་ཤ་བ	bon of the deer, the science of flight, he who performs the rites of the deer who knows how to fly, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis	lding shes sha ba
ལྡིང་སི	very, quite, very much	lding si
ལྡིང་སེ	quite, very	lding se
ལྡིངས	(not in DAS)	ldings
ལྡིངས་པ	[p lding ba]	ldings pa
ལྡིབ་ལྡིབ	impure/ unclear words	ldib ldib
ལྡིབ་པ	not clear, not intelligible, stammering, stuttering	ldib pa
ལྡིབ་ཚིག	unclear words	ldib tshig
ལྡིམ	crash of a falling tree, report of a gun	ldim
ལྡིར	roar (of thunder, thundering, bulge, become distended/ inflated, protrude, aim at	ldir
ལྡིར་སྒྲ	roaring/ thundering sound	ldir sgra
ལྡིར་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	rumble	ldir sgra sgrog pa
ལྡིར་སྒྲས་འཁྲུགས་པ	thundering exploded	ldir sgras 'khrugs pa
ལྡིར་ཅན	full to the brim, eaten to the full, roar, bulgy, p[rotruding, swollen	ldir can
ལྡིར་ལྡན	full to the brim, eaten to the full, roar, bulgy, p[rotruding, swollen	ldir ldan
ལྡིར་ལྡིར	full to the brim, eaten to the full, roar, bulgy, p[rotruding, swollen	ldir ldir
ལྡིར་བ	to roar/ roll like thunder; to be distended, inflated, to belly, to rush, to roar, to roll; {ldir ba, ldir ba, ldir ba} intr. v	ldir ba
ལྡིར་ཚ་བ	thundering	ldir tsha ba
ལྡིར་བཞིན	like thunder	ldir bzhin
ལྡིལ་མགོ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	Dilgo Khyentse	ldil mgo mkhyen brtse
ལྡུ་གུ	SA gdu ba, gdu gu	ldu gu
ལྡུག	(tha dad pa ldugs pa, ldug pa, ldugs!,, pour, put in	ldug
ལྡུག་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	deprave	ldug tu gtong ba
ལྡུག་པ	{ldug pa, ldugs pa, ldug pa, ldugs} trans. v.; ft. of {ldug pa}	ldug pa
ལྡུགས	pour, SA ldug pa	ldugs
ལྡུགས་སྐུ	molten image	ldugs sku
ལྡུགས་པ	[p ldug pa] pour, put in	ldugs pa
ལྡུང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the set of downfalls	ldung byed kyi sde
ལྡུད	give to drink	ldud
ལྡུད་པ	give/ pour a drink/ water, pour, sprinkle, cast, found. (tha dad pa,,	ldud pa
ལྡུམ	vegetables, greens, edible roots in general, lettuce, salad	ldum
ལྡུམ་སྐྱུར	vegetables	ldum skyur
ལྡུམ་སྟག	ko byi la	ldum stag
ལྡུམ་དུག	poison of plants	ldum dug
ལྡུམ་འདྲིལ	{ldum 'dril} med. herb	ldum 'dril
ལྡུམ་ལྡུམ	round	ldum ldum
ལྡུམ་ནག	black species of lettuce	ldum nag
ལྡུམ་ནག་དོམ་མཁྲིས	{ldum nag dom mkhris} med. herb	ldum nag dom mkhris
ལྡུམ་པ	[arch] 1) tshod ma [vegetable/ herb] mkhan; 2) cook	ldum pa
ལྡུམ་པོ	grove, garden, vegetable, SA dum po, zlum po, round	ldum po
ལྡུམ་བུ	a plant	ldum bu
ལྡུམ་བུ་ཁྲག་གཅོད	agrimonia pilosa ledeb.	ldum bu khrag gcod
ལྡུམ་བུ་རེ་རལ	med. herb	ldum bu re ral
ལྡུམ་བུ་རེག་འབྱར	zangs rtsi	ldum bu reg 'byar
ལྡུམ་བུའི་རྩ་བ	vegetable roots	ldum bu'i rtsa ba
ལྡུམ་བུའི་ཚལ	garden vegetable field	ldum bu'i tshal
ལྡུམ་སྨན	medicines from plants	ldum sman
ལྡུམ་ཞིང	vegetable garden	ldum zhing
ལྡུམ་ར	garden in general, (fruit, vegetable, kitchen) garden, artificial grove, orchard	ldum ra
ལྡུམ་ར་བ	garden, orchard, park caretaker	ldum ra ba
ལྡུམ་རའི་རིག་པ	horticulture	ldum ra'i rig pa
ལྡུམ་རའི་ལོ་ཏོག	garden crops	ldum ra'i lo tog
ལྡུམ་ལ་འགྲིལ་བ	made round, rounded off	ldum la 'gril ba
ལྡུར་ལྡུར	noise of boiling water, roaring, rushing	ldur ldur
ལྡུར་ཕྱེ	peas or barley flour boiled in water for cattle	ldur phye
ལྡུར་བ	(tha mi dad pa, flexible soft[ened] smooth, pulp[ed], mash[ed] [comp ldur ldur	ldur ba
ལྡུས་པ	[arch] lus pa	ldus pa
ལྡེ	belonging together, of the same species	lde
ལྡེ་ཁ	belonging together, of the same species	lde kha
ལྡེ་ཁུ	colored medicinal syrup, sweetened medicine	lde khu
ལྡེ་གུ	mixture, syrup, ointment, electuary	lde gu
ལྡེ་གུའི་སྦྱོར་བ	sbrang chu bcad pa &, mar gyi wu snyigs phyung ba, molasses in water bsdus pa bcas kyi steng du nad gang sel bar byed pa'i sman phye bsrel te dkrug de'i steng ka ra zhib btags btab nas thick porrid...	lde gu'i sbyor ba
ལྡེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	{lde rgyal po}	lde rgyal po
ལྡེ་བརྒྱད	the 8 kings	lde brgyad
ལྡེ་ཆུང	junior treasurer in monastery or government	lde chung
ལྡེ་ཆེན	senior treasurer	lde chen
ལྡེ་འཆང་པ	key holder	lde 'chang pa
ལྡེ་སྣོལ་ནམ	one of the early kings of tibet, Tibetan king	lde snol nam
ལྡེ་སྣོལ་པོ	{lde snol po}	lde snol po
ལྡེ་སྤྲིན་བཙན	Tibetan king	lde sprin btsan
ལྡེ་འཕྲུལ་ནམ་གཞུང་བཙན	descendant of ze lde, Tibetan king	lde 'phrul nam gzhung btsan
ལྡེ་བ	(tha dad pa ldes pa, lde ba, ldes,, warm [1self]	lde ba
ལྡེ་བུ	a kind of phyur ba ?, buttermilk la skyur rtsi btab nas bzos pa'i phyur ba like bread	lde bu
ལྡེ་མིག	key, key of a storeroom, padlock, introduction to a book, index, eye of a lock, hole in a hatchet or hammer to insert the handle	lde mig
ལྡེ་མིག་ཁྱེར	take the key	lde mig khyer
ལྡེ་མིག་ཅན	introduction through keys	lde mig can
ལྡེ་མིག་པ	caretaker	lde mig pa
ལྡེ་རྫུན	key which is not the real/ original one	lde rdzun
ལྡེག་པ	{ldeg pa, bldegs pa, bldeg pa} intr. v	ldeg pa
ལྡེང	to suffice, be sufficient, be enough	ldeng
ལྡེང་ཀ	a pond	ldeng ka
ལྡེང་རྒྱས	a mount on indian border	ldeng rgyas
ལྡེང་ངེས	sufficient, enough, ample, adequate	ldeng nges
ལྡེང་བ	p ldeng[s],, fit the measure, suffice, be sufficient/ enough	ldeng ba
ལྡེང་མིན	insufficient	ldeng min
ལྡེན་མ་རྩེ་མངས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	lden ma rtse mangs
ལྡེབ	leaf, sheet	ldeb
ལྡེབ་པ	SA ldeg pa, bend round or back, turn round, double down or over	ldeb pa
ལྡེབ་མ	page ldeb ma sum brgya tsam yod pa'i po ti 300 page volume	ldeb ma
ལྡེབས	side, compass, enclosure, fence	ldebs
ལྡེབས་པ	the side, enclosure, fence	ldebs pa
ལྡེབས་བྲིས	picture/ writing, on a wall, mural, fresco	ldebs bris
ལྡེབས་མ	ldeb ma ?	ldebs ma
ལྡེབས་ཞལ	wall's face	ldebs zhal
ལྡེབས་ཞིང	hillside field	ldebs zhing
ལྡེབས་རིས	skya ldebs la painted picture	ldebs ris
ལྡེབས་ལ	together	ldebs la
ལྡེབས་ཤིག་བསྟན	join together	ldebs shig bstan
ལྡེམ	crooked, riddle, SA ldem po, statue, image, idol 1452	ldem
ལྡེམ་སྐུ	painted/ relief body image bzhengs pa'i rnam pa can	ldem sku
ལྡེམ་དགོངས	concealed intention, indirect purpose, covert intention/thoughts GD	ldem dgongs
ལྡེམ་དགོངས་བརྒྱད	[TRS 133-6] + expl	ldem dgongs brgyad
ལྡེམ་དགོངས་བཞི	the four indirect purposes	ldem dgongs bzhi
ལྡེམ་འགྲོས	walk	ldem 'gros
ལྡེམ་ཆོད་པ	solve a riddle [gsang gtam]	ldem chod pa
ལྡེམ་བརྗོད་པ	utter a double entendre, speak a parable	ldem brjod pa
ལྡེམ་གཏམ	1) parable, allegory; 2) indirect/ crooked/ devious talk	ldem gtam
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ	flexible	ldem ldem
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་ལྕུག་ལྕུག	healthy and quick body	ldem ldem lcug lcug
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་པ	move up and down, vibrate	ldem ldem pa
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་བྱེད་པ	undulate ldem ldem g.yo ba - shake flexibly, bending but not breaking	ldem ldem byed pa
ལྡེམ་པ	contrariety, opposition, irony, inconsistent, unstable, variable, move up and down, vibrate	ldem pa
ལྡེམ་པའི་རང་བཞིན	elasticity, flexibility, suppleness	ldem pa'i rang bzhin
ལྡེམ་པར་དགོངས་པ	covert intention	ldem par dgongs pa
ལྡེམ་པར་དགོངས་པ་བཞི	the four covert intentions	ldem par dgongs pa bzhi
ལྡེམ་པོ	flexible, supple, unsteady, unstable, shaky	ldem po
ལྡེམ་པོ་བཞི	[TRS 133-6] + expl	ldem po bzhi
ལྡེམ་པོའི་ངག	allegory, parable	ldem po'i ngag
ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	design a plan	ldem por dgongs pa
ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of covert intention	ldem por dgongs pa rnam bzhi
ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ་བཞི	the four indirect purposes, {zhugs pa}-, {mtshan nyid}-, {gnyen po}-, {bsgyur ba}- ]. [TRS 133-6] + expl	ldem por dgongs pa bzhi
ལྡེམ་འཕྲུ	crest banner	ldem 'phru
ལྡེམ་འཕྲུལ	tremble, move ldem 'phrul mdzes gyi mkha' lding khyung - beautiful movement of a garuda in the sky	ldem 'phrul
ལྡེམ་བུ	ldem bu disease	ldem bu
ལྡེམ་མེ་བ	swaying to and fro	ldem me ba
ལྡེམ་རྩིབ	spring [watch, car etc.]	ldem rtsib
ལྡེམ་ཚོད་པ	solve a riddle	ldem tshod pa
ལྡེམ་ཤུགས	elastic/ spring power	ldem shugs
ལྡེམས	flex	ldems
ལྡེམས་སེ་ལྡེམ	(to) swing from side to side	ldems se ldem
ལྡེའུ	riddle, mixture, syrup, ointment, bullet, kind of peas, SA lde gun, 1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, symbolic languages, cryptic languages, symbolic languages, SA lde	lde'u
ལྡེའུ་སྒང	place in tibet	lde'u sgang
ལྡེའུ་འཕྲུལ	pebbles, system of divination widespread in ancient Bon, "manifestation of knowledge", SA mo, phywa mo	lde'u 'phrul
ལྡེའུ་མིག	key, knowledge, clairvoyance, SA snron	lde'u mig
ལྡེར	Syn {ldabs} clay, on the side, on	lder
ལྡེར་སྐུ	terracotta / statue	lder sku
ལྡེར་བ	toughness, clamminess, potter's clay	lder ba
ལྡེར་ཚོ	clay statue, wall painting	lder tsho
ལྡེར་ཚོས	clay [statue]	lder tshos
ལྡེར་བཟོ	image, statue, figures modelled of clay, clay	lder bzo
ལྡེར་བཟོའི་ལྡེབས	clay enclosure or wall	lder bzo'i ldebs
ལྡེས	warm oneself, SA lde ba	ldes
ལྡེས་པ	[p lde ba]	ldes pa
ལྡོ	side	ldo
ལྡོ་ལྡོ	for a few days, for a short time	ldo ldo
ལྡོག	1) to counteract. 2) vi. to be opposed to, on the contrary to 3) opposite, contrary 4) [las +--) contrary, opposed to, on the contrary. 5) desist, return, prevent, reversed, send back, come back, t...	ldog
ལྡོག་སྐྱེན་པ	1) quickly returning; 2) Tshon mdog log sla ba	ldog skyen pa
ལྡོག་ཁྱབ	reverse pervasion [thd]	ldog khyab
ལྡོག་ཁྱབ་རྣལ་མ	reverse pervasion rnal ma	ldog khyab rnal ma
ལྡོག་ཁྱབ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	wrong /erroneous counter-pervasion	ldog khyab phyin ci log
ལྡོག་འགྱུར	changeableness, inconstancy, fickleness, solstice	ldog 'gyur
ལྡོག་འགྲོས	a paradox	ldog 'gros
ལྡོག་རྒོལ	protest, opposition, anti/	ldog rgol
ལྡོག་རྒྱུ་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	ldog rgyu bcu gnyis
ལྡོག་སྒོམ	reversal meditation	ldog sgom
ལྡོག་ཅན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	consonant combinations	ldog can gyi yi ge
ལྡོག་ཆ	[opposite of the] characteristics	ldog cha
ལྡོག་ཆས་དབྱེ་བ	divisions of aspects	ldog chas dbye ba
ལྡོག་ཆོས	isolate phenomena	ldog chos
ལྡོག་ཆོས་གསུམ	the three kinds of isolate phenomena	ldog chos gsum
ལྡོག་གཉིས	the two solstices	ldog gnyis
ལྡོག་ཏུ་མེད	irreversible	ldog tu med
ལྡོག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	irreversible	ldog tu med pa
ལྡོག་ཏུ་མེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན	irreversibility, certainty, inevitability	ldog tu med pa'i rang bzhin
ལྡོག་སྟེ	against	ldog ste
ལྡོག་སྟེ་བྱ་བའི་ཚུལ	way of acting contrary to --	ldog ste bya ba'i tshul
ལྡོག་འདྲི	counter-inquiry	ldog 'dri
ལྡོག་འདྲེད་པ	stumbling	ldog 'dred pa
ལྡོག་པ	returned {lha rnams rang yul du ldog go} the gods returned to their own land	ldog pa
ལྡོག་པ་ངོས་འཛིན	presentation of distinguishers [ggd]	ldog pa ngos 'dzin
ལྡོག་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	sgra don gang rung gi sgo nas dpe dang don gnyis mtshungs par gyur pa las slar khyad chos 'dra min gzhan zhig gi sgo nas mi mtshungs par dbye ba 'byed pa'i rgyan zhig ste, nang gses rnam grangs bcu...	ldog pa can gyi rgyan
ལྡོག་པ་ཅན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	both example and exampled khyad chos 'dra ba ltar snang yang, khyad gzhi ngo bo mi mthun par mthong bas mtshungs pa las ldog pa ston pa'i rgyan zhig, gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	ldog pa can gyi gzugs can
ལྡོག་པ་ཅིག་ཀྱང	unique distinguisher [ggd]	ldog pa cig kyang
ལྡོག་པ་གཅིག	same reverse	ldog pa gcig
ལྡོག་པ་གཅིག་པས་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonestablishment from aspects of the syllogism being identical	ldog pa gcig pas ma grub pa
ལྡོག་པ་གཅིག་པས་མ་གྲུབ་པ་གསུམ	the	ldog pa gcig pas ma grub pa gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་ཀིནདས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	establishment from aspects of the syllogism being identical	three kinds of non
ལྡོག་པ་ཉིད	opposite, characteristic	ldog pa nyid
ལྡོག་པ་གཉིས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	particulars/ individuations that are a collection of two distinguishers [ggd]	ldog pa gnyis tshogs kyi bye brag
ལྡོག་པ་ཐ་དད	different opposites	ldog pa tha dad
ལྡོག་པ་ནས	from the point of view of specific aspects	ldog pa nas
ལྡོག་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སྦྱར་བ	wrongly joining the opposite	ldog pa phyin ci log tu sbyar ba
ལྡོག་པ་མ་བསྟན་པ	not showing the characteristic ldog pa gzhan rigs 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur yang dag gi mtshan nyid bcu drug CHN	ldog pa ma bstan pa
ལྡོག་པ་རིགས་གཅིག	similarity of reverse type	ldog pa rigs gcig
ལྡོག་པ་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	things w like characteristics, different particulars of a single kind	ldog pa rigs gcig pa
ལྡོག་པ་རིགས་གཅིག་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of different particulars of a single kind	ldog pa rigs gcig pa gnyis
ལྡོག་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of ldog pa	ldog pa gsum
ལྡོག་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	being who has attained cessation	ldog pa'i skyes bu
ལྡོག་པའི་ཆོས	phenomena that exist as distinguisher; a distinguisher phenomenon [= merely imputed] [ggd]	ldog pa'i chos
ལྡོག་པའི་བདེན་པ	the truth of cessation	ldog pa'i bden pa
ལྡོག་པར	be averted	ldog par
ལྡོག་ཕྱེ་བ	divided into different characteristics/ aspects	ldog phye ba
ལྡོག་ཕྱོགས	opposites	ldog phyogs
ལྡོག་ཕྱོགས་སུའང	vice versa	ldog phyogs su'ang
ལྡོག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	indispensable cause	ldog byed kyi rgyu
ལྡོག་མི་བྱེད	do not deviate from	ldog mi byed
ལྡོག་མེད	irreversible	ldog med
ལྡོག་མེད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	irreversibility, certainty, inevitability	ldog med kyi rang bzhin
ལྡོག་མེད་པ	irreversible	ldog med pa
ལྡོག་མེད་རང་བཞིན	irreversibility, certainty, inevitability	ldog med rang bzhin
ལྡོག་ཚུལ	way of acting contrary to cho ga de	ldog tshul
ལྡོག་ཟླ	the opposite	ldog zla
ལྡོག་ལན	reaction 1454	ldog lan
ལྡོག་ཤུགས	naturally returning power	ldog shugs
ལྡོགས	imp. of {ldag pa}	ldogs
ལྡོང	rise, SA ldang ba, 1 of 4 original races of tibet, SA nang gi rigs bzhi, 1 of 6 early tribes of tibet descended from the 4 sons of the monkey patriarch, SA mi bu gdung drug	ldong
ལྡོང་ཁ	cover or lid of a tea churner	ldong kha
ལྡོང་བ	blind	ldong ba
ལྡོང་བྱེད	1) darkness; 2) become/ be blind/ infatuated	ldong byed
ལྡོང་མོ	tea churner	ldong mo
ལྡོང་རོས	kind of mineral medicine, yellow earth used for painting walls of houses, realgar	ldong ros
ལྡོང་ལྷ	mountain in tibet, demi-god	ldong lha
ལྡོངས	be blind, ldang ba!	ldongs
ལྡོངས་པ	blind, infatuated	ldongs pa
ལྡོད	imp. of {ldad pa}	ldod
ལྡོན་པ	to give or pay back, to return, to answer	ldon pa
ལྡོབ	(tha mi dad pa ldobs pa, ldob pa,, 1) learn, become familiar w; 2) apprehend quickly, be witty, be quick in repartee	ldob
ལྡོབ་ལྡོབ	indolence, athletic or warrior monk	ldob ldob
ལྡོབ་པ	ft. of {ldob pa}; to apprehend quickly, to be witty, to be quick in repartee; {ldob pa, ldobs pa, ldob pa} intr. v	ldob pa
ལྡོབ་བེ་བ	dull	ldob be ba
ལྡོབས	1) Ldab pa!; 2) deceptive, lying	ldobs
ལྡོབས་རྐྱེན་པ	quick perception, understanding readily	ldobs rkyen pa
ལྡོབས་སྐྱེན་པ	easily known/learned	ldobs skyen pa
ལྡོབས་ཅན	some who says what is false is true	ldobs can
ལྡོབས་པ	SA spobs pa	ldobs pa
ལྡོམ་པ	[ask/ beg for] alms	ldom pa
ལྡོམ་པོ	1) wanderer; 2) ownerless animals; 3) round	ldom po
ལྡོམ་བུ	1) alms[-gathering]; 2) [arch] scrutinize, wander through	ldom bu
ལྡོམ་བུ་པ	religious beggar, mendicant	ldom bu pa
ལྡོམ་བུ་བ	alms-gatherer, beggar, religious mendicant	ldom bu ba
ལྡོམ་བུ་བྱེད་པ	ask for alms	ldom bu byed pa
ལྡོམ་ས	alms house, house where beggars receive food	ldom sa
སྡ་རེ་སྡོ་རེ	sticky	sda re sdo re
སྡགས	praise	sdags
སྡང	dislike, aversion, hatred, anger, aggression, hostility, irritation, be hateful, dislike, be hostile toward, opposed to, angry at; {zhe sdang}	sdang
སྡང་སྐྱེན་པ	swift to wrath	sdang skyen pa
སྡང་ཁྲོ	hatred, enmity	sdang khro
སྡང་གྲོང	freehold, house, resident, owner	sdang grong
སྡང་དགྲ	hatred, bitter enemy	sdang dgra
སྡང་སྒྲ	a hated / hateful enemy	sdang sgra
སྡང་ཅན	hated, despised	sdang can
སྡང་པོ	hostile, inimical, vindictive, spiteful	sdang po
སྡང་པོ་བྱེད	act [hostile, inimical, vindictive, spiteful], pick on	sdang po byed
སྡང་བ	{sdang ba, sdang ba, sdang ba} intr. v.; hostile; to be angry, wrathful, to hate, to be inimically disposed, to oppose, be hostile towards	sdang ba
སྡང་བ་དང་དབ༹ངས་པ	disturbed [unvirtuous] or lucid [virtuous] / without like or dislike	sdang ba dang dvangs pa
སྡང་བ་མེད་པ	freedom from hatred	sdang ba med pa
སྡང་བའི་དགྲ	hating enemy	sdang ba'i dgra
སྡང་བའི་རྟགས	signs of hatred	sdang ba'i rtags
སྡང་བར་མངོན་གྱུར་ན	appears angry	sdang bar mngon gyur na
སྡང་བས་ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	overcome by anger; 2) by anger overcome another	sdang bas zil gyis gnon pa
སྡང་བུ	SA gdang bu	sdang bu
སྡང་བྱེད	enemy	sdang byed
སྡང་མིག	angry eyes	sdang mig
སྡང་མིག་ལྟ་རེས་བྱེད་པའི་མི་གཉིས	two people looking angrily at each other	sdang mig lta res byed pa'i mi gnyis
སྡང་མེད	devoid of hatred/ enmity	sdang med
སྡང་ཚད	enough	sdang tshad
སྡང་འཛིན	animosity, hatred	sdang 'dzin
སྡང་ཟུག	hostility, hatred, vindictiveness, spite	sdang zug
སྡང་ཟུག་སྤྲོད	act w [hostility, hatred, vindictiveness, spite]	sdang zug sprod
སྡང་སེམས	hostile attitude, hostility, wanting to harm	sdang sems
སྡང་སེམས་ཀྱིས་མི་གནོད	nor hatred can harm me sdang sems byad kha bzlog pa'i sha ba deer that repels the curses of angry enemies	sdang sems kyis mi gnod
སྡང་སེམས་བྱེད	harbor animosity, hate, despise	sdang sems byed
སྡང་སེམས་བྱེད་པ	hate	sdang sems byed pa
སྡངས	angry, wrath, hate, SA sdang ba	sdangs
སྡད་གྲོང	freehold house, resident owner, not occupied by agricultural tenant	sdad grong
སྡམ	[p sdom],, tied, bound, fastened	sdam
སྡམ་པ	abstinent, self-restraining, bound, SA sdom pa	sdam pa
སྡར་སྐད	timid/ cowardly words	sdar skad
སྡར་སྡར	fearful rnam pa	sdar sdar
སྡར་བ	{sdar ba, sdar ba, sdar ba} intr. v	sdar ba
སྡར་མ	coward, trembling, timorous, timid [person]	sdar ma
སྡར་མ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་འབྲོ་ས་ཡིན	cowards run to these places to hide	sdar ma rnams kyi 'bro sa yin
སྡར་མ་ཝའི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	rgyal khab la pha rol gyi rgol ba dpung tshan che ba byung na dgra phyogs las rgyal ba ma byung yang, mi pham pa'i thabs jus rtsom thabs kyi khrims	sdar ma wa'i zhal lce
སྡར་ཚན	dozen, pile	sdar tshan
སྡི་ཉེས	crime	sdi nyes
སྡི་ཉེས་ཅན	criminal	sdi nyes can
སྡི་བ	point towards, SA sdigs pa	sdi ba
སྡིག	"threat," "evil," evil deed, misdeed, wrongdoing, [sin, vice], negative / unwholesome action, disservice. to threaten. abbr. of {sdig pa} disservice, thick, foundation, wrongdoing, misdeed	sdig
སྡིག་ཁྱིམ	house of Scorpio	sdig khyim
སྡིག་གྲོགས	evil companionship	sdig grogs
སྡིག་རྒྱུན་གཅོད་པ	sdud pa, collapse ???	sdig rgyun gcod pa
སྡིག་རྒྱུན་བཅད་པ	cut the stream of negative action	sdig rgyun bcad pa
སྡིག་སྒྲ	thumping noise	sdig sgra
སྡིག་སྒྲ་གཏོང	thump, pound	sdig sgra gtong
སྡིག་སྒྲ་བྱེད	thump, pound	sdig sgra byed
སྡིག་སྒྲིབ	evil deeds and obscurations, sin and defilement, contamination of sin, obstacles and hindrances due to negative actions, obstacles & negativities	sdig sgrib
སྡིག་སྒྲིབ་ཉེས་ལྟུང	evil deeds, obscurations, faults and failings; evil deeds' obscurations and violations' falls. This is only two categories. The first is {rang bzhin kha na ma tho ba} and the second {bcas pa'i kha ...	sdig sgrib nyes ltung
བཟླས	The visualization and recitation of Vajrasattva to purify evil deeds and obscurations	bzlas
སྡིག་སྒྲིབ་ལས་གཙང་མ་བཟོ་བ	purge	sdig sgrib las gtsang ma bzo ba
སྡིག་སྒྲིབ་སྲབ་པ	lesser sin, defilement	sdig sgrib srab pa
སྡིག་ཅན	wicked	sdig can
སྡིག་ཅན་མི	a sinful person	sdig can mi
སྡིག་ཅན་ཤན་པ	sinful butcher	sdig can shan pa
སྡིག་བཅོམ	defeating evil	sdig bcom
སྡིག་ཆེ	most heinous crime	sdig che
སྡིག་ཆེན	sinner	sdig chen
སྡིག་ཆོས	non-virtuous actions	sdig chos
སྡིག་འཇོམས	w/o evil deeds bzo ba	sdig 'joms
སྡིག་ཏོ	evil, wrongdoing	sdig to
སྡིག་ཏོ་ཅན	evildoer	sdig to can
སྡིག་ཏོ་བ	sinner	sdig to ba
སྡིག་ཏོའི་བསམ་པ	thoughts of doing evil deeds should be discarded	sdig to'i bsam pa
སྡིག་ཏོའི་བསམ་པ་འདོར་བར་བྱ	thoughts of doing evil deeds should be discarded	sdig to'i bsam pa 'dor bar bya
སྡིག་ལྟ	an unwholesome belief	sdig lta
སྡིག་ལྟ་མི་གཏོང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the failing of not relinquishing an unwholesome belief	sdig lta mi gtong ba'i ltung byed
སྡིག་ལྟའི་མཚན་ཉིད	suspicious character	sdig lta'i mtshan nyid
སྡིག་ལྟའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	one having sinful looks	sdig lta'i mtshan nyid can
སྡིག་ལྟུང	misdeeds and failings, negative actions and downfalls	sdig ltung
སྡིག་ལྟུང་ལ་གནོང་འགྱོད	feeling of regret and sorrow for all evil deeds and failings	sdig ltung la gnong 'gyod
སྡིག་ལྟུང་བཤག་པ	confession	sdig ltung bshag pa
སྡིག་བལྟ	scorpion	sdig blta
སྡིག་ལྡན་དབང་པོ་རྒྱལ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	sdig ldan dbang po rgyal
སྡིག་སྡུག	evil deeds and suffering	sdig sdug
སྡིག་བརྡ	warning	sdig brda
སྡིག་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	warn	sdig brda gtong ba
སྡིག་པ	evil deeds, scorpion	sdig pa
སྡིག་པ་འཁུར	take responsibility for evil deeds [an oath]	sdig pa 'khur
སྡིག་པ་འཁྱེར	take responsibility for evil deeds [an oath]	sdig pa 'khyer
སྡིག་པ་སྒྲོག་པ	sdig pa khyab bsgrag tu shod pa	sdig pa sgrog pa
སྡིག་པ་ལྔ	the five evil deds [Kalachakra: 1 gzhan ldus 'khor las gsungs pa'i sdig pa lnga ste, 1 gzhan la 'tse ba dang, two rdzun smra ba, three 'dod log four ma byin len pa five chang 'thung ba]	sdig pa lnga
སྡིག་པ་ཅན	evil person/ being	sdig pa can
སྡིག་པ་ཅི་ཡང་མི་བྱ་ཞིང	Doing no evil whatsoever {dge ba phun sum tshogs par spyad} Practice virtue perfectly, {rang gi sems ni yongs su 'dul} Tame your mind completely, {'di ni sangs rgyas bstan pa yin} This is the teach...	sdig pa ci yang mi bya zhing
སྡིག་པ་འཆགས་སོ	i have confessed my sins	sdig pa 'chags so
སྡིག་པ་འཆབ་པ	evil deeds which 1 hides fearing that others will know	sdig pa 'chab pa
བྱས་པ་ལེགས	if rather than hiding evil deeds, 1 confesses them right away it is best	byas pa legs
སྡིག་པ་འཇོམས་པ	conquer sin sdig pa rtag tu spongs la dge ba'i bsod	sdig pa 'joms pa
ནམས་སྤེལ་མཛོད	always abandon evil and increase the merit of virtuous actions	nams spel mdzod
སྡིག་པ་དག་པ	purified of sin	sdig pa dag pa
སྡིག་པ་རྣམ་པར་སྦྱངས	one whose sins have been entirely washed off	sdig pa rnam par sbyangs
སྡིག་པ་སྤང་བ	giving up negative acts	sdig pa spang ba
སྡིག་པ་སྤང་ཚུལ	how to give up negative actions	sdig pa spang tshul
སྡིག་པ་སྤོང	abandon negative actions	sdig pa spong
སྡིག་པ་སྤོང་བ	to shun wrongdoing 1456	sdig pa spong ba
སྡིག་པ་སྤྱོད་པ	practice sin	sdig pa spyod pa
སྡིག་པ་བྱས་པ	harm committed	sdig pa byas pa
སྡིག་པ་བྱས་པ་རྣམས	those who have committed negative actions	sdig pa byas pa rnams
སྡིག་པ་བྱེད་པ	commit sin	sdig pa byed pa
སྡིག་པ་འབའ་ཞིག	sin only	sdig pa 'ba' zhig
སྡིག་པ་འབའ་ཞིག་གསོག	we accumulate nothing but misdeeds	sdig pa 'ba' zhig gsog
སྡིག་པ་སྦྱང་བ	purification of unvirtuous deeds	sdig pa sbyang ba
སྡིག་པ་སྦྱོང་བ	purge sin, clear up evil, purification of sins, cleansing sin by making confession	sdig pa sbyong ba
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བ	non-virtuous evil deeds	sdig pa mi dge ba
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ	mi dge ba bcu	sdig pa mi dge ba bcu
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས	evil deeds of the 10 non- virtues	sdig pa mi dge ba bcu'i las
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བའི་ཆོས	harmful and unvirtuous attributes	sdig pa mi dge ba'i chos
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས	negative actions	sdig pa mi dge ba'i las
སྡིག་པ་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་བསགས་པ	committed negative actions	sdig pa mi dge ba'i las bsags pa
སྡིག་པ་མི་བྱེད་པའི་ཁྲིམས	the rule against retaliation	sdig pa mi byed pa'i khrims
སྡིག་པ་མིག་བཙུམ	purposely close the eyes to good or evil fruitions	sdig pa mig btsum
སྡིག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཤ	meat that is free from evil action	sdig pa med pa'i sha
སྡིག་པ་ཞི་བ	pacifying misdeeds	sdig pa zhi ba
སྡིག་པ་ར་ཙ	scorpion	sdig pa ra tsa
སྡིག་པ་ར་ཚ	scorpion	sdig pa ra tsha
སྡིག་པ་རབ༹་ཅན	scorpion	sdig pa rva can
སྡིག་པ་རྭ་ཅན	scorpion	sdig pa rwa can
སྡིག་པ་རྭ་ཅོ	rivulet, dishwater	sdig pa rwa co
སྡིག་པ་རབ༹་ཉག	scorpion	sdig pa rva nyag
སྡིག་པ་རབ༹་ཙ	scorpion	sdig pa rva tsa
སྡིག་པ་རྭ་ཙ	scorpion	sdig pa rwa tsa
སྡིག་པ་ལ་བརྟབས	feared sin	sdig pa la brtabs
སྡིག་པ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	{rang gzhan sdig pa la sbyor ba las mi 'dug} it only creates wrongdoing for myself and others	sdig pa la sbyor ba
སྡིག་པ་ལ་འཛུད	seduce into sin	sdig pa la 'dzud
སྡིག་པ་ལས་ཀྱིས་འཁོར་བ	disruptions from people acting with iniquity	sdig pa las kyis 'khor ba
སྡིག་པ་ལས་བྱས	harmful actions	sdig pa las byas
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས	confess evil deeds	sdig pa bshags
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས་པ	to apologize for wrongdoing; admit and lay aside evil deeds. See {bshags pa}	sdig pa bshags pa
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས་པའི་སྟོབས་བཞི	the four powers of confessing evil deeds [rten gyi stobs dang, sun 'byin pa'i stobs, sor chud pa'i stobs, gnyen po kun tu spyod pa'i stobs]	sdig pa bshags pa'i stobs bzhi
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས་པའི་ཡན་ལག	the aspect of confession misdeeds, {stobs bzhi}	sdig pa bshags pa'i yan lag
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས་པའི་ལེའུ	repentance for sins GD ?? chapter of?	sdig pa bshags pa'i le'u
སྡིག་པ་བཤགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	expiation of sin by confession and repentance	sdig pa bshags par byed pa
སྡིག་པ་སོ་སོར་བཤགས་པ	to apologize for individual misdeeds	sdig pa so sor bshags pa
སྡིག་པ་གསོག	commit/ accumulate evil deeds	sdig pa gsog
སྡིག་པ་བསགས་པ	sinner	sdig pa bsags pa
སྡིག་པའམ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	sanctify	sdig pa'am dri ma med par bzo ba
སྡིག་པའི་ཁ་ཁེངས	sdig pa'i kha snon longs pa	sdig pa'i kha khengs
སྡིག་པའི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion of Scorpio, [10th of the 12 mansions in the zodiac, {skar khyim bcu gnyis}	sdig pa'i khyim
སྡིག་པའི་གད་མོ	coquettish laugh	sdig pa'i gad mo
སྡིག་པའི་གྲོགས	companion in vice, associate in crime	sdig pa'i grogs
སྡིག་པའི་གྲོགས་པོ	bad friend; evil companion	sdig pa'i grogs po
སྡིག་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	possessed of vicious propensities	sdig pa'i chos can
སྡིག་པའི་གཉེན་པོ་སྟོབས་བཞི	the four powers of antidote to evil deeds	sdig pa'i gnyen po stobs bzhi
སྡིག་པའི་ལྟོ་ཅན	bear	sdig pa'i lto can
སྡིག་པའི་སྟོ་ཅན	dom bear	sdig pa'i sto can
སྡིག་པའི་རྣམ་སྨིན	ripened evil deeds	sdig pa'i rnam smin
སྡིག་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	large number of scorpions in one place	sdig pa'i phung po
སྡིག་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	the result of having done wrong	sdig pa'i 'bras bu
སྡིག་པའི་གཞན་དབང	the influence of their wrong actions	sdig pa'i gzhan dbang
སྡིག་པའི་ལས	evil action/ deeds	sdig pa'i las
སྡིག་པའི་ལས་བསགས	to accumulate evil actions sdig pa'i sa bon btab na sdug bsngal dug	sdig pa'i las bsags
གི་སྡོང་པོ་སྐྱེ	if you plant the seeds of nonvirtue, the poison ivy of suffering will grow	gi sdong po skye
སྡིག་པའི་སོ་ནམ	farming/ cultivation of evil deeds	sdig pa'i so nam
སྡིག་སྤངས	gave up misdeeds	sdig spangs
སྡིག་སྤངས་དགེ་བསྒྲུབ	abandon evil deeds and perform good ones	sdig spangs dge bsgrub
སྡིག་སྤོང་དགེ་སྒྲུབ	give up negative actions and practice wholesome deeds	sdig spong dge sgrub
སྡིག་སྤྱོད	evil action/ behavior/ conduct	sdig spyod
སྡིག་སྤྱོད་ཕལ་པ	common evil-doers	sdig spyod phal pa
སྡིག་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	commit evil actions/ behavior/ conduct	sdig spyod byed
སྡིག་ཕུག་མ	species of tibetan bird	sdig phug ma
སྡིག་ཕྲུག	1) baby scorpion; 2) small zangs sdig	sdig phrug
སྡིག་བྱེད	evil-doers	sdig byed
སྡིག་བློན	minister delighting in evil deeds	sdig blon
སྡིག་འབྲས	the result of misdeeds	sdig 'bras
སྡིག་སྦྱོང་བཏང་བ	to torture, starve, abuse, beat	sdig sbyong btang ba
སྡིག་སྦྲུལ	scorpions and snakes	sdig sbrul
སྡིག་མི་དགེ	wrongs acts	sdig mi dge
སྡིག་མེད་གནས	harmless, innocent	sdig med gnas
སྡིག་ཚིག	words of sin, words of repentance	sdig tshig
སྡིག་མཛུབ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra of the "threatening pointer" 1457	sdig mdzub phyag rgya
སྡིག་འཛུབ	direction introduction mudra of right forefinger pointing to disciple	sdig 'dzub
སྡིག་ཟས	harmful food, for obtained through evil deeds	sdig zas
སྡིག་ར	woman's silver sash w ornaments	sdig ra
སྡིག་རྭ	scorpion, threat, intimidation, wrench	sdig rwa
སྡིག་རབ༹	1) scorpion; 2) child's 'khur chas gzan chung gi sne sgrog byed in the shape of a scorpion	sdig rva
སྡིག་རབ༹་གློ་ཕྲེང	Tibetan lha lcam gzab spros spras skabs mdun phyogs su 'dogs pa'i rgyan zhig ste, waist of the upper garment thad nas sgrog byed scorpion made of gold and silver &, rgyan pearl and coral etc. kyi z...	sdig rva glo phreng
སྡིག་རེ་བསྐུར	threaten yourself with this	sdig re bskur
སྡིག་ལ་ལྡོག་པ	turn away from evil deeds	sdig la ldog pa
སྡིག་ལ་རེམ	involve myself in evil actions	sdig la rem
སྡིག་ལས	{sdig pa'i las} evil action, evil deeds	sdig las
སྡིག་ཤས	wicked people	sdig shas
སྡིག་བཤགས	confessing misdeeds	sdig bshags
སྡིག་བཤགས་ཕུལ་བ	offered confession of his sins	sdig bshags phul ba
སྡིག་བཤགས་སྨོན་ལམ	penitential prayer	sdig bshags smon lam
སྡིག་བཤགས་གསེར་གྱི་སྤུ་གྲི	Tibetan formula of atonement	sdig bshags gser gyi spu gri
སྡིག་སེལ	to dispel misdeeds	sdig sel
སྡིག་སྲིན	crab	sdig srin
སྡིག་བསགས་རང་འཁུར	take on responsibility for one's evil deeds by oneself	sdig bsags rang 'khur
སྡིགས	sdig pa! threaten, menace, intimidate	sdigs
སྡིགས་སྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	abash	sdigs skul byed pa
སྡིགས་བསྐུལ	threat, intimidation	sdigs bskul
སྡིགས་སྡིགས	thumping, pounding	sdigs sdigs
སྡིགས་སྡིགས་གཏོང	thump, pound	sdigs sdigs gtong
སྡིགས་སྡིགས་བྱེད	thump, pound	sdigs sdigs byed
སྡིགས་པ	terrifying/ fear arousing manner/ aspect/ expression/ laughter	sdigs pa
སྡིགས་པའི་གད་མོ	terrifying/ threatening laughter	sdigs pa'i gad mo
སྡིགས་མོ	arouse fear, blackmail, extortion	sdigs mo
སྡིགས་མོ་བྱེད	arouse fear, blackmail, extort	sdigs mo byed
སྡིགས་མོ་བྱེད་པ	assume a menacing attitude, threaten, taunting	sdigs mo byed pa
སྡིགས་ཚིག	words threatening/ arousing fear in others	sdigs tshig
སྡིགས་མཛུབ	index-finger, the mudra of threatening, threatening mudra/ gesture	sdigs mdzub
སྡིགས་མཛུབ་བསྟན་པ	to point a finger	sdigs mdzub bstan pa
སྡིགས་མཛུབ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra of the "threatening pointer."	sdigs mdzub phyag rgya
སྡིགས་ར	fear arousing manner, threat, intimidation	sdigs ra
སྡིགས་ར་བསྐུལ	threaten, intimidate, menace [w]	sdigs ra bskul
སྡིགས་ར་སྤྲོད	threaten, intimidate, menace [w]	sdigs ra sprod
སྡིགས་རྭ་བསྐུལ	threaten, intimidate, menace [w]	sdigs rwa bskul
སྡིགས་རྭ་སྤྲོད	threaten, intimidate, menace [w]	sdigs rwa sprod
སྡིགས་རའི་ཐ་ཚིག	in taking an oath accompany w use fear arousing/ threatening words	sdigs ra'i tha tshig
སྡིགས་རྭའི་ཐ་ཚིག	in taking an oath accompany w use fear arousing/ threatening words	sdigs rwa'i tha tshig
སྡིགས་རི	fear arousing manner	sdigs ri
སྡིང་ཆ	stage	sding cha
སྡིངས	a cavity or depression	sdings
སྡིངས་ཆ	platform	sdings cha
སྡིངས་ཆུ	{sdings chu	sdings chu
སྡིངས་པོ་ཅོག་གྲ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་བི༹	ngag dbang chos kyi rgyal mtshan	sdings po cog gra sprul sku vi
སྡིངས་པོ་ཆེ	Drukpa Kagyü Monastery	sdings po che
སྡིད	(not in DAS)	sdid
སྡིབ་པ	SA ldib pa, ltib pa	sdib pa
སྡིར	(not in DAS)	sdir
སྡུ	collect, assemble, gather, absorb, contain, be adhesive, cohesion, holding together, comprehend, abridge, summarize, epitomize, folds, drawing hem, ? synthesis, steal away, abbreviate, condense	sdu
སྡུ་གུ	beauty, beautiful	sdu gu
སྡུ་བ	brief	sdu ba
སྡུ་རུབ་བྱེད་པ	procure	sdu rub byed pa
སྡུག	1) suffering, misery, pain[ful], sorrow, discomfort, miserable, [be] depressed/ sad; 2) pleasant, sad, pretty, beautiful; 3) harm, difficulty, painful, toil, hardship; 4) bad * [comp sdug po]	sdug
སྡུག་ཀུན་འགོག་ལམ	the four noble truths	sdug kun 'gog lam
སྡུག་དཀའ་ལས	hard work, labor, toil	sdug dka' las
སྡུག་དཀའ་ལས་རྒྱག	work hard, labor, toil	sdug dka' las rgyag
སྡུག་དཀའ་ལས་རྒྱག་གི་ཡོད	[they] worked hard	sdug dka' las rgyag gi yod
སྡུག་བཀོལ	make suffer, torment [R]	sdug bkol
སྡུག་སྐད	groan, complaints, grumbling	sdug skad
སྡུག་སྐད་རྒྱག	cry w unbearable suffering *, complain, grumble	sdug skad rgyag
སྡུག་སྐད་འདོན	cry w unbearable suffering *, complain, grumble, howl of an animal	sdug skad 'don
སྡུག་སྐད་ཚིག	words of complain/ discontent	sdug skad tshig
སྡུག་སྐད་ཚེ་རེ	words of suffering or tsho nge	sdug skad tshe re
སྡུག་བསྐུར	bestow the burden of suffering	sdug bskur
སྡུག་ཁང	darkened room, chamber of mourning	sdug khang
སྡུག་ཁུར་བྱེད་པ	undergo hardships, bear affliction, suffer	sdug khur byed pa
སྡུག་ཁྲལ	hard to fulfill/ bad tax [obligation] 1458	sdug khral
སྡུག་འཁུར	carry the burden of/ bear/ put up w suffering/ hardship	sdug 'khur
སྡུག་འཁུར་མི་ཐུབ་པ	not able to carry the burden of/ bear/ put up w suffering/ hardship	sdug 'khur mi thub pa
སྡུག་འཁྱག	be able to endure illness/ unpleasantness/ suffering	sdug 'khyag
སྡུག་ག	worse	sdug ga
སྡུག་གད	w mind mostly sad ngu shor laugh	sdug gad
སྡུག་གི་འདའ	{mi tshe sdug gi 'da'} our lives are consumed by suffering	sdug gi 'da'
སྡུག་གུ	beauty, beautiful, engaging, pretty, winsome	sdug gu
སྡུག་གུ་མ	excellent woman	sdug gu ma
སྡུག་གེ་བ	state of being pleasing	sdug ge ba
སྡུག་གོས	mourning dress	sdug gos
སྡུག་གྱོང	sad disappointment/ loss/ defeatism	sdug gyong
སྡུག་གྱོང་འཁུར་བ	suffer/ bear a loss	sdug gyong 'khur ba
སྡུག་གྱོང་གུན་འཁུར་བ	suffer/ bear a loss	sdug gyong gun 'khur ba
སྡུག་གྱོང་བཏང་བ	1) suffer/ bear a loss; 2) throw away w/o thinking	sdug gyong btang ba
སྡུག་གྱོང་འབུ་རུ	incurable thor nad	sdug gyong 'bu ru
སྡུག་གྲོགས	companion in suffering	sdug grogs
སྡུག་གྲོགས་སོང	brought parents suffering	sdug grogs song
སྡུག་གླུ	sems sdug song [happy? sad?]	sdug glu
སྡུག་རྒན	1) old person who has experienced suffering over and over; 2) life of nothing but suffering	sdug rgan
སྡུག་རྒུར	having borne/ submitted to hardship and loss remain	sdug rgur
སྡུག་སྒུར	having borne/ submitted to hardship and loss remain	sdug sgur
སྡུག་སྒོམ	tolerating misery / suffering / hardship	sdug sgom
སྡུག་སྒོམ་རྒྱག	endure, forbear/ tolerate misery/ suffering/ hardship	sdug sgom rgyag
སྡུག་ངུ	weep w sadness	sdug ngu
སྡུག་ངོ	unhappy expression	sdug ngo
སྡུག་སྔལ	tribulation, SA sdug bsngal	sdug sngal
སྡུག་སྔལ་ཅན	gloomy, SA sdug bsngal can	sdug sngal can
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཀུན་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	the causes for the origin of suffering	sdug bsngal kun 'byung ba'i rgyu
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཀྱི་ལམ	road of suffering	sdug bsngal kyi lam
སྡུག་བསྔལ་སྐྱེ་བ	the arising of suffering	sdug bsngal skye ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཁས་ལེན་པ	to accept suffering	sdug bsngal khas len pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གི་བདེན་པ	the truth of suffering GD	sdug bsngal gi bden pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of suffering GD	sdug bsngal gi sdug bsngal
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི	woeful	sdug bsngal gyi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་སྐད་ཕྱུང	uttered lamentations	sdug bsngal gyi skad phyung
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel/ continuity of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi 'khor lo
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་རྒྱུ	the cause of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi rgyu
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	the four great floods of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi chu bo chen po bzhi
གཟིངས་ལྟ་བུ	like the ship of wisdom traveling over the river of misery	gzings lta bu
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	world of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi 'jig rten
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་བདེན་པ	truth of suffering GD	sdug bsngal gyi bden pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་བདེན་པའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of the truth of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi bden pa'i rang bzhin
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	notion of suffering sdug bsngal gyi 'du shes dpag tu med pas	sdug bsngal gyi 'du shes
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of suffering; suffering of pain itself; suffering of pain	sdug bsngal gyi sdug bsngal
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	gloom	sdug bsngal gyi rnam pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	reflecting on the types of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi rnam pa bsgom pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	mass of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi phung po
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	the great mass of suffering sdug bsngal gyi phung po chen po 'ba'	sdug bsngal gyi phung po chen po
ཞིག་པ	great mass of total suffering sdug bsngal gyi phung po chen po rab tu	zhig pa
ཞི་བ	fully pacifying the great mass of suffering sdug bsngal gyi phung po 'ba' zhig po great mass of total suffering; the skandhas which are nothing but suffering sdug bsngal gyi phung po 'ba' zhig po g...	zhi ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་དབང་པོ	the faculty for suffering/ painful [feeling]	sdug bsngal gyi dbang po
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་དབྱེ་བ་བརྒྱད	eight types of suffering; see {sdug bsngal brgyad}	sdug bsngal gyi dbye ba brgyad
པ་ལ་ཆགས	the root of suffering for men is women; for women, it is attachment to men.	pa la chags
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་ཚོར་བ	painful sensation	sdug bsngal gyi tshor ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཞི	the four characteristics of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi mtshan nyid bzhi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་གཞན་དབང	dependency of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi gzhan dbang
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་གཞི་བདུན	7 bases of suffering	sdug bsngal gyi gzhi bdun
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱིས་ཉམས་ཐག	wearied/ exhausted by suffering 1459	sdug bsngal gyis nyams thag
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	oppressed by suffering	sdug bsngal gyis non pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱིས་ཟིལ་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	overcome by suffering	sdug bsngal gyis zil gyis non pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བགྲང	recount 1's misery/ hardship	sdug bsngal bgrang
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འགྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཞི	CHN	sdug bsngal 'gyi'i mtshan nyid bzhi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྒྱད	eight miseries. 1) {skye ba'i sdug bsngal} the misery of birth. 2) {rga ba'i sdug bsngal} the misery of old age. 3) {na ba'i sdug bsngal} the misery of sickness. 4) {'chi ba'i sdug bsngal} the mise...	sdug bsngal rgyad
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྒྱུ་བཅས་ཞི་བ	pacification of suffering and its causes GD	sdug bsngal rgyu bcas zhi ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བརྒྱད	the eight sufferings, {skye rga na 'chi}, {sdug pa dang bral ba}, {mi 'dod pa thog tu bab pa}, {'dod pa btsal kyang ni rnyed pa}, {zag bcas kyi phung po lnga}	sdug bsngal brgyad
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བསྒྲལ་ཕྱིར	in order to be liberated from suffering	sdug bsngal bsgral phyir
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཅན	grievous, sorrowful, gloomy	sdug bsngal can
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཆོས་བཟོད	{sdug bsngal la chos shes pa'i bzod pa} patient acceptance producing knowledge of the	sdug bsngal chos bzod
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཆོས་ཤེས	see {sdug bsngal la chos shes pa}	sdug bsngal chos shes
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྗེས་བཟོད	ensuing acceptance of suffering	sdug bsngal rjes bzod
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྗེས་ཤེས	see {sdug bsngal la rjes su shes pa}	sdug bsngal rjes shes
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཉམ་ཐག	suffering and poverty	sdug bsngal nyam thag
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	the aggregates that perpetuate suffering	sdug bsngal nyer len gyi phung po
མ་དང་བཅས་པ	w residue of the skandhas closely associated w/ perpetuating suffering sdug bsngal nyer len gyi phung po'i lhag	ma dang bcas pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གཉུག་མ	innate suffering	sdug bsngal gnyug ma
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གཏེར	hell	sdug bsngal gter
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྟོག་པ	conception of suffering sdug bsngal thams cad kyi 'byung khungs - the source of all suffering	sdug bsngal rtog pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཐུ་བ	malignant suffering, severe accident	sdug bsngal thu ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཐོབ་པ	be miserable, be unhappy	sdug bsngal thob pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མཐོང	see suffering	sdug bsngal mthong
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	painful	sdug bsngal dang ldan pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from suffering	sdug bsngal dang bral ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་ཡིད་མི་བདེ་བ	suffering and unhappiness	sdug bsngal dang yid mi bde ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་ལེན་གྱི་བཟོད་པ	the patience of undertaking pain	sdug bsngal dang len gyi bzod pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become melancholy	sdug bsngal du 'gyur ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དུ་རིག	see as painful	sdug bsngal du rig
སྡུག་བསྔལ་དྲུག	the six kinds of suffering	sdug bsngal drug
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདག་ཉིད	nature of suffering	sdug bsngal bdag nyid
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདེན་པ	the truth of suffering	sdug bsngal bden pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདེན་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four aspects of the trut of suffering [bden bzhi rnam pa bcu drug gi nang tsan zhig ste, skad cig re re nas skye zhing 'jug pa'i chos can yin pas mi rtag pa dang, sdug bsngal gsum gyis rgyun mi...	sdug bsngal bden pa'i rnam pa bzhi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདེན་པའི་གཞི	the basis for the truth of suffering. Def. Mipham: {ma dag pa'i snod bcud las nyon gyi dbang gis byung ba zag bcas 'bras gyur gyi cha thams cad do} everything that is a product of defiling states: ...	sdug bsngal bden pa'i gzhi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདེན་པས་བསྡུས	are subsumed under the truth of suffering	sdug bsngal bden pas bsdus
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལྡོག་པ་ལྔ	CHN	sdug bsngal ldog pa lnga
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three sufferings 1460 sdug bsngal rnams skye ba'i kun nas nyon	sdug bsngal rnam gsum
སྡུག་བསྔལ་སྣ་ཚོགས	so much suffering	sdug bsngal sna tshogs
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཕུང་པོ	the mass of suffering	sdug bsngal phung po
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ	misery, suffering	sdug bsngal ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བའི་སྐད	painful or lamentable cries	sdug bsngal ba'i skad
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	having the characteristics of suffering, painful traits	sdug bsngal ba'i mtshan nyid can
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བྱུང་བ	the arising of suffering	sdug bsngal byung ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བྱེད་པ	aggrieve, grieve, bewail, bemoan	sdug bsngal byed pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབབ་པ	the occurrence of suffering	sdug bsngal 'bab pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབའ་ཞིག་མཉོང་ངོ	we experience only the suffering	sdug bsngal 'ba' zhig mnyong ngo
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབྱུང་གནས	samsara	sdug bsngal 'byung gnas
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབྱུང་བ	the arising of suffering	sdug bsngal 'byung ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of the arising of suffering	sdug bsngal 'byung ba'i rgyu
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མ་བྱེད	don't let it cause you pain!	sdug bsngal ma byed
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མ་བྱེད་ཅིག	do not be sad	sdug bsngal ma byed cig
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མང་པོ་མྱོང	undergo much suffering	sdug bsngal mang po myong
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་རྟོག་པ	not conceptualize suffering	sdug bsngal mi rtog pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་འདོད	none of them want to suffer	sdug bsngal mi 'dod
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་བྱེད་ཉིད	nonproduction of suffering	sdug bsngal mi byed nyid
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་བཟད་གདུང་བ	unbearable [torment of] suffering	sdug bsngal mi bzad gdung ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང	suffer, undergo misery/ hardship	sdug bsngal myong
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས	'actions that produce painful experiences' {'dod khams su sdug bsngal myong bar byed pa'i las mi dge ba'o} unvirtuous actions which create unpleasant experiences within the desire realms	sdug bsngal myong 'gyur gyi las
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང་པ	taste distress, get into trouble	sdug bsngal myong pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང་བར་བྱེད་པའི་ལས	actions which create unpleasant experiences	sdug bsngal myong bar byed pa'i las
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང་བྱེད	that create painful experiences	sdug bsngal myong byed
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཞི་མཛད	bring peace to misery	sdug bsngal zhi mdzad
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཞི	the four kinds of suffering [skye ba dang, rga ba, na ba, 'chi ba'i sdug bsngal bcas bzhi]	sdug bsngal bzhi
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཞི་ལྡན	w the four kinds of suffering	sdug bsngal bzhi ldan
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཟད་པར་འདོད་པ	want to exhaust/ eliminate suffering, maintain that suffering is exhausted/ eliminated	sdug bsngal zad par 'dod pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཟུག་རྔུ	the pain/ torment of suffering	sdug bsngal zug rngu
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཟོད་གླགས་མ་མཆིས	is an unbearable misery anguish	sdug bsngal bzod glags ma mchis
སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཟོད་པ	endurance of suffering	sdug bsngal bzod pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རང་བཞིན	a painful nature	sdug bsngal rang bzhin
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བ	the total subsiding of suffering	sdug bsngal rab tu zhi ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རབ་ཏུ་ཤི་བ	completely pacify/ eliminate	sdug bsngal rab tu shi ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of the phenomenon of suffering specifically in the desire realm	sdug bsngal la chos shes pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ་ཐེ་ཨཕ༹ཏེར	effect of the perception of the doctrine of the truth of suffering GD	sdug bsngal la rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa the after
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	subsequent knowledge of suffering (specifically in the two higher realms)	sdug bsngal la rjes su shes pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པས	the suffering they experience; x {yi dvags ni bkres skom kyi sdug bsngal la spyod pas chos byed du mi khoms} the pretas have no opportunity to practise the Dharma because of the suffering they expe...	sdug bsngal la spyod pas
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལས་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	be [completely] liberated from suffering	sdug bsngal las rnam par grol ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལོ	it is painful	sdug bsngal lo
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of the defiled perpetuating skandhas as suffering	sdug bsngal shes pa
སྡུག་བསྔལ་སེལ་བ	clear away/ eliminate suffering	sdug bsngal sel ba
སྡུག་བསྔལ་གསུམ	Three sufferings. The suffering upon suffering, the suffering of change, and the all-pervasive suffering of formations	sdug bsngal gsum
སྡུག་ཅག	hateful, abominable, bad	sdug cag
སྡུག་ཅན	terrible, bad, horrible	sdug can
སྡུག་ཅིག་མ	a nadi	sdug cig ma
སྡུག་ཆག	terrible, awful, abominable	sdug chag
སྡུག་ཆག་ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག	atrocious	sdug chag zhed po cig
སྡུག་ཆགས	awful, bad, repulsive, horrid	sdug chags
སྡུག་ཆུ་བྱོ	recount 1's misery/ hardship sdug mchil ma gnyis lkog 'thung byed She had to suffer and weep, alone and in secret silence	sdug chu byo
སྡུག་བསྙལ་ཀྱིས་གདུང་བ	tormented by the miseries	sdug bsnyal kyis gdung ba
སྡུག་བསྙལ་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns and sufferings	sdug bsnyal bag chags
སྡུག་ཏུ་འགྲོ	worsen, deteriorate	sdug tu 'gro
སྡུག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	descend	sdug tu 'gro ba
སྡུག་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	exasperate, worsen	sdug tu gtong ba
སྡུག་ཏུ་བཏང་བ	aggravate, make worse	sdug tu btang ba
སྡུག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན	[it] got worse	sdug tu phyin
སྡུག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	deteriorate	sdug tu phyin pa
སྡུག་གཏམ	1) words/ talk of suffering; 2) inauspicious talk	sdug gtam
སྡུག་ཐུག	[reach the point of] suffering	sdug thug
སྡུག་ཐུག་པ	troubles	sdug thug pa
སྡུག་ཐུག་འུ་ཐུག་པ	suffering field servants w/o food and clothing who go begging food	sdug thug 'u thug pa
སྡུག་ཐེག་པ	able to endure suffering	sdug theg pa
སྡུག་ཐོག་སྡུག་བརྩེག	1) sufferings 1 after another; 2) badder than bad	sdug thog sdug brtseg
སྡུག་ཐོག་སྡུག་བརྩེགས	1) sufferings 1 after another; 2) badder than bad	sdug thog sdug brtsegs
སྡུག་མཐའ	sad ending	sdug mtha'
སྡུག་མཐུག	accumulated calamities	sdug mthug
སྡུག་བདེན	Syn {sdug bsngal gyi bden pa} suffering, truth of, as interdependent links	sdug bden
སྡུག་བདེན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	[Tse]	sdug bden gyi rnam pa lnga
སྡུག་བདེན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four aspects of the truth of suffering	sdug bden gyi rnam pa bzhi
སྡུག་བདེན་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ་བཅུ	the 10 to be abandoned by the truth of suffering *]	sdug bden gyi spang bya bcu
སྡུག་བདེན་སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {mi rtag sdug bsngal/ stong pa/ bdag med pa bzhi/ mdzod 'grel las/ de la rkyen la rag lus pa'i phyir	sdug bden spyi'i mtshan nyid
སྡུག་མདོག	sad expression/ mein	sdug mdog
སྡུག་འདྲེ	demon	sdug 'dre
སྡུག་སྡུག་འདྲ་ན	when things go wrong	sdug sdug 'dra na
སྡུག་བསྡལ	sorrow	sdug bsdal
སྡུག་ན	When you face hardships	sdug na
སྡུག་ནད	the disease of suffering	sdug nad
སྡུག་པ	lovely, attractive, agreeable, comely, nice, dear, loveable, afflicted, downcast, depressed, prostrated, sorrow, misery, distress	sdug pa
སྡུག་པ་གྱིས་ཤིག	sad words spoken from disappointment [R]	sdug pa gyis shig
སྡུག་པ་ཉལ་བ	SA 'gog pa	sdug pa nyal ba
སྡུག་པ་དང་བྲལ་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery of separation from what one loves	sdug pa dang bral pa'i sdug bsngal
སྡུག་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	being separated from what we like/ 1 loves	sdug pa dang bral ba
སྡུག་པ་དང་བྲལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of being separated from what one loves	sdug pa dang bral ba'i sdug bsngal
སྡུག་པ་དང་མི་སྡུག་པ	the lovely and the repulsive; attractive and disgusting	sdug pa dang mi sdug pa
སྡུག་པའི་རྣམ་ཐར	liberation of the fair [Tse]	sdug pa'i rnam thar
སྡུག་པའི་རྣམ་པ	attractive appearance, good aspect	sdug pa'i rnam pa
སྡུག་པའི་རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ	liberation of the fair	sdug pa'i rnam par thar pa
སྡུག་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become dear to a person, be endeared to	sdug par 'gyur ba
སྡུག་པར་འཛིན་པ	love	sdug par 'dzin pa
སྡུག་པོ	1) harm; 2) hard, difficult; 2) bad, evil; 3) miserable, sad, sorrowful, painful, suffering, misery; 4) worrying; 5) good looking, attractive	sdug po
སྡུག་པོ་གཏོང་བ	afflict harass	sdug po gtong ba
སྡུག་པོ་བཏང་བ	do evil to a person, molest, injure anyone	sdug po btang ba
སྡུག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	do evil	sdug po byed pa
སྡུག་པོ་མྱང	suffered, underwent misery/ hardship	sdug po myang
སྡུག་པོ་མྱང་བ	suffered, underwent misery/ hardship	sdug po myang ba
སྡུག་པོ་མྱོང	suffer, undergo misery/ hardship	sdug po myong
སྡུག་པོ་མྱོང་ཐུབ་མཁན	hardy	sdug po myong thub mkhan
སྡུག་པོ་མྱོང་པའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	stories of misery/ hardship [they] had undergone	sdug po myong pa'i lo rgyus
སྡུག་པོ་མྱོང་བ	suffer, undergo misery/ hardship	sdug po myong ba
སྡུག་སྤྱོད	suffering, misery	sdug spyod
སྡུག་སྤྱོད་གཏོང	mistreat, abuse	sdug spyod gtong
སྡུག་ཕོངས་པ	poor person	sdug phongs pa
སྡུག་བྱེད	cause of suffering	sdug byed
སྡུག་བྲེད་ཅན	stubborn	sdug bred can
སྡུག་འབབ་པ	be in mourning	sdug 'bab pa
སྡུག་སྦྱོང	torture	sdug sbyong
སྡུག་སྦྱོང་གཏོང་བ	torture	sdug sbyong gtong ba
སྡུག་མི་བསྔལ་བ	not suffering	sdug mi bsngal ba
སྡུག་མི་སྡུག	beautiful and ugly	sdug mi sdug
སྡུག་བཙིར	relentless, unyielding; {blos byas sdug btsir gyi 'ching ba} rigid bindings that are mental constructs	sdug btsir
སྡུག་བཙིར་འཇུར་དྲན	rigid mindfulness; ascetic practice of suppressing thoughts	sdug btsir 'jur dran
སྡུག་བཙིར་འཟུར་དྲན	ascetic practice of suppressing thoughts	sdug btsir 'zur dran
སྡུག་རྩུབ	ferocious, savage, cruel	sdug rtsub
སྡུག་ཞྭ	mourning hood or cap	sdug zhwa
སྡུག་བཞིན་སྤང་བ	to reject like poison	sdug bzhin spang ba
སྡུག་ཟད	useless waste	sdug zad
སྡུག་ཡུལ	sad region, suffering, misery, hardship	sdug yul
སྡུག་ཡུལ་བགྲང	tell 1's suffering, misery, hardship	sdug yul bgrang
སྡུག་ཡུལ་ཤོད	tell 1's suffering, misery, hardship	sdug yul shod
སྡུག་ཡུས	byas yus [pej] Phan chung btags par ngo so'i sdug yus bgrang ba	sdug yus
སྡུག་ཡུས་ཆེ་བ	to bemoan the hardships	sdug yus che ba
སྡུག་རིད	by suffering and exhaustion body becoming weakened/ frail/ emaciated	sdug rid
སྡུག་རུལ	1) clothes etc worn out and tattered; 2) rotten person w bad thoughts of harm, depraved, rotten	sdug rul
སྡུག་རུས	1) very diligent/ earnest; 2) [w much] forbearance/ endurance/ perseverance/ patience * tolerance of hardship/ suffering/ misery 1462	sdug rus
སྡུག་རུས་རྒྱག	1) be very diligent/ earnest; 2) have/ endure [much] forbearance/ endurance/ perseverance/ patience * tolerance of hardship/ suffering/ misery	sdug rus rgyag
སྡུག་རུས་ཐེག་པོ	great ability to endure hardship	sdug rus theg po
སྡུག་རུས་བྱེད	1) be very diligent/ earnest; 2) have/endure [much] forbearance/ endurance/ perseverance/ patience * tolerance of hardship/ suffering/ misery	sdug rus byed
སྡུག་རུས་བྱེད་པ	be patient, restrain oneself	sdug rus byed pa
སྡུག་རུས་ཙ་པོ	1) great effort; 2) very diligent/ earnest; 3) w much forbearance/ endurance	sdug rus tsa po
སྡུག་རེས་བྱུང་ན་ལབ་རེས	if harm arises explanation will come in its turn	sdug res byung na lab res
སྡུག་ལས	1) 1's own and others's painful actions; 2) unpleasant work	sdug las
སྡུག་ཤི	dying miserably/ painfully	sdug shi
སྡུག་ཤི་རྒྱག	dying miserably	sdug shi rgyag
སྡུག་ཤི་ཐེབས	dying miserably	sdug shi thebs
སྡུག་ཤོད་མུག་ཤོད	speak unwanted talk	sdug shod mug shod
སྡུག་ཤོས	worst	sdug shos
སྡུག་སེམས	affectionate	sdug sems
སྡུག་སོགས་བྱེད་པ	accumulate misery upon oneself	sdug sogs byed pa
སྡུག་སྲན	fortitude, endurance, resilience, persistence, tenacity, tolerance; perseverance, fortitude, endurance, asceticism	sdug sran
སྡུག་སྲུང	mourn, grieve	sdug srung
སྡུག་སྲུང་བ	mourn	sdug srung ba
སྡུག་གསོག་དཀའ	painful difficult collection of wealth	sdug gsog dka'
སྡུག་གསོད	destroy, murder	sdug gsod
སྡུག་གསོད་བྱེད	destroy, murder	sdug gsod byed
སྡུག་བསངས	throw away/ discard/ get rid of the burden of suffering	sdug bsangs
སྡུག་བསྲན་སྐྱེད	Be ready to endure hardship!	sdug bsran skyed
སྡུག་བསྲན་ཆེན	very patient in troubles	sdug bsran chen
སྡུག་ཨུ་ཚུགས	endure pain	sdug u tshugs
སྡུད	p bsdus, f bsdu,, collect, assemble, gather, absorb, contain, be adhesive, cohesion, holding together, comprehend, abridge, summarize, epitomize, abridge, condense, folds, drawing hem, ? synthesis,...	sdud
སྡུད་ཁ	string for drawing together the opening of a bag, drawing hem	sdud kha
སྡུད་སྒོ	body gnad gsang zhig ste ltag khung [med]	sdud sgo
སྡུད་ཉར	storing up/ hoarding goods/ foods	sdud nyar
སྡུད་ཉར་བྱེད	store up/ hoard	sdud nyar byed
སྡུད་པ	subsumed	sdud pa
སྡུད་པ་ཉིད	collection	sdud pa nyid
སྡུད་པ་པོ	collector; the compiler	sdud pa po
སྡུད་པ་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	Compendium in Verses	sdud pa tshigs su bcad pa
སྡུད་པའི་སྒྲ	1) nas, from particle; 2) collecting particle, conjunction	sdud pa'i sgra
སྡུད་པའི་ཆིངས	included within	sdud pa'i chings
སྡུད་པའི་དཔག་པ	inductive reasoning	sdud pa'i dpag pa
སྡུད་པའི་ཚིག	conjunction	sdud pa'i tshig
སྡུད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	consolidating sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge	sdud pa'i shes rab
སྡུད་པར་བྱེད་པ	collect, gather[er]	sdud par byed pa
སྡུད་སྤྲོད	give/ send/ deliver and receive, gather and distribute	sdud sprod
སྡུད་བྱེད	outline, concise description	sdud byed
སྡུད་ཚད	yield [harvest]	sdud tshad
སྡུད་འཚག	storing, keeping things/ people together	sdud 'tshag
སྡུད་འཚག་བྱེད	store, keep things/ people together	sdud 'tshag byed
སྡུད་རུང	{yon tan gzhan thams cad 'di'i nang du sdud rung ngo} All other virtues can be condensed into these	sdud rung
སྡུད་ལེན	from others bring together/ back * collect	sdud len
སྡུད་ལེན་བྱེད	from others bring together/ back * collect	sdud len byed
སྡུད་སྲང	weight or measure of revenue	sdud srang
སྡུད་གསོ	give shelter, harbor, keep	sdud gso
སྡུད་གསོ་ཁང	detention camp, reservation	sdud gso khang
སྡུད་གསོག	store up, hoard, amass, collect	sdud gsog
སྡུད་གསོག་བྱེད	store up, hoard, amass, collect	sdud gsog byed
སྡུན	(not in DAS)	sdun
སྡུབ	(not in DAS)	sdub
སྡུམ	reconcile/ settle/ mediate [R], house	sdum
སྡུམ་མཁན	conciliator, pacifier, peacemaker	sdum mkhan
སྡུམ་རྒྱུ་ཁག་པོ	hard to reconcile/ settle/ mediate [a dispute/ legal case etc.]	sdum rgyu khag po
སྡུམ་གཏོང	reconcile/ settle/ mediate [R]	sdum gtong
སྡུམ་ཐབ	[arch] householder, married couple	sdum thab
སྡུམ་ཐབས	family life	sdum thabs
སྡུམ་པ	agree, reconcile, make agree, bring to an agreement, reconcile, conciliate, bring harmony, treaty, agreement, mansion, house	sdum pa
སྡུམ་པ་པོ	conciliator, pacifier, peacemaker	sdum pa po
སྡུམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	bring to harmony or terms	sdum par byed pa
སྡུམ་བུ	[arch] small house/ building	sdum bu
སྡུམ་བྱེད	mediator, peace maker, conciliator	sdum byed
སྡུམ་མཚེས	[arch] neighbor, next door	sdum mtshes
སྡུམ་ར	garden 1463	sdum ra
སྡུམས	imp. of {sdum pa}	sdums
སྡུམས་བྱེད་པ	reconciliation	sdums byed pa
སྡུམས་མཛད	intermediary	sdums mdzad
སྡུར	[p bsdur],, compare, check, verify sdur ba!	sdur
སྡུར་བ	check, verify, compare, make comparison	sdur ba
སྡུར་བླང	amber	sdur blang
སྡུར་ལེན	amber, part, portion	sdur len
སྡུལ་བ་པོ	the 1 who requests	sdul ba po
སྡུས	imp. of {sdud pa}	sdus
སྡུས་པ	mild, gentle	sdus pa
སྡེ	community, [sub-]section, division, practitioners, teaching, scripture, faction, order, unit, department, set, domain, district, [sub-]class, [sub]group * collection, kind, tribe, enclave	sde
སྡེ་དཀྲུག	a disturbance	sde dkrug
སྡེ་དཀྲུགས	disturbance, dispute, general misunderstanding	sde dkrugs
སྡེ་སྐོར	district	sde skor
སྡེ་ཁག	section, group, division	sde khag
སྡེ་འཁྲུག	have community disturbances/ disputes	sde 'khrug
སྡེ་འཁྲུག་པ	fighting between neighboring states or countries, general revolt of a people	sde 'khrug pa
སྡེ་འཁྲུགས	civil wars	sde 'khrugs
སྡེ་གྲལ	community	sde gral
སྡེ་དགེ	Derge in East Tibet	sde dge
སྡེ་དགེ་བཀའ་འགྱུར	the Derge Kangyur	sde dge bka' 'gyur
སྡེ་དགེ་ཁྲོ་ལ	sde ge khro pass	sde dge khro la
སྡེ་དགེ་དགོན་ཆེན	{sde dge dgon chen	sde dge dgon chen
སྡེ་དགེ་བསྟན་འགྱུར	the Tengyur at {sde dge'i par khang}	sde dge bstan 'gyur
སྡེ་དགེ་བཙན་འགྱུར	the Derge Tengyur	sde dge btsan 'gyur
སྡེ་དགེའི་བཀའ་འགྱུར་དཀར་ཆག	{sde dge'i bka' 'gyur dkar chag	sde dge'i bka' 'gyur dkar chag
སྡེ་དགེའི་བསྟན་འགྱུར་དཀར་ཆག	{sde dge'i bstan 'gyur dkar chag	sde dge'i bstan 'gyur dkar chag
སྡེ་དགེའི་པར་ཁང	Derge Printing House	sde dge'i par khang
སྡེ་དགོན	{sde dge dgon chen} monastery	sde dgon
སྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 classes of violent deities, 8 kinds of demons in 3 series ('gong po, the'u brang, nga yam, sa bdag, yul lha, sman, btsan, kla), (srog bdag, ma mo, gshin rje, bdud, gnod sbyin, dmu, dgra lha, 'gon...	sde brgyad
སྡེ་བརྒྱད་འཁྲུགས་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	magical attack from upset gods and spirits of the eight classes	sde brgyad 'khrugs pa'i cho 'phrul
སྡེ་བརྒྱད་ཐེབས	assemblage of 8 classes of demons	sde brgyad thebs
སྡེ་བརྒྱད་སྤྱིའི་གཏོར་མ	general gtor ma for the eight classes	sde brgyad spyi'i gtor ma
སྡེ་བརྒྱད་བཟློག་སེལ	exorcism to repel the eight classes	sde brgyad bzlog sel
སྡེ་ཅན	ancient indian sage	sde can
སྡེ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 sects of early buddhism	sde bco brgyad
སྡེ་ཆེན་བྱ་གག	epithet of karttikeya youngest son of maheshvara	sde chen bya gag
སྡེ་ཆེན་ལ་སྙེག་པ	aim at an extension of territory	sde chen la snyeg pa
སྡེ་གཉིས	the two orders: sutra tradition mdo sde and tantra tradition rgyud sde	sde gnyis
སྡེ་ཐང	1) grong sde [village district/ villagers] yod pa'i thang plain?; 2) Yul thang [local price?]	sde thang
སྡེ་དུམ	small sde shog	sde dum
སྡེ་བདུན	7 treatises of dharmakirti	sde bdun
སྡེ་བདུན་ཡིད་ཀྱི་མུན་སེལ	{sde bdun yid kyi mun sel sde bdun la 'jug pa'i sgo don gnyer yid kyi	sde bdun yid kyi mun sel
མུན་སེལ	{sde bdun la 'jug pa'i sgo don gnyer yid kyi mun sel	mun sel
སྡེ་སྡེར་བགོ་བ	divide into classes	sde sder bgo ba
སྡེ་རྣ	[arch] 1) tsho pa'i leader; 2) chief, head, leader, commander	sde rna
སྡེ་སྣོད	collection (of scripture/ teachings)	sde snod
སྡེ་སྣོད་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve kinds of teachings	sde snod bcu gnyis
སྡེ་སྣོད་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	tripitaka	sde snod chen po gsum
སྡེ་སྣོད་གཉིས	the two Collections	sde snod gnyis
སྡེ་སྣོད་འདུལ་བ	the collection of scriptures on discipline /Vinaya	sde snod 'dul ba
སྡེ་སྣོད་འདུས་པ	Embodiment of the Tripitaka	sde snod 'dus pa
སྡེ་སྣོད་འདུས་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	a scripture that embodies the Tripitaka	sde snod 'dus pa'i glegs bam
སྡེ་སྣོད་འཛིན་པ	graspers of the pitakas, learned ['dul ba, mdo sde, mngon pa bcas kyi don nyams su len pa po]	sde snod 'dzin pa
སྡེ་སྣོད་འཛིན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	a great upholder of the tripitaka	sde snod 'dzin pa chen po
སྡེ་སྣོད་བཞི་པ	fourth pitaka: Secret Mantra	sde snod bzhi pa
སྡེ་སྣོད་འོག་མ་གསུམ	Three Lower Pitakas. Vinaya pitaka {'dul ba'i sde snod} Sutra pitaka {mdo'i sde snod} and Abhidharma pitaka {mngon chos kyi sde snod} 1464	sde snod 'og ma gsum
སྡེ་སྣོད་ལས་གསུངས་པ	the pitakas say	sde snod las gsungs pa
སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ	three collections of scripture	sde snod gsum
སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ་གྱི་བཤད་གྲྭ	teachings centers for the Tripitaka	sde snod gsum gyi bshad grwa
སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ་གྱི་བཤད་གརབ༹	teaching centers for the Tripitaka	sde snod gsum gyi bshad grva
སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ་ངོས་འཛིན་གྱི་ཕྱག	'dul ba'i klad du thams cad mkhyen pa dang, mdo sde la sangs rgyas byang sems dang, mngon pa la 'jam dpal gzhon nur gyur pa la phyag 'tshal smos shig ces lo pan gyis bkas bcad de la phyi rabs pa rn...	sde snod gsum ngos 'dzin gyi phyag
སྡེ་པ	dignitary	sde pa
སྡེ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {slob dpon dul ba'i lhas mdzad pa'i sde pa tha dad bklags pa'i 'khor lo las/ shar dang nub dang gangs rir gnas/ /'jig rten 'das par smra ba'i sde/ /btags par smra ba'i sde ...	sde pa bco brgyad
སྡེ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱུད	18 schools/ sects	sde pa bco brgyud
སྡེ་པ་ཐ་དད་བཀླགས་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	text by {slob dpon dul ba'i lha}	sde pa tha dad bklags pa'i 'khor lo
སྡེ་པ་དོན་ཡོད	name of rin chen pung pa of tsang	sde pa don yod
སྡེ་པ་ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད	Tibetan 30 consonants classes of four	sde pa phyed brgyad
སྡེ་པ་གཙང་པ	powerful chief in 17 century	sde pa gtsang pa
སྡེ་པ་གཞུང	name of the traditional Tibetan Government	sde pa gzhung
སྡེ་པ་བཞི་པ	4th phonetic class (labials)	sde pa bzhi pa
སྡེ་པའི་ལྔ་པ	SK consonants sde pa lnga individual five letters	sde pa'i lnga pa
སྡེ་པའི་ཆེ་ཐབས	arrogance of the chief	sde pa'i che thabs
སྡེ་དཔོན	the leaders of his armies	sde dpon
སྡེ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	great leader	sde dpon chen po
སྡེ་དཔོན་དབང་པོ	Depön Zangpo, a disciple of Buddha Shakyamuni	sde dpon dbang po
སྡེ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག	nobles, aristocrats	sde dpon mi drag
སྡེ་དཔོན་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 {dregs pa} Chieftains; belonging under {'jig rten mchod bstod}	sde dpon sum cu
སྡེ་དཔོན་སུམ་བཅུ	the thirty commanders. Syn {dregs pa'i sde dpon sum bcu}	sde dpon sum bcu
སྡེ་ཕོ་མཚལ་ལུ	large species of fowl whose bile cures poison	sde pho mtshal lu
སྡེ་ཕྱོགས་རིས	factions	sde phyogs ris
སྡེ་བློན	sde tsho'i 'go khrid blon po	sde blon
སྡེ་འབངས	tribe, [lor/ chief &] subject, serf, vassal	sde 'bangs
སྡེ་དམག	military unit/ group, militia	sde dmag
སྡེ་བཙུགས	monastery	sde btsugs
སྡེ་ཚན	category 1465	sde tshan
སྡེ་ཚན་ཉེར་གཅིག	...bsrung ba med pa gsum, dran pa nyer gzhag gsum, bsnyel ba mi mnga' ba'i chos nyid, bag chags yang dag bcom pa, thugs rje chen po, sangs rgyas kyi ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad, rnam mkhyen bcas	sde tshan nyer gcig
སྡེ་ཚན་བུ་མོ	very useful and important medicine	sde tshan bu mo
སྡེ་ཚོ	tsho pa [houses, groups of inhabitants?]	sde tsho
སྡེ་ཚོགས	followers; hosts	sde tshogs
སྡེ་མཚན་པ	astrologer, collection, multitude	sde mtshan pa
སྡེ་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt yul sde'i gyod don skor la rtsad zhib byed sa'i las khungs	sde zhib las khungs
སྡེ་ཞུང	Deshung, in Domey sde gzhung lung rig sprul sku kun dga'	sde zhung
སྡེ་བཞི	4 classes of buddhists	sde bzhi
སྡེ་ཟིང་དགུ་ཟིང	mixed up, disordered	sde zing dgu zing
སྡེ་གཟར	civil dissension, lawlessness, anarchy	sde gzar
སྡེ་གཟར་སྐྱས་འུར	great battle and people rang sar ma chags par 'ur 'gro ba	sde gzar skyas 'ur
སྡེ་གཟར་ཆེན་པོ	great revolution, civil war	sde gzar chen po
སྡེ་བཟང	good or well disciplined brigade	sde bzang
སྡེ་ཡངས	court, courtyard	sde yangs
སྡེ་རབ་ཏུ་ཕམ་བྱེད	king of sravasti	sde rab tu pham byed
སྡེ་རིས	factions	sde ris
སྡེ་རོང	{sde rong rdzong	sde rong
སྡེ་ལག	limb/ division of region monastery etc	sde lag
སྡེ་ཤོག	tribe, group, division, unit	sde shog
སྡེ་ཤོག་ཡུལ་ཚོ	sde shog rigs rgyud	sde shog yul tsho
སྡེ་སྲིད	1) regional government/ governor =sde pa; 2) bod du chos srid gnyis ldan gyi lam lugs dar ba'i skabs srid phyogs kyi bya ba byed mkhan gtso bo; 3) regent	sde srid
སྡེ་སྲིད་གཅིག་པའི་ས	single place of srid dbang sde tshan sde srid phag mo gru pa'i rgyal rabs rim	sde srid gcig pa'i sa
བྱོན་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	byon bcu gnyis
སྡེ་སྲིད་ཕག་མོ་གྲུབ	rulers of tibet in 15th & 16th centuries	sde srid phag mo grub
སྡེ་སྲིད་མི་གཅིག་པའི་ས	srid dbang sde tshan mi gcig pa'i sa cha	sde srid mi gcig pa'i sa
སྡེ་སྲིད་གཙང་པ	when the bka' brgyud pas ruled Tibet rgyal po rting ma ste, M gu shr'i bstan 'dzin chos rgyal by force ended that and took over	sde srid gtsang pa
སྡེ་སྲིད་རིན་སྤུངས་པ	Desi Rinpungpa, from the clan who ruled Tibet from 1435 to 1565	sde srid rin spungs pa
སྡེ་སྲིད་སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{sde srid sangs rgyas rgya mtsho	sde srid sangs rgyas rgya mtsho
སྡེ་སྲིད་ལྷན་ཚོགས	regent's council	sde srid lhan tshogs
སྡེ་གསུམ	teachings of the three classes, 3 divisions of 6,000,400 atiyoga verses	sde gsum
སྡེ་གསུམ་པོ	three series (sems sde, klong sde, man ngag sde)	sde gsum po
སྡེ་ཧོར	{tre hor}	sde hor
སྡེག་པར་གཟའ	reproach, reviling	sdeg par gza'
སྡེགས་པ	threat, menace	sdegs pa
སྡེང་ཁག	charge, responsibility	sdeng khag
སྡེང་གེའི་གདོང་པ	a goddess	sdeng ge'i gdong pa
སྡེང་གེའི་གདོང་པ་ཅན	the one with the lion's face	sdeng ge'i gdong pa can
སྡེད་དཔོན	leader	sded dpon
སྡེབ	to mix, join together, put all in one. all together, in bulk, time, times	sdeb
སྡེབ་གྱ	[1] like this/ of its kind, ally, supporter	sdeb gya
སྡེབ་རྒྱ	kind, class	sdeb rgya
སྡེབ་སྒྲིགས	organizing, composing, designing	sdeb sgrigs
སྡེབ་སྒྲིགས་བྱེད	organize, compose, design	sdeb sgrigs byed
སྡེབ་གཅིག	all, entirely	sdeb gcig
སྡེབ་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one swoop, all the once	sdeb gcig tu
སྡེབ་གཅིག་ལ	all together, in one bunch, at one time	sdeb gcig la
སྡེབ་ཉོ	buy much merchandise in 1 lot, wholesale/ bulk	sdeb nyo
སྡེབ་ཉོ་རྒྱག	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb nyo rgyag
སྡེབ་ཉོ་སྡེབ་ཚོང	buy and sell much merchandise in 1 lot, wholesale/ bulk	sdeb nyo sdeb tshong
སྡེབ་ཉོ་སྡེབ་འཚོང	buy and sell much merchandise in 1 lot, wholesale/ bulk	sdeb nyo sdeb 'tshong
སྡེབ་ཉོ་བྱེད	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb nyo byed
སྡེབ་ཉོ་ཚོང	buy and sell much merchandise in 1 lot, wholesale/ bulk	sdeb nyo tshong
སྡེབ་ཉོ་འཚོང	buy and sell much merchandise in 1 lot, wholesale/ bulk	sdeb nyo 'tshong
སྡེབ་པ	mingle, mix, make, unite, conjoin, fasten together, join, exchange, barter, change money, make poetry, compose verses	sdeb pa
སྡེབ་བླངས	received together	sdeb blangs
སྡེབ་འབྱར	accessories	sdeb 'byar
སྡེབ་སྦྱར	versification, compose	sdeb sbyar
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར	1) two things yan chad cig sdeb and sbyor ba; 2) Tibetan letters prefix, word and suffix brtsegs 'dogs rnams bsdebs nas yi ge sbyor ba; 3) composing verses etc, poetry, poetics, composition, prosod...	sdeb sbyor
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་བྲལ	metrical line	sdeb sbyor gyi bral
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་བསྡུས་པ	metrical collection, extracts	sdeb sbyor bsdus pa
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་བྱེ་བྲག	metrical narrative	sdeb sbyor bye brag
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་དབྱེ་བ	metrical distinction	sdeb sbyor dbye ba
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་རིག་པ	TSE	sdeb sbyor rig pa
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས	bratita dang dz' ti la yi ge lci yang sogs phan tshun bsdebs nas tshig sbyor legs par ston pa'i gzhung slob dpon shanti bas mdzad pa	sdeb sbyor rin chen 'byung gnas
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་སུམ་བིད	bstan bcos kyi 'go rgyan mchod brjod sogs su lanytsa, wartu, bod yig gsum lci yang bsdebs te 1466 sbyar ba'i sum phab kyi bratita'i zur chag	sdeb sbyor sum bid
སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་གསུམ་སྔགས	lanytsa, wartu, bod yig gsum sbyar ba'i sngags	sdeb sbyor gsum sngags
སྡེབ་མི་ཐོན	incoherent	sdeb mi thon
སྡེབ་རྩིས	figure together	sdeb rtsis
སྡེབ་ཚོ	mang po 'gril ba'i sde tshan	sdeb tsho
སྡེབ་ཚོང	wholesale	sdeb tshong
སྡེབ་ཚོང་ཁྲོམ་ར	wholesale warehouse	sdeb tshong khrom ra
སྡེབ་ཚོང་རྒྱག	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb tshong rgyag
སྡེབ་ཚོང་བྱེད	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb tshong byed
སྡེབ་ཚོང་བྱེད་པ	wholesale	sdeb tshong byed pa
སྡེབ་ཚོང་ཚོང་ཁང	wholesale store	sdeb tshong tshong khang
སྡེབ་འཚོགས	mnyam 'tshogs	sdeb 'tshogs
སྡེབ་འཚོང	sell much merchandise as a unit	sdeb 'tshong
སྡེབ་འཚོང་ཁྲོམ་ར	wholesale warehouse	sdeb 'tshong khrom ra
སྡེབ་འཚོང་རྒྱག	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb 'tshong rgyag
སྡེབ་འཚོང་བྱེད	buy much merchandise in 1 lot/ wholesale/ in bulk	sdeb 'tshong byed
སྡེབ་འཚོང་ཚོང་ཁང	wholesale store	sdeb 'tshong tshong khang
སྡེབ་ཟིང	many people causing a disturbance/ trouble	sdeb zing
སྡེབ་གཟི	gleam of gold bris ri mo after polishing	sdeb gzi
སྡེབ་འུར	sound of many people at once	sdeb 'ur
སྡེབ་འུར་རྒྱག	kick up a fuss [all at once]	sdeb 'ur rgyag
སྡེབ་ཡིག	1) med. sbyor thabs 'khod pa'i dpe cha [recipe book] - 2) many pages sewed together yig deb	sdeb yig
སྡེབ་ལ	all together, in bulk/ mass	sdeb la
སྡེབ་ལ་ཉོ	buy in bulk	sdeb la nyo
སྡེབ་གསོད	massacre	sdeb gsod
སྡེབ་གསོད་གཏོང	massacre	sdeb gsod gtong
སྡེབ་གསོད་བྱེད	massacre	sdeb gsod byed
སྡེབས	edited. imp. of {sdebs}; imp. of {sdeb pa}	sdebs
སྡེབས་སྤོད	delivering altogether, making over entire charge, delegating responsibility	sdebs spod
སྡེབས་བླངས	to take up together	sdebs blangs
སྡེབས་སྦྱོར	poetic composition	sdebs sbyor
སྡེབས་ཚོགས	assembling of different people in one place	sdebs tshogs
སྡེབས་གསོད	massacre	sdebs gsod
སྡེབས་གསོད་གཏོང	massacre	sdebs gsod gtong
སྡེབས་གསོད་བྱེད	massacre	sdebs gsod byed
སྡེམ	p bsdams f bsdam shut, close [down]	sdem
སྡེམ་ཀ	bunch sgril kha	sdem ka
སྡེམ་ཆག	mang po gshibs te 'ching ba zhig	sdem chag
སྡེམ་པ	close, shut	sdem pa
སྡེམ་རས	bow, ribbon for tying	sdem ras
སྡེར	claw, talon, plate, saucer	sder
སྡེར་ཀྱུ	claw, talon	sder kyu
སྡེར་ཁ	on lo gsar etc mar snum gro zhib kyis bzos pa'i dkar spro'am food of various shapes ya grangs any of 9 7 five three du brtsegs pa &, fruit, 'bru sna sogs snod bzang du bshams bsgrigs auspicious sub...	sder kha
སྡེར་གང	plateful	sder gang
སྡེར་ཅན	furnished with claw, hawk	sder can
སྡེར་ཆགས	animals provided with claws	sder chags
སྡེར་ཆགས་ཀླུ	chameleon	sder chags klu
སྡེར་ཆགས་རྒྱལ་པོ	lion	sder chags rgyal po
སྡེར་ཆགས་དབང་པོ	metaphor for lion	sder chags dbang po
སྡེར་ཐང	vast plain	sder thang
སྡེར་ཐོགས	clawed animals	sder thogs
སྡེར་སྤྱད	ma dish, platter, plate, saucer	sder spyad
སྡེར་སྤྱད་ཀྱི་ཞལ	etc.	sder spyad kyi zhal
སྡེར་སྤྱད་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ལྟ་བ	superintendent plates	sder spyad kyi zhal lta ba
སྡེར་མ	dish, platter, plate, saucer; a plate	sder ma
སྡེར་མ་ཆག་ཆག	broken dish or plate	sder ma chag chag
སྡེར་མེད	without claws	sder med
སྡེར་མོ	claws	sder mo
སྡེར་མོ་རྣོ	sharp claw	sder mo rno
སྡེར་མོས་འབལ	scratch w claws	sder mos 'bal
སྡེར་ཙ	dish, platter, plate, saucer	sder tsa
སྡེར་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	seize with the claws	sder 'dzin byed pa
སྡེར་ཤད	scratch w claws	sder shad
སྡེལ་ཚེ	(CH tshal zas sogs blug snod	sdel tshe
སྡེས་བསྒོ་བ	orders issued by section of the church	sdes bsgo ba
སྡོ་ཁམ	belonging together, a pair	sdo kham
སྡོ་མཐེང	azure	sdo mtheng
སྡོ་བ	risk, make venture	sdo ba
སྡོག	(tha dad pa bsdogs pa, bsdog pa, sdogs,, 1) gather, collect, assemble, roll up [essentialize?]; 2) preparations, pack, get ready; 3) wind up, finish	sdog
སྡོག་པ	{sdog pa, bsdogs pa, bsdog pa, sdogs} trans. v	sdog pa
སྡོགས	imp. of {sdog pa}	sdogs
སྡོང	abbr. of {sdong po} pit. to join, accompany	sdong
སྡོང་རྐང	1) lamp's sdong rkang; 2) plant or tree's sdong rkang	sdong rkang
སྡོང་རྐང་སྦོད	tree with a huge trunk	sdong rkang sbod
སྡོང་སྐམ	a dead tree trunk {shing skam po}	sdong skam
སྡོང་སྐྱ	wick	sdong skya
སྡོང་ཁང	residence, home	sdong khang
སྡོང་གྲོགས	practitioners, friends	sdong grogs
སྡོང་རྒན	old tree	sdong rgan
སྡོང་གཅིག	one day	sdong gcig
སྡོང་བཅུད་ཆང	fermented juice of certain trees	sdong bcud chang
སྡོང་ཇ	tea of seng ldang	sdong ja
སྡོང་ཐིགས	lamp's sdong rkang rgyun 'dzugs yod sar kha gsos phran bu re blugs pa'i drops of oil [R]	sdong thigs
སྡོང་ཐུང་བ	short stem	sdong thung ba
སྡོང་ཐུང་ཤིང	shrubbery	sdong thung shing
སྡོང་དུམ	log [of wood]; a log	sdong dum
སྡོང་དུམ་ཚིག་པ	burnt stump of a tree	sdong dum tshig pa
སྡོང་སྡུམ	tree stump	sdong sdum
སྡོང་པོ	[trunk of] tree, stalk [of plants], flower, stalk	sdong po
སྡོང་པོ་བཀོད་པ	SK Gandavyuha, sow	sdong po bkod pa
སྡོང་པོ་བཀོད་པ་ལས	the Sutra Arranged like a Tree says: 1467	sdong po bkod pa las
སྡོང་པོ་བཀོད་པའི་མདོ	Gandhavuhya Sutra, Sutra of the Arrayed Tree, (T 44), part 45 of the Flower Ornament Sutra, {phal po che}	sdong po bkod pa'i mdo
སྡོང་པོ་བཀོར་པ	Gandavyuha Sutra	sdong po bkor pa
སྡོང་པོ་ཁོག་སྟོང	hollow log or stalk	sdong po khog stong
སྡོང་པོ་ལྔ	five plants (thabs, shes rab, smin pa, chos 'dzin, btang snyoms)	sdong po lnga
སྡོང་པོ་ཅན	possessed of a stalk, lotus flower	sdong po can
སྡོང་པོ་གཅིག	species of gentian	sdong po gcig
སྡོང་པོ་ལྟ་བུ	like the trunk of a tree	sdong po lta bu
སྡོང་པོའི་བཀོད་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	'phags pa sdong po bkod pa gzung bar 'gyur ba'i gzungs	sdong po'i bkod pa'i snying po
སྡོང་པོའི་སོར་མོ	branch	sdong po'i sor mo
སྡོང་པོས་བརྒྱན་པའི་མདོ	Gandavyuhasutra	sdong pos brgyan pa'i mdo
སྡོང་ཕྲན	shrub, plant	sdong phran
སྡོང་ཕྲན་ལྗོན་ཤིང	short trunked tree etc	sdong phran ljon shing
སྡོང་བ	(tha dad pa bsdongs pa, bsdong ba, sdongs,, accompany, go together w *, unite, join [in a confederacy], associate one's self w	sdong ba
སྡོང་བུ	1) lamp wick; 2) small tree trunk, stem	sdong bu
སྡོང་བུ་གཟུགས	x {lus la sha'i kong bu brus te 'bru mar gyi sdong bu stong gzugs pa} he gouged holes in his own flesh to serve as offering lamps, filling them with oil and planting in them thousands of burning wicks	sdong bu gzugs
སྡོང་བུ་རིང	gourd	sdong bu ring
སྡོང་བུའི་སྨན	medicinal plant	sdong bu'i sman
སྡོང་མོ	small churn for making tea	sdong mo
སྡོང་ཟླ	companion, friend	sdong zla
སྡོང་ར	hollowness	sdong ra
སྡོང་རས	cotton wick, wick	sdong ras
སྡོང་རིང་ཤིང	tall stately tree	sdong ring shing
སྡོང་རོ	ash of lamp wick	sdong ro
སྡོང་རོས	ldong ros, realgar mineral med, yellow earth used to paint houses	sdong ros
སྡོང་ཤིང	pith, wick of wood	sdong shing
སྡོངས	sdong ba!	sdongs
སྡོངས་གྲོངས	make friendship, assist	sdongs grongs
སྡོངས་པ	accompany, SA sdong ba	sdongs pa
སྡོད	respite, relaxation, to stay, live, sit, pulse with intermittent pauses	sdod
སྡོད་ཁང	house, apartment etc in which someone lives	sdod khang
སྡོད་ཁང་གི་ཁུལ	residential district/ area	sdod khang gi khul
སྡོད་ཁང་ཆ་ཚང	apartment	sdod khang cha tshang
སྡོད་ཁང་ཆེན་པོ	mansion	sdod khang chen po
སྡོད་ཁུལ	residential district/ area	sdod khul
སྡོད་ཁྱིམ	house, apartment etc in which someone lives	sdod khyim
སྡོད་མཁན	resident, the 1 sitting	sdod mkhan
སྡོད་གུར	tent in which someone lives	sdod gur
སྡོད་གྲོང	city/ grong khyim where 1 is staying	sdod grong
སྡོད་རྒྱལ་གྱི་སྒྲ	arbitrary names [ggd]	sdod rgyal gyi sgra
སྡོད་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	unbearable	sdod rgyu med pa
སྡོད་སྒར	camp	sdod sgar
སྡོད་བཅུག་པ	accommodate	sdod bcug pa
སྡོད་ཆོག་དབང་ཆ	right of residence	sdod chog dbang cha
སྡོད་སྟངས	pose, posture	sdod stangs
སྡོད་སྟབས	way of sitting	sdod stabs
སྡོད་སྡོད	sit	sdod sdod
སྡོད་ན་དྲག	it is better to stay	sdod na drag
སྡོད་གནས	place of residence, dwelling place; dwelling place	sdod gnas
སྡོད་གནས་ཀྱི	residential	sdod gnas kyi
སྡོད་གནས་སྟོང་པ	empty place	sdod gnas stong pa
སྡོད་གནས་དེ་ནས	from our place	sdod gnas de nas
སྡོད་གནས་སུ་བསླེབས	went back to my place	sdod gnas su bslebs
སྡོད་པ	to live	sdod pa
སྡོད་པ་གསུམ	threefold abidance	sdod pa gsum
ཨེ྾ཏེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	fields is reached by means of the presence in which there is no hesitation or doubt regarding appearances {snang ba 'dar 'phring med par sdod pas zhing khams tshad la phebs par byed} [gd]	extent of the buddha
སྡོད་པའི་དུས་མ་ཡིན	there is no time for being idle	sdod pa'i dus ma yin
སྡོད་པར་བྱེད	to be seated, to cause to sit	sdod par byed
སྡོད་བྱ	turns to stay [on guard/ duty]	sdod bya
སྡོད་དབང	right of residence	sdod dbang
སྡོད་དབང་མེད་པར	not being able to wait	sdod dbang med par
སྡོད་འབངས	residents, citizens, populace	sdod 'bangs
སྡོད་མ	group that remains	sdod ma
སྡོད་མལ	place 1 stays	sdod mal
སྡོད་མི	resident, the 1 sitting	sdod mi
སྡོད་མི་ཁོམ	no leisure to stay	sdod mi khom
སྡོད་མི་ཚུགས	restless, cannot remain in one place	sdod mi tshugs
སྡོད་མི་ཚུགས་པ	unbearable	sdod mi tshugs pa
སྡོད་དམངས	residents, citizens, populace	sdod dmangs
སྡོད་རྩ	vein	sdod rtsa
སྡོད་རྩིས	{sdod rtsis mang du byas kyang} expecting to stay, they may have made many plans 1468	sdod rtsis
སྡོད་ཚུགས་པ	1) be able to remain in 1's own place; 2) take care about, keep control of	sdod tshugs pa
སྡོད་བཞིན་པ	staying	sdod bzhin pa
སྡོད་བཟོད་བདེ་པོ	safe and peaceful place	sdod bzod bde po
སྡོད་བཟོད་མི་བདེ་བ	by others made hard to bear	sdod bzod mi bde ba
སྡོད་ཡུལ	place two is [staying]	sdod yul
སྡོད་རུང་བ	habitable, livable	sdod rung ba
སྡོད་རེས	[stay in] turns/ shifts	sdod res
སྡོད་རེས་བྱེད	[stay in] turns/ alternate duty/ watch shifts	sdod res byed
སྡོད་རོགས	sweetheart, mistress, concubine	sdod rogs
སྡོད་ལུགས	1) the way something is; 2) mode of subsistence, way of living; 3) the way things are, emptiness; 4) way of sitting	sdod lugs
སྡོད་ལུགས་ཅི་བདེ	be as it naturally is	sdod lugs ci bde
སྡོད་ལོང	'dug pa'i khom pa, Rang gi khyim du las ka byas te sdod long yod pa, Rtag par sdod long med pa	sdod long
སྡོད་ཤག	dormitory, hostel	sdod shag
སྡོད་ཤོག	house, apartment etc in which someone lives	sdod shog
སྡོད་གཤོམ	{yun ring sdod gshom byed pa'i blo rgya} plans that assume we will live a long time	sdod gshom
སྡོད་གཤོམས་བྱེད་པ	assume to live / remain	sdod gshoms byed pa
སྡོད་བཤོམ	{sdod bshom mang du byas pa} assume you will stay and make a lot of plans	sdod bshom
སྡོད་ས	place 1 stays, place [to stay or live]	sdod sa
སྡོད་ས་གུ་ཡངས་པ	commodious residence	sdod sa gu yangs pa
སྡོད་ས་སྤོ་རེ་བྱེད་པ	sometimes changing his place of residence	sdod sa spo re byed pa
སྡོད་སྲུང	guard the place 1 is staying, occupy as defenders/ guards/ troops	sdod srung
སྡོན་བ	accompany, join with, enter into partnership	sdon ba
སྡོབ་སྦྱོར	composition, poetry, orthography	sdob sbyor
སྡོམ	[p bsdams f bsdam sdoms!],, 1) binder, binds together, tie, bind [together], fasten; 2) spider *, {sden mig}; 3) add, total, sum up, unify, combine; 4) discipline; 5) summary, synopsis, [table of] ...	sdom
སྡོམ་སྐུད	spider silk	sdom skud
སྡོམ་ཁྲིམས	covenant, vow	sdom khrims
སྡོམ་གྱི་དོན	summary	sdom gyi don
སྡོམ་གྱི་དྲ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like a spider web, complicated	sdom gyi dra ba lta bu
སྡོམ་གྱི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	final summary verses	sdom gyi tshigs su bcad pa
སྡོམ་གྱིས་མདོར་བསྟན	brief statement through a summary	sdom gyis mdor bstan
སྡོམ་རྒྱུན	precept lineage	sdom rgyun
སྡོམ་རྒྱུན་འབོགས་པ	increase the lineage and continuity of the vows	sdom rgyun 'bogs pa
སྡོམ་བརྒྱུད	lineage of vows	sdom brgyud
སྡོམ་གཅོད་པ	gzims chung gi sgor mjal mi gtong gcod byed mkhan	sdom gcod pa
སྡོམ་ཆུང	1) sdom tshig [table of contents, summary, index] for a short chapter; 2) a kind of Srog chags	sdom chung
སྡོམ་ཆེན	1) sdom tshig, table of contents, summary, index for a long chapter; 2) a kind of srog chags	sdom chen
སྡོམ་འཆིང	1) trap, snare; 2) binding rope	sdom 'ching
སྡོམ་འཆོར	vow is dissipated	sdom 'chor
སྡོམ་བརྗོད	synopsis	sdom brjod
སྡོམ་རྟེན	obligation	sdom rten
སྡོམ་ཐག	spider silk/ web	sdom thag
སྡོམ་ཐག་གཏོང	spin a spider web	sdom thag gtong
སྡོམ་དང་ལྡན་པ	commitment	sdom dang ldan pa
སྡོམ་སྡོམ་མིན	[positive] vows and negative vows	sdom sdom min
སྡོམ་སྡོམ་མིན་བར་མ	sdom pa ni dge ba dang/ sdom min ni mi dge ba/ bar ma ni dge mi dge gang rung ngo	sdom sdom min bar ma
སྡོམ་ན	in sum/ total	sdom na
སྡོམ་ནག་པོ	black spider	sdom nag po
སྡོམ་ནས	in sum/ total	sdom nas
སྡོམ་རྣམ་གཉིས	Asanga's two compedia [1) {theg pa chen po bsdus pa} [Mahaayaana-samuccaya] 2) {chos mngon pa kun las btus pa} [Abhidharma-samuccaya] [Tse]	sdom rnam gnyis
སྡོམ་པ	{ji srid 'tsho'i mtha' can dge ba la zhugs pa} 'Vow' means [to pledge] to engage in virtue for as long as one is alive.	sdom pa
ཨནད་ཕི༹ཕ༹ཏཡ	three vows described in the Analysis of the Vows of a Monk Bhikshu Vibhanga, T. 3) and in the other transmissions of the Vinaya	and fifty
སྡོམ་པ་ཆགས་པ	enter into an engagement, bind oneself to perform a certain duty	sdom pa chags pa
སྡོམ་པ་ཉམས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	the four causes of transgressing one's vows [ltung ba 'byung ba'i sgo bzhi, 1 mi shes pa dang, two ma gus pa dang, three bag med pa dang, four nyon mongs pa]	sdom pa nyams pa'i rgyu bzhi
སྡོམ་པ་ཉི་ཤུ་པ	samvaravimsaha	sdom pa nyi shu pa
སྡོམ་པ་ཉི་ཤུ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ	Commentary on the Twenty Verses on the Commitments of Bodhichitta; by Shantarakshita; (T 4082)	sdom pa nyi shu pa'i 'grel pa
སྡོམ་པ་གཏོང་བ	to forsake one's vows, giving up / back the precepts	sdom pa gtong ba
སྡོམ་པ་གཏོང་བའི་རྒྱུ་ལྔ	CHN	sdom pa gtong ba'i rgyu lnga
སྡོམ་པ་གཏོང་བའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	the four causes of abandoning one's vows [so thar gyi sdom pa spyi'i gtong ba'i rgyu ni bzhi ste, 1 brda 'phrod pa'i gang zag gi drung du bsam pa thag pa nas bslab pa phul ba dang, two shi 'phos pa...	sdom pa gtong ba'i rgyu bzhi
བསླབ་སྐྱོར་གནང་བ	to restore broken vows and samayas	bslab skyor gnang ba
སྡོམ་པ་གནང་བ	ordain	sdom pa gnang ba
སྡོམ་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	TSE	sdom pa rnam pa gsum
སྡོམ་པ་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of vows	sdom pa pa'i tshul khrims
སྡོམ་པ་ཕུལ་བ	precepts yar phul te skya sar bab pa	sdom pa phul ba
སྡོམ་པ་བར་མ	dge mi dge gang rung ngo	sdom pa bar ma
སྡོམ་པ་བྱང	summary text	sdom pa byang
སྡོམ་པ་བླངས་པ	the set of commitments one has assumed	sdom pa blangs pa
སྡོམ་པ་འབོགས་པ	conducting the ordination ceremony sdom pa ma yin pa'i bya ba bcu gsum CHN	sdom pa 'bogs pa
སྡོམ་པ་མེད	no vow	sdom pa med
སྡོམ་པ་གཙང་བ	kept pure vows	sdom pa gtsang ba
སྡོམ་པ་བརྩོན	ascetic	sdom pa brtson
སྡོམ་པ་འཛིན་པ	enter into an engagement, bind oneself to perform a certain duty	sdom pa 'dzin pa
སྡོམ་པ་བཞི	{chos kyi sdom bzhi}	sdom pa bzhi
སྡོམ་པ་ལ་གནས་པ	abiding by [positive] vows	sdom pa la gnas pa
སྡོམ་པ་ལེན་པ	take an oath/ vow	sdom pa len pa
སྡོམ་པ་ལེན་ཚུལ	vow-taking ceremony; the way of taking precepts	sdom pa len tshul
སྡོམ་པ་ལེན་ཡུལ་ལྔ	the five objects received by one's vows [one ston pa'i sku gzugs, two chos, three mkhan po, four slob dpon, five dge 'dun]	sdom pa len yul lnga
སྡོམ་པ་ཤོར་བ	to break / loose one's vows	sdom pa shor ba
སྡོམ་པ་སྲུང	keep 1's vow/ promise	sdom pa srung
སྡོམ་པ་སྲུང་པ	be true to one's words, keep one's engagements	sdom pa srung pa
སྡོམ་པ་སྲུངས	Keep your vows!	sdom pa srungs
སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ	[TRS 108-1]; the three vows, 1) [so thar gyi, byang chub sems dpa'i, gsang sngags kyi]. 2) [so thar gyi, bsam gtan gyi, zag med kyi]; Three Vows. Pratimoksha {so thar} bodhisattva vows {byang sems ...	sdom pa gsum
གཞུང་ལུགས་ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པ	a detailed commentary on {sa skya paN Di ta}'s famed sdom gsum rab dbye; by {spos khang pa rin chen rgyal mtshan{	gzhung lugs legs par bshad pa
སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ་རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པ	work by {mnga' ris pan chen pad-ma dbang rgyal} 1487 or 8-1542 or 3	sdom pa gsum rnam par nges pa
སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ་པ	the three vows: Refuge, bodhisattva, samaya	sdom pa gsum pa
སྡོམ་པ་བསྲུང་བ	maintain discipline	sdom pa bsrung ba
སྡོམ་པའི་དགྲ	enter into an engagement, bind oneself to perform a certain duty, epithet of kamadeva	sdom pa'i dgra
སྡོམ་པའི་རྗེས་འཐུན	spiritual commitment	sdom pa'i rjes 'thun
སྡོམ་པའི་སྟོབས	power of resolve	sdom pa'i stobs
སྡོམ་པའི་ཐོབ་མཚམས	the exact point when we receive the vow	sdom pa'i thob mtshams
སྡོམ་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of the vows	sdom pa'i tshul khrims
སྡོམ་པའི་ཞགས་པས་བཏགས་པ	bound by the noose of vows	sdom pa'i zhags pas btags pa
སྡོམ་པའི་གཞི	fundamental vows	sdom pa'i gzhi
སྡོམ་པའི་ལུས་རྟེན་ཅན་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	not a suitable physical support for the vows	sdom pa'i lus rten can du mi rung ba
སྡོམ་བུ	a ball, a round tassel	sdom bu
སྡོམ་བུ་པ	mispelling or variant spelling for {ldom bu ba}. E.g, @ KKP: 264.12. [mss]	sdom bu pa
སྡོམ་བྱང	summary text	sdom byang
སྡོམ་བྱང་རྒྱས་བཤད	{sdom byang rgyas bshad	sdom byang rgyas bshad
སྡོམ་བྱེད	one that binds by duty, astringent medicine	sdom byed
སྡོམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mystical posture in yoga signifying perseverance	sdom byed kyi phyag rgya
སྡོམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཟེར་བུ	binding nail	sdom byed kyi gzer bu
སྡོམ་བྱེད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	binding mudra	sdom byed phyag rgya
སྡོམ་འབྱུང	Samvarodaya	sdom 'byung
སྡོམ་མིན	non-virtuous vow	sdom min
སྡོམ་མིན་གཉིས	CHN 1470	sdom min gnyis
སྡོམ་མིན་གཏོང་ཚུལ	Mipham Rinpoche:{ji srid sdom min de'i gnyen po sdom pa thob pa na gtong la, shi ba na yang gtong ngo, mtshan gnyis byung bas kyang gtong bar bshad do} The negative vow is abandoned as soon as one ...	sdom min gtong tshul
སྡོམ་མིན་ཐོབ་ཚུལ	Mipham Rinpoche: {shan pa sogs sdig byed kyi rigs su skyes shing rang gis kyang las 'dis bdag ji srid 'tsho bar bya'o snyam pa las sdom sems med pa dag bya ba de la dang por zhugs pa tsam gyis thob...	sdom min thob tshul
བོརན་ཨིནཏོ་ཨ་ཕ༹མིལཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེབི༹ལ	doers, such as butchers, thinks: “I will sustain myself through this activity for as long as I live!” and does not possess the attitude of a [positive] vow. In other cases, even without being born ...	born into a family of evil
སྡོམ་མིན་སྤང	abandoning negative vows	sdom min spang
སྡོམ་མོ	she spider	sdom mo
སྡོམ་གཙང	pure discipline of the precepts	sdom gtsang
སྡོམ་རྩིས	addition	sdom rtsis
སྡོམ་རྩིས་རྒྱག	add up	sdom rtsis rgyag
སྡོམ་རྩིས་རྒྱག་ན	if [it] is added up	sdom rtsis rgyag na
སྡོམ་རྩིས་བརྒྱབ་པ	to add up, tally, do addition	sdom rtsis brgyab pa
སྡོམ་རྩིས་ལྟར་ན	according to statistics	sdom rtsis ltar na
སྡོམ་རྩིས་པ	statistician	sdom rtsis pa
སྡོམ་རྩིས་རེའུ་མིག	statistical form, chart, table	sdom rtsis re'u mig
སྡོམ་བརྩོན	monk, observer of precepts, ordained person, vow-observer, renunciates	sdom brtson
སྡོམ་བརྩོན་དམ་པ	symbols of rigs gsum mgon po &, mkhan/ slob/ chos, lo ts' ba etc. [R]	sdom brtson dam pa
སྡོམ་བརྩོན་དབང་པོ	rishis	sdom brtson dbang po
སྡོམ་ཚད	abbreviated method of drawing proportional figures	sdom tshad
སྡོམ་ཚིག	few words summarizing, conclusion	sdom tshig
སྡོམ་ཚོགས	conclusion, summary	sdom tshogs
སྡོམ་བཞི	{chos kyi sdom bzhi}	sdom bzhi
སྡོམ་གཟེར	binding nail	sdom gzer
སྡོམ་རོ་མེད་པ	though the dge tshul vow was taken once, as a root downfall was not confessed but kept secret, nyams pa ma yin pa sdom pa rnying pas rgyud ma bkag pa, 'dul ba las bshad pa'i mthun rkyen lnga'i nang...	sdom ro med pa
སྡོམ་ལ	in sum/ total	sdom la
སྡོམ་སེམས	{phyin chad sdom sems byed pa} vow not to commit them again	sdom sems
སྡོམ་སེམས་མེད་པ	does not possess / without the attitude of a [positive] vow	sdom sems med pa
སྡོམ་གསུམ	three levels of ordination	sdom gsum
སྡོམ་གསུམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	Triple-vow	sdom gsum rdo rje 'dzin pa
སྡོམ་གསུམ་རྣམ་ངེས	work by {mnga'	sdom gsum rnam nges
རིས་པན་ཆེན་པད	ma dbang rgyal} 1487 or 8-1542 or 3	ris pan chen pad
བྱ་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	by mnga' ris paN	bya ba'i bstan bcos
ཆེན་པདམ་དབང་རྒྱལ	(1487 or 81542 or 3)	chen padma dbang rgyal
སྡོམ་གསུམ་རབ་དབྱེ	sdom pa gsum gyi	sdom gsum rab dbye
རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བའི་གཞུང	{sa skya paN Di ta}'s famed sdom gsum rab dbye	rab tu dbye ba'i gzhung
སྡོམ་གསུམ་རབ་འབྱེད	Distinctive Features of the Three Vows, by Sakya Pandita	sdom gsum rab 'byed
སྡོམ་གསོས	1) put animals for slaughter in a group and feed; 2) amend/ renew broken vows/ precepts	sdom gsos
སྡོམས	bind, stop, SA sdom pa	sdoms
སྡོམས་རྟགས	combined reason	sdoms rtags
སྡོམས་པ	altogether, add	sdoms pa
སྡོར	stock, general seasoning term (spices, butter, lard, oil), condiment	sdor
སྡོར་དཀར་བ	having abandoned red food smyung gnas etc. 1 who eats the three whites	sdor dkar ba
སྡོར་མཁན	1) one who goes round. 2) watchman. 3) turner	sdor mkhan
སྡོར་ཐལ	thug pa la gdab rgyu'i sdor [seasoning, condiment, stock] and flour or tsampa	sdor thal
སྡོས	imp. of {sdo ba}	sdos
བརྡ	* signal, sign, gesture, communication, term[inology], word, [conventional] designation/ symbol, message, code, indicat[ive][ion], intimation, symptom, token, communicate, answer/ reply	brda
བརྡ་དཀྲོག	sound/ give an alarm/ warning	brda dkrog
བརྡ་བཀྲོལ	1) decipher, solve [code/ symbol]	brda bkrol
བརྡ་སྐད	symbolical language, signexpression, sign speech, code language, languages	brda skad
བརྡ་སྐྱེལ	correspond, communicate, give/ issue a notice	brda skyel
བརྡ་སྐྱེལ་བ	communicate	brda skyel ba
བརྡ་ཁྱབ	notification, notice, announcement	brda khyab
བརྡ་ཁྲོལ	decode	brda khrol
བརྡ་ཁྲོལ་བ	decoding of the symbolic script	brda khrol ba
བརྡ་གར་བསྒྱུར	the dancing transmutation of her form	brda gar bsgyur
བརྡ་འགྲོལ་བ	explain, describe, represent	brda 'grol ba
བརྡ་སྒྱུར་པ	interpreter	brda sgyur pa
བརྡ་སྒྱུར་བ	/ change[r] translat[or of] the symbols [written or spoken]	brda sgyur ba
བརྡ་བརྒྱུད	sign lineage	brda brgyud
བརྡ་ཆད	language, spoken of	brda chad
བརྡ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རིག	perceptible signs	brda chos kyi rnam rig
བརྡ་འཆལ	brda khungs ma dag pa ???	brda 'chal
བརྡ་མཇལ	comprehend the words	brda mjal
བརྡ་རྙིང	old orthography, ancient orthography, archaic	brda rnying
བརྡ་རྙིང་པ	old word	brda rnying pa
བརྡ་རྙིང་བ	1) archaic terms; 2) writing before king khri ral pa can established the present form	brda rnying ba
བརྡ་གཏོགས་པ	imputed symbols	brda gtogs pa
བརྡ་གཏོང	LKh: to notify; rgyud skul suggestion, advice, instigation; to instigate, suggest [mss]	brda gtong
བརྡ་གཏོང་སྒྲོན་མེ	signal light/ lamp/ torch	brda gtong sgron me
བརྡ་གཏོང་མདེའུ	signal shot/ bullet	brda gtong mde'u
བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	inform, notify	brda gtong ba
བརྡ་གཏོང་མེ་མད	signal/ flare gun	brda gtong me mda
བརྡ་རྟགས	mark, sign, symbol, signal	brda rtags
བརྡ་རྟེན་ཅན་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	symbolic thought	brda rten can gyi rtog pa
བརྡ་སྟོན་པ	symbolic teaching[er] [go brda sprod pa]	brda ston pa
བརྡ་སྟོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	radar	brda ston 'phrul 'khor
བརྡ་ཐབས	indication and method, symbolic methods, methods	brda thabs
བརྡ་ཐོ	notice, advertisement	brda tho
བརྡ་ཐོ་གཏོང	give notice, advertise	brda tho gtong
བརྡ་ཐོ་གཏོང་བ	inform, notify	brda tho gtong ba
བརྡ་ཐོ་བཏང་བ	gave notice, advertised	brda tho btang ba
བརྡ་ཐོག་ཐག་གཅོད	by means of tshogs 'du'i thog skad cha'am lag rkyong etc resolve the root meaning	brda thog thag gcod
བརྡ་དག	earlier now obsolete orthography	brda dag
བརྡ་དང་ཐ་སྙད་བཏགས་ཚུལ	the way of convention and conventional symbols	brda dang tha snyad btags tshul
བརྡ་དུམ་ཤེས་པ	know only roughly	brda dum shes pa
བརྡ་དུས	time when name and object were first joined	brda dus
བརྡ་དོན	the signs and the meanings	brda don
བརྡ་དོན་རྟགས་གསུམ	symbol, meaning, and sign/ reason	brda don rtags gsum
བརྡ་དོན་སྤྲད	understand clearly	brda don sprad
བརྡ་དོན་སྤྲད་པ	to understand / recognize the meaning clearly	brda don sprad pa
བརྡ་དོན་མི་འབྱེད་པ	unable to distinguish	brda don mi 'byed pa
བརྡ་དོན་ལམ་ཟབ	pure vision by {rgod ldem}	brda don lam zab
བརྡ་དྲིལ	alarm bell	brda dril
བརྡ་གདགས་པ	imputed symbols	brda gdags pa
བརྡ་འདུམ་ཤེས	signal of danger	brda 'dum shes
བརྡ་འདེད	eradicate, analyze, examin[ation]	brda 'ded
བརྡ་འདེད་པ	khungs rtsad gcod mkhan ???	brda 'ded pa
བརྡ་འདོགས་པ	to label	brda 'dogs pa
བརྡ་སྤྲལ་བ	to clearly explain, openly explain, explanation of a symbol	brda spral ba
བརྡ་སྤྲོད	1) (by'akarana, text teaching how properly to understand conventional words and symbols,; 2) [shastra on words or] grammar; 2) answer/ reply and tell the meaning; 3) communicate, get a message acro...	brda sprod
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་ཀྱི	grammatical	brda sprod kyi
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་བསྟན་བཅོས	text showing the meanings of words, grammar shastra	brda sprod bstan bcos
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་པ	grammatical	brda sprod pa
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	grammar shastra	brda sprod pa'i bstan bcos
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་པའི་གཞུང	grammar book	brda sprod pa'i gzhung
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་པའི་རིག་པ	science of grammar	brda sprod pa'i rig pa
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་བའི་རིག་པ	the science of grammar	brda sprod ba'i rig pa
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་གཙུག་ལག	shastra on grammar	brda sprod gtsug lag
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་ཡི་གེ	1) grammar and letters; 2) letter [= missive]	brda sprod yi ge
བརྡ་སྤྲོད་རིག་པ	grammar 1472	brda sprod rig pa
བརྡ་ཕྱག	symbolic salutation	brda phyag
བརྡ་ཕྲད་པ	to receive understanding, to understand	brda phrad pa
བརྡ་ཕྲོད	be able to communicate	brda phrod
བརྡ་ཕྲོད་པ	explain, describe, represent	brda phrod pa
བརྡ་འཕྲིན	message	brda 'phrin
བརྡ་འཕྲོད	communicate	brda 'phrod
བརྡ་འཕྲོད་པ	to have meaning conveyed/ have significance explained; to be deciphered	brda 'phrod pa
བརྡ་བྱང	pure symbols, symbolic letter	brda byang
བརྡ་བྱང་གཙོ་བོ	main symbolic letter	brda byang gtso bo
བརྡ་བྱུང	arise from conventional symbols	brda byung
བརྡ་བྱུང་གི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	conventional bodhicitta	brda byung gi sems bskyed
བརྡ་དབང	symbolic empowerment	brda dbang
བརྡ་སྦྱར་བའི་གཞི	the basis on which the name was introduced [ggd]	brda sbyar ba'i gzhi
བརྡ་སྦྱོར་མཁན	messenger	brda sbyor mkhan
བརྡ་སྦྱོར་མཁན་པོ	1) brda sprod mkhan, messenger; 2) 1st assigner/ giver of a name	brda sbyor mkhan po
བརྡ་སྦྱོར་བ	explain, describe, represent	brda sbyor ba
བརྡ་མ་འཕྲོད	no understanding; x {brda ma 'phrod par 'dzin pa} remembering both with no understanding	brda ma 'phrod
བརྡ་མི་རྒན་པོ	1) the first imputer of [a] name; 2) the convention	brda mi rgan po
བརྡ་མི་འཇལ་བ	incapable of communicating	brda mi 'jal ba
བརྡ་ཙམ	mere [meaningless] words	brda tsam
བརྡ་ཚིག	term, word, coded verses, slogan	brda tshig
བརྡ་མཚོན	clue, hint, symbol of Da	brda mtshon
བརྡ་མཚོན་རྟགས་ཤད	phonetic symbols	brda mtshon rtags shad
བརྡ་འཛིན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	communications satellite	brda 'dzin 'phrul 'khor
བརྡ་གཞན	secondary symbolic script	brda gzhan
བརྡ་བཞི	the Four Signs (in Dzogchen Longde practice)	brda bzhi
བརྡ་བཞི་བསྐྱང	practice the Four Das	brda bzhi bskyang
བརྡ་བཞིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Yoga of the Four Das	brda bzhi'i rnal 'byor
བརྡ་ཡི་སྐད	symbolic sound	brda yi skad
བརྡ་ཡི་བསྟན་བཅོས	Tibetan language	brda yi bstan bcos
བརྡ་ཡི་བླ་མ	sign guru	brda yi bla ma
བརྡ་ཡི་དབང	sign empowerments	brda yi dbang
བརྡ་ཡིག	1) brda'i shastra; 2) responding letter; 3) extraordinary kind of writing, sign script, code letters, symbolic writing, magic words; 4) written notice	brda yig
བརྡ་ཡིག་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	magical city	brda yig sprul pa'i grong khyer
བརྡ་ཡིས་བསྟན	indicated by means of symbols	brda yis bstan
བརྡ་ཡོངས་སུ་གཅོད་པ	to determine a name	brda yongs su gcod pa
བརྡ་རིས	indicative signs, writing	brda ris
བརྡ་རིས་བཀོད	write, show signs	brda ris bkod
བརྡ་རིས་ལས་ཕབ་པ	decoding symbols	brda ris las phab pa
བརྡ་ལན	answer/ response to speech/ a letter	brda lan
བརྡ་ལན་བྱེད	answer/ respond [to speech/ a letter]	brda lan byed
བརྡ་ལན་ཞུ	answer/ respond [to speech/ a letter] [h]	brda lan zhu
བརྡ་ལས་བྱུང	deriving from an intimation brda las byung ba'i sems bskyed pa arousal of bodhicitta arising from symbols or words	brda las byung
བརྡ་ལེན	respond, react	brda len
བརྡ་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	communications satellite	brda len 'phrul 'khor
བརྡ་ལོག	brda go log tu [wrongly] sprod pa ...Skad cha 'di go nyes brda log byung song	brda log
བརྡ་ཤེས	1) know the meaning of the symbols [speech or written]; 2) a number	brda shes
བརྡ་གཤོག	phyogs ris che ba	brda gshog
བརྡ་གསང	secret language	brda gsang
བརྡ་གསར	new orthography	brda gsar
བརྡ་གསར་པ	new letters [decreed by king khri ral pa can afterwards T's writing]	brda gsar pa
བརྡ་བསལ་བ	eliminate words and symbols	brda bsal ba
བརྡབ	[f rdeb]	brdab
བརྡབ་དཀྲུག་རྒྱག་པ	phra ma 'jug pa,...Phan tshun mthun pa'i bar du brdab dkrug rgyag pa,	brdab dkrug rgyag pa
བརྡབ་སྐྱོན	accident	brdab skyon
བརྡབ་སྐྱོན་བྱུང་བའི་རྨ	bruise	brdab skyon byung ba'i rma
བརྡབ་འཆོས་ཏེ་འགྲོ	'dred pa'am 'gyel gyin 'gro ba,...Chang gis ra bzi nas lam bar brdab 'chos te 'gro ba,	brdab 'chos te 'gro
བརྡབ་བརྡབ་བཏང་བ	to beat [a rug]	brdab brdab btang ba
བརྡབ་བརྡབ་སྤྲུགས་པ	rdul sogs gsig gsig byas nas annihilate,...Gyon chas la sa rdul 'gos pa brdab brdab sprugs te ltebs tsigs brgyab pa yin	brdab brdab sprugs pa
བརྡབ་བརྡབ་གསིག་གསིག	al that there is/ are [Dngos po gang yod kho rang la brdab brdab gsig gsig byas nas sprad pa yin]	brdab brdab gsig gsig
བརྡབ་པ	{brdab pa, brdabs pa, brdab pa} intr. v.; ft. of {rdeb pa}; ft. of {brdab pa}	brdab pa
བརྡབ་ཞོགས	las ka gang yin rung mi gcig gis byas na tshang mas byed pa'i 'ur langs pa,...Mi rnams brdab zhogs langs nas slob sbyong byed pa,...Skad cha brdab zhogs byas nas bshad pa,...Gros gtam lhod dal gyis...	brdab zhogs
བརྡབ་གཤོགས	1) brdab zhogs; 2) {brda gshog	brdab gshogs
བརྡབ་གསིག	'phrog rdung ngam mnar	brdab gsig
བརྡབ་བསིགས	rough, harsh, severe, tyranny, domineering oppression	brdab bsigs
བརྡབ་བསིགས་བྱེད	rule oppressively, tyrannize, domineer, bully 1473	brdab bsigs byed
བརྡབས	[p rdeb]	brdabs
བརྡབས་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	crash	brdabs sgra sgrog pa
བརྡབས་ཆག	be broken after hitting something or skyon shor ba	brdabs chag
བརྡབས་པ	to bang against	brdabs pa
བརྡབས་སིགས	oppression, tyranny, giving trouble to the subjects	brdabs sigs
བརྡའ	{brda} symbol(ic gesture); indication	brda'
བརྡའ་སྐད	sign language	brda' skad
བརྡའ་རྟགས	Symbolic attribute	brda' rtags
བརྡའ་བསྟན་པ་ཙམ་ལ་རྟོགས་པ	attaining realization merely by seeing a gesture	brda' bstan pa tsam la rtogs pa
བརྡའ་ཐབས	symbolic means/ technique	brda' thabs
བརྡའ་ཐིམ	symbol's dissolved, esoteric utterance marking the end of a visionary revelation	brda' thim
བརྡའ་དོན	significance of symbols	brda' don
བརྡའ་དོན་རྟགས་གསུམ	Symbol, meaning, and sign. Three aspects of Vajrayana teachings. For example, the peaceful and wrathful deities depicted are the symbol. The meaning they symbolize is the enlightened qualities spon...	brda' don rtags gsum
བརྡའ་སྤྲོད་པ	to convey meaning, communicate, explain significance	brda' sprod pa
བརྡའ་འཕྲོད་པ	to have meaning conveyed/ have significance explained; to be deciphered	brda' 'phrod pa
བརྡའ་སྦྱར་བ	affixing the appellation	brda' sbyar ba
བརྡའ་མ་འཕྲོད་པར་བཟུང	if you remember the teaching without identifying; x {drang nges ldem dgongs kyi gsung sna tshogs pa rnams brda' ma 'phrod par bzung na tshig dang don du 'dzol nas yang dag pa'i chos dang rgyab 'gal...	brda' ma 'phrod par bzung
ལེབེ༹ལས	the expedient meaning, the real	levels
མེཨནིང་ཨནད་ཐེ་ཨིནདིརེཅཏ་མེཨནིང	you will be confused about what the words refer to. This may lead you away from the true Dharma	meaning and the indirect meaning
བརྡའ་ཡིག	sign letters	brda' yig
བརྡའ་ཤེས	numerical figure	brda' shes
བརྡའ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོ	a number of higher value than the preceding	brda' shes chen po
བརྡའི	symbolic, indicative	brda'i
བརྡའི་འགོག་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'jig rten pa'i lam gyis spang bya'i sa bon smad cing mgo mnan pas 'gog pa gang yin pa ste/ de tsam la'ang 'gog par 'dogs pa 'gog pa de'i rnam grangs su gtogs pa la dgongs ...	brda'i 'gog pa
བརྡའི་སྒོ་ནས	through symbols	brda'i sgo nas
བརྡའི་སྒོ་ནས་བསྐུར	transmitted to him, by means of symbols	brda'i sgo nas bskur
བརྡའི་གཏེར་ཡིག	symbolic terma script	brda'i gter yig
བརྡའི་ཐ་སྙད	1) names, words. 2) symbolic name	brda'i tha snyad
བརྡའི་ཕྱག	homage with words, mutterings expressive of respect in bowing down	brda'i phyag
བརྡའི་བླ་མ	lama who instructs verbally (especially spelling)	brda'i bla ma
བརྡའི་དབང	sign abhisheka, symbolic empowerment	brda'i dbang
བརྡའི་དབང་བཞི	the four sign abhishekas,	brda'i dbang bzhi
བརྡའི་འབུལ་ལེན	brda dang brda'i 'bul len symbolic offer and answer; symbolic offering and answering	brda'i 'bul len
བརྡའི་འོད་གསལ	Sign luminosity. The experiences of manifest luminosity during the bardo of dying	brda'i 'od gsal
བརྡའི་ཡུལ	object of convention [ggd]	brda'i yul
བརྡའི་རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ	rab byung gi ming rtags tsam 'dzin pa symbolic consecration	brda'i rab tu byung ba
བརྡར	representing that; p. of {rdar}; to signify, signifying	brdar
བརྡར་གྱུར་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra turned into symbols. The letter characters of the scriptures	brdar gyur pa'i rgyud
བརྡར་བཏགས	named, termed	brdar btags
བརྡར་བཏགས་པ	verbal[ly]/ symbolic[ally] designat[ion] [eg call a wild man a lion]	brdar btags pa
བརྡར་བཏགས་པའི་ཆོས་མངོན་པ	* abhidharma of verbal designation	brdar btags pa'i chos mngon pa
བརྡར་བཏགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	the knowledge of verbal designation [tha snyad dpyod byed kyi rig pa]	brdar btags pa'i shes pa
བརྡར་ཐབས་རྒྱས་པ	the symbolic act	brdar thabs rgyas pa
བརྡར་རྡོ	whetstone, grindstone	brdar rdo
བརྡར་སྡེགས	grinding machine	brdar sdegs
བརྡར་ནས་ཟད་པ	detrition	brdar nas zad pa
བརྡར་བ	[f p rdar ba] grind, polish	brdar ba
བརྡར་སྦྱོང	training	brdar sbyong
བརྡར་གཙུབ	drad drud	brdar gtsub
བརྡར་ཟད་དུ་སོང	be worn away/ off	brdar zad du song
བརྡར་ཤ	decision, conclusion, judgement, discrimination	brdar sha
བརྡར་ཤ་གཅོད་པ	to make a decision, judgment; examine thoroughly; distinguish	brdar sha gcod pa
བརྡར་ཤ་ཆོད	examine minutely, take seriously to heart	brdar sha chod
བརྡར་ཤ་ཆོད་པ	1) clearly decide/ distinguish arrive at a conclusion/ decision/ judgement; 2) sharpen weapons etc.	brdar sha chod pa
བརྡལ	?? spread, SA rdal ba, equilibrium, arrayed, extensive	brdal
བརྡལ་ཁྱབ	pervasive (and extensive); expansive; pervasion; to let (oneself) expand (into)	brdal khyab
བརྡལ་གླ	= rdal gla	brdal gla
བརྡལ་ཐག་གཅོད	put to a vote	brdal thag gcod
བརྡལ་ཐག་གཅོད་པའི་དབང་ཆ	right to vote	brdal thag gcod pa'i dbang cha
བརྡལ་བ	[will] spread, permeate[d] pervade[d] [rage (fire shine (moon light [p f rdal ba]	brdal ba
བརྡལ་ལེན	1) receiver of fees to transport goods; 2) wage receiver	brdal len
བརྡལ་གཤིག་གཏོང	tear up, scrap, dissolve (treaty	brdal gshig gtong
བརྡལ་བཤིག	pay no attention/ regard to	brdal bshig
བརྡས	SA 'ded	brdas
བརྡས་བསྙད་པ	is called	brdas bsnyad pa
བརྡས་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	decide by vote, vote	brdas thag gcod pa
བརྡིབ	will fall to pieces, give way, break down [f {rdib}	brdib
བརྡིབ་པ	f. of {rdib}; to collapse, fall down, fall in	brdib pa
བརྡིབས	fell to pieces, gave way, broke down [f {rdib}	brdibs
བརྡིབས་པ	{gnas khang brdibs pa} crushed under their collapsing houses	brdibs pa
བརྡུག	conquer, SA rdug pa	brdug
བརྡུགས	conquered [p {rdug}	brdugs
བརྡུགས་སོ་བྱས	used up, spent	brdugs so byas
བརྡུང	beat, SA rdung ba, SA brtung ba	brdung
བརྡུང་ལྕགས	forgings	brdung lcags
བརྡུང་བརྡེག	beat, strike	brdung brdeg
བརྡུང་བརྡེགས	hitting or mistreating	brdung brdegs
བརྡུང་བ	ft. of {rdung ba}	brdung ba
བརྡུང་བ་རུང་བ	malleable, soft, pliant	brdung ba rung ba
བརྡུང་མ	beating, pulverization	brdung ma
བརྡུངས	{dngul 'jangs brdungs kyi glegs ral} a volume of scripture and a sword of pure beaten silver	brdungs
བརྡུངས་པ	beat/ struck [p rdung ba]	brdungs pa
བརྡུངས་བྱས	beaten	brdungs byas
བརྡུངས་སྦྱར	brdungs te lhu bsgrigs pa /brdungs sbyar gyis bzos pa'i lcags shog snod spyad	brdungs sbyar
བརྡུངས་བཙོགས	wickedly beat	brdungs btsogs
བརྡུངས་ཟིན་པ	smitten	brdungs zin pa
བརྡུངས་གཟེར	rivet	brdungs gzer
བརྡུལ	1) deceive, cheat; 2) swing, brandish, flourish	brdul
བརྡུལ་པ	[arch] 1) swing, brandish, flourish; 2) tame, subdue, conquer; 3) deceive, cheat	brdul pa
བརྡུལ་ཕྲན་པ	atom, particle	brdul phran pa
བརྡུལ་བ	1) deceive, cheat; 2) swing, brandish, flourish	brdul ba
བརྡེག	beat, knock, thrust, SA rdeg pa	brdeg
བརྡེག་ཆ	knife	brdeg cha
བརྡེག་འཆོས	slip, fall	brdeg 'chos
བརྡེག་འཆོས་པ	fall	brdeg 'chos pa
བརྡེག་པ	ft. of {rdeg pa}; pointing [downward]	brdeg pa
བརྡེག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of striking	brdeg pa'i ltung byed
བརྡེག་པར་བརྩམས་པ	begin to wave	brdeg par brtsams pa
བརྡེག་པར་གཟས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of [trying to] strike dge slong another dge slong out of anger [one of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}	brdeg par gzas pa'i ltung byed
བརྡེག་འཚོག་པ	threaten to beat, prepare to beat, tumble down, slip, slide, lose one's footing	brdeg 'tshog pa
བརྡེགས	[p rdeg]	brdegs
བརྡེགས་པ	pf. of {rdeg pa}	brdegs pa
བརྡེགས་ཤུལ	marks/ scars of beating	brdegs shul
བརྡེབ	flail. f. of {rdeg}	brdeb
བརྡོག་འཆོས་པ	to slip, to slide, to lose one's footing	brdog 'chos pa
བརྡོག་པ	eaten up	brdog pa
བརྡོལ	spring/ well up, overflow, gush forth, leak out [p {rdol}	brdol
བརྡོལ་ཆོས	overflowing dharmas. rtsing spyod dam ma rabs	brdol chos
བརྡོལ་གཏམ	1) saying whatever comes out; 2) talking inappropriately, vulgar speech	brdol gtam
བརྡོལ་ཐབས	confused/ nonsensical speech	brdol thabs
བརྡོལ་བ	to ooze, burst open; be revealed; spring up, overflow, gush forth, well up, leak out; collapse; blossom, billow, rose up, well forth, burst forth. Ex. {chu ser brdol ba} secretion of liquid	brdol ba
བརྡོལ་བོན	{brdol bon} [from king {gnya' khri btsan po} rgyal rabs drug pa in the time of {khri sde btsan po} a kind of B"n spreading in Tibet sngon gyi bshad srol du sngar gdug 'dres byis pa zhig yul khams g...	brdol bon
བརྡོས	friend	brdos
བརྡོས་པ	CM: rdos pa dang 'dra. [mss]	brdos pa
བལྡག	will lick [f ldag pa]	bldag
བལྡག་ལྕེས་འབྱོག་པ	licker	bldag lces 'byog pa
བལྡག་ལྕེས་འབྱོག་པ་པོ	one who licks	bldag lces 'byog pa po
བལྡག་པ	ft. of {ldag pa}	bldag pa
བལྡགས	f. of {ldag}	bldags
བལྡགས་པ	licked [p ldag pa]	bldags pa
བལྡད	[p ldad] 1475	bldad
བལྡད་པ	chew; pf. of {ldad pa}; ft. of {ldad pa}	bldad pa
བལྡབ	fold up, SA ldab pa	bldab
བལྡབ་པ	ft. of {ldab pa}	bldab pa
བལྡབས	fold up, SA ldab pa	bldabs
བལྡབས་པ	repeated [p ldab pa]	bldabs pa
བལྡིབ	SA ldib pa	bldib
བལྡེ	warm oneself, SA lde ba	blde
བལྡེག་པ	will move, bite, chew [f ldeg pa]	bldeg pa
བལྡེགས་པ	pf. of {ldeg pa}	bldegs pa
བལྡེས	warm oneself, SA lde ba 'ldom gang - an armspan	bldes
གསྡུག་ལས	hard labor	gsdug las
བསྡགས་འོས	praise worthy	bsdags 'os
བསྡད	remain, sit, SA sdod pa, past of sdod, sat down	bsdad
བསྡད་གྲོང	inhabited city	bsdad grong
བསྡད་དུད	smoke of a family living place presently in use bsdad na las rgyu 'gro na lus rgyu med pa - who, when he stays, has no work to do; who, when he goes, has nothing he leaves behind	bsdad dud
བསྡད་པ	[will] stay[ed] [f p sdod pa], remaining to be done [bya bsdad: reamining to be done]	bsdad pa
བསྡད་དབང་མེད	it is not in my power to stay	bsdad dbang med
བསྡད་དབང་མེད་པ	there is no way to remain	bsdad dbang med pa
བསྡད་ཟིན་པ	sat	bsdad zin pa
བསྡད་ཤུལ	place where 1 formerly stayed	bsdad shul
བསྡམ	will control, refrain from [hold [back from], bind, restrain, [f sdom pa]	bsdam
བསྡམ་བཀྱིག	bind/ tie up w a rope	bsdam bkyig
བསྡམ་རྒྱ	area to be prohibited by a rule [bkag sdom byed rgyu'i khrims rgya actually a place or also conduct???]	bsdam rgya
བསྡམ་པ	will control, refrain from [hold [back from], bind, restrain, [f sdom pa]	bsdam pa
བསྡམ་བ	hope, expect, wait for a favor	bsdam ba
བསྡམ་བྱ	that should be refrained from/ controlled [faults of the three gates, to be abandoned by the three vows	bsdam bya
བསྡམ་བྱའི་ཉེས་བྱས	faults which should be refrained from [aside from the {dge tshul gyis bsrung bya blangs 'das so gsum}, others to be abandoned by a gelong, so called because they should be bound = refrained from by...	bsdam bya'i nyes byas
བསྡམ་མོ	knot, tied, bandage	bsdam mo
བསྡམ་ར	bkag sdom dam po byed pa	bsdam ra
བསྡམས	tighten; to promise to refrain from	bsdams
བསྡམས་པ	held, bound, refrained from controlled, restrained [p sdom pa]	bsdams pa
བསྡམས་པ་གློད	slacken binding	bsdams pa glod
བསྡམས་པར་འགྱུར	be controlled	bsdams par 'gyur
བསྡམས་ཙོང	restricted commerce [except for certain institutions and individuals buying and selling of something is not allowed]	bsdams tsong
བསྡམས་ཚོང	restricted commerce	bsdams tshong
བསྡམས་ཟིན་པ	bound	bsdams zin pa
བསྡར་བ	to hope, to expect or wait for	bsdar ba
བསྡས་ཤོག	envelope	bsdas shog
བསྡི	point towards, SA sdigs pa	bsdi
བསྡིག	{bran g.yog por ma bsdig} don't abuse servants	bsdig
བསྡིག་པ	ft. of {sdig pa}	bsdig pa
བསྡིགས	p. of {sdigs}; threatening/ intimidation	bsdigs
བསྡིགས་ཁུང་སྤྲོད་པ	mig gis gzas pa,...So khung [window nas 'ben look at la bsdigs khung sprad de me mda' rgyag pa,..???	bsdigs khung sprod pa
བསྡིགས་པ	threatened, menaced, intimidated [p sdig pa]	bsdigs pa
བསྡིགས་པའི་གད་མོ	loud laughter	bsdigs pa'i gad mo
བསྡིགས་ཚིག	catch or quibble in a dispute	bsdigs tshig
བསྡིགས་ར	evil action	bsdigs ra
བསྡིས	point towards, SA sdigs pa	bsdis
བསྡུ	collect, unite, comprise, consist in, gather together, SA sdud pa, future of sdud	bsdu
བསྡུ་བཀང་བྱེད	convene, summon, assemble	bsdu bkang byed
བསྡུ་སྐོར་བྱེད	convene, summon, assemble	bsdu skor byed
བསྡུ་སྐྱོགས	[arch] commission, charge, superintendence	bsdu skyogs
བསྡུ་འགུགས	convene, summon, assemble	bsdu 'gugs
བསྡུ་སྒྲིབ་བྱེད་པ	digest	bsdu sgrib byed pa
བསྡུ་དངོས	synopsis	bsdu dngos
བསྡུ་དངོས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	{bsdu ba'i dngos po rnam pa bzhi} four means of positively influencing others	bsdu dngos rnam pa bzhi
བསྡུ་དངོས་བཞི	four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva	bsdu dngos bzhi
བསྡུ་ཅ	subscription	bsdu ca
བསྡུ་ཅ་སྤྲོད་པ	subscribe	bsdu ca sprod pa
བསྡུ་ཆ	gather many into 1 or few[er]	bsdu cha
བསྡུ་ཉར	gather and keep/ store	bsdu nyar
བསྡུ་དེབ	abbreviated text	bsdu deb
བསྡུ་ལྡང	dissolve/ dissolution and emerge[nce]	bsdu ldang
བསྡུ་སྡུད	grouped/ included under	bsdu sdud
བསྡུ་ན	when / if abbreviated	bsdu na
བསྡུ་བ་དང་པོ	First Council - Council of 500 Arhats convened at Rajgir after the Parinirvana to authenticate the teachings	bsdu ba dang po
བསྡུ་བ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four magnetizing (activities)/means of attraction and gathering/ ways of winning devotees; 1) {sbyin pa}, 2) {snyan par smra ba}, 3) {don spyod pa}, 4) {don mthun pa} generosity, pleasing speec...	bsdu ba rnam pa bzhi
བསྡུ་བ་བཞི	the four magnetizing (activities)/ means of attraction and gathering/ ways of winning devotees; 1) {sbyin pa}, 2) {snyan par smra ba}, 3) {don spyod pa}, 4) {don mthun pa} generosity, pleasing spee...	bsdu ba bzhi
བསྡུ་བ་གསུམ་པ	Third Council - Council convened at time of Kaniska to authenticate the teachings; in the Theravada the Third Council was convened at Pataliputra under Ashoka	bsdu ba gsum pa
བསྡུ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	followers	bsdu ba'i dngos po
བསྡུ་བའི་དངོས་པོ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four means of positively influencing others	bsdu ba'i dngos po rnam pa bzhi
བསྡུ་བའི་དངོས་པོ་བཞི	four means of attraction, Four Means of Conversion, four ways of gathering beings, four ways of gathering, four means of positively influencing others. Four ways to benefit others (giving, using me...	bsdu ba'i dngos po bzhi
སམགྲཧ	vastu. Giving, pleasant speech, helping, and consistency	samgraha
བསྡུ་བའི་སྟོབས	power of gathering. the power of all beings of rjes su 'dzin par [follow believe in, accept???]	bsdu ba'i stobs
བསྡུ་བའི་གནས	abbreviated expression	bsdu ba'i gnas
བསྡུ་བའི་ཕྱིར་ཟང་ཟིང་དང་ཆོས	disturbed dharmas for the sake of accumulation	bsdu ba'i phyir zang zing dang chos
བསྡུ་བའི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	summary verses	bsdu ba'i tshigs su bcad pa
བསྡུ་བར་བྱ	gather [in], magnetize, abbreviate, amass	bsdu bar bya
བསྡུ་བར་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	summary verses	bsdu bar tshigs su bcad pa
བསྡུ་ཙགས	gather and keep control of/ take care of	bsdu tsags
བསྡུ་ཚུལ	way of gathering/ magnetizing	bsdu tshul
བསྡུ་བཞི་སྒོ་ནས	through the four ways of gathering / means of magnetizing	bsdu bzhi sgo nas
བསྡུ་རིམ	dissolution phase; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 135, 206]	bsdu rim
བསྡུ་རུབ	convene, summon, assemble	bsdu rub
བསྡུ་རུབ་ཀྱི	collective	bsdu rub kyi
བསྡུ་རུབ་བྱེད་པ	collect, gather, concentrate, centralize, assemble	bsdu rub byed pa
བསྡུ་ལེན	summon [students etc]., collect [rtsis len pa]	bsdu len
བསྡུ་ལེན་བྱེད	summon [students etc]., collect [rtsis len pa]	bsdu len byed
བསྡུ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	absorb	bsdu len byed pa
བསྡུ་གསོག	store, hoard, amass, collect [things that are out]	bsdu gsog
བསྡུ་གསོག་རྒྱག་པ	put in order, clear away	bsdu gsog rgyag pa
བསྡུ་གསོག་བྱེད	store, hoard, amass, collect	bsdu gsog byed
བསྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception/ conception of suffering	bsdug bsngal gyi 'du shes
བསྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱོང་བ	to suffer, experience suffering	bsdug bsngal myong ba
བསྡུད	SA bsdus, sdud pa, reabsorbed	bsdud
བསྡུད་ཀྱིས་འབྱིན	using medicines to concentrate the excessive bile factors and expel them through evacuation	bsdud kyis 'byin
བསྡུད་འཇོམས	the Crushing (hell; 1) of the 8 hot hells	bsdud 'joms
བསྡུད་པ	dissolve	bsdud pa
བསྡུད་བྲིས	shorthand	bsdud bris
བསྡུད་བཞག	close down	bsdud bzhag
བསྡུམ	agree, reconcile, make agree, SA sdum pa	bsdum
བསྡུམ་པ	[f sdum pa] reconcile, cause to agree	bsdum pa
བསྡུམ་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	restoring the vows ceremony [for settlement of sangha disputes]	bsdum pa'i gso sbyong
བསྡུམ་བྱེད་པ	reconcile {pha rol dang bsdum byas} reconciled with his enemy	bsdum byed pa
བསྡུམས	agree, reconcile, make agree, SA sdum pa	bsdums
བསྡུམས་པ	1) reconcile, cause to agree; 2) treaty (/ [p sdum pa]	bsdums pa
བསྡུར	to compare	bsdur
བསྡུར་གཅོད	compare and decide, judge	bsdur gcod
བསྡུར་འདེམ	selection	bsdur 'dem
བསྡུར་བ	compare [f p sdur ba]	bsdur ba
བསྡུར་བའི་བརྟག་དཔྱད	comparative research	bsdur ba'i brtag dpyad
བསྡུར་མོལ	evaluation, deliberation	bsdur mol
བསྡུར་མོལ་བྱེད	evaluate, deliberate	bsdur mol byed
བསྡུར་ཚད	proportional, balanced	bsdur tshad
བསྡུར་ཚད་ཁྲེ་ཙེ	measure, scale [on graphs/ maps]	bsdur tshad khre tse
བསྡུར་ཚད་ངེས་ཅན་ཞིག	in a certain proportion	bsdur tshad nges can zhig
བསྡུར་ཚད་དངོས	direct ratio, in proportion to	bsdur tshad dngos
བསྡུར་ཚད་ལྟར	proportionally	bsdur tshad ltar
བསྡུར་ཚད་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in proportion to	bsdur tshad dang bstun pa
བསྡུས	are subsumed under bsdus dissolved, concentrated, gather[ed][ing], brought/ grouped together, collected, abridged, epitomized, abbreviated, consist/ be comprised of, belong to, embodiment compendiu...	bsdus
བསྡུས་ཀློག	sbyor klog ma yin par bsdus klog brgyab ste klog pa ???	bsdus klog
བསྡུས་ཁུ	essence [boiled a long time] [Snying po dang bcud]	bsdus khu
བསྡུས་གྭ	collected topics [of pramana]	bsdus gwa
བསྡུས་གྲྭ	Collected Topics [ggd]	bsdus grwa
བསྡུས་གྲྭ་ཆེ་འབྲིང་ཆུང་གསུམ	the geater, middle, and lesser collected topics [in studying the collected topics of reasoning, in introductory pramana, collections for those of the greatest, middle, and lesser powers or training	bsdus grwa che 'bring chung gsum
བསྡུས་གྲྭའི་བསྡུས་ཚན་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 classifications of the collected topics	bsdus grwa'i bsdus tshan nyer lnga
བསྡུས་འགྲེལ	abbreviated commentary	bsdus 'grel
བསྡུས་རྒྱུད	Condensed Tantra	bsdus rgyud
བསྡུས་ཆུང	lesser collected topics of logic	bsdus chung
བསྡུས་ཆེན	greater collected topics of logic	bsdus chen
བསྡུས་འཇོམས	the Crushing hell [one of the {sems can dmyal ba brgyad} eight hot hells {tsha dmyal brgyad} lcags kyi gtun chen po yul ljongs tzam pa re'i nang du the hell beingsn grangs med pa blugs nas, with bu...	bsdus 'joms
བསྡུས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	ornament of abbreviated expression [among {don rgyan}, ornament where having thought of some example of the meaning expressed de dang chos mtsungs pa'i dpe'i other things by means of verbally prese...	bsdus brjod kyi rgyan
བསྡུས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་བཞི	four ornaments of abbreviated expression	bsdus brjod kyi rgyan bzhi
བསྡུས་ཏེ	shortly, briefly	bsdus te
བསྡུས་ཏེ་བསྡོམས་ནས	having abridged	bsdus te bsdoms nas
བསྡུས་དང་རྒྱས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	briefly and in detail	bsdus dang rgyas pa'i sgo nas
བསྡུས་དོན	essence, core meaning, summary, summarize	bsdus don
བསྡུས་དོན་གྱི་ཆིངས	summary of the meaning of a text te bsgrigs pa'i sa bcad [outline, section]	bsdus don gyi chings
བསྡུས་སྡོམ	synopsis, summary	bsdus sdom
བསྡུས་བསྡུས	curt	bsdus bsdus
བསྡུས་ན	when / if abridged	bsdus na
བསྡུས་ན་འདྲིལ་བ	if amassed it agglomerates, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	bsdus na 'dril ba
བསྡུས་པ་འཐོར་བུ	concise oral transmissions, SA nyams rgyud	bsdus pa 'thor bu
བསྡུས་པ་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 kinds of gathering	bsdus pa rnam pa bcu gcig
བསྡུས་པ་ཙམ་བྱ	abbreviated	bsdus pa tsam bya
བསྡུས་པ་ལས་གྱུར་པ	form compounded from atoms	bsdus pa las gyur pa
བསྡུས་པ་ལས་གྱུར་པའི་གཟུགས	[among the five forms of proliferation of dharmas {chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs lnga}, by concepts the extreme end of division atoms kyi gzugs not shown to the eye is inferred. form (yid shes kyi...	bsdus pa las gyur pa'i gzugs
བསྡུས་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་དམིགས་པ	conception/ perception of gathered dharmas bsdus pa'i bstan bcos don rnam gnyis two collections of summarized treatises bsdus pa'i bstan bcos don rnam gnyis two collections of summarised treatises ...	bsdus pa'i chos la dmigs pa
བསྡུས་པའི་དོན	summarized meaning	bsdus pa'i don
བསྡུས་པའི་སྡོམ	summary [many things 1 description]	bsdus pa'i sdom
བསྡུས་པའི་དཔེ	example of combined emboidiment [among the {dpe'i rgyan),	bsdus pa'i dpe
བསྡུས་པའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	"Having an abbreviated form." A grammatical term used in poetry manuals to refer to expressions or compound terms in which the grammatical connectives such as the sixth case {rnam dbye drug pa} are...	bsdus pa'i gzugs can
བསྡུས་པོ	abbreviated, abridged	bsdus po
བསྡུས་ཕྱིར	in order to summarize	bsdus phyir
བསྡུས་བྱས་པ	which I have gathered	bsdus byas pa
བསྡུས་གབ	collected topics	bsdus gba
བསྡུས་འབྲིང	middle collected topics [of logic]*	bsdus 'bring
བསྡུས་འབྲིང་རྒྱས	abbreviated, middle, and extensive	bsdus 'bring rgyas
བསྡུས་མིང	abbreviation	bsdus ming
བསྡུས་ཚན	topics in an abbreviated text	bsdus tshan
བསྡུས་ཚན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 summarized topics	bsdus tshan bco brgyad
བསྡུས་ཚིག	abbreviation	bsdus tshig
བསྡུས་ཚུལ་གྱི་དབྱེ་བ	list of divisions	bsdus tshul gyi dbye ba
བསྡུས་གཞུང	1) gtan tshig rig pa and mtshan nyid rigs lam study example book; 2) abbreviated text	bsdus gzhung
བསྡུས་གཞོམ	= bsdus 'joms, diligently gather, destroy accumulations	bsdus gzhom
བསྡུས་བཞོམ	hell, perdition	bsdus bzhom
བསྡུས་ཡིག	abbreviation	bsdus yig
བསྡུས་ཡིག་བྲིས་མཁན	stenography	bsdus yig bris mkhan
བསྡུས་ར	collected topics of pramana	bsdus ra
བསྡེབ	f. of {sdeb}	bsdeb
བསྡེབ་པ	ft. of {sdeb pa}	bsdeb pa
བསྡེབས	{de dag dang bsdebs nas nags gseb tu byon pa} went back with them to live in the wilderness	bsdebs
བསྡེབས་བསྒྲིལ	accumulation	bsdebs bsgril
བསྡེབས་བསྒྲིལ་ཐེབས	be accumulated	bsdebs bsgril thebs
བསྡེབས་བསྒྲིལ་བྱེད	accumulate, store up	bsdebs bsgril byed
བསྡེབས་པ	1) prepared, arranged; 2) mixed, mingled, blended, joined, united (/ [p sdeb pa]	bsdebs pa
བསྡེབས་འཛོགས	pile together	bsdebs 'dzogs
བསྡེབས་ལང	action/ rising of many people together	bsdebs lang
བསྡེབས་ལང་གིས་བྱས་པ་རེད	they did [it] together	bsdebs lang gis byas pa red
བསྡེབས་གསོད	mass killing, massacre	bsdebs gsod
བསྡེབས་གསོད་གཏོང	kill en masse, massacre	bsdebs gsod gtong
བསྡེབས་གསོད་བྱེད	kill en masse, massacre	bsdebs gsod byed
བསྡོ	to risk	bsdo
བསྡོ་མཁན	doer of harm	bsdo mkhan
བསྡོ་བ	ft. of {sdo ba}; harm	bsdo ba
བསྡོ་བ་ཚད་མེད	immeasurable harm	bsdo ba tshad med
བསྡོ་འབྲས	fruition of harm	bsdo 'bras
བསྡོ་ཡུལ	object of harm	bsdo yul
བསྡོག	1) [f sdog pa]; 2) (A; 1) bshams pa; 2) patches of leather shoes etc	bsdog
བསྡོག་ཆས	implements/ things to be prepared/ readied	bsdog chas
བསྡོག་པ	ft. of {sdog pa}	bsdog pa
བསྡོགས	[p sdog pa]	bsdogs
བསྡོགས་པ	[p sdog pa]	bsdogs pa
བསྡོང	accompany, SA sdong ba	bsdong
བསྡོང་བ	will compose, prepare [f sdong ba]	bsdong ba
བསྡོངས	accompany, SA sdong ba	bsdongs
བསྡོངས་ཏེ	together, in company	bsdongs te
བསྡོངས་པ	pf. of {sdong ba}	bsdongs pa
བསྡོམ	bind, stop, SA sdom pa	bsdom
བསྡོམ་པ	1) will be together with, combine, add [f {sdom}; 2) tie, bind, summarize, restrain	bsdom pa
བསྡོམས	1) [was] together with, combined, added [p {sdom}; 2) tie, bind, summarize, restrain	bsdoms
བསྡོམས་གྲངས	total [count]	bsdoms grangs
བསྡོམས་ན	together w	bsdoms na
བསྡོམས་ནས	in sum/ total	bsdoms nas
བསྡོམས་པ	alt. pf. of {bsdom pa}; duty, obligation	bsdoms pa
བསྡོམས་སྤྲོད	delivering altogether, making over entire charge or responsibilities, delegating authority	bsdoms sprod
བསྡོམས་འབོར	total [up]	bsdoms 'bor
བསྡོམས་རྩིས	addition	bsdoms rtsis
བསྡོམས་རྩིས་རིག་རིགས	statistical figures/ charts	bsdoms rtsis rig rigs
བསྡོམས་ཚིག	words added to a text	bsdoms tshig
བསྡོས	[arch] attack, challenge [in debate]	bsdos
བསྡོས་པ	[p sdo ba]	bsdos pa
ཡོད་ན་ནད་ཨཨེ་སོས་མི་ནའང	although [contrary to fact] sos,...Gdan 'dren zhus zin na kho yong ngam mi yong,...4. La don zhig...La... [definite] resolution??? {nas rtsa rgyud dang, bshad rgyud, phyi ma rgyud kyi chu mdo yan g...	yod na nad ae sos mi na'ang
ན་ཀ	a buddhist sage	na ka
ན་ཀུ	ant-hill	na ku
ན་ཀུ་ལ	mongoose; Indian cuckoo	na ku la
ན་ཀུ་ལེ	n of plant; vatica robusta	na ku le
ན་ཀྲ	sea monster, maybe a crocodile, alligator	na kra
ན་ཀྲའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	sea-dragon city, ocean	na kra'i grong khyer
ན་སྐད་རྒྱབ་པ	moan	na skad rgyab pa
ན་ཁ	1) meadow, pasture land, lawn, greensward, tuft. 2) n of place	na kha
ན་ཁ་ཆུང	bean flower na kha thub chen thar pa'i rgyal mtshan mahasiddha thar pa'i rgyal mtshan of na kha D	na kha chung
ན་ཁ་སྤོ་ཐོ	tufts of grass in the midst of a meadow/ marsh	na kha spo tho
ན་ཁི	1) plant Marsilea quadrifolia D; 2) pearl oyster	na khi
ན་མཁན	sick person 1480	na mkhan
ན་ག	n ga, klu	na ga
ན་ག་གེ་སར	nagachesara, nagapula, Michelia champaka	na ga ge sar
ན་ག་ཕ་ནི	med herb {na ga pha ni}	na ga pha ni
ན་ག་རའི་ཡི་གེ	1) nagari/ SK letters; 2) letters of civilized people	na ga ra'i yi ge
ན་ག་རི	SK [letters]	na ga ri
ནཱ་གའ་རྫུ་ན	Nagarjuna	nA ga' rdzu na
ན་གི	1) na gi animal med.; 2) mgron bu zhig; 3) herb w pea-like seed; 4) being ill; 5) the claws of a sea- monster	na gi
ཨ་སེཨ	monster	a sea
ན་གི་དགོན་པ	Nagi Gompa	na gi dgon pa
ན་གི་ཆི	herb	na gi chi
ན་གུ	black ear [of corn]	na gu
ན་གུ་ཆང	green meadow, pasture land	na gu chang
ན་གུ་ཆུང	green-sward, pasture-land	na gu chung
ན་གུ་ལེ	plant Vatica robusta D	na gu le
ན་གོ་པ	{na go pa [Buddhist Indian ascetic wearing few clothes. When he lectured in a king's harem the king had his limbs cut off. He was indifferent and caused the king's liombs to be cut off. Lived in he...	na go pa
ན་དགའ	it would be better	na dga'
ན་འགྱུ	shooting pain	na 'gyu
ན་འགྲོ་བ	to fall ill	na 'gro ba
ན་རྒ་འཆི	sickness, old age and death	na rga 'chi
ན་རྒས་རྫི་རྡིབ	in old age diminished understanding	na rgas rdzi rdib
ན་རྒྱན་བཞི	na bzhi'i brgyan - [TRS 142]	na rgyan bzhi
ན་རྒྱུ	{na rgyu tsha rgyu byung kyang} I may have illness and fever	na rgyu
ན་རྒྱུ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great cause of illness; 2) 'khon chen po	na rgyu chen po
ན་རྒྱུ་ཚ་རྒྱུ	1) body sick and tsha ba 2; 2) 'khon 'dzin zhi nad	na rgyu tsha rgyu
ན་ངེས་རིགས	dubious family	na nges rigs
ན་གཅལ	na spang gi dum bu bsgrigs pa'i sa cha	na gcal
ན་གཅིག	yi ge na gcig - each word	na gcig
ན་ཆིང་ཨེ་ཆེ	youth should be regarded w respect	na ching e che
ན་ཆུང	teenager, early youth	na chung
ན་ཆུང་བ	[very] young person/ horse etc chung ba	na chung ba
ན་ཆུང་མ	young girl/ women	na chung ma
ན་ཆུང་མཛེས་མ	beautiful maiden na chung gzhon nus mig gi blta ba'ang	na chung mdzes ma
རིང་ནས་སྤོངས	the young make eyes at others in their youth, but later they abandon them	ring nas spongs
ན་ཆུང་བཟང་མོ	beautiful girls D	na chung bzang mo
ན་ཆེན	marsh, where ground has lots of water	na chen
ན་འཆི	sickness and death	na 'chi
ན་འཇའ	mock-suns	na 'ja'
ན་མཉམ	of similar/ the same age, contemporaries	na mnyam
ན་མཉམ་མ	female friend	na mnyam ma
ན་རྙིང	last year	na rnying
ན་ཏི་ཀ	{na ti ka place in ancient India	na ti ka
ན་ཏོ་ཏ་ན	1 of 5 great mountains of the western continent of godaniya, SA ri chen po lnga na tha par tha'i nang tshan na de shva ra'i	na to ta na
ན་ཐང	marsh[y field]	na thang
ན་ཐིང་ཐིང	kind of sickness	na thing thing
ན་ཐོག	after falling ill	na thog
ན་མཐོ་ཁ་འཁྱེར	lo rgas khag 'dogs	na mtho kha 'khyer
ན་འཐན	be the oldest	na 'than
ན་འཐན་པ	to be the oldest	na 'than pa
ན་ད	sound	na da
ཏེརམ	-sound beyond uttering or not}	term
ན་དང་པོ	horse/ mule mdun so tshang ma brjes tshar ba'i lo ste five years old	na dang po
ན་དང་མི་ན	disease and health	na dang mi na
ན་དའི་སྒྲ	utterance of nada [ati term-beyond uttering or not}	na da'i sgra
ན་དྲི་ཞུ་བ	wait on, pay one's respects	na dri zhu ba
ན་བདུན་ཅུ	the 70 kinds of sickness	na bdun cu
ན་འདམ	meadow [wet, puddly], marsh	na 'dam
ན་འདམ་ས་ཁུལ	marsh, swamp[y area]	na 'dam sa khul
ན་འདོད་པ	one that wants to grow ill, person who doesn't take care of himself	na 'dod pa
ན་འདྲེད་སྤང་ཐོགས	na la 'dred pa dang spang la thogs pa ste, rang gis yag po byed ma thub par khag 'dogs sna tshogs byed stangs kyi dpe	na 'dred spang thogs
ན་ན་ཚ་ཚ	na tsha'i ldab tshig...Nye char nga la na na tsha tsha mang po byung,...Mi 'ga' zhig la lo chung dus nas na na tsha tsha mang po yod	na na tsha tsha
ན་ནིང	last year	na ning
ན་ནིང་གཞེས་ནིང	the year before last	na ning gzhes ning
ན་པ	patient, sick person, sickness, disease, {nad pa}	na pa
ན་པུན་ལྟར་གྲོལ་བ	liberated/ vanishing like mist	na pun ltar grol ba
ན་པོ་ལི	Naples Italy	na po li
ན་པོའི་ཆོས་བཞི	four negative doctrines GD	na po'i chos bzhi
ན་ཕུ	child	na phu
ན་ཕྲ	young	na phra
ན་ཕྲ་མ	young maiden	na phra ma
ན་ཕྲ་མོ	trifling, slight, little as to age	na phra mo
ན་འཕར	rose above {'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan las na 'phar} rose above the mundane state of meditation	na 'phar
ན་འཕར་བ	to leap up; leap up higher to; jump to the next level; sometimes {na spar ba}. | {spros bral du na spar ba'i gdams ngag} the oral instruction of leaping up into freedom from elaboration	na 'phar ba
ན་འཕྲེང	complications/ fits/ series of diseases	na 'phreng
ན་བ	aching, painful, fall ill, be ill, sick, sick person	na ba
ན་བ་མཁན	the ill person, sick man	na ba mkhan
ན་བ་ཅན	1) sick person; 2) sickly person, invalid	na ba can
ན་བ་དང་རྒས་པ	sick people and old people	na ba dang rgas pa
ན་བ་དང་འཆི་བ	sickness and death	na ba dang 'chi ba
ན་བ་པ	ill, unwell, sick	na ba pa
ན་བ་མ	sick woman D	na ba ma
ན་བ་མ་ལི་ཀ	jasmin	na ba ma li ka
ན་བ་མེད་པ	good health, healthy	na ba med pa
ན་བ་ཙ་ཏི	young sparrow	na ba tsa ti
ན་བ་ཙ་ཏི་ཀ	{na ba tsa ti ka bird, young sparrow D	na ba tsa ti ka
ན་བ་སངས	recovery	na ba sangs
ན་བ་སངས་པ	recovered	na ba sangs pa
ན་བ་གསོ་བ	cure sickness	na ba gso ba
ན་བའི་རྒྱུ་གསུམ	the three causes of sickness	na ba'i rgyu gsum
ན་བའི་ཆུ་བོ	the river of sickness	na ba'i chu bo
ན་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the misery of sickness, one of the {sdug bsngal brgyad} eight miseries [tserig] sdug bsngal brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig ste, lus kyi 'byung ba'i khams rnams cha mi mnyam par shas che chung du 'khrugs p...	na ba'i sdug bsngal
ན་བུན	fog, mist. ex. {na bun khrod}misty heights, thick mist	na bun
ན་བུན་ཁྲོད	the misty heights	na bun khrod
ན་བུན་འཁྱིམས	encircling fog	na bun 'khyims
ན་བུན་འཁྲིགས་པ	mist-shrouded	na bun 'khrigs pa
ན་བུན་ཅན	foggy, misty	na bun can
ན་བུན་ལྟར་གྲོལ་བ	dissolving like mist	na bun ltar grol ba
ན་བུན་བུ་མོ	{na bun bu mo} animal medicine [phyi skogs dung dkar 'dra ba'i nang du gnas shing dbyar dus na bun long ba'i skabs lus phyir mngon pa zhig ste, nus pas klad pa 'dzag pa gcod, rma gso, rus chag sbyor	na bun bu mo
གོས་དྲུག	the six garments used by a B"n priest [smad gos, smad 'og, smad sham, stod god, sad zhu, sad lham, another is 'ding ba	gos drug
ན་བུན་བཞིན	like mist	na bun bzhin
ན་ལྦ	Norway	na lba
ན་མ	1) kind of grass, meadow land; 2) peat/ moss usable for fuel; 3) day; 4) name, praise, glory, adoration, homage; 5) entitled; 6) [stod] Gar in NT and lake ma pham/Manasrovar	na ma
ཨནད་མ་ཨིས་ལཀེ་མ	pham	and ma is lake ma
ན་མ་གཏོགས	the "unless" clause connector	na ma gtogs
ན་མ་ནག་སྐྱེ	it grows in meadows	na ma nag skye
ན་མ་པོ་ཐོ	tufts of grass in the midst of a meadow/ marsh	na ma po tho
ན་མ་མེད	healthy	na ma med
ན་མར	down in	na mar
ན་མིན	illness and good health	na min
ན་མེ་རུ་ཀ	SK herbs with dreck/ blemishes	na me ru ka
ན་མེད	tireless, free from sickness, w/o illness, w/o resting, wholesome, irresistibly	na med
ན་མོ	praise, glory, adoration, age, SA na	na mo
ན་མོ་གུ་རུ	homage to the master/ guru	na mo gu ru
ན་མོ་ཆེ	place in ancient india	na mo che
ན་མོ་བུད་དྷ་ཡ	Homage to the Buddha	na mo bud dha ya
ན་མོ་ཝན	Namo Wen, in Hor, Domey	na mo wan
ན་དམར་གཞུང	marsh[y field]	na dmar gzhung
ན་རྨུགས	fog[gy], mist[y]	na rmugs
ན་སྨད་པ	in the vinaya yan lag gcig ma tshang ba'i ltung bar na smad pa zer bas ltung ba de ldan pa'i mi	na smad pa
ན་ཙ	sickness [w pain and fever] [syn: khams mi bde ba dang, nyams mi bde ba, nye bar gdung, snyun, 'du ba 'khrugs pa, na ba, nad, brnag dka', bro nad, bro 'tsal, zug rngu]	na tsa
ན་ཚ	illness, trouble, sickness, disease, indisposition, malady, illness	na tsha
ན་ཚ་ཅན	painful, aching, sick	na tsha can
ན་ཚ་བཅག་པ	to alleviate pain	na tsha bcag pa
ན་ཚ་རྙིང་པ	chronic disease	na tsha rnying pa
ན་ཚ་གཏོང	pain ache, be sick	na tsha gtong
ན་ཚ་གཏོང་བ	aching, painful	na tsha gtong ba
ན་ཚ་ཐེབས	pain ache, be sick	na tsha thebs
ན་ཚ་དྲག་པ	cure an illness	na tsha drag pa
ན་ཚ་འདེབས	pain ache, be sick	na tsha 'debs
ན་ཚ་འདེབས་པ	to simulate illness, hypochondria	na tsha 'debs pa
ན་ཚ་སྡེབ་བསླངས	employ many simultaneous countermeasures against illness	na tsha sdeb bslangs
ན་ཚ་ཕོག་པ	be struck/ afflicted w illness	na tsha phog pa
ན་ཚ་བྱུང་བ	to sicken	na tsha byung ba
ན་ཚ་མེད	w/o sickness/ pain	na tsha med
ན་ཚ་ཚབས་ཆེན	serious illness	na tsha tshabs chen
ན་ཚ་བཟོ་མཁན་འབུ་ཕྲ་ཞིག	bacteria	na tsha bzo mkhan 'bu phra zhig
ན་ཚ་ཡུན་རིང	chronic	na tsha yun ring
ན་ཚ་རོས་པ	being afflicted by an old illness	na tsha ros pa
ན་ཚུལ	1) state/ situation of a sickness; 2) mi na na khul	na tshul
ན་ཚོད	age	na tshod
ཨན་ཨེཨིགྷཏ	year-old child	an eight
ན་ཚོད་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ	stages of life	na tshod kyi dbye ba
ན་ཚོད་རྒས	grown old, reached a mature age	na tshod rgas
ན་ཚོད་རྒས་པ	of advanced age	na tshod rgas pa
ན་ཚོད་མཉམ་པ	of the same age	na tshod mnyam pa
ན་ཚོད་མཐུན་པ	of the same age	na tshod mthun pa
ན་ཚོད་དར་བ	young	na tshod dar ba
ན་ཚོད་དར་མ	young, grown up, come of age, maturity	na tshod dar ma
ན་ཚོད་དར་ལ་བབ་པ	youth, young age	na tshod dar la bab pa
ན་ཚོད་དར་ལ་བབས	young age	na tshod dar la babs
ན་ཚོད་ལྡན	1) Yuvan, 9th year, female wood pig, {shing mo phag}; 2) youthful, young	na tshod ldan
ན་ཚོད་གནས	1) cuckoo D; 2) raven D; 3) skyu ru ra, emblic myrobalan tree D; 4) person who is grown up, mature [30-40]	na tshod gnas
ན་ཚོད་གནས་པ	a youth	na tshod gnas pa
ན་ཚོད་བཟང་པོ	youthful vigor	na tshod bzang po
ན་ཚོད་ཡོལ	passed youth, one whose youth is over	na tshod yol
ན་ཚོད་ཡོལ་བ	aged, old age, passed youth; whose youth is over; between 60 and 72	na tshod yol ba
ན་ཚོད་ལོངས་པ	1) reach a certain age; 2) come of age	na tshod longs pa
ན་ཚོད་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ	very young	na tshod shin tu phra
ན་ཚོད་སོང་བ	Syn {na tshod yol ba}	na tshod song ba
ན་རྫ	sprinkled D	na rdza
ན་རྫུ	feign illness	na rdzu
ན་རྫུ་གཏོང	feign illness	na rdzu gtong
ན་རྫུ་འདེབས་པ	to simulate illness, hypochondria	na rdzu 'debs pa
ན་རྫུ་བྱེད	feign illness	na rdzu byed
ན་གཞོན	young, youthful; youth	na gzhon
ན་གཞོན་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས	youth federation	na gzhon 'brel tshogs
ན་ཟུག	ache, aspirin, pain, suffering, pain, illness	na zug
ན་ཟུག་གི་དཀའ་ངལ	agony	na zug gi dka' ngal
ན་ཟུག་གི་སྐད	groan	na zug gi skad
ན་ཟུག་ཆེན་པོ	excruciating	na zug chen po
ན་ཟུག་མེད་པ	healthy	na zug med pa
ན་ཟླ	of equal age; young friend	na zla
ན་བཟའ	dress, clothes, covering, vestment, cowl of monk patched with rags from rubbish heaps, robe, garment or dress to be worn	na bza'
ན་བཟའ་དཀར་པོ	white garment	na bza' dkar po
ན་བཟའ་གོས་དྲུག	the six garments used by a B"n priest [h]	na bza' gos drug
ན་བཟའ་སྒྲོན	honorary title for dress of royalty	na bza' sgron
ན་བཟའ་ལྔ	[TRS 143-6]	na bza' lnga
ན་བཟའ་ཅན	ngur smrig gi na bza' can saffron-robed	na bza' can
ན་བཟའ་མཆོད	[wearing] dress, put on clothing [h]	na bza' mchod
ན་བཟའ་དམ་པ	the best clothing	na bza' dam pa
ན་བཟའ་མནབ་པ	put on clothes	na bza' mnab pa
ན་བཟའ་སྤངས་པ	naked, undressed	na bza' spangs pa
ན་བཟའ་བཞེས	[wearing] dress, put on clothing [h]	na bza' bzhes
ན་བཟའི་ལྟེབ་ཏུ	in a fold of the dress [h]	na bza'i lteb tu
ན་བཟའི་གསེབ་ཏུ	in a fold of the dress [h]	na bza'i gseb tu
ན་འུན	fogs, SA na bun	na 'un
ན་རའི་ཀི་ལ	SK fruit of the beta tree	na r'i ki la
ན་ཡ་ཀོ་ཏ	village in nepal	na ya ko ta
ན་ཡ་ཀོ་ཨ	{na ya ko a [village in Nepal	na ya ko a
ན་ཡ་གྲོ་ཏ	nayagrodha tree	na ya gro ta
ན་ཡང	even though/ if	na yang
ན་ཡམ	; x {tshig gi na yam gyis sems la phan mi thogs} words alone are of no benefit for the mind	na yam
ན་ཡས	sound	na yas
ན་ཡེ་ཤམ་དཀར་པོ	medicinal substance	na ye sham dkar po
ན་ཡོལ	{na tshod yol ba} aged, old age	na yol
ན་ར	place in india	na ra
ན་ར་ཀ	SK hell esp {mnar med dmyal ba} the incessant hell	na ra ka
ན་ར་ཀམ	hell, mystical diagram	na ra kam
ན་ར་གྱུ་མཚོ	na ra turquoise lake [in N mtsho sna rdzong gi byang rgyud du yod	na ra gyu mtsho
ན་ར་ར	continuously	na ra ra
ན་རག	vajra hell, hell of ceaseless torture	na rag
ན་རག་དོང་སྤྲུགས	a form of Avalokiteshvara	na rag dong sprugs
ན་རམ	medicinal plant used for diarrhea triglochin maritimum l.	na ram
ན་རི	woman	na ri
ན་རི་ཀི་ལ	nA ri ke la - cocoa-nut	na ri ki la
ན་རི་ཀེ་ལ	coconut	na ri ke la
ན་རི་ཀྲོ་ར	delicious fruit	na ri kro ra
ན་རིམ	by age seniority, in succession, [seated] according to age	na rim
ན་རིམ་བཞིན་དུ་གྲལ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arrange the young and old in order/ series [of age] na rim bzhin du rgan gzhon gral bsgrigs	na rim bzhin du gral bsgrigs pa
སློབ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པ	the students did their studies in order	slob sbyong byed pa
ན་རུ་བཅུག	to fall ill	na ru bcug
ན་རེ	says, said, uttered, spoke	na re
ན་རེ་ཀན	cease to tell anybody	na re kan
ན་རེ་ནོ་རེ	error, mistake	na re no re
ན་རེ་ནོ་རེས་དོན་མི་གོ	not understanding because of error	na re no res don mi go
ན་རེ་བ	always, incessantly, continually	na re ba
ན་རོ	1) the vowel "o". 2) chronic disease, neglected illness. 3) staff, stick	na ro
ནཱ་རོ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	the Vajrayogini teachings of Naropa 1483	nA ro mkha' spyod
ན་རོ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་མ	sakya yidam emanation of Vajrayogini	na ro mkha' spyod ma
ན་རོ་ཆོས་དྲུག	yogas of Naropa, six	na ro chos drug
ན་རོ་ཏ	Naropa	na ro ta
ན་རོ་ཏ་པ	Naropa	na ro ta pa
ནཱ་རོ་པ	Naropa, [Great Indian master, guru of Marpa and disciple of Tilopa]	nA ro pa
ནཱ་རོ་པའི་ལྕམ	the sister/consort of Naropa, Niguma	nA ro pa'i lcam
ན་རོ་བོན་ཆུང	Naro Bönchung, in a contest of miracles with Milarepa	na ro bon chung
ན་རོགས	meaningless, useless	na rogs
ནཱ་རོའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	six yogas of naropa {gtum mo - candali, "inner heat", {sgyu	nA ro'i chos drug
ན་རོས	pink with a marronish tinge	na ros
ན་ལ་ཀ	bones of the legs	na la ka
ན་ལ་ཏ	Nalanda [monastic university in ancient india]	na la ta
ན་ལ་ད	= Narada	na la da
ན་ལ་ཙེ	sister of ceylonese king	na la tse
ན་ལ་ཚེ	na la tshe	na la tshe
ན་ལན་ཏ	Nalanda, [monastic institution in ancient India]; {na len dra}	na lan ta
ན་ལི	bowl, basin	na li
ན་ལི་ཤམ	pebber	na li sham
ན་ལིང	beef	na ling
ན་ལིན	celestial flower, water-lily	na lin
ན་ལུགས	nad bab	na lugs
ན་ལེ་དྲ	Nalanda	na le dra
ན་ལེ་དྲའི་ཆོས་སྡེ	Nalanda Monastery	na le dra'i chos sde
ན་ལེ་ཤག	{shi kru}, s l [an acrid medicine	na le shag
ན་ལེ་ཤམ	1) pepper; 2) pearl	na le sham
ན་ལེ་ཤམ་དཀར་པོ	grayish drug	na le sham dkar po
ན་ལེན་ཏྲ	Nalanda	na len tra
ན་ལེན་དྲ	monastery in magadha	na len dra
ནཱ་ལེན་དྲའི་ཆོས་སྡེ	the monastic center of Nalanda	nA len dra'i chos sde
ན་ལོ	last year	na lo
ན་ཤུལ	time of sickness	na shul
ན་ཤོ	herb na sho	na sho
ན་ས་ཤ	conch-shell	na sa sha
ན་སོ	{na so ni rgas} my youth is gone	na so
ན་སོ་རྒས་ནས་གདའ	getting old	na so rgas nas gda'
ན་སོ་རྒས་པ	decays from youth to old age	na so rgas pa
ན་སོ་ཕྲ་བ	childhood, youth	na so phra ba
ན་སོ་གཞོན	young, youth	na so gzhon
ན་སོ་གཞོན་ཐོག་འདིར	while you are still young	na so gzhon thog 'dir
ན་སོ་གཞོན་དུས	when you have full youth and vigor	na so gzhon dus
ན་སོ་གཞོན་གཞོན	very young	na so gzhon gzhon
ན་སོན	reach the age of	na son
ན་གསུམ་སླེབས	7 year old horse/ mule	na gsum slebs
ན་བསོ	cure of sickness	na bso
ན་ལྷང་ལྷང	being struck by painful illness	na lhang lhang
ནག	{nag po}, {nag mo} black	nag
ནག་སྐོ	blackness	nag sko
ནག་སྐྱ	gray	nag skya
ནག་ཁུང	dark[ness]	nag khung
ནག་ཁུང་ཆགས་པ	blackout	nag khung chags pa
ནག་ཁུང་ནང	darkling	nag khung nang
ནག་ཁྲ	black mottled, paintings on a black base, crimes	nag khra
ནག་ཁྲ་འཛུགས	accuse of crimes	nag khra 'dzugs
ནག་ཁྲོག་གེ	dull and black	nag khrog ge
ནག་ཁྲོད	jungle, forest	nag khrod
ནག་འཁྲིགས་པ	becoming dark	nag 'khrigs pa
ནག་གི་བར་ཆད	Inner obstacles	nag gi bar chad
ནག་གི་ཞིང	bower, uncultivated field D	nag gi zhing
ནག་གེ་ནོག་གེ	1) unclear, indistinct, hazy, vague. 2) black color. 3) dirt, impurity. 4) sin, crime	nag ge nog ge
ནག་གེ་བ	w tears and filth	nag ge ba
ནག་གྲོད	jungles	nag grod
ནག་མགོ་ཕྱིར་བཙོང	tell an outsider the inside story	nag mgo phyir btsong
ནག་འགྲོ	becoming black; darkening, blackening	nag 'gro
ནག་འགྲོས	nag po 'gro shes nag 'gros bklags chog tu bkod pa adapted and arranged for liturgical recitation 1484	nag 'gros
ནག་འགྲོས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	liturgical recitation, arranged for convenient liturgical recitation; arranged for convenient liturgical recitation	nag 'gros su bkod pa
ནག་འགྲོས་སུ་བསྡེབས་པ	liturgical arrangement	nag 'gros su bsdebs pa
ནག་རྒྱ	tribe n ancient India, Rajputs	nag rgya
ནག་ངམ་མེ་བ	jet / deep black, dark dark	nag ngam me ba
ནག་ཅན	wicked man, murder, person guilty of a crime	nag can
ནག་ཅན་དོང་ནས་ཐར་པ	criminal released from prison	nag can dong nas thar pa
ནག་ཅན་བཙོན་དོང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་བཞིན	like a convict lead into a black dungeon	nag can btson dong du 'gro ba bzhin
ནག་ཅན་བཙོན་དོང་ནས་བྲོས་པ་ལྟར	like a convict escaping from the dungeon	nag can btson dong nas bros pa ltar
ནག་ལྕེ	poisonous tongue	nag lce
ནག་ཆགས	black/ horned cattle	nag chags
ནག་ཆུ	1) nag chu rdzong; 2) nag chu river; 3) place in NT; 4) nagchukha province N of Lhasa	nag chu
ནག་ཆུ་ཁ	a district in Tibet; Nakchuka [a province north of Lhasa]	nag chu kha
ནག་ཆུ་ཁ་པ	people of nagchukha province N of Lhasa	nag chu kha pa
ནག་ཆེན	1) great / heinous crime / sin. 2) serious criminal. 3) yak, bull. 4) relation, blood relationship	nag chen
ནག་ཆེན་ཁྲག་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	previous khrims 'gal tshabs chen byas rigs la dbang po gcod 'breg sogs lus steng gi chad pa gcod lugs kyi khrims [zhal lce bcu drug gi nang gses	nag chen khrag sbyor gyi zhal lce
ནག་མཆན	gzhung chen rnams kyi yig 'bru'i zhabs la snag tshas bris pa'i mchan 'grel	nag mchan
ནག་ཉིལ	blackish liquid	nag nyil
ནག་ཉེས	crime, guilt, offense, violation	nag nyes
ནག་ཉེས་བགྲང	enumerate [faults of transgressions, crimes, guilt, offenses, violation]s	nag nyes bgrang
ནག་ཉེས་མགྲོགས་བཟུང	incorrigible	nag nyes mgrogs bzung
ནག་ཉེས་ཅན	evil person, criminal	nag nyes can
ནག་ཉེས་ཅན་གྱི་དམིགས་ཡུལ	evil motives	nag nyes can gyi dmigs yul
ནག་ཉེས་ཆེ་ཆུང	degree of seriousness of a crime	nag nyes che chung
ནག་ཉེས་ཐོན་པ	found guilty	nag nyes thon pa
ནག་ཉེས་པ	convict	nag nyes pa
ནག་ཉེས་ཕྱིར་འཐེན	exoneration	nag nyes phyir 'then
ནག་ཉེས་བྱུང་བ	violate, commit	nag nyes byung ba
ནག་ཉེས་བྱེད	commit [faults of transgressions, crime, guilt, offense, violation]	nag nyes byed
ནག་ཉེས་མེད	innocent	nag nyes med
ནག་ཉེས་མེད་པ	innocent	nag nyes med pa
ནག་ཉེས་བཙུགས	accuse of a serious crime	nag nyes btsugs
ནག་ཉེས་འཛུགས་མཁན	prosecutor	nag nyes 'dzugs mkhan
ནག་ཉེས་འཛུགས་སྲོལ	prosecution	nag nyes 'dzugs srol
ནག་ཉེས་བཟོ་བ	denigrate	nag nyes bzo ba
ནག་ཉེས་རེད་ལབ་པ	convict	nag nyes red lab pa
ནག་ཉེས་བསགས་པ	violate, commit	nag nyes bsags pa
ནག་ཉོག	smeared, dirty	nag nyog
ནག་ཏ་མ་ལ	the black tamala tree	nag ta ma la
ནག་ཏིང	really black, deep black, solid black	nag ting
ནག་ཏིང་ངེ	very black/ dark	nag ting nge
ནག་ཏིང་ངེ་བའི་སོལ་ལྟར་བྲག་རྡོ	rock as black as coal	nag ting nge ba'i sol ltar brag rdo
ནག་ཏིང་ཏིང	completely black, jet black	nag ting ting
ནག་ཐང	thangka in which black predominates	nag thang
ནག་ཐི	black line	nag thi
ནག་ཐིག	mole, dark spot	nag thig
ནག་ཐིགས	speck	nag thigs
ནག་ཐིང་ངེ	very dark, completely black	nag thing nge
ནག་ཐིང་ཐིང	pitch black, completely black	nag thing thing
ནག་ཐིབ་ཐིབ	dark and grib so 'thibs pa'i color	nag thib thib
ནག་ཐུམ	jet black	nag thum
ནག་ཐུམ་མེ	suddenly dark 'thibs pa like appearance 'char stangs shig...Nad pa nag thum mer brgyal song	nag thum me
ནག་ཐུལ་ལེ	{ro nag thul le} a stinking corpse	nag thul le
ནག་ཐོམ	jet black	nag thom
ནག་ཐོམ་ཐོམ	pitch black	nag thom thom
ནག་ཐོམ་མེ་བ	pitch black, totally oblivious	nag thom me ba
ནག་འཐོམ་མེ	Syn {nag thom me ba}	nag 'thom me
ནག་དྲེག	dirt at the bottom of a thab snod etc	nag dreg
ནག་མདངས	black mdangs	nag mdangs
ནག་རྡོག	dot speck	nag rdog
ནག་ནོག	unclear, indistinct, hazy, vague, dirt, filth	nag nog
ནག་ནོག་ཅན	unclear, stained, polluted	nag nog can
ནག་ནོག་དྲི་མས་ནོགས་པ	dirty, dingy, covered with dirt	nag nog dri mas nogs pa
ནག་ནོག་བཟོ་བ	smudge	nag nog bzo ba
ནག་པ	13th constellation, 1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, spica verginis, 1 of rgyu skar	nag pa
ནག་པ་སྐྱེ་པོ་མི	laymen	nag pa skye po mi
ནག་པ་སྐྱེ་བོ་མི	laymen	nag pa skye bo mi
ནག་པ་ཅན	nag pa month	nag pa can
ནག་པ་ཟླ་བ	the third month, MarchApril; also {nag pa'i zla ba}	nag pa zla ba
ནག་པང	blackboard	nag pang
ནག་པང་ཚགས་པར	black board news	nag pang tshags par
ནག་པའི་ཉ	15th day of 3rd month when skar ma nag pa dang zla ba mnyam bgrod	nag pa'i nya
ནག་པའི་ཚོགས	variegated	nag pa'i tshogs
ནག་པའི་ལས	unwholesome action/ karma, {gnag pa}	nag pa'i las
ནག་པས་ཉ	full moon day of mar-apr	nag pas nya
ནག་པོ	1) black, 2) dark, gloomy. 3) unwholesome, negative, evil, perverted, tarnished. 4) Saturn. 5) Vishnu	nag po
ནག་པོ་སྐབས	krsnapada	nag po skabs
ནག་པོ་སྐྱེས	Kamadeva	nag po skyes
ནག་པོ་ཁྱབ་འཇུག	name of vishnu	nag po khyab 'jug
ནག་པོ་མགོན་པོ	black spirit	nag po mgon po
ནག་པོ་འགྲོ་ཤེས	tshig 'bru dkyus gcig tu shar gyis 'don klog thub pa very clear writing D	nag po 'gro shes
གཞུང་དོན་རྣམས	difficult textual meanings in very clear writing	gzhung don rnams
ནག་པོ་འགྲོ་བཤེར	illustrate sentence by comparing it w similar passages	nag po 'gro bsher
ནག་པོ་རྒྱ་གླིང	china	nag po rgya gling
ནག་པོ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the black mantra	nag po sngags kyi bon
ནག་པོ་ཆེ	Mahakala	nag po che
ནག་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahakala	nag po chen po
ནག་པོ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཚོགས	attendants of Mahakala	nag po chen po'i tshogs
ནག་པོ་བསྟན་པ	an unwholesome / perverted doctrine	nag po bstan pa
ནག་པོ་དང་དཀར་པོའི་ཕྱོགས་དག	the sides of darkness and light/good and evil, the periods of the waxing and waning moon	nag po dang dkar po'i phyogs dag
ནག་པོ་དྲི་ལྡན	black sulfur D	nag po dri ldan
ནག་པོ་བདུད	Black Maras	nag po bdud
ནག་པོ་བདུད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བྱད	tantra of the destructive magic of the view of the black bdud	nag po bdud kyi lta byad
ནག་པོ་འདམ་འཛིན	Lord of Black Swamp	nag po 'dam 'dzin
ནག་པོ་ནག་རྐྱང	black alone not mixed w other colors	nag po nag rkyang
ནག་པོ་ནང་དཀར	garment black outside, white inside	nag po nang dkar
ནག་པོ་པ	Nagpopa [an Indian mahasiddha]	nag po pa
ནག་པོ་དཔྱི་དཀར	black yak with white flanks	nag po dpyi dkar
ནག་པོ་སྤྱོད་པ	1) evil conduct; 2) Nagpopa	nag po spyod pa
ནག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to blacken, make dark	nag po byed pa
ནག་པོ་མི་དགེ་སྡིག་པ་བྱས་པ	engaged in unvirtuous actions	nag po mi dge sdig pa byas pa
ནག་པོ་བརྩེགས	poison	nag po brtsegs
ནག་པོ་བཞི	the four black actions [According to the pagoda of precious gems ratnak ta, Tibet 45 93 as quoted in longchenpa, treasury of spiritual and philosophical systems, p 201, these are 1 to deceive the t...	nag po bzhi
ནག་པོ་ཡོར་འགེལ	ham bsnyon gyis nyes skyon 'dzugs pa	nag po yor 'gel
ནག་པོ་ཤི་ཏི	kind of seed good for thirst	nag po shi ti
ནག་པོ་ཤུ་ཏི	a grain or seed which cures the disease of thirst	nag po shu ti
ནག་པོ་སུམ་སྒྲིལ	srin bu parpa ta w external poison &, bloodworm in the body two combined, by gnyan tshad rlung gsum = induced brought on disease gdug pa can 'phral du srog la rgol ba zhig	nag po sum sgril
ནག་པོའི་ཆ	1) waning period of the moon; 2) unvirtuous actions; 3) aspect of negativity/darkness	nag po'i cha
ནག་པོའི་ཆོས	negative qualities	nag po'i chos
ནག་པོའི་ཆོས་བཞི	[TRS 111-3]	nag po'i chos bzhi
ནག་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	the dark side, the waning moon, on the side of the dark [nonvirtuous]	nag po'i phyogs
ནག་པོའི་ཕྱོགས་གྱུར	[whatever] is on the side of the dark	nag po'i phyogs gyur
ནག་པོའི་ཕྱོགས་གྱུར་ཞིང	on the side of the dark	nag po'i phyogs gyur zhing
ནག་པོའི་རྩ་ལག	bad/lay companion/relative	nag po'i rtsa lag
ནག་པོའི་ལས	evil actions, negative karma TSE	nag po'i las
ནག་པོའི་ལས་བྱེད	negative karmic action	nag po'i las byed
ནག་སྤང	black board	nag spang
ནག་ཕྱུགས	black cattle, yak	nag phyugs
ནག་ཕྱོགས	forces of negativity/ evil	nag phyogs
ནག་ཕྱོགས་བདུད	the dark forces, maras on the side of the dark	nag phyogs bdud
ནག་བོན	black bon	nag bon
ནག་འབྱམས	1) yi ge nag zub,...Snag tsha 'dal nas yig 'bru nag 'byams la phyin 'dug; 2) Dkar cha'am snang ba thams cad 'grib pa ...Char mun 'thibs te mun pa nag 'byams la song ba; 3) Srol ngan 1486 rgyun chag...	nag 'byams
ནག་མ	vegetable med. [nag ma'i thang chus nag 'bigs chu ser 'dzin	nag ma
ནག་མེད	faultless, w/o transgression	nag med
ནག་མེད་ཉེས་འགེལ	though 1 is faultless accuse of faults	nag med nyes 'gel
ནག་མེད་ཉེས་འདོགས	though 1 is faultless accuse of faults	nag med nyes 'dogs
ནག་མེད་ཉེས་བཙུགས	attiribute faults to 1 who is faultless nag med nyes g.yogs - though 1 is faultless accuse of faults	nag med nyes btsugs
ནག་མེད་ནག་བཙུགས	w/o transgression accuse of faults/ crimes nag med nag btsugs kyis rtsod shags	nag med nag btsugs
བརྒྱབ་མི་ཆོག	it is not allowed to stir up disputes by accusing those w/o transgression of faults/ crimes	brgyab mi chog
ནག་མོ	black woman, goddess kali	nag mo
ནག་མོ་ཁྱོ་མེད	{nag mo khyo med} [a female sa bdag/ soil goddess]	nag mo khyo med
ནག་མོ་ཁྲོས་མ	the Black Wrathful Goddess [GD	nag mo khros ma
ནག་མོ་ལྔ་ལེན	a name of draupadi	nag mo lnga len
ནག་མོ་ཅན	1) a yellow fragrant wood considered yellow sandal wood D; 2) saffron D	nag mo can
ནག་མོའི་ཁོལ	poet kalidasa	nag mo'i khol
ནག་མོའི་བུ	sons of Kali	nag mo'i bu
ནག་མོའི་འབངས	poet kalidasa	nag mo'i 'bangs
ནག་མོའི་འབྲས	tower, consequence	nag mo'i 'bras
ནག་ཙུར	salt med [ro skyur, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas rma rul gso, skran nad bshig skra dkar nag por 'gyur, so rnyil dang kha'i nad sel	nag tsur
ནག་གཙང	a district in Tibet	nag gtsang
ནག་བཙུགས་པ	nag med nag btsugs	nag btsugs pa
ནག་རྩི	tar, black paint [houses doors and windows gi mtha'i nag rtsi]	nag rtsi
ནག་རྩིས	CH divination GD	nag rtsis
ནག་རྩིས་མཚུར་ལུགས	the mtshur lugs of Tibetan astrology	nag rtsis mtshur lugs
ནག་ཚང	SA me khang, a tibetan region	nag tshang
ནག་ཚིག	point, dot	nag tshig
ནག་ཚུབ་ཚུབ	grib ma'am mun pa and rlung nag tshub tshub	nag tshub tshub
ནག་ཚུར	salt med	nag tshur
ནག་ཚེག	point separating syllables	nag tsheg
ནག་ཚོ	black lake	nag tsho
ནག་ཚོ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྒྱལ་བ	Apparently a close disciple of Atisha, but who he is, when he lived or what he did I don't know. See Blue Annals I, 31, 242, 258, 262; II, 857. Mentioned @ R75:252.2 [mss]	nag tsho tshul khrims rgyal ba
ནག་ཚོ་ལོ་ཙ	tibetan scholar who visited magadha	nag tsho lo tsa
ནག་ཚོ་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Naktsho Lotsawa nag tsho lo tsa' ba tshul khrims rgyal ba {nag tsho lo tsa' ba tshul khrims rgyal ba [rab 'byung yung dang po'i gong gi lo grangs bcu bdun pa lcags phag la sku 'khrungs shing gu ge'...	nag tsho lo tsa ba
ནག་ཚོང	smuggling	nag tshong
ནག་ཚོང་རྒྱབ་པ	smuggle	nag tshong rgyab pa
ནག་མཚུར	mineral used for cleaning gold	nag mtshur
ནག་ཟལ	mottled/ spotted black	nag zal
ནག་ཟིང་ཟིང་བ	gleaming / glimmering black	nag zing zing ba
ནག་ཟླ	3rd month	nag zla
ནག་ཟླ་བ	mar-apr	nag zla ba
ནག་ཡོ་རེ་བ	grib nag gi rnam pa zhig...Mtshan mor thag ring gi khang pa rnams nag yo re ba zhig las mthong rgyu mi 'dug	nag yo re ba
ནག་ཡོར	deep black	nag yor
ནག་ཡོར་དུ	deep black	nag yor du
ནག་རིག་པ	metaphysics	nag rig pa
ནག་རོག་གེ་བ	ash color	nag rog ge ba
ནག་ལམ	Blackness. An experience of utter blackness which is the third stage of appearance, increase and attainment	nag lam
ནག་ལམ་པ	utter blackness	nag lam pa
ནག་ལས	bad work, evil/ criminal behavior	nag las
ནག་ལིང་ངེ	totally black / dark	nag ling nge
ནག་ལིང་ངེར	totally black/ dark	nag ling nger
ནག་ལིང་ལིང	totally black/ dark	nag ling ling
ནག་ཤ	linden-tree, lime-tree	nag sha
ནག་ཤེ	cattle she	nag she
ནག་ཤོག	carbon paper, black paper	nag shog
ནག་ཤོས	blackest	nag shos
ནག་སིང་བ	jet-black, very black	nag sing ba
ནག་སུབས་སེ	pitch black	nag subs se
ནག་སེང་བ	black color khyad par zhig	nag seng ba
ནག་སེར	dark yellow, brown	nag ser
ནག་སྲེ	white earth and CH black ink mixed color	nag sre
ནག་ཧུ་རེ	pitch black	nag hu re
ནག་ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ	a black and round thing	nag hril hril
ནག་ཧྲུལ་ལེ་བ	torn/ dirty	nag hrul le ba
ནག་ལྷག་ལྷག	dirty/ stained	nag lhag lhag
ནག་ལྷད	true/ good mixed w bad/ faulty, adulteration, impurity	nag lhad
ནགས	forest	nags
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱི	'phar ba, large wild dog Cuon alpinus	nags kyi khyi
ནགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ	lion, plant Verbesina scandens	nags kyi rgyal
ནགས་ཀྱི་གཅན་གཟན་དུག་པ་ཅན	polecat, to'u lo	nags kyi gcan gzan dug pa can
ནགས་ཀྱི་གཅན་གཟན་གདུག་པ་ཅན	polecat	nags kyi gcan gzan gdug pa can
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཏིག་ཏ	a bitter med. plant, species of Chiretta [D syn rig pa'i rna ba, gnas gcig 'dzin, legs ldanb, ro ldan, sdong bu gcig, sdig pa'i brang mo, 'jom byed ma]	nags kyi tig ta
ནགས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	the borders of the forest	nags kyi mtha'
ནགས་ཀྱི་མཐར	a distant forest	nags kyi mthar
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	1 of 6 great mountains of lus 'phags pa, SA ri chen po drug	nags kyi phreng ba
ནགས་ཀྱི་འཕྲེང་བ	circle of woods	nags kyi 'phreng ba
ནགས་ཀྱི་དབང	lion 1487	nags kyi dbang
ནགས་ཀྱི་སྦལ་པ	tree/ forest frog	nags kyi sbal pa
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཚན་དན	aa ga ru, emblic myrobalan	nags kyi tshan dan
ནགས་ཀྱི་རྭ་རྩི	bull's eye-flower	nags kyi rwa rtsi
ནགས་ཀྱི་རི་དབ༹གས	wild creatures of the forest	nags kyi ri dvags
ནགས་ཀྱི་རི་དབ༹གས་གསོད	'phar ba, large wild dog Cuon alpinus	nags kyi ri dvags gsod
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཤ་ན	tiger-leopard	nags kyi sha na
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཤྭ་ན	predator stag gzig	nags kyi shwa na
ནགས་ཀྱི་ས་འཛིན	forested mt	nags kyi sa 'dzin
ནགས་ཀྱི་ཧི་ར	wild pig/ boar	nags kyi hi ra
ནགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	sylvan god, nymph	nags kyi lha
ནགས་ཀླུང	natural thick forest	nags klung
ནགས་ཀློང	deep forest	nags klong
ནགས་ཁུལ	forest[ed] area	nags khul
ནགས་ཁྱི	'phar ba, large wild dog Cuon alpinus	nags khyi
ནགས་ཁྱིམ	forest-dweller	nags khyim
ནགས་ཁྲོད	jungles	nags khrod
ནགས་ཁྲོད་ན་གནས	living in a forest or monastery	nags khrod na gnas
ནགས་ཁྲོད་པ	succession of thick woods on steep hill sides	nags khrod pa
ནགས་ཁྲོད་ཞིག་ན	in the forest	nags khrod zhig na
ནགས་གྲོད་ན་གནས	living in a forest or monastery [one of the {gnas bzhi} four ways of living)	nags grod na gnas
ནགས་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ	city of fabulous continent Pashcima Godaniya	nags mngon par dga' ba
ནགས་ཆུ་ཁ	Nakchuka	nags chu kha
ནགས་ལྗོངས	woody district	nags ljongs
ནགས་ལྗོངས་ཕལ་མོ	ordinary jungle	nags ljongs phal mo
ནགས་ཉེ་བ	grove	nags nye ba
ནགས་སྟུག་པོ	thick forest/ jungle	nags stug po
ནགས་མཐའ	jungle	nags mtha'
ནགས་མཐའ་འགྲིམས་པ	roaming the ordinary jungle	nags mtha' 'grims pa
ནགས་མཐར	solitude of forests	nags mthar
ནགས་འཐུག	dense forest	nags 'thug
ནགས་དང་ཆུ་ཀླུང་འགྲམ་དུ	on the banks of the forest river	nags dang chu klung 'gram du
ནགས་དུམ་བུའི་གླིང་ཟེར་བ	a small forested island	nags dum bu'i gling zer ba
ནགས་དྲེད	forest dweller brown bear	nags dred
ནགས་འདབས	[neighborhood/ area of a] forest/ jungle	nags 'dabs
ནགས་འདབས་ན	in the wood	nags 'dabs na
ནགས་འདི་ན	in this forest	nags 'di na
ནགས་ལྡན	peacock	nags ldan
ནགས་ན	in the wood	nags na
ནགས་ན་དགའ	(met 1 cuckoo; 2) elephant	nags na dga'
ནགས་ན་དགའ་བ	(met 1 cuckoo; 2) elephant	nags na dga' ba
ནགས་ན་གནས	one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [staviras] / [arhats]	nags na gnas
ནགས་ན་གནས་པའི་དགེ་སྦྱོང	the shramana who lives in the forest	nags na gnas pa'i dge sbyong
ནགས་ན་སྤྱོད	sha ra bha, 8 legged lion	nags na spyod
ནགས་ནས	in the forest	nags nas
ནགས་གནས	Vanav sin	nags gnas
ནགས་འན་གནས	1 of the 16 sthaviras	nags 'na gnas
ནགས་པ	forest-dwelling savages	nags pa
ནགས་ཕག་མཙོ	nags phag like [in yun nan zhing chen gyi rgyal thang rdzong]{nags tshal) - jungle, woodlands, forest [syn: dgon pa, stug po'i nags, 'thibs po, nags klung, tsang tsing can, tsal shing ldan]	nags phag mtso
ནགས་ཕག་མཚོ	nags phag lake	nags phag mtsho
ནགས་བྱ་རོག་པོ	khva ta bird	nags bya rog po
ནགས་བྱུང	elephant, kind of grass	nags byung
ནགས་སྦྲང	forest bees	nags sbrang
ནགས་མ	[broken bones mending] med. herb {nags ma}	nags ma
ནགས་མའི་ཀླུང	forest	nags ma'i klung
ནགས་མིའི་ཐང་ཆུ	gsom thang tree gi thang chu [ro kha la tsa, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas rnag 'bigs, chu ser skem	nags mi'i thang chu
ནགས་མེ	forest fire	nags me
ནགས་དམན་པ	tree without fruit	nags dman pa
ནགས་ཙལ	forests	nags tsal
ནགས་ཚལ	jungle, wood[land]s, forest	nags tshal
ནགས་ཚལ་སྐྱེས	elephant, kind of grass	nags tshal skyes
ནགས་ཚལ་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་པ	told him of the benefits of a life of solitude	nags tshal gyi yon tan brjod pa
ནགས་ཚལ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 123-6]	nags tshal chen po brgyad
ནགས་ཚལ་སྟུག་པོ	deep forest	nags tshal stug po
ནགས་ཚལ་རལ་གྲིའི་ལོ་མ་ཅན	forest w leaves of swords	nags tshal ral gri'i lo ma can
ནགས་ཚལ་ལས་ཁུངས	forestry department	nags tshal las khungs
ནགས་རྫོབ	shing nags tshang tshing	nags rdzob
ནགས་བཟོ	afforestation	nags bzo
ནགས་བཟོ་བྱེད	afforest	nags bzo byed
ནགས་རི	forested mt	nags ri
ནགས་རི་དང་གངས་རི་སྤང་རི་གསུམ	forested snowy and -- mts.	nags ri dang gangs ri spang ri gsum
ནགས་རིགས	forestry	nags rigs
ནགས་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ	school of fortestry	nags rigs slob grwa
ནགས་ལ་ལུས	fond of the forest, indian cuckoo	nags la lus
ནགས་ལས	forestry [shing cha dang nags thon dngos rdzas 'don pa'i ched du nags tshal 'dzugs gnyer gyi thon skyed las don]	nags las
ནགས་ལས་རིག་པ	[study of] forestry	nags las rig pa
ནགས་གསེབ	forest, jungle, deep forest	nags gseb
ནགས་གསེབ་ཀྱི་རང་སངས་རྒྱས	pratyekabuddhas from the forest wilderness	nags gseb kyi rang sangs rgyas
ནགས་གསེབ་ཏུ	in the dense forest	nags gseb tu
ནགས་གསེབ་ཏུ་ནོར་གྱིས་དགོས་པ་མེད	I live in the forest, so I do not need any kind of wealth	nags gseb tu nor gyis dgos pa med
ནགས་གསེབ་ཞིག་ཏུ་བྱོན་པ	had entered a wilderness	nags gseb zhig tu byon pa
ནགས་གསོ	afforestation	nags gso
ནགས་གསོ་བྱེད	afforest	nags gso byed
ནགས་བསེབ་ཏུ	into the jungles	nags bseb tu
ནང	inner/ inward(ly)/ internal(ly)	nang
ནང་ཀར	sbra 'bubs byed nang gi ka rgyug	nang kar
ནང་ཀློང་སྡེ	the inner Space Section	nang klong sde
ནང་དཀྲུག་རྐོ་བྱེད	shing rdog khog pa dkrug byed kyi lag cha phyogs gcig la so yod pa zhig	nang dkrug rko byed
ནང་རྐུན	inner thief	nang rkun
ནང་རྐྱེན	inner condition/ reason/ cause, direct/ near condition	nang rkyen
ནང་སྐོར	1) inner contents; 2) inner meaning; 3) Skor lam nang ma; 4) coiling to the right; 5) inner set of teachings, inner/ esoteric cycle	nang skor
ནང་སྐོར་ཁ་འཆམས	1	nang skor kha 'chams
ནང་སྐོར་སྙིང་ལྟ་བུ	the inner cycle that is like the heart	nang skor snying lta bu
ནང་སྐྲུབ	inner practice/ sadhana	nang skrub
ནང་ཁ་ལོག	clockwise	nang kha log
ནང་ཁུང་ནང་སྡོད་མི་ཐུབ་པ	claustrophobia	nang khung nang sdod mi thub pa
ནང་ཁུངས	within, internal, inside	nang khungs
ནང་ཁུལ	internal, domestic	nang khul
ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་འགལ་བ	internal contradictions	nang khul gyi 'gal ba
ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་ཡིག་ཆ	four	nang khul gyi yig cha
ནང་ཁུལ་དབང་འཛིན	internal control	nang khul dbang 'dzin
ནང་ཁོང་སྐེམས	consumption	nang khong skems
ནང་ཁོང་ཟླུམ་པོ་དེར	inside within the spherical part	nang khong zlum po der
ནང་ཁོངས	inner, inside, internal, inland	nang khongs
ནང་ཁོངས་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	inland city	nang khongs gyi grong khyer
ནང་ཁྱིམ	1's own house	nang khyim
ནང་ཁྲལ	excise	nang khral
ནང་ཁྲིམས	internal/ Sger [personal, private] / khyim tshang sgrigs khrims [discipline, order]	nang khrims
ནང་ཁྲིལ	inner respect	nang khril
ནང་ཁྲོམ	sell things from one's house	nang khrom
ནང་ཁྲོལ	bowels, entrails, intestines, contents of a slaughtered animal (stomach, entrails, lungs, liver, etc.), coiled intestine	nang khrol
ནང་ཁྲོལ་དྲོང་བ	contractions of the bowels	nang khrol drong ba
ནང་ཁྲོལ་བཞག	SA mnyam bzhag	nang khrol bzhag
ནང་འཁོར	domestic attendants and officers (gsol dpon, gzim dpon), domestic servants, household servants, domestics	nang 'khor
ནང་འཁོར་དག་པ	maintaining close ties with upright persons	nang 'khor dag pa
ནང་འཁྲུག	internal quarrel/ fighting, civil war	nang 'khrug
ནང་འཁྲུག་རྒྱག	wage civil war/ strife, fight/ quarrel internally	nang 'khrug rgyag
ནང་འཁྲུགས	civil war	nang 'khrugs
ནང་འཁྲུགས་བྱེད	stir up civil war, internal feuds	nang 'khrugs byed
ནང་གི	inner, internal, subjective	nang gi
ནང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	the three inner mandalas TSE	nang gi dkyil 'khor gsum
ནང་གི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the subjective bases of cognition/ inner ayatanas	nang gi skye mched
ནང་གི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	the six inner bases/ ayatanas	nang gi skye mched drug
ནང་གི་ཁང་པ	inner apartment/ room	nang gi khang pa
ནང་གི་ཁམས	internal essence	nang gi khams
ནང་གི་ཁམས་དཀར་པོ	the inner white element	nang gi khams dkar po
ནང་གི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six inner dhatus	nang gi khams drug
ནང་གི་ཁམས་དམར་པོ	the inner red element	nang gi khams dmar po
ནང་གི་ཁམས་གསུམ	Syn body, speech and mind {lung ngag yid}	nang gi khams gsum
ནང་གི་ཁྱབ་པ	inner pervasion	nang gi khyab pa
ནང་གི་ཁྲིམས	private law, doctrine not intended for the public, private punishment	nang gi khrims
ནང་གི་གྲུ་འཛིན	store keeper, one in charge of stores	nang gi gru 'dzin
ནང་གི་དགར་གསུམ	the three inner joys	nang gi dgar gsum
ནང་གི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	inner condition/ reason/ cause, direct/ near condition nang gi rgyu gzhan cung zad ston pa'i srid	nang gi rgyu rkyen
པ་ཅན	ornament of another inner cause not/slightly being shown	pa can
ནང་གི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན	possessing inner obscuration	nang gi sgrib pa can
ནང་གི་ངོ་བོས་སྟོང་པ	empty of their own nature	nang gi ngo bos stong pa
ནང་གི་མངར་གསུམ	the inner three sweets	nang gi mngar gsum
ནང་གི་མཆོད་པ	the inner offering	nang gi mchod pa
ནང་གི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	sacrifice of animals, offering	nang gi mchod sbyin
ནང་གི་རྟགས་ཐབས་གསུམ	the three means of inner signs	nang gi rtags thabs gsum
ནང་གི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	inner interdependence	nang gi rten 'brel
ནང་གི་རྟོགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ	inner biography nang gi rtogs pa brjod pa togs pa brjod pa - inner biography	nang gi rtogs pa brjod pa
ནང་གི་སྟེ་བརྒྱད	the inner 8 deities	nang gi ste brgyad
ནང་གི་བསྟན་བཅོས	Buddhist shastra	nang gi bstan bcos
ནང་གི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	the three inner vehicles	nang gi theg pa gsum
ནང་གི་དུར་ཁྲོད་བརྒྱད	the inner 8 charnel grounds,	nang gi dur khrod brgyad
ནང་གི་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	the 10 inner natures	nang gi de nyid bcu
ནང་གི་དྲི་མ་དྲུག	the six inner defilements	nang gi dri ma drug
ནང་གི་བདུད	internal m ras TS nang gi 'du byed rnams kyi skye ba rnam	nang gi bdud
པ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 kinds of arising of inner formations nang gi 'du byed rnams skad cig ma nyid the instantaneousness of inner formations	pa bcu bzhi
ནང་གི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	inner suffering [1) sems kyi sdug bsngal; 2) Rang khyim du gra ma 'grig pa'i sdug bsngal{nang gi	nang gi sdug bsngal
ནང་གི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the eight inner classes [of gods and demons], {yab gcig bdud rje nag po}, {btsan rgyal yam shud dmar po}, {yul lha phywa sang klu sras}, {srog bdag rgyal po snying 'byin}, {chos skyong gnod sbyin d...	nang gi sde brgyad
ནང་གི་ནམ་མཁའ	inner space	nang gi nam mkha'
ནང་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	inner yoga	nang gi rnal 'byor
ནང་གི་སྣང་བ	the inner experience of appearance	nang gi snang ba
ནང་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	[Ts]	nang gi phyag rgya
ནང་གི་བམ་པོ	internal matter	nang gi bam po
ནང་གི་བར་ཆད	Inner obstacles [of imbalances in the pranas and nadis]	nang gi bar chad
ནང་གི་བེམ་པོ	internal matter, atoms included in someone's continuum, the	nang gi bem po
ཕོ༹རམ	having dbang po rnams	form
ནང་གི་བྱེ་བྲག	specify, inner distinction	nang gi bye brag
ནང་གི་བྱེ་བྲག་ཕྱེ་བ	differentiate	nang gi bye brag phye ba
ནང་གི་བྱེད་པ	inner agent	nang gi byed pa
ནང་གི་བླ་མ	internal guru, inner guru, personal meditation deity	nang gi bla ma
ནང་གི་དབང་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 inner empowerments GD	nang gi dbang bcu gcig
ནང་གི་དབྱིངས	the inner space	nang gi dbyings
ནང་གི་དབྱེ་པ	subdivisions	nang gi dbye pa
ནང་གི་དབྱེ་བ	subdivision	nang gi dbye ba
ནང་གི་སྦྱིན	gift of parts of the body D	nang gi sbyin
ནང་གི་སྦྱིན་པ	personal sacrifices, surrendering of parts of ourself	nang gi sbyin pa
ནང་གི་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 8 inner eight root substances	nang gi rtsa brgyad
ནང་གི་རྩ་བ་བརྒྱ	the inner eight root [substances). 1) {srid pa chags pa'i rtsa ba lte ba}. 2) {gzugs phung byings kyi sha rus stong po} 3) {yal ga yan lag bzhi} 4) {lo ma sen mo skra dang ba spu} 5) {me tog dbang ...	nang gi rtsa ba brgya
ནང་གི་རྩ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 inner root substances	nang gi rtsa ba brgyad
ནང་གི་རྩོལ་བ	in reading kha nang gi skye gnas dang byed pa rnams kyi exertion	nang gi rtsol ba
ནང་གི་ཚོར་བ	inner feeling/perception	nang gi tshor ba
ནང་གི་མཚན་མ	inner characteristics	nang gi mtshan ma
ནང་གི་མཚོ	inner lake/reservoir	nang gi mtsho
ནང་གི་མཚོ་དྲུག	the six inner lakes/oceans	nang gi mtsho drug
ནང་གི་འཛིན་ཆས	furniture	nang gi 'dzin chas
ནང་གི་འཛིན་པ	the perceiver inside; 1) {sems}. 2) {dbang po drug}	nang gi 'dzin pa
ནང་གི་ཟིན་པའི་ཆོས	inner embraced phenomena [by a consciousness]	nang gi zin pa'i chos
ནང་གི་གཟུགས	inner forms	nang gi gzugs
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་བརྟེན་དབང་བཅུ	the 10 powers on which inner forms depend	nang gi gzugs kyi brten dbang bcu
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན་དང་བ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs can dang ba
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན་དྭང་བ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs can dwang ba
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན་དངས་པ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs can dangs pa
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན་དྭངས་པ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs can dwangs pa
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅན་དྭངས་བ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs can dwangs ba
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅེན་དང་བ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs cen dang ba
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་ཅེན་དངས་པ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs cen dangs pa
ནང་གི་གཟུགས་དང་བ	inner subtle forms	nang gi gzugs dang ba
ནང་གི་འོད་ལྔ	five inner aspects of illumination nang gi yul dbyings kyi sgron ma la gtad	nang gi 'od lnga
པས་འོད་གསལ་མ་བུ་འབྲེལ	the essential which connects with the mother and offspring inner radiance/luminosity by focusing on the inner object which is the light of the expanse/ space/ the dh tu GD 1490	pas 'od gsal ma bu 'brel
ནང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབྱུག་གུ	the wand of inner wisdom [Rtsa dbu ma	nang gi ye shes dbyug gu
ནང་གི་ཡོངས་འཛིན	inner teacher	nang gi yongs 'dzin
ནང་གི་རབ་ཏུ་དབེན་པའི་བདེ་བ	the inner bliss of complete solitude	nang gi rab tu dben pa'i bde ba
ནང་གི་རི་དྲུག	the inner six mts	nang gi ri drug
ནང་གི་རིག་པ	orthodox literature, sacred literature	nang gi rig pa
ནང་གི་རིགས་བཞི	the inner/original four clans	nang gi rigs bzhi
ནང་གི་རླུང	breath	nang gi rlung
ནང་གི་རླུང་ལྔ	the five inner winds/ pranas [= {'byung ba lnga'i rlung lnga}, {sa rlung ser po}, {me rlung dmar po}, {chu rlung dkar po}, {rlung gi rlung ljang gu}, {nam mkha'i rlung mthing ga}	nang gi rlung lnga
ནང་གི་ལུས	inner body	nang gi lus
ནང་གི་ལོག་པ་བཞི	see {log pa brgyad}	nang gi log pa bzhi
ནང་གི་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the inner 8 classes of gods and spirits	nang gi lha srin sde brgyad
ནང་གི་ལྷོང	internal dangers (diseases of the body)	nang gi lhong
ནང་གི་ཨ་མ	housewife	nang gi a ma
ནང་གུ་གཏོང་བ	admit	nang gu gtong ba
ནང་གོག	SA ther	nang gog
ནང་གོས	1) underclothes; 2) gos chen from the CH emperor's treasury	nang gos
ནང་གྲས	1) lto dang gros kha mnyam mtshungs kyi nang mi'i gras,...Blo mthun nang gras,...Gnyen tshan nang gras; 2) inner stages/details	nang gras
ནང་གྲོས	inner/ private discussion [*	nang gros
གསལ	1) nang du explain/ clarify [Yi ge]; 2) inner brilliance/luminosity/lucency; {gdod ma'i gnas lugs}{nang gsang	gsal
ནང་དགྲ	rang phyogs nas bsam sbyor log pa byed mkhan	nang dgra
ནང་མགོ	the inside story	nang mgo
ནང་མགོ་ཕྱིར་བཙོང	tell an outsider the inside story	nang mgo phyir btsong
ནང་འགལ	contradiction	nang 'gal
ནང་འགལ་བ	general term for the inner contents of the body	nang 'gal ba
ནང་འགྲིག	consent, agreement	nang 'grig
ནང་འགྲིག་བྱེད	consent, agree, concur	nang 'grig byed
ནང་འགྲིགས་བྱེད་པ	a compromise	nang 'grigs byed pa
ནང་འགྲོ	entry	nang 'gro
ནང་རྒྱ	internal measure/ extent	nang rgya
ནང་རྒྱས་བྱེད	to fight among themselves	nang rgyas byed
ནང་རྒྱུགས	rgyugs dngos su ma blangs gong la nang khul du rgyugs len pa	nang rgyugs
ནང་རྒྱུད	3 inner tantric yanas, inner tantra, inner tantras	nang rgyud
ནང་རྒྱུད་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	mah yoga, anu yoga, ati yoga GD	nang rgyud thabs kyi theg pa gsum
ནང་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་གསུམ	Three Inner Tantras. Maha, Anu, and Ati Yoga	nang rgyud sde gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་མ་ཧ་ཨ་ནུ་ཨ་ཏི	sm {dbang bsgyur thabs kyi theg pa} [gd-mk]). rnying ma'i gzhung lugs la rgyud ma h' yo ga, lung aa nu yo ga, man ngag aa ti yo ga ste yo ga rnam pa gsum ni, sems nyid sku dang ye shes kyi rnam par...	three ma ha a nu a ti
ནང་རྒྱུད་ཡོ་ག་གསུམ	the three yogas of the inner tantras, [Maha, anu and ati){nang rgyud - inner tantras [rnying ma ba'i lugs las nang bla med kyi rgyud rnams rdo rje 'chang chen pos chos 'byung yangs pa'i zhing khams...	nang rgyud yo ga gsum
ནང་རྒྱུད་ཡོ་ག་གསུམ་གྱི་ཆོས	the Dharma of the three inner yogas	nang rgyud yo ga gsum gyi chos
ནང་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	the three inner tantras/ sections of tantra [1 {rgyud ma haa yo ga} two {lung a nu yo ga} three {man ngag a ti} or 1 {pha ma gnyis med} two {bskyed rdzogs gnyis med} three ma ha	nang rgyud gsum
ཨ་ནུ་ཨ་ཏི	sm {dbang bsgyur thabs kyi theg pa} [gd-mk]). rnying ma'i gzhung lugs la rgyud ma h' yo ga, lung aa nu yo ga, man ngag aa ti yo ga ste yo ga rnam pa gsum ni, sems nyid sku dang ye shes kyi rnam par...	a nu a ti
ནང་རྒྱུས	inner gnas tshul	nang rgyus
ནང་རྒྱུས་ཅན	1) rang phyogs kyi gnas tshul rgyus mnga' yod mkhan; 2) one who has mastered a science/ discipline	nang rgyus can
ནང་སྒེག་བཞི	the four inner offering goddesses	nang sgeg bzhi
ནང་སྒོ	inner door nang sgyu lus la dbang thob pas gdos	nang sgo
བཅས་འོད་གསལ་དུ་དག	the condition under which matter is purified into inner radiance by the attainment of power over the internal illusory body	bcas 'od gsal du dag
ནང་སྒྲིག	reconciliation	nang sgrig
ནང་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	reconcile, conciliate	nang sgrig byed
ནང་སྒྲིབ	eye disorder produced by disease and elements and dhatus	nang sgrib
ནང་སྒྲུབ	inner sadhana	nang sgrub
ནང་སྒྲུབ་རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པ	see rig 'dzin 'dus pa 1491	nang sgrub rig 'dzin 'dus pa
ནང་སྒྲུབ་བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	Inner Sadhana Sampa Lhündrub	nang sgrub bsam pa lhun grub
ནང་བརྒྱ་སྨན་གཅིག	universal panacea	nang brgya sman gcig
ནང་ངོར་ཤར་བ	1) perception D; 2) enlightenment D	nang ngor shar ba
ནང་ངོས	inside	nang ngos
ནང་སྔགས	inner mantras	nang sngags
ནང་གཅིག	one morning/ day	nang gcig
ནང་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one house	nang gcig tu
ནང་བཅར	bribe	nang bcar
ནང་བཅར་སྤྲད	bribe	nang bcar sprad
ནང་བཅར་ཕུལ	bribe	nang bcar phul
ནང་བཅས	[arch] zhe 'gras pa'am khon yod pa	nang bcas
ནང་བཅུད	inner contents. [abbr. of {nang g.yo ba bcud kyi sems can}; (animate life forms as) inner contents; contents (of a vase). See also {snod bcud}	nang bcud
ནང་བཅུད་ཀུན	all the inner inhabitants	nang bcud kun
ནང་བཅུད་ཀྱི་འགྲོ་བ	the inner contents [sentient beings	nang bcud kyi 'gro ba
ནང་བཅུད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	living or animated world	nang bcud kyi 'jig rten
ནང་བཅུད་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཅན	the inner contents of sentient beings	nang bcud kyi sems can
ནང་བཅུད་འགྲོ་ཀུན	the beings contained within it (the world)	nang bcud 'gro kun
ནང་ཆ	Syn {nang khrol}; entrails	nang cha
ནང་ཆ་དྲོང་བ	contractions of the bowels	nang cha drong ba
ནང་ཆག	phyi rgyar bka' gtan tshig la bsgyur bkod med pa'i thog nas khral pa nang khul phan tshun gros mol gyis khral chag btang ba	nang chag
ནང་ཆགས་སུ	within one['s own mind]	nang chags su
ནང་ཆས	furniture	nang chas
ནང་ཆིངས	1) dor ma sogs binding sash; 2) Gsang ba'i ngang nas bzhag pa'i kha dan yig rigs	nang chings
ནང་ཆུ	inland water	nang chu
ནང་ཆུབ	in morning and evening	nang chub
ནང་ཆེན	Nangchen. A major province in Eastern Tibet	nang chen
ནང་ཆེན་ཆིང་ཧུ	a ruler of the Nangchen Province	nang chen ching hu
ནང་ཆེན་སྤེར་གཅིག	place in khams	nang chen sper gcig
ནང་ཆེན་སྤེར་གཤིག	{nang chen sper gshig [place in Khams	nang chen sper gshig
ནང་ཆེན་ཚེ་ཆུ་དགོན་པ	Nangchen Tsechu Monastery	nang chen tshe chu dgon pa
ནང་ཆེན་ཚོགས་གཉིས	major lama in the Nangchen province of Kham; reincarnation of Ratna Lingpa	nang chen tshogs gnyis
ནང་ཆོན	1) gos kyi nang gi mtha' 'jags; 2) chon thag in a nomad tent	nang chon
ནང་ཆོས	Buddhism	nang chos
ནང་མཆོད	inner offerings	nang mchod
ནང་མཆོད་ཀ་ལི	the inner offering is the consonants [sngags kyi mchod pa'i snod spyad gras ka p' li	nang mchod ka li
ནང་མཆོད་འཐོར	sprinkle the inner offering/amrita	nang mchod 'thor
ནང་ཇ	breakfast	nang ja
ནང་འཇམ	underclothes, shirt	nang 'jam
ནང་འཇུག	entering into [the palace of the deity	nang 'jug
ནང་རྗེ	minister of the interior, homeminister	nang rje
ནང་ཉམས	mtsher snang dang rtsi 'jog med pa	nang nyams
ནང་ཉེ	nang ma'i gnyen grogs	nang nye
ནང་སྙིང	1) inner tshi gu; 2) inner essence/heart; 3) inside of bread etc.	nang snying
ནང་སྙིང་ཟས་ཕོངས	destitute in their inner hearts	nang snying zas phongs
ནང་གཏམ	inner thabs jus don skor gyi talk	nang gtam
ནང་གཏམ་ཕྱིར་སྐྱེལ	tell outsiders inner secret talk	nang gtam phyir skyel
ནང་རྟགས	inner signs	nang rtags
ནང་རྟེན	religious items	nang rten
ནང་རྟོག	internal thoughts	nang rtog
ནང་ལྟར	1) according to, in conformity with, like, as. 2) internal way	nang ltar
ནང་ལྟར་བསྒྲུབ་པ	1) to practice according to the inner way. 2) inner practice	nang ltar bsgrub pa
ནང་ལྟར་ན	according to the inner way	nang ltar na
ནང་སྟོང་ཉིད	emptiness of the inward elements	nang stong nyid
ནང་སྟོང་པ	inner emptiness	nang stong pa
ནང་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	nothingness with regard to the internal	nang stong pa nyid
ནང་བལྟས་པ	directed / facing inwards	nang bltas pa
ནང་བསྟན	buddhist teachings, buddhism	nang bstan
ནང་ཐུ	chuba's thu ba nang ma	nang thu
ནང་ཐོག	ceiling	nang thog
ནང་མཐུན	in harmony, intimacy	nang mthun
ནང་མཐུན་པ	intimacy	nang mthun pa
ནང་མཐུན་བརྩེ་གདུང་པས	because of our love, yearning, and intimacy 1492	nang mthun brtse gdung pas
ནང་འཐབ	nang tshags mi mthun pa'i fight/ quarrel, civil wars/ family feuds	nang 'thab
ནང་འཐབ་བྱེད་པ	stir up civil war, internal feuds	nang 'thab byed pa
ནང་དག	internally pure	nang dag
ནང་དག་པོ	mentally in accord	nang dag po
ནང་དང་ཕྱི	internal and external	nang dang phyi
ནང་དང་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་འདུ་བྱེད	inner and outer conditioning/formations	nang dang phyi rol gyi 'du byed
ནང་དུ	within/ inside	nang du
ནང་དུ་དཀའ་ཚེགས་ཆེ་མ་ཞུམ	two	nang du dka' tshegs che ma zhum
ནང་དུ་སྐྱོད	step in if you please	nang du skyod
ནང་དུ་འགལ་བ	general term for the inner contents of the body	nang du 'gal ba
ནང་དུ་འགྱུར	it becomes the inside	nang du 'gyur
ནང་དུ་འགྲོ་སྟེར	allow to come indoors	nang du 'gro ster
ནང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	1) contain; 2) apprehend, realize	nang du chud pa
ནང་དུ་འཇུག་པ	go into a room, go inside, breathe in, inhale	nang du 'jug pa
ནང་དུ་ཉེན་ཁ	domestic	nang du nyen kha
ནང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	let in, permit to enter	nang du gtong ba
ནང་དུ་བལྟས་པ	looked inside	nang du bltas pa
ནང་དུ་དྲངས	invite into a house	nang du drangs
ནང་དུ་འདུས་པ	inhale, breathe in	nang du 'dus pa
ནང་དུ་འདྲེན	lead inward, import	nang du 'dren
ནང་དུ་འདྲེན་བྱེད	lead inward, import	nang du 'dren byed
ནང་དུ་སྡུད	withdrawn, introverted, inwardly absorbed; inward tension; x {phyi rol rnam g.yengs nang du sdud} outward distraction and inward tension; expl {dbang po sgo lnga nang du sdud pa} focusing your five...	nang du sdud
ནང་དུ་སྡུད་པ	x {dbang po sgo lnga nang du sdud pa} focusing your five senses too intently inwards	nang du sdud pa
ནང་དུ་བསྡུ	include[d] in	nang du bsdu
ནང་དུ་གནས་པ	indwelling	nang du gnas pa
ནང་དུ་ཕེབས་དང	come inside!	nang du phebs dang
ནང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	enter	nang du phyin pa
ནང་དུ་བོས་པ	called me to their homes	nang du bos pa
ནང་དུ་བྱོན	enters (you	nang du byon
ནང་དུ་བླུག་པ	enclose	nang du blug pa
ནང་དུ་འབོད	calls indoors	nang du 'bod
ནང་དུ་དམིགས་པ	to focus inwards	nang du dmigs pa
ནང་དུ་ཚུད་པ	khongs su gtogs pa,...Log spyod pa rnams mi dmangs kyi nang du tshud med,	nang du tshud pa
ནང་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	entered	nang du zhugs pa
ནང་དུ་གཟིགས་དང	look inside	nang du gzigs dang
ནང་དུ་བཟུང	to keep inside	nang du bzung
ནང་དུ་འོང་བ	inhalation, inhaling	nang du 'ong ba
ནང་དུ་ཡང་དག་འཇོག	complete absorption D	nang du yang dag 'jog
ནང་དུ་ཡང་དག་པར་བཞག་པ	having inner composure	nang du yang dag par bzhag pa
ནང་དུ་ཡོང་བ	come into, enter, go in, walk into	nang du yong ba
ནང་དུ་ཡོད	internal, inner, inside	nang du yod
ནང་དུ་ཡོད་པ	internal, inner, inside	nang du yod pa
ནང་དུ་རབ་གནས	inner consecration	nang du rab gnas
ནང་དུ་སོང	gone in	nang du song
ནང་དུ་བསྲེས་ནས	mixing it with	nang du bsres nas
ནང་དུ་བསླེབས་སོང	arrived inside	nang du bslebs song
ནང་དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	inner Kalachakra	nang dus kyi 'khor lo
ནང་དོ་གི་རིག	buddhist philosophy	nang do gi rig
ནང་དོན	1) subject/ [inner] meaning/ content of pecha etc.; 2) Rgyal khab bam khyim tshang individual las don; 3) mental objects; 4) intrinsic meaning; 5) inwardly, inner; 6) confidential; 7) true sense	nang don
ནང་དོན་བཀའ་མོལ	secret talks/ negotiations	nang don bka' mol
ནང་དོན་གྱི་སྐད་ཆ	confidential	nang don gyi skad cha
ནང་དོན་རྟོག་པ	investigate te real/ inner meaning	nang don rtog pa
ནང་དོན་ལྟར	internally	nang don ltar
ནང་དོན་དམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུས་ཀྱི་མན་དལ	the inner absolute is the mandala of the vajra body	nang don dam rdo rje lus kyi man dal
ནང་དོན་པུའུ་ཁང	Ministry of the Interior	nang don pu'u khang
ནང་དོན་བེམ་པོ	internally existing as atoms, nang gi gzugs can dbang po lnga po'o	nang don bem po
ནང་དོན་རྦད	internally	nang don rbad
ནང་དོན་རང་དབང་རང་བཙན	internal autonomy	nang don rang dbang rang btsan
ནང་དོན་རིག་པ	doctrinal studies, the inner science {rig gnas lnga}, [= {sde	nang don rig pa
གནོད་གསུམ	sm {bka' dang bstan bcos} [Tserig]{nang dus kyi 'khor lo - inner Kalachakra [dus 'khor phyi nang gsang gsum gyi nang gses shig ste rtsa rlung thig le'u chags tsul{nang gi de nyid bcu - the 10 inner...	gnod gsum
གཟུགས་ཅན་དྭངས་པ	iner subtle forms [dbang po lnga'o{nang gi gzugs inner forms [skyes bu'i shes rgyud kyis bsdus pa'i gzugs te, dbang po lnga lta bu nang gi gzugs can dvangs pa'o{nang	gzugs can dwangs pa
ཟད་སྟོན་པའི་སྲིད་པ་ཅན	ornmane of another inner cause not/slightly being shown [srid pa can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, having refuted a very well known cause, nang gi rgyu gzhan cung zad tsam gyi 'bras bu ston pa'...	zad ston pa'i srid pa can
ནང་བདག་ལྟའི་རུ་དྲ	inner rudra of viewing in terms of identity	nang bdag lta'i ru dra
བི༹ཨེཝིང་ཨིན་ཏེརམས་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	nature	viewing in terms of self
ནང་མདངས	inwardly directed glow, inner radiance	nang mdangs
ནང་འདུམ	internal settlement/ reconciliation of greivances	nang 'dum
ནང་འདོམ	sne mang combine [Snga phyi'i go rim ma bsgrigs na las don byed rgyu mang po nang 'dom yong]	nang 'dom
ནང་འདྲེན	lead inward, import	nang 'dren
ནང་འདྲེན་སྒོ་ཁལ	import duty	nang 'dren sgo khal
ནང་འདྲེན་ཕྱིར་གཏོང	import and export	nang 'dren phyir gtong
ནང་འདྲེན་བྱེད	lead inward, import	nang 'dren byed
ནང་འདྲེན་ཚོང་ཟོག	imported goods	nang 'dren tshong zog
ནང་སྡུད་པ	to turn inward (on itself)	nang sdud pa
ནང་སྡེ	orthodox [buddhist]	nang sde
ནང་སྡོད་ཕྱི་མི	foreigners living in a country	nang sdod phyi mi
ནང་བསྡུ	include[d] in	nang bsdu
ནང་ན	in[to][side], within	nang na
ནང་ན་ལྕི་བ	becomes heavier	nang na lci ba
ནང་ན་བདག་ལྟ་བ	inner view of ego/ nature	nang na bdag lta ba
ནང་ན་གནས་པ	abiding/ to abide inwardly	nang na gnas pa
ནང་ན་སྤྱོད་པ་ཉིད	inner action	nang na spyod pa nyid
ནང་ནང་གི	from among, out of	nang nang gi
ནང་ནང་ནས	from among, out of	nang nang nas
ནང་ནད	internal disease/ medicine	nang nad
ནང་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	department of internal medicine	nang nad tshan khag
ནང་ནས	from within, from, among, from among, out of	nang nas
ནང་ནས་ཕྱིར་འཐོན་པ	come from within	nang nas phyir 'thon pa
ནང་ནས་ཕྱུང	was taken out	nang nas phyung
ནང་ནས་བྱུང	came out of, arise from inside	nang nas byung
ནང་ནུབ	morning and evening	nang nub
ནང་ནུས་པའི་དབང་ལྔ	the inner five enabling empowerments; five inner empowerments of ability	nang nus pa'i dbang lnga
ནང་ནུས་པའི་དབང་བཅུ	the five inner empowerments of ability	nang nus pa'i dbang bcu
ནང་ནུས་དབང་ལྔ	five inner enabling empowerments: the two empowerments of learning and meditation enabling one to benefit oneself, the two empowerments of exposition and activity enabling one to benefit others, an...	nang nus dbang lnga
ཀིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	encompassing teachings enabling one to benefit both oneself and others.	king of all
ནང་ནོམ	household goods	nang nom
ནང་ནོར	household goods	nang nor
ནང་སྣང	inner experience	nang snang
ནང་པ	Buddhist; Buddhist, "insider." Morning, orthodox [Buddhist]. private/ a Buddhist	nang pa
ནང་པ་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	mah yoga, anu yoga, ati yoga GD	nang pa rgyud sde rnam pa gsum
ནང་པ་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་གསུམ	mah yoga, anu yoga, ati yoga GD	nang pa rgyud sde gsum
ནང་པ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the inner tantras of skillful means GD	nang pa thabs kyi rgyud kyi theg pa
ནང་པ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	three kinds of inner methodical tantras [Mahayoga, anuyoga, atiyoga){nang pa	nang pa thabs kyi rgyud gsum
ནང་པ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the inner vehicles of skillful means	nang pa thabs kyi theg pa
ནང་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	buddhist	nang pa sangs rgyas
ནང་པ་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	a buddhist, buddhism	nang pa sangs rgyas pa
ནང་པ་སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཆོས	Syn nang pa'i chos	nang pa sangs rgyas pa'i chos
ནང་པ་སངས་རྒྱས་པར་མོས་པ	was an avid admirer of Buddhism; a follower of the Buddha	nang pa sangs rgyas par mos pa
ནང་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	Buddhist philosophical schools	nang pa'i grub mtha'
སྨྲ་བ་གཉིས	the two kinds of exponents of buddhist doctrine [nyan thos sde pa dang, theg chen smra ba{nang	smra ba gnyis
པའི་ལྟ་བ	inner view [lta ba bkar btags kyi phyag rgya bzhi	pa'i lta ba
ནང་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ	adherents of the Buddhist philosophical system	nang pa'i grub mtha' smra ba
ནང་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ་གཉིས	the two kinds of exponents of buddhist doctrine	nang pa'i grub mtha' smra ba gnyis
ནང་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་བཞི་པོ	the four Buddhist philosophical schools	nang pa'i grub mtha' bzhi po
ནང་པའི་ཆ་ལུགས	buddhist style/ tradition/ dress/ accouterments	nang pa'i cha lugs
ནང་པའི་ཆོས	Buddhist Dharma	nang pa'i chos
ནང་པའི་ལྟ་བ	the Buddhist view	nang pa'i lta ba
ནང་པའི་སྟོན་པ	buddhist teacher	nang pa'i ston pa
ནང་པའི་བསྟན་པ	buddhist doctrine	nang pa'i bstan pa
ནང་པའི་ཐེག་གསུམ	the three Buddhist vehicles	nang pa'i theg gsum
ནང་པའི་ནང་གཙང	buddhist pure inside 1494	nang pa'i nang gtsang
ནང་པའི་མི་རྟོག་པ་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the thoughtfree suchness of the Inner Tantras [e.g. Mahayoga]	nang pa'i mi rtog pa de bzhin nyid
ནང་པའི་རིག་གནས	inner science of Buddhism	nang pa'i rig gnas
ནང་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	Syn nang pa'i chos	nang pa'i ring lugs
ནང་པའི་ལུགས	inner system	nang pa'i lugs
ནང་པར	in the morning, the following morning	nang par
ནང་པར་ཀྱི་སྐལ་པ	allotment for the [following] morning D	nang par kyi skal pa
ནང་པར་ཀྱི་སྐལ་བ	allowance or ration for the following morning	nang par kyi skal ba
ནང་པོ	intimate, bosom friend	nang po
ནང་དཔའ་བོའི་དཔའ་གྲལ་བཤིག	1	nang dpa' bo'i dpa' gral bshig
ནང་སྤྲ	this morning	nang spra
ནང་སྤྲོ་མེད་དབང་བསྐུར	the inner unelaborate empowerment GD	nang spro med dbang bskur
ནང་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་གི་དབང	the inner empowerment which is free from conceptual elaboration	nang spros bral gi dbang
ནང་སྤྲོས་མེད་དབང་བསྐུར	the inner unelaborate empowerment	nang spros med dbang bskur
ནང་ཕན་ཚུན	inner mutuality	nang phan tshun
ནང་ཕན་ཚུན་དུ་མཐོང	can see one another	nang phan tshun du mthong
ནང་ཕན་ཚུན་མི་གཅིག་པ	dissimilar	nang phan tshun mi gcig pa
ནང་ཕུག	inside, inner part	nang phug
ནང་ཕྱོགས	the Buddhist side	nang phyogs
ནང་ཕྲ་བའི་དབུ་མ	the subtle & inner Madhyamaka	nang phra ba'i dbu ma
ནང་ཕྲད	CM: nang lugs su phan tshun thug phrad, "a mutual meeting among insiders/intimates/associates (nang lugs su)" E.g's., grogs po phan tshun nang phrad byung ba, "meeting/visiting (thug 'phrad) betwee...	nang phrad
སྤེཨཀ་ཨོཕ༹་མེཨེཏིངས་ཨམོང་འིན	group' such a family, and so indicates very close, or intimate contact. [mss]	speak of meetings among 'in
ནང་འཕྲོད་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	coincidence	nang 'phrod kyi sbyor ba
ནང་བ	buddhist, morning	nang ba
ནང་བོན	Buddhism and Bön	nang bon
ནང་བྱན	1) servant; 2) apprehend, realize, certainly know	nang byan
ནང་བྱན་ཆུད་པ	one who has mastered all meanings and doesn't need to ask for explanations	nang byan chud pa
ནང་བྱན་ཆུད་པའི་ཤེས་བྱ	apprehended/ independently known knowables	nang byan chud pa'i shes bya
ནང་བྱན་ཚུད་པ	1 who knows all topics and does not need to ask others	nang byan tshud pa
ནང་བྱོན	inner cabinet ministers	nang byon
ནང་བློན	inner / major minister	nang blon
ནང་བློན་ཁང	cabinet ministers/ ministry	nang blon khang
ནང་བློན་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	5 bon sense organs	nang blon dbang po lnga
ནང་དབུགས	inner breath [phyi dbugs chad nas snying ga'i drod thag ma chad bar	nang dbugs
ནང་དབུགས་ཆད་པ	the cessation of the inner breath	nang dbugs chad pa
ནང་དབྱིང	inner mental space	nang dbying
ནང་དབྱིངས	inner basic space; inner space, inward space; internal space, internal dimension	nang dbyings
ནང་དབྱིངས་ཀ་དག	the primordially pure inner space, inner space of primordial purity	nang dbyings ka dag
ནང་དབྱིངས་ཀ་དག་གི་དབྱིངས	the inner space of the sphere of primordial purity	nang dbyings ka dag gi dbyings
ནང་དབྱིངས་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the unchanging nature of the inner space	nang dbyings mi 'gyur ba'i chos nyid
ནང་དབྱིངས་རང་གསལ་ཆེན་པོ	inner space of great natural luminosity, of great natural lucidity	nang dbyings rang gsal chen po
ནང་འབར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	internal combustion engine	nang 'bar 'phrul 'khor
ནང་འབར་མེ་འཁོར	internal combustion engine	nang 'bar me 'khor
ནང་འབྱུང་བཞིའི་ཕུང་པོ	the four inner skandhas [other than form){nang 'jug - entering into [the palace of the deity [students becoming of equal fortune w the deities and gzhug pa'i phyir yol ba nang 'jug bya ba ste, from...	nang 'byung bzhi'i phung po
ནང་འབྲས་བུའི་ཐེག་པ	inner fruition vehicles	nang 'bras bu'i theg pa
ནང་འབྲས་བུའི་ཐེན་པ	inner resultant vehicles	nang 'bras bu'i then pa
ནང་སྦུག	inner part, inside	nang sbug
ནང་སྦུབས	tube pipe like interior	nang sbubs
ནང་སྦྱོང	tuition	nang sbyong
ནང་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	do preliminaries, make preparations, study diligently as a preliminary, rehearse, drill, practice	nang sbyong byed
ནང་མ	lining, confidential, private, housewife, chief lady of the household, a type of Tibetan song, inside	nang ma
ནང་མ་ཁང	house where the inner retinue stays	nang ma khang
ནང་མ་སྒང	house where the inner retinue stays	nang ma sgang
ནང་མན་ངག་དམར	SA zhang zhung snyan rgyud nang man ngag dmar khrid du bshad pa instructions which are considered to be internal 1495	nang man ngag dmar
ནང་མའི་བཀའ་མཆིད	three confidential instructions/ correspondence	nang ma'i bka' mchid
ནང་མའི་བཀའ་བྲིས	three private/ confidential writing/ correspondence	nang ma'i bka' bris
ནང་མའི་བཀའ་ཚོགས	confidential instructions or correspondence	nang ma'i bka' tshogs
ནང་མའི་འཁོར་གྱོག	house servants	nang ma'i 'khor gyog
ནང་མའི་འགྱིག་འཁོར	tire	nang ma'i 'gyig 'khor
ནང་མའི་ཞབས་བྲོ	rkang stabs kyi bye brag	nang ma'i zhabs bro
ནང་མའི་གསུང་མཆིད	Buddhist writings/ talk	nang ma'i gsung mchid
ནང་མའི་གསུང་མཆེད	private advice	nang ma'i gsung mched
ནང་མི	family members	nang mi
ནང་མི་མཐུན	domestic strife	nang mi mthun
ནང་མིག	room, apartment	nang mig
ནང་མིག་དེ་སྟོང་པ་རེད	the room is empty	nang mig de stong pa red
ནང་མེ	inner fire/ digestive force, morning fire for cooking	nang me
ནང་མེད	1) suddenly; 2) unexpectedly; 3) internally non-existent	nang med
ནང་མེད་ནོར་རྙེད་པ	become rich unexpectedly	nang med nor rnyed pa
ནང་མེད་ལ	suddenly	nang med la
ནང་མོ	tomorrow morning, morning, in the morning	nang mo
ནང་མོལ	inner speech/ discussion [phyir ma gyar bar nang khul du gros mol byed pa{nang nus pa'i dbang bcu the five inner empowerments of ability [Gdmk] ma h' yo ga'i 'jug sgo ste, rang don nus pa'i brtson ...	nang mol
ནང་མོལ་བྱེད་པ	brew	nang mol byed pa
ནང་མྱགས་པ	inner rot	nang myags pa
ནང་དམག	nye skor 'gangs che sa guardsoldiers	nang dmag
ནང་དམེ	fratricidal conflicts, family (conflicts, feuds), murder of one's own brothers or relations	nang dme
ནང་རྨུག	complaining	nang rmug
ནང་ཙག	1) close friends; 2) nang lugs D	nang tsag
ནང་ཙིག	close friends	nang tsig
ནང་གཙང	1) mi phan tshun dga' mthun blos 'khel ba; 2) white/ pure inner essence [of mind]	nang gtsang
ནང་ཚ	family	nang tsha
ནང་ཚག	1) close friends; 2) nang lugs D	nang tshag
ནང་ཚགས	SA nang lugs	nang tshags
དགོས་དོགས་མེད	since we are among friends we needn't fear to speak out like that	dgos dogs med
ནང་ཚང	whole family	nang tshang
ནང་ཚང་གཉིས	husband and wife	nang tshang gnyis
ནང་ཚངས	clothes' lining or middle layer	nang tshangs
ནང་ཚངས་ཅན	lining of garment etc.	nang tshangs can
ནང་ཚན	among	nang tshan
ནང་ཚིག	kham bu sogs kyi inner tshi gu	nang tshig
ནང་ཚིལ	internal fat	nang tshil
ནང་ཚིས	inner 'tsho thabs or bde thabs	nang tshis
ནང་ཚུད	within, within	nang tshud
ནང་ཚུན	within	nang tshun
ནང་ཚུན་གི	within	nang tshun gi
ནང་ཚུལ	1) inner situation/ story; 2) Nang ma yin khul	nang tshul
ནང་ཚོང	commerce within [a region]	nang tshong
ནང་ཚོན	category	nang tshon
ནང་ཚོམས	large middle of a house [tshoms chen] or large room	nang tshoms
ནང་འཚང	inner fault nang 'tshang bdag 'dzin gyi ma gzhug Do not enter into the inner fault of egofixation	nang 'tshang
ནང་འཚང་བདག་འཛིན་གྱི་མ་གཞུག	do not center into the inner fault of agofixation	nang 'tshang bdag 'dzin gyi ma gzhug
ནང་འཚངས	'tshang kha brgyab ste nang du zhugs pa	nang 'tshangs
ནང་འཚོང	commerce within [a region]	nang 'tshong
ནང་མཛོད	1) good kata; 2) storehouse/ treasury in a house	nang mdzod
ནང་འཛིང	internal quarrel/ fight	nang 'dzing
ནང་འཛིན་པ	inner fixation/ grasper	nang 'dzin pa
ནང་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས	inner perceiving mind	nang 'dzin pa'i sems
ནང་འཛིན་སེམས	perceiving mind within	nang 'dzin sems
ནང་འཛོན་པ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་འདྲེ	the inner gods and demons of the grasping mind	nang 'dzon pa sems kyi lha 'dre
ནང་འཛོམ་པ	combination, integration	nang 'dzom pa
ནང་རྫས	ingredient	nang rdzas
ནང་རྫོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	nang rdzong
ནང་གཞིས	master's home and estate/ property	nang gzhis
ནང་བཞིན	as, like	nang bzhin
ནང་བཞུགས	1) khyim mi ste, gtong yig 'bri srol du nang bzhugs lhan rgyas lta bu; 2) person staying in one's house byes la bltos nas btags pa'i khyim mi; 3) Gzungs su bzhugs pa'i rten	nang bzhugs
ནང་ཟ	breakfast	nang za
ནང་ཟན	domestic room and board/ payment in kind workers	nang zan
ནང་ཟབ་མོ་བརྡ	profound inner signs	nang zab mo brda
ནང་ཟབ་མོ་བརྡ་ཡི་དབང་བཞི	four profound inner sign abhishekas	nang zab mo brda yi dbang bzhi
ནང་ཟིང	internal quarrel/ disorder	nang zing
ནང་བཟན	nang zan clerks/ officials/ domestic servants [receiving allowance in kind]	nang bzan
ནང་བཟན་པ	clerks or ministerial officers who receive allowance in kind or money, domestic servants who receive food for the work they do 1496	nang bzan pa
ནང་བཟན་ལས་བྱེད	workers who receive allowance in kind	nang bzan las byed
ནང་བཟུང་བ	khyim bzung ba,...Pho mo gnyen sgrig byas nas nang bzung ba	nang bzung ba
ནང་འཟམ	underclothes	nang 'zam
ནང་འོད	inherent light, inner light, internal light	nang 'od
ནང་ཡངས་པ	1) vast mind; 2) internally vast/many; 3) magnanimous, bighearted	nang yangs pa
ནང་ཡན་པ	1) one who makes mind open/ vast; 2) secret meaning phyir gyar ba; 3) [arch] in a house du gyog [servant] rgyug mkhan; 4) internally naturally free/relaxed	nang yan pa
ནང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	inner mandala of wisdom	nang ye shes kyi dkyil 'khor
ནང་ཡོང	import	nang yong
ནང་ཡོང་དངོས་རྡས	import goods	nang yong dngos rdas
ནང་ཡོང་མང་བ	import surplus	nang yong mang ba
ནང་ཡོད	internal, inner, inside	nang yod
ནང་ཡོད་འགལ་བ	inner contradiction	nang yod 'gal ba
ནང་ཡོད་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	inner factor, cause	nang yod rgyu rkyen
ནང་ཡོད་འབྲེལ་བ	inner relations/ connections nang g.yo ba bcud - the animate contents inside	nang yod 'brel ba
ནང་ར	ra ba inside a house	nang ra
ནང་རིག་པ	Syn {nang don rig pa; metaphysics. Syn {nang don rig pa} [the Buddhist teachings]	nang rig pa
ནང་རིག་པའི་བོན	'dul ba'i klu 'bum khra bo, gtsang ma'i glu 'bum dkar po)	nang rig pa'i bon
ནང་རིག་པའི་བོན་སྡེ་གསུམ	the three inner divisions of Bon	nang rig pa'i bon sde gsum
ནང་རིམ	1) inner stage/ details; 2) cloth for a turban D	nang rim
ནང་རུབ	morning and evening, dawn and dusk	nang rub
ནང་རུལ	1) inner rot; 2) inner discord; 3) disloyal, traitorous	nang rul
ནང་རུལ་པ	1 who does harm from within and produces rebellion, disloyal/ traitorous person	nang rul pa
ནང་རུལ་བ	1) inner rot; 2) inner discord; 3) disloyalty, traitorousness	nang rul ba
ནང་རེ་དགོངས་རེ	every morning and evening	nang re dgongs re
ནང་རོལ	inside, inner, internal	nang rol
ནང་རོལ་ན	within the	nang rol na
ནང་རླུང	internal pranas includes karmic and wisdom pranas	nang rlung
ནང་ལ	in[to][side], within	nang la
ནང་ལ་འགྲོ་ཆོག	you may go inside	nang la 'gro chog
ནང་ལ་འཇུག་པ	internalize	nang la 'jug pa
ནང་ལ་བཞུགས	stay at home	nang la bzhugs
ནང་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	inner consecration	nang la rab tu gnas pa
ནང་ལ་ལོག་ཕྱིན་སོང	return home	nang la log phyin song
ནང་ལ་སོང	go home	nang la song
ནང་ལས	from among	nang las
ནང་ལས་བྱེད	do housework	nang las byed
ནང་ལུགས	[speaking] 1's mind w/o putting a special spin/ klight on things to make it palatable for someone else	nang lugs
ནང་ལུགས་བྱས་ཀྱང་འགྲིག	it is OK even if 1 says what 1 really thinks	nang lugs byas kyang 'grig
ནང་ལུགས་གསུང་མཆིད	nang ma'i gsung mchid	nang lugs gsung mchid
ནང་ལུགས་གསུམ་མཆིད	private advice	nang lugs gsum mchid
ནང་ལོགས	inside, inner, internal	nang logs
ནང་ལོགས་ཀྱི	inner, interior	nang logs kyi
ནང་ལོགས་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	inner story/ state of affairs	nang logs kyi gnas tshul
ནང་ལོགས་ཀྱི་མཚེའུ	inland lake	nang logs kyi mtshe'u
ནང་ལོགས་ཀྱི་མཚོ	inland sea	nang logs kyi mtsho
ནང་ལོགས་སུ	inward	nang logs su
ནང་ལོགས་སུ་བལྟས	looked inside	nang logs su bltas
ནང་ལོང་རུས་འབུར	inner leg joints kyi rus 'bur	nang long rus 'bur
ནང་ཤ	1) nang khrol; 2) inside/ lining of clothing, stuffing of cushion etc; 3) inner essence	nang sha
ནང་ཤངས	having discussed internally, make a decision	nang shangs
ནང་ཤུགས་སུ་གཏོང	cede, surrender [up] make over, convey	nang shugs su gtong
ནང་ཤུན	inner skin/ peel/ rind	nang shun
ནང་ཤེས	interiority of the noetic	nang shes
ནང་ཤེས་པ	the inner consciousness	nang shes pa
ནང་ཤེས་བྱེད་ཀི་རྒྱུ	cause producing inner awareness	nang shes byed ki rgyu
ནང་བཤུག	[among friends and relatives] private deal/ trade/ business [w/o profit for [mutual] convenience buying and selling]	nang bshug
ནང་སེམས	[inner] mind	nang sems
ནང་སེམས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	inner mind practice	nang sems kyi rnal 'byor
ནང་སེམས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པའི་ཁམས	the elements comprised of the mind within	nang sems kyis bsdus pa'i khams
ནང་སེལ	domestic dispute, dissensions, discrepancy	nang sel
ནང་སོ	border night watchman	nang so
ནང་སོག	inner/ S Mongolia	nang sog
ནང་སོག་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས	Inner Mongolia	nang sog rang skyong ljongs
ནང་སོང	went in	nang song
ནང་སོབ	hollow tree	nang sob
ནང་སྲིད	individual countries' internal affairs administration	nang srid
ནང་སྲིད་སྒང	Ministry of Internal Affairs	nang srid sgang
ནང་སྲིད་བློན་ཆེན	Minister of Internal/ Home Affairs	nang srid blon chen
ནང་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས	Ministry of Internal Affairs	nang srid las khungs
ནང་སྲིན	intestinal worms	nang srin
ནང་སླུ་བྱེད་མཁན	traitor	nang slu byed mkhan
ནང་སློང	internal upheaval	nang slong
ནང་གསང་སྔགས	inner secret mantra 1497	nang gsang sngags
ནང་གསལ	1) inner luminosity, internal luminosity; inner lucency. inner luminosity, {gdod ma'i gnas lugs}; inner brilliance; inner/ inward/ internal(ized) clarity. See {gsal} 2) according to, as written in	nang gsal
ནང་གསལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	dharmakaya of inner brilliance	nang gsal chos kyi sku
ནང་གསལ་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	present as inner clarity	nang gsal du bzhugs pa
ནང་གསུམ	inner precepts	nang gsum
ནང་གསེར	inner gold, gold on the inside	nang gser
ནང་གསེས	diverse, in particular, part, category, subdivision, within	nang gses
ནང་གསེས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ	subdivisions	nang gses kyi dbye ba
ནང་གསེས་སྡེ་ཚན	sections within	nang gses sde tshan
ནང་གསེས་ལ་ཚན	sub-unit, party, heading, category, heading, sub-title, internal/ local unit/ category/ part	nang gses la tshan
ནང་ལྷ	house god, sa bdag, demon monster	nang lha
ནང་ལྷོག	don snod nang gi gnas su babs nas lhog pa lta bu'i show signs of sickness	nang lhog
ནང་ལྷོང	inner obstacles/ obstructing spirits	nang lhong
ནངས	day after tomorrow	nangs
ནངས་ནུབ	morning and evening	nangs nub
ནངས་པ	morning	nangs pa
ནངས་པར	tomorrow	nangs par
ནངས་མེ	zhogs par gtong ba'i fire	nangs me
ནངས་མོ	morning	nangs mo
ནངས་ཝར	in the morning	nangs war
ནངས་ཞོགས	the next morning	nangs zhogs
ནངས་རེ་དགོང་རེ	every morning and evening	nangs re dgong re
ནངས་རེ་ནུབ་རེ	every morning and evening	nangs re nub re
ནད	disease [harming body and or mind w pain and sufferinge, div: nad rigs bzhi brgya rtza bzhi dang, stong dang rtza gnyis sogs] distemper, epidemic, humor	nad
ནད་ཀི་བསྐལ་པ	the age of sickness	nad ki bskal pa
ནད་ཀྱི་རྐྱེན	cause of disease	nad kyi rkyen
ནད་ཀྱི་རྐྱེན་རྩི	medical draught, potion	nad kyi rkyen rtsi
ནད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the proliferation of disease [dus dang, dbang po, spyod lam sogs la brten nas nad kyi rnam pa mang du skye zhing, stobs 'phel ba'am rim bzhin lus la mched par gyur pa'i don	nad kyi skye mched
ནད་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་པ	age of disease	nad kyi bskal pa
ནད་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་པ་བར་མ	the age of sickness	nad kyi bskal pa bar ma
ནད་ཀྱི་འཇུག་སྒོ་དྲུག	the six ways of becoming ill	nad kyi 'jug sgo drug
ནད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	symptom	nad kyi rtags
ནད་ཀྱི་ནང་བཞིན་གསུམ	the three similar sicknesses	nad kyi nang bzhin gsum
ནད་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གཞི	pathogen	nad kyi 'byung gzhi
ནད་ཀྱི་འབྲས་ཅན	banana tree	nad kyi 'bras can
ནད་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ་ཅན	having the germ of disease	nad kyi 'bras bu can
ནད་ཀྱི་སྨན	remedy for disease	nad kyi sman
ནད་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	the 8 kinds of sickness	nad kyi yan lag brgyad
ནད་ཀྱིས་ཉེ་བར་བཏབ་པ	{'chi bdag nad kyis nye bar btab pa'i tshe} when the Lord of Death strikes one down in agony	nad kyis nye bar btab pa
ནད་ཀྱིས་བསྙུན་ཏོ	laid up with an illness	nad kyis bsnyun to
ནད་ཀྱིས་ཐེབས་པ	sick man	nad kyis thebs pa
ནད་ཀྱིས་འཐེབས་པ	seized with disease	nad kyis 'thebs pa
ནད་ཀྱིས་འདེབས་པ	attacked by disease, be attacked with an illness	nad kyis 'debs pa
ནད་ཀྱིས་ལྡང	one will experience illness	nad kyis ldang
ནད་ཀྱིས་མནར	vi. to be / get sick	nad kyis mnar
ནད་ཀྱིས་མནར་བ	be plagued by illnesses	nad kyis mnar ba
ནད་ཀྱིས་གཟིར་བ	troubled by disease	nad kyis gzir ba
ནད་ཀྱིས་རེག	attacked by sickness, taken ill	nad kyis reg
ནད་ཀྱིས་ལངས་མི་ཐུབ་པ	bed-ridden	nad kyis langs mi thub pa
ནད་ཀྱིས་ཤི་བ	dying of illness	nad kyis shi ba
ནད་རྐྱལ	bag of pestilence	nad rkyal
ནད་རྐྱེན	circumstances for sickness	nad rkyen
ནད་རྐྱེན་བྱེད	the causes of illness	nad rkyen byed
ནད་སྐྱེས་འབུ་ཕྲ	disease germs/ bacteria	nad skyes 'bu phra
ནད་སྐྱོན་ཅན	diseased	nad skyon can
ནད་ཁ	plague, disease, sickness	nad kha
ནད་ཁང	hospital	nad khang
ནད་ཁྲག	bad blood in the body of a sick person	nad khrag
ནད་ཁྲི	sickbed, hospital bed	nad khri
ནད་འཁྱོག	1) be able to bear/ endure patiently [a sickness]	nad 'khyog
ནད་འཁྱོག་པ	1) be able to bear/ endure patiently [a sickness]	nad 'khyog pa
ནད་འཁྱོགས	1) be able to bear/ endure patiently [a sickness]	nad 'khyogs
ནད་འཁྲོལ་གདོན་འཁྲོལ	pacify disease/ pacify d"ns, use all inner and outer measures against disease	nad 'khrol gdon 'khrol
ནད་གོ	seat of disease	nad go
ནད་གྲམ་པ	nad lus la gram pa'am byer ba	nad gram pa
ནད་གྲིབ	disease defilement	nad grib
ནད་དགོངས	treat and cure a sick person, sick leave	nad dgongs
ནད་འགོ་བ	infect	nad 'go ba
ནད་འགོག་ནུས་ཤུགས	immunity from disease	nad 'gog nus shugs
ནད་འགོག་པ	rims nad mi yong ba byed pa	nad 'gog pa
ནད་འགོལ	catch an illness	nad 'gol
ནད་འགོས་པ	infect	nad 'gos pa
ནད་རྒས་པ	old/ chronic illness	nad rgas pa
ནད་རྒྱལ	bag of pestilence	nad rgyal
ནད་རྒྱུ	cause of sickness	nad rgyu
ནད་བརྒྱ་སྨན་གཅིག	universal panacea 1498	nad brgya sman gcig
ནད་ངན	plague	nad ngan
ནད་ངོ	previous sign of sickness	nad ngo
ནད་ཅན	having sickness [lus kyi zungs bdun &, dri ma gsum &, rlung mkhris bad kan being disturbed and increasing or decreasing	nad can
ནད་ཅན་ཆུ	sick person's urine	nad can chu
ནད་ཅན་མ	pregnant woman	nad can ma
ནད་ཅན་རྩ	physician's external/ internal breath movement rer five pulse nadis lnga yan brgal ba or lnga man nyung bar gyur pa	nad can rtsa
ནད་གཅོང	old/ chronic illness	nad gcong
ནད་བཅོས	[means to] treat a disease, med. treatment	nad bcos
ནད་བཅོས་མཁས་པ	med. specialist	nad bcos mkhas pa
ནད་བཅོས་ཞལ་འདེབས་རུ་ཁག	medical service team	nad bcos zhal 'debs ru khag
ནད་བཅོས་སྲོག་སྐྱོབ	life protecting means to treat a disease	nad bcos srog skyob
ནད་ལྕི	bad/ serious illness	nad lci
ནད་འཇོམས་ཀྱི་སྨན་པ	the physician who cured the diseases	nad 'joms kyi sman pa
ནད་ལྗིད་པོ	serious illness	nad ljid po
ནད་གཉའ	strength of a sickness..Sman khab brgyab ste nad gnya' bcag pa	nad gnya'
ནད་རྙིང	chronic illness / ailment	nad rnying
ནད་གཏོང	pestilence	nad gtong
ནད་གཏོང་མ་མོ	Pestilent Mamos	nad gtong ma mo
ནད་བཏབ་པ	to be ill; x {nad tshab po ches btab pa'i nad pa des sman pa mkhas pa zhig bsten} when people are seriously ill, they go to consult a good doctor	nad btab pa
ནད་རྟགས	signs/ symptoms of disease [by which one can diagnose and cure it [R]	nad rtags
ནད་བརྟག་ཚུལ་གསུམ	the three ways of examining for disease	nad brtag tshul gsum
ནད་བལྟ་ཉན་བྱེད	stethoscope	nad blta nyan byed
ནད་བསྟུན་སྨན་བཅོས	give treatment according to the disease nad thams cad rab tu zhi bar byed pa'i	nad bstun sman bcos
གསུངས	the scriptures about curing /eliminating all diseases	gsungs
ནད་ཐར་མ	person/ animal cured of disease	nad thar ma
ནད་ཐུབ	disease-resistant	nad thub
ནད་ཐུབ་ས་བོན	disease-resistant seed	nad thub sa bon
ནད་ཐེག་པ	1) be able to endure illness/ unpleasantness/ suffering; 2) suffer sickness/ loss D	nad theg pa
ནད་ཐོ	physicians handbook of diseases and cures, medical history records	nad tho
ནད་ཐོག་སྨན་འཁེལ	'gangs che sar gnad 'khel ba'i dpe nad dang mu ge zhi zhing bkra shis par	nad thog sman 'khel
ནད་དབ༹ངས་པ	severe sickness [h]	nad dvangs pa
ནད་དུག	virus	nad dug
ནད་དྲག་པ	cure a sickness	nad drag pa
ནད་དྲག་པོ	plague	nad drag po
ནད་གདོན	disease and evil spirits	nad gdon
ནད་གདོན་སྡིག་སྒྲིབ	sickness, evil influence, misdeeds and veils / obscurations	nad gdon sdig sgrib
ནད་གདོན་བར་ཆད	sickness, evil influences and obstacles	nad gdon bar chad
ནད་བདག	sickness causing demons	nad bdag
ནད་བདུད་མགོ་གཅོད	a naga	nad bdud mgo gcod
ནད་བདུན	the 7 sicknesses [rlung, mkhris pa, bad kan rkyang pa re dang, de dag gnyis ldan gsum, gsum 'dus gcig bcas bdun no	nad bdun
ནད་འདོར	aa ru ra, emblic myrobalan	nad 'dor
ནད་ན	be/ get sick	nad na
ནད་མནར	be/ get sick, illness	nad mnar
ནད་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་བཏབ	laid up with a complexity of diseases	nad sna tshogs kyis btab
ནད་པ	patient, sick person, [sickness, disease]	nad pa
ནད་པ་དེའི་བུ་སྨད	sick man's family	nad pa de'i bu smad
ནད་པ་འདྲེན་འཁོར	ambulance	nad pa 'dren 'khor
ནད་པ་རྨས་པ	the sick and wounded	nad pa rmas pa
ནད་པ་བཟོ་བ	sicken	nad pa bzo ba
ནད་པ་འོར་འདྲེན་ཉལ་ཁྲི	stretcher nad pa so so'i nad gzhi la brtag dpyad	nad pa 'or 'dren nyal khri
ནད་པའི་སྡོད་ཁང	hospital [ward]	nad pa'i sdod khang
ནད་པའི་སྡོད་ཤག	hospital ward	nad pa'i sdod shag
ནད་པོ	a sick person	nad po
ནད་སྤང	beyond illness	nad spang
ནད་ཕོག	fall/ be/ get ill	nad phog
ནད་ཕོག་པ	fall/ be/ get ill, sick, struck by disease	nad phog pa
ནད་བག	dirt of disease	nad bag
ནད་བབས	heavy or light sickness situation	nad babs
ནད་བུ	illness, disease	nad bu
ནད་བུ་ཅན	sickly	nad bu can
ནད་བུ་མེད	person w/o disease or chronic illness	nad bu med
ནད་བྱེར་སོང	the sickness was dispersed	nad byer song
ནད་བྲང	hospital ward	nad brang
ནད་འབུ	very small disease producing 'bu [insect worm, organism] germs, bacteria	nad 'bu
ནད་འབུ་ཕྲ་མོ	very small disease producing 'bu [insect worm, organism] germs, microbes, virus	nad 'bu phra mo
ནད་འབུམ་ནག་པོ	B"n textual/ practice tradition	nad 'bum nag po
ནད་འབྱམས་པ	illness spreading/ becoming pervasive	nad 'byams pa
ནད་མ	nad ma med. herb	nad ma
ནད་མ་འཁྱོགས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	unendurable suffering	nad ma 'khyogs pa'i sdug bsngal
ནད་མུག་འཁྲུག་རྩོད	infectious disease/ plague, famine and war	nad mug 'khrug rtsod
ནད་མུག་འཁྲུག་རྩོད་གསུམ	sickness famine and strife	nad mug 'khrug rtsod gsum
ནད་མུག་མཚོན་བསྐལ་པ	age of illness/plague, famine and warfare; Variant of {nad mtshon mu ge'i bskal pa}. E.g., nad mug mtshon bskal zhi bar byin gyis rlobs. [mss]	nad mug mtshon bskal pa
ནད་མེད	1) freedom from disease, well, healthy; 2) aa ru ra tree, emblic myrobalan; 3) sun D	nad med
ནད་མེད་གཅོང་སྐྱེ	person w/o any particular disease but weak and unhealthy	nad med gcong skye
ནད་མེད་ཆུ	urine of a healthy person	nad med chu
ནད་མེད་ཆོས	faultless dharma	nad med chos
ནད་མེད་པ	freedom from sickness	nad med pa
ནད་མེད་པ་རྙེད	attain freedom from sickness	nad med pa rnyed
ནད་མེད་པ་རྙེད་པ	attain freedom from sickness, get well	nad med pa rnyed pa
ནད་མེད་པ་ཐོབ	recover one's health	nad med pa thob
ནད་མེད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	get well	nad med pa thob pa
ནད་མེད་པ་འཐོབ	attain freedom from sickness	nad med pa 'thob
ནད་མེད་པ་འཐོབ་པ	attain freedom from sickness, get well	nad med pa 'thob pa
ནད་མེད་པར་སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ་གསུམ	the three ways of establishing freedom from sickness	nad med par sgrub tshul gsum
ནད་མེད་པར་བྱེད	physician	nad med par byed
ནད་མེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	heal	nad med par byed pa
ནད་མེད་རྩ	physician's when the breath is moving outward pulse nadi twice &, twice when it is inhaled, between 1 five altogether	nad med rtsa
ནད་མོད	plenty of diseases	nad mod
ནད་ཚ	fever, disquietude	nad tsha
ནད་ཚིག	illness	nad tshig
ནད་ཚིག་ཟོས་པ	anger caused by sickness; arising on / from illness	nad tshig zos pa
ནད་ཚུལ	character of a disease/ illness	nad tshul
ནད་མཚོན་མུ་གེའི་བསྐལ་པ	age of illness, warfare, and famine	nad mtshon mu ge'i bskal pa
ནད་རྫུ	mi na na khul	nad rdzu
ནད་ཞི་བ	cure/ alleviate/ recovery from a disease	nad zhi ba
ནད་གཞི	1) cause of disease / illness. 2) illness, sickness	nad gzhi
ནད་གཞི་ལྗིད	serious [cause of] illness	nad gzhi ljid
ནད་གཞི་ཉན་བྱེད	stethoscope	nad gzhi nyan byed
ནད་གཞི་བརྟག་དཔྱོད	diagnose [cause of] disease/ illness, sickness	nad gzhi brtag dpyod
ནད་གཞི་བརྟག་དཔྱོད་བྱེད	diagnose [cause of] disease/ illness, sickness	nad gzhi brtag dpyod byed
ནད་གཞི་ཐུ་པོ	serious/ principal [cause of] illness	nad gzhi thu po
ནད་གཞི་ཕོག	fall ill	nad gzhi phog
ནད་གཞི་ཡང་པོ	light [cause of] illness	nad gzhi yang po
ནད་བཞི་བརྒྱ་རྩ་བཞི	404 diseases	nad bzhi brgya rtsa bzhi
ནད་ཟུག	ache, pain	nad zug
ནད་ཟུག་ལངས་པ	irritation or pain in sickness, exacerbation	nad zug langs pa
ནད་ཡམས	an epidemic	nad yams
ནད་ཡོག་པ	medical attendant nad g.yog - nurse nad g.yog - nurse, service at sick-bed, nurse, one that attends sick persons, a nurse nad g.yog - a nurse nad g.yog pa - medical attendant, nurse nad g.yog byed ...	nad yog pa
ནད་རབ་ཏུ་ཤི་བར་བྱེད་པ	completely cure/eliminate a disease	nad rab tu shi bar byed pa
ནད་རིགས	certain diseases, various illnesses	nad rigs
ནད་རིགས་བསྐྱེད	can create illnesses	nad rigs bskyed
ནད་རིགས་སྔོན་འགོག	inocculation	nad rigs sngon 'gog
ནད་རིགས་བཞི་བརྒྱ་རྩ་བཞི	[TRS 75-2]	nad rigs bzhi brgya rtsa bzhi
ནད་རིམས	infectious disease, epidemic	nad rims
ནད་རིམས་ངན་པ	pestilence of the worst kind	nad rims ngan pa
ནད་རོ	1) [remainder of a] chronic/ uncured illness	nad ro
ནད་རླངས	disease germs	nad rlangs
ནད་ལམས	epidemics	nad lams
ནད་ལས་གྲོལ	recover from illness	nad las grol
ནད་ལས་གྲོལ་བའི་བདེ་བ	the happiness of being recovered from an illness	nad las grol ba'i bde ba
ནད་ལས་ཐར་པ	without disturbance in the mind	nad las thar pa
ནད་ལས་ཐར་བ	be cured of sickness	nad las thar ba
ནད་ལོག	relapse [of illness]	nad log
ནད་ལོག་རྒྱག	have a relapse [of illness]	nad log rgyag
ནད་ལོག་རྒྱབ་པ	relapse	nad log rgyab pa
ནད་ཤ	meat from an animal that died of disease	nad sha
ནད་སངས	cure/ be cured of sickness, recover[y]	nad sangs
ནད་སངས་པ	cure/ be cured of sickness, recover[y]	nad sangs pa
ནད་སེལ	medicine	nad sel
ནད་སེལ་བ	cure a sickness	nad sel ba
ནད་སོགས་ནས་དྲག་པ	cure	nad sogs nas drag pa
ནད་སོན	disease germs, disease cauwing worms/ insects	nad son
ནད་སོན་ཕྲ་མོ	disease germs	nad son phra mo
ནད་སོས་པ	cure/ be cured of sickness	nad sos pa
ནད་སློང་རྐྱེན་གཉིས	the two conditions conducive to sickness	nad slong rkyen gnyis
ནད་གསེང	interval in severe sickness	nad gseng
ནད་གསོ	cure a disease [syn: sman bcos dang, sman gyi bya ba, tse'i rig byed, 'tso thabs, gso dpyad]	nad gso
ནད་གསོ་ཁང	sanatorium	nad gso khang
ནད་གསོ་ཐབས	medical treatment, method of healing, mode of healing, method of treatment of disease, science of medicine	nad gso thabs
ནད་གསོ་དཔྱད	rites that cure illnesses	nad gso dpyad
ནད་གསོ་བ	recuperate, convalesce	nad gso ba
ནད་གསོ་བའི་རིག་པ	the science of curing diseases	nad gso ba'i rig pa
ནད་གསོ་བྱེད	cure a disease, * recuperate, convalesce[nce]	nad gso byed
ནད་གསོས་པ	recovery	nad gsos pa
ནད་ལྷག	remainder of a former illness	nad lhag
ནན	abbr. of {nan tan} insistent, earnest, the act of pressing, urging, pressure, urgency, importunity; unshakeable	nan
ནན་ཀྭ	pumpkin	nan kwa
ནན་ཀྲང	Nanchang	nan krang
ནན་ཀྲང་འོས་ལངས	Nanchang Uprising	nan krang 'os langs
ནན་སྐུལ	urge	nan skul
ནན་བསྐུལ	insist	nan bskul
ནན་བསྐུལ་ཆེན་པོ	earnest request, emphatically, insistently	nan bskul chen po
ནན་བསྐུལ་ཆེན་པོས་བརྗོད	say emphatically/ insistently	nan bskul chen pos brjod
ནན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	compel	nan bskul byed pa
ནན་ཁ	urgency, pressure	nan kha
ནན་གྱིས	with great insistence/ urgency / exertion	nan gyis
ནན་གྱིས་བཀླགས་པ	have carefully read	nan gyis bklags pa
ནན་གྱིས་གཏེམས་པ	strongly presses	nan gyis gtems pa
ནན་གྱིས་འདྲི	asked persistently	nan gyis 'dri
ནན་གྱིས་བརྣན་ཏོ	pressed, urged upon	nan gyis brnan to
ནན་གྱིས་སྦྱངས་པ	persevere in the training	nan gyis sbyangs pa
ནན་གྱིས་སྦྱོང	to earnestly train in perfecting	nan gyis sbyong
ནན་གྱིས་འཚེར	press hard	nan gyis 'tsher
ནན་གྱིས་ཞུས་པ	insisted	nan gyis zhus pa
ནན་དགུག	conjure	nan dgug
ནན་དགུག་པའི་རྐུ་བ	steal by conjuring	nan dgug pa'i rku ba
ནན་འགུགས	1) nan tan gyis call here/ summon; 2) [arch] mthus 'phrog pa	nan 'gugs
ནན་ཅིན	Nanking	nan cin
ནན་གཅགས་པ	well-impressed, impressive	nan gcags pa
ནན་ཆེན་པོས	strongly, with great insistence, carefully	nan chen pos
ནན་ཆེར	strongly, with great insistence, carefully	nan cher
ནན་ཆེར་གསུང་པ	urged strongly	nan cher gsung pa
ནན་ཏང་ཏུ	earnestly	nan tang tu
ནན་ཏན	diligent; x {nan tan nyams su len pa ni nad nye bar 'tsho ba'i 'du shes bskyed par bya'o} you should think of diligent practice as the way to recovery	nan tan
ནན་ཏན་གལ་ཆེ	it is important to devote ourselves fervently	nan tan gal che
ནན་ཏན་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	persistently nan tan gyi sgo nas 'dod chos rnams zhus	nan tan gyi sgo nas
ནན་ཏན་གྱིས	emphatically, firmly, forcefully, earnestly, stress	nan tan gyis
ནན་ཏན་གྱིས་རྒྱུན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	persistent daily repetition	nan tan gyis rgyun du byed pa
ནན་ཏན་གྱིས་སྟོབ་པ	press a person to accept a dish	nan tan gyis stob pa
ནན་ཏན་གྱིས་བཤད་པ	say emphatically, stress	nan tan gyis bshad pa
ནན་ཏན་གཅེས་སུ་བྱ	exert [yourself] willingly D	nan tan gces su bya
ནན་ཏན་ཆེན་པོས	insisted	nan tan chen pos
ནན་ཏན་ཆེར་བྱེད	to emphasize	nan tan cher byed
ནན་ཏན་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པ་ལ	intense practice	nan tan nyams su len pa la
ནན་ཏན་དུ	earnestly, persistently, over and over again; scrupulously, meticulously; insistently, unremittingly, assiduously	nan tan du
ནན་ཏན་དུ་རྣམ་ཀུན་འདེ་ལ་མཛོད	exert yourself unremittingly in this	nan tan du rnam kun 'de la mdzod
ནན་ཏན་དུ་བྱས	apply assiduously	nan tan du byas
ནན་ཏན་དུ་བསླབ	to engage diligently	nan tan du bslab
ནན་ཏན་དུའོ	should strive	nan tan du'o
ནན་ཏན་བརྣན	pressed, urged upon	nan tan brnan
ནན་ཏན་བྱ	endeavor to	nan tan bya
ནན་ཏན་བྱ་དགོས	one should persist in	nan tan bya dgos
ནན་ཏན་བྱས་པ	emphasized strongly	nan tan byas pa
ནན་ཏན་བྱེད་པ	to persevere in	nan tan byed pa
ནན་ཏན་བཤ་པ	to assert	nan tan bsha pa
ནན་ཏན་བཤད་པ	to assert	nan tan bshad pa
ནན་ཏར	exemplify	nan tar
ནན་ཏུར	observing, scrutinizing as secret agent	nan tur
ནན་ཏུར་གྱི་ཕྱིར་བཅོས	thorough remedy ltung ba phyir bcos byed par mi spro ba'am mi 'dod na nan tur gyi las bya ba [nang gses su nan tur bzhi dang, gnas dbyung bdun gcig tu byas pas lnga yod do, 'dul ba gzhi bcu bdun la...	nan tur gyi phyir bcos
ནན་ཏུར་བཞི	mi spro ba nan tur gyi phyir bcos bya tshul khag gcig:	nan tur bzhi
ནན་ཏེ	sick, ill	nan te
ནན་ཏེན	emphatically, serious, severe, firm	nan ten
ནན་ཏེན་གྱིས	emphatically, firmly, forcefully, earnestly	nan ten gyis
ནན་གཏན	insistent, careful, thorough, persistent, pressing, intensive, assiduous, [earnest] [application], intensity, effort, exertion, strive towards it repeatedly/ positively, emphatically, seriously, se...	nan gtan
ནན་གཏན་གྱིས་བཤད་པ	say emphatically, stress	nan gtan gyis bshad pa
ནན་ལྟར	interminable, endless D	nan ltar
ནན་ལྟར་གཏུགས་པ	look closely	nan ltar gtugs pa
ནན་ཐུར	SA nan tan, nan tur	nan thur
ནན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས	the level of the shr vakas	nan thos kyi sa
ནན་དུ	{nan tan du} scrupulous(ly)/ meticulous(ly); insistent(ly)	nan du
ནན་དུ་བསྐུལ	entreat	nan du bskul
ནན་དུ་ཞུས	begged and begged	nan du zhus
ནན་འདྲི	questioning, interrogating	nan 'dri
ནན་འདྲི་བྱེད	question, interrogate	nan 'dri byed
ནན་ནན	beat or press with the hand	nan nan
ནན་ནན་བཅག་བཅག	brtan brling dang gzab nan	nan nan bcag bcag
ནན་བརྣན	ched dmigs kyis nges bzung ba,...Mi mang po'i nang nas drag shos gcig nan brnan gyis 'dems bsko byas pa	nan brnan
ནན་པ	ru nga ba [malicious?, careful, thorough [Mi do nan pa zhig gtong dgos,...Gtam nan pa zhig bshad song,...Mi ngan rigs khrims la bcur te nan gyis 'jun pa,...Tsul min gyi bya spyod la nan gyis gshe ba	nan pa
ནན་པང་ཕྱི་རས	eraser	nan pang phyi ras
ནན་པོ	strict, serious, firm, strict	nan po
ནན་ཚིག་བརྡ་ཡིག	urgent notice	nan tshig brda yig
ནན་ཞག	late, recent D	nan zhag
ནན་ཟབ	insistent, careful, thorough, persistent, pressing, intensive, assiduous, [earnest] [application], intensity, effort, exertion, strive towards it repeatedly/ positively, emphatically, seriously, se...	nan zab
ནན་ལ་གཏད་པ	1) don gyi gnad la bkar ba; 2) urgently command; 3) Btsan pos levy taxes etc	nan la gtad pa
ནན་ལིང་རི་བོ	Nan Ling mts	nan ling ri bo
ནན་བཤད	stress, emphasis	nan bshad
ནན་བཤད་བྱེད	stress, emphasize	nan bshad byed
ནན་སི་ལ་ཕུའི	Yugoslavia	nan si la phu'i
ནན་ཧའེ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	S China Sea	nan ha'e rgya mtsho
ནབ་ནུབ	a great number	nab nub
ནབ་ནུམ	# D	nab num
ནབ་པ	(tha dad pa mnabs pa, mnab pa, nobs,, wear	nab pa
ནབས	put on	nabs
ནབས་སོ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, 6th constellation, beta geminorum, 1 of rgyu skar	nabs so
ནབས་སོ་སྐྱེས	Vi h u	nabs so skyes
ནམ	1) question particle for words ending in 'n'. 2) when, whenever. night, at	nam
དཡ	break, midnight; (coll) time/ when; when, now; now	day
ནམ་ཀ	[arch] sky, space	nam ka
ནམ་ཀྱི་སྨད་ཆ	last part of the night	nam kyi smad cha
ནམ་མཀའ་ཨར་གཏད	integration into space	nam mka' ar gtad
ནམ་ཁའ་ཁྱབ་པར	pervading space	nam kha' khyab par
ནམ་ཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the perception-sphere of infinite space	nam kha' mtha' yas skye mched
ནམ་ཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པ	as vast as space	nam kha' dang mnyam pa
ནམ་ཁའ་ཡངས་པ	vast sky	nam kha' yangs pa
ནམ་མཁ་ནས་མུ་ཏིག་ཆར་བབས	pearls rained from the sky	nam mkha nas mu tig char babs
ནམ་མཁའ	space, heaven, sky, the ether	nam mkha'
ནམ་མཁའ་ཀུན་སོང	all-pervading space	nam mkha' kun song
ནམ་མཁའ་ཀློང་ལྟར་ཡངས	vast like the wide expanse of sky nam mkha' klong yangs kyi rgyud chen Great Vastness of Space Tantra	nam mkha' klong ltar yangs
ནམ་མཁའ་ཁྱབ་པ	as the sky pervades	nam mkha' khyab pa
ནམ་མཁའ་གང	filling the sky	nam mkha' gang
ནམ་མཁའ་གང་བར	filling the sky	nam mkha' gang bar
ནམ་མཁའ་གར་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings, as many as filling the sky	nam mkha' gar khyab kyi sems can
ནམ་མཁའ་གླས་བབས་ཏེ	descend from [their] realm	nam mkha' glas babs te
ནམ་མཁའ་གླིང	cloud	nam mkha' gling
ནམ་མཁའ་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	nam mkha' rgyal po
ནམ་མཁའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	nam mkha' rgyal mtshan [abbot of rin spungs rdzng in Tshang	nam mkha' rgyal mtshan
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྔ	the five kinds of space [1 {spyi kun la khyab pa'i nam mkha'} two {yul med gsal dangs kyi nam mkha'} three {ma 'dres dag pa'i nam mkha'} four {don mtshon byed kyi nam mkha'} five dag pa'i zhing du ...	nam mkha' lnga
ནམ་མཁའ་སྔོ་སངས	color of a cloudless sky	nam mkha' sngo sangs
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ	a tantra of {man ngag chos}	nam mkha' che
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ་གྲོལ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Great Space Liberation Tantra. One of the	nam mkha' che grol ba'i rgyud
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ལུང	Great Space King Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum nam mkha' che rgyas pa spyi ti'i rgyud Great Extensive Space Chiti Ta...	nam mkha' che rgyal po'i lung
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ་རྒྱས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Great Extensive Space Tantra. One of the	nam mkha' che rgyas pa'i rgyud
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆེ་བ་སེམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Great Space Tantra of Awakened Mind. One	nam mkha' che ba sems kyi rgyud
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཊྭེནཏཡ	five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana nam mkha' che dbang gi gal mdo'i rgyud Epitomized Great Space Empowerment Tantra. One of The Twenty-five Tantras of the Grea...	of the Twenty
ནམ་མཁའ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གནས	the space which is the source of dharmas	nam mkha' chos kyi 'byung gnas
ནམ་མཁའ་མཇལ	sunlight	nam mkha' mjal
ནམ་མཁའ་འཇལ	sun's rays	nam mkha' 'jal
ནམ་མཁའ་འཇིགས་མེད	lha btsun; (b. 1597)	nam mkha' 'jigs med
ནམ་མཁའ་གཏེར	sky treasure	nam mkha' gter
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུ	space-like	nam mkha' lta bu
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	sky-like yogi	nam mkha' lta bu'i rnal 'byor pa
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟར་ཅིར་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པ	like space, it is not made out of anything	nam mkha' ltar cir yang ma grub pa
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟར་མཐའ་ཡས་སོ	"It is boundless like space!"	nam mkha' ltar mtha' yas so
ནམ་མཁའ་སྟོང་པ	void space	nam mkha' stong pa
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐ་ཡས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	mental sphere/ayatana of infinite space	nam mkha' mtha yas skye mched
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས	infinite/limitless space	nam mkha' mtha' yas
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the ayatana of limitless space nam mkha' mtha' yas kyi skye mched [mental] sphere/ayatana of infinite space	nam mkha' mtha' yas kyi skye mched
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	infinity of space, meditating in absorption by infinite space	nam mkha' mtha' yas skye mched
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་སྙོམས་འཇུག	the serenity of infinite space	nam mkha' mtha' yas snyoms 'jug
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་སྙོམས་འཟུག	the absorption of the sphere of limitless space	nam mkha' mtha' yas snyoms 'zug
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	someone in the state of "infinite space"	nam mkha' mtha' yas pa
ནམ་མཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན	sphere of infinite space	nam mkha' mtha' yas pa'i skye mched perception
ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པ	rtogs pa	nam mkha' dang mnyam pa
ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པ་བྱུང	his realization became vast as the sky	nam mkha' dang mnyam pa byung
ནམ་མཁའ་དྭངས་པ	clear & cloudless sky	nam mkha' dwangs pa
ནམ་མཁའ་དྭངས་གསལ	clear sky w/o clouds, smoke etc	nam mkha' dwangs gsal
ནམ་མཁའ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་མདོ	Sutra of Immaculate Space	nam mkha' dri ma med pa'i mdo
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང	"sky-soarer," [included within the animal realm. a class of beings included in the animal realm	nam mkha' lding
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང་གི་ཁྲི	1) throne hovering in space; 2) sky-soarer throne	nam mkha' lding gi khri
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང་ཕུག	Namkha Ding Phug, at Nyanang. See Cave: Garuda Cave	nam mkha' lding phug
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང་ཕྱུག	Namkha Dingphuk nam mkha' nas lha rnams kyang rgyugs even the gods came down from the heavens to see such a wonder	nam mkha' lding phyug
ནམ་མཁའ་གནས་ཚུལ	celestial phenomena, heavenly bodies	nam mkha' gnas tshul
ནམ་མཁའ་གནོན	lion	nam mkha' gnon
ནམ་མཁའ་རྣམ་དག	totally purified space element	nam mkha' rnam dag
ནམ་མཁའ་དཔལ	1170-1226 - Namkha Pel, a Kadampa master	nam mkha' dpal
ནམ་མཁའ་སྤྲིན	cloudy sky	nam mkha' sprin
ནམ་མཁའ་ཕྲ་སྒྲུག	in the top of a thangka sky mtha' rim gyis mi gsal bar thig le chung ngu bris pa'i ming	nam mkha' phra sgrug
ནམ་མཁའ་ཕྲ་རིང	in the top of a thangka sky mtha' rim gyis mi gsal bar 'phred shad byas pa'i ming	nam mkha' phra ring
ནམ་མཁའ་དབྲལ་བའི་ནང་ཤུགས	skyhigh enthusiasm	nam mkha' dbral ba'i nang shugs
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད	1) example of perfect qualities; 2) undefiled offering substances blessed by samadhi, increasing as inexhaustible treasure; 3) skytreasure	nam mkha' mdzod
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད་ཀྱི་སྔགས་རྒྱ	the	nam mkha' mdzod kyi sngags rgya
མནཏྲ་ཨནད་མུདྲ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སཀཡ	treasury	mantra and mudra of the sky
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the	nam mkha' mdzod kyi ting nge 'dzin
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད་ཀྱི་སྣགས་རྒྱ	the Sky Treasure mantra and mudra	nam mkha' mdzod kyi snags rgya
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད་ཀྱི་སྤྲིན	the cloud of the sky treasure	nam mkha' mdzod kyi sprin
ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད་ཀྱིས་ཞུས་པ	questions of gayanaganfa sutra	nam mkha' mdzod kyis zhus pa
ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན་དུ	like space	nam mkha' bzhin du
ནམ་མཁའ་བཟང་པོ	{lo tsa ba}	nam mkha' bzang po
ནམ་མཁའ་འོད་གསལ་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	Space dissolving in luminosity. The dividing point between the bardo of dying and the bardo of dharmata	nam mkha' 'od gsal la thim pa
ནམ་མཁའ་ཡིད་ཅན་པ	those holding the mind to emerge from space	nam mkha' yid can pa
ནམ་མཁའ་རབ་འབྱམས	Syn {gser zhwa} golden hat [for tulkus when riding] nam mkha' rin po che'i gos kyis khyab jeweled cloth fell from the sky covering the ground	nam mkha' rab 'byams
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	formed within space	nam mkha' la chags pa
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་འཇའ་ཡལ་བ་ལྟར	like a rainbow dissolving into space	nam mkha' la 'ja' yal ba ltar
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་འཕུར་ཏེ་བྱུང	appeared to him out of the sky	nam mkha' la 'phur te byung
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་འཕེན	fling into the air	nam mkha' la 'phen
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་གཟའ་སྐར་བཞིན	just like the stars and planets in the heavens	nam mkha' la gza' skar bzhin
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་ལམ་བྱས་ནས	made a path in the sky	nam mkha' la lam byas nas
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་སོགས་པ་འདུས་མ་བྱས	the noncompounds such as space and so forth	nam mkha' la sogs pa 'dus ma byas
ནམ་མཁའ་ལས་བབས་ཏེ	descend from [their] realm	nam mkha' las babs te
ནམ་མཁའ་ལས་ཡངས་པ	wider than the sky	nam mkha' las yangs pa
ནམ་མཁའ་བཤིན་དུ	like space	nam mkha' bshin du
ནམ་མཁའ་བཤིན་དུ་མི་གོས	unobscured like space	nam mkha' bshin du mi gos
ནམ་མཁའ་སུམ་སྤྲུགས	3-fold space, the three skies	nam mkha' sum sprugs
ཕྲུག	the "threefold space," {phyi rol dpe'i nam mkha' dag pa/ nang gi chos nyid don gyi nam mkha'/ gsang ba 'od gsal snying po'i nam mkha'}	phrug
ནམ་མཁའ་སུམ་ཕྲུག་གི་དགོངས་པ	realization of the 3-fold space/ three skies	nam mkha' sum phrug gi dgongs pa
ནམ་མཁའ་ཨར་གཏད	fixation on the sky, integration into space, the integrating of one's awareness with the sky, sky gazing, Namkha Arted	nam mkha' ar gtad
ནམ་མཁའི	spatial	nam mkha'i
ནམ་མཁའི་ཀློང་འདྲ	like space in the sky	nam mkha'i klong 'dra
ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ	the center/ heart of space/ the [vault of the] sky	nam mkha'i dkyil
ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་དུ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ལྟོས	Look into the midst of the space of simplicity	nam mkha'i dkyil du spros bral ltos
ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་སྤྲིན་མེད་ལྟ་བུ	like the center of a cloudless sky	nam mkha'i dkyil sprin med lta bu
ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱེལ	compass of the heavens	nam mkha'i dkyel
ནམ་མཁའི་རྐྱེན་བྲལ	a "cloudless" sky	nam mkha'i rkyen bral
ནམ་མཁའི་སྐ་རགས	the milky way, horizon	nam mkha'i ska rags
ནམ་མཁའི་སྐར་ཚོགས	stars in the sky	nam mkha'i skar tshogs
ནམ་མཁའི་སྐེ་རགས	the milky way, horizon	nam mkha'i ske rags
ནམ་མཁའི་སྐྱེ་རགས	horizon	nam mkha'i skye rags
ནམ་མཁའི་སྐྲ་ཅན	Shiva	nam mkha'i skra can
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས	the element of space	nam mkha'i khams
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་ཀྱི་མཐར་གཏུགས	ultimate realm of space	nam mkha'i khams kyi mthar gtugs
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་གང་བ	filling the whole sky	nam mkha'i khams gang ba
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	everywhere throughout the expanse of space	nam mkha'i khams thams cad du
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁྱིམ	heavenly mansion	nam mkha'i khyim
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁྱོན	the expanse of the heavens	nam mkha'i khyon
ནམ་མཁའི་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ	as limitless as space	nam mkha'i mkha' dang mnyam
ནམ་མཁའི་གོས་ཅན	1) naked ascetic/ Jain; 2) prostitute	nam mkha'i gos can
ནམ་མཁའི་གླང་པོ	cloud, the bull of the heavens	nam mkha'i glang po
ནམ་མཁའི་གླིང	cloud	nam mkha'i gling
ནམ་མཁའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum, King of Space	nam mkha'i rgyal po
ནམ་མཁའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	cloud	nam mkha'i rgyal mtshan
ནམ་མཁའི་སྒོ་འབྱེད	part of the Oral Transmission of Tangtong Gyalpo; also an abhisheka text by Taranatha	nam mkha'i sgo 'byed
ནམ་མཁའི་ངང	sphere of void space	nam mkha'i ngang
ནམ་མཁའི་ཆུ་བོ	the Ganges	nam mkha'i chu bo
ནམ་མཁའི་སྙིང	essence of space	nam mkha'i snying
ནམ་མཁའི་སྙིང་པོ	Namkhai Nyingpo. One of the 25 disciples of Guru Rinpoche. Born in Lower Nyal, he was one of the first Tibetans to take ordination. An adept translator, he journeyed to India where he received tran...	nam mkha'i snying po
ནམ་མཁའི་སྙིང་པོའི་མདོ	{nam mkha'i snying po'i mdo}	nam mkha'i snying po'i mdo
ནམ་མཁའི་ཏ་མ་ལ	cloud	nam mkha'i ta ma la
ནམ་མཁའི་ཏོག	1) sun; 2) bodhisattva {nam mkha'i tog}	nam mkha'i tog
ནམ་མཁའི་རྟ	bird	nam mkha'i rta
ནམ་མཁའི་རྟེན	heart, SA dbang rten lnga	nam mkha'i rten
ནམ་མཁའི་སྟེང་འགྲོ་བ	Mars	nam mkha'i steng 'gro ba
ནམ་མཁའི་སྟོབས	wind	nam mkha'i stobs
ནམ་མཁའི་ཐིག་ལེ	sun	nam mkha'i thig le
ནམ་མཁའི་ཐོ་བ	thunderbolt	nam mkha'i tho ba
ནམ་མཁའི་ཐོད་ལྡན་ཟླ་བ	7th month	nam mkha'i thod ldan zla ba
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ	infinite space	nam mkha'i mtha'
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ་ཀླས	filling the limits of the sky	nam mkha'i mtha' klas
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ་ཀླས་པ	limitless as space	nam mkha'i mtha' klas pa
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ་དང་མཉམ	equal to the reaches of space	nam mkha'i mtha' dang mnyam
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ་ཡས	1 of snyoms par 'jug pa dgu	nam mkha'i mtha' yas
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐོང	expanse of space	nam mkha'i mthong
ནམ་མཁའི་མཐོངས	center/ substance of the sky	nam mkha'i mthongs
ནམ་མཁའི་མདངས་གསལ	beginning of the 3rd month	nam mkha'i mdangs gsal
ནམ་མཁའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra of space	nam mkha'i rdo rje
ནམ་མཁའི་ལྡིང	wind, "sky breath"	nam mkha'i lding
ནམ་མཁའི་ནོར	sun and moon, "gems of heaven"	nam mkha'i nor
ནམ་མཁའི་ནོར་བུ	sun, jewel of the sky	nam mkha'i nor bu
ནམ་མཁའི་ནོར་བུར	jewel of space nam mkha'i gnas tshul ston pa'i 'phrul 'khor - planetarium nam mkha'i gnas tshul ston pa'i 'phrul	nam mkha'i nor bur
ནམ་མཁའི་རྣ་བ	moon	nam mkha'i rna ba
ནམ་མཁའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	immersion in the genuine experience/ nature of space	nam mkha'i rnal 'byor
ནམ་མཁའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	sky-yogi [Tt]	nam mkha'i rnal 'byor pa
ནམ་མཁའི་པ་མོ	a sky lotus flower	nam mkha'i pa mo
ནམ་མཁའི་པད་མ་བཞིན	like a sky lotus	nam mkha'i pad ma bzhin
ནམ་མཁའི་པད་མོ	a sky lotus flower; (example of something impossible; appeared without a cause) nam mkha'i dpyings kyi dbang phyug ma Akashadhatvishavari, sky-realm lady [consort of Vairocana)	nam mkha'i pad mo
ནམ་མཁའི་བྱ་རྗེས	imprint of a bird in the sky	nam mkha'i bya rjes
ནམ་མཁའི་བྱ་ལམ	bird flying in the sky	nam mkha'i bya lam
ནམ་མཁའི་དབུགས	wind	nam mkha'i dbugs
ནམ་མཁའི་དབྱིངས	the expanse of space	nam mkha'i dbyings
ནམ་མཁའི་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ་ཨཱཀཤ	dhatvi-shvari, queen of the realm of space [consort of Vairocana]	nam mkha'i dbyings kyi dbang phyug ma Akasha
ནམ་མཁའི་དབྱིངས་ཉིད	celestial space	nam mkha'i dbyings nyid
ནམ་མཁའི་དབྱིངས་ཕྱུག་མ	Akashadhatvi-shvari	nam mkha'i dbyings phyug ma
ནམ་མཁའི་མིག	sun	nam mkha'i mig
ནམ་མཁའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	firefly	nam mkha'i mu khyud
ནམ་མཁའི་མེ་ཏོག	sky flower; example of illusion	nam mkha'i me tog
ནམ་མཁའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic/definition of space	nam mkha'i mtshan nyid
ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད	sky-treasury	nam mkha'i mdzod
ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་ཀྱི་སྔགས	the skytreasury mantra	nam mkha'i mdzod kyi sngags
ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག	one of the {phyag rgya drug} the six mudras [in rituals]	nam mkha'i mdzod kyi phyag
ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	skytreasury medr [one of the {phyag rgya drug}, the six mudr s [in rituals])	nam mkha'i mdzod kyi phyag rgya
ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་འཆང	??	nam mkha'i mdzod 'chang
ནམ་མཁའི་ཟིལ་པ	gnam gyer ba'i skabs ba mo 'byung ba'i water particles	nam mkha'i zil pa
ནམ་མཁའི་འོད	firefly	nam mkha'i 'od
ནམ་མཁའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of space	nam mkha'i rang bzhin
ནམ་མཁའི་རླངས་པ	cow	nam mkha'i rlangs pa
ནམ་མཁའི་རླུང	vibration of spaciousness	nam mkha'i rlung
ནམ་མཁའི་ལམ	the path of the motion of the planets	nam mkha'i lam
ནམ་མཁའི་སྲོག	wind	nam mkha'i srog
ནམ་མཁའི་ལྷ་ཞིག	a god in the sky	nam mkha'i lha zhig
ནམ་མཁར་བགྲོད་དེ	traveled through the sky	nam mkhar bgrod de
ནམ་མཁར་འགྲོ	bird	nam mkhar 'gro
ནམ་མཁར་འགྲོ་བའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhi of flying in space	nam mkhar 'gro ba'i dngos grub
ནམ་མཁར་དེང	melted away into space, dissolved into air	nam mkhar deng
ནམ་མཁར་འཕུར	flew out into the sky nam mkhar lha rnams kyis me tog gi char dang gdugs dang rgyal mtshan ba dan rlung yab sogs kyis gang bar byed do the gods rained down flowers from the sky and bestowed on him ...	nam mkhar 'phur
ནམ་མཁས་གར་ཁྱབ	completely pervading the space in nam mkhas nam mkha' glags mi rnyed Space cannot [cause] harm [to] space	nam mkhas gar khyab
ནམ་འཁའ་མཐའ་ཡས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the ayatana of limitless space	nam 'kha' mtha' yas skye mched
ནམ་ག་ཡིད་ལ་འདོད	Kama	nam ga yid la 'dod
ནམ་གང	new moon night/ day	nam gang
ནམ་གུ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	nam gu
ནམ་གུང	midnight	nam gung
ནམ་གྱི་གུང	at midnight	nam gyi gung
ནམ་གྱི་གུང་ཐུན	midnight [session]	nam gyi gung thun
ནམ་གྱི་གུང་ལ	at the midnight hour, middle watch of night	nam gyi gung la
ནམ་གྱི་ཆ་སྟོད	first portion of the night, first half of the night	nam gyi cha stod
ནམ་གྱི་ཆ་སྨད	last part of the night [of 3]	nam gyi cha smad
ནམ་གྱི་ཐོ་རངས་ཆ	last part of the night	nam gyi tho rangs cha
ནམ་གྱི་འཕྱི་དགུ	later part of the night	nam gyi 'phyi dgu
ནམ་གྱི་འབྲུག	thunder	nam gyi 'brug
ནམ་གྱི་སྨད་ཆ	latter part of the night	nam gyi smad cha
ནམ་གྱི་སྨད་དུ	after midnight	nam gyi smad du
ནམ་གྱི་སྲོད་ཆ	evening, 1st part of the night	nam gyi srod cha
ནམ་གྲང་བ་རེ	sky is cold, it is cold	nam grang ba re
ནམ་གྲུ	1) * nam gru, the airship; 2) airplane	nam gru
ནམ་གྲུ་སྐྱེས	1) river Yamuna; 2) wife of the sun	nam gru skyes
ནམ་གྲུ་མ	yaksha princess, nerbudda river, the 26th constellation	nam gru ma
ནམ་དགུང	[mid]night	nam dgung
ནམ་དགོང་ཐོ་རེངས	early morning nam mga' klong yangs kyi rgyud chen Great Vastness of Space Tantra	nam dgong tho rengs
ནམ་འགྲོ	when will you go?	nam 'gro
ནམ་འགྲོ་ཆ་མེད	when we will go is uncertain	nam 'gro cha med
ནམ་འགྲོ་བའི་དུས	the time when {we] shall go	nam 'gro ba'i dus
ནམ་རྒྱུན	usual, customary	nam rgyun
ནམ་རྒྱུན་དང་མི་འདྲ་བ	unusual, abnormal nam rgyun tshogs tshud dmag dpung regular army	nam rgyun dang mi 'dra ba
ནམ་རྒྱུན་ཟེར་སྒྲོས	as is commonly said, commonly, usually, generally	nam rgyun zer sgros
ནམ་འཆི	the time of death	nam 'chi
ནམ་འཆི་ངེས་པ་མེད	the time of death uncertain	nam 'chi nges pa med
ནམ་འཆི་ངེས་མེད	death lies uncertain; when death will occur is uncertain	nam 'chi nges med
ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་མེད	uncertainty of the time of death, the time of death is uncertain	nam 'chi cha med
ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་མེད་པ	death strikes without warning	nam 'chi cha med pa
ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་མེད་མ་དྲན་པ	oblivious of the stark presence of death	nam 'chi cha med ma dran pa
ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་མེད་སོམས	reflect on the fragility of life!	nam 'chi cha med soms
ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་ཡང་མེད	the exact time of death remains uncertain	nam 'chi cha yang med
ནམ་འཆི་བ་ལ་བབས་བའི་ཙེ	at the time of death	nam 'chi ba la babs ba'i tse
ནམ་འཆི་བ་ལ་བབས་བའི་ཚེ	at the time of death	nam 'chi ba la babs ba'i tshe
ནམ་འཆི་ལ་ངེས་པ་མི་འདུག	"Who knows when I'll die?	nam 'chi la nges pa mi 'dug
ནམ་མཇུག	end of autumn	nam mjug
ནམ་མཇུག་འཆད་ཀ	end of autumn	nam mjug 'chad ka
ནམ་འཇིག་ངེས་པ	to know with certainty the hour of my own doom 1506	nam 'jig nges pa
ནམ་སྙིང	1) essence of space; 2) bodhisattva Akashagarbha; 3) 1 of the 25 disciples of Padmasambhava in T; 4) Namkhai Nyingpo one of the first 7 monks in T; 5) the translator namkhainyingpo	nam snying
ནམ་རྟག་པར	always, continuously	nam rtag par
ནམ་རྟགས	argument	nam rtags
ནམ་སྟོད	first portion of the night, first half of the night	nam stod
ནམ་ཐང	serge of great breadth which monks wrap around their bodies, cloudless sky, fine weather	nam thang
ནམ་ཐོ་རེངས	last session of the night	nam tho rengs
ནམ་དུའང	+ neg: never ever	nam du'ang
ནམ་དུས	1) season, time of the year. 2) when	nam dus
ནམ་དུས་ཀྱི	seasonal	nam dus kyi
ནམ་དུས་བཞི	the four seasons	nam dus bzhi
ནམ་ལྡོག་ན	when reversed	nam ldog na
ནམ་ནངས་པ	[arch] arise[n]	nam nangs pa
ནམ་ནས	at daybreak	nam nas
ནམ་པར	#	nam par
ནམ་ཕར་ཚུར་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	zhal lce bcu drug gi nang gses shig ste, sngar rta drel mdzo gyag sogs sgo zog phyugs rigs gyar po sprod len gyi nam zhag snga phyi'i bar du shi god byung na gyar mkhan la nyes khag 'khri min zhib ...	nam phar tshur gyi zhal lce
ནམ་ཕུག	for a long time, in the future, permanent	nam phug
ནམ་ཕུག་བློ་རེ་འགྱོད	You will regret it in the future	nam phug blo re 'gyod
ནམ་ཕུགས	dus mthar thug pa, the future, time D	nam phugs
ནམ་ཕུགས་འགྱུར་བ་མེད	it will not happen/ change in the future	nam phugs 'gyur ba med
ནམ་ཕུགས་སུ	in the future	nam phugs su
ནམ་ཕེབས་སོང	when did [they] come	nam phebs song
ནམ་ཕྱིན་ཕྱིན	when going out	nam phyin phyin
ནམ་ཕྱེད	midnight, 1 of 12 dus tshod, midnight	nam phyed
ནམ་ཕྱེད་རྒྱལ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	midnight	nam phyed rgyal ba'i dkyil 'khor
ནམ་ཕྱེད་ཙམ་ན	about midnight	nam phyed tsam na
ནམ་ཕྱེད་ཡོལ	* glang gi dus tshod	nam phyed yol
ནམ་ཕྱེད་ཡོལ་བ	has gone by midnight	nam phyed yol ba
ནམ་འཕང	the heights, high in the sky	nam 'phang
ནམ་འཕང་དགུང་ལ་བསྟོད་པ	gliding in the sky and, soaring higher and higher	nam 'phang dgung la bstod pa
ནམ་འཕང་གཅོད་པ	soar through the heights / high in the sky	nam 'phang gcod pa
ནམ་འཕང་གཅོད་པ་ལྟར	like a vulture	nam 'phang gcod pa ltar
ནམ་འཕང་གཅོད་བྱེད	vulture	nam 'phang gcod byed
ནམ་འཕང་བསྟོད་པ	soaring in the firmament	nam 'phang bstod pa
ཆེར་བསྟོད	to soar higher and higher into space	cher bstod
ནམ་འཕང་སྤྱོད	vulture	nam 'phang spyod
ནམ་མི་ལངས་ཀ་མེད་ཉི་མས་འདེད	two	nam mi langs ka med nyi mas 'ded
ནམ་དམུས་པ	cloudy skies, dusk, evening, sa sros pa'am become dark/ night	nam dmus pa
ནམ་རྨུས་པ	cloudy skies, dusk, evening, sa sros pa'am become dark/ night	nam rmus pa
ནམ་སྨད	second half of the night	nam smad
ནམ་སྨན་དཀར་མོ	Nammen Karmo	nam sman dkar mo
ནམ་ཚོང	[arch] upper chest bones yan chad	nam tshong
ནམ་ཚོད	measure of earlier and later sessions of the night	nam tshod
ནམ་ཞག	daytime when the sun is up	nam zhag
ནམ་ཞག་རྒྱུན་གཏན	continuously, always	nam zhag rgyun gtan
ནམ་ཞག་རྒྱུན་པ	continuously, always	nam zhag rgyun pa
ནམ་ཞར	[arch] always, all the time, whenever	nam zhar
ནམ་ཞིག	A time came when	nam zhig
ནམ་ཞིག་གི་ཚེ་ན	once, at 1 time	nam zhig gi tshe na
ནམ་ཞིག་གི་ཚེ་ནས	since what time/ when?	nam zhig gi tshe nas
ནམ་ཞིག་སྒྱུ་ལུས་འཇོག་པའི་ཚེ	the time when [he] will lay aside the illusory body	nam zhig sgyu lus 'jog pa'i tshe
ནམ་ཞིག་དུས་ལ་བབས་པའི་ཚེ	when the time was ripe	nam zhig dus la babs pa'i tshe
ནམ་ཞིག་ན	KCL, AC: when...? when. [mss]	nam zhig na
ནམ་ཞིག་ཙ་ན	once upon a time	nam zhig tsa na
ནམ་ཞིག་ཙེ་ཡི་དུས་བྱས་ཙེ	when our time has come to an end	nam zhig tse yi dus byas tse
ནམ་ཞིག་ཚེ་ཡི་དུས་བྱས་ཚེ	when our time has come to an end	nam zhig tshe yi dus byas tshe
ནམ་ཞོད	continual/heavy rain	nam zhod
ནམ་ཞོད་དུས	summer (time of heavy rains)	nam zhod dus
ནམ་གཞག་གཏན་གྱི་འདུན་མ	permanent goal (enlightenment. permanent goal (enlightenment	nam gzhag gtan gyi 'dun ma
ནམ་གཞུག	1) nam dus kyi mjug ste mostly autumn; 2) gtan gyi phugs	nam gzhug
ནམ་གཞུག་འཆད་ཀ	end of autumn	nam gzhug 'chad ka
ནམ་གཞུག་བསྡུ་ཁ	autumn rdzogs la khad	nam gzhug bsdu kha
ནམ་ཟིན	whenever	nam zin
ནམ་ཟླ	season	nam zla
ནམ་ཟླ་དགུན་བྱུང	winter	nam zla dgun byung
ནམ་ཟླ་དགུན་ཤར	winter has set in	nam zla dgun shar
ནམ་ཟླ་སྟོན་བྱུང	autumn	nam zla ston byung
ནམ་ཟླ་སྟོན་ཤར	autumn has set in	nam zla ston shar
ནམ་ཟླ་དུས་བཞི	the four seasons	nam zla dus bzhi
ནམ་ཟླ་འདས	the favorable period has passed D	nam zla 'das
ནམ་ཟླ་སྤྱིད་བྱུང	spring	nam zla spyid byung
ནམ་ཟླ་དབྱར་དགུན་སྟོན་དཔྱིད་ཡིན	the seasons are summer, winter, autumn and spring	nam zla dbyar dgun ston dpyid yin
ནམ་ཟླ་དབྱར་བྱུང	summer	nam zla dbyar byung
ནམ་བཟའ	clothes [h]	nam bza'
ནམ་འོག	1) the star sa ga; 2) before something has arisen	nam 'og
ནམ་ཡང	ever, always, whenever, never (with negative), emphatic negative adverb, never, in double negative constructions	nam yang
ནམ་ཡང་འདའ་མེད	never move away from	nam yang 'da' med
ནམ་ཡང་མ་ཐོས	never been heard of	nam yang ma thos
ནམ་ཡང་མ་སྤོང	never renounce/ abandon..	nam yang ma spong
ནམ་ཡང་མ་བྱེད	Don't ever do ... verb	nam yang ma byed
ནམ་ཡང་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	never-arising	nam yang mi skye ba
ནམ་ཡང་མི་འཇིགས་པ	never-dying, immortal	nam yang mi 'jigs pa
ནམ་ཡང་མེད	never	nam yang med
ནམ་ཡང་མེད་པ	never ever	nam yang med pa
ནམ་ཡང་རུང	whenever	nam yang rung
ནམ་ཡང་ལངས	dawn	nam yang langs
ནམ་ཡང་ལངས་ཀྱི་ཡོད་འདུག	the day was dawning	nam yang langs kyi yod 'dug
ནམ་ཡང་ལངས་ཉེར	almost dawn	nam yang langs nyer
ནམ་ཡང་ལངས་ནས་ཡོད	it was dawn	nam yang langs nas yod
ནམ་ཡིན་ཡང	at all times	nam yin yang
ནམ་ཡིན་རུང	whenever	nam yin rung
ནམ་ཡོང	when did [you] come ?	nam yong
ནམ་རིང	long night	nam ring
ནམ་ལ	nam pass [in S ding ri rdzong]	nam la
ནམ་ལང	day break	nam lang
ནམ་ལངས	daybreak, 1 of 12 dus tshod, to be dawn, dawn	nam langs
ནམ་ལངས་མཁའ	sky at dawn	nam langs mkha'
ནམ་ལངས་ཏེ	at daybreak, night having passed away	nam langs te
ནམ་ལངས་ཐང་གསལ	dawn and a clear day	nam langs thang gsal
ནམ་ལངས་པ	down, day break, the breaking dawn, day break; dawn, daybreak	nam langs pa
ནམ་ལངས་སྤར་མོས་འགེབས	cover up dawn w one's palm, try to conceal what can't be concealed	nam langs spar mos 'gebs
ནམ་ལངས་མི་འདུག	not yet dawn	nam langs mi 'dug
ནམ་ཤེས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	Vij¤ nav dins [GD	nam shes su smra ba
ནམ་ཤོད	heavy/ continual rain	nam shod
ནམ་གཤིས	climate, weather	nam gshis
ནམ་སེང་ཙམ	nam langs ma langs tsam	nam seng tsam
ནམ་སོ	1) Punarvasu; 2) Vi u	nam so
ནམ་སྲོད	hours of night from 21 to 24	nam srod
ནམ་སྲོད་བྱིན་སོང་བའི་ཚེ	it was almost dark	nam srod byin song ba'i tshe
ནམ་སྲོད་ལ	early in the night	nam srod la
ནམ་སྲོས་པ	sa rub pa	nam sros pa
ནམ་གསལ	time of arising, dawn, day break	nam gsal
ནམ་གསལ་བ	first arising of dawn	nam gsal ba
ནའང	even, if. Syn {kyang} even in/ even if	na'ang
ནའང་སི་ལ་ཕུའུ	Yugoslavia	na'ang si la phu'u
ནའི་འཁོར	those who surround me	na'i 'khor
ནའི་ལྗོངས	place in tibet	na'i ljongs
ནའུ་ག	green [marshy] meadow	na'u ga
ནར	intensity, to get stretched	nar
ནར་གྱིས་བྱུང	happened straightway D	nar gyis byung
ནར་འགྱངས	postpone, delay	nar 'gyangs
ནར་འགྱངས་གཏོང	postpone, delay	nar 'gyangs gtong
ནར་འགྱངས་སུ་གཏོང་བའི་ལས་ཀ	postponed work	nar 'gyangs su gtong ba'i las ka
ནར་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	elastic	nar rgyu yod pa
ནར་གཏོང་བྱེད	provide something until a need is satisfied [vs fixed time]	nar gtong byed
ནར་སྟབས	oval	nar stabs
ནར་འཐེན	extend, put off, suspend	nar 'then
ནར་ནར	oval, oblong elliptical	nar nar
ནར་ནར་པོ	oblong	nar nar po
ནར་ནར་མོ	1) elongated; 2) hanging down/on, dilly dally, rectangular; 3) oval	nar nar mo
ནར་ནར་རིང་པོ	projection	nar nar ring po
ནར་ནོར	na re no re	nar nor
ནར་པོ	dung heap	nar po
ནར་བ	wrong, go far/ long	nar ba
ནར་བ་མ་རེད་ཀྱིས་ལས་ཀ	work that didn't go far	nar ba ma red kyis las ka
ནར་བ་འཛག་པའི་མཆི་མ	far-flowing tears	nar ba 'dzag pa'i mchi ma
ནར་མ	ordinary, continuous, without interruption	nar ma
ནར་མའི་མཆ་མ	continuous tears	nar ma'i mcha ma
ནར་མའི་ཟས	usual/ uninterrupted food	nar ma'i zas
ནར་མར	always, continuous, regularly; constant(ly)	nar mar
ནར་མོ	elongated Syn {'jong mo} oblong, rhombic, lozenge-shaped	nar mo
ལོཟེངེ	shaped	lozenge
ནར་བཞག	to leave it naturally & freely	nar bzhag
ནར་གཟུགས	oval, oblong, elliptical	nar gzugs
ནར་ཡོང་གྱི་འགྱིག་གི་སྐུད་པ	stretched rubber cord	nar yong gyi 'gyig gi skud pa
ནར་ར་ར	in a line, row, file	nar ra ra
ནར་རིང	elongated, long oblong	nar ring
ནར་རེ	say, said	nar re
ནར་ལུས་ཤོར་བ	be delayed	nar lus shor ba
ནར་སོང་ནས་རྒན་པོའི་བར	from adult maturity to old age GD	nar song nas rgan po'i bar
ནར་སོན་པ	to continue without a break	nar son pa
ནལ	1) ruby-like gem, color mostly a little brown; 2) rus gcig pa'i khyim thab; 3) incest, fornication	nal
ནལ་གྱིས་དུག་སེལ	the nal stone removes poison	nal gyis dug sel
ནལ་གྲིབ	defilement from incest, pollution, fornication	nal grib
ནལ་གྲུབ	pollution [of incest, fornication]	nal grub
ནལ་ཕྲུག	1) child or illegitimate sex, bastard; 2) child of incest	nal phrug
ནལ་བ	place in tibet	nal ba
ནལ་བུ	1) child of illegitimate sex, bastard or father unknown; 2) child of incest 1508	nal bu
ནལ་བྱ	bird of incest	nal bya
ནལ་བྱི	unnatural offence, poison tree	nal byi
ནལ་བྱེད	incestuous action, fornication	nal byed
ནལ་མ	incestuous action, fornication	nal ma
ནལ་མཚེ	incest	nal mtshe
ནལ་ཟེ	1) lus kyi za 'phrug 'drad spyad zhig; 2) [arch] spoon, cup, goblet, ladle, shovel	nal ze
ནལ་རིན་ཆེན	a brownish colored gem stone	nal rin chen
ནལ་ལུ	child of fornication or w father unknown	nal lu
ནལ་ལེ	bastard child	nal le
ནལ་བཤམས	1) secret incest/ fornication; 2) falsely call a bastard D	nal bshams
ནལ་བཤམས་ཞེས་ཕྲ་མ་བཅུག	they falsely called him a bastard	nal bshams zhes phra ma bcug
རྣམ་པ་དྲུག	the six kinds of barley [one spun pa dad bcas pa; spun pa med pa; rnam par 'dres pa; mngar po; mdog nag pa; mdog skya ba]	rnam pa drug
ནས་ཀྱི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	chaff, straw	nas kyi 'khri shing
ནས་ཀྱི་བར་ཏེ	from ~ up to	nas kyi bar te
ནས་ཀྱི་ཞིག	barley field or cultivation	nas kyi zhig
ནས་ཀྱི་ཞིང	barley field	nas kyi zhing
ནས་ཀྱི་སོ་བ	barley cake	nas kyi so ba
ནས་བསྐུལ་ངོར	at/by the urging of	nas bskul ngor
ནས་སྒྲ་ལྷག་བཅས	"nas" like word showing more to come [mtsams sbyor lhag bcas la 'jug pa'i nas sgra,...Ste te...De...Mig gis bltas nas mthong	nas sgra lhag bcas
ནས་རྔ་བ	cut barley	nas rnga ba
ནས་བསྔོད་པ	reap barley	nas bsngod pa
ནས་ཆག	leb mor brdzogs pa'i barley	nas chag
ནས་ཆང	barley beer	nas chang
ནས་ཆང་བསྙལ་བ	to brew barley beer	nas chang bsnyal ba
ནས་ཆན	barley pap	nas chan
ནས་ཆུ	nas ril gyi thug pa noodles/soup/ gruel	nas chu
ནས་རྗེང	grain storage house	nas rjeng
ནས་རྗེན	raw unparched barley	nas rjen
ནས་རྗེན་ཚ་བ	barley flour thug pa [noodles, soup/ gruel]	nas rjen tsha ba
ནས་ལྗང	barley plant	nas ljang
ནས་སྙེ	barley ears	nas snye
ནས་རྡོག	a barley head	nas rdog
ནས་ནག་གྲ་གཉིས་མ	kind of thon tshad mtho ba'i barley	nas nag gra gnyis ma
ནས་སྤྱན	"grain eyes"	nas spyan
ནས་ཕུབ	barley chaff	nas phub
ནས་ཕྱི	after, later than	nas phyi
ནས་ཕྱེ	barley flour	nas phye
ནས་བར་དུ	beginning with ~ up to	nas bar du
ནས་འབྱུང་བ་ལྟར	according	nas 'byung ba ltar
ནས་འབྲས་བཟང	{nas 'bras bzang} med. millet	nas 'bras bzang
ནས་འབྲུ	barley grain	nas 'bru
ནས་སྦྱང	barley storehouse	nas sbyang
ནས་མ་གཏོགས	SA na ma gtogs	nas ma gtogs
ནས་ཙན	half-ripe barley	nas tsan
ནས་རྩམ	barley tsampa	nas rtsam
ནས་བརྩམས	beginning from	nas brtsams
ནས་ཚགས	sieve for cleansing and sifting grains	nas tshags
ནས་འཛིན	nas ze - grain box; also 'bru	nas 'dzin
ཕོར	grain cup	phor
ནས་ཞིང	barley field	nas zhing
ནས་ཟན	1) barley dough; 2) small bird mchil pa	nas zan
ནས་ཟེ	nas 'dzin - grain box; also 'bru	nas ze
ནས་བཟུང	from that time; beginning with, starting from, from ## and onwards; from then on, ever since	nas bzung
ཕ༹ྲོམ	-- and onwards, from then on, ever since	from
ནས་བཟུང་སྟེ	beginning with, successively	nas bzung ste
ནས་བཟུང་ད་ལྟའི་བར་དུ	from then until now	nas bzung da lta'i bar du
ནས་བཟུང་དུས་ད་ལྟའི་བར་དུ	from that time onwards up to the present day	nas bzung dus da lta'i bar du
ནས་ཡོད	has been -- had --	nas yod
ནས་ཡོས	popped/ puffed	nas yos
ནས་ལ་རྣམ་པ་དྲུག	the six kinds of barley	nas la rnam pa drug
ནས་སོ་བ	grain w chaff	nas so ba
ནས་སོག	barley sog ma	nas sog
ནས་སོན	seed barley	nas son
ནས་སྲུས	unripe ears of barley	nas srus
ནས་བསོད	barley bsod snyoms; by Tibetan monastics at the time of the autumn grain ripening yul grong khag la grain slong ba	nas bsod
ནི	gzhi las logs su dgar ba'am, dmigs kyis 'byed pa dang, nges gzung ngam, nan gyis brnan pa dang, tshig gi kha skong bcas la 'jug pa'i phrad rang dbang can zhig...Mthing ga ni sngo sangs las gzhan no...	ni
ནི་ཀུ	betel nut	ni ku
ནི་གུ	Niguma; the sister of Naropa	ni gu
ནི་གུ་ཆོས་དྲུག	the six doctrines of Niguma	ni gu chos drug
ནི་གུ་མ	12th cent. - Niguma, Naropa's sister	ni gu ma
ནི་གུའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	the six dharmas of Niguma	ni gu'i chos drug
ནས་བརྒྱུད་པའི་ཆོས་དྲུག་སྟེ	gtum mo bde drod rang 'bar, sgyu lus chags sdang rang grol, rmi lam nying 'khrul rang dag 'od gsal gti mug rang sangs, 1509 'pho ba ma bsgoms sangs rgyas, bar do rgyal ba longs sku rnams so	nas brgyud pa'i chos drug ste
ནི་ཚབས	{ni tshabs feminine disease	ni tshabs
ནི་འིའ་ལི	great buzzard/ mouse hawk D	ni 'i' li
ནི་ཡ་མ	{ni ya ma} tree	ni ya ma
ནི་རུ་ཧ	{ni ru ha disease [rtug skam dang, gzhang srin lta bu lte 'og man gyi nad la sman bskol nas khu ba grod pa'i nang blug ste gshang lam nas mas btang dgos pa zhig ste, nang gses su dbye na sbyor ba r...	ni ru ha
ནི་རུ་ཧ་རྒྱབ་པ	inject med. rectally	ni ru ha rgyab pa
ནི་རོ་དྷ	cessation stoppage, obstruction	ni ro dha
ནི་ལ	indigo, blue pheasant	ni la
ནིང	ni, rnying	ning
ནིད་དུ་ཞི་ལོ་དྷི	a tree	nid du zhi lo dhi
ནིད་དུ་ཞོ་ལོ་དྷི	a tree D	nid du zho lo dhi
ནིམ་པ	Nimba. A tree with bitter fruit, Azadirachta indica. Every part of it is used for magical purposes	nim pa
ནིམ་པ་ཁ	bitter of neem or Azadirachta Indica	nim pa kha
ནིམ་བུ	lemon	nim bu
ནིའི་ལི	the great buzzard or mouse-hawk	ni'i li
ནིའི་ལེ	weasel	ni'i le
ནིའུ་ལྡེ་ལི	New Dehli	ni'u lde li
ནིའུ་ཡོ	New York	ni'u yo
ནིའུ་ལི	weasel	ni'u li
ནིར་ཏི་མ	Naivedya	nir ti ma
ནུ	figure 72, SA nu bo, nu ba	nu
ནུ་སྐྱེས	[mother's] milk	nu skyes
ནུ་ཁུག	suckling bag, sucking bag for babies	nu khug
ནུ་མགོ	nipple	nu mgo
ནུ་རྒྱས་མ	cow	nu rgyas ma
ནུ་ཏོག	nipple	nu tog
ནུ་འཐུང	1) drink milk; 2) baby	nu 'thung
ནུ་གདན	nipple ground/ seat, cow's udder	nu gdan
ནུ་རྡོག	nipple	nu rdog
ནུ་ཕྲག	breasts	nu phrag
ནུ་བ	suck	nu ba
ནུ་བ་པོ	suckling	nu ba po
ནུ་བོ	suckling, younger brother	nu bo
ནུ་འབུར	nipple	nu 'bur
ནུ་འབོར	nipple	nu 'bor
ནུ་མ	mammary gland, bosom, nipple of a cow's udder, breast	nu ma
ནུ་མ་གཉིས་མ	women in general	nu ma gnyis ma
ནུ་མ་གཏོར	cow emptying its udder by discharging the milk, cow emptying its udder by discharging the milk	nu ma gtor
ནུ་མ་སྟེར	nurse a child	nu ma ster
ནུ་མ་མཐོ་བ	heaving breast	nu ma mtho ba
ནུ་མ་འཐུང་བ	breast sucker, infant	nu ma 'thung ba
ནུ་མ་ནུ་ནུ་མཛད	sucking	nu ma nu nu mdzad
ནུ་མ་བསྣུན	suckle	nu ma bsnun
ནུ་མ་བསྣུན་པ	to suck the breast	nu ma bsnun pa
ནུ་མ་བསྣུན་པའི་མ་མ	wet nurse	nu ma bsnun pa'i ma ma
ནུ་མ་ཟུང	pair of breasts nu ma'i dkyil na nor bu dga' 'khyil 'khor lo 'dra ba - her round breasts are like fabulous gems	nu ma zung
ནུ་མའི་ཐད་དུ	in front of her breasts nu ma'i don du brjod cing ma ngo shes	nu ma'i thad du
ཙམ	do not have any interest other than drinking from the breast and knowing one's mother	tsam
ནུ་མའི་རྩེ	nipple, tit	nu ma'i rtse
ནུ་མས་མཆི་མ་ཕྱིས་ཤིང	tears running down her breasts	nu mas mchi ma phyis shing
ནུ་མོ	the younger sister [of a female]	nu mo
ནུ་རྫི	[arch] chang and amrita nying khu, fermented milk	nu rdzi
ནུ་ཞོ	1) [mother's] milk; 2) milk and curds	nu zho
ནུ་ཞོ་སྟེར་ཁང	nursing room for mothers	nu zho ster khang
ནུ་ཞོ་འཐུང་བ	suckling	nu zho 'thung ba
ནུ་ཞོ་ལྡུད་པ	1	nu zho ldud pa
ནུ་ཞོ་སྣུན་པ	suckle	nu zho snun pa
ནུ་འོ་སྟེར་བ	suckle	nu 'o ster ba
ནུ་རིན	price of milk	nu rin
ནུ་ལོངས	suck	nu longs
ནུ་ཤ	thoracic muscle	nu sha
ནུ་ཤུབས	brassiere	nu shubs
ནུ་སོར	nipple	nu sor
ནུག་ཏི	so, thus, in this manner	nug ti
ནུག་སྟེ	so, thus	nug ste
ནུད	imp. of {nud pa}	nud
ནུད་པ	suckle	nud pa
ནུབ	set; ex {nyi ma nub} the sun has set	nub
ནུབ་ཀྱི	of the west, western	nub kyi
ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཁྱིམ་མ	TSE	nub kyi khyim ma
ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	moon	nub kyi thig le
ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	W direction protector water god, Varuna	nub kyi phyogs skyong
ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་རོལ	western direction	nub kyi phyogs rol
ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ	toward the W	nub kyi phyogs su
ནུབ་ཀྱི་བ་གླང་སྤྱོད	Western continent of cattle	nub kyi ba glang spyod
ནུབ་ཀྱི་བ་ལང་སྤྱོང	W continent of cattle nub kyi ba lang spyong gyo ldan dang	nub kyi ba lang spyong
ལམ་མ་ཆོག་འགྲོ་བ	W continent of cattle land of deceit and land of great passage	lam ma chog 'gro ba
ནུབ་ཀྱི་བ་ལང་སྤྱོད	Western continent of cattle 1510 nub kyi ba lang spyod g.yo ldan dang lam	nub kyi ba lang spyod
མཆོག་འགྲོ་བ	Western land of deceit and land of great passage	mchog 'gro ba
ནུབ་ཀྱི་རི	W mt	nub kyi ri
ནུབ་ཀྱི་རི་བོ་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	1 of the phal chen sde pa lnga	nub kyi ri bo la gnas pa'i sde
ནུབ་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 W stars [lha mtshams dang, snron, snrubs, chu stod, chu smad, gro bzhin, byi bzhin rnams so	nub skar bdun
ནུབ་ཁ	last day, end of the world	nub kha
ནུབ་གངས་ལ	nub gangs pass [lha ri rdzong gi shar rgyud du yod, de'i mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos nas smi 5776 yod	nub gangs la
ནུབ་གླིང	W continent/ region, the W world	nub gling
ནུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Atlantic Ocean	nub rgya mtsho
ནུབ་རྒྱུད	W side/ direction	nub rgyud
ནུབ་སྒོ	W gate	nub sgo
ནུབ་ངོས	west side, west direction	nub ngos
ནུབ་ངོས་ནས	from the west nub gcig lhag por nyal ba'i ltung byed the downfall of sleeping more than 1 night [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, bsnyen par ma rdzogs pa dang lhan cig tu mtshams nang g...	nub ngos nas
ནུབ་ཇ	supper	nub ja
ནུབ་འཇར་མན	W Germany	nub 'jar man
ནུབ་ཏུ	in the W	nub tu
ནུབ་ཏུ་གནས	resident of the west	nub tu gnas
ནུབ་ཏུ་མི་འཇུག	not decline	nub tu mi 'jug
ནུབ་གཏེར་གསལ་བ་མེ་ཏོག་ལྟ་བུ	W radiant treasures like flowers GD	nub gter gsal ba me tog lta bu
ནུབ་སྟོད	the upper W [nub phyogs stod smad gnyis su phye ba'i stod cha	nub stod
ནུབ་བལྟ	turn/ look/ face to the W	nub blta
ནུབ་ཐ་མ	final day [of retreat]	nub tha ma
ནུབ་དེ་ཁོ	W Germany	nub de kho
ནུབ་ནས་འོངས	come from the west	nub nas 'ongs
ནུབ་པ	to subside/ sink/ be lowered/ fall/ falter; isc. to disappear/ fade from view; to be eclipsed	nub pa
ནུབ་པ་གླང་སྤྱོད	cattle-feeding land in the west, a western continent	nub pa glang spyod
ནུབ་པ་མེད་པ	that is never lowered/ never sinks/ falls/ falters/ declines	nub pa med pa
ནུབ་པར་གྱུར	disappeared, vanquished	nub par gyur
ནུབ་པར་འགྱུར	disappeared, set	nub par 'gyur
ནུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	cause to sink, decay, decline	nub par byed pa
ནུབ་པོ	disappearance	nub po
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས	W [side direction]	nub phyogs
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	western	nub phyogs kyi
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	occident	nub phyogs rgyal khab
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁྱབ	W nations	nub phyogs rgyal khyab
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་བདག	W protector water god	nub phyogs bdag
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་བདག་པོ	W protector water god	nub phyogs bdag po
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་བདེ་དང་ལྡན་པ	one of the {phyogs bcu'i zhing khams} the [buddha] realms of the ten directions	nub phyogs bde dang ldan pa
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་པ	western, occidental	nub phyogs pa
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་པད་མ་བརྩེགས་པ	Padmakuta, the western Buddhafield	nub phyogs pad ma brtsegs pa
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་བ་གླང་སྤྱོད	the western continent of the Bountiful Cow	nub phyogs ba glang spyod
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་སུ	in the West	nub phyogs su
ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཨོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་ཡུལ	[go] west to the land of Oddiyana	nub phyogs o rgyan gyi yul
ནུབ་བ	sink	nub ba
ནུབ་བ་གླང་སྤྱོད	pargod'aniya in the W	nub ba glang spyod
ནུབ་བ་ལང་སྤྱོད	to the west, the continent of Aparagodaniya	nub ba lang spyod
ནུབ་བྱང	1) NW; 2) N and W	nub byang
ནུབ་བྱང་བདག་པོ	wind deity, protector of the NW	nub byang bdag po
ནུབ་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	wind god, protector of the NW direction	nub byang phyogs skyong
ཝཧོ་ཀེཨེཔས་ཐེ་ནོརཐ	western quarter	who keeps the north
ནུབ་བྱང་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་བ	mastery? of the NW [one of the {phyogs bcu'i zhing khams} = the [buddha] realms of the 10 directions	nub byang dbang du gyur ba
ནུབ་མ	the W one	nub ma
ནུབ་མེད	{nub pa med pa} that is never lowered/ never sinks/ falls/ falters/ declines	nub med
ནུབ་མོ	evening, night, in the evening, at night	nub mo
ནུབ་མོ་ལ	in the evening, at sunset	nub mo la
ནུབ་སྨད	the lower W [nub phyogs stod smad gnyis su phye ba'i smad cha	nub smad
ནུབ་བཞིན	setting	nub bzhin
ནུབ་རི	western mountain	nub ri
ནུབ་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	1 of the phal chen sde pa lnga	nub ri la gnas pa'i sde
ནུབ་ཧོར	nub hor district	nub hor
ནུབ་ཨོམ་དི་ཡ་ན	1 of gnas chen lnga	nub om di ya na
ནུམ	sounding, thundering D	num
ནུར་གྱིས་འཐེན་པ	pulling by jerks, by little and little	nur gyis 'then pa
ནུར་ནུར	oblong	nur nur
ནུར་ནུར་པོ	<kallam>, the soupy, (oval, oblong	nur nur po
ནུར་ནུར་མ	denotes the embryo in the 2nd week	nur nur ma
ནུར་ནུར་མོ	oval, oblong	nur nur mo
ནུར་པ	elongated, stretched, come out D	nur pa
ནུར་བ	change place or posture, shift, move by degrees, be displaced, be impressed, yield, give way, be desiccated, SA snur ba, brnur ba	nur ba
ནུར་བྱིན	in an eclipse Rahu gdong mjug gang rung la chu tshod gzugs me sogs four 1/2 month's coursing kyis subtracted &, gza' dag pa'i longs spyod kyi above the change nur is added	nur byin
ནུར་རྩི	alcohol, naptha D	nur rtsi
ནུར་རྫིས	spirit of wine, naptha	nur rdzis
ནུས	ability, suck, SA nu ba, the auxiliary verb "to dare to"	nus
ནུས་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་པ	emphasize	nus skyed byed pa
ནུས་འགན	ability and responsibility	nus 'gan
ནུས་འགན་མཐུན་པོ	ability goes w responsibility	nus 'gan mthun po
ནུས་འགྲོ	bird	nus 'gro
ནུས་ཅན	bird	nus can
ནུས་བཅས	efficacy, endowed with power	nus bcas
ནུས་བཅུད	nourishing power	nus bcud
ནུས་སྟོབས	ability, capacity, strength, power, efficacy, efficiency	nus stobs
ནུས་སྟོབས་ཇེ་འཕེལ	growing in its power	nus stobs je 'phel
ནུས་སྟོབས་སྤར་བ	enliven	nus stobs spar ba
ནུས་སྟོབས་མེད་པ	faint	nus stobs med pa
ནུས་སྟོབས་ཞན་པ	weak, feeble	nus stobs zhan pa
ནུས་སྟོབས་ལ་དཔགས་པ	in proportion to our strength	nus stobs la dpags pa
ནུས་ཐུ་མ	shaman, sorcerer	nus thu ma
ནུས་མཐུ	energy and power/ force	nus mthu
ནུས་མཐུ་ཅན	powerful one	nus mthu can
ནུས་མཐུ་ཆེ	great is the power of ...	nus mthu che
ནུས་ལྡན	powerful	nus ldan
ནུས་ལྡན་གྱིས་བྱས	they did it effectively	nus ldan gyis byas
ནུས་ལྡན་ཆེན་པོ	1) very powerful/ beneficial/ effective; 2) species of amaranth D	nus ldan chen po
ནུས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	'bri gung rig 'dzin	nus ldan rdo rje
ནུས་པ	abilities {rgyas pa'i nus pa 'di 'dra lha rnams la yang med} his abilities are unequaled even by the gods	nus pa
ནུས་པ་སྐྱེད	increase of efficacy or ability	nus pa skyed
ནུས་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 powers	nus pa brgyad
ནུས་པ་ཅན	endowed with the capacity for . . .	nus pa can
ནུས་པ་ཆེ	powerful; x {sems can gzhan gyis bsgrub pa las nus pa che bas} more powerful too than those of other kinds of beings	nus pa che
ནུས་པ་བཏོན	played a role/ part in, had an effect, succeed	nus pa bton
ནུས་པ་སྟོང་ལྡན	dur ba grass, Panicum dactylum	nus pa stong ldan
ནུས་པ་སྟོན་པ	to show off one's powers	nus pa ston pa
ནུས་པ་བརྟན་པར་བྱས	stabilize the blessing	nus pa brtan par byas
ནུས་པ་ཐོན	to be effective	nus pa thon
ནུས་པ་ཐོན་པའི་འཕེན་ཐག	effective range of a gun	nus pa thon pa'i 'phen thag
ནུས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	potent	nus pa dang ldan pa
ནུས་པ་དྲག་པོ	wrathful energy	nus pa drag po
ནུས་པ་འདོན	play a role/ part in, have an effect, succeed	nus pa 'don
ནུས་པ་ལྡན	capable, able, effective; 2) mantra holder, sorcerer D	nus pa ldan
ནུས་པ་མེད་པ	powerless, weakling	nus pa med pa
ནུས་པ་ཚོགས་པ	collective force	nus pa tshogs pa
ནུས་པ་ཞན་པ	inferior ability, low efficiency	nus pa zhan pa
ནུས་པ་རང་ཆས	intrinsic power	nus pa rang chas
ནུས་པ་སུ་ཆེ་བ་ལྟ	let us see who is more able	nus pa su che ba lta
ནུས་པ་སྲུང	lcags rdung sar lcags &, zangs rdung sar zangs [syn: kla klo kha, lcags dmar, zangs ma, zangs dmar]; 2) copper water vessel of kitchen equipment	nus pa srung
ནུས་པའི་སྤྱང་ཀི	"jackal of power," [variety of poisons]	nus pa'i spyang ki
ནུས་པའི་དབང་ལྔ	= the five empowerments of ability GD	nus pa'i dbang lnga
ནུས་པོ	powerful, beneficial, effective	nus po
ནུས་སྤོབས	power and confidence	nus spobs
ནུས་བ	ba able	nus ba
ནུས་བྱེད	semen, able D	nus byed
ནུས་དབང	the enabling empowerments	nus dbang
ནུས་དབང་ལྔ	five enabling empowerments: the two empowerments of learning and meditation enabling one to benefit oneself, the two empowerments of exposition and activity enabling one to benefit others, and the ...	nus dbang lnga
ནུས་འབྲས	grub 'bras of power chu yur gsar bskrun de rnams kyi nus 'bras thon pa	nus 'bras
ནུས་མ	SK shakti, [female consort/ energy of a hindu deity]	nus ma
ནུས་མིན	not endowed with efficacy	nus min
ནུས་མེད	powerless, weak, incapable, ineffective, impotent	nus med
ནུས་མེད་པ་ཆགས་པ	paralyze 1512	nus med pa chags pa
ནུས་བཙོན	efficiency, capability, effectiveness	nus btson
ནུས་རྩལ	power	nus rtsal
ནུས་ཚད	capacity, level of efficiency/ ability	nus tshad
ནུས་ཚད་ཐོན་པ་ཞིག་མ་བྱུང་ན	if [we] don't attain the ability	nus tshad thon pa zhig ma byung na
ནུས་ཚོད	to the extent of one's ability, as much as one can	nus tshod
ནུས་ཚོད་དང་བསྟུན	as much as we are able	nus tshod dang bstun
ནུས་ཟླ	(met rgyal 12th month	nus zla
ནུས་རུང་ཙམ	mere capability	nus rung tsam
ནུས་རླབས་ཕོག་པ	[electric] induction	nus rlabs phog pa
ནུས་ཤུགས	force, impact, strength, power	nus shugs
ནུས་ཤུགས་གང་ཡོད་འདོན	bring forth/ use [all] 1's strength/ power, spare no effort, go to all lengths	nus shugs gang yod 'don
ནུས་ཤུགས་གང་ཡོད་འདོན་པ	bring forth/ use [all] 1's strength/ power, spare no effort, go to all lengths	nus shugs gang yod 'don pa
ནུས་ཤུགས་ཅན	dynamic potent	nus shugs can
ནུས་ཤུགས་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང	intensify	nus shugs che ru gtong
ནུས་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	powerful	nus shugs chen po
ནུས་ཤུགས་འདོན	bring forth/ use 1's strength/ power	nus shugs 'don
ནུས་ཤུགས་འདོན་པ	bring forth/ use 1's strength/ power	nus shugs 'don pa
ནུས་ཤུགས་མེད་པ	null, impotent	nus shugs med pa
ནུས་ཤུགས་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	deaden nus shugs yod rgyu rtsal sprugs byed bring forth/ use [all] 1's strength/ power, spare no effort, go to all lengths	nus shugs med par bzo ba
ནུས་ཤུགས་ལྷག་མ	extra strength, surplus energy	nus shugs lhag ma
ནེ	= ne'u	ne
ནེ་ཀོ	the Cabinet	ne ko
ནེ་གུ	[arch] black	ne gu
ནེ་གྲོ་ཏ	nyagroda tree	ne gro ta
ནེ་སྒོར	Nepalese rupees	ne sgor
ནE་རྙ་ཛ་ནའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང	Nairanjana River	nE rnya dza na'i chu klung
ནེ་ཐང	meadow, grassland, sward	ne thang
ནེ་ནེ	1) [maternal] aunt	ne ne
ནེ་ནེ་མོ	aunt (address of courtesy to a woman	ne ne mo
ནེ་པ་ལ	Nepal	ne pa la
ནེ་པ་ལའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	Nepal	ne pa la'i rgyal khab
ནེ་པ་ལའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	Nepal	ne pa la'i rgyal po'i rgyal khab
ནེ་པ་ལེ	Nepalese	ne pa le
ནེ་ཕ	NEFA, NE frontier area	ne pha
ནེ་ལྦེ	trowel	ne lbe
ནེ་མ	meadow, green sward	ne ma
ནེ་མོ	meadow, grass-plot, green-sward	ne mo
ནེ་ཙེ	parrot	ne tse
ནེ་ཙོ	1) parrot [syn: kun tu 'gro, skad gnyis pa, 'khyog po'i mchu can, lce gnyis pa, 'jam ljang 'dab ldan, 'thor byed, yid gzhung, tsig 'jam] 2) minister of the king of the rakshasas)	ne tso
ནེ་ཙོ་སྣ	parrot's nose, red tree, parrot	ne tso sna
ནེ་རྩ་མ་པ	place sw of dignaga	ne rtsa ma pa
ནེ་རྩམ་པ	{ne rtsam pa}	ne rtsam pa
ནེ་ཚེ	parrot	ne tshe
ནེ་ཚོ	1) parrot; 2) minister of the king of the rakshasas D	ne tsho
ནེ་ཚོ་ལྗང་གུ	parrot green	ne tsho ljang gu
ནེ་ཚོའི་ཁ་འདོན	parroting utterance	ne tsho'i kha 'don
ནེ་ཝ	masons's trowel	ne wa
ནེ་ཝ་རྒྱག	plastering	ne wa rgyag
ནེ་ཝེ	mason's trowel	ne we
ནེ་ཝེ་རྒྱག་པ	plaster, rough-cast	ne we rgyag pa
ནE་རན	dza na - Nairanjana, [the river flowing by Bodhgaya in present day Bihar]	nE ran
ནེ་རན་ཛ་ན	Nairanjana River	ne ran dza na
ནེ་རི་བུལ་མཙོ	ne ri bul lake [W nag chu rdzong]	ne ri bul mtso
ནེ་རི་བུལ་མཚོ	ne ri bul lake	ne ri bul mtsho
ནེ་རེ	sediment settlings, dregs D	ne re
ནེ་ལེ	'ol ba, mouse-hawk	ne le
ནེ་གསིང	alpine pastures, grass on mountain tops	ne gsing
ནེ་གསིང་མེ་ཏོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་བཀྲ	alpine pasture dotted w various flowers, grassland, lawn	ne gsing me tog sna tshogs bkra
ནེ་གསེང	alpine pasture, grass on high mountaintops, [marshy] meadow, grassland, lawn	ne gseng
ནེ་གསེང་མེ་ཏོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་བཀྲ	alpine pasture/ meadow dotted w various flowers	ne gseng me tog sna tshogs bkra
ནེག་སོན	Nixon	neg son
ནེན	take, lay hold of seize, take out/ off/ away, hold J	nen
ནེན་པ	take, lay hold of, seize, take off	nen pa
ནེམ	softly	nem
ནེམ་ཐང	white and red silk spel ba'i gzan lta bu zhig	nem thang
ནེམ་ནུར	doubt[ful], suspicion D	nem nur
ནེམ་ནུར་མི་བྱེད	not doubt	nem nur mi byed
ནེམ་ནུར་བསལ་ཡོང	clear up doubt	nem nur bsal yong
ནེམ་ནེམ	nodding, waving, swaying, rocking, quivering, fall through, collapse, cave in, sink down, give way	nem nem
ནེམ་ནེམ་པ	1) cave in, sink down, give way; 2) rocking motion D; 3) doubtful	nem nem pa
ནེམ་ནེམ་བྱེད་པ	sink a little, give way	nem nem byed pa
ནེམ་ནེམ་བྱེད་པའི་ས་གཞི	quaking/ collapsing earth	nem nem byed pa'i sa gzhi
ནེམ་ནེམ་ལིང་ལིང	kind of flexible motion nem nem ling ling byed pa'i zam pa nodding, waving, swaying, rocking bridge	nem nem ling ling
ནེམ་བུ	doubt, error	nem bu
ནེམ་ཙམ་ཉིད་ནས	starting very softly	nem tsam nyid nas
ནེམས	it sinks a little, gives way	nems
ནེའུ	small fish	ne'u
ནེའུ་ཁ	upper part of a[n alpine] meadow	ne'u kha
ནེའུ་ལྗང	SA ne gsing	ne'u ljang
ནེའུ་ཐང	meadow, grass-plot, greensward	ne'u thang
ནེའུ་ལྡང	contemporary, friend, protector, defender	ne'u ldang
ནེའུ་ལྡངས	of the same age, protector, defender D	ne'u ldangs
ནེའུ་ཟི་ལན་ཨ	New Zealand	ne'u zi lan a
ནེའུ་ཟླ	[friend] of = age, contemporary	ne'u zla
ནེའུ་རིང	a meadow	ne'u ring
ནེའུ་ལེ	a mongoose; ichneumon, weasel	ne'u le
ནེའུ་ལེ་སེར་པོ	yellow weasel	ne'u le ser po
ནེའུ་ལེའི་རི་མོ	lag sor gyi rtse mo'i mdun ngos kyi dkyil du chags pa'i ri dang mtsho'i ri mo	ne'u le'i ri mo
ནེའུ་ལོ་པ	of = age	ne'u lo pa
ནེའུ་སིང	grass-plots, alpine pastures	ne'u sing
ནེའུ་སེང	meadow	ne'u seng
ནེའུ་སྲེང	field of moss	ne'u sreng
ནེའུ་སྲེང་གསིང	field of moss, soft, grassy meadow	ne'u sreng gsing
ནེའུ་གསིང	green meadow/ grass-plot/ lawn	ne'u gsing
ནེའུ་གསིང་གི་ཁ	upper part of a[n alpine] meadow	ne'u gsing gi kha
ནེའུ་གསིང་བཞིན	like a soft meadow	ne'u gsing bzhin
ནེའུ་གསེང	lawn, beautiful grassy green	ne'u gseng
ནེར	sink, fall gradually, subside, lower itself	ner
ནེར་བ	drop gradually, lower itself, subside, sink	ner ba
ནེས་པར་མཁོ་བ	important, necessary	nes par mkho ba
ནོ	completing particle; {rdzogs yig}	no
ནོ་ཀྲོ་གོང	no kro gong	no kro gong
ནོ་ནོ	title of young noblemen	no no
ནོ་ནོ་ཆུང་སེ	youngest of a nobleman's sons	no no chung se
ནོ་ནོ་ཆེན་མོ	oldest son of a nobleman	no no chen mo
ནོ་ནོ་བར་པ	second oldest of a nobleman's sons	no no bar pa
ནོ་ནོ་བར་མ	middle son of a nobleman	no no bar ma
ནོ་པི་ཀ	no pi ka, propitiatory rite, sadhana [particular 1?]	no pi ka
ནོ་མུ་ཧན	monastery incarnation	no mu han
ནོ་མུན་ཧན	(M king of the doctrine, dharmaraja	no mun han
ནོ་མོ	chos for mongols	no mo
ནོ་མོན་ཧན	(M rank/ title	no mon han
ནོ་ཝེ	Norway	no we
ནོ་ཡོན	(M noble, lord, chief	no yon
ནོ་ཡོན་ཧུ་ཐུག	incarnate lama	no yon hu thug
ནོ་ཡོན་ཧུ་ཐུག་ཐུ	mongol chief saint	no yon hu thug thu
ནོག	cervical vertebra, hump of a camel [ba lang dang rnga mong gi mjing steng gi sha 'bur]	nog
ནོག་ཁ	tea color	nog kha
ནོག་ཅན	humped-back, cattle	nog can
ནོག་བསྟན	show	nog bstan
ནོག་པ	very dark, deep-black	nog pa
ནོག་པོ	very dark, deep-black	nog po
ནོག་འབུར	on top of cattle's neck gi sha 'bur	nog 'bur
ནོག་བཤུས	carbon copy	nog bshus
ནོགས་ཐུབ	capable of being cleaned	nogs thub
ནོགས་པ	rubbed, cleansed, cleaned	nogs pa
ནོགས་བག་དྲི་མའི་སྐྱོན་ནམ་གྱའ	clothes slog la nogs bag chags pa wash in clean water	nogs bag dri ma'i skyon nam gya'
ནོགས་ཟིན	to identify	nogs zin
ནོང	fault, mistake err, make a mistake, harmful actions, crime	nong
ནོང་པ་བཤགས་པ	to confess/ confession of errors	nong pa bshags pa
ནོང་བ	grieve, upset, cause pain, ail, commit a fault, make a mistake, commit oneself	nong ba
ནོངས	faults, grieve, SA nong ba	nongs
ནོངས་ཅི་བྱེད	how can you go wrong?	nongs ci byed
ནོངས་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, err[or], mistake[s]; 2) [p nong ba] fault, crime, harmful, mistake[s] err[or], dead	nongs pa
ནོངས་པ་ཅན	blamable, culpable, guilty	nongs pa can
ནོངས་པ་ཇི་མཆིས་བཟོད་པར་གསོལ	please put up w/ pardon the faults [I] have committed	nongs pa ji mchis bzod par gsol
ནོངས་པ་བྱས་པ	commit faults/ mistakes	nongs pa byas pa
ནོངས་པ་མི་མངའ	having no faults	nongs pa mi mnga'
ནོངས་པ་མི་བྱེད་པ	not to commit a crime	nongs pa mi byed pa
ནོངས་པ་མེད་པ	w/o faults/ mistakes	nongs pa med pa
ནོངས་པ་བཤགས	confess faults/ errors	nongs pa bshags
ནོངས་པ་བཤགས་པ	confess faults/ errors	nongs pa bshags pa
ནོངས་པའི་ལས	harmful actions, mistakes	nongs pa'i las
ནོངས་པར་ཉེས་ཆད་ཕོག	erroneously commit faults	nongs par nyes chad phog
ནོངས་སྤྱོད	faults, crimes, transgressions, misdeed, mistaken actions	nongs spyod
ནོངས་མེད	w/o fault/ error	nongs med
ནོངས་ཚིག	confession	nongs tshig
ནོངས་བཤགས	apology, admittance of error, confessing faults	nongs bshags
ནོངས་བཤགས་ཕུལ	apologize, admit error, confess faults	nongs bshags phul
ནོད	"vessel" [the world], habitation, abode, receive/ obtain instruction	nod
ནོད་པ	1) (Tha dad pa mnos pa, mno ba, nos,, receive, keep, take, obtain [instruction]; 2) (Tha mi dad pa,, attain	nod pa
ནོད་པའི་འཕྲིན	a letter of request	nod pa'i 'phrin
ནོད་རིམ་པ	the two stages (dev/comp)	nod rim pa
ནོན་ཅིག	press, SA gnon pa	non cig
ནོན་ཆུང་བ	1) weak oppression/ burden, control suppression; 2) w/o brilliance/ shining, faded, lusterless non chung ba'i sprin gseb kyi nyi 'od weak sunlight among the clouds	non chung ba
ནོན་ཆེ་བ	powerful oppression/ burden control suppression	non che ba
ནོན་པ	{non pa, non pa, non pa} intr. v.; suppressed, to press, to pur over, to cover with	non pa
ནོན་པོ	firm, agressive	non po
ནོབས	nab pa!	nobs
ནོམ	1) vi. to enjoy, to take pleasure in. 2) to seize, to keep, to hold 3) to smell	nom
ནོམ་ཆི་ཐུ	(M rank/ title	nom chi thu
ནོམ་ཆེན	ca lag 'gangs chen nam rtsa chen	nom chen
ནོམ་ཉུག	[arch] one side reg par nom and all reg par nyug zer	nom nyug
ནོམ་འདོད་ལྟོ་འཚོལ	rnyed bkur la chags nas look for food and drink	nom 'dod lto 'tshol
ནོམ་ནོམ	{lag pas nom nom gnyen gos la reg cing} convulsively clutching at the clothes of their relatives	nom nom
ནོམ་ནོམ་ལག་པ	sick person near death gos kyi logs nas spu 'thog tshul dang, 'chang tsam 'chang tsam byed pa'i ngang tshul zhig	nom nom lag pa
ནོམ་པ	enjoyments, all articles, partake of, enjoy, be satisfied, lay hold of	nom pa
ནོམ་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	satisfying	nom pa dang bcas pa
ནོམ་པས་ཉོ	buy through wealth	nom pas nyo
ནོམ་ཕུད	phud [select portion/ offering] of 1's wealth and possessions	nom phud
ནོམ་བུ	small child kha yis bsnyod de the be given food, satisfied, content	nom bu
ནོམ་འུན་ཁན	(M king of the doctrine, dharmaraja	nom 'un khan
ནོམ་འུན་ཧན	(M king of the doctrine, dharmaraja	nom 'un han
ནོམས	enjoy, SA nom pa	noms
ནོམས་ཏུག་བྱེད་པ	lay hold of	noms tug byed pa
ནོམས་པ	valuables	noms pa
ནོའུ་ཏའོ	glutinous rice	no'u ta'o
ནོའུར	(M lake	no'ur
ནོར	property, possessions, wealth, riches, money, cattle, mistakes	nor
ནོར་ཀུན	all one's wealth/ goods	nor kun
ནོར་རྐང་གྲིབ་པ	falling off in the number of cows	nor rkang grib pa
ནོར་རྐང་བྲི་བ	1) wealth/ cattle diminishing	nor rkang bri ba
ནོར་སྐལ	inheritance, hereditary portion, share of property	nor skal
ནོར་སྐལ་རྣམས	funds, capital	nor skal rnams
ནོར་སྐྱི་བ	borrow money D	nor skyi ba
ནོར་སྐྱིན	loan of money or goods	nor skyin
ནོར་སྐྱོང	a kind of bird, treasurer, watchdog, dog	nor skyong
ནོར་སྐྱོང་ཟེ་འབྲུ	a medicinal fruit	nor skyong ze 'bru
ནོར་སྐྱོངས	a kind of bird, treasurer	nor skyongs
ནོར་སྐྱོན	mistaken fault	nor skyon
ནོར་བསྐྱིས་པའི་སྐྱིན	loan producing interest	nor bskyis pa'i skyin
ནོར་ཁམ་པོ་ཆེ	nor rtsa 'gangs can	nor kham po che
ནོར་ཁྲལ	wealth/ cattle gyi dpya khral	nor khral
ནོར་མཁན	mistaker, one who commits a blunder	nor mkhan
ནོར་འཁྲིག	mating of cattle	nor 'khrig
ནོར་འཁྲིག་པ	pairing of cattle	nor 'khrig pa
ནོར་འཁྲུལ	mistake, error, wrong, aberration, blunder, fallacy, fault, inaccurate, incorrect, slip, mistake	nor 'khrul
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་གང་ཤེས་གཞན་ལ་ལབ་པ	confess	nor 'khrul gang shes gzhan la lab pa
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་གྱི	wrongful	nor 'khrul gyi
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་སྟོན་པ	refute	nor 'khrul ston pa
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་བྱེད་མཁན	aberrant	nor 'khrul byed mkhan
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་བྱེད་པ	err	nor 'khrul byed pa
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་མེད་པ	without mistake	nor 'khrul med pa
ནོར་འཁྲུལ་བཟོ་ཉེན་ཅན	fallible	nor 'khrul bzo nyen can
ནོར་གྱང	auspicious wealth	nor gyang
ནོར་གྱི་ཉ་བ	security for money	nor gyi nya ba
ནོར་གྱི་བདག	Vaishravana, rnam thos sras, owner of wealth	nor gyi bdag
ནོར་གྱི་སྡོང་བུ	wish-fulfilling tree	nor gyi sdong bu
ནོར་གྱི་བློ་གྲོས་བདག	king	nor gyi blo gros bdag
ནོར་གྱི་བློ་གྲོས་མ	the earth	nor gyi blo gros ma
ནོར་གྱི་དབང་པོ	lord of wealth	nor gyi dbang po
ནོར་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	Jambhala	nor gyi dbang phyug
ནོར་གྱི་མཛོད	Danakosha; Treasury of Wealth	nor gyi mdzod
ནོར་གྱི་ལེགས་སྦྱར	Danasamskrita	nor gyi legs sbyar
ནོར་གྱིས་བཀུར་བ	{rgyal po nor gyis bkur ba zhes pa byung} King Dhanasammata, Honored by Wealth, held sway	nor gyis bkur ba
ནོར་གྱིས་ཁེངས་པའི་སྤང	meadow full of cattle	nor gyis khengs pa'i spang
ནོར་གྱིས་ཚིམ་པར་མཛད	gave them enough wealth to satisfy them	nor gyis tshim par mdzad
ནོར་གླིང	{nor bu gling kha}	nor gling
ནོར་གླིང་དུ་འཛོམས་པ	gather at Nor-ling	nor gling du 'dzoms pa
ནོར་དགུ	the whole of one's possessions	nor dgu
ནོར་བགོ་བ	divide property	nor bgo ba
ནོར་མགོ་ལ	nor mgo pass [gangs ri yod pa'i la zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi sa dga' rdzong gi lho nub mtshams su 1515 yod, la rtse'i mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos nas smi 6724 yod,...6724	nor mgo la
ནོར་རྒྱས	abundance, plenty, snakegoddess with earth on her head	nor rgyas
ནོར་རྒྱས་པ	rich, increase of wealth	nor rgyas pa
ནོར་རྒྱས་བུ	naga {nor rgyas bu}	nor rgyas bu
ནོར་རྒྱུན་མ	vasudhara (bodhisattva of abundance), yab is rnam thos sras, a goddess, the earth	nor rgyun ma
ནོར་རྒྱུན་མའི་སྨོན་ལམ	{nor rgyun ma'i smon lam [from CH to Tibetan tr tantra	nor rgyun ma'i smon lam
ནོར་རྒྱུན་མའི་གཟུངས	dharani of deity	nor rgyun ma'i gzungs
ནོར་སྒྲུབ	prospering of wealth, wealth sadhana, prosperity practice, practice of richness; prospering of wealth	nor sgrub
ནོར་སྒྲུབ་པ	gain riches, furnish with, supply	nor sgrub pa
ནོར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་བག་ཆགས	a tendency to want to get rich	nor sgrub pa'i bag chags
ནོར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་བསམ་སྦྱོར	planned to gain more wealth	nor sgrub pa'i bsam sbyor
ནོར་སྒྲུབ་མི་ནུས་པར་བདེ་བར་བསྡད་ན	if I am unable to gain wealth, we may live comfortably now	nor sgrub mi nus par bde bar bsdad na
ནོར་བརྒྱུད	MSS: "wealth" R75: 168.6, nor brgyud ba'i rgyu. [mss]	nor brgyud
ནོར་དངོས་པོ	wealth, property	nor dngos po
ནོར་ཅན	wealthy, rich	nor can
ནོར་བཅལ	estimated wealth	nor bcal
ནོར་བཅོས	correction [of MS]	nor bcos
ནོར་བཅོས་གཏོང་བ	correct	nor bcos gtong ba
ནོར་བཅོས་བྱེད	correct [MS]	nor bcos byed
ནོར་བཅོས་རེའུ་མིག	[list of] errata	nor bcos re'u mig
ནོར་ཆགས་པ	accumulation of wealth	nor chags pa
ནོར་ཆར་འབབས	a gem of Indra	nor char 'babs
ནོར་ཆེན	{wa ra Na sir tshong pa nor chen bya ba} Mahadhana, a wealthy merchant of Varanasi	nor chen
ནོར་མཆོག	pure jewel	nor mchog
ནོར་འཆོར	money has fled	nor 'chor
ནོར་འཇལ་བ	khral bun nyes chad sogs sprod pa	nor 'jal ba
ནོར་ཉན་པ	anything that is useful	nor nyan pa
ནོར་གཉེར	treasurer	nor gnyer
ནོར་གཉེར་པ	treasurer, caretaker, steward, overseer, manager	nor gnyer pa
ནོར་ཏོག	jewel top [in the topknot of a deity]	nor tog
ནོར་གཏོང	bud med kyi phyir du la la nor	nor gtong
ནོར་རྟགས	sign, symbol to note an error	nor rtags
ནོར་ལྟ་བརྒྱད	8 gods of wealth	nor lta brgyad
ནོར་སྟོབས	wealth or cattle khyon 'bor	nor stobs
ནོར་དང་རྒྱན་གོས་ཁྱེར་ཏེ	had taken all her money, jewels, and even her clothes	nor dang rgyan gos khyer te
ནོར་དང་བཅས་ཇག་པས་འཁྲིད	stole all her possessions and led her away	nor dang bcas jag pas 'khrid
ནོར་དང་ཆེ་བ	greed for wealth, avarice	nor dang che ba
ནོར་དང་འདྲ	like wealth	nor dang 'dra
ནོར་དང་འདྲ་བ	counterpart, parallel, equivalent to wealth	nor dang 'dra ba
ནོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing wealth/ cattle/ gems	nor dang ldan pa
ནོར་དང་བུ་ལོན	count to be added or subtracted nor dang g.yog 'khor - wealth, servants, attendants	nor dang bu lon
ནོར་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	rich	nor dang longs spyod
ནོར་དད	be attached to the delights of wealth	nor dad
ནོར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	bsre ba	nor du 'gyur ba
ནོར་དུ་དོགས་པ་ལྔ	1) {chad par dogs}. 2) {rtag par dogs} 3) {phyal bar dogs} 4) {bying bar togs} 5) {med par dogs}	nor du dogs pa lnga
ནོར་དོན	government money/ property 'du 'god, financial affairs	nor don
ནོར་བདག	lord of riches, epithet of vaisravana,	nor bdag
ནོར་བདག་པོ	heir	nor bdag po
ནོར་བདག་མ	mistress of wealth	nor bdag ma
ནོར་བདག་མོ	heiress, goddess {nor bdag mo}	nor bdag mo
ནོར་བདལ་བ	give away riches, scatter money	nor bdal ba
ནོར་བདུན	7 prizes (dad pa, tshul khrims, ngo tsha shes pa, khrel yod pa, thos pa, gtong ba, shes rab)	nor bdun
ནོར་འདུས	gathering of taxes	nor 'dus
ནོར་ལྡན	wealthy	nor ldan
ནོར་ལྡན་མ	Dhanavati	nor ldan ma
ནོར་ལྡན་མ་ཞེས	called Dhanavati	nor ldan ma zhes
ནོར་ལྡན་བརྩེགས	anthill	nor ldan brtsegs
ནོར་སྡིར་ལས་ལུགས	financial system	nor sdir las lugs
ནོར་སྡོང	wish-fulfilling tree	nor sdong
ནོར་ནད	murrain	nor nad
ནོར་ནན་གྱིས་བསྐྱི་བརྙ་བྱས་པ	borrow without repayment / repaying	nor nan gyis bskyi brnya byas pa
ནོར་གནས་པ	treasurer, store-keeper	nor gnas pa
ནོར་སྣ་མང་པོ	various precious things	nor sna mang po
ནོར་དཔོན	cattle guard/ herder	nor dpon
ནོར་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	{rku ba spang zhing sbyin pa byin pas nor phun sum tshogs pa} Abundant wealth results from abandoning stealing and from being generous.	nor phun sum tshogs pa
ནོར་ཕྱ	prognostics relative to prosperity	nor phya
ནོར་ཕཡབ༹	wealth, prosperity	nor phyva
ནོར་ཕྱིར་དུ་གནོད་པ་མང་བ	in return for wealth much harm accrues	nor phyir du gnod pa mang ba
ནོར་ཕྱུག	wealthy	nor phyug
ནོར་ཕྱུག་པ	wealthy nor phyug pa dang ro bca' ba'i thog chod - the wealthiest man nor phyug pa dang ro bca' ba'i thog chod - the wealthiest man [notes: has best of everything; "gather tastes "	nor phyug pa
ནོར་ཕྱུགས	cattle, livestock	nor phyugs
ནོར་འཕེལ	prosperity	nor 'phel
ནོར་འཕྲོད	presents	nor 'phrod
ནོར་བ	(tha mi dad pa 1) confused, mistaken, wrong; 2) err, make a mistake, commit a fault; 3) error. mistake 1516	nor ba
ནོར་བག་ཙམ་རེ	each a little money	nor bag tsam re
ནོར་བུ	1) jewel, precious stone/ thing, mani; 2) tip of the penis; 3) magic weapon/ talisman	nor bu
ནོར་བུ་ཀེ་ཏ་ཀ	ketaka gem	nor bu ke ta ka
ནོར་བུ་དཀར་པོ	crystal gem	nor bu dkar po
ནོར་བུ་བཀྲ་བཀོད	Tantra of Studded Jewels. This tantra shows how to eliminate the defects and sidetracks connected to the view and the practice of meditation, conduct and fruition	nor bu bkra bkod
ནོར་བུ་སྐར་མདོག	kind of gem, gem that shies like a star	nor bu skar mdog
ནོར་བུ་མཁན	jeweller	nor bu mkhan
ནོར་བུ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	Norbu Khachö, in Tsari	nor bu mkha' spyod
ནོར་བུ་གླིང	Treasure-island	nor bu gling
ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ	summer palace of Dalai lama [t' la'i bla ma bdun pa'i dus dbyar kha bzhugs gnas bskal bzang pho brang bzhengs pa nas phyis su aar rgyag sogs kyis khang pa je rgyas su song ba'i spro gling	nor bu gling kha
ནོར་བུ་དགའ་འཁྱིལ	gem with value of 120 gold ounces	nor bu dga' 'khyil
ནོར་བུ་དགོད་འདོད་སྤུངས་འཇོམ	wishfulfilling gem	nor bu dgod 'dod spungs 'jom
ནོར་བུ་དགོས་འདོད་དཔུང་འཇོམས	sgrung las bshad pa'i nor bu rin po che zhig	nor bu dgos 'dod dpung 'joms
ནོར་བུ་དགྲ་འདུལ	Gesar	nor bu dgra 'dul
ནོར་བུ་སྔོན་པོ	sapphire	nor bu sngon po
ནོར་བུ་ཅན	adorned with jewels jug	nor bu can
ནོར་བུ་གཅིག་ཆོག	Single sufficient jewel. The personal teacher regarded as the embodiment of the Three jewels, the Three Roots, and the Three Kayas	nor bu gcig chog
ནོར་བུ་ཆ་བདུན	the 7 places of gems [rgyal po'i rna cha, btshun mo'i rna cha, bse ru'i rva, byu ru'i sdong po, glang chen mche ba, blon po'i rna cha, nor bu mig gsum ste bdun	nor bu cha bdun
ནོར་བུ་ཆབ་བདུན	kind of chinese satin, SA gos chen	nor bu chab bdun
ནོར་བུ་ཆབ་བདུན་མ	a superior quality satin	nor bu chab bdun ma
ནོར་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	byu ru	nor bu chen po
ནོར་བུ་འཆིང་བ	wrists/ ankles	nor bu 'ching ba
ནོར་བུ་འཆིང་བུ	wrist (the part where jewels are bound)	nor bu 'ching bu
ནོར་བུ་ལྗང	emerald	nor bu ljang
ནོར་བུ་ལྗང་ཁུ	emerald	nor bu ljang khu
ནོར་བུ་བསྟན་འཛིན	Norbu Tendzin. The first name of Chokgyur Lingpa, given by his father	nor bu bstan 'dzin
ནོར་བུ་ཐོབ	stone from which gems are obtained	nor bu thob
ནོར་བུ་གདུགས	royal umbrella	nor bu gdugs
ནོར་བུ་བདུན་ཐང	medicine with 7 ingredients	nor bu bdun thang
ནོར་བུ་འདྲ	gem-like	nor bu 'dra
ནོར་བུ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three gems	nor bu rnam gsum
ནོར་བུ་པ	jeweler, expert in gems	nor bu pa
ནོར་བུ་སྤྲོ་བ	white sandalwood	nor bu spro ba
ནོར་བུ་ཕ་ལམ	diamond	nor bu pha lam
ནོར་བུ་ཕྲ་བཀོད	Norbu Trako. A Dzogchen tantra	nor bu phra bkod
ནོར་བུ་ཕྲ་བཀོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Studded Jewels	nor bu phra bkod kyi rgyud
ནོར་བུ་འཕྲ་བཀོད	the Array of Fine Gemstones/ finely set Gem [US] Tantra GD	nor bu 'phra bkod
ནོར་བུ་འཕྲེང་བ	rosary of precious stones	nor bu 'phreng ba
ནོར་བུ་བི་ཙུ་ལ་ཏ	a fabulous gem	nor bu bi tsu la ta
ནོར་བུ་དབང་སྔོན	(aindran'ila	nor bu dbang sngon
ནོར་བུ་འབར་བ	mythical wish-fulfilling jewel	nor bu 'bar ba
ནོར་བུ་མེ་འབར	flaming jewel, the design	nor bu me 'bar
ནོར་བུ་མཛེས་བཟང	kind of vari-colored ordinary gem, mching bu	nor bu mdzes bzang
ནོར་བུ་ཟུར་བརྒྱད་པ	eight-faceted jewel	nor bu zur brgyad pa
ནོར་བུ་བཟང་པོ	epithet of jambhala, the god of wealth	nor bu bzang po
ནོར་བུ་བཟང་པོའི་གཟུངས	dharani of Jambhala D	nor bu bzang po'i gzungs
ནོར་བུ་འི་གླིང	land of jewels, jewel, gem, precious stone	nor bu 'i gling
ནོར་བུ་རིན་ཆེན	precious jewel, 1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu	nor bu rin chen
ནོར་བུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	mani -ratnam, jewel of jewels	nor bu rin po che
ནོར་བུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལྟར	like the precious	nor bu rin po che ltar
ནོར་བུ་ལ	Norbu Pass	nor bu la
བྱུགས་ན་གསེར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	yielded lifegiving nectar that changed iron into gold	byugs na gser du 'gyur ba
ནོར་བུ་ལིང་ཀ	Dalai lama's summer palace	nor bu ling ka
ནོར་བུ་གསེར་པོ	topaz	nor bu gser po
ནོར་བུ་བསམ་འཕེལ	wishfulfilling gem	nor bu bsam 'phel
ནོར་བུམ	vase of wealth	nor bum
ནོར་བུའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	(met coral	nor bu'i 'khri shing
ནོར་བུའི་གླིང	a land of jewels, jewel, gem, precious stone	nor bu'i gling
ནོར་བུའི་མགྲིན་ཅན	domestic fowl	nor bu'i mgrin can
ནོར་བུའི་ཆུན་པོ	nor bu phyogs gcig bsdebs pa'i chag pa lta bu	nor bu'i chun po
ནོར་བུའི་མཆོག	diamond	nor bu'i mchog
ནོར་བུའི་སྙིང་པོ	most excellent gem, diamond	nor bu'i snying po
ནོར་བུའི་རྟ་བབས	1 of 5 great mountains of the western continent of godaniya, SA ri chen po lnga 1517	nor bu'i rta babs
ནོར་བུའི་ཐག་པ	jewel's gzung thag [grasping rope?]	nor bu'i thag pa
ནོར་བུའི་དོ་ཤལ	The Necklace of Jewels, book by Chogyal Namkhai Norbu	nor bu'i do shal
བུའི་དོ་ཤལ	by Rigdzin Kunzang Ngedön Long Yang	bu'i do shal
ནོར་བུའི་ཕྲེང་བ	jewel necklace	nor bu'i phreng ba
ནོར་བུའི་བང་མཛོད	treasury of jewels	nor bu'i bang mdzod
ནོར་བུའི་རྩ་འཁོར་གྱི་མདུད་པ	TSE	nor bu'i rtsa 'khor gyi mdud pa
ནོར་བུའི་འོད	1) light of gems; 2) {nor bu'i 'od mt	nor bu'i 'od
ནོར་བེལ་ཞི་བདེའི་གཟེངས་རྟགས	Nobel Peace Prize	nor bel zhi bde'i gzengs rtags
ནོར་བྱས	by accident, by mistake	nor byas
ནོར་བློ་གྲོས་བདག	a king	nor blo gros bdag
ནོར་དབྱིག	wealth	nor dbyig
ནོར་དབྱུག	jeweled staff	nor dbyug
ནོར་འབོག་པ	{phas bu la nor 'bog pa} like a child who receives his father's inheritance	nor 'bog pa
ནོར་སྦྱིན	kuvera	nor sbyin
ནོར་སྦྱིན་རྒྱལ	Vaishravana, rnam thos sras	nor sbyin rgyal
ནོར་སྦྱིན་གཅུང་པོ	king of the rakshasas	nor sbyin gcung po
ནོར་སྦྱིན་འདྲེན་པ	SA rnam thos sras	nor sbyin 'dren pa
ནོར་སྦྱིན་མ	1) Indra's wife; 2) the goddess nor rgyun ma	nor sbyin ma
ནོར་མ་སྲིད་པ	infallible	nor ma srid pa
ནོར་མ་གསོག	don't bother to accumulate wealth	nor ma gsog
ནོར་མང་བ	abundant wealth; one of {mtho ris kyi yon tan bdun} the seven virtues of a high rebirth	nor mang ba
ནོར་མི་ཉན་པ	useless things	nor mi nyan pa
ནོར་མི་ཉན་པའི་ཆ་ལག	useless things	nor mi nyan pa'i cha lag
ནོར་མི་བདོག་པ	poor, having no property	nor mi bdog pa
ནོར་མི་འདུག	i'm quite sure, no doubt about it	nor mi 'dug
ནོར་མེད	without mistake	nor med
ནོར་མེད་པ	1) poor, impoverished; 2) w/o error	nor med pa
ནོར་རྩིས	count of cattle	nor rtsis
ནོར་རྩེན	playing with wealth, one rolling in wealth, epithet of vaisravana	nor rtsen
ནོར་ཚན	wealth	nor tshan
ནོར་མཛོད	treasury	nor mdzod
ནོར་འཛིན	holding wealth	nor 'dzin
ནོར་འཛིན་བདག་པོ	king	nor 'dzin bdag po
ནོར་འཛིན་བདག་པོའི་སྲད	prince	nor 'dzin bdag po'i srad
ནོར་འཛིན་པ་ཏྲ	rgyab yol sogs la 'god pa'i kind of picture	nor 'dzin pa tra
ནོར་འཛིན་བུ་མོ	daughter of the earth S ta	nor 'dzin bu mo
ནོར་འཛིན་དབང་མོ	holder of treasure, wife of kuvera, title of queens and princesses	nor 'dzin dbang mo
ནོར་འཛིན་གསེར་མོ	female energy of kye rdo rje	nor 'dzin gser mo
ནོར་འཛོམས	abounding in wealth	nor 'dzoms
ནོར་རྫས	valuables	nor rdzas
ནོར་རྫས་སྒེར་གྱིས་བདག་གིར་མི་བྱེད	not privately own wealth nor rdzas rnams dbul phongs la yongs su	nor rdzas sger gyis bdag gir mi byed
རྫོགས་པར་སྦྱིན	after giving all his wealth and possessions to the poor	rdzogs par sbyin
ནོར་རྫས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་ནི་ཡོད	we have enough to live on	nor rdzas phun sum tshogs pa ni yod
ནོར་ཝིའི་ཡུལ	norway	nor wi'i yul
ནོར་ཝེ	Norway	nor we
ནོར་གཞི	'khrul gzhi,...	nor gzhi
ནོར་གཞོང	tray/ vessel of jewels	nor gzhong
ནོར་ཟང་ཟིང	material wealth	nor zang zing
ནོར་ཟས་པ	spendthrift	nor zas pa
ནོར་བཟང	manibhadra (legendary person noted for great dharma efforts)	nor bzang
ནོར་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{mkhas grub} 1423-1513	nor bzang rgya mtsho
ནོར་ཡ	place where there is danger of error	nor ya
ནོར་ཡོད་དགུ་ཅོག	property, all the goods that one has	nor yod dgu cog
ནོར་ཡོད་བཞིན་དུ	though already wealthy	nor yod bzhin du
ནོར་ཡོད་ཡུལ་བྱེས་ཀུན་ཏུ་བྱམས	with wealth you are loved by everyone friend or stranger	nor yod yul byes kun tu byams
ནོར་ལ་གོད	loss of money and property	nor la god
ནོར་ལ་གོད་པ	suffer a loss of property	nor la god pa
ནོར་ལ་ལྟ་བ	look after wealth/ property, be avaricious	nor la lta ba
ནོར་ལ་མནག་པ	wealthy and fortunate	nor la mnag pa
ནོར་ལ་སྤྱད་པ	dge 'dun gyi nor la spyad	nor la spyad pa
ནོར་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoy one's goods	nor la spyod pa
ནོར་ལ་སྲེད་པ	hankering after riches	nor la sred pa
ནོར་ལ་བསྲི	economy in riches	nor la bsri
ནོར་ལས་སྐྱེས	Agnideva the god of fire	nor las skyes
ནོར་ལས་རྒྱལ	epithet of arjuna	nor las rgyal
ནོར་ལས་རྒྱལ་གྱི་རླུང	dhananjaya energy	nor las rgyal gyi rlung
ནོར་ལས་འདས	extravagant	nor las 'das
ནོར་ལས་བྱུང་ཞེས་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	the city called Vasava	nor las byung zhes pa'i grong khyer
ནོར་ལུག་བ་ར	(yaks, sheep, cows and goats)	nor lug ba ra
ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	wealth [and enjoyment]	nor longs spyod
ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མེད་པ	to have no wealth or property	nor longs spyod med pa
ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འཛོམ་དུས	While wealth and possessions are in your hands	nor longs spyod 'dzom dus
ནོར་ཤ	beef	nor sha
ནོར་ཤུགས	financial power/ capacity	nor shugs
ནོར་བཤུགས	exchange property	nor bshugs
ནོར་ས	a mistake to be made, misunderstandings	nor sa
ནོར་སིང་ཧོམ	nursing home	nor sing hom
ནོར་སོ	mistake	nor so
ནོར་སོ་ཅན	blundering	nor so can
ནོར་སོག་འཇོག་པ	accumulate riches	nor sog 'jog pa
ནོར་སྲིད	finance, financial affairs/ activities	nor srid
ནོར་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཁ་སྣོན	subsidy, grant	nor srid kyi kha snon
ནོར་སྲིད་ཀྱི་མཚལ་ཡིག	deficit	nor srid kyi mtshal yig
ནོར་སྲིད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་ཇུས	financial policy	nor srid kyi srid jus
ནོར་སྲིད་ཁུར་པོ	financial burden 1518	nor srid khur po
ནོར་སྲིད་ཁྲུའུ	finance department/ office/ section	nor srid khru'u
ནོར་སྲིད་གྱི་མཚལ་ཡིག	financial deficit	nor srid gyi mtshal yig
ནོར་སྲིད་ཉི་ཚོང	financial commerce [nyo tshong?]	nor srid nyi tshong
ནོར་སྲིད་པུའུ	Ministry of Finance	nor srid pu'u
ནོར་སྲིད་ཚོང་དོན་པུའུ	Finance and Commerce department	nor srid tshong don pu'u
ནོར་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས	finance office	nor srid las khungs
ནོར་སྲུང	1) guard[ian of] wealth; 2) dog	nor srung
ནོར་སྲུང་ཤ་བའི	SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	nor srung sha ba'i
ནོར་སྲུང་ཤ་བའི་གདོང	fawn-headed Vasuraksa	nor srung sha ba'i gdong
ནོར་གསག་པ	hoard up riches	nor gsag pa
ནོར་གསང་བ	conceal treasures	nor gsang ba
ནོར་གསར	fresh wealth, newly rich, good fortune	nor gsar
ནོར་བསགས	accumulated wealth, hoarded treasure	nor bsags
ནོར་བསོག་པ	to accumulate wealth	nor bsog pa
ནོར་བསྲིས	savings	nor bsris
ནོར་བསྲིས་པ	thrift, economy	nor bsris pa
ནོར་བསྲེས	thrift, economy	nor bsres
ནོར་ལྷ	type of lha, gods of wealth, deities of wealth, deity of wealth, assimilated to kubera of the Indian tradition, white	nor lha
ནོར་ལྷ་རྒྱལ	King of Wealth	nor lha rgyal
ནོར་ལྷ་རྒྱལ་གི་རླུང	connecting with the tongue and of the King of wealth GD	nor lha rgyal gi rlung
ནོར་ལྷ་བརྒྱད	the 8 wealth gods	nor lha brgyad
ནོར་ལྷའི་བུ	{rgyal po nor lha'i bu zhes} King Vasava, named after the god of wealth	nor lha'i bu
ནོར་ལྷས་བྱིན	gift of the god of wealth	nor lhas byin
ནོལ་ཐབས་བགྱི	[arch] fight a battle	nol thabs bgyi
ནོལ་བ	unclean, dirty, unchaste, agree, come to terms	nol ba
ནོས	imp. of {nod pa}. Syn {nod}; receive!	nos
ནོས་པ	receive, accept, obtain, SA nod pa, judge, appraise, measure	nos pa
ནོས་ལ་མཐའ་རུ་ཐོན	to bring to perfection	nos la mtha' ru thon
ནྲི	(not in Das)	nri
གན་བཟང་དེང་དཔྱོད	use old traditions in the present age	gna bzang deng dpyod
གནག	black, unwholesome, hostile, negative, opposed, cattle	gnag
གནག་ཁྱུ	herd of cattle/ livestock	gnag khyu
གནག་གི་ཁྱུ	herd of cattle	gnag gi khyu
གནག་རྗེས	cattle's for and hind legs gi rjes	gnag rjes
གནག་ནད	disease of cattle	gnag nad
གནག་སྣུམ	shiny black	gnag snum
གནག་པ	1) w gentle exterior inner malice; 2) sooty black [cattle]	gnag pa
གནག་པོ	1) w gentle exterior inner malice; 2) sooty black [cattle]	gnag po
གནག་ཕྱུག	black cattle	gnag phyug
གནག་ཕྱུགས	yaks; cattle, livestock, black yaks	gnag phyugs
གནག་བག	black stain	gnag bag
གནག་སྦག	sooty	gnag sbag
གནག་རྫི	MSS: cowherd (R75: 184.1) [mss]	gnag rdzi
ནེཨཏ	herd	neat
གནག་ལས་བུ	Maskari Gosaliputra; one of {mu stegs kyi ston pa drug} at the time of Buddha Shakyamuni	gnag las bu
གནག་ལིངས་བཏབ	[arch] = hunted meat, have collected large tax of meat	gnag lings btab
གནག་ལུག	cattle and sheep	gnag lug
གནག་ལུག་སེམས་ཅན	domestic animals	gnag lug sems can
གནག་ཤར་ཤར་བ	gleaming / glimmering black	gnag shar shar ba
གནག་སེམས	evil, wicked, sinister	gnag sems
གནག་ལྷས	cattle shed/ barn	gnag lhas
གནང	{nan du zhus kyang ma gnang} though she begged and begged, the were deaf to her pleas	gnang
གནང་བཀག	permissions and prohibitions, do's and don't's, rules [of the vinaya]	gnang bkag
གནང་སྐྱེད	present, reward, grant	gnang skyed
གནང་སྐྱེས	gift, present, reward [h] [syn: mchod byed, 'degs rten, 'degs mtson, 'bab rten, 'bab stegs, gzigs rten, can be mutual exchange]	gnang skyes
གནང་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་ན་ཞས	since we last met	gnang khyod kyis na zhas
གནང་སྒོ	duties, things to do. Syn {byed sgo}; activities, duties, things to do, things which one has to do	gnang sgo
གནང་ཆ	remuneration, gift	gnang cha
གནང་ཆེན	immense great gift	gnang chen
གནང་རྟེན	lag rtags, yig rten	gnang rten
གནང་སྟེ་འོང	he will assent to it	gnang ste 'ong
གནང་ཐབས་དེ་འདྲ་ག་ལ་ཡོད	how can you possibly do that?	gnang thabs de 'dra ga la yod
གནང་དང	let, allow	gnang dang
གནང་ན་ནས	since our last meeting	gnang na nas
གནང་ཕྱོགས	method, means [h]	gnang phyogs
གནང་བ	conferred upon	gnang ba
གནང་བ་ཐོབ	obtain authorization/ permission	gnang ba thob
གནང་བ་ཐོབ་པ	to obtain authorization	gnang ba thob pa
གནང་བ་གནང	ATG: to give permission. [mss] 1519	gnang ba gnang
གནང་བ་སྤྲོད	ATG: To give permission. [mss]	gnang ba sprod
གནང་བ་བྱིན་པ	to give permission	gnang ba byin pa
གནང་བ་མེད་པ	prohibited	gnang ba med pa
གནང་བ་རྩོལ་དུ་གསོལ	ATG: to give permission (chos skad, honorific.) [mss]	gnang ba rtsol du gsol
གནང་བ་མཛད	grant permission	gnang ba mdzad
གནང་བ་ཞུ	ATG: To ask permission. MG: bh. approval. consent, permission. va. -- zhu, to ask for approval/consent/permission; vi/ -- thob, to obtain approval/consent/permission. 3) CM: [mss]	gnang ba zhu
གནང་བ་ཞུ་བ	to ask permission	gnang ba zhu ba
གནང་བ་ཞུས	to ask his permission	gnang ba zhus
གནང་བའི་སྐབས	with permission	gnang ba'i skabs
གནང་བའི་ཉེས་མེད་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 things which are permitted to a getsul without fault: [one chos gos lhag po 'chang ba dang, two lhung bzed zung 'chang ba dang, three chos gos dang bral ba dang, four sa rko ba dang, five ri...	gnang ba'i nyes med bcu gsum
གནང་བའི་ཏུང་བར	entreaty, application of perfumes	gnang ba'i tung bar
གནང་བའི་ཏུང་བར་བྱས	invitation	gnang ba'i tung bar byas
གནང་བྱུང	bestowed	gnang byung
གནང་འབྱོར	sent and received [h]	gnang 'byor
གནང་འབྱོར་བའི་ཕྱག་བྲིས	letter that was sent and received [h]	gnang 'byor ba'i phyag bris
གནང་སྦྱིན	present, gift, prize, reward	gnang sbyin
གནང་མི་དགོས	don't	gnang mi dgos
གནང་རྩལ	empowerment	gnang rtsal
གནང་ཚུར་ལེན	[arch] rgyal kha tshur len pa	gnang tshur len
གནང་མཛད	1) (Tha dad pa gnang ba, gnang ba, gnongs!,; 1) give, bestow [h]; 2) do say [h]; 2) things suitable to do, permission, approval, consent, confer upon, commit to, grant, concede, be permitted	gnang mdzad
གནང་མཛད་པ	to transmit teachings	gnang mdzad pa
གནང་སྲོལ	way of doing something	gnang srol
གནངས	the day after tomorrow	gnangs
གནངས་འཆར	3rd day thog gi dus tshigs re mos,...Nyi ma gnangs 'char thog ltad mo re ston	gnangs 'char
གནངས་ཉིན	the day after tomorrow	gnangs nyin
གནངས་ཉིན་གྱི་རྗེས་མ	three days from now	gnangs nyin gyi rjes ma
གནངས་བརྡ	sign of what will happen and what should be done on the 3rd day	gnangs brda
གནངས་ཕོད	the year after next	gnangs phod
གནངས་གཞེས	the day after tomorrow and gzhes nyin	gnangs gzhes
གནངས་ལོ	the year after next	gnangs lo
གནད	key/ crucial point; the very heart of . . . ; isc. (when ending a line of verse or a sentence) it is crucial to . . .	gnad
གནད་ཀ	essence, fundamental point	gnad ka
གནད་ཀུན	all the main points	gnad kun
གནད་ཀྱི	crucial, essential	gnad kyi
གནད་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	essential practice	gnad kyi nyams len
གནད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essential point, quintessential	gnad kyi snying po
གནད་ཀྱི་གདམས་ངག	essential advice, crucial instructions	gnad kyi gdams ngag
གནད་ཀྱི་གདམས་པ	key instruction, essential instructions, crucial pithinstructions	gnad kyi gdams pa
གནད་ཀྱི་ལྡེའུ་མིག	key texts	gnad kyi lde'u mig
གནད་ཀྱི་བརྡ	symbol of the/ symbolic pith	gnad kyi brda
གནད་ཀྱི་མན་ངག	vital instruction	gnad kyi man ngag
གནད་ཀྱི་ཟིན་ཏིག	Neykyi Sintig. Scripture on Mahamudra	gnad kyi zin tig
གནད་ཀྱིས	due to [the fact of] because of	gnad kyis
གནད་ཀྱིས་གཅུན་པ	applying the key points	gnad kyis gcun pa
གནད་བཀག	essential point, essence, importance	gnad bkag
གནད་བཀག་ཟབ་པོ	deep essence / meaning	gnad bkag zab po
གནད་བཀྲོལ	Syn {gnad du bkrol ba}	gnad bkrol
གནད་བཀྲོལ་བ	to reveal the key point	gnad bkrol ba
གནད་ཁག	main/ essential point	gnad khag
གནད་ཁེལ་བ	1) fulfill a goal/purpose; 2) strike/ attack a vital essential place in the body [load happen, fulfill hit strike]	gnad khel ba
གནད་འཁེལ་པོ	accurate	gnad 'khel po
གནད་གག	emphasis	gnad gag
གནད་གག་ཆེ་ཤོས	main	gnad gag che shos
གནད་གལ	importance	gnad gal
གནད་གལ་ཆེ་བ	salient, very important point	gnad gal che ba
གནད་གྱིས	because of, due to	gnad gyis
གནད་གྱིས་གྲོ་བ	happen because of	gnad gyis gro ba
གནད་འགག	crux of a matter, key to a situation, important thing, focus, significance; essential key point, important points, main point, salient points, condensed into a single point; a point of importance, ...	gnad 'gag
གནད་འགག་ཅན	important/ essential/ critical/ consequential [point]	gnad 'gag can
གནད་འགག་ཆེ་བ	important	gnad 'gag che ba
གནད་འགག་ཆེན་པོ	very important, important subject matter	gnad 'gag chen po
གནད་འགག་ཐུག་སའི་དོན	question, problem, matter, importance, significance, essence, pith, essential meaning	gnad 'gag thug sa'i don
གནད་འགག་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	the ultimate key point	gnad 'gag mthar thug pa
གནད་འགག་མེད་པ	unimportant/ inessential/ inconsequential [point]	gnad 'gag med pa
གནད་འགག་གཙོ་བ	essential point 1520	gnad 'gag gtso ba
གནད་འགག་ཟང	a most crucial and deep point	gnad 'gag zang
གནད་འགགས	crucial point	gnad 'gags
གནད་འགངས	crux of the matter, key to a situation, important thing, focus, significance. essential key/ important/ main/ salient point	gnad 'gangs
གནད་འགྲོལ་བ	explain the main point	gnad 'grol ba
གནད་སྒྲིམ	efficacy	gnad sgrim
གནད་བསྒྱུར	translating the essence/ important parts	gnad bsgyur
གནད་ཅན	important, consequential, significant	gnad can
གནད་ཅིག	an essential point; x {de na lta ba'i gnad cig yod} here is an essential point for the view	gnad cig
གནད་གཅིག་རྟོལ	make/ affect a breakthrough	gnad gcig rtol
གནད་གཅིག་པོ	single essential point	gnad gcig po
གནད་གཅུན	focus	gnad gcun
གནད་གཅུན་པ	get to the point	gnad gcun pa
གནད་གཅོད	1) causing intense suffering or pain, wounding mortally. 2) interruption of life, dying. 3) great sorrow	gnad gcod
གནད་གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the pain of dying	gnad gcod kyi sdug bsngal
གནད་གཅོད་པ	interruption, cessation	gnad gcod pa
གནད་བཅད་པ	pf of gnad gcod pa. [mss]	gnad bcad pa
གནད་མཅོད	the interruption of life	gnad mcod
གནད་ཆུང་ཆེ་བཟོས	a very small point made big	gnad chung che bzos
གནད་ཆུན་པ	/ bsnun pa - to intensify focus on/ emphasize the key/ crucial point	gnad chun pa
གནད་ཆེ	important, important	gnad che
གནད་ཆེ་བ	principal, main	gnad che ba
གནད་ཆེ་བཟོ་ལས་ཐོན་རྫས	major industrial products	gnad che bzo las thon rdzas
གནད་ཆེ་ས	important/ significant/ major/ consequential/ vitally important/ key point main aspect	gnad che sa
གནད་ཆེན	Syn {gnad che}	gnad chen
གནད་ཆེན་པོ	important	gnad chen po
གནད་ཆེན་བྱུ	very important	gnad chen byu
གནད་ཆེའི་ས་བཅད	important, significant, major, consequential vitally important items/ factors	gnad che'i sa bcad
གནད་འཆད་པ	by weapons or inner wind lus kyi rtsa gnad rnams dum bur zhig 'gro ba	gnad 'chad pa
གནད་སྙིང	essential pith/ main point	gnad snying
གནད་བསྟུན	skillful, clever, ingenious	gnad bstun
གནད་ཐབས	new/ better techniques	gnad thabs
གནད་ཐམས་ཅད་འདུ་བ	epitomizes all the other points	gnad thams cad 'du ba
གནད་ཐིངས་པ	to embrace the key point (of)	gnad things pa
གནད་ཐེབ	important/ crucial means	gnad theb
གནད་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཁྱོལ་བ	fulfill a goal/purpose gnad thog tu thebs pa'i me btsa' lta bu similar to moxabustion applied directly to the vital point	gnad thog tu 'khyol ba
གནད་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕན་པ	be of use/ effective	gnad thog tu phan pa
གནད་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate point, real essence	gnad mthar thug
གནད་མཐུན་པ	similar meaning	gnad mthun pa
གནད་དམ་པ	real practice	gnad dam pa
གནད་དམ་པ་ཡིན་ནོ	that is the essential point	gnad dam pa yin no
གནད་དུ	important	gnad du
གནད་དུ་བཀྲོལ་བ	laying bare the key points, revealing the key point	gnad du bkrol ba
གནད་དུ་འཁེལ	be accurate/ precise/ exact	gnad du 'khel
གནད་དུ་འགྲོ	be effective, strike the essential point, hit home	gnad du 'gro
གནད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	strike to the essential point	gnad du 'gro ba
གནད་དུ་གཅུན	applying the key points	gnad du gcun
གནད་དུ་ཆུན་པ	/ bsnun pa - to intensify focus on/ emphasize the key/ crucial point	gnad du chun pa
གནད་དུ་ཐེབས་དཀའ	difficult to apply	gnad du thebs dka'
གནད་དུ་ཐེབས་ངེས	to precisely concentrate upon	gnad du thebs nges
གནད་དུ་ཐེབས་པ	to precisely perfect	gnad du thebs pa
གནད་དུ་འདྲིལ	to essentialize	gnad du 'dril
གནད་དུ་བརྡེག་པ	strike the essential point, hit the vital point	gnad du brdeg pa
གནད་དུ་བསྣུན	focused on, captures the mind, applying the key points, pierce to the pith, captures the essence	gnad du bsnun
གནད་དུ་བསྣུན་པ	encapsulate, essentialize	gnad du bsnun pa
གནད་དུ་བསྣུན་པར	pierce / get to the essential point, read the crucial point	gnad du bsnun par
གནད་དུ་ཕོག་པ	hurt someone's feelings, pierce the heart	gnad du phog pa
གནད་དུ་མ་སོང་བ	fail to take effect	gnad du ma song ba
གནད་དུ་མི་འགྲོ	not become effective	gnad du mi 'gro
གནད་དུ་སྨིན་པ	be effective	gnad du smin pa
གནད་དུ་ཚུད	captured the essential point, capture with precision	gnad du tshud
གནད་དུ་ཚུད་རླུང	captured prana w precision	gnad du tshud rlung
གནད་དུ་འཛུགས་པ	to strike a vitally important organ (the heart)	gnad du 'dzugs pa
གནད་དུ་སོང་བ	to have arrived at/ penetrated to the key point	gnad du song ba
གནད་དུ་བསུན་པ	penetrate the heart of, immediate and vivid	gnad du bsun pa
གནད་དོན	proper meaning, the pith of the matter, real meaning of the essential point	gnad don
གནད་དོན་ངོ་མ	essence, nature	gnad don ngo ma
གནད་དོན་ཐག་གཅོད	decide the significance/ question	gnad don thag gcod
གནད་དོན་བསྡུ་བ	to epitomize	gnad don bsdu ba
གནད་དྲུག	6 crucial means (sgo gsum, 'od gsal concentrations)	gnad drug
གནད་བདུན	7 important parts of the body	gnad bdun
གནད་འདུས	essential point, essential	gnad 'dus
གནད་སྡུ	to summarize the key points; synopsis of the key points	gnad sdu
གནད་བརྡེག	to hit the vital point, penetrate to the essence, to penetrate the essence	gnad brdeg
གནད་བརྡེགས	to strike at the vital point, "hit the nail on the head"	gnad brdegs
གནད་བསྡུ་བ	to summarize the key points; synopsis of the key points	gnad bsdu ba
གནད་བསྡུད	essential points	gnad bsdud
གནད་བསྡུས	summary, abstract, abridgment, synopsis, key points	gnad bsdus
གནད་བསྡུས་དོན་སྙིང	embodiment/ summary of all the essential piths	gnad bsdus don snying
གནད་བསྡུས་རྩ་ཚིག	outline, sketch, abstract, summary, synopsis	gnad bsdus rtsa tshig
གནད་རྣམས	the essential teachings	gnad rnams
གནད་བསྣུན་པ	/ chun pa - to intensify focus on/ emphasize the key/ crucial point	gnad bsnun pa
གནད་པ	wounded; {gnad la reg pa} wounded	gnad pa
གནད་འཕིགས	incisive	gnad 'phigs
གནད་འཕྲོད	appropriate, good, just right	gnad 'phrod
གནད་བྱང	essential inventory; crucial prophetic guide	gnad byang
གནད་སྦྱོར	pith practices [Notes. The reference in this context is to the four yogas of mahamudra]	gnad sbyor
གནད་མ་ནོར་བ	unmistaken essential point	gnad ma nor ba
གནད་མ་ཟིན་པ	ineffectual	gnad ma zin pa
གནད་མ་རིག་པ	not recognize the essential point	gnad ma rig pa
གནད་མ་སོང	never got around to it	gnad ma song
གནད་མི་ཆག	not be able to bear, not get the point/understand	gnad mi chag
གནད་རྨོ	grandmother	gnad rmo
གནད་སྨིན	to be effective	gnad smin
གནད་སྨིན་ལ	effective	gnad smin la
གནད་གཙོ་བོ་ལ་མན་ངག་སྡེ	most important essence	gnad gtso bo la man ngag sde
གནད་ཚང	hotel, inn, wife	gnad tshang
གནད་འཚམས་ཟོས་ན	follow precisely; Thrangu Rinpoche: = tshod zin na; make neatly, exactly, right measure	gnad 'tshams zos na
གནད་བཞི	the four vital points [of a teaching], {phyi bshad pa'i khog che ba}., {nang lag len gyi gzhung tshugs pa}., {gsang ba'i don thog tu pheb pa}., {de kho na nyid kyi 'gag don zin pa}	gnad bzhi
གནད་ཟིན	excerpt	gnad zin
གནད་ཟིན་པ	excerpt	gnad zin pa
གནད་ཟིན་བྱེད	excerpt	gnad zin byed
གནད་ཡིག	instructions on essential aspects	gnad yig
གནད་ཡོད	important	gnad yod
གནད་ཡོད་མི	star	gnad yod mi
གནད་ལ་བཀར་བ	get to the essential phug rtsa ..Rtsa don gyi gnad la bkar nas gros mol byed,...Khrims kyi gnad la bkar nas sgrigs la bcur,...Byas nyes kyi gnad la bkar nas khrims chad 'gel ba	gnad la bkar ba
གནད་ལ་ཁེས་པ	strike the vital parts, hit mortally	gnad la khes pa
གནད་ལ་བསྒྲེ་བ	1) harm by deceit; 2) crooked unsteady wavering; 3) Gnad don rigs 'gre gtong rgyu'am gnad don gcig mtshungs bya rgyu	gnad la bsgre ba
གནད་ལ་བོར་བ	to bring to its real condition	gnad la bor ba
གནད་ལ་དབབ་པ	to strike at/ hit on the key/ crucial point	gnad la dbab pa
གནད་ལ་རེག་པ	wounded. Syn {gnad pa}	gnad la reg pa
གནད་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ	most essential / quite important point	gnad shin tu che
གནད་ཤེས	; x {blang dor gyi gnad shes} know what we should and should not do	gnad shes
གནད་གསང	essential / main point	gnad gsang
གནད་གསུམ	three key points [thod rgal meditation, bca' ba lus kyi gnad sku gsum gyi bzhud stangs gsum las mi g.yo ba, 'khrid pa dbyings kyi gnad sku gsum gyi gzigs stangs las mi 'gul ba, snang ba yul gyi gna...	gnad gsum
གནད་གསུམ་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	dharmata wheel of the three key points	gnad gsum chos nyid kyi 'khor lo
གནད་གསུམ་ལྡན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	the view which possesses the three essential points	gnad gsum ldan pa'i lta ba
གནན	f. of {gnon pa}	gnan
གནན་མགོ	mountain in nepal	gnan mgo
གནབ་པ	{gnabs}, to put on [clothes]	gnab pa
གནབས	see {gnab pa}	gnabs
གནབས་པ	garment or dress to be worn	gnabs pa
གནམ	sky; heaven	gnam
གནམ་ཀུང	sky, heavens, mthongs khung, steng gi du khung	gnam kung
གནམ་སྐུད	antenna	gnam skud
གནམ་སྐྱོང་གོང་མ	Guardian of the Skies, an epithet for the Emperor of China	gnam skyong gong ma
གནམ་སྐྱོད	1) fly in space; 2) bird	gnam skyod
གནམ་སྐྱོན	1) time of drought; 2) bad weather; 3) epilepsy; 4) grib skyon	gnam skyon
གནམ་བརྐོས	heavenly appointed	gnam brkos
གནམ་བསྐོས	1) might. 2) heavenly appointment, divine right [of kings], "by heaven appointed", [title of the Chinese Emperor]. 3) virtuous / pious person. 4) the chakravartin, universal monarch	gnam bskos
གནམ་བསྐོས་གོང་མ	heaven mandated Emperor 1522	gnam bskos gong ma
གནམ་བསྐོས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང	heaven mandated Ganden Palace = Tibetan govt (elegant	gnam bskos dga' ldan pho brang
གནམ་བསྐོས་རྒྱལ་པོ	heavenly appointed king; the chakravartin, universal monarch gnam bskos 'jam dbyangs gong ma bdag	gnam bskos rgyal po
པོ་ཆེན་པོ	heaven mandated great lord 'jamyang Emperor	po chen po
གནམ་བསྐོས་མ	epithet of empress of universe, chakravarti raja	gnam bskos ma
གནམ་བསྐོས་ས་ཡི་ཚངས་པ	exalting name for the emperor	gnam bskos sa yi tshangs pa
གནམ་ཁ	azure, sky-color	gnam kha
གནམ་ཁ་ཞེང	sky, heavens	gnam kha zheng
གནམ་ཁད	get balanced	gnam khad
གནམ་ཁུང	{gnam kha zheng}	gnam khung
གནམ་ཁྱི་ནག་པོ	black dog of the sky; 1) garuda. 2) n of {gzhi bdag}	gnam khyi nag po
གནམ་མཁའི་བདག་པོ	lord of heaven	gnam mkha'i bdag po
གནམ་འཁྲིག	thick sky	gnam 'khrig
གནམ་འཁྲིགས་པ	cloudy sky / weather	gnam 'khrigs pa
གནམ་གང	1) new moon; 2) the auspicious 30the day of the Tibetan calendar month, last day of the month. 3) New Year's eve	gnam gang
གནམ་གོས་ཅན	clothed in air; naked Jain followers	gnam gos can
གནམ་གྱི་ཀ་བ	pillar of heaven	gnam gyi ka ba
གནམ་གྱི་སྐྱོན	drought, want of rains, drought	gnam gyi skyon
གནམ་གྱི་ཁྲི་བདུན	the 7 khri kings who went into space	gnam gyi khri bdun
གནམ་གྱི་གོ་ལ	the heavenly gola	gnam gyi go la
གནམ་གྱི་རྒྱན	canopy	gnam gyi rgyan
གནམ་གྱི་རྒྱལ	king, "heaven's king"	gnam gyi rgyal
གནམ་གྱི་བཅུད	turnip; "sap of the sky"	gnam gyi bcud
གནམ་གྱི་འཇིགས་པ	dangers brought by the skies like drought, famine, heat, drought	gnam gyi 'jigs pa
གནམ་གྱི་ཉེར་འཙེ	(met) harm of the weather [freezing, hail drought etc.]	gnam gyi nyer 'tse
གནམ་གྱི་ཉེར་འཚེ	drought	gnam gyi nyer 'tshe
གནམ་གྱི་འཐེན་པ	11 dynasties of bon kings (gnam 'then rje, ye mu la 'then, ma sangs la 'then, mu la sangs g.yen la 'then, g.yen sangs phya la 'then, phya sangs 'ol la 'then, 'ol sangs yum la 'then, yum sangs rgod ...	gnam gyi 'then pa
གནམ་གྱི་བུ	Heavenly Son. 1) Chakravartin. 2) Chinese Emperor	gnam gyi bu
གནམ་གྱི་བྱ་ཁུ	1) black dog of the sky; 2) garuda	gnam gyi bya khu
གནམ་གྱི་བྱ་ཁྱུང	sa bdag deity, garuda	gnam gyi bya khyung
གནམ་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	heavenly moon	gnam gyi zla ba
གནམ་གྱི་ཤེ་མོང	"sky's destiny"; crane, raven	gnam gyi she mong
གནམ་གྱི་ཤེ་མོང་བྱ	raven	gnam gyi she mong bya
གནམ་གྱི་ལྷ	divine ruler, god of the sky; Chakravartin	gnam gyi lha
གནམ་གྱིས་བསྐོས་པ	see {gnam bskos}	gnam gyis bskos pa
གནམ་གྲགས་ངར་ཆེན	kamadeva, god of love	gnam grags ngar chen
གནམ་གྲང་མོ	cold weather	gnam grang mo
གནམ་གྲངས་ངར་ཆེན	Kamadeva	gnam grangs ngar chen
གནམ་གྲུ	airplane, flying machine	gnam gru
གནམ་གྲུ་ཆགས་ས	airport	gnam gru chags sa
གནམ་གྲུ་གཏོང	fly an airplane	gnam gru gtong
གནམ་གྲུ་གཏོང་མཁན	pilot	gnam gru gtong mkhan
གནམ་གྲུ་ཐང	airport, airfield	gnam gru thang
གནམ་གྲུ་སྣེ་ལེན	stewardess	gnam gru sne len
གནམ་གྲུ་སྣེ་ལེན་བུ་མོ	air-hostess	gnam gru sne len bu mo
གནམ་གྲུ་འབབ་ཐང	airport	gnam gru 'bab thang
གནམ་གྲུ་འབབ་ས	airport	gnam gru 'bab sa
གནམ་གྲུ་འབབ་སའི་གྲུ་གཟིངས	aircraft carrier	gnam gru 'bab sa'i gru gzings
གནམ་གྲུ་འབབ་སའི་དམག་གྲུ	aircraft carrier	gnam gru 'bab sa'i dmag gru
གནམ་གྲུ་བཞག་ས	hangar	gnam gru bzhag sa
གནམ་གྲུ་བཟོ་ས	aerodrome	gnam gru bzo sa
གནམ་གྲུམ་པ	the heavens very turbulent/ disturbed or, curses etc. la grum pa'i example	gnam grum pa
གནམ་གྲུའི་གནོད་འགོག	air defense	gnam gru'i gnod 'gog
གནམ་གྲུའི་དཔུང་དམག	air force	gnam gru'i dpung dmag
གནམ་གྲུའི་ལམ་ཁག	air route	gnam gru'i lam khag
གནམ་གྲུར་ཡིབ་ཁུང	air raid shelter	gnam grur yib khung
གནམ་གྲོ་ཐག་རྩེད	2nd day of the 1st month potala'i shar chen lcog gi yang steng nas, rdo ring nang ma'i bar gtsang gnam gro pa'i pho skyes lus rtsal can 'gas thur rgyug thag shur glod pa'i entertainment	gnam gro thag rtsed
གནམ་དགུང	midnight	gnam dgung
གནམ་རྒྱ་ས་རྙི	traps in all directions so that enemies/ transgressors won't get away easily, surrounded by difficulties, nets in the air and snares on the ground	gnam rgya sa rnyi
གནམ་རྒྱན	1) bla re; 2) Thog yol	gnam rgyan
གནམ་སྒོ	a skylight, arch of the cave	gnam sgo
གནམ་སྒྱོགས	anti-aircraft gun	gnam sgyogs
གནམ་ངན	natural calamity	gnam ngan
གནམ་ངན་པ	natural calamity	gnam ngan pa
གནམ་སྔོན	blue sky	gnam sngon
གནམ་སྔོན་པོ	1) clear blue sky; 2) gnam dpang du 'dzugs pa'i mna' tshig cig	gnam sngon po
གནམ་ལྕགས	1) meteoric iron, meteoric metal. 2) thunderbolt	gnam lcags
གནམ་ལྕགས་སྐུད	antenna	gnam lcags skud
གནམ་ལྕགས་སྒྲ	thunder	gnam lcags sgra
གནམ་ལྕགས་ཐོག་བབ	sudden thunder clap/ bolt	gnam lcags thog bab
གནམ་ལྕགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Sky-Iron Vajra". "The	gnam lcags rdo rje
ཏོ་ལོང	life practice	to long
གནམ་ལྕགས་ཕུར་པ	phurba of meteoric iron	gnam lcags phur pa
གནམ་ལྕགས་འབར་བ	{gnam lcags 'bar ba} mt [in sman gling rdzong yar klungs gtsang po'i khug pa chen po'i nang du yod cing, el. smi 7756]	gnam lcags 'bar ba
གནམ་ལྕགས་འབར་བའི	geographical place not definitely identified, perhaps a volcanic mountain in ne india	gnam lcags 'bar ba'i
གནམ་ལྕགས་རྩ་གསུམ་གླིང་པ	Namchak Tsasum Lingpa, tertön. {rtsa gsum gter bdag gling pa} {gter ston}; 17th cent; alias {gar dbang gnam lcags rdo rje} gnam lcags rtsa gsum gling pa'i gter chos Rediscovered Treasures of Namcha...	gnam lcags rtsa gsum gling pa
གནམ་ལྕེ	lightning	gnam lce
གནམ་ཆུ	rain [water]	gnam chu
གནམ་ཆོད་པ	good, very good	gnam chod pa
གནམ་ཆོས	sky teaching	gnam chos
གནམ་ཆོས་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་གཏེར་ཁ	terma revealed by {mi 'gyur rdo rje} {sprul sku} 1645-1667	gnam chos thugs kyi gter kha
གནམ་ཆོས་བདེ་ཆེན་ཞིང་སྒྲུབ	written	gnam chos bde chen zhing sgrub
བཡ་མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	sprul sku, 16451667	by mi 'gyur rdo rje
གནམ་ཆོས་པད་བྱུང	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {gnam chos mi 'gyur rdo rje}	gnam chos pad byung
གནམ་ཆོས་མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	alias {mi 'gyur rdo rje} {sprul sku} 1645-1667	gnam chos mi 'gyur rdo rje
གནམ་ཆོས་རྩ་གསུམ	three root of the {gnam chos} practice followed in the {dpal yul} monastery	gnam chos rtsa gsum
གནམ་ཆོས་ཞི་ཁྲོ	terma by {gnam chos mi 'gyur rdo rje} & {karma chags med}	gnam chos zhi khro
གནམ་མཆོངས	bird, "soaring up into the sky"	gnam mchongs
གནམ་མཆོངས་གུར	parachute	gnam mchongs gur
གནམ་འཇམ་ས་འཇམ	example of dus bde zhod 'jags	gnam 'jam sa 'jam
གནམ་ཉེ	gram nye [R]	gnam nye
གནམ་གཏའ	heavenly treatment [medical]	gnam gta'
གནམ་རྟ་གྱི་ལིང	horse breed	gnam rta gyi ling
གནམ་རྟའི་ལིང	famous breed of horse [from Amdo and Mongolia]	gnam rta'i ling
གནམ་སྟེང་ལྷའི་སྲིད་པ	upper world of gods	gnam steng lha'i srid pa
གནམ་སྟོང	new moon day	gnam stong
གནམ་བལྟས	looking up to	gnam bltas
གནམ་བལྟས་བྱེད	look up	gnam bltas byed
གནམ་ཐང	airport, clear sky, good weather	gnam thang
གནམ་ཐང་པ	gnam yer ba	gnam thang pa
གནམ་ཐང་ཕྱར	type of silk cloth	gnam thang phyar
གནམ་ཐང་ལྷའི་རྩ	Sky Plain of Lhaitsa	gnam thang lha'i rtsa
གནམ་ཐིག	plumb-line, measurement	gnam thig
གནམ་ཐིབ་པ	cloudy, overcast	gnam thib pa
གནམ་མཐའ་མཚོ་གཏིང	the four corners/ ends of the earth, end of space and the bottom of the ocean	gnam mtha' mtsho gting
གནམ་འཐིབས་པ	1) to become cloudy. 2) cloudy sky, bad-weather	gnam 'thibs pa
གནམ་འཐིབས་ས་རུབ	example of thick darkness	gnam 'thibs sa rub
གནམ་འཐེན་རྗེ	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	gnam 'then rje
གནམ་དྭངས	clear sky, fine weather	gnam dwangs
གནམ་དབ༹ངས་པ	a fine, sunny day; clear sky, fine / sunny day / weather, cloudless sky	gnam dvangs pa
གནམ་དྭངས་པ	fine, sunny day	gnam dwangs pa
གནམ་དབ༹ངས་པོ	fine / clear weather	gnam dvangs po
གནམ་དྭངས་པོ	fine, sunny day, good clear weather	gnam dwangs po
གནམ་དུ་འཁོལ	to spout, spring forth	gnam du 'khol
གནམ་དུ་གཤེགས	to die; proceed to the heavenly realms	gnam du gshegs
གནམ་དུ་གཤེགས་པ	die [h]	gnam du gshegs pa
གནམ་དྲག་ལ	gnam drag pass [in si khron zhing chen rnga ba, zung chu rdzong]	gnam drag la
གནམ་གདུགས	parachute	gnam gdugs
གནམ་གདུགས་མཆོང	parachute	gnam gdugs mchong
གནམ་གདོང་པོ	place in tibet	gnam gdong po
གནམ་བདག་གི་ཆོས་ལུགས	Roman Catholicism	gnam bdag gi chos lugs
གནམ་བདག་ཆོས	Roman Catholicism	gnam bdag chos
གནམ་བདག་ཆོས་ལུགས	Roman Catholicism	gnam bdag chos lugs
གནམ་བདེ	heavenly	gnam bde
གནམ་བདེ་སྒོ་མོ་ཆེ	Tien an min Gate [Peking]	gnam bde sgo mo che
གནམ་མདའ	sky archery (ceremony on the 27th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	gnam mda'
གནམ་རྡིབ	impossible example...Ri bong gnam rdib kyi sdug bsngal	gnam rdib
གནམ་རྡོ	1) stones falling from the sky [meteors]; 2) hail	gnam rdo
གནམ་ལྡེ་འོད་སྲུང	early king of tibet	gnam lde 'od srung
གནམ་ལྡེ་འོད་སྲུངས	{gnam lde 'od srungs}	gnam lde 'od srungs
གནམ་སྡོད	aditi, celestial, resident in heaven, mother of the gods	gnam sdod
གནམ་ནས་བརྐོས	heavenly appointed; see {gnam brkos}	gnam nas brkos
གནམ་པ	bad smell, stench	gnam pa
གནམ་པ་བ	rdo [chen] gshag pa, rdo ris rkos worker	gnam pa ba
གནམ་པང	thog pang ste khang pa'i ngos su pang leb bsgrigs pa'i thog	gnam pang
གནམ་པོ	honest, straight	gnam po
གནམ་པྲ	prasena divination signs of good and bad weather	gnam pra
གནམ་དཔྱད	examine the weather	gnam dpyad
གནམ་ཕུད	a special phud	gnam phud
གནམ་ཕྱི་གུང་རྒྱལ	ancestress queen of the sky, 1 of srid pa mo dgu, one of the foremost female deities of the Tibetan pantheon	gnam phyi gung rgyal
གནམ་འཕང	soaring, flying, hovering	gnam 'phang
གནམ་འཕང་སྤྱོད་པ	to fly / move through the sky	gnam 'phang spyod pa
གནམ་འཕང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	"soarer", vulture	gnam 'phang spyod byed
གནམ་བབ་པ	rain	gnam bab pa
གནམ་བོན	Bon of the Sky	gnam bon
གནམ་དབྱིངས	sky 1524	gnam dbyings
གནམ་དབྱིབས	1) space gi phyogs kyi bzo dbyibs; 2) Nam mkha'i dgung	gnam dbyibs
གནམ་འབབ་པ	rain falling	gnam 'bab pa
གནམ་དམག	air force	gnam dmag
གནམ་སྨན་དཀར་མོ	name of square in lde'u 'phrul, white sman mo of the sky, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	gnam sman dkar mo
གནམ་མཙོ	gnam lake [in Mongolian du thang ge ri no'ur, NM of Lhasa between 'dam gzhung and dpal mgon rdzong, the 'bo chu etc. flow into it &, rgya khyon spyi le grub bzhi 1993, biggest lake in T]	gnam mtso
གནམ་རྩེ	monastery (Sikkim, India)	gnam rtse
གནམ་ཚིག་ཁང	observatory	gnam tshig khang
གནམ་མཚན	meteorological phenomena	gnam mtshan
གནམ་མཚོ	gnam lake	gnam mtsho
གནམ་མཚོ་རྡོ་རིང	1 of 37 bon holy places, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	gnam mtsho rdo ring
གནམ་མཚོ་ཕྱིད་མོ	large lake 120 miles n.w. of lhasa	gnam mtsho phyid mo
གནམ་མཚོ་ཕྱུག་མོ	Syn Tengri Nor, one of {mtsho bzhi}	gnam mtsho phyug mo
གནམ་མཚོ་ལ	gnam lake pass [in W chab mdo rdzong]	gnam mtsho la
གནམ་མཛོད	sa bdag deity	gnam mdzod
གནམ་རྫོང	Namdzong, in Domey	gnam rdzong
གནམ་ཞལ་མ	Namshelma	gnam zhal ma
གནམ་ཟེར	a disease, wooden bench	gnam zer
གནམ་ཟླ	nature of the sky, climate, weather	gnam zla
གནམ་གཟེར	[felt tent's] door-bar	gnam gzer
གནམ་འོག	the world	gnam 'og
གནམ་འོག་གཅིག་ཏུ	to everyone/ all the world/ under the sky	gnam 'og gcig tu
གནམ་འོག་ཡོངས་སུ	to everyone/ all the world/ under the sky	gnam 'og yongs su
གནམ་ཡངས་ཀ་བ་བཞི	large building's inner court? w four pillars bar khyams seng g.yab	gnam yangs ka ba bzhi
གནམ་ཡན	open like the sky	gnam yan
གནམ་ཡས	castle in tibet	gnam yas
གནམ་ཡུལ	heavenly abode	gnam yul
གནམ་ཡེར	gnam thang nas sprin 'khor mi thub pa	gnam yer
གནམ་ཡོལ	baldachin, canopy	gnam yol
གནམ་རི་སྲོང་བཙན	{gnam ri slon btsan}	gnam ri srong btsan
གནམ་རི་སློན་བཙན	{gnam ri slon btsan}	gnam ri slon btsan
གནམ་རིག	astronomy	gnam rig
གནམ་རིག་གི་ཉེ་མཁོ་རྒྱང་ཤེལ	astronomical telescope	gnam rig gi nye mkho rgyang shel
གནམ་རིག་བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཁང	astronomical observatory	gnam rig brtag dpyad khang
གནམ་རིག་བརྟག་དཔྱད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	astronomical instruments	gnam rig brtag dpyad 'phrul chas
གནམ་རུ	"heavenly horn", 1) the rainbow; 2) bow, archery. 3) district N.E. of Lhasa	gnam ru
གནམ་རློན་པ	very rainy weather	gnam rlon pa
གནམ་ལ་ཁྲི་བདུན	Seven Namla Tri; Seven Thrones of the Sky	gnam la khri bdun
གནམ་ལ་ལྡིང་བ	soar	gnam la lding ba
གནམ་ལ་མཛུབ་མོ་ཀེར་བ	point the fingers towards heaven	gnam la mdzub mo ker ba
གནམ་ལ་ཟོ་བ་བཏགས་པ་ལྟར་གནས་པ	remains there as if suspended in space	gnam la zo ba btags pa ltar gnas pa
གནམ་ལ་གཤེགས་པ	died, went heavenward	gnam la gshegs pa
གནམ་ལངས	Syn {nam lnge}	gnam langs
གནམ་ལོ	year	gnam lo
གནམ་ལོ་གསར་པ	new year	gnam lo gsar pa
གནམ་ལོ་གསར་ཚེས	new year's day	gnam lo gsar tshes
གནམ་ལོ་གསར་ཚེས་ལ	MSS: On the day of the New Year/On New Year's Day.... [mss]	gnam lo gsar tshes la
གནམ་ལོ་གསར་བཞད	new year's [day]	gnam lo gsar bzhad
གནམ་ལོའི་སྨེ་བ	'byung rtsis: sme ba for individual years	gnam lo'i sme ba
གནམ་གཤིས	nature of the sky, climate, weather	gnam gshis
གནམ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	climatic conditions	gnam gshis kyi cha rkyen
གནམ་གཤིས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	meteorology	gnam gshis kyi rig pa
གནམ་གཤིས་འཁྲུགས	stormy weather	gnam gshis 'khrugs
གནམ་གཤིས་སྔོན་བསྒྲགས	weather forecast gnam gshis sngon bsgrags mkhan weather forecaster	gnam gshis sngon bsgrags
གནམ་གཤིས་སྔོན་བསྒྲགས་པ	weather forecaster	gnam gshis sngon bsgrags pa
གནམ་གཤིས་སྔོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	weather forecasting apparatus	gnam gshis sngon 'phrul 'khor
གནམ་གཤིས་སྔོན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	weather forecasting apparatus	gnam gshis sngon 'phrul chas
གནམ་གཤིས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་ཁང	weather station	gnam gshis brtag dpyad khang
གནམ་གཤིས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་མཁན	meteorologist	gnam gshis brtag dpyad mkhan
གནམ་གཤིས་བརྟག་དཔྱད་རིག་པ	meteorology	gnam gshis brtag dpyad rig pa
གནམ་གཤིས་བརྟག་དཔྱོད་ཁང	weather station	gnam gshis brtag dpyod khang
གནམ་གཤིས་བརྟག་དཔྱོད་མཁན	meteorologist	gnam gshis brtag dpyod mkhan
གནམ་གཤིས་དྲོ་དྲང་གི་ཚད	[air] temperature	gnam gshis dro drang gi tshad
གནམ་གཤིས་གནས་ཚུལ	weather conditions	gnam gshis gnas tshul
གནམ་གཤིས་ལས་དོན	meteorological work	gnam gshis las don
གནམ་གཤིས་ས་ཚིགས	weather station	gnam gshis sa tshigs
གནམ་གཤེད	{sa bdag}	gnam gshed
གནམ་ས	breed of horse from amdo	gnam sa
གནམ་ས་ཁ་རྡེབ	heaven and earth sbug chal rdeb pa ltar gyo 'gul btang ba ste g.yo 'gul tshabs chen gyi dpe	gnam sa kha rdeb
གནམ་ས་མགོ་རྟིང་ལོག	incredible, world shaking, startling the universe	gnam sa mgo rting log
གནམ་ས་མགོ་རྟིང་སློག	1) grandiose; "shaking the sky and the earth. Syn {gnam sa g.yo ba}. 2) type of horse	gnam sa mgo rting slog
གནམ་ས་བསྒྱུར	to be turned upsidedown	gnam sa bsgyur
གནམ་ས་གཉིས་པོ་སྦྲེལ	in heaven and earth	gnam sa gnyis po sbrel
གནམ་ས་བླ་འོག་འགྱུར་བ	incredible, world shaking, startling the universe	gnam sa bla 'og 'gyur ba
གནམ་སངས	fine weather, cloudless sky	gnam sangs
གནམ་སའི་ཁྱད་པར	worlds apart	gnam sa'i khyad par
གནམ་སའི་དྲག་ཤུགས	air and ground power	gnam sa'i drag shugs
གནམ་སེལ་ཆེན་པོ	Great sky exorcism	gnam sel chen po
གནམ་སོ	straightforward, honest, open, frank	gnam so
གནམ་གསས་དབྱིང་རུམ	bon god who suppresses gti mug	gnam gsas dbying rum
གནམ་གསོར	from above below du skor ba'i gsor che ba	gnam gsor
གནམ་བསིལ་པོ	it is cold, the weather is cold	gnam bsil po
གནམ་ལྷ	[sky] lha/ deity, Jehovah	gnam lha
གནམ་ལྷ་བརྒྱད	8 sky lha	gnam lha brgyad
གནམ་ཨ་སྔོན	[blue] sky/ space	gnam a sngon
གནའ	large wild sheep	gna'
གནའ་གྱག	wild animal like sheep male	gna' gyag
གནའ་སྔ་མོ	ancient	gna' snga mo
གནའ་གཏམ	ancient history	gna' gtam
གནའ་དུས	former / ancient times	gna' dus
གནའ་དུས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ལུགས	style/ fashion of former times/ antiquity	gna' dus kyi cha lugs
གནའ་དུས་ལྟར	just like it was in the past	gna' dus ltar
གནའ་དུས་སུ	in the past	gna' dus su
གནའ་ནབས་ཀྱི	primitive	gna' nabs kyi
གནའ་ནས	from former times, from long ago, originally	gna' nas
གནའ་ནས་མ་མཐོང	never seen before	gna' nas ma mthong
གནའ་པོ	ancient, primeval, classical	gna' po
གནའ་པོའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	ancient city	gna' po'i grong khyer
གནའ་པོའི་ནགས་ཚལ	primeval forest	gna' po'i nags tshal
གནའ་དཔེ	example/ proverb/ saying/ pecha from former times	gna' dpe
གནའ་བ	burrhel, wild sheep	gna' ba
གནའ་བོ	ancient	gna' bo
གནའ་བོའི་མི	aboriginal, man of ancient times	gna' bo'i mi
གནའ་བོའི་རྩོམ་རིག	classical literature	gna' bo'i rtsom rig
གནའ་བོའི་སྲོལ	ancient customs	gna' bo'i srol
གནའ་བོའི་གསུང་རབ	classical reference book	gna' bo'i gsung rab
གནའ་མི	witness, person from former times	gna' mi
གནའ་མོ	1) the past, former times; 2) female of sheep-like wild animal gna' ba; 3) ancient, classical	gna' mo
གནའ་མོའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	ancient city	gna' mo'i grong khyer
གནའ་མོའི་རོལ་མོ	classical music	gna' mo'i rol mo
གནའ་རྫས	old/ ancient things/ articles/ curios, antiques	gna' rdzas
གནའ་རྫས་རྙིང་ཤུལ	old/former things and yul lung gi rjes shul	gna' rdzas rnying shul
གནའ་རྫས་རྟོག་ཞིབ	closely examine previous history by looking at past artifacts, archeology	gna' rdzas rtog zhib
གནའ་རྫས་རྟོག་ཞིབ་མཁན	archeologist	gna' rdzas rtog zhib mkhan
གནའ་རྫས་རྟོག་ཞིབ་མཁས་པ	archeologist	gna' rdzas rtog zhib mkhas pa
གནའ་རྫས་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད	closely examine previous history by looking at past artifacts, archeology	gna' rdzas zhib dpyod
གནའ་རྫས་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་མཁན	archeologist	gna' rdzas zhib dpyod mkhan
གནའ་རྫས་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་མཁས་པ	archeologist	gna' rdzas zhib dpyod mkhas pa
གནའ་རྫས་བཤམས་སྟོན་ཁང	museum of antiquities	gna' rdzas bshams ston khang
གནའ་ཟོག	old/ ancient things/ articles/ curios, antiques	gna' zog
གནའ་ཟོག་རྙིང་ཤུལ	old/former things and yul lung gi rjes shul	gna' zog rnying shul
གནའ་ཟོག་རྟོག་ཞིབ	closely examine previous history by looking at past artifacts, archeology	gna' zog rtog zhib
གནའ་ཟོག་རྟོག་ཞིབ་མཁས་པ	archeologist	gna' zog rtog zhib mkhas pa
གནའ་ཟོག་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད	closely examine previous history by looking at past artifacts, archeology	gna' zog zhib dpyod
གནའ་ཟོག་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་མཁན	archeologist	gna' zog zhib dpyod mkhan
གནའ་ཟོག་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་མཁས་པ	archeologist	gna' zog zhib dpyod mkhas pa
གནའ་ཟོག་རོག་ཞིབ་མཁན	archeologist	gna' zog rog zhib mkhan
གནའ་ཟོག་བཤམས་སྟོན་ཁང	museum of antiquities	gna' zog bshams ston khang
གནའ་རབས	ancient times, men who lived in olden times, the ancients, in ancient times, long ago	gna' rabs
གནའ་རབས་ཀྱི	ancient	gna' rabs kyi
གནའ་རབས་ཀྱི་བར་དུས	middle ages	gna' rabs kyi bar dus
གནའ་རབས་ཀྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	ancient history	gna' rabs kyi lo rgyus
གནའ་རབས་མིའི་རིགས་རིག་པ	paleoanthropology	gna' rabs mi'i rigs rig pa
གནའ་ལུགས	ancient/ classical custom	gna' lugs
གནའ་ལུགས་ཞབས་བྲོ	ancient/ classical dance	gna' lugs zhabs bro
གནའ་ཤུལ་གྲགས་ཅན	person who was subsequently famous	gna' shul grags can
གནའ་གཤིས	gna' bo'i gshis lugs	gna' gshis
གནའ་སྲོལ	former tradition	gna' srol
ཐེ་ཊྲེཨསུརཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ	pervading knowledge] (17) be still, stillness, tranquility (18) stability, stable abiding (19) basis, object, (20) state of being (21) lifetime (22) establishing oneself (23) adherence (24) standpo...	the Treasury of all
གནས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོ་མོ་ཆེན་མོ་བརྒྱད	the eight great wrathful ladies of the sacred places	gnas kyi khro mo chen mo brgyad
གནས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	secret centers connected w the abiding of the mind	gnas kyi 'khor lo
གནས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	cause of abiding	gnas kyi rgyu
གནས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	furniture etc at one's dwelling place	gnas kyi dngos po
གནས་ཀྱི་ཏིག་ཏ	species of gentian	gnas kyi tig ta
གནས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	name of brgya byin lha	gnas kyi bdag po
གནས་ཀྱི་མ་མོ	chom rkun ma, rab rmong ba, ro lang ma, gtum mo, spos ma, sme sha chan, dur khrod ma	gnas kyi ma mo
གནས་ཀྱི་མ་མོ་བརྒྱ	1) {gO rI}. 2) {sme sha} 3) {tsan da li} 4) {be tA li} 5) {gsma ri} 6) {pra mo ha} 7) {pu ska si} 8) {tsO rI ma}	gnas kyi ma mo brgya
གནས་ཀྱི་མ་མོ་བརྒྱད	The 8 mamos of the sacred places	gnas kyi ma mo brgyad
གནས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	1) limb of the {bsam gtan bzhi}, source of their limbs of antidote and benefit, 1 pointed samadhi; 2) dran pa yang dag {byang chub kyi yan lag}	gnas kyi yan lag
གནས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	teacher of the topics [among the {slob dpon lnga} explained in the vinaya, a monk who teaches the three kinds of precepts of dgag sgrub gnang]	gnas kyi slob dpon
གནས་ཀྱི་སློབ་མ	bla ma'i gam du gnas 'cha' ba'i student	gnas kyi slob ma
གནས་སྐ་ཅས	occasion	gnas ska cas
གནས་སྐབ	temporary, immediate	gnas skab
གནས་སྐབས	phases	gnas skabs
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི	provisional, conditional; temporary, short-term, fleeting	gnas skabs kyi
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་རྐྱེན	secondary adventitious factors	gnas skabs kyi rkyen
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་སྐྱབས	protection for the place and for the occasion	gnas skabs kyi skyabs
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཐབས་ཚུལ	temporary arrangement/ measure	gnas skabs kyi thabs tshul
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་འཐབ	rival for the time being, family and relations a secular man has to struggle with	gnas skabs kyi 'thab
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་འཐབ་ཡ	occasional rival	gnas skabs kyi 'thab ya
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	happy situation	gnas skabs kyi bde ba
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ་གཉིས	the two temporary results, 1) {mngon mtho}. 2) {nges legs}	gnas skabs kyi 'bras bu gnyis
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་བཞི	the four occasions	gnas skabs kyi bzhi
གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་སྲོལ་ཡིག	temporary/ provisional arrangement/ measure/ regulation	gnas skabs kyi srol yig
གནས་སྐབས་བརྒྱད	8 stages of dissolution [in mantrayana: sa chu me rlung &, dkar lam, dmar lam, nag lam, snang ba: thim rim gyi gnas skabs brgyad]	gnas skabs brgyad
གནས་སྐབས་ཆུ་རགས	coffer dam	gnas skabs chu rags
གནས་སྐབས་ཉམས་ཚུལ་ཙམ	merely a temporary decline from	gnas skabs nyams tshul tsam
གནས་སྐབས་བརྟན་པ	temporary stability	gnas skabs brtan pa
གནས་སྐབས་ཐམས་ཅད	all circumstances, in all situations	gnas skabs thams cad
གནས་སྐབས་མཐར་ཐུག	immediate and final, temporary and ultimate	gnas skabs mthar thug
གནས་སྐབས་དང་མཐར་ཐུག	temporary and ultimate	gnas skabs dang mthar thug
གནས་སྐབས་རྣམ་བཞི	the four occasions	gnas skabs rnam bzhi
གནས་སྐབས་པའི་ཡིད	the mind of the incidental	gnas skabs pa'i yid
གནས་སྐབས་པའི་ལུས	ephemeral psychoorganism (built up by materialityproducing forces, clothed in experientially initiated potentialities of experience, takes birth in any of the 6 forms of life)	gnas skabs pa'i lus
གནས་སྐབས་དམག་མཚམས་འཇོག	make a temporary truce, armistice, cease fire 1527 gnas skabs bzhi}. - 1) {sad pa}. 2) {rmi lam}. 3) {gnyid stug}. 4) chags rtog}	gnas skabs dmag mtshams 'jog
གནས་སྐབས་བཞི	{'gro ba rnams} Mipham: {de yang skye srid dang, de nas 'chi ba ma byung gi bar sngon dus kyi srid pa dang, 'chi srid dang, bar srid bzhi'i gnas skabs can no} There are four occasions: birth existe...	gnas skabs bzhi
གནས་སྐབས་བཞི་པ	the 4[th] occasion[s]	gnas skabs bzhi pa
གནས་སྐབས་རིང་སྡོད་པ	sojourn	gnas skabs ring sdod pa
གནས་སྐབས་ལམ་ཡིག	Tibetan govt, rta khal gyi khral 'ul thengs re tsam skul 'thus kyi lag 'khyer	gnas skabs lam yig
གནས་སྐབས་ལས་གྱུར་པ	produced from circumstance	gnas skabs las gyur pa
གནས་སྐབས་སུ	presently	gnas skabs su
གནས་སྐབས་སུ་རླུང	technique related to the control of vibrations	gnas skabs su rlung
གནས་སྐབས་སྲིད་གཞུང	provisional government	gnas skabs srid gzhung
གནས་སྐབས་གསུམ	three categories [of beings in relation to the nucleus of the tath gata. Sentient beings who are impure, {ma dag pa'i sems can}. bodhisattvas who are in the course of purification {dag pa byed pa'i...	gnas skabs gsum
གནས་སྐོར	(to go on) pilgrimage	gnas skor
གནས་སྐོར་པ	pilgrim, pilgrims, people on pilgrimage	gnas skor pa
གནས་སྐོར་བ	people on pilgrimage, pilgrims	gnas skor ba
གནས་སྐོར་མི	pilgrims	gnas skor mi
གནས་སྐྱེས་མ	habitable, night	gnas skyes ma
གནས་བསྐལ	kalpa of existence	gnas bskal
གནས་བསྐལ་གྱི་དུས་བཞི	the four times of the kalpa of existence [rdzogs ldan, gsum ldan, gnyis ldan, rtsod ldan]	gnas bskal gyi dus bzhi
གནས་བསྐོར	pilgrimage	gnas bskor
གནས་བསྐོར་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go on pilgrimage	gnas bskor du 'gro ba
གནས་བསྐོར་བ	pilgrim, pilgrim	gnas bskor ba
གནས་ཁང	dwelling place, house, hut	gnas khang
གནས་ཁང་བརྡིབས་པ	crushed under their collapsing houses	gnas khang brdibs pa
གནས་ཁང་སྤངས་པ	one who has forsaken his home, mendicant, buddhist monk	gnas khang spangs pa
གནས་ཁང་བཟང་པོ	an excellent mansion	gnas khang bzang po
གནས་ཁྱད་འཕགས	exalted realm	gnas khyad 'phags
གནས་ཁྲབ	body armor	gnas khrab
གནས་མཁན	agent located (somewhere)	gnas mkhan
གནས་འཁོད	residing, living	gnas 'khod
གནས་འཁོད་པ	settler, resident, live, inhabitant	gnas 'khod pa
གནས་འཁོད་བྱེད	reside, live, inhabit	gnas 'khod byed
གནས་འཁོད་བཞུགས་སྒར	settlement	gnas 'khod bzhugs sgar
གནས་འཁོར	make the rounds of the holy places	gnas 'khor
གནས་འཁོར་བ	make the rounds of the holy places	gnas 'khor ba
གནས་འཁོས	pilgrimage	gnas 'khos
གནས་གང་དུ་བཞུགས	where does he live?	gnas gang du bzhugs
གནས་གོང	price, value	gnas gong
གནས་གོང་ཆེ་བ	expensive	gnas gong che ba
གནས་གོང་མ	the higher realms	gnas gong ma
གནས་གྱུར	transform, transformation, to change	gnas gyur
གནས་གྱུར་པ	transformed	gnas gyur pa
གནས་གྲོགས་ཡོ་བྱད	property, friends and possessions	gnas grogs yo byad
གནས་གླ	[room] rent	gnas gla
གནས་དགོངས	ceremony for the dead, {gnas chog}., {byang chog}., {bdun tshig}., {lho sgo'i cho ga}	gnas dgongs
གནས་མགྲོན	lam bar gyi gnas tshang and 1 who comes there	gnas mgron
གནས་འགངས་ཆེན་རྣམས	important or chief places of pilgrimage	gnas 'gangs chen rnams
གནས་འགྱུ	[the] moving and still, the way of arising of discursive thoughts	gnas 'gyu
གནས་འགྱུ་གཉིས་མེད	beyond the duality of calm & movement	gnas 'gyu gnyis med
གནས་འགྱུ་རིག	dwelling, moving and aware (stillness, occurrence, and awareness)	gnas 'gyu rig
གནས་འགྱུ་རིག་གསུམ	abiding, moving and conscious; stillness, occurrence and awareness; the still, thinking and noticing [aspects of mind]	gnas 'gyu rig gsum
གནས་འགྱུ་ཤེས་པ	to know thinking and stillness. Syn {gnas 'gyu rig gsum; moving stillness and occurrence. Syn {gnas 'gyu rig gsum}	gnas 'gyu shes pa
གནས་འགྱུར	deities in changed form, transformation, transmutation, transmuted, naturally transformed	gnas 'gyur
གནས་འགྱུར་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ་གསུམ	the three ultimate transformations	gnas 'gyur mthar phyin pa gsum
གནས་འགྱུར་ནས	having changed, transformed	gnas 'gyur nas
གནས་འགྱུར་པ	to transform; transformation	gnas 'gyur pa
གནས་འགྱུར་བ	transformed herself (into)	gnas 'gyur ba
གནས་རྒྱབ་མཆོག་སྤྲུལ	master who taught chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu sems sde, klong sde, and Mingyur Dorje termas gnas rgyab mchog sprul rin po che 1902-1952	gnas rgyab mchog sprul
གནས་རྒྱབ་རིན་པོ	SA gnas rgyab mchog sprul rin po che gnas rgyab rin po che blo gros rgya mtsho - Negyab Rinpoche	gnas rgyab rin po
གནས་རྒྱུན	tenure	gnas rgyun
གནས་བསྒྱུར	transformed, to change over, transmute, turn into	gnas bsgyur
གནས་བསྒྱུར་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	sadhana style of transformation	gnas bsgyur gyi sgrub lugs
གནས་ངན	the lower realms	gnas ngan
གནས་ངན་མ	married woman still attached to her parents's house	gnas ngan ma
གནས་ངན་ལན	depravity, wickedness	gnas ngan lan
གནས་ངན་ལེན	negative tendencies, rebirth in lower realms, rigidity	gnas ngan len
ཝྲོང་ཨོབཇེཅཏ་ཨེབེ༹ར	increasing power's habitual pattern dwelling in one's continuum; 4) [arch] downfalls, negative tendencies, rebirth in lower realms, rigidity	wrong object ever
གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་གྱིང་བ	the distraction of negative tendencies def. {ngar 'dzin dang nga yin 'dzin pa}	gnas ngan len gyi gying ba
གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་གྱེང་བ	the distraction of negative tendencies [among the rnam g.yeng drug, from one's heart woanting the good qualities of samadhi kyang, in pride thinking "I am in dhyana." [craving for the happiness of ...	gnas ngan len gyi gyeng ba
གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	cause of birth in the lower realms	gnas ngan len gyi rgyu
གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་འཆིང་བ	harmful psychophysical tendencies	gnas ngan len gyi 'ching ba
གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་དྲི་མ	defilement of negative tendencies; Thrangu Rinpoche: = shes bya'i sgrib pa phra ba / sa cha sdug chags la 'gro ba gnas ngan len gyi g.yeng ba - / shin sbyangs kyi bde ba la sred pa /	gnas ngan len gyi dri ma
གནས་ངན་ལེན་འཆབ་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	* w/o a special purpose, for another monk, pham or lhag defeats or other downfalls which have arisen intentionally keep secret gnas ngan len 'chab pa'i ltung byed [among the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa...	gnas ngan len 'chab pa'i ltung byed
གནས་ངན་ལེན་བརྗོད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	faults of expression that lead to the lower realms	gnas ngan len brjod pa'i ltung byed
གནས་ངན་ལེན་པ	to perpetuate ignoble states of existence; tendency that perpetuates ignoble states of existence	gnas ngan len pa
གནས་ངེས་པ	a fixed dwelling	gnas nges pa
གནས་ངེས་མེད	one whose residence is not fixed, mendicant ascetic, vagabond, one of uncertain residence, not residing in one place	gnas nges med
གནས་ངེས་མེད་འགྲིམ་དུ་སོང་བ	to wander on from place to place, with no particular destination in mind	gnas nges med 'grim du song ba
གནས་ངེས་མེད་འགྲིམས་པ	wander from one secluded place to another	gnas nges med 'grims pa
གནས་ངེས་མེད་པ	w/o fixed dwelling	gnas nges med pa
གནས་ལྔ	five centers/ places [of the body, spyi bo, mgrin pa, snying ga, lte ba, gsang gnas]	gnas lnga
གནས་ཅན	people in a certain place	gnas can
གནས་གཅིག་འཛིན	species of wild gentian used in medicine	gnas gcig 'dzin
གནས་བཅའ་བ	inhabit, live, fit to be a shelter, ancient indian city	gnas bca' ba
གནས་བཅའ་རུང་བ	hospitable	gnas bca' rung ba
གནས་བཅས	saketa, Saketa, also called Ayodha, ancient capital of kingdom of Kosala	gnas bcas
གནས་བཅས་པ	1) dwelling place kyi rten gzhi gsar du chags pa gang zhig dug gi ri la gnas bcas na, de yi 'dab chags thams cad dug tu 'gyur, gang zhig gser gyi ri la gnas bcas na, de yi 'dab chags thams cad gser...	gnas bcas pa
གནས་བཅུ	the ten topics	gnas bcu
གནས་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 physical states in medical works (rtsa ba mdo, grub pa lus, 'phel grib nad, bya ba spyod lam, 'tsho ba zas, sbyor ba sman, cha byad dpyad, tha mal nad med, ngos bzung rtags, gso byed, bya byed s...	gnas bcu gcig
གནས་བཅུ་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	The Sutra teaching the 10 Topics	gnas bcu bstan pa'i mdo
གནས་བཅུའི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakinis of the ten directions	gnas bcu'i mkha' 'gro
གནས་ལྕགས་ཀ་དག་གི་གཞི	the foundation of absolute primal purity	gnas lcags ka dag gi gzhi
གནས་ཆ	calmness	gnas cha
གནས་ཆ་ཆུང	calm state is not very present, less calm	gnas cha chung
གནས་ཆ་ཆེ	calm state is very present	gnas cha che
གནས་ཆ་རྙེད་པ	acquired calm	gnas cha rnyed pa
གནས་ཆགས་ནས	while I was living	gnas chags nas
གནས་ཆགས་པ	gzhis chags pa ste, always stay in a certain place	gnas chags pa
གནས་ཆུང་དགོན	gnas chung monastery	gnas chung dgon
གནས་ཆུང་སྒྲ་དབྱངས་གླིང	monastery s.e. of 'bras spungs	gnas chung sgra dbyangs gling
གནས་ཆུང་ལྕོག	state Oracle's Seat	gnas chung lcog
གནས་ཆུང་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	a protector, deity near lhasa consulted as oracle	gnas chung chos skyong
གནས་ཆུང་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	Nechung oracle [the State Oracle of Tibet]	gnas chung chos rgyal
གནས་ཆུང་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ	Nechung oracle	gnas chung chos rgyal chen po
གནས་ཆུང་ལྷ་བསྡུར	the comparison of the gods at Nechung (ceremony on the 8th day of the 5th Tibetan month)	gnas chung lha bsdur
གནས་ཆེན	1) very important/essential place; 2) holy/ sacred place; 3) Varanasi	gnas chen
གནས་ཆེན་ལྔ	5 great holy places (dbyus rgya gra rdo rje gdan, shar ri bo rtse lnga, lho ri bo po ta la, nub om di ya na or ur rgyan yul, byang sham bha la, sku yi gnas brgyad)	gnas chen lnga
གནས་ཆེན་མཇལ	meeting holy places	gnas chen mjal
གནས་ཆེན་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི	It is recounted in the Chakrasamvara Tantra and its commentaries (as related in MK) that the world was once ruled by Bhairava, the wrathful form of Mahadeva who made the land of Magadha the seat of...	gnas chen nyi shu rtsa bzhi
བླེསསེད་ཨེཨཆ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ	four abodes as a palace of Chakrasamvara and each	blessed each of the twenty
མལེ་ཨནད་ཏྭེནཏཡ	four female Bodhisattvas, and the twelve goddesses. [MR]	male and twenty
གནས་ཆེན་ཉེར་གཞི	Sacred places, twenty four	gnas chen nyer gzhi
གནས་ཆེན་ཉེར་བཞི	24 centers of teaching	gnas chen nyer bzhi
གནས་ཆེན་བྱིན་འབེབས	consecration of sacred places	gnas chen byin 'bebs
གནས་ཆེན་མཟལ	go to holy places	gnas chen mzal
གནས་ཆོག	"ceremony of [transferring the dead to a higher] place." {gnas lung}, {gnas dgongs}, {gnas 'dren}, {byang chog}	gnas chog
གནས་མཆོག	supreme sacred place, holy site	gnas mchog
གནས་འཆའ	self-reliant as a tutor; comp {'char 'jug}	gnas 'cha'
གནས་འཆའ་བ	prepare a place, prepare an abode, settle	gnas 'cha' ba
གནས་མཇལ	pilgrimage	gnas mjal
གནས་མཇལ་དུ་འགྲོ	to visit a sacred place	gnas mjal du 'gro
གནས་མཇལ་པ	pilgrim	gnas mjal pa
གནས་མཇལ་བ	visit a sanctuary, go on pilgrimage	gnas mjal ba
གནས་མཇལ་མི	pilgrims	gnas mjal mi
གནས་འཇུག	day	gnas 'jug
གནས་འཇོག	geography	gnas 'jog
གནས་འཇོག་མི་མདོ	The Sutra on {geography	gnas 'jog mi mdo
གནས་བརྗེ་བ	displace, transpose	gnas brje ba
གནས་ཉམས	meditative experience of stillness	gnas nyams
གནས་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི	24 holy places	gnas nyi shu rtsa bzhi
གནས་ཉེར་བཞི	the twenty-four sacred places. 1) Puliramalaya 2) Jalandhara 3) Oddiyana 4) Arbuta 5. Godavari 6. Rameshvari 7. Devikota 8. Malava 9. Kamarupa 10. Otri 11. Trishakune 12. Kosala 13. Kalingkara 14. ...	gnas nyer bzhi
གནས་སྙིང	old monastery in tsang	gnas snying
གནས་ཏ་ལ	place in tibet	gnas ta la
གནས་གཏེར་སྐྱོང	protectors of the places and treasures	gnas gter skyong
གནས་གཏེར་བརྒྱ་རྩའི་བདག	lord of the hundred places and treasures	gnas gter brgya rtsa'i bdag
གནས་གཏོང་བ	1) gnas tshang g.yar ba .{glo bur du lhags pa'i mgron po la tsha zhag gi gnas gtong ba; 2) leave one's its own place	gnas gtong ba
གནས་རྟན་ཅུ་དྲུག	16 arhats: 1) {gnas rtan yan lag 'byung} A giraja/mt kailash. 2) {gnas brtan ma pham pa} Ajita/crystal slope of sage mt. 3) {gnas rtan nags na gnas}Vanav sin/mt. Saptapar a. 4) {gnas rtan dus ldan ...	gnas rtan cu drug
རྟན་བྷར	dvaa-dza gser can}Kanaka on western continent god n ya. 9) {gnas rtan ba ku la}. 10) {gnas rtan sgra gcan 'dzin} R hula/priya gudv pa. 11) {gnas rtan lam phran bstan} k udrapanthaka/mt. {g idhrak t...	rtan bhar
བྷར	dzaa-dza bsod snyoms len}. 13) {lam bstan[pa]} Panthaka/trayatri sha. 14) {gnas rtan klu'i sde}N gasena /mt/ urumu a. 15) {gnas rtan sbed byed}. 16) {gnas rtan mi phyed pa}Abhedya in himalayas]bsgyur	bhar
གནས་རྟེན	1) chos lugs kyi gnas 'gangs can [important] and rten gsum; 2) {gnas sa'am gnas gzhi; 3) arhat, sthavira; 4) base [military] station	gnas rten
གནས་རྟེན་རིམ་བཞིན་མཇལ་གྱིན་འགྲོ་བ	go on a pilgrimage	gnas rten rim bzhin mjal gyin 'gro ba
གནས་སྟངས	status, situation, condition	gnas stangs
གནས་བརྟན	Elder [thd]	gnas brtan
གནས་བརྟན་གྲོལ་བ	calm, steady, and liberated	gnas brtan grol ba
གནས་བརྟན་ཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen arhats. 1) {gnas rtan yan lag 'byung}. 2) {gnas brtan ma pham pa} 3) {gnas rtan nags na gnas} 4) {gnas rtan dus lngan} 5) {gnas rtan rdo rje mo'i bu} 6) {gnas rtan dpal bzang po} 7) {gnas r...	gnas brtan cu drug
གནས་བརྟན་ཆེན་པོ	mahasthavira	gnas brtan chen po
གནས་བརྟན་བཆུ་དྲུག	the 16 sthaviras gnas brtan ldang ma lhun gyi rgyal	gnas brtan bchu drug
གནས་བརྟན་སྡེ་པ	sthavira school	gnas brtan sde pa
གནས་བརྟན་པ	sthaviras, arhats	gnas brtan pa
གནས་བརྟན་པ་གསུམ	the three sthavira schools [among the 18 schools of hinayana, rgyal byed tshal na gnas pa, 'jigs med ri la gnas pa, gtsug lag khang chen na gnas pa]	gnas brtan pa gsum
གནས་བརྟན་པའི་སྡེ	sthavira school [one of the basic four schools of the shravakas, gnas brtan 'phags pa'i rigs yin par smra bas gnas brtan par grags la, chant the sutras in bi shva tsi, mkhan po smyig ma mkhan gyi r...	gnas brtan pa'i sde
གནས་བརྟན་པའི་སྡེ་པ་གསུམ	the three pitakas of the sthaviras	gnas brtan pa'i sde pa gsum
གནས་བརྟེན	Das: 1) Skrt: Sthavira. lit. "firm in his place," an elder, a Buddhist monk of the Sthavira school. 2) dashamisya. [arrived at the 10th decade of life, above ninety years old]. But cheifly the 16 f...	gnas brten
ཏོ་ཆིན་བཡ་ཐེ་པྲིནཅེསས་ཝུན	shing	to China by the Princess Wun
ཀོནཇོ་དཽགྷཏེར་ཨོཕ༹་Eམཔེརོར་ཋན	ju. [mss]	Konjo daughter of Emperor Than
གནས་བརྟེན་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ་དྲུག	Sixteen Great Elders. They were Panthaka {lam pa} in Trayatrimsha, Abhedya {mi phyed pa} in the Himalayas, Kanaka {gser can} in the western continent of Godana, Bakula {bha ku la} in the northern c...	gnas brten chen po bcu drug
གནས་བརྟེན་ཆེན་པོ་བཙུ་དྲུག	16 great elders/ sthaviras [panthaka {lam pa}. in Trayatri.ms'a, Abhedya {mi phyed pa}. in the Him layas, kanaka {gser can}. in the western continent of {godana, bakula {bhakula}. in the northern c...	gnas brten chen po btsu drug
གནས་བསྟན་སྡེ	school of the elders	gnas bstan sde
གནས་བསྟོད	a praise of the sacred place	gnas bstod
གནས་ཐབས	method of resting, meditation technique	gnas thabs
གནས་ཐབས་བྱེད	preserve, maintain	gnas thabs byed
གནས་ཐབས་སེམས་ཀྱི	the method of resting the mind	gnas thabs sems kyi
གནས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་འཕར་བ	going through all the realms	gnas thams cad du 'phar ba
གནས་ཐོག	very stillness	gnas thog
གནས་དག	natural purity, basically / naturally pure, transmuted	gnas dag
གནས་དག་ཏུ	in (its) inherent purity	gnas dag tu
གནས་དག་པ	stainless abode, pure field	gnas dag pa
གནས་དག་པ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དཔལ་གྱི	the glorious pure celestial field of ..	gnas dag pa mkha' spyod dpal gyi
གནས་དང་ཉེ་བཞི་གནས	the main and neighboring regions	gnas dang nye bzhi gnas
གནས་དང་གནས་མ་ཡིན	fact and not fact, definite and impossible, appropriate and inappropriate	gnas dang gnas ma yin
གནས་དང་གནས་མ་ཡིན་པ	places, definite and indefinite gnas dang gnas ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i	gnas dang gnas ma yin pa
གནས་དང་གནས་མིན	the appropriate and the inappropriate, problem, question	gnas dang gnas min
གནས་དང་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudras of the places and valleys	gnas dang yul gyi phyag rgya
གནས་དུ་དྲིལ་བ	to condense to the essentials / key points	gnas du dril ba
གནས་དུས	times and circumstances	gnas dus
གནས་དུས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	coincidence of place and time	gnas dus kyi rten 'brel
གནས་དུས་གང་ཟག་གི་དབང་གིས	in terms of place, time, and type of person	gnas dus gang zag gi dbang gis
གནས་དུས་སྟོན་འཁོར་ཡོ་བྱད	place, time, teacher, retinue, and articles	gnas dus ston 'khor yo byad
གནས་དུས་ཚོད་རྩིས	depending on according place and time having arrived, perform evil deeds	gnas dus tshod rtsis
གནས་དུས་བཟང་བསྟུན་གྱིས	in accord w appropriate times and circumstances	gnas dus bzang bstun gyis
གནས་དོན	problem, question	gnas don
གནས་དོན་ལུས	environment, sense objects, and a body	gnas don lus
གནས་དོན་ལུས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	appearances of environment, sense objects, and a body	gnas don lus kyi snang ba
གནས་དྲུག	bslab pa'i gnas drug	gnas drug
གནས་བདག	master of the region; regional god; local deities	gnas bdag
གནས་བདེ་དུས་འཇགས	gnas bde and dus skabs lhing 'jags	gnas bde dus 'jags
གནས་བདོ་བའི་ཆ	stagnation	gnas bdo ba'i cha
གནས་མདོ་སྟོད་བརྒྱུད	the Upper Lineage of Neydo [Monastery]	gnas mdo stod brgyud
གནས་མདོ་སྨད་བརྒྱུད	the Lower Lineage of Neydo [Monastery]	gnas mdo smad brgyud
གནས་མདོ་གསེར་ཕྲེང	the golden rosary of Neydo monastery; [lineage masters]	gnas mdo gser phreng
གནས་འདུས	essential point	gnas 'dus
གནས་འདྲི་འདྲ	place such as should be enquired about	gnas 'dri 'dra
གནས་འདྲེན	funeral ceremony	gnas 'dren
གནས་སྡོད	living in a place	gnas sdod
གནས་སྡོད་བྱས	was living in a place, while living in	gnas sdod byas
གནས་སྡོད་བྱེད	live, reside	gnas sdod byed
གནས་བརྡན	elder monk, sthavira	gnas brdan
གནས་ན	when calm, when still	gnas na
གནས་ན་གནས་ཐོག	in the very stillness when calm	gnas na gnas thog
གནས་ནང་དགོན་པ	Nenang gonpa [seat of pawo rinopches, karma kagyu]	gnas nang dgon pa
གནས་ནས	when he has established	gnas nas
གནས་ནས་སྐྲོད	expel from a place	gnas nas skrod
གནས་ནས་འདྲེན་པ	ex {'gro rnams 'khor ba'i gnas nas 'dren pa} to deliver all beings from cyclic existence	gnas nas 'dren pa
གནས་ནས་སྤེད་པ	[arch] from ones own place/where 1 is to another 'bud pa	gnas nas sped pa
གནས་ནས་དབྱུང	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas nas dbyung
གནས་ནས་དབྱུང་བ	turn out of a monastery, excommunication, banish from a place, deport from a monastery	gnas nas dbyung ba
གནས་ནས་དབྱུངས	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas nas dbyungs
གནས་གནས་མིན	fact and nonfact	gnas gnas min
གནས་རྣམས	abodes	gnas rnams
གནས་སྣང	appearance and existence [abbr. of {gnas tshul}. and {snang tshul}., {gnas lugs and snang lugs} situation, phenomenal realm]	gnas snang
གནས་སྣང་མཐུན་པ	correspondence of appearance and existence	gnas snang mthun pa
གནས་སྣང་མཐུན་མི་མཐུན	harmony and disharmony between the seeming and the real / apparitional & abiding natures	gnas snang mthun mi mthun
གནས་སྣང་མི་མཐུན་པ	disharmony between the seeming and the real	gnas snang mi mthun pa
གནས་པ་བསྐྱང་བ	remaining in the calm state	gnas pa bskyang ba
གནས་པ་དགུ	the 9 topics [ston pa, chos, dge 'dun, slob dpon, mkhan po, bla ma, gnas, gang zag, yul la brten pa'o]	gnas pa dgu
གནས་པ་སྙོམ་མེ་བ	dull type of calm	gnas pa snyom me ba
གནས་པ་འཐུག་པོ	dense type of calm	gnas pa 'thug po
གནས་པ་འདེབས་པ	perform a monastic function	gnas pa 'debs pa
གནས་པ་ན་མི་རུང	unsuitable abiding	gnas pa na mi rung
གནས་པ་པོ	abider	gnas pa po
གནས་པ་མ་ཡིན	nowhere	gnas pa ma yin
གནས་པ་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་ས	Unchanging Abidance	gnas pa mi 'gyur ba'i sa
གནས་པ་མེད	homeless, unfixed	gnas pa med
གནས་པ་མེད་པ	non-abiding, nondwelling, not resting on anything	gnas pa med pa
གནས་པ་ཙ	steady channels	gnas pa tsa
གནས་པ་ཙམ	to simply remain in, simply consists in remaining	gnas pa tsam
གནས་པ་རྩ	constituting nadis; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 35]	gnas pa rtsa
གནས་པ་ཚ	steady channels	gnas pa tsha
གནས་པ་གཞི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of the primordial base	gnas pa gzhi 'khor lo
གནས་པ་གཞིའི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of the innate ground gnas pa gzhi'i sgron ma bo ji ltar gnas pa	gnas pa gzhi'i sgron ma
ཀུན་གཞི་ངོས་འཛིན	method for recognizing the base of all	kun gzhi ngos 'dzin
གནས་པ་བཞི	the four abidings [among the zhugs gnas brgyad, dge sbyong gi 'bras bu la gnas pa bzhi [rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas, phyir 'ong 'bras gnas, phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas, dgra bcom 'bras gnas]	gnas pa bzhi
གནས་པ་ཟབ་པ	profound topic	gnas pa zab pa
གནས་པ་ཡིན	continued like that	gnas pa yin
གནས་པ་ལ་ནི་མི་སྲིད	cannot possibly exist	gnas pa la ni mi srid
གནས་པ་ལས་མི་བསྐྱོད་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	the dharmin not moving from its place [among the dgra bcom pa drug, gang dull powers, by desirable qualities intoxicated or not kyang rung mthong ba'i chos la bde bar gnas pa las completely transgr...	gnas pa las mi bskyod pa'i chos can
བྱུང་ན	if your calm feel restless, unsettled or fidgety	byung na
གནས་པ་ཨ	hold with AH	gnas pa a
གནས་པའི་བསྐལ་པ	kalpa of existence [2nd of the bskal pa bzhi, period after completion of creation of the world to its destruction de uninterruptedly sems can gcig skyes pa nas gnas bskal gyi mgo tshugs pa yin &, f...	gnas pa'i bskal pa
གནས་པའི་རྒྱུ	cause of existence	gnas pa'i rgyu
གནས་པའི་ཉམས	meditative mood of stillness	gnas pa'i nyams
གནས་པའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	contemplation of calm state, SA rnal 'byor bzhi, ting 'dzin rnam bzhi	gnas pa'i ting 'dzin
གནས་པའི་ཐབས	means of resting	gnas pa'i thabs
གནས་པའི་དེ་བཤིན་ཉིད	the suchness of existence	gnas pa'i de bshin nyid
གནས་པའི་མདུན	appearing before one	gnas pa'i mdun
གནས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	1 of rnal 'byor bzhi	gnas pa'i rnal 'byor
གནས་པའི་བར་བསྐལ་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 intermediate kalpas of existence [ya thog ring mo, the 1st intermediate kalpa &, khug pa bco brgyad &, ma thog ring mo or bar bskal tha ma	gnas pa'i bar bskal nyi shu
གནས་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	acting cause of subsistence	gnas pa'i byed rgyu
གནས་པའི་དབྱིབས	sense of calm; syn {gnas pa'i rnam pa}	gnas pa'i dbyibs
གནས་པའི་རང་རྒྱལ	after having just attained the fruition of a shravaka entering the stream 1 becomes a pratyekabuddha	gnas pa'i rang rgyal
གནས་པའི་རིགས	enduring potential, indwelling potential	gnas pa'i rigs
གནས་པའི་ས	location (in which (something) remains/ abides)	gnas pa'i sa
གནས་པར	for the calm state	gnas par
གནས་པར་ལྟ་བ	abiding view	gnas par lta ba
གནས་པས	while continuing in that state	gnas pas
གནས་པོ	host, landlord, inn-keeper	gnas po
གནས་པོ་སོ་མོ	hosts and hostesses	gnas po so mo
གནས་སྤར	1) move one's dwelling place; 2) promotion in rank; 3) in dharma gshin po'i rnam shes gnas gong mar spar ba	gnas spar
གནས་སྤར་བ	1) move one's dwelling place; 2) promotion in rank; 3) in dharma gshin po'i rnam shes gnas gong mar spar ba	gnas spar ba
གནས་སྤོ	transference, displacement, evacuation 1533	gnas spo
གནས་སྤོ་བ	move house, emigrant, evacuate, move, transplant, change place of residence, move, shift, transplant	gnas spo ba
གནས་སྤོ་བྱེད	move [residence], emigrate	gnas spo byed
གནས་སྤོ་ཡུལ་མི	immigrant, emigrant, settler, colonist	gnas spo yul mi
གནས་སྤོར	move [residence], emigrate	gnas spor
གནས་སྤོར་བ	move to another place to stay, move [residence]	gnas spor ba
གནས་སྤོར་བྱེད	move [residence], emigrate	gnas spor byed
གནས་སྤོར་ཡུལ་མི	immigrant, emigrant, settler, colonist	gnas spor yul mi
གནས་སྤོས	move [residence], emigrate	gnas spos
གནས་སྤོས་བ	move to another place to stay, move [residence]	gnas spos ba
གནས་སྤོས་བྱེད	move [residence], emigrate	gnas spos byed
གནས་སྤོས་བྱེད་པ	decamp	gnas spos byed pa
གནས་སྤོས་ཡུལ་མི	immigrant, emigrant, settler, colonist	gnas spos yul mi
གནས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	the perfect place; one of {phun sum tshogs pa lnga}	gnas phun sum tshogs pa
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་དྲང	the perfect place is the citadel of the absolute expanse, called Akanistha, "the unexcelled" gnas phun sum tshogs pa shar phyogs	dbyings kyi pho drang
གནས་ཕྱིར་ཞུགས	the following so that the doctrine continues	gnas phyir zhugs
གནས་ཕྱོགས	1) place 1 is staying; 2) way of grasping the view, point of view, position	gnas phyogs
གནས་འཕོ་བ	change to another dwelling place/ birth/ status	gnas 'pho ba
གནས་འཕྲིན	[news]letter	gnas 'phrin
གནས་འཕྲོ	still or diffusing, quietude or mental activity	gnas 'phro
གནས་བབ	position, situation, condition, occasion	gnas bab
གནས་བབ་ངན་པ	inferior/ poor [position, situation, condition, occasion]	gnas bab ngan pa
གནས་བབ་ཞན་པ	inferior/ poor [position, situation, condition, occasion]	gnas bab zhan pa
གནས་བབས	position, situation, condition, occasion	gnas babs
གནས་བྱང	essential inventory	gnas byang
གནས་བྱའི་ཆོས་བཞི	continuously to be practiced by a renunciate {'tsho ba'i spyod lam rigs bzhi} downfalls to be avoided of the two extremes in	gnas bya'i chos bzhi
གནས་བྱེད	orb of the sun, saint, sage	gnas byed
གནས་བྱེད་མ	cow, woman	gnas byed ma
གནས་བྲལ	absence of a discontinuous existent	gnas bral
གནས་བླ་མ	disciplined elder monk	gnas bla ma
གནས་དབང་སྒྱུར་ཆེན་པོའི་འོག་མིན	Mah vas'avartins	gnas dbang sgyur chen po'i 'og min
གནས་དབང་རྟེན	sense organ	gnas dbang rten
གནས་དབེན་པ	a solitary place; remote / secluded / retreat place	gnas dben pa
གནས་དབེན་པར	in a secluded place	gnas dben par
གནས་དབྱུང	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas dbyung
གནས་དབྱུང་གཏོང	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas dbyung gtong
གནས་དབྱུང་གཏོང་བ	dismiss, evict	gnas dbyung gtong ba
གནས་དབྱུང་བདུན	among the {ltung ba phyir bcos kyi gzhi bzhi}, mi spro ba nan tur gyi phyir bcos byed pa'i tshul zhig; lhag ma la sogs pa'i ltung ba byung bar kun la grags kyang phyir bcos byed mi 'dod pa'i gang z...	gnas dbyung bdun
དགེ་སློང་མ་དང་འཕྱར་ག	yeng dang rtsa hral gyis 'dris shing gnas pa, 7 chos rnam par gtan la phab pas kyang rtsod pa zhi bar ma gyur pa rnams ni gnas nas dbyung ba]	dge slong ma dang 'phyar ga
གནས་དབྱུང་བ	cast out, banish, throw away	gnas dbyung ba
གནས་དབྱུངས	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas dbyungs
གནས་དབྱུངས་གཏོང	/(1 be taken/ removed/ expelled far from 1's own place; 2) be removed/ deposed/ demoted from one's rank/ status [because of transgressions]	gnas dbyungs gtong
གནས་དབྱུངས་བདུན	among the {ltung ba phyir bcos kyi gzhi bzhi}, mi spro ba nan tur gyi phyir bcos byed pa'i tshul zhig; lhag ma la sogs pa'i downfalls that arise, though they are proclaimed to all, a being does not...	gnas dbyungs bdun
གནས་འབེབས་པ	1) from the place 1 is or is staying gtan 'cha' ba {grong khyer gyi nang nas grong gseb tu gnas 'bebs pa, settle down in; 2) be reduced in/ stripped of rank/status gcog pa	gnas 'bebs pa
གནས་འབྱིན་པ	banish, cast out, throw away	gnas 'byin pa
གནས་འབྱུང	source places	gnas 'byung
གནས་འབྱེད	set out for	gnas 'byed
གནས་འབྲེལ	pilgrimage	gnas 'brel
གནས་འབྲེལ་བཞག་པ	to make a [spiritual] connection with a holy place	gnas 'brel bzhag pa
གནས་སྦྱིན་པ	confer priestly status on a man	gnas sbyin pa
གནས་སྦྱིན་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	master, slob dpon, of the place	gnas sbyin pa'i slob dpon
གནས་མ	residence, resident	gnas ma
གནས་མ་བརྒྱད	the 8 ladies of the [sacred] places	gnas ma brgyad
གནས་མ་བུ	Vatsiputriya	gnas ma bu
གནས་མ་བུ་པ	Vatsiputriya 1534	gnas ma bu pa
གནས་མ་བུ་པའི་སྡེ	Vatsiputriya school [one of the mang bkur ba gsum}	gnas ma bu pa'i sde
གནས་མ་བུའི་སྡེ	Vatsiputriya school	gnas ma bu'i sde
གནས་མ་ཡིན	not be an object of	gnas ma yin
གནས་མ་ཡིན་པ	[the] indefinite gnas ma yin pa la skrag pa'i nyes dmigs the defect of being afraid of the indefinite	gnas ma yin pa
གནས་མང་གྲངས་ཀ	many digited #	gnas mang grangs ka
གནས་མའི་བུ་པ	followers of Vatsiputra [ a disciple of sariputra] a sthavira school	gnas ma'i bu pa
གནས་མའི་བུའི་སྡེ	Vatsiputriya school	gnas ma'i bu'i sde
གནས་མལ	(lit. the place one sleeps) home; place to stay at, dwelling	gnas mal
གནས་མལ་གྱི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	transgression of dwelling place	gnas mal gyi ltung byed
གནས་མལ་གྱི་གཞི	basic dwelling place	gnas mal gyi gzhi
གནས་མལ་འཆའ	I will dwell [at.]	gnas mal 'cha'
གནས་མལ་འཆོས	prepare the dwelling and bedding!	gnas mal 'chos
གནས་མལ་བསྟེན	my sleeping place will be [at..]	gnas mal bsten
གནས་མི	habitant	gnas mi
གནས་མིན	[be an] unsuitable [object]	gnas min
གནས་མེད	homeless	gnas med
གནས་མེད་འཁྱམས་པོ	wanderer w/o a fixed dwelling, destitute and homeless	gnas med 'khyams po
གནས་མེད་དུ་འཁྱམས་པ	to roam about without fixed dwelling place	gnas med du 'khyams pa
གནས་མེད་པ	1) unsuitable, unworthy, have no place in; 2) no opportunity; 3) homeless [one]; 4) (met wind	gnas med pa
གནས་མེད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become homeless	gnas med par 'gyur ba
གནས་མེད་ཕྱོགས་གྱར	since 1 is w/o dwelling place in uncertain places gyar ba	gnas med phyogs gyar
གནས་མེད་ཡུལ་ཁྱར	homeless and wandering around	gnas med yul khyar
གནས་མེད་ཡུལ་འཁྱར	wanderer w/o a fixed dwelling, destitute and homeless	gnas med yul 'khyar
གནས་མེད་ཡུལ་གྱར	homeless and wandering around	gnas med yul gyar
གནས་མོ	hostess, landlady, mistress, female innkeeper, hostess	gnas mo
གནས་མོ་སྣ་གཉིས	gns mo sna gnyis mt peak i[n spu hreng rdzong ma pham S of g.yu mtso, el smi 7728]	gnas mo sna gnyis
གནས་རྨོ	grandmother	gnas rmo
གནས་གཙང	pure abodes, pure lands in the form realm, the classes of gods who dwell there	gnas gtsang
གནས་གཙང་མ	{gtsang ma'i gnas ris lnga} realms of the noble ones, the pure abodes, classes of gods [among the 28 in the form realm]	gnas gtsang ma
གནས་གཙང་མ་ལྔ	Five Pure Abodes	gnas gtsang ma lnga
གནས་གཙང་མའི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the god of Suddhagasakayika, the Heaven of Pure Reaches	gnas gtsang ma'i rigs kyi lha
གནས་གཙང་མའི་རིས	the Shuddhavasa realm	gnas gtsang ma'i ris
གནས་གཙང་མའི་ས་ལྔ	the five pure abodes [god realms of form mi che ba, mi gdung ba, gya nom snang, shin tu mthong, 'og min]	gnas gtsang ma'i sa lnga
གནས་གཙང་མའི་ལྷ	gods of the pure abodes; 1) {mi che ba}. 2} {mi gdung ba}. 3) {gya nom snang ba}. 4) {shin tu mthong}. 5) {'og min}	gnas gtsang ma'i lha
གནས་གཙང་མའི་ལྷའི་གནས	the dwellings of the gods of the Shuddhavasa realm	gnas gtsang ma'i lha'i gnas
གནས་ཚ་པོ་བྱུང	it has become hot	gnas tsha po byung
གནས་ཚང	inn, lodging, lodging house, habitation	gnas tshang
གནས་ཚང་བཅའ་བ	lodge	gnas tshang bca' ba
གནས་ཚང་བུ་མོ	wife and daughter gnas tshang g.yar ba - hire night-quarters gnas tshang g.yar ba'i gla cha - [room] rent	gnas tshang bu mo
གནས་ཚད	level [yon tan gnas tshad: education level]	gnas tshad
གནས་ཚུལ	news	gnas tshul
གནས་ཚུལ་བསྒྲག	report [the news/ situation]	gnas tshul bsgrag
གནས་ཚུལ་ངོ་མ	real facts, true situation	gnas tshul ngo ma
གནས་ཚུལ་ངོ་མར	real situation	gnas tshul ngo mar
གནས་ཚུལ་དངོས་གཞི	real facts, true situation	gnas tshul dngos gzhi
གནས་ཚུལ་ཇི་ལྟ	nature	gnas tshul ji lta
གནས་ཚུལ་ཇི་བཞིན	this is so, the way things are	gnas tshul ji bzhin
གནས་ཚུལ་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	natural state of things just as they are true state offerings	gnas tshul ji bzhin pa
གནས་ཚུལ་བསྟན	show life	gnas tshul bstan
གནས་ཚུལ་མཐོང་བ	see things as they are	gnas tshul mthong ba
གནས་ཚུལ་མཐོང་བའི་འཕགས་པ	noble ones who see thing as they are	gnas tshul mthong ba'i 'phags pa
གནས་ཚུལ་མཐོང་བའི་བློ	the mind that sees things as they are	gnas tshul mthong ba'i blo
གནས་ཚུལ་དང་མཐུན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	view in accord w things as they are	gnas tshul dang mthun pa'i lta ba
གནས་ཚུལ་དུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not existing as things as they are	gnas tshul du ma grub pa
གནས་ཚུལ་མདོར་བསྡུད	summary of the situation, news summary	gnas tshul mdor bsdud
གནས་ཚུལ་སྣང་ཚུལ	being & appearing	gnas tshul snang tshul
གནས་ཚུལ་མ་མཐོང་བ	not see things as they are	gnas tshul ma mthong ba
གནས་ཚུལ་མ་མཐོང་བའི་བློ	mind that does not see the natural state	gnas tshul ma mthong ba'i blo
གནས་ཚུལ་མ་མཐོང་བའི་སོ་སྐྱེ	ordinary beings who do not see things as they are	gnas tshul ma mthong ba'i so skye
གནས་ཚུལ་ཞུ	report, give an account	gnas tshul zhu
གནས་ཚུལ་ཞུ་ཡིག	report, account, message, note	gnas tshul zhu yig
གནས་ཚུལ་བཞིན	this is so	gnas tshul bzhin
གནས་ཚུལ་ཡ་མ་ཚན	curious thing	gnas tshul ya ma tshan
གནས་ཚུལ་ཨི་ལྟ	nature	gnas tshul i lta
གནས་ཚུལ་ཨི་བཞིན	this is so	gnas tshul i bzhin
གནས་ཚེའུ	tank	gnas tshe'u
གནས་འཛིན	MSS: take a stance, based on oral commentary by NyDh. E.g. R75: 209.6; Acc. to NyDh gnas 'dzin = bzung 'dzin, I have translated gnas 'dzin as "take a stance" because in English to "take a stance" m...	gnas 'dzin
གནས་འཛིན་བུ་མོ	CM: (mngon) mtshan mo, night. [mss]	gnas 'dzin bu mo
གནས་ཞིག་ནས	from somewhere	gnas zhig nas
གནས་ཞུའི་རྩོམ་རིག	reportage	gnas zhu'i rtsom rig
གནས་གཞན	another place/ topic, something else	gnas gzhan
གནས་གཞན་གྱུར་པ་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	ultimate transformation	gnas gzhan gyur pa mthar thug pa
གནས་གཞན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	transformation	gnas gzhan du gyur pa
གནས་གཞི	CM: 1) sdod sa'i yul lam khang gzhis. 2) rnam dbye bdun pa. 3) (mngon) khang pa. [mss]	gnas gzhi
གནས་གཞི་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	words showing whether something/ a dharma is or is not in a certain place; rnam dbye bdun pa rten gnas kyi sgra la don gyi phrad sbyar ba'i sgra zhig /{gnam la nyi zla yod}	gnas gzhi ston pa'i sgra
གནས་གཞི་མེད	there is nothing concrete	gnas gzhi med
གནས་གཞིའི་སྒྲ	gnas gzhi showing word	gnas gzhi'i sgra
གནས་བཞི	the four places [head, throat, heart and navel]	gnas bzhi
གནས་བཞི་པ	king of the rakshasas	gnas bzhi pa
གནས་བཞིན	during this state	gnas bzhin
གནས་བཞིན་པ	living	gnas bzhin pa
གནས་བཞིན་ལས	while remaining that way	gnas bzhin las
གནས་བཞུགས	resident	gnas bzhugs
གནས་ཟབ	city of asura at foot of sumeru	gnas zab
གནས་ཟོས་བདེ་པོ	1) w/o doing harm; 2) quiet, silent	gnas zos bde po
གནས་གཟིགས་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	to visit a sacred place	gnas gzigs la phebs pa
གནས་བཟང	good and happy world	gnas bzang
གནས་བཟང་པོ	1) good dwelling place (met 1 god realms two Rtsva ri gangs ri etc	gnas bzang po
གནས་བཟང་པོར་སྐྱེ་བ	birth in a good place	gnas bzang por skye ba
གནས་བཟང་བ	wholesome environment, [no thieves and robbers]	gnas bzang ba
གནས་བཟོད	contentment, easiness at heart	gnas bzod
གནས་བཟོད་བདེ་པོ	contented, happy	gnas bzod bde po
གནས་འ་གྱུར	transform	gnas 'a gyur
གནས་འོག་མ	the desire realm	gnas 'og ma
གནས་ཡིག	written history of a place, instructions on essential aspects	gnas yig
གནས་ཡུལ	sacred lands and places	gnas yul
གནས་ཡུལ་གྱི་དཔའ་པོ་མཁ་འགྲོ	dakas and dakinis of the sacred places and valleys	gnas yul gyi dpa' po mkha 'gro
གནས་ཡུལ་དུར་ཁྲོད	Places, countries and charnel grounds. These refer to the 24 major places, the 32 major countries and the eight charnel grounds. When added together, there are the 64 places and countries (gnas yul...	gnas yul dur khrod
གནས་ཡུལ་དོམ་ལ	{gnas yul dom} pass [S sman gling rdzong]	gnas yul dom la
གནས་ཡུལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	64 sacred places and countries	gnas yul drug cu rtsa bzhi
གནས་ཡུལ་དཔའ་བོ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	the dakas and dakinis of the sacred places and valleys	gnas yul dpa' bo mkha' 'gro
གནས་ཡེར་བཞི	24 lands	gnas yer bzhi
གནས་ཡོ་བྱིན་རླབས	consecration of dwelling place and ritual articles	gnas yo byin rlabs
གནས་ཡོ་བྱིན་བརླབ	consecration of site and the materials 1536	gnas yo byin brlab
གནས་ཡོངས་གྱུར་ནས་དག་པའི་སེམས	mind that transfers in position	gnas yongs gyur nas dag pa'i sems
གནས་ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	transformation in position	gnas yongs su gyur pa
གནས་ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic of transferring in position	gnas yongs su gyur pa'i mtshan nyid
གནས་ཡོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་བའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་པ	being the cause of transferring in position	gnas yongs su 'gyur ba'i rgyu yin pa
གནས་ཡོད་སྐབས	when I was living	gnas yod skabs
གནས་ཡོད་འདུག	was at, was in	gnas yod 'dug
གནས་ཡོད་པ	existent	gnas yod pa
གནས་རི	mt in the god realms	gnas ri
གནས་རིགས	classes of gods	gnas rigs
གནས་རིགས་མཐུན་པ	similar abode and class	gnas rigs mthun pa
གནས་རིམ	grade	gnas rim
གནས་རིས	limited realm	gnas ris
གནས་རིས་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 different realms of the emanational body	gnas ris bcu gnyis
གནས་རིས་བཅུ་བདུན	17 realms	gnas ris bcu bdun
གནས་རིས་དེ་དག་ཏུ	in their respective realms	gnas ris de dag tu
གནས་རིས་དྲུག	Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings	gnas ris drug
གནས་རིས་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 abodes [of the desire realms]	gnas ris so drug
གནས་རིས་སོ་སོའི་ཚེ་ཚད	the life-spans of those in the different abodes	gnas ris so so'i tshe tshad
གནས་ལ་བསྟོད་པའི་མགུར་དབྱངས	song in praise of the place	gnas la bstod pa'i mgur dbyangs
གནས་ལ་དད	faith in the right place	gnas la dad
གནས་ལ་དད་པ	confidence in the foundation of spiritual life	gnas la dad pa
གནས་ལ་འདུན	be interested in (the topic of	gnas la 'dun
གནས་ལན	phar gnas tshul yi ge btang ba'i yig lan	gnas lan
གནས་ལུགས	basic state	gnas lugs
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ངང	the natural state; the realm of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi ngang
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་པ	realize the natural state	gnas lugs kyi rtogs pa
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་པ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	realized the natural state gnas lugs kyi rtogs pa rgyud la skyes te	gnas lugs kyi rtogs pa skyes te
གྲོལ་བ་ཡིན་པ	awakens the realization of the natural state within one and brings liberation	grol ba yin pa
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi lta ba
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྟ་བ	vision of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi sta ba
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དོན	the meaning of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi don
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དོན་རྟོགས	realized the nature of reality	gnas lugs kyi don rtogs
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	appearance of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi snang ba
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamudra of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi phyag rgya chen po
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྩལ	expressions of the natural state	gnas lugs kyi rtsal
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རང་མཚང་ཇི་བཞིན	innate suchness of the natural state exactly as it is	gnas lugs kyi rang mtshang ji bzhin
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རང་ཞལ	the true face of your nature	gnas lugs kyi rang zhal
གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རང་ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	see the natural face of the real condition	gnas lugs kyi rang zhal mthong ba
གནས་ལུགས་གི་གཞི	the ground of the natural state	gnas lugs gi gzhi
གནས་ལུགས་བསྒོམ་ཟེར	claim to meditate on the natural state	gnas lugs bsgom zer
གནས་ལུགས་ངང	the natural state	gnas lugs ngang
གནས་ལུགས་ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya as the natural state	gnas lugs chos sku
གནས་ལུགས་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ངང	continuity of the dharmata nature	gnas lugs chos nyid kyi ngang
གནས་ལུགས་ཇི་ལྟ	innate state gnas lugs ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i ye shes wisdom of knowing the nature as it is gnas lugs ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i ye shes Wisdom of knowing the nature as it is. The knowledge which cognize...	gnas lugs ji lta
གནས་ལུགས་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན	the natural state as it is	gnas lugs ji lta ba bzhin
གནས་ལུགས་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the knowledge of quality, the knowledge which sees the natural state just as it is	gnas lugs ji lta ba gzigs pa'i ye shes
གནས་ལུགས་གཏན་ལ་འབེབས	ascertain the natural state	gnas lugs gtan la 'bebs
གནས་ལུགས་གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པ	ascertaining the natural state	gnas lugs gtan la 'bebs pa
གནས་ལུགས་རྟོགས་པ	knowledge of the essence of all things	gnas lugs rtogs pa
གནས་ལུགས་ལྟ་བའི་ངོ་སྤྲོད	introducing the view of the natural state	gnas lugs lta ba'i ngo sprod
གནས་ལུགས་སྟོང་པ	natural state of emptiness	gnas lugs stong pa
གནས་ལུགས་ཐ་བྲལ	the natural state free from difference	gnas lugs tha bral
གནས་ལུགས་ཐར་ཐུག	the ultimate natural state	gnas lugs thar thug
གནས་ལུགས་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate natural state	gnas lugs mthar thug
གནས་ལུགས་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the natural state/ real condition of thatness, suchness	gnas lugs de kho na nyid
གནས་ལུགས་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དོན	the natural state/ real condition of thatness, suchness	gnas lugs de kho na nyid kyi don
གནས་ལུགས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the natural state as it is, the suchness nature	gnas lugs de bzhin nyid
གནས་ལུགས་དོན	the thing-in-itself, bare haeceity of an object, authenticity	gnas lugs don
གནས་ལུགས་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	ultimate allground of the natural state	gnas lugs don gyi kun gzhi
གནས་ལུགས་དོན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	ultimate wisdom of the natural state	gnas lugs don gyi ye shes
གནས་ལུགས་དོན་དམ	ultimate nature	gnas lugs don dam
གནས་ལུགས་དོན་དམ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the ultimate view of the natural state	gnas lugs don dam gyi lta ba
གནས་ལུགས་དོན་དམ་པའི་བདེན་པ	absolute truth of the natural state	gnas lugs don dam pa'i bden pa
གནས་ལུགས་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ	vajra refuge of the natural state	gnas lugs rdo rje'i skyabs 'gro
གནས་ལུགས་སྤྱོད་པའི་བློ	mind that realizes the natural state	gnas lugs spyod pa'i blo
གནས་ལུགས་ཕུག་ཆོད	total understanding of the natural state	gnas lugs phug chod
གནས་ལུགས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	mahamudra of the natural state [= {de gshegs snying po}	gnas lugs phyag rgya chen po
གནས་ལུགས་ཕྱག་ཆེན	Mahamudra as it is, things as they are-Mahamudra, [ground Mahamudra]	gnas lugs phyag chen
གནས་ལུགས་མཛོད	the treasury of the way things are	gnas lugs mdzod
གནས་ལུགས་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	dzogchen of the natural state	gnas lugs rdzogs pa chen po
གནས་ལུགས་གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ	Ground luminosity of the natural state	gnas lugs gzhi'i 'od gsal
རྗེའི་སྙིང་པོ	a systematic presentation of the teachings of the rdzogs chen approach of rnying ma pa Buddhism revealed by bdud 'joms gling pa and edited by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje	rje'i snying po
གནས་ལུགས་ལ་སྒྲིབ	to obscure the natural state	gnas lugs la sgrib
གནས་ལུགས་གཤིས	absolute nature	gnas lugs gshis
གནས་ལུགས་བཤད	to argue, reason	gnas lugs bshad
གནས་ལུགས་བཤད་པ	argue, reason	gnas lugs bshad pa
གནས་ལུང	tie to the higher realms, sending the consciousness of a deceased to a pure realm	gnas lung
གནས་ལུང་གི་ཆོ་ག	rite of the tie to the higher realms/ sending consciousness of a deceased to a pure realm	gnas lung gi cho ga
གནས་ལུང་རོ་སྲེག	funeral ceremony	gnas lung ro sreg
གནས་ཤིག་ཏུ	in a place	gnas shig tu
གནས་ཤིང	1 who stands firm	gnas shing
གནས་ཤེས་ན	if one is able to remain	gnas shes na
གནས་ཤོམ་པ	give shelter to, lodge a person	gnas shom pa
གནས་གཤིས་བརྟག་རིག	climatology	gnas gshis brtag rig
གནས་བཤད	explanation of places of interests to Buddhist pilgrims	gnas bshad
གནས་བཤད་བསྟན་པ	to give an explanation of a holy place	gnas bshad bstan pa
གནས་ས	address. Syn {gnas yul}	gnas sa
གནས་ས་གུ་དོག	narrow place	gnas sa gu dog
གནས་ས་མེད	(thoughts) do not remain anywhere	gnas sa med
གནས་སམ་ཀློག་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	[monk's] tutor and instructor	gnas sam klog pa'i slob dpon
གནས་སུ	intrinsically	gnas su
གནས་སུ་སྐྱེས	aromatic plant	gnas su skyes
གནས་སུ་འཁོད་པ	settled at a place	gnas su 'khod pa
གནས་སུ་གྱར	come to be [in a state of]	gnas su gyar
གནས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	{'jig rten na gad mo'i gnas su gyur pa} in the world, you who are so laughable	gnas su gyur pa
གནས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	come to a place, arrive at	gnas su 'gyur ba
གནས་སུ་བཅུག	allow oneself to remain	gnas su bcug
གནས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	allow attention to remain	gnas su 'jug pa
གནས་སུ་འཇོག	put/ place in a position of	gnas su 'jog
གནས་སུ་འཇོག་པ	station	gnas su 'jog pa
གནས་སུ་སྟོབས་པ་མཆོད་པ	offerings which bring the goal to fruition	gnas su stobs pa mchod pa
གནས་སུ་སྟོབས་པའི་མཆོད་པ	1) liberating offering. 2) offerings which brings the goal to fruition	gnas su stobs pa'i mchod pa
གནས་སུ་དག	transmuted	gnas su dag
གནས་སུ་དག་པ	in its basic purity, be transmuted, be naturally purified	gnas su dag pa
གནས་སུ་དུས	lit. time of abiding/ this aeon	gnas su dus
གནས་སུ་བྱ་བ	object to realize	gnas su bya ba
གནས་སུ་མ་ཡིན	cannot be located	gnas su ma yin
གནས་སུ་བཞག	put/ placed in a position of	gnas su bzhag
གནས་སུ་སོང་ངོ	they returned to their place	gnas su song ngo
གནས་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ	'dam shod snar mo, 'phan yul grab dkar, mal gro ra ba, chun gyi brag dmar, has po ri thang, lha yer ba, snam gyi re ga, gnam mtsho rdo ring, stod ras lung gsum, skyid shod lung nag, ru rgyang sha m...	gnas sum cu so
གནས་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་བདུན	37 bon holy places (gnyan and lo and ral	gnas sum cu so bdun
གནས་སྲུང	local guardian	gnas srung
གནས་སྲུང་པོ	epithet of rnam sras	gnas srung po
གནས་སྲོག	vital essence of the original seat, original life symbol of the guardian deity, the seed syllable, 1 of srog gsum	gnas srog
གནས་སློབ	the tutor [for monks] 1538 gnas gsar 'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse	gnas slob
དབང་ཕྱུག	1524-1568 - Nesar Jamyang Khyentse Wangchuk	dbang phyug
གནས་གསུམ	three places	gnas gsum
གནས་གསུམ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakinis of the three worlds gnas gsum gyi rung ba ma yin pa'i sha [TRS 70-2] expl	gnas gsum mkha' 'gro
གནས་བསྲུང	local god who guards holy place, earnest money, pledge, security	gnas bsrung
གནིད	a small drum	gnid
གནུབ་ཁམ་ར	Nub Khamra, in Domey	gnub kham ra
གནུབ་བཟའ་དགེ་མཚོ	the mother of Yeshe Tsogyal; wife of {mkhar chen dpal gyi dbang phyug}	gnub bza' dge mtsho
གནུབ་ལུགས་གཤིན་རྗེ་རུ་མཐན་དམར་པོ	1 of two divisions of the {gshin rje skor} gnub lugs gshin rje ru mthan dmar po one of the two divisions of the {gshin rje skor}	gnub lugs gshin rje ru mthan dmar po
གནུབས	valley in gtsang rin spungs and clan living there [one of	gnubs
གནུབས་ཆེན	Nubchen Sangye Yeshe: 841- /or: 767-880 or 915	gnubs chen
གནུབས་ཆེན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས	9th century author of bsam gtan mig sgron	gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes
གནུབས་ནམ་མཁའི་སྙིང་པོ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	gnubs nam mkha'i snying po
ཅོཨུནཏེད་ཨམོང་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five disciples of Guru Rinpoche. Receiving the transmission of Vishuddha Mind, he became able to fly on the rays of the sun. When meditating in Splendid Long Cave of Kharchu at Lhodrak he had visio...	counted among the twenty
གནུབས་བན	probably an alias of gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes	gnubs ban
གནུབས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས	{gnubs sangs rgyas ye shes}	gnubs sangs rgyas ye shes
གནོ་སྤྲོད	point out, transmission	gno sprod
གནོག	profit	gnog
གནོང	give, allow, SA gnang ba, consciousness of guilt	gnong
གནོང་བཀུར་བ	proclaim one's own fault	gnong bkur ba
གནོང་འཁུར་བ	recognize one's faults	gnong 'khur ba
གནོང་འགྱོད	repentance proceeds from consciousness of guilt	gnong 'gyod
གནོང་བ	{gnong ba, gnongs pa, gnong ba} intr. v.; ft. of {gnong ba}; to be conscious of one's guilt, to feel remorse, to be seized with anguish	gnong ba
གནོང་བག	mind ashamed, depressed, guilty, remorse, guilt feelings, sorrow	gnong bag
གནོང་མི་བཀུར་བ	slander, SA nyes pa khas mi len pa gnong mi bkur ba'i gang zag rnam tshar	gnong mi bkur ba
བཅད་པའི་ཕྱིར	for correcting those who have gone wrong	bcad pa'i phyir
གནོང་མེད	shameless	gnong med
གནོང་མེད་པ	w/o guilt/ remorse/ anguish/ repentance	gnong med pa
གནོང་ལེན་པ	show/ feel remorse/ guilt/ sorrow	gnong len pa
གནོངས	imp. of {nang ba}	gnongs
གནོངས་ངོ་རེ	and so I am ashamed	gnongs ngo re
གནོངས་པ	[p gnong ba]	gnongs pa
གནོད	harm	gnod
གནོད་རྐྱེན	harmful influence	gnod rkyen
གནོད་སྐྱེལ	to harm, to injure, to damage; to do harm, objection, contradiction, absurdity	gnod skyel
གནོད་སྐྱེལ་བ	{gnod bskyal ba} to inflict injury (on)/ do harm (to)	gnod skyel ba
གནོད་སྐྱེལ་བ་མེད	does not bring harm	gnod skyel ba med
གནོད་སྐྱོན	injury, damage, misfortune, disaster	gnod skyon
གནོད་སྐྱོན་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the three great evils	gnod skyon chen po gsum
གནོད་སྐྱོན་གཏོང	harm, injure, damage, cause misfortune/ disaster	gnod skyon gtong
གནོད་སྐྱོན་གཏོང་མཁན	derogatory	gnod skyon gtong mkhan
གནོད་སྐྱོན་བྱེད	harm, injure, damage, cause misfortune/ disaster gnod skyon byed mkhan sems can predator	gnod skyon byed
གནོད་སྐྱོན་ཚ་པོ	mischievous	gnod skyon tsha po
གནོད་སྐྱོན་རང་བྱུང	natural disaster	gnod skyon rang byung
གནོད་སྐྱོན་རང་བྱུང་སེལ	clear up a natural disaster 1539	gnod skyon rang byung sel
གནོད་སྐྱོན་རང་བྱུང་སེལ་བ	clear up a natural disaster	gnod skyon rang byung sel ba
གནོད་བསྐྱལ་བ	{gnod skyel ba} to inflict injury (on)/ do harm (to)	gnod bskyal ba
གནོད་བསྐྱེལ	objection, contradiction, absurdity, harmed, injured, damaged	gnod bskyel
གནོད་འགལ	harm, injury	gnod 'gal
གནོད་འགལ་ཅན	harmful	gnod 'gal can
གནོད་འགོག	prevention of harm/ injury	gnod 'gog
གནོད་འགྱེད་པ	inflict harm, make suffering	gnod 'gyed pa
གནོད་ངན་གཏམ་ལ་དགའ་བ	to find pleasure in saying hurtful things	gnod ngan gtam la dga' ba
གནོད་ཅན	obnoxious	gnod can
གནོད་བརྗོད	MSS: express harm; controvert. [mss]	gnod brjod
གནོད་ཉེན	danger of harm	gnod nyen
གནོད་བསྙེན	the source of suffering, kun 'byung ba	gnod bsnyen
གནོད་ལྟས	sign of harm	gnod ltas
གནོད་དམ་མི་གནོད	{stong nyid rtogs na sdig pa byas na gnod dam mi gnod zhus pa} "Once we have realized emptiness, does it still harm us to commit negative acts?" he asked	gnod dam mi gnod
གནོད་དོགས	possible danger	gnod dogs
གནོད་གདུག	injurious and malevolent forces	gnod gdug
གནོད་གནས	dzambhala, yaksha, spirit of the kind of the wealth god	gnod gnas
གནོད་བརྣབ	ill-will or/and covetousness	gnod brnab
གནོད་པ	1) (Tha dad pa produce harm or unhappiness, ill health; 2) be harmed, pain suffering, hurt, [do] harm, injure [y], damage, inflict injury, hurt	gnod pa
གནོད་པ་སྐྱེལ་བ	do harm to another [syn: ngan byed pa, nyes byed, mtho 'tsams pa, gnod skyel ba, rnam 'tse, 'tse bar byed]	gnod pa skyel ba
གནོད་པ་བསྐྱལ	harm, injure	gnod pa bskyal
གནོད་པ་བསྐྱལ་བ	harm, injure	gnod pa bskyal ba
གནོད་པ་གང་ཡང་མ་བྱས་པ	who had done no harm	gnod pa gang yang ma byas pa
གནོད་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྟགས	undermining sign	gnod pa can gyi rtags
གནོད་པ་བྱས་པ	1 who has done harm	gnod pa byas pa
གནོད་པ་བྱུང་ངམ	are you well?	gnod pa byung ngam
གནོད་པ་བྱེད	harm, hurt, cause harm to	gnod pa byed
གནོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	doer of harm	gnod pa byed pa
མི་འབྱུང་བ	unbearable suffering [caused by] doers of harm	mi 'byung ba
གནོད་པ་བྱེད་པ་བཟོད་པ	endurance of doers of harm	gnod pa byed pa bzod pa
གནོད་པ་མེད་པ	without travail	gnod pa med pa
གནོད་པ་ཟད་པར་སྒམ་པ	SA lam	gnod pa zad par sgam pa
གནོད་པ་བཟློག་པ	averting harm	gnod pa bzlog pa
གནོད་པ་བཟློག་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	posadha that reverses harm.	gnod pa bzlog pa'i gso sbyong
གནོད་པ་ཡོད་པ	disadvantageous, unfavorable	gnod pa yod pa
གནོད་པ་ལ་ནི་གཟོད་པ	endurance of harm	gnod pa la ni gzod pa
གནོད་པ་ལ་ནི་བཟོད་པ	endurance of harm	gnod pa la ni bzod pa
གནོད་པ་གཤོམ་པ	'tshe ba byed gra sgrig pa	gnod pa gshom pa
གནོད་པའི་ནུས་པ	harmful/ negative function/ force	gnod pa'i nus pa
གནོད་པའི་ཚིག	sems la gnod pa'i tshig	gnod pa'i tshig
གནོད་པའི་ལྷག་མ་གཉིས	among the {dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum}, groundless slander &, w just an insignificant ground, harmful lhag ma'o	gnod pa'i lhag ma gnyis
གནོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	hurt, harm, injure, damage, do harm, inflict injury, hurt, 1 who harms	gnod par byed pa
གནོད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་མི་དགེ་བ	the vice of doing harm	gnod par byed pa'i mi dge ba
གནོད་པར་བྱེད་པིའ་མི་དགེ་བ	harmproducing non- virtue	gnod par byed pi' mi dge ba
གནོད་པར་སེམས་པ	malicious attitude	gnod par sems pa
གནོད་པས་མི་རྫི་བ	free from destruction [by.]	gnod pas mi rdzi ba
གནོད་པས་བཙེས	troubled by danger or mischief, troubled by persecution	gnod pas btses
གནོད་པས་འཛག་པ	encountering bad conditions/ situations lus zungs sa bon shor ba	gnod pas 'dzag pa
གནོད་པོ	noxious	gnod po
གནོད་སྤྱིན	type of lha	gnod spyin
གནོད་བྱ	harmful/ injurious actions/ deeds	gnod bya
གནོད་བྱས	injured	gnod byas
གནོད་བྱེད	opposing, injuring. similar to {dgag pa rgyab} refutable. For example if one says that a glass of water is a glass of tea, it can be refuted and therefore is {gnod byed} those who inflict injury, t...	gnod byed
གནོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དགྲ	the enemy who harms you	gnod byed kyi dgra
གནོད་བྱེད་དགྲ	the enemy who harms you	gnod byed dgra
གནོད་བྱེད་གཏོང	to counteract	gnod byed gtong
གནོད་བྱེད་བཏང	apply counterarguments, eliminate with a counterargument	gnod byed btang
གནོད་བྱེད་གདོན་བགེགས	harming demons/spirits and obstructing spirits	gnod byed gdon bgegs
གནོད་བྱེད་པ	damnify	gnod byed pa
གནོད་འབུ	injurious/ harmful insects	gnod 'bu
གནོད་སྦྱིང	spirit	gnod sbying
གནོད་སྦྱིན	spirit	gnod sbyin
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ཁ་རླངས	dgu tshigs, yaksha	gnod sbyin kha rlangs
གནོད་སྦྱིན་མཁའི་ཁྱིམ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	he	gnod sbyin mkha'i khyim zhes bya ba
བེཅམེ་ཀནོཝན་ཨས་སཀཡ	Dwelling Yaksa = {nga la nu}	became known as Sky
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གང་བ་བཟང་པོ	one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad} the eight outer classes	gnod sbyin gang ba bzang po
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གང་བཟང	{gnod sbyin gang bzang} mt	gnod sbyin gang bzang
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གངས་བཟང	Nöjin Gangsang gnod sbyin gyi rgyal po sgrub pa'i thabs means of establishing the 10 kings of the yakshas	gnod sbyin gangs bzang
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གྱི་གཏོན	yaksha evil-spirits	gnod sbyin gyi gton
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གྱི་སྡེ་དཔོན་བཅུ་གཉིས	10 commanders of the yakshas	gnod sbyin gyi sde dpon bcu gnyis
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གྱི་སྡེ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	great commanders of the yakshas	gnod sbyin gyi sde dpon chen po
གནོད་སྦྱིན་རྒྱལ	Vaishravana	gnod sbyin rgyal
གནོད་སྦྱིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the yakshas [one of the {phyogs skyong bcu}, 10 guardians of the directions]	gnod sbyin rgyal po
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ཆང	alcoholic spirit	gnod sbyin chang
གནོད་སྦྱིན་སྡེ་དཔོན	1) lord of the yakshas, like rnam thos sras; 2) (met Vajrapani	gnod sbyin sde dpon
གནོད་སྦྱིན་སྤོས	spos dkar	gnod sbyin spos
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ཕོ་མོ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག་ཊྭེནཏཡ	one Male and Female Yakshas	gnod sbyin pho mo nyi shu rtsa gcig Twenty
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ཕྱོགས	N	gnod sbyin phyogs
གནོད་སྦྱིན་མ	sun	gnod sbyin ma
གནོད་སྦྱིན་མོ	yak.si, female mountain spirits	gnod sbyin mo
གནོད་སྦྱིན་མོ་འཕྲོག་མ་ཞེས་པ	a yaksini called Haritaka gnod sbyin mo'i rkang mgyogs kyi dngos	gnod sbyin mo 'phrog ma zhes pa
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ཡ་པ་ར་ཛི་ཏ	the yaksha Yaparajita	gnod sbyin ya pa ra dzi ta
གནོད་སྦྱིན་རེ་མ་ཏི	the yakshini Remati	gnod sbyin re ma ti
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ལག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ	the yaksa Vajrapani	gnod sbyin lag na rdo rje
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ལག་ན་ཕྲེང་ཐོགས	the sprites called those who hold rosaries	gnod sbyin lag na phreng thogs
གནོད་སྦྱིན་ལག་ན་གཞོང་ཐོགས	the guards of Mount Meru, the Karotapani yaksas	gnod sbyin lag na gzhong thogs
གནོད་སྦྱིན་གསང་བ	guhya-yaksha	gnod sbyin gsang ba
གནོད་སྦྱེན་ལག་ན་ཕྲེང་ཐོགས	the sprites called those who hold rosaries	gnod sbyen lag na phreng thogs
གནོད་མ་སྐྱེལ་མཁན	innocent	gnod ma skyel mkhan
གནོད་མ་འཁྱོལ་བ	to be unharmed	gnod ma 'khyol ba
གནོད་མིག	angry/irritated way of looking	gnod mig
གནོད་མེད	harmlessness, being w/o injury	gnod med
གནོད་མེད་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	established unimpaired, indisputably, incontrovertibly, undeniably	gnod med du grub pa
གནོད་མེད་སྨྲ་བ	theory of harmlessness - harmlessness, being w/o injury	gnod med smra ba
གནོད་འཙེ	attack	gnod 'tse
གནོད་ཚབས	harm, injury, damage, violation, encroachment	gnod tshabs
གནོད་ཚབས་སྐྱེལ	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod tshabs skyel
གནོད་ཚབས་གཏོང	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod tshabs gtong
གནོད་ཚབས་བྱེད	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod tshabs byed
གནོད་ཚིག	words attacking others	gnod tshig
གནོད་འཚེ	harm, injury, damage, violation, encroachment	gnod 'tshe
གནོད་འཚེ་སྐྱེལ	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod 'tshe skyel
གནོད་འཚེ་སྐྱེལ་བ	attack	gnod 'tshe skyel ba
གནོད་འཚེ་གཏོང	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod 'tshe gtong
གནོད་འཚེ་ཕོག་མི	victim	gnod 'tshe phog mi
གནོད་འཚེ་བྱེད	harm, injure, damage, violate, encroach on	gnod 'tshe byed
གནོད་འཚེ་བྱེད་པ	prey	gnod 'tshe byed pa
གནོད་མཛེས	Sumbha	gnod mdzes
གནོད་གཞི	harm, injury, damage, hurt	gnod gzhi
གནོད་གཞི་བྱེད	harm, injure, damage, hurt	gnod gzhi byed
གནོད་བཞི	the four pests	gnod bzhi
གནོད་བཞི་རྩ་གཏོར	annihilate the four pests	gnod bzhi rtsa gtor
གནོད་ཟད་པ	SA 'gog pa	gnod zad pa
གནོད་ཟས	gzugs khams la mi 'phrod pa'i lto	gnod zas
གནོད་ཟློག་གསོ་སྦྱོང	gso sbyong to eliminate obstacles [among the gso sbyong gsum]	gnod zlog gso sbyong
གནོད་ལན	revenging a harm / injury	gnod lan
གནོད་ལན་འཇལ	revenge injury	gnod lan 'jal
གནོད་སེམས	malicious thoughts, rancour, vindictiveness, malevolence, ill-will, malice, the wish to injure [syn: ngan sems, sdug sems, ma rungs sems, 'tse sems, {zhe lding gi rtsa bcan pha rol sdug bsngal bar ...	gnod sems
གནོད་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ	sins of wishing to do evil to others, SA sgrib pa lnga	gnod sems kyi sgrib
གནོད་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	sins of an evil heart	gnod sems kyi sgrib pa
གནོད་སེམས་ཀྱིས་ཁྲག་ཕྱུང་བ	causing blood to blood with malice / intent to harm	gnod sems kyis khrag phyung ba
གནོད་སེམས་སྒོམ་བྱེད	to harbor malice	gnod sems sgom byed
གནོད་སེམས་སྤོང་བ	abandon ill-will	gnod sems spong ba
གནོད་སེམས་མེད་པར	w/o ill will	gnod sems med par
གནོད་སེལ	clear away/ eliminate harm	gnod sel
གནོན	see {gnon pa}. See also {rnam par gnon pa}	gnon
གནོན་གཉའ་བྱེད་པ	oppress	gnon gnya' byed pa
གནོན་སྟེགས	compressor, pressing machine	gnon stegs
གནོན་ཐུབ	compressive strength	gnon thub
གནོན་སྡོམ	sgrigs khrims kyis gcun pa,...Log spyod pa rnams la khrims srol gnon sdom legs par dgos rgyu	gnon sdom
གནོན་པ	(tha dad pa mnan pa, mnan pa, non,, press down, 'gul du mi 'jug pa suppress, oppress, overwhelm	gnon pa
གནོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to suppress	gnon par byed pa
གནོན་པོ	those that suppress	gnon po
གནོན་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	compressor, pressing machine	gnon byed 'phrul 'khor
གནོན་བཙིར	pressing, compression, oppression	gnon btsir
གནོན་བཙིར་གྱི་ལེབ་ལེབ	pressed flat gnon btsir ba'i gos rlon pa nyi mar skem dry wrung out garments in the sun gnon btsir ba'i pad kha nas snum 'don pa press oil from lotuses	gnon btsir gyi leb leb
གནོན་བཙིར་བྱེད	press, compress, oppress	gnon btsir byed
གནོན་ཚད	degree of pressure	gnon tshad
གནོན་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ	high pressure	gnon tshad mthon po
གནོན་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ་ལས་བརྒལ	super high pressure	gnon tshad mthon po las brgal
གནོན་ཚབས	harm	gnon tshabs
གནོན་གཟེར	drawing pin, thumbtack	gnon gzer
གནོན་ཤིང	1) door etc. closing beam; 2) Thags chas kyi rkang shing	gnon shing
གནོན་ཤུགས	power of harming, pressure, compulsion	gnon shugs
གནོན་ཤུགས་འཁོར་ལོ	pressing machine	gnon shugs 'khor lo
གནོན་སུགས	pleasure	gnon sugs
གནོན་གསོག	hoard up, store up, monopolize	gnon gsog
གནོབ	SA mnab pa	gnob
དནོགས་གྲངས	positive/ real #	dnogs grangs
དནོགས་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཉམས་མྱོང	practical experience	dnogs 'brel gyi nyams myong
བན	(not in Das)	bna
བནུ	ten	bnu
མན་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	perfect peace	mna ngan las 'das pa
མནག	vi. to endure, to suffer, tolerate	mnag
མནག་པ	endure, suffer, tolerate	mnag pa
མནག་རུང	fit to be worn	mnag rung
མནགས	p. of {mnag}	mnags
མནང་མེད་པ	hell of waves of torment	mnang med pa
མནད་མནད	falsehood, calumny	mnad mnad
མནན	pressed down / squashed; burial sorcery. p. of {gnon}	mnan
མནན་མགོ	a mountain in nepal	mnan mgo
མནན་ཆོག	ritual of subjugation	mnan chog
མནན་གཏད	one of the best-known rites of destructive magic in Tibet where various impure substances and objects are put in a yak horn together with written destructive mantra, suppression	mnan gtad
མནན་དྲག་ཏུ	press firmly	mnan drag tu
མནན་ན་ནེམ་པ	gives way when stepping down	mnan na nem pa
མནན་ན་འབོལ	elasticity, if pressed it springs up, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	mnan na 'bol
མནན་པ	pf. of {gnon pa}; ft. of {gnon pa}; (ritual of) suppression; treads; see {gnon pa}	mnan pa
མནན་པ་མ་ཡིན	non pressed down	mnan pa ma yin
མནན་པ་སོས	teeth biting	mnan pa sos
མནན་པའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of subjugation	mnan pa'i cho ga
མནན་ཚད	direction, how the pulse is to be felt	mnan tshad
མནན་སྲེག་འཕང་གསུམ	crush burn and blow away	mnan sreg 'phang gsum
མནན་གསོག	hoard, store up, monopolize, corner the market	mnan gsog
མནན་གསོག་བྱེད	hoard, store up, monopolize, corner the market	mnan gsog byed
མནན་བསྲེགས་འཕང་གསུམ	crush burn and blow away	mnan bsregs 'phang gsum
མནབ	to don, put on, dress up in; to put on, wear	mnab
མནབ་པ	put on, wear	mnab pa
མནབ་བཙལ	kind of pastry, biscuit, cake	mnab btsal
མནབ་རྩལ	mean, worthless nourishment, food, snack foster-child	mnab rtsal
མནབས	attired (in a gown) * put on, wore	mnabs
མནབས་པ	put on, to wear	mnabs pa
མནབས་གཟན	a shawl	mnabs gzan
མནམ	smell	mnam
མནམ་པ	smell, smell of	mnam pa
མནམ་ཞིང	having smelt	mnam zhing
མནམས་པ	pf. of {nom pa}	mnams pa
མནའ	an oath; oath, pledge, vow, -{skyel}-bzhag to take an oath, to swear, to vow, --za to disregard / renege on an oath / pledge vow	mna'
མནའ་སྐྱེལ	see {mna'}	mna' skyel
མནའ་སྐྱེལ་དམ་བཅའ	swearing an oath	mna' skyel dam bca'
མནའ་སྐྱེལ་བ	to swear	mna' skyel ba
མནའ་སྐྱེལ་ཟིན་པ	swore, sworn	mna' skyel zin pa
མནའ་བསྐྱལ	took an oath	mna' bskyal
མནའ་བསྐྱལ་བ	took an oath 1542	mna' bskyal ba
མནའ་བསྐྱས	forsworn, promised	mna' bskyas
མནའ་བསྐྱེལ	took an oath	mna' bskyel
མནའ་བསྐྱེལ་བ	took an oath	mna' bskyel ba
མནའ་གྲིབ	confirm an oath, defilement caused by oath or by barbarous custom of killing animals and swearing over their blood	mna' grib
མནའ་གྲོགས	ally, allied/ sworn friend	mna' grogs
མནའ་སྒྱུག	both daughter-in-law and	mna' sgyug
མནའ་སྒྲོག	force to take an oath/ vow	mna' sgrog
མནའ་ཆུ	oath water	mna' chu
མནའ་གཉིས	chn	mna' gnyis
མནའ་ཐོ་བྱེད	to take an oath	mna' tho byed
མནའ་མཐུན	alliance, league, union	mna' mthun
མནའ་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	allied countries	mna' mthun rgyal khab
མནའ་མཐུན་པ	an ally	mna' mthun pa
མནའ་མཐུན་དཔུང་ཚོགས	allied forces	mna' mthun dpung tshogs
མནའ་མཐུན་དམག་དཔུང	allied forces	mna' mthun dmag dpung
མནའ་མཐུན་ཚོགས	alliance, league, union	mna' mthun tshogs
མནའ་སྡིག་བཤགས་པ	formula of confession and atonement	mna' sdig bshags pa
མནའ་ནང	district in nw tibet	mna' nang
མནའ་བོར	disregard/ renege on an oath/ pledge/ vow	mna' bor
མནའ་འབྲེལ་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	leader among allies	mna' 'brel gyi gtso bo
མནའ་འབྲེལ་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	allied countries	mna' 'brel rgyal khab
མནའ་འབྲེལ་དཔུང་ཚོགས	allied forces	mna' 'brel dpung tshogs
མནའ་འབྲེལ་དམག་དཔུང	allied forces	mna' 'brel dmag dpung
མནའ་མ	a daughter-in-law, bride	mna' ma
མནའ་མ་ཆུང་གསོ	child bride	mna' ma chung gso
མནའ་མ་གཏོང	to send as a bride	mna' ma gtong
མནའ་མ་བསྟེར	to give as bride	mna' ma bster
མནའ་མ་བླངས	to take a bride	mna' ma blangs
མནའ་མ་ལེན	take as a bride	mna' ma len
མནའ་མ་ལེན་པ	to take a wife	mna' ma len pa
མནའ་མ་ལོག	bride returns, get divorced	mna' ma log
མནའ་མའི་སྐལ་དངོས	dowry	mna' ma'i skal dngos
མནའ་མེད་ཁྲེལ་མེད	deceitful, unscrupulous, 2-faced	mna' med khrel med
མནའ་མེད་དགེ་མེད	deceitful, unscrupulous, 2-faced	mna' med dge med
མནའ་ཚིག	oath, covenant, vow	mna' tshig
མནའ་བཞག	see mna'	mna' bzhag
མནའ་ཟ	see mna'	mna' za
མནའ་ཟ་དགེ་བསྐྱུར	deceitful, unscrupulous, 2-faced	mna' za dge bskyur
མནའ་ཟ་དགེ་བཅོས	deceitful, unscrupulous, 2-faced	mna' za dge bcos
མནའ་ཟ་གཏོམ་སྣོགས	whose mouths are full of empty oaths and lies	mna' za gtom snogs
མནའ་ཟ་བྱེད་པ	to renege on an oath	mna' za byed pa
མནའ་གཟན་དུ་བོར	to take an oath in vain	mna' gzan du bor
མནའ་བཟས་པ	to abjure [an oath / vow]	mna' bzas pa
མནའ་རབས	ancient times	mna' rabs
མནའ་ཤུལ་གྲོགས་ཅན	historical interest/ fame	mna' shul grogs can
མནའ་བཤགས	Mahayana Buddhist formula of confession and atonement	mna' bshags
མནར	to suffer, be oppressed	mnar
མནར་གཅོད	oppression, torture, beating	mnar gcod
མནར་གཅོད་གཏོང་མཁན	tormentor	mnar gcod gtong mkhan
མནར་གཅོད་བྱེད	oppression, torture, beat	mnar gcod byed
མནར་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	{de 'dir mnar gcod byed pa yin} he will find his torment here	mnar gcod byed pa
མནར་བརྡུང	oppression, torture, beating	mnar brdung
མནར་བརྡུང་བྱེད	oppression, torture, beat	mnar brdung byed
མནར་སྤྱོད	torture	mnar spyod
མནར་བ	SA gzir ba, torture, torment, excruciating pain, suffer	mnar ba
མནར་བའི་སྐབས	at the time [they] were oppressed	mnar ba'i skabs
མནར་མེད	avici hell, hell of uninterrupted pain, 1 of 8 hells with excruciating pains, 1 of tsha dmyal brgyad, ceaseless torture hell	mnar med
མནར་མེད་ཀྱི་དམྱལ་བ	Avici hell, incessant hell	mnar med kyi dmyal ba
མནར་མེད་པ	avici	mnar med pa
མནར་མེད་དམྱལ་བ	hell of endless torments	mnar med dmyal ba
མནར་སེམས	vindictive attitude	mnar sems
མནལ	sleep	mnal
མནལ་ཁུག	fall asleep [h]	mnal khug
མནལ་ཆོག་སྦྱོན	doze off [h]	mnal chog sbyon
མནལ་ལྟས	{mnal lam} dream [h]	mnal ltas
མནལ་ལྟས་ངན	nightmares [h]	mnal ltas ngan
མནལ་ལྟས་ངན་པ	nightmares	mnal ltas ngan pa
མནལ་ལྟས་ངན་པ་བྱུང	had nightmare	mnal ltas ngan pa byung
མནལ་ལྟས་དངན་པ་བྱུང	had a nightmare [h]	mnal ltas dngan pa byung
མནལ་ཐུམ་པ	short nap, slight sleep	mnal thum pa
མནལ་དུ་ཁུག་ཕྱིན་པ	to fall asleep	mnal du khug phyin pa
མནལ་དུ་ཕེབ་པ	fall asleep	mnal du pheb pa
མནལ་བ	ft. of {mnal ba}; {mnal ba, mnal ba, mnal ba, mnol} intr. v.; pf. of {mnal ba}	mnal ba
མནལ་གཟིམ་པ	go to sleep	mnal gzim pa
མནལ་བཟིམ	fall asleep [h]	mnal bzim
མནལ་ཡེ་མ་ལོག་པ	never asleep from the beginning	mnal ye ma log pa
མནལ་ལབ	talking in 1's sleep	mnal lab
མནལ་ལམ	dream	mnal lam
མནལ་ལམ་འཁྲུགས	disturbed by a dream	mnal lam 'khrugs
མནལ་ལམ་གྱི་ཚུལ	what had happened in the dream, what was dreamed	mnal lam gyi tshul
མནལ་ལམ་དུ	dreamt [h]	mnal lam du
མནལ་ལམ་དུ་གོ	recognized that I was in a dream	mnal lam du go
མནལ་ལམ་དུ་མཇལ	met in a dream	mnal lam du mjal
མནལ་ལམ་ཡིན་པ	that I was dreaming	mnal lam yin pa
མནལ་ལམ་རང་ངོ་ཤེས	to recognize that one is dreaming	mnal lam rang ngo shes
མནལ་ལས་དཀྲོགས	shook awake	mnal las dkrogs
མནལ་ལས་སད	to be woken up, woke up from the dream, was woken up, woke up	mnal las sad
མནལ་ལོག	[a]sleep, dream	mnal log
མནལ་ལོག་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	a bad omen in dream 1543	mnal log rten 'brel
མནལ་སད	woke up	mnal sad
མནལ་སད་རྗེས་སུ	after waking up, when waking up	mnal sad rjes su
མནལ་སད་དུས	when waking up	mnal sad dus
མནལ་སད་པ	awoke, wake up [h]	mnal sad pa
མནུན	suckle, nurse	mnun
མནོ	to think, to consider	mno
མནོ་བ	fancy, imagine, think [upon], consider	mno ba
མནོ་ཤིས་ལྔ་པ	king of headless spirits	mno shis lnga pa
མནོ་བསམ	{rtog dbyod} thoughts	mno bsam
མནོ་བསམ་འཁོར	come to mind, have a thought	mno bsam 'khor
མནོ་བསམ་གཏོང	think, consider	mno bsam gtong
མནོ་བསམ་ཐོང	think!	mno bsam thong
མནོ་བསམ་པ	muse upon	mno bsam pa
མནོག	profit, gain	mnog
མནོག་ཆུང	small-minded, insignificant, trifling, of little value	mnog chung
མནོག་ཆུང་ཞིང	small minded	mnog chung zhing
མནོག་ཆེ	big profit/ gain, important, significant	mnog che
མནོག་ཆོས	sublime, perfect gya nom	mnog chos
མནོག་པ	contentment	mnog pa
མནོང	Syn {gnong}	mnong
མནོང་དུ་འབྱིན	disclose, reveal, make known	mnong du 'byin
མནོང་པར་ཞེན་པ	settling down, inclination	mnong par zhen pa
མནོང་པར་ཤེན་པ	settling down, inclination	mnong par shen pa
མནོང་བ	SA gnong ba	mnong ba
མནོང་མེད	shameless	mnong med
མནོད་པ	keep, take, obtain, receive, receive instruction, get favors, SA rnyed pa, nod pa	mnod pa
མནོད་སེམས་སྒོམ་བྱེད	harbor malice	mnod sems sgom byed
མནོན	(not in Das)	mnon
མནོན་པ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	Abhidharma samacchaya by Asanga, Compendium	mnon pa kun las btus pa
མནོར	(not in Das)	mnor
མནོལ	imp. of {mnal ba}	mnol
མནོལ་གྲིབ	weak & dul, obscure, contaminations	mnol grib
མནོལ་ཐུབ་ཁྲག་སྣ་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 types of blood that purify contaminations	mnol thub khrag sna bcu gsum
མནོལ་བ	{mnol ba, mnol ba, mnol ba} intr. v	mnol ba
མནོལ་བ་ཡིན	have been weakened	mnol ba yin
མནོལ་བར་འགྱུར	contaminated and weakened	mnol bar 'gyur
མནོལ་བྲིབ	exhalations of contaminations	mnol brib
མནོལ་བཙོག་ཤོར་བའི་ཟས	dug dang mnol	mnol btsog shor ba'i zas
བཙོག་ཤོར་བའི་ཟས	poisoned, polluted, or dirty food	btsog shor ba'i zas
མནོལ་རི	dirty, filthy	mnol ri
མནོལ་རིག	weak intellect	mnol rig
མནོལ་བསང	bsang for contaminations	mnol bsang
མནོས	think over, SA mno ba, keep, SA nod pa	mnos
མནོས་པ	ponder; pf. of {nod pa}	mnos pa
རྣ	elk?, pesedois nayaur hodgson	rna
རྣ་ཀོར	ear ring	rna kor
རྣ་སྐོར	earring	rna skor
རྣ་སྐྱག	ear wa	rna skyag
རྣ་ཁུང	ear hole / cavity	rna khung
རྣ་ཁེབས	bod mda'i rna ba dang rna rdzas 'gebs byed	rna khebs
རྣ་འཁོར	earring	rna 'khor
རྣ་ག་བཀང	[arch] shoot an arrow	rna ga bkang
རྣ་གི་མར་སྣེ	ear lobe	rna gi mar sne
རྣ་གྱག	gna' gyag	rna gyag
རྣ་རྒན	earring, ear ornament	rna rgan
རྣ་རྒྱངས	ear ring	rna rgyangs
རྣ་རྒྱན	ear ring	rna rgyan
རྣ་རྒྱན་ཅན	peacock	rna rgyan can
རྣ་རྒྱན་གཅིག་པ	he who wears only one earring, epithet of rnam sras, layman	rna rgyan gcig pa
རྣ་རྒྱབ	back of the ear	rna rgyab
རྣ་རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ལྷགས་པ	like a wind behind the ear, not listen to meaningful words like the precepts, pay no concern attention to words, a matter of no concern	rna rgyab kyi lhags pa
རྣ་རྒྱབ་ལྷགས་པ	wind from behind the ear [not listen to meaningful speech of the precepts etc. or example of skad char rtsi 'jog mi byed par rgyab skyur byed pa]	rna rgyab lhags pa
རྣ་རྒྱུན	oral tradition	rna rgyun
རྣ་སྒྲང	bullet, buzzing arrow	rna sgrang
རྣ་བརྒྱུད	oral transmission	rna brgyud
རྣ་ཅན	first born of kunti before she married pandu	rna can
རྣ་ཅོག	ear	rna cog
རྣ་གཅོད་པ	rna cog 'breg pa	rna gcod pa
རྣ་ལྕོག	ear	rna lcog
རྣ་ཆ	ear ornament, halo encircling the sun, canopy of the sun	rna cha
རྣ་ཆ་གདུབ་ཀོར	round ear ring	rna cha gdub kor
རྣ་ཆ་གདུབ་སྐོར	earring	rna cha gdub skor
རྣ་ཆེན	donkey	rna chen
རྣ་མཆོག	ear	rna mchog
རྣ་མཆོག་འཇམ་པོ	quiet	rna mchog 'jam po
རྣ་མཆོག་ཚ་པོ	quiet	rna mchog tsha po
རྣ་ཉན་པ	watchman	rna nyan pa
རྣ་གཏམ	talk passed on from 1 to another 1544	rna gtam
རྣ་ལྟག་བསེར་བུ	rna rgyab lhags pa	rna ltag bser bu
རྣ་ཐེག་ཅན	not be movable by talk which occurs	rna theg can
རྣ་ཐོད་ལ	Natula Pass	rna thod la
རྣ་ཐོས	hearsay	rna thos
རྣ་ཐོས་ལ	rma thos pass [in S gro mo rdzong]	rna thos la
རྣ་མཐོང	divination	rna mthong
རྣ་གདུབ	ear-ring	rna gdub
རྣ་འདབ	aam cog gi shun lpags krong krong	rna 'dab
རྣ་འདྲེན	perfect guide	rna 'dren
རྣ་ནད་དྲུག	CHN	rna nad drug
རྣ་པ་གསུམ	the three forms	rna pa gsum
རྣ་པར་མི་རྟང་པའི་དྲན་རྒྱུན	the	rna par mi rtang pa'i dran rgyun
སྟྲེཨམ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	discriminatory awareness	stream of non
རྣ་སྤགས	ear wax	rna spags
རྣ་སྤབ	ear-wax; also {rna spabs}	rna spab
རྣ་སྤབས	dirt/wax in the ear hole [rna skyag dang, rna ba'i dri ma, rna dreg]	rna spabs
རྣ་ཕྲུག	a wild goat kid	rna phrug
རྣ་འཕྱང	rna cog gi mar sne'i sha leb	rna 'phyang
རྣ་བ	1) ear, hearing [Rna ba 'gebs pa,...Rna thos brgya las mig mthong gcig dga',...Ji ltar bsgo yang rna bar nyan pa,...Ming gi rnam grangs la sgra 'dzin dang, sgra yi gnas, nyan byed, snyan, thos pa '...	rna ba
རྣ་བ་ཀྲོང་ཀྲོང	1) aam cog gyen du 'greng tshul; 2) produce hope Don smin thob shag gis da lta'i bar du rna ba krong krong byas nas sgug 'dug	rna ba krong krong
རྣ་བ་མཁྲེགས་པོ	1) not listen to the precepts; 2) impaired hearing, deaf	rna ba mkhregs po
རྣ་བ་གོན་པ	place prob. east of india	rna ba gon pa
རྣ་བ་བརྒྱད་པ	one possessed of 8 ears, epithet of deities with 4 heads, brahma	rna ba brgyad pa
རྣ་བ་ཅན	spos dkar shing	rna ba can
རྣ་བ་ལྗིད་པོ	be immovable by talk which occurs	rna ba ljid po
རྣ་བ་གཏོད་པ	listen	rna ba gtod pa
རྣ་བ་དྲེགས་བྱེད	ear ring	rna ba dregs byed
རྣ་བ་འདུད	incline one's ears to hear	rna ba 'dud
རྣ་བ་བྱ་བ	listen	rna ba bya ba
རྣ་བ་བྱེ་བ་རི	name of a hill in the preta realm	rna ba bye ba ri
རྣ་བ་བྱོ་བ	listen	rna ba byo ba
རྣ་བ་བླག	with all your ears	rna ba blag
རྣ་བ་བླག་པ	listen, incline one's ear to, listen to	rna ba blag pa
རྣ་བ་བླགས་པ	[arch] listen to speech	rna ba blags pa
རྣ་བ་འབིགས་པ	{mu stegs rnams kyis bdag cag gi rna ba 'bigs par 'dug pa} the tirthikas are pressuring us	rna ba 'bigs pa
རྣ་བ་མ་ཚ	do not disturb with frequent prayers or clamor	rna ba ma tsha
རྣ་བ་མི་གཏད	not to pay attention, give ear	rna ba mi gtad
རྣ་བ་མི་གསང་བ	deaf	rna ba mi gsang ba
རྣ་བ་མེད་པ	1) not listen to the precepts; 2) impaired hearing, deaf	rna ba med pa
རྣ་བ་གཙེར་སུན	disappointing, depressing	rna ba gtser sun
རྣ་བ་ཚ་པོ	disappointed, depressed, discouraged	rna ba tsha po
རྣ་བ་འཛིན	holder of the helm of a boat, pilot	rna ba 'dzin
རྣ་བ་འོན་པ	deaf	rna ba 'on pa
རྣ་བ་རལ་བ	a torn ear	rna ba ral ba
རྣ་བ་ལ་གཟོན	listen to	rna ba la gzon
རྣ་བ་ལ་གཟོན་པ	attend to	rna ba la gzon pa
རྣ་བ་ཤེས་པ	heavenly ear	rna ba shes pa
རྣ་བ་སུན་འབྱིན་པ	disappointment gtong ba	rna ba sun 'byin pa
རྣ་བ་སྲ་བ	1) damaged hearing; 2) not listen to talk which occurs	rna ba sra ba
རྣ་བ་སྲབ་པོ	listen to and believe what is said	rna ba srab po
རྣ་བ་སླ་པོ	be glad to listen to talk which occurs, gullible	rna ba sla po
རྣ་བ་གསང་པོ	1) words easy to understand; 2) extensive hearing/ learning	rna ba gsang po
རྣ་བ་གསེང	quick ear	rna ba gseng
རྣ་བའི	the ear-	rna ba'i
རྣ་བའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	ear ayatana [rna ba'i rnam shes skye zhing mched pa'i dbang po]	rna ba'i skye mched
རྣ་བའི་ཁམས	ear dhatu/ element [sgra 'dzin byed kyi rgyu'am rigs te rna ba'i dbang po]	rna ba'i khams
རྣ་བའི་དགའ་སྟོན	feast or treat to one's ears, treat for the ear	rna ba'i dga' ston
རྣ་བའི་མངོན་ཤེས	lha'i rna ba'i mngon shes dang don gcig	rna ba'i mngon shes
རྣ་བའི་བཅུད	singing bird, indian koel, SA ka la ping ka	rna ba'i bcud
རྣ་བའི་བདུད་རྩི	good/ pleasing talk agreeable to the mind	rna ba'i bdud rtsi
རྣ་བའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	ear consciousness	rna ba'i rnam par shes pa
རྣ་བའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	ear consciousness element	rna ba'i rnam par shes pa'i khams
རྣ་བའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	auditory consciousness	rna ba'i rnam shes
རྣ་བའི་བུ་རམ	good/ pleasing talk agreeable to the mind	rna ba'i bu ram
རྣ་བའི་དབང་མངོན	sense perception of hearing [dbang mngon lnga'i nang gses, rang gi bdag rkyen rna ba'i dbang po las byung zhing rtog bral ma 'khrul ba'i gzhan rig dper na, gling bu'i sgra 'dzin pa'i rna shes lta b...	rna ba'i dbang mngon
རྣ་བའི་དབང་པོ	faculty of hearing, auditory sensory faculty; ear sense	rna ba'i dbang po
རྣ་བའི་དབང་པོ་གཏོད	lend me your ear	rna ba'i dbang po gtod
རྣ་བའི་དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན	material ear organ	rna ba'i dbang po gzugs can
རྣ་བའི་མེ་ལོང	drum or tympanum of the ear	rna ba'i me long
རྣ་བའི་ཚེར་མ	words the ear does not want to hear	rna ba'i tsher ma
རྣ་བའི་ཡུལ	1) ear object sound; 2) rna ba'i lam, thos rgya	rna ba'i yul
རྣ་བའི་ལས	function of hearing	rna ba'i las
རྣ་བའི་ཤེས་པ	the cognition of sound, ear consciousness	rna ba'i shes pa
རྣ་བར་འཇེབས་པ	agreeable talk/ sound	rna bar 'jebs pa
རྣ་བར་འཇོ་བ	agreeable to the mind	rna bar 'jo ba
རྣ་བར་འཇོག་པ	listen	rna bar 'jog pa
རྣ་བར་འབབ་པ	talk reaching the mind/ pleasing the ear	rna bar 'bab pa
རྣ་བར་མི་འགྲོ་བ	not come to the mind/attention, not go into the ear	rna bar mi 'gro ba
རྣ་བར་སྨན་བཏིག་པ	drop medicine in the ears	rna bar sman btig pa
རྣ་བར་གཟན་པ	harm the ears/ hearing	rna bar gzan pa
རྣ་བར་གཟོན་པ	bsgo ba rnar gzon te mi nyan pa,...Phan tshig bslab bya rna bar gzon par byas pa phangs pa la	rna bar gzon pa
རྣ་བར་བཟླུགས་པ	pour into the ear, ask	rna bar bzlugs pa
རྣ་བར་བཟློས	g.yo can	rna bar bzlos
རྣ་བར་ལྷུང་བ	hear	rna bar lhung ba
རྣ་བར་ལྷུངས་པ	falling upon one's ears; to hear	rna bar lhungs pa
རྣ་བས་ཐོས་པས་ལམ་རྒྱུས་བྱས	he knew how to get there	rna bas thos pas lam rgyus byas
རྣ་བས་བརྡ་དོན་མི་གོ	we do not understand the meaning of what we hear with our ears	rna bas brda don mi go
རྣ་བུག	ear hole	rna bug
རྣ་དབང	ear organ, faculty of hearing	rna dbang
རྣ་དབང་སྒྲ	sounds for the ears	rna dbang sgra
རྣ་སྦངས	ear wax	rna sbangs
རྣ་སྦུག	ear hole	rna sbug
རྣ་སྦུབས	rna khung gi sbubs stong	rna sbubs
རྣ་སྦྲང	[arch] bullet	rna sbrang
རྣ་མེད	earless	rna med
རྣ་རྩ	base/ neighborhood of the ear	rna rtsa
རྣ་རྩ་ཕུས་འདེབས	gnyan nad {rna rtsa phus 'debs} [symptoms: rna ba'i rtsa'i 'khor du phus 'debs pa ltar skrangs pa]	rna rtsa phus 'debs
རྣ་རྩེ	tip of the ear	rna rtse
རྣ་ཚོགས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	various miraculous actions	rna tshogs rdzu 'phrul
རྣ་མཛད	kind of ear ornament	rna mdzad
རྣ་རྫས	me mda'i rna rdzas	rna rdzas
རྣ་ཞབས	ear lobe	rna zhabs
རྣ་ཟ་ལ་གཟན	it deafens the ears	rna za la gzan
རྣ་ཟལ་ལ་གཟན	deafens the ears	rna zal la gzan
རྣ་འུར	roaring in the ears	rna 'ur
རྣ་ཡི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	auditory, audial consciousness	rna yi rnam par shes pa
རྣ་རིང	hare	rna ring
རྣ་རུ	copulative union of the sexes	rna ru
རྣ་རོས	dkar rag and rgya tshos mixed color	rna ros
རྣ་ལམ	[path of the] ear, thos rgya	rna lam
རྣ་ལམ་དུ་གྲགས་པ	MSS: 1) renowned to the ears. 2) syn of {rna lam du bsgrags pa}, fell upon their ears (???). ¦ R75: 346.3. [mss]	rna lam du grags pa
རྣ་ལམ་དུ་བསྒྲགས་པ	fell upon their ears	rna lam du bsgrags pa
རྣ་ལམ་དུ་སོང་བ	go into the ears/mind, be hear/ attended to/ understood	rna lam du song ba
རྣ་ལུང	ear or handle of a vessel	rna lung
རྣ་ལོང	ear ring	rna long
རྣ་ལོང་སྒོར་མོ	round ear ring	rna long sgor mo
རྣ་ཤལ	tip of the ear, ear lap, vessel	rna shal
རྣ་ཤེས	ear consciousness [rkyen rang gi thun mong ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen rna dbang la brten nas byung ba'i rang yul du gyur pa'i sgra'i skye mched kyi ngo bo rang stobs kyis mthong ba'i rig pa, dper na, g...	rna shes
རྣ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	ear consciousness element	rna shes kyi khams
རྣ་ཤེས་སྒྲ་ལ་གཏད་པ	ear consciousness listening to sound	rna shes sgra la gtad pa
རྣ་གཤོག	rna ba'i 'dab phrum krong nge ba	rna gshog
རྣ་སུན་པོ	noisy, irritating to the ear	rna sun po
རྣ་སླགས	capable of being heard	rna slags
རྣ་སླན	fur cover for the ears worn by tibetan ladies	rna slan
རྣ་ལྷག་གི་བསེར་པོ	pay no attention to words, a matter of no concern	rna lhag gi bser po
རྣ་ལྷོང་སྒྲོག་སྦྱངས	yig cha sogs rna bar go nges kyi sgrog sbyangs byed pa	rna lhong sgrog sbyangs
རྣག	matter, pus [and blood], suppuration	rnag
རྣག་ཁུག་པ	bring forth pus	rnag khug pa
རྣག་ཁུག་པ་གཙག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	instrument for drawing out pus	rnag khug pa gtsag byed kyi yo byad
རྣག་ཁྲག	pus and blood	rnag khrag
རྣག་ཅན	containing pus, purulent	rnag can
རྣག་ཅན་ལུས	[the] material body	rnag can lus
རྣག་ཐོག་གཙག་འཁེལ	gnad la 'khel ba'i dpe	rnag thog gtsag 'khel
རྣག་དྲི	smell of pus	rnag dri
རྣག་འདོན	draw out pus from a wound	rnag 'don
རྣག་འདོན་གཙག་བུ	instrument for drawing out pus	rnag 'don gtsag bu
རྣག་འདྲེན	draw out pus from a wound	rnag 'dren
རྣག་འདྲེན་པ	draw out pus	rnag 'dren pa
རྣག་རྡོལ	excessive expectoration	rnag rdol
རྣག་པར་རྣག་པ	form pus, ulcerate	rnag par rnag pa
རྣག་པོ	celibate, unmarried man	rnag po
རྣག་འབུར	abscess	rnag 'bur
རྣག་འབྱམས་པ	pervasive pus 1546	rnag 'byams pa
རྣག་འབྲུམ	abscess	rnag 'brum
རྣག་སྨིན་པ	rdol ran pa'i/ ripe w old pus	rnag smin pa
རྣག་གཙག་པ	draw out pus from a wound 'don pa	rnag gtsag pa
རྣག་འཛག་པ	1) [naturally] dripping w pus; 2) a nose disease	rnag 'dzag pa
རྣག་གཟན	bhikshu w pussy flesh la sbyar te of size = bla gos; special robe to absorb pus etc from wounds ['tsho ba'i yo byad bcu gsum gyi nang gses]	rnag gzan
རྣག་རུལ	rotten pus	rnag rul
རྣག་ལུད	pus and spit	rnag lud
རྣག་སུངས	rotten stinking pus	rnag sungs
རྣག་སུངས་སུ་གྱུར་པའི་རྨ་རྙིང	old would w rotten stinking pus	rnag sungs su gyur pa'i rma rnying
རྣག་གསོག	fester, fill w pus	rnag gsog
རྣགས	ready money, cash	rnags
རྣགས་པ	festering	rnags pa
རྣང	[arch] field, be checked/ stopped/ shut off/ choked	rnang
རྣང་རྒལ	in a field so that water khod snyoms 'grems bde'i 'then pa'i sa bcad, ridge, mound, berm around agricultural plots, for irrigation purposes	rnang rgal
རྣང་བ	be checked, stopped, shut off, be choked	rnang ba
རྣང་མ	in a field so that water khod snyoms 'grems bde'i 'then pa'i sa bcad, ridge, mound, berm around agricultural plots, for irrigation purposes, zhing chu snyoms ched du bcos pa'i sa 'bur gyi sgang	rnang ma
རྣང་མར་ཆུ་འདྲེན	irrigation by plots surrounded by berms	rnang mar chu 'dren
རྣང་མིག	field contained by an irrigation berm	rnang mig
རྣབ	ear	rnab
རྣབ་པ	(tha mi dad pa brnabs pa, brnab pa,, by desire want to obtain or covet others possessions	rnab pa
རྣམ་ཀུན	ever, in all aspects, at all times, usually, always	rnam kun
རྣམ་ཀུན་མངོན་རྫོགས་རྟོགས་པ	complete realization of all aspects [= rnam kun mngon rdzogs sbyor ba]	rnam kun mngon rdzogs rtogs pa
རྣམ་ཀུན་མངོན་རྫོགས་སྦྱོར་བ	perfect union of all aspects	rnam kun mngon rdzogs sbyor ba
རྣམ་ཀུན་མཆོག་ལྡན	(endowed with) the sublime capacity for manifestation; endowed with the most sublime of all qualities/ attributes	rnam kun mchog ldan
རྣམ་ཀུན་མཆོག་ལྡན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the supreme of all aspects	rnam kun mchog ldan gyi ye shes
རྣམ་ཀུན་མཆོག་ལྡན་སྟོང་ཉིད	the supreme emptiness of all forms	rnam kun mchog ldan stong nyid
རྣམ་ཀུན་དུ	always	rnam kun du
རྣམ་དཀར	virtuous	rnam dkar
རྣམ་དཀར་གྱི་དགེ་ཚོགས	wholesome actions	rnam dkar gyi dge tshogs
རྣམ་དཀར་གྱི་བག་ཆགས་བཞག་པ	pure seeds were sown	rnam dkar gyi bag chags bzhag pa
རྣམ་དཀར་གྱི་ལས	virtuous karma	rnam dkar gyi las
རྣམ་དཀར་དགེ་བ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	to practice pure, virtuous deeds	rnam dkar dge ba la brtson pa
རྣམ་དཀར་དགེ་བའི་ལས	virtuous deeds	rnam dkar dge ba'i las
རྣམ་དཀར་རྩེ	small town on lake yamdok	rnam dkar rtse
རྣམ་བཀྲ	rnam par bkra ba	rnam bkra
རྣམ་འཀྱུར་ཆ་ལུགས	expressions and attire	rnam 'kyur cha lugs
རྣམ་སྐྱེད	procreate	rnam skyed
རྣམ་སྐྱེས	a king	rnam skyes
རྣམ་སྐྲག	very agitated, overcome	rnam skrag
རྣམ་ཁྲོ	wrath	rnam khro
རྣམ་མཁས་མ	clever and wise woman	rnam mkhas ma
རྣམ་མཁྱེན	omniscient consciousness, exalted knower of all aspects	rnam mkhyen
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་གྱི་ཆོས	the qualities / attributes of omniscience	rnam mkhyen gyi chos
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་གྱི་ཆོས་བཅུ	the 10 dharmas of omniscience	rnam mkhyen gyi chos bcu
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་གྱི་གཞལ་བྱ	object of comprehension of an omniscient consciousness	rnam mkhyen gyi gzhal bya
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the omniscient wisdom rnam mkhyen du nges par 'byung ba'i	rnam mkhyen gyi ye shes
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་འཇུག་སྒྲུབ	TSE rnam mkhyen snags rgyas kyi go 'phang the omniscient state of buddhahood	rnam mkhyen du 'jug pa'i 'jug sgrub
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་སྦྱོར་བ	TSE rnam mkhyen mtshon byed kyi chos bcu TSE rnam mkhyen sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang to the state of omniscient Buddhahood rnam mkhyen sangs rgyas kyi sgo 'phang Buddhahood of omniscience	rnam mkhyen sbyor ba
རྣམ་འཁོར	mistake, flurry	rnam 'khor
རྣམ་འཁྲུགས	very agitated, overcome	rnam 'khrugs
རྣམ་གན	rnam sras gan mdzod	rnam gan
རྣམ་གྱེང	[see {rnam par gyeng ba} wandering, excitement, distraction, complete distractedness [R]	rnam gyeng
རྣམ་གྱེང་གི་རྟོག་པ་བཅུ	the 10 distracting concepts [dngos po med par rtog pa dang, dngos po yod par rtog pa, sgro 'dogs pa'i rtog pa, skur ba 'debs pa'i rtog pa, gcig tu rtog pa, tha dad du rtog pa, ngo bo nyid du rtog p...	rnam gyeng gi rtog pa bcu
རྣམ་གྱེང་ཅན	day-dreaming fool, undulating [about waves]	rnam gyeng can
རྣམ་གྱེང་དྲུག	the six distractions [ngo bo nyid kyi gyeng ba/ phyi rol du gyeng ba/ nang gi gyeng ba/ mtshan ma'i gyeng ba/ gnas ngan len gyi gyeng ba/ yid la byed pa'i gyeng ba- .(chn]	rnam gyeng drug
རྣམ་གྱེང་བག་མེད	useless distraction and careless behavior	rnam gyeng bag med
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་བཏགས	accountable false conceptions	rnam grangs kyi kun btags
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	variety of teachings	rnam grangs kyi chos
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཀྱི་དབང་དུ	subdividing into categories	rnam grangs kyi dbang du
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཀྱིས	regarding the subdivisions	rnam grangs kyis
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཅན་པ	grangs can pa, Charvaka	rnam grangs can pa
རྣམ་གྲངས་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན	'dod pa'i don bsgrub bya gang zhig dngos su ma brjod par de nyid 'grub phyir thabs mkhas kyis rnam pa gzhan zhig ston pa'i rgyan zhig, don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	rnam grangs brjod pa'i rgyan
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཐ་དད་པ	1 object w different names	rnam grangs tha dad pa
བྱའོ	In this way, many classifications 1548 exist which can be known from other sources	bya'o
རྣམ་གྲངས་དུ་ཡོད་ཅེ་ན	What are the categories?	rnam grangs du yod ce na
རྣམ་གྲངས་དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ	absolute truth of enumeration	rnam grangs don dam bden pa
རྣམ་གྲངས་མདོར་བསྟན	brief points	rnam grangs mdor bstan
རྣམ་གྲངས་མདོར་བསྡན	brief points	rnam grangs mdor bsdan
རྣམ་གྲངས་བསྡུ་བ	the yogacaryabhumau-paryaya-samgrcha	rnam grangs bsdu ba
རྣམ་གྲངས་པ	redundant rnam grangs pa ma yin pa yang dag gshis	rnam grangs pa
ཀྱི་དོན་དམ	Uncategorized ultimate of the true innate essence rnam grangs pa mtshan ma tshig gi don	kyi don dam
རྣམ་གྲངས་པའི་ཀུན་བཏགས	accountable false conceptions [kun btags kyi nang gses, rtog pa la snang ba'i don spya rnams dang med pa gsal snang lta bu]	rnam grangs pa'i kun btags
རྣམ་གྲངས་པའི་ཀུན་བརྟགས	enumerated imputation	rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags
རྣམ་གྲངས་པའི་དོན་དམ	categorized ultimate [thd]	rnam grangs pa'i don dam
ཡོགཅར	Svatantrikas	Yogacara
རྣམ་གྲངས་པའི་འདུས་མ་བྱས	ex {nyan thos pas 'dus ma byas gsum du bshad pa lta bu}	rnam grangs pa'i 'dus ma byas
རྣམ་གྲངས་དཔག་ཡས	many different individual things, great variety of numbers	rnam grangs dpag yas
རྣམ་གྲངས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་དོན་དམ	see {don dam bden pa gnyis}	rnam grangs ma yin pa'i don dam
རྣམ་གྲངས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པ	there are numerous classifications	rnam grangs mang po yod pa
རྣམ་གྲངས་མིན	all-pervasive, not amenable to being framed within categories	rnam grangs min
རྣམ་གྲངས་མིན་པའི་དོན་དམ	catagorized/ unenumerated ultimate, the Ultimate truth which cannot be expressed in words, [from the yogcarasvatantrikas]	rnam grangs min pa'i don dam
རྣམ་གྲངས་གཤོད་པ	enumerate	rnam grangs gshod pa
རྣམ་གྲུ	name of a constellation, Revati	rnam gru
རྣམ་གྲུའི་གདོན	1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags	rnam gru'i gdon
རྣམ་གྲོལ	complete liberation in---, completely freed, [complete/ total] liberation, emancipation, nirvana	rnam grol
རྣམ་གྲོལ་སྐུ	vimuktikaya, embodiment of liberation	rnam grol sku
རྣམ་གྲོལ་གྱི་ལམ	path of complete freedom	rnam grol gyi lam
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཆོས་དྲུག	6 liberation practices	rnam grol chos drug
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཉམས་པ་མེད	unwaning liberation	rnam grol nyams pa med
རྣམ་གྲོལ་མཐར་ཕྱིན	final deliverance	rnam grol mthar phyin
རྣམ་གྲོལ་སྡེ	{rnam grol sde [Indian pandita, chiefly commentator on prajnaparamita texts like nyi khri snang ba student of Vasubandu; rang las mkhas pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig]	rnam grol sde
རྣམ་གྲོལ་བཟང་པོ	(b. 1444), a lama of {dol po}	rnam grol bzang po
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of complete liberation [sgrib gnyis spangs pa'i gzigs pa mthar thug ste thams cad mkhyen pa'i ye shes]	rnam grol ye shes
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ	path of complete freedom; path of liberation, path of release; (in each of the three {thar lam dngos})	rnam grol lam
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ་ཟད་པ་ཤེས་པ	knowledge that the path to liberation has been brought to an end	rnam grol lam zad pa shes pa
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ་བཟང	the excellent path of liberation	rnam grol lam bzang
རྣམ་གླིང	shangs rnam gling rdzong	rnam gling
རྣམ་མགུར	Autobiographical Songs, by Shabkar 1549	rnam mgur
རྣམ་འགུར	1) express; 2) a rextainment ???; 3) sign, certain manner, mood, form, posture; 4) expressions	rnam 'gur
རྣམ་འགྱུར	1) way of showing rnam pa; 2) iron male tiger year the 24th year of {rab byung} {lcags pho stag}, appearance, look, attitude, posture, evolute, expression, drastic change, manner, mood, [completely...	rnam 'gyur
རྣམ་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i sngos po yid du 'ong ba las 'bras bu mi 'dod pa'i dngos por 'gyur ba ston pa'i rgyan zhig, rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	rnam 'gyur gyi rgyu
རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཅན	one whose mind has been affected or changed	rnam 'gyur can
རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཉེར་གསུམ	TSE	rnam 'gyur nyer gsum
རྣམ་འགྱུར་སྟོན་པ	good bad or pleasure and pain bzo lta ston pa [Dpa' bo'i rnam 'gyur ston pa,...Mkhas pa yin khul gyi rnam 'gyur ston pa,...Gdung sems mnyam skyes kyi rnam 'gyur ston pa]	rnam 'gyur ston pa
རྣམ་འགྱུར་སྡུག་པ	ugly	rnam 'gyur sdug pa
རྣམ་འགྱུར་བ	[Samkhya system.] effect	rnam 'gyur ba
རྣམ་འགྱུར་འབྲས་བུའི་གཙོ་བོ	TSE	rnam 'gyur 'bras bu'i gtso bo
རྣམ་འགྱུར་མི་མངའ	mind in its serene & calm state	rnam 'gyur mi mnga'
རྣམ་འགྱུར་མི་མངའ་བ	without anything affecting the mind	rnam 'gyur mi mnga' ba
རྣམ་འགྱུར་མེད་པ	convalescent, recovered from illness	rnam 'gyur med pa
རྣམ་འགྱུར་མཛེས་པ	mimic gestures or performances	rnam 'gyur mdzes pa
རྣམ་འགྱེད	a fabulous number	rnam 'gyed
རྣམ་འགྲེལ	pramanavarttika, commentary, elucidation	rnam 'grel
རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ཚད་མ	pramanavartika	rnam 'grel tshad ma
རྣམ་རྒྱལ	victorious, complete victory, mystic, gourd	rnam rgyal
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཁང་བཟང	in the center of the city lta na sdug pa palace of Indra king of the gods	rnam rgyal khang bzang
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Victorious conduct. One of the numerous types of conduct	rnam rgyal gyi spyod pa
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གླིང	SA rnam gling	rnam rgyal gling
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་སྒར	rdzogs chen 'dus sde in Australia	rnam rgyal sgar
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཆོས་སྡེ	dalai lama's personal monastery on potala	rnam rgyal chos sde
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་མཆོད་རྟེན	all victorious stupa [in yangs pa can the Buddha pa'i dbang pos sku tse'i 'du byed zla ba gsum du byin gyis brlabs pa'i tse bzhengs pa'i round three storied stupa, mchod rten cha brgyad kyi ya gyal...	rnam rgyal mchod rten
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བུམ་པ	the all-victorious vase [in the mandala of the vase abhisheka bum pa lnga'i nang gses sangs rgyas kyi bum pa'i bum pa]	rnam rgyal bum pa
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་མ	Vijaya	rnam rgyal ma
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཚེ་ཆོག	{rnam rgyal tshe chog} kriya tantra life increasing ritual	rnam rgyal tshe chog
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཤིང	1 of names of arjuna, name of youngest son of mahadeva, standard of victory, SA rgyal mtshan	rnam rgyal shing
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ལྷ་རྩེ	Namgyal Lhatse, in Latö	rnam rgyal lha rtse
རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཨ་རུ་ར	Lat. Terminalia chebula - Myrobalan	rnam rgyal a ru ra
རྣམ་རྒྱས	tree, abundant	rnam rgyas
རྣམ་རྒྱུ	always circulating prana for hearing	rnam rgyu
རྣམ་སྒེག་མ	rnam 'gyur brjid pa'am khengs nyams can ma	rnam sgeg ma
རྣམ་སྒོམ	night	rnam sgom
རྣམ་སྒྱུར་འགྲོ་ལུས	sun	rnam sgyur 'gro lus
རྣམ་ངེས	determination	rnam nges
རྣམ་ངེས་ཏི་ཀ	tshad ma rnam nges kyi ti ka rgyal ba'i dgongs pa rab gsal [by rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen]	rnam nges ti ka
རྣམ་རྔམ་རྫིག་རྫིག་བྱེད་པ	anything tidy and very fine	rnam rngam rdzig rdzig byed pa
རྣམ་ལྔ	5 (facets, objects)	rnam lnga
རྣམ་ལྔ་འདོད་སྐོར	the circling of the five desirables	rnam lnga 'dod skor
རྣམ་གཅིག་ཏུ	according to other traditions, according to others	rnam gcig tu
རྣམ་གཅོད	preclusion [ggd]	rnam gcod
རྣམ་གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	excluding words [EG kho na, nyid, sbyor tshul gyi dbang gis gzhi gang la what dharma doesn't have what dharma or, gzhan la ldan pa rnam par gcod pa'i sgra'o]	rnam gcod kyi sgra
རྣམ་གཅོད་གཉིས	CHN	rnam gcod gnyis
རྣམ་བཅད	elimination, exclusion	rnam bcad
རྣམ་བཅད་ཀྱི་དགོས་པ	negative purpose	rnam bcad kyi dgos pa
རྣམ་བཅད་ཀྱི་མཚམས་སྦྱོར	grammatical tsheg drag gi mtshams sbyor	rnam bcad kyi mtshams sbyor
རྣམ་བཅད་ཅན	passage or sentence at the end of which two dots are put	rnam bcad can
རྣམ་བཅད་དུ་ཁེག	cognitive operation of exclusion	rnam bcad du kheg
རྣམ་བཅས་པ	proponent of features	rnam bcas pa
རྣམ་བཅུ	[TRS 54-2]	rnam bcu
རྣམ་བཅུ་དབང་ལྡན	hom ksha ma la wa ra yom zhes pa lanydza'i yi ge hkshmlwryom brtsegs ma 'di 'dra zhig ste, rten gzhal yas khang gi 'og gzhi rlung me chu sa'i dkyil 'khor bzhi ya ra wa la, ri rab gzhal yas khang bc...	rnam bcu dbang ldan
རྣམ་ཆ་སྤྱི	the entire form	rnam cha spyi
རྣམ་ཆད་པ	removed	rnam chad pa
རྣམ་འཇིག	sadness	rnam 'jig
རྣམ་འཇོག་གི་རྒྱུ	cause of categorization [thd]	rnam 'jog gi rgyu
རྣམ་འཇོམས	1) lhag med du gtor ba; 2) excellent deity	rnam 'joms
རྣམ་འཇོམས་པ	oppose	rnam 'joms pa
རྣམ་འཇོམས་རྩ་བ	a medicinal root	rnam 'joms rtsa ba
རྣམ་བརྗིད	expression or appearance of wrath, splendor, magnificence	rnam brjid
རྣམ་གཉིས	the two	rnam gnyis
རྣམ་གཉིས་དབར	between the two	rnam gnyis dbar
རྣམ་གཉིས་སྦྱར་སྤོས	bad smell, stink	rnam gnyis sbyar spos
རྣམ་རྟོག	1) mind's experiences; 2) hesitation/ doubt [Rnam rtog tsa po,...Rnam rtog can la 'dre dgu 'khor,...Drang bden gyi las don la hur brtson che bskyed byas na 'grub min	rnam rtog
རྣམ་རྟོག་སྐྱེད་པ	feel disgust	rnam rtog skyed pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་ཆེ	the Great cutting through thoughts	rnam rtog khregs chod che
རྣམ་རྟོག་གི་ཕྱི་ལ་འབྲང	following after thoughts {sems}	rnam rtog gi phyi la 'brang
རྣམ་རྟོག་གི་འཕྲོ་འདུ་ཐམས་ཅད	all kinds of thought activity	rnam rtog gi 'phro 'du thams cad
རྣམ་རྟོག་གྲོལ	liberate discursive thoughts	rnam rtog grol
རྣམ་རྟོག་གྲོལ་བ	to liberate discursive thoughts	rnam rtog grol ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་དགེ་བ	virtuous thought	rnam rtog dge ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་མགོ་ནོན་པ	to rise above discursive thoughts	rnam rtog mgo non pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་རྒྱུན་ཆད་ནས	once the stream of thoughts was cut	rnam rtog rgyun chad nas
རྣམ་རྟོག་བསྒོམ་དུ་འཆར་བ	Thought arising as meditation	rnam rtog bsgom du 'char ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་ངོ་བོ	the essence of thought	rnam rtog ngo bo
རྣམ་རྟོག་ངོ་ཤེས་པ	recognize discursive thoughts	rnam rtog ngo shes pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཅན	superstitious, doubtful, hesitating	rnam rtog can
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཆོས་སྐུར་ཤར་བ	thought dawns as dharmakaya	rnam rtog chos skur shar ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཉིད་བསྒོམ	meditation guided by conceptual thought	rnam rtog nyid bsgom
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཉིད་ལས	from discursive thought itself rnam rtog rnyogs ma zhi ba'i nyams	rnam rtog nyid las
མྱོང	experience	myong
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལྟར་སྣང	manifest as thought	rnam rtog ltar snang
རྣམ་རྟོག་དང་བཅས	1 of chos brgyad	rnam rtog dang bcas
རྣམ་རྟོག་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom united with discursive thought	rnam rtog dang bcas pa'i ye shes
རྣམ་རྟོག་དེར་སོང	become the thought	rnam rtog der song
རྣམ་རྟོག་དྲ་བ	net of discursive thought	rnam rtog dra ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་དཔྱོད་པ	remove doubts	rnam rtog dpyod pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་འཕྲོ་འདུ	thought activity	rnam rtog 'phro 'du
རྣམ་རྟོག་འཕྲོ་བ	thought moves	rnam rtog 'phro ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་འཕྲོས་པ	thought projections	rnam rtog 'phros pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་བན་བུན	slightly unnoticed thoughts. Syn 'og 'gyu'i rnam rtog	rnam rtog ban bun
རྣམ་རྟོག་བྱ་མི་དགོས	need not feel uneasy about	rnam rtog bya mi dgos
རྣམ་རྟོག་མི་མངའ	unquestionably	rnam rtog mi mnga'
རྣམ་རྟོག་མི་མངའ་བ	doubtless	rnam rtog mi mnga' ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་མེད་པ	without discursive thoughts	rnam rtog med pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་རྩ་བ	the root of discursive thoughts, ignorance	rnam rtog rtsa ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་རྩལ་དུ་ཡན་པའི་གདམས་པ	advice to free through as an expression 1551	rnam rtog rtsal du yan pa'i gdams pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་རྩོལ་བས	by discursive effort	rnam rtog rtsol bas
རྣམ་རྟོག་མཚན་མ	conceptual attributes	rnam rtog mtshan ma
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཞི་ནས	when thoughts have subsided	rnam rtog zhi nas
རྣམ་རྟོག་བཞི	TSE	rnam rtog bzhi
རྣམ་རྟོག་རགས་པ	obtrusive thought	rnam rtog rags pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་རགས་པ་ཏིལ་གྱིས་འཆར་ན	when an obtrusive thought strongly presents itself	rnam rtog rags pa til gyis 'char na
རྣམ་རྟོག་རང་ཁ་མ	ordinary thought	rnam rtog rang kha ma
རྣམ་རྟོག་རང་ག་མ	ordinary thoughts	rnam rtog rang ga ma
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལ་བལྟ	observe thoughts	rnam rtog la blta
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལངས་པ	thoughts of hope and fear arising	rnam rtog langs pa
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལམ་འཁྱེར	TSE	rnam rtog lam 'khyer
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལམ་མེ་བ	vividness of the thought	rnam rtog lam me ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	thought-trains	rnam rtog lu gu rgyud
རྣམ་རྟོག་སློང་བ	arouse doubts, fear of obstacles etc.	rnam rtog slong ba
རྣམ་རྟོག་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate thinking, innate thought rnam rtog lhan skyes kyi rang ngo mthong	rnam rtog lhan skyes
རྣམ་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	discriminated [constructed] reality	rnam brtags kyi ngo bo nyid
རྣམ་ཐཏ་སྒོ་གསུམ	three gates of emancipation	rnam that sgo gsum
རྣམ་ཐཏ་མདོར་བསྡུས	abridged biography/ story	rnam that mdor bsdus
རྣམ་ཐར་འཁྲབ	stage/ perform a story	rnam thar 'khrab
རྣམ་ཐར་སྒོ་གསུམ	three gates of emancipation, three doors of deliverance, three approaches to liberation. Emptiness {stong pa nyid}, aspirationlessness {smon pa med pa}, and attributelessness {mtshan nyid med pa}	rnam thar sgo gsum
ནིརླཀསན	the three door of delivarance, three gates of emancipation [tserig]	nirlaksana
རྣམ་ཐར་བརྒྱད	sprul bsgyur [emanations and transformations] byed pa'i sgrig pa las rnam par thar pa brgyad [gzugs can gzugs la lta ba'i rnam thar dang, gzugs med gzugs la lta ba'i rnam thar dang, sdug pa'i rnam ...	rnam thar brgyad
རྣམ་ཐར་ཉིང་བསྡུས	brief biography	rnam thar nying bsdus
རྣམ་ཐར་གཏོང་བ	from holy beings biography verses dbyangs su len pa	rnam thar gtong ba
རྣམ་ཐར་དད་པའི་འཇུག་ངོགས	{rnam thar dad pa'i 'jug ngogs	rnam thar dad pa'i 'jug ngogs
པའི་མགུར་མ	Short Biography with The Kailash Songs, by Shabkar rnam thar bsdus pa dang gang rir mdzad	pa'i mgur ma
རྣམ་ཐར་མཛད་ཚུལ་ལོ་རྒྱུས	the story of [her] life and liberation	rnam thar mdzad tshul lo rgyus
རྣམ་ཐར་ཞལ་གསུང་མ	autobiography	rnam thar zhal gsung ma
རྣམ་ཐར་གཞན	other biography	rnam thar gzhan
རྣམ་ཐར་ཟབ་ཡངས	profound and vast	rnam thar zab yangs
རྣམ་ཐར་ཟིན་པ	follow your lifeexample	rnam thar zin pa
རྣམ་ཐར་གསུམ	3 liberations (stong pa nyid, mtshan ma med pa, smon pa med pa), SA sgo gsum	rnam thar gsum
རྣམ་ཐར་གསོལ་འདེབས	supplication in the style of a biography	rnam thar gsol 'debs
རྣམ་ཐར་བསླབ་ཅིང	follow the example of a model life	rnam thar bslab cing
རྣམ་ཐོས	much/ extensive hearing/ learning	rnam thos
རྣམ་ཐོས་ཀྱི་བུ	Vaishravana	rnam thos kyi bu
རྣམ་ཐོས་བུ	Vaishravana	rnam thos bu
རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས	kubera, a chos skyong, vaisravana, 1 of 4 'jig rten skyong, guardian in the north, god of wealth, yum is nor rgyun ma, king of yakshas 1552 who bring diseases, king of nojin or mountain deities who...	rnam thos sras
རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	sadhana of Vaishravana	rnam thos sras kyi sgrub pa'i thabs
རྣམ་དག	impeccable, completely pure, nonconceptual, transformation, quite pure, most holy, state of purity, very pure, thoroughly cleansed, a chaitya on the site of which buddha cut off his locks to renoun...	rnam dag
རྣམ་དག་སྒོམ་ལམ	TSE	rnam dag sgom lam
རྣམ་དག་སྒྱུ་མའི་སྐུ	supreme illusory form	rnam dag sgyu ma'i sku
རྣམ་དག་ཆེན་མོ	Namdag Chenmo, a stupa in Domey	rnam dag chen mo
རྣམ་དག་མཆོད་རྟེན	a kind of stupa	rnam dag mchod rten
རྣམ་དག་འཇིག་རྟེན	pure dimension of the world	rnam dag 'jig rten
རྣམ་དག་བསྟན	the pure teachings	rnam dag bstan
རྣམ་དག་གདོད་ནས	primordially pure rnam dag bde can zhing gi smon lam aspiration for [rebirth in] the pure land of Sukhavati; also {zhing smon}, work by {kar-ma chags med}	rnam dag gdod nas
རྣམ་དག་པ	utterly pure	rnam dag pa
རྣམ་དག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	pure buddha fields{rnam dag sems -	rnam dag pa'i zhing khams
རྣམ་དག་དབྱིངས	dimension of purity, pure ying	rnam dag dbyings
རྣམ་དག་དབྱིངས་སྒྲོན	lamp of pure ying	rnam dag dbyings sgron
རྣམ་དག་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་འདུལ་བའི་འབུམ	bon gyi spyod pa'i skor gyi gzhung lugs shig	rnam dag tshul khrims 'dul ba'i 'bum
རྣམ་དག་བཞི	{rnam pa thams cad dag pa bzhi} four aspects of absolute purity	rnam dag bzhi
རྣམ་དྭངས	learned man	rnam dwangs
རྣམ་དུ་ཕབ་པ	to leave in naturalness	rnam du phab pa
རྣམ་དུ་འབྱོར་བ	to put into practice, "to join with the natural state"	rnam du 'byor ba
རྣམ་དུ་སེབས	leave in naturalness	rnam du sebs
རྣམ་དུལ	king of horses which has power of hearing, SA rta mchog	rnam dul
རྣམ་གདུང་མ	very useful and important medicine	rnam gdung ma
རྣམ་བདུན་གྱི་རིགས་པ	7-fold reasoning	rnam bdun gyi rigs pa
རྣམ་བདུན་ཤིང་རྟའི་རིགས་པ	CHN	rnam bdun shing rta'i rigs pa
རྣམ་བདེན	the thesis that sensa coincide with what is real	rnam bden
རྣམ་བདེན་པ	True Aspectarian, Sakaravadins. Vijnanavadins	rnam bden pa
རྣམ་བདེན་རྫུན	sensa as veridical or delusive	rnam bden rdzun
རྣམ་འདལ	[arch] rnam par 'dud pa	rnam 'dal
རྣམ་འདུད	1) rab tu gus pa; 2) <Binataka> [gser gyi ri bdun gyi ya gyal, ri'i rtse dbus kyi phyogs la 'dud par yod pas rnam 'dud dang, ngos rer dpag tshad lnga 'bum lnga khri nyis stong lnga brgya re dang, m...	rnam 'dud
རྣམ་འདུད་སྐྱེས	epithet of khyung bird	rnam 'dud skyes
རྣམ་འདྲིན	guide, universal guide, leader, title of universal buddhas	rnam 'drin
རྣམ་འདྲིན་བཞི་པ	the 4th guide	rnam 'drin bzhi pa
རྣམ་འདྲེན	rnam par 'dren pa	rnam 'dren
རྣམ་འདྲེན་ལྔ་པ	Fifth Guide; Maitreya	rnam 'dren lnga pa
རྣམ་འདྲེན་ཆེན་པོ	great leader, epithet of bodhisattvas	rnam 'dren chen po
རྣམ་འདྲེན་སྟོང་རྩ	1,000 buddhas	rnam 'dren stong rtsa
རྣམ་འདྲེན་བཞི་པ	Shakyamuni, the Fourth Guide	rnam 'dren bzhi pa
རྣམ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	determinate cognition	rnam ldan gyi shes pa
རྣམ་གནས	sun	rnam gnas
རྣམ་གནོན	the 14th year of {rab byung}{lcags pho 'brug}	rnam gnon
རྣམ་གནོན་ངང་ཚུལ	Vikramashila [in Magadha]	rnam gnon ngang tshul
རྣམ་གནོན་གནང་ཚུལ	vikramasila rnam gnon tshul gyis bsngags pa'i slob	rnam gnon gnang tshul
དཔོན་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 masters renowned at Vikramas'i^la *]{rnam gnon - the 14th year of {rab byung}{lcags pho 'brug} 1553 rnam gnon tshul gyis bsngags pa'i slob	dpon bcu gnyis
རྣམ་སྣང	vairocana, Vairochana, position of Vairochana	rnam snang
རྣམ་སྣང་གངས་ཆེན་མཚོ	buddha {rnam snang gangs chen mtsho	rnam snang gangs chen mtsho
རྣམ་སྣང་གི་ཆོས་བདུན	the seven fold posture of Vairochana	rnam snang gi chos bdun
རྣམ་སྣང་གི་དམ་ཚིག་དྲུག	TSE	rnam snang gi dam tshig drug
རྣམ་སྣང་གི་རིགས	the family/aspects of Vairochana	rnam snang gi rigs
རྣམ་སྣང་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བ	Magical Net of Vairochana. A Mahayoga scripture which functions as subsidiary support for engaging in yogic activities connected to the mandala. See Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	rnam snang sgyu 'phrul drva ba
རྣམ་སྣང་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	mahayoga tantra of completion rnam snang mngon par byang chub pa'i	rnam snang sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
རྣམ་སྣང་མངོན་བྱང	the Tantra of the Enlightenment of Mahavairocana	rnam snang mngon byang
རྣམ་སྣང་ཆོས་བདུན	Seven-point posture of Vairochana	rnam snang chos bdun
རྣམ་སྣང་ཆོས་བདུན་དང་ལྡན་པ	sitting in the sevenfold posture of Vairochana	rnam snang chos bdun dang ldan pa
རྣམ་སྣང་རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད	TSE	rnam snang rnam par snang mdzad
རྣམ་སྣང་བྱེད	sun	rnam snang byed
རྣམ་སྣང་མི་བཞི	Vairochana with four bodies	rnam snang mi bzhi
རྣམ་བསྣུན	manifold, various, many	rnam bsnun
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན	all knowables	rnam pa kun
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག	endowed w all the supreme aspects [te(chn)ical term for sambhogakaya and heruka; lit "best of all expressions" ; sambhogakaya display, splendor, vividness; three levels body, speech and mind; actua...	rnam pa kun gyi mchog
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག་ལྡན	supremelyendowed	rnam pa kun gyi mchog ldan
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་མཆོག	"best of all expressions/ aspects"	rnam pa kun mchog
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་མཆོག་ལྡན	endowed w all the supreme aspects rnam pa kun mchog ldan gyi stong pa	rnam pa kun mchog ldan
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་ཏུ	in every respect	rnam pa kun tu
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རིག་པ	all-knowing	rnam pa kun tu rig pa
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་ལྡན	supporting/ endowed with/ having the potential to manifest all distinct manifestations/ forms; endowed with all potential/ qualities/ attributes; endowed with the sublime process of (distinct) mani...	rnam pa kun ldan
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་ལྡན་གྱི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness that supports all distinct manifestations; emptiness that is endowed with/ has the potential to manifest all distinct manifestations/ forms rnam pa kun ldan mngon shes kyi theg pa - Way o...	rnam pa kun ldan gyi stong pa nyid
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	external appearance	rnam pa kun spyod
རྣམ་པ་སྐུ	his bodily form	rnam pa sku
རྣམ་པ་སྐུའི	his bodily form	rnam pa sku'i
རྣམ་པ་འགྱུར	vi. to change in appearance	rnam pa 'gyur
རྣམ་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	many varieties [of]	rnam pa rgya che ba
རྣམ་པ་ངེས་ཅན	definite, fixed form	rnam pa nges can
རྣམ་པ་ཅན	. . . (kyi) rnam pa can - taking the distinct manifestation/ form (of) . . .	rnam pa can
རྣམ་པ་ཅིར་སྣང	in whatever form they arise	rnam pa cir snang
རྣམ་པ་ཅིར་ཡང	any image whatsoever	rnam pa cir yang
རྣམ་པ་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྟོན	one single flow	rnam pa gcig tu ston
རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	see {bden bzhi'i rnam pa bcu drug}	rnam pa bcu drug
རྣམ་པ་ཉི་ཤི་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	20 ways in which the body is enlightened [according to ngushul khen rinpoche, refers to the 10 aspects of renunciation and 10 of realisation which pertain to the ten bodhisattva levels. may also re...	rnam pa nyi shi byang chub pa
རྣམ་པ་ཉི་ཤུ་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	20 ways in which [the body] is enlightened	rnam pa nyi shu byang chub pa
རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	two kinds	rnam pa gnyis
རྣམ་པ་གཏོད་པ	casting its aspect [ggd]	rnam pa gtod pa
རྣམ་པ་གཏོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	object transmitting/supporting / that provides features	rnam pa gtod byed kyi yul
རྣམ་པ་རྟོག་པ	thought, concept, conceptual thinking 1555	rnam pa rtog pa
རྣམ་པ་སྟོན	show signs of, manifest the appearance/ expression of, [don't tr]	rnam pa ston
རྣམ་པ་སྟོན་པ	show signs of, manifest the appearance/ expression of, [don't tr]	rnam pa ston pa
རྣམ་པ་བསྟན	show signs of, manifest the appearance/ expression of, [don't tr]	rnam pa bstan
རྣམ་པ་བསྟན་པ	show signs of, manifest the appearance/ expression of, [don't tr]	rnam pa bstan pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམ་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	omniscience	rnam pa tham cad mkhyen pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all knowables	rnam pa thams cad
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཁྱེན་པ	exalted knower of all aspects/ omniscient consciousness	rnam pa thams cad khyen pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁེན་པ	omniscient	rnam pa thams cad mkhen pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་ཉིད་ལམ	the way to the knowledge of all modes	rnam pa thams cad mkhyen nyid lam
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	omniscient	rnam pa thams cad mkhyen pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་རྟོགས	full understanding of all modes	rnam pa thams cad rtogs
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དག་པ་བཞི	four aspects of absolute purity	rnam pa thams cad dag pa bzhi
པ་ཉིད	emptiness endowed w all supreme forms GD rnam pa thams cad dang ldan pa'i stong	pa nyid
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	in every way	rnam pa thams cad du
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་པ	imbued/ endowed with the potential for all of	rnam pa thams cad pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཆད་མཁྱེན་པ	total omniscience	rnam pa thams chad mkhyen pa
རྣམ་པ་ཐར་པ	liberation, emancipation, deliverance	rnam pa thar pa
རྣམ་པ་མཐུན་པ	(. . . dang) rnam pa	rnam pa mthun pa
རྣམ་པ་དང་བཅས	personified outward appearance	rnam pa dang bcas
རྣམ་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	assuming individuality	rnam pa dang bcas pa
རྣམ་པ་དང་བཅས་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of aspect [ggd]	rnam pa dang bcas par smra ba
རྣམ་པ་དང་མཐུན་པ	similar in aspect	rnam pa dang mthun pa
རྣམ་པ་དང་ནང་དོན	form and content	rnam pa dang nang don
རྣམ་པ་དྲུག་ཏུ	in 6 ways, in 6 directions	rnam pa drug tu
རྣམ་པ་བདེན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	True Aspectarians [Yogacharya]; usually: {rnam bden pa} [ggd]	rnam pa bden par smra ba
རྣམ་པ་འདྲ་བ	same appearance, uniform	rnam pa 'dra ba
རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	manifold, different sorts, various, all kinds of, all sorts of	rnam pa sna tshogs
རྣམ་པ་སྣང་བ	perceived image	rnam pa snang ba
རྣམ་པ་བློ	the form [they] take in the mind, the form [love] takes in your mind	rnam pa blo
རྣམ་པ་འབྱེད་པ	Vibhan.gas	rnam pa 'byed pa
རྣམ་པ་མ་ཚང	incompleteness	rnam pa ma tshang
རྣམ་པ་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	nonconceptual wisdom	rnam pa mi rtog pa'i ye shes
རྣམ་པ་མེད་པ	negation of form (type of rnal 'byor spyod pa)	rnam pa med pa
རྣམ་པ་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of	rnam pa med par smra ba
རྣམ་པ་སྨིན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	ripened effect / result	rnam pa smin pa'i 'bras bu
རྣམ་པ་ཙམ	simply an appearance	rnam pa tsam
རྣམ་པ་ཙམ་དུ	outwardly	rnam pa tsam du
རྣམ་པ་རྫུན་པར་སྨྲ་བ	False Aspectarians [Yogacharya]; usually: {rnam rdzun pa} [ggd]	rnam pa rdzun par smra ba
རྣམ་པ་ཞི་རགས	the peaceful and coarse levels	rnam pa zhi rags
རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four orders [monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen see also the entry under four assemblies]	rnam pa bzhi
རྣམ་པ་བཞིན་མཛེས	handsome	rnam pa bzhin mdzes
རྣམ་པ་བཟུང	take the appearance/ form of	rnam pa bzung
རྣམ་པ་ཡོངས་ཀྱིས་མེད	totally beyond form rnam pa g.yeng ba - desultoriness, mibp 96	rnam pa yongs kyis med
རྣམ་པ་ལམ་བྱེད	forging the path with specific manifestations	rnam pa lam byed
རྣམ་པ་གསལ་བ	vivid features; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 107]	rnam pa gsal ba
རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three degrees of ordination, the three forms [renunciate {rabs sbyang} or pravrajy, the novitiate {dge tshul} or s'ramanera, and complete monkhood {bsyen rdzogs} or upasampad ]	rnam pa gsum
རྣམ་པ་ལྷན་རྒྱས་པ	to all of you [h] rnam pa o rgyan rdo rje 'chang chen po in the form of the great Guru of Oddiyana	rnam pa lhan rgyas pa
རྣམ་པའི་ཁྱད་པ	details of experience	rnam pa'i khyad pa
རྣམ་པའི་ཁྱད་པར	the particular types	rnam pa'i khyad par
རྣམ་པའི་ཆ་ནས	on the level of appearance	rnam pa'i cha nas
རྣམ་པའི་འཆིང་བ	attachment to an aspect	rnam pa'i 'ching ba
རྣམ་པའི་ཕྲ་མོ	phra mo'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bsam blo sngon btang med par lus kyi rnam 'gyur gsar pa zhig ngang gis gsal ba'i sgo nas sems kyi 'char sgo mtshon par byed pa'i phra mo'i rgyan zhig	rnam pa'i phra mo
རྣམ་པའི་བློ	the form [they] take in the mind, the form [love] takes in your mind	rnam pa'i blo
རྣམ་པའི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་ན	with regard to its structure	rnam pa'i dbang du byas na
རྣམ་པའི་དབྱེ་བ	categories	rnam pa'i dbye ba
རྣམ་པའི་ཡུལ	aspective object	rnam pa'i yul
རྣམ་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	classified	rnam pa'i rab tu dbye ba
རྣམ་པའི་ཤེས་པ	the [mind] conscious of form, cognition of phenomena	rnam pa'i shes pa
རྣམ་པར	[SK] 'vi' very, most, completely, fully, utterly, etc, completely, etc as, "about to" {kha}, {'bus kyi rnam par bye ba} into the form, like, entirely, perfectly, thoroughly, by no means, on no 1556...	rnam par
རྣམ་པར་ཀྱེན་བ	distraction	rnam par kyen ba
རྣམ་པར་དཀར་བ	pure, virtuous, noble	rnam par dkar ba
རྣམ་པར་དཀྲུགས་པ	agitated	rnam par dkrugs pa
རྣམ་པར་བཀོད	fully arranged	rnam par bkod
རྣམ་པར་བཀོད་པ	arrayed, displayed	rnam par bkod pa
རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བ	1) very beautiful; 2) clear and distinct; 3) wild thoughts	rnam par bkra ba
རྣམ་པར་རྐྱལ་བྱེད	sins	rnam par rkyal byed
རྣམ་པར་སྐྱེས	a king	rnam par skyes
རྣམ་པར་བསྐྱིང་བ	magnificent, imposing	rnam par bskying ba
རྣམ་པར་བསྐྱེད	fully generate/give rise to	rnam par bskyed
རྣམ་པར་ཁྱབ་པ	pervasive	rnam par khyab pa
རྣམ་པར་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང	1) {gzhi la khyab byed kyi rlung}. 2) {'phral la khyab byed kyi rlung} 3) {dngas shing skrag pa khyab byed kyi rlung} 4) {dran pa khyab byed kyi rlung} 5) 'dzin pas yul kun khyab pa'i rlung}	rnam par khyab byed kyi rlung
རྣམ་པར་མཁས་པ	thoroughly wise, fully acquainted with	rnam par mkhas pa
རྣམ་པར་འཁོར	quite dazed	rnam par 'khor
རྣམ་པར་འཁྲུགས་པ	disturbance	rnam par 'khrugs pa
རྣམ་པར་གྱེང་བ	distraction [one of the 20 sub-disturbances] excitement, restlessness, carelessness, mental wandering, be distracted, inability to control our mind, forgetfulness [of {chos nyid}	rnam par gyeng ba
རྣམ་པར་གྱེངས	being distracted, not caring about, being careless, = {sems pa mngon du ma byas pa}	rnam par gyengs
རྣམ་པར་གྲགས་པ	renowned	rnam par grags pa
རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ	be liberated, completely liberated	rnam par grol
རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	deliverance, liberation, complete freedom; completely free	rnam par grol ba
རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ་མཆོག	supreme liberation rnam par grol ba nyams pa mi mnga' ba not having defective liberation [shravakas are satisfied w 1 sided peace and destory only the obscuration of the kleshas. This merely partia...	rnam par grol ba mchog
རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བའི་ཕུང་པོ	embodiment of complete liberation	rnam par grol ba'i phung po
རྣམ་པར་དགེ་བའི	auspicious moment, favorable time	rnam par dge ba'i
རྣམ་པར་དགེ་བའི་དུས	good times	rnam par dge ba'i dus
རྣམ་པར་འགྱུར་བ	changeability	rnam par 'gyur ba
རྣམ་པར་འགྱུར་བ་འི་ཆོས་ཅན	changeable, changeability	rnam par 'gyur ba 'i chos can
རྣམ་པར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	changeable, changeability	rnam par 'gyur ba'i chos can
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ	vi. to be victorious	rnam par rgyal
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བ	all-victorious; name of Shakra's palace. vijaya, the victorious	rnam par rgyal ba
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཁང་བཟང	Mansion of Complete Victory, a celestial mansion	rnam par rgyal ba'i khang bzang
ཐེ་པལཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཥཀྲ་ཨམོང་ཐེ་ཅེལེསྟིཨལ་བེཨིངས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཐིརཏཡ	threefold godrealm	the palace of Shakra among the celestial beings of the thirty
དང་བཅས་པའི་དབུས་ཁང་ན	in the	dang bcas pa'i dbus khang na
ཅེནཏྲལ་ཆམབེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨཱལལ	Victorious palace, at the very summit of which was a tree of life, topped by a ninepointed vajra	central chamber of the All
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྔེ	conquering army	rnam par rgyal ba'i snge
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བྱེད	celestial palace of indra, (general name for a bodhisattva)	rnam par rgyal byed
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱུ་བ	fully moving energy TSE	rnam par rgyu ba
རྣམ་པར་སྒེག་པ	flirtation	rnam par sgeg pa
རྣམ་པར་སྒེད་པ	flirtation	rnam par sged pa
རྣམ་པར་བསྒོམ	visualize	rnam par bsgom
རྣམ་པར་བསྒྱིང་བ	magnificent, imposing	rnam par bsgying ba
རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པ	fully verifying, determination, detailed definition; definitive treatment; to ascertain definitively	rnam par nges pa
རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	mind of resolve	rnam par nges pa'i blo gros
རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to determine definitively	rnam par nges par byed pa
རྣམ་པར་སྔོ་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a rotting corpse	rnam par sngo ba'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་སྔོས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of the livid [bluish corpse]; perception of a mottled corpse	rnam par sngos pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་ཅིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཟུགས་ནོན	revelatory form	rnam par cig byed ma yin pa'i gzugs non
རྣམ་པར་བཅད་པ	eliminated	rnam par bcad pa
རྣམ་པར་འཆོ་བ	malice	rnam par 'cho ba
རྣམ་པར་འཇིགས་འཇིགས་ལྟ	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	rnam par 'jigs 'jigs lta
རྣམ་པར་འཇིགས་བྱེད	1 of srin po'i rgyal po 1557	rnam par 'jigs byed
རྣམ་པར་འཇུག་བྱེད	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	rnam par 'jug byed
རྣམ་པར་འཇོག་པ	resting evenly / thoroughly rnam par 'jog pa resting evenly/thoroughly	rnam par 'jog pa
རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས	to conquer	rnam par 'joms
རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་པ	to be completely overcome	rnam par 'joms pa
རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་མཛད	completely destroys	rnam par 'joms mdzad
རྣམ་པར་ཉམས་པ	deteriorate	rnam par nyams pa
རྣམ་པར་གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ་བསྡུ་བ	{rnam par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba ['phags pa thogs med kyis mdzad pa'i sa sde lnga'i nang tsan zhig]	rnam par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba
རྣམ་པར་གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པའི་བསྡུ་བ	Var. of {gtan la phab pa'i bsdu ba} ??? E.g., R75: 302.5: Yogaacaarya-bhuuminirnaaya Samgraha; YogSHcSHryabhuminirnSHya-samgraha. The Yogacharya bhumi Nirnaya Samgraha, one of Asanga's five treatis...	rnam par gtan la dbab pa'i bsdu ba
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག	complete understanding/ cognition	rnam par rtog
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	forming concepts; ex {yul dang yul can du rnam par rtog pa} forming concepts of subject and object	rnam par rtog pa
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་ཅི་ཤར་ཡང	no matter what thoughts may arise rnam par rtog pa dang bcas pa'i gzugs	rnam par rtog pa ci shar yang
ཨནལཡཏིཅ་ཅོནཅེཔཏིཨོནས་ཐཏ་ཨིས་སོ	called rnam par rtog pa med pa'i gzugs brnyan reflection w/o concept rnam par rtog pa med pa'i gzugs brnyan eflection w/o concept [khyab pa'i dmigs pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, dmigs pa dang mtshan ...	analytic conceptions that is so
རྣམ་པར་ལྟ	saw, should see {rnam par blta bar bya}	rnam par lta
རྣམ་པར་ལྟམས་པ	quite full, full to the brim	rnam par ltams pa
རྣམ་པར་བརྟག་པ	imputed, created; imputations	rnam par brtag pa
རྣམ་པར་བརྟགས	is given the name	rnam par brtags
རྣམ་པར་བརྟགས་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	constructed [reality]	rnam par brtags pa'i ngo bo nyid
རྣམ་པར་ཐར	deliverance	rnam par thar
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ	liberation, emancipation, deliverance, lifestyle, life example, life, activities, the work of [bodhisattva] biography, liberation	rnam par thar pa
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ་སྒོ་གསུམ	the three gates of complete liberation	rnam par thar pa sgo gsum
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ་བརྒྱད	8 deliverances	rnam par thar pa brgyad
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ་མདོར་བསྡུས	a brief account of my life rnam par thar pa smon pa med pa'i sgo gate of emancipation free from wishing	rnam par thar pa mdor bsdus
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ་ཞལ་གསུངས་མ	autobiography	rnam par thar pa zhal gsungs ma
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི	SA rnam thar gsum	rnam par thar pa'i
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ	means of attaining nirvana, samadhi	rnam par thar pa'i sgo
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་Eམནཅིཔཏིཨོན	gate of emptiness. One of the 'three gates of emancipation.' rnam par thar pa'i sgo stong pa nyid kyi	rnam par thar pa'i sgo stong pa nyid Emancipation
ཨེམནཅིཔཏིཨོན	gate of emptiness	emancipation
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་སྨོན་པ་མེད་པ་Eམནཅིཔཏིཨོན	gate of wishlessness. One of the 'three gates of emancipation.' rnam par thar pa'i sgo mtshan ma med pa - Emancipation-gate of marklessness, gate of emancipation free from attributes rnam par thar ...	rnam par thar pa'i sgo smon pa med pa Emancipation
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་བཞི	four gates of liberation 1558	rnam par thar pa'i sgo bzhi
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	three gates of emancipation. three avenues/ doorways to liberation. 1) {stong pa nyid}. 2) {smod pa med pa} 3) {mtshan ma med pa}. Emptiness, wishlessness, and marklessness. [TRS 41-3] expl	rnam par thar pa'i sgo gsum
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་མཛད་པ	biography	rnam par thar pa'i mdzad pa
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་བ	saved, fully released	rnam par thar ba
རྣམ་པར་ཐར་བའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	CHN	rnam par thar ba'i sgo gsum
རྣམ་པར་ཐོས	intelligent	rnam par thos
རྣམ་པར་འཐག་པ་བསྡུས་པ	compendium of all the weaving Sutra	rnam par 'thag pa bsdus pa
རྣམ་པར་འཐོར་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	yoga of meditating on the unpleasant	rnam par 'thor ba'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་དག་ཉིད	purity	rnam par dag nyid
རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	complete purity; completely pure/ authentic	rnam par dag pa
རྣམ་པར་དག་པ་ཉིད	complete purity	rnam par dag pa nyid
རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་རྒྱུ་ལྔ	the five causes of complete purity [lam dngos yongs su dag pa dang, nyer bsdogs yongs su dag pa, rnam par rtog pas ma smas pa, dran pas yongs su zin pa, mya ngan las 'das par bsngos pa bcas lnga'o]	rnam par dag pa'i rgyu lnga
རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five [aspects of] embodiment of complete purity: {tshul khrims kyi, ting nge 'dzin gyi, she rab kyi, rnam par grol ba'i, dang rnam par grol ba'i ye shes mthong ba'i phung po}	rnam par dag pa'i phung po lnga
རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ས	level of enlightenment	rnam par dag pa'i sa
རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ལྷ	beings from stream enterer to buddhahood	rnam par dag pa'i lha
རྣམ་པར་དག་པར	{rnam dag}	rnam par dag par
རྣམ་པར་དྭངས	learned	rnam par dwangs
རྣམ་པར་དུལ	excellent horse	rnam par dul
རྣམ་པར་འདལ་བ	1 of 10 kings of mountains, SA ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu	rnam par 'dal ba
རྣམ་པར་འདུད	bending down most humbly, bow respectfully	rnam par 'dud
རྣམ་པར་འདྲེན	cart	rnam par 'dren
རྣམ་པར་འདྲེན་པ	1) lead, pull; 2) chariot wheel; 3) buddha	rnam par 'dren pa
རྣམ་པར་ལྡན་པ	gone away	rnam par ldan pa
རྣམ་པར་གནག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a putrefying corpse	rnam par gnag pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་གནས	rest, repose, residing at a place comfortably	rnam par gnas
རྣམ་པར་གནས་པ	existing as such, be substantial	rnam par gnas pa
རྣམ་པར་གནེང་བ	divergences	rnam par gneng ba
རྣམ་པར་གནོན	great stability, firmly seated	rnam par gnon
རྣམ་པར་མནས་པ	existing as such, be substantial	rnam par mnas pa
རྣམ་པར་རྣག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a putrefying corpse, perception of the festering [corpse]	rnam par rnag pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་རྣམས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of the festering [corpse]	rnam par rnams pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་སྣགས་མཛད	Vairochana	rnam par snags mdzad
རྣམ་པར་སྣང	Vairochana	rnam par snang
རྣམ་པར་སྣང་བྱེད	light maker	rnam par snang byed
རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད	Vairochana/ Distinct Manifestation	rnam par snang mdzad
ཤོཨུལད་ཧབེ༹	-] 1559 rnam par snang mdzad kyi chos bdun the 7 characteristics of Vairocana [ex {lus gnad bcas} the posture of body	should have
པ་མདོ་སྡེའི་དབང་པོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	The Tantra of the Enlightenment of Mahavairochana; Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-vikurvitadhisthana-vaipulyasutranta-raja, (T 494) rnam par snang mdzad chen po mngon par rdzogs par byang chub rnam par s...	pa mdo sde'i dbang po'i rgyal po
མ	vaipulya-sutrantaraja, T. 494 rnam par snang mdzad chen po mngon par rdzogs par byang chub rnam par sprul pa byin gyis rlobs pa shin tu rgyas	MahaVairochanabhisambodhivikurvitadhisthana
ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས་མཧ	vairocana-bhisam.bodhivikurvitadhis.t.ha-navaipulyasu-treindrara-ja nama dharmaparya-ya; That Expression of the Holy Dharma entitled "The King of All Kings among the Collection of Sutras, a Work of...	zhes bya ba'i chos kyi rnam grangs Maha
རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Vairochana. 1) One of the five families, the chief buddha of the tathagata family. 2) The great and unequalled translator during the reign of King Trisong Deutsen. Vairochana, (also pronounced	rnam par snang mdzad lo tsa ba
བཻ༹རོ	tsa-na), was recognized by Padmakara as a reincarnation of an Indian pandita. He was among the first seven monks and was sent to India to study with Shri Singha. Shri Singha in turn entrusted Vairo...	vairo
རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད་སངས་རྒྱས	Vairochana Buddha, light maker, buddha family	rnam par snang mdzad sangs rgyas
རྣམ་པར་སྣུན་པ	flowing, issuing forth	rnam par snun pa
རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་པ	subjected to analysis, investigation	rnam par dpyad pa
རྣམ་པར་དཔྱོད་པ	thorough investigation [seems different from dpyod pa]	rnam par dpyod pa
རྣམ་པར་སྤངས་པ	rejection	rnam par spangs pa
རྣམ་པར་སྤོང་བ	beyond everything	rnam par spong ba
རྣམ་པར་སྤྲོས་ཏེ་གོ་བ	understanding [only] by a detailed explanations	rnam par spros te go ba
རྣམ་པར་སྤྲོས་པ	detailed explanations	rnam par spros pa
རྣམ་པར་སྤྲོས་པ་མེད	without enthusiasm	rnam par spros pa med
རྣམ་པར་ཕར་བ་དགུ	CHN	rnam par phar ba dgu
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་ཏེ་སྨྲ་བ	1 of 7 thams cad yod par smra ba	rnam par phye te smra ba
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་སྨྲ་བ	Vibhajyavadin, "those who make distinctions"	rnam par phye ste smra ba
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ	{rnam par phye ste smra ba'i sde} [one of the 18 shravaka scools nyan thos sde pa bco brgyad kyi nang gses shig]	rnam par phye ste smra ba'i sde
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	a detailed revelation	rnam par phye ste lung bstan pa
རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་ཞིང་བཤད་པ	to explain in detail	rnam par phye zhing bshad pa
རྣམ་པར་འཕེལ	thoroughly expanded	rnam par 'phel
རྣམ་པར་འཕེལ་བ	ex. {ra 'gyur} are thoroughly expanded	rnam par 'phel ba
རྣམ་པར་འཕྲུལ་པ	distinct/ specific expression/ manifestation	rnam par 'phrul pa
རྣམ་པར་འཕྲུལ་བ	sorcery, SA rnam 'phrul	rnam par 'phrul ba
རྣམ་པར་འཕྲོ་བ	rnam gyeng	rnam par 'phro ba
རྣམ་པར་བམ་པ	decomposed	rnam par bam pa
རྣམ་པར་བམ་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a decomposing corpse	rnam par bam pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	total enlightenment/ enlightened being 2) totally mastered	rnam par byang chub pa
རྣམ་པར་བྱང་བ	complete refinement (of being); completely refined	rnam par byang ba
རྣམ་པར་བྱང་བ་བཞི	four purifications	rnam par byang ba bzhi
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	chos kyi dbyings	yongs su grub pa
རྣམ་པར་བྱས	shape, form	rnam par byas
རྣམ་པར་བྱིངས	quite submerged, foundered	rnam par byings
རྣམ་པར་བྱེ	blossoming	rnam par bye
རྣམ་པར་དབེན་པ	void, separation	rnam par dben pa
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ	to thoroughly distinguish 1560	rnam par dbye
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ	detailed analysis; division (into components or parts); divisibility	rnam par dbye ba
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེད་བ	distinction	rnam par dbyed ba
རྣམ་པར་འབབ་པ	forest in hill of samkasa in uttara kuru	rnam par 'bab pa
རྣམ་པར་འབུས་གཞིག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a maggot-ridden corpse	rnam par 'bus gzhig pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་འབྱུང་དུ	in the form of	rnam par 'byung du
རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	to distinguish/ differentiate/ analyze completely; thorough discernment; complete analysis/ differentiation	rnam par 'byed pa
རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ་ཆོས	discriminating dharmas	rnam par 'byed pa chos
རྣམ་པར་སྦྱང	trained, perfected, mastered	rnam par sbyang
རྣམ་པར་སྦྱང་བ	consecrated, purification	rnam par sbyang ba
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག	complete nonthought	rnam par mi rtog
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པ	Nonconceptual. Of or pertaining to the absence of conceptual thinking or discursive thought	rnam par mi rtog pa
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པ་རྣམ་པར	"in form", "in concept," {mi rtog} "non-concept" the state of mind beyond concepts	rnam par mi rtog pa rnam par
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས	nondiscursive knowledge rnam par mi rtog pa lhan cig skyes pa shin	rnam par mi rtog pa ye shes
ཏུ་སྤྲོས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	nonconceptual, innate and utterly unconstructed wakefulness rnam par mi rtog pa lhan cig skyes pa shin	tu spros pa dang bral ba
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི	completely nonconceptual (awareness)	rnam par mi rtog pa'i
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཏིང་དེ་འཛིན	nonconceptual samadhi, nondiscriminating absorption	rnam par mi rtog pa'i ting de 'dzin
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི་དྲན་རྒྱུན	the	rnam par mi rtog pa'i dran rgyun
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	reflection of non-thought	rnam par mi rtog pa'i gzugs brnyan
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	nonconceptual wisdom	rnam par mi rtog pa'i ye shes
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom free of discursive thought	rnam par mi rtog ye shes
རྣམ་པར་མི་ཐོག་པ	thoughtfree	rnam par mi thog pa
རྣམ་པར་མི་འཐེ་བ	commiseration, nonharmfulness, not being able to endure the suffering of others	rnam par mi 'the ba
རྣམ་པར་མི་འཚེ	non-violence, mibp 57	rnam par mi 'tshe
རྣམ་པར་མི་འཚེ་བ	total harmlessness; benignity	rnam par mi 'tshe ba
རྣམ་པར་མེ་རྟོག་པ	non-conceptual	rnam par me rtog pa
རྣམ་པར་དམར་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a mottled corpse	rnam par dmar ba'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་རྨོངས་བྱེད	kind of srin bu infesting the human body	rnam par rmongs byed
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ	maturation, karmic maturation, ripening [of karma]	rnam par smin pa
མཏུརིཏཡ	maturation, karmic maturation, ripening [of karma]	maturity
མའི་སྦྱོར་བ	instant sbyor ba [practice/ application] of the unripened [unripened defiled qualities gyi rigs rnams in an instant mngon du byed nus pa'i sems dpa'i rnal 'byor mthar thug, sher phyin don bdun cu'i...	ma'i sbyor ba
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་ཀུན་གཞི	all-ground of maturation	rnam par smin pa'i kun gzhi
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཨལལ	ground consciousness of maturation	rnam par smin pa'i kun gzhi'i rnam shes all
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག་སྦྱོར་བ	TSE rnam par smin pa'i skad cig ma'i sbyor ba ripened instant union [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, rnam par smin pa'i zag med kyi sbyin sogs nas dpe byad brgyad cu'i bar gyi yon tan gyi rigs ...	rnam par smin pa'i skad cig sbyor ba
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་རྒྱུ	rnam smin gyi rgyu	rnam par smin pa'i rgyu
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	ripened obscuration [ngan 'gro rnam pa gsum dang 'du shes med pa'i sems can dang byang gi sgra mi snyan du skyes pa rnams ni rnam par smin pa'i sgrib pa ste, sngar gyi las kyis rgyud ngan par 'phan...	rnam par smin pa'i sgrib pa
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	ripening consciousness [= alaya kun gzhi'i rnam shes former defiled karma las certain ripening and skyes pa na ripening consciousness]	rnam par smin pa'i rnam shes
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་བག་ཆགས	ripened habitual patterns [kun gzhi la chos gzhan gyis bgos pa'i nus pa chos gzhan skye ba'i rgyu'i rkyen du gyur pa]	rnam par smin pa'i bag chags
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	effect that has matured, ripened effect / result	rnam par smin pa'i 'bras bu
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	Vidyadhara of Full Maturation; fully developed Vidyadhara; vidyadhara level of Full Maturation	rnam par smin pa'i rig 'dzin
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་ལུས	karmically produced body	rnam par smin pa'i lus
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing fully matured bodhichitta	rnam par smin pa'i sems bskyed
རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་དགུ	the 9 completely rpened arousings of bodhicitta [sems bskyed nyer gnyis las rnam par smin pa'i sems bskyed dgu ste, yid bzhin nor bu'i sems bskyed dang, nyi ma lta bu'i sems bskyed dang, glu dbyang...	rnam par smin pa'i sems bskyed dgu
རྣམ་པར་གཙིགས་པ	to clench	rnam par gtsigs pa
རྣམ་པར་ཚིག	solvent	rnam par tshig
རྣམ་པར་ཚིག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of the burned [corpse]	rnam par tshig pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་གཚིགས་པ	clench	rnam par gtshigs pa
རྣམ་པར་འཚིག་པ	burn entirely	rnam par 'tshig pa
རྣམ་པར་འཚིག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a corpse being cremated	rnam par 'tshig pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་འཚེ་བ	{gzhan gsod pa dang rdeg pa sogs rang nyid dam gzhan la byed du stsal ba} Hostility, as one of the twenty subdisturbances, harmfulness 1562	rnam par 'tshe ba
རྣམ་པར་ཞི་བ་བྱེད་པ	complete pacification, thoroughly pacifying	rnam par zhi ba byed pa
རྣམ་པར་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ	completely pacifying [7th of the sems gnas dgu 9 means of resting, chags sems dang yid mi bde sogs zhi bar byed pa'o]	rnam par zhi bar byed pa
རྣམ་པར་གཞག	representation	rnam par gzhag
རྣམ་པར་བཞག	presented	rnam par bzhag
རྣམ་པར་བཞག་འཇོག་གི་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	cause and effect of dependent definition	rnam par bzhag 'jog gi rgyu 'bras
རྣམ་པར་བཞག་པ	establishment, good arrangement	rnam par bzhag pa
རྣམ་པར་བཞེངས	assume the form of	rnam par bzhengs
རྣམ་པར་ཟོས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of [the corpse] being devoured; perception of a corpse devoured by wild animals	rnam par zos pa'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་གཟིགས	all-seeing [1st Buddha in this kalpa]	rnam par gzigs
རྣམ་པར་གཟིགས་པ	<bipashy'i> [sangs rgyas rabs bdun gyi ya gyal zhig]	rnam par gzigs pa
རྣམ་པར་ཡངས་པ	wide and spacious rnam par g.yeng ba - x {sems phyi rol gyi yul la rnam par g.yeng ba} getting distracted by external events rnam par g.yeng ba - distraction, agitation, SA rnam g.yeng, very attent...	rnam par yangs pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	perception	rnam par rig pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	acts wisely	rnam par rig pa dang ldan pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ	intelligence [information] only, pure intelligence [information] rnam par rig pa tsam nyid du grub pa {rnam par rig pa tsam nyid du grub pa [rgya gar gyi slob dpon rin chen 'byung gnas zhi bas brts...	rnam par rig pa tsam
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པར་བྱེད་པ	perceptible	rnam par rig par byed pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པར་བྱེད་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	imperceptible rnam par rig par byed pa ma yin pa'i	rnam par rig par byed pa ma yin pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	Mind Only	rnam par rig par smra ba
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད	"causing to know", information, manifest, manifest [form], consciousness ={ram shes rnam rig}	rnam par rig byed
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	perceptible forms	rnam par rig byed kyi gzugs
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བཅུ	the 10 apprehended forms [the five senses and their five objects dbang po lnga and don lnga]	rnam par rig byed kyi gzugs bcu
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས	{lus ngag gi las rig byed de, de la dge mi dge lung ma bstan gyi las gsum} 'perceptible actions' are the perceptible actions of body and speech which may be virtuous, unvirtuous, or neutral	rnam par rig byed kyi las
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པ	behavior trait	rnam par rig byed ma yin pa
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཟུགས	nonrevelatory form [Tserig]- [yang dag par blangs pa las byung ba'i gzugs]	rnam par rig byed ma yin pa'i gzugs
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཟེངས་ནོན	revelatory form, unmanifested form	rnam par rig byed ma yin pa'i gzengs non
རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད་མིན་པའི་གཟུགས	[1,1920]- imperceptible forms	rnam par rig byed min pa'i gzugs
རྣམ་པར་རུལ་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of a disintegrating corpse 1563	rnam par rul ba'i 'du shes
རྣམ་པར་རོལ	to manifest in form	rnam par rol
རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པ	manifold display; to display in manifold/ myriad ways	rnam par rol pa
རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པའི་མདོ	{rnam par rol pa'i mdo	rnam par rol pa'i mdo
རྣམ་པར་རོལ་བ	enjoyment, merriment	rnam par rol ba
རྣམ་པར་ཤར་བ	take the form of {sbyin pa'i rnam par shar ba} take the form of generosity	rnam par shar ba
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས	intelligent	rnam par shes
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	consciousness [clearly perceive various paticulars; engaging w individual particular objectsyul bye brag so sor, placeing /establishing them in consciousness rnam shes su bzhag pa gang yin pa de ni...	rnam par shes pa
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ་དྲུག	six [collections of] cognitions	rnam par shes pa drug
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ་པོ	cognizer, perceiver	rnam par shes pa po
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ་ཚོགས་དྲུག་པོ	the six collections of cognitions, consciousnesses	rnam par shes pa tshogs drug po
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six dhatus of consciousness [khams bco	rnam par shes pa'i khams drug
བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་ནང་གསེས་ཤིག་སྟེ	mig, rna, sna, lce, lus, yid kyi rnam par shes pa'i khams rnams so]	brgyad kyi nang gses shig ste
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས་བདུན	7 consciousness elements	rnam par shes pa'i khams bdun
སྲོག	the life-force that is the basis/ support for consciousness rnam par shes pa'i rten du gyur pa'i tshe	srog
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependentrelated consciousness	rnam par shes pa'i rten 'brel
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	skandha of consiousness [phung po lnga'i ya gyal zhig ste, mig shes sogs yul gyi ngo bo rnam par rig cing shes par byed pas rang rang gi dmigs pa'i ngo bo so sor shes pa'i bdag nyid can gyi sems du...	rnam par shes pa'i phung po
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཟས	sustenance of consciousness	rnam par shes pa'i zas
རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ་དགུ	CHN	rnam par shes par bya ba dgu
རྣམ་པར་གཤག	{rnam par gtan la dbab	rnam par gshag
རྣམ་པར་བཤད་པ	detailed commentary	rnam par bshad pa
རྣམ་པར་བཤད་པའི་སྒོ་བསྡུ་བ	{rnam par bshad pa'i sgo bsdu ba	rnam par bshad pa'i sgo bsdu ba
རྣམ་པར་བཤད་པའི་རིག་པ	Vyaakhyayuktii	rnam par bshad pa'i rig pa
རྣམ་པར་སུན་འབྱིན་པ	complete disgust [with-self-cherishing]	rnam par sun 'byin pa
རྣམ་པར་སུན་འབྱིན་པ་འི་སྟབས	the power of complete remorse	rnam par sun 'byin pa 'i stabs
རྣམ་པར་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote for discouragement [gnyen po bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, bden pa dang po gnyis la dmigs pa'i lam gang gis dmigs pa de mi rtag pa la sogs pa'i rnam par sun 'byin pa'o]	rnam par sun 'byin pa'i gnyen po
རྣམ་པར་སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་སྟོབས	Power of complete remorse	rnam par sun 'byin pa'i stobs
རྣམ་པར་གསལ་བ	clear form, vivid features	rnam par gsal ba
རྣམ་པར་ལྷུང	fallen away	rnam par lhung
རྣམ་པར་ལྷུང་བ	entirely fallen morally	rnam par lhung ba
རྣམ་པས	in consequence of, by the form of	rnam pas
རྣམ་དཔྱད	analyzed logically	rnam dpyad
རྣམ་དཔྱད་རྣམ་པ་བདུན	TSE	rnam dpyad rnam pa bdun
རྣམ་དཔྱོད	discernment, understanding, discrimination, judgements, opulent, splendid, intellect, prajna	rnam dpyod
རྣམ་དཔྱོད་དང་ལྡན	possessed of judgment	rnam dpyod dang ldan
རྣམ་དཔྱོད་དང་ལྡན་པ	sensible	rnam dpyod dang ldan pa
རྣམ་དཔྱོད་མིག	eye of prajna	rnam dpyod mig
རྣམ་དཔྱོད་རིག་པ	deductive method	rnam dpyod rig pa
རྣམ་སྤངས	avoid	rnam spangs
རྣམ་སྤྱོད	engagement	rnam spyod
རྣམ་སྤྲུལ	manifestations	rnam sprul
རྣམ་སྤྲུལ་འགྲོ་དོན	SA nye brgyud	rnam sprul 'gro don
རྣམ་སྤྲུལ་འགྲོ་དོན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་པ	emanations who care for the well-being of sentient beings	rnam sprul 'gro don gyi rgyud pa
རྣམ་སྤྲུལ་སྟོན་པ	manifest	rnam sprul ston pa
རྣམ་སྤྲོ	pleasant sounds	rnam spro
རྣམ་ཕུག་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	non-buddhist treatise of magadha	rnam phug pa'i grub mtha'
རྣམ་ཕྱར་ལྔ	5 modes of reproof	rnam phyar lnga
རྣམ་ཕྱི་མ་སྣང	excrements	rnam phyi ma snang
རྣམ་ཕྱིང	snam phying	rnam phying
རྣམ་ཕྱིས	snam phyis	rnam phyis
རྣམ་ཕྱེ	blossoming, distinction, division, section, SA rnam byed	rnam phye
རྣམ་ཕྱེད	distinction, SA rnam phye	rnam phyed
རྣམ་འཕུལ	incarnation, miraculous display, emanative [offerings of Samantabhadra], emanation	rnam 'phul
རྣམ་འཕེལ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rnam 'phel
རྣམ་འཕྱང	32nd year of rab byung, {sa pho khyi} Vilamba, [the year of the-]	rnam 'phyang
རྣམ་འཕྱོ	fish	rnam 'phyo
རྣམ་འཕྱོའི་བདག་པོ	king of fish with 1000 teeth	rnam 'phyo'i bdag po
རྣམ་འཕྲུལ	magical manifestation [thd]	rnam 'phrul
རྣམ་འཕྲུལ་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve manifestations (of Padmasambhava)	rnam 'phrul bcu gnyis
རྣམ་བའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	ear consciousness	rnam ba'i rnam par shes pa
རྣམ་བུམ	the victorious vase	rnam bum
རྣམ་བྱང	Perfection. Same as nirvana or enlightenment	rnam byang
རྣམ་བྱང་གི་ཆོས	the dharmas of complete enlightenment [nyon mongs pa dag spong ba'i gnyen po mi gtsang ba dang byams pa dang rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba la sogs pa'o]	rnam byang gi chos
རྣམ་བྱང་གི་སྟོབས་ལྔ	the five powers of complete enlightenment [byang phyogs so bdun gyi nang gses shig ste, dad pa dang, brtson 'grus, dran pa, ting nge 'dzin, shes rab ste lnga]	rnam byang gi stobs lnga
རྣམ་བྱང་གི་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱད	TSE	rnam byang gi dbang po brgyad
རྣམ་བྱང་གི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	CHN rnam byang phyogs kyi 'grel rkang nga	rnam byang gi dbang po lnga
རྣམ་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	TSE	rnam byang phyogs kyi chos
རྣམ་བྱང་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five powers of complete purification	rnam byang dbang po lnga
རྣམ་བྱང་བཞི	the four complete purifications [rang bzhin gyi rnam byang dang, dmigs pa'i rnam byang, rnam dag gi'am sgrub pa'i rnam byang, thob pa'i rnam byang bcas bzhi]	rnam byang bzhi
རྣམ་བྱུང	earth dragon year	rnam byung
རྣམ་བྱེད	providence, fortune	rnam byed
རྣམ་དབྱེ	1) differentiated, kinds; distinguish/ division; 2) declension [in grammar]. completely separate, A term of grammar. Case. See {rnam dbye brgyad}	rnam dbye
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བརྒྱད	A term of grammar. The eight cases. There are eight cases in Tibetan grammar. The first case is called {ming tsam ngo bo}, i.e. the case of the name. Since this is not a case in the normal sense, i...	rnam dbye brgyad
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བརྒྱད་པ	'bod pa'i sgra, words of address	rnam dbye brgyad pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་ལྔ་པ	'byung khungs kyi sgra source words	rnam dbye lnga pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་རྗེས་མཐུན་པ	to adverb like LA join a negation word, EG na byang du mi 'gro, phru gu la chang mi ster]	rnam dbye rjes mthun pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་གཉིས་པ	las su bya ba'i sgra	rnam dbye gnyis pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བསྟན་པ	taught the distinctions / how to observe	rnam dbye bstan pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་དང་པོ	ngo bo ston pa'i sgra, words showing the essence	rnam dbye dang po
རྣམ་དབྱེ་དྲུག་པ	'brel ba'i sgra, connecting words, conjunctions	rnam dbye drug pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བདུན	the 7 divisions [ngo bo brjod pa dang, las@su bya ba, byed pa po, dgos ched, 'byung khungs, 'brel ba, gnas gzhi bcas bdun]	rnam dbye bdun
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བདུན་པ	rten gnas kyi sgra	rnam dbye bdun pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་མེད	inseparable form	rnam dbye med
རྣམ་དབྱེ་མེད་པ	indivisibility/ indivisible	rnam dbye med pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་བཞི་པ	dgos ched kyi sgra, words of purpose	rnam dbye bzhi pa
རྣམ་དབྱེ་རིགས་མཛོད	name of a book	rnam dbye rigs mdzod
རྣམ་དབྱེ་གསུམ་པ	byed pa'i sgra	rnam dbye gsum pa
རྣམ་དབྱེའི་རྐྱེན	la don, byed pa dang, 'brel ba rnams dang, mkhas pa la las rnam dbye lnga pa'ang yin par bshad,...La...Nas las	rnam dbye'i rkyen
རྣམ་དབྱེའི་ཕྲད	rnam dbye'i rkyen gyi yi ge	rnam dbye'i phrad
རྣམ་དབྱེར་མེད	completely indivisible, inseparable form, virtuous	rnam dbyer med
རྣམ་འབྱུང	the 2nd year of {rab byung} Syn {sa pho 'brug}	rnam 'byung
རྣམ་འབྱེད	distinguish, disentangle	rnam 'byed
རྣམ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་བློ	discerning intellect	rnam 'byed kyi blo
རྣམ་འབྱེད་བུ	physician of the gods rnam 'byor gla na med pa'i rgyud brgyad CHN rnam 'byor spyod pa'i sa las gtan la phab	rnam 'byed bu
པའི་བསྡུ་བ	[Yogacarayaa-bhuuminiran.aya-samgraha]one of the {sa sde lnga} Asanga's five treatises on levels rnam 'byor spyod pa'i sa las gtan la phab	pa'i bsdu ba
རྣམ་སྦྱར་བཏགས་པ་བ	TSE	rnam sbyar btags pa ba
རྣམ་མ	natural	rnam ma
རྣམ་མང	many kinds	rnam mang
རྣམ་མང་ཐམས་ཅད	all beings	rnam mang thams cad
རྣམ་མང་ཐོས་སྲས	Vaishravana	rnam mang thos sras
རྣམ་མང་དུ	in many ways	rnam mang du
རྣམ་མི་རྟོག	free from discrimination, he should not discriminate	rnam mi rtog
རྣམ་མེད	formless	rnam med
རྣམ་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	indeterminate cognition	rnam med kyi shes pa
རྣམ་མེད་དུ་དངོས་སུ་སྣང་བ	appearing nakedly in an aspectless fashion [ggd]	rnam med du dngos su snang ba
རྣམ་མེད་པ	proponent of no features	rnam med pa
རྣམ་མེད་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of noaspect [ggd]	rnam med smra ba
རྣམ་སྨིན	maturity, the result of former actions, what is going to mature, maturation, effects of maturation, residues, fully ripened, fullness of one's sin, ripening of actions, karmically produced, product...	rnam smin
རིཔེནིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ནཏུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཀརྨ	result, karma result, karmic ripening, [moment of] maturation. inherited, result of past karma, total ripening, ripening 1566	ripening of the nature of karma
རྣམ་སྨིན་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	veil of karmic ripening; Mipham Rinpoche: {ngan song gsum lha min sgra mi snyan du skyes pa lta bu rten gyi dbang gis lam mi skye ba rnam smin gyi sgrib pa} The 'veil of karmic ripening' is the pat...	rnam smin kyi sgrib pa
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་སྐྱི་བ་བཅུ	CHN	rnam smin gyi skyi ba bcu
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	ripening cause	rnam smin gyi rgyu
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	def. {ngan song gsum lha min sgra mi snyan du skyes pa lta bu rten kyi dbang gis lam mi skye ba}; countless obscurations of ripened karma	rnam smin gyi sgrib pa
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	body of karmic ripening	rnam smin gyi phung po
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་འབས་བུ	developed result	rnam smin gyi 'bas bu
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	fruition of ripening * ripened/ matured effect/ result / fruition, the result of maturation, ripe karmic result, fruit of karma result TSE	rnam smin gyi 'bras bu
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱད	TSE CHN	rnam smin gyi yon tan brgyad
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་རིག་འཛིན	vidyadhara of maturation, completely matured holder of intrinsic awareness. See also {rnam par smin pa'i rig 'dzin}	rnam smin gyi rig 'dzin
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ལུས	the trap of my inherited body, body of complete maturation, body of karmic ripening	rnam smin gyi lus
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཤན	ltung ba'i shan no	rnam smin gyi shan
རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱིས	the ripening of	rnam smin gyis
རྣམ་སྨིན་རྒྱུ་མཐུན	effect of compatibility of experiences	rnam smin rgyu mthun
རྣམ་སྨིན་ངོ་བོ	maturation	rnam smin ngo bo
རྣམ་སྨིན་དང་རྒྱས་བྱུང	ripening and development rnam smin bde ba myong ba'i rgyu byed	rnam smin dang rgyas byung
རྣམ་སྨིན་རྣམ་ཤེས	fruition consciousness	rnam smin rnam shes
རྣམ་སྨིན་པ	ripen	rnam smin pa
རྣམ་སྨིན་འབྱིན་པར་མ་ངེས་པ	not certain to yield a ripening	rnam smin 'byin par ma nges pa
རྣམ་སྨིན་མྱང་བྱར་མེད་པ	[for them] there exists no complete ripening to be experienced	rnam smin myang byar med pa
རྣམ་སྨིན་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of maturation	rnam smin yon tan
རྣམ་སྨིན་རིག་འཛིན	ripened rigdzin	rnam smin rig 'dzin
རྣམ་སྨིན་ལས་སྐྱེས	arisen form ripening, produced from ripening	rnam smin las skyes
རྣམ་སྨིན་ལས་བྱུང	occurred / resulting from ripening	rnam smin las byung
རྣམ་བརྩལ་ན	if one seeks something	rnam brtsal na
རྣམ་མཚུངས	'dzin stangs kyi gzung cha gcig pa ste mig shes sngon po'i rnam pa can du skyes pa na tshor ba'ang der skyes pa lta bu	rnam mtshungs
རྣམ་ཛག	arrangement [system, presentation]	rnam dzag
རྣམ་ཛུན་པ	see {sems tsam rnam brdzun pa}, false aspectarians	rnam dzun pa
རྣམ་མཛེས	very handsome, beautiful, large species of lime	rnam mdzes
རྣམ་འཛིན་གཟུགས	body	rnam 'dzin gzugs
རྣམ་རྫུན	sensa are delusive (a mentalistic thesis) 1567	rnam rdzun
རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་བཅས་པ	rnam shes 'di rnams bde sdug sogs kyi 'dzin rnam de nyid du don la gnas kyang ma rig pa'i mthus phyi rol gyi gzung ba'i rnam par snang bas rnam shes rang gi ngo bo rnam pa rdzun pa des gos par smra...	rnam rdzun dri bcas pa
རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་མེད་པ	don dam par phyi'i rnam pas gos pa med par rnam shes 'di dag gi ngo bo shel gong dag pa lta bu yin yang de so skyes rtogs mi nus par sangs rgyas kho nas mkhyen par smra ba'o	rnam rdzun dri med pa
རྣམ་རྫུན་པ	false aspectarians [sems tsam pa'i grub mtha'i nang gses shig ste, phyi don bden dngos su ma grub par ma zad, dbang shes la snang ba ltar ma grub pas sems su'ang mi bden par 'dod pa'o]	rnam rdzun pa
རྣམ་རྫོགས་སྦྱོར་བ	perfect union of all aspects	rnam rdzogs sbyor ba
ཆོས་བཅུ་གཅིག	TSE rnam rdzogs sbyor ba'i chos bcu gcig the 11 dharmas symbolizing union w complete liberation [sher phyin don bdun cu las sbyor ba bzhi'i chos so drug gi nang tshan, rnam rdzogs sbyor ba mtshon b...	chos bcu gcig
རྣམ་བརྫུན་པ	mentalists who claim sensa to be delusive	rnam brdzun pa
རྣམ་ཞིག་བསྐལ་པ	the world age/kalpa of destruction	rnam zhig bskal pa
རྣམ་ཞེས་མཐའ་ཡས་སྐྱེད་མཆེད	the ayatana of limitless consciousness	rnam zhes mtha' yas skyed mched
རྣམ་གཞག	presentation, principles of, postulate, establish/ arrange a tradition/ way of doing things	rnam gzhag
རྣམ་གཞག་མཛད	define	rnam gzhag mdzad
རྣམ་གཞང་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one principle, equal	rnam gzhang gcig tu
རྣམ་བཞག	being itself, dissertation, division, divide into, defined as, be known, specification, contemplation, state, SA mnyam bzhag, arrangement, order in reference to place, position, definition	rnam bzhag
རྣམ་བཞག་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	limitless kinds	rnam bzhag mtha' yas pa
རྣམ་བཞག་འདི་ཀོ་ཅེས་པར	these same classifications	rnam bzhag 'di ko ces par
རྣམ་བཞི	4 aspects, 4 modes of origination (womb, egg, heat-moisture, spon- taneous), 4 activities (calm, increase, empower, wrath)	rnam bzhi
རྣམ་གཟིགས	observing well, observation, name of 1 of 6 buddhas preceding shakyamuni	rnam gzigs
རྣམ་ཡན་ཆེན་པོ	the ultimate roaming, the great letting go rnam g.yeng - distraction, see.{rnam par g.yeng ba} wandering, excitement, distraction, complete distractedness; dug gsum gang rung gi yul la sems rnam pa...	rnam yan chen po
རྣམ་རབ་དྭགས་པོ་གྲྭ་ཚང	monastery west of lhasa	rnam rab dwags po grwa tshang
རྣམ་རིག	intelligent; mental cognition; rnam par rig byed	rnam rig
རྣམ་རིག་བཅུ་གཅིག	/gzhan dbang las 'phros pa'i rnam rig bcu gcig ni/ rnam shes tsam bag chags kyi gzugs snang ba lus kyi dbang por snang ba'i rnam rig mig shes dbang por snang ba lus can gyi rnam rig yid kyi rnam sh...	rnam rig bcu gcig
རྣམ་རིག་པ	sems tsam pa, Chittamatra	rnam rig pa
རྣམ་རིག་བྱེད	mentally cognize/ apprehend/ perceive	rnam rig byed
རྣམ་རིག་བྱེད་མིན་གཟུགས	imperceptible form	rnam rig byed min gzugs
རྣམ་རིག་མིན་པའི་གཟུགས	imperceptible form	rnam rig min pa'i gzugs
རྣམ་རིག་མིན་པའི་གཟུགས་ལྔ	five kinds of imperceptible form, unmanifest form	rnam rig min pa'i gzugs lnga
རྣམ་རིག་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of cognitive awarenes	rnam rig smra ba
རྣམ་རིག་ཙམ	rnam par rig pa tsam	rnam rig tsam
རྣམ་རོལ	miraculous manifestations; display of manifestations	rnam rol
ཨན་ཨིལླུསིཨོན	like display	an illusion
རྣམ་ལངས	dawn	rnam langs
རྣམ་ལོག	turning away from	rnam log
རྣམ་ཤིང	SA lcum rtsa	rnam shing
རྣམ་ཤེས	Consciousness	rnam shes
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	dhatu of consciousness [ming dang gzugs skye ba'i bya ba byed pa'i zag pa dang bcas pa'i rnam shes te srid par skye ba'i rten]	rnam shes kyi khams
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་ལྔ	the five consciousness elements/ dhatus [def {min rna sna lce lus kyi rnam shes kyi khams lnga}	rnam shes kyi khams lnga
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བདུན	the 7 dhatus of consciusness [mig dang, rna, sna, lce, lus, yid bcas kyi rnam shes kyi khams drug dang, yid kyi khams dang bdun no]	rnam shes kyi khams bdun
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གནས་པ	object grasped w attachment by consciousness	rnam shes kyi gnas pa
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གནས་པ་བདུན	the 7 places of consciousness	rnam shes kyi gnas pa bdun
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གནས་པ་བཞི	the four objects of consciousness [experiencing [nye bar spyod pa] defiled form/ feeling/ perception and formations]	rnam shes kyi gnas pa bzhi
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregate of consciousnesses, aggregate of consciousness / cognition. aggregate of ordinary (discursive)consciousness;. consciousness skandha. "that which makes known individually the attributes of...	rnam shes kyi phung po
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཟས	the food of consciousness	rnam shes kyi zas
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	the nidana of consciousness [rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis	rnam shes kyi yan lag
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པའི་ལུས	a body comprised of consciousness, [sm. {yid kyi lus}	rnam shes kyis bsdus pa'i lus
རྣམ་ཤེས་གྱེངས་པ	the mind wandering	rnam shes gyengs pa
རྣམ་ཤེས་བརྒྱད	eight consciousnesses	rnam shes brgyad
རྣམ་ཤེས་ལྔ	five consciousnesses	rnam shes lnga
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཅན	possessing only consciousness (sect in india and china)	rnam shes can
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཆ་མེད	indivisible / partless consciousness	rnam shes cha med
རྣམ་ཤེས་གཉིས	TSE	rnam shes gnyis
རྣམ་ཤེས་རྟེན	heart (which is basis of consciousness)	rnam shes rten
རྣམ་ཤེས་མཐའ་ཡས	Infinite Consciousness; {skye mched mu bzhi} {gzugs med pa'i khams bzhi}	rnam shes mtha' yas
རྣམ་ཤེས་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	field of infinite consciousness" (2nd of 4 states in formless realm)	rnam shes mtha' yas kyi skye mched
རྣམ་ཤེས་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན	sphere of Infinite Consciousness; realm of infinite consciousness	rnam shes mtha' yas kyi skye mched perception
རྣམ་ཤེས་མཐའ་ཡས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	boundless consciousness, sphere of boundless consciousness, one of the classes of gods in the {gzugs med pa'i khams} formless realm. the activity field of infinite consciousness; sphere of infinite...	rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched
རྣམ་ཤེས་མཐའ་ཡས་སྙོམས་འཇུག	samapatti of limitless consciousness [gzugs med snyoms 'jug bzhi'i ya gyal, rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched la dmigs pa 1570 rtse gcig tu 'jug pa'i ting nge 'dzin no] rnam shes mtha' yas snyoms 'jug...	rnam shes mtha' yas snyoms 'jug
རྣམ་ཤེས་གནས་སྤར་བ	to eject the consciousness	rnam shes gnas spar ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་རྣམ་དག	totally purified consciousness	rnam shes rnam dag
ཤེས་སྤར་བ	sending the consciousness to a pure realm	shes spar ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཕུང་པོ	the aggregate of consciousness / cognition	rnam shes phung po
རྣམ་ཤེས་འཕོ་བ	Ejection of consciousness	rnam shes 'pho ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་འཕོ་བའི་བུ་ག་དགུ	the 9 holes by which consciousness exits [tshangs bug smin mtshams, mig, rna ba, sna, kha, lte ba, chu lam, bshang lam bcas dgu'o]	rnam shes 'pho ba'i bu ga dgu
རྣམ་ཤེས་འཕོ་བིའ་བུ་ག་དགུ	the 9 holes where consciousness ejects	rnam shes 'pho bi' bu ga dgu
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཙམ་པ	sems tsam pa	rnam shes tsam pa
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་བརྒྱད	8 collections/ aggregates/ gatherings of consciousness/ consciousnesses * [mahayana]	rnam shes tshogs brgyad
ཅོནསཅིཨོཨུསྣེསས་ཨནད་ཨལལ	ground consciousness	consciousness and all
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་དྲུག	Six sense cognitions. A synonym for 'six sense perceptions.'	rnam shes tshogs drug
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་བདུན	Seven collections of consciousnesses	rnam shes tshogs bdun
རྣམ་ཤེས་གཞན་དུ་སྤོ་བ	transmigrate	rnam shes gzhan du spo ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཟླ་བ	2nd month w sun in Pisces	rnam shes zla ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཡུལ་བརྒྱད	the eight consciousness objects [fields of perception]	rnam shes yul brgyad
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཡུལ་ལ་འཇུག	the consciousness engaged in an object	rnam shes yul la 'jug
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཡུལ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དྲུག	the six cognitions that become involved in objects	rnam shes yul la 'jug pa drug
རྣམ་ཤེས་ཡེ་ཤེས་འབྱེད་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཝོརཀ་བཡ་རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	karma pa iii, 1284-1339. on the relationship of transmigrating consciousness (vijnana) and transcending awareness (jnana) rnam shes g.yengs pa - mind wandering, distracted mind	rnam shes ye shes 'byed pa'i bstan bcos work by rang byung rdo rje
རྣམ་ཤེས་རིགས་མཐུན	cognitions of a similar type [ggd]	rnam shes rigs mthun
རྣམ་ཤེས་ལ་མི་རྟོན་པ	not relying on consciousness [mi rton pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, tsu rol bden par lta ba dang, bdag dang phung po la sogs pa mtshan mar rtog pa dang, 'dod pa'i yon tan lnga'i bde ba la der 'dzin g...	rnam shes la mi rton pa
རྣམ་ཤེས་ལ་མི་རྟོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་རྟོན	rely on awareness, not on ordinary consciousness. one of the {rton pa bzhi} four reliances	rnam shes la mi rton ye shes la rton
རྣམ་ཤེས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	Vijnanavadins; {sems tsam pa}	rnam shes su smra ba
རྣམ་ཤེས་སུ་སྨྲ་བ་པ	Vijn~ nav dins	rnam shes su smra ba pa
རྣམ་ཤེས་གསལ་རིག་གི་ཆ	the cognizant quality of consciousness	rnam shes gsal rig gi cha
རྣམ་ཤེས་གསལ་རིག་ཙམ	a mere cognizant consciousness	rnam shes gsal rig tsam
རྣམ་བཤད	{rnam par bshad pa} detailed explanation	rnam bshad
རྣམ་བཤད་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱན	14th century by rje blo bzang grags pas sher phyin mngon rtogs rgyan gsungs pa'i zhal lung bzhin rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen gyis mdzad pa'i phar phyin gyi 'grel pa zhig rnam bshad pa'i chos mngon ...	rnam bshad snying po'i rgyan
རྣམ་བཤད་རིག་པ	the Well Explained Reasoning [n of text]	rnam bshad rig pa
རྣམ་སད	deva 1571	rnam sad
རྣམ་སྲས	Vaishravana [king of mt deities who guards the N querter or the god of wealth]	rnam sras
རྣམ་སྲས་གན་མཛོད	Tibetan govt. treasury in the rtse po ta la	rnam sras gan mdzod
རྣམ་སྲས་མདུང་དམར	protective deity	rnam sras mdung dmar
རྣམ་སྲོལ	custom, tradition	rnam srol
རྣམ་གསལ	1) knowledge; 2) lightning	rnam gsal
རྣམ་གསལ་བྱེད	maker of light, sun	rnam gsal byed
རྣམ་གསུམ་དག་པའི་ཤ	meat w 3-fold purity [w/o seeing, hearing or fear of being killed for oneself sha'o]	rnam gsum dag pa'i sha
རྣམ་གསུམ་དག་པའི་ཤ་གསུམ	CHN	rnam gsum dag pa'i sha gsum
རྣམ་བསགས	well formed realm	rnam bsags
རྣམ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོག	fort in nyang stod	rnam lhun grub rdzog
རྣམས་རྨོངས་ཏེ	enticed, infatuated, fascinated	rnams rmongs te
རྣམས་བཞག	classifications	rnams bzhag
རྣའི་དབང་པོ	nose	rna'i dbang po
རྣར	abbr of rnam par, or rnam thar, SA rna bar	rnar
རྣར་རྒྱུད	orally transmitted tantras which is a section of snyan brgyud	rnar rgyud
རྣར་སྙན་ཡིད་འབབ	sweet-sounding, and satisfying to the mind	rnar snyan yid 'bab
རྣར་སྙམ་པ	pleasant to the ear, tickling the ear	rnar snyam pa
རྣལ	rest, tranquility of mind, composedness, absence of passion, meditation	rnal
རྣལ་འགོངས	crossing	rnal 'gongs
རྣལ་འགྱོར་པ	saint	rnal 'gyor pa
རྣལ་ལྟས	signs of a dream	rnal ltas
རྣལ་ལྟས་བཟང་པོ	good prognostics of a dream	rnal ltas bzang po
རྣལ་དུ	at ease / peace / to the natural state	rnal du
རྣལ་དུ་བཀོད་པ	put in the way of ascetical practice, endeavors	rnal du bkod pa
རྣལ་དུ་འགོད་པ	make someone feel at ease/ at peace/ relaxed	rnal du 'god pa
རྣལ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	resting naturally	rnal du 'jug pa
རྣལ་དུ་གནས་པ	relaxation in their authentic condition	rnal du gnas pa
རྣལ་དུ་ཕེབས	calm, tranquil	rnal du phebs
རྣལ་དུ་ཕེབས་པ	steady in its nature as before	rnal du phebs pa
རྣལ་དུ་བེབས	to leave in naturalness	rnal du bebs
རྣལ་དུ་དབབ་པ	to reach/ arrive at/ (allow to) come down to (a state of) genuine being	rnal du dbab pa
རྣལ་དུ་མི་གནས	restless, not in equanimity, without rest	rnal du mi gnas
རྣལ་དུ་གཞུགས	to remain in naturalness	rnal du gzhugs
རྣལ་དུ་བཞག	normal condition	rnal du bzhag
རྣལ་འདུག	genuine indwelling	rnal 'dug
རྣལ་ཕེབས	arrived at the real	rnal phebs
རྣལ་བབས	resting in naturalness, reaching composure	rnal babs
རྣལ་བྱོར་པར་རྫུ་བ	pretend to be a practitioner	rnal byor par rdzu ba
རྣལ་དབབ	relaxing in the natural state	rnal dbab
རྣལ་འབེབས	bringing to the natural state	rnal 'bebs
རྣལ་འབོར་རྒྱུད	Yoga tantra	rnal 'bor rgyud
རྣལ་འབོར་སྤྱོད་པ	yogachara/ -in	rnal 'bor spyod pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga, yogi, master, adept, unite with, tuning in, communion with being, contemplative harnessing, practitioner, practicer, realization of the happy state of meditation, esoteric practices of tantra...	rnal 'byor
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of yogatantra	rnal 'byor kyi rgyud kyi theg pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གོང་མ་གཉིས	two higher yogas. The two higher yogas are Anu and Ati Yoga.	rnal 'byor gong ma gnyis
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི	Yogic. Of, or pertaining to, Vajrayana practice with emphasis on personal training as opposed to scholarly learning	rnal 'byor gyi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	yoga tantra	rnal 'byor gyi rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Yogatantrayana, vehicle of Yogatantra	rnal 'byor gyi rgyud kyi theg pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	Yoga sadhana. The main practice which traditionally follows the preliminaries. It includes the two stages of development and 1572 completion and is a perfect stepping stone for approaching the more...	rnal 'byor gyi sgrub thabs
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་བྱ་བ	activities of practitioners rnal 'byor gyi dbang phyug lu hi pa'i bzhed srol dpal 'khor lo bde mchog gi dkyil chog sin du'i klung chen khyu	rnal 'byor gyi bya ba
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་སྦྱོར་བ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	CHN	rnal 'byor gyi sbyor ba yan lag drug
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་དམིགས་པ་བཞི	TSE	rnal 'byor gyi dmigs pa bzhi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ཚུལ་གཅིག	one great system of realization of the authentic condition	rnal 'byor gyi tshul gcig
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ས་ལྔ	TSE CHN	rnal 'byor gyi sa lnga
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 124-2]	rnal 'byor grub thob brgyad
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྲུབ་པའི་ལུང	SA spyi mdo dgongs 'dus	rnal 'byor grub pa'i lung
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད	Yoga Tantra. The third of the three outer tantras: Kriya, Upa and Yoga. It emphasizes the view rather than the conduct and to regard the deity as being the same level as oneself	rnal 'byor rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྒོམ	meditation of Yogatantra	rnal 'byor rgyud kyi sgom
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	yogatantrayana	rnal 'byor rgyud kyi theg pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དུམ་བུ་བཞི	the four fragments of yoga tantra [rdor dbyings kyi dum bu dang, khams gsum rnam rgyal gyi dum bu, 'gro 'dul gyi dum bu, don grub kyi dum bu bcas bzhi]	rnal 'byor rgyud kyi dum bu bzhi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དབང་བདུན	7 abhishekas of yoga tantra	rnal 'byor rgyud kyi dbang bdun
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རིགས་བཞི	TSE	rnal 'byor rgyud kyi rigs bzhi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་རིགས་ལྔ	the five families of yoga tantra	rnal 'byor rgyud rigs lnga
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	the three yoga tantras	rnal 'byor rgyud gsum
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུན་གྱི་བཀོལ་བྱང	Concise Manual For Daily Practice. The condensed version of the guru sadhana of Lamey Tukdrub Barchey Künsel	rnal 'byor rgyun gyi bkol byang
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྒྲུབ་པ	practitionerpractitioner	rnal 'byor sgrub pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྒྲོལ	to liberate practitioners	rnal 'byor sgrol
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ	yogic direct prception [mngon sum bzhi'i nang gses, rang gi thun mong ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen zhi lhag zung 'brel gyi ting nge 'dzin la brten nas byung ba'i rang yul yang dag pa'i don la rtog bral m...	rnal 'byor mngon sum
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ	yogic direct prception [mngon sum@tshad ma'i nang gses, rang gi thun mong ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen zhi lhag zung 'brel gyi ting nge 'dzin las byung zhing rang yul yang dag pa'i don la rtog bral ma 'k...	rnal 'byor mngon sum tshad ma
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ་བཞི	CHN	rnal 'byor mngon sum bzhi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ལྔ	five yogas according to Mah yoga	rnal 'byor lnga
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆས་སུ	in yogic garb	rnal 'byor chas su
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆེ	anuttarayoga, great yoga	rnal 'byor che
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆེན་པོ	mahayoga, Great Development Yoga, mahayoga	rnal 'byor chen po
ཨནད་ཨེqཨུཨལིཏཡ	the pure natures of the aggregates, elements and sense factors are the male and female buddhas and bodhisattvas. At the same time, everything that appears and exists is of the equal nature of empti...	and equality
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆེན་པོའི་ཐེག་པ	Mah yoga	rnal 'byor chen po'i theg pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཆེན་པོའི་པོའི་རྒྱུད	mahayoga tantra, anuttara tantra	rnal 'byor chen po'i po'i rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་འཇིག་རྟེན	a mundane person with the qualities of shamatha and vipashyana	rnal 'byor 'jig rten
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	the hearing transmission of the yogis	rnal 'byor snyan brgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བསྟན་བཅོས	yogic love	rnal 'byor bstan bcos
རྣལ་འབྱོར་དྲུག	Six Yogas. See 'Six Doctrines of Naropa' (nA ro chos drug) rnal 'byor nang pa'i tshogs rgyud chen po - anuyoga rare tantra, rare tantra of anuyoga	rnal 'byor drug
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྣ་བརྒྱུད	hearing transmission between yogis	rnal 'byor rna brgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྣམ་པ	dpal ldan dus kyi 'khor lo	rnal 'byor rnam pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྣམ་བཞི	4 yogas of mahamudra, SA rtse gcig, ro gcig, spros bral, sgom med, four yogas of khams lugs system (gna pa, mi g.yo ba, mnyam nyid, lhun grub)	rnal 'byor rnam bzhi
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྣམས	yogis rnal 'byor rnal 'byor che dang 'byed rtogs la nang gses bzhir dbye rig 'dzin bcu	rnal 'byor rnams
རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	yogi, yogi, practitioner, male practitioner of yoga, 'one who masters the real'	rnal 'byor pa
ཨ་མལེ་པྲཅཏིཏིཨོནེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཡོག	yogin, 1 who masters the real TSE	a male practitioner of yoga
རྣལ་འབྱོར་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra arriving at a wholesome communication w being, yoga tantra	rnal 'byor pa'i rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་པའི་ཆས	yogic attire	rnal 'byor pa'i chas
རྣལ་འབྱོར་པའི་ཆས་ཅན	yogin's attire rnal 'byor pa'i sbyang gzhi bar do lus	rnal 'byor pa'i chas can
རྣལ་འབྱོར་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of a practitioner	rnal 'byor pa'i yon tan
རྣལ་འབྱོར་དཔོན་སློབ་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	we yogis, master and disciples	rnal 'byor dpon slob kyi tshogs
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ	"one who practices yoga", cittamatrin school, yog c ra [experientalist- def dngos po dang mthun pa ltar tshul bzhin yid la byed pas spyod pas na rnal 'byor spyod pa zhes kyang grags so]	rnal 'byor spyod pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ་བ	Yogachara [ggd]	rnal 'byor spyod pa ba
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ་དབུ་མ	YogacharaMadhyamaka. Great Madhyamaka	rnal 'byor spyod pa dbu ma
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ་བཞི་བརྒྱ་པ	Four Hundred Verses [of Yogic Deeds]; Catuhshataka-shastra-karika; Aryadeva, 2nd century rnal 'byor spyod pa'i grub mtha' chen po	rnal 'byor spyod pa bzhi brgya pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་ཡོགཆརྱ	madhyamika [founded by shantarakshita]	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma Yogacharya
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ	yogacharamadhyamika	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་པ	Yog c ramadhyamaka, great madhyamaka [one of three {dbu ma pa} schools]	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma pa
མེནཏལིསྟིཅ	phenomenalistic] initiated by santaraksita and his disciple kamalastla which synthesized the madhyamika svatantrika line [of bhavaviveka] with the understanding of the yogacara school [tserig] rnal...	mentalistic
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས	Yogacarayaabhuumii [one of the {sa sde lnga asanga's five treatises on levels]	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i sa
པརྱཨཡ	samgraha] [one of the {sa sde lnga} = asanga's five treatises on levels] rnal 'byor spyod pa'i sa las gtan la phab	paryaaya
རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས་ལས་གཞི་བསྡུ་བ་ཡོགཅརྱ	bhumau	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i sa las gzhi bsdu ba Yogacarya
བ༹སྟུ	samgraha	vastu
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཕོ་མོ	yogins and yoginis, male & female practitioners	rnal 'byor pho mo
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་རྒྱུད	<bit'antantra> anuttaratantra [thabs dang shes rab dbyer med du sbyor bas rgyud thams cad kyi mchog tu gyur pa, de'i gong na rgyud gzhan med pas na rnal 'byor bla med kyi rgyud ces bya'o]	rnal 'byor bla na med pa'i rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བླ་མེད	anuttara yoga, highest yoga tantra, the unexcelled yoga	rnal 'byor bla med
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བླ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Anuttarayoga tantra	rnal 'byor bla med kyi rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བླ་མེད་རྒྱུད	TSE	rnal 'byor bla med rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་དབང་པོ	the lord of (realized) yogis	rnal 'byor dbang po
རྣལ་འབྱོར་དབང་མོ	queen of practitioners rnal 'byor sbyod pa'i dbu ma rgyud pa yogic autonomy middle way school	rnal 'byor dbang mo
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	<yogin'i> 1) genuine female practitioner; 2) mother tantra deity	rnal 'byor ma
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ་ཡི་རྒྱུད་དྲུག	CHN	rnal 'byor ma yi rgyud drug
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ་གསུམ	the three yogas	rnal 'byor ma gsum
རྣལ་འབྱོར་མའི་རྒྱུད	Yogini Tantras	rnal 'byor ma'i rgyud
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཚེའི་རིག་འཛིན	Yoga of vidyadhara life. The tantric practice of attaining immortality by accomplishing the 'vidyadhara level of longevity.'	rnal 'byor tshe'i rig 'dzin
མིརཅླེས	1) {sems dpa'i rnal 'byor lngags phyi pa gsum}; 2) {rnal 'byor chen po bskyed pa ma (error:)haa yo ga}; 3) {yongs su rnal 'byor lung a nu yo ga} 4) {shin tu rnal 'byor man dag a ti yo ga'o} (chn]	miracles
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི་སྒོམ་མེད	nonmeditation	rnal 'byor bzhi sgom med
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	simplicity	rnal 'byor bzhi spros bral
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི་རྩེ་གཅིག	1-pointedness	rnal 'byor bzhi rtse gcig
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི་རོ་གཅིག	one taste	rnal 'byor bzhi ro gcig
རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི་གསུམ་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	rnal 'byor bzhi gsum bcu gnyis
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཟབ་མོ	deep yoga	rnal 'byor zab mo
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རགས་པའི་དབང་དྲུག	CHN	rnal 'byor rags pa'i dbang drug
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རིམ་པ	yoga levels	rnal 'byor rim pa
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ལམ	path of the yogins	rnal 'byor lam
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཤེས་པའི	1 of mngon sum bzhi	rnal 'byor shes pa'i
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཤེས་པའི་མངོན་སུམ	yogic knowledge	rnal 'byor shes pa'i mngon sum
རྣལ་འབྱོར་ས་གསུམ	the three levels of yoga	rnal 'byor sa gsum
རྣལ་འབྱོར་གསུམ	three yogas	rnal 'byor gsum
རྣལ་མ	natural [thd]	rnal ma
རྣལ་མ་ཡང་དག་པ	true innate; aspect of nges don definitive meaning	rnal ma yang dag pa
རྣལ་མའི་དགོངས་པ	genuine realization	rnal ma'i dgongs pa
རྣལ་མའི་རྒྱུད	real passage to nirvana	rnal ma'i rgyud
རྣལ་མའི་ངང	the natural state	rnal ma'i ngang
རྣལ་མའི་དོན	the true nature, natural state	rnal ma'i don
རྣལ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of naturalness/ the natural state, {rdzogs rim}	rnal ma'i rnal 'byor
རྣལ་མའི་རིག་པ	natural awareness	rnal ma'i rig pa
རྣལ་མའི་རླུང་སེམས	prana/mind of the natural state [lus la rang chas su yod pa'i rlung sems te, ye shes kyi rlung dang rig pa'o]	rnal ma'i rlung sems
རྣལ་མའི་ལུས	body of the natural state	rnal ma'i lus
རྣལ་མའི་གཤིས	authentic condition	rnal ma'i gshis
རྣལ་མའི་སེམས	original mind	rnal ma'i sems
རྣལ་མར་གཞག	settle into the natural state	rnal mar gzhag
རྣལ་མར་བཞག་པ	to settle into the natural state	rnal mar bzhag pa
རྣལ་མིན་གྱི་བསམ་པ	thought not in accord w rgyun lugs	rnal min gyi bsam pa
རྣལ་མོ	brtan brling bag phab pa	rnal mo
རྣལ་གཞག	naturally occurring	rnal gzhag
རྣལ་གཞག་ཆེན་པོ	great natural state	rnal gzhag chen po
རྣལ་བཞག	authentic condition	rnal bzhag
རྣལ་བཞག་ཆེན་པོ	totally settled into the natural state, the great self-settled natural state	rnal bzhag chen po
རྣལ་ལན	rnal ma'i lan te, in debating, to divide, thal lan rnam thar sgo bzhir 'debs pa'am, dri ba dang rtsod pa spong ba'i lan dngos brjod pa'o	rnal lan
རྣལ་ལམ	[arch] dream	rnal lam
རྣིལ	[arch] so'i rnyil	rnil
རྣིལ་ནད	[arch] so rnyil nad	rnil nad
རྣུར་བ	pull forward, pull out of the way, SA snur ba	rnur ba
རྣུལ་དུ་གནས་པ	natural quiet state of mind	rnul du gnas pa
རྣོ	intelligent, keen, blade, edge, point, sharp	rno
རྣོ་ངར	sharp	rno ngar
རྣོ་ཅན	pointed	rno can
རྣོ་ལྕགས	steel	rno lcags
རྣོ་རྟུལ	1) sharp and dull; 2) understanding/ faculties clear or not (	rno rtul
རྣོ་མཐོང	divination	rno mthong
རྣོ་མཐོང་སྒྲུབ	divination	rno mthong sgrub
རྣོ་མཐོང་མོ	kings of the deities of divination	rno mthong mo
རྣོ་འདོན་པ	get sharp, be sharpened	rno 'don pa
རྣོ་རྡུགས་པ	dull/ blunt knife tip or blade	rno rdugs pa
རྣོ་ནར་ཆེ་ཤོས	the sharpest/ most powerful	rno nar che shos
རྣོ་པོ	sharp, pointed, sharp	rno po
རྣོ་ཕྱུང	a name, personal name	rno phyung
རྣོ་ཕྱུང་བ	sharpen[ed]	rno phyung ba
རྣོ་བ	acute. adj. comp. of {rno po} sharp, edged, pointed, dull, blunt	rno ba
རྣོ་བ་གྲི་འདི་ལྟ་བུ	{blo dang shes rab rno ba gri 'di lta bur gyur cig} May my wisdom be as sharp as these scissors	rno ba gri 'di lta bu
རྣོ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	sharp prajna/ understanding [dka' gnad kyi gting 'bigs nus pa'am las sla por shes thub pa'i blo gros]	rno ba'i shes rab
རྣོ་བིའ་ཤེས་རབ	sharp prajna/ understanding	rno bi' shes rab
རྣོ་བོ	sharp{rno bton - ground, sharpened	rno bo
རྣོ་བྱས	sharpened knife	rno byas
རྣོ་བྱེད	horn	rno byed
རྣོ་དབལ	weapon tip's sharp pointedness	rno dbal
རྣོ་འབིགས	auger, hole borer	rno 'bigs
རྣོ་འབེབས	drill, borer	rno 'bebs
རྣོ་མེད	dull, blunt	rno med
རྣོ་མེད་པ	blunt	rno med pa
རྣོ་ཟུར	acute angle	rno zur
རྣོ་ལེན་པ	sharpen	rno len pa
རྣོ་ལོག་པ	dull, blunt [the edge of a weapon]	rno log pa
རྣོག	conceal, hide	rnog
རྣོག་པ	(tha dad pa brnags pa, brnag pa, rnogs,, 1) remember, recall, think about; 2) bear, endure; 2) Brnogs pa, brnog pa, rnogs,, conceal, hide	rnog pa
རྣོག་ཟན	fried 'khur ba	rnog zan
རྣོགས	rnog pa!	rnogs
རྣོགས་པ	[arch] call	rnogs pa
རྣོན	bright, intelligent	rnon
རྣོན་པོ	sharp, keen	rnon po
རྣོན་པོ་བྱས	sharpened	rnon po byas
རྣོན་དབང	perceptive [people]	rnon dbang
རྣོན་མང་དུ་བྱས	acute meditation	rnon mang du byas
རྣོམ་བརྗིད	splendor, magnificence	rnom brjid
རྣོར་བ	[arch] brje ba	rnor ba
སྣ་ཀུ	nose	sna ku
སྣ་དཀར་རྩེ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	sna dkar rtse
སྣ་སྐད	sound coming from the nostrils, nasal speech	sna skad
སྣ་བསྐྱིལ་བ	to direct; block, inhibit; ex {rtog pa'i sna mi bskyil} don't direct the thought	sna bskyil ba
སྣ་ཁ	kind, type, variety, species	sna kha
སྣ་ཁ་འཛོམས་པོ	many kinds/ varieties	sna kha 'dzoms po
སྣ་ཁ་ཟིན	hold to the edge, enter the threshold, reach the entrance	sna kha zin
སྣ་ཁག	kind, type, variety, species	sna khag
སྣ་ཁག་འཛོམས་པོ	many kinds/ varieties	sna khag 'dzoms po
སྣ་ཁུ	nose	sna khu
སྣ་ཁུག	nose	sna khug
སྣ་ཁུག་ཁ་འཐེན	'grub thabs med pa'i bya bar au tshugs byed pa'i dpe	sna khug kha 'then
སྣ་ཁུག་ཐུང་ཐུང	[short nose] quick tempered	sna khug thung thung
སྣ་ཁུག་རྡབ་པ	have bad luck	sna khug rdab pa
སྣ་ཁུག་རྡབས	be disappointed [about something 1 was sure of]	sna khug rdabs
སྣ་ཁུག་རྡུམ་རྡུམ	[short nose] quick tempered	sna khug rdum rdum
སྣ་ཁུག་བརྡབས་པ	run into something w the nose, be disappointed [about something 1 was sure of]	sna khug brdabs pa
སྣ་ཁུང	nostril	sna khung
སྣ་ཁུང་གཅིག་ལས་དབུགས་གཏོང་བ	holding identical opinions, breathing from 1 nostril	sna khung gcig las dbugs gtong ba
སྣ་ཁོག	nasal cavity, inside of the nose	sna khog
སྣ་ཁྲག	blood coming from the nose,	sna khrag
ནོསེ	bleed	nose
སྣ་ཁྲག་དོན་པ	to bleed from nose	sna khrag don pa
སྣ་ཁྲག་སྣ་ཆུ་འཛག	blood and water dripping from the nose	sna khrag sna chu 'dzag
སྣ་ཁྲིད	guide, leader, charioteer	sna khrid
སྣ་ཁྲིད་གནང	lead, direct [h]	sna khrid gnang
སྣ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	lead, direct [h]	sna khrid byed
སྣ་ཁྲིད་གསུམ	the three guides/ directions	sna khrid gsum
སྣ་འཁྱོག	1) crooked nose; 2) owl	sna 'khyog
སྣ་འཁྱོག་པ	bent nose	sna 'khyog pa
སྣ་འཁྲིད་པ	leader	sna 'khrid pa
སྣ་ག	sna kha	sna ga
སྣ་ག་གང་ཡོད་ཀྱི་ཐོ	recipe	sna ga gang yod kyi tho
སྣ་གུག	flat nose	sna gug
སྣ་གུང་དགོང	morning noon/ afternoon and evening	sna gung dgong
སྣ་གོང	between the eyes	sna gong
སྣ་གོང་གཉེར་བ	knit the brows, frown	sna gong gnyer ba
སྣ་གྲངས	dissimilar kinds kha grangs	sna grangs
སྣ་དགའ་དགེ་བསྙེན	TSE	sna dga' dge bsnyen
སྣ་དགུ	Syn {sna rgu}	sna dgu
སྣ་དགུ་ཚོང་ཁང	department store	sna dgu tshong khang
སྣ་འགའ་སྤྱོད་པ	[genyen] observing a few rules	sna 'ga' spyod pa
སྣ་འགའ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	genyen observing a few rules	sna 'ga' spyod pa'i dge bsnyen
སྣ་རྒུ	various kinds/ items	sna rgu
སྣ་རྒུ་ཚོང་ཁང	department store	sna rgu tshong khang
སྣ་རྒྱན	ornament attached to the nose	sna rgyan
སྣ་རྒྱུག་ཐག་གཅོད་གཅིག་སྤྲོད་པ	strike a telling blow	sna rgyug thag gcod gcig sprod pa
སྣ་རྒྱུག་སྤྲད	strike on the nose [dogs], block, halt	sna rgyug sprad
སྣ་རྒྱུག་གཞུས་པ	establishing 1's goal ma bcug pa'am, re don pham nyes su btang ba'i dpe, Btsan 'dzul pa la sna rgyug gzhus pa	sna rgyug gzhus pa
སྣ་སྒང	bridge of nose	sna sgang
སྣ་སྒོ	nostrils	sna sgo
སྣ་ལྔ	five kinds	sna lnga
སྣ་ཅན	wild pig, having a snout	sna can
སྣ་ཅན་མ	wind	sna can ma
སྣ་གཅིག	one of the	sna gcig
སྣ་གཅིག་དགེ་བསྙེན	dge bsnyen practicing only 1 precept	sna gcig dge bsnyen
སྣ་གཅིག་སྤྱོད་པ	practice only 1 [of the precepts	sna gcig spyod pa
སྣ་གཅིག་སྤྱོད་པའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	dge bsnyen practicing only 1 precept	sna gcig spyod pa'i dge bsnyen
སྣ་གཅུ	in mdzo or gyag nostrils round shing lcug [twig?]	sna gcu
སྣ་གཅོད་པ	cut [off] the tip of the nose	sna gcod pa
སྣ་བཅག་པ	1) strength sam ngar gyi rtse med par bzos pa; 2) nose bone damaged/ twisted/ broken; 3) clothing shoes etc sne tshem bus bsgril ba	sna bcag pa
སྣ་ལྕག་རྒྱག	strike on the nose [dogs], block, halt	sna lcag rgyag
སྣ་ཆམ	cold in the nose, after a cold in the nose ya ma 'khrugs te sickness w facial swelling &, stopped up nose, from the nose pus and chu ser dripping	sna cham
སྣ་ཆུ	nose mucus	sna chu
སྣ་ཆེན་གླང་ཆེན	SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	sna chen glang chen
སྣ་ཆེན་གླང་ཆེན་གདོང	elephantheaded Mahahastini	sna chen glang chen gdong
སྣ་ཆེན་པོ	1) big nose; 2) powerful minister	sna chen po
སྣ་འཇུ	sna gcu	sna 'ju
སྣ་ཉག	nose w indentation/ hollow	sna nyag
སྣ་གཉིས་ནས	through the two nostrils	sna gnyis nas
སྣ་གཉེར	undesired rnam pa zhig ste nose wrinkles	sna gnyer
སྣ་གཉེར་བ	wrinkled nose	sna gnyer ba
སྣ་ཏི	water from the nose, SA spyi	sna ti
སྣ་གཏོར	greedy	sna gtor
སྣ་རྟུག	snot	sna rtug
སྣ་རྟོག	nostril	sna rtog
སྣ་བསྟད་པ	confident, rely on, trust	sna bstad pa
སྣ་ཐ	snuff, etc. snuffed into the nose	sna tha
སྣ་ཐ་བླུག་སྣོད	snuff box 1578	sna tha blug snod
སྣ་ཐག	lead rope tied to the nose of animals	sna thag
སྣ་ཐག་མགོར་དཀྲིས	grasping autonomy, wrapped my tether around my head	sna thag mgor dkris
སྣ་ཐག་འཐེན་པ	snuff	sna thag 'then pa
སྣ་ཐག་བསྡོགས་པ	1) nose rope; 2) Gzhan dbang du ma phyin pa'i dpe	sna thag bsdogs pa
སྣ་ཐག་སྦྲེལ	being tethered	sna thag sbrel
སྣ་ཐག་སྦྲེལ་བ	being tethered	sna thag sbrel ba
སྣ་ཐག་སྦྲེལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	being tethered by suffering	sna thag sbrel ba'i sdug bsngal
སྣ་ཐག་མི་ལ་མ་ཤོར་བ	not handing	sna thag mi la ma shor ba
ཨོནེའས་ནོསེ	rope to others	one's nose
སྣ་ཐག་རང་གི་མགོ་དཀྲི་བ	wrapped my tether around my head	sna thag rang gi mgo dkri ba
སྣ་ཐག་ཤོར་བ	losing 1's nose rope/ autonomy	sna thag shor ba
སྣ་ཐུང	short-tempered	sna thung
སྣ་ཐུང་ཐུང	short-tempered, easily angered	sna thung thung
སྣ་ཐུང་སྤུ་སུད	easily angered and bad natured	sna thung spu sud
སྣ་ཐུང་བ	short-tempered, one who loses his spirits very easily	sna thung ba
སྣ་ཐོད	sling	sna thod
སྣ་མཐོ་ལ	{sna mtho} Pass [Sikkim/T border]	sna mtho la
སྣ་དྲངས	leader, guide	sna drangs
སྣ་དྲངས་པ	headed [by.] Syn {dbu mdzad pa} the foremost, led	sna drangs pa
སྣ་དྲི	SA snabs, nose mucus	sna dri
སྣ་དྲོངས	chos kyi zhu sna drongs - assist them in asking for teachings	sna drongs
སྣ་གདན	lham mgo'i sna'i 'og gi streamer? snam bu	sna gdan
སྣ་གདོང	1) nostrils dpangs zur; 2) mt's sna zur	sna gdong
སྣ་འདེད་པ	one who goes before, forerunner, pioneer, precede, go before	sna 'ded pa
སྣ་འདྲེན	leader, commander	sna 'dren
སྣ་འདྲེན་གཅིག་འགྱུར	united leadership	sna 'dren gcig 'gyur
སྣ་འདྲེན་པ	go 1st/ before, precursor	sna 'dren pa
སྣ་ལྡན	nasal sounds/ consonants	sna ldan
སྣ་ལྡན་མཚོན་པ	show which are the nasal sounds/ consonants	sna ldan mtshon pa
སྣ་ལྡོག་པ	change direction	sna ldog pa
སྣ་བརྡབས་པ	1) nose banging against a wall etc; 2) hopes not fulfilled	sna brdabs pa
སྣ་ནག་མ	inauspicious rnam grangs shig ste, gar song du don mi 'grub pa'i mi zhig	sna nag ma
སྣ་ནད	nose disease	sna nad
སྣ་ནད་ལྔ	CHN	sna nad lnga
སྣ་ནད་ཤ་ལུ	sna'i nang sha lhag skyes nas breath is stopped and voice not clear	sna nad sha lu
སྣ་ནམ	Samarkand	sna nam
སྣ་ནམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འཇོམས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	sna nam rdo rje bdud 'joms
སྣ་ནམ་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འཇོམས	Dorje Dudjom of Nanam. One of king Trisong Deutsen's ministers, sent to Nepal to invite Padmasambhava to Tibet. A mantrika who had reached perfection in the two stages of development and completion...	sna nam pa rdo rje bdud 'joms
སྣ་ནམ་བཟའ	king khri lde gtsug brtan or, mes aag tshom can's queen, gyim shing kong jo la sras khri srong lde btsan bltams dus zhe sdang gis kong jo'i sras phrogs te mo rang las skyes pa ltar byed mkhan de yi...	sna nam bza'
སྣ་ནམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ	Nanam Yeshe, alias Yeshe Dey of Nanam. Also known as Bandey Yeshe Dey of Shang (zhang gi bhan dhe ye shes sde). A prolific translator of more than 200 scriptures and a disciple of Padmasambhava, th...	sna nam ye shes sde
སྣ་ནས་སྦྲིད་པ	sneeze	sna nas sbrid pa
སྣ་རྣོ་བ	sharp sense of smell	sna rno ba
སྣ་རྣོན་པོ	1) sharp sense of smell; 2) sharp tipped nose; 3) [arch] bya ra ba'am watchman	sna rnon po
སྣ་སྣབས	snot	sna snabs
སྣ་སྣུར་གྱིས་བསྒྲུབས་པ	accomplished/ finished ahead of schedule	sna snur gyis bsgrubs pa
སྣ་སྣུར་གྱིས་སྤྲོད་པ	pay in advance/ before the due date	sna snur gyis sprod pa
སྣ་སྣུར་དུ་ཚར་པ	finished ahead of schedule	sna snur du tshar pa
སྣ་སྣེམ	lazy	sna snem
སྣ་བསྣུར་གྱིས་བསྒྲུབས་པ	accomplished/ finished ahead of schedule	sna bsnur gyis bsgrubs pa
སྣ་བསྣུར་གྱིས་སྤྲོད་པ	pay in advance/ before the due date	sna bsnur gyis sprod pa
སྣ་བསྣུར་དུ་ཚར་པ	finished ahead of schedule	sna bsnur du tshar pa
སྣ་པ	person who show knowledge, ho to do things	sna pa
སྣ་པོ	leader, guide	sna po
སྣ་ཕུ	place in tibet	sna phu
སྣ་ཕྱི	handkerchief	sna phyi
སྣ་ཕྱིས	nose rag	sna phyis
སྣ་འཕྱང	yellow pennants with studded jewelry	sna 'phyang
སྣ་འཕྱིད	handkerchief	sna 'phyid
སྣ་འཕྱོང	one of {'bras bu'i rta babs brgyad}	sna 'phyong
སྣ་བ	leader, guide	sna ba
སྣ་བ་འཛིན	ship commander, boat man	sna ba 'dzin
སྣ་བག་བྲེལ	being tethered	sna bag brel
སྣ་བབས	glanders	sna babs
སྣ་བུག	Syn {sna khung}	sna bug
སྣ་བུག་གི	nasal	sna bug gi
སྣ་བུམ	ink stand	sna bum
སྣ་བོ	1) chief, principal, leader, head 1; 2) Gros dpon, 1 showing how something is done	sna bo
སྣ་བོ་ཆེ	minister, chief noble	sna bo che
སྣ་བོ་ལ་ཁ	a mountain peak	sna bo la kha
སྣ་བོན	bonpo charms during marriage	sna bon
སྣ་དབང	nose/ smell faculty/ organ	sna dbang
སྣ་དབུགས་རྔུབ་པ	sniff	sna dbugs rngub pa
སྣ་དབྱུག་གཞུས་པ	sna rgyug gzhus pa	sna dbyug gzhus pa
སྣ་སྦྱོང	snuff	sna sbyong
སྣ་སྦྲང	mucus	sna sbrang
སྣ་སྦྲིད་ཤུགས་ཆེན་རྒྱབ་པ	snort	sna sbrid shugs chen rgyab pa
སྣ་སྦྲེལ	1) plow mdzo sna sbrel byed kyi rope; 2) 1 of cattle connected to others by the nose	sna sbrel
སྣ་མ	1) dz' ti [flower]; 2) Sna phug pa'i cattle; 3) pack animal, beast of burden	sna ma
སྣ་མ་འགག་པ	relentlessly	sna ma 'gag pa
སྣ་མ་འགག་པར	relentlessly	sna ma 'gag par
སྣ་མ་མི་སྐལ	informer tradition while traveling mi gcig gis bdag sprod bya rgyu'i sna ma: pack cattle gnag phyugs ngo grangs 20 re'i ming, in dbus gtsang called dre'u lag or gyag lag	sna ma mi skal
སྣ་མ་མེ་ཏོག	Das: n. of a flower (Jasminum grandiflorum) [mss]	sna ma me tog
སྣ་མང	many different varieties	sna mang
སྣ་མང་ངལ་རྩོལ	complex labor	sna mang ngal rtsol
སྣ་མང་བདག་གཉེར	diversified ownership/ business/ economy	sna mang bdag gnyer
སྣ་མང་སྣ་ཚོགས	all sorts of	sna mang sna tshogs
སྣ་མང་ཕུན་ཚོགས	varied, diverse	sna mang phun tshogs
སྣ་མའི་སྣ་ཚོགས	various kinds	sna ma'i sna tshogs
སྣ་མའི་འབྲས་བུ	sna ma shing = dz' ti'i tree fruit de'i 'bras bu ni dz' ti'o	sna ma'i 'bras bu
སྣ་མའི་མེ་ཏོག་འོད	light of the jasmine	sna ma'i me tog 'od
སྣ་མིན་སྣ་ཚོགས	many [like &] different kinds	sna min sna tshogs
སྣ་མེད	1) sna thag brgyu sa'i torn hole; 2) cattle w/o nose rope; 3) Sna phug med pa'i mdzo gyag sogs	sna med
སྣ་དམར་བ	red nose	sna dmar ba
སྣ་སྨད	place in tibet	sna smad
སྣ་སྨན	mgo dang nam tshong yan chad kyi nad la sman sna nang du btang nas nad phyir sbyong bar byed pa'i thabs shig	sna sman
སྣ་རྩེ	tip of the nose	sna rtse
སྣ་རྩེ་ཙམ	only a part / fraction	sna rtse tsam
སྣ་རྩེར	onto the tip of the nose	sna rtser
སྣ་རྩེར་བབས་པ	descends onto the tip of the nose	sna rtser babs pa
སྣ་ཚང	combine a variety of different things cha tshang ba *, all kinds of	sna tshang
སྣ་ཚད	various, of every kind, of all sorts	sna tshad
སྣ་ཚོགས	all kinds of	sna tshogs
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ན་བཟའ	multicolored clothes	sna tshogs kyi na bza'
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྐྱོགས་བརྒྱ	many means	sna tshogs skyogs brgya
སྣ་ཚོགས་གླིང	Vishva Temple. A temple at Samye	sna tshogs gling
སྣ་ཚོགས་འགེངས	the earth	sna tshogs 'gengs
སྣ་ཚོགས་རྒྱུ	fish	sna tshogs rgyu
སྣ་ཚོགས་བསྒྲུབ	brahma	sna tshogs bsgrub
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅན	citrini water bird, wild cock	sna tshogs can
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཆུ་བཞིན	shimmers like a reflection in water	sna tshogs chu bzhin
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཉིད	differentiation	sna tshogs nyid
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཉིས་མེད་པ	non-pluralists	sna tshogs gnyis med pa
སཆོཨོལ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	dual variety	school of non
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཉིས་མེད་སུ་སྨྲ་བ	proponents of perceptual nonduality / the absence of diversity [ggd] sna tshogs gnyis med su smra ba'i mdo	sna tshogs gnyis med su smra ba
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཏོག	a son of kamadeva	sna tshogs tog
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཏེར་ཆེན་གྱི་ལུང	Variegated Great Treasury Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	sna tshogs gter chen gyi lung
སྣ་ཚོགས་རྟ་ཅན	wind god	sna tshogs rta can
སྣ་ཚོགས་རྟོག་པ	daydreams and mistakes	sna tshogs rtog pa
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྟོན་པ	displaying various forms	sna tshogs ston pa
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཐབས་བརྒྱ	many means	sna tshogs thabs brgya
སྣ་ཚོགས་འཐུང	all-drinking, the sun or moon or fire sna tshogs dri ma med pa chu bzhin gzigs	sna tshogs 'thung
མཛད	(your pure appearance shimmers like a reflection in water	mdzad
སྣ་ཚོགས་མདོག	ba bla -	sna tshogs mdog
སྣ་ཚོགས་མདོག་ཅན	comet's tail	sna tshogs mdog can
སྣ་ཚོགས་འདྲེས་མ	different sorts mixed up together	sna tshogs 'dres ma
སྣ་ཚོགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	visvadakini, four-fold dorje, double vajra, visvavajra	sna tshogs rdo rje
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྡེ	a medicine, cassia alata plant	sna tshogs sde
སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	different kinds, various; variety	sna tshogs pa
སྣ་ཚོགས་པད་མ	multicolored lotus; variegated lotus	sna tshogs pad ma
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	variegated nirmanakaya	sna tshogs sprul sku
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྤྲུལ་པ	diversified emanations [gd]	sna tshogs sprul pa
སྣ་ཚོགས་བྱེད་པོ	Bhrama	sna tshogs byed po
སྣ་ཚོགས་བྲལ་བའི་རིག་པ	awareness free of complication	sna tshogs bral ba'i rig pa
སྣ་ཚོགས་དབྱིག	39th year of {rab byung} sm {shing mo sbrul}	sna tshogs dbyig
སྣ་ཚོགས་འབྲས	medicinal fruit effective against worms	sna tshogs 'bras
སྣ་ཚོགས་མ་འདྲེས	many-fold but unmixed, distinguished, unmixed variety	sna tshogs ma 'dres
སྣ་ཚོགས་མིག་ཅན	deity dbang phyug	sna tshogs mig can
སྣ་ཚོགས་མིག་ལྡན་མ	a noijin goddess	sna tshogs mig ldan ma
སྣ་ཚོགས་མུ་མཐའ	limits of variety	sna tshogs mu mtha'
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཙུག་རྒྱན	Jupiter	sna tshogs gtsug rgyan
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཙུག་ཅན	vrhaspati, spiritual guide of the gods	sna tshogs gtsug can
སྣ་ཚོགས་བཙེགས	mount sumeru	sna tshogs btsegs
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཚོན་ཆགས	variegated, particolored	sna tshogs tshon chags
སྣ་ཚོགས་འཛིན	the earth	sna tshogs 'dzin
སྣ་ཚོགས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	various miraculous actions	sna tshogs rdzu 'phrul
སྣ་ཚོགས་གཟུགས་ཅན	plant calotropis gigantea	sna tshogs gzugs can
སྣ་ཚོགས་འོད	1 of 'od bdun pa	sna tshogs 'od
སྣ་ཚོགས་འོད་ཟེར	1) fire [god]; 2) wind 1580	sna tshogs 'od zer
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཡུམ	consort of {dus 'khor} [Kalachakra]	sna tshogs yum
སྣ་ཚོགས་རང་གྲོལ	{rtse le rgod tshang pa} b. 1608 sna tshogs rang grol gyi rnal 'byor pa Natsok Rangdröl Yogi. 'Natsok' means 'manifold,' the various kinds of sense cognitions. 'Rangdröl' means 'selfliberated.' sna...	sna tshogs rang grol
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཤིང	tree called harimantha	sna tshogs shing
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཤིང་རྟ	sun	sna tshogs shing rta
སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ	variously	sna tshogs su
སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ་སྣང	to manifest as variety	sna tshogs su snang
སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ་ཤར་བ	arising as a/ in myriad array	sna tshogs su shar ba
སྣ་ཚོགས་སོ་སོར	various and distinct	sna tshogs so sor
སྣ་ཚོགས་ལྷ	type of lha	sna tshogs lha
སྣ་ཚོགས་ལྷུ་སྒྲིག	many things alike and not phyogs sgrig	sna tshogs lhu sgrig
སྣ་མཚུལ	nose and lips/ mouth	sna mtshul
སྣ་འཚང་བ	difficulty in breathing from the nostrils gtong len byed dka' ba	sna 'tshang ba
སྣ་མཛུབ	picking the nose, example of bad action	sna mdzub
སྣ་མཛུབ་སྤྲོད་པ	1) pick the nose; 2) example of a fault	sna mdzub sprod pa
སྣ་འཛར	fringe at the end	sna 'dzar
སྣ་འཛིན	nose rope holder, leader, beginner[ing] of a job	sna 'dzin
སྣ་འཛོམ	rich, abundant	sna 'dzom
སྣ་འཛོམས	many kinds/ varieties	sna 'dzoms
སྣ་འཛོམས་དུས་དེབ	dus nges gtan zhig la par du skrun pa'i dus deb w various contents	sna 'dzoms dus deb
སྣ་འཛོམས་དུས་དེབ་ཁང	magazine/ journal office	sna 'dzoms dus deb khang
སྣ་འཛོམས་པ	gather many/all different kinds of things	sna 'dzoms pa
སྣ་འཛོམས་པོ	lavishly and complete	sna 'dzoms po
སྣ་ཞགས	CM: glang chen gyi sna zhags pa'i gsugs su bkod pa. MSS: elephant's trunk, lit. "nose rope/noose." [mss]	sna zhags
སྣ་ཞགས་ཅན	CM: glang po che. [mss]	sna zhags can
སྣ་ཞོམ	indrawn/flat nostrils	sna zhom
སྣ་ཟིན	threshold, beginning, initial state	sna zin
སྣ་ཟིན་པ	to take/ have taken the first step; to set out/ embark	sna zin pa
སྣ་ཟིན་སྤུ་སིན་བྱས་པ	take bits and pieces	sna zin spu sin byas pa
སྣ་ཟིན་ཙམ	to take hold of	sna zin tsam
སྣ་གཟེངས་མཐོ་བ	high nose	sna gzengs mtho ba
སྣ་ཡི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	olfactory /smell consciousness	sna yi rnam par shes pa
སྣ་ཡི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	nose consciousness element sna g.yar - [make] an advance/ short term loan, ahead of schedule	sna yi rnam shes kyi khams
སྣ་རྭ	horn snuff box	sna rwa
སྣ་རལ	person w torn nose	sna ral
སྣ་རིགས	kinds, varieties	sna rigs
སྣ་རིང	1) elephant; 2) wild pig; 3) med/ spice pi pi ling; 4) owl	sna ring
སྣ་རིང་བ	1) long wool etc; 2) goodnatured- forebearing; 3) 'Bel po dang mod po; 4) 'bur len ring po zhig	sna ring ba
སྣ་རིས་སྤུ་ཚོགས	drag zhan ci rigs mang po 'dres pa	sna ris spu tshogs
སྣ་རུ	1) [horn] snuff box; 2) [arch] vowels na ro mtshon byed kyi brda	sna ru
སྣ་རེ	a few; single/ solitary	sna re
སྣ་རེ་སྣ་གཉིས	a pair or several things	sna re sna gnyis
སྣ་རེ་ཙམ	only a portion	sna re tsam
སྣ་རོ	sign of vowel o, snuff bottle from yak horn	sna ro
སྣ་ལ་འགྲོ	go ahead/ in front	sna la 'gro
སྣ་ལུང	rope through the nose	sna lung
སྣ་ལུད	snot	sna lud
སྣ་ལེན	Syn {sne len} welcome; byas offered hospitality, welcoming	sna len
སྣ་ལེན་གྱི	a welcoming	sna len gyi
སྣ་ལེན་བགྱི་བ	to be hospitable	sna len bgyi ba
སྣ་ལེན་དང་འབབ་ས	receive me	sna len dang 'bab sa
སྣ་ལེན་དང་འབབ་ས་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	will have welcomed you	sna len dang 'bab sa byed du 'jug pa
སྣ་ལེན་དུ	as a gesture of welcome	sna len du
སྣ་ལེན་པ	give shelter, hospitality	sna len pa
སྣ་ལེན་བྱེད	arrange a welcoming feast	sna len byed
སྣ་ལེབ	snub-nosed	sna leb
སྣ་ལེབ་པ	flat nosed person	sna leb pa
སྣ་ལོ	ride-able yak	sna lo
སྣ་ཤ	1) nose flesh; 2) nose rope	sna sha
སྣ་ཤུ	1) in the nose shu thor skyes te disease where lesions arise; 2) Sna rlung gi shu sgra	sna shu
སྣ་ཤུགས	grunting	sna shugs
སྣ་ཤེས	nose/smell consciousness	sna shes
སྣ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	the nose consciousness element, abbr. of {sna'i rnam par shes pa'i khams}	sna shes kyi khams
སྣ་ཤོ	torn nose	sna sho
སྣ་གཤོག	nostrils external sha 'bur po'am sna'i bya gshog	sna gshog
སྣ་ས	husband	sna sa
སྣ་སར་སར	from before/ long ago, in advance	sna sar sar
སྣ་སར་སར་ནས	from before/ long ago, in advance	sna sar sar nas
སྣ་སུན	wearying	sna sun
སྣ་སུན་པོ	noisy, irritating [to the ear]	sna sun po
སྣ་སུན་ཕོག་པ	experience previous failure, defeat, downfall myong ba	sna sun phog pa
སྣ་སུབས	nose disease where it is hard to breather	sna subs
སྣ་སེལ	1) eliminate obstacles ['Gan rkyen bar chad ma byung gong nas sna sel sgrub pa]; 2) where 1 is going gdong lam bde po bzo ba	sna sel
སྣ་བསུན་འཁེལ	learn 1's lesson, get taught a lesson [slang]	sna bsun 'khel
སྣག	tribal name	snag
སྣག་ཀོང	1) ink pot; 2) ink dbur sa'i vessel	snag kong
སྣག་སྐྱོགས	Tibetan style ink dbur sa'i wood/ metal vessel	snag skyogs
སྣག་གི་གཉེན་མཚམས	[half-]sibling	snag gi gnyen mtshams
སྣག་གི་ཚ་བོ	maternal relatives	snag gi tsha bo
སྣག་རྒྱུག	ink snur byed stick shing hril lam snag hril	snag rgyug
སྣག་ཆར	in the manifest aspect	snag char
སྣག་སྙིགས	ink snyigs ro	snag snyigs
སྣག་ཐིག	ink blot/ stain	snag thig
སྣག་ཕྱི་རིས་མེད	without linear time frame	snag phyi ris med
སྣག་བ	appearance, appear, manifest, karmic vision	snag ba
སྣག་བའི་བག་ཆགས	karmic traces of material vision	snag ba'i bag chags
སྣག་བུམ	chinese ink-box, ink pot	snag bum
སྣག་བླུག	ink pot	snag blug
སྣག་དབོན	maternal aunt's/ sister's son	snag dbon
སྣག་མོ	[arch] soft	snag mo
སྣག་མོ་རང	quite early in the morning	snag mo rang
སྣག་སྨྱུག	1) pen and ink; 2) a Tibetan writing implement	snag smyug
སྣག་ཚ	ink	snag tsha
སྣག་ཚ་སྐམ་པོ	chinese ink	snag tsha skam po
སྣག་ཚ་འཕེལ་བྱེད	glue, sizing	snag tsha 'phel byed
སྣག་ཚ་བླངས	to blot ink	snag tsha blangs
སྣག་ཚ་དབུར་གཞོང	ink stone	snag tsha dbur gzhong
སྣག་ཚ་དབུར་གཞོང་ཡན་ཐའེ	ink slab	snag tsha dbur gzhong yan tha'e
སྣག་ཚ་འབྱར་བྱེད	glue, gum	snag tsha 'byar byed
སྣག་ཚ་རང་འབབ་གི་སྨྱུ་གུ	fountain pen	snag tsha rang 'bab gi smyu gu
སྣག་ཚུལ་བཅོས་མ	false/ bogus appearance	snag tshul bcos ma
སྣག་ཚོགས	[arch] soft meat w/o bones etc	snag tshogs
སྣག་རིས	ink drawing/ painting	snag ris
སྣག་ལས་སྐྱེས	lineage, born of the family of sngag, family extraction	snag las skyes
སྣག་ལེན་ཤོག་བུ	blotter	snag len shog bu
སྣགས་པ	(A; 1) rape; 2) clean things by dirt/stains sbags pa	snags pa
སྣང	abbr. of {snang ba} appearance, phenomena, presence, to appear, show, be seen, be visible, to manifest, seem, day light, app. to {mun pa} illumination, thought, heart, mind, ex. {chos gnang} to be ...	snang
སྣང་རྐྱེན	conditions accounting for the manifestation of apparent phenomena	snang rkyen
སྣང་རྐྱེན་གྲོགས་སུ་འཆར	conditions arise as aids	snang rkyen grogs su 'char
སྣང་སྐྱིད	fun	snang skyid
སྣང་སྐྱིད་བློ་བདེ	relaxed/happy/ joyful and comfortable/ at ease	snang skyid blo bde
སྣང་ཁུང	window	snang khung
སྣང་མཁན	perceiver	snang mkhan
སྣང་མཁན་གྱི་སེམས་ཉིད	the perceiving mind itself	snang mkhan gyi sems nyid
སྣང་འཁྲུལ	illusion, delusion	snang 'khrul
སྣང་གིན་འདུག་པ	is appearing	snang gin 'dug pa
སྣང་གིན་འདུག་པས	is appearing	snang gin 'dug pas
སྣང་གྱེལ	inattentive, lazy	snang gyel
སྣང་གྲག་རིག་གསུམ	gzugs snang zhing, sgra grag pa dang, yid gsal ba	snang grag rig gsum
སྣང་གྲགས	kun gyis mthong zhing yongs su grags pa, Grod ltogs mkhan la zas 'phrod sla ba dang, kha skom mkhan la btung 'phrod sla ba tshang ma'i snang grags red	snang grags
སྣང་གྲགས་འགྱུ་གསུམ	sights, sounds, and thoughts	snang grags 'gyu gsum
སྣང་གྲགས་རྟོག་ཚོགས	sights, sounds and thoughts	snang grags rtog tshogs
སྣང་གྲགས་རིག་གསུམ	sights, sounds and awareness [cognitions]	snang grags rig gsum
སྣང་གྲོགས་རྟོག	sight, sound and thought	snang grogs rtog
སྣང་གླུ	illuminating song; sonorous	snang glu
སྣང་འགྱུར	which will be experienced	snang 'gyur
སྣང་འགྱུར་ཐུན་མོང་བའི་ལས	the Karma for common appearances, def. {sems can gyi gnas kyis bskyed pa}	snang 'gyur thun mong ba'i las
སྣང་འགྲོས	apparent motion	snang 'gros
སྣང་འགྲོས་གསུམ	CHN	snang 'gros gsum
སྣང་བརྒྱད་པའི་རབ་ཀླུང	epithet of the river ganga	snang brgyad pa'i rab klung
སྣང་ངོ	appearances	snang ngo
སྣང་ངོ་ཐ་དད	diversity	snang ngo tha dad
སྣང་ངོ་ར	is seen, in [my] seeing/ perception/ "eyes"	snang ngo ra
སྣང་ངོ་རིག་པའི་ལྷ་འདྲེ་བདེན་མེད	in the 'eyes' of awareness gods and devas, are unreal	snang ngo rig pa'i lha 'dre bden med
སྣང་ངོ་ལ་ཇི་ལྟར་སྣང་ཡང	no matter how they may occur in your experience	snang ngo la ji ltar snang yang
སྣང་ངོར	as perceived by, in the perception	snang ngor
སྣང་ངོར་མི་འཇུག་པ	not in accord w appearance	snang ngor mi 'jug pa
སྣང་ངོར་མཛེས་པ	beautiful looking	snang ngor mdzes pa
སྣང་ངོར་ལ་བདེན	true while perceiving; kun rdzob	snang ngor la bden
སྣང་ངོས	1) front, side seen; 2) [from the viewpoint of] seeing, appearance, look phenomenon, form	snang ngos
སྣང་བཅས	conception	snang bcas
སྣང་བཅས་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ	direct yogic perception w appearance	snang bcas rnal 'byor mngon sum
སྣང་བཅས་སྣང་མེད	involving an apparent object and act. Syn {mtshan bcas mtshan med}	snang bcas snang med
སྣང་ཆ	appearance aspect, projection, vision	snang cha
སྣང་ཆ་བཀག་པ	to block off perceptual experience	snang cha bkag pa
སྣང་ཆགས	shifts of work from serfs according to their respective turns	snang chags
སྣང་ཆུང	abasement	snang chung
སྣང་ཆུང་ཁུར་མེད	mthong chung lhod yangs, Spyi don tshang mar snang chung khur med ma byed	snang chung khur med
སྣང་ཆུང་བྱེད	not regard as important, have little regard/consideration for, be neglectful	snang chung byed
སྣང་ཆུང་ལྷོད་ཡངས	act w inattentive mind	snang chung lhod yangs
སྣང་ཆེན	regard as important, have [high] regard/ consideration/ esteem for 1582	snang chen
སྣང་ཆེན་བྱེད	have high regard/ esteem for	snang chen byed
སྣང་མཆེད་ཐོབ་ཉེར་ཐོབ	appearance, increase, attainment, and full attainment snang mched thob pa'i snang ba gsum the three experiences of appearance, increase and attainment	snang mched thob nyer thob
སྣང་མཆེད་ཐོབ་གསུམ	appearance, increase, and attainment	snang mched thob gsum
སྣང་འཆར	appear, [arise in] appearance	snang 'char
སྣང་འཆར་ཚུལ	the way in which appearances arise	snang 'char tshul
སྣང་ཇི་སྙེད་ཀུན	all appearances whatever exist in this world	snang ji snyed kun
སྣང་ཉམས	display-experiences	snang nyams
སྣང་བརྙན	picture. Syn {sku brnyan}; image, mask	snang brnyan
སྣང་བཏགས	projected association	snang btags
སྣང་བཏགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས	mixing of appearance and denomination as [being] one [ggd]	snang btags gcig tu 'dres
སྣང་བཏགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྲེས་པ	mixing up the apparent and the designated as if these were one	snang btags gcig tu bsres pa
སྣང་སྟོང	1) appearance and emptiness; appearance-emptiness. 2) empty perceiving	snang stong
སྣང་སྟོང་གཉིས་མེད	non-duality of vision and emptiness, in which vision & emptiness are not dual	snang stong gnyis med
སྣང་སྟོང་བརྡ	vision & emptiness related to symbols	snang stong brda
སྣང་སྟོང་དབྱེད་མེད	inseparable appearance emptiness	snang stong dbyed med
སྣང་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible experience and emptiness. inseparability of appearance and emptiness	snang stong dbyer med
སྣང་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	coalescence/unity of appearances/experience and emptiness	snang stong zung 'jug
སྣང་སྟོང་ཟུང་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་རིག་པ	the awareness in which appearances and voidness are inseparably united	snang stong zung du 'jug pa'i rig pa
སྣང་སྟོང་བཟུང་འཇུག	uniting appearance and emptiness	snang stong bzung 'jug
སྣང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འཇུག་པ	to operate by the power of appearance [ggd]	snang stobs kyis 'jug pa
སྣང་བརྟག	[+ neg] w/o fear/ worry, confident	snang brtag
སྣང་བརྟགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	visible or examinable phenomenon	snang brtags kyi chos
སྣང་ཐམས་ཅད	all that presents itself	snang thams cad
སྣང་ཐོང	blank	snang thong
སྣང་མཐོང་རྩིས	astrology that reveals existence	snang mthong rtsis
སྣང་དག	inward man, heart, soul	snang dag
སྣང་དག་མ་བཏང	be indifferent	snang dag ma btang
སྣང་དག་མ་བཏང་བ	not to care at all	snang dag ma btang ba
སྣང་དང་མི་སྣང	appearance or disappearance	snang dang mi snang
སྣང་དངས	naturally clear	snang dangs
སྣང་དུ་མི་འདུག	did not show	snang du mi 'dug
སྣང་དོར	as perceived by, in the perception	snang dor
སྣང་ལྡན	filled w light	snang ldan
སྣང་ལྡན་ཤིང་རྟ	skar ma brtan pa	snang ldan shing rta
སྣང་གནོར	in the view of, = {ngo thog na}	snang gnor
སྣང་སྤྱོད་ཉིད	just that which appears and which one enjoys	snang spyod nyid
སྣང་ཕྱོགས	1) the aspect of seeing; 2) Dkar gsal [white and bright, window ??] gyi phyogs; 3) the aspect of upaya snang phyogs ngo bo rdzogs pa'i lha sku	snang phyogs
སྣང་བ་དཀར་པོ	moonlight	snang ba dkar po
སྣང་བ་དཀར་ལམ་པའི་སེམས	TSE	snang ba dkar lam pa'i sems
སྣང་བ་སྐུའི་འཁྱེར་སོ	TSE	snang ba sku'i 'khyer so
སྣང་བ་སྐྱིད་པོ	carefree, contented	snang ba skyid po
སྣང་བ་འཁྲུལ་བ	confused appearance	snang ba 'khrul ba
སྣང་བ་གང་དྲན	however, one wants, whatever comes to mind, undisciplined, impulsive, ad hoc	snang ba gang dran
སྣང་བ་གྱེང་བ	distract the mind	snang ba gyeng ba
སྣང་བ་གྲུབ	to create concrete vision	snang ba grub
སྣང་བ་བགྱིད་པ་འགྱུར་པ	filled with light	snang ba bgyid pa 'gyur pa
སྣང་བ་འགྱུར	change of experience / perception / outlook	snang ba 'gyur
སྣང་བ་འགྱུར་ཆོས་སུ	transformed into dharma	snang ba 'gyur chos su
སྣང་བ་འགྱུར་བ	change hearts, repent, conversion	snang ba 'gyur ba
སྣང་བ་འགྲོ་པོ	comely	snang ba 'gro po
སྣང་བ་རྒྱ་ཡིས་ཐེབས	strike phenomena with mudra	snang ba rgya yis thebs
སྣང་བ་རྒྱས་འདེབས་པ	1 of the four practices called	snang ba rgyas 'debs pa
སྣང་བ་སྒྱུ་མ	illusory appearances, magical appearances	snang ba sgyu ma
སྣང་བ་སྒྱུ་མ་རྨི་ལམ་འདྲ	appearances are like illusions and dreams	snang ba sgyu ma rmi lam 'dra
སྣང་བ་སྒྱུར་བ	{snang ba 'phral du sgyur nus pa} can transform everything in an instant	snang ba sgyur ba
སྣང་བ་ཅན	manifest, present in all its glory	snang ba can
སྣང་བ་ཅེར་བཞག	resting in the immediacy of sensory appearances	snang ba cer bzhag
སྣང་བ་ཅོག་གཞག	freely resting experience	snang ba cog gzhag
སྣང་བ་ཅོག་གཞག་གི་ཉམས་ལེན	practice of the freely resting experience	snang ba cog gzhag gi nyams len
སྣང་བ་ཅོག་བཞག	1 of cog bzhag, state of relaxation of the vision (visions of phenomenal reality are recognized in a state of presence and clarity beyond dualistic judgement)	snang ba cog bzhag
སྣང་བ་བཅུ་གཅིག	dbang po lnga/ don lnga/ rnam par rig byed ma yin pa'i gzugs te rdzas bcu gcig	snang ba bcu gcig
སྣང་བ་ཆེར་གཞག	directly resting in appearance	snang ba cher gzhag
སྣང་བ་ཆོས་སུ་འགྱུར	appearance transformed into dharma	snang ba chos su 'gyur
སྣང་བ་མཆེད་པ	enhanced appearance	snang ba mched pa
སྣང་བ་མཆེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of enhanced appearance	snang ba mched pa'i ye shes
སྣང་བ་འཆར	get the feeling, impression	snang ba 'char
སྣང་བ་འཆར་བ	felt	snang ba 'char ba
སྣང་བ་འཆར་ཚུལ	way in which appearances are perceived	snang ba 'char tshul
སྣང་བ་ཉིད	appearance itself	snang ba nyid
སྣང་བ་ཉིད་ན	the very moment it appears	snang ba nyid na
སྣང་བ་ཉིད་སྣང་བས་གྲོལ	the vision	snang ba nyid snang bas grol
ཨིཙེལཕ༹་ཨིས་སེལཕ༹	liberated by means of the vision	itself is self
སྣང་བ་ཉིན་སྲིབ	light and dark, way of thinking much changed	snang ba nyin srib
སྣང་བ་གཉིས	the two kinds of experience	snang ba gnyis
སྣང་བ་སྟོང་པ	appearance-empty, visible emptiness, manifest emptiness	snang ba stong pa
སྣང་བ་སྟོང་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the empty luminosity of appearance	snang ba stong pa'i 'od gsal
སྣང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད	all appearance, all experiences, everything you see	snang ba thams cad
སྣང་བ་ཐུག་ཕྲད	sensory appearances directly presenting themselves; the direct encounter with sensory appearances	snang ba thug phrad
སྣང་བ་ཐོབ་པ	obtained the vision	snang ba thob pa
སྣང་བ་ཐོབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of attained appearance, def. {sems 'gag pa la phyogs pa}	snang ba thob pa'i ye shes
སྣང་བ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་གླིང	Amitabha Temple. A temple at Samye	snang ba mtha' yas kyi gling
སྣང་བ་མཐོ	uplifted	snang ba mtho
སྣང་བ་མཐོ་ལིང་ངེ་འབྲེང	let one's heart soar high and happy	snang ba mtho ling nge 'breng
སྣང་བ་མཐོན་པོ	great confidence, pride	snang ba mthon po
སྣང་བ་དག་པ	pure appearance free from faults, sacred outlook	snang ba dag pa
སྣང་བ་དང་སྟོང་པ	TSE	snang ba dang stong pa
སྣང་བ་དང་སྣང་ཡུལ	discussion	snang ba dang snang yul
སྣང་བ་དང་བློ་ལ་འགྲོ་པོ	desirable	snang ba dang blo la 'gro po
སྣང་བ་དྲེད་པ	by great familiarity not loose pure appearance	snang ba dred pa
སྣང་བ་གདོང་དེད་པ	pursue one's course regardless of others	snang ba gdong ded pa
སྣང་བ་གདོང་འདེད	rang shed tsha po, Rang 'dod gang dran mthar skyel gtong ba'i snang ba gdong 'ded byas pa	snang ba gdong 'ded
སྣང་བ་གདོང་རེད་པ	take up a work without much deliberation	snang ba gdong red pa
སྣང་བ་བདུན	the 7 appearances [rmi lam dang, sgyu ma, smig rgyu, sgra brnyan, gzugs brnyan, dri za'i grong khyer, sprul pa bcas bdun]	snang ba bdun
སྣང་བ་བདེ་བ	happiness	snang ba bde ba
ཞིང་ཁམས་ཚད་ལ་ཕེབས་པར་བྱེད་ཋེ་ཨེ྾ཏེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	fields is reached by means of the presence in which there is no hesitation or doubt regarding appearances [gd]	zhing khams tshad la phebs par byed The extent of the buddha
སྣང་བ་སྡུད	focus appearances	snang ba sdud
སྣང་བ་བརྡའི་བླ་མ	TSE	snang ba brda'i bla ma
སྣང་བ་ནས་སྣང་བར་འགྲོ་བ	proceeding from light to light	snang ba nas snang bar 'gro ba
སྣང་བ་ནས་མུན་ཁྲོད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go from light to darkness	snang ba nas mun khrod du 'gro ba
སྣང་བ་ནས་མུན་པར་འགྲོ་བ	going from light to darkness	snang ba nas mun par 'gro ba
སྣང་བ་ནུབ་པ	subsiding of appearance, death	snang ba nub pa
སྣང་བ་གནས་བསྒྱུར	to transform appearances	snang ba gnas bsgyur
སྣང་བ་རྣམ་བདུན	CHN	snang ba rnam bdun
སྣང་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས	various types of perceptions, manifold perceptions	snang ba sna tshogs
སྣང་བ་དཔེ་ཆར་འཆར་བ	the phenomenal world will arise as teachings	snang ba dpe char 'char ba
སྣང་བ་སྤྲོ་བ	elevating the mind, expanding on appearances	snang ba spro ba
སྤྲོ་བ	joy	spro ba
སྣང་བ་ཕྱད་ཕྱོད	perception flickers	snang ba phyad phyod
སྣང་བ་ཕྲ་རགས	gross and subtle perceptions	snang ba phra rags
སྣང་བ་བན་བུན	flickering / fluttering appearances; Syn {snang ba yom yom, shig shig}	snang ba ban bun
སྣང་བ་བྱུང་བ	feels	snang ba byung ba
སྣང་བ་བྲིད་མཁས	skillful in imposing upon	snang ba brid mkhas
སྣང་བ་དབང་སྒྱུར་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	the action of mastering phenomena	snang ba dbang sgyur gyi spyod pa
སྣང་བ་དབང་བསྒྱུར	to dominate appearances	snang ba dbang bsgyur
སྣང་བ་འབྱུང་བ	experience	snang ba 'byung ba
སྣང་བ་མ་དག	{rang gi snang ba ma dag na} if your perceptions were impure	snang ba ma dag
སྣང་བ་མ་བྱུང	attention/ concern not arising	snang ba ma byung
སྣང་བ་མེད་པ	no one pays any attention	snang ba med pa
སྣང་བ་མེད་པའི	which never manifests visibly	snang ba med pa'i
སྣང་བ་ཙམ	a mere percept	snang ba tsam
སྣང་བ་ཙམ་ཡིན	can only take place	snang ba tsam yin
སྣང་བ་བཞི	4 visions (direct, increase, perfection, dissolution), SA snang bzhi, 4 visions, 4 stages in the progress of the practice of integration of the light of thod rgal, SA chos nyid mngon sum gyi snang ...	snang ba bzhi
ཨཔཔེཨརནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	increasing contemplative experience {nyams gong 'phel ba'i snang ba} the visionary appearance of reaching the limit of awareness {rig pa tshad phebs kyi snang ba} and the visionary appearance of th...	appearance of ever
སྣང་བ་ཟ་ཟི	obscure dim light	snang ba za zi
སྣང་བ་ཟི་བུན་ནེ་བ	enraptured	snang ba zi bun ne ba
སྣང་བ་ཟི་བུན་པ	to experience a thrill	snang ba zi bun pa
སྣང་བ་གཟུགས	forms that appear GD	snang ba gzugs
སྣང་བ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་གཞི	form basis of appearance [one of the 5-fold basis of knowables, appearing forms ???	snang ba gzugs kyi gzhi
སྣང་བ་འོད་ལྡན	Luminous Vision	snang ba 'od ldan
སྣང་བ་ཡུལ	objective appearances	snang ba yul
སྣང་བ་ཡུལ་གྱི་གནད་གསུམ	three essentials of objective appearance	snang ba yul gyi gnad gsum
སྣང་བ་ཡོད་པའི	when it is light	snang ba yod pa'i
སྣང་བ་ཡོད་པའི་དུས་སུ	when there is light snang ba g.yeng - be amused/entertained by snang ba ra ma phyin pa'i rnam 'gyur grimace	snang ba yod pa'i dus su
སྣང་བ་ལ	beheld a vision; syn {gzigs snang la} it seemed to him/her that	snang ba la
སྣང་བ་ལ་རྒྱས་གདབ་པ	sealing experience	snang ba la rgyas gdab pa
སྣང་བ་ལ་རྒྱས་གདབ་པ་ཕྱི	externally sealing appearances	snang ba la rgyas gdab pa phyi
སྣང་བ་ལ་ངེས	definite factor in appearance	snang ba la nges
སྣང་བ་ལ་མ་ངེས་པ	contingent factor in appearance	snang ba la ma nges pa
སྣང་བ་ལ་རྩལ་སྒྱོང་བ་ཕྱི	externally developing strength on appearances	snang ba la rtsal sgyong ba phyi
སྣང་བ་ལ་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བ	training with perceptions	snang ba la rtsal sbyong ba
སྣང་བ་ལ་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བ་ཕྱི	externally developing strength on appearances	snang ba la rtsal sbyong ba phyi
སྣང་བ་ལམ་ཡེངས	occupied with concepts	snang ba lam yengs
སྣང་བ་ལིང་ལིང	mere appearance	snang ba ling ling
སྣང་བ་ཤར	the occurrence of a perception	snang ba shar
སྣང་བ་ཤར་བའི་རྣམ་པ	perceived image	snang ba shar ba'i rnam pa
སྣང་བ་སེམས་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	appearances dissolving into mind	snang ba sems la thim pa
སྣང་བ་སེམས་སུ་ཤར་བ	phenomena dawn as your mind	snang ba sems su shar ba
སྣང་བ་གསལ	luminosity, luminous	snang ba gsal
སྣང་བ་གསུམ	[TRS 105-5]; 1) the three appearances. {lus snang ba 'dod khams}, {ngag phyed snang gzugs khams}, {sems ni snang ba gzugs med khams}. 2) three visions	snang ba gsum
སྣང་བ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate perception	snang ba lhan skyes
སྣང་བ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཆོས་སྐུའི་འོད	coemergent appearance is the light of dharmakaya	snang ba lhan skyes chos sku'i 'od
སྣང་བ་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ	coemergent appearance	snang ba lhan cig skyes pa
སྣང་བའི་མཁར་པོ	the perceiver	snang ba'i mkhar po
སྣང་བའི་ངོ་བོ	identity of perception	snang ba'i ngo bo
སྣང་བའི་དངོས	concrete presence	snang ba'i dngos
སྣང་བའི་ཆོས	Phenomena	snang ba'i chos
སྣང་བའི་འཆར་སྒོ	perceptions	snang ba'i 'char sgo
སྣང་བའི་སྟོན་གཞི	base underlying vision	snang ba'i ston gzhi
སྣང་བའི་བདག་པོ	sun	snang ba'i bdag po
སྣང་བའི་རྣམ་པ	the form that appears, the apparent image	snang ba'i rnam pa
སྣང་བའི་དབང་པོ	eye	snang ba'i dbang po
སྣང་བའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	lustrous halo round the sun	snang ba'i mu khyud
སྣང་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	characteristics of vision	snang ba'i mtshan nyid
སྣང་བའི་མཛོད	repository of light, sun	snang ba'i mdzod
སྣང་བའི་འོད་གསལ	Luminosity of appearance. The first of the three stages of appearance, increase and attainment	snang ba'i 'od gsal
སྣང་བའི་ཡུལ	1) [objects of] appearance; 2) apparent object	snang ba'i yul
སྣང་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the dawning of pristine cognition, perfects the {tshogs lam} def. {sems nyid kyi ngang du blo'i 'jug pa zhi nas dangs gsal g.yo ba med ma'i ye shes thog mar skyes pa gang yin pa de ni} the wisdom o...	snang ba'i ye shes
སྣང་བའི་རང་བཞིན་སོ་གསུམ	CHN	snang ba'i rang bzhin so gsum
སྣང་བའི་ས	levels of visions	snang ba'i sa
སྣང་བའི་ས་བཅུ	sixteen bhumis of the visions	snang ba'i sa bcu
སྣང་བར་གང་ཤར	what the mind apprehends	snang bar gang shar
སྣང་བར་འགྱུར་བ	be filled with light, be enlightened	snang bar 'gyur ba
སྣང་བར་འགྲོ་པོ	delectable	snang bar 'gro po
སྣང་བར་འགྲོ་ཤོས	favorite	snang bar 'gro shos
སྣང་བར་འཆར	get the feeling, impression	snang bar 'char
སྣང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to illuminate; illuminate, to reveal, ex. {thar lam}	snang bar byed pa
སྣང་བར་མ་འགྲོ་བ	loathsome	snang bar ma 'gro ba
སྣང་བར་མཛེས་མ	a great yaksini, shedemon	snang bar mdzes ma
སྣང་བར་བཞག	heed, listen, pay attention	snang bar bzhag
སྣང་བས་གར་ཁྱབ་ཐམས་ཅད	everything, as far as you can see	snang bas gar khyab thams cad
སྣང་བྱས	effulgent	snang byas
སྣང་བྱུང་བ	it seemed to him/her that	snang byung ba
སྣང་བྱེད	1) sun; 2) eye; 3) light rays; 4) fire	snang byed
སྣང་བྱེད་གཉིས་པ	the second luminary, the moon	snang byed gnyis pa
སྣང་བྱེད་ཕུང་པོ	kacimbala tree	snang byed phung po
སྣང་བྱེད་ཟུང	the two luminaries, the sun and the moon	snang byed zung
སྣང་བྱེད་འོད་བྱེད	the sun	snang byed 'od byed
སྣང་དབང་གིས་འཇུག	operate by the power of appearance; [comp with {nges dbang gis 'jug} operate by the power of ascertainment] [ggd]	snang dbang gis 'jug
སྣང་མི་སྣང	is or is not	snang mi snang
སྣང་མུན	light & darkness	snang mun
སྣང་མེད	beyond form; careless, indifferent, unconcerned, neglectful, invisible, unmanifest	snang med
སྣང་མེད་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	non-apparent luminosity	snang med kyi 'od gsal
སྣང་མེད་གྱང་གྱེང	rang mthong rang 'gying gi snang med rtog bzo, Snang med gyang gyeng gis rang che rang bstod byed pa	snang med gyang gyeng
སྣང་མེད་ཅན	insignificant, negligent	snang med can
སྣང་མེད་ཆོར་མེད	do snang med cing khe nyen mi tshor ba	snang med chor med
སྣང་མེད་དུ་བཞག་པ	neglect	snang med du bzhag pa
སྣང་མེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ	direct yogic perception w/o appearance	snang med rnal 'byor mngon sum
སྣང་མེད་བག་ཡངས	khur med lhod yangs	snang med bag yangs
སྣང་མེད་བྱེད	1) make invisible, unmanifest, not apparent, beyond form; 2) be careless/ indifferent/ unconcerned, neglectful, disregard, overlook	snang med byed
སྣང་མེད་བྱེད་པ	ignore	snang med byed pa
སྣང་མེད་འོད་གསལ	Non-apparent luminosity	snang med 'od gsal
སྣང་མེད་ལིང་སྐྱུར	khur med rgyang skyur	snang med ling skyur
སྣང་མེད་ལྷོད་གྱེང	khur med sems gyeng ngam rang dgar 'jog pa	snang med lhod gyeng
སྣང་མོད	it seemed	snang mod
སྣང་སྨྲས་པའི་ཚུལ	the character of his last speech	snang smras pa'i tshul
སྣང་ཙམ	just visible (symbolic script), mere impression, only perceived to be, mere presence, in the very moment it is perceived	snang tsam
སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt, lha sa'i gling skor nang khongs sgrigs khrims gnon gcod byed mkhan gyi las khungs yin zhing, las khungs tshugs yul khrom stod sa khul sngags pa snang rtse ba zer ba zhig gi sdod shag ...	snang rtse shag las khungs
སྣང་ཚད	the measure of light, all that happens	snang tshad
སྣང་ཚད་སྲིད་ཚད	all that appears and exists'	snang tshad srid tshad
སྣང་ཚུལ	apparent/ manifest mode	snang tshul
སྣང་ཚུལ་འཆར	show an appearance/ look	snang tshul 'char
སྣང་ཚུལ་ལོག་པ	perception as being perverted	snang tshul log pa
སྣང་ཚུལ་ལོག་པར	perception as being perverted	snang tshul log par
སྣང་ཚེ	illumination, exhibition	snang tshe
སྣང་ཚེ་འདིན་ལས	mundane pettiness	snang tshe 'din las
སྣང་ཚེ་འདིའི་ལས	mundane pettiness	snang tshe 'di'i las
སྣང་ཚེ་འདིར	the phenomena of this life	snang tshe 'dir
སྣང་མཛད	brightening, illuminating, illuminator	snang mdzad
སྣང་འཛིན	fixating on appearance	snang 'dzin
སྣང་ཝ་ལིང་ལིང	mere appearance	snang wa ling ling
སྣང་ཞིག་དགོན	snang zig monastery	snang zhig dgon
སྣང་ཞིང་སྟོང	apparent yet empty	snang zhing stong
སྣང་ཞིང་སྲིད་པ	the phenomenal world	snang zhing srid pa
སྣང་ཞེན	tha mal snang zhen - clinging to ordinary perceptions	snang zhen
སྣང་ཞེན་སྦྱོང་བ	to purify clinging to the appearances	snang zhen sbyong ba
སྣང་བཞི	the four visions [revelation of dharmata, increasing experience, maturation of insight, exhausting dharmata = {snang ba bzhi	snang bzhi
སྣང་བཞི་རྫོགས་པ	to accomplish the four visions	snang bzhi rdzogs pa
སྣང་བཞིན་དུ	while it is experienced	snang bzhin du
སྣང་བཞིན་བདེན་པར་མ་གྲུབ	{snang bzhin bden par ma grub pa smig rgyu lta bu} as in a mirage, things appear but are not real	snang bzhin bden par ma grub
སྣང་བཞིན་བདེན་པར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	appearing while not possessing true existence	snang bzhin bden par ma grub pa
སྣང་ཟེར་ཅན་མ	a bon deity, one refulgent with light, radiant	snang zer can ma
སྣང་ཟེར་ལྡན་མ	a bon deity, one refulgent with light, radiant	snang zer ldan ma
སྣང་གཟིགས	x {longs sku'i zhing snang gzigs} you saw sambhogakaya buddhafields appear	snang gzigs
སྣང་འོད	shining light	snang 'od
སྣང་ཡུལ	appearing object [ggd]	snang yul
སྣང་ཡུལ་ཀུན	all external vision	snang yul kun
སྣང་ཡུལ་ལ་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས	the mind fixating on the perceived object snang g.yel - [arch] 1) window; 2) solitary place; 3) inattentive, lazy snang g.yel can - forgetful, lazy	snang yul la 'dzin pa'i sems
སྣང་ར་གསེར་ཁང	Nangra, Golden Temple, in Domey	snang ra gser khang
སྣང་རིག་གསལ	luminous perception	snang rig gsal
སྣང་རིག་བསྲེས	unify rigpa with vision, unify vision & rigpa	snang rig bsres
སྣང་རིགས་པ	apparent character	snang rigs pa
སྣང་རུ་སྒང	place in tibet near stod lung	snang ru sgang
སྣང་རུང	suitable to appear, cap[able of appearing [if it is there]	snang rung
སྣང་རུང་གི་འགལ་ཟླ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	affirming reason (of negation) which negates (the antithesis) by mutual incompatibility with a potentially visible (referent) snang rung gi 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags - non-affirming reason whic...	snang rung gi 'gal zla dmigs pa'i rtags
སྣང་རུང་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	sign/	snang rung ma dmigs pa'i rtags
རེཨསོན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	observation of what is suitable to appear	reason of non
ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཨ་ནོན	observation of the suitable to appear	which is a non
སྣང་རུང་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས་གཉིས	'the two kinds of sign/ reason of nonobservation of what is suitable to appear 1587	snang rung ma dmigs pa'i rtags gnyis
སྣང་ལ་བདེན་པར་མེད་པ	appearing but being unreal	snang la bden par med pa
སྣང་ལ་བདེན་མེད	manifest yet lack true existence	snang la bden med
སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པ	inattentive cognition [ggd]	snang la ma nges pa
སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པའི་དབང་མངོན	sensory perception w unascertained appearance	snang la ma nges pa'i dbang mngon
སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པའི་ཡིད་མངོན	mental perception in which appearance is unascertained	snang la ma nges pa'i yid mngon
སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པའི་རང་རིག	selfknowing that perceives yet is not determined	snang la ma nges pa'i rang rig
སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	awareness/ knowledge in which appearance is unascertained	snang la ma nges pa'i shes pa
སྣང་ལ་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པ	{snang la rang bzhin med pas gzugs brnyan gyi snang ba lta bu} as in a reflection, things appear but have no reality of their own	snang la rang bzhin med pa
སྣང་ལས	activities (manifest actions)	snang las
སྣང་ལུགས	way of appearing/ being experienced	snang lugs
སྣང་ལུགས་ཡེ་ཤེས	wakefulness as the manifest state	snang lugs ye shes
སྣང་ལུས	all remaining visions	snang lus
སྣང་ལོག	mthong tshul log pa	snang log
སྣང་ཤར	a vision arose	snang shar
སྣང་ཤས	thoughts, fancies, experience, view	snang shas
སྣང་ཤས་ཐ་ཤལ	conventional view	snang shas tha shal
སྣང་ཤས་སུ་འགྲོ	to make too much of this experience	snang shas su 'gro
སྣང་ཤས་སུ་འགྲོ་དོགས་པ	I was concerned that I might make to much of this experience	snang shas su 'gro dogs pa
སྣང་ཤེས	vision and sensation, vision & consciousness	snang shes
སྣང་ཤེས་ཉམས	experiences of vision and sensation	snang shes nyams
སྣང་ཤེས་ཉམས་རིགས	sign-experiences both of vision and sensation	snang shes nyams rigs
སྣང་ཤེས་ཟུང་འཇུག	unity of appearances and mind	snang shes zung 'jug
སྣང་གཤན	a bon priest of great learning	snang gshan
སྣང་གཤེན	Shen of the phenomenal universe	snang gshen
སྣང་གཤེན་ཐེག་པ	Way of the Shen of the Manifest World, 1 of rgyu'i bon, way of the shen of the phenomenal universe	snang gshen theg pa
སྣང་གཤེན་བལ་ཐོད་ཅན	Shen of the phenomenal universe that has a woolen turban	snang gshen bal thod can
སྣང་ས	name of a very famous daughter of a noble	snang sa
སྣང་ས་འོད་འབུམ	name of an opera	snang sa 'od 'bum
སྣང་སེམས	mind and/ experiencing apparent phenomena	snang sems
སྣང་སེམས་གཉིད་མེད	vision & mind are not dual	snang sems gnyid med
སྣང་སེམས་གཉིས་མེད	nonduality of appearances and mind	snang sems gnyis med
སྣང་སེམས་ཐམས་ཅད	everything at manifests as vision and as mind	snang sems thams cad
སྣང་སེམས་བར	between appearance & mind	snang sems bar
སྣང་སེམས་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable appearance and mind TSE	snang sems dbyer med
སྣང་སེམས་ཙམ	appearances are mind only	snang sems tsam
སྣང་སེམས་རོ་གཅིག	the one taste of appearances and mind	snang sems ro gcig
སྣང་སེལ་ཁྲབ་གྱོན	a bon deity of sa bdag class who wears a coat of mail	snang sel khrab gyon
སྣང་སྲིད	(world of) appearances and possibilites	snang srid
སྣང་སྲིད་ཀྱི་འོད་ཕུང	cosmic rays	snang srid kyi 'od phung
སྣང་སྲིད་ཁ་སྐོང	pacify and appease all existence	snang srid kha skong
སྣང་སྲིད་ཁ་སྐོང་འགྲམས་བཅོས	rites to repair	snang srid kha skong 'grams bcos
སྣང་སྲིད་འཁོར་འདས	(world of) appearances and possibilities, whether samsara or nirvana 1588	snang srid 'khor 'das
སྣང་སྲིད་འཁོར་འདས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	everything that appears and exists, samsara and nirvana	snang srid 'khor 'das kyis bsdus pa
སྣང་སྲིད་འཁོར་འདས་བཞི	TSE	snang srid 'khor 'das bzhi
སྣང་སྲིད་རྒྱན་མདོས	ornamental mdos of existence	snang srid rgyan mdos
སྣང་སྲིད་ཆོས	animate and inanimate phenomena	snang srid chos
སྣང་སྲིད་བརྟག་ཐབས	cosmology	snang srid brtag thabs
སྣང་སྲིད་ཐམས་ཅད	all that appears and exists	snang srid thams cad
སྣང་སྲིད་དག་པ་རབ་འབྱམས	the allencompassing purity of appearance and existence	snang srid dag pa rab 'byams
སྣང་སྲིད་དྲེགས་པ	gods and demons w defilements of worldly appearance	snang srid dregs pa
སྣང་སྲིད་བདེ་སྟོང་དུ་ཤར་བ	the phenomenal world dawns as bliss and emptiness	snang srid bde stong du shar ba
སྣང་སྲིད་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	eight classes of the universe	snang srid sde brgyad
སྣང་སྲིད་རྣམ་དག	TSE	snang srid rnam dag
སྣང་སྲིད་སྣོད་བཅུད	the animate and inanimate universe	snang srid snod bcud
སྣང་སྲིད་ཕྱི	external phenomena	snang srid phyi
སྣང་སྲིད་མ་མོའི་ཁྲུགས་མདོས	mdos for reparation of disturbances caused to the Mamo of the universe	snang srid ma mo'i khrugs mdos
སྣང་སྲིད་ཙམ	mere [appearance and] existence/ appearance and existence	snang srid tsam
སྣང་སྲིད་གཞིར་གཞེངས	possible appearances and beings arising within the	snang srid gzhir gzhengs
སྣང་སྲིད་གཞིར་བཞེངས	appearance and existence as manifest ground, ground manifest appearance and existence	snang srid gzhir bzhengs
སྣང་སྲིད་གཞིར་བཞེངས་ཆེན་པོ	the great state of appearance and existence as manifest ground	snang srid gzhir bzhengs chen po
སྣང་སྲིད་གཞིར་བཞེངས་སུ་རྟོགས	the realization that everything that exists arises from the primordial ground	snang srid gzhir bzhengs su rtogs
སྣང་སྲིད་ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	to manipulate the phenomenal world	snang srid zil gyis gnon pa
སྣང་སྲིད་ཟིལ་གནོན	Nangsi Silnon. The name of Guru Rinpoche which means glorious subjugator of appearance and existence	snang srid zil gnon
སྣང་སྲིད་ཟིལ་གནོན་རྩལ	Nangsi Silnon Tsal	snang srid zil gnon rtsal
སྣང་སྲིད་ཟིས་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	manipulate the phenomenal world	snang srid zis gyis gnon pa
སྣང་སྲིད་རང་གྲོལ	TSE	snang srid rang grol
སྣང་སྲིད་རིལ	whole animate and inanimate universe	snang srid ril
སྣང་སྲིད་ལྷ་དང	SA ting 'dzin	snang srid lha dang
སྣང་སྲིད་ལྷ་དང་ལྷ་མོའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	intermediate samadhi in which light and energy forms appear as gods and goddesses	snang srid lha dang lha mo'i ting 'dzin
སྣང་སྲིད་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	celestial beings belonging to the eight classes of gods and rakshasa	snang srid lha srin sde brgyad
སྣང་གསལ	to illuminate; 2) bright, clear, shining 3) illuminating (lamp), lamp	snang gsal
སྣང་གསལ་གྱི་ཀོང་བུ	a butter lamp, lamp	snang gsal gyi kong bu
སྣང་གསལ་གྱི་ལྷ་མོ	lamp goddess	snang gsal gyi lha mo
སྣང་གསལ་སྒྲོན་མེ	offering lamps	snang gsal sgron me
སྣང་གསལ་མ	Aloka, lamp goddess, the female bodhisattva Aloka	snang gsal ma
སྣང་གསལ་མར་མེ	illuminating lamp	snang gsal mar me
སྣང་གསལ་འོད་འབུམ	Tibetan drama	snang gsal 'od 'bum
སྣང་གསུམ	3 perceptions (impure, pure, and neutral), SA las snang, nyams snang, dag snang	snang gsum
བླིསསཕུ༹ལ་སེམི	appearance of speech of the pure form realm {ngag phyed snang ba gzugs khams}; and formless realm which is the intangible appearance of mind {sems kyi snang ba ma myong ba gzugs med khams} GD snang...	blissful semi
སྣང་གསུམ་འཕོ་བ་བག་ཆགས	habit inherent in the three phenomena of body, speech & mind	snang gsum 'pho ba bag chags
སྣང་གསུམ་འཕོ་བའི་བག་ཆགས	the habitual pattern of passing three manifestations/experiences	snang gsum 'pho ba'i bag chags
སྣངས་ཆེན	[arch] have much respect/ regard for, pay great attention, important	snangs chen
སྣད་ཀྱིས་དོགས་ཏེ	afraid of hurting him	snad kyis dogs te
སྣད་འགྲོ	become injured	snad 'gro
སྣད་པ	wound, hurt, stab, to butt	snad pa
སྣད་ཡར	wounded, damaged, skyon zhugs pa	snad yar
སྣབ	(not in Das)	snab
སྣབ་སྟུག	nose mucus	snab stug
སྣབས	mucus, snivel, snot 1589	snabs
སྣབས་རྟུག	nasal mucus, snivel, snot	snabs rtug
སྣབས་སྟུག	nose mucus	snabs stug
སྣབས་ལྡུག་པ	snot	snabs ldug pa
སྣབས་ཕྱི	handkerchief	snabs phyi
སྣབས་ཕྱི་བ	wipe one's nose	snabs phyi ba
སྣབས་ཕྱིས	handkerchief; handkerchief, snot rag	snabs phyis
སྣབས་འཕྱི	handkerchief	snabs 'phyi
སྣབས་འཕྱིས	handkerchief, hanky	snabs 'phyis
སྣབས་འབྱིད	wiping snot; ex {ngu zhing snabs 'byid} wiping away tears	snabs 'byid
སྣབས་ལུག་པ	snot	snabs lug pa
སྣབས་ལུད	spit and [nose] mucus; snot	snabs lud
སྣབས་ལུད་ཅན	snotty	snabs lud can
སྣམ	1) thick wool garment cloth/serge; 2) platform; 3) streamer; 4) long piece of cloth; 5) trousers	snam
སྣམ་ཀྱི་རེ་གད	1 of 37 sacred bon places	snam kyi re gad
སྣམ་དཀར	white or woollen blanket	snam dkar
སྣམ་དཀྲིས	btags zin pa'i woolen cloth wrapping stick	snam dkris
སྣམ་ཁྱད	sngar bod lugs snam rtsis kyi khyad par zhig	snam khyad
སྣམ་གོས	woolen clothing	snam gos
སྣམ་གྱི་རེ་ག	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	snam gyi re ga
སྣམ་སྟོད	woolen cloth upper garment	snam stod
སྣམ་ཐེར	very thick serge resembling blanket	snam ther
སྣམ་འཐག་པ	wool cloth weaver	snam 'thag pa
སྣམ་དོར	breeches made of thick serge cloth	snam dor
སྣམ་པ	dar gos snam ras sogs kyi gling ngam zheng	snam pa
སྣམ་ཕྱི	privy, latrine	snam phyi
སྣམ་ཕྱིང	outhouse	snam phying
སྣམ་ཕྱིས	outhouse, bathroom. toilet	snam phyis
སྣམ་ཕྱོགས	whole bodily person of deity or lama, sides of deity or lama	snam phyogs
སྣམ་ཕྲག	breast pocket	snam phrag
སྣམ་ཕྲན	bhikshu garment bye brag pa'i snam pa'am gling	snam phran
སྣམ་ཕྲུག	woollen cloth	snam phrug
སྣམ་ཕྲུགས	coarse/ rough woolen cloth	snam phrugs
སྣམ་བུ	rolls of woolen cloth	snam bu
སྣམ་བུ་དཀར་པོ	white cotton cloth	snam bu dkar po
སྣམ་བུ་རྐྱ་ཡ་མ	rgyu spun phra mos btags pa'i thin woolen cloth	snam bu rkya ya ma
སྣམ་བུ་བཏིང་བ	a warp on a loom	snam bu bting ba
སྣམ་བུ་ཐིག་མ	on woolen cloth ku ru kha'i thig khra brgyab pa	snam bu thig ma
སྣམ་བུ་འཐག་པ	weave woolen cloth	snam bu 'thag pa
སྣམ་བུ་འཐུག་པོ	kind of thick blanket	snam bu 'thug po
སྣམ་བུ་སྤུ་ཅན	woolen cloth w hairs not cut	snam bu spu can
སྣམ་བུ་བྱ་བའི་བཟོ	manufacturing woollens	snam bu bya ba'i bzo
སྣམ་བུ་བྱིང་མ	middle quality wool serge w hairs not cut	snam bu bying ma
སྣམ་བུ་ཚོས་ལ་བཅུག་པ་ལྟར	like dye soaking into wool	snam bu tshos la bcug pa ltar
སྣམ་བྲག	bosom, breast pocket	snam brag
སྣམ་བྲས	bosom	snam bras
སྣམ་འབྱར	pair, couple, aquatic plant trapa bispinosa	snam 'byar
སྣམ་སྦྱར	SK sanghatiya, more elaborate "shirt" worn only by bhikshus, monk's robe [Gold]	snam sbyar
སྣམ་སྦྱར་གྱི་གྲྭ་རྟགས་བཞི	CHN	snam sbyar gyi grwa rtags bzhi
སྣམ་འཛར	wool cloth's sne 'dzar	snam 'dzar
སྣམ་ཞེང	width of woolen cloth	snam zheng
སྣམ་གཞོགས	nye 'gram mam rgyab	snam gzhogs
སྣམ་ཟུངས	[arch] 1) chief of women; 2) mistress, owner (female	snam zungs
སྣམ་ཡུག	whole piece or roll of woollen cloth	snam yug
སྣམ་རས	woolen and cotton cloth	snam ras
སྣམ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	spin and weave	snam las byed pa
སྣམ་ལོགས	[arch] 1) neighborhood; 2) corner, back	snam logs
སྣའི	nose [gd]	sna'i
སྣའི་ཀ་བ	nasal septum/ cartilage	sna'i ka ba
སྣའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense field of the nose, the nose [sense] factor	sna'i skye mched
སྣའི་ཁམས	nose ayatana	sna'i khams
སྣའི་ཁུང་བུ	nostril	sna'i khung bu
སྣའི་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང	sna'i rus srab phrum phrum	sna'i khrung khrung
སྣའི་ཅག་ཀྲུམ	bridge of the nose	sna'i cag krum
སྣའི་དྲི་མ	dirt/ snot in the nose	sna'i dri ma
སྣའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	nose consciousness, olfactory consciousness; cognition of smell	sna'i rnam par shes pa
སྣའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	nose consciousness dhatu	sna'i rnam par shes pa'i khams
སྣའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	{sna'i rnam par shes pa} olfactory consciousness	sna'i rnam shes
སྣའི་དབང་མངོན	direct sense perception of smell	sna'i dbang mngon
སྣའི་དབང་པོ	nose/ smell faculty	sna'i dbang po
སྣའི་དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན	material smell sense organ	sna'i dbang po gzugs can
སྣར	nose-band, pocket-handkerchief,	snar
གུཨིདེ	rope, stretch	guide
སྣར་ཐང	Narthang / Edition - Earliest manuscript edition of the Tibetan Canon, compiled in thirteenth century; different from the later printed edition	snar thang
སྣར་ཐང་དགོན་པ	{snar thang monastery	snar thang dgon pa
སྣར་ཐང་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	snar thang monastery	snar thang gtsug lag khang
སྣར་ལྡུད་པའི་སྤྱད	cattle's snar sman administering instrument	snar ldud pa'i spyad
སྣར་པོ	a white or light red color	snar po
སྣར་ཕོག་པ	hit an essential point, get to the heart of the matter, get him where he lives, punch in the nose	snar phog pa
སྣར་བ	{snar ba, bsnar ba, bsnar ba, snor} trans. v	snar ba
སྣར་མ	lunar mansions, snar ma	snar ma
སྣར་མ་སྐྱེས	balarama, planet mercury	snar ma skyes
སྣར་མའི་བདག་པོ	moon	snar ma'i bdag po
སྣར་མོ	long, lengthwise	snar mo
སྣར་ཙམ	a few, some	snar tsam
སྣལ་རྙིང	spindle	snal rnying
སྣལ་འཕར	spindle	snal 'phar
སྣལ་མ	woolen thread, yarn, warp, thread, silk thread, knitting	snal ma
སྣལ་མ་བསྟོམ	cut threads	snal ma bstom
སྣལ་མ་ཕྲ་བའི་འཁོར་ཁང	spinning/ textile shop	snal ma phra ba'i 'khor khang
སྣལ་མ་ཕྲ་མ	fine thread/ yarn, textiles	snal ma phra ma
སྣལ་མའི་བཟོ་ཁང	textile plant	snal ma'i bzo khang
སྣས	(not in Das)	snas
སྣས་འཁོར	a part of a [mechanical?] loom	snas 'khor
སྣིད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	vessel like world, the universal vessel, the environment [of the world]	snid kyi 'jig rten
སྣུད	imp. of {snud pa}	snud
སྣུད་པ	{snud pa, bsnud pa, bsnud pa, snud} trans. v	snud pa
སྣུན	1) to stick in, to prick; imp. of {snun pa}	snun
སྣུན་པ	to prick, to stick or prick into, to suckle; {snun pa, bsnun pa, bsnun pa, snun} trans. v	snun pa
སྣུབ	destroy, extinguish, abolish, annihilate, sink [ships]	snub
སྣུབ་བརྡུང་བའི་རོ་ཐོ	remnant of mustard when oil has been extracted	snub brdung ba'i ro tho
སྣུབ་པ	to subside/ sink/ be lowered/ fall/ falter; isc. to disappear/ fade from view; to be eclipsed	snub pa
སྣུབས	one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} 28 Nakshatras gods of the constellations; imp. of {snub pa}	snubs
སྣུབས་གཉའ་ཏོ་རེ་ཙུག་ལོ	son of king to re srong btsan	snubs gnya' to re tsug lo
སྣུབས་མཚོ་གླིང་དགུའི་བླ་དོ	place in yam dok	snubs mtsho gling dgu'i bla do
སྣུབས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ	shes, 832-942, author of bsam gtan mig sgron	snubs sangs rgyas ye
སྣུམ	1) oil [of sesame etc.; 2) petroleum, gasoline; 3) [quite] glossy, shiny	snum
སྣུམ་ཀོང	bowl for burning oil	snum kong
སྣུམ་དཀྱུས་མ	low quality/ inferior oil	snum dkyus ma
སྣུམ་བཀྲག	shiny, glossy	snum bkrag
སྣུམ་རྐྱལ	oil container rkyal pa	snum rkyal
སྣུམ་སྐུད་པ	be smeared with oil	snum skud pa
སྣུམ་ཁུར	cake cooked in oil, cakes or pastry fried in oil or butter	snum khur
སྣུམ་ཁུལ	oil field	snum khul
སྣུམ་ཁྲོན	oil well	snum khron
སྣུམ་འཁུར	fried pastry	snum 'khur
སྣུམ་འཁོར	car	snum 'khor
སྣུམ་འཁོར་འཁྲག	truck	snum 'khor 'khrag
སྣུམ་འཁོར་འཁྲག་སི	taxi snum 'khor gyi 'ded g.yog pa - driver, chauffeur	snum 'khor 'khrag si
སྣུམ་འཁོར་འཇོག་ཁང་ངམ་བཟོ་ས	garage	snum 'khor 'jog khang ngam bzo sa
སྣུམ་འཁོར་གཏོང་བ	drive	snum 'khor gtong ba
སྣུམ་འཁོར་ཚོགས་འདུ	Motor Vehicle Board/ Bureau snum 'khor tshogs 'du'i zhib dpyad pa Motor Vehicle Board/ Bureau Inspector	snum 'khor tshogs 'du
སྣུམ་འཁོར་ལམ་ཆེན	vehicle road, highway	snum 'khor lam chen
སྣུམ་འཁྱེར་གྲུ་གཟིངས	oil tanker	snum 'khyer gru gzings
སྣུམ་རྒྱུ	oil making materials, grains etc	snum rgyu
སྣུམ་རྒྱུའི་ལོ་ཏོག	oil making crops	snum rgyu'i lo tog
སྣུམ་བསྒོས་པ	stain, anoint, infect with disease	snum bsgos pa
སྣུམ་བརྔོས	snum khol ma'i nang bsregs pa	snum brngos
སྣུམ་ཅན	oily, greasy	snum can
སྣུམ་ཅན་ཤིང	a medicinal plant	snum can shing
སྣུམ་བཅས	fatty, oily, greasy	snum bcas
སྣུམ་བཅས་སྣང་པ	to look greasy	snum bcas snang pa
སྣུམ་ཆིལ་ལི་བ	oily shine	snum chil li ba
སྣུམ་ཆོས་མ	fried food	snum chos ma
སྣུམ་འཆོས	defecating vomiting etc. las lnga'i sngon treatment to eliminate rlung etc oil of grain, butter etc rub on the body &, in its holes	snum 'chos
སྣུམ་རྗེན་པ	uncooked/ unrefined oil, crude oil	snum rjen pa
སྣུམ་སྙེགས	asphalt, tar	snum snyegs
སྣུམ་སྙེགས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོམ་ལམ	asphalt street	snum snyegs kyi khrom lam
སྣུམ་གཏེར	oil well/ field	snum gter
སྣུམ་གཏེར་ཆགས་ཚུལ	oil bearing layer	snum gter chags tshul
སྣུམ་ཐབ	kerosene cook stove	snum thab
སྣུམ་དམ	class or clay container for oil	snum dam
སྣུམ་དྲི	smell of oil	snum dri
སྣུམ་གདོང	oil pipe[line]	snum gdong
སྣུམ་མདངས	shine of oil	snum mdangs
སྣུམ་མདངས་འཚེར་རེ་བ	oily shine	snum mdangs 'tsher re ba
སྣུམ་མདོང	oil pipe[line]	snum mdong
སྣུམ་འདོན་བཟོ་པ	oil worker	snum 'don bzo pa
སྣུམ་འདྲེན་ལྕགས་གདོང	oil pipe[line]	snum 'dren lcags gdong
སྣུམ་འདྲེན་ལྕགས་མདོང	oil pipe[line]	snum 'dren lcags mdong
སྣུམ་རྡོ་སྒྲུག་པ	formerly in Tibet when a law case couldn't be decided in a snum khol put white and black stones gyod ya gnyis la sgrug tu 'jug pa	snum rdo sgrug pa
སྣུམ་ལྡན	deep [block ink,] shining. Syn {snum can}	snum ldan
སྣུམ་ལྡན་ཤོག་ཕྱིང	linoleum	snum ldan shog phying
སྣུམ་ནག	vegetable oil	snum nag
སྣུམ་ནང་འཚོད་པ	fry	snum nang 'tshod pa
སྣུམ་གནག་ལྡན་པའི་སྣག་ཚ	deep black ink	snum gnag ldan pa'i snag tsha
སྣུམ་སྣག	oily printer's ink	snum snag
སྣུམ་པ	fat, grease, any greasy substance, to grease, to smear, deep color, oily, greasy, fatty	snum pa
སྣུམ་པར	print from oily ink, mimeograph	snum par
སྣུམ་པར་རྒྱག	print from oily ink, mimeograph	snum par rgyag
སྣུམ་པར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	mimeograph machine	snum par 'phrul 'khor
སྣུམ་པར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	mimeograph machine	snum par 'phrul chas
སྣུམ་པོ	smooth, SA snum pa, sleek	snum po
སྣུམ་བག	oily, greasy	snum bag
སྣུམ་བག་ཅན	greasy, oily 1591	snum bag can
སྣུམ་བག་ཆགས་པ	a little oil on it	snum bag chags pa
སྣུམ་བག་འཚེར་བ	very oily, greasy, shiny, glossy	snum bag 'tsher ba
སྣུམ་བན	oil container kyi khog ma	snum ban
སྣུམ་བྱུག	pour melted butter etc into the soles of the hands and feet and rlung gsang rnams to benefit rlung nad shig	snum byug
སྣུམ་བྱུག་པ	lubricate	snum byug pa
སྣུམ་བྱུགས་པ	be smeared with oil	snum byugs pa
སྣུམ་བྲིས	oil painting	snum bris
སྣུམ་བྲིས་རི་མོ	oil painting	snum bris ri mo
སྣུམ་སྦུག	oil pipe[line]	snum sbug
སྣུམ་སྦྱང	oil refining	snum sbyang
སྣུམ་སྦྱང་བཟོ་གྲྭ	oil refinery	snum sbyang bzo grwa
སྣུམ་ཙི་ཙི	oily, shiny	snum tsi tsi
སྣུམ་བཙིར	press/ extract oil from oil grain	snum btsir
སྣུམ་བཙིར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	oil press [machine for pressing oil from grain]	snum btsir 'phrul 'khor
སྣུམ་རྩི	oily substance	snum rtsi
སྣུམ་ཚགས	oil pressing/ extracting equipment	snum tshags
སྣུམ་ཚིལ	[oil &] fat	snum tshil
སྣུམ་ཚིལ་ལི་བ	oily, greasy	snum tshil li ba
སྣུམ་ཚོན	paint applied in opaque coats, yielding rich colors	snum tshon
སྣུམ་ཚོན་རི་མོ	oil painting	snum tshon ri mo
སྣུམ་མཛུབ་མོ་ཙམ	a small morsel of fat	snum mdzub mo tsam
སྣུམ་མཛོད	oil storage tank	snum mdzod
སྣུམ་འཛད	oil/ gas consumption [car]	snum 'dzad
སྣུམ་ཞག	grease, fat	snum zhag
སྣུམ་ཞག་དོད་པོ	snum gyi mdog bkrag mngon gsal che ba, Khang pa snum zhag dod po, Yul lung snum zhag dod po, Sa zhing snum zhag dod po, Zhal ras snum zhag dod po	snum zhag dod po
སྣུམ་ཞིང	oil field	snum zhing
སྣུམ་ཞིང་འཇམ་པ	shiny and soft	snum zhing 'jam pa
སྣུམ་ཞུ	oil lamp	snum zhu
སྣུམ་བཞུ	oil lamp	snum bzhu
སྣུམ་ཟ	oil-burner, lamp, light	snum za
སྣུམ་ཟད་མར་མེ	lamp w the oil exhausted, death	snum zad mar me
སྣུམ་ཟད་མར་མེ་འདྲ	like a lamp running out of oil	snum zad mar me 'dra
སྣུམ་ཟན་མ	food zhim mngar, tshon po za ba'i person	snum zan ma
སྣུམ་རིས	oil painting	snum ris
སྣུམ་ལ་དགའ	lamp, light	snum la dga'
སྣུམ་ལ་རྟེན་པ	keep to the fat, eat much fat	snum la rten pa
སྣུམ་ཤད་ཆེ་ཆུང	oil reserve/ content	snum shad che chung
སྣུམ་སོགས་གཙིར	press out oil	snum sogs gtsir
སྣུམས	glossy, oil	snums
སྣུར	imp. of {snur ba}	snur
སྣུར་སྐྱོགས	stirring stick for mixing paints	snur skyogs
སྣུར་བ	(tha dad pa bsnur ba, bsnur ba, snur,, 1) pull, lead; 2) former times or a short distance/ time gtong ba; 3) grind/ divide finely, soften/ make flexible by cooking/boiling; 4) put or move out of it...	snur ba
སྣེ	end, tip, extremity	sne
སྣེ་སྐོག	chaff of barley or wheat	sne skog
སྣེ་ཁ	kind, nose, ends, kind, type, part	sne kha
སྣེ་ཁྲིད	leading, heading	sne khrid
སྣེ་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	leading force	sne khrid kyi nus pa
སྣེ་ཁྲིད་པ	leader leading, heading	sne khrid pa
སྣེ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	lead, head	sne khrid byed
སྣེ་འཁོར	warp, get twisted	sne 'khor
སྣེ་འཁྲིད	leading, heading	sne 'khrid
སྣེ་འཁྲིད་པ	leader leading, heading	sne 'khrid pa
སྣེ་གྲངས	# of kinds/ items/ titles	sne grangs
སྣེ་མགྲོན	1) [action of] traveler's welcome[r]; 2) Tibetan govt srid skyong [government chiefs] gi mgron gnyer gtso bo [inviter of guests, chamberlain]	sne mgron
སྣེ་འགུགས	hitching/ tethering rope la brgyus pa'i short rope	sne 'gugs
སྣེ་རྒོད	herb sne'u rgod	sne rgod
སྣེ་རྒྱན	ornament at the upper/ lower end	sne rgyan
སྣེ་གཅིག	a single bit/ kind, some, 1 kind/ unit, individual	sne gcig
སྣེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་འཛོམས་པ	converge	sne gcig tu 'dzoms pa
སྣེ་གཉིས	the two ends/ poles	sne gnyis
སྣེ་བཏགས	tag	sne btags
སྣེ་སྟོན	indicate, remind	sne ston
སྣེ་ཐིག་གི་རྒྱ	dpe cha'i shog ldeb so so'i steng 'og gyas gyon gyi mtha' las mi 'chol bar byed pa'i rtags	sne thig gi rgya
སྣེ་མཐུད	cloth kyi yas mutually joined end to end, join, link, coordinate	sne mthud
སྣེ་གདོང	name of a place in southern Tibet	sne gdong
སྣེ་གདོང་རྩེ	town	sne gdong rtse
སྣེ་གདོང་རྫོང	{sne gdong rdzong}	sne gdong rdzong
སྣེ་འདི་བྱས་གཅིག	act only in this way, ends	sne 'di byas gcig
སྣེ་འདོམས	many kinds of things combined	sne 'doms
སྣེ་འདྲེན་པ	beginner/ leader of a task	sne 'dren pa
སྣེ་པོ	1 in part of the body skyon shor ba	sne po
སྣེ་མ	extremity, SA sne	sne ma
སྣེ་མང	too many ideas, many kinds	sne mang
སྣེ་མང་འདྲེས་འཛིང	1) tassel etc of many combined cords; 2) combine many jobs/ kinds into 1, complicated	sne mang 'dres 'dzing
སྣེ་མང་འདྲེས་འཛིངས	1) tassel etc of many combined cords; 2) combine many jobs/ kinds into 1, complicated	sne mang 'dres 'dzings
སྣེ་མང་པོ	of all kinds of	sne mang po
སྣེ་མང་ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས	combine many jobs/ kinds/ things into 1	sne mang phyogs bsdus
སྣེ་མང་ལ་རྙོག་འཛིང	1) tassel etc of many combined cords; 2) combine many jobs/ kinds into 1, complicated	sne mang la rnyog 'dzing
སྣེ་མང་ལ་རྙོག་འཛིངས	1) tassel etc of many combined cords; 2) combine many jobs/ kinds/ things into 1, complicated	sne mang la rnyog 'dzings
སྣེ་མོ	1) beginning, end, tip; 2) corner, cul de sac	sne mo
སྣེ་མོ་བ	leader/ beginner of a job	sne mo ba
སྣེ་མོ་ལས་འཛིན་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	king of T's lung gis mtha' dbus yul gru so so'i sne mor bskos pa'i workers's work kyi khrims, 1 of the zhal lce bcu drug	sne mo las 'dzin gyi zhal lce
སྣེ་མོར	fringed with	sne mor
སྣེ་ཚར	shred	sne tshar
སྣེ་མཚམས	ends	sne mtshams
སྣེ་འཛར	fringe	sne 'dzar
སྣེ་འཛིན	1) work leader; 2) beginning of work/ job	sne 'dzin
སྣེ་འཛོམ	fragrant plant burnt as incense	sne 'dzom
སྣེ་འཛོམས	assembly of many kinds of things	sne 'dzoms
སྣེ་ཟིན	truly	sne zin
སྣེ་ཟིན་པ	to begin	sne zin pa
སྣེ་ཟུག་པ	end, tail/ edge, tip	sne zug pa
སྣེ་ཟུར	end, zur mtha'a	sne zur
སྣེ་ཟུར་བདར་བ	chip	sne zur bdar ba
སྣེ་ཟུར་ཟང་ཟིང	tassel	sne zur zang zing
སྣེ་ལེན	reception, attention to guests, hospitality, reception given to guests, hospitality	sne len
སྣེ་ལེན་ཁང	building where guests are received/ entertained, reception room/ hall/ house 1592	sne len khang
སྣེ་ལེན་དགའ་ཚོགས	reception for people	sne len dga' tshogs
སྣེ་ལེན་དགའ་ཚོགས་བསྡུས	give a reception for people	sne len dga' tshogs bsdus
སྣེ་ལེན་འདུ་ཚོགས	reception for people	sne len 'du tshogs
སྣེ་ལེན་འདུ་ཚོགས་བསྡུས	give a reception for people	sne len 'du tshogs bsdus
སྣེ་ལེན་པ	1) welcome travellers; 2) person who receives/ entertains guests	sne len pa
སྣེ་ལེན་སྤྲོ་ཚོགས	reception for people	sne len spro tshogs
སྣེ་ལེན་སྤྲོ་ཚོགས་བསྡུས	give a reception for people	sne len spro tshogs bsdus
སྣེ་ལེན་བྱེད	receive people, give a reception, entertain	sne len byed
སྣེ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	entertain, give a reception	sne len byed pa
སྣེ་ལེན་ཚོགས་འདུ	reception for people	sne len tshogs 'du
སྣེ་ལེན་ཚོགས་འདུ་བསྡུས	give a reception for people	sne len tshogs 'du bsdus
སྣེ་ལེན་ཞུ	MG: (h) to receive (people), to give a reception. Syn. sne len gsol ston bshams. [mss]	sne len zhu
སྣེ་ལེན་ཞུ་བ	welcome	sne len zhu ba
སྣེ་ལེན་ཞུས་པ	mgron por ja chang bshams nas sne len byed	sne len zhus pa
སྣེ་ལེན་ས་ཚུགས	reception center	sne len sa tshugs
སྣེ་ཤན	guide, host, liaison person	sne shan
སྣེ་ཤན་པ	sku mgron la phyi nang bar gyi rgyus yod byed mkhan, a guide	sne shan pa
སྣེ་ཤན་བྱེད	to serve as guide, to be liaison person	sne shan byed
སྣེ་ཤམ	pendent	sne sham
སྣེ་ཤོད	village in khams	sne shod
སྣེ་སེལ	small, nominal, few, little	sne sel
སྣེ་སེལ་ཙམ་དུ་མཆིས	am in the due discharge of my duties	sne sel tsam du mchis
སྣེག་མང་པོ	sundry	sneg mang po
སྣེད་པོ་བཅས	in part of the body skyon shor ba	sned po bcas
སྣེམ	to shake, to move	snem
སྣེམ་པ	shake, cause to move slightly	snem pa
སྣེམ་བྱའི་ས་གཞི	quagmire, bog, siberian tundra	snem bya'i sa gzhi
སྣེམས	snem pa!	snems
སྣེའུ	1) sne'u; 2) sne'u med herb	sne'u
སྣེའུ་གྱུང	herb sne'u gyung	sne'u gyung
སྣེའུ་གླིང་ཁ	grove near lhasa	sne'u gling kha
སྣེའུ་རྒོད	herb sne'u rgod	sne'u rgod
སྣེའུ་སྔོན	blue/ green grass/ herb	sne'u sngon
སྣེའུ་སྟན	child, boy	sne'u stan
སྣེའུ་གདོང	sne gdong	sne'u gdong
སྣེའུ་གདོང་རྩེ་ཚོག་པ	Neudong Tse Tsokpa; A Sakya monastery at the foot of Neudong Dzong. Founded by the Kasmiri Pandita Sakyashri (1145-1243)	sne'u gdong rtse tshog pa
སྣེའུ་གདོང་རྫོང	Neudong Dzong. The site of the palace from which the Phagmodrupa family ruled Tibet during the 14th and 15th centuries	sne'u gdong rdzong
སྣེའུ་འབྲས	{'bras so ba} unhusked rice	sne'u 'bras
སྣེའུ་ཚོད	sngo tshod	sne'u tshod
སྣེའུ་རྫོང	small fort opposite 'bras spungs	sne'u rdzong
སྣེར	sne+dat.-loc	sner
སྣེར་སླེབས	officials who succeed each other by gradual promotion	sner slebs
སྣེལ	(not in Das)	snel
སྣོ	(tha dad pa bsnos pa, bsno ba, snos,, reduce to small pieces, crumble	sno
སྣོ་བ	(tha dad pa bsnos pa, bsno ba, snos,, reduce to small pieces, crumble	sno ba
སྣོག་པ	{snog pa, bsnogs pa, bsnog pa, snogs} trans. v	snog pa
སྣོག་པོ	[arch] 1) phon che ba'am shong che ba; 2) Bcud che ba	snog po
སྣོག་ཟན	rnog zan	snog zan
སྣོགས	snog pa!	snogs
སྣོང	guilt	snong
སྣོང་ཅན	guilty snong stong zung 'jug 'bu ma chen po the great middle way of the unity of appearance and emptiness	snong can
སྣོང་མོ་ནས་ཀྱི་སྦྲན་མ	unripened green barley grains that are bluish green in color	snong mo nas kyi sbran ma
སྣོད	candidate/ (potential) recipient; container/ vessel; isc. repository	snod
སྣོད་ཀོང་ཀོང	snod spyad mthil sbug sbug	snod kong kong
སྣོད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་གསུམ	the three faulty vessels [chos nyan pa po slob ma'i skyon gsum ste, 1 rna ba mi gtod kha sbub lta bu'i skyon upturned vessel, yid la mi 'dzin zhabs rdol [leaky] lta bu'i skyon, nyon mongs dang 'dre...	snod kyi skyon gsum
སྣོད་ཀྱི་ཁྱེད་པ	small pot	snod kyi khyed pa
སྣོད་ཀྱི་མཁྲིས་སྐྲན	essence of undigested food by falling into the snod mkhris kyi gnas de la mkhris pa'i rtsi chags te 'dril bar gyur pa zhig	snod kyi mkhris skran
སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the 'vessel-like world'	snod kyi 'jig rten
སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་ཚན་རིག	natural science	snod kyi 'jig rten pa'i tshan rig
སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་འརྟེན	vessel like world, the universal vessel, def. {sems can rnams gnas pa'i snod yin pa}	snod kyi 'jig 'rten
སྣོད་ཀྱི་སྟེང	upper part of a vessel, cover, lid	snod kyi steng
སྣོད་བཀང་བ	a vessel filled up	snod bkang ba
སྣོད་སྐྱོམ་པ	shake a vessel	snod skyom pa
སྣོད་ཁ	mouth of a vessel	snod kha
སྣོད་ཁ་སྦུབས་པའི	an upside-down pot	snod kha sbubs pa'i
སྣོད་མཁྲིས	gall bladder	snod mkhris
སྣོད་གུ་གྱུར་པ	suitable vessel	snod gu gyur pa
སྣོད་རྒྱོང་བ	to fill up	snod rgyong ba
སྣོད་བརྒྱང་བ	to set out a vessel	snod brgyang ba
སྣོད་ངན	bad vessel, unsuitable recipient	snod ngan
སྣོད་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one vessel 1593	snod gcig tu
སྣོད་བཅུད	environment and inhabitants	snod bcud
སྣོད་བཅུད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of vessel and contents	snod bcud kyi 'jig rten
སྣོད་བཅུད་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཁོར་ལོར་བལྟ	perceive ... as the mandala circle	snod bcud dkyil 'khor 'khor lor blta
སྣོད་བཅུད་ཐམས་ཅད	animate and inanimate universe	snod bcud thams cad
སྣོད་བཅུད་སྣང	vision of the universe and its beings	snod bcud snang
སྣོད་བཅུད་བྱེ་བྲག་ཐ་དད	the various vessels and their separate contents	snod bcud bye brag tha dad
སྣོད་བཅུད་བྱེད་པ་པོ	creator of the world and beings	snod bcud byed pa po
སྣོད་བཅུད་སྨིན	the universe and its beings ripen	snod bcud smin
སྣོད་བཅུད་ཚུལ་སྡན	genuine -- and -	snod bcud tshul sdan
སྣོད་བཅུད་རང་ལུས་བཅས	the world and its inhabitants along with your body	snod bcud rang lus bcas
སྣོད་ཆག་པ	broken vessel	snod chag pa
སྣོད་ཆགས་པའི་འོག་བཞི	CHN	snod chags pa'i 'og bzhi
སྣོད་ཆས	containers, pots, pans	snod chas
སྣོད་ཆེན	road, bathing place	snod chen
སྣོད་ཆེན་པོ	cauldron	snod chen po
སྣོད་བཆ	vags ???	snod bcha
སྣོད་མཆོག	excellent vessel	snod mchog
སྣོད་སྟོང་པ	empty vessel	snod stong pa
སྣོད་ཐེར་ཐེར	snod spyad kha gyer gyer sder ma lta bu	snod ther ther
སྣོད་དག་པ	purity of the outer world	snod dag pa
སྣོད་དང་སྐལ་བར་ལྡན་པ	fortunate disciples who were fit vessels for the teaching	snod dang skal bar ldan pa
སྣོད་དང་བཅུད	1) the external vessel/ place the world and its contents Sbs, environment/ world and inhabitants, the world and beings, the world and beings; 2) vessel/ container/ structure and contents, container...	snod dang bcud
སྣོད་དང་ལྡན་པ	a worthy vessel	snod dang ldan pa
སྣོད་དུ་མ་གྱུར	{rab byung gi sdom pa'i snod du ma gyur} does not meet the requirements laid down for taking the monastic vows	snod du ma gyur
སྣོད་དུ་མ་གྱུར་པ	do not meet the requirements {so thar gyi sdom pa mtshan nyid pa'i snod du ma gyur pa} do not meet the requirements laid down for taking the pratimoksha vows	snod du ma gyur pa
སྣོད་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	(to be a(n)) unsuitable recipient	snod du mi rung ba
སྣོད་དུ་བཙུད	put into a vessel	snod du btsud
སྣོད་དུ་བརྫངས	poured into a vessel	snod du brdzangs
སྣོད་དུ་ཟླུགས་པ	pour into a pot or vessel	snod du zlugs pa
སྣོད་དུ་རུང་བ	(to be a(n)) suitable recipient	snod du rung ba
སྣོད་དུ་ལྷུང་བ	in any of the nad snod drug po rim bzhin zhugs pa'i don, 'jug sgo drug gi nang tshan	snod du lhung ba
སྣོད་དྲུག	six hollow organs	snod drug
སྣོད་ལྡན	open/ worthy/ suitable vessel	snod ldan
སྣོད་ལྡན་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན་ཆེད་ཕྱིར	for the benefit of qualified beings	snod ldan 'gro ba'i don ched phyir
སྣོད་ལྡན་སློབ་མ	disciple eager to be instructed	snod ldan slob ma
སྣོད་བརྡབ	puts one vessel in or on another	snod brdab
སྣོད་གནད	snod kyi gnad snying ste pho ba	snod gnad
སྣོད་པ	worldly environment, world	snod pa
སྣོད་པོ་ཆེ	jug	snod po che
སྣོད་སྤྱད	containers, pots, pans	snod spyad
སྣོད་སྤྱད་བཀོལ་བ	boiling vessel. Syn {bkol ba}	snod spyad bkol ba
སྣོད་མ	circular, coiling	snod ma
སྣོད་མ་ཡིན	insusceptible of religion	snod ma yin
སྣོད་མ་ཡིན་པ	students who are not worthy vessels	snod ma yin pa
སྣོད་མི་བསྐྱམས	vessel has not dried, vessel has not dried	snod mi bskyams
སྣོད་མིན	unsuitable recipient	snod min
སྣོད་མེད	an unworthy recipient (for teachings)	snod med
སྣོད་ཚད	pho ba sogs nang gi snod drug la phog pa'i tshad pa	snod tshad
སྣོད་ཞབས	bottom of a container	snod zhabs
སྣོད་ཞབས་རྡོལ	x{snod zhabs rdol du bcud ci tsam blugs kyang chags rgyu med pa dang 'dra} you will be like a pot with a leak: however much liquid is poured into it, nothing can stay	snod zhabs rdol
སྣོད་བཟེད	basin, bowel	snod bzed
སྣོད་རུང	perfect vessel	snod rung
སྣོད་རུང་བ	receptacle, vessel for roasting or frying	snod rung ba
སྣོད་ལ་འབག་པ	unclean as to a vessel	snod la 'bag pa
སྣོད་ཤིང	tree called harimantha	snod shing
སྣོད་བཤལ	washing or cleansing a vessel	snod bshal
སྣོད་གསུམ	three qualities of the sense organs (rab, 'bring, mtha')	snod gsum
སྣོན	p. {bsnan} to add, augment, rest, remainder, to add, increase; imp. of {snon pa}	snon
སྣོན་ཁ	an addition/ augmentation	snon kha
སྣོན་གྲངས	addend	snon grangs
སྣོན་ཆས་བཟོ་མཁན	tinker	snon chas bzo mkhan
སྣོན་རྟགས	+ sign	snon rtags
སྣོན་ཐབས	means of adding many numbers together	snon thabs
སྣོན་པ	1 (Tha dad pa bsnan pa, bsnan pa, snon,, add collect, pile up augment, increase; 2) increase, addition	snon pa
སྣོན་པ་བརྒྱབ	add more to	snon pa brgyab
སྣོན་སྤེལ	extra, addition	snon spel
སྣོན་སྤེལ་རྒྱག	add, increase, augment	snon spel rgyag
སྣོན་སྤེལ་སྤྲོད	add, increase, augment	snon spel sprod
སྣོན་འཕེལ	extra, addition	snon 'phel
སྣོན་འཕྲི	adding and reducing, fluctuation	snon 'phri
སྣོན་འཕྲི་སྤོར་གཅོག	add and subtract and raise and lower	snon 'phri spor gcog
སྣོན་འབེལ	extra, addition	snon 'bel
སྣོན་འབེལ་སྤྲད་པ	to add, sum, total	snon 'bel sprad pa
སྣོན་མ	addition	snon ma
སྣོན་རྩིས	MG, 666: addition; va. -- rgyag, to do addition. [mss]	snon rtsis
སྣོན་རྩིས་རྒྱག	do addition	snon rtsis rgyag
སྣོན་ལ	before	snon la
སྣོན་ལམ་དབང་བསྐུར	aspiration conferred lineage	snon lam dbang bskur
སྣོན་ལུད	top dressing [fertilizer	snon lud
སྣོན་ལུད་རྒྱག	apply top dressing [fertilizer	snon lud rgyag
སྣོན་ཤུགས	pressure, compression	snon shugs
སྣོབ་ཟོག་ཅན	curious, inquisitive	snob zog can
སྣོམ	grasp, SA snom pa	snom
སྣོམ་པ	lay hold of, grasp, pick up, seize on, smell	snom pa
སྣོམ་པ་དྲི་མ	smell	snom pa dri ma
སྣོམ་བུ་པ	[arch] analyze, examine	snom bu pa
སྣོམ་བྱེད	the nose	snom byed
སྣོམས	snom pa!	snoms
སྣོར	imp. of {snor ba}; imp. of {snar ba}	snor
སྣོར་བ	(tha dad pa bsnor ba, bsnor ba, snor,, * confound, get wrong, mingle, stir/ mix [up], disturb	snor ba
སྣོར་མ	1) meadow of good grass; 2) autumn harvest straw; 3) hay	snor ma
སྣོལ	imp. of {snol ba}; to unite, join together, intertwine	snol
སྣོལ་བ	(tha dad pa bsnol ba, bsnol ba, snol,, * unite, join, put together, fit together, adjust	snol ba
སྣོལ་མ	put together, united	snol ma
སྣོས	sno ba!	snos
སྣྲུན	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	snrun
སྣྲུབས	snrubs	snrubs
སྣྲེལ་ཞི	a kind of meditative absorption similar to {thod brgal ba} sloping, oblique, confusedly, pell-mell, mediocrity ?	snrel zhi
སྣྲོན	one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} 28 nakshatras gods of the constellations	snron
སྣྲོན་གྱི་ཉ་བ	full moon of may-june	snron gyi nya ba
སྣྲོན་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	month of may-june	snron gyi zla ba
སྣྲོན་གྱིས་ཉ་བ	full moon day [15th] of the 5th month	snron gyis nya ba
སྣྲོན་ཟླ	the fifth month	snron zla
སྣྲོན་ཟླ་བ	the fifth month; Jyaishtha	snron zla ba
གརྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	nonconceptual wisdom	grnam par mi rtog pa'i ye shes
བརྣག་ནུས	patience	brnag nus
བརྣག་པ	1) will remember, take care/ be concerned about; 2) devise, contrive; 3) strive for/ after (/ [f rnog pa]	brnag pa
བརྣག་པ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	net of magic ferocity	brnag pa sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
བརྣག་པར་བཀའ་བ	difficult to keep in mind/ think above	brnag par bka' ba
བརྣག་མིན་གྱི་གཏམ	mi bzod pa'i gtam	brnag min gyi gtam
བརྣགས	See {snying la brnags} vi. to be ingrained, kept in heart	brnags
བརྣགས་པ	remember, keep in mind [p rnog pa]	brnags pa
བརྣགས་པའི་དོན	things the mind is thinking about	brnags pa'i don
བརྣང་བ	choke, stop up	brnang ba
བརྣངས	choked/ tormented	brnangs
བརྣངས་ཏེ་འཆི་བ	dying by choking	brnangs te 'chi ba
བརྣངས་པ	choked	brnangs pa
བརྣན	pressed, urged upon	brnan
བརྣན་པ	eager for, be on the alert, be attentive to	brnan pa
བརྣན་པའི་སྒྲ	word about earnestly discriminate/ identify nges gzung byed pa, eg, this is gold/ silver, gold and silver things individual earnestly distinguish and, keep las khungs rules, laws an arrangements, b...	brnan pa'i sgra
བརྣན་ཚིག	1) important earnestly expressing talk; 2) word about earnestly discriminate/ identify (/ [brnan pa'i sgra]	brnan tshig
བརྣབ	[f rnab pa]	brnab
བརྣབ་པ	ft. of {rnab pa}	brnab pa
བརྣབ་སེམས	covetice, selfishness, greedy, ravenous, envious [due to desire]	brnab sems
བརྣབ་སེམས་ཅན	a covetous person	brnab sems can
བརྣབ་སེམས་གནོད་སེམས་ལོག་ལྟ	craving, illwill, and holding wrong views; greed, harmful thoughts, and wrong views	brnab sems gnod sems log lta
བརྣབ་སེམས་སྤོང་བ	abandon covetousness	brnab sems spong ba
བརྣབ་སེམས་བྱེད་པ	covet	brnab sems byed pa
བརྣབ་སེམས་མེད་པ	non-covetousness	brnab sems med pa
བརྣབས་པ	pf. of {rnab pa}	brnabs pa
བརྣུ་བ	pull forward, SA rnur ba	brnu ba
བརྣུར་བ	pull forward, SA rnur ba	brnur ba
བརྣོག་ཆོས	precious teachings given exclusively [to someone]	brnog chos
བརྣོག་པ	alt. ft. of {rnog pa}	brnog pa
བརྣོགས་ཏེ་རྐུ་བ	steal by concealment	brnogs te rku ba
བརྣོགས་པ	alt. pf. of {rnog pa}; to hide, conceal	brnogs pa
བསྣང་བ	[p {rnang ba} be choked/ stifled/ constricted	bsnang ba
བསྣངས་པ	[arch] mind flew upward	bsnangs pa
བསྣད	wound, SA snad pa	bsnad
བསྣད་པ	wound w a weapon [f p snad pa]	bsnad pa
བསྣན	[p {snon} added, increased	bsnan
བསྣན་གྲངས	sum	bsnan grangs
བསྣན་པ	1) added, increased [p f snon pa]; 2) addition	bsnan pa
བསྣན་པའི་སྒྲ	yang yang [again and again repeated word]	bsnan pa'i sgra
བསྣན་ཚིག	adverbs	bsnan tshig
བསྣམ	grasp, SA snom pa	bsnam
བསྣམ་པ	[f {snom},,[will] smell, take, seize, grasp	bsnam pa
བསྣམ་པར་བྱ	bull, excellent	bsnam par bya
བསྣམ་ཟིན	soul, individual	bsnam zin
བསྣམས	to carry, take (h). p. of {snom} holding, wield, held, brought, holding, holds; to hold	bsnams
བསྣམས་པ	to bring	bsnams pa
བསྣར	p. of {snar}	bsnar
བསྣར་བ	stretch, SA rkyong ba, extend in length, lengthen, pull out, have in its train, drag after	bsnar ba
བསྣལ་བ	spit out, protract	bsnal ba
བསྣུངས་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indestructible	bsnungs thabs med pa
བསྣུད་པ	[f p snud pa]	bsnud pa
བསྣུན	[Notes see {pir kha bsnun} [p {snun} pierced through, pierced, prick, stick, suckle	bsnun
བསྣུན་གནད་དུ	brings 1 into the essence	bsnun gnad du
བསྣུན་གནད་དུ་པ	apply the key points	bsnun gnad du pa
བསྣུན་པ	hit him	bsnun pa
བསྣུན་པ་ཉིད་དུ་གྱུར	poke it full of holes	bsnun pa nyid du gyur
བསྣུན་ཕིར་ཁ	draw out a stroke	bsnun phir kha
བསྣུབ	destroy, do away with, SA snub pa	bsnub
བསྣུབ་པ	to subside/ sink/ be lowered/ fall/ falter; isc. to disappear/ fade from view; to be eclipsed	bsnub pa
བསྣུབས	destroy. p. of {snub}; fall, be destroyed	bsnubs
བསྣུབས་ཆེན་སངས་རྒྱས	Nupchen sangye	bsnubs chen sangs rgyas
བསྣུབས་ཆེན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས	Nubchen Sangye Yeshe	bsnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes
བསྣུབས་པ	[p {snub pa} cause to perish, suppress, abolish, abrogate, annul, destroy, annihilate	bsnubs pa
བསྣུར	push, SA snur ba, snur, dus tshod myur du btang ba	bsnur
བསྣུར་བ	ft. of {snur ba}; pf. of {snur ba}	bsnur ba
བསྣེམ	{p of {snem pa} shake, cause to move slightly	bsnem
བསྣེམ་པ	[f p? snem pa] shake, cause to move slightly	bsnem pa
བསྣེམས	SA snem, nem par bsnems	bsnems
བསྣེམས་པ	pf. of {snem pa}	bsnems pa
བསྣོ་བ	[f sno ba]	bsno ba
བསྣོག་པ	ft. of {snog pa}	bsnog pa
བསྣོགས་པ	[p snog pa]	bsnogs pa
བསྣོགས་བཤེར	inspection, search	bsnogs bsher
བསྣོན་པ	extended, added to	bsnon pa
བསྣོམ་པ	cut, shape, carve	bsnom pa
བསྣོམས	to smell/ to hold, grasp	bsnoms
བསྣོམས་པ	to smell	bsnoms pa
བསྣོར	confound, SA snor ba, SA nar nar, gong 'og bsnor	bsnor
བསྣོར་བ	[f p snor ba	bsnor ba
བསྣོར་མ	mutually upper and lower 'khrugs pa'i dngos rigs	bsnor ma
བསྣོལ	interlaced, SA snol ba, upper and lower flaps of a garment joined, to cross	bsnol
བསྣོལ་ཁ	crossed straight lines ba'i mtshams,...tal mar btang ba'i gdung mthud pa, bsnol kha med na phugs mi brtan	bsnol kha
བསྣོལ་རྒྱ	Mudra of crossed arms	bsnol rgya
བསྣོལ་རྒྱབ	contradictory	bsnol rgyab
བསྣོལ་སྟབས	crossed mudra position	bsnol stabs
བསྣོལ་བ	pf. of {snol ba}; ft. of {snol ba}	bsnol ba
བསྣོལ་མ	crossed	bsnol ma
བསྣོས	SA 'dres pa, brdzis pa	bsnos
བསྣོས་པ	to accumulate	bsnos pa
མསྣད	be injured	msnad
མསྣད་མགོ་ཡོད་པ	have hurt my head	msnad mgo yod pa
མསྣད་པ	injured	msnad pa
པ་ཀི་སི་ཏན	Pakistan	pa ki si tan
པ་ཀི་སི་ཐན	Pakistan	pa ki si than
པ་ག་ཏ	Baghdad	pa ga ta
པ་གིར	there, to there	pa gir
པ་གོར	{pa gor} [place in snyam mo district	pa gor
པ་གོར་བE་རོ་ཙ་ན	Vairochana of Pagor. One of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	pa gor bE ro tsa na
པ་ཅར	small piece of cloth worn over the privities, the end of a lower garment gathered up behind and tucked into the waistband	pa car
པུལླེད་ཨུཔ་ཨནད་ཏུཅཀེད་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཝཻསཏ	band	pulled up and tucked in the waist
པ་ཆར	[arch] 1) small piece of cloth over the privates; 2) end of lower garment pulled up and tucked in the	pa char
ཝཻསཏ	band	waist
པ་ཆེན	mahapandita, great pandit, Panchen Lama	pa chen
པ་ཆེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Panchen Lama	pa chen rin po che
པ་ཆེན་ཨེར་ཏི་ནི	Panchen erdini/ Panchen Lama	pa chen er ti ni
པ་ཉ་ཙ་ལི་ཀ	rainbow-colored, fivecolored	pa nya tsa li ka
པ་ཏ	SK 'bras, cross	pa ta
པ་ཏ་ལོ་ཏན	{pa ta lo tan} river [running EW N of Monkori	pa ta lo tan
པ་ཏ་ཧ	kind of drum	pa ta ha
པ་ཏ་ཧོར	country east of yarkand	pa ta hor
པ་ཏན	Pa an [ancient capital of Nepal	pa tan
པ་ཏའོ་ཐི	semi-conductor, transistor	pa ta'o thi
པ་ཏི	tea	pa ti
པ་ཏུ	SK learned, skilled	pa tu
པ་ཏུ་ཤ	{pa tu sha} tree	pa tu sha
པ་ཏུའི་འདབ	very useful and important medicine	pa tu'i 'dab
པ་ཏོ	{pa to} med herb/ fruit [fragrant skran dang sel, zhe rjes mngar bas yig 'byed par byed	pa to
པ་ཏོ་ལ	scorzonera austriaca willd. medicinal plant and fruit	pa to la
པ་ཏྲ	a bowl; flourishes	pa tra
པ་ཏྲུ	{pa tru} River	pa tru
པ་ཐ་ན	Patna	pa tha na
པ་ཐག	creeping plant, SA thag pa	pa thag
པ་ད	just	pa da
པ་ད་ག	as soon as	pa da ga
པ་ད་གར	as soon as, as much as, just	pa da gar
པ་དང	"and" clause connective, "as soon as" connective	pa dang
པ་དང་ཆབས་ཅིག	"together with" clause connective	pa dang chabs cig
པ་དང་སྟབས་བསྟུན	"together with" clause connective, "according to" clause connective	pa dang stabs bstun
པ་དང་བསྟུན	"together with" clause connective, "according to" clause connective pa dang phyir zhing 'byung ba dang nyams par mi 'gyur ba dang yongs su rdzogs par bya ba'i phyir 'dun pa	pa dang bstun
བསྐྱེད་དོ	strive to maintain, increase, stablize and perfect virtues already generated 9-1{rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bshi} (catva_rirddhi-pa_da_s) - four bases or miraculous power 9) {'dun pa'i ding nge 'dzin...	bskyed do
པོཝེར་ཧབི༹ང་ཐེ་ཕོ༹རྨཏིབེ༹་ཕོ༹རཅེ་རེལེཨསེད་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨོནེ	pointed cultivation of mind 1 {brtson 'grus kyi ding nge 'dzun spong ba'i 'du dang ldan pa'i rdzu 'phral gyi rkang pa - the basis of miraculous power having the formative force	power having the formative force released through one
རེལེཨསེད་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨོནེ	pointed cultivation of effort 1 {dpyod pa'i ting nge 'dzin spong ba'i 'du byed dang ldan pa'i	released through one
རྫུ་འཕྲལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the basis ofmiraculous power having the formative force released	rdzu 'phral gyi rkang pa
པ་དང་སྦྲགས	"together with" clause connective	pa dang sbrags
པ་དི་ཏ	pandit, scholar	pa di ta
པ་དེ་མ་ཐག	"as soon as" clause connective	pa de ma thag
པ་དྲ	cup, basin, bowl	pa dra
པ་འདྲ	it seems too late	pa 'dra
པ་སྡེ	1) PA class	pa sde
པ་ན	16th part of a rupee, when connective, conditional connective	pa na
པ་ན་མ	Panama	pa na ma
པ་ན་ས	jack fruit tree	pa na sa
པ་ནམ	SK water	pa nam
པ་ཎི	water	pa Ni
པ་རྣི	desmodium gangeticum	pa rni
པ་སྣ་མ	district with a fort called penam jong on the penam nyang chu	pa sna ma
མིདྭཡ་བེཏྭེཨེན་ཏཤི	lhunpo and gyang-tse	midway between tashi
པ་སྣམ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	pa snam
པ་སྣམ་རྫོང	{pa snam rdzong}	pa snam rdzong
པ་སྤ་ལི	long pepper	pa spa li
པ་ཕ	dad, father, father	pa pha
པ་བ་རེ་སྐོན	pa yag	pa ba re skon
པ་བ་སངས	Venus, Friday	pa ba sangs
པ་བེན	strip of wood, ledge, border	pa ben
པ་མ	lotus; Padmasambhava; the lotus family / aspect	pa ma
པ་མ་ཀ་ར	Padmakara, Guru Rinpoche	pa ma ka ra
པ་མ་དཀར་པོ	white lotus, pundarika; pa ma dkar po} [a great drukpa kagyu master and author]	pa ma dkar po
པ་མ་བཀོད	pa ma bkod district	pa ma bkod
པ་མ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	lotus posture	pa ma skyil krung
པ་མ་སྐྱེས	Lotus born, Guru Rinpoche	pa ma skyes
པ་མ་ཁྲག་འཐུང	Padma Heruka, "lotus blood drinker"	pa ma khrag 'thung
པ་མ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Padma/ lotus dakini	pa ma mkha' 'gro
པ་མ་གར་དབང	"lotus lord of manifestation"/dancers [one Avalokiteshvara, two Hayagriva)	pa ma gar dbang
པ་མ་ཅན	the lotus-endowed, Padmini	pa ma can
པ་མ་སྙིང་པོ	Lotus essence/ seed	pa ma snying po
པ་མ་ལྟར་གས་པ	(Hell of Splitting like a Lotus	pa ma ltar gas pa
པ་མ་ལྟར་གས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Splitting like a Lotus [Hell]	pa ma ltar gas pa chen po
པ་མ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང	Lotus skull garland, Padmasambhava	pa ma thod phreng
པ་མ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Padma Thotrengtsal, ["lotus skull-garland power", (secret name of Padmakara) -	pa ma thod phreng rtsal
པ་མ་དྲྭ་བ	Lotus Net buddha field	pa ma drwa ba
པ་མ་སྤྱན	Lotus Eye, Avalokiteshvara	pa ma spyan
པ་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	Padmakara, Padmasambhava, the "lotus- born"	pa ma 'byung gnas
པ་མ་རྩེགས་པ	Lotus Mound	pa ma rtsegs pa
པ་མ་བརྩེགས་པ	the pure land of {a'od dpag med}, {bde ba can}	pa ma brtsegs pa
པ་མ་འོད	Lotus Light, the palace of Padmasambhava on zangs mdog dpal ri	pa ma 'od
པ་མ་འོད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་བྲང	the Palace of Lotus Light, (abode of Guru Rinpoche on the summit of zangs mdog dpal ri	pa ma 'od kyi pho brang
པ་མ་ར་ག	ruby	pa ma ra ga
པ་མ་ལེ་པང	place in tibet	pa ma le pang
པ་མའི་གདན	lotus seat	pa ma'i gdan
པ་མེ་ལེ་པང	{pa me le pang} place	pa me le pang
པ་མོ	lotus	pa mo
པ་མོའི་དྲ་བ	Lotus Net buddha field	pa mo'i dra ba
པ་མོའི་སྦུབས	hollow/ sphere of a lotus, lotus bud	pa mo'i sbubs
པ་ཙམ་ན	"as soon as" clause connective	pa tsam na
པ་ཙམ་ནས	"as soon as" clause connective	pa tsam nas
པ་ཙི་ཀ	a Noijin chief	pa tsi ka
པ་ཙི་ཀ་ཆེན་པོ	a Noijin chief	pa tsi ka chen po
པ་ཙེ	1) mask; 2) leather bag for water etc.	pa tse
པ་ཚབ	tibetan district and of a resident officer of the district	pa tshab
པ་ཝ་སངས	SA pa sangs	pa wa sangs
པ་ཞི	Brazil	pa zhi
པ་གཞུང	government of Pakistan	pa gzhung
པ་ཟབ	Punjab	pa zab
པ་བཟོ་མི་འདུག	"does not seem" construction	pa bzo mi 'dug
པ་ཡག	{pa yag med. herb [ro mngar la kha, zhu rjes bsil, rtsa bas glo nad sel, glo rnag 'dren, lo mas rma gso, 'bras bus snying nad sel,... syn: skye ba rgyun gcod dang, kho yag pa, rgyal po gtsug na nor...	pa yag
པ་ཡག་པ	medicinal herb, SA smug chung	pa yag pa
པ་ཡན་ཧ་ར	payan kara mts	pa yan ha ra
པ་ཡུས་ཆིའུ	feather-ball game	pa yus chi'u
པ་ཡོད	SA ba yod	pa yod
པ་ར	two	pa ra
པ་ར་ཁ	cross D	pa ra kha
པ་ར་ཤ	sweet delicious fruit D	pa ra sha
པ་རྭ་བརྒྱ་པོ	1 of 5 great mountains of the western continent of godaniya, SA ri chen po lnga	pa rwa brgya po
པ་རམ	bowl/ cup	pa ram
པ་རི	box [cylindrical or oval] D	pa ri
པ་རི་ད	kshatriya caste D	pa ri da
པ་རི་པི་རི	unstable, mgo bde dran 'phrul	pa ri pi ri
པ་རི་པུ་རུ	flirting girl	pa ri pu ru
པ་རི་ཙི་ཏྲ	{pa ri tsi tra tree/ flower D	pa ri tsi tra
པ་རི་རྩི་ཏྲ	a tree and its flower	pa ri rtsi tra
པ་རི་ཛ་ཏི	flower of paradise	pa ri dza ti
པ་རུ	1) cooking pot; 3) sotrage vessel for tsampa chang etc rdza ban che ba zhig; 3) bowl/ cup; 4) box [cylindrical or oval])/ [= pa ram = ba ru	pa ru
པ་རུ་པ་རུ	sometimes	pa ru pa ru
པ་རུ་ཤ་ཀ	grewia aasiatica from the berries of which a cooling beverage is prepared	pa ru sha ka
པ་རེད	past complement	pa red
པ་ལ་ཀུའེ	Paraguay	pa la ku'e
པ་ལ་བདུན	CHN	pa la bdun
པ་ལ་ཤ	tree butea frondosa, its leaf	pa la sha
པ་ལ་ཤ་པུར	seaport balasore on west shore of the bay of bengal	pa la sha pur
པ་ལགས	father, dad (h)	pa lags
པ་ལས	have to, be obliged to	pa las
པ་ལི	Paris	pa li
པ་ལི་ཀྲུང་ཧྲེ	Paris Commune	pa li krung hre
པ་ལུའུ་ཅུན	8th route army	pa lu'u cun
པ་ལེ	ballet	pa le
པ་ལེ་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	ballet	pa le sgyu rtsal
པ་ལེ་སེ་ཐན	Palestine	pa le se than
པ་ལེའི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	ballet	pa le'i sgyu rtsal
པ་ལོ	skra lhas ma,...Gnag snum pa lo bregs pa	pa lo
པ་ཤ་ནི	indian gold formerly imported into tibet	pa sha ni
པ་ཤི	a teacher	pa shi
པ་ཤི་པ་ཏི་ཤྭ་ར	Hindu place of pilgramage in Nepal [= gu lang dbang phyug	pa shi pa ti shwa ra
པ་ཤུ	wild animal	pa shu
པ་ཤུ་པ་ཏི་ཤྭ་ར	sacred place in nepal much frequented by hindu pilgrims	pa shu pa ti shwa ra
པ་ཤུ་ལི་ཀ	house	pa shu li ka
པ་སང	Venus, Friday	pa sang
པ་སངས	Venus friday [srod dang tho rengs mthong thub pa'i skar chen zhig skyes khyim skar drug ste nabs so'i chu tshod thig nyin dkyil nyis brgya nyer bzhi dang bcu cha bdun, tses dkyil nyis brgya nyer br...	pa sangs
པ་སངས་སློབ་མ	asura	pa sangs slob ma
པ་སུ་ཤ་ཀ	Grewia asiatica whose berries yield a cooling beverage	pa su sha ka
པ་སུའུ་ཐུའོ་ལན	Basutoland	pa su'u thu'o lan
པ་སེ	ticket	pa se
པ་སེ་བཙོང་མཁན	ticket seller, conductor	pa se btsong mkhan
པ་བསླས	lham zon pa'i lham yu dang mthil sgrog mtshams 'tshem stangs shig	pa bslas
པ་ཧྲུ	great river flowing by madhubandha	pa hru
པ་ཨ	1/16 rupee	pa a
པག	barley dough	pag
པག་མཁན	bricklayer	pag mkhan
པག་གུ	barley dough	pag gu
པག་པ་ཅན	skinny	pag pa can
པག་པུ་མཁན	mason	pag pu mkhan
པག་ཕོར	barley flour bowl	pag phor
པག་ཙིག	brick wall/ row/layer of bricks	pag tsig
པག་རྩིག	brick wall, row of bricks, measure	pag rtsig
པག་རྩིར	burnt brick	pag rtsir
པག་ཚི	layer of bricks [measure]	pag tshi
པག་ཚིར	burned bricks	pag tshir
པག་ཟན	barley meal	pag zan
པག་ཤི	teacher	pag shi
པགས	skin [w fur], hide,	pags
པགས་བཀྲ	leopard	pags bkra
པགས་བཀྲ་ཅན	tiger	pags bkra can
པགས་རྐྱལ	skin rkyal pa	pags rkyal
པགས་ཁ	sman dpyad gser khab rgyag sa'i gnad gsang gi pags pa	pags kha
པགས་གོས	skin clothing	pags gos
པགས་གྲི	pags pa'i skyi mo 'brad byed dam bzhar byed kyi knife	pags gri
པགས་ཆེན	sheepskin w much long wool	pags chen
པགས་གདན	skin seat	pags gdan
པགས་ནད	skin disease [lus kyi chu ser sogs nad du gyur nas pags la gram pa ste, nad rtags su pags pa mdog 'gyur &, za 'phrug langs pa &, shu thor sogs 'byung ba zhig	pags nad
པགས་པ་ཅན	(met 1) birch tree; 2) wood tiger year	pags pa can
པགས་པ་རྗེས་པ	change the skin [snake]	pags pa rjes pa
པགས་པ་ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	sea monster skin	pags pa nye ba'i rin po che
པགས་པ་མཉེད་པ	tan hides	pags pa mnyed pa
པགས་པ་མཉེན	pags pa can	pags pa mnyen
པགས་པ་འཐུག་པོ	thick skin	pags pa 'thug po
པགས་པ་དབུགས་འབྱིན	(met sbud pa	pags pa dbugs 'byin
པགས་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	snake skin	pags pa rin po che
པགས་པ་ཤུ	skin [an animal], peel	pags pa shu
པགས་པ་ཤུ་བ	give a good beating skin, to skin	pags pa shu ba
པགས་པ་བཤུས	flayed, skin taken off	pags pa bshus
པགས་པ་སོགས་བཤུ་བ	peel pags pa srab cing 'jam pa'i mtsan bzang te major mark of delicate soft skin [sangs rgyas kyi mtsan bzang so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste, khang bzang la sogs pa dam pa byin pas pags pa srab ci...	pags pa sogs bshu ba
པགས་པ་སྲབ་ཅིང་མདོག་གསེར་འདྲ་བ	w delicate and golden skin	pags pa srab cing mdog gser 'dra ba
པགས་པའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	wild animal	pags pa'i skye gnas
པགས་པའི་གོས	skin or fur clothing, fur cloak	pags pa'i gos
པགས་པའི་གོས་ཅན	epithet of maheshvara who dresses in tiger skin	pags pa'i gos can
པགས་པའི་མགོ་ཤུབས	dvags kong gnyis kyi skin garment mgo nas mar gyon bya zhig	pags pa'i mgo shubs
པགས་པའི་འདབ་ཅན	having skin wings, bat	pags pa'i 'dab can
པགས་པའི་འདབ་ཆགས	skin wings, bat	pags pa'i 'dab chags
པགས་པའི་ནད	skin disease [10 kinds sha bkra, glang shu, 'dzer ba, za kong, shu ba, khye ma, rno gyan pa, pags pa'i myu gu/me tog]	pags pa'i nad
པགས་པའི་མེ་ཏོག	hair of the skin	pags pa'i me tog
པགས་པའི་མྱུ་གུ	hair of the skin	pags pa'i myu gu
པགས་པའི་གཙུག་ཕུད	domestic fowl	pags pa'i gtsug phud
པགས་པའི་གཙུག་ཕུད་ཅན	(met chicken	pags pa'i gtsug phud can
པགས་པའི་རིམ་པ	layer	pags pa'i rim pa
པགས་པོ	skin, SA pags pa	pags po
པགས་བྱིའུ	species of plant, bat	pags byi'u
པགས་མ་ཚར	immature sheepskin	pags ma tshar
པགས་རྩག	skin garments:slog pa; lined w	pags rtsag
པགས་ཚག	fur-lined coat, robe or cloak lined with lamb skin	pags tshag
ཝ་ལམབ	skin	w lamb
པགས་ཚར	1) skin and tsa ru; 2) skin clothing	pags tshar
པགས་ཞྭ	[winter] skin/ fur hat	pags zhwa
པགས་ཞུ	fur cap	pags zhu
པགས་རིགས	leather, skin	pags rigs
པགས་ཤུན	skin/ hide &/or tree bark	pags shun
པགས་ཤོག	parchment 1599	pags shog
པགས་སོབ	stuffed skin of an animal	pags sob
པགས་སྲིན	srin nad of the skin	pags srin
པགས་སློག་ཞབ༹་མོ	pags slog mdo khams usually worn hat	pags slog zhva mo
པགས་གསོབ	stuffed skin	pags gsob
པང	lap; the lap, bosom	pang
པང་ཀ	crutch	pang ka
པང་ཁེབ	napkin	pang kheb
པང་ཁེབས	apron	pang khebs
པང་ཁྲག	when a child is born, blood coming from the womb	pang khrag
པང་འགྱོགས	climb into the lap	pang 'gyogs
པང་སྒང	on the lap	pang sgang
པང་གཅལ	khang pa'i mthil du pang leb bsgrigs pa'i gcal	pang gcal
པང་དཅལ	floor	pang dcal
པང་ཆོས་སེམས	a buddhist nun	pang chos sems
པང་སྟེང	1) on the lap; 2) spang rten	pang steng
པང་ཐག	pang gdan tying rope	pang thag
པང་དུ་འཁྱེར	hold on the lap/ bosom	pang du 'khyer
པང་དུ་གསོ་བའི་ཕྲུ་གུ	child nursing at the breast	pang du gso ba'i phru gu
པང་གདན	woman's apron	pang gdan
པང་ན་འཚོ་བ	1 of 4 ma ma	pang na 'tsho ba
པང་ནས་སྐྱེས	kotita	pang nas skyes
པང་པ	lap, abandon	pang pa
པང་པར	in the lap, on the bosom	pang par
པང་པར་འདེགས་པ	climb into the lap	pang par 'degs pa
པང་བ	w the two hands receive in the lap	pang ba
པང་བའི་ཕྲུ་གུ་པང་དུ་བླངས	receive a [suckling] child into the lap	pang ba'i phru gu pang du blangs
པང་མ	spindle	pang ma
པང་ཚད	when a child is born 'byung ba'i ma'i tshad nad cig pang g.yog ma - midwife, wet nurse pang g.yog ma - mid-wife, wet nurse	pang tshad
པང་རས	apron	pang ras
པང་ལེབ	board, plank	pang leb
པང་ལེབ་ཏུ་གཤགས་པའི་ཤིང་སྡོང	tree sawn into boards	pang leb tu gshags pa'i shing sdong
པད	Indian money = 1/100 rupee	pad
པད་ཀོག	forehead	pad kog
པད་ཀོར	pekor mudra	pad kor
པད་དཀར	pundarika, white lotus	pad dkar
པད་དཀར་སྐྱེས	very useful and important medicine	pad dkar skyes
པད་དཀར་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{spa gro chos rje} alias {gzar chen chos rje}	pad dkar rgya mtsho
པད་དཀར་ཅན	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po	pad dkar can
པད་དཀར་འཆང	holder of the white lotus, Chenrezig	pad dkar 'chang
པད་དཀར་མ	celestial courtesan	pad dkar ma
པད་དཀར་མིག	lotus-eyed, epithet of vishnu	pad dkar mig
པད་དཀར་མོ	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	pad dkar mo
པད་དཀར་ཞབས	the eminent Pema Karpo	pad dkar zhabs
པད་དཀར་ཞལ་ལུང	{pad dkar zhal lung	pad dkar zhal lung
པད་བཀོད	Pemak" district in ST	pad bkod
པད་རྐྱང	single lotus [flower]	pad rkyang
པད་སྐོར	pekor [literally, "turning, revolving lotus", a particular mudra	pad skor
པད་ཁ	source of oil, small grain w red straw, rapeseed, mustard	pad kha
པད་ཁང	lotus	pad khang
པད་ཁའི་སྣུམ	lotus oil	pad kha'i snum
པད་ཁུད་མཚོ	{pad khud} Lake [between gnya' nang rdzong and skyid rong rdzong	pad khud mtsho
པད་གངས	black mustard	pad gangs
པད་གླིང	sanctuary consecrated to padma sambhava	pad gling
པད་རྒྱུག	1) on a clay vessel lotus picture 'don byed kyi shing zhig; 2) lotus's lo 'bras bton zin pa'i rkang	pad rgyug
པད་ཅན་མ	1) lotus flower; 2) accomplished woman	pad can ma
པད་ཅིང	Beijing	pad cing
པད་ཆུང	small lotus	pad chung
པད་ཆེན	large lotus	pad chen
པད་ཉི	lotus and sun (disc	pad nyi
པད་ཉི་ཟླར	on lotus sun moon seat	pad nyi zlar
པད་སྙིང	{pad ma'i snying po}	pad snying
པད་ཏུང	CH a kind of metal	pad tung
པད་སྟོང	thousand petaled lotus	pad stong
པད་གདན	lotus seat / throne	pad gdan
པད་འདབ	lotus petals	pad 'dab
པད་རྡུལ	lotus pollen	pad rdul
པད་སྡེར	lotus-plate, plate in the form of a lotus blossom	pad sder
པད་སྡོང	1) lotus stalk; 2) kind of reed	pad sdong
པད་སྡོང་ཆེན་པོ	great lotus stems pad sdong pad ma'i khri steng du bzhugs	pad sdong chen po
པད་སྣུམ	lotus oil	pad snum
པད་པ	leech	pad pa
པད་ཕྲིན	Abbr. of {pad ma phrin las}	pad phrin
པད་ཕྲེང	lotus garland	pad phreng
པད་འབྱུང	Padmakara	pad 'byung
པད་འབྱུང་ཡབ་ཡུམ	Padmasambhava with consort	pad 'byung yab yum
པད་སྦུབས	lotus bud	pad sbubs
པད་མ	1) lotus [med. herb]; 2) female organ; 3) pad ma rdzong	pad ma
པད་མ་ཀ་ར	epithet of padmakara or padma sambhava	pad ma ka ra
པད་མ་ཀ་ར་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Padmakara Tötreng Tsal. Same as Guru Rinpoche	pad ma ka ra thod phreng rtsal
པད་མ་ཀུ་ཤེ་ཤ་ཡ	mythological lake on side of mountain of same name	pad ma ku she sha ya
པད་མ་ཀུ་ཤེ་ཤ་ཡ་དང་ལྡན་པ	1 of 10 great mountains	pad ma ku she sha ya dang ldan pa
པད་མ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma kun tu rgyu
པད་མ་ཀུན་ཏུ་འཆང	All-Holding Lotus	pad ma kun tu 'chang
པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	white lotus, SA 'brug pa kun mkhyen pad ma dkar po	pad ma dkar po
པད་མ་དཀོད	{pad ma dkod} area of SET	pad ma dkod
པད་མ་བཀའ་ཐང	Padma Kathang, Chronicles of Padma. Life-story of Guru Padmasambhava, revealed by Orgyen Lingpa	pad ma bka' thang
པད་མ་བཀའ་ཐང་ཤེལ་བྲག་མ	the Crystal Cave Chronicles of Padmasambhava; {u rgyan gu ru padma 'byung gnas kyi skyes rabs rnam par thar pa rgyas par bkod pa}; a biography of the Mahaguru Padmasambhava, said to have been disco...	pad ma bka' thang shel brag ma
པད་མ་བཀོད	Pemakö, district in Southeast Tibet	pad ma bkod
པད་མ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	lotus posture	pad ma skyil krung
པད་མ་སྐྱེས	Lotus Born, - Syn Guru Rinpoche	pad ma skyes
པད་མ་ཁ་འབུས	the lotus-bud; one of Padmasambhava's crowns	pad ma kha 'bus
པད་མ་ཁྲག་འཐུང	Padma Heruka, "Lotus Blood Drinker"	pad ma khrag 'thung
པད་མ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Padma / Lotus Dakini	pad ma mkha' 'gro
པད་མ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma mkha' 'gro'i dbang phyug
པད་མ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་འོད་ཟེར	Pema Khyentse Özer, one of Jigmey Lingpa's names	pad ma mkhyen brtse'i 'od zer
པད་མ་འཁྱིལ་བ	twisted lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma 'khyil ba
པད་མ་འཁྱུགས་པ	lightning-like lotus, snaking lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma 'khyugs pa
པད་མ་གར་གྱི་དབང	Padma Gargyi Wangpo	pad ma gar gyi dbang
པད་མ་གར་གྱི་དབང་པོ	Padma Gargyi Wangpo. 1) Syn Avalokiteshvara. 2) The name of Jamgön Kongtrül the first	pad ma gar gyi dbang po
པད་མ་གར་གྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་རྩལ	Pema Gargyi Wangchuk Tsal. This is Jamgön Kongtrül's "secret" or Tantric name, which he received during a rtsa gsum dril sgrub "Practice of the Three Roots in Unison" empowerment in 1836,	pad ma gar gyi dbang phyug rtsal
ཝཧེན་ཧེ་ཝས་ཏྭེནཏཡ	three years old	when he was twenty
པད་མ་གར་དབང	1) Avalokiteshvara, "lotus lord of manifestation"; 2) Hayagriva	pad ma gar dbang
པད་མ་གར་དབང་ཆོས་སྤྱོད	Dharma practice of padma garwang	pad ma gar dbang chos spyod
པད་མ་གེ་སར	pistil of the lotus flower	pad ma ge sar
པད་མ་གེ་སར་གྱི་སྡོང་པོ	in the heart of a lotus	pad ma ge sar gyi sdong po
པད་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma grub pa'i blo gros
པད་མ་གླིང་པ	1450-1521 - Pema Lingpa, tertön {gter ston}	pad ma gling pa
པད་མ་དགྱེད་པ	stretched lotus, curved lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma dgyed pa
པད་མ་དགྱེས་པའི་འབངས	the joyful servant of Padma; [often Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo]	pad ma dgyes pa'i 'bangs
པད་མ་འགྱུར་མེད་རྒྱ་མཚོ	smin gling rgyal sras, b. 1686	pad ma 'gyur med rgya mtsho
པད་མ་འགྲོ་མགོན་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che pad ma 'gro 'dul gsang sngags gling pa {thugs sras dri med} the son of {bdud 'joms gling pa}	pad ma 'gro mgon rtsal
པད་མ་འགྲོ་བའི་སྐྱབས	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma 'gro ba'i skyabs
པད་མ་རྒྱ་བྱ	brocade w pictures of pad ma and rgya bya	pad ma rgya bya
པད་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ	{pad ma rgyal po, Lotus King [gu ru mtshan brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig]	pad ma rgyal po
པད་མ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{blo gling mkhan zur}	pad ma rgyal mtshan
པད་མ་རྒྱས་པ	unfolded, fully bloomed lotus	pad ma rgyas pa
པད་མ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	Lotus Magical Net	pad ma sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
པད་མ་མངའ་བདག་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma mnga' bdag rtsal
པད་མ་ཅན	epithet of wife of vishnu, epithet of avalokiteshvara, lotus- 1601 endowed, 1 of sangs rgyas sa gsum	pad ma can
པད་མ་ཅན་གྱི་མཚོ	lotus lake	pad ma can gyi mtsho
པད་མ་ཅོད་པན་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Lotus Crown Root Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	pad ma cod pan rtsa ba'i rgyud
པད་མ་ཆགས་མཆོག་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma chags mchog rtsal
པད་མ་ཆེ་མཆོག་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma che mchog rtsal
པད་མ་ཆེན་པོ	{pad ma chen po	pad ma chen po
པད་མ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྟར་གས་པ	mahapadma	pad ma chen po ltar gas pa
པད་མ་ཆོས་བརྩེགས	pictures engraved on temple door and beams	pad ma chos brtsegs
པད་མ་ཉི་ཟླ་བརྩེགས་པ	layered lotus, sun, and moon	pad ma nyi zla brtsegs pa
པད་མ་ཉིན་བྱེད་དབང་པོ	Pema Nyinjey Wangpo (1774-1853) "Lotus Daylight-Bringer Power". The name of the ninth Tai Situpa, who was the rootteacher of Jamgön Kongtrül	pad ma nyin byed dbang po
པད་མ་སྙིང་ཐིག	Padma Nyingtig	pad ma snying thig
པད་མ་སྙིང་པོ	Lotus Essence; lotus seed	pad ma snying po
པད་མ་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Lotus Essence Tantra; terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	pad ma snying po'i rgyud
པད་མ་ལྟར་གས་པ	padma cold hell, 1 of grang dmyal brgyad, splitting like a lotus hell	pad ma ltar gas pa
པད་མ་ལྟར་གས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Splitting Like a Lotus	pad ma ltar gas pa chen po
པད་མ་ལྟར་ཆེར་གས་པ	1 of grang dmyal brgyad, splitting widely like a great lotus hell	pad ma ltar cher gas pa
པད་མ་ལྟར་འཇམ་པར་མཛད་ནས	made as soft as lotuses pad ma bstan gnyis g.yung drung gling pa - Padma Tennyi Yungdrung Lingpa. The tertön name of Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye	pad ma ltar 'jam par mdzad nas
པད་མ་བསྟན་འཛིན	{smin gling khri chen} (1759-1776	pad ma bstan 'dzin
པད་མ་ཐང་ཡིག	abridged collection of padma sambhava legends	pad ma thang yig
པད་མ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང	Padma Tötreng	pad ma thod phreng
པད་མ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma thod phreng rtsal
པད་མ་མཐོང་གྲོལ	Lotus Crown which liberates by sight	pad ma mthong grol
པད་མ་དང་བྷན་དྷ	lotus flower and skull cup	pad ma dang bhan dha
པད་མ་དོ་མི་བྷ་པ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma do mi bha pa
པད་མ་དོན་གྲུབ	(1668-1744) - religious figure from Nubri and Kutang / Lutang in central Nepal	pad ma don grub
པད་མ་དོན་ཡོད་ཞགས་པ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma don yod zhags pa
པད་མ་དརབ༹་བ	Lotus Net. Same as Padmajala, the pure land of Guru Rinpoche. The name of the pure land of Guru Rinpoche	pad ma drva ba
པད་མ་དྲྭ་བ	Lotus Net, [a buddha field]	pad ma drwa ba
པད་མ་དརབ༹་བའི་ཞིང	the Lotus Net realm	pad ma drva ba'i zhing
པད་མ་དྲྭ་བའི་ཞིང	the Lotus Net realm	pad ma drwa ba'i zhing
པད་མ་དྲི་མེད་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	thugs rje chen po pad ma dri med dkar po, revealed by hUM ral bdud 'dul rtsal	pad ma dri med pad ma dkar po
པད་མ་བདུད་འདུལ	{nyag bla} 1816-1872	pad ma bdud 'dul
པད་མ་བདེ་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	{pad ma bde chen gling pa [great terton and reincarnation of Lotsava vairochana	pad ma bde chen gling pa
པད་མ་མདོ་སྔགས་གླིང་པ	Padma Dongak Lingpa. The tertön name of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	pad ma mdo sngags gling pa
པད་མ་འདབ་བརྒྱ	100 petalled lotus	pad ma 'dab brgya
པད་མ་འདབ་བརྒྱད	8 petalled lotus	pad ma 'dab brgyad
པད་མ་འདབ་བརྒྱད་ཁྲོལ་བུའི་སྒྲུབ་པ་Fརགམེནཏ་སདྷན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་Eཨིགྷཏ	petaled Lotus	pad ma 'dab brgyad khrol bu'i sgrub pa Fragment Sadhana of the Eight
པད་མ་འདབ་བཞི	four petalled lotus	pad ma 'dab bzhi
པད་མ་ལྡན་ཞེས	Padmavati	pad ma ldan zhes
པད་མ་ལྡིང་བ	flying lotus, suspended lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma lding ba
པད་མ་ནག་པོ་སྤྱོད་པ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma nag po spyod pa
པད་མ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	zhe chen rgyal tshab; zur mang mkhan po	pad ma rnam rgyal
པད་མ་པ་ནི	form of avalokiteshvara	pad ma pa ni
པད་མ་དཔལ་འཛིན་མ	dakini in retinue of Yudronma	pad ma dpal 'dzin ma
པད་མ་སྤུངས་པ	Lotus Mound	pad ma spungs pa
པད་མ་སྤུངས་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	bde gshegs mchod rten, sugata stupa	pad ma spungs pa'i mchod rten
པད་མ་སྤྱན	Lotus Eye, Avalokiteshvara	pad ma spyan
པད་མ་ཕྲིན་ལས	rdo rje brag rig 'dzin - II (1640?-1718)	pad ma phrin las
པད་མ་འཕྲིན་ལས	{rdo rje brag rig 'dzin} ii, 1640?-1718	pad ma 'phrin las
པད་མ་འཕྲིན་ལས་མགོན	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma 'phrin las mgon
པད་མ་འཕྲིལ་བ	swinging lotus	pad ma 'phril ba
པད་མ་འཕྲིལ་སྦྱོར	swinging lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma 'phril sbyor
པད་མ་བ་ཛྲ	padmavajra, terma revealed at {gru gu'i lha brag} by {yongs dge gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje} b. 1628	pad ma ba dzra
པད་མ་དབང	Mighty Padma; Hayagriva	pad ma dbang
པད་མ་དབང་ཆེན	1) Mighty Lotus. Same as the tantric deity Hayagriva, the chief heruka of the padma family. 2) Pema Wangchen, one of Jigmey Lingpa's names	pad ma dbang chen
པད་མ་དབང་ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Mighty Lotus Tantra. Several Mahayoga tantras with resembling names occur in Vol. HA of the Nyingma Gyübum	pad ma dbang chen gyi rgyud
པད་མ་དབང་འདུས	(b. 1697) - religious figure from Nubri and Kutang / Lutang in central Nepal	pad ma dbang 'dus
པད་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག་མགོན	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma dbang phyug mgon
པད་མ་དབྱེས་པའི་འབངས	the joyful servant of Padma	pad ma dbyes pa'i 'bangs
པད་མ་འབར་བ	flaming lotus, flaming lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma 'bar ba
པད་མ་འབེབས་པ	dropping lotus, leaping lotus, SA pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun	pad ma 'bebs pa
པད་མ་འབྱུང	lotus-born, Padmasambhava	pad ma 'byung
པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	1) Padmakara. 'Lotus-born.' Same as Guru Rinpoche. Padmakara and Padmasambhava are interchangeable in Tibetan literature, sometimes is used the Tibetan translation Pema Jungney, sometimes the Sansk...	pad ma 'byung gnas
ཅོམཔོསེད་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེལཕ༹	display of innate wakefulness in the center of the pure realm of Sukhavati. Inseparable from the luminous dharmakaya essence of Amitabha's mind, Padmasambhava is an unceasing miraculous display of ...	composed of the self
པད་མ་མ	marked by a lotus, king, brahma	pad ma ma
པད་མ་མ་ཏི	{stag bla} 1591-1637	pad ma ma ti
པད་མ་དམར	red lotus	pad ma dmar
པད་མ་དམར་པོ	red lotus	pad ma dmar po
པད་མ་རྩེགས་པ	Lotus Mound, [buddha field of Amitabha]	pad ma rtsegs pa
པད་མ་བརྩེགས	Lotus Mound; the pure land of {'od dpag med}. Syn: {bde ba can}	pad ma brtsegs
པད་མ་བརྩེགས་པ	Lotus Mound	pad ma brtsegs pa
པད་མ་བརྩེགས་པ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Lotus Mound Mantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	pad ma brtsegs pa sngags kyi rgyud
པད་མ་བརྩེགས་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the realm of Lotus Mound	pad ma brtsegs pa'i zhing khams
པད་མ་ཚུ་ཆེན་པོ	an indian sage	pad ma tshu chen po
པད་མ་ཚེ་རིང	learned friend of Chogyal Namkhai Norbu	pad ma tshe ring
པད་མ་རྫོང	Pema Dzong, the Lotus Citadel, in Domey	pad ma rdzong
པད་མ་གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད་འཕྲོ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma gzi brjid 'od 'phro
པད་མ་བཟང་པོ	excellent lotus flower (represents the purity of buddha's mind)	pad ma bzang po
པད་མ་འོད	Lotus Light. The name of the palace in Guru Rinpoche's pure land, on {zangs mdog dpal ri}	pad ma 'od
པད་མ་འོད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་དྲང	the lotus-light palace	pad ma 'od kyi pho drang
པད་མ་འོད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་བྲང	the Palace of Lotus Light [abode of guru rinpoche on the summit of zangs mdog dpal ri)	pad ma 'od kyi pho brang
པད་མ་འོད་འབར	Radiant Lotus. Guru Padmabhasajvala. Padmabhasajvala.	pad ma 'od 'bar
ལོཏུས་ཥིནིང	Light. Padmasambhava's name in the Könchok Chidü practice	Lotus Shining
པད་མ་འོད་གསལ་ཐེག་མཆོག་གླིང	Pema Ösel Tekchok Chöling, Jigmey Lingpa's hermitage at Tsering Jong in Lokha	pad ma 'od gsal theg mchog gling
པད་མ་འོད་གསལ་མདོ་སྔགས་གླིང་པ	the tertön name of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo pad ma 'od gsal mdo sngags gling pa Padma Ösel Do-ngak Lingpa. The tertön name of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo pad ma 'od gsal mdo sngags gling pa Padma Ösel D...	pad ma 'od gsal mdo sngags gling pa
པད་མ་རའ་ག	lotus ruby	pad ma r'a ga
པད་མ་ཡང་གསང་དྲག་པོ	a deity	pad ma yang gsang drag po
པད་མ་ཡངས་རྩེ	sacred place in Sikkim	pad ma yangs rtse
པད་མ་ཡེ་མཛེས	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu	pad ma ye mdzes
པད་མ་ར་ག	ruby	pad ma ra ga
པད་མ་རབ་བཟང་མ	{pad ma rab bzang ma} female saint D	pad ma rab bzang ma
པད་མ་རིགས	lotus-family	pad ma rigs
པད་མ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the deities of the lotus family	pad ma rigs kyi lha tshogs
པད་མ་རིས	figure of a lotus flower	pad ma ris
པད་མ་ལས་འཁྲུངས	Lotus-born, Guru Rinpoche	pad ma las 'khrungs
པད་མ་ལས་འབྲེལ	associated with many termas in mkha' 'gro'i snying thig	pad ma las 'brel
པད་མ་ལས་འབྲེལ་རྩལ	1291-1315	pad ma las 'brel rtsal
པད་མ་ལུང་རྟོགས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	author of {nye brgyud gcod kyi khrid yig gsal bar	pad ma lung rtogs rgya mtsho
པད་མ་ས་ར་ཧ	name of or rgyan rin po che	pad ma sa ra ha
པད་མ་སམ་ཞྭ	Padmasambhava pandita hat	pad ma sam zhwa
པད་མ་སམ་བྷ	{pad ma sam bha [gu ru mtsan brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig	pad ma sam bha
པད་མ་སམ་བྷ་བ	indian buddhist saint	pad ma sam bha ba
པད་མ་སམ་བྷ་ཝ	Padmasambhava	pad ma sam bha wa
པད་མ་སེར་པོ	herb {pad ma ser po	pad ma ser po
པད་མ་གསུང	Lotus Speech; one of {sgrub pa sde brgyad}	pad ma gsung
པད་མ་ཧྭ་གོས	bhikshu's zla gam gong rgyan shaped like a lotus leaf pad ma bhañ dza - padma bhanja. The word padma bhanja means authentic skull.	pad ma hwa gos
པད་མ་ལྷ་མཚོ	Divine Lotus Lake; see {ma pham g.yu mtsho}	pad ma lha mtsho
པད་མ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	(b. 1708) - religious figure from Nubri and Kutang / Lutang in central Nepal	pad ma lhun grub
པད་མའི་དཀྱིལ་ནས་འཁྲུངས་པ	born from the center of a lotus	pad ma'i dkyil nas 'khrungs pa
པད་མའི་བཀའ་ཆེམས	Testament of Padma. Revealed by the great tertön Nyang Ral, and presumably identical	pad ma'i bka' chems
ཝིཐ་ཐེ་མེདིཨུམ	length version of the Sanglingma biography of Padmasambhava, an English translation of which is	with the medium
པུབླིཤེད་ཨས་ཋེ་ལོཏུས	Born (Shambhala Publications, 1993)	published as The Lotus
པད་མའི་སྐུད་པ་ལས་ཕྲ	finer than a lotus stamen	pad ma'i skud pa las phra
པད་མའི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	lotus posture	pad ma'i skyil krung
པད་མའི་སྐྱེས་གནས	lotus birthplace, Bhram	pad ma'i skyes gnas
པད་མའི་སྐྲ	pistil of the lotus flower	pad ma'i skra
པད་མའི་ཁ་ཟུམ་བཞིན	just as the lotus flower closes	pad ma'i kha zum bzhin
པད་མའི་ཁྲག	blood from the womb of women	pad ma'i khrag
པད་མའི་འཁྱིལ་བ	coiled lotus	pad ma'i 'khyil ba
པད་མའི་གེ་སར	the antlers of a lotus flower	pad ma'i ge sar
པད་མའི་གྲོགས	friend of the lotus, sun	pad ma'i grogs
པད་མའི་དགངས	dang energy of padma	pad ma'i dgangs
པད་མའི་དགྲ	moon	pad ma'i dgra
པད་མའི་རྒྱ་རྣམ	SA pad ma 'bar ba, pad ma dgyed pa, pad ma 'khyil ba, pad ma lding ba, pad ma 'phril sbyor, pad ma 'bebs pa, pad ma 'khyugs pa	pad ma'i rgya rnam
པད་མའི་རྒྱ་རྣམ་པ་བདུན	7 lotus positions of yantra yoga	pad ma'i rgya rnam pa bdun
པད་མའི་ངང་ཚུལ	Kamalashila. Kamalashila means Lotus Flower Character, which refers to Phadampa.	pad ma'i ngang tshul
པད་མའི་ཆ་ལག	lotus fiber	pad ma'i cha lag
པད་མའི་གཉེན	sun	pad ma'i gnyen
པད་མའི་སྙིང་ཏིག	nyingtig of Padmasambhava	pad ma'i snying tig
པད་མའི་སྙིང་ཐིག	[Dzogchen teachings of] Nyingtig of Padmasambhava	pad ma'i snying thig
པད་མའི་སྙིང་པོ	lotus essence/ seed	pad ma'i snying po
པད་མའི་ལྟེ་བ	epithet of vishnu, seedovary of the lotus flower	pad ma'i lte ba
པད་མའི་གདན	lotus seat	pad ma'i gdan
པད་མའི་གདན་ཅན	indra	pad ma'i gdan can
པད་མའི་བདག་པོ	sun	pad ma'i bdag po
པད་མའི་སྡོང་པོ	lotus stalk, lotus stick, fine lotus stalk, lotus flower	pad ma'i sdong po
པད་མའི་དཔལ	resplendent lotus realm	pad ma'i dpal
པད་མའི་སྤྱན	Lotus Eyed	pad ma'i spyan
པད་མའི་བར་ཤུན	herb {pad ma'i bar shun [sman du btang na tshad pa 'jags pa dang, khrag rgyu ba, zla mtsan snyoms pa bcas la phan	pad ma'i bar shun
པད་མའི་དབྱངས་ཅན	Padma Sarasvati, lotus family of the melodious goddess 1604	pad ma'i dbyangs can
པད་མའི་འབྱུང་གནས	pond where lotus grows, lotus birthplace	pad ma'i 'byung gnas
པད་མའི་སྦུབས་སུ་སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	born within a lotus blossom	pad ma'i sbubs su sku 'khrungs pa
པད་མའི་མིག	lotus eyes	pad ma'i mig
པད་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	lotus	pad ma'i me tog
པད་མའི་རྩ་བ	lotus root or stalk, lotus fiber	pad ma'i rtsa ba
པད་མའི་རྩ་ལག	sun	pad ma'i rtsa lag
པད་མའི་རྫིང་བུ	a lotus pond	pad ma'i rdzing bu
པད་མའི་བཞིན་ཞེས	Padmamukha, Countenance like a Lotus	pad ma'i bzhin zhes
པད་མའི་ཟེ་བ	lotus anthers	pad ma'i ze ba
པད་མའི་ཟེ་འབྲུ	anther and ovary of the lotus	pad ma'i ze 'bru
པད་མའི་ཟེའུ་འབྲུ	lotus rtser chags pa'i 'bras bu	pad ma'i ze'u 'bru
པད་མའི་འོད	Lotus Light	pad ma'i 'od
པད་མའི་ར་ག	ruby	pad ma'i ra ga
པད་མའི་རིག་འཛིན	awareness-holders of the lotus	pad ma'i rig 'dzin
པད་མའི་རིགས	padma/ lotus family	pad ma'i rigs
པད་མའི་ལག	hand of the lotus, the sun	pad ma'i lag
པད་མའི་ལག་པ	lotus-armed, sun	pad ma'i lag pa
པད་མའི་ས་མཚན	symbolized by a lotus, king, Bhram	pad ma'i sa mtshan
པད་མའི་སྲིན་བུ	leech	pad ma'i srin bu
པད་མས	by Padma(sambhava)	pad mas
པད་མས་འཁེབས་པའི་ཞིང	Lotus Covered Realm. Pure land manifested after the death of Chokgyur Lingpa	pad mas 'khebs pa'i zhing
པད་མས་མཚན	adorned with a lotus	pad mas mtshan
པད་མོ	lotus	pad mo
པད་མོ་དམ་པའི་དཔལ་མངའ	one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas} the buddhas of the ten directions	pad mo dam pa'i dpal mnga'
པད་མོའི་དྲ་བ	Lotus Web, Lotus Net	pad mo'i dra ba
པད་མོའི་དྲྭ་བ	Lotus Web, Lotus Net	pad mo'i drwa ba
པད་མོའི་དཔལ་ཉིད	one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas} the buddhas of the ten directions	pad mo'i dpal nyid
པད་མོའི་སྦུབས	hollow / sphere of a lotus, lotus flower that hasn't yet opened	pad mo'i sbubs
པད་མཙོ	lotus lake [syn: chu yi snying po dang, pad ma can, pad ma ldan, pad ma'i 'byung gnas, pad ma'i rdzing bu, bzhad ldan ma, lhas bkang	pad mtso
པད་རྩ	lotus root	pad rtsa
པད་ཚལ	cluster of lotuses, Ch cabbage	pad tshal
པད་མཚོ	lotus lake	pad mtsho
པད་ཞྭ	Lotus crown; a lotus crown	pad zhwa
པད་ཞབ༹	lotus crown [miter like hat offered Padmasambhava by za hor rgyal po	pad zhva
པད་ཞྭ་དམར་པོ	red lotus crown	pad zhwa dmar po
པད་ཞབས	lotus feet	pad zhabs
པད་ཞུ	{dbu la pad zhu mnabs pa} is wearing a lotus hat	pad zhu
པད་ཟླ	lotus and moon	pad zla
པད་ཟླའི་སྟེང	upon a lotus and moon, on lotus and moon disks	pad zla'i steng
པད་ཟླའི་གདན	lotus and moon seat	pad zla'i gdan
པད་ཟླུམ་མགྲིན	white goose, wild swan	pad zlum mgrin
པད་ལས	flattery, saying what some1 wants to hear	pad las
པད་ལས་བྱེད	flatter, say what some1 wants to hear	pad las byed
པད་ལས་ཚ་པོ	flatterer, sycophant	pad las tsha po
པད་ལས་ཤོད	flatter, say what some1 wants to hear	pad las shod
པད་ཤག	money	pad shag
པཎ	pandita	paN
པན་ཀོག	Bangkok	pan kog
པན་ཀྲང	squad leader	pan krang
པན་གོང་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་པ	{pan gong phyag rgya pa [vinaya text	pan gong phyag rgya pa
པན་གྲུབ	siddha pandit	pan grub
པཎ་ཆུང	minor pandita	paN chung
པན་ཆེན	abbr of pan di ta chen po	pan chen
པན་ཆེན་སྐུ་འཕྲེང་རིམ་བྱོན་བཅུ	(chn paN chen grags pa rgyal mtshan Panchen Drakpa Gyaltsen	pan chen sku 'phreng rim byon bcu
པན་ཆེན་གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{pan chen grags pa rgyal mtshan pan chen chos kyi grags pa bstan pa'i	pan chen grags pa rgyal mtshan
པན་ཆེན་སྡོམ་རྒྱུན	vow lineage from the Kashmiri pandit sh'akya shri	pan chen sdom rgyun
པན་ཆེན་ན་རོ་པ	the great pandita Naropa	pan chen na ro pa
པཎ་ཆེན་ནའ་རོ་པ	the great pandita Naropa	paN chen na' ro pa
པན་ཆེན་དཔལ་ལྡན་ཡེ་ཤེས	{pan chen dpal ldan ye shes} 3rd Panchen Lama	pan chen dpal ldan ye shes
པཎ་ཆེན་བི་མ་མི་ཏྲ	the great pandita Vimalamitra	paN chen bi ma mi tra
པཎ་ཆེན་བི་མ་ལ་མི་ཏྲ	the great pandita Vimalamitra	paN chen bi ma la mi tra
པན་ཆེན་བླ་མ	Panchen Lama / - Incarnation lineage of the abbots of Tashi Lhünpo {bkra shis lhun po} monastery, established in the time of the Fifth Dalai Lama pan chen blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan - {pan che...	pan chen bla ma
པཎ་ཆེན་ཞིང་སྡེ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	paN chen zhing sde
པཎ་ཆེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Panchen Lama	paN chen rin po che
པན་ཆེན་ཨིར་ཏི་ནི	title of panchen in mongolia	pan chen ir ti ni
པན་ཆེན་ཨེར་ཏི	name of the Panchen Lama 1605	pan chen er ti
པན་ཆེན་ཨེར་ཏི་ནི	Panchen Erdini	pan chen er ti ni
པན་ཆེན་ཨེར་ཏེ་ནི	Panchen Lama	pan chen er te ni
པན་མཐའ	traveller, wanderer	pan mtha'
པན་དི་ཏ	pandit, scholar	pan di ta
པཎ་ཌི་ཏ་བརྒྱ་དང་རྩ་བརྒྱད	one hundred and eight panditas [invited to Tibet by king Trisong Detsen]	paN Di ta brgya dang rtsa brgyad
པཎ་ཌི་ཏ་ཆེན་པོ	great scholar / pandita	paN Di ta chen po
པན་དི་ཏ་སྨྲི་ཏི	{pan di ta smri ti} [came during Lang Darma's persecution, and finding no encouragement lived a while as shepherd	pan di ta smri ti
པཎ་ཌི་ཏའི་དཔྱད་བསྒོམ	the analytical meditation of a pandita	paN Di ta'i dpyad bsgom
པན་དི་ཏའི་ཞྭ	kind of miter-shaped cap which atisa and tsong kha pa used to wear	pan di ta'i zhwa
པན་དདི་ཏའི་དཔྱད་བསྒོམ	the analytical meditation of a pandita	pan ddi ta'i dpyad bsgom
པན་ནི་ཏ་ཆེན་པོ	mahapandita, great pandit	pan ni ta chen po
པན་པ	<pandaka:> eunuch	pan pa
པན་པོན	not considered perfect in dignity as for instance married lamas	pan pon
པན་ཙ	Skt fivefold	pan tsa
པན་ཙི་ཀ	noijin chief	pan tsi ka
པན་ཛ་ལི་ཀ	rainbow-colored, 5-colored	pan dza li ka
པན་ཞ	CH herb {pan zha}	pan zha
པཎ་ཞྭ	scholar's cap, pandita hat	paN zhwa
པན་ཞབ༹	pandit hat sne ring zhig	pan zhva
པཎ་ཞྭ་རྣ་རིང	pandita hat	paN zhwa rna ring
པན་ཞབ༹་རྣ་རིང	long sided pandit hat	pan zhva rna ring
པན་ཞྭ་རྩེ་རིང	conical pointed hat worn by lamas	pan zhwa rtse ring
པན་ཞྭ་རྩེར་རིང	conical miter-shaped cap worn by lamas	pan zhwa rtser ring
པཎ་ཞུ	pandita hat, sm: {paN zhwa}; pandita hat	paN zhu
པཎ་ཌྷི་ཏ	pandita	paN Dhi ta
པན་དྷི་ཏ་ཛི་ན་མི་ཏྲ	the pandit Jinamitra	pan dhi ta dzi na mi tra
པན་དྷི་ཏ་དྷར་མ་པ་ལ	the pandit Dharmapala	pan dhi ta dhar ma pa la
པམ	(not in Das)	pam
པའམ	"or" particle	pa'am
པའི་སྐབས་སུ	"when" connective	pa'i skabs su
པའི་སྒང་ལ	SA sgang	pa'i sgang la
པའི་ཆེད་དུ	SA ba'i ched du	pa'i ched du
པའི་རྗེས་སུ	"temporal" connective	pa'i rjes su
པའི་དུས་སུ	"when" connective	pa'i dus su
པའི་རྣམ་གྲངས་ཉེར་གཅིག	the 21 modes of conduct as example	pa'i rnam grangs nyer gcig
པའི་དབང་གིས	"causal" connective	pa'i dbang gis
པའི་རིང་ལ	"when" connective	pa'i ring la
པའི་རེ་བ	hope construction	pa'i re ba
པའུ	brick	pa'u
པའུ་རྩེ	kind of tea	pa'u rtse
པའེ་ཚལ	Chinese cabbage	pa'e tshal
པའོ	{pa} + finishing particle	pa'o
པའོ་པོ	Chi. pocket	pa'o po
པའོ་མོ	nurse, housekeeper, pocket	pa'o mo
པར་ཀོང	lugs kong	par kong
པར་རྐོ	carve wood printing blocks	par rko
པར་རྐོ་མཁན	cutter of type	par rko mkhan
པར་རྐོ་པ	print block letter cutter	par rko pa
པར་རྐོ་བ	1) print block engraver; 2) par du rko bzhin pa; 3) cut print blocks	par rko ba
པར་སྐྲུན	printing	par skrun
པར་བསྐྲུན	printing, publishing	par bskrun
པར་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	print, publish	par bskrun byed
པར་ཁ་བཏབ་པ	completely similar like prints	par kha btab pa
པར་ཁང	press, printing house	par khang
པར་ཁུལ་ནོའུར	(M) {par khul no'ur [lake in zhin cang yu gur	par khul no'ur
པར་མཁན	printer	par mkhan
པར་གྱིས་འཕར་བ	[arch] 1) suddenly fly up; 2) Rgyang gis 'phar ba sbal ba'i 'gro stangs lta bu	par gyis 'phar ba
པར་གྱོག	printer's helper [par 'debs skabs par shing gi sne gcig 'dzin mkhan sogs lta bu	par gyog
པར་གྲངས	circulation [book etc], edition	par grangs
པར་འགེབས	1) 'dra dpe 'gebs pa,...yul lung gcig gi nyams myong yul lung gzhan zhig la par 'gebs kyis lag len bstar na mi 'grig ...Sger don la gzhung don yin khul gyi par 'gebs byas na nor 'khrul red; 2) very...	par 'gebs
པར་འགོ་རྟེན་མཁན	in printing par shing gi sne gcig 'dzin mkhan	par 'go rten mkhan
པར་འགྲེམ	publication	par 'grem
པར་འགྲེམ་བྱེད	publish	par 'grem byed
པར་འགྲེམ་བྱེད་པོ	publisher	par 'grem byed po
པར་འགྲེམས	issue, publication	par 'grems
པར་འགྲེམས་པ	publisher	par 'grems pa
པར་འགྲེམས་བྱེད་པ	to publish	par 'grems byed pa
པར་རྒྱག	take a photograph, print	par rgyag
པར་རྒྱག་རྒྱུ་སྤྲོད	put into print	par rgyag rgyu sprod
པར་རྒྱག་པ	to print. Syn {par 'debs pa}	par rgyag pa
པར་རྒྱབ	text D	par rgyab
པར་རྒྱབ་པ	photograph, print, print, stamp	par rgyab pa
པར་སྒྲིག	set type	par sgrig
པར་སྒྲིག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	type setting machine	par sgrig 'phrul 'khor
པར་སྒྲོམ	1) par shing 'jog sa'i sgrom; 2) Brnyan par sgrig sa'i sgrom	par sgrom
པར་ངོས	page surface of a printing plate	par ngos
པར་ཅན	pictorial	par can
པར་ཆས	camera	par chas
པར་རྗེས	impression	par rjes
པར་བརྗོད་པ	manyjushr'in'amasangg'iti; Mahayana Buddhist devotional work recalling the names of the bodhisattva Manjushri; includes a prayer based on the manyjushr'in'amasangg'iti	par brjod pa
པར་ཏང	a hairy carpet	par tang
པར་སྟེགས	stand for print blocks while printing	par stegs
པར་བརྟེན	"causal" connective	par brten
པར་ཐང	par tang	par thang
པར་ཐང་ཁྲ་བོ	[arch] gdan grum ze	par thang khra bo
པར་ཐུང	1) short printing block; 2) Dpe cha par ma ldeb thung	par thung
པར་དུ་བཀོད་པ	print, set up in print	par du bkod pa
པར་དུ་སྐྲུན་པ	to publish, issue, print	par du skrun pa
པར་དུ་བསྐྲུན	to publish	par du bskrun
པར་དུ་འདེབས་པ	print, stamp	par du 'debs pa
པར་དུ་ལེན	photograph	par du len
པར་འདེབས	printing, dyeing	par 'debs
པར་འདེབས་དང་ཚོས་རྒྱག	printing and dyeing	par 'debs dang tshos rgyag
པར་འདེབས་པ	print	par 'debs pa
པར་འདེབས་ཚོས་རྒྱག	printing and dyeing	par 'debs tshos rgyag
པར་འདེབས་ལག་རྩལ	art of printing	par 'debs lag rtsal
པར་སྣག	printing ink	par snag
པར་པ	printer	par pa
པར་པ་ཏ	med. herb {par pa ta [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rims tsad dang, dug tsad sel,... syn: 'khri shing ral pa can dang, sngon po chig thub, mi rgan ral pa can, rims 'joms	par pa ta
པར་པར	flying up or rising	par par
པར་པིར	flirting girl	par pir
པར་པོ་སོ་བརྒྱད	castle in which shen rab's father lived	par po so brgyad
པར་དཔོན	pecha printer leader/ foreman	par dpon
པར་སྤྱི	print foreman	par spyi
པར་ཕུད	1st print [offering	par phud
པར་བུ	breadth, SA pa tra	par bu
པར་བྱང	par gyi mjug byang	par byang
པར་བླངས	print	par blangs
པར་དབང	copyright, publication rights	par dbang
པར་མ	printed matter edition	par ma
པར་ཙ་སོ་ཏི	kind of cotton cloth	par tsa so ti
པར་རྩ	dpe cha etc. to be engraved 1st written on paper	par rtsa
པར་རྩ་སྦྱར་བ	, join the letters of the example to the block	par rtsa sbyar ba
པར་མཛུབ	middle finger	par mdzub
པར་ཞུ་གཏོང་བ	proofread, check	par zhu gtong ba
པར་ཞུས	proof-reading	par zhus
པར་ཞུས་བྱེད	proof-read	par zhus byed
པར་ཞུས་ཟིན་དཔེ	proofs, galley sheet	par zhus zin dpe
པར་གཞི	printing boards	par gzhi
པར་གཞི་དང་པོ	1st edition	par gzhi dang po
པར་གཞི་ཚོན་ཅན	color print/ edition	par gzhi tshon can
པར་ཡིག་གི་ཞུས་དག	proof-reading	par yig gi zhus dag
པར་ཡིག་བླུག་འཁོར	type-casting machine par g.yog - printer's assistant par g.yog - printer's helper	par yig blug 'khor
པར་རིང	1) long printing block mda' tshad ma; 2) Dpe cha par ma ldeb ring	par ring
པར་རིས	1) picture, portrait; 2) par gyi ri mo; 3) chart	par ris
པར་རིས་འབྲི	draw/ paint a picture/ portrait	par ris 'bri
པར་ལུས	SA lus	par lus
པར་ལེན	print, take a photograph	par len
པར་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	camera, printing/ photography machines/ apparatus	par len 'phrul chas
པར་ལེན་སློབ་ཚོགས	photographic society	par len slob tshogs
པར་ཤ་དང་བོད་ཀྱི་ཆས་གོས	Persia and Tibetan dress	par sha dang bod kyi chas gos
པར་ཤིག	a flower	par shig
པར་ཤིང	wood-block	par shing
པར་ཤིང་ཁྲེས་པ	par rko sa'i kind of hard wood	par shing khres pa
པར་ཤོག	paper to be printed/ for printing	par shog
པར་བཤུས	dpe don rnam pa dbyer med kyi 'dra tshul,...Bshad rgyu'i nang don gcig kyang mi so so'i shod stangs par bshus brgyab pa nang bzhin mi yong	par bshus
པར་སིག	1) W of India kingdom = stag gzig, ta zig, now dbyi lang, Persia; 2) leather strap/ strip D	par sig
པར་སིག་པ	[arch] 1) mi sha la longs spyod mkhan gyi rigs shig; 2) Par sig pa ??	par sig pa
པར་སོགས་བླུགས་སྣོད	album	par sogs blugs snod
པར་སློག	reprint, re-publish	par slog
པལ་ཁ	vein, tubular vessel D	pal kha
པལ་པ་ཛ	hemp	pal pa dza
པལ་ལ་ཏུ་ལཱ	scales of a balance	pal la tu lA
པས	and so	pas
པས་ཀྱང	x {rgya gar dam pas kyang} this is why the Indian sage, Padampa Sangye, said:	pas kyang
པས་ཁར་མཚོ	Lake Baikal	pas khar mtsho
པས་ན	because connective	pas na
པས་ན་རེད	because construction	pas na red
པས་ནའོ	because construction	pas na'o
པས་མ་ཚད	the greatest/ best	pas ma tshad
པས་རེད	because construction	pas red
པས་ལུས	SA lus	pas lus
པི	charnel ground, 43 D	pi
པི་ཀ་ལི	book shelf	pi ka li
པི་ཀྲི	feet	pi kri
པི་ཅི་ནི	Bikini Atoll	pi ci ni
པི་ཅིང	Peking	pi cing
པི་ཆག	large butcher's knife	pi chag
པི་ཆི	water chestnut	pi chi
པི་ཏོ་པ	{pi to pa} [Buddhist said to have visited Shambhala	pi to pa
པི་རྟོ་པ	an indian buddhist who visited shambhala	pi rto pa
པི་པ་ཅན	{pi pa can} River [in India]	pi pa can
པི་པ་ཤན	a great river in india	pi pa shan
པི་པི	fife, flute, nipple, teat	pi pi
པི་པི་ལིང	the piper longum fruit which cures all kinds of cold, long pepper, piper longum, long pepper	pi pi ling
པི་སྤལ	the wild fig-tree	pi spal
པི་ཕོ	abbr of pi pi ling, black pepper	pi pho
པི་བ	lute/ vina	pi ba
པི་ལྦང	flute, guitar, string instrument	pi lbang
པི་ལྦང་རྒྱུད་གཆིག་པ	single string instrument	pi lbang rgyud gchig pa
པི་ལྦང་རྒྱུད་མང	many strong instrument	pi lbang rgyud mang
པི་ལྦང་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	three string instrument	pi lbang rgyud gsum
པི་ཙི	cup, teacup	pi tsi
པི་ཙུ་ལ་ལ	a gem	pi tsu la la
པི་ཙེ	skin, leather bag	pi tse
པི་ཝང	guitar, lute, violin, fiddle, Tibetan stringed instrument used in popular music	pi wang
པི་ཝང་མཁན	violin player, guitarist	pi wang mkhan
པི་ཝང་གི་སྒྲ	the sound of the vina	pi wang gi sgra
པི་ཝང་གླིང་བུ	reed flute	pi wang gling bu
པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད	musician	pi wang rgyud
པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད་གཅིག་པ	1 string tamboura/ vi a	pi wang rgyud gcig pa
པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད་གཆིག་པ	single string instrument	pi wang rgyud gchig pa
པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད་མང	vi a tamboura w many strings	pi wang rgyud mang
པི་ཝང་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	three string instrument	pi wang rgyud gsum
པི་ཝང་སྦྲེང་བ	vina-player; x {pi wang sbreng ba la mkhas sam gsungs} [the Buddha] asked him: you were a	pi wang sbreng ba
པི་རག	a gem	pi rag
པི་རི	CH pir leb mo	pi ri
པི་རི་ན	SA snying nyid pi lang la} - pi lang pass [spu hreng rdzong gi lho rgyud du yod cing, el. smi 5320	pi ri na
པི་ལང་ལ	pi lang pass	pi lang la
པི་ལི་སི	Belgium	pi li si
པི་ལི་ཧྲི	Belgium	pi li hri
པི་ལིང	demigods	pi ling
པི་ལིང་འཕར་མ	demigods	pi ling 'phar ma
པི་ལིན་དའི་བུ	son of pilinda	pi lin da'i bu
པི་ལུ	kind of flesh-eating demon	pi lu
པི་ལུ་མཐའ་ཡས	kind of flesh-eating demon	pi lu mtha' yas
པི་ལུ་བཟང་པོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	pi lu bzang po
པི་ཤི	cat	pi shi
པིག་པ་མི་གསལ	fool	pig pa mi gsal
པིག་པ་མི་གསལ་བ	idiot	pig pa mi gsal ba
པིག་མོ	knee	pig mo
པིང	(not in Das)	ping
པིང་ཀྱུ་མ	kite bird	ping kyu ma
པིང་ཀྱུར་མ	bird ne le' or 'ol pa	ping kyur ma
པིང་ཁྱུ་མ	kite	ping khyu ma
པིང་ཆིའུ	ice ball	ping chi'u
པིང་གཏོང་བ	bod du 'tsho ba skyel stangs rags rgyab pa dang gcig pa yin yang thob cha phyed skal las mi 'thob pa'i tshogs pa zhig	ping gtong ba
པིང་ཐོན	army	ping thon
པིང་སོང	ping pong	ping song
པིང་སོང་ཆིའུ	ping pong	ping song chi'u
པིན་ཀན	biscuit, cracker	pin kan
པིན་ཁབ	[safety] pin, needle	pin khab
པིན་འགལ་མཚོ	Bay of Bengal	pin 'gal mtsho
པིན་ཆིའུ	ice hockey	pin chi'u
པིན་ཏ་ར་ཏ	{pin ta ra ta} [commentator on yogachara works etc. D	pin ta ra ta
པིབ་པ་ལ	peepul tree	pib pa la
པིའི་ཙི	CH short liquor drinking vessel	pi'i tsi
པིར	chinese writing brush, pencil, pen, brush, lead pencil pir} - 1) (CH) writing brush [syn: bris smyug dang 'bri byed; 2) brush, pencil; 2) chur gnas srog chags dbyibs 'khar rnga kha sbyar ba ltar yo...	pir
པིར་ཁ	brush point	pir kha
པིར་ཁ་བསྣུན	draw out a stroke	pir kha bsnun
པིར་གྱི་རུས་པ	water animal dbyibs 'khar rnga kha sbyar ba ltar mtha' 'khor ba'i kha so can zhig ste, its bones overcome byis pa'i gdon nad &, chung sri 'joms	pir gyi rus pa
པིར་མགོ	big toe spu skyes sar yod pa'i chu rtsa sbu gu can gyi yan lag cig ste, der bcad brdung shor na rlung 'phyo zhing lus kyi bya ba nyams par 'gyur ba zhig	pir mgo
པིར་སྟེགས	tshon spyad pir gyi stegs	pir stegs
པིར་དོང	brush container	pir dong
པིར་སྤུ	brush hair	pir spu
པིར་བ	crush, grind	pir ba
པིར་སྦུག	pir blug sa zhig	pir sbug
པིར་ཤུབས	pir gyi snod in the god realms	pir shubs
པིལ་ཙེ	sieve	pil tse
པིས	take off, undress	pis
པུ་ཁ་རེ་སེད	Bucharest	pu kha re sed
པུ་གའི་འབྲས་བུ	areca nut	pu ga'i 'bras bu
པུ་གུ	child. Syn {phur gu}	pu gu
པུ་ཏ་ན	a city	pu ta na
པུ་ཏི	milfoil	pu ti
པུ་ཏོ་པོ	{pu to po} a learned lama	pu to po
པུ་སྟ་ཀ	book	pu sta ka
པུ་སྟི	book, volume, scripture	pu sti
པུ་སྟི་ཀ	volume of scripture pu de gung rgyal} - 9th king of Tibet pu de kun rgyal [zur chag stod kyi steng gnyis kyi ya gyal zhig khong gis sku mkhar phying dbar stag rtse brtsigs, rgyal po 'di'i sku dus s...	pu sti ka
པུ་དེ་གུང་རྒྱལ	9th king of Tibet pu de kun rgyal	pu de gung rgyal
པུ་ན་ཀ	{pu na ka} flower	pu na ka
པུ་ན་ཁ	{pu na kha}	pu na kha
པུ་པུ་ཀུ་ཤུ	hoopoe bird pu pu khu shud} - kind of bird = pu shud, bya khra bo mgo la sgro lcog yod pa zhig [syn: sgro yi gtsug phud can dang, mchu ring, dri nga'i 'dab chags	pu pu ku shu
པུ་པུ་ཁུ་ཤུད	kind of bird = pu shud 1608	pu pu khu shud
པུ་བ	press[ing]	pu ba
པུ་བྱི	spu byi	pu byi
པུ་ཙེ	husks of barley, bran	pu tse
པུ་ཚབ་གསེར་ཁང་གླིང	Golden Orphan Temple, at Samye	pu tshab gser khang gling
པུ་ཚེ	husks of barley, bran	pu tshe
པུ་རང	spu hreng gangs kyi skor - Snow Land of Purang, one of the three districts of Ngari (mnga' ris skor gsum)	pu rang
པུ་རངས	district in se ngari khorsum	pu rangs
པུ་རི	SK Puri City, tube	pu ri
པུ་རི་ཕུག་མོ་ཆེ	place where {bka' thang gser phreng} was revealed by {sangs rgyas gling pa} {gter ston} 13401396	pu ri phug mo che
པུ་རིག	a district in Tibet	pu rig
པུ་རུ་ག་རི་ཡ	Bulgaria	pu ru ga ri ya
པུ་རུ་ཟིལ	Brazil	pu ru zil
པུ་རུ་རུ	flutter (wave (ribbons	pu ru ru
པུ་རུ་ཤ	official, minister	pu ru sha
པུ་རུ་སཤ	man, soul	pu ru ssha
པུ་ལ་ཁེ	Prague	pu la khe
པུ་ལི་ར་མ་ལ་ཡ	{pu li ra ma la ya}	pu li ra ma la ya
པུ་ལི་སི	police	pu li si
པུ་ལིང་ག	name for masculine gender	pu ling ga
པུ་ལིས	police	pu lis
པུ་ལུ	hut	pu lu
པུ་ལེ་ར་མ་ལ་ཡ	a country in ancient india	pu le ra ma la ya
པུ་ལོ	Puloman [father of Indra's wife, destroyed to avoid his curse at having violated her]	pu lo
པུ་ལོ་མ	Puloman	pu lo ma
པུ་ལོ་མ་དགྲ	name of brgya byin lha	pu lo ma dgra
པུ་ལོ་མའི་དགྲ	Indra	pu lo ma'i dgra
པུ་ལོ་མའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of Puloman, wife of Indra	pu lo ma'i bu mo
པུ་ལོ་མའི་སྲས་མོ	daughter of Puloman, wife of Indra	pu lo ma'i sras mo
པུ་ལོའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of Puloman, wife of Indra	pu lo'i bu mo
པུ་ལོའི་སྲས་མོ	name of brgya byin ma	pu lo'i sras mo
པུ་ཤུ	definition, balustrades, railings, fence, upper story of building; coping (of mansion)	pu shu
པུ་ཤུད	/; 2) hoopoe bird [med.]	pu shud
པུ་ཤུད་མགོ	hoopoe head	pu shud mgo
པུ་ཤུའི་སྟེངས	top of a building	pu shu'i stengs
པུ་ཤེད	hoopoe bird, turret, open airing room at top of house	pu shed
པུ་ཤེལ	kind of stone pu shel tse} - {pu shel tse med. herb [ro mngar, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas skyug pa gcod, bad kan tsa ba sel [syn: ba la dang, mirmu la, rtsva ga bur, au ri sha]	pu shel
པུ་ཤེལ་ཙེ	med herb {pu shel tse} [Andropogon muraticus root good for vomiting, klu man sgras] = nag dbye, bya zas, 'khor lo'i lus, nya yi 'byor pa, lus ngan mig]	pu shel tse
པུ་ཤེལ་རྩི	orchis, vetiveria zizanoides, Orchid, khus khus	pu shel rtsi
པུ་ས་ལ	sman 'u su or sngo bsod nams dpal 'dzoms	pu sa la
པུ་ཨེ་ར་ཧྲི་ལྦི་ཁེའི་རིང་ལུགས	bolshevism	pu e ra hri lbi khe'i ring lugs
པུག་ཏ	shelf, partition [in box]	pug ta
པུག་མ	collar-bone	pug ma
པུག་རིལ	chang btsags zin pa blug sa'i snod cig	pug ril
པུང་པ	unshaped clay or wood vessel for beverage	pung pa
པུད	(not in Das)	pud
པུཎ་ཊ་རི་ཀ	blue lotus	puN Ta ri ka
པུན་ད་རི་ཀ	1) {pu a r ka gem; 2) {pu a r ka	pun da ri ka
པུན་ད་རི་ཀའི་ཕྲེང	1) garland of pundarika flowers	pun da ri ka'i phreng
པུན་ནག	{pun nag tree [Rotleria tinctoria, flowers yield yellow dye	pun nag
པུའུ	department, ministry, bureau	pu'u
པུའུ་ཀྲང	minister, director	pu'u krang
པུའུ་ཀྲང་གྲོས་ཚོགས	council of ministers	pu'u krang gros tshogs
པུའུ་ཁང	ministry	pu'u khang
པུའུ་ཏུའེ	detachment, command, crew	pu'u tu'e
པུའུ་ཡིས་རིགས	Puyi nationality/ ethnic group	pu'u yis rigs
པུའུ་ལུའུ་སེར	Brussells	pu'u lu'u ser
པུར	corpse, steel-yard; corpse	pur
པུར་ཁང	crematorium, tomb	pur khang
པུར་གྱིས་འཕུར་བ	[arch] suddenly 'phur ba	pur gyis 'phur ba
པུར་རྒྱལ	kingdom of the dead, ghost land, Tibet	pur rgyal
པུར་སྒམ	coffin	pur sgam
པུར་སྒྲོམ	coffin	pur sgrom
པུར་ཅ་རི་ཡ	Bulgaria	pur ca ri ya
པུར་དར	corpse covering kha btags	pur dar
པུར་ན་གི་རི	{pur na gi ri [holy place in N Uddiyana	pur na gi ri
པུར་པན་ལ	prince of digestive stimulants, SA tsi hra ka	pur pan la
པུར་པུར	fidget	pur pur
པུར་པུར་མིན་པའི་རླབས་ཆེ་བ་ས་ལེ་བ	do not fidget, be expansive and clear	pur pur min pa'i rlabs che ba sa le ba
པུར་བ	too intensely	pur ba
པུར་སྦྱངས་པ	pur bzhus pa	pur sbyangs pa
པུར་བཞུས་པ	burn a corpse	pur bzhus pa
པུར་ཧྲི་ཝ་ཁེ	bolshevik	pur hri wa khe
པུས	knee	pus
པུས་ཀ་སི	Pukkasi, 1 of ke'u ri brgyad	pus ka si
པུས་ཁེབས	knee warming cover	pus khebs
པུས་འཁྱུད	meditation belt	pus 'khyud
པུས་གུག	gshol mgo'i shing gug	pus gug
པུས་གོང	knees pus gong gru g.yas brtan - right elbow on the knee	pus gong
པུས་གོང་ཉིས་སུ་བརྟན	placed on the two knees 1609	pus gong nyis su brtan
པུས་གོང་དུ་བརྟན	placed on the knee pus gong g.yas par - around the right knee	pus gong du brtan
པུས་མགོ	top of the knees	pus mgo
པུས་ལྕིབས	knee's gyogs sam pus shubs	pus lcibs
པུས་ཏི	book, {po ti}, {dpe cha}	pus ti
པུས་ནུབ་ཙམ་དུ	knee-deep/ up to one's knees in	pus nub tsam du
པུས་གནོན	[hand] touching the knee	pus gnon
པུས་གནོན་ངལ་བསོའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the resting mudra of touching the knees	pus gnon ngal bso'i phyag rgya
པུས་པ་ལ	pu sa la	pus pa la
པུས་མོ	knee	pus mo
པུས་མོ་མཁྲེགས	stiff knee	pus mo mkhregs
པུས་མོ་འཁྲེགས	stiff knee pus mo gyas pa'i lha nga sa la gtsugs te kneel w the right knee on the ground	pus mo 'khregs
པུས་མོ་གཅོད་པ	cutting [off?] the knees as punishment	pus mo gcod pa
པུས་མོ་ནུབ་པ	knee-deep	pus mo nub pa
པུས་མོ་ནུབ་པ་ཙམ	even to sinking in up to the knees	pus mo nub pa tsam
པུས་མོ་བཙུགས	kneel	pus mo btsugs
པུས་མོ་བཙུགས་པ	kneel	pus mo btsugs pa
པུས་མོ་བཙུགས་ཟིན་པ	knelt	pus mo btsugs zin pa
པུས་མོ་འཛུགས	kneel	pus mo 'dzugs
པུས་མོ་འཛུགས་པ	to kneel	pus mo 'dzugs pa
པུས་མོ་ས་ལ་བཙུགས་པ	kneel	pus mo sa la btsugs pa
པུས་མོའི་གནས	knee joint	pus mo'i gnas
པུས་མོའི་ཚིགས	knee joint	pus mo'i tshigs
པུས་མོའི་ལྷ་ང	knee pans, kneel down	pus mo'i lha nga
པུས་མོའི་ལྷ་ང་ས་ལ་འཛུགས་པ	set the knees on the ground	pus mo'i lha nga sa la 'dzugs pa
པུས་བཙུག་མཛད	knees planted (on ground); knelt, knees planted (on ground)	pus btsug mdzad
པུས་བཙུག་མཛད་པ	kneeling	pus btsug mdzad pa
པུས་བཙུགས	kneel	pus btsugs
པུས་བཙུགས་ཐལ་སྦྱར	pus mo btsugs te lag pa gnyis kyi sor bcu snying gar sbyar ba	pus btsugs thal sbyar
པུས་ཚིགས	knee joint	pus tshigs
པུས་ཚིགས་ཕྱི	in med. treatment gser khab rgyag sa'i gnad gsang zhig	pus tshigs phyi
པུས་འཛུགས་ཆུ་ལེན	place the knee on the ground chu len pa'i lha gar 'khrab tshul zhig	pus 'dzugs chu len
པུས་འོག	the lower edge of the knees	pus 'og
པུས་ཤུབས	knee's shubs sam dor khug	pus shubs
པུས་ལྷང	knee's front bone or 'phang lo	pus lhang
པེ	gruel broth D	pe
པེ་ཀར	spirit king of custodians of monastic properties	pe kar
པེ་ཀར་གླིང	Pekar Temple. A temple at Samye	pe kar gling
པེ་ཀྲན་ན	Bechuanaland	pe kran na
པེ་ཀྲོན་སྣུམ	gasoline, petrol	pe kron snum
པེ་དཀར	pe dkar	pe dkar
པེ་སྒང	place	pe sgang
པེ་ཅིང	Beijing	pe cing
པེ་ཅིན	CH Beijing	pe cin
པེ་ཅིན་གྱི་སྤྲ་མི	Peking man	pe cin gyi spra mi
པེ་ཅིན་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ	Peking University	pe cin slob grwa che ba
པེ་ཏ་ཧོར	country E of Yarkand	pe ta hor
པེ་ཏ་ཧྲུའང	great northern waste	pe ta hru'ang
པེ་ཏའི	{be ta li}	pe ta'i
པེ་ཏེ་རོལ	gasoline	pe te rol
པེ་ཏེ་ཧོར	country E of Yarkand	pe te hor
པེ་དུའི་ཉིད་པོ	essence of vaidurya	pe du'i nyid po
པེ་བན	graft, scion	pe ban
པེ་བེ	calf	pe be
པེ་དབྱང་དམག་དཔོན་ངན་པོ	Northern Warlords	pe dbyang dmag dpon ngan po
པེ་དབྱང་དམག་གཤེད་ཅན	Northern Warlords	pe dbyang dmag gshed can
པེ་ཙམ	little, small	pe tsam
པེ་ཙེ	CH white cabbage J, celery	pe tse
པེ་ཚལ	CH white cabbage J, celery	pe tshal
པེ་ཚེ	white cabbage	pe tshe
པེ་ཞི	ravioli like CH food	pe zhi
པེ་ཡང་དམག་དཔོན་ངན་པོ	Northern Warlords	pe yang dmag dpon ngan po
པེ་ཡང་དམག་གཤེད་ཅན	Northern Warlords	pe yang dmag gshed can
པེ་ར	a flat basket	pe ra
པེ་ར་ཅིན	Belgium	pe ra cin
པེ་ར་ལེན	Berlin	pe ra len
པེ་རི་སི	Paris	pe ri si
པེ་རོ	Vairochana	pe ro
པེ་རོ་ཙ་ནའི་ཡང་དག་བཅུ་གཅིག	(chn	pe ro tsa na'i yang dag bcu gcig
པེ་ལིང	Berlin	pe ling
པེ་ལུན་ཆུ་བོ	Pe Lun River S CH	pe lun chu bo
པེ་ཤ	exclamation of wonder	pe sha
པེ་སིང་དབྱང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	Arctic Ocean	pe sing dbyang rgya mtsho chen po
པེ་ཧར	pe har [spirit king, chief custondian of monastic property [w principal shrine in nechung grove near Lhasa said to have been bound to oath by Padmasambhava	pe har
པེ་ཧར་རྒྱལ་པོ	deity {pe har rgyal po}	pe har rgyal po
པེན་ཏ	pincers	pen ta
པེན་ད་པ	Pindapa	pen da pa
པེན་དི་ནེ	Pendine in Wales	pen di ne
པེན་པ	pincers	pen pa
པེར་ཅིན	Belgium	per cin
པེལ་པེལ	be'u	pel pel
པོ་གོ་ཏ	Bogata	po go ta
པོ་ཏ་ལ	residence of Avalokiteshvara and Tara said to be on a hill in a harbor on the Indian Ocean or by CH in an island in the China Sea near Shanghai. Palace in NW Lhasa	po ta la
པོ་ཏ་ལ་ཡི་རྩེ	atop the peak of Mount Potala	po ta la yi rtse
པོ་ཏ་ལའི་ཕོ་བྲང་དཀར་པོ	potala's white palace	po ta la'i pho brang dkar po
པོ་ཏ་ལའི་ཕོ་བྲང་དམར་པོ	Potala's Red Palace	po ta la'i pho brang dmar po
པོ་ཏ་ལའི་ཤོད	at the bottom of the Potala	po ta la'i shod
པོ་ཏང་གི	SA gsong por smra ba 1610	po tang gi
པོ་ཏི	book, scripture, volume	po ti
པོ་ཏུམ	large wasp	po tum
པོ་ཏོ	bullock	po to
པོ་ཏོ་བ	1031-1105 - Potowa, a Kadampa master	po to ba
པོ་ཏོ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་གསལ	Geshe Potowa, Rinchen Sal; also known as Rinchen Sal, 1031-1105, one of the three main disciples of Dromtönpa. {bka' gdams pa}	po to ba rin chen gsal
པོ་ཏོག	tall	po tog
པོ་བསྟོད	words of praise w many final PO particles	po bstod
པོ་ཐོ	spo to	po tho
པོ་མཐོ	shape 'bur 'bur / tshog tshog	po mtho
པོ་པོ	grand-dad	po po
པོ་པོ་རི་ཇ	herb	po po ri ja
པོ་བོ	grandfather	po bo
པོ་བོ་ལགས	grand-dad, grandfather	po bo lags
པོ་དབྱང་མཐེའུ	Lake Poyang	po dbyang mthe'u
པོ་མེད་པ	base	po med pa
པོ་མོ	grandmother, old woman	po mo
པོ་ཚལ	spinach	po tshal
པོ་ཚི་ཐན་གྱི་སྤྱི་བསྒྲགས	Potsdam Declaration	po tshi than gyi spyi bsgrags
པོ་རྫུའོ་ལི	Pozzuoli	po rdzu'o li
པོ་ཟོས་པ	[arch] ji ltar thogs pa'am, ji tsam 'gor ba	po zos pa
པོ་རླུང་ཡིན་ཟློག་ཐབས་མང	1) 'phral du 'tshubs kyang phugs mi skyon, zer skad; 2) gzhan gyi skad cha la cung zad zur za ba'i tshig	po rlung yin zlog thabs mang
པོ་ལ	pilaw	po la
པོ་ལན	Poland	po lan
པོ་ལའེ་མ	Plei me Vietnam	po la'e ma
པོ་ལི་ཝ་ཡ	Bolivia	po li wa ya
པོ་ལེའ་ཀུའུ	Pleiku Vietnam	po le' ku'u
པོ་ལོ	ball games, polo	po lo
པོ་ལོ་འགྲན་བསྡུར	ball game, game competition	po lo 'gran bsdur
པོ་ལོ་རྒྱག	play ball games/ polo	po lo rgyag
པོ་ལོ་ཤན	{po lo shan - [high mt in China	po lo shan
པོ་ལོན་ཤན	high mountain in china	po lon shan
པོ་ཤེལ	amber	po shel
པོ་སོ་ཆ	po so cha med. tree	po so cha
པོ་སོན་ཆ	shrub sesbana grandiflora	po son cha
པོ་སོན་འཆའ	po so cha med. tree	po son 'cha'
པོ་ཧའེ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Pahai Sea	po ha'e rgya mtsho
པོ་ཧྲང	single man w/o consort/ wife	po hrang
པོ་ཧྲི	Ph. D	po hri
པོ་ཨེན	Bonn	po en
པོག	resin of plant boswellia thurifera	pog
པོག་ཏ	sir, lord, SA rje	pog ta
པོག་ཕོར	[arch] incense burner	pog phor
པོག་རི	[arch] ends of the bone-joints	pog ri
པོག་རེ	[arch] ba gam ste palace's sdings cha	pog re
པོད	bundle, sheaf, volume, book	pod
པོད་དམར	pod dmar	pod dmar
པོད་རལ	scripture and sword	pod ral
པོད་ལུང	book-authorization	pod lung
པོན་ཏོ	phon to	pon to
པོབ	castrated ram	pob
པོབ་ལིག	public	pob lig
པོབ་ལིག་སློབ་གྲྭ	public school	pob lig slob grwa
པོའོ་ལོ	pineapple	po'o lo
པོའོ་ཧའེ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Pahai Sea	po'o ha'e rgya mtsho
པོའོ་ཧྲི	Ph. D	po'o hri
པོར	Abbr. of {po la, po ru}	por
པོར་ནི	Bern	por ni
པོར་མོག	small mound of earth covered with a thin layer of grass which almost resembles a human head	por mog
པོར་འཛོད	tribe in tibet	por 'dzod
པོལ	a kind of fever	pol
པོས	{po} + instrumental case	pos
པོས་ཀྱང	x {mnyam med dvags pos kyang} as the peerless Dagpo Rinpoche says:	pos kyang
པྱངས	{dpyang}!	pyangs
པྱི་ལོགས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	subsequent arising {pha - Tibetan - phat	pyi logs su byung ba
པྲ	"mirror" divination, lot, sign, token, prognostic, omen, {phra} turquoises	pra
པྲ་ཀ་ར་ན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the 8 prakarana of Vasubandu	pra ka ra na sde brgyad
པྲ་ཀིར་ཡ	{pra kir ya} plant/ tree	pra kir ya
པྲ་ཀྲི་ཏི	SK prakrit	pra kri ti
པྲ་ཁྲིད	detailed teaching	pra khrid
པྲ་མཁན	Syn {pra phab pa}	pra mkhan
པྲ་ག་རྫྱོ་ཏི་ཤ	{pra ga rdzyo ti sha} mt [beyond mts of Susr mo Parvata, where gods live and fight asuras]	pra ga rdzyo ti sha
པྲ་ངན	inauspicious pra divination	pra ngan
པྲ་ངན་པ	bad sign	pra ngan pa
པྲ་ཆལ	jest, joke, nonsensical talk	pra chal
པྲ་ཆལ་བྱེད	joke, play the clown	pra chal byed
པྲ་ཆལ་བྱེད་པ	make sport, play the buffoon	pra chal byed pa
པྲ་ཆལ་སློང་བ	make merriment	pra chal slong ba
པྲ་ཏི་པོ་ཏང་གི	reply to an enquiry given in a mystic language	pra ti po tang gi
པྲ་རྟགས	omens	pra rtags
པྲ་ལྟས	signs	pra ltas
པྲ་ལྟས་མོ	divinatory methods	pra ltas mo
པྲ་ལྟས་གསལ་བའི་མེ་ལོང	Mirror that reveals the clues	pra ltas gsal ba'i me long
པྲ་དུན་རྩེ	Tra Düntse	pra dun rtse
པྲ་དུན་རྩེ་ལྷ་ཁང	{pra dun rtse temple	pra dun rtse lha khang
པྲ་དུམ་རྩེ	{pra dum rtse temple	pra dum rtse
པྲ་དུམ་རྩེ་ལྷ་ཁང	{pra dum rtse temple	pra dum rtse lha khang
པྲ་འདེབས	do pra divination	pra 'debs
པྲཱ་ཎ	see {rlung}	prA Na
པྲ་པ་ཏ	boat	pra pa ta
པྲ་ཕབ	do pra divination	pra phab
པྲ་ཕབ་པ	a prince, figure, shape, image, draw, prognostics from a charmed mirror	pra phab pa
པྲ་ཕབ་བཞིན	likeness image [in pra divination]	pra phab bzhin
པྲ་བ	1) flower of tree Aeschynomene grandiflora D; 2) plant Teronia elephantum; 3) hardness	pra ba
པྲ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	subtle primordial wisdom	pra ba'i ye shes
པྲ་མ་ཎ	logic and dialectics	pra ma Na
པྲ་མིག	eye able to see pre reflections etc.	pra mig
པྲ་མོ	pra divine w mirror etc. [R] lot, sign, token, prognostic, omen,	pra mo
པྲ་མོ་འདེབས	do prasena mirror divination	pra mo 'debs
པྲ་མོ་ཧ	n of goddess pra mo ha pad ma dpal 'dzin ma Pramoha Padma Paldzinma	pra mo ha
པྲ་རྩི	varnish	pra rtsi
པྲ་རྩི་པོག	white sandal wood	pra rtsi pog
པྲ་ཚིལ	beeswax	pra tshil
པྲ་ཡས	speculation, lots of discursive thoughts or scattered ideas which do	pra yas
པྲ་ལི	rat-like tailless rodent Lagomys badius ?	pra li
པྲ་ལེགས	auspicious pra divination	pra legs
པྲ་སེ་ན	oracular mirror. [employed in tantra divination to detect past, present and future events]	pra se na
པྲ་ཧེ་བ་ཛྲ	Prahevajra. Syn Pramodavajra, {dga' rab rdo rje}	pra he ba dzra
པྲ་ཧེ་བཛྲ	Prahevajra, Pramodavajra, {dga' rab rdo rje}	pra he bdzra
པྲག	(not in Das)	prag
པྲག་ཆུས	doubt, suspicion	prag chus
པྲག་པྲིག	a little, a few	prag prig
པྲི་ཡ་ཀ	saffron	pri ya ka
པྲི་ཡང་ཀུ	dracocephalum tanguticum maxim., saffron, panicum italicum, medicinal plant and perfume, lavandula officinalis, callicarpa macrophylla, lavender pri yang ku} - {pri yang ku med. herb [ro mngar la k...	pri yang ku
པྲི་ཡང་གུ	1) the crest of a cock; 2) {pri yang ku med. herb	pri yang gu
པྲི་ཤའི་མིག	rat, mouse	pri sha'i mig
པྲུ	(not in Das)	pru
པྲེ་ཏ	preta	pre ta
པྲེ་ཏ་ཀ	Skt. for {yi dwags}	pre ta ka
པྲེ་ཏ་པུ་རི	Pretapuri; Seventy-five kilometers west of Darchen, Pretapuri is one of the most sacred of the eight Underground Abodes (sa 'og gi gnas brgyad, see note 10). Vajra Varahi is the chief deity of the ...	pre ta pu ri
པྲེ་ཏ་པུ་རིའི་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	preta realm	pre ta pu ri'i rgyal khams
པྲོག	p, tip, crest of a cock	prog
པྲོག་མ	container, sprog ma	prog ma
པྲོག་ཞྭ་ཅན	wearing a jeweled cap, helmet	prog zhwa can
པྲོག་ཞུ	cap, helmet	prog zhu
པྲོག་ཞུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	a jeweled cap	prog zhu rin po che
པྲོག་ཞུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི	a jeweled cap	prog zhu rin po che'i
པླུཏ་ཅན	SK letter's sgra gdangs longest mtshon byed du sbyor ba'i rtags nya 'di yod pa,...Nya	plut can
དཔ་འཆེན	heroic	dpa 'chen
དཔ་འདུལ་ཝེར་མ་མཆེད་གསུམ	three wer ma brothers that subjugate heroes	dpa 'dul wer ma mched gsum
དཔག	measure, infer	dpag
དཔག་ཆད་བརྒྱ	hundreds of yojanas	dpag chad brgya
དཔག་ཆེན	powerful, 5000 fathoms	dpag chen
དཔག་ཆེན་གྱི་མདའ་ལྟ་བུ	like the arrow of a skilled archer	dpag chen gyi mda' lta bu
དཔག་ཆེན་གྱི་མདའ་འཕང་བ་ལྟར	like an arrow loosed from the bow of a master shooter	dpag chen gyi mda' 'phang ba ltar
དཔག་འཇལ	to estimate, scale, measure	dpag 'jal
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད	immeasurable	dpag tu med
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	innumerable	dpag tu med pa
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་ཉིད	immeasurability	dpag tu med pa nyid
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་གཉིས	the two immeasurables	dpag tu med pa gnyis
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པའི་དངོས་པོ	immeasurable things	dpag tu med pa'i dngos po
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པའི་དུས	immeasurable time	dpag tu med pa'i dus
དཔག་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	measurable, numerable	dpag tu yod pa
དཔག་ཏུ་རུང་བ	be able to measure, measurable	dpag tu rung ba
དཔག་ཐག	measuring tape/ string	dpag thag
དཔག་ཐབས་མེད་པ	incalculable, innumerable, immeasurable, limitless 1612	dpag thabs med pa
དཔག་འདོད	NyTh: shes 'dod dang 'dra. "that which one desires to know," i.e., the subject of a syllogism. [mss]	dpag 'dod
དཔག་པ	[f dpog pa]	dpag pa
དཔག་དཔག་པར་དཀའ་པ	immeasurable, measure, fathom, scale, estimate, weigh, compare, proportion	dpag dpag par dka' pa
དཔག་བྱས	measurable	dpag byas
དཔག་བྲལ	Syn {dpag med}	dpag bral
དཔག་མི་ཐུབ་པ	impossible to comprehend	dpag mi thub pa
དཔག་མིན	inestimable	dpag min
དཔག་མེད	{dpag tu med pa} countless; boundless; unfathomable	dpag med
དཔག་མེད་པར	inconceivably	dpag med par
དཔག་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་ཚོགས་འཕེལ	increase of the assembly of immeasurable virtues	dpag med yon tan tshogs 'phel
དཔག་ཙད	pagtse, measure of distance; 1) in Kalachakra 24 fingers is a cubit x four = gzhu 'dom gang, x 2000 x four = dpag tshad yojana, mile, league, 2) in Abhidharma = 8 {rgyang grags 4000 fathoms, approx...	dpag tsad
དཔག་ཚད	4000 fathoms (1 land mile)/ a league; Yojana [measure of distance], mile, a 'league', acc. to Abhidharma. def. {rgyang grags brgyad la dpag tshad gcig} 4000 fathoms, approximately 8 km. a distance ...	dpag tshad
ཞིག	a great elephant known as Fine Mountain who could travel hundreds of miles in a day	zhig
དཔག་ཚད་གཅིག	one league / yojana	dpag tshad gcig
དཔག་ཚད་ཕྱེད	half a yojana	dpag tshad phyed
དཔག་ཚད་བྱེ་བར	for millions of miles	dpag tshad bye bar
དཔག་ཚུལ	way of measuring, estimation	dpag tshul
དཔག་ཚོད	presumption	dpag tshod
དཔག་གཞི	basis of inference	dpag gzhi
དཔག་ཡས	incalculable, innumerable, immeasurable, limitless	dpag yas
དཔག་རང་ཉམས་ལ་དཔག	using your own experience	dpag rang nyams la dpag
དཔག་ཤོད	{dpag shod} district	dpag shod
དཔག་བསམ	wish granting	dpag bsam
དཔག་བསམ་འཁྲི་ཤིང	wishing tree, tree of cogitation, poem by kshemendra	dpag bsam 'khri shing
དཔག་བསམ་གྱི་ཤིང	wish granting tree	dpag bsam gyi shing
དཔག་བསམ་གྱི་ཤིང་ལྟ་བུ	like the wishgranting tree	dpag bsam gyi shing lta bu
དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་པ	the wish-granting tree	dpag bsam ljon pa
དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་ཤིང	the wishfulfilling tree, wish granting tree	dpag bsam ljon shing
དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང	wish-fulfilling tree, wishing tree of the gods	dpag bsam shing
དཔགས	vi. in proportion to, relative to, according to, estimating on	dpags
དཔགས་པ	pf. of {dpog pa}	dpags pa
དཔགས་པར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to measure/ infer	dpags par dka' ba
དཔང	witness	dpang
དཔང་གྱུར	witness	dpang gyur
དཔང་རྒྱ	[arch] draw up/ sign an agreement/ contract	dpang rgya
དཔང་བརྒྱད	gyod ya phan tshun gnyis kyi witnesses four each or 8	dpang brgyad
དཔང་རྟགས	evidence, proof	dpang rtags
དཔང་བསྟོད	1) to teachings or virtue guarding divine protectors make high/ lofty praise; 2) elevate, raise, expand, make limitless	dpang bstod
དཔང་བསྟོད་པ	to extol	dpang bstod pa
དཔང་མཐོ	high	dpang mtho
དཔང་མཐོ་བ	high, lofty, elevated	dpang mtho ba
དཔང་དུ་འགྱུར	become a witness	dpang du 'gyur
དཔང་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	be witness of	dpang du 'gyur ba
དཔང་དུ་ཚུགས	to take as witness 1613	dpang du tshugs
དཔང་པོ	witness, evidence, eyewitness, referee, testimony, umpire, witness	dpang po
དཔང་པོ་བྱེད	defend in court, act as a witness, give evidence/ testimony	dpang po byed
དཔང་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to attest to	dpang po byed pa
དཔང་པོ་ར་བཀོད	take as one's measure	dpang po ra bkod
དཔང་པོ་གསུམ	CHN	dpang po gsum
དཔང་པོར་བཀོད་པ	to take as one's measure	dpang por bkod pa
དཔང་པོར་དྲིས	ask to be a witness	dpang por dris
དཔང་པོར་དྲིས་པ	asked to be a witness	dpang por dris pa
དཔང་པོར་བཞག	to take as witness	dpang por bzhag
དཔང་འཕེར	become a witness	dpang 'pher
དཔང་འཕེར་བ	become witness	dpang 'pher ba
དཔང་བྱེད་པ	make/ be a witness	dpang byed pa
དཔང་བློ་གྲོས་བརྟན་པ	a Lotsawa	dpang blo gros brtan pa
དཔང་དམའ་བ	low	dpang dma' ba
དཔང་མཛངས་དང་ལྡན	courageous	dpang mdzangs dang ldan
དཔང་འཛུགས	make a witness	dpang 'dzugs
དཔང་ཡིག	certificate, credentials, document, diploma, guarantee, surety	dpang yig
དཔང་ལོ	Pang Lotsawa: -1342	dpang lo
དཔངས	elevation, height	dpangs
དཔངས་དཀྱུས	height and length	dpangs dkyus
དཔངས་ཅན	high	dpangs can
དཔངས་སྟོད	high praise, lofty praise elevate, raise, expand, make limitless, praise highly	dpangs stod
དཔངས་བསྟོད	high, lofty praise, to elevate, raise, to expand, make limitless, to praise highly	dpangs bstod
དཔངས་བསྟོད་པ	{rgya bskyed +}- to make vast and lofty. {shes pa +} to heighten awareness	dpangs bstod pa
དཔངས་མཐོ	high, elevated, heightened, raised, lifted, uplifted, upraised	dpangs mtho
དཔངས་མཐོ་བ	high, elevated	dpangs mtho ba
དཔངས་མཐོ་བ་སེམས	to feel way confident	dpangs mtho ba sems
དཔངས་ཚད	height	dpangs tshad
དཔངས་ཞིང	height and width	dpangs zhing
དཔངས་ཞེང	height and width	dpangs zheng
དཔངས་སུ	in height	dpangs su
དཔད་པོ	witness	dpad po
དཔའ	1) {dpa' ba} courageous, brave, strong, bold, brave, heroic, fearless, gallant, unafraid, dauntless, stout, intrepid, undaunted, valiant, audacious, stouthearted, valorous. 2) bravery, strength, co...	dpa'
དཔའ་བཀོང	/ +(s intimidate, frighten, terrorize	dpa' bkong
དཔའ་བཀོང་བ	humiliated	dpa' bkong ba
དཔའ་བཀོངས	intimidated, cowed	dpa' bkongs
དཔའ་སྐད	courageous talk	dpa' skad
དཔའ་སྐོང	/ +(s intimidate, frighten, terrorize	dpa' skong
དཔའ་སྐོང་བ	humiliate, humble, break the pride of	dpa' skong ba
དཔའ་སྐྱེད་ཚ་པོ	pher sha tsha po'am 'jon mdog gi tshul,...Mi shes shes mdog gi dpa' skyed tsha po byed pa	dpa' skyed tsha po
དཔའ་སྐྱེས་ཚ་པོ	braggart	dpa' skyes tsha po
དཔའ་ཁ	victory	dpa' kha
དཔའ་ཁ་རྒྱལ་ཁ་ཐོབ་ན	if he wins	dpa' kha rgyal kha thob na
དཔའ་ཁུམས	cowardly, timid	dpa' khums
དཔའ་མཁན	heap of stones known as castles of warriors	dpa' mkhan
དཔའ་འཁོང་བ	be discouraged, disheartened	dpa' 'khong ba
དཔའ་འཁོངས	disheartened	dpa' 'khongs
དཔའ་གོང་བ	snying stobs chag pa,...Dka' tshegs mthong tsam gyis sdar ma gang yin dpa' gong ba	dpa' gong ba
དཔའ་འགྲོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the courageously going samadhi	dpa' 'gro'i ting nge 'dzin
དཔའ་རྒོ	brave	dpa' rgo
དཔའ་རྒོད	brave	dpa' rgod
དཔའ་རྒྱས་པ	heroic, very powerful, chivalrous	dpa' rgyas pa
དཔའ་ངར	bravery, courage, fearlessness, valor	dpa' ngar
དཔའ་ངར་སྐྱེ	get/ arouse courage, bravery, valor, spirit/ morale	dpa' ngar skye
དཔའ་ངར་བསྐྱེད	get/ arouse courage, bravery, valor, spirit/ morale	dpa' ngar bskyed
དཔའ་ངར་ཅན	brave, courageous	dpa' ngar can
དཔའ་ངར་ཆེ་བ	bold, brave	dpa' ngar che ba
དཔའ་ངར་བརྟུལ་ཕོད	fearless, dauntless, courageous, brave	dpa' ngar brtul phod
དཔའ་ངར་ལྡན	brave, courageous	dpa' ngar ldan
དཔའ་ངར་ལྡན་པ	brave, courageous	dpa' ngar ldan pa
དཔའ་ངར་བ	very powerful, heroic, chivalrous	dpa' ngar ba
དཔའ་ངར་འབར་བ	blaze w courage, high in spirits/ morale	dpa' ngar 'bar ba
དཔའ་ངར་ཞུམ་མེད	indomitable	dpa' ngar zhum med
དཔའ་ངོམས་དཔུང་སྟོན	saber rattling	dpa' ngoms dpung ston
དཔའ་མངའ	strong, powerful	dpa' mnga'
དཔའ་རྔམ་ཆེ	courageous and formidably intimidating	dpa' rngam che
དཔའ་ཅན	brave, beautiful, savoury	dpa' can
དཔའ་གཅིག	ekavira, without consort	dpa' gcig
དཔའ་ཆས་བརྒྱད	the 8 accoutrements of a heruka	dpa' chas brgyad
དཔའ་ཆེན	brave, courageous, great hero	dpa' chen
དཔའ་ཉམས	experience/ manner of a warrior, spirit, courage	dpa' nyams
དཔའ་ཉམས་ཅན	heroic, courageous, spirited	dpa' nyams can
དཔའ་ཉམས་དང་ལྡན	heroic, courageous, spirited 1614	dpa' nyams dang ldan
དཔའ་ཉམས་དང་ལྡན་པ	heroic, courageous, spirited	dpa' nyams dang ldan pa
དཔའ་ཉམས་ལྡན	heroic, courageous, spirited	dpa' nyams ldan
དཔའ་ཉམས་པ	intimidated, overwhelmed, courage	dpa' nyams pa
དཔའ་སྙིང	the heart of a warrior, the essence of bravery, daka essence, fearlessness	dpa' snying
དཔའ་སྙིང་ཆེ་བ	bold, brave	dpa' snying che ba
དཔའ་སྙེམས	very courageous arrogance or confidence	dpa' snyems
དཔའ་གཏུམ	courage and fierceness	dpa' gtum
དཔའ་བཏུལ་ཕུ་ནུ	heroic kinsmen and kinswomen [of Gesar]	dpa' btul phu nu
དཔའ་རྟུལ	heroic and brave, bravery, courage, fearlessness, valor, spirit, morale	dpa' rtul
དཔའ་རྟོགས་པའི་བསྐྱེད	the confidence of realization is aroused	dpa' rtogs pa'i bskyed
དཔའ་སྟོབས	bravery	dpa' stobs
དཔའ་བརྟུལ	courageous person, daka, hero[ic], v ra, warrior	dpa' brtul
དཔའ་ཐལ་བ	very brave	dpa' thal ba
དཔའ་ཐུལ	warrior, hero	dpa' thul
དཔའ་དམ	sword	dpa' dam
དཔའ་དར	dpa' bo'i gzigs bzos sam bya dga'i dar,...Rkun por dpa' dar g.yogs, spyang ki tshe thar btang	dpa' dar
དཔའ་དྲེགས	{dpa' yod pa'i nga rgyal	dpa' dregs
དཔའ་གདམ	long knife, sword	dpa' gdam
དཔའ་གདིང	courage and confidence	dpa' gding
དཔའ་གདེང	courage and confidence	dpa' gdeng
དཔའ་གདེངས	courage, a feeling of assurance and certainty	dpa' gdengs
དཔའ་ལྡན	brave	dpa' ldan
དཔའ་སྡེ་གསུམ	in king srong btsan sgam po's time Tibet NW to NE gyi sa upper, middle, and lower armies guarding the borders	dpa' sde gsum
དཔའ་པ	medicinal plant	dpa' pa
དཔའ་པོ	heroic	dpa' po
དཔའ་པོ་མཁ་འགྲོའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of dakas and dakinis	dpa' po mkha 'gro'i rang bzhin
དཔའ་པོ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of dakas and dakinis	dpa' po mkha' 'gro'i rang bzhin
དཔའ་པོ་ལྕགས	hero's whip	dpa' po lcags
དཔའ་པོ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཆས	hero's whip	dpa' po lcags kyi chas
དཔའ་པོ་བརྟན་པ	saffron	dpa' po brtan pa
དཔའ་པོ་དུལ	epithet of bhimasena	dpa' po dul
དཔའ་པོ་ཛ་མ	epithet of paracurama	dpa' po dza ma
དཔའ་པོ་རང་དཔའ་མོ	male and female warriors	dpa' po rang dpa' mo
དཔའ་པོ་ལག་པ	fragrant oleander, medicinal plant	dpa' po lag pa
དཔའ་པོའི་ཁང་པ	hero's residence	dpa' po'i khang pa
དཔའ་བ	1) strength, power, courage, daring, bravery, valor, daka, hero, strength; 2) snying stobs [courage, energy, spiritual power] kyi 'phel cha great and stable	dpa' ba
དཔའ་བ་བརྟན་པ	saffron dpa' ba phun tshogs kyi zol bstod among zol bstod kyi rgyan, ornament where to a praiseworthy perfect warrior/ hero, tying to attribute faults, really the virtues naturally become praise	dpa' ba brtan pa
དཔའ་བའི་ཉམས	among nyams ldan gyi rgyan, ornament where rgyu ma bsgrubs par 'dod don chen po grub pa'i stobs kyis nang du spro ba khyad 'phags can 'phel ba'i rnam 'gyur dpa' nyams	dpa' ba'i nyams
དཔའ་བའི་དཔུང	bravery, courage, valor	dpa' ba'i dpung
དཔའ་བར་འགྲོ་བ	1) going as a hero, bravery; 2) Surangama-samadhi, the samadhi of bravery, going-as-a-hero samadhi	dpa' bar 'gro ba
དཔའ་བར་འགྲོ་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	surangama samadhi, the samadhi of bravery, "going-as-a-hero samadhi" {ting nge 'dzin bzhi} surangama samadhi, the samadhi of bravery	dpa' bar 'gro ba'i ting nge 'dzin
གོཨིང	as-a-hero samadhi {ting nge 'dzin bzhi}	going
དཔའ་བོ་དཀར་པོ	{dpa' bo dkar po} med. herb	dpa' bo dkar po
དཔའ་བོ་སྐྱེ	town s. of vajrasana	dpa' bo skye
དཔའ་བོ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakas and dakinis	dpa' bo mkha' 'gro
དཔའ་བོ་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	dakas and dakinis dpa' bo mkha' 'gro'i rang bzhin du gsal	dpa' bo mkha' 'gro ma
དཔའ་བོ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བསུ་མ	the welcome party of dakas and dakinis	dpa' bo mkha' 'gro'i bsu ma
དཔའ་བོ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བསུན་མ	the welcome party of dakas and dakinis	dpa' bo mkha' 'gro'i bsun ma
དཔའ་བོ་དགྲ་འདུལ	warrior subduing the enemy	dpa' bo dgra 'dul
དཔའ་བོ་བརྒྱུད	epithet of vishnu	dpa' bo brgyud
དཔའ་བོ་གཅིག་པ	the ekavira form; single deity	dpa' bo gcig pa
དཔའ་བོ་ཆིག་ཐུབ	n. of tantra, see {btags grol}	dpa' bo chig thub
དཔའ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	aconite	dpa' bo chen po
དཔའ་བོ་ཆོས་འབྱུང	Dharma history, text by Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa	dpa' bo chos 'byung
དཔའ་བོ་སྟག	the tiger of courage	dpa' bo stag
དཔའ་བོ་སྟག་གི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	when 1's country quarrelled with another zhi drag thabs jus gang mkhas kyi sgo nas dgra bo 'dul lugs kyi khrims, zhal lce bcu drug gi nang gses shig	dpa' bo stag gi zhal lce
དཔའ་བོ་བརྟན་པ	saffron	dpa' bo brtan pa
དཔའ་བོ་འདས་པ	dead hero	dpa' bo 'das pa
དཔའ་བོ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Chakrasamvara	dpa' bo rdo rje
དཔའ་བོ་དཔའ་མོ	dakas and dakinis	dpa' bo dpa' mo
དཔའ་བོ་མོ	dakas and dakinis	dpa' bo mo
དཔའ་བོ་གཙུག་ལག	general name for the incarnations of Pawo Rinpoche	dpa' bo gtsug lag
དཔའ་བོ་གཙུག་ལག་དགའ་བ	Pawo Rinpoche	dpa' bo gtsug lag dga' ba
དཔའ་བོ་གཙུག་ལག་ཕྲེང་བ	{dpa' bo gtsug lag phreng ba}	dpa' bo gtsug lag phreng ba
དཔའ་བོ་གཏཟུག་ལག་ཕྲེང་བ	{dpa' bo gtzug lag phreng ba} [b 8th wood bird yr, pupil of 8th Karmapa mi bskyod rdo rje, lho brag lha lung gi gdan sa bskyangs, great commentary on the spyod 'jug 'grel chen &, astr shastra, chos...	dpa' bo gtzug lag phreng ba
དཔའ་བོ་རིགས་བཞི	four families of dakas, four daka aspects	dpa' bo rigs bzhi
དཔའ་བོ་སེར	officinal plant of bitter taste	dpa' bo ser
དཔའ་བོ་སེར་པོ	{dpa' bo ser po}	dpa' bo ser po
དཔའ་བོའི་ཁྱིམ	residence of a sage or hero	dpa' bo'i khyim
དཔའ་བོའི་གད་མོ་བརྒྱད	1) old lady [chn]; 2) the 8 warrior laughters [ha ha bsdigs pa'i gad mo, hi hi dgyes pa'i gad mo, he he sgeg pa'i gad mo, ho ho zil gyis gnon pa'i gad mo]	dpa' bo'i gad mo brgyad
དཔའ་བོའི་རྒད་མོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 warrior laughters	dpa' bo'i rgad mo brgyad
དཔའ་བོའི་རྒྱུད	chivalrous spirit, heroic,	dpa' bo'i rgyud
ནོབླེ	birth	noble
དཔའ་བོའི་སྟོན་མོ	dakini teacher	dpa' bo'i ston mo
དཔའ་བོའི་དྲིལ་བུ	kind of ghanta	dpa' bo'i dril bu
དཔའ་བོའི་འདུག་སྟངས	god's manner of sitting	dpa' bo'i 'dug stangs
དཔའ་བོའི་དཔུང་ཚོགས	an army of heroes	dpa' bo'i dpung tshogs
དཔའ་བོའི་རིང་ལུགས	heroism	dpa' bo'i ring lugs
དཔའ་བོར་འགྲོ་བ	The four outer contemplations of moving as a spiritual warrior	dpa' bor 'gro ba
དཔའ་བོར་འགྲོ་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	contemplation of moving as a spiritual warrior	dpa' bor 'gro ba'i ting nge 'dzin
དཔའ་བོས	ashvaghosa	dpa' bos
དཔའ་བྱེད	hero	dpa' byed
དཔའ་བློ་ཁོག་མེད	weak power and courage, gutless	dpa' blo khog med
དཔའ་སྦྱིན་གྱིས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	viradatta grhapati pariprccha sutra	dpa' sbyin gyis zhus pa'i mdo
དཔའ་མི་ཞུམ	fearless, dauntless, courageous, brave	dpa' mi zhum
དཔའ་མི་ཞུམ་པ	do not lose courage	dpa' mi zhum pa
དཔའ་མོ	virini [virA?] / (spiritual) heroine	dpa' mo
དཔའ་མོའི་སྟོན་མོ	dakini feast / banquet	dpa' mo'i ston mo
དཔའ་མོའི་འདུག་སྟངས	warioress posture	dpa' mo'i 'dug stangs
དཔའ་རྩ་ལ	bravery	dpa' rtsa la
དཔའ་རྩལ	bravery, courage and skill/ strength	dpa' rtsal
དཔའ་ཚལ	bravery, courage	dpa' tshal
དཔའ་ཚུལ	heroic, warrior-like	dpa' tshul
དཔའ་མཚན་དྲུག	stag stod, stag smad, zer chen, zar chung, gong ras, stag slog: in Songtsen Gampo's case Tibet lag len bstar ba'i bya gzhag rigs	dpa' mtshan drug
དཔའ་མཛངས	courageous and skillful, heroism, bravery, courage, valor	dpa' mdzangs
དཔའ་མཛངས་རྟུལ་ཕོད	courageous and skillful, heroism, bravery, courage, valor	dpa' mdzangs rtul phod
དཔའ་མཛངས་དེས་གསུམ	courageous, skillful, and gentle	dpa' mdzangs des gsum
དཔའ་ཞིང་ཤེད་ཆེ	might hero	dpa' zhing shed che
དཔའ་ཞུམ	cowardly, timid, intimidated	dpa' zhum
དཔའ་ཞུམ་བྱེད	act cowardly, be intimidated	dpa' zhum byed
དཔའ་ཞུམ་མེད	fearless, dauntless, courageous, brave	dpa' zhum med
དཔའ་ཞུམ་མེད་པ	fearless, dauntless, courageous, brave	dpa' zhum med pa
དཔའ་ཟླ	[arch] dmag spyi gzhon pa	dpa' zla
དཔའ་ཡ་མེད	unrivaled	dpa' ya med
དཔའ་ཡང་དག	true warrior	dpa' yang dag
དཔའ་རབ	a country	dpa' rab
དཔའ་རི	dpa' ri mt [in si khron province smi li]	dpa' ri
དཔའ་རླབས་དང་བཅས	having violent waves	dpa' rlabs dang bcas
དཔའ་རླབས་དང་བཅས་པ	ocean	dpa' rlabs dang bcas pa
དཔའ་རློམ	heroism, courage, bravery, valor	dpa' rlom
དཔའ་རློམ་རིང་ལུགས	heroism, courage, bravery, valor	dpa' rlom ring lugs
དཔའ་ལུང	on a knife handle btags pa'i lung thag	dpa' lung
དཔའ་ཤོད	tsa ba dpa' shod rdzong [E Tibet on the upper rgyal mo rngul chu, ruled from pad ma] phyi nang gnyis kyi grub mtha' dang snyan ngag sogs sciences very learned, mtshan dkon cog 'bangs zhes grags, sn...	dpa' shod
དཔའ་སེམས	courage, bravery	dpa' sems
དཔའ་སེམས་མི་ཞུམ་པ	not to lose courage	dpa' sems mi zhum pa
དཔའ་སེར	officinal yellow plant of bitter taste with root resembling a radish	dpa' ser
དཔའ་སྲུང	dpa' sung pass [in khron zhing chen khongs smi li]	dpa' srung
དཔའ་བསེ་མཚན	'phar ba	dpa' bse mtshan
དཔའི་བོའི་སྒྲུང	epic	dpa'i bo'i sgrung
དཔར	dictate, SA dpor pa	dpar
དཔར་ཀོང	lugs kong 1616	dpar kong
དཔར་རྐོ	carve wood printing blocks	dpar rko
དཔར་རྐོ་མཁན	print block letter cutter	dpar rko mkhan
དཔར་རྐོ་པ	print block letter cutter	dpar rko pa
དཔར་རྐོ་བ	1) print block engraver; 2) par du rko bzhin pa; 3) cut print blocks	dpar rko ba
དཔར་སྐྲུན	print	dpar skrun
དཔར་བསྐྲུན	printing, publishing	dpar bskrun
དཔར་བསྐྲུན་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང	copyright	dpar bskrun pa'i thob dbang
དཔར་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	print, publish	dpar bskrun byed
དཔར་ཁ་བཏབ་པ	completely similar like prints	dpar kha btab pa
དཔར་ཁང	1) print shop/ block storage place; 2) press, printing house/ office	dpar khang
དཔར་ཁུལ་ནོའུར	(M {dpar khul no'ur	dpar khul no'ur
དཔར་མཁན	printer	dpar mkhan
དཔར་གྲངས	circulation [book etc], edition	dpar grangs
དཔར་འགེབས	1) 'dra dpe 'gebs pa,...Yul lung gcig gi nyams myong yul lung gzhan zhig la par 'gebs kyis lag len bstar na mi 'grig ...Sger don la gzhung don yin khul gyi par 'gebs byas na nor 'khrul red; 2) very...	dpar 'gebs
དཔར་འགོ་རྟེན་མཁན	in printing par shing gi sne gcig 'dzin mkhan	dpar 'go rten mkhan
དཔར་འགྲེམ	publication	dpar 'grem
དཔར་འགྲེམ་བྱེད	publish	dpar 'grem byed
དཔར་འགྲེམ་བྱེད་པོ	publisher	dpar 'grem byed po
དཔར་འགྲེམས་བྱེད་པ	to publish	dpar 'grems byed pa
དཔར་རྒྱག	take a photograph, print	dpar rgyag
དཔར་རྒྱག་རྒྱུ་སྤྲོད	put into print	dpar rgyag rgyu sprod
དཔར་རྒྱག་པ	print	dpar rgyag pa
དཔར་རྒྱབ	text D	dpar rgyab
དཔར་སྒྲིག	set type	dpar sgrig
དཔར་སྒྲིག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	type setting machine	dpar sgrig 'phrul 'khor
དཔར་སྒྲོམ	1) par shing 'jog sa'i sgrom; 2) Brnyan par sgrig sa'i sgrom	dpar sgrom
དཔར་ངོས	page surface of a printing plate	dpar ngos
དཔར་ཆས	camera, printing/ photography machines/ apparatus	dpar chas
དཔར་ཏང	[arch] mtha' sne rta'i ze rngog dang 'dra ba'i gdan te rngog stan = grum ze, 'bol gdan gyi steng du gding ba'i kha gdan 'phred zhol &, kha gang ma rigs gnyis,. a hairy carpet square carpet for sitting	dpar tang
དཔར་སྟེགས	stand for print blocks while printing	dpar stegs
དཔར་བརྟེན	because	dpar brten
དཔར་ཐང	par tang	dpar thang
དཔར་ཐང་ཁྲ་བོ	[arch] gdan grum ze	dpar thang khra bo
དཔར་ཐུང	1) short printing block; 2) Dpe cha par ma ldeb thung	dpar thung
དཔར་ཐོན་ཨང	edition	dpar thon ang
དཔར་དུ་སྐྲུན་པ	publish	dpar du skrun pa
དཔར་དུ་བསྐྲུན	publish	dpar du bskrun
དཔར་དུ་འདེབས་པ	print, stamp	dpar du 'debs pa
དཔར་དུ་ལེན	photograph	dpar du len
དཔར་འདེབས	printing, dyeing	dpar 'debs
དཔར་འདེབས་དང་ཚོས་རྒྱག	printing and dyeing	dpar 'debs dang tshos rgyag
དཔར་འདེབས་པ	print	dpar 'debs pa
དཔར་འདེབས་ཚོས་རྒྱག	printing and dyeing	dpar 'debs tshos rgyag
དཔར་འདེབས་ལག་རྩལ	art of printing	dpar 'debs lag rtsal
དཔར་སྣག	printing ink	dpar snag
དཔར་པ	printer	dpar pa
དཔར་དཔོན	pecha printer leader/ foreman	dpar dpon
དཔར་སྤྱི	print foreman	dpar spyi
དཔར་ཕུད	1st print [offering	dpar phud
དཔར་བ	print, type, take a picture	dpar ba
དཔར་བྱང	par gyi mjug byang	dpar byang
དཔར་བླངས	print	dpar blangs
དཔར་དབང	copyright, publication rights	dpar dbang
དཔར་མ	par ma	dpar ma
དཔར་ཙ་སོ་ཏི	kind of cotton cloth	dpar tsa so ti
དཔར་རྩ	dpe cha etc. to be engraved 1st written on paper	dpar rtsa
དཔར་རྩ་སྦྱར་བ	, join the letters of the example to the block	dpar rtsa sbyar ba
དཔར་ཞུ་གཏོང་བ	proofread, check	dpar zhu gtong ba
དཔར་ཞུས	proof-reading	dpar zhus
དཔར་ཞུས་བྱེད	proof-read	dpar zhus byed
དཔར་ཞུས་ཟིན་དཔེ	proofs, galley sheet	dpar zhus zin dpe
དཔར་གཞི	printing ground of wood/ metal etc., edition	dpar gzhi
དཔར་གཞི་དང་པོ	1st edition	dpar gzhi dang po
དཔར་གཞི་ཚོན་ཅན	color print/ edition	dpar gzhi tshon can
དཔར་ཡིག་གི་ཞུས་དག	proof-reading	dpar yig gi zhus dag
དཔར་ཡིག་བླུག་འཁོཏ	type-casting machine dpar g.yog - printer's helper	dpar yig blug 'khot
དཔར་རིང	1) long printing block mda' tshad ma; 2) Dpe cha par ma ldeb ring	dpar ring
དཔར་རིས	1) picture, portrait; 2) par gyi ri mo; 3) chart	dpar ris
དཔར་རིས་འབྲི	draw/ paint a picture/ portrait	dpar ris 'bri
དཔར་ལེན	print, take a photograph	dpar len
དཔར་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	camera, printing/ photography machines/ apparatus	dpar len 'phrul chas
དཔར་ལེན་སློབ་ཚོགས	photographic society	dpar len slob tshogs
དཔར་ཤ་དང་བོད་ཀྱི་ཆས་གོས	Persia and Tibetan dress	dpar sha dang bod kyi chas gos
དཔར་ཤིག	{dpar shig} flower	dpar shig
དཔར་ཤིང	wood print block	dpar shing
དཔར་ཤིང་ཁྲེས་པ	par rko sa'i kind of hard wood	dpar shing khres pa
དཔར་ཤོག	paper to be printed/ for printing	dpar shog
དཔར་བཤུས	dpe don rnam pa dbyer med kyi 'dra tshul,...Bshad rgyu'i nang don gcig kyang mi so so'i shod stangs par bshus brgyab pa nang bzhin mi yong	dpar bshus
དཔར་སློག	reprint, re-publish	dpar slog
དཔལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཁ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Glorious Tantra of Everlasting Union	dpal kun tu kha sbyor gyi rgyud
དཔལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	Shri Samantabhadra	dpal kun tu bzang po
དཔལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་གོ་ཕང	level of Shri Samantabhadra	dpal kun tu bzang po'i go phang
ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོན་དབྱེར་མེད་སེལཕ༹	existing nature, having the nature of the four kayas and five wisdoms]	fruition dbyer med self
དཔལ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོའི་གོ་འཕང	the state of the glorious Samantabhadra dpal kun tu bzang po'i smon lam zhes bya	dpal kun tu bzang po'i go 'phang
དཔལ་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	glorious vajra dpal kye rdo rje zhes bya ba'i rgyud kyi	dpal kyi rdo rje
དཔལ་ཀྱེའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	glorious Hevajra	dpal kye'i rdo rje
དཔལ་སྐྱིད	dpal skyid	dpal skyid
དཔལ་སྐྱེས	juniper	dpal skyes
དཔལ་སྐྱོང	Vishnu	dpal skyong
དཔལ་ཁང	{dpal khang} [= dpal sgang, Tibetan clan dang its house name, thought to be in mthong smon rdzong]	dpal khang
དཔལ་ཁང་ཆོས་མཛད	{dpal khang chos mdzad}	dpal khang chos mdzad
དཔལ་ཁང་ལོ་ཙ་བ	author of {dag yig ngag sgron}	dpal khang lo tsa ba
དཔལ་ཁོག	forehead	dpal khog
དཔལ་ཁྱིམ	red lotus	dpal khyim
དཔལ་ཁྲག་འཐུང་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Glorious Heruka Root Tantra dpal mkha' 'gro snyan brgyud kyi yab bka' - Chakrasamvara	dpal khrag 'thung rtsa ba'i rgyud
དཔལ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་པ	Pal Kachöpa. Probably identical with Kachö Wangpo, the second Shamar Rinpoche (1350-1405)	dpal mkha' spyod pa
དཔལ་མཁོང་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	the glorious protector root guru	dpal mkhong rtsa ba'i bla ma
དཔལ་མཁོན	glorious protector	dpal mkhon
དཔལ་འཁོར་བཏན	early king of tibet, son of gnam lde 'od srung	dpal 'khor btan
དཔལ་འཁོར་བཙན	king {dpal 'khor btsan} [son of king {gnam lde 'od srung}	dpal 'khor btsan
དཔལ་འཁོར་ལོ་བདེ་མཆོག	Shri Chakrasamvara	dpal 'khor lo bde mchog
དཔལ་འཁོར་ལོ་སྡོམ་པ	Shri Chakrasamvara. Syn {bde mchog, dpal 'khor lo bde mchog}	dpal 'khor lo sdom pa
དཔལ་གོས	1) lotus; 2) Thang chu	dpal gos
དཔལ་གྱི་ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ	bza' shing gi ra ba ste pleasure grove	dpal gyi kun dga' ra ba
དཔལ་གྱི་བཀའ་ཉན	listen to the glorious word	dpal gyi bka' nyan
དཔལ་གྱི་ཆས་བརྒྱད	[TRS 146-2] 2 types	dpal gyi chas brgyad
དཔལ་གྱི་ཆས་བཅུ	Ten glorious ornaments. Ornaments worn by a wrathful buddha	dpal gyi chas bcu
དཔལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of glory, sword	dpal gyi snying po
དཔལ་གྱི་གཏོར་མ	name of the main {thugs skrub gtor ma} Chokling tradition	dpal gyi gtor ma
དཔལ་གྱི་དུམ་བུ	white sandalwood [tsan dan dkar po]	dpal gyi dum bu
དཔལ་གྱི་དུམ་བུ་ཙན་ལྡན་དཀར་པོ	white sandalwood	dpal gyi dum bu tsan ldan dkar po
དཔལ་གྱི་བདག	Vishnu	dpal gyi bdag
དཔལ་གྱི་བདག་དཔལ་གྱི་བདག	epithet of vishnu	dpal gyi bdag dpal gyi bdag
དཔལ་གྱི་འདབ་མ་ཅན	lotus flower	dpal gyi 'dab ma can
དཔལ་གྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	he who killed lang dar ma	dpal gyi rdo rje
དཔལ་གྱི་སྡེ	rgyal po dpal gyi sde - King Shrisena	dpal gyi sde
དཔལ་གྱི་གནང་བ	privilege of nobility	dpal gyi gnang ba
དཔལ་གྱི་གནང་ཤོག	certificate of nobility	dpal gyi gnang shog
དཔལ་གྱི་གནང་ཤོག་པ	one having a diploma of nobility	dpal gyi gnang shog pa
དཔལ་གྱི་ཕ་འབབ	legacy of the Glorious One. The 'legacy of the Glorious One' is the first pure part.	dpal gyi pha 'bab
ཕབ	gift of the glorious one	phab
དཔལ་གྱི་ཕག་པ	divine boar, Vishnu	dpal gyi phag pa
དཔལ་གྱི་ཕམ་ཕབ	legacy of the Glorious One	dpal gyi pham phab
དཔལ་གྱི་བུ	horse	dpal gyi bu
དཔལ་གྱི་བེའུ	Srivatsa, symbolic/ glorious knot of eternity	dpal gyi be'u
དཔལ་གྱི་མིང་ཅན	li shi	dpal gyi ming can
དཔལ་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	byu ru	dpal gyi me tog
དཔལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Palgyi Yeshe. Born into the Drogmi clan he was also known as Palgyi Yeshe of Drogmi. He was an adept translator and rendered numerous sutras and tantras into Tibetan including the Tantra of the Mot...	dpal gyi ye shes
དཔལ་གྱི་རི	Sri parvata	dpal gyi ri
དཔལ་གྱི་ལག་པ	epithet of vishnu	dpal gyi lag pa
དཔལ་གྱི་ལོ་མ	a tree the leaves of which are sweet	dpal gyi lo ma
དཔལ་གྱི་བསམ་ཡས	glorious samye	dpal gyi bsam yas
དཔལ་གྱི་བསམ་ཡས་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	the temple of Samye, the glorious and spontaneous fulfillment of boundless wishes	dpal gyi bsam yas lhun gyis grub pa
དཔལ་གྱི་བསོད་ནམས	glorious merit	dpal gyi bsod nams
དཔལ་གྱི་ལྷ་མོ	Srimati devi	dpal gyi lha mo
དཔལ་གྱི་ལྷ་ས	Glorious Lhasa	dpal gyi lha sa
དཔལ་གྱིས་དཀྲིས་གྱུར	encircled with glory	dpal gyis dkris gyur
དཔལ་གྲོ་མོན་ལ	town in bhutan	dpal gro mon la
དཔལ་དགུ	Nine Glorious Ones	dpal dgu
དཔལ་དགེ་བསམ་གཏན་ཕུན་ཚོགས	Palge Samten Puntshok	dpal dge bsam gtan phun tshogs
དཔལ་དགེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Sri Hevajra dpal dges pa rdo rje'i rnam bshad gsang	dpal dges pa rdo rje
སྔགས་མཛེས་རྒྱན	dpal kyE rdo rje'i phyi nang gi bskyed rim gyi rnam par bshad pa dge legs nor bu'i phreng ba	sngags mdzes rgyan
གསང་སྔགས་མཛེས་རྒྱན	a detailed explanation of the utpattikrama or visualization of the hevajra tantra; by {'jam mgon a myes zhabs ngag dbang	gsang sngags mdzes rgyan
ཀུན་དགའ་བསོད་ནམས	(1597-ca. 1662)	kun dga' bsod nams
དཔལ་དགོན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	dpal dgon
དཔལ་མགོན	glorious protector	dpal mgon
དཔལ་མགོན་ཀླུ་གྲུབ	Glorious lord nagarjuna	dpal mgon klu grub
དཔལ་མགོན་ཆེན་པོ	glorious great lord	dpal mgon chen po
དཔལ་མགོན་བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	seventyfive glorious protectors; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	dpal mgon bdun cu rtsa lnga
དཔལ་མགོན་ནག་པོ	Glorious Black Protector	dpal mgon nag po
དཔལ་མགོན་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	the ---root guru	dpal mgon rtsa ba'i bla ma
དཔལ་མགོན་ཞལ་བཞི་པ	a deity	dpal mgon zhal bzhi pa
དཔལ་མགྲིན	Vishnu	dpal mgrin
དཔལ་སྒང	dpal khang la ltos	dpal sgang
དཔལ་སྒྲོན	glorious light {dpal}	dpal sgron
དཔལ་ངག་གི་དབང་པོ	{dpal ngag gi dbang po	dpal ngag gi dbang po
བཤད་གཞན་ཕན་མཛེས་རྒྱན	kun rig cho ga'i rnam bshad by {'jam dbyangs kun dga rnam rgyal}	bshad gzhan phan mdzes rgyan
དཔལ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྲུང་མ	the Splendorous protectress of secret mantra, Ekajati	dpal sngags kyi srung ma
དཔལ་ཅན	1 of 10 kings of mountains, SA ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu	dpal can
དཔལ་ཅུ་བོ་རི	Chuwori monastery	dpal cu bo ri
དཔལ་ཆས	attributes of splendor	dpal chas
དཔལ་ཆས་བཅུ	see {dpal gyi chas bcu}	dpal chas bcu
དཔལ་ཆུ་བོ་རིའི་སྒོམ་གརབ༹	the practice center at Chuwori	dpal chu bo ri'i sgom grva
དཔལ་ཆུ་བོ་རིའི་སྒོམ་གྲྭ	the practice center at Chuwori [founded during the reign of Trisong Deutsen]	dpal chu bo ri'i sgom grwa
དཔལ་ཆེན	Great glorious one, = heruka	dpal chen
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལྷ་ཚོགས	Maha Shri Heruka and his assembly of deities	dpal chen khrag 'thung lha tshogs
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཁྲོ་བོ་དབུ་དགུ	Glorious wrathful one, the 9-faced	dpal chen khro bo dbu dgu
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཆེ་མཆོག	"Supreme Heruka", Palchen Chemchok	dpal chen che mchog
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དོན་གྲུབ	1695-1732 - eighth Shamar, Palchen Chökyi Döndrub	dpal chen chos kyi don grub
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཐུགས་སྤྲུལ	mind emanation of Palchen heruka	dpal chen thugs sprul
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Palchen th"trengtsal	dpal chen thod phreng rtsal
དཔལ་ཆེན་འདུས་པ་རྩལ	{dpal yul pad nor} the first	dpal chen 'dus pa rtsal
དཔལ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Glorious One, synonymous with heruka dpal chen phur bu skrub pa'i grogs rnam	dpal chen po
དཔལ་ཆེན་བུད་དྷ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	glorious	dpal chen bud dha he ru ka
གྲེཨཏ་བུདདྷ	Heruka 1619	great Buddha
དཔལ་ཆེན་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	Glorious heruka, palchen heruka, [wrathful aspect of samantabhadra]	dpal chen he ru ka
དཔལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	glorious Dharmakirti	dpal chos kyi grags pa
དཔལ་མཆོག	great glory	dpal mchog
དཔལ་མཆོག་དང་པོ	mahayoga virtue tantra, yon tan mahayoga tantra	dpal mchog dang po
དཔལ་མཆོག་དང་པོའི	rgyud a book	dpal mchog dang po'i
དཔལ་མཆོག་དང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Skt. Shri Paramadi Tantra, Glorious Supreme Primal Tantra. One the Four Major Sections of Yoga Tantra. A tantra of the same title is sometimes listed among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras as the tant...	dpal mchog dang po'i rgyud
དཔལ་འཇིགས་པ་སྐྱོབ་པའི་ཡིད	Glorious Mind that Protects Against Fear. Syn {'jigs pa skyob} Protector Against Fear; third of {ston pa bcu gnyis}	dpal 'jigs pa skyob pa'i yid
དཔལ་བརྗིད	glory, halo, splendor, lustre	dpal brjid
དཔལ་གཏུམ་པོ	spirit king of very frightful appearance	dpal gtum po
དཔལ་གཏེར་གསང་བདག	SA rnam thos sras	dpal gter gsang bdag
དཔལ་གཏོར	name of the main {thugs skrub gtor ma} Chokling tradition	dpal gtor
དཔལ་རྟ་མགྲིན	Sri Hayagriva	dpal rta mgrin
དཔལ་སྟག་ལུང་ཐང	seat of Taklung Kagyü in Central Tibet	dpal stag lung thang
དཔལ་སྟུག	majestic	dpal stug
དཔལ་སྟུག་པོ	1) great brilliance and glory; 2) buddha	dpal stug po
དཔལ་སྟེར	epithet of rnam sras	dpal ster
དཔལ་སྟོབས	strength of glory	dpal stobs
དཔལ་ཐང	a place in Tibet where G.R. subdued the {brtan ma bcu gnyis}	dpal thang
དཔལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	SA dpal ldan	dpal dang ldan pa
དཔལ་དང་ལྡན་པའི་ཞིང	Glorious Buddhafield, Ratnasambhava's Buddhafield	dpal dang ldan pa'i zhing
དཔལ་དང་ལྡན་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the Glorious buddhafield [S of Ratnasambhava]	dpal dang ldan pa'i zhing khams
དཔལ་དང་འབྱོར་པ་ཡོད་པ	enjoys prosperity and plenty	dpal dang 'byor pa yod pa
དཔལ་དི	dpal di [place yar 'brog dpal in N sna dkar rtze rdzong gi byang rgyud du yod	dpal di
དཔལ་དུ་ཤར	appear as glory	dpal du shar
དཔལ་དུ་ཤར་བ	beamed	dpal du shar ba
དཔལ་དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	kalachakra	dpal dus kyi 'khor lo
དཔལ་དུས་གསུམ་མཁྱེན་པ	Glorious knower of the three times/ dus gsum mkhyen pa	dpal dus gsum mkhyen pa
དཔལ་གདན་བཞི	Sri-Catuhpitha, n. of a scripture	dpal gdan bzhi
སྲི	catuhpitha	Sri
དཔལ་གདོང	7th year of {rab byung}, {chu mo bya}	dpal gdong
དཔལ་མདའ་བསྣུན	Shri Saraha	dpal mda' bsnun
དཔལ་འདབ	plant premna spinosa, lotus	dpal 'dab
དཔལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	ancient name of buddha gaya in behar	dpal rdo rje gdan
དཔལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ནག་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	Shri Vajra Mahakala	dpal rdo rje nag po chen po
དཔལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	glorious Vajrasattva	dpal rdo rje sems dpa'
དཔལ་ལྡན	1) having many good characteristics or virtues or brilliance and glory; 2) [h] added to names of sutras and lamas etc glorious, splendorous, illustrious [n of Nagarjuna when ordained at Nalanda]	dpal ldan
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཁྲག་འཐུང	epithet of wrathful deity dgyes pa rdo rje	dpal ldan khrag 'thung
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཁྲག་འཐུང་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	name of he ba dzra	dpal ldan khrag 'thung he ru ka
དཔལ་ལྡན་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་འོད་ཟེར	Palden Khyentse Özer. The reincarnation of Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye and son of the 15th Karmapa	dpal ldan mkhyen brtse 'od zer
དཔལ་ལྡན་རྒྱུ་སྐར	Kalachakra mandala	dpal ldan rgyu skar
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	Sri Dharmapala	dpal ldan chos skyong
དཔལ་ལྡན་དུས་འཁོར	epithet of adi buddha 1620	dpal ldan dus 'khor
དཔལ་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	glorious Vajradhara, resplendent vajra-holder	dpal ldan rdo rje 'chang
དཔལ་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	glorious vajra holder [tantra master, having put behind dharmas of samsara, having little desire and knowing what is enough, skilled and experienced in practice, learned in the words and sense of t...	dpal ldan rdo rje 'dzin pa
དཔལ་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Shri Vajrasattva	dpal ldan rdo rje sems dpa'
དཔལ་ལྡན་ནག་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	mah'ak'ala dpal ldan pad ma las 'khrungs sprul pa'i	dpal ldan nag po chen po
དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མ	the glorious guru	dpal ldan bla ma
དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མ་དམ་པ	the sublime and glorious master; holy and glorious lama, the illustrious and genuine master	dpal ldan bla ma dam pa
དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲས་སྤུངས	ancient buddhist monastery in orissa, SA 'bras spungs	dpal ldan 'bras spungs
དཔལ་ལྡན་མ	possessed of glory and charms, noble woman, polite term for the female sex, queen of yaksha demigods	dpal ldan ma
དཔལ་ལྡན་མ་རིང	{dgon po ma ring}, mahakala	dpal ldan ma ring
དཔལ་ལྡན་སྨད་རྒྱིད་པ	{rgyud smad grwa tshang}	dpal ldan smad rgyid pa
དཔལ་ལྡན་སྨད་རྒྱུད་པ	tantric section of dga' ldan monastery	dpal ldan smad rgyud pa
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཙངས་པ་སྡེ་བཞི	the four glorious bhram realms [enjoyment of the five desirables, wealth, increase of the dharma, and because of that attaining happiness and liberation]	dpal ldan tsangs pa sde bzhi
དཔལ་ལྡན་བརྩེགས་པ	a buddha realm	dpal ldan brtsegs pa
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཚངས་པ་སྡེ་བཞི	the four glorious bhram realms	dpal ldan tshangs pa sde bzhi
དཔལ་ལྡན་བཟང་པོ	{gnyos ston} 14471507	dpal ldan bzang po
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཡ་ཏི་ཤ	Sri Atisa	dpal ldan ya ti sha
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཡེ་ཤེས	Panchen lama iii, 1738?-1780	dpal ldan ye shes
དཔལ་ལྡན་ས་སྐྱ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཡབ་སྲས	the glorious Sakyapa masters, father and son dpal ldan sa skya'i lha khang chen mo the Great Temple of Sakya	dpal ldan sa skya rin po che yab sras
དཔལ་ལྡན་ས་སྐྱོང	in former Tibetan govt srid blon dang zhabs pad kyi ming gi 'gor sbyor ba'i che bstod kyi tshig	dpal ldan sa skyong
དཔལ་ལྡན་ས་གསུམ་མ	Glory of the Three Realms, by Tsongkhapa	dpal ldan sa gsum ma
དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ	sudevi, a chos skyong, sridevi (yab is gshin rje), goddess of terrific aspect	dpal ldan lha mo
དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ་དུད་གསོལ་མ	a form of Shridevi, very popular in the 'brug pa bka' brgyud school [tsd]	dpal ldan lha mo dud gsol ma
དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ་ནག་མོ	Glorious Black Goddess	dpal ldan lha mo nag mo
དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ་རང་བྱུང་རྒྱལ་མོ	a form of Shridevi, consort of ber nag can, very popular in the kam tshang or karma bka' brgyud school [tsd]	dpal ldan lha mo rang byung rgyal mo
དཔལ་ལྡན་ཨ་ཏི་ཤ	Lord Atisha	dpal ldan a ti sha
དཔལ་ལྡེམ	deity incarnated in pandim mtn. peak	dpal ldem
དཔལ་སྡེ་རྫོང	{dpal sde rdzong	dpal sde rdzong
དཔལ་སྡེ་ཞབས་དྲུང	rnying ma sage of yamdok district	dpal sde zhabs drung
དཔལ་སྡེ་ཤབས་དྲུང	{dpal sde shabs drung} [Nyingma tantrika who repelled the M by his power from the lake deities]	dpal sde shabs drung
དཔལ་སྡེའི་རྫོང	small fort on road to lha sa from gyantse	dpal sde'i rdzong
དཔལ་ན་ལེན་ཏྲའི་གཙུག་ལག	Nalanda monastery	dpal na len tra'i gtsug lag
དཔལ་ན་ལེན་དྲ	Kadampa monastery in C Tibet	dpal na len dra
དཔལ་ནག་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	the glorious great black one dpal ni gar mkhan dang glog dang 'dra fame and glory are nothing more than a dance soon over or like a lightning flash	dpal nag po chen po
དཔལ་གནམ	district, SA pa sna ma	dpal gnam
དཔལ་པྲེང་གི་མདོ	Lion's Roar of Queen Srimala Sutra	dpal preng gi mdo
དཔལ་སྤས	household incited by Kshapanaka to kill the buddha but instead converted	dpal spas
དཔལ་སྤུང	Palpung. The monastery in East Tibet which was the seat of Situ Rinpoche	dpal spung
དཔལ་སྤུངས	Palpung, name of a monastery, seat of monastic Situ lineage. Retreat center there begun by Jamgön Kongtrül	dpal spungs
དཔལ་སྤུངས་ཀྱི་གདན་ས	monastery, the seat of Palpung	dpal spungs kyi gdan sa
དཔལ་སྤུངས་དགོན་པ	sde dge dpal spungs monastery	dpal spungs dgon pa
དཔལ་སྤུངས་དབོན་རྒན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	important lama at Palpung	dpal spungs dbon rgan rin po che
དཔལ་སྤྲུལ	o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po (b. 1808)	dpal sprul
དཔལ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ	alias 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po	dpal sprul rin po
དཔལ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Paltrul Rinpoche	dpal sprul rin po che
དཔལ་ཕྲེང་གི་མདོ	Lion's roar of Queen Shrimala Sutra	dpal phreng gi mdo
དཔལ་བེའུ	endless-knot design, glorious knot (of eternity	dpal be'u
དཔལ་བྱུང	srisambhava (character in 50th chapter of gandyavyuhasutra)	dpal byung
དཔལ་བྱེད	{dpal byed}	dpal byed
དཔལ་དབྱངས	Syn {sba rat na} The first of {sad mi mi bdun}	dpal dbyangs
ཝ་ཨོཨིལ	soaked cloth, grass, wood; 3) dpal 'bar Rdzong [in NE Tibet and above the rgyal mo rngul chu, ruled from rdo dmar thang], torchlight	w oil
དཔལ་འབར་ཁྲོ་མོ	rare tantra of anuyoga	dpal 'bar khro mo
དཔལ་འབར་ཁྲོས་མ	anuyoga rare tantra	dpal 'bar khros ma
དཔལ་འབར་སྒྲེང	raise the torch	dpal 'bar sgreng
དཔལ་འབར་བ་ཁྲོ་མོའི་རྒྱུད	Glorious Blazing Wrathful Goddess Tantra. A Mahayoga scripture. A tantra of this name is found in PA of the Nyingma Gyübum	dpal 'bar ba khro mo'i rgyud
དཔལ་འབྱུང་གི་རྣམ་ཐར	Biography of Shri Sambhava (in T 44)	dpal 'byung gi rnam thar
དཔལ་འབྱོར	economics; grandeur/ wealth & glory; wealth wealthy, glory and riches, prosperity, wealth, prosperous, magnificent, prosperity, magnificent	dpal 'byor
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་གྲུབ་ཆ	economic element	dpal 'byor gyi grub cha
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ཉེན་ཁ	economic crisis	dpal 'byor gyi nyen kha
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	economic struggle	dpal 'byor gyi 'thab rtsod
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་བཙན་འཛུལ	economic invasion	dpal 'byor gyi btsan 'dzul
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་འཚོ་བ	economic conditions, standard of living	dpal 'byor gyi 'tsho ba
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	economic construction/ development	dpal 'byor gyi 'dzugs skrun
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ཞིབ་རྩིས	business/ cost accounting	dpal 'byor gyi zhib rtsis
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རིག་པ	economics	dpal 'byor gyi rig pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་སྲོག་རྩ	economic lifeline/ key points	dpal 'byor gyis srog rtsa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱས་པ	had extensive wealth and glory	dpal 'byor rgyas pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་རྗེས་སུ་ལུས་པ	economically backward	dpal 'byor rjes su lus pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་མཉམ་ལས	economic cooperation	dpal 'byor mnyam las
དཔལ་འབྱོར་དང་ལྡན	wealthy	dpal 'byor dang ldan
དཔལ་འབྱོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	was rich and powerful	dpal 'byor dang ldan pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་དོ་དམ་པ	treasurer [club etc], official in charge of economics	dpal 'byor do dam pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་དྲི་མེད་སྦྱིན་པའི་ཆུ	a river of undefiled and glorious giving dpal 'byor mi rtag lang tsho myur du rgas wealth is impermanent, youth turns soon to age	dpal 'byor dri med sbyin pa'i chu
དཔལ་འབྱོར་དམངས་གཙོ	economic democracy	dpal 'byor dmangs gtso
དཔལ་འབྱོར་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	economic construction/ development	dpal 'byor 'dzugs skrun
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གཟུགས་གཞི	economic structure	dpal 'byor gzugs gzhi
དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཡར་རྒྱས	economic growth dpal 'byor ri rgyal lhun po tsam gyur pa my wealth and luxuries equalled Mount Sumeru	dpal 'byor yar rgyas
དཔལ་འབྱོར་རིག་གནས	economics	dpal 'byor rig gnas
དཔལ་འབྱོར་རིག་པ	economics	dpal 'byor rig pa
དཔལ་འབྱོར་རིང་ལུགས	economism	dpal 'byor ring lugs
དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལོ་ཏོག	economic/ cash crops	dpal 'byor lo tog
དཔལ་འབྱོར་གསར་པའི་སྲིད་ཇུས	new economic policy	dpal 'byor gsar pa'i srid jus
དཔལ་འབྲས	wood-apple, several plants such as momordika mixta	dpal 'bras
ཐབས་དངོས་གྲུབ་རོལ་མཚོ	by the 8th {bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin ngag gi dbang po kun bzang rang byung rdo rje}	thabs dngos grub rol mtsho
དཔལ་སྦས	(see {slob dpon dpal sbas} most glorious	dpal sbas
དཔལ་སྦས་ཀྱིས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Shri Gupta	dpal sbas kyis zhus pa'i mdo
དཔལ་སྦྱིན	Kuvera	dpal sbyin
དཔལ་མར་མེ་མཛད་ཡེ་ཤེས	jo bo rje aa ti sha, Dipamkara sri jnana	dpal mar me mdzad ye shes
དཔལ་མར་མེ་མཛོད་ཡེ་ཤེས	dipamkarasrijnana	dpal mar me mdzod ye shes
དཔལ་མིན	preta	dpal min
དཔལ་མོ	most glorious [referring to females]	dpal mo
དཔལ་མོ་དཔལ་ཐང	plain of plains (place where padmasambhava subdued 12 invisible dakinis)	dpal mo dpal thang
དཔལ་མོ་དཔལ་མཚོ	Lake of Splendor	dpal mo dpal mtsho
དཔལ་མོ་འོད་ཅན	jo bo Atisha's consort former queen of Bengal	dpal mo 'od can
དཔལ་མོ་ལུགས	the tradition of Gelongma Palmo	dpal mo lugs
དཔལ་གཙོ	bolder	dpal gtso
དཔལ་རྩེ་དབྱིངས་གསུམ	Splendor, Peak, and Space	dpal rtse dbyings gsum
དཔལ་བརྩེགས	translator about 790	dpal brtsegs
དཔལ་ཚོགས་ཆེན་འདུས	name of fundamental sgrub thabs of anu yoga root tantra kun 'dus rig pa'i mdo rnal 'byor grub pa'i lung or dgongs pa 'dus pa, the elaborate initiation is theg pa rim dgu'i rtsa dbang	dpal tshogs chen 'dus
དཔལ་མཛེས	glorious beauty	dpal mdzes
དཔལ་འཛོམས་པ	all good and virtuous things	dpal 'dzoms pa
དཔལ་བཟང	in Priyan.gudvipa, Shri bhadra	dpal bzang
དཔལ་བཟང་པོ	Sri Bhadra, the glorious and excellent, a disciple of Naropa and friend of Marpa	dpal bzang po
དཔལ་ཡ་ཏི་ཤ	glorious Atisha	dpal ya ti sha
དཔལ་ཡང་དག	Glorious Vishuddha [Shri Heruka], {rdo rje khrag 'thung}	dpal yang dag
དཔལ་ཡང་དག་གྲུབ་པ	Glorious Vishuddha Sadhana. One of the Eight Sadhana Teachings	dpal yang dag grub pa
དཔལ་ཡིད་ལ	dpal yid pass	dpal yid la
དཔལ་ཡུལ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	dpal yul
དཔལ་ཡུལ་ཀུན་བཟང་སེས་རབ	Kunzang Sherab of palyul monastery	dpal yul kun bzang ses rab
དཔལ་ཡུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་གླིང	the Palyül monastery in kham	dpal yul rnam rgyal byang chub gling
དཔལ་ཡུལ་པ	old school lineage	dpal yul pa
དཔལ་ཡུལ་པད་ནོར	the first; alias {dpal chen 'dus pa rtsal}	dpal yul pad nor
དཔལ་ཡུལ་ལུགས	{dpal yul} tradition	dpal yul lugs
དཔལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མགོན་པོ	Mahakala dpal ye shes kyi mgon po'i bskang bshags - ritual for the propitiation of mah'ak'al'a; by {spyan snga lha gzigs ras pa}	dpal ye shes kyi mgon po
དཔལ་ཡོན	glorious qualities, glorious wealth, fortune, civilization, magnificent, splendid, majestic	dpal yon
དཔལ་ཡོན་དར་བ	civilized, cultured dpal g.yang - essence of goodness and virtue	dpal yon dar ba
དཔལ་རི	rnga g.yab dpal ri - Glorious Mountain. The pure land of Guru Rinpoche	dpal ri
དཔལ་རི་དགོན	Palri Monastery, in Lokha	dpal ri dgon
དཔལ་རི་སྨོན་ལམ	prayer (pranidh'ana) for rebirth in the Sangdok Palri paradise of padma sambhava	dpal ri smon lam
དཔལ་ལ	intrepidity	dpal la
དཔལ་ལན་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	your glorious root teacher	dpal lan rtsa ba'i bla ma
དཔལ་ལས	flattery, saying what another wants to hear	dpal las
དཔལ་ལས་བྱེད	flatter, say what another wants to hear	dpal las byed
དཔལ་ལས་ཚ་པོ	flatterer, sycophant	dpal las tsha po
དཔལ་ལས་ཤོད	flatter, say what another wants to hear	dpal las shod
དཔལ་ལེན	n. of early Hinayana teacher. Teacher in the Sautrantika tradition	dpal len
ཌཔལ་བཤོས	glorious-food. commonly known as a "Paltor" Glorious Torma	Dpal bshos
དཔལ་ས་སྐྱ	{dpal sa skya	dpal sa skya
དཔལ་གསང་བ་སྙིང་པོ	Shri Guhyagarbha. An important Nyingma tantra dpal gsang ba snying po skyu 'phrul dra	dpal gsang ba snying po
དཔལ་གསང་བ་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Guhyagarbha tantra, the basic Mahayoga tantra of the rnying ma pa tradition	dpal gsang ba snying po'i rgyud
དཔལ་གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	tantric book	dpal gsang ba 'dus pa
ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	guhyasam'ajatantra	kyi rgyal po chen po
དཔལ་གསང་བ་བསྡུས	sang-dui	dpal gsang ba bsdus
དཔལ་གསང་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	book in rnying ma school dpal gsang ba'i snying po de kho na nyid	dpal gsang ba'i snying po
ངེས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Guhyagarbha tantra	nges pa'i rgyud
དཔལ་གསུམ	Syn {dkyil 'khor gsum} 1) {bdag nyid rtsa ba'i dkyil 'khor}. 2) {phyogs bcu khro bo bcu'i dkyil 'khor} 3) {phur pa sras kyi dkyil 'khor}	dpal gsum
དཔལ་བསམ་ཡས	Glorious Samye. The wondrous temple erected during the time of Guru Rinpoche in Tibet by the Dharma King Trisong Deutsen	dpal bsam yas
དཔལ་བསམ་ཡས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་འཁོར	Dharmachakra of Glorious Samye	dpal bsam yas kyi chos 'khor
དཔལ་བསམ་ཡས་ལྷ་ཁང	the temple at Glorious Samye	dpal bsam yas lha khang
དཔལ་བསམ་ཡས་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	Glorious and Spontaneous Fulfillment of Boundless Wishes	dpal bsam yas lhun gyis grub pa
དཔལ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	the glorious Heruka	dpal he ru ka
དཔལ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Glorious Assemblage of Herukas. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	dpal he ru ka 'dus pa'i rgyud
དཔལ་ལྷ	dpal ldan lha mo	dpal lha
དཔལ་ལྷ་མོ	dpal ldan lha mo, shrI devi	dpal lha mo
དཔལ་ལྷའི་གཟབ་གསོལ	the brilliant invocation of the Glorious goddess (ceremony on the 19th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	dpal lha'i gzab gsol
དཔལ་ལྷའི་རི་གྲ	the Mountain Visit of the Glorious Goddess (ceremony on the 14th-15th days of the 10th Tibetan month)	dpal lha'i ri gra
དཔལ་ལྷའི་རི་རབ	in Lhasa 10th month 15th day feast of dpal lha &, grib rdzong btsan	dpal lha'i ri rab
དཔལ་ལྷོ་བྲག་རྫོང	Glorious Fortress of Lhodrak dpal e ka dza ti nag mo khros ma'i rgyud Tantra of the Black Wrathful Shri Ekajati. This tantra describes how to protect the practitioner against harms inflicted by others	dpal lho brag rdzong
དཔས	(not in Das)	dpas
དཔས་བྱིན	gift of courage	dpas byin
དཔུང	courage	dpung
དཔུང་རྐང	upper arm [marrow] bone dpung pa	dpung rkang
དཔུང་སྐོར	rotating the arms, to rotate the arms, SA rtsa 'dul lnga	dpung skor
དཔུང་སྐྱེད	race to the defense of	dpung skyed
དཔུང་སྐྱོད	military mission	dpung skyod
དཔུང་བསྐྱེད	{gi dpung bskyed pa} to marshal the forces of	dpung bskyed
དཔུང་བསྐྱེད་པ	. . . gi dpung bskyed pa - to marshal the forces of . . .	dpung bskyed pa
དཔུང་ཁག	camp, detachment, force, unit	dpung khag
དཔུང་འཁྱུད	clasp the arms	dpung 'khyud
དཔུང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	army, troops	dpung gi dkyil 'khor
དཔུང་གི་ཁྱུ་མཆོག	general	dpung gi khyu mchog
དཔུང་གི་མགོན་པོ	general, commander	dpung gi mgon po
དཔུང་གི་གཉེན	friend, protector, defender, assistant	dpung gi gnyen
དཔུང་གི་སྦྲོན་ཐོ	dpung sde skong ba'i notes	dpung gi sbron tho
དཔུང་གི་ཚོགས	host/ kind of troops	dpung gi tshogs
དཔུང་གི་ཚོགས་ཡན་ལག་བཤི་པ	the four kinds of troops [cavalry, elephants, chariots, infantry]	dpung gi tshogs yan lag bshi pa
དཔུང་གི་ཚོགས་ཤོམ་པ	make armaments	dpung gi tshogs shom pa
དཔུང་གྲོགས	1) allied troops; 2) relief/ escort troops, reinforcements; 3) Dpung 'degs las rogs	dpung grogs
དཔུང་གྲོགས་འཁྲིད	escort	dpung grogs 'khrid
དཔུང་གྲོགས་གཏོང	1) gzhogs 'degs dmag sde; 2) Rgyab snon dmag sde; 3) Dpung 'degs las rogs send relief/ escort troops, reinforcements	dpung grogs gtong
དཔུང་མགོ	shoulder or phrag gong	dpung mgo
དཔུང་མགོན	general, commander	dpung mgon
དཔུང་འགོ	shoulder	dpung 'go
དཔུང་འགོ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཟླུམ་པ	shoulders broad. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being; shoulders broad	dpung 'go shin tu zlum pa
དཔུང་རྒོལ	attack	dpung rgol
དཔུང་རྒོལ་བྱེད	attack	dpung rgol byed
དཔུང་རྒྱན	arm band, armlet	dpung rgyan
དཔུང་རྒྱུད	shoulder	dpung rgyud
དཔུང་རྒྱུད་བསྲང	shoulder stretched up	dpung rgyud bsrang
དཔུང་རྒྱུས	biceps	dpung rgyus
དཔུང་སྒར	military camp	dpung sgar
དཔུང་སྒར་ལྟེ་བ	military headquarters	dpung sgar lte ba
དཔུང་སྒྲིག་ཚུལ	battle array, disposition of forces	dpung sgrig tshul
དཔུང་སྒྲིལ	bring together many people in 1 place	dpung sgril
དཔུང་ངར་མ	strong/ powerful troops	dpung ngar ma
དཔུང་ངོམ	dpung shugs yod nyams ston pa	dpung ngom
དཔུང་བཅད་རས	1) sleeveless upper garment; 2) Dge slong ma's breast covering cloth	dpung bcad ras
དཔུང་བཅུག་དབང་སྡུད	dpung dmag btang nas dgra bo dbang du sdud pa	dpung bcug dbang sdud
དཔུང་ཆུང	small force/ detachment/ unit	dpung chung
དཔུང་ཆེན	large force/ army	dpung chen
དཔུང་འཇུག	marching/ moving/ ordering troops forward/ to attack/ to battle	dpung 'jug
དཔུང་འཇུག་གི་དུང་བརྡ	horn/ bugle signal to march/ attack	dpung 'jug gi dung brda
དཔུང་འཇུག་དམག་མི་གཏོང་བ	for a long distance drag po dpung 'jug byas	dpung 'jug dmag mi gtong ba
དཔུང་འཇུམ་པ	contract the arm	dpung 'jum pa
དཔུང་གཉེན	'gro ba'i dpung gnyen du	dpung gnyen
དཔུང་རྟགས	left and right dpung pa 'dogs pa'i mtshan ma, arm-band	dpung rtags
དཔུང་སྟོབས	military power/ might	dpung stobs
དཔུང་སྟོབས་དྲག་པོ	military might	dpung stobs drag po
དཔུང་སྟོབས་དྲག་པོའི	military might	dpung stobs drag po'i
དཔུང་དར	military unit flag/ colors	dpung dar
དཔུང་དུ་ཁུར	load on the shoulder?, keep as company	dpung du khur
དཔུང་གདང་ཤིག་ཤིག	dpung gshibs nas 'gro tshul zhig	dpung gdang shig shig
དཔུང་གདུབ	armlet	dpung gdub
དཔུང་མདུན་མ	advance troops, avant garde	dpung mdun ma
དཔུང་འདེགས་པ	1) {dpung tshogs [troops, military unit] 'gro ba,...g.yul sa dang nye bar dpung 'degs pa; 2) help, assist	dpung 'degs pa
དཔུང་རྡུལ	dust of moving troops	dpung rdul
དཔུང་ལྡན	mountain	dpung ldan
དཔུང་སྡེ	1) troops, military force/ unit; 2) assembly of many people; 3) ranks of	dpung sde
དཔུང་སྡེ་ཁག	military force/ unit	dpung sde khag
དཔུང་སྡེབ	combine/ join many people into 1 military force	dpung sdeb
དཔུང་སྡེབས	join forces, combine many people into 1 military force	dpung sdebs
དཔུང་གནོན	reinforcement	dpung gnon
དཔུང་གནོན་པ	overcome the opponent by military force, reinforcements	dpung gnon pa
དཔུང་སྣོན	reinforcements	dpung snon
དཔུང་སྣོན་བྱེད	reinforce 1624	dpung snon byed
དཔུང་པ	1) in the body from elbow to shoulder blade, upper arm [Mgo las dpung pa mtho,...Lag zad dpung par thug]; 2) shoulder; 3) force/ power of troops; 4) sleeve (/ forearm???	dpung pa
དཔུང་པ་རྐང	shoulder blade	dpung pa rkang
དཔུང་པ་སྐྱེས	king	dpung pa skyes
དཔུང་པ་རྒྱངས	square the shoulders	dpung pa rgyangs
དཔུང་པ་རྗེ་ངར	small shoulders	dpung pa rje ngar
དཔུང་པ་རྗེ་ངར་ཐུང་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad	dpung pa rje ngar thung ba
དཔུང་པ་མཉམ་གཤིབ	shoulder to shoulder	dpung pa mnyam gshib
དཔུང་པ་མཉམ་གཤིབས	shoulder to shoulder	dpung pa mnyam gshibs
དཔུང་པ་རྡར་བ	compete, challenge	dpung pa rdar ba
དཔུང་པ་ར་འགྱོགས་པ	to shoulder, carry on one's shoulder	dpung pa ra 'gyogs pa
དཔུང་པའི་མགོ་ཟླུམ་པ	broad shoulders dpung pa'i mgo zlum pa'i mtsan bzang major mark of broad shoulders [one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mthan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} = the thirty major marks of a great being sangs rgyas ky...	dpung pa'i mgo zlum pa
དཔུང་པའི་རྒྱན	bracelet worn on the upper arm, chain straps for the shoulder, shoulder ornament	dpung pa'i rgyan
དཔུང་པའི་འདབ	hand	dpung pa'i 'dab
དཔུང་པའི་ནང	inner side of the arm	dpung pa'i nang
དཔུང་པའི་བུ	arms	dpung pa'i bu
དཔུང་པའི་འོག	shoulder	dpung pa'i 'og
དཔུང་པར་འགྱོགས་པ	carry on a shoulder pole, carry on one's shoulder	dpung par 'gyogs pa
དཔུང་པར་བདགས་བྱེད	ornament for the arm	dpung par bdags byed
དཔུང་པས་བྱིན	epithet of yeru tsang po	dpung pas byin
དཔུང་པོ	[arch] heap	dpung po
དཔུང་ཕྱོགས	military camp	dpung phyogs
དཔུང་བ	shoulder	dpung ba
དཔུང་བའི་གདུ་བུ	chain straps for the shoulder, shoulder ornament	dpung ba'i gdu bu
དཔུང་བུ་ཆུང	rkang dmag	dpung bu chung
དཔུང་སྦྲེལ	shoulder to shoulder dpung sbrel gyi sgo nas las ka 'bad brtson	dpung sbrel
ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	make a great effort shoulder to shoulder	chen po byed pa
དཔུང་དམག	army	dpung dmag
དཔུང་དམག་རུ་སྒྲིག	military review	dpung dmag ru sgrig
དཔུང་རྩ	dpung pa'i lug gzhug nas downward three fingers, a bleeding nadi [if bleed good for glo tshad &, khrag tshad etc]	dpung rtsa
དཔུང་ཚིགས	dpung lag gnyis kyi tshigs	dpung tshigs
དཔུང་ཚིགས་ཕྱི	sog pa gnyis kyi phyogs	dpung tshigs phyi
དཔུང་ཚོགས	troops, military force	dpung tshogs
དཔུང་ཚོགས་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	chakravartin's four kinds of troops [cavalry, elephants, chariots, infantry]	dpung tshogs yan lag bzhi
དཔུང་ཚོགས་ཡན་ལག་བཞིའི་དམག	[TRS 102-6]	dpung tshogs yan lag bzhi'i dmag
དཔུང་འཛུམ	phrag dpung mdun right and left gyi kong mo	dpung 'dzum
དཔུང་འཛུལ	invasion force	dpung 'dzul
དཔུང་འཛུལ་བྱེད	invade	dpung 'dzul byed
དཔུང་བཟང	AryaSubaahuparipr.cchanaama-tantra	dpung bzang
དཔུང་བཟང་གིས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	subahupariprcchatantra	dpung bzang gis zhus pa'i mdo
དཔུང་བཟངས	Aryasub hupariprccha-n	dpung bzangs
དཔུང་ཡ	'gran ya, kha gtad,...Dpa' bo'i dpung ya dpung g.yos - reinforcement of troops, sending troops to fight	dpung ya
དཔུང་རངས	the shoulder [on a torma]	dpung rangs
དཔུང་རུས	phrag pa'i bone	dpung rus
དཔུང་རོགས	companion, helper	dpung rogs
དཔུང་རོགས་འཁྲིད	escort	dpung rogs 'khrid
དཔུང་རོགས་གཏོང	1) gzhogs 'degs dmag sde; 2) Rgyab snon dmag sde; 3) Dpung 'degs las rogs send relief/ escort troops, reinforcements	dpung rogs gtong
དཔུང་ལ་སྐྱེས	born of the hand, a king	dpung la skyes
དཔུང་ཤུགས	1) military power; 2) power of the hands [Khres khur chen po phrag steng du sangs kyis 'gyogs pa'i dpung shugs skyed pa]	dpung shugs
དཔུང་ཤེད	1) power of troops; 2) power of the arms	dpung shed
དཔུང་ཤོག	group, crowd	dpung shog
དཔུང་ཤོག་བྱེད	break through an encirclement	dpung shog byed
དཔུང་གཤིབ	dpung pa mnyam gshib	dpung gshib
དཔུང་གཤོག	group, crowd	dpung gshog
དཔུང་གཤོག་བྱེད	break through an encirclement	dpung gshog byed
དཔུང་གཤོང	phrag mtshams kyi kong bu	dpung gshong
དཔུང་གཤོལ	armistice	dpung gshol
དཔུང་གཤོལ་ཆིངས་ཡིག	armistice agreement/ pact/ treaty	dpung gshol chings yig
དཔུང་སིག	shrug	dpung sig
དཔུང་སིག་རྒྱབ་པ	shrug	dpung sig rgyab pa
དཔུང་སུག	[maliciously] search out faults/ blame	dpung sug
དཔུང་སུག་གཏོང	[maliciously] search out faults/ blame	dpung sug gtong
དཔུང་སུག་བཏང	[maliciously] searched out faults/ blame	dpung sug btang
དཔུང་སུག་བྱེད	[maliciously] search out faults/ blame	dpung sug byed
དཔུང་གསར་སྣོན	reinforce	dpung gsar snon
དཔུང་གསིག	dpung pa gsig gsig byed pa ...Khur chen 'khyer dus dpung gsig yang yang brgyab na ngal dub chung	dpung gsig
དཔུང་བསིག	shaking of one's shoulder, shrugging the shoulder, winnow, fan, sift	dpung bsig
དཔུང་ཧྲག་པ	go thang gi dmag sde,...Dgra bo zil gyis gnon pa'i dpung hrag pa zhig gtong ba	dpung hrag pa
དཔུངས	collect, SA dpung	dpungs
དཔུར	[arch] corpse, fly, cremation, funeral	dpur
དཔུལ	(not in Das)	dpul
དཔུས་བསྒྱུར་བ	exchange articles, dispose of articles	dpus bsgyur ba
དཔེ	metaphor/ analogy/ example; allegory	dpe
དཔེ་ཀ	little book	dpe ka
དཔེ་སྐྱོན་ཅན	1) inappropriate/ improper/ [internally] faulty example; 2) pecha w errors	dpe skyon can
དཔེ་སྐྱོན་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པ	1) proper[ly joined] example; 2) not a pecha w/o errors	dpe skyon can ma yin pa
དཔེ་སྐྲུན	1) publication, publishing, printing [pechas]; 2) mig ltos kyi dpe bzang 'jog pa	dpe skrun
དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང	publishing house	dpe skrun khang
དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁར	publishing house	dpe skrun khar
དཔེ་སྐྲུན་བྱེད	publish, print	dpe skrun byed
དཔེ་སྐྲུན་རང་དབང	freedom of the press	dpe skrun rang dbang
དཔེ་བསྐྲུན	1) publication, publishing, printing [pechas]; 2) mig ltos kyi dpe bzang 'jog pa	dpe bskrun
དཔེ་བསྐྲུན་ཁང	publishing house	dpe bskrun khang
དཔེ་བསྐྲུན་ཁར	publishing house	dpe bskrun khar
དཔེ་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	publish, print	dpe bskrun byed
དཔེ་བསྐྲུན་རང་དབང	freedom of the press	dpe bskrun rang dbang
དཔེ་ཁང	1) library. 2) bookstore	dpe khang
དཔེ་ཁུག	pecha/ book satchel/ bag, school bag	dpe khug
དཔེ་ཁྲི	table for books, book-stand, bookshelf; bookshelf	dpe khri
དཔེ་ཁྲིད	pecha tri/ explanation talk, teaching, lecturing	dpe khrid
དཔེ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	give a pecha tri/ explanation, teach, lecture	dpe khrid byed
དཔེ་ཁྲོམ	book market	dpe khrom
དཔེ་མཁྱུད	fond of books	dpe mkhyud
དཔེ་མཁྱུད་ཅན	unwillingness to lend books	dpe mkhyud can
དཔེ་མཁྱུད་པ	unwillingness to lend books	dpe mkhyud pa
དཔེ་མཁྱུད་བྱེད་པ	be unwilling to lend books	dpe mkhyud byed pa
དཔེ་འཁྱར་པོ	defective simile	dpe 'khyar po
དཔེ་འཁྲིད	teach, lecture, explain a pecha	dpe 'khrid
དཔེ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	teach, lecture, explain a pecha	dpe 'khrid byed
དཔེ་གོག	dpe cha deprecatory	dpe gog
དཔེ་དགུ	nine similes [for the buddha body of form]. According to the Uttaratantra: "Like the buddha in an ugly lotus, like honey in bees, like kernels in husks, like gold in alluvium, treasure in the earth...	dpe dgu
དཔེ་དགོད་པ	to illustrate, exemplify	dpe dgod pa
དཔེ་མགོ	beginning of a book	dpe mgo
དཔེ་འགྲེ	dpe spyi mtshungs su rigs 'gre byed pa,...Slob sbyong byed thabs dpe 'gre byas chog	dpe 'gre
དཔེ་རྒྱན་སོ་གཉིས	CHN	dpe rgyan so gnyis
དཔེ་རྒྱུག	book lesson	dpe rgyug
དཔེ་རྒྱུགས	book lesson	dpe rgyugs
སྦས	were then put into writing on "yellow scrolls"and hidden as spiritual treasures	sbas
དཔེ་སྒམ	box/ chest for books	dpe sgam
དཔེ་སྒྲ	speech	dpe sgra
དཔེ་སྒྲོམ	bookshelf	dpe sgrom
དཔེ་བརྒྱད	eight examples of illusion	dpe brgyad
དཔེ་བརྒྱུད	text	dpe brgyud
དཔེ་བརྒྱུད་པ	example lineage	dpe brgyud pa
དཔེ་ངན་པ	bad example	dpe ngan pa
དཔེ་དངོས	real/ actual example, evidence, proof	dpe dngos
དཔེ་ཅི་ལྟར	according to what method or plan	dpe ci ltar
དཔེ་ཆ	book scripture, text, common word for book, Tibetan style book	dpe cha
ཨིན་ཨིམིཏཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨཱིནདིཨན་པལམ	leaf manuscripts	in imitation of the Indian palm
དཔེ་ཆ་ཀློག	read books, study manuals	dpe cha klog
དཔེ་ཆ་ཀློག་པ	read, study	dpe cha klog pa
དཔེ་ཆ་ཁ་འཐོར་བ	book whose leaves are mixed up	dpe cha kha 'thor ba
དཔེ་ཆ་ཁང	library, book store	dpe cha khang
དཔེ་ཆ་ཁྲིད	teach, lecture	dpe cha khrid
དཔེ་ཆ་ཁྲུ་ཚད་མ	pecha pages 1 cubit in length	dpe cha khru tshad ma
དཔེ་ཆ་འཁྲིད	teach [a pecha]	dpe cha 'khrid
དཔེ་ཆ་མགོ་བཙེམས་མ	book	dpe cha mgo btsems ma
དཔེ་ཆ་མགོ་ཚོན	bound book	dpe cha mgo tshon
དཔེ་ཆ་འགྲེམ	publish a pecha/ book	dpe cha 'grem
དཔེ་ཆ་ལྟ	read books, study manuals	dpe cha lta
དཔེ་ཆ་བལྟས་པ	have read the book	dpe cha bltas pa
དཔེ་ཆ་མདའ་ཚད་མ	pecha pages dkyus la mda' gang yod pa	dpe cha mda' tshad ma
དཔེ་ཆ་པར་མ	printed pecha	dpe cha par ma
དཔེ་ཆ་བ	person who studies books	dpe cha ba
དཔེ་ཆ་བ་གླེན་པ	book worm	dpe cha ba glen pa
དཔེ་ཆ་བྲིས	copied a holy noble	dpe cha bris
དཔེ་ཆ་བླ་མར་བརྟེན	bar du + - In the middle I took the scriptures as teacher	dpe cha bla mar brten
དཔེ་ཆ་བཞེངས	copied the texts	dpe cha bzhengs
དཔེ་ཆ་བཟོ	write/ make a pecha/ book	dpe cha bzo
དཔེ་ཆ་སོགས་ཀློག	etc	dpe cha sogs klog
དཔེ་ཆ་སོགས་ཀློག་པ	reading books	dpe cha sogs klog pa
དཔེ་ཆར་འཆར་བ	snang ba dpe char 'char ba - the phenomenal world will arise as teachings	dpe char 'char ba
དཔེ་ཆེ་ཀློག་པ	to read, study	dpe che klog pa
དཔེ་ཆེ་དཀྲུགས	leaves of a book are confused or mixed up together	dpe che dkrugs
དཔེ་ཆོས	explanations of the examples	dpe chos
དཔེ་ཆོས་རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	Jewel mound tantra [by Kadampa geshe po to ba dpe chos kyi 'grel pa brag dkar ba]	dpe chos rin chen spungs pa
དཔེ་མཇལ་བ	to find a copy	dpe mjal ba
དཔེ་མཇུག	end of a book	dpe mjug
དཔེ་འཇུག་ས	model, example, sample	dpe 'jug sa
དཔེ་འཇོག་དངོས་པོ	model, example, sample, demonstration/ show piece	dpe 'jog dngos po
དཔེ་འཇོག་པ	for example, instance, analogy	dpe 'jog pa
དཔེ་འཇོག་ས	model, type	dpe 'jog sa
དཔེ་བརྗོད	Syn {dpe ston}	dpe brjod
དཔེ་བརྗོད་བྱེད	cite an example, compare w 1626	dpe brjod byed
དཔེ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the 22 examples	dpe nyi shu rtsa gnyis
དཔེ་ཉེར་འཇལ	completely evaluate the example	dpe nyer 'jal
དཔེ་ཉེར་འཇལ་གྱི	SA rjes dpag	dpe nyer 'jal gyi
དཔེ་ཉེར་འཇལ་གྱི་རྗེས་དཔག	comparative judgment of perception	dpe nyer 'jal gyi rjes dpag
དཔེ་ཉེར་འཇལ་བའི་ཙད་མ	pram na completely evaluating the example [depending on the example's realized true reason rang la hidden object infer to be like the example eg a sprout has no true existence like a reflection in ...	dpe nyer 'jal ba'i tsad ma
དཔེ་ཉེར་འཇལ་བའི་ཚད་མ	pram na completely evaluating the example	dpe nyer 'jal ba'i tshad ma
དཔེ་གཉིས	the two kinds of examples	dpe gnyis
དཔེ་གཉིས་པ	second version of a text	dpe gnyis pa
དཔེ་སྙིང	ancient manuscript	dpe snying
དཔེ་གཏམ	NyTh: "history," saying, (other meanings: proverb, aphorism, adage, maxim). This is a variant of gtam dpe. According to NyTh, dpe gtam and gtam dpe are identical, however dpe gtam is not attested i...	dpe gtam
དཔེ་ལྟ	follow an example	dpe lta
དཔེ་ལྟ་ཁང	reading room	dpe lta khang
དཔེ་ལྟ་ས	model, example	dpe lta sa
དཔེ་ལྟར་སྣང	faulty example [the thesis ascertaining sngon du khyab pa nges pa'i gzhir though bzung it cannot be ascertained	dpe ltar snang
དཔེ་ལྟར་བཟོ་བ	model	dpe ltar bzo ba
དཔེ་སྟོན	1) show examples to the eyes of others; 2) exemplifier, [the Sautrantikas, or possibly their principal school)	dpe ston
དཔེ་སྟོན་གྱི་དེབ	sample/ specimen copy	dpe ston gyi deb
དཔེ་སྟོན་སྒྲིག་ཡིག	model regulations	dpe ston sgrig yig
དཔེ་སྟོན་ཐོན་རྫས	model/ specimen/ sample product	dpe ston thon rdzas
དཔེ་སྟོན་སྡེ་པ	exemplifier [the Sautrantikas, or possibly their principal school	dpe ston sde pa
དཔེ་སྟོན་ནུས་པ	model function	dpe ston nus pa
དཔེ་སྟོན་པ	Syn {mdo sde pa}; exemplifier, n. of the Sautrantikas, or possibly of their principal school	dpe ston pa
དཔེ་སྟོན་བ	exemplifier	dpe ston ba
དཔེ་སྟོན་བྱེད	1) show/ set an example; 2) take the lead	dpe ston byed
དཔེ་སྟོན་ཚད་ལྟ	preliminary trial, experiment	dpe ston tshad lta
དཔེ་བལྟ་བྱས	to read	dpe blta byas
དཔེ་བལྟས	use as an example/ model, read	dpe bltas
དཔེ་བལྟས་ནས	using as an example/ model	dpe bltas nas
དཔེ་ཐིག	thin writing line in pecha to keep letters straight	dpe thig
དཔེ་ཐུང	short manuscript size	dpe thung
དཔེ་ཐུམ	a book wrapper	dpe thum
དཔེ་ཐོ	book list	dpe tho
དཔེ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བྲོ་འཁྲབ་ཤེས	know how to dance on books (give teachings without really understanding)	dpe thog tu bro 'khrab shes
དཔེ་ཐོག་བྲོ་བརྡུང	dances on books	dpe thog bro brdung
དཔེ་མཐུན	(example of example	dpe mthun
དཔེ་དང་དོན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	facsimile/ example and actual clear light/ luminosity	dpe dang don gyi 'od gsal
དཔེ་དང་དཔེ་ཅན	example and exemplified	dpe dang dpe can
དཔེ་དང་མཚོན་དོན	analogy and indication	dpe dang mtshon don
དཔེ་དར	pennant, banner	dpe dar
དཔེ་དར་བ	a new tradition spreading	dpe dar ba
དཔེ་དེ་བཞིན་དུ	Likewise,	dpe de bzhin du
དཔེ་དེབ	book	dpe deb
དཔེ་དེབ་ཀྱི་མཛེས་ཆ	book illustration	dpe deb kyi mdzes cha
དཔེ་དེབ་བཏོན་རིགས	publications	dpe deb bton rigs
དཔེ་དེབ་ལྟ	study	dpe deb lta
དཔེ་དེབ་ལྟ་ཁང	study/ reading room	dpe deb lta khang
དཔེ་དེབ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིགས	encyclopedia	dpe deb phyogs sgrigs
དཔེ་དེབ་རིང་ལུགས	book worship-ism	dpe deb ring lugs
དཔེ་དོན	example and meaning; metaphor and actuality; an analogy	dpe don
དཔེ་དོན་རྟགས་གསུམ	(three factors of) metaphor, underlying meaning, and indication/ evidence/ expression	dpe don rtags gsum
དཔེ་དོན་སྦྱར	to relate the meaning and the example	dpe don sbyar
དཔེ་དོན་སྦྱར་བ	join example and meaning	dpe don sbyar ba
དཔེ་དོན་ཤི་རབས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the examples and meanings of the genealogies of the dead	dpe don shi rabs kyi bon
དཔེ་དྲིལ	a bundle of books	dpe dril
དཔེ་འདྲ	copy imitation, likeness	dpe 'dra
དཔེ་ལྡེབ་ལྟ	read a book/ pecha	dpe ldeb lta
དཔེ་རྣམ	analogy	dpe rnam
དཔེ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སྦྱར་བ	give an wrongly joined example [tshul lnga 'dod pa'i lugs, among chos mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang lnga, gtan tshigs rig pa'i sbyor ba'i 'god tshul sbyar skabs reversing thesis and reason: wrongly inf...	dpe phyin ci log tu sbyar ba
དཔེ་བྱང་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	80 minor marks [ornament of emergent realization, vv 21- 32]	dpe byang brgyad cu
དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of (physical) perfection	dpe byad
དཔེ་བྱད་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	a buddha's 80 minor marks	dpe byad brgyad cu
དཔེ་བྱད་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	eighty minor marks	dpe byad brgyad bcu
དཔེ་བྱད་ཅན	proportional, symmetrical	dpe byad can
དཔེ་བྱད་བཟང་པོ	minor characteristic, excellent minor marks [of a great being perfectly shown as a flower has anthers]	dpe byad bzang po
དཔེ་བྱད་བཟང་པོ་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	80 excellent signs, 80 minor marks of excellence	dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu
དཔེ་བྱད་བཟང་པོ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	80 minor marks of excellence / excellent signs	dpe byad bzang po brgyad bcu
དཔེ་བྱད་བཟང་པོའི་སྐུ	the body having the 80 minor marks	dpe byad bzang po'i sku
དཔེ་བྱས	modeled on, took as a model/ example	dpe byas
དཔེ་བྱེད	to model on, to take as a model, example	dpe byed
དཔེ་བྱེད་བརྒྱད་ཅུ	eighty minor marks	dpe byed brgyad cu
དཔེ་བྱེད་བཟང་པོ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	the 80 minor marks	dpe byed bzang po brgyad bcu
དཔེ་བྲལ	beyond analogy	dpe bral
དཔེ་དབྱིབས	model for/ of, volume	dpe dbyibs
དཔེ་སྦྱར	give an example	dpe sbyar
དཔེ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	unestablished/ nonexistent example	dpe ma grub pa
དཔེ་མ་མཆིས་པར	unexampled	dpe ma mchis par
དཔེ་མ་སྦྱར་བ	tshul lnga 'dod pa'i lugs, among the chos mthun pa'i dpe ltar snang lnga, the joining of the example since it is gtan med vase etc. thesis and reason are alone: eg, vase being made and impermanent ...	dpe ma sbyar ba
དཔེ་མི་མཐུན་པ	dpe don 'gal ba'am mi mtshungs pa,...Dpe mi mthun pa zhig bzhag nas skad cha bshad na go brda 'phrod mi thub	dpe mi mthun pa
དཔེ་མི་སྲིད་པ	desperately, serious, disastrous, marvelous, amazing, terrific, grave	dpe mi srid pa
དཔེ་མི་སྲིད་པའི་ཡག་པོ	extraordinarily good	dpe mi srid pa'i yag po
དཔེ་མེད	1) unequalled, unexampelled, incomparable, matchless; 2) Buddha; 3) city {dpe med} [in ancient India]	dpe med
དཔེ་མེད་པ	incomparable, unique, unexampled, epithet of buddha, personal name	dpe med pa
དཔེ་མེད་པར་བསྟོད་པ	Nagarjuna's "Peerless Praise"; name of text	dpe med par bstod pa
དཔེ་དམག	exemplary soldier, pace setter	dpe dmag
དཔེ་ཙམ	simile	dpe tsam
དཔེ་ཙམ་གྱིས	merely by the example the meaning is not real, because there is nothing else like it Nyi ma'am zla ba lta bu'o zhes pa ni dpe tsam las dngos ma yin	dpe tsam gyis
དཔེ་རྩོམ	write/ compose a book	dpe rtsom
དཔེ་རྩོམ་པ	write, compose	dpe rtsom pa
དཔེ་ཚང་མང	many household situations	dpe tshang mang
དཔེ་ཚད	model, example, norm	dpe tshad
དཔེ་ཚོགས	collection/ series of printed works/ published books	dpe tshogs
དཔེ་ཚོང་ཁང	book store	dpe tshong khang
དཔེ་མཚམས་པ	mtshams la bsdad: grasp the words of a pecha in mind and realize and analyze the meaning	dpe mtshams pa
དཔེ་མཚོན	model, example, type. Syn {dpe 'jog sa}	dpe mtshon
དཔེ་མཚོན་གྱི	exemplary	dpe mtshon gyi
དཔེ་མཚོན་ཆེན་རན་པོ	ideal	dpe mtshon chen ran po
དཔེ་མཚོན་པ	illustrate	dpe mtshon pa
དཔེ་མཚོན་ཞིབ་འཇུག	model investigation/ survey	dpe mtshon zhib 'jug
དཔེ་འཚོང་ཁང	book store	dpe 'tshong khang
དཔེ་འཚོང་བ	pecha seller	dpe 'tshong ba
དཔེ་འཚོམ་པ	stitch a book	dpe 'tshom pa
དཔེ་མཛོད	{khang} library	dpe mdzod
དཔེ་མཛོད་ཁང	library	dpe mdzod khang
དཔེ་འཛིན་པ	pecha blo 'dzin byed mkhan	dpe 'dzin pa
དཔེ་རྫི	index, register	dpe rdzi
དཔེ་གཞི	model, specimen, sample	dpe gzhi
དཔེ་གཞི་ཁང	[model, specimen, sample] hall	dpe gzhi khang
དཔེ་བཞུས	copied a book	dpe bzhus
དཔེ་ཟླ	[that which has an] example, comparison, match	dpe zla
དཔེ་ཟླ་བྱ་བ	example	dpe zla bya ba
དཔེ་ཟླ་མ་མཆིས	has no example/ is unequalled	dpe zla ma mchis
དཔེ་ཟླ་མ་མཆིས་པ	[that which] has no example/ is unequalled/ matchless	dpe zla ma mchis pa
དཔེ་ཟླ་མེད	[that which] has no example/ is unequalled	dpe zla med
དཔེ་ཟླ་མེད་པ	[that which] has no example/ is unequalled	dpe zla med pa
དཔེ་གཟིགས་ཁང	reading room	dpe gzigs khang
དཔེ་བཟང	good model, ideal, standard	dpe bzang
དཔེ་བཟང་ཅན	exemplary [person, group]	dpe bzang can
དཔེ་བཟང་དུ་རྩི	hold up as a [good model, ideal, standard]	dpe bzang du rtsi
དཔེ་བཟོས་པ	1) make a pecha; 2) when misfortune arises say words of regret	dpe bzos pa
དཔེ་འོད་གསལ	facsimile clear light	dpe 'od gsal
དཔེ་འོས	good model, ideal, standard	dpe 'os
དཔེ་འོས་ཅན	exemplary [person, group]	dpe 'os can
དཔེ་འོས་དུ་རྩི	hold up as a [good model, ideal, standard]	dpe 'os du rtsi
དཔེ་ཡང་དག	true, genuine example	dpe yang dag
དཔེ་ཡང་དག་གཉིས	the two kinds of genuine examples [compatible and incompatible]	dpe yang dag gnyis
དཔེ་ཡས	a number	dpe yas
དཔེ་ཡི་ཡེ་ཤེས	example wisdom	dpe yi ye shes
གཔ་ཅཽསེད་བཡ་ཐེ་བློཝན	out orgasm of karmamudra, 3rd abhiseka, {don gyi ye shes} follows]	gap caused by the blown
དཔེ་ཡིག	yig gzugs sbyong dpe = yig dpe	dpe yig
དཔེ་ར་བརྗོད	example, instance	dpe ra brjod
དཔེ་རས	book cloth-cover, book cover; book cover [cloth cover used with traditional Tibetan books]	dpe ras
དཔེ་རིས	plan, drawing, blueprint, designs	dpe ris
དཔེ་རིས་སྔོན་པོ	blue print 1628	dpe ris sngon po
དཔེ་རིས་བྲིས	drew a pattern, designed	dpe ris bris
དཔེ་རིས་འབྲི	draw a pattern, design	dpe ris 'bri
དཔེ་རིས་རེའུ་མིག	pecha illustration and aang grangs [figure] number, total, enumeration, writing] presenting table/ diagram	dpe ris re'u mig
དཔེ་རུལ	rotten/ useless/ meaningless pecha	dpe rul
དཔེ་ལ་བསམ་པ	reflecting on images; x {rnyed dka'i dpe la bsam pa} reflecting on images that show how difficult it is to find	dpe la bsam pa
དཔེ་ལམ	example, sample, specimen, model	dpe lam
དཔེ་ལས་དཔེ་ཅན་ལྷག་པའི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	ornament showing dpe can khyad chos lhag pa'i sgo nas mtshungs pa dngos su ldog cing, shugs la dpe don 'dra ba, among ldog pa can gyi rgyan	dpe las dpe can lhag pa'i ldog pa can
དཔེ་ལས་མི་སྲིད་པ	MSS: Regional variant of {dpe mi srid pa}? Used by TsGM. [mss]	dpe las mi srid pa
དཔེ་ལུང་ཆུ	dpe lung river	dpe lung chu
དཔེ་ལེགས	good model, ideal, standard	dpe legs
དཔེ་ལེགས་ཅན	exemplary [person, group]	dpe legs can
དཔེ་ལེགས་དུ་རྩི	hold up as a [good model, ideal, standard]	dpe legs du rtsi
དཔེ་ལེན	for example, instance, analogy, copy, follow an example	dpe len
དཔེ་ལེན་པ	for example, instance, analogy	dpe len pa
དཔེ་ཤུ	to copy a book	dpe shu
དཔེ་ཤུབས	book case/ cover	dpe shubs
དཔེ་གཤོད་པ	cite	dpe gshod pa
དཔེ་བཤད	explanation of kha dpe'/ gtam dpe sogs...Kho la go rtogs yong ched sngar gyi lo rgyus dpe bshad, lung drangs, lung thag ske la brgyus pa yin,...Skad cha don la ma khel na dpe bshad lung 'dren mang ...	dpe bshad
དཔེ་བཤུ་བ	copy a book	dpe bshu ba
དཔེ་བཤུབས	copy of a book	dpe bshubs
དཔེ་བཤུས	copied manuscript	dpe bshus
དཔེ་བཤུས་བྱེད	copy a book	dpe bshus byed
དཔེ་སྲིད་པས	yod dogs med ces ston tshig ...Khyed rang lag shes mkhas po zhe drag yod pa red zer gyi 'dug lags dpe srid pas, dpe srid pas, nga 'dra po brgya stong mang po yod pa red	dpe srid pas
དཔེ་སྲོལ	mig dpe view?,...Byas rjes bzang po'i dpe srol 'jog pa,...Las stangs cha	dpe srol
དཔེ་གསར	new shape/ kind/ style of thing	dpe gsar
དཔེ་གསར་ཡང་གསར	newest of the new [Mi dang mi'i bar gyi 'brel lam dpe gsar yang gsar zhig chags yod]	dpe gsar yang gsar
དཔེ་བསགས་འདུག	"oh my goodness"	dpe bsags 'dug
དཔེ་ཧྲུལ	stacks of books [in a mess]	dpe hrul
དཔེན་པ	(A; 1) necessary, useful, helpful; 2) beautiful, pleasing; 3) Gus pa	dpen pa
དཔེའི	metaphorical, illustrative, exemplifying	dpe'i
དཔེའི་རྒྱན	ornament of example [among don rgyan, the example and exemplified are gyi dpe can mutually dra ba'am, mtsungs par showing ornament, among which are 32 kinds: chos dpe, dngos po'i dpe, bzlog pa'i dp...	dpe'i rgyan
དཔེའི་རྒྱུན	example lineage	dpe'i rgyun
དཔེའི་རྒྱུན་པ	the example lineage	dpe'i rgyun pa
དཔེའི་སྒྱུ་མ	in sgyu lus, depending on substances etc., while really nonexistent, incidentally/ apparently horses and oxen etc. arising	dpe'i sgyu ma
དཔེའི་ཆེ་བ་ཉིད	greatness of the example	dpe'i che ba nyid
དཔེའི་དོན	the meaning of the example	dpe'i don
དཔེའི་འདོ་གསལ	metaphoric clear light, example clear light	dpe'i 'do gsal
དཔེའི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	drang don/ example vajra and ghanta	dpe'i rdor dril
དཔེའི་སྡོམ	table of contents, index in general, introductory remarks, introduction	dpe'i sdom
དཔེའི་ནམ་མཁའ	sky in the conventional/ usual/ customary/ metaphorical sense	dpe'i nam mkha'
དཔེའི་རྣམ་གྲངས་ཉེར་གཅིག	the 21 modes of conduct as exemplar	dpe'i rnam grangs nyer gcig
དཔེའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	phal pa dpe can gyi khyad gzhi dang, gtso bo dpe'i khyad gzhi gnyis la yod pa'i khyad chos mthun par ston pa'i rgyan zhig, gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	dpe'i gzugs can
དཔེའི་འོད་གསལ	metaphoric clear light	dpe'i 'od gsal
དཔེའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of example (experience of mother chos nyid by disciple), knowledge indicated by example, exemplary knowledge	dpe'i ye shes
དཔེའི་ལམ་རིམ་རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	by Potowa	dpe'i lam rim rin chen spungs pa
དཔེའུ་ཆུང	small pecha	dpe'u chung
དཔེའུ་རི	illustrations	dpe'u ri
དཔེའུ་རིས	diagram	dpe'u ris
དཔེར	for example	dper
དཔེར་བསྒྲུན་པ	compare a quality w an example phan tshun khyad sdur gyi dpe zlar 'gran pa,...Blo gros kyi gting zab pas rgya mtsho'i dper bsgrun pa,...Rnam rig gsal bas nyi 'od kyi dper bsgrun pa	dper bsgrun pa
དཔེར་བརྗོད	figures of speech	dper brjod
དཔེར་བརྗོད་པ	to make an analogy, illustrate; to make examples / an analogy	dper brjod pa
དཔེར་ལྟ	follow an example, imitate, read	dper lta
དཔེར་ན	for example; by way of example/ analogy/ metaphor; for to illustrate this, for instance	dper na
དཔེར་ན་ཆ་བཞག་ན	for example	dper na cha bzhag na
དཔེར་བྱས་ནས	having made a comparison	dper byas nas
དཔེར་བྱས་པ	present an example	dper byas pa
དཔེར་བླངས	present/ make like/ copy/ follow an example	dper blangs
དཔེར་འབེབས་པ	transcribe	dper 'bebs pa
དཔེར་མི་སྲིད་པ	having no example, not exemplifiable	dper mi srid pa
དཔེར་མི་སྲིད་པའི་ཡག་པོ	extraordinarily good	dper mi srid pa'i yag po
དཔེར་མཚོན	setting example	dper mtshon
དཔེར་མཚོན་པ	clarify/ understand through an example	dper mtshon pa
དཔེར་མཛད་ནས	having made a comparison	dper mdzad nas
དཔེར་རྫོད	example, instance	dper rdzod
དཔེར་བཞག་པ	to set forth in metaphors	dper bzhag pa
དཔེར་བརཟོད་པ	paradigm, comparison, [give an] example	dper brzod pa
དཔེར་འོས	worthy of emulation	dper 'os
དཔེར་ཡང	even comparison	dper yang
དཔེར་ལེན	present/ make like/ copy/ follow an example	dper len
དཔེར་ལེན་པ	present/ make like/ copy/ follow an example	dper len pa
དཔེར་སྲིད་དམ	dngos su dri ba'i zol gyis ldog pa nas yong shes kyi ma red ces ston tshig ...Ya rabs tshad ldan zhig gis spyod ngan de 'dra byed pa dper srid dam,...Sngar gyi lam lugs ngan pa de rigs spyi tshogs ...	dper srid dam
དཔེས་སྟོན་པ	exemplifiers	dpes ston pa
དཔེས་བསྟན་པ	give an example	dpes bstan pa
དཔེས་མཚོན་པ	illustrated by the example of	dpes mtshon pa
དཔོག	to infer, know by inference, to measure, to judge, to weigh	dpog
དཔོག་འགྲོ	cross a river	dpog 'gro
དཔོག་པ	(tha dad pa dpags pa, dpag pa, dpogs!,, what is hidden measure, evaluate or conceptualize/ perceive, measure, proportion, infer, evaluate	dpog pa
དཔོག་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unfordable river or lake	dpog mi thub pa
དཔོག་རྩིས	compute an evaluation of the measure, estimation	dpog rtsis
དཔོགས	imp. of {dpog pa}	dpogs
དཔོང་ཁང	[arch] dpong sa	dpong khang
དཔོང་ས	(A; 1) ra skor; 2) Chos grva; 3) Grva shag; 4) 'dus sa; 5) rtsen sa	dpong sa
དཔོད	imp. of {dpod pa}	dpod
དཔོད་པ	(tha dad pa,, 1 person speaks and another writes it down, dictate	dpod pa
དཔོད་བྲིས	dictation	dpod bris
དཔོད་བྲིས་གཏོང་བ	dictate	dpod bris gtong ba
དཔོད་རྩོམ	elegant composition	dpod rtsom
དཔོན	best, chieftain, lord, chief, master, overseer of working men, foreman, leader, chief, lord, ruler	dpon
དཔོན་སྐྱ	honorable & distinguished man	dpon skya
དཔོན་ཁག	1) thu'u si; 2) Sa khul khag gi dpon rigs	dpon khag
དཔོན་ཁུངས	mi rabs kyi mi rtsa'i bdag po	dpon khungs
དཔོན་འཁོར	chief and his servant	dpon 'khor
དཔོན་གོང་ན་མེད	w/o a master above (me	dpon gong na med
དཔོན་གོས	clothes of a lord, chief, aristocrat	dpon gos
དཔོན་གྱོག	master/ lord and servant	dpon gyog
དཔོན་གྱོག་གི་ཚུལ་དུ	as his servant	dpon gyog gi tshul du
དཔོན་གྱོག་པ	the ruler and his subjects	dpon gyog pa
དཔོན་གྱོག་པས	the ruler and his subjects	dpon gyog pas
དཔོན་མགོ	chief	dpon mgo
དཔོན་འགོ	chief, governor, ruler, lord	dpon 'go
དཔོན་རྒྱུད	lineage of lords/ rulers	dpon rgyud
དཔོན་བརྒྱུད	lineage of lords	dpon brgyud
དཔོན་ངན	bureaucrat	dpon ngan
དཔོན་ངན་འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྲལ་རིམ	wealthy class of evil masters [in a country only half feudal and serfs etc spel yul only half an evil alliance of imperialists and landlords taking over the country's government, rgyal yongs kyi dp...	dpon ngan 'byor ldan gral rim
དཔོན་ངན་སྦྱོར་ལྡན་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucrat/ capitalist class	dpon ngan sbyor ldan ring lugs
དཔོན་ངན་མ་རྩ	bureaucratic capital, capital of evil masters	dpon ngan ma rtsa
དཔོན་ངན་མ་རྩའི་ཁེ་ལས	bureaucraticcapitalist enterprises	dpon ngan ma rtsa'i khe las
དཔོན་ངན་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucratic capitalism	dpon ngan ma rtsa'i ring lugs
དཔོན་ངན་བཟའ་རྔམ་ཅན	corrupt official/ bureaucrat	dpon ngan bza' rngam can
དཔོན་ངན་རིང་ལུགས	feudal or capitalist bad master class, bureaucracy-ism	dpon ngan ring lugs
དཔོན་ཆེན	officials	dpon chen
དཔོན་ཉམས	feudal or capitalist bad master class, bureaucracy, bureaucrat, nyams/ rnam 'gyur of / rulers/ masters/ lords/ VIPs	dpon nyams
དཔོན་ཉམས་སྦྱོར་ལྡན་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucrat/ capitalist class	dpon nyams sbyor ldan ring lugs
དཔོན་ཉམས་མ་རྩ	bureaucratic capital, capital of evil masters	dpon nyams ma rtsa
དཔོན་ཉམས་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucratic capitalism	dpon nyams ma rtsa'i ring lugs
དཔོན་ཉམས་བཟའ་རྔམ་ཅན	corrupt official/ bureaucrat	dpon nyams bza' rngam can
དཔོན་ཉམས་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucracy	dpon nyams ring lugs
དཔོན་ཐག་འབངས་གཅོད	thag gcod dbang med bzhin du thag gcod pa dpon thag g.yog gcod - thag gcod dbang med bzhin du thag gcod pa	dpon thag 'bangs gcod
དཔོན་དུ་བསྐོས	appoint a lord/ master	dpon du bskos
དཔོན་ནས་མན་ངག	1 of bon sgo bzhi	dpon nas man ngag
དཔོན་པོ	chiefs, commander, chief, SA dpon, lord	dpon po
དཔོན་པོ་བཙན་དབང་ཅན	despot	dpon po btsan dbang can
དཔོན་པོའི་བཀའ	order of the chief	dpon po'i bka'
དཔོན་སྤྱོད	lordly/ burocratic behavior/ airs 1630	dpon spyod
དཔོན་བློན	1) king and minister; 2) Dpon po dang blon po	dpon blon
དཔོན་དབང་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucracy	dpon dbang ring lugs
དཔོན་འབངས	lord and subjects/ servants/ vassals	dpon 'bangs
དཔོན་མེད	free	dpon med
དཔོན་མོ	mistress lady [ruler]	dpon mo
དཔོན་དམག	officers and men	dpon dmag
དཔོན་ཚང	precious ruler, the lord guru	dpon tshang
དཔོན་ཚང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious Dharma king	dpon tshang rin po che
དཔོན་མཛད་པ	preside over	dpon mdzad pa
དཔོན་ཡོད	standing under master or mistress dpon g.yog - master and servant, master and attendants dpon g.yog - master and servants	dpon yod
དཔོན་རབས	family of rulers/ lords	dpon rabs
དཔོན་རིགས	officials, lords, authorities	dpon rigs
དཔོན་རིམ	stages/ degrees of rank	dpon rim
དཔོན་ས་བླ་མ	high priest, hierarch	dpon sa bla ma
དཔོན་སྲས	son of a chief or king, prince	dpon sras
དཔོན་སློབ	1) master/ head teacher [& student]; 2) sometimes name of khenpo or loppon in a small monastery; 3) Punlop Rinpoche master and disciple; 4) governor	dpon slob
དཔོན་སློབ་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་རྣམས	teacher and disciples	dpon slob kyi tshogs rnams
དཔོན་སློབ་འཁོར་བཅས	master and disciples	dpon slob 'khor bcas
དཔོན་སློབ་རྣམས	master & students	dpon slob rnams
དཔོན་སློབ་མང་པོ་དང་བཅས	accompanied by many disciples	dpon slob mang po dang bcas
དཔོན་གསས	Master Guide to the Portal of Rituals, epithet of great masters, Masters, 1 of bon sgo bzhi, officiant priest, series of rdzogs chen teachings (chab nag, 'phan yul, chab dkar)	dpon gsas
དཔོན་གསས་ཕྱྭ་གཉན	the gto rites	dpon gsas phywa gnyan
དཔོན་གསས་ཕྱྭ་གཉན་གཏོ་ཡི་སྒོ	series of the dpon gsas with the powerful phywa	dpon gsas phywa gnyan gto yi sgo
དཔོན་གསས་མན་ངག་ལུང་གྱི་བོན	Bon of the Oral Guidance and Secret Instructions of the Master Sage	dpon gsas man ngag lung gyi bon
དཔོན་གསས་ལྷ	divine master	dpon gsas lha
དཔོར	[p dpar],, dictate	dpor
དཔོར་འདྲེན	transportation	dpor 'dren
དཔོར་པ	dictate	dpor pa
དཔོར་བ	to dictate	dpor ba
དཔྱ	tax, duty, tribute	dpya
དཔྱ་ཁུར	pay taxes	dpya khur
དཔྱ་ཁྲལ	government revenue	dpya khral
དཔྱ་ཁྲལ་ཁུར	pay taxes	dpya khral khur
དཔྱ་ཁྲལ་གྱི་ཡོངས་བབ	government tax revenue/ income	dpya khral gyi yongs bab
དཔྱ་ཁྲལ་མཇལ	pay taxes	dpya khral mjal
དཔྱ་མཇལ	pay taxes	dpya mjal
དཔྱ་འཇལ་བ	pay taxes	dpya 'jal ba
དཔྱ་ཐང	khral 'ul 'jal dgos kyi thob cha'am khral 'bab	dpya thang
དཔྱ་སྤྲོད་པ	pay taxes/ tribute	dpya sprod pa
དཔྱ་འཕྲེང	dangerous passages	dpya 'phreng
དཔྱ་བ	rent, tax in kind, SA 'phya ba	dpya ba
དཔྱ་བླ་སྐྱེས	revenue, tax, toll	dpya bla skyes
དཔྱ་འབབ	total taxes due	dpya 'bab
དཔྱ་འབེབས་པ	impose taxes, impose a tax	dpya 'bebs pa
དཔྱ་སེམས	feeling / desire to deride, {'phya sems}	dpya sems
དཔྱང	[p dpyangs],, be hanging, dangle	dpyang
དཔྱང་འཁོར	[construction] crane	dpyang 'khor
དཔྱང་འགེལ	suspension	dpyang 'gel
དཔྱང་ཐག	1) hanging rope, rope by which something is suspended; 2) plaything; 3) doubt; 4) rope for pulling something down	dpyang thag
དཔྱང་ཐག་རྩེད་པ	swing	dpyang thag rtsed pa
དཔྱང་ཐིག	downward glod pa'i thi gu or cord	dpyang thig
དཔྱང་ཐིགས	perpendicular line	dpyang thigs
དཔྱང་དར	hanging dar gos or dar dpyang, tassel	dpyang dar
དཔྱང་རྡོ	stone weight for pulling something down, stone on end of a rope	dpyang rdo
དཔྱང་དཔྱང་ཁྲུལ་ཁྲུལ	hanging things flapping in the wind	dpyang dpyang khrul khrul
དཔྱང་བ	to suspend, to make hang down, to rock, to pitch; ft. of {dpyong ba}	dpyang ba
དཔྱང་བའི	suspense	dpyang ba'i
དཔྱང་ཞགས	hanging zhags thag	dpyang zhags
དཔྱང་ལུང	downward hanging lung thag	dpyang lung
དཔྱངས	hang, SA dpyongs ba, dangle, SA dpyang ba, to be hanging, dangling	dpyangs
དཔྱངས་འཁོར	[construction] crane	dpyangs 'khor
དཔྱངས་ཐག	gnas lung dpyangs thag the 'rope of rescue' ritual to guide the dead	dpyangs thag
དཔྱངས་དར	silken streamers	dpyangs dar
དཔྱངས་ནས་ཡོམ་ཡོམ་བྱེད་པ	dangle	dpyangs nas yom yom byed pa
དཔྱངས་པ	was hanging, dangled [p dpyong ba]	dpyangs pa
དཔྱངས་ཟིན་པ	slung	dpyangs zin pa
དཔྱངས་ལུང	rings [gymnastics]	dpyangs lung
དཔྱད	[p and f? {dpyod pa} examination, investigation, analysis, inspection, compose, fathom, med. diagnosis	dpyad
དཔྱད་ཀྱི་ས	horses and oxen 'dul sa'i place	dpyad kyi sa
དཔྱད་ཁྲ	1) decision, sentence, verdict, judgement; 2) Tibetan govt rim gro sgrub skabs dgos cha'i grangs 'bor thag bcad pa'i yi ge sbug dam 'byar ma	dpyad khra
དཔྱད་སྒོམ	analysis and meditation/ investigation analytic rational, inspecting, investigative, examining, scrutinizing, analytical investigation	dpyad sgom
དཔྱད་སྒོམ་དྲུག	6-fold analytic meditation CHN	dpyad sgom drug
དཔྱད་ལྔ	the five examinations [gtar ga, me btsa', dugs, lums, byug pa]	dpyad lnga
དཔྱད་གཅེས་གཟུང	precious treatment, surgical treatise	dpyad gces gzung
དཔྱད་ཆས	instrument, apparatus	dpyad chas
དཔྱད་མཆན	talk examining topics/ things, commentary, notes, remarks, introduction	dpyad mchan
དཔྱད་འཇོག་སྤེལ་མ	dpyad sgom dang 'jog sgom res mos byed pa	dpyad 'jog spel ma
དཔྱད་འཇོག་རེས་མོས་བྱེད་པ	to alternate analysing and resting	dpyad 'jog res mos byed pa
དཔྱད་འཇོག་རེས་མོས་སུ་བསྒོམ	alternating analytic and resting meditation	dpyad 'jog res mos su bsgom
དཔྱད་གཏམ	talk examining topics/ things, commentary, notes, remarks, introduction	dpyad gtam
དཔྱད་གཏམ་ཆུང་ངུ	brief comment/ note	dpyad gtam chung ngu
དཔྱད་གཏམ་བརྗོད	comment on	dpyad gtam brjod
དཔྱད་གཏམ་ཐུང་ངུ	brief comment/ note	dpyad gtam thung ngu
དཔྱད་རྟགས	tick	dpyad rtags
དཔྱད་སྟོང	emptiness through analysis	dpyad stong
དཔྱད་ཐབས	knowing the means of curing [by purgatives emetics, bshal sman dang, skyug sman, sna sman, 'jam rtsi, ni ru ha, gtar kha, bleeding me btsa', moxibustion bdug lums, thur ma etc.]	dpyad thabs
དཔྱད་ཐབས་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	B"n enlightened activity text	dpyad thabs brgyad khri bzhi stong
དཔྱད་ཐབས་བཅུ	CHN	dpyad thabs bcu
དཔྱད་དུ་མེད་པ	inscrutable, unfathomable	dpyad du med pa
དཔྱད་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	to consult, refer to	dpyad sdur byed pa
དཔྱད་སྡེ	lkog gyur gyi don rnams ji ltar rig pas dpyad cing mngon gyur gyi sgo nas gtan la phab nas nad zhi bar byed pa'i thabs te, gtar ga dang, me btsa', dugs, lums, byug pa, thur ma bcas sde tshan drug go	dpyad sde
དཔྱད་བརྡར	rtog dpyod zhib cha,...Gros gzhi tshang mar blo bsdur dpyad brdar gyi thog nas gtan 'bebs gzab nan byed pa	dpyad brdar
དཔྱད་བསྡུར	brtag zhib go bsdur, examine and compare	dpyad bsdur
དཔྱད་པ	analysis, determine, investigation [thd]	dpyad pa
དཔྱད་པ་གནད་དུ་མ་སོང་བ	analysis that does not get to he pith	dpyad pa gnad du ma song ba
དཔྱད་པ་གནད་དུ་སོང་བ	analysis that gets to the pith dpyad pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa completely pure/trained analytical focus	dpyad pa gnad du song ba
དཔྱད་པ་གསུམ	mngon sum &, rjes dpag or dngos stobs rjes dpag and yid ches rjes dpag or grags pa'i rjes dpag : analysis by those three kinds of reasoning	dpyad pa gsum
དཔྱད་པ་གསུམ་ཀྱི་དག་པ	verified by threefold investigation [thd]	dpyad pa gsum kyi dag pa
དཔྱད་པ་གསུམ་གྱིས་དག་པའི་ལུང	scripture that is purified by the three kinds of analysis like {sangs rgyas kyi bka' tshad ma}, gzhal bya'i gnas gsum char brjod byar ston &, mngon gyur ston pa la are not refuted by perception, an...	dpyad pa gsum gyis dag pa'i lung
དཔྱད་པའི་ཡུལ	object to be investigated	dpyad pa'i yul
དཔྱད་པའི་རིགས་ཤེས	analytical rational cognition	dpyad pa'i rigs shes
དཔྱད་བུ་ཁྲི་ཤིང	1 of sku sras brgyad	dpyad bu khri shing
དཔྱད་བྱད	nad 'chos byed kyi yo byad	dpyad byad
དཔྱད་བྱེད	examine, test, research, analyze, hold to an examination, withstand close scrutiny, bear analysis, =={bden grub}	dpyad byed
དཔྱད་བྱེད་པ	test, make an examination of, diagnose medically	dpyad byed pa
དཔྱད་བྲ	decision, sentence, verdict	dpyad bra
དཔྱད་འབུམ་ཁྲ་བོ	Variegated Collections of Therapies	dpyad 'bum khra bo
དཔྱད་འབྲས	fruition of analysis	dpyad 'bras
དཔྱད་མ	on examination	dpyad ma
དཔྱད་མི་བཟོད་པ	not bearing analysis	dpyad mi bzod pa
དཔྱད་མཚམས	rules, laws, decision, settlement, agreement, minute rules, close inquiry	dpyad mtshams
དཔྱད་མཚམས་ཁྲ་མ	kha mchu thag bcad pa'i yi ge	dpyad mtshams khra ma
དཔྱད་ཞིབ	measuring, estimating	dpyad zhib
དཔྱད་ཞིབ་བྱེད	measure, estimate	dpyad zhib byed
དཔྱད་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to analyze	dpyad zhib byed pa
དཔྱད་གཞི	a point to be analyzed; question, problem, issue, a point to be analyzed	dpyad gzhi
དཔྱད་གཞིག	investigation	dpyad gzhig
དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཔེ་ཆ	reference book	dpyad gzhi'i dpe cha
དཔྱད་གཞིའི་ཡིག་ཆ	reference books/ materials	dpyad gzhi'i yig cha
དཔྱད་གཞིའི་ཡིག་རིགས	question, problem, issue, a point to be analyzed, reference books/ materials	dpyad gzhi'i yig rigs
དཔྱད་གཟིགས	review, examination	dpyad gzigs
དཔྱད་གཟིགས་བྱེད	review, examine	dpyad gzigs byed
དཔྱད་བཟོད	to withstand scrutiny, scouting	dpyad bzod
དཔྱད་བཟོད་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	existence that can withstand scrutiny	dpyad bzod du grub pa
དཔྱད་བཟོད་པ	* ability to withstand analysis	dpyad bzod pa
དཔྱད་ཡུལ	object of analysis	dpyad yul
དཔྱད་ར	parameters for investigation	dpyad ra
དཔྱད་ཤེས	subsequent cognizer/ cognition, certification, attestation	dpyad shes
དཔྱད་ཤེས་དོན་མཐུན	valid referent impression, (recollective, reflective) examination	dpyad shes don mthun
དཔྱད་ཤེས་པ	ascertain, come to a conclusion upon	dpyad shes pa
དཔྱད་གསུམ	3-fold scrutiny and examination scrutiny, three types of analysis/ diagnosis	dpyad gsum
དཔྱལ	clan of dpyal lo tsh' ba chos bzang	dpyal
དཔྱས	blame, accuse	dpyas
དཔྱས་ཅན	faulty, blameable	dpyas can
དཔྱས་བཏགས་པ	disparage, attribute faults/ blame	dpyas btags pa
དཔྱས་འདོགས་པ	blame	dpyas 'dogs pa
དཔྱས་པ	[p dpya ba] offence, fault, blame, accusation	dpyas pa
དཔྱས་པོ	fault, blunder	dpyas po
དཔྱས་མེད	faultless, blameless	dpyas med
དཔྱི	hip, hipbone	dpyi
དཔྱི་དཀྲི	doors and windows gi ru bzhi'i zur sner yod pa'i dpyi mig tu rgyu rgyu'i yas mas kyi sne'i shing lce	dpyi dkri
དཔྱི་མགོ	hip	dpyi mgo
དཔྱི་གཉིས	hips	dpyi gnyis
དཔྱི་པ	Chipa, in Domey	dpyi pa
དཔྱི་མིག	socket of the hip bone	dpyi mig
དཔྱི་ཚིགས	hip joints	dpyi tshigs
དཔྱི་ཟུར	dpyi mgo'i zur, dpyi rus kyi zur sne	dpyi zur
དཔྱི་རུས	hip bone	dpyi rus
དཔྱིད	delightful, enjoyment, fresh air; spring	dpyid
དཔྱིད་ཀ	1) spring[time]; 2) Snying po; 3) [arch] na tshod yol dang rgan po	dpyid ka
དཔྱིད་ཀ་གཉིས	2 spring months	dpyid ka gnyis
དཔྱིད་ཀའི་གཉེན	1 of a mra'i mchog gi ming	dpyid ka'i gnyen
དཔྱིད་ཀའི་དུས	spring[time]	dpyid ka'i dus
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མོ	the cuckoo bird, "the queen of spring"	dpyid kyi rgyal mo
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མོའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	T's royal family history telling text, 17th century by rgyal dbang lnga pa	dpyid kyi rgyal mo'i glu dbyangs
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	seed, semen	dpyid kyi thig le
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་དཔལ་ཡོན	springtime phun tshogs Rgyal dmangs dpal 'byor dpyid kyi dpal yon ltar yar rgyas 'gro bzhin du 'dug	dpyid kyi dpal yon
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	1) the messenger of spring; 2) cuckoo; 3) kind of tree	dpyid kyi pho nya
དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་ཤིང	aa mra tree	dpyid kyi shing
དཔྱིད་འཁྱགས	spring heat 'khor nas bskyar du yong ba'i grang nad	dpyid 'khyags
དཔྱིད་གྲོ	spring wheat	dpyid gro
དཔྱིད་མགོ	plum	dpyid mgo
དཔྱིད་མགོའི་མེ་ཏོག	plum flower	dpyid mgo'i me tog
དཔྱིད་འགོའི་མེ་ཏོག	lu gu flower or g.yar mo thang	dpyid 'go'i me tog
དཔྱིད་ཆར	spring rain	dpyid char
དཔྱིད་ཆུ་འདྲེན	do spring irrigation	dpyid chu 'dren
དཔྱིད་ཆོལ	fickle spring weather	dpyid chol
དཔྱིད་ཉིན་མཚན་མཉམ	spring equinox	dpyid nyin mtshan mnyam
དཔྱིད་མཉམ	spring equinox	dpyid mnyam
དཔྱིད་ཐ་མ	3rd month, last month/ end of spring	dpyid tha ma
དཔྱིད་ཐན	spring drought	dpyid than
དཔྱིད་ཐིག	dpyid kyi thig le	dpyid thig
དཔྱིད་དུས	spring[time]	dpyid dus
དཔྱིད་དུས་ཆགས	tshva	dpyid dus chags
དཔྱིད་དྲོད	spring heat [year's first arising of heat]	dpyid drod
དཔྱིད་འདེབས	spring planting	dpyid 'debs
དཔྱིད་རྣ་བའི་དུ་སྒྲེངས་བ	playing to enthrall the ear	dpyid rna ba'i du sgrengs ba
དཔྱིད་དཔལ	spring's yon tan/ dge mtshan beauty/ grandeur of spring	dpyid dpal
དཔྱིད་དཔལ་ཤར	become spring	dpyid dpal shar
དཔྱིད་འཔྲིང	middle month of spring	dpyid 'pring
དཔྱིད་བལ	spring shorn wool	dpyid bal
དཔྱིད་བྱུང	spring	dpyid byung
དཔྱིད་འབྲིང	middle month of spring (April}, 2nd month	dpyid 'bring
དཔྱིད་འབྲུག་གི་སྒྲ	spring thunder	dpyid 'brug gi sgra
དཔྱིད་རྨོས	spring plowing/ cultivation	dpyid rmos
དཔྱིད་རྨོས་བྱེད	do spring plowing/ cultivation	dpyid rmos byed
དཔྱིད་སྨིན་ལོ་ཏོག	spring crop	dpyid smin lo tog
དཔྱིད་ཚུགས	beginning of spring	dpyid tshugs
དཔྱིད་མཚེར	spring nomad staying place	dpyid mtsher
དཔྱིད་ཟུག	beginning of spring [hor zla dang po'i dbugs thob]	dpyid zug
དཔྱིད་ཟླ	months of spring	dpyid zla
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་ཐ་ཆུང	month of mar-apr	dpyid zla tha chung
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་འབྲིང་པོ	2nd month	dpyid zla 'bring po
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་ར་པ	feb-mar	dpyid zla ra pa
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་ར་བ	1st month of spring	dpyid zla ra ba
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་རྭ་བ	1st month of spring	dpyid zla rwa ba
དཔྱིད་ཟླ་གསུམ	the three months of spring	dpyid zla gsum
དཔྱིད་ཟླར་པ	first month of Spring	dpyid zlar pa
དཔྱིད་རླུང	hot wind of spring	dpyid rlung
དཔྱིད་ས	nomad ru ba spring staying place, spring cultivation land	dpyid sa
དཔྱིད་སོས	spring and summer together	dpyid sos
དཔྱིད་གསར་དུས་ཆེན	spring new year feast	dpyid gsar dus chen
དཔྱིད་བསུ་མེ་ཏོག	dpyid bsu flower [middle of 1st month or second growing on the banks of chu mig and spang light red flower = Rdzi bo me tog]	dpyid bsu me tog
དཔྱིའི་འཁོར་མིག	hip bone socket	dpyi'i 'khor mig
དཔྱིའི་རུས་མིག	hip bone socket	dpyi'i rus mig
དཔྱིས	the last, the end, conclusion	dpyis
དཔྱིས་ཕྱིན	bring to an end, conclude, reach the bottom/ end, complete, finish	dpyis phyin
དཔྱིས་ཕྱིན་པ	bring to an end, conclude, reach the bottom/ end, complete, finish	dpyis phyin pa
དཔྱིས་ཕྱིན་པར	full, complete	dpyis phyin par
དཔྱིས་ཕྱིན་པར་མཁྱེན་པ	to have full knowledge	dpyis phyin par mkhyen pa
དཔྱེ་སེམས	feeling of derision, desire to deride	dpye sems
དཔྱོ་བ	change	dpyo ba
དཔྱོང	be hanging, dangle	dpyong
དཔྱོང་བ	to change; {dpyong ba, dpyangs pa, dpyang ba, dpyongs} trans. v	dpyong ba
དཔྱོངས	dpyong ba! {dpyongs - be hanging, dangle	dpyongs
དཔྱོངས་བ	hang	dpyongs ba
དཔྱོད་ལྡན	1) sagacious, wise; 2) Jupiter	dpyod ldan
དཔྱོད་ལྡན་ཆེན་པོ	sagacious, wise, knowing masters	dpyod ldan chen po
དཔྱོད་པ	{dpyad pa} (mental) analysis/ investigation/ evaluation; to analyze/ investigate/ evaluate	dpyod pa
དཔྱོད་པ་དོན་གྱི་རིག་པ	science of the examination of the organs	dpyod pa don gyi rig pa
དཔྱོད་པ་པ	mimamsaka, ritualist, analyzer, arbitrator	dpyod pa pa
དཔྱོད་པ་པོ	analyzer, investigator, researcher	dpyod pa po
དཔྱོད་པ་བ	1) Dpang po; 2) Indian doctrine, = rgyal dpog pa des offering/pujas alone maintain that the celestial levels like those of Bhrama are attained, and that suffering pacifying liberation does not exis...	dpyod pa ba
དཔྱོད་པ་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the [4] feet of miraculous discernment	dpyod pa rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
དཔྱོད་པ་ཞིབ་མོར་འཇུག་པའི་སེམས	mind undertaking detailed analysis	dpyod pa zhib mor 'jug pa'i sems
དཔྱོད་པ་ཡིད་བྱེད	attention of discernment	dpyod pa yid byed
དཔྱོད་པའི་དམིགས་པ	analytical focusing	dpyod pa'i dmigs pa
དཔྱོད་པའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the [4] feet of miraculous discernment	dpyod pa'i rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
དཔྱོད་པའི་རིགས་ཤེས	analytical cognition	dpyod pa'i rigs shes
དཔྱོད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	analytical prajna	dpyod pa'i shes rab
དཔྱོད་པའི་ལྷག་མཐོང	analytical vipashyana meditation	dpyod pa'i lhag mthong
དཔྱོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to examine	dpyod par byed pa
དཔྱོད་བྱ་བ	analyzed, analysis, should be analyzed, thing to be analyzed	dpyod bya ba
དཔྱོད་བྱེད	analyze[r]	dpyod byed
དཔྱོད་མེད	non-analytic	dpyod med
དཔྱོད་མེད་ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མ	nonanalytic conventional validating cognition dpyod med tha snyan pa'i tshad ma conventional validating cognition	dpyod med tha snyad pa'i tshad ma
དཔྱོད་མེད་བདག་འཛིན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	natural self habit	dpyod med bdag 'dzin lhan skyes
དཔྱོད་མེད་རྣམ་བཞག	presentation	dpyod med rnam bzhag
དཔྱོད་ལ	Tibetan minister	dpyod la
དཔྱོར	1) abundance and wealth, glory and riches, prosperity, prosperous; 2) magnificent; 3) economics thog la spyi tshogs kyi dngos po'i thon skyed and again thon skyed byed pa'i bya ba; 4) [common name]...	dpyor
དཔྱོར་གྱི་གྲུབ་ཆ	economic element	dpyor gyi grub cha
དཔྱོར་གྱི་ཉེན་ཁ	economic crisis	dpyor gyi nyen kha
དཔྱོར་གྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	economic struggle	dpyor gyi 'thab rtsod
དཔྱོར་གྱི་བཙན་འཛུལ	economic invasion	dpyor gyi btsan 'dzul
དཔྱོར་གྱི་འཚོ་བ	economic conditions, standard of living	dpyor gyi 'tsho ba
དཔྱོར་གྱི་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	economic construction/ development	dpyor gyi 'dzugs skrun
དཔྱོར་གྱི་ཞིབ་རྩིས	business/ cost accounting	dpyor gyi zhib rtsis
དཔྱོར་གྱི་རིག་པ	economics	dpyor gyi rig pa
དཔྱོར་གྱིས་སྲོག་རྩ	economic life-line/ key points	dpyor gyis srog rtsa
དཔྱོར་རྗེས་སུ་ལུས་པ	economically backward	dpyor rjes su lus pa
དཔྱོར་མཉམ་ལས	economic cooperation	dpyor mnyam las
དཔྱོར་དང་ལྡན	wealthy	dpyor dang ldan
དཔྱོར་དོ་དམ་པ	treasurer [club etc], official in charge of economics	dpyor do dam pa
དཔྱོར་དམངས་གཙོ	economic democracy	dpyor dmangs gtso
དཔྱོར་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	economic construction/ development	dpyor 'dzugs skrun
དཔྱོར་ཡར་རྒྱས	economic growth	dpyor yar rgyas
དཔྱོར་རིག་གནས	economics	dpyor rig gnas
དཔྱོར་རིག་པ	economics	dpyor rig pa
དཔྱོར་རིང་ལུགས	economism	dpyor ring lugs
དཔྱོར་ལོ་ཏོག	economic/ cash crops	dpyor lo tog
དཔྱོར་གསར་པའི་སྲིད་ཇུས	new economic policy	dpyor gsar pa'i srid jus
དཔྱོས	changed	dpyos
དཔྲག	dbrag, bar mtshams, dbar between	dprag
དཔྲང་པོ	beggar	dprang po
དཔྲལ	forehead, hairline	dpral
དཔྲལ་ཀོ	forehead	dpral ko
དཔྲལ་ཀོ་སྒམ་པོ	w/o merit/ luck	dpral ko sgam po
དཔྲལ་ཀོ་ཅན	1) spyi brtol can, au tshugs can; 2) having merit	dpral ko can
དཔྲལ་ཀོ་མཐུག་པོ	1) au tshugs tsha po,...Bod kyi brda sprod mi shes par, ham rtsod dpral ko mthug pa'i skyon; 2) Snying tshan che ba'am snying stobs che ba (/ shameless, thick-skinned	dpral ko mthug po
དཔྲལ་ཁེབས	1) rngon pa'i lha gar 'khrab dus 'bag gis dpral bar mi gnon pa'i gdan; 2) horse, mule, donkey face ornament	dpral khebs
དཔྲལ་གི་བསྙེར་མ	wrinkles of cheeks	dpral gi bsnyer ma
དཔྲལ་མགོ	forehead and head	dpral mgo
དཔྲལ་མགོ་སྟུག་པོ	shameless, thickheaded, shameless person, shamelessness 1634	dpral mgo stug po
དཔྲལ་མགོ་མཐུག་པོ	1) au tshugs tsha po,...Bod kyi brda sprod mi shes par, ham rtsod dpral ko mthug pa'i skyon; 2) Snying tshan che ba'am snying stobs che ba (/ shameless, thick-skinned	dpral mgo mthug po
དཔྲལ་རྒྱན	bindu or ornament on the forehead	dpral rgyan
དཔྲལ་སྒོ	gap between the eyebrows	dpral sgo
དཔྲལ་པ	forehead	dpral pa
དཔྲལ་པའི་དབྱེས་མཉམ་པ	broad forehead	dpral pa'i dbyes mnyam pa
དཔྲལ་བ	the forehead	dpral ba
དཔྲལ་བ་ངན་པ	luckless person	dpral ba ngan pa
དཔྲལ་བ་ཆུང་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, small or narrow forehead	dpral ba chung ba
དཔྲལ་བ་གཏུགས་པ	touch the forehead	dpral ba gtugs pa
དཔྲལ་བ་བདེ་བ	1 of 'khor lo drug, cakra of bliss at the forehead	dpral ba bde ba
དཔྲལ་བ་དབྱེས་ཆེ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a broad forehead * dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu among the 80 minor marks, by overcoming all exponents, dpral ba rgyas shing dbyes che ba major or minor	dpral ba dbyes che ba'i dpe byad
དཔྲལ་བ་འབུར་བ	protruding forehead	dpral ba 'bur ba
དཔྲལ་བ་ལེགས་པར་འབྱེས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a broad forehead	dpral ba legs par 'byes pa'i dpe byad
དཔྲལ་བའི་མདའ	arrow lodged in the forehead	dpral ba'i mda'
དཔྲལ་བའི་དབྱེས་ཆེ	broad forehead	dpral ba'i dbyes che
དཔྲལ་བའི་དབྱེས་མཉམ་པ	broad forehead	dpral ba'i dbyes mnyam pa
དཔྲལ་བར	at the forehead	dpral bar
དཔྲལ་མིག	the third eye, eye of knowledge	dpral mig
དཔྲལ་རྩ	bleeding vessel four fingers above the smin mtshams nas if bled good for dpral ba lci la gzer and mig mi theg par gyur pa'i nad]	dpral rtsa
དཔྲལ་རྩ་སྒྲེང་བ	experience of anger or expression of fear..Kho khros nas	dpral rtsa sgreng ba
དཔྲལ་རིལ	bindu on the forehead	dpral ril
དཔྲལ་རིས	1 the forehead a sa dkar gyi ri mo, bhramin tradition sometimes has three	dpral ris
དཔྲི	cream, porridge made of milk and rice, diminish, SA 'phri ba	dpri
དཔྲུལ་དཔྲུལ་ལ་གཏོང	hang oneself	dprul dprul la gtong
དཔྲུལ་དཔྲུལ་ལ་གཏོང་བ	hang oneself	dprul dprul la gtong ba
དཔྲེ་བ	[arch] rdze ba	dpre ba
དཔྲེ་ལ་ཐ	Beirut	dpre la tha
དཔྲོག	take away, SA 'phrog pa 'pags pa - superior, aryan, noble one 'pul 'ded - phyir 'bud, expel, drive out, banish 'pul 'dren - pushing and pulling, struggle 'pe ras - book [cloth]-cover 'pe'i ye shes ...	dprog
ལྤ་མོ	one of the {gcan gzan che dgu}	lpa mo
ལྤགས	skin, skin of people as well as of food	lpags
ལྤགས་ལྡན་མ	covered with hides or skins, river in bundelkhand	lpags ldan ma
ལྤགས་ནད	skin disease	lpags nad
ལྤགས་པ	skin	lpags pa
ལྤགས་པ་མཉེན	soft skin, name of stag pa shing, of soft skin, a birch tree	lpags pa mnyen
ལྤགས་པ་གསེར་མདོག	skin has a golden hue	lpags pa gser mdog
ལྤགས་པའི་འདབ་ཆགས	bat, skin-winged animal	lpags pa'i 'dab chags
ལྤགས་པའི་ལས་ཅན	leather dealer, shoemaker	lpags pa'i las can
ལྤགས་བྱེའུ	bat	lpags bye'u
ལྤགས་མྱགས	lpags myags skin mdze disease	lpags myags
ལྤགས་མཛེ	skin mdze disease	lpags mdze
ལྤགས་ཞྭ	skin/ fur hat	lpags zhwa
སྤ	ornament, equipment, that which beautifies, bamboo, cane, hairdressing	spa
སྤ་ཀི་ས་ཏན	Pakistan	spa ki sa tan
སྤ་ཀོང	frighten	spa kong
སྤ་ཀོང་བ	{spa bkong} intimidate, frighten, terrorize	spa kong ba
སྤ་ཀོང་བར་གྱུར	be overcome/ discouraged/ intimidated/ frightened/ terrorized	spa kong bar gyur
སྤ་བཀོང	discouraged, intimidate, frighten, terrorize	spa bkong
སྤ་བཀོང་བ	to humble	spa bkong ba
སྤ་སྐོར	hoop of a cask	spa skor
སྤ་ཁུམ	Syn {dpa' zhum}	spa khum
སྤ་མཁན	hairdresser	spa mkhan
སྤ་མཁན་པ	one who is skilled in dressing hair	spa mkhan pa
སྤ་འཁར	walking cane	spa 'khar
སྤ་གོང་བ	[arch] discouraged	spa gong ba
སྤ་གོང་བར་གྱུར	incurs blaming	spa gong bar gyur
སྤ་གོར་གན་ཇག་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	father of Vairotsana {ba gor bE ro tsa na}	spa gor gan jag rdo rje rgyal po
སྤ་གོར་ཧེ་འདོད	uncle (step-father) of Vairotsana {ba gor bE ro tsa na}	spa gor he 'dod
སྤ་གྲོ	seat of west bhutan government called paro	spa gro
སྤ་གྲོ་སྟག་ཚང	Padro Tagtshang which is a meditation place in Bhutan spa gro stag tshang bsam grub ke'u	spa gro stag tshang
སྤ་གྲོ་རྫོང	Paro Dzong, in Bhutan	spa gro rdzong
སྤ་གླིང	bamboo flute	spa gling
སྤ་སྒོར	kind of gtsang mo'i mgo rgyan	spa sgor
སྤ་ཅུ་གང	bamboo manna	spa cu gang
སྤ་ཅོག	spa lcog	spa cog
སྤ་ལྕག	walking cane	spa lcag
སྤ་ལྕོག	Tibetan govt shod drung tsho'i mgo bo'i skra lcog, woman's headdress/ ornament	spa lcog
སྤ་ལྕོག་གའུ	Tibetan govt shod drung tsho'i mgo bo'i skra lcog steng du rgyag pa'i ornament	spa lcog ga'u
སྤ་ཆ	beautiful thing, ornament	spa cha
སྤ་ཆལ	restless, cannot remain in one place	spa chal
སྤ་ཆས	ornament, decoration, object d'art	spa chas
སྤ་ཏི	tea	spa ti
སྤ་ཏིལ	match, SA pha til	spa til
སྤ་ཐག	string to which ornament is tied 1635	spa thag
སྤ་དོང	bamboo tube for water or milk, little cask made of bamboo, bamboo vessel to carry milk or water	spa dong
སྤ་ལྡོང	little bamboo cask, bamboo vessel to carry milk or water	spa ldong
སྤ་པ	SA drag po	spa pa
སྤ་ཕྲུག	former Tibetan woman's head ornament	spa phrug
སྤ་བ	{spa ba, spa ba, spa ba} trans. v	spa ba
སྤ་དབྱུག	walking cane	spa dbyug
སྤ་འབྲུ	med. spa ma tree fruit	spa 'bru
སྤ་འབྲུམ	med. spa ma tree fruit	spa 'brum
སྤ་མ	juniper	spa ma
སྤ་ཚབ	place in upper tibet	spa tshab
སྤ་ཟམ་ཁ་པ	muslin with variegated figures embroidered on it	spa zam kha pa
སྤ་ཡག་རྩ་བ	herb {spa yag rtsa ba	spa yag rtsa ba
སྤ་ཡི་སྙས	small stake	spa yi snyas
སྤ་ར	village nw of lhasa	spa ra
སྤ་རབ་རྡ	Pravda	spa rab rda
སྤ་རབ་དྷ	Pravda	spa rab dha
སྤ་རི	kind of cotton cloth	spa ri
སྤ་རེངས	pig, hog	spa rengs
སྤ་ལོ	SA spobs pa, hair dressed and tied in a round ball on the crown of the head of civil officers of tibet	spa lo
སྤ་སེ	pass, permit	spa se
སྤ་སློམ	plate made of wicker work	spa slom
སྤ་ཧེན	Pakistan and India	spa hen
སྤག	barley dough, barley paste balls, barley meal moistened with butter or tea, staple Tibetan food	spag
སྤག་ལྟར་བསྣོས	mixed in dough	spag ltar bsnos
སྤག་ལྟར་བརྫིས	mixed in dough	spag ltar brdzis
སྤག་པ	to smack, to; ft. of {spog pa}	spag pa
སྤག་ཕོར	bowl made of wood or metal to hold barley meal	spag phor
སྤག་ཕྱི་རྒྱབ	cleaning by rubbing with dough	spag phyi rgyab
སྤག་ར	Pokhara	spag ra
སྤགས	1) tsampa dough	spags
སྤགས་ཁུ	spags gyo byed kyi liquid tea chang etc.	spags khu
སྤགས་བསྒོངས་པ	lump of dough	spags bsgongs pa
སྤགས་ཆང	dough chang	spags chang
སྤགས་ཐང	spags g.yo snod small skin khug chung	spags thang
སྤགས་འདེད	foods eaten w tsampa dough	spags 'ded
སྤགས་པ	1) [p spog pa][1) mix; 2) go to another place; 3) remove and to bring near by turns (/ "sogs: profit gain ](2 [arch] prelude, preliminaries	spags pa
སྤགས་པ་སློང་བའི་སྤང་བ	by an unrelated householder blos gang spogs kyis [by profit?] when they start to give, a higher price than that price etc bzang ba zhig dgos zhes begging like that, spang ltung sum cu'i nang gses s...	spags pa slong ba'i spang ba
སྤགས་ཕོར	1) spags g.yo ba dang eating container; 2) tsampa bowl	spags phor
སྤགས་ཕྱིས་རྒྱག་པ	spags kyis dreg pa'am nag nog phyi ba	spags phyis rgyag pa
སྤགས་མ	food eaten w tsampa dough	spags ma
སྤགས་ཚུགས	worsen	spags tshugs
སྤགས་བརྫི་བ	spags gyo ba [kneaded? moistened? tsampa dough ?	spags brdzi ba
སྤགས་ཟན	rtsam pa dough eater	spags zan
སྤགས་ཟས	rtsam pa dough	spags zas
སྤགས་རིལ	parched grain flour balls	spags ril
སྤགས་ལུག	sheep fattened on tsampa dough	spags lug
སྤང	grassland, meadow, lawn, aversion, abandoned, gone beyond, renunciation, board, plank, soft springy turf yielding to the feet, rebuttal of opponent's arguments against one's own view, discard, abandon	spang
སྤང་ཀོ	beggar	spang ko
སྤང་ཀློག་འཁོར་ལོ་གསུམ	1) {slog pa thos bsam kyi 'khor lo}. 2) {spong ba bsam gtan gyi 'khor lo} 3) {bya ba nan tan gyi 'khor lo}	spang klog 'khor lo gsum
སྤང་རྐྱང	1) tshon spang ma rkyang rkyang; 2) w/o forest mt and plain meadows kher rkyang	spang rkyang
སྤང་སྐོང	amending breaches	spang skong
སྤང་སྐོང་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བ	the Sutra of a Hundred Invocations and Prostrations	spang skong phyag rgya ba
སྤང་སྐོང་ཕྱག་རྒྱའི་མདོ	sutra which fell to roof of king's palace	spang skong phyag rgya'i mdo
སྤང་སྐོང་ཕྱག་བརྒྱ་པ	the Sutra of a Hundred Invocations and Prostrations	spang skong phyag brgya pa
སྤང་སྐོང་མཚོ	lake on tibeto-ladak frontier	spang skong mtsho
སྤང་སྐྱ	2nd to lightest shade of malachite green	spang skya
སྤང་ཁ	meadow	spang kha
སྤང་ཁེབ	board, plank	spang kheb
སྤང་ཁེབས	apron	spang khebs
སྤང་ཁྲི	bookstand	spang khri
སྤང་ཁྲུག	apron	spang khrug
སྤང་འཁྱམས་རྒྱག	wander about, roam aimlessly	spang 'khyams rgyag
སྤང་གི་ཧོང་ལེན	herb {spang gi hong len}	spang gi hong len
སྤང་གོང་མཚོ	{spang gong mtsho lake	spang gong mtsho
སྤང་དགོས	avoid	spang dgos
སྤང་རྒྱ	border, edging	spang rgya
སྤང་རྒྱན	autumnal flower that grows along with grass	spang rgyan
སྤང་རྒྱན་དཀར་པོ	white autumnal flower which cures poisons and afflictions of the throat	spang rgyan dkar po
སྤང་རྒྱན་ཁྲ་པོ	gentiana algida pall. var. parviflora kusnez., gentiana sinoornata balf. f.	spang rgyan khra po
སྤང་རྒྱན་ཁྲ་བོ	herb {spang rgyan khra bo 1636	spang rgyan khra bo
སྤང་རྒྱན་སྔོན་པོ	gentiana veitchiorum hemsl., gentiana szechenyii kanitz, blue autumnal flower	spang rgyan sngon po
སྤང་རྒྱན་ནག་པོ	herb med {spang rgyan nag po	spang rgyan nag po
སྤང་རྒྱན་མེ་ཏོག	the flowers, the meadow's ornaments	spang rgyan me tog
སྤང་རྒྱུས	rdo sman gyi rigs dbyibs rgyus phran gshib pa dang 'dra zhing mdog spang ma dang mtshungs pa zhig ste, ro bska, zhu rjes drod, nus pas chu rgyus chad pa dang, chu rgyus reng 'khum du gyur pa sogs l...	spang rgyus
སྤང་སྒོ	board or panel of a door, planks	spang sgo
སྤང་གཅལ	wooden floor	Spang gcal
སྤང་ཆ	all that is to be given up	spang cha
སྤང་ཆུ	thin light green paint made from malachite	spang chu
སྤང་ལྗོངས	grassy plain / field, meadow	spang ljongs
སྤང་ལྗོངས་ནེའུ་གསིང	meadows	spang ljongs ne'u gsing
སྤང་གཉེན	remedies to eliminate the undesirable, something to reject w/ and its antidote	spang gnyen
སྤང་གཉེན་གཉིས	the discard and its remedy	spang gnyen gnyis
སྤང་གཉེན་མེད་པ	free from discard and remedy	spang gnyen med pa
སྤང་གཉེན་གཞི་མེད	in which there is no place at all for renunciation or antidotes	spang gnyen gzhi med
སྤང་རྟེན	#	spang rten
སྤང་རྟོག	relinquishment and realization [thd]	spang rtog
སྤང་རྟོགས	renunciation and realization	spang rtogs
སྤང་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of renunciation/realization	spang rtogs kyi yon tan
སྤང་ལྟུང	abandoning downfalls	spang ltung
སྤང་ལྟུང་གི་སྡེ	a group of 30 moral rules for gelongs	spang ltung gi sde
སྤང་ལྟུང་བཅུ་ཚན་གཉིས་པ	the 2nd decad of abandoning downfalls	spang ltung bcu tshan gnyis pa
སྤང་ལྟུང་བཅུ་ཚན་དང་པོ	the 1st decad of abandoning downfalls	spang ltung bcu tshan dang po
སྤང་ལྟུང་བཅུ་ཚན་གསུམ་པ	the 3rd decad of abandoning downfalls	spang ltung bcu tshan gsum pa
སྤང་ལྟུང་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 abandoning downfalls	spang ltung sum cu
སྤང་ཐང	green grassy meadow	spang thang
སྤང་ཐོག་པ	herb {spang thog pa	spang thog pa
སྤང་ཐོབ	to abandon or attain	spang thob
སྤང་ཐོབ་གཉིས་འཛིན	clinging to loss and gain	spang thob gnyis 'dzin
སྤང་གདན	apron	spang gdan
སྤང་རྡོལ	meadow rdol ba w water underneath	spang rdol
སྤང་སྡིངས	undulation on a grassy plain	spang sdings
སྤང་པ	abandon, action the effect of which is to mature, freedom	spang pa
སྤང་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great abandonment	spang pa chen po
སྤང་པ་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of abandonment	spang pa zung 'jug
སྤང་པའི་ཆོས	the qualities extirpated	spang pa'i chos
སྤང་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of riddance, riddance qualities	spang pa'i yon tan
སྤང་པར་མི་བྱ་བ	five not to be renounced	spang par mi bya ba
སྤང་པོ	boggy marshy flat, moss spang pya rim gyis pa'i rgyun zhugs 'bras	spang po
གནས་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	TSE	gnas khyad par can
སྤང་སྤོས	An aromatic fast growing plant	spang spos
སྤང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme renunciation [gd]	spang ba chen po
སྤང་བ་རྣམ་གཉིས	two kinds of renunciation/ abandonment	spang ba rnam gnyis
སྤང་བ་སྦྱིན་པ	gift of fearlessness spang ba'i rjes su phyogs pa'i ltung byed act like a bhikshu who was expelled	spang ba sbyin pa
སྤང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	abandoning downfall	spang ba'i ltung byed
སྤང་བར	upper story, gradually tapering, to be abandoned	spang bar
སྤང་བར་བྱ	fit to be left out	spang bar bya
སྤང་བོག	piece of turf, sod	spang bog
སྤང་བྱ	factor to be removed/ renoucned/ rejected/ abandoned; object of renunciation	spang bya
སྤང་བྱ་ཀུན་བཏགས	TSE spang bya kun btags sa bon dang bcas pa	spang bya kun btags
སྤོང་པའི་མཐོང་ལམ	TSE spang bya lnga brgyad bcu dang thams	spong pa'i mthong lam
སྤང་བྱ་གཅིག་ཆར་པའི་རྒྱུན་ཞུགས	TSE spang bya gcig char pa'i rgyun zhugs	spang bya gcig char pa'i rgyun zhugs
སྤང་བྱ་གཅིག་ཆར་བ	TSE 1637	spang bya gcig char ba
སྤང་བྱ་གཅིག་ཆར་བའི་དགྲ་བཅོམ	TSE spang bya gcig char ba'i dgra bcom zhugs	spang bya gcig char ba'i dgra bcom
སྤང་བྱ་གཅིག་ཆར་བའི་ཕྱིར་འོང	TSE spang bya gcig char ba'i phyir 'ong zhugs	spang bya gcig char ba'i phyir 'ong
སྤང་བྱ་བཅུ	the 10 things to be abandoned [by a getsul dge tshul gyi spang bya bcu ste, rtsa ltung bzhi dang, chang 'thung ba, gar sogs, phreng sogs, mal stan che mtho, dus min kha zas, chags pas gser dngul le...	spang bya bcu
སྤང་བྱ་ཉོན་མོངས	emotion to be discarded	spang bya nyon mongs
སྤང་བྱ་རྟོག་པ་བཞི	the four thoughts to be abandoned CHN	spang bya rtog pa bzhi
སྤང་བྱ་བདེན་པ་གཉིས	the two truths concerning what is to be abandoned	spang bya bden pa gnyis
སྤང་བྱ་རྣམ་རྟོག་བཅུ	the 10 thoughts to be abandoned CHN	spang bya rnam rtog bcu
སྤང་བྱ་སྤོང་བ	abandon/ renounce what is to be abandoned/ renounced	spang bya spong ba
སྤང་བྱ་སྤོང་ཚུལ་གཉིས	the two ways of abandoning what is to be abandoned	spang bya spong tshul gnyis
སྤང་བྱ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	the 10 things to be abandoned [by a getsul dge tshul gyi spang bya bcu ste, rtsa ltung bzhi dang, chang 'thung ba, gar sogs, phreng sogs, mal stan che mtho, dus min kha zas, chags pas gser dngul le...	spang bya yan lag bcu
སྤང་བྱ་རིམ་གྱིས་པ	TSE	spang bya rim gyis pa
སྤང་བྱ་རིམ་གྱིས་པའི་དགྲ་བཅོམ	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i dgra bcom 'bras	spang bya rim gyis pa'i dgra bcom
སྤང་བྱ་རིམ་གྱིས་པའི་རྒྱུན་ཞུགས	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i rgyun zhugs	spang bya rim gyis pa'i rgyun zhugs
མོས་པ	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i rgyun zhugs 'bras	mos pa
གནས་ཙམ་བོ་པ	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i rgyun zhugs	gnas tsam bo pa
ཞུངས་པ	TSE	zhungs pa
སྤང་བྱ་རིམ་གྱིས་པའི་ཕྱིར་མི་འོང	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i phyir mi 'ong 'bras	spang bya rim gyis pa'i phyir mi 'ong
སྤང་བྱ་རིམ་གྱིས་པའི་ཕྱིར་འོང	TSE spang bya rim gyis pa'i phyir 'ong zhugs	spang bya rim gyis pa'i phyir 'ong
སྤང་བྱ་རིས་ལྔ	the five classes of riddables	spang bya ris lnga
སྤང་བྱ་གསུམ	3 abandonings ('jig rten gyi lha la skyabs su mi 'gro, sems can la gnod 'tshe gang thub spang dgos, sdig pa'i grogs po'i ngag la mi nyan)	spang bya gsum
སྤང་བྱ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	TSE	spang bya lhan skyes
སྤང་བྱའི་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	the right conduct in terms of what to avoid	spang bya'i kun spyod
སྤང་བླང	{spang len} (ordinary) moral choice/ decision; renunciation/ rejection and/ or acceptance/ indulgence; isc. reaction	spang blang
སྤང་བླང་གི་བྱ་བ	the action of developing and avoiding	spang blang gi bya ba
སྤང་བླང་གི་དམིགས་ཕྱེ	opened the sight of what is to be avoided or adopted	spang blang gi dmigs phye
སྤང་བླང་མེད་པ	without attachment or aversion	spang blang med pa
སྤང་བླངས	what to adopt and what to reject	spang blangs
སྤང་འབུར	grassy hill spang 'bur chung chung zhig gi steng du	spang 'bur
སྤང་མ	malachite, malachite green pigment	spang ma
སྤང་མའི་མིག་སྨན	tshon spang ma eye med	spang ma'i mig sman
སྤང་མི་ཕམ་མགོན་པོ	klong sde student of Vairocana	spang mi pham mgon po
སྤང་མེད	nothing to abandon	spang med
སྤང་སྨུག	deep green, the darkest shade of malachite green	spang smug
སྤང་རྩྭ	turf	spang rtswa
སྤང་རྩི	herb {spang rtsi	spang rtsi
སྤང་རྩི་དོ་བོ	{spang rtsi do bo med herb	spang rtsi do bo
སྤང་རྩི་འབྱར་བག	herb {spang rtsi 'byar bag	spang rtsi 'byar bag
སྤང་ཚན	herb {spang tshan	spang tshan
སྤང་ཚན་སྤུ་རུ	herb {spang tshan spu ru	spang tshan spu ru
སྤང་ཚན་སྤུ་རུག	herb {spang tshan spu rug	spang tshan spu rug
སྤང་ཚོན	malachite green, malachite tshon ljang khu spang ma	spang tshon
སྤང་མཚེ	meadow growing mtshe ldum	spang mtshe
སྤང་ཞུན	1) tshon ljang gu'i khu ba; 2) spang zhun rock med	spang zhun
སྤང་རམ	meadow growing ram bu med herb	spang ram
སྤང་རས	apron	spang ras
སྤང་རི	meadow, grass covered hill, hill covered with grass	spang ri
སྤང་ལ་བེ་ཕུར་བཏབ་པ་ལྟར	ground, meadow, field, like an oak stake drives in the ground	spang la be phur btab pa ltar
སྤང་ལ་མེ་ཤོར	fire loose in a meadow	spang la me shor
སྤང་ལམ	path of renunciation	spang lam
སྤང་ལུང	grassy valley	spang lung
སྤང་ལེན	{spang blang} (ordinary) moral choice/ decision; renunciation/ rejection and/ or acceptance/ indulgence; isc. reaction	spang len
སྤང་ལེབ	planks	spang leb
ཨནད་ཕོ༹རྭརདས་ཨོན་ཐེ་ཨེདགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་རེད	hot sword, boards 1638	and forwards on the edge of a red
སྤང་ལེབ་ཁང	the stand on which a buddhist priest keeps his cap	spang leb khang
སྤང་ལོངས	meadow, ground	spang longs
སྤང་ཤ	[meadow] mushroom	spang sha
སྤང་གཤོང	{spang gshong nyams dga' ba} a pleasant meadow	spang gshong
སྤང་གཤོངས	1) green grassy meadow; 2) low grassy place	spang gshongs
སྤང་སངས	clearing	spang sangs
སྤང་སངས་རྒྱས་མགོན་པོ	disciple of vairocana	spang sangs rgyas mgon po
སྤང་སི	lightest shade of malachite green	spang si
སྤང་སེ	a bird	spang se
སྤང་སེང	light green las dkar shas cung zad chung ba	spang seng
སྤང་སླང་གི་ལུང་འབོགས་པ	explaining the prohibitions and duties	spang slang gi lung 'bogs pa
སྤངས	left behind, [trying] give up, given up, has been removed, free of, abolished, removed, relinquished, omitting, renunciation {spang} p {spong} abandoning	spangs
སྤངས་རྒྱལ་བས་པ	left behind by the buddhas	spangs rgyal bas pa
སྤངས་གཉེན	that to be renounced and its antidote	spangs gnyen
སྤངས་ཏེ	giving up	spangs te
སྤངས་རྟོགས	Abandonment and realization	spangs rtogs
སྤངས་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtues / qualities of abandonment and realization	spangs rtogs kyi yon tan
སྤངས་རྟོགས་གཉིས	renunciation/ abandoning and realization	spangs rtogs gnyis
སྤངས་རྟོགས་མཐར་ཕྱིན	[Tse]	spangs rtogs mthar phyin
སྤངས་རྟོགས་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of abandoning/renouncing and realizing	spangs rtogs yon tan
སྤངས་བསྟོད	elevation	spangs bstod
སྤངས་ཐོབ	renunciation and/ or attainment	spangs thob
སྤངས་མཐོ་བ	high, elevated	spangs mtho ba
སྤངས་ནས་མེད་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	mi 'dod pa 'byung ba'i nyes rgyu rtsa ba nas	spangs nas med pa'i byed rgyu
སྤངས་པ	pf. of {spong ba}; omitting, one refutes, one who gives up, without. Abstain from, refrain from, given up	spangs pa
སྤངས་པ་ཁྱད་པར་གསུམ་ལྡན	TSE	spangs pa khyad par gsum ldan
སྤངས་པ་རྟོག་གེ་འབར་བ	madhyamakahrdayavrtti tarkajvala	spangs pa rtog ge 'bar ba
སྤངས་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས	TSE	spangs pa phun tshogs
སྤངས་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	having no fear that renunciation is not perfect	spangs pa phun tshogs la mi 'jigs pa
སྤངས་པ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyon mongs pa dang shes bya'i sgrib pa bcom pa dang}	spangs pa phun sum tshogs pa
སྤངས་པ་བཞི	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyan thos dang rang rgyal yid la byed pa spangs pa dang/ theg pa chen po la som nyi spangs pa dang/ chos la phyogs 'dzin spangs pa dang/ rnam par rtog pa spangs pa}	spangs pa bzhi
སྤངས་པ་ཟ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of eating abandoned food	spangs pa za ba'i ltung byed
སྤངས་པ་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of abandonment	spangs pa zung 'jug
སྤངས་པ་ས་གཞན་ན་གནས་པ	be removed from one's rank and dge tshul throw down/ destroy] spyod pa gzhan na gnas pa'i gzhi'i nang gses	spangs pa sa gzhan na gnas pa
སྤངས་པར་འཇོག	remains to be purified	spangs par 'jog
སྤངས་པས་མི་སྤངས	are not cast away by discarding	spangs pas mi spangs
སྤངས་པོ	renunciation of everything, freedom	spangs po
སྤངས་བ	abandonment	spangs ba
སྤངས་བྱ	anything very bad, worthy of being abandoned	spangs bya
སྤངས་བྱའི་སྒོ་ནས་བརྒྱད	CHN	spangs bya'i sgo nas brgyad
སྤངས་བླང	{spangs len} (ordinary) moral choice/ decision; renunciation/ rejection and/ or acceptance/ indulgence; isc. reaction	spangs blang
སྤངས་མི་ཤེས	do not know how to give up	spangs mi shes
སྤངས་རང་སེམས་ཐ་འདྲ	it is like trying to give up your mind	spangs rang sems tha 'dra
སྤངས་རིང་ནས	must be left far behind, extirpated	spangs ring nas
སྤངས་ལེན	{spangs blang} (ordinary) moral choice/ decision; renunciation/ rejection and/ or acceptance/ indulgence; isc. reaction	spangs len
སྤངས་ཤོངས	valley with meadows, low ground over grown with grass	spangs shongs
སྤད	SA pha spad	spad
སྤད་བླད	discursive thoughts of accepting and rejecting	spad blad
སྤན་སྤུན	brothers, relatives	span spun
སྤབས	1) gradually arising dirt, soot, earwax; 2) wet/ moist	spabs
སྤམ	beautiful, nice, good	spam
སྤམ་ཆེ་བ	1) many, large total; 2) hypocrite	spam che ba
སྤམ་ཆེ་བའི་དངོས་ཟོག	many articles for sale	spam che ba'i dngos zog
སྤམ་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	modest	spam mdog kha po
སྤམ་པ	proper, suitable, worthy	spam pa
སྤམ་པོ	of the middle quality, average, mediocre	spam po
སྤམ་པོ་ཅན	elegant	spam po can
སྤམ་པོ་མེད་པོ	gawky	spam po med po
སྤམ་སྤོམ	1) outer and inner not agreeing inconsistency/ hypocrisy; 2) only rough superficial, perfunctory	spam spom
སྤམ་འབོར	section of 'bras spungs	spam 'bor
སྤམ་མེ་སྤོམ་མེ	1) outer and inner not agreeing inconsistency/ hypocrisy; 2) only rough superficial, perfunctory	spam me spom me
སྤམ་མེ་བ	bab chags se ba' [pleasant, warm cuddly] am mdzes tsam yod pa spam mdzes 'phrul gyi chu bo 'babs taken in by the appearance of great beauty, they crash over the waterfall of desire	spam me ba
སྤམ་རྫུ	hypocrisy [about others's wealth	spam rdzu
སྤམ་ལ་མཛེས་པ	tshul dang mthun la mtshar ba [beautiful, wondrous]	spam la mdzes pa
སྤམ་ཤོར	lose face	spam shor
སྤམ་བཤད	[beautiful seeming but] merely partial explanation	spam bshad
སྤའི་ཐེམ་སྐས་ལ་འཛེགས་ནས	climbed a ladder of bamboo	spa'i them skas la 'dzegs nas
སྤའི་བེར་མ	cane, bamboo stick	spa'i ber ma
སྤའུ	brick, tile	spa'u
སྤར	lit	spar
སྤར་བཀྲུན་པ	printed, published 1639	spar bkrun pa
སྤར་ཁ	the [8] trigrams	spar kha
སྤར་ཁ་བརྒྱད	8 trigrams (li, khon, dwa, khen, kham, gin, zin, zon (fire, earth, metal, fire, water, wood, earth, earth)	spar kha brgyad
སྤར་ཁ་སྨེ་བའི་གླིང་སྐོར	Diagrams of the places of the spar kha and sme ba	spar kha sme ba'i gling skor
སྤར་ཁྱིམ	palm of the hand, handful	spar khyim
སྤར་གང	handful	spar gang
སྤར་གྱིས་བཏབ	grasped by hand, grasped in the hand	spar gyis btab
སྤར་བརྒྱད	8 chinese divination diagrams, (me sa lcags gnam chu ri shing rlung)	spar brgyad
སྤར་བཏབ	photograph	spar btab
སྤར་མཐིལ	palm of the hand	spar mthil
སྤར་འཐམ་པ	1) tightly grip in the palm of the hand [So so'i me mdar so sos spar 'tham pa]; 2) Lag pa'i rtsa 'khum pa, [Byi'u gcig spar 'thams nas sar lhungs pa]	spar 'tham pa
སྤར་དུ་བསྒྲུབས་པ	published, printed	spar du bsgrubs pa
སྤར་པ	raise	spar pa
སྤར་ཕུ	place in tibet	spar phu
སྤར་བ	raise, increase, advance, promote, excite, incite, SA spor ba, elevate, enhance, light	spar ba
སྤར་བྱ་མེའི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of blazing fire	spar bya me'i 'khor lo
སྤར་མ	low shrub with hard wood	spar ma
སྤར་མོ	claw, handful, grasping hand	spar mo
སྤར་མོ་བཏབ་པ	to claw	spar mo btab pa
སྤར་མོ་ཐེར་ཐེར	open hand	spar mo ther ther
སྤར་མོ་རུབ	make a fist	spar mo rub
སྤར་མོ་ལྷོད་པ	w/o avarice, very generous	spar mo lhod pa
སྤར་མོར་སྤྲོད་པ	put into one's hand	spar mor sprod pa
སྤར་མོས་རྒྱབ་པ	strike with the paws	spar mos rgyab pa
སྤར་མོས་སྣམ་པ	clutch, grab at	spar mos snam pa
སྤར་ཚད	1) handful; 2) just a few; 3) measure of height	spar tshad
སྤར་ཚོད	handful	spar tshod
སྤར་ཚོད་གང	handful	spar tshod gang
སྤར་འཛིན	grab/ hold in the hand/ palm	spar 'dzin
སྤར་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	to hold in one's hand, to grab {spar zin byas}	spar 'dzin byed pa
སྤར་ཟིན	to grab hold of	spar zin
སྤར་ཟིན་པ	lit	spar zin pa
སྤར་ཟིན་བྱེད་པ	grab for	spar zin byed pa
སྤར་རུབ	make a fist	spar rub
སྤར་ཤད	scratch w the nails	spar shad
སྤར་ཤད་རྒྱག་པ	scratch	spar shad rgyag pa
སྤར་ཤད་འདྲེན་པ	scratch	spar shad 'dren pa
སྤར་སློང་བྱེད་པ	enhance	spar slong byed pa
སྤལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ	sridevi, important female deity of fierce mien connected with Remati and to the class of the ma mo	spal ldan lha mo
སྤལ་ལད་ཁྲབ་མཁན	sycophant	spal lad khrab mkhan
སྤལ་ལད་གཤོད་པ	flatter	spal lad gshod pa
སྤས་ཀ་དག་པོ	good quality	spas ka dag po
སྤི་ཏི	Spiti	spi ti
སྤིག་རྫོང	place in tibet	spig rdzong
སྤིན	gum, SA spyin	spin
སྤུ	hair, fur, a rite	spu
སྤུ་དཀར	1) white wool, long yak hair etc; 2) sometimes nomads call goats and sheep spu dkar	spu dkar
སྤུ་དཀྱིལ	the center of a hair	spu dkyil
སྤུ་རྐང	a single hair	spu rkang
སྤུ་སྐམ་བཙུད་པ	rmas ma min pa'i ri dvags sha khyis khug kyog tu bcug pa'am mtha' la bkar ba	spu skam btsud pa
སྤུ་སྐུད	thread of wool or yak hair	spu skud
སྤུ་བསྐྱུར	shed fur	spu bskyur
སྤུ་ཁ	kind of cotton cloth, color	spu kha
སྤུ་འཁྱིལ	people or cattle whorl of the hair at the crown and su lu'i spu 'khyil	spu 'khyil
སྤུ་གུ	Syn {phru gu}	spu gu
སྤུ་གུ་དོར	place in tibet	spu gu dor
སྤུ་གྱོས	hairs stood on end	spu gyos
སྤུ་གྲ	1) fur; 2) hair[-tip] (/ [gra ma]	spu gra
སྤུ་གྲའི་ཐང	razor's edge	spu gra'i thang
སྤུ་གྲི	razor	spu gri
སྤུ་གྲི་ཁའི་སྦྲང་རྩི	razor w honey on the edge	spu gri kha'i sbrang rtsi
སྤུ་གྲི་གང་བ	hell full of razors	spu gri gang ba
སྤུ་གྲི་གཏམས་པ	quite full of razors	spu gri gtams pa
སྤུ་གྲི་གཏམས་པའི་ལམ་པོ་ཆེ	the great road of razor blades	spu gri gtams pa'i lam po che
སྤུ་གྲི་ཚལ	the grove of razors	spu gri tshal
སྤུ་གྲི་རེག་ཆོད་རྣམ་བཞི	Four Types of Instantaneous Razor Slash	spu gri reg chod rnam bzhi
སྤུ་གྲིའི་ཐང	field of razors	spu gri'i thang
སྤུ་གྲིའི་ལམ	one of the {nye 'khor pa'i dmyal ba}	spu gri'i lam
སྤུ་གྲིའི་སོ	the edge of a razor	spu gri'i so
ཨེབེ༹ན་ཨིཕ༹་ཡོཨུ་ཧབེ༹་ཏོ་ཕ༹ཅེ་བླཟིང་ཨིནཕེ༹རྣོས་ཨོར་རཟོར	sharp blades search for the Dharma until you die	even if you have to face blazing infernos or razor
སྤུ་གྲིས་གཏམས་པའི་ལམ	the razor filled path	spu gris gtams pa'i lam
སྤུ་རྒོད་ཀྱི	vulture feathers	spu rgod kyi
སྤུ་རྒྱལ	see {spur rgyal}	spu rgyal
སྤུ་རྒྱལ་གངས་རི	{spu rgyal gangs ri mt	spu rgyal gangs ri
སྤུ་ངན	pubic hair	spu ngan
སྤུ་ཅན	hairy, furry	spu can
སྤུ་ཆེན	cloth having only long fibers	spu chen
སྤུ་ཇ	kind of tea	spu ja
སྤུ་བརྗེས	to shed its skin	spu brjes
སྤུ་ཉག	single thread/ hair spu nyag gcig gyis pha bong dbyangs pa boulder suspended by a hair, very dangerous spu nyag mang po bsgril te thag pa bzos	spu nyag
སྤུ་སྙོལ	suppression of anger	spu snyol
སྤུ་སྙོལ་བ	smooth down the hair, abate one's anger by touch	spu snyol ba
སྤུ་བསྙལ་བ	/(1 repress/ diffuse intense anger; 2) small sound byas pa; 3) [arch] confess faults	spu bsnyal ba
སྤུ་བཏོགས་པ	plucked out the hairs	spu btogs pa
སྤུ་བཏོན	{mar gyi dkyil nas spu bton bzhin} like a hair plucked out of butter, like a hair pulled from butter	spu bton
སྤུ་རྟེངས	bristles, wild boar	spu rtengs
སྤུ་ཐག	hair-rope	spu thag
སྤུ་ཐི	razor blade	spu thi
སྤུ་ཐུལ	btsugs phrug[winter long haired mal gzan] gi cloak ?	spu thul
སྤུ་དེ་གུང་རྒྱལ	= pu de gung rgyal	spu de gung rgyal
སྤུ་དྲི་རེག་ཆོད	Instantaneous Razor Slash	spu dri reg chod
སྤུ་འདྲག་པ	= spu 'dreg pa	spu 'drag pa
སྤུ་རྡུལ	spu'i rdul [atoms of a hair?]	spu rdul
སྤུ་ལྡང་བ	hair standing on end	spu ldang ba
སྤུ་ལྡེ་གུང་རྒྱལ	Tibetan king	spu lde gung rgyal
སྤུ་སྡུག	lovely	spu sdug
སྤུ་སྡུག་ཚར་བུ	soft lambskin fur	spu sdug tshar bu
སྤུ་ནག	hairy cattle, yak	spu nag
སྤུ་ནག་སྐྱ་ཅན	grizzly	spu nag skya can
སྤུ་ནོར	cattle	spu nor
སྤུ་སྤ་ད་མ	fabulous asura abode	spu spa da ma
སྤུ་ཕྲུག	hairy blanket, fine strong serge	spu phrug
སྤུ་འཕྱག	after carpets etc. are finished spu snyigs 'phyag pa	spu 'phyag
སྤུ་བུས་སྐྱོན་འཚོལ	look for faults [where there are none] 1640	spu bus skyon 'tshol
སྤུ་མ	velvet [garment]	spu ma
སྤུ་མ་གྲ་རིང	long pile velvet	spu ma gra ring
སྤུ་མ་བརྗེད་པ	do not shed their coats	spu ma brjed pa
སྤུ་མེད	ill-looking, of inferior quality	spu med
སྤུ་སྨྱུག	CH writing brush	spu smyug
སྤུ་ཙམ	even a hair('s tip worth)/ hairsbreadth	spu tsam
སྤུ་ཙམ་མེད	not even a trace of	spu tsam med
སྤུ་ཙམ་མེད་པ	not/ none at all	spu tsam med pa
སྤུ་ཙམ་ཡང་མེད་པ	w/o any/ so much as a hair's breadth of	spu tsam yang med pa
སྤུ་གཙང་མ	gem	spu gtsang ma
སྤུ་གཙུག	criteria	spu gtsug
སྤུ་རྩིད	soft inner hairs and coarse outer ones	spu rtsid
སྤུ་རྩུབ་པོ	coarse hair	spu rtsub po
སྤུ་རྩེ	hair-tip	spu rtse
སྤུ་རྩེ་ཙམ	even a hair('s tip worth)/ hairsbreadth	spu rtse tsam
སྤུ་འཛིངས	spu 'dres pa hair matted like felt	spu 'dzings
སྤུ་ཟལ	various hair color	spu zal
སྤུ་ཟིང་ཟིང	hairs standing on end	spu zing zing
སྤུ་འི་སོ	razor's edge	spu 'i so
སྤུ་འོ་བྲག	rock cavern in tibet	spu 'o brag
སྤུ་ཡི་ཁུང་བུ	pores of the hair	spu yi khung bu
སྤུ་ཡི་ལྕུག་ཕོན	[yak] tail fly whisk spu g.yos - hairs stood on end	spu yi lcug phon
སྤུ་ར	knife	spu ra
སྤུ་རབ༹	hair/feather horns, owl/ lynx ears	spu rva
སྤུ་རང	a district in Tibet; Purang	spu rang
སྤུ་རང་བཤད་འཕེལ་གླིང	Purang Shephel Ling; also {spu hreng bshad 'phel gling}, the main Gelukpa monastery in Purang	spu rang bshad 'phel gling
སྤུ་རང་ཨོར་སྤུ་ཧྲེང	Purang, in Ngari	spu rang or spu hreng
སྤུ་རངས	= spu hreng	spu rangs
སྤུ་རིང	long hair[ed], pig	spu ring
སྤུ་རིང་ཉ	fish	spu ring nya
སྤུ་རིང་པོ	vulva, elephant	spu ring po
སྤུ་རིས	hairline	spu ris
པིཅཏུརེ་དྲཝན་ཝ་ཨ་ཧཻར	tip; 3) fine distinctions	picture drawn w a hair
སྤུ་རིས་གཅོད་པ	make [fine] distinctions, split hairs	spu ris gcod pa
སྤུ་རིས་འབྱེད་པ	make fine/ hair-splitting distinctions	spu ris 'byed pa
སྤུ་རུགས	woolen material spu re re nas skyes shing gyas su 'khyil ba - each hair turns to the right spu re re nas skyes shing g.yas su 'khyil ba - each hair turns to the right. one of the {skyes bu chen po'...	spu rugs
སྤུ་རེངས	1) wild pig; 2) spu hreng district	spu rengs
སྤུ་རེངས་སྨན་པ་མི་བཞི	The four physicians of spu rengs [great translator Rinchen Sangpo's med students; 1) myang 'das seng ge'i sgra; 2) sha ka khri ye shes 'byung gnas; 3) aong sman aa ne, 4) mang po sman btsun]	spu rengs sman pa mi bzhi
སྤུ་ལ་བབ་པ	[arch] suitable, acceptable	spu la bab pa
སྤུ་ལངས	hair standing on end	spu langs
སྤུ་ལོང	bristling of hairs, glad	spu long
སྤུ་ལོང་གྱོ་བ	hair standing on end/ crawling	spu long gyo ba
སྤུ་ལོང་བ	hair standing on end/ crawling	spu long ba
སྤུ་ཤད	1) [bamboo] wool picker, bal shad; 2) hair plucking implement	spu shad
སྤུ་ཤད་ཀྱིས་བྲིས་པའི་རི་མོ་ལྟ་བུ	drawn as if with the tip of a single hair	spu shad kyis bris pa'i ri mo lta bu
སྤུ་ཤད་ལྟ་བུ	[written] as it by a hair	spu shad lta bu
སྤུ་ཤད་རྩེ་མོ	the tip of 1 hair [shad [brush]-stroke]	spu shad rtse mo
སྤུ་ཤེལ	amber	spu shel
སྤུ་སུ	moment, short period or yud tsam	spu su
སྤུ་སུད	1) short tempered; 2) w unstable nature lasting only a moment or short time	spu sud
སྤུ་སེབ	between the hairs	spu seb
སྤུ་སེབ་ནས	from between the hairs	spu seb nas
སྤུ་སོབ་སོབ	shaggy	spu sob sob
སྤུ་གསར	little birds etc that live only a year	spu gsar
སྤུ་གསེད	spu 'dzings pa dbye ba 'byed pa [Lag pas spu gsed pa, Lcags shad kyis spu gsed pa ???]	spu gsed
སྤུ་ཧྲང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	spu hrang
སྤུ་ཧྲུག	hairy blanket, serge of soft hair	spu hrug
སྤུ་ཧྲེང	district in W. Tibet	spu hreng
སྤུ་ཧྲེང་བཤད་འཕེལ་གླིང	Purang Shephel Ling; also {spu rang bshad 'phel gling}, the main Gelukpa monastery in Purang	spu hreng bshad 'phel gling
སྤུ་ཧྲེངས་པ	people from Purang	spu hrengs pa
སྤུ་ཧྲེངས་བཤད་འཕེལ་གླིང	Purang Shephel Ling Monastery, in {stod}	spu hrengs bshad 'phel gling
སྤུག	kind of precious stone	spug
སྤུང	heap; to pile up, to heap up	spung
སྤུང་ངེ་བ	piled up	spung nge ba
སྤུང་ཐང	Punakha [bhutan]	spung thang
སྤུང་སྡེ	division	spung sde
སྤུང་པ	amass	spung pa
སྤུང་པ་རྒྱས་པ	fleshy shoulder	spung pa rgyas pa
སྤུང་པོ	pile, heap	spung po
སྤུང་བ	(tha dad pa spungs pa, spung ba, spungs,, collect, gather, pile into 1	spung ba
སྤུང་འཛོམས	huddle	spung 'dzoms
སྤུང་ཡིག	a certain dakini script	spung yig
སྤུང་རི	spung ri pass	spung ri
སྤུང་རོང	Pungrong, in Tö, Mangyul. See Pongrong	spung rong
སྤུང་གསོག	heap	spung gsog
སྤུང་གསོག་བྱེད་པ	hoard	spung gsog byed pa
སྤུངས	heaped; imp. of {spung ba}; p. of {spung} to heap, group, aggregate	spungs
སྤུངས་ཆེ་བ	courageous, fearless [feeling]	spungs che ba
སྤུངས་པ	to be heaped together, grouped; pf. of {spung ba}	spungs pa
སྤུངས་པ་ཅན	broad, expanded	spungs pa can
སྤུངས་སེ་སྤུང	1) billow; 2) be impressive; 3) funeral	spungs se spung
སྤུངས་གསོག	stored/ piled up 1641	spungs gsog
སྤུངས་གསོག་བྱེད	store/ pile up	spungs gsog byed
སྤུད	hanging ornament, embroidery, equipment	spud
སྤུད་པ	to decorate; {spud pa, spud pa, spud pa, spud} trans. v.; pf. of {spud pa}; ft. of {spud pa}	spud pa
སྤུན	kin, kindred, relative, brother, siblings, children of same fathers, comrades, members of same religious section in monastery	spun
སྤུན་ཀྱག	relative, kinsman	spun kyag
སྤུན་སྐྱ	son of one's brother	spun skya
སྤུན་གྲོགས	rdo rje'i vajra brothers and sisters	spun grogs
སྤུན་རྒན་པ	1) older sibling; 2) elderly sibling	spun rgan pa
སྤུན་སྔ་ཚར	/(1 ones own previous siblings; 2) half siblings from before one's parents were married	spun snga tshar
སྤུན་ཆེན་བ	elder brother	spun chen ba
སྤུན་མཆེད	sibling, relative	spun mched
སྤུན་ཉེ	blood relative; syn {gnyen tshan}	spun nye
སྤུན་ཉེ་ནང་ཁུ་འཁྲིག་པ	incest	spun nye nang khu 'khrig pa
སྤུན་གཉེན	kinsfolk	spun gnyen
སྤུན་གཏེར	meaningless, without substance, hollow, vain, small building where writings are deposited	spun gter
སྤུན་གཏོང	wind thread/ yarn	spun gtong
སྤུན་གཏོང་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	machine to wind thread/ yarn	spun gtong 'phrul 'khor
སྤུན་ཐག	common thread running through; intervention, effect	spun thag
སྤུན་དང་འདྲ	you are like a brother	spun dang 'dra
སྤུན་དོག	knitting wool; knitting wool, woolen yarn	spun dog
སྤུན་དྲུང	spun zla'i drung pa: [half] sibling, close relative [h]	spun drung
སྤུན་བདུན་ཞོལ་པ	the 7 sisters from ? zhol pa	spun bdun zhol pa
སྤུན་ནང་བཞིན	fraternal	spun nang bzhin
སྤུན་པ	husks of winnowed grain, corn waste after brewing	spun pa
སྤུན་པོ	chaff	spun po
སྤུན་ཕྱི་ཚར	younger siblings	spun phyi tshar
སྤུན་ཕྲུག	1st cousin	spun phrug
སྤུན་སྨྱུག	spun dkri sa'i smyug ma	spun smyug
སྤུན་རྩིས	very high rate of interest, 50 percent	spun rtsis
སྤུན་ཚ	brothers and nephews	spun tsha
སྤུན་བཞི	allegory	spun bzhi
སྤུན་ཟླ	brothers	spun zla
སྤུན་ཟླའི་མནའ་འབྲེལ	fraternal alliance	spun zla'i mna' 'brel
སྤུན་ཟླའི་བུ	son of one's brother	spun zla'i bu
སྤུན་ཤིང	sa gdan and btsugs phrug sogs 'thag dus spun dkri sa'i shing	spun shing
སྤུན་སེར	monastic sibling	spun ser
སྤུན་སོགས	with his relative	spun sogs
སྤུབ	[usu. kha+--] to turn upside down	spub
སྤུབ་པ	reverse, turn upside down	spub pa
སྤུབས	turned upside down	spubs
སྤུའི་ཁུང་བུ	hair-pores	spu'i khung bu
ཧཻར	hole	hair
སྤུའི་བུ་ག	the pores of the hairs	spu'i bu ga
སྤུའི་བུག	pores	spu'i bug
སྤུའི་སོ	razor's edge	spu'i so
སྤུར	1) corpse, va, --{bzhus} to cremate. 2) Syn {'phur} cremation, dead body; imp. of {spur ba}	spur
སྤུར་ཁང	crematory, mortuary, funeral pyre, hearth, hearth for cremation, crypt	spur khang
སྤུར་རྒྱལ	Tibet	spur rgyal
སྤུར་སྒམ	coffin, container for a corpse	spur sgam
སྤུར་སྒྲོམ	coffin	spur sgrom
སྤུར་ཆས	charnel things like clothing of a corpse	spur chas
སྤུར་ཐལ	ashes of the dead body	spur thal
སྤུར་བ	to make fly, to scare up, to let fly; {spur ba, spur ba, spur ba, spur} trans. v.; pf. of {spur ba}; ft. of {spur ba}	spur ba
སྤུར་བྱངས་པ	burn a dead body	spur byangs pa
སྤུར་སྦྱོང་བ	phung po zhugs 'bul byed pa	spur sbyong ba
སྤུར་བཞུས	cremate	spur bzhus
སྤུར་ལེན	amber	spur len
སྤུར་ཤིང	wood for cremation	spur shing
སྤུལ	(not in Das)	spul
སྤུས	quality of a thing, pleasant characteristic	spus
སྤུས་ཀ	quality, quality	spus ka
སྤུས་ཀ་དག་ག	superior quality	spus ka dag ga
སྤུས་ཀ་སྡུག་པ	inferior	spus ka sdug pa
སྤུས་ཀ་གནང	sell	spus ka gnang
སྤུས་ཀ་ཞན་པ	inferior	spus ka zhan pa
སྤུས་ཀ་ཞན་པོ	bad quality	spus ka zhan po
སྤུས་ཀ་ཞུ	buy	spus ka zhu
སྤུས་ཁ	quality of things, good or bad	spus kha
སྤུས་ཁ་དག་ག	superior quality	spus kha dag ga
སྤུས་ཁ་གནང	sell	spus kha gnang
སྤུས་ཁ་ཞན་པ	inferior	spus kha zhan pa
སྤུས་ཁ་ཞན་པོ	bad quality	spus kha zhan po
སྤུས་ཁ་ཞུ	buy	spus kha zhu
སྤུས་སྒྱུར་བ	1) merchant; 2) sell	spus sgyur ba
སྤུས་བསྒྱུར	change the quality	spus bsgyur
སྤུས་ཅན	good quality	spus can
སྤུས་ཆ	quality of things	spus cha
སྤུས་ཆ་དངོག་གཙང	articles of good quality	spus cha dngog gtsang
སྤུས་བརྗེ	exchange things	spus brje
སྤུས་ལྟ་བ	see if quality is good or bad	spus lta ba
སྤུས་བརྟག་པ	[arch] unsuitable, unacceptable	spus brtag pa
སྤུས་དག	good quality [comp spus dag po]	spus dag
སྤུས་དག་པ	good quality	spus dag pa
སྤུས་དག་པོ	high / good quality	spus dag po
སྤུས་པྲིས་པ	written w a hair	spus pris pa
སྤུས་པྲིས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	as if written w a hair	spus pris pa lta bu
སྤུས་ཕབ་པ	[arch] suitable, pleasing, OK 1642	spus phab pa
སྤུས་བྲིས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	as if written with a hair	spus bris pa lta bu
སྤུས་འབྲིང	middling	spus 'bring
སྤུས་མེད	very poor quality	spus med
སྤུས་གཙང	pure	spus gtsang
སྤུས་ཚད	[measure of good and bad] quality, sample	spus tshad
སྤུས་ཚད་ཞིག་འཁྱེར	take a sample	spus tshad zhig 'khyer
སྤུས་ཚོང	selling	spus tshong
སྤུས་ཚོང་གནང	sell [h]	spus tshong gnang
སྤུས་ཚོང་ཞུ	buy [h]	spus tshong zhu
སྤུས་འཚོང	sell things	spus 'tshong
སྤུས་ཞན་པ	bad quality	spus zhan pa
སྤུས་ཞིབ་བཤེར་བྱེད	check quality	spus zhib bsher byed
སྤུས་ཞིབ་བཤེར་བྱེད་མཁན	quality checker	spus zhib bsher byed mkhan
སྤུས་ཟོང	goods, wares	spus zong
སྤུས་གཟིགས	1) buy necessary things [h]; 2) see if things are of good or bad quality	spus gzigs
སྤུས་རབ	best quality	spus rab
སྤུས་རུ	Puru, in U	spus ru
སྤུས་ལེགས	good quality	spus legs
སྤུས་ལོ	acceptable quality	spus lo
སྤེ	place in tibet	spe
སྤེ་ཐུབ	village in w. tibet	spe thub
སྤེ་ལེགས་དགོན་པ	Pelek Gönpa, in Tsang	spe legs dgon pa
སྤེག་ཤིང	part of a cart	speg shing
སྤེད	[arch] spo ba	sped
སྤེད་ས	[arch] small	sped sa
སྤེན་དཀར	tamarisk-blossom, potentilla leucophylla	spen dkar
སྤེན་རྒྱན	ornament of house's spen bad	spen rgyan
སྤེན་བཅུ་འཕྲོད	Saturday the 10th	spen bcu 'phrod
སྤེན་ཏོག	muslin with variegated figures embroidered on it	spen tog
སྤེན་ཏོག་རྒྱན	muslin with variegated figures embroidered on it	spen tog rgyan
སྤེན་ཐོག	roof made of tamarisk stems	spen thog
སྤེན་མདོ་ཉག་ག	{spen mdo nyag ga pass	spen mdo nyag ga
སྤེན་མདོག	country chintz with tamarisk figures	spen mdog
སྤེན་ནག	spen nag med tree	spen nag
སྤེན་པ	1) Saturn; 2) Saturday	spen pa
སྤེན་པད	border formed of tamarisk brushwood	spen pad
སྤེན་ཕོར	eating bowl of tamarisk wood	spen phor
སྤེན་ཕྱགས	spen ma wood duster	spen phyags
སྤེན་བད	spen ma wood mda' yab	spen bad
སྤེན་འབར	torch	spen 'bar
སྤེན་མ	tamarisk plant	spen ma
སྤེན་མ་དཀར་པོ	herb {spen ma dkar po}	spen ma dkar po
སྤེན་མ་སེར་པོ	herb {spen ma ser po}	spen ma ser po
སྤེན་རྫབ	spen ma tree burl	spen rdzab
སྤེའུ	turret	spe'u
སྤེའུ་ཁང	small house	spe'u khang
སྤེའུ་ལྕོག	lcags ri'i sgang sogs kyi small house	spe'u lcog
སྤེའུ་ཞོལ	shag sgor chung ngu	spe'u zhol
སྤེལ	1) to spread disseminate, unfold. 2) to increase, enlarge, expand; imp. of {spel ba}; propagate; propagate; compose, prepare, propagate, to increase, to send out, {gtong} to carry out, develop, unf...	spel
སྤེལ་བསྐུལ	encourage, stimulate, urge, promote	spel bskul
སྤེལ་གོས	clothes of various colors	spel gos
སྤེལ་རྒྱས	spear, disseminate unfold, initiate, increase, enlarge, expand	spel rgyas
སྤེལ་རྒྱས་པར	blaze about	spel rgyas par
སྤེལ་རྒྱུག་གློག་རྒྱུན	AC current	spel rgyug glog rgyun
སྤེལ་རྒྱུག་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	AC current generator	spel rgyug glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
སྤེལ་སྔགས	mantra for increase	spel sngags
སྤེལ་ཆོས	* meaning of the text/tradition explaining outline/ description	spel chos
སྤེལ་བསྟན་པ	propagate the teachings	spel bstan pa
སྤེལ་འདེབས	seed increasing or, mixed planting, plant a crop between rows of another spel 'debs byas pa'i nas sran thon che	spel 'debs
སྤེལ་འདེབས་བྱེད	plant a crop between rows of another	spel 'debs byed
སྤེལ་པར	sets of printing plates for printing in two or more colors	spel par
སྤེལ་བ	{spel ba, spel ba, spel ba, spel} trans. v.; 1) to propagate; cause to increase / spread; augment, increase, multiply, spread, 2) write, compose, author	spel ba
སྤེལ་བ་གཏོང	carry out, develop, publish, issue, expand	spel ba gtong
སྤེལ་བ་ལ	for increasing	spel ba la
སྤེལ་འབྱོར	sent and received	spel 'byor
སྤེལ་སྦྱོར	increasing, expanding, augmenting	spel sbyor
སྤེལ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	increase, expand, augment	spel sbyor byed
སྤེལ་མ	medley, developing, alternation	spel ma
སྤེལ་མ་བགྱི་བ	to mix, alternate, interchange	spel ma bgyi ba
སྤེལ་མ་བྱས་པ	connected, in stages, mixed, intermingled, overlapped, intertwined	spel ma byas pa
སྤེལ་མ་བྱེད	alternate, write mixed verse and prose [gd] connect, mix, intermingle, overlap, intertwine	spel ma byed
སྤེལ་མར་བསྟོད་པ	Interwoven Praises; by Matricheta and Dignaga	spel mar bstod pa
སྤེལ་མར་གནས་པ	to keep different or many things together	spel mar gnas pa
སྤེལ་མར་བྱེད་པ	to mix, to alternate	spel mar byed pa
སྤེལ་ཚིག	additional verses	spel tshig
སྤེལ་གཞི	a village in tsang	spel gzhi
སྤེལ་ཟིན	increased	spel zin
སྤེལ་རེས	exchange, taking turns	spel res
སྤེལ་རེས་བྱས་པའི་ལས་ཀ	exchanging/ taking turns in work	spel res byas pa'i las ka
སྤེལ་ལུགས	way of propagating	spel lugs
སྤེས	edge, brim, border	spes
སྤོ	summit of a mountain; summit/ height; 1) to move, shift residence. 2) to change	spo
སྤོ་སྐྱེལ	transferring, transmitting	spo skyel
སྤོ་སྐྱེལ་གཏོང	transfer, transmit	spo skyel gtong
སྤོ་སྐྱོད	moving, shifting [place of residence]	spo skyod
སྤོ་སྐྱོད་པའི་དམག་སྒར	moved/ shifted army camp spo skyod byas pa'i las grva tshugs yul moved factory site	spo skyod pa'i dmag sgar
སྤོ་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	move, shift [place of residence]	spo skyod byed
སྤོ་སྐྱོད་བྱེད་པའི་འབྲོག་པ	moving nomads	spo skyod byed pa'i 'brog pa
སྤོ་འཁྱབ་བྱེད་པ	tourist	spo 'khyab byed pa
སྤོ་མགུ་སྤྱོད་པ	vinaya expression 'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, lhag ma'i ltung ba byung ba'i dge slong to rectify it, spo ba: by gnas khyad par can nas dman par spo ba dang, mgu ba ni make ther sangha rejoice; dge...	spo mgu spyod pa
སྤོ་མགུ་དབྱུང་བ	vinaya expression, spo mgu spyad zin pa'i dge slong de nyid sa rang bzhin du gnas pa thob pa dang gzengs bstod kyi phyir du gsol bzhi'i las kyis rang bzhin gyi gnas su dbyung ste gzhan gyis bsnyen ...	spo mgu dbyung ba
སྤོ་མགུ་དབྱུང་གསུམ	TSE	spo mgu dbyung gsum
སྤོ་འགྲོས་མེད་པ	stalemate	spo 'gros med pa
སྤོ་སྒྱེལ་རྨོ་སློང	[benefit 1 side and harm the other]	spo sgyel rmo slong
སྤོ་ཆོག་པ	adaptable	spo chog pa
སྤོ་ཏོ	1) grassy small hill [rdog rdog]; 2) clumps of earth [in a plowed field]; 3) bullock; 4) unburned brick	spo to
སྤོ་ཏོག	top or pinnacle	spo tog
སྤོ་ཐང	name of rat in story	spo thang
སྤོ་མཐོ	mt	spo mtho
སྤོ་མཐོ་ནམ་མཁ་རྫོང	Potho Namkha Dzong, the Sky Citadel Mountain, one of Milarepa's caves, in Tsang	spo mtho nam mkha rdzong
སྤོ་ལྡན	{spo lo 'gran sdur byed pa}, play a ball game	spo ldan
སྤོ་པ	spo yul inhabitant	spo pa
སྤོ་སྤོ	great grandfather	spo spo
སྤོ་ཕོ	spo bo	spo pho
སྤོ་བ	ft. of {spo ba}; {spo ba, spos pa, spo ba, spos} trans. v.; remove, move, to alter, to change	spo ba
སྤོ་བ་ཆ་དཀར	insect that eats up corn	spo ba cha dkar
སྤོ་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	TSE	spo ba spyod pa
སྤོ་བ་གསུམ	the three kinds of removal {spro ba mthol bshags kyi phyir bcos byed tshul gsum} gyi nang gses, spyod pa gzhan na gnas pa spo ba spyod pa la, lhag ltung 'chab med [not kept secret] ni dge slong gi ...	spo ba gsum
སྤོ་བའི་གཞི	* penance of spo mgu etc. ston pa la called by the name spo ba	spo ba'i gzhi
སྤོ་བོ	father in law, grandfather, grandfather	spo bo
སྤོ་བོ་གྲག་ཐོག	palace of chieftain of po yul	spo bo grag thog
སྤོ་བོ་མགོ་ཡོར	disease where hair is lost due to rims tshad	spo bo mgo yor
སྤོ་བོ་གཏེར་སྟོན་བདུད་འདུལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	16151672	spo bo gter ston bdud 'dul rdo rje
སྤོ་བོ་ལགས	old man	spo bo lags
སྤོ་འབག	mask of old and decrepit grandfather	spo 'bag
སྤོ་འབོར	1 of 5 smad mdo khams sbang	spo 'bor
སྤོ་འབོར་སྒང	Pombor Gang, one of the Six Ranges of Dokham	spo 'bor sgang
སྤོ་རྨོ	spo bo rmo bo	spo rmo
སྤོ་སྨད	county in 21th cent Tibet.	spo smad
སྤོ་ཚལ	(CH a table herb	spo tshal
སྤོ་ཡུལ	a district in Tibet	spo yul
སྤོ་ཡོར	in summer fields mu gseb tu na ma spo tho built kind of heap of stones	spo yor
སྤོ་རི་མཐོན	lofty green mountain	spo ri mthon
སྤོ་རི་སྤོ་མཐོན	lofty green mt	spo ri spo mthon
སྤོ་རེ	SA spor	spo re
སྤོ་རོང	monastery of the {bo dong} tradition in spo rong}	spo rong
སྤོ་ལ་དར་འཕྱར	put a flag in a high place, irreversible because of great power	spo la dar 'phyar
སྤོ་ལགས	1) grandfather; 2) old man	spo lags
སྤོ་ལོ	ball	spo lo
སྤོ་ལོ་འགྲན་སྡུར	ball game, match	spo lo 'gran sdur
སྤོ་ལོ་འགྲན་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	to play a ball game	spo lo 'gran sdur byed pa
སྤོ་ལོག	football	spo log
སྤོ་ཤུགས	moving, shifting [place of residence]	spo shugs
སྤོ་ཤུགས་པའི་དམག་སྒར	moved/ shifted army camp spo shugs byas pa'i las grva tshugs yul moved factory site	spo shugs pa'i dmag sgar
སྤོ་ཤུགས་བྱེད	move, shift [place of residence]	spo shugs byed
སྤོ་ཤུགས་བྱེད་པའི་འབྲོག་པ	moving nomads	spo shugs byed pa'i 'brog pa
སྤོ་ཤུད	evacuation shift	spo shud
སྤོ་ཤུད་བྱེད་པ	remove	spo shud byed pa
སྤོ་ཤུད་བྱེད་རུང་བ	removable	spo shud byed rung ba
སྤོ་ཤུད་མི་བྱེད་པ	stationary	spo shud mi byed pa
སྤོ་བཤུད་བྱེད་རུང	portable	spo bshud byed rung
སྤོ་བཤུད་བྱེད་རུང་བ	mobile	spo bshud byed rung ba
སྤོ་ས	place newly occupied by nomads spo ser dkon mchog bkra shis gling birthplace of marpa	spo sa
སྤོག	incense	spog
སྤོག་ཁེ	[arch] profit, gain	spog khe
སྤོག་འདོན	money lender, leaser	spog 'don
སྤོག་པ	(tha dad pa spags pa, spag pa, spogs,, 1) mix; 2) go to another place; 3) remove and to bring near by turns, remove, carry elsewhere, shift	spog pa
སྤོག་མ	vassal	spog ma
སྤོག་ར	Pokhara	spog ra
སྤོགས	imp. of {spog pa}; gain, profit	spogs
སྤོགས་པ	[arch] profit, gain	spogs pa
སྤོགས་བྱེད	[make a] profit/ gain	spogs byed
སྤོགས་བྱེད་པ	make profit 1644	spogs byed pa
སྤོགས་མ	profit, power	spogs ma
སྤོགས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	give money on interest	spogs su gtong ba
སྤོང	[p spang[s],, give up, renounce, abandon, discard, overcome, [the two extremes], avoid, abolish, revoke	spong
སྤོང་ཁང	hermitage, meditation retreat	spong khang
སྤོང་རྒྱུ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཞི	the ground not to be abandoned	spong rgyu ma yin pa'i gzhi
སྤོང་སྒྱུར	giving up and transmuting	spong sgyur
སྤོང་ཐག	one who has renounced everything, destitute person	spong thag
སྤོང་བདུན	abandon the three nonvirtuous actions of body and four of speech	spong bdun
སྤོང་བདུན་འཁོར་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the vow of the 7 to be abandoned along w their retinue spong bdun 'khor dang bcas pa spong ba - the 7 to be abandoned w what is related to them	spong bdun 'khor bcas kyi sdom pa
སྤོང་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ་གསུམ	CHN	spong pa'i sbyor ba gsum
སྤོང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great abandonment	spong ba chen po
སྤོང་བ་པ	renunciant	spong ba pa
སྤོང་བ་པ་ལ་གནས	living as a religious mendicant, one of the {gnas bzhi} 4 ways of living	spong ba pa la gnas
སྤོང་བ་བཞི	4 attempts at rejection and acquisition (reject arisen evil, not allow more to arise, continue good arisen, increase good)	spong ba bzhi
སྤོང་བ་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	one of the {spang klog 'khor lo gsum}	spong ba bsam gtan gyi 'khor lo
སྤོང་བ་བསམ་གཏན་པ	renunciant meditators; a meditator who has renounced worldly things, a renunciant	spong ba bsam gtan pa
སྤོང་བའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	TSE	spong ba'i sgrub pa
སྤོང་བའི་གཉེན་པོ	the remedy to discard	spong ba'i gnyen po
སྤོང་བའི་རྙེད་པ	possessions of a renunciate	spong ba'i rnyed pa
སྤོང་བའི་འདུ་བྱེད	application of abandoning	spong ba'i 'du byed
སྤོང་བའི་སྡོམ་པ	dhyana and spotless discipline arising on the path of nonobstruction/ non-interruption {bar chad med pa'i lam} dgu ??? dag	spong ba'i sdom pa
སྤོང་བའི་ཡན་ལག	limbs of abandonment	spong ba'i yan lag
སྤོང་བའི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of abandonment [of defilements]	spong ba'i yan lag lnga
སྤོང་བའི་ལམ	path of abandonment	spong ba'i lam
སྤོང་བའི་སེམས	attitude of renunciation	spong ba'i sems
སྤོང་བའི་སེམས་པ	the intention / will to discard	spong ba'i sems pa
སྤོང་བར་ནུས་པ	power of abandoning/renunciation	spong bar nus pa
སྤོང་བྱ	that which should be given up, renunciation	spong bya
སྤོང་བྱེད	vriji, an ancient town in magadha	spong byed
སྤོང་འབོར	section of 'bras spungs	spong 'bor
སྤོང་ལམ	Path of Renunciation; the path of renunciation; way of renunciation	spong lam
སྤོང་སེམས་མཚུངས་ལྡན	those who have an disdaining ??? mind	spong sems mtshungs ldan
སྤོང་ཨོར་སྤུང་རོང	Pongrong Valley, at Gungthang, Tö, Mangyul	spong or spung rong
སྤོངས	Avoid	spongs
སྤོངས་ཤིག	do abandon, give up	spongs shig
སྤོངས་སེམས	renunciation, abandonment	spongs sems
སྤོད	spice (like pepper, ginger, onion, garlic)	spod
སྤོད་ཁང	hermitage	spod khang
སྤོད་ཅན	seasoned	spod can
སྤོད་འདབ་པ	extract food essence	spod 'dab pa
སྤོད་འདེབས་པ	season	spod 'debs pa
སྤོད་པ	hermit, vow	spod pa
སྤོད་པ་ཉམས་པ	one that has broken his vow	spod pa nyams pa
སྤོད་བ་པ	renunciant	spod ba pa
སྤོད་སྨན	food essence extract	spod sman
སྤོད་ཚ	hot flavored food, chilis	spod tsha
སྤོད་རྫས	food essence extract	spod rdzas
སྤོན	forsaking, seed	spon
སྤོན་པ	[arch] abandon, beat	spon pa
སྤོན་ཚང	physician	spon tshang
སྤོབ་པ	train in	spob pa
སྤོབ་ལིག	public	spob lig
སྤོབ་ལིག་ལོབ་གྲྭ	public school	spob lig lob grwa
སྤོབས	criticize, to dare [ to criticize]; selfconfidence/ courage	spobs
སྤོབས་ཉམས	manifestation/experience of mental strength	spobs nyams
སྤོབས་ཏེ་ལ	{spobs te} pass	spobs te la
སྤོབས་གཏམ	arrogant disparaging talk	spobs gtam
སྤོབས་པ	self-confidence	spobs pa
སྤོབས་པ་བསྐྱེད	increase confidence	spobs pa bskyed
སྤོབས་པ་རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་པ	1) be able to explain the meaning of the words w/o obstruction; 2) pride/ arrogance never quelled	spobs pa rgyun mi 'chad pa
སྤོབས་པ་བརྒྱད	eight confidences	spobs pa brgyad
སྤོབས་པ་ཅན	daring, bold	spobs pa can
སྤོབས་པ་ཆེ་བ	1) great pride [nga rgyal]; 2) great unforgettable confidence	spobs pa che ba
སྤོབས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	self-important, proud	spobs pa chen po
སྤོབས་པ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	limitless confidence	spobs pa mtha' yas pa
སྤོབས་པ་མཐའ་ཡས་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of limitless confidence TSE	spobs pa mtha' yas pa'i ting nge 'dzin
སྤོབས་པ་མཐོ	proud, confident	spobs pa mtho
སྤོབས་པ་མཐོ་པོ	1) great bravery/ spiritual power; 2) great arrogance/pride	spobs pa mtho po
སྤོབས་པ་བྱེད	be proud/ confident	spobs pa byed
སྤོབས་པ་མི་འཇིགས་པའི་ཐོབ་པ	attained the fearless confidence	spobs pa mi 'jigs pa'i thob pa
སྤོབས་པ་མི་ཟད་པ	inexhaustible courage, or fearless confidence	spobs pa mi zad pa
སྤོབས་པ་བརྩེགས་པ	a bodhisattva	spobs pa brtsegs pa
སྤོབས་པ་ཚིག་ཆུང་བ	words of little weight	spobs pa tshig chung ba
སྤོབས་པ་ཞན	not daring, less intelligent	spobs pa zhan
སྤོབས་པ་ཞན་པ	one less intelligent and wanting in courage	spobs pa zhan pa
སྤོབས་པ་ཞུམ་པ	despondent, depressed, dejected	spobs pa zhum pa
སྤོབས་པ་སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ	discriminating knowledge of ready speech, the right discriminating knowledge of eloquence	spobs pa so so yang dag par rig pa
སྤོབས་པ་སོ་སོར་ཡང་དག་རིག་པ	TSE	spobs pa so sor yang dag rig pa
སྤོབས་པ་བསམ་གྱི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable eloquence	spobs pa bsam gyi khyab pa
སྤོབས་པའི་གཏེར	a religious work	spobs pa'i gter
སྤོབས་པའི་གཏེར་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	eight great treasure mines of courageous eloquence	spobs pa'i gter chen brgyad
སྤོབས་པའི་གཏེར་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the eight	spobs pa'i gter chen po brgyad
གྲེཨཏ་ཏྲེཨསུརེ	mines of courageous eloquence	great treasure
སྤོབས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	a sutra	spobs pa'i blo gros kyis zhus pa'i mdo
སྤོབས་པར་བྱེད་པ	enable, empower, authorize	spobs par byed pa
སྤོབས་བློ་མ་པ	to one's surprise	spobs blo ma pa
སྤོབས་སེམས	pride, confidence	spobs sems
སྤོམ	1) quantity, measure of many or few; 2) in general, roughly, on the average; 3) bomb	spom
སྤོམ་ཆེན་པོ	diffuse, prolix, long winded	spom chen po
སྤོམ་ཐག	give things to the dharma, old tradition of clearing away conditions of sickness	spom thag
སྤོམ་བསྡོམས	to sum up	spom bsdoms
སྤོམ་སྤོད	delivering altogether, making over entire charge or responsibilities	spom spod
སྤོམ་སྤོམ	1) talk where words and sense are unclear; 2) shoddy, careless work; 3) in general, roughly, on the average	spom spom
སྤོམ་སྤྲོད	distribute/ bring together by guessing the measures	spom sprod
སྤོམ་འབོར	a section of 'bras spungs monastery	spom 'bor
སྤོམ་རྩིས	calculate weights measures etc	spom rtsis
སྤོམ་རྩེ་རག	{spom rtse rag place	spom rtse rag
སྤོམ་ཚིག	general/ rough/ approximate statement	spom tshig
སྤོམ་ཚོད	approximate/ guess the measures	spom tshod
སྤོམ་ཡོར	prolix, long-winded	spom yor
སྤོམ་ཡོར་ཆད་པ	be succinct, to the point	spom yor chad pa
སྤོམ་ར	snowy mountain in amdo	spom ra
སྤོམ་བཤད	merely partial explanation	spom bshad
སྤོམ་བཤད་མ་བརྟགས་བབ་ཅོལ	partial explanation [which appears beautiful but] which is mere nonsense]	spom bshad ma brtags bab col
སྤོམས་པ	self-assurance, courage	spoms pa
སྤོར	small pair of scales, a medicinal plant	spor
སྤོར་གང	currency unit = about 1 srang	spor gang
སྤོར་གོར	[arch] cup/bowl	spor gor
སྤོར་གྲངས་ཁལ་བསྒྲིལ	weight measure	spor grangs khal bsgril
སྤོར་གཅུས་པ	kha gzhan du gcus te unwanted rnam 'gyur ston pa	spor gcus pa
སྤོར་གཅོག	enlarge/ diminish # there should be	spor gcog
སྤོར་ཆེན	anemone trullifolia hook. f. et thoms var. linearis (bruhl) hand.-mazz.	spor chen
སྤོར་ཐང	black art, divination	spor thang
སྤོར་ཐང་རྩིས	1) CH divination brought w CH princess {rgya bza' kong jo}; 2) CH astr	spor thang rtsis
སྤོར་སྣུམ	lamp oil, lamp butter	spor snum
སྤོར་ཕྱོགས	kha phyogs, Las ka spor phyogs bslogs nas byed pa, Gzhung don bzhag nas sger don la 'jug pa'i spor phyogs log pa byed pa	spor phyogs
སྤོར་བ	elevate, raise, SA dpor ba, increase	spor ba
སྤོར་བྱེད་ཆེན་མོ་བརྒྱད	transformation of six munis with Samantabhadra and consort	spor byed chen mo brgyad
སྤོར་བྱེད་རླུང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of	spor byed rlung gi 'khor lo
བླཟེ	causing wind	blaze
སྤོར་རེ	scales, plant, SA spor	spor re
སྤོར་ཤིང	neem, tamarisk	spor shing
སྤོས	p. of {spo} imp. of {spo ba}; 1) to move to, shift residence; 2) incense; perfume, 3) fragrant	spos
སྤོས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	(poetic) musk deer; chief of the elephants, the musk deer	spos kyi glang po
སྤོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	nutmeg	spos kyi rgyal po
སྤོས་ཀྱི་ངད་ཅན	1 of 10 kings of mountains, SA ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu	spos kyi ngad can
སྤོས་ཀྱི་དུད་སྤྲིན	clouds of incense smoke	spos kyi dud sprin
སྤོས་ཀྱི་དྲི་ཞིམ་པོ	the fragrant smell of incense	spos kyi dri zhim po
སྤོས་ཀྱི་ནད་ལྡན	dandha-madana	spos kyi nad ldan
སྤོས་ཀྱི་རེང་བ	stick of incense	spos kyi reng ba
སྤོས་ཀྱི་རེང་བུ	single incense stick, pastil, long thin straw covered with odoriferous substance	spos kyi reng bu
སྤོས་དཀར	1) sala tree thang chu'i rigs shig; 2) a kind of incense	spos dkar
སྤོས་དཀར་ཤིང	sal tree whose dried sap is incense, tendril, plant premna spinosa	spos dkar shing
སྤོས་རྐང	spos chag pa'i nang gi rkang	spos rkang
སྤོས་སྐོར	practitioners carrying incense and circumambulating	spos skor
སྤོས་ཁང	an incense pot	spos khang
སྤོས་ཁང་པ	rin chen rgyal mtshan (15th cent)	spos khang pa
སྤོས་འཁོར	spos sbom sgor mor 'khyil ba	spos 'khor
སྤོས་གླང	royal elephant, name of elephant	spos glang
སྤོས་རྒྱ	incense clock	spos rgya
སྤོས་རྒྱ་རིས	meander patterns	spos rgya ris
སྤོས་རྒྱག	burn incense	spos rgyag
སྤོས་སྒམ	incense box/ censer	spos sgam
སྤོས་སྒྲུབ་པ	burn incense	spos sgrub pa
སྤོས་ངད་ལྡང་བའི་རི	snow mt te se nas 500 dpag tshad	spos ngad ldang ba'i ri
སྤོས་ངད་ལྡངས	Syn {ri bo spos ngad ldan pa}	spos ngad ldangs
སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན	1) spos ngad ldang ba'i ri; 2) Chang; 2) bee	spos ngad ldan
སྤོས་ཆག	bunch of incense	spos chag
སྤོས་ཆགས	bundle of incense sticks	spos chags
སྤོས་ཆུ	perfume, scented water	spos chu
སྤོས་ཉུག་པ	[arch] spos byug pa, with incense perfume clothes etc.	spos nyug pa
སྤོས་གཏུལ་བ	1) burn incense; 2) [arch] incense smoke bskyil ba	spos gtul ba
སྤོས་སྟེགས	incense holder/stand	spos stegs
སྤོས་ཐལ་སྟེར་བ	by criticism/ insult/ bad feelings give a wrong answer	spos thal ster ba
སྤོས་ཐུར	incense stick spos dang kha dog dang byag pa dang	spos thur
ཕྲེང་བ་ཐོགས་པ་སྤང་བ	refrain from using perfumes, cosmetics and unguents spos dang kha dog dang byug pa dang	phreng ba thogs pa spang ba
སྤོས་དུད	incense smoke	spos dud
སྤོས་དྲི	the good smell of incense	spos dri
སྤོས་བདུག	burn incense	spos bdug
སྤོས་མདོང	spos rkang blug snod	spos mdong
སྤོས་འདམ	paste of crushed incense powder	spos 'dam
སྤོས་འདྲ	1) practitioners spos sna zhu skabs lag 'khyer spos chun po dang 'dra ba'i shing hril; 2) fake spos shel	spos 'dra
སྤོས་རྡུང་པ	incense maker	spos rdung pa
སྤོས་ནད་ལྡན	beer, very delicious and fragrant wine	spos nad ldan
སྤོས་ནས	moved [to a place]	spos nas
སྤོས་སྣེས་སྔུན་བསུ	practitioners carrying lighted incense escorts in front of someone	spos snes sngun bsu
སྤོས་སྣོད	censer	spos snod
སྤོས་པ	pf. of {spo ba}	spos pa
སྤོས་སྤར་བ	to burn incense	spos spar ba
སྤོས་སྤོག	box/bowl for incense	spos spog
སྤོས་སྤྱོར	incense	spos spyor
སྤོས་སྤྲོག	box/bowl for incense	spos sprog
སྤོས་ཕོར	incense burner, perfuming pan	spos phor
སྤོས་ཕྱེ	fumigating powder	spos phye
སྤོས་ཕྱེ་ཕུར་མ	incense powder blugs pa'i [rubbed smeared?] offering substance	spos phye phur ma
སྤོས་བ་ལའི་ཤིང	fragrant herb andropogon schoenanthus	spos ba la'i shing
སྤོས་འབར	(gesture of) lighting incense (in dance)	spos 'bar
སྤོས་འབྱུག	anoint/rub w perfume	spos 'byug
སྤོས་འབྱུག་པ	cover with perfumed ointment	spos 'byug pa
སྤོས་སྦྱོར	incense	spos sbyor
སྤོས་སྦྱོར་བ	burn incense	spos sbyor ba
སྤོས་མ	pukkasi (purity of nose consciousness)	spos ma
སྤོས་འཛིན	spos rkang 'dzugs sa	spos 'dzin
སྤོས་ཞིམ་ལྡེ་གུ	good smell sbangs pa'i chu	spos zhim lde gu
སྤོས་གཞོང	oval spos rkang burning vessel	spos gzhong
སྤོས་རོལ	incense and music	spos rol
སྤོས་ཤེལ	amber	spos shel
སྤོས་བསྲེག	burn incense	spos bsreg
སྤྱང	transmutation, perky, clever, wakeful, cunning	spyang
སྤྱང་ཀི	one of the {gcan gzan che dgu} wolf; wolf	spyang ki
སྤྱང་ཀིའི་ལྕེ	wolf's tongue, [animal med]	spyang ki'i lce
སྤྱང་ཀིའི་ཕོ་བ	{spyang ki'i pho ba} animal med	spyang ki'i pho ba
སྤྱང་ཀུ	wolf, jackal	spyang ku
སྤྱང་ཀྱི	wolf, lupus tibetanus	spyang kyi
སྤྱང་ཁུ	wolf, jackal	spyang khu
སྤྱང་ཁུ་ལ་ཁ	hill near lhasa	spyang khu la kha
སྤྱང་ཁྱི	wolf-dog, wolf, jackal	spyang khyi
སྤྱང་ཁྲིག	a tribe	spyang khrig
སྤྱང་གྲུང	1) intelligent [perceptive and clear minded], clever; 2) inscrutable	spyang grung
སྤྱང་གྲུང་ཅན	artful, prudent	spyang grung can
སྤྱང་གྲུང་བསྟུན་མཁས	w clear intelligence knowing potential profit and danger, skillful at seeing/ choosing right time and action	spyang grung bstun mkhas
སྤྱང་གྲུང་དོད་པོ	intelligent clear minded and very perceptive, clever	spyang grung dod po
སྤྱང་གྲུང་ལྡན་པ	cunning, bright, brilliant	spyang grung ldan pa
སྤྱང་གྲུང་འཛོམས་པོ	intelligent, clever	spyang grung 'dzoms po
སྤྱང་གླེན	intelligent and idiotic	spyang glen
སྤྱང་སྒམ	rock box in a hole for trapping wolves [rdo sgam]	spyang sgam
སྤྱང་བཅོས	not intelligent mdog gi actions, Glen pas spyang bcos byas na mngon gsal gzhan las dod pa	spyang bcos
སྤྱང་ཐག	rope for pulling something down	spyang thag
སྤྱང་ཐབས	knack	spyang thabs
སྤྱང་ཐུལ	kind of wolf-skin garment	spyang thul
སྤྱང་ཐུལ་གྱོན་པ་ཞིག	wearing a coat of wolf skin	spyang thul gyon pa zhig
སྤྱང་དུག་པ	thistle saussurea taraxacifolia wall.	spyang dug pa
སྤྱང་ནག	black wolf	spyang nag
སྤྱང་པགས	wolf skin	spyang pags
སྤྱང་པོ	very clever and dexterous, brainy, crafty, intelligent, sly, wise	spyang po
སྤྱང་པོ་ཀླད་མེད	clever but not a deep/original thinker	spyang po klad med
སྤྱང་པོ་དང་མཁས་པ	shrewd	spyang po dang mkhas pa
སྤྱང་པོ་འདོ་མེད	sharp understanding but no focus	spyang po 'do med
སྤྱང་ཕྲུག	wolf/ jackal cub	spyang phrug
སྤྱང་འཕར་འདུས་པ	1) wolf/ 'phar ba cross; 2) 'Phar/wolf couple	spyang 'phar 'dus pa
སྤྱང་བ	skill, skillful, clever	spyang ba
སྤྱང་མི་སྤྱང	intelligence	spyang mi spyang
སྤྱང་མོ	she-wolf, jackal	spyang mo
སྤྱང་མོ་མདེའུ་འབྱིན	depending on a med's khungs bshad dam action btags pa'i spang rtsi do bo	spyang mo mde'u 'byin
སྤྱང་ཚགས	[arch] water strainer w handle	spyang tshags
སྤྱང་ཚེར	thistle carduus crispus l. xanthopappus subacaulis winkl., carduus crispus, plumeless thistle	spyang tsher
སྤྱང་ཚེར་དཀར་པོ	morina betonicoides benth.	spyang tsher dkar po
སྤྱང་ཞྭ	wolf-skin hat	spyang zhwa
སྤྱང་རིག་མེད་པ	slow-witted 1647	spyang rig med pa
སྤྱང་ལུག་གོ་ནོར	bskyab bya dang bsgral bya nor ba'i dpe	spyang lug go nor
སྤྱང་ལུང	Changlung, in Domey	spyang lung
སྤྱང་ལུང་ནམ་མཁའ་འཇིགས་མེད	17691833 - Changlung Namkha Jigme spyang lung nam mkha' 'jigs med kyi rnam	spyang lung nam mkha' 'jigs med
སྤྱང་ཤ་དོད་པོ	grung nyams dod po'am grung mdog kha po	spyang sha dod po
སྤྱང་སློག	wolf skin slog pa	spyang slog
སྤྱངས	study	spyangs
སྤྱངས་པ	seizing, catching hold of	spyangs pa
སྤྱད	practice, SA spyod pa, enjoyed, eaten, past of spyod	spyad
སྤྱད་དཀའ	hard to do	spyad dka'
སྤྱད་དངོས	implement, things, materials	spyad dngos
སྤྱད་ཅིང	doing and doing, practice, {spyod pa la spyad par 'dod pa} who wishes to practice	spyad cing
སྤྱད་ཅིང་ཅིང	doing and doing, practice	spyad cing cing
སྤྱད་དང་མ་སྤྱད	acting and not acting	spyad dang ma spyad
སྤྱད་གདང	rack for laying out/ displaying articles	spyad gdang
སྤྱད་ནག	black kitchen utensils	spyad nag
སྤྱད་པ	enjoy	spyad pa
སྤྱད་པ་རྣམ་སྦྱོང་གི་དམིགས་པ	antidote object spyad pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa lnga the five antidote objects spyad pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa lnga the five antidote objects: 1) mi sdug pa, unpleasantness; 2) byams pa, kindness...	spyad pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa
སྤྱད་པར་བྱ་བ	be practiced	spyad par bya ba
སྤྱད་པར་བྱ་བ་ལྔ	five to be practiced	spyad par bya ba lnga
སྤྱད་བྱ	enjoyed, eaten	spyad bya
སྤྱད་བྱར་མི་འགྱུར	unusable	spyad byar mi 'gyur
སྤྱད་མཚམས	rules, instructions, extent of person's duties	spyad mtshams
སྤྱད་ཟིན	routine, bogged down, way of daily life, settled into a rut	spyad zin
སྤྱད་ལ་རྗེས	to engage in	spyad la rjes
སྤྱད་ལ་དྲག་པ	articles of superior quality	spyad la drag pa
སྤྱད་ལག	goods, effects, necessaries, provisions, articles	spyad lag
སྤྱད་ལག་འགངས་ཆེན	valuable things	spyad lag 'gangs chen
སྤྱད་ལག་དངོས་པོ	implement	spyad lag dngos po
སྤྱད་ལག་སྟོར་བ	lose an article	spyad lag stor ba
སྤྱན	eyes; / {mig} [the five] Eyes, organ of vision	spyan
སྤྱན་ཀྱུག	eyebrow [h]	spyan kyug
སྤྱན་དཀར	white paint applied to the eyes of deities etc in thangka	spyan dkar
སྤྱན་དཀར་ནག་འབྱེས	eyes of contrasting black and white	spyan dkar nag 'byes
སྤྱན་དཀྱུས་མ	the lower two of a set of three eyes [deity etc]	spyan dkyus ma
སྤྱན་དཀྱུས་རིང	the eyes far apart	spyan dkyus ring
སྤྱན་བསྐྱངས་མཛད་པ	protect, preserve the eyes	spyan bskyangs mdzad pa
སྤྱན་ཁུག	eyebrow	spyan khug
སྤྱན་ཁྱུག	eyebrow	spyan khyug
སྤྱན་ཁྱེར	1) pechas's shog ldeb kyi zur mtha'i dpe ming dang aang grangs rgyag sa'i thig khang; 2) Gdong 'dzar	spyan khyer
སྤྱན་ཁྱེར་གྱི་རྒྱ	1 of the {rgya rim pa bdun} gdong 'dzar	spyan khyer gyi rgya
སྤྱན་གྱི་དཀར་ནག	the white and black of the eyes	spyan gyi dkar nag
སྤྱན་གྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་ལྔ	the five minor marks of the eyes	spyan gyi dpe byad lnga
བུའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark	bu'i mtshan bzang
ཐཏ་ཧིས་ཨེཡེ	lashes are like the eyelashes of a cow spyan gyi rdzi ma ba mchog gi rdzi ma lta	that his eye
སྤྱན་གྱིས་གཟིགས	see khros spyan gyis gzigs	spyan gyis gzigs
སྤྱན་ལྔ	Five eyes. The physical eye, the divine eye, eye of discriminating knowledge, the eye of Dharma, the eye of wisdom also called 'buddha eye.'	spyan lnga
སྤྱན་སྔ	before, in the presence of	spyan snga
སྤྱན་སྔ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	Chenngawa Chökyi Drakpa; Shamar IV: 1453-1524	spyan snga chos kyi grags pa
སྤྱན་སྔ་བ	1) {spyan snga ba 'tshul khrims 'bar}; 2) in the presence of	spyan snga ba
སྤྱན་སྔ་བ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	Shamar: IV Chökyi Drakpa; 1453-1524 spyan snga ba blo gros rgyal mtshan 1402-1472 - Chen-ngawa Lodrö Gyaltsen, 118, 153 n. 38, 471 spyan snga ba blo gros rgyal mtshan 1402-1472 - Lodrö Gyaltsen, Ch...	spyan snga ba chos kyi grags pa
སྤྱན་སྔ་བ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་འབར	{spyan snga ba tshul khrims 'bar}	spyan snga ba tshul khrims 'bar
སྤྱན་སྔ་ལྷ་གཟིགས་རས་པ	author of dpal ye shes kyi mgon po'i bskang bshags	spyan snga lha gzigs ras pa
སྤྱན་སྔར	before, in front of, near, in the presence of, before his eyes, in his presence, in the presence of, in person, an audience	spyan sngar
སྤྱན་སྔར་བླ་མའི་ཕྱིན་པ	he arrived in the presence of the guru	spyan sngar bla ma'i phyin pa
སྤྱན་གཅིག	one-eyed	spyan gcig
སྤྱན་གཅིག་མ	{spyan gcig ma	spyan gcig ma
སྤྱན་ལྕིབས	eyelid, that protect the eyes	spyan lcibs
སྤྱན་ཆབ	tears, tears	spyan chab
སྤྱན་ཆབ་གྱོ་བ	weep, cry, shed tears	spyan chab gyo ba
སྤྱན་ཆབ་ཆར་ལྟར་འགྲུབ	his tears gushed forth like rain	spyan chab char ltar 'grub
སྤྱན་ཆབ་གཏོང	cry	spyan chab gtong
སྤྱན་ཆབ་ཕྱུང་བ	wept spyan chab g.yo ba - to weep; to weep, cry, shed tears	spyan chab phyung ba
སྤྱན་ཆབ་ཤོར	burst into/ shed tears, cry	spyan chab shor
སྤྱན་ཆབ་བསིལ	shed tears	spyan chab bsil
སྤྱན་ཆབ་བསིལ་ནས	with tears streaming from his eyes	spyan chab bsil nas
སྤྱན་ཆབ་བསེལ་ནས	w tears streaming from his eyes	spyan chab bsel nas
སྤྱན་ཆེན་པོ	great eyed	spyan chen po
སྤྱན་འཆུས་པ	from sleepiness or tiredness eyelids la sul chags pa	spyan 'chus pa
སྤྱན་གཉིས་དག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of perfect eyes	spyan gnyis dag pa'i dpe byad
སྤྱན་ལྟོད	imitation	spyan ltod
སྤྱན་ལྟོས	imitation	spyan ltos
སྤྱན་སྟོན	feast at the time of opening the eyes ceremony for thangka, statue etc	spyan ston
སྤྱན་བལྟར་བ	offer for inspection or revision	spyan bltar ba
སྤྱན་བསྟར	look over [prepare the eyes and look at]	spyan bstar
སྤྱན་བསྟར་ཞུ	look over [prepare the eyes and look at] spyan mthon mthing 'dra ba'i mtshan	spyan bstar zhu
སྤྱན་དྲང	{spyan 'dren pa} to invite; invitation	spyan drang
སྤྱན་དྲངས	invited, took [p spyan 'dren], invitation	spyan drangs
སྤྱན་དྲངས་པ	1) p. of {spyan drang ba} to invite; 2) invitation. 3) revealed [a terma]	spyan drangs pa
སྤྱན་དྲུག	6 glances or vision in bon, bon gyi spyan, ye shes kyi spyan, rig pa'i spyan, thugs rje'i spyan, sprul pa'i spyan, shes rab kyi spyan	spyan drug
སྤྱན་དྲེན་པ	invite, go to meet	spyan dren pa
སྤྱན་དྲོངས	imp. of {spyan drang ba}	spyan drongs
སྤྱན་བདར	examine, look over	spyan bdar
སྤྱན་འདན	/(1 implement used in eye opening ceremony for a clay statue; 2) (CH kind of fine silk brocade	spyan 'dan
སྤྱན་འདྲེན	/ drangs - invite; invitation, to invite	spyan 'dren
སྤྱན་འདྲེན་བཏང་བ	perform the invitation to the Buddhas	spyan 'dren btang ba
སྤྱན་འདྲེན་པ	to invite; invitation	spyan 'dren pa
སྤྱན་འདྲེན་ཞུ	invite	spyan 'dren zhu
སྤྱན་འདྲེན་ཞུ་བ	to invite, invoke, send an invitation, call upon	spyan 'dren zhu ba
སྤྱན་འདྲོང	{rgyal pos de 'dra spyan 'drong ngam zhus pa} Will it not be impossible to invite someone like that?"asked the king	spyan 'drong
སྤྱན་ལྡན	1) kind of rum gdan gyi picture; 2) fine silk brocade	spyan ldan
སྤྱན་ལྡན་སྒམ་པོ	silk robe w spyan ldan ??? picture and, bat picture rum	spyan ldan sgam po
སྤྱན་ལྡན་འབྲུག་འགྲོས་མ	kind of silk brocade	spyan ldan 'brug 'gros ma
སྤྱན་བརྡར	offer for inspection or revision	spyan brdar
སྤྱན་རྣོན	sharp eyes [h]	spyan rnon
སྤྱན་པ	give heed, attention, take care, inspection, overseer, inspector, eyewitness	spyan pa
སྤྱན་ལྤགས	eye lid [h]	spyan lpags
སྤྱན་སྤུ	eye lash [h]	spyan spu
སྤྱན་ཕྱེ	eye opening [actually painting] ceremony for thangka etc]	spyan phye
སྤྱན་བར	the space between the eyes	spyan bar
སྤྱན་དབུས་མ	middle eye	spyan dbus ma
སྤྱན་དབྱེ	eye opening, the painting of the eyes of a deity	spyan dbye
སྤྱན་དབྱེ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	eye opening ceremony	spyan dbye ba'i cho ga
སྤྱན་འབེབས	inspection	spyan 'bebs
སྤྱན་འབྲུག་ལ	{spyan 'brug} pass	spyan 'brug la
སྤྱན་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	making invocation	spyan 'brel byed
སྤྱན་མ	Lochana; syn {sangs rgyas spyan ma} Buddha-Lochana, BuddhaEye	spyan ma
སྤྱན་མ་བརྟུལ	w undistracted eyes	spyan ma brtul
སྤྱན་མི་བཟང	Virupakasa	spyan mi bzang
སྤྱན་དམར	epithet of planet mars	spyan dmar
སྤྱན་དམར་འཁྲུག	bloodshot eyes	spyan dmar 'khrug
སྤྱན་དམིགས	apprehension, perception, conception, imagination	spyan dmigs
སྤྱན་སྨན	eye med. [h]	spyan sman
སྤྱན་རྩ་ཁྲག་གིས་གང་བ	bloodshot eyes	spyan rtsa khrag gis gang ba
སྤྱན་རྩ་དམར	bloodshot eyes	spyan rtsa dmar
སྤྱན་རྩེག	puckers about the eye,	spyan rtseg
སྤྱན་ཚབ	sight helper; in case of a	spyan tshab
སིགྷཏ	impaired Lama, during an empowerment, for instance, the {spyan tshab} will read a few lines and the Lama will then repeat them	sight
སྤྱན་འཛུགས་གནང	pick, select, nominate [h]	spyan 'dzugs gnang
སྤྱན་རྫི	eye-lash	spyan rdzi
སྤྱན་བཞིན་རང་བཞིན	natural intelligence	spyan bzhin rang bzhin
སྤྱན་ཟིམ་མེ	eyes half-closed	spyan zim me
སྤྱན་ཟེམ་མེ	slightly smiling	spyan zem me
སྤྱན་གཟིགས	presents, costly offerings to the gods, wild animals or food presented to a noble person, objects pleasing to sight, yaks & sheep which are dressed up & decorated and brought near the altar as symb...	spyan gzigs
སྤྱན་གཟིགས་རྟག་ངུ	saxifraga melanocentra franch.	spyan gzigs rtag ngu
སྤྱན་བཟོ་མགོ་སྐོན	= gseg spyan = mgo skon, copper implement	spyan bzo mgo skon
སྤྱན་ཡངས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of large eyes	spyan yangs pa'i dpe byad
སྤྱན་རལ་གཟིགས་བློ	Avalokiteshvara awareness	spyan ral gzigs blo
སྤྱན་རས	penetrating vision, observation	spyan ras
སྤྱན་རས་མཛེས་པ	graceful face 1649	spyan ras mdzes pa
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས	avalokiteshvara, yum is sgrol ma dkar po	spyan ras gzigs
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་ཀྱི་སྤྲུལ་པ	an emanation of Avalokiteshvara	spyan ras gzigs kyi sprul pa
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་གང་ཆེན་མཚོ	Avalokiteshvara-Gangchentso	spyan ras gzigs gang chen mtsho
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཞལ	Avalokiteshvara w 11 faces	spyan ras gzigs bcu gcig zhal
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	avalokitavrata	spyan ras gzigs brtul zhugs
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་ཕྱག་བཞི་པ	Avalokiteshvara w 1 head and four arms	spyan ras gzigs phyag bzhi pa
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་དབང	Lord Avalokiteshvara	spyan ras gzigs dbang
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་དབང་ཕྱུག	Avalokiteshvara	spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug
སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་སེང་གེ་གྲགས	a deity	spyan ras gzigs seng ge grags
སྤྱན་རས་འཟིགས	TSE	spyan ras 'zigs
སྤྱན་རིལ	eye ball [h]	spyan ril
སྤྱན་ལ་མཛེས་པ	1) beautiful appearance; 2) thugs la 'bab pa	spyan la mdzes pa
སྤྱན་ལ་གསལ་བ	come into the presence of	spyan la gsal ba
སྤྱན་ལམ	the eyes/presence of [h]	spyan lam
སྤྱན་ལམ་དུ	in the observation, near, in the presence of	spyan lam du
སྤྱན་ལམ་དུ་ཕབ་པ	in your presence	spyan lam du phab pa
སྤྱན་ལེགས	sunetra	spyan legs
སྤྱན་ལེགས་ཤེས	intelligent	spyan legs shes
སྤྱན་ལོག	{spyan log cig gzigs pa} to make him frown	spyan log
སྤྱན་ལོག་གནང	give a backwards glance, look backwards [h]	spyan log gnang
སྤྱན་ལོག་མཛད་པ	look backward, glance behind	spyan log mdzad pa
སྤྱན་ཤེལ	spectacles [h]	spyan shel
སྤྱན་གསལ	favorite	spyan gsal
སྤྱན་གསལ་རྒྱབ	laughing-eyed buddha	spyan gsal rgyab
སྤྱན་གསལ་རྒྱས	{spyan gsal rgyas buddha	spyan gsal rgyas
སྤྱན་གསུམ	three eyes	spyan gsum
སྤྱན་གསུམ་པ	epithet of maheshvara spyan gsum bla ma'i thugs kar rings pa'i	spyan gsum pa
ཚུལ་གྱིས་གཟིགས་པ	and three eyes gazes longingly at the heart of the teacher	tshul gyis gzigs pa
སྤྱན་གསུམ་མ	three-eyed	spyan gsum ma
སྤྱན་བསལ	formerly king's eyes la dmigs bsal 'jug pa'i zhabs 'bring nang ma	spyan bsal
སྤྱན་བསལ་ཕོ་བྲང	Chensel palace	spyan bsal pho brang
སྤྱན་ཧུར	keen sighted	spyan hur
སྤྱན་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག	with wide open eyes	spyan hrig hrig
སྤྱར	(not in Das)	spyar
སྤྱར་མ	1) immoral woman; 2) transgressor	spyar ma
སྤྱི	universal [thd]	spyi
སྤྱི་ཀློང	cosmic space	spyi klong
སྤྱི་དཀྱིལ	general mandala	spyi dkyil
སྤྱི་བཀུར	1) receive on the head; 2) great respect	spyi bkur
སྤྱི་སྐད	the common spoken chinese	spyi skad
སྤྱི་སྐད་དུ	in colloquial language	spyi skad du
སྤྱི་སྐར	centimeter	spyi skar
སྤྱི་སྐོར	revolution, turn	spyi skor
སྤྱི་ཁང	commonly owned/ used house/ building, commune	spyi khang
སྤྱི་ཁོག་ཁྱོན་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་གཞི	1st gzhung don gyi spyi khog phub &, then nang don gsal bar bshad pa, Las grva'i 'char gzhi'i spyi khog 'bubs pa'i ched du 'brel yod yig rigs khag dang zhib bsdur yang byas pa spyi khyad par dang l...	spyi khog khyon yongs kyi gzhi
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	1) all-pervasive; 2) top leader, viceroy, governor-general	spyi khyab
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཀན་ཧྲི	general secretary, executive chief spyi khyab kyi pu'u u yon lhan khang general branch committee	spyi khyab kan hri
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བཀོད་འདོམས་པོ	commander in chief	spyi khyab bkod 'doms po
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང	head office, general headquarters	spyi khyab khang
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ	official abbot, Tibetan govt from among the rtse drung dpon thob che ba, Dalai Lama's mdzod pa [treasurer?/ appointee]	spyi khyab mkhan po
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཅིང་ལི	general manager	spyi khyab cing li
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཆབ་སྲིད་ལུའུ	general political bureau [of the People's Liberation Army]	spyi khyab chab srid lu'u
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཏུ་གནས	abide in a pervasive way	spyi khyab tu gnas
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	to remain in a pervasive way	spyi khyab tu gnas pa
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་དྲུང་ཆེ	secretary-general, general secretary	spyi khyab drung che
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བློན་ཆེན	prime minister	spyi khyab blon chen
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་སྨན་ཁང	general hospital	spyi khyab sman khang
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་རྩོམ་སྒྲིག	chief editor, editor in chief	spyi khyab rtsom sgrig
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཚན་མོའུ་ཀྲང	chief of staff	spyi khyab tshan mo'u krang
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཟན་ཁྲ་ཀྲང	general chiefprocurator	spyi khyab zan khra krang
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བཟོ་ཚོགས	general labor union	spyi khyab bzo tshogs
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ལིང་ཧྲི	consul general	spyi khyab ling hri
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཤན་འབྱེད་པ	chief, umpire, referee	spyi khyab shan 'byed pa
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཧྲུའུ་ཅི	general secretary	spyi khyab hru'u ci
སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ལྷུན་ཚོགས	general office/ headquarters/ assembly	spyi khyab lhun tshogs
སྤྱི་ཁྲལ	general duty/ obligation, public service	spyi khral
སྤྱི་ཁྲི	meter [length] 1650	spyi khri
སྤྱི་ཁྲི་གྲུ་བཞི	cubic meter	spyi khri gru bzhi
སྤྱི་ཁྲིད	meter [length]	spyi khrid
སྤྱི་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་ཚུན	centimeter	spyi khrid kyi tshun
སྤྱི་ཁྲིད་གྲུ་བཞི	cubic meter	spyi khrid gru bzhi
སྤྱི་ཁྲིམས	ordinary/common law	spyi khrims
སྤྱི་ཁྲིའི་ཚུན	centimeter	spyi khri'i tshun
སྤྱི་ཁྲེ	meter [length]	spyi khre
སྤྱི་ཁྲེ་གྲུ་བཞི	cubic meter	spyi khre gru bzhi
སྤྱི་ཁྲེའི་ཚུན	centimeter	spyi khre'i tshun
སྤྱི་མཁན	abbr of spyi khyab mkhan po	spyi mkhan
སྤྱི་གན	contract agreement which parties must keep	spyi gan
སྤྱི་གུ	pen	spyi gu
སྤྱི་གོང	[public]	spyi gong
སྤྱི་གྲོས	public discussion	spyi gros
སྤྱི་གླིང	park	spyi gling
སྤྱི་དགོན	the Chiwong monastery in Solu	spyi dgon
སྤྱི་དགྲ	common/ public enemy	spyi dgra
སྤྱི་འགག	avenue	spyi 'gag
སྤྱི་འགྲེ	like all of them, general rules	spyi 'gre
སྤྱི་འགྲོ	ordinary	spyi 'gro
སྤྱི་འགྲོས	formula	spyi 'gros
སྤྱི་འགྲོས་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ཡིག	government red tape	spyi 'gros kyi gzhung yig
སྤྱི་འགྲོས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	formulate	spyi 'gros can du 'gyur
སྤྱི་རྒན	formerly in some monasteries administrator of the monks's common property	spyi rgan
སྤྱི་རྒྱ	kilogram	spyi rgya
སྤྱི་རྒྱུད་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བའི་སྐོར	Syn {sgyu 'phrul drwa ba'i skor}	spyi rgyud sgyu 'phrul drwa ba'i skor
སྤྱི་སྒེར	general and personal, public and private	spyi sger
སྤྱི་སྒེར་གཉིས་མཐོང	benefit both public and private sectors	spyi sger gnyis mthong
སྤྱི་སྒེར་གཉིས་ཕན	benefit both public and private sectors	spyi sger gnyis phan
སྤྱི་སྒོས	general and particular	spyi sgos
སྤྱི་སྒྲ	particle w only general meaning	spyi sgra
སྤྱི་སྒྲུབ	combined sadhana; general sadhana	spyi sgrub
སྤྱི་བརྒྱུད	general lineage [of transmission]	spyi brgyud
སྤྱི་བསྒྲགས	general/ public communique, official report/ bulletin/ notification	spyi bsgrags
སྤྱི་དངུལ	general/ public money/ funds [people, business government etc]	spyi dngul
སྤྱི་དངོས་པོ་བ	real universals [ggd]	spyi dngos po ba
སྤྱི་སྔགས	the general mantra [for all the deities]	spyi sngags
སྤྱི་ཅེར	bald	spyi cer
སྤྱི་གཅེར	bald, hairless	spyi gcer
སྤྱི་ཆིང	hectare	spyi ching
སྤྱི་ཆིངས	common context	spyi chings
སྤྱི་ཆེར	bald, hairless	spyi cher
སྤྱི་ཆོས	general teachings	spyi chos
སྤྱི་འཇོག་ཏུ་བཞག་པ	left as an offering of a permanent fund	spyi 'jog tu bzhag pa
སྤྱི་འཇོག་བྱས་པ	created a permanent fund for offerings	spyi 'jog byas pa
སྤྱི་འཇོག་བཞག་པ	made a general offering [to a community of monks]	spyi 'jog bzhag pa
སྤྱི་རྗེ	lord	spyi rje
སྤྱི་གཉེར	general affairs/ livelihood [caretaker]	spyi gnyer
སྤྱི་གཉེར་ཁང	general affairs office/ department	spyi gnyer khang
སྤྱི་གཉེར་ལས་ཁུངས	general affairs office/ department	spyi gnyer las khungs
སྤྱི་མཉམ	common, united, general	spyi mnyam
སྤྱི་མཉམ་ཆེན་པོ	universal harmony	spyi mnyam chen po
སྤྱི་མཉམ་དབང་སྲོལ	communism	spyi mnyam dbang srol
སྤྱི་མཉམ་རྩི་ཚིག	general program	spyi mnyam rtsi tshig
སྤྱི་མཉམ་སྲོལ་ཛིན	communist	spyi mnyam srol dzin
སྤྱི་སྙོམས	average	spyi snyoms
སྤྱི་སྙོམས་འཇིག་རྟེན	world of great harmony, utopia	spyi snyoms 'jig rten
སྤྱི་ཏི	a dzogchen yoga, essential dzogchen tantras	spyi ti
སྤྱི་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	Chiti Yoga	spyi ti yo ga
སྤྱི་ཏིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Chiti Yoga. One of the subdivisions of the Instruction Section of Dzogchen: Ati, Chiti and Yangti. Chiti is defined as covering the general points of Dzogchen	spyi ti'i rnal 'byor
སྤྱི་ཏོར	SA spyi gtor, spyi bo, common property	spyi tor
སྤྱི་གཏམ	public opinion	spyi gtam
སྤྱི་གཏོར	turban, pagri	spyi gtor
སྤྱི་གཏོལ	impudent, SA spyi brtol	spyi gtol
སྤྱི་བཏང	[in] general, common, usual	spyi btang
སྤྱི་རྟོལ་ཆེ་བ	transgression, impudent, impertinent	spyi rtol che ba
སྤྱི་ལྟར	as usual	spyi ltar
སྤྱི་བརྟེན་སྒེར་ཕན	promoting private interests in the guise of serving the public	spyi brten sger phan
སྤྱི་བརྟོལ	MG: shamelessness, impudence; va. - byed, to act impudent, to act shameless [mss]	spyi brtol
ཕོ༹ཨུལ	mouthed, SA spyi brtol	foul
སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་ཅན	shameless one	spyi brtol can
སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་གཏམ	shameless talk, impertinent language	spyi brtol gtam
སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་དུ	without hesitation	spyi brtol du
སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་བྱེད	act shameless/ hypocritical/ impudent	spyi brtol byed
སྤྱི་བསྟབས	torma offered by practitioners to mchod yul gyi guests in general in this case to the protectors	spyi bstabs
སྤྱི་ཐབ	mess	spyi thab
སྤྱི་ཐམ	public/ chief's seal	spyi tham
སྤྱི་ཐེར	bald, hairless	spyi ther
སྤྱི་ཐེར་བ	Chither	spyi ther ba
སྤྱི་ཐོག་ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྟེང་དང	in general	spyi thog thun mong gi steng dang
སྤྱི་ཐོག་ནས	concertedly	spyi thog nas
སྤྱི་མཐུན	to correspond in general	spyi mthun
སྤྱི་མཐུན་གྱི་དབྱིངས	universal space	spyi mthun gyi dbyings
སྤྱི་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས	shared work	spyi mthun gyi las
སྤྱི་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	republic	spyi mthun rgyal khab
སྤྱི་མཐུན་དུ	in common, shared	spyi mthun du
སྤྱི་མཐུན་ཚོགས་པ	union	spyi mthun tshogs pa
སྤྱི་མཐུན་ལས	shared work	spyi mthun las
སྤྱི་མཐོང་སྤྱི་རིལ	placard, poster, handbill	spyi mthong spyi ril
སྤྱི་འཐུས	general/ national representative	spyi 'thus
སྤྱི་དང་ཁྱད་པར	the general and the specific	spyi dang khyad par
སྤྱི་དང་མཐུན	follow the general	spyi dang mthun
སྤྱི་དང་མཐུན་པ	as usual	spyi dang mthun pa
སྤྱི་དང་བྱེ་བྲག	the general and specific	spyi dang bye brag
སྤྱི་དང་མཚུངས་པ	as usual	spyi dang mtshungs pa
སྤྱི་དམ	public/ chief's seal	spyi dam
སྤྱི་དོན	general meaning, survey [thd]	spyi don
སྤྱི་དོན་སྒེར་བརྗེད	selflessness	spyi don sger brjed
སྤྱི་དོན་མདོར་བསྟན	briefly stating the general meaning	spyi don mdor bstan
སྤྱི་དོན་བསྡོམས་ཚིག	summary of the general meaning; general summary	spyi don bsdoms tshig
སྤྱི་དོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	three kinds of general meaning	spyi don rnam gsum
སྤྱི་དོན་གཞན	separate universals [ggd]	spyi don gzhan
སྤྱི་དོན་འོད་གསལ་སྙིང་པོ	commentary on the Guhyagarbha Tantra by Mipham Rinpoche	spyi don 'od gsal snying po
སྤྱི་དོན་གསུམ	three kinds of general meaning [This is the 2nd of the four styles of the scriptures which ; 1) counters regret for entering into the sutras etc {mdo sogs la zhugs pa'i 'gyod pa zlog pa}; 2) counte...	spyi don gsum
སྤྱི་དྲིལ	general	spyi dril
སྤྱི་དྲོས་ན་སྒེར་འཁྱམས་པོ་མ་ལུས	if society as a whole improves the individual will also improve, if the public is warm private persons won't be cold	spyi dros na sger 'khyams po ma lus
སྤྱི་བདེ	public security	spyi bde
སྤྱི་བདེ་ཅུས	bureau of public security	spyi bde cus
སྤྱི་བདེ་ཆེན་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	head great bliss chakra	spyi bde chen gi 'khor lo
སྤྱི་བདེ་ལས་ཁུངས	public security office/ bureau, police station	spyi bde las khungs
སྤྱི་བདེ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	public security officer, policeman	spyi bde las byed pa
སྤྱི་བདེའི་དཔུང་ཁག	public security unit, home guard forces	spyi bde'i dpung khag
སྤྱི་བདེའི་དམག་དཔུང	public security unit, home guard forces	spyi bde'i dmag dpung
སྤྱི་མདའ	general	spyi mda'
སྤྱི་མདའ་ཆུང་བ	major general	spyi mda' chung ba
སྤྱི་མདོ	the main point	spyi mdo
སྤྱི་མདོ་དགོངས་འདུས	the fundamental anuyoga scripture in 75 chapters, The General Condensed Meaning	spyi mdo dgongs 'dus
སྤྱི་མདོ་དགོངས་པ་འདུས་པ	SA spyi mdo dgongs 'dus	spyi mdo dgongs pa 'dus pa
སྤྱི་མདོར་བཀོད་པ	make a general outline	spyi mdor bkod pa
སྤྱི་འདུས	union of	spyi 'dus
སྤྱི་འདེམ	general election	spyi 'dem
སྤྱི་འདོམས	foreman, head, chief, general	spyi 'doms
སྤྱི་འདོམས་བྱེད	lead, direct	spyi 'doms byed
སྤྱི་འདོམས་ཧྲུའུ་ཅི	general secretary	spyi 'doms hru'u ci
སྤྱི་ལྡོག	general-distinguisher [ggd]	spyi ldog
སྤྱི་སྡེ་བཞི	4 bon sects (bka' lung ldan bshad, brag dgon dka' thub, dur khrod nyan thos bog bu, shing drung ma rig pa)	spyi sde bzhi
སྤྱི་སྡོམ	general summary, contents	spyi sdom
སྤྱི་སྡོམས	general summary of contents of a tantra	spyi sdoms
སྤྱི་བརྡོལ	impudence, impertinence	spyi brdol
སྤྱི་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་སྐོ	general textual categories [as opposed to {so sor phye ba'i skor}	spyi bsdus kyi sko
སྤྱི་བསྡོམས	1) many combined together into 1; 2) final total [of subtotals]	spyi bsdoms
སྤྱི་བསྡོམས་སྙན་ཞུ	complete report	spyi bsdoms snyan zhu
སྤྱི་བསྡོམས་བྱེད	sum, total	spyi bsdoms byed
སྤྱི་ན	in general, generally speaking	spyi na
སྤྱི་ནོར	title used with Dalai Lama's name {spyi nor gong sa skyabs mgon chen po} h. h. the Dalai Lama	spyi nor
སྤྱི་ནོར་དུ་བྱེད་པ	make into common property	spyi nor du byed pa
སྤྱི་གནད	general/ universal key point	spyi gnad
སྤྱི་སྣང	external vision	spyi snang
སྤྱི་སྣོད	outer world	spyi snod
སྤྱི་པ	1) ordinary person; 2) keeper of the common wealth; 3) foreman, head of those in a certain trade, chief, head; 4) public	spyi pa
སྤྱི་པའི་ཁེ་ཕན	public benefit	spyi pa'i khe phan
སྤྱི་པའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	high seas, open sea	spyi pa'i rgya mtsho
སྤྱི་པའི་རྒྱུ་ནོར	public property	spyi pa'i rgyu nor
སྤྱི་པའི་སྒྲིགས་ལམ	public order	spyi pa'i sgrigs lam
སྤྱི་པའི་འདས་མཆོད	public sacrifice	spyi pa'i 'das mchod
སྤྱི་པའི་སྤྱོད་བཟང	public morality	spyi pa'i spyod bzang
སྤྱི་པའི་ཕན་བདེ	public benefit/ welfare	spyi pa'i phan bde
སྤྱི་པའི་འཕྲོད་བརྟེན	public health	spyi pa'i 'phrod brten
སྤྱི་པའི་ཟ་ཁང	public/ community dining hall/ canteen	spyi pa'i za khang
སྤྱི་པའི་གསོག་འཇོག	accumulated public funds	spyi pa'i gsog 'jog
སྤྱི་པོ	the crown of the head	spyi po
སྤྱི་དཔལ	universal/ general splendor	spyi dpal
སྤྱི་དཔལ་ཆེན་པོ	the great glorious chief	spyi dpal chen po
སྤྱི་དཔོན	general/ overall leader, chief, head	spyi dpon
སྤྱི་སྤམ	unclear talk 1652	spyi spam
སྤྱི་སྤམ་སྦག་སྦུག་བཤད་པ	explain unclearly	spyi spam sbag sbug bshad pa
སྤྱི་སྤུང	cycle of teachings	spyi spung
སྤྱི་སྤུངས	[various deities] in an assembled form	spyi spungs
སྤྱི་སྤུངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	sadhana style of the general assembly [of the Three Roots]	spyi spungs kyi sgrub lugs
སྤྱི་སྤུངས་བོན་མཛོད	{spyi spungs bon mdzod	spyi spungs bon mdzod
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད	ordinary conduct, public	spyi spyod
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	public utilities/ works	spyi spyod kyi bya ba
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་ཁ་པར	public telephone	spyi spyod kha par
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་ཆིའི་ཁྲེའེ	public bus	spyi spyod chi'i khre'e
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་རླངས་འཁོར	public bus	spyi spyod rlangs 'khor
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་ལས་དོན	public utilities/ works	spyi spyod las don
སྤྱི་སྤྱོད་གསང་སྤྱོད	public bathroom	spyi spyod gsang spyod
སྤྱི་ཕན	1) the general/ public benefit; 2) benefit of the common people; 3) public	spyi phan
སྤྱི་ཕན་གྱི་ལས་དོན	public works/ welfare	spyi phan gyi las don
སྤྱི་ཕན་གྲོན་དངུལ	public funds	spyi phan gron dngul
སྤྱི་ཕན་མ་དངུལ	public/ welfare fund	spyi phan ma dngul
སྤྱི་ཕིན	centimeter	spyi phin
སྤྱི་ཕུད	1) ushnisha; 2) highest; 3) 1st 1000 worlds = {stong dang po}	spyi phud
སྤྱི་ཕུད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the 1st thousand worlds * the worldly Bhrama	spyi phud kyi rgyal po
སྤྱི་ཕུད་རྒྱལ་པོ	universal king	spyi phud rgyal po
སྤྱི་ཕེབས	receiving orders, instructions from a superior	spyi phebs
སྤྱི་ཕེབས་བཞིན	according to orders/ instructions from a superior	spyi phebs bzhin
སྤྱི་ཕྱོགས	general line	spyi phyogs
སྤྱི་བབ	general/ usual way [of abiding on the path]	spyi bab
སྤྱི་བབས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	general view	spyi babs kyi lta ba
སྤྱི་བུངས	[arch] sangha's common property	spyi bungs
སྤྱི་བུན	public debt/ bonds	spyi bun
སྤྱི་བུན་གཏོང	issue public bonds	spyi bun gtong
སྤྱི་བོ	the top / crown of the head, apex	spyi bo
སྤྱི་བོ་སྐྱེས	Murdhaja, Born from the Head = {nga la nu}	spyi bo skyes
སྤྱི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན	1 of 'khor lo bzhi	spyi bo bde chen
སྤྱི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra of great bliss at the crown of the head	spyi bo bde chen 'khor lo
སྤྱི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	1) wheel of great bliss at the grown of the head. 2) forehead center	spyi bo bde chen gi 'khor lo
སྤྱི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	crown center of great bliss	spyi bo bde chen gyi 'khor lo
སྤྱི་བོ་ནས་དབང་སྐུར་བ	empower on the head	spyi bo nas dbang skur ba
སྤྱི་བོ་གནམ་བསྟན	showing the head to the sky	spyi bo gnam bstan
སྤྱི་བོ་ཚངས་པའི་བུ་ཁ་ནས	through the fontanel opening	spyi bo tshangs pa'i bu kha nas
སྤྱི་བོའི་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra in the crown of the head	spyi bo'i 'khor lo
སྤྱི་བོའི་རྒྱན	crown ornament	spyi bo'i rgyan
སྤྱི་བོའི་གནས་ལྔ	5 places in the head; 5 places on the head	spyi bo'i gnas lnga
སྤྱི་བོའི་གཙུག	above the crown of his head	spyi bo'i gtsug
སྤྱི་བོའི་རྩ་འཁོར	crown chakra of nadis	spyi bo'i rtsa 'khor
སྤྱི་བོར	above (her head	spyi bor
སྤྱི་བོར་བསྐུར་བ	x {rgyal phran kun gyis spyi bor bskur ba} was honored as the chief of many lesser kings	spyi bor bskur ba
སྤྱི་བོར་ཁུར	ex {rang gi spyi bor khur cig} place him on the crown of your head!	spyi bor khur
སྤྱི་བོར་འཁུར་བ	receive on the head/ showing great respect	spyi bor 'khur ba
སྤྱི་བོར་འཁྱོལ་འ	swirls around on the top of their head	spyi bor 'khyol 'a
སྤྱི་བོར་བརྟན་པ	placed on the top of one's head	spyi bor brtan pa
སྤྱི་བོར་བབས་པ	fell upon the heads	spyi bor babs pa
སྤྱི་བོར་དབང་བསྐུར	king, kshatriya class	spyi bor dbang bskur
སྤྱི་བོར་དབང་བསྐུར་བ	empower on the head	spyi bor dbang bskur ba
སྤྱི་བོར་གསལ་སྩོལ	by high officials, a command which they are worthy of issuing themselves? rang la bstsal 'os pa'i bka' rnams holding above their own heads gsal por stsol as a way of showing respect	spyi bor gsal stsol
སྤྱི་བོས་བཀུར་བ	to be honored on top of the head	spyi bos bkur ba
སྤྱི་བོས་རིར་བརྡུང	beating one's head against a mt, impossible, futile	spyi bos rir brdung
སྤྱི་བོས་ལེན་པ	receive in the head/ w great reverence	spyi bos len pa
སྤྱི་བྱིངས	overall, majority, all, whole, entire [of the people]	spyi byings
སྤྱི་བྱེ	the general and the particular specific	spyi bye
སྤྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	general and particular [common and personal]	spyi bye brag
སྤྱི་བྱེ་ཟིང་འབྲེལ	uniting general and particular	spyi bye zing 'brel
སྤྱི་བླུགས	(lit.) anointment; sanctity; "total/ deep immersion" (experience) [?]	spyi blugs
སྤྱི་བླུགས་རིག་པ	the immediacy of total awareness	spyi blugs rig pa
སྤྱི་བློན	chief officer	spyi blon
སྤྱི་དབང	civil rights, rights of citizenship	spyi dbang
སྤྱི་དབྱེ་བ་གསུམ	CHN	spyi dbye ba gsum
སྤྱི་འབངས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཆ	civil rights, rights of citizenship	spyi 'bangs kyi dbang cha
སྤྱི་འབངས་ཀྱི་རང་དབང	civil rights, rights of citizenship	spyi 'bangs kyi rang dbang
སྤྱི་འབོར	overall, grand, total, whole	spyi 'bor
སྤྱི་འབོར་གྱི་འཆར་གཞི	overall/ master plan	spyi 'bor gyi 'char gzhi
སྤྱི་འབྱམས	irregular habits	spyi 'byams
སྤྱི་འབྱམས་གོ་ཡུལ་ཙམ	mere generalized theory	spyi 'byams go yul tsam
སྤྱི་འབྱམས་གཤིས་ཤོར	falling away from one's innate disposition due to irregular habits	spyi 'byams gshis shor
སྤྱི་མ	1) foreman, head of workers in a trade; 2) held in common	spyi ma
སྤྱི་མ་སྤོམ	spyi spam ???	spyi ma spom
སྤྱི་མང	public, citizens	spyi mang
སྤྱི་མང་ཀློག་དེབ	popular literature, books for the public	spyi mang klog deb
སྤྱི་མང་རྒྱན་རྒྱ	collective agreement	spyi mang rgyan rgya
སྤྱི་མང་ཞིང་ར	collective farm	spyi mang zhing ra
སྤྱི་མང་རིང་ལུགས	collectivism	spyi mang ring lugs
སྤྱི་མི	ordinary person replacement/ administrator, delegate to Bhutan national Assembly, elected group leader	spyi mi
སྤྱི་མིང	general term/ name	spyi ming
སྤྱི་མེས	forefather, common ancestor	spyi mes
སྤྱི་མེས་ཆེན་པོ	universal ancestor, great universal ancestor 1653	spyi mes chen po
སྤྱི་མོས	what everyone wants from the bottom of their hearts	spyi mos
སྤྱི་དམངས	public, citizens	spyi dmangs
སྤྱི་ཙམ	general idea	spyi tsam
སྤྱི་ཙམ་དུ་སྨོས་པ	speaking only in general	spyi tsam du smos pa
སྤྱི་ཙུག	{spyi gtsug}	spyi tsug
སྤྱི་གཙུག	top of the head	spyi gtsug
སྤྱི་གཙུག་ཏུ	on the crown of my head	spyi gtsug tu
སྤྱི་གཙུག་བདེ་ཆེན	the chakra of great bliss on the crown of my head; ex {steng spyi gtsug bde chen rgyan du bzhugs} Remain upon the crown of my head, as the ornament of the chakra of great bliss	spyi gtsug bde chen
སྤྱི་གཙུག་བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱན	upon my head, as the ornament of the chakra of great bliss	spyi gtsug bde chen rgyan
སྤྱི་གཙུག་སྤུ་འཁྱིལ	center of the head where the hair curls secret prana	spyi gtsug spu 'khyil
སྤྱི་གཙོ་བོ	primordial nature [Hindu phil] [ggd]	spyi gtso bo
སྤྱི་བཙུག	the top of the head	spyi btsug
སྤྱི་ཚབ	counsel general	spyi tshab
སྤྱི་ཚིས	general meaning	spyi tshis
སྤྱི་ཚུགས	placing head on the ground stay or go	spyi tshugs
སྤྱི་ཚུགས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	1) go placing head on the ground; 2) hell being	spyi tshugs su 'gro ba
སྤྱི་ཚེས	W calendar date	spyi tshes
སྤྱི་ཚོགས	society	spyi tshogs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི	social	spyi tshogs kyi
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་ཕན	social welfare	spyi tshogs kyi khe phan
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གྲལ་རིམ	social classes/ strata	spyi tshogs kyi gral rim
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གླེང་ཕྱོགས	public opinion	spyi tshogs kyi gleng phyogs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བསྒྱུར་བཀོད	social reforms	spyi tshogs kyi bsgyur bkod
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ངལ་རྩོལ	social labor	spyi tshogs kyi ngal rtsol
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	nature/ character of society	spyi tshogs kyi ngo bo
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	social existence/ condition	spyi tshogs kyi cha rkyen
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	social forces	spyi tshogs kyi stobs shugs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཐོན་རྫས	social products spyi tshogs kyi thon rdzas bsdoms 'bor total products of the society	spyi tshogs kyi thon rdzas
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	social consciousness	spyi tshogs kyi 'du shes
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གནད་དོན	social problem/ ?	spyi tshogs kyi gnad don
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ	social type/ form	spyi tshogs kyi rnam pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་སྒོ	social activity	spyi tshogs kyi byed sgo
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	social origins	spyi tshogs kyi 'byung khungs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་འདྲིས	social intercourse	spyi tshogs kyi 'brel 'dris
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	social relations spyi tshogs kyi dmangs gtso'i ring lugs social democratism	spyi tshogs kyi 'brel ba
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཚན་རིག	social sciences	spyi tshogs kyi tshan rig
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་ཁག	social groups	spyi tshogs kyi tshogs khag
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	socialness, social nature/ character	spyi tshogs kyi rang bzhin
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	sociology	spyi tshogs kyi rig pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས	social system	spyi tshogs kyi lam lugs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལས་བགོས	social division of labor	spyi tshogs kyi las bgos
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གསར་རྗེ	social revolution	spyi tshogs kyi gsar rje
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཁེ་ཕན	social welfare	spyi tshogs khe phan
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་གང་ལས་བྱུང་བ	social origins	spyi tshogs gang las byung ba
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཅན་དུ་སྒྱུར	become socialized/ a socialist society	spyi tshogs can du sgyur
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་བཅོས་སྒྱུར	social transformation/ change/ reform	spyi tshogs bcos sgyur
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཉེན་སྲུང	social insurance	spyi tshogs nyen srung
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རྙིང་པ	old social system/ society	spyi tshogs rnying pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཏང	socialist party	spyi tshogs tang
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་བདེ་དོན	social welfare	spyi tshogs bde don
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་གནས་སྟངས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	sociology	spyi tshogs gnas stangs kyi rig pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་འཕེལ་རྒྱས	social[ist] development	spyi tshogs 'phel rgyas
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཚན་རིག	social sciences	spyi tshogs tshan rig
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཞབས་འདེགས	social service	spyi tshogs zhabs 'degs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཞིབ་འཇུག	social investigation	spyi tshogs zhib 'jug
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས	socialism, socialism	spyi tshogs ring lugs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་འགྲན་བསྡུར	socialist emulation campaign/ movement	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi 'gran bsdur
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བསྒྱུར་བཀོད	socialist transformation spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi dngos yod ring	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi bsgyur bkod
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དཔུང་ཁག	socialist camp	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi dpung khag
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	socialist society	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi spyi tshogs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	socialist camp	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi phyogs khag
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་མི་རིགས	socialist, socialist nation[ality] spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi bzo las can du 'gyur ba - socialist industrialization	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi mi rigs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གསར་བརྗེ	socialist revolution	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi gsar brje
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གསོག་འཇོག	socialist accumulation	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi gsog 'jog
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	socialist thought	spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi bsam pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	socialist country	spyi tshogs ring lugs rgyal khab
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་པ	socialist	spyi tshogs ring lugs pa
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	socialist construction spyi tshogs ring lugs bzo las can du 'gyur	spyi tshogs ring lugs 'dzugs skrun
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ལམ་སྲོལ	socialism	spyi tshogs lam srol
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ལེགས་བཅོས་རིང་ལུགས	social reformism	spyi tshogs legs bcos ring lugs
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སུ་སྒྱུར	become socialized/ a socialist society	spyi tshogs su sgyur
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སྲུང་སྐྱོབས་ཚོགས་འདུ	UN Security Council	spyi tshogs srung skyobs tshogs 'du
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སྲོལ་འཛིན	socialist	spyi tshogs srol 'dzin
སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཨར་ཐོན	social progress	spyi tshogs ar thon
སྤྱི་མཚན	generalized characteristics, abstract[ions]	spyi mtshan
སྤྱི་མཚན་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	abstract thought	spyi mtshan gyi rtog pa
སྤྱི་མཚན་གྱི་མིང་ཚིག	abstract nouns	spyi mtshan gyi ming tshig
སྤྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	general characteristic	spyi mtshan nyid
སྤྱི་མཚན་བསྡུས་ཏེ་བསྟན་པ	teach an abbreviated/ generalized version	spyi mtshan bsdus te bstan pa
སྤྱི་མཚན་པ	vs {rang mtshan pa}, way of grasping in terms of the nature of many particular actual actions and khyad chos rigs mthun pa 1654	spyi mtshan pa
སྤྱི་མཚུངས	as commonly done, as is common conventional	spyi mtshungs
སྤྱི་འཛར	crown ornament	spyi 'dzar
སྤྱི་རྫས	wealth held in common, public property	spyi rdzas
སྤྱི་ཞག་མཚན་ཅན	spyi zhag gi chu ro'i lhag mar fewer than 15 days''x''mtshan mas phye ba de la mtshan can zer	spyi zhag mtshan can
སྤྱི་ཞབས་འབོར་ལེན་པ	touch the guru's feet w your head	spyi zhabs 'bor len pa
སྤྱི་ཞུར་གྱི་ཤིང	tree terminalia tomentosa or marsileaquadrifolia a medicinal plant	spyi zhur gyi shing
སྤྱི་གཞི	universal ground; common ground {'khor 'das kyi spyi bzhi} general basis	spyi gzhi
སྤྱི་བཞི	TSE	spyi bzhi
སྤྱི་བཞུར	kind of med tree	spyi bzhur
སྤྱི་ཟུམ	combined	spyi zum
སྤྱི་ཟླ	Western month	spyi zla
སྤྱི་ཟླུམ་ཅན	shaven-headed	spyi zlum can
སྤྱི་གཟུགས	embodiment, form gathered into 1	spyi gzugs
སྤྱི་འུར	[arch] man immorally consorting w a woman w whom he is not married	spyi 'ur
སྤྱི་ཡུལ་དུ་མ་གྲུབ	nothing concrete exists outside	spyi yul du ma grub
སྤྱི་ཡོངས	totality, complete humility, whole, general, common	spyi yongs
སྤྱི་ཡོངས་འདེམས་སྐོ	general election	spyi yongs 'dems sko
སྤྱི་ཡོངས་འདེམས་བསྐོ	general election	spyi yongs 'dems bsko
སྤྱི་ཡོད་ལམ་ལུགས	communal system	spyi yod lam lugs
སྤྱི་ར	generally	spyi ra
སྤྱི་ལ	in general; in general, in common, on the whole	spyi la
སྤྱི་ལ་དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	public ownership	spyi la dbang ba'i lam lugs
སྤྱི་ལམ	general line	spyi lam
སྤྱི་ལེ	kilometer, kilometer	spyi le
སྤྱི་ལེ་གྲུ་བཞི	(CH square kilometer	spyi le gru bzhi
སྤྱི་ལེབ	flat head	spyi leb
སྤྱི་ལེབ་འདུས་མགོ	head that is flat on top	spyi leb 'dus mgo
སྤྱི་ལོ	Western year	spyi lo
སྤྱི་ལོ་གོང	year BC	spyi lo gong
སྤྱི་ལོ་གོང་གྱི་དུས་རབས	century BC	spyi lo gong gyi dus rabs
སྤྱི་ལོ་གོང་གྱི་དུས་རབས་གཉིས་པ	2nd century BC	spyi lo gong gyi dus rabs gnyis pa
སྤྱི་ལོ་དང་པོ	beginning of a reign/ era	spyi lo dang po
སྤྱི་ལོའི་སྔོན་ཚད	year BC	spyi lo'i sngon tshad
སྤྱི་ལོའི་སྔོན་ཚད་དུས་རབས	century BC	spyi lo'i sngon tshad dus rabs
སྤྱི་ཤུར	plant whose flowers give blue tint to water	spyi shur
སྤྱི་གཤུང་ལྷན་རྒྱས	parliament	spyi gshung lhan rgyas
སྤྱི་བཤད	detailed commentary	spyi bshad
ཨེ྾པླནཏིཨོན	the 5th of the 5 stages KPS uses in giving oral teachings (on mchan 'grel texts). The others are: (1) sa bcad; (2) mtshams sbyor; (3) rtsa ba; (4) mchan 'grel. [mss]	explanation
སྤྱི་བཤལ	hot cold and don snod sogs kyi nad la bltos mi dgos par nad rigs spyi la 'phrod pa'i bshal te, phyi rgyud ded dpon bzhi sbyor dang, ded dpon bcu sbyor gnyis so	spyi bshal
སྤྱི་ས	place of common ownership/ work	spyi sa
སྤྱི་སར་སྤུངས	turn over to the community/ government	spyi sar spungs
སྤྱི་སེམས	wanting to benefit the common people	spyi sems
སྤྱི་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	just and selfless, fair	spyi sems chen po
སྤྱི་སོ	office of those who take care of ordinary tasks in monasteries	spyi so
སྤྱི་སོན	receive orders/ instruction from higher authorities [h]	spyi son
སྤྱི་སྲོལ	general/ common practice/ custom	spyi srol
སྤྱི་གསལ	1) general and particular; 2) allperceiving	spyi gsal
སྤྱི་གསོག	public accumulation/ reserves	spyi gsog
སྤྱི་བསགས་མ་དངུལ	common principal/ capital collected and invested	spyi bsags ma dngul
སྤྱིང	to sink immerse, submerge	spying
སྤྱིང་སྐོར་གསུམ	3 original bon scriptures (steng lha, 'og klu, bar mi)	spying skor gsum
སྤྱིང་བ	(tha dad pa spyings pa, spying ba, spyings,, sink, lower, let down, dip under, immerse, submerge	spying ba
སྤྱིངས	imp. of {spying ba}; p. of {spying}	spyings
སྤྱིངས་པ	pf. of {spying ba}	spyings pa
སྤྱིད	(not in Das)	spyid
སྤྱིན	gum, glue, paste	spyin
སྤྱིན་ཀོང	glue pot	spyin kong
སྤྱིན་སྐུད་པ	spread glue on	spyin skud pa
སྤྱིན་སྐོལ་བ	manufacture glue	spyin skol ba
སྤྱིན་ཆུ	chu la sbangs pa'i spyin, dilute sizing solution	spyin chu
སྤྱིན་གནས	donors	spyin gnas
སྤྱིན་པ	alms	spyin pa
སྤྱིན་པ་གཏོང	give alms	spyin pa gtong
སྤྱིན་པར་འོས	it is becoming, it is meet to give	spyin par 'os
སྤྱིན་ཕོར	glue pot	spyin phor
སྤྱིན་བག	glue, paste	spyin bag
སྤྱིན་སྦྱར་སྤང་ལེབ	plywood	spyin sbyar spang leb
སྤྱིན་ཚི	spyin gyi tshi sna	spyin tshi
སྤྱིན་རས	glue byugs pa'i cloth	spyin ras
སྤྱིན་ཤོག	spyin gyis bzos pa'i paper, film [negative]	spyin shog
སྤྱིན་ཤོག་དཀར་ནག	spyin gyis bzos pa'i paper, black and white film [negative]	spyin shog dkar nag
སྤྱིན་ཤོག་པར་འཁྲུ	develop film	spyin shog par 'khru
སྤྱིན་ཤོག་ཚོན་ལྡན	spyin gyis bzos pa'i paper, color film [negative]	spyin shog tshon ldan
སྤྱིན་སྲེག	fire puja	spyin sreg
སྤྱིན་སྲེག་ཆོ་ག	fire puja ritual	spyin sreg cho ga
སྤྱིའི་སྐད	colloquial language	spyi'i skad
སྤྱིའི་སྐད་དུ	generally phrased	spyi'i skad du
སྤྱིའི་ཁྱད་པར	general key points	spyi'i khyad par
སྤྱིའི་གྲུ་བཞི	centimeter	spyi'i gru bzhi
སྤྱིའི་དགོངས་འགྲེལ	a general commentary	spyi'i dgongs 'grel
སྤྱིའི་བགོ་གྲངས	common factor	spyi'i bgo grangs
སྤྱིའི་རྒྱ་མ	kilogram	spyi'i rgya ma
སྤྱིའི་སྒྲ་དོན	general literal meaning	spyi'i sgra don
སྤྱིའི་ངལ་རྩོལ	common/ public labor	spyi'i ngal rtsol
སྤྱིའི་ཆ	[its] identity as a universal [ggd]	spyi'i cha
སྤྱིའི་ཆོས་སྤྱོད	general Dharma practices	spyi'i chos spyod
སྤྱིའི་མཆོད་རྟེན་གསུམ	CHN	spyi'i mchod rten gsum
སྤྱིའི་ཐོན་རྫས་རིན་གོང	gross output	spyi'i thon rdzas rin gong
སྤྱིའི་དམ་ཚིག	General samayas. The general precepts for Hinayana, Mahayana and the three outer tantras	spyi'i dam tshig
སྤྱིའི་དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ	three general commitments, according to Kriya tantra. According to the Secret Tantra of General Rites, there are the commit- 1655 ments of taking refuge {skyabs su 'gro ba} generating the enlighten...	spyi'i dam tshig gsum
སྤྱིའི་དུར་ས	ordinary/public crematorium and charnel ground	spyi'i dur sa
སྤྱིའི་དོན	general points	spyi'i don
སྤྱིའི་ལྡབ་གྲངས	common multiple	spyi'i ldab grangs
སྤྱིའི་ལྡེ་མིག	master key	spyi'i lde mig
སྤྱིའི་བསྡུས་བརྗོད	bsdu bya don gyi having contemplated the general nature of things, de dang chos mtshungs pa'i dpe'i dngos po gzhan zhig sdud byed du bkod pa'i rgyan, bsdus brjod kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	spyi'i bsdus brjod
སྤྱིའི་བསྡོམས་འབོར	grand total	spyi'i bsdoms 'bor
སྤྱིའི་རྣམ་བཞག	general presentation	spyi'i rnam bzhag
སྤྱིའི་འཕྲུལ་ཆས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	general machine shop	spyi'i 'phrul chas bzo grwa
སྤྱིའི་རྩ་འཛིན	chief/ fundamental point/ principle	spyi'i rtsa 'dzin
སྤྱིའི་ཚུགས	headfirst	spyi'i tshugs
སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད	see {spyi mtshan} [ggd]	spyi'i mtshan nyid
སྤྱིའི་མཚན་གཞི	the basis for the general defining characteristic	spyi'i mtshan gzhi
སྤྱིའི་གཞུང	central/ overall government	spyi'i gzhung
སྤྱིའི་གཞུང་ལམ	general line/ course/ policy	spyi'i gzhung lam
སྤྱིའི་བཟའ་ཁང	public canteen/ dining hall/ mess hall	spyi'i bza' khang
སྤྱིའི་བཟོ་ཚོགས	labor federation	spyi'i bzo tshogs
སྤྱིའི་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	general line/ policy	spyi'i lam phyogs
སྤྱིའི་ལམ་ཚིག	general line	spyi'i lam tshig
སྤྱིའི་ལས་འགན	general duty	spyi'i las 'gan
སྤྱིའི་ལི་ཐོ	W calendar	spyi'i li tho
སྤྱིའི་ལེ	kilometer	spyi'i le
སྤྱིའི་ལེ་དབར	kilometer	spyi'i le dbar
སྤྱིའི་ལོ་བརྩི་ཚུལ	W calendar system	spyi'i lo brtsi tshul
སྤྱིའི་གསོག་དངུལ	public/ common reserve fund	spyi'i gsog dngul
སྤྱིའི་ལྷན་ཁང	general/ main meeting place	spyi'i lhan khang
སྤྱིའུ་བླུགས	spyi blugs	spyi'u blugs
སྤྱིའུ་ཚུགས	spyi tshugs	spyi'u tshugs
སྤྱིར	usually	spyir
སྤྱིར་གྱིས	in general	spyir gyis
སྤྱིར་གྲགས	generally widely known, widespread	spyir grags
སྤྱིར་གཅེས་པ	general importance	spyir gces pa
སྤྱིར་བཅིངས	to demonstrate & epitomize	spyir bcings
སྤྱིར་བཏང	common, ordinary, general, universal	spyir btang
སྤྱིར་བཏང་གི	usual	spyir btang gi
སྤྱིར་བཏང་གི་རང་བཞིན	generalization, in general	spyir btang gi rang bzhin
སྤྱིར་བཏང་ཅན	general, common, usual, ordinary	spyir btang can
སྤྱིར་བཏང་དུ	generally	spyir btang du
སྤྱིར་བཏང་པ	general, common, usual, ordinary	spyir btang pa
སྤྱིར་བཏང་བྱས་ན	as is usual[ly done]	spyir btang byas na
སྤྱིར་བཏང་བྱས་ནས་བཤད་ན	generally speaking	spyir btang byas nas bshad na
སྤྱིར་བསྟན	general statement / explanation	spyir bstan
སྤྱིར་བསྟན་པ	general presentation	spyir bstan pa
སྤྱིར་དུ	generally	spyir du
སྤྱིར་ན	in general	spyir na
སྤྱིར་སྤྱིར	adv. generally	spyir spyir
སྤྱིར་ཕྱིན་སློབ་གྲྭ་པ	students studying abroad	spyir phyin slob grwa pa
སྤྱིར་བཤད་པ	briefly explain	spyir bshad pa
སྤྱིར་སུ་གཏོང་བ	generalize	spyir su gtong ba
སྤྱིལ་དཀར་བ	{chos rje} 1228-1300	spyil dkar ba
སྤྱིལ་ཆུང	small huts	spyil chung
སྤྱིལ་རྟའི་པོ	woven grass dome	spyil rta'i po
སྤྱིལ་དྲིལ་སྙིང་པོ	1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad	spyil dril snying po
སྤྱིལ་པ	hut dweller	spyil pa
སྤྱིལ་པོ	cabin, hut of grass or straw	spyil po
སྤྱིལ་བ	grass hut, cell, room	spyil ba
སྤྱིལ་བུ	hut of grass/ wood etc. * cell, room	spyil bu
སྤྱིལ་མ	female hut dweller	spyil ma
སྤྱིས	(not in Das)	spyis
སྤྱིས་བཙན་པ	[arch] dpral ko mthug po [earnest/ courageous] shameless, not decent	spyis btsan pa
སྤྱུག	to expel, drive out, banish	spyug
སྤྱུག་པ	(tha dad pa spyugs pa, spyug pa, spyugs,, * expel, dispel, turn/drive out, banish	spyug pa
སྤྱུགས	expel, SA spyug pa	spyugs
སྤྱུགས་བཏང་བ	sent away, banished	spyugs btang ba
སྤྱུགས་བཏང་བ་གྲགས་ཟེར	declared that he should be banished	spyugs btang ba grags zer
སྤྱུགས་པ	pf. of {spyug pa}	spyugs pa
སྤྱུགས་ཤིག	turn him out!	spyugs shig
སྤྱོ	(tha dad pa spyos pa, spyo ba, spyos,, deprecate, insult, threaten, scold, rebuke, blame, mock, ridicule, criticize, abuse	spyo
སྤྱོ་བ	(tha dad pa spyos pa, spyo ba, spyos,, deprecate, insult, threaten, rebuke, blame, mock, ridicule, criticize, scold, abuse	spyo ba
སྤྱོ་བ་མཛད	cursing, blaming	spyo ba mdzad
སྤྱོ་ཚིག	censure, words of blame	spyo tshig
སྤྱོང་བ	[arch] grasp and hold	spyong ba
སྤྱོང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	{spyong ba}	spyong ba chen po
སྤྱོད་མཁས	competent way of doing what needs doing * economical, efficient, thrifty	spyod mkhas
སྤྱོད་མཁས་བྱེད	competently do what needs doing * be [economical, efficient, thrifty]	spyod mkhas byed
སྤྱོད་མཁོ	use, usage, application, appropriation	spyod mkho
སྤྱོད་འགྲོས	way of doing acting	spyod 'gros
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུ	a thing to act out, enact, behavior, activity, way, act, conduct, action	spyod rgyu
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད	charyatantra/ tantra of conduct	spyod rgyud
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	upa tantra yana	spyod rgyud kyi theg pa
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་བཞི	14 samayas of upa tantra [mi dge ba bcu spong ba, de'i thog dam pa'i chos mi gtong ba, byang chub kyi sems mi gtong ba, ser snas nor mi sbyin pa, sems can la gnod mi byed pa bzhi bsnan pas bcu bzhi'o]	spyod rgyud kyi dam tshig bcu bzhi
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད	Amitayus according to Charya Tantra	spyod rgyud tshe dpag med
སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད་རིགས་གསུམ	the three families of upa tantra	spyod rgyud rigs gsum
སྤྱོད་སྒོ	use	spyod sgo
སྤྱོད་སྒོ་ཡོད་པ	useful	spyod sgo yod pa
སྤྱོད་ངན	bad behavior	spyod ngan
སྤྱོད་ངན་པ	wicked	spyod ngan pa
སྤྱོད་ངན་བྱེད	misbehave	spyod ngan byed
སྤྱོད་ངན་བྱེད་པ	misbehave	spyod ngan byed pa
སྤྱོད་ཆ	utensils, materials	spyod cha
སྤྱོད་ཆས	utensils, materials	spyod chas
སྤྱོད་འཇུག	bodhisattva carya vatara, fundamental mahayana work by 7th century Santideva	spyod 'jug
སྤྱོད་འཇུག་གི་ལེའུ་བཅུ	Ten Chapters of the Introduction to the Conduct of a Bodhisattva. The beneficial attributes of enlightened mind {byang sems kyi phan yon bzhad pa} or bodhichittanushamsa, repentance for sins {sdig ...	spyod 'jug gi le'u bcu
སྤྱོད་འཇུག་འགྲེལ་ཆེན	"Great commentary on Bodhicharyavatara"	spyod 'jug 'grel chen
སྤྱོད་འཇུག་མཆན་འགྲེལ	a filling-in commentary to Bodhicharyavatara	spyod 'jug mchan 'grel
སྤྱོད་འཇུག་ཤེར་ལེ	the 9th chapter of Shantideva's Bodhic'ary'avat'ara	spyod 'jug sher le
སྤྱོད་ཉེས	bad/ erroneous action	spyod nyes
སྤྱོད་མཉམ	to practice	spyod mnyam
སྤྱོད་ཐོག	at the level of behavior	spyod thog
སྤྱོད་བདེ	easy to use, convenient, applicable	spyod bde
སྤྱོད་ལྡན	wall-behaved	spyod ldan
སྤྱོད་བསྡུས	Summary of Conduct; text name	spyod bsdus
སྤྱོད་བསྡུས་སྒྲོན་མ	name of text	spyod bsdus sgron ma
སྤྱོད་གནས	abbr. of {spyod pa la gnas pa}; adhering to the conduct [of a bodhisattva]	spyod gnas
སྤྱོད་རྣམ་དག	pure conduct	spyod rnam dag
སྤྱོད་པ་སྐྱོང་བ	to continue a practice, adhere to a conduct	spyod pa skyong ba
སྤྱོད་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེ	magnanimity, noble behavior	spyod pa rgya che
སྤྱོད་པ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	[TRS 120-4]	spyod pa rgyun gyi dam tshig bzhi
སྤྱོད་པ་འཆལ་བ	wanton / careless conduct	spyod pa 'chal ba
སྤྱོད་པ་ཉམས་པ	1 of 6 nyams pa	spyod pa nyams pa
སྤྱོད་པ་དང་བོགས་འདོན	makes it a living experience and deepens one's practice	spyod pa dang bogs 'don
སྤྱོད་པ་དྲག་པོ	1) rtsub po actions/ behavior; 2) practice hardship/ asceticism ?	spyod pa drag po
སྤྱོད་པ་སྡོམ་པ	make firm one's moral conduct	spyod pa sdom pa
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམ་དག	pure conduct	spyod pa rnam dag
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	[Tse]	spyod pa rnam pa bzhi
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམ་སྦྱོང་གི་དམིགས་པ	the objects for purifying deeds	spyod pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of authentic conduct; four daily activities	spyod pa rnam bzhi
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམས	those who enjoy, those who experience	spyod pa rnams
སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམས་སྦྱོང་བའི་ཆོས	spiritual teachings for refining behavior patterns	spyod pa rnams sbyong ba'i chos
སྤྱོད་པ་པ	practitioner, yogi	spyod pa pa
སྤྱོད་པ་བ	Mimamsa [ggd]	spyod pa ba
སྤྱོད་པ་བྱར་མེད	the conduct of nondoing	spyod pa byar med
སྤྱོད་པ་བྱས་པ	to have sex with, indulge with	spyod pa byas pa
སྤྱོད་པ་མ་སྒྲུངས་མ་རྩིགས	actions that are vicious/ unsuitable/ not straightforward	spyod pa ma sgrungs ma rtsigs
སྤྱོད་པ་མ་འདྲེས་པ་དྲུག	six unassociated activities	spyod pa ma 'dres pa drug
སྤྱོད་པ་མི་གསལ་བ	awkward practice	spyod pa mi gsal ba
སྤྱོད་པ་རྩིང་པ	rude manners	spyod pa rtsing pa
སྤྱོད་པ་རྩིང་པོ	rude, bad mannered	spyod pa rtsing po
སྤྱོད་པ་རྩིང་བ	rude, rough manners	spyod pa rtsing ba
སྤྱོད་པ་རྩུབ་པ	rude behavior, bad conduct	spyod pa rtsub pa
སྤྱོད་པ་རྩུབ་པོ	abrasive personality	spyod pa rtsub po
སྤྱོད་པ་ཞིབ་པ	strict monastic walk	spyod pa zhib pa
སྤྱོད་པ་གཞན་ན་གནས་པའི་གཞི	lhag ltung dngos gzhi dang 'chab nyes 'dag byed spo mgu spyod pa nod dgos pas spo mgu spyod pa sa gzhan na gnas pa'i gzhi zhes grags la, de la'ang nang gses su smad pa sa gzhan na gnas pa dang, spa...	spyod pa gzhan na gnas pa'i gzhi
སྤྱོད་པ་བཞི་པོ	the four daily activities	spyod pa bzhi po
སྤྱོད་པ་ཡག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	behave	spyod pa yag po byed pa
སྤྱོད་པ་ཡག་པོར	decently	spyod pa yag por
སྤྱོད་པ་ཡང་ངམ	have you accomplished all that you had to do? spyod pa yan lag tu 'gro ba' rgyud sde	spyod pa yang ngam
སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་སྤྱད་པར་འདོད་པ	who wishes to practice	spyod pa la spyad par 'dod pa
སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་དབང་འབྱོར་བ	mastery of conduct	spyod pa la dbang 'byor ba
སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་གཤེགས	enter into the action	spyod pa la gshegs
སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་གཤེགས་པ	to enter the action, enter into the action, engage in tantric conduct; [become a crazy yogi]	spyod pa la gshegs pa
སྤྱོད་པ་ལམ་ཁྱེར	utilize the conduct	spyod pa lam khyer
སྤྱོད་པ་གསུམ	Three Kinds of Conduct, According to Anu Yoga. Consecration. or blessing {bying gyis rlob} overpowering {dbang bsgyur} and the conduct of skillful means {thabs kyi spyod pa}	spyod pa gsum
སྤྱོད་པ་ཧྲལ་ལེ་ཕགས	[arch] indiscriminate, disorderly, impulsive action	spyod pa hral le phags
སྤྱོད་པད	lemon, citron	spyod pad
སྤྱོད་པའི་རྒྱུད	charya tantra	spyod pa'i rgyud
སྤྱོད་པའི་རྒྱུད་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	Charya tantra yana, [caryatantrayana] spyod pa'i rgyud spyir dam tshig khyad	spyod pa'i rgyud gyi theg pa
པར་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	CHN	par ba bcu bzhi
སྤྱོད་པའི་སྒོ་བཞི	the four gates of realization	spyod pa'i sgo bzhi
སྤྱོད་པའི་ཆས	adorned	spyod pa'i chas
སྤྱོད་པའི་སྟོབས	[Tse]	spyod pa'i stobs
སྤྱོད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	false notions about the practice	spyod pa'i 'du shes
སྤྱོད་པའི་གནད	key point of behavior	spyod pa'i gnad
སྤྱོད་པའི་ཕུན་བུ	fortified town, city	spyod pa'i phun bu
སྤྱོད་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	Charyamati	spyod pa'i blo gros
སྤྱོད་པའི་མཛོད	treasury of activity spyod pa'i yan lag tu 'gro ba'i rgyud sde	spyod pa'i mdzod
སྤྱོད་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་ལྔ	CHN	spyod pa'i rab tu dbye ba lnga
སྤྱོད་པའི་སྲོག	life-force of the action	spyod pa'i srog
སྤྱོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	to utilize, use; enjoy	spyod par byed pa
སྤྱོད་པས་སྐད་ཅིག་ཀྱང་མི་ཚུགས	of an extremely variable conduct	spyod pas skad cig kyang mi tshugs
སྤྱོད་པས་ཐོབ་པ	obtained / acquired through behavior	spyod pas thob pa
སྤྱོད་པས་བསྡུས་པ་དྲུག	the six gathered by action	spyod pas bsdus pa drug
སྤྱོད་པས་འཕྲང་བསལ་བ	clearing dangerous passages through the conduct	spyod pas 'phrang bsal ba
སྤྱོད་པས་བོགས་འབྱིན་པ	enhancing through the conduct	spyod pas bogs 'byin pa
སྤྱོད་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ལྟ་བ་ཤོར་བ	to lose the view in the conduct; Padmasambhava: {spyod pa'i phyogs su lta ba ma shor bar mdzod, de shor na dngos po dang mtshan mas bcings nas grol ba'i dus med} Do not let your view slip in the di...	spyod phyogs su lta ba shor ba
སྤྱོད་བབ་རྩེ་མཐུན	having a similar way of acting/ doing things	spyod bab rtse mthun
སྤྱོད་བབས་རྩེ་མཐུན	generous conduct	spyod babs rtse mthun
སྤྱོད་བྱེད་མ	woman	spyod byed ma
སྤྱོད་བྱེད་ཡིད	the acting intellect [gd]	spyod byed yid
སྤྱོད་དབང	right of use	spyod dbang
སྤྱོད་མི་ལྡན	ill-mannered, rude, uncouth	spyod mi ldan
སྤྱོད་མིག	hole in a privy	spyod mig
སྤྱོད་མེད	religious mendicant, naked devotee 1658	spyod med
སྤྱོད་ཚད	rate of utilization	spyod tshad
སྤྱོད་ཚུལ	behavioral ways	spyod tshul
སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་འཛིན	have/ hold an attitude	spyod tshul 'dzin
སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་བཟང་པོ	high moral	spyod tshul bzang po
སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་བཟུང	have/ hold an attitude	spyod tshul bzung
སྤྱོད་བཟང	good way of doing, good behavior/ manners, well-behaved, upright, moral	spyod bzang
སྤྱོད་བཟང་གི	ethic	spyod bzang gi
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་དུ	. . . (kyi) spyod yul (du) - to be within the reach/ province of . . .	spyod yul du
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་པ	experienced	spyod yul pa
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་འཕགས་པ	the domain of the deeply realized	spyod yul 'phags pa
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་འཕགས་པའི	domain of the deeply realized	spyod yul 'phags pa'i
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་བ	experience, the sphere of activity /action of, place, practice, * benefit	spyod yul ba
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན	smad 'tshong ma'i gnas, rgyal po'i pho brang 'khor gyi sgo, rigs ngan gyi gnas, chang 'tshong ma'i gnas) spyod yul ma yin pa'i gnas rnam pa lnga 5 places with which one should have nothing to do (r...	spyod yul ma yin
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	pure experience, thorough purification of one's sphere of activity	spyod yul yongs su dag pa
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the reach of experience	spyod yul las 'das pa
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ལོག་པ	wrong modes of behavior	spyod yul log pa
སྤྱོད་རིག་མཉམ་པའི	awareness, and sameness	spyod rig mnyam pa'i
སྤྱོད་རིག་མཉམ་པའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	yogic discipline of having equalized conduct and insight. The yogic discipline of having equalized conduct and insight means, according to Khenpo Könchok Mönlam, to be able to act with pure percept...	spyod rig mnyam pa'i brtul zhugs
སྤྱོད་ལན	reaction	spyod lan
སྤྱོད་ལམ	(code of) conduct; way of action, behavior, daily activities, ways of conduct, physical activity. Syn {spyod pa}; mode of conduct, life-style, activity, practice	spyod lam
སྤྱོད་ལམ་གྱི་རིགས་ལ	go about your daily activities	spyod lam gyi rigs la
སྤྱོད་ལམ་འགལ་ཞིང་དོན་ལ་འབྲེལ	contradiction in terms of behavior and coherency in terms of the sense	spyod lam 'gal zhing don la 'brel
སྤྱོད་ལམ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	four commitments relating to continuity of the path of conduct: to abandon sleep which cuts off the life of concentration, to abandon alcohol, to propound the symbolic language of secret mantras, a...	spyod lam rgyun gyi dam tshig bzhi
སྤྱོད་ལམ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་བཞི	four commitments relating to continuity of the path of conduct	spyod lam rgyun gyi bzhi
སྤྱོད་ལམ་ཐུབ་པ	to bridle one's conduct	spyod lam thub pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་དྲག་པོ	strenuous activities	spyod lam drag po
སྤྱོད་ལམ་སྡོམ་པ	control your behavior; x {sa phyogs spyod lam sdom pa dang} put the place in order and control your behavior	spyod lam sdom pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four bodily activities ['gro ba dang, 'dug pa, nyal ba, 'chag pa]	spyod lam rnam pa bzhi
སྤྱོད་ལམ་རྣམ་བཞི	[TRS 73-6]	spyod lam rnam bzhi
སྤྱོད་ལམ་མཛེས་པ	admirable conduct	spyod lam mdzes pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་གཞན་བརྟན་པ	other modes of conduct	spyod lam gzhan brtan pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་གཞན་བརྟེན་པ	other modes of conduct	spyod lam gzhan brten pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་བཞི	the four paths of action/ aspects of living,	spyod lam bzhi
སྤྱོད་ལམ་བཞི་ཤོང་གི་ཁང་པ	house containing the four activities	spyod lam bzhi shong gi khang pa
སྤྱོད་ལམ་བཞིའི་མཉམ་རྗེས	four activities of postmeditation, standing, walking, sitting or lying down	spyod lam bzhi'i mnyam rjes
སྤྱོད་ལམ་ལ་འགྲེས	mingling w the path of action	spyod lam la 'gres
སྤྱོད་ཤན་ཆེ་བ	durable	spyod shan che ba
སྤྱོད་ཤེད	useful, mkho bed spyod shugs	spyod shed
སྤྱོད་གཤིས	custom, way of doing things	spyod gshis
སྤྱོད་གསུམ	three activities of the gods [standing, sitting and walkng They don't sleep like humans]	spyod gsum
སྤྱོན	SA byon pa	spyon
སྤྱོན་པ	(tha mi dad pa come approach, arrive	spyon pa
སྤྱོམ	pride	spyom
སྤྱོམ་པ	to boast, to exhibit with ostentation; ft. of {spyom pa}; {spyom pa, spyoms pa, spyom pa, spyoms} trans. v	spyom pa
སྤྱོམས	boast, SA spyom pa, self-praise	spyoms
སྤྱོམས་པ	pf. of {spyom pa}	spyoms pa
སྤྱོར་བ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	dngos gzhi dmigs med	spyor ba sems bskyed
སྤྱོར་མཚམས	place of union	spyor mtshams
སྤྱོས	[p ! {spyo} ] deprecated, insulted, threatened, scolded, rebuked, blamed, mocked, ridiculed, criticized, abused	spyos
སྤྱོས་པ	reprove, remonstrate with	spyos pa
སྤྲ	1) a predator, ape, baboon; 2) [p spras],, adorn, decorate, embellish, dress up; 2) attach to	spra
སྤྲ་དཀར	gray species of langur monkey	spra dkar
སྤྲ་གྱུང	herb spra gyung	spra gyung
སྤྲ་རྒོད་པ	wild spra ba	spra rgod pa
སྤྲ་ཆལ	changeable, moving about, trembling	spra chal
སྤྲ་འཆལ	1) unreliable, aimless stubborn; 2) salt that changes the taste of food	spra 'chal
སྤྲ་ཐོག	medicinal herb	spra thog
སྤྲ་ཐོག་པ	leontopodium leontopodioides (willd.) beauv.	spra thog pa
སྤྲ་མདོག་པ	herb {spra mdog pa}	spra mdog pa
སྤྲ་རྡོ	1) spra ba and me rdo [rock burning under certain conditions]; 2) a stone that makes spra ba burn, me rdo in Tibet the best is white]	spra rdo
སྤྲ་སྤྲེའུ	monkeys	spra spre'u
སྤྲ་སྤྲོ	glamorous	spra spro
སྤྲ་ཕྲུག	young langur	spra phrug
སྤྲ་བ	dried moss used as tinder/ med.	spra ba
སྤྲ་བ་སྤྲ་ཆ	ornament, decorations	spra ba spra cha
སྤྲ་བ་བ་སུ	white species of plant calotropis gigantea	spra ba ba su
སྤྲ་བའི་ཐོག་གུ	spra ba herb seed	spra ba'i thog gu
སྤྲ་བའི་མེ་ཏོག	spra ba herb flower	spra ba'i me tog
སྤྲ་མི	ape man	spra mi
སྤྲ་མེ	burning spra ba moss	spra me
སྤྲ་མེ་སེན་རྩེས་གསོད	extinguishing moxa with the tip of one's nail	spra me sen rtses gsod
སྤྲ་མོ	a female ape/ monster	spra mo
སྤྲ་མོ་ཞར་མ	an old blind female monkey	spra mo zhar ma
སྤྲ་ཚིལ	wax	spra tshil
སྤྲ་ཚིལ་དཀར་པོ	white glue/ [bees]wax	spra tshil dkar po
སྤྲ་ཚིལ་སྒྲོན་མེ	glue heating lamp	spra tshil sgron me
སྤྲ་ཚུགས	burning spra ba herb	spra tshugs
སྤྲ་བཟང	parpata	spra bzang
སྤྲ་བཟང་ཟིལ་པ	parpata	spra bzang zil pa
སྤྲ་ལག་གྱོ་ཁྲམ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ	hypocrisy is a sign of spra lag tsha po	spra lag gyo khram gyi spyod tshul
སྤྲག	(not in Das)	sprag
སྤྲག་ཆགས་པ	earth piled for a long time which becomes hard	sprag chags pa
སྤྲགས	(not in Das)	sprags
སྤྲང	humble practitioners	sprang
སྤྲང་སྐད	slang	sprang skad
སྤྲང་ཁྱི	1) beggar dog [insult]; 2) beggar's dog	sprang khyi
སྤྲང་འཁྱམས་པ	1) insult: no good drifter; 2) wandering beggar/indigent	sprang 'khyams pa
སྤྲང་འགྱེད་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	at the time of the {lha ldan smon lam} sprang 'gyed btang chog pa [asking is enough] zhes tshogs chen zhal ngor [discipline monk] dgongs pa zhus pa'i [asking for consideration] 'khrol 'dzin [gets it?]	sprang 'gyed 'khrol 'dzin
སྤྲང་རྒན	old beggar	sprang rgan
སྤྲང་རྒྱུག	beggars staff for stopping dogs	sprang rgyug
སྤྲང་དུ་སོང	had become a beggar mendicant	sprang du song
སྤྲང་བདག	this beggar	sprang bdag
སྤྲང་པོ	beggar, lowly one, impoverished person	sprang po
སྤྲང་པོ་ཀེར་ལངས	a person living w nothing w/o any land, house wealth, relatives, or friends etc	sprang po ker langs
སྤྲང་པོ་གཅེར་ལངས	naked beggar	sprang po gcer langs
སྤྲང་པོ་ཏེ་ལོ་པ	Tilopa the Beggar	sprang po te lo pa
སྤྲང་པོ་བཟོ་བ	impoverish	sprang po bzo ba
སྤྲང་པོ་ལ་སྦྱིན་པ་བཏང་བ	gave alms to the poor, made gifts to the beggars	sprang po la sbyin pa btang ba
སྤྲང་པོ་ལམ་ཡངས་འགྲོ་ཆོག	In Tibet at the time of the spyi tshogs rnying pa farmers, servants poor people under the yoke, living in the narrow path of exploitation, in other lands 'tsho ba slong ba'i wide path delighting to...	sprang po lam yangs 'gro chog
སྤྲང་ཕུགས་ཤི་ལ་གཏད	live your beggar's life until death; one of {gtad pa bzhi} the four ultimate aims	sprang phugs shi la gtad
སྤྲང་ཕྱེ	beggar's flour	sprang phye
སྤྲང་བ	beg[gar]	sprang ba
སྤྲང་བན	mendicant, monk	sprang ban
སྤྲང་བྱ་བཏང	a renunciate	sprang bya btang
སྤྲང་མོ	tramp [insult to a woman]	sprang mo
སྤྲང་ཟས	few poor scraps	sprang zas
སྤྲང་རི་འཛིན	mountain-dwelling vagabonds	sprang ri 'dzin
སྤྲང་སློང	beggars	sprang slong
སྤྲད	1) p. of {sprod}. 2) to give	sprad
སྤྲད་ཁ	register, list of things, revenue received	sprad kha
སྤྲད་མཆན	donation note	sprad mchan
སྤྲད་པ	gave over	sprad pa
སྤྲད་སྤྲད	get busy 1660	sprad sprad
སྤྲན	to warn	spran
སྤྲབས་པ	[arch] food	sprabs pa
སྤྲལ་ཅལ	restless, cannot remain in one place	spral cal
སྤྲལ་རིས	[arch] dpral ris	spral ris
སྤྲལ་ལད་ཚ་པོ	sycophant [-cy], flattery [-er]	spral lad tsha po
སྤྲས	ornament, adorned with, place in 'phan yul in tibet, clinging, SA spra	spras
སྤྲས་ཁོག	thumb ring	spras khog
སྤྲས་བཅས	adorned, decorated	spras bcas
སྤྲས་དང་ལྡན་པ	adorned, decorated	spras dang ldan pa
སྤྲས་པ	variegated, bedecked, enumerated, arrangement, SA bsgrims pa, bkod pa, embellished with	spras pa
སྤྲས་སྤྲོས	complications	spras spros
སྤྲས་སྤྲོས་ཀྱི་ཚིག་ཚོགས	masses of discursive words	spras spros kyi tshig tshogs
སྤྲས་བྲལ	state of absolute inactivity	spras bral
སྤྲས་མུ་ཏིག་ཧར་གྱི་ཆུན་འཕྱང	decorated with tassels and garlands of pearls	spras mu tig har gyi chun 'phyang
སྤྲས་ལེགས་བཀོད་པ	well-structured and adorned	spras legs bkod pa
སྤྲི	cream	spri
སྤྲི་དཀར་གྱི་རིགས	albumin	spri dkar gyi rigs
སྤྲི་བཏོན་འོ་མ	skim milk	spri bton 'o ma
སྤྲི་སྟི་མར་ཛ་ཡ་སི་ཆེན	chinese emperor	spri sti mar dza ya si chen
སྤྲི་མ	cream	spri ma
སྤྲི་གསར	cow's 1st milk for a few days after calf is born	spri gsar
སྤྲིག་ཀ་གན་དྷ	bird in land of asura, kind of mixed scent, scent of plant trigonella corniculata	sprig ka gan dha
སྤྲིང	to send word, information, to send news information word	spring
སྤྲིང་པ་འཐིབས་ཡོད་པ	cloudy	spring pa 'thibs yod pa
སྤྲིང་བ	send a message, give information, send word	spring ba
སྤྲིང་ཡིག	letter	spring yig
སྤྲིང་ཡིག་ཀ་ལ་པིན་ཀའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	by Shabkar	spring yig ka la pin ka'i sgra dbyangs
སྤྲིང་ཡིག་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཆུང	various letters and small texts	spring yig dang bstan bcos chung
སྤྲིངས	[p spring] advise	springs
སྤྲིངས་བསྐུལ	servant, messenger	springs bskul
སྤྲིངས་པ	[p springs ba] sent a message/ word, gave information	springs pa
སྤྲིངས་ཡིག	letter, epistle	springs yig
སྤྲིངས་ཡིག་གཟིགས་མཁྱེན	letter, note	springs yig gzigs mkhyen
སྤྲིངས་ལན	answer, reply	springs lan
སྤྲིད	(not in Das)	sprid
སྤྲིན	cloud	sprin
སྤྲིན་དཀར	white cloud	sprin dkar
སྤྲིན་དཀར་པོ་རྒྱུ་བ	mountain in uttarakuru	sprin dkar po rgyu ba
སྤྲིན་དཀར་པོ་འཛིན	SA ri bo chen po bcu	sprin dkar po 'dzin
སྤྲིན་དཀར་པོ་འཛིན་པ	1 of 10 great mountains	sprin dkar po 'dzin pa
སྤྲིན་དཀྲིགས	gathering or condensing of clouds, darkened, obscured, dim, diffused	sprin dkrigs
སྤྲིན་རྐང	sprin gyi rtsa ba thur du nar ba	sprin rkang
སྤྲིན་སྐྱེས	thunder	sprin skyes
སྤྲིན་གུག	hook shaped clouds	sprin gug
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ཀ་བ	hail	sprin gyi ka ba
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ཁ་དོག	cloud color	sprin gyi kha dog
སྤྲིན་གྱི་གོང་བུ	hail	sprin gyi gong bu
སྤྲིན་གྱི་གླང་པོ	epithet of airavata the elephant of indra	sprin gyi glang po
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	sources of rain vapor and humid air	sprin gyi rgyu
སྤྲིན་གྱི་སྒེག	peacock	sprin gyi sgeg
སྤྲིན་གྱི་སྒྲ	thunder, a kind of war cry	sprin gyi sgra
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རྔ་སྒྲ	thunder	sprin gyi rnga sgra
སྤྲིན་གྱི་བཅུད	water	sprin gyi bcud
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ལྕག་མ	lightning	sprin gyi lcag ma
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ལྕུག་མ	lightning	sprin gyi lcug ma
སྤྲིན་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	camphor	sprin gyi snying po
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རྡོ	hail stones	sprin gyi rdo
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རྡོ་བ	hail, thunderbolt	sprin gyi rdo ba
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	heap of clouds	sprin gyi phung po
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	cloud messenger	sprin gyi pho nya
སྤྲིན་གྱི་བྱ	SA chu bya gag	sprin gyi bya
སྤྲིན་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	1) rain; 2) water	sprin gyi me tog
སྤྲིན་གྱི་མེ་པོ་ཆེ	thunder	sprin gyi me po che
སྤྲིན་གྱི་མེ་བོ་ཆེ	thunder	sprin gyi me bo che
སྤྲིན་གྱི་མྱུ་གུ	water	sprin gyi myu gu
སྤྲིན་གྱི་བཞོན་པ	sprin gyi bzhon pa'i rtogs brjod de, de'i bstan bya gtso bo Mt Malaya in S India near sar 'khrungs zhes pa'i rgyal po zhig	sprin gyi bzhon pa
སྤྲིན་གྱི་འོད་ཟེར	lightning, thunderbolt	sprin gyi 'od zer
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རུས་པ	hailstones	sprin gyi rus pa
སྤྲིན་གྱི་ཤུགས་ཅན	an angel	sprin gyi shugs can
སྤྲིན་གྱི་སོ་ཅན	mt	sprin gyi so can
སྤྲིན་གྱི་གསེབ་ནས	from between the clouds	sprin gyi gseb nas
སྤྲིན་གྱིས་སྒེག	peacock	sprin gyis sgeg
སྤྲིན་སྒྲ	thunder	sprin sgra
སྤྲིན་བཅུད	rain	sprin bcud
སྤྲིན་ཆར	small rain, clouds and rain	sprin char
སྤྲིན་ཆེན	vaidurya	sprin chen
སྤྲིན་ཆེན་ཆར་འབེབས་ཆོ་ག	religious service for rain to fall	sprin chen char 'bebs cho ga
སྤྲིན་ཆེན་སྙིང་པོ	name of bodhisattva or demon	sprin chen snying po
སྤྲིན་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 126-2] sprin chen po'i mdo Mahaameghasuutra/ great cloud sutra sprin chen po'i mdo [Mahaameghasuutra] Great cloud Sutra	sprin chen po brgyad
སྤྲིན་འཇའ	rainbow cloud	sprin 'ja'
སྤྲིན་ལྟ་བུ	cloud-like	sprin lta bu
སྤྲིན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing bodhicitta like a cloud	sprin lta bu'i sems bskyed
སྤྲིན་ལྟར་གཏིབས	gathered like cloud-banks	sprin ltar gtibs
སྤྲིན་ཐིབས	be cloudy/ overcast	sprin thibs
སྤྲིན་མཐོངས	gaps in clouds	sprin mthongs
སྤྲིན་དག་པ	fog, frog	sprin dag pa
སྤྲིན་དང་བྲལ་བ	cloud-free, cloudless	sprin dang bral ba
སྤྲིན་བདུན	brocade w red clouds	sprin bdun
སྤྲིན་མདངས	"cloud shading", shading	sprin mdangs
ཨཔཔླིཨེད་ཨིན་ཧོརིཟོནཏལ་ཅློཨུད	like bands 1661	applied in horizontal cloud
སྤྲིན་འདུས་པ	clouds appeared	sprin 'dus pa
སྤྲིན་འདེགས	swallow	sprin 'degs
སྤྲིན་ལྡན	cloudlike	sprin ldan
སྤྲིན་ལྡན་མ	enveloped in clouds, peacock	sprin ldan ma
སྤྲིན་པ	Syn {sprin}	sprin pa
སྤྲིན་པ་སྒམ་པོ	rum w picture of clouds and bats	sprin pa sgam po
སྤྲིན་པས་སྒྲིབ་པ	overcast	sprin pas sgrib pa
སྤྲིན་ཕུང	cloud banks	sprin phung
སྤྲིན་ཕུང་གཏིབ་པ	thick clouds gathering	sprin phung gtib pa
སྤྲིན་ཕུང་འཕྲོ	emanating cloudbanks	sprin phung 'phro
སྤྲིན་བར་གི་ཉི་ཞུར	the sun coming in and out of the clouds	sprin bar gi nyi zhur
སྤྲིན་བལ	cotton, cotton wool	sprin bal
སྤྲིན་བོན་བ་ཐུལ	bon of clouds	sprin bon ba thul
སྤྲིན་བྲལ	cloudless	sprin bral
སྤྲིན་བྲལ་གྱི་ནམ་མཁའ	cloudless sky	sprin bral gyi nam mkha'
སྤྲིན་བྲལ་ནམ་མཁའ	cloudless sky	sprin bral nam mkha'
སྤྲིན་འབྱུང	summer	sprin 'byung
སྤྲིན་མེད	cloudless heaven, in the 4th dhyana bhumi of form realm	sprin med
སྤྲིན་མེད་ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ	the heart of a cloudless sky	sprin med nam mkha'i dkyil
སྤྲིན་མེད་པ	cloudless	sprin med pa
སྤྲིན་མེད་འོད	the first of the {so skye'i gnas gsum} in the {bsam gtan bzhi pa}	sprin med 'od
ཆེ་བ་གསུམ	the three abodes of Cloudless Light, Merit-Born, and Great Fruit	che ba gsum
སྤྲིན་དམར	red cloud	sprin dmar
སྤྲིན་སྨུག་པོ	dark cloud	sprin smug po
སྤྲིན་རྩ་བ	root of long pepper	sprin rtsa ba
སྤྲིན་ཚོགས	banked clouds, mass of clouds, cloudy	sprin tshogs
སྤྲིན་ཞལ་ཅན	the cloud faced, a form of {dgon po ber can}	sprin zhal can
སྤྲིན་བཞིན	cloud-like	sprin bzhin
སྤྲིན་བཞིན་འདུ་བ	to gather like clouds	sprin bzhin 'du ba
སྤྲིན་གཟུགས	lhang tsher med mineral	sprin gzugs
སྤྲིན་བཟང་ཅན	sprin bzang can gyi zla ba, 8th month	sprin bzang can
སྤྲིན་བཟང་ཅན་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	8th month	sprin bzang can gyi zla ba
སྤྲིན་རཏ་ནའི་ཁ་དོག་ཅན་ལས	from a	sprin rat na'i kha dog can las
ཇེཝེལ	coloured cloud	jewel
སྤྲིན་རིས	picture of clouds	sprin ris
སྤྲིན་རིས་མ	cloud picture brocade etc	sprin ris ma
སྤྲིན་རུམ	amidst the clouds, in the thick of clouds	sprin rum
སྤྲིན་ལ་དགའ	peacock	sprin la dga'
སྤྲིན་ལ་གནས་པའི་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	sprin la gnas pa'i lha mo brgyad
སྤྲིན་ལ་ཞོན	name of brgya byin lha	sprin la zhon
སྤྲིན་ལ་སོགས་པས་བསྒྲིབས་པ	obscured by clouds etc.	sprin la sogs pas bsgribs pa
སྤྲིན་ལ་སློང	swallow	sprin la slong
སྤྲིན་ལམ	space	sprin lam
སྤྲིན་ལས་རྒྱལ	Rahu	sprin las rgyal
སྤྲིན་ལས་ཆུ་བཞིན	like when rain is forced from a cloud	sprin las chu bzhin
སྤྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	planet, SA sgra gcan	sprin las rnam rgyal
སྤྲིན་གསར	ink	sprin gsar
སྤྲིན་གསེབ	in/ among the clouds	sprin gseb
སྤྲིན་གསེབ་ཅིག་ནས	among the clouds, from my cloud	sprin gseb cig nas
སྤྲིན་གསེབ་ནས	among the clouds	sprin gseb nas
སྤྲིབས་པ	be hungry	spribs pa
སྤྲིས	scum, congealed grease, cream	spris
སྤྲིས་མ	urine milk etc. kyi kha la chags pa'i rtsi, 'O spris, Zho spris, Chu spris, Gcin pa'i steng du spris ma 'khor ba, 'O ma bskol te grang bcug na spris ma chags yong	spris ma
སྤྲུ་དཀར	field herb white hellebore	spru dkar
སྤྲུ་དཀར་མཆོག	heracleum millefolium diels	spru dkar mchog
སྤྲུ་དཀར་དམན་པ	thalictrum petaloideum l.	spru dkar dman pa
སྤྲུ་དཀར་རྩ་བ	root of the med herb white hellebore	spru dkar rtsa ba
སྤྲུ་སྐྱ	herb	spru skya
སྤྲུ་ནག	black hellebore	spru nag
སྤྲུ་བ	hellebore	spru ba
སྤྲུ་མ	hellebore, med herb	spru ma
སྤྲུ་དམར	valeriana fauriei briq.	spru dmar
སྤྲུག	[p sprugs],, arouse, ruffled his feathers, shake, stir, agitate	sprug
སྤྲུག་བརྡབས	hit, beat out dust	sprug brdabs
སྤྲུག་པ	splitting, opening, blowing, wasting, consuming, shake, bustle, beat out, bestir one's self, bustle, SA zad pa	sprug pa
སྤྲུག་སྤྲུག་རྡེབ་རྡེབ	beat a seat or bed and raise dust	sprug sprug rdeb rdeb
སྤྲུག་ས	arouse, ruffled his feathers	sprug sa
སྤྲུག་གསིག	[med dust etc.] stirred/beaten out	sprug gsig
སྤྲུགས	[p ! {sprug} stirred, churned, exhausted, cleaned, shook, hit, beat, stirred up, raised, ruffled, agitated	sprugs
སྤྲུགས་པ	beat, stirred [up] shook [p sprug pa]	sprugs pa
སྤྲུགས་ཟིན་པ	shook	sprugs zin pa
སྤྲུགས་བསིགས	falling asunder	sprugs bsigs
སྤྲུལ	1) mentally created/ emanated [as]; 2) incarnated; 3) apparitional, magical, miraculous, transformed [~into] emanated[ing][tion]; 4) nirmanakaya; 5) manifest, change/ transform [miraculously]	sprul
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Nirmanakaya, manifested body	sprul sku
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་དགའ་རབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	the nirmanakaya Garab Dorje; see {dga' rab rdo rje}	sprul sku dga' rab rdo rje
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འགྲོ་འདྲེན་པ	pad ma 'byung gnas	sprul sku 'gro 'dren pa
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་མཆོག་ལྡན་མགོན་པོ	an embodiment of rdo rje gling pa from lho	sprul sku mchog ldan mgon po
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་གཉིས	CHN sprul sku gter ston grangs med pa 'byung	sprul sku gnyis
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་ཐུགས་རྗེ	potentiality of nirmanakaya sprul sku drang srong gi bzhugs stangs the nirmanakaya rishi posture	sprul sku thugs rje
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་དྲིན་ཅན	the compassionate ones, SA nye brgyud	sprul sku drin can
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འདྲོ་མགོན་པ	pad ma 'byung gnas	sprul sku 'dro mgon pa
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three kinds of nirmakakaya {rang bzhin sprul pa}, {'gro 'dul sprul pa}, {sna tshogs sprul pa}	sprul sku rnam gsum
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	Nirmanakaya padmakara	sprul sku pad ma 'byung gnas
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་གི་འཕོ་བ	nirmanakaya phowa of training	sprul sku rtsal sbyong gi 'pho ba
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འི་སྐུ	nirmanakaya, emanation body	sprul sku 'i sku
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འི་ཞིང་ཁམས	nirmanakaya realm	sprul sku 'i zhing khams
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འི་ཞུགས་སྟངས	the nirmanakaya posture	sprul sku 'i zhugs stangs
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འི་གཟིགས་སྟངས	the nirmanakaya gaze sprul sku rig 'dzin mchog ldan mgon po'i rnam thar mgur 'bum dad ldan spro ba	sprul sku 'i gzigs stangs
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ	the nirmanakaya Shakyamuni	sprul sku sha kya thub pa
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་གསུམ	the three kinds of nirmanakayas	sprul sku gsum
རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Tulku Urgyen Tsewang Chokdrub Rinpoche. The long name of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	rin po che
སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་ཨོ་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche. A contemporary master of the Kagyü and Nyingma lineages, who lives at Nagi Gompa in Nepal sprul sku o rgyan rin po che tshe dbang	sprul sku o rgyan rin po che
མཆོག་གྲུབ་དཔལ་འབར	b. 1919 - Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche, Tsewang Chokdrub Palbar	mchog grub dpal 'bar
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་སྐུ	nirmanakaya, emanation body	sprul sku'i sku
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་འཁོར་ལོ	emanation wheel/	sprul sku'i 'khor lo
ནིརྨན	chakra, navel center	nirmana
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་འགྲོ་དོན་མཛད	accomplishing the benefit of beings of a/ through a nirmanakaya	sprul sku'i 'gro don mdzad
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་འགྲོ་དོན་མཛད་པ	to work for beings in nirmanakaya form	sprul sku'i 'gro don mdzad pa
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་རྣམ་གསུམ	three kinds of emanational body [Emanations of natural expression {rang bzhin sprul pa} emanations which train living beings {'gro 'dul sprul pa} and diversified emanations {sna tshogs sprul pa}	sprul sku'i rnam gsum
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	CHN	sprul sku'i mtshan nyid lnga
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	nirmanakaya realm	sprul sku'i zhing khams
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ཞུགས་སྟངས	the nirmanakaya posture	sprul sku'i zhugs stangs
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་གཟིགས་སྟངས	the nirmanakaya gaze	sprul sku'i gzigs stangs
སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་སངས་རྒྱས	a magically created buddha	sprul sku'i sangs rgyas
སྤྲུལ་མཁན	magician	sprul mkhan
སྤྲུལ་འཁོར	navel center	sprul 'khor
སྤྲུལ་འཁོར་བཅས	emanations w their retinues	sprul 'khor bcas
སྤྲུལ་སྒྱུར	emanations, {ston nus} able to manifest, manifested [from the space of primordial wisdom], emanation, {'khor bcas} with their retinues	sprul sgyur
སྤྲུལ་སྒྱུར་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་ལ་གོམས	become skilled in conjuring emanations	sprul sgyur rtsal sbyong la goms
སྤྲུལ་བསྒྱུར	[produce] apparitions and transformations [emanated display]	sprul bsgyur
སྤྲུལ་བསྒྱུར་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of conjuring apparitions, samadhi of miraculous transformations	sprul bsgyur gyi ting nge 'dzin
སྤྲུལ་བསྒྱུར་གྱི་ཏིང་གནེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of conjuring apparitions/ miraculous transformations	sprul bsgyur gyi ting gne 'dzin
སྤྲུལ་ཆེན་པོ	great magic	sprul chen po
སྤྲུལ་སྟོན་ནུས	able to manifest emanations	sprul ston nus
སྤྲུལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	the vajra of emanation	sprul rdo rje
སྤྲུལ་ནས	was transformed into	sprul nas
སྤྲུལ་པ	{smin mtshams nas sprul pa'i dge slong a kar ma ti zhes bya bar sprul} manifested a monk named Akarmati from between his eyebrows	sprul pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་བཀྱེ	caused a form to emanate	sprul pa bkye
སྤྲུལ་པ་བཀྱེ་བ	to emanate [infinite] forms	sprul pa bkye ba
སྤྲུལ་པ་བཀྱེས་པ	to send out emanations	sprul pa bkyes pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྐུ	apparitional	sprul pa sku
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྐུའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	natural nirmanakaya realm	sprul pa sku'i zhing khams
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྐྱེས	emanate a form/ incarnate	sprul pa skyes
སྤྲུལ་པ་མཁྱེན་པ	to be an adept in the art of producing miraculous apparitions	sprul pa mkhyen pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་འགྱེད་པ	to let emanations go forth	sprul pa 'gyed pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྒྱུ་མ	magical emanation	sprul pa sgyu ma
སྤྲུལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	sambhogakaya that appears to 10th bhumi bodhisattvas	sprul pa chen po
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྟོན་པ	displaying an emanation sprul pa dag gis dga' ldan gi gnas la sogs	sprul pa ston pa
པར་སྐྱེ་བར་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྟོན་པ	teach by means of emanations arising in the Ganden heaven etc	par skye bar kun tu ston pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་དང་ཕོ	envoys	sprul pa dang pho
སྤྲུལ་པ་དང་ཕོ་ཉ	spiritual emanations sprul pa dang yongs su sgyur ba la mnga'i	sprul pa dang pho nya
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྡུད་པ	gather back emanations	sprul pa sdud pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	four distinct modes of emanation	sprul pa rnam bzhi
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	the {sprul pa} such as {mchog sprul} that appears to ordinary persons	sprul pa sna tshogs pa
སྤྲུལ་པ་པོ	magical emanation	sprul pa po
སྤྲུལ་པ་སྤྲུལ་བྱེད	inventor, transformer, maker	sprul pa sprul byed
སྤྲུལ་པ་འཕྲོ་བ	to send forth an emanation	sprul pa 'phro ba
སྤྲུལ་པ་འི	miraculous	sprul pa 'i
སྤྲུལ་པ་འི་དམག	a magical/emanated army	sprul pa 'i dmag
སྤྲུལ་པ་ཡང་སྤྲུལ	emanations and reemanations	sprul pa yang sprul
སྤྲུལ་པའི	miraculous {'i btsug lag khang} monastery	sprul pa'i
སྤྲུལ་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བསྡུས	dissolved the incarnated mandala (died)	sprul pa'i dkyil 'khor bsdus
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	SA sprul sku	sprul pa'i sku
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ་དགའ་རབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	the nirmanakaya manifestation Garab Dorje sprul pa'i sku dga' rab rdo rje zhes bya ba - the nirmanakaya manifestation called Garab Dorje	sprul pa'i sku dga' rab rdo rje
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ་མཆོག	Supreme nirmanakaya	sprul pa'i sku mchog
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ་སྟོན་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 teachers of the emanational body	sprul pa'i sku ston pa bcu gnyis
སྤྲུལ་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	navel center, cakra of emanation unified in the feet, SA 'khor lo bzhi	sprul pa'i 'khor lo
སྤྲུལ་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྟེ་བ	the navel	sprul pa'i 'khor lo lte ba
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གང་ཟག	emanation	sprul pa'i gang zag
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	magically produced city	sprul pa'i grong khyer
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	kadampa sprul pa'i glegs bam	sprul pa'i glegs bam
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	incarnated king; magically emanated king	sprul pa'i rgyal po
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཚུལ་བཟུང་བ	appeared as an emanation of	sprul pa'i rgyal po'i tshul bzung ba
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བ	Magical net of emanations	sprul pa'i sgyu 'phrul drva ba
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	Magical net of emanations	sprul pa'i sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཉན་ཐོས	magically emanated shravakas	sprul pa'i nyan thos
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གཏེར་ཆེན	the incarnated great treasure revealer	sprul pa'i gter chen
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ལྟད་མོ	phantasmagoria	sprul pa'i ltad mo
སྤྲུལ་པའི་བསྟན་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the three great emanational teachings	sprul pa'i bstan pa chen po gsum
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གནས་འགྱུར	emanation	sprul pa'i gnas 'gyur
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྣམ་རོལ	{rgyal po'i sprul pa'i rnam rol du ma} the king himself displayed multiple forms	sprul pa'i rnam rol
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྤྲེའུ	{'phags pa spyan ras gzigs kyis sprul pa'i spre'u brag srin gnyis} ape-an emanation of the noble	sprul pa'i spre'u
ཨཱབ༹ལོཀིཏེཤབ༹ར་ཨནད་ཨ་ཅྲག	demoness	Avalokiteshvara and a crag
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཕོ་ཉ	emanated messengers	sprul pa'i pho nya
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཕོ་བྲང	miraculous mansion, manifest palace	sprul pa'i pho brang
སྤྲུལ་པའི་མུ་སྟེགས་པ	TSE	sprul pa'i mu stegs pa
སྤྲུལ་པའི་དམག	a magical army	sprul pa'i dmag
སྤྲུལ་པའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་ཆེན་མོ	Great Emanated Temple; main temple of Sakya	sprul pa'i gtsug lag khang chen mo
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous emanations [various transformations] 1664	sprul pa'i rdzu 'phrul
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	emanated realm, nirmanakaya realm	sprul pa'i zhing khams
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	emanated vidyadhara	sprul pa'i rig 'dzin
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ལེགས་བམ	emanated scriptures	sprul pa'i legs bam
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	a magically created buddha	sprul pa'i sangs rgyas
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སེམས	a mind that creates apparitions	sprul pa'i sems
སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྲས་བརྒྱད	CHN	sprul pa'i sras brgyad
སྤྲུལ་པའི་ལྷ་ཁང་ཆེན་མོ	the Great Emanated Temple [at Sakya]	sprul pa'i lha khang chen mo
སྤྲུལ་པས་སླུ་བ	enchant	sprul pas slu ba
སྤྲུལ་པོ	phantom, name of kinnara raja	sprul po
སྤྲུལ་བ	(tha dad pa display, transform, emanate	sprul ba
སྤྲུལ་བའི་འཁོར་ལོ	[tse]	sprul ba'i 'khor lo
སྤྲུལ་བའི་གང་ཟག	unembodied emanation	sprul ba'i gang zag
སྤྲུལ་བའི་གར	[Tse]	sprul ba'i gar
སྤྲུལ་བྱེད་པ	{rab tu sprul nas} to manifest miraculously	sprul byed pa
སྤྲུལ་མིང	incarnation names	sprul ming
སྤྲུལ་རྫོགས	nirmanakaya and sambhogakaya	sprul rdzogs
སྤྲུལ་གཞི	basic being, emanation basis	sprul gzhi
སྤྲུལ་ཡང་གསང	bon divinity	sprul yang gsang
སྤྲུལ་ཡིད་ཀྱིས	mentally create	sprul yid kyis
སྤྲུལ་ལམ་གསུམ	TSE	sprul lam gsum
སྤྲུལ་སེམས	special ability to create visible appearances	sprul sems
སྤྲུས་མེད	unelaborate	sprus med
སྤྲེ	monkey	spre
སྤྲེ་ད	broken faulty blemished ears of grain [sre da]	spre da
སྤྲེ་པེ་སྟན་ཆུང	Trepe Tenchung, "Small Monkey Mat", Milarepa's field, in Tö, Mangyul	spre pe stan chung
སྤྲེ་མོ	female monkey	spre mo
སྤྲེ་མོ་ལ	spre mo pass [in gro mo rdzong E of phag ri]	spre mo la
སྤྲེ་མོང	weasel	spre mong
སྤྲེ་རྩེད	kidding around, joking, monkeyshines	spre rtsed
སྤྲེ་གཞུག་རེ་རལ	ape, monkey	spre gzhug re ral
སྤྲེངས	(not in Das)	sprengs
སྤྲེན་མེད	cloudless	spren med
སྤྲེའུ	a monkey; Plavanga, the 41st year of {rab byung} Syn {me mo lug} monkey. one of the {gcan gzan che dgu}; monkey	spre'u
སྤྲེའུ་སྙུག་མ	kind of tree	spre'u snyug ma
སྤྲེའུ་ལྟ་བུ་ཟློས	to imitate	spre'u lta bu zlos
སྤྲེའུ་ལྟ་བུ་ཟློས་པ	to ape	spre'u lta bu zlos pa
སྤྲེའུ་འདྲ	spider	spre'u 'dra
སྤྲེའུ་རིགས་ཤིག	baboon	spre'u rigs shig
སྤྲེའུ་ལད	monkey imitation	spre'u lad
སྤྲེའུ་ཤིང	pomegranate	spre'u shing
སྤྲེལ	a monkey; monkey, ape	sprel
སྤྲེལ་རྒྱལ	king of the monkeys	sprel rgyal
སྤྲེལ་སྒོམ	monkey meditator	sprel sgom
སྤྲེལ་མཇུག་པ	med herb re ral	sprel mjug pa
སྤྲེལ་སྙུག	herb sprel snyug	sprel snyug
སྤྲེལ་བ	monkey	sprel ba
སྤྲེལ་སྨྱུག	smilax menispermoides a. dc.	sprel smyug
སྤྲེལ་ཟླ	Monkey Month	sprel zla
སྤྲེལ་ལད	monkey imitation	sprel lad
སྤྲེལ་སླག	1 of 36 border countries of ancient india	sprel slag
སྤྲེལ་སློག	monkey skin garment	sprel slog
སྤྲོ	desiring to explain, able, run after, cheerfulness	spro
སྤྲོ་སྐྱིད	1) happy/ glad [& body comfortable]; 2) festival, celebration	spro skyid
སྤྲོ་སྐྱིད་ཁང	* club, recreation center, summer cottage	spro skyid khang
སྤྲོ་ཁང	* club, recreation center, summer cottage	spro khang
སྤྲོ་འཁྱམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	hike	spro 'khyam du 'gro ba
སྤྲོ་དགའ	joy and inspiration	spro dga'
སྤྲོ་ཉམས་ཅན	lively, vivacious, jovial	spro nyams can
སྤྲོ་སྟོན	dga' bar byed pa'i celebration	spro ston
སྤྲོ་ཐུང	short tempered	spro thung
སྤྲོ་ཐུང་ཐུང	irascible	spro thung thung
སྤྲོ་ཐུང་བ	easily angered	spro thung ba
སྤྲོ་སྡུ	thought process???	spro sdu
སྤྲོ་བསྡུ	projecting and gathering (of thought)	spro bsdu
སྤྲོ་ན	if it is preferable, if one prefers	spro na
སྤྲོ་སྣང	joy, happiness, pleasure, optimism	spro snang
སྤྲོ་སྣང་སྐྱེད་པ	exhilarate	spro snang skyed pa
སྤྲོ་སྣང་གི་ལྟ་སྟངས	optimism	spro snang gi lta stangs
སྤྲོ་སྣང་ཅན	lively, vivacious	spro snang can
སྤྲོ་སྣང་རིང་ལུགས	optimism	spro snang ring lugs
སྤྲོ་པ	elevating, uplifting, joyful, delight, fabrication, elaborations, dualistic activity	spro pa
སྤྲོ་པོ	amusing, interesting, happy, merry, cheerful, joyful, frolic, nice	spro po
སྤྲོ་སྤྲོ	dga' dga'	spro spro
སྤྲོ་བ་སྐྱེད	set heart on	spro ba skyed
སྤྲོ་བ་སྐྱེད་པ	feel joy, feel pleasure	spro ba skyed pa
སྤྲོ་བ་སྐྱེས	you arose [in me]	spro ba skyes
སྤྲོ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to bring joy	spro ba bskyed pa
སྤྲོ་བ་ཅན	fish	spro ba can
སྤྲོ་བ་ཆེ་བ	1) great delight; 2) great effort/ exertion	spro ba che ba
སྤྲོ་བ་བརྟན་པ	eager	spro ba brtan pa
སྤྲོ་བ་ལྡན་པ	happy, joyful, cheerful	spro ba ldan pa
སྤྲོ་བ་འཕེལ	to have joy	spro ba 'phel
སྤྲོ་བ་འཕེལ་བ	encourage, inspire, incite, increase of pleasure, enthusiasm	spro ba 'phel ba
སྤྲོ་བ་བྱེད་པ	elaborate, differentiate discursively	spro ba byed pa
སྤྲོ་བ་སེམས	joyful	spro ba sems
སྤྲོ་བ་བསྲིངས་པ	joyful mind	spro ba bsrings pa
སྤྲོ་བག་ཕེབས་པ	mind happy and bzhugs bag phebs pa	spro bag phebs pa
སྤྲོ་བའི་དམིགས་པ	emanation visualizations	spro ba'i dmigs pa
སྤྲོ་བའི་ཚོགས	rhinoceros	spro ba'i tshogs
སྤྲོ་བའི་ཟློས་གར	comedy	spro ba'i zlos gar
སྤྲོ་བའི་རླུང་རྫི་བསླང	raising the breeze of delight emanating	spro ba'i rlung rdzi bslang
སྤྲོ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	get cheerful, be merry	spro bar 'gyur ba
སྤྲོ་བར་བྱེད	MSS: to cause to be delighted, to take delight in. E.g., @ KKP 253.16: {gzhan phyogs kyis grub mthar sun 'byin spro bar byed pa} "to take delight in repudiating the tenets of other positions." [mss]	spro bar byed
སྤྲོ་བར་མཛད་པ	filled with exultation	spro bar mdzad pa
སྤྲོ་བར་སོམས	Be happy!	spro bar soms
སྤྲོ་བོ་བཟོ་བ	entertain	spro bo bzo ba
སྤྲོ་བྱས་པ	dge 'dun la spro byas pa to slander members of the sangha and they are expelled	spro byas pa
སྤྲོ་བྱེད	porcupine	spro byed
སྤྲོ་མེད	kind of srin bu infesting the human body	spro med
སྤྲོ་མོ	joyful	spro mo
སྤྲོ་རྩེད	concert, show	spro rtsed
སྤྲོ་རྩེད་ཁང	* club, recreation center, summer cottage	spro rtsed khang
སྤྲོ་ཚོགས	party	spro tshogs
སྤྲོ་ཞི་བ	wind or anger pacify or calm	spro zhi ba
སྤྲོ་བཞིན་དུ	happily, delighted	spro bzhin du
སྤྲོ་རིང་པོ	small anger or goodnatured and forebearing,	spro ring po
སྤྲོ་རིམ་པ	increase by degrees	spro rim pa
སྤྲོ་ལངས་པ	wind/ anger arising	spro langs pa
སྤྲོ་ཤི་བ	not be joyful, dying of joy	spro shi ba
སྤྲོ་ཤིན་ཏུ་དགའ	great joy and happiness	spro shin tu dga'
སྤྲོ་ཤུགས	power of joy	spro shugs
སྤྲོ་སང་བ	great joy	spro sang ba
སྤྲོ་སིང་ངེ་བ	sems skyid nyams che ba, Rnam 'gyur spro sing nge ba zhig ston pa	spro sing nge ba
སྤྲོ་སིང་སིང	great joy/ gladness	spro sing sing
སྤྲོ་སུད་པ	easily angered, short tempered	spro sud pa
སྤྲོ་སེང་ངེ་བ	joyous	spro seng nge ba
སྤྲོ་སེང་ངེ་བ་གྱིས	joyously	spro seng nge ba gyis
སྤྲོ་སེམས	joy, gladness, happiness enthusiasm	spro sems
སྤྲོ་སེམས་འཁོལ་བ	enthusiasm, warm feelings	spro sems 'khol ba
བསྔགས་བྱས	warmly praised	bsngags byas
སྤྲོ་སེམས་ཆེ་བ	enthusiastic, ardent,	spro sems che ba
ཝརམ	hearted	warm
སྤྲོ་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	great joy/ enthusiasm	spro sems chen po
སྤྲོ་སེམས་འཕེལ་བ	pleasant, happy, joyful, cheerful	spro sems 'phel ba
སྤྲོ་གསེང	vacation, having gone to a park etc relax/ enjoy 1self	spro gseng
སྤྲོ་གསེང་གཏོང	go on vacation [trip], go to a park etc relax/ enjoy 1self	spro gseng gtong
སྤྲོ་གསེང་གཏོང་མཁན	vacationer, tourist, traveller	spro gseng gtong mkhan
སྤྲོ་གསེང་ལྟ་སྐོར	sightseeing tour, excursion, trip	spro gseng lta skor
སྤྲོ་བསྲིངས	consoled	spro bsrings
སྤྲོག་མ	little box for frankincense	sprog ma
སྤྲོད་ཁོངས་ཡིག་རིགས	put in a list/ register documents abut what is to be transferred to whom	sprod khongs yig rigs
སྤྲོད་ཁྲ	order documents which are means of rtsis sprod rtsis len giving or taking transfer authority/ control over wealth etc	sprod khra
སྤྲོད་དངུལ	money transferred officially to someone or repaid	sprod dngul
སྤྲོད་ཆས	things given and received according to official order documents	sprod chas
སྤྲོད་འཐམ་མོ	technicality	sprod 'tham mo
སྤྲོད་དེ	having come out	sprod de
སྤྲོད་དེབ	book recording transactions of documents giving/ receiving money authority etc, book/ list of things given	sprod deb
སྤྲོད་དེབ་པ	give accounts of articles, making over of an office or duty	sprod deb pa
སྤྲོད་པ	to meet	sprod pa
སྤྲོད་པ་དང་མཁོ་བ	supply and demand	sprod pa dang mkho ba
སྤྲོད་དཔང	witness of receipt of things and loan	sprod dpang
སྤྲོད་བུན	debt that must be repaid 1666	sprod bun
སྤྲོད་འཛིན	document about possession of items officially given or received	sprod 'dzin
སྤྲོད་འོས	worthy or fit to be given	sprod 'os
སྤྲོད་ཡུལ	address [on letter]	sprod yul
སྤྲོད་ལེན	give/ send/ distribute and receive	sprod len
སྤྲོད་ལེན་བྱེད	give/ send/ distribute and receive	sprod len byed
སྤྲོད་ལྷག	arrear	sprod lhag
སྤྲོལ་བྲལ	beyond imaginative activity	sprol bral
སྤྲོས	think [= {spro ba} p {spro}sems nyid gzhi med rtsa bral spros pa'i mtha'	spros
དང་བྲལ་བའོ	mind is groundless, rootless, beyond the extremes of conditions	dang bral ba'o
སྤྲོས་ཀུན	1) all the things in the phenomenal world; 2) all rgyas spros	spros kun
སྤྲོས་གཅོད	cutting through complexity	spros gcod
སྤྲོས་བཅད་པ	TSE	spros bcad pa
སྤྲོས་བཅས	intentionality, propositional, conceptual proliferation, elaborate, complex	spros bcas
སྤྲོས་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Elaborate conduct	spros bcas kyi spyod pa
སྤྲོས་བཅས་བུམ་པའི་དབང	elaborate vase empowerment	spros bcas bum pa'i dbang
སྤྲོས་མཐའ	{spros pa'i mtha'} extreme/ limitation imposed by/ due to (conceptual) elaboration	spros mtha'
སྤྲོས་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ	{spros pa'i mtha' dang bral ba} free of/ beyond/ freedom the limitations of (conceptual) elaborations/ from limits imposed by/ due to (conceptual) elaborations	spros mtha' bral ba
སྤྲོས་དང་བཅས	elaborate, SA spros bcas	spros dang bcas
སྤྲོས་དང་བྲལ	{spros bral} unconstructed	spros dang bral
སྤྲོས་དང་བྲལ་བ	unconditioned	spros dang bral ba
སྤྲོས་ན་དོན་མེད་སྣ་ཚོགས་དྲན	if you think, all sorts of meaningless thoughts will occur	spros na don med sna tshogs dran
སྤྲོས་པ	(conceptual) elaboration(s); embellishment	spros pa
སྤྲོས་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་ཡུལ་མིན་པ	is not the domain of all the complexities	spros pa kun gyi yul min pa
སྤྲོས་པ་བརྒྱད	Eight constructs. The mental formulations of mind or phenomena having such attributes as arising and ceasing, being singular or plural, coming and going, and being the same or being different	spros pa brgyad
སྤྲོས་པ་ཅན	elaborate	spros pa can
སྤྲོས་པ་ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བ	calming of elaborations	spros pa nye bar zhi ba
སྤྲོས་པ་ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བའི་མྱང་འདས	the nirvana of totally pacified thought constructions	spros pa nye bar zhi ba'i myang 'das
སྤྲོས་པ་ཉེར་ཞི	full pacification of constructs	spros pa nyer zhi
སྤྲོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all mental constructs	spros pa thams cad
སྤྲོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from all complexities/ elaboration	spros pa thams cad dang bral ba
སྤྲོས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	{spros bcas} with constructions, constructed, elaborate, involving conceptual elaboration; inclined to elaboration	spros pa dang bcas pa
སྤྲོས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from fabrications, complexity / elaboration, simple, noncomplex, simplicity, lacking elaboration [of thought]; free from / devoid of fabrication / complexity / elaboration, simple, noncomplex,...	spros pa dang bral ba
སྤྲོས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མ་སྤྲོས་པ	not differentiated into elaborations	spros pa rnams kyis ma spros pa
སྤྲོས་པ་མེད	SA spros med	spros pa med
སྤྲོས་པ་མེད་པ	lacking elaborations [of thought]. nonfabrication, simplicity, free from complexities, unelaborate	spros pa med pa
སྤྲོས་པ་མེད་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature of simplicity	spros pa med pa'i bdag nyid
སྤྲོས་པའི་བསྐྱེད་རིམ	elaborate creation stage	spros pa'i bskyed rim
སྤྲོས་པའི་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་ཆོད	1 resolves the complexity	spros pa'i sgro 'dogs chod
སྤྲོས་པའི་མཐའ	constructed limitations, limitation due to conceptual elaboration, mind-made limitations, limiting concepts	spros pa'i mtha'
སྤྲོས་པའི་མཐའ་བརྒྱད	the 8 extreme complexities [partialities of view] birth, cessation eternalism, nihilism going coming 1 different skye, 'gag rtag chad, 'gro, 'ong, gcig tha dad bcas mtha' brgyad]	spros pa'i mtha' brgyad
སྤྲོས་པའི་མཐའ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of/ beyond/ freedom the limitations of (conceptual) elaborations/ from limits imposed by/ due to (conceptual) elaborations	spros pa'i mtha' dang bral ba
སྤྲོས་པའི་མཐའ་བཞི	four limiting concepts	spros pa'i mtha' bzhi
སྤྲོས་པའི་ཕྱོགས་མཐའ	conceptual limitations	spros pa'i phyogs mtha'
སྤྲོས་པའི་བྱ་བ	elaborate activities	spros pa'i bya ba
སྤྲོས་པའི་མཚན་མ	attributes of fabrication, complex conceptions, elaborated characteristic spros pa'i mtshan ma can gyi 'du shes conception w the marks of mental constructs spros pa'i mtshan ma can gyi 'du shes con...	spros pa'i mtshan ma
སྤྲོས་པའི་ཡུན་མིན	not the domain of complexities	spros pa'i yun min
སྤྲོས་པའི་ཡུལ་མིན	not the domain of complexities	spros pa'i yul min
སྤྲོས་སྤྱོད	elaborate practice/ conduct	spros spyod
སྤྲོས་བྲལ	freedom from constructs, simplicity [thd]	spros bral
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of simplicity, unconstructed wakefulness	spros bral gyi ye shes
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་བརྒྱད	in prasangika madhyamika when 1 resolves the view of emptiness, there is freedom from 8 complexities	spros bral brgyad
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཆུང་ངུ	lesser simplicity	spros bral chung ngu
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཆེན་པོ	greater simplicity	spros bral chen po
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཆོས་སྐུ	unconditioned dharmakaya spros bral mchog gi rtogs pa mngon tu	spros bral chos sku
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of freedom from elaboration, the second of the four yogas of Mahamudra	spros bral rnal 'byor
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་འབྲིང	medium simplicity	spros bral 'bring
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་རྫོགས་རིམ	unelaborate perfection stage [gd]	spros bral rdzogs rim
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཟབ་མོ	profound simplicity	spros bral zab mo
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	unconstructed wakefulness	spros bral ye shes
སྤྲོས་བྲལ་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	unconstructed absolute spros bral sems kyi rang ngo mthong ba saw the unconstructed natural face of mind; saw the mind-essence in its complete simplicity	spros bral yongs grub
སྤྲོས་མེད	{spros pa med pa} unelaborate/ without (conceptual) elaboration; disinclined to elaboration; unelaborate (empowerment)*	spros med
སྤྲོས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Unelaborate conduct. One of the various types of enhancement	spros med kyi spyod pa
སྤྲོས་མེད་དོན་གྱི་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	ultimate guru yoga of simplicity	spros med don gyi bla ma'i rnal 'byor
སྤྲོས་མེད་དོན་གྱི་དབང་བསྐུར	the abhisheka of ultimate simplicity	spros med don gyi dbang bskur
སྤྲོས་མེད་དོན་སྒྲུབ	the ultimate sadhana of simplicity	spros med don sgrub
སྤྲོས་མེད་པ	unelaborate/ without conceptual elaboration; disinclined to elaboration	spros med pa
སྤྲོས་མེད་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	guru yoga of simplicity	spros med bla ma'i rnal 'byor
སྤྲོས་མེད་གསང་བའི་དབང	unelaborate secret empowerment	spros med gsang ba'i dbang
སྤྲོས་མཚན	fabricated attributes	spros mtshan
སྤྲོས་མཚན་ཀུན་གྱིས་དབེན་པ	devoid of all marks of complexity	spros mtshan kun gyis dben pa
སྤྲོས་གཟན	allowance given by tenants toward government men and goods	spros gzan
སྤྲོས་ལས་འདས་པ	transcending/ beyond fabrication/ complexity/ elaboration	spros las 'das pa
སྤྲོས་གཤོམ	rgyas rgyas bzang bzang gi gshom ra, Dang dod kyi 'tso ba'i spros gshom spong ba, /Pha	spros gshom
བསྤུ	quiver (hairs, spread, (fire, roll, (waves??	bspu
བསྤྱད་པ	cut off	bspyad pa
ཕ	1) PHA [bod yig gsal byed bcu bzhi pa 'di'i nga ro 'don tsul la skye gnas mchu dang, byed pa mchu, nang gi rtsol ba mgrin pa phye ba dang, phyi'i rtsol ba srog chen sgra med,...1.Ming 1668 gzhi'i m...	pha
ཕ་ཀི	over there	pha ki
ཕ་ཀིན	over there, yonder	pha kin
ཕ་ཀྱི་ཟ་འདྲེ	the "eater-demon" of forefathers	pha kyi za 'dre
ཕ་ཀླུངས	one's age in reference to father's horoscope	pha klungs
ཕ་སྐྱེས	evening, night	pha skyes
ཕ་སྐྱེས་བུ	son of a good father	pha skyes bu
ཕ་ཁ	other side	pha kha
ཕ་ཁ་ན	on the other side	pha kha na
ཕ་ཁག་བུ་དཀྲི	1 another khag dkri tshul	pha khag bu dkri
ཕ་ཁུ	father and paternal uncle	pha khu
ཕ་ཁུ་རྒན་རབས	the older generation	pha khu rgan rabs
ཕ་ཁོལ	obstacle, one carrying a stick in his hand	pha khol
ཕ་ཁྱིམ	home	pha khyim
ཕ་ག	the opposite side	pha ga
ཕ་གར	on the opposite side, to the opposite side	pha gar
ཕ་གར་ཐོན	having arrived on the other side	pha gar thon
ཕ་གི	that, yonder, there, over there	pha gi
ཕ་གི་ན་འདུག	[it's] over there	pha gi na 'dug
ཕ་གི་ནས	from there, from yonder	pha gi nas
ཕ་གི་མི་དེ་སུ་རེད	who is that person over there?	pha gi mi de su red
ཕ་གི་ལོངས	stand there	pha gi longs
ཕ་གིའི་རི	that mt over there	pha gi'i ri
ཕ་གིའི་རི་དེ	that mountain yonder	pha gi'i ri de
ཕ་གིར	[over] there	pha gir
ཕ་གུ	brick, border, bond, beam, wall, edge, tile	pha gu
ཕ་གེར	over there	pha ger
ཕ་གེར་གཟིགས་དང	look over there	pha ger gzigs dang
ཕ་གོས	inherent garment	pha gos
ཕ་གྱར	pha yar	pha gyar
ཕ་གླང	bull	pha glang
ཕ་རྒན	1) old father; 2) insulting word for monks, gramps, grandfather	pha rgan
ཕ་རྒྱུད	Father Tantras	pha rgyud
ཅླསས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨཱུནསུརཔསསེད་ཡོགཏནཏྲ	book 1. rdo rje theg pa'i snang phyogs sgyu lus sam thabs bskyed pa'i rim pa gtso bor ston pa'i rgyud	class of Unsurpassed yogatantra
ཕ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི	paternal	pha rgyud kyi
ཕ་རྒྱུད་སྐོར་གསུམ	(chn	pha rgyud skor gsum
ཕ་རྒྱུད་ལྟ་བ་ཀློང་ཡངས	terma revealed by {rdo rje gling pa} gter ston}	pha rgyud lta ba klong yangs
ཕ་རྒྱུད་དྲག་པོ་དགུ་འདུས	{pha rgyud drag po dgu 'dus}	pha rgyud drag po dgu 'dus
ཕ་རྒྱུད་ཕྱོགས་མཐུན	the aspect of upaya of the father tantras	pha rgyud phyogs mthun
ཕ་རྒྱུད་མ་ཧ་ཡོ་ག	Father Tantra Maha Yoga	pha rgyud ma ha yo ga
ཕ་རྒྱུད་རིགས་དྲུག	six families of the Father Tantras pha rgyud gsang ba 'dus pa'i bshad rgyud - Exposition Tantra of the Father Tantra Guhyasamaja: dgongs pa lung ston Tantra that Prophesies Realization	pha rgyud rigs drug
ཕ་ངོས	that/ the other side/ boundary	pha ngos
ཕ་གཅིག	the only father	pha gcig
ཕ་གཅིག་བླ་མ་དམ་པ	the only father and sublime master	pha gcig bla ma dam pa
ཕ་གཅིག་མ་གཅིག	siblings	pha gcig ma gcig
ཕ་ཆོས	father dharma [bka' gdams pa pha ston 'brom rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas kyis dri ba zhus te jo bo rje aa ti shas dri lan gsungs pa zab rgyas lam gyi gnad las brtsams pa'i zhal gdams mang po dang, jo bo'...	pha chos
ཕ་ཆོས་བུ་ཆོས	bka' gdams pa school pha chos and bu chos textual traditions	pha chos bu chos
ཕ་མཆོར་པོ	handsome man	pha mchor po
ཕ་ཇོ	father, noble father, venerable father	pha jo
ཕ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་སྒོམ་ཞིག་པོ	a 12th century khams pa 'brug pa bka' rgyud pa meditative ascetic who spread his teaching in Bhutan; a 12th century Khampa yogi of the Drukpa Kargyü sect, founder of the Phajo lineages of Bhutan	pha jo 'brug sgom zhig po
ཕ་རྗེ	venerable father	pha rje
ཕ་རྗེས་བུ	1) after the father dies, son who can take on his work/ responsibilities; 2) son born after the father dies	pha rjes bu
ཕ་རྗེས་བུ་རབས	many generations	pha rjes bu rabs
ཕ་རྗེས་བུས་འཛིན	after the father dies, the son shul 'dzin tshul	pha rjes bus 'dzin
ཕ་རྗེས་བུས་ཟིན	fathers responsibilities by the son theg pa	pha rjes bus zin
ཕ་རྗོ	venerable father	pha rjo
ཕ་གཉིས་པ	step-father	pha gnyis pa
ཕ་གཉེན	relations on father's side	pha gnyen
ཕ་ཏ	phat The combination of the syllable 'pha' that is 'gathering means' and the letter 't' that is 'cutting knowledge'./ The syllable of knowledge and means	pha ta
ཕ་ཏིང	sweet dried apricots	pha ting
ཕ་ཏིལ	lunt, ??? match	pha til
ཕ་ཏྲ	phat The combination of the syllable 'pha' that is 'gathering means' and the letter 't' that is 'cutting knowledge'./ The syllable of knowledge and means	pha tra
ཕ་གཏམ་བུ་འཇགས	1) the father's zer rgyun bu rgyud la spreading/ remaining; 2) Gzhan gyi zer sgros su 'brang ba	pha gtam bu 'jags
ཕ་རྟ	stallion	pha rta
ཕ་ཐར་སྒྲོལ	boat	pha thar sgrol
ཕ་ཐེལ	SA pha rol	pha thel
ཕ་ཐེལ་དུ	to the other side	pha thel du
ཕ་མཐའ	the other end, the other boundary	pha mtha'
ཕ་མཐའ་སྒྲོལ་བྱེད	boat 1669	pha mtha' sgrol byed
ཕ་མཐའ་དོན་གྱི་ཕ་མཐའ	the entire meaning	pha mtha' don gyi pha mtha'
ཕ་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ	limitless, transcendent	pha mtha' bral ba
ཕ་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན	like limitless space/ sky	pha mtha' bral ba nam mkha' bzhin
ཕ་མཐའ་མི་མངོན་པ	endless, no end in sight	pha mtha' mi mngon pa
ཕ་མཐའ་མེད	endless, limitless, infinite	pha mtha' med
ཕ་མཐའ་མེད་པ	endless, limitless, infinite	pha mtha' med pa
ཕ་མཐའ་ཡས	endless	pha mtha' yas
ཕ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་ནམ་མཁ	limitless space/ sky	pha mtha' yas kyi nam mkha
ཕ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་བྱ	limitless knowables	pha mtha' yas kyi shes bya
ཕ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	endless, limitless, infinite	pha mtha' yas pa
ཕ་མཐར	to the end, to the boundary, to the limits	pha mthar
ཕ་མཐར་སྒྲོལ	boat	pha mthar sgrol
ཕ་དང་འདྲ་བ	like the father	pha dang 'dra ba
ཕ་དང་བུ	father and son, father and daughter	pha dang bu
ཕ་དམ་པ	[deceased] father	pha dam pa
ཕ་དམ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Padampa Sangye	pha dam pa rin po che
ཕ་དམ་པ་སངས	The Indian mahasiddha who introduced the zhi byed tradition into tibet, main master of ma gcig lab sgron	pha dam pa sangs
ཕ་དམ་པ་སངས་རྒྱས	indian who founded zhi byed school	pha dam pa sangs rgyas
ཕ་དྲུག	the six paramitas	pha drug
ཕ་གདོང་སེར་མོ	yellow sow-head	pha gdong ser mo
ཕ་བདུན་པ	(met Jupiter, Thursday	pha bdun pa
ཕ་ནས་ཚུར	from there to here	pha nas tshur
ཕ་ནོར	1) patrimony; 2) burnt brick D	pha nor
ཕ་སྤད	father & children, father and son, father and daughter	pha spad
ཕ་སྤུན	family	pha spun
ཕ་ཕག	boar	pha phag
ཕ་ཕྱུག	bull	pha phyug
ཕ་ཕྱུག་ར་བ	cattle breeding field/ farm	pha phyug ra ba
ཕ་ཕྱུགས	bull	pha phyugs
ཕ་ཕྱོགས	father's side, the other side	pha phyogs
ཕ་བ	fathers	pha ba
ཕ་བ་དགོ་དགོ	puff-ball, bull-fist	pha ba dgo dgo
ཕ་བ་དོག་དོག	puff-ball, bull-fist	pha ba dog dog
ཕ་བང་ལོང་བུ	{pha bang long bu} black rock medicine w square crystals	pha bang long bu
ཕ་བི	SA pha rol, one of the other side	pha bi
ཕ་བིའོ	fabio	pha bi'o
ཕ་བུ	father and son	pha bu
ཕ་བུ་གོ་ལྡོག་གི་ཕྱྭ	in 'byung rtsis using the father's lag rtsar bu tsa, or vice versa; obstacles/ calamity etc. telling mo divination	pha bu go ldog gi phywa
ཕ་བུ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	refers to the {tshangs gsar} family. one of the family discards and his relative, together 18, had made 18 silver-golden Kagyü, which when distributed over whole Tibet	pha bu bco brgyad
ཕ་བོ	daka	pha bo
ཕ་བོང	large rock/ block/ boulders	pha bong
ཕ་བོང་ཁ	1) rdo pha bong gi steng; 2) king Srong btsan sgam po's hermitage	pha bong kha
ཕ་བོང་གོལ་གོལ	pha ba dgo dgo	pha bong gol gol
ཕ་བོང་གྱམ	shelter under a beetling rock	pha bong gyam
ཕ་བོང་ཐང	the Dakini's residence, near Reting Monastery	pha bong thang
ཕ་བོང་ལོང་བུ	(looks like metal, has iron or copper in it, has cube shape, crystalline, quite heavy, gray metallic color)	pha bong long bu
ཕ་བོན	bon fathers	pha bon
ཕ་བྱེད་པ	sire	pha byed pa
ཕ་བླ་མ	the father guru	pha bla ma
ཕ་བླ་བཙོངས་པ	pha ma'i zhabs 'dren zhus pa	pha bla btsongs pa
ཕ་འབབ	inheritance. lag rtags	pha 'bab
ཕ་འབབ་ས	inheritance. Father's gift, heirloom. gift, command gift	pha 'bab sa
ཕ་འབབས	inheritance, gift	pha 'babs
ཕ་འབུན	ancestral	pha 'bun
ཕ་འབྲུག་སྒོམ་ཞིག་པོ	see pha jo 'brug sgom zhig po	pha 'brug sgom zhig po
ཕ་ལྦ	solid rock, boulder	pha lba
ཕ་ལྦང	bat, ammonite	pha lbang
ཕ་ལྦང་ལོང་བུ	[a cubic-shape stone]	pha lbang long bu
ཕ་སྦུན	cousin by the father's side	pha sbun
ཕ་མ	parent, parents, father and mother, parents	pha ma
ཕ་མ་རྒས་ཁར་མ་བརྙས	Don't mistreat your elderly parents	pha ma rgas khar ma brnyas
ཕ་མ་གཅིག་པ	born of same farther and mother	pha ma gcig pa
ཕ་མ་གཅིག་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྤུན	cousin	pha ma gcig pa ma yin pa'i spun
ཕ་མ་ཆད	fiasco	pha ma chad
ཕ་མ་གཉེན་འབྲེལ	parents and relatives	pha ma gnyen 'brel
ཕ་མ་གཉེན་གཤེས	father mother and friends	pha ma gnyen gshes
ཕ་མ་གཉེན་བཤེས་གྲོགས་མཆེད	parents, brothers, sisters, relatives, and friends	pha ma gnyen bshes grogs mched
ཕ་མ་ལྟ་བུ	like mother and father/ parents	pha ma lta bu
ཕ་མ་དང་ལྡན་པ	having parents	pha ma dang ldan pa
ཕ་མ་བུ་ཕྲུག	parents and children, family	pha ma bu phrug
ཕ་མ་བྱས་པའི་དུས	when they were our parents	pha ma byas pa'i dus
ཕ་མ་བྱས་པའི་དུས་སུ	when/ at the time of being a parent	pha ma byas pa'i dus su
ཕ་མ་བྱེད་པ	be a parent	pha ma byed pa
ཕ་མ་ཡ་བྲལ	[children] having only 1 parent	pha ma ya bral
ཕ་མ་ལ	{pha ma} pass	pha ma la
ཕ་མ་ལ་གུས་པ	respect for parents	pha ma la gus pa
ཕ་མ་ཤི་ནས་ངུ་བ	to cry when one's father or mother dies	pha ma shi nas ngu ba
ཕ་མ་བསད་པ	killing 1's parents, patricide	pha ma bsad pa
ཕ་མའི་དགེ་སློང	monks and nuns	pha ma'i dge slong
ཕ་མའི་དོན	1) the benefit of 1's parents; 2) offerings to deceased ancestors	pha ma'i don
ཕ་མའི་མདོ	{pha ma'i mdo} [sutra on dutues to parents	pha ma'i mdo
ཕ་མའི་འདུ་འཕྲོད	the parents' having sexual intercourse	pha ma'i 'du 'phrod
ཕ་མའི་རིགས་རྒྱུད	parentage	pha ma'i rigs rgyud
ཕ་མའི་ཤ་ཁྲག	{sdig zas pha ma'i sha khrag} the worst of all foods: the flesh and blood of living beings	pha ma'i sha khrag
ཕ་མར་གྱུར་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings who have been my parents	pha mar gyur pa'i sems can
ཕ་མར་གྱུར་བའི་སེམས་ཅན	the sentient beings who have been my parents	pha mar gyur ba'i sems can
ཕ་མས་ཀྱི་ལག་རྒྱུན	handed down from long ago, hereditary	pha mas kyi lag rgyun
ཕ་མིང	1) father and [older] brother; 2) father's name; 3) friends and relatives of bride	pha ming
ཕ་མིང་ནས་བུ་མོ་གཏོང་སྐབས	friends and relatives of the bride at the time of sending her away	pha ming nas bu mo gtong skabs
ཕ་མིང་བོས	invited the relatives on his wife's side J	pha ming bos
ཕ་མིར་ས་མཐོ	the Pamirs	pha mir sa mtho
ཕ་མེས	ancestors, forefathers, paternal ancestors, eternal, ancestors	pha mes
ཕ་མེས་ཀྱི་དུས	forefather's time	pha mes kyi dus
ཕ་མེས་ཀྱི་ཡིག་ཚང	mi thog gong ma gong ma'i written story	pha mes kyi yig tshang
ཕ་མེས་ཀྱི་སྲོལ	x {rang gi pha mes kyi srol ngan pa'i rjes su 'brang ba} inheriting from their forefathers such pernicious customs	pha mes kyi srol
ཕ་མེས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	deity of paternal ancestors	pha mes kyi lha
ཕ་མེས་སྐབས	in the time of 1's ancestors	pha mes skabs
ཕ་མེས་གོང་མ	ancestor	pha mes gong ma
ཕ་མེས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	ancestral fatherland	pha mes rgyal khab
ཕ་མེས་དུས	the time of 1's ancestors	pha mes dus
ཕ་མེས་ནགས	(met charnel ground	pha mes nags
ཕ་མེས་པ	belonging to 1's ancestors	pha mes pa
ཕ་མེས་ཡང་མེས	ancestors, forefathers	pha mes yang mes
ཕ་མེས་ཤི་བ	deceased ancestors	pha mes shi ba
ཕ་མེས་ཤི་བའི་དོན་དུ	for the defunct ancestors	pha mes shi ba'i don du
ཕ་མོ་ལྷ་ལྔ	the five Varahi devis	pha mo lha lnga
ཕ་མྱེས	ancestors	pha myes
ཕ་ཙ་བུ་རྒྱུད	father and bu tsa bo descendants	pha tsa bu rgyud
ཕ་ཙད་དུ་བཞག་པ	to put aside	pha tsad du bzhag pa
ཕ་ཙན་དན	pure blood, blue blood	pha tsan dan
ཕ་རྩེ	SA phar skyal ba	pha rtse
ཕ་ཚད	space, distance	pha tshad
ཕ་ཚད་ཅིག་ཏུ་འདོན་ནས	stepping aside a little	pha tshad cig tu 'don nas
ཕ་ཚད་དུ་བཞག	put aside	pha tshad du bzhag
ཕ་ཚད་དུ་བཤག	put aside	pha tshad du bshag
ཕ་ཚན	paternal relatives	pha tshan
ཕ་ཚན་ཆེ	of noble extraction or birth, noble pedigree	pha tshan che
ཕ་ཚན་དན	father like sandal wood, blue/ pure/ noble blood	pha tshan dan
ཕ་ཚབ	step-father	pha tshab
ཕ་ཚབ་མ་ཚབ	foster parent	pha tshab ma tshab
ཕ་ཚེ	bag, sack, alms bag carried by mendicants	pha tshe
ཕ་ཚེ་བུ་རབས	the father's time and that of the sons	pha tshe bu rabs
ཕ་ཚོ	those of 1's father's clan, those over there	pha tsho
ཕ་ཝ	solid rock boulder	pha wa
ཕ་ཝང	bat, myotis mystaunus kuhl, boulder, bat of any species	pha wang
ཕ་ཝང་མགོ	Bat-head. Syn {dga' ba}	pha wang mgo
ཕ་ཝང་སྒོ་ཏི	pha ba dgo dgo	pha wang sgo ti
ཕ་ཝང་བྲུན	{pha wang brun} animal medicine	pha wang brun
ཕ་ཝང་ལོང་བུ	a cubic-shape stone	pha wang long bu
ཅུབིཅ	shape stone [sometimes called gser rdo; rdo nag po gru bzhi sho dang 'dra ba zhig; sman la 'gro; rang byung zangs red zer srol yang yod] 1671	cubic
ཕ་ཝང་ཤ	bat meat [med.] [stops vomiting	pha wang sha
ཕ་ཝམ	boulder	pha Wam
ཕ་ཝོང་ལོང་བུ	soul-stone for btsan	pha wong long bu
ཕ་གཞི	heritage of landed property, ancestral property, heritage	pha gzhi
ཕ་གཞིས	nature/ fields/ estate held from the time of 1's forefathers, patrilineal estate	pha gzhis
ཕ་གཞིས་གཟུང་མཁན	heir	pha gzhis gzung mkhan
ཕ་ཟད	1) end, other side; 2) close to [space/time] Dus tsod pha zad 'gyangs song,...Chu skyogs 'di pha zad khol cig	pha zad
ཕ་ཟད་འགྲོ	go a bit further	pha zad 'gro
ཕ་ཟད་ཅིག་ན	a bit further n	pha zad cig na
ཕ་ཟད་གཏུགས་པ	get further	pha zad gtugs pa
ཕ་ཟས	inherent sustenance, food legacy	pha zas
ཕ་བཟང་གི་བུ	son of good family	pha bzang gi bu
ཕ་བཟང་པོ	father w good nature	pha bzang po
ཕ་ཡ	step-father	pha ya
ཕ་ཡག་རྩ་བ	med. herb {pha yag rtsa ba [ro mngar la kha ba, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas glo tsad dang, lud pa dang, dug sel ba la phan	pha yag rtsa ba
ཕ་ཡང	step-father, foster-father	pha yang
ཕ་ཡར	step-father, foster-father	pha yar
ཕ་ཡི་རྒྱུད	paternal lineage	pha yi rgyud
ཕ་ཡུལ	homeland; ex {pha yul rgyab tu spongs shig} leave your homeland behind!	pha yul
ཕ་ཡུལ་གཅིག་པ	people from the same country	pha yul gcig pa
ཕ་ཡུལ་གཅིག་པ་ཡིན་པ	fellow-townsman / villager	pha yul gcig pa yin pa
ཕ་ཡུལ་སྤང་བ	give up your homeland	pha yul spang ba
ཕ་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	love of country	pha yul la chags pa
ཕ་ཡེ་བུ	same as father, 'like father, like son'	pha ye bu
ཕ་ར	billy/ he-goat	pha ra
ཕ་རག	breeding buck, SA phar ba, section in 'bras spungs monastery	pha rag
ཕ་རང	1) person from Feringhi, european; 2) venereal disease D	pha rang
ཕ་རན་སི	France	pha ran si
ཕ་རན་སི་མི་རིགས་དང་སྐད	french	pha ran si mi rigs dang skad
ཕ་རབས	excellent fathers	pha rabs
ཕ་རབས་བུ་རབས	generations	pha rabs bu rabs
ཕ་རི	1) the mt over there/ on the other side; 2) coarse cover/ carpet	pha ri
ཕ་རི་ཕུར་རི	rubbing	pha ri phur ri
ཕ་རེས་བུ་རེས	pha bu ltos sa ltos 'jog gi res skor	pha res bu res
ཕ་རོ་པོ	somebody else, another, the other	pha ro po
ཕ་རོལ	1) the other, 1's neighbor; 2) opponent, enemy; 3) outsider, foreigner; 4) the beyond, the next world; 5) beyond, outside, abroad; 6) the other side	pha rol
ཕ་རོལ་སྐྱེ་བོ	outsider, opposes	pha rol skye bo
ཕ་རོལ་འཁོར	further bank or side	pha rol 'khor
ཕ་རོལ་འཁོར་བ	the enemy's designs/ machinations/ advice	pha rol 'khor ba
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་ཀླན་ཀ	1) later lives; 3) peace, nirvana	pha rol gyi klan ka
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་གོ་བ	space or sphere beyond	pha rol gyi go ba
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་དུས	the time after death	pha rol gyi dus
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་དོན	1) the benefit of others; 2) external object	pha rol gyi don
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of others	pha rol gyi sdug bsngal
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་སྡེ	the other/ opposing army	pha rol gyi sde
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས	the other side	pha rol gyi phyogs
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་དམག་ཚོགས	enemy's troops	pha rol gyi dmag tshogs
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་རྫས	another's property or things	pha rol gyi rdzas
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་གཞན་སེམས་ཤེས་པ	know the minds of others	pha rol gyi gzhan sems shes pa
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་ཟླ་ལྡན་མཐུན་པར་བྱས	acting in obedience to the enemy	pha rol gyi zla ldan mthun par byas
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་ལེན་པ	take away a neighbor's property	pha rol gyi len pa
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་སེམས	the thoughts/ minds of others	pha rol gyi sems
ཕ་རོལ་གྱི་སེམས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of the minds/thoughts of others	pha rol gyi sems shes pa
ཕ་རོལ་བགྲོད	being on/ cross to the other shore	pha rol bgrod
ཕ་རོལ་འགྲོ	go on to another life	pha rol 'gro
ཕ་རོལ་རྒོལ་བ་ཚར་བཅད་པ	defeat the opponent	pha rol rgol ba tshar bcad pa
ཕ་རོལ་ངོགས	opposite side or bank	pha rol ngogs
ཕ་རོལ་ལྔ་པའི་ལམ	the occasion of death	pha rol lnga pa'i lam
ཕ་རོལ་ལྔ་བའི	death	pha rol lnga ba'i
ཕ་རོལ་ལྔ་བའི་ལམ	the occasion of death [the 5: byis pa childhood/ infancey lang tsho youth dar ma maturity rgas pa old age 'chi ba death] OR the process of dissolution of the five elements at death	pha rol lnga ba'i lam
ཕ་རོལ་འཇིག་རྟེན	the next life 1672	pha rol 'jig rten
ཕ་རོལ་འཇིག་རྟེན་འགྲོ	go to the next world	pha rol 'jig rten 'gro
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ	to the other shore/ side, beyond	pha rol tu
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཁ	look outside, go beyond, look beyond or outside, go against, act in opposition to, contradict, go beyond one's boundary or jurisdiction, go over to the enemy	pha rol tu kha
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཁ་ཕྱོགས་པ	examining by appearances	pha rol tu kha phyogs pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to the other shore/ side/ beyond	pha rol tu 'gro ba
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Maha Paramika, important monk follower of the Buddha	pha rol tu 'gro ba chen po
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན	transcendent, ways of overcoming limitations, perfection, (sbyin pa, tshul khrims, bzod pa, brtson 'grus, bsam gtan, shes rab, thabs, smon lam, stobs, ye shes), get to the other side, crossing to t...	pha rol tu phyin
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	Paramita. Literally, 'paramita' means 'reaching the other shore.' Particularly, it means transcending concepts of subject, object and action	pha rol tu phyin pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་སྒོམ་པ	to train in the paramitas / transcendent actions	pha rol tu phyin pa sgom pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ངེས་ལེགས	[Paramita, nihereyasa], transcendence	pha rol tu phyin pa nges legs
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལྔའི་མདོ	{pha rol tu phyin pa lnga'i mdo	pha rol tu phyin pa lnga'i mdo
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་བཅུ	10 perfections/ paramitas [the six +	pha rol tu phyin pa bcu
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ཐོབ་པའི་རྟགས	the signs of having attained the paramitas	pha rol tu phyin pa thob pa'i rtags
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དང་མཐུན་པ	in accord w/ conducive to the paramitas	pha rol tu phyin pa dang mthun pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing the perfections/ paramitas	pha rol tu phyin pa dang ldan pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དྲུག	the six paramitas [paramitashata sbyin pa, tsul khrims, bzod pa, brtson 'grus, bsam gtan, shes rab	pha rol tu phyin pa drug
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དྲུག་པ	the six paramitas pha rol tu phyin pa drug mtshon pa symbolizing the six paramitas pha rol tu phyin pa drug mtshon pa symbolizing the six paramitas [see {rus pa'i rgyan drug}	pha rol tu phyin pa drug pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དྲུག་མཚོན་པ	see {rus pa'i rgyan drug} pha rol tu phyin pa rnams kyi rten du gyur pa byang chub kyi sems} -}	pha rol tu phyin pa drug mtshon pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ཕར་པྱིན	perfection	pha rol tu phyin pa phar pyin
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ཕར་ཕྱིན	perfection pha rol tu phyin pa sbyin pa dang tshul	pha rol tu phyin pa phar phyin
ཁྲིམས་དང་བཟོད་པ་དག	the perfections of generosity, discipline and patience	khrims dang bzod pa dag
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ་སྒོམ་པ	practice/ train in the six paramitas	pha rol tu phyin pa la sgom pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་དགེ་བ	the virtues of the six paramitas etc.	pha rol tu phyin pa la sogs pa dge ba
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་སྐབས	in the context of the Paramita [vehicle / teachings]	pha rol tu phyin pa'i skabs
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of transcendental perfection	pha rol tu phyin pa'i theg pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	Transcendental actions pha rol tu phyin pa'i mi mthun phyogs (chn pha rol tu phyin pa'i mi mthun phyogs	pha rol tu phyin pa'i spyod pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ལམ	the Paramita Path, path of the perfections	pha rol tu phyin pa'i lam
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱེན་པ	paramitas	pha rol tu phyen pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་སོན་པ	traverse	pha rol tu son pa
ཕ་རོལ་རྟུལ་བ	conquer/ vanquish the enemy	pha rol rtul ba
ཕ་རོལ་ལྟར་མི་སྣང	the other side cannot be seen, very distant	pha rol ltar mi snang
ཕ་རོལ་བརྟེན	the support of the other shore, refuge	pha rol brten
ཕ་རོལ་དང་བསྡུམ་བྱས	reconciled with his enemy	pha rol dang bsdum byas
ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendental perfection/ paramita	pha rol du phyin pa
ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་བཅུ	10 transcendental perfections/ paramitas	pha rol du phyin pa bcu
ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of transcendental perfection/ the paramitas	pha rol du phyin pa'i theg pa
ཕ་རོལ་དུ་བཞུད་པ	'jig rten + - gone from this world	pha rol du bzhud pa
ཕ་རོལ་གདུང	enemies tormented, conqueror, king of magadha	pha rol gdung
ཕ་རོལ་གདུན	1) conqueror; 2) a king of Magadha	pha rol gdun
ཕ་རོལ་འདས་པ	died, passed on to another world	pha rol 'das pa
ཕ་རོལ་འདོད	rishi, 1 w aspirations for the next life	pha rol 'dod
ཕ་རོལ་འདོད་པ	one who thinks of the next world, rishi	pha rol 'dod pa
ཕ་རོལ་བརྡུངས	subduer of enemies, victor	pha rol brdungs
ཕ་རོལ་ན	on the other side, beyond	pha rol na
ཕ་རོལ་གནོན	1) overcome other[s] conquer enemies; 2) (met warrior, hero, conqueror	pha rol gnon
ཕ་རོལ་གནོན་པ	1) overcome other[s] conquer enemies; 2) (met warrior, hero, conqueror	pha rol gnon pa
ཕ་རོལ་བརྣོགས	hidden adversary	pha rol brnogs
ཕ་རོལ་པ	outsider, foreigner, enemy, the others, the other side [people]	pha rol pa
ཕ་རོལ་པས་ཀྱང་གུས་བྱེད	even the other side respects [them]	pha rol pas kyang gus byed
ཕ་རོལ་པོ	an enemy, foe; adversary, enemy, the other person	pha rol po
ཕ་རོལ་པོ་བསླུ་བ	deceive the enemy	pha rol po bslu ba
ཕ་རོལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the enemy king	pha rol po'i rgyal po
ཕ་རོལ་པོའི་དམག	the enemy army	pha rol po'i dmag
ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན	perfection	pha rol phyin
ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་དྲུག་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	practiced the Six Perfections	pha rol phyin drug la spyod pa
ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ	gone beyond, paramita	pha rol phyin pa
ཕ་རོལ་བྱོན་པ	transcended	pha rol byon pa
ཕ་རོལ་མི་མངོན	ocean	pha rol mi mngon
ཕ་རོལ་ཚུ་རོལ	hither and thither	pha rol tshu rol
ཕ་རོལ་ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	overpowering opponents [non-Buddhists]	pha rol zil gyis gnon pa
ཕ་རོལ་ལེགས་འགྲོ	cart	pha rol legs 'gro
ཕ་རོལ་གཤེགས་པ	1) pass on to another life/ place; 2) reach the end	pha rol gshegs pa
ཕ་རོལ་སར་ཕྱིན	gone to the next or another world	pha rol sar phyin
ཕ་རོལ་སོན་པ	gone beyond	pha rol son pa
ཕ་རོལ་བསོད་ནམས	the future results of merit	pha rol bsod nams
ཕ་རོལ་བསླུ་བ	deceive others	pha rol bslu ba
ཕ་ལ	1) dz' ti pha la??, fruit; 2) pha la family from which generals are ogen appointed [estates in Tsang and Yarlung and reside at Gyankhar castle near Gyantse	pha la
ཕ་ལ་ཚང	family of Shapbpe Phala in Tsang	pha la tshang
ཕ་ལགས	father [h address]	pha lags
ཕ་ལད	epithet of parasurama	pha lad
ཕ་ལམ	diamond	pha lam
ཕ་ལམ་རྡོ་རྗེ	diamond	pha lam rdo rje
ཕ་ལི	shield, buckler	pha li
ཕ་ལོགས	father's side, the other side	pha logs
ཕ་ཤི་སི	fascist	pha shi si
ཕ་ཤི་སི་རིང་ལུགས	fascism	pha shi si ring lugs
ཕ་ཤིད	virtuous roots of father who has passed away	pha shid
ཕ་ཤུལ	what is left by/ inherited from the father	pha shul
ཕ་ཤུལ་རྒྱུ་རྫས	what is left by/ inherited from the father	pha shul rgyu rdzas
ཕ་ཤུལ་བུ་འཛིན	inheritance, heritage	pha shul bu 'dzin
ཕ་ཤུལ་བུས་འཛིན	son taking up father's inheritance/ work etc after his death	pha shul bus 'dzin
ཕ་ཤུལ་འཛིན་པ	son inheriting his father's property, heir	pha shul 'dzin pa
ཕ་ཤོད་ཤེད་འདུག	he changes color, turns pale	pha shod shed 'dug
ཕ་ས་མ་ཁུངས	pha rtsa ma rgyud	pha sa ma khungs
ཕ་སོགས་རྒན་རབས	former generations in 1's paternal lineage	pha sogs rgan rabs
ཕ་གསོད་པ	patricide	pha gsod pa
ཕ་བསད་པ	killing [er of]1's father	pha bsad pa
ཕ་ལྷ་གོང་མ	ancestral sovereigns	pha lha gong ma
ཕག	1) Lkog gam rgyab [Sgo phag nas bltas pa,.Gyang gi phag tu mi zhig yibs nas bsdad 'dug]; 2) pig [one of the lo 'khor bcu gnyis]	phag
ཕི༹བེ༹་སཅྲམེནཏལ་སུབསྟནཅེས	sgo phag	five sacramental substances
ཅྲཅཀ་ཨིན་ཨ་དོཨོར་བག་མའི་ཕག	embrace of the bride	crack in a door bag ma'i phag
ཕག་ཀ	woman's belt/ sash	phag ka
ཕག་ཀོ	pig leather	phag ko
ཕག་ཀྲུམ	pork	phag krum
ཕག་དཀར	White Varahi	phag dkar
ཕག་སྐྱག	pig shit	phag skyag
ཕག་ཁྱུ	herd of swine	phag khyu
ཕག་ཁྲག	pig blood animal med.	phag khrag
ཕག་ཁྲོས་སེང་གསུམ	Vajra varahi, krodhi, and singhamukha	phag khros seng gsum
ཕག་གི་འགོ་ནད	hog cholera	phag gi 'go nad
ཕག་གི་གདོང	pig's face	phag gi gdong
ཕག་གི་གདོང་པ	the pig-faced one	phag gi gdong pa
ཕག་གི་ཤིང་རྟ་ཅན	earth goddess bstan ma	phag gi shing rta can
ཕག་གུང	district in tibet	phag gung
ཕག་གུང་རྫོང	{phag gung rdzong}	phag gung rdzong
ཕག་གྲུ	district in lhokha	phag gru
ཕག་གྲུ་སྡེ་སྲིད	phag mo gru pa'i yul sde'i srid dbang 'dzin mkhan [khri rabs dang po ta'i si tu byang chub rgyal mtshan gyis rab byung drug pa'i shing 'brug lo bar srid bskyangs pa dang, de nas gnyis pa 'jam dbyan...	phag gru sde srid
ཕག་མགོ	mineral medicine, a stone 1674	phag mgo
ཕག་མགོ་མ	sow-head. Syn {phag mo nag mo}	phag mgo ma
ཕག་རྒོད	wild boar	phag rgod
ཕག་རྒྱ	mudra, spiritual consort	phag rgya
ཕག་རྒྱ་གསུམ	(chn	phag rgya gsum
ཕག་སྒོད	mt. pig	phag sgod
ཕག་ལྕེ	1) pig tongue animal med.; 2) dkrug shing gi lkog lab	phag lce
ཕག་ཆར	phag zhag skabs falling rain [char chu de dug tu 'gyur bas sman dpyad sogs 'dzem dgos pa'i bshad srol yod	phag char
ཕག་མཆུ	hog	phag mchu
ཕག་མཆེ	boar's tusks	phag mche
ཕག་མཆོད	prostrations and offerings; pay respect	phag mchod
ཕག་ཉན	clandestine listening, bugging	phag nyan
ཕག་ཉན་རྒྱག	bug, listen to in secret	phag nyan rgyag
ཕག་ཉན་རྒྱག་པ	bug, listen to in secret	phag nyan rgyag pa
ཕག་ཉན་རྒྱག་པའི་གསང་གཏམ	secret talk that is bugged	phag nyan rgyag pa'i gsang gtam
ཕག་ཉན་བྱེད	{'phags skyes pos bcom ldan 'das ci gsung phag nyan byed mi btang ba} Virudhaka sent a man to eavesdrop on what the Buddha was saying	phag nyan byed
ཕག་ཉན་བྱེད་པ	eavesdrop	phag nyan byed pa
ཕག་ཏུ	secretly, clandestinely, covertly	phag tu
ཕག་ཏུ་ཡོང	come secretly	phag tu yong
ཕག་ཏོ་རྒྱག་པ	to brush	phag to rgyag pa
ཕག་ལྟ	concealed view	phag lta
ཕག་ལྟོ	pig feed	phag lto
ཕག་ཐོང	pigheaded	phag thong
ཕག་དང་མཆོད་པ་བྱས་པ	having made prostrations and offerings	phag dang mchod pa byas pa
ཕག་དྲུ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Phamo Drupa Kagyu lineage	phag dru bka' brgyud
ཕག་དྲུ་བཀའ་བསྒྱུད	Phamo Drupa Kagyu lineage [phag mo gru pa rdo rje rgyal po nas bsgyud pa'i bka' brgyud, divisions: 'dri gung, stag lung, 'brug pa, gya' bzang, khro phu, shug gseb, smar tsang	phag dru bka' bsgyud
ཕག་གདོང་མ	Sow-faced Dakini, 5	phag gdong ma
ཕག་གདོང་མ་ནག་མོ	Black Varahi	phag gdong ma nag mo
ཕག་གདོང་སེར་མོ	yellow sow-head	phag gdong ser mo
ཕག་མདོ	[hog-bristle] brush dreg pa 'khrud byed	phag mdo
ཕག་མདོ་རྒྱག	brush	phag mdo rgyag
ཕག་འདོ	brush	phag 'do
ཕག་སྡོང	pigheaded	phag sdong
ཕག་ནད་བརྒྱད	(chn	phag nad brgyad
ཕག་ནོར	secretly stored wealth	phag nor
ཕག་པ	boar, hog, pig	phag pa
ཕག་པ་སྡོམ་གསོས	pig to be slaughtered shed mo mgyogs po len ched phag tshang gi nang kho nar bcug nas gsos pa	phag pa sdom gsos
ཕག་པའི་སྐད་འདྲ་པོ	grunt	phag pa'i skad 'dra po
ཕག་པའི་མཆོག	boar's tail	phag pa'i mchog
ཕག་པའི་གདོང	head/ face of a pig	phag pa'i gdong
ཕག་པའི་སྣ	hog snout	phag pa'i sna
ཕག་པའི་གསོ་ཐང	hog farm	phag pa'i gso thang
ཕག་ཕག	Codonopsis ovata	phag phag
ཕག་བྲུན	{phag brun} animal med. pig shit?	phag brun
ཕག་བྲུན་ནུས་བསྲེགས	ash of pig manure burned smokelessly	phag brun nus bsregs
ཕག་མོ	sow, a plant, 1 of lha mo bdun	phag mo
ཕག་མོ་གྲུ	{phag mo gru} [place] [sne gdong rdzong gi khongs sngar bod khri skor bcu gsum gyi ya gyal du gtogs pa'i yul zhig	phag mo gru
ཕག་མོ་གྲུ་པ	[followers of] {phag mo gru pa ; 1) sde srid phag mo gru pa ste rab byung drug pa'i shing rta lor ta'i si tu byang chub rgyal mtsan gyis btsugs pa'i srid dbang de yin zhing, rab byung bcu pa'i sa r...	phag mo gru pa
ཕག་མོ་གྲུ་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	{phag mo gru pa rdo rje rgyal po [mdo khams lho rgyud 'bri lung sne shod du lcags stag lor 'khrungs, dgung lo bcu dgu la dbus su byon, dvags po lha rje bsten, phag gru'i gdan sa btab nas gtan chags...	phag mo gru pa rdo rje rgyal po
ཕག་མོ་གྲུབ་པ	Phagmotrupa	phag mo grub pa
ཕག་མོ་ནག་མོ	Black Varahi	phag mo nag mo
ཕག་མོ་ནག་མོ་ཕག་གི་མགོ	Varahi, sow, black, with the head of a sow	phag mo nag mo phag gi mgo
ཕག་མོ་ཕག་གདོང	sow-headed Varahi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	phag mo phag gdong
ཕག་མོ་ཞལ་གཉིས་མ	two-headed Varahi	phag mo zhal gnyis ma
ཕག་མོ་ལྷ་ལྔ	the five Varahi devis	phag mo lha lnga
ཕག་མོའི་ལྷ་ཁང	Phakmo Lhakhang, in Tsari. See Varahi Temple	phag mo'i lha khang
ཕག་དམར་ཞལ་གཉིས་མ	Two-headed Red Varahi	phag dmar zhal gnyis ma
ཕག་ཚང	pig pen/ sty, place where pigs stay	phag tshang
ཕག་ཚིལ	pig fat [med.] [R] lard	phag tshil
ཕག་ཚེམ	sewing [h]	phag tshem
ཕག་ཚོང	1) secretly selling, black market; 2) commerce in pigs	phag tshong
ཕག་ཚོན་པོ	plump pig	phag tshon po
ཕག་རྫི	swine herd	phag rdzi
ཕག་ཞག	pig day	phag zhag
ཡི་ལས་ལ་འཛེམ་དགོས་ཟེར	nyi bar tshad 5,46,30,0 shar, D says 12 days after the summer solstice	yi las la 'dzem dgos zer
ཕག་ཞལ་ནག་མོ	head of a black sow	phag zhal nag mo
ཕག་ཞོ	31 zho	phag zho
ཕག་ཟན	1) concealed food; 2) pig food	phag zan
ཕག་ཟུར	? a wt for gold etc.	phag zur
ཕག་ཟེ	brush	phag ze
ཕག་ཟེ་རྒྱག	brush	phag ze rgyag
ཕག་ཟེར	secretly talk	phag zer
ཕག་ཟེར་མ་བྱེད་ཐད་ཀར་ཤོད	say straight out w/o secret talk	phag zer ma byed thad kar shod
ཕག་ཟེས་འཕྱག་པ	whisk	phag zes 'phyag pa
ཕག་ཟླ	pig month 10th month	phag zla
ཕག་ར	pig pen	phag ra
ཕག་རགས	entrenchment, ramparts	phag rags
ཕག་རི	{phag ri} city	phag ri
ཕག་རི་རྫོང	{phag ri rdzong}	phag ri rdzong
ཕག་རི་ལུང	{phag ri lung} valley w of {phag ri rdzong}	phag ri lung
ཕག་རིའི་ཉ	fish?, glyptosternon maculatus regan	phag ri'i nya
ཕག་རིལ	pig shit	phag ril
ཕག་རིལ་ཐལ་བ	pig shit ash med.	phag ril thal ba
ཕག་ལང་པ	reed-bamboo	phag lang pa
ཕག་ལམ	secret path	phag lam
ཕག་ལོ	pig year	phag lo
ཕག་ལོ་པ	person born in the pig year	phag lo pa
ཕག་ཤ	pork	phag sha
ཕག་སུག	pig's legs	phag sug
ཕག་སུག་མ	small table w legs something like a pig's	phag sug ma
ཕག་གསུག	bribery, remuneration, reward	phag gsug
ཕགས་འདབ	cinnamon	phags 'dab
ཕགས་པ	noble	phags pa
ཕགས་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་རོལ་པ	lalitavistara	phags pa rgya che rol pa
ཕགས་པའི་ཡུལ	noble land	phags pa'i yul
ཕགས་པར	noble	phags par
ཕགས་ཡུལ	India, aryadesha, ancient name for bodhgaya	phags yul
ཕང	spindle, SA 'phang, pang	phang
ཕང་ཁེབ	apron	phang kheb
ཕང་ཁེབས	apron	phang khebs
ཕང་མཁན	weaver [caste]	phang mkhan
ཕང་མཁན་པ	[arch] rigs ngan pa	phang mkhan pa
ཕང་འགྲོ	sgra snyan te, gtong skabs phang par 'khyer dgos stabs phang 'gro zhes btags so	phang 'gro
ཕང་ངི་ཕུང་ངི	1) well-ripened fruit, crops etc.; 2) drifting, sinuous, swinging or uneven motion	phang ngi phung ngi
ཕང་ངི་ཕུང་ངིར་ཁམ་བུ་སྨིན་པ་ཝེལལ	ripened apricots phang ngi phung ngir lding ba'i sprin nag drifting/ sinuous black clouds	phang ngi phung ngir kham bu smin pa well
ཕང་པ	lap	phang pa
ཕང་ཕུང	bit by bit, piece by piece, patched	phang phung
ཕང་ཕུང་དུ	in patches	phang phung du
ཕང་བ	to save, to spare, to use economy, thriftiness	phang ba
ཕང་བུ	spindle	phang bu
ཕང་མ	1) {phang ma} tree med.; 2) spindle D	phang ma
ཕང་མ་དཀར་པོ	{phang ma dkar po} tree	phang ma dkar po
ཕང་མ་ནག་པོ	lonicera myrtillus hook. f. et thoms.	phang ma nag po
ཕང་ལོ	wheel	phang lo
ཕང་ལོང	vertebra	phang long
ཕང་ཤིང	wool spinning apparatus's srog shing	phang shing
ཕང་སེ་མ་ཡིན་པ	infrequent	phang se ma yin pa
ཕང་སེམས	careful disposition	phang sems
ཕང་སེམས་ཅན	thrifty, frugal	phang sems can
ཕང་སེམས་མེད་པ	lavish	phang sems med pa
ཕང་སེམས་མེད་པར	lavishly	phang sems med par
ཕང་གསིར་བ	whirl a spindle	phang gsir ba
ཕངས	great loss, greed, feel devastated, regret, be sorry	phangs
ཕངས་ཁེབ	apron; rectangular cloth	phangs kheb
ཕངས་ཁྱོད་ན	if you feel a loss	phangs khyod na
ཕངས་རྒྱུ	{ mi gces rgyu, mi dmar rgyu, mi phangs rgyu} the reason for not cherishing others, not regarding them as precious, feeling no empathy with them	phangs rgyu
ཕངས་པ	esteemable, valuable, dear and pleasing, beloved [gtsegs che ba, mnangs che ba if lost or not obtained disappointment, dejection {mi ngan de gson bzung byed ma thub phangs pa} {mda' mo dongs pa'i n...	phangs pa
ཕངས་པ་མེད	not caring, w/o hesitation, unconcerned	phangs pa med
ཕངས་པ་མེད་པ	unstintingly	phangs pa med pa
ཕངས་པ་ལ་ཨང	a common spoken phrase meaning "oh, what a shame"	phangs pa la ang
ཕངས་འབུལ	give stintingly	phangs 'bul
ཕངས་མེད	without hesitation, abundant, not caring	phangs med
ཕངས་མེད་སྟེར་བ	to amply supply	phangs med ster ba
ཕངས་མེད་པར་ཕུལ	offer unstintingly phangs med rang srog brtsi mthong med	phangs med par phul
པ་གཞན་སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་པ	unhesitatingly protected others' lives w/o regard for their own	pa gzhan srog skyob pa
ཕངས་མོད	excess of anything, anything that is thrown out when not required	phangs mod
ཕངས་སེམས	feeling of loss, stinginess, parsimony	phangs sems
བརླག་གཏོང་བ	wasting wealth w no sense of economy	brlag gtong ba
ཕངས་སེམས་ཞིག་ཤར་བ	felt great loss	phangs sems zhig shar ba
ཕཏ	PHAT 1676	phat
ཕད	large bag of hair or cloth, sting in the tail of a scorpion	phad
ཕད་ཁུག་སྒྱེ་མོ་ཆུང་ངུ	small sack	phad khug sgye mo chung ngu
ཕད་ཁོག	bag	phad khog
ཕད་གང	full sack, sackful	phad gang
ཕད་གོག	large bag/ sack	phad gog
ཕད་གོག་སྒྱེ་མོ	large bag/ sack	phad gog sgye mo
ཕད་སྟོང	empty sack	phad stong
ཕད་མཐིལ	bottom of a sack	phad mthil
ཕད་སྣམ	sack-cloth	phad snam
ཕད་སྣོད	large sack/ bag	phad snod
ཕད་ཕོད	[arch] elaborately, extravagantly	phad phod
ཕད་ཕོད་མི་བྱ་བ	[arch] not do elaborately, extravagantly	phad phod mi bya ba
ཕད་བུ	small handbag	phad bu
ཕད་ཙི	large wool/ yak hair bag	phad tsi
ཕད་ཙེ	yak hair sack	phad tse
ཕད་ཚ	very coarse sack cloth	phad tsha
ཕད་ཚེ	large grain vessel [of yak hair]	phad tshe
ཕད་ལ་ཕུག	CH kind of turnip/ radish	phad la phug
ཕན་སྐྱེས	[be of] use/ help/ benefit, use[ful], profitable	phan skyes
ཕན་ཁ	benefit	phan kha
ཕན་ཁྱད	benefit, advantage, difference	phan khyad
ཕན་ཁྱད་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག	there's a lot of difference	phan khyad chen po 'dug
ཕན་གྲུབ	1) panditas and siddhas. 2) accomplished scholar	phan grub
ཕན་གྲུབ་ཆས	the attire / dress of an accomplished scholar	phan grub chas
ཕན་གྲོགས	subsidiary, succor	phan grogs
ཕན་གྲོགས་བྱེད་པ	help, assist	phan grogs byed pa
ཕན་འགྲོར་པའི་བགྱི་བ	accomplish the welfare of beings, well-being	phan 'gror pa'i bgyi ba
ཕན་ངེས	useful, helpful, beneficial	phan nges
ཕན་ངེས་པ	which surely benefits	phan nges pa
ཕན་ཅད	1) from now/there on; 2) until now/there; 3) as long/far as; 4) over there from/ on the other side of; 4) beyond, further than, until	phan cad
ཕན་ཅན	useful, helpful, beneficial	phan can
ཕན་ལྕེ	streamer	phan lce
ཕན་ཆ	benefit	phan cha
ཕན་ཆད	another place, beyond, further than, as far as, until	phan chad
ཕན་ཆད་མ་འགྲོ	do not go any farther [than here/ that]	phan chad ma 'gro
ཕན་ཆུང	small cooking vessel	phan chung
ཕན་ཆུང་དྲིན་ཆུང	little benefit/ profit/ advantage, little profit little kindness	phan chung drin chung
ཕན་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ	the majority group (school of philosophies	phan chen sde pa
ཕན་ཆོད	1) from now on; 2) until now; 3) as long/far as	phan chod
ཕན་ཇི་ཐོགས་བྱེད	to be helpful, useful/ to give medicine	phan ji thogs byed
ཕན་སྙམ་བྱེད་ཀྱང	though one may imagine that it will help	phan snyam byed kyang
ཕན་བཏགས	help, use, benefit, be helpful, prove beneficial, assist, be of benefit to	phan btags
ཕན་བཏགས་དཀ	not of much use (Amdo	phan btags dka
ཕན་བཏགས་དཀའ	not of much use (Amdo	phan btags dka'
ཕན་བཏགས་པ	{phan 'dogs pa} to bring benefit; for benefit to accrue	phan btags pa
ཕན་བཏགས་པ་མེད	no benefit	phan btags pa med
ཕན་ཐབས	CM: phan thogs pa'i thabs shes, a method/means to benefit. 2) byed, "to look after [someone]." ¦ See {nang pa'i lta spyod kun btus}, p 41. [mss]	phan thabs
ཕན་ཐུབ	useful, profitable	phan thub
ཕན་ཐུབ་པ	be useful	phan thub pa
ཕན་ཐོག	[be of] use/ help/ benefit, use[ful], profitable, give med. to sick person	phan thog
ཕན་ཐོག་ཅན	useful, helpful, beneficial	phan thog can
ཕན་ཐོག་པོ	useful, serviceable	phan thog po
ཕན་ཐོགས	benefit, use	phan thogs
ཕན་ཐོགས་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	beneficial/ med. power	phan thogs kyi nus shugs
ཕན་ཐོགས་གྱིས	you must help them	phan thogs gyis
ཕན་ཐོགས་བགྱི་བ	to help	phan thogs bgyi ba
ཕན་ཐོགས་ཅན	favorable	phan thogs can
ཕན་ཐོགས་ཆེ་བ	salient phan thogs chen po khyed kyi bka' slob la	phan thogs che ba
བརྟེན་ནས་ང་ལ་བྱུང	I got great benefit from your teaching	brten nas nga la byung
ཕན་ཐོགས་ནུས་ཤུགས	beneficial/ med. power 1677	phan thogs nus shugs
ཕན་ཐོགས་པ	avail, administration of medicine to a sick person	phan thogs pa
ཕན་ཐོགས་པའི	for the benefit of	phan thogs pa'i
ཕན་ཐོགས་པའི་ལས	useful action	phan thogs pa'i las
ཕན་ཐོགས་པའི་ལས་ཀ	favor	phan thogs pa'i las ka
ཕན་ཐོགས་པོ	helpful, useful, serviceable	phan thogs po
ཕན་ཐོགས་པོ་བྱུང	proved helpful	phan thogs po byung
ཕན་ཐོགས་འབྱུང་བ	bringing benefit	phan thogs 'byung ba
ཕན་ཐོགས་མ་བྱུང	medicine which didn't have the desired effect	phan thogs ma byung
ཕན་ཐོགས་མེད་པ	decrepid, futile	phan thogs med pa
ཕན་ཐོབ	happy, good auspicious	phan thob
ཕན་འཐོགས་པ	useful	phan 'thogs pa
ཕན་ད	until now	phan da
ཕན་དང་བདེ་བའི་འབྱུང་གནས	source of benefit and happiness	phan dang bde ba'i 'byung gnas
ཕན་དིལ	round open metal pot of all sizes, common cooking vessel	phan dil
ཕན་དོན	khe phan dang nus pa,//thabs shes gnad du ma khel bas phan don ma grub	phan don
ཕན་བདེ	happiness and benefit, welfare, spiritual and temporal well-being	phan bde
ཕན་བདེ་དགོངས	intending to bring welfare and happiness	phan bde dgongs
ཕན་བདེ་བྱེད་པ་འབྲས་བུ	beneficial fruition	phan bde byed pa 'bras bu
ཕན་བདེ་འབྱུང་གནས	the source of benefit and happiness	phan bde 'byung gnas
ཕན་བདེའི་ཆར་རྒྱུན་མ་བུ་ལེ་ལག	{phan bde'i char rgyun ma bu le lag	phan bde'i char rgyun ma bu le lag
ཕན་བདེའི་སྙིང་པོ	{phan bde'i snying po}	phan bde'i snying po
ཕན་བདེའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	beneficial buddha activity	phan bde'i phrin las
ཕན་བདེའི་འབྱུང་གནས	source of benefit and happiness; Abbr. of {phan dang bde ba'i 'byung gnas}	phan bde'i 'byung gnas
ཕན་འདོགས	assist, usefulness, be useful, to be of benefit	phan 'dogs
ཕན་འདོགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	(chn phan 'dogs mkhan gyi bu mo bzang po dutiful daughter	phan 'dogs kyi yan lag bcu
ཕན་འདོགས་གྱིས	help them!	phan 'dogs gyis
ཕན་འདོགས་ཆེ་ཚོད	the greatness of the advantage	phan 'dogs che tshod
ཕན་འདོགས་ཐབས་མེད་པ	leaves him no chance of treating	phan 'dogs thabs med pa
ཕན་འདོགས་འདོད	want to [help assist, be of benefit to]	phan 'dogs 'dod
ཕན་འདོགས་པ	helpfulness	phan 'dogs pa
ཕན་འདོགས་པའི་དགེ་བ	{bsdu dngos bzhis sems can la phan 'dogs pa} 'Benefiting virtues' are [for instance] to benefit sentient beings through the four means of attraction.	phan 'dogs pa'i dge ba
ཕན་འདོགས་མེད་པ	useless, without usefulness	phan 'dogs med pa
ཕན་འདོད་མ	desire to benefit	phan 'dod ma
ཕན་འདྲོང	benefit,help	phan 'drong
ཕན་ནི་ཕུན་ནི	1) phyang phrul gyi rgyan rigs 'jol ba'i tshul; 2) old tattered broken and not fit for use	phan ni phun ni
ཕན་ནུས	function, role, beneficial power/ result, efficacy, effect	phan nus
ཕན་ནུས་ཐོན་པའི	beneficial, benefitbringing	phan nus thon pa'i
ཕན་ནུས་ལྡན་པ	beneficial, effective, efficacious	phan nus ldan pa
ཕན་ནུས་མེད་པ	negative, ineffective	phan nus med pa
ཕན་ནུས་ཟབ་གསུམ་གྱི་དབང	empowerments of benefit, ability and profundity	phan nus zab gsum gyi dbang
ཕན་ནུས་ཡོད་པ	effective	phan nus yod pa
ཕན་གནོད	benefit, results, effect; 1) help and harm. 2) effect, affect	phan gnod
ཕན་གནོད་ཆུ་ལ་དཔྱད་པ	ascertainment of the state of health or illness through examination of the urine	phan gnod chu la dpyad pa
ཕན་གནོད་དང་བྲལ་བ	without/ free of anything to benefit or harm; without/ beyond being helped/ improved or hindered	phan gnod dang bral ba
ཕན་གནོད་བྱེད་པ	to help or harm	phan gnod byed pa
ཕན་གནོད་བྲལ	cannot receive any harm or benefit	phan gnod bral
ཕན་གནོད་མ་བྱུང་བ	have no effect	phan gnod ma byung ba
ཕན་གནོད་མེད་པ	{phan gnod dang bral ba} without/ free of anything to benefit or harm; without/ beyond being helped/ improved or hindered	phan gnod med pa
ཕན་གནོད་ཡོད་པ	w effect/ result/ benefit and harm	phan gnod yod pa
ཕན་པ	benefit, good, advantage, be of use, be useful, utility, force, victory	phan pa
ཕན་པ་སྒྲུབ	{'on kyang khyod la ngas phan pa sgrub po} Even so, I will help you	phan pa sgrub
ཕན་པ་ཅན	(met aa ru ra tree	phan pa can
ཕན་པ་ཐུབ་པ	able to help	phan pa thub pa
ཕན་པ་ཞིག་སྲིད	healing is possible	phan pa zhig srid
ཕན་པ་ཡིན་པ	useful	phan pa yin pa
ཕན་པ་རླབས་པོ་ཆེ	immense benefit	phan pa rlabs po che
ཕན་པའི	helpful for	phan pa'i
ཕན་པའི་སྐྱབ་འཇུག་བྱ	I shall pray that you be protected	phan pa'i skyab 'jug bya
ཕན་པའི་གྲོས	useful advice	phan pa'i gros
ཕན་པའི་དངོས་ཉིད	supplying with beneficial things	phan pa'i dngos nyid
ཕན་པའི་སྙིང་གཏམ	beneficial advice	phan pa'i snying gtam
ཕན་པའི་དོན	useful thing, valuable possession	phan pa'i don
ཕན་པའི་དོན་མེད	of no use	phan pa'i don med
ཕན་པའི་ནུས་མཐུ་མེད་པ	powerless to help	phan pa'i nus mthu med pa
ཕན་པའི་ཚིག	beneficial instruction	phan pa'i tshig
ཕན་པའི་སེམས	benevolence, helpfulness 1678	phan pa'i sems
ཕན་པར་གོ་བ	understanding the benefits	phan par go ba
ཕན་པར་བརྗོད་པ	{bdag la phan par brjod pa legs} it is indeed good that you speak for the sake of my benefit	phan par brjod pa
ཕན་པར་བཞེད	solicitous	phan par bzhed
ཕན་པོ	beneficial	phan po
ཕན་ཕན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	perfection vehicle	phan phan gyi theg pa
ཕན་ཕུན	{phan ni phun ni - 1) phyang phrul gyi rgyan rigs 'jol ba'i tshul; 2) old tattered broken and not fit for use; 3) #	phan phun
ཕན་ཕུན་དུ་གྱུར	not be in accord or agreement	phan phun du gyur
ཕན་ཕུན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	disagree	phan phun du gyur pa
ཕན་ཕུན་དུ་གྱུར་བ	disagree	phan phun du gyur ba
ཕན་ཕུན་མེད་པ	[arch] chud zos su mi 'gro ba	phan phun med pa
ཕན་ཕྱིན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	perfection vehicle	phan phyin gyi theg pa
ཕན་བྱ	usefulness, useful birds	phan bya
ཕན་བྱས	beneficial action	phan byas
ཕན་བྱེད	beneficent being	phan byed
ཕན་དབང	the benefitting empowerments	phan dbang
ཕན་དབང་བཅུ	outer benefiting empowerments. The Guhyagarbha Tantra enumerates the ten outer benefiting empowerments: "Crown, tiara, and rosary, armor, banner of victory, and mudra, parasol, vase, and food and d...	phan dbang bcu
ཕན་འབུ	beneficial insects	phan 'bu
ཕན་འབྲས	gain, profit, beneficial result	phan 'bras
ཕན་མ་ཐོག	useless	phan ma thog
ཕན་མ་ཐོགས	useless	phan ma thogs
ཕན་མ་ཐོགས་པ	invalid phan ma thogs rung gnod pa ma byed where you can't be of benefit, at least don't do harm	phan ma thogs pa
ཕན་མི་ཐོག	useless	phan mi thog
ཕན་མི་ཐོགས	is of no avail	phan mi thogs
ཕན་མེད	of no use {sde snod gsum shes kyang bla ma la mos gus med na phan med} You may know the whole Tripitaka, but without devotion to your teacher that will be of no use to you.	phan med
ཕན་མེད་ཆགས་པ	emaciate	phan med chags pa
ཕན་མེད་གནོད་རྐྱེན	harmful, injurious	phan med gnod rkyen
ཕན་མེད་པ	useless	phan med pa
ཕན་ཚུན	identical, mutual	phan tshun
ཕན་ཚུན་གྱི་འགྲམ་ལ	on both banks	phan tshun gyi 'gram la
ཕན་ཚུན་གྱི་དཔེ	example and meaning gnyis kyi mtshungs chos phar tshur 'jal res byed pa'i rgyan zhig, dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste	phan tshun gyi dpe
ཕན་ཚུན་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	mutual interconnection/ relationship phan tshun grogs 'dris bzang po'i mthun between familiar friends there is good agreement	phan tshun gyi 'brel ba
ཕན་ཚུན་གྲོགས་བྱེད	cultivate friendship, be mutual friends	phan tshun grogs byed
ཕན་ཚུན་དགྲར་འཛིན	mutually regarding/ fixating each other as enemies	phan tshun dgrar 'dzin
ཕན་ཚུན་འགལ་བ	mutual contradiction	phan tshun 'gal ba
ཕན་ཚུན་འགེབས་བསྡུར	articles etc phan tshun bzang ngan bsdur ba	phan tshun 'gebs bsdur
ཕན་ཚུན་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	mutual transformation/ change	phan tshun 'gyur ldog
ཕན་ཚུན་འགྲིག་པ	reconcile	phan tshun 'grig pa
ཕན་ཚུན་འགྲིགས་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	compromise	phan tshun 'grigs thabs byed pa
ཕན་ཚུན་འགྲོགས	associate, accompany/ hold to 1 another	phan tshun 'grogs
ཕན་ཚུན་འགྲོགས་པ	hold to one another, associate	phan tshun 'grogs pa
ཕན་ཚུན་རྒྱུ	mutual cause	phan tshun rgyu
ཕན་ཚུན་རྒྱུད་པ	twist, string together	phan tshun rgyud pa
ཕན་ཚུན་གཅིག་ཕན་གཅིག་གྲོགས	reciprocal aid/ support	phan tshun gcig phan gcig grogs
ཕན་ཚུན་ཆེན་པོའི་འཁོར་ལོ	showing planets and stars fruition: good or bad weather, how much rain etc. astr. ri mo'i 'khor lo	phan tshun chen po'i 'khor lo
ཕན་ཚུན་རྗེས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	mutually successive	phan tshun rjes su byed pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བརྗེ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	interchange	phan tshun brje len byed pa
ཕན་ཚུན་གཉིས་དབར	mutual	phan tshun gnyis dbar
ཕན་ཚུན་བསྙམས་པ	reconciled	phan tshun bsnyams pa
ཕན་ཚུན་རྟེན་པ	interdependence	phan tshun rten pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ལྟོས་གྲུབ	mutually dependent status	phan tshun ltos grub
ཕན་ཚུན་ལྟོས་ནས	relative to 1 another	phan tshun ltos nas
ཕན་ཚུན་ལྟོས་པ	mutual support/ dependence	phan tshun ltos pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ལྟོས་པའི་གདགས་གྲུབ	mutually dependent designative status; designative status	phan tshun ltos pa'i gdags grub
ཕན་ཚུན་བརྟེན་པ	mutually supporting each other	phan tshun brten pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བརྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependent	phan tshun brten 'brel
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོད་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	establish existence in mutual dependence	phan tshun bltod nas grub pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོད་པ	mutual dependence	phan tshun bltod pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོས	mutual dependence	phan tshun bltos
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོས་ནས་གྲུབ	establish existence in mind	phan tshun bltos nas grub
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	establish existence in mutual dependence	phan tshun bltos nas grub pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བལྟོས་པ	mutual dependence	phan tshun bltos pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ཐོགས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	mutually obstructive phan tshun thogs pa dang bcas pa'i	phan tshun thogs pa dang bcas pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ཐོར་བ	scatter, disperse	phan tshun thor ba
ཕན་ཚུན་མཐུན་པ	harmony	phan tshun mthun pa
ཕན་ཚུན་མཐུན་པའི་གཏམ	words of mutual friendship	phan tshun mthun pa'i gtam
ཕན་ཚུན་མཐུན་འབྲེལ	interrelation	phan tshun mthun 'brel
ཕན་ཚུན་དུ	on each of the, to each of them	phan tshun du
ཕན་ཚུན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	1) phan tshun gcig nas gcig tu gyur pa; 2) become different	phan tshun du gyur pa
ཕན་ཚུན་དུ་འགྲོ	walk there and back	phan tshun du 'gro
ཕན་ཚུན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	walk to and fro	phan tshun du 'gro ba
ཕན་ཚུན་དུ་ཕུལ་བ	push hither and thither	phan tshun du phul ba
ཕན་ཚུན་དྲལ་བ	split asunder, splitting, rending	phan tshun dral ba
ཕན་ཚུན་འདུས་ནས	when those there meet each other	phan tshun 'dus nas
ཕན་ཚུན་འདྲ་བ	[mutually] similar	phan tshun 'dra ba
ཕན་ཚུན་སྡུར་བ	mix one with the other	phan tshun sdur ba
ཕན་ཚུན་སྡུར་བ་སྡེབས་པ	compare with one another	phan tshun sdur ba sdebs pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ནང་འགལ	mutually contradictory	phan tshun nang 'gal
ཕན་ཚུན་གནོད་བྱེད	[mutually] harm each other/ encroach	phan tshun gnod byed
ཕན་ཚུན་སྣོལ་བ	unite both the parties	phan tshun snol ba
ཕན་ཚུན་བསྣོར་བ	mixed, stirred back and forth	phan tshun bsnor ba
ཕན་ཚུན་བསྣོལ་ཏོ	friends and relations mutually attending or associating	phan tshun bsnol to
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤང་འགལ	contradictory in the sense of mutual exclusion, into two	phan tshun spang 'gal
ཏཡྤེས	Mutually exclusive oppositeness, oppositeness, mutually exclusive, mutual exclusion	types
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤང་འགལ་གྱི་རྟགས་སྦྱོར	syllogistic proof by contradiction of mutual exclusion w the reason	phan tshun spang 'gal gyi rtags sbyor
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤང་འགལ་གྱི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence of mutual exclusion	phan tshun spang 'gal gyi thal 'gyur
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤངས་འགལ	mutual exclusion phan tshun spangs 'gal gyi thal 'gyur consequence of mutually exclusive contradiction 'gal ba'i khyab bya dmigs pa	phan tshun spangs 'gal
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤངས་པ	syn of {phan tshun spangs 'gal}? [mss]	phan tshun spangs pa
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤོང་འགལ	contradiction of mutual exclusion	phan tshun spong 'gal
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤྲད	exchange mutually, mutual exchange	phan tshun sprad
ཕན་ཚུན་སྤྲོད་པ	1) mutually lhu bsgrigs pa; 2) give each other things	phan tshun sprod pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ཕང་འགལ	incompatibility of mutual exclusion	phan tshun phang 'gal
ཕན་ཚུན་ཕྱག་བྱེད་པ	mutually prostrate/ show homage	phan tshun phyag byed pa
ཕན་ཚུན་འཕྲད་པ	interview, meet together	phan tshun 'phrad pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བང་འགལ	incompatible through exhaustive mutual exclusion	phan tshun bang 'gal
ཕན་ཚུན་འབྲལ་བ	mutual separation/ absence/ exclusion	phan tshun 'bral ba
ཕན་ཚུན་འབྲེལ་བ	mutual interconnection/ relationship	phan tshun 'brel ba
ཕན་ཚུན་འབྲོས་པ	run hither and thither	phan tshun 'bros pa
ཕན་ཚུན་སྦྲེལ་མཐུད	coordination [relationship]	phan tshun sbrel mthud
ཕན་ཚུན་སྦྲེལ་བ	mutual mthud pa following/ relationship	phan tshun sbrel ba
ཕན་ཚུན་མེད་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, phan tshun yin pa med pa'i rgyu dngos med des, sems la 'dod pa'i 'bras bu dngos por gyur pa bskyed pa'i rgyu'i rgyan zhig	phan tshun med pa'i byed rgyu
ཕན་ཚུན་སྨྲ་བ	converse	phan tshun smra ba
ཕན་ཚུན་མཚུངས་ལྡན	mutually concurrent, can occur together	phan tshun mtshungs ldan
ཕན་ཚུན་འཚེ་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of mutual hostility	phan tshun 'tshe pa'i sdug bsngal
ཕན་ཚུན་འཚེ་བ	attacks; x {dud 'gro ni bkol spyod dang phan tshun 'tshe ba'i sdug bsngal la spyod pas chos byed du mi khoms} animals have no opportunity to practise the Dharma because they undergo slavery and suf...	phan tshun 'tshe ba
ཕན་ཚུན་འཚེ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of mutual harm	phan tshun 'tshe ba'i sdug bsngal
ཕན་ཚུན་མཛའ་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ	they became friends phan tshun mdza' bas bsnyen bskur byas friendly visit	phan tshun mdza' bar gyur te
ཕན་ཚུན་གཞོགས་འདེགས	phar tshur gcig gzhogs gcig 'degs kyi rogs ram	phan tshun gzhogs 'degs
ཕན་ཚུན་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ	coordination	phan tshun zung sbrel
ཕན་ཚུན་བཟོད་སྒོམ	phan tshun bzod pa sgom res	phan tshun bzod sgom
ཕན་ཚུན་ཡ་བཟུང	phan tshun gyod 'dzing gi kha gtad 'jal ba	phan tshun ya bzung
ཕན་ཚུན་ཡི་གེ་གཏོང	send/ write letters to each other	phan tshun yi ge gtong
ཕན་ཚུན་ཡོད་མེད་བརྗེ་རེས	mutual exchange [according to each others' needs] phan tshun g.yo - reciprocal movement	phan tshun yod med brje res
ཕན་ཚུན་རོ་སྤྲོད	1st hand evidence,	phan tshun ro sprod
ཨེཡེ	witness	eye
ཕན་ཚུན་རོགས་སྐྱོར	reciprocal aid/ support	phan tshun rogs skyor
ཕན་ཚུན་རོགས་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	give reciprocal aid/ support	phan tshun rogs skyor byed
ཕན་ཚུན་རོགས་རམ	help each other	phan tshun rogs ram
ཕན་ཚུན་རོགས་རམ་བྱེད	give reciprocal aid/ support	phan tshun rogs ram byed
ཕན་ཚུན་རོགས་རམ་བྱེད་པ	aid mutually	phan tshun rogs ram byed pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ལ	on either side	phan tshun la
ཕན་ཚུན་ལ་འཆུས	obstinately perverse	phan tshun la 'chus
ཕན་ཚུན་ལ་འཆུས་པ	distorted	phan tshun la 'chus pa
ཕན་ཚུན་ལེགས་འབྲེལ	mutual friendship/ harmony	phan tshun legs 'brel
ཕན་ཚུན་སེམས་ཁུར	mutual consideration/ concern	phan tshun sems khur
ཕན་ཚུན་སོ་སོར་འགྱེས་པ	separate 2 parties	phan tshun so sor 'gyes pa
ཕན་ཚུན་བསམ་ཤེས	mutual understanding	phan tshun bsam shes
ཕན་ཚུལ་འགལ་བ	mutual contradiction	phan tshul 'gal ba
ཕན་གཚུན	identical, mutual	phan gtshun
ཕན་ཟས	beneficial food	phan zas
ཕན་ཟི་ལིང	paraffin	phan zi ling
ཕན་ཡུལ	'phan yul	phan yul
ཕན་ཡོད	benefits, blessing, advantage, virtue, beneficial qualities, power, serviceable, comfortable, a comfort, merit	phan yod
ཕན་ཡོན	benefits, blessing, advantage, virtue, benefits and advantages	phan yon
ཕན་ཡོན་ཁྱད་པར་ཆེ་བ་ཡིན	especially beneficial	phan yon khyad par che ba yin
ཕན་ཡོན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	the aspect of benefits	phan yon gyi yan lag
ཕན་ཡོན་བཅུ	10 advantages inherent to the teachings	phan yon bcu
ཕན་ཡོན་བཞི	1) {'phral gyi phan yon}. 2) {yun gyi phan yon} 3) {yon tan thams cad 'dus pa'i phan yon} 4) {tshegs chung don che'i phan yon}	phan yon bzhi
ཕན་རོགས	subsidiary 1680	phan rogs
ཕན་རོགས་ཅན	helpful	phan rogs can
ཕན་ལ	until	phan la
ཕན་ལན	x {dge slong rnams phan lan la gnod pa byung yang gnod lan du phan pa sgrub dgos pa} - Even if monks are harmed in return for their help, they need to return help for harm	phan lan
ཕན་ལན་གནོད་པས	return evil for good, return, repay, return evil for good	phan lan gnod pas
ཕན་ལན་གནོད་པས་འཇལ	retaliate	phan lan gnod pas 'jal
ཕན་ཤེས་སྨན་དཔྱད	he who uses the therapeutic methods who knows how to heal, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis	phan shes sman dpyad
ཕན་སེམས	helpful/ altruistic attitude/ wishes/ intentions/ thoughts	phan sems
ཕན་སེམས་ཅན	thrifty	phan sems can
ཕན་སེམས་སྦྱངས་པ	cultivated benevolence	phan sems sbyangs pa
ཕན་སྲུང	insurance, security	phan srung
ཕན་སླེབ	[be of] use/ help/ benefit, use[ful], profitable, give med. to sick person	phan sleb
ཕན་སླེབས	[able/power to] benefit/ help, be of use	phan slebs
ཕབ་བསྒྱུར	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phab bsgyur
ཕབ་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phab bsgyur byed
ཕབ་བསྒྱུར་ཞུ	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phab bsgyur zhu
ཕབ་ཆ	discount	phab cha
ཕབ་ཆ་གཅོད	discount	phab cha gcod
ཕབ་བཏབ་པ	adding the yeast	phab btab pa
ཕབ་རྟ	yeast	phab rta
ཕབ་པ	bring down, decoding, consecrate	phab pa
ཕབ་ཕོབ	cloths etc. phyi bong che ba'i tshul	phab phob
ཕབ་བེ་ཕོབ་བེ	cloths etc. phyi bong che ba'i tshul	phab be phob be
ཕབ་ཙེ	CH face etc. wiping cloth aa cor	phab tse
ཕབ་རྩི	yeast	phab rtsi
ཕབ་རྩིས	conversion [$ etc], calculation [rin thang gi khyad par]	phab rtsis
ཕབས	1) dry barm, lees, yeast; 2) med. chang lees	phabs
ཕབས་བསྒྱུར	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phabs bsgyur
ཕབས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phabs bsgyur byed
ཕབས་བསྒྱུར་ཞུ	tr, transcribe, change, convert	phabs bsgyur zhu
ཕབས་རྟ	rgyun dang, ru ma, phabs rtsi [chang gi phabs rta,//sman gyi phabs rta	phabs rta
ཕབས་པ	transcription of terma scripts	phabs pa
ཕབས་རྩི	cheese chang lees etc.	phabs rtsi
ཕབས་རྫས	cheese chang lees etc.	phabs rdzas
ཕམ	defeat, disappointment, lose, loss, [be] defeat[ed], fail[ure]	pham
ཕམ་ཁ	defeat	pham kha
ཕམ་ཁ་དང་རྒྱལ་ཁ	defeat and victory	pham kha dang rgyal kha
ཕམ་འཁུར་བ	gyong 'khyer ba, bzod par byas pa	pham 'khur ba
ཕམ་འཁྱེར་བ	pham 'khur ba	pham 'khyer ba
ཕམ་རྒུད	failure, defeat, downfall, loss	pham rgud
ཕམ་རྒྱལ	loss and gain	pham rgyal
ཕམ་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ་གཏོང	wager high stakes pham rgyal chen po gtong ba'i rgyan	pham rgyal chen po gtong
རྩེད	high stakes gambling	rtsed
ཕམ་རྒྱལ་གཏོང	put at stake	pham rgyal gtong
ཕམ་རྒྱལ་མཐའ་གསལ་གྱི་འཐབ་མོ	decisive fight	pham rgyal mtha' gsal gyi 'thab mo
ཕམ་རྒྱལ་མྱུར་དུ་འབྱེད་ཡོང	victory and defeat were quickly distinguished pham rgyal su la yong min dbye ba 'byed	pham rgyal myur du 'byed yong
པའི་གནས	gnas [place/ topic ?] of distinguishing who won and lost	pa'i gnas
ཕམ་བཅུག་པ	beat defeat	pham bcug pa
ཕམ་ཆད	failure	pham chad
ཕམ་རྗེས་སླར་ལྡོག	[make a] comeback, recover [after defeat]	pham rjes slar ldog
ཕམ་རྗེས་སླར་ལྡོག་བྱེད	[make a] comeback, recover [after defeat]	pham rjes slar ldog byed
ཕམ་ཉེས	failure, defeat, downfall, loss	pham nyes
ཕམ་ཉེས་འགྱུར	be defeated, lose, fail	pham nyes 'gyur
ཕམ་ཉེས་གཏོང	defeat, vanquish	pham nyes gtong
ཕམ་ཉེས་གཏོང་མི་ཐུབ་པ	undefeatable, invincible	pham nyes gtong mi thub pa
ཕམ་ཉེས་བྱུང་བ	be defeated, lose, fail	pham nyes byung ba
ཕམ་ཉེས་ཡོང	be defeated, lose, fail	pham nyes yong
ཕམ་ཉེས་སུ་གཏོང	defeat, vanquish	pham nyes su gtong
ཕམ་ཉེས་སུ་གཏོང་མི་ཐུབ་པ	undefeatable, invincible	pham nyes su gtong mi thub pa
ཕམ་ལྟུང	a severe violation	pham ltung
ཕམ་སྟེར་བ	gyong gtong ba,//nyo tshong drang po byed pa las, phar tshur pham ster ba mi chog //dgra dmag la 'dzings nas pham ster ba	pham ster ba
ཕམ་ཐིང་པ་ཅན	{pham thing pa can	pham thing pa can
ཕམ་མཐིང	Phamthing [a place in Nepal	pham mthing
ཕམ་མཐིང་པ་ཅན	a buddhist of nepal	pham mthing pa can
ཕམ་འཐོར	defeated and scattered	pham 'thor
ཕམ་འདྲའི་ཉེས་བྱས	transgressions that are like a defeat	pham 'dra'i nyes byas
ཕམ་པ	1) [p 'pham pa]; 2) [be] defeat[ed], lose, fail; 2) <par'adzik'a> violate root pratimoksha/ bodhisattva vows	pham pa
ཕམ་པ་ཁས་ལེན	admit/ concede defeat	pham pa khas len
ཕམ་པ་རྒྱལ་བའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་ཡིན	defeat is a condition of victory	pham pa rgyal ba'i rgyu rkyen yin
ཕམ་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 downfalls	pham pa brgyad
ཕམ་པ་འཆབ་བཅས་གསོར་མི་རུང	root downfalls kept secret which can't be restored	pham pa 'chab bcas gsor mi rung
ཕམ་པ་བཞི	four major transgressions of the monastic vows	pham pa bzhi
ཕམ་པ་བཟོ	defeat, vanquish	pham pa bzo
ཕམ་པའི་དངོས་གཞི	actual defeat	pham pa'i dngos gzhi
ཕམ་པའི་སྡེ	the four moral rules which cover the ordination of gelong, gelongma, getsul, getsulma	pham pa'i sde
ཕམ་པའི་སྦོམ་པོ	approximate defeat	pham pa'i sbom po
ཕམ་པར་བྱེད	defeat, vanquish	pham par byed
ཕམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	to defeat	pham par byed pa
ཕམ་པོ	sadness	pham po
ཕམ་པོ་ཆེ	gtsang po	pham po che
ཕམ་བྱེད	the defeater [ggd]	pham byed
ཕམ་བྱོལ	withdrawal as result of defeat	pham byol
ཕམ་བྱོལ་བྱེད	withdraw as result of defeat	pham byol byed
ཕམ་བྲོས	flee/ run away as result of defeat	pham bros
ཕམ་འབབས	pham phab	pham 'babs
ཕམ་སྦོམ་ལྕི་བ	heavy penalty of nearly breaking the four root downfalls	pham sbom lci ba
ཕམ་མི	invincible	pham mi
ཕམ་དམག	defeated army	pham dmag
ཕམ་རྩེ	[arch] semi-circular cloak	pham rtse
ཕམ་ཚབས་ཆེ་བ	great defeat, rout	pham tshabs che ba
ཕམ་ཚོང	selling at a loss, undersell pham tshong brgyab na dgos pa med there is no need/ reason to sell at a loss	pham tshong
ཕམ་འཚོང	sell at a loss, undersell	pham 'tshong
ཕམ་འཚོང་རྒྱག	sell at a loss, undersell	pham 'tshong rgyag
ཕམ་མཛད	defeat	pham mdzad
ཕམ་ཤོར	defeat	pham shor
ཕམ་སེམས་པ	be disappointed	pham sems pa
ཕམས་ཏེ་ལོག་གོ	was overcome and withdrew	phams te log go
ཕམས་པ	defeat	phams pa
ཕའི	pah, bah, pooh	pha'i
ཕའི་ཀྲང	platoon leader	pha'i krang
ཕའི་རྒྱུ་དངོས	father's wealth, patrimony	pha'i rgyu dngos
ཕའི་རྒྱུད	father tantra	pha'i rgyud
ཕའི་ཆིའུ་སྤོ་ལོ	volleyball	pha'i chi'u spo lo
ཕའི་གདོངས་པོ	patrimony	pha'i gdongs po
ཕའི་སྡེ	assembly of monks, father's relatives	pha'i sde
ཕའི་སྤུན	father's relatives	pha'i spun
ཕའི་ཕ	paternal grandfather	pha'i pha
ཕའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཉེན་ཙན	paternal relatives	pha'i phyogs kyi gnyen tsan
ཕའི་བུ	son, worthy son	pha'i bu
ཕའི་དབང་ཆ	paternal rights	pha'i dbang cha
ཕའི་མ	paternal grandmother	pha'i ma
ཕའི་མིང་ནས་དྲས་ཏེ	borrowing from the father's name	pha'i ming nas dras te
ཕའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་ཕན་པ	enjoying inheritance/ fathers property	pha'i longs spyod la phan pa
ཕའི་སྲིང་མོ	father's sister, aunt	pha'i sring mo
ཕྭའི་གཏོ་སྤྱད	B"n gto bcos implement	phwa'i gto spyad
ཕའུ	SA pag	pha'u
ཕའེ	platoon	pha'e
ཕའེ་ཀྲང	platoon leader	pha'e krang
ཕའེ་ཆིའུ	volleyball	pha'e chi'u
ཕར	across	phar
ཕར་ཀ་ན	the other side, over there	phar ka na
ཕར་ཀན	the other side, over there	phar kan
ཕར་ཀྱོག་ཚུར་ཀྱོག	not straightforward	phar kyog tshur kyog
ཕར་ཁ	over there, opposite side	phar kha
ཕར་ཁ་ལྟ	SA gzhan du phyogs, phyin ci log	phar kha lta
ཕར་ཁ་ལྟ་བ	1) gzhan du phyogs; 2) wrong, in error	phar kha lta ba
ཕར་ཁ་ན	SA pha rol	phar kha na
ཕར་ཁག་ཚུར་དཀྲི	phar tshur ngan khag 'jog res	phar khag tshur dkri
ཕར་ཁར་སོང་བ	reached the other shore	phar khar song ba
ཕར་འཁུམ་པ	recede	phar 'khum pa
ཕར་འཁྱམ་པ	roam onwards	phar 'khyam pa
ཕར་འཁྱམས	roam on/ away	phar 'khyams
ཕར་བགྲོད་ཀྱི་དུས་སྐབས	transition period	phar bgrod kyi dus skabs
ཕར་འགྱང	delay, postpone, put off	phar 'gyang
ཕར་འགྱངས	extension, prolongation	phar 'gyangs
ཕར་འགྱངས་གཏོང	postpone, put off, delay	phar 'gyangs gtong
ཕར་འགྱངས་པ	prolong	phar 'gyangs pa
ཕར་འགྱངས་བྱེད	postpone, put off, delay	phar 'gyangs byed
ཕར་འགྱངས་བྱེད་པ	adjourn, postpone, procrastination	phar 'gyangs byed pa
ཕར་འགྲེ་ཚུར་འགྲེ	1) roll back and forth; 2) phan tshun rigs 'gre gtong ba	phar 'gre tshur 'gre
ཕར་འགྲེ་ཚུར་འགྲེ་བྱེད་པའི་རྟ	horse rolling back and forth	phar 'gre tshur 'gre byed pa'i rta
ཕར་འགྲོ	go off/ away 1682 phar 'gro brgya dang tshur yong stong 100 going 1,000 coming back	phar 'gro
ཕར་འགྲོ་བ	go off	phar 'gro ba
ཕར་འགྲོ་ཚུར་འགྲོ	go [there] and come [here]/ hither and thither/ back and forth phar 'gro tshur 'gro rgyun mi 'chad pa'i	phar 'gro tshur 'gro
རླངས་འཁོར	constantly going and coming vehicle	rlangs 'khor
ཕར་འགྲོ་ཚུར་འོང	go and come	phar 'gro tshur 'ong
ཕར་འགྲོ་ཚུར་ཡོང	go and come	phar 'gro tshur yong
ཕར་འགྲོ་ཚུར་ཡོང་བྱེད་པ	come and go	phar 'gro tshur yong byed pa
ཕར་རྒོལ	attack, assault, go on the offensive, questioner in a debate	phar rgol
ཕར་རྒོལ་གནམ་གྲུ	attack/ fighter plane	phar rgol gnam gru
ཕར་རྒོལ་བྱེད	attack, assault, go on the offensive	phar rgol byed
ཕར་རྒོལ་བྱེད་པ	to attack	phar rgol byed pa
ཕར་རྒོལ་དམག་འཐབ	offensive action/ warfare	phar rgol dmag 'thab
ཕར་རྒོལ་རང་སྲུང	offensive and defense, defense against an offensive phar rgol rang srung gyis dgra dmag thal	phar rgol rang srung
བའི་རྡུལ་དུ་བརླགས	by the defense against the offensive the enemy army was crushed to dust	ba'i rdul du brlags
ཕར་རྒོལ་སྲིད་ཇུས	offensive policy/ strategy	phar rgol srid jus
ཕར་རྒོལ་སྲིད་བྱུས	offensive policy/ strategy	phar rgol srid byus
ཕར་རྒྱུག་ཚུར་རྒྱུག	go quickly here and there	phar rgyug tshur rgyug
ཕར་རྒྱུགས	go away quickly! get out!	phar rgyugs
ཕར་རྒྱུགས་ཚུར་རྒྱུགས	crisscross	phar rgyugs tshur rgyugs
ཕར་རྒྱུགས་ཤིག	go away quickly! get out! phar ngo phar la mi shes tshur ngo tshur	phar rgyugs shig
ལ་མི་ཤེས	with no food in your mouth, no money in your hands, and no clothes on your back	la mi shes
ཕར་ངོགས	other bank/ shore/ side	phar ngogs
ཕར་ངོགས་སུ	on the other bank/ shore/ side	phar ngogs su
ཕར་ངོགས་སུ་ཕྱིན་པ	gone to the other bank/ shore/ side	phar ngogs su phyin pa
ཕར་ངོས	the other side	phar ngos
ཕར་ངོས་དང་པོའི་འཕྲོས	continuation from p. 1 phar ngos dang rang ngos gnyis ka	phar ngos dang po'i 'phros
མཐོང་དགོས	1 must see both the other side and 1's own	mthong dgos
ཕར་ཅེར་ཚུར་ཅེར	[arch] eye phar tshur bsgrims te way of looking	phar cer tshur cer
ཕར་ཆག	fluctuate [-ion]	phar chag
ཕར་ཆག་ཕྱིན་པ	fluctuate	phar chag phyin pa
ཕར་ཆིན	embroidery [on brocade and 'go snam etc.]	phar chin
ཕར་ཆིན་རྒྱག	embroider	phar chin rgyag
ཕར་ཆེར་ཚུར་ཆེར	phar cer tshur cer	phar cher tshur cher
ཕར་མཆོངས	I jumped at it	phar mchongs
ཕར་འཆི་ལ་ཉེ	my death is nearer and nearer	phar 'chi la nye
ཕར་བལྟས་དཔོན་མེད	looking outward, has no master,	phar bltas dpon med
ཕར་ཐལ་ཚུར་ཐལ	pass back and forth (through	phar thal tshur thal
ཕར་ཐེངས	edition	phar thengs
ཕར་ཐེངས་དང་པོ	1st edition	phar thengs dang po
ཕར་ཐོན་པ	drawings, expenses	phar thon pa
ཕར་འཐབ	attack, assault, go on the offensive	phar 'thab
ཕར་འཐབ་བྱེད	attack, assault, goon the offensive	phar 'thab byed
ཕར་འཐེན་ཚུར་འཐེན	pulled to and fro	phar 'then tshur 'then
ཕར་འདེད་པ	chase out, drive out	phar 'ded pa
ཕར་ལྡོག་པ	return phar ldog pa rang yul du phebs} -}	phar ldog pa
ཕར་སྤྱང	pallas's wild dog, cuon alpinus	phar spyang
ཕར་སྤྱན	Pallas's wild dog, Cuon alpinus	phar spyan
ཕར་སྤྲོད	give to another	phar sprod
ཕར་སྤྲོད་ཚུར་ལེན	give things or money to others and receive them 1self	phar sprod tshur len
ཕར་ཕར	indirectly, eventually, later on	phar phar
ཕར་ཕར་འགྲོ	walk away from	phar phar 'gro
ཕར་ཕར་ཕྱིན་པ	to start walking	phar phar phyin pa
ཕར་ཕར་ཧོ་གོ	eventually understand	phar phar ho go
ཕར་ཕུད	1) mthar bskrad pa; 2) chas gos sogs brje 'bud; 3) logs su bkar ba	phar phud
ཕར་ཕེབས་ཕེབས	coming and going	phar phebs phebs
ཕར་ཕེབས་ཚུར་ཕེབས	coming and going	phar phebs tshur phebs
ཕར་ཕོར	a few bowls	phar phor
ཕར་ཕྱིན	Paramita teachings	phar phyin
ཕར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	perfection vehicle, the monastic study of {mngon rtogs rgyan} and commentaries, transcendent vehicle	phar phyin gyi theg pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་དྲུག་ཐེ་ནོན	corresponding aspects w the six paramitas	phar phyin gyi mi mthun phyogs drug the non
ཕར་ཕྱིན་བཅུ	the 10 paramitas	phar phyin bcu
ཕར་ཕྱིན་སྟོབས	by nature sangs rgyas kyi chos yongs su smin par byed pa &, sems can yongs su smin par byed pa &, sems can thams cad la phan pa'i spyod pa mi gtong ba bcas so	phar phyin stobs
ཕར་ཕྱིན་ཐེག་པ	paramita vehicle [rgyu mtshan nyid kyi theg pa	phar phyin theg pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་དྲུག	six paramitas. The six transcendent actions of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and discriminating knowledge	phar phyin drug
ཆོས་བཞི་ལྡན་གྱི་སྦྱིན་པ་དང	tsul khrims, bzod pa, brtson 'grus, bsam gtan, shes rab	chos bzhi ldan gyi sbyin pa dang
ཕར་ཕྱིན་དྲུག་དང་ལྡན་པ	the six transcendent perfections	phar phyin drug dang ldan pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་དྲུག་པ	six paramitas/ perfections	phar phyin drug pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་དྲུབ་ལ་སློབས	train in the six transcendent perfections!	phar phyin drub la slobs
ཕར་ཕྱིན་བསྡུས་པ	see {sher phyin bsdus pa}	phar phyin bsdus pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་པ	go away, transcending functions, SA pha rol tu phyin pa	phar phyin pa
ཕར་ཕྱིན་ཚུར་ཡོང	back and forth	phar phyin tshur yong
ཕར་ཕྱིན་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	genuine transcendent perfection	phar phyin mtshan nyid pa
ཕར་ཕྱོགས	the other side, the side over there	phar phyogs
ཕར་ཕྱོགས་པ	another person	phar phyogs pa
ཕར་ཕྱོགས་ཚུར་ཕྱོགས	the other side and this side	phar phyogs tshur phyogs
ཕར་ཕྱོགས་སུ	across, on the other side	phar phyogs su
ཕར་འཕུལ་བ	give away in charity	phar 'phul ba
ཕར་བ	wild dog Cuon primoevus	phar ba
ཕར་བ་རྟོག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga realizing the subtle	phar ba rtog pa'i rnal 'byor
ཕར་བྱིན་གྱི་སྐོར	perfection of wisdom	phar byin gyi skor
ཕར་བྱིན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	perfection vehicle	phar byin gyi theg pa
ཕར་མ་བཏང་ཚུར་མ་སྒྲུབ	"no externalization, no internalization" phar mi dgag tshur mi sdud bar du mi	phar ma btang tshur ma sgrub
གཞག	don't block, don't focus deliberately, don't leave alone as some compromise [CYDz, 109.b.1]	gzhag
ཕར་མི་མཆིའོ	I do not go away	phar mi mchi'o
ཕར་མི་སྣང	not manifest outside	phar mi snang
ཕར་མི་འཛིན་པ	1 who does not know his ancestors	phar mi 'dzin pa
ཕར་ཙམ	near[by]	phar tsam
ཕར་ཙམ་ན	on the other side of	phar tsam na
ཕར་ཙམ་ནས	from somewhere	phar tsam nas
ཕར་ཙམ་ནས་འོང	coming from somewhere	phar tsam nas 'ong
ཕར་ཙམ་བསླེབས་པ	gone quite a way	phar tsam bslebs pa
ཕར་ཚད་ཚུར་ཚད	near[by], a short distance away [from each other] phar tshad tshur tshad du grong khyer de	phar tshad tshur tshad
གཉིས་ཆགས་ཡོད	those two cities are close to each other	gnyis chags yod
ཕར་ཚུར	back and forth, hither and thither, here and there, mutually	phar tshur
ཕར་ཚུར་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་བྱེད་པ	ply	phar tshur skyel 'dren byed pa
ཕར་ཚུར་འཁྱོག་པ	dodge	phar tshur 'khyog pa
ཕར་ཚུར་བཏང་བའི་ཡི་གེ	letters that were sent back and forth	phar tshur btang ba'i yi ge
ཕར་ཚུར་ལྟ་བ	look around/ about	phar tshur lta ba
ཕར་ཚུར་འཐེན་པ	pull this way and that way	phar tshur 'then pa
ཕར་ཚུར་སྦོར་བ	remove from one place to another	phar tshur sbor ba
ཕར་ཚུར་ལོག་རེས	topsy-turvy, upside down, all confused together, jumbled	phar tshur log res
ཕར་ཚུར་སྲེས་པ	mix up together this and that	phar tshur sres pa
ཕར་འཚོང	sell	phar 'tshong
ཕར་འཛིན་པ	esteem, respect one as a father, one who knows his ancestors	phar 'dzin pa
ཕར་འཛུག	SA snga rgol	phar 'dzug
ཕར་འཛུག་དང་ཚུར་རྒོལ	snga gol and phyi rgol, disputant and respondent in a debate	phar 'dzug dang tshur rgol
ཕར་རྫས	an old heir-loom	phar rdzas
ཕར་ཞོག	Let alone	phar zhog
ཕར་ཞོག་ལྟ་ཅི་སྨོས	yi ge 'bri rgyu phar zhog though it is read is not understood	phar zhog lta ci smos
ཕར་བཞག	leave along / far from / putting aside / not even to mention	phar bzhag
ཕར་བཞུད	pray go away	phar bzhud
ཕར་བཞུད་པ	{nyi ma phar bzhud pa} sunset	phar bzhud pa
ཕར་ཟད	1) end, other side; 2) close to	phar zad
ཕར་ལ	beyond, over there, after	phar la
ཕར་ལ་བཏགས་པ་ཙམ	nothing more than labels and designations affixed	phar la btags pa tsam
ཕར་ལུང་གཙང་པོ	{phar lung gtsang po} river	phar lung gtsang po
ཕར་ལེན་ཤལ་སྒོ	camera lens	phar len shal sgo
ཕར་ལོག་ཚུར་ལོག	topsy-turvy, upsidedown, all confused together	phar log tshur log
ཕར་ལོག་ཚུར་ལོག་ཁ་བྱས་ནས་ལྟ་བ	after [he] spoke [their] view was confused	phar log tshur log kha byas nas lta ba
ཕར་ལོགས	the other side, on the other side	phar logs
ཕར་ཤེས་པ	appreciating one's father	phar shes pa
ཕར་སོང	phar rgyugs! go away!	phar song
ཕར་སླེབ	arrive there, on further side	phar sleb
ཕལ	[comp phal pa] general, common, ordinary [person], usual, common	phal
ཕལ་ཀ	'phal ka	phal ka
ཕལ་ཀུ་ཤ	birth D	phal ku sha
ཕལ་ཀུ་ཤམ	birth	phal ku sham
ཕལ་ཀུ་ཤི	birth	phal ku shi
ཕལ་སྐད	ordinary colloquial speech, local dialect	phal skad
ཕལ་སྐད་ཀྱི་རྩོམ་ཡིག	colloquial/ vernacular style of writing	phal skad kyi rtsom yig
ཕལ་སྐད་དང་ཡིག་སྐད	colloquial and literary speech phal skad dang yig skad gnyis la khyad	phal skad dang yig skad
པར་ཕྲན་བུ་ཡོད	colloquial and literary speech are a little different	par phran bu yod
ཕལ་སྐད་དུ་ཆང་རིན	gratuity	phal skad du chang rin
ཕལ་ག	river of Gaya, anciently Naira¤jana	phal ga
ཕལ་གུ་ན	SK 2nd month	phal gu na
ཕལ་ཅན	broad, wide	phal can
ཕལ་ཅེར	[arch] mostly	phal cer
ཕལ་ཆན	broad, wide	phal chan
ཕལ་ཆེ་བ	general, ordinary, host, troop, mass of people	phal che ba
ཕལ་ཆེ་བར	crowd/ troop/ mass of people, very many 1684	phal che bar
ཕལ་ཆེན	1) Avatamsaka Sutra; 2) [nyan thos sde bzhi'i gras phal chen sde pa] mahasamghika[s]	phal chen
ཕལ་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ	the majority group [school of philosophers), {phal chen pa}	phal chen sde pa
ཕལ་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ་ལྔ	mahasamghika[s]	phal chen sde pa lnga
ཕལ་ཆེན་པ	mahasanghikas	phal chen pa
ཕལ་ཆེན་པའི་སྡེ	mahasamghika school	phal chen pa'i sde
ཕལ་ཆེར	mostly, near, probably, approximately, about, i am afraid, i think, roughly, nearly, almost, as if, seemingly, as a rule, generally, for the most part, majority of people, usually, many, majority, ...	phal cher
ཕལ་ཆེར་ཁྱད་མེད	almost the same	phal cher khyad med
ཕལ་ཆེར་མཐུན	in thorough agreement, in harmony	phal cher mthun
ཕལ་ཆེར་སྤྱོད་པ	practicing most of [the precepts]	phal cher spyod pa
ཕལ་ཆེར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དགེ་བསྙེན	genyen taking most of the precepts [srog gcod dang, ma byin len, 'dod log dang gsum spong ba'i dge bsnyen no	phal cher spyod pa'i dge bsnyen
ཕལ་ཆེར་ཕེབས་ཚར་བ་རེད	[they] probably left	phal cher phebs tshar ba red
ཕལ་ཆེར་ཞིག	most of the..	phal cher zhig
ཕལ་ཆེར་ལ	for most people, for the most part	phal cher la
ཕལ་ཆེར་ལས་འགན་བསྒྲུབས་ཟིན་པ	the task was mostly accomplished	phal cher las 'gan bsgrubs zin pa
ཕལ་ཆེར་ལོ་དགུ་ཙམ	almost 9 years	phal cher lo dgu tsam
ཕལ་གཏམ	skad cha spyir btang pa/ dkyus ma	phal gtam
ཕལ་བཏང	very common, unfit, unsuited	phal btang
ཕལ་པ	ordinary/ mundane/ common	phal pa
ཕལ་པ་ལ་ངེས་པ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 110-4]	phal pa la nges pa brgyad
ཕལ་པ་ལས་ཕགས་པར	better than usual	phal pa las phags par
ཕལ་པའི་སྐད	layman's language/ tongue, colloquial	phal pa'i skad
ཕལ་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the experience of commoners	phal pa'i spyod yul
ཕལ་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not within the experience to/ to be realized by ordinary people	phal pa'i spyod yul ma yin pa
ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ	Avatamsaka Sutra [mdo sde sangs rgyas phal po che zhes pa brda rnying du sangs rgyas rma ga chad du grags shing, yang snyan gyi gong rgyan du'ang bsgyur ba yod la, mdo sde 'di sho lo ka 'bum dang, ...	phal po che
ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ་མདོ	Avatamsaka	phal po che mdo
ཕལ་བ་ལ་ངེས་བ་བརྒྱད	(chn	phal ba la nges ba brgyad
ཕལ་མེད	narrow D	phal med
ཕལ་མོ	ordinary	phal mo
ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ	for the most part	phal mo che
ཕལ་མོ་ཆེའི་མི	most of the people	phal mo che'i mi
ཕལ་མོ་ཆེའི་ལས་ཀ	most of the work	phal mo che'i las ka
ཕལ་མོ་ཆེར	mostly, for the most part	phal mo cher
ཕལ་ཚིག	ordinary colloquial speech, local dialect	phal tshig
ཕལ་ལས་འཕགས་པ	far excel others	phal las 'phags pa
ཕས	by the father, of the opposite side,	phas
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཅོཨུནཏེར	party. pha rol,//phas kyi rgol ba	of the counter
ཕས་ཀྱི་དགྲ	hostile, opposed, enemy	phas kyi dgra
ཕས་ཀྱི་རྒོལ་བ	opponent	phas kyi rgol ba
ཕས་རྒོལ	1) opposing debater; 2) [harmful] foreign enemy; 3) opposite/ opposing side/ party	phas rgol
ཕས་རྒོལ་བ	enemy, on the opposite side, counterpart	phas rgol ba
ཕས་རྒོལ་མི	adversary, opponent	phas rgol mi
ཕས་སྤུན	children of 1 father	phas spun
ཕས་ཕམ་པ	par'adzika, defeating downfall, that breaks/ nullifies 1's vows	phas pham pa
ཕས་ཕམ་པ་བཞི	4 fundamental sins (impurity, stealing, killing, frivolous talk)	phas pham pa bzhi
ཕས་ཕམ་པར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཆོས་བཞི	four basic rules, Skt. catvarah parajika dharmah; The foremost serious violations of monastic discipline: sexual intercourse, theft, murder, and claiming greater realization than what one has attained	phas pham par 'gyur ba'i chos bzhi
ཕས་བུ་ལ་ནོར་འབོག་པ	like a child who receives his father's inheritance	phas bu la nor 'bog pa
ཕི	phyi, 44	phi
ཕི་ཀྲི	feet. Loan word from English. E.g., (from HHDL, ngos kyi yul..., 5) stag 'tsher ni rgya mtsho nas mtho tshad phi kri dgu stong yod, Tag-tsher is 9000 feet above sea level. [mss]	phi kri
ཕི་པ	outsider, non-buddhist	phi pa
ཕི་མ	Vimalamitra	phi ma
ཕི་རི་ཁྲུན་སི	radio frequency	phi ri khrun si
ཕི་ལིང	foreigner, european, englishman, one of the outer continent	phi ling
ཕི་ལིབ་པིན	Philippines	phi lib pin
ཕི་ཤད	saddle roll [KNT]	phi shad
ཕིག	pierce	phig
ཕིག་ཕིག	jelly	phig phig
ཕིགས	pierce, SA 'bigs pa	phigs
ཕིགས་བརྟོལ	breakthrough, penetration	phigs brtol
ཕིགས་པ	(tha mi dad pa) 1) rtogs pa,//yig rigs kyi snying don phigs pa; 2) brtol thub pa [rtsig pa'i nang ngos nas ai khung gcig phug nas phigs pa,	phigs pa
ཕིགས་པའི་བུ་ག	pierced hole	phigs pa'i bu ga
ཕིགས་པར་སྨྲ་བ	zur phyin par bshad pa	phigs par smra ba
ཕིང	bean jelly, vermicelli, earthenware cup	phing
ཅུཔཔིང	glass; 2) door-hinge; 3) vermicelli, noodles of bean/ sweet potato flour, CH noodles of pea flour; 4) CH food made from rgyu sran //lab phing; 5) CH currency unit	cupping
ཕིང་དཀར་བ	1) white felt; 2) place; 3) name of a buddha image in phing dkar ba	phing dkar ba
ཕིང་གིས	{phing gis} mt S CH where fine tea is grown	phing gis
ཕིང་ཆག	phing skam po chag pa	phing chag
ཕིང་པ	felt	phing pa
ཕིང་ཕང་ཆིའུ	table tennis ball	phing phang chi'u
ཕིང་ཕང་སྤོ་ལོ	ping pong ball	phing phang spo lo
ཕིང་ཕན་ཆིའུ	ping pong	phing phan chi'u
ཕིང་བ	felt	phing ba
ཕིང་བྱ་སྟག་རྩེ་རྫོང	{phing bya stag rtse dzong [district in Lhoka near rphung rgyas	phing bya stag rtse rdzong
ཕིང་བྲིས	a special outlining technique for clouds	phing bris
ཕིང་རྩམ	sran ma rlon par btags pa'i flour	phing rtsam
ཕིང་ཡང	Pyongyang	phing yang
ཕིང་རླུང	breathing heavily	phing rlung
ཕིང་ཤ	1) mixed phing and meat [w vegetables] dish; 2) example of compatibility	phing sha
ཕིན་མགྱོགས	rang 'thag gam chu 'khor gyi lcags stegs kyi sner bsgar ba'i rdo	phin mgyogs
ཕིབ་རྒྱ	gilded, pagoda-like roof	phib rgya
ཕིབས	1) roof, dome, canopy; 2) house	phibs
ཕིབས་པག	roof tile	phibs pag
ཕིབས་འོག	under a canopy or dome of a house, residence, house	phibs 'og
ཕིའོ	ticket	phi'o
ཕིར	phyir, phar	phir
ཕིར་བ	fall down	phir ba
ཕིས	phyir, phar	phis
ཕུ	the upper part of a sloping valley/ foothills; upper end/ higher ground; the upper part of sloping valley/ the high ground; sleeve, the upper part, a village in Upper Kunawar	phu
ཕུ་ཀྱི་བྱ་བཞག	schemes of going here and there	phu kyi bya bzhag
ཕུ་ཀྲི	feet	phu kri
ཕུ་ཀྲི་དྲུག	fathom	phu kri drug
ཕུ་དཀྲོག་མདའ་དཀྲོག	causing disturbance/ agitation/ trouble everywhere	phu dkrog mda' dkrog
ཕུ་བཀྲུ	{phu 'khru ba, phu thag 'khru} to get to the heart of (the matter/ something)	phu bkru
ཕུ་ཁང	LKh: an ancient Ngari term equivalent to {chos khang}. Still used today in Ngari [mss]	phu khang
ཕུ་འཁྲུ	{phu bkru ba, phu thag 'khru} to get to the heart of (the matter/ something)	phu 'khru
ཕུ་གུ	hole	phu gu
ཕུ་གྲས	elder brother phu gras} - older brother J phu 'gro mda sdod kyi bya bzhag schemes of going here and there	phu gras
ཕུ་འགྲོ་མདའ་སྡོད	schemes of going here and there	phu 'gro mda' sdod
ཕུ་རྒྱག་པ	blow	phu rgyag pa
ཕུ་རྒྱབ	puff	phu rgyab
ཕུ་རྒྱབ་པ	inflate, pump	phu rgyab pa
ཕུ་བརྒྱབ	blow at	phu brgyab
ཕུ་ཆུ	river coming from above	phu chu
ཕུ་ཆུང་བ	{phu chung ba [rab byung dang po'i lcags lug lor 'phan yul du 'khrungs, mtsan gzhon nu rgyal mtsan, 'brom ston gyi thugs sras, sprul ba'i sku mched gsum gyi ya gyal, bka' gdams pa'i nang gses kyi m...	phu chung ba
ཕུ་ཆུའི་རྒྱུན	upland stream	phu chu'i rgyun
ཕུ་མཆོད	LKh: abbreviation for {phu khang gi mchod pa}, "altar/chapel offerings" [mss]	phu mchod
ཕུ་ཇོ་མོ་གངས་ཀྱི་འདུན་རོལ་ན	in the foothills in front of the Lady of Glaciers	phu jo mo gangs kyi 'dun rol na
གཉད	primordial awareness has no origin phu gnyug ma'i shes pa de gar yang ma	gnyad
ཕུ་བཏབས་པ	{zhal gyis phu btabs pa} blew on	phu btabs pa
ཕུ་སྟོད	worn by Tibetan govt gi shod drung, rgya lu chas kyi upper garment w sleeves	phu stod
ཕུ་ཐག	CM: 1) sbug gi ring tshad de/ lung pa'i phu nas mda'i bar gyi ring thung. "a measure of internal distance: the distance from the upland part of a valley (lung pa'i phu) to the lower part." ¦ phu lu...	phu thag
ཕུ་ཐག་བཀྲུ་བ	{phu thag 'khru ba} to get to the heart of (the matter/ something)	phu thag bkru ba
ཕུ་ཐག་འཁྲུ་བ	{phu thag bkru ba} to get to the heart of (the matter/ something)	phu thag 'khru ba
ཕུ་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	reflect on the real meaning, not make any mistake about the real meaning of a thing	phu thag gcod pa
ཕུ་ཐག་བཅད	left no room for doubts	phu thag bcad
ཕུ་ཐག་བཅད་པ	[re]solved, determined, fathomed the depth of, left no room for doubts	phu thag bcad pa
ཕུ་ཐག་ཆོད	[re]solved *, basis of matter completely settled, found the source, come yo a decisive conclusion, resolve, find a permanent solution	phu thag chod
ཕུ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	to solve, resolve, determine, fathom the depth of, to leave no room for doubt	phu thag chod pa
ཕུ་ཐག་ཆོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁ	decisive victory	phu thag chod pa'i rgyal kha
ཕུ་ཐག་ཐུང་ཐུང	short-sighted	phu thag thung thung
ཕུ་ཐག་མ་ཆོད་ན་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཡོད	if 1 does not reflect on/ settle the real meaning 1 will be in doubt	phu thag ma chod na the tshom yod
ཕུ་ཐུང	sleeve, with short sleeves	phu thung
ཕུ་ཐོ་ཡ	Portugal	phu tho ya
ཕུ་མཐའ	ultimate, highest [peak of]	phu mtha'
ཕུ་དུང	[short] sleeve, hand-ruffles	phu dung
ཕུ་དུང་གི་ཁ	cuff	phu dung gi kha
ཕུ་དུང་ན་བཟའི་ལྟེབ་ཏུ	in the sleeve of his dress	phu dung na bza'i lteb tu
ཕུ་དུང་རྩེ	sleeve edges	phu dung rtse
ཕུ་དུང་ཡོད	having sleeves	phu dung yod
ཕུ་དུད	honor, respect, esteem	phu dud
ཕུ་དུད་ཀུར་པ	show honor/ respect	phu dud kur pa
ཕུ་དུད་པ	bend or bow down respectfully	phu dud pa
ཕུ་དུད་བྱེད་པ	show honor/ respect	phu dud byed pa
ཕུ་བདག	Phudag, a white man in a long robe with tight sleeves	phu bdag
ཕུ་མདའ	1) valley's upper and lower parts; 2) pump for vehicles etc	phu mda'
ཕུ་མདའ་བར་གསུམ	upper and lower parts and in between of a valley	phu mda' bar gsum
ཕུ་མདའ་ལ་ཀླུངས	valley's upper and lower part, and ri mgo lung gzhung	phu mda' la klungs
ཕུ་མདོ	valley's upper and lower part	phu mdo
ཕུ་མདོ་བར་གསུམ	valley's upper and lower part and middle	phu mdo bar gsum
ཕུ་རྡུགས	bewildered person	phu rdugs
ཕུ་ན	1) long gown, robe; 2) at the summit; 3) B"n sacred place in Persia	phu na
ཕུ་ནས་མདའ་ལ་ཐུར་དུ་འགྲོ	descend from the top to the bottom of the valley	phu nas mda' la thur du 'gro
ཕུ་ནུ	elder and the younger brothers	phu nu
ཕུ་ནུ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལྷན་དུ་སོང	both the elder and younger brothers came together	phu nu gnyis ka lhan du song
ཕུ་ནུ་མ	[elder] sister[s]	phu nu ma
ཕུ་ནུ་མོ	[elder] sister[s], bu mo spun gzhon pa	phu nu mo
ཕུ་ནུའི་རྩེ་གདུང	brotherly love	phu nu'i rtse gdung
ཕུ་པ	person living in the lower part of a valley	phu pa
ཕུ་ཕུ	1) the lowest part of the lowest part of a valley; 2) expression of disapproval/ regret; 3) blow wind with the mouth	phu phu
ཕུ་བ	blew, [p 'bud pa]	phu ba
ཕུ་བོ	elder brother [syn: sngon skyes dang, gcen po, jo jo, aa jo]	phu bo
ཕུ་བྱུང་བ	Pujungwa: 1031-1106	Phu byung ba
ཕུ་དབྲག	lung pa'i phu ri srubs	phu dbrag
ཕུ་འབྲོག	nomad having the upper part of a valley	phu 'brog
ཕུ་མེད	Tibetan woman's summer sleeveless dress, sleeveless	phu med
ཕུ་མོ	kind of plant growing in the glens of high mountains	phu mo
ཕུ་རྩ་གྱེ་མོ	village n.w. of lhasa	phu rtsa gye mo
ཕུ་ཚུགས་སུ	fervently	phu tshugs su
ཕུ་རྫི	wind blowing from the uplands	phu rdzi
ཕུ་ཡིས་འདྲེན་པ	pump	phu yis 'dren pa
ཕུ་ཡོད	having sleeves	phu yod
ཕུ་ར་ག	Prague	phu ra ga
ཕུ་རིང	long sleeves	phu ring
ཕུ་རུང	sleeves	phu rung
ཕུ་རོན	pigeons	phu ron
ཕུ་རོན་གྱི་ཁྱ	flock of pigeons D	phu ron gyi khya
ཕུ་རོན་གྱི་ཁྱུ	flock of pigeons	phu ron gyi khyu
ཕུ་ལ་རྫོང་ཕུག	Fortress Cave at Phula	phu la rdzong phug
ཕུ་ལ་ཧ་རི	Phulahari, abode of Naropa	phu la ha ri
ཕུ་ལངས་པ	be irritated, enraged	phu langs pa
ཕུ་ལུང	sleeves	phu lung
ཕུ་ཤུ	[arch] sash, belt	phu shu
ཕུ་ཤུད	hoopoe bird	phu shud
ཕུ་ཤོར་བ	blew out	phu shor ba
ཕུ་སུམ་ཆུ	water coming from lung pa phu gsum	phu sum chu
ཕུ་སེ	mouse, souslik [and suchlike rodent quadrupeds D]	phu se
ཕུ་ལྷ	x. [mss]	phu lha
ཕུ་ལྷགས	higher situated and colder places or districts, elevated cold region	phu lhags
ཕུག	bore, dwelling place of solitary lamas, hollow out, SA 'bugs pa, innermost part 1687	phug
ཕུག་སྐྱ	1) light colored pigeon; 2) a white 1; 3) pigeon color; 4) light-blue	phug skya
ཕུག་གི་འཁྲུལ་རྒྱུ	the deep causes of error / ultimate cause of confusion	phug gi 'khrul rgyu
ཕུག་སྒོར་འདག་སྦྱར་བྱས་པ	sealed the entrance to the cave with mud	phug sgor 'dag sbyar byas pa
ཕུག་ཅན	woody, wild	phug can
ཕུག་ཅི་འདྲ་ཅིག་འོང	what will be the upshot? where will it all end?	phug ci 'dra cig 'ong
ཕུག་གཅོད་པ	{phug chod, phug bcad pa} (to reach a) final resolution/ decision	phug gcod pa
ཕུག་བཅད་པ	{phug chod, phug gcod pa} (to reach a) final resolution/ decision	phug bcad pa
ཕུག་ཆན	woody, wild, forest	phug chan
ཕུག་ཆོད་པ	{phug gcod, phug bcad pa} (to reach a) final resolution/ decision	phug chod pa
ཕུག་ཉལ	bear	phug nyal
ཕུག་ཏུ	into the hollow	phug tu
ཕུག་ཏུ་སྦས	on the sly	phug tu sbas
ཕུག་གཏུགས	trace back to the origin/ source	phug gtugs
ཕུག་གཏོར	primary gtor ma	phug gtor
ཕུག་རྟེན	support of the home	phug rten
ཕུག་སྟོང	empty cave phug stong du long ba bzhin du sdod	phug stong
ཕུག་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	reflect on/ not be mistaken about the real meaning, decisively conclude/ settle	phug thag gcod pa
ཕུག་ཐག་ཆོད	[re]solved *, basis of matter completely settled, found the source, come yo a decisive conclusion, resolve, find a permanent solution	phug thag chod
ཕུག་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	to resolve fully	phug thag chod pa
ཕུག་ཐག་ཆོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁ	decisive victory	phug thag chod pa'i rgyal kha
ཕུག་ཐག་མ་ཆོད་ན་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཡོད	if 1 does not reflect on/ settle the real meaning 1 will be in doubt	phug thag ma chod na the tshom yod
ཕུག་ཐག་མི་ཆོད	not feel it is conclusively decided	phug thag mi chod
ཕུག་ཐོགས་པ	quivering, vibrating	phug thogs pa
ཕུག་འདུན	ultimate / final goal / aim	phug 'dun
ཕུག་རྡུགས་པ	phug la thug nas 'gro sa med pa	phug rdugs pa
ཕུག་ན	in the hollow, recess	phug na
ཕུག་གནས	gnod sbyin phug gnas zla 'od	phug gnas
ཕུག་པ	cave, cavern, recess in a rock	phug pa
ཕུག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	big cave	phug pa chen po
ཕུག་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཙོ	{phug pa lhun grub rgya mtso [bod kyi rtsis rig la mkhas pa zhig rab byung brgyad pa'i me yos lor rtsis gzhung pad dkar zhal lung mdzad	phug pa lhun grub rgya mtso
ཕུག་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{phug pa lhun grub rgya mtsho	phug pa lhun grub rgya mtsho
ཕུག་པའི་སྒོ་བསལ	cleared the entrance to the cave	phug pa'i sgo bsal
ཕུག་པའི་ནང་ཀུན	whole interior of the cavern	phug pa'i nang kun
ཕུག་པའི་རྨ	deeply piercing wound [from knife, weapons]	phug pa'i rma
ཕུག་མ	chaff, dust inside	phug ma
ཕུག་མ་ཆོད་པ	not properly understood	phug ma chod pa
ཕུག་མི་ཐུབ	unreliable	phug mi thub
ཕུག་མོ	a cave	phug mo
ཕུག་མོ་ཆེ	Phugmoche, at Puri (spu ri)	phug mo che
ཕུག་རྩ	source, origin, roots	phug rtsa
ཕུག་རྩ་རྩད་གཅོད	investigate the source/ origin/ roots	phug rtsa rtsad gcod
ཕུག་རྩ་རྩད་གཅོད་བྱེད	investigate the source/ origin/ roots	phug rtsa rtsad gcod byed
ཕུག་གཟོང	par shing zhu dag gtong skabs par shing la gdab bya'i gzong zhig	phug gzong
ཕུག་རགས	stack of straw	phug rags
ཕུག་རང་འདོད་ཏུ་བཅུག	secretly cherish selfishness	phug rang 'dod tu bcug
ཕུག་རིང་གནམ་སྐས	Long Cave Sky Ladder	phug ring gnam skas
ཕུག་རོན	dove, pigeon; pigeon, dove	phug ron
ཕུག་རོན་རྐང	{phug ron rkang med. herb [Cassia alata, Cardiospermum halicabum = phag gdong = phag mo	phug ron rkang
ཕུག་རོན་གསང	don snod sogs med pa'i lus kyi stong cha phug ron thar tsam gyi gsang zhig ste, ske stong tsa ra khung nas nu ma'i steng thig gcig &, nu ma nas sgrog rus phyi zur bar thig gcig sgrog rus nas ske st...	phug ron gsang
ཕུག་རོན་གསོན་མ	live pigeon	phug ron gson ma
ཕུག་ལམ	tunnel	phug lam
ཕུག་ལུགས	system of astrology and chronology	phug lugs
ཕུག་ཤུབ་ཤེ་ལེ	hoopoe	phug shub she le
ཕུག་ལྷ	deities of the inside, Phuglha, may be disturbed when practitioner comes into the kitchen, support is made of twigs of aromatic plants decorated with pieces of cloth of the five colors and is hung ...	phug lha
ཕུག་ལྷའི་རྟེན	support of the phug lha	phug lha'i rten
ཕུགས	long-term/ ultimate implication	phugs
ཕུགས་ཀྱི་བློ	ultimate design, plan, goal D	phugs kyi blo
ཕུགས་ཀྱི་བློ་བསམ	ultimate design, plan, goal D	phugs kyi blo bsam
ཕུགས་སྐྱོན	long-term harm	phugs skyon
ཕུགས་འཁྱོལ	final support, see through to the end	phugs 'khyol
ཕུགས་འཁྱོལ་བའི་སློབ་སྦྱོང	carry 1's studies through to the end	phugs 'khyol ba'i slob sbyong
ཕུགས་གྲོགས	spouse	phugs grogs
ཕུགས་རྒྱགས	phugs kyi 'tsho chas	phugs rgyags
ཕུགས་རྒྱང་རིང་པོའི་ཆ་ནས	NTCKT, 43; KCI, 31: in the long run. [mss] 1688	phugs rgyang ring po'i cha nas
ཕུགས་རྒྱུད	breed of cattle/ livestock	phugs rgyud
ཕུགས་རྒྱུད་ལེགས་བཅོས	breed improvement of cattle/ livestock	phugs rgyud legs bcos
ཕུགས་བརྒྱགས་ཀྱི་བློ་གཏད་ནས	and decided to rely on that for his complete provisions	phugs brgyags kyi blo gtad nas
ཕུགས་བརྒྱུད	breed of cattle/ livestock	phugs brgyud
ཕུགས་བརྒྱུད་ལེགས་བཅོས	breed improvement of cattle/ livestock	phugs brgyud legs bcos
ཕུགས་ཅི་འདྲ	how will it end? J	phugs ci 'dra
ཕུགས་བཅུག	eradicate (?)	phugs bcug
ཕུགས་ཏ	firm, strong, durable	phugs ta
ཕུགས་གཏུག་ལ	to the very depth	phugs gtug la
ཕུགས་གཏུག་ལ་བརྟག་པ	examine to the very depth	phugs gtug la brtag pa
ཕུགས་གཏོར	continuously offered torma	phugs gtor
ཕུགས་བརྟན་པ	unchanging nam phugs	phugs brtan pa
ཕུགས་ཐུབ་པ	able to endure a long time	phugs thub pa
ཕུགས་ཐེབས་ཆེ་བ	decisive and reliable; Thrangu Rinpoche: = trustworthy, reliable	phugs thebs che ba
ཕུགས་དོན	nam phugs kyi 'dun ma'i don	phugs don
ཕུགས་བདེ	phugs kyi bde ba	phugs bde
ཕུགས་འདུན	a goal	phugs 'dun
ཕུགས་ན	in the end, eventually, ultimately	phugs na
ཕུགས་ནོར	essential wealth of the goal, trump card, last resort	phugs nor
ཕུགས་ནོར་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of essential wealth of the goal [bka' gdams pa'i dge bshes rnams kyis chos rnal ma zhig bsgrub par tshe 'di blos gtong ba'i gdams ngag phugs nor lta bu bcu s{pa	phugs nor bcu
གོར་བེཨེ་རོ་ཏཟ་ན་རཀཤི་ཏ	{pa gor bee ro tza na rakshi ta [dus rabs brgyad pa'i dkyil du byung ba'i bod rgyal khri srong lde btzan dus kyi lo ts' ba grags can zhig	gor bee ro tza na rakshi ta
ཕུགས་པ	inner region of zhang zhung	phugs pa
ཕུགས་ཕན	long-term well being	phugs phan
ཕུགས་འཕེར་བ	able to work/ function for a long time	phugs 'pher ba
ཕུགས་འབྲས	result of work, final result/ outcome phugs 'bras thon skyed bzang po las ka	phugs 'bras
རྗེས་བྱུང	after the work there was a good result	rjes byung
ཕུགས་མ	interior	phugs ma
ཕུགས་མ་མཐོང་བར་འཕྲལ་རྩོད	incidental argument that misses the point	phugs ma mthong bar 'phral rtsod
ཕུགས་མི་རྟོགས	cannot be ultimately be fathomed	phugs mi rtogs
ཕུགས་མི་ཐུབ	unreliable	phugs mi thub
ཕུགས་དམིགས	1) long period of time cha rkyen or dmigs rten; 2) mthar thug blo gtad sa'i dmigs yul	phugs dmigs
ཕུགས་རྩ	fundamental point/ pith phugs rtsa rtsad gcod byed pa'i sdig pa evil deeds annihilating the fundamental point/ pith	phugs rtsa
ཕུགས་རྩྭ	pasturage, fodder, grass	phugs rtswa
ཕུགས་ཡུན	phugs kyi dus long period of time	phugs yun
ཕུགས་ཡུལ	ideal, hope, think about [1's hopes]/ plan for the future	phugs yul
ཕུགས་རེ	ideal	phugs re
ཕུགས་ལུད	animal/ cattle manure	phugs lud
ཕུགས་ལོན	provident, fore-seeing person	phugs lon
ཕུགས་ལོན་པ	realize fundamental meaning/ root [mi phugs mi yis lon la, chu phugs nya yis lon	phugs lon pa
ཕུགས་སུ	in the end/ future, ultimately, eventually	phugs su
ཕུགས་སུ་བྲོས	escaped from inside, sunk, set	phugs su bros
ཕུགས་སོ	[w] ground/ reason[ing] truth	phugs so
ཕུགས་སོ་མེད་གཏམ་རྫུན་གཏམ་རེད	w/o a true basis talk is false	phugs so med gtam rdzun gtam red
ཕུགས་བསམ	ideal, hope, think about [1's hopes]/ plan for the future	phugs bsam
ཕུགས་བསམ་གྱི་ཡུལ	ideal society of the future	phugs bsam gyi yul
ཕུགས་བསམ་ཅན	provident	phugs bsam can
ཕུང	degenerate, SA 'phung ba, disaster, disastrous	phung
ཕུང་ཀྲོལ	1) ruin, destroy; 2) useless D; 3) battle, quarrel; 4) cause of harm/ evils/ faults	phung krol
ཕུང་ཀྲོལ་རྒྱུད་སྐུལ	cause / incite/ bring about trouble/ disaster	phung krol rgyud skul
ཕུང་དཀྲུག	disturbance	phung dkrug
ཕུང་དཀྲུག་རྒྱབ་པ	to disunite, create difference; disunite, create difference, instigate disunity	phung dkrug rgyab pa
ཕུང་རྐྱེན	cause of disaster	phung rkyen
ཕུང་རྐྱེན་དབྱེན་དཀྲུག	disturbances, disorders, trouble	phung rkyen dbyen dkrug
ཕུང་ཁ	basis of transgression, become non-existent	phung kha
ཕུང་ཁམས	physical body, skandhas and dhatus, aggregates and elements	phung khams
ཕུང་ཁམས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	skandhas, dhatus and ayatanas, aggregates, constituents, sense-bases, elements and sources	phung khams skye mched
ཅོནསྟིཏུཨེནཙ་ཨནད་སེནསེ	bases	constituents and sense
ཕུང་ཁམས་ཉེར་གཉིས	(chn	phung khams nyer gnyis
ཕུང་ཁམས་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 skandhas, dhatus etc.	phung khams so drug
ཕུང་ཁྲོལ	a glittering heap; destruction, that which devastates	phung khrol
ཕུང་ཁྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ	utter misery	phung khrol chen po
ཕུང་གི་གཞི	the cause of devastation	phung gi gzhi
ཕུང་གྱོད	khyim stong mi stong bzo ba'i regrettable disaster	phung gyod
ཕུང་གྱོད་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	trouble, archenemy, cause of disaster	phung gyod kyi rtsa ba
ཕུང་གྲུབ་གསོ་ཐབས	tissue/ histo- therapy	phung grub gso thabs
ཕུང་གྲོལ་མཁན	your cause of disaster	phung grol mkhan
ཕུང་དགྲུག	disturbances, disorders, trouble	phung dgrug
ཕུང་དགྲུག་རྒྱག	create disturbances, disorders, trouble	phung dgrug rgyag
ཕུང་དགྲུག་བྱེད	create disturbances, disorders, trouble	phung dgrug byed
ཕུང་འགྲོ	bring disaster {'dis khyim phung 'gro ma len byas pa} who would bring disaster to his household	phung 'gro
ཕུང་རྒན	arch-enemy, evildoer, prodigal son, black sheep	phung rgan
ཕུང་རྒན་རྒན	the agent behind it, not obvious, old, clever, shy	phung rgan rgan
ཕུང་རྒན་བསྟན་བཤིག	arch-enemy/ evildoer destroyer of the teachings 1689	phung rgan bstan bshig
ཕུང་རྒན་ཕུང	corruption, deterioration, harm	phung rgan phung
ཕུང་ངེ་བ	a pile, piled up	phung nge ba
ཕུང་ལྔའི་རབ་དབྱེ	{phung lnga'i rab dbye [important vinaya text	phung lnga'i rab dbye
ཕུང་བཅུག	trouble	phung bcug
ཕུང་གཉིས	disastrous to self and others	phung gnyis
ཕུང་གཏན་པ	which will ruin me permanently	phung gtan pa
ཕུང་དུང་མ	waistcoat	phung dung ma
ཕུང་འདབ	back-bite	phung 'dab
ཕུང་འདོ	a mass of light masses	phung 'do
ཕུང་འདྲེ	disaster producing demon	phung 'dre
ཕུང་པ	spoiled, blown-out, destroyed, lost, destruction, disturbance, disorder	phung pa
ཕུང་པོ་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	84,000 components of the doctrine	phung po brgyad khri bzhi stong
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ་ལས་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	liberation from the Five Skandhas	phung po lnga las rnam par grol ba
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ་ལེན	assumption of the five aggregates	phung po lnga len
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ་ལེན་པ	be born	phung po lnga len pa
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔའི་དཔེ་ལྔ	(chn	phung po lnga'i dpe lnga
ཕུང་པོ་ལྔའི་རབ་ཏུ་འབྱེད་པ	{phung po lnga'i rab tu 'byed pa (Pa¤caskandha-prakarana	phung po lnga'i rab tu 'byed pa
ཕུང་པོ་ཅན	tree, SA ljon shing, ljon pa	phung po can
ཕུང་པོ་གཉིས	2 categories	phung po gnyis
ཕུང་པོ་དྲུག	the six skandhas	phung po drug
ཕུང་པོ་བདུད	embodiment devil	phung po bdud
ཕུང་པོ་རི་བོ་ཆེ	{phung po ri bo che [bod kyi ri chen bzhi'i ya gyal, gtsang khul du yod	phung po ri bo che
ཕུང་པོ་ལ་རྒྱས་གདབ་པ	internally "sealing the body"	phung po la rgyas gdab pa
ཕུང་པོ་ལ་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བ	internally developing strength	phung po la rtsal sbyong ba
ཕུང་པོ་ལ་རྩལ་སྦྱོད་བ	internally developing strength 1690	phung po la rtsal sbyod ba
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ	the three groups. 1) {sdig bshags} confessing misdeeds. 2) {yi rang} rejoicing. 3) {bskul zhing gsol ba gdab pa} beseeching and supplicating [to remain and teach]. the three	phung po gsum
སེཙ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨགགྲེགཏེས	{yang dag par nges pa'i phung po} & {log par nges pa'i phung po}, {ma nges pa'i phung po}	sets of aggregates
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ་གྱི	epithet of buddha	phung po gsum gyi
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལམ་སྟོན་པ	teacher of the path [to salvation] of the three aggregates	phung po gsum gyi lam ston pa
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ་པ	1) phung po gsum pa'i mdo ste, = ltung bshags; 2) sdig pa bshags pa dang, rjes su yi rang ba, dge ba bsngo ba'i phung po gsum mam, yang na, sdig pa bshags pa dang, rjes su yi rang ba, chos 'khor bs...	phung po gsum pa
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ་པའི་མདོ	1) phung po gsum pa'i mdo	phung po gsum pa'i mdo
ཕུང་པོ་ལྷག་མའི་མྱང་འདས	conditioned nirvana	phung po lhag ma'i myang 'das
ཕུང་པོ་ལྷག་མེད་མྱང་འདས	unconditioned nirvana	phung po lhag med myang 'das
ཕུང་པོའི་བདུད	devil originated from the aggregates, demon of the physical, 1 of bdud bzhi	phung po'i bdud
ཕུང་པོའི་བདུད་ཕྲ་མོ	sublte skandha Mara	phung po'i bdud phra mo
ཕུང་པོའི་བདུད་རགས་པ	the coarse skandha mara	phung po'i bdud rags pa
ཕུང་པོའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལྔ	(chn	phung po'i sdug bsngal lnga
ཕུང་པོའི་དཔེ	examples of the skandhas [theg dman gyi mdo las bden med ston tshul, gzugs ni dbu ba rdol ba 'dra, tsor ba chu yi chu bur 'dra, 'du shes smig rgyu lta bu ste, 'du byed rnams ni chu shing bzhin, rna...	phung po'i dpe
ཕུང་པོར་བྱས	heaped	phung por byas
ཕུང་ཕུང་པོ	mass, heap	phung phung po
ཕུང་ཕུང་འཕྲོ་བ	emanation of fire, light etc.	phung phung 'phro ba
ཕུང་བ	[to be] ruined	phung ba
ཕུང་བ་མེད་པ	1 of snyoms par 'jug pa dgu	phung ba med pa
ཕུང་བར་འགྱུར	to destroy oneself	phung bar 'gyur
ཕུང་བར་བྱེད	to bring to ruin	phung bar byed
ཕུང་སྦྱོར	leading astray, bring abut the downfall of	phung sbyor
ཕུང་སྦྱོར་གཏོང	leading astray, bring abut the downfall of	phung sbyor gtong
ཕུང་མི	who ruins others	phung mi
ཕུང་མིན་ལ	phung min pass [S rdza yul rdzong gi lho rgyud du yod	phung min la
ཕུང་ཚབ	dangerous	phung tshab
ཕུང་རྫས	trash, rubbish	phung rdzas
ཕུང་གཞི	trouble, arch-enemy, cause of disaster	phung gzhi
ཕུང་གཞི་བྱེད	make trouble, bring about destruction	phung gzhi byed
ཕུང་གཞི་སློང	make trouble, bring about destruction	phung gzhi slong
ཕུང་གཞི་སློང་བ	make trouble, bring about destruction	phung gzhi slong ba
ཕུང་རང་ཕུང	self defeat, destruction {rang gis rang} self-annihilation	phung rang phung
ཕུང་ལ་དད	caused to be killed or spoiled	phung la dad
ཕུང་ལ་འདེབས	make meaningless	phung la 'debs
ཕུང་ལ་སྦྱར་བ	to have come to ruin	phung la sbyar ba
ཕུང་སུམ	the three groups	phung sum
ཕུང་སུམ་པ	the 3rd possibility, three groups	phung sum pa
ཕུང་སེལ	chags sgo doers of harm	phung sel
ཕུང་སོང	destroyed, ruined, upset, fallen	phung song
ཕུང་སྲི	doom, ruin, disaster, recurrent calamity [bringing dons/ demons]	phung sri
ཕུང་གསུམ་པ	a 3rd alternative beyond the two extremes, 3rd party, neutral person, mediator	phung gsum pa
ཕུང་གསོགས	accumulation, piling up	phung gsogs
ཕུང་གསོགས་རྒྱག	accumulate, pile/ store up	phung gsogs rgyag
ཕུང་གསོགས་ཐེབས	accumulate, pile/ store up	phung gsogs thebs
ཕུད	except, besides, put off, take off, expel, SA 'bud pa, that which is taken forth from the rest, specimen, first taste, experimental trial, portion selected and offered to the gods, "excluding" clau...	phud
ཕུད་ཀོང	tea/ chang phud 'jog snod	phud kong
ཕུད་ཀོང་དུ་ཕུད་རེ་བླུགས	put the first portion in the offering vessel	phud kong du phud re blugs
ཕུད་སྐྱོགས	sgron thur - sbreng thur Spoon for amrita and rakta	phud skyogs
ཕུད་རྒོད	wild drink; tea or liquor only	phud rgod
ཕུད་སྒྲ	poisonous snake's sound	phud sgra
ཕུད་མཆོད	select portion offering of food, clothes, etc	phud mchod
ཕུད་གཏོར	gtsang lhag - lhag phud - phud	phud gtor
ལྷག	yar lhag - pure residual	lhag
ཕུད་གཏོར་མ	select portion	phud gtor ma
ཕུད་དམ	tea/ chang phud/ select portion vessel	phud dam
ཕུད་དུ་ཀུར་བ	show honor or respect	phud du kur ba
ཕུད་དུ་བསྐུར	best	phud du bskur
ཕུད་དུ་བསྐུར་བ	carry a present on the head, offer respectfully	phud du bskur ba
ཕུད་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	go on, naked	phud nas 'gro ba
ཕུད་པ	throw out, drive off, cast out, turned out, dismissed, hair knot, tuft of hair, SA 'bud pa	phud pa
ཕུད་དཔེ	1st book offering	phud dpe
ཕུད་ཕོར	tea/ chang etc phud offering vessel	phud phor
ཕུད་བུ	skra'i thor tshugs chung ngu [gtsug phud,//zur phud	phud bu
ཕུད་བྱིན	gave the best	phud byin
ཕུད་བྱེན	gave the best	phud byen
ཕུད་ཚོང	sales promotion, free sample	phud tshong
ཕུད་ཞུ	offering	phud zhu
ཕུད་བཞི་པ	the fourth primary	phud bzhi pa
ཕུད་རབས་རྒྱས་པ	propitiatory rituals for the host of protective deities	phud rabs rgyas pa
ཕུད་བཤགས་བསྒྲལ་བ་གསུམ	three parts of a feast	phud bshags bsgral ba gsum
ཕུད་ལྷག	primary residual - gtsang lhag phud gtor - lhag phud - yar lhag - pure residual	phud lhag
ཕུད་ལྷག་བསྲེ	mingling the primary and the residual. Syn. gtsang lhag bsre - yar gnas mar gnas bsres	phud lhag bsre
ཕུན	upper end of a valley	phun
ཕུན་གང	1/2 finger med. measure	phun gang
ཕུན་གླིང	abbr. of phun tshogs gling, jonangpa monastery	phun gling
ཕུན་ཆག	bundle, tuft	phun chag
ཕུན་ནུ་མོ	sisters	phun nu mo
ཕུན་ནུ་མོས་བསྲུངས་པ	protected/ supported by the sisters	phun nu mos bsrungs pa
ཕུན་བུ	'dzar	phun bu
ཕུན་ཙོགས་ལྔ	the five perfections [chos phun sum tsogs pa dang, dus phun sum tsogs pa, ston pa phun sum tsogs pa, gnas phun sum tsogs pa, 'khor phun sum tsogs pa ste lnga	phun tsogs lnga
ཕུན་ཙོགས་སྡེ་བཞི	the four abundances/ completions perfections [chos nor 'dod thar bcas 'jig rten dang, 'jig rten las 'das pa'i phun tsogs sde bzhi ste sangs rgyas kyi chos dar ba dang, nor longs spyod dang ldan pa,...	phun tsogs sde bzhi
ཕུན་རྩེ་མཙོ	{phun rtse salt lake [in N ngam ring rdzong	phun rtse mtso
ཕུན་རྩེ་མཚོ	{phun rtse} salt lake	phun rtse mtsho
ཕུན་ཚུགས་པ	[arch] gzhi tshugs pa	phun tshugs pa
ཕུན་ཚུན	mutual support	phun tshun
ཕུན་ཚོག་གླིང	Phuntsoling; and Jonang; (jo nang) Ganden Phuntsoling, or Jonang Monastery, was founded by Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen (1292-1361), whose established his hermitage nearby, an built the Great Stupa that...	phun tshog gling
ཕུན་ཚོགས	distinguishment, excellence, abundance, perfection, accomplishment, abundant, perfect, complete, excellent, exquisite, distinguished, superior good, possessed of the three. grace glory and wealth. ...	phun tshogs
ཕུན་ཚོགས་འཁོར་བའི	samsaric glories	phun tshogs 'khor ba'i
ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང	dga' ldan phun tshogs gling place lha rtse rdzong khongs yar klungs gtsang po'i 'gram du yod	phun tshogs gling
ཕུན་ཚོགས་རྒྱས་པ	increase of all good accumulations	phun tshogs rgyas pa
ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལྔ	the five perfections	phun tshogs lnga
ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྡེ་ཚན་ལྔ	(chn	phun tshogs sde tshan lnga
ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྡེ་བཞི	the four abundances/ completions perfections [chos nor 'dod thar bcas 'jig rten dang, 'jig rten las 'das pa'i phun tshogs sde bzhi ste sangs rgyas kyi chos dar ba dang, nor longs spyod dang ldan pa...	phun tshogs sde bzhi
ཕུན་ཚོགས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Phüntsok Namgyal / - Seventeenth century bka' brgyud pa lama who became Dharma king of the Himalayan Kingdom of Sikkim	phun tshogs rnam rgyal
ཕུན་ཚོགས་པ	perfect	phun tshogs pa
ཕུན་ཚོགས་འཕེལ	wish-fulfilling tree	phun tshogs 'phel
ཕུན་ཚོགས་མིན	preta 1692	phun tshogs min
ཕུན་ཚོགས་སུ་གཏོང	make complete/ perfect/ best	phun tshogs su gtong
ཕུན་ཚོགས་གསུམ	the three perfections	phun tshogs gsum
ཕུན་ཚོགས་གསུམ་ལྡན	possessing the three perfections	phun tshogs gsum ldan
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས	1) abundant, plentiful, prosperous, splendid, sublime, supreme, wonderful, perfect, perfect and complete, satisfying, desirable, fortuitous, auspicious. 2) perfection, prosperity, wealth, abundance...	phun sum tshogs
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་ལྔ	five perfect conditions (teacher, teaching, assembly, place, and time), SA nges pa lnga	phun sum tshogs lnga
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་ལྡན	to perfectly possess	phun sum tshogs ldan
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	abundant excellence, perfect[ion], prosperous[ity], complete, abundance, wealth, abundant, plentiful, perfect, sublime, excellent, wonderful, desirable, auspicious/ (having grace, glory, and wealth...	phun sum tshogs pa
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་གྱུར་ཅིག	may it be abundant	phun sum tshogs pa gyur cig
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་ལྔ	five perfections, five aspects of excellence; five	phun sum tshogs pa lnga
བཞིན་དུ་གྱུར་བ་ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	the fearlessness that the path through which all excellent attributes are to be obtained, transformed and ascertained, is just what it is	bzhin du gyur ba la mi 'jigs pa
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་རོ	the taste was wonderful	phun sum tshogs pa ro
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པར་འགྱུར་རོ	all will be well	phun sum tshogs par 'gyur ro
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	consummate, complete, perfect	phun sum tshogs par byed pa
ཕུབ	shield, buckler. ex. {kyi sba 'khor}; shield, buckler; imp. of {'bubs pa}; armor	phub
ཕུབ་ཀ	defeat {gyong dang bub ka rang gis len khe dang rgyal kha sems can la sbyin/ gyong dang bub ka rang gis len} offering gain and victory to sentient beings and taking loss and defeat for oneself phub...	phub ka
ཕུབ་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	middle of a shield	phub kyi me long
ཕུབ་སྐོར	round shield	phub skor
ཕུབ་སྐོར་ཙམ་པ	the size of a round shield	phub skor tsam pa
ཕུབ་ཁ	defeat	phub kha
ཕུབ་མཐིལ	middle of a shield	phub mthil
ཕུབ་གདུགས	parasol, umbrella	phub gdugs
ཕུབ་པ	probe into, penetrate into the meaning, get at the sense, SA 'bub pa	phub pa
ཕུབ་མ	short straw; husks	phub ma
ཕུབ་མ་རླུང་འཁྱེར	shield carried away by the wind	phub ma rlung 'khyer
ཕུབ་མའི་མེ	torture from burning body	phub ma'i me
ཝིཐ་རིཅེ	chaff fire	with rice
ཕུབ་དམག	soldiers w shields	phub dmag
ཕུབ་ཙམ་པ	about the size of a round shield , like a shield in size	phub tsam pa
ཕུབ་ཤུབས	cover of a shield	phub shubs
ཕུབ་སླེལ	large wicker basket	phub slel
ཕུབས	put on a roof, SA 'bubs pa	phubs
ཕུམ་ཕུམ	posterior, anus	phum phum
ཕུའུ	deputy, vice, asst.	phu'u
ཕུའུ་ཁེ	playing cards	phu'u khe
ཕུའུ་ཐའོ་ཡ	Portugal	phu'u tha'o ya
ཕུའུ་དུང	the sound "phuthung" of a splash	phu'u dung
ཕུའུ་ཙི	musical notation	phu'u tsi
ཕུའུ་ཙི་སྟབས་བདེ	musical notation	phu'u tsi stabs bde
ཕུར	imp. of {'phur ba}; stake, peg	phur
ཕུར་དཀར	phur dkar med herb	phur dkar
ཕུར་བསྐྱོད་རུང་བ	airworthy	phur bskyod rung ba
ཕུར་ཁ	mi kha, mouth?	phur kha
ཕུར་ཁྲ	caryopteris trichosphaera w. w. smith	phur khra
ཕུར་གྱིས་ཕུར་བ	flutter	phur gyis phur ba
ཕུར་འགྱུར	tent pegs	phur 'gyur
ཕུར་བཅས	'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, [ltung ba phyir bcos kyi nang gses], when downfalls are being discussed, if even when they are revealed they do not listen phur bcas must be done: tshe dang ldan pa khy...	phur bcas
ཕུར་ལྕོག	name of a monastery near Lhasa	phur lcog
ཕུར་མཉེ	massage	phur mnye
ཕུར་མཉེ་གཏོང	massage, rub, knead	phur mnye gtong
ཕུར་རྙི	mouse trap	phur rnyi
ཕུར་གདང	1) phur pa yod pa'i gdang thag; 2) clothes etc. 'gel gdang	phur gdang
ཕུར་གདན	purpa stand	phur gdan
ཕུར་བདར	rub	phur bdar
ཕུར་བདར་བྱེད་པ	scrub	phur bdar byed pa
ཕུར་ལྡིང	soaring, floating [in flight]	phur lding
ཕུར་ནག	phur nag med herb	phur nag
སྔོ་ནག་འཆར་བ་ཞིག་སྟེ	ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas srin gsod, gnyan nad 'joms, shu thor dang sha bkar sogs la phan	sngo nag 'char ba zhig ste
ཕུར་པ	1) stake for tying animals etc. [//lcags phur,//shing phur,//gur phur,//gdang phur]; 2) kila [gdon bgegs taming tantrika implement {phur ba}; 3) dagger; 4) peg, pin, nail	phur pa
ཕུར་པ་བཀའ་མ	Oral History of Kilaya	phur pa bka' ma
ཕུར་པ་རྒྱག	secure w/ drive in a peg/ stake	phur pa rgyag
ཕུར་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	mahayoga sadhana	phur pa bcu gnyis
ཕུར་པ་ཐོགས	holding/ brandishing a phurba phur pa gnam lcags spu gri reg phung revealed by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje, 1904-87	phur pa thogs
ཕུར་པ་ཕྲིན་ལས	Kilaya Activity; one of {sgrub pa sde brgyad}	phur pa phrin las
ཕུར་པ་དབང་ཆེན	extensive empowerment of Vajra Kilaya	phur pa dbang chen
ཕུར་པ་དབང་ཆེན་བཞད་པ	text of the extensive empowerment of Vajrakilaya	phur pa dbang chen bzhad pa
ཕུར་པ་འབུམ་ནག	see phur 'brel 'bum nag [tsd]	phur pa 'bum nag
ཕུར་པ་བཞི	four phurpas (rig pa ye shes, lhag pa byang chub sems, tshad med snying rje, 'dus byas rdzas)	phur pa bzhi
ཕུར་པ་ཡང་གསང་བླ་མེད	Most Secret and Unsurpassable Dagger, revealed by Ratna Lingpa	phur pa yang gsang bla med
ཕུར་པ་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Kilaya Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga	phur pa rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
ཕུར་པ་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	1 of the {rol pa'i	phur pa rol pa'i skor
རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization {sgrub sde}	rgyud sde lnga
ཕུར་པ་སྲས་མཆོག་ཀི་ལ་ཡ	the Supreme Son of Kilaya Dagger	phur pa sras mchog ki la ya
ཕུར་པ་སྲི་གནོན	depending on the yidam Vajrakilaya sri suppressing liturgy	phur pa sri gnon
ཕུར་པའི་དོན་ཏིག	Purpa Döntig	phur pa'i don tig
ཕུར་པའི་དབལ	triangular tip of the purpa	phur pa'i dbal
ཕུར་པས་ཕུར་པ་ལ་དབང་བསྐུར	empowering the purpa with the purpa	phur pas phur pa la dbang bskur
ཕུར་ཕུར	rubbing, scratching	phur phur
ཕུར་ཕུར་གཏོང	rub, scratch	phur phur gtong
ཕུར་ཕུར་གཏོང་བ	rub, scratch	phur phur gtong ba
ཕུར་ཕུར་བྱེད	rub, scratch	phur phur byed
ཕུར་བ	Kilaya. 1) Sacred dagger used in tantric rituals. 2) Same as Kilaya Activity	phur ba
ཕུར་བ་ཆུ་གཉིས་འབྱུང་བ	mahayoga sgrub thabs	phur ba chu gnyis 'byung ba
ཕུར་བུ	1) Jupiter //. Jupiter - kilaka, Thursday [syn: sgra mkhan dang, sgra mkhas, bcu gnyis 'od, nyi ma'i rigs skyes, mtho ris thob, pha bdun pa, blo ldan, dbyangs bdag 'bar ba ldan, me bzhi skyes, tshi...	phur bu
ཕུར་བུ་ལྕོག	small monastery near sera	phur bu lcog
ཕུར་བུ་པ	on non-Buddhist school [nihilist]; Followers of B.rhaspati	phur bu pa
ཕུར་བུ་བ	a non-Buddhist school [nihilist]	phur bu ba
ཕུར་བུའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་དྲུག	Six Tantras of Bahaspati [thd]	phur bu'i rgyud sde drug
ཕུར་བུའི་གདན	kila stand	phur bu'i gdan
ཕུར་བུའི་ཤམ་ཐབས	skirt of daggers	phur bu'i sham thabs
ཕུར་བྱེད	to rub	phur byed
ཕུར་འབྲེལ་འབུམ་ནག	the famous commentary on Vajrakila composed by the three masters Padmasambhava, Vimalamitra and Shilamanju, full title: {rdo rje phur pa'i bshad 'bum slob dpon rnam gsum gyi dgongs pa slob dpon che...	phur 'brel 'bum nag
ཕུར་མ	relievo work, embossment, funnelled vessel, fine medicinal powders, anything volatile	phur ma
ཕུར་མ་གསུམ་པ	medicinal root	phur ma gsum pa
ཕུར་མང	cylinder of cloth [rolled-up] hanging from temple ceiling	phur mang
ཕུར་མོང	medicament	phur mong
ཕུར་མོང་གླ་རྐང	elsholtzia fruticosa (d. don) rehd.	phur mong gla rkang
ཕུར་མོང་སྒང	{phur mong sgang} [place]	phur mong sgang
ཕུར་སྨུག	{phur smug med herb	phur smug
ཕུར་ཚབ	dangerous	phur tshab
ཕུར་ཚུགས	1-pointedly, directly, firm, strong, firmly, strongly	phur tshugs
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ	penetrating(ly)/ piercing(ly)	phur tshugs su
ཚུགས་སུ་འདེབས་པ	pray w ardor from the heart phur tshugs su btang ba'i bsam blo kyis	tshugs su 'debs pa
ལས་དོན་བྱེད	with steadfast thoughts doing the task	las don byed
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་བཏབ་པའི་གསོལ་བ	supplicate ardently	phur tshugs su btab pa'i gsol ba
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་ལྟ་བའི་མིག	piercingly looking eyes	phur tshugs su lta ba'i mig
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་ལྟས	looking w eyes fixed on	phur tshugs su ltas
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་འདེབས་པ	to pray from the heart	phur tshugs su 'debs pa
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ	I prayed to him with great fervour	phur tshugs su gsol ba btab pa
ཕུར་ཚུགས་སུ་གསོལ་བ་གདབ་པ	praying with resolute trust	phur tshugs su gsol ba gdab pa
ཕུར་འཛུགས	1) stab w/ plant a phurba/ stake; 2) way of planting a field	phur 'dzugs
ཕུར་ཟེར	dart	phur zer
ཕུར་ཟོར	dart	phur zor
ཕུར་ཤད	shad after dbu can words	phur shad
ཕུར་ཤམ	dagger skirt, [three daggers hanging from a silken loincloth]. def. {gsang khabs dar sna la phur pa gsum 'phyang ba}	phur sham
ཕུར་ཤིང	phur pa making wood	phur shing
ཕུར་ཤེས་བཅུ་གསུམ	yogis from {nag chan} who could fly in the sky	phur shes bcu gsum
ཕུར་གཤིན	Vajrakilaya and Yamantaka	phur gshin
ཕུལ	highest degree/ perfection	phul
ཕུལ་གང	handful	phul gang
ཕུལ་གྲངས་ཁལ་བསྒྲིལ	barley, rice etc. bre phul mang po khal du bsgril tshul	phul grangs khal bsgril
ཕུལ་ཏུ	egregiously, exceedingly	phul tu
ཕུལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	finished, perfect, accomplished, reached the climax, attained highest point, victorious, get the better of an argument	phul tu phyin pa
ཕུལ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ	1) exquisite; 2) eminent, especially fine/ noble, excellent; 3) Atisha; 4) perfected gift, donation {phyag rten} (H	phul tu byung ba
ཕུལ་ཏེ	having offered phul rtogs pa phyin thugs la 'khrungs pa gave birth to supreme realization	phul te
ཕུལ་ཐག	{a'tshams pa}	phul thag
ཕུལ་ཐག་ཙམ	of corresponding size	phul thag tsam
ཕུལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	the perfection of	phul du gyur pa
ཕུལ་དུ་གྱུར་བ	eminent, exquisite, especially fine/ noble, attained excellence, best, highest, outstanding	phul du gyur ba
ཕུལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	especially fine/ noble, excellent	phul du phyin pa
ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང	1) exquisite; 2) eminent, especially fine/ noble, excellent; 3) Atisha; 4) perfected gift, donation {phyag rten} (H	phul du byung
ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	eminent, exquisite, especially fine/ noble, attained excellence, best, highest, outstanding	phul du byung ba
ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་ཝ	attained excellence	phul du byung wa
ཕུལ་དུ་འབྱུང་བ	to become the highest degree/ perfection	phul du 'byung ba
ཕུལ་ཕྱིན	supreme, eminent, perfect, best/ perfected, victorious to perfect, make eminent	phul phyin
ཕུལ་བའི་བཏུང་ཕོར	offering, present, drinking plate	phul ba'i btung phor
ཕུལ་བྱུང	accomplished, perfect, eminent, tibetan translation of the personal name of atisha, best, buddhist pandit of bengal who taught in tibet for 13 years	phul byung
ཕུལ་བྱུང་ཁྱད་འཕགས	excellent and especially fine/ noble	phul byung khyad 'phags
ཕུལ་བྱུང་གི་རྒྱན	brjod 'dod dngos po gang yang rung ba'i khyad chos kyi yon tan mchog tu gyur pa brjod bsams pa de rjod byed kyi tsig 'jig rten grags tshod kyi mtshams las brgal ba'i 'ud chen po'i sgo nas phul du b...	phul byung gi rgyan
ཕུལ་བྱུང་གི་རྒྱན་བཞི	(chn	phul byung gi rgyan bzhi
ཕུལ་བྱུང་གི་དཔེ	dpe dang dpe can gnyis 'byed chos kyi khyad par mang du yod mod kyang gcig kho na las med par 'ud brjod pa'i sgo nas dpe don phan tshun ha cang 'dra bar ston pa'i rgyan zhig, dpe'i rgyan gyi nang g...	phul byung gi dpe
ཕུལ་བྱུང་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་ཅན	outstanding producer	phul byung thon skyed can
ཕུལ་འབྱུང	{phul du 'byung ba} to become the highest degree/ perfect(ion); outstanding	phul 'byung
ཕུལ་བཞེས་གཉིས་ཀ	both offering and acceptance	phul bzhes gnyis ka
ཕུལ་ཡང་ཏོག	peak	phul yang tog
ཕུལ་ཡིག	bskur yig	phul yig
ཕུལ་ལུ་རེ་ཙམ	phul gang tsam	phul lu re tsam
ཕུལ་གསོག	full measure; ex {bre gsog dang phul gsog byas pa} accumulates a full measure of	phul gsog
ཕུས	phu + inst.	phus
ཕུས་འདེད་གནམ་གྲུ	jet plane	phus 'ded gnam gru
ཕུས་འདེབས	blow	phus 'debs
ཕུས་བསད་པ	blow out phus bsad pa'i sgron me phu brgyab nas	phus bsad pa
མེ་ལ་འབར་བ	having blown out the lamp, light it	me la 'bar ba
ཕེ	key, powder	phe
ཕེ་ཆིའུ་སྤོ་ལོ	volleyball	phe chi'u spo lo
ཕེ་ཆིའུ་སྤོ་ལོ་རྒྱག	play volleyball	phe chi'u spo lo rgyag
ཕེ་ཕེ	[arch] fine powder	phe phe
ཕེ་ཕེ་ཞིབ་མོ	fine powder	phe phe zhib mo
ཕེ་ཙེའི་རེ་སོ	spu bal rtsub po las btags pa'i snam ther thags ma'i ngos kyi ri mo 'bur dod	phe tse'i re so
ཕེ་རང	Feringhi, europeans	phe rang
ཕེ་ལེའི་པིན	Philippines	phe le'i pin
ཕེ་ལོ	ticket	phe lo
ཕེ་ཤ	exclamation	phe sha
ཕེག་རྡོག	musical instrument, cymbal, small hand drum	pheg rdog
ཕེག་རྡོག་པ	minstrel	pheg rdog pa
ཕེག་རྡོབ	ting shags las che tsam kind of music, small/ long drum, cymbals	pheg rdob
ཕེག་རྡོབ་པ	minstrel	pheg rdob pa
ཕེང་སོན	boric acid	pheng son
ཕེད	imp. of {phed pa}	phed
ཕེད་པ	(tha dad pa be able to dig earth, cut wood	phed pa
ཕེན་པ	throw, cast, fling	phen pa
ཕེན་པོ	effective, beneficial, good for	phen po
ཕེན་པོ་བྱུང	serves you right	phen po byung
ཕེན་ཙེ	phonograph record, film	phen tse
ཕེབ	SA 'bab	pheb
ཕེབ་ཀྱང	even when come, small drum, cymbal, even when come	pheb kyang
ཕེབ་ཆོག་པ	to have access, permission to go	pheb chog pa
ཕེབ་རྡོབ	ting shags las che tsam kind of music, small drum/ cymbals	pheb rdob
ཕེབ་རྡོབ་པ	minstrel	pheb rdob pa
ཕེབ་པ	to go, to come	pheb pa
ཕེབ་པར་སྨྲ་བ	ask/invite to come	pheb par smra ba
ཕེབས་ཀོ	leather boat, leather [h]	phebs ko
ཕེབས་སྐས	ladder, stairs [h]	phebs skas
ཕེབས་སྐྱེལ	see someone off [h]	phebs skyel
ཕེབས་སྐྱེལ་ཞུ	see someone off [h] phebs skyel zhu ba thag ring bar du byas [they] saw [him] off for a long way	phebs skyel zhu
ཕེབས་སྐྱེས	departure or arrival present	phebs skyes
ཕེབས་ཁ	when parting	phebs kha
ཕེབས་ཁྲི	phebs byams	phebs khri
ཕེབས་གྲུ	boat [h]	phebs gru
ཕེབས་གྲོགས	travelling companion	phebs grogs
ཕེབས་གྲོགས་གནང	accompany as a travelling companion [h]	phebs grogs gnang
ཕེབས་གྲོགས་ཞུ	accompany as a travelling companion	phebs grogs zhu
ཕེབས་རྒྱུ	should go	phebs rgyu
ཕེབས་སྒུག	tshur yong ba sgug pa [h] [spro sems 'khol ba'i ngang nas mi dmangs kyi dpa' bo phebs sgug zhu ba	phebs sgug
ཕེབས་སྒོ	1) commands of superiors; 2) sngar mdzad sgo'i skabs rim pa gong mas bstsal ba'i food etc.	phebs sgo
ཕེབས་སྒོའི་གཞུང་ལམ	royal route [h]	phebs sgo'i gzhung lam
ཕེབས་སྒྲིག	before travellers arrive, prepare place for them to stay, prepare for someone's arrival [h]	phebs sgrig
ཕེབས་སྒྲིག་ཞུ	before travellers arrive, prepare place for them to stay, prepare for someone's arrival [h]	phebs sgrig zhu
ཕེབས་རྗེས་ཟིན	to catch up	phebs rjes zin
ཕེབས་སྟོན	phar tshur phebs kha'i gsol ston	phebs ston
ཕེབས་བསྟུན	as 1 arrives/ leaves	phebs bstun
ཕེབས་བསྟུན་རོལ་ཆ་བཏང	[they] played music as [1] arrived	phebs bstun rol cha btang
ཕེབས་ཐོན	departure, leaving [h]	phebs thon
ཕེབས་ཐོན་གནང	depart, leave [h]	phebs thon gnang
ཕེབས་དང	let us go	phebs dang
ཕེབས་དུས	while/at the time of coming/ going	phebs dus
ཕེབས་དོན	purpose of a journey	phebs don
ཕེབས་གདོང	before/ while/ at the time of coming/ going [h]	phebs gdong
ཕེབས་རྡོག	preparations for travelling	phebs rdog
ཕེབས་བརྡ	proclaiming arrival by beating drums, announcing arrival by firing guns	phebs brda
ཕེབས་པ	takes leave	phebs pa
ཕེབས་པ་དང་མཉམ	while/at the time of coming/ going	phebs pa dang mnyam
ཕེབས་པ་ཡིན	khyed gang du + - Where will you go?	phebs pa yin
ཕེབས་པ་ལེགས	welcome to	phebs pa legs
ཕེབས་པའི་དུས་མིན	not a time for traveling	phebs pa'i dus min
ཕེབས་པར་སྨྲ་བ	ask to come, invite	phebs par smra ba
ཕེབས་དཔྱང	sedan chair, palanquin [h]	phebs dpyang
ཕེབས་བྱམ	sedan chair, palanquin [h]	phebs byam
ཕེབས་བྱམས	palanquin, stretcher, Sanskrit palyanka (khyogs) (do li). A covered litter for one person carried on poles on the shoulders of two or four men	phebs byams
ཕེབས་བྱས	palanquin	phebs byas
ཕེབས་འབྱོན	he will return	phebs 'byon
ཕེབས་འབྱོར	arrival	phebs 'byor
ཕེབས་འབྱོར་སྐྱབས	on [their] arrival	phebs 'byor skyabs
ཕེབས་འབྱོར་གནང	arrive	phebs 'byor gnang
ཕེབས་འབྱོར་བྱུང	arrived	phebs 'byor byung
ཕེབས་བརྩིས་གནང	to plan to go / come	phebs brtsis gnang
ཕེབས་ཚོགས	instructions D, something sent as a favor D, letter of news/ instructions D	phebs tshogs
ཕེབས་རྫོངས	farewell present	phebs rdzongs
ཕེབས་བཞུ	[h] melted butter/ oil, lamp	phebs bzhu
ཕེབས་ཟམ	bridge [h]	phebs zam
ཕེབས་རོགས	1) companion in coming/ goings; 2) please come/ go [h]	phebs rogs
ཕེབས་རོགས་གནང	accompany as a travelling companion [h]	phebs rogs gnang
ཕེབས་རོགས་མཛད་པ	accompany, keep someone company	phebs rogs mdzad pa
ཕེབས་རོགས་ཞུ	accompany as a travelling companion	phebs rogs zhu
ཕེབས་རོགས་ལབ་པ	bye	phebs rogs lab pa
ཕེབས་ལམ	the road	phebs lam
ཕེབས་ལམ་དུ	while traveling	phebs lam du
ཕེབས་ལམ་བདེ་བར་བཅོས་ཏེ	began preparing a great highway phebs lam la thugs lcag gnang rogs please take care on the journey [h]	phebs lam bde bar bcos te
ཕེབས་ལམ་ལ་མ་སྡོད	not stand in the way [h]	phebs lam la ma sdod
ཕེབས་གསལ	as per, according to, as stated [h]	phebs gsal
ཕེབས་གསོ་བ	go to meet a person arriving	phebs gso ba
ཕེབས་བསུ	go to meet someone arriving, welcome, reception	phebs bsu
ཕེབས་བསུ་བ	go and meet a person in the way for his reception	phebs bsu ba
ཕེབས་བསུ་ཞུ	welcome, receive	phebs bsu zhu
ཕེབས་བསུ་ཞུ་བ	greet	phebs bsu zhu ba
ཕེབས་བསུ་ཞུ་བའི་སྐུ་ཚབ	welcoming representative	phebs bsu zhu ba'i sku tshab
ཕེབས་བསུ་གཟབ་རྒྱས་ཞིག་ཞུས་པ	welcomed elaborately	phebs bsu gzab rgyas zhig zhus pa
ཕེའུ	CH sa sbyor rdza ma ltar byas la so ma btang ba'i sa phag skam po ste, de me la bsros pa'i dugs kyis rlung tshad 'thab pa la phan	phe'u
ཕེའོ	ticket	phe'o
ཕེར	will be useful	pher
ཕེར་པོ	skillful, clever, able	pher po
ཕེར་བ	be able, be capable of, equal to, serviceable, equivalent	pher ba
ཕེར་ཡོད	ingenuity	pher yod
ཕེར་ཡོད་ཅན	something valid, valuable, will be useful	pher yod can
ཕེར་ཤ	show-offish, smart-alecky	pher sha
ཕེར་ཤ་བྱེད	show-off, be a wise guy	pher sha byed
ཕེར་ཤ་ཚ་པོ	show-off, wise guy, smart alec	pher sha tsha po
ཕེལ	increase, augment, SA 'phel ba	phel
ཕོ	males; a gentleman / man, male	pho
ཕོ་ཀྱི་མཚན	male organ	pho kyi mtshan
ཕོ་དཀར	a harder variety of ka rag white	pho dkar
ཕོ་བཀྱག	pho dkar 'dzugs yul gyi stegs	pho bkyag
ཕོ་རྐྱང	male wild ass	pho rkyang
ཕོ་སྐད་མཐོ་ཤོས	tenor	pho skad mtho shos
ཕོ་སྐྱེས	man, men	pho skyes
ཕོ་སྐྲན	pho ba'i nang du chags pa'i skran	pho skran
ཕོ་ཁ	1) stomach; 2) reticulum, 2nd stomach of ruminant	pho kha
ཕོ་ཁེབས	1) to be worn under a woman's kyi 'og 'jug 'og tu gyon rgyu'i pho ba'i thad kyi khebs; 2) CH cotton bar tshangs cad kyi bedding, bedding, quilt [folded to form a sleeping bag]	pho khebs
ཕོ་ཁྱི	male dog	pho khyi
ཕོ་ཁྱོ་ག	man go 'pher	pho khyo ga
ཕོ་ཁྲོམ	multitude of men	pho khrom
ཕོ་མཁྲིས	from snod bile increasing mkhris khu pho bar lhung ba zhig ste, symptoms diarrhea/ vomiting	pho mkhris
ཕོ་གིང	ging pho ste male divine dancer	pho ging
ཕོ་གུ	1) tshag ris brgyab pa'i dngul rag sogs kyi sgor rgyan sbubs can zhig; 2) belt/ sash w ornament	pho gu
ཕོ་གོས	male dress	pho gos
ཕོ་གྱོག	hollow tile	pho gyog
ཕོ་གྱོང་བཟའ་རྒྱལ་མོ་བཙུན	Lady Gyalmo Tsün of Pho-gyong. One of the queens of king Trisong Deutsen	pho gyong bza' rgyal mo btsun
ཕོ་གྲུང་པོ	an intelligent person	pho grung po
ཕོ་གླང	1) glang thabs pho bar babs pa zhig; 2) lungs D; 3) bladder D	pho glang
ཕོ་གླུད	ransoms for men, rite for the benefit of men	pho glud
ཕོ་གློག	positive electricity	pho glog
ཕོ་དགུ	nine male spirits	pho dgu
ཕོ་རྒུད	pho ba'i fire and heat damaging disease [symptomsnad rtags su sgreg pa mang zhing zas mi 'ju ba dang, lbu ba can skyug pa sogs 'byung ba zhig	pho rgud
ཕོ་རྒོད	brave man	pho rgod
ཕོ་རྒོད་པ	raising, elevation	pho rgod pa
ཕོ་རྒོད་པོ	shrewd, bold	pho rgod po
ཕོ་རྒོད་མོ་རྒོད	whether or not you have courage	pho rgod mo rgod
ཕོ་རྒོད་རབ་ཏུ་འདུག	you are a very brave man	pho rgod rab tu 'dug
ཕོ་རྒྱས	{nor sgrub pa pho rgyas yin} the hope for wealth is an extension of one's manhood	pho rgyas
ཕོ་རྒྱུད	male classes (of protectors	pho rgyud
ཕོ་སྒོ	masculinity	pho sgo
ཕོ་སྒོ་མཐོ་བ	cleverness (?)	pho sgo mtho ba
ཕོ་སྒྲོབ	che nyams, spam rdzu, bragging, boasting	pho sgrob
ཕོ་སྒྲོབ་ཤོད	brag, boast	pho sgrob shod
ཕོ་བརྒྱད	kata	pho brgyad
ཕོ་བརྒྱའི་ཤེས་པ	the knowledge of many minds	pho brgya'i shes pa
ཕོ་ངན	man of low thoughts/ actions, weak/ unhealthy digestion	pho ngan
ཕོ་ཅོང	med. pho cong	pho cong
ཨནད་ཧེཨབ༹ཡ་ལིཀེ་བྲོཀེན་ཧོརསེ	teeth [nus pas khrag mkhris kyi nad dang, pho nad 'joms	and heavy like broken horse
ཕོ་གཅུ	gzer gdan rgyag sa	pho gcu
ཕོ་གཅོད	pha dam pa sangs rgyas's pupil yar lung pa sma ra ser po's gcod lineage	pho gcod
ཕོ་བཅོག	mi gyong po	pho bcog
ཕོ་ལྕགས	steel, inferior sort of iron	pho lcags
ཕོ་ལྕམ	althaea rosea cav.	pho lcam
ཕོ་ལྕིབས	pho dkris	pho lcibs
ཕོ་ཆས	man's dress	pho chas
ཕོ་ཆེ་བ	noble, exalted 1697	pho che ba
ཕོ་ཆེན	stallion, gentlemen, castrated male animal [Gold] ??	pho chen
ཕོ་ཆོས	rgya skyegs	pho chos
ཕོ་མཆོར་པོ	handsome man	pho mchor po
ཕོ་མཆོར་བ	handsome man	pho mchor ba
ཕོ་ཉ	Phonya. 1) Messenger, emissary. 2) Spiritual consort in Vajrayana practice	pho nya
ཕོ་ཉ་བཀྱེ	send a messenger	pho nya bkye
ཕོ་ཉ་འགྱེད་པ	send a messenger, dismiss	pho nya 'gyed pa
ཕོ་ཉ་མངག་བ	1) send a messenger; 2) divine messenger	pho nya mngag ba
ཕོ་ཉ་གཏོང	send a messenger	pho nya gtong
ཕོ་ཉ་གཏོང་བ	send a messenger	pho nya gtong ba
ཕོ་ཉ་དང་ཕོ་ཉ་མོ	intermediaries of the enlightened family, male and female. according to Kriya tantra	pho nya dang pho nya mo
ཕོ་ཉ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	[TRS 130-3]	pho nya drug cu rtsa bzhi
ཕོ་ཉ་བ	messenger	pho nya ba
ཕོ་ཉ་མུ་དྲ	mudra messengers	pho nya mu dra
ཕོ་ཉ་མོ	messenger (goddess)	pho nya mo
ཕོ་ཉ་མོའི་གྲོགས	consort	pho nya mo'i grogs
ཕོ་ཉ་རྫོང	send a messenger	pho nya rdzong
ཕོ་ཉ་གཟིག་གི་ཟློག་པ་ཅན	messenger wearing a leopard skin, grog spos sman	pho nya gzig gi zlog pa can
ཕོ་ཉ་འི་ལམ	the paths of the methods, mudras, helper, ambassador, envoy, servant, attendant, messenger, {phyag rgya ma}	pho nya 'i lam
ཕོ་ཉ་སུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ	the three hundred and sixty servants; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	pho nya sum brgya drug cu
ཕོ་ཉའི	messenger's	pho nya'i
ཕོ་ཉའི་ལམ	phonya path, mudra, {rnam gsum} the three ~. [sm. {phyag rgya ma}; the paths of the methods	pho nya'i lam
ཕོ་ཉིད	coming after, successive	pho nyid
ཕོ་གཏམ	man's kha pho che	pho gtam
ཕོ་རྟ	stallion	pho rta
ཕོ་རྟགས	male sex, masculine gender	pho rtags
ཕོ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	testicle	pho rtags kyi 'bras bu
ཕོ་ལྟར	manly	pho ltar
ཕོ་སྟོང་བཤད་མིན་པའི་ཁ་བཤད	this is not empty talk of a hypocritical man	pho stong bshad min pa'i kha bshad
ཕོ་སྟོད	upper garment for rngon pa 'khrab dus	pho stod
ཕོ་ཐ	pho'i tha ma ste sdar ma'am zhan pa	pho tha
ཕོ་ཐག་ཆེ་བ	1) very arrogant, khur che ba; 2) exalted view	pho thag che ba
ཕོ་ཐང	'brug 'brug	pho thang
ཕོ་ཐུགས་གཏོང་བ	offend	pho thugs gtong ba
ཕོ་ཐེག	1) proud, arrogant, haughty; 2) [arch] khur khyer ba	pho theg
ཕོ་དང་མོ་གཉིས	male and female	pho dang mo gnyis
ཕོ་དྲང་པད་མ་འོད	Lotus Light Palace; Palace of Lotus Light	pho drang pad ma 'od
ཕོ་དྲུག	a silk scarf for presentation	pho drug
ཕོ་དྲེ	mule	pho dre
ཕོ་དྲེལ	male mule	pho drel
ཕོ་དྲོད	stomach/ digestive [fiery] heat [neccessary to digest food	pho drod
ཕོ་གདུང	pho ba'i thad kyi gsang zhig	pho gdung
ཕོ་གདོང	male figure	pho gdong
ཕོ་གདོན	gdon of men	pho gdon
ཕོ་བདུད	curses of bdud that strike males	pho bdud
ཕོ་བདུད་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 male bdud	pho bdud bcu gsum
ཕོ་འདྲེ	male ghost/ demon	pho 'dre
ཕོ་ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་ཆགས་སྤྱོད	homosexual	pho nang khul gyi chags spyod
ཕོ་ནད	1) stomach disease; 2) maleonly disease	pho nad
ཕོ་ནད་གྲང་བ	cold disease from not digesting food	pho nad grang ba
ཕོ་ནད་ཚ་བ་བདུན	the 7 kinds of hot disease from not digesting food (chn	pho nad tsha ba bdun
ཕོ་ནོར	male cattle	pho nor
ཕོ་རྣམས	males	pho rnams
ཕོ་སྣེ	anode, positive electrode/ pole	pho sne
ཕོ་དཔའ་རྟ་མགྱོགས	pho dpa' rtsal che la quick horse	pho dpa' rta mgyogs
ཕོ་སྤྱང་གྲུང་འཛོམ་པ	wise, skillful and courageous	pho spyang grung 'dzom pa
ཕོ་ཕག	boar	pho phag
ཕོ་ཕྱག	phyag 'bul zhu stangs	pho phyag
ཕོ་ཕྱུ	man's chuba	pho phyu
ཕོ་ཕྱུགས	male cattle	pho phyugs
ཕོ་བ	stomach, reticulum	pho ba
ཕོ་བ་བཀྲེས་པ	be hungry	pho ba bkres pa
ཕོ་བ་ངན་པ	weak/ unhealthy digestion	pho ba ngan pa
ཕོ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme transformation	pho ba chen po
ཕོ་བ་ལྗིད་པ	overcharge/ clog the stomach	pho ba ljid pa
ཕོ་བ་དུག་ཐབས	digestive disease from lack of food and drink	pho ba dug thabs
ཕོ་བ་གདགས	immediate	pho ba gdags
ཕོ་བ་སྦོས་པ	gsum pa sbos pa	pho ba sbos pa
ཕོ་བ་འཚིང་བ	{pho ba 'tshing ba} digestive disease	pho ba 'tshing ba
ཕོ་བ་བཟང་པོ	good stomach, powerful/ healthy digestion	pho ba bzang po
ཕོ་བ་རི	black pepper, stomachic pills	pho ba ri
ཕོ་བ་རི་ལུ	black pepper	pho ba ri lu
ཕོ་བ་རིལ	black pepper	pho ba ril
ཕོ་བ་རིལ་པོ	piper nigrum, black pepper	pho ba ril po
ཕོ་བ་རིལ་བུ	black pepper	pho ba ril bu
ཕོ་བ་རིས	{pho ba ris med tree, black pepper ['bras bu la nor lug gi pho kha'i ri mo ltar dod pa zhig ste, ro tsa, nus pas drod skyed, zas 'ju, bad kan dang grang nad gzhil,// syn: drod sman hril mo dang, na...	pho ba ris
ཅོལད	disease is eliminated	cold
ཕོ་བ་རུལ་ནད	ulcer	pho ba rul nad
ཕོ་བ་ཤོལ་བ	purge, cleanse	pho ba shol ba
ཕོ་བའི་ཐད	at the stomach	pho ba'i thad
ཕོ་བའི་བད་ཀན	pho ba'i be snabs	pho ba'i bad kan
ཕོ་བའི་མེ་དྲོད	digestive fiery heat	pho ba'i me drod
ཕོ་བའི་རྭ་རྩ	{pho ba'i rwa rtsa bleeding nadi [lhen sne'i rtse nas thur du tshon do dang, de nas gyas gyon du sor gsum re gzhal mtshams su yod pa'i bleeding nadi [if bled pho ba'i tshad pa 1698 dang, pho ba'i g...	pho ba'i rwa rtsa
ཕོ་བའི་རླུང་ཚབས	tshabs nad pho bar byer ba'i nad	pho ba'i rlung tshabs
ཕོ་བའི་གསང	a moxibustion point connected w digestion ][at the 12th vertabra der me btsa' bzhag na pho ba'i me drod nyams pa dang, zas mi 'ju ba, rtag tu khog pa bshal ba, pho ba'i grang skran bcas la phanR]	pho ba'i gsang
ཕོ་བར་འཕྲོད	agreeing with the stomach	pho bar 'phrod
ཕོ་བོ	elder brother,	pho bo
ཕོ་བོ་ལྡོན	clan	pho bo ldon
ཕོ་བོང	male donkey	pho bong
ཕོ་བྱུང	men, males	pho byung
ཕོ་བྲང	palace; castle, mansion, palace, court, house, dwelling, hall	pho brang
ཕོ་བྲང་ཀ་ལའ་པ	Kalapa Palace	pho brang ka la' pa
ཕོ་བྲང་དཀར་པོ	White House	pho brang dkar po
ཕོ་བྲང་འཁོར	1) queen; 2) king's retinue; 3) town	pho brang 'khor
ཕོ་བྲང་འཁོར་གྱི་སྐད	court language	pho brang 'khor gyi skad
ཕོ་བྲང་གི་ཉེ་འཁོར་ཁང་བཟང	a neighboring palace	pho brang gi nye 'khor khang bzang
ཕོ་བྲང་གི་སླས	king's retinue, court, people at court	pho brang gi slas
ཕོ་བྲང་གྲུ་འཛིན་གཉིས་པ	the palace that is the Potala on earth pho brang chen po g.yu mtsho - Podrang Yutso, in Tsari. See Turquoise Lake Palace pho brang chen po g.yu mtsho - Turquoise Lake Palace, in Tsari	pho brang gru 'dzin gnyis pa
ཕོ་བྲང་ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི་སྐྱེད་ཚལ	the palace garden	pho brang nye 'khor gyi skyed tshal
ཕོ་བྲང་ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི་བུད་མེད	ladies of your royal household	pho brang nye 'khor gyi bud med
ཕོ་བྲང་ཐེག་ཆེན་ཆོས་གླིང	{pho brang theg chen chos gling} [Dalai Lama's residence in Dharmamsala]	pho brang theg chen chos gling
ཕོ་བྲང་དུ་ལོག་གོ	returned home to the palace pho brang du seng ge'i khri la bzhugs par	pho brang du log go
ཞུས	begged him to return to the throne / to sit again on the lion throne in the palace	zhus
དཀར་བའི་དབུས་སུ	from a pure white palace surrounded by everything beautiful	dkar ba'i dbus su
ཕོ་བྲང་ནང་དུ	from within the palace	pho brang nang du
ཕོ་བྲང་ནང་མ	inner palace [sngar rgyal po'i pho brang phyi nang gnyis su phye ba'i nang ma	pho brang nang ma
ཕོ་བྲང་ནང་བཞིན	palatial	pho brang nang bzhin
ཕོ་བྲང་པད་མ་འོད	Palace of Lotus Light	pho brang pad ma 'od
ཕོ་བྲང་འབུམ་གདུགས	{pho brang 'bum gdugs} palace built by king gnam ri srong btsan where med. were sorted for Tibet	pho brang 'bum gdugs
ཕོ་བྲང་མེ་ཏོག་ཅན	chos rgyal pho brang	pho brang me tog can
ཕོ་བྲང་ཞི་བ་འོད	{pho brang zhi ba 'od [dus rabs bcu gcig pa'i skabs bod kyi stod mnga' ris kyi rgyal po rab byung gi rten can zhig	pho brang zhi ba 'od
ཕོ་བྲང་ཡངས་རྩེ	{pho brang yangs rtse} monastery [in lho kha sa khul khongs lhun rtse rdzong]	pho brang yangs rtse
ཕོ་བྲང་ཡུམ་བུ་ཀླ་སྒང	{pho brang yum bu kla sgang [structure built by 1st king of Tibet	pho brang yum bu kla sgang
ཕོ་བྲང་རི་བོ་གྲུ་འཛིན	Potala Palace 1) the Buddhafield of Avalokiteshvara. 2) The Potala of Lhasa; said to be an earthly version of the celestial Potala Palace	pho brang ri bo gru 'dzin
ཕོ་དབང	1) a bodily faculty, nga ro gsang mtho ba sogs pho'i chos nyid la dbang byed pa; 2) male faculty/ organ	pho dbang
ཕོ་འབོག	upper garment for men	pho 'bog
ཕོ་འབྲིང	skyes pa pho 'jon thang 'bring gras	pho 'bring
ཕོ་མ	hermaphrodite of the male class	pho ma
ཕོ་མེ	fiery heat of digestion/ the stomach	pho me
ཕོ་མོ	husband and wife	pho mo
ཕོ་མོ་ཁ་སྦྲེལ	gnyen sgrig pa	pho mo kha sbrel
ཕོ་མོ་འགྱུར་པ	changing into female and vice versa	pho mo 'gyur pa
ཕོ་མོ་རྒན་གཞོན	male female old and young, everybody	pho mo rgan gzhon
ཕོ་མོ་གཉིས	[both] male and female	pho mo gnyis
ཕོ་མོ་འདྲ་མཉམ	=ity of the sexes	pho mo 'dra mnyam
ཕོ་མོ་བྱང་ཐང	mtsho large lake on bhutan frontier	pho mo byang thang
ཕོ་མོ་བྱང་ཐང་མཚོ	{pho mo byang thang} Lake	pho mo byang thang mtsho
ཕོ་མོ་སྦྱོར་བའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས	through the circumstance of a male and female copulating	pho mo sbyor ba'i rkyen gyis
ཕོ་མོ་མེད	without difference of sex	pho mo med
ཕོ་མོ་ལྷན་ཅིག	live harmoniously	pho mo lhan cig
ཕོ་མོ་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	residing together as husband and wife	pho mo lhan cig tu gnas pa
ཕོ་མོ་ལྷན་གཅིག་གནས	cohabitation	pho mo lhan gcig gnas
ཕོ་མོའི་འཁྲིག་པ	sexual union	pho mo'i 'khrig pa
ཕོ་མོའི་ཚན་གྱི	sexual	pho mo'i tshan gyi
ཕོ་མོའི་མཚན	gender, genitals	pho mo'i mtshan
ཕོ་མོའི་མཚན་མེད	asexual	pho mo'i mtshan med
ཕོ་རྨོངས	penis	pho rmongs
ཕོ་རྩ	stomach nadi	pho rtsa
ཕོ་རྩ་བོང་རྨེད	above the navel tshon gang gzhal ba'i sa nas 'phred la gnas pa'i stomach/ digestion connected nadi	pho rtsa bong rmed
ཕོ་རྩལ་སྣ་དགུ	the 9 pho rtsal	pho rtsal sna dgu
ཕོ་རྩེད་སྣ་དགུ	nine sports or feats	pho rtsed sna dgu
ཕོ་རྩེན་སྣ་དགུ	9 sports of a man in rtsis len	pho rtsen sna dgu
ཕོ་ཚད	1) heat of digestion or power of digesting food; 2) pho nad, stomach/ digestive disease from food poisoning	pho tshad
ཕོ་ཚན་མོ་ཚན་གྱི་ན་ཚ	venereal disease	pho tshan mo tshan gyi na tsha
ཕོ་ཚུགས	solidity, stability pho tshugs ji zhig na rkyen kho'i pho	pho tshugs
ཚུགས་རང་ཞིག་ལ་སོང་ནས	after sometime the solidity of these conditions will collapse by itself	tshugs rang zhig la song nas
ཕོ་ཚོད	arrogance, haughty, outrageous, egocentric, boasting, selfevaluation/ estimate D	pho tshod
ཕོ་ཚོད་ཅན	outrageous, arrogant, egocentric, boasting, haughty	pho tshod can
ཕོ་ཚོད་མ་བྱེད	don't boast	pho tshod ma byed
ཕོ་ཚོས	red paint	pho tshos
ཕོ་མཚན	male organ, penis	pho mtshan
ཕོ་མཚན་གི་སྒོང་རྡོག	testicle	pho mtshan gi sgong rdog
ཕོ་མཚན་གྱི་ཏོག	glans-penis	pho mtshan gyi tog
ཕོ་མཚན་གྱི་ནད་ལྔ	(chn	pho mtshan gyi nad lnga
ཕོ་མཚན་འབྲེག་པ	excise the membrum virile	pho mtshan 'breg pa
ཕོ་མཚན་སོས་ཟིན་ནད	rdo rje rtag tu 'greng ba dang, so btab pa lta bu disease where skin of the penis splits	pho mtshan sos zin nad
ཕོ་གཞོན	young man	pho gzhon
ཕོ་བཞི	ya gnyis ma gnyis te so bzhi ma gtogs brjes tshar ba'i horse/ mule	pho bzhi
ཕོ་ཟོ	manly	pho zo
ཕོ་ཟོ་བཀྲ་བ	masculinity	pho zo bkra ba
ཕོ་ཟོམ	man's lham zon pa	pho zom
ཕོ་གཟེར	{pho gzer} stomach/ digestive disease	pho gzer
ཕོ་བཟང	powerful/ healthy digestion	pho bzang
ཕོ་བཟོ	1) lying; 2) speculative opinion, guess/ assumption; 3) masculinity, qualities of men	pho bzo
ཕོ་བཟོ་དོད་པོ	masculine, manly	pho bzo dod po
ཕོ་ཡན	single man, bachelor	pho yan
ཕོ་ཡི་རྩ	male pulse with strong deep beat	pho yi rtsa
ཕོ་ཡིག	male letters ka ca ta pa rtsa etc	pho yig
ཕོ་ཡོང་བཟའ་རྒྱལ་མོ་བསྟན	1 of the five wives of {khri srong lde'u bstan}	pho yong bza' rgyal mo bstan
ཕོ་རག	same as above	pho rag
ཕོ་རང	unmarried/ single man	pho rang
ཕོ་རབ	man w very capacious mind	pho rab
ཕོ་རབས་ཆད་པ	man w broken family lineage or no sons	pho rabs chad pa
ཕོ་རིགས	male	pho rigs
ཕོ་རིལ	pho ril spod rdzas [food essence extract] and pho ba [stomach digestion] heat producing med.	pho ril
ཕོ་རིས	[med. tree] black pepper	pho ris
ཕོ་རེང	man w/o wife/ consort	pho reng
ཕོ་རོག	crow, raven, raven	pho rog
ཕོ་རོག་མིག	a medicinal herb	pho rog mig
ཕོ་རོལ་གཏོང	1) send to the other side; 2) cut off life	pho rol gtong
ཕོ་རླུང	pho bar cold wind disease	pho rlung
ཕོ་ལ	great tibetan mountain range	pho la
ཕོ་ལད	lazy person faulty in thought and action, steel	pho lad
ཕོ་ལན	Poland	pho lan
ཕོ་ལིང་ག	masculine gender	pho ling ga
ཕོ་ལུག	ram	pho lug
ཕོ་ལུང	sgrog gu [button?]	pho lung
ཕོ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	transfer of govt. officers	pho len byed pa
ཕོ་ལོ	male calendar years	pho lo
ཕོ་ལོ་དྲུག	byi ba dang - the six male year animals [stag 'brug rta, sprel, khyi	pho lo drug
ཕོ་ལོ་ལིང	peppermint	pho lo ling
ཕོ་ལོག	stomach disease	pho log
ཕོ་ལོག་མོ་ལོག	bisexual, eunuch	pho log mo log
ཕོ་ལོང	1) ball [of thread/ yarn]; 3) kind of jasmine D	pho long
ཕོ་ལོང་ཧེལ	1) a bodily faculty, nga ro gsang mtho ba sogs pho'i chos nyid la dbang byed pa; 2) male faculty/ organ	pho long hel
ཕོ་ཤ	1) internal path from beginning of the entrails to the anus; 2) [arch] btsos pa	pho sha
ཕོ་ཤ་མོ་གྱོད	a man killed and his wife ravished ground of regret	pho sha mo gyod
ཕོ་ཤའི་ཁུ་བ	thug pa [porridge/ noodles/ soup w pieces of meat	pho sha'i khu ba
ཕོ་ཤར	young man	pho shar
ཕོ་ཤལ	skyes pa tha shal	pho shal
ཕོ་ཤིང	male tree, birch	pho shing
ཕོ་ཤེད	dpa' ngom	pho shed
ཕོ་ཤེལ	crystal which affects the eye in spectacles	pho shel
ཕོ་ཤོབ	bragging, boasting	pho shob
ཕོ་སུལ	pho ba'i nang ldebs su yod pa'i food and drink myag byed kyi sul lam gnyer ma lta bu zhig	pho sul
ཕོ་སོ	haughtiness, pride	pho so
ཕོ་སོ་ཅན	proud, haughty	pho so can
ཕོ་གསར	virgin, young man	pho gsar
ཕོ་ཧོར	a po hor	pho hor
ཕོ་ཧྲང	unmarried man, single man, celibate	pho hrang
ཕོ་ཧྲང་ང	bachelor	pho hrang nga
ཕོ་ཧྲེང	single man, bachelor	pho hreng
ཕོ་ཧྲེངས	single man, bachelor	pho hrengs
ཕོ་ལྷ	1) man's phrag lha, tutelary deity of right side J; 2) sir	pho lha
ཕོ་ལྷ་བ	of the Phola family [family descended from king miwang pholha Thaiji originally from village of 'dus chung in Tsang	pho lha ba
ཕོ་ལྷ་བ་བསོད་ནམས་སྟོབས་རྒྱལ	{pho lha ba bsod nams stobs rgyal [rgyal rtse rdzong gi mi yin zhing, lha bzang h'an gyis bod sa gnas kyi rgyal po byas pa'i dus su khong gis dmag dpon mdzad, rab byung bcu gnyis pa'i chu yos lor k...	pho lha ba bsod nams stobs rgyal
ཕོ་ལྷ་བསོད་ནམས་སྟོབས་རྒྱལ	16891747 - Pholha Sönam Tobgyal, a Tibetan ruler	pho lha bsod nams stobs rgyal
ཕོག	imp. of second {'bog pa}; 1) salary. 2) strike, touch, affect, influence, hit. 3) beam, rafter; a gift; profit/ hit, strike, affect; touch; punished; strike, touch, affect, influence, hit; salary; ...	phog
ཕོག་ཁེབས	quilt	phog khebs
ཕོག་གུ	pho gu	phog gu
ཕོག་རྒྱར	meat allowance	phog rgyar
ཕོག་སྙ་ཆེ	[arch] bsran che ba	phog snya che
ཕོག་ཐུག	1) salary; 2) strike, touch, affect, influence, hit; 3) beam, rafter)/ {phog thug - gzhan gnod kyi khong	phog thug
ཁྲོ་བསླངས་པ	//khyed rang la rang gar kha shor gyis don med phog thug thal song yang dgongs pa gtan nas ma 'tsom,//stag mor phog thug btang yang rung ma btang yang rung gang ltar mi phyugs za mkhan gcan gzan zh...	khro bslangs pa
ཕོག་ཐུག་འགྲོ	be [irritated, stimulated, excited, offended, hurt]	phog thug 'gro
ཕོག་ཐུག་གཏོང	irritate, stimulate, excite, offend, hurt	phog thug gtong
ཕོག་ཐུག་གཏོང་བ	irritate, stimulate, excite	phog thug gtong ba
ཕོག་ཐུག་ཤོར	be [irritated, stimulated, excited, offended, hurt]	phog thug shor
ཕོག་དུག	1) salary; 2) strike, touch, affect, influence, hit; 3) beam, rafter; 4) offending, hurting; 5) stimulation, excitement	phog dug
ཕོག་དུག་ཡོད་པའི་རྫས	stimulant	phog dug yod pa'i rdzas
ཕོག་དུག་ཡོད་པའི་བཟའ་བཏུང	stimulant foods	phog dug yod pa'i bza' btung
ཕོག་རྡོག	small drum, cymbal	phog rdog
ཕོག་པ	1) give bestow [p 'bog pa and 'bogs pa]; 2) (tha mi dad pa,, stuck, hit,; 3) encourage; 4) fall	phog pa
ཕོག་པ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	~ to adopt on attitude	phog pa sems bskyed
ཕོག་དཔོན	/(1 paymaster; 2) officer at Shigatse who looks after frontier troops D	phog dpon
ཕོག་མེ་ཏོག་པའི་མིང	the name from when I tossed the flower	phog me tog pa'i ming
ཕོག་བཟན	allowances in money or goods	phog bzan
ཕོག་གསང	wound	phog gsang
ཕོག་ལྷ	'destined deity' [the deity on whom one's flower falls during the empowerment]	phog lha
ཕོགས	salary, wage, pay, allowance, afflicted with, SA 'phog pa, emolument, salary	phogs
ཕོགས་ཀྱི་ཐོབ་ཆ	wages	phogs kyi thob cha
ཕོགས་ཁང	payroll office	phogs khang
ཕོགས་རྒྱག	pay wages	phogs rgyag
ཕོགས་དངུལ	wages [$]	phogs dngul
ཕོགས་ཆ	wages	phogs cha
ཕོགས་ཐེབས	grva par phogs rgyag rgyu'i ma rtsa 'bru dngul sogs	phogs thebs
ཕོགས་ཐོབ	income, wage, pay, salary	phogs thob
ཕོགས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་འཚོ་སྐྱོང	livlihood	phogs thob kyi 'tsho skyong
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཝགེ	earning	through wage
ཕོགས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས་འཚོ་སྐྱོང་ཝགེ	system	phogs thob kyi lam lugs 'tsho skyong wage
ཕོགས་ཐོབ་མཐོན་པོ	high wages	phogs thob mthon po
ཕོགས་ཐོབ་དམའ་པོ	low wages	phogs thob dma' po
ཕོགས་མདའ་རྩིས་སྲས	Tibetan govt phogs dpon &, mda' dpon, rtsis dpon, sras rnam pa bcas	phogs mda' rtsis sras
ཕོགས་སྣོན	subsidy, allowance	phogs snon
ཕོགས་དཔོན	leader of those in charge of military pay, paymaster phogs blangs nas las ka byed mkhan wage earner	phogs dpon
ཕོགས་འབབ	'tsho dod, salary, wage, pay, income, earnings phogs med kyi rgyal khams nyul ba wandering ~though countries, limitless	phogs 'bab
ཕོགས་ཚད	ration	phogs tshad
ཕོགས་ཟན	wage earner	phogs zan
ཕོགས་ཟན་པ	wage earner	phogs zan pa
ཕོང	throw, SA 'phen pa	phong
ཕོང་གྱམ	shelter under a beetling rock	phong gyam
ཕོང་གྱུར་བ	afflicted	phong gyur ba
ཕོང་བ	ft. of {phong ba}; {phong ba, phongs pa, phong ba} intr. v	phong ba
ཕོངས	poverty, miseries, impoverish, feel poor, bereft, (afflicted, be impoverished/ deprived/ destitute/ devoid of	phongs
ཕོངས་གྲིར་ཤི	ltogs grir shi ba	phongs grir shi
ཕོངས་རྒུད	MSS: poverty and decay; destitute. E.g. @ KKP 253.20 {zab mo'i chos kyi phongs rgud dang bral} "free of being destitute of the profound dharma." [mss]	phongs rgud
ཕོངས་ངན	very poor	phongs ngan
ཕོངས་རྟགས	signs of poverty phongs rtags mthong rgyu med par gyur signs of poverty not to be seen	phongs rtags
ཕོངས་པ	1) [p phong ba]; 2) destitute, poor, impoverished, poverty, distress, needy, adversity	phongs pa
ཕོངས་པ་དབུལ་པོ	poverty, distress, adversity	phongs pa dbul po
ཕོངས་པ་མེད་པ	w/o poverty/ adversity/ neediness	phongs pa med pa
ཕོངས་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of poverty	phongs pa gsum
ཕོངས་པའི་དུས	time of danger, time of calamity	phongs pa'i dus
ཕོངས་པར་འགྱུར	become poor/ destitute	phongs par 'gyur
ཕོངས་པར་འགྱུར་པའི་ལས	karma of becoming poor	phongs par 'gyur pa'i las
ཕོངས་མེད	impoverished, sufficient (w/o feeling a loss 1701	phongs med
ཕོད	1) clothing's sgab gsham sne 'dzar ram, made of dar gos dang stong skud sogs [silk, silken thread etc.] phod 'dzar ornament; 2) power of mind or snying stobs; 3) comet; 4) daring, dare [to] fearles...	phod
ཕོད་ཀ	deep-sleeved gown, kind of	phod ka
སྟགེ	dress of the lamas, masquerade garment with long sleeves	stage
ཕོད་ཀ་ཕོད་ཁ	a gown	phod ka phod kha
ཕོད་ཀ་ལིང་ངེ་བ	flowing (flowing hair	phod ka ling nge ba
ཕོད་ཁ	a gown, masquerade garment	phod kha
ཕོད་ཅ་བཟའ	star/ comet du ba mjug ring D	phod ca bza'
ཕོད་ཅན	comet	phod can
ཕོད་ཆུང	blo khog chung ba	phod chung
ཕོད་ཆུང་ངེ་བ	small/ weak power of mind or snying stobs	phod chung nge ba
ཕོད་ཆུངས་སེ་བ	small/ weak power of mind or snying stobs	phod chungs se ba
ཕོད་ཆེན་མཐིང་ཀ	the blue gown [worn by Guru Rinpoche under his Dharma robes.]	phod chen mthing ka
ཕོད་ཆེན་མཐིང་ག	blue gown worn by Guru Rinpoche under the darma robes	phod chen mthing ga
ཕོད་ཇི་ལྟར	how could I dare?, be willing to part with, not grudge	phod ji ltar
ཕོད་མདོ	{phod mdo}	phod mdo
ཕོད་པ	be able to, have the power to, dare, - able, prevail on oneself to, bold, daring, timid, cowardly,??? not? withstand, resist {sh kya} cope w, D coerce D ['bral mi phod - hardly able to part w; lta ...	phod pa
ཞིམ་སུ་ཡིས་ཕོད	who can resist good food])	zhim su yis phod
ཕོད་པ་ཅན	bold, daring	phod pa can
ཕོད་པོ	person w power/ ability/ daring/ courage and spyi brtol can	phod po
ཕོད་འབྲལ་མི	cannot bear to be separated	phod 'bral mi
ཕོད་མ་བཙོངས	Don't overestimate your capacities!	phod ma btsongs
ཕོད་བཙུགས་པ	after they have actually occurred search for faults	phod btsugs pa
ཕོད་འཛར	ornament made of dar gos stong skud etc. [silk, silken thread etc.]	phod 'dzar
ཕོན	bundle, bunch, cluster, truss, sheaf, bunch, wisp, umbel, tassel, tuft, collection chag pa, volume, quantity, #, amount	phon
ཕོན་ཆུང	small amount, few	phon chung
ཕོན་ཆུང་བ	small amount, few	phon chung ba
ཕོན་ཆེ་བ	many, a lot, much	phon che ba
ཕོན་ཆེན	lots, good deal, much, many	phon chen
ཕོན་ཆེན་པོ	many, a lot, much	phon chen po
ཕོན་ཆེན་པོ་གསོད་པ	massacre	phon chen po gsod pa
ཕོན་ཉི་བཙུགས་ཕོ་བཞག་པ	set a trap for birds	phon nyi btsugs pho bzhag pa
ཕོན་ཏེ	[arch] profit, benefit	phon te
ཕོན་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	bulky	phon stobs chen po
ཕོན་ཐག	grass rope, rope of grass	phon thag
ཕོན་པ	bundle, truss, sheaf, bunch, wisp, cluster, umbel, collection	phon pa
ཕོན་པོ	bunch, cluster,, truss, sheaf, bunch, wisp, cluster, umbel, collection chag pa, bam po	phon po
ཕོན་བུ	made of dar gos and stong skud etc. tassel/ tuft	phon bu
ཕོན་འབོར	quantity, #, amount	phon 'bor
ཕོན་ཚར་གྱི་ཤམ་ཅན	with. in clusters	phon tshar gyi sham can
ཕོན་ཚར་གྱི་ཤམ་ཆན	with. in clusters phon 'dzar} - on cloth etc tassel/ tuft at the end	phon tshar gyi sham chan
ཕོབ	'bebs pa! bring down, make fall/ descend!	phob
ཕོབ་པ	be concrete	phob pa
ཕོབ་ཕོབ་པ	be concrete	phob phob pa
ཕོམ	form, blank	phom
ཕོམ་པ	pot, jar phom pa} - [arch] vase, pot	phom pa
ཕོམ་ཤོག	form, blank	phom shog
ཕོའི	masculine	pho'i
ཕོའི་སྤྱོད་ཁང	men's toilet	pho'i spyod khang
ཕོའི་དབང་པོ	the male faculty / organ	pho'i dbang po
ཕོའི་རང་བཞིན	masculine/ positive element/ principle in nature	pho'i rang bzhin
ཕོའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	positive reaction	pho'i rang bzhin gyi 'gyur ldog
ཕོའི་ལམ	the path of the messenger	pho'i lam
ཕོར་དཀྲུག་འཁོར་ལོ	phor pa dkrug byed kyi dkrug 'khor	phor dkrug 'khor lo
ཕོར་དཀྲུག་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	phor mkhan gyi lag cha w tip sharp and flat, curved like a hook	phor dkrug lcags kyu
ཕོར་ཁ	bowl	phor kha
ཕོར་ཁ་ཙམ་པ	the size of a bowl	phor kha tsam pa
ཕོར་རྒྱར	meat allowance	phor rgyar
ཕོར་ཉི	trap/ net to catch birds	phor nyi
ཕོར་རྙི	trap, net to catch birds	phor rnyi
ཕོར་པ	[rice] bowl, tea/ drinking cup	phor pa
ཕོར་པ་གཏིང་རིང	deep phor pa for drinking	phor pa gting ring
ཕོར་སྤོས	of incense	phor spos
ཕོར་ཕྱིས	[cloth to] wipe a bowl	phor phyis
ཕོར་བ	bowl, dish, drinking-cup	phor ba
ཕོར་བུ	small food bowl	phor bu
ཕོར་འབྱིད	phor phyis	phor 'byid
ཕོར་མར	butter for tea	phor mar
ཕོར་མོ་ས	Formosa, Taiwan	phor mo sa
ཕོར་རྩི	phor pa'i rtsi	phor rtsi
ཕོར་རྭ	powder horn	phor rwa
ཕོར་རས	phor pa sgril byed or wiping cloth	phor ras
ཕོར་རུ	[rice] bowl, teacup	phor ru
ཕོར་ཤུབས	phor pa blug snod 1702	phor shubs
ཕོལ	a skin-boil, ulcer, blister, sore; blister, a bad sore, ulcer, abscess	phol
ཕོལ་ཏ	{phen te} D	phol ta
ཕོལ་ཏེ	[arch] profit, benefit	phol te
ཕོལ་བ	SA rtogs pa	phol ba
ཕོལ་བྱུང	mould	phol byung
ཕོལ་འབྲས	wounds of phol mig disease and 'bras nad	phol 'bras
ཕོལ་མིག	1) skin disease boils? w round sngo nag gya' za mi bzod pa, in succession wounds arising and virulently contagious and two [arch] circle, wheel, disk	phol mig
ཕོས	imp. of {'bo ba}	phos
ཕོས་པ	pf. of {'bo ba}	phos pa
ཕོས་བོར	bza' tshang kha phral byed skabs bden pa mo la che na phos bor zer	phos bor
ཕྱ	lot, luck, chance, fortune	phya
ཕྱ་ཀེན་ཙེ	one who pretends to know the issue of fighting between gods and demons	phya ken tse
ཕྱ་མཁན	potter	phya mkhan
ཕྱ་རྒྱབ་པ	cast lots	phya rgyab pa
ཕྱ་ངན	bad luck/ omens phya dang g.yang - luck and blessing phya dang g.yang - fortune and blessing phya dang g.yang 'gug - call forth good luck and blessing phya dang g.yang 'gug pa - call forth/ magneti...	phya ngan
ཕྱ་ན་པད་མོ	Padmapani, a name for Avalokiteshvara	phya na pad mo
ཕྱ་པ	1) potter; 2) sorcerer D; 3) fortune teller	phya pa
ཕྱ་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སེང་གེ	1182-1251 [ggd]	phya pa chos kyi seng ge
ཕྱ་པ་ཆོས་སེང	Syn {phya pa chos kyi seng ge} master of SautrantikaMadhyamika	phya pa chos seng
ཕྱ་བོན་ཇུ་ཐིག་ཅན	class of bonpo	phya bon ju thig can
ཕྱ་མ་ཕྱོའི་གླུ་འདི་བླངས་པ	[he] sang this very moving song	phya ma phyo'i glu 'di blangs pa
ཕྱ་མ་འཕྱོ	floating, soaring, very moving	phya ma 'phyo
ཕྱ་མི	1) potter; 2) sorcerer D; 3) fortune teller	phya mi
ཕྱ་ཙན	1) humans horses and dogs, when the child is in the womb kyi substance emitted by the nipple; 2) feces of new born infant, colt, calf etc that died immediately after suckling used as augury D	phya tsan
ཕྱ་ཙན་གསུམ	humans horses and dogs when the child has yet to drink at the nipple breast secretion/ brun	phya tsan gsum
ཕྱ་ཚན	infant shit after dying from drinking milk	phya tshan
ཕྱ་བཟང	good luck/ omens	phya bzang
ཕྱ་བཟང་ཕྱ་ངན	good and bad fortune phya g.yang - quintessence	phya bzang phya ngan
ཕྱ་ར	curtain before a door	phya ra
ཧཻར་བླནཀེཏ	like cloth/ felt D	hair blanket
ཕྱ་ར་ཁྲ་བོ	blanket of yak's hair	phya ra khra bo
ཕྱ་ར་གྲུ་འདེགས	{phyar ba gru 'degs	phya ra gru 'degs
ཕྱ་རའི་གུར	black yak hair tent	phya ra'i gur
ཕྱ་རུ	[arch] 'gebs rgyu'i ber	phya ru
ཕྱ་ལ་ལེ་བ	coarse, rude, negligent, disorderly	phya la le ba
ཕྱ་ལེ་བ	level. Syn {phyal le ba}	phya le ba
ཕྱ་ལེ་བ་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-level	phya le ba ma yin pa
ཕྱ་ལེ་མ་ཡིན་པ	1 of dbyibs gzugs brgyad	phya le ma yin pa
ཕྱ་ལེ་མིན	not level/ even, w irregularities, protrusions, high and low places etc.	phya le min
ཕྱ་ལེ་ཡིན་མིན	flat/ smooth or not	phya le yin min
ཕྱ་ལེགས་པ	attractive	phya legs pa
ཕྱ་ལེགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	unattractive	phya legs pa ma yin pa
ཕྱ་གཤེན་ཐེག་པ	Way of the Shen Practice of Prediction	phya gshen theg pa
ཕྱ་སངས	[mind] clear of wavering/ stirring/ vacillation	phya sangs
ཕྱ་སངས་འོལ་ལ་འཐེན	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	phya sangs 'ol la 'then
ཕཡབ༹	affluence	phyva
ཕྱྭ	auspicious, cha, individual's positive force, the base of prosperity, signifies the indestructible vital capacity, prediction in terms of the relation between one's phywa and the phywa of the outer...	phywa
ཕྱྭ་ཀེན་ཙེ	1 claiming to know the issue of fighting between gods and asuras/demons, B"n sorcerer	phywa ken tse
ཕཡབ༹་ཀེན་ཙེ	bon po mo diviner	phyva ken tse
ཕྱྭ་ཁུ་ཡེ	g.yang 'bod pa'i tsig cig	phywa khu ye
ཕྱྭ་ཁུག	sack of the phywa	phywa khug
ཕྱྭ་མཁན	1) potter; 2) sorcerer D; 3) fortune teller	phywa mkhan
ཕྱྭ་གྱང	dpal lam bcud	phywa gyang
ཕཡབ༹་འགུགས་པ	phun tshogs 'khor thabs byed pa	phyva 'gugs pa
ཕྱྭ་སྒམ	casket of the phywa	phywa sgam
ཕྱྭ་ངན	bad luck/ omens	phywa ngan
ཕྱྭ་རྗེ་རིང་དཀར	lord of the phywa dressed in white, 1 of srid pa pho dgu	phywa rje ring dkar
ཕྱྭ་རྟེན	support of the phywa phywa dang g.yang - fortune and blessing phywa dang g.yang 'gug pa - call forth/ magnetize fortune and blessing	phywa rten
ཕྱྭ་མདའ	arrow of the phywa	phywa mda'
ཕཡབ༹་འདེབས་པོ	mo diviner	phyva 'debs po
ཕཡབ༹་པ	mo diviner	phyva pa
ཕྱྭ་པ	1) potter; 2) sorcerer D; 3) fortune teller	phywa pa
ཕྱྭ་ཕོར	chalice of the phywa phywa 'phrin nor bu mchog rgyal {phywa 'phrin nor bu mchog rgyal [B"n work brining good fortune phywa 'phrin nor bu mchog rgyal {phywa 'phrin nor bu mchog rgyal	phywa phor
ཕྱྭ་བོན	a bon po who was expert in performing rites to summon the phywa nad g.yang to enhance fortune and prosperity	phywa bon
ཕྱྭ་བོན་ཐེའུ་ལེགས	bon of the phywa	phywa bon the'u legs
ཕྱྭ་འབོད	to summon the phywa	phywa 'bod
ཕྱྭ་མི	1) potter; 2) sorcerer D; 3) fortune teller	phywa mi
ཕྱྭ་མོ	divination, SA mo, lde'u 'phrul	phywa mo
ཕྱྭ་སྨྲ་བ	(Lang): Fatalists (niyativAdin), also "phya smra ba" [mss]	phywa smra ba
ཕྱྭ་ཚེའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	queen of the phywa and of longevity, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	phywa tshe'i rgyal mo
ཕྱྭ་བཟང	good luck/ omens	phywa bzang
ཕཡབ༹་བཟང་པོ	good omens/ predictions 1703 phyva g.yang - affluence and prosperity phywa g.yang gi phug lha - deities of the phywa g.yang of the home phywa g.yang gi bum pa - vase of the phywa and g.yang	phyva bzang po
ཕྱྭ་གཤེན	Shen of the Cha	phywa gshen
ཕཡབ༹་གཤེན་ཇུ་ཐིག་ཅན	1 having the mo cord, mo diviner	phyva gshen ju thig can
ཕྱྭ་གཤེན་ཇུ་ཐིག་ཅན	shen of the cha that has the ju thig	phywa gshen ju thig can
ཕྱྭ་གཤེན་ཐེག་པ	1 of rgyu'i bon, way of the shen of the cha	phywa gshen theg pa
ཕྱག	folding one's hands, hand, salutation, reverence, do homage, bow down	phyag
ཕྱག་ཀོར	pad kor mudra	phyag kor
ཕྱག་སྐུད	thread, cord, string [h]	phyag skud
ཕྱག་སྐོར	prostrations and circumambulations	phyag skor
ཕྱག་སྐོར་གྱིས	do prostrations and circumambulations!	phyag skor gyis
ཕྱག་སྐོར་བྱས་པ	made prostrations and circumambulations	phyag skor byas pa
ཕྱག་སྐོར་རེམ	do prostrations and circumambulations!	phyag skor rem
ཕྱག་སྐྱེལ	pay respects	phyag skyel
ཕྱག་སྐྱེལ་བ	to pay respect	phyag skyel ba
ཕྱག་བརྐྱངས་ནས	reached out his hands	phyag brkyangs nas
ཕྱག་བསྐྱེལ	pay his respects	phyag bskyel
ཕྱག་ཁང	mosque etc. house of prostration	phyag khang
ཕྱག་མཁར	hand staff	phyag mkhar
ཕྱག་འཁར	walking-staff, stick, staff	phyag 'khar
ཕྱག་འཁུར	phyag rten	phyag 'khur
ཕྱག་ག་ཕྱོག་གེ	things mixed up or thrown together	phyag ga phyog ge
ཕྱག་གང	breadth of a fist	phyag gang
ཕྱག་གི	symbolic	phyag gi
ཕྱག་གི་ཉ	upper arm	phyag gi nya
ཕྱག་གི་གནས	object of prostration/ veneration	phyag gi gnas
ཕྱག་གི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the hands [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, phyag ring zhing rgyas pa dang, phyag shing bal ltar 'jam pa'o	phyag gi dpe byad gnyis
ཕྱག་གི་ཚུལ་དུ	in a way as if saluting	phyag gi tshul du
ཕྱག་གི་རི་མོའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	the three minor marks of the lines on the hands * [h]	phyag gi ri mo'i dpe byad gsum
ཕྱག་གིས་མཆོད	worship w the homage of	phyag gis mchod
ཕྱག་གུས་འཚལ	respectfully prostrate	phyag gus 'tshal
ཕྱག་གོང	back of hand	phyag gong
ཕྱག་གྱང་འགྱེལ	suddenly falling on the ground to make salutation	phyag gyang 'gyel
ཕྱག་གྱང་འགྱེལ་ཐབས་སུ་འཚལ	to	phyag gyang 'gyel thabs su 'tshal
མཀེ་ཕུ༹ལལ	length prostrations	make full
ཕྱག་གྱང་འགྱེལ་བ	did full prostrations	phyag gyang 'gyel ba
ཕྱག་གྱི་གནས	object of prostration	phyag gyi gnas
ཕྱག་གྱེང་འགྱེལ	suddenly falling on the ground to make salutation	phyag gyeng 'gyel
ཕྱག་གྲ	privy, wc, toilet D	phyag gra
ཕྱག་གྲངས་མེད་བཅས	unnumbered compliments	phyag grangs med bcas
ཕྱག་གྲོན	expense, expenditure [h]	phyag gron
ཕྱག་བགྱི་བ	to prostrate, salute, pay homage / respect	phyag bgyi ba
ཕྱག་བགྱིའོ	prostrate	phyag bgyi'o
ཕྱག་འགྱེད	gift, present	phyag 'gyed
ཕྱག་འགྲོས	giving out, distributing	phyag 'gros
ཕྱག་འགྲོས་གནང	give out, distribute	phyag 'gros gnang
ཕྱག་རྒོད	moose?, sus scrofa linnaeus	phyag rgod
ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra (consort); symbol(ic gesture/ ornament); symbolic form of a deity; mudra, symbol, symbolic form, gesture, consort, [mudra]; mudra [seal, symbolic gesture]; formalized hand gesture, mudra, sea...	phyag rgya
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་རྐྱང་པ	Single Form. Sadhana text of Mahayoga composed by Padmasambhava. The title refers to the sadhana practice of a single deity without a retinue	phyag rgya rkyang pa
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་དངོས་དང་མཇལ་བ	to actually meet with the form [of the deity]	phyag rgya dngos dang mjal ba
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ལྔ	[TRS 143-4]; the five symbolic ornaments / seals	phyag rgya lnga
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གཅིག	single form, (the deity alone	phyag rgya gcig
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གཅིག་པ	single mudra'; single form, [the deity alone]	phyag rgya gcig pa
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གཅིག་པའི་སྐུར	in the form of the single mudra	phyag rgya gcig pa'i skur
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གཅིག་པའི་སྐུར་བསྒོམས	meditation on the deity alone phyag rgya gcig spros tshom bu tshogs	phyag rgya gcig pa'i skur bsgoms
ཋེ་གཐེརེད	assembly mudra is a group of deities	The gathered
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamudra	phyag rgya chen po
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	(chn phyag rgya chen po mchog gi dngos grub - Supreme attainment / siddhi of Mahamudra. 1) Supreme enlightenment. 2) The third of the four vidyadhara levels phyag rgya chen po mchog gi rig 'dzin Su...	phyag rgya chen po lnga
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་ཐིག་ལེའི་རྒྱུད	Mahamudra Tilaka Tantra	phyag rgya chen po thig le'i rgyud
མ	tilaka phyag rgya chen po dang rdzogs pa chen	Mahamudra
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྡའི་སྐོར་གསུམ	instructions of {pha dam pa sangs rgyas}	phyag rgya chen po brda'i skor gsum
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་རིག་འཛིན	great symbol Vidyadhara/ awareness holder	phyag rgya chen po rig 'dzin
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི	SA rig 'dzin bzhi	phyag rgya chen po'i
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mahamudra mandala	phyag rgya chen po'i dkyil 'khor
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐུ	Bodily form of Mahamudra. The 'body of Mahamudra'	phyag rgya chen po'i sku
རེཕེ༹རས་ཏོ་ཐེ་རཻནབོཝ	like form of one's personal yidam	refers to the rainbow
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	Siddhi of Mahamudra. Same as enlightenment. In the context of Mahayoga Tantra, it can also refer to the attainment of the third vidyadhara level in which 'Mahamudra' means the sublime body of the y...	phyag rgya chen po'i dngos grub
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཆོས་བཅུ	(chn	phyag rgya chen po'i chos bcu
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི	the four yogas of mahamudra [1) {rtse gcig [chung brid dang chen po} 2) {spros bral} 3) {ro gcig} 4) {sgom med}	phyag rgya chen po'i rnal 'byor bzhi
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིག་འཛིན	great symbol Vidyadhara	phyag rgya chen po'i rig 'dzin
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་མོ	1) the seal of the great mother. 2) Mahamudra, supreme seal/ symbol	phyag rgya chen mo
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་དྲུག	six charnel-ground ornaments	phyag rgya drug
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་འདེབས་པའི་གཞུང་ཡིག	sealed text	phyag rgya 'debs pa'i gzhung yig
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three types of mudra	phyag rgya rnam pa gsum
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of mudra [body, speech [mantra and sign] mind [meditation on the deity	phyag rgya rnam gsum
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་སྤྲོས་བཅས	elaborate form / mudra [of a deity]. elaborate mudraform; elaborate seal (of Mahayoga)	phyag rgya spros bcas
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཕྲ་རགས	the seals which are subtle and coarse [See five paths of	phyag rgya phra rags
མཧ་ཡོག	subtle and coarse forms (of deities), 1 of {ting nge 'dzin gsum}	mah yoga
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བ་ཞི	the four seals	phyag rgya ba zhi
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་སྦྲོས་བཅས་བཞི	(chn	phyag rgya sbros bcas bzhi
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མ	posture of hands or feet	phyag rgya ma
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མོ	mudra consort	phyag rgya mo
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མཛད	gesturing	phyag rgya mdzad
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་འཛིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to take hold, symbolic [ornament], bone ornaments, figure, modes. {lha sku'i ra rdzogs} perfected as the~ of the divine body, seal	phyag rgya 'dzin par byed pa
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	four seals/mudras	phyag rgya bzhi
རདིཨཏིཨོན་ཨནད་རེ	absorption of the rays of light)	radiation and re
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་འི་ལྷ	seal deity	phyag rgya 'i lha
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་རིགས་ལྔ	five seals/ mudras [enlightened body, speech, mind, attributes and activities are symbolised	phyag rgya rigs lnga
བཡ་ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་སེཨལས་ཨོར་ཧནད	gesture mudras: 1 the seal of the doctrinal wheel {chos kyi 'khor lo'i phyag rgya} or dharmacakramudr, two the earthtouching seal {sa reg gi phyag rgya} or bhu^mispars'amudr, three the seal of libe...	by the five seals or hand
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་གསུམ	Three Seals. Either impurity, impermanence, three approaches to liberation, and suffering. or else the four seals indicative of the transmitted precepts, in which the third selflessness. and the fo...	phyag rgya gsum
ཧུམ་གྱིས་མཚན	three bone ornaments marked w om a hum	hum gyis mtshan
ཕྱག་རྒྱན	armlet, bracelet, ring etc jewelry for arm/ hand [h]	phyag rgyan
ཕྱག་རྒྱའི	. . . that seals reality	phyag rgya'i
ཕྱག་རྒྱའི་ལྷ	seal deity, deity of the mudra refers to making the gesture of empowerment with the hands touching the top of the head or a mudra of commitment	phyag rgya'i lha
ཕྱག་རྒྱར་བསྒྱུར	to transform into the forms of ..	phyag rgyar bsgyur
ཕྱག་རྒྱར་སྣང་བ	appearance as mudra, 1 of gzugs kyi bye brag tu snang ba bzhi	phyag rgyar snang ba
ཕྱག་རྒྱས་འགྲོལ་ཝ	set free by dissolving the charm	phyag rgyas 'grol wa
ཕྱག་རྒྱས་མནན་པ	overcome evil spirits by gesticulations	phyag rgyas mnan pa
ཕྱག་རྒྱུན	traditionally, tradition, style	phyag rgyun
ཕྱག་རྒྱུན་ལས་ཁྱད་པ	stylistic variations	phyag rgyun las khyad pa
ཕྱག་རྒྱུས	ring [h]	phyag rgyus
ཕྱག་སྒམ	chest, cupboard	phyag sgam
ཕྱག་སྒྲིལ་ཚེ་རིལ	personally compounded pills of longevity	phyag sgril tshe ril
ཕྱག་ངར	wrist	phyag ngar
ཕྱག་དངུལ	money [h]	phyag dngul
ཕྱག་ལྔ	five symbolic ornaments {rus pa'i rgyan drug} w/o {ka sha}	phyag lnga
ཕྱག་བརྔན	assistant, SA phywa gnyan	phyag brngan
ཕྱག་བཅབས	salutation in secret	phyag bcabs
ཕྱག་བཅས	w prostrations/ homage	phyag bcas
ཕྱག་ལྕགས	door lock [h]	phyag lcags
ཕྱག་ཆ	any manual tool, implement	phyag cha
ཕྱག་ཆས	symbolic scepters carried in the hand [h]	phyag chas
ཕྱག་ཆེན	mahamudra	phyag chen
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ཀློང་ཡངས་མཐའ་བྲལ	Mahamudra of Unconfined Vastness	phyag chen klong yangs mtha' bral
ཕྱག་ཆེན་སྐྱོང་བ	maintaining of mahamudra	phyag chen skyong ba
ཕྱག་ཆེན་གའུ་མ	the trunk is the	phyag chen ga'u ma
ཨཱམུལེཏ	box Precept of the Great Seal	Amulet
ཕྱག་ཆེན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི	four yogas of mahamudra	phyag chen gyi rnal 'byor bzhi
ཕྱག་ཆེན་རྒྱ་གཞུང	collected texts of the Mahamudra practice translated from Sanskrit	phyag chen rgya gzhung
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ངོ་སྤྲོད	Pointing-out Instruction of Mahamudra	phyag chen ngo sprod
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ལྔ་ལྡན	The Fivefold Mahamudra, of the Drigungpas consist of: 1) The Great Seal of Bodhichitta (byang sems phyag chen); 2) the Great Seal of the Deity's form (lha sku'i phyag chen); 3) the Great Seal of Fe...	phyag chen lnga ldan
ཕྱག་ཆེན་སྔོན་ཁྲིད	introduction to the fundamentals of Mahamudra practice	phyag chen sngon khrid
ཕྱག་ཆེན་སྔོན་འགྲོ	preliminary practices for Mahamudra	phyag chen sngon 'gro
ཕྱག་ཆེན་གཅེར་མཐོང	naked mahamudra	phyag chen gcer mthong
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ཐིག་ལེ	Mahamudra Bindu. A tantric text	phyag chen thig le
ཕྱག་ཆེན་བརྡའི་སྐོར	{phyag rgya chen po brda'i skor gsum} instructions of {pha dam pa sangs rgyas}	phyag chen brda'i skor
ཕྱག་ཆེན་པ	Mahamudra follower; in Mahamudra	phyag chen pa
ཕྱག་ཆེན་པས	in mahamudra	phyag chen pas
ཕྱག་ཆེན་མ་རིག་མུན་སེལ	Mahamudra of Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance	phyag chen ma rig mun sel
ཕྱག་ཆེན་སྨོན་ལམ	by the third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje	phyag chen smon lam
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ཞལ་གདམས	Oral Advice on Mahamudra	phyag chen zhal gdams
ཕྱག་ཆེན་རིག་འཛིན	{phyag rgya chen po'i rig 'dzin} master/ holder of awareness of mahamudra/ the supreme seal/ symbol*	phyag chen rig 'dzin
ཕྱག་ཆེན་རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་ལྔ	five kind	phyag chen rig 'dzin rnam lnga
ཨོཕ༹་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder of the great seal [the awareness-holders of indestructible reality {rdo rje'i rig 'dzin} or vajravidy dhara, of the doctrinal wheel {chos 'khor gyi rig 'dzin or dharmacakravidy dhara, of pre...	of awareness
ཋེ་ཨཝརེནེསས	holders of indestructible reality {rdo rje'i rig 'dzin} or vajra vidyadhara, of the doctrinal wheel {chos 'khor gyi rig 'dzin}. or dharmachakra vidyadhara, of precious gemstones {rin chen gyi rig '...	The awareness
ཕྱག་ཆེན་སེམས་ཁྲིད་བྱས་པ	gave some instructions on the nature of the mind according to Mahamudra	phyag chen sems khrid byas pa
ཕྱག་ཆེན་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་སྦྱོར	coemergent union of mahamudra	phyag chen lhan cig skyes sbyor
ཕྱག་མཆོད	salutation & worshipping	phyag mchod
ཕྱག་མཆོད་བགྱི་བ	to make offerings, prostrations	phyag mchod bgyi ba
ཕྱག་མཆོད་ཕུལ	prostrated and made offerings	phyag mchod phul
ཕྱག་མཆོད་བྱེད	offered prostrations	phyag mchod byed
ཕྱག་ཇེམ	scissors [h]	phyag jem
ཕྱག་འཇུག	physically punish, fault, crime, transgression phyag 'jug deng sang lag grwa nang la	phyag 'jug
གནང་མི་ཆོག	these days physical punishment is not allowed in the schools	gnang mi chog
ཕྱག་འཇུག་གནང	punish, commit fault, crime, transgression [h]	phyag 'jug gnang
ཕྱག་རྗེས	hand [im]print, sign, result of work [h]	phyag rjes
ཕྱག་ཉ	touch food attained w/o being given [h]	phyag nya
ཕྱག་གཉིས	the two hands [h]	phyag gnyis
ཕྱག་གཉིས་མཉམ་བཟག	the two hands joined [h]	phyag gnyis mnyam bzag
ཕྱག་གཉེན	SA phywa gnyan	phyag gnyen
ཕྱག་མཉམ་བཞག	hands were in the meditation posture	phyag mnyam bzhag
ཕྱག་སྙན	melodic sound, stringed instrument [h]	phyag snyan
ཕྱག་སྙིགས	SA phyag gdar, gad snyigs	phyag snyigs
ཕྱག་སྙུག	pen [h]	phyag snyug
ཕྱག་བརྙན	emissary	phyag brnyan
ཕྱག་ཏུ	in the hand [h]	phyag tu
ཕྱག་ཏུ་ཐེངས	get hold of [h]	phyag tu thengs
ཕྱག་ཏུ་དྲངས	was served (food and drink etc [h]	phyag tu drangs
ཕྱག་ཏུ་སྣོམ་པ	grasp with the hand	phyag tu snom pa
ཕྱག་ཏུ་བསྣམས་པ	was holding / held in his hand	phyag tu bsnams pa
ཕྱག་ཏུ་འབྱོར	receive [h]	phyag tu 'byor
ཕྱག་ཏུ་ཞལ་ཟས་དྲངས	was served food [h]	phyag tu zhal zas drangs
ཕྱག་ཏུ་བཞེས	practice, lag tu len [h]	phyag tu bzhes
ཕྱག་ཏུ་བཞེས་པ	to take out	phyag tu bzhes pa
ཕྱག་གཏོང་གནང	shake [h]	phyag gtong gnang
ཕྱག་གཏོང་རེས་གནང་བ	shaking hands [h]	phyag gtong res gnang ba
ཕྱག་བཏགས	handwoven, present, gift [h]	phyag btags
ཕྱག་བཏབ	produced, manufactured, made, founded, established [h]	phyag btab
ཕྱག་བཏབ་པ	founded [h]	phyag btab pa
ཕྱག་རྟགས	sign of the hand, impression of a blackened finger in the place of a seal, hand token, present, present, gift	phyag rtags
ཕྱག་རྟེན	gift, present	phyag rten
ཕྱག་རྟེན་མེད་པ	to have no present, nothing material to offer	phyag rten med pa
ཕྱག་རྟེན་དམར	[arch] good gift	phyag rten dmar
ཕྱག་ལྟ་བུ	handful	phyag lta bu
ཕྱག་སྟབས	hand gesture/ signal/ sign [h]	phyag stabs
ཕྱག་སྟབས་བྱེད	make a hand gesture/ signal/ sign [h]	phyag stabs byed
ཕྱག་སྟོང་སྤྱན་སྟོང	Avalokiteshvara w 1,000 eyes/ hands	phyag stong spyan stong
ཕྱག་བརྟེན	orders, instruction, message	phyag brten
ཕྱག་བསྟར	made/ written by 1's own hand [h], practice	phyag bstar
ཕྱག་བསྟར་མ	something made/ written by 1's own hand [h]	phyag bstar ma
ཕྱག་ཐམ	phyag dam	phyag tham
ཕྱག་ཐེ	seal, signet, stamp	phyag the
ཕྱག་ཐོ	account book	phyag tho
ཕྱག་མཐིལ	palm of the hand	phyag mthil
ཕྱག་མཐེ	thumb [h]	phyag mthe
ཕྱག་མཐེབ	thumb	phyag mtheb
ཕྱག་དང་བསྐོར་བ་བྱས	began to do prostrations and circumambulate him	phyag dang bskor ba byas
ཕྱག་དང་མཆོས་འོས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	worthy of the homage and offerings / honor and respect	phyag dang mchos 'os su gyur pa
ཕྱག་དང་པོ	1st salute/ prostration	phyag dang po
ཕྱག་དང་པོ་ལ	at the first salute phyag dang zhabs kyi mthil 'khor lo'i	phyag dang po la
མཚན་དང་ལྡན་པ	the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet are marked w a wheel phyag dang zhabs kyi mthil 'khor lo'i	mtshan dang ldan pa
མཚད་དང་ལྡན་པ	the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet are marked with a wheel [one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mthan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} = the 32 marks of a great being phyag dang zhabs kyi mthil 'khor lo'o	mtshad dang ldan pa
གཞོན་ཤ་ཆགས་པ	the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet are soft and smooth. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being phyag dang zhabs kyi mthil djal zhing	gzhon sha chags pa
ཆགས་པའི་མཙན་བཟང	the minor mark of soft hands and feet and youthful appearance [sangs rgyas kyi mtsan bzang so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste gos gya nom pa byin pas phyag dang zhabs 'jam zhing gzhon sha chags pa phy...	chags pa'i mtsan bzang
ཆགས་པའི་མཚན་བཟང	the minor mark of soft hands and feet and youthful appearance phyag dang zhabs gnyis dra bas 'brel ba toes and finger joined by a membrane phyag dang zhabs gnyis dra bas 'brel ba toes and finger ea...	chags pa'i mtshan bzang
ཕྱག་དང་ཞེ་སར་བཅས	bowing and paying respect	phyag dang zhe sar bcas
ཕྱག་དམ	1) dirt, dust, rubbish; 2) dar	phyag dam
ཆ་ཧནད་ཅློཐ་པུཏ་ཨོན་ཧོཨུསེ	tops and held in throwing torma; 3) seal [h]	cha hand cloth put on house
ཕྱག་དར	broom, dust heaps, sweeping, cleaning	phyag dar
ཕྱག་དར་ཁྲོད	a rubbish heap, dust heap	phyag dar khrod
ཕྱག་དར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་གོས	[wearing] dharma robes made from refuse rags	phyag dar khrod kyi chos gos
ཕྱག་དར་ཁྲོད་པ	wearing the dress of a dung sweeper, refuse-rag-wearer, rubbish/ dust heap	phyag dar khrod pa
ཨ་དུང་སྭེཨེཔེར	refuse-rag-wearer, rubbish/ dustheap [gad snyigs khrod kyi gos drug tshal gyon mkhan	a dung sweeper
ཕྱག་དར་གོས	clothing picked up from a rubbish heap	phyag dar gos
ཕྱག་དར་གྱི་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་གོས	[wearing] dharma robes made from refuse rags	phyag dar gyi khrod kyi chos gos
ཕྱག་དར་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	dust heap	phyag dar gyi phung po
ཕྱག་དར་པ	sweeper, duster 1708	phyag dar pa
ཕྱག་དར་ཕུང་པོ	dust/ rubbish heap	phyag dar phung po
ཕྱག་དར་བྱ	to sweep	phyag dar bya
ཕྱག་དར་བྱེད	sweep, clean	phyag dar byed
ཕྱག་དར་ལེགས་པར	swept well, cleansed well	phyag dar legs par
ཕྱག་དར་ལེགས་པར་བྱས་པ	[well]cleaned/ swept	phyag dar legs par byas pa
ཕྱག་དེང་མཛད	I bow to you!	phyag deng mdzad
ཕྱག་དེབ	book	phyag deb
ཕྱག་དྲིལ	ghanta [h]	phyag dril
ཕྱག་གདན	in prostrating/ paying homage gting bya'i gdan	phyag gdan
ཕྱག་གདུང	armlet	phyag gdung
ཕྱག་གདུབ	bracelets; bracelet	phyag gdub
ཕྱག་བདར	clearing from dust, dusting, making a thing clean	phyag bdar
ཕྱག་བདེ	cook, waiter or waitress	phyag bde
ཕྱག་བདེ་པོ	good at making things w the hands	phyag bde po
ཕྱག་བདེ་བ	1) in monasteries for great assemblies etc. monk who brings tea; 2) good at making things w the hands	phyag bde ba
ཕྱག་མདའ	arrow	phyag mda'
ཕྱག་མདའ་བཀྱོན་པ	to shoot an arrow or fire a gun	phyag mda' bkyon pa
ཕྱག་མདུད	knot, protective knot tied by the guru [h]	phyag mdud
ཕྱག་འདེབས	produce, manufacture, make, found, establish [h]	phyag 'debs
ཕྱག་འདེབས་མཁན	the founder [of monastery etc]	phyag 'debs mkhan
ཕྱག་རྡོར	vajrapani, SA phyag na rdo rje	phyag rdor
ཕྱག་རྡོར་རྟག་ངུ	{phyag rdor rtag ngu med. herb [sngo sman rtag ngu rigs gsum gyi nang tsan me tog sngo nag 'char ba zhig	phyag rdor rtag ngu
ཕྱག་རྡོར་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཐིག་པ	by Lhodrak Drubchen	phyag rdor bdud rtsi'i thig pa
ཕྱག་རྡོར་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Vajrapani	phyag rdor na rdo rje
ཕྱག་རྡོར་ཞི་བ	peaceful vajrapani	phyag rdor zhi ba
ཕྱག་ལྡེ	key [h]	phyag lde
ཕྱག་བརྡ	hand signal [h]	phyag brda
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Vajrapani. 'Vajra Bearer.' wielder of the vajra. One of the eight great bodhisattvas and the chief compiler of the Vajrayana teachings. Also known as 'Lord of Secrets.'	phyag na rdo rje
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་གོས་སྔོན་ཅན	{phyag na rdo rje gos sngon can [an especcially terrifying manifestation of Vajrapani body 260,000 dpag tshad, rt hand flaming pointed vajra, left king of eagles, 8 snakes coiled on arms 6,000 tige...	phyag na rdo rje gos sngon can
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་བསྣམས་པ	was holding a vajra phyag na rdo rje dbang bskur ba'i rgyud Vajrapani Empowerment Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	phyag na rdo rje bsnams pa
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབང་གི་རྒྱུད	Vajrapani Command Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	phyag na rdo rje dbang gi rgyud
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་གླིང	Vajrapani Temple. A temple at Samye	phyag na rdo rje'i gling
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆེ་བ་སྐོར་དྲུག	(chn	phyag na rdo rje'i che ba skor drug
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆེ་བ་བརྒྱད	(chn phyag na rdo rje'i mdzad brgya brgyad pa	phyag na rdo rje'i che ba brgyad
གཟུངས་སྔགས་བཅས་པ	108 attributes of Vajrapani w dharani	gzungs sngags bcas pa
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རེ	Vajrapani	phyag na rdo re
ཕྱག་ན་སྣ་ཚོགས་རྡོ་རྗེ	visvapani (assoc. with don yod grub pa)	phyag na sna tshogs rdo rje
ཕྱག་ན་པ་མ་མོ	Padmapani	phyag na pa ma mo
ཕྱག་ན་པ་དམོ	Padmapani, Lotus Holder	phyag na pa dmo
ཕྱག་ན་པད་དཀར་འཆང	the holder of the white lotus, Shakyamuni's name in the god realm	phyag na pad dkar 'chang
ཕྱག་ན་པད་མ	epithet of avalokiteshvara	phyag na pad ma
ཕྱག་ན་པད་མོ	Holder of the Lotus Flower, one of Avalokiteshvara's names	phyag na pad mo
ཕྱག་ན་པར་དཀར་འཆང	the Holder of the White Lotus / Shakyamuni's name in the god realm	phyag na par dkar 'chang
ཕྱག་ན་རིན་ཆེན	ratnapani (assoc. with rin chen 'byung ldan)	phyag na rin chen
ཕྱག་ནས	'bru - 'thor nas - grains	phyag nas
ཕྱག་ནས་འཐེན	to take by the hand	phyag nas 'then
ཕྱག་ནས་ཞུ་བ	paid respect and requested	phyag nas zhu ba
ཕྱག་རྣལ་འབྱོར་ལུགས་སུ་བཙལ་བ	to prostrate in the fashion of a yogi	phyag rnal 'byor lugs su btsal ba
ཕྱག་སྣམ	thick wool garment/ cloth/ serge, streamer, trousers, platform, long piece of cloth	phyag snam
ཕྱག་སྣེ	lag sne [h] skabs 'phral 'gro song given money etc.	phyag sne
ཕྱག་པ	bunch, refuse-rag wearer {sbyang ba'i yon tan bcu gnyis}	phyag pa
ཕྱག་དཔུང	1) shoulder; 2) arm [h] D; 2) lag rogs	phyag dpung
ཕྱག་དཔེ	book	phyag dpe
ཕྱག་ཕུལ	prostrate	phyag phul
ཕྱག་ཕེབ་གནང་གཅིག	form of welcome by a host on arrival of a guest	phyag pheb gnang gcig
ཕྱག་ཕེབས	arrived	phyag phebs
ཕྱག་ཕེབས་གནང	welcome a guest	phyag phebs gnang
ཕྱག་ཕེབས་གནང་བྱུང	"welcome" [conveying greetings]	phyag phebs gnang byung
ཕྱག་ཕེབས་པ	(h) to go, arrive, come	phyag phebs pa
ཕྱག་ཕེབས་ཞུ་གནང	welcome a guest	phyag phebs zhu gnang
ཕྱག་ཕྱམ་གྲོལ་བ	spontaneously liberated	phyag phyam grol ba
ཕྱག་ཕྱི	attendant, man servant	phyag phyi
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་བགྱིས	was attendant on 1709	phyag phyi bgyis
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་ཕོ་མོ	male and female attendants	phyag phyi pho mo
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་བ	prostrated, servant (personal, attendant	phyag phyi ba
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་བྱེད་པ	be a servant	phyag phyi byed pa
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་འབྲེངས	followed as attendants	phyag phyi 'brengs
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་ཞབས་ཏོག	attendance and service	phyag phyi zhabs tog
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་ར་འབྲེང	to attend	phyag phyi ra 'breng
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་ལ	be a follower [of lama], train of retinue	phyag phyi la
ཕྱག་ཕྱི་ལ་འགྲོ་བར་ཞུ་ཞུས	ask to follow /be a servant	phyag phyi la 'gro bar zhu zhus
ཕྱག་ཕྱིག	1) # D; 2) leftovers D; 3) very small portion	phyag phyig
ཕྱག་ཕྱིད	1) servants, attendants, retinue; 2) follower of traveller	phyag phyid
ཕྱག་ཕྱིད་ཞུ	serve as servants, attendants, retinue	phyag phyid zhu
ཕྱག་ཕྱིར་འབྲེང	to attend	phyag phyir 'breng
ཕྱག་ཕྱིར་འབྲེང་བ	be a follower, retinue	phyag phyir 'breng ba
ཕྱག་ཕྱིར་འབྲེངས	followed as attendants	phyag phyir 'brengs
ཕྱག་ཕྲེང	1) mala [h]; 2) phyag phreng rdzong [si khron zhing chen khongs dkar mdzes SWT, bordering yun nan zhing chen	phyag phreng
ཕྱག་བུན	debt [h]	phyag bun
ཕྱག་བྱ	prostration, salutation	phyag bya
ཕྱག་བྱ་བ	to salute, prostrate, pay homage	phyag bya ba
ཕྱག་བྱ་བའི་འོས	worthy of a respectful salute	phyag bya ba'i 'os
ཕྱག་བྱ་བའི་འོས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	worthy of respect / veneration	phyag bya ba'i 'os su gyur pa
ཕྱག་བྱ་བའི་འོས་སུ་གྱུར་བ	worthy of respect	phyag bya ba'i 'os su gyur ba
ཕྱག་བྱས	attendants	phyag byas
ཕྱག་བྱས་པ	prostrated, bow, worshipped, revered, worshipped	phyag byas pa
ཕྱག་བྱེད་པ	to make prostrations	phyag byed pa
ཕྱག་བྲིས	handwriting, writing	phyag bris
ཕྱག་བྲིས་བཀའ་ལན་གནང་བ	to answer a letter, reply mail	phyag bris bka' lan gnang ba
ཕྱག་བྲིས་བརྩེ་བ	[your] kind letter	phyag bris brtse ba
ཕྱག་བྲིས་ཚེས་གསུམ་ལ་ཕུལ	letter sent or written on the 3rd date	phyag bris tshes gsum la phul
ཕྱག་བྲིས་མཛད་པ	written, wrote, write	phyag bris mdzad pa
ཕྱག་བྲིས་ཡག་པོ	good handwriting	phyag bris yag po
ཕྱག་དབང	blessing (with hand) worshipped, make [Notes in the sense of what one does when bending from the waist, not in the sense of "bow and arrow"; on other's head	phyag dbang
ཕྱག་དབང་གནང	give blessing (with hand on head	phyag dbang gnang
ཕྱག་དབང་གནང་བ	to bless [with hand on head]	phyag dbang gnang ba
ཕྱག་དབང་ཞུ	request blessing (with hand on head, pay respects to superior	phyag dbang zhu
ཕྱག་དབང་ཞུས	ask him to give you a blessing with his hand	phyag dbang zhus
ཕྱག་དབང་ཞུས་པ	to request a hand blessing, asked him to bless us with his hands	phyag dbang zhus pa
ཕྱག་འབུལ	offer homage w the hands, greet/ salute/ prostrate to superiors, present D [h]	phyag 'bul
ཕྱག་འབུལ་དཔྲལ་སྐོར	mutually salute/ greet/ prostrate	phyag 'bul dpral skor
ཕྱག་འབུལ་ཞུ་བ	salute/ greet superiors	phyag 'bul zhu ba
ཕྱག་འབུལ་བཞེས	acknowledge/ accept salute/ greeting to superiors	phyag 'bul bzhes
ཕྱག་འབེབས	physical punishment	phyag 'bebs
ཕྱག་འབེབས་གནང་བ	beat	phyag 'bebs gnang ba
ཕྱག་འབྱོར	receiving, get[ting hold of] [h]	phyag 'byor
ཕྱག་འབྱོར་བྱུང་བ	h. to acquire, get	phyag 'byor byung ba
ཕྱག་འབྲུ	grain, bit, kernel, seed syllable, letter, word [h]	phyag 'bru
ཕྱག་སྦག	mah jong game, sbag	phyag sbag
ཕྱག་སྦལ	prison house, SA phyag gong	phyag sbal
ཕྱག་སྦུག	treasury sbug and its caretaker	phyag sbug
ཕྱག་སྦྲེལ	helper, colleague, co-worker	phyag sbrel
ཕྱག་མ	broom, duster, mop	phyag ma
ཕྱག་མོ	mo divination [h]	phyag mo
ཕྱག་སྨན	SA sman, phyag rten	phyag sman
ཕྱག་སྨྱུག	pen [h]	phyag smyug
ཕྱག་ཙ	hand made s'atstsa	phyag tsa
ཕྱག་བཙལ	prostrated, paid homage	phyag btsal
ཕྱག་བཙལ་ནས	prostrated himself	phyag btsal nas
ཕྱག་བཙལ་ནས་སྨྲེ་སྔགས་བཏོན	prostrated before him, saying	phyag btsal nas smre sngags bton
ཕྱག་བཙལ་བ	prostrated, paid homage	phyag btsal ba
ཕྱག་བཙལ་བྱས	did prostrations	phyag btsal byas
ཕྱག་མཙན	scepter, khatvanga scepters	phyag mtsan
ཕྱག་འཙལ་བསྟོད	prostrate and praise	phyag 'tsal bstod
ཕྱག་རྩ	root, capital, nadi [h]	phyag rtsa
ཕྱག་རྩེ་སྤྲོད	show each other = homage	phyag rtse sprod
ཕྱག་ཚགས	preservation, keeping, taking care of	phyag tshags
ཕྱག་ཚང	cook	phyag tshang
ཕྱག་ཚད	thig tshad	phyag tshad
ཕྱག་ཚོད	time to, hour, watch [h]	phyag tshod
ཕྱག་མཚན	symbols, emblems, scepter, instruments, symbolic attributes of deities	phyag mtshan
ཕྱག་མཚན་པད་མ	{jo bo mched	phyag mtshan pad ma
གསུམ་ལ་ཕྱག་མཚན་པད	ma phul} offered lotus flowers to be held by each of the three Jowo statues	gsum la phyag mtshan pad
ཕྱག་མཚན་གསུམ	(chn	phyag mtshan gsum
ཕྱག་འཚལ	expression of reverence, prostration, bow, showing reverence, salutation, greeting, salute	phyag 'tshal
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཀྱང	doing prostrations	phyag 'tshal kyang
ཕྱག་འཚལ་རྒྱག	prostrate	phyag 'tshal rgyag
ཕྱག་འཚལ་སྒང	prostration ridge (spot from which one first sees a monastery and prostrates)	phyag 'tshal sgang
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བསྟོད	prostrate and praise	phyag 'tshal bstod
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ནས	bowed down [to him]	phyag 'tshal nas
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཕྱི་ཕྱག་འཚོལ	bid farewell	phyag 'tshal phyi phyag 'tshol
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	1) to prostrate; pay homage; bow, kowtow, salute, prostrated herself / himself, bowed down; ex. {la +} to bow down to ...2) prostration, homage, salutation, bow, kowtow. Ex. {phyi phyag 'tshol} bid...	phyag 'tshal ba
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བའི་ཕན་ཡོན	the benefit of bowing to	phyag 'tshal ba'i phan yon
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བར་བགྱིའོ	I revere you	phyag 'tshal bar bgyi'o
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བར་བྱེད་དོ	I will pay homage to	phyag 'tshal bar byed do
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བྱེད	prostrate	phyag 'tshal byed
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཞིང	{mu stegs rnams la phyag 'tshal zhing} bowed down to the tirthikas	phyag 'tshal zhing
ཕྱག་མཛད་པ	pay one's respects, salute	phyag mdzad pa
ཕྱག་མཛུབ	finger [h]	phyag mdzub
ཕྱག་མཛོད	treasurer, bursar, steward	phyag mdzod
ཕྱག་མཛོད་ཆས	Tibetan sde dpon and high nobles phyag mdzod pa'i gzab chas	phyag mdzod chas
ཕྱག་མཛོད་སྡེ་ཆུང	deputytreasurer	phyag mdzod sde chung
ཕྱག་མཛོད་པ	treasurer, bursar, steward	phyag mdzod pa
ཕྱག་རྫགས་གཉིས་ཀའི་རྒྱུད	both mahamudra and mahasandhi tantras	phyag rdzags gnyis ka'i rgyud
ཕྱག་རྫས	material wealth, possessions [h]	phyag rdzas
ཕྱག་རྫས་ལ་སྲེད་པ	desire for material wealth, miserly	phyag rdzas la sred pa
ཕྱག་རྫོགས	Mahamudra and Dzogchen. {phyag rgya chen po dang rdzogs pa chen po} Mahamudra and Mahasandhi; Mahamudra and Mahasandhi	phyag rdzogs
ཕྱག་རྫོགས་གཉིས་ཀ	both Mahamudra and Dzogchen	phyag rdzogs gnyis ka
ཕྱག་རྫོགས་གཉིས་ཀའི་རྒྱུད	both Mahamudra and Mahasandhi tantras	phyag rdzogs gnyis ka'i rgyud
ཕྱག་རྫོགས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	yogis of Mahamudra and Dzogchen	phyag rdzogs pa'i rnal 'byor pa
ཕྱག་ཞབས	hands and feet, arms and legs [h]	phyag zhabs
པའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of soft arms and legs and fresh and delicate youthful appearance [h] phyag zhabs dpal be'u sogs kyis brgyan	pa'i mtshan bzang
ཕྱག་ཞུ	accompanying, serving	phyag zhu
ཕྱག་གཞུ	bow	phyag gzhu
ཕྱག་བཞག་པ	to place one's hands on	phyag bzhag pa
ཕྱག་བྱད	a deed	phyag byad
ཕྱག་བཞི	4 hands	phyag bzhi
ཕྱག་བཞི་པ	deity w 1 face and four arms	phyag bzhi pa
ཕྱག་བཞེས	1) practice [h]; 2) rubrics, practical guidance, hands-on instruction, traditions, take in hand	phyag bzhes
ཧནདས	on instruction	hands
ཕྱག་བཞེས་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Hearing Lineage of the oral tradition	phyag bzhes snyan brgyud
ཕྱག་བཞེས་གནང	to practice	phyag bzhes gnang
ཕྱག་བཞེས་གནང་བ	practice	phyag bzhes gnang ba
ཕྱག་བཞེས་པ	accept another's devotion	phyag bzhes pa
ཕྱག་བཞེས་མཛད	carries on	phyag bzhes mdzad
ཕྱག་བཟོས་མ	things someone has personally made	phyag bzos ma
ཕྱག་འོས	respectable, honorable; worthy of respect	phyag 'os
ཕྱག་འོས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	(chn	phyag 'os kyi khyad par bzhi
ཕྱག་ཡིག	official order, letter phyag g.yas - right hand phyag g.yas na - With her right hand she 1711 phyag g.yas pa rdo rje dang g.yon rin po	phyag yig
ཆེའི་ཕྱག་ཤིང་ཐོགས་པ	holding a vajra in his right hand and a rod of precious material in his left	che'i phyag shing thogs pa
ཕྱག་ར	privy, water closet, SA phyag sa	phyag ra
ཕྱག་རབ་ཆོ་ག	the prayer for offering prostrations [by Chagmey Raga Arya]	phyag rab cho ga
ཕྱག་རས	hand-wiping cloth	phyag ras
ཕྱག་རིང་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of big long hands [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, mchog tu gnod pa bzlog par mdzad pa nyid kyis phyag ring zhing rgyas pa	phyag ring zhing rgyas pa'i dpe byad
ཕྱག་རིས	1) [handwritten] letter, hand drawn picture; 2) lines of the hand	phyag ris
ཕྱག་རིས་ཟབ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of deep lines in the hand [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, chos zab mo la gnas pa nyid kyis phyag gi ri mo gting zab par dod pa	phyag ris zab pa'i dpe byad
ཕྱག་རིས་རིང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of long/unbroken lines in the hand	phyag ris ring ba'i dpe byad
ཕྱག་རོགས	help	phyag rogs
ཕྱག་རོགས་གནང	to help	phyag rogs gnang
ཕྱག་རོགས་ཞུ	to request help	phyag rogs zhu
ཕྱག་རོགས་ཞུ་བ	to help	phyag rogs zhu ba
ཕྱག་ལ་སོན	receive, get [into 1's hands]	phyag la son
ཕྱག་ལན	response to homage	phyag lan
ཕྱག་ལས	work, business, action, SA las, work	phyag las
ཕྱག་ལས་ཁོམ	SA ra ro ba	phyag las khom
ཕྱག་ལེན	ritual details of practice, ritual traditions, performance, ritual tradition, spiritual practice. {lag len} ritual practices {chos kyi phyag len}	phyag len
ཕྱག་ལེན་ཆོས	ritual practices	phyag len chos
ཕྱག་ལེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི	ritual practices	phyag len chos kyi
ཕྱག་ལེན་དོན་འཁེལ	put into practice, implement [h]	phyag len don 'khel
ཕྱག་ལོར	paper money [h]	phyag lor
ཕྱག་ཤན	knife	phyag shan
ཕྱག་ཤུབས	glove	phyag shubs
ཕྱག་ཤེས	rubrics / practical knowledge	phyag shes
ཕྱག་ས	privy, wc, toilet D	phyag sa
ཕྱག་སེན	nails [of hands/ feet] [h]	phyag sen
ཕྱག་སོན	receipt of cash, cash in hand	phyag son
ཕྱག་སོར	fingers [of the hand] [h]	phyag sor
ཕྱག་སོར་རིང་མོ	Dirghanguli his fingers are long 29	phyag sor ring mo
ཕྱག་སྲོལ	system, [practice] tradition, law, D regulation D, customs [h]	phyag srol
ཕྱག་བསིལ	1) wash [the hands [& face]; 2) cold/ frozen hands (/ [h]	phyag bsil
ཕྱག་བསིལ་བ	1) wash [the hands [& face]; 2) cold/ frozen hands (/ [h]	phyag bsil ba
ཕྱག་ལྷམ	kid of slipper which ancient monks wore	phyag lham
ཕྱགས	boots [h] [p 'phyag] swept, cleaned [up], polished	phyags
ཕྱགས་ཁྱུ	herd	phyags khyu
ཕྱགས་རྒྱའི་ལྷ	deity of the mudra, SA kri ya lha drug, SA phyag rgya'i lha	phyags rgya'i lha
ཕྱགས་སྒྲོ	feather duster	phyags sgro
ཕྱགས་སྙིགས	swept together dirt, heap of dirt / dust	phyags snyigs
ཕྱགས་བཏེག་པ	go, depart	phyags bteg pa
ཕྱགས་དར	sweeper	phyags dar
ཕྱགས་དར་རྒྱོབ	sweep!	phyags dar rgyob
ཕྱགས་དར་བྱེད་པ	use as dustbin	phyags dar byed pa
ཕྱགས་ཕེབས	come, go, arrive	phyags phebs
ཕྱགས་མ	a broom; broom	phyags ma
ཕྱགས་མས་འཕྱགས་པ	swept with a broom	phyags mas 'phyags pa
ཕྱགས་ལྷམ	lham	phyags lham
ཕྱང་ངེ་བ	1) hanging down, long [dress]; 2) slender, slight D; 3) straight, stretched D	phyang nge ba
སླིགྷཏ	made, straight, stretched	slight
ཕྱང་ཆད	decided; committed; determinate; predictable; isc. being any definite/ specific thing; isc. inert void/ emptiness in the wrong sense	phyang chad
མ་འདྲེས	absolute/ unqualified appearance unmixed w emptiness	ma 'dres
ཕྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་སྐྱེས་པ	Utpdada conception (of the spirit of enlightenment	phyang chub kyi sems skyes pa
ཕྱང་སྤྲུལ	necklace, pendant, ornaments	phyang sprul
ཕྱང་ཕྱང་ཕྲུལ་ཕྲུལ	hanging down phrul ler gnas pa'i ngang tshul	phyang phyang phrul phrul
ཕྱང་ཕྱང་བ	w/o high and low, does not hang down, hanging down, straight stretched	phyang phyang ba
ཕྱང་ཕྲུལ	necklace	phyang phrul
ཕྱང་འཕྲུལ	hanging down/ pendant ornaments, necklace	phyang 'phrul
ཕྱང་བ	'phyang ba	phyang ba
ཕྱང་མ	doubt	phyang ma
ཕྱང་མ་ཆད	undecided; uncommitted; indeterminate; unpredictable; isc. without being any definite/ specific thing; isc. inert void/ emptiness in the wrong sense	phyang ma chad
ཕྱང་མ་ཆད་པ	not [1 nothing, ness, mere emptiness; 2) insubstantial; 3) decisive, doubtless, resolved, certain, sure, definite; 4) absolute, unqualified]	phyang ma chad pa
ཕྱང་མེད་ཅིང་མེད	R/GD: a syn for {cang med phyang chad}, totally blank nothingness. Spelling uncertain: it could also be {cang med cing med}. [mss]	phyang med cing med
ཕྱང་ཚད་པོ	definitely	phyang tshad po
ཕྱང་ཡར	1) srang bar gyi gtam 'khyam po; 2) [arch] buddha activity	phyang yar
ཕྱང་ས	phyogs las rnam rgyal gyi	phyang sa
ཕྱད	fluctuating, going here and there, to and fro	phyad
ཕྱད་སྟོང་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཤལ	a deity	phyad stong bcu gcig shal
ཕྱད་དེ	totally, unbroken / despair; {snying mi dga' phyad de}	phyad de
ཕྱད་དེ་སྙིང་མི་དགའ	despair	phyad de snying mi dga'
ཕྱད་དེ་ཕྱོད་དེ	unexamined {gya tshom} flash/ glimpse/ action	phyad de phyod de
ཕྱད་དྲུག་པ	1) six armed Mahakala [a protector of the Shangpa Kagyu and Gelukpa lineages]; 2) constant, firm, perservering; 3) always, continually, perpetually)	phyad drug pa
ཕྱད་པ	[={rgyun par or mu mthud pa}	phyad pa
ཕྱད་པར	continuously, constantly	phyad par
ཕྱད་པར་འབད་བརྩོན་མ་བྱེད	do not make constant effort	phyad par 'bad brtson ma byed
ཕྱད་པར་ལུང་སྟོན	uncurtailed explanation	phyad par lung ston
ཕྱད་པར་ལུང་སྟོན་པ	uncurtailed explanation/ exposition ? D	phyad par lung ston pa
ཕྱད་སྤྱོད	descriptive of uncertainty of movement	phyad spyod
ཕྱད་ཕྱད	awkward gambols D	phyad phyad
ཕྱད་ཕྱོད	evanescent, uncertainty of movement, not going by the straight path, to flicker	phyad phyod
ཕྱད་ཕྱོད་ཀྱི་ཡིད	my perception becomes uncertain/ fluctuating/ wandering	phyad phyod kyi yid
ཕྱད་ཕྱོད་ཡིན་ཀྱང	my perception becomes uncertain	phyad phyod yin kyang
ཕྱན་པ	continually revolving, uninterrupted revolution	phyan pa
ཕྱབ་ལེན	practice	phyab len
ཕྱམ	resting beam of a staircase or ladder, prop, bracket, mortise, lath, pole, rafter, spar of a roof	phyam
ཕྱམ་གྱི་རྟེན་མ	lcam rtsa gnon byed stones etc.	phyam gyi rten ma
ཕྱམ་གྱི་སྤྱི་རྟེན	projecting bracket	phyam gyi spyi rten
ཕྱམ་གྱིས	completely, fully, equanimity	phyam gyis
ཕྱམ་གྱིས་ཞོག	Let go! Rest evenly!; leave it wide open / rest in equanimity / completely let go. rest in equanimity, completely let go, ex. {ngal sar sleb pa ltar song ba} ex. {khyab gdal klong yangs chen por zhog}	phyam gyis zhog
ཕྱམ་སྔས	transverse ledges on which roof rafters rest D	phyam sngas
ཕྱམ་གཅིག	simultaneously, together, at once, oneness	phyam gcig
ཕྱམ་གཅིག་པ	overarching oneness, the	phyam gcig pa
ཨོནེ་ཨོབེ༹ར	arching reality, overacrchingness, ex. {gtad so med pas zhe 'dzin las 'das pa}	one over
ཕྱམ་ཆད	=ity/ equanimity	phyam chad
ཕྱམ་ཆད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	nihilistic view/ exponent	phyam chad du smra ba
ཕྱམ་མཉམ	evenness; equilibrium; uniformity	phyam mnyam
ཕྱམ་སྟན	[arch] dmag sgra	phyam stan
ཕྱམ་སྟེགས	resting beam of a staircase or ladder	phyam stegs
ཕྱམ་གདལ	equilibrium	phyam gdal
སྤཅེད	out, spreading [in all directions], ex. {mar me'i 'od 'ta bur}	spaced
ཕྱམ་གདལ་བ	all-pervasive, spreading [in all directions] / smoothly undistracted / spaced-out	phyam gdal ba
ཕྱམ་བརྡལ	pass freely into / expand into	phyam brdal
ཕྱམ་གནས	even-minded, smoothly abiding, same-level state, remaining evenly	phyam gnas
ཕྱམ་གནས་པ	even-minded / smoothly abiding / same-level state, equanimity / remaining evenly	phyam gnas pa
ཕྱམ་གནས་ལྷོད་དེ	even minded and relaxed	phyam gnas lhod de
ཕྱམ་སྣ	tip of a house's lcam shing [rafters]	phyam sna
ཕྱམ་ཕད	equality/ equanimity	phyam phad
ཕྱམ་ཕྱད	state of evenness, equality	phyam phyad
ཕྱམ་ཕྱམ	complete evenness; isc. uniformity/ equilibrium	phyam phyam
ཕྱམ་ཕྱམ་གྲོལ་བ	spontaneously liberated	phyam phyam grol ba
ཕྱམ་ཕྱམ་པ	glittering, shimmering [flashing, vibrating and ~]	phyam phyam pa
ཕྱམ་ཕྱལ	complete openness	phyam phyal
ཕྱམ་ཕྱལ་ལེ་བ	inexpressible state where nothing is found through examination	phyam phyal le ba
ཕྱམ་མེ	equality /equanimity, even, level	phyam me
ཕྱམ་མེ་བ	quiet, serene, calm, placid, undisturbed	phyam me ba
ཕྱམ་མེ་བའི་ལམ	even/ level road	phyam me ba'i lam
ཕྱམ་བཞག	relax in that presence, relaxed in the state	phyam bzhag
ཕྱམ་ཤིང	house's lcam shing [rafters]	phyam shing
ཕྱམ་ལྷོད	equanimity and relaxation	phyam lhod
ཕྱམས་པ་མཐོང་གྲོལ	lord Jampa who liberates on seeing	phyams pa mthong grol
ཕྱྭའི་ལྷ	deities of the phywa	phywa'i lha
ཕྱྭའི་ལྷ་བདུན	seven deities of the phywa	phywa'i lha bdun
ཕྱར	{mtshang phyar} exposing the faults]; raise up, lift; to hoist, raise, hold aloft	phyar
ཕྱར་ཀ	blame, insult, affront, deprecation	phyar ka
ཕྱར་ཀ་གཏོང	disparage, blame, insult, affront, deprecate	phyar ka gtong
ཕྱར་ཀ་གཏོང་བ	disparage, blame, insult, affront, deprecate	phyar ka gtong ba
ཕྱར་ཁ	blame, affront, insult	phyar kha
ཕྱར་ཁ་གཏོང	disparage, blame, insult, affront, deprecate	phyar kha gtong
ཕྱར་ཁ་གཏོང་བ	disparage, blame, insult, affront, deprecate	phyar kha gtong ba
ཕྱར་སྟབས	upraised	phyar stabs
ཕྱར་དར་དཀར་བ	a hanging of white silk	phyar dar dkar ba
ཕྱར་པོ	piece of felt, cover, nomad tent	phyar po
ཕྱར་པོ་ཆེ	1) re lde/ phyar ba chen po piece of felt, cover; 2) large nomad tent	phyar po che
ཕྱར་ཕྱུར	a large numeral	phyar phyur
ཕྱར་བ	to raise; pf. of {'phyar ba}	phyar ba
ཕྱར་བ་གྲུ་འདེགས	lift a tarpaulin from all the corners, work that must be cooperative	phyar ba gru 'degs
ཕྱར་བ་ནག་པོ	black cloth	phyar ba nag po
ཕྱར་བའི་སྟབས་འཛིན	raises, holds up khatvanga phyar ba'i stabs su gyon 'og rdo rje 'dzin the lower left hand raises a vajra khatvanga	phyar ba'i stabs 'dzin
ཕྱར་མཚང	exposing the faults phyar g.yeng - distraction, given up to worldly ends, fickle, vacillating phyar g.yeng can - given up to enjoyment of worldly happiness phyar g.yeng can - distracted [person], [...	phyar mtshang
ཕྱལ	belly, stomach	phyal
ཕྱལ་གྱིས་འགྲོ	totally free from; Thrangu Rinpoche: gang ga mnyam por 'gro	phyal gyis 'gro
ཕྱལ་ཆད	blank, nothing, void	phyal chad
ཕྱལ་ཆད་སྟོང་ཉིད	blank emptiness	phyal chad stong nyid
ཕྱལ་ཆད་སྟོང་པ	blank emptiness, empty nothingness	phyal chad stong pa
ཕྱལ་འཇོལ་ལེ་བ	gsus pa'am grod pa lhug lhug	phyal 'jol le ba
ཕྱལ་འདེབས	pervasive	phyal 'debs
ཕྱལ་པ	1) continuous, pervasiveness. 2) nihilist, [Syn {phyal bar 'dod pa}	phyal pa
ཕྱལ་པ་ཆེ	all-pervasive state	phyal pa che
ཕྱལ་དཔྱད	[arch] equality/ equanimity	phyal dpyad
ཕྱལ་ཕྱང་ངེ	prominent or hanging paunch	phyal phyang nge
ཕྱལ་ཕྱང་ངེ་བ	flat belly [D paunch]	phyal phyang nge ba
ཕྱལ་ཕྱང་ངེ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of a flat belly [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, chos zad pa rnam par zlog pa nyid kyis phyal phyang nge ba, sku'i phyal te flat belly w/o protrudng...	phyal phyang nge ba'i dpe byad
ཕྱལ་ཕྱལ་བ	vast open; ex {stong nyams phyal phyal ba}	phyal phyal ba
ཕྱལ་ཕྱེལ	large number	phyal phyel
ཕྱལ་ཕྱོལ	{phyal le phyol le} chaotic	phyal phyol
ཕྱལ་བ	1) even, regular, plan. 2) flat, level. 3) ex. {lag stongs phyal bar 'gro} [if you look up] you will go empty handed. Syn {bar med pa} the per- 1714 verted worldly view of; 1) even, regular, plan. ...	phyal ba
ཕྱལ་བར་འགྲོ	go [empty-handed]	phyal bar 'gro
ཕྱལ་བར་འགྲོ་ལག་སྟོངས	go empty handed	phyal bar 'gro lag stongs
ཕྱལ་བར་འདོད་པ	Syn {phyal pa}; nihilistic view, [Syn {phyam chad du smra ba}	phyal bar 'dod pa
ཕྱལ་མོ	1) pregnant woman; 2) paunch	phyal mo
ཕྱལ་ཡས	expand, infinite, infinity/ even[ness], open/ free state	phyal yas
ཕྱལ་ཡས་སུ་ཐོངས	completely let go into evenness, expand into the infinite	phyal yas su thongs
ཕྱལ་ཡས་སུ་ཐོངས་ལ་ཞོག	extend into infinity and then let be	phyal yas su thongs la zhog
ཕྱལ་ལེ	ex. {bar med du} uninterruptedly, {skyong ba} to maintain ~	phyal le
ཕྱལ་ལེ་སྐྱོང་བ	to maintain uninterruptedly	phyal le skyong ba
ཕྱལ་ལེ་ཕྱོལ་ལེ	chaotic	phyal le phyol le
ཕྱལ་ལེ་བ	open(ly); even(ly)/ uniform(ly); level	phyal le ba
ཕྱལ་ལེ་བ་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-level	phyal le ba ma yin pa
ཕྱལ་ལེ་བར་མེད་དུ	uninterruptedly	phyal le bar med du
ཕྱི	1) out-, ex-, behind, outer, outward, outside [in the beginning of a sentence, future, when also nang and gsang comes] -ly, external, outwardly, outer/ exoteric; outer/ outward(ly)/ external(ly); [...	phyi
ཕྱི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྫས་ཀྱི་མཎ་ཌ་ལ	the outer relative mandala of material substance	phyi kun rdzob rdzas kyi maN Da la
ཕྱི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་རྫས་ཀྱི་མཎ་ཌལ	the outer relative mandala of material substance phyi dka' thub rig pa'i rgyud kyi theg pa 3) vehicles of the outer tantras of austere awareness phyi dka' thub rig pa'i rgyud kyi theg pa	phyi kun rdzob rdzas kyi maN Dal
ཕྱི་དཀྱིལ་མདོར་བསྡུས	condensed outer mandala	phyi dkyil mdor bsdus
ཕྱི་བཀན	gan gyal	phyi bkan
ཕྱི་བཀན་རྒྱབ་པ	lie on the back D	phyi bkan rgyab pa
ཕྱི་བཀན་དུ་ཉལ་བ	lie on one's back	phyi bkan du nyal ba
ཕྱི་རྐང	among the four planetary motions 'gros bzhi the dal 'gros &, 'byung 'gros	phyi rkang
ཕྱི་རྐྱེན	externally/ other side arising condition/ cause	phyi rkyen
ཕྱི་སྐོགས	shell	phyi skogs
ཕྱི་སྐོར	exoteric cycle	phyi skor
ཕྱི་སྐོར་བྱེད	turn/ circle/ circumambulate counter- clockwise	phyi skor byed
ཕྱི་སྐོར་བྱེད་པ	turn/ circle/ circumambulate counter-clockwise	phyi skor byed pa
ཕྱི་སྐོར་ལུས་ལྟ་བུ	the body-like Outer Cycle	phyi skor lus lta bu
ཕྱི་ཁམས	external dhatus/ elements	phyi khams
ཕྱི་ཁྱམས	outer skor gyi khyams ra	phyi khyams
ཕྱི་ཁྲལ	Tibetan govt individual foreign-born masters's tax, to govt vs individual lord	phyi khral
ཕྱི་འཁོར	around (him(/ the main figure, in the outer circle	phyi 'khor
ཕྱི་འཁྱེར	take away/ out	phyi 'khyer
ཕྱི་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	take away/ out	phyi 'khyer byed
ཕྱི་གོས	kha gos, coat, outer-wear	phyi gos
ཕྱི་གོས་ལྷུག་ལྷུག	gown	phyi gos lhug lhug
ཕྱི་གྱར་འགྲོ	become known outside, leak	phyi gyar 'gro
ཕྱི་གྱི་ཡུལ	external/ outer objects	phyi gyi yul
ཕྱི་གྱེད	phyi nud de sngar gnas las ltag rgyab tu 'then pa	phyi gyed
ཕྱི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	outer and inner schools	phyi grub mtha'
ཕྱི་གླིང	abroad, foreign countries	phyi gling
ཕྱི་གླིང་སྒོར་མོ	indian rupee	phyi gling sgor mo
ཕྱི་གླིང་པ	foreigners	phyi gling pa
ཕྱི་གློ	saddle's rgyu glo	phyi glo
ཕྱི་དགྲ	future foe, outer enemy, foreign enemy	phyi dgra
ཕྱི་དགྲ་ནང་འཇུག	external enemy coming in	phyi dgra nang 'jug
ཕྱི་བགྲོད	step back, back away	phyi bgrod
ཕྱི་མགྲོན	foreign guest	phyi mgron
ཕྱི་འགྱངས	delay, postponement	phyi 'gyangs
ཕྱི་འགྱངས་བྱེད	delay, postpone, put off	phyi 'gyangs byed
ཕྱི་འགྱངས་ཤོར	be delayed/ postponed/ put off/ overdue 1715	phyi 'gyangs shor
ཕྱི་འགྱུར	Later Translation Schools. Same as Sarma, the New Schools	phyi 'gyur
ཕྱི་འགྱུར་བཅུ་གསུམ	13 later translated sems sde tantras (rtse mo byung rgyal, nam mkha'i rgyal po, bde ba 'phral bkod, rdzogs pa spyi chings, byang chub sems tig, bde ba rab 'byams, srog gi 'khor lo, thig le drug pa,...	phyi 'gyur bcu gsum
ཕྱི་འགྱུར་གསར་མ	the new schools of later translations; New Schools of Later Translations	phyi 'gyur gsar ma
ཕྱི་འགྱོད	my final regret	phyi 'gyod
ཕྱི་འགྲིབ	eye's external ling tog	phyi 'grib
ཕྱི་འགྲོ	walk behind, person taking care of external/ outside/ external/ foreign affairs, exports	phyi 'gro
ཕྱི་འགྲོ་རྒྱབ་པ	retreat, walk backwards quickly	phyi 'gro rgyab pa
ཕྱི་འགྲོ་བ	walk behind	phyi 'gro ba
ཕྱི་འགྲོའི་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	export goods	phyi 'gro'i thon skyed
ཕྱི་འགྲོས	walking backwards	phyi 'gros
ཕྱི་འགྲོས་བྱས	walked backwards [Amdo] back out withdraw	phyi 'gros byas
ཕྱི་རྒས	aging/ diminishing afternoon sun	phyi rgas
ཕྱི་རྒོལ	1) phyi nas tshur rgol ba; 2) dgra dang tshur rgol ba po; 3) 2nd party/debater phyogs snga refuting or showing unwanted consequence [syn: phyogs phyi ma dang yang dag bzung]	phyi rgol
ཕྱི་རྒོལ་ཡང་དག	proper respondent, one to whom it is proper to posit some reason in that he accepts the major premise and applicability of the reason to the subject	phyi rgol yang dag
ཕྱི་རྒོལ་ལ་ལྟོས་ཏེ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	rgol ba la ltos te ma grub pa'i rtags gsum gyi ya gyal zhig ste, EG, snga rgol gcer bu pas phyi rgol sangs rgyas pa la, the dharmin a tree, possesses a mind, shun pa bshus na it dies, then sangs rg...	phyi rgol la ltos te ma grub pa
ཕྱི་རྒྱ	outermost confines	phyi rgya
ཕྱི་རྒྱ་རླབས་ཀྱིས་གཅོད་པ	to thoroughly shatter the outermost confines	phyi rgya rlabs kyis gcod pa
ཕྱི་རྒྱ་རླབས་ཀྱིས་ཆོད་པ	who has conquered space (like a vulture	phyi rgya rlabs kyis chod pa
ཕྱི་རྒྱ་གསང་བ་བྱས	kept secret outside	phyi rgya gsang ba byas
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ	foreign country, abroad	phyi rgyal
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་སྐུ་ཚབ	foreign ambassador	phyi rgyal sku tshab
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་གྱི་སྐད་ཡིག	foreign language/ speech and writing	phyi rgyal gyi skad yig
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་གྱི་དངུལ་འགྲུལ	foreign exchange/ currency	phyi rgyal gyi dngul 'grul
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་དུ	abroad	phyi rgyal du
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་དོན་གཅོད་ལས་ཁུངས	Foreign Affairs Office	phyi rgyal don gcod las khungs
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ནས་ཉོ་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	import	phyi rgyal nas nyo len byed pa
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ནས་བྱུང་བ	exotic	phyi rgyal nas byung ba
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་བ	foreigner	phyi rgyal ba
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་བློན་པོ	foreign minister	phyi rgyal blon po
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་མི	foreigner	phyi rgyal mi
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་སྨན་བཅོས་རིག་པ	allopathy	phyi rgyal sman bcos rig pa
ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt. Foreign Office [founded 1943, bod rang btsan zer ba zhig byed rgyu'i re ba bcangs te phyi rgyal dang 'brel ba byed mkhan gyi las khungs shig]	phyi rgyal las khungs
ཕྱི་རྒྱུད	the last medical treatise in a group of 4 which makes the other 3 easy to practice, outer tantras	phyi rgyud
ཕྱི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་གསུམ	three outer tantras [kriy tantra, ubhaya or cary tantra, and	phyi rgyud sde gsum
ཡོགཏནཏྲ	{kri ya} 2) {u pa} 3) {yo ga}, = {dka' thub rigs byed kyi theg pa} rnying ma'i gzhung lugs la kri ya ste bya ba dang, au bha ya ste gnyis ka zhes spyod pa dang, yo ga ste rnal 'byor bcas phyi rgyud...	yogatantra
ཕྱི་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	Three outer tantras. Kriya, Upa, and Yoga. The Kriya Tantras emphasize purification of body and speech through ritual and cleansing activities, establishing a relationship between the deity and the...	phyi rgyud gsum
ཕྱི་རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ	outer causal vehicles	phyi rgyu'i theg pa
ཕྱི་སྒེག་བཞི	dkyil 'khor nang gi phyi'i mchod pa'i lha mo bzhi ste, sgeg pa ma dang, phreng ba ma, glu ma, gar ma bcas bzhi'o	phyi sgeg bzhi
ཕྱི་སྒོ	outside door/ gate	phyi sgo
ཕྱི་སྒོ་ནང་སྒོ	outdoors or indoors	phyi sgo nang sgo
ཕྱི་སྒོ་ཤར་ལྟ	E facing outer door	phyi sgo shar lta
ཕྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན	externally obscured	phyi sgrib pa can
ཕྱི་སྒྲུབ	outer sadhana [ among outer, inner and secret versions]	phyi sgrub
ཕྱི་སྒྲུབ་བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སེལ	Outer Sadhana Barchey Künsel	phyi sgrub bar chad kun sel
ཕྱི་སྒྲོབ	spam rdzu'i rnam 'gyur,//rgyan gos bzang po'i phyi sgrob mdzes pa,//phyi sgrob che la nang snying stong pa	phyi sgrob
ཕྱི་སྒྲོམ	frame	phyi sgrom
ཕྱི་ངོས	surface	phyi ngos
ཕྱི་སྔགས	outer mantras	phyi sngags
ཕྱི་ཅི་ལོག་གིས	depraved by perversity	phyi ci log gis
ཕྱི་ཅི་ལོག་གིས་བསླད་དེ	corrupt	phyi ci log gis bslad de
ཕྱི་ལྕག	1) strike w the back of the hand, a blow	phyi lcag
ཕྱི་ལྕག་གཞུ་བ	lag pa phyir gyugs nas horse whip gzhu tshul	phyi lcag gzhu ba
ཕྱི་ཆ་མ་སྐྱེས	the later phase has not yet come into being	phyi cha ma skyes
ཕྱི་ཆབ	water passed around after religious meeting	phyi chab
ཕྱི་ཆུས	to look after, care take; to make preparations for the future	phyi chus
ཕྱི་ཆོན	1) clothing's phyi'i mtha' 'jags; 2) nomad tent's phyi'i chon thag	phyi chon
ཕྱི་ཆོས	outsider dharma	phyi chos
ཕྱི་མཆོད	external offering[s]	phyi mchod
ཕྱི་འཇམ་ནང་རྩུབ	externally soft and internally hard	phyi 'jam nang rtsub
ཕྱི་འཇུག	pupil dkyil 'khor du gzhug pa'i snod du rung bar bya ba'i phyir yol ba	phyi 'jug
ཕྱི་འཇུག་བྱ་སྟེ	having supplicated chas su bcug and in visualization of the deity shar sgor bzhag pa &, taking ordinary and extraordinary vows and rigs dang mos pa dri ba &, thams cad rnal 'byor gyi sems bskyed an...	phyi 'jug bya ste
ཕྱི་རྗེས	1) slad ma, subsequent aspect; 2) song ba'i shul	phyi rjes
ཕྱི་ལྗོངས	outdoor scene [movies etc.]	phyi ljongs
ཕྱི་ཉིད་ནང	the outside itself is the inside	phyi nyid nang
ཕྱི་ཉིན	the day after, the next day	phyi nyin
ཕྱི་ཉུག	[arch] beggar	phyi nyug
ཕྱི་གཉུལ་བ་པོ	beggar, wanderer vagabond	phyi gnyul ba po
ཕྱི་སྙགས	after-effect	phyi snyags
ཕྱི་སྙགས་བྱས	to recreate a past experience	phyi snyags byas
ཕྱི་གཏོང	export	phyi gtong
ཕྱི་གཏོང་ནང་འདྲེན	export and import phyi gtong nang 'dren gyi nyo tshong export and import trade	phyi gtong nang 'dren
ཕྱི་རྟགས	outer sign	phyi rtags
ཕྱི་རྟིང	heel	phyi rting
ཕྱི་ལྟ་བ་སྤྱི་གཅོད	general understanding of the view	phyi lta ba spyi gcod
ཕྱི་ལྟ་བ་སྤྱི་གཅོད་དུ་བཤད་པ	doctrines of introduction which concern the general teachings which are considered to be external	phyi lta ba spyi gcod du bshad pa
ཕྱི་ལྟ་བ་སྤྱི་སྤྱོད	outer general view	phyi lta ba spyi spyod
ཕྱི་ལྟར	outer aspect, externally	phyi ltar
ཕྱི་ལྟར་བསྒྲུབ་པ	external practice	phyi ltar bsgrub pa
ཕྱི་སྟེ་རྟོག་པ	{nges par rtogs pa}	phyi ste rtog pa
ཕྱི་སྟོང་ཉིད	voidness of the external, voidness of the six sense object, voidness of others five aggregates	phyi stong nyid
ཕྱི་སྟོང་པ	outer emptiness	phyi stong pa
ཕྱི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the external, {stong nyid} 16] / void of the six sense objects, void of others' five aggregates, voidness of the external and internal, syn of {stong nyid nyi shu}	phyi stong pa nyid
ཕྱི་བརྟན་པ་སྣོད	the inanimate vessel outside	phyi brtan pa snod
ཕྱི་ཐག	1) the future [life], eventually, afterward, endurance, lastingness; 2) aa gsar med par 'grogs yun ring ba [bsdongs pa'i mi la phyi thag dgos, bzhon pa'i rta la snying rje dgos]	phyi thag
ཕྱི་ཐག་རིང་པོ	future life	phyi thag ring po
ཕྱི་ཐག་རིང་བ	long-time	phyi thag ring ba
ཕྱི་ཐག་རིང་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	long-time companion	phyi thag ring ba'i grogs po
ཕྱི་ཐན	drought at the end of summer, threat, menace D	phyi than
ཕྱི་ཐབས	foreign/ external method/ means	phyi thabs
ཕྱི་ཐུན	afternoon session [3 to 6 pm]	phyi thun
ཕྱི་ཐུབ་པ	???	phyi thub pa
ཕྱི་ཐུམ	outer cover/ wrapper	phyi thum
ཕྱི་ཐུམ་ཀོ་བས་བྱས་པ	leather cover	phyi thum ko bas byas pa
ཕྱི་ཐོ	sa gdan sogs 'thag dus dgos pa'i shing gi tho ba zhig	phyi tho
ཕྱི་མཐའ	the end of the age	phyi mtha'
ཕྱི་མཐའ་བྱས	a little later	phyi mtha' byas
ཕྱི་མཐའ་མུར	final end	phyi mtha' mur
ཕྱི་མཐུན	outward agreement/ compatibility	phyi mthun
ཕྱི་མཐུན་ནང་འགལ	outward agreement but inner contradiction/ opposition	phyi mthun nang 'gal
ཕྱི་དང་ནང	outer and inner, external and internal, foreign and domestic	phyi dang nang
ཕྱི་དང་ནང་གི་དངོས་པོ	outer and inner things phyi dang nang gis bsdus pa'i chos phyi	phyi dang nang gi dngos po
ཐམས་ཆད	all things included under inner and outer phenomena phyi dang nang gis ba sdus pa'i chos	thams chad
ཐམས་དད	all things includes under outer and inner phenomena phyi dang nang gis ba sdus pa'i chos	thams dad
ཕྱི་དང་ནང་མེད	transparent	phyi dang nang med
ཕྱི་དར	2nd missionary period (11th to present), second diffusion of buddhism in tibet, later development, later spreading of the dharma	phyi dar
ཕྱི་དར་གྱི་དུས	renaissance	phyi dar gyi dus
ཕྱི་དར་རྒྱག	dust, wipe, cleanse	phyi dar rgyag
ཕྱི་དར་སྔར་དར	earlier introduction and later development of buddhism	phyi dar sngar dar
ཕྱི་དར་གཏོང	dust, wipe, cleanse	phyi dar gtong
ཕྱི་དར་བསྟན་པ	the later spread of the doctrine	phyi dar bstan pa
ཕྱི་དལ	'gor ba'am 'gyangs pa	phyi dal
ཕྱི་དུ	outside, out of doors, from without, on the outside of	phyi du
ཕྱི་དུ་གྱེང་བ	outward distraction [pursuing the five sense-objects)	phyi du gyeng ba
ཕྱི་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	objectivity phyi du g.yeng ba - outward distraction, [pursuing the five sense-objects]	phyi du grub pa
ཕྱི་དུས	a future time	phyi dus
ཕྱི་དུས་ཀྱི་ཁོར་ལོ	external and internal cycles, time	phyi dus kyi khor lo
ཕྱི་དུས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ་ཁུངས་མེད	foundationless epistemology of later times	phyi dus kyi tshad ma khungs med
ཕྱི་དུས་སུ་མི་ལྟོས་པ	without having to depend upon some future moment	phyi dus su mi ltos pa
ཕྱི་དེ	the latter (last mentioned	phyi de
ཕྱི་དོན	external object, external objectivity, outer object [thd]	phyi don
ཕྱི་དོན་ལྐོག་ན་མོ	hidden external object,	phyi don lkog na mo
ཕྱི་དོན་ཏུ་གྲུབ་པ	stains/ objectivity	phyi don tu grub pa
ཕྱི་དོན་སྟོང	{phyi rol don stong} empty of external objects	phyi don stong
ཕྱི་དོན་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	external objectivity	phyi don du grub pa
ཕྱི་དོན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	def. {bye brag tu smra ba / mdo sde pa}	phyi don du smra ba
ཕྱི་དོན་བདེན་པར་མེད་པ	unreality of external objects	phyi don bden par med pa
ཕྱི་དོན་བདེན་མེད	the unreality of external objects	phyi don bden med
ཕྱི་དོན་བེམ་པོ	material external objects	phyi don bem po
ཕྱི་དོན་ཡོད་པ	the existence of external objects	phyi don yod pa
ཕྱི་དོན་རང་མཚན	specific character of the external object	phyi don rang mtshan
ཕྱི་དོན་རོལ་གྱི་དོན	external objects	phyi don rol gyi don
ཕྱི་དོར	cleanse, wipe	phyi dor
ཕྱི་དོར་བགྱི་བ	to sweep	phyi dor bgyi ba
ཕྱི་དྲགས	be too late	phyi drags
ཕྱི་དྲགས་པ་རེད	it's too late	phyi drags pa red
ཕྱི་དྲོ	afternoon	phyi dro
ཕྱི་དྲོ་དགོང་ཁ	tonight	phyi dro dgong kha
ཕྱི་དྲོ་སྔ་དྲོའི་དུས་དྲུག	the six times of morning and afternoon	phyi dro snga dro'i dus drug
ཕྱི་དྲོ་ཆུ་ཚོད་དང་པོ	1:00 PM	phyi dro chu tshod dang po
ཕྱི་དྲོ་སོང་ནས	by the late afternoon	phyi dro song nas
ཕྱི་དྲོའི་དུས	afternoon	phyi dro'i dus
ཕྱི་གདངས	externalized/ outwardly directed radiance (of being)*	phyi gdangs
ཕྱི་བདག་ལྟའི་རུ་དྲ	outer rudra of viewing in terms of self-nature	phyi bdag lta'i ru dra
ཕྱི་བདར	to clean, to cleanse	phyi bdar
ཕྱི་བདར་གཏོང་པ	wipe, scrub, rub, polish	phyi bdar gtong pa
ཕྱི་བདར་གཏོང་བ	wipe, scrub, rub, polish	phyi bdar gtong ba
ཕྱི་བདར་བྱེད་པ	make clean by sweeping away whatever is filthy	phyi bdar byed pa
ཐལ་རྡུལ་གྱིས་མི་ནོག་པའི་ཁྱད་ཡོད	if 1 cleans again and again things will be quite free of dirt phyi bdar yang yang byed dgos pa'i khang pa ltar bsam blo la'ang phyi bdar yang	thal rdul gyis mi nog pa'i khyad yod
ཡང་གཏོང་དགོས	like a house that has to be cleaned again and again, thoughts too must be cleaned	yang gtong dgos
ཕྱི་བདེན་མེད	[there is] external lack of true existence	phyi bden med
ཕྱི་མདའ་རྒྱག་པ	arrows/ guns phyi rgyag byed pa [rjes 'ded yong mkhan dgra bor phyi mda' rgyag pa	phyi mda' rgyag pa
ཕྱི་འདྲེད	legs rgyab tu 'dred pa	phyi 'dred
ཕྱི་འདྲེན	export	phyi 'dren
ཕྱི་འདྲེན་བྱེད	export	phyi 'dren byed
ཕྱི་རྡོ	1) 'phongs phyi ba'i rdo; 2) rgyab tu phyir 'phangs pa'i rdo	phyi rdo
ཕྱི་ལྡིར་ནང་སྟོང	1) surface 'bur 'bur la inside stong shig shig; 2) talkative but w/o any good qualities at all	phyi ldir nang stong
ཕྱི་སྡོད	living abroad	phyi sdod
ཕྱི་སྡོད་དོན་གཅོད	consul	phyi sdod don gcod
ཕྱི་སྡོད་གཞུང་ཚབ	government representatives living abroad	phyi sdod gzhung tshab
ཕྱི་སྡོད་རང་མི	citizens/ nationals [of 1's own country] living abroad	phyi sdod rang mi
ཕྱི་ན	outside, out of doors, from without, on the outside of, behind	phyi na
ཕྱི་ནང	escape from within	phyi nang
ཕྱི་ནང་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ	outer environment(s) and the being within it/ them phyi nang gang na'ang med pa gsal snang - clearly manifest yet nonexistenet anywhere, outwardly or inwardly	phyi nang skye 'gro
ཕྱི་ནང་གི	outer and inner	phyi nang gi
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	outsider and insider/ non- buddhist and buddhist doctrines	phyi nang gi grub mtha'
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ	Outer and inner tantra sections. The three outer are Kriya, Upa and Yoga. The three inner are Maha, Anu and Ati	phyi nang gi rgyud sde
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་བསྒོ་བ	both Buddhist and	phyi nang gi bsgo ba
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་དངོས་པོ	outer and inner things	phyi nang gi dngos po
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་དངོས་པོ་རྣམས	all outer and inner things	phyi nang gi dngos po rnams
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་མངོན་བྱང	the five outer and inner awakenings	phyi nang gi mngon byang
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཆོས	outer and inner phenomena 1718	phyi nang gi chos
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད	all outer and inner phenomena	phyi nang gi chos thams cad
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཐེག་པ	Outer or inner vehicles. Same as 'higher and lower vehicles.' Hinayana and Mahayana	phyi nang gi theg pa
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་གདོས་བཅས	(the experience of) the physical body and the material world	phyi nang gi gdos bcas
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་འབྱུང་བ	outer and inner elements	phyi nang gi 'byung ba
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་རྫས	outer and inner substance	phyi nang gi rdzas
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཡོངས་འཛིན	outer and inner teachers	phyi nang gi yongs 'dzin
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ལར་རྒྱ	internal and external usage of a country	phyi nang gi lar rgya
ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ལུས	outer and inner body	phyi nang gi lus
ཕྱི་ནང་གྲུབ་མཐ	the tenets of outsiders and insiders [Buddhist and nonBuddhists]	phyi nang grub mtha
ཕྱི་ནང་གྲུབ་མཐའ	non-Buddhist and buddhist/ outsider and insider schools	phyi nang grub mtha'
ཕྱི་ནང་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཀུན	all phenomena of outer and inner causation	phyi nang rgyu 'bras kyi chos kun
ཕྱི་ནང་རྒྱུད་སྡེའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the deities of the inner and outer tantras	phyi nang rgyud sde'i lha tshogs
ཕྱི་ནང་སྒྲུབ་གསང	outer, inner, sadhana, and the secret. The four empowerments of the outer, the inner, the sadhana, and the secret are included within the four rivers of empowerment: the outer empowerment river of ...	phyi nang sgrub gsang
ཕྱི་ནང་བསྒྱུར	turn inside out	phyi nang bsgyur
ཕྱི་ནང་གཉིས	outer and inner, outside and inside, buddhists and nonbuddhists	phyi nang gnyis
ཕྱི་ནང་གཉིས་ཀ	buddhists and nonbuddhists	phyi nang gnyis ka
ཕྱི་ནང་གཉིས་ཀ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	the emptiness of both the outer and the inner [phenomena]	phyi nang gnyis ka stong pa nyid
ཕྱི་ནང་གཉིས་པ	duality of outside and inside	phyi nang gnyis pa
ཕྱི་ནང་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependence of external and internal conditions, outer and inner interdependent conditions, external and internal interdependence, external and internal interdependent factors	phyi nang rten 'brel
ཕྱི་ནང་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the external and internal [voidness of the external and internal/ (third of {stong nyid nyi shu}, stong nyid bcu drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, skye mched bcu gnyis po nang dang phyi gnyis ...	phyi nang stong pa nyid
ཕྱི་ནང་དུ་རྒྱངས	calling in from outside	phyi nang du rgyangs
ཕྱི་ནང་དུ་རྒྱངས་ཏེ	calling in from outside	phyi nang du rgyangs te
ཕྱི་ནང་དུ་མི་རྒྱུ	does not escape from within	phyi nang du mi rgyu
ཕྱི་ནང་སྣོད་བཅུད	the outer world and the inner beings	phyi nang snod bcud
ཕྱི་ནང་ཕྱི་དབུགས	respiration, breathing	phyi nang phyi dbugs
ཕྱི་ནང་ཕྱི་དབྱུགས	respiration, breathing	phyi nang phyi dbyugs
ཕྱི་ནང་བར	outer & inner & median	phyi nang bar
ཕྱི་ནང་བར་གསུམ	outside inside and between these two	phyi nang bar gsum
ཕྱི་ནང་མ་གསལ་བ	opaque	phyi nang ma gsal ba
ཕྱི་ནང་མིན	an outsider	phyi nang min
ཕྱི་ནང་མེད་པ	w/o outside or inside	phyi nang med pa
ཕྱི་ནང་གཙང	clean outside and inside/ in thought and action	phyi nang gtsang
ཕྱི་ནང་གཙང་མའི་ཁང་པ	house cleaned inside and out	phyi nang gtsang ma'i khang pa
ཕྱི་ནང་གཞན་གསུམ	outer, inner and other	phyi nang gzhan gsum
ཕྱི་ནང་གཞན་གསུམ་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད	the identity of the outer, the inner and the other phyi nang gzhan gsum kyi bdag nyid outer, inner and other natures	phyi nang gzhan gsum kyi bdag nyid
ཕྱི་ནང་གཞན་གསུམ་བདག་ཉིད	outer, inner and other natures	phyi nang gzhan gsum bdag nyid
ཕྱི་ནང་ཟོང་འགྲུལ	internal and external circulation of commodities	phyi nang zong 'grul
ཕྱི་ནང་གཟུང་འཛིན	the dualism of outer object and inner subject	phyi nang gzung 'dzin
ཕྱི་ནང་བཟློག་པ	outside and inside can change positions	phyi nang bzlog pa
ཕྱི་ནང་ཡོ་བྱད	personal and general belongings [personal toothbrush, clothes, general door, window	phyi nang yo byad
ཕྱི་ནང་རིམ་པ་གཉིས	two layers, inner and outer	phyi nang rim pa gnyis
ཕྱི་ནང་ལག་འབྲེལ	conspiracy, insiders joining w outsiders	phyi nang lag 'brel
ཕྱི་ནང་སློག	turn inside out	phyi nang slog
ཕྱི་ནང་སློག་པ	reverse	phyi nang slog pa
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང	exoteric & esoteric & mystic, outer & inner & secret	phyi nang gsang
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གི	outer, inner and secret --	phyi nang gsang gi
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	outer, inner and secret mandalas	phyi nang gsang gi dkyil 'khor
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གི་དབང	outer, inner and secret empowerments	phyi nang gsang gi dbang
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་བ	the outer, inner and secret	phyi nang gsang ba
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་བ་དེ་ཉིད	outer, inner, secret, and That	phyi nang gsang ba de nyid
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་བའི	the outer inner and	phyi nang gsang ba'i
སེཅྲེཏ	- phyi nang gsang ba'i dur khrod brgyad the outer inner and secret 8 charnel grounds 1719 phyi nang gsang ba'i dur khrod brgyad the outer, inner and innermost eight charnel grounds	secret
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་བའི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the outer inner and secret 8 classes	phyi nang gsang ba'i sde brgyad
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་བའི་མཚམས	outer, inner, and secret retreat	phyi nang gsang ba'i mtshams
ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ	outer inner and secret	phyi nang gsang gsum
ཕྱི་ནང་བསློགས	turned inside out	phyi nang bslogs
ཕྱི་ནད	surgery	phyi nad
ཕྱི་ནད་ཐན་ཁག	surgery [unit/ department]	phyi nad than khag
ཕྱི་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	surgical department	phyi nad tshan khag
ཕྱི་ནད་གཤེག་བཅོས	surgery, [surgical] operation	phyi nad gsheg bcos
ཕྱི་ནས	1) around [you]; 2) [from] behind/ outside (vctr; 3) in future, later, subsequently; 4) again	phyi nas
བལྟས་ན་ཕྱི་གསལ	transparent	bltas na phyi gsal
ཕྱི་ནས་ཐར་བ་དཀ་ཞིང	later hard to get out of	phyi nas thar ba dka zhing
ཕྱི་ནས་ཐར་བ་དཀའ་ཞིང	later hard to get out of	phyi nas thar ba dka' zhing
ཕྱི་ནས་གདུང	repentance	phyi nas gdung
ཕྱི་ནས་བྱུང	arise from outside	phyi nas byung
ཕྱི་ནུད	phyir 'then	phyi nud
ཕྱི་ནུད་མེད་པ	without fail	phyi nud med pa
ཕྱི་ནུབ	evening, the next evening	phyi nub
ཕྱི་ནུར	SA phyi 'then	phyi nur
ཕྱི་ནུར་མེད་པ	without fail	phyi nur med pa
ཕྱི་ནོར་ནང་རྫས	cattle outside and possessions inside	phyi nor nang rdzas
ཕྱི་སྣང	outer appearances/ experience	phyi snang
ཕྱི་སྣང་བ་གང་འབྱུང	every thing visible phyi snang ba la dbang thob pas rkyen	phyi snang ba gang 'byung
སྣང་ཞིང་ཁམས་སུ་འཆར	appearances arise as buddhafields by the attainment of power over external appearances phyi snang ba la dbang thob pas rkyen	snang zhing khams su 'char
ཕྱི་སྣང་བར	externally, internally and inbetween	phyi snang bar
ཕྱི་སྣོད	external world; the outer world, (inanimate world as) outer container	phyi snod
ཕྱི་སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག	rten, physical or inorganic world	phyi snod kyi 'jig
ཕྱི་སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of the external vessel	phyi snod kyi 'jig rten
ཕྱི་སྣོད་འཇིག་རྟེན	the external [container the] world	phyi snod 'jig rten
ཕྱི་སྣོད་རིག་གནས	geography	phyi snod rig gnas
ཕྱི་པ	non-buddhist, brahmanist	phyi pa
ཕྱི་པ་མུ་སྟེགས་པ	the heretic / extremist outsiders	phyi pa mu stegs pa
ཕྱི་པའི་ཆོས	non buddhist religion	phyi pa'i chos
ཕྱི་པའི་བསྟན་པ་ལ་གནོད་ངེས	will certainly harm the non-Buddhists	phyi pa'i bstan pa la gnod nges
ཕྱི་པའི་ཕྱི་གཙང	hindus clean outside	phyi pa'i phyi gtsang
ཕྱི་པའི་ལུགས	non-buddhist tradition[s]	phyi pa'i lugs
ཕྱི་པུར	ornament, phan	phyi pur
ཕྱི་པོ	late	phyi po
ཕྱི་པོ་ཆགས	be late	phyi po chags
ཕྱི་པོ་བསྡད	stayed late	phyi po bsdad
ཕྱི་པོ་བྱེད	be late	phyi po byed
ཕྱི་སྤྱད	phyi bdar gtong byed kyi rdzas spyi	phyi spyad
ཕྱི་སྤྲོས་བཅས་ཀྱི་དབང	the outer empowerment of conceptual elaboration	phyi spros bcas kyi dbang
ཕྱི་སྤྲོས་པའི་དབང	bskur - the outer elaborate empowerment	phyi spros pa'i dbang
ཕྱི་སྤྲོས་པའི་དབན	bskur - the outer elaborate empowerment	phyi spros pa'i dban
ཕྱི་ཕན་པའི་དབང་བཅུ	10 outer empowerments of benefit	phyi phan pa'i dbang bcu
ཕྱི་ཕན་དབང་བཅུ	ten outer benefiting empowerments. The Guhyagarbha Tantra enumerates the ten outer benefiting empowerments: "Crown, tiara, and rosary, armor, banner of victory, and mudra, parasol, vase, and food a...	phyi phan dbang bcu
ཕྱི་ཕུར	ornament	phyi phur
ཕྱི་ཕྱག	parting gesture, farewell prostrations, a parting gift	phyi phyag
ཕྱི་ཕྱག་བྱེད་པ	request for the last time, bid farewell, take leave	phyi phyag byed pa
ཕྱི་ཕྱག་འཚོལ	bid farewell!, prostrate in farewell	phyi phyag 'tshol
ཕྱི་ཕྱི་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	(he will bid farewell, parting gesture, farewell, prostration	phyi phyi phyag 'tshal ba
ཕྱི་ཕྱི་ས	excrement	phyi phyi sa
ཕྱི་ཕྱིར	eventually; further and further	phyi phyir
ཕྱི་ཕྱིར་དུ་རྒྱུག་པའི་ཁྱི	the dog running after, behind	phyi phyir du rgyug pa'i khyi
ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས	other side in a dispute, outside, external	phyi phyogs
ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཉོ་ཚོང	external/ foreign trade	phyi phyogs kyi nyo tshong
ཕྱི་འཕེལ	subsequent increase D	phyi 'phel
ཕྱི་འཕྱོར་ཆེ་བ་ཡིན་པ	physical appearance is very important	phyi 'phyor che ba yin pa
ཕྱི་འཕྲིན་གྱི་ཚུལ་དུ	as a parting message	phyi 'phrin gyi tshul du
ཕྱི་འཕྲེད	afternoon	phyi 'phred
ཕྱི་འཕྲོད	evening	phyi 'phrod
ཕྱི་བ	wipe, erase, scrub, rub, polish, splitting, opening, blowing, large marmot, be wiped off, SA 'byi ba, gopher	phyi ba
ཕྱི་བི	[arch] phyi rol, the other side	phyi bi
ཕྱི་བུན	foreign debt	phyi bun
ཕྱི་བོན	the non-Buddhist Bönpos	phyi bon
ཕྱི་བྱད	external things/ articles	phyi byad
ཕྱི་བློན	subsidiary minister	phyi blon
ཕྱི་དབུགས	the external [noticeable] breathing	phyi dbugs
ཕྱི་དབུགས་ཆད	since one cannot being external air into the lungs breath ceasing [rlung srog 'dzin sogs kyi nus pa med par gyur nas myur du 'chi ba'i ltas shig	phyi dbugs chad
ཕྱི་དབྱིངས	external space, external dimension	phyi dbyings
ཕྱི་དབྱིབས	the general shape	phyi dbyibs
ཕྱི་དབྱུགས	respiration	phyi dbyugs
ཕྱི་འབབ་ཆུ་བོ	river flowing outward [into the sea]	phyi 'bab chu bo
ཕྱི་འབུད	expulsion, banishment, deportation	phyi 'bud
ཕྱི་འབུད་བྱེད	expel, banish, eject, deport	phyi 'bud byed
ཕྱི་འབྱུང་བཞི	external four elements	phyi 'byung bzhi
ཕྱི་འབྲང་བ	followers	phyi 'brang ba
ཕྱི་འབྲས	late rice	phyi 'bras
ཕྱི་འབྲེད	afternoon, PM	phyi 'bred
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ	external affairs, foreign relations, diplomacy	phyi 'brel
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	external/ foreign relations	phyi 'brel kyi 'brel ba
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་སྐུ་ཚབ	external affairs/ foreign relations, diplomatic representative, ambassador, diplomat	phyi 'brel sku tshab
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ཉོ་ཚོང	external/ foreign trade	phyi 'brel nyo tshong
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་མཐུན་ལམ	diplomatic relation	phyi 'brel mthun lam
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་དྲུང་ཆེན	foreign secretary	phyi 'brel drung chen
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་པུའུ་ཀྲུང	external/ foreign minister	phyi 'brel pu'u krung
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་བློན་ཆེན	external/ foreign minister	phyi 'brel blon chen
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་མི་སྣ	ambassador	phyi 'brel mi sna
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་མི་སྣའི་ལས་ཁང	embassy	phyi 'brel mi sna'i las khang
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལས་ཁུངས	Foreign Office, Ministry of External Affairs	phyi 'brel las khungs
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	workers in the Foreign Office, Ministry of External Affairs, diplomatic personnel	phyi 'brel las byed pa
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་སྲིད་ཇུས	foreign policy	phyi 'brel srid jus
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་སྲིད་བྱུས	foreign policy	phyi 'brel srid byus
ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་སློབ་ཚོགས	foreign affairs institute	phyi 'brel slob tshogs
ཕྱི་མ	last; excrement, last, later, future life, next life, the later summer retreat; next life/ later; later	phyi ma
ཕྱི་མ་སྐྱེ་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་ཅན	to take on the guise of the coming rebirth	phyi ma skye 'gyur gyi rnam pa can
ཕྱི་མ་རྒྱུད	the Subsequent tantra [med.] dpal ldan rgyud bzhi'i ya gyal dum bu bzhi pa gso ba rig pa'i lag len gyi skor rnams ston pa 'phrin las kyi rgyud de le'u nyi shu rtsa bdun yod pa'i sman gzhung tsad ld...	phyi ma rgyud
ཕྱི་མ་ལྟར	like the latter case	phyi ma ltar
ཕྱི་མ་དོན་གཉེར་སྐྱེ་བ	to spur their diligence for the sake of the next life	phyi ma don gnyer skye ba
ཕྱི་མ་ནང	conspiracy	phyi ma nang
ཕྱི་མ་རྣམས	the later/ modern ones	phyi ma rnams
ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱི་མ	each following one, every one consecutively in a series	phyi ma phyi ma
ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱི་མའི་དུས	in the final end of this age	phyi ma phyi ma'i dus
ཕྱི་མ་འཕྲེད	[arch] PM, [in the] afternoon	phyi ma 'phred
ཕྱི་མ་བྲེད	[arch] PM, [in the] afternoon	phyi ma bred
ཕྱི་མ་མ་སྐྱེས	next thought has not yet arisen	phyi ma ma skyes
ཕྱི་མ་རིག་པ	knowledge of later lives [phyi mtha' rig pa ste, later lives and birthplaces perceiving prajna, 1 of rig pa gsum	phyi ma rig pa
ཕྱི་མ་གསུམ	the last three	phyi ma gsum
ཕྱི་མའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	the next place of birth	phyi ma'i skye gnas
ཕྱི་མའི་སྐྱེ་སྲིད	the next life/ rebirth	phyi ma'i skye srid
ཕྱི་མའི་རྒྱུད	the Subsequent [med.] Tantra	phyi ma'i rgyud
ཕྱི་མའི་མཐའ	the future	phyi ma'i mtha'
ཕྱི་མའི་མཐའ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	the emptiness of the future basis phyi ma'i mtha' la brten pa'i lta ba bzhi the four views relying on the end of time phyi ma'i mtha' la brten pa'i lta ba bzhi the four views relying on the end of ...	phyi ma'i mtha' stong pa nyid
ཕྱི་མའི་དུས	future time, future or after time	phyi ma'i dus
ཕྱི་མའི་དོན	hereafter	phyi ma'i don
ཕྱི་མའི་ཕྱི་མ	final	phyi ma'i phyi ma
ཕྱི་མའི་ཕྱི་མ་རྒྱུད	Final Tantra (as in third section of kun byed rgyal po)	phyi ma'i phyi ma rgyud
ཕྱི་མའི་ཕྱི་མ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Final Subsequent Mantra Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. Vol. OM of the Nyingma Gyübum	phyi ma'i phyi ma sngags kyi rgyud
ཕྱི་མའི་ཟས་ཀྱི་བསོད་སྙོམས	almsbegging for afternoon food	phyi ma'i zas kyi bsod snyoms
ཕྱི་མའི་ཡུལ	the next life	phyi ma'i yul
ཕྱི་མའི་རི	(met W mt	phyi ma'i ri
ཕྱི་མའི་ལམ	on the journey to your next life	phyi ma'i lam
ཕྱི་མའི་ལམ་མི་རྙེད	not finding the path in the future life	phyi ma'i lam mi rnyed
ཕྱི་མའི་ལམ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	gone on the great path of future lives	phyi ma'i lam la zhugs pa
ཕྱི་མའི་ལུས	future body	phyi ma'i lus
ཕྱི་མའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་སུ་སྣང	appears in the shape of the [body of the] next life phyi ma'i srid pa gzhan 'phen pa sems pa'i	phyi ma'i sha tshugs su snang
ཕྱི་མར	later	phyi mar
ཕྱི་མར་འགྲོ་དུས	when leaving for the next life	phyi mar 'gro dus
ཕྱི་མར་འཇུག	the next should be entered	phyi mar 'jug
ཕྱི་མས་བསྡུས་པ	that comprise the succeeding state	phyi mas bsdus pa
ཕྱི་མི	chinese, outsider	phyi mi
ཕྱི་མི་སྐྱེ་བའི་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of	phyi mi skye ba'i bzod pa
ཕུ༹ཏུརེ་ནོན	origination	future non
ཕྱི་མི་ཕར་ཕུར	anti-foreign	phyi mi phar phur
ཕྱི་མིག	over one's shoulder	phyi mig
ཕྱི་མིག་ལྟ་བ	look behind	phyi mig lta ba
ཕྱི་མིག་ལྟ་མི་ཤེས	doesn't look back on what we did	phyi mig lta mi shes
ཕྱི་མིག་ལྟ་བཞིན	looking back	phyi mig lta bzhin
ཕྱི་མིག་བལྟས་ནས	looking back	phyi mig bltas nas
ཕྱི་མིག་མི་ལྟ	without looking back	phyi mig mi lta
ཕྱི་མིག་ཙམ་ཡང་མི་བལྟ་བར	without a single glance back, without looking back	phyi mig tsam yang mi blta bar
ཕྱི་མིག་གཟིགས་པ	looked back phyi mig log log lta zhing bros nas song they took off, glancing back as they fled	phyi mig gzigs pa
ཕྱི་མིའི་ཐོབ་ཐང	rights of foreigners	phyi mi'i thob thang
ཕྱི་མོ	1) grandmother; 2) root and subsequent letters; 3) the original MS/ copy; 4) bzo pa'i dge rgan; 5) queen; 6) copy; 7) SK m tr meter; 8) small particle; 9) [the] last, latest	phyi mo
ཕྱི་མོ་རྣམས	those who came last	phyi mo rnams
ཕྱི་མོ་སླེབས	arrive late	phyi mo slebs
ཕྱི་མོར	late	phyi mor
ཕྱི་མོར་འགྱུར་བ	have become late	phyi mor 'gyur ba
ཕྱི་མྱུག་མ	[arch] phyogs nas 'ong ba'i beggar lady	phyi myug ma
ཕྱི་མྱུལ	wandering/ searching elsewhere/ in foreign lands phyi rol tu gnyul ba'am 'tshol ba	phyi myul
ཕྱི་སྨན	yeast	phyi sman
ཕྱི་སྨིན	late ripening	phyi smin
ཕྱི་སྨིན་འབྲས	late ripening rice	phyi smin 'bras
ཕྱི་ཙས	[arch] phyi thum	phyi tsas
ཕྱི་རྩལ	outwardly directed dynamic energy	phyi rtsal
ཕྱི་རྩི	coating	phyi rtsi
ཕྱི་རྩིས	final tally	phyi rtsis
ཕྱི་ཚན	[unit/ department of] surgery	phyi tshan
ཕྱི་ཚར	chen ma dang chun ma gnyis las chun ma'i bu rgyud	phyi tshar
ཕྱི་ཚིག	plan ("words for future" plans about the future	phyi tshig
ཕྱི་ཚིག་འགལ་བ	transition	phyi tshig 'gal ba
ཕྱི་ཚིག་འགལ་བ་སྟོན་པའི་རྒྱན	tshig snga phyi gnyis phan tshun mi mthun pa'i don gsal byed kyi phrad cig ste, rnam dbye drug pa dang, na yig //na//mi 'di sngar brtson 'grus cher med na da ni 'bad brtson chen po zhig tu gyur 'du...	phyi tshig 'gal ba ston pa'i rgyan
ཕྱི་ཚིག་ངེས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱན	tsig phyi mar nan gyis brjod pa'i phrad cig ste dper na na yig lta bu,//na	phyi tshig nges par byed pa'i rgyan
ཕྱི་ཚིགས	later time	phyi tshigs
ཕྱི་ཚིལ	body's outer fat	phyi tshil
ཕྱི་ཚིས	future means of livelihood	phyi tshis
ཕྱི་ཚུལ	disguised (deceptively, outwardly, surface, external appearance/ shape/ aspects/ form, superficial	phyi tshul
ཕྱི་ཚུལ་གྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས་རིག་པ	formal logic	phyi tshul gyi gtan tshigs rig pa
ཕྱི་ཚུལ་ཙམ་བརྗེས་པ	[merely] external/superficial change	phyi tshul tsam brjes pa
ཕྱི་ཚུལ་བཟང་མདོག་ཅན	who put on a good show	phyi tshul bzang mdog can
ཕྱི་ཚུལ་རིང་ལུགས	formalism	phyi tshul ring lugs
ཕྱི་ཚེས	future projects; x {phyi tshes grab shom drog skam nya rgya 'dra} your future projects and plans are like nets cast in a dry riverbed	phyi tshes
ཕྱི་ཚོང	export	phyi tshong
ཕྱི་ཚོང་བྱེད	export	phyi tshong byed
ཕྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	three outer vehicles of dialectics [pious attendants {nyan thos kyi theg pa} or s'r vakay na, self- centred buddhas {rang rgyal gyi theg pa} or pratyekabuddhay na and bodhisattvas {byang chub sems ...	phyi mtshan nyid kyi theg pa gsum
ཕྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པ	[3] outer vehicles of dialectics	phyi mtshan nyid theg pa
ཕྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	three outer vehicles of dialectics [pious attendants {nyan thos kyi theg pa} or s'r vakay na, self- centred buddhas {rang rgyal gyi theg pa} or pratyekabuddhay na and bodhisattvas {byang chub sems ...	phyi mtshan nyid theg pa gsum
ཕྱི་མཚན་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	outer mandala of attributes	phyi mtshan ma'i dkyil 'khor
ཕྱི་མཛེས་པོ	tawdry	phyi mdzes po
ཕྱི་རྫིག་ནང་སྟོང	outwardly elegant/ strong seeming but inwardly empty, paper tiger	phyi rdzig nang stong
ཕྱི་བཞི	[arch] bar dpang byed mkhan	phyi bzhi
ཕྱི་བཞིན	1) external appearance; 2) follow[er], pursue; 3) [go] after	phyi bzhin
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འགྲོ	follow, pursue, go after	phyi bzhin 'gro
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འགྲོ་བ	pursue	phyi bzhin 'gro ba
ཕྱི་བཞིན་དུ	in future, behind	phyi bzhin du
ཕྱི་བཞིན་ཕྱི་བཞིན	SA rjes, rjes su	phyi bzhin phyi bzhin
ཕྱི་བཞིན་ཕྱིན་པ	follow, pursue, go after	phyi bzhin phyin pa
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འབྲང	attend, follow	phyi bzhin 'brang
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འབྲང་བ	pursue, follower	phyi bzhin 'brang ba
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འབྲང་བའི་དགེ་སྦྱོང	attendant Shramana 1722	phyi bzhin 'brang ba'i dge sbyong
ཕྱི་བཞིན་འོང་བ	follow, pursue, go after	phyi bzhin 'ong ba
ཕྱི་ཟོག	imports	phyi zog
ཕྱི་ཟོག་ནང་འདྲེན	import	phyi zog nang 'dren
ཕྱི་ཟླ་དགུ་པ	september	phyi zla dgu pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་བརྒྱད་པ	august	phyi zla brgyad pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་ལྔ་པ	may	phyi zla lnga pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པ	december	phyi zla bcu gnyis pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་བཅུ་པ	october	phyi zla bcu pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་གཉིས་པ	february	phyi zla gnyis pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་དྲུག་པ	june	phyi zla drug pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་བདུན་པ	july	phyi zla bdun pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་བཞི་པ	april	phyi zla bzhi pa
ཕྱི་ཟླ་གསུམ་པ	march	phyi zla gsum pa
ཕྱི་གཟུགས	external form [gzhan rgyud dang sems can min pa dper na yul drug lta bu	phyi gzugs
ཕྱི་གཟུང་བ་ཡུལ་གྱི་ལྷ་འདྲེ	holding onto objects	phyi gzung ba yul gyi lha 'dre
ཕྱི་གཟུང་ཡུལ	the external perceived object	phyi gzung yul
ཕྱི་བཟུང་བའི་ཡུལ	outer perceived objects	phyi bzung ba'i yul
ཕྱི་བཟོ	disguised (deceptively, outwardly, surface, external appearance/ shape/ aspects/ form, superficial	phyi bzo
ཕྱི་ཡི་ཀོག	exterior shell, bark	phyi yi kog
ཕྱི་ཡི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	outer sea, ocean	phyi yi rgya mtsho
ཕྱི་ཡི་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	outer causation, external cause and effect	phyi yi rgyu 'bras
ཕྱི་ཡི་སྟོང་གཟུགས	external form of emptiness	phyi yi stong gzugs
ཕྱི་ཡི་དབང་བཅུ	the 10 outer empowerments	phyi yi dbang bcu
ཕྱི་ཡི་མི	people from abroad, foreigner, strange people	phyi yi mi
ཕྱི་ཡི་ལོག་པ་བཞི	see {log pa brgyad}	phyi yi log pa bzhi
ཕྱི་ཡི་སོ་ནམས	husbandry, farming	phyi yi so nams
ཕྱི་ཡུམ་ལྔའི་སྣང་བ	the perceptions of the outer five objects	phyi yum lnga'i snang ba
ཕྱི་ཡུལ	objectivity; body surface	phyi yul
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	objects, objective/ external things	phyi yul gyi dngos po
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	objective/ external conditions	phyi yul gyi cha rkyen
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	objective/ external laws/ essence	phyi yul gyi chos nyid
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	external/ objective world	phyi yul gyi 'jig rten
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་བདེན་དོན	external/ objective truth	phyi yul gyi bden don
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	objective reality/ situation	phyi yul gyi gnas tshul
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ་དངོས	objective reality/ situation	phyi yul gyi gnas tshul dngos
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	objectivity	phyi yul gyi rang bzhin
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་པའི་ཁམས་ལྔ	the five elements gathered by the external world; 1) {sa'i} 2) {chu'i} 3) {me'i} 4)	phyi yul gyis bsdus pa'i khams lnga
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་ལྔའི་སྣང་བ	the perception of the five outer objects	phyi yul lnga'i snang ba
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་སྣང	outer appearances of sense objects	phyi yul snang
ཕྱི་ཡུལ་རིང་ལུགས	objectivism	phyi yul ring lugs
ཕྱི་ར	outer fence/ enclosure	phyi ra
ཕྱི་རགས་ཀྱི་དབུ་མ	the coarse & outer Madhyamaka	phyi rags kyi dbu ma
ཕྱི་རབས	later generation[s]/ times, posterity, modern era	phyi rabs
ཕྱི་རབས་ཀྱི་དུས	later time	phyi rabs kyi dus
ཕྱི་རབས་ཀྱི་ནི	modern man, people of later generations	phyi rabs kyi ni
ཕྱི་རབས་ཀྱི་བུ	descendants in later generations	phyi rabs kyi bu
ཕྱི་རབས་དོན་དུ	for the sake of later generation[s]/ times/ posterity	phyi rabs don du
ཕྱི་རབས་རྣམས	contemporary people, people of later generations	phyi rabs rnams
ཕྱི་རབས་པ	people in / of future generations	phyi rabs pa
ཕྱི་རབས་པ་རྣམས	later followers	phyi rabs pa rnams
ཕྱི་རས	wiping cloth	phyi ras
ཕྱི་རིག	1) outsider rig pa; 2) tha snyad rig pa	phyi rig
ཕྱི་རིག་པའི་བོན	3 bonpo texts (kyi gto 'bum nag po, rin chen gyi kun 'bum khra'o, gtsug lag gi dpal 'bum dkar po)	phyi rig pa'i bon
ཕྱི་རིག་པའི་བོན་དེ་གསུམ	the three B"n sutras re their outer doctrine	phyi rig pa'i bon de gsum
ཕྱི་རིམ	house etc outside ra ba phyi ma'i rim pa [lcags ri phyi rim,//'dzing ra phyi rim	phyi rim
ཕྱི་རིམ་དུ	beyond	phyi rim du
ཕྱི་རིམ་པ	non-Buddhist, outsider, heterodox	phyi rim pa
ཕྱི་རུ	1) behind [a saddle etc]; 2) outside of	phyi ru
ཕྱི་རུ་དགྱེད	to draw back	phyi ru dgyed
ཕྱི་རུ་འཇོག	left behind phyi ru ljon shing mang po btsugs pa outside many trees were planted	phyi ru 'jog
ཕྱི་རུ་ཐོན	go out from phyi ru gzung yul dang nang du 'dzin pa'i	phyi ru thon
ཕྱི་རེ	the latter (last mentioned	phyi re
ཕྱི་རོ	evening	phyi ro
ཕྱི་རོལ	outward; outside, external, in the external world, the outer world, beyond, without, exterior; outside	phyi rol
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག་པོ	the six outer ayatanas	phyi rol gyi skye mched drug po
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་རྒྱུ	superficial cause of environment	phyi rol gyi 'khrul rgyu
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་འགལ་བ	external contradiction	phyi rol gyi 'gal ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	external things	phyi rol gyi dngos po
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་མཐོང་སྣང	outer appearances/ experience	phyi rol gyi mthong snang
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན	external object, existing externally and not just internally as of the nature of mind. {ldan pa} The palms of his hands and the soles of his feet are marked with a wheel	phyi rol gyi don
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་གྲུབ་པ	phyi rol gyi don grub pa zhes bya ba'i tsig le'ur byas pa	phyi rol gyi don grub pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	philosophers maintaining the reality of the external world phyi rol gyi drang srong dang mu stegs	phyi rol gyi don yod par smra ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་འདོད་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	external desirable qualities	phyi rol gyi 'dod pa'i yon tan
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས	variety of external appearances	phyi rol gyi snang ba sna tshogs
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	mi sogs gnas 'cha' sa'i yul khams	phyi rol gyi snod kyi 'jig rten
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	external connections/ relations	phyi rol gyi 'brel ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་ཟང་ཟིང	external goods earthly possessions	phyi rol gyi zang zing
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་གཟུགས	forms of the sensible world, impressions that are made on the eye	phyi rol gyi gzugs
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་གཟུགས་རྣམས	external forms phyi rol gyi gzung ba'i rnam par snang ba - appearing in the form of outer perceived [objects]	phyi rol gyi gzugs rnams
ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་ཡུལ	1) foreign countries/ lands; 2) outer objects	phyi rol gyi yul
ཕྱི་རོལ་དངོས་པོ	external things	phyi rol dngos po
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ	outside, out of doors, from without, on the outside of	phyi rol tu
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་གྱེང་བ	external distraction [rnam gyeng drug gi nang gses, yid kyi rnam par shes pa phyi 'dod pa'i yon tan lnga la gyeng ba'o]	phyi rol tu gyeng ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་སྣང་བ	appearing externally	phyi rol tu snang ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་འཕེན	be thrown away or outside	phyi rol tu 'phen
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་འབྱུང	make one's appearance	phyi rol tu 'byung
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་འབྱུང་བ	come out into the open air phyi rol tu g.yeng ba - external distraction, {rnam g.yeng drug}; external distraction	phyi rol tu 'byung ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་སེམས་རྣམ་པར་གྱེང་བ	external distraction phyi rol tu sems rnam par g.yeng ba - the attention straying outwardly	phyi rol tu sems rnam par gyeng ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་རྟག་ཆད་གཉིས	outsider eternalists and nihilists/ eternalism and nihilism (chn	phyi rol rtag chad gnyis
ཕྱི་རོལ་རྟག་ཆད་གཉིས་པ	[TRS 45-2]	phyi rol rtag chad gnyis pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ	around the circumference, around the circumstance, beyond	phyi rol du
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་གྱུར	to be far from	phyi rol du gyur
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	which is external;	phyi rol du gyur pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་གྱུར་པའི་ལྟ་ལོག་ཅན	a nonBuddhist with a wrong view	phyi rol du gyur pa'i lta log can
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་གྲུབ་པ་མེད་པ	no external existence	phyi rol du grub pa med pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་འཛིན་པ	grasp as existing externally phyi rol du g.yeng ba - outward distraction [pursuing the five sense aggregates), sgo lnga'i shes pa yul la 'jug pa] phyi rol du g.yeng ba - outward distraction phyi ro...	phyi rol du 'dzin pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་སྟོང	devoid / empty of external objects	phyi rol don stong
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	established as an external object	phyi rol don du grub pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་དོན་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of the existence of external objects, realist	phyi rol don yod par smra ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་ན	outside, beyond, outward, out of doors, from without, on the outside of	phyi rol na
ཕྱི་རོལ་ནས	outside, out of doors, from without, on the outside of	phyi rol nas
ཕྱི་རོལ་རྣམ་གྱེངས	outward distraction [one of the {dri ma drug}	phyi rol rnam gyengs
ཕྱི་རོལ་པ	nonbuddhist	phyi rol pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	non-Buddhist beliefs / philosophical positions	phyi rol pa'i grub mtha'
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་སྨྲ་བ	exponents of outsider/ non-buddhist doctrine	phyi rol pa'i grub mtha' smra ba
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་ཆོས	non buddhist religion	phyi rol pa'i chos
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་རྟོག་གེ་སྡེ་དྲུག	the six outsider schools (chn	phyi rol pa'i rtog ge sde drug
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་སྟོན་པ་སྡེ་དྲུག	the six nonBuddhist teachers: Maskarí Goshalaputra, Purnakashyapa, Sanjayivairatthiputra, Ajitakeshakambala, Kakudakatyayana, Nirgranthojnatiputra	phyi rol pa'i ston pa sde drug
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་འདོད་པ	non-Buddhist belief	phyi rol pa'i 'dod pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	five external members of the body [lag pa, rkang pa, 'pho ba, belly, 'doms privates, ngag speech	phyi rol pa'i dbang po lnga
ཕྱི་རོལ་པའི་ལུགས	heterodox traditions phyi rol pas brtags pa'i bdag rtag pa gcig	phyi rol pa'i lugs
པུ་རང་དབང་ཅན	the permanent,	pu rang dbang can
སིངུལར་ཨནད་སེལཕ༹	contained self-entity as	singular and self
ཅོནཅེཔཏུཨལིཟེད་བཡ་ནོན	Buddhists phyi rol ba'i rtag par smra ba'i rtog ge sde	conceptualized by non
ཕྱི་རོལ་མུ་སྟེགས་པ	non-Buddhist philosophies	phyi rol mu stegs pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་བསྟན་པ	doctrines such as those of the Tirthikas	phyi rol mu stegs pa'i bstan pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་གཞན་དུ	elsewhere	phyi rol gzhan du
ཕྱི་རོལ་བཟུང་བའི་ཡུལ	external perceived objects	phyi rol bzung ba'i yul
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཡུལ	objectivity, outer objects, external things	phyi rol yul
ཕྱི་རོལ་ཡུལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	forms of external objects	phyi rol yul gyi rnam pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་ལྱུལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	forms of external objects	phyi rol lyul gyi rnam pa
ཕྱི་རོལ་སོ་སྐྱེ	dge rtsa kun tu chad pa	phyi rol so skye
ཕྱི་རླུང	external prana which is the pranas of the 5 elements	phyi rlung
ཕྱི་ལ	without, after, afterwards	phyi la
ཕྱི་ལ་ཁྱི་བཏང	let out the dog 1724	phyi la khyi btang
ཕྱི་ལ་སྒྲོག	publicize, make public	phyi la sgrog
ཕྱི་ལ་སྒྲོད་པ	go outside	phyi la sgrod pa
ཕྱི་ལ་ཉག	{mar kha lgro dong byad pa}	phyi la nyag
ཕྱི་ལ་སྟོན་པ	expose, exposed to outward show	phyi la ston pa
ཕྱི་ལ་འཕུར	flew behind	phyi la 'phur
ཕྱི་ལ་འབྲང	x {sems rnam rtog gi phyi la 'brang} while your mind wanders off after your thoughts	phyi la 'brang
ཕྱི་ལ་འབྲངས་པ	followed behind	phyi la 'brangs pa
ཕྱི་ལ་ཤིག	shifting, moving backwards, withdrawing, retreating	phyi la shig
ཕྱི་ལ་ཤིག་རྒྱག	shift, move backwards, withdraw, retreat	phyi la shig rgyag
ཕྱི་ལ་གསལ་བ	reveal	phyi la gsal ba
ཕྱི་ལག	outsider/ foreign bad person/ enemy	phyi lag
ཕྱི་ལག་ནག་ནང	discuss out of public view	phyi lag nag nang
ཕྱི་ལག་ནག་ནང་འབྲེལ་བ	have confidential conference	phyi lag nag nang 'brel ba
ཕྱི་ལག་ནང་སྦྲེལ	have a confidential discussion	phyi lag nang sbrel
ཕྱི་ལག་ནང་ལག་འབྲེལ་བ	have a confidential discussion	phyi lag nang lag 'brel ba
ཕྱི་ལང་མཐོ་བ	[arch] of bad nature	phyi lang mtho ba
ཕྱི་ལང་བྱེད	[arch] sngar nyes byed pa'i steng du yang nyes pa byed pa	phyi lang byed
ཕྱི་ལན་སྐུར་བ	rang nyid gang nas yong sa der phar phyir log tu lan skur ba	phyi lan skur ba
ཕྱི་ལའི་གཅིན	human blood	phyi la'i gcin
ཕྱི་ལིང་ཅན	european	phyi ling can
ཕྱི་ལུགས	alien/ foreign/ western customs/ traditions	phyi lugs
ཕྱི་ལུགས་གྱི་འཆིང་རྒྱ	alien/ foreign/ western doctrines/ conventions	phyi lugs gyi 'ching rgya
ཕྱི་ལུགས་བྱོན་ཆས	western-style clothes	phyi lugs byon chas
ཕྱི་ལུགས་སྨན	foreign/ western med.	phyi lugs sman
ཕྱི་ལུགས་སྨན་བཅོས	foreign/ western med.	phyi lugs sman bcos
ཕྱི་ལུགས་སྨན་པ	foreign/ western med.	phyi lugs sman pa
ཕྱི་ལེགས་ནང་བཙོག	phyi nang mi 'dra ba'i ngan pa	phyi legs nang btsog
ཕྱི་ལེབ	felt rug	phyi leb
ཕྱི་ལོ	the year according to the Roman calendar	phyi lo
ཕྱི་ལོག	back, return	phyi log
ཕྱི་ལོག་ལྟ་བ	turn one's head	phyi log lta ba
ཕྱི་ལོགས	outside, exterior, outer	phyi logs
ཕྱི་ལོགས་ཀྱི	exterior, external, foreign	phyi logs kyi
ཕྱི་ལོགས་ཀྱི་དགྲ	foreign/ outside enemy	phyi logs kyi dgra
ཕྱི་ལོགས་ཀྱི་ཤུན་པགས	outer husk/ skin/ rind	phyi logs kyi shun pags
ཕྱི་ལོགས་དང་ནང་ལོགས	outside and inside	phyi logs dang nang logs
ཕྱི་ལོགས་སུ	subsequently, evanescent, outside, on the outside	phyi logs su
ཕྱི་ལོགས་སུ་ཐོན	went outside	phyi logs su thon
ཕྱི་ལོགས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	subsequent arising	phyi logs su byung ba
ཕྱི་ལོང་རུས་འབུར	rkang ske'i phyi rgyab kyi ankle joint rdog	phyi long rus 'bur
ཕྱི་ཤ	1 gos kyi phyi sha; 2) lus kyi phyi'i sha,//. outside, cover (of a clothing	phyi sha
ཕྱི་ཤིག	shifting, moving backwards, withdrawing, retreating	phyi shig
ཕྱི་ཤིག་རྒྱག	shift, move backwards, withdraw, retreat	phyi shig rgyag
ཕྱི་ཤུན	outer husk	phyi shun
ཕྱི་ཤེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, shes bya phyi rol gyi dngos po'i 'pho 'gyur sogs kyi gnas tshul shes par byed pa'i rgyu'i rgyan zhig // phyi bshol, phyir 'gyangs pa'am phyir 'then,//de ring gi...	phyi shes byed kyi rgyu
ཕྱི་ཤོས	behind, later, latest	phyi shos
ཕྱི་བཤོལ	SA phyir log rgyab pa	phyi bshol
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་མཁན	who postpone [practicing the sacred Dharma]	phyi bshol mkhan
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་གྱི་དབང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	caught up in procrastination	phyi bshol gyi dbang du 'gro ba
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་གྱི་དབང་དུ་སོང	caught up in procrastination	phyi bshol gyi dbang du song
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་གནས་སྐབ	temporary postponement	phyi bshol gnas skab
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་བ	to procrastinate	phyi bshol ba
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་བྱས་པ	to postpone	phyi bshol byas pa
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་བྱེད	procrastinate, put off, postpone, turn, phyir log rgyab	phyi bshol byed
ཕྱི་བཤོལ་བློ་སྣ་བསྟུང	A mind without postponing	phyi bshol blo sna bstung
ཕྱི་ས	excrements, shit	phyi sa
ཕྱི་ས་ཁང	skyag gcin 'dor sa'i khang pa	phyi sa khang
ཕྱི་སེམས་སྡེ	the outer Mind Section	phyi sems sde
ཕྱི་སོ	sa mtshams phyi'i gnas tshul mel tse byed mi	phyi so
ཕྱི་སོག	Outer Mongolia [sog byang ma ste sngar krung go'i mnga' khongs sa cha yin zhing, da lta mong gol mi dmangs spyi mthun rgyal khab ces bya'o]	phyi sog
ཕྱི་སྲིད	foreign policy	phyi srid
ཕྱི་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས	foreign policy, foreign office/ bureau	phyi srid las khungs
ཕྱི་སྲིན	vermin living on the skin	phyi srin
ཕྱི་སྲོལ	present/ future customs/ tradition	phyi srol
ཕྱི་སློང	external upheaval	phyi slong
ཕྱི་གསལ	outward clarity; outer luminosity, outward clarity [Syn {phyir gsal}; outer/ outward/ external(ized) illumination	phyi gsal
ཕྱི་གསལ་ནང་གསལ	outward and inward luminosity	phyi gsal nang gsal
ཕྱི་གསལ་ནང་གསལ་བའི་ཤེལ་དམ	bottle/ crystal seal w everything external and inner crystal clear/ clear and lucid	phyi gsal nang gsal ba'i shel dam
ཕྱི་གསལ་སྣང་བའི་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	eight gates manifesting as outward luminosity	phyi gsal snang ba'i sgo brgyad
ཕྱི་གསུམ	outer precepts	phyi gsum
ཕྱིགས	(not in das)	phyigs
ཕྱིང	{a'phyings}. ?? felt	phying
ཕྱིང་དཀར	White felt	phying dkar
ཕྱིང་དཀར་དོན་ཡོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Chingkar Donyö Dorje; Meaningful Vajra Clad in White Felt	phying dkar don yod rdo rje
ཕྱིང་དཀར་བ	place in tibet	phying dkar ba
ཕྱིང་གུར	felt tent	phying gur
ཕྱིང་གོས	felt-cloth	phying gos
ཕྱིང་འགག	chuba w/o sleeves/ blanket made from layers of wool pressed together	phying 'gag
ཕྱིང་སྟན	felt seat/ carpet	phying stan
ཕྱིང་ཐོ	lumpy felt	phying tho
ཕྱིང་དྲིལ	phying pa bcags zin pa'am, snam bu chags bcags zin pa ma skam gong la phying dril byed pa zhig	phying dril
ཕྱིང་གདན	felt seat/ cushion/ rug	phying gdan
ཕྱིང་འདུད་པ	make felt	phying 'dud pa
ཕྱིང་པ	felt. [like cloth. not woven. fibres are suspended in water then pressed together.]	phying pa
ཕྱིང་པ་བ	felt-garment wearer	phying pa ba
ཕྱིང་བ	felt	phying ba
ཕྱིང་བ་སྟག་རྩེ	fortress in 'phyong rgyas valley	phying ba stag rtse
ཕྱིང་བ་པ	felt-wearer	phying ba pa
ཕྱིང་བུ	matted	phying bu
ཕྱིང་བྱ་སྟག་རྩེ་རྫོང	district in lho kha	phying bya stag rtse rdzong
ཕྱིང་དབར་སྟག་རྩེ་རྫོང	{phying dbar stag rtse rdzong [in 'phyong rgyas rdzong ancient mkhar rdzong]	phying dbar stag rtse rdzong
ཕྱིང་དམར	red felt [rug]	phying dmar
ཕྱིང་ཞྭ	felt hat	phying zhwa
ཕྱིང་གཟར	felt saddle blanket	phying gzar
ཕྱིང་སང	CH minister	phying sang
ཕྱིང་སར	CH minister	phying sar
ཕྱིང་ཧྲུལ་གནམ་འཕྱར	ngan mtshang khrom 'don gyi dpe	phying hrul gnam 'phyar
ཕྱིང་ལྷམ	felt boots	phying lham
ཕྱིངས་པ་ཅན	wearing bad-colored clothes	phyings pa can
ཕྱིད	1) after, following; 2) [due to snow or smoke etc when the eye waters pains, becomes red, and 1 almost is blind for a few days] get frostbite,	phyid
ཕྱིད་ཉིན	the day after tomorrow	phyid nyin
ཕྱིད་སྣང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	the semi-apparent Nirmanakaya	phyid snang sprul sku
ཕྱིད་པ	1) ldeng ba, 'phyong ba [p 'byid pa]; 2) [arch] rgan po retard, prolong,	phyid pa
ཕྱིད་མི་ཚེ་མ	losing means of livelihood	phyid mi tshe ma
ཕྱིད་ཚེ་མ	miserable, unhappy	phyid tshe ma
ཕྱིད་ཟས་འཚོ་བ་གར་ལྟ་བ	looking for where they might find food and livelihood	phyid zas 'tsho ba gar lta ba
ཕྱིན	later, afterwards, pass, cross, go through, what is to come [p 'gro] went, hereafter, after that, from here on, from now on, hence forth, since, as long as, later, future, once, outside, once ---, --,	phyin
ཝཧེནེབེ༹ར	-,--, w/o exception when --,-	whenever
ཕྱིན་ཀ་ལོག	[arch] erroneous, mistaken, wrong phyin ci log	phyin ka log
ཕྱིན་ག་ལོག	erroneous, mistaken, wrong phyin ci log	phyin ga log
ཕྱིན་གྱི་ལོག་པ	see {phyin gyis log pa}	phyin gyi log pa
ཕྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་བཀའ་གསུམ	(chn	phyin gyis brlabs pa'i bka' gsum
ཕྱིན་དགྲ	foreign enemy	phyin dgra
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག	absence of perverted views, in the right way, incontrovertible, unperverted, correct, unerring	phyin ci ma log
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་འཆད	expounded without distortion	phyin ci ma log 'chad
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ	unmistaken (opinion/ position); isc.incontrovertible; isc. genuine	phyin ci ma log pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	undistorted suchness	phyin ci ma log pa de bzhin nyid
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	ma nor ba'i de bzhin nyid	phyin ci ma log pa yongs su grub pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པའི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	unmistaken nature/ suchness	phyin ci ma log pa'i de bzhin nyid
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པའི་དོན	true meaning	phyin ci ma log pa'i don
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པའི་བློ	unmistaken mind/ thought/ idea	phyin ci ma log pa'i blo
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པའི་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	{gzung 'dzin gnyis kyis stong pa'i shul na gnyis med kyi shes pa rang rig bden pa rdzas su grub pa zhig go} the unmistaken absolute	phyin ci ma log pa'i yongs grub
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པར	unmistakenly	phyin ci ma log par
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ	unmistakenly establish	phyin ci ma log par sgrub pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	perverse/ perverted/ wayward/ wrong/ false distorted/ reversed/ opposite/ mistaken/ incorrect/ deceptive/ fallacious [view], misconception, [of the nature of a] perverted view, reverse, perversion,...	phyin ci log
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་དངོས་པོ་བཞི	[TRS 32-6]	phyin ci log gi dngos po bzhi
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་རྟོག་པ	distorted thinking	phyin ci log gi rtog pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་ལྟ་བ་ཅན	harbor the mistaken view	phyin ci log gi lta ba can
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་ལྟ་བ་བཞི	the four wrong views/ perversions/ misapprehensions	phyin ci log gi lta ba bzhi
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་ཐེག་པ	{log pa'i theg pa rtag chad kyi rang bzhin} 1726	phyin ci log gi theg pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གི་བློ་ཅན	of distorted mental powers	phyin ci log gi blo can
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་གིས་སླད་དེ	corrupt, depraved	phyin ci log gis slad de
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་བརྗོད	blasphemy	phyin ci log brjod
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ	distortedly, misconstrued, erroneous	phyin ci log tu
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	[one who is] perverted, in error; one who is perverted, in error	phyin ci log tu gyur pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་འགྲོ	go wrongly, be counter/opposed to	phyin ci log tu 'gro
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སྒྲུབ	reverse	phyin ci log tu sgrub
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སོང	become perverted / opposite	phyin ci log tu song
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སོང་ནས	contradict; x {lag len phyin ci log tu song nas} what they actually do thus contradict	phyin ci log tu song nas
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་རྟག་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ	erroneous[ly] impermanent [-ce] and so forth	phyin ci log rtag pa la sogs pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་དང་ལྡན་པ	[one who is] perverted, in error	phyin ci log dang ldan pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་དུ་འཛིན་པ	perceiving incorrectly	phyin ci log du 'dzin pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	mistaken [thd]	phyin ci log pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པའི་འགྲོ་ལམ	wrong road	phyin ci log pa'i 'gro lam
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པའི་གཏམ	wrong talk	phyin ci log pa'i gtam
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པའི་ལྟ་བ	wrong view	phyin ci log pa'i lta ba
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	wrong behavior/ action	phyin ci log pa'i spyod pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པའི་ལམ	wrong road/ path	phyin ci log pa'i lam
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་མི་རྟག་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ	erroneous[ly] impermanent [-ce] and so forth	phyin ci log mi rtag pa la sogs pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་བཞི	the four misapprehensions, four perversions: 1) {mi rtag pa rtag pa} mistaking what is impermanent for permanent. 2) {dka' ba sla ba} mistaking what is ill for what is ease. 3) {dgag med pa bdag pa...	phyin ci log bzhi
ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་བཞི་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing the four wrong views/ perversions/ misapprehensions	phyin ci log bzhi dang ldan pa
ཕྱིན་ཅི་སློག	pervert, distort, do things in the opposite way	phyin ci slog
ཕྱིན་ཆད	thereafter/ henceforth; hereafter, from now on; from now on, henceforth; future; hereafter, after that, from here on, from now on, hence forth, since, as long as, later, future, once	phyin chad
ཕྱིན་ཆད་དེ་ལྟར་མ་བྱེད	hereafter don't do that	phyin chad de ltar ma byed
ཕྱིན་ཆད་འདི་འདྲ་མ་བྱེད	from now on don't do that	phyin chad 'di 'dra ma byed
ཕྱིན་ཆད་སྡོམ	bound over for the time to come	phyin chad sdom
ཕྱིན་ཆི་མ་ལོག་པའི་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	nonerroneous perfect establishment	phyin chi ma log pa'i yongs grub
ཕྱིན་ཆོག་པ	to have access, permission to go	phyin chog pa
ཕྱིན་དང་ལྡན་པ	erroneous, mistaken	phyin dang ldan pa
ཕྱིན་དན	late propagation	phyin dan
ཕྱིན་དྲུག	the six paramitas	phyin drug
ཕྱིན་དྲུག་གི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	the four special dharmas of the six paramitas [phar phyin rang rang gi mi mthun pa'i phyogs dang bral ba dang, grogs 'khor gsum mi rtog pa'i shes rab kyis zin pa, byed las gzhan gyi 'dod don rdzogs...	phyin drug gi khyad chos bzhi
ཕྱིན་དྲུག་གི་ཕན་ཡོན་བཞི	the four beneficial qualities of the six paramitas [gzhan don rdzogs byang la dmigs pas dmigs pa rgya che ba dang, lan dang rnam smin la re ba sogs med pas kun slong zang zing med pa, sems can tham...	phyin drug gi phan yon bzhi
ཕྱིན་ནམ	did [he] arrive?	phyin nam
ཕྱིན་པ	pass, cross, go through, set out, go, reach, come to, arrive at	phyin pa
ཕྱིན་པ་ཡིན	he has gone, has departed, went there already	phyin pa yin
ཕྱིན་པ་ཡོད	he has gone	phyin pa yod
ཕྱིན་པ་སོངས་བ་ཕེབས་པ	proceeded, went, gone	phyin pa songs ba phebs pa
ཕྱིན་པའི་དུས་མེད	never reach the destination	phyin pa'i dus med
ཕྱིན་ཕྱིན་སྟོང་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	returning	phyin phyin stong log byed pa
ཕྱིན་ཕྱོད	#	phyin phyod
ཕྱིན་རྩེག་པ་མེད	there was no outside wall	phyin rtseg pa med
ཕྱིན་རྩེག་པ་མེད་དེ	as there was no wall outside	phyin rtseg pa med de
ཕྱིན་ཚར་བ	ago	phyin tshar ba
ཕྱིན་ཚོང	business/ foreign trade	phyin tshong
ཕྱིན་ཞིང	again	phyin zhing
ཕྱིན་ཟིན་པ	gone left went	phyin zin pa
ཕྱིན་རླབས	great blessings	phyin rlabs
ཕྱིན་ལས	outside business, foreign affairs	phyin las
ཕྱིན་ལས་ལྔ	(chn	phyin las lnga
ཕྱིབ་ཤོལ་དུ	R/GD: later, slowly. E.g., KKP, 252.19. N.B.: there is no entry for this term in CM, MG, or Das. Indeed, there are no entries under "phyib" in any of these sources, but R/GD seemed to recognize it....	phyib shol du
ཕྱིམ་བྲེད	PM, [in the] afternoon	phyim bred
ཕྱིའི	the outer, outside, foreign external	phyi'i
ཕྱིའི་དཀར་གསུམ	the external three whites	phyi'i dkar gsum
ཕྱིའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	outer sense bases/ ayatanas ['byung ba chen po bzhi dag rgyur byas pa'i bstan yod thogs bcas kyi gzugs sgra dri ro reg sogs bstan med thogs bcas kyi gzugs rnams so	phyi'i skye mched
ཕྱིའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	six outer sense bases/ ayatanas [skye mched bcu gnyis	phyi'i skye mched drug
ཀྱི་ནང་གསེས་ཤིག་སྟེ	gzugs, sgra, dri, ro, reg chos bcas dmigs pa'i cha nas shes pa skye ba'i sgor gyur pa drug go	kyi nang gses shig ste
ཕྱིའི་ཁམས	outer elements	phyi'i khams
ཕྱིའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six external dhatus [khams bco brgyad kyi nang gses shig	phyi'i khams drug
ཕྱིའི་གྲུལ་བུམ་ལྷ་ལྔ	(chn	phyi'i grul bum lha lnga
ཕྱིའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	salt outer ocean	phyi'i rgya mtsho
ཕྱིའི་རྒྱག་སྐྱོར	foreign/ outside support phyi'i rgyu gzhan cung zad ston pa'i srid	phyi'i rgyag skyor
ཕྱིའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡི་དྭགས	pretas w external obscuration	phyi'i sgrib pa can gyi yi dwags
ཕྱིའི་མངར་གསུམ	the external three sweets (chn	phyi'i mngar gsum
ཕྱིའི་ལྕགས་རི	the outer iron mountains [surrounding the four continents]. the outer mountain wall, made of iron	phyi'i lcags ri
ཕྱིའི་ཆོས	outer phenomena [not embraced by a consciousness]. phenomena, origination of outer.[4,2-3]	phyi'i chos
ཕྱིའི་མཆོད་པ	formal worshipping	phyi'i mchod pa
ཕྱིའི་རྟགས་ཐབས་གསུམ	{lus stong pa snyam byed} two {ye med pa snya ma byed} three {dum bu tsam las med pa snyam byed}	phyi'i rtags thabs gsum
ཕྱིའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	outer interdependence/ concerning inanimate matter	phyi'i rten 'brel
ཕྱིའི་སྟེ་བརྒྱད	1) {lha'i dbang po brgya byin}. 2) {lha min dbang po thag bzang rin} 3) {ma'i ma ci ljon pa rta mgo can} 4) {gnod sbyin gang ba bzang po} 5) {mkha' lding gser mig 'khyil ba}	phyi'i ste brgyad
ཕྱིའི་ཐེག་པ་གསུམ	the outer three yanas/ vehicles [nyan rang byang gsum gyi theg pa'o	phyi'i theg pa gsum
ཕྱིའི་དུར་ཁྲོད་བརྒྱད	{dur khrod chen po brgyad}	phyi'i dur khrod brgyad
ཕྱིའི་དུས་འཁོར	gza' skar sogs phyi snod kyi 'jig rten te dus 'khor phyi nang gzhan gsum gyi ya gyal zhig	phyi'i dus 'khor
ཕྱིའི་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	gsang sngags sgrub pa'i sbyor ba bcu ste gzugs can dang gzugs can ma yin pa'i dkyil 'khor dang, dang po sbyor ba sogs kyi ting nge 'dzin, lha la rgyas 'debs pa'i phyag rgya, stangs stabs 'dug stang...	phyi'i de nyid bcu
ཕྱིའི་དོན	external object	phyi'i don
ཕྱིའི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	external vajra and ghanta [drang don gyi rdor dril te, mtshan ma rdzas kyi rdor dril	phyi'i rdor dril
ཕྱིའི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	the 8 outer classes	phyi'i sde brgyad
ཕྱིའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	external appearance	phyi'i rnam 'gyur
ཕྱིའི་སྣང་བ	external appearances	phyi'i snang ba
ཕྱིའི་བར་ཆད	Outer obstacles. Disturbances in the four elements of the world	phyi'i bar chad
ཕྱིའི་བེམ་པོ	external matter	phyi'i bem po
ཕྱིའི་བླ་མ	external guru, outer guru	phyi'i bla ma
ཕྱིའི་དབང་སྒྱུར་ཡུལ	colony	phyi'i dbang sgyur yul
ཕྱིའི་མི	foreigners	phyi'i mi
ཕྱིའི་རྨས་སྐྱོན	external wounds	phyi'i rmas skyon
ཕྱིའི་རྩ་བརྒྱད	(chn	phyi'i rtsa brgyad
ཕྱིའི་རྩ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 outer principal (medicines,	phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad
ཕྱིའི་རྩོལ་བ	external effort	phyi'i rtsol ba
ཕྱིའི་ཚོར་བ	lus kyi tshor ba dang, dbang po'i tshor ba'o	phyi'i tshor ba
ཕྱིའི་མཚན་མ	sngo ser sogs kha dog dang, dbyibs kyi khyad par lta bu	phyi'i mtshan ma
ཕྱིའི་རྫས	external substance	phyi'i rdzas
ཕྱིའི་གཟུགས	external visual objects	phyi'i gzugs
ཕྱིའི་ཡུལ་དྲུག	provinces of the 6 senses phyi'i yul nam mkha' sprin dengs la gtod pas rig pa rang sa sangs phyed la snang	phyi'i yul drug
བའི་འབེལ་མྱུར	the essential which intensifies the appearance of awareness, pure as it is, by focusing on the outer object which is like the vanishing of clouds in the sky [Longchenpa, treasury of the supreme veh...	ba'i 'bel myur
ཕྱིའི་རང་རྣམ	outer biography	phyi'i rang rnam
ཕྱིའི་རིག་པ	profane literature, heterodox literature	phyi'i rig pa
ཕྱིའི་རོགས་རམ	foreign aid	phyi'i rogs ram
ཕྱིའི་རླུང་ལྔ	the five outer winds, [Syn {rtsa ba'i rlung lnga}	phyi'i rlung lnga
ཕྱིའི་ལས	outer activities	phyi'i las
ཕྱིའི་ལས་འགན	outside/ foreign affairs/ relations	phyi'i las 'gan
ཕྱིའི་ལུས	rnam par shes pas ma zin pa gzugs sgra dang rtsi shing la sogs pa'i bem gzugs snod kyi 'jig rten	phyi'i lus
ཕྱིའི་སོ་རྣམས	husbandry, farming	phyi'i so rnams
ཕྱིའི་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	(chn	phyi'i lha srin sde brgyad
ཕྱིའི་ལྷོང	external dangers (spirits, enemies, robbers, wild animals, fire, water, wind)	phyi'i lhong
ཕྱིར་བཀུག་པ	curb	phyir bkug pa
ཕྱིར་བཀོང་བ	countermand	phyir bkong ba
ཕྱིར་སྐུམ་པ	phyir 'then rgyag pa	phyir skum pa
ཕྱིར་སྐྱུར་བ	cast out	phyir skyur ba
ཕྱིར་སྐྱེལ་བ	send back	phyir skyel ba
ཕྱིར་སྐྱོད	phyi logs su 'gro ba,//rta bzhon nas phyir skyod byed pa	phyir skyod
ཕྱིར་སྐྲོད	drive out	phyir skrod
ཕྱིར་སྐྲོད་གཏོང	kick/ cast out, expel, deport, banish	phyir skrod gtong
ཕྱིར་བསྐྱོད	go outside/ abroad	phyir bskyod
ཕྱིར་བསྐྱོད་ལག་ཁྱེར	passport	phyir bskyod lag khyer
ཕྱིར་བསྐྲད	turn out, expel phyir bskrad} -} - kicked/ cast out, expelled, deported, banished	phyir bskrad
ཕྱིར་བསྐྲད་གཏོང	kicked/ cast out, expelled, deported, banished	phyir bskrad gtong
ཕྱིར་བསྐྲད་པ	cast out	phyir bskrad pa
ཕྱིར་ཁྱེད་པ	bow without uncovering one's head (a less humble way of saluting)	phyir khyed pa
ཕྱིར་འཁྱལ་བ	to deviate	phyir 'khyal ba
ཕྱིར་དགྱེ	to open out	phyir dgye
ཕྱིར་དགྱེད	bend backwards	phyir dgyed
ཕྱིར་འགུགས	call back, recall, summon to return	phyir 'gugs
ཕྱིར་འགྱང་ན	if one defers it	phyir 'gyang na
ཕྱིར་འགྱངས	* procrastinate, put off, delay, postpone	phyir 'gyangs
ཕྱིར་འགྱུར	it becomes the outside	phyir 'gyur
ཕྱིར་འགྱེད	dmag sogs phar 'gyed pa'am spro ba,//rtsod lan tsa po zhig phyir 'gyed pa,//drag po'i dpung sde phyir 'gyed kyis rgol lan sprod pa	phyir 'gyed
ཕྱིར་འགྲོ	go outside/ abroad	phyir 'gro
ཕྱིར་འགྲོ་དངོས་རྫས	export products	phyir 'gro dngos rdzas
ཕྱིར་འགྲོ་བ	exhaling	phyir 'gro ba
ཕྱིར་འགྲོས	tshur log //dgra nyen che chung gang zhig yod kyang phyir 'gros gtan nas mi rgyag	phyir 'gros
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ	outside aggressor, foreign foe	phyir rgol
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་གྱི་དྲི་བ	questions of the questioner in a debate	phyir rgol gyi dri ba
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་བ	hostile forces	phyir rgol ba
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་བའི་གནོད་པ	an external danger against which every one tries to protect himself by charms and witchcraft	phyir rgol ba'i gnod pa
ཕྱིར་རྒོལ་བྱེད	[be a] antagonist/ opponent, outside/ foreign foe, counterattack, questioner in a debate	phyir rgol byed
ཕྱིར་སྒྲོད	drive out	phyir sgrod
ཕྱིར་བསྒྲལ	pha rol tu bskrad pa'am bton pa,//lug lpags gyon pa'i spyang ki lug khyu'i nang nas phyir bsgral ba,//gru gzings btang nas 'grul pa rnams chu klung chen po'i phyir bsgral ba	phyir bsgral
ཕྱིར་མངོན་པ	show, display	phyir mngon pa
ཕྱིར་བཅིལ་བ	obstruct, hinder	phyir bcil ba
ཕྱིར་བཅིལ་བར་བྱེད	put hindrance to	phyir bcil bar byed
ཕྱིར་བཅིལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	obstruct	phyir bcil bar byed pa
ཕྱིར་བཅོས	repair	phyir bcos
ཕྱིར་བཅོས་ཀྱི་གཞི	grounds of repairing [broken vows] ['dul ba gzhi'i phyir bcos kyi gzhi	phyir bcos kyi gzhi
ཕྱིར་བཅོས་ཀྱི་གཞི་བདུན	the 7 grounds of repairing [broken vows]	phyir bcos kyi gzhi bdun
ཕྱིར་བཅོས་པ	reply, return	phyir bcos pa
ཕྱིར་བཅོས་པའི་གཞི	grounds of repairing [broken vows]	phyir bcos pa'i gzhi
ཕྱིར་མཅི་ལྡོག་པའི་དད་པ	irreversible faith [dad pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, skyid sdug legs nyes mtho dman cir 'gyur rung dkon mchog la yid ches byed shes kyi dad pa'o	phyir mci ldog pa'i dad pa
ཕྱིར་ཆོད	gzhan la chod pa	phyir chod
ཕྱིར་ཆོས	dharma, for the sake of, in order to, because	phyir chos
ཕྱིར་མཆེད་པ	1) increase again; 2) tell a secret to outsiders 1729	phyir mched pa
ཕྱིར་འཆོས	phyir bcos dang 'dra phyir bsnyil ba, 1 phyi rol tu bskrad pa,//mi ngan rnams phyir bsnyil nas gsar brje'i dpung sde dvangs gtsang gcig gyur bzo ba; 2) mar bshig pa'am, bsgyel ba,//lcags ri rnying ...	phyir 'chos
ཕྱིར་འཇིལ་བ	banish out, expel	phyir 'jil ba
ཕྱིར་འཇོག་པ	leave behind/ at home lay up/ aside	phyir 'jog pa
ཕྱིར་ཉིན	the next day	phyir nyin
ཕྱིར་སྙིལ	expel	phyir snyil
ཕྱིར་སྙིལ་བ	expel, banish, exile	phyir snyil ba
ཕྱིར་བསྙེལ	bend backwards	phyir bsnyel
ཕྱིར་གཏོང	let out	phyir gtong
ཕྱིར་བཏང	let out	phyir btang
ཕྱིར་རྟེན་ཙོང་པའི་གྲལ་རིམ	[mi ser spel yul dang mi ser spel yul phyed tsam gyi rgyal khab nang du btsan rgyal ring lugs dang ngan 'brel byas thog btsan rgyal ring lugs kyi btsan 'dzul srid jus la zhabs 'degs zhu mkhan 'byor...	phyir rten tsong pa'i gral rim
ཕྱིར་རྟེན་ཚོང་པ	* comprador, chief native servant/ buyer/ business person in European business house	phyir rten tshong pa
ཕྱིར་རྟེན་ཚོང་པའི་གྲལ་རིམ	* comprador, chief native servant/ buyer in European business house	phyir rten tshong pa'i gral rim
ཕྱིར་རྟེན་ཚོང་པའི་མ་རྩ	* comprador/ chief native servant/ buyer/ business person in European business house capital	phyir rten tshong pa'i ma rtsa
ཕྱིར་ལྟ་བ	1) phyi ltas slog pa; 2) blo kha phyir phyogs pa	phyir lta ba
ཕྱིར་སྟོན་མཁན	extrovert	phyir ston mkhan
ཕྱིར་སྟོན་པ	divulge, reveal	phyir ston pa
ཕྱིར་བལྟས	dispersed	phyir bltas
ཕྱིར་བལྟས་པ	directed outwards	phyir bltas pa
ཕྱིར་བསྟན	turn inside out	phyir bstan
ཕྱིར་བསྟན་ནས	turned inside out	phyir bstan nas
ཕྱིར་ཐལ་ནང་ཐལ	pierce/ move freely to and from	phyir thal nang thal
ཕྱིར་ཐོན	projection, to come out from, to come out of	phyir thon
ཕྱིར་ཐོན་པ	1) phyi logs su phyin pa'am song ba; 2) phyi la mngon pa'am gsal ba	phyir thon pa
ཕྱིར་ཐོབ་པ	regain	phyir thob pa
ཕྱིར་འཐེན	withdrawal, withdraw, pulling back	phyir 'then
ཕྱིར་འཐེན་གནང	withdraw, pull back, recall, retreat, postpone	phyir 'then gnang
ཕྱིར་འཐེན་བྱས་ཟིན་པ	withdrew	phyir 'then byas zin pa
ཕྱིར་འཐེན་བྱེད	withdraw, pull back, recall, retreat, postpone	phyir 'then byed
ཕྱིར་འཐེན་བྱེད་པ	boycott, repeal, retreat, revoke, withdraw	phyir 'then byed pa
ཕྱིར་འཐོན་པ	come forth	phyir 'thon pa
ཕྱིར་དུ	because of, on account of, by, through, for the sake of, in order to	phyir du
ཕྱིར་དོང་བ	phyi rol tu song ba	phyir dong ba
ཕྱིར་དོན་པ	1) coming out, emerging; 2) externally manifest	phyir don pa
ཕྱིར་དོན་པའི་མྱུ་གུ	emerging sprout	phyir don pa'i myu gu
ཕྱིར་དོན་བ	come out of, go out	phyir don ba
ཕྱིར་དྲང་བ	1) against the grain; 2) disagreeable, hostile	phyir drang ba
ཕྱིར་བདས	drive out from	phyir bdas
ཕྱིར་འདུག་པ	remain behind, at home, lay aside, lay up	phyir 'dug pa
ཕྱིར་འདེང་བ	return	phyir 'deng ba
ཕྱིར་འདེབས	to follow	phyir 'debs
ཕྱིར་འདོན	emission	phyir 'don
ཕྱིར་འདྲི་བ	gtam tshur dris pa'i lan du phar 'dri ba'am, phar dris pa'i lan du tshur 'dri ba gang rung	phyir 'dri ba
ཕྱིར་འདྲེན་པ	export, [import]	phyir 'dren pa
ཕྱིར་རྡེག་པ	if someone beats one, beat them back	phyir rdeg pa
ཕྱིར་ལྡོག་པ	return, come/ turn back	phyir ldog pa
ཕྱིར་ལྡོག་པ་མེད་པ	never turning back	phyir ldog pa med pa
ཕྱིར་ལྡོག་པའི་ལམ	the way back, the return	phyir ldog pa'i lam
ཕྱིར་སྡོད	living abroad	phyir sdod
ཕྱིར་སྡོད་གཞུང་ཚབ	government representatives living abroad	phyir sdod gzhung tshab
ཕྱིར་སྡོད་རང་མི	citizens/ nationals [of 1's own country] living abroad	phyir sdod rang mi
ཕྱིར་བསྡུ	recall, call back [people/ products]	phyir bsdu
ཕྱིར་བསྡུ་བྱེད	recall, call back	phyir bsdu byed
ཕྱིར་ན	in order to, for the sake of	phyir na
ཕྱིར་ནང	next morning [KNT]	phyir nang
ཕྱིར་ནུད	1) postpone, delay [las mjug bsgril rgyu phyir nud song]; 2) mdun du 'gro bzhin par phyir 'then brgyab pa,//dmag 'thab drag po brgyab par brten dgra bo bzo lta shor nas phyir nud rgyag dgos byung s...	phyir nud
ཕྱིར་ནུད་བྱེད	1) phar 'gyangs,//las mjug bsgril rgyu phyir nud song; 2) mdun du 'gro bzhin par phyir 'then brgyab pa,//dmag 'thab drag po brgyab par brten dgra bo bzo lta shor nas phyir nud rgyag dgos byung song...	phyir nud byed
ཕྱིར་ནུར	yield, fall back, give way, cede	phyir nur
ཕྱིར་སྣང་དུ་ཤར་བ	manifests so as to be perceived outwardly	phyir snang du shar ba
ཕྱིར་བསྣུར	time phyi 'gyang byed pa	phyir bsnur
ཕྱིར་པོ	take out	phyir po
ཕྱིར་སྤྲོ་བ	{phyir 'phro ba} to proliferate/ unfold/ extend outward; isc. to be drawn out to/ outward	phyir spro ba
ཕྱིར་སྤྲོད	return, give back	phyir sprod
ཕྱིར་སྤྲོད་པ	repay	phyir sprod pa
ཕྱིར་ཕུད	returned [something], gave back [h]	phyir phud
ཕྱིར་ཕུད་པ	drive out	phyir phud pa
ཕྱིར་ཕུལ	bcos	phyir phul
ཕྱིར་ཕེབས	1) return, come back; 2) go away, depart; 3) 'og rim nas gong rim la phul ba'i snyan zhu sogs kyi lan du gong rim nas btang ba'i lan	phyir phebs
ཕྱིར་ཕྱུང་བ	cast off, pullout	phyir phyung ba
ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས	w face turned back, disinclined towards, regardless of, turn the back on	phyir phyogs
ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་པ	turn aside	phyir phyogs pa
ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་སུ	backwards	phyir phyogs su
ཕྱིར་འཕགས	to jump backwards	phyir 'phags
ཕྱིར་འཕར་བ	repulse	phyir 'phar ba
ཕྱིར་འཕུལ་བ	turn out	phyir 'phul ba
ཕྱིར་བུ	hay-rick, shock of sheaves, heap of sticks	phyir bu
ཕྱིར་བྱིན་པ	to return something, give back	phyir byin pa
ཕྱིར་བྲོས་པ	ran away, fled from, took to flight	phyir bros pa
ཕྱིར་བྲོས་བྱེད	defect	phyir bros byed
ཕྱིར་དབྱུང་བ	turn out	phyir dbyung ba
ཕྱིར་འབབ	issue	phyir 'bab
ཕྱིར་འབུད	go to the toilet	phyir 'bud
ཕྱིར་འབུད་པ	expel outward	phyir 'bud pa
ཕྱིར་འབུར	confound	phyir 'bur
ཕྱིར་འབུར་བ	confound 1730	phyir 'bur ba
ཕྱིར་འབུལ	return [something], give back [h]	phyir 'bul
ཕྱིར་འབུལ་གནང	return [something], give back [h]	phyir 'bul gnang
ཕྱིར་འབུལ་ཞུ	return [something], give back [h]	phyir 'bul zhu
ཕྱིར་འབོད་པ	recall	phyir 'bod pa
ཕྱིར་འབོར་བ	cast out	phyir 'bor ba
ཕྱིར་འབྱིན	give vent to	phyir 'byin
ཕྱིར་འབྱུང་བ	come out	phyir 'byung ba
ཕྱིར་འབྱོར	return, get back	phyir 'byor
ཕྱིར་འབྱོར་བ	1) yong mkhan tshur slebs pa,//rang rgyal du phyir 'byor ba; 2) ca lag tshur 'phrod pa,//gzhan la gyar ba'i dngos po phyir 'byor ba	phyir 'byor ba
ཕྱིར་འབྲང	follow, pursue, run after, imitate	phyir 'brang
ཕྱིར་འབྲང་བ	to follow	phyir 'brang ba
ཕྱིར་འབྲངས	see {a'brangs}	phyir 'brangs
ཕྱིར་མ་བལྟ	Don't look back!	phyir ma blta
ཕྱིར་མ་སྤངས	without having to renounce	phyir ma spangs
ཕྱིར་མའི་མཐའ	future end	phyir ma'i mtha'
ཕྱིར་མར་མེ་བཞག་ཡོད	placed the lamp outside	phyir mar me bzhag yod
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག	never fall back, nonreturning	phyir mi ldog
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པ	Nonreturn. See also 'fruition of nonreturn.'	phyir mi ldog pa
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	chos skyon med pa nyid	phyir mi ldog pa yongs su grub pa
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང	irreversible master empowerment [Yoga tantra sm rdo rje'i brtul zhugs kyi dbang	phyir mi ldog pa slob dpon gyi dbang
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི	unalterable belief	phyir mi ldog pa'i
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་དད་པ	irreversible faith, irreversible devotion	phyir mi ldog pa'i dad pa
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་བྱང་སེམས	irreversible / nonregressing bodhisattva	phyir mi ldog pa'i byang sems
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་དབང	empowerment of nonregression back to ordinary being	phyir mi ldog pa'i dbang
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	Fruition of nonreturn. Liberation from samsara or the omniscient state of buddhahood phyir mi ldog pa'i smon lam chen po	phyir mi ldog pa'i 'bras bu
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	for the sake of all beings establishing unsurpassable enlightenment bskal pa'i bar du brtson pa mi 'dor ba'o	phyir mi ldog pa'i brtson 'grus
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་ས	level of no-return; the stage of nonregression	phyir mi ldog pa'i sa
ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་ས་ལ་གནས་པ	abiding in	phyir mi ldog pa'i sa la gnas pa
ཐེ་སྟགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	regression	the stage of non
ཕྱིར་མི་ནུར	not change place w	phyir mi nur
ཕྱིར་མི་ནུར་བ	not to change place with	phyir mi nur ba
ཕྱིར་མི་ཟློག་པ	irreversible	phyir mi zlog pa
ཕྱིར་མི་ཟློག་པའི་བུམ་པའི་དབང	empowerment of the irreversible vase	phyir mi zlog pa'i bum pa'i dbang
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང	never returner	phyir mi 'ong
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of nonreturner	phyir mi 'ong bcu
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་པ	Non-returner	phyir mi 'ong pa
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་བ	Never-Returners	phyir mi 'ong ba
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་བ་ལ་ཞུགས་གནས་གཉིས	the pair which enters and becomes established in not returning to samsara	phyir mi 'ong ba la zhugs gnas gnyis
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruit/ result	phyir mi 'ong ba'i 'bras bu
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་བའི་འབྲས་བུ་ལྔ	(chn phyir mi 'ong ba'i 'bras bu thob pa'i thabs the means to obtain the fruit of NeverReturner	phyir mi 'ong ba'i 'bras bu lnga
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་འབྲས་གནས	abider in the	phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas
ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	return. [zhugs gnas brgyad kyi nang gses, phyir mi 'ong ba'i 'bras bu la gnas pa ste, 'dod pa'i sgom spang dgu pa spangs pa'i theg dman slob pa'o	fruit of non
ཕྱིར་མི་འོང་ཞུགས་པ	candidate for	phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa
ཅནདིདཏེ་ཕོ༹ར་ནོན	return. Def {lan cig phyir 'ong 'bras gnas des phyir mi 'ong gi 'bras bu thob par bya ba'i phyir de'i lam la 'brel chags su brtson par byas pas phyir mi 'ong zhugs par 'gyur ba yin no}	candidate for non
ཕྱིར་མི་ཨོང་བ	nonreturner	phyir mi ong ba
ཕྱིར་སྨྲས་པ	[he] replied	phyir smras pa
ཕྱིར་ཚོང	export, sell out, betray	phyir tshong
ཕྱིར་ཚོང་བྱེད	export, sell out, betray	phyir tshong byed
ཕྱིར་ཚོང་བྱེད་པ	export	phyir tshong byed pa
ཕྱིར་འཛིན	to remain a little empty after exhaling, to remain empty after exhaling	phyir 'dzin
ཕྱིར་ཞྭ	hat made of felt	phyir zhwa
ཕྱིར་ཞིང	in return	phyir zhing
ཕྱིར་ཞིང་ཕྱིར་ཞིང	again and again	phyir zhing phyir zhing
ཕྱིར་ཞིང་བྱུང་བ	1) happen again; 2) follow; 3) [arch] increase	phyir zhing byung ba
ཕྱིར་ཞིང་འབྱུང་བ	nondisappearance	phyir zhing 'byung ba
ཕྱིར་བཞག	place/ leave outside	phyir bzhag
ཕྱིར་བཞིན	after	phyir bzhin
ཕྱིར་ཟློག	bring back, draw off, divert from D, repel, rebuff, beat back	phyir zlog
ཕྱིར་ཟློག་འཁོར་ལོ	reversed wheel	phyir zlog 'khor lo
ཕྱིར་ཟློག་པ	repel, bring back, draw off, divert from	phyir zlog pa
ཕྱིར་ཟློག་པ་གཉིས	two reversals	phyir zlog pa gnyis
ཕྱིར་བཟིལ་བ	expel	phyir bzil ba
ཕྱིར་བཟློག	kicked/ cast out, expelled, deported, banished	phyir bzlog
ཕྱིར་བཟློག་པ	to turn back/ recant	phyir bzlog pa
ཕྱིར་བཟློག་པའི་གནོད་འཙེ་རྣམས	expelled malicious 1s	phyir bzlog pa'i gnod 'tse rnams
ཕྱིར་བཟློག་པར་བྱ་བ	to be expelled	phyir bzlog par bya ba
ཕྱིར་འོང	once-returner, once-return, [Syn {lan cig phyir 'ong ba}, {'phags pa'i skyes bu bzhi}. once returner	phyir 'ong
ཕྱིར་འོང་གི་འབྲས་གནས	abider in the fruit	phyir 'ong gi 'bras gnas
ཨོཕ༹་ཨོནཅེ	return, {zhugs gnas brgyad}	of once
ཕྱིར་འོང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruit / result of	phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu
ཨོནཅེ	return; the fruit / result of oncereturn, {'bras bu bzhi}	once
ཕྱིར་འོང་བ	once-returner	phyir 'ong ba
ཕྱིར་འོང་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of	phyir 'ong ba'i 'bras bu
ཕྱིར་འོང་འབྲས་གནས	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'bras gnas de'i nang tshan tshe gcig bar chad pa zhes bya ba yod de/ de la spangs rtogs gnyis las/ spangs pa la 'dod nyon bdun pa dang brgyad pa spangs srid/ dgu pa gtan m...	phyir 'ong 'bras gnas
ཕྱིར་འོང་འབྲས་གནས་ཙམ་པོ་བ	making no effort to abandon khams gong ma'i kleshas [dge 'dun nyi shu'i nang gses	phyir 'ong 'bras gnas tsam po ba
ཕྱིར་འོང་ཞུགས་པ	{rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas des lan cig phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu thob pa'i phyir du de'i lam sgom pa la brtson par byas pa na phyir 'ong zhugs par 'gyur la/ des nyon mongs drug pa nam spangs pa'i tshe 'b...	phyir 'ong zhugs pa
ཅནདིདཏེ་ཕོ༹ར་ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་Oནཅེ	Return;	candidate for the fruit of Once
ཅནདིདཏེ་ཕོ༹ར་ཨོནཅེ	return, Syn {lan cig phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu la zhugs pa}, {zhugs gnas brgyad}. candidate for the	candidate for once
ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་Oནཅེ	Return	fruit of Once
ཕྱིར་ཡང	again phyir g.yug pa - expel	phyir yang
ཕྱིར་ལ	from an interior to an exterior place	phyir la
པའི་ཞབས་འདྲེན་ཡིན	"Replying 'I accept' to 'because...' is the disgrace of a debater." (From ATG.) [mss]	pa'i zhabs 'dren yin
ཕྱིར་ལ་ཤོག	come back here!	phyir la shog
ཕྱིར་ལང་བ	get up again after having fallen	phyir lang ba
ཕྱིར་ལན་འོང་ཟིན་གྱི་ངོ་ཤུས	true copy of a reply received	phyir lan 'ong zin gyi ngo shus
ཕྱིར་ལམ་སེང་ཁྱེར་ཤོག	bring it back right away!	phyir lam seng khyer shog
ཕྱིར་ལུད	expelled	phyir lud
ཕྱིར་ལུས	backwardness	phyir lus
ཕྱིར་ལེན	take back	phyir len
ཕྱིར་ལེན་པ	recover	phyir len pa
ཕྱིར་ལེན་པའི་དགྲར་ཤོར་ས་ཆ	take back territory lost to the enemy	phyir len pa'i dgrar shor sa cha
ཕྱིར་ལེན་བྱེད	take back	phyir len byed
ཕྱིར་ལོག	to return	phyir log
ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྐབས	when [they] were going back	phyir log skabs
ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྐྱོན་པ	make ride face backwards on a horse D	phyir log skyon pa
ཕྱིར་ལོག་འགྲོ	return, go back	phyir log 'gro
ཕྱིར་ལོག་རྒྱག	return, go back	phyir log rgyag
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཏུ	aback	phyir log tu
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཏུ་ཕོག	reflect, bounce back on	phyir log tu phog
ཕྱིར་ལོག་བཏང	put back in its place, return	phyir log btang
ཕྱིར་ལོག་བཏང་བ	put back in its place, return, send back phyir log btang ba'i 'dzin bzung dmag mi	phyir log btang ba
ཕྱིར་ལོག་གདོང	tshur yong mkhan brgyud,//dgongs skor zhus rigs phyir log gdong bka' gsal yod pa mkhyen,//'di ga'i gnas tshul che phra tsang ma phyir log gdong snyan seng zhus chog	phyir log gdong
ཕྱིར་ལོག་པ	returned	phyir log pa
ཕྱིར་ལོག་པའི་ལམ	the way back	phyir log pa'i lam
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཕྱི་རུ་འཁོར་བ	tshur byung dngos po phyir log tu sprod 'gro lam ma shes par phyir log brgyab nas slebs byung	phyir log phyi ru 'khor ba
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཕྱིར་སྡོད་རང་མི	returning overseas nationals	phyir log phyir sdod rang mi
ཕྱིར་ལོག་བྱེད	return, go back	phyir log byed
ཕྱིར་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	revert	phyir log byed pa
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཡོང་བ་ལ	as they was returning home	phyir log yong ba la
ཕྱིར་ཤར	manifestation	phyir shar
ཕྱིར་ཤིག	phyir 'then	phyir shig
ཕྱིར་ཤིག་རྒྱག	shift, move backwards, withdraw, retreat	phyir shig rgyag
ཕྱིར་ཤིག་རྒྱག་པ	to go backwards, retrogress	phyir shig rgyag pa
ཕྱིར་ཤོག	let leak out [secrets]	phyir shog
ཕྱིར་ཤོར་བ	losing, spilling	phyir shor ba
ཕྱིར་གཤེ་བ	scold back	phyir gshe ba
ཕྱིར་བཤོལ	withdraw, pull back, recall, retreat, postpone	phyir bshol
ཕྱིར་བཤོལ་བྱེད་པ	withhold 1732	phyir bshol byed pa
ཕྱིར་སངས་ནས	having recovered	phyir sangs nas
ཕྱིར་སོས་པ	grow again, revive, come back to life	phyir sos pa
ཕྱིར་སོས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	return to life	phyir sos par 'gyur ba
ཕྱིར་སློག	1) put back in its proper place; 2) turn clothes inside out; 3) give/ send back, return; 4) reverse sides	phyir slog
ཕྱིར་སློག་པ	send back, refund, return	phyir slog pa
ཕྱིར་གསལ	outer radiance, externally manifest; outer luminosity, radiance, externally manifest / visualized, [Syn. {phyir gsal snang}, {phyir gsal shar} Syn {phyi gsal}	phyir gsal
ཕྱིར་གསལ་ཉིད་དུ	in external manifestation	phyir gsal nyid du
ཕྱིར་གསལ་སྣང	outer luminosity, radiance, externally manifest/ visualized	phyir gsal snang
ཕྱིར་གསལ་བ	(to) become evident outwardly; outward evidence	phyir gsal ba
ཕྱིར་གསལ་ཤར	outer luminosity, radiance, externally manifest/ visualized	phyir gsal shar
ཕྱིར་བསབ་ཟེར་ནས་རྐུ་བ	rob by saying that he will return the thing afterwards	phyir bsab zer nas rku ba
ཕྱིར་བསྲིངས	sent off	phyir bsrings
ཕྱིར་ལྷོངས	expulsion, driving out, banishment, deportation	phyir lhongs
ཕྱིས	'byid pa!, clean it, wipe it off!, erase, behind, afterwards, late[r], in the future, from now on, wiping rag	phyis
ཕྱིས་སྐྱེས	(met younger sibling	phyis skyes
ཕྱིས་འགྱང	postpone, delay, procrastinate, put off	phyis 'gyang
ཕྱིས་བཅོས	amendment, reparation	phyis bcos
ཕྱིས་ཆོས་རྒྱུན	the later development of dharma	phyis chos rgyun
ཕྱིས་འཆད	will give an explanation below	phyis 'chad
ཕྱིས་དྲགས	to be too late	phyis drags
ཕྱིས་བདར	dusting, wiping	phyis bdar
ཕྱིས་བདར་གཏོང	dust, wipe	phyis bdar gtong
ཕྱིས་ན	in the rear, from behind D	phyis na
ཕྱིས་ན་བྱུང་ནས	having come later, at last	phyis na byung nas
ཕྱིས་ནས	MG: = phyis 'byung, in the future, afterwards, later. [mss]	phyis nas
ཕྱིས་ནས་ནང་ལ་ཞུགས	come in from outside	phyis nas nang la zhugs
ཕྱིས་གནོན	[arch] zil gnon, overcome	phyis gnon
ཕྱིས་གནོན་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, undertake to har physically/ verbally monk who previously abided in the gtsug lag khang or rang gi lus kyis gzhan brdzis shing gnon pa'o	phyis gnon byed pa'i ltung byed
ཕྱིས་པ	cleaned up, wiped off [p 'byid pa]	phyis pa
ཕྱིས་པ་ངེས་སོ	certainly ~	phyis pa nges so
ཕྱིས་བུ	1) vessel; 2) [arch] the other side, outside	phyis bu
ཕྱིས་བྱུང	something that will arise, consequences	phyis byung
ཕྱིས་འབྱུང	something that will arise, consequences, in the future, afterwards, later	phyis 'byung
ཕྱིས་འབྱུང་འགྱུར	what will appear in the future / later	phyis 'byung 'gyur
ཕྱིས་འབྱུང་ཇི་བྱེད	provide for a contingency	phyis 'byung ji byed
ཕྱིས་འབྱུང་བ	future generations	phyis 'byung ba
ཕྱིས་འབྲང	rjes su snyeg pa'am 'gro ba,//lag rtsal gyi thad la gzhan gyi phyis 'brang kho na byed mi nyan	phyis 'brang
ཕྱིས་སྦྱིན་ནོ་ཞེས་ནས་རྐུ་བ	rob a thing promising to return it	phyis sbyin no zhes nas rku ba
ཕྱིས་མ	cow who has lost her calf, later, too late, afterwards	phyis ma
ཕྱིས་ཞིག་ན	at a later time	phyis zhig na
ཕྱིས་རས	cleaning cloth	phyis ras
ཕྱིས་ལམ	1) slad kyi 'gro lam; 2) rjes su lang shor gyi mig dpe ngan pa; 3) reoccurrence D	phyis lam
ཕྱིས་ལམ་ཁེགས་པ	prevent the reoccurrence D	phyis lam khegs pa
ཕྱིས་ལུང་བསྟན་དུས་ལ་བབས་པ་ན	Later, at the prophesied times,	phyis lung bstan dus la babs pa na
ཕྱིས་ཤིག་ན	at a later time	phyis shig na
ཕྱིས་སུ	later,	phyis su
ཕྱིས་སུ་འབྱུང	what happens later	phyis su 'byung
ཕྱིས་ལྷད་དུ་བཅུག་པའི་ཚིག	a later interpolation	phyis lhad du bcug pa'i tshig
ཕྱུ་པ	tibetan robe, long gown, robe, a Tibetan style dress	phyu pa
ཕྱུ་པ་སྲམ་ཤན་མ	tshar tshags sogs kyi phyu pa sram lpags kyi mtha' lcags can	phyu pa sram shan ma
ཕྱུ་ར	cheese	phyu ra
ཕྱུ་རུ་རུ	way of rising of clouds, smoke, steam etc	phyu ru ru
ཕྱུག་ཁྱད	riches, wealth, opulence	phyug khyad
ཕྱུག་ཏུ་མི་སྟེར་དབུལ་བའི་འདྲེ	'dre who make poor and do not allow to become rich	phyug tu mi ster dbul ba'i 'dre
ཕྱུག་བདག	rich person	phyug bdag
ཕྱུག་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, be rich, having much, brgyan pa'am brjid pa la'ang 'jug	phyug pa
ཕྱུག་པར་འགྱུར་བ	grow rich	phyug par 'gyur ba
ཕྱུག་པོ	wealthy, rich, rich	phyug po
ཕྱུག་པོ་ཞི་དུལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	a wealthy	phyug po zhi dul dang ldan pa
མན་ཤོཨུལད་བེ་ཝེལལ	disciplined and peaceful	man should be well
ཕྱུག་པོ་བཟོ་བ	enrich	phyug po bzo ba
ཕྱུག་པོ་རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ་གསུམ	the supreme, middle, and lesser rich	phyug po rab 'bring tha ma gsum
ཕྱུག་དབུལ	rich and poor phyug dbul gyi khyad par ha cang chen	phyug dbul
པོ་རང་མི་ཡོང	there is really not so great a difference between the rich ad the poor	po rang mi yong
ཕྱུག་དབུལ་མེད	no difference between rich and poor	phyug dbul med
ཕྱུག་མོ	rich lady	phyug mo
ཕྱུག་རོན	columba rupestris rupestris pallas	phyug ron
ཕྱུག་ལྷ	Wealth-deities	phyug lha
ཕྱུགས	herds, cattle [ldad rgyag mkhan khyim gso'i dud 'gro,//gnag phyugs,//sgo phyugs,//lo phyugs legs pa	phyugs
ཕྱུགས་ཀྱི་གློ་ནད	cattle lung disease/ plague	phyugs kyi glo nad
ཕྱུགས་ཀྱི་རུ་མ	few cattle from which more are bred	phyugs kyi ru ma
ཕྱུགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱུག	rich in cattle, cattlewealth	phyugs kyis phyug
ཕྱུགས་སྐད	cattle/ livestock sounds	phyugs skad
ཕྱུགས་སྐྱོང	nomad, herdsman	phyugs skyong
ཕྱུགས་སྐྱོང་བ	tending to cattle	phyugs skyong ba
ཕྱུགས་ཁྱུ	herd of cattle	phyugs khyu
ཕྱུགས་གྱང་མོ	1) sheep; 2) cattle which have lived many years D	phyugs gyang mo
ཕྱུགས་གླུད	ransom for livestock	phyugs glud
ཕྱུགས་སྒོ	draught animal, herbs, cattle	phyugs sgo
ཕྱུགས་སྒྲོལ	cattle chu bo las sgrol ba	phyugs sgrol
ཕྱུགས་རྔོ	phyugs rngo cattle skin disease phyugs rngo} - {phyugs rngo cattle disease [ra lug sogs phyugs rigs tsang ma na ba'i pags nad cig	phyugs rngo
ཕྱུགས་བཅོས་པ	1) cattle veterinarian; 2) cure cattle disease	phyugs bcos pa
ཕྱུགས་ཆགས	threshing [by driving cattle over grain]	phyugs chags
ཕྱུགས་ཆགས་སྐོར	thresh [by driving cattle over grain]	phyugs chags skor
ཕྱུགས་ཆུང	young woman, small cattle	phyugs chung
ཕྱུགས་ཆེན	large cattle	phyugs chen
ཕྱུགས་འཆག་སྒོར་བ	g.yul las gtong skabs ston 'bras tshar ma'i steng du phyugs ded de 'chag pa,//bod du ston thog g.yul khar bskams nas phyugs 'chag sgor ba'i lugs srol yod	phyugs 'chag sgor ba
ཕྱུགས་གཉེར	cattle la do dam byed mkhan	phyugs gnyer
ཕྱུགས་ལྟོ	cattle fodder	phyugs lto
ཕྱུགས་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	animal drawn cart	phyugs 'then 'khor lo
ཕྱུགས་དང་མཚུངས	brute-like	phyugs dang mtshungs
ཕྱུགས་དེབ	cattle accounts book	phyugs deb
ཕྱུགས་བདག	maheshvara	phyugs bdag
ཕྱུགས་བདག་དགའ	white species of plant calotropis gigantea	phyugs bdag dga'
ཕྱུགས་འདུལ	taming of beasts, breaking in horses and mules, domesticating animals	phyugs 'dul
ཕྱུགས་འདུལ་བ	tame cattle/ horses/ mules etc., teach them plowing etc. phyugs 'dul ba la rab tu mkhas pa'i 'brog	phyugs 'dul ba
ཕྱུགས་ལྡན	nomad	phyugs ldan
ཕྱུགས་ནད	cattle/ domestic animal disease phyugs nad 'gags} - {phyugs nad 'gags cattle disease [nor lug gi kha sna nas chu 'bab pa dang, ske skrangs shing dbugs 'gags te nyin gcig gnyis tsam nas 'chi ba'i ph...	phyugs nad
ཕྱུགས་ནད་འགགས	{phyugs nad 'gags cattle disease	phyugs nad 'gags
ཕྱུགས་ནད་སྨན་ཁང	veterinary hospital	phyugs nad sman khang
ཕྱུགས་ནད་སྨན་པ	veterinarian	phyugs nad sman pa
ཕྱུགས་གནག	yak	phyugs gnag
ཕྱུགས་པ	cattle herder	phyugs pa
ཕྱུགས་པའི་རྫས་གསུམ	the three smeared substances, {thal chen, rak-ta, zhag}; the three smeared substances	phyugs pa'i rdzas gsum
ཕྱུགས་ཕྱུང	youthful maiden	phyugs phyung
ཕྱུགས་ཕྱུང་མ་ཉམས་པ	gzhon nu ma grong pa'i chos kyis ma gos pa	phyugs phyung ma nyams pa
ཕྱུགས་ཕྲུག	calves, young domestic animals	phyugs phrug
ཕྱུགས་བྱུགས་པའི་རྫས་གསུམ	1) {dpral bar thal chen gyi tshom bu}. 2) {sprin	phyugs byugs pa'i rdzas gsum
མཚམས་དང་མཁུར་ཚོས་སུ་རཀ	ta'i thig pe} 3) {ol kol la zhag gi zo ris dong sprug sgom rim}	mtshams dang mkhur tshos su rak
ཕྱུགས་གཙེས	(met wolf	phyugs gtses
ཕྱུགས་རྩྭ	herbage, forage, grass	phyugs rtswa
ཕྱུགས་རྩིས	account of cattle	phyugs rtsis
ཕྱུགས་ཚང	barn	phyugs tshang
ཕྱུགས་འཚོ	look after/ pasture/ graze/ raise cattle/ animals	phyugs 'tsho
ཕྱུགས་འཚོ་མཁན	1 living by/ raising/ herding cattle/ domestic animals	phyugs 'tsho mkhan
ཕྱུགས་འཚོ་བ	to pasture, graze animals	phyugs 'tsho ba
ཕྱུགས་འཚོ་ས	seasonal grazing place	phyugs 'tsho sa
ཕྱུགས་རྫི	herdsmen	phyugs rdzi
ཕྱུགས་ཟོག	domestic/ draught animal, livestock, cattle	phyugs zog
ཕྱུགས་ཟོག་གི་སྟོད་ནད	{phyugs zog gi stod nad	phyugs zog gi stod nad
ཕྱུགས་ཟོག་གི་སྨད་ནད	gnag phyugs kyi rgyu mar phog pa'i nad cig phyugs g.yag - cattle and yaks phyugs g.yang mo - cattle which have lived a great many years	phyugs zog gi smad nad
ཕྱུགས་ར	cattle enclosure	phyugs ra
ཕྱུགས་རིགས	domestic animals	phyugs rigs
ཕྱུགས་རིགས་སྤོ་འཚོ	nomadic life	phyugs rigs spo 'tsho
ཕྱུགས་ལ་གོད་ཁ་བྱུང་ན	When cattle sicken	phyugs la god kha byung na
ཕྱུགས་ལ་གོད་མེད་པ	cattle is free from epidemics	phyugs la god med pa
ཕྱུགས་ལས	nomad/ herding work, pastoral industries phyugs las thon skyed mnyam las khang livestock breeders' production coop	phyugs las
ཕྱུགས་ལས་ཐོན་རྫས	livestock/ animal products	phyugs las thon rdzas
ཕྱུགས་ལས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	economy of animal husbandry	phyugs las dpal 'byor
ཕྱུགས་ལུག	phung - draw, {khrag ba} to draw blood	phyugs lug
ཕྱུགས་ཤིག	[insect] that all cattle have	phyugs shig
ཕྱུགས་ཤུགས	animal power	phyugs shugs
ཕྱུགས་ཤུགས་གྲོ་རྔ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	animal power wheat harvester	phyugs shugs gro rnga 'phrul 'khor
ཕྱུགས་ས	cattle area	phyugs sa
ཕྱུགས་གསོ	care for cattle, animal husbandry	phyugs gso
ཕྱུགས་གསོ་ར་བ	livestock farm	phyugs gso ra ba
ཕྱུགས་ལྷ	cattle god	phyugs lha
ཕྱུགས་ལྷས	cattle enclosure	phyugs lhas
ཕྱུགས་ཨང་མཚུངས	like cattle, brutish, stupid	phyugs ang mtshungs
ཕྱུང	draw, pull out, remove, emit, SA 'byin pa, past of 'byin	phyung
ཕྱུང་བ	cast out, throw away, banish, be in excess, the overflow, expressed in, SA bton pa, dbyung ba, 'byin pa, be more than what is required, overflow of a thing in a vessel	phyung ba
ཕྱུངས	emit, banish, SA phyung, phyung ba	phyungs
ཕྱུངས་པ	draw [out], banish, expel, remove, yield, pull out, cause to come forth, put out, turn out	phyungs pa
ཕྱུད	(not in das)	phyud
ཕྱུབ་ཆེན	big chuba	phyub chen
ཕྱུར	past of 'phyur	phyur
ཕྱུར་སྐམ	dried curds/ buttermilk solids	phyur skam
ཕྱུར་སྐུམ	dried "rock" cheese	phyur skum
ཕྱུར་ཁུ	whey	phyur khu
ཕྱུར་ཁུ་སྨུག་རྩི	phyur khu yun ring bskol nas chags pa'i lde gu mdog rgya smug cig	phyur khu smug rtsi
ཕྱུར་པོ	raised/ piled/ filled high	phyur po
ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	'phyur 'phyur phyur ba} - phyu ra, [//mngar phyur,//skyur phyur,//sngo phyur,//skya phyur	phyur phyur
ཕྱུར་བ	cheese	phyur ba
ཕྱུར་བ་བར་ཧྲོབ	zhib zhib dang hrob hrob gnyis ka min pa'i bar hrob	phyur ba bar hrob
ཕྱུར་བ་ཧྲོག་པོ	chuba zhib zhib min pa	phyur ba hrog po
ཕྱུར་བུ	hay-rick, shock of sheaves, heap of sticks, solid substance obtained from milk devoid of butter, full	phyur bu
ཕྱུར་བུར	clusters	phyur bur
ཕྱུར་བུར་བཀང	piled up	phyur bur bkang
ཕྱུར་བུར་བཀང་བ	piled up	phyur bur bkang ba
ཕྱུར་བུར་སྤུངས	accumulated	phyur bur spungs
ཕྱུར་ཞིབ	phyur ba zhib zhib	phyur zhib
ཕྱུར་ར	cheese	phyur ra
ཕྱུར་རུལ	rotten/ rancid cheese	phyur rul
ཕྱུར་རེ	rlangs pa + - steam rising	phyur re
ཕྱུར་རེ་སྐུ་རླངས་པ	bodies steaming w heat	phyur re sku rlangs pa
ཕྱུར་རེ་བ	rdul dang du ba sogs langs tshul zhig //khyim brdibs nas sa tsub phyur re bar gyur	phyur re ba
ཕྱུར་ཧྲོབ	phyur ba hrob hrob	phyur hrob
ཕྱུལ་ཏོ་བྱུང་བ	{phul byung}	phyul to byung ba
ཕྱེ	1) [past and imp. form of {'byed pa} opened, uncovered / to separate, divide, distinguish, differentiate, open, spread. 2) tsampa, flour, powder, flour of parched barley. 3) one discerns, gives ris...	phye
ཕྱེ་རྐྱལ	bag for flour	phye rkyal
ཕྱེ་འགམ་པ་པོ	eater of flour	phye 'gam pa po
ཕྱེ་འགམས	1) rtsam pa etc. 'gams zin pa; 2) 'gam rgyu'i rtsam pa	phye 'gams
ཕྱེ་གཏོར	offerings made of barley flour to spirits	phye gtor
ཕྱེ་བཏབ	to add some tsampa flour	phye btab
ཕྱེ་སྟེ་རྟག་པ	true investigation, arrive at the truth of a thing	phye ste rtag pa
ཕྱེ་སྟེ་རྟོག་པ	realize w certainty, truly discriminate	phye ste rtog pa
ཕྱེ་ཐུག	porridge/ noodles/ broth of rtsam pa, wheat flour	phye thug
ཕྱེ་འཐག	mill [to grind rtsam pa/ flour etc.]	phye 'thag
ཕྱེ་འཐག་པ	grind rtsam pa/ flour etc.	phye 'thag pa
ཕྱེ་འཐག་པའི་འབྲུ་རིགས	ground grain	phye 'thag pa'i 'bru rigs
ཕྱེ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	flour factory	phye 'thag bzo grwa
ཕྱེ་སྣོད	vessel for meal or flour	phye snod
ཕྱེ་པ	open, SA 'bye ba	phye pa
ཕྱེ་སྤོས	powdered incense	phye spos
ཕྱེ་ཕུར	offering substance, of cloth, brocade etc. fragrant powder phur ma'i snod cig	phye phur
ཕྱེ་བ	gter ka phye ba - to reveal the treasure	phye ba
ཕྱེ་བྱས	pulverized	phye byas
ཕྱེ་བྱེད་པ	making flour	phye byed pa
ཕྱེ་བྲུལ	spags gong brul ba	phye brul
ཕྱེ་འབོ	two wooden 'bo connected together in 1 flour and butter &, in the other wheat	phye 'bo
ཕྱེ་མ	powder, dust	phye ma
ཕྱེ་མ་བདར་ཏོ	reduced to powder	phye ma bdar to
ཕྱེ་མ་མྱོང	never before taken sides	phye ma myong
ཕྱེ་མ་མྱོད	not take sides	phye ma myod
ཕྱེ་མ་དམར་པོ	(met li khri	phye ma dmar po
ཕྱེ་མ་ལ	phye ma pass [spu hreng rdzong gi lho rgyud du yod, el. 6175 yod	phye ma la
ཕྱེ་མ་ལེབ	butterfly, moth, 1 1/2	phye ma leb
ཕྱེ་མ་ལེབ་ཁྲ་པོ	marbled or striped butterfly	phye ma leb khra po
ཕྱེ་མའི་ཕུར་མ	vessels of aromatic powder	phye ma'i phur ma
ཕྱེ་མར	mixture of roast barley flour and butter used in Tibet as an auspicious offering during the new year celebrations	phye mar
ཕྱེ་མར་བཏགས	ground, milled, pulverized	phye mar btags
ཕྱེ་མར་འཐག	grind, mill, pulverize	phye mar 'thag
ཕྱེ་མར་འཐག་པ	grind into flour, pulverize	phye mar 'thag pa
ཕྱེ་མར་བརྡར	grind, mill, pulverize	phye mar brdar
ཕྱེ་མར་བྱེད	grind, mill, pulverize	phye mar byed
ཕྱེ་སྨན	powdered med.	phye sman
ཕྱེ་ཡོད་པ	open	phye yod pa
ཕྱེ་ལབ	butterfly, moth	phye lab
ཕྱེ་ལེབ	butterfly, moth	phye leb
ཕྱེ་ལེབ་སེར་ཁྲ	vegetable medicine	phye leb ser khra
ཕྱེད	open, separate, half, place apart, SA 'byed pa, the more something is	phyed
ཕྱེད་ཀ	half, one half	phyed ka
པའི་སྔོན་འཇུག	demi	pa'i sngon 'jug
ཕྱེད་ཀ་ཕྱེད་ཀ	fifty-fifty	phyed ka phyed ka
ཕྱེད་ཀ་བཟོ་བ	halve	phyed ka bzo ba
ཕྱེད་ཀ་རེ	half each, a series taking/ subtracting 1/2 each time	phyed ka re
ཕྱེད་ཀའི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་སྔོན་འཇུག	semi	phyed ka'i don ston pa'i sngon 'jug
ཕྱེད་ཀྲུང	1/2 cross legged, 1 leg stretched out 1 folded	phyed krung
ཕྱེད་སྐུང་ཕྱེད་བཤད	skad cha rkyong skum byas pa, telling bits and pieces, hesitant to tell all, mincing words	phyed skung phyed bshad
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ	[Syn {phyed skyil ma skyil krung}, half cross-legged	phyed skyil
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	1/2 cross legged, either loosely cross legged or w 1 leg extended	phyed skyil krung
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ་དུ་བཞུགས	to sit with halfcrossed legs	phyed skyil du bzhugs
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ་བ	sit in a cross-legged posture but not exactly in the manner of buddha	phyed skyil ba
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ་མ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	1/2 cross legged, either loosely cross legged or w 1 leg extended	phyed skyil ma skyil krung
ཕྱེད་སྐྱིལ་མཛད་པ	sitting with her legs crossed	phyed skyil mdzad pa
ཕྱེད་གང	1/2 full	phyed gang
ཕྱེད་གོང་མ	the upper half	phyed gong ma
ཕྱེད་གྲུབ	1/2 finished	phyed grub
ཕྱེད་གྲུབ་ཐོན་རྫས	semi-finished product	phyed grub thon rdzas
ཕྱེད་གྲོལ	hair half loose	phyed grol
ཕྱེད་གླིང	peninsula	phyed gling
ཕྱེད་གླིང་ཕྲན	peninsula	phyed gling phran
ཕྱེད་བགོས	divide in half	phyed bgos
ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད	1) Tibetan dngul rtsi stangs la skar phyed brgyad gnyis la tam ga gcig zer; 2) 7 1/2 [measures]	phyed brgyad
ཕྱེད་བཅིངས	hair half tied in a knot	phyed bcings
ཕྱེད་ཆ	piece of something divided into halves/ two	phyed cha
ཕྱེད་གཉིས	1 1/2	phyed gnyis
ཕྱེད་གཉིས་པ	one and a half	phyed gnyis pa
ཕྱེད་ལྟིར	kha gang gsum, or 7 1/2 skar ri ba'i chang 'gro ba'i snod khog ltir	phyed ltir
ཕྱེད་ཐོན་ཕྱེད་མ་ཐོན་པ	[its calf became stuck,] and only half of the calf would come out	phyed thon phyed ma thon pa
ཕྱེད་དག་ཆ་ཤས	gza' phyed dag gi grangs gnas 'og ma'i ming	phyed dag cha shas
ཕྱེད་དང་གཉིས	1 1/2	phyed dang gnyis
ཕྱེད་དང་ཞག་བཞི	three 1/2 days	phyed dang zhag bzhi
ཕྱེད་དང་བཞི	three and a half	phyed dang bzhi
ཕྱེད་དྭངས	translucence; translucence, [Syn {gsal dvangs phyed dvangs pa}	phyed dwangs
ཕྱེད་དབ༹ངས་པའི་གསལ་དབ༹ངས	translucence	phyed dvangs pa'i gsal dvangs
ཕྱེད་དུ་འཁོར་བའི་རྒྱན	yi ge'i sgra 'dra bas tsig rkang brtsegs pa'i tshigs bcad nar mo'i dbyibs can gyi phyed du 'khor bar bkod pa'i rgyan zhig	phyed du 'khor ba'i rgyan
ཕྱེད་སྣང	semi-appearance	phyed snang
ཕྱེད་སྣང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	the semi-apparent nirmanakaya, {phyed sprul}, [Syn. {gzugs brnyan longs sku}; semi apparent	phyed snang sprul sku
ཕྱེད་པ	{phyed pa, phyed pa, phyed pa} intr. v	phyed pa
ཕྱེད་པའི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	loosely crossed	phyed pa'i skyil krung
ཕྱེད་པོ	that which has changed	phyed po
ཕྱེད་སྤྲུལ	Syn {phyed snang sprul sku}	phyed sprul
ཐེ་སེམི	apparent nirmanakaya. [Syn. {phyed sprul longs sku}, {rang bzhin sprul pa'i sku}, {gzugs brnyan longs sku}, it is only perceived by bodhisattvas on the ten bhumis]	the semi
ཕྱེད་སྤྲུལ་ལོངས་སྐུ	semi-apparent sambhogakaya, {gzugs brnyan longs sku} {phyed snang sprul sku	phyed sprul longs sku
ཕྱེད་ཕྱེད	half each, a series taking/ subtracting 1/2 each time	phyed phyed
ཕྱེད་འཕར་བ	ultimately going to 'og min, born in tshangs ris, then dying and transmigrating te the intermediate ones bor te and born in 1 of the gnas gtsang lnga'i dang po gsum, then again bar pa rnams dor te ...	phyed 'phar ba
ཕྱེད་དབྱེ་པའི་ཕྱིར	to set at variance, create enmity, part, separate	phyed dbye pa'i phyir
ཕྱེད་མ	a half [of what there is], a partner	phyed ma
ཕྱེད་མ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	half-vajra posture, loosely crossed legs, legs were loosely crossed, half cross-legged, one leg drawn in and one extended	phyed ma skyil krung
ཕྱེད་མ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་གིས	w legs loosely crossed	phyed ma skyil krung gis
ཕྱེད་མ་སྤུ་རུག	bye ma spu rug	phyed ma spu rug
ཕྱེད་མ་ཚིག་པ	half not burned	phyed ma tshig pa
ཕྱེད་མི་པ	indestructible	phyed mi pa
ཕྱེད་མི་སེར་སྤེལ་ཡུལ	semi-colonial	phyed mi ser spel yul
ཕྱེད་མེད	indestructible	phyed med
ཕྱེད་སྨིན་པ	1/2 ripened or cooked	phyed smin pa
ཕྱེད་སྨིན་པའི་ཤིང་ཏོག	1/2 ripened or cooked fruit	phyed smin pa'i shing tog
ཕྱེད་ཙམ	[less than]/ about half, semi 1736	phyed tsam
ཕྱེད་ཙམ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཐོན་རྫས	semifinished products	phyed tsam grub pa'i thon rdzas
ཕྱེད་ཚལ	[fragments which are] 1/2 of something	phyed tshal
ཕྱེད་ཚིག	half burned	phyed tshig
ཕྱེད་འཛིན	half eclipse	phyed 'dzin
ཕྱེད་གཟུགས	lha'i zhal ras left and right 1/2 ser la phyed sngo ba lta bu	phyed gzugs
ཕྱེད་འོག་མ	the lower 1/2	phyed 'og ma
ཕྱེད་ཡོལ	afternoon, 1 of 12 dus tshod	phyed yol
ཕྱེད་ཡོལ་ཉི་མ་དུ་སོང	it was past noon	phyed yol nyi ma du song
ཕྱེད་ལས་ལྷག	more than 1/2, majority	phyed las lhag
ཕྱེད་ལུས	half remaining	phyed lus
ཕྱེད་ལོག་གེ་བ	extremely vivid	phyed log ge ba
ཕྱེད་ལོག་གེ་བ་ཞིག	his appearance was extremely vivid	phyed log ge ba zhig
ཕྱེད་ཤས	landlords taking 1/2 the harvest practice	phyed shas
ཕྱེད་གཤགས	split in half	phyed gshags
ཕྱེད་གསལ	translucent	phyed gsal
ཕྱེད་ལྷག	1) more than half [remaining/ gone]	phyed lhag
ཕྱེད་ལྷག་པ	more than 1/2 remaining, //'gro rgyu'i lam thag -	phyed lhag pa
ཕྱེད་ཨམ	unit of Bhutanese currency	phyed am
ཕྱེན	wind, flatulence	phyen
ཕྱེན་གཏོང	purposely let a fart	phyen gtong
ཕྱེན་དྲི	fart smell phyen lung stong la btang na sngo lo	phyen dri
བཞུགས་གྲལ་ལ་འཕྱར་ཡོང	fart in an empty valley and the disgrace will be proclaimed in the rows [of the assembly]	bzhugs gral la 'phyar yong
ཕྱེན་ཤོར་བ	fart [by accident]	phyen shor ba
ཕྱེན་ཤོར་སོང	wind has escaped	phyen shor song
ཕྱེམ་འཕྲེད	[arch] afternoon	phyem 'phred
ཕྱེམ་རེད	the whole afternoon from 1 3 pm	phyem red
ཕྱེར་འཐག་པ	grind to powder/ flour	phyer 'thag pa
ཕྱེལ	(not in das)	phyel
ཕྱེས	open, separate, place apart, SA 'byed pa	phyes
ཕྱེས་པ	{'byed pa / phyes pa / phyed pa/ dbye ba} to differentiate/ distinguish/ analyze/ divide; analysis/ differentiation; isc. to distil	phyes pa
ཕྱེས་མང་པོར	into many	phyes mang por
ཕྱོ	pour out, SA 'byo ba	phyo
ཕྱོ་ཕྱོ	set [dog] on	phyo phyo
ཕྱོ་ཕྱོ་བ	unsteady, flicker, waver, flutter; see {shes pa phyo phyo ba} unsteady mind	phyo phyo ba
ཕྱོ་རྩལ་དགུ	(chn	phyo rtsal dgu
ཕྱོ་རིས་མེད	no directions or divisions	phyo ris med
ཕྱོགས	{phyogs chos} premise/ proposition (in logic)	phyogs
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན	all ways/ aspects, all directions, everywhere	phyogs kun
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཏུ	in all directions	phyogs kun tu
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཙལ་བས་མ་རྙེད	she looked every where, but could not find him	phyogs kun tu btsal bas ma rnyed
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ནས	from all directions	phyogs kun nas
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ནས་དྲག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན	have improved in all ways	phyogs kun nas drag tu phyin
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ནས་མི་སླེབས་པ་རེད	people came from all directions	phyogs kun nas mi slebs pa red
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གོས	naked, uncovered	phyogs kyi gos
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གོས་ཅན	(met clothed in the directions	phyogs kyi gos can
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	Dignaga [great logician, c 500ad, author of pramanasammuccaya 'dzam gling mdzes pa'i rgyan drug gi ya gyal, tsad ma rig pa'i rgyan gyi slob dpon phyogs kyi glang po ni, rgya gar lho phyogs kyi rgyu...	phyogs kyi glang po
ཨོཕ༹་པྲམན	Samucchaya	of Pramana
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 mythological elephants guarding the directions of the world	phyogs kyi glang po brgyad
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་གསུམ	(chn	phyogs kyi sgra gsum
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཅོད་བགེགས	4 obstructors in the 4 directions ('byung bas gcod pa, khams kyis gcod pa, lha 'dre sa gcod pa, dgra yis gcod pa)	phyogs kyi gcod bgegs
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཅོད་པའི་བགེགས་བཞི	the four obstructors in the four directions	phyogs kyi gcod pa'i bgegs bzhi
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆ	directional aspects; see also {phyogs cha}	phyogs kyi cha
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆ་མེད་པ	without directional aspects	phyogs kyi cha med pa
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གནས	7th of sgra'i gnas brgyad, skyes bu'i ldog pa phyogs gcig ston pa ste, EG skyes bu 'di ni stobs dang ldan pa'o and skyes bu 'di yon tan dang ldan pa'o	phyogs kyi gnas
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ	bu mo phyogs kyi gzugs su bkod pa'i snyan ngag gi rgyan	phyogs kyi bu mo
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བུད་མེད	the local beauty	phyogs kyi bud med
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་མུ་ཁྱུད	sun	phyogs kyi mu khyud
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་མཛེས་མ	phyogs kyi bu mo	phyogs kyi mdzes ma
ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ལུས་ཕྲ་མ	phyogs kyi bu mo	phyogs kyi lus phra ma
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	guardian of a direction	phyogs skyong
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་རྒྱལ་པོ	the guardian kings of the 4/10 directions [2nd of four kinds sa 'dzin rgyal po; phyogs skyong..; ris srug..; 'dzam gling	phyogs skyong rgyal po
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་བརྒྱད	the 8 direction protectors phyogs skyong brgyad} - the 8 direction protectors [phyogs bzhi mtshams brgyad kyi lha ste, shar du dbang po, lho ru gshin rje, nub tu chu bdag byang du gnod sbyin, shar ...	phyogs skyong brgyad
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་གཅོ་ལྔ	(chn	phyogs skyong gco lnga
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་བཅུ	the 10 direction protectors	phyogs skyong bcu
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 direction protectors	phyogs skyong bco lnga
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་བ	to be mindful, alert, undistracted, to collect oneself, be watchful / on guard	phyogs skyong ba
ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོད	go to another place	phyogs skyod
ཕྱོགས་བསྐྱོད	travels, travelling	phyogs bskyod
ཕྱོགས་ཁག	bloc, section	phyogs khag
ཕྱོགས་ཁྱེར	partisan discrimination	phyogs khyer
ཕྱོགས་འཁྱམས	wander/ roam to another place	phyogs 'khyams
ཕྱོགས་འཁྱར	rang yul du sdod dbang ma byung bar sa phyogs gzhan du 'gro dgos byung ba	phyogs 'khyar
ཕྱོགས་ག་གེ་མོ	ming mi gsal ba'i yul zhig	phyogs ga ge mo
ཕྱོགས་གང་ཐད་ནས	from all directions/ everywhere, from all points of view/ ways/ aspects, by all means/ methods	phyogs gang thad nas
ཕྱོགས་གང་དུ་གཏོགས	the side in which it was included	phyogs gang du gtogs
ཕྱོགས་གང་ནས	from whence?	phyogs gang nas
ཕྱོགས་གི་གླང་པོ	Dignaga	phyogs gi glang po
ཕྱོགས་གུན་ཏུ	throughout all directions, {rgyas pa} extending in all directions	phyogs gun tu
ཕྱོགས་གོར	murrain	phyogs gor
ཕྱོགས་གོས	1) clothed in the directions, naked; 2) travel clothes	phyogs gos
ཕྱོགས་གོས་ཅན	epithet of maheshvara	phyogs gos can
ཕྱོགས་གྱར་དུ་འགྲོ	roam about, lead a vagabond life	phyogs gyar du 'gro
ཕྱོགས་གྱི་མདོག་ཅན	each [petal] having te color od one of the four directions	phyogs gyi mdog can
ཕྱོགས་གླང	Dignaga [= {phyogs glang kyi glang po} is, among the six ornaments which beautify jambudvipa, the recipient of the transmission of pramana, valid cognition, to bring an end to confusion about meaning	phyogs glang
ཕྱོགས་གླང་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	Syn {phyogs glang} Dignaga	phyogs glang kyi glang po
ཕྱོགས་བགོས	division, distribution, allocation	phyogs bgos
ཕྱོགས་བགོས་བྱེད	divide, distribute, allocate	phyogs bgos byed
ཕྱོགས་བགོས་བྱེད་པ	to allot	phyogs bgos byed pa
ཕྱོགས་མགོ་ཙམ	vague	phyogs mgo tsam
ཕྱོགས་འགལ	opponent, opposition	phyogs 'gal
ཕྱོགས་འགལ་བྱེད	go counter/ be opposed to	phyogs 'gal byed
ཕྱོགས་འགལ་ཚོགས་སྡེ	opposition party/ group	phyogs 'gal tshogs sde
ཕྱོགས་འགྲིལ	bring together in 1 place	phyogs 'gril
ཕྱོགས་འགྲུལ	/ traveller from / to the directions/ far places	phyogs 'grul
ཕྱོགས་འགྲོ	light, travels, travelling	phyogs 'gro
ཕྱོགས་འགྲོ་བྱེད	travel	phyogs 'gro byed
ཕྱོགས་འགྲོན	phyogs kyi 'gron po	phyogs 'gron
ཕྱོགས་རྒྱས་པ	extending out into all directions	phyogs rgyas pa
ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིག	tshan pa so so ba rnams phyogs gcig tu sdeb pa, ordering, regulating, adjusting	phyogs sgrig
ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	tshan pa so so ba rnams phyogs gcig tu sdeb pa, order, regulate, adjust	phyogs sgrig byed
ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	compile	phyogs sgrig byed pa
ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིལ	actions/ behavior phyogs gcig tu sgril ba, compilation	phyogs sgril
ཕྱོགས་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད	actions/ behavior phyogs gcig tu sgril ba, compile 1738	phyogs sgril byed
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲགས	propagate spread information/ publicity	phyogs bsgrags
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	propagate/ spread information/ publicity	phyogs bsgrags byed
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིགས	collection	phyogs bsgrigs
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིགས་བྱེད	tshan pa so so ba rnams phyogs gcig tu sdeb pa, order, regulate, adjust	phyogs bsgrigs byed
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིལ	alliance, confederation	phyogs bsgril
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིལ་སྤངས་པའི་ཡུལ་ཁག	nonaligned neutral nations	phyogs bsgril spangs pa'i yul khag
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིལ་སྤངས་པའི་སྲིད་ཇུས	nonaligned neutral policy	phyogs bsgril spangs pa'i srid jus
ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིལ་སྤངས་པའི་སྲིད་བྱུས	nonaligned neutral policy	phyogs bsgril spangs pa'i srid byus
ཕྱོགས་ངན་ལ་འཛེམ་པ	dread going in an inauspicious direction	phyogs ngan la 'dzem pa
ཕྱོགས་སྔ	opponent	phyogs snga
ཕྱོགས་སྔ་མ	northern side, left side, second part of an argument, the reply	phyogs snga ma
ཕྱོགས་ཅན	1) 30 day month having waxing/waning phases; 2) rishi phyogs can	phyogs can
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཁོ་ན་འཛིན་པ	1 sidedness, partiality, prejudice	phyogs gcig kho na 'dzin pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གི་མ་ནིང	hermaphrodite whose sex changes w month's waxing and waning periods	phyogs gcig gi ma ning
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ	simplified, generalized, one the one hand	phyogs gcig tu
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འཁོད་པ	stood to one side	phyogs gcig tu 'khod pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིགས	/ bsdus - unified, condensed into one	phyogs gcig tu bsgrigs
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	(textual) arrangement	phyogs gcig tu bsgrigs pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲེགས་པ	unified	phyogs gcig tu bsgregs pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས	mixed together, miscellaneous	phyogs gcig tu 'dres
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྡུད	concentrate	phyogs gcig tu sdud
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྡེབས་པ	arranged together	phyogs gcig tu bsdebs pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཤད་པ	use a simplified treatment	phyogs gcig tu bshad pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་སློག་པ	tilt	phyogs gcig tu slog pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ནས	on the one hand	phyogs gcig nas
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་པ	1 sided, partial	phyogs gcig pa
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་མྱུར་ལྟུང་གི་ཞེན་པ	the clinging of abruptly falling into onesidedness phyogs gcig tsam nas bltas pas gnas tshul	phyogs gcig myur ltung gi zhen pa
ཤེས་དཀའ	looking from only 1 side it is hard to know how things are	shes dka'
ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ལ	together, at one time	phyogs gcig la
ཕྱོགས་བཅུ	10 directions {shar} east, 2) {lho} south, 3) {nub} west, 4) {byang} north, 5) {shar lho} south-east, 6) {lho nub} south-west, 7) {nub byang} northwest, 8) {byang shar} north-east, 9) {'og} below, ...	phyogs bcu
ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་ཁྲོ་བོ་བཅུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of the 10 wrathful 1s of the 10 directions	phyogs bcu khro bo bcu'i dkyil 'khor
ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་དུས་བཞི	The Chokchu Düshi prayer by Chokgyur Lingpa	phyogs bcu dus bzhi
ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་དུས་གསུམ	the ten directions and the three times phyogs bcu dus gsum gyi sangs rgyas the buddhas of the 10 directions and three times phyogs bcu dus gsum gyi sangs rgyas the buddhas of the ten directions and...	phyogs bcu dus gsum
ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་མུན་སེལ	comm. on Guhyagarbha Tantra by Longchenpa	phyogs bcu mun sel
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the buddha fields of the victorious 1s of the 10 directions	phyogs bcu'i rgyal ba'i zhing khams
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the worlds of the ten directions	phyogs bcu'i 'jig rten
མེད་པ་གྲངས་མེད་པ	immeasurable countless worlds of the 10 directions phyogs bcu'i mun pa rnam par sel ba completely clearing away the darkness of the 10 directions	med pa grangs med pa
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་ཞིང་ཀུན	all the fields of the 10 directions	phyogs bcu'i zhing kun
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the (buddha) realms of the 10 directions {shar phyogs rin chen gkod pa'i zhing khams} 2) {lho phyogs mya ngan med pa'i zhing khams} 3) {nub phyogs bde dang ldan pa'i zhing khams} 4) {byang phyogs r...	phyogs bcu'i zhing khams
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddhas of the ten directions. 1) {dkon mchog 'byung gnas}. 2) {mya ngan med pa} 3) {rin chen 'od 'phro} 4) {rgyal ba'i dbang bo} 5) {pa dmo dam pa'i dpal mnga'} 6) {nyi ma snang ba'i dpal} 7) ...	phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas
ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད	all the sentient beings of the 10 directions	phyogs bcu'i sems can thams cad
ཕྱོགས་བཅུར་འཕྲོས	emanated in the 10 directions	phyogs bcur 'phros
ཕྱོགས་ཆ	limited dimension	phyogs cha
ཕྱོགས་ཆ་ཅན	partial, biased, prejudiced	phyogs cha can
ཕྱོགས་ཆ་དབུས་མེད	without periphery or center	phyogs cha dbus med
ཕྱོགས་ཆ་མེད་པ	impartially	phyogs cha med pa
ཕྱོགས་ཆ་རེ་རེ	individual positions	phyogs cha re re
ཕྱོགས་ཆད	delimited in various directions	phyogs chad
ཕྱོགས་ཆའི་རྟོག་པ	hesitation or scruples arising from feeling an interest in a thing	phyogs cha'i rtog pa
ཕྱོགས་ཆར	in a limited manner	phyogs char
ཕྱོགས་ཆར་གཙེས	to become stuck on a partial aspect	phyogs char gtses
ཕྱོགས་ཆར་འཛིན་པ	to follow in a limited manner	phyogs char 'dzin pa
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས	property of the subject,	phyogs chos
སུབཇེཅཏའས་ཆརཅཏེརིསྟིཅ	reason (1 of 3 roles of a valid reason), reason's relevance to the subject	subject's characteristic
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལྟོས	reason, the logical subject itself	phyogs chos kyi ltos
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ལྟོས་གཞི	basis of the subject's characteristic	phyogs chos kyi ltos gzhi
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་དགུའི་འཁོར་ལོ	Dignaga's wheel of reasons diagram: above and below true [yang dag], logs la the two contradictory ones 'gal ba gnyis &, in the four corners the four thun mong ma nges, in the center thun min ma ng...	phyogs chos dgu'i 'khor lo
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་ཅན་གྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས་དགུ	the 9 reasons qualifying the subject phyogs chos 'jal ba'i rtags 'dzin sems thought grasping the reason evaluating the subject of the thesis [the cause of inference, knowledge of perception, infere...	phyogs chos can gyi gtan tshigs dgu
ཕྱོགས་ཆོས་གཏན་ཚིགས་དགུ	the 9 reasons qualifying the subject	phyogs chos gtan tshigs dgu
ཕྱོགས་ཉལ	to avoid [?]	phyogs nyal
ཕྱོགས་གཉིས	1) 2/ both sides, bilateral ris gnyis; 2) yul phyogs khag gnyis; 3) rang gzhan gyi cha gnyis	phyogs gnyis
ཕྱོགས་གཉིས་ཀ	both sides	phyogs gnyis ka
ཕྱོགས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་གྲོས་མོལ	bilateral negotiations	phyogs gnyis kyi gros mol
ཕྱོགས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ཆོད་དོན	bilateral agreement	phyogs gnyis kyi chod don
ཕྱོགས་ཏུ་བཤད་པ	use a simplified treatment	phyogs tu bshad pa
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས	included in the class/ on the side of, adherent of, members of,	phyogs gtogs
པྲོ	-	pro
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས་ཀྱི་མི	members, people	phyogs gtogs kyi mi
ཨོན་ཐེ་སིདེ་ཨོཕ༹	-	on the side of
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	satellite country	phyogs gtogs rgyal khab
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས་རྒྱལ་ཕྲན	satellite country	phyogs gtogs rgyal phran
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས་དང་བཅས་པ	and their associated divisions	phyogs gtogs dang bcas pa
ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས་པ	included in the class/ on the side of, adherent of, members of, pro --	phyogs gtogs pa
ཕྱོགས་རྟོག	concepts/ thoughts of different aspects/ sides	phyogs rtog
ཕྱོགས་རྟོགས	know only 1 side/ aspect phyogs rtogs byed kyi srang mda'i 'khor lo - compass	phyogs rtogs
ཕྱོགས་ལྟ	partial/ biased viewpoint	phyogs lta
ཕྱོགས་ལྟ་འཁོར་ལོ	compass	phyogs lta 'khor lo
ཕྱོགས་ལྟའི་མཐའ་ལ་ཞེན་པ	fixations on the extremes of biased views	phyogs lta'i mtha' la zhen pa
ཕྱོགས་སྟོན	1) show/ face in the direction [sa gnas gang du 'gro dgos phyogs ston byed pa]; 2) act as a guide, show someone around [,//las ka byed lugs phyogs ston byed pa,//'byor med gral rim la gsar brje'i p...	phyogs ston
ཕྱོགས་སྟོན་འཁོར་ལོ	compass	phyogs ston 'khor lo
ཕྱོགས་སྟོན་པ	hinds	phyogs ston pa
ཕྱོགས་སྟོན་བྱེད	guide, direct	phyogs ston byed
ཕྱོགས་སྟོན་དབྱུག་བརྡ	conductor's baton	phyogs ston dbyug brda
ཕྱོགས་བལྟ་འཁོར་ལོ	compass	phyogs blta 'khor lo
ཕྱོགས་བསྟན	a hint should be given, to give a hint	phyogs bstan
ཕྱོགས་བསྟུན	in accord w	phyogs bstun
ཕྱོགས་ཐབས	means, method	phyogs thabs
ཕྱོགས་ཐབས་ཅན	phyogs kun ??	phyogs thabs can
ཕྱོགས་ཐམས་ཅད	in all directions	phyogs thams cad
ཕྱོགས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	all around	phyogs thams cad du
ཕྱོགས་ཐོན	go far	phyogs thon
ཕྱོགས་མཐའ	1) end of the earth; 2) phyogs dang mtha' ste every direction; 3) ultimate end/ use; 4) far away, distant places, the ends of the earth	phyogs mtha'
ཕྱོགས་མཐའ་ཁ་བཞི	all directions	phyogs mtha' kha bzhi
ཕྱོགས་མཐའ་དག	all sides/ parties, various aspects phyogs mtha' dag dang go bsdur byas nas	phyogs mtha' dag
ཡོང་བའི་མི་མང་པོ	many people coming from far away/ every direction into the city	yong ba'i mi mang po
ཕྱོགས་མཐའ་བྲལ	transcends all limited views	phyogs mtha' bral
ཕྱོགས་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ	to transcend directions and limits	phyogs mtha' bral ba
ཕྱོགས་མཐུན	appropriate, suitable, adequate, conducive to	phyogs mthun
ཕྱོགས་མཐུན་དངོས་བཅུ	(chn	phyogs mthun dngos bcu
ཕྱོགས་མཐུན་པ	be in conformity w	phyogs mthun pa
ཕྱོགས་མཐོང	phyogs re ba tsam shes pa'am phyogs ris lta snang	phyogs mthong
ཕྱོགས་འཐེན	bias, partiality 1740	phyogs 'then
ཕྱོགས་འཐེན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བརྗོད	biased comments	phyogs 'then gyi 'grel brjod
ཕྱོགས་འཐེན་པ	phyogs ris byed pa	phyogs 'then pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་ཆ	1 side/ direction, place	phyogs dang cha
ཕྱོགས་དང་མཐུན་པ	similar class	phyogs dang mthun pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་མཐུན་པའི	jO 138	phyogs dang mthun pa'i
ཕྱོགས་དང་མཐུན་པའི་ཆོས	qualities conducive to enlightenment (37)	phyogs dang mthun pa'i chos
ཕྱོགས་དང་འཐུན་པ	similar class	phyogs dang 'thun pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་དེད་པ	along	phyogs dang ded pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་ཕྱོགས་མཚམས	the main and intermediate directions phyogs dang phyogs mtshams kun tu	phyogs dang phyogs mtshams
སྙན་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོར་གྲགས་པ	in all	snyan pa rgya chen por grags pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་རིས་མེད	no bias or division exists	phyogs dang ris med
ཕྱོགས་དང་རིས་མེད་པ	{phyogs dang ris su ma chad par} without (arbitrary) bias and/ or distinction/ division; not subject to extremes or distinctions/ divisions	phyogs dang ris med pa
ཕྱོགས་དང་རིས་སུ་མ་ཆད་པར	{phyogs ris med pa} without (arbitrary) bias and/ or distinction/ division; not subject to extremes or distinctions/ divisions	phyogs dang ris su ma chad par
ཕྱོགས་དུས	space/ (direction and time	phyogs dus
ཕྱོགས་དུས་ཀྱི་སྣང་པ	appearances of space and time	phyogs dus kyi snang pa
ཕྱོགས་དུས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	awareness/ knowledge of space and time	phyogs dus kyi shes pa
ཕྱོགས་དུས་རྒྱལ	the victorious 1s of the times and directions, victorious over the times and directions	phyogs dus rgyal
ཕྱོགས་དུས་རྒྱལ་བ	the victorious 1s of the times and directions	phyogs dus rgyal ba
ཕྱོགས་དེར	[to] there, in that direction, that way	phyogs der
ཕྱོགས་དྲུག	the six directions phyogs drug shar lho nub byang steng 'og	phyogs drug
ཕྱོགས་བདག	sun, guardians of the 8 quarters	phyogs bdag
ཕྱོགས་མདོག	the primary colors [of the four directions], cardinal point, region	phyogs mdog
ཕྱོགས་འདྲ་བ	similar	phyogs 'dra ba
ཕྱོགས་སྡུད	collecting, gathering, combining, uniting, summary, multipurpose, complex, comprehensive	phyogs sdud
ཕྱོགས་སྡུད་བྱེད	collect, gather, combine, unite, summarize,	phyogs sdud byed
ཕྱོགས་སྡོམ	summary, synthesis	phyogs sdom
ཕྱོགས་སྡོམ་བྱེད་པ	to sum up, summarize	phyogs sdom byed pa
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུ་བྱེད་པ	mass	phyogs bsdu byed pa
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུར	compiled	phyogs bsdur
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས	combination	phyogs bsdus
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་བེད་སྤྱོད	multi-purpose use	phyogs bsdus bed spyod
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་བྱས་པའི་དཔེ་རྩོམ	anthology	phyogs bsdus byas pa'i dpe rtsom
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་བྱེད	collect, gather, combine, unite, summarize	phyogs bsdus byed
ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་རིག་པ	inductive method	phyogs bsdus rig pa
ཕྱོགས་བསྡེབས་པ	many combined into 1	phyogs bsdebs pa
ཕྱོགས་བསྡོམས	mang po mnyam bsdebs	phyogs bsdoms
ཕྱོགས་ན་མི་གནས་པ	impartially remaining straightforward	phyogs na mi gnas pa
ཕྱོགས་ནས་ཀྱི་གཤིན་རྗེ་བཅུ་གཉིས	1) {steng gi 'ci 9bdag nag 'joms}. 2) {shar gyi kong rtse brag 'joms} 3) {shar lhor a ba glang mgo} 4) {lha'i ya ba ti} 5) {lho nub mig dmar} 6) {nub kyi rmigs pa} 7) {nub byang te la ba} 8) {byang...	phyogs nas kyi gshin rje bcu gnyis
ཕྱོགས་ནུས་པ	ability to turn to {blo chos la phyogs nus pa} having the ability to turn your mind to the Dharma	phyogs nus pa
ཕྱོགས་ནོར	deviation, error	phyogs nor
ཕྱོགས་སྣང་བྱེད	illuminator of the directions, sun	phyogs snang byed
ཕྱོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	divert from, dissuade from	phyogs par byed pa
ཕྱོགས་སྤྲང	bum, vagabond	phyogs sprang
ཕྱོགས་ཕེབས	traveling [h]	phyogs phebs
ཕྱོགས་ཕེབས་གནང	travel, take a trip [h]	phyogs phebs gnang
ཕྱོགས་ཕེབས་བྱེད	travel, take a trip [h]	phyogs phebs byed
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱི་མ	enemy's party, bad guys, side	phyogs phyi ma
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས	many places	phyogs phyogs
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	different places / lands	phyogs phyogs rgyal khams
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས་ནས	from all directions	phyogs phyogs nas
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས་སུ	all around	phyogs phyogs su
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཕེབས་པ	wandering from place to place 1741	phyogs phyogs su phebs pa
ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོང་ངེ་བ་ཐུགས་ཚ	her heart was troubled	phyogs phyong nge ba thugs tsha
ཕྱོགས་བྱམས	extending in all directions	phyogs byams
ཕྱོགས་བྱེད་པ	side	phyogs byed pa
ཕྱོགས་བྲལ	impartial, unbiased	phyogs bral
ཕྱོགས་བྲལ་དྲང་ཐིག	unbiased and drang pos gzhung bsrangs pa [straighten out the main point]?	phyogs bral drang thig
ཕྱོགས་བྲལ་འཛིན་མེད	beyond direction and concepts	phyogs bral 'dzin med
ཕྱོགས་བྲལ་ལྷུང་དང་བྲལ་བ	impartial, unbiased	phyogs bral lhung dang bral ba
ཕྱོགས་འབྱམས	panorama/ panoramic (vista)	phyogs 'byams
ཕྱོགས་འབྱམས་སུ་གྲོལ	boundless selfliberation	phyogs 'byams su grol
ཕྱོགས་འབྲང	phyogs gcig gi rjes su 'gro ba po	phyogs 'brang
ཕྱོགས་མ་གོ་བ	the direction is different. For example to distinguish two types of reasoning, one can use {phyogs ma go ba} to imply the one reasoning is different from the other	phyogs ma go ba
ཕྱོགས་མ་ཕྱེས་པ	without defining the issues involved	phyogs ma phyes pa
ཕྱོགས་མང་གྲོས་ཆོད	multi-lateral treaty/ agreement	phyogs mang gros chod
ཕྱོགས་མང་གྲོས་མོལ	multi-lateral negotiation/ discussion/ conference	phyogs mang gros mol
ཕྱོགས་མང་པོར་མཁས་པ	versatile	phyogs mang por mkhas pa
ཕྱོགས་མི་འཛིན	non-partisan [Prasangika view]	phyogs mi 'dzin
ཕྱོགས་མེད	impartial, without country, a vagabond, no limitations, neutral, not curved, without any curvature or crookedness, absence of extremes, unbiased	phyogs med
ཕྱོགས་མེད་འགྲིམ	wandering carefree [from retreat to retreat]	phyogs med 'grim
ཕྱོགས་མེད་འགྲིམས	roaming at random	phyogs med 'grims
ཕྱོགས་མེད་འགྲིམས་པ	rgyal khams + - to roam through countries at random	phyogs med 'grims pa
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རྒྱལ་ཁམས	rgya khyab kyi yul lung gcig tu ma nges pa	phyogs med rgyal khams
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རྒྱལ་ཁམས་འགྲིམ་པ	to wander from place to place, traveling at will throughout many regions	phyogs med rgyal khams 'grim pa
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རྒྱལ་ཁམས་འགྲིམས་པ	wandering freely from place to place	phyogs med rgyal khams 'grims pa
ཕྱོགས་མེད་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	~generosity, there are no preferences, carefree	phyogs med mchod sbyin
ཕྱོགས་མེད་གཏོང	impartial	phyogs med gtong
ཕྱོགས་མེད་ཐོས་པ	~learning	phyogs med thos pa
ཕྱོགས་མེད་དུ	impartially	phyogs med du
ཕྱོགས་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	unrestricted movements	phyogs med du 'gro ba
ཕྱོགས་མེད་བདུན	(chn	phyogs med bdun
ཕྱོགས་མེད་མ	1) young woman; 2) prickly med plant Solanum jaquinii	phyogs med ma
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རིམ་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཟབ	profound dharmas of all traditions without prejudice	phyogs med rim med kyi chos zab
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རིས་མེད	of all traditions without prejudice	phyogs med ris med
ཕྱོགས་མེད་རིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཟབ	profound dharmas of all traditions without prejudice	phyogs med ris med kyi chos zab
ཕྱོགས་སྨྲ་བ	{dngos smra ba} but most {bye mdo gnyis}	phyogs smra ba
ཕྱོགས་ཙམ	(even in) the slightest	phyogs tsam
ཕྱོགས་ཙམ་བསྟན	give a hint	phyogs tsam bstan
ཕྱོགས་ཙམ་ཞིག	just partially	phyogs tsam zhig
ཕྱོགས་གཙང	1) bkra shis pa'i phyogs; 2) bod du mi shi ba'i phung po skyel ba dang gsur khog gyug skabs thog mar kha ston sa'i phyogs	phyogs gtsang
ཕྱོགས་རྩ	tshes gcig	phyogs rtsa
ཕྱོགས་ཚོགས	party, group, bloc, clique	phyogs tshogs
ཕྱོགས་མཚམས	cardinal and intermediate directions, cardinal and intercardinal directions	phyogs mtshams
ཕྱོགས་མཚམས་ཁོར་ཡུག	in all surrounding directions	phyogs mtshams khor yug
ཕྱོགས་མཚམས་སྟེང་འོག	all directions, above and below, the cardinal and intermediate directions, above and below, the four cardinal and the four intermediate directions and above and below, the ten directions	phyogs mtshams steng 'og
ཕྱོགས་མཚམས་འདི	this particular point in space	phyogs mtshams 'di
ཕྱོགས་མཚམས་མ	queen of the yaksha	phyogs mtshams ma
ཕྱོགས་མཚུངས	a variant form, similar kind	phyogs mtshungs
ཕྱོགས་མཚོན་ཙམ	merely a rough idea	phyogs mtshon tsam
ཕྱོགས་འཚོ	be mindful, alert, undistracted, collect 1self	phyogs 'tsho
ཕྱོགས་འཚོ་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	being watchful/ on guard	phyogs 'tsho phyogs skyong
ཕྱོགས་འཚོ་བ	to be mindful, alert, undistracted, to collect oneself, be watchful / on guard	phyogs 'tsho ba
ཕྱོགས་འཛིན	to take sides, partiality, onesidedness; sectarian; fanatic(al); (religious) zealot	phyogs 'dzin
ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་གྲུབ་མཐའ	Semde view regarding the limits and partiality of a philosophical position	phyogs 'dzin grub mtha'
ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་པ	be attached to/ grasp 1 side/ tradition	phyogs 'dzin pa
ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་པའི་དབུ་མ་པ	side-taking madhyamakas	phyogs 'dzin pa'i dbu ma pa
ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་བྱེད	take sides, be partial/ biased/ 1-sided, take the side/ part of	phyogs 'dzin byed
ཕྱོགས་འཛོལ	go in the wrong direction, be wrong	phyogs 'dzol
ཕྱོགས་ཞྭ	Tibetan masters travel hat	phyogs zhwa
ཕྱོགས་ཞེན	be attached to 1's own side	phyogs zhen
ཕྱོགས་ཞེན་ཅན	biased, subjective, prejudiced, partisan, taking sides	phyogs zhen can
ཕྱོགས་ཞེན་བྱེད་པ	to be biased, subjective, prejudiced, partisan, taking sides	phyogs zhen byed pa
ཕྱོགས་གཞན་གཅིག་ཏུ	{rgyal po phyogs gzhan gcig tu don gnyer du song ba} the king had to go away for a time on state business	phyogs gzhan gcig tu
ཕྱོགས་བཞི	the four directions, all around	phyogs bzhi
ཕྱོགས་བཞི་ཁ་རུ	all round	phyogs bzhi kha ru
ཕྱོགས་བཞི་མཚམས་བརྒྱད	the 8 main and intermediate directions, in all directions	phyogs bzhi mtshams brgyad
ཕྱོགས་བཞི་ཡངས་པ	panorama	phyogs bzhi yangs pa
ཕྱོགས་བཞིའི་གནས་ཆེན་བཞི	(chn phyogs bzhi'i brag la sprul sku'i zhabs rjes	phyogs bzhi'i gnas chen bzhi
བཞག་པ་བཞི	(chn	bzhag pa bzhi
ཕྱོགས་བཞིར	in the four [cardinal] directions	phyogs bzhir
ཕྱོགས་བཟུང	took sides, was partial/ biased/ 1- sided, took the side/ part of	phyogs bzung
ཕྱོགས་བཟུང་པ	one who has become a party to, one engaged to	phyogs bzung pa
ཕྱོགས་བཟུང་བྱེད	took sides, was partial/ biased/ 1-sided, took the side/ part of	phyogs bzung byed
ཕྱོགས་འི་ལྷོ	to the south of	phyogs 'i lho
ཕྱོགས་འི་ལྷོའི	the S of	phyogs 'i lho'i
ཕྱོགས་ཡན	(in an) unconstrained/ unrestrained (manner); isc. unlimited/ limitless	phyogs yan
ཕྱོགས་ཡན་དུ	(in an) unconstrained/ unrestrained (manner); isc. unlimited/ limitless	phyogs yan du
ཕྱོགས་ཡན་དུ་ཤར	to surge boundlessly	phyogs yan du shar
ཕྱོགས་ཡོངས	all-around, general	phyogs yongs
ཕྱོགས་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁ	all-around victory	phyogs yongs kyi rgyal kha
ཕྱོགས་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་འདེམས་བསྐོ	general election	phyogs yongs kyi 'dems bsko
ཕྱོགས་རིམ་མེད་པ	impartial	phyogs rim med pa
ཕྱོགས་རིས	1) shog kha; 2) biased desire and dislike, sectarianism, partiality, bias, particle, preferences, 1-sidedness, preconceptions, be partial, take 1 side, faction, clique, sect	phyogs ris
ཕྱོགས་རིས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	partial/ biased viewpoint	phyogs ris kyi lta tshul
ཕྱོགས་རིས་ཀྱིས	simply wouldn't, insist on phyogs ris chung bas dgra dang gnyen	phyogs ris kyis
བཤེས་མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད	by lessening partiality make enemies and friends into 1	bshes mtha' gcig tu byed
ཕྱོགས་རིས་ཆོས་ལ་བཅད	be sectarian toward the dharma	phyogs ris chos la bcad
ཕྱོགས་རིས་འཐེན་འཁྱེར	bias, partiality	phyogs ris 'then 'khyer
ཕྱོགས་རིས་དང་ཁ་འཛིན་ཆེ	revel in bigotry and prejudice	phyogs ris dang kha 'dzin che
ཕྱོགས་རིས་བྱེད་པ	to be partial, make preferences	phyogs ris byed pa
ཕྱོགས་རིས་བྲལ	impartial, unbiased, unfragmented, w/o bias, impartiality, w/o partiality	phyogs ris bral
ཕྱོགས་རིས་བྲལ་བ	impartial, unbiased, unfragmented, w/o bias, impartiality, w/o partiality	phyogs ris bral ba
ཕྱོགས་རིས་མེད	impartial, unbiased, unfragmented, w/o bias, impartiality, w/o partiality	phyogs ris med
ཕྱོགས་རིས་མེད་པ	impartial, unbiased, unfragmented, w/o bias, impartiality, w/o partiality	phyogs ris med pa
ཕྱོགས་རིས་མེད་པའི	has been all over, anywhere	phyogs ris med pa'i
ཕྱོགས་རིས་མེད་པའི་ཡུལ	throughout the lands	phyogs ris med pa'i yul
ཕྱོགས་རིས་མེད་པའི་ཡུལ་ས	throughout the lands	phyogs ris med pa'i yul sa
ཕྱོགས་རིས་རིང་ལུགས	sectarianism, bigotry	phyogs ris ring lugs
ཕྱོགས་རིས་སུ་སྣང	to appear delimited and divided in one direction	phyogs ris su snang
ཕྱོགས་རིས་སུ་ལྷུང་བ	[fall into] bias/ partiality	phyogs ris su lhung ba
ཕྱོགས་རེ	inclined, slanting, imperfect, biased, limited	phyogs re
ཕྱོགས་རེ་བ	partial, some portion / part of	phyogs re ba
ཕྱོགས་རེ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	incompleteness, partiality, 1-sidedness, unilateralness, bias	phyogs re ba'i rang bzhin
ཕྱོགས་རེ་ཙམ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	unilateral	phyogs re tsam gyi sgo nas
ཕྱོགས་རེར་འཆོལ་བ	. . . phyogs rer 'chol	phyogs rer 'chol ba
ཕྱོགས་རེས	partial	phyogs res
ཕྱོགས་རོལ	direction	phyogs rol
ཕྱོགས་ལ	. . . gi phyogs la - with respect to . . . ; in the case of . . .	phyogs la
ཕྱོགས་ལ་གཏོང་ལ	gleng dug gsum	phyogs la gtong la
ཕྱོགས་ལ་གཏོང	whatever he says is bent toward the three poisons	phyogs la gtong
ཕྱོགས་ལང	phyogs gcig la dpung rogs byed pa	phyogs lang
ཕྱོགས་ལས་གོལ་བ	mistake the path, go off course, go amiss	phyogs las gol ba
ཕྱོགས་ལས་འདས	beyond the limits	phyogs las 'das
ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	conqueror of all, victorious in all directions; {zhabs drung gsung sprul} 1708-1736 1743	phyogs las rnam rgyal
ཕྱོགས་ལོངས	period of coursing of a planet	phyogs longs
ཕྱོགས་སམ་སྡེར་གྱུར་པ	belong to that category or type	phyogs sam sder gyur pa
ཕྱོགས་སུ	gen. + - in the direction of	phyogs su
ཕྱོགས་སུ་འགྲུལ་ལམ	pathway leading to	phyogs su 'grul lam
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བསྒྱུར	attune to; x {chos kyi phyogs su bsgyur mi gtub} they cannot attune themselves to the Dharma	phyogs su bsgyur
ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཆད	fall to extremes; partial position." ¦ KKP, 239.18: {snang stong so so'i phyogs su chad}.../fall to the extremes//the partial positions/ of appearance and emptiness [considered] separately. [mss]	phyogs su chad
ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཉེར་སོང	approaches	phyogs su nyer song
ཕྱོགས་སུ་གཏོགས་པ	collect, put aside	phyogs su gtogs pa
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བཏང་བ	spend for the benefit of ...	phyogs su btang ba
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བལྟས་པ	to consider according to a partial view	phyogs su bltas pa
ཕྱོགས་སུ་མ་ལྷུང	not biased, impartial	phyogs su ma lhung
ཕྱོགས་སུ་མ་ལྷུངས	not fall into sectarianism	phyogs su ma lhungs
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བསླན་ཏོ	kept them together on one side	phyogs su bslan to
ཕྱོགས་སུ་ལྷུང	partial to	phyogs su lhung
ཕྱོགས་སུ་ལྷུང་བ	to fall into a partial view, to fall into sectarianism	phyogs su lhung ba
ཕྱོགས་སློན་པ	phyogs su sdud pa,//khyab spel byas nas phan nus thon pa'i nyams myong rnams phyogs slon pa	phyogs slon pa
ཕྱོགས་བསླད་པ	make a mistake about the road	phyogs bslad pa
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང	{phyogs su lhung ba} (to be subject to/ defined by)(to fall/ falling into) extremes	phyogs lhung
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་ཀུན་བྲལ	beyond all partitions	phyogs lhung kun bral
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་རྒྱ་ཆད	to fragment or fall into bias	phyogs lhung rgya chad
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་དང་བྲལ་བ	unbiased phyogs lhung rnal 'byor gnyis la srung ba	phyogs lhung dang bral ba
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་ཕྱོགས་སུ་མ་ལྷུང	transcending bias, open minded	phyogs lhung phyogs su ma lhung
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་བ	biased, partial	phyogs lhung ba
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་བྲལ་བ	free from bias or polarity	phyogs lhung bral ba
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་མེད	impartial, without taking sides	phyogs lhung med
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་མེད་པ	without - falling into biased extremes	phyogs lhung med pa
རྟེན་གསུམ་དུ་ཁྱབ	by his looking after the common people w/o partiality the fame of the king filled the three worlds	rten gsum du khyab
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་མེད་བྲལ	be impartial	phyogs lhung med bral
ཕྱོགས་ལྷུངས	sectarianism	phyogs lhungs
ཕྱོད	haunted; See also {mi dga' phyod de ba, skyo phyod de ba}	phyod
ཕྱོད་ཆེ	pushy, persistent	phyod che
ཕྱོད་ཆེ་བ	very pushing	phyod che ba
ཕྱོད་སྙིང་མི་དགའ་དེ་བ	feeling haunted and miserable	phyod snying mi dga' de ba
ཕྱོད་དེ་སྙིང་མི་དགའ་བ	feeling haunted and miserable	phyod de snying mi dga' ba
ཕྱོད་པ	be thorough, carry through	phyod pa
ཕྱོད་མ	disturbed, agitated cranky, miserable, undisturbed, agitated, cranky	phyod ma
ཕྱོན་པ	wearing	phyon pa
ཕྱོར	imp. of {'phyar ba}	phyor
ཕྱོལ་ཡས	#	phyol yas
ཕྱོས	pour out, A 'byo ba	phyos
ཕྱོས་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one direction, in a certain direction	phyos gcig tu
ཕྱོས་པ	distracted	phyos pa
ཕྲ	1) subtle, minor, thin, fine, narrow, shallow, minute, detailed, complex [comp phra mo]; 2) inlaid jewel, precious stone, ornament	phra
ཕྲ་ཀོང	phra 'debs yul gyi kong kong	phra kong
ཕྲ་གཀོད	inlaid	phra gkod
ཕྲ་གཀོད་རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་བདུན་པ	the 7 inlaid precious stones	phra gkod rin chen sna bdun pa
ཕྲ་བཀོད	mounted jewel, mounted ornament, jeweled display	phra bkod
ཕྲ་བཀོད་པ	encrusted, inlaid [with jewels.]	phra bkod pa
ཕྲ་བཀོད་ཕྲོ	irregular	phra bkod phro
ཕྲ་ཁུང	phra rgyan 'debs sa'i kong kong	phra khung
ཕྲ་འགོད་པ	set/ inlay/ emboss w jewels	phra 'god pa
ཕྲ་རྒྱག་པ	set/ inlay/ emboss w jewels	phra rgyag pa
ཕྲ་རྒྱན	ornamental objects set w stones	phra rgyan
ཕྲ་རྒྱན་གྱི་ཚོམ་བུ	jewel stone [in jewelry]	phra rgyan gyi tshom bu
ཕྲ་རྒྱས	"subtle increaser", latent tendency, [ploliferating] kleshas, vanities [nyon mongs pa phra ba las rgyas par byed pa ste ngo bo mthong dka' bas na phra ba dang, dmigs pa dang mtsungs ldan gang rung ...	phra rgyas
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་ཀུན་འགྲོ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 all perading proliferating kleshas [sdug bsngal bden pa mthong bas spang bya	phra rgyas kun 'gro bcu gcig
ལྟ་བ་ལྔ་དང	the tsom dang, kun 'byung bden pa mthong bas spang bya log lta dang, lta ba mchog 'dzin, the tsom bcas gsum dang, de dag dang mtsungs par mi ldan pa'i ma 'dres pa'i ma rig pa bcas bcu gcig go	lta ba lnga dang
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	the all pervading proliferating kleshas	phra rgyas kun tu 'gro ba
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཐེ་ཚོམ	doubt w the kleshas	phra rgyas kyi the tshom
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་དགུ་བཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 98 proliferating kleshas [mthong spang brgyad cu rtsa brgyad &, sgom spang bcu bcas khams gsum gyi spang bya dgu bcu go brgyad mngon pa mdzod las gsungs	phra rgyas dgu bcu rtsa brgyad
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་བརྒྱ་དང་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	the 128 proliferating kleshas [mthong spang brgya dang bcu gnyis, sgom spang bcu drug bcas khams gsum gyi spang bya brgya dang nyi shu rtsa brgyad yod pa mngon pa kun btus las gsungs	phra rgyas brgya dang nyer brgyad
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་བཅུ	the 10 root kleshas	phra rgyas bcu
ཕྲ་རྒྱས་དྲུག	the six root kleshas	phra rgyas drug
ཕྲ་རྒྱུད་བདུན	seven special tantras	phra rgyud bdun
ཕྲ་བརྒྱབ་པའི་རྒྱན་ཆ	ornamental objects set w stones	phra brgyab pa'i rgyan cha
ཕྲ་གཅོད	cut jewels/ stones	phra gcod
ཕྲ་ཉལ་གྱིས་སོང	to vanish	phra nyal gyis song
ཕྲ་བཏབ་པ	encrusted (with jewels	phra btab pa
ཕྲ་ཐག་པ་སར་ཆད	cut the thread wherever it is thin	phra thag pa sar chad
ཕྲ་མཐོང་ཆེ་ཤོས	microscope	phra mthong che shos
ཕྲ་དོག	jealousy	phra dog
ཕྲ་དོག་བྱེད	be jealous	phra dog byed
ཕྲ་རྡུལ	subtle atom	phra rdul
ཕྲ་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ	new tree branch small and supple, wicker phra ldem ldem gyi lcang ma'i yal ga small and supple willow twig	phra ldem ldem
ཕྲ་ནང་གི་དབུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	subtle & inner Great Madhyamaka	phra nang gi dbu ma chen po
ཕྲ་པོ	tiny, subtle, fine, very, tenuous, narrow/ precise	phra po
ཕྲ་ཕབ་པ	cast a horoscope	phra phab pa
ཕྲ་ཕུང	cells [bio]	phra phung
ཕྲ་ཕྲོ	ex {za zi phra phro g.yo 'gul can}	phra phro
ཕྲ་བ	1) fine, little, subtle, slight, minor, thin, minute, detailed, complex; 2) snum pa	phra ba
ཕྲ་བ་ཆོས་ཉིད	subtle ultimate nature	phra ba chos nyid
ཕྲ་བ་རྟོགས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga realizing the subtle	phra ba rtogs pa'i rnal 'byor
ཕྲ་བ་བདག	subtle ego	phra ba bdag
ཕྲ་བ་ནང་གི་དབུ་མ	same as ngo bo nyid med par smra ba'i dbu ma	phra ba nang gi dbu ma
ཕྲ་བ་ནང་གི་དབུ་མ་པ	rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma	phra ba nang gi dbu ma pa
ཕྲ་བ་རྫོགས་རིམ	[through the] subtle perfection / completion stage	phra ba rdzogs rim
ཕྲ་བའི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	subtle momentariness	phra ba'i skad cig ma
ཕྲ་བའི་རྒྱུ	subtle cause	phra ba'i rgyu
ཕྲ་བའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	subtle three doors. The subtle three doors are the nadis, pranas and bindus. The gross three doors are body, speech and mind.	phra ba'i sgo gsum
ཕྲ་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of the most subtle	phra ba'i rnal 'byor
ཕྲ་བའི་འབྱུང་བཞི	the four subtle elements	phra ba'i 'byung bzhi
ཕྲ་བའི་མི་རྟག་པ	subtle impermanence	phra ba'i mi rtag pa
ཕྲ་བའི་རླུང	subtle mind	phra ba'i rlung
ཕྲ་བའི་སེམས	subtle mind	phra ba'i sems
ཕྲ་འབུ	germ	phra 'bu
ཕྲ་འབེབས	mirror divination	phra 'bebs
ཕྲ་སྦོམ	thick and thin, thickness	phra sbom
ཕྲ་སྦོམ་གྱི་ཚད	[degree of] thickness	phra sbom gyi tshad
ཕྲ་སྦོམ་གཉིས	thick and thin	phra sbom gnyis
ཕྲ་མ	calumny, slander, slander, divisive talk, slander, divisive talk, def. {pha rol mthun pa dbye ba'i tshig smra ba}	phra ma
ཕྲ་མ་མཁན	troublemaker	phra ma mkhan
ཕྲ་མ་ཅན	(met saffron	phra ma can
ཕྲ་མ་བྱེད	cheat	phra ma byed
ཕྲ་མ་བྱེད་པ	to make malicious gossip	phra ma byed pa
ཕྲ་མ་བྱེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of slandering [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, bsam bzhin du dge slong mthun pa dag phra ma'i tshig gis 'byed par byed pa'o	phra ma byed pa'i ltung byed
ཕྲ་མ་དབྱེན་སྦྱོར	dkrug shing rgyag pa	phra ma dbyen sbyor
ཕྲ་མ་རྫུན་ཚིག	gossip and slander	phra ma rdzun tshig
ཕྲ་མ་ཞུ་བ	speak words of slander/ calumny	phra ma zhu ba
ཕྲ་མན	+(ma - striped, variegated/ tramen, "alloyed"/ "hybrid" goddess ("with head different from the body"	phra man
ཨས་ཧེརྨཕྲོདིཏེ་ཨོར་ཧལཕ༹	black halfwhite representing uncertainty, which could become confusion or liberation in vys they appear as beautiful godesses with animal heads]	as hermaphrodite or half
ཕྲ་མན་གྱི་ཁྲབ	the armor of animalheaded divinities	phra man gyi khrab
ཕྲ་མན་མ	stripped, variegated / tramen, "alloy" / "hybrid" goddess. ["with head different from the body"]	phra man ma
ཕྲ་མན་མ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 127-2]	phra man ma brgyad
ཕྲ་མའི་ནད	a disease	phra ma'i nad
ཕྲ་མའི་ཚིག	words of calumny	phra ma'i tshig
ཕྲ་མར་སྨྲ་བ	slander	phra mar smra ba
ཕྲ་མེད	displaced precious stones from an ornament 1745	phra med
ཕྲ་མེན	pis' cis [animal headed, cannibalistic deities/ spirits of the wrathful mandala, capable of seeing the future on an oracular mirror book 1, two	phra men
ཨནིམལ	headed divinity. a class of beings included under humans, deities who protect the fringe of the mandala. goddesses with animal heads; Tramen (animal-headed beings) 2) sorcery, witchcraft, tramen	animal
ཕྲ་མེན་མ	8 bardo goddesses	phra men ma
ཕྲ་མོ	tiny, subtle, fine, very, tenuous, narrow/ precise	phra mo
ཕྲ་མོ་ཙམ	slender, very fine	phra mo tsam
ཕྲ་མོ་འང	even the slightest	phra mo 'ang
ཕྲ་མོ་རེ་ཙམ	the least {zang zing gi longs spyod phra mo re tsam} with the least material offering	phra mo re tsam
ཕྲ་མོ་ལ	to a certain degree	phra mo la
ཕྲ་མོའང	even the slightest	phra mo'ang
ཕྲ་མོའི་རྒྱན	bsam blo sngon btang gi sgo nas go bya'i don brda thabs zur gyis thon pa dang, bsam blo sngon btang med par 'phral la lus kyi rnam 'gyur gsar pa zhig ngang gis gsal ba'i sgo nas nang sems kyi 'char...	phra mo'i rgyan
ཕྲ་མོའི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	(chn	phra mo'i rgyan gnyis
ཕྲ་མོའི་འབྲས	very useful and important medicine	phra mo'i 'bras
ཕྲ་མོའི་ཞིང	field of panicum miliaceum	phra mo'i zhing
ཕྲ་མོའི་ཡང་ཕྲ་མོ	smallest of the small phra mo'i las don la yang yun ring ngal ba - \ -	phra mo'i yang phra mo
ཕྲ་མོར	slander	phra mor
ཕྲ་མོས་ཀྲང	even the tiniest	phra mos krang
ཕྲ་ཚུགས	get firmly established/ settled	phra tshugs
ཕྲ་ཚུགས་ཐབས་ལ	in order to get firmly established/ settled	phra tshugs thabs la
ཕྲ་ཚོགས	inset stones, studded	phra tshogs
ཕྲ་ཚོམ	jewel stone [in jewelry]	phra tshom
ཕྲ་ཚོམས	inset stones, studded	phra tshoms
ཕྲ་ཚོམས་ཅན	has inset stones/ studded	phra tshoms can
ཕྲ་ཞིག་ཅན	precise	phra zhig can
ཕྲ་ཞིང་ཕྲ་བ	the most subtle	phra zhing phra ba
ཕྲ་ཞིང་ཕྲ་མོ	most subtle	phra zhing phra mo
ཕྲ་ཞིང་བ	most detailed, finest	phra zhing ba
ཕྲ་ཞིབ	fine, thin, subtle, minute, exact, in detail, detailed, at great length	phra zhib
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་ཀྱི་ལས་སྟངས	precise/ meticulous way of working	phra zhib kyi las stangs
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་ཏུ	very minutely	phra zhib tu
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་རྟོག་པའི་གནས་ལུགས	way things are perceived/ conceived in detail phra zhib tu dpyad pa'i dogs gnas closely analyzed doubtful point	phra zhib tu rtog pa'i gnas lugs
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་འཐུས་འདེམས	(minute, complete) details	phra zhib 'thus 'dems
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་འཐུས་འདོམས	subtle and detailed	phra zhib 'thus 'doms
ཕྲ་ཞིབ་སྤུས་ལྡན	precision phra zhib spus ldan gyi 'od tshod lon pa'i	phra zhib spus ldan
ཡོ་ཆས	precision exposure meter	yo chas
ཕྲ་གཟབ་ཆུང་ཟོན	cautious and meticulous	phra gzab chung zon
ཕྲ་བཟོ་བ	goldsmith, jeweler, make jewelry	phra bzo ba
ཕྲ་ཡིག	divination manual phra g.yu - little turquoise stones	phra yig
ཕྲ་རག་སྦོམ	subtle, tangible, and gross	phra rag sbom
ཕྲ་རག་སྦོམ་གསུམ	subtle, tangible and gross	phra rag sbom gsum
ཕྲ་རགས	small and large	phra rags
ཕྲ་རགས་ཀྱི་རྟོག་པ	subtle and gross thoughts	phra rags kyi rtog pa
ཕྲ་རབ	most subtle, smallest, atom	phra rab
ཕྲ་རབ་ཀྱི་རྡུལ	the very finest particle	phra rab kyi rdul
ཕྲ་རབ་ཆ་མེད	partless atom	phra rab cha med
ཕྲ་རབ་ཆ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྡུལ	the most subtle and partless atom/ particle	phra rab cha med kyi rdul
ཕྲ་རབ་རྡུལ	the very finest particle	phra rab rdul
ཕྲ་རབ་ཙམ	even an atom	phra rab tsam
ཕྲ་རིང	small and long	phra ring
ཕྲ་རུ	smaller	phra ru
ཕྲ་རུ་ཕྲ་རུ	thinner and thinner, finer and finer	phra ru phra ru
ཕྲ་ལ་དྭངས་པ	pure and clear yet hard to discern	phra la dwangs pa
ཕྲ་ལ་ལེགས་པ	beautiful and thin	phra la legs pa
ཕྲ་ཤིན་ཕྲ་ཝ	subtle extremely fine	phra shin phra wa
ཕྲ་སིལ་སིལ	extremely fine/ minute/ detailed	phra sil sil
ཕྲ་སེམ་མེ	subtle	phra sem me
ཕྲ་གསས་གཞོན་ནུ	'jam dpal dkar po in B"n mythology	phra gsas gzhon nu
ཕྲག	1) class/ total/ set of; 2) edge border; 3) intermediate space, interstice, interval, in between D; 4) crevice, ravine, a hollow, defile (/; 5) numeric particle = set[s]/ multiples of 10; 6) shoulder	phrag
ཕྲག་ཁུར	burden carried on the shoulders phrag khur ljid po thag ring bar du khyer	phrag khur
ཕྲག་ཁེབས	phrag gdan	phrag khebs
ཕྲག་འཁུར	carry [things] on the shoulders	phrag 'khur
ཕྲག་འཁུར་བྱེད	carry [things] on the shoulders	phrag 'khur byed
ཕྲག་གོང	shoulder, upper arm, phrag pa'i steng	phrag gong
ཕྲག་གོང་ཁེབ	covering the shoulders	phrag gong kheb
ཕྲག་གོང་བརྟན	to lean on the shoulder	phrag gong brtan
ཕྲག་མགོ	upper arms	phrag mgo
ཕྲག་འགེལ	carry things on the shoulders	phrag 'gel
ཕྲག་འགེལ་བྱེད	carry things on the shoulders	phrag 'gel byed
ཕྲག་རྒྱུག	carrying pole	phrag rgyug
ཕྲག་རྒྱུག་ཁུར	carry w carrying pole for the shoulders	phrag rgyug khur
ཕྲག་བརྒྱ	hundreds 1746	phrag brgya
ཕྲག་ཏུ	in between, in the gaps	phrag tu
ཕྲག་ཏུ་བཅུག	put on the shoulder	phrag tu bcug
ཕྲག་ཏུ་སྡོད་བཅུག	make sit on the shoulder	phrag tu sdod bcug
ཕྲག་ཏུ་བླངས	shouldered [burdens responsibilities etc]	phrag tu blangs
ཕྲག་ཏུ་ལེན	shoulder [burdens responsibilities etc]	phrag tu len
ཕྲག་རྟགས	epaulet	phrag rtags
ཕྲག་རྟེན	present, souvenir with letter	phrag rten
ཕྲག་དོག	jealousy, envy	phrag dog
ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལ་མི་བཟོད་པ	khong	phun tshogs la mi bzod pa
ཁྲོའི་ཆར་གཏོགས་པ	rang rnyed bkur sogs la chags nas gzhan gyi phun tshogs la mi bzod par sems khong nas 'khrug pa nye nyon nyi shu'i nang gses shig	khro'i char gtogs pa
ཕྲག་དོག་སྐྱེད	be jealous/ envious	phrag dog skyed
ཕྲག་དོག་མཁྲེགས་བཟུང	tight/ narrow bad attitude unable to bear the prosperity of others/ jealousy	phrag dog mkhregs bzung
ཕྲག་དོག་འཁོན་འཛིན	gzhan 'byor sogs la mi bzod pa'i zhe nad	phrag dog 'khon 'dzin
ཕྲག་དོག་གི་ཁྱི་རྒན་རྒྱ་བོ	very envious/ jealous	phrag dog gi khyi rgan rgya bo
ཕྲག་དོག་གི་དྲི་མ	the defilement of jealousy	phrag dog gi dri ma
ཕྲག་དོག་གི་དྲི་མ་ཅན	tainted by jealousy	phrag dog gi dri ma can
ཕྲག་དོག་གི་ཚུབ་མ	violent fit of envy	phrag dog gi tshub ma
ཕྲག་དོག་གིས	became very jealous	phrag dog gis
ཕྲག་དོག་གིས་བསླངས	excited by jealousy	phrag dog gis bslangs
ཕྲག་དོག་རྒྱས་ནས	in great jealousy	phrag dog rgyas nas
ཕྲག་དོག་སྒྲིབ་པ	obstacle of jealousy	phrag dog sgrib pa
ཕྲག་དོག་ཅན	envious	phrag dog can
ཕྲག་དོག་ཆེན་པོ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	had become so jealous of	phrag dog chen po skyes te
ཕྲག་དོག་དང་བཅས	has become / is jealous	phrag dog dang bcas
ཕྲག་དོག་བྱེད	act jealous/ envious	phrag dog byed
ཕྲག་གདང	carrying pole for the shoulders	phrag gdang
ཕྲག་རྡང	carrying pole for the shoulders	phrag rdang
ཕྲག་ན	in between	phrag na
ཕྲག་པ	1) shoulder, upper arm; 2) envy, grudge D	phrag pa
ཕྲག་པ་བཅུམ་པ	phrag mgo kum kum gyis rgya chung ngur btang ba	phrag pa bcum pa
ཕྲག་པ་མཉམ	level shoulders	phrag pa mnyam
ཕྲག་པ་དང་བྲང་ཁོག	bust	phrag pa dang brang khog
ཕྲག་པ་ནས་མཆོང་བ	jump from upon the shoulder of one person to that of another person phrag pa g.yas - right shoulder, right arm phrag pa g.yas pa - right shoulder/ upper arm phrag pa g.yon pa - left shoulder/ upper...	phrag pa nas mchong ba
ཕྲག་པ་ལ་ཁུར་པོ་འགེལ་བ	carry a burden on the shoulders	phrag pa la khur po 'gel ba
ཕྲག་པ་ལ་ཁྱེར	carry on the shoulders	phrag pa la khyer
ཕྲག་པ་ལ་ཁྱེར་ནས	carrying on his shoulders	phrag pa la khyer nas
ཕྲག་པ་ལ་འཁྱེར་རྒྱུའི་ཁུར་པོ	burden carried on the shoulders	phrag pa la 'khyer rgyu'i khur po
ཕྲག་པར་ཁྱེར་ཏེ	carried on his shoulders	phrag par khyer te
ཕྲག་པར་དངོས་པོ་འཁྱེར་བ	carry things on the shoulders	phrag par dngos po 'khyer ba
ཕྲག་དབྱུང	[arch] 1) long sleeveless monastic robe; 2) monastic shawl worn leaving 1 shoulder bare D	phrag dbyung
ཕྲག་མིག	1) crab; 2) kind of spirits w eyes on the shoulders	phrag mig
ཕྲག་ཚིགས	shoulder joint	phrag tshigs
ཕྲག་གཟུགས་མ	nadi	phrag gzugs ma
ཕྲག་ཡོན	crooked shoulders	phrag yon
ཕྲག་ལ་འགེལ་བ	load/ carry on the shoulders	phrag la 'gel ba
ཕྲག་ཤིང	bar, stout carrying pole	phrag shing
ཕྲག་ལྷར་ཐོགས	will be always at our side	phrag lhar thogs
ཕྲང	{bar do'i 'phrang ring po} the tortuous paths of the bardo	phrang
ཕྲང་བཙན	place in Tibet	phrang btsan
ཕྲང་ཚེགས་འགྲེལ་པ	{phrang tshegs 'grel pa [slob dpon tshul khrims bskyangs kyis mdzad pa'i 'dul ba lung phran tsegs kyi 'grel pa	phrang tshegs 'grel pa
ཕྲད	grammatical particle, meaning connecting word, bsten, [p 'phrad] met, encountered, fell in w	phrad
ཕྲད་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར	use/ application of grammatical particles	phrad kyi sbyor
ཕྲད་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ	particle word	phrad kyi yi ge
ཕྲད་གང་ཐོབ	grammatical particles to be applied	phrad gang thob
ཕྲད་པ	[p 'phrad pa] meeting/ contact, collision, rush on	phrad pa
ཕྲད་པ་བརྟགས་པའི་རིགས་པ	the reasoning of examining meeting / contact	phrad pa brtags pa'i rigs pa
ཕྲད་པའི་རྩོལ་བ	yi ge'i skye gnas rnams dngos su thug nas effort of emitting vocal sounds	phrad pa'i rtsol ba
ཕྲད་པོ	khrad po	phrad po
ཕྲད་ཕྲད	thug thug	phrad phrad
ཕྲད་མ་ཕྲད་དཔྱད	discerned with or without contact	phrad ma phrad dpyad
ཕྲད་ཚད་རང་གྲོལ	Self-liberation for All those One Meets, a root empowerment of the peaceful and wrath deities of Anu Yoga	phrad tshad rang grol
ཕྲད་གཞན་དབང་ཅན	particle like "kyang" depending on rjes 'jug and yang 'jug	phrad gzhan dbang can
ཕྲད་རང་དབང་ཅན	particle not depending on rjes 'jug, like "ni"	phrad rang dbang can
ཕྲན	1) little, small, trifling, minor, slight, some, few; 2) scalpels and small surgical instruments; 3) part of the body D; 4) I, this lowly 1	phran
ཕྲན་ཆུང	small, this insignificant 1 [in letters	phran chung
ཕྲན་གཉིས	we two [lowly 1s]	phran gnyis
ཕྲན་བུ	minor, slight, tiny; a trifle	phran bu
ཕྲན་བུ་ཙམ	only few, a little	phran bu tsam
ཕྲན་བུ་རེ	even the least bit; x {rang la yon tan phran bu re yod pa nga rang de dang de lta bu yin no snyam nas ched du 'zin na} any feeling that there is something even the least bit special about your own ...	phran bu re
ཕྲན་བུའི་ནད	not included in major diseases thor bu'i nad kyi nang tshan te, gre bar gra ma zug pa sogs nad chung ngu	phran bu'i nad
ཕྲན་བུའི་ནད་བཅུ	(chn	phran bu'i nad bcu
ཕྲན་བུར	slightly	phran bur
ཕྲན་མོ	{tshod ma}	phran mo
ཕྲན་ཙམ	for a little while, [just] a little, like me/ this lowly 1, just small	phran tsam
ཕྲན་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཡང་ཐུབ	Even this lowly 1 can do it	phran tsam gyis yang thub
ཕྲན་རྩག	details	phran rtsag
ཕྲན་རྩེག	small, insignificant	phran rtseg
ཕྲན་ཚེགས	little; minor	phran tshegs
ཕྲན་ཚེགས་ཀྱི་གཞི	minute/ very detailed points	phran tshegs kyi gzhi
ཕྲན་ཚེགས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	yo byad gsum gyi tshad du ma longs pa'i zhva, lham, ska rags, lhung bzed etc. implements of livelihood phran tshegs &, mkho lhag yo byad kyi rgyur bsngos and not as long as a cubit	phran tshegs kyi yo byad
ཕྲན་ཚེགས་ཀྱི་ལས་དོན	little tasks	phran tshegs kyi las don
ཕྲན་ཚེགས་ཀྱི་ལུགས	routinism	phran tshegs kyi lugs
ཕྲན་ཚེགས་འགྲིམ་པ	practicing in small degree	phran tshegs 'grim pa
ཕྲན་ཚོ	we [lowly ones]	phran tsho
ཕྲན་རང	I myself	phran rang
ཕྲམ་མ	liar, SA khram pa	phram ma
ཕྲའུ	tiny, subtle, fine, very, tenuous, narrow/ precise	phra'u
ཕྲར	(not in das)	phrar
ཕྲལ	1) be free from!; 2) at present, just now D (enumeration, separation	phral
ཕྲལ་རྐྱེན	immediate disaster	phral rkyen
ཕྲལ་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་རྒྱུ	superficial cause of error	phral gyi 'khrul rgyu
ཕྲལ་གྲིག	finished, ready, prepared	phral grig
ཕྲལ་དགོས	immediate necessity	phral dgos
ཕྲལ་ཉིད་དུ	instantly	phral nyid du
ཕྲལ་ཉིད་དུ་དེ་ལྟར་བཀའ་བསྒོས་པ	instruct instantly	phral nyid du de ltar bka' bsgos pa
ཕྲལ་ཏུ	at present	phral tu
ཕྲལ་དུ	at present, recently	phral du
ཕྲལ་ན	at present	phral na
ཕྲལ་ཕུགས	present and future	phral phugs
ཕྲལ་བ	(tha dad pa phral ba, phral ba, phrol,; 1) discard, eliminate, throw away reject, separate, freed from; 2) get torn	phral ba
ཕྲལ་ཙམ	a little while	phral tsam
ཕྲལ་ཡུན	present and future	phral yun
ཕྲལ་ཡུན་བདེ་འབྲས་ལ་བསམ	thought of the present and future	phral yun bde 'bras la bsam
ཕྲལ་སེལ་ལས་མེད་བཟོ་བ	layoff	phral sel las med bzo ba
ཕྲལ་སོག་འཇོག་མེད་པ	without having collected and deposited the daily requisites	phral sog 'jog med pa
ཕྲས་སྤྲས་པ	phra rgyan bkod pa; 1) subtle, thin, fine, narrow, shallow; 2) inlaid jewelry, ornament, jewel	phras spras pa
ཕྲི	subtract, diminish, SA 'phri ba	phri
ཕྲི་བ	diminish, reduce, SA 'phri ba, sbrid pa	phri ba
ཕྲི་ལས	enlightened activity	phri las
ཕྲི་ལི་ལི	shivering, trembling	phri li li
ཕྲིག	(not in das)	phrig
ཕྲིག་པ་ཅིག	[arch] trembling, shaking, moving a little	phrig pa cig
ཕྲིག་ཕྲིག་ཏུ་བྱེད	be completely ordered	phrig phrig tu byed
ཕྲིགས	completely, thoroughly	phrigs
ཕྲིང	(not in das)	phring
ཕྲིན	news, tidings, intelligence, SA 'phrin	phrin
ཕྲིན་བཀུར་མཁན	messenger	phrin bkur mkhan
ཕྲིན་འཁྱེར་པོ	answer/ message/ letter carrier	phrin 'khyer po
ཕྲིན་གོང་འོག་འཛོལ	make a mess out of a message	phrin gong 'og 'dzol
ཕྲིན་གོང་འོག་འཛོལ་བ	deliver a message confusedly	phrin gong 'og 'dzol ba
ཕྲིན་བཅོལ	1) gtam mngags pa, attend to a project; 2) Tibetan buddhist chos pa tshos chos skyong la 'dod don zhu gnyer byed lugs	phrin bcol
ཕྲིན་ཆོག	sadhana text	phrin chog
ཕྲིན་བརྡ	gnas lugs go byed kyi brda	phrin brda
ཕྲིན་རྣམ	{phrin las rnam rgyal}	phrin rnam
ཕྲིན་པ	'phrin skyel mkhan	phrin pa
ཕྲིན་བློན	minister, kind of ambassador	phrin blon
ཕྲིན་ཡིག	letter	phrin yig
ཕྲིན་ལན	answer to a letter received	phrin lan
ཕྲིན་ལས	enlightened activity; activity ritual	phrin las
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག	activity-holder	phrin las kyi mnga' bdag
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	sadhana text, the activity ritual	phrin las kyi cho ga
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of the seal of buddha activity [sgo lnga'i rnam shes kyi 'khrul ba bsal nas bya ba grub pa'i ye shes mngon du bya ba ste 1 of yoga tantra {phyag rgya bzhi'i rnal 'byor}	phrin las kyi phyag rgya'i rnal 'byor
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་དབང	empowerment of enlightened activity	phrin las kyi dbang
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	Root of Activities. The dakinis and Dharma protectors 1748	phrin las kyi rtsa ba
ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	sadhana text	phrin las kyi gzhung
ཕྲིན་ལས་གར	an activity emanation	phrin las gar
ཕྲིན་ལས་འགྲོ་འདུལ་རྩལ	Trinley Drodül Tsal. Another name of Chokgyur Lingpa	phrin las 'gro 'dul rtsal
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྒྱས་པ	extensive sadhana text	phrin las rgyas pa
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྒྱུན་ཁྱེར	daily sadhana	phrin las rgyun khyer
ཕྲིན་ལས་སྒྲུབ་པ	to perform their enlightened actions	phrin las sgrub pa
ཕྲིན་ལས་བསྒྲུབ	practice the sadhanas	phrin las bsgrub
ཕྲིན་ལས་ལྔ	five enlightened activities	phrin las lnga
ཕྲིན་ལས་བཅོལ་བ	to commission/ enjoin enlightened activity; urge them to act	phrin las bcol ba
ཕྲིན་ལས་གཉིས	the two activities, [qualities of a buddha's action], {lhun gyis grub pa} spontaneous, {rgyun mi chad pa} uninterrupted]. two qualities of a Buddha's action	phrin las gnyis
ཕྲིན་ལས་གཉིས་རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད་པ	uninterrupted	phrin las gnyis rgyun mi chad pa
ཕྲིན་ལས་གཉིས་ལྷུན་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་མ	spontaneous	phrin las gnyis lhun kyis grub ma
ཕྲིན་ལས་སྙིང་པོ	Trinley Nyingpo. The Essence Practice. The short version of the guru sadhana of Barchey Künsel	phrin las snying po
ཕྲིན་ལས་བརྡལ་ཆེ་བ	renowned	phrin las brdal che ba
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four kinds of activities	phrin las rnam pa bzhi
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of enlightened activity [pacification {zhi ba} or s' nti, enrichment {rgyas pa} or pusti, overpowering, increasing, enriching {dbang} or vas', magnetizing, and forceful rites {drag po} o...	phrin las rnam bzhi
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞི་རྒྱས	increasing	phrin las rnam bzhi rgyas
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞི་དྲག	subjugating	phrin las rnam bzhi drag
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞི་དབང	magnetizing	phrin las rnam bzhi dbang
ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞི་ཞི	pacifying	phrin las rnam bzhi zhi
ཕྲིན་ལས་བྱང་བུ	sadhana manual	phrin las byang bu
ཕྲིན་ལས་དབང་ཆོག	sadhana and empowerment ritual text phrin las dbang gnas mon kha ne ring power place of Guru Rinpoche's Activity phrin las dban gnas mon kha ne ring power place of Guru Rinpoche's activity	phrin las dbang chog
ཕྲིན་ལས་འབྲིང་པོ	Trinley Dringpo, the Medium Practice Manual; from {thugs sgrub bar chad kun sel}	phrin las 'bring po
ཕྲིན་ལས་མ་འདྲེས་པ་དྲུག	(chn	phrin las ma 'dres pa drug
ཕྲིན་ལས་མ་འདྲེས་པ་གསུམ	three unassociated activities	phrin las ma 'dres pa gsum
ཕྲིན་ལས་མཛད་པ	Buddha-actions	phrin las mdzad pa
ཕྲིན་ལས་བཞི	the four karmas/ buddha activities	phrin las bzhi
ཕྲིན་ལས་རབ་འབྱམས	vast karmas	phrin las rab 'byams
ཕྲིལ	1) vibrating; 2) the whole D	phril
ཕྲིལ་གྱི་ལུས་བདེ་བ	body vibrating w bliss	phril gyi lus bde ba
ཕྲིལ་གྱིས་སོང་བ	[arch] hril gyis song ba	phril gyis song ba
ཕྲིལ་ཕྲིལ	vibrating	phril phril
ཕྲིལ་ཕྲིལ་བ	ex {bde nyams phril phril ba}	phril phril ba
ཕྲིལ་ལེ	thoroughly, completely; syn {hril le}	phril le
ཕྲིས	imp. of {'brid pa}	phris
ཕྲིས་པ	pf. of {'brid pa}	phris pa
ཕྲུ	[arch] 1 phye ma; 2) phub ma; 3) rngog ma; 4) sa zhing, phru slog	phru
ཕྲུ་གུ	child, kid, SA phrug, babe, baby, offspring, child	phru gu
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེ་བཀག	contraception	phru gu skye bkag
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེ་བ	give birth to a child	phru gu skye ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེ་སའི་ཚན་ཀག	obstetrics [section of a hospital] phru gu skye bsu'i sman bcos sde tshan maternity section/ division	phru gu skye sa'i tshan kag
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེས་པའི	delivery	phru gu skyes pa'i
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཁོག་པར་འཁོར་བ	conceive	phru gu khog par 'khor ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་འཁོར	get pregnant	phru gu 'khor
ཕྲུ་གུ་མངལ་འཁོར	conception phru gu mngal nas med par bzo ba abortion	phru gu mngal 'khor
ཕྲུ་གུ་མངལ་ནས་ཤོར་བ	miscarriage 1749	phru gu mngal nas shor ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་མངལ་ཤོར	infant lost by miscarriage/ dying before birth/ abortion	phru gu mngal shor
ཕྲུ་གུ་མངལ་ཤོར་བ	infant lost by miscarriage/ dying before birth/ abortion	phru gu mngal shor ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཆགས་པ	pregnant	phru gu chags pa
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཆགས་ཡོད་པའི་རྟ་ཕྱུགས	pregnant cows and mares	phru gu chags yod pa'i rta phyugs
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཆེ	great w child, pregnant woman	phru gu che
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཉར་སྐྱོང་ཁང	nursery school, child-care/ day-care center	phru gu nyar skyong khang
ཕྲུ་གུ་གཉིད་སྙལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གླུ	lullaby	phru gu gnyid snyal byed kyi glu
ཕྲུ་གུ་བལྟ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	babysit	phru gu blta skyong byed pa
ཕྲུ་གུ་བལྟ་མཁན	babysitter	phru gu blta mkhan
ཕྲུ་གུ་བདེ་སྲུང་ཁང	nursery school,	phru gu bde srung khang
ཕྲུ་གུ་ནང་བཞིན	babyish, childish	phru gu nang bzhin
ཕྲུ་གུ་བྱིས་པ	children	phru gu byis pa
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྦྲུམ་བྱུང	being with child	phru gu sbrum byung
ཕྲུ་གུ་སྦྲུམ་བྱུང་བས	having conceived	phru gu sbrum byung bas
ཕྲུ་གུ་མ་བྱར	infant	phru gu ma byar
ཕྲུ་གུ་མལ་དུ་སྙོལ་བ	lay a child on its bed	phru gu mal du snyol ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་མི་ཆགས་པ་བྱེད	use contraceptives, practice birth control	phru gu mi chags pa byed
ཕྲུ་གུ་དམར་འབྱར	[nearly] newborn infant	phru gu dmar 'byar
ཕྲུ་གུ་བཙའ་ཐབས	phru gu bde bar skye ba'i thabs shes	phru gu btsa' thabs
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཚོ	children	phru gu tsho
ཕྲུ་གུ་བཞི་མཉམ་སྐྱེས	quadruplet	phru gu bzhi mnyam skyes
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཤོར	1) infant lost by miscarriage/ dying before birth/ abortion, have a miscarriage; 2) child lost by running away to another place	phru gu shor
ཕྲུ་གུ་ཤོར་བ	1) infant lost by miscarriage/ dying before birth/ abortion; 2) child lost by running away to another place	phru gu shor ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་སློད་པ	phru gu ngan lang du gtong ba	phru gu slod pa
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསུམ་བསྡེབས་སྐྱེ་བ	triplet	phru gu gsum bsdebs skye ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསོ	rear/ bring up/ nurse/ cure a child	phru gu gso
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསོ་སྐྱོང་ཁང	nursery school, child-care/ day-care center	phru gu gso skyong khang
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསོ་བ	rear/ bring up/ nurse/ cure a child	phru gu gso ba
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསོ་སྲུང་ཁང	nursery school,	phru gu gso srung khang
ཕྲུ་གུའི་ངུ་སྐད	boohoo	phru gu'i ngu skad
ཕྲུ་གུའི་གཅིན་གདན	diaper	phru gu'i gcin gdan
ཕྲུ་གུའི་ཉལ་ཁྲི་ཆུང	cot	phru gu'i nyal khri chung
ཕྲུ་གུའི་དུས	infancy, childhood	phru gu'i dus
ཕྲུ་གུའི་བསམ་བློ	childish/ infantile ideas	phru gu'i bsam blo
ཕྲུ་ཆུང	personal belongings	phru chung
ཕྲུ་དྲེག	rdza ma'i dreg pa -	phru dreg
ཕྲུ་མདའ	rdza khog 'khrud byed kyi yo byad cig	phru mda'
ཕྲུ་འདེབས་པ	kha phru 'debs pa	phru 'debs pa
ཕྲུ་རྡོག་བཙུགས་པ	sla nga dang khog ma sogs thab tu btsugs pa	phru rdog btsugs pa
ཕྲུ་སྣོད	clay vessel	phru snod
ཕྲུ་དཔོན	[arch] general	phru dpon
ཕྲུ་བ	earthen pot, pan, stew pan	phru ba
ཕྲུ་བུ་འཁྱེར་བ	hold in one's arm	phru bu 'khyer ba
ཕྲུ་མ	1) amniotic sack, uterus, matrix of animals; 2) military encampment; 3) ri la btab pa; 4) king's palace; 5) bladder	phru ma
ཕྲུ་མ་བཤུས	separated you from the placenta	phru ma bshus
ཕྲུ་ཟངས	rdza khog, zangs khog	phru zangs
ཕྲུ་སློག་པ	1) plow/ turn a field; 2) field newly plowed/ turned; 3) subversive activities	phru slog pa
ཕྲུ་སློག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	tractor, bulldozer	phru slog 'phrul 'khor
ཕྲུ་སློག་བྱེད	1) plow/ turn a field; 2) carry on subversive activities	phru slog byed
ཕྲུག་གུ	child, SA phrug	phrug gu
ཕྲུག་གུ་སྐྱེ་བ	beget children, bring forth a child	phrug gu skye ba
ཕྲུག་གུ་ཆགས་པ	pregnancy, a pregnant woman	phrug gu chags pa
ཕྲུག་གུ་ཤོར་པ	miscarriage, abortion	phrug gu shor pa
ཕྲུག་གུ་གསོ་བ	rear a child, bring up a child	phrug gu gso ba
ཕྲུག་གུའི་དུས	infancy, childhood	phrug gu'i dus
ཕྲུག་སྟན	snam bu spu phrug gi gdan	phrug stan
ཕྲུག་ཐུལ	furred coat/ cloak made of btsugs phrug	phrug thul
ཕྲུག་ཕྲིག	[arch] scatter earth w arms and legs	phrug phrig
ཕྲུག་ཙི	silk	phrug tsi
ཕྲུག་གཟན	a thick woolen scarf	phrug gzan
ཕྲུག་ཤད	snam bu btags tshar rjes 'jam po bzo byed dang spu slong byed kyi yo byad cig	phrug shad
ཕྲུགས	scratch one's body, one day with the night, period of 24 hours, scratch one's body, SA 'phrug pa	phrugs
ཕྲུགས་གཅིག	1 day	phrugs gcig
ཕྲུགས་གཅིག་གི་ལས་ཀ	1 day's work	phrugs gcig gi las ka
ཕྲུགས་གཅིག་ལ་ཉམས་ལེན་དགོས	should practice daily	phrugs gcig la nyams len dgos
ཕྲུགས་གཉིས	two days	phrugs gnyis
ཕྲུགས་སྡེབས	gnyis sam, sde tsan	phrugs sdebs
ཕྲུགས་པ	['phrug pa]	phrugs pa
ཕྲུགས་སྤྱད	[back] scratcher	phrugs spyad
ཕྲུགས་མ	three hour period D	phrugs ma
ཕྲུགས་རེ	each set / pair	phrugs re
ཕྲུབས་མ	period of 3 hours	phrubs ma
ཕྲུམ	cartilage, gristle	phrum
ཕྲུམ་ཁུ	[arch] phyur ba'i khu ba	phrum khu
ཕྲུམ་ཕྲུམ	SA rdog rdog	phrum phrum
ཨོཕ༹་ཅོནཏིནུཨོཨུསལཡ་ཕ༹ལླིང་རཻན	drops, tears etc. rdog rdog	of continuously falling rain
ཕྲུམ་ཕྲུམ་འབབ་པ་མིག་ཆུ	continuously falling tears	phrum phrum 'bab pa mig chu
ཕྲུམ་ཕྲུམ་འབབ་པའི་ཆུ་ཐིགས	continuously falling rain/ water drops	phrum phrum 'bab pa'i chu thigs
ཕྲུམ་ཚུད	1) zho vessel; 2) milk and buttermilk, whey dar ba bskol ba'i snyigs ma	phrum tshud
ཕྲུམ་རུས	cartilage, gristle	phrum rus
ཕྲུམ་གསར	milk and buttermilk, whey spyar nas bskol ba'i snyigs ma gsar pa	phrum gsar
ཕྲུར་བུ	Jupiter, Thursday	phrur bu
ཕྲུལ	(not in das)	phrul
ཕྲུལ་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, hang down	phrul pa
ཕྲུལ་ཕྲུལ	1) 'dzar 'dzar du hanging; 2) Tibetan nobles's women gzab spros mdun ngos kyi lus rgyan	phrul phrul
ཕྲུལ་རློག་པ	1 of zhing las	phrul rlog pa
ཕྲེང	string of, garland, rosary, order, line, row, series	phreng
ཕྲེང་བཀོད་པ	put in succession, string as a mala, make a garland of	phreng bkod pa
ཕྲེང་སྐོར	garland-circle [of mantra syllables]	phreng skor
ཕྲེང་གླིང	flute, piccolo	phreng gling
ཕྲེང་འགོད	put in rows/ lines/ order, string, arrange	phreng 'god
ཕྲེང་རྒྱུད	string of, garland, rosary, order, line, row, series	phreng rgyud
ཕྲེང་རྒྱུད་ལྟ་བུ	repeatedly, 1 after another	phreng rgyud lta bu
ཕྲེང་རྒྱུད་ལྟར	repeatedly, 1 after another	phreng rgyud ltar
ཕྲེང་བརྒྱུད	las don khag mang dkyus gcig tu phreng ba ltar bsgrigs pa 1750	phreng brgyud
ཕྲེང་བསྒྲིགས	put in rows/ lines/ order, string, arrange	phreng bsgrigs
ཕྲེང་སྔགས	mantra for blessing mala	phreng sngags
ཕྲེང་བཏགས	festoon, garland	phreng btags
ཕྲེང་བསྟར་བ	put in rows/ lines/ order, string	phreng bstar ba
ཕྲེང་ཐག	mala string, rope, garland D	phreng thag
ཕྲེང་ཐོགས	Garland-holder, [the second terrace of Mt. Meru, abode of {rgyal chen}	phreng thogs
ཕྲེང་ཐོགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the Garland-Bearers; one of the {rgyal chen bzhi'i ris} on the third terrace of Mount Sumeru	phreng thogs kyi lha
ཕྲེང་དུ་བསྒྲིགས	put in rows/ lines/ order, string	phreng du bsgrigs
ཕྲེང་དུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	put in rows/ lines/ order, string	phreng du bsgrigs pa
ཕྲེང་རྡོག	counting mala bead	phreng rdog
ཕྲེང་ལྡན	garuda	phreng ldan
ཕྲེང་ལྡན་མ	cascade	phreng ldan ma
ཕྲེང་པོ	phreng po place	phreng po
ཕྲེང་པོ་ཞི་བ	lama of phreng po place	phreng po zhi ba
ཕྲེང་བ་རྒྱུ	string [jewels/ beads etc]	phreng ba rgyu
ཕྲེང་བ་ཅན	mountain crane, king of swans, garland maker, gardener, florist	phreng ba can
ཕྲེང་བ་རྡོག་ཕུད	phreng rdog re re bzhin bsher zhing phud pa	phreng ba rdog phud
ཕྲེང་བ་མ	female garland maker	phreng ba ma
ཕྲེང་བ་གསར	nepalese	phreng ba gsar
ཕྲེང་བའི་གྲངས་འཛིན	counter for a mala	phreng ba'i grangs 'dzin
ཕྲེང་བའི་ཉེ་འཁོར	1 of 10 great mountains, SA ri bo chen po bcu	phreng ba'i nye 'khor
ཕྲེང་བའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe don snga ma snga mas dpe don phyi ma phyi ma'i gnas tshul gsal bar byed pa phreng ba lta bu'i rim par spel ba'i rgyan zhig	phreng ba'i dpe
ཕྲེང་བའི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, gsal bya phyi ma phyi ma'i don, gsal byed snga ma snga mas gsal bar byed pa ngag gi phreng bar spel ba'i rgyan zhig	phreng ba'i gsal byed
ཕྲེང་མ	Mala, garland goddess, [female bodhisattva), (sems ma brgyad) {phreng ba ma} (consort of namkhainyingpo)	phreng ma
ཕྲེང་མོ	mala, system of divination using a mala	phreng mo
ཕྲེང་ཚར་དུ	in rows	phreng tshar du
ཕྲེང་ཚོམ	garland	phreng tshom
ཕྲེང་ཤལ	string, bunch	phreng shal
ཕྲེང་སོགས་གསུམ	getsul precepts blangs 'das so gsum gyi nang gses, two rgyan gyi rigs byed phreng ba la sogs pa'i rgyan dang, two spos nyug pa dang, three kha dog 'chang ba ste gsum mo	phreng sogs gsum
ཕྲེང་གསེར་གྱི་བའི་རྒྱན	the ornament of the golden garland	phreng gser gyi ba'i rgyan
ཕྲེངས	Notes see {yid phrengs}	phrengs
ཕྲེད	cross, transverse, across, athwart, obliquely	phred
ཕྲེད་རྒྱུགས	cutting across, transverse, sideways	phred rgyugs
ཕྲེད་རྒྱུགས་རི་རྒྱུད	transverse mts	phred rgyugs ri rgyud
ཕྲེད་གཅོད	cutting transversely across	phred gcod
ཕྲེད་གཅོད་ཆུ་སྒོ	water gate	phred gcod chu sgo
ཕྲེད་གཅོད་ཆུ་རགས	regulating dam	phred gcod chu rags
ཕྲེད་གཅོད་བྱེད	cut transversely across	phred gcod byed
ཕྲེད་བཅད	cutting transversely across	phred bcad
ཕྲེད་བཅད་ཀྱི་ངོས	transverse/ cross section	phred bcad kyi ngos
ཕྲེད་གཏན	bolt/ bar [of gate	phred gtan
ཕྲེད་གཏན་རྒྱག	bolt/ bar/ lock [gate/ door]	phred gtan rgyag
ཕྲེད་ཐིག	latitude, parallel	phred thig
ཕྲེད་ཐིག་ཀླད་སྒོར	equator	phred thig klad sgor
ཕྲེད་ཐིག་ཉི་ཤུ	20th parallel	phred thig nyi shu
ཕྲེད་ཐོགས	Matadharin [Buddha]	phred thogs
ཕྲེད་དུ	transversely, across	phred du
ཕྲེད་བརྡ་ལ	{phred brda} pass	phred brda la
ཕྲེད་གཞུང	vertical and horizontal across and along	phred gzhung
ཕྲེད་གཞུང་དཔྱད་ཆས	theodolite	phred gzhung dpyad chas
ཕྲེད་ལ	across, at an angle to	phred la
ཕྲེད་ལམ	path leading along the side of a mountain	phred lam
ཕྲེའུ	fine sash, SA phra mo	phre'u
ཕྲོ་འདུ་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཀྱི་གཟེར	the nail of activity which is the emanation and absorption of light rays	phro 'du phrin las kyi gzer
ཕྲོ་བ	scattering, mental turbulence not originating from attachment	phro ba
ཕྲོ་བོ	a child's frock or chemise	phro bo
ཕྲོ་ཡས	#	phro yas
ཕྲོག	rob; to be robbed, cheated	phrog
ཕྲོག་པ	carry it off	phrog pa
ཕྲོག་ཞུ	ornamental helmet	phrog zhu
ཕྲོགས	seized [seized the heart essences]	phrogs
ཕྲོགས་པ	[p 'phrog pa] seized, ravished, plundered, stole, took by force, diminished, reduced, subtracted	phrogs pa
ཕྲོད	be given, SA 'phrod pa	phrod
ཕྲོད་འཛིན	receipt	phrod 'dzin
ཕྲོབ	SA 'phrob	phrob
ཕྲོམ	phrom	phrom
ཕྲོམ་སྒྲག	public, known to all, trumpeted D	phrom sgrag
ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ	def. {'od 'phro tshul}; twinkling	phrom phrom
ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ་ཆགས་པའི་ཟིལ་པ	sparkling dewdrops	phrom phrom chags pa'i zil pa
ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ་པ	sparkling, glinting; ex {mun pa'i gseb tu me stag 'phro ba lta bu phrom phrom pa} sparkling like sparks of fire in dense darkness phrom phrom 'phro ba'i chu shel las rang	phrom phrom pa
མདངས་ཅན་གྱི་འོད་ཟེར་འཕྲོ	light shining from glittering crystal	mdangs can gyi 'od zer 'phro
ཕྲོམ་མེ་བ	round, shining, flickering, twinkling	phrom me ba
ཕྲོམ་མེར	shining, shimmering	phrom mer
ཕྲོམ་མེར་འབར་བའི་གློག	flickering lightning	phrom mer 'bar ba'i glog
ཕྲོལ	[']phral ba!] count the decrease, separate, part	phrol
ཕྲོས	see 'phro ba	phros
དཕས	blame, accuse 'phag - tries to leap; flopping 'phag - be elevated/ raised, exalted 'phag chen - way of dancing a if rising/ flying up from the earth 'phag pa - 'phags pa, 'phag pa, 'phogs,, 1) fly/...	dphas
ཤཱཀ	ya shrI} 'phags mchog sems dpa' - venerable body of saints 'phags mchod pa - to honor the Enlightened Ones 'phags dang so skye - 'phags pa dang so	shAk
སོ་སྐྱེ་བོ	Noble and ordinary beings 'phags dang lha dang tshangs pa yi gnas	so skye bo
པ་དཔེ་མེད	the topics of the noble 1s, gods, and Bhram that are unexemplifiable 'phags nor - riches of the noble 1s 'phags nor bdun - the seven noble riches 'phags nor bdun - faith, generosity, discipline, le...	pa dpe med
ཨོཕ༹་ཏྭེནཏཡ	seven m tr s] [superior, exalted, eminent, elevated, raised, holy, sublime rise, manifested, jump, project out, be raised, soar up. noble one, arya arya, a diety, noble, Noble one, exhalted one, su...	of twenty
ཨེཨིགྷཏ་ཕེ༹ཨེཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཏྭེནཏཡ	seven matras. arya, holy, saint, noble, sublime, an arya, noble, sublime being, saint, to rise, to be raised, to soar up. elevated/ aloft/ airborne; noble; to rise above, excel, ascend; pf. of {'ph...	eight feet of twenty
བྱ་བ་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ངེས་པར་བསྟན་པ	Arya pita-putrasama-gamana na-ma	bya ba de kho na nges par bstan pa
པོའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	le'u stong phrag brgya pa las le'u bco brgyad pa ste, yul 'khor skyong gis zhus pa - A-rya	po'i chos kyi rnam grangs
ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་པ་ལས	le'u lnga pa ste, 'od	phrag brgya pa las
དཔག་མེད་ཀྱི་བཀོད་པ	A-rya amita-	dpag med kyi bkod pa
བྷབ༹ྱུ	ha na-ma maha-ya-nasu-tra; The "Sutra on Immeasurable Light," being the Fifth Chapter of a Hundred Thousand Chapters of the Many Various Teachings of the Exalted Sutra entitled "The Stack of the Je...	bhavyu
ཁྱིམ་བདག་དྲག་ཤུལ་ཅན་གྱིས་ཞུས་པ་ཨཱ	rya gr.hapati ugraparipr.ccha- na-ma	khyim bdag drag shul can gyis zhus pa A
གང་པོས་ཞུས་པ	A-rya purn.aparipr.ccha- na-ma maha-ya-nasutra; The "Sutra Requested by Purna," being the Seventeenth Chapter of a Hundred Thousand Chapters of the Many Various Teachings of the Exalted Sutra entit...	gang pos zhus pa
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Arya sam.dhinirmocana na-ma maha-yanasu-tra; The Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "A Commentary on the Intent of the Sutras" 'phags pa dgongs pa zab mo - the profound realization of the no...	zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo
ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	A-rya	pha rol tu phyin pa'i snying po
བྷགབ༹ཏི	prajn~a-pa-ramita- hr.daya; The Exalted "Essence of the Conqueress, the Perfection of Wisdom" [The "Heart Sutra"] 'phags pa bcom ldan 'das shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rdo rje gcod pa'i don	bhagavati
བདུན་གྱི་རྒྱ་ཆེར་འགྲེལ་པ	A-rya Bhagavati-prajn~a-pa-ramitavajracchedika-sapta-rthat.i-ka-, by Vasubandhu {dbyig gnyen}; SHES PHYIN, VOL MA, in the Derge Edition, 'phags pa chen po - great noble one 'phags pa chen po rnams ...	bdun gyi rgya cher 'grel pa
པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ་ཨཱ	rya vimalaki-rtinirdesha na-ma mahaya-nasu-tra; An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The Sutra of Vimalakirti" 'phags pa bde ba can gyi bkod pa zhes	pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo A
བྱ་བ་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	A-rya	bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo
སུཁ	vati-vyu-ha na-ma maha-ya-nasutra; An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The Sutra of the Heaven of Happiness" 'phags pa bden bzhi'i rnam pa bcu drug the 16 aspects of the four noble truths...	sukha
རྒྱལ་པོ་སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ	King Songtsen Gampo, an emanation of Avalokitesvara 'phags pa spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug the noble lord Avalokiteshvara	rgyal po srong btsan sgam po
སེལ་བ	by gter ston - o rgyan bstan	sel ba
གཉིས་གླིང་པ	a text rediscovered by gter ston {bstan gnyis gling pa} at kho mthing in lho brag 'phags pa phyogs bcu'i mun sel - a text rediscovered by gter ston {bstan gnyis gling pa} at kho mthing in lho brag ...	gnyis gling pa
ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་བསྟོད་པ	a-rya jambhalajalendravishes.astotra; by +vasudharashri- {nor 'dzin dpal}; special words of praise to the exalted one, the keeper of confusion (jambhala), lord of water (jalendra)@; RGYUD, Vol TZU,...	khyad par gyi bstod pa
བཡ་ཤ	kyashri- {sh'akya dpal}; A Method for Reaching the Exalted One, the Black Jambhala; RGYUD, Vol TZU, in the Derge Edition, 'phags pa gzhi thams cad yod par smra	by sha
བའི་དགེ་ཙུལ་གྱི་ཙིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	aryamu-lasarva-stiva-dishra-man.erakarika-, by sha-kyaprabha {sh'akya 'od}; The Exalted "Verses concerning Novices," according to the System of the "Comprehensive" School; 'DUL BA, Vol SHU, in the ...	ba'i dge tsul gyi tsig le'ur byas pa
པ་འོད་ལྡན	a-ryamu-lasarva-ativadishra-man.eraka-rika-vr.ttiprabha-vati-;	pa 'od ldan
གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	samantabhadracary'apranidh'anar'aja 'phags pa 'i bden pa bzhi - the four noble truths 'phags pa 'i nor bdun - the 7 noble riches 'phags pa 'og ma gsum - Three Lower Kinds of Sublime Being. Pious at...	gyi rgyal po
ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	A-rya lan*ka-vata-ra	chen po'i mdo
སྡུད་པ་ཚིག་སུ་བཅད་པ	Skt. Prajnaparamita-sancayagatha, T. 13 'phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa bsdus pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa'i rnam par 'grel ba - Exalted Abridged Versified Prajnaparamita Commentary 'phags p...	sdud pa tshig su bcad pa
པ་གཅིག་པ	the wisdom of the individual and personal understanding of the noble 1s and their single vehicle 'phags pa so so rang gis rig pa - the individual and personal understanding of the noble 1s 'phags p...	pa gcig pa
གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	the special characteristics of the individual and personal understanding of the noble 1s 'phags pa so so rang gis rig pa'i chos - the dharmas realized individually and personally by the noble 1s 'p...	gyi mtshan nyid
ཐེ་པོསཏ	meditation of the noble 1s 'phags pa'i rjes thob ye shes - the postmeditation wisdom of noble beings, holy aftermath intuition 'phags pa'i mnyam par bzhag - the meditation of the noble 1s 'phags pa...	the post
དྲུག་ཏུ་ཕྱེ་བ	the four noble truths divided into 16 aspects 'phags pa'i bden pa bzhis mang du gnas	drug tu phye ba
ཆས་ཕྱེ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 aspects of the wisdom of unity revealed on the path of the noble 1s [CHN] 'phags lam bgrod pa'i shing rta - liturgy for the Kagyü Ngon dro by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje 'phags lam bgrod p...	chas phye ba bcu gnyis
ཨརྱ	marga, {yang dag pa'i rtog pa}, {ngag}, {las kyi mtha'}, {'tsho ba}, {rtsol ba}, {dran pa}, {ting nge 'dzin} and {lta ba} 'phags lam brgyad - 8-fold noble path, 'phags lam brgyad - eightfold noble ...	arya
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཧེཨརཏ་གོཨིང་དོཝནྭརད	- la cha shas gnyis su dbye ba'i snying nas brgyud de thur du rgyu ba'i 'phar rtsa ste, in the wrist visible nadi and armpit sweat, brla'i of the thighs mig dmar lta bu] 'phar rtsa chen po - aorta ...	from the heart going downward
བའི་གཞི	the basis on which one appreciates whether another phenomenon is or is not implied [ggd] 'phen - banner 'phen 'khor ba'i gting la - cast into the depths of samsara 'phen 'khor ba'i gting la - cast ...	ba'i gzhi
པྲིནཏ	out!!! - until {'pho ba'i dbugs} 'phel bar byed pa - increase 'phel byed - to make increase; {spel ba} 'phel byed - increaser, chicken 'phel byed - domestic fowl, growing, rising 'phel Bri - wax an...	print
ལོཨདས་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཨེནདས་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ཡོཀེ	like pole, sounding line, string stretched on walls to hang clothes, cord by which thing is suspended 'phyang thag - downward hanging rope 'phyang rdo - weight on a plumb line 'phyang phrul - hair ...	loads from the ends of a yoke
ཨེཨསཡ	going 'phyar - easy going, roof of a house, brandishing, to hoist, raise up 'phyar - [arch] balcony [eg. divine palace] parapet, balustrade railing [? = mda' yab] 'phyar ka - abusing, disparaging, ...	easy
པོ་འདོད	I need freshly killed flesh and lots of fresh blood 'phral don - 1) of temporary profit/ benefit; 2) temporary work 'phral bde - present comfort 'phral bde - 1) temporary happiness; 2) caretaker/ s...	po 'dod
གཅོ་ལྔ	the fifteen downfalls connected w buddha activity [CHN] 'phrin las brgyad - the 8 buddha activities [CHN] 'phrin las bsgrub pa - accomplish buddha activity 'phrin las bcu - ten types of action (zhi...	gco lnga
པའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ལྔ	five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization {sgrub sde} 'phrin las phur pa rol pa'i skor - Syn {phur pa rol pa'i skor} 'phrin las myur bar grags pa'i lha mo - the famo...	pa'i rgyud sde lnga
བསམ་ཚུགས	machine repair/ assembly station 'phrul gyi stobs - magical power or force 'phrul gyi spyan - miraculous eye [in the first dhyana and so forth established, established from meditation, different fr...	bsam tshugs
ཨནད་རེ	absorb light, radiation and reabsorption, expansion and reabsorption 'phro 'du - emanate and gather [flow, activity, occurrence and dissolution of thoughts] 'phro 'du - complexity and simplicity; b...	and re
བ་ཀ	tree	ba ka
བ་ཀན་སེལ	medicine which cures phlegm	ba kan sel
བ་ཀུ་ལ	Bakkula, important monk follower of the Buddha; Bakula; one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [staviras], [arhats]. He dwells on the northern continent of Unpleasant Sound	ba ku la
བ་ཀུ་ལི	kind of tree mimusops elengi	ba ku li
བ་དཀར	1) white cow; 2) lime[-stone] [soft white/ light colored earth]	ba dkar
བ་སྐྱ	sna'i sgor chags pa'i snabs skam po, zhal sgo snum bag ldan yang, shangs la skya chags 'dug ???	ba skya
བ་ཁལ་སྨུག་པོ	gter ston, 12th cent. revealed gsol 'debs bar chad lam sel	ba khal smug po
བ་ཁྱུ	cow herd	ba khyu
བ་མཁལ་སྨུག་པོ	Bakal Mukpo, Tertön	ba mkhal smug po
བ་ག	SA bha ga	ba ga
བ་གམ	balcony, SA mda' yab, dome on top of a house, timber work of a roof, battlement	ba gam
བ་གམ་ཅན	king's palace, milch cow	ba gam can
བ་གམ་འོད་ཚོགས	glittering dome	ba gam 'od tshogs
བ་གོར	SA pa gor, clan in which Vairocana was born	ba gor
བ་གྲུས་མ	milk-cow in the year she had a calf	ba grus ma
བ་གླང	ox, bull, cattle	ba glang
བ་གླང་རྐང	1) khrums zla, the 8th month; 2) Virgo (/; 3) ox foot	ba glang rkang
བ་གླང་རྐྱལ་འཇུག	when an ox swims the herder kyis rang snang gang shar gyis brdungs nas 'ded pa lta bu ni example	ba glang rkyal 'jug
བ་གླང་སྐྱོང་བ	low indian caste which tends cattle	ba glang skyong ba
བ་གླང་གི་ཤ	ox, meat, beef	ba glang gi sha
བ་གླང་ལྕེ	dandelion, SA khur mangs	ba glang lce
བ་གླང་ལྡན	yakshini of rohita, yaksha of country of rohita	ba glang ldan
བ་གླང་སྤྱོད	Godaniya	ba glang spyod
བ་གླང་མིག	small opening in the wall of a house for light and air, medicinal flower, name of millet	ba glang mig
བ་གླང་འཚོ་མཁན	cowboy	ba glang 'tsho mkhan
བ་གླང་རྫས	SA spang rgyan me tog	ba glang rdzas
བ་གླང་རྫི	a cowboy/ cattle herdsman	ba glang rdzi
བ་གླང་རྫི་མོ	a maiden who herded cattle	ba glang rdzi mo
བ་གླང་ཤ	ox meat	ba glang sha
བ་གླང་བསྲུང	medicinal plant, SA thal dres sman	ba glang bsrung
བ་རྒྱ	spider web	ba rgya
བ་རྒྱ་ཅན	spider, w cobwebs	ba rgya can
བ་རྒྱ་བྱེད་མཁན	web maker, spider	ba rgya byed mkhan
བ་བརྒྱ	spider's web	ba brgya
བ་ཅར	piece of cloth to cover the secret parts, hem of a lower garment	ba car
བ་ཅུ	cow	ba cu
བ་ལྕི	cattle manure/ heaviness	ba lci
བ་ཆ	echo	ba cha
བ་ཆ་འཁོར	echo	ba cha 'khor
བ་ཆུ	cow urine	ba chu
བ་འཇོ	milk a cow	ba 'jo
བ་འཇོ་མཁན	cow milker, nomad	ba 'jo mkhan
བ་འཇོ་བ	milk a cow	ba 'jo ba
བ་ཉལ་མཛོ་གྲོད	dzo belly eater and sleeper, bad person who does little but eat and sleep	ba nyal mdzo grod
བ་གཉིས་པའི་བསྡུ་བ	bgrang gzhi dang bgrang bya'i bar gyi tshig bsdu ba ste, bgrang gzhi 'byung ba la bgrang bya lnga yod pa bsdus pa la 'byung ba lnga brjod pa ltar ro ??	ba gnyis pa'i bsdu ba
བ་རྙི	cow dung	ba rnyi
བ་ཏི	dry grain measure equal to 4 pounds	ba ti
བ་ཏི་ཀ	small long measure, 1/7th of a barley corn	ba ti ka
བ་ཏི་ལ	tree	ba ti la
བཱ་ཏུ་ཊའི་ཡུལ་དུ་བྲོས	escaped to the land of Vatuta	bA tu Ta'i yul du bros
བ་ཏུ་བ	country mentioned in bon works	ba tu ba
བ་ཐག	1) spider silk; 2) very fine roots)/ [??rope, root, stalk of fruit.]	ba thag
བ་ཐག་མ་ཆད	tsam, barely unbroken	ba thag ma chad
བ་ཐག་མ་ཆད་ཙམ	barely unbroken	ba thag ma chad tsam
བ་ད་ག	SA pa da ga	ba da ga
བ་ད་ན	face	ba da na
བ་ད་ར	jujube fruit	ba da ra
བ་ད་རའི་གླིང	the island of Badara ba da ra'i gling du bgrod pa'i rtogs brjod Travels to the Island of Badara	ba da ra'i gling
བ་ད་རའི་གླིང་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	the land called Badara	ba da ra'i gling zhes bya ba
བ་དང	ribbon of five colors, SA pa dang	ba dang
བ་དན	1) offering banner; 2) flag, pennant w stick or staff, standard, banner, silk ensign	ba dan
བ་དན་འཛིན་མ	flag holder, carrier of a standard ba dan g.yo ba - to wave the flag	ba dan 'dzin ma
བ་དན་སེན་པོ	demon of naga class	ba dan sen po
བ་དམ	peanut, ground nut; almond, peanut	ba dam
བ་དམ་གྱི་སྣུམ	peanut oil	ba dam gyi snum
བ་དི་ཡ་ལ	flax	ba di ya la
བ་དེ	tree	ba de
བ་དེ་མ་ཐག	SA pa de ma thag	ba de ma thag
བ་དྲུས་མ	milk-cow [in the year she had a calf]	ba drus ma
བ་བདེ་རྣམ་འཛོམ	village in neighborhood of stod lung	ba bde rnam 'dzom
བ་ལྡིང་ཆུ	{ba lding chu} river	ba lding chu
བ་ན	SA pa na	ba na
བ་ན་རི་སྐྱེས	{ldong ros} mineral med	ba na ri skyes
བ་ནུ	mineral medicine	ba nu
བ་སྤུ	1) small hairs on the body [syn: pags pa'i me tog dang, pags pa'i myu gu, lus skyes]; 2) field-herb {ba spu}	ba spu
ཕི༹ཨེལད	herb {ba spu}	field
བ་སྤུ་ཁུང་བུ	pore ba spu gyen du phyogs pa'i mtshan bzang - the excellent mark of body hairs turning upward [one of the 32 major marks of a Buddha {sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis}, as having genuinely re...	ba spu khung bu
བ་སྤུ་གྱོ་བ	the body hairs trembled/ stood on end	ba spu gyo ba
བ་སྤུ་ཅན	w hairy body	ba spu can
བ་སྤུ་ལྡང	joyful	ba spu ldang
བ་སྤུ་ལྡང་བ	body hairs rising [anger]	ba spu ldang ba
བ་སྤུ་མེད	bald	ba spu med
བ་སྤུ་གཟིངས་པ	body hairs standing on end [fright] ba spu g.yo - x {lus ba spu g.yo mig mchi ma 'khrugs} every pore on your body tingling and your eyes wet with tears ba spu g.yo ba - the hairs trembled, stood on...	ba spu gzings pa
བ་སྤུ་ལངས་པ	body hairs standing on end [cold]	ba spu langs pa
བ་སྤུ་ལྷུང་བ	hair fall, mineral med.	ba spu lhung ba
བ་སྤུའི་ཁུང་བུ	the pores on the body	ba spu'i khung bu
བ་སྤུའི་ཉག་མ	a single strand of body hair	ba spu'i nyag ma
བ་སྤུའི་བུ་ག	body hair pores	ba spu'i bu ga
བ་སྤྲུ	milabiris himalaica mirabilis himalaica (edgew.) heim., mirabilis himalaica, a type of hellebore, 1 of rtsa ba lnga	ba spru
བ་སྤྲུ་ཤིང	medicinal tree which removes tumors or abscess	ba spru shing
བ་ཕྱུག	cow	ba phyug
བ་ཕྱུགས	cows/ cattle	ba phyugs
བ་ཕྱུགས་སོགས་རྩ་ཁར་གཏོང་བ	graze	ba phyugs sogs rtsa khar gtong ba
བ་ཕྱུགས་སོགས་གསོ་སྐྱོང་ཁང	ranch	ba phyugs sogs gso skyong khang
བ་ཕྱུས	cow	ba phyus
བ་ཕྱེད	Wa zur [small mark under a letter signifying W, 1 of the 'dogs bzhi. y r l w] 1777	ba phyed
བ་ཕྲུག	calf	ba phrug
བ་བུ	a soft shoe ba be'u skyes pa zhig gis brdungs nas was kicked by a cow who has just given birth to a calf	ba bu
བ་བྱུང	cow-nectar, cow essence, ingredients of a cow	ba byung
བ་བྱུང་ལྔ	the five things coming from a cow	ba byung lnga
བ་བྱུང་སྣ་ལྔ	Cow nectar. Five essences from a special cow. Syn {ba'i rnam lnga}	ba byung sna lnga
བ་བྱུང་རིལ་བུ	pill made of the five things coming from a cow {ba [las] byung [ba'i rdzas] lnga [po]}	ba byung ril bu
བ་བླ	ba bla [mineral medicine ba bla} -}-	ba bla
བ་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྒོམ་པ	training in guru yoga	ba bla ma'i rnal 'byor sgom pa
བ་འབོག	clod, lump of earth	ba 'bog
བ་རྦུ་ར	1) of a variegated or spotted color. 2) gold. 3) yellow pigment	ba rbu ra
བ་རྦུ་རི	yellow pigment	ba rbu ri
བ་མ	thad kar bskor te 'bigs pa'i lag gsor 'phrul ma, ???	ba ma
བ་མར	cow's butter	ba mar
བ་མིག་གི་ཆུ	water collected in impression of a cow's foot	ba mig gi chu
བ་མེན	gayal wild ox bos gavoeus	ba men
བུཕ༹ཕ༹ལོ	calf. 5) {rkem}	buffalo
བ་མེན་གྱི་ར	the horn of the "bamen" deer; [has a conic shape]	ba men gyi ra
བ་མོ	cow, frost, coarse soil, milch-cow, hoarfrost	ba mo
བ་མོ་བྱིའུ	swallow	ba mo byi'u
བ་མོའི་བྱིའུ	bird cuculus melanoleucus	ba mo'i byi'u
བ་མོས་ལཧབ༹མ་བྱེད	she will get up before dawn with only the frost for her shoes,	ba mos lhvam byed
བ་རྨིག	cow hoof	ba rmig
བ་ཙམ་ན	"as soon as" clause connective	ba tsam na
བ་ཙམ་ནས	"as soon as" clause connective	ba tsam nas
བ་ཙི་གེར་གླིང	an island	ba tsi ger gling
བ་ཚྭ	alkali, [soda] salt, salty	ba tshwa
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན	salty, briny	ba tshwa can
བ་ཚབ༹་ཅན	alkaline	ba tshva can
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the salty ocean	ba tshwa can gyi rgya mtsho
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་ཆུ་ཀླུང་གི་མདོ	unidentified	ba tshwa can gyi chu klung gi mdo
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་མཚོ	lake of soda-salt	ba tshwa can gyi mtsho
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་ས	salty/ alkaline earth	ba tshwa can gyi sa
བ་ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་ས་ཞིང	salty/ alkaline land/ fields	ba tshwa can gyi sa zhing
བ་ཚྭ་ལྡན	salt/ alkali-laden, bad earth	ba tshwa ldan
བ་ཚང	cattle barn/ shed	ba tshang
བ་ཚྭའི་སྐྱུར་ཚི	muriatic acid	ba tshwa'i skyur tshi
བ་ཚབ༹འི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the Salty Ocean, [the ocean between the continents and the surrounding iron mountain wall]	ba tshva'i rgya mtsho
བ་ཚྭའི་རང་བཞིན	alkalinity, saltiness, salinity	ba tshwa'i rang bzhin
བ་ཛ	musical instrument	ba dza
བ་ཛ་གཏོང	play a musical instrument	ba dza gtong
བ་ཛིར	bajira	ba dzir
བ་ཛྲ	vajra, dorje	ba dzra
བ་ཛྲ་གུ་རུ་སྔགས	Vajra Guru Mantra	ba dzra gu ru sngags
བ་ཛྲ་གུ་རུའི་ཕན་ཡོན	text revealed by	ba dzra gu ru'i phan yon
ཀརྨ་གླིང་པ	14th cent. on the "Vajra Guru" formula invoking the blessings of padma sambhava; a syllable by syllable commentary and an explanation of the benefits to be derived from its recital	karma gling pa
བ་ཛྲ་དུང་སྒྲུབ	100 million Vajra Guru recitations	ba dzra dung sgrub
བ་ཛྲ་བོ་དྷི	indian buddhist	ba dzra bo dhi
བ་ཛྲ་མུ	dissolve	ba dzra mu
བ་ཛྲ་ས་མའ་ཛ	vajrasamaja, vajra assembly	ba dzra sa ma' dza
བ་ཛྲ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	vajra heruka	ba dzra he ru ka
བ་མཛོ	dzo [father a yak, mother a cow.]	ba mdzo
བ་རྫི	cattle herder	ba rdzi
བ་རྫི་མ	cowherdess	ba rdzi ma
བ་ཞོ	MSS: cow's yogurt/curds ??? E.g R75: 320, ba zho ba mo mu tig mdog. [mss]	ba zho
བ་འོ	cow's milk	ba 'o
བ་ཡག་པ	lancea tibetica hook. f. et thoms.	ba yag pa
བ་ཡན་མཁར	county in 21th cent Tibet.	ba yan mkhar
བ་ཡན་ཧ་རི	{ba yan ha ri} mountain	ba yan ha ri
བ་ཡར	two year old cow	ba yar
བ་ཡར་མ	cow who bore a calf last year and won't this year, two year old cow	ba yar ma
བ་ཡི་ནུ་མ	cow nipple, pustule	ba yi nu ma
བ་ཡི་འོ་མ	red cow's milk	ba yi 'o ma
བ་ཡིན	SA pa yin	ba yin
བ་ར	1) cattle/ cows and goats; 2) cattle corral/ shed	ba ra
བ་ར་ན་སི	Varanasi, Benares	ba ra na si
བ་ར་པོ་ཏ	wild animal of the deer class	ba ra po ta
བ་ར་བོང་གསུམ	cows, goats, and donkeys	ba ra bong gsum
བ་རན	n. of a place	ba ran
བ་རི	ba ri hat, formerly worn by soldiers, guards or later just for ceremony	ba ri
བ་རི་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ	Bari Lotsawa; (10401111), contemporary of Milarepa, important lineage holder in early Sakya	ba ri lo tsA ba
བ་རུ	1 of 3 skyur byed gsum	ba ru
བ་རུ་བཞི་སྦྱོར	{ba ru bzhi sbyor} contact poison	ba ru bzhi sbyor
བ་རུ་ར	ba ru ra [aragaegus Sanguinea, beleric myrobalan, (important med. tree, bitter, hot, astringent, sweet and sour tasting, middle melting, by its powerTIb: bad mkhris dang, chu ser nag po skem par by...	ba ru ra
བ་རུ་རའི་མདོ	Sutra on the Myrobalan Fruit, Aksharasi Sutra	ba ru ra'i mdo
བ་རེ་ནང	place in tibet	ba re nang
བ་རེ་བེ་རེ	1) sluggish, careless. 2) getting drunk, slightly tipsy	ba re be re
བ་རེ་བོ་རེ	1) sluggish/ listless and careless; 2) getting drunk, slightly tipsy	ba re bo re
བ་རེད	SA pa red	ba red
བ་རླ་ལེགས་པར་ཟླུམ་པ	well-rounded thighs [one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} = 32 marks of a great being) the major marks.]	ba rla legs par zlum pa
བ་ལ	[Syn {sha chen lnga gang rung}	ba la
བ་ལ་ཀ	tree sida cordifolia	ba la ka
བ་ལ་རྨིག་པ	bullock's hoof, plant asteracantha longifolia	ba la rmig pa
བ་ལ་ཤ	tirthika king	ba la sha
བ་ལ་ཧ	wonderful horse of indra	ba la ha
བ་ལང	1) [cows and] oxen; 2) elephant; 3) bull (/ *]	ba lang
བ་ལང་རྐང་པ	1) khrums zla, the 8th month; 2) Virgo; 3) ox foot	ba lang rkang pa
བ་ལང་སྐྱོང་བ	owner/ herder of oxen/ bulls/ cattle	ba lang skyong ba
བ་ལང་སྐྱོང་མ	woman tending bullocks	ba lang skyong ma
བ་ལང་ཁ་ཞོ་སྔོན་པ	wild animal of deer species	ba lang kha zho sngon pa
བ་ལང་ཁྲ་བོ	spotted or parti-colored bullock	ba lang khra bo
བ་ལང་གི་མཁྲིས	bile used as medicine by hindus	ba lang gi mkhris
བ་ལང་གི་འགྲོས	cow's foot mark holes	ba lang gi 'gros
བ་ལང་གི་ཕྲུག	young elephant	ba lang gi phrug
བ་ལང་བགྲང	cow-counter, nomad	ba lang bgrang
བ་ལང་མགོ	ox head, white sandal wood	ba lang mgo
བ་ལང་ལྕེ	khur mong med herb	ba lang lce
བ་ལང་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	the discipline of the cow [Indian rule/discipline of respecting the cow.]	ba lang brtul zhugs
བ་ལང་བདག	Gabamyati	ba lang bdag
བ་ལང་སྣ	cow nose/ leader, snake	ba lang sna
བ་ལང་སྤྱོད	Aparagodaniya	ba lang spyod
བ་ལང་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of cattle, nomad	ba lang dbang phyug
བ་ལང་མིག	ox eye, window	ba lang mig
བ་ལང་རྨིག་རྗེས	cow's foot	ba lang rmig rjes
བ་ལང་ཚོགས	cow shed	ba lang tshogs
བ་ལང་འཚེ	1) wolf; 2) singer of the gods; 3) harmer of cattle	ba lang 'tshe
བ་ལང་རྫི	cow keeper	ba lang rdzi
བ་ལང་ཟས	cow-food, spang rgyan flower/ med herb	ba lang zas
བ་ལང་ཤིང་རྟ	chariot drawn by oxen/ bulls	ba lang shing rta
བ་ལང་སོ	ox tooth, {ba bla} mineral med. ba lang so} -}-	ba lang so
བ་ལིང་ག་ནའི་ཤིང	species of creeper	ba ling ga na'i shing
བ་ལུ	fragrant dwarf species of rhododendron, a holy plant, species of fragrant arborescent plants, rhododendrons, abies webbiana	ba lu
བ་ལུ་ཀ	aquatic insect	ba lu ka
བ་ལུ་ནག་པོ	black ba lu med herb [a kind of dva li w red flowers, some places called black, by its power drod skyed, chu ser skem]	ba lu nag po
བ་ལེ་ཀ	baleka [Skt] gcig stobs, med tree	ba le ka
བ་ལོང་བ	ankle, ankle bone	ba long ba
བ་ཤ	beef	ba sha
བ་ཤ་ཀ	[Skt] bashaka field herb med.	ba sha ka
བ་ཤུ	virulent boil, ulcer	ba shu
བ་ཤེ	previously in Tibet cattle she ste bogs ma la btang nas len pa'i butter and cheese	ba she
བ་ཤེ་གླང་འགེལ	ba la 'khri ba'i she mar glang la 'gel ba ste 'gan 'gel yul ga phyi slog pa'i dpe	ba she glang 'gel
བ་ཤོ	currants, small raisins	ba sho
བ་བཤད	subcommentary	ba bshad
བ་སེར་མཁྲིས་པ	yellow cow's bile	ba ser mkhris pa
བ་སོ	elephant's tooth, ivory; ivory	ba so
བ་སོ་མཁན	worker in ivory	ba so mkhan
བ་སོ་བ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	1402-73 Basowa Chökyi Gyaltsen, one of the six siddhas of the "Ganden Mahamudra"	ba so ba chos kyi rgyal mtshan
བ་ཧྭ	abbr of 'dus ma byas & 'dus byas	ba hwa
བ་ཧལ	bahal	ba hal
བ་ཧི་ཀ	bird	ba hi ka
བག	1) feeling, frame of mind. 2) a narrow space, 3) slight, insignificant, trifling, 4) attention, care, caution. {zon bag} careful. 5) dough of roasted barley flour	bag
བག་སྐར	astrological calculation regarding good and bad luck at the selection of a bride	bag skar
བག་སྐྱོ	wheat dough/ porridge 'dur, [pressed? fragmented? mixed up so it is	bag skyo
བག་སྐྱོང	1) relaxed; 3) open-minded; 3) [arch] shameless w/ oshunning immodesty/ impropriety	bag skyong
བག་བརྐྱང	openhandedness, largess	bag brkyang
བག་ཁག	brick of tea weighing 6 pounds	bag khag
བག་ཁུམ	conservative	bag khum
བག་ཁུམས	depressed	bag khums
བག་འཁུམ	be intimidated/ scared, timidity, shying away, discouraged mind, cowardly, conservative	bag 'khum
བག་འཁུམ་པ	be intimidated/ scared, timidity, shying away, discouraged mind, cowardly, conservative	bag 'khum pa
བག་འཁུམས	be intimidated/ scared, timidity, shying away, discouraged mind, cowardly, conservative	bag 'khums
བག་འཁུམས་པ	be intimidated/ scared, timidity, shying away, discouraged mind, cowardly, conservative	bag 'khums pa
བག་འཁུམས་རིང་ལུགས	timidity-ism, conservatism	bag 'khums ring lugs
བག་གི་བུག་གི	1) part clear part unclear words; 2) small[er], less[er]	bag gi bug gi
བག་གེ་བོག་གེ	unpleasing/ ungraceful clothing	bag ge bog ge
བག་གྱོག	bride[groom]'s servant	bag gyog
བག་གྱོག་མ	wife's/ bride's female servant / attendant	bag gyog ma
བག་གྲིབ	defilement from meeting a bride	bag grib
བག་གྲོ	cheerful. Syn {bag dro ba}; warmth	bag gro
བག་གྲོ་བ	1) resplendent magnificent [adhisthana]; 2) pleasant, happy, jolly; 3) suffuse with/ convey a cheerful warmth; 4) good atmosphere (/ [person house place words, transmission]	bag gro ba
བག་གྲོ་བོ	cheerful	bag gro bo
བག་གྲོ་བྱིན་ཆེ་བ	splendid/magnificent and suffused with warmth [like a divine palace, adhist- hana gzi brjid zhing bab chags pa, khang bzang bag dro byin che ba]	bag gro byin che ba
བག་གླུ	marriage songs sung by women	bag glu
བག་རྔ	drum at a wedding	bag rnga
བག་ཅན	timid	bag can
བག་ཆ	bunch, bundle	bag cha
བག་ཆག་གྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	Obscuration of habitual tendencies. The propensity for apprehending attributes occurring in the mind of even highly developed bodhisattvas	bag chag gyi sgrib pa
བག་ཆགས	habitual tendency, karmic traces, karmic residues, unconscious propensities, [vasana]; disposition, habit energy, thought, habit formation, habit thought dormant, potential tendency, habitual patte...	bag chags
ཨིནཅླིནཏིཨོནས་ཨིམཔྲིནཏེད་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground consciousness	inclinations imprinted in the all
བག་ཆགས་ཀུན་སྤངས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of having relinquished all habitual tendencies 1780	bag chags kun spangs pa'i ye shes
བག་ཆགས་ཀུན་གཞི	the all-ground of tendencies, [Syn {bag chags sna tshogs pa'i kun gzhi}	bag chags kun gzhi
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	the element of habitual patterns	bag chags kyi khams
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་འཁྲུལ་པ	illusion of karmic traces	bag chags kyi 'khrul pa
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་བགོ་བཞིར	the four divisions of habitual patterns	bag chags kyi bgo bzhir
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of habitual tendencies	bag chags kyi sgrib pa
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	the habitual tendencies of disturbing emotions	bag chags kyi nyon mongs pa
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་རྟེན	support for the tendencies	bag chags kyi rten
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ལུས	the body of habitual patterns/ tendencies	bag chags kyi lus
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ས་བོན	seed of habitual patterns	bag chags kyi sa bon
བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ་མ་ཟད་པ	our emotional habits do not diminish	bag chags kyi srid pa ma zad pa
བག་ཆགས་བགོ་བར	adopt habitual patterns	bag chags bgo bar
བག་ཆགས་བསྒོས་པ	defiled with moral impurity	bag chags bsgos pa
བག་ཆགས་ངན་གོམས	bad habits	bag chags ngan goms
བག་ཆགས་ངན་པ	unwholesome tendencies	bag chags ngan pa
བག་ཆགས་གཉིད	habitual sleep	bag chags gnyid
བག་ཆགས་བཏབ་པ	sowing / planting habitual tendencies	bag chags btab pa
བག་ཆགས་བརྟས་པ	inflated with passion	bag chags brtas pa
བག་ཆགས་འཐུག་པོ	strong inclination	bag chags 'thug po
བག་ཆགས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	universal ground of various traces	bag chags sna tshogs kyi kun gzhi
བག་ཆགས་སྣ་ཚོགས་པའི་ཀུན་གཞི	allground for manifold tendencies bag chags sna tshogs pa'i kun gzhi ground of all experience as a multiplicity of habitual patterning/ patterns	bag chags sna tshogs pa'i kun gzhi
བག་ཆགས་གཞན་དབང	the dependency of habitual tendencies	bag chags gzhan dbang
བག་ཆགས་བཞག་པ	ex {rnam dkar gyi bag chags bzhag pa} pure seeds were sown	bag chags bzhag pa
བག་ཆགས་བཞག་ཙམ	only established some karmic tendencies	bag chags bzhag tsam
བག་ཆགས་བཞི	the four types of habitual tendencies	bag chags bzhi
བག་ཆགས་ཡང་དག་བཅོམ་པ	authentic overcoming of habitual patterning/ patterns	bag chags yang dag bcom pa
བག་ཆགས་ཡིད་ཀྱི་ལུས	a mental body of unconscious tendencies, mental body of habitual patterns	bag chags yid kyi lus
བག་ཆགས་རང་གྲོལ	one of the sections within the {kar gling zhi khro,}	bag chags rang grol
བག་ཆགས་ལུས	bodily tendencies	bag chags lus
བག་ཆགས་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	universal ground of the body of traces	bag chags lus kyi kun gzhi
བག་ཆགས་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བ	extremely subtle tendencies	bag chags shin tu phra ba
བག་ཆགས་སད་ནས	reawakening of accumulated latencies	bag chags sad nas
བག་ཆགས་སད་པ	awaken experience from a past life	bag chags sad pa
བག་ཆགས་གསུམ	the three kinds of habitual patterns	bag chags gsum
བག་ཆགས་བསྲབ་པ	restrain the passions	bag chags bsrab pa
བག་ཆགས་ལྷག་མ	residual habitual patterns	bag chags lhag ma
བག་ཆལ	a flat pastry made of wheat dough [food w butter molasses etc.]	bag chal
བག་ཆས	LKh: wedding clothes/dress for either the bride or groom. The term bag chas covers both the woman's wedding clothes {bag ma'i chas} and the man's wedding clothes {mag pa'i chas}. [mss]	bag chas
བག་ཆུ	starch	bag chu
བག་ཆུང	small square box for moist tea leaves	bag chung
བག་ཆེན	large square box for moist tea leaves, mah jong set	bag chen
བག་ཉལ	hidden, dormant, latent	bag nyal
བག་ཉལ་དུ་ཤོར་བ	stray into latency	bag nyal du shor ba
བག་ཉལ་བདུན	the seven types of latency:	bag nyal bdun
བག་གཉིད	habitual sleep	bag gnyid
བག་སྟོན	marriage feast	bag ston
བག་ཐུག	wheat dough [gro zan] ril mo cooked noodles/ porridge/ gruel/ broth	bag thug
བག་དང་ལྡན་པ	heedfulness	bag dang ldan pa
བག་དོག་པ	straightened, attention, care, caution	bag dog pa
བག་དོག་པོ	narrow, closed, cramped [mind]	bag dog po
བག་དྲོ	happy, jolly, splendidly, suffused with warmth, convey a cheerful warmth	bag dro
བག་དྲོ་པོ	1) resplendent magnificent [adhisthana]; 2) pleasant, happy, jolly, good natured; 3) suffuse with/ convey a cheerful warmth; 4) good atmosphere	bag dro po
བག་དྲོ་བ	cheerful/ joyful; pleasing. Syn {bag dro le ba}; a good atmosphere	bag dro ba
བག་དྲོ་བྱིན་ཆེ	splendid/ magnificent and suffused w warmth [like a divine palace, adhisthana gzi brjid zhing bab chags pa]	bag dro byin che
བག་དྲོ་ལ་བྱིན་ཆགས་པ	resplendent and suffused with warmth	bag dro la byin chags pa
བག་དྲོ་ལེ་བ	1) suffused w warmth; 2) good atmosphere; 3) Somewhat dignified, splendid	bag dro le ba
བག་དྲོན	warm porridge	bag dron
བག་ལྡན	proper behavior	bag ldan
བག་པ	be afraid, purity, gambler	bag pa
བག་པོ	bridegroom	bag po
བག་སྤྱིན	paste compounded of flour and glue	bag spyin
བག་ཕབ	, phebs - to completely relax, relaxing, becoming lax, to abandon oneself, relaxed, lax, conducive, rest, to abandon oneself, abandoning; phebs relaxed, lax, conducive, rest; to abandon oneself	bag phab
བག་ཕབ་པ	1) comfortable; 2) relaxed; 3) at ease; 4) let go; 5) lax	bag phab pa
བག་ཕུག	cave	bag phug
བག་ཕེབ་པ	1) relaxed; 2) conducive; 3) lax	bag pheb pa
བག་ཕེབ་ས་པ	relaxed, conducive	bag pheb sa pa
བག་ཕེབས	with a cheerful mind, without care, no anxiety	bag phebs
བག་ཕེབས་པ	1) relaxed and happy; 2) conducive	bag phebs pa
བག་ཕེབས་པར	at ease, leisurely, without any hurry	bag phebs par
བག་ཕེབས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to be open with, speak freely with {de dang bag phebs par byas nas gtam smra bar mi bya} avoid being too open or having familiar conversations with such people.	bag phebs par byed pa
བག་ཕེབས་པོ	relaxed, conducive	bag phebs po
བག་ཕེབས་སྨྲ་བ	to speak freely with	bag phebs smra ba
བག་ཕེབས་ལྷིང་འཇགས	joyful w/o cares and business	bag phebs lhing 'jags
བག་ཕོར	bowl to keep barley flour	bag phor
བག་ཕྱེ	wheat-flour, lute, putty	bag phye
བག་བུག	1) part clear part unclear words; 2) small[er], less[er]; 3) (rnying cave	bag bug
བག་བོག	unpleasing/ ungraceful clothing	bag bog
བག་བྲུལ	crumbs of bread	bag brul
བག་བྲོ་པོ	cozy	bag bro po
བག་བླ	officiating lama	bag bla
བག་འབེབས་པ	drop fear, abandon fear, cast away all fear	bag 'bebs pa
བག་སྦྱར	paste	bag sbyar
བག་སྦྱིན	lute, putty, compound of meal and glue	bag sbyin
བག་མ	bride, wife	bag ma
བག་མ་འབོགས་པ	1) woman given as a bride; 2) man receiving a bride	bag ma 'bogs pa
བག་མ་གསར་པ	bride, newly married wife	bag ma gsar pa
བག་མར་བཏང	to give away as bride; to give away the bride	bag mar btang
བག་མར་བཏང་བ	given in marriage	bag mar btang ba
བག་མར་བླང་བ	take as wife, marry	bag mar blang ba
བག་མར་ལེན་པ	take in marriage	bag mar len pa
བག་མར་བསུ་བ་ཡིན	we will lead her home as your bride	bag mar bsu ba yin
བག་མི་ཕེབ	anxiety, fearful	bag mi pheb
བག་མི་ཚ	intrepid, fearless, hero	bag mi tsha
བག་མེད	heedlessly {'bangs gzhan zhig dang bag med spyad cing} - heedlessly left the task to another servant	bag med
བག་མེད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད	careless/ reckless/ wanton/ unrestrained/ shameless behavior	bag med kyi spyod
བག་མེད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	careless/ reckless/ wanton/ unrestrained/ shameless behavior bag med kyi spyod pa la gzengs bstod praise careless behavior bag med kyi spyod pa la gzengs bstod praising, approving careless behavior	bag med kyi spyod pa
བག་མེད་ཀྱིས	with abandon, lack of inhibition	bag med kyis
བག་མེད་རྒྱས་སྤྲོས	extravagantly elaborate/ luxurious	bag med rgyas spros
བག་མེད་དུ	unrestrained/ careless bag med du g.yeng - be hedonistic	bag med du
བག་མེད་པ	heedless/ reckless/ careless(ness)	bag med pa
བག་མེད་པའི་ཉེས་དམིགས་སོ་ལྔ	the 30 faults of carelessness 1782	bag med pa'i nyes dmigs so lnga
བག་མེད་པར	without restraint	bag med par
བག་ཙམ	for a while; just a little	bag tsam
བག་ཙམ་གྱི་ལྷག་མ	just a little remainder	bag tsam gyi lhag ma
བག་ཙམ་པ	slight, insignificant, trifling	bag tsam pa
བག་ཙེ	basket for [clews of] wool	bag tse
བག་རྩིས	accounting in giving/ taking a bride	bag rtsis
བག་ཚ	slightly frayed lack of confidence, to have fear, to panic. {nyam nga bag tsha} fear and doubt	bag tsha
བག་ཚ་བ	be afraid, panic-struck, be convulsed out of fright, fear, timidity, anxiousness	bag tsha ba
བག་ཚ་བ་མེད	fearless	bag tsha ba med
བག་ཚ་བ་མེད་པ	intrepid	bag tsha ba med pa
བག་ཚ་མེད་པ	fearless	bag tsha med pa
བག་ཚ་ཞེད་པ	great embarrassment, shyness, fear, panic	bag tsha zhed pa
བག་ཚབ	1) slightly afraid; 2) lacking confidence, apprehensive, doubtful; 3) have fear, panic	bag tshab
བག་ཚབ་མེད་པའི་དྲོ	cry of fearlessness	bag tshab med pa'i dro
བག་ཚི	[greasy] stains [cloth]	bag tshi
བག་ཚོས	fried bread etc.	bag tshos
བག་མཚེར་བ	discouraged, disenheartened	bag mtsher ba
བག་འཚེར	feel shy, be timid/ scared	bag 'tsher
བག་རྫོངས	woman going to be a bride sprod pa'i skal ba, [rdzongs = parting gift she gets or IS it?]	bag rdzongs
བག་རྫོངས་རྔན་པ	dowry	bag rdzongs rngan pa
བག་ཞ	dormant, hidden, latent [tendency]	bag zha
བག་ཞད	[arch] partial[ly], slight[ly]	bag zhad
བག་ཞུམ་པ	discouraged	bag zhum pa
བག་ཟན	thick pap, dough	bag zan
བག་ཟོན	1) be careful/cautious; 2) watch/look out)/ [reason for doubt + attention/concern.]	bag zon
བག་ཟོན་བྱེད	1) be careful/ cautious/ vigilant; 2) watch/ look out	bag zon byed
བག་ཡང	carefree, relax freely	bag yang
བག་ཡངས	freely; carefree, to relax freely, rest, relaxation	bag yangs
བག་ཡངས་པོ	carefree, freely rest, relax[ation], open- minded, free in thought	bag yangs po
བག་ཡངས་སུ	be naturally at ease; x {dbang po bag yangs su bzhag} let your senses be naturally at ease	bag yangs su
བག་ཡངས་སུ་སྐྱོད	to move easily	bag yangs su skyod
བག་ཡངས་སུ་རྒྱུ་བ	wander carefree	bag yangs su rgyu ba
བག་ཡངས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	leave in a relaxed state	bag yangs su gtong ba
བག་ཡངས་སུ་བྱས་པ	relaxation	bag yangs su byas pa
བག་ཡངས་སུ་བཞག	rest, leave in a relaxed state	bag yangs su bzhag
བག་ཡོད	careful, concern, mibp 54, modest, prudent person, pious, lawabiding, temperate, dutiful, discreet, conscientious, shame, mindfulness, pay heed, decent, conscientiousness	bag yod
བག་ཡོད་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	limbs of conscientiousness [abandoning liquor. drinking even if discipline is perfect one will become careless]	bag yod kyi yan lag
བག་ཡོད་སྐེ་རག་བཅིངས	fastened with the sash of mindfulness	bag yod ske rag bcings
བག་ཡོད་བསྟན་པ	vigilance w respect to enlightened mind	bag yod bstan pa
བག་ཡོད་བདུན	the 7 latent tendencies	bag yod bdun
བག་ཡོད་པ	wakefulness, conscientiousness, reverence, fear, self-respect, selfcontrol, chaste, careful	bag yod pa
ཕོ༹ར་ནོན	virtuous deeds, attentiveness, attentiveness, wakefulness	for non
ཨལེརཏནེསས་ཕོ༹ར་ནོན	virtuous deeds, attentiveness, wakefulness]	alertness for non
བག་ཡོད་པར	modestly, chastely	bag yod par
བག་ཡོད་པར་བྱས	be conscientious about	bag yod par byas
བག་ཡོད་པར་བྱས་ཏེ	be conscientious about it	bag yod par byas te
བག་ཡོད་སྤྱོད་པ	conscientious behavior with seven aspects (dad brtson & shes rab, snying rje, phyogs gcig, spros bcas, tshogs, rdzu 'phrul, cig car ba)	bag yod spyod pa
བག་ཡོད་བག་ལ་ཉལ	habit of vigilance bag g.yeng - benumbed, blunt, careless bag g.yeng - insensitive, negligent, lacking vigilance bag g.yog ma - maid-servant who waits upon a bride	bag yod bag la nyal
བག་རེ	tiny bits	bag re
བག་རེ་གྱི་ལྷག་མ	just a little remainder	bag re gyi lhag ma
བག་རེ་དྲོ	conveys a cheerful warmth	bag re dro
བག་རེ་བ	little hope? cung zad re, dus tshod bag re tsam yang 'phro brlag tu ma btang ba	bag re ba
བག་རོགས	attendants on a bride at the time of marriage	bag rogs
བག་ལ་ཉལ	Predispositions, anushaya. Unwholesome tendencies, much the same as defilements	bag la nyal
བག་ལ་ཉལ་བདུན	the seven latent tendencies	bag la nyal bdun
བག་ལ་ཉལ་བ	(to be) latent; instinct, latencies. Dormant, potential	bag la nyal ba
བག་ལ་ཉལ་བ་བདུན	the 7 latent tendencies	bag la nyal ba bdun
བག་ལ་ཞ	dormancy, latent tendency	bag la zha
བག་ལ་ཞ་ཉེས	to be in danger of disappearing	bag la zha nyes
བག་ལ་ཞ་བ	dormant, hidden, latent. [tendency]	bag la zha ba
བག་ལེབ	[flat] bread	bag leb
བག་ལེབ་སྦོམ	plastic explosives	bag leb sbom
བག་ལེབ་བཟོ	bake bread	bag leb bzo
བག་ལེབ་བཟོ་མཁན	bakery bag leb sogs kyi phyi spag mkhregs po crust	bag leb bzo mkhan
བག་ལེབ་སྲག་པ	bake	bag leb srag pa
བག་ལེབ་སྲེག	bake bread	bag leb sreg
བག་ལོག	return of the bride accompanied by her husband for the first time after marriage	bag log
བག་ཤིས	1) fee; 2) present; 3) alms	bag shis
བག་སེབ	bun	bag seb
བག་སྲེག	kind of pancake	bag sreg
བག་སློག	gnyen log skabs mna' ma'i pha	bag slog
བག་གསར	new bride	bag gsar
བགས	slowly, gradually, one after another, by degrees, SA rims, sog pa	bags
བགས་ཀྱིས	slowly, gradually, by degrees	bags kyis
བགས་ཀྱིས་གཞོལ	SA chu klung	bags kyis gzhol
བགས་ཆགས	predisposition	bags chags
བགས་ཆགས་ནུས་པ	potency	bags chags nus pa
བགས་ཉལ་གྱི་ཉོན་མོངས	dormant/ latent kleshas	bags nyal gyi nyon mongs
བང	foot race, courier, gait	bang
བང་ཁ	* foot race, skill/ power in foot racing/ running	bang kha
བང་ཁ་རྒྱུགས	run a foot race	bang kha rgyugs
བང་ཁ་ཐལ་བ	win a foot race	bang kha thal ba
བང་ཁ་ཤོར	lose a foot race	bang kha shor
བང་ཁང	storehouse, storeroom	bang khang
བང་ཁོག	chest [of body]	bang khog
བང་ཁྲག	blood from the womb at the time of birth	bang khrag
བང་ཁྲི	stand, frame, rack	bang khri
བང་ཁྲིར་འཇོག་པ	shelve	bang khrir 'jog pa
བང་གལ	Bengal	bang gal
བང་མགྱོགས་པ	run a race	bang mgyogs pa
བང་འགྲོས་རྒྱབ་པ	prance	bang 'gros rgyab pa
བང་འགྲོས་པ	1) runner; 2) jumping leaping gait	bang 'gros pa
བང་རྒྱུག་པ	run a race	bang rgyug pa
བང་རྒྱུགས	galloping	bang rgyugs
བང་སྒྲིག	line up	bang sgrig
བང་སྒྲིག་པ	line, queue	bang sgrig pa
བང་སྒྲོམ	place to store grain etc ['jog snod]	bang sgrom
བང་བརྒྱུགས་པ	race	bang brgyugs pa
བང་ཆེན	swift messenger, courier, emissary, harbinger, runner	bang chen
བང་ཆེན་པ	a message [will be send]; a swift messenger, courier	bang chen pa
བང་མཆོང་འགྲོས	foot gesture while dancing	bang mchong 'gros
བང་མཆོང་འགྲོས་པ	bang 'gros pa ???	bang mchong 'gros pa
བང་གཏོང་བ	running, dispatching a messenger	bang gtong ba
བང་སྟེགས	bracket	bang stegs
བང་འདུར	quick trot, run, race	bang 'dur
བང་འདུར་བ	quick trot, run, race	bang 'dur ba
བང་ལྡན	horse	bang ldan
བང་ནེ	accumulation gtor ma	bang ne
བང་པོ་ལྔ	the five powers	bang po lnga
བང་ཕུད	first-fruit offering from the barn	bang phud
བང་ཕྱིན	{'phral gyi mngags gzhug dang bang phyin} to serve his daily needs or to carry messages for him	bang phyin
བང་ཕྱིན་པ	messenger, post	bang phyin pa
བང་ཕྲོམ་ནག་པོ	anisodus luridus ling et otto	bang phrom nag po
བང་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa bangs pa, bang ba,, [naturally] moist/; 2) storeroom, store-house, corn magazine, treasury, storage bin	bang ba
སྟོརེ	house, corn magazine, treasury, storage bin	store
བང་བུ	bee; bee, honeybee	bang bu
བང་སྦྲང	honey	bang sbrang
བང་མ	delivery (of baby)	bang ma
བང་མི	messenger	bang mi
བང་མི་ལྡང	gallop (?)	bang mi ldang
བང་རྩལ	race, foot racing, track	bang rtsal
བང་རྩལ་གྲན་སྡུང	race	bang rtsal gran sdung
བང་རྩལ་གྲན་སྡུར	run a foot race, track meet	bang rtsal gran sdur
བང་རྩལ་གྲན་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	run a race, compete in a track meet	bang rtsal gran sdur byed pa
བང་རྩལ་འགྲན་སྡུར	running race	bang rtsal 'gran sdur
བང་རྩལ་སྦྱོང	nimbleness in running	bang rtsal sbyong
བང་ཚད	by a woman after a child is born ma la mngal tshad dug thabs kyi nad gzhi bskyar du ldang ba zhig ???	bang tshad
བང་མཛོད	treasury, store house	bang mdzod
བང་མཛོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Storehouse Tantra bang mdzod lta bu'i sems bskyed arousal of bodhicitta like a treasury	bang mdzod kyi rgyud
བང་མཛོད་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	treasury-like resolve	bang mdzod lta bu'i sems bskyed
བང་མཛོད་པ	treasurer	bang mdzod pa
བང་མཛོད་འཛིན་པོ	treasurer	bang mdzod 'dzin po
བང་རིམ	steps of a chorten, terrace steps, rotation, sequence, serial, tier, turn	bang rim
བང་རིམ་ཅན	having layers/ stories/ steps	bang rim can
བང་རིམ་བཞི	four steps	bang rim bzhi
བང་རིམ་ལོག་གེ་བ	inverted bang rim	bang rim log ge ba
བང་སངས་པ	1) severe post partum illness in the mother	bang sangs pa
བང་སོ	tomb, grave, monument, royal monument	bang so
བང་སོ་དམར་པོ	Emperor Songtsen Gampo's tomb	bang so dmar po
བངས	chased	bangs
བངས་པ	pf. of {bang ba}; pf. of {'bang ba}	bangs pa
བངས་པོ	wet, moist	bangs po
བཏ་ཏི	balance, pair of scales	bat ti
བད	moisture, humidity, edge, border, past of gcod	bad
བད་ཀ	plant similar to mustard yielding oil	bad ka
བད་ཀན	phlegm * mucus, lung diseases	bad kan
བད་ཀན་གྲེ་ཐོགས	a disease where food sticks in the throat	bad kan gre thogs
བད་ཀན་ལྔ	the five phlegms	bad kan lnga
བད་ཀན་ལྕགས་དྲེག	{bad kan lcags dreg phlegm disease	bad kan lcags dreg
བད་ཀན་འཇུ་སྐེམ	{bad kan 'ju skem disease [one of the six kinds of phlegm diseases in which pho ba'i bad srin increases. symptom: 1 cannot digest	bad kan 'ju skem
བད་ཀན་འཇོམས	species of tree, that which removes phlegm	bad kan 'joms
བད་ཀན་འཕེལ	increase of phlegm disease [its natural ldang tshad [extent, arising measure? rags pa'i dbang du byas na rang gi snyim pa bzhi yin pas [is roughly four of one's double handfuls?] and if > that, the...	bad kan 'phel
བད་ཀན་མེ་ཉམས	1 of the six kinds of phlegm	bad kan me nyams
དྲོཔསཡ	like swelling occurs]	dropsy
བད་ཀན་དམུ་ཆུ	dropsy phlegm disorder	bad kan dmu chu
བད་ཀན་སྨུག་པོ	convulsions, choleraic cramps	bad kan smug po
བད་ཀན་ཟད	lack of phlegm	bad kan zad
བད་ཀན་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	[embryonic development] w the nature of phlegm	bad kan rang bzhin can
བད་ཀན་རིགས་དྲུག	the six kinds of phlegm diseases	bad kan rigs drug
བད་ཀན་ལས་གྱུར་པའི་མོ་ནད	a female ailment	bad kan las gyur pa'i mo nad
བད་སྐྲན	kind of steatite	bad skran
བད་ཁ	bad ka: on top of a house pu shu'i [balustrade] 'dabs sne, ??[ends? [bye'u mchil pa bad kar sdod]	bad kha
བད་ཁྲག	phlegm-blood [disease]	bad khrag
བད་མཁྲིས	phlegm and bile 'doms pa'i disease, symptoms: food undigested and kha kha ba dang mgo bo lci la mtshog ma mi theg pa	bad mkhris
བད་གྱམ	building's bad phur [= pu shu balustrades, railings] pressing rdo gyam [thin black slate? rock usable for roofing	bad gyam
བད་མཆུ	1) a house's pu shu or bad ka [rail, balustrade? sne [tips]; 2) lip disease [mostly 1 of phlegm, symptoms: mchu [lip?] color becomes white/light and slog pa chags nas swelling]; 3) corners of the l...	bad mchu
བད་ཏི་ཀ	a bird	bad ti ka
བད་ཐོར	the bleeding of [bad khrag]	bad thor
ཕླེགམ	blood disease	phlegm
བད་འདལ	being left exhausted on the road, sinking under fatigue	bad 'dal
བད་ནག	in the 9th month having attained breath ba mo 'bab pas the bad nag time/ season] is said to have come]	bad nag
བད་པ	{bad pa, bad pa, bad pa} intr. v	bad pa
བད་པིར	outlining brush	bad pir
བད་ཕུར	house's nya rgyab = housetop pu shu [rail balustrade?]	bad phur
བད་བད	bits of wood etc. as knife handle	bad bad
བད་སྨུག	convulsions, choleraic cramps	bad smug
བད་ཚལ	cabbage	bad tshal
བད་རླིང	dizziness, giddiness, vertigo	bad rling
བད་ས	tribe or class	bad sa
བད་སྲིན	flatworm [intestinal]	bad srin
བན	monk	ban
བན་ཀླང	ox, bull	ban klang
བན་སྐྱ	monks and laymen, abbr of ban de & skya, priests and laymen	ban skya
བན་མཁྲིས་རླུང་གསུམ་གྱི་གནས་བཞི	the four places? of phlegm. bile and wind	ban mkhris rlung gsum gyi gnas bzhi
བན་རྒན	old monk	ban rgan
བན་ཆུང	novice, pupil in a monastery	ban chung
བན་ཆེན	1) messenger; 2) great monks and nuns; 2) mahapandita	ban chen
བན་ཏ	tribe in nepal	ban ta
བན་ཏ་ཤ་ཀ	a bird	ban ta sha ka
བན་ད་རུ	faith	ban da ru
བན་དེ	monk, Buddhist monk, Buddhist	ban de
བན་དེ་རྒན་པ	old monk/ buddhist	ban de rgan pa
བན་དེ་ཆེན་པོ	great monk/ buddhist	ban de chen po
བན་དེ་དྲི་མེད་བརྡ་ཤར	Bende Drimey Dashar. One of the close disciples of Guru Rinpoche. Same of Jnana Kumara of Nyag	ban de dri med brda shar
བན་དེ་པོན་དེ	1) hazy; 2) evanescent; 3) shimmering; 4) vanish[ing like mist]	ban de pon de
བན་དེ་བོན་དེ	1) hazy; 2) evanescent; 3) shimmering; 4) vanish[ing like mist] (5} buddhists/ monks and B"npos	ban de bon de
བན་དེ་མོ	ban mo, nun, female buddhist	ban de mo
བན་དེའི་མཁྲིས་པ	bile of brown duck	ban de'i mkhris pa
བན་སྡེ	the collection of monks	ban sde
བན་ནི་བུན་ནི	1) fog; 2) wisps and billows 1) hazy; 2) evanescent; 3) shimmering; 4) vanish[ing like mist]	ban ni bun ni
བན་ནེ་བུན་ནེ	disconnected	ban ne bun ne
བན་སྤྲང	poor monk	ban sprang
བན་བུན	flickering / fluttering; see {snang ba ban bun} fluttering appearances	ban bun
བན་བུན་དུ་སོང་བ	vanished, dissolved	ban bun du song ba
བན་བུན་པོ	little by little (elusive as mist)	ban bun po
བན་བུན་ལང་ལོང	like mist	ban bun lang long
བན་བོན	1) hazy; 2) evanescent; 3) shimmering; 4) vanish[ing like mist]	ban bon
བན་མ་བུན	1) fog; 2) wisps and billows 1) hazy; 2) evanescent; 3) shimmering; 4) vanish[ing like mist]	ban ma bun
བན་མ་བུན་མ	wisps and billows [about clouds]	ban ma bun ma
བན་མོ	queen	ban mo
བན་བཙུན	monks and nuns	ban btsun
བན་རྩ	dgon sde so so'i grva pa 'byung sa'i khyim tshang ???	ban rtsa
བན་ཞྭ	scholar's hat	ban zhwa
བན་ཞུ	pandita hat	ban zhu
བན་ཟོན	dread, fear	ban zon
བན་ཟོན་བྱེད་པ	SA rig pa 'grim pa	ban zon byed pa
བན་གཟན	shawl or serge-cloth wrapper used by lamas	ban gzan
བན་གཟུགས	monks and nuns cha byad can	ban gzugs
བན་རལ	monastics who break or transgress discipline [khrims ral lam khrims 'chal]	ban ral
བན་ལང	[arch] ox, bull	ban lang
བན་ལོག	monk who returns to being a lay buddhist	ban log
བན་ཤུལ	Benshul, at Mangra Kha in Domey	ban shul
བན་དྷ	skull, cranium, great mountain n. of kakari	ban dha
བན་དྷུ་ཀ	youth, red flower terminalia tomentosa	ban dhu ka
བན་དྷུ་ཛི་པ་ཀ	red brilliant flower penetapetes phoenicea	ban dhu dzi pa ka
བན་དྷེ	a Buddhist priest, a Bon priest	ban dhe
བན་ལྷམ	shoes worn by buddhist priests	ban lham
བབ	1) to bring down, come arrive, encounter, rain, - down, shower, go down, flow down, alight, descend, land, fall, receive. 2) nature, [Syn {gshis, rang bzhin}. [ {ye bab, rang bab}. 3) transmission,...	bab
བབ་ཀྱིས	naturally, spontaneously, by nature	bab kyis
བབ་ཀྱིས་འཇོག	rest naturally	bab kyis 'jog
བབ་ཁེབས	ornament at thogs the door of a Tibetan house	bab khebs
བབ་ཅོལ	1) unexamined, unanalyzed; 2)	bab col
ནོཏ་ཐོཨུགྷཏ	out; 3) nonsense, babble; 4) careless, hasty	not thought
བབ་ཅོལ་ཏུ	inconsiderately	bab col tu
བབ་ཅོལ་གཏམ	ill-considered talk	bab col gtam
བབ་ཅོལ་སྨྲ་བ	speaking falsehood, insincere speech	bab col smra ba
བབ་ཆ	cluster	bab cha
བབ་ཆགས	simple, plain	bab chags
བབ་ཆུ	waterfall	bab chu
བབ་ཆོགས་པོ	just right [not too much/ little], plain, simple	bab chogs po
བབ་ཆོལ་ཕྱར་ཡང	[arch] answer w/ o thinking	bab chol phyar yang
བབ་ལྟ	look at/ consider/ examine how things are/ 1's prospects	bab lta
བབ་བལྟ	looked at/ considered/ examined how things are	bab blta
བབ་བསྟུན	according to the situation, in accordance w	bab bstun
བབ་ཐང	airport	bab thang
བབ་དང་བསྟུན	according to the situation, in accordance w	bab dang bstun
བབ་དང་མཚུངས་པ	according to the situation	bab dang mtshungs pa
བབ་པ	occurred, descended	bab pa
བབ་བབ	1) speak w/o thinking; 2) say [copiously] whatever comes out 1786	bab bab
བབ་བབ་དུ	sporadically, from time to time	bab bab du
བབ་བླ	ba bla, mineral med bab bla} -}-	bab bla
བབ་འབྲེལ	1) in accord w the way things are; 2) suitable position/ attainment; 3) order, system, systematic sequence	bab 'brel
བབ་མལ	halting stage after day's march, lodging for one night, place of one day's halt	bab mal
བབ་མོ	soft, mild, chaste, modest	bab mo
བབ་སྨྱུག་བཞི་ཟུར	at the time of passing sentence chad 'bab as many as 'khris [fond of, entangled in] pa de'i bzhi zur re secretary la smyug [write] dod du sprod dgos par zer. the real meaning is a fine [chad dngul ...	bab smyug bzhi zur
བབ་ཚུལ	manner of occurrence	bab tshul
བབ་མཚུངས	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	bab mtshungs
བབ་མཚུངས་པ	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	bab mtshungs pa
བབ་གཟིགས	look at how things are	bab gzigs
བབ་འོས	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	bab 'os
བབ་འོས་པ	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	bab 'os pa
བབ་བརླིང	stable/ secure situation, calm, tranquillity seriousness, gravity	bab brling
བབ་བརླིང་ཅན	stable/ secure, calm, tranquil, serious, grave	bab brling can
བབ་བརླིང་ལྡན	stable/ secure, calm, tranquil, serious, grave	bab brling ldan
བབ་བརླིང་ལྡན་པ	stable/ secure, calm, tranquil, serious, grave	bab brling ldan pa
བབ་ལ	ba bla, mineral med	bab la
བབ་ལ་ལྟ	consider, examine [prospects, alternatives, situation]	bab la lta
བབ་ལ་བལྟས	considered, examined [prospects, alternatives, situation]	bab la bltas
བབ་ལ་བསྟུན	according to the situation, in accordance w	bab la bstun
བབ་ས	landing place, settlement, colony	bab sa
བབ་སོ	mainstream line of transmission	bab so
བབ་ལྷིང	considerateness, discreetness, carefully weighed	bab lhing
བབས	innate abiding; natural condition/ circumstance(s)	babs
བབས་ཀྱི་བཞུགས་པ	to remain at ease (in the nature)	babs kyi bzhugs pa
བབས་ཀྱིས	naturally, spontaneously, by nature, by itself	babs kyis
བབས་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ	naturally existing	babs kyis grub
བབས་ཀྱིས་འགྲུབ་པ	innately/ inherently ensured/ so/ present	babs kyis 'grub pa
བབས་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ	naturally empty	babs kyis stong pa
བབས་བཀོད་གཅོད་ངེས	presentation of the situation where [punishment is certain [presented in very hot speech]	babs bkod gcod nges
བབས་ཁུར	the service that falls to 1	babs khur
བབས་ཆགས	pleasant, warm, suffused w warmth cuddly	babs chags
བབས་ཆགས་པ	1) beautiful; 2) timely, appropriate, capable	babs chags pa
བབས་ཏོག་ཏོག	appealing, attractive	babs tog tog
བབས་སྟེགས	dismounting, platform [horse], descending/ landing platform	babs stegs
བབས་བསྟུན	in accord w the way things really are	babs bstun
བབས་ཐང	airport	babs thang
བབས་ཐོབ	suitable position/ attainment, authority, rights	babs thob
བབས་ཐོབ་མེད	have no right to	babs thob med
བབས་དང་འགལ	mix up the proper sequence; x {gong 'og nor nas bzung na bstan pa'i babs dang 'gal te nyan 'chad sgom pa gang gi dus su yang 'gal ba 'du} if you remember it out of order, you will mix up the proper...	babs dang 'gal
བབས་དང་བསྟུན	in accordance with	babs dang bstun
བབས་དང་འབྲེལ	properly linked together; x {gong 'og gi babs dang 'brel ma nor bar tshig don thams cad yang dag par 'dzin dgos pa yin} to remember both words and meaning perfectly, in the right order and with eve...	babs dang 'brel
བབས་དང་མཚུངས་པ	according to the situation	babs dang mtshungs pa
བབས་བརྡལ་བ	babs mi brdal - you won't go wrong	babs brdal ba
བབས་པ	{'bebs pa} to come (down)	babs pa
བབས་པའི་ལྷ	the destined deity [upon which one's flower fell]	babs pa'i lha
བབས་སྤར	yearly occurring trigrams, I Ching divination	babs spar
བབས་བྱུང་བ	landed	babs byung ba
བབས་འབྲེལ	joint, combined, conjointly, in connection, in harmony with, in accordance with	babs 'brel
བབས་མི་བརྡལ	you won't go wrong	babs mi brdal
བབས་སྨེ	# which occurs	babs sme
བབས་ཚུགས	[RR] station, landing/ descending place	babs tshugs
བབས་ཚོད	evaluate as mostly suitable	babs tshod
བབས་མཚུངས	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	babs mtshungs
བབས་མཚུངས་པ	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	babs mtshungs pa
བབས་འོས	suitable for, opportune	babs 'os
བབས་འོས་པ	according to the situation, appropriate, fitting	babs 'os pa
བབས་ལ་བསྟུན	according to the situation, in accordance w	babs la bstun
བབས་ལ་གཞིག་ན	according to the situation, in accordance w	babs la gzhig na
བབས་ལུགས	history of transmission	babs lugs
བབས་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	three great descents. three lineages of the Conqueror's intention, the symbols of the	babs lugs chen po gsum
བབས་ས	the chief receiver [of a teaching]	babs sa
བབས་སོ	transmission	babs so
བབས་སོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the three main transmissions in snying [?rnying] ma	babs so chen po gsum
བབས་གསེད	pull the situation to pieces [gnas lugs yong rkyen go brda [opposite?] sprod pa, [give?]	babs gsed
བབས་ལྷིང	stable, steady	babs lhing
བམ	rotten, decayed, putrid, mould, fusty, musty	bam
བམ་སྐྲངས	[corpse] bloating/ swelling	bam skrangs
བམ་གྲངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ	the number of divisions [one of the rgya rim pa bdun, bam po mi 'khrug par byed pa'i rtags te eg vol 1]	bam grangs kyi rgya
བམ་སྒྲུབ	make into a rolang, walking corpse	bam sgrub
བམ་ཆག	parts, volume, bunch, load	bam chag
བམ་ཆེ་བ	large	bam che ba
བམ་ཆེན	large	bam chen
བམ་དྲི	1) defilements of a human corpse; 2) rottenness	bam dri
བམ་ནད	bloating/ swelling	bam nad
བམ་པ	{bam pa, bam pa, bam pa} intr. v	bam pa
བམ་པའི་འབེར་བ	swollen	bam pa'i 'ber ba
བམ་པོ	bundle, division, section, board, chapter, part. shu lo ka sum brgya; bam po kha yar bstan dang le'u kha mar bstan; a volume/ a chapter, section	bam po
བམ་པོ་བརྒྱད་པ	Eightfold Volume. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga; focused on Nectar Quality. Tantra with similar title is found in Vol. LA of the Nyingma Gyübum. Possibly identical with the Sc...	bam po brgyad pa
བམ་པོའི་གྲངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ	the number of divisions	bam po'i grangs kyi rgya
བམ་པོའི་རྒྱ	# of divisions	bam po'i rgya
བམ་པོའི་ཚད	volume, piece of a text w 300 shlokas, each shloka w 30 or 32 tsheg bar; the number of/ all the divisions	bam po'i tshad
བམ་པོར་སྦྲེལ	[arch] bind into the same [volume etc]	bam por sbrel
བམ་བ་མི	Bombay	bam ba mi
བམ་རིལ	dull, weak, worn out, mould	bam ril
བམ་རུངས་པ	vicious, poisonous	bam rungs pa
བམ་རོ	human corpse	bam ro
བའི	in which, which is, which has	ba'i
བའི་སྒང་ལ	SA sgang	ba'i sgang la
བའི་ཆེད་དུ	the purposive connective	ba'i ched du
བའི་རྗེས་སུ	the temporal connective	ba'i rjes su
བའི་དུ་རྒྱ	lapis lazuli, 1 of rin chen nor bdun	ba'i du rgya
བའི་དུར་ཡ་འདྲ	triglochin palustrel., arenaria tapanshanensis tsui	ba'i dur ya 'dra
བའི་རྣམ་ལྔ	the five things of a cow, 1) {lci ba, chu, 'o ma, zho, mar} dung, urine, milk, curd, butter. {ba byung lnga}	ba'i rnam lnga
བའི་དཔེ	cow's shadow	ba'i dpe
བའི་དབང་གིས	SA pa'i dbang gis	ba'i dbang gis
བའི་རེ་བ	hope construction	ba'i re ba
བའི་རོ་ཙ་ན	Vairochana	ba'i ro tsa na
བར་ཀྱི་བསྐལ་པ	intermediate kalpa	bar kyi bskal pa
བར་དཀྱིལ་ཡོངས་འོས་བསྡུ	not a national election year	bar dkyil yongs 'os bsdu
བར་རྐྱེན	condition arising in the middle/ between/ during	bar rkyen
བར་སྐབས	space of time, meanwhile, interval, inter-lapse of time	bar skabs
བར་སྐབས་ཀྱི	intermediate, incidental	bar skabs kyi
བར་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་བཅད	intermediate/ incidental verse	bar skabs kyi tshigs bcad
བར་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	intermediate/ incidental verse. [eg in a commentary extra 1s other than the root verses, especially as a kind of pleasant break]	bar skabs kyi tshigs su bcad pa
བར་སྐབས་བར་སྐབས	occasionally	bar skabs bar skabs
བར་སྐབས་སུ	in the meantime	bar skabs su
བར་སྐྱ	wall or partition	bar skya
བར་སྐྱ་སིང་པོ	pure, clear space	bar skya sing po
བར་བསྐལ	antahkalpa, intermediate aeon. Syn {bar gyi bskal pa}	bar bskal
བར་བསྐལ་ཉི་ཤུ	20 intermediate kalpas	bar bskal nyi shu
བར་བསྐལ་བཞི	four intermediate aeons	bar bskal bzhi
བར་བསྐོར	inner road in Lhasa	bar bskor
བར་ཁ་རྟ་ཟམ	Barkha Tasam, at Kailash	bar kha rta zam
བར་ཁང	the second, middle story, chamber 1788	bar khang
བར་ཁུག་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 cycles of length of life.	bar khug bco brgyad
བར་ཁེ	brokerage / fee	bar khe
བར་ཁེ་བ	broker, agent, intermediary between buying and selling	bar khe ba
བར་ཁེ་ཟ་བ	broker	bar khe za ba
བར་ཁྱད	1) be/ the quality between [great and small high and low etc.]; 2) the difference between individual elements of a series	bar khyad
བར་ཁྱམས	hall, foyer, colonnade, corridor	bar khyams
བར་ཁྱི	a sa-bdag demon	bar khyi
བར་ཁྲ	internal agreement, agreement between parties [KNT]	bar khra
བར་འཁྱམས	veranda	bar 'khyams
བར་འཁྱམས་སྡོད་པ	loiter	bar 'khyams sdod pa
བར་གོས	clothes of middling elegance/ formality	bar gos
བར་གྱི་བསྐལ་པ	intermediate kalpa/ aeon,	bar gyi bskal pa
བར་གྱི་ཁ་ཁྱེར	portico, veranda	bar gyi kha khyer
བར་གྱི་ཁུག་མ་བཅུ་བརྒྱད	18 cycles of length of life.	bar gyi khug ma bcu brgyad
བར་གྱི་སྟེང་གཉིས	30th king of Tibet 'brong gnyan lde ru, and 31st stag ri gnyan gzigs. OR the upper two being between the 8th gri gum btsan po and 9th bya khri btsan po]	bar gyi steng gnyis
བར་གྱི་ལྡིང་གཉིས	the 2-king tibetan dynasty	bar gyi lding gnyis
བར་གྱི་སྡེར་ཆག	lizard	bar gyi sder chag
བར་གྱི་མཚམས	intermediate zone, middle zone, boundary	bar gyi mtshams
བར་གྱུ	of the middle/ between quality	bar gyu
བར་གྲས	the middle kind/ rank	bar gras
བར་གླིང	subcontinents [two for each of the four continents gling chen bzhi	bar gling
བར་དགའ	occasionally, at times, some, several	bar dga'
བར་འགག	between the outside and inside of a building bar mtshams kyi 'gag [stoppage, point???]	bar 'gag
བར་འགྲིབ	mig gi rgya mo'i shun pags [covering skin] bar gyi 'grib rkyen ???	bar 'grib
བར་སྒོ	middle door	bar sgo
བར་བརྒལ	actions and things gradually increasing from 1 time to another, transition, shift	bar brgal
བར་བརྒལ་གྱི་དུས་སྐབས	transition period	bar brgal gyi dus skabs
བར་བརྒལ་དུས་སྐབས	transition period	bar brgal dus skabs
བར་བསྒྲིག	agreement, treaty	bar bsgrig
བར་དངུལ	commission, broker's/ agent's fee	bar dngul
བར་གཅོད	1) harmful obstructing spirits, geks [w means of elimination even if they succeed]; 2) obstruct[ion], interrupt[ion], make[ing] obstacles; 3) cut/break off, make stop	bar gcod
བར་གཅོད་གཏོང	obstruct, interrupt, make obstacles; 3) cut/break off, make stop	bar gcod gtong
བར་གཅོད་པ	to cause obstacles, obstruct	bar gcod pa
བར་གཅོད་བྱེད	obstruct, interrupt, make obstacles; 3) cut/break off, make stop	bar gcod byed
བར་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	hamper	bar gcod byed pa
བར་བཅུག་རི་མོ	pictures inserted in [the spaces of] a text to clarify the meaning	bar bcug ri mo
བར་ཆད	hindrance, interruption, obstacle, obstruction, danger, difficulties, SA bar chod, calamity, disaster, misfortune, obstacles	bar chad
བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སེལ	[Dispell[er of] all Obstacles [lineage prayer from the Cokling Tersa, Nyingma]	bar chad kun sel
བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སེལ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྐོར	Barchey Künsel Cycle of Teachings. Here is a short introduction to the Barchey Künsel cycle: The Barchey Künsel is the heart essence of the accomplished master Padmasambhava who perceives the three...	bar chad kun sel kyi chos skor
ཐྲེཨེ་པོཝེརཕུ༹ལ་ཀནོཝླེདགེ	holders [Khyentse, Kongtrül, and Chokling], the great beings of the three families, who incarnated as masters to compile and propagate an ocean of secret teachings. It is exclusively through their ...	three powerful knowledge
བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སོལ	dispel all obstacles!	bar chad kun sol
བར་ཆད་ཀྱི་ལྷོང	sign of obstacles, conditions of harm	bar chad kyi lhong
བར་ཆད་གཅིག་པ	[with a] single interval/ obstacle	bar chad gcig pa
བར་ཆད་གཅིག་པར	[with a] single interval/ obstacle	bar chad gcig par
བར་ཆད་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 obstacles,	bar chad bcu drug
བར་ཆད་ཆེན་པོ	big/ many obstacles/ misfortunes/ interruptions	bar chad chen po
བར་ཆད་གཉེན་པོ	antidote for obstacles	bar chad gnyen po
བར་ཆད་གཏོང	hinder, cause trouble/ misfortune/ setbacks/ obstacles	bar chad gtong
བར་ཆད་དྲི་བ	conduct an inquiry to determine potential impediments [for a candidate wishing to receive ordination]	bar chad dri ba
བར་ཆད་བདུད་ཚོགས	the host of obstructing maras bar chad rnam pa bzhi'i gnyen po'i dbye	bar chad bdud tshogs
བར་ཆད་པ	obstacle, mishap	bar chad pa
བར་ཆད་བྱེད	(possible obstacles, make obstacles	bar chad byed
བར་ཆད་བྱེད་པ	[make] obstacles	bar chad byed pa
བར་ཆད་བྱེད་པར་འགྱུར	obstacles will be made	bar chad byed par 'gyur
བར་ཆད་མེད	w/o mishap/ obstacles	bar chad med
བར་ཆད་མེད་བཅས	the state without impediments	bar chad med bcas
བར་ཆད་མེད་པ	chos la bar chad med	bar chad med pa
བར་ཆད་མེད་པ་ཡི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the	bar chad med pa yi ting nge 'dzin
སམདྷི་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	obstruction bar chad med pa yi ting nge 'dzin la reg contact the samadhi of nonobstruction, unimpeded concentration	samadhi of non
བར་ཆད་མེད་པམ	uninterruptedly	bar chad med pam
བར་ཆད་མེད་པའི	obstacle-removing path	bar chad med pa'i
བར་ཆད་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	unhindered samadhi; unimpeded concentration	bar chad med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
བར་ཆད་མེད་པའི་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	unobstructed reaching the peak	bar chad med pa'i rtse sbyor
བར་ཆད་མེད་པའི་ལམ	the path of no interruption/ obstruction [= bar chad med lam]	bar chad med pa'i lam
བར་ཆད་མེད་པར	continuously, uninterruptedly	bar chad med par
བར་ཆད་མེད་པར་ཕེབས	arrived safely	bar chad med par phebs
བར་ཆད་མེད་པར་བརྩོན་པ	unimpeded effort	bar chad med par brtson pa
བར་ཆད་མེད་ལམ	uninterrupted path, path of no obstacles	bar chad med lam
བར་ཆད་ཞི་བ	to pacify obstructive situations; obstacles subside	bar chad zhi ba
བར་ཆད་བཞི	the four obstacles	bar chad bzhi
བར་ཆད་ལམ་སེལ	barchey lamsel	bar chad lam sel
བར་ཆད་སེལ	dispel obstacles	bar chad sel
བར་ཆད་སེལ་བ	remove impediments	bar chad sel ba
བར་ཆད་སེལ་བའི་ལྷ་བཞི	the four deities clearing obstacles, {'phags ma sgrol ma}, {mi g.yo ba}, {rdo rje be con}, {sme ba brtsegs pa}	bar chad sel ba'i lha bzhi
བར་ཆད་སྲུང་བ	protective ritual against obstacles	bar chad srung ba
བར་ཆད་གསུམ	the three obstacles, 1) {phyi rol gdon gyi bar chad} of demons in the external world. 2) {'byung ba lus 'khrugs kyi bar chad} of physical disturbance, 3) {ting nge 'dzin sems kyi bar chad} of the m...	bar chad gsum
བར་ཆད་བསྲུང	held back hindrances	bar chad bsrung
བར་ཆེད་མེད་ལམ	uninterrupted path	bar ched med lam
བར་ཆོད	that which interferes, hindrance, accident, impediment, unto- 1790 ward occurrence, interruption, danger	bar chod
བར་ཆོད་པ	to prevent	bar chod pa
བར་ཆོད་བྱེད་པའི་མི་དགེ་བ	obstacle	bar chod byed pa'i mi dge ba
པྲོདུཅིང་ནོན	virtue/ unwholesomeness [obstacles to virtue]	producing non
བར་ཆོད་ས་ཁུལ	buffer zone	bar chod sa khul
བར་གཉིས	two intermediate periods (79am, 7-9pm)	bar gnyis
བར་བཏབ	2nd planting/ crop	bar btab
བར་བཏབ་འབྲས	2nd planting/ crop rice	bar btab 'bras
བར་རྟ	gelding, link between two things	bar rta
བར་སྟོང	break[s], gap[s], [space] between	bar stong
བར་སྟོན	feast in the middle of an extensive construction project etc	bar ston
བར་བརྟེན	SA par brten	bar brten
བར་ཐག	gap, chasm, space/ distance between --, breach	bar thag
བར་ཐག་མཉམ་པ	equidistant	bar thag mnyam pa
བར་ཐང	Bartang, a locality on the slopes of Jomo Karak overlooking the Tsangpo River	bar thang
བར་ཐོ	middle-size hammer	bar tho
བར་ཐོག	middle story	bar thog
བར་མཐུད	junction, link	bar mthud
བར་དྭ་ཛ	Bharadvaja	bar dwa dza
བར་དུ	In the middle phase,	bar du
བར་དུ་དགེ་བ	good in the middle; the goodness of the middle	bar du dge ba
བར་དུ་བསྒྱུར་བོན	mixed translation B"n[pos]	bar du bsgyur bon
བར་དུ་གཅོད་པ	disrupters, hindrances, impediment, interruption, to cause hindrance	bar du gcod pa
བར་དུ་གཅོད་པའི་རྒྱུ	obstructive cause	bar du gcod pa'i rgyu
བར་དུ་གཅོད་པའི་ཆོས	impediments, things which are cut off	bar du gcod pa'i chos
བར་དུ་གཅོད་བྱེད	interrupt, cut off	bar du gcod byed
བར་དུ་མཅོད་པ	impediment	bar du mcod pa
བར་དུ་ཆད་ཅིང་འཇུག་པ	interruptedly engaging	bar du chad cing 'jug pa
བར་དུ་ཆོད་པའི་ཟུང་ལྡན་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 interrupted pairs	bar du chod pa'i zung ldan bcu gsum
བར་དུ་ཐིམ་པ	seen bar du nang sha med pa'i stod thung lined coat	bar du thim pa
བར་དུ་བླ་མ་བསྟེན་ལ་མཁས་པ	in the middle, skillfully follow the teacher	bar du bla ma bsten la mkhas pa
བར་དུ་བཙིར་བ	sandwich	bar du btsir ba
བར་དུ་ཚོགས་བསགས་ཚུལ	how [the Buddha] gathered the accumulations in between	bar du tshogs bsags tshul
བར་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	intervene	bar du bzhugs pa
བར་དུ་ལངས	middle reaches, middle of the road, neutral, mid-stream	bar du langs
བར་དུ་ལངས་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	neutral country	bar du langs pa'i rgyal khab
བར་དུ་ལམ	the path in between	bar du lam
བར་དུམ་གཅོད་པ	intersect	bar dum gcod pa
བར་དོ	intermediate state/ interval (between death and rebirth)	bar do
བར་དོ་ཁྱད་པར་བ	the particular intermediate state	bar do khyad par ba
བར་དོ་སྒྱུ་མ	the illusion of the bardo [one of the illusory bodies, the bardo body arising from mind with all its senses {bgrod pa - 1) travel; 2) cross [march, move, course, wander, cross, walk, travel, journe...	bar do sgyu ma
བར་དོ་རྗེས་དྲན	recollection of the bardo [one of the {rjes dran drug}	bar do rjes dran
བར་དོ་ཐོས་གྲོལ	Liberation Through Hearing in the Bardo. Liberation Through Hearing in the Bardo	bar do thos grol
བར་དོ་ཐོས་གྲོལ་ལུགས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གསུམ	the three ways of liberation of the bardo thodol	bar do thos grol lugs lugs kyi gsum
བར་དོ་དང་པོ	1st bardo	bar do dang po
བར་དོ་དང་པོ་གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ	Ground luminosity of the first bardo	bar do dang po gzhi'i 'od gsal
བར་དོ་དང་པོ་འོད་གསལ	luminosity of the first bardo	bar do dang po 'od gsal
བར་དོ་དང་པོའི་འོད་གསལ	luminosity of the first bardo	bar do dang po'i 'od gsal
བར་དོ་དུས	bardo state	bar do dus
བར་དོ་དུས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of the intermediate state	bar do dus kyi 'khor lo
བར་དོ་དུས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of the bardo state	bar do dus kyi sgron ma
ཚུལ་གྱི་གནད	method of understanding in the bardo	tshul gyi gnad
བར་དོ་དྲུག	6 intermediate states (nature beginning at birth, dreams, contemplation, moment of death, quintessential reality, arising existence)	bar do drug
བར་དོ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of Bardo	bar do rnam pa gsum
བར་དོ་རྣམ་བཞི	four bardos or intermediate states	bar do rnam bzhi
བར་དོ་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness of the beings traveling in the intermediate state	bar do rnam shes
བར་དོ་སྣང་ཚུལ	the way things appear in the bardo [the way the bardo manifests, appearance-mode of the bardo, a vision of the bardo]	bar do snang tshul
བར་དོ་བ	intermediate state beings	bar do ba
བར་དོ་མེད་པར	without having to pass through the Bardo	bar do med par
བར་དོ་འཛིན	enter the bardo	bar do 'dzin
བར་དོ་བཞི	the four bardos [birthplace, dying, dharmata, and becoming]	bar do bzhi
བར་དོ་གསུམ་པ	Syn {chos nyid bar do}	bar do gsum pa
བར་དོའི་སྐད་ཅིག་བཞི	the four bardo moments. 1) {snang ba}. 2) {mched pa} 3) {thob pa} 4) {nye bar thob pa}	bar do'i skad cig bzhi
བར་དོའི་སྐད་ཅིག་བཞི་སྣང་ཚུལ	the way the bardo manifests, appearingmode of the bardo, a vision of the bardo	bar do'i skad cig bzhi snang tshul
བར་དོའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་འཇིགས་སྐྲག་བཞི	the four terrors of the bardo	bar do'i skabs kyi 'jigs skrag bzhi
བར་དོའི་ཁྱད་པར་བཞི	four distinctions of the bardo	bar do'i khyad par bzhi
བར་དོའི་འཁྲུལ་སྣང	bardo hallucinations {bar do'i 'khrul snang 'jigs skrag drag po} the terrifying hallucinations of the bardo	bar do'i 'khrul snang
བར་དོའི་འགྲོ་བ	the beings in the bardo state	bar do'i 'gro ba
བར་དོའི་ཆོས་བཤད	bardo teaching	bar do'i chos bshad
བར་དོའི་གདམས་ངག	bardo instructions	bar do'i gdams ngag
བར་དོའི་གནས	existence in the bardo	bar do'i gnas
བར་དོའི་གནས་སྐབས	the bardo state	bar do'i gnas skabs
བར་དོའི་གནས་སྐབས་བཞི	four bardo states	bar do'i gnas skabs bzhi
བར་དོའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་འཁྱམས་པོ	a consciousness wandering in the intermediate state	bar do'i rnam shes 'khyams po
བར་དོའི་སྣང་བ་ཡིད་གྱི་ལུས	the mental body of the bardo experience	bar do'i snang ba yid gyi lus
བར་དོའི་སྣང་ཚུལ	the way things appear in the bardo [vision of the bardo, the way the bardo appears, appearing mode of the bardo.]	bar do'i snang tshul
བར་དོའི་འཕོ་བ	ejection of consciousness during the intermediate state	bar do'i 'pho ba
བར་དོའི་འཕྲང	{rgyus med cha med bar do'i 'phrang ring po} the long, narrow, unfamiliar, unpredictable track of the bardo	bar do'i 'phrang
བར་དོའི་འཕྲང་སྒྲོལ	prayer for escaping the isthmus of the bardo	bar do'i 'phrang sgrol
བར་དོའི་འཕྲང་རིང	the long defile of the bardo	bar do'i 'phrang ring
བར་དོའི་འཕྲང་རིང་པོ	the tortuous paths of the bardo	bar do'i 'phrang ring po
བར་དོའི་དབྱིངས་སུ	in the region of the bar do	bar do'i dbyings su
བར་དོའི་ཡིད་ལུས	the mental body of the bardo	bar do'i yid lus
བར་དོའི་རླུང་ལུས	the prana-body of the intermediate state	bar do'i rlung lus
བར་དོའི་སྲིད་པ	bardo state, the intermediate existence	bar do'i srid pa
བར་དོར	in the intermediate state	bar dor
བར་དོར་འཁྱམས	rove for no purpose	bar dor 'khyams
བར་དོར་འཁྱམས་པ	wander in the bardo	bar dor 'khyams pa
བར་དོར་མཇལ་བ	{mos gus med bzhin bar dor mjal ba mtshar} with no devotion, to meet the teacher in the intermediate state would be miraculous!	bar dor mjal ba
བར་དོར་འདའ་བ	one kind of phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas/ Def: phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas yin pa gzhir byas nas/ tshangs chen ma gtogs pa'i gzugs khams bcu drug gang yang rung ba'i rten gyi bar do la mya ngan 'da' ba'i ...	bar dor 'da' ba
བར་དོར་འདའ་བ་གསུམ	the three kinds of nirvana attainable in the bardo/ transcendences of the bardo	bar dor 'da' ba gsum
བར་དོར་ཡོངས་སུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བ	attain nirvana in the bardo [w/o rebirth]	bar dor yongs su mya ngan las 'da' ba
བར་གདང	rail of a clothes rack	bar gdang
བར་གདོན	obstructing d"ns/ btsan and gyal gongs/ mi ma yin	bar gdon
བར་འདུམ	close mouth and lips etc. te 'grig par byed thabs, nang khul gyi rtsod gzhi la dge skyon gsed bkrol byas te bar 'dum byed pa ???	bar 'dum
བར་འདུམ་བྱེད་པ	make peace between, pacify	bar 'dum byed pa
བར་འདུལ	lineage of sdom rgyun from Nagarjuna through Kashmiri mahapandita sh'akya shr'i of Sakya panchen etc.	bar 'dul
བར་འདུལ་ཁ་ཆེའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of sdom rgyun from Nagarjuna through Kashmiri mahapandita sh'akya shr'i of Sakya panchen etc.	bar 'dul kha che'i brgyud pa
བར་འདོད	sensual realm (?)	bar 'dod
བར་འདོས་བྱེད་པ	make peace between, pacify	bar 'dos byed pa
བར་ལྡིང	not have mastered the remainder of the work	bar lding
བར་སྡུམ	means of reconciliation	bar sdum
བར་སྡོད	middle reaches, mid-stream, middle of the road, neutral	bar sdod
བར་སྡོད་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	neutral country/ policy	bar sdod rgyal khab
བར་སྡོད་པ	neutralist, middle of the roader	bar sdod pa
བར་སྡོད་སྲིད་ཇུས	neutral policy	bar sdod srid jus
བར་སྡོམ	suppression of the breath	bar sdom
བར་སྡོམ་བཏོང་ཚུལ	Mipham Rinpoche def: {bsam pa'i 'phen shugs chad pa 'am, khas blang las ldog pa 'am, 'jug pa'i bya ba chad pa 'am, don gtsug lag khang dang rgya sogs lta bu chad pa dang, tshe 'phos pa rnams kyis g...	bar sdom btong tshul
བར་བསྡུམ་བྱེད་པ	treaty, intermediation, reconciliation	bar bsdum byed pa
བར་ན	between, SA bar du	bar na
བར་ནས	from between	bar nas
བར་གནམ	atmosphere	bar gnam
བར་གནས	middle reaches, middle of the road, neutral, mid- stream	bar gnas
བར་གནས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	neutral country/ policy	bar gnas rgyal khab
བར་གནས་པ	neutralist, middle of the roader	bar gnas pa
བར་གནས་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	middle of the road position/ course	bar gnas lam phyogs
བར་གནས་སྲིད་ཇུས	neutral policy	bar gnas srid jus
བར་སྣག་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་དབང	air supremacy/ control	bar snag kha lo sgyur dbang
བར་སྣང	atmospherical space, illumined space, heavens above, the light between, atmosphere, light of heaven, sky, space, intermediate sphere in tibetan cosmology, mid-air	bar snang
བར་སྣང་ཁང་ཆེན	apparent form of a great house in space	bar snang khang chen
བར་སྣང་ཁམས	space	bar snang khams
བར་སྣང་ཁམས་ལ་འཕྱོ་བ	to move throughout all of space, to soar throughout the vastness of the sky	bar snang khams la 'phyo ba
བར་སྣང་གི	spatial	bar snang gi
བར་སྣང་གི་ཁམས	space	bar snang gi khams
བར་སྣང་གི་ནམ་མཁའི	celestial	bar snang gi nam mkha'i
བར་སྣང་ཆུ་རླབས	waves in space, mirage	bar snang chu rlabs
བར་སྣང་འཇའ་ལྟར	Like a rainbow in space	bar snang 'ja' ltar
བར་སྣང་དུ	in [the sky, [unobstructed] space, air, midair, atmosphere]	bar snang du
བར་སྣང་དུ་མཇལ	to see in space	bar snang du mjal
བར་སྣང་དུ་གནས	suspended in midair	bar snang du gnas
བར་སྣང་དུ་སྤར	SA rtsal gsum	bar snang du spar
བར་སྣང་དུ་སྤར་བའི་རྩལ	power to move through space	bar snang du spar ba'i rtsal
བར་སྣང་དུ་བྱོན	appeared in space	bar snang du byon
བར་སྣང་བདེ་མོ་སྐོར་གྱིན	flies about into the free heavens	bar snang bde mo skor gyin
བར་སྣང་བདེ་མོར་འཕུར་བ	fly easily through space	bar snang bde mor 'phur ba
བར་སྣང་ནས	from [the sky, [unobstructed] space, air, midair, atmosphere]	bar snang nas
བར་སྣང་ལ	in [the sky, [unobstructed] space, air, midair, atmosphere]	bar snang la
བར་སྣང་ལ་ཐིག་ལེན་པ	aerial photo survey	bar snang la thig len pa
བར་སྣང་ལ་གནས་པ	rest/ abide in space	bar snang la gnas pa
བར་པ	middle one, second son, central, central region of zhang zhung, class of gnyan, those who are in the middle, intermediate stage, the second one (of three)	bar pa
བར་པ་བསྐང་བཤགས	amendmentconfession offering	bar pa bskang bshags
བར་པ་མཚན་ཉིད་རྒྱུའི་ཐེག་པ	the middle teaching on metaphysics of the casual vehicle	bar pa mtshan nyid rgyu'i theg pa
བར་པ་ར་ཙ་ཀ	ancient indian sect	bar pa ra tsa ka
བར་དཔང	witness, evidence	bar dpang
བར་བ	the middle 1	bar ba
བར་བ་ཏ	hypecoum leptocarpum hook. f. et thoms	bar ba ta
བར་བག་ཙམ	slight space	bar bag tsam
བར་བར	sometimes	bar bar
བར་བར་དུ	at intervals, occasionally, from time to time, now and then	bar bar du
བར་བོར	1) sluggish/ listless and careless; 2) getting drunk, slightly tipsy	bar bor
བར་བྱེད་པ	reconcile [quarrels and strife]	bar byed pa
བར་བྲིས	intermediate sketch	bar bris
བར་བློན	deputy ministers	bar blon
བར་དབུས་གཙང་རུ་བཞི	The four 'ru's of U and Tsang in C Tibet	bar dbus gtsang ru bzhi
བར་དབྲག	space between two objects 1793	bar dbrag
བར་དབྲག་ལ	[in the ] space between two objects	bar dbrag la
བར་དབྲག་ས་ཁུལ	space between two objects	bar dbrag sa khul
བར་དབྲག་ས་ཁུལ་ལ	[in the ] space between two objects	bar dbrag sa khul la
བར་མ	1) middle, intermediate, neutral, between [1]; 2) 1 of the 7 ascertainments of song {glu dbyangs nges pa bdun}: {khrung khrung sgra sgrog pa lta bu}, like the call of a crane; 3) female singer; 4) ...	bar ma
བར་མ་བཅད་པ	not interrupted by	bar ma bcad pa
བར་མ་ཆད	uninterrupted, unbroken	bar ma chad
བར་མ་ཆད་པ	uninterruptedly	bar ma chad pa
བར་མ་ཆད་པར	unobstructed, uninterrupted, w/o break/ interval, constant[ly]	bar ma chad par
བར་མ་ཆོད་པའི་ཟུང་ལྡན་གཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 divided pairs ??	bar ma chod pa'i zung ldan gco lnga
བར་མ་ཆོད་པར	uninterrupted	bar ma chod par
བར་མ་དོ	bardo	bar ma do
བར་མ་དོའི་སྲིད་པ	intermediate existence	bar ma do'i srid pa
བར་མ་དོར་འཆི་བ	untimely death bar ma dor bar yongs su mya ngan las 'da'	bar ma dor 'chi ba
བར་མ་འདོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	belonging to the middle country, midlander	bar ma 'don par byed pa
བར་མ་པ	middle one	bar ma pa
བར་མ་ཕུང	alternative	bar ma phung
བར་མ་བཞག་པ	establish a break mtshams ma bzhag pa [in work etc]	bar ma bzhag pa
བར་མ་རབ་བྱུང	intermediate renunciate	bar ma rab byung
བར་མ་རབ་བྱུང་གི་བསླབ་བྱ	the precepts to be taken in the intermediate renunciate's vows	bar ma rab byung gi bslab bya
བར་མ་རི	Barma Hill	bar ma ri
བར་མའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	intermediate turning of the wheel of Dharma [of prajnaparamita and emptiness at Vulture peak]	bar ma'i chos 'khor
བར་མའི་སྟོང་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	Intermediate Thousandfold World System; Mipham: {gling bzhi ri rab 'dod lha drug tshangs pa'i 'jig rten dang bcas pa la gling bzhi pa'i 'jig rten gyi khams zhes bya la, de stong la dang po spyi phu...	bar ma'i stong gi 'jig rten gyi khams
བར་མའི་སྟོང་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	one thousand {dang po spyi phung gi 'jig rten} or 1,000,000 universes of four continents. the intermediate thousand fold world system, [one million {gling bzhi'i 'jig rten} one thousand {dang po sp...	bar ma'i stong gyi 'jig rten gyi khams
བར་མའི་འདེམས་སྐོ	midterm election	bar ma'i 'dems sko
བར་མའི་སྡོམ་པ	the middle vow [to abandon what is harmful and engage in what is free from harm]	bar ma'i sdom pa
བར་མའི་སྡོམ་པའི་དགེ་མི་དགེ	Mipham Rinpoche: {dus sogs kyi rgyun 'jug pa'i nges pa med par thad ka thad kar dge mi dge byed pa ste de ni sdom sdom min gang yang min ste de dus kyi rnam par rig byed kyi las yin no} The virtue ...	bar ma'i sdom pa'i dge mi dge
བར་མའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	high school	bar ma'i slob grwa
བར་མི	witness [w means to arrange concord], mediator	bar mi
བར་མི་ཆད་པར	unobstructed, uninterrupted, w/o break/ interval, constant[ly]	bar mi chad par
བར་མི་ཆོད	without break	bar mi chod
བར་མི་བྱེད	mediate	bar mi byed
བར་མི་བྱེད་པ	intermediate, mediate, umpire	bar mi byed pa
བར་མིན་པ	except	bar min pa
བར་མེད	. . . (la) bar med - nothing stands between . . . ; isc. there is no gap between . . .	bar med
བར་མེད་བསྐོར	constantly turn	bar med bskor
བར་མེད་མཁའ	the heavens	bar med mkha'
བར་མེད་འཁོར་བ	revolves continuously	bar med 'khor ba
བར་མེད་དུ	uninterruptedly, without break	bar med du
བར་མེད་པ	seamless, continuous, constant, incessant, unremitting, perpetual, perennial, unbroken	bar med pa
བར་མེད་པར	unobstructed, uninterrupted, w/o break/ interval, constant[ly]	bar med par
བར་སྨིན་ཆུ་འབྲས	middle season ripening rice	bar smin chu 'bras
བར་ཙམ	between	bar tsam
བར་བཙངས	insulation/ padding of clothes etc	bar btsangs
བར་བརྩེགས	middle layer/ level	bar brtsegs
བར་ཚགས	break[s], gap[s], [space] between 1794	bar tshags
བར་ཚངས	padding/ insulation [in clothes etc]	bar tshangs
བར་ཚམས་ན	in the spaces/ gaps between	bar tshams na
བར་ཚམས་བྲལ	uninterruptedly	bar tshams bral
བར་ཚེག	tshig [in the middle of a multisyllable word]	bar tsheg
བར་ཚེགས	terma sign separating each syllable, separating each syllable	bar tshegs
བར་ཚོང	commerce between cities or tshong 'dus etc. lung chung 'gar sil merchant, wholesaler, broker, middle man	bar tshong
བར་ཚོང་རྒྱག	act as wholesaler/ broker/ seller of odds and ends	bar tshong rgyag
བར་ཚོང་པ	1) wholesaler/ broker between merchants; 2) huckster, seller of little odds and ends	bar tshong pa
བར་མཚམ་ཆད་པ	stop, halt, pause	bar mtsham chad pa
བར་མཚམས	1) border/ interval, break[s], gap[s], space, time between, chasm, intermission	bar mtshams
བར་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རོལ་དབྱངས	intermezzo	bar mtshams kyi rol dbyangs
བར་མཚམས་ཁྱུག་ཙམ་གཅོད	halt/ stop/ pause for a moment	bar mtshams khyug tsam gcod
བར་མཚམས་གཅོད	halt, stop, pause	bar mtshams gcod
བར་མཚམས་གཅོད་པ	disrupt, interrupt	bar mtshams gcod pa
བར་མཚམས་བཅད་པ	1) stop[ped], halt[ed] pause[d]; 2) pause, break; 3) make a division	bar mtshams bcad pa
བར་མཚམས་ཆད	[come to a] stop/ halt/ pause, discontinue	bar mtshams chad
བར་མཚམས་ཆད་པ	stop, halt, pause	bar mtshams chad pa
བར་མཚམས་ན	in the gaps, in-between, in the spaces between, the gaps between	bar mtshams na
བར་མཚམས་མེད	uninterrupted, continual, often, no intervals	bar mtshams med
བར་མཚམས་མེད་པ	unobstructed, uninterrupted, w/o break/ interval, constant[ly]	bar mtshams med pa
བར་མཚམས་མེད་པར་ཡོང་བ	flux	bar mtshams med par yong ba
བར་མཚམས་བཞག་པ	to break off, adjourn, took a break	bar mtshams bzhag pa
བར་མཚམས་ལ	in between/ the middle [of]/ the interim/ interval	bar mtshams la
བར་མཚམས་སུ	the brake between. e.g. teaching	bar mtshams su
བར་འཚང	crowd together	bar 'tshang
བར་འཚངས	stuffing, quilting, filling	bar 'tshangs
བར་ཞིབ	barley flour of mediocre quality	bar zhib
བར་བཞུགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	neutral country/ policy	bar bzhugs rgyal khab
བར་བཞུགས་པ	neutralist, middle of the roader	bar bzhugs pa
བར་བཞུགས་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	middle of the road position/ course	bar bzhugs lam phyogs
བར་བཞུགས་སྲིད་ཇུས	neutral policy	bar bzhugs srid jus
བར་གཟབ	clothing and ornaments of middling elegance	bar gzab
བར་གཟུ	witness, person who can reconcile	bar gzu
བར་གཟུང་འཛིན་འབྲེལ་བའི་ལྷ་འདྲེ	the gods and demons in between, connected through holding and grasping	bar gzung 'dzin 'brel ba'i lha 'dre
བར་འོས་པ	appropriate	bar 'os pa
བར་ཡིག	written document/ agreement settling a dispute bar g.yu - turquoise of mediocre quality bar g.yen gtod po dgu'i bon po - Bönpos of the nine powerful classes of beings of intermediate space	bar yig
བར་རླུང	the medium breath	bar rlung
བར་ལ	during; in the meantime	bar la
བར་ལ་ལྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 Groups of Space (Tibetan kings)	bar la lde brgyad
བར་ལ་ལེགས་པར་ཟླུམ་པ	well-rounded thighs. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	bar la legs par zlum pa
བར་ལག	barrier	bar lag
བར་ལག་འགྱེལ	fall apart	bar lag 'gyel
བར་ལག་པ	go-between, agent	bar lag pa
བར་ལམ	in the meantime, presently	bar lam
བར་ལམ་འཐེན་འཁྱེར	incidental contention	bar lam 'then 'khyer
བར་ལིག	a field, estate	bar lig
བར་ཤ	meat of mediocre quality	bar sha
བར་ཤར་བ	intermediate/ middle precepts for renunciates bring gras ?? [Not 1st or last you get?]	bar shar ba
བར་ཤིག	a flower	bar shig
བར་ཤུན	layer between meat and skin	bar shun
བར་ཤུར	catwalk [narrow. on top of a house etc]	bar shur
བར་ཤོག	"may it come" verbal construction	bar shog
བར་ས	synonym for bar do	bar sa
བར་ས་ལག་ལ	in between, in the interim	bar sa lag la
བར་སེང	not busy, idle, intermission, interval, recess	bar seng
བར་སེལ	mutual divisive talk/ calumny	bar sel
བར་སྲང	lane, alley, path	bar srang
བར་སྲིད	interval/ intermediate state between death and rebirth as a phase of conditioned existence	bar srid
བར་སྲིད་གྲུབ་ནས	once the intermediate existence has taken place	bar srid grub nas
བར་སྲིད་པ	beings in the bardo	bar srid pa
བར་སྲུབས	CM: gseng dbar, opening, space(?), (MG: for gseng bdar gives) chasm, intermission. E.g, sgo'i bar gseng nas bltas, looking through the opening/chasm of the door. spyi don gyi bar gseng (space, inte...	bar srubs
བར་སླ	inflammable	bar sla
བར་སླའི་དངོས་རྫས	inflammable materials	bar sla'i dngos rdzas
བར་གསར་རྫིང་ཁང	place in tibet	bar gsar rdzing khang
བར་གསེང	crack, gap, space, interval, time off, break, off- duty time	bar gseng
བར་གསེབ	gaps, in between places	bar gseb
བར་ཧྲག་བར་ཧྲག	spotty, from time to time	bar hrag bar hrag
བར་ཧྲུབ	in between	bar hrub
བར་ལྷུ	borders/ intervals between [parts of a machine, joints	bar lhu
བལ	1) Nepal; 2) wool	bal
བལ་དཀར	fleece, white wool	bal dkar
བལ་བཀལ་བ	load wool	bal bkal ba
བལ་སྐད	Nepalese	bal skad
བལ་སྐུད	a piece of thread	bal skud
བལ་སྐུད་འཁེལ་འཁོར	wool thread/ yarn spinning machine	bal skud 'khel 'khor
བལ་སྐྱེ	mould on fermented liquors	bal skye
བལ་ཁེལ	thread from raw wool or cotton	bal khel
བལ་ཁྲལ	former government wool spinning sgo khral [by door service assessment by house] on nomad houses	bal khral
བལ་འཁལ་བ	to spin yarn	bal 'khal ba
བལ་འཁེལ	spin woolen thread	bal 'khel
བལ་འཁེལ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	woolens mill	bal 'khel 'thag bzo grwa
བལ་འཁེལ་བ	spin wool	bal 'khel ba
བལ་འཁོར	bal gcus ball	bal 'khor
བལ་འཁྲུར་འཇུག་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandoning [offense] of washed and dyed wool	bal 'khrur 'jug pa'i spang ba
བལ་གུར	Nepalese gur gum [saffron] [cures mchin tshad]	bal gur
བལ་གོང	price of wool	bal gong
བལ་གོར	Nepalis [bal po] and gor sha	bal gor
བལ་གོས	Nepalese/ wool garments	bal gos
བལ་གྱི	woollen, woollen	bal gyi
བལ་གྱི་སླེའུ	SA bal sle	bal gyi sle'u
བལ་གྲི	knife for cutting wool from sheep and goats	bal gri
བལ་གྲོ	mixture of peas and wheat	bal gro
བལ་གླང	Nepalese elephant	bal glang
བལ་རྒྱབ	load or pack of wool	bal rgyab
བལ་རྒྱུ	[raw] wool	bal rgyu
བལ་སྒོར	ball of tangled wool? bal gcus te bzos pa'i bal do sgor mo, tshva ya bal gyis ma non na, bal sgor chu la sbang rgyu yin	bal sgor
བལ་རྔ	nepalese drum	bal rnga
བལ་ཅན	woollen blanket, spider	bal can
བལ་ཆོལ	cymbal imported from nepal	bal chol
བལ་འཇམ	soft wool of tibetan goat	bal 'jam
བལ་སྙིགས	impurities on wool	bal snyigs
བལ་ཏམ	nepalese coin	bal tam
བལ་ཏིག	Nepalese tig ta = Gentiana barbera herb	bal tig
བལ་བཏགས	made of wool	bal btags
བལ་བཏགས་དངོས་རྫས	woolen fabrics	bal btags dngos rdzas
བལ་སྟན	wool seat/ cushion	bal stan
བལ་ཐག	1) wool rope; 2) binding a load of wool kyi bal gcus	bal thag
བལ་ཐེར	shawl made of sheep's wool	bal ther
བལ་ཐོད	hair that is tied to the skull cap, woolen turban	bal thod
བལ་ཐོད་ཅན	class of bon exorcists who wear tufts of wool on their forehead	bal thod can
བལ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	woolens mill	bal 'thag bzo grwa
བལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	wooly	bal dang ldan pa
བལ་དོ	1) load of wool; 2) servants who work w wool	bal do
བལ་དོ་པོ	1) load of wool; 2) servants who work w wool	bal do po
བལ་དོས	bale of wool	bal dos
བལ་དྲིལ	bell manufactured in nepal, cotton cloth	bal dril
བལ་མདའ	match lock manufactured in nepal	bal mda'
བལ་འདབ	wool separating ling ling, [blowing away, shaking?] dgos med kyi tshig nyog [dirt y] bal 'dab rdo gnon du bzhag ???	bal 'dab
བལ་ལྡན	wool haver, sheep	bal ldan
བལ་ལྡན་པ	woolly	bal ldan pa
བལ་ནག་སྟན་གྱི་སྤང་བ	abandonmentfault of an all black wool cushion	bal nag stan gyi spang ba
བལ་ནད	Nepali disease	bal nad
བལ་སྣ	bal spu'i tshi sna'am dkyus, bal sna depending on whether it is long or short dividing into good and bad ???	bal sna
བལ་སྣམ	wool cloth	bal snam
བལ་པ་ཛ	a bodhisattva	bal pa dza
བལ་པོ	nepal, native of nepal	bal po
བལ་པོ་གུར་ཀུམ	Nepalese saffron	bal po gur kum
བལ་པོ་གུར་གུམ	saffron of nepal, nepalese saffron	bal po gur gum
བལ་པོ་སེའུ	Das: pomegranate tree (bal po se'u shing) E.g. R75: 505.2 [mss]	bal po se'u
བལ་པོ་སེའུ་ཤིང	pomegranate tree	bal po se'u shing
བལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་བ་སུ་དྷཱ་ར	the Nepali king Vasudhara	bal po'i rgyal po ba su dhA ra
བལ་པོའི་ཏོང་ཏོང	hand drum used in a goddess play/ Tibetan opera	bal po'i tong tong
བལ་པོའི་སྦུག་ཆལ	kind of cymbal manufactured in nepal	bal po'i sbug chal
བལ་སྤུ	1) wool and hair; 2) cattle hair/ fur/ wool in general	bal spu
བལ་བ་རྩྭ	= bal pa dza; 1) rtsva dres ma [a plant good for making rope] bal pa dza'i thag pa; 2) the plant byi 'dzin	bal ba rtswa
བལ་བ་ཛ	= bal pa dza 1) rtsva dres ma [plant good for making rope] bal pa dza'i thag pa; 2) the plant byi 'dzin	bal ba dza
བལ་བག	shear wool	bal bag
བལ་བུ	bal bu med. tree	bal bu
བལ་བེའུ	infinite know	bal be'u
བལ་བོད	nepal & tibet, Tibeto-nepalese, Nepal and Tibet	bal bod
བལ་བོད་ཀྱི་ལམ	journey from nepal to tibet	bal bod kyi lam
བལ་བྲིས	school of Thangka paining originating in Nepal	bal bris
བལ་བྲུག་བྱེད་པ	to spin wool	bal brug byed pa
བལ་འབངས	lit. subject of Nepal; usually refers to the Newar master Shilamanju who, together with Padmasambhava and Vimalamitra, was a co-author of the {phur 'brel 'bum nag} and instrumental in the spreading...	bal 'bangs
བལ་འབྲེག	shear wool	bal 'breg
བལ་འབྲེག་གི་ཁྲལ	shearing service [fall and spring, field servants or those assigned compulsory service of shearing the master's wool]	bal 'breg gi khral
བལ་འབྲེག་པ	shear	bal 'breg pa
བལ་རྦད་རྦོད	wool matted like felt	bal rbad rbod
བལ་སྦུག	nepalese cymbals, cymbals manufactured in nepal, kind of cymbal manufactured in nepal	bal sbug
བལ་སྦུབ	Nepalese cymbals	bal sbub
བལ་མ	fend wool worker	bal ma
བལ་མུག	wool moth	bal mug
བལ་མོ	nepalese woman	bal mo
བལ་མོ་བཟའ	nepalese queen of srong btsan sgam po	bal mo bza'
བལ་རྨལ	spin wool	bal rmal
བལ་རྨེལ་བ	gsed pa [pick separate: card?] or spin wool	bal rmel ba
བལ་ཚི	1) wool zhag tshi [grease?]; 2) spu sna ??? of a sheep 1796	bal tshi
བལ་ཚོང	Sell[er of] Nepalese goods in Tibet	bal tshong
བལ་ཚོན	colored wool	bal tshon
བལ་ཚོན་སྣ་ལྔ	wool-yarn or thread of five different colors	bal tshon sna lnga
བལ་ཟམ	chintz from nepal, cotton yard of red and white	bal zam
བལ་ཟེ	after cloth is made an implement to soften and lift the pile	bal ze
བལ་ཟོམ	wool zom lham	bal zom
བལ་བཟའ	tibetan name of nepalese wife of king srong btsan sgam po, a tibetan lady who obtained sainthood, the Nepalese bride of King Srongtsen gambo	bal bza'
བལ་བཟོས	woollen	bal bzos
བལ་ཡིག	Nepalese letters	bal yig
བལ་ཡུལ	Nepal	bal yul
བལ་ཡུལ་སྐྱེས	a medicine	bal yul skyes
བལ་ཡུལ་དུ	in Nepal	bal yul du
བལ་ཡེ	sat the tip wrapped w silk stick a med making implement	bal ye
བལ་རིས	nepalese style of painting	bal ris
བལ་ལ	heavenly flowers	bal la
བལ་ལ་ཆེན་པོ	heavenly flowers	bal la chen po
བལ་ལས	wool spinner/ weaver	bal las
བལ་ལི	Nepalese images of bell metal	bal li
བལ་ཤད	carding comb	bal shad
བལ་ཤད་རྒྱག	carding wool	bal shad rgyag
བལ་ཤད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	wool carding machine	bal shad 'phrul 'khor
བལ་ཤོ	wool import/ export tax	bal sho
བལ་ཤོ་བ	wool import/ export tax collector	bal sho ba
བལ་སིང་བ	third plucking of the finest wool	bal sing ba
བལ་སེད	carding wool	bal sed
བལ་སེད་རྒྱག	carding wool	bal sed rgyag
བལ་སེད་པ	first coarse plucking of wool	bal sed pa
བལ་སེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	wool carding machine	bal sed 'phrul 'khor
བལ་སླེ	woollen serge-cloth of very small breadth	bal sle
བལ་སླེ་རྣམ་པ	piece of bal sle	bal sle rnam pa
བལ་སླེའུ	wool hanging or cover	bal sle'u
བལ་གསེད་པ	assort wool	bal gsed pa
བལ་བསིད་པ	sort wool	bal bsid pa
བལ་བསེད	carding comb	bal bsed
བལ་ལྷོག	the two infectious diseases gnyan rims {bal nad} and {lhog pa}	bal lhog
བས	1) than [comparative]; 2) reason showing particle [de lta bas na, if so then...]; 3) remote place; 4) say nothing of; 5) much less; 5) ba + inst	bas
བས་མཐའ	suburb of a town, border country, solitude	bas mtha'
བས་མཐའི་གནས་མལ	outlying residence	bas mtha'i gnas mal
བས་དི	1 of 11 astrological diagrams, SA byed pa bcu gcig	bas di
བས་བལྡགས	a skin disease ba yis bldags pa ltar gyi sha mdog gzhan dang ma 'dres pa w small pustules skya zhib	bas bldags
བས་ན	. . . (verb root) pas/ bas na - since . . . , this is why/ so, . . .	bas na
བས་པ	1) used up, done w; 2) at the border [country]; 3) completed settled	bas pa
བས་འཕུལ	ba prefix	bas 'phul
བས་མོ	SA bab mo	bas mo
བས་རེད	SA pas red	bas red
བི་ཀྲ་མ་བུ་རི	place in east bengal	bi kra ma bu ri
བི་ཀྲ་མ་ལ་པུ་རི	place in east bengal	bi kra ma la pu ri
བི་ཀྲ་མ་ལ་ཤི་ལ	Vikramalashila, [monastery in old India]	bi kra ma la shi la
བི་ཀྲ་མ་ཤི་ལ	monastery at magadha	bi kra ma shi la
བི་གང	hole bi tang door	bi gang
བི་ཅི་ལི	flash light	bi ci li
བི་ཅི་ལིའི་སྨན	flash light battery	bi ci li'i sman
བི་ཆུ	moss	bi chu
བི་ཆུང	SA bya chung	bi chung
བི་ཆུར་ཚ་པོ	(yul 'pher sha tsha po, 'byon rgyu med pa'i bi tshur tsha po, ???	bi chur tsha po
བི་ཏ་མ	bi ta ma	bi ta ma
བི་ཏང	door	bi tang
བི་དི་ནམ	Viet Nam	bi di nam
བི་དྱོཏ་ཏ་མ་འབུམ	(Skt) 100,000 Sections of Unexcelled Knowledge	bi dyot ta ma 'bum
བི་དྲུ་མ	precious stone	bi dru ma
བི་དྲུ་མ་འདྲ་བ	mountain of naga	bi dru ma 'dra ba
བི་ན་ཡ་ཀ	class of malignant spirits	bi na ya ka
བི་པ	receiving, accepting	bi pa
བི་པ་ཀ་ཡ	fabulous phantom receiving naga homage	bi pa ka ya
བི་པ་ཤྱཱ་ན	{lhag mthong}	bi pa shyA na
བི་རྦ་པ	Virupa [sakya lineage master, indian.]	bi rba pa
བི་མ་སྙིང་ཐིག	part of Longchen Rabjam's snying thig ya bzhi	bi ma snying thig
བི་མ་ཡང་ཏིག	longchenpa's commentary on bi ma snying thig	bi ma yang tig
བི་མ་ལ	indian buddhist saint, Vimalamitra	bi ma la
བི་མ་ལ་མི་ཏྲ	Vimalamitra [Indian mahasandhi lineage master) meaning spotless spiritual friend. Went to Tibet at the time of the Tibetan king Trisong Deutsen.]	bi ma la mi tra
བི་མ་ལའི་སྙིང་ཏིག	[Dzogchen teachings of] Nyingtig of Vimalamitra	bi ma la'i snying tig
བི་མའི་བཀའ་སྲོལ་སྙིང་ཐིག	spiritual instructions that originated with Vimalamitra	bi ma'i bka' srol snying thig
བི་ཛ་པུ་ར	ancient city of southern india	bi dza pu ra
བི་རྫི	shrew	bi rdzi
བི་ར་པ	Virupa	bi ra pa
བི་རི་འ་མདོ	place in amdo	bi ri 'a mdo
བི་རུ་པ	Virupa Indian Siddha; founder of the lineage brought to Tibet by Drogmi Lotsawa ('brog mi lo tsa ba) in the eleventh century, now renowned as the Sakya (sa skya) School. He is also counted among th...	bi ru pa
བི་རོ་ཙ་ན	Vairochana	bi ro tsa na
བི་ཥ	big pan vitriol, potash, garlic-ashes	bi Sha
བི་ཤཱ་ཀ་རྨ	Vishvakarman, a craftsman of the gods	bi shA ka rma
བི་ཤ་ནག་པོ	(Sanskrit) black visha, med. herb [= khyab byed nag po = bong nga nag po]	bi sha nag po
བི་ཤ་ཙེ	bi sha tse, wind disease	bi sha tse
བི་ཤྭ་ཀ་རྨ	Vishvakarman, a craftsman of the gods	bi shwa ka rma
བི་ཤུ	rtsed chas mda'i rtse mor sgar byed shing ril sbubs can mig khung bzhi ldan sgra gsang po sgrog pa zhig ???	bi shu
བི་སཤ	big pan, sulfuric acid, vitriol, potash, garlic- ashes	bi ssha
བི་ཧ་ར	buddhist monastery	bi ha ra
བི་ཧར	Bihar	bi har
བི་དྷ	chain of hills in central india	bi dha
བིག་པན	a kind of med. salt, potash, sulphuric acid	big pan
བིག་བི་ལིག	quail	big bi lig
བིང་ཆེན	a club [dharmapala club like Pernagchen, Hanuman. hollow inside]	bing chen
བེརྣཀཆེན་ཅམྲིས	also Hanuman hollow inside; a club (like Hanumann's)	Bernakchen camris
བིང་པ་ཏ	treatise on science of words	bing pa ta
བིད་བིད	mouth-piece of a hautboy, hautboy reed	bid bid
བིན་དྷ	chain of hills in central india	bin dha
བིམ་པ	(bilba tree w red fruit, peach	bim pa
བིམ་པའི་མཆུ	lip red like the fruit of bim ba	bim pa'i mchu
བིམ་བ་ལྟར་དམར	red like the Bimba berry	bim ba ltar dmar
བིའུ	calf, snake	bi'u
བིའུ་ཕྲུག	linen cloth dyed with red color	bi'u phrug
བིའུ་རས་དམར་པོ	linen cloth dyed with red color	bi'u ras dmar po
བིར	(not in das)	bir
བིར་ཐིག	bod mda'i me spar byed ??	bir thig
བིར་བིར	crumbs, bits, scraps	bir bir
བིར་ཝ་པ	Virupa	bir wa pa
བིར་ཤུབས	bod mda'i me spar byed or bir thig or in aa mdo called lar bir lto. me thag 'jug snod ???	bir shubs
བིལ་བ	ka bed pho mo rigs gnyis kyi nang nas chung ba mo rigs shig ste, ro skyur zhing bska, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas tsha 'khru gcod,	bil ba
བིལ་བའི་ཚལ	1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	bil ba'i tshal
བིལ་འབྲས	1) fruit of the bil ba tree; 2) a med. tree	bil 'bras
བུ་ཀུན	{skal ldan bu kun} worthy disciples	bu kun
བུ་སྐྱེ་ཁང	maternity ward/ home	bu skye khang
བུ་སྐྱེད	bu lon gyi skyed ka'i skyed ka	bu skyed
བུ་སྐྱེའི་སྨན་ཁང	maternity hospital	bu skye'i sman khang
བུ་སྐྱེས	gave birth to a son	bu skyes
བུ་སྐྱེས་པ་ཡང་མ་གསོས	You did not even take care of your son.	bu skyes pa yang ma gsos
བུ་ཁྱིམ	home for children	bu khyim
བུ་ཁྱིམ་ཁང	home for children	bu khyim khang
བུ་འཁྲིད	common title given by parents	bu 'khrid
ཏོ་ཕི༹རསཏ	born daughter hoping a son will come next	to first
བུ་ག	1) hole, opening, orifice, aperture, fontanel, cavity, vessel; 2) 9; 3) child	bu ga
བུ་ག་དགུ	the body w its 9 apertures	bu ga dgu
བུ་ག་སྒོ་དགུ	the body w its 9 apertures	bu ga sgo dgu
བུ་ག་གཉིས་པ	gzhang 'brum phyogs gang na yod med examining implement	bu ga gnyis pa
བུ་ག་སྣང་བ	opening appearing	bu ga snang ba
བུ་ག་འབིགས	pierce/ make/ drill a hole	bu ga 'bigs
བུ་ག་འབུགས	pierce/ make/ drill a hole	bu ga 'bugs
བུ་ག་འཛིན	full of perforations	bu ga 'dzin
བུ་ག་འཛིན་པ	1) wind [god]; 2) perforated	bu ga 'dzin pa
བུ་ག་ཧ་རེ	disordered and empty	bu ga ha re
བུ་གའི་ནམ་མཁའ	SNT: the space inside a vessel/hole/orifice. e.g., the space inside the nostrils, ears, mouth, etc are called bu ga'i nam mkha'. In contrast to rgyan gyi nam mkha'; also spelled bu kha'i nam mkha' ...	bu ga'i nam mkha'
བུ་གའི་དབྱངས	bird's cage	bu ga'i dbyangs
བུ་གར་འགྲོ	go into the orifice/ the aperture of Bhram	bu gar 'gro
བུ་གུ	1) disordered; 2) little boy; 3) small hole	bu gu
བུ་གུར་སྡོད་པ	[arch] stay alone bu gos kyis g.yog pa - cover a child with a garment	bu gur sdod pa
བུ་གྱར	adopted/ foster child	bu gyar
བུ་གྲས	kinds of child [boys and girls]	bu gras
བུ་གླིང	park in lhasa	bu gling
བུ་གློང	park or grove in Lhasa	bu glong
བུ་དགུ	9 sons	bu dgu
བུ་དགོན	Tibetan dgon sde che gras kyi dgon lag , bu dgon gyi byed sgo rnams ma dgon gyi srol ltar byed dgos ??	bu dgon
བུ་རྒྱལ་བྱེད་ཅེས་པ	Prince Jeta	bu rgyal byed ces pa
བུ་རྒྱུད	children, scion	bu rgyud
བུ་རྒྱུད་རྒན་གཞོན	old and young children/ descendants	bu rgyud rgan gzhon
བུ་རྒྱུད་དམག	children's army	bu rgyud dmag
བུ་རྒྱུད་དམག་གི་ཨ་མ	mother of the children's army [title]	bu rgyud dmag gi a ma
བུ་བརྒྱུད	descendant, offspring, disciple. lineage son, scion, children, sons of the lineage, a descendant of the lineage	bu brgyud
བུ་གཅིག་པ	only child	bu gcig pa
བུ་གཅིག་བུ	the only son	bu gcig bu
བུ་གཅེས	1) dear child; 2) heat meat for a child	bu gces
བུ་བཅོལ་ཁང	nursery, nursery	bu bcol khang
བུ་ཆུ་ལྷ་ཁང	bon monastery near ri bo rin chen spungs pa, 1 of 12 buddhist sanctuaries erected during reign of king srong btsan sgam po	bu chu lha khang
བུ་ཆུང	infant	bu chung
བུ་ཆེ་མ	1) a guest; 2) pregnant woman	bu che ma
བུ་ཆེན	close disciple	bu chen
བུ་ཆེན་མ	pregnant woman, one big with child	bu chen ma
བུ་ཆོས	the students of both jo 'brom bu rngog legs pa'i shes rab kyis zhus: by jo bo rje aa ti shas taught 'brom ston rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas kyi skyes rabs rnam thar mang po &, after that when Atisha died...	bu chos
བུ་ཏ་ཀ	offerings to the earthly gods and spirits	bu ta ka
བུ་ཏ་ཕེ་སི	Budapest	bu ta phe si
བུ་ཏང	child's figure	bu tang
བུ་གཏེལ	hostage [KNT]	bu gtel
བུ་རྟ	men and horses	bu rta
བུ་སྟོན	Butön (1290-1364). Fourteenth century Tibetan scholar and historian; early compiler of the Kangyur, the Buddhist Canon	bu ston
བུ་སྟོན་ཆོས་འབྱུང	Elucidating the teachings of the sugata the treasury of the Source of the Dharma, bde bar gshegs pa'i bstan pa'i gsal byed chos kyi 'byung gnas gsung rab rin po che'i mdzod * (1290-1364(212, ya, 12...	bu ston chos 'byung
བུ་སྟོན་རིན་ཆེན་གྲུབ	1290-1364	bu ston rin chen grub
བུ་སྟོར་རོ	lost child	bu stor ro
བུ་བསྟོན་ཐམས་བཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	omniscient But"n	bu bston thams bcad mkhyen pa
བུ་ཐང	mag pa	bu thang
བུ་མཐོང་ལྡན	ajatasatru	bu mthong ldan
བུ་དང་ཆུང་མ	children and spouse; children and spouses	bu dang chung ma
བུ་དང་ཆུང་མ་སོགས་ཀྱང་སྦྱིན	I gave even my wives and children	bu dang chung ma sogs kyang sbyin
བུ་དང་བུ་མོའི་སློབ་གྲ	co-education	bu dang bu mo'i slob gra
བུ་དེ་ཚེ	life	bu de tshe
བུ་དེབ	1) copy of a book; 2) master's field tax book	bu deb
བུ་དོད	adopted son, foster-child	bu dod
བུ་དོད་ཡིན་ལ	brag rgya bo dgu 'dus kyi rtser sgrub pa mdzad de rdzogs chen mngon par grub cing, spobs pa mtha' yas par gyur pas bde gshegs rgya bo par grags, died in the 1st wood tiger year	bu dod yin la
བུ་གདུང	cross beam, small cross beam	bu gdung
བུ་འདེད	'byung rtsis nang ma la brten nas bu'i gnas tshul rtsi ba'i thabs shig	bu 'ded
བུ་རྡོ	idle talk, tittle-tattle	bu rdo
བུ་སྡུག	pleasing child/ son	bu sdug
བུ་ནད	1) sickness of the mother after a child is born; 2) phru gu skye ba'i zug	bu nad
བུ་ནོར	children and wealth	bu nor
བུ་གནས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	the female organ	bu gnas grong khyer
བུ་སྣོད	uterus, womb	bu snod
བུ་སྣོད་ལུག་པ	phru gu chags snod mtshan ma nas phyir thon pa [protruding vagina?]	bu snod lug pa
བུ་དཔེ	copy of a book, true copy, copy of any document	bu dpe
བུ་སྤུན	older brother, relatives	bu spun
བུ་སྤུན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	brotherly attitude	bu spun gyi 'du shes
བུ་སྤུན་རྒན་པ	elder brother	bu spun rgan pa
བུ་སྤུན་ཆུང	a man's younger brother	bu spun chung
བུ་སྤུན་གཞོན་པ	younger brother	bu spun gzhon pa
བུ་ཕ་ཁྱིམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་ལྟར	go there just like a child going home to his parents	bu pha khyim du 'gro ba ltar
བུ་ཕོ	a son	bu pho
བུ་ཕོ་མོ་གང་སྐྱེ་ཞུས་པ	asked whether her child would be a boy or a girl	bu pho mo gang skye zhus pa
བུ་ཕྲུག	child[ren]	bu phrug
བུ་བུ་མོ	1) children; 2) family	bu bu mo
བུ་བྱུང	understanding arises	bu byung
བུ་བྲོ་བ	make cry	bu bro ba
བུ་མ་ཕྱིན་པའི་མོ་ནད	disease where a woman is unable to have a child	bu ma phyin pa'i mo nad
བུ་མི་གསོས་པ	not keeping a child alive	bu mi gsos pa
བུ་མོ	maidens	bu mo
བུ་མོ་སྐྲ་དཀར	the White-haired Girl CH ballet	bu mo skra dkar
བུ་མོ་ཁྱུ	bevy of girls	bu mo khyu
བུ་མོ་དགའ་སྟོབས་མ	woman who offered milk to Buddha	bu mo dga' stobs ma
བུ་མོ་དགའ་མོ	the maiden Sujata	bu mo dga' mo
བུ་མོ་བརྟན་མ	1) virgin; 2) rang gi khyo ga ma gtogs khyo ga byung ma myong ba	bu mo brtan ma
བུ་མོ་དར་མ	bride, maiden, youthful maiden, young woman	bu mo dar ma
བུ་མོ་དྲི་མེད་ལུང་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	{bu mo dri med lung bstan pa'i mdo Sutra	bu mo dri med lung bstan pa'i mdo
བུ་མོ་བདུན་གྱིས་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	[TRS 97-4]	bu mo bdun gyis rtogs brjod
བུ་མོ་སྤུན་གྱེས	sister	bu mo spun gyes
བུ་མོ་སྤུན་རྒན	older sister	bu mo spun rgan
བུ་མོ་འཕང་བཟུང	'phang lag tu bzung ba'i girl, gna' dus su blo khog med pa'i mi'i ming 'dogs la zer	bu mo 'phang bzung
བུ་མོ་མ	daughter, girl, maiden, virgin	bu mo ma
བུ་མོ་གཙང་མ	virgin girl	bu mo gtsang ma
བུ་མོ་གཙོ་མོ	most beautiful girl	bu mo gtso mo
བུ་མོ་མཛེས་པོ	sweet daughter	bu mo mdzes po
བུ་མོ་བརྫངས་པ	give one's daughter in marriage	bu mo brdzangs pa
བུ་མོ་བརྫོངས་པ	to marry off one's daughter	bu mo brdzongs pa
བུ་མོ་གཞོན་ནུ་མ	lang tsho dar sgang gi na chung ma	bu mo gzhon nu ma
བུ་མོ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	love a girl	bu mo la chags pa
བུ་མོ་ལ་གཉིས་མ	girl two years old	bu mo la gnyis ma
བུ་མོ་ལེགས་སྐྱེས་མ	woman who offered milk to Buddha 1799	bu mo legs skyes ma
བུ་མོ་ས་ལེ་འོད	the girl Saleh Ö, Brilliant Light; disciple of Jetsün Milarepa	bu mo sa le 'od
བུ་མོ་གསར་པ	virgin girl	bu mo gsar pa
བུ་མོ་གསར་མ	virgin girl	bu mo gsar ma
བུ་མོ་བསླང་བ	had come to seek her hand, came as suitor	bu mo bslang ba
བུ་མོའི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion of Virgo, [8th of {skar khyim bcu gnyis}	bu mo'i khyim
བུ་མོའི་ཆས་སུ	put on a girl's dress	bu mo'i chas su
བུ་མོའི་ཆས་སུ་ཞུགས	disguise oneself as a girl	bu mo'i chas su zhugs
བུ་མོའི་བདག་པོ	bridegroom, son-in-law, lotus	bu mo'i bdag po
བུ་མོས་ཟིན་པ	taken in love by a girl	bu mos zin pa
བུ་རྨ་ཆང	spirit from sugarcane juice or from treacle	bu rma chang
བུ་སྨད	family, children	bu smad
བུ་སྨད་རྣམས	my wife and children	bu smad rnams
བུ་ཙ་ལི	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	bu tsa li
བུ་བཙའ	ayah, babysitter	bu btsa'
བུ་བཙས	gave birth to a child/ son	bu btsas
བུ་རྩ	1) ma bu dgra grogs kyi 'byung ba rtsi skabs shing bu me lta bu bu dang 'phrad pa de la bu rtsa zhes zer; 2) in a woman's womb, after a child has been five months mkhrig ma'i 'phar rtsa'i sgo nas m...	bu rtsa
བུ་ཚ	{skyes pa'i bu tsha} young children	bu tsha
བུ་ཚ་སྐྱེ་རན་འདུག	time of childbirth has arrived	bu tsha skye ran 'dug
བུ་ཚ་འཁྲིད་བྱུང	lead out the children	bu tsha 'khrid byung
བུ་ཚ་འཕེལ	increase of family	bu tsha 'phel
བུ་ཚ་བོ་བཟང་པོ	brave son	bu tsha bo bzang po
བུ་ཚ་མིང་སྲིང	children	bu tsha ming sring
བུ་ཚ་མེད་པ	to have no children	bu tsha med pa
བུ་ཚ་ཡང་ཚ་གསུམ་ཚ	son/child of 1's own body, grand child, great grandchild, and great great grand child/ son	bu tsha yang tsha gsum tsha
བུ་ཚང	all the children	bu tshang
བུ་ཚབ	SA bu dod	bu tshab
བུ་ཚབ་བླང་བ	to adopt a child	bu tshab blang ba
བུ་ཚབ་གསེར་ཁང་གླིང	Putsab Serkhang Temple, Golden Orphan Temple. Temple at Samye built by Lady Gyalmo Tsün of Pho-gyong, a queen of King Trisong Deutsen	bu tshab gser khang gling
བུ་ཚས་འབྲེལ་བ	cohabit	bu tshas 'brel ba
བུ་ཚུབ	gust of wind	bu tshub
བུ་འཛིན་མ	woman w child	bu 'dzin ma
བུ་རྫི	baby sitter	bu rdzi
བུ་རྫི་བྱེད	baby sit	bu rdzi byed
བུ་རྫི་མ	[son's] nanny	bu rdzi ma
བུ་རྫིས	guard of a young child, nurse that looks after children	bu rdzis
བུ་ཞིག་བཙས	gave birth to a child/ son	bu zhig btsas
བུ་གཞོན་པ	young child	bu gzhon pa
བུ་བཞིན	as your own children, like one's own child	bu bzhin
བུ་བཞིན་སྐྱོང་བ	ex {rang gi bu bzhin bskyangs pa} someone you've cared for as lovingly as your own child	bu bzhin skyong ba
བུ་ཟན་མོ	[arch] 1) dakini; 2) rakshasi	bu zan mo
བུ་འོག་མ	younger brother	bu 'og ma
བུ་ཡར	adopted/ foster child	bu yar
བུ་ཡི་སྣང་བ	child manifestations	bu yi snang ba
བུ་ཡི་བུ	great grandson	bu yi bu
བུ་ཡུག	a blizzard; snow-flurries; blizzard, snowstorm	bu yug
བུ་ཡུག་འཚུབ	swirling snowstorm	bu yug 'tshub
བུ་ཡུག་འཚུབ་པ་ལྟར	[like] a swirling storm	bu yug 'tshub pa ltar
བུ་ཡུག་འཚུབས་པ	swirling snowstorm/ a blizzard	bu yug 'tshubs pa
བུ་ཡུག་འཚུབས་པ་ལྟར	like a swirling storm/ blizzard bu g.yar - adopted child	bu yug 'tshubs pa ltar
བུ་རབས	son lineage	bu rabs
བུ་རབས་ཚ་རྒྱུད	succeeding generation[s]	bu rabs tsha rgyud
བུ་རམ	raw sugar, muscovado, treacle, sugarcane, brown sugar, molasses	bu ram
བུ་རམ་ཀ་ར	treacle	bu ram ka ra
བུ་རམ་དཀར	white molasses	bu ram dkar
བུ་རམ་སྐྲ	epithet of arjuna	bu ram skra
བུ་རམ་གོང་བུ	sweet lump of molasses boiled down in oil	bu ram gong bu
བུ་རམ་གྱི་ཁུ་བ	diluted sugar	bu ram gyi khu ba
བུ་རམ་སྒོང་བ	bu ram rdog rdog bzo ba	bu ram sgong ba
བུ་རམ་སྒོར་བ	boil down raw sugar	bu ram sgor ba
བུ་རམ་ཆང	sweetened chang	bu ram chang
བུ་རམ་ཏིང་ཀོར་མ	ting la par brgyab pa'i bu ram dang shel ka ra mchod ting gi dbyibs can	bu ram ting kor ma
བུ་རམ་དྭངས་མ	sugar syrup molasses w/o impurities	bu ram dwangs ma
བུ་རམ་ཕར་ཁ	poor quality molasses	bu ram phar kha
བུ་རམ་མ་ལོ	a good kind of molasses	bu ram ma lo
བུ་རམ་སྨུག་པོ	black molasses	bu ram smug po
བུ་རམ་ཞིང	sugarcane	bu ram zhing
བུ་རམ་ཞིང་པ	ikchvakh, sugar cane 1, Buddha	bu ram zhing pa
བུ་རམ་ཤིང	sugarcane	bu ram shing
བུ་རམ་ཤིང་གི་ཁུ་བ	sugarcane juice	bu ram shing gi khu ba
བུ་རམ་ཤིང་པ	1) Buddha's rigs rus, family?; 2) Buddha, Sugarcane 1; 3) buddha, ikchvakh	bu ram shing pa
བུ་རོ་ལུས་པ	1) stillborn child; 2) dead child in the womb	bu ro lus pa
བུ་རོགས	bu snod dam sha ma	bu rogs
བུ་ལ་བྱམས་པ་ཡང་ཞིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	very kind to the child	bu la byams pa yang zhin tu che ba
བུ་ལ་ཧ་རི	kind of fine leather used to line boxes, monastery on ganges	bu la ha ri
བུ་ལུགས	iconographic representation, liturgical system of bu-ston	bu lugs
བུ་ལུགས་པ	in the 13th century, follower of zha lu bu ston rin chen grub, Bulukpa school	bu lugs pa
བུ་ལེ	great tibetan mountain range	bu le
བུ་ལོ	My child!	bu lo
བུ་ལོང་ཁྱེར་བ	contract debts	bu long khyer ba
བུ་ལོང་འཁྲི་བ	entangled in debt	bu long 'khri ba
བུ་ལོང་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	promissory note	bu long gyi yi ge
བུ་ལོང་དུ་ཚུད་པ	indebted	bu long du tshud pa
བུ་ལོང་བྱེད་པ	contract debts	bu long byed pa
བུ་ལོང་ལ་ཤོར་བ	lost in consequence of debt	bu long la shor ba
བུ་ལོན	debt, credit, loan, advanced money 1800	bu lon
བུ་ལོན་ཁྱེར་བ	contract a debt	bu lon khyer ba
བུ་ལོན་མཁན	debtor	bu lon mkhan
བུ་ལོན་འགྱུར	subtraction	bu lon 'gyur
བུ་ལོན་ཆགས	get into debt	bu lon chags
བུ་ལོན་ཆགས་པ	get into debt	bu lon chags pa
བུ་ལོན་འཇལ	pay a debt, repay a loan	bu lon 'jal
བུ་ལོན་འཇལ་དགོས་མཁན	debtor bu lon 'jal dgos pa'i rgyal khab mkhan debtor nation	bu lon 'jal dgos mkhan
བུ་ལོན་འཇལ་འགན	debt, loan	bu lon 'jal 'gan
བུ་ལོན་འཇལ་བ	pay a debt, repay a loan	bu lon 'jal ba
བུ་ལོན་གཏོང	give a loan	bu lon gtong
བུ་ལོན་གཏོང་མཁན	creditor	bu lon gtong mkhan
བུ་ལོན་གཏོང་ལེན	give and take a loan, credit system	bu lon gtong len
བུ་ལོན་བཏང	give a loan	bu lon btang
བུ་ལོན་བདག་པོ	creditor	bu lon bdag po
བུ་ལོན་བདས་པ	recover money lent, sue	bu lon bdas pa
བུ་ལོན་འདེད	pursue/ ask for repayment of/ go to collect a debt/ loan	bu lon 'ded
བུ་ལོན་འདེད་པ	to urge a debtor to pay up	bu lon 'ded pa
བུ་ལོན་སྡུད་དབང	right to collect debts/ loans	bu lon sdud dbang
བུ་ལོན་སྡུད་དབང་ཡོད་མཁན	creditor bu lon sdud dbang yod pa'i rgyal khab creditor nation	bu lon sdud dbang yod mkhan
བུ་ལོན་པ	debtor	bu lon pa
བུ་ལོན་པའི་མིང	hush up, conceal	bu lon pa'i ming
བུ་ལོན་པའི་མིང་སུབ་པ	remove the name of a debtor	bu lon pa'i ming sub pa
བུ་ལོན་སྤྲོད	repay a debt/ loan	bu lon sprod
བུ་ལོན་སྤྲོད་རྒྱུ	debit	bu lon sprod rgyu
བུ་ལོན་སྤྲོད་པ	repay a debt/ loan	bu lon sprod pa
བུ་ལོན་བྱེད	contract a debt	bu lon byed
བུ་ལོན་བྱེད་པ	contract a debt	bu lon byed pa
བུ་ལོན་མ་གཞལ་བ	not having repaid one's debts	bu lon ma gzhal ba
བུ་ལོན་ཚ་འདེད	lent and owed things bring back paper ces dza drag gi skul lcag gtong ba	bu lon tsha 'ded
བུ་ལོན་ཟུག	get into debt	bu lon zug
བུ་ལོན་ཟུག་པ	get into debt bu lon g.yar - lend/ borrow a loan	bu lon zug pa
བུ་ལོན་ལེན	borrow, take a loan	bu lon len
བུ་ལོན་ལེན་པ	borrow, take a loan	bu lon len pa
བུ་ལོན་སོད་པ	repaid a debt	bu lon sod pa
བུ་ཤིང	child wood	bu shing
བུ་ཤེལ་ཙེ	amber	bu shel tse
བུ་གཤོན་པ	young child	bu gshon pa
བུ་སུ་ཀུ	biological functions (eating, drinking, sleeping, defecation, urination)	bu su ku
བུ་སྲིང	brothers and sisters	bu sring
བུ་སློབ	disciple, son-like disciple; disciples	bu slob
བུ་སློབ་ཡོན་བདག	disciples and patrons	bu slob yon bdag
བུ་གསོ་ཁང	nursery	bu gso khang
བུ་གསོ་བ	rear a child	bu gso ba
བུ་ཧ་ཆུ	a river w its source in mtsho sngon province, arising from SW then cun rdzong, finally flowing into mtsho sngon po, its upper course called the shar dge chu]	bu ha chu
བུག	a hole	bug
བུག་སྒོ	small window	bug sgo
བུག་སྒོ་བཅད་པ	sealed the door	bug sgo bcad pa
བུག་ལྕག	sting	bug lcag
བུག་རྡོལ	pierce/ punch a hole, hole getting pierced/ punched	bug rdol
བུག་པ	hole	bug pa
བུག་པ་ཕྲ་མོ	full of hidden holes	bug pa phra mo
བུག་པ་བྱས	bored holes	bug pa byas
བུག་པ་བྱེད	hole maker, mouse	bug pa byed
བུག་པ་དབྱུང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	1 of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, above a vihara the roof thog snyi ba la khri rkang rnon pas [sharp seat platform legs?] btsugs te and on it having placed weight, punching a hole	bug pa dbyung ba'i ltung byed
བུག་པ་མེད་པ	without orifices	bug pa med pa
བུག་ཞོལ	SA sbugs	bug zhol
བུག་རེག	sensations of sex	bug reg
བུག་སུག	bird's foot-trefoil	bug sug
བུགས་གཅིག	week, 7 days	bugs gcig
བུགས་ལོང	entire carcase	bugs long
བུང་གུ	donkey, ass	bung gu
བུང་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ	the	bung sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub
བུང་ལྕག	sting [bee, wasp]	bung lcag
བུང་ཐལ	harmful insect liking rotten odors, sbrang nag	bung thal
བུང་པ	honey-bees	bung pa
བུང་བ	a bee; bee	bung ba
བུང་བ་སྐྲོད་བྱེད	female bee, chowry to drive away flies	bung ba skrod byed
བུང་བ་ལྟར་ནག	black bee, black stone	bung ba ltar nag
བུང་བ་ནག་པོ	1) black bee; 2) the color of stang zil stone	bung ba nag po
བུང་བ་གནག	black bee	bung ba gnag
བུང་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	queen bee	bung ba'i rgyal po
བུང་བའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	queen bee	bung ba'i rgyal mo
བུང་བའི་དྲ་བ	network of bees bung ba'i tshang zhig lta bu'i rnal 'byor the practice 'like a bee hive broken open,'	bung ba'i dra ba
བུང་བའི་ཚང་ཞིག་པ་སྟར	like a bung bas med tog bcud la ro myang	bung ba'i tshang zhig pa star
བུང་བུ	discus bearer	bung bu
བུང་ཚང	1) swarm/ hive of bees; 2) a lung disease lud pa'i dri ngan kha zhing mdog sngo ba, nang la rnag thig mang ba nya mig lta bu yod pas ming de ltar btags]	bung tshang
བུང་ཞིང	fuel	bung zhing
བུངས	gtos dang rgya khyon, mass, heap, bulk, mass, large amount, heap	bungs
བུངས་བསྐྱེད	[be] of wide extent rgya khyon cher btang ba	bungs bskyed
བུངས་ཆེན	large heap	bungs chen
བུངས་བྱེད	pile up	bungs byed
བུངས་བྱེད་པ	heap one upon another, pile up	bungs byed pa
བུངས་ཚན	rgya khyon gyi stobs, thon zog bungs tshan, khang pa'i bungs tshan	bungs tshan
བུད	imp. of first {'bud pa}; slip; slip (?); expelled; a cloud of dust; to fall out/ to be laid down; stripped	bud
བུད་ཀྱིས་བཏབ	wrapt in dusty mist	bud kyis btab
བུད་སྐྱེད	usury, to profiteer, to gain profit	bud skyed
བུད་གྲོང	empty village	bud grong
བུད་རྒྱག་གཏོང་བ	bump, push	bud rgyag gtong ba
བུད་རྙིང	house field etc empty for a long time	bud rnying
བུད་རྙེད་ཐོབ་གསུམ	expulsion?, acquiring and accomplishment	bud rnyed thob gsum
བུད་བསྙེགས་ཐོབ་གསུམ	casting oneself out, taking, and finding: Cast yourself out from your place among men and take your place among dogs, and you shall find a place among celestial beings. {mi gral nas bud, khyi gral ...	bud bsnyegs thob gsum
བུད་སྟོང	destitute tenants or subjects, family which has been expelled 1801	bud stong
བུད་སྟོང་ཡུལ་གྱར	after houses and buildings 'thor nas, the people scattering to other places	bud stong yul gyar
བུད་སྟོངས	empty houses of people who have left	bud stongs
བུད་ཐོ	account of expenditures	bud tho
བུད་པ	emerging	bud pa
བུད་བུད	bruise	bud bud
བུད་མ་བུད	is it or is it not something	bud ma bud
བུད་མེད	woman, concubine, mistress, women, female	bud med
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐོར	class of women, about women	bud med kyi skor
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་ལྔ	five faults of womankind [according to longd"l lama, collected works, p 1455, these are 1) to think of other persons {skyes pa gzhan la sems pa} 2) to harbor great jealousy for other women {bud med...	bud med kyi skyon lnga
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐྲ	locks of hair of women	bud med kyi skra
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་ན་ཚའི་ཚན་ཁག	division of obstetrics |& gynecology bud med kyi nu phrag la mgo hril le gnyid	bud med kyi na tsha'i tshan khag
ལོག་པ	fall asleep with their head glued to a woman's breasts	log pa
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	womanly expression and beauty bud med kyi phyir du la la tshul khrims	bud med kyi rnam 'gyur
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་དབང་ཆ	women's rights	bud med kyi dbang cha
བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་ས་དམ་པ་ལྔ	the five indispensable levels	bud med kyi sa dam pa lnga
བུད་མེད་ཀྱིས་འཚོ	goat-herd	bud med kyis 'tsho
བུད་མེད་བསྐྱངས	goat-herd	bud med bskyangs
བུད་མེད་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བརྒྱད	the 8 faults of women	bud med gyi skyon brgyad
བུད་མེད་གྲུབ་པ	female saints	bud med grub pa
བུད་མེད་གྲུབ་པ་ཐོབ་པ	female ascetics who wear human bone ornaments	bud med grub pa thob pa
བུད་མེད་དགའ་བྲལ	woman devoid of enjoyment and happiness, barren woman, hermaphrodite of the female sign	bud med dga' bral
བུད་མེད་མགོ་གཙང	guarded by family, dharma and victory banners [unmarried woman]	bud med mgo gtsang
བུད་མེད་མངལ་ལྡན	bud med sbrum can	bud med mngal ldan
བུད་མེད་བརྔོད་པ	seduce a woman	bud med brngod pa
བུད་མེད་ཆུང་ངུ	female child	bud med chung ngu
བུད་མེད་ཆོས་ལྡན	menstruating woman	bud med chos ldan
བུད་མེད་མཆོག	very beautiful woman [syn: rked med ma, kha dog mchog glang chen 'gros, dga' byed ma, dga' ma, sgeg mo, mchog gi lcug ma, mchog ldan ma, 'jigs can, 'dod ldan ma, 'dod ma, sdug gu ma, mig yangs ma, ...	bud med mchog
བུད་མེད་མཆོར་མོ	pretty woman,	bud med mchor mo
སྨརཏ་གཻལཡ	dressed female bud med mnyam chags pa byed pa womanize bud med mnyal 'brel lhan tshang women's association/ union	smart gaily
བུད་མེད་གཏུམ་པོ	aggressive woman of untamed mind [syn: khro byed ma dang, 'jigs byed ma, gtum mo]	bud med gtum po
བུད་མེད་གཏུམ་མོ	fierce frowning fretful woman, fierce woman, amazon, fearful woman, violent hag	bud med gtum mo
བུད་མེད་ལྟ་བུ	womanly bud med mthong na nyon mongs pa med	bud med lta bu
བུད་མེད་དང་ཉལ་བ	lie with a woman bud med dang gnas gcig tu nyal ba'i ltung	bud med dang nyal ba
བུད་མེད་དར་མ	bud med na tshod dam lang tsho gzhon ma [syn: khengs ldan ma, dar bab ma, dregs ldan ma, rdul bcas ma, bar pa myos ma, me tog gsar, rtse dga' ma, lang tsho ma]	bud med dar ma
བུད་མེད་འདོད་ལྡན	any voluptuous or unchaste woman	bud med 'dod ldan
བུད་མེད་འདོད་ལྡན་མ	woman of great passion	bud med 'dod ldan ma
བུད་མེད་རྡུལ	menses	bud med rdul
བུད་མེད་སྡུག་པ	fair woman	bud med sdug pa
བུད་མེད་ན་སོ	marriageable girl	bud med na so
བུད་མེད་ན་སོ་སྒང	full grown woman	bud med na so sgang
བུད་མེད་བྱེད་པ	woman	bud med byed pa
བུད་མེད་བློ་ལྡན	magnanimous woman	bud med blo ldan
བུད་མེད་བློ་ལྡན་མ	noble and generous lady	bud med blo ldan ma
བུད་མེད་སྦྲུམ་པ	pregnant woman	bud med sbrum pa
བུད་མེད་སྦྲུམ་མ	pregnant woman	bud med sbrum ma
བུད་མེད་སྨད་འཆལ	whore, harlot	bud med smad 'chal
བུད་མེད་སྨད་འཆལ་བྱེད་པ	woman that has lost her purity	bud med smad 'chal byed pa
བུད་མེད་ཚད་མ	one who is bullied by his wife	bud med tshad ma
བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་པ	women's association/ union	bud med tshogs pa
བུད་མེད་གཞན་ལ་ཕྲག་དོག་ཆེ	to harbor great jealousy for other women	bud med gzhan la phrag dog che
བུད་མེད་ཟླ་མཚན་ཅན	menstruating woman	bud med zla mtshan can
བུད་མེད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	(stri-ratnam jewel of queens	bud med rin po che
བུད་མེད་ལ་བགྲོད་པ	to lie with a woman	bud med la bgrod pa
བུད་མེད་ལ་ཆགས་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	philander	bud med la chags pa skyes pa
བུད་མེད་ལ་ཆོས་སྟོན་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of teaching the dharma to women [one of the ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu, in a place without another man, teaching more than five or six words of dharma to women]	bud med la chos ston pa'i ltung byed
བུད་མེད་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	cohabit with a woman	bud med la spyod pa
བུད་མེད་ལ་སོགས	sex 1802	bud med la sogs
བུད་མེད་ལོག་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	adulterous woman	bud med log par spyod pa
བུད་མེད་ཤེས་ལྡན་མ	woman of understanding [syn: mkhas ma, rnam mkhas ma, blo ldan ma, shes ldan ma]	bud med shes ldan ma
བུད་རྫས	firewood	bud rdzas
བུད་ཞིང	firewood	bud zhing
བུད་ཤིང	1) fire-wood, fuel; 2) yam shing, sticks burned in a fire puja	bud shing
བུད་ཤིང་བཅུ་པ	torch, light	bud shing bcu pa
བུད་ཤིང་ཚིག་པ	burn fuel	bud shing tshig pa
བུད་ཤིང་ཟད་པའི་མེ	a fire that has exhausted its fuel	bud shing zad pa'i me
བུད་ཤིང་བཤག་པ	split or chop wood	bud shing bshag pa
བུད་དྷ	SA sangs rgyas	bud dha
བུད་དྷ་ཀྲོ་ཏི་ཤཱ་རི	Buddhakrodhiswari; consort of Buddha Heruka	bud dha kro ti shA ri
བུད་དྷ་ན་ཀི	Buddha Naki	bud dha na ki
བུད་དྷ་བ་ན	forest east of vajrasana	bud dha ba na
བུད་དྷ་རིགས	Tathagata. or buddha-family	bud dha rigs
བུན	debt [= bu lon], mist, vanish debtor's account book, bond, a loan, lend	bun
བུན་སྐྱེད	1) debt + interest; 2) interest on a debt/ loan; 3) vase visualization	bun skyed
བུན་སྐྱེད་གཏོང་བ་པོ	creditor	bun skyed gtong ba po
བུན་སྐྱོད	stretched and hanging	bun skyod
བུན་དངུལ	money for loans	bun dngul
བུན་ཆད	money short on a payment	bun chad
བུན་གཏོང	lend money on interest	bun gtong
བུན་ཐོ	debtor's account book, bond, obligation	bun tho
བུན་བདག	money lender, banker	bun bdag
བུན་འདེད	bu lon gyi dngos po bsnyegs te len pa, sprod dmigs zhan la bun 'ded mang ba snga dus kyi bun len dbul phongs kyi snang tshul la ltos	bun 'ded
བུན་ནེ	relaxed, free and easy, vanish, dissolve, disappear (like mist	bun ne
བུན་ནེ་བ	unconstrained	bun ne ba
བུན་ནེ་ཤིགས་སེ	free & relaxed	bun ne shigs se
བུན་ནེར་སོང	vanished	bun ner song
བུན་པ་བཟང་པོ	the good vase, the bulge	bun pa bzang po
བུན་སྤྲོད་ལེན་བྱ་རྒྱུའི་དངུལ	money for loans	bun sprod len bya rgyu'i dngul
བུན་བུན	fog, wisps and billows, hazy, vague, insubstantial, evanescent, ephemeral, shimmering, vanishing like mist, disappear, vanish, dissolve, languid, sluggish rising/ diffusing/ swirling [boiling water...	bun bun
བུན་འབབ་ངོ་སྐྱེད	bun 'bor ma skyed	bun 'bab ngo skyed
བུན་འབྲེལ	bun bdag dang bun len gyi 'brel ba, sprad nas 'phrod rgyu med pa'i bun 'brel	bun 'brel
བུན་ཛན་ཏི	very handsome	bun dzan ti
བུན་འཛིན	bu lon blangs pa'i 'dzin	bun 'dzin
བུན་རྫན་ཏི	very handsome	bun rdzan ti
བུན་ཡིག	loan contract document	bun yig
བུན་རེ	small matter	bun re
བུན་ལེན་གཏོང	give a loan	bun len gtong
བུན་ལེན་པ	debtor, borrow, take a loan	bun len pa
བུན་ལོང	whirling up and down, boiling water	bun long
བུན་ལོང་ངེ	swirling, hazy, in a vaselike manner [in vase breathing Belly is like a vase, pranas are held down and up]	bun long nge
བུན་ལོང་དུ་བྱེད་པ	swirling together	bun long du byed pa
བུན་ལོབ	some large number	bun lob
བུན་གསོགས	get silted up, accumulated	bun gsogs
བུན་གསོགས་ཐེབས	get accumulated/ deposited	bun gsogs thebs
བུབ	overthrown, SA 'bub pa	bub
བུབ་ཀ	defeat	bub ka
བུབ་ཁ	defeat	bub kha
བུབ་ཆང	cymbals	bub chang
བུབ་ཆེན	sbub chal - rol mo - big cymbals	bub chen
བུབ་ཐལ	gyong gud che drags pa'am ha log pa, bubs, ras snam sogs yug ril po'am, cha tshang	bub thal
བུབ་པ	bolt of cloth	bub pa
བུབ་རིལ	whole body (of an insect for example)	bub ril
བུབས	uncut piece of cloth, all of something, whole/ entire thing, turn upside down!	bubs
བུབས་ཚང	whole bolt/ piece of cloth, all of something, the whole thing	bubs tshang
བུབས་རིལ	whole, entire	bubs ril
བུབས་རིལ་བུས	whole body	bubs ril bus
བུབས་རིལ་ལུས	whole body	bubs ril lus
བུབས་ལོང	whole bolt/ piece of cloth, all of something, the whole thing	bubs long
བུམ	vase	bum
བུམ་དཀྱིལ	vase mandala	bum dkyil
བུམ་སྐུ	sugatagarbha, vase body	bum sku
བུམ་སྐྱེད	imagining a vase-like body	bum skyed
བུམ་སྐྱེས	the star ri byi	bum skyes
བུམ་བསྐྱེད	vase visualization/ practice [vase lhar bskyed pa &, gzungs thag rdo rjes bum lha'i rgyud bskul ba, dung chos kyi chu mchod yon du phul bas the deities dissolve into the nature of the great bliss e...	bum bskyed
བུམ་ཁེབས	vase cover	bum khebs
བུམ་ཁྱིམ	the house/ Mansion of Aquarius	bum khyim
བུམ་མཁན	potter 1803	bum mkhan
བུམ་སྒྲུབ	vase consecration; consecration of the vase, vase consecration	bum sgrub
བུམ་བརྒྱ་སྐྱེས	gold	bum brgya skyes
བུམ་ཅན	kumbhaka, tree, vase-like manner , hold in kumbhaka	bum can
བུམ་ཅན་གྱི་རླུང་སྦྱོར	vase breath	bum can gyi rlung sbyor
བུམ་ཅན་སྦྱོར་བ་བཞི་ལྡན	vase breathing possessing the four unions	bum can sbyor ba bzhi ldan
བུམ་ཅན་རླུང་གི་སྦྱོར་བ་བྱས་པ	holding prana in the vase	bum can rlung gi sbyor ba byas pa
བུམ་ཆུ	water from the vase	bum chu
བུམ་ཆུང	small water pot	bum chung
བུམ་ལྟར་བསྐྱིལ	to hold the air like a vase	bum ltar bskyil
བུམ་དར	silk tie on the vase	bum dar
བུམ་གདན	the vase of the vase	bum gdan
བུམ་ལྡན	species of tree	bum ldan
བུམ་ནང	inside a vase	bum nang
བུམ་ནང་མར་མེ	lamp inside a vase	bum nang mar me
བུམ་ནང་མར་མེ་བཞིན	like a butter lamp in a vase [meaning. brightness without disturbance	bum nang mar me bzhin
བུམ་རྣ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	bum rna
བུམ་པ	1 vase [vessel w kha gyer ba ??? and widened belly]; 2) chu 'khor dang lag mchig gi 'bru blug khung, ??? bottle, flask, vase, jug, pot, bulge (of a stupa	bum pa
བུམ་པ་སྐྱེས	a fish born in a water pot	bum pa skyes
བུམ་པ་གང་པྱོའི་ཚུལ	as when 1 fills a vase to the brim	bum pa gang pyo'i tshul
བུམ་པ་གང་བྱོ	vase filled to the brim [example of filling a student w 1's good qualities]	bum pa gang byo
བུམ་པ་གང་བྱོའི་ཚུལ	as when one fills a vase to the brim	bum pa gang byo'i tshul
བུམ་པ་གང་བྱོའི་ཚུལ་དུ	as if filling a vase to the brim	bum pa gang byo'i tshul du
བུམ་པ་ལྔ	the five vases [in rituals), {'jug sgo'i bum pa}, {gtso bo'i rnam rgyal}, {lha so so'i lha bum}, {las bum}, {mchod pa'i gar bum}	bum pa lnga
བུམ་པ་ཅན	a lotus, premna spinosa, kumbhaka retention	bum pa can
བུམ་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	pot-possessing yoga	bum pa can gyi rnal 'byor
བུམ་པ་བཅུད་ལྡན	the vase with elixir	bum pa bcud ldan
བུམ་པ་ཉེར་ལྔའི་བཅུད་ལྡན	vase containing the twenty-five essences]	bum pa nyer lnga'i bcud ldan
བུམ་པ་གཉིས	the two vases {las bum} {tshogs bum}	bum pa gnyis
བུམ་པ་སྟ་གོན	vase prelude/ preparation	bum pa sta gon
བུམ་པ་དྲ་བའི་སྣོད་ཞིག	jug	bum pa dra ba'i snod zhig
བུམ་པ་བཟང་པོ	excellent vase, wishing vase	bum pa bzang po
ལིཀེ་ཝིཤ	granting jewel), grants amrita like abhisheka vase, has spout from which to pour]	like wish
བུམ་པའི་སྐུ	vase-like body, SA bum sku	bum pa'i sku
བུམ་པའི་ཁྱིམ	house of aquarius [1st? house in the zodiac) the house of the vase]	bum pa'i khyim
བུམ་པའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	SA zo chun khyud	bum pa'i 'khrul 'khor
བུམ་པའི་མགུལ་ཅན	neck	bum pa'i mgul can
བུམ་པའི་ཆུ་སྦྲེང་བ	shake the water in a bottle	bum pa'i chu sbreng ba
བུམ་པའི་བདུད་རྩི་ཁོལ	boil the amrita in the vase	bum pa'i bdud rtsi khol
བུམ་པའི་ལྡོག་པ	the characteristic of a vase	bum pa'i ldog pa
བུམ་པའི་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟར་གྲོལ་བ	spacelike liberation of the vase/ elimination of the vase	bum pa'i nam mkha' ltar grol ba
བུམ་པའི་དབང	vase empowerment, SA bum dbang	bum pa'i dbang
བུམ་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	vase-breathing	bum pa'i sbyor ba
བུམ་པའི་རྫས་བདུན	the 7 substances of the vase	bum pa'i rdzas bdun
བུམ་པས་སྒྲོལ	pitcher, back of the neck	bum pas sgrol
བུམ་བུ	small water pot	bum bu
བུམ་དབང	vase empowerment {bum pa'i dbang}	bum dbang
བུམ་དབང་གི་ཆས་བཅུ	the 7 articles of the vase abhisheka	bum dbang gi chas bcu
བུམ་དབང་གི་སྣང་བ་འདའ་ཀ་མ	the decease in which appearances have been transformed according to the vase empowerment (Khetsun zangpo	bum dbang gi snang ba 'da' ka ma
བུམ་དབང་བཅུ་གཅིག	[water, crown, vajra, bell, name: slob ma'i dbang lnga &, vajra master abhisheka rdo rje slob dpon gyi dbang mantra, prophesy and confirmation lung bstan dang dbugs dbyung gnyis gcig tu mdzad pa'i ...	bum dbang bcu gcig
བུམ་ཚགས་གཅེའུ་ཅན	sonorous	bum tshags gce'u can
བུམ་རྫ	in drinking chang sbang glum 'tshod snod kyi rdza ma	bum rdza
བུམ་རྫས	25 sacred objects and medicines in water pot	bum rdzas
བུམ་རྫས་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 vase substances	bum rdzas nyer lnga
སུཆ་ཨས་ཐེ་རོཨོཏ་ཨོཕ༹་སྭེཨེཏ	flag and the blue lotus. Five kinds of grain, such as barley, wheat and white sesame. Five valuables, which can be either gold, silver, sapphire, ruby and pearl, or if using metals only, gold, silv...	such as the root of sweet
བུམ་བཟང	zhal gyi bum bzang - the perfect vase of your throat	bum bzang
བུམ་བཟླས	vase recitation	bum bzlas
བུམ་རིལ	See {thod pa bum ril}	bum ril
བུམ་ལྷ	vase deities	bum lha
བུའི་མནའ་མ	daughter-in-law	bu'i mna' ma
བུའི་འོད་གསལ	Child luminosity, son clear light. the Son Clear Light	bu'i 'od gsal
བུའི་འོད་གསལ་གཉིས	two child luminosities	bu'i 'od gsal gnyis
བུར	upright bolt or fastening to a door	bur
བུར་དཀར	rock-sugar	bur dkar
བུར་ཆང	sugar chang, sweet wine [med.]	bur chang
བུར་ཏིང	kind of bell or gong in temples	bur ting
བུར་རྟིང	bell, gong	bur rting
བུར་ལྟང	balls of molasses packed in goat skin	bur ltang
བུར་ཐུང་ཁུགས	suddenly	bur thung khugs
བུར་ཐུད	pastry or cakes made of dried milk & molasses & butter	bur thud
བུར་བུར	convex	bur bur
བུར་ཙེ	various species of Eurotia used as fuel	bur tse
བུར་ཚོང	sugar traders	bur tshong
བུར་ཤིང	sugar cane	bur shing
བུར་ཤིང་དྲི	bull's eye-flower, medicinal root	bur shing dri
བུལ	ja khu 'don byed kyi bul tog, offer, perform, soda, tardy, taking a long time	bul
བུལ་ཁུག	pouch containing soda	bul khug
བུལ་འགྲོ	slow goer, tortoise	bul 'gro
བུལ་འགྲོས	slow pace	bul 'gros
བུལ་ཆུ	slow flowing water	bul chu
བུལ་ཏོག	soda, white powder, slow, dilatory, lazy, valley, ravine, kind of soda obtained from the northern deserts of tibet	bul tog
བུལ་ཏོག་བསྲེགས་མ	caustic soda	bul tog bsregs ma
བུལ་པོ	slow, heavy, tardy	bul po
བུལ་བ	slow	bul ba
བུལ་བུལ	very slowly	bul bul
བུལ་གཙང	soda ash	bul gtsang
བུལ་མཚོ	lake containing soda	bul mtsho
བུལ་རན་པ	neither very quick nor slow in walking	bul ran pa
བུལ་ཧ་རི	Russian leather, jufts	bul ha ri
བུས	[p {'bud} ] removed remove! =gtong ba! ['bud pa!] dispense with, get ousted/ expelled/ dropped, come off, get unstrung, burn, throw on a fire, made fire sounded [horn etc] expelled, stripped, laid ...	bus
བུས་པ	pf. of second {'bud pa}	bus pa
བུས་པར་བྱས་ཏེ་སྦྱར་བར་བྱ	what is removed should be joined	bus par byas te sbyar bar bya
བུས་མོ	knee	bus mo
བུས་མོ་གོང་མན	higher than the knee	bus mo gong man
བུས་མོ་བཙུགས་པ	kneel	bus mo btsugs pa
བེ	oak	be
བེ་ཀར	Pekar	be kar
བེ་ཁྱི	forest animal, weasel, very agile, w tail hair long and thick	be khyi
བེ་ཁྲག	sap of the be do tree	be khrag
བེ་གེ	SA beg ge, measles	be ge
བེ་ཅི	little boy, lad, lass	be ci
བེ་ཅོན	staff	be con
བེ་ཅོན་ལྔང་ནག་ཝའི་མགོ	danda club dark green, fox- headed deity	be con lngang nag wa'i mgo
བེ་ཅོན་འཆང	1) hold a danda club; 2) danda/ club holder; 3) Vishnu; 4) king of death	be con 'chang
བེ་ཅོན་ལྗང་ནག་ཝའི་མགོ	Danda, club, dark green, fox-headed	be con ljang nag wa'i mgo
བེ་ཅོན་ཝ་གདོང	wolf-headed Danda, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	be con wa gdong
བེ་ཆོན	danda, club	be chon
བེ་ལྗང	mystic	be ljang
བེ་ལྗང་རེ་རལ	{be ljang re ral} a kind of re ral [ldum bu med. herb] [growing next to be trees, by its power sha dug dang, sbyar dug etc. dug diseases are helped	be ljang re ral
བེ་ཏ	be ta, med. evergreen tree with edible fruit [syn: ta la'i rgyal po dang, 1805 'bras bu rtag 'bras bu'i phung po, gshol ldan, sa 'tsho 'dab.]	be ta
བེ་ཏ་ལི	the protectress Vaitali/ Vetali	be ta li
བེ་ཏ་ལི་ནག་མོ	black Vetali	be ta li nag mo
བེ་ཏའི་ཤིང	cocoa-nut tree	be ta'i shing
བེ་ཏུ	1) coconut; 2) Bedar, birthplace of Nagarjuna	be tu
བེ་ཏུར	sulphate of copper	be tur
བེ་ཏོ	calf	be to
བེ་བཏབ་པ་ལྷར	like a peg driven into solid ground	be btab pa lhar
བE་དུ་རྱ	lapis lazuli	bE du rya
བE་ཌཱུ་རྱ་སེར་པོ	bE DUr ser po - a history of dga' ldan (dge lugs pa sect); by {sde srid sangs rgyas rgya mtsho} (1653-1705)	bE DU rya ser po
བE་དུར	lapis lazuli	bE dur
བE་དུར་དཀར་པོ	white lapis	bE dur dkar po
བE་དུར་སྔོན་པོ	blue lapis	bE dur sngon po
བE་དུར་ཡ	lapis lazuli. The Sanskrit vaidurya means 'utterly bright.'	bE dur ya
བE་དུར་ཡ་རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་སྔོ་བ	naturally blue lapis	bE dur ya rang bzhin gyis sngo ba
བE་ཌཱུར་སེར་པོ	a history of dga' ldan (dge lugs pa sect); by {sde srid sangs rgyas rgya mtsho} (1653-1705)	bE DUr ser po
བེ་དོ	oak[-tree]	be do
བེ་མདུང	spear or javelin made of oak wood	be mdung
བེ་རྡོ	oak[-tree]	be rdo
བེ་ནོ	[arch] grasp	be no
བེ་སྣ་ལག་ཆེན	demon of the naga class	be sna lag chen
བེ་སྣབས	1) mucus	be snabs
བེ་ཕུར	oak stake/ peg	be phur
བེ་བུམ	writing, scripture, book	be bum
བེ་བུར་བེ་བུམ	small notebook	be bur be bum
བེ་བེ	calf	be be
བེ་འབུམ	writing, scripture, book	be 'bum
བེ་འབྲས	fruit of the be nag tree	be 'bras
བེ་མུའུ	fritillary bulb	be mu'u
བེ་མོ	cow-calf	be mo
བེ་ཙོན	danda, club	be tson
བེ་རྩེ་འདོད་ཡོན་རྫོང	Betsey Doyen Dzong, in Latö?	be rtse 'dod yon rdzong
བེ་རྫི	SA skar ma snar ma, 1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	be rdzi
བེ་ཞིང	oath	be zhing
བེ་ཟ	interest	be za
བེ་ཟོབ་བེ	keeping things carelessly	be zob be
བེ་ར	za phrug[s] langs pa'i thor nad cig ???	be ra
བེ་རག	fillet	be rag
བེ་རི	district of chamdo	be ri
བེ་རི་དོན་ཡོ	petty chief who favored karmapa school	be ri don yo
བེ་རེག	a wheat pastry cooked in oil nang rdzas can [the name of the pastry or the filling?]	be reg
བE་རོ	Abbr. of {lo tsa ba bE ro tsa na}	bE ro
བE་རོ་ཙ་ན	Vairochana	bE ro tsa na
བེ་རོ་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Vairochana the translator	be ro lo tsa ba
བE་རོའི་སྙིང་ཏིག	[Dzogchen teachings of] Nyingtig of Vairochana	bE ro'i snying tig
བE་རོའི་འདྲ་འབག་ཆེན་མོ	{'dra 'bag chen mo} the biography of Vairochana, the locchava of {pa gor} in 39 chapters	bE ro'i 'dra 'bag chen mo
བེ་ལེ་ཀ	surgical instrument	be le ka
བེ་ལོ	kind of tree	be lo
བེ་ལོག	great-grandfather	be log
བེ་ཤ་ཁ	[Skt] 4th month	be sha kha
བེ་ཤིང	oak-tree	be shing
བེ་ས་ར་ཀ	species of very small insects	be sa ra ka
བེ་སུ་བིའོ	Mount Vesuvio in Italy	be su bi'o
བེག་གེ	= sib bu, measles	beg ge
བེག་ཙེ	a deity	beg tse
བེང	smaller beams of a house which support the roof, stick, cudgel, club	beng
བེང་སྒོ་གཉིས་པ	club w two "gates" ??	beng sgo gnyis pa
བེང་ཆེན	big club	beng chen
བེང་དབྱུག	large club	beng dbyug
བེད	dearness, advantage	bed
བེད་གཅོད	1) [be] exploit[ed]; 2) use, employ; 3) apply, utilize	bed gcod
བེད་བཅད	usefulness/ advantage	bed bcad
བེད་ཆོད	useful	bed chod
བེད་ཆོད་པ	useful [bed bcad nas chod pa ste,, , lag cha gcig legs bcos byas nas mkho chas mang po'i bed chod song, nad gzhi dang mi 'phrod pa'i sman mang po btang yang drag skyed kyi bed ma chod]	bed chod pa
བེད་ཆོད་པོ	useful	bed chod po
བེད་པིར	outlining brush	bed pir
བེད་སྤྱོད	1) [be] exploit[ed]; 2) use[fulness], employ, apply, utilize [ation]	bed spyod
བེད་སྤྱོད་ཆག་པོ	useful, practical	bed spyod chag po
བེད་སྤྱོད་གཏོང	1) [be] exploit[ed]; 2) use, employ, apply, utilize	bed spyod gtong
བེད་སྤྱོད་གཏོང་བ	utilize	bed spyod gtong ba
བེད་སྤྱོད་པ	use, utilize, apply	bed spyod pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་འཕེར་བ	be suitable for use [as]	bed spyod 'pher ba
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	1) [be] exploit[ed]; 2) use, employ, apply, utilize	bed spyod byed
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་མཁན	consumer 1806	bed spyod byed mkhan
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་སྟངས	usage	bed spyod byed stangs
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་ཐུབ་པ	able to use	bed spyod byed thub pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་པ	1) [be] exploit[ed]; 2) use, employ, apply, utilize	bed spyod byed pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་ཚད	utilization rate	bed spyod byed tshad
བེད་སྤྱོད་མ་ཕོག་པ	virgin	bed spyod ma phog pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་མེད་པ	defunct, obsolete, useless	bed spyod med pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་མེད་པའི་ས་ཆ	arid	bed spyod med pa'i sa cha
བེད་སྤྱོད་ཚ་པོ	useful	bed spyod tsha po
བེད་སྤྱོད་ཡོད་པ	relevant	bed spyod yod pa
བེད་སྤྱོད་ལོག་པ་གཏོང་བ	misuse	bed spyod log pa gtong ba
བེད་མ་ཆོད	proved of no use, no advantage	bed ma chod
བེད་མེད	decrepid, worthless	bed med
བེད་མེད་ཀྱི་ཐོན་རྫས	useless products	bed med kyi thon rdzas
བེད་མེད་རྒྱུ་ཆ	waste materials	bed med rgyu cha
བེད་མེད་རྒྱུ་རོ	trash	bed med rgyu ro
བེད་མེད་ཟོག་རོ	waste materials, scrap	bed med zog ro
བེན	large pitcher	ben
བེན་ཆང	chang poured into a ben vessel	ben chang
བེན་ཐུལ	crescent, half circle	ben thul
བེན་པར་གྲུབ་པ	truly established	ben par grub pa
བེན་པར་འཛིན	hold to be true[ly existing], believe in	ben par 'dzin
བེན་པར་ཡོད་པ	true existence	ben par yod pa
བེམ	ben ???	bem
བེམ་ཆག	list of contents	bem chag
བེམ་ཏོལ	bel rdol ???	bem tol
བེམ་སྟོང	impotent, nothingness, nihilistic, emptiness, inanimate substance	bem stong
བེམ་སྟོང་པ	blank emptiness [vacuous nothingness, void.]	bem stong pa
བེམ་ལྡེམ	allegory applied to inanimate beings	bem ldem
བེམ་པོ	dead matter, physical organ, matter, external, inanimates, old, box, SA bem	bem po
བེམ་པོ་རྟུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་མེད	partless material atoms	bem po rtul phran cha med
བེམ་པོ་ལྟར་ལྐུག	stupid, senseless like a log of wood or physical matter	bem po ltar lkug
བེམ་པོ་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་མེད	the material indivisible particle	bem po rdul phran cha med
བེམ་པོ་ཞལ་གྲིལ	false empty abusive talk by someone w/o good qualities	bem po zhal gril
བེམ་པོའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of matter, material nature	bem po'i rang bzhin
བེམ་པོའི་རླུང	the winds of the body	bem po'i rlung
བེམ་པོའི་སྲོག་འཛིན་པའི་རླུང	the wind	bem po'i srog 'dzin pa'i rlung
ཨུཕོལྡིང་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	force of the body	upholding the life
བེམ་རྩེག	'brum bu dkar po'i ming gi rnam grangs shig	bem rtseg
བེམ་ཚོད	riddle about inanimate objects	bem tshod
བེམ་རིག	matter/ body and mind/ awareness	bem rig
བེམ་རིག་གཉིས	both matter and mind	bem rig gnyis
བེམ་རིག་བྲལ་བ	without body and soul	bem rig bral ba
བེམ་རིག་འབྲལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the pain of body and mind separating	bem rig 'bral ba'i sdug bsngal
བེམ་ཤེས	matter and consciousness	bem shes
བེམ་ཤེས་ལྡན་མིན	matter, mind and	bem shes ldan min
བེམ་ཤེས་ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད	matter, consciousness, and non- associated compositional factors	bem shes ldan min 'du byed
བེམ་ཤེས་ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད་གསུམ	matter, consciousness and non-associated compositional factors	bem shes ldan min 'du byed gsum
བེམ་ཧྲུལ	old torn clothes	bem hrul
བེམས	(not in das)	bems
བེམས་པོ	1) inanimate mindless, lifeless things; 2) thick bed clothes built up from many patches; 3) existing as particles; 4) Material substance; 5) a pestilential disease; 7) physical body	bems po
བེམས་པོ་ཤེས་པ	awareness of material things	bems po shes pa
བེམས་པོའི་རྫས	'byung ba'i rdul la sogs pa	bems po'i rdzas
བེའུ	calf	be'u
བེའུ་ཁང	cross between 'bri [female of yak] and bull	be'u khang
བེའུ་འཁྲི	carry a calf, be pregnant [cow]	be'u 'khri
བེའུ་གོག	calf	be'u gog
བེའུ་ཅན	medicinal fruit	be'u can
བེའུ་ལྗང་འདྲིད	calf deceived by blue green [example of deception	be'u ljang 'drid
བེའུ་དྭ	calf whose mother has died	be'u dwa
བེའུ་གདང	be'u rdang ??	be'u gdang
བེའུ་རྡང	calves be'u rnams bstar bsgrigs [tie? te 'dogs sa'i thag pa.	be'u rdang
བེའུ་ལྡག	1) licking calf w the tongue; 2) in the mouth a kind of rma shu'i [scar? = shul]	be'u ldag
བེའུ་ཕྲུག	calf	be'u phrug
བེའུ་བུམ	1) little pithy volume of many oral instructions; 2) calf's pot; 3) cows teat; 4) scripture; 5) spiritual nourisher	be'u bum
བེའུ་བུམ་ཁྲ་བོ	{be'u bum khra bo, variegated scripture [Kadampa 'i dge bshes glang thang pas dmigs pa rnams sa bcad brgyad du mdzad pa'i blo sbyong tshig brgyad ma la zer bar grags shing, sha'o sgang pa'i blo sby...	be'u bum khra bo
བེའུ་བུམ་སྔོན་པོ	{be'u bum sngon po} * blue scripture	be'u bum sngon po
བེའུ་ཚང	cross between 'bri [female of yak] and bull	be'u tshang
བེའུ་རས	fine linen	be'u ras
བེར	a brocade cloak; cloak; brocade material; robe, cape. {khri ber} throne cloak. {zab ber} brocade robe	ber
བེར་ཀ	branch	ber ka
བེར་ཀ་རྒྱག	hit w stick/ staff/ club	ber ka rgyag
བེར་ཀ་ཞུ	hit w stick/ staff/ club	ber ka zhu
བེར་བསྐྱིལ	a knot (in the nadi)	ber bskyil
བེར་ག	staff	ber ga
བེར་གྱོད	wear a fine robe	ber gyod
བེར་རྒྱུག	baton	ber rgyug
བེར་ཅན	sharp, pungent, keen	ber can
བེར་ལྕག	usable both as a staff and horsewhip ber rgyug w whip	ber lcag
བེར་ཆེན	big robe, gown	ber chen
བེར་གཉིས	2 sacerdotal cloaks	ber gnyis
བེར་ཐུལ	gown of a priest, sacerdotal cloak without sleeves, fur cloak	ber thul
བེར་དོ	hardwood tree [= be rdo, be lo.]	ber do
བེར་འདུང	, {phyam} brocade cloak;	ber 'dung
བེར་ནག	black cloak worn by mantrikas	ber nag
བེར་ནག་ཅན	a deity	ber nag can
བེར་ཕྱམ	brocade cloak	ber phyam
བེར་འབྲུ	fruit of the ber do tree	ber 'bru
བེར་མ	branch	ber ma
བེར་མ་རྒྱག	hit w stick/ staff/ club	ber ma rgyag
བེར་མ་ལྕག	usable both as a staff and horsewhip ber rgyug w whip	ber ma lcag
བེར་མ་ཞུ	hit w stick/ staff/ club	ber ma zhu
བེར་ཟླམ	phyam tse'am ??? zla gam cloak	ber zlam
བེར་ལོ	ber do leaf	ber lo
བེར་ཤ	mushroom growing in ber do groves	ber sha
བེར་ཤིང་གི་ལྤག་པ	cork	ber shing gi lpag pa
བེར་གཤོལ	plow made of ber do hardwood	ber gshol
བེར་སེར་ཅན	aquatic grass	ber ser can
བེར་སོལ	ber do charcoal [ash?]	ber sol
བེལ	1) calf; 2) leather bag	bel
བེལ་རྡོལ	thumb and gung mo gnyis sbyar ba'i shugs kyis gtogs pa'i sgra ???	bel rdol
བེལ་སྣབས	1 phlegm vomiting; 2) me rdo legs pa 'od can zhig ??; 3) kin of mineral medicine	bel snabs
བེལ་ལྤགས	calf-skin	bel lpags
བེས	cheek	bes
བོ་འགྱེལ	clumsiness	bo 'gyel
བོ་འགྱེལ་མེད་པ	without clumsiness	bo 'gyel med pa
བོ་རྒྱས	a man	bo rgyas
བོ་སྒྱེལ	1) water in a vessel and; 2) roll/ turn over [vessel]	bo sgyel
བོ་ཏོག་པ	ankle, ankle bone	bo tog pa
བོ་དེ་ཉལ་བ	sleep well	bo de nyal ba
བོ་དེ་ཙེ	(CH) bodhi seed [fruit pit suitable for mala beads]	bo de tse
བོ་དོང	do dong	bo dong
བོ་དོང་པ	Podongpa [doctrine holder]	bo dong pa
བོ་དོང་པན་ཆེན	the great pandit Podongpa [= {phyogs las rnam rgyal}, {'jigs med grags pa}, {chos kyi rgyal mtshan}. B in the 6th wood rabbit year. D in the 8th iron sheep year. bo dong ae'i bshad grva las thon pa...	bo dong pan chen
བོ་དོང་ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	celebrated lama of tibet	bo dong phyogs las rnam rgyal
བོ་རྡོ	1) ball/ lump of earth; 2) rdog pa [step?]	bo rdo
བོ་རྡོག	sole of a shoe kyi mgo phyogs kyi rdog pa	bo rdog
བོ་བ	[liable to] fall	bo ba
བེ༹སསེལ་བེཅཽསེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོབེ༹ར	filling	vessel because of over
བོ་བ་མྱོང	have tasted	bo ba myong
བོ་བོ	grand-dad, grandfather	bo bo
བོ་ཙུག	Botsuk, in Domey	bo tsug
བོ་ལོ	ball	bo lo
བོ་ཤོག་ཐུ	province in mongolia	bo shog thu
བོ་དྷི	wisdom, the Indian fig-tree, white narcissus. Syn {byang chub}	bo dhi
ཨཱིནདིཨན་ཕི༹ག	tree; 3) white narcissus	Indian fig
བོ་དྷི་ཙེ	bodhi seed	bo dhi tse
བོ་དྷི་ཙེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	bodhi seed rosary	bo dhi tse'i phreng ba
བོ་དྷི་རྩི	rosary used to count recitations	bo dhi rtsi
བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹	(SK; 1) bodhisattva; 2) Shantarakshita {zhi ba 'tsho}	bo dhi sa tva
བོ་དྷེ་དར་མོ་ཏ་ར	see {slob dpon dhar mo ta}	bo dhe dar mo ta ra
བོག	dislocated, SA 'bog pa	bog
བོག་ཀྱང་འདོན	progress	bog kyang 'don
བོག་ཆོལ	Syn {bab chol} ?	bog chol
བོག་ཏོ	mongolian for prince or chief, lord, sir	bog to
བོག་ཏོ་མུ་ཏན	prince of mongolia	bog to mu tan
བོག་དན	[= dgu bog], mdel grangs dgu 'gro ba'i gun	bog dan
བོག་འདོན	enhanced, perfecting	bog 'don
བོག་པ	intr. pf. of {'bog pa}	bog pa
བོག་འབྱིན	perfecting	bog 'byin
བོག་མ	lease	bog ma
བོག་ར	roof	bog ra
བོག་རྭ	deer horn w velvet [= khrag rwa]	bog rwa
བོག་རི	SA bog te, ba gam	bog ri
བོག་རེ	[arch] ba gam	bog re
བོགས	profit, advantage, gain [material or mental]	bogs
བོགས་སྐྱེད	produce benefit, rent and interest 1808	bogs skyed
བོགས་ཁྲལ	royalty	bogs khral
བོགས་གྱར	lend out the profit	bogs gyar
བོགས་དངུལ	profit, rent and lease money	bogs dngul
བོགས་ཆག	rent/ lease fee reduction	bogs chag
བོགས་ཆག་སྐྱེད་ཆག	rent and interest reduction	bogs chag skyed chag
བོགས་ཆག་གཏོང	reduce rent/ lease fee	bogs chag gtong
བོགས་ཆོད	the level of heightened mind chod pa [cut off? cut through to?	bogs chod
བོགས་གཏོང	fields and grassland	bogs gtong
བོགས་ཐོན	improve[ment], profit, enhance, increase, further heighten, set off to advantage, gain benefit, strengthen, utilize	bogs thon
བོགས་ཐོན་པ	have gained progress, will bring progress	bogs thon pa
བོགས་ཐོན་པ་བྱུང	{kho rang gi lta sgom bogs thon pa byung} helped his view and meditation to progress	bogs thon pa byung
བོགས་ཐོན་ཡོངས	will be enhanced	bogs thon yongs
བོགས་འཐོན	1) improve[ment], increase; 2) gain benefit, profit; 3) utilize (/ [set off to advantage, enhance, strengthen, heighten]	bogs 'thon
བོགས་འདོན	extract maximal benefit, to make progress, enhancement, enhancement	bogs 'don
བོགས་འདོན་པ	to enhance, profit, improve, enhance, increase, further heighten, set off to advantage, gain benefit, strengthen, utilize; bring forth enhancement, intensify, heighten, deepen	bogs 'don pa
བོགས་པ་མ་ཡིན	not be profitable	bogs pa ma yin
བོགས་དབུང་བ	increase	bogs dbung ba
བོགས་དབྱུང	progress in practice	bogs dbyung
བོགས་དབྱུང་བ	to progress in practice, support, enrich; have a supportive and enriching effect; enrichment, increasing	bogs dbyung ba
བོགས་འབྱིན	to gain	bogs 'byin
བོགས་འབྱིན་པ	to have a supportive and enriching effect; to support/ enrich	bogs 'byin pa
བོགས་འབྱུང	find enhancement	bogs 'byung
བོགས་མ	1) profit; 2) power; 3) rental/ lease fee, renting, leasing	bogs ma
བོགས་མ་གཏོང	rent, lease	bogs ma gtong
བོགས་མ་ལེན	rent/ lease something	bogs ma len
བོགས་མ་ལེན་པ	contractor	bogs ma len pa
བོགས་མའི་གན་རྒྱ	rental/ lease contract	bogs ma'i gan rgya
བོགས་མར་གཏོང	rent, lease	bogs mar gtong
བོགས་ཞིང	profit crop field, leased farm land/ fields	bogs zhing
བོགས་ཞིང་འདེབས་མཁན	leaser of farm land/ fields, tenant farmer/ peasant	bogs zhing 'debs mkhan
བོགས་ཞིང་པ	leaser of farm land/ fields, tenant farmer/ peasant bogs g.yar sa cha - profit crop field, leased farm land/ fields	bogs zhing pa
བོགས་ལེན	receiving profit	bogs len
བོགས་ལེན་དུད་ཚང	family who receives profit from fields etc	bogs len dud tshang
བོགས་ལེན་ས་ཞིང	profit crop field, leased farm land/ fields	bogs len sa zhing
བོགས་ས	profit crop field, leased farm land/ fields	bogs sa
བོགས་སུ་ཆེ	great benefit, to be of	bogs su che
བོང	clay, size, dimensions, volume, bulk, height, donkey	bong
བོང་དཀར	aconitum naviculare stapf, aconitum tanguticum (maxim.) stapf	bong dkar
བོང་སྐད	donkey sound	bong skad
བོང་ཁྲ	falcon [subspecies]	bong khra
བོང་གུ	syn {bong bu}	bong gu
བོང་གུ་འདོན་པ	broke, bankrupt [coll]	bong gu 'don pa
བོང་འགྲོས	donkey path	bong 'gros
བོང་རྒྱ	rabbit trap	bong rgya
བོང་རྒྱབ	bong bur 'gel rgyu'i do gnyis	bong rgyab
བོང་སྒ	bong bu la bstad bya'i sga	bong sga
བོང་ང	wild aconite of which 7 species grow in the himalayas, aconite, aconitum, cuckoo's cap ; wolf's bane,	bong nga
བོང་ང་དཀར་པོ	white species of aconite, aconitum heterophyllum, white aconite	bong nga dkar po
བོང་ང་ནག་པོ	black species of aconite or wolf's bane, aconitum napellus, black aconite, aconitum ferox, black aconite	bong nga nag po
བོང་ང་དམར	red species of aconite	bong nga dmar
བོང་ང་དམར་པོ	delphinium densiflorum duthie et huth, red aconite	bong nga dmar po
བོང་ང་སེར་པོ	yellow aconite, med. herb	bong nga ser po
བོང་ཆིང་བ	short	bong ching ba
བོང་ཆུང	small-sized	bong chung
བོང་ཆེ	large-sized	bong che
བོང་ཆེ་བ	tall	bong che ba
བོང་ཆོད	full-sized; SA {bongs tshod}	bong chod
བོང་རྟག	Bongtak, in Domey	bong rtag
བོང་སྟག་ཐེམ་ཆེན་རྫོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	bong stag them chen rdzong
བོང་ཐུང	short in stature	bong thung
བོང་ཐོར	two year old donkey [= co pa]	bong thor
བོང་འདན	clay-sculptor's implement	bong 'dan
བོང་ནག	black species of aconite, dungbeetle	bong nag
བོང་རྣ	1) donkey's ears; 2) a food made of grain fried in oil	bong rna
བོང་པ	clod, dirt	bong pa
བོང་ཕོ	he-ass	bong pho
བོང་ཕྲུག	foal, colt or foal of an ass	bong phrug
བོང་བ	dirt, 1 of zhing las	bong ba
བོང་བ་གསེར་གཟིགས	see clumps of earth as gold [example of what is low or tha shal being accounted excellent khengs skyung gi brjod tshul zhig]	bong ba gser gzigs
བོང་བུ	1) ass, donkey [syn: skad chen dang, grong du 'dren, mgrin bzang, chos can ring, rna chen, byin pa gtsang, bzod pa'i mu khyud, shugs 'gro'i pha.];	bong bu
བོང་བུ་གྭ་པ	a donkey w a white gdong gzhung	bong bu gwa pa
བོང་བུ་དོན་པ	to go bankrupt	bong bu don pa
བོང་བུ་འདྲ་བ	ass-like, like a donkey (derogative)	bong bu 'dra ba
བོང་བུ་པ	an ass-driver	bong bu pa
བོང་བུ་ཕྱེ་མར	SA {lhog dug pa}, {lce tsha}	bong bu phye mar
བོང་བུ་བ	donkey driver	bong bu ba
བོང་བུ་ལན་ཚ	1) the med. herb sga tsha; 2) lce tsha flower	bong bu lan tsha
བོང་བུན་ནག	dung-beetle	bong bun nag
བོང་བུའི་སྐད	bray	bong bu'i skad
བོང་བུའི་ཁྲག	donkey blood, animal medicine	bong bu'i khrag
བོང་བུའི་སྙེ་མ	kind of tree	bong bu'i snye ma
བོང་བུའི་སྤྱོད་པ	characteristics of an ass (carries burden, not affected by cold or heat, knows when has had enough)	bong bu'i spyod pa
བོང་བུར་བསྐྱོན	expelled them as if they were dirt	bong bur bskyon
བོང་བུས་གཟིགས་པགས་བྱོན་པ	donkey wearing a leopard skin, pretending to be wise	bong bus gzigs pags byon pa
བོང་བྲེས	donkey manger / corral	bong bres
བོང་མེ	small protruding grassy hill, pile of earth [= po to ;la ma'i me n/ l, spang me n/ l]	bong me
བོང་མོ	she-ass	bong mo
བོང་དམར	aconitum brunneum hand.mazz.	bong dmar
བོང་རྨེད	1) under a donkey's tail bskon rgyu'i sga chas shig; 2) a nadi lte ba nas gyen du tshon gang gzhal ba'i sar yod pa'i pho ba dang 'brel ba	bong rmed
བོང་ཚང	donkey corral/ shed or place where they stay	bong tshang
བོང་ཚད	volume	bong tshad
བོང་ཚིལ	1) animal medicine, bong bu'i tshil bu; 2) an herb	bong tshil
བོང་ཚོད	full-sized	bong tshod
བོང་ཡར	donkey mare w no foal that year	bong yar
བོང་སེར	1) ldong ros kyi rigs shig two bong nga ser po, an herb (/ ???	bong ser
བོངས	size/ height of the body	bongs
བོངས་ཆེ་ཆུང	dimension	bongs che chung
བོངས་སྙོམས	= size	bongs snyoms
བོངས་ཐུང	dwarf	bongs thung
བོངས་ཚད	height	bongs tshad
བོངས་ཚོད	sharpness, size, dimension	bongs tshod
བོངས་རྫོགས་པ	full-grown	bongs rdzogs pa
བོད	Tibet, Central Tibet	bod
བོད་ཀྱི་ཁང་པ	Tibet house, Dehli	bod kyi khang pa
བོད་ཀྱི་ཁོད་དྲུག	the six kinds of divisions of Tibet	bod kyi khod drug
བོད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་ཆེ་ཤོས	T's most remarkable special dharmas	bod kyi khyad chos che shos
བོད་ཀྱི་གངས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four snow mountains of Tibet	bod kyi gangs chen bzhi
གང་ཡར་ལྷ་ཤམ་པོ་གངས	Yarlha Shampo snow mountain	Gang yar lha sham po gangs
བོད་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great siddhas of Tibet	bod kyi grub chen brgyad
བོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the regent-king of Tibet	bod kyi rgyal po
བོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་རབས	royal family-line of/ history of Tibet	bod kyi rgyal rabs
བོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	four main traditions of Tibetan Buddhism	bod kyi chos lugs chen po bzhi
བོད་ཀྱི་ཇོ་མོ	Queen of Tibet	bod kyi jo mo
བོད་ཀྱི་འཇམ་དབྱངས་རྣམ་གསུམ	The three jamyang gurus of Tibet [holy beings: Sakya Pandita {kun dga' rgyal mtshan}, omniscient Longchenpa {klong chen rab 'byams dri med 'od zer}, and Lord {tsong kha pa, blo bzang grags pa}	bod kyi 'jam dbyangs rnam gsum
བོད་ཀྱི་འཇམ་དབྱངས་གསུམ	The three jamyang gurus of Tibet [holy beings: Sakya Pandita {kun dga' rgyal mtshan}, omniscient Longchenpa {klong chen rab 'byams dri med 'od zer}, and Lord {tsong kha pa, blo bzang grags pa}	bod kyi 'jam dbyangs gsum
བོད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ་བརྒྱད	eight schools of Tibetan Buddhism	bod kyi bstan pa'i shing rta brgyad
བོད་ཀྱི་ཐོག་མའི་རིགས་དྲུག	the original six families/ tribes of Tibet bod kyi brda'i bye brag gsal bar byed pa Tibetan language, orthography and spelling bod kyi nang bstan grub mtha' bcu gnyis the 12 buddhist doctrines of T...	bod kyi thog ma'i rigs drug
པའི་ལས་ཚན་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 kinds of actions that were the purposes of the great masters of Tibet	pa'i las tshan bcu gsum
བོད་ཀྱི་མི་བརྒྱུད	tibetan nation, tibetan people	bod kyi mi brgyud
བོད་ཀྱི་རི་ཆེན་བཞི	T's four important mountains; 1) In Lhasa lcags po ri, 2) lho kha bsam yas su yod pa'i has po ri Hepo Hill at Samye in the south, 3) SW of lha sa chu bo ri, 4) in Tsang phung po ri bo che]	bod kyi ri chen bzhi
བོད་ཀྱི་རིག་འཛིན་བརྒྱད	Eight Tibetan Vidyadharas. Eight accomplished disciples of Guru Rinpoche	bod kyi rig 'dzin brgyad
བོད་ཀྱི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the jewel/precious one of Tibet [Sangharakshita [= ba khri gzigs te king {khri srong lde btsan} great khenpo bo dhi sa tva'i rjes su rab tu byung ba dang, by the king {bod kyi rin po che} by that n...	bod kyi rin po che
བོད་ཀྱི་ལུགས་སུ	according to the fashion of tibet	bod kyi lugs su
བོད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཐོ	tibetan calendar	bod kyi lo tho
བོད་ཀྱི་ལོ་པཎ	Tibetan translator and scholar	bod kyi lo paN
བོད་ཀྱི་ལོ་གསར	tibetan new year	bod kyi lo gsar
བོད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་དོན་རྒྱལ་རབས	Tibetan History, by Tsepon, W.D. Shakabpa, published by Shakabpa House, Kalimpong, Indian, 1976, Vol. I and II	bod kyi srid don rgyal rabs
བོད་སྐད	tibetan language, Tibetan language	bod skad
བོད་སྐད་བཀྱོན་པ	to converse in Tibetan	bod skad bkyon pa
བོད་སྐད་སྒྲོས་དག	perfect Tibetan, pure Tibetan accent	bod skad sgros dag
བོད་སྐད་དུ་བསྒྱུར	he translated into Tibetan, , texts	bod skad du bsgyur
བོད་སྐད་དུ་བསྒྱུར་བཅུག	translated into tibetan	bod skad du bsgyur bcug
བོད་སྐས	Tibetan stairs [on a wooden beam mar nyag ka bton nas [cutting out notches] made [stairs, ladder]	bod skas
བོད་སྐྱོང་བརྟན་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the twelve Tenma guardians of Tibet; x {bod 'dir o rgyan sangs rgyas gnyis pas bod skyong brtan ma bcu gnyis la gtad pas mu stegs pa dngos su mi 'jug} here in Tibet, because the second buddha, Padm...	bod skyong brtan ma bcu gnyis
བོད་བསྐྱོད	Tibet bound	bod bskyod
བོད་ཁ་བ	tibet	bod kha ba
བོད་ཁ་བ་ཅན	T, the land of snow	bod kha ba can
བོད་ཁ་བ་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	Tibet, the Land of Snows	bod kha ba can gyi yul
བོད་ཁ་བ་ཅས	Tibet, the land of snow [because it is surrounded by snow mountains]	bod kha ba cas
བོད་ཁང	Tibet house, Dehli	bod khang
བོད་ཁམས	Tibet	bod khams
བོད་ཁམས་སྐྱོང	protectress of Tibet [one of {sman mo bzhi}	bod khams skyong
བོད་ཁམས་གླིང་དགུ	Nine regions of Tibet and Kham: The Regions of Jewel Light (rin chen 'od kyi gling) are the three upper districts (stod khams gsum) between the slate and snow mountains which are governed by elepha...	bod khams gling dgu
བོད་ཁམས་མཐའ་དབུས	the center and borders of Tibet bod mkhas pa mi pham dge legs rnam	bod khams mtha' dbus
བོད་མཁས་དཔེར་བརྗོད	snyan ngag [poetry] me long [mirror] gzhung gis bstan pa'i [? in the title] dper brjod legs par 1811 bshad pa sgra dbyangs rgya mtsho'i 'jug ngogs, composed in the 17th century by th mkha learned 1...	bod mkhas dper brjod
བོད་གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ལྗོངས	Tibet, the land of snows [because it is surrounded by snow mountains.]	bod gangs can gyi ljongs
བོད་གངས་ཅན་གྱི་ཡུལ	Tibet, the land of snows	bod gangs can gyi yul
བོད་གུར་གུར	1) pri yang ku [med. herb]; 2) garden/ park grown saffron	bod gur gur
བོད་གྲོ	1) long grained reddish colored wheat; 2) Tibetan flour	bod gro
བོད་རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	Tibetan national day	bod rgyal yongs kyi nyi ma
བོད་སྒྲ	'bod pa'i sgra ste, kye dang kva ye lta bu, ??	bod sgra
བོད་དངུལ	Tibetan measures of silver/ money	bod dngul
བོད་སྔ་ཕྱི་མང་པོ	many sequential Tibetan masters	bod snga phyi mang po
བོད་སྔ་མ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ	the opinion of former Tibetan [masters]	bod snga ma rnams kyi 'dod pa
བོད་སྔ་མ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་གསུངས	the words of former Tibetan (masters)	bod snga ma rnams kyi gsungs
བོད་སྔ་རབས་པ	previous Tibetan [thinkers] [ggd]	bod snga rabs pa
བོད་ཅན	tibetan	bod can
བོད་ལྕང	a med. herb	bod lcang
བོད་ཆམས	tibetan leather tanned and painted in tibet	bod chams
བོད་ཆས	Tibetan style clothing	bod chas
བོད་ཆུང	dbu and tsang	bod chung
བོད་ཆེན	mdo smad and mdo stod	bod chen
བོད་ཆེན་པོ	greater Tibet [includes ethnic TTs outisde Tibet proper, eg in Chinghai and Szechuan]	bod chen po
བོད་ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ	three provinces of Tibet	bod chol kha gsum
བོད་འཆོལ་ཀ་གསུམ	the three provinces of Tibet; 2) Tibetan people; 3) central valley of Tibet	bod 'chol ka gsum
བོད་ཇ	Tibetan tea, butter tea	bod ja
བོད་རྗེ	king of Tibet	bod rje
བོད་ལྗང	Tibetan green [malachite]	bod ljang
བོད་ལྗོངས	[the central regions of] Tibet	bod ljongs
བོད་ལྗོངས་ཉིན་རེའི་གསར་འགྱུར	Tibet Daily News [Lhasa paper] bod ljongs bstan srung dang blangs dmag - Defend Tibet Volunteer Army [guerrillas]	bod ljongs nyin re'i gsar 'gyur
བོད་ལྗོངས་ཡོངས་ལ	whole of Tibet bod tu byung ba'i gsang sngags snga 'gyur gyi bstan 'dzin skyes mchog rim byung	bod ljongs yongs la
གྱི་རྣམ་ཐར་ནོར་བུའི་དོ་ཤལ	Necklace of Jewels, a history of the Nyingma Tradition, by Rigdzin Kunzang Ngedön Long Yang	gyi rnam thar nor bu'i do shal
བོད་ཐབ	hearth made on the earth	bod thab
བོད་ཐུག	kind of bul phye btab pa'i chur brdzis pa'i wheat noodles	bod thug
བོད་མཐིང	Tibetan blue (azurite	bod mthing
བོད་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	be translated into tibetan	bod du 'gyur ba
བོད་དུ་ཆས་སོ	they set out for tibet	bod du chas so
བོད་དུ་དར་བ	spread in Tibet	bod du dar ba
བོད་དུད	tibetan smoke, tibetan husbandmen engaged in agricultural pursuits, tibetans with settled life	bod dud
བོད་དོར	rta kha 'byed rgyu yod pa'i dor ma [trousers]	bod dor
བོད་མདའི་མདེལ་ཁུག	Tibetan gun's mde'u blug snod [place you pour bullets.?]	bod mda'i mdel khug
བོད་སྡུག་པའི་མགོ་འཛུག	beginning of the misfortunes of tibet	bod sdug pa'i mgo 'dzug
བོད་བརྡ	Tibet writing/ symbols	bod brda
བོད་ན	in Tibet	bod na
བོད་རྣམས	Tibetan masters	bod rnams
བོད་སྣེའུ	grass of the ldum bu family growing in Tibet	bod sne'u
བོད་པ	inhabitant of tibet, tibetan, Tibetan	bod pa
བོད་པ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	mdo sngags bstan pa'i	bod pa sprul sku
བོད་པ་གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	rnam dbye brgyad pa, kye, kye grogs po slob sbyong yag po gyis, ..???	bod pa gsal byed kyi sgra
བོད་པའི་སྒྲ	Tibetan sgra = [1 words [ming] two verses three consonants {gsal byed kyi sgra, kye, ka ye, kva sogs ?? = {rnam dbye brgyad pa}, gong gsal sgra skad mtshon byed kyi ming tsam las logs su rnam dbye'...	bod pa'i sgra
བོད་པའི་ཚིག	interjection	bod pa'i tshig
བོད་སྤྲུལ	mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyi ma bod pa sprul sku (1907-1959) bod sprul mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyi ma bod pa sprul sku (1907-1959)	bod sprul
བོད་ཕག	Tibetan pig	bod phag
བོད་ཕྲུག	Tibetan children	bod phrug
བོད་དབུས	C Tibet	bod dbus
བོད་འབངས	the Tibetan people	bod 'bangs
བོད་འབངས་མགོ་ནག	the race of Tibetans	bod 'bangs mgo nag
བོད་འབྲོག	herdsmen of tibet living in the northern solitudes tending their cattle	bod 'brog
བོད་མི	Tibetan people	bod mi
བོད་མི་བུ་གདུང་དྲུག	six principal tribes of Tibet	bod mi bu gdung drug
བོད་མིའུ་གདུང་དྲུག	six principal tribes	bod mi'u gdung drug
བོད་མོ་ཆེན་མོ	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	bod mo chen mo
བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང	Tibet military district office/ headquarters	bod dmag khul khang
བོད་སྨན	tibetan medicine	bod sman
བོད་སྨན་མཁས་པ་མི་དགུ	9 famous Tibetan doctors [in the time of king Trisong Deutsen, from upper Tibet [R]	bod sman mkhas pa mi dgu
བོད་ཚེམ	Tibetan sewing	bod tshem
བོད་ཚེས	date count by the Tibetan calendar	bod tshes
བོད་འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of Tibet, the great Tibetan king	bod 'dzam gling rgyal po
བོད་གཞས	Tibetan song/ joke	bod gzhas
བོད་གཞུང	Tibetan government	bod gzhung
བོད་བཞུགས་ཨམ་བན	am ban [Manchu emperors representative living in Tibet [Manchurian term TT: {gong ma'i bkas [permitted, authoriized] mngags} ??, CH: gnam bskos. The emperor 'jam dbyangs gong ma, the great being's ...	bod bzhugs am ban
བོད་ཟས	Tibetan style food	bod zas
བོད་ཟོང	goods from Tibet	bod zong
བོད་ཟླ	Tibetan lunar month	bod zla
བོད་ཡིག	the writing of T. in the 7th century in the time of the king Songtsen Gampo, the Tibetan scholar {thu mi sam bho ta} took letters from an Indian text. The generally used Tibetan writing was newly e...	bod yig
བོད་ཡིག་གི་མགོ་ཅན་གསུམ	the three kinds of Tibetan letters w heads [horizontal top strokes like SK]	bod yig gi mgo can gsum
བོད་ཡིག་གི་སྒྲའི་ང་རོ་དབྱེ་བ་ལྔ	the five different naros of Tibetan writing	bod yig gi sgra'i nga ro dbye ba lnga
བོད་ཡིག་གི་འདོགས་ཅན་བཞི	the four designations of Tibetan letters	bod yig gi 'dogs can bzhi
བོད་ཡིག་གི་འདོན་པ་བཅུ	the 12 ways of writing Tibetan	bod yig gi 'don pa bcu
བོད་ཡིག་གི་སུམ་བརྩེག་ཅན་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 3-stacks in Tibetan writing	bod yig gi sum brtseg can bcu bzhi
བོད་ཡིག་དབུ་ཅན	Tibetan uchen script	bod yig dbu can
བོད་ཡིག་འབྲི་སྲོལ་བཙོ་བོ་དྲུག	the four chief ways of writing Tibetan	bod yig 'bri srol btso bo drug
བོད་ཡིག་རྨང་གཞི་རྐྱང་པ	the single foundation of Tibetan writing	bod yig rmang gzhi rkyang pa
བོད་ཡིག་གསལ་བྱེད་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 consonants of Tibetan writing	bod yig gsal byed sum cu
བོད་ཡུལ	tibet	bod yul
བོད་ཡུལ་གངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	the Snow Land of Tibet	bod yul gangs kyi ra ba
བོད་ཡུལ་གྱི་མཚོ་མིང་ཅན་བཅུ	the 10 named lakes of Tibet	bod yul gyi mtsho ming can bcu
བོད་ཡུལ་གྱི་རི་མིང་ཅན་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 named mts of Tibet bod yul gyi lha 'dre thams cad dam la	bod yul gyi ri ming can bcu gcig
བཏགས་ནས	bound and all the gods and spirits of Tibet to firm oaths	btags nas
བོད་ཡུལ་གླིང་དགུ	the 9 regions of Tibet	bod yul gling dgu
བོད་རག	Tibetan liquor	bod rag
བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས	[central] Tibet *, Tibetan Autonomous region of the PRC	bod rang skyong ljongs
བོད་རིག་པ	Tibetological	bod rig pa
བོད་རིགས	The Tibetan people	bod rigs
བོད་རིགས་གཞོན་ནུ	Tibetan youth	bod rigs gzhon nu
བོད་རིས	Tibetan painting	bod ris
བོད་རུ་བཞི	Four districts of Tibet. Four areas in Central Tibet flanking the rivers Kyichu and Tsangpo	bod ru bzhi
བོད་ལ་ཕན་པའི་བཙུག་ལག་སྡེ་དགུ	the 9 shelters/ sciences/ collections??? that benefitted Tibet	bod la phan pa'i btsug lag sde dgu
བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	Tibetan affairs Committee	bod las don u yon lhan khang
བོད་ལུགས	Tibetan customs, way, manner	bod lugs
བོད་ཤོག	tibet paper	bod shog
བོད་ས་ཁུལ	Tibetan region	bod sa khul
བོད་ས་གནས	[the region of] Tibet	bod sa gnas
བོད་སོག	Tibetan and M	bod sog
བོད་སྲན	bod kyi sran ma'am sran ril	bod sran
བོད་སྲིན	the wild folks of Tibet	bod srin
བོད་བསེ	leather made in Tibet	bod bse
བོན	Bön [shamanism]; Bon, Pön. Pon. The native religion of Tibet, according to Tibetan Buddhists. It was first promulgated in Shangshung (zhang zhung), an ancient name of the province of Gugey in weste...	bon
བོན་སྐུ	bon word for chos sku, essence body, dimension of the state of existence	bon sku
བོན་སྐྱོང	guardian deity of bon, forces which protect the doctrines, SA chos skyong	bon skyong
བོན་གྱི་ཆོས	the Bon religion/ teachings	bon gyi chos
བོན་གྱི་ཐེག་དགུ	[TRS 43-2]	bon gyi theg dgu
བོན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ་དགུ་བ	the 9 bon vehicles	bon gyi theg pa dgu ba
བོན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ་རིམ་དགུ	the 9 bon vehicles	bon gyi theg pa rim dgu
བོན་གྱི་འདུ་གནས	great centers of bon	bon gyi 'du gnas
བོན་གྱི་སྡེ	Bön community	bon gyi sde
བོན་གྱེར	religious chant in B"n style	bon gyer
བོན་འགྱེར	Shamanism. The term has the negative connotation of rituals performed for selfish or superficial mundane aims	bon 'gyer
བོན་རྒྱ	Böngya, in Domey	bon rgya
བོན་སྒོ་བཞི	4 schools of bon (chab dkar drag po sngags, chab nag srid pa rgyud, 'phar yul rgyas pa 'bum, dpon	bon sgo bzhi
བོན་སྒོ་བཞི་མཛོད	4 doorways and the treasure that is the 5th, SA dbon gsas, chab nag, chab dkar, 'phan yul	bon sgo bzhi mdzod
བོན་སྒོ་བཞི་མཛོད་ལྔ	Four Bon Portals and the Fifth the Treasury	bon sgo bzhi mdzod lnga
བོན་སྒྲུང	B"npos and fables	bon sgrung
བོན་སྒྲུང་ལྡེའུ་གསུམ	B"n, fables, and dialogues [the former king of Tibet {pu de gung rgyal} relying on dharmic behavior had the the protectors of the realm, {rgyal srid skyong byed gsum} gyi ming ste for ordinary peop...	bon sgrung lde'u gsum
བོན་ཅན	bon-like	bon can
བོན་ཆག་དཀར	white bon tradition, SA bsgyur bon	bon chag dkar
བོན་ཆོས	B"n [religion]	bon chos
བོན་ཉིད	the essence itself of existence, SA chos nyid, infinite nature of existence	bon nyid
བོན་ཉིད་ཟད་པ	exhaustion of phenomena	bon nyid zad pa
བོན་གཏོ	B"n {gto bcos} [exorcism, healing ritual?]	bon gto
བོན་མདོ	B"n sutra [B"n dharma appearing after the earlier translation B"n translated Buddhist shastras.]	bon mdo
བོན་སྡེ	bon community	bon sde
བོན་སྡེ་གསུམ	3 subdivisions of bon scriptures	bon sde gsum
བོན་པ	express, mutter, to recite magical formulas	bon pa
བོན་པོ	practitioners of bon	bon po
བོན་པོ་རྔ་ཁུར	med. herb [= bre ga]	bon po rnga khur
བོན་པོ་ཇུ་ཐིག་ཅན	w a B"n [mo ma, mo 'debs mkhan] mo cord/ letter	bon po ju thig can
བོན་པོའི་ཆོས	B"n religion	bon po'i chos
བོན་པོའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	the Bön religion	bon po'i chos lugs
བོན་པོའི་ཐལ་བ	1 dust from rta bon [protuberance on a horse's leg]; 2) bya wang [a bird] feather dust	bon po'i thal ba
བོན་བླ	the B"n soul	bon bla
བོན་འབྱུང་རྩིས་ཆེན	bon religious text bon zhig g.yung drung gling pa - (b. 1228); author of {rdzogs chen gser gyi thur ma}	bon 'byung rtsis chen
བོན་གཞུང	B"n tradition/ texts	bon gzhung
བོན་རི	"Bön Mountain", in the north-east, a seat of the Gelukpa school. It was founded by the great meditator Khedrub Lobsang Norbu (mkhas grub blo bzang nor bu) on Bönri, the hill which Milarepa had give...	bon ri
བོན་རི་དགོན་པ	Bönri Gönpa	bon ri dgon pa
བོན་ལུགས	B"n tradition	bon lugs
བོན་ལུང་འོད་དཀར	venerable	bon lung 'od dkar
བོན་གཤེན	the B"n teacher gshen rab	bon gshen
བོན་གཤོས	Bon of Offerings	bon gshos
བོན་གསར་ལུགས	the new Bon tradition	bon gsar lugs
བོན་ལྷ	B"n deities	bon lha
བོབ	don't! [with sense = bshal ba imp {'bab pa}	bob
བོབས	descend, SA 'bab pa, imperfect of 'bab	bobs
བོམ་རྒྱག	drop bombs on	bom rgyag
བོམ་རྒྱག་གནམ་གྲུ	bomber [plane]	bom rgyag gnam gru
བོམ་འཕེན	drop bombs on	bom 'phen
བོམ་དབྱུགས	drop bombs on	bom dbyugs
བོམ་འབེ	Bombay 1814	bom 'be
བོམ་སྦེ	Bombay	bom sbe
བོར	throw, SA 'bor ba, 'bor, to lose, past of 'bor, to cast aside, to cast away	bor
བོར་ཅིག	keep it, put it by, leave it	bor cig
བོར་སྟོར	throw away, pour away	bor stor
བོར་སྟོར་བ	go astray, be lost	bor stor ba
བོར་སྟོར་བྱུང་བ	to lose something	bor stor byung ba
བོར་ཐོ	list of things lost/ missing	bor tho
བོར་ཐོ་འགོད	make list of things lost/ missing	bor tho 'god
བོར་དོར་བ	throw away, pour away	bor dor ba
བོར་ནས	is thrown away	bor nas
བོར་བ	1) {bor ba, bor ba, bor ba} intr. v.; to forego, throw, fling; cast away, abandon, spread, scatter, disperse, put aside; cast aside; renounce; 2) pf. of {'bor ba} to be left behind, lose, 3) renunc...	bor ba
བོར་ཚོང	pham tshong	bor tshong
བོར་ཟེགས	lose lost	bor zegs
བོར་ར	a sack of corn	bor ra
བོར་བརླག	loss, losing	bor brlag
བོར་བརླག་ཤོར	lose, have stolen	bor brlag shor
བོར་ལ་ཐོང	abandon.! [deliberate meditation]	bor la thong
བོལ	the upper part of the foot, the leg of a boot, clod of earth	bol
བོལ་གར	SA bul ha ri	bol gar
བོལ་གོང	upper part of the leg [rgyab in T]	bol gong
བོལ་ནུབ	rkang pa'i bol nub pa, descend?, kha ba bol nub tsam bab pa ???	bol nub
བོལ་པོ	SA 'bol po	bol po
བོལ་རྩ	upper leg pulse nadi [at the time of death of all nadis it is 1st to cease]	bol rtsa
བོལ་ཚིགས	joints of the [upper part of the] leg	bol tshigs
བོས	call, SA 'bod pa, past of 'bod	bos
བོས་པ	pf. of {'bod pa}	bos pa
བོས་པའི་མགྲོན	a summoned guest	bos pa'i mgron
བོས་རྭ	me mda'i ru	bos rwa
བྱ་ཀ་དམ་པ	kadampa goose	bya ka dam pa
བྱ་ཀ་ན་ལ	phasianus gallus	bya ka na la
བྱཱ་ཀ་ར་ན	explanation; prophecy	byA ka ra na
བྱ་ཀ་རན་ད	karanda bird	bya ka ran da
བྱ་ཀ་རུ་ར	[Skt] [goose, duck, swan [syn: rgyang grags thos dang, sgra sgrog sgra 'byin chen po]	bya ka ru ra
བྱ་ཀ་ལ་ལིང་ཀ	kalalingka bird	bya ka la ling ka
བྱ་ཀར་ན་ད	karnada bird	bya kar na da
བྱ་ཀུ་ར་ར	osprey	bya ku ra ra
བྱ་ཀྲི	Vyaghrimukha, tiger head lady	bya kri
བྱ་ཀྲི་མུ་ཁ	Yaghrimukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	bya kri mu kha
བྱ་ཀྲི་མུ་ཁ་དམར་མོ	red Vyaghrimukha, tiger head	bya kri mu kha dmar mo
བྱ་དཀའ	to do what is hard	bya dka'
བྱ་དཀའ་བ	hard work, hard to do	bya dka' ba
བྱ་དཀའ་བའི་རྒྱན	letters or sounds 'dra ba verses or, the feet of verse gi phyogs kun tu 'khor ba dang, phyed 'khor, vowels and consonants gcig tu nges pa etc. bya dka' ba'i rnam grangs sgra kho nas ornaments showi...	bya dka' ba'i rgyan
བྱ་དཀའ་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	action hard to do	bya dka' ba'i spyod pa
བྱ་དཀའ་བྱེད་གཏད	difficult to do	bya dka' byed gtad
བྱ་དཀར	staying in the forest bya dkar mjug sgro nag pa zhig	bya dkar
བྱ་རྐང	place in magadha	bya rkang
བྱ་རྐང་བ	delphinium caeruleum jacq. ex camb., delphinium souliei franch., delphinium pseudograndiflorum w. t. wang, delphinium pylzowi maxim. var. trigynum w. t. wang, delphinium albo-coeruleum maxim. var. ...	bya rkang ba
བྱ་རྐོད་ཕུང་པོ་རི	Vulture Peak, Bihar	bya rkod phung po ri
བྱ་སྐད	a book of satirical fables, cock's crow	bya skad
བྱ་སྐད་སྔ་མོ་ནས	from the first	bya skad snga mo nas
ཅོཅཀ	crow	cock
བྱ་སྐད་བྱེའུ་སྒྱུར	bird's sound became the sound of a little bird [small]	bya skad bye'u sgyur
བྱ་སྐས	gdung ma'i logs gcig la nyag ka bton nas bzos pa'i 'dzeg skas te in Amdo lar kher skas zer ???	bya skas
བྱ་སྐོན	bird trap	bya skon
བྱ་སྐྱག	bird droppings	bya skyag
བྱ་སྐྱང་ཀ	bird with a coral-like bill	bya skyang ka
བྱ་སྐྱི	roof, shelter	bya skyi
བྱ་སྐྱིབས	1) overhanging rock shelter; 2) buildings mda' gyab [eaves?]	bya skyibs
བྱ་སྐྱུང་ཀ	jackdaw	bya skyung ka
བྱ་སྐྱེས་བུ	renunciant	bya skyes bu
བྱ་ཁྭ་ཏ་དེད	able to scare a raven	bya khwa ta ded
བྱ་ཁྭ་ཏ་དེད་ཐུབ་པ	attribute of buddha	bya khwa ta ded thub pa
བྱ་ཁང	bird's cage	bya khang
བྱ་ཁུ་བྱུག་སྔོན་མོ	the blue cuckoo	bya khu byug sngon mo
བྱ་ཁོག་རྒྱངས	my lungs were blocked	bya khog rgyangs
བྱ་ཁྱི	birds and dogs	bya khyi
བྱ་ཁྱུ	a flock of birds	bya khyu
བྱ་ཁྱུང	garuda, [eagle]	bya khyung
བྱ་ཁྱུང་རྡོ	blue mineral color	bya khyung rdo
བྱ་ཁྱུང་བྲག	bya khung brag monastery [in mtsho sngon, in the 6th earth ox year founded by chos rje don grub rin chen, where rje tsong kha pa lived until 16 , 1349]	bya khyung brag
བྱ་ཁྲ	peregrine falcon hawk	bya khra
བྱ་ཁྲལ	former egg tax on chicken raisers	bya khral
བྱ་ཁྲལ་བྱི་སོ	bird tax mouse teeth	bya khral byi so
བྱ་ཁྲལ་བྱུང་དུས་བྱི་སོ་བསྟན	at the time of a bird tax show mouse's teeth	bya khral byung dus byi so bstan
བྱ་ཁྲི	{bya khri btsan po}	bya khri
བྱ་ཁྲི་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	a deity	bya khri chos skyong
བྱ་ཁྲི་བསྟན་པོ	ninth king of Tibet	bya khri bstan po
བྱ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	king {bya khri bstan po = pu de gung rgyal	bya khri btsan po
བྱ་ཁྲུང	crane	bya khrung
བྱ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང	crane	bya khrung khrung
བྱ་ག	pliancy, nimbleness, agility of body	bya ga
བྱ་གག	1) chicken; 2) the gray duck	bya gag
བྱ་གག་གི་ལོ	bird year	bya gag gi lo
བྱ་གག་དང་འུར་བ་འཐབ་པ	buffalo fight	bya gag dang 'ur ba 'thab pa
བྱ་གག་རི་པ	in the 18 shravaka schools {nyan thos sde pa bco brgyad}	bya gag ri pa
བྱ་གི་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན	byang...	bya gi sgra mi snyan
བྱ་གུ་གུ	cuckoo	bya gu gu
བྱ་གོ་བོ	lammergayer, kind of vulture with plumes	bya go bo
བྱ་གོང་མོ	snow cock	bya gong mo
བྱ་གྱབ	canopy-like tent	bya gyab
བྱ་གྱབ་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང	large canopy gur gyab	bya gyab nam mkha' lding
བྱ་གྲུབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	all-accomplishing wisdom	bya grub ye shes
བྱ་གླག	(TT eagle	bya glag
བྱ་དགའ	reward, gift for services; gift, present, reward, award, [encouragement]	bya dga'
བྱ་དགའ་དང་རིམ་གྲོ་ཆེར་མཛད	proceeded to conduct many feasts and ceremonies	bya dga' dang rim gro cher mdzad
བྱ་དགའ་སྤྲོད་པ	[give a] reward/ prize/ gift, award, encourage and reward	bya dga' sprod pa
བྱ་དགའི་དངུལ	cash prize/ reward/ gift	bya dga'i dngul
བྱ་དགའི་དངོས་རྫས	prize/ reward/ gift in goods	bya dga'i dngos rdzas
བྱ་དགའི་ཆ་ལག	prize/ reward/ gift in goods	bya dga'i cha lag
བྱ་དགའི་རྟགས་མ	medal	bya dga'i rtags ma
བྱ་དགའི་བདག་རྐྱེན	gzengs bstod kyi gzid bzos	bya dga'i bdag rkyen
བྱ་དགའི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	bonus	bya dga'i phogs thob
བྱ་དགུ་ལ་ཕྱི་ལང་བྱེད་པ	[arch] all that was done being faulty	bya dgu la phyi lang byed pa
བྱ་མགྲིན་སྔོན་ཟླ་བའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	byang chub kyi sems mnga' ba'i bya mgrin sngon zla ba'i rtogs pa brjod pa 'khor ba mtha' dag la snying po med	bya mgrin sngon zla ba'i rtogs brjod
པར་མཐོང་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྣ་རྒྱན	(b. ca. 1765) gnubs kyi rigs las ba de'i sha gzugs ma ti'i ming can no	par mthong ba rnams kyi rna rgyan
བྱ་འགྲོས	1) birds gait, way of going; 2) lha mo'i rngon pa 'khrab dus ltad mo ba rnams la step done when the words of auspiciousness are said	bya 'gros
བྱ་རྒན་སྒྲོ་ཟད	worn out like feathers of an old bird	bya rgan sgro zad
བྱ་རྒོད	1) vulture 2) bird of prey,	bya rgod
བྱ་རྒོད་ཐང་ནག	black rgod spu	bya rgod thang nag
བྱ་རྒོད་ཐང་སྨུག	brown rgod spu	bya rgod thang smug
བྱ་རྒོད་པོ	vulture	bya rgod po
བྱ་རྒོད་སྤོས	{bya rgod spos} med. herb	bya rgod spos
བྱ་རྒོད་ཕུང་པོ	vulture's peak, grdhrakuta	bya rgod phung po
བྱ་རྒོད་ཕུང་པོའི་རི	Vulture Peak	bya rgod phung po'i ri
བྱ་རྒོད་ཕུང་པོའི་རི་བོ	Vulture Peak, at Kailash	bya rgod phung po'i ri bo
བྱ་རྒོད་བྲུན	vulture shit	bya rgod brun
བྱ་རྒོད་རི	Vulture peak mountain [near rajgir in bihar]	bya rgod ri
བྱ་རྒོད་ཤ	vulture meat animal med. [heatng, by its power pho ba'i me drod nyams pa dang, lba ba skyes pa sogs la phan]	bya rgod sha
བྱ་རྒོད་ཤ་ལ་འཐེབས་པ་བཞིན	like vultures covering meat	bya rgod sha la 'thebs pa bzhin
བྱ་རྒོད་སུག་པ	{bya rgod sug pa} med. herb [bitter, cooling, by its power mgo rma gso, lhog rgod 'dul, tsha ba'i gzer gcog gza' nad sel, lus zungs gso syn: rgyal po la thod can dang, da byid dkar po, byang gyag b...	bya rgod sug pa
བྱ་རྒོད་སེན་མོ	delphinium moschatum	bya rgod sen mo
བྱ་རྒྱ	fowler's net	bya rgya
བྱ་རྒྱ་བསྐུར་ཏེ་རྨ་བྱ་ཟིན	bird traps were set to catch the peacock	bya rgya bskur te rma bya zin
བྱ་རྒྱ་བཙུགས་པ	fell into the bird traps	bya rgya btsugs pa
བྱ་རྒྱལ་གྱི་རྒོད་པོ	royal eagle	bya rgyal gyi rgod po
བྱ་རྒྱལ་རྒོད་པོ	drang srong bya rgyal	bya rgyal rgod po
བྱ་རྒྱལ་ཐབས་ཟད	all resources failing, bereft of help	bya rgyal thabs zad
བྱ་རྒྱུ	1) work las ka; 2) means of doing	bya rgyu
བྱ་རྒྱུ་ཟད་པ	all efforts or measures exhausted, nothing left to be done	bya rgyu zad pa
བྱ་རྒྱུད	Kriya tantra; activity tantra, tantra as activity; Action Tantra; Abbr. of {bya ba'i rgyud}. Lowest of the four levels of Tantra	bya rgyud
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ་གསུམ	the three accomplishments of kriya [supreme: becoming a rig 'dzin and higher perceptions and knowing all the shastras etc and, the middle: invisibility rasayana, swift walking etc, [8 ordinary sidd...	bya rgyud kyi dngos grub gsum
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the kriya yoga yana	bya rgyud kyi theg pa
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 samayas of kriya	bya rgyud kyi dam tshig bcu bzhi
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ཉིད་བཞི	the four natures of kriya	bya rgyud kyi de kho nyid bzhi
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དབང་གསུམ	the three abhishekas of kriya	bya rgyud kyi dbang gsum
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ལམ་གསུམ	the three paths of kriya	bya rgyud kyi lam gsum
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ	the three dhyanas of kriya [the three natures of dhyana in kriya: 1) mer gnas kyi de nyid dang, 2) sgrar gnas kyi de nyid dang 3) sgra mtha'i de nyid]	bya rgyud kyi bsam gtan gsum
དང་དོན་གཅིག	the six deities of kriya	dang don gcig
བྱ་རྒྱུད་དམ་ཚིག་གསུམ་བཀོད	Kriya Tantra, The Arrangement of the Three Samayas	bya rgyud dam tshig gsum bkod
བྱ་རྒྱུད་སྤྱི་ཡི་དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ་བཞི	The 14 general samayas of kriya	bya rgyud spyi yi dam tshig bcu bzhi
བྱ་རྒྱུད་རིགས་དྲུག	the six families of kriya; 1) de bzhin gshegs pa'i rigs, 2) padma'i rigs, 3) rdo rje'i rigs: 'jig rten las 'das pa'i rigs gsum &, 4) nor bu'i rigs, 5) lngas rtsen gyi rigs, 6) 'jig rten phal pa'i r...	bya rgyud rigs drug
བྱ་རྒྱུད་རིགས་གསུམ	the three families of kriya	bya rgyud rigs gsum
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ལྷ་དྲུག	the six deities of kriya	bya rgyud lha drug
བྱ་སྒབ	sha shig on the front side of the shoulder blade	bya sgab
བྱ་སྒོང	bird's egg	bya sgong
བྱ་སྒོང་སྤྲི་དཀར	white of an egg	bya sgong spri dkar
བྱ་སྒོང་སེར་ཐིག	yolk of an egg	bya sgong ser thig
བྱ་སྒོའི་མི་སེར	former snye mo rdzong, rgyal byed monastery's neighboring theatrical troupe	bya sgo'i mi ser
བྱ་སྒྲུང	bya byi'i fabulous brjod byar byas pa'i rtsom zhig	bya sgrung
བྱ་སྒྲུངས	a book of satirical fables	bya sgrungs
བྱ་སྒྲུབ	accomplish actions	bya sgrub
བྱ་སྒྲུབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	all-accomplishing wisdom	bya sgrub ye shes
བྱ་སྒྲོ	tail/ wing feathers	bya sgro
བྱ་སྒྲོ་ཅན	feathery	bya sgro can
བྱ་སྒྲོ་རྩེད་མོ	badminton	bya sgro rtsed mo
བྱ་ངང་པ	swan	bya ngang pa
བྱ་ངན	bad actions/ conduct	bya ngan
བྱ་ངན་སྤྱོད་ངན	bad actions and conduct	bya ngan spyod ngan
བྱ་ངུར་པ	ruddy goose	bya ngur pa
བྱ་དངོས	things	bya dngos
བྱ་ཅོ་བ	pilgrims	bya co ba
བྱ་གཅན	birds and predators	bya gcan
བྱ་གཅན་གཉིས	bya [bird/ chicken] and predators	bya gcan gnyis
བྱ་གཅོད	sterilize, castrate	bya gcod
བྱ་གཅོད་པ	sterilize, castrate	bya gcod pa
བྱ་ལྕུང་ཀར	ruby-throat	bya lcung kar
བྱ་ཆེན་པོ་མི་ཙམ	bird of the height of man	bya chen po mi tsam
བྱ་མཆིལ་པ	swallow	bya mchil pa
བྱ་མཆུ	bird's beak [syn: gcod byed dang, mchu to, nyer 'dzin]	bya mchu
བྱ་མཆུ་རིང	hoopoe	bya mchu ring
བྱ་འཆད་ཁ་བ	{bya 'chad kha ba	bya 'chad kha ba
བྱ་རྗེས	1) bird's [foot]print/ track; 2) a gzong; 3) lham zon pa'i rting pa'i 'ja' 'og ma'i phar phyin ??? [imprint of a bird, the trace a bird leaves behind (when it flies]	bya rjes
བྱ་རྗོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག	1 instant of completed action	bya rjogs kyi skad cig
བྱ་རྗོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	1 instant of completed action	bya rjogs kyi skad cig ma
བྱ་ཉལ་ཁྱི་ཉལ	birds and dogs sleep	bya nyal khyi nyal
བྱ་ཉལ་དུས	time when birds sleep, night and srod gung	bya nyal dus
བྱ་རྙི	fowler's net	bya rnyi
བྱ་རྙོང	1) bird snare; 2) stretching arms and legs	bya rnyong
བྱ་རྙོང་བྱེད	stretch arms and legs	bya rnyong byed
བྱ་སྙམ་པ	SA bya bsam pa	bya snyam pa
བྱ་སྙེང	stretch out, prostrate	bya snyeng
བྱ་བསྙངས	yawn	bya bsnyangs
བྱ་བསྙངས་པ	yawning	bya bsnyangs pa
བྱ་བསྙངས་བྱེད	yawn 1817	bya bsnyangs byed
བྱ་ཏང་ག	erycibe paniculata, medicinal fruit	bya tang ga
བྱ་ཏེ	chick[en]	bya te
བྱ་ཏེ་ཕོ	cock, rooster	bya te pho
བྱ་ཏེ་མོ	hen	bya te mo
བྱ་ཏེ་སོགས	poultry	bya te sogs
བྱ་ཏེ་གསོ་ར	chicken farm	bya te gso ra
བྱ་གཏོང	notify, inform	bya gtong
བྱ་གཏོང་དུ	warned	bya gtong du
བྱ་གཏོང་བ	a warning	bya gtong ba
བྱ་བཏང	all-abstracted, relinquishing one's interest	bya btang
བྱ་བཏང་སྐྱེས་བུ	renunciant	bya btang skyes bu
བྱ་བཏང་རྣལ་འབྱོར	a renunciate yogi	bya btang rnal 'byor
བྱ་བཏང་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	a renunciate yogi	bya btang rnal 'byor pa
བྱ་བཏང་བ	1) gsang brda btang ba; 2) practitioner who has renounced, anchorite, recluse	bya btang ba
བྱ་བཏང་ཚོགས་དྲུག་རང་གྲོལ	Jatang Tsokdrug Rangdröl; alias {bla ma zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol} 1781-1850	bya btang tshogs drug rang grol
བྱ་བཏང་རི་ཁྲོད་པ	renunciate hermit	bya btang ri khrod pa
བྱ་ཐགས	opportunity for action	bya thags
བྱ་ཐན	explained in stories, bird that gives a bad omen	bya than
བྱ་ཐབས	something to do, way/ means/ opportunity/ possibility to do/of doing [arch] certain action	bya thabs
བྱ་ཐབས་བྲལ	can't be done, nothing [we] can do, no way to do, cannot do	bya thabs bral
བྱ་ཐབས་མ་རྙེད་པ	had no means to	bya thabs ma rnyed pa
བྱ་ཐབས་མེད	can't be done, nothing [we] can do, no way to do, cannot do	bya thabs med
བྱ་ཐབས་ཟད	can't be done, nothing [we] can do, no way to do, cannot do	bya thabs zad
བྱ་ཐལ	bird shit, vulture shit	bya thal
བྱ་ཐི་བ	[arch] pigeon	bya thi ba
བྱ་ཐུལ	a cock	bya thul
བྱ་ད་ལི་པ	a pupil of virupa	bya da li pa
བྱ་དག	bribery bya dang gcan gzan sha za rnams rjes su	bya dag
བྱ་དང་བྱིའུ་ཡི་ཚང	nest	bya dang byi'u yi tshang
བྱ་དང་ལུག་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡོད་ཁང	cote	bya dang lug sogs kyi sdod khang
བྱ་དབ	projecting molding (of mansion)	bya dab
བྱ་དེ	chicken, chick	bya de
བྱ་དེ་ཕོ	cock, rooster	bya de pho
བྱ་དེ་མོ	hen	bya de mo
བྱ་དེ་གསོ་ར	chicken farm	bya de gso ra
བྱ་དེའི་སྒོ་ང	egg	bya de'i sgo nga
བྱ་དོད	lha mo'i rngon pa 'khrab dus beginning auspicious verses	bya dod
བྱ་དོན་མེད	absurd {stong nyid rtogs na sdig pa bya don med} once you realize emptiness, it would be absurd to do anything negative	bya don med
བྱ་དྲང་སྲོང	vulture	bya drang srong
བྱ་གདང	perch for chickens	bya gdang
བྱ་གདང་བུ	thags chas snas 'khor brgyu sa'i small tree	bya gdang bu
བྱ་གདང་མ	thags chas bya gdang bu 'jog sa'i right and left ru steng ma	bya gdang ma
བྱ་གདོན	large d"ns emanating in the form of birds harming children, harpy	bya gdon
བྱ་འདབ	a bird's wing, eaves; projecting molding (of mansion)	bya 'dab
བྱ་འདྲེ	harpy	bya 'dre
བྱ་རྡང	small tabernacles	bya rdang
བྱ་རྡོ་མགོ	vulture-head	bya rdo mgo
བྱ་རྡོ་ལམ་འཕྲད	meeting a vulture on the road [chance meeting]	bya rdo lam 'phrad
བྱ་ལྡན	phasianus gallus	bya ldan
བྱ་ལྡེམ	bya sgrung	bya ldem
བྱ་ན	salted curry	bya na
བྱ་ན་གནང	gave gifts	bya na gnang
བྱ་ན་བ	tshod ma bzo mkhan	bya na ba
བྱ་ནག	raven	bya nag
བྱ་ནན	earnest endeavor	bya nan
བྱ་ནེ་ཙོ	parrot	bya ne tso
བྱ་པ	1) fowler, bird-catcher; 2) man w damaged male organ	bya pa
བྱ་པན་ཆུ་རྩི	epilobium cephalostigma hausskn.	bya pan chu rtsi
བྱ་པོ	cock, sparrow	bya po
བྱ་པོ་དང་པོ	the first cock-crow	bya po dang po
བྱ་པོ་ཙི་ཙི	medicinal plant, impatiens sulcata, a plant	bya po tsi tsi
བྱ་དཔེ་བྱེའུ་སྒྲུང	Allegories of Birds and Fables of Little Birds	bya dpe bye'u sgrung
བྱ་སྤང	renunciate	bya spang
བྱ་སྤུ	bird's down feather	bya spu
བྱ་སྤུ་ནོན	1) as birds's feathers press 1 on another, have to do 1 job after another; 2) in order, neatly, orderly	bya spu non
བྱ་སྤུ་ནོན་པ	pat on the back, keep in order, not disturb any arrangement	bya spu non pa
བྱ་སྤུ་གནམ་འཐོར	bird's down/ feathers scattered in the air, scattering/ destruction]	bya spu gnam 'thor
བྱ་སྤུ་གནོན	1) as birds's feathers press 1 on another, have to do 1 job after another; 2) in order, neatly, orderly	bya spu gnon
བྱ་སྤོས	a constellation	bya spos
བྱ་སྤྱོད	action, behavior, movement, act, deed, proceeding	bya spyod
བྱ་སྤྱོད་ཀུན་སློང	conduct and attitude, action and intent	bya spyod kun slong
བྱ་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རྩ་འཛིན	program/ guide/ blueprint for [act[ion], activities, conduct, movement, behavior, effort of action of the three gates]	bya spyod kyi rtsa 'dzin
བྱ་སྤྱོད་ངན་པ	bad/ evil [act[ion], activities, conduct, movement, behavior, effort of action of the three gates]	bya spyod ngan pa
བྱ་སྤྱོད་ངན་པ་གང་བྱས་པ	whatever wrongdoings I have committed	bya spyod ngan pa gang byas pa
བྱ་སྤྱོད་དངོས	real/ main [act[ion], activities, conduct, movement, behavior, effort of action of the three gates]	bya spyod dngos
བྱ་སྤྱོད་གཅིག་འགྱུར	united action	bya spyod gcig 'gyur
བྱ་ཕ	cock	bya pha
བྱ་ཕུག་རོན	pigeon	bya phug ron
བྱ་ཕུར་ལེབ	field herb {ko byi la} 1818	bya phur leb
བྱ་ཕོ	male bird, cock, a medicinal plant for menstruation	bya pho
བྱ་ཕོ་བྱ་མོ	fowl	bya pho bya mo
བྱ་ཕོ་ཙི་ཙི	{bya pho tsi tsi} field herb	bya pho tsi tsi
བྱ་ཕོ་ཙི་ཙི་མཆོག	corydalis curviflora maxim.	bya pho tsi tsi mchog
བྱ་ཕོ་ཙི་ཙི་དམན་པ	pisum sativum l.	bya pho tsi tsi dman pa
བྱ་ཕོ་རྩི	melandrium apricum (turcz.) rohrb., silene repens patr.	bya pho rtsi
བྱ་ཕོ་རྩེ	{bya pho rtse scrub rtsi shing [growing by rivers, good for kindling]	bya pho rtse
བྱ་ཕོའི་ཤ	rooster meat animal med. [sweet, heating, by its power mkhal rked kyi drod nyams pa dang, khu ba zad pa sogs la phan]	bya pho'i sha
བྱ་ཕྱེད་བློ་ཡི་སྣང་བ	displays of dualistic mind	bya phyed blo yi snang ba
བྱ་ཕྲུག	fledglings, birdling	bya phrug
བྱ་ཕྲུག་གུ	a little bird	bya phrug gu
བྱ་ཕྲུག་ཚང་མ་ཞིག	a perfect young bird	bya phrug tshang ma zhig
བྱ་འཕིར	1) bird flying in[to] space; 2) paper etc toys skud pa btags nas flying in the sky	bya 'phir
བྱ་འཕུར	flight of a bird	bya 'phur
བྱ་འཕུར་བ་ལྟར	like the flight of a bird	bya 'phur ba ltar
ཨོབཇེཅཏ	beaten); to use (a term) for (something); (something) to be done; project at hand	object
བྱ་བ་ཀུན་བྱེད	carry out all functions	bya ba kun byed
བྱ་བ་གང་བཏང	whatever one does	bya ba gang btang
བྱ་བ་གང་བྱེད་པ	whatever he does	bya ba gang byed pa
བྱ་བ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	accomplishment awareness, pristine wisdom of accomplishing aims, wisdom that accomplishes actions, actionaccomplishing wisdom	bya ba grub pa'i ye shes
བྱ་བ་གློ་བུར་པ	incidental actions, leading/ advanced worker	bya ba glo bur pa
བྱ་བ་གློ་བུར་འབད་པའི་དཔུང་སྡེ	shock troops brigade	bya ba glo bur 'bad pa'i dpung sde
བྱ་བ་དགུ་ཕྲུག	ninefold actions; ninefold activities; nine actions of the three doors, all manner of activity; nine activities of body, speech, and mind; ex. {sgo gsum bya ba dgu phrug btang ba} to abandon the ni...	bya ba dgu phrug
བྱ་བ་དགུ་ཕྲུགས	The nine actions of the three doors; all outer, inner, and secret activities of body, speech, and mind, which a yogin will give up when engaging in Tögal practice. Three concern the body: 1) outwar...	bya ba dgu phrugs
བྱ་བ་འགལ་མིན་གྱི་སྦྱར་བ	ornament where the two things the sbyar and gzhi kyi to be made into the sbyar chos are non contradictory and suitable to be combined in 1 object, among sbyar ba'i rgyan	bya ba 'gal min gyi sbyar ba
བྱ་བ་འགྲུབ་པ	accomplish action	bya ba 'grub pa
བྱ་བ་རྒྱུད	Kriya tantra	bya ba rgyud
བྱ་བ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of Kriya Tantra / action tantra,	bya ba rgyud kyi theg pa
བྱ་བ་སྒོ་ལྔ་ཕྲིན་ལས་ལས་རྒྱ	action seal of enlightened activity which secures the fives senses as the accomplishing pristine cognition	bya ba sgo lnga phrin las las rgya
བྱ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish action	bya ba sgrub pa
བྱ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	all accomplishing wisdom	bya ba sgrub pa'i ye shes
བྱ་བ་ངན་པ	misdeed	bya ba ngan pa
བྱ་བ་ངན་ཞེན་གྱི་ལེ་ལོ	the laziness of clinging to unwholesome actions	bya ba ngan zhen gyi le lo
བྱ་བ་ཅི་བྱས་ཀྱང	whatever you do bya ba cig car ba'i mtshams sbyor lhag	bya ba ci byas kyang
བྱ་བ་གཅིག་པའི་ལྷན་ཅིག་བརྗོད་པ	among the lhan cig brjod pa'i rgyan, whatever thing 1 wants to express dpe don gyi bya ba 'dra ba, ornament teaching that at the same time bya ba 'jug ldog gang du'ang lung ma	bya ba gcig pa'i lhan cig brjod pa
བྱ་བ་ཉམས་པ	1) bad work; 2) effort becoming weak; 3) lose the power of work 1819	bya ba nyams pa
བྱ་བ་ཉུང་བ	have few activities/ less business	bya ba nyung ba
བྱ་བ་མཉམ་སྒྲུབ	united action, working together, cooperation	bya ba mnyam sgrub
བྱ་བ་བཏུབ་པ	easy/ suitable work bya ba tha dad pa'i lhan cig brjod pa among the lhan cig brjod pa'i rgyan, ornament where the thing 1 wants to express dpe don gyi bya ba mi 'dra ba at the same time	bya ba btub pa
བྱ་བ་ཐ་དད་མིན་པའི་སྦྱར་བ	among the sbyar ba'i rgyan, ornament where sbyar gzhi two things, though the essence is different, sbyar chos bya ba'i khyad par is not different	bya ba tha dad min pa'i sbyar ba
བྱ་བ་དང་སྤྱོད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	always acting	bya ba dang spyod pa thams cad
བྱ་བ་དང་བྱེད་པ	action and actor bya ba dang byed pa med pa'i rnal 'byor the yoga devoid of deed and action, the yoga where there is nothing to be done and nothing done bya ba dang byed pa med pa'i rnal 'byor the ...	bya ba dang byed pa
བྱ་བ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of/ freedom from/ beyond anything (more) to be done; in which/ the fact that nothing need be done; (to be) such that nothing need be done; that which does not require that anything be done	bya ba dang bral ba
བྱ་བ་དང་མིང	verbs and nouns	bya ba dang ming
བྱ་བ་དང་རྩོལ་བ	action and effort	bya ba dang rtsol ba
བྱ་བ་དེ་ཡིན	you must act in this way	bya ba de yin
བྱ་བ་ནན་ཏན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel of persistent activity, {spang klog 'khor lo gsum}	bya ba nan tan gyi 'khor lo
བྱ་བ་ནན་ཏན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of persistent action, wisdom of persevering action. Equivalent to 'allaccomplishing wisdom; syn {bya ba grub pa'i ye shes}, {bya grub ye shes}	bya ba nan tan gyi ye shes
བྱ་བ་ནན་ཏན་ཏུ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	allaccomplishing wisdom	bya ba nan tan tu grub pa'i ye shes
བྱ་བ་རྣམས	The other birds	bya ba rnams
བྱ་བ་སྤྱོད་ལམ	lose one's character, 1 of gnas bcu gcig, behavior, conduct, doings	bya ba spyod lam
བྱ་བ་སྤྱོད་ལམ་སྟོར་བ	be misguided	bya ba spyod lam stor ba
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་སྟངས	way means, details of doing work etc.	bya ba byed stangs
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་ནུས	capable of, have the power to	bya ba byed nus
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་ནུས་པ	capable of setting up causal sequences	bya ba byed nus pa
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པ	creativity, duty, perform a task, work, to behave	bya ba byed pa
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པ་ཐ་དད་པ	separate function	bya ba byed pa tha dad pa
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པའི	(krtakarana functional	bya ba byed pa'i
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པའི་རིག་པ	reasoning of performance [thd]	bya ba byed pa'i rig pa
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་པའི་རིགས་པ	functional reasoning, the reasoning of function [one of the {rigs pa bzhi - the four reasoning from barley seed barley grows and nothing else]	bya ba byed pa'i rigs pa
བྱ་བ་བྱེད་རུང་མི་བྱེད་རུང	regardless of whether or not their action is engaged in	bya ba byed rung mi byed rung
བྱ་བ་བྲལ་བ	unoccupied, actionless, free from activity bya ba ma tshang ba'i khyad par brjod pa - among the khyad par brjod pa'i rgyan, brjod 'dod dngos po gang zhig gi bya ba'i cha lag ma tshang yang, tshang ...	bya ba bral ba
བྱ་བ་མ་ཡིན་པ	wrong action	bya ba ma yin pa
བྱ་བ་མང་པོ	excessive activity	bya ba mang po
བྱ་བ་མི་ནུས	unable to function	bya ba mi nus
བྱ་བ་མིན	not about to	bya ba min
བྱ་བ་མེད་པ	nonaction, inactive, that which does not act	bya ba med pa
བྱ་བ་མེད་པར	without acting bya ba gtsang spyod ye bon gyi theg pa Way of the Primordial Bon of Pure Conduct and Ritual Activity	bya ba med par
བྱ་བ་འཛོལ་བ	blunder in working	bya ba 'dzol ba
བྱ་བ་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག	moment of completing an act	bya ba rdzogs pa'i skad cig
བྱ་བ་གཞན	other activities	bya ba gzhan
བྱ་བ་ཟེད	dust brush	bya ba zed
བྱ་བ་བཟང་པོ	merit	bya ba bzang po
བྱ་བ་འི་རྒྱུད	kriya (tantra bya ba rim gyis pa'i mtshams sbyor lhag	bya ba 'i rgyud
བྱ་བ་ལ་བརྩོན	readiness to act	bya ba la brtson
བྱ་བ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	alacrity	bya ba la brtson pa
བྱ་བ་ལམ་འགྲོ	good fortune in business	bya ba lam 'gro
བྱ་བའང	these kinds of things	bya ba'ang
བྱ་བའི་ཁམས	transitory existence	bya ba'i khams
བྱ་བའི་འཁོབས	sphere of one's doing or work, be startled, agitated, alarmed	bya ba'i 'khobs
བྱ་བའི་རྒྱུད	kriya tantra	bya ba'i rgyud
བྱ་བའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྒོམ	meditation of Kriya tantra	bya ba'i rgyud kyi sgom
བྱ་བའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Kriy tantra	bya ba'i rgyud kyi theg pa
བྱ་བའི་རྒྱུད་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	Kriyatantra yana, [kriya tantra yana]	bya ba'i rgyud gyi theg pa
བྱ་བའི་བསྒང	proper time for doing a thing	bya ba'i bsgang
བྱ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	material deeds	bya ba'i dngos po
བྱ་བའི་གཉེར	duty, responsibility, task	bya ba'i gnyer
བྱ་བའི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་ཚིག	be	bya ba'i don ston pa'i tshig
བྱ་བའི་ནུས་ཚད	working/ labor efficiently	bya ba'i nus tshad
བྱ་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Kriya Yoga. The first of the three outer tantras which places emphasis on cleanliness and pure conduct. The scriptures of Kriya Tantra appeared first in Varanasi	bya ba'i rnal 'byor
བྱ་བའི་ཚིག་གྲོགས	auxiliary particle	bya ba'i tshig grogs
བྱ་བའི་ཚུལ	the way to do something	bya ba'i tshul
བྱ་བའི་ཡུལ	object	bya ba'i yul
བྱ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	pristine cognition of accomplishment, all- accomplishing wisdom	bya ba'i ye shes
བྱ་བའི་རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པ	among the rang bzhin brjod pa'i rgyan, ornament straightforwardly expressing a thing's bya spyod kyi gnas lugs	bya ba'i rang bzhin brjod pa
བྱ་བའི་ལམ	sems pa'i [thinking/ wishing's] 'jug gzhi [basis of reference/ attaining] of body and speech	bya ba'i lam
བྱ་བའི་ལས་ལ་བརྩོན	Carry out your duties with diligence!	bya ba'i las la brtson
བྱ་བར་ཆད	to penetrate	bya bar chad
བྱ་བར་འོས་པ	responsibility	bya bar 'os pa
བྱ་བར་རིགས	worthy to be called	bya bar rigs
བྱ་བལ	down	bya bal
བྱ་བལ་མ	1) khrung khrung gi spu 'jam shos, bya bal ma'i nang tshangs can gyi nyal chas,(2 rdo rgyus mchog gi ming	bya bal ma
བྱ་བས་བྱས་པ	to create deliberately/ through deliberate action	bya bas byas pa
བྱ་བུ་ཤུད	long-beaked bird, hoopoe, crane	bya bu shud
བྱ་བྱ	constant business	bya bya
བྱ་བྱིའུ	birds, large and small	bya byi'u
བྱ་བྱེད	action and actor, doer and deed, dealings, affairs, doings, activities [. ; 1) bya ba dang spyod lam, bya byed mang na bya rkang chag 'gro 'gro mang na sdod sa shor,; 2) bya ba dang byed pa gnyis k...	bya byed
བྱ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	contrived activities	bya byed kyi chos
བྱ་བྱེད་ངན	bad dealings	bya byed ngan
བྱ་བྱེད་ངན་པ	bad dealing	bya byed ngan pa
བྱ་བྱེད་ཐ་དད་པ	a different doer [in the intended meaning of rtags kyi 'jug pa for a thing gang zhig la the doer of some action las ka gang zhig byed pa po gzhan gyis dngos su sgrub par byed pa, really being accom...	bya byed tha dad pa
བྱ་བྱེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ	rtags kyi 'jug pa'i dgongs don ltar for a thing dngos po gang zhig la the doer of an action las ka gang zhig byed pa po gzhan dngos su med par w/o another rang gi ngang gis being accomplished , 'kh...	bya byed tha mi dad pa
བྱ་བྱེད་པ	castrate	bya byed pa
བྱ་བྱེད་སྤངས་པ	1) abandon action; 2) zla ba gzas bzung ba	bya byed spangs pa
བྱ་བྱེད་མང	many activities	bya byed mang
བྱ་བྱེད་མེད་པ	absence/ nonexistence of deliberate (design and) action/ activities and the potential for action	bya byed med pa
བྱ་བྱེད་སྨན་པ	1 of gnas bcu gcig	bya byed sman pa
བྱ་བྱེད་ཡུལ་གསུམ	f.ex. {'chad byed bla ma}, {'chad yul slob ma}, {'chad bya gdams ngag}, subject, doer and recipient	bya byed yul gsum
བྱ་བྱེད་ལས་གསུམ	the work/ action to be done, the doer, and the thing to which it is done *, verb, subject and object	bya byed las gsum
བྱ་བྱེའུ	big or little bird	bya bye'u
བྱ་བྲག	divided	bya brag
བྱ་བྲང	1) bird's breast, upper body bya brang, khyung ske, yu mo'i mgo bcas stod kyi bzang gsum 'dzoms pa'i rta	bya brang
བྱ་བྲན	flock of birds	bya bran
བྱ་བྲའི་དུགས	pigeon dung bsros in fire te mkhal rked which must be applied to the place of illness, phlegm disease clearing dpyad cig	bya bra'i dugs
བྱ་བྲལ	1) free from worldly action/ occupations; 2) non- action, renouncing; 3) night	bya bral
བྱ་བྲལ་ཀློང་གི་སྡེ	the Space Section of Nondoing; see {klong sde}	bya bral klong gi sde
བྱ་བྲལ་ཆོས	the teaching of non-action	bya bral chos
བྱ་བྲལ་རྣམས་ལ་ཀློང་སྡེ	effortlessness	bya bral rnams la klong sde
བྱ་བྲལ་པ	one free from business, ascetic	bya bral pa
བྱ་བྲལ་བ	ascetic, renunciant, vagabond, [Syn. ku su lu]	bya bral ba
བྱ་བྲལ་འབྲས་བུའི་ཐེག་པ	the actionless vehicle of fruition, [Syn. Syn {a ti yo ga}, {rdzogs chen}. the yana of effortless fruition, free from activity, inactivity, nonaction, effortless	bya bral 'bras bu'i theg pa
བྱ་བྲལ་སངས་རྒྱས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Chadral Sangye Dorje; Nyingma master, resident at Yangleshö in the Kathmandu Valley	bya bral sangs rgyas rdo rje
བྱ་བྲུན	bird dung	bya brun
བྱ་བློ་བྱེད་བློ	good and bad, whichever to do action/ work 'dod byed 'dod kyi thought/ attitude bsam blo, bya blo byed blo'i ngang nas las ka nyin 'gyangs zhag 'phul gyis dngos su lag len ma bstar na phyis su 'gyo...	bya blo byed blo
བྱ་དབྱིབས་ཅན	bird-shaped	bya dbyibs can
བྱ་འབྲས	bird's egg	bya 'bras
བྱ་འབྲུག	1) bird [phoenix] and dragon; 2) picture on fine silk robe etc.	bya 'brug
བྱ་ལྦང	night-hawk, goat-sucker, bat	bya lbang
བྱ་སྦོ	the star gro bzhin	bya sbo
བྱ་མ	mother bird	bya ma
བྱ་མ་རྟ	courier, estafet	bya ma rta
བྱ་མ་བུ	a god, at the time of {rgya bza' kong jo} lha mo 'khrab dus symbolizing auspicious coincidence	bya ma bu
བྱ་མ་བུམ	monks's vases etc. puja implements kyi chab bum zhig	bya ma bum
བྱ་མ་བུམ་པ	teapot-shaped vessel used in sacrificing	bya ma bum pa
བྱ་མ་བྱར་སྐྱག	dandelion	bya ma byar skyag
བྱ་མ་བྱི	bat	bya ma byi
བྱ་མ་བྱི་ཁོག་སྟོང	bat	bya ma byi khog stong
བྱ་མ་བྱིའུ	flying -fox bat	bya ma byi'u
བྱ་མ་བྱེའུ	squirrel?, petaurista xanthotis	bya ma bye'u
བྱ་མ་བྱེལ་བུ	bat	bya ma byel bu
བྱ་མ་ར	sentinel	bya ma ra
བྱ་མ་ལེབ	butterfly	bya ma leb
བྱ་མང་པོ	Many Birds, in Tö, Mangyul	bya mang po
བྱ་མལ	bird's nest	bya mal
བྱ་མིང	verbs and nouns	bya ming
བྱ་མེད	can't be made, unforced, nondoing, non-activity, nothing to do, without the possibility of acting, without acting	bya med
བྱ་མོ	the female, hen, female fowl; hen	bya mo
བྱ་མོ་ལབ	(A; 1) offering substance; 2) 'bul rdzongs	bya mo lab
བྱ་དམར	flamingo	bya dmar
བྱ་དམར་མཚལ་བུའི་གག་སེལ	exorcism of hindrances by means of the red vermilion bird	bya dmar mtshal bu'i gag sel
བྱ་རྨྱང	1) stretch [body] [rkyong shad dam, sgying ba'am, glal ba, seng ge tshang nas thon te bya rmyang byed pa]; 2) involuntary stretching of arms and legs shad du brkyang dgos in rlung nad	bya rmyang
བྱ་རྨྱང་བ	yawn, stretch	bya rmyang ba
བྱ་རྨྱང་བྱེད	yawn, stretch	bya rmyang byed
བྱ་རྨྱང་བྱེད་པ	stretch, yawn	bya rmyang byed pa
བྱ་བཙལ	conscious striving; deliberate search/ seeking/ attempts to do (anything about . . . )	bya btsal
བྱ་བཙལ་དང་བྲལ་བའི་ལྟ་བ	sangs rgyas sbas pa's view which is free of all action and seeking	bya btsal dang bral ba'i lta ba
བྱ་བཙལ་འདས	beyond action	bya btsal 'das
བྱ་བཙལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond any attempt to do anything about it	bya btsal las 'das pa
བྱ་རྩོལ	{bya brtsal} concerted effort	bya rtsol
བྱ་རྩོལ་དང་བྲལ	effortless	bya rtsol dang bral
བྱ་རྩོལ་དང་བྲལ་བ	effortless	bya rtsol dang bral ba
བྱ་རྩོལ་མེད་པ	free of any pursuit or effort	bya rtsol med pa
བྱ་བརྩལ	{bya rtsol} concerted effort	bya brtsal
བྱ་ཚང	bird's nest [syn: bya khyim dang bya mal lo]	bya tshang
བྱ་ཚིག	been verb	bya tshig
བྱ་ཚིག་ཁྱད་པར་སྟོན་པའི་ཚིག	adverb	bya tshig khyad par ston pa'i tshig
བྱ་ཚུལ	the way of doing	bya tshul
བྱ་ཚེ་རིང	the white crane	bya tshe ring
བྱ་ཚོགས	1) many actions; 2) flock of birds	bya tshogs
བྱ་ཚོམ	Das: haste, hurry; rashness. CM: gya tshom dang 'dra. [mss]	bya tshom
བྱ་ཚོལ	acting and seeking, try to act	bya tshol
བྱ་མཚའ་ལུ	red chicken	bya mtsha' lu
བྱ་འཚོལ	like birds looking for food every day	bya 'tshol
བྱ་འཚོལ་བྱི་འཚོལ	like birds and mice looking for food [not knowing where]	bya 'tshol byi 'tshol
བྱ་རྫི	person attending to poultry	bya rdzi
བྱ་རྫི་མོ	a poultry farm-woman	bya rdzi mo
བྱ་རྫོགས	complete[d] action, perfect action	bya rdzogs
བྱ་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག	instant of completed action	bya rdzogs kyi skad cig
བྱ་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	an instant of completed action	bya rdzogs kyi skad cig ma
བྱ་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་གཅིག་མ	One instant of completed action. A short moment	bya rdzogs kyi skad gcig ma
སུཆ་ཨས་ཨ་ཕི༹ངེར	snap or a long period such as from initially engendering bodhichitta until final and complete buddhahood	such as a finger
བྱ་རྫོགས་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	smallest moment in which an action can be completed	bya rdzogs skad cig ma
བྱ་རྫོགས་སྐར་ཅིག་མ	1) moment/ time span of completing an action; 2) time span from beginning to completion of any action; 3) smallest moment in which an action can be completed	bya rdzogs skar cig ma
བྱ་ཝང	bat	bya wang
བྱ་ཝང་ཤ	{bya wang sha} animal med. [sweet, body heat neutral, by its power good for indigestion and vomiting]	bya wang sha
བྱ་ཞྭ	lhun rtse rdzong bya yul woman's hat	bya zhwa
བྱ་ཞག	after the winter solstice after 24 days are completed zhag 14 ring la bya zhag zer, de yang bya ma'i zhag six gshog zur zhag six dpung zhag 3, mjing khung zhag 7, kha gdong zhag 3, gshog rtse zhag ...	bya zhag
བྱ་གཞག	las ka dang de byed stangs kyi rnam gzhag, phenomenon, characteristic, circumstance	bya gzhag
བྱ་གཞུག	1) bird's mjug ma hind end; 2) the star byi bzhin	bya gzhug
བྱ་བཞག	deeds, activities, actions, career, cause, undertaking	bya bzhag
བྱ་བཞོན	egg	bya bzhon
བྱ་ཟན	birds's food, chicken feed	bya zan
བྱ་ཟིན་ཉ་ཟིན	disorder[ly fashion] not just paying attention to a bird but many things] disorder[ly fashion]	bya zin nya zin
བྱ་ཟེ	21st constellation or lunar mansion	bya ze
བྱ་ཟླ	the 8th month	bya zla
བྱ་གཟུགས་མོ	ze mo [animal]	bya gzugs mo
བྱ་གཟུངས་མོ	ze mo [animal]	bya gzungs mo
བྱ་གཟེབ་ནང་དུ་ཚུད་པ་ལྟར	like a bird who has entered its cage	bya gzeb nang du tshud pa ltar
བྱ་འུག	owl	bya 'ug
བྱ་འོན	illness related to low blood pressure	bya 'on
བྱ་ཡང་མི་ཐར་བ	even bird could not reach	bya yang mi thar ba
བྱ་ཡུལ	work place, object [of action], target	bya yul
བྱ་ཡུལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	{bya yul ba chen po}	bya yul ba chen po
བྱ་ར	watch, superintendence, attention	bya ra
བྱ་ར་གྱིས	be careful!	bya ra gyis
བྱ་ར་ལྟ	spy, [stand] guard, watch	bya ra lta
བྱ་ར་ལྟ་བྱེད	spy, [stand] guard, watch	bya ra lta byed
བྱ་ར་བ	spy, watcher, guard [= lta rtog pa, so lta byed mkhan, mel tshe pa dang so pa]	bya ra ba
བྱ་ར་བྱེད	spy, stand guard, watch	bya ra byed
བྱ་ར་བྱེད་པ	the spy	bya ra byed pa
བྱ་ར་ལེགས་བཀོད་ནས	establishing proper watchfulness	bya ra legs bkod nas
བྱ་ར་ལེགས་སྐོད	establish proper watchfulness	bya ra legs skod
བྱ་རི་སྙེགས	species of bird, gracula religiosa	bya ri snyegs
བྱ་རིམ	actions earlier and later stages/ detail	bya rim
བྱ་རིམ་འགོག་རྩར་ཐུག་པ	key process	bya rim 'gog rtsar thug pa
བྱ་རུ་མི་རུང	not proper to do	bya ru mi rung
བྱ་རུ་མེད་པ	byar med - there is nothing to be done	bya ru med pa
བྱ་རུང་ཁ་ཤོར	improper uncontrolled speech	bya rung kha shor
བྱ་རུང་ཁ་ཤོར་གྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	terma revealed by {lha btsun sngon mo} {lha dbang rgya mtsho'i blo gros} and later by {yol mo gter chen shAk-ya bzang po}	bya rung kha shor gyi lo rgyus
བྱ་རེག་ན་འཇམ	the smooth to the touch bird	bya reg na 'jam
བྱ་རོག	crow, raven, crow-like	bya rog
བྱ་རོག་སྐྲོད་ནུས་པ	child old enough to chase off a raven [8 year old]	bya rog skrod nus pa
བྱ་རོག་དགྲ	owl	bya rog dgra
བྱ་རོག་དགྲ་བོ	bat	bya rog dgra bo
བྱ་རོག་ཆེན་པོ	large species of crow, raven	bya rog chen po
བྱ་རོག་མཆུ	fragrant powder, kind of gem	bya rog mchu
བྱ་རོག་མཆུ་རིང	in the flesh of the body bone zug pa 'don byed kyi skam pa kha gnyis shig	bya rog mchu ring
བྱ་རོག་འཇིགས་བྱེད	owl	bya rog 'jigs byed
བྱ་རོག་ཉུང་མ	medicinal plant	bya rog nyung ma
བྱ་རོག་ཉུངས་མ	{bya rog nyungs ma} med. herb	bya rog nyungs ma
བྱ་རོག་ལྟོ	vegetable substance used in medicine	bya rog lto
བྱ་རོག་སྟོབས་ལྡན	important medicinal root	bya rog stobs ldan
བྱ་རོག་མཐོ་གང	mdzub mo'i tshigs dbus mar thumb joint sbyar ba'i measure	bya rog mtho gang
བྱ་རོག་གདོང	kind of sandal wood, crow's face	bya rog gdong
བྱ་རོག་གདོང་ཅན	Kakamukha, the raven-headed 1	bya rog gdong can
བྱ་རོག་ནོར་བུ	medicinal fruit useful in consumption	bya rog nor bu
བྱ་རོག་སྤྱོད་པ	characteristics of a crow (mi mngon 'khrig, rngam pa, dus su gnas na 'cha' bag yod pa, yid mi ches)	bya rog spyod pa
བྱ་རོག་མིག	1) glo bu thugs khab kyi gsang nas steng du tshon gang gzhal ba'i sar yod pa'i byang khog stod kyi mda' gsang zhig; 2) med. herb bya rog nyungs ma	bya rog mig
བྱ་རོག་མཚལ་མཆུ	bya skyung ka	bya rog mtshal mchu
བྱ་རོག་གསོས	cuckoo	bya rog gsos
བྱ་རོག་ཨུ་དུམ་ལྤ་རི་ཀ	glomerous fig tree	bya rog u dum lpa ri ka
བྱ་ལག	rough/ crude behavior of children	bya lag
བྱ་ལམ	sky, bird's flight, bird flying in the sky	bya lam
བྱ་ལམ་རྗེས་མེད	a bird's flight, leaving no trace	bya lam rjes med
བྱ་ལས	one's duties	bya las
བྱ་ལེ	vagina	bya le
བྱ་ལེ་བྱོ་ལེ	not work carefully [ha le ho le]	bya le byo le
བྱ་ལོ	year of the bird/ cock [one of the 12 year cycle]	bya lo
བྱ་ལོ་པ	person born in the bird year	bya lo pa
བྱ་ལོག	wrong actions, ha log	bya log
བྱ་ལོང	gambling	bya long
བྱ་ལོང་གི་རྩེད་མོ	gambling, diceplaying	bya long gi rtsed mo
བྱ་ཤ	chicken	bya sha
བྱ་ཤ་སེན་བགོས	dividing up [chicken meat] equally	bya sha sen bgos
བྱ་ཤང་ཤང	shang shang bird. fabulous smad bya la stod mi yin pa	bya shang shang
བྱ་ཤང་ཤང་ཏེའུ	shang shang bird	bya shang shang te'u
བྱ་ཤིང་རྟ་མོ	woodpecker	bya shing rta mo
བྱ་ཤོ་བ	bird of prey	bya sho ba
བྱ་ཤོར་བ	something that must be kept secret being known by the enemy	bya shor ba
བྱ་གཤོག་གདེང་པ	bird with its wings raised and spread	bya gshog gdeng pa
བྱ་གཤོག་བྱི་སོ	skin like a little bird pags byi'u ltar mgo bde dran 'phrul byed pa'i dpe, bya khral byi so la'ang ltos	bya gshog byi so
བྱ་གཤོར་བ	hunt birds	bya gshor ba
བྱ་ས	monastery near rtse thang	bya sa
བྱ་ས་ཀོ་ཁར	ferry at bya sa where people cross the tsang po	bya sa ko khar
བྱ་སོ་མ	bat	bya so ma
བྱ་སླ་བ	easy to be done	bya sla ba
བྱ་གསོ	poultry raising	bya gso
བྱ་གསོ་ཁང	poultry farm	bya gso khang
བྱ་གསོའི་ར་བ	poultry farm	bya gso'i ra ba
བྱག་མཁན	1) sweeper; 2) archer [mda' mkhan, byag mkhan skyen pos bya khra nam mkhar bsad]; 2) bandit; 3) dancer; 4) previously in Lhasa po ta la'i rtse nas zhol rdo ring bar thag pa'i thog rgyug pa'i sgyu r...	byag mkhan
བྱག་པ	pliancy, nimbleness, agility of body	byag pa
བྱང	1) perfected, purified, purified, cleared, - away, cleansed, trained, accomplished. 2) signboard, inscription, manual, list. 3) north. a district in Tibet. 4) Syn {byang bu}	byang
བྱང་ཀྱི་ཆོས	factors conducive to enlightenment	byang kyi chos
བྱང་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	essence of enlightenment	byang kyi snying po
བྱང་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན	the 37 factors of enlightenment,	byang kyi phyogs sum cu rtsa bdun
བྱང་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the 7 bodhi factors	byang kyi yan lag bdun
བྱང་ཀྱི་སེམས	bodhicitta [bodhi mind, awakened heart/ mind, en lightened mind/ attitude, mind/ thought of enlightenment]	byang kyi sems
བྱང་ཀྱི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	arousing/ generation of bodhicitta, {sems bskyed}	byang kyi sems bskyed pa
བྱང་བཀོད་རིན་གོང	listed/ official price	byang bkod rin gong
བྱང་རྐྱང	trowsers, small-clothes, breeches	byang rkyang
བྱང་སྐར	N star	byang skar
བྱང་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 N stars	byang skar bdun
བྱང་ཁ་སྣ་བརྒྱད	the eight districts to the north, the eight northern districts	byang kha sna brgyad
བྱང་ཁུལ	N region	byang khul
བྱང་ཁོག	chest, lungs, the inside of the body	byang khog
བྱང་ཁོག་བརྒྱངས	lungs were blocked	byang khog brgyangs
བྱང་ཁོག་སྟོད	chest	byang khog stod
བྱང་ཁོག་སྟོད་སྨད	upper and lower torso divided by mchin dri	byang khog stod smad
བྱང་ཁོག་རྨ	head and four limbs phar phud pa'i de byings kyi lus phyi nang du mtshon sogs phog nas phyi rkyen blo bur du byung ba'i wound	byang khog rma
བྱང་ཁོག་ཡུལ་ཐིག	chest lines [in the chest the don lnga &, snod drug places &, che chung 'dra dbyibs bcas clearly realizing thse, by external lines gsal being able to find things inside]	byang khog yul thig
བྱང་ཁྱི་རྣ་ལེབ	North Tibetan M thon pa'i sha khyi zhig	byang khyi rna leb
བྱང་ཁྲ	beetle?, mylabris cichoni fabricius	byang khra
བྱང་གི་ཀོ་མདའ	hide arrow used in the north of tibet	byang gi ko mda'
བྱང་གི་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན	Northern continent of Harsh Sounds [Uttarakuru]	byang gi sgra mi snyan
དང་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི་ཟླ	Northern continent of Harsh Sounds [Uttarakuru] and adherents of Harsh Sounds [Kuravakaurava] byang gi sgra mi snyan sgra mi snyand	dang sgra mi snyan gyi zla
བྱང་གི་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་པ	N continent of harsh sounds (uttarakuru	byang gi sgra mi snyan pa
བྱང་གི་གཏུམ་མོ	purifying tummo	byang gi gtum mo
བྱང་གི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	guardian of the north, epithet of vaisravana	byang gi phyogs skyong
བྱང་གི་འཕྲེད་ཐིག	N latitude	byang gi 'phred thig
བྱང་གི་ལམ་མཆོག	purification of the supreme path, supreme enlightenment/ bodhisattva path	byang gi lam mchog
བྱང་གོམས	1) bodhisattva meditation; 2) be familiar with/ adept at something	byang goms
བྱང་གྱི་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	northern	byang gyi byang phyogs kyi
བྱང་གྲོལ	freedom, immortality, emancipation, salvation, purification and liberation	byang grol
བྱང་དགུ	some say khab 'then 'tshem spyad, some to guard from harm khrab kyi byang bu having 9 holes ???	byang dgu
བྱང་བགྲོད	[sun's] N march/ transit *]	byang bgrod
བྱང་འགྲོལ	purified and liberated	byang 'grol
བྱང་རྒྱུག	when a horse travels fast w/o food for 10 days 'bru etc. having been given rgyug ma ran gong la rta mgyogs pa kha shas brgyugs nas tshod lta ba'i ming	byang rgyug
བྱང་རྒྱུད	purified being	byang rgyud
བྱང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བླ	SA nye brgyud	byang rgyud kyi bla
བྱང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	masters of the north	byang rgyud kyi bla ma
བྱང་སྒོ	signboard, shop sign	byang sgo
བྱང་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན	N continent of harsh sounds Uttarakuru [N of Mt Meru in the ocean, whose people cry for 7 days before dying "I'm dying" or others say it comes from space, square shape, and the measure of the four ...	byang sgra mi snyan
བྱང་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན་གྱི་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ	sadhana for longevity, received in a vision of Guru Padmasambhava by Drigung Chökyi Drakpa	byang sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub
བྱང་ངི་བྱིང་ངི	light occasional disease	byang ngi bying ngi
བྱང་ངོས	the N side/ surface/ face	byang ngos
བྱང་ལྔ་པོ	the 5-fold (manifest) enlightenment {mngon byang lnga} ; 1) {gdan}., {thabs shes}.; 2) {sku}., {skye mched}. 3) {gsung}. {ming gi rnams}. 4) {thugs}. {rigs kyi sangs rgyas}. 5) {rnam ye shes sems d...	byang lnga po
ཕྱིར་འདུན་པ་བསྐྱེད་དོ	strive not to initiate nonvirtuos a tions not yet generated 6) {sdig pa me dge ba'i chos skyes pa rnams spang ba'i phyir 'dun pa	phyir 'dun pa bskyed do
བྱང་ཅུབ་ཐོབ་པ	attain enlightenment	byang cub thob pa
བྱང་ཆ	1) measure of familiarity, experience, training; 2) N part	byang cha
བྱང་ཆ་ཕོག	be experienced/ trained	byang cha phog
བྱང་ཆ་མེད་པ	1) inexperienced, untrained; 2) stiff, rigid, stern	byang cha med pa
བྱང་ཆུང	1) khrab [armor?] kyi byang bu chung ngu; 2) shing sogs kyi byang bu chung ngu small inscription/ label byang chung sems dpa'i mos pas spyod	byang chung
པའི་ཆ་མཐུན་བཞི	the four factors according w practice through bodhisattva devotion byang chung sems dpa'i mos pas spyod	pa'i cha mthun bzhi
བྱང་ཆུབ	1) intimate familiarity, adeptness, perfect, adept, complete, excellent, skilled, master[ful], experienced, ripe mature; 2) enlightenment <bodhi:> have purified all defilements, and perfectly reali...	byang chub
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྐབས	at the time of enlightenment	byang chub kyi skabs
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྐུ	embodiment of enlightened being	byang chub kyi sku
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས	factors conducive to enlightenment; {sum bcu rtsa bdun}	byang chub kyi chos
ཐིརཏཡ	seven of enlightenment	thirty
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སུམ་བཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་ཐིརཏཡ	seven factors of enlightenment. the four essential recollections. four correct renunciations. four stages of miraculous ability, five faculties, five powers, seven branches of enlightenment, and ei...	byang chub kyi chos sum bcu rtsa bdun thirty
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སོ་བདུན	the 37 factors of enlightenment [the four essential recollections mvt 953 956, four correct renunciations {958 961, four stages of miraculous ability 967 970, five faculties 977 981, five powers 98...	byang chub kyi chos so bdun
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	offerings/ homage to enlightenment	byang chub kyi mchod pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	Bodhimanda. {byang chub snying po}	byang chub kyi snying po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྙེར་པོ	terrace of enlightenment	byang chub kyi snyer po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཐུགས	Syn {byang chub kyi sems} (h)	byang chub kyi thugs
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Bodhisattva conduct	byang chub kyi spyod pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་འཟུག་པ	Bodhicaryavatara, entering the path of enlightenment	byang chub kyi spyod pa la 'zug pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	harmony with enlightenment; factor conducive to	byang chub kyi phyogs
ཨེནླིགྷཏེནམེནཏ་དང	mthun-pa'i chos	enlightenment dang
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	accessories of enlightenment	byang chub kyi phyogs kyi chos
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ཆོས	accessories of enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs chos sum cu rtsa	byang chub kyi phyogs chos
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་བསྒོམ་པ	medita- 1825 tion on the 37 factors of enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i	sum cu rtsa bdun bsgom pa
ཆོས་སོ་བདུན	thirty-seven factors conducive to enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i	chos so bdun
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna of the nature according w enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i	bdag nyid kyi shes rab
བསྡུས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna gathered by being in accord w enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pas	bsdus pa'i shes rab
མང་དུ་གནས	the many topics of factors in accord w enlightenment byang chub kyi phyogs la sogs pa rin po	mang du gnas
ཆེའི་གནས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the activity of the precious topics, the factors of enlightenment and so forth byang chub kyi phyogs sum cu rtsa bdun the 37 factors of enlightenment, - bodhi-factors, {dran pa nyer bzhag bzhi}, {y...	che'i gnas nyid kyi phrin las
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	assembly of enlightened 1s	byang chub kyi tshogs
ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	thought]	wisdom of non
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the seven	byang chub kyi yan lag bdun
དག་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལ	sm enlightened mindfulness; 2) chos rab du rnam par 'byed pa yang dag byang chub kyi	dag byang chub kyi yan la
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ལམ	path of enlightenment [manifests the qualities of renunciation/realization]	byang chub kyi lam
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཤིང	the tree of enlightenment	byang chub kyi shing
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	bodhichitta awakened mind, bodhichitta, bodhimind, awakened heart, mind, en lightened mind, attitude, mind, thought of enlightenment	byang chub kyi sems
དག་སྟོན་པ	major klong sde tantra byang chub kyi sems kyi dge ba'i rtsa ba the virtuous roots of the bodhimind	dag ston pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	the four causes of bodhicitta; 1) rgyal ba'am de'i sprul pas bskul ba encouragement by the voctorious ones or their emanations, 2) byang chub sems kyi phan yon thos pa hearing the benefits of bodic...	byang chub kyi sems kyi rgyu bzhi
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་སྐྱེས་པ	Utpdada conception [of the spirit of enlightenment]	byang chub kyi sems skyes pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	arousing/ generation of bodhicitta	byang chub kyi sems bskyed pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་བསྒོམས་པ	trained in / cultivated / produced the mind of enlightenment / bodhichitta byang chub kyi sems mnga' ba'i bya mgrin sngon zla ba'i rtogs pa brjod pa 'khor ba mtha' dag la snying po med	byang chub kyi sems bsgoms pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་གཉིས	the two bodhicittas	byang chub kyi sems gnyis
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Precious mind of enlightenment. See 'bodhichitta.'	byang chub kyi sems rin po che
བྱང་ཆུབ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྟོབས་རྒྱལ	Nyingma master of {byang gter}	byang chub bkra shis stobs rgyal
བྱང་ཆུབ་གི་ཡན་ལག་སོ་བདུན	Thirtyseven branches of enlightenment	byang chub gi yan lag so bdun
བྱང་ཆུབ་གྱི་ལམ་རིམ་ཆེན་མོ	by Tsongkhapa byang chub gyi lam rim chen mo Graded Path/Great Graded Path to Enlightenment, by Tsongkhapa	byang chub gyi lam rim chen mo
བྱང་ཆུབ་གླིང	Bodhi Temple. A temple at Samye	byang chub gling
བྱང་ཆུབ་གླིང་པ	14th century - Jangchub Lingpa, a tertön who attained the Rainbow body	byang chub gling pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་དགའ་ལྡན	possessing the joy of enlightenment	byang chub dga' ldan
བྱང་ཆུབ་དགའ་བ	joyful enlightenment	byang chub dga' ba
བྱང་ཆུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	18th cent. Bhutanese prelate	byang chub rgyal mtshan
བྱང་ཆུབ་རྒྱུད	pure & total presence	byang chub rgyud
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	means of cultivating enlightenment	byang chub sgrub pa'i thabs
བྱང་ཆུབ་བསྒྲུབ་པ	to become enlightened	byang chub bsgrub pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྔ	five factors of realization, SA mngon byang lnga	byang chub lnga
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྔ་པོ	see {mngon byang lnga} the fivefold [manifest] enlightenment	byang chub lnga po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོ	total enlightenment	byang chub chen po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་དམིགས་པ	aim/ focus on great enlightenment byang chub chen po las phyir mi ldog pa not turn back from (attaining great enlightenment byang chub chen po las phyir mi ldog pa not turning back from [attaining]...	byang chub chen po la dmigs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྷུར་ལེན་པ	devote 1self to great enlightenment	byang chub chen po lhur len pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	the cause of great enlightenment	byang chub chen po'i rgyu mtshan
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང	the palace of great enlightenment [by the arhat nyer sbas in the bstan pa bskyang [practice nurture maintain ???] who in the region of Magadha met the Buddha ba'i bhramin lady yod pa de'i bu bram z...	byang chub chen po'i pho brang
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེན་པོར་སྨོན་པ	aspiration to great enlightenment byang chub chen por yongs su bsngos pa - dedication to great enlightenment	byang chub chen por smon pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག	perfect, supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog gi dkyil 'khor
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	emanation of sublime enlightenment/ sublime nirmanakaya	byang chub mchog gi sprul sku
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་པ	emanation of sublime enlightenment/ sublime nirmanakaya	byang chub mchog gi sprul pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་གི་ས་བོན་ཉིད	seed of supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog gi sa bon nyid
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཏུ་བསྔོ	devote to supreme enlightenment byang chub mchog tu thugs bskyed gave birth to a mind of supreme Bodhi byang chub mchog tu thugs bskyed pa (H develop the mind set upon supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog tu bsngo
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཏུ་སེམས་སྐྱེད	develop the aspiration toward supreme enlightenment! byang chub mchog tu sems bskyed pa arousing the mind set on supreme enlightenment, to aspire towards supreme enlightenment byang chub mchog tu s...	byang chub mchog tu sems skyed
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་རྟེན	support of supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog rten
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཐོབ་པ	to attain supreme enlightenment	byang chub mchog thob pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོད་རྟེན	stupa of enlightenment	byang chub mchod rten
བྱང་ཆུབ་བཇང་པོ	budhibhadra	byang chub bjang po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྗོན་ཤིང	1) tree = glang po'i zas, shing dbang, aa shvattha; 2) medicinal tree = pi pi ling; 3) tree of enlightened paradise	byang chub ljon shing
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཉེ་བར་རྟོགས་པ	complete realization of enlightenment	byang chub nye bar rtogs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྙིང་པོ	the very quintessence of enlightenment, sacred heart of the bodhisattva (place where buddha attained nirvana, vajrasana now called gaya), spirit of byang chub sems dpa', buddhahood, essence of enli...	byang chub snying po
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྙིང་པོའི་བར	until we attain enlightenment	byang chub snying po'i bar
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྙིང་པོའི་གཞི	the ground of buddha nature	byang chub snying po'i gzhi
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་བསྔོ་བ	to dedicate towards enlightenment	byang chub tu bsngo ba
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་ཞུགས་པ	have taken part in enlightened action	byang chub tu zhugs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་ལུང་སྟོན་པར་འགྱུར	be predicted to attain of enlightenment	byang chub tu lung ston par 'gyur
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	be predicted to attain enlightenment	byang chub tu lung bstan pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས	bodhicitta	byang chub tu sems
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the resolve towards enlightenment	byang chub tu sems bskyed
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་དོ	developing bodhicitta/ the mind set on awakening	byang chub tu sems bskyed do
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to give rise to/ arouse bodhicitta/ the intention to attain enlightenment	byang chub tu sems bskyed pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་པ་སྐྱེད་པ	developing bodhichitta, developing the mind set on awakening	byang chub tu sems pa skyed pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་བ་སྐྱེད་པ	developing bodhicitta/ the mind set on awakening	byang chub tu sems ba skyed pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྟུང་བཤགས	see {byang chub sems dpa'i ltung bshags}	byang chub ltung bshags
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐག་མི་རིང	not far from enlightenment	byang chub thag mi ring
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐུགས	enlightened mind	byang chub thugs
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་པ	attain enlightenment	byang chub thob pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་འཐོབ་པ	attain enlightenment	byang chub 'thob pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་ཉེ་བར་ཤེས་པ	know 1 is close to enlightenment, completely know enlightenment	byang chub dang nye bar shes pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་དམ་པ	true enlightenment byang chub dam pa thob par 'gyur ba will attain true enlightenment	byang chub dam pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་དམ་པ་འཐོབ་པར་བྱེད	attain true enlightenment	byang chub dam pa 'thob par byed
བྱང་ཆུབ་དོན་གཉེར	aspire to enlightenment, realize enlightenment	byang chub don gnyer
བྱང་ཆུབ་དྲི་མེད་ཡངས་པ	vast spotless enlightenment byang chub bde lam gyi khrid dmigs skyong tshul shin tu gsal bar bkod pa dge legs 'od snang 'gyed pa'i nyin byed - written by {a mdo zhva dmar} (18521910), alias {dge 'd...	byang chub dri med yangs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	namkhai norbu's root master of nyala gar in derge, Changchub Dorje	byang chub rdo rje
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྡེ་སྣོད	Bodhisattva Pitaka	byang chub sde snod
བྱང་ཆུབ་གནས	abide in enlightenment	byang chub gnas
བྱང་ཆུབ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure enlightenment	byang chub rnam par dag pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་རྣོ་རྟུལ་གཉིས	sharp and dull enlightenment	byang chub rno rtul gnyis
བྱང་ཆུབ་པའི་ལག་རྩལ	skilled technology	byang chub pa'i lag rtsal
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྤྱོད་མཆོག	supreme Bodhisattva conduct	byang chub spyod mchog
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct, [Syn {byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa}	byang chub spyod pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	Bodhicaryavatara, entering into the conduct/ realization of enlightenment	byang chub spyod pa la 'jug pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཕྱོགས	the 37 factors/ side of enlightenment	byang chub phyogs
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the factors of enlightenment	byang chub phyogs kyi chos
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཆོས	factors of enlightenment,	byang chub phyogs chos
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཕྱོགས་མཐུན	wing to enlightenment	byang chub phyogs mthun
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཕྱོགས་མཐུན་ཆོས	the factors of enlightenment [37]	byang chub phyogs mthun chos
བྱང་ཆུབ་འཕགས་དབང	the founder of the {rgya nag ma} near {skye rgu mdo} in {sga}	byang chub 'phags dbang
བྱང་ཆུབ་བར་དུ་སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆི	I take refuge until enlightenment byang chub bar sa rnams gong nas gong	byang chub bar du skyabs su mchi
བྱང་ཆུབ་བླ་མེད	unsurpassable enlightenment	byang chub bla med
བྱང་ཆུབ་མ་ཐོབ	did not obtain enlightenment	byang chub ma thob
བྱང་ཆུབ་མ་ཐོབ་བར	until enlightenment is obtained	byang chub ma thob bar
བྱང་ཆུབ་མེ་ཏོག	Jangchub Metok, at Labchi byang chub dman pa dang 'bring dang	byang chub me tog
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྨོན་པའི་སེམས	bodhicitta aspiration to enlightenment 1828	byang chub smon pa'i sems
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཚོག	highest enlightenment	byang chub mtshog
བྱང་ཆུབ་འཚོལ་བ	seek enlightenment	byang chub 'tshol ba
བྱང་ཆུབ་གཞུང་ལམ	{byang chub gzhung lam} [Tsongkhapa's commentary of the Bodhisattvabhumi's discipline chapter	byang chub gzhung lam
བྱང་ཆུབ་བཟང་པོ	bodhibhadra	byang chub bzang po
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལཟོན་ཤིང	tree of enlightened paradise	byang chub lzon shing
བྱང་ཆུབ་འོད	{byang chub 'od} pn [in the beginning of the 11th century 8th in the from king glang dar ma counted royal lineage, who invited Atisha to T, stod mnga' ris kyi lha bla ma zhes pa rab byung gi rgyal ...	byang chub 'od
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡང་དག་པར་འགྲུབ	establish true enlightenment	byang chub yang dag par 'grub
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡངས་པ	vast enlightenment	byang chub yangs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག	secondary methods of realization	byang chub yan lag
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	7 branches of enlightenment/ bodhi- factors/ causes of enlightenment	byang chub yan lag bdun
པ་ཡང་དག	pure ecstacy 6) {ting nge 'dzin - samadhi 7) {btang snyoms - pure state of equaninity). samadhi and prajna mnyam par 'jug pa'i seven dharmas]	pa yang dag
ཤིག་སྟེ	sems in accord w the kleshas par gnas pa'i unequal and rnal du mi 'dug pa &, rtsol ba dang bcas pa'i producing antidotes to kleshas byang chub yan lag bdun dang ldan pa the Seven Branches of Enligh...	shig ste
བྱང་ཆུབ་རང་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	enlightened pratyekabuddha	byang chub rang sangs rgyas pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་རབ་ཏུ་ཐོབ་པ	completely attain/ supreme attainment of enlightenment	byang chub rab tu thob pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལ་འགོད	plan enlightenment/ enlightenment/ enlightenment byang chub la ni nye ba mthong ba enlightenment is direct seeing	byang chub la 'god
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ	the path of enlightenment byang chub lam kyi rim pa la blo sbyong ba la thog mar blo sbyong chos kyi sgo 'byed - Opening the Door to Mind Training, by Chen-ngawa Lodrö Gyaltsen byang chub lam kyi r...	byang chub lam
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	bodhipathapradipa	byang chub lam gyi sgron ma
ཆུང་བརྒྱ་རྩ	dpal ldan Atisha's mdzad pa	chung brgya rtsa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མེ	The lamp of the path to Enlightenment, Jowo Atisha's text showing the steps of the path the enlightenment. The text is short and very pithy, written in stanzas of four lines each. This became the	byang chub lam gyi sgron me
མོདེལ་ཕོ༹ར་ཨ་ཧུགེ་གེནྲེ་ཨོཕ༹་སོ	called {lam rim} literature	model for a huge genre of so
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ	the stages of the path of enlightenment; the graded path of enlightenment	byang chub lam gyi rim
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	stages of the path of enlightenment [by Tsongkhapa, lesser middle and greater path]	byang chub lam gyi rim pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་གྱི་རིམས་པ	the graded path of enlightenment	byang chub lam gyi rims pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་སྒྲོན	Bodhipathapradipa, Lamp of the Path of Enlightenment, [text by Atisha 982-1054]	byang chub lam sgron
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་རིམ་ཆེ	lam rim chen	byang chub lam rim che
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་རིམ་ཆེན་མོ	Lamrim chenmo the great treatise of the stages to enlightenment by Tsongkhapa [paramita path stages for the three kinds of beings giving the geneal intention of the teachings late 14th century]	byang chub lam rim chen mo
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལུང་བསྟན	the prophesy for enlightenment	byang chub lung bstan
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང	Bodhi tree	byang chub shing
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང་དོང	Bodhi tree	byang chub shing dong
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང་དྲུང	in front of the Bodhi tree	byang chub shing drung
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང་གདོང	Bodhi Tree	byang chub shing gdong
བྱང་ཆུབ་ས	the stage / state of enlightenment	byang chub sa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	bodhicitta, pure & total presence, primordial state, total presence, enlightened attitude, lifeforce, energy, ethical impulse, bodhisattva's vow, seed of compassion, semen, as lived experience (mys...	byang chub sems
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་སློང	the attitude of bodhichitta	byang chub sems kyi kun slong
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of bodhicitta	byang chub sems kyi dkyil 'khor
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	Bodhisattvabindu	byang chub sems kyi thig le
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Sphere of Awakened Mind.	byang chub sems kyi thig le'i rgyud
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	Aspiration to attain enlightenment	byang chub sems bskyed
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་འགྲེལ	Commentary on Bodhichitta;	byang chub sems 'grel
བོདྷིཆིཏཏ	vivarana; Smrtijñanakirti, 10th-11th centuries	Bodhichitta
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་བསྒོམ	Cultivating the Primordial State of Pure and Total Presence, also known as rdo la gser zhun	byang chub sems bsgom
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་བསྒོམ་པ	1 of snga 'gyur lnga	byang chub sems bsgom pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ལྔ	5 forms of pure and total presence, 5 aspects of bodhicitta byang chub sems bcos thabs mdor bsdus - Brief Treatise of Means for Arousing Bodhicitta by Garab dorje, byang chub sems bcos thabs mdor b...	byang chub sems lnga
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་མཆོག	supreme bodhichitta	byang chub sems mchog
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་མཆོག་སྐྱེད་ཅིག	set your mind on enlightenment!	byang chub sems mchog skyed cig
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཉིད	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras	byang chub sems nyid
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་གཉིས་བསྐྱེད	arouse the two bodhicittas,	byang chub sems gnyis bskyed
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་གཉིས་བསྐྱེད་པ	generate the twofold bodhichitta	byang chub sems gnyis bskyed pa
བསླབ་བྱ་ཉི་ཤུ	[TRS 109-6]	bslab bya nyi shu
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཏིག	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	byang chub sems tig
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དག་བླང་བ	receiver pure bodhicitta	byang chub sems dag blang ba
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ལྡན	who has an awakening mind	byang chub sems ldan
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་པ	Bodhisattva	byang chub sems pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་པའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the bodhisattva gaze	byang chub sems pa'i lta stangs
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་པའི་མཛད་སྤྱོད	bodhisattva activities	byang chub sems pa'i mdzad spyod
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་པའི་ས	the bodhisattva stages; 2) the byang sa, Bodhisattva Stages by Asanga	byang chub sems pa'i sa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔ	bodhisattva [being on the path of enlightenment, heroic being of enlightenment, those heroically committed to pure and total presence]	byang chub sems dpa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva	byang chub sems dpa'
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་བརྒྱད	8 [foremost] bodhisattvas	byang chub sems dpa' brgyad
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་བཅུ	the 10 bodhisattvas	byang chub sems dpa' bcu
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་རྟོག་མེད	conceptionless bodhisattvas byang chub sems dpa' thams cad dang	byang chub sems dpa' rtog med
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	completely perfect the vast mind of the unobstructed 1830 great compassion of the 1,000- armed/ eyed bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara	yongs su rdzogs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct	byang chub sems dpa' spyod pa
གནམ་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ་བླངས་པའི་མདོ	{byang chub sems dpa' byams pa dga' ldan gnam du skye ba blangs pa'i mdo} text byang chub sems dpa' smon lam gyi stobs	gnam du skye ba blangs pa'i mdo
ཅན་རྣམ་པར་རྩེ་བ	play of phenomena w the power of bodhisattva aspiration byang chub sems dpa' rigs la gnas pa abide in the family of bodhisattvas	can rnam par rtse ba
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ལས་དང་པོ	beginning bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa' las dang po ba beginner bodhisattva, being first entering the bodhisattva path byang chub sems dpa' sa la gnas pa bsad	byang chub sems dpa' las dang po
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་བསླབ་པ	bodhisattva precepts byang chub sems dpa'i dge slong gi dge 'dun - a congregation of bodhisattva monks byang chub sems dpa'i dge slong gi dge 'dun - congregation of bodhisattva monks	byang chub sems dpa' bslab pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྒོམ	meditation of the bodhisattvas	byang chub sems dpa'i sgom
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་རྟགས་ལྔ	the five marks of bodhisattvas	byang chub sems dpa'i rtags lnga
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the bodhisattva gaze byang chub sems dpa'i ltung ba bshags pa - confess bodhisattva downfalls	byang chub sems dpa'i lta stangs
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ལྟུང་བཤགས	a Mahayana Buddhist formula of confession and atonement; atonement; Mahayana Buddhist formula of prayer, confession, and atonement	byang chub sems dpa'i ltung bshags
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	the 10 powers of a bodhisattva	byang chub sems dpa'i stobs bcu
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཐེག་པ	Bodhisattva vehicle. A synonym for Mahayana	byang chub sems dpa'i theg pa
པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རིགས	lineage of truly realizing the vehicle of the bodhisattva [one of the {rigs can lnga - five lineages] byang chub sems dpa'i theg pa mngon	par rtogs pa'i rigs
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	bodhisattvapitaka	byang chub sems dpa'i sde snod
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྡོམ་པ	the bodhisattva vow [motivated by benefitting others, abandoning harm, vow of discipline of practice of enlightenment]	byang chub sems dpa'i sdom pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	bodhisattva practice	byang chub sems dpa'i rnal 'byor
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་འཇུག	Shantideva's Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct, (= {spyod 'jug}	byang chub sems dpa'i spyod 'jug
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct, bodhisattva's training	byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་པ་དྲུག	he six conducts of a bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa la 'jug pa - Shantideva's Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct [= {spyod 'jug} [R] byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa la 'jug pa - Bodhicharya...	byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa drug
པར་མཛད་པ	carried out the activities of a bodhisattva; heroically strove to byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa'i mdo 'phags pa byang chub sems dpa'i spyod 1831 pa bstan pa zhes bya ba'i mdo * (Bodhisattvapi akas...	par mdzad pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ	the practice of a Bodhisattva	byang chub sems dpa'i spyod lam
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་དབང་བཅུ	the 10 powers of bodhisattvas	byang chub sems dpa'i dbang bcu
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་འབྲས་བུ་བཞི	the four fruitions of bodhisattvas byang chub sems dpa'i 'bras bu'i khyad	byang chub sems dpa'i 'bras bu bzhi
པར་བཅུ་གཅིག	the eleven special fruitions of bodhisattvas byang chub sems dpa'i mi 'jigs pa bzhi the four fearlessnesses of a bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa'i mi 'jigs pa bzhi [TRS 53-4]	par bcu gcig
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	bodhisattva discipline byang chub sems dpa'i tshul khrims kyi	byang chub sems dpa'i tshul khrims
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་མཚན་ཉིད	The definition/ defining marks of a bodhisattva	byang chub sems dpa'i mtshan nyid
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་མཚན་སྤྱི	the universal characteristics of a bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa'i yongs su smin pa complete ripening of a bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa'i rigs can ma nges	byang chub sems dpa'i mtshan spyi
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ལམ་ལྔ	five bodhisattva paths	byang chub sems dpa'i lam lnga
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ས	1) the bodhisattva stages. 2) the byang sa, Bodhisattva Stages by Asanga	byang chub sems dpa'i sa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ས་བཅུ	10 levels/ bhumis of the bodhisattva	byang chub sems dpa'i sa bcu
པྲམུདིཏ་བྷུམི	the joyous. 2) {dri ma med pa} [vimalabhumi] - the immaculate. 3) {'od byed pa} [arcusmatibhumi] - the light giving. 4) {'od 'phro can} [arcismatibhumi] - the radiant. 5) {shin du sbyong dka' ba} [...	pramudita bhumi
བྱ་ཚུལ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 ways bodhisattvas act for the benefit of sentient beings	bya tshul bcu gnyis
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་བསླབ་པ	Bodhisattva trainings, bodhisattva precepts	byang chub sems dpa'i bslab pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་བསླབ་བྱ	Bodhisattva vows byang chub sems dpas sems can gyi don	byang chub sems dpa'i bslab bya
བྱ་ཚུལ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 ways bodhisattvas act for the benefit of sentient beings	bya tshul bcu gcig
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་འཔའི་དགེ་འདུན	sangha of bodhisattvas	byang chub sems 'pa'i dge 'dun
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་འབྱོངས	have mastered bodhicitta	byang chub sems 'byongs
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་མ་བརྒྱད	Eight female bodhisattvas. Lasya, Mala, Gita, Nirti, Pushpa, Dhupa, Aloka and Gandha	byang chub sems ma brgyad
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་མི	also known as rdo rje sems dpa' nam mkha' che byang chub sems mi nub pa'i rgyal	byang chub sems mi
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་རྩ	bodhicitta nadi [moved by the nature of phlegm nad med kyi rgyun rtsa'i 'phar tshul zhig ste, 'phar rtsa'i rgyud rgyun ring 'jam la dal bar 'phar ba zhig byang chub sems zhva, dge lugs kyi ri khrod...	byang chub sems rtsa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་རྩལ་ཆེན་སྤྲུགས་པ	1 of snga 'gyur lnga	byang chub sems rtsal chen sprugs pa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཞྭ	bodhisattva crown	byang chub sems zhwa
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་རིག	SA rig pa'i khu byug	byang chub sems rig
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་རིག་པ་ཁུ་བྱུག	1 of snga 'gyur lnga	byang chub sems rig pa khu byug
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ལོན	unidentified text cited in bsam gtan mig sgron, Instructions on Bodhicitta	byang chub sems lon
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་གསུམ	the three bodhicittas	byang chub sems gsum
བྱང་ཆུབ་སོ་བདུན	the 37 factors of enlightenment	byang chub so bdun
བྱང་ཆུབ་གསུམ	Three levels of enlightenment. The attainment of the nirvana of an arhat, pratyekabuddha, and of a fully perfected buddha	byang chub gsum
བྱང་ཆུབ་གསུམ་ལ་བཀོད	set out the three degrees of enlightenment	byang chub gsum la bkod
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྷ་ཁང	sanctuary in kong po	byang chub lha khang
བྱང་ཆེན	great enlightenment	byang chen
བྱང་ཆེན་མཆོད་རྟེན	byang chub mchod rten, mahabodhi chorten	byang chen mchod rten
བྱང་ཆེན་པོ	Mahabodhi, the great enlightenment, [Syn {sangs rgyas}	byang chen po
བྱང་ཆོག	"inscription-ritual" [performed for dead persons. Syn {gnas chog}, {gnas 'dren}	byang chog
བྱང་མཆོག	perfect/ supreme enlightenment	byang mchog
བྱང་མཆོག་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of supreme enlightenment	byang mchog gi dkyil 'khor
བྱང་མཆོག་ཏུ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	arouse the mind set on supreme enlightenment 1832	byang mchog tu sems bskyed pa
བྱང་འཆད་ཉན་ངོ	in teaching and study	byang 'chad nyan ngo
བྱང་ཉི་ལྡོག་ཐིག	Tropic of Cancer	byang nyi ldog thig
བྱང་གཉིས	bodhisattva and mahasattva byang gnyis bodhisattva and	byang gnyis
མཧསཏཏབ༹	bodhisattva. {byang chub sems dpa' dang byang chub sems dpa' sems dpa' chen po}	mahasattva
བྱང་སྙིང་པོ	supreme/ essence of enlightenment, bodhimanda, the bodhi tree	byang snying po
བྱང་གཏེར	Northern Treasures, revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	byang gter
བྱང་གཏེར་བཀའ་རྒྱད	Syn {sgrub chen bka' brgyad drag po rang byung rang shar} terma revealed by {rgod kyi ldem 'phru can}, tertön, 1337-1408	byang gter bka' rgyad
བྱང་གཏེར་བཀའ་བརྒྱད	{bka' brgyad drag po rang byung rang shar} terma revealed by {rgod kyi ldem 'phru can} {gter ston} 1337-1408	byang gter bka' brgyad
བྱང་གཏེར་ཁྱུང་ནག	Black Garuda of the Jangter tradition	byang gter khyung nag
བྱང་གཏེར་དགོངས་པ་ཟང་ཐལ	terma by {rig 'dzin rgod kyi ldem 'phru can dngos grub rgyal mtshan}	byang gter dgongs pa zang thal
བྱང་གཏེར་རྒོད་ལྡེམ	{rig 'dzin rgod ldem}	byang gter rgod ldem
བྱང་གཏེར་རྒྱས་པ་ཡལ་ག་ལྟ་བུ	northern treasures, vast like branches	byang gter rgyas pa yal ga lta bu
བྱང་གཏེར་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར་རྣམ་གསུམ	Three Cycles of the Northern Terma, revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	byang gter sgrub skor rnam gsum
བྱང་གཏེར་ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ	terma revealed by {rgod kyi ldem 'phru can} {gter ston} 1337-1408 byang gter 'phags pa thugs rje chen po spyan ras gzigs 'gro ba kun grol gyi rtsa	byang gter thugs sgrub
བྱང་གཏེར་རིག་འཛིན་གདུང་སྒྲུབ	ter ma by {rig 'dzin rgod kyi ldem 'phru can} on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava	byang gter rig 'dzin gdung sgrub
བྱང་སྟོད	the upper N	byang stod
བྱང་བལྟས	facing north, N exposure	byang bltas
བྱང་ཐང	a district in Tibet	byang thang
བྱང་ཐང་གི་འབྲོག་པ	the nomads of the northern steppes	byang thang gi 'brog pa
བྱང་ཐིག	bodhicitta drop	byang thig
བྱང་མཐའི་སྒོར་ཐིག	Arctic Circle	byang mtha'i sgor thig
བྱང་དར	kind of white silk scarf presented to guests at the time of meeting or parting	byang dar
བྱང་དི་དི་ནམ	N Vietnam	byang di di nam
བྱང་དྲེད	steppe dweller brown bear byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang	byang dred
པོ་སྡེ	{byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang po sde} [terton and emanation of qualties of King trisong deutsen also called gter ston dbang po'i sde] byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal dbang	po sde
བྱང་འདྲེན	lead to enlightenment	byang 'dren
བྱང་འདྲེན་པ	1) umdze; 2) begin	byang 'dren pa
བྱང་རྡོ	monument	byang rdo
བྱང་སྡོམ	bodhisattva precepts. According to the system of Nagarjuna, the Chariot of the Profound View, the precepts are to refrain from the following: to steal the funds of the Three Jewels; to commit the a...	byang sdom
བྱང་སྡོམ་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	instructor in bodhisattva precepts	byang sdom gyi slob dpon
བྱང་ནག	a medicine	byang nag
བྱང་གནམ་མཚོ	{byang gnam mtsho} lake	byang gnam mtsho
བྱང་པ	1) among two traditions of Tibetan medicine, holder of explanatory tradition of {byang pa rnam rgyal grangs bzang}; 2) byang gter lineage holder; 3) an animal medicine ['bu byang pa dmar khra, hot-...	byang pa
བྱང་པ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲགས་བཟང	byang pa rnam rgyal grangs bzang}	byang pa rnam rgyal grags bzang
བྱང་པས་ལུག་འབྲེག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	x {bsam pa'i dus su byang pas lug 'breg pa lta bu zhig dgos} contemplate them like a northern nomad shearing sheep	byang pas lug 'breg pa lta bu
བྱང་པྲ་དུན་རྩེ	Changtra Düntse	byang pra dun rtse
བྱང་སྤྱི	Tibetan government nag chu sa khul du btang ba'i N spyi khyab = hor spyi	byang spyi
བྱང་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct, [Syn {byang sems dpa'i spyod pa}	byang spyod pa
བྱང་ཕུག་མ	name of a local deity in {'phan yul} subdued by Padmakara	byang phug ma
བྱང་ཕྱགས་བོད	Tibet, the Northern Land	byang phyags bod
བྱང་ཕྱོགས	[37] factors of enlightenment, N direction/ side	byang phyogs
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	arctic northern	byang phyogs kyi
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	factors conducive to enlightenment, the [thirtyseven] factory conducive to enlightenment	byang phyogs kyi chos
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སོ་བདུན	37 factors conducive to enlightenment	byang phyogs kyi chos so bdun
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	SA rnam thos sras	byang phyogs skyong
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱལ་བ་ཅན	{rgyal ba can} in the N	byang phyogs rgyal ba can
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སྒྲ་མི་སྙན	the northern continent of Ominous Sound	byang phyogs sgra mi snyan
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཆོས	the factors of enlightenment	byang phyogs chos
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་བདག་པོ	rnam thos sras	byang phyogs bdag po
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ན	north of	byang phyogs na
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་རྣམ་དག་གྲུབ་པ	the northern buddhafield of True Accomplishment	byang phyogs rnam dag grub pa
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་པ	northerner	byang phyogs pa
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཡན་ལག་སོ་བདུན	the 37 facets of awakening byang phyogs las rang brtsegs pa'i zhing	byang phyogs yan lag so bdun
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སུ	northerly	byang phyogs su
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སུ་བཏུན	37 harmonies w enlightenment	byang phyogs su btun
བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སོ་བདུན	{byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i chos so} bdun	byang phyogs so bdun
བྱང་འཕགས	noble bodhisattva [on or above the mthong lam. Syn {byang chub sems dpa' 'phags pa}. Syn {byang chub sems dpa' 'phags pa}	byang 'phags
བྱང་འཕགས་གཉིས	bodhisattva and mahasattva	byang 'phags gnyis
བྱང་བར་འགྱུར	becomes purified, byang bar ma byas has not been made clean	byang bar 'gyur
བྱང་བལ	northern wool	byang bal
བྱང་བུ	inscription, direction, label, sign/ notice/ address board, wood, cloth, paper etc. gru bzhi nar mor dras pa'i tshal bu ???	byang bu
བྱང་བུ་ལྕགས་གྱི	mail of iron plates	byang bu lcags gyi
བྱང་བུ་བཞུ་བ	burn the name inscription	byang bu bzhu ba
བྱང་བུ་ལྲགས་གྱི	armor of iron plates	byang bu lrags gyi
བྱང་བུའི་ཁྲབ	shield of thin plates or foils	byang bu'i khrab
བྱང་བྱང་ལ་འཇུག་པ	Shantideva's Engaging in Bodhisattva Con duct, {spyod 'jug}, Bodhicaryavatara	byang byang la 'jug pa
བྱང་བྱང་སོ་བདུན	the 37 factors of enlightenment	byang byang so bdun
བྱང་བྱས	purifying	byang byas
བྱང་བྱིང	a number	byang bying
བྱང་དབང	satin of superior quality	byang dbang
བྱང་འབྲུག	northern branch of the Drukpa Kagyü lineage	byang 'brug
བྱང་འབྲོག	northern nomad, hor 'brog	byang 'brog
བྱང་འབྲོང	wild yak from byang thang	byang 'brong
བྱང་མ	skilled	byang ma
ཡིག་ལྷན་ཚོགས	NATO	yig lhan tshogs
བྱང་མི	north-man, nothing, not at all, by no means	byang mi
བྱང་མི་གསུང	said nothing	byang mi gsung
བྱང་མེ་གླིང	north America	byang me gling
བྱང་རྩལ	skills talents	byang rtsal
བྱང་རྩེ	{byang rtse} monastic college	byang rtse
བྱང་ཚྭ	iron helmet	byang tshwa
བྱང་ཚྭ་དཀར་པོ	northern white salt [from stod mnga' ris etc naturally crystal-like]	byang tshwa dkar po
བྱང་ཚད	measure of familiarity/ adeptness	byang tshad
བྱང་ཚོང	commerce in [wool salt etc.] northern plain commodities	byang tshong
བྱང་ཞྭ	iron helmet	byang zhwa
བྱང་ཞིང་དག་པ	cleanse and purify	byang zhing dag pa
བྱང་བཞིན	image [neglected in a mirror]	byang bzhin
བྱང་བཞུ	smelt, refine	byang bzhu
བྱང་བཞུ་སྲེག	virtue establishing rite	byang bzhu sreg
བྱང་བཞུས	ritual of name-burning	byang bzhus
བྱང་ཟང་ཟང་ལྷ་བྲག	the place in the southern part of Central Tibet where {dgongs pa zang thal} was revealed	byang zang zang lha brag
བྱང་ཟུར་གཉིས	byang pa rnam rgyal grags bzang and zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje	byang zur gnyis
བྱང་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	the 7 bodhi-factors,	byang yan lag bdun
བྱང་ཡིག	1) kha byang du bris pa'i ming sogs; 2) gshin po'i ming byang yi ge ???	byang yig
བྱང་རིང་སྔོན་རྩ་རི	{byang ring sngon rtsa mountain	byang ring sngon rtsa ri
བྱང་རིམ་གྱིས	gradually cleansed, accomplished	byang rim gyis
བྱང་ལ་སྟོད	North Latö	byang la stod
བྱང་ལམ	path of enlightenment, Chiunghai-Lhasa highway	byang lam
བྱང་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	stages of the path of enlightenment	byang lam gyi rim pa
བྱང་ལམ་སྒྲོན	Bodhipatha-pradipa, Lamp of the Path of Enlightenment, by atisha	byang lam sgron
བྱང་ལུགས	The N tradition [from {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal} byang pa {rnam rgyal grags bzang} explanation of tantras &, medical diagnosis etc.]	byang lugs
བྱང་ཤམ་བྷ་ལ	N country of Shambhala *]	byang sham bha la
བྱང་ཤར	northeast	byang shar
བྱང་ཤར་ཏིང་འཛིན་བརྒྱན་པ	Adornment of samadhi in the NE [one of the {phyogs bcu'i zhing khams} = the (buddha) realms of the 10 directions]	byang shar ting 'dzin brgyan pa
བྱང་ཤར་མཐའ་མཚམས་ས་གནས	NE Frontier Agency	byang shar mtha' mtshams sa gnas
བྱང་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	direction protector of the NE	byang shar phyogs skyong
བྱང་ས	bodhisattva-bhumi Bodhisattva bhumis by Asanga	byang sa
བྱང་ས་བཅུ	the ten bodhisattva stages, {sa bcu}	byang sa bcu
བྱང་སེམས	enlightened mind a synonym for {thig le} or seminal point	byang sems
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	bodhisattva-yana	byang sems kyi theg pa
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	Bodhisattva Collections	byang sems kyi sde snod
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	bodhisattva vows	byang sems kyi sdom pa
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་ཕན་ཡོན་བཞད་པ	The beneficial attributes of enlightened mind	byang sems kyi phan yon bzhad pa
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་འཕགས་པ	bodhisattvaarya	byang sems kyi 'phags pa
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལམ	bodhisattva path/realization [in crossing to the liberation of mahayana phye shul du gyur pa'i realization or knowledge of bodhicitta]	byang sems kyi lam
བྱང་སེམས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	a bodhisattva's instructor	byang sems kyi slob dpon
བྱང་སེམས་དཀར	(or dmar), white and red species of medicinal plants which are used to stop seminal discharge	byang sems dkar
བྱང་སེམས་དཀར་པོ	the white enlightening spirit	byang sems dkar po
བྱང་སེམས་དཀར་དམར	man's white essence/ bodhicitta and woman's red	byang sems dkar dmar
བྱང་སེམས་འགྲེལ	Bodhicitta-vivarana, Nagarjuna's essay on bodhicitta	byang sems 'grel
བྱང་སེམས་རྒྱན་བཞི	four ornaments of a bodhisattva	byang sems rgyan bzhi
བྱང་སེམས་རྒྱུད་ལ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	failed to develop bodhichitta 1835	byang sems rgyud la ma skyes pa
བྱང་སེམས་སྒོམ་པ	MSS: probably = byang chub sems dpa'i sgom [mss]	byang sems sgom pa
བྱང་སེམས་སྒོམ་ཚུལ་གཉིས	the two ways of cultivation on the bodhisattva path [according to the dgongs don of the prajnaparamita by means of the rgyu 'bras man ngag bdun 7 oral instructions of cause and effect the 1st and t...	byang sems sgom tshul gnyis
བྱང་སེམས་བསྒོམ་པ	to cultivate bodhichitta, meditate on compassion	byang sems bsgom pa
བྱང་སེམས་དོན་དྲུག	n. of a Dzogchen tantra	byang sems don drug
བྱང་སེམས་བདུད་རྩི	Bodhicitta nectar	byang sems bdud rtsi
བྱང་སེམས་བདུད་རྩེ	Bodhichitta nectar	byang sems bdud rtse
བྱང་སེམས་རྡོ་ལ་གསེར་ཞུན	the instructions on Bodhichitta Written in Gold on Stone	byang sems rdo la gser zhun
བྱང་སེམས་ལྡན་པའི	pumice stone byang sems ldan pa'i lha bu gzhon nu soapstone	byang sems ldan pa'i
བྱང་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva	byang sems dpa'
བྱང་སེམས་དཔའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the bodhisattva gaze byang sems dpa'i lta stangs dpa'i theg pa the bodhisattva vehicle, (= {theg pa chen po} byang sems dpa'i lta stangs dpa'i theg pa the bodhisattva vehicle, [Syn {theg pa chen po...	byang sems dpa'i lta stangs
ལ་འཇུག་པ	Shantideva's engaging in bodhisattva conduct, (= {spyod 'jug}, bodhicaryavatara byang sems dpa'i lta stangs dpa'i theg pa	la 'jug pa
ས	1) the bodhisattva stages. 2) the {byang sa} Bodhisattva Stages by Asanga byang sems dpa'i lta stangs dpa'i theg pa'i	sa
བྱང་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་པ	bodhisattva conduct	byang sems dpa'i spyod pa
བྱང་སེམས་ཕྱག་ཆེན	the Great Seal of Bodhichitta; one of {phyag chen lnga ldan} The Fivefold Mahamudra of the Drigungpas	byang sems phyag chen
བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པ	bodhisattva noble 1s on the bhumis	byang sems 'phags pa
བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་དགེ་འདུན	the noble sangha of Bodhisattvas	byang sems 'phags pa'i dge 'dun
བྱང་སེམས་འབབ་རྩ	a nadi	byang sems 'bab rtsa
བྱང་སེམས་འབྱོངས་པ	to perfect bodhichitta	byang sems 'byongs pa
བྱང་སེམས་སྦྱོར་ལམ་པ	1) path of application/ preparation of a bodhisattva; 2) red bodhicitta, female blood essence	byang sems sbyor lam pa
བྱང་སེམས་དམར་པོ	the red enlightening spirit byang sems rtsa ba'i sras kyi dkyil 'khor fundamental mandala of enlightened mind	byang sems dmar po
བྱང་སེམས་ཡོངས་བཟུང	seizing the enlightened mind	byang sems yongs bzung
བྱང་སེམས་སོ་སྐྱེའི་ལམ	the path for ordinary bodhisattvas	byang sems so skye'i lam
བྱང་སེམས་སོ་སྐྱེས	1) the bodhisattva path of accumulation and preparation; 2) bodhisattvas and ordinary beings	byang sems so skyes
བྱང་སེམས་ལྷག་པར་ཆེ་བ	possessed immense bodhichitta	byang sems lhag par che ba
བྱང་སོ་བདུན	the 37 bodhi-factors, [abbr. of {byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa'i chos sum cu rtsa bdun}	byang so bdun
བྱང་སྲེག	gshin po'i ming	byang sreg
བྱང་བསྲེགས	name burning ritual for the dead	byang bsregs
བྱང་བསྲེགས་བྱན་ཚུད་པ	name burning ceremony for the dead	byang bsregs byan tshud pa
བྱང་ལྷ་རྩེ	Chang Lhatse, in Tsang	byang lha rtse
བྱངས	well-cleansed, purified, SA byang	byangs
བྱངས་སྙིང	affectionate	byangs snying
བྱད་ཀ	harming power of sorcery etc., curse	byad ka
བྱད་ཁ	curse, [sorcerer]	byad kha
བྱད་མཁན	1) sorcerer; 2) 1 w a sign in the face	byad mkhan
བྱད་དགྲོལ	purified and liberated	byad dgrol
བྱད་འགྲོལ	rites to avert the effects of the byad ka	byad 'grol
བྱད་ལྟས	1) mtshan ma of sorcery; 2) characteristics of a face [signs?]	byad ltas
བྱད་སྟེམས	cursed	byad stems
བྱད་སྟེམས་གདོན	d"n's curse disease [said to be caused by sorcery, as symptoms lag tu shing 'dzin and gcer bur rgyug pa &, gnas stong pa la 'dug pa etc. byed pa zhig	byad stems gdon
བྱད་དུ་བཅུག	diabolically possessed	byad du bcug
བྱད་པ་མི་སྡུག་པ	unpleasant appearance	byad pa mi sdug pa
བྱད་པ་བཟང་པོ	to be handsome	byad pa bzang po
བྱད་ཕུར	CM: mthu gtad kyi phur bu. [mss]	byad phur
བྱད་ཕུར་རྦོད་གཏོང	black magic and curses	byad phur rbod gtong
བྱད་བར་འཕགས་པ	distinguishing superiority	byad bar 'phags pa
བྱད་བྱུར	fragrant grass cyperus	byad byur
བྱད་དབྱིབས	shape, form, structure	byad dbyibs
བྱད་མ	sorcerer, enemy [spirit causing death through magical powers]	byad ma
བྱད་མ་ལྷ་སྲུང	guardian deities which send curses	byad ma lha srung
བྱད་མོ	shape, form, structure	byad mo
བྱད་བཙོག་བཞིན་མི་མཛེས་པ	ugly dirty face	byad btsog bzhin mi mdzes pa
བྱད་ཚུགས	shape of the face	byad tshugs
བྱད་གཞིན	face	byad gzhin
བྱད་བཞིན	face	byad bzhin
བྱད་ཟློག་སྲི་ཟློག	turn back the [sorcerer's] curse, turn back the demons [mthu gtad las byung ba'i byad kha dang, dus su ldang ba'i sri'i bzlog pa gnyis]	byad zlog sri zlog
བྱད་གཟུགས	well-formed, attractive; form, shape	byad gzugs
བྱད་བཟང	pretty face	byad bzang
བྱད་རིས	picture of a face	byad ris
བྱད་ལ་ཧམ་པ	ugly things, [moribund) on the tree, [like rotten meat] 1836	byad la ham pa
བྱད་སྲིད	being between (death and birth	byad srid
བྱན	salted curry, SA bya na	byan
བྱན་ཆུབ	enlightenment byan chub kyi chos sum bcu rtsa bdun 37 doctrines of enlightenment	byan chub
བྱན་ཆུབ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	means of establishing enlightenment	byan chub sgrub pa'i thabs
བྱན་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག་བདུན	7 branches of enlightenment	byan chub yan lag bdun
བྱན་ཆུབ་སེམས	enlightened mind	byan chub sems
བྱན་ཆུབ་གསུམ	three degrees of enlightenment	byan chub gsum
བྱན་པོ	married man, wife, spouse	byan po
བྱན་མོ	housewife, cook, divorced woman, woman who cooks food	byan mo
བྱན་ཚུད་པ	determine unimpededly what is to be done, allure, entice, seduce, concrete personal experience, concrete personal experiences	byan tshud pa
བྱན་རླབས་བཞི	the four blessings	byan rlabs bzhi
བྱནད་ཐང	{byand thang} district	byand thang
བྱནད་བཞུས	ritual of name-burning after death	byand bzhus
བྱབ	sweep/ clean [up], sense, meaning, essence cho, bzo, snying po	byab
བྱབ་ཆུང	silly, stupid, childish, w little meaning	byab chung
བྱབ་ཆུང་གི་ལས་ཀ	stupid work	byab chung gi las ka
བྱབ་ཆུང་བ	silly, stupid, childish, w little meaning	byab chung ba
བྱབ་པ	ft. of {byab pa}; to clean, cleanse, wash, wipe; {byab pa, byabs pa, byab pa, byobs} trans. v	byab pa
བྱབ་བ	called	byab ba
བྱབ་བྱབ	w the hand nyug nyug gam 'phur 'phur, mgo bor lag pas byab byab byed pa [rub?]	byab byab
བྱབ་མེད	nonsensical, silly, stupid, childish	byab med
བྱབ་མེད་པ	nonsensical, silly, stupid, childish	byab med pa
བྱབ་མེད་པའི་སྐད་ཆ	nonsensical/ silly, stupid, childish talk	byab med pa'i skad cha
བྱབ་ཟེད	brush	byab zed
བྱབས	sweep/ clean [up], sense, meaning, essence cho, bzo, snying po	byabs
བྱབས་ཁྲུས	obscurations and mi gtsang ba purifying liturgy	byabs khrus
བྱབས་ཆུང	silly, stupid, childish, w little meaning	byabs chung
བྱབས་ཆུང་བ	silly, stupid, childish, w little meaning	byabs chung ba
བྱབས་པ	cleanse, seize, SA byab pa	byabs pa
བྱབས་མེད་པའི་སྐད་ཆ	nonsensical talk	byabs med pa'i skad cha
བྱམ	stretcher	byam
བྱམ་ཁྲི	stretcher	byam khri
བྱམ་པ	in printing ink a plate	byam pa
བྱམ་པོ	gentleness	byam po
བྱམས	friendly, kindness, to be kind, love, loving kindness, maitri, mercy, benevolence, gentle ness, friendliness. adj. merciful, benevolent, friendly, loving, compassionate, kind; love, loving kindness	byams
བྱམས་སྐྱོང	cherish, take good care of, care, protection, loving care	byams skyong
བྱམས་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	to protect with	byams skyong byed pa
ལོབི༹ང	kindness	loving
བྱམས་ཁང	temple w image of Manjushri/ Maitreya	byams khang
བྱམས་གྱོག	1) khyogs khebs; 2) byams 'degs mkhan	byams gyog
བྱམས་དགོངས	kindness	byams dgongs
བྱམས་དགོན	1) gentle refuge; 2) loving protector; 3) Natha maitreya, the savior maitreya	byams dgon
བྱམས་མགོན	Maitreya kind lord/ protector [name of the future rnam 'drin lnga pa byams pa]	byams mgon
བྱམས་མགོན་ཀོང་སྤྲུལ	Jamgön Kongtrül the First. A great nonsectarian master of the nineteenth century and author of more than one hundred volumes of books	byams mgon kong sprul
བྱམས་དངོས་མཆོད་རྟེན	dbyen zlum stupa	byams dngos mchod rten
བྱམས་ཆེན	1) kindness causing compassion, great loving kindness; 2) [large statue of] Maitreya or Manjushri	byams chen
བྱམས་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ	Jamchen Chöje, founder of Sera monastery in 1419, 238 n. 1 byams chen chos rje sha kya ye rje founder of sera monastery	byams chen chos rje
བྱམས་ཆེན་ལྡན་པ	possessing great loving kindness	byams chen ldan pa
བྱམས་ཆོས	Teachings of Maitreya	byams chos
བྱམས་ཆོས་ལྔ	5 texts by maitreyaasanga in 4th century (dbus dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa, )	byams chos lnga
བྱམས་ཆོས་སྡེ་ལྔ	Five Teachings of Lord Maitreya	byams chos sde lnga
བྱམས་ཉམས	merciful, kind	byams nyams
བྱམས་སྙིང་རྗེ	love and compassion	byams snying rje
བྱམས་སྙིང་རྗེ་སྒོམ	practice love and compassion	byams snying rje sgom
བྱམས་སྙིང་རྗེ་སྟོང་ཉིད	lovingkindness, compassion and emptiness byams snying rje byang chub kyi sems kindness, compassion, and the aspiration to attain enlightenment 1837 byams snying rje byang chub kyi sems love, compas...	byams snying rje stong nyid
བྱམས་དང་རྙིང་རྗེ	kindness and compassion, love and compassion	byams dang rnying rje
བྱམས་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ	maitri and karuna, friendliness/kindness/ love and compassion	byams dang snying rje
བྱམས་གདུང	loving kindness, affection	byams gdung
བྱམས་འདོད	kind wishes	byams 'dod
བྱམས་ལྡན	dear, beloved	byams ldan
བྱམས་སྡང	kindness and aggression, love and hate	byams sdang
བྱམས་པ	Loving kindness. The attitude of wishing that other beings may be happy	byams pa
བྱམས་པ་གོ་ལོག	1) wrong kindness [to bad people and enemies, predators etc.]; 2) mna' ma dang mag pa go log pa	byams pa go log
བྱམས་པ་གླིང	great monaster and mchod rten in gra nang	byams pa gling
བྱམས་པ་གླིང་སྐོར	cho 'phrul smon lam dang drug pa'i smon lam skabs su rje btsun byams pa'i sku gling skor du gdan 'dren zhu ba byams pa gling mchod rten chen po Jampa Ling, Great Stupa, in Lokha	byams pa gling skor
བྱམས་པ་གླེང	{byams pa gleng} [monestary and chorten in Gra nang on lhokha with a huge image of maitreya	byams pa gleng
བྱམས་པ་དགོན་པོ	Maitreyanatha, loving protector	byams pa dgon po
བྱམས་པ་མགོན་པོ	the Natha Maitreya, Loving Protector	byams pa mgon po
བྱམས་པ་རྒོན་པོ	Maitreyanatha byams pa ngag dbang bstan 'dzin 'phrin	byams pa rgon po
ལས	gzims 'og sprul sku iv. Sakyapa Ngorpa byams pa ngag dbang blo gros rin chen author of {bla med rdo rje theg pa'i lam gyi sngon 'gro thun mong dang thun mong ma yin pa'i khrid rim thar pa thams cad...	las
བྱམས་པ་མངོན	maitreyanatha	byams pa mngon
བྱམས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great compassion, great love	byams pa chen po
བྱམས་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྟོབས	in protecting all sentient beings la having supreme unrelenting sbyor ba, the force of the great compassion	byams pa chen po'i stobs
བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་འཁོར་མ	Maitreya? turning the wheel of dharma	byams pa chos 'khor ma
བྱམས་པ་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 works connected w Maitreya	byams pa nyi shu
བྱམས་པ་ཉེར་གཅིག	21 duties of the bon pantheon byams pa mnyam pa nyid dang ldan pa possessing kindness and equanimity	byams pa nyer gcig
བྱམས་པ་མཐོང་གྲོལ	a deity	byams pa mthong grol
བྱམས་པ་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ	love and compassion byams pa dang snying rje'i stobs dang	byams pa dang snying rje
བྱམས་པ་དང་ཐུགས་རྗེ	kind and compassionate	byams pa dang thugs rje
བྱམས་པ་དང་ལྡན	one who is loving	byams pa dang ldan
བྱམས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	loving & affectionate	byams pa dang ldan pa
བྱམས་པ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉི་ཤུ	20 works connected to Maitreya [by Maitreya the byams chos sde lnga &, taught by Asanga the sa sde lnga and sdom rnam gnyis, by Vasubandu pra ka ra na sde brgyad]	byams pa dang 'brel ba'i chos nyi shu
བྱམས་པ་དང་བརྩེ་བ	loving, merciful	byams pa dang brtse ba
བྱམས་པ་གདན་འདྲེན	on the 1st month 25th day nyin ma 'ongs rnam 'dren lnga pa'i bstan pa 'char ba'i rten 'brel bsgrig phyir the Maitreya silver statue Lhasa bar skor du gdan 'dren pa'i mdzad sgo zhig	byams pa gdan 'dren
བྱམས་པ་ནི་སྲེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན	kindness has the nature of clinging	byams pa ni sred pa'i rang bzhin
བྱམས་པ་ཕྱག་བཞི་པ	'phags pa thogs med kyi thugs dam gyi rten byams pa	byams pa phyag bzhi pa
བྱམས་པ་བུམ་གླིང	Jampa Bumling, in Domey. See Abode of the Hundred Thousand Maitreyas 1838	byams pa bum gling
བྱམས་པ་འབུམ་གླིང	Abode of the Hundred Thousand Maitreyas, in Domey	byams pa 'bum gling
བྱམས་པ་མི་འགྱུར	ancient castle built by father of srong btsan sgam po	byams pa mi 'gyur
བྱམས་པ་ཚད་མེད	boundless lovingkindness	byams pa tshad med
བྱམས་པ་ཚད་མེད་པ་བཞིའི་རྒྱུད	four immeasurable, Maitreya, total gentleness tantra	byams pa tshad med pa bzhi'i rgyud
བྱམས་པ་ལ་གནས་པ	abide in kindness	byams pa la gnas pa
བྱམས་པ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	The prophesy of Maitreya Sutra	byams pa lung bstan pa
བྱམས་པ་ལུང་བསྟན་པའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of the Prophesy of Maitreya	byams pa lung bstan pa'i rtogs brjod
བྱམས་པ་སེང་གེའི་སྒྲའི་མདོ	Sutra requested by Maitri Simhanada	byams pa seng ge'i sgra'i mdo
བྱམས་པ་ལྷ་ཁང	Maitreya Temple:	byams pa lha khang
བྱམས་པའི་མགོན་པོ	Maitreyanatha	byams pa'i mgon po
བྱམས་པའི་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five dharmas of Maitreya	byams pa'i chos lnga
བྱམས་པའི་གཉེན	beloved relation, kind and beloved friend	byams pa'i gnyen
བྱམས་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of loving kindness	byams pa'i ting nge 'dzin
བྱམས་པའི་སྟོབས	maitribala (king)	byams pa'i stobs
བྱམས་པའི་སྟོབས་མངའ་བ	possessing the power of kindness/ Maitreya	byams pa'i stobs mnga' ba
བྱམས་པའི་ཐུགས	{kun la byams pa'i thugs dang ldan pa} loved all beings byams pa'i bdud rtsis khong khro'i me	byams pa'i thugs
བསད་པས་མེས་མི་ཚུགས	The nectar of love kills the fire of hatred, and thus fire cannot harm me	bsad pas mes mi tshugs
བྱམས་པའི་རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ	Liberation of Maitreya Sutra	byams pa'i rnam par thar pa
བྱམས་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ	kind generosity, [among the sbyin pa bzhi, meditation on kindness wishing that other sentient beings may have happiness and virtues]	byams pa'i sbyin pa
བྱམས་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ	aspiration connected w the six paramitas by Maitreya	byams pa'i smon lam
བྱམས་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ	commentary on a mAitreyapraNidh'ana of sthiramati	byams pa'i smon lam gyi 'grel pa
བྱམས་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	maitreyapranidh'anar'aja byams pa'i smon lam yon tan gyi rgya mtsho la rnam bshad dad pa'i ngang	byams pa'i smon lam gyi rgyal po
མོ་རྣམ་པར་རྩེ་བ	a commentary on a mAitreyapraNidh'ana of sthiramati; by {gzhung brgya pa dngos grub dpal 'bar} (16th cent)	mo rnam par rtse ba
བྱམས་པའི་ཚིག	loving words	byams pa'i tshig
བྱམས་པའི་འཛུམ་གྱིས	with a friendly smile	byams pa'i 'dzum gyis
བྱམས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱད	Eight qualities of loving kindness; : If one has loving kindness, (1) It will rejoice gods and men (2) they will protect one (3) one will not be harmed by poison and (4) by weapons (5) one will hav...	byams pa'i yon tan brgyad
བྱམས་པའི་ཤུགས	ardor of love, energy of	byams pa'i shugs
བྱམས་པའི་སེང་གེའི་སྒྲ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Lion's Roar of Maitreya Sutra	byams pa'i seng ge'i sgra chen po
བྱམས་པའི་སེམས	kind thought [until enlightenment wish that all sentient beings may have happiness]	byams pa'i sems
བྱམས་པའི་སེམས་དང་ལྡན་པ	kind	byams pa'i sems dang ldan pa
བྱམས་པའི་སེམས་པ	kind thoughts byams par sangs rgyas par lung bstan no prophesied that be would become the Buddha Maitreya	byams pa'i sems pa
བྱམས་པས་ཞུས་པ	the sutra requested by Maitreya	byams pas zhus pa
བྱམས་པས་ཞུས་པའི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	8 religious discourses delivered to byams pa	byams pas zhus pa'i chos brgyad
བྱམས་པས་ལུང་བསྟན་ལུགས	method introduced by Maitreya in a prophecy	byams pas lung bstan lugs
བྱམས་པོ	kind, love, affection	byams po
བྱམས་པོ་བྱམས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	show more and more affection	byams po byams po byed pa
བྱམས་པོ་བྱས་བསྡད	fondle affectionately, caress	byams po byas bsdad
བྱམས་པོ་བྱེད	act affectionately/ lovingly	byams po byed
བྱམས་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to be affectionate, loving	byams po byed pa
བྱམས་སྤྲིན	place with monastery in skyid grong	byams sprin
བྱམས་སྤྲིན་དགེ་རྒྱས་ལྷ་ཁང	{byams sprin dge rgyas} temple [established by srong btsan sgam po, 1 of the {yang 'dul gyi gtsug lag khang bzhi}	byams sprin dge rgyas lha khang
བྱམས་བྱམས	staggering, reeling, loitering, wavering	byams byams
བྱམས་མ	B"n deity	byams ma
བྱམས་མའི་བུ་གང་པོ	Purna Maitrayani Putra, important monk follower of the Buddha byams me lha mchog ngag dbang bstan 'dzin blo gros - b. 1843?	byams ma'i bu gang po
བྱམས་རྩེ	love	byams rtse
བྱམས་བརྩེ	kind and compassionate, gentle[ness]	byams brtse
བྱམས་བརྩེ་མཐར་སོན	supreme excellent thoughts of benefit for others, magnanimous, kind, compassionate	byams brtse mthar son
བྱམས་བརྩེ་ཤ་ཚ	fundamentally/ completely kind and compassionate	byams brtse sha tsha
བྱམས་བརྩེའི་མཐར་སོན	supreme excellent thoughts of benefit for others, magnanimous, kind, compassionate	byams brtse'i mthar son
བྱམས་ཞུས་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Maitreya	byams zhus mdo
བྱམས་བཞུགས	byams mgon stegs bzhugs ma'i way of sitting	byams bzhugs
བྱམས་ལ་སོགས་བསྒོམ་པ་མཆོག	excellent meditation on kindness etc	byams la sogs bsgom pa mchog
བྱམས་སེམས	kind and gentle mind/ thoughts, kindness, love, compassion	byams sems
བྱམས་སོགས་ཚད་མེད་བཞི	kindness and so forth, the four immeasurable	byams sogs tshad med bzhi
བྱའི་ཁང་པ	bird's cage	bya'i khang pa
བྱའི་ཁྱུ	flock of birds	bya'i khyu
བྱའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ངང་པ་གསེར་མདོག	the golden duck, the king of birds 1839	bya'i rgyal po ngang pa gser mdog
བྱའི་མཆུ་ཏོ	beak	bya'i mchu to
བྱའི་གདོན	malignant spirit which kills birds, disease of birds, 1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags	bya'i gdon
བྱའི་ཕྱུར་ཚུལ	flying of a bird	bya'i phyur tshul
བྱའི་ཚོགས	flock of birds	bya'i tshogs
བྱའུ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	bya'u
བྱའོ་ཅོག	all the work	bya'o cog
བྱའོ་ཕྱིར་རོ་ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ལོ	invocation to the gods by throwing a handful of barley flour to the wind	bya'o phyir ro lha rgyal lo
བྱར	(indicates future tense), SA bya bar, byed pa	byar
བྱར་པོ་པན་ཆེན	{byar po pan chen}	byar po pan chen
བྱར་མེད	(state) of/ in which there is nothing to be done; without anything to be done; - in which/ the fact that nothing need be done; does not require that anything be done; absence of anything to be done...	byar med
བྱར་མེད་ཀྱི་ངང	state of non-action	byar med kyi ngang
བྱར་མེད་ཀྱི་ངང་དུ	in a state of nonaction	byar med kyi ngang du
བྱར་མེད་ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་ཐེ་པྲཅཏིཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	doing that is like the steady flow of a river	byar med chu bo'i rgyun gyi rnal 'byor the practice of non
བྱར་མེད་དུ་ཤེས་པ	spontaneous knowledge	byar med du shes pa
བྱར་མེད་པ	nothing more to be done, performed, carried out	byar med pa
བྱར་མེད་རྩོལ་མེད	with no effort and no action	byar med rtsol med
བྱར་མེད་རླུང་ཞོན	one who is borne effortlessly on the wind; one who rides the wind effortlessly; effortless rider on the wind [epithet for garuda, used in Dzogchen for highest level of yogic experience]	byar med rlung zhon
བྱར་མེད་ལྷུན་རྫོགས་ཆེན་པོ	spontaneous great perfection of nonaction	byar med lhun rdzogs chen po
བྱར་རུང	doable, suitable to do	byar rung
བྱར་གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་གླིང	Char Sangngak Chöling; seat of Drukchen Rinpoche	byar gsang sngags chos gling
བྱས་གྲོལ	liberation from activity	byas grol
བྱས་གྲོལ་བཞག་གྲོལ་ཅེར་གྲོལ་གསུམ	three categories of liberation from the longde (spatial class	byas grol bzhag grol cer grol gsum
བྱས་ཆོག	gives you an opportunity	byas chog
བྱས་ཆོས	{byas pa'i chos} factors/ phenomena that are products/ produced/ made; (mentally) produced phenomena; isc. conditioned phenomena	byas chos
བྱས་རྗེས	achievement, success, contribution, credit trace, result, achievement	byas rjes
བྱས་རྗེས་འགོད	record meritorious acts/ achievements/ accomplishments/ success	byas rjes 'god
བྱས་རྗེས་ཅན	1 who has successful result of work, meritorious, successful	byas rjes can
བྱས་རྗེས་ཆེན་པོ	[one w] great success/ accomplishment/ achievement	byas rjes chen po
བྱས་རྗེས་འཇོག	achieve, accomplish, contribute, be successful w	byas rjes 'jog
བྱས་རྗེས་རྟགས་མ	sign showing result of work, medal, decoration	byas rjes rtags ma
བྱས་རྗེས་ཐོབ་རྟགས	sign showing result of work, medal, decoration	byas rjes thob rtags
བྱས་རྗེས་བསྡུར	evaluate [result/ fruition [of work], contribution, credit, achievement, success, accomplishment, contributions]	byas rjes bsdur
བྱས་རྗེས་གཟེངས་རྟགས	sign showing result of work, medal, decoration	byas rjes gzengs rtags
བྱས་ཉེས	crime, fault, transgression, illegal action, criminal act/ behavior	byas nyes
བྱས་ཉེས་བཟོ་བའི་བྱ་སྤྱོད	crime, fault, transgression, illegal action, criminal act/ behavior	byas nyes bzo ba'i bya spyod
བྱས་དང་མ་བྱས	acting and not acting	byas dang ma byas
བྱས་དེབ	las ka byas rabs bris pa'i deb yig ???	byas deb
བྱས་དྲིན	phan btags pa'i rjes drin ???	byas drin
བྱས་ན	if, if it is done, when done, well then	byas na
བྱས་ནས	cautioned	byas nas
བྱས་ནས་རིང་མོ་ཤིག་ལོན་པ	from action arriving at a distant place	byas nas ring mo shig lon pa
བྱས་པ་ཅན	1) successful, meritorious, 1 who has successfully done some job; 2) kind ???	byas pa can
བྱས་པ་ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བ	accomplishment not going to waste/ being done in vain [byas rjes 'phro brlag tu mi 'gro ba'am don med du mi 'gyur ba, mi rabs snga 1840 ma'i byas pa chud mi za ba byed pa ???]	byas pa chud mi za ba
བྱས་པ་ཆུད་ཟ་བ	destruction of what has been done [technical term of Indian philosophy describing the allegedly absurd consequence if there is not karma and rebirth]	byas pa chud za ba
བྱས་པ་རྟོགས་པའི་ས	[kr.rtavi-bhumih]. the stage of realizing one's actions, seventh of the {nyan thos kyi sa bdun} the seven stages of the shravaka	byas pa rtogs pa'i sa
བྱས་པ་དོན་ལྡན	meaningful action	byas pa don ldan
བྱས་པ་དྲིན་གཟོ	gratitude	byas pa drin gzo
བྱས་པ་མེད་པ	uncreated	byas pa med pa
བྱས་པ་ཙམ	objectified	byas pa tsam
བྱས་པ་ཚོར་བ	grateful	byas pa tshor ba
བྱས་པ་གཟོ	gratitude	byas pa gzo
བྱས་པ་གཟོ་བ	SA byas shes pa	byas pa gzo ba
བྱས་པ་བཟོ	repay kindness/ favors	byas pa bzo
བྱས་པ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་བ	rejoice when someone else has committed them	byas pa la rjes su yi rang ba
བྱས་པ་ལག་རྗེས་ཆེ་བ	measureless were the fruits of his prowess	byas pa lag rjes che ba
བྱས་པ་ཤེས་པ	know that someone is kind	byas pa shes pa
བྱས་པ་བསྲུང་བའི་ས	level of guarding action name [= pratyekabuddha from the {dman pa'i sa brgyad}	byas pa bsrung ba'i sa
བྱས་པའི་ཆོས	factors/ phenomena that are products/ produced/ made; (mentally) produced phenomena; isc. conditioned phenomena	byas pa'i chos
བྱས་པའི་སྟོང་ཉིད	constructed nothingness, artificial emptiness	byas pa'i stong nyid
བྱས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱིས	the effect of performing	byas pa'i yon tan gyis
བྱས་འབྲས	fruition of action	byas 'bras
བྱས་མི་གཟོ	ungratefulness	byas mi gzo
བྱས་མིན	uncreated, non-created, unmade	byas min
བྱས་མེད	uncreated/ uncompounded/ unfabricated/ unmade	byas med
བྱས་ཙང	therefore	byas tsang
བྱས་ཙང་ཀ	exactly	byas tsang ka
བྱས་ཟིན་པ	completed action, already done	byas zin pa
བྱས་ཡུས	las ka byas pa'i drin yus, rang gis las la byas yus bshad	byas yus
བྱས་ཡོད་དུས	when this had occurred	byas yod dus
བྱས་རབས	story of actions that were done	byas rabs
བྱས་ལ་མ་གསགས་པའི་ལས	performed yet not accumulated karma	byas la ma gsags pa'i las
བྱས་ལ་མ་བསགས་པའི་ལས	action not accumulated as karma	byas la ma bsags pa'i las
ཐེ་ཨབོབེ༹	mentioned six properties are incomplete. See under {byas la bsags pa'i las}	the above
བྱས་ལ་གསགས་པའི་ལས	action accumulated as karma	byas la gsags pa'i las
བྱས་ལ་བསགས་པའི་ལས	'committed and accumulated action'; Mipham Rinpoche: {kun slong drag pos bsam bzhin byed pa, dngos gzhi'i las te rdzogs par byas pa, rjes su 'gyod pa med cing yi rangs pa, de 'joms byed kyi gnyen p...	byas la bsags pa'i las
བྱས་ལས་ལོག་པ	counter action	byas las log pa
བྱས་ཤེས	gratitude, appreciation	byas shes
བྱས་ཤེས་པ	be grateful, gratitude, thankfulness	byas shes pa
བྱས་སོ་ཅོག	all/ everything that is/ was done	byas so cog
བྱི	to commit adultery or rape of females	byi
བྱི་ཀུ	[arch] garlic	byi ku
བྱི་ཁུང	mouse hole	byi khung
བྱི་ཁུང་དུ་བཙུག	to drive into the ground	byi khung du btsug
བྱི་ཆད	gna' rabs kyi khrims lugs shig ste punishment for adultery ???	byi chad
བྱི་འཇལ	gna' rabs kyi legal manner: others wife spad pa'i 'jal	byi 'jal
བྱི་ཏང	a medicine	byi tang
བྱི་ཏང་ཀ	byi tang ka, med. herb [hot,heating, by its power srin gsod, me d skyed	byi tang ka
བྱི་ཏང་ག	medicinal fruit effective against worms	byi tang ga
བྱི་རྟ	noon and midnight	byi rta
བྱི་རྟའི་གཞུང་ཐིག	meridian	byi rta'i gzhung thig
བྱི་ཐར་དུར	porcupine, hedgehog	byi thar dur
བྱི་ཐུར	1) porcupine, hedgehog [animal	byi thur
ཝ་ནེཨེདླེ	like quills]; 2) gzud mo'i lus kyi thur ma ??? spine	w needle
བྱི་དར	silk stuff	byi dar
བྱི་དུར	porcupine, hedgehog	byi dur
བྱི་དོར	wiping, cleansing, cleaning	byi dor
བྱི་དོར་གྱི་ལས	the work of cleansing, sweeping, dusting, act of sweeping	byi dor gyi las
བྱི་དོར་ཅན	neat person	byi dor can
བྱི་དོར་བྱས་འདྲ	smooth	byi dor byas 'dra
བྱི་དོར་བྱས་འདྲ་རིང་བར་འཚམ	smooth and slender	byi dor byas 'dra ring bar 'tsham
བྱི་དོར་བྱེད	polish	byi dor byed
བྱི་དོར་བྱེད་པ	to sweep clean	byi dor byed pa
བྱི་དོར་མེལ་ཚེ	mirror	byi dor mel tshe
བྱི་དོར་ལེགས་པ	sweep, clean	byi dor legs pa
བྱི་བདར	gad bdar	byi bdar
བྱི་བདར་བྱེད་པ	dress trimly, make one's self smart	byi bdar byed pa
བྱི་ལྡེམ	1) byi ba 'dzin byed; 2) byi ba'i sgrung ]fable?	byi ldem
བྱི་སྡིངས	whole, entire	byi sdings
བྱི་ནད	bubonic plague	byi nad
བྱི་ནུ་ཏི	ancient place in india	byi nu ti
བྱི་ནུ་ར་ཙ	1 of sde brgyad 1841	byi nu ra tsa
བྱི་པོ	bosom, male/ tom-cat, lewd person, adulterer	byi po
བྱི་ཕོ	adulterer, lewd person	byi pho
བྱི་ཕོ་བྱེད་པ	copulate, luck	byi pho byed pa
བྱི་ཕྲུག	bastard children	byi phrug
བྱི་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa) lose hair, become bald; 2) mouse/ rat [R]; 3) mouse year [one of 12 year cycle]	byi ba
བྱི་བ་བརྐོ་བ	digging up marmots; x {dred mo byi ba brko ba ltar re re zin dus re re brjed 'gro ba las thams cad shes pa'i dus mi 'ong} like a dremo bear	byi ba brko ba
དིགགིང་ཨུཔ་མརྨོཙ	each time you seize one item, you forget the one before, and will never get to understand the whole	digging up marmots
བྱི་བ་ནག་པོ	animal like gyi	byi ba nag po
བྱི་བ་ཕྲག་གསུམ	30 million	byi ba phrag gsum
བྱི་བ་སྨུག་ཆུང	fable mouse	byi ba smug chung
བྱི་བ་ལོ་པ	man born in mouse year	byi ba lo pa
བྱི་བ་ལོ་མ	woman born in mouse year	byi ba lo ma
བྱི་བའི་དུག	dug can gyi by mouse's teeth rmugs pa'i dug previously in winter zhugs pa though not clearly experienced later in spring when thunder is heard dug ldang ba na byi bas reg pa	byi ba'i dug
དྲན་པ་ལས	dug gis gos pa dran pa'o ???	dran pa las
བྱི་བའི་ཟས་ཅན	cat	byi ba'i zas can
བྱི་བའི་ལོ	mouse year [one of 12 year cycle]	byi ba'i lo
བྱི་བའི་ལོ་མ	SA thar nu	byi ba'i lo ma
བྱི་བོ	1) rape 'Chal po &, adultery 'phyon pa; 2) improper sex; 3) bald; 2) unadorned, gog po; 4) little child, infant	byi bo
བྱི་བོ་བྱེད	rape	byi bo byed
བྱི་བོ་བྱེད་པ	to commit adultery	byi bo byed pa
བྱི་བོ་གཤོར	rape	byi bo gshor
བྱི་བྱད	gad dar ???	byi byad
བྱི་བྱས	adultery, fornication, calumniated	byi byas
བྱི་བྱས་བྱི་རིན་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	1 of the 16 {zhal lce bcu drug} gna' rabs kyi legal custom in which gtso bo skyes pas	byi byas byi rin gyi zhal lce
བྱི་བྱེད་པ	ravish, rape	byi byed pa
བྱི་བྲུན	mouse dung	byi brun
བྱི་མོ	a lewd woman	byi mo
བྱི་ཚེ	a monster	byi tshe
བྱི་ཚེར	medicine for external application morina chinensis (batal.) diels, xanthium sibiricum patrl	byi tsher
བྱི་འཛིན	1) mousetrap; 2) the plant rtsva byi 'dzin	byi 'dzin
བྱི་བཞིན	one of the {rgyu skan nyi shu rtsa brgyad} 28 nakshatras gods of the constellations	byi bzhin
བྱི་ཟ	cat	byi za
བྱི་ཟན	cat	byi zan
བྱི་ཟེ	manner, way, method	byi ze
བྱི་ཟླ	mouse/ 11th month	byi zla
བྱི་བཟུང	bur of burdock plant arctium lappa l.	byi bzung
བྱི་འུ	poultry, a small bird	byi 'u
བྱི་འུ་ཆུང	small bird	byi 'u chung
བྱི་རལ	sugar	byi ral
བྱི་རིན	adultery price [in ancient law]	byi rin
བྱི་རིམས	bubonic plague	byi rims
བྱི་རིལ	pill of concentrated molasses, candy	byi ril
བྱི་རུ	coral	byi ru
བྱི་རུག	a plant	byi rug
བྱི་རུག་ནག་པོ	black byi rug	byi rug nag po
བྱི་རུག་པ	elsholtzia calycocarpa diels	byi rug pa
བྱི་རུག་སྨུག་པོ	maroon/ brown byi rug	byi rug smug po
བྱི་རུག་སེར་པོ	yellow byi rug	byi rug ser po
བྱི་ལ	cat	byi la
བྱི་ལམ་སྔོན་མོ	naga monster w pig head	byi lam sngon mo
བྱི་ལམ་ཕག་མགོ	naga monster w pig head	byi lam phag mgo
བྱི་ལའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	banner like a flag with cat's head on top	byi la'i rgyal mtshan
བྱི་ལའི་གཅིན	[Syn {rta'i khrag}	byi la'i gcin
བྱི་ལའི་མིག	herb ba bla	byi la'i mig
བྱི་ལོང	underground living animal w very small eyes mdog sngo ba smaller than a mouse	byi long
བྱི་ཤང་དཀར་མོ	medicinal plant	byi shang dkar mo
བྱི་ཤིང་དཀར་མོ	potamogeton pectinatus l.	byi shing dkar mo
བྱི་ཤོར	'chal po spyod pa	byi shor
བྱི་ས་མ	a deity	byi sa ma
བྱིང	drowsiness, sink in, SA 'bying ba, dullness, torpor, depression, laxity, drowsy, dull, sluggish, drowsiness	bying
བྱིང་གྱིས་རློབ	Consecration or blessing	bying gyis rlob
བྱིང་རྒོད	dullness and agitation	bying rgod
བྱིང་རྒོད་སྐྱོན་སྤངས	abandon the faults of drowsiness and discursiveness	bying rgod skyon spangs
བྱིང་རྒོད་འཆལ་བར	be confused by drowsiness and discursiveness	bying rgod 'chal bar
བྱིང་རྒོད་བྲལ་བ	free from mental dullness and wildness	bying rgod bral ba
བྱིང་ཆེ་སེ	[arch] khyab che tsam	bying che se
བྱིང་ཉོབ	unclear understanding	bying nyob
བྱིང་འཐིབ	unintelligent	bying 'thib
བྱིང་འཐིབས	overcome with drowsiness	bying 'thibs
བྱིང་རྡུལ	a number	bying rdul
བྱིང་ན	on the bottom, under water	bying na
བྱིང་ན་གནས་པ	fish	bying na gnas pa
བྱིང་གནས	fish 1842	bying gnas
བྱིང་པ	hidden, sunk, drowsy	bying pa
བྱིང་པོ	unclear understanding	bying po
བྱིང་སྤུ་མ	thick cloth w 1 face soft and 1 furry	bying spu ma
བྱིང་ཕབ	kind of tea	bying phab
བྱིང་བ	drowsiness, dullness; (mental) laxity, lost, sunk, mental sinking	bying ba
བྱིང་བ་ཕྲ་བ	subtle laxity	bying ba phra ba
བྱིང་བ་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle dullness	bying ba phra mo
བྱིང་བ་རགས་པ	gross laxity, lack of lucidity	bying ba rags pa
བྱིང་བ་གསེང་བ	clearing up / invigorating / refreshing dullness	bying ba gseng ba
བྱིང་བའི	sinking	bying ba'i
བྱིང་བྱིང་ཐུ་ལུ	species of small beetle	bying bying thu lu
བྱིང་མ	cloth w pile	bying ma
བྱིང་རྨུག	drowsiness	bying rmug
བྱིང་རྨུག་གཉིད	drowsiness, sloth and sleep	bying rmug gnyid
བྱིང་རྨུག་གཉིད་གསུམ	slackness, obliviousness, and somnolence	bying rmug gnyid gsum
བྱིང་རྨུགས	drowsiness & torpor	bying rmugs
བྱིང་རྨུགས་གཉིད་གསུམ	torpor, dullness and drowsiness	bying rmugs gnyid gsum
བྱིང་རྨུགས་འཐིབས་གསུམ	feeling drowsy, foggy, and in a stupor, torpid, foggy and dull	bying rmugs 'thibs gsum
བྱིང་སོགས	dull and sluggish, obscured and stupid; Thrangu Rinpoche: bying ba = sinking, nyog = muddy, rmug = unclear, gti mug - close-minded	bying sogs
བྱིངས	majority/ most [KNT]	byings
བྱིངས་ཅན	trance-like immersion	byings can
བྱིངས་ཆེ	most people, the majority, almost everyone	byings che
བྱིངས་ཆེ་བ	most people, the majority, almost everyone	byings che ba
བྱིངས་མདོ	paradigms of the roots (in grammar	byings mdo
བྱིངས་ན་གནས་པ	living in the depths [of oceans]	byings na gnas pa
བྱིངས་པ	1) [p 'bying ba]; 2) general, common; 3) hidden, concealed	byings pa
བྱིངས་པོ	1) whole, all entire, full; 2) chief 1; 3) mostly	byings po
བྱིངས་འཕྲོས་རྒྱག་པ	after spring plowing bshal skor drud nas nyin shas song mtshams plow again	byings 'phros rgyag pa
བྱིངས་བ	sinking, drowning	byings ba
བྱིངས་མ་བསྙལ་བ	plow to eliminate weeds, having watered ser ma langs bar du rmon pa ma brgyab par bzhag pa ???	byings ma bsnyal ba
བྱིངས་མང་ཆེ་བ	most people, the majority, almost everyone	byings mang che ba
བྱིངས་རྨུག་གཉིད	discursiveness, sloth and sleep	byings rmug gnyid
བྱིངས་ཟིན་པ	sank	byings zin pa
བྱིད	[p 'byid] wiped slid, glided	byid
བྱིད་པ	naturally subside and disappear? [p 'byid pa]	byid pa
བྱིན	give, SA sbyin pa, blessings, pomp, splendor, magnificence, blessing, past of sbyin	byin
བྱིན་ཀྱོག	outside the rkang pa'i phyi ngos ankle long bu'i thad nas ngar gdong ngos su crooked bleeding vein, if bled good for mkhal nad, dreg grum, mngal nad etc.]	byin kyog
བྱིན་ཁྲིད	empowering instructions	byin khrid
བྱིན་གྱི་རླབས	blessing	byin gyi rlabs
བྱིན་གྱིས་ཕྲ	regular	byin gyis phra
བྱིན་གྱིས་ཕྲ་བ	tapering	byin gyis phra ba
བྱིན་གྱིས་མ་བརླབས	{mkhan pos byin gyis ma brlabs sam} have you not blessed the site?	byin gyis ma brlabs
བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས	SA byin rlabs	byin gyis rlabs
བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས་ཀྱི	SA cho 'phrul rnam bzhi	byin gyis rlabs kyi
བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous action of empowering flow	byin gyis rlabs kyi cho 'phrul
བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས་བདུད་ཀྱིས་པ	possessed by Mara	byin gyis rlabs bdud kyis pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས་པ	consecration. blessing	byin gyis rlabs pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབ	consecrate, bless	byin gyis rlob
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབ་པ	consecrate [-tion], bless[ing	byin gyis rlob pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	conduct of consecration, act of blessing	byin gyis rlob pa'i spyod pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས	bless me that I may	byin gyis rlobs
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས་པ	see {byin gyis rlabs pa}	byin gyis rlobs pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	conduct of consecration or blessing [in Anu Yoga]. One of {spyod pa gsum}	byin gyis rlobs pa'i spyod pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ	blessings	byin gyis brlab
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ་པ	{byin gyis rlobs} to bless/ grant blessings; "Grant your blessings!"; to consecrate; to imbue with the quality/ attribute (of)	byin gyis brlab pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ་པའི་ལུགས	transmission of the stream of empowering energy	byin gyis brlab pa'i lugs
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ་ཚུལ་གཉིས	the two kinds of blessings	byin gyis brlab tshul gnyis
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས	blessings	byin gyis brlabs
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	blessed, bestowed blessings. possessed [by a spirit. Mara, etc], inspiration, inspiring power, those given by consecration. blessing	byin gyis brlabs pa
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་བཀའ	speech transmitted by the buddha's blessings	byin gyis brlabs pa'i bka'
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miracles of blessing, miraculous blessing	byin gyis brlabs pa'i cho 'phrul
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་བ	blessed, consecrated	byin gyis brlabs ba
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་བཞི	the four inspirations	byin gyis brlabs bzhi
བྱིན་གྱིས་བརློབས་བ	blessing, consecration 1843	byin gyis brlobs ba
བྱིན་ཅན	imbued with blessings, blessed, sacred	byin can
བྱིན་ལྕགས	kind of tea	byin lcags
བྱིན་ཆགས	blessed	byin chags
བྱིན་ཆགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཤིང	impregnating this place with auspiciousness	byin chags bkra shis shing
བྱིན་ཆགས་པ	magnificent, resplendent, splendid	byin chags pa
བྱིན་ཆེ	grandeur	byin che
བྱིན་ཆེ་བ	majestic	byin che ba
བྱིན་ཆེན	filled with blessings	byin chen
བྱིན་ཆེན་ཕེབས་པ	[when such] great blessings descend	byin chen phebs pa
བྱིན་ཆེན་ཕོབ	bestow the great blessing	byin chen phob
བྱིན་ཆེན་དབབ་པ	bringing down the great resplendence	byin chen dbab pa
བྱིན་སྙིང	calf of the leg, nyva	byin snying
བྱིན་རྟེན	relics	byin rten
བྱིན་ལྟོ་བསྐུལ་ལས	except that what is given is to be eaten and work that is urged is to be done las 'khur sems gang yang mi byed pa'i dpe	byin lto bskul las
བྱིན་ཐིབས་སེ་བཞུགས	magnificently seated	byin thibs se bzhugs
བྱིན་མཐུ	{ye shes kyi byin mthu} the power of the gift of wisdom	byin mthu
བྱིན་རྡེན	relics	byin rden
བྱིན་བསྡུ	gather blessings	byin bsdu
བྱིན་ནུས	[power of] blessing	byin nus
བྱིན་པ	legs, calf of leg, SA sbyin pa	byin pa
མངར་ཞིམ་པོ་བྱིན་པ	the lotus flower gives off a most delicious scent	mngar zhim po byin pa
བྱིན་པ་གཙང	donkey	byin pa gtsang
བྱིན་པ་ཡེ་ན་ཡའི་འདྲ	calves like those of the antelope enaya	byin pa ye na ya'i 'dra
བྱིན་པ་རི་དྭགས་ཡེ་ན་ཡ་ལྟ་བུ	calves like those of the antelope enaya	byin pa ri dwags ye na ya lta bu
བྱིན་པ་རི་དབ༹གས་ཡེ་ན་ཡ་ལྟ་བུ	legs like those of the antelope eney; one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	byin pa ri dvags ye na ya lta bu
བྱིན་པའི་མཐའ	limit of charity	byin pa'i mtha'
བྱིན་པར་བྱ་བ	give as a gift	byin par bya ba
བྱིན་པོ	all, the whole, general, the majority/ most, byings po	byin po
བྱིན་ཕབ་པ	descent of blessings	byin phab pa
བྱིན་ཕབས	good ordinary tea	byin phabs
བྱིན་ཕུག	hole behind the knee	byin phug
བྱིན་ཕུལ	hollow on the inner side of the thigh	byin phul
བྱིན་ཕོབ	bring down blessings	byin phob
བྱིན་འཕྲོག	give and take back	byin 'phrog
བྱིན་འཕྲོག་གི་སྤང་བ	the abandoning fault of taking back things given to another monk	byin 'phrog gi spang ba
བྱིན་བ	laxity	byin ba
བྱིན་བབ	received blessings	byin bab
བྱིན་བབ་པ	attain blessings	byin bab pa
བྱིན་བབས	descent of blessings	byin babs
བྱིན་དབབ	consecration, bringing down resplendence	byin dbab
བྱིན་དབབ་པ	descent of blessings	byin dbab pa
བྱིན་འབེབས	descent of blessings, resplendence	byin 'bebs
བྱིན་འབེབས་བྱེད་པ	consecrate, let resplendence descend, bring down blessings	byin 'bebs byed pa
བྱིན་མེད	without display	byin med
བྱིན་གཞུག	rting pa'i dreg pa yod med mtshams nas upward mdzub gang gzhal ba'i sar bleeding vein, if bled good for mkhal rked na ba &, gcin pa'i nang khrag 'dres shing tsha ba, khu ba 'dzag pa etc.	byin gzhug
བྱིན་ཟ	1) fire [god]; 2) south-east	byin za
བྱིན་ཟའི་ལྟ་བ	kind of vulture with plumes	byin za'i lta ba
བྱིན་ཟའི་ལྟོ་བ	lammergayer	byin za'i lto ba
བྱིན་ཟའི་ཕུང་པོ	mass if fire	byin za'i phung po
བྱིན་ཟའི་ཤིང	sticks offered in fire puja = yam shing	byin za'i shing
བྱིན་རླབས	blessing, consecration (with reference to objects,	byin rlabs
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	stream of its blessings	byin rlabs kyi brgyud pa
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་མཐུ	blessing power	byin rlabs kyi mthu
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ	Root of Blessings. The guru among the three roots	byin rlabs kyi rtsa ba
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བ་བླ་མ	Guru, the root of blessings. The first of the three roots	byin rlabs kyi rtsa ba bla ma
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་ཚན་ཁ	the power of blessings	byin rlabs kyi tshan kha
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་ཚན་ཁ་རབ་ཏུ་རྣོ་བ	supremely powerful	byin rlabs kyi tshan kha rab tu rno ba
བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་ལམ	path of blessings	byin rlabs kyi lam
བྱིན་རླབས་དངོས་གྲུབ	blessings and accomplishments byin rlabs dngos grub kyi 'byung gnas the source of all blessings and accomplishments	byin rlabs dngos grub
བྱིན་རླབས་ཅན	blessed, holy	byin rlabs can
བྱིན་རླབས་ཆེ་བ	very powerful	byin rlabs che ba
བྱིན་རླབས་ཆེན་པོ	total potentiality	byin rlabs chen po
བྱིན་རླབས་མཆོད་རྟེན	rnam rgyal stupa	byin rlabs mchod rten
བྱིན་རླབས་ཇུག	gain the blessings	byin rlabs jug
བྱིན་རླབས་འཇུག	receive blessings	byin rlabs 'jug
བྱིན་རླབས་འཇུག་པ	receive the blessing	byin rlabs 'jug pa
བྱིན་རླབས་འཇུག་པ་མྱུར་ཞིང	the blessings will come swiftly	byin rlabs 'jug pa myur zhing
བྱིན་རླབས་བསྙིགས	benediction less efficacious 1844	byin rlabs bsnyigs
བྱིན་རླབས་གཏོར་དབང	torma empowerment as consecration	byin rlabs gtor dbang
བྱིན་རླབས་རྟགས་མཚན	blessings and signs	byin rlabs rtags mtshan
བྱིན་རླབས་ཐིབས་ཐིབས	blessing devolving upon a person	byin rlabs thibs thibs
བྱིན་རླབས་དམ་རྫས	blessed samaya substance	byin rlabs dam rdzas
བྱིན་རླབས་དོན་གྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ	true lineage of blessings, blessed transmission of the ultimate / innate nature; the ultimate blessing lineage	byin rlabs don gyi brgyud pa
བྱིན་རླབས་དྲུག	the six blessings	byin rlabs drug
བྱིན་རླབས་གནང་བ	to bless	byin rlabs gnang ba
བྱིན་རླབས་རྣམ་ལྔ	fivefold blessings	byin rlabs rnam lnga
བྱིན་རླབས་པ	sacred/ blessed/ consecrated	byin rlabs pa
བྱིན་རླབས་འཕོ་བའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས	by the power of his blessings being transferred to you	byin rlabs 'pho ba'i stobs kyis
བྱིན་རླབས་བབ་ཆེན་པོ	great descent of blessings	byin rlabs bab chen po
བྱིན་རླབས་བྱས་པ	he blessed them	byin rlabs byas pa
བྱིན་རླབས་བླ་མའི་འཕོ་བ	guru phowa of blessings	byin rlabs bla ma'i 'pho ba
བྱིན་རླབས་བླ་མའི་ལམ་ཁྱེར	to take the teacher's blessings as the path	byin rlabs bla ma'i lam khyer
བྱིན་རླབས་མྱུར	quick blessings	byin rlabs myur
བྱིན་རླབས་ཞུགས	has absorbed the empowering energy	byin rlabs zhugs
བྱིན་རླབས་ཞུགས་པ	suppress evil by means of blessing, exorcise spirits, absorb the empowering energy	byin rlabs zhugs pa
བྱིན་རླབས་ཞུས	ask for a blessing	byin rlabs zhus
བྱིན་རླབས་བཞི	the four blessings	byin rlabs bzhi
བྱིན་རླབས་གཟི་འོད་འབར་བ	blaze with blessings and majestic brilliance	byin rlabs gzi 'od 'bar ba
བྱིན་རླབས་རང་ལ་ཐིམ	the blessings dissolve into 1self	byin rlabs rang la thim
བྱིན་རླབས་ལམ་བྱེད	forging the path with blessings	byin rlabs lam byed
བྱིན་རླབས་ཤིག་མཛད་རོགས	please bless me	byin rlabs shig mdzad rogs
བྱིན་རླབས་ཤིག་ཞུ	please bless me	byin rlabs shig zhu
བྱིན་རླབས་ཤིག་ཞུས	to ask for a blessing	byin rlabs shig zhus
བྱིན་རློབས	SA byin rlabs	byin rlobs
བྱིན་བརླབ	blessing	byin brlab
བྱིན་བརླབ་དབང་བསྐུར	Consecration and empowerment	byin brlab dbang bskur
བྱིན་བརླབས	blessing, sacred medicinal plants	byin brlabs
བྱིན་བརླབས་བཀའ་གསུམ	the three bka' of the blessings of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind	byin brlabs bka' gsum
བྱིན་བརླབས་བཞི	four blessings	byin brlabs bzhi
བྱིན་ལག་རྒྱབ་རྩ	nadi behind the ming med finger	byin lag rgyab rtsa
བྱིན་ལན	thank-offering	byin lan
བྱིན་ལེན	return gratitude for gift	byin len
བྱིན་ལེན་བྱས་པ	proper offering to a monk byin len ma byas par za ba'i ltung byed the downfall of eating what is not properly offered 1 of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, sman bzhi po gang rung byin len ma ...	byin len byas pa
བྱིན་ལེན་མེད	not properly offered (to a monk	byin len med
བྱིབ་པ	enveloped, hidden	byib pa
བྱིབས	enveloped, hidden	byibs
བྱིབས་པ	(tha dad pa hide, cover [up]	byibs pa
བྱིའུ	bird, sparrow; little bird, bird, alpine hare; mice	byi'u
ཕོ༹རམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་གློརིཨོཨུས་ཅོཔཔེར	colored Mountain (zangs mdog dpal ri) upon a	form of the Glorious Copper
བྱིའུ་ཀ་ལ་པིང་ཀ	nightingale	byi'u ka la ping ka
བྱིའུ་སྐས	skas ril te, shing gdung hril por nyag ka btod pa'i skas ???	byi'u skas
བྱིའུ་ཁྱུ	many mice	byi'u khyu
བྱིའུ་ཁྲི་འུར	parakeet	byi'u khri 'ur
བྱིའུ་མགོ	1) small bird's head; 2) med. mineral	byi'u mgo
བྱིའུ་སྒོག	medicinal plant	byi'u sgog
བྱིའུ་མཆིལ་བ	sparrow	byi'u mchil ba
བྱིའུ་མཆོང་ལྡིང	jumping and soaring up like a bird	byi'u mchong lding
བྱིའུ་འཇོག་ཁང	aviary	byi'u 'jog khang
བྱིའུ་ཏི་ཏི་རི	a quail	byi'u ti ti ri
བྱིའུ་ཕུར	sty	byi'u phur
བྱིའུ་ཕྲུག	baby bird	byi'u phrug
བྱིའུ་ཕྲུག་ཐང་གྱར	baby mouse ... [w/o refuge or protector]	byi'u phrug thang gyar
བྱིའུ་སྦྱང	small bird	byi'u sbyang
བྱིའུ་མེ་ཟན	fabulous bird from whose excrement gold is obtained	byi'u me zan
བྱིའུ་ཚང	field shrew	byi'u tshang
བྱིའུ་འཛུལ	small hole or srubs ka and among forest thickets a mouse can go unobstructedly shar 'dzul skyod byed pa'i dpe	byi'u 'dzul
བྱིའུ་ཟུལ	[arch] thim nyams, 'dzul nyams ???	byi'u zul
བྱིའུ་འུར་བ	locust that sings on flying	byi'u 'ur ba
བྱིའུ་ཡི་སྐད	chirp	byi'u yi skad
བྱིའུ་ཡི་ཚང	field shrew	byi'u yi tshang
བྱིའུ་རིགས་ཤིག	wren	byi'u rigs shig
བྱིའུ་ལ་ཕུག	byi'i la phug med. herb	byi'u la phug
བྱིའུ་སྲད་མ	byi'i srad ma med. herb [zhing skyes sran ma'i rigs shig ste, sweet, cooling, by its power curing wounds, and good for bites by mad dogs]	byi'u srad ma
བྱིའུ་སྲན་མ	polygala tenuifolia willd.	byi'u sran ma
བྱིར	g.yu byir - coral and turquoise	byir
བྱིལ	smear, stroke, pat, caress ['byil ba!]	byil
བྱིལ་བ	to pat (a person's head)	byil ba
བྱིལ་བྱིལ	caress, stroke, pat phyogs gcig nas byul byul byed stangs, sma ra byil byil btang ba, mgo skra byil byil byed pa, sge khung gi ru shing la bkrag rtsi byil byil gyis 'byug pa ???	byil byil
བྱིལ་བྱིལ་བྱེད	caress, stroke, pat	byil byil byed
བྱིལ་མོ	naked	byil mo
བྱིས	children['s]	byis
བྱིས་ཀློག་རྩམ་རིག	children's literature	byis klog rtsam rig
བྱིས་གླུ	children's songs	byis glu
བྱིས་འགྲོས	child's way of going	byis 'gros
བྱིས་སྒྲུང	child's [fairy-]tale	byis sgrung
བྱིས་ཉམས	phru gu'i rnam 'gyur, rgas 'khogs byis nyams can ???	byis nyams
བྱིས་ནད	pediatrics, children's diseases	byis nad
བྱིས་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	department of pediatrics	byis nad tshan khag
བྱིས་པ	immature; (spiritually) immature person/ individual; child, childish, immature being, kid, infant, childish fool, [ignorant worldly person lacking the insight of a 'phags pa]. childish people, ever...	byis pa
བྱིས་པ་ཁང	kindergarten	byis pa khang
བྱིས་པ་གོས་ཀྱིས་སྲུབས་པ	infants are smothered under their blankets	byis pa gos kyis srubs pa
བྱིས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་རྟོག་གེ	{byis pa 'jug pa'i rtog ge} pramana text by the Indian master {dgra las rgyal ba}	byis pa 'jug pa'i rtog ge
བྱིས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་དབང་བདུན	seven empowerments to initiate immature beings	byis pa 'jug pa'i dbang bdun
བྱིས་པ་ཉེར་སྤྱོད་ཀྱེ་བསམ་གཏན	the enjoyment meditations of an immature person, a worlding's dhyana of enjoyment, [attachment to experiences of bliss, clarity and non-thought]	byis pa nyer spyod kye bsam gtan
བྱིས་པ་ཉེར་སྦྱོད་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	the enjoyment meditations of an immature person, a worldling's dhyana of enjoyment	byis pa nyer sbyod kyi bsam gtan
བྱིས་པ་དྲང་བའི་ཆོས	spiritual teachings which are designed to lead those who are spiritually immature byis pa bde blag tu 'jug pa'i rnam par	byis pa drang ba'i chos
བཤད་པ་མཁས་པ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ	an introduction to the principles of Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism; by {sa skya paN Di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan} (1182-1251)	bshad pa mkhas pa 'jug pa'i sgo
བྱིས་པ་འདོད་ནོག	boy who knows not his mind	byis pa 'dod nog
བྱིས་པ་འདོད་ནོག་ཅན	boy wishful of many things	byis pa 'dod nog can
བྱིས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ	childish conduct	byis pa spyod pa
བྱིས་པ་བླུན་པོ	childish fool	byis pa blun po
བྱིས་པ་འི་རྫས་གསུམ	the three smeared substances,	byis pa 'i rdzas gsum
བྱིས་པ་ཤེད་མ་བྱེ་བ	child in whom power of body and mind have not arisen	byis pa shed ma bye ba
བྱིས་པ་སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ	childish individual beings	byis pa so so'i skye bo
བྱིས་པ་གསོད	a kind of crocodile/ water dragon	byis pa gsod
བྱིས་པ་གསོད་པ	infanticide	byis pa gsod pa
བྱིས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ	childish people	byis pa'i skye bo
བྱིས་པའི་རྒྱན	ornaments of youth	byis pa'i rgyan
བྱིས་པའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	childish resolution or vows	byis pa'i brtul zhugs
བྱིས་པའི་དུས	infancy * childhood	byis pa'i dus
བྱིས་པའི་གདོན	gdon who strike children	byis pa'i gdon
བྱིས་པའི་གདོན་ཆེན་གཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 dons of fools	byis pa'i gdon chen gco lnga
བྱིས་པའི་གདོན་ཆེན་བཅོ་ལྔ	[TRS 76-5]	byis pa'i gdon chen bco lnga
བྱིས་པའི་འདག་ཁང	like children building sand castles	byis pa'i 'dag khang
བྱིས་པའི་ནུ་མ	child's nipple, seng ldeng tree	byis pa'i nu ma
བྱིས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ཅན	w childish/ foolish conduct	byis pa'i spyod pa can
བྱིས་པའི་སྦྱོད་པ	childish/ foolish conduct	byis pa'i sbyod pa
བྱིས་པའི་སྦྱོད་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not realized by fools byis pa'i rmongs pa bral nas shes rab go	byis pa'i sbyod yul ma yin pa
བ་རྙེད་དོ	as we become free from childhood ignorance, we gain some knowledge	ba rnyed do
བྱིས་པའི་རྩེད་མོ	child's play, children's toy	byis pa'i rtsed mo
བྱིས་པའི་རྫས་གསུམ	the three smeared substances, [thal chen, rakta, khrag], {byugs pa'i rdzas gsum}	byis pa'i rdzas gsum
བྱིས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	puerile childish nature	byis pa'i rang bzhin
བྱིས་པའི་ལམ	childish ways	byis pa'i lam
བྱིས་པའི་སློབ་གསོ	children's education	byis pa'i slob gso
བྱིས་པའི་བསམ་སྤྱོད	childish, naive	byis pa'i bsam spyod
བྱིས་པས་བསླུ་བས	beguiled by the ignorant	byis pas bslu bas
བྱིས་ཕྲུག	illegitimate offspring, bastard child	byis phrug
བྱིས་བློ	childish, naive	byis blo
བྱིས་བློ་འབྱེད་པ	enlighten, eliminate naivete, open the mind	byis blo 'byed pa
བྱིས་བློ་སེལ	enlighten	byis blo sel
བྱིས་བློའི་སྐྱོན	infantile disorder	byis blo'i skyon
བྱིས་རྩེད	childish play / game	byis rtsed
བྱིས་རློན	1) child not living long after birth; 2) infant's btung ba	byis rlon
བྱིས་གསོ་ཁང	kindergarten, nursery school	byis gso khang
བྱུ་བ	[arch] byi ba mouse?	byu ba
བྱུ་རུ	coral, coral	byu ru
བྱུ་རུ་ཇ	kind of tea	byu ru ja
བྱུ་རུ་ལུགས་སུ་བཤད་པ	[arch] speak straightforwardly	byu ru lugs su bshad pa
བྱུ་རུའི་མཆུ་ཅན	bird skyung ka w coral color beak	byu ru'i mchu can
བྱུག	anoint; to rub, smear	byug
བྱུག་མདངས	shading spread-on/ applied through a smooth transition	byug mdangs
བྱུག་ནོམ	spread on and touch [eg medicine]	byug nom
བྱུག་སྣུམ	cream	byug snum
བྱུག་པ	ft. of {'byug pa}; to anoint/ smear (with); anoint, scented unguent, perfume, to apply, spread on, smear, rub, ointments, salve; scented unguent, perfume; to apply, spread on, smear, rub	byug pa
བྱུག་པ་འི་རྫས་གསུམ	the three smeared substances	byug pa 'i rdzas gsum
བྱུག་པའི་བཅོས་ཀ	medicine spread on swelling etc.	byug pa'i bcos ka
བྱུག་པའི་རྫས་གསུམ	[TRS 146-1]; three smeared things; the three smeared substances, [thal chen, rakta, khrag], {byugs pa'i rdzas gsum}	byug pa'i rdzas gsum
བྱུག་པིར	big brush used for applying main coats of color	byug pir
བྱུག་སྤོས	scented ointment, sweetscented water or ointment	byug spos
བྱུག་མར	oil to be spread on	byug mar
བྱུག་དམར	colored butter	byug dmar
བྱུག་སྨན	salve, lotion med. for wounds swelling etc	byug sman
བྱུག་བཟང་དྲུག་སྨན་གྱི	scented unguents of six ingredients apply/ spread on	byug bzang drug sman gyi
བྱུག་རིས	rows, stages bsgrigs pa	byug ris
བྱུག་རིས་ཞོག	make room, leave a place empty	byug ris zhog
བྱུག་གསེར	gold to be spread on	byug gser
བྱུགས	pierce, moisten, perfumed, SA 'byugs pa, 'byug pa, to smear, apply a cream, to anoint with	byugs
ཨནོཨིནཏིང	oil, performed, anoint, spread on	anointing
བྱུགས་པ	pf. of {'byug pa} 1846	byugs pa
བྱུགས་པ་མ	Gandha, Perfume Girl, [female bodhisattva, offering goddess]. perfume goddess, the female Bodhisattva Gandha	byugs pa ma
བྱུགས་པའི་རྫས་གསུམ	the three smeared substances	byugs pa'i rdzas gsum
བྱུང་རྐྱེན	event	byung rkyen
བྱུང་ཁུངས	{byung ba'i khungs} origin from which (something) arises/ comes	byung khungs
བྱུང་ཁུངས་ལོ་རྒྱུས	stories describing the occasion/ source	byung khungs lo rgyus
བྱུང་མཁན	agent coming (into being)	byung mkhan
བྱུང་གྱུར	sprung up	byung gyur
བྱུང་རྒྱལ	spontaneity, unstructured, not arranged	byung rgyal
བྱུང་རྒྱལ་དུ	{rtsod pa'i tshig mang po byung rgyal du smras pa} uttering such a stream of uncontrolled polemic	byung rgyal du
བྱུང་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྟོན་པ	spontaneous teaching	byung rgyal du ston pa
བྱུང་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྨྲ	spontaneous speech, talking nonsense, saying whatever comes to mind	byung rgyal du smra
བྱུང་རྒྱལ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	speak falsehood	byung rgyal du smra ba
བྱུང་རྒྱལ་སྨྲ་བ	speak frivolously	byung rgyal smra ba
བྱུང་ངམ	did you?	byung ngam
བྱུང་ངོ་ཅོག	all that appear	byung ngo cog
བྱུང་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	Vaibhashika	byung tu smra ba
བྱུང་ཏུ་བཤད་པ	explain in detail, detailed explanation	byung tu bshad pa
བྱུང་རྟིང	after he has come	byung rting
བྱུང་སྟངས	origin, source, the way something happened	byung stangs
བྱུང་སྟེ	sprang forth	byung ste
བྱུང་ཐོ	incoming written message/ note, receipts, invoices	byung tho
བྱུང་གནས་འགྲོ	arrival, remaining and departure	byung gnas 'gro
བྱུང་གནས་འགྲོ་གསུམ	where thoughts arose from, where thoughts stayed, and where thoughts went	byung gnas 'gro gsum
བྱུང་གནས་འགྲོ་གསུམ་ལ་བརྟགས་པ	examining the arising, abiding and disappearance	byung gnas 'gro gsum la brtags pa
བྱུང་པ	1) come forth, arise; 2) Vaishesika, particularist,	byung pa
བྱུང་པོ	ghost, spirit	byung po
བྱུང་པོ་ཅན	belonging to evil spirits, elemental	byung po can
བྱུང་བ་འགོག་པ	refutation of what has arisen/ occurred	byung ba 'gog pa
བྱུང་བ་ཉེར་བཞི	the 24 that arise [samkhya entities]	byung ba nyer bzhi
བྱུང་བ་ཐོན་པ	produce, emerge, come into being	byung ba thon pa
བྱུང་བ་གསུམ	the three occurrences	byung ba gsum
བྱུང་བ་གསུམ་རྒྱས་གྱུར	development	byung ba gsum rgyas gyur
བྱུང་བ་གསུམ་རྒྱས་བྱུར	development of the arising, abiding and disappearance	byung ba gsum rgyas byur
བྱུང་བ་གསུམ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན	causal resemblance (of the arising, abiding and disappearance	byung ba gsum rgyu mthun
བྱུང་བ་གསུམ་རྣམ་སྨིན	ripening (of the arising, abiding and disappearance	byung ba gsum rnam smin
བྱུང་བའི	. . . byung ba'i . . . - isc. source of . . .	byung ba'i
བྱུང་བའི་ཁུངས	source/ origin [from which something comes]	byung ba'i khungs
བྱུང་བའི་ཚུལ	what had happened	byung ba'i tshul
བྱུང་བར་བྱེད་པ	arise	byung bar byed pa
བྱུང་འབྲས	result, outcome	byung 'bras
བྱུང་མ་བྱུང	arising and non-arising	byung ma byung
བྱུང་མ་མྱོང་བ	has not encountered	byung ma myong ba
བྱུང་མིན་གྱི་དཔེ	example that does not arise	byung min gyi dpe
བྱུང་སྨྲ་བ	Vaibhashika	byung smra ba
བྱུང་ཚུལ	origin, source, the way something happened	byung tshul
བྱུང་ཚེ	when he shows up	byung tshe
བྱུང་ཚོར	sensation of what is happening/ "background awareness" of surroundings; ordinary mental activity	byung tshor
བྱུང་ཚོར་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	apprehended thought, thought the arising of which is perceived, noticed	byung tshor gyi rtog pa
བྱུང་ཚོར་ཆད་པ	to observe dualistically byung tshor thams cad skye med rang	byung tshor chad pa
གྲོལ་དུ་ཐག་བཅད	resolving that all perceptions are nonarising and naturally freed	grol du thag bcad
བྱུང་འཛིན	receipt, invoice	byung 'dzin
བྱུང་ཟིན	already arisen	byung zin
བྱུང་ཟིན་པ	got	byung zin pa
བྱུང་རབས	history, historical events	byung rabs
བྱུང་ཤག	must have occurred, must have happened, it is hoped that such a thing has happened	byung shag
བྱུང་ཤེས	knowledgeable of the event [that led to the establishment of a particular rule]	byung shes
བྱུང་བཤད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	The Great Detailed Explanation,	byung bshad pa chen po
བྱུང་ས	(place of) origin	byung sa
བྱུང་ས་མེད	sourceless, do not arise from anywhere	byung sa med
བྱུང་སོང	1) wealth/ money/ goods received and spent; 2) have arisen/ been obtained	byung song
བྱུང་སོང་རྩིས་ཁྲ	statement of receipts and expenditure/ credits and debits	byung song rtsis khra
བྱུང་སྲིད་པ	hard to avoid	byung srid pa
བྱུངས	(not in das)	byungs
བྱུབ	abbr. of byang chub	byub
བྱུར	inauspicious bad situation, disaster, misfortune, mishap, accident	byur
བྱུར་རྐྱེན	kha mchu etc, situations of loss or misfortune	byur rkyen
བྱུར་ཁ	loss/ misfortune and chags sgo etc. inauspicious events	byur kha
བྱུར་གོད	gyod chags nyams nyes etc inauspicious loss/ misfortune ???	byur god
བྱུར་ཆགས	inauspicious * trouble, misfortune	byur chags
བྱུར་ཆགས་རྐྱེན་ངན	undesired sudden bad conditions, calamity, disaster	byur chags rkyen ngan
བྱུར་ཆགས་སྣེ་འདོམས	many unwished for bad events/ conditions gather	byur chags sne 'doms
བྱུར་ཆགས་བཟོ	cause trouble/ misfortune	byur chags bzo
བྱུར་ཉེས	bad conditions, source of suffering	byur nyes
བྱུར་ལྟས	bad sign of kha mchu bad conditions, source of suffering etc.	byur ltas
བྱུར་དང་མ་བླ་ཆུད་ཀྱི་དམན་སེལ	exorcism of the misfortunes and the negative forces of the ma bla chud	byur dang ma bla chud kyi dman sel
བྱུར་སྡུད་མ	1) 1 who brings misfortune; 2) woman	byur sdud ma
བྱུར་གནམ་རྡིབ་མ	occurrence of sudden obstacles	byur gnam rdib ma
བྱུར་པོ	heaped; an ill=fated person	byur po
བྱུར་པོ་ཆེ	great misfortune	byur po che
བྱུར་བུ	full	byur bu
བྱུར་བུ་བསྐང	fill to the brim, heap up	byur bu bskang
བྱུར་བུ་གང	be filled to the brim, be heaped up	byur bu gang
བྱུར་བུ་གཏམས	be filled to the brim, be heaped up	byur bu gtams
བྱུར་བྱུར	heaped, heaped measure of corn or meal	byur byur
བྱུར་བྱུར་གྱུར་པ	became heaped up, accumulated	byur byur gyur pa
བྱུར་ལྦ	preceding sign of loss/ misfortune or disaster	byur lba
བྱུར་སྲི	causer of misfortunes	byur sri
བྱུར་ལྷ	Coral Deity	byur lha
བྱུལ་བྱུལ	1) roam, wander; 2) pat, caress	byul byul
བྱུས	MG: strategy, tactics. va. --- byed; -gtong to use/make strategy or tactics 2) RC. has the sense of "idea" iso "approach," E.g. nga la byus zhig lab rogs byed kyi 'dug. "Please give me some idea [a...	byus
བྱུས་འགྲོ	luck, good fortune	byus 'gro
བྱུས་འགྲོ་བ	be successful, succeed	byus 'gro ba
བྱུས་ཆེ	very important	byus che
བྱུས་ཉེས	disaster, misfortune	byus nyes
བྱུས་གཏོགས	interference, meddling, minding others's business	byus gtogs
བྱུས་གཏོགས་བྱེད	interfere, meddle, mind others's business	byus gtogs byed
བྱུས་གཏོགས་བྱེད་པ	interfere, meddle	byus gtogs byed pa
བྱུས་གཏོང	make/ employ strategy/ tactics/ policy	byus gtong
བྱུས་དཔོན	successful commander-inchief	byus dpon
བྱུས་བྱེད	make/ employ strategy/ tactics/ policy	byus byed
བྱུས་མེད་བྱུས་འཁྲི	interference, meddling, minding others's business	byus med byus 'khri
བྱུས་ལེགས	fortunate, lucky	byus legs
བྱུས་ལེགས་ཞིག་ལ	fortunately, luckily	byus legs zhig la
བྱེ	sand, [p f dbye],, open, separate, divide, categorize	bye
བྱེ་ཀར	sugar	bye kar
བྱེ་ཀོང	bowl of sand	bye kong
བྱེ་དཀར	refined sugar, sugar candy	bye dkar
བྱེ་དཀྲུག	yos dang bye ma dkrug byed shing zhig	bye dkrug
བྱེ་འཁྲུད	rub off the hairs of skin w sand	bye 'khrud
བྱེ་གྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	Vaibhashika	bye grag tu smra ba
བྱེ་གླིང	bird's nest	bye gling
བྱེ་མགོ	bird's head, an officinal mineral	bye mgo
བྱེ་འགོག་ཤིང་ནགས	sand-break forest	bye 'gog shing nags
བྱེ་སྒང	sand mountainside/ dune	bye sgang
བྱེ་སྔགས	practitioners's sngags brgyab pa'i sand	bye sngags
བྱེ་ཆབ	sandy water	bye chab
བྱེ་འཇགས་ཤིང་ནགས	sand-break forest	bye 'jags shing nags
བྱེ་ལྟོངས	sandy barren place	bye ltongs
བྱེ་ལྟོངས་ཞིག	sandy barren place	bye ltongs zhig
བྱེ་སྟག	animal living in a sand hole rmigs bu	bye stag
བྱེ་སྟག་ཁྲ་བོ	butterfly?, parnassius emperator musugeta	bye stag khra bo
བྱེ་སྟོང	sand filled empty plain, desert	bye stong
བྱེ་སྟོངས	margin of a lake or river free from sand, sandless bank	bye stongs
བྱེ་སྟོངས་ཞིག	a sandy barren place	bye stongs zhig
བྱེ་སྟོབས	sand bank	bye stobs
བྱེ་ཐང	sandy plain, sandy plain on side of river, desert, desert	bye thang
བྱེ་དྲག་ཏུ་ཤེས	know in detail 1848	bye drag tu shes
བྱེ་མདོ་གཉིས	the Vaibhashikas and Sautrantikas	bye mdo gnyis
བྱེ་མདོ་དབུ་སེམས	the four schools of philosophy, {bye brag smra ba}, {mdo sde pa}, {dbu ma}, {sems tsam pa}	bye mdo dbu sems
བྱེ་འདམ	1) sand and 'dam rdzab, silt; 2) slurry of sand and water three sandy bottomed pond	bye 'dam
བྱེ་རྡིབ	sand pile thur du nyil ba	bye rdib
བྱེ་རྡོ	sand and stones, gravel	bye rdo
བྱེ་རྡོ་ལ	sand and rock pass [in S 'brong pa rdzong]	bye rdo la
བྱེ་ན་ནབ་ནུབ	javelin, measuring rod	bye na nab nub
བྱེ་ནག	black sand	bye nag
བྱེ་སྣོད	sand bag	bye snod
བྱེ་སྤུང	heap of sand, sand dune	bye spung
བྱེ་ཕུང	sand pile/ dune	bye phung
བྱེ་ཕུང་ལུང་སྟོང	desert wilderness	bye phung lung stong
བྱེ་ཕྲུག	young bird	bye phrug
བྱེ་བ	ten million, disjunction, billions	bye ba
བྱེ་བ་ཁྲག་ཁྲིག	myriads	bye ba khrag khrig
བྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 hundred times ten million	bye ba brgya phrag bcu gnyis
བྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 hundred times ten million	bye ba brgya phrag bcu drug
བྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་བཞི	fourteen hundred times ten million	bye ba brgya phrag bcu bzhi
བྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	1800 x 10 million	bye ba brgya phrag bco brgyad
བྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་ཉི་ཤུ	2 thousand times ten million	bye ba brgya phrag nyi shu
བྱེ་བ་ཅན	hair	bye ba can
བྱེ་བ་གཅིག	10,000,000	bye ba gcig
བྱེ་བ་ཐེར་འབུམ	a million times 10 million	bye ba ther 'bum
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་དགུ	90 millions	bye ba phrag dgu
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་བརྒྱ	100 million; one billion; one billion, [Syn. {ther 'bum}	bye ba phrag brgya
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད	eighty million; eight million	bye ba phrag brgyad
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་གཉིས	20 million	bye ba phrag gnyis
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་སྟོང	1000 x 10 million	bye ba phrag stong
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་ཐེར་འབུམ	ten million times one billion	bye ba phrag ther 'bum
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་འབུམ	100 thousand times ten million	bye ba phrag 'bum
བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་གསུམ	30 million	bye ba phrag gsum
བྱེ་བ་འབུམ	hundreds of thousands of myriads	bye ba 'bum
བྱེ་བ་རིང་བསྲེལ	{bye ba ring bsrel}	bye ba ring bsrel
བྱེ་བ་ས་ཡ	11,000,000	bye ba sa ya
བྱེ་བའི་ཟུར	part od 1/ 10 million	bye ba'i zur
བྱེ་བྲག	individuation [ggd]	bye brag
བྱེ་བྲག་གི་དབྱེ་བ	specific categories	bye brag gi dbye ba
བྱེ་བྲག་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	specific (defining) characteristic/ feature	bye brag gi mtshan nyid
བྱེ་བྲག་གི་བསླབ་བྱ	particular precepts bye brag gis spyi la khyab par bzung ba employ the particular for making generalization about all bye brag gis spyi la khyab par bzung ba to employ the particular for making gen...	bye brag gi bslab bya
བྱེ་བྲག་དངོས་མེད	epithet of amitabha	bye brag dngos med
བྱེ་བྲག་ཅན	different	bye brag can
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ	specifically/ separately; in detail	bye brag tu
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	there are the categories of	bye brag tu 'gyur
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་འཆད་པ	to teach / mention specifically	bye brag tu 'chad pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་དཔྱད་པ	separately examining it	bye brag tu dpyad pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་ཕྱེ	classified, sorted, differentiated	bye brag tu phye
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་འབྱེད	classify, sort, differentiate bye brag tu mi shes pa dang the tshom za	bye brag tu 'byed
བར་དོན་འཛིན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	enter into	bar don 'dzin du 'jug pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	{bye smra} proponent of Vaibhashika school of Indian philosophy/ proponent of the analysis of discrete entities	bye brag tu smra ba
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ་རྣམས	vaibhasikas, Analysts	bye brag tu smra ba rnams
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ	detailed knowledge	bye brag tu shes par bya ba
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	know in detail	bye brag tu shes par byed pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་བཤད་པ	explain in detail, detailed explanation	bye brag tu bshad pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་བཤད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	The great detailed explanation ](basic text of the	bye brag tu bshad pa chen po
བཻ༹བྷཤིཀས་ཨནད་ཐེ་ཨབྷིདྷརྨ	kosha) = bye brag bshad mtsho = bye brag bshad mdzod]	vaibhashikas and the abhidharma
བྱེ་བྲག་རྟོག་བྱེད	{bye brag rtog byed}	bye brag rtog byed
སུཏྲས་ཨནད་ཤསྟྲས་ཏར་ཅོལླེཅཏེད་སཀ	T dictionary]	sutras and shastras tr collected SK
བྱེ་བྲག་མཐའ་ཡས	different myriad	bye brag mtha' yas
བྱེ་བྲག་རྣམ་པ	types	bye brag rnam pa
བྱེ་བྲག་སྣ་ཚོགས	most varied forms	bye brag sna tshogs
བྱེ་བྲག་པ	1) among, [in] particular, specific; 2) Vaibhashika; 3) Vaisheshika	bye brag pa
བྱེ་བྲག་པའི་ཚིག་དོན་དྲུག	the six meanings of bye brag pa [rdzas, yon tan, las, spyi, bye brag, 'du ba]	bye brag pa'i tshig don drug
བྱེ་བྲག་ཕྱེད་པ	designation of differentiation	bye brag phyed pa
བྱེ་བྲག་ཕྱེད་པའི་ཐ་སྙད	designation of differentiation	bye brag phyed pa'i tha snyad
བྱེ་བྲག་བྱེ་བ	millions of differences	bye brag bye ba
བྱེ་བྲག་བྱེད	adjective	bye brag byed
བྱེ་བྲག་འབྱེད་པ	find the difference, show the difference	bye brag 'byed pa
བྱེ་བྲག་མ་བྱེ་བའི་བར་དུ	as long as the separation has not evidenced itself	bye brag ma bye ba'i bar du
བྱེ་བྲག་མེད་པ	not different	bye brag med pa
བྱེ་བྲག་མེད་པར	w/o particularity	bye brag med par
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨར་བ	vaibhasika	bye brag smar ba
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ	Great exposition school, vaibhashika, (pluralistic) atomist, analyst, detailists, realist (one of two main schools of shravakas {nyan thos kyi theg pa}	bye brag smra
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ་པ	great exposition school	bye brag smra pa
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ་བ	Proponent of Differences / Distinctions	bye brag smra ba
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 schools of the Vaibhashikas	bye brag smra ba'i sde pa bco brgyad
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ་པ་བཞི	the four schools of the Vaibhashikas bye brag smra ba'i rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi the four root schools of the Vaibhashikas	bye brag smra ba'i sde pa bzhi
བྱེ་བྲག་སྨྲར་བ	Vaibhasika	bye brag smrar ba
བྱེ་བྲག་ཡིན་པའི་འགྲོ་ཚུལ	criteria for individuation [ggd]	bye brag yin pa'i 'gro tshul
བྱེ་བྲག་ལས	besides the different	bye brag las
བྱེ་བྲག་བཤད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	The great detailed explanation, (basic text of the vaibhashikas and the abhidharmakosha	bye brag bshad pa chen po
བྱེ་བྲག་བཤད་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ	The great detailed explanation, * abhidharma bye brag bshad mdzod chen mo, after the buddha's parinirvana in the N at ri bo 'bigs byed gar mkhan gyi gtsug lag khang by the noble 1 'phags pa nye sba...	bye brag bshad mdzod chen mo
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བཻ༹བྷཤིཀས་ཨནད་ཐེ་ཨབྷིདྷརྨ	kosha)	of the vaibhashikas and the abhidharma
བྱེ་བྲལ	part	bye bral
བྱེ་བྲལ་བྱེད	part with	bye bral byed
བྱེ་བྲལ་བྱེད་པ	to part with	bye bral byed pa
བྱེ་བྲས་སྨྲ་བ	Vaibhashika	bye bras smra ba
བྱེ་བྲུན	bird dung	bye brun
བྱེ་མ	sand	bye ma
བྱེ་མ་ཀ་ར	white sugar	bye ma ka ra
བྱེ་མ་གྲོང	red sand	bye ma grong
བྱེ་མ་སྒོ་ལ	sandy hill in stod lung	bye ma sgo la
བྱེ་མ་ངོགས	sandy bank	bye ma ngogs
བྱེ་མ་ཅན	sandy	bye ma can
བྱེ་མ་ཉུ་གུ	bye ma myu gu	bye ma nyu gu
བྱེ་མ་འདྲེས་ཚད	sand content	bye ma 'dres tshad
བྱེ་མ་འབྲུ་རེ	each grain of sand	bye ma 'bru re
བྱེ་མ་མྱུ་གུ	chameleon	bye ma myu gu
བྱེ་མ་དམར	li khri, vermillion	bye ma dmar
བྱེ་མ་རེག་ཆོད	[arch] sharpening stone	bye ma reg chod
བྱེ་མ་ལ་མུ་ཏྲ	Vimalamitra {dri med bshes gnyen}	bye ma la mu tra
བྱེ་མ་ལ་མུ་དྲ	Vimalamitra	bye ma la mu dra
བྱེ་མ་ལུང	district in tibet	bye ma lung
བྱེ་མ་ལེབ་སེར	moth?, khra colias erati esp.	bye ma leb ser
བྱེ་མ་སེང་གེ	place in tibet	bye ma seng ge
བྱེ་མ་ཨ་ཀྲོང	image of Guru Rinpoche made of clay in his presence by his close disciples	bye ma a krong
བྱེ་མ་ཨ་ཁྲོང	a deity	bye ma a khrong
བྱེ་མ་ཨ་གྲོང	red sand	bye ma a grong
བྱེ་མའི་ཁང་བུ	sand castles	bye ma'i khang bu
བྱེ་མའི་གླིང	a sandy isle	bye ma'i gling
བྱེ་མའི་རྨིགས་བུ	chameleon	bye ma'i rmigs bu
བྱེ་མའི་རི	dune 1850	bye ma'i ri
བྱེ་མའི་ལྷ་ཁང	monastery in tsangpo	bye ma'i lha khang
བྱེ་མར	vaibhasikas	bye mar
བྱེ་མས་དགང་བ	sandy	bye mas dgang ba
བྱེ་མོའི་གཏམ	chatting, chatter	bye mo'i gtam
བྱེ་མྱུག	bye ma myu gu	bye myug
བྱེ་སྨྲ	Vaibhashika	bye smra
བྱེ་སྨྲ་བ	Vaibhashika	bye smra ba
བྱེ་སྨྲས་འདོད	the Vaibhashikas hold that	bye smras 'dod
བྱེ་ཚན	hot sand	bye tshan
བྱེ་ཚན་གྱི་ཆར་འབབ་པ	rain hot sand	bye tshan gyi char 'bab pa
བྱེ་ཚུབ	sand storm	bye tshub
བྱེ་ཚེར་དམན་པ	bidens tripartita l.	bye tsher dman pa
བྱེ་འཚུབ	sandy wind 'tshub	bye 'tshub
བྱེ་ཝ་ས་ཡ	eleven million	bye wa sa ya
བྱེ་ཞིང	sandy field/ land	bye zhing
བྱེ་ར	sand ra ba	bye ra
བྱེ་རགས	sand dam/ water embankment	bye rags
བྱེ་རི	hill/ mt/ dune of sand	bye ri
བྱེ་རིང	bu yig dvags po 'tsho byed karma kun phan gyis mdzad pa'i man ngag bye ba ring bsrel gyi kha skong sman yig cig	bye ring
བྱེ་རིལ	sugar cane juice bsgar te made into pills, candy, sweets	bye ril
བྱེ་རུ	red coral, coral, 1 of rin chen nor bdun	bye ru
བྱེ་རུག	med. herb hot astringent, heating, tsha ba dang sib thor ma smin pa dang, srin thor thon pa la phan, rma yi 'bru srung	bye rug
བྱེ་རླུང	sandy dusty wind, sandstorm	bye rlung
བྱེ་ལ	sandy pass	bye la
བྱེ་ལབ	a butterfly	bye lab
བྱེ་ལེབ	butterfly	bye leb
བྱེ་ཤེལ	sugar and sugar candy	bye shel
བྱེ་བཤད	mahavibhasa (text by parsva)	bye bshad
བྱེ་ས	sand	bye sa
བྱེ་སླེབ	moth butterfly	bye sleb
མོཐ་དིཨེས་ཨིན་ཐེ་ལམཔ	flame because its visual consciousness is attracted to forms	moth dies in the lamp
བྱེ་གསེར	gold separated from sand, gold dust	bye gser
བྱེང་བ	distraction	byeng ba
བྱེད་ཀྱང	though saying	byed kyang
བྱེད་ཁག་པོ་བཟོ	awkward	byed khag po bzo
བྱེད་ཁག་པོ་བཟོ་བ	embarrassed	byed khag po bzo ba
བྱེད་ཁུལ	false, pretended	byed khul
བྱེད་ཁུལ་བྱས	thinking that you did	byed khul byas
བྱེད་མཁན	doer, performer, author, someone who creates	byed mkhan
བྱེད་གོ	understand	byed go
བྱེད་གྲུབ་རྩིས	methods for calculating the Tibetan calendar according to the phug pa byed grub system expounded by phug pa lhun grub rgya mtsho and mkhas grub nor bzang rgya mtsho	byed grub rtsis
བྱེད་འགོ་འཛུགས་པ	start work, touch	byed 'go 'dzugs pa
བྱེད་རྒྱུ	active causal force, activity, ado, SA 'gyur ba'i byed rgyu, 'bral bar byed pa'i byed rgyu, gzhan du bsgyur ba'i byed rgyu, skye ba'i byed rgyu, gnas pa'i byed rgyu, rten pa'i byed rgyu, bstan par ...	byed rgyu
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་ཉི་ཤུ	20 acting causes	byed rgyu nyi shu
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་ནུས་ལྡན	effective productive cause	byed rgyu nus ldan
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་ནུས་མེད	w/o productive power, non-potent acting cause	byed rgyu nus med
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་མང	many things to do, very busy	byed rgyu mang
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་མང་བ	running around doing too much	byed rgyu mang ba
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་གཞན་དོན་ལས་མི་འདུག	you do nothing but benefit others	byed rgyu gzhan don las mi 'dug
བྱེད་རྒྱུ་ཡོད	something able to do	byed rgyu yod
བྱེད་རྒྱུའི་སྐལ་བ་བྱུང་ན	when you have the chance to do so	byed rgyu'i skal ba byung na
བྱེད་སྒོ	activities; duties, things to do. Syn {gnang sgo}; business, profession, vacation, activity, to act, move about, must do, things one has to do	byed sgo
བྱེད་སྒོ་ཁྱར་ཁྱོར་དུ་གནས་པ	leave a work half done or unfinished	byed sgo khyar khyor du gnas pa
བྱེད་སྒོ་སྤེལ་བ	act, move about	byed sgo spel ba
བྱེད་སྒོ་ཕྲ་ཞིབ	detailed works, minute and important work, minute details, all works small or great	byed sgo phra zhib
བྱེད་སྒོ་རིམ་སེལ	performing duties methodically and continuously	byed sgo rim sel
བྱེད་སྒོའི་ནུས་པ	occupational skill/ ability	byed sgo'i nus pa
བྱེད་སྒོའི་རྩ	tshig byed stangs kyi rtsa ba 'dzin sa'i tshig; byed sgo'i rtsa 'dzin yi ge	byed sgo'i rtsa
བྱེད་སྒྲ	A term of grammar. Agentive term. The third case	byed sgra
བྱེད་ངན	evil actions, misbehavior, crimes	byed ngan
བྱེད་ཅིག	make, SA byed pa	byed cig
བྱེད་ཅིང	to do and ..	byed cing
བྱེད་བཅས	w action	byed bcas
བྱེད་འཇུག་པ	make, cause, enable	byed 'jug pa
བྱེད་འཇོལ་ངན་པ	work badly, work wrongly	byed 'jol ngan pa
བྱེད་འཇོལ་འཛབ་ཆེ	performing work with zeal, doing working in an efficient manner	byed 'jol 'dzab che
བྱེད་ཉམས	pleasing manner of doing or dealing	byed nyams
བྱེད་ཉེན་ཅན	apt	byed nyen can
བྱེད་གཏད	action hard to do	byed gtad
བྱེད་གཏེ	chief evildoer, ringleader	byed gte
བྱེད་ལྟེ་བ	the basis of works or of anything to be done	byed lte ba
བྱེད་སྟངས	form, fashion, way, manner, movement, act	byed stangs
བྱེད་སྟངས་ནོར་བ	malpractice	byed stangs nor ba
བྱེད་ཐབས	method, way, means	byed thabs
བྱེད་ཐབས་བྲལ་བ	helpless	byed thabs bral ba
བྱེད་ཐབས་ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཅན	evil [techniques, methods, approach], tyranny	byed thabs log spyod can
བྱེད་ཐབས་ཤེས་པ	knowing what we should do	byed thabs shes pa
བྱེད་ཐུབ	be able to do	byed thub
བྱེད་ཐུབ་པའི་རང་བཞིན	possibility, potentiality	byed thub pa'i rang bzhin
བྱེད་ཐུབ་འོས་པ	feasible	byed thub 'os pa
བྱེད་མཐུན	astr positions conducive to an action	byed mthun
བྱེད་དུ་བཅུག	continue, to assume, take	byed du bcug
བྱེད་དུ་བཅུག་པ	made to be done or worked out	byed du bcug pa
བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག	make, cause enable	byed du 'jug
བྱེད་དོན་ཅི་ཡོད	there is no need, why	byed don ci yod
བྱེད་བདེ	good way of doing an action	byed bde
བྱེད་བདེ་པོ	convenient	byed bde po
བྱེད་བདེ་བ	easy	byed bde ba
བྱེད་བདེ་ཚགས་ཚུད	las ka byed bde zhing gra 'grig pa, bzo grwa gsar 'dzugs kyi bya ba byed bde tshags tshud cig byung	byed bde tshags tshud
བྱེད་འདི་བྱེད	doing all sorts or with nothing to do [with neg.]	byed 'di byed
བྱེད་འདོད	be willing	byed 'dod
བྱེད་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ	keen	byed 'dod chen po
བྱེད་འདོད་བྱེད་པ	be willing to	byed 'dod byed pa
བྱེད་འདོད་ཡོད་པ	be willing to	byed 'dod yod pa
བྱེད་ནུས་པ	able to do	byed nus pa
བྱེད་པ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན	acting similar to the cause; sngon las kyis 'phangs pa'i las de dang de skyes thob kyis byed par spro zhing byed pa	byed pa rgyu mthun
བྱེད་པ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	result of action resembling the cause	byed pa rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu
བྱེད་པ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	action, karma similar to a performed cause, [making one delight in doing that action in a future life]	byed pa rgyu mthun pa'i 'bras bu
བྱེད་པ་ཅན	doer, hair, produced from or belonging to any doer	byed pa can
བྱེད་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 actions of the planets and stars	byed pa bcu gcig
བྱེད་པ་ཉུང་བ	less doing, little to be done	byed pa nyung ba
བྱེད་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	w action byed pa dang bya ba rim gyis 'jug pa'i	byed pa dang bcas pa
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་ལྷག་བཅས	previous words byed pa &, later bya bar rim gyis 'jug pa'i mtshams sbyor lhag bcas, sman bzas te nad sos, te ???	mtshams sbyor lhag bcas
བྱེད་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	each of the five prefixes and 10 suffixes 'jug yul ming gzhi'i 1 this letter and that 'jug pa dang, two 'jug pa po sngon rjes gang dang gang gis 'jug pa, three sngon rjes rnams 'jug tshul ji ltar '...	byed pa rnam bzhi
བྱེད་པ་པོ	agent, creator, maker, doer, performer, producer, grammatical subject	byed pa po
བྱེད་པ་པོ་ཉིད	creator	byed pa po nyid
བྱེད་པ་པོ་རྟག་པ	permanent creator byed pa po dang za ba po dang shes pa	byed pa po rtag pa
པོ་དང་གྲོལ་བ་པོ	doer, maker, knower, and liberator byed pa po dang las dang bya ba rnams	po dang grol ba po
མི་དམིགས་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of not perceiving doer, action, and karma	mi dmigs pa'i phyir
བྱེད་པ་པོ་ནི་མི་དམིགས་སོ	not perceive a doer, not conceive of a doer	byed pa po ni mi dmigs so
བྱེད་པ་པོ་མེད་པ	without a producer, agent	byed pa po med pa
བྱེད་པ་པོའི་སྒྲ	sign of instrumental case, word for doer	byed pa po'i sgra
བྱེད་པ་པོར	source {bla ma 'jig rten dang 'jig rten las 'das pa'i dngos grub thams cad kyi byed pa por ngo shes dgos} The teacher should be recognized as the source of all accomplishments, worldly and beyond t...	byed pa por
བྱེད་པ་བྱས་པ	doer of deeds	byed pa byas pa
བྱེད་པ་བྱས་བྱས་པ	one who has accomplished that which was to be done	byed pa byas byas pa
བྱེད་པ་མེད་པ	effortless	byed pa med pa
བྱེད་པ་ལོ་འཕོ	skyon 'don ma byas pa'i lo 'pho ???	byed pa lo 'pho
བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱུ	principal/ acting cause	byed pa'i rgyu
བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	primary and secondary causes	byed pa'i rgyu rkyen
བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	a result similar to the performed cause, which agrees with a performed cause	byed pa'i rgyu mthun pa'i 'bras bu
བྱེད་པའི་སྒྲ	actor and action dividing and, condition of saying who did what, {'brel sgra'i mthar sa sbyar ba} 5th de yin la 3rd division's also said &, among them rgyu mtshan gyi also can be shown, eg, [bdag g...	byed pa'i sgra
བྱེད་པའི་གནས	1st of the {sgra'i gnas brgyad}, in establishing any thing, just these sounds/ word[s] must be establish by assembling just these words, eg, sa and ga and ra = sa ga ra which has its particular mea...	byed pa'i gnas
བྱེད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	the over-all effect	byed pa'i 'bras bu
བྱེད་པའི་རྩིས་འགོ	in the fire dog year rigden {rgyal dka'} came to the throne and byed pa'i rtsis counting began	byed pa'i rtsis 'go
བྱེད་པའི་ཡན་ལག	the female organ	byed pa'i yan lag
བྱེད་པའི་ལས	function, SA byed las	byed pa'i las
བྱེད་པའི་ལོ་འཕོ	skyon bton lo 'pho ???	byed pa'i lo 'pho
བྱེད་པོ	creator	byed po
བྱེད་པོ་ཉིད	agent	byed po nyid
བྱེད་པོ་ཕལ་པ	ordinary doer [implement like a pen]	byed po phal pa
བྱེད་པོ་མིན	non-doer, non-efficacious	byed po min
བྱེད་པོ་གཙོ་བོ	chief doer	byed po gtso bo
བྱེད་སྤྱོད	behave	byed spyod
བྱེད་སྤྱོད་ཐམས་ཅད	all activities	byed spyod thams cad
བྱེད་ཕྱོགས	means/ way of doing, policy, course of action	byed phyogs
བྱེད་བྲག་བྱས་པའི་ཚིག	adjective	byed brag byas pa'i tshig
བྱེད་བློ	chos byed blo'i ngang - entertaining fantasies about practicing the Dharma	byed blo
བྱེད་མི་ཐུབ་པ་བཟོ་བ	disable	byed mi thub pa bzo ba
བྱེད་མི་ནུས	incapable of {chos nyan 'chad sgom gang yang byed mi nus} incapable of listening to the teachings, expounding them, reflecting on them and putting them into practise	byed mi nus
བྱེད་མིན	undone uncreated	byed min
བྱེད་མུས་ཉེས་ཅན	having a fault against the law	byed mus nyes can
བྱེད་མེད	actionless, uncreated	byed med
བྱེད་མྱོང་ལོ་རྒྱུས	resume, vita	byed myong lo rgyus
བྱེད་རྩིས	1) thought/ intention/ plan/ of doing a certain action/ task; 2) Abbreviated Kalachakra Tantra: according to mu stegs [Hindu] astr byed lugs byed rtsis: zer don ri mo'i lag len, since it is easy to...	byed rtsis
བྱེད་རྩིས་བྱེད་པ	to intend, plan	byed rtsis byed pa
བྱེད་རྩོལ	force of exertion in productive power byed las kyi rtsol shugs	byed rtsol
བྱེད་རྩོལ་ཀུན	all activities	byed rtsol kun
བྱེད་ཚད	anyone whose	byed tshad
བྱེད་ཚིག	action word, verb	byed tshig
བྱེད་ཚུལ	1) way of doing; 2) merely seem to do	byed tshul
བྱེད་འཛོལ	err in doing a task	byed 'dzol
བྱེད་བཞིན་པ	doing	byed bzhin pa
བྱེད་ཟིན་པ	done byed bzung byed pa dang pham nyes	byed zin pa
བྱུང་བ་རེད	as soon as they annexed [the territory] they were defeated	byung ba red
བྱེད་བཟོ	byed nyams te byed pa'i rnam pa, byed bzo dod po	byed bzo
བྱེད་འཟུག	to make, cause, enable	byed 'zug
བྱེད་ཡུལ	object	byed yul
བྱེད་རིན	worthiness, desert, worth doing, worthwhile	byed rin
བྱེད་རིན་མེད	not worth doing, not worth while	byed rin med
བྱེད་རིན་མེད་པ	not worth doing, not worth while	byed rin med pa
བྱེད་རིན་ཡོད་པ	be worth, deserve	byed rin yod pa
བྱེད་རིམ	stages/ details of doing, rate of progress	byed rim
བྱེད་ལས	1) * action or work; 2) force or power; 3) function	byed las
བྱེད་ལུགས	form, fashion, way, manner	byed lugs
བྱེད་ལོ	verb + lo - pretend to do the verb	byed lo
བྱེད་ལོག་ལས་དོན་ཡང་དག་མིན་པ	praise good actions and dispute bad	byed log las don yang dag min pa
བྱེད་ལོང་བྱུང་བ	there's still time	byed long byung ba
བྱེད་ལོང་མ་བྱུང་བ	it's too late	byed long ma byung ba
བྱེད་ལོང་མེད་པ	it's too late	byed long med pa
བྱེད་སྲོལ	way/ system of doing, customs	byed srol
བྱེད་སླ་པོ	convenient	byed sla po
བྱེའི་སེ་རུ	kingfisher	bye'i se ru
བྱེའུ	baby birds	bye'u
བྱེའུ་མགོ	little bird's head	bye'u mgo
བྱེའུ་ཅོག་མོ	small singing bird, lark	bye'u cog mo
བྱེའུ་ཆུང་འཕུར་མདོས	mdos of the flight of small birds	bye'u chung 'phur mdos
བྱེའུ་མཆིལ་པ	swallow, sparrow	bye'u mchil pa
བྱེའུ་ཐར་མ	1) baby bird able to fly; 2) tshe thar btang ba'i bye'u [little bird killed or liberated from life]	bye'u thar ma
བྱེའུ་ལྡན་དཀར	magpie	bye'u ldan dkar
བྱེའུ་ཕྲུག	chick	bye'u phrug
བྱེའུ་ལ་ཕུག	medicinal herb	bye'u la phug
བྱེར	escape by flight, SA 'byer ba	byer
བྱེར་གྱུར	to open	byer gyur
བྱེར་འགྲམས	increase and proliferate	byer 'grams
བྱེར་བ	[p 'byer ba], separate, disintegrate, destroy, let go, let disperse med = {bram pa}	byer ba
བྱེར་སྲི	causer of separations	byer sri
བྱེར་སླེབས	horse/ mule having grown old and lost all the teeth	byer slebs
བྱེལ	bye'u	byel
བྱེལ་ཚང	bye'u'i tshang, bya tshang gtor na byel tshang zhig yong ??	byel tshang
བྱེས	place of temporary residence, place of occasional residence, foreign country, abroad	byes
བྱེས་འཁོར	exiles, expatriates	byes 'khor
བྱེས་འགྲོ	depart, leave, go elsewhere, travel, go abroad	byes 'gro
བྱེས་འགྲོན	phyogs 'grul travel	byes 'gron
བྱེས་རྒུན་འབྲུ	mountain grown rgun 'brum	byes rgun 'bru
བྱེས་ཐུབ་དཔའ་བོ་སྤུན་དྲུག	six Heroic Brothers skillful in journeys	byes thub dpa' bo spun drug
བྱེས་པ	foreigner, stranger, traveller	byes pa
བྱེས་ཕག་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་ཕག་རྒོད	wild pig living on byes phag mountain	byes phag ri la gnas pa'i phag rgod
བྱེས་འབྱོར	exiles, expatriates	byes 'byor
བྱེས་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	to se on the way to be on road	byes la 'gro ba
བྱེས་ལམ	travelling road, road on which to travel	byes lam
བྱེས་སུ་འགྲོ	depart, leave, go elsewhere, travel, go abroad	byes su 'gro
བྱེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	go abroad, travel	byes su 'gro ba
བྱོ	devoid of food and drink	byo
བྱོ་བ	[f 'byo ba] will hear, hearken, listen	byo ba
བྱོ་བྱོས	pour out, SA 'byo ba	byo byos
བྱོ་ར་གྱི་ལི་ལི	tho sound dancing ground	byo ra gyi li li
བྱོགས	lick, SA 'byog pa	byogs
བྱོན	go, arrive, come, SA 'byon pa, appeared, arrived, descend	byon
བྱོན་སྐྱེམས	welcoming drink	byon skyems
བྱོན་སྐྱེས	arrival/ farewell gift	byon skyes
བྱོན་ཁར	when he came, at the moment of arrival	byon khar
བྱོན་གྱི་ཐོབ་ཁ་མ་ལ	directly he had arrived	byon gyi thob kha ma la
བྱོན་གྲུབ་པར	had gone on {ded dpon byon grub par bsams nas} thought that the captain had gone on before them	byon grub par
བྱོན་ཅིག	give me one, fetch me one	byon cig
བྱོན་ཆས	clothes	byon chas
བྱོན་གཏོར	welcoming torma	byon gtor
བྱོན་རྟིང་ལ	after their appearance	byon rting la
བྱོན་ཐལ	has passed by	byon thal
བྱོན་དུ་མ་གནང	he refused to come	byon du ma gnang
བྱོན་དུ་རེ་ནས	expecting his arrival	byon du re nas
བྱོན་ནས་ཚལ་ཆེན་པོར་གཤེགས་པ	went to the great garden after arriving	byon nas tshal chen por gshegs pa
བྱོན་པ	to approach/ come/ appear	byon pa
བྱོན་པ་ལེགས	welcome	byon pa legs
བྱོན་པའི་ཚོ	at the time of going	byon pa'i tsho
བྱོན་ཟན	welcoming food	byon zan
བྱོབས	clean! wash ! wipe! byab pa!	byobs
བྱོར	SA nar nar	byor
བྱོལ	[p ! 'byol ba],, turn away, avoid, mistook, blundered, strayed, erred	byol
བྱོལ་འགྲོ	bros nas 'gro ba'am, bzur te 'gro ba, nyes can rnams gnam mtha' sa	byol 'gro
བྱོལ་པ	to err, to go astray	byol pa
བྱོལ་བ	[p ! 'byol ba],, turn away, avoid, mistook, blundered, strayed, erred	byol ba
བྱོལ་མ	gzhan yul du gyol mkhan ???	byol ma
བྱོལ་སོང	animal, beast of burden, animals	byol song
བྱོལ་སོང་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as an animal	byol song skye gnas
བྱོལ་སོང་གི་སྐྱེ་གནས་པ	the place of those born as animals	byol song gi skye gnas pa
བྱོལ་སོང་གི་སྐྱེ་བ	being born as an animal	byol song gi skye ba
བྱོལ་སོང་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of beasts, lion byol song thub pa seng ge rab brtan Shravasinha, steadfast lion, sage of the animals	byol song rgyal po
བྱོལ་སོང་བས་གླེན་པ	more stupid than a brute	byol song bas glen pa
བྱོལ་སོང་སྲིད	produces the existence of animals	byol song srid
བྱོས	make, SA byed pa, let, allow, must	byos
བྱོས་པ	[p 'byo ba],, poured from 1 vessel to another	byos pa
བྲ	[arch] sems stor ba	bra
བྲ་ཁུང	aa bra 'dzul sa'i khung bu	bra khung
བྲ་མཁར	burrow of bra ba	bra mkhar
བྲ་འཁུར	'khur ba of buckwheat flour	bra 'khur
བྲ་རྗེན	buckwheat meal	bra rjen
བྲ་བརྗོད་དུ་མི་བ	indescribably [many]	bra brjod du mi ba
བྲ་ཉེ	bra nye [one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} [R]	bra nye
བྲ་ཉེ་སྐྱེས	Rahu	bra nye skyes
བྲ་ཏི་སུམ་རྟགས	by bra ti dge bshes rin chen don grub 18th century commentary on the sum cu pa, kun bzang dgongs gsal &, rtags 'jug dgongs 'grel gsal ba zhes bya'o	bra ti sum rtags
བྲ་ད་ར	a tree	bra da ra
བྲ་ནག	dark yellow	bra nag
བྲ་པོ	buckwheat	bra po
བྲ་ཕབ་པ	mirror divination	bra phab pa
བྲ་ཕྱེ	buckwheat flour	bra phye
བྲ་བ	animals of the lagomys genus, small tailless rodents living in burrows, have, be in great plenty, small rodent similar to the a bra	bra ba
བྲ་བོ	1) buck-wheat; 2) dark brown	bra bo
བྲ་བོ་ཁ	sha gseb tu mde'u yod med bskyar du brtag byed bra bo'i dbyibs 'dra'i thur spyad rtse zur gsum pa zhig	bra bo kha
བྲ་བོ་སྒོམ་ཉག	gter ston of Bönpo text: srid pa las kyi gting zlog	bra bo sgom nyag
བྲ་བོ་སུམ་གཤགས	[example of something w three kinds]	bra bo sum gshags
བྲ་བོའི་ཟན	buckwheat meal	bra bo'i zan
བྲ་མ	bushes	bra ma
བྲ་མ་དན་དི	medicinal drug bra rtse g.yag - kind of animal, species of hedgehog	bra ma dan di
བྲ་ཚ	Dratsa, at Mangra Kha, in Domey	bra tsha
བྲ་ཚང	aa bra'i sdod gnas	bra tshang
བྲ་ཞིབ	buckwheat flour	bra zhib
བྲ་རིལ	aa bra'i ril ma or chaff	bra ril
བྲ་ཤུན	buckwheat hulls	bra shun
བྲ་སོག	buckwheat straw	bra sog
བྲ་ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཕུག	serpent's cave	bra lha klu phug
བྲག་དཀན	hard to cross brag ngos gzar po	brag dkan
བྲག་དཀར	white rock [mt]	brag dkar
བྲག་དཀར་རྟ་སོ	Horse tooth white rock, cave/ crag	brag dkar rta so
བྲག་དཀར་རྟ་སོ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	chos kyi dbang phyug brag dkar rta so sprul sku chos kyi dbang	brag dkar rta so sprul sku
ཕྱུག་གི་བཀའ་འབུམ	Trakar Taso Tulku Chökyi Wangchuk's Collected Writings	phyug gi bka' 'bum
བྲག་དཀར་སྤྲེལ་རྫོང	White Rock Monkey Fortress, in Domey. Drakar/Trakar Drel Dzong	brag dkar sprel rdzong
བྲག་དཀར་སྤྲེལ་རྫོང་གི་དཀར་ཆག	Description of Trakar Drel Dzong, by Drigung Chödrak	brag dkar sprel rdzong gi dkar chag
བྲག་སྐེད	in the middle of the rock	brag sked
བྲག་སྐོར་ལ	{brag skor la} pass	brag skor la
བྲག་སྐྱ་པོའི་རི	mountain beyond ratna dwipa in western quarter	brag skya po'i ri
བྲག་སྐྱ་ཧ་པོ	aleruitopteris argentea (gmel.) fee	brag skya ha po
བྲག་སྐྱ་ཧ་བོ	{brag skya ha bo} med. herb	brag skya ha bo
བྲག་སྐྱབས	harborage for birds under the cleft of a rock	brag skyabs
བྲག་སྐྱིབ	a natural rocky shelter	brag skyib
བྲག་སྐྱིབས	shallow sheltering hole/ cave in the rock	brag skyibs
བྲག་སྐྱེས	rock-grown, fragrant resin, benzoin, storax	brag skyes
བྲག་ཁ	face of the cliff	brag kha
བྲག་ཁུག་རྟ	rock-dwelling swallow	brag khug rta
བྲག་ཁུང	cleft in a rock, cave, hole	brag khung
བྲག་ཁུང་མཐོ་སྐོར	circular hole a finger span in size	brag khung mtho skor
བྲག་མཁན	medicinal/ incense shrub	brag mkhan
བྲག་གི་ཆགས་རིམ	rock layer	brag gi chags rim
བྲག་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས	specific classifications	brag gi rnam grangs
བྲག་གི་ཡང་བགྲོད་དཀའ	Rock that is Hard to Reach, in Drak Yerpa	brag gi yang bgrod dka'
བྲག་གི་ཨ་བྲ	mouse?, ochotona erythrotis buchner	brag gi a bra
བྲག་གོང	large rocks, boulders	brag gong
བྲག་གྱབ་དགོན་ཆེན	{brag gyab dgon chen} monastery [established by in the 11th iron bird year by rngu spe grags pa rgya mtsho]	brag gyab dgon chen
བྲག་གྱམ	shelter under a rock	brag gyam
བྲག་མགོ	summit of a rock mt	brag mgo
བྲག་འགག	narrow 'gag between two rocky mountains	brag 'gag
བྲག་འགོ	rdzong in si khron province dkar mdzes in north T, ruled from shis mdor	brag 'go
བྲག་རྒྱབ	behind the rock, village beyond 'phan yul	brag rgyab
བྲག་སྒང	rock	brag sgang
བྲག་སྒོག	brag la skyes pa'i sgog pa	brag sgog
བྲག་སྒོར	on the cave door brag nges par 'phangs pa'i rtogs brjod the story of the Destruction of the Boulder	brag sgor
བྲག་ངོས	rocky face	brag ngos
བྲག་ངོས་དེར	on the rock-face	brag ngos der
བྲག་ཅ	echo	brag ca
བྲག་ཅ་འཁོར	echo	brag ca 'khor
བྲག་ཅ་འཐབ	echo	brag ca 'thab
བྲག་ཅན	rocky	brag can
བྲག་ཅའི	resonant	brag ca'i
བྲག་ལྕམ	brag lcam, field herb	brag lcam
བྲག་ལྕམ་པ	rock vegetation	brag lcam pa
བྲག་ཆ	echo returned from a rock, echo, echo from a rock, echo	brag cha
བྲག་ཆ་འཁོར	echo	brag cha 'khor
བྲག་ཆ་འཐབ	echo	brag cha 'thab
བྲག་ཆུ	1) water coming from cracks in rocks; 2) brag gsum phu chu (? brag gtor rdo gshag pha bong bshig nas	brag chu
བྲག་སྟོང	rocky desert	brag stong
བྲག་ཐོག	monastery in Ladakh	brag thog
བྲག་མཐོན་པོ	high rocky mountain	brag mthon po
བྲག་དང་ལྡན་པ	rocky	brag dang ldan pa
བྲག་དིལ་ཆུང་ངུ	small rock shaped like a hill	brag dil chung ngu
བྲག་དྲེད	rock-dwelling bear	brag dred
བྲག་གདོང	side of a rock [=brag zur]	brag gdong
བྲག་རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ་འཐོར་བ	the dust particles of the boulder	brag rdul phra rab 'thor ba
བྲག་རྡོ	rock, boulder, granite brag las byung ba'i rdo	brag rdo
བྲག་རྡོ་ཆེན་པོ	a great boulder	brag rdo chen po
བྲག་རྡོ་ཞུན་མ	melted rock, lava, igneous rock	brag rdo zhun ma
བྲག་ལྡན	rocky	brag ldan
བྲག་བརྡབས་ཆུ་བཤལ	mkhregs 'bol gyi dngos po btsog pa rnams brag la brdabs shing chu la bshal dgos pa ltar byas nyes dang nor 'khrul la skyon 'don dag ther byed dgos pa'i dpe, , skyon cha byung rigs la dri ngan sa 'g...	brag brdabs chu bshal
བྲག་ནག་བྱ་སྐྱིབས	black rock cave	brag nag bya skyibs
བྲག་ནག་ལ	mountain in stod lung tshul phug	brag nag la
བྲག་སྣ	brag gi zur gdong	brag sna
བྲག་སྣ་ཕུག	Draknaphuk, cave near Amnye Machen	brag sna phug
བྲག་པ	anger, malice	brag pa
བྲག་དཔོན	place in tibet	brag dpon
བྲག་སྤོ་མཐོ	high peak of a rock mountain	brag spo mtho
བྲག་སྤོས	lepisorus contortus, valeriana tangutica baatal., different kinds of miasma, aromatic substance used for incense	brag spos
བྲག་སྤྱིལ	rock spyil bu	brag spyil
བྲག་སྤྲོས	SA skye ba rgyu gcod	brag spros
བྲག་ཕུག	cave, rock	brag phug
བྲག་ཕུག་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	eight great caves: : Yangdzong Phuk (yang rdzong phug), Chimphu Phuk (mchims phu phug), Kharchu Phuk (mkhar chu phug), Sheldrag Phuk (shel brag phug), Senge Dzongphuk (seng ge rdzong phug), Yerpa P...	brag phug chen po brgyad
བྲག་ཕུག་ན	in the rock cave, rock	brag phug na
བྲག་ཕུག་པ	cave, rock	brag phug pa
བྲག་ཕུག་ཟླུམ་པོ	round cave	brag phug zlum po
བྲག་ཕུག་འོད་གསལ	'cave luminosity'	brag phug 'od gsal
བྲག་ཕུང	walled in overhanging rock forming a hermitage	brag phung
བྲག་ཕྱེ	small fragments of stone produced by stone cutting	brag phye
བྲག་འཕྲང	1 rock mountain cliff; 2) rocky narrow/ difficult path	brag 'phrang
བྲག་བྲ	a small tailless burrowing rodent	brag bra
བྲག་འབུར	round-shaped rock 1855	brag 'bur
བྲག་དམར	Drakmar, in Tö, Mangyul. See Red Rock	brag dmar
བྲག་དམར་མགྲིན་བཟང	Drakmar Drinsang [Trisong Deutsen's birthplace]	brag dmar mgrin bzang
བྲག་དམར་ཆོང་ལུང	Red Rock of the Valley of Agates, one of Milarepa's caves in Tsang	brag dmar chong lung
བྲག་དམར་ཐེམ་ན	on the cornices of red cliffs	brag dmar them na
བྲག་དམར་དཔལ་གྱི་བསམ་ཡས	Glorious Samye at Red Rock. The fabulous temple complex of Samye in Central Tibet built by King Trisong Deutsen (790844). The mountain slope behind Samye is of a bright red color	brag dmar dpal gyi bsam yas
བྲག་དམར་ཕོ་བྲང	name of the dwelling place of king Trisong Deutsen	brag dmar pho brang
བྲག་དམར་བྱ་ཁྱུང	Red Rock Garuda	brag dmar bya khyung
བྲག་དམར་འོམ་བུ་ཚལ	red rock tamarisk grove king [Trisong Deutsen's palace location, today in gra nang rdzong, in bsam yas]	brag dmar 'om bu tshal
བྲག་དམར་འོམ་བུས་གཏིབས་པའི་ཚལ	Red Rock Dense Tamarisk Forest. The location of the temple complex of Samye brag dmar g.ya' ma lung - Yamalung, Drakmar, hermitage near Samye brag dmar g.ya' ma lung - Red Rock of Yamalung	brag dmar 'om bus gtibs pa'i tshal
བྲག་རྩ	base of a rock	brag rtsa
བྲག་རྩ་ཕུག	Draktsa Cave, at Drigung Terdrom	brag rtsa phug
བྲག་རྩང	rock-lizard	brag rtsang
བྲག་རྩངས	rock-dwelling rtsangs pa kha ral	brag rtsangs
བྲག་རྩེ	tip of a rock	brag rtse
བྲག་ཚྭ	rock salt [from dried ancient seas tshva bang rim du gyur pa zhig]	brag tshwa
བྲག་ཚེ་རིང	1 of the tshe ring rnam drug	brag tshe ring
བྲག་མཚམས་ཚབ༹་ཁ	salt source in NE dge rgyas rdzong	brag mtshams tshva kha
བྲག་མཚེ	kind of mtshe ldum ??? growing among rocks	brag mtshe
བྲག་རྫོང	brag sdeb kyi mkhar rdzong	brag rdzong
བྲག་ཞུན	bitumen which is the essence of earth, fossil pitch, bitumen, effusion of which there are five varieties derived from gold, silver, copper, iron and lead	brag zhun
བྲག་ཞུན་རིགས་ལྔ	five five kinds of rtsi med. [1) gser zhun dang 2) dngul zhun 3) zangs zhun, 4) lcags zhun, 5) zha nye zhun a kind of iron/metal? lcags]	brag zhun rigs lnga
བྲག་གཞུ་ཅན	bow rock??	brag gzhu can
བྲག་ཟུར	ridge	brag zur
བྲག་ཟོམ	cracks in rock	brag zom
བྲག་གཟར་པོ	rock w face mostly descending	brag gzar po
བྲག་གཟིག	rock leopard	brag gzig
བྲག་གཟེངས་པ	rock w a point rising upwards	brag gzengs pa
བྲག་ཡེར་པ	Drak Yerpa	brag yer pa
བྲག་ཡོས	= bre gu gser thig brag g.yang - cliff, creek brag g.yab - county in 21th cent Tibet. brag g.yab - piece of projecting rock, place in khams brag g.yab - 1) rock shelter from rain; 2) brag g.yab rdz...	brag yos
བྲག་རམ	place in tibet, mineral substance encrusted on rocks	brag ram
བྲག་རི	rocky peaks	brag ri
བྲག་རི་དཀར་པོ	white rock	brag ri dkar po
བྲག་རི་རིན་ཆེན་བརྩེགས་པ	Precious Rocky Mountain. A mountain on the right side of {seng chen gnam brag}	brag ri rin chen brtsegs pa
བྲག་རིམ	rock bang rim	brag rim
བྲག་རིའི་ཁྲོད	a rocky gorge	brag ri'i khrod
བྲག་རོང	ravine, narrow ravine, dell or chasm between rocks	brag rong
བྲག་ལ	rock mt pass	brag la
བྲག་ལ་ཆུ་འཐབ	rapids, water hitting the rocks	brag la chu 'thab
བྲག་ལ་རི	a mt in central bzhad mthong smon rdzong	brag la ri
བྲག་ལམ	rocky path	brag lam
བྲག་ལུག་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 great brag lug [sheep?]	brag lug chen po brgyad
བྲག་ཤིག	rock-mite, tick	brag shig
བྲག་ཤུར	1) khang pa bstar bsgrigs gyas gyon gyi bar du dgos pa'i 'gro lam; 2) khang pa sra brtan yong ched ka ba ma btsugs par 'phred gzhung khag la rdo rtsig bslangs pa'i steng du lcam gdung bkal ba las b...	brag shur
བྲག་ཤོད	wild animal roaming on rocks	brag shod
བྲག་སུལ	narrow ravine between rocks	brag sul
བྲག་སེར	brag gas pa'i ser srubs	brag ser
བྲག་སྲམ	rock otter	brag sram
བྲག་སྲིན	a crag-demoness	brag srin
བྲག་སྲིན་པོའི་སྤར་རྗེས	Rock of the Imprint of the Raksha's Claw	brag srin po'i spar rjes
བྲག་སྲུབས	cracks in the rocks	brag srubs
བྲག་གསུམ་ཕུ་ཆུ	{brag gsum phu chu} river	brag gsum phu chu
བྲག་གསུམ་མཚོ	{brag gsum} Lake	brag gsum mtsho
བྲག་གསེང	cracks in rocks	brag gseng
བྲག་ལྷ་ཀླུ་སྒུག	in the lcags po mt range, a rock cave in which Dharmaraja srong btsan sgam po's queen ru yong bza'i according to what she said carved by by skillful rdo bzo ba famous temple w some statues	brag lha klu sgug
བྲག་ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཕུག	Dra Lhalupuk; King Songtsen Gampo's meditation cave on the front side of Chakpori Hill 1856	brag lha klu phug
བྲགས་དམར་མགྲིན་བཟང	Drakmar Drinsang	brags dmar mgrin bzang
བྲང	1) chest, breast; 2) house, place where 1 is staying (/ [bsti gnas pho brang, bzhugs brang]	brang
བྲང་དཀྱིལ	middle of the breast, pit of the stomach	brang dkyil
བྲང་སྐྱེས	what grows on the breast, teats, son, child, mythological being	brang skyes
བྲང་ཁ	chest	brang kha
བྲང་ཁང	house where someone is staying/ living	brang khang
བྲང་ཁོག	breast, chest	brang khog
བྲང་ཁོག་གི་ཕྱི་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	department of thoracic surgery	brang khog gi phyi nad tshan khag
བྲང་ཁོག་ལྡིར	to stick out one's chest with pride	brang khog ldir
བྲང་གི་རྒྱན	necklace	brang gi rgyan
བྲང་གི་མཐིལ	depths of necessity	brang gi mthil
བྲང་གི་འོག	part of the belly below the breast	brang gi 'og
བྲང་མགོ	breast bone kyi stod	brang mgo
བྲང་འགྲོ	snake	brang 'gro
བྲང་རྒྱན	chest ornament, necklace	brang rgyan
བྲང་རྒྱབ	chest/ front and back, ahead and behind	brang rgyab
བྲང་ངེ	mindful	brang nge
བྲང་ངེ་བ	{san ne ba brang nge ba 'tshub be ba} - restless, unsettled and fidgety	brang nge ba
བྲང་བཅར	embrace	brang bcar
བྲང་ཏི	court official and physician in 704 ad	brang ti
བྲང་ཏི་དཔལ་ལྡན་འཚོ་བྱེད	{brang ti dpal ldan 'tsho byed}	brang ti dpal ldan 'tsho byed
བྲང་ལྟོ་གོས་གྲེམ་ཙམ	just the pure necessities of food and clothing	brang lto gos grem tsam
བྲང་གདན	bib or apron worn by ladaki women	brang gdan
བྲང་བདག	owner of a house, landlord	brang bdag
བྲང་རྡུང	1) rang zhe rang la khrel nas 'gyod gdung drag po skyes pa'i rnam 'gyur; 2) dgra dang gdong thug skabs shin tu khros nas 'bar stangs	brang rdung
བྲང་ལྡན་མ	young woman with fine bust	brang ldan ma
བྲང་པ	mindfulness	brang pa
བྲང་དཔོན	owner of a house	brang dpon
བྲང་སྤུ	chest hair	brang spu
བྲང་བ་ཅན	mgo bo'i rma 'dra byed implement	brang ba can
བྲང་བུར	middle convex part of the rdo rje	brang bur
བྲང་བྲེང	a number	brang breng
བྲང་བྲེད	token, nominal	brang bred
བྲང་བྲེམ	pure necessity	brang brem
བྲང་མོ་ཆེ	Drangmoche, in Tsang	brang mo che
བྲང་རྩིའི་དོག་པ	buds containing honey in their capsules	brang rtsi'i dog pa
བྲང་ཚ	brang khog tsha ba pho nad disease	brang tsha
བྲང་མཚེས	khyim mtshes, shag mtshes	brang mtshes
བྲང་ཞེང	breadth of chest	brang zheng
བྲང་ཞོལ	lower chest [=brang 'dabs]	brang zhol
བྲང་གཞུང	brang khog gi dkyil gzhung ???	brang gzhung
བྲང་གཞུང་དཀར་ནག་མཚམས	in the center of a string connecting the left and right nipples a me gsang [secret fire?] connected w the heart.	brang gzhung dkar nag mtshams
བྲང་ཟེ	breast flesh of goat sheep or yak	brang ze
བྲང་ཟླ	shag tshang??? someone who lives w 1 in the same house brang g.yas - right side of the chest	brang zla
བྲང་རུས	breast bone	brang rus
བྲང་ལ་སྦྱར	to place on the chest	brang la sbyar
བྲང་ལ་རེག་པ	residing in the woods	brang la reg pa
བྲང་ལག་འཐབ	to beat your chest	brang lag 'thab
བྲང་ཤ	flesh of the chest/ ribs	brang sha
བྲང་ས	place someone is staying, house, dwelling	brang sa
བྲང་གསེང	upper cavity of body w/o heart and lungs etc	brang gseng
བྲད	scratch, SA 'brad pa	brad
བྲད་རྡར	friction	brad rdar
བྲད་བརྡར	abrasion	brad brdar
བྲད་པ	consume [p 'brad pa]	brad pa
བྲད་བྲད	1) scratched, scraped, sliced [gri thur shing bu sogs kyis rdar rdar byed tshul, dreg pa brad brad byed pa]; 2) (A) great effort	brad brad
བྲད་བྲུད	[arch] small	brad brud
བྲད་བྲེད	[arch] small	brad bred
བྲད་ཤད	field evening implement	brad shad
བྲད་ཤུལ	scratch	brad shul
བྲན་ཀ	a local demon whom Atisha subdued	bran ka
བྲན་བཀོལ	bind into servitude	bran bkol
བྲན་བཀོལ་བ	binding into servitude	bran bkol ba
བྲན་སྐུལ	use as a servant	bran skul
བྲན་ཁོལ	enslave, bind into servitude	bran khol
བྲན་འཁོར	servants and retinue	bran 'khor
བྲན་གྱི་བདག་པོ	bran gyog spyi tshogs nang thon skyed rgyu chas dang, master of slaves/ servants	bran gyi bdag po
བྲན་འགྱུར་བསམ་པ	servile thinking/ mentality	bran 'gyur bsam pa
བྲན་སྒྱུར་སློབ་གསོ	servile education	bran sgyur slob gso
བྲན་ཏེ	{tsan dan gyi chus legs par bran te} sprinkling the way with sandalwood water 1857	bran te
བྲན་ལྟར་འདུ་བ	assemble as their servants	bran ltar 'du ba
བྲན་དང་འདྲ་བ	like a servant bran dang g.yog po - servants and attendants	bran dang 'dra ba
བྲན་དུ་གཀོལ	enslave, bind into servitude	bran du gkol
བྲན་དུ་བཀོལ	enslave, bind into servitude; [useless occupations) enslave me	bran du bkol
བྲན་དུ་བཀོལ་བ	bind into servitude	bran du bkol ba
བྲན་དུ་སྐུལ་བ	engage as a servant	bran du skul ba
བྲན་དུ་འཁོལ་བ	to bind to/ accept into servitude	bran du 'khol ba
བྲན་དུ་བྱེད	enslave, bind into servitude	bran du byed
བྲན་དུ་འབུལ་བ	to offer as a servant/ into servitude	bran du 'bul ba
བྲན་བདག	bran gyog spyi tshogs nang thon skyed rgyu chas dang, master of slaves/ servants	bran bdag
བྲན་ནི་ཡང་དག་པར་འཇུག	truly enter into servitude	bran ni yang dag par 'jug
བྲན་པ	sbags pa - sprinkle	bran pa
བྲན་པ་འཕེལ	developing what has been stabilized	bran pa 'phel
བྲན་པོ	male servant	bran po
བྲན་པོ་མེད་པ	rickety	bran po med pa
བྲན་ཕོ	bitter	bran pho
བྲན་ཕོ་བྱེད་པ	to be a servant	bran pho byed pa
བྲན་འབངས	a servant	bran 'bangs
བྲན་མ	sal tree	bran ma
བྲན་མི	servant	bran mi
བྲན་མོ	servitude {bran mo'i sdug bsngal mi 'byung ba'i smon lam btab} prayed to be delivered from the misery of servitude	bran mo
བྲན་མོ་བྱེད་པ	to be a maid	bran mo byed pa
བྲན་བཟའ	slave	bran bza'
བྲན་རབས	gyog 'khor gyi mi rabs, sngar bran rabs mang po'i ring gyog byas pa,	bran rabs
བྲན་རིགས	servant [caste]	bran rigs
བྲན་ལྷ་འཁོར་བུ	a sa bdag monster of the naga class	bran lha 'khor bu
བྲབ	whip; beat; to whip (?)	brab
བྲབ་ཀྱིན	turning over	brab kyin
བྲབ་པ	cast, thrown	brab pa
བྲབས	whip	brabs
བྲབས་ཐུན	wielding a whip	brabs thun
བྲབས་པ	cast, thrown	brabs pa
བྲབས་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	whip	brabs pa brgyab pa
བྲམ་ཆ	1 of 36 border countries	bram cha
བྲམ་ཇེ	brahmin	bram je
བྲམ་ཐེ	Brahmin	bram the
བྲམ་ཛེ	brahman	bram dze
བྲམ་ཛེའི་འཇིག་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	brahmana view of a transitory collection as a self	bram dze'i 'jig tshogs kyi lta ba
བྲམ་ཟིའི་གསང་ཚིག	bhramin secret teachings	bram zi'i gsang tshig
བྲམ་ཟེ	Brahman, brahmin, member of the hindu priestly caste	bram ze
བྲམ་ཟེ་མགོན་པོ	brahmana's spirit	bram ze mgon po
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཆེན་པོ	great brahmin	bram ze chen po
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཆེན་པོ་ས་ར་ཧ	great Brahmin Saraha	bram ze chen po sa ra ha
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཆེན་པོའི་གདམས་པ	deep metaphysical precepts	bram ze chen po'i gdams pa
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཆོས་འཆད་པ་ལ་མཁས་པ	a wise and learned brahmin	bram ze chos 'chad pa la mkhas pa
བྲམ་ཟེ་གཉིས	brahman couple	bram ze gnyis
བྲམ་ཟེ་སྙིང་པོ་གྲུབ་པ	the brahmin Sarasiddhi; = Manjushrimitra	bram ze snying po grub pa
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཐེག་པའི་སྒོམ	meditation according to the Brahman vehicle	bram ze theg pa'i sgom
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཐོས་མཆོག་བྱ་བ	a brahmin named Srutapara	bram ze thos mchog bya ba
བྲམ་ཟེ་དུས་དཔོག	bhramin time measure	bram ze dus dpog
བྲམ་ཟེ་བདེ་སྐྱོང	the brahmin Sukhapala	bram ze bde skyong
བྲམ་ཟེ་པ	adherent of brahmanical doctrine	bram ze pa
བྲམ་ཟེ་མོ	female brahman	bram ze mo
བྲམ་ཟེ་མོ་གསལ་བའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the brahmin lady salwe tsultim	bram ze mo gsal ba'i tshul khrims
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཙ་ན་ཀ	indian minister & author	bram ze tsa na ka
བྲམ་ཟེ་འི་རིགས	the priestly/ brahman caste	bram ze 'i rigs
བྲམ་ཟེ་རང་དགའ	ordinary brahman	bram ze rang dga'
བྲམ་ཟེ་ལི་བི་ཀ་ར	indian who taught sanskrit to thon mi	bram ze li bi ka ra
བྲམ་ཟེ་ཤམ་ཀ་ར	The brahmin Shankara [vedanta philosopher). in the case of king Songtsen Gampo, master who came to Tibet and was a translator of tantras	bram ze sham ka ra
བྲམ་ཟེའི་འཇིག་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	Brahmana View of Mundane Aggregates	bram ze'i 'jig tshogs kyi lta ba
བྲམ་ཟེའི་བུ་མོ	a brahmin maiden	bram ze'i bu mo
བྲམ་ཟེའི་རིག་བྱེད་བཞི	the four Vedas of the brahmins	bram ze'i rig byed bzhi
བྲམ་ཟེའི་རིགས	priestly/ brahmin class 1858	bram ze'i rigs
བྲམ་ཟེའི་རིགས་གསུམ	3 classes of brahmans (nags gnas, khyim gnas, dka' thub)	bram ze'i rigs gsum
བྲམ་ཟེའི་ལས་དྲུག	the six actions of the brahmins	bram ze'i las drug
བྲམ་ཟེར་རང་དགའ	ordinary brahman	bram zer rang dga'
བྲམ་ཟེར་ཤེས་པ	respect or pay homage to brahman	bram zer shes pa
བྲམ་ཟེས་གདུག་པ	wicked/ cruel bhramin	bram zes gdug pa
བྲམ་ཟེས་མཚན་མཁན	a brahmin versed in the art of reading signs	bram zes mtshan mkhan
བྲམ་སེ་ཆེན་པོ	great brahmin Saraha	bram se chen po
བྲའུ	buckwheat	bra'u
བྲའོ	buck-wheat	bra'o
བྲལ་རྒྱུ	{bral ba'i rgyu} (primary) cause (underlying/ of a process) of divestment/ disjunction/ disengagement	bral rgyu
བྲལ་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	{bral ba'i rgyu 'bras} causation as a process of divestment	bral rgyu 'bras
བྲལ་ཆ	SNT: the part separated from,	bral cha
ཐེ་རེམོབེ༹ད་པརཏ	- which is it??? Ask again [mss]	the removed part
བྲལ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indivisible, inseparable	bral thabs med pa
བྲལ་ཐོབ	loss and gain	bral thob
བྲལ་ཐོབ་མེད་པ	neither to be without nor achieved	bral thob med pa
བྲལ་དང་རྣམ་སྨིན	freedom and maturation, ripened and freed	bral dang rnam smin
བྲལ་དང་རྣམ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of being ripened and freed	bral dang rnam smin gyi yon tan
བྲལ་ནས་འགྲོ་བ	go on all alone	bral nas 'gro ba
བྲལ་ནས་ངུ་བ	{bla ma bral nas ngu ba} to cry when parting from one's guru	bral nas ngu ba
བྲལ་ནས་འོང་དུས	when I left	bral nas 'ong dus
བྲལ་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	freedom result	bral pa'i 'bras bu
བྲལ་བ་བཞི	the four separations/ freedoms; 1) dogs pa dang bral ba fear and doubt 2) nges shes ... certainty 3) dngos por lta ba ... view of real things 4) re ba.. hope]	bral ba bzhi
བྲལ་བའི་དགེ་སློང	monk dwelling in any of the four or 8 states from stream enterer to arhat	bral ba'i dge slong
བྲལ་བའི་རྒྱུ	cause of freedom; primary cause of disjunction/ disengagement	bral ba'i rgyu
བྲལ་བའི་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	causation as a process of divestment	bral ba'i rgyu 'bras
བྲལ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ	disconnected effect, effect of absence, effect which is an state of separation, the result of freedom, {bral 'bras}. disjunctive result; result of disengagement	bral ba'i 'bras bu
བྲལ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the quality of freedom, {'bras bu phun sum tshogs pa'i yon tan} quality of perfect fruition	bral ba'i yon tan
བྲལ་བར་མེད་པར	never be parted from	bral bar med par
བྲལ་བར་སྨིན	ripen by separation (from kleshas	bral bar smin
བྲལ་བར་སྨིན་བྱེད	ripen by separation	bral bar smin byed
བྲལ་བྱ	that to be freed from, [Syn. {sbyang bya}	bral bya
བྲལ་བྲུལ	become tattered, broken, fragmented	bral brul
བྲལ་འབྲས	{bral ba'i 'bras bu} disjunct result; result of disengagement/ divestment	bral 'bras
བྲལ་འབྲས་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of being ripened and freed	bral 'bras gyi yon tan
བྲལ་འབྲས་སྨིན	free and mature, freedom and maturation ripening and freeing/ separating, ripening of a fruition of separation	bral 'bras smin
བྲལ་འབྲས་གཞི	basis, ground of separation, freedom, [Syn. {sbyang gzhi}	bral 'bras gzhi
བྲལ་འབྲས་ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the spotless qualities of being free and mature/ ripened and freed/ a fruition of separation	bral 'bras zag med kyi yon tan
བྲལ་མ་བྲལ	{sems la bral ma bral med} mind is not something with which you can possibly part	bral ma bral
བྲལ་སྨིན	free[dom] and mature[ation], ripening and freeing, separating [Free from kleshas, ripened kayas and wisdoms] 1859	bral smin
བྲལ་སྨིན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of being ripened and freed	bral smin gyi yon tan
བྲལ་སྨིན་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of freedom and maturation; the good qualities of being free and mature	bral smin yon tan
བྲལ་སྨིན་ཡོན་ཏན་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	sixtyfour qualities of freedom and maturation	bral smin yon tan drug cu rtsa bzhi
བྲལ་གཞི	ground of releasement	bral gzhi
བྲལ་ཡ་བ	separate from, break away from	bral ya ba
བྲལ་ཡེ་མེད	to be never separated	bral ye med
བྲལ་ཧྲུལ	become tattered, fragmented	bral hrul
བྲས་དང་བཅས	together w the fruition/ rice	bras dang bcas
བྲས་བུ་ལྔ	the five results, {rnam smin 'bras}, {rgyu mthun 'bras}, {bral 'bras}, {byed bras}, {bdag 'bras}	bras bu lnga
བྲས་བུ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the mantric vehicle of fruition, the resultant vehicle of mantra	bras bu sngags kyi theg pa
བྲས་བུ་ཆེ་བ	Great Fruit, Brihat phala, [third of {so skye'i gnas gsum} a heaven and class of gods in the 4th {bsam gtan} of {gzugs khams}	bras bu che ba
བྲས་བུ་གཉིས	the two results * incidental and ultimate]	bras bu gnyis
བྲས་བུ་རྣམ་ལྔ	the five kinds of fuition/ results; 1) {rnam smin 'bras} 2)	bras bu rnam lnga
བྲས་བུ་འབྱུང་འགྱུར་གྱི་གཟུགས་ལྔ	five resultant material forms [within {gzugs kyi phung po}	bras bu 'byung 'gyur gyi gzugs lnga
བྲས་བུ་འཛིན་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the good qualities of holding the fruition	bras bu 'dzin pa'i yon tan
བྲས་བུ་བཞི	the four fruits, [= {'phags pa'i skyes bu bzhi} stream enterer,	bras bu bzhi
བྲས་བུ་ལ་གནས་པ	abider in the attainment [of stream entry etc, {zhugs gnas brgyad}	bras bu la gnas pa
བྲས་བུ་ལམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ	taking fruition as the path, to make the result one's path	bras bu lam du byed pa
བྲས་བུ་གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the fruition vehicle of secret mantra	bras bu gsang sngags kyi theg pa
བྲས་བུ་གསུམ	the three (med. fruits, {a bar skyur} yellow baleric and emblic myrobalan	bras bu gsum
སྦུབས	the precious secret sphere of spontaneously present fruition	sbubs
བྲས་བུའི་ཐེག་པ	the resultant vehicle[s], yanas of result, effect vehicle, [Syn Vajrayana]	bras bu'i theg pa
བྲས་བུའི་གཟུགས	resultant forms, {'bras gzugs bcu gcig}	bras bu'i gzugs
བྲས་བུའི་ལམ་ཁྱེར	taking the result as path, bringing the goal into one's practice	bras bu'i lam khyer
བྲས་ཤུན	chaff	bras shun
བྲི	lose, grow less, diminish, SA 'bri ba	bri
བྲི་སྐུ	painted image	bri sku
བྲི་མཁན	writer	bri mkhan
བྲི་གང	1) diminish and develop; 2) wax and wane	bri gang
བྲི་གང་མེད་པ	without fluctuation; without increase or diminution	bri gang med pa
བྲི་གུང་སྐྱོབ་པ	Drikung Kyobpa. A great master of the Drigung Kagyü lineage. (1143-1217)	bri gung skyob pa
བྲི་གུད་མེད་པ	can never be diminished	bri gud med pa
བྲི་བ	execute; intr. pf. of {bris pa}; pf. of {bris pa}; to diminish/ decrease	bri ba
བྲི་བ་གང	in the 4th month the time when chu phran increase	bri ba gang
བྲི་བའི་བསྒང	time for writing	bri ba'i bsgang
བྲི་བོ	flavor	bri bo
བྲི་ཡིག	drawing / design manual	bri yig
བྲི་ཤོག	writing/ painting paper	bri shog
བྲིག་ཆུམ	[arch] doubt	brig chum
བྲིང	thag pa mkhregs por lcags gug po sogs bskyon pa'i chu pha rir crossing rope bridge	bring
བྲིད	beguile, SA 'brid pa	brid
བྲིད་མཁས	skilful in imposing upon	brid mkhas
བྲིད་སྣང་བ་མཁས་པ	it appearances are deceptive	brid snang ba mkhas pa
བྲིད་པ	1) be connected; 2) continue, reiterate, repeat continually; 3) [will] deceive[d]/ delude[d], seduce[d] [p f 'drid pa]	brid pa
བྲིད་བྲིད་པ	to float	brid brid pa
བྲིད་བློ་ནས	[are] deceived	brid blo nas
བྲིན	(tha mi dad pa,, sell merchandise, have a market, be marketable	brin
བྲིན་སྐྱེན་པོ	be able to sell merchandise quickly	brin skyen po
བྲིན་རྒྱུག	merchandise 'gro rgyug, , dbyar dus pags gos rigs brin rgyug mi bde, 'brog khral du gro phye brin rgyug che, rong khul du sha mar brin rgyug bde, 1860	brin rgyug
བྲིན་ཆུ་དབར	Drin Chubar, in Tsang. See Chubar	brin chu dbar
བྲིན་དུས	good time to sell merchandise	brin dus
བྲིན་བདེ་པོ	easy to sell, salable	brin bde po
བྲིན་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, sell merchandise, have a market, be marketable	brin pa
བྲིན་པོ	rush, run upon anything, demand, brisk	brin po
བྲིན་པོ་བྱུང	there being a full market for articles of sale	brin po byung
བྲིན་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unsalable	brin mi thub pa
བྲིན་ཚོང	merchandise 'gro rgyug	brin tshong
བྲིན་འཚོང	marketing, selling	brin 'tshong
བྲིམ	SA 'brim pa	brim
བྲིམ་པ	will distribute/ offer/ hand out [f 'brim pa]	brim pa
བྲིམས	imp. of {'brim pa}	brims
བྲིམས་པ	pf. of {'brim pa}	brims pa
བྲིལ	(not in das)	bril
བྲིས	imp. of {bris pa}; picture of a saint, wrote out, {gsal bar pa} wrote it out clearly	bris
བྲིས་ཀློག་མཁན	copyist and reciter	bris klog mkhan
བྲིས་ཀློག་མི་ཐུབ་མཁན	illiterate	bris klog mi thub mkhan
བྲིས་སྐུ	painting [of a divinity]. same as {thang ka} image	bris sku
བྲིས་མཁན	painter, writer	bris mkhan
བྲིས་རྒྱུན	tradition of calligraphy/ painting	bris rgyun
བྲིས་ཆ	drawing, painting	bris cha
བྲིས་འཆད	transcribe and uphold	bris 'chad
བྲིས་ཉེས	wrongly made letters/ pictures	bris nyes
བྲིས་རྙིང	old writings, records, old manuscripts	bris rnying
བྲིས་ཐང	a scroll painting	bris thang
བྲིས་དེབ	note book	bris deb
བྲིས་ནོར	wrongly made letters/ painting	bris nor
བྲིས་པ	applied, transcribed, wrote down, painted [tha dad par [p 'bri ba]	bris pa
བྲིས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like it had been written, as if they were written	bris pa lta bu
བྲིས་པའི་ནོར་བུ	painted gem	bris pa'i nor bu
བྲིས་པའི་ཡི་གེ	written letters	bris pa'i yi ge
བྲིས་པའི་རི་མོ	painted picture	bris pa'i ri mo
བྲིས་བ	ft. of {bris pa}	bris ba
བྲིས་འབུར	art of painting and carving images	bris 'bur
བྲིས་མ	drawings, written book, manuscript, book	bris ma
བྲིས་རྩོམ་གྱི་མ་དཔེ	script	bris rtsom gyi ma dpe
བྲིས་ཚུགས་སུ	written in characters	bris tshugs su
བྲིས་ཞུས	bris mar zhus dag btang ba	bris zhus
བྲིས་ཟིན་པ	drawn, written, wrote	bris zin pa
བྲིས་བཤུས	copy	bris bshus
བྲིས་སུབ	erase	bris sub
བྲིས་སུབ་གཏོང	erase	bris sub gtong
བྲིས་སུབ་བྱེད	erase	bris sub byed
བྲིས་བསུབ	yi ge bris nor brad bsub, ma zin la bzo bcos byed skabs don med tshig lhag rnams bris bsub btang ba ???	bris bsub
བྲུ	Dru [one of the six earliest tribes of Tibet {bod kyi dang po'i mi bu gdung drug} = 'dru]	bru
བྲུ་བ	ft. of {'brud pa}	bru ba
བྲུ་བ་ཚ	hunger	bru ba tsha
བྲུ་བ་ཚ་བ	[arch] hunger	bru ba tsha ba
བྲུ་འབུམ	100,000 per seed-syllable	bru 'bum
བྲུ་ཚ	country n.w. of tibet, tribe in tibet	bru tsha
བྲུ་ཞ	1) shin cang yu gur tribe; 2) a valley's ancient name (/ [= bru sha]	bru zha
བྲུ་ཤ	1) shin cang yu gur tribe; 2) a valley's ancient name	bru sha
བྲུ་སོགས་རླུང་ལ་འཕྱར་བ	winnow	bru sogs rlung la 'phyar ba
བྲུག	gush, stream, flow	brug
བྲུག་སྐད	thunder, voice of the dragon	brug skad
བྲུག་སྐད་གྲགས་པ	thunder	brug skad grags pa
བྲུག་ཆུ	naturally increasing/ spreading/ flowing water	brug chu
བྲུག་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, flow, stream, gush, fill naturally spread [water]; 2) [arch] gather together, pool 'dril ba	brug pa
བྲུག་ཤིང	a plant which removes illness caused by klu brought forth by the rain	brug shing
བྲུགས	(not in das)	brugs
བྲུང	(not in das)	brung
བྲུངས	[arch] 1) thum so sor byas pa; 2) all [there are]	brungs
བྲུངས་ཁུངས	source, root	brungs khungs
བྲུད་ཀྱི་མཁར་གདོང	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	brud kyi mkhar gdong
བྲུད་བྲུད	[arch] small	brud brud
བྲུན	dirt, dung excrements	brun
བྲུན་རིལ	dung pellet	brun ril
བྲུབ	[p 'brub],, imprison, dig, bury, rise, spread, increase	brub
བྲུབ་ཁུང	hiding place/ hole	brub khung
བྲུབ་མཐའ	tenets	brub mtha'
བྲུབ་བདེ་རྫས་གཅིས	substantial entity of establishment and abiding	brub bde rdzas gcis
བྲུབ་པ	will imprison [tha dad par f 'brub pa]	brub pa
བྲུབ་པ་བྲུལ	small particles, fritters, bits, crumbs	brub pa brul
བྲུབས	to imprison	brubs
བྲུབས་ཁུང	hom khung - brub khung 'brub khung - lcags sgrom - e sgrom lcags hom - Triangular pit	brubs khung
བྲུབས་བཏང་བ	[arch] gather, superintend	brubs btang ba
བྲུབས་པ	put in	brubs pa
བྲུམ་ནད	chicken pox	brum nad
བྲུར	(not in das)	brur
བྲུལ	crumbs, bits/ rotten	brul
བྲུལ་གཏོར	torma protecting against mishandling of religious funds [oral instruction of the siddha dbon ston skyer sgang pa] 1861	brul gtor
བྲུལ་ཐོར	scattered, in pieces	brul thor
བྲུལ་འཐོར	scatter [in pieces], after rice has ripened scatter it on the ground???	brul 'thor
བྲུལ་བ	pf. of {'brul ba}	brul ba
བྲུས	recite! tell! chisel! cut! dig [up]! [p ! 'bru ba, 'brud pa!]	brus
བྲུས་ཆུ	1) water muddied w sug earth; 2) spring; 3) well water	brus chu
བྲུས་པ	1) recited, told; 2) chiseled, cut; 3) dug [up] (/ [p 'bru ba 'brud pa]	brus pa
བྲེ	volume measure; 20 equals 1 {khal}	bre
བྲེ་ཀོ	basin for washing	bre ko
བྲེ་ཁ	measure of size of paper, length 1 meter + and width less than 1 meter	bre kha
བྲེ་ཁ་གཅིག	a paper bre kha measure	bre kha gcig
བྲེ་ཁའི་མིག་ཅན	mouse	bre kha'i mig can
བྲེ་ཁྱད	bod rtsis kyi 'bo che chung gi khyad par rtsi stangs shig , bre = 18 khal gyi .9, 17 phul ni phyed five six cha 1 byung na khal gyi 8/ 9 yin no	bre khyad
བྲེ་ག	medicinal herb	bre ga
བྲེ་ག་བ	thlaspi arvense l.	bre ga ba
བྲེ་གུ་གསེར་ཐིག	{bre gu gser thig} med. herb	bre gu gser thig
བྲེ་ཆུ་ལྷ་ལྡན་མ	constellation	bre chu lha ldan ma
བྲེ་དོ	2 bre measure	bre do
བྲེ་གནག	bre measure	bre gnag
བྲེ་ཕུལ	a bre and two phul [grain measure bre = khal/ 20 and phul = bre/ 6]	bre phul
བྲེ་བ	{bre ba, bres pa, bre ba, bres} trans. v./ {}; capital, chapter; ft. of {bre ba}	bre ba
བྲེ་བར	to mingle	bre bar
བྲེ་བོ	1) measuring vessel kyi bre chen po, bre bo che; 2) gnag phyugs kha mig gi mtha'i spu mdog skya bo can	bre bo
བྲེ་བོ་ཟས	{bre bo zas} [one of the four sons of the Indian king seng ge 'gram, Buddha's uncle]	bre bo zas
བྲེ་མོ	joking, unfit, useless, worthless	bre mo
བྲེ་མོ་ངག	meaningless speech	bre mo ngag
བྲེ་མོ་བྱེད	talk foolishly	bre mo byed
བྲེ་ཝོ	measure for dry things and fluids, about 2 pints	bre wo
བྲེ་ལ་བཅལ	measured in bre	bre la bcal
བྲེ་ལོག	wrong liter	bre log
བྲེ་ལོག་སྲང་ལོག	wrong liter wrong ounce	bre log srang log
བྲེ་སྲང	a measure for things [honest]. weights and measures	bre srang
བྲེ་གསོག་དང་ཕུལ་གསོག་བྱས་པ	accumulates a full measure of	bre gsog dang phul gsog byas pa
བྲེག	prune, SA 'breg pa	breg
བྲེགས	prune, SA 'breg pa	bregs
བྲེགས་པ	cut, shaved [p 'breg pa]	bregs pa
བྲེང	[about color] {ser ba}	breng
བྲེང་ངེ	1) tense, tight. 2) affectionate, lovingly, affectionately	breng nge
བྲེང་ངེ་བ	light. Syn {dam po}	breng nge ba
བྲེང་བ	a little, SA cung zad, 'breng ba	breng ba
བྲེང་བྲེང་པ	[arch] 1) follow/ run 1 after another; 2) nar nar, rgyu breng breng nar zhing 'thor	breng breng pa
བྲེང་བྲེང་བ	unsteady, flicker, waver, flutter; see {shes pa phyo phyo ba} unsteady mind	breng breng ba
བྲེང་མ་ཆད་པ	continuous and unbroken	breng ma chad pa
བྲེད	stale	bred
བྲེད་སྐད	1) sound uttered in fear; 2) terrifying sound	bred skad
བྲེད་སྐད་རྒྱག	scream w fright	bred skad rgyag
བྲེད་འཁྲིམས	be extremely frightened	bred 'khrims
བྲེད་དངངས	panic	bred dngangs
བྲེད་དངངས་སློང་བ	producing fear/ panic	bred dngangs slong ba
བྲེད་འཐོམས	'jigs skrag skyes nas mgo 'thoms pa, bya dka' byung bar byed thabs zad nas bred 'thoms su lus ???	bred 'thoms
བྲེད་གདངས	crying out/ open mouthed w fear	bred gdangs
བྲེད་པ	terror, be alarmed, depressed at heart, be dejected, be ashamed	bred pa
བྲེད་པ་ལྟར་བྱས	acted as one who has become alarmed	bred pa ltar byas
བྲེད་ཕོངས	tormented/ bereft by fear	bred phongs
བྲེད་ཤ་ཐོན	have the look of fear	bred sha thon
བྲེད་ཤ་ཐོན་པ	have the look of fear	bred sha thon pa
བྲེད་ཤ་དོད་པོ	afraid, frightened	bred sha dod po
བྲེའི་ཟླ་བ	6th month	bre'i zla ba
བྲེའུ་ཆུང	small bre measure	bre'u chung
བྲེར	(not in das) 1862	brer
བྲེལ	busy, engaged in; (ba) - constant toil, busy, frenzy, constant toil, busyness; business/ serfdom/occupied, employed with, busy/ unfree	brel
བྲེལ་ཆེ	urgent, very busy	brel che
བྲེལ་ཆེའི་ཡིག་ཆ	urgent paper/ document	brel che'i yig cha
བྲེལ་རྟབ	quick and busy	brel rtab
བྲེལ་རྟབ་ཚབ་ཚུབ	hurried busyness	brel rtab tshab tshub
བྲེལ་ཐག་གཅོད	cut the ties to	brel thag gcod
བྲེལ་དུས	busy season	brel dus
བྲེལ་དོས	overload	brel dos
བྲེལ་པ་ཅན་གཞན	related opposite	brel pa can gzhan
བྲེལ་པ་བརྟག་པ	Examination of relation,	brel pa brtag pa
ཐེ་སམཏནཏར	siddhi by Dharmakirti [one of the {tshad ma sde bdun}	the samtanatara
བྲེལ་ཕོངས	impoverished [dbul phongs]	brel phongs
བྲེལ་འཕོང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of getting and losing	brel 'phong sdug bsngal
བྲེལ་བ	busy	brel ba
བྲེལ་བ་བསྐུལ	make someone hurry up	brel ba bskul
བྲེལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	busy, flurried, flustered, confused	brel ba chen po
བྲེལ་བ་ཏུར་ཏུར	rings pa'am rtab rtab, skad cha brel ba tur tur gyis bshad pa gsal por go mi thub	brel ba tur tur
བྲེལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	worry, be anxious/ impatient/ in a hurry	brel ba byed pa
བྲེལ་བ་མེད་པ	without hurry, no haste	brel ba med pa
བྲེལ་བ་ཚ་བོ	busy	brel ba tsha bo
བྲེལ་བས	on account of much business	brel bas
བྲེལ་བས་དགེ་བ	virtue by association	brel bas dge ba
བྲེལ་བྲེལ་ཚུབ་ཚུབ	rushed, hurried, busy	brel brel tshub tshub
བྲེལ་དབང	busily, anxiously	brel dbang
བྲེལ་མྱུར	hasty	brel myur
བྲེལ་བརྩོན	busy/ anxious effort, intense, sharp	brel brtson
བྲེལ་བརྩོན་བྱེད	do busily/ anxiously/ intensely/ sharply	brel brtson byed
བྲེལ་ཚད	whoever is encountered, all who encounter/ have contact w 1/ you	brel tshad
བྲེལ་ཚད་དོན་ལྡན	benefitting whoever is encountered	brel tshad don ldan
བྲེལ་ཚབ	haste	brel tshab
བྲེལ་ཚབས	las brel gyi bab, bsam tshul brel tshabs che ba, byed stangs brel tshabs che ba	brel tshabs
བྲེལ་ཚབས་ངང	busily	brel tshabs ngang
བྲེལ་ཚབས་ཅན	hasty	brel tshabs can
བྲེལ་ཚུབ	rushed, hurried, busy	brel tshub
བྲེལ་ཚུབས	busy, frantic, milling around	brel tshubs
བྲེལ་འཚབ	hurried, rushed	brel 'tshab
བྲེལ་འཚུབ	tense	brel 'tshub
བྲེལ་ཟིང	busy/ hard work/ toil, frenzied activity, hectic, busy	brel zing
བྲེལ་ལངས་པ	impatience	brel langs pa
བྲེལ་ས་མནར	tormented by constant toil, frenzied	brel sa mnar
བྲེས	1) display! adorn! put up/ between! put up decorations, spread out; 2) manger	bres
བྲེས་ཀྱུ	manger	bres kyu
བྲེས་པ	dra ba dra phyed ltar bres pa spread out like a lattice	bres pa
བྲེས་ཕན་ཚུན་པ	interviewed	bres phan tshun pa
བྲེས་ལུད	barnyard manure	bres lud
བྲེས་བཤར་བ	measure with a bre	bres bshar ba
བྲེས་སུ་བཅུག་པ	spread	bres su bcug pa
བྲོ	1) dance [posture]; 2) oath; 3) [arch] disease; 4) provisions; 5) raise, rise	bro
བྲོ་སྐྲབ་པ	beat the ground with one's feet	bro skrab pa
བྲོ་ཁ	provisions [and flour]	bro kha
བྲོ་མཁན	dancer, performer, a god	bro mkhan
བྲོ་འཁྲབ	performed dances	bro 'khrab
བྲོ་འཁྲབ་པ	dance, stage/ perform in a dance show	bro 'khrab pa
བྲོ་འཁྲབས་པ	dance	bro 'khrabs pa
བྲོ་གར	(theatrical, dramatic) performance, drama, play	bro gar
བྲོ་གར་ཤིགས་སེ་ཤིག	march in formation	bro gar shigs se shig
བྲོ་གྱོག	nurse [attendant]	bro gyog
བྲོ་གྱོག་པ	nurse [attendant]	bro gyog pa
བྲོ་རྒྱག	dance	bro rgyag
བྲོ་རྒྱག་པ	dance	bro rgyag pa
བྲོ་ཅི་ཡང་མི་བའི་ཁུར་བ་ལབ་ལེབ	tasteless flat cookies	bro ci yang mi ba'i khur ba lab leb
བྲོ་བཅུད	taste and nutritiousness	bro bcud
བྲོ་བཅུད་ལྡན	tasty and nutritious	bro bcud ldan
བྲོ་ཆས	provisions	bro chas
བྲོ་ཆུང	narrow-minded person	bro chung
བྲོ་འཆམ་པ	dance[er]	bro 'cham pa
བྲོ་ལྟ་བ	to try the taste of	bro lta ba
བྲོ་དང་གླུ་གཞས	dancing and singing/ music	bro dang glu gzhas
བྲོ་དོར	take an oath	bro dor
བྲོ་དོར་བ	forsake an oath	bro dor ba
བྲོ་རྡུང	[tread a] dance	bro rdung
བྲོ་རྡུང་བ	dance	bro rdung ba
བྲོ་བརྡུང	dance[s], put on a dance show	bro brdung
བྲོ་བརྡུང་དགོན་པ	monaster in kham	bro brdung dgon pa
བྲོ་བརྡུང་དཔེ་ཐོག་ཙམ	dilettantism	bro brdung dpe thog tsam
བྲོ་ནད	CM: na tsha, e.g. lus la bro nad med. [mss]	bro nad
བྲོ་ནད་ཅན	sick person	bro nad can
བྲོ་པ	dancer	bro pa
བྲོ་པ་གཞས་མ	dancer and singer [in former Tibetan government when the Dalai Lama received temporal and spiritual authority etc gzhung gi mdzad sgo che khag tshugs dus kyi dancer and singer]	bro pa gzhas ma
བྲོ་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,; 1) want, desire; 2) arise, experience, smell, taste, flavor, feel, have a feeling; 3) six [be- 1863 cause there are six tastes]; 4) enjoy; 5) oath	bro ba
བྲོ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	tasty	bro ba chen po
བྲོ་བ་རྙེད	get the savor/ smell taste [of food]	bro ba rnyed
བྲོ་བ་ལྟ	taste, savor	bro ba lta
བྲོ་བ་ལྟ་བ	taste, savor	bro ba lta ba
བྲོ་བ་བལྟས	check whether food is tasty	bro ba bltas
བྲོ་བ་འབོར་བ	make oath	bro ba 'bor ba
བྲོ་བ་མེད	tasteless, insipid	bro ba med
བྲོ་བ་མེད་པ	insipid, savour	bro ba med pa
བྲོ་བ་མྱོང་བ	taste	bro ba myong ba
བྲོ་བ་ཞིམ	tasty delicious	bro ba zhim
བྲོ་བ་ཞིམ་པོ	tasty delicious	bro ba zhim po
བྲོ་བ་ཞིམ་བུ	tasty delicious	bro ba zhim bu
བྲོ་བོར	taking an oath	bro bor
བྲོ་བོར་བ	to take an oath, swear	bro bor ba
བྲོ་མ	lady dancer [actress?bro gar 'khrab mkhan bud med	bro ma
བྲོ་མི་འཚལ་བ	healthy person	bro mi 'tshal ba
བྲོ་མོ	folk dance	bro mo
བྲོ་བརྩེས	dance, do theatrics? bro 'khrabs pa / mi mang gi dbus su bro brtses nas ltad mo ston pa	bro brtses
བྲོ་ཚལ	sick	bro tshal
བྲོ་ཚལ་རྒྱ་ཚད་ཀྱི་བ	became sick w fever	bro tshal rgya tshad kyi ba
བྲོ་འཚལ་བ	have a cold sick man, one laid up with illness	bro 'tshal ba
བྲོ་གཞས	dance[ing] and sing[ing]/ music	bro gzhas
བྲོ་ཟན	zas nor bro zan - food and possessions	bro zan
བྲོ་ར་འཁྲབ	dancing	bro ra 'khrab
བྲོ་ཤོན	song and dance w drum	bro shon
བྲོག	prune, SA 'breg pa	brog
བྲོག་ལྦུར	ant-hill	brog lbur
བྲོག་མི་དཔལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Drogmi Palgyi Yeshe, one of Guru Padmasambhava's	brog mi dpal gyi ye shes
བྲོག་མི་ལོ་ཙ་བ	993-1050 - Drogmi Lotsawa, an eminent Sakya translator	brog mi lo tsa ba
བྲོག་ཞུ	SA prog zhu	brog zhu
བྲོགས	prune, SA 'breg pa	brogs
བྲོང	enticing	brong
བྲོད	taste, SA bro ba, scratch, SA 'brad pa	brod
བྲོད་རྒྱགས་པ	extremely happy	brod rgyags pa
བྲོད་པ	feel very proud, joy, joyfulness	brod pa
བྲོད་པ་བསྐྱེད	inspired to feel proud	brod pa bskyed
བྲོད་པ་མཆོག	great complacency	brod pa mchog
བྲོད་པའི་ཐུགས་ཉམས	experience of pride brod pa'i thugs nyams drag po zhig shar	brod pa'i thugs nyams
བྲོད་པོ	happi[ness], joy[ful], fun loving, entertaining	brod po
བྲོན	pour! scatter! offer! [bran pa!]	bron
བྲོབ	catch!, snatch!, beat!, throw!, scatter! {'brab}!	brob
བྲོབས	imp. of {'brab pa}	brobs
བྲོའུ	buckwheat	bro'u
བྲོའོ	buckwheat	bro'o
བྲོར	{bro} + la. 1) dance, dance-circles; 2) oath, 3) ill	bror
བྲོལ	be separated from, SA 'bral ba	brol
བྲོས	/bros shor - to flee, escape; escape, flee, sneak out, run away; imp. of {'bros pa}; run away, escape	bros
བྲོས་བསྐྱོད	escaping, fleeing, running away	bros bskyod
བྲོས་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	escape, flee, run away	bros bskyod byed
བྲོས་འགྲོ	escape, flee, run away	bros 'gro
བྲོས་ཐར	escape, get away from	bros thar
བྲོས་ཐར་ཐབས་མེད་པ	inescapable	bros thar thabs med pa
བྲོས་འདེད	pursue someone fleeing	bros 'ded
བྲོས་འདོན	[arch] swear an oath	bros 'don
བྲོས་ནས་འགྲོ	to sneak out	bros nas 'gro
བྲོས་པ	escape, flee, sneak out, run away [p 'bros pa]	bros pa
བྲོས་ཕྱིན་པ	bunk (phal skad du)	bros phyin pa
བྲོས་བྱོལ	flee to somewhere else, escaping, fleeing	bros byol
བྲོས་བྱོལ་དུ་འགྲོ	flee, escape, seek refuge, run away from	bros byol du 'gro
བྲོས་འབྱོལ	exodus	bros 'byol
བྲོས་དམག	soldiers of the fleeing army, fleeing soldiers, deserters	bros dmag
བྲོས་ཡོང	flee here	bros yong
བྲོས་ལམ	loophole	bros lam
བྲོས་ཤོར་བ	run away	bros shor ba
བྲོས་ས	place of refuge	bros sa
བྲོས་ས་དང་གབ་ས	place to run to and to hide; x {bros sa dang gab sa skyabs dang re ltos thams cad zad nas ci bya gtol med pa'i skabs su} how could such	bros sa dang gab sa
ཨ་མོམེནཏ	when there is no place to run to and nowhere to hide, no refuge and no hope, when you are desperate and have no idea what to do	a moment
བླ	life-force/ supreme; life energy, vital principle, energy, [the basis, support for life force and life span], vital basis, over, above. {bla} is a {bon} term for soul	bla
བླ་ཀྱང	even, indeed	bla kyang
བླ་སྐམ་པ	1) empty headed person; 2) coward; 3) resolve fear	bla skam pa
བླ་སྐྱལ	succession	bla skyal
བླ་སྐྱེལ་བ	1) sngar rmongs dad kyi shod srol ltar lus kyi bla 'dre la 'khyer 'jug pa, ??; 2) mercenary traitorous acts [bla 'tshong] ba lar rgya dgra la shor bar byed pa; 3) [arch] inexhaustible, endless, ete...	bla skyel ba
བླ་སྐྱེས	1) gru btsas [born in a boat?]; 2) government revenue, determined tax; 3) gift, tribute	bla skyes
བླ་བསྐྱལ་བ	[arch] not exhaust, [not only ??? mi zad pa]	bla bskyal ba
བླ་ཁྱད	[arch] haughty, arrogant	bla khyad
བླ་ཁྱིམ	"house above", where souls dwell after death	bla khyim
བླ་ཁྱེར	be petrified w fright	bla khyer
བླ་ཁྱེར་ཧོན་ཐོར	be scared silly [bla tshe gzhan gyis khyer nas dran pa thor ba become confused, dgra bo dpa' zhum ste bla khyer hon thor gyis lag pa bkyag ste mgo sgur ba]	bla khyer hon thor
བླ་མཁྱེན	1) queen's retinue; 2) astrologer; 3) lama's instructor [dge rgan]	bla mkhyen
བླ་མཁྱེན་ཕེའུ	a demon, exorcist	bla mkhyen phe'u
བླ་འཁར	1 the lama's body existing or being born; 2) support [walking stick or hand support [for panting etc.]	bla 'khar
བླ་འཁུགས	life-summon	bla 'khugs
བླ་འཁྱམས་པ	renegade monk	bla 'khyams pa
བླ་འཁྱར་བ	bla tshe [srog] gzhan du 'thor ba'am gyar ba, ???	bla 'khyar ba
བླ་གབ	canopy	bla gab
བླ་གབ་ཅན	w a roof, house	bla gab can
བླ་གབ་མེད་པ	open unsheltered place, without any upper garment	bla gab med pa
བླ་གབ་མེད་པ་བ	someone living without shelter	bla gab med pa ba
བླ་གོར་ཞོ་ཤ	{bla gor zho sha} [a medicine]	bla gor zho sha
བླ་གོས	long red shawl, upper garment, buddhist religious robe, sacred raiment with 32 patches, kind of toga	bla gos
ཐེ་ཝེལལ	known three robes of a bhikshu {chos gos rnam gsum}, yellow upper robe worn in the day by getsuls and gelongs, snam phra bdun dang, glegs bu phyed dang gsum pa, tshad snam sbyar dang 'dra la.]	the well
བླ་གྱར་བ	bla srog gzhan du 'thor ba [scatter?]	bla gyar ba
བླ་གྱུ	turquoise from a high place	bla gyu
བླ་གྲྭ	1) lamas and monks/ disciples; 2) upper cover, roof	bla grwa
བླ་གླུད	ransom for the lama	bla glud
བླ་འགུགས	rites to summon the bla, summon the bla	bla 'gugs
བླ་རྒན	guru and old/ senior monks	bla rgan
བླ་སྒྲུབ	guru sadhana; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 64-65]	bla sgrub
བླ་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	guru sadhana cycle (of Padmasambhava	bla sgrub skor
བླ་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར་བཞི	Four Cycles of Guru Sadhana	bla sgrub skor bzhi
བླ་སྒྲུབ་ནོར་བུ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	also {bla ma nor bu rgya mtsho}, terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {padma gling pa}	bla sgrub nor bu rgya mtsho
བླ་སྒྲུབ་བྱིན་རླབས་སྒྲོན་མེ	belongs to {kun bzang thugs gter}, revealed as {nye brgyud} by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	bla sgrub byin rlabs sgron me
བླ་སྒྲུབ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {stag sham nus ldan rdo rje}	bla sgrub yid bzhin nor bu
བླ་སྒྲོ	bla gnas sa'i bya sgro, smug po sgro gcig yod pa 'di tsha bo ge sar bla sgro red, ??? [bird feather?]	bla sgro
བླ་བརྒྱུད	succession of lamas	bla brgyud
བླ་བརྒྱུད་གསོལ་འདེབས	supplication to the masters of the lineage	bla brgyud gsol 'debs
བླ་ཅོལ	frivolous talk	bla col
བླ་བཅོལ	bla col	bla bcol
བླ་ཆགས་ཙམ	only definitions, just to use an expression, just to give it a name	bla chags tsam
བླ་ཆད་པ	zhed [fear] thag chod nas [having resolved?] bla 'thor ba ???	bla chad pa
བླ་ཆས	lamas's clothes/ implements	bla chas
བླ་ཆུང	lesser lamas	bla chung
བླ་ཆེ	great lama	bla che
བླ་ཆེ་མཁ་བརྒྱུད	lineage of the pratimoksha vow from the great lama Gongpa Rabsel	bla che mkha brgyud
བླ་ཆེ་དགེ་བ་རབ་གསལ	the great lama Gewa Rabsel [a disciple and preceptsuccessor of {gtsang pa rab gsal}	bla che dge ba rab gsal
བླ་ཆེ་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	the great lama Gongpa Rabsel	bla che dgongs pa rab gsal
བླ་ཆེ་དྲུག	the six great lamas ??	bla che drug
བླ་ཆེན	chief lama, pontiff	bla chen
བླ་ཆེན་དགེ་བ་རབ་གསལ	a disciple an	bla chen dge ba rab gsal
པྲེཅེཔཏ	successor of {gtsang pa rab gsal}	precept
བླ་ཆེན་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	Lachen Gongpa Rabsel 893-. Tibetan Vinaya master who preserved the Vinaya lineage during the period of disruption in ninth century	bla chen dgongs pa rab gsal
བླ་ཆོས	ministry	bla chos
བླ་ཆོས་པ	priests, ministry	bla chos pa
བླ་མཆོད	1 resident monk {bla'i mchod gnas} the lama to who offerings are made two guru puja {bla ma mchod pa} ritual of commemoration and worship of the master	bla mchod
བླ་མཆོད་དཀོར	resident monk	bla mchod dkor
བླ་མཆོད་དཀོར་གཉེར	resident monk	bla mchod dkor gnyer
བླ་འཆོལ	frivolous talk 1865	bla 'chol
བླ་ལྗོན	life tree [notes specific tree totem connected w 1 family {bla} is a {bon} term for soul]	bla ljon
བླ་གཉ་ནད	a wind disease lta bu not eliminated khar later again a bile disease lta bu associating w the former illness and endangering life	bla gnya nad
བླ་གཉན	[arch] 1 ston pa, two nyer 'tshe,	bla gnyan
བླ་གཏེར	a vital treasure. 2) terma of guru sadhana	bla gter
བླ་རྟགས	emblems of the bla	bla rtags
བླ་རྟེན	support of the bla	bla rten
བླ་བརྟོལ	[arch] talking in sleep	bla brtol
བླ་ཐང	upper and lower, within and without	bla thang
བླ་ཐབས	excellent methods	bla thabs
བླ་ཐོད	crown of head, ornament for head	bla thod
བླ་མཐང	high and low, upper and lower, top and bottom	bla mthang
བླ་འཐོང་པ	shamer	bla 'thong pa
བླ་དག	1) abstraction; 2) denomination; 3) account; 4) primitive word	bla dag
བླ་དགས	designation [thd]	bla dags
བླ་དྭགས	name, denomination, designation	bla dwags
བླ་དབ༹གས	name, denomination, designation, term, word, expression	bla dvags
བླ་དྭགས་ཙམ	only definitions, just to use an expression, just to give it a name	bla dwags tsam
བླ་དབ༹གས་ཚིག་གི་རེག་པ	contact of designated words, act of {yid dbang}	bla dvags tshig gi reg pa
བླ་དྭགས་ཚིག་གི་རེག་པ	contact of designated words, (act of {yid dbang}	bla dwags tshig gi reg pa
བླ་དར	on top of a house, the year individual persons were born 'i 'byung khams kyi tshos mdog la bstu nas btsugs pa'i dar cha ???	bla dar
བླ་དོར་གྱི་གནས	the points of what should be adopted or avoided	bla dor gyi gnas
བླ་མདུད	main knots, principal knots	bla mdud
བླ་རྡོ	1) rock in a high place; 2) life stone (/ [support for guardians]	bla rdo
ཇེཏ	black. kar ma chags med (16131678) describes them, and their uses in chapter 48 {TSHAM} in his famous retreat manual chags med ri chos [tsd]	jet
བླ་རྡོལ	false speech, inconsiderate talking	bla rdol
བླ་སྡེ	guest of honor, head of village, chieftain	bla sde
བླ་སྡེ་འབུལ་བ་ར་ལེན	receive gifts as the guest of honor	bla sde 'bul ba ra len
བླ་བརྡོལ	CM: (rnying) ma bsams gang bab bam byung rgyal du smra ba'i gtam, "Speaking frivolously or whatever comes [to mind] (gang bab) without reflection." [mss]	bla brdol
བླ་ན	[if there is a] higher, over, above	bla na
བླ་ན་མཆིས་པ	anuttara, highest, unexcelled, unsurpassed, unsurpassable	bla na mchis pa
བླ་ན་འབར་བ	anuttara, highest, unexcelled, unsurpassed, unsurpassable	bla na 'bar ba
བླ་ན་མ་མཆིས་པ	unsurpassable, unexcelled	bla na ma mchis pa
བླ་ན་མེད	anuttara, nothing higher, unsurpassable	bla na med
བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassed, highest, anuttara; Anuttara, highest, unexcelled, unsurpassed, unsurpassable, ["highest" when substitute for Anuttara]. perfect,	bla na med pa
ཐེ་ཨུཔཔེར	most	the upper
བླ་ན་མེད་པ་དྲུག	the six unsurpassables ??? bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa'i	bla na med pa drug
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་ངེས་པ་ཡིན	unsurpassed true perfect enlightenment is certain	byang chub tu nges pa yin
བླ་ན་མེད་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས	unsurpassed wisdom	bla na med pa ye shes
བླ་ན་མེད་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཐབས	skillful means of unsurpassed wisdom	bla na med pa ye shes kyi thabs
བླ་ན་མེད་པ་གསུམ	the three unexcelled [in mahayana {sgrub pa}, practice {dmigs pa}, meditation objects {yang dag par 'grub pa} establishing genuineness/ perfect establishment]	bla na med pa gsum
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་སྐོར	Unexcelled set of teachings	bla na med pa'i skor
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་རྒྱུད	Unexcelled Tantras	bla na med pa'i rgyud
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of Unsurpassed Tantras	bla na med pa'i theg pa
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Anuttara yoga tanra	bla na med pa'i rnal 'byor
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Unsurpassed Yoga Tantra bla na med pa'i rnal 'byor gyi rgyud anuttarayoga tantra	bla na med pa'i rnal 'byor gyi rgyud
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ	unsurpassable awakening	bla na med pa'i byang chub
བླ་ནས་བླར	better and better, from better to best	bla nas blar
བླ་གནས	life-supporting talismans	bla gnas
བླ་དཔོ་གོང་ས	1 ku gyi dbu bzhugs gtso 'dzi che po, two dpo po mtho shos kyi mtsha bstod zhe tshig ???	bla dpo gong sa
བླ་དཔོན	spiritual leader	bla dpon
བླ་སྤྱང	life-supporting wolf-spirit	bla spyang
བླ་སྤྱི	governing council of a monastery	bla spyi
བླ་སྤྱི་ལྷ་རྒྱས	individual khenpos, umdzes, zhal ngo, spyi so, etc of Sera, Drepung, and Ganden monastic colleges {ser ra 'bras dpung dga'{grwa tshang}, when they assemble together, are so called]	bla spyi lha rgyas
བླ་སྤྲུལ	1) [lama and] tulku; 2) emanation of the guru	bla sprul
བླ་ཕུར་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	terma revealed by {klong chen ye shes rdo rje} Kanjur Rinpoche	bla phur thugs kyi thig le
བླ་ཕྱག	treasury of a monastic household	bla phyag
བླ་བ	[arch] speak[er]	bla ba
བླ་བོ	conversation, conversed	bla bo
བླ་བོ་ཅི་ལབ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད	1) what is there to talk about?; 2) there is nothing to talk about	bla bo ci lab rgyu yod
བླ་བོ་ཅི་ལབ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	what is there to talk about?	bla bo ci lab rgyu yod pa
བླ་བོའི་ཚིག	conversation	bla bo'i tshig
བླ་བྲང	residence, lama's residence, the "corporation" of a lama	bla brang
བླ་བྲང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ	Labrang Tashikhyil, in Domey	bla brang bkra shis 'khyil
བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད	bursar of the monastic household. in former Tibetan government lha ldan smon lam che mo'i gtong sgo dang yong sgo superintending office	bla brang phyag mdzod
བླ་བྲི	baldachino	bla bri
བླ་བྲེ	canopy	bla bre
བླ་བྲེས	canopy	bla bres
བླ་དབྱེ	courtyard	bla dbye
བླ་དབྱེ་ཡེ	[side] courtyard [outside house]	bla dbye ye
བླ་འབོད	bla 'khyams pa call hither ??	bla 'bod
བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག	1 nature forbearing	bla ma dkon mchog
ཨོར་སྟྲཻགྷཏཕོ༹རྭརད	[person, words, actions]; 2) the guru and the three jewels	or straightforward
བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་ཐུགས་རྗེ	the compassion of the lama and the Three Jewels	bla ma dkon mchog gi thugs rje
བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ	the guru and the three jewels bla ma bka' brgyad 'dus pa rin chen gter	bla ma dkon mchog gsum
བླ་མ་བཀའ་གཉན་པོ	strict lama	bla ma bka' gnyan po
བླ་མ་བཀའ་དྲིན	gracious guru	bla ma bka' drin
བླ་མ་སྐུ་བཞིའི་གངས་རི་ལ	{bla ma sku bzhi'i gangs ri la, mos gus kyi nyi ma ma shar na, byin rlabs kyi chu rgyun mi 'bebs pas, sems mos gus 'di la nan tan mdzod} Unless the sun of devotion shines / On the snow peak of the ...	bla ma sku bzhi'i gangs ri la
བླ་མ་སྐུ་གསུམ་མ	Three Dimensions of Master Padmasambhava	bla ma sku gsum ma
བླ་མ་སྐྱེས་ཆེན	the guru, the great being [realized]	bla ma skyes chen
བླ་མ་ཁོ་ན་གལ་ཆེ་བ་ཡིན་པ	the teacher has a unique and paramount importance	bla ma kho na gal che ba yin pa
བླ་མ་ཁྱད་ཆོས་གསུམ་ལྡན	master endowed with three special qualities	bla ma khyad chos gsum ldan
བླ་མ་མཁྱེ་ནོ	guru please consider me	bla ma mkhye no
བླ་མ་མཁྱེན་ནོ	Lama Khyenno. "Master, think of me!"	bla ma mkhyen no
བླ་མ་གོང་མ	spiritual forefathers	bla ma gong ma
བླ་མ་གྲུབ་ཆེན	an accomplished lama	bla ma grub chen
བླ་མ་དགའ་སྟོན	the priest's banquet (ceremony on the 16th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	bla ma dga' ston
བླ་མ་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	spiritual teacher	bla ma dge ba'i bshes gnyen
གཟུང་བ	be accepted by a spiritual friend guru bla ma dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyi rjes su	gzung ba
བླ་མ་དགོངས་འདུས	Summary of the Guru's Intention	bla ma dgongs 'dus
བླ་མ་དགོངས་འདུས་རྣམ་བཤད	bla ma dgongs pa 'dus pa'i cho ga'i rnam bzhag dang 'brel ba'i bskyed rdzogs zung 'jug gi sgom khog mkhyen brtse'i	bla ma dgongs 'dus rnam bshad
མེ་ལོང་འོད་ཟེར་བརྒྱ་པ	{gter chen sangs rgyas gling pa'i bla ma dgongs 'dus rnam bshad} by 'jigs med gling pa	me long 'od zer brgya pa
རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	(1729 or 30-1798)	rang byung rdo rje
བླ་མ་དགོངས་པ་འདུས་པ	Lama Gongpa Düpa bla ma dgongs pa 'dus pa'i cho ga'i rnam bzhag dang 'brel ba'i bskyed rdzogs zung 'jug gi sgom khog mkhyen brtse'i	bla ma dgongs pa 'dus pa
བླ་མ་རྒལ་ཅིག	chameleon	bla ma rgal cig
བླ་མ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཀུན་འདུས	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {rol pa'i rdo rje}	bla ma rgyal ba kun 'dus
བླ་མ་རྒྱུད་པ	{bla ma brgyud pa} lineage of masters	bla ma rgyud pa
བླ་མ་སྒྲུབ་ཅིང་མཆོད་པའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual texts outlining the liturgy for the worship of the tantric preceptor (gurup'ujavidhi); guru worship bla ma sgrub pa'i rnal 'byor phyi nang	bla ma sgrub cing mchod pa'i cho ga
བླ་མ་བརྒྱུད་པ	the gurus of the lineage	bla ma brgyud pa
བླ་མ་བརྒྱུད་པའི་རིམ་པ	the masters in the succession of transmission bla ma brgyud pa'i rim pa'i man ngag {bla ma rje} precious lama	bla ma brgyud pa'i rim pa
བླ་མ་དངོས	position of spiritual chief	bla ma dngos
བླ་མ་དངོས་གྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Lama Ngödrub Gyamtso; terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	bla ma dngos grub rgya mtsho
བླ་མ་ལྔ་བཅུ་པ	Fifty Verses on Devotion to the Master, by Ashvagosha, (T 3721)	bla ma lnga bcu pa
བླ་མ་ལྔ་བཅུ་པའི་གཞུང	the Gurupanchashika text by Ashvaghosha	bla ma lnga bcu pa'i gzhung
བླ་མ་ཆར་ཆེན་པོ	the great lama Char; disciple of Phadampa Sangye	bla ma char chen po
བླ་མ་ཆེ་ཆུང	well-known and unknown gurus	bla ma che chung
བླ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	great lama bla ma chos sku rdo rje 'chang gsang ba 'dus pa - 1) dharmakaya form of Padmasambhava. 2) terma by Guru Chöwang	bla ma chen po
བླ་མ་ཆོས་པ	masters and practitioners	bla ma chos pa
བླ་མ་ཆོས་འབྲེལ་གས་བཞི	the guru, the dharma, the connection, and hearing	bla ma chos 'brel gsa bzhi
བླ་མ་མཆེད་གྲོགས	lamas and spiritual companions	bla ma mched grogs
བླ་མ་མཆོག	chief lama	bla ma mchog
བླ་མ་མཆོག་བསྟེན	followed a supreme master	bla ma mchog bsten
བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ	guru puja [ritual of commemotation and worship of the master]	bla ma mchod pa
མན་ངག་གི་གཏེར་མཛོད	by tshe mchog gling ye shes rgyal mtshan (1713-1793)	man ngag gi gter mdzod
བླ་མ་མཆོད་པའི་ཆོ་ག	rituals for the veneration of the tantric preceptor (guru) bla ma mchod pa'i cho ga yon tan kun	bla ma mchod pa'i cho ga
བླ་མ་རྗེ	precious guru, lord guru	bla ma rje
བླ་མ་ཉིད	[value greatly] the guru himself	bla ma nyid
བླ་མ་གཉིས	two types of guru / master: outer and inner	bla ma gnyis
བླ་མ་བརྟགས་མཁས་པ	to examine the teacher skillfully	bla ma brtags mkhas pa
བླ་མ་བརྟགས་པར་བྱ་བ	to examine a teacher	bla ma brtags par bya ba
བླ་མ་བསྟན་གཉིས་སྐོར་གསུམ	Lama Tennyi Korsum	bla ma bstan gnyis skor gsum
བླ་མ་བསྟེན	follow a guru	bla ma bsten
བླ་མ་བསྟེན་མཁས་པ	follows him skillfully	bla ma bsten mkhas pa
བླ་མ་བསྟེན་པ	to follow a master	bla ma bsten pa
བླ་མ་དམ་པ	a sublime teacher	bla ma dam pa
བླ་མ་དམ་པ་དེས	your sublime teacher	bla ma dam pa des
བླ་མ་དམ་པའི་བཀའ་དྲིན་གྱིས	through the kindness of a sublime guru bla ma dam pa'i mdzad spyod thams cad the way he behaves	bla ma dam pa'i bka' drin gyis
བླ་མ་དམ་པའི་ཞལ་རྒྱུན	the oral teaching of the sacred master	bla ma dam pa'i zhal rgyun
བླ་མ་དུས་གསུམ་གྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	your lama, the Buddhas of the three times in person; my root lama, the embodiment of the Buddhas of the three times	bla ma dus gsum gyi sangs rgyas
བླ་མ་དུས་གསུམ་སངས་རྒྱས	guru, union of the buddhas of the three times	bla ma dus gsum sangs rgyas
བླ་མ་དྲག་པོ་རྩལ	guru in his wrathful aspect gu ru drag po	bla ma drag po rtsal
བླ་མ་བདེ་མཆོག་འཁོར་ལོ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {rgya ston padma dbang phyug}, revealed as yang gter by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	bla ma bde mchog 'khor lo
བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲོ་ལོད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཐར	Life Story of Dorje Drolö by Taksham Nüden Dorje. A life story of Padmasambhava focusing on the esoteric meaning of his wrathful manifestation as Dorje Drolö bla ma rdo rje 'chang dang po mjal nas	bla ma rdo rje gro lod kyi rnam thar
བཟུང	ever since I first met my guru, the Vajradhara	bzung
བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛི་པ་ཆེ་པོ	great vajra holder guru	bla ma rdo rje 'dzi pa che po
བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	the Vajradhara teacher	bla ma rdo rje 'dzin pa
བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great vajra holder guru	bla ma rdo rje 'dzin pa chen po
བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Guru Vajrasattva	bla ma rdo rje sems dpa'
བླ་མ་ནོར་བུ	terma on Padmasambhava practice by {stag sham pa}	bla ma nor bu
བླ་མ་ནོར་བུ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	terma revealed by {pad-ma gling pa} {gter ston} b. 1450? bla ma nor bu'i gsol 'debs le'u bzhi pa supplication to Padmasambhava by {stag sham nus ldan rdo rje}	bla ma nor bu rgya mtsho
བླ་མ་རྣམས	masters	bla ma rnams
བླ་མ་པ	name of an Indian buddhist doctrinal school	bla ma pa
བླ་མ་དཔལ་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	the teacher is glorious Vajradhara	bla ma dpal ldan rdo rje 'chang
བླ་མ་བ་ལ་ཙན་དྲ	11-12th cent. Guru Balachandra, an Indian master	bla ma ba la tsan dra
བླ་མ་བྲལ་ནས་ངུ་བ	to cry when parting from one's guru	bla ma bral nas ngu ba
བླ་མ་བླ་མར་བརྟེན	dang po + - In the beginning I took the teacher as teacher	bla ma bla mar brten
བླ་མ་དབུ་མཛད	the lad lama, the lead chanter	bla ma dbu mdzad
བླ་མ་མ་ནི	a beneficial bug w a small long body double wings, able to fly high, living and eating around water. [dragonfly?]	bla ma ma ni
བླ་མ་མ་ནི་བ	Tibetan yogi[nis] who urged people to say the mani mantra dang sbrags las dkar nag gi thang bshad rgyag pa'i rnal 'byor pho mo	bla ma ma ni ba
བླ་མ་མན་ཆད	those below the lama	bla ma man chad
བླ་མ་སྨྲ་བའི་སེང་གེ	the guru the lion of speakers	bla ma smra ba'i seng ge
བླ་མ་སྨྲ་སེང	the guru the lion of speakers	bla ma smra seng
བླ་མ་མཚན་ཉིད་དང་ལྡན་པ	Qualified master. Someone with the correct view and genuine compassion	bla ma mtshan nyid dang ldan pa
བླ་མ་ཞི་དྲག	a deity; peaceful and wrathful guru; a deity, peaceful and wrathful guru	bla ma zhi drag
བླ་མ་ཡང་ཏིག	Lama Yangtig, part of Longchen Rabjam's snying thig ya bzhi	bla ma yang tig
བླ་མ་ཡང་ཏིག་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Wishfulfilling Jewel of the Guru's / Unexcelled Innermost Essence; condensation of the quintessence of {bi ma snying thig} by {klong chen rab 'byams pa}	bla ma yang tig yid bzhin nor bu
བླ་མ་ཡང་ཐིག	Lama Yangtig	bla ma yang thig
བླ་མ་ཡི་དམ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	guru, yidam, and dakini	bla ma yi dam mkha' 'gro
བླ་མ་ཡི་དམ་གཏོར་མ	Lama Yidam torma	bla ma yi dam gtor ma
བླ་མ་ཡི་དམ་གསོལ་ཁ	Lama Yidam Dharmapala petition offering	bla ma yi dam gsol kha
བླ་མ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	form of guru pema	bla ma yid bzhin nor bu
བླ་མ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	terma by {nyang ral nyi ma 'od zer} on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava	bla ma yongs rdzogs
བླ་མ་རི་པོ་ཆེ	precious guru	bla ma ri po che
བླ་མ་རིག་འཛིན	Guru Vidyadhara. A deity and set of scriptures belonging to the Nine Sadhana Sections. Often the Guru Vidyadhara and the eight herukas in the Eight Sadhana Teachings form a single mandala with nine...	bla ma rig 'dzin
བླ་མ་རིག་འཛིན་ཀུན་འདུས	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava from the {grol tig dgongs pa rang grol} cycle revealed by {shes rab 'od zer} bla ma rig 'dzin gyi sgrub thabs brgya rtsa	bla ma rig 'dzin kun 'dus
བླ་མ་རིག་འཛིན་ཐུགས་ཐིག	terma by {smin gling gter chen o rgyan gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje}	bla ma rig 'dzin thugs thig
བླ་མ་རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པ	sadhanas for the practice of bla ma rigs thams cad kyi bdag po'i dkyil 'khor gyi 'khor lo mchod pa'i lhan thabs - by padma dkar po, the 4th rgyal dbang 'brug pa	bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa
བླ་མ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	precious lama; [way of addressing a teacher]	bla ma rin po che
བླ་མ་ལ	Gurubhya	bla ma la
བླ་མ་ལ་གུས་ཉན	reverence for the instructor	bla ma la gus nyan
བླ་མ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ	Namo Guru	bla ma la phyag 'tshal lo
བླ་མ་ལ་ཞུས་ཏེ	ask his advice on	bla ma la zhus te
བླ་མ་ལགས	your lama reverence	bla ma lags
བླ་མ་ལོ་གསར	the priest's new year (ceremony on the 1st day of the 1st Tibetan month)	bla ma lo gsar
བླ་མ་ཤང་བཙོན་གྲུས་གྲགས་པ	Lama Shang; Tsöndrü Drakpa 1123-1193: Disciple of founder of Tsalpa Kagyü and disciple of Dakpo Gomtsul; Wöngom Tsültrim Nyingpo bla ma sangs rgyas dngos su gsungs pa	bla ma shang btson grus grags pa
ཡིན་ཏེ	describe the master as being the Buddha in person	yin te
བླ་མ་སངས་རྒྱས་བླ་མ་ཆོས	the teacher is the buddha, the teacher is the Dharma	bla ma sangs rgyas bla ma chos
བླ་མ་གསང་འདུས	Lama Sangdü. A terma discovered by Guru Chöwang (12121270), one of the earliest and most im- portant tertöns. It focuses on the guru principle as Padmasambhava's sambhogakaya form of the fivefold m...	bla ma gsang 'dus
བླ་མ་གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	sadhanas for the practice of	bla ma gsang ba 'dus pa
བླ་མའི་བཀའ	the lama's injunction	bla ma'i bka'
བླ་མའི་བཀའ་དྲིན་དྲན་པ	to remember the master's kindness / the qualities of the guru	bla ma'i bka' drin dran pa
བླ་མའི་བཀའ་ལུང	the master's oral instructions/ command	bla ma'i bka' lung
བླ་མའི་ཁོ་ན	only highest [yoga tantra]	bla ma'i kho na
བླ་མའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice on the spiritual master	bla ma'i sgrub pa
བླ་མའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	the guru's lineage	bla ma'i brgyud pa
བླ་མའི་བརྒྱུད་རིམ	the lives of the masters of the transmission	bla ma'i brgyud rim
བླ་མའི་བསྙེན་བཀུར་གྱི་དཀའ་འགྲེལ	Commentary on the Fifty Verses on Devotion to the Master, (T 3722)	bla ma'i bsnyen bkur gyi dka' 'grel
བླ་མའི་ལྟ་ལྡན་མ	lunar mansion called pusya bla ma'i thugs grub bar chad kun sel Lamey Tukdrub Barchey Künsel bla ma'i thugs rgyud kyi spangs rtogs kyi	bla ma'i lta ldan ma
ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities of freedom and realization of the teacher's wisdom mind	yon tan
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the qualities the teacher has	bla ma'i thugs rgyud kyi yon tan
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ	Guru's Heart Practice. See Barchey Künsel	bla ma'i thugs sgrub
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་བར་ཆད་ཀུན	Guru's Heart Practice, Dispeller of all Obstacles [most prominent terma of Chokgyur Lingpa] 1869 bla ma'i thugs sgrub bar chad kun sel The Guru's Heart Practice, Dispeller of All Obstacles bla ma'i...	bla ma'i thugs sgrub bar chad kun
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་རྗེ	by the compassion of the guru	bla ma'i thugs rje
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་རྗེས་གྲིགས	the guru's grace [will] save me!	bla ma'i thugs rjes grigs
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཔྲིགས	the guru's grace (will save me!	bla ma'i thugs rjes gprigs
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་རྗེས་གཟིགས	Lama, look on me with compassion; x {bla ma'i thugs rjes gzigs zer nas re chen po byed cing rang gis mi dge ba'i las du ma bsags de'i 'bras bu myong mi dgos par bla ma'i thugs rjes dag pa'i zhing k...	bla ma'i thugs rjes gzigs
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་གཏེར	Guru's Mind Treasure bla ma'i thugs dang bstun nas sgrub cing be according to the teacher's wishes	bla ma'i thugs gter
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་བཟུང་བ	be receptive to your teacher	bla ma'i thugs bzung ba
བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་ཤེས	to know the teacher's mind	bla ma'i thugs shes
བླ་མའི་དྲང་སྲོང	ascetic lama, a siddhi	bla ma'i drang srong
བླ་མའི་དྲིན་གྱིས	through the guru's kindness; {bla ma dam pa'i bka' drin gyis} through the kindness of a sublime guru	bla ma'i drin gyis
བླ་མའི་དྲུང་དུ	in the teacher's presence	bla ma'i drung du
བླ་མའི་གདན་ས	seat of a chief lama	bla ma'i gdan sa
བླ་མའི་གདམས་ངག	the guru's pith instructions	bla ma'i gdams ngag
བླ་མའི་གདམས་ངག་ཇ	the tea of the guru's oral instructions	bla ma'i gdams ngag ja
བླ་མའི་རྣམ་ཐར	collection of hagiographies of masters of zhang zhung snyan rgyud traditions	bla ma'i rnam thar
བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Guru yoga	bla ma'i rnal 'byor
བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་དགོས་པ	the reason for guru yoga	bla ma'i rnal 'byor gyi dgos pa
བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྒོམ་པ	the practice of guru yoga	bla ma'i rnal 'byor sgom pa
བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྒོམ་ཚུལ	how to practise Guru Yoga	bla ma'i rnal 'byor sgom tshul
བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བསྒོམ་པ	to practise Guru Yoga bla ma'i rnal 'byor bde chen byin rlabs	bla ma'i rnal 'byor bsgom pa
བླ་མའི་བྱ་བ	religious and spiritual duties	bla ma'i bya ba
བླ་མའི་དབུ་སྐྲ	the guru's hair	bla ma'i dbu skra
བླ་མའི་མན་ངག	the guru's oral instructions	bla ma'i man ngag
བླ་མའི་མན་ངག་ཁ་བསྟེན་པ	rely on the guru's oral instructions	bla ma'i man ngag kha bsten pa
བླ་མའི་མན་ངག་ལས་འབྱུང་བ་ལྟར	following your teachers oral advice	bla ma'i man ngag las 'byung ba ltar
བླ་མའི་མི་རྟོག་པ	{theg pa chen po ste de la don rab 'byed pa'i bsam gtan lhag mthong ste so sor rtogs pa'i shes rab kyi rgyu las byung ba'o}	bla ma'i mi rtog pa
བླ་མའི་མོས་གུས	devotion to your teacher {bla ma'i mos gus dang byin rlabs kho na'i mthu} the power of your devotion to your teacher and of his blessings	bla ma'i mos gus
བླ་མའི་མཚན	lama's name, religious name	bla ma'i mtshan
བླ་མའི་མཛད་པ	the activity of the guru	bla ma'i mdzad pa
བླ་མའི་མཛད་སྤྱོད་མཛད་པ	the teacher's behavior, how the master behaves	bla ma'i mdzad spyod mdzad pa
བླ་མའི་ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱེད་པ	to serve your guru	bla ma'i zhabs tog byed pa
བླ་མའི་ཞབས་དྲུང་དུ	in the presence of the lama	bla ma'i zhabs drung du
བླ་མའི་ཞབས་པད་བསྟེན	served at the lotus feet of [my] master	bla ma'i zhabs pad bsten
བླ་མའི་ཞལ་ལུང	the guru's oral instructions	bla ma'i zhal lung
བླ་མའི་ལུང་ཚད་མ	the perfect measure of the statements of masters	bla ma'i lung tshad ma
བླ་མའི་གསུང	the teachings of the gurus	bla ma'i gsung
བླ་མའི་གསོལ་འདེབས	a single prayer addressed to the teacher bla ma'i gsol 'debs byin rlabs myur 'jugs Swift Gathering of Blessing, a prayer to the guru, by Shabkar	bla ma'i gsol 'debs
བླ་མའི་ལྷ་ལྡན	SA rgyal	bla ma'i lha ldan
བླ་མའི་ལྷ་ལྡན་མ	constellation	bla ma'i lha ldan ma
བླ་མར་བྱ་བ	by means of taking as guru be respectful	bla mar bya ba
བླ་མར་བྱས་པ	to be honored, respected, revered	bla mar byas pa
བླ་མར་བྱེད་པ	to act as a guru; to take to position of / function as master	bla mar byed pa
བླ་མར་ཞུ་བ	to consult the lama bla mas ci gsung gi bka' bzhin bsgrub obey the teacher in all things bla mas smras pa gang gi snying zhugs pa - lag pa'i mthil du gnas pa'i gter mthong 'dra - The master's words...	bla mar zhu ba
བླ་མས་བརྩེ་བས་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	to be accepted with love by a teacher	bla mas brtse bas rjes su bzung ba
བླ་མེད	{bla na med pa} Syn {gong na med pa}. supreme, unsurpassable, unsurpassed, highest, unexcelled; ultimate	bla med
བླ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	anuttara tantra	bla med kyi rgyud
བླ་མེད་ཀྱི་དབང་བཞི	the four empowerments of Anuttara	bla med kyi dbang bzhi
བླ་མེད་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Highest Yoga Tantra 1870	bla med gyi rgyud
བླ་མེད་རྒྱུད	highest yoga tantra	bla med rgyud
བླ་མེད་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	the aspects of Anuttara Tantra	bla med rgyud gsum
བླ་མེད་ཆོས	supreme qualities, unexcelled attributes, the supreme qualities	bla med chos
བླ་མེད་མཆོད་རྟེན	unsurpassable stupa	bla med mchod rten
བླ་མེད་མཉམ་པ	equally unsurpassable	bla med mnyam pa
བླ་མེད་ཐེག་པ	supreme way	bla med theg pa
བླ་མེད་དོན་རྫོགས་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Perfect Embodiment of the Unexcelled Nature bla med rdo rje theg pa'i lam gyi sngon 'gro thun mong dang thun mong ma yin pa'i khrid rim thar pa thams cad	bla med don rdzogs 'dus pa'i rgyud
མཁྱེན་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མེ	an explanation of the preliminaries to the practice of Vajrayana Buddhism according to the sa skya pa tradition; by {byams pa ngag dbang blo gros rin chen} bla med rdo rje theg pa'i lam gyi sngon '...	mkhyen pa'i lam gyi sgron me
བླ་མེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Unsurpassed Yoga Tantra	bla med rnal 'byor gyi rgyud
བླ་མེད་པ	unexcelled, w/o mental power ??	bla med pa
བླ་མེད་བྱང་ཆུབ	enlightenment, unexcelled	bla med byang chub
བླ་མེད་འབྲས་བུ	unsurpassable fruit bla med rdzogs chen yang rtse klong	bla med 'bras bu
བླ་མེད་འོད་འབྱིན	unsurpassable light giver, sun bla med yang dag rdzogs pa'i byang chub	bla med 'od 'byin
བླ་མེད་གསང་ཆེན	vajrayana	bla med gsang chen
བླ་མེད་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	Anuttara Heruka, {rdo rje bdud rtsi}, the chief figure of the wrathful herukas of the ratna family	bla med he ru ka
བླ་སྨན	a court physician	bla sman
བླ་སྨན་ཁང	Dalai Lama's personal dispensary	bla sman khang
བླ་སྨན་པ	physician lama	bla sman pa
བླ་འཙོང་པོ	shamer	bla 'tsong po
བླ་རྩ	the channel of the vital basis/ "la". [nadi where 1 can examine length of life, under the wrist zur chu rgyus kyi gseb na gnas pa'i 'phar rtsa]	bla rtsa
བླ་རྩིས་པ	Tibetan government head accountant	bla rtsis pa
བླ་ཚེ	soul and life-force	bla tshe
བླ་མཚོ	1) lake in a high place [gold, turquoise and dung [conch shell? lakes of the great, middle, and lesser continents gling che 'bring chung; 2) Spirit Lake [at {sbrags mda'} 25 miles south of Lhasa, b...	bla mtsho
བླ་འཚོ	hereditary portion, inheritance	bla 'tsho
བླ་འཚོང	= mercenary traitorous acts [for personal profit and benefit do bad actions that benefit the enemy, and harm 1's own land and people	bla 'tshong
བླ་འཚོང་པ	embarrassment, shamer, disgrace	bla 'tshong pa
བླ་འཚོང་པོ	shamer	bla 'tshong po
བླ་རྫོགས་ཐུགས་གསུམ	Guru sadhana, ati yoga, and Avalokiteshvara the guru, great perfection and great compassionate 1	bla rdzogs thugs gsum
བླ་ཟུར	senior lama, lama in retirement	bla zur
བླ་གཟུགས	lama image	bla gzugs
བླ་འུར	immediately, of a sudden	bla 'ur
བླ་འོག	above and below, inferior and subordinate, zenith and nadir	bla 'og
བླ་འོག་བསྒྱུར	turn upside down	bla 'og bsgyur
བླ་ཡང་ཐིག	by {klong chen rab 'byams} part of {snying thig ya bzhi}	bla yang thig
བླ་ཡལ་བ	bla gyar ba ??	bla yal ba
བླ་ཡི	chief, highest	bla yi
བླ་ཡིད་སེམས་འཐོར	perceptual conscious and mind	bla yid sems 'thor
བླ་ཡིད་སེམས་འཐོར་བ་བསུད་པའི་བོན	bon which reunites bla bla yul mchod rten chen po rnam gnyis the two great stupas of Nepal; Boudhanath and Swayambhunath	bla yid sems 'thor ba bsud pa'i bon
བླ་ཡེ	courtyard bla g.yu - life-supporting turquoise bla g.yu - turquoise of the bla	bla ye
བླ་རབས	lineage	bla rabs
བླ་རབས་རྣམ་ཐར	lineage biography	bla rabs rnam thar
བླ་རི	hill on which one's soul rests after death, mountain of the bla	bla ri
བླ་རི་གངས་དཀར	snow-laden mountain of the bla	bla ri gangs dkar
བླ་རིག་འཛིན	a ninth cycle of teaching often added to {sgrub pa bka' brgyad}	bla rig 'dzin
བླ་རེ	canopy, canopies	bla re
བླ་རེ་བྲེས་པ	decorated w canopies	bla re bres pa
བླ་ལུག	sheep of the bla made of tsampa and butter	bla lug
བླ་ཤིང	1) tree in a high place; 2) totemic tree of a individual [bon]	bla shing
བླ་ཤེས	1) queen's retinue; 2) astrologer; 3) lama's instructor [dge rgan]	bla shes
བླ་ཤོར་བ	to lose heart	bla shor ba
བླ་གཤེད	1 bla 'khyer mkhan 'dre ???; 2) bla dang gshed, [enemy?]	bla gshed
བླ་གཤེད་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྒྱལ་གཉིས	the two bdud and rgyal po who hinder the bla 1871	bla gshed kyi bdud rgyal gnyis
བླ་སྲིད	lama's dominion	bla srid
བླ་སྲོག	life [essence] that makes sentient beings live	bla srog
བླ་སློབ	master and disciple	bla slob
བླ་བསླུ	ransom of the bla, rites to ransom the bla, to ransom the bla, belongs to series of glud rites	bla bslu
བླ་བསླུ་འཁོར་ལོ	protection wheel for the ransom of the bla	bla bslu 'khor lo
བླ་ལྷའི་ལུང་བརྟག	guru's examination and deity's prophesy	bla lha'i lung brtag
བླག	1) incline 1's ear, listen to; 2) cover	blag
བླག་པ	(tha dad pa blags pa, blag pa, blogs,, 1) incline 1's ear and listen, pay attention; 2) shed [tears] [gtong ba dang 'dor ba]	blag pa
བླག་པ་མེད་པ	sitting in exposed places	blag pa med pa
བླག་ཤ	tree	blag sha
བླགས	attend to, SA blag pa	blags
བླགས་ཆེ	[arch] great failure	blags che
བླགས་པ	1) listened; 2) shed	blags pa
བླང	accept/ receive; ft. of {len}	blang
བླང་དོན་གྱི་གནད	the points of what is to be adopted or avoided	blang don gyi gnad
བླང་དོར	accept and reject	blang dor
ཉེས་བླང་དོར	to take up good and avoid evil	nyes blang dor
བླང་དོར་ཀྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	rules about accepting and rejecting	blang dor kyi bslab bya
བླང་དོར་ཁྲིགས་ཆགས	blang dor gyi bya ba rim pa dang ldan pa,	blang dor khrigs chags
བླང་དོར་གྱི་གནད	the points of what is to be adopted or avoided blang dor gyi gnad lag le du thebs pa apply the pith instruction of accepting and rejecting blang dor gyi gnad lag le du bzhed pa apply the pith instr...	blang dor gyi gnad
བླང་དོར་གྱི་གནས	the points of discipline as to what should be adopted or avoided, acceptance and rejection, cultivation and avoidance, adopt and discard, discrimination	blang dor gyi gnas
བླང་དོར་དགག་སྒྲུབ་གྱི་ཞེན་ཡུལ	the conceived objects of accepting and rejecting, affirming and denying	blang dor dgag sgrub gyi zhen yul
བླང་དོར་དགྲ་གཉེ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་རིས	partialities of accepting and rejecting enemies and antidotes	blang dor dgra gnye gyi phyogs ris
བླང་དོར་གཉིས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་དབྱེ	how to distinguish between what to avoid and what to accomplish	blang dor gnyis kyi rnam dbye
བླང་དོར་དུ་བྱ་བའི་ཆ་ནས	in terms of what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned	blang dor du bya ba'i cha nas
བླང་དོར་འདྲི་བ	{blang dor 'dri ba dang chos kyi bstan bcos byin pas shes rab 'thob par gsungs so} It is said that one gains intelligence due to inquiring into what is to be adopted or abandoned and by making a gi...	blang dor 'dri ba
བླང་དོར་གནས་ཀུན	all objects of accepting and rejecting	blang dor gnas kun
བླང་དོར་གནས་ལ	as to what should be accepted and rejected	blang dor gnas la
བླང་དོར་བྱ་རྩོལ	busy mediations	blang dor bya rtsol
བླང་དོར་བྱེད་པ	[informal] exercise your discernment	blang dor byed pa
བླང་དོར་མེད་པ	without accepting or rejecting, beyond attachment and rejection	blang dor med pa
བླང་དོར་མེད་པར་བསྐྱང་བ	continue without accepting or rejecting anything	blang dor med par bskyang ba
བླང་དོར་ལ་གཏི་མུག	stupidity as to what should be adopted or discarded	blang dor la gti mug
བླང་དོར་ཤེར་པ	know what to adopt and what to avoid	blang dor sher pa
བླང་འདོར	rejecting and taking, deciding for or against, acceptance or rejection, affirmed or denied	blang 'dor
བླང་འདོར་མེད	there is nothing to accept or reject, no acceptance or rejection	blang 'dor med
བླང་སྤང	attachment and aversion	blang spang
བླང་བ	received, took, accepted, quoted, taken from a book, SA len pa	blang ba
བླང་བ་བཅེས	to endeavor	blang ba bces
བླང་བ་དང་དོར་བ	accepting and rejecting	blang ba dang dor ba
བླང་བར་བྱ་བ	to be adopted	blang bar bya ba
བླང་བྱ	(what should be) adopted; qualities to be cultivated, that to be cultivated, adopted, taken up	blang bya
བླང་བྱ་བ	to be adopted [the five conflicting emotions]	blang bya ba
བླང་བྱ་བྱེད	produce qualities to be cultivated/ adopted, make demands/ requirements	blang bya byed
བླང་བྱ་གསུམ	3 engagements (mtho sa la bzhag dgos, chos gang thub thub sbyang dgos, bla ma dge ba'i bshes gnyen yag po bsten dgos)	blang bya gsum
བླང་བྱའི་ཀུ་སྤྱོད	the conduct to be adopted	blang bya'i ku spyod
བླང་བྱའི་ཀུན་སྤྱོད	the right conduct in terms of what to do	blang bya'i kun spyod
བླང་བྱར་བཟུང	to be deemed something to embrace	blang byar bzung
བླང་མེད	nothing to accept	blang med
བླང་འཚོ་བ	to herd cattle	blang 'tsho ba
བླང་ཡུལ	locality	blang yul
བླང་རི་ལུང་བསྟན	sutra when buddha visited li yul	blang ri lung bstan
བླངས་ཀྱང	[arch] again	blangs kyang
བླངས་དོར	1) [what should be] accept[ed][ance] and reject[ed][ion; 2) cultivation and avoidance; 3) discrimination	blangs dor
བླངས་འདས	transcendence of accepting	blangs 'das
བླངས་འདས་སོ་གསུམ	the 33 transcendences of accepting	blangs 'das so gsum
བླངས་པ	rdo + - removed a rock	blangs pa
བླད་པ	chew [a'cha' ba,[make prepare, construct, establish??]	blad pa
བླན་ཏེ་འཇོག་བ	repeated settling	blan te 'jog ba
བླན་གཏབ་པ	retort, answer	blan gtab pa
བླན་པ	give a reply	blan pa
བླན་མེད	unexcelled	blan med
བླན་མེད་པ	unexcelled	blan med pa
བླབ་བྱ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to advise	blab bya brgyab pa
བླའི་གྭ	[arch] ministers's assembly place	bla'i gwa
བླའི་གྲྭ	upper cover, roof	bla'i grwa
བླའི་མཆོག	chief priest	bla'i mchog
བླའི་མཆོད་གནས	court chaplain/ officiating priest; officiating priests at court, resident monk ={bla mchod} court chaplain, the main object of offering	bla'i mchod gnas
བླའོ	is above, is better, is superior	bla'o
བླའོ་ཡང	even, indeed	bla'o yang
བླར	abbr of bla mar, SA slar	blar
བླས	[arch] be hazy, hail [stones]	blas
བླས་པ	pf. of {gla ba}	blas pa
བླས་བླང	three-dimensional, taken by the mind, metaphor for something stable and definite	blas blang
བླི་འདྲི	seek advice, consult	bli 'dri
བླི་འདྲི་བྱེད་ཡུལ	adviser, consultant, counselor	bli 'dri byed yul
བླི་འདྲི་ས	adviser, consultant, counselor	bli 'dri sa
བླུ་ཉོ	redeem a pledge [repay and reclaim object left as security for a debt]	blu nyo
བླུ་ཉོ་བྱེད	redeem ransom	blu nyo byed
བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིད་ཇུས་བྱེད	policy of redemption	blu nyo'i srid jus byed
བླུ་བ	(tha dad pa,, blus pa, blu ba, blus,, buy [off]/ pay off, ransom, redeem	blu ba
བླུ་བའི	deceptive	blu ba'i
བླུ་རྨོངས་མུན་པ་ཅན	dark stupid deception/ buying	blu rmongs mun pa can
བླུ་ཚིག	persuasive language, sweet words	blu tshig
བླུ་ཡོན	price [for religious objects]	blu yon
བླུ་ཡོན་དུ་གཏོང	sell [religious objects]	blu yon du gtong
བླུ་རིན	price paid for redemption, ransom	blu rin
བླུ་རིན་ལ་བཏང	selling lama possessions	blu rin la btang
བླུག	pour, SA ldug pa	blug
བླུག་ཀོང	1) dngul sogs bzhu snod lugs kong; 2) par kong ngam lugs par, . bunghole	blug kong
བླུག་སྐྱོར	[b]?lugs rgyag skyor, khro zangs bzhus nas blug skyor byed pa, ???	blug skyor
བླུག་སྣོད	vase [poured into, vs a pitcher from which 1 pours]	blug snod
བླུག་པ	(tha dad pa blugs pa, blug pa, blugs,, 1) fill/ load [with (water]; 2) pour in/ on	blug pa
བླུག་གཟར	ladle	blug gzar
བླུགས	1) pour! poured, filled, cast; 2) thing of cast metal; 3) liberation; 4) vase	blugs
བླུགས་ཀོང	casting mould, crucible	blugs kong
བླུགས་སྐུ	molten image	blugs sku
བླུགས་པ	filled [with (water], loaded, poured in/ on	blugs pa
བླུགས་པར	casting mould	blugs par
བླུགས་མ	cast metal, statues, relievo	blugs ma
བླུགས་གཟར	ladle with long handle, long spoons used at burnt offerings	blugs gzar
བླུགས་ཤོག	shog bu dras ro rnams zhib mor brdungs te lugs su blugs pa'i shog bu [tiny bits of paper -liquified?]	blugs shog
བླུད	give to drink, SA ldud pa	blud
བླུད་པ	ft. of {blud pa}; to pour out; release, ransom, redemption; pf. of {blud pa}; {blud pa, blud pa, blud pa, blud} trans. v	blud pa
བླུད་བྱིན	giving the price of, telling the worth of	blud byin
བླུན	foolish, stupid, ignorant	blun
བླུན་ལྐུག	imbecilic	blun lkug
བླུན་སྒོམ	ignorant meditators	blun sgom
བླུན་གཏམ	foolish talk	blun gtam
བླུན་རྟགས	sign of a fool [not knowing au tsugs?]	blun rtags
བླུན་དད	idiot/ blind faith	blun dad
བླུན་པ	Stupidity	blun pa
བླུན་པ་ཐ་ཆད	the fool; {blun pa tha chad kyi sdig can} such degenerate, ignorant, and destructive individuals	blun pa tha chad
བླུན་པའི་ལུགས	the way of fools	blun pa'i lugs
བླུན་པོ	stupid, foolish, silly, dull, zany	blun po
བླུན་པོ་གླིང	fool's park, grove near lhasa	blun po gling
བླུན་པོ་ཉིད	stupidity, foolishness	blun po nyid
བླུན་པོ་གཙོ་བོ	ministers	blun po gtso bo
བླུན་པོའི་ལུགས	foolery, fool's opinion, antagonistic views	blun po'i lugs
བླུན་བྱས	to be stupefied by	blun byas
བླུན་རྨོངས	{yid kyi dbang po lkugs te shin tu blun rmongs su gyur pa} those whose mental disability makes them unable to comprehend	blun rmongs
བླུན་ཚིག	stupid talk that misses the point	blun tshig
བླུས	ransom; imp. of {blu ba}	blus
བླུས་པ	pf. of {blu ba} blus pos phyag rgya che bsgom pa phal	blus pa
ཆེར་དུད་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུ་རུ་གདའ	Mahamudra as practiced by fools usually results in an animal state	cher dud 'gro'i rgyu ru gda'
བླུས་མ	1) thing bought for a price; 2) bought [off] ransomed, redeemed (/ [p blu ba]	blus ma
བླུས་མ་བཏང་བ	to bribe; {mi 'theb yod pas blus ma btang du med} a rich man cannot buy his way out of it	blus ma btang ba
བླེ་ལོ	indolence	ble lo
བླེང	(not in das)	bleng
བླེང་བ	to say, talk converse	bleng ba
བླེས་ལ་བོར	1) [arch] discard w/o mastering; 2) mind, knowledge [1 {rang yul snang ba'i rig pa} the mind apprehending its objects: [ordinary level] awareness seeing a pillar, vase and so forth	bles la bor
བློ	ordinary (rational) consciousness/ intellect; isc. scope (of mind)	blo
བློ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	conceptual mind	blo kun tu rtog pa
བློ་ཀུན་རྫོབ	theorizing component of mind	blo kun rdzob
བློ་ཀུན་རྫོབ་པ	conventional/ relative awareness/ mind	blo kun rdzob pa
བློ་དཀར	1) good/pure/ excellent mind/ thoughts; 2) mutual enjoyment [friends between each other]; 3) faithful, sincere, kind	blo dkar
བློ་དཀར་སེམས་དཀར	1) good/ pure/ excellent mind/ thoughts; 2) mutual enjoyment; 3) faithful, sincere, kind	blo dkar sems dkar
བློ་དཀྱེལ	vast mind	blo dkyel
བློ་དཀྲོགས་པ	disturbed/ troubled mind	blo dkrogs pa
བློ་བཀལ	[p blos 'gel] trusted, relied on, had confidence in	blo bkal
བློ་བཀུགས་པ	to attract	blo bkugs pa
བློ་སྐྱེ	1) think about; 2) arouse the mind/ bodhicitta	blo skye
བློ་སྐྱེ་བ	1) think about; 2) arouse the mind/ bodhicitta	blo skye ba
བློ་སྐྱེད	improve/ elevate prajna or intellect, gain understanding/ awareness	blo skyed
བློ་སྐྱེད་ཐོ་ཤུགས	the power of elevating awareness	blo skyed tho shugs
བློ་སྐྱེལ་བ	rely, depend upon, repose, confidence, rely on	blo skyel ba
བློ་སྐྱེས་པ	notions	blo skyes pa
བློ་བསྐྱེད	resolve to	blo bskyed
བློ་བསྐྱེད་ཐོན་པ་བྱུང	strengthened their aspirations	blo bskyed thon pa byung
བློ་བསྐྱེད་ཐོན་པ་བྱུང་བ	were inspired	blo bskyed thon pa byung ba
བློ་བསྐྱེད་པ	form a attitude/ frame of mind	blo bskyed pa
བློ་བསྐྱེད་བྱུང་བ	was inspired	blo bskyed byung ba
བློ་ཁ	dispositions and capacities	blo kha
བློ་ཁ་ཁེངས་པ	to fill one's mind completely	blo kha khengs pa
བློ་ཁ་ཆོས་ལ་འགྱུར	turned the minds toward the Dharma	blo kha chos la 'gyur
བློ་ཁ་ཆོས་ལ་འགྱུར་བ	whose mind had turned to the Dharma	blo kha chos la 'gyur ba
བློ་ཁ་ཆོས་ལ་སྒྱུར་བ	turn the minds toward the Dharma	blo kha chos la sgyur ba
བློ་ཁ་ཆོས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ	inclined toward the Buddhist teachings	blo kha chos la phyogs pa
བློ་ཁ་མཐོན་པོ	boundless enthusiasm, high spirits	blo kha mthon po
བློ་ཁ་དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་བསྒྱུར	turned their mind to the sublime Dharma blo kha dam pa'i chos la phyogs par shog - may their minds turn to the sublime Dharma!	blo kha dam pa'i chos la bsgyur
བློ་ཁ་ནང་འགུགས	phyir phyogs kyi blo kha nang du sgyur ba, bar gnas kyi mi rnams blo kha nang 'gugs kyi thabs byed pa, ???	blo kha nang 'gugs
བློ་ཁ་ཕྱོགས	desire, long/ wish for 1874	blo kha phyogs
བློ་ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྟངས	will, inclination	blo kha phyogs stangs
བློ་ཁ་ཕྱོགས་པ	{blo kha dam pa'i chos la phyogs pa} turn their minds to the holy Dharma blo kha rtse gcig gcig tu bsgrims pa'i rig	blo kha phyogs pa
བློ་ཁ་ཚིམས་པ	be satisfied with	blo kha tshims pa
བློ་ཁ་ཚུར་འཁོར	blo snying gzha la gtod pa'i mi zhig rjes su tshur khug pa ???	blo kha tshur 'khor
བློ་ཁ་རྫོགས་པ	be satisfied/ content	blo kha rdzogs pa
བློ་ཁ་ཡངས་པ	broad outlook	blo kha yangs pa
བློ་ཁམས་སུ་འཇུག	to enter into the mentality (of the students)	blo khams su 'jug
བློ་ཁེལ	trust, have confidence in, rely on	blo khel
བློ་ཁེལ་བ	to trust/ rely on; trustworthy/ reliable	blo khel ba
བློ་ཁེལ་ལིང་བསྐྱུར	total trust and surrender	blo khel ling bskyur
བློ་ཁོ་ནས	with an attitude of	blo kho nas
བློ་ཁོག	1) courage; 2) force or intrinsic power of mind; 3) insides of the mind; 4) container of mind]	blo khog
བློ་ཁོག་གི	gallantry	blo khog gi
བློ་ཁོག་ཅན	gallant	blo khog can
བློ་ཁོག་ཆུང་བ	timid, cowardly	blo khog chung ba
བློ་ཁོག་ཆེ	broad-hearted, generous, confident, intrepid, undaunted	blo khog che
བློ་ཁོག་ཆེན་པོ	courageous, brave	blo khog chen po
བློ་ཁོག་མེད་པ	coward	blo khog med pa
བློ་ཁོག་མེད་པར	cowardly	blo khog med par
བློ་ཁོག་ཡངས	broad-hearted, generous, confident, intrepid, undaunted	blo khog yangs
བློ་ཁོག་ཡངས་པ	broad heart, magnanimity, generous, one with broad views and principles	blo khog yangs pa
བློ་ཁྲིད་པ	lead/ transform the mind	blo khrid pa
བློ་འཁུམ	be discouraged	blo 'khum
བློ་འཁུམས་པ	contracted mind, easily frightened heart, one who is much afraid, impress on the mind	blo 'khums pa
བློ་འཁེལ་བ	reliable	blo 'khel ba
བློ་འཁེལ་ལིང་བསྐྱུར	trusting and surrendering	blo 'khel ling bskyur
བློ་འཁེལ་ས	trusted/ reliable person	blo 'khel sa
བློ་འཁྲུལ་པ	confused mind	blo 'khrul pa
བློ་གེལ་བ	hope	blo gel ba
བློ་གྱེལ	idle/ careless mind/ open mind	blo gyel
བློ་གྲུབ་པ	cognitive status	blo grub pa
བློ་གྲོགས	confident companion	blo grogs
བློ་གྲོས	[discriminating] intellect [seeing different angles and how things fit together, rig rtsal lam shes rab], intelligence, wits, reason, understanding	blo gros
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་པ	engagement of intellect	blo gros kyi 'jug pa
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་མིག	the eye of intelligence	blo gros kyi mig
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་མིག་ལོང	blind to wisdom	blo gros kyi mig long
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་བཟོ	the art of designing	blo gros kyi bzo
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་ཤེས་བྱ	what is to be discerned by understanding	blo gros kyis shes bya
བློ་གྲོས་དགེ་བ	good intellect	blo gros dge ba
བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	mkhan po blo gros rgya mtsho of bkra shis 'khyil	blo gros rgya mtsho
བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱ་མཚོས་བསྟན་པ	Requested by S?garamati [thd]	blo gros rgya mtshos bstan pa
བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱ་མཚོས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra requested by Sagara Mati; Sagaramatiparipriccha-sutra	blo gros rgya mtshos zhus pa'i mdo
བློ་གྲོས་ངན་པ	1) weak prajna, bad intellect; 2) son of Mara, evil understanding	blo gros ngan pa
བློ་གྲོས་ཅན	intelligent, one who judges well, judge, sensible, judicious	blo gros can
བློ་གྲོས་ཆུང་ངུ	of little understanding	blo gros chung ngu
བློ་གྲོས་ཆེ་པོ	1) extensive knowledge; 2) a noble 1; 3) Mahamati [bodhisattva to whom Lankavatara Sutra was preached]	blo gros che po
བློ་གྲོས་ཆེན་པོ	of much sense, of excellent understanding	blo gros chen po
བློ་གྲོས་མཆོག་ལྡན	supreme intelligence	blo gros mchog ldan
བློ་གྲོས་ལྟ་བུ	habit	blo gros lta bu
བློ་གྲོས་བརྟ་པ	stable understanding, Sthiramati	blo gros brta pa
བློ་གྲོས་བརྟན་པ	of strong common sense	blo gros brtan pa
བློ་གྲོས་ཐོགས་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	unobstructed understanding	blo gros thogs pa mi mnga' ba
བློ་གྲོས་མཐའ་ཡས	Lodrö Thaye	blo gros mtha' yas
བློ་གྲོས་མཐོ་བའི་རྟགས་སོ	the awareness and other qualities of blo gros dang sems drang ba dang bslu	blo gros mtho ba'i rtags so
བློ་གྲོས་འདོན	offer suggestions/ ideas	blo gros 'don
བློ་གྲོས་ལྡན་པ	understanding, wise, intellectual	blo gros ldan pa
བློ་གྲོས་རྣམ་པར་གྱེངས་པ	1) distracted intellect; 2) vacillating understanding	blo gros rnam par gyengs pa
བློ་གྲོས་སྦྱོང་བ	to refine one's understanding	blo gros sbyong ba
བློ་གྲོས་མ་ཁེངས་ཏེ	his mind not being satiated	blo gros ma khengs te
བློ་གྲོས་མ་སྦྱངས་པ	untrained intellect, unpurified understanding blo gros ma smi pa dang yang dag pa	blo gros ma sbyangs pa
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པ	inexhaustible understanding	blo gros mi zad pa
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པའི་མདོ	sutra followed by nagarjuna and aryadeva	blo gros mi zad pa'i mdo
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པས་སྟན་པ	Taught by Akshayamati [thd]	blo gros mi zad pas stan pa
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པས་བསྟ་པ	Akshayamati Nirdesa Sutra [the sutra taught by inexhaustible intellect/ Aksayamati.]	blo gros mi zad pas bsta pa
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པས་བསྟན་པ	Akshayamati Nirdesa Sutra, the Sutra Taught by Inexhaustible Intellect, teaching of Aksayamati sutra	blo gros mi zad pas bstan pa
བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Unending Intelligence	blo gros mi zad pas zhus pa'i mdo
བློ་གྲོས་མེད	unintelligent, injudicious	blo gros med
བློ་གྲོས་དམན་པ	limited intellect; {rang 'dra'i blo gros dman pa} whose intellect is as limited as mine	blo gros dman pa
བློ་གྲོས་དམའ་བ	mean in mind	blo gros dma' ba
བློ་གྲོས་རྨོངས་པ	confused minds	blo gros rmongs pa
བློ་གྲོས་ཞན་པ	of inferior intellect	blo gros zhan pa
བློ་གྲོས་གཞག	let go of intellect	blo gros gzhag
བློ་གྲོས་བཞག	let go of intellect	blo gros bzhag
བློ་གྲོས་ཟད་པ	understanding exhausted	blo gros zad pa
བློ་གྲོས་བཟང་པོ	fabulous mountain north of northern ocean	blo gros bzang po
བློ་གྲོས་ཡང་དག་པར་སྨི་པ	ripe perfect understanding	blo gros yang dag par smi pa
བློ་གྲོས་རང་ལྡན	judicious	blo gros rang ldan
བློ་གྲོས་རང་ལྡན་པ	sensible	blo gros rang ldan pa
བློ་གྲོས་ལོག་པ	wrong prajna	blo gros log pa
བློ་གྲོས་སེམས་པ	intelligent mind	blo gros sems pa
བློ་གྲོས་གསར་བུ	new mind	blo gros gsar bu
བློ་གྲོས་གསལ་བ	clear understanding	blo gros gsal ba
བློ་གླིང	section of 'bras spungs monastery	blo gling
བློ་དགའ	happy mind	blo dga'
བློ་དགོས་མེད	seeing futility; futility	blo dgos med
བློ་དགོས་སེལ་ཁྱད	question of the fulfillment of one's plans or intentions	blo dgos sel khyad
བློ་འགལ	oppositeness, mental	blo 'gal
བློ་འགུགས	persuade, convince	blo 'gugs
བློ་འགེལ	trust, rely on	blo 'gel
བློ་འགེལ་བ	trust, rely on, have confidence	blo 'gel ba
བློ་འགེལ་ཡིད་ཆེས	trust, confidence	blo 'gel yid ches
བློ་འགེལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད	trust, have confidence	blo 'gel yid ches byed
བློ་འགྱུ་བ	movements/ flickerings/ of mind [emanations of discursive thoughts]	blo 'gyu ba
བློ་འགྱུར་བ	change 1's mind	blo 'gyur ba
བློ་འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པ	unchanging mind	blo 'gyur ba med pa
བློ་འགྱོད	zhe khrel lam sems gnong, rang gi sngar byas kyi las la blo 'gyod med pa	blo 'gyod
བློ་རྒོད	agitated mind	blo rgod
བློ་རྒོད་པ	creative, smart, quick thinker	blo rgod pa
བློ་རྒྱ	1) extent/ scope of mind/ vision/ mental capacity [bsam blo = thinking/ reflection]; 2) trap of mind	blo rgya
བློ་རྒྱ་སྐྱེད	widen 1's scope of mind, think broadly	blo rgya skyed
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆུང	not magnanimous, of contracted views, illiberal	blo rgya chung
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	MG, E-T: narrowminded. [mss]	blo rgya chung chung
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	limited/ small mental scope	blo rgya chung ba
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་སྐྱེད	broad in vision/ outlook	blo rgya che skyed
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	vast [scope of] mind	blo rgya che ba
བློ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	broadminded	blo rgya chen po
བློ་རྒྱ་འབྱམས་པ	pervasive/ universal mind	blo rgya 'byams pa
བློ་རྒྱང་དུ་སོང	become estranged/ alienated	blo rgyang du song
བློ་རྒྱུད	[my] mind, mind-stream	blo rgyud
བློ་སྒམ་པ	very profound	blo sgam pa
བློ་སྒོ	the gates of mind. [knowledge, awareness]	blo sgo
བློ་སྒོ་ཕྱེ	opened the gates of mind, aroused, inspired, enlightened	blo sgo phye
བློ་སྒོ་ཕྱེ་བ	arouse, inspire	blo sgo phye ba
བློ་སྒོ་འབྱེད	open the gates of mind, arouse, inspire, enlighten	blo sgo 'byed
བློ་སྒོ་ཡངས	open mental attitude	blo sgo yangs
བློ་སྒོ་ཡངས་པ	open minded	blo sgo yangs pa
བློ་སྒྲིལ་བ	to focus one's mind on	blo sgril ba
བློ་སྒྲུབ	desire to practice; abbr. of {bla ma'i sgrub pa} guru sadhana, master practice	blo sgrub
བློ་སྒྲོས	intelligence	blo sgros
བློ་བསྒྱུར	transform/ change 1's mind	blo bsgyur
བློ་ངན	bad-hearted, evil-minded	blo ngan
བློ་ངན་མ་རུངས་པ་ཕྲག་དོག་ཅན	a wicked, jealous, and cunning man	blo ngan ma rungs pa phrag dog can
བློ་ངན་གསུམ	the three kinds of wrong thinking	blo ngan gsum
བློ་ངར་སྐྱེད་བཅུག་པ	inspire	blo ngar skyed bcug pa
བློ་ངོ	1) [form] the perspective of mind/ thought; 2) in thought	blo ngo
བློ་ངོར	MSS: "cognitive framework" e.g., R75: 233. [mss]	blo ngor
བློ་ངོར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	non-establishment from the perspective of mind	blo ngor ma grub pa
བློ་ངོར་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས་གསུམ	the	blo ngor ma grub pa'i rtags gsum
བློ་མངོ་གྱུར་པ	manifest awareness	blo mngo gyur pa
བློ་མངོ་སུམ་པའི་མཚ་ཉིད་བཞི	the four characteristics of mental? perception	blo mngo sum pa'i mtsha nyid bzhi
བློ་མངོན་གྱུར་པ	manifest awareness	blo mngon gyur pa
བློ་ཅན	w mind	blo can
བློ་གཅིག་ཏུ་ངེས་པ	single minded	blo gcig tu nges pa
བློ་གཅིག་སེམས་གཅིག	1 mind 1 thought, 1 pointed mind and thought, singlemindedness, whole-hearted, w 1 mind	blo gcig sems gcig
བློ་གཅོད	acumen	blo gcod
བློ་གཅོད་ཁམས	acumen	blo gcod khams
བློ་བཅོལ་བ	have faith/ confidence in	blo bcol ba
བློ་བཅོས	modifications of the mind	blo bcos
བློ་བཅོས་པ	changing one's attitude	blo bcos pa
བློ་བཅོས་པའི་བསྒོམ	intellectually fabricated meditation	blo bcos pa'i bsgom
བློ་ཆུང	of lesser/ small aptitude	blo chung
བློ་ཆུང་ན	if one is of lower capacity	blo chung na
བློ་ཆུང་བ	1) degraded mind/ understanding; 2) small mind [capacity/ power], fool; 3) timid, cowardly	blo chung ba
བློ་ཆུང་ཟོས	absent-minded negligent person, lazy	blo chung zos
བློ་ཆེ	of great aptitude	blo che
བློ་ཆེ་སྐྱེ་བ	give rise to great mind	blo che skye ba
བློ་ཆེ་ན	if one is of higher capacity 1876	blo che na
བློ་ཆེ་པོ	vast intellect/ knowledge/ [power of] mind	blo che po
བློ་ཆེ་བ	of great aptitude	blo che ba
བློ་ཆེ་ཝ	magnanimous, generous, one with broad views and principles	blo che wa
བློ་ཆེན	great mind/ attitude	blo chen
བློ་ཆེན་པོ	of great mental abilities	blo chen po
བློ་ཆེས་བ	have confidence in	blo ches ba
བློ་ཆོས	mental property [ggd]	blo chos
བློ་ཆོས་བྱ་འི་ངང་དུ	while planning to practice the dharma	blo chos bya 'i ngang du
བློ་ཆོས་བྱའི་ངང་དུ	while planning to practice the dharma	blo chos bya'i ngang du
བློ་ཆོས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་ནུས་པ	having the ability to turn your mind to the Dharma	blo chos la phyogs nus pa
བློ་ཆོས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ	my mind is turned toward the Dharma	blo chos la phyogs pa
བློ་ཆོས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	mind turning to[wards] the Dharma	blo chos su 'gro ba
བློ་ཆོས་སུ་སོང་བའི་སེམས་ཉིད	my mind which has become the dharma	blo chos su song ba'i sems nyid
བློ་མཆོག་གི་བདེ་བ	the happiness/ bliss of supreme mind	blo mchog gi bde ba
བློ་མཆོག་ཅིག་ཅར་བ	sudden supreme mind	blo mchog cig car ba
བློ་མཆོག་དང་ལྡ་པ	possessing supreme mind	blo mchog dang lda pa
བློ་མཆོད་དཀོར་གཉེར	the resident monk	blo mchod dkor gnyer
བློ་འཇིག་པ	to collapse the concepts of	blo 'jig pa
བློ་འཇུག་པ	mental engagement / involvement	blo 'jug pa
བློ་ཉམས་འགྱུར	1) dignified mind; 2) degeneration of mind	blo nyams 'gyur
བློ་ཉེ་བ	friendly, amiable	blo nye ba
བློ་ཉེས	mistake	blo nyes
བློ་གཉིས	hesitation	blo gnyis
བློ་གཉིས་སྣང	dualistic mind	blo gnyis snang
བློ་གཉེ་པོའི་དང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	purification of the antidote of mind	blo gnye po'i dang du gyur pa
བློ་སྙིང་པོར་འཛིན་པ	grasp/ fixate the essence of mind	blo snying por 'dzin pa
བློ་སྙིང་བྲང་གསུམ	mind, heart and chest	blo snying brang gsum
བློ་གཏད	to rely on, trust in	blo gtad
བློ་གཏད་ཁེལ་བ	reliable, credible, trustworthy	blo gtad khel ba
བློ་གཏད་བཅའ་བ	to form a mental focus	blo gtad bca' ba
བློ་གཏད་བཅོལ	entrust 1's aim to, rely/ depend on	blo gtad bcol
བློ་གཏད་བཅོལ་བ	entrust 1's aim to, rely/ depend on	blo gtad bcol ba
བློ་གཏད་ཆོག་པ	reliable, safe, dependable	blo gtad chog pa
བློ་གཏད་འཆའ་བ	place confidence in	blo gtad 'cha' ba
བློ་གཏད་འཆོལ	rely/ depend on	blo gtad 'chol
བློ་གཏད་འཆོལ་བ	rely/ depend on	blo gtad 'chol ba
བློ་གཏད་ཐུབ་པ	attain confidence	blo gtad thub pa
བློ་གཏད་པ	to trust/ rely on	blo gtad pa
བློ་གཏད་བྱེད	produce a focused mind/ reference point / confidence	blo gtad byed
བློ་གཏད་བྱེད་པ	produce a focused mind/ reference point / confidence	blo gtad byed pa
བློ་གཏད་མ་བརྟན	our confidence has faltered	blo gtad ma brtan
བློ་གཏད་མེད	w/o good qualities	blo gtad med
བློ་གཏད་མེད་པ	unreliable, cannot be depended upon	blo gtad med pa
བློ་གཏད་ཞུ	to trust	blo gtad zhu
བློ་གཏད་ཡུལ་མེད	no object or place to rely on, trust in	blo gtad yul med
བློ་གཏད་ལིང་བསྐྱུར	rely completely on [complete trust and surrender]	blo gtad ling bskyur
བློ་གཏད་ལིང་གིས་བཅོལ	put your unshakable trust!	blo gtad ling gis bcol
བློ་གཏད་ལིང་འཆོལ	place 1's complete trust	blo gtad ling 'chol
བློ་གཏད་ལིངས་བཅོལ	put complete/ unshakable trust/ effort in	blo gtad lings bcol
བློ་གཏན	conceptual mind	blo gtan
བློ་གཏིང་ནས	from the core of one's heart	blo gting nas
བློ་གཏིང་ཟབ་པ	1 deep vast prajna two profound	blo gting zab pa
བློ་གཏེར་མཆོག	supreme mind treasure/ terma, Manjushri	blo gter mchog
བློ་གཏོད	rely/ depend on	blo gtod
བློ་གཏོད་པ	rely on, confide in	blo gtod pa
བློ་བཏང	preoccupation	blo btang
བློ་བཏང་བ	to use an idea	blo btang ba
བློ་བཏད	relied/ depended on	blo btad
བློ་རྟག་པ་གཉིས་པ	the second section	blo rtag pa gnyis pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་Hཨེབ༹ཇྲ	tantra	of the Hevajra
བློ་རྟབ་རྟབ་པ	ATG: flustered, to have "butterflies." [mss]	blo rtab rtab pa
བློ་རྟུལ	weak intellect	blo rtul
བློ་རྟུལ་པོ	of dull aptitude	blo rtul po
བློ་རྟོག	ordinary (rational) thinking/ thought patterns	blo rtog
བློ་རྟོག་སྤྲོས་པ	elaborations of conceptual mind	blo rtog spros pa
བློ་རྟོགས	knowledge, understanding	blo rtogs
བློ་ལྟོས	trust	blo ltos
བློ་ལྟོས་བཅོལ	place hopes/ aspirations in/ rely on [someone]	blo ltos bcol
བློ་སྟོབས	power of mind, courage, spirit, bravery, ambition	blo stobs
བློ་སྟོབས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to muster all our courage and strength	blo stobs bskyed pa
བློ་སྟོབས་ཅན	courageous, ambitious	blo stobs can
བློ་སྟོབས་མ་ཉམ་པར	w/o losing courage	blo stobs ma nyam par
བློ་བརྟན	stability of mind, stable mind	blo brtan
བློ་བརྟན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ	commentary on stable mind	blo brtan gyi 'grel pa
བློ་བརྟན་འགྱུར་མེད	resolute, determined, unchanging	blo brtan 'gyur med
བློ་བརྟན་པ	stable mind	blo brtan pa
བློ་བརྟན་པས	with great firmness	blo brtan pas
བློ་བརྟན་པོ	firm attitude	blo brtan po
བློ་བསྟུན	trust	blo bstun
བློ་ཐག་གཅོད	make a decision	blo thag gcod
བློ་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	{/ chod/ bcad pa} to decide intellectually	blo thag gcod pa
བློ་ཐག་བཅད	decide, be convinced, resolve the mind	blo thag bcad
བློ་ཐག་བཅད་པ	{/ chod/ gcod pa} to decide intellectually	blo thag bcad pa
བློ་ཐག་ཆོད	the matter is decided, deliberation is cut off, conviction	blo thag chod
བློ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	determination, resolution	blo thag chod pa
བློ་ཐག་ཆོད་པོ	decisive	blo thag chod po
བློ་ཐག་རྦད་གཅོད	1) abruptly decide; 2) completely resolve	blo thag rbad gcod
བློ་ཐག་རྦད་བཅད	resolute, determined	blo thag rbad bcad
བློ་ཐག་རྦད་བཅད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱབ་སྐོར	resolute support	blo thag rbad bcad kyis rgyab skor
བློ་ཐག་རྦད་གཆོད	1) abruptly decide; 2) completely resolve	blo thag rbad gchod
བློ་ཐག་གཙང་བཅད	completely decide/ resolve	blo thag gtsang bcad
བློ་ཐུབ	trustworthy, reliable, credible	blo thub
བློ་ཐུབ་པ	(to feel that something) has integrity/ is trustworthy/ is reliable	blo thub pa
བློ་ཐོག	toward/ in the mind	blo thog
བློ་ཐོག་ཏུ	toward/ in the mind	blo thog tu
བློ་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཐོ་པ	hold in 1's mind	blo thog tu tho pa
བློ་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཐོན་པ	to hold in one's mind	blo thog tu thon pa
བློ་ཐོག་ནས	from memory	blo thog nas
བློ་ཐོག་ནས་འདོན	recite by heart	blo thog nas 'don
བློ་མཐུན	comrade	blo mthun
བློ་མཐུན་གྱི་གནས	a pleasant place	blo mthun gyi gnas
བློ་མཐུན་པ	1) 1 whose thinking accords w the administration's; 2) in agreement/ accord; 3) pleasant; 4) comrade	blo mthun pa
བློ་འཐས	mental attachment	blo 'thas
བློ་འཐུམས	unclear mind	blo 'thums
བློ་དང་བསྟུན	appropriate to one's intellect	blo dang bstun
བློ་དང་ལྡ་པ	wise, intelligen[ce], cognition	blo dang lda pa
བློ་དང་ལྡན་པ	judicious man	blo dang ldan pa
བློ་དང་འཚམས་པ	according w [the] mind [of ---], suitable, agreeable, compatible	blo dang 'tshams pa
བློ་དང་ཤེས་རབ	brilliant and wise	blo dang shes rab
བློ་དན་ལྡན་པ	1) have the attitude/	blo dan ldan pa
མིནད་ཨོཕ༹	--; 2) intelligent, wise, sensible; 3) consider; 4) minister; 5) Jupiter; 6) w a mind [person eg (Bodhisattvas]	mind of
བློ་དོ་མཐུན	mind in accord w benefit/ the goal	blo do mthun
བློ་དོ་དམ་པ	ultimate awareness	blo do dam pa
བློ་དོགས	suspicion, doubt	blo dogs
བློ་དོགས་ཐེ་ཚོམ	suspicion, doubt	blo dogs the tshom
བློ་དོགས་སེལ་ཆེད	for the purpose of removing one's doubts or fears	blo dogs sel ched
བློ་དོན་མཐུན	mind in accord with fact [thd]	blo don mthun
བློ་དོན་དམ	percipient component of mind, unerring cognition of the apparent object	blo don dam
བློ་དོན་དམ་པ	ultimate awareness	blo don dam pa
བློ་དོར་གྲུབ་པ	establish rejection of mind	blo dor grub pa
བློ་དྲེད་ཅན	unfeeling person	blo dred can
བློ་གདིང་འཆའ་བ	to gain confidence in one's mind	blo gding 'cha' ba
བློ་གདེང	implicit confidence, trust, hope, confidence, assurance	blo gdeng
བློ་གདེང་འཁེལ	be confident/ assured	blo gdeng 'khel
བློ་བདེ	carefree (state of mind)	blo bde
བློ་བདེ་པོ	satisfied, relaxed and comfortable, well being, at ease, relieved, w/o worries	blo bde po
བློ་བདེ་བ	feel at ease, be relieved, feel relieved	blo bde ba
བློ་བདེ་བག་ཕེབས	easy-going, free and easy	blo bde bag phebs
བློ་བདེ་བོ་བྱུང	became glad	blo bde bo byung
བློ་བདེ་ཞེ་ལྷོད	cool headed, unflustered	blo bde zhe lhod
བློ་འདས	beyond conceptual mind [concepts intellect/ thought inconceivable, unfathomable, incomprehensible, transcending mind..]	blo 'das
བློ་འདས་ཀྱི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	a mindtranscending miracle	blo 'das kyi rdzu 'phrul
བློ་འདས་བརྗོད་བྲལ	transcending conception by the intellect and beyond expression in words	blo 'das brjod bral
བློ་འདས་དོ་དམ་བདེ་པ	absolute truth transcending mind	blo 'das do dam bde pa
བློ་འདིང་ཅན	a person who in work knows bsam blo gnad che gtong [plan?, what he's doing?]	blo 'ding can
བློ་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འཇུག་པ	enter into mental formations	blo 'du byed kyi 'jug pa
བློ་འདུན	interest in	blo 'dun
བློ་འདུན་པ	interest, concern	blo 'dun pa
བློ་འདོད	own choice	blo 'dod
བློ་འདོད་ལྟར་གྲུབ	have 1s wish come true	blo 'dod ltar grub
བློ་འདོད་བྱེད་པ	be willing/ wish/ desire to	blo 'dod byed pa
བློ་འདོད་བཞིན	according to my wish	blo 'dod bzhin
བློ་འདོན	1) propose, suggest, come up w ideas; 2) recite by heart	blo 'don
བློ་འདྲི་བ	to fraternize with	blo 'dri ba
བློ་འདྲེན་པ	persuade, induce	blo 'dren pa
བློ་འདྲོག་པ	1) mind in a whirl; 2) quickly thinking and remembering	blo 'drog pa
བློ་རྡེག	thought-shattering	blo rdeg
བློ་རྡོར	ounce, srang weight of gold	blo rdor
བློ་རྡོལ་དགོན་པ	blo rdol Monastery	blo rdol dgon pa
བློ་ལྡན	intelligent [thd]	blo ldan
བློ་ལྡན་གྱུར་པ	the intelligent	blo ldan gyur pa
བློ་ལྡན་ཅིན་ཏ	heart of a rabbit, cowardice, timidity	blo ldan cin ta
བློ་ལྡན་མཆོག་སྲེད	craving for supreme intelligence [one of the eight characteristics of the guru, gu ru mtshan brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig.]	blo ldan mchog sred
བློ་ལྡན་སྙིང་པོ	1360-1385? Bönpo master	blo ldan snying po
བློ་ལྡན་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོས་བྱས་ན	an intelligent man who acts with true mastery	blo ldan bdag nyid chen pos byas na
བློ་ལྡན་རྣམས	discerning readers	blo ldan rnams
བློ་ལྡན་རྣམས་བགྲོད་ནས	the wise men of the land conferred	blo ldan rnams bgrod nas
བློ་ལྡན་མ	wise and virtuous woman	blo ldan ma
བློ་ལྡན་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཅན	an intelligent and active man	blo ldan brtson 'grus can
བློ་ལྡོག	change of attitude, to change one's attitude, mind-changings	blo ldog
བློ་ལྡོག་རྣམ་བཞི	the four reminders	blo ldog rnam bzhi
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར་མིནད	changers, four ways of changing, turning around one's attitude, frame of mind. the four meditations which change one's attitude (toward life); {dal 'byor rnyed dka'}, {'chi ba mi rtag}, {las rgyu '...	the four mind
བློ་ལྡོག་པ	change the mind from	blo ldog pa
བློ་སྡོས་རྣམ་བཞི	four thoughts that reorient the mind	blo sdos rnam bzhi
བློ་བསྡུར	exchange of ideas, discussion	blo bsdur
བློ་བསྡུར་དགེ་འཚོལ	seek ideas from many sources and collect the good 1s	blo bsdur dge 'tshol
བློ་བསྡུར་བྱེད	exchange ideas, discuss	blo bsdur byed
བློ་བསྡོགས	yid la bzung ba ??	blo bsdogs
བློ་ནས་འཆད་ཤེས	knew by heart	blo nas 'chad shes
བློ་ནས་འདོན་པ	to recite by heart	blo nas 'don pa
བློ་ནས་ཤེས་པ	recollection, memorized, committed to memory	blo nas shes pa
བློ་ནུས	mental/ intellectual capabilities	blo nus
བློ་ནུས་གང་ཡོད་འདོན	do the best 1 can w all 1's mental/ intellectual capabilities	blo nus gang yod 'don
བློ་གནོད་མེད	a non-defective mind	blo gnod med
བློ་རྣམས	all concerns	blo rnams
བློ་རྣོ་པ	sharp/ clever mind	blo rno pa
བློ་རྣོ་བ	talented, gifted	blo rno ba
བློ་སྣ	1) attitude, attention; 2) experiences [proliferations of mind]	blo sna
བློ་སྣ་ཆེ་བ	broad-ranging focus of attention	blo sna che ba
བློ་སྣ་ཆོས་ལ་བསྒྱུར	to turn [their) minds to the dharma	blo sna chos la bsgyur
བློ་སྣ་གཏད་པ	be granted/ confront the experience of [good]	blo sna gtad pa
བློ་སྣ་བསྟུངས	1) confine the mind!; 2) be decisive and immediate [plans, good] restrict/; 3) strictly control experience [bad] ?	blo sna bstungs
བློ་སྣ་ཐུང་བ	focused attention; narrow field of focus	blo sna thung ba
བློ་སྣ་བྲོད	be inspired	blo sna brod
བློ་སྣ་བྲོད་པར་བྱང	inspired	blo sna brod par byang
བློ་སྣ་བྲོད་པར་བྱས	inspired	blo sna brod par byas
བློ་སྣ་མང་པོ	1) distraction; 2) too many ideas/ thoughts, undecided	blo sna mang po
བློ་སྣ་མང་བ	1) distraction; 2) too many ideas/ thoughts, undecided	blo sna mang ba
བློ་སྣ་འཛིན	take an attitude	blo sna 'dzin
བློ་སྣ་རིང་པོ	procrastination	blo sna ring po
བློ་སྣ་རིང་བ	procrastination	blo sna ring ba
བློ་སྣང་བ	thoughts; {blo chos min snang ba 'gag pa} put an end to all thoughts contrary to the Dharma	blo snang ba
བློ་པ	be able	blo pa
བློ་དཔངས	inspiration	blo dpangs
བློ་སྤོངས	1) give up; 2) abandon mind	blo spongs
བློ་སྤོབས	courage	blo spobs
བློ་སྤོབས་མེད་པ	down-trodden	blo spobs med pa
བློ་ཕབ་བདེ་བར་གནས་པ	dwell at ease	blo phab bde bar gnas pa
བློ་ཕམ	disappointment	blo pham
བློ་ཕམ་བཅུག་པ	disappoint	blo pham bcug pa
བློ་ཕམ་མདོག་ཅན	dejected	blo pham mdog can
བློ་ཕམ་པ	w/o joy, unsatisfied, disappointed	blo pham pa
བློ་ཕམ་པོ	sorry	blo pham po
བློ་ཕམ་ཡི་ཆད	losing heart from sadness/ regret,/ disappointment	blo pham yi chad
བློ་ཕམ་ཡི་མུག	disappointed and sad	blo pham yi mug
བློ་ཕམ་ཡིད་ཆད	pessimistic, depressed, losing heart	blo pham yid chad
བློ་ཕུག	innermost part/ feelings of the mind/ heart	blo phug
བློ་ཕུག་གདོད་ཡུལ་མེད་པར་འགྲོ	become w/o anything to depend on	blo phug gdod yul med par 'gro
བློ་ཕུགས	innermost mind, fx: {blo phugs nor la gtad pa} their innermost mind aims for wealth. See also {brgyags kyi blo phugs}	blo phugs
བློ་ཕུགས་རྒན་ལ་དྲིས་པ	to rely on the advice of elders	blo phugs rgan la dris pa
བློ་ཕུགས་ཆོས་ལ་གཏད	Aim your mind at the Dharma. leave your mind to the Dharma; one of {gtad pa bzhi} the four ultimate aims	blo phugs chos la gtad
བློ་ཕུགས་གཏད་པ	rang la blo phugs gtad	blo phugs gtad pa
བློ་ཕྱོགས་པ	to direct one's interest, mind	blo phyogs pa
བློ་འཕམ	feel sad/ sorry discouraged/ disappointed, regret	blo 'pham
བློ་བ	to be able	blo ba
བློ་བག	mood [sems khur phab ste blo bag dro ba'i ngang nas las do byed pa, dogs snang che drags nas blo bag 'khums pa, sger gyi gtam do khe gsum thob shor re dogs kyi sgo nas blo bag mi phebs pa] 1879	blo bag
བློ་བག་ཕེབས་པ	relaxed, carefree, calm, free from fear/ anxiety	blo bag phebs pa
བློ་བད	sticky/ phlegmy mind,, doubt	blo bad
བློ་བབ	wholesome, becoming wholesome (?)	blo bab
བློ་བབ་བྱེད	have a joyful mind, show interest/ enthusiasm for	blo bab byed
བློ་བབ་སེམས་བབ	glad and rejoicing mind	blo bab sems bab
བློ་བུག	[arch] hole [?? {bug pa}}	blo bug
བློ་བུར	sudden[ly], adventitious, quickly	blo bur
བློ་བུར་རྐྱེན	sudden accident	blo bur rkyen
བློ་བུར་གྱི་དྲི་མ	Adventitious stains temporary stains	blo bur gyi dri ma
བློ་བུར་དུ	sudden[ly], adventitious, quickly	blo bur du
བློ་བུར་དྲི་བྲལ	pure as regards removal of incidental stains, SA ngo bo nyid kyi sku	blo bur dri bral
བློ་བུར་བ	chance, momentary	blo bur ba
བློ་བེམ་གྱིས་སོང	[arch] relaxed the mind	blo bem gyis song
བློ་བོད་འདོན	give/ make suggestions, guide, direct	blo bod 'don
བློ་བྱས	mind-created, fabricated by the mind	blo byas
བློ་བྱས་བཅོས་མའི་ལྟ་སྒོམ	view and meditation fabricated by the mind	blo byas bcos ma'i lta sgom
བློ་བྱས་འཇུར་དྲན	forced and contrived mindfulness	blo byas 'jur dran
བློ་བྱས་པ་རྣམས	those who rely (on	blo byas pa rnams
བློ་བྲལ	beyond ordering mind, unbiased mind free from concepts, free of the conceptual mind, transcend conceptual mind	blo bral
བློ་བྲལ་རྗེ་པའི་རང་ཞལ	naked and innate face of mind free from concepts	blo bral rje pa'i rang zhal
བློ་བྲལ་རྗེན་པའི་རང་ཞལ	naked and innate face of mind free from concepts	blo bral rjen pa'i rang zhal
བློ་བྲལ་ཕྱོགས་འཛིན	limited position	blo bral phyogs 'dzin
བློ་བྲལ་ཕྱོགས་འཛིན་ལས་འདས་པ	Semde view that transcends conceptual mind and a partial	blo bral phyogs 'dzin las 'das pa
བློ་བྲིད	[p blo 'brid],, deceptions, deceit, guile *, deceive, beguile, delude	blo brid
བློ་བྲིད་བྱེད	[p blo 'brid],, deceive, beguile, delude	blo brid byed
བློ་བྲོ་བ	taste, desire	blo bro ba
བློ་བློ་མང	many ideas, plans ={dran rgyu mang}	blo blo mang
བློ་བློང་བ	(A; 1) unhappy; 2) unclear understanding	blo blong ba
བློ་འབྲང་བ	blo ma 'brang bar - don't bother with / pursue	blo 'brang ba
བློ་འབྲིང	moderate mental faculty	blo 'bring
བློ་འབྲིད	beguile, impose upon	blo 'brid
བློ་འབྲིད་བྱེད	[p blo 'brid],, deceive, beguile, delude	blo 'brid byed
བློ་སྦུག	narrow minded	blo sbug
བློ་སྦུག་འཐུམས་པ	1) narrow mindedness; 2) unclear understanding	blo sbug 'thums pa
བློ་སྦུག་དོག་པོ	MG, E-T: narrowminded. [mss]	blo sbug dog po
བློ་སྦུག་དོགས་པོ	narrow minded	blo sbug dogs po
བློ་སྦུག་སེམས་གུ	narrow minded	blo sbug sems gu
བློ་སྦུབས	the cocoon/ [trap] of mind	blo sbubs
བློ་སྦྱང	to train the mind	blo sbyang
བློ་སྦྱངས་དགེ་བ	good/ virtuous / wholesome mind training	blo sbyangs dge ba
བློ་སྦྱོང	mind exercises, selfcultivation, accomplishment, mind trainings	blo sbyong
བློ་སྦྱོང་གླེགས་བམ	a collection of {blo sbyong} teachings of the {bka' gdam pa} masters	blo sbyong glegs bam
བློ་སྦྱོང་བརྒྱུད	the tradition of intellectual discipline	blo sbyong brgyud
བློ་སྦྱོང་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of mind training [the tradition of intellectual discipline (= {dge lugs pa}	blo sbyong brgyud pa
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	by Namkha Pal	blo sbyong nyi ma 'od zer
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཟེར	the solar rays of mind training	blo sbyong nyi ma'i 'od zer
བློ་སྦྱོང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད་ཆེན་མོ	Great Oral Transmission of Mind Training, collected writings of Ngülchu Togmey	blo sbyong snyan brgyud chen mo
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཐུན་བརྒྱད་མ	mind training for the 8 sessions	blo sbyong thun brgyad ma
བློ་སྦྱོང་དོན་བདུན་མ	The 7 points of mind training [by Atisha) Kadampa tradition [: 1) preliminaries sngon 'gro rten gyi chos sems pa dang ???, 2) and whose main part is training in bodhicitta dngos gzhi byang chub kyi...	blo sbyong don bdun ma
བློ་སྦྱོང་བདུད་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ	by Yongdzin Pandita Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen	blo sbyong bdud rtsi snying po
བློ་སྦྱོང་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	[Syn {blo ldog rnam bzhi}	blo sbyong rnam pa bzhi
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཚོན་ཆའི་འཁོར་ལོ	by Dharmarakshita	blo sbyong tshon cha'i 'khor lo
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཞེན་པ་བཞི་བྲལ	mind training free of the four attachments [blo chos su 'gro ba dang, chos lam du 'gro ba, lam gyi 'khrul ba sel ba, 'khrul ba ye shes su 'char ba.?? how are those attachments??	blo sbyong zhen pa bzhi bral
བློ་སྦྱོང་ཞེན་པའི་བཞི་བྲལ	mind training free of the four attachments	blo sbyong zhen pa'i bzhi bral
བློ་སྦྱོང་ལས་འབྱུང་བའི་སྟོབས་ལྔ	the five powers arising from mind training	blo sbyong las 'byung ba'i stobs lnga
བློ་སྦྱོངས་ཞེན་པ་བཞི་བྲལ	mind training free of the four attachments	blo sbyongs zhen pa bzhi bral
བློ་མ	anus, intelligence	blo ma
བློ་མ་ཁེལ	to distrust	blo ma khel
བློ་མ་འཁྲུལ་པ	unconfused mind	blo ma 'khrul pa
བློ་མ་ཆེ་པོ་ངོས་གཉིས་པ	from the dualistic perspective of small mind	blo ma che po ngos gnyis pa
བློ་མ་གཏོད	don't rely on ...!	blo ma gtod
བློ་མ་བསྟུན	should not trust	blo ma bstun
བློ་མ་མཐུན་པ	dissent	blo ma mthun pa
བློ་མ་བདེ	feels dismay	blo ma bde
བློ་མ་བདེ་བ	MG: worried, uneasy, anxious; vi. - byed to be worried, to feel uneasy/anxious [mss]	blo ma bde ba
བློ་མ་བདེ་བ་བྱེད	be/ feel worried/ uneasy/ anxious	blo ma bde ba byed
བློ་མ་འབྲང་བར	don't bother with / pursue	blo ma 'brang bar
བློ་མ་སྦྱངས	untrained mind	blo ma sbyangs
བློ་མ་རྨོངས་པ	unimpaired mind	blo ma rmongs pa
བློ་མ་རྫོགས་པ	1) skill of intellect not perfected / completed [not highly skilled]; 2) mind not satisfied/ fulfilled	blo ma rdzogs pa
བློ་མ་བསད་པ	wishes unfulfilled	blo ma bsad pa
བློ་མང	fanciful, fickle	blo mang
བློ་མང་གི་བྱ་བྱེད	intellectual pursuit of numerous plans	blo mang gi bya byed
བློ་མང་བ	one who thinks many things at a time but does very little	blo mang ba
བློ་མི་ཁེལ་བ	to not trust	blo mi khel ba
བློ་མི་དད་པ	few had faith	blo mi dad pa
བློ་མི་བདེ་བ	anxiety	blo mi bde ba
བློ་མི་བདེ་བར་གྱུར	became extremely worried and distressed	blo mi bde bar gyur
བློ་མི་ཚིམ་པ་མེད་པ	satisfied mind	blo mi tshim pa med pa
བློ་མི་ཞི་བ	those with unsubtle minds [ggd]	blo mi zhi ba
བློ་མིག	the mind's eye	blo mig
བློ་མིག་ཅན	w the eye of intellect/ understanding [prajna discernment, good judgement]	blo mig can
བློ་མིག་མ་དག་པ	{rang re blo mig ma dag pa yin gyi} it is your own mental vision that is impure blo mig sems mig gi gzugs su bkod pa clear eye of mind that sees things as they are	blo mig ma dag pa
བློ་མུག་པ	gloomy doleful way of thinking	blo mug pa
བློ་མེད	senseless, foolish	blo med
བློ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	highest yoga tantra	blo med kyi rgyud
བློ་མོས	approve, endorse	blo mos
བློ་མོས་བྱེད	MG: agreement, consent; va. - byed to agree/consent to. [mss]	blo mos byed
བློ་མོས་བྱེད་པ	to agree	blo mos byed pa
བློ་མོས་མེད	no intention	blo mos med
བློ་དམ་བདག	unintelligent ego	blo dma bdag
བློ་དམན	(those of) lesser aptitude/ limited intelligence	blo dman
བློ་དམན་དག	those of average intelligence	blo dman dag
བློ་དམན་པ	feeble minds [ggd]	blo dman pa
བློ་རྨོངས	ignorant, uneducated	blo rmongs
བློ་རྨོངས་པ་རྣམས	fools	blo rmongs pa rnams
བློ་སྨོན་ཐང	lo mustang, Nepal	blo smon thang
བློ་གཙང	intelligent, wise and learned person	blo gtsang
བློ་གཙང་མ་ཁེལ	completely trust	blo gtsang ma khel
བློ་རྩ	the root of mind	blo rtsa
བློ་རྩ་བརྟན་པོ	resolute, firm [of purpose]	blo rtsa brtan po
བློ་རྩ་གསར་རྙེད	resuming a question after much deliberation	blo rtsa gsar rnyed
བློ་རྩབ་རྩུབ	restless mind	blo rtsab rtsub
བློ་རྩལ	power/ skill/ sharpness of mind/ mental perception/ wits [prajna]	blo rtsal
བློ་རྩལ་ཞན	weak intellectual power	blo rtsal zhan
བློ་རྩིང་པོ	unrefined, crude/ rough thinking	blo rtsing po
བློ་རྩེ	opinion, idea, decision	blo rtse
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་འགྱུར	1-pointedly focus the mind on a single idea/ purpose	blo rtse gcig 'gyur
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲིམ	1) concentrate [mind 1 pointedly]; 2) be 1-pointedly aware of mind	blo rtse gcig sgrim
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲིམ་བྱེད	concentrate [mind 1 pointedly]; 2) be 1-pointedly aware of mind	blo rtse gcig sgrim byed
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	1-pointedly focus the mind [on a single idea/ purpose]	blo rtse gcig tu 'gyur
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གཏོད	1-pointedly focus the mind	blo rtse gcig tu gtod
བློ་རྩེ་གཅིག་མཐུན	1-pointedly focus the mind [on a single idea/ purpose]	blo rtse gcig mthun
བློ་རྩེ་གཉིས	"2-pointed mind," split attention]	blo rtse gnyis
བློ་རྩེ་གཏད་མཚམས	MSS: E.g., R75: 320.6 See {thugs rtse gtad mtshams}. [mss]	blo rtse gtad mtshams
བློ་རྩེ་ཐུང་བ	1) impatient/ easily irritated; 2) short attention-span	blo rtse thung ba
བློ་རྩེ་གསར་རྙེད	find/ think about a new idea	blo rtse gsar rnyed
བློ་བརྩེ	intelligence and kindness, [Syn {shes rab}, {snying rje}	blo brtse
བློ་ཚད་མ	knowledge w valid cognition/ pramana [like the Buddha's omniscient wisdom and the true perception of the minds of the noble 1s]	blo tshad ma
བློ་ཚབ	nervous, anxious	blo tshab
བློ་ཚབས	nervous, anxious	blo tshabs
བློ་ཚམ་པ	hesitation, shrinking, cowardice	blo tsham pa
བློ་ཚིམ	satisfy	blo tshim
བློ་ཚུབ	nervous, anxious	blo tshub
བློ་ཚུབས	nervous, anxious	blo tshubs
བློ་ཚུར་མི་འཇུག	cannot be conceived by the intellect	blo tshur mi 'jug
བློ་ཚོད་དང་བསྟུན་པ	that suits the mental aptitude	blo tshod dang bstun pa
བློ་ཚོད་དཔག་པ	presume	blo tshod dpag pa
བློ་མཚན་མ	conceptual characteristics	blo mtshan ma
བློ་འཚབ་ཆེ་བ	tense	blo 'tshab che ba
བློ་འཚབ་པ	busy mind	blo 'tshab pa
བློ་འཚབས	nervous, anxious	blo 'tshabs
བློ་འཚུབ་པ	busy, preoccupied mind	blo 'tshub pa
བློ་འཛིན	memorize	blo 'dzin
བློ་འཛིན་བྱེད	memorize	blo 'dzin byed
བློ་རྫོགས	mind fulfilled 1881	blo rdzogs
བློ་ཞིག	to destroy concepts	blo zhig
བློ་ཞིབ་མོས་བརྟགས་ན	if one examines this well	blo zhib mos brtags na
བློ་ཞུམ་པ	depression	blo zhum pa
བློ་ཞུམས་པ	timid, cowardly	blo zhums pa
བློ་བཞག	mental conviction	blo bzhag
བློ་བཞུགས་པ	what is retained by memory	blo bzhugs pa
བློ་ཟད	(yul 'dzin gyi) blo zad (pa) - resolution/ falling away of ordinary consciousness (that conceives of objects)	blo zad
བློ་ཟད་ཆོས་ཟད	exhaustion of phenomena beyond concepts, exhaustion of concepts and phenomena	blo zad chos zad
བློ་ཟབ	profound mind, profound, deep understanding	blo zab
བློ་ཟིན	sems la nges pa, dpe cha blo la zin pa, [is or makes certain??]	blo zin
བློ་ཟློག	returning, pulling back	blo zlog
བློ་ཟློག་རྣམ	four reminders [sense of "returning" or "pulling back"]	blo zlog rnam
བློ་ཟློག་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four reminders [sense of "returning" or "pulling back"]	blo zlog rnam pa bzhi
བློ་ཟློག་རྣམ་བཞི	four mind-changings, four reminders	blo zlog rnam bzhi
བློ་ཟློག་པ	alter the mind, subtract, draw off, divert, dissuade from	blo zlog pa
བློ་གཟའ་གཏད་དང་བྲལ་བ	aimless mind	blo gza' gtad dang bral ba
བློ་གཟུར་བོར་གནས་པ	sensible, impartial, rational, reasonable	blo gzur bor gnas pa
བློ་བཟང	learned, common personal name, good-hearted, generous, noblehearted	blo bzang
བློ་བཟང་གྲགས་པ	Lobzang Trakpa. Tsongkhapa; tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa, 1357-1419	blo bzang grags pa
བློ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{blo bzang rgya mtsho}	blo bzang rgya mtsho
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་ཀྱི	1st panchen lama of tashilhunpo	blo bzang chos kyi
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	Panchen Lama 1st. Syn {chos rgyan} Syn {chos kyi rgyal mtshan}: 1570-1662	blo bzang chos kyi grags pa
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan} [4th Panchen Lama [R] blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan Panchen lama i, 1567? 1662	blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་གྲགས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Lobsang Chödrak Gyatso, Kalden Gyatso's	blo bzang chos grags rgya mtsho
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་རྒྱན	{blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan}	blo bzang chos rgyan
བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་འབྱོར་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	rong tha, 1857-1900; rong tha, 1857-1900. the 4th rong tha chung tshang sprul sku	blo bzang chos 'byor lhun grub
བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་པའི་ཉི་མ	4th panchen	blo bzang bstan pa'i nyi ma
བློ་བཟང་ཐོགས་མེད	rgyal rong chos	blo bzang thogs med
བློ་བཟང་དོན་གྲུབ	Lobsang Döndrub, Fulfilling Intelligence	blo bzang don grub
བློ་བཟང་པོ	name of son of kamadeva	blo bzang po
བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན་ཡེ་ཤེས	1738-1780 Sixth Panchen Lama, Lobsang Palden Yeshe, 456	blo bzang dpal ldan ye shes
བློ་བཟང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཆོས་འཕེལ	ri	blo bzang tshul khrims chos 'phel
རྫོང་སྲས་སྤྲུལ	(1860-1926?)	rdzong sras sprul
བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་བརྟན	{har gdong dge bshes}	blo bzang tshe brtan
བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་རིང	{rje drung dbyangs can grub pa'i rdo rje} {dngul chu} 18091887	blo bzang tshe ring
བློ་བཟང་བཟོད་པ	alias {khrig tse dka' chen}; dge lugs pa author	blo bzang bzod pa
བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས	{blo bzang ye shes} 5th Panchen aer te ni [in the 12th water snake year from the 'jam dbyangs Emperor khang shis previous Dalai	blo bzang ye shes
ལམ	r rank giving tradition gzhir bzhag gis gser gyi 'ja' sa gser tham dang 'brel bar pa che the title aer te ni having been bestowed, others in the lineage have also been called that	Lama
བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤལ་བཟང་པོ	2nd panchen who died in 1737 at 75 yrs old	blo bzang ye shes spal bzang po
བློ་བཟོ	rang bzo ste rang blos yi rlom byed pa, create mind ???	blo bzo
བློ་ཡངས	spacious mind	blo yangs
བློ་ཡངས་པ	generous	blo yangs pa
བློ་ཡི	mental, intellectual, by the mind, of the mind	blo yi
བློ་ཡི་ཆོས	intellectual events	blo yi chos
བློ་ཡི་གཏེར	epithet of 'jam dpal or sarasvati 1882	blo yi gter
བློ་ཡི་རྣམ་བཞག	definition by the mind	blo yi rnam bzhag
བློ་ཡི་བྱེད་པ	wisdom	blo yi byed pa
བློ་ཡི་ཡུལ	the realm of mind	blo yi yul
བློ་ཡི་ཡུལ་བྱེད	to make something an object of mind	blo yi yul byed
བློ་ཡིས་བཅོས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	the intellect does not tamper with	blo yis bcos pa ma yin pa
བློ་ཡིས་བཏགས་པ	mind made	blo yis btags pa
བློ་ཡིས་བཏང་བ	gave up	blo yis btang ba
བློ་ཡིས་བཏང་བ་བློས་བཏང	renounced	blo yis btang ba blos btang
བློ་ཡིས་ཐོང་བ	see by mind	blo yis thong ba
བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས	dismiss; {tshe 'di yi bya ba blo yis thongs} dismiss concern for this life alone	blo yis thongs
བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས་ཤིག	ex {tshe 'di blo yis thongs shig} give up this life's concerns!	blo yis thongs shig
བློ་ཡིས་བཟོ་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	to (mentally) fabricate or contrive	blo yis bzo bcos byed pa
བློ་ཡུལ	1) object of mind; 2) realm of objects of mind	blo yul
བློ་ཡུལ་འཆར	imagine, conceive	blo yul 'char
བློ་ཡུལ་འཆར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to imagine/ conceive	blo yul 'char dka' ba
བློ་ཡུལ་དུ་འཆར	imagine, conceive	blo yul du 'char
བློ་ཡུལ་དུ་འཆར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to imagine/ conceive	blo yul du 'char dka' ba
བློ་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས	beyond the objects/ realm of mind/ imagination, inconceivable	blo yul las 'das
བློ་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the objects/ realm of mind/ imagination, inconceivable	blo yul las 'das pa
བློ་ཡོ་བ	wavering weak mind	blo yo ba
བློ་ཡོད་ན	if one entertains notions of blo g.yeng - 1) anxious, worried, fears, worries; 2) distracted mind [gzhan du 'phro ba] blo g.yeng byed - be anxious/ worried/ afraid blo g.yel - inattentive, careless...	blo yod na
བློ་རབ	sound mental faculty, person of highest acumen	blo rab
བློ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	consecrate the mind	blo rab tu gnas pa
བློ་རིག	1) knowledge by the perceiver; 2) pramana, knowledge	blo rig
བློ་རིག་བཀྲ་བ	intelligent	blo rig bkra ba
བློ་རིག་གི	intellectual	blo rig gi
བློ་རིག་བདུན	the 7 kinds of knowledge	blo rig bdun
བློ་རིག་གསལ་དུས	while your intelligence is clear	blo rig gsal dus
བློ་རིག་གསལ་བ	wise, intelligent, bright, clever	blo rig gsal ba
བློ་རིགས	types of awareness, cognition	blo rigs
བློ་རིགས་བཞི	the four kinds of knowledge/mental situation [in terms of the way of grasping the object {yul 'dzin tshul}, the four different kinds of the perceiver, blo: awareness, cognition, mind. {yul can blo'...	blo rigs bzhi
བློ་རིམ	aspect/ stage of consciousness	blo rim
བློ་རེ་བདེ	see how delightful!	blo re bde
བློ་བརླུག	[arch] grogs po	blo brlug
བློ་ལ	in mind	blo la
བློ་ལ་འགྲོ	be appealing/ attractive	blo la 'gro
བློ་ལ་འགྲོ་པོ	impressive	blo la 'gro po
བློ་ལ་ངེས	remember, stick/ stay in mind	blo la nges
བློ་ལ་ངེས་བྱུང	to retain in mind	blo la nges byung
བློ་ལ་བཅང་བ	to keep in one's heart	blo la bcang ba
བློ་ལ་ཆུད	to retain in mind	blo la chud
བློ་ལ་ཆུབ་པ	knew by heart,	blo la chub pa
བློ་ལ་འཆར་བདེ་བ	simple to understand	blo la 'char bde ba
བློ་ལ་གཉིས་སུ་དབྱེ་ཚུལ	how the mind divides in two	blo la gnyis su dbye tshul
བློ་ལ་བཏགས་པ	1) approach the essence; 2) sems mthun pa in accord w mind blo la ltos nas ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs	blo la btags pa
བློ་ལ་བརྟན་པ	mental stability, stability of mind	blo la brtan pa
བློ་ལ་དྲན་གསོས	to remember	blo la dran gsos
བློ་ལ་འདོད་པ	desire	blo la 'dod pa
བློ་ལ་བསྡོགས་པ	have, grasp, and be certain in mind	blo la bsdogs pa
བློ་ལ་སྣང་བ	appearing to the mind	blo la snang ba
བློ་ལ་འབབ	be appealing/ attractive	blo la 'bab
བློ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	impress on the mind, inculcate	blo la sbyor ba
བློ་ལ་མི་སྣང	not visible to mind	blo la mi snang
བློ་ལ་མི་ཤོང	MSS: "does not fit into the mind." cannot be encompassed by the mind. @ KKP 257.9. [mss]	blo la mi shong
བློ་ལ་ཚད་མ	valid means of cognition	blo la tshad ma
བློ་ལ་ཚུད་པ	be certain, comprehend fully	blo la tshud pa
བློ་ལ་འཛིན	memorize, remember, keep in mind	blo la 'dzin
བློ་ལ་འཛིན་པ	remember, memorize, keep in mind be grasped by the mind	blo la 'dzin pa
བློ་ལ་ཟིན	remember, stick/ stay in mind	blo la zin
བློ་ལ་ཟིན་ངེས	to memorize	blo la zin nges
བློ་ལ་བཟུང་བ	learn by heart	blo la bzung ba
བློ་ལ་ཡོད་པ	know by heart	blo la yod pa
བློ་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་སྤྱི	mental universals [ggd]	blo la yod pa'i spyi
བློ་ལ་ཤར	to come to mind	blo la shar
བློ་ལ་ཤར་པ	appearing to the mind	blo la shar pa
བློ་ལས་འདས	1) conceptual mind is transcended; 2) beyond mind	blo las 'das
བློ་ལས་འདས་ན	when conceptual mind is transcended	blo las 'das na
བློ་ལས་འདས་པ	transcending/ beyond conceptual mind/ intellect 1883	blo las 'das pa
བློ་ལེན	learn by heart, memorize	blo len
བློ་ལེན་པ	learn by heart, memorize	blo len pa
བློ་ལོག	renounce	blo log
བློ་ལོག་པ	1) previous thoughts/ wishes gzhan du 'gyur ba having become something else/ been transformed ???; 2) wrong attachment/ attitude/ mind/ thinking	blo log pa
བློ་ཤས	repentant, remorseful	blo shas
བློ་ཤེད	1) power of mind, memory; 2)	blo shed
བློ་གཤའ་མ	upright, true heart	blo gsha' ma
བློ་གཤོགས་ཆེ་པོ	great essential power/ energy, virile, vigorous	blo gshogs che po
བློ་གཤོགས་ཆེ་བ	great essential power/ energy, virile, vigorous	blo gshogs che ba
བློ་བཤས	disappointment	blo bshas
བློ་སེམས	mind, thought, heart, feelings, sentiments	blo sems
བློ་སེམས་དཀར་བ	sincere, pure, noble	blo sems dkar ba
བློ་སེམས་ཁེངས	be satisfied/ content	blo sems khengs
བློ་སེམས་འགྲིག་པ	agree in opinion	blo sems 'grig pa
བློ་སེམས་རྒྱབ་འགལ	bsam blo gtong phyogs [thinking] rgyab spyod [conflicting] not powerful? dam, mi mthu pa, sger gyi khe pha kho na gnyer na blo sems rgyab 'gal las med,	blo sems rgyab 'gal
བློ་སེམས་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ	1 thought 1 wish? 1 mind 1 thought, 1 pointed mind and thought, single-mindedness, wholehearted, w 1 mind	blo sems gcig sgril
བློ་སེམས་འདྲེས་པ	a close friend	blo sems 'dres pa
བློ་སེམས་འདྲེས་པ་མཆེད་གྲོགས	a	blo sems 'dres pa mched grogs
བློ་སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་བློ་སྣ་ཉུང་བ	1 pointed mind w few thoughts	blo sems rtse gcig blo sna nyung ba
བློ་སེམས་འཚོ	an Indian pandita invited to Tibet by the translator Lithise during the reign of king {lha tho tho ri} Believed by some to be one and the same as {mkhan po zhi ba 'tsho}	blo sems 'tsho
བློ་སེམས་སུན་པ	be sick at heart of	blo sems sun pa
བློ་སྲབ	the reins of mind	blo srab
བློ་གསར	novice	blo gsar
བློ་གསར་བུ	slob gnyer ba gsar pa	blo gsar bu
བློ་གསལ	clear mind, clear understanding; intelligent people	blo gsal
བློ་གསལ་གླིང	Losel Ling monastic college [in Drepung Monastery]	blo gsal gling
བློ་གསལ་འཇིགས་མེད་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1796-1855 - Losel Jigmey Gyatso, the third Jamyang Shepa	blo gsal 'jigs med rgya mtsho
བློ་གསལ་ཏེ	of clear understanding	blo gsal te
བློ་གསལ་ལག་བདེ	intelligent and skillful/ dexterous	blo gsal lag bde
བློ་བསད་པ	the defeated mind of another	blo bsad pa
བློ་བསམ	thinking, wishing, working of the mind	blo bsam
བློ་བསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to make the mind crystal clear	blo bsal bar byed pa
བློ་བསྲལ་ཆེ	[arch] vast mind	blo bsral che
བློ་བསྲུན་པ	1) sems tamed/ disciplined or peaceful; 2) [arch] happy mind	blo bsrun pa
བློ་ལྷགས	as it occurs to one's mind, according to one's own sweet will	blo lhags
བློ་ལྷད	1) faults of mind, bad thoughts/ wishes; 2) sick or suffering mind	blo lhad
བློ་ལྷད་དྲ་འཕྲུལ	bad motivation la mi dran dgu dran tsha po ???	blo lhad dra 'phrul
བློ་ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་ལ་ཤོད	relate the matter calmly	blo lhod kyis la shod
བློ་ལྷོད་ཤིག་ཤིག	tranquil mind [w/o conflict, completely relaxed]	blo lhod shig shig
བློ་ཨ་འཐས	mental attachment	blo a 'thas
བློག	1) incline 1's ear, listen to [!]; 2) cover	blog
བློགས	listen! incline your ear!	blogs
བློགས་ལ	clear mind	blogs la
བློང་བ	(A; 1) unclear understanding; 2) depression	blong ba
བློང་བློང	/ 1 unclear understanding; 2) depressed; 3) intense terror, panic	blong blong
བློང་བློང་པོར་འཇུག་པ	becomes wooly / unclear	blong blong por 'jug pa
བློང་མོ	bones or knuckles	blong mo
བློངས	receive, SA len pa	blongs
བློད	imp. of {blad pa}	blod
བློན	advice, counsel	blon
བློན་ཁམས	realm ruled by a minister	blon khams
བློན་ཆེན	minister	blon chen
བློན་ཆེན་ཁང	ministry	blon chen khang
བློན་ཆེན་ལྷན་ཚོགས	council of minister	blon chen lhan tshogs
བློན་ཆོས	Lönchö, in Domey	blon chos
བློན་བཏབ་པ	[arch] 1) zur nas gros btab pa; 2) cos bsta[n] pa, ???	blon btab pa
བློན་སྟོང་བཙན	minister mgar stong btsan guardian of the realm	blon stong btsan
བློན་འདེབས་པ	give advice, counsel, give religious instructions, make arrangements	blon 'debs pa
བློན་པ	minister	blon pa
བློན་པོ	minister, officer	blon po
བློན་པོ་བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	part of {bka' thang sde lnga}, terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323)	blon po bka'i thang yig
བློན་པོ་མགར་སྟོང་བཙན	the minister Gartongtsen [during king Songtsen Gampo]	blon po mgar stong btsan
བློན་པོ་རྒྱལ་གདོང	{blon po rgyal gdong} [mt in W gro mo rdzong, el smi 7128]	blon po rgyal gdong
བློན་པོ་ཆེ་པོ་ལྟ་བུ	like a great minister	blon po che po lta bu
བློན་པོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	jewel of ministers of state	blon po rin po che
བློན་པོ་རེ་རལ	mineral med/ [in the byang lugs tradition brag skya ha bo and in the zur lugs tradition brag spos]	blon po re ral
བློན་པོ་ལ་ངེས་པ་ལྔ	[TRS 110-3]	blon po la nges pa lnga
བློན་པོའི་དོ་ཧ	Doha for the Minister, by Saraha	blon po'i do ha
བློན་པོའི་རྣམ་ཐར	1 in a goddess play story, a song sing by an actor playing a minister two blo po mgar ba'i ??? rnam thar	blon po'i rnam thar
བློན་འབངས་ཀུན	the ministers and hordes of common people	blon 'bangs kun
བློན་འབངས་ལ་བཀའ་སྩལ་བ	spoke the following to the minister and the people	blon 'bangs la bka' stsal ba
བློན་འབེབས་པ	give advice, counsel, give religious instructions, make arrangements	blon 'bebs pa
བློན་ཟུར	zur pa minister ???	blon zur
བློན་རབས	succession of ministers	blon rabs
བློའི་གོ་ཡུལ་ཙམ	mere object of intellectual understanding 1884	blo'i go yul tsam
བློའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of mind	blo'i rgyu
བློའི་ཐུ་རིས	the hairline of conceptualization	blo'i thu ris
བློའི་གདེང་ཚད	matching one's desires, in accordance with design	blo'i gdeng tshad
བློའི་མདུན	state of mind	blo'i mdun
བློའི་མདུན་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	is not experienced in light of ordinary consciousness [lit. "does not abide in the presence of ordinary consciousness"]	blo'i mdun la mi gnas pa
བློའི་འདུ་བྱེད	mental activity	blo'i 'du byed
བློའི་རྣམ་པ	idea, mental image, the mind's object, attitude, mentality, state, frame of mind. [Syn. {blo'i mdun}. the ideas of the reasoning mind, the [various] types, forms of attitude, mentality	blo'i rnam pa
བློའི་སྤུ་རིས	1) hairlines of conceptualization; 2) mental doodles	blo'i spu ris
བློའི་བྱེད་པ	power/ activities / creations of mind [5 perceptual faculties,	blo'i byed pa
བློའི་དབང་པོ	the five perceptual faculties of Samkhya	blo'i dbang po
བློའི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	five perceptual faculties	blo'i dbang po lnga
བློའི་དབང་པོ་རེ་ཉིད་ཉེར་ལྔ	the five perceptual faculties of Samkhya	blo'i dbang po re nyid nyer lnga
བློའི་མིག	the eye of mind	blo'i mig
བློའི་དམིགས་བསམ	the perceptions/ conceptions and thoughts of mind	blo'i dmigs bsam
བློའི་འཛིན་སྟངས	notions	blo'i 'dzin stangs
བློའི་ཞེ་པ	mental attachment	blo'i zhe pa
བློའི་ཞེན་པ	mental clinging	blo'i zhen pa
བློའི་གཞན་སེལ	mental elimination [ggd]	blo'i gzhan sel
ཨོཐེར	exclusion	other
བློའི་ཡུལ་རྣམས	the objects of mind	blo'i yul rnams
བློའི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the objects/ realm of mind/ imagination, inconceivable	blo'i yul las 'das pa
བློའི་བསམ་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the conceptual objects of mind	blo'i bsam yul las 'das pa
བློར་ངེས	remember, stick/ stay in mind	blor nges
བློར་ཆུད་པ	understand	blor chud pa
བློར་བབ	/ 1 understand; 2) suitable for 1's mind	blor bab
བློར་འབབ་པ	appreciate	blor 'bab pa
བློར་མ་ཆུབ	I have not understood	blor ma chub
བློར་མ་ཤོང་བ	unable to grasp, beyond their scope	blor ma shong ba
བློར་འཛིན	memorize	blor 'dzin
བློར་འཛིན་པ	memorize	blor 'dzin pa
བློར་བཟུང	memorized	blor bzung
བློར་ཡོངས་སུ་ཆུད	completely understand	blor yongs su chud
བློར་ཤོང་བ	comprehend	blor shong ba
བློས	imp. of {gla ba}	blos
བློས་བཀལ	[p blos 'gel] trusted, relied on, had confidence in	blos bkal
བློས་བཀལ་ཐུབ་པ	confident	blos bkal thub pa
བློས་བཀལ་བ	confide, entrust, rely	blos bkal ba
བློས་བཀལ་བྱེད	trusted, relied on, had confidence in	blos bkal byed
བློས་བཀལ་རུང་བ	reliable	blos bkal rung ba
བློས་བཀོད	mind-made, [Syn {blos btags pa}	blos bkod
བློས་བཀོད་པ	mind made	blos bkod pa
བློས་བཀོད་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	Intellectually created philosophy	blos bkod pa'i grub mtha'
བློས་སྐྱེལ་བ	dependable	blos skyel ba
བློས་འཁེལ་པོ	trusty	blos 'khel po
བློས་འཁེལ་བ	reliable, safe, dependable	blos 'khel ba
བློས་གྲུབ་པ	[cognitive status] established by mind	blos grub pa
བློས་འགེལ	trust, reliance confidence	blos 'gel
བློས་འགེལ་བྱེད	trust, rely on, have confidence in	blos 'gel byed
བློས་བཅོས	to adjust mentally	blos bcos
བློས་ལྕོགས	comprehend, understand	blos lcogs
བློས་ཆ་ཆས་བསལ་བ	to mentally split up	blos cha chas bsal ba
བློས་འཆུ་པ	[arch] / 1 realizable by thought; 2) mentally containable	blos 'chu pa
བློས་ཇི་ལྟར་བལྟས	however conceived by mind	blos ji ltar bltas
བློས་འཇལ	comprehend, understand	blos 'jal
བློས་གཏོང	/ thong - abandon, relinquish	blos gtong
བློས་གཏོང་བ	sacrifice, forego	blos gtong ba
བློས་གཏོང་སྲོག་བ	sacrifice, give up, renounce	blos gtong srog ba
བློས་བཏགས	mental/ intellectual construct; imputed by ordinary consciousness; mental projections; ordinary mind's projections	blos btags
བློས་བཏགས་ཀྱི་ཆ	the mind-made [aspect]	blos btags kyi cha
བློས་བཏགས་པ	mind made	blos btags pa
བློས་བཏང	1) renunciation, giving up [concerns with]; 2) sacrifice; 3) careless, inattentive; 4) let go w/o attachment	blos btang
བློས་བཏང་ཐམས་ཅད་བ	empty 1's mind of everything	blos btang thams cad ba
བློས་བཏང་ནུས	intelligent; Don't care! (?)	blos btang nus
བློས་བཏང་བ	thams cad + - let everything go	blos btang ba
བློས་བཏང་བའི་བཏང་སྙོམས	careless indifference	blos btang ba'i btang snyoms
བློས་བཏངས་བ	careless[ness], inattentive[ness]	blos btangs ba
བློས་རྟོགས་པ	mental conception	blos rtogs pa
བློས་ཐོང	Forget about it!	blos thong
བློས་ཐོང་བ	see by mind	blos thong ba
བློས་པ	to acquit	blos pa
བློས་དཔྱད་པ	analyzed by mind	blos dpyad pa
བློས་དཔྱད་པར་མི་བཟོད	overwhelms the mind's inspection, unable to withstand, bear intellectual scrutiny	blos dpyad par mi bzod
བློས་ཕར་བཏགས་པ	mentally projected labeling	blos phar btags pa
བློས་བྱས	{blos byas sdug btsir gyi 'ching ba} rigid bindings that are mental constructs 1885	blos byas
བློས་བྱས་ཀུན་བརྟག	mind-made false conceptions blos byas kyi bsgom rgyu ga nas 'ong how could there be meditation devised by thought blos byas kyi bsgom rgyu ga nas 'ong how could there be intellectualized meditation	blos byas kun brtag
བློས་བྱས་བཅོས་མ	1) intellectual contrivance, mind-made fabrication; 2) intellectually corrected/ modified	blos byas bcos ma
བློས་བྱས་སྟོང་པ	empty intellectual concepts	blos byas stong pa
བློས་བྱས་ཡིད་བྱེད	mental constructs and fabrications	blos byas yid byed
བློས་བྱས་ལས་འདས་པ	to transcend intellectual concepts	blos byas las 'das pa
བློས་བླངས	[voluntarily] accepted [by mind]	blos blangs
བློས་བླངས་རང་བཙུགས་དམག	volunteer army	blos blangs rang btsugs dmag
བློས་མ་འཁྱུད་པ	not bearable / controllable / dealable w by mind	blos ma 'khyud pa
བློས་མ་བཅོས	uncontrived mind	blos ma bcos
བློས་མ་ལྕིགས་པ	(A; 1) unrealizable; 2) uncontainable in the mind	blos ma lcigs pa
བློས་མ་ལྕིབས་པ	not magnanimous, of contracted views, illiberal, extremely	blos ma lcibs pa
ལིཏཏླེ	minded	little
བློས་མ་སྤོབས་པ	to one's surprise	blos ma spobs pa
བློས་མི་ཐོང	not see by mind	blos mi thong
བློས་གཞལ་བ	understand	blos gzhal ba
བློས་གཞིག	investigate, examine; careful scrutiny, examination, examine carefully [with mind) focusing	blos gzhig
བློས་བཞག་པ	intervention of conceptual mind	blos bzhag pa
བློས་བཟོད	risk doing --	blos bzod
བློས་བཟོད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད	will/ cannot risk	blos bzod kyi ma red
དོཨིང	-	doing
བློས་རིག་དཀའ་བ	difficult for the intellect to understand	blos rig dka' ba
བློས་རླུམས་པ	intellectual supposition	blos rlums pa
བློས་རློམ་པ	intellectual supposition	blos rlom pa
བློས་རློམས་པ	intellectual supposition	blos rloms pa
བློས་ལིངས་བསྐྱུར	utter abandon	blos lings bskyur
བློས་སད་པ	examine/ apprehend by mind	blos sad pa
བློས་བསླང་མཇལ་བ	to scrutinize a scaled model	blos bslang mjal ba
བློས་བསླངས	1) elevate/ set up the mind; 2) mind the beggar; 3) relief image/ mandala for meditation	blos bslangs
གབུ་ལགས	boy (H	gbu lags
བ་སླེབས	death pursues us like a creditor pursues a pauper	ba slebs
གབྱེད་འདི་བྱེད	doing all sorts, w nothing to do (+ neg.	gbyed 'di byed
དབ་ཚུབ	wave	dba tshub
དབ་རླབས་སྐྱེས	sea-foam	dba rlabs skyes
དབག	mask	dbag
དབག་པ	covered, SA dbog pa	dbag pa
དབག་ས	covered	dbag sa
དབགས	involved with, entangled in, contaminated	dbags
དབགས་པ	1) Nyams pa, btsog pa, lto chas la dbags pa shor yong; 2) [arch] 'bags pa ste, skyon dang, tshos, tshon, dri ma sogs kyis 'go ba	dbags pa
དབང	1) thob thang, power, force, might, control, potency, influence, authority; 2) (CH) gna' dus go gnas shig; 3) (aabhishinytsa) scatter, pour [having scattered obscurations cleanse the continuum, and...	dbang
དབང་ཀུན་དགའ་ལེགས་པ	{dbang kun dga' legs pa [8th {phag gru sde srid khri rabs} earth dragon to fire ox year 9 years srid bskyangs, in the 8th earth ox chin hang rgyal po'i bka' 'brel dbang gi go sa thob]	dbang kun dga' legs pa
དབང་རྐྱེན	empowering condition [ggd]	dbang rkyen
དབང་སྐལ	faculties and particular fortune; to own, be destined to be in charge of	dbang skal
དབང་སྐལ་རང་ཉིད་ཀྱི	one's own faculties and particular fortune	dbang skal rang nyid kyi
དབང་སྐུར	confer consecration, SA dbang bskur	dbang skur
དབང་སྐུར་བསྐུར་བྱང་ངོ་སྐད	proclaim they are accomplished in Abhishekas	dbang skur bskur byang ngo skad
དབང་སྐུར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱུད	King of Empowerment Tantra	dbang skur rgyal po'i rgyud
དབང་སྐུར་དྲུག	the six empowerments CHN 1886	dbang skur drug
དབང་སྐུར་བ	consecrate, anoint with royalty	dbang skur ba
དབང་བསྐུར་རྒྱལ་པོ	anuyoga branch tantra, branch tantra of anuyoga	dbang bskur rgyal po
དབང་བསྐུར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱུད	King of Mastery Tantra	dbang bskur rgyal po'i rgyud
དབང་བསྐུར་ཆེན་པོ	great abhisheka	dbang bskur chen po
དབང་བསྐུར་ཆོ་གས་གསུམ	the three rites of abhisheka CHN	dbang bskur cho gsa gsum
དབང་བསྐུར་བདུན	the 7 abhishekas CHN	dbang bskur bdun
དབང་བསྐུར་བ	empower, initiate into, authorize, confer abhisheka, bestow empowerment	dbang bskur ba
དབང་བསྐུར་བའི་ཆོ	SA cho 'phrul rnam bzhi	dbang bskur ba'i cho
དབང་བསྐུར་བའི་ཆོ་ག་བརྒྱད	the 8 rituals of abhisheka CHN	dbang bskur ba'i cho ga brgyad
དབང་བསྐུར་བའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the miracle[s] of abhisheka	dbang bskur ba'i cho 'phrul
དབང་བསྐུར་བྱིན་རླབས	1 of 3 bka' drin	dbang bskur byin rlabs
དབང་བསྐུར་བྱིན་རླབས་བྱེད་པ	blessing and ordaining	dbang bskur byin rlabs byed pa
དབང་བསྐུར་རི	hill east of lhasa dbang bskur la mkho ba'i yo byad bcu	dbang bskur ri
དབང་ཁམ་དཀར་པོ	semen virile	dbang kham dkar po
དབང་ཁོངས	under the power/ jurisdiction/ authority of	dbang khongs
དབང་ཁྲིད	manuscript, letter of charms	dbang khrid
དབང་ཁྲིད་བཀའ་ལུང	empowerment, instruction, and recitation	dbang khrid bka' lung
དབང་ཁྲུས	ablution	dbang khrus
དབང་མཁན	owner	dbang mkhan
དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	mighty king, king of empowerments	dbang gi rgyal po
དབང་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	the lineage of empowerment	dbang gi brgyud pa
དབང་གི་དངོས་གཞིའི་ཆོ་ག	main /actual ritual of empowerment [among dbang bskur ba'i sbyor ba'i cho ga, of the mandala las rim, sgrub mchod, bdag 'jug empowering others]	dbang gi dngos gzhi'i cho ga
དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ	stream of empowerment	dbang gi chu bo
དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ་རྣམ་པར་དག	the completely pure stream of empowerment	dbang gi chu bo rnam par dag
དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞི	four rivers of empowerment. The four empowerments of the outer, the inner, the sadhana, and the secret are included within the four rivers of empowerment: the outer empowerment river of the water o...	dbang gi chu bo bzhi
དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞི་འདུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra that Embodies the Four Rivers of Empowerment	dbang gi chu bo bzhi 'dus kyi rgyud
དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞིའི་ཆག་བཤད	CHN	dbang gi chu bo bzhi'i chag bshad
དབང་གི་ཆོ་ག	liturgy of empowerment	dbang gi cho ga
དབང་གི་ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ	stages/ details of the liturgy of empowerment	dbang gi cho ga'i rim pa
དབང་གི་སྟ་གོན	'wang-prep,' empowerment preparation	dbang gi sta gon
དབང་གི་སྟོབས	power of attaining wishes	dbang gi stobs
དབང་གི་མཐའ་རྟེན	the support/ consolidation of abhisheka [pupils dbang thob par bka' drin gtang rag yon du offer a mandala and, promise to keep samaya, offer the three gates in service, dedicate the merit etc.	dbang gi mtha' rten
དབང་གི་མདོག་ཅན	maroon	dbang gi mdog can
དབང་གི་སྣོད་དུ་རུང་བ	a fit receptacle for the empowerments	dbang gi snod du rung ba
དབང་གི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the activity of controlling, magnetizing activity	dbang gi phrin las
དབང་གི་འཕྲིན་ལས	the activity of empowerment	dbang gi 'phrin las
དབང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	dominant result	dbang gi 'bras bu
དབང་གི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	magnetizing fire offering	dbang gi sbyin sreg
དབང་གི་སྦྱོར་བ	empowerment *, the union of abhisheka	dbang gi sbyor ba
དབང་གི་ལས	domineering activities	dbang gi las
དབང་གི་ལྷ	empowerment deity, devas of Abhisheka	dbang gi lha
དབང་གི་ལྷ་མོ	lha mo rig byed ma, devi of abhisheka	dbang gi lha mo
དབང་གིས	since, because. dbang-gis due to (the influence of)/ on account of/ through agency of; as a result, due to, because of, by the power of, by means of, by virtue of, due to, under the influence of	dbang gis
དབང་གིས་འགོག་པ	ornament showing some dgag bya 'gog byed de'i dge mtshan gyi gnas lugs mang du gshad pa'i mthar btsan shugs kyis 'gog pa, among 'gog pa'i rgyan	dbang gis 'gog pa
དབང་གིས་རྒྱུད་སྨིན	ripen his being through empowerment	dbang gis rgyud smin
དབང་གིས་རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པ	mature his mind through empowerments	dbang gis rgyud smin pa
དབང་གིས་གནོན་པ	overpower	dbang gis gnon pa
དབང་གིས་ལོག་ཞུགས	induced perverted engagement	dbang gis log zhugs
དབང་གོང་མ་གསུམ	the three higher empowerment	dbang gong ma gsum
དབང་གྱུར	have control of/ power over, gain or lose power	dbang gyur
དབང་གྱུར་པ	conditioned by	dbang gyur pa
དབང་གྲྭ	empowerment vases for the corners of the mandala	dbang grwa
དབང་གྲགས	power and fame dbang grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang	dbang grags
དབང་གྲགས་པ་འབྱུང་གནས	{dbang grags pa 'byung gnas}	dbang grags pa 'byung gnas
དབང་གྲལ	rows of those receiving abhisheka	dbang gral
དབང་འགྱུར	be under one's power	dbang 'gyur
དབང་རྒྱལ	the king of power	dbang rgyal
དབང་རྒྱལ་གྲལ་རིམ	ruling class	dbang rgyal gral rim
དབང་རྒྱས་པར་གནང	give the full empowerment	dbang rgyas par gnang
དབང་རྒྱས་པར་གནང་བ	give full abhisheka, bestow detailed empowerment	dbang rgyas par gnang ba
དབང་སྒ	{dbang sga} kind of saddle	dbang sga
དབང་སྒོ་དབྱེ་བ	open the door of the empowerment	dbang sgo dbye ba
དབང་སྒོ་གསལ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	rites to make object or person fit for consecration	dbang sgo gsal ba'i cho ga
དབང་སྒྱུར	kha lo sgyur ba, power, domination, rule	dbang sgyur
དབང་སྒྱུར་གོ་གནས	dominant/ ruling/ position/ status	dbang sgyur go gnas
དབང་སྒྱུར་གྲལ་རིམ	ruling class	dbang sgyur gral rim
དབང་སྒྱུར་བ	person in authority/ charge	dbang sgyur ba
དབང་སྒྱུར་ཚོགས་ཁག	ruling clique	dbang sgyur tshogs khag
དབང་སྒྱུར་འོག	under the [power, domination, rule, control] of	dbang sgyur 'og
དབང་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Indra, Shakra, "ruler of hundred sacrifices,"	dbang brgya byin
དབང་བརྒྱུད	lineage of empowerment, {dbang gi brgyud pa}	dbang brgyud
དབང་བསྒུར་མཛད་པ	empower, give abhisheka	dbang bsgur mdzad pa
དབང་བསྒྱུར	gdug rtsub can -	dbang bsgyur
དབང་བསྒྱུར་མཁན	the master [of.]	dbang bsgyur mkhan
དབང་བསྒྱུར་འཁོར་ལོའི་སྔགས་རྒྱ	the mantra and mudra of the wheel of mastery	dbang bsgyur 'khor lo'i sngags rgya
དབང་བསྒྱུར་འཁོར་ལོའི་ཕྱག	the mudra of the wheel of mastery [one of the {phyag rgya drug} -}-he six mudras (in rituals]	dbang bsgyur 'khor lo'i phyag
དབང་བསྒྱུར་གོ་གནས	dominant/ ruling/ position/ status	dbang bsgyur go gnas
དབང་བསྒྱུར་གྲལ་རིམ	ruling class	dbang bsgyur gral rim
དབང་བསྒྱུར་ཆེན་པོ	most powerful one	dbang bsgyur chen po
དབང་བསྒྱུར་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	the method vehicles of mastery, the vehicles of overpowering means {nang rgyud sde gsum},-{rgyud ma ha yo ga},{lung a nu yo ga}, {man ngag a ti yo ga}	dbang bsgyur thabs kyi theg pa
དབང་བསྒྱུར་བ	having mastery over	dbang bsgyur ba
དབང་བསྒྱུར་བ་པོ	one who controls, dominates	dbang bsgyur ba po
དབང་བསྒྱུར་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	overpowering conduct [in Anu Yoga]. One of {spyod pa gsum} 1888	dbang bsgyur ba'i spyod pa
དབང་བསྒྱུར་བྱས་པ	change by force	dbang bsgyur byas pa
དབང་བསྒྱུར་ཚོགས་ཁག	ruling clique	dbang bsgyur tshogs khag
དབང་བསྒྱུར་འོག	under the [power, domination, rule, control] of dbang ngag dbang bkra shis grags pa	dbang bsgyur 'og
དབང་མངོན	Syn {dbang po'i mngon sum}, direct sense perception	dbang mngon
དབང་མངོན་ལྔ	the five senseperceptions	dbang mngon lnga
དབང་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར	to realize mastery of	dbang mngon du gyur
དབང་མངོན་ཚད་མ	the pramana of sense perception [among perceptual pramana {mngon sum tshad ma}, rang gi extraordinary predominant condition from the material sense organs las arising free from conception, nonconfu...	dbang mngon tshad ma
དབང་ལྔ	five powers, {dad pa}, {brtson 'grus}, {dran pa}, {ting nge 'dzin}, {shes rab}. def. {rnam byang bskyed pa la dngos su dbang byed pa} 2) five empowerments	dbang lnga
དབང་སྔོན	sapphire	dbang sngon
དབང་ཅན	powerful, mighty	dbang can
དབང་བཅས་པ	concerning the faculties	dbang bcas pa
དབང་བཅུ	the 10 powers [of a bodhisattva] [at the time of being a sentient being rang dbang med par gnod pa bcu dang rgyun du ldan la as for bodhisattva possessing the antidote to that the 10 powers, the 10...	dbang bcu
དབང་བཅུ་མངའ་བ	possess the 10 powers	dbang bcu mnga' ba
དབང་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 empowerments	dbang bcu gcig
དབང་བཅུའི་མགོན་པོ	lord of the 10 powers	dbang bcu'i mgon po
དབང་ཆ	power, authority, power, ownership	dbang cha
དབང་ཆ་སྐྱུར	relinquish [power, dominion, authority, rights]	dbang cha skyur
དབང་ཆ་ཁྱབ་ཡུལ	jurisdiction	dbang cha khyab yul
དབང་ཆ་གཅིག་བདག	centralization/ monopolization of power	dbang cha gcig bdag
དབང་ཆ་གཅིག་སྡུད	centralization/ monopolization of power	dbang cha gcig sdud
དབང་ཆ་སྤྲད་པ	to give authority	dbang cha sprad pa
དབང་ཆ་སྤྲོད་པ	authorize, empower	dbang cha sprod pa
དབང་ཆ་ཚང་མ	full/ total power/ authority dbang cha tshang ma yod pa'i sku tshab representative plenipotentiary / w full/ total power/ authority	dbang cha tshang ma
དབང་ཆ་བཞག་པ	to give up authority	dbang cha bzhag pa
དབང་ཆ་གཤམ་སྤྲོད	transfer/ delegation of authority to lower levels dbang cha sogs khungs so sor sprod pa decentralize	dbang cha gsham sprod
དབང་ཆགས་པ	to maintain the empowerments	dbang chags pa
དབང་ཆའི་བཀའ་རྒྱ	warrant	dbang cha'i bka' rgya
དབང་ཆས	empowerment articles, abhisheka implements	dbang chas
དབང་ཆུའི་བབས་ལུགས	transmission of the stream of empowerment	dbang chu'i babs lugs
དབང་ཆེ་བ	powerful	dbang che ba
དབང་ཆེན	1) great power; 2) river; 3) in anuttara tantra great divine/ tantric empowerment chen po; 4) (abbr of -{gser gyi sa gzhi} the mighty golden base; 5) {rta mgrin he ru ka}/ Hayagriva, the Mighty 1	dbang chen
དབང་ཆེན་ཁྲག་མཐུང	herukas of great power	dbang chen khrag mthung
དབང་ཆེན་གེ་ཁོད	bon deity	dbang chen ge khod
དབང་ཆེན་གྲོང	cataract, hill stream	dbang chen grong
དབང་ཆེན་དགྱེས་རབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Wangchen Gyerab Dorje [thd]	dbang chen dgyes rab rdo rje
དབང་ཆེན་བཅད་ཀྱི་ཁྲིམས	five khrims yig written ny king srong btsan sgam po: bden rdzun dbye 'byed skabs gnyis kas lan na pass sentence =ly on both	dbang chen bcad kyi khrims
དབང་ཆེན་རྟ་སྐད་འཚེར	The great neigher lord Hayagriva	dbang chen rta skad 'tsher
དབང་ཆེན་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Embodiment of Great Power Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga tantras	dbang chen 'dus pa'i rgyud
དབང་ཆེན་སྡེ	legendary king who was buddha in a previous existence	dbang chen sde
དབང་ཆེན་པོ	the great power	dbang chen po
དབང་ཆེན་དབང་མེད	by 1 who has dominion gyis to 1 w/o thub tshod btang ba or brnyas bcos byas pa	dbang chen dbang med
དབང་ཆེན་མ	epithet of queen of indra, name of brgya byin ma	dbang chen ma
དབང་ཆེན་མཚན	(met ocean	dbang chen mtshan
དབང་ཆེན་རན་པ	SA gshed nag	dbang chen ran pa
དབང་ཆེན་གསེར་གྱི་ས་གཞི	right golden ground	dbang chen gser gyi sa gzhi
དབང་ཆེས་པས	being very powerful	dbang ches pas
དབང་ཆོག	empowerment ritual, ceremony; empowerment ritual / text / manual; empowerment manual, Abhisheka ritual, empowerment liturgy, 1889 empowerment ritual; ritual for bestowing the initiation (abhisheka)	dbang chog
དབང་ཆོག་སོ་དྲུག	36 empowerments of anu yoga [10 outer {phyi yi dbang	dbang chog so drug
དབང་ཆོར	senses and feelings	dbang chor
དབང་ཆོས	{dbang chos kyi 'brel ba ma zhus pa'i gong du} before becoming committed to him through empowerments and teachings	dbang chos
དབང་མཆོག	supreme capacity	dbang mchog
དབང་མཆོག་རྡོ་རྗེ	Wangchok Dorje A son of Chokgyur Lingpa	dbang mchog rdo rje
དབང་འཆོར་བ	to loose control over one's senses	dbang 'chor ba
དབང་རྗས	empowerment entitles	dbang rjas
དབང་ཉེར་གཉིས	the 22 ruling faculties	dbang nyer gnyis
དབང་གཏད	grant power	dbang gtad
དབང་གཏད་པ	dbang cha sprad pa,//'dri gcod pa la 'dri gcod las don gyi dbang gtad pa,/	dbang gtad pa
དབང་བཏང	to fall prey to, under the power of, be governed by, absorbed by, fall subject to	dbang btang
དབང་རྟ་བརྒྱད	8 miraculous horses near lake mapham seen in a vision	dbang rta brgyad
དབང་རྟུལ	dull faculties	dbang rtul
དབང་རྟེན	faculty support, sense basis [physical sense organ that supports the inner subtle sense faculty, the dbang po, nadis for the sense faculties]	dbang rten
དབང་རྟེན་ལྔ	the five dbang rten [nam mkha'i rten, rlung gi rten, me'i rten, chu'i rten, sa'i rten ]	dbang rten lnga
དབང་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	big shot	dbang stobs chen po
དབང་བརྟན	firm strength	dbang brtan
དབང་བརྟུལ	dull powers/ senses	dbang brtul
དབང་བརྟུལ་ལ་སྤྱི་དོན	general meaning for people of dull faculties	dbang brtul la spyi don
དབང་ཐག་གཅོད	take responsibility	dbang thag gcod
དབང་ཐང	power, domain, good fortune, authentic presence	dbang thang
དབང་ཐང་སྐྱེད	growth of wealth and power	dbang thang skyed
དབང་ཐང་གི་ལྷ	deities of the dbang thang	dbang thang gi lha
དབང་ཐང་ཆེ་བ	great fortune	dbang thang che ba
དབང་ཐང་ཆེན་བ	one in abundance, in plenty, possessed of wealth and power	dbang thang chen ba
དབང་ཐང་མེད་པ	having no particular destiny	dbang thang med pa
དབང་ཐད	power, authentic presence	dbang thad
དབང་ཐུལ	tame the senses/faculties	dbang thul
དབང་ཐོབ	receive empowerment, obtain power/ authority over	dbang thob
དབང་ཐོབ་པ	to master; attainment of power over	dbang thob pa
དབང་མཐོ་བ	of high power or ability	dbang mtho ba
དབང་དང་དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ	obtained the empowerments and siddhis	dbang dang dngos grub thob
དབང་དང་དངོས་གྲུབ་སྩོལ	bestow empowerments and siddhis!	dbang dang dngos grub stsol
དབང་དུ	to be subjected to	dbang du
དབང་དུ་གྱི་མི་གཏོང་པར	don't be governed by	dbang du gyi mi gtong par
དབང་དུ་གྱུར	overpowered, made subservient	dbang du gyur
དབང་དུ་གྱུར་ན	. . . gi dbang du (')gyur	dbang du gyur na
དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	became subjected, subdued, brought or come under one's power	dbang du gyur pa
དབང་དུ་གྱུར་བ	gain mastery	dbang du gyur ba
དབང་དུ་འགྱུར	{... gi-dbang-du 'gyur-na} if one falls under the sway/ influence of ..	dbang du 'gyur
དབང་དུ་འགྱུར་ན	. . . gi dbang du (')gyur	dbang du 'gyur na
དབང་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	get into another's power, be overpowered	dbang du 'gyur ba
དབང་དུ་འགྲོ	to be controlled, under the power of	dbang du 'gro
དབང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to be caught up in	dbang du 'gro ba
དབང་དུ་སྒྱུར	control, master, govern, rule, dominate	dbang du sgyur
དབང་དུ་སྒྱུར་བ	control	dbang du sgyur ba
དབང་དུ་བསྒྱུར་བ	to overpower	dbang du bsgyur ba
དབང་དུ་བཏང	present an example, cha bzhag pa, fall	dbang du btang
དབང་དུ་བཏང་ན	"hypothetical" construction	dbang du btang na
དབང་དུ་བཏང་ནའང	even if, even though	dbang du btang na'ang
དབང་དུ་བཏང་བ	falling under the power of	dbang du btang ba
དབང་དུ་བཏང་བའི་གནས་སྐབས	assumed/ hypothetical situation, situation presented as example	dbang du btang ba'i gnas skabs
དབང་དུ་འདུ་བ	to possess power over, have control over, bring under one's power, influence, magnetize, conquest over	dbang du 'du ba
དབང་དུ་འདུས	conquest	dbang du 'dus
དབང་དུ་འདུས་པ	conquest over, to have control over	dbang du 'dus pa
དབང་དུ་སྡུ་བ	subdue, subjugate, vanquish	dbang du sdu ba
དབང་དུ་སྡུད	conquest/ [have] control over, conquer	dbang du sdud
དབང་དུ་སྡུད་པ	bring under one's power, subject, subdue	dbang du sdud pa
དབང་དུ་བསྡུ	to bring under power, to dominate, conquer	dbang du bsdu
དབང་དུ་བསྡུ་བ	annex, conquer	dbang du bsdu ba
དབང་དུ་བསྡུས	became ruler	dbang du bsdus
དབང་དུ་བསྡུས་པ	subjugated	dbang du bsdus pa
དབང་དུ་ཕྱིན	be influenced by	dbang du phyin
དབང་དུ་བྱས	in terms of, from the point of view of	dbang du byas
དབང་དུ་བྱས་ཀྱི	was made in terms of	dbang du byas kyi
དབང་དུ་བྱས་ན	{gnas ris so so'i dbang du byas na} in terms of the individual realms	dbang du byas na
དབང་དུ་བྱས་པ	to concern	dbang du byas pa
དབང་དུ་བྱེད་པ	SA dbang du sdud pa	dbang du byed pa
དབང་དུ་མི་བཏང	do not be absorbed by	dbang du mi btang
དབང་དུ་མི་འབྲང	not caught up in it, not fall under its power	dbang du mi 'brang
དབང་དུ་མཛད	in terms of	dbang du mdzad
དབང་དུ་མཛོད་པ་ཉིད	scope	dbang du mdzod pa nyid
དབང་དུ་འཛིན	conquest/ [have] control over, conquer	dbang du 'dzin
དབང་དུ་ཤོར	to fall under the power, influence of 2) ATG: to be overpowered by. [mss]	dbang du shor
དབང་དུ་ཤོར་ན	with respect to, as regards, in reference to, as concerning	dbang du shor na
དབང་དུ་སོང	passed into the power, came into the power of	dbang du song
དབང་དུ་སོང་བ	Under the influence of	dbang du song ba
དབང་དུ་སོང་བ་འཁྲུལ་པ	be taken over by confusion, come under the power of	dbang du song ba 'khrul pa
དབང་དུང	brass tube trumpet	dbang dung
དབང་དུས་སུ	at the moment of the initiation	dbang dus su
དབང་དོན	1 objects of the five senses [gzugs sgra dri ro reg bya; 2) faculties and objects; 3) meaning/ benefits of abhisheka	dbang don
དབང་དོན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom that is the nature of the empowerment	dbang don gyi ye shes
དབང་དོན་བཅུ	the 10 faculties and objects	dbang don bcu
དབང་དྲག	enchantment & destruction, subjugating & wrathful actions	dbang drag
དབང་དྲུག	six empowerments according to Yoga tantra (book 1	dbang drug
དབང་མདོན་ལྔ	the five sense perceptions CHN	dbang mdon lnga
དབང་མདོར་བསྟན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བ	commentary briefly teaching about the empowerment	dbang mdor bstan gyi 'grel ba
དབང་འདུས	a district in tsang	dbang 'dus
དབང་འདུས་ཕོ་བྲང	{dbang 'dus pho brang}, Bhutan [palace]	dbang 'dus pho brang
དབང་འདུས་རྫོང	fort in district in tsang	dbang 'dus rdzong
དབང་ལྡན	powerful	dbang ldan
དབང་ལྡན་གྱི་ཕྱོགས	the north-east quarter	dbang ldan gyi phyogs
དབང་ལྡན་བགེགས་ཀྱི་གླུད་མདོས	mdos of ransom from the powerful bgegs	dbang ldan bgegs kyi glud mdos
དབང་ལྡན་མ	kind of presentation scarf	dbang ldan ma
དབང་ལྡན་མེ་ཏོག་མེ་འོད་གསལ	fancied world believed to exist to the west of this world	dbang ldan me tog me 'od gsal
དབང་སྡན	powerful	dbang sdan
དབང་སྡུད	to magnetize, bring under one's power, magnetizing, [pulled in through bodhichitta]	dbang sdud
དབང་སྡུད་ཟིལ་གནོན	controlling through splendor	dbang sdud zil gnon
དབང་སྡུད་རིང་ལུགས	centralism	dbang sdud ring lugs
དབང་སྡུད་ལས་ཀྱི་བརྣག་པ	tantra of the ferocity of the action of conquest	dbang sdud las kyi brnag pa
དབང་སྡེམ་རིང་ལུགས	totalitarianism 1891	dbang sdem ring lugs
དབང་བསྡུ	1) by effort master; 2) collect abhishekas	dbang bsdu
དབང་གནད	key point of the senses	dbang gnad
དབང་རྣོན	sharp faculties	dbang rnon
དབང་རྣོན་པོ	sharp faculties, keen wits, sharp minded, intelligent	dbang rnon po
དབང་རྣོན་ལ་སྤྱི་དོན	general meaning for people of sharp faculties	dbang rnon la spyi don
དབང་སྣོན	perceptive	dbang snon
དབང་པ	conquering	dbang pa
དབང་པོ་བཀྲ་བ	name of a medicine	dbang po bkra ba
དབང་པོ་སྐྱོན་ཅན	defective sense organ	dbang po skyon can
དབང་པོ་དགུ	the 9 powers included in the continuums of the noble ones	dbang po dgu
དབང་པོ་སྒོ་ལྔ	the five sense faculties	dbang po sgo lnga
དབང་པོ་སྒོ་ལྔ་ཚང	with five unimpaired senses	dbang po sgo lnga tshang
དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	1) Indra, shakra, "ruler of 100 sacrifices"; 2) the buddha in the realm of devas	dbang po brgya byin
དབང་པོ་མངོན་སུམ	direct sense perception	dbang po mngon sum
དབང་པོ་ལྔ	1) the five senses w form; 2) rnam byang dbang po lnga; 3) kun nyon gyi dbang po lnga; 4) the five controlling powers	dbang po lnga
དབང་པོ་ལྔ་དང་དོན་ལྔ	the five senses and five objects	dbang po lnga dang don lnga
དབང་པོ་ལྔའི་ཁྱད་པར་གསུམ	CHN	dbang po lnga'i khyad par gsum
དབང་པོ་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	dbang po bcu gcig
དབང་པོ་ཆེ	master	dbang po che
དབང་པོ་མཆོག	best capacity dbang po mchog dang mchog ma yin pa	dbang po mchog
དབང་པོ་མཆོག་རབ	supreme capacities	dbang po mchog rab
དབང་པོ་འཆོར་བ	loose control over one's senses	dbang po 'chor ba
དབང་པོ་ཉམས	weakened senses, dull senses	dbang po nyams
དབང་པོ་ཉམས་པ	weakened senses, dull, old, decrepit, one devoid of procreative power	dbang po nyams pa
དབང་པོ་ཉེར་གཉིས	the 22 ruling faculties [R rten gyi dbang po bdun dang, rten can gyi dbang po gnyis dang, tshor ba'i dbang po lnga dang, rnam byang gi dbang po lnga dang, zag med kyi dbang po gsum]	dbang po nyer gnyis
དབང་པོ་གཉིས་སྦྱོར་བ	united the two sexes copulate	dbang po gnyis sbyor ba
དབང་པོ་རྟུལ	dull [faculties/ senses/ powers], insensitive	dbang po rtul
དབང་པོ་རྟུལ་པོ	dull faculties	dbang po rtul po
དབང་པོ་རྟུལ་པོ་རྣོན་པོར་འཕོས་པ	dull faculties transforming into sharper ones	dbang po rtul po rnon por 'phos pa
དབང་པོ་རྟེན་བཅས	faculty with support	dbang po rten bcas
དབང་པོ་བརྟུལ་རྣོ	dull or sharp faculties	dbang po brtul rno
དབང་པོ་བརྟུལ་པོ	weaker capacity; dull acumen	dbang po brtul po
དབང་པོ་ཐ་དད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicles for those of different powers	dbang po tha dad kyi theg pa
དབང་པོ་ཐ་མ	individuals with inferior capacities	dbang po tha ma
དབང་པོ་ཐ་ཤལ	inferior capacity dbang po thams cad tshim par byed pa pleasing all the senses	dbang po tha shal
དབང་པོ་ཐུལ་བ	rishi, ascetic, one with capacities, controlled, one who has brought his passions under his control	dbang po thul ba
དབང་པོ་དང་ཉེ་དབང	the main and subsidiary powers CHN	dbang po dang nye dbang
དབང་པོ་དང་བསྟུན་ནས	according to one's capacity	dbang po dang bstun nas
དབང་པོ་དང་བསྟུན་པ	according to one's faculties	dbang po dang bstun pa
དབང་པོ་དོན་ལྔ	the five sense objects	dbang po don lnga
དབང་པོ་དྲུག	six sense objects	dbang po drug
དབང་པོ་དྲུག་ཚང་བ	unimpaired sense faculties	dbang po drug tshang ba
དབང་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་བ	King Vajra Bearer	dbang po rdo rje 'chang ba
དབང་པོ་བསྡུས་པ	composed of sense faculties	dbang po bsdus pa
དབང་པོ་བསྡུས་པའི་རྒྱང་ཞགས	farreacher composed of the sense faculty	dbang po bsdus pa'i rgyang zhags
དབང་པོ་ནུས་པ	sensory capacities	dbang po nus pa
དབང་པོ་རྣོ	sharp faculties	dbang po rno
དབང་པོ་རྣོ་རྟུལ	sharp and dull powers CHN	dbang po rno rtul
དབང་པོ་རྣོ་རྟུལ་གཉིས	sharp and dull powers CHN	dbang po rno rtul gnyis
དབང་པོ་རྣོ་བ	to have sharp intelligence	dbang po rno ba
དབང་པོ་རྣོ་བ་ཉིད	sharpness	dbang po rno ba nyid
དབང་པོ་རྣོན་པོ	keen acumen; sharp faculties, intelligent, keen faculties, keen wits, sharp minded, intelligent	dbang po rnon po
དབང་པོ་རྣོན་པོའི་དབང་བྱས་པ	it is for those with sharp faculties dbang po rnon po'i dbang byas pa meant for those of highest acumen	dbang po rnon po'i dbang byas pa
དབང་པོ་ཕྱིར་སློང	feign	dbang po phyir slong
དབང་པོ་ཕྱིར་སློང་པར་བྱེད་པ	dissemble	dbang po phyir slong par byed pa
དབང་པོ་བར་མ	intermediate capacities	dbang po bar ma
དབང་པོ་འབྲིང	intermediate capacities	dbang po 'bring
དབང་པོ་འབྲིང་པོ	moderate capacity, middling acumen	dbang po 'bring po
དབང་པོ་མ་ཙང	not to have all sense faculties intact	dbang po ma tsang
དབང་པོ་མ་ཚང་བ	having deficient faculties	dbang po ma tshang ba
དབང་པོ་དམན་པ	of lesser capacity	dbang po dman pa
དབང་པོ་ཚང	complete faculties	dbang po tshang
དབང་པོ་ཚང་བ	to have unimpaired faculties	dbang po tshang ba
དབང་པོ་ཚོགས་དྲུག	six aggregates	dbang po tshogs drug
དབང་པོ་ཞན	weakened capacity	dbang po zhan
དབང་པོ་གཞན་ལ་རག་མ་ལུས་པ	not depend on any other power	dbang po gzhan la rag ma lus pa
དབང་པོ་བཞི	Four Sense-Organs. The eye {mig gi dbang po} or cakshur indriya. ear {rna ba'i dbang po} nose {rna'i dbang po} and tongue {lce'i dbang po}	dbang po bzhi
དབང་པོ་ཟུང་སྦྱོར	joining the organs (met sex	dbang po zung sbyor
དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན་པ	the sense organs having form [rang 'bras dbang shes kyi extraordinary predominant condition producing rigs su gnas pa'i nang gi gzugs can dvangs pa]	dbang po gzugs can pa
དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན་པ་ལྔ	the five sense organs with form [mig gi dbang po, rna ba'i.. sna'i.., lce'i.., lus kyi.. vs. mind organ]	dbang po gzugs can pa lnga
དབང་པོ་འི་ཤེས་པ	sensory cognition	dbang po 'i shes pa
དབང་པོ་ཡང་རབ	very highest acumen	dbang po yang rab
དབང་པོ་ཡིས	by the power	dbang po yis
དབང་པོ་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of possessing the sense faculties	dbang po yon tan gyi 'byor pa
དབང་པོ་རབ	highest acumen	dbang po rab
དབང་པོ་རབ་རྣབས	those of the highest capacity	dbang po rab rnabs
དབང་པོ་རབ་རྣམས	those of the highest capacity	dbang po rab rnams
དབང་པོ་རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ	superior, moderate, and inferior capability	dbang po rab 'bring tha ma
དབང་པོ་རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་གསུམ	superior, moderate, and inferior capability [of mind etc]	dbang po rab 'bring tha gsum
དབང་པོ་རི	Gesar's temple	dbang po ri
དབང་པོ་རིལ་བུ	1) {dbang po ril bu rtsi med. [bitter-sweet, body heat neutral, by its power sbyar dug dang gyur dug sogs dug nad kun 'joms, bad kan smug po dang, mchin nad sel]; 2) pills made from elephant, peaco...	dbang po ril bu
དབང་པོ་ལག་པ	field herb med.	dbang po lag pa
དབང་པོ་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	erection of the penis	dbang po las su rung ba
དབང་པོ་ཤོར་བ	lose 1's senses through impairment [sdug myangs rkyen gyis dbang po shor ba]	dbang po shor ba
དབང་པོ་གསུམ	dbang po rnon po dang, 'bring dang, brtul po'o	dbang po gsum
དབང་པོ་གསོ་བ	revive the senses	dbang po gso ba
དབང་པོའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	lus, the sense ayatanas	dbang po'i skye mched
དབང་པོའི་ཁམས་ལྔ	five elements of the sense faculties, as of the eighteen elements, sense faculties	dbang po'i khams lnga
དབང་པོའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six sense faculty elements, {rten gyi khams drug}	dbang po'i khams drug
དབང་པོའི་ཁྱད་པར	according to one's capacity	dbang po'i khyad par
དབང་པོའི་གྲོལ་ལུགས	the way people of different capacities are liberated	dbang po'i grol lugs
དབང་པོའི་དགྲ	asura, enemies of indra	dbang po'i dgra
དབང་པོའི་སྒོ	the sense doors [the five senses, body, speech and mind, etc.]	dbang po'i sgo
དབང་པོའི་སྒོ་ལྔ	the five sense doors	dbang po'i sgo lnga
དབང་པོའི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	superknowledge of sense faculties	dbang po'i mngon par shes pa
དབང་པོའི་མངོན་སུམ	sense, direct perceiver, sensory knowledge, 1 of rnal 'byor mngon sum	dbang po'i mngon sum
བཡ་ཐེ་སེནསེ	organs, sense direct perceiver, sense direct perception [among the {mngon sum bzhi}, arising from rang gi dominant condition the sense organs with form, free from conception, non- confused gzhan ri...	by the sense
པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེནསེ	organs	perception of the sense
དབང་པོའི་མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ	the validity of direct sense perception	dbang po'i mngon sum tshad ma
དབང་པོའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	roof/ top of the sky	dbang po'i rdo rje
དབང་པོའི་སྡོམ་པ	faculty vow; Mipham Rinpoche: {yid dang dbang shes kyi 'khor du byung ba'i dran pa dang shes bzhin la yid dang dbang po'i sdom pa zhes pa'i tha snyad mdzad do} Mindfulness and alertness, which occu...	dbang po'i sdom pa
དབང་པོའི་གནས	female genitals	dbang po'i gnas
དབང་པོའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	sense consciousness/ perception	dbang po'i rnam par shes pa
དབང་པོའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	sense perceiver	dbang po'i rnam shes
དབང་པོའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་སྣ་ཚོགས	the various fields of the senses	dbang po'i spyod yul sna tshogs
དབང་པོའི་ཕྱོགས	E	dbang po'i phyogs
དབང་པོའི་མེའི་དུ་བ	khug sna	dbang po'i me'i du ba
དབང་པོའི་མཚོན	rainbow	dbang po'i mtshon
དབང་པོའི་གཞུ	Bow of Indra. Poetical name for a rainbow	dbang po'i gzhu
དབང་པོའི་ཡུལ	sphere of cognition, anything of the senses, evident or clearly perceived	dbang po'i yul
དབང་པོའི་ཡུལ་དུ་སྣང་ཚད	whatever appears in the sense field	dbang po'i yul du snang tshad
དབང་པོའི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the realm of the senses	dbang po'i yul las 'das pa
དབང་པོའི་རིམ་པ	'bring po, rnon po), levels of capability	dbang po'i rim pa
དབང་པོའི་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	three stages of sense organs (rtul po	dbang po'i rim pa gsum
དབང་པོའི་རིམ་པས	according to the practitioner's capacity	dbang po'i rim pas
དབང་པོའི་རིམས་པ	levels of capacity	dbang po'i rims pa
དབང་པོའི་ལག་པ	same as above	dbang po'i lag pa
དབང་པོའི་ཤིང་བལ	rainbow, colors of the rainbow	dbang po'i shing bal
དབང་པོའི་ཤེས་པ	sensory cognition, sense consciousnesses 1894	dbang po'i shes pa
དབང་པོའི་སོག	avenue/ experience of the senses	dbang po'i sog
དབང་པོའི་གསལ	lamp, light, that which clears the sight	dbang po'i gsal
དབང་པོར་སྐྱོན་ཤོར	crippled, disabled	dbang por skyon shor
དབང་པོར་འགྲོ	semen virile	dbang por 'gro
དབང་པོར་མདོན་སུམ	sense perception	dbang por mdon sum
དབང་སྤྲད	empower, turn over power/ authority	dbang sprad
དབང་ཕྱག་མ	wife of mahadeva, epithet of goddess durga	dbang phyag ma
བཡ་སོམེ་ནོན	Buddhist to be the creator of the world. 2) Lord, sovereign, allmighty, Maheshvara, Ishvara, God, as creator. lordship, ex. {rnal 'byor gyi dbang phug} the lord of the yogis. 3) the 11th year of {r...	by some non
དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་རྒྱུ	the cause of mastery	dbang phyug gi rgyu
དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱད	the 8 qualities of mastery CHN	dbang phyug gi yon tan brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་གོ་ཆ	{dbang phyug go cha} [Indian grammarian]	dbang phyug go cha
དབང་ཕྱུག་གྲུབ་པ	{kong ston}	dbang phyug grub pa
དབང་ཕྱུག་བརྒྱད	8 qualities of mastery	dbang phyug brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་བཅུ	ten sovereign powers	dbang phyug bcu
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆུང་བ	direction protector of the NE	dbang phyug chung ba
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ	maheshvara (who resides on top of mount kailas with 8 attributes (phra, yang, rab thob, rab 'don, mchod 'os, dbang phyug, dbang du bsgyur, 'dod dgur bsgyur)	dbang phyug chen po
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉི་ཤུ	leopard-headed Mahadevi,	dbang phyug nyi shu
ཝེཨསེལ	headed Lobha,	weasel
སྣཀེ	headed Brahmi, snow bearheaded Kumari, brown bear-headed Indrani; south - bat-headed Vajra,	snake
མཀར	headed Santi, scorpion-headed Amrta, hawk-headed Candra, wolfheaded Danda, tiger-headed Raksasi;	makara
ཝེསཏ	vulture-headed Bhaksini, horseheaded Rati, eagle-headed Mahabala,	west
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉི་ཤུ་བརྒྱད	twentyeight Isvaris (east - yak-headed Raksasi	dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 28 Ishvaris; {dbang phyug ma nyer brgyad}	dbang phyug nyi shu rtsa brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉིད་རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 aspects of mastery CHN	dbang phyug nyid rnam pa brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	twenty-eight Ishvaris; also among the {lhag mgron} residual guests	dbang phyug nyer brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་མཐོ	exalted, uplifted, glorified, sublime, attained the summit	dbang phyug mtho
དབང་ཕྱུག་ལྡན	1 of 7 mtho ris kyi yon tan	dbang phyug ldan
དབང་ཕྱུག་པ	Followers of Ishvara; worshippers of Shiva; Shaiva, Shaivite, a follower of Shiva; Aishvara	dbang phyug pa
དབང་ཕྱུག་བ	Ishvara, rule, dominate, be capable mastery, power over	dbang phyug ba
དབང་ཕྱུག་བུ་གཉིས	tshogs bdag and gdong drug	dbang phyug bu gnyis
དབང་ཕྱུག་འབྱོར	rule, master, acquire mastery, attain power over	dbang phyug 'byor
དབང་ཕྱུག་འབྱོར་བའི་གཟུགས	mastered forms, {rnam rig min pa'i gzugs} unperceived forms	dbang phyug 'byor ba'i gzugs
དབང་ཕྱུག་འབྲས	dominant result	dbang phyug 'bras
དབང་ཕྱུག་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	bestow mastery	dbang phyug sbyin par byed pa
དབང་ཕྱུག་མ	powerful lady	dbang phyug ma
དབང་ཕྱུག་མ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 28 Ishvaris	dbang phyug ma nyi shu rtsa brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་མ་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	Twentyeight Shvara goddesses. Wrathful emanations of the four female gate keepers among the 42 peaceful deities in the mandala of Magical Net; seven for each of the four activities	dbang phyug ma nyer brgyad
དབང་ཕྱུག་མ་ཧ་དེ་ལྦ	secret meaning in	dbang phyug ma ha de lba
དབང་ཕྱུག་མེད་པ	helpless, powerless, against one's will	dbang phyug med pa
དབང་ཕྱུག་བཙན	power	dbang phyug btsan
དབང་ཕྱུག་རྩ	nerve, nadi for the sense faculties	dbang phyug rtsa
དབང་ཕྱུག་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	SA lo re pa	dbang phyug brtson 'grus
དབང་ཕྱུག་རྫོགས་པར་ཞུས	received the complete empowerment, abhisheka	dbang phyug rdzogs par zhus
དབང་ཕྱུག་གཞུའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས	rainbow leggings	dbang phyug gzhu'i smad dkris
དབང་ཕྱུག་བཞི	the four abhishekas	dbang phyug bzhi
དབང་ཕྱུག་བཞེངས་བཞུགས	grub pa'i khyim slebs nyin gyi res gza' dang byed pa'i lo bdag la brten pa'i khyim gza' gnyis mang nyung la dpad nas gnam gshis dang, sa g.yo, bde sdug sogs brtag thabs	dbang phyug bzhengs bzhugs
དབང་ཕྱུགས	Almighty, Ishvara, lord, [thd]	dbang phyugs
དབང་ཕྱུགས་ནག་པོའི་རྒྱུད་དྲུག་ཅུ་པ་སི྾ཏཡ	fold Tantra of Ishvarakala [thd]	dbang phyugs nag po'i rgyud drug cu pa Sixty
དབང་ཕྱུགས་པ	opulent, wealthy	dbang phyugs pa
དབང་ཕྱོགས	mar ngo	dbang phyogs
དབང་བ	power, SA dbang, mastery, capable, control, possess, magnetizing, 1 of 4 'phrin las bzhi, owner	dbang ba
དབང་བ་བཅུ	the 10 powers CHN	dbang ba bcu
དབང་བ་ཉིད	power, mastery, empowerment	dbang ba nyid
དབང་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	system of ownership[[thon skyed rgyu chas su la dbang ba'i lam lugs yin zhing, de ni thon skyed kyi 'brel ba'i rmang gzhi yin]	dbang ba'i lam lugs
དབང་བའི་ས་འདིར་མ་སྡོད	will not find any place to stay here in my kingdom	dbang ba'i sa 'dir ma sdod
དབང་བར་འགྱུར	be owned/ in possession of	dbang bar 'gyur
དབང་བར་བྱ	{lha mi'i sa thams cad nga rang gcig dbang bar bya} I myself alone am master over all the lands of gods and men	dbang bar bya
དབང་བུམ	empowerment vases [for the corners of the mandala]	dbang bum
དབང་བོ	lord powerful	dbang bo
དབང་བྱས་པ	to be used	dbang byas pa
དབང་བྱེད	govern	dbang byed
དབང་བྱེད་བདག	'dod lha, Kamadeva	dbang byed bdag
དབང་བྱེད་པ	to master	dbang byed pa
དབང་བྱེད་པའི་དོན	meaning of mastery, mastered meaning/ benefit/ objects	dbang byed pa'i don
དབང་བྲལ	w/o power/ control/ choice/ freedom/ abhisheka	dbang bral
དབང་བླང་བ	receive empowerment	dbang blang ba
དབང་བློན	las don dbang sgyur gyi blon po,/	dbang blon
དབང་འབྱོར	[acquire] mastery, rule, master, powerful masterful	dbang 'byor
དབང་འབྱོར་ཉིད་ཐོབ	attain mastery	dbang 'byor nyid thob
དབང་འབྱོར་པ	attain mastery, produced by 1 who has attained meditative power	dbang 'byor pa
དབང་འབྱོར་པ་ཉིད་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	rely on mastery	dbang 'byor pa nyid la brten pa
དབང་འབྱོར་པ་རྙེད་པ	attain mastery	dbang 'byor pa rnyed pa
དབང་འབྱོར་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attain mastery	dbang 'byor pa thob pa
དབང་འབྱོར་པའི་རྒྱུ	the cause of mastery	dbang 'byor pa'i rgyu
དབང་འབྱོར་པའི་དབང	the power of mastery	dbang 'byor pa'i dbang
དབང་འབྱོར་པའི་དབང་གིས	ph by the power of mastery	dbang 'byor pa'i dbang gis
དབང་འབྱོར་པའི་གཟུགས	mastered forms [among the {chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs lnga}, by dhyana la dbang 'byor ba'i power exhaust the forms of appearance like sngon po etc., {rnam rig min pa'i gzugs}-- like the earth a...	dbang 'byor pa'i gzugs
ཨོཕ༹་ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་སཻད་ཏོ་བེ་ཨིལླུསིཨོན	like]	of which is said to be illusion
དབང་འབྱོར་པོ་ཉིད	mastery	dbang 'byor po nyid
དབང་འབྱོར་བ	lordship	dbang 'byor ba
དབང་འབྱོར་བའི་གཟུགས	mastered forms, {rnam rig min pa'i gzugs}	dbang 'byor ba'i gzugs
དབང་འབྱོར་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་མི་ཟད་པ	the inexhaustible wisdom of mastery	dbang 'byor ba'i ye shes mi zad pa
དབང་འབྲས	dominant result, [Syn {dbang gi 'bras bu}	dbang 'bras
དབང་འབྲིང	{dbang po 'bring po} middling acumen	dbang 'bring
དབང་སྦྱོར	attain sovereignty	dbang sbyor
དབང་མ	nadi petals of the heart chakra snying kha'i rtsa 'khor gyi 'dab ma zhig	dbang ma
དབང་མེད	helplessly, disobedient, out of power, out of control, powerless, involuntary, without spiritual power, no chance but to, no way not to, (with preceding negative verb)	dbang med
དབང་མེད་རྗེས་བྲང་པ	unwilling follower/ member	dbang med rjes brang pa
དབང་མེད་དུ	against my will, helplessly, w/o power/ control/ choice/ freedom/ abhisheka,forcefully, powerlessly, irresistibly	dbang med du
དབང་མེད་དུ་འཚོལ་བ	make a person powerless	dbang med du 'tshol ba
དབང་མེད་པ	helpless, powerless, against one's will	dbang med pa
དབང་མེད་མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་གྱོ	I was unable to contain may tears dbang med mig nas mchi ma g.yo - I was unable to contain may tears	dbang med mig nas mchi ma gyo
དབང་མེད་གཞན་བྲང་པ	unwilling follower/ member	dbang med gzhan brang pa
དབང་མེད་སྲིད་གཞུང	puppet government	dbang med srid gzhung
དབང་མོ	lord, powerful	dbang mo
དབང་མོ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	the 28 Ishvaris	dbang mo nyi shu rtsa brgyad
དབང་བཙན	force; power	dbang btsan
དབང་རྩ	nerve	dbang rtsa
དབང་རྩ་འཁྲུག	nervous breakdown 1896	dbang rtsa 'khrug
དབང་རྩ་ཉམས	nervous breakdown	dbang rtsa nyams
དབང་རྩའི་ལྟེ་གནད	nerve center	dbang rtsa'i lte gnad
དབང་རྩའི་ནད	neurosis	dbang rtsa'i nad
དབང་རྩའི་མ་ལག	nervous system	dbang rtsa'i ma lag
དབང་ཚད	jurisdiction	dbang tshad
དབང་ཚད་ཆེ་ཤོས	dominant	dbang tshad che shos
དབང་ཚོར	lus tshor ro	dbang tshor
དབང་འཛིན	control, rule, authority	dbang 'dzin
དབང་འཛིན་མཁན	boss, ruler	dbang 'dzin mkhan
དབང་འཛིན་པ	person in authority, authorities	dbang 'dzin pa
དབང་འཛིན་བྱེད	be in control/ power, rule, wield authority	dbang 'dzin byed
དབང་རྫས	Empowerment implements	dbang rdzas
དབང་རྫོགས་པར་ཞུས	receive the complete empowerment	dbang rdzogs par zhus
དབང་ཞུས་པ	requested the empowerment of	dbang zhus pa
དབང་གཞུ	rainbow	dbang gzhu
དབང་གཞུའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས	rainbow leggings	dbang gzhu'i smad dkris
དབང་བཞི	the four abhishekas [bum dbang, gsang dbang, shes rab ye shes kyi dbang, tshig dbang or 4th (the common vase empowerment {thun mong pa bum dbang} and the three supreme, higher empowerments which ar...	dbang bzhi
དབང་བཞི་ནོས	receive the four empowerments!	dbang bzhi nos
དབང་བཞི་པ	4th empowerment, {tshig dbang}	dbang bzhi pa
དབང་བཞི་པའི་དོན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	real wisdom of the 4th empowerment	dbang bzhi pa'i don gyi ye shes
དབང་བཞི་པའི་འདའ་ཀ་མ	the departure according to the fourth empowerment	dbang bzhi pa'i 'da' ka ma
དབང་བཞི་བླང	receive the four abhishekas	dbang bzhi blang
དབང་བཞི་བླང་བ	receive the four empowerments	dbang bzhi blang ba
དབང་བཞི་ཟབ་པའི་མཐར	the ultimate profundity of the fourth empowerment	dbang bzhi zab pa'i mthar
དབང་བཞིས་རྒྱུད་བཞི་སྨིན་པ	to bring the four natures to maturity by means of the four empowerments	dbang bzhis rgyud bzhi smin pa
དབང་བཞིས་རྒྱུད་བཞི་སྨིན་ལ	ripening the four modes of being by the four abhishekas CHN	dbang bzhis rgyud bzhi smin la
དབང་ཟ་བ	(to be) presumptuous; to fake/ pretend [?]	dbang za ba
དབང་འོག་ཏུ	under the rule/ control/ authority of	dbang 'og tu
དབང་ཡུལ	sense objects	dbang yul
དབང་ཡུལ་ཤེས་པ	abbr. of {dbang po} sense faculties {yul} =sense objects, and {rnam par shes pa} consciousnesses	dbang yul shes pa
དབང་ཡུལ་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས་བཅུ་ལྔ	the 15 elements of sense faculties, objects and consciousnesses	dbang yul shes pa'i khams bcu lnga
དབང་ཡུལ་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས་བཅོ་ལྔ	the fifteen elements of sense faculties, objects and consciousnesses	dbang yul shes pa'i khams bco lnga
དབང་ཡོད	force, violence	dbang yod
དབང་ཡོད་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཆ་མ་ཤོད	don't use bullying talk	dbang yod kyi skad cha ma shod
དབང་ཡོད་ཀྱིས	by force	dbang yod kyis
དབང་ཡོད་གཏོང	bully	dbang yod gtong
དབང་ཡོད་པ	to be powerful	dbang yod pa
དབང་ཡོད་བྱེད་པ	tyrannize	dbang yod byed pa
དབང་ཡོད་བྱེད་པའི་བུད་མེད	bullied woman	dbang yod byed pa'i bud med
དབང་ཡོད་ཤེད་འཁྱེར	rang dbang shugs can byed pa	dbang yod shed 'khyer
དབང་ཡོད་གཤོད་མཁན	tyrant	dbang yod gshod mkhan
དབང་ཡོད་གཤོད་པ	coerce	dbang yod gshod pa
དབང་ཡོད་བཤད་པ	to bully	dbang yod bshad pa
དབང་ཡོད་བཤེད	violence	dbang yod bshed
དབང་ཡོད་བཤེད་ཁྱེར	levy blackmail	dbang yod bshed khyer
དབང་ཡོད་བཤེད་ཁྱེར་བ	take money by force	dbang yod bshed khyer ba
དབང་ཡོད་བཤེད་འཁྱེར	carry away by force	dbang yod bshed 'khyer
དབང་ཡོན	things to be offered in dbang zhu skabs, sense qualities	dbang yon
དབང་རབ	highest capacity	dbang rab
དབང་རིལ	dbang po ril bu	dbang ril
དབང་རིས	rang bdag gi rgyu dngos sogs,//dbang ris bdag thob skor gyi rtsod gleng rgyun mi 'chad pa yod	dbang ris
དབང་ལག	orchis latifolia l. var. angustata maxim., a medicinal root resembling the human hand in shape	dbang lag
དབང་ལག་དམན་པ	habenaria diphylla dalz., coeloglossum viride (l.) hartm. var. bracteatum (willd.) richt.	dbang lag dman pa
དབང་ལུང	[mantra] empowerment &, [ritual etc.] reading empowerment/ permission blessing, [governmental] affairs	dbang lung
དབང་ལུང་ཁྲིད	initiation, authorization, and explanation	dbang lung khrid
དབང་ལུང་ཁྲིད་གསུམ	empowerments, transmissions and instructions	dbang lung khrid gsum
རེཨདིང	transmission and instruction 1897	reading
དབང་ལེན	taking empowerment; selfabhisheka; receiving of empowerment	dbang len
དབང་ལེན་པ	receiving the empowerment	dbang len pa
དབང་ཤུགས	influence, tyranny, excessive use of authority	dbang shugs
དབང་ཤུགས་བྱེད	tyrannize	dbang shugs byed
དབང་ཤེད	force, violence, tyranny, excessive use of power	dbang shed
དབང་ཤེད་ངལ་རྩོལ	forced labor	dbang shed ngal rtsol
དབང་ཤེད་བཙན་གཏམ	gzhan la brnyas bcos thub tshod gtong ba'i talk, bullying talk	dbang shed btsan gtam
དབང་ཤེས	{dbang po'i shes pa} sense consciousness	dbang shes
དབང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྐྱེན་གསུམ	the three	dbang shes kyi rkyen gsum
ཅོནདིཏིཨོནས་ཨོཕ༹་སེནསེ	awareness	conditions of sense
དབང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དེ་མ་ཐག་རྐྱེན	the immediately preceding condition of sense awareness	dbang shes kyi de ma thag rkyen
དབང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བདག་རྐྱེན	the dominant	dbang shes kyi bdag rkyen
ཅོནདིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་སེནསེ	awareness	condition of sense
དབང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དམིགས་རྐྱེན	the observed object condition of senseawareness [because of rang gi bsgos pa'i bag chags, rang 'bras dbang shes yul gyi rnam ldan du gtso bor skyed byed, eg, sngor snang dbang shes snga ma ni shes ...	dbang shes kyi dmigs rkyen
དབང་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ལོག་ཤེས	wrong knowledge of sense awareness [among rtog med log shes, eg, conch appears yellow, snow mt blue, two moons]	dbang shes kyi log shes
དབང་ཤེས་འཁྲུལ་བ	confused senseawareness [two moons etc.]	dbang shes 'khrul ba
དབང་ཤེས་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གསུམ	the three	dbang shes gyi rkyen gsum
དབང་ཤེས་ལྔ	the five sense knowledges/ awareness	dbang shes lnga
དབང་ཤེས་པ	knowledge communicated by the sense organs	dbang shes pa
དབང་ཤེས་བླུན་ལྐུག་བརྡ་མི་འཇལ་བ	to possess defective faculties or mental capacity, such as being imbecilic, inept or incapable of communicating	dbang shes blun lkug brda mi 'jal ba
དབང་ཤོར	to fall under the power, influence of	dbang shor
དབང་བཤད	empowerment teaching; explanation given during an empowerment ritual	dbang bshad
དབང་སུ་སོང	to be overpowered	dbang su song
དབང་སྲས་མོ	epithet of the goddess sgrol ma	dbang sras mo
དབང་སྲིད	kingdom, power	dbang srid
དབང་གསང	hidden initiation	dbang gsang
དབང་གསུམ་པ	third empowerment. Syn {shes rab ye shes kyi dbang}	dbang gsum pa
དབང་གསུམ་པ་དཔེའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	example wisdom of the third empowerment	dbang gsum pa dpe'i ye shes
དོན་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ངོ་སྤྲོད་པ	the use of the illustrative primal wisdom of the third empowerment to introduce true primal wisdom	don gyi ye shes ngo sprod pa
དབང་གསུམ་པོ	3rd empowerment, {shes rab ye shes kyi dbang}	dbang gsum po
དབང་ལྷ	the Deva of Abhisheka, the empowerment deity, divinity	dbang lha
དབངས་རུ་འཁོར་ནས	become a follower	dbangs ru 'khor nas
དབངས་སུ་བཅུག་པ	strain	dbangs su bcug pa
དབད	study hard	dbad
དབད་པ	[arch] 'thog pa dang 'then pa,//sder gyis lus sha dbad pa,//gos dbad pa,/, /skra dbad pa,//. effort, endeavor fall	dbad pa
དབད་པར་འདུས་པ	gather w exertion	dbad par 'dus pa
དབད་རྩལ	exertion	dbad rtsal
དབད་རྩོན	strife, struggle, fight	dbad rtson
དབད་རྩོན་བྱེད་པ	strive, fight, struggle	dbad rtson byed pa
དབན་ལུང	Bandung	dban lung
དབནད་སྲོག་རྒྱུད་ལ་འཛིན་པ	keeps the empowerment alive in one's being	dband srog rgyud la 'dzin pa
དབབ	descend, let down, cause to descend, SA 'bebs pa, evocation	dbab
དབབ་པ	{'babs pa} to fall/ come down	dbab pa
དབའ	wave, expression of approval, well done, billow	dba'
དབའ་ཀློང	wave, billow	dba' klong
དབའ་ཀློང་འཁྲུག	a large lake	dba' klong 'khrug
དབའ་ཁྲི་གཟིགས	first tibetan who entered monastic life	dba' khri gzigs
དབའ་རྒལ	cross the waves	dba' rgal
དབའ་སྒལ	[arch] waves	dba' sgal
དབའ་རླབས	waves	dba' rlabs
དབའ་རླབས་སྐྱེས	spray, sea foam, scum on water	dba' rlabs skyes
དབའ་རླབས་ཅན་མ	hill torrent, rapid mountain stream	dba' rlabs can ma
དབའ་ལེ་ལ	pass in N rdza yul rdzong gi byang	dba' le la
དབའ་སི	gas	dba' si
དབར	between two, amongst, between, cleft, gap, fissures	dbar
དབར་མི	faint-hearted, timorous person	dbar mi
དབལ	the point of a phurba; blade, top, summit, point	dbal
དབལ་གྱི་ཁྲོ་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	a bon god 1898	dbal gyi khro bo chen po
དབལ་གྱི་ཆུ་སླག	wearing a flaming blue tunic	dbal gyi chu slag
དབལ་གྱི་བློ་གྲོས	srimati	dbal gyi blo gros
དབལ་གྱི་མི་ཕོ	red dbal man	dbal gyi mi pho
དབལ་གྱི་ཚ་ཚ	strewing flames and sparks	dbal gyi tsha tsha
དབལ་ངར	cutting potency	dbal ngar
དབལ་ཆུ	dbal liquid, liquid dbal, rite performed to purify various types of negativities	dbal chu
དབལ་ཆེན་ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལྷ་ཚོགས	Maha shri heruka and his assembly of deities	dbal chen khrag 'thung lha tshogs
དབལ་ཆེན་ཁྲོ་བོ	the wrathful Great dbal	dbal chen khro bo
དབལ་ཆོགས་པ	[arch] rtse gcog thub pa'am ngar ram shugs gcog thub pa	dbal chogs pa
དབལ་སྙིང	dbal heart, a gtor ma	dbal snying
དབལ་མདོས	ritual of the "effigy of the blade"	dbal mdos
དབལ་ལྡན	skrangs par rnag smin nam ma smin brtag byed kyi thur spyad rtse mo zur gsum gyi dbyibs can zhig	dbal ldan
དབལ་ལྡན་ཤ་ཁབ	sha lpags ral ba 'tshem byed implement	dbal ldan sha khab
དབལ་ནས	dbal barley	dbal nas
དབལ་པོ་མདུང་རྩེ་ཅན	a bon god	dbal po mdung rtse can
དབལ་ཕུར་བུ	blade of a dagger	dbal phur bu
དབལ་ཕུར་བུའི	blade of a dagger	dbal phur bu'i
དབལ་བ	SA 'bal ba	dbal ba
དབལ་བོན	a bon po who specialized in ritual acts connected with control of the fire element like the dbal chu and dzwo, bon of the dbal	dbal bon
དབལ་བོན་རོམ་པོ	bon of the dbal	dbal bon rom po
དབལ་བྲག	dbal rocks	dbal brag
དབལ་འབར་སྟག་སླག	Bönpo tertön	dbal 'bar stag slag
དབལ་མེ	dbal flames	dbal me
དབལ་མོ	class of female deities of the type of, but inferior to, the rgod lcam, some are emanations of srid pa'i rgyal mo	dbal mo
དབལ་མོ་ལས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	tantra of the sphere of actions of the dbal mo	dbal mo las kyi thig le
དབལ་མོ་ལས་ཀྱི་བྱང་བུ	tantra of the ritual tablet of the actions of the dbal mo	dbal mo las kyi byang bu
དབལ་མོ་སྲོག་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	tantra of the sphere of the life of the dbal mo	dbal mo srog gi thig le
དབལ་མོ་སྲོག་གི་སྤུ་གྲི	tantra of the razor of the life of the dbal mo	dbal mo srog gi spu gri
དབལ་ཚ	tongue of fire	dbal tsha
དབལ་ཚ་བ	sharpness, brightness, spiritedness	dbal tsha ba
དབལ་མཚོ	dbal lake	dbal mtsho
དབལ་ཟངས	dbal copper cauldron, ritual container in which medicines, aromatic herbs, etc. are boiled to produce the dbal chu liquid, receptacle of dbal dbal g.yag - yaks of the dbal	dbal zangs
དབལ་རི	dbal mountains	dbal ri
དབལ་སོ་རྣོན་མོ	sharp flaming point, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	dbal so rnon mo
དབལ་གསས	epithet of padma heruka of bon pantheon who has 9 heads and 18 arms	dbal gsas
དབལ་གསས་རྔམ་པ	a male deity	dbal gsas rngam pa
དབལ་གསས་དྲག་པོའི་རྒྱུད	inner series of tantras	dbal gsas drag po'i rgyud
དབལ་གསས་མེ་འབར	a bon deity	dbal gsas me 'bar
དབས	[arch] gna' rabs T's 'phan po khul du clan	dbas
དབས་ཁྲི་གཟིག་མང་ཉེན	king khri song lde'u tsan's great minister, appointed 705 d 721]	dbas khri gzig mang nyen
དབས་ཁྲི་སུམ་རྗེ་རྩན་བཞེར	king khri song lde'u tsan's great minister, appointed 721, d 725	dbas khri sum rje rtsan bzher
དབས་སྟག་སྒྲ་ཁོང་ལོད	king khri song lde'u tsan's great minister, appointed 727 and 728 gnas nas phab]	dbas stag sgra khong lod
དབིག	pierce, SA 'bigs pa	dbig
དབིག་གི་ཁུ་བ	the river Shita	dbig gi khu ba
དབིག་གི་ཆར་བེབས	Vaishrava a	dbig gi char bebs
དབིག་ལྟེ་བ	the Kailasha mountains	dbig lte ba
དབུ	head, beginning, commencement, blow, SA 'bud pa	dbu
དབུ་ཀླད	brains	dbu klad
དབུ་རྐྱང་རོ་གསུམ	avadhuti, rasana and lalana, the three nadis	dbu rkyang ro gsum
དབུ་སྐོར	entertainment, amusement, deceiving, cheating [h]	dbu skor
དབུ་སྐོར་བ	cheat, deceive	dbu skor ba
དབུ་སྐོར་ཞུ	entertain, amuse, deceive, cheat dbu skor g.yo zhus - gong la mgo skor btang ba &, g.yo sgyu bshad pa	dbu skor zhu
དབུ་སྐྲ	hair of the head, hair	dbu skra
དབུ་སྐྲ་རྐང	for {skra rkang}	dbu skra rkang
དབུ་སྐྲ་གྱས་སུ་འཁྲིལ་བ	[the major mark of] hair curling to the right * [h]	dbu skra gyas su 'khril ba
པོའི་མཚན་སུམ་བཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the 32 marks of a great being]	po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis
དབུ་སྐྲ་འཇམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of soft hair [one of the buddha's 80 minor marks [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu], blo 'jam pos yongs su shes pa nyid kyis]	dbu skra 'jam pa'i dpe byad
དབུ་སྐྲ་དྲི་ཞིམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of hair that is good smelling * [h]	dbu skra dri zhim pa'i dpe byad
དབུ་སྐྲ་སྡུག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of hair that is attractive * [h]	dbu skra sdug pa'i dpe byad
དབུ་སྐྲ་མ་འཛིང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of hair that is not shaggy or bristly [one of sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu, thugs 'dod chags la sogs pas ma 'khrugs pa nyid kyis]	dbu skra ma 'dzing ba'i dpe byad
དབུ་སྐྲ་མི་གཤོར་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of hair that is not rough [one of the Buddha's 80 minor marks sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu, rtag tu tshig mi tsub pa nyid kyis ]	dbu skra mi gshor ba'i dpe byad
དབུ་སྐྲ་རལ་པ	long hair [h]	dbu skra ral pa
དབུ་སྐྲ་ལི་བ	(A; 1) mgo skra byi ba; 2) skra 'khyil	dbu skra li ba
དབུ་སྐྲ་སིལ་བུར་གྲོལ་བ	loose hair dbu skra sen cha gnang ba 'khyer nas carrying the hair clippings with them dbu skra sen cha'i mchod rten bzhengs so - built a stupa to enshrine the hair	dbu skra sil bur grol ba
དབུ་སྐྲའི་དཔེ་བྱད་དྲུག	the six minor marks concerning the hair (black like a bee, good smelling, not shaggy or bristly, not rough, attractive * [h]	dbu skra'i dpe byad drug
དབུ་བསྐོར་བ་ཞུ་བ	to amuse, entertain	dbu bskor ba zhu ba
དབུ་ཁང	1 of the 'phags pa mched bzhi famous deity image in Nepal	dbu khang
དབུ་ཁྱུད	headless letters's 1st 'bri rgyu'i mgo ris ? ? 'Di dang, dbu can gyi yi ge'i 1st 'bri rgyu'i mgo ris *. ? = dang kyog, berga 1899	dbu khyud
དབུ་ཁྲིད	leader[ship]	dbu khrid
དབུ་འཁོར	be deceived/ duped/ confused	dbu 'khor
དབུ་འཁྲིད	1) chief, leader; 2) supremacy, glory; 3) status, position; 4) state	dbu 'khrid
དབུ་གུར	tent [h]	dbu gur
དབུ་གོ་གནས	rank, positions	dbu go gnas
དབུ་གྱོར་འཁྲུག་སློང	after Lang Darma died, two queens so so'i phyogs blon 'bangs tha dad kyis bzung ste yum brtan gyis dbu ru, 'od srungs kyis ga-yo	dbu gyor 'khrug slong
རུ་བཟུང་ནས་དབུ་ག	yor 'khrug pa byas, de'i phyogs bod yul phal cher la khyab ste yul gru re rer yang che srid chung srid, mang tshan nyung tshan,	ru bzung nas dbu ga
གསེར་པ་ག	yu pa, sha zan rtsam zan, zhes sde gnyis gnyis su chad de rtsod, rgyal bu gnyis lo nyer gsum lon pa'i sa glang nas bzung ste 'bangs kyi kheng log rnams rim par byung ngo	gser pa ga
དབུ་གླད་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་རལ	the cranial membrane was torn	dbu glad kyi rgya ral
དབུ་བགྱིས	the chief things, principal possessions	dbu bgyis
དབུ་རྒྱན	a crown; head ornament, crown	dbu rgyan
དབུ་རྒྱན་དབང	crown abhisheka dbu rgyan mi g.yo ba - the royal diadem	dbu rgyan dbang
དབུ་རྒྱན་གསུམ	[TRS 144-5]	dbu rgyan gsum
དབུ་རྒྱས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a [very] wide forehead [one of the buddha's 80 minor marks {dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu}, by having completely perfected the assembly of aspirations, round like a parasol]	dbu rgyas pa'i dpe byad
དབུ་བརྒྱན	crown, adorning the top of the head, tiara	dbu brgyan
དབུ་བརྒྱན་པ	crowned	dbu brgyan pa
དབུ་རྔས	pillow	dbu rngas
དབུ་སྔས	pillow, cushion, bolster	dbu sngas
དབུ་ཅན	printed letters, letter furnished with a headline, block-print letters, the type of Tibetan script used in books and newspapers	dbu can
དབུ་གཅོད་པར་བརྩམས་པ	began to cut off his own head	dbu gcod par brtsams pa
དབུ་བཅད་དེ་བྲམ་ཟེ་ལ་སྦྱིན་ནོ	the king cut off his head and gave it to the brahmin	dbu bcad de bram ze la sbyin no
དབུ་ལྕང	hair braid/ pigtail	dbu lcang
དབུ་ལྕོག	VIPs hair's spa lcog	dbu lcog
དབུ་ཆུང	dbu mdzad chung ba - assistant to the head chanter; second grade provost (below {dbu mdzad}]	dbu chung
དབུ་ཆེན	head man, chief craftsman, high officer	dbu chen
དབུ་ཆོས	chief instructor	dbu chos
དབུ་ཆོས་བསྒྲེས་རིམ	aged respectable lamas	dbu chos bsgres rim
དབུ་ཇི་ལྟར་འཛུགས	how did it begin?	dbu ji ltar 'dzugs
དབུ་འཇུག	dbu ma la 'jug pa; Chandrakirti's madhyamak'avat'ara	dbu 'jug
དབུ་རྗེ	reverence, reverend (address to lamas	dbu rje
དབུ་ཉུག་མཛད་པ	look out, peep out, take a peek at	dbu nyug mdzad pa
དབུ་རྙེད་པ	beginning, commencement	dbu rnyed pa
དབུ་རྙེས	to commence, begin, start	dbu rnyes
དབུ་སྙགས་རྒྱབ་པ	obstinate assertion, persistent application	dbu snyags rgyab pa
དབུ་སྙུང	1) mgo na ba; 2) mna'a, //rogs ram gnang rgyu'i dbu snyung bzhes song	dbu snyung
དབུ་བརྙེས	{lha tho tho ri snyan shal gyi ring la dam pa chos kyi dbu brnyes} the Dharma had first come to Tibet during	dbu brnyes
ཐེ་རེཨིགན་ཨོཕ༹་ལྷ	Thothori Nyentsen	the reign of Lha
དབུ་བརྙེས་པ	begin, found [h]	dbu brnyes pa
དབུ་གཏུག	head and mgo gtug pa [h]	dbu gtug
དབུ་གཏོར་གྱི་འཆམས	Buddhist ceremonial dance. It starts on the eve of the Tibetan New Year	dbu gtor gyi 'chams
དབུ་བཏེག	head support, pillow	dbu bteg
དབུ་རྟགས	head (of a page)	dbu rtags
དབུ་སྟེང་དུ་བབས	fell down on top of his head	dbu steng du babs
དབུ་སྟོན	when a clay statue bzheng dbu'i bzo las tshugs skabs kyi a feast	dbu ston
དབུ་ཐོད	a crown	dbu thod
དབུ་ཐོད་ཅིག་གཏུགས	touch foreheads together	dbu thod cig gtugs
དབུ་ཐོད་ཅིག་གནང་མཛད	to touch foreheads together	dbu thod cig gnang mdzad
དབུ་ཐོད་བུད་བུད་དུ	bowing one's head with great devotion	dbu thod bud bud du
དབུ་ཐོད་རེ་གནང	touched his forehead against ours	dbu thod re gnang
དབུ་མཐུན་དྲུང་དུ	SA zhabs drung du	dbu mthun drung du
དབུ་འཐམ	be puzzled/ confused [h]	dbu 'tham
དབུ་དུ	lhasa district	dbu du
དབུ་དུམ	bald	dbu dum
དབུ་དྲངས	at the beginning	dbu drangs
དབུ་གདུགས	parasol, midday, any awning	dbu gdugs
དབུ་འདོམ	leader, head [h]	dbu 'dom
དབུ་ནས	from the beginning	dbu nas
དབུ་གནང	head, lead	dbu gnang
དབུ་གནས	rank, position, [Syn {go gnas}	dbu gnas
དབུ་མནའ་བཞེས	take an oath [h]	dbu mna' bzhes
དབུ་མནའ་བཞེས་པ	swear	dbu mna' bzhes pa
དབུ་པན	pandit hat [h]	dbu pan
དབུ་དཔངས	power, rank, glory, status, position, state, supreme, prestige	dbu dpangs
དབུ་སྤྱི	monastery umdze dang spyi so	dbu spyi
དབུ་ཕར	dbu ma dang phar phyin. [mss]	dbu phar
དབུ་ཕུད	for {skra phud} tuft of hair	dbu phud
དབུ་ཕྱོགས་སུ	at the beginning	dbu phyogs su
དབུ་ཕྲེང	bubbles on water	dbu phreng
དབུ་འཕང	power, rank, glory {go 'phang}, status, position, state, supreme, glory, prestige	dbu 'phang
དབུ་འཕང་བསྟོད	glorify	dbu 'phang bstod
དབུ་འཕང་བསྟོད་པ	to glorify, uplift	dbu 'phang bstod pa
དབུ་འཕང་མཐོ	are exalted, uplifted, exalted, glorified, sublime, attained the summit	dbu 'phang mtho
དབུ་འཕང་མཐོ་འདུག	attained the summit	dbu 'phang mtho 'dug
དབུ་འཕངས	helmet	dbu 'phangs
དབུ་འཕངས་མཐོ	lofty head (image of sovereignty)	dbu 'phangs mtho
དབུ་བ	the top of the head, foam, froth, bubbles	dbu ba
དབུ་བ་རྒྱན	adorn the top of the head, crown	dbu ba rgyan
དབུ་བ་རྡོས	bubbles of water, hard breathing	dbu ba rdos
དབུ་བ་བརྡོས	variant of {dbu ba rdos}. Also {dbu ba brdos pa}. [mss]	dbu ba brdos
དབུ་བ་བརྡོས་པ	water bubble	dbu ba brdos pa
དབུ་བྱིངས	1) in construction head of stone masons, carpenters etc. &, the workers; 2) monastery's umdze and monks	dbu byings
དབུ་བླ	chief spiritual advisor	dbu bla
དབུ་འབྱེད	inauguration, opening [h]	dbu 'byed
དབུ་འབྱེད་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	inauguration/ opening ceremony [h]	dbu 'byed rten 'brel
དབུ་མ	1) Middle Way; Skt. Madhyamaka. The highest of the four Buddhist schools of philosophy. The Middle Way means not holding any extreme views, especially those of eternalism or nihilism. 2) avadhuti -...	dbu ma
དབུ་མ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དགོངས་རྒྱན	work by {a mdo dge 'dun chos 'phel} 1905? 1951?; lectures on the profound import of Madhyamika philosophy	dbu ma klu sgrub dgongs rgyan
དབུ་མ་གྱན	maahadhyamikaalankaara [by S'aantaraksita]	dbu ma gyan
དབུ་མ་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	illumination of the thought, by Dzong ka ba	dbu ma dgongs pa rab gsal
དབུ་མ་རྒྱན	Ornament of the Middle Way;	dbu ma rgyan
མ	karika; Shantarakshita, 8th century	Madhyamakalamkara
མ	Lamkara, Shantarakshita "Ornament of the Middle Way"	Madhyamaka
དབུ་མ་རྒྱན་ཆུང	name of text	dbu ma rgyan chung
དབུ་མ་ཆེ་འབྲིང	the great and intermediate madhyamaka	dbu ma che 'bring
དབུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Middle Way	dbu ma chen po
དབུ་མ་ཆེན་པོ་གྲགས་པའི་ལམ	the path known as the Great Middle	dbu ma chen po grags pa'i lam
དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པ	Introduction to the Middle Way; Madhyamaka-Avatara-nama; Chandrakirti, 7th century	dbu ma 'jug pa
དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	Jayaananda's Explanation on the middle way	dbu ma 'jug pa'i 'grel bshad
དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པའི་འགྲེལ་བཤར	Jaya-ananda's explanation on the middle way	dbu ma 'jug pa'i 'grel bshar
དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པའི་རང་འགྲེལ	Chandrakirti's	dbu ma 'jug pa'i rang 'grel
དབུ་མ་ཉིགས་ཚོགས	collection of Madhyamaka arguments	dbu ma nyigs tshogs
དབུ་མ་སྙིང་པོ	Heart of the Middle Way;	dbu ma snying po
དབུ་མ་སྟོང་ཐུན་ཆེན་མོ	{dbu ma stong thun chen mo}	dbu ma stong thun chen mo
དབུ་མ་ཐལ་འགྱུར	Middle Way of Consequence [thd]	dbu ma thal 'gyur
དབུ་མ་ཐལ་འགྱུར་པ	middle way consequence school	dbu ma thal 'gyur pa
དབུ་མ་ཐལ་འགྱུར་བ	Prasangika-m dhyamika [advanced school of absolute reductionism book 1 beyond extremes of existence and on existence, without any assertion of natures, middle way consequence school]	dbu ma thal 'gyur ba
གྲངས་གསུམ	CHN	grangs gsum
དབུ་མ་བདེན་ཆུང	Short Truth of the Middle Way	dbu ma bden chung
དབུ་མ་བདེན་གཉིས	{dbu ma bden gnyis} [work on Madhyamaka by {ye shes snying po}	dbu ma bden gnyis
དབུ་མ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ་མདྷྱམིཀ	Yogachara	dbu ma rnal 'byor spyod pa Madhyamika
དབུ་མ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ	Middle Way of Yogic Action [thd]	dbu ma rnal 'byor spyod pa
དབུ་མ་སྣང་བ	Light of the Middle Way [thd]	dbu ma snang ba
དབུ་མ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great Madhyamaka master	dbu ma pa chen po
དབུ་མ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of madhyamaka [sautrantika and yogachara svatantrika and prasangika]{'jig rten grags sde spyod pa},-{mdo sde spyod pa},-{rnal 'byor spyod pa}	dbu ma pa gsum
དབུ་མ་ཕྱི་ནང་ཕྲ་རགས་གཉིས	the two types of Madhyamaka, [the coarse outer madhyamaka of the svatantrikas and prasangikas, and the subtle inner madhyamaka of the yogacharamadhyamaka, divisions as presented by the latter]	dbu ma phyi nang phra rags gnyis
དབུ་མ་དབུ་མའི་ལམ	central way	dbu ma dbu ma'i lam
དབུ་མ་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of the Middle Way [thd]	dbu ma smra ba
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བ	the Root of the middle way/ rtsa ba shes rab	dbu ma rtsa ba
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བ་ཤེས་རབ	T 3824 Madhyamaka-Karika, by Nagarjuna	dbu ma rtsa ba shes rab
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་འགྲེལ་པ	any commentary on Nagarjuna's madhyamika shastras, especially Chandrakirti's prasannapada	dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་མཆོད་བརྗོད	nt. Eulogy to the Root Verses on the Middle Way	dbu ma rtsa ba'i mchod brjod
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	{dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'u byas pa/ {rtsa ba shes rab} dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'u byas pa shes	dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'u byas pa
རབ་ཆེས་བྱ་བ	Mulamadhyamakakarikas	rab ches bya ba
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	[Syn {rtsa ba shes rab} dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa shes	dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa
རབ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	the verses of the root of the middle path entitled "wisdom" dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshigs le'ur byas pa shes	rab zhes bya ba
དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	rtsa she - Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way; Prajña-mulamadhyamaka-karika; Nagarjuna, 1st-2nd century	dbu ma rtsa ba'i shes rab
དབུ་མ་རྩ་ཤེ	Mulamadhyamakakarikas	dbu ma rtsa she
དབུ་མ་རྩ་ཤེར	dbu ma rtsa ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa shes rab	dbu ma rtsa sher
དབུ་མ་རྩྭ་བ་ཤེས་རབ	Mulamadhyamakakarikas	dbu ma rtswa ba shes rab
དབུ་མ་ཚིག་གསལ	Prasannapada[by Chandrakirti]	dbu ma tshig gsal
དབུ་མ་འཛུགས་སྐོར	isolating the central channel	dbu ma 'dzugs skor
དབུ་མ་འཛུགས་ཚུལ	isolating the central channel	dbu ma 'dzugs tshul
དབུ་མ་རྫོང	Central Citadel, one of Milarepa's meditation places in Tö, Mangyul	dbu ma rdzong
དབུ་མ་གཞན་སྟོང	shentong madhyamika	dbu ma gzhan stong
དབུ་མ་བཞི་བརྒྱ་པ	the Madhyamika work, the catu:shatakash'astra Karika of a'aryadeva dbu ma bzhi brgya pa'i tshig don rnam par bshad pa klu dbang dgongs rgyan a rare and previously unpublished	dbu ma bzhi brgya pa
ཅོམམེནཏརཡ་ཨོན་ཨའརྱདེབ༹འས་མོནུམེནཏལ་ཝོརཀ་ཨོན་མདྷྱམཀ་ཕིལོསོཕཡ	the catu:shatakash'astrak'arik'a; by {bod pa sprul sku mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyi ma} (1907-1959)	commentary on a'aryadeva's monumental work on Madhyamaka philosophy
དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད	Sv tantrikamadhyamaka	dbu ma rang rgyud
དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་གོང་མ	the Higher madhyamika svatantrika	dbu ma rang rgyud gong ma
དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ	svatantrika madhyamaka	dbu ma rang rgyud pa
དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ་གཉིས	[chn]	dbu ma rang rgyud pa gnyis
དབུ་མ་རིགས་པའི་ཐོགས་དྲུག	the six logical works of the Madhyamika, 1) {rtsa ba shes rab}. 2) {rigs pa drug cu pa} 3) {stong nyid bdun cu pa} 4) {zhib mo 1902 rnam 'tha'} 5) {rtsod ldog}, {rtsod ma bzlog pa} 6) {tha snyad bs...	dbu ma rigs pa'i thogs drug
དབུ་མ་རིགས་ཚོགས་ལྔ	Five Collections of Madhyamaka Reasoning. Works of Nagarjuna	dbu ma rigs tshogs lnga
དབུ་མ་རིགས་ཚོགས་དྲུག	see dbu ma'i bstan bcos rigs pa'i tshogs drug	dbu ma rigs tshogs drug
དབུ་མ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	Syn {dbu ma 'jug pa}	dbu ma la 'jug pa
དབུ་མ་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་རང་འགྲེལ	Autocommentary on Entering the Middle Way [thd]	dbu ma la 'jug pa'i rang 'grel
དབུ་མ་ལ་བསྟོད་པ	name of text	dbu ma la bstod pa
དབུ་མ་ཤིང་རྟ་གཉིས	the two chariots of Madhyamika, Nagarjuna and Asanga	dbu ma shing rta gnyis
དབུ་མ་ཤེས་རབ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	name of text	dbu ma shes rab la 'jug pa
དབུ་མའི་སྐོར	the collected commentaries and exegetic works concerned with the elucidation the Madhyamika literature translated from Sanskrit into Tibetan	dbu ma'i skor
དབུ་མའི་རྒྱན	{dbu ma rgyan} [by Shantarakshita]	dbu ma'i rgyan
དབུ་མའི་སྒོམ་རིམ་གསུམ	Bhavanakrama, Kamalashila's "Stages of Meditation on the Middle Way, in three parts],	dbu ma'i sgom rim gsum
དབུ་མའི་བཅོས	treatise on the middle way, by Nagarjuna dbu ma'i snying po tshig le'ur byas pa madhyamaka hrdaya karika by 5th century Bhavaviveka	dbu ma'i bcos
དབུ་མའི་ལྟ་བ	middle way view, centrism [realizes the way all dharmas are]	dbu ma'i lta ba
དབུ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	Nagarjuna's "Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way,	dbu ma'i bstan bcos
ཐེ་མུལ	Madhyamaka Karika]. fundamental treatise on the middle way	the Mula
དབུ་མའི་མས་སྣ	the lower end of the central channel	dbu ma'i mas sna
དབུ་མའི་རྩ	avadhuti, central channel	dbu ma'i rtsa
དབུ་མའི་ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	Madhyamikakaarikaas	dbu ma'i tshig le'u byas pa
དབུ་མའི་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ་མདྷྱམིཀ	kArikAs, one of the {rigs tshogs drug} the six logical works of the Madhyamika by Nagarjuna. [Syn {rtsa ba shes rab}	dbu ma'i tshig le'ur byas pa Madhyamika
དབུ་མའི་རྫོང	fortress of avadhuti/ the central channel	dbu ma'i rdzong
དབུ་མའི་ཡར	the upper end of the central channel	dbu ma'i yar
དབུ་མའི་ཡར་སྣ	the upper end of the central channel	dbu ma'i yar sna
དབུ་མའི་ཡས་མར	the upper and lower end of the central channel	dbu ma'i yas mar
དབུ་མའི་ལམ	[path realizing] the Middle way [avoidance of extremes, = {stong pa nyid}	dbu ma'i lam
དབུ་མའི་ལམ་གྱི་དགག་བྱ་གསུམ	CHN	dbu ma'i lam gyi dgag bya gsum
དབུ་མའི་ཤེས་རབ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	Entry into the Knowledge of the Middle Way [thd]	dbu ma'i shes rab la 'jug pa
དབུ་མའི་སློབ་དབོན་གསུམ	CHN	dbu ma'i slob dbon gsum
དབུ་མར	in the central channel	dbu mar
དབུ་མར་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of Madhyamika	dbu mar smra ba
དབུ་མེད	(cursive, headless) letters, headless, cursive script, headless current hand writing	dbu med
དབུ་དམར	bald red head	dbu dmar
དབུ་རྨོག	1) helmet; 2) rank, status, majesty, dignity [arch] political rule	dbu rmog
དབུ་གཙུག	the top of the head, above the head	dbu gtsug
དབུ་གཙུག་ཏུ་ཐིམ་པ	dissolving into him through the crown of his head	dbu gtsug tu thim pa
དབུ་གཙུག་ཏུ་ཝ་བ་སྐྱེས་པ	a protuberance appeared at the top of his head	dbu gtsug tu wa ba skyes pa
དབུ་གཙུག་ཏོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	a protuberance on the crown of the head	dbu gtsug tor dang ldan pa
དབུ་གཙོ	'go byed gtso bo	dbu gtso
དབུ་རྩ	a turret	dbu rtsa
དབུ་རྩེ	central temple	dbu rtse
དབུ་རྩེ་རིགས	{rim gsum} the threestoried, triple-styled central temple [of Samye near Lhasa]	dbu rtse rigs
དབུ་རྩེ་རིགས་གསུམ	Triple-storied Central Temple / (rim gsum). The central structure at the temple complex of Samye 1903	dbu rtse rigs gsum
དབུ་རྩེ་རིམ་གསུམ	three-storey central building	dbu rtse rim gsum
དབུ་རྩེའི་ཐང	top floor of a gompa	dbu rtse'i thang
དབུ་རྩེའི་བྱ་འདབ	house top's rgya phibs [pagoda like roof usu of gilded metal]	dbu rtse'i bya 'dab
དབུ་ཚད	CM: dbu ma dang tshad ma'i bsdus ming. [mss]	dbu tshad
དབུ་ཚད་ཀྱི་གཞུང	scriptures of Madhyamika and valid cognition	dbu tshad kyi gzhung
དབུ་ཚུགས	start, commence, begin [h]	dbu tshugs
དབུ་མཚམས	1) hairline; 2) hair rkang so so'i bar	dbu mtshams
དབུ་མཛད	Umdze, first grade provost	dbu mdzad
དབུ་མཛད་ཆུང་བ	assistant to the head chanter; second grade provost (below {dbu mdzad}]	dbu mdzad chung ba
དབུ་མཛད་པ	inspect, look after, superintend, control	dbu mdzad pa
དབུ་འཛུགས	start, begin	dbu 'dzugs
དབུ་འཛུགས་སྟངས	the way of beginning	dbu 'dzugs stangs
དབུ་རྫི	nurse, nanny [h]	dbu rdzi
དབུ་རྫོགས་ཕྱག་གསུམ	Madhyamika, Mahamudra and great perfection	dbu rdzogs phyag gsum
དབུ་ཞྭ	hat (H	dbu zhwa
དབུ་ཞབས	{bde ba can}, blissful pure land, the entire body (of a text, head and feet (H	dbu zhabs
དབུ་ཞབས་ཀྱི་བསྡུ་དོན	summarized meaning of the whole text	dbu zhabs kyi bsdu don
དབུ་ཞབས་དོན	the meaning from 'cover to cover'; top to bottom	dbu zhabs don
དབུ་ཞུར	red head ? mgo dmar po	dbu zhur
དབུ་གཞུག	1) skra gzhug; 2) mgo mjug	dbu gzhug
དབུ་བཞུགས	chair, head, chief, foreman [gral mgo' or las ka'i mgor sdod pa]	dbu bzhugs
དབུ་བཞུགས་སྐུ་ཚབ	delegate/ representative of the head/ chair/ chief	dbu bzhugs sku tshab
དབུ་བཞུགས་བྱེད་པ	preside	dbu bzhugs byed pa
དབུ་བཞུགས་བློན་ཆེན	prime/ chief/ highest ranking/ senior minister	dbu bzhugs blon chen
དབུ་ཟུར་དབུ་མཛད	senior head chanter; retired provost	dbu zur dbu mdzad
དབུ་ཟླུམ་ཞབས་རྗེན	shaven and barefeet; pure monk	dbu zlum zhabs rjen
དབུ་ཡ	ya ma disease [h]	dbu ya
དབུ་ཡུ	aa yu ma, cattle rva med mkhan	dbu yu
དབུ་ཡུ་མ	male yak, yak cow without horns	dbu yu ma
དབུ་རིལ	shaved head	dbu ril
དབུ་རུ	dbu ru	dbu ru
དབུ་རུ་སྟོད	on the upper skyid chu 'bri gung etc. regions	dbu ru stod
དབུ་རུ་ཤོད་ཆེན	bod skyid shod old name	dbu ru shod chen
དབུ་རེག་མགོ་རིལ	shaved head [h]	dbu reg mgo ril
དབུ་ལ་གསོལ་བ	wear on the head (h	dbu la gsol ba
དབུ་ལོ	hair [h]	dbu lo
དབུ་ཤྭ་པན་ཆེན་རྔ་རིང	pandit hat	dbu shwa pan chen rnga ring
དབུ་ཤོག	title page of a book	dbu shog
དབུ་སེ	[grey headed] one of the three meditators from Kham. Use, {dus gsum mkhyen pa}	dbu se
དབུ་སེ་བོ	grey-headed person	dbu se bo
དབུ་སེམས	madhyamaka and mind only	dbu sems
དབུ་སེམས་གཉིས	madhyamaka and mind only	dbu sems gnyis
དབུ་སློང་བ	to ask for his head	dbu slong ba
དབུ་གསལ་འདེབས་ཚོགས་པ	central advisory board	dbu gsal 'debs tshogs pa
དབུ་བསིལ	1) was the hair; 2) cut the hair; 3) skra bshig pa ste, skra'i spa lo or lcang lo bshig pa	dbu bsil
དབུ་ལྷ་བ	centrism	dbu lha ba
དབུག	cavern, hole, cavity, bore, SA 'bugs pa	dbug
དབུག་པ	[f 'bugs pa] ?? cave hole	dbug pa
དབུགས	breath, wind, respiration	dbugs
དབུགས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ཙམ	within the fraction of a breath	dbugs kyi cha tsam
དབུགས་ཀྱི་ཆ་ཙམ་འགྱང་མེད	as quickly as possible	dbugs kyi cha tsam 'gyang med
དབུགས་ཀྱིས་གང་བ	bloat	dbugs kyis gang ba
དབུགས་ཀྱིས་ཆ་ཙམ་འབྱུང་མེད	as quickly as possible, not letting even a fraction of a breath go by	dbugs kyis cha tsam 'byung med
དབུགས་ཀྱིས་རྣང་ཤིང	breath stopping short	dbugs kyis rnang shing
དབུགས་རྐྱལ	lha 'dres dbugs bsdus te blug sa'i rkyal pa	dbugs rkyal
དབུགས་སྐྱེས	month of 30 days	dbugs skyes
དབུགས་སྐྱོ་པོ	snying stobs med pa', las shugs mi thon pa	dbugs skyo po
དབུགས་ཁང	lha 'dres sems can gyi dbugs bsdus te bcug sa'i khang pa ste, bsam yas dbugs khang lta bu'o	dbugs khang
དབུགས་འཁར་བ	hold the breath in the throat, by mucus obstructing the windpipe obstruct the breath	dbugs 'khar ba
དབུགས་འཁུན་པ	dbugs rtseg pa, //nad zug drag pos dbugs 'khun pa 1904	dbugs 'khun pa
དབུགས་གློད་པ	to breathe out, exhale	dbugs glod pa
དབུགས་བགྲང་བ	counting the breaths dbugs bgrang bzhi sgo nas sems gnas par	dbugs bgrang ba
བྱ་བའི་ཐབས	resting the mind by the four kinds of counting breath	bya ba'i thabs
དབུགས་རྒོད་པ	breathing w a wheezing or rasping sound	dbugs rgod pa
དབུགས་ལྒང	rlung yang po blugs te nam mkha' mtho sar glod rgyu'i lgang bu	dbugs lgang
དབུགས་སྒང	at the beginning of the month and dkyil la slebs pa'i dus rtags, in the phug tradition, in 'dzam gling chen po'i in the 12 earth fragments sa dum bu bcu gnyis la khyim slebs 'dra'ang, sa tshigs dba...	dbugs sgang
དབུགས་སྒོམ་པ	shed shugs sgrim pa,//lus rtsal sbyong dus dbugs bsgoms te gyad rdo 'degs pa	dbugs sgom pa
དབུགས་བརྒྱངས་པ	dbugs gyen du 'tshangs pa,//dgra la khong khro 'bar nas dbugs brgyangs pa	dbugs brgyangs pa
དབུགས་ངར་བ	forceful breathing	dbugs ngar ba
དབུགས་ངལ་གསོ་བ	relaxed/ easy breathing	dbugs ngal gso ba
དབུགས་རྔུད་པ	inhalation	dbugs rngud pa
དབུགས་རྔུབ	inhale	dbugs rngub
དབུགས་རྔུབ་གཏོང	inhale and exhale	dbugs rngub gtong
དབུགས་རྔུབ་པ	inhale, draw, breathing, inhalation, breathe in	dbugs rngub pa
དབུགས་རྔུབ་པ་དང	inhale and exhale	dbugs rngub pa dang
དབུགས་རྔུབ་པ་དང་འབྱིན་པ	respire	dbugs rngub pa dang 'byin pa
དབུགས་རྔུབས	inhale	dbugs rngubs
དབུགས་སྔུར	snoring dbugs brngubs dang 'byung ba rjes su	dbugs sngur
དབུགས་བརྔུབས་པ	to breathe in, inhale	dbugs brngubs pa
དབུགས་གཅིག	"one breath", 4 seconds, def. {dus mtha'i skad cig ma sum brgya}, {skyes bu dar ma khams snyoms pa'i dbugs 'byin rngub rnal ma zung re gcig tu brtsi pa}	dbugs gcig
དབུགས་ཆ	1) a breath, period of drawing and exhaling the breath [A sub measure of chu tshod and skar ma]	dbugs cha
དབུགས་ཆགས	[arch] living being	dbugs chags
དབུགས་ཆད	losing breath, stopping of the breath	dbugs chad
དབུགས་ཆད་པ	expired breath	dbugs chad pa
དབུགས་ཆེན	great encouragement	dbugs chen
དབུགས་ཆེན་འབྱིན་པ	receiving the great confirmation. release the great breath	dbugs chen 'byin pa
དབུགས་ཆེན་འབྱིན་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of releasing the great breath or receiving the great confirmation	dbugs chen 'byin pa'i rnal 'byor
དབུགས་ཆེན་འབྱིན་སའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of the level of receiving the great confirmation	dbugs chen 'byin sa'i rnal 'byor
དབུགས་འཆད་ཀྱིན་འདུག	he is stopping for breath, die away, become extinct (of family or generation), be consumed	dbugs 'chad kyin 'dug
དབུགས་གཏོང	breath, exhale	dbugs gtong
དབུགས་གཏོང་བ	breathe	dbugs gtong ba
དབུགས་གཏོང་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unable to breathe	dbugs gtong mi thub pa
དབུགས་གཏོང་ལེན	sending and taking of the breath, tonglen practice, breathing, inhaling and exhaling	dbugs gtong len
དབུགས་གཏོང་ལེན་བྱེད	respire	dbugs gtong len byed
དབུགས་གཏོང་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	to breathe	dbugs gtong len byed pa
དབུགས་བཏང་བ	to breathe	dbugs btang ba
དབུགས་སྟེབ་སྟེབ་བྱེད	pant for breath	dbugs steb steb byed
དབུགས་སྟོད་དུ་འཚང	breathing hard, getting out of breath	dbugs stod du 'tshang
དབུགས་སྟོད་ལ་འཚངས	all choked up inside, lit. breath gathering in the upper part of the body e.g. the feeling of distress, like crying	dbugs stod la 'tshangs
དབུགས་ཐག	1) dbugs kyi bar yun; 2) dbugs kyi power 'khyongs che chung gi tshad, //bye'u'i dbugs thag thung ba,//rta de dbugs thag ring bas le dbar mang por bang rgyug thub	dbugs thag
དབུགས་ཐུང	short breath	dbugs thung
དབུགས་ཐེབ་རེ	1 breath	dbugs theb re
དབུགས་ཐེབ་རེལ	in 1 breath	dbugs theb rel
དབུགས་ཐོབ	1) be revived from dying or fainting; 2) sentient being; 3) individual months's dbugs 'go thog mar tshugs pa; 4) get strength energy	dbugs thob
དབུགས་འཐུམས	unable to breathe	dbugs 'thums
དབུགས་འཐུམས་པ	suffocate, choke	dbugs 'thums pa
དབུགས་འཐེན	inhale	dbugs 'then
དབུགས་འཐེན་པ	inhale	dbugs 'then pa
དབུགས་དང་མ་བྲལ་ཀྱང་བེམ་པོ	you would be as good as a corpse, even though you were still breathing	dbugs dang ma bral kyang bem po
དབུགས་དང་མིད་པ་འགག་པ	choke	dbugs dang mid pa 'gag pa
དབུགས་འདྲེན	confidence	dbugs 'dren
དབུགས་འདྲེན་པ	1) inhalation, draw breath; 2) count breaths; 3) confidence	dbugs 'dren pa
དབུགས་རྡུབ	taking breath	dbugs rdub
དབུགས་རྡེབ་པ	hard/short breathing pa,/	dbugs rdeb pa
དབུགས་རྡོས་པ	to pant	dbugs rdos pa
དབུགས་བསྡུ་བ	draw breath	dbugs bsdu ba
དབུགས་ནང་དུ་རྔུབ་པ	inhaling [the breath) inhalation	dbugs nang du rngub pa
དབུགས་ནད	respiratory disease	dbugs nad
དབུགས་ནས་འབུད་པ	breathe upon	dbugs nas 'bud pa
དབུགས་ཕར	exhalation	dbugs phar
དབུགས་ཕར་འགྲོ	exhalation	dbugs phar 'gro
དབུགས་ཕར་ཧར	" death rattle" sound of last exhalation	dbugs phar har
དབུགས་ཕྱི་ལ་སྟོན་པ	exhale	dbugs phyi la ston pa
དབུགས་ཕྱིན	regained his breath	dbugs phyin
དབུགས་ཕྱིན་པ	breathe a sigh of relief	dbugs phyin pa
དབུགས་ཕྱུང	[p {dbugs 'byin pa] confirm, relieve, samsara and nirvana, forgive, find relief, exhale. 1 exhale; 2) relief from suffering	dbugs phyung
དབུགས་ཕྱུང་བ	to inspire, encourage 1905	dbugs phyung ba
དབུགས་ཕྱེར་རྒྱུ་བ	exhaling (the breath, exhalation	dbugs phyer rgyu ba
དབུགས་འཕོ་བ	the shifting breaths; to expire	dbugs 'pho ba
དབུགས་འཕོ་བའི	the shifting breaths	dbugs 'pho ba'i
དབུགས་བྲལ	breath is stopped	dbugs bral
དབུགས་བྲལ་གདན	corpse seat	dbugs bral gdan
དབུགས་དབྱུང	khyod sdug bsngal ma byed dbugs dbyung bar mdzod cig May I relieve your suffering!	dbugs dbyung
དབུགས་དབྱུང་རྔུབ་གཉིས	exhaling and inhaling	dbugs dbyung rngub gnyis
དབུགས་དབྱུང་བ	relieve, confirm, exhale	dbugs dbyung ba
དབུགས་དབྱུང་བར་མཛད	a sigh (of relief)	dbugs dbyung bar mdzad
དབུགས་དབྱུང་གཟེངས་བསྟོད	graced and honored	dbugs dbyung gzengs bstod
དབུགས་འབྱིན	relieving, confirmed, find relief, confirm	dbugs 'byin
དབུགས་འབྱིན་སྐྱབས་སྦྱིན་བྱ	give the relief of protection	dbugs 'byin skyabs sbyin bya
དབུགས་འབྱིན་རྔུབ	exhalation and inhalation, respiration, shortness of breath	dbugs 'byin rngub
དབུགས་འབྱིན་རྔུབ་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	respiratory organs/ power/ faculty	dbugs 'byin rngub kyi dbang po
དབུགས་འབྱིན་བདག	god of wind, lord of blowing out the breath	dbugs 'byin bdag
དབུགས་འབྱིན་པ	1) find relief, be comforted; 2) exhale; 3) confirmation	dbugs 'byin pa
དབུགས་འབྱིན་པར་བྱེད	to exhale, sigh	dbugs 'byin par byed
དབུགས་འབྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	comfort, confirm, relieve, forgive	dbugs 'byin par byed pa
དབུགས་འབྱིན་དབྱུང	confirm, relieving, samsara and nirvana, forgive, find relief	dbugs 'byin dbyung
དབུགས་འབྱིན་ཤིང	shrub	dbugs 'byin shing
དབུགས་འབྱུང	forgive	dbugs 'byung
དབུགས་འབྱུང་རྔུབ	exhalation and inhalation, respiration, shortness of breath	dbugs 'byung rngub
དབུགས་འབྱུང་རྔུབ་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	respiratory organs/ power/ faculty	dbugs 'byung rngub kyi dbang po
དབུགས་འབྱེན་པ	relief, ease, grace, the inspiration to mature beyond (the Hinayana level of experience	dbugs 'byen pa
དབུགས་མི་བདེ་བ་ལྔ	CHN	dbugs mi bde ba lnga
དབུགས་མི་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	illness w blockage of speech, dry throat, rasping breath, much mucus, and hard breathing	dbugs mi bde ba chen po
དབུགས་མི་བདེ་བའི་ནད	the windpipe being blocked by phlegm, mucus increases and exhalation is not easy, an aol krong illness	dbugs mi bde ba'i nad
དབུགས་མེད	breathless	dbugs med
དབུགས་མེད་པ	breathless [weakness, joy etc]	dbugs med pa
དབུགས་མེད་སྲོག	an egg which has life but doesn't breathe	dbugs med srog
དབུགས་རྩོལ་བ	take courage, draw breath	dbugs rtsol ba
དབུགས་བརྩེགས་པ	pant, gasp	dbugs brtsegs pa
དབུགས་ཚུར་འགྲོ	inhalation	dbugs tshur 'gro
དབུགས་ཚུར་ཧུབ	a gasp sound of last inhalation	dbugs tshur hub
དབུགས་འཚངས	pant	dbugs 'tshangs
དབུགས་རྫང	shortness of breath, asthma	dbugs rdzang
དབུགས་རྫང་བ	asthma, shortness of breath	dbugs rdzang ba
དབུགས་བརྫངས་པ	asthma, shortness of breath	dbugs brdzangs pa
དབུགས་ཡན	irregular breathing	dbugs yan
དབུགས་ཡན་གཏོང	sigh w regret	dbugs yan gtong
དབུགས་ཡར་འཐེན་མར་བཏང	respiration	dbugs yar 'then mar btang
དབུགས་རིང	sighing	dbugs ring
དབུགས་རིང་གཏོང	sigh	dbugs ring gtong
དབུགས་རིང་གཏོང་བ	sigh	dbugs ring gtong ba
དབུགས་རིང་འཐེན་པ	heave	dbugs ring 'then pa
དབུགས་རིང་ནར་ནར	sigh w depression etc.	dbugs ring nar nar
དབུགས་རླངས	steamy breath dbugs rlangs dgun dus zhogs par mthong	dbugs rlangs
དབུགས་རླངས་པ་ཙམ	breath is like vapor	dbugs rlangs pa tsam
དབུགས་རླུང	prana/ wind of 1 nature w the breath	dbugs rlung
དབུགས་ལམ	respiratory passages	dbugs lam
དབུགས་ལམ་གཅིག་གི་འབྲེལ་བ	very close relationship	dbugs lam gcig gi 'brel ba
དབུགས་ལམ་གཅིག་གྱུར	very close relationship	dbugs lam gcig gyur
དབུགས་ལེན	thieves of the vital breath	dbugs len
དབུགས་ལེན་པ	take away the breath, smell, inhale an odor	dbugs len pa
དབུགས་ཤུགས་ཆེན་འཐེན་པ	gasp	dbugs shugs chen 'then pa
དབུགས་ཤོར་བ	by exhaustion lose 1's strength, be deflated	dbugs shor ba
དབུགས་སུབ	suffocation	dbugs sub
དབུགས་སུབ་གཏོང	suffocate, choke	dbugs sub gtong
དབུགས་སུབ་གཏོང་བ	suffocate, choke	dbugs sub gtong ba
དབུགས་སུབ་བཏང་སྟེ་གསོད་པ	smother	dbugs sub btang ste gsod pa
དབུགས་སུབ་ཐེབས	die of suffocation, choke to death	dbugs sub thebs
དབུགས་སུབ་ཐེབས་པ	die of suffocation, choke to death	dbugs sub thebs pa
དབུགས་སུབ་པ	strangle, suffocate, choke a person, fill up, choke up with earth	dbugs sub pa
དབུགས་སུབ་ཤི	die of suffocation, choke to death	dbugs sub shi
དབུགས་བསགས་ན་ཚ	asthma	dbugs bsags na tsha
དབུགས་ཧད་པ	difficult/bad inhaling and exhaling	dbugs had pa
དབུགས་ཧལ	to sigh	dbugs hal
དབུགས་ལྷེབ་ལྷེབ	pant, labored breathing	dbugs lheb lheb
དབུགས་ལྷེབ་ལྷེབ་བྱེད་པ	to pant for breath	dbugs lheb lheb byed pa
དབུགས་ལྷེམ་མེ	[experience of] stopping/age of breathing	dbugs lhem me
དབུགས་ལྷེམ་ལྷེམ	panting	dbugs lhem lhem
དབུང	[arch] the middle	dbung
དབུང་སྟོབས་དྲག་པོ	military might	dbung stobs drag po
དབུང་དང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་རྒོལ་བ	fight by means of troops and powers	dbung dang stobs kyis rgol ba
དབུང་བུ་ཆུང་གིས་འགྱེད་པ	tournament	dbung bu chung gis 'gyed pa
དབུངས་དབྱུང	doubtlessly pass on	dbungs dbyung
དབུད	put off, take off, expel, SA 'bud pa	dbud
དབུབ	vault, put on a roof, SA 'bubs pa	dbub
དབུབ་པ	[f 'bubs pa] [will] roof, build a structure having a roof	dbub pa
དབུམ་འཇུག་པ	Syn {'jug pa} 1906	dbum 'jug pa
དབུའི་མཆོད་གནས	sublime object of offering Syn {bla'i mchod gnas}	dbu'i mchod gnas
དབུའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	the three minor marks concerning the head [among the 80 dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu, dbu rgyas pa dang, dpral ba legs par 'byes pa dang, dpral ba dbyes che ba bcas gsum mo]	dbu'i dpe byad gsum
དབུའི་གཙུག	the top of the head	dbu'i gtsug
དབུའི་འོད་འཁོར	head nimbus	dbu'i 'od 'khor
དབུའི་ལམ	central wing	dbu'i lam
དབུར	1st, at 1st, pulverize, powder	dbur
དབུར་ཏི	pressing iron *, iron clothes	dbur ti
དབུར་ཏི་གོས་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	iron clothes	dbur ti gos la rgyag pa
དབུར་ཏི་རྒྱག	iron clothes	dbur ti rgyag
དབུར་ཏེ	[pressing] iron, iron clothes	dbur te
དབུར་ཏེ་གོས་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	iron clothes	dbur te gos la rgyag pa
དབུར་ཏེ་རྒྱག	iron clothes	dbur te rgyag
དབུར་ལྟིར	iron	dbur ltir
དབུར་སྟོད	dbu ru stod	dbur stod
དབུར་འདན	'jim sku'i 'jam sha 'don byed lha bzo'i yo byad cig	dbur 'dan
དབུར་རྡར	tshon snag sogs dbur byed kyi rdar rdo	dbur rdar
དབུར་རྡེལ	1) tshem srubs sgang gshong snyom byed mer bsros pa'i lcags sgam or lcags leb; 2) 'jam por dbur byed rdo shing gang rung gi rde'u	dbur rdel
དབུར་རྡོ	stone for polishing or burnishing the ground	dbur rdo
དབུར་ལྡན	on his head	dbur ldan
དབུར་བརྡར	friction	dbur brdar
དབུར་པང	ras gzhi dbur gdan gyi pang leb	dbur pang
དབུར་བ	humming insect, be noisy, SA 'ur ba, smooth, paper, woollen stuff, pavement	dbur ba
དབུར་རིས	residue from polishing	dbur ris
དབུར་ཤིང	paper, zhal ba etc. dbur byed kyi stick	dbur shing
དབུར་ཤོག	'bur kyong khod snyoms byed kyi shog bu	dbur shog
དབུལ	offer, present, SA 'bul ba, phul	dbul
དབུལ་རྐྱང	poor person w no means of livelihood, completely impoverished	dbul rkyang
དབུལ་ཁུག	pouch for silver, purse	dbul khug
དབུལ་གྱུར	destitute	dbul gyur
དབུལ་པོ	impoverished {mi dbul po rgad po zhig} an old and impoverished mendicant	dbul po
དབུལ་པོ་སྡོད་ཡུལ	slum	dbul po sdod yul
དབུལ་པོ་སྤྲང་པོ	indigent, poor, beggarly, pauper	dbul po sprang po
དབུལ་པོ་ལག་སྟོང	poor man whose purse is empty, a monster	dbul po lag stong
དབུལ་པོའི་གནས་ཡུལ	slum	dbul po'i gnas yul
དབུལ་པོར་སྦྱིན་གཏོད	charity to the poor dbul por yon tan yod kyang mthong mi 'byung - when you are poor, you may have many good qualities, but people do not see them	dbul por sbyin gtod
དབུལ་ཕངས	the destitute	dbul phangs
དབུལ་ཕོངས	poor, destitute	dbul phongs
དབུལ་ཕོངས་ཅན	poor/ destitute [person] dbul phongs nyam thag gi dpung gnyen last resort for the destitute and the frightened	dbul phongs can
དབུལ་ཕྱུག	poor and rich, poverty and wealth	dbul phyug
དབུལ་ཕྱུགས	poor and rich, poverty and wealth	dbul phyugs
དབུལ་འཕོངས	the poor	dbul 'phongs
དབུལ་བ	1) [f 'Bul ba]; 2) (Tha mi dad pa,, bkren pa'am nor gyis phongs pa, be poor, indigent, destitute poverty, want, penury	dbul ba
དབུལ་བ་དང་བྲལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	{skye rgu rnams dbul ba dang bral ba byas shing} freeing all of beings from poverty	dbul ba dang bral ba byed pa
དབུལ་བ་སེལ་བ	to remove poverty	dbul ba sel ba
དབུལ་བ་སེལ་བའི་ནོར་བུ	the jewel that eased the poverty	dbul ba sel ba'i nor bu
དབུལ་མོ	a poor woman	dbul mo
དབུལ་ཞིང་ཕོངས་པ	poverty	dbul zhing phongs pa
དབུལ་སེལ་གླིང་པ	{gter ston} a rebirth of {sna nam rdo rje bdud 'joms}	dbul sel gling pa
དབུས	in the center, central	dbus
དབུས་ཀྱི	central	dbus kyi
དབུས་ཀྱི་གདན་ས་ཆེན་པོ་དྲུག	CHN	dbus kyi gdan sa chen po drug
དབུས་ཀྱི་རི་བོ	the Central mountain, Mt Meru	dbus kyi ri bo
དབུས་ཀྱུ	kind of pastry made of millet flour	dbus kyu
དབུས་སྐད	the dialect of U	dbus skad
དབུས་སྐྱེས	born in a civilized land	dbus skyes
དབུས་ཁང	khang pa dkyil ma	dbus khang
དབུས་གྲལ	Central area [in a temple gathering]	dbus gral
དབུས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	[Indian] central parliament	dbus gros tshogs
དབུས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཁང	parliament	dbus gros tshogs khang
དབུས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་གོང་མ	[Indian] central parliament upper house	dbus gros tshogs gong ma
དབུས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་བོད་དོན་ཚགས་པ	[Indian] central parliament committee for Tibetan affairs dbus gros tshogs bod don lhan tshogs [Indian] central parliament committee for Tibetan affairs 1907	dbus gros tshogs bod don tshags pa
དབུས་འགྱུར	Lhasa/ the central province of Tibet	dbus 'gyur
དབུས་འགྱུར་འཆང	Bodhgaya in the center of India	dbus 'gyur 'chang
དབུས་འགྱུར་ཚལ	Magadha	dbus 'gyur tshal
དབུས་འགྱུར་ལུང་བསྟན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of Predictions in Magadha	dbus 'gyur lung bstan gyi mdo
དབུས་ཆུ	Lhasa's skyid chu	dbus chu
དབུས་གཏེར	bon tradition of the central gter ma	dbus gter
དབུས་གཏེར་ཇུག་པ་རྩ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	central treasures, introductory like roots	dbus gter jug pa rtsa ba lta bu
དབུས་ཐིག་ལེ	center point	dbus thig le
དབུས་མཐའ	the Madhyanta-vibhaga, [Syn {dbus mtha' rnam 'byed}. the discrimination of the middle way and the extremes	dbus mtha'
དབུས་མཐའ་འདས་པ	beyond center and border	dbus mtha' 'das pa
དབུས་མཐའ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	Discerning the middle and the extremes [one of the five books of Maitreya]	dbus mtha' rnam par 'byed pa
དབུས་མཐའ་རྣམ་འབྱེད	the Madhyantavibhanga, Discrimination of the Middle Way and the Extremes	dbus mtha' rnam 'byed
དབུས་འཐུས་ཚོགས	[Indian] central parliament	dbus 'thus tshogs
དབུས་འཐུས་ཚོགས་ཁང	[Indian] central parliament house/ house of representatives	dbus 'thus tshogs khang
དབུས་འཐུས་ཚོགས་བོད་དོན་ཚགས་པ	[Indian] central parliament committee for Tibetan affairs	dbus 'thus tshogs bod don tshags pa
དབུས་དང་མཐའ་རྣམ	madhyanta vibhaga	dbus dang mtha' rnam
དབུས་དང་མཐའ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	Discrimination of the middle (way) and the extremes[verse treatise on yogachara philosophy (madhy ntavibh nga) "investigation of the center and extremes" by maitreya (one of the {byams chos sde lng...	dbus dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa
ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	Commentary on Discrimination of the Middle (way and the Extremes dbus dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa'i tshig	le'u byas pa
དབུས་དུ་སྟོད	upper dbu	dbus du stod
དབུས་ན	in the midst of	dbus na
དབུས་ནས་འཛག	crystal	dbus nas 'dzag
དབུས་སྣམ	woollen cloth	dbus snam
དབུས་པ	person from the province of Central Tibet	dbus pa
དབུས་པ་བློ་གསལ	a pandita	dbus pa blo gsal
དབུས་པར	U pecha par ma	dbus par
དབུས་ཕྱོགས	central Tibet	dbus phyogs
དབུས་ཕྲུག	snam phrug, a kind of thick cloth from U	dbus phrug
དབུས་བང	cupboard, press	dbus bang
དབུས་འབུན་སྤོར་གཅོག	bod rtsis kyi bar khyad rtsi stangs: eg gcig skyed phyed gnyis dang, gnyis skyed gsum, lnga skyed phyed brgyad, brgyad skyed bcu gnyis etc]	dbus 'bun spor gcog
དབུས་མ	middle one of three things, central, central dancer, middle	dbus ma
དབུས་མ་པ	central one, one who follows madhyamika	dbus ma pa
དབུས་མར	the middle one	dbus mar
དབུས་མོ	woman of U	dbus mo
དབུས་གཙང	U and tsang	dbus gtsang
དབུས་གཙང་ཁམས་གསུམ	U Tsang and Kham	dbus gtsang khams gsum
དབུས་གཙང་གི་མི་བཅུ	smad 'dul gyi brgyud pa'i khungs [klu mes tshul khrims shes rab dang, 'bring ye shes yon tan, rag shi tshul khrims 'byung gnas, rba tshul khrims blo gros, sum pa ye shes blo gros te dbus kyi mi lng...	dbus gtsang gi mi bcu
དབུས་གཙང་མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ	U Tsang and stod mnga' ris	dbus gtsang mnga' ris skor gsum
དབུས་གཙང་དག་པའི་ཞིང	the Pure	dbus gtsang dag pa'i zhing
ཪེཨལམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨཱུ	Tsang	Realm of U
དབུས་གཙང་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་མི་གཉིས	two men traveling to central Tibet	dbus gtsang du 'gro ba'i mi gnyis
དབུས་གཙང་དུ་བཞི	name of tibet proper	dbus gtsang du bzhi
དབུས་གཙང་མདོ་གསུམ	dbus gtsang and khams	dbus gtsang mdo gsum
དབུས་གཙང་ཕོ་ཆས	garments / accoutrements of men from dbus and gtsang	dbus gtsang pho chas
དབུས་གཙང་རུ་བཞི	the four mountain ranges/ divisions of u and tshang [u divided into the valley of the {skyid chu}, called {dwu ru skyid shod} and {gyas ru nam shod}, {lho ka}; and tshang divided 1908 into {gtsang ...	dbus gtsang ru bzhi
དབུས་ཞོ	one ounce of silver or 20 se ba	dbus zho
དབུས་གཞུང	central government	dbus gzhung
དབུས་ཡེ་ཤར	central Asia	dbus ye shar
དབུས་རྭ	central prong [of a vajra]	dbus rwa
དབུས་རི	the central mountain	dbus ri
དབུས་རིས	dbus pa'i lag rgyun gyi ri mo	dbus ris
དབུས་རུ	dbu ru	dbus ru
དབུས་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	Traveling on the path that leads to central Tibet	dbus lam chen po la zhugs pa
དབུས་ཤར	middle east	dbus shar
དབུས་སུ	at its center	dbus su
དབུས་སུ་སྐྱེས	one born in lhasa or magadha	dbus su skyes
དབུས་ཨནད་གཙང	U and Tsang, the two main provinces of central Tibet, 10, 546	dbus and gtsang
དབེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མོ	Queen of Great Bliss	dbe chen rgyal mo
དབེ་བ་ཅན	Dewachen, blissful pure land	dbe ba can
དབེད་པ	detachment	dbed pa
དབེན	hermitage, solitary, retreat, isolated, secluded, solitude, quiet	dben
དབེན་ཁང	retreat hut, hermitage	dben khang
དབེན་དགོན	the Enchay monastery in Gangtok	dben dgon
དབེན་རྒྱུ	that to be isolated	dben rgyu
དབེན་སྙིང་པོ	be meaningless, separation (from sin	dben snying po
དབེན་གཏམ	secret, confidential talk	dben gtam
དབེན་འདུ་འཛིས་པ	be isolated from the hustle and bustle, lack	dben 'du 'dzis pa
དབེན་གནས	a hermitage; hermitage, quiet place, retreat place, solitary place, place of solitude; solitude, lonely or secluded place, isolation, solitary place, secluded place	dben gnas
དབེན་གནས་ཆེན་པོ	great hermitage	dben gnas chen po
དབེན་གནས་པ	retreat	dben gnas pa
དབེན་པ	remote, an unpeopled area, isolated, free from, secluded place, solitary, lonely, solitude, loneliness, seclusion, remote, void, like an unpopulated mountain or valley, devoid, without, empty {chos...	dben pa
དབེན་པ་ཅན	one who lives in a solitary place	dben pa can
དབེན་པ་སྟེན་པ	to stay in solitude / remote places	dben pa sten pa
དབེན་པ་བསྟེན	keep to secluded places	dben pa bsten
དབེན་པ་ན་འདུག་པ	be in solitude	dben pa na 'dug pa
དབེན་པ་གསུམ	three solitudes [Body, speech, and mind) 1) in the ordinary sutra and mantra body is isolated from 'du 'dzis, mind from discursive thoughts	dben pa gsum
དབེན་པའི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ	Tashikhyil hermitage, also known as Yama Tashikhyil (g.ya' ma bkra shis 'khyil), in Domey	dben pa'i bkra shis 'khyil
དབེན་པའི་རྒྱན་ནི་ཞི་བ་ཡིན	the finest ornament of solitude is peace	dben pa'i rgyan ni zhi ba yin
དབེན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	elusiveness	dben pa'i 'du byed
དབེན་པའི་གནས	solitudes	dben pa'i gnas
དབེན་པའི་གནས་ས	solitary place, recluse's cell	dben pa'i gnas sa
དབེན་པའི་གནས་གསུམ	three solitudes	dben pa'i gnas gsum
དབེན་པའི་མཚམས་པོ་ཆེ	great isolated retreat	dben pa'i mtshams po che
དབེན་པའི་རི	the solitude of the wild mountains	dben pa'i ri
དབེན་པའི་རི་ཁྲོད	mountain seclusion, solitary dwelling, isolated mountains	dben pa'i ri khrod
དབེན་པར	isolated	dben par
དབེན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཡིན	one who practices in solitude	dben par sgrub par byed pa yin
དབེན་པར་སྡོད་པ	nges med dben par	dben par sdod pa
དབེན་པོ	solitary	dben po
དབེན་ཕུག	solitary cave	dben phug
དབེན་དབེན་པར་གནས	to stay in solitude	dben dben par gnas
དབེན་ཞིང	isolated place	dben zhing
དབེན་ཡང	the upper retreat	dben yang
དབེན་རི	mountain solitude, remote, secluded mountains	dben ri
དབེན་ས	solitary place	dben sa
དབེན་ས་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	hearing lineage of the hermit blo bzang don grub	dben sa snyan brgyud
དབེན་ས་པ	1) 1 who stays in solitude, hermit; 2) lama in a monastery in a clean secluded place	dben sa pa
དབེན་ས་པ་བློ་བཟང་དོན་གྲུབ	{dben sa pa blo bzang don grub	dben sa pa blo bzang don grub
དབེན་གསུམ	three solitudes [Body, speech, and mind]	dben gsum
དབེན་གསུམ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	vajra yoga of the three solitudes [body, speech, and mind]	dben gsum rdo rje'i rnal 'byor
དབེམ	hermitage, solitary, retreat isolated, secluded, solitude, quiet	dbem
དབེར་མེད	inseparable	dber med
དབོ	1 of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} -}-8 Naksatras gods of the constellations [= sbo, khra dang, nyi ma'i lha ldan, phyi mo]	dbo
དབོ་ཅན	2nd month	dbo can
དབོ་བ	ft. of {'bo ba}	dbo ba
དབོ་སྦོ	beta leonis, 1 of rgyu skar	dbo sbo
དབོ་ཟླ	2nd month	dbo zla
དབོ་ཟླ་བ	11th month of tibetan calendar	dbo zla ba
དབོ་ཡི་ཉ་པ	full moon of the 11th month	dbo yi nya pa
དབོ་ཡིས་ཉ་བ	full moon of the second month [15th day of 2nd month where the moon and dbo skar mnyam du spyod pa]	dbo yis nya ba
དབོག	dislocated, submerge, bestow advice, SA 'bog pa, 'bogs pa	dbog
དབོག་པ	ft. of {'bogs pa}; ft. of second {'bog pa}	dbog pa
དབོང་གོང་མ་གསུམ	the three higher empowerments	dbong gong ma gsum
དབོང་པོ་རི	Gesar's temple	dbong po ri
དབོན	grandchild	dbon
དབོན་རྒྱུད	chain of male descendants	dbon rgyud
དབོན་ཆོས་མཛད	sngar gdan sa khag gi tshogs chen chos mdzad	dbon chos mdzad
དབོན་སྟོད	college where Chogyal Namkhai Norbu studied with mkhyen rab chos kyi 'od zer	dbon stod
དབོན་སྟོད་དགོན་པ	Böntod Monastery	dbon stod dgon pa
དབོན་པོ	nephew of a lama or chief, grandson, sect of red married lamas, lama skilled in astrology	dbon po
དབོན་པོ་རི	a mountain	dbon po ri
དབོན་མ	grand daughter	dbon ma
དབོན་མོ	1) queen; 2) tsha mo	dbon mo
དབོན་ཞང	zhang po, tsha bo	dbon zhang
དབོན་སེར་གཟུགས	person w appearance of a monk [to get monk's salary]	dbon ser gzugs
དབོན་སྲས	1) spun gyi bu, nephew [h]; 2) bon po la ma's name	dbon sras
དབོན་གསས	wise master (teachings of sages of zhang zhung snyan rgyud), SA sgo bzhi mdzod lnga	dbon gsas
དབོར	transport	dbor
དབོར་འདྲེན	transportation	dbor 'dren
དབོར་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport	dbor 'dren byed
དབོར་འདྲེན་བྱེད་པ	to transport	dbor 'dren byed pa
དབོར་པ	wa kha for rain water to go [gutter?]	dbor pa
དབོར་བ	transport	dbor ba
དབོར་ཡོང	transport/ bring to where 1 is	dbor yong
དབོལ	extract, squeeze out	dbol
དབོལ་བ	(A; 1) 'pho bar byed pa, gsho ba; 2) hard to fathom, deep	dbol ba
དབོས་པ	[arch] skrang ba, sbos pa	dbos pa
དབྱ་སེམས	derisive feeling, deride	dbya sems
དབྱག་གཉེན	vasubandhu	dbyag gnyen
དབྱང་ཀོང	Rangoon	dbyang kong
དབྱང་ཀྱིས་བསྙད	1 of 12 gsung rab yan lag	dbyang kyis bsnyad
དབྱང་རླངས	oxygen	dbyang rlangs
དབྱང་གསལ	vowels and consonants	dbyang gsal
དབྱངས	vowel sounds (60), ritual songs and music, melodious song, melody, vowel, metrical rhyme, tune	dbyangs
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ང་རོ	full voice	dbyangs kyi nga ro
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ང་རོ་དང་བཅས་པ	with a full voice	dbyangs kyi nga ro dang bcas pa
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་རྟ་ལ་བསྐྱོན	mount the horse of melody	dbyangs kyi rta la bskyon
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་རྟ་ལ་དྲངས་ཏེ་ལེན་པ	take the reins of the horse of melody, sing melodious songs	dbyangs kyi rta la drangs te len pa
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་མཚམས་ཚིགས	rhythm	dbyangs kyi mtshams tshigs
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ཁག	diverse melodies	dbyangs kyi yan khag
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	varieties of songs, diverse harmonies	dbyangs kyi yan lag
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of melody	dbyangs kyi yan lag lnga
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག་ཅུ	sixty modulations [of voice]	dbyangs kyi yan lag drug cu
དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ	chanting manuals	dbyangs kyi yi ge
དབྱངས་ཀྱིས	snyan pa'i dbyangs kyis	dbyangs kyis
དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བསྙད་པ	proclamation in song	dbyangs kyis bsnyad pa
དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བསྙད་པའི་སྡེ	hymns and praises [1 of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu	dbyangs kyis bsnyad pa'i sde
དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བ་སྙད་པ	proclamation in song	dbyangs kyis ba snyad pa
དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བ་སྙད་པའི་སྡེ	hymns and praises	dbyangs kyis ba snyad pa'i sde
དབྱངས་དཀར་པོ	white Sarasvati	dbyangs dkar po
དབྱངས་སྐྱིད	pleasant melody	dbyangs skyid
དབྱངས་བསྐུལ	a song of calling forth	dbyangs bskul
དབྱངས་གྱི་ཡན་ཁག	diverse melodies	dbyangs gyi yan khag
དབྱངས་གྱིས་བ་སྙད་པའི་སྡེ	proclamation in song 1910	dbyangs gyis ba snyad pa'i sde
དབྱངས་སྒྲོག	singer of the gods, bee	dbyangs sgrog
དབྱངས་སྒྲོགས	fly, bee, resounding melody realm	dbyangs sgrogs
དབྱངས་ངེས་པ་གསུམ	CHN	dbyangs nges pa gsum
དབྱངས་ངེས་པའི་བྱ་དཀའི་རྒྱན	tshigs bcad gcig gi tshig rkang re re'am, bzhi ga la ai sogs dbyangs re re kho na'i sgra'i nges pa sbyar te ston pa'i rgyan zhig	dbyangs nges pa'i bya dka'i rgyan
དབྱངས་ཅན	vowel	dbyangs can
དབྱངས་ཅན་དཀར་མོ	white Sarasvati	dbyangs can dkar mo
དབྱངས་ཅན་གྲུབ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	{dngul chu dbyangs can grub pa'i rdo rje} 18091887. A direct disciple of his uncle, {dngul chu thogs med} who was a direct student of the eight Situ Rinpoche, Chökyi Jungney. He and his uncle carri...	dbyangs can grub pa'i rdo rje
དབྱངས་ཅན་དགའ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས	a kya yongs 'dzin	dbyangs can dga' ba'i blo gros
དབྱངས་ཅན་དགྱེས་གླུ	commentary on the snyan ngag me long [called the dbyangs can dgyes glu composed in the 11th fire pig yr by rgyal dbang lnga pa]	dbyangs can dgyes glu
དབྱངས་ཅན་དགྱེས་པའི་རོལ་མཚོ	{dbyangs can dgyes pa'i rol mtsho}	dbyangs can dgyes pa'i rol mtsho
དབྱངས་ཅན་བྱ་ཀ་ར་ན	the melodious bird karana	dbyangs can bya ka ra na
དབྱངས་ཅན་མ	Sarasvati goddess of learning [shes rab stsol ba'i lha mo zhig mythologically in the 1st kalpa S great ocean moved by wind de'i nang du brtan g.yo'i language sounds all rab tu snyan par grags pas b...	dbyangs can ma
དབྱངས་ཅན་མ་དཀར་པོ	white Sarasvati	dbyangs can ma dkar po
ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ་བྱུང	she spoke the Dharma in a voice as sweet and boundless as that of the goddess Sarasvati	thogs pa med pa byung
དབྱངས་ཅན་མའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	sadhana of Sarasvati	dbyangs can ma'i sgrub thabs
དབྱངས་ཅན་ལྷ་མོ	Sarasvati goddess of learning	dbyangs can lha mo
དབྱངས་གཅིག	one purpose (?)	dbyangs gcig
དབྱངས་གཅིག་པུ་པ	SK vowels gcig rkyang las med pa'i tshig //aaaapehi//aa//aiaindrapashya//ai// auautishtha//au/	dbyangs gcig pu pa
དབྱངས་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 sanskrit vowels [aa ' ai 'i, au 'u, ri r'i, li l'i, ae aee, ao aoo, aam aa]	dbyangs bcu drug
དབྱངས་བཅུ་པ	Venus	dbyangs bcu pa
དབྱངས་འཆམ	dance performed to chanted melody (in dance)	dbyangs 'cham
དབྱངས་འཆར	dbyangs yig la brten nas brtag pa'i rtsis	dbyangs 'char
དབྱངས་འཆར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	the tantra of the arising of vowels [the deity dbang phyug chen po and goddess u ma, zhu ba zhu lan gyi tshul du gsungs par bshad, showing many bde sdug legs nyes rgyal pham etc brtag thabs kyi 'kh...	dbyangs 'char gyi rgyud
དབྱངས་འཆར་གྱི་རྩིས	by joining vowels and consonants legs nyes brtsi tshul	dbyangs 'char gyi rtsis
དབྱངས་འཆར་རྒྱུད	the Yuddhavijaya Tantra	dbyangs 'char rgyud
དབྱངས་ཉམས་པ	1) w missing vowels; 2) sanskrit consonants w/o vowels	dbyangs nyams pa
དབྱངས་སྙན	1) cuckoo; 2) gandharva; 3) divine singer; 4) melodic voice/ sound	dbyangs snyan
དབྱངས་སྙན་སྒྲོག་པ	calling out sweetly	dbyangs snyan sgrog pa
དབྱངས་སྙན་པ	melodic sound	dbyangs snyan pa
དབྱངས་བསྙད	proclaim in song, hymns and praises	dbyangs bsnyad
དབྱངས་བསྙད་པའི་སྡེ	pitaka of prose and verse combined, hymns and praises [1 of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu	dbyangs bsnyad pa'i sde
དབྱངས་རྟ	[the horse of] melody. sgra'i mtho dman phra sbom sogs mtshon pa'i rtags, //all folk songs have dbyangs rta nges can	dbyangs rta
དབྱངས་རྟ་སྙན་པོ	melodious tune, song, melody	dbyangs rta snyan po
དབྱངས་འཐེན་པ	chant the song, keep time	dbyangs 'then pa
ཚིག་འབྲུ་སྨྲ	learn the meanings of sounds and letters	tshig 'bru smra
དབྱངས་བདག	Jupiter	dbyangs bdag
དབྱངས་བདུན	glu dbyangs kyi nges pa bdun CHN	dbyangs bdun
དབྱངས་ལྡན་མ	songstress with musical voice	dbyangs ldan ma
དབྱངས་ལྡེམ་མོ	singer of the gods	dbyangs ldem mo
དབྱངས་རྣ་སྙན་པོ	melodious tune	dbyangs rna snyan po
དབྱངས་པ	1) sing, song melody; 2) umdze, byang 'dren etc, leader of song/chant	dbyangs pa
དབྱངས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the good qualities of song	dbyangs pa'i yon tan
དབྱངས་བྲལ	letter w/o vowels	dbyangs bral
དབྱངས་བླངས་པ	dbyangs 'di blangs so - sang this song	dbyangs blangs pa
དབྱངས་མེད	vowelless letters	dbyangs med
དབྱངས་བཞི	four vowels	dbyangs bzhi
དབྱངས་ཟིན་པ	hung	dbyangs zin pa
དབྱངས་ཡིག	vowel	dbyangs yig
དབྱངས་ཡིག་མིན་པ	consonant	dbyangs yig min pa
དབྱངས་ཡིག་བཞི	four vowels	dbyangs yig bzhi
དབྱངས་རོལ	chanting and music 1911	dbyangs rol
དབྱངས་ལོགས་པ	mtshungs pa dang 'dra ba ma yin pa'i SK mtshams sbyor four letters//ae aee ao aoo//aee//ae//aoo//ao/	dbyangs logs pa
དབྱངས་སུ་བསྙད་པ	Proclamations in Song; one of 12 aspects of excellent speech {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	dbyangs su bsnyad pa
དབྱངས་སུ་བླངས་པ	sang this song	dbyangs su blangs pa
དབྱངས་སུ་ལེན་པ	to sing	dbyangs su len pa
དབྱངས་གསལ	vowels and consonants	dbyangs gsal
དབྱངས་གསལ་བརྡ་རྟགས	phonetic alphabet	dbyangs gsal brda rtags
དབྱངས་གསལ་ཡི་གེ	1) alphabet; 2) letters, vowels and consonants	dbyangs gsal yi ge
དབྱངས་གསལ་ཡེ་གེ	alphabet, letter, vowels and consonant	dbyangs gsal ye ge
དབྱངས་གསལ་ལ་སོགས	vowels, consonants and so forth	dbyangs gsal la sogs
དབྱད་སྒོམ	examining meditation	dbyad sgom
དབྱན་གནས་པར་བཞུགས་བཞུགས་པ	retreat for the duration of the summer rains	dbyan gnas par bzhugs bzhugs pa
དབྱར	short summer of tibet, 1 of dus bzhi	dbyar
དབྱར་ཀ	summer	dbyar ka
དབྱར་ཀྱི་དུས	summertime	dbyar kyi dus
དབྱར་སྐྱིད	summer outing/ picnic/ celebration	dbyar skyid
དབྱར་སྐྱེས	summer born	dbyar skyes
དབྱར་སྐྱེས་རྔ	thunder	dbyar skyes rnga
དབྱར་ཁ	summer, summertime	dbyar kha
དབྱར་ཁ་སྤེན་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	kind of rum thags kyi ri mo	dbyar kha spen ma'i me tog
དབྱར་ཁང	summer residence	dbyar khang
དབྱར་ཁའི་བ་མོ་ལྟ་བུ	lady like summer frost	dbyar kha'i ba mo lta bu
དབྱར་ཁས་བླངས	accept the summer retreat	dbyar khas blangs
དབྱར་ཁས་བླངས་པ	accept the summer retreat	dbyar khas blangs pa
དབྱར་གོས	1) summer garments, summer robes; 2) monks's raincoat	dbyar gos
དབྱར་གྱི་གོས་རས་ཆེན	cotton summer robe	dbyar gyi gos ras chen
དབྱར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་མོ	grismadevi, goddess of summer	dbyar gyi rgyal mo
དབྱར་གྱི་རྔ་གསང	thunder	dbyar gyi rnga gsang
དབྱར་གྱི་རྟ་ཞྭ	summer riding hat	dbyar gyi rta zhwa
དབྱར་གྱི་ཐིག་པ	drops of summer, rain	dbyar gyi thig pa
དབྱར་གྱི་དུས	dbyar tsam gyi dus, from the 16th day of the 6th month to the 15th of the 7th	dbyar gyi dus
དབྱར་གྱི་དཔལ	the glory of summer	dbyar gyi dpal
དབྱར་གྱི་གཞི་དགོས་པ་དགུ	CHN	dbyar gyi gzhi dgos pa dgu
དབྱར་གྱི་རས་ཆེན	cotton summer robe	dbyar gyi ras chen
དབྱར་དགུན་མེད་པར	without distinction of summer and winter, at all times	dbyar dgun med par
དབྱར་རྒུན་ཉི་ལྡོག	the summer and winter solstice	dbyar rgun nyi ldog
དབྱར་སྒར	summer camp	dbyar sgar
དབྱར་རྔ	thunder	dbyar rnga
དབྱར་རྔ་དྲག་ཏུ་ལྡིར་བ	the dragon thundered its voice	dbyar rnga drag tu ldir ba
དབྱར་སྔ་མ	earlier summer retreat	dbyar snga ma
དབྱར་གཅིག་མ	1 year old calf	dbyar gcig ma
དབྱར་ཆར	summer rain	dbyar char
དབྱར་ཆས	summer clothes	dbyar chas
དབྱར་ཆུ	summer water/ flood	dbyar chu
དབྱར་མཆོད	summer puja, offering for summer retreat	dbyar mchod
དབྱར་མཇལ	dbyar kha'i mjal kha, sngar rtse slob grva bas dbyar kha 5th month Dalai Lama dbyar mjal zhu srol yod	dbyar mjal
དབྱར་ཉལ་ཞིང	field unplanted for a yr	dbyar nyal zhing
དབྱར་ཉལ་ལངས	zhing ga 'debs 'jog res mos byed pa'i so nam gyi ming	dbyar nyal langs
དབྱར་ཉི་ལྡོག	summer sun reversal in the 5th month sgang la nyi ma finishes the northern and begins southern transit	dbyar nyi ldog
དབྱར་གཉིས	2 rainy months	dbyar gnyis
དབྱར་གཉིས་མ	two year old calf, 2nd month of summer	dbyar gnyis ma
དབྱར་བསྙལ་བསླངས	dbyar nyal langs	dbyar bsnyal bslangs
དབྱར་སྟོད	1st part of summer	dbyar stod
དབྱར་སྟོན	1) summer rains festival; 2) summer and autumn; 3) 6th month, last month of summer = dbyar tha chung	dbyar ston
དབྱར་ཐ་མ	last of summer	dbyar tha ma
དབྱར་ཐའི་སྒང་ཚད	dkyil gyi tshad of the last month of summer	dbyar tha'i sgang tshad
དབྱར་ཐའི་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the last month of summer	dbyar tha'i dbugs thob
དབྱར་ཐུང་ངུའི་དུས	16th day of the 7th month	dbyar thung ngu'i dus
དབྱར་ཐོག	summer	dbyar thog
དབྱར་དུས	summer, summertime	dbyar dus
དབྱར་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྲིན་ལྟར་འདུས་པ	gathered like rain clouds in summer	dbyar dus kyi sprin ltar 'dus pa
དབྱར་འདབ	platform or stand for vessel/ begging bowl 'jog sa'i 'og gzhi	dbyar 'dab
དབྱར་འདེབས	summer planting/ crops	dbyar 'debs
དབྱར་སྡུད	summer harvest	dbyar sdud
དབྱར་སྡུད་ལོ་ཏོག	summer harvest crops dbyar gnam lha mo ltar mdzes par skyes has now become Varsika, as beautiful as a goddess	dbyar sdud lo tog
དབྱར་གནས	summer residence in religious confinement, solitary summer fasting of the monks, the summer retreat of monks	dbyar gnas
དབྱར་གནས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	[sbyor ba gtsug lag khang byi dor bya zhing, gnas mal sta gon dang, gang zag sta gon sogs byas nas, dngos gzhi bla gab dang bcas pa'i gnas su dge slong gi mdun du sngags tshig lan gsum brjod pas db...	dbyar gnas kyi cho ga
དབྱར་གནས་སྔ་མ	the earlier summer retreat	dbyar gnas snga ma
དབྱར་གནས་གནང	doing the summer retreat	dbyar gnas gnang
དབྱར་གནས་པར་བཞུགས་པ	to retreat for the duration of the summer rains	dbyar gnas par bzhugs pa
དབྱར་གནས་ཕྱི་མ	the later summer retreat	dbyar gnas phyi ma
དབྱར་གནས་མ	Varsika {rgyal po'i btsun mo sngon ma dbyar gnas ma zhes} Queen Varsika, the king's first wife	dbyar gnas ma
དབྱར་གནས་ཞལ་བཞེས	acceptance of the precepts for the ~	dbyar gnas zhal bzhes
དབྱར་གནས་ལས་ཉམས་པ	[one who does] not go into summer retreat	dbyar gnas las nyams pa
དབྱར་གནས་སུ་མ་ཞུགས་པ	[one who does] not enter into summer retreat	dbyar gnas su ma zhugs pa
དབྱར་པ	poplar	dbyar pa
དབྱར་པ་ནག་པོ	black poplar	dbyar pa nag po
དབྱར་ལྤགས	1) shing dbyar pa ste sbyar pa'i pags pa; 2) summer pelt of sheep etc.	dbyar lpags
དབྱར་ཕྱི་མ	later summer retreat [khrums zla day 1 1st month of autumn 7th month 16th day dbyar khas len pa'o]	dbyar phyi ma
དབྱར་བ	month of april-may	dbyar ba
དབྱར་བྱིན་རླབས	dbyar gnas skabs su dbyar khas len pa'i gang zag gis gnang ba ma thob par mtshams kyi phyi rol tu zhag gcig gnas kyang dbyar ral ba'i nyes pa 'byung la, 'on kyang chos ldan gyi dgos pa'i dbang gis ...	dbyar byin rlabs
དབྱར་བྱུང	summer	dbyar byung
དབྱར་འབྲིང་སྒང་ཚད	dkyil sgang gi tshad of the middle month of summer	dbyar 'bring sgang tshad
དབྱར་འབྲིང་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the middle month of summer	dbyar 'bring dbugs thob
དབྱར་སྦྱོར	preparations for summer retreat	dbyar sbyor
དབྱར་མ	fallow field [not planted for 1 year]	dbyar ma
དབྱར་མར	1) dbyar gzhung gi mar; 2) nomad region grain etc. sold te rin 'bab kyi mar dbyar kha sprod len byed pa	dbyar mar
དབྱར་མོ་ཁང	nuns's vihara/ temple	dbyar mo khang
དབྱར་རྩ་དབྱུང་འབུ	like grass in summer but worm-like in winter, kind of grass which grows abundantly in tibet, root is bladder medicine	dbyar rtsa dbyung 'bu
དབྱར་རྩྭ་དགུན་འབུ	chinese caterpillar fungus cordyceps sinensis (berk.) sacc.	dbyar rtswa dgun 'bu
དབྱར་རཙབ༹་དགོན་བུ	"summer grass winter worm," medicinal tonic	dbyar rtsva dgon bu
དབྱར་རྩྭ་དགོན་བུ	"summer grass winter worm," med. tonic. herb	dbyar rtswa dgon bu
དབྱར་ཚུགས	dbyar zug	dbyar tshugs
དབྱར་ཚུལ་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	monks summer retreat kyi dkyil 'khor remain in, until it is over, properly spend the summer in retreat	dbyar tshul du bzhugs pa
དབྱར་མཚེར	place nomads stay in summer, summer pasture	dbyar mtsher
དབྱར་མཚོ་རྒྱས་པ	energetic, vigorous	dbyar mtsho rgyas pa
དབྱར་ཞ	summer-hat	dbyar zha
དབྱར་ཞྭ	summer hat	dbyar zhwa
དབྱར་ཞབ༹་བསེ་ཐེབས	ras bse hat	dbyar zhva bse thebs
དབྱར་ཞོ	summer curds	dbyar zho
དབྱར་ཟུག	beginning of summer	dbyar zug
དབྱར་ཟླ	months of summer [4th 5th 6th]	dbyar zla
དབྱར་ཟླ་ཐ་ཆུང	the last month of summer	dbyar zla tha chung
དབྱར་ཟླ་འབྲིང་པོ	the middle of the three months of summer	dbyar zla 'bring po
དབྱར་ཟླ་ར་པ	the month of april-may	dbyar zla ra pa
དབྱར་ཟླ་ར་བ	the 1st month of summer	dbyar zla ra ba
དབྱར་ཟླ་གསུམ	the three months of summer	dbyar zla gsum
དབྱར་གཟིགས	in summer ri klung skyed sar spro gseng du 'gro ba	dbyar gzigs
དབྱར་རའི་སྒང་ཚད	1st month of summer dkyil sgang gi tshad	dbyar ra'i sgang tshad
དབྱར་རའི་དབུགས་ཐོབ	beginning of the 1st month of summer	dbyar ra'i dbugs thob
དབྱར་རལ་པའི་ཉེས་པ	the violation of breaking summer retreat	dbyar ral pa'i nyes pa
དབྱར་རིང་པོའི་དུས	7th month 17th day to 10th month 15th day	dbyar ring po'i dus
དབྱར་ལམ	1) path narrow/ nges pa can; 2) strict rules/ careful conduct	dbyar lam
དབྱར་ས	place 1 stays in summer	dbyar sa
དབྱར་སངས	summer spro gseng	dbyar sangs
དབྱར་སོས་དུས	in summer	dbyar sos dus
དབྱར་གསུམ	1) shad dam three yr old cattle; 2) three months of summer	dbyar gsum
དབྱར་གསུམ་ནམ་ཟླ	summer	dbyar gsum nam zla
དབྱལ	expert, old word for a bonpo	dbyal
དབྱལ་བ	hell being	dbyal ba
དབྱལ་བ་བཞི	CHN	dbyal ba bzhi
དབྱི	lynx, [f 'byid] will wipe off, blot out, efface	dbyi
དབྱི་ཀྲང	president of a legislative body, speaker of the house etc	dbyi krang
དབྱི་དཀར	1) {dbyi dkar} tree; 2) predator white lynx	dbyi dkar
དབྱི་གུ	little stick, hole	dbyi gu
དབྱི་ཏ་ལི	Italy	dbyi ta li
དབྱི་ནག	1) kind of tree; 2) black lynx [predator dbyi or g.yi]	dbyi nag
དབྱི་ལྤགས	skin of lynx	dbyi lpags
དབྱི་ཕྲུག	young lynx	dbyi phrug
དབྱི་བ	'dag par byed pa [f 'byid pa] will wipe off, blot out, efface	dbyi ba
དབྱི་མོ	predator dbyi mo, flax ?	dbyi mo
དབྱི་མོང	piper chaba used against delirium	dbyi mong
དབྱི་མོང་དཀར་པོ	clematis aethusaefolia turcz.	dbyi mong dkar po
དབྱི་མོང་ཁྲ་པོ	clematis orientalis l. var. tangutica maxim.	dbyi mong khra po
དབྱི་མོང་ནག་པོ	clematis macropetala ledeb.	dbyi mong nag po
དབྱི་མོང་སེར་པོ	clematis orientalis l. var. intricata (bunge) maxim.	dbyi mong ser po
དབྱི་དམར	red lynx 1913	dbyi dmar
དབྱི་ཙེ	chair	dbyi tse
དབྱི་ཚང	lynx's lair	dbyi tshang
དབྱི་ཡོན	member of parliament, senator, congressman	dbyi yon
དབྱི་ཡོན་གྲོས་མི	member of parliament, senator, congressman	dbyi yon gros mi
དབྱི་སི་ལན	moslem, islamic	dbyi si lan
དབྱི་སི་ལན་ཆོས་ལུགས	islam	dbyi si lan chos lugs
དབྱི་སུའོ	Aesop	dbyi su'o
དབྱི་སེ་ལི	Israel	dbyi se li
དབྱི་ཧུའེ་གྲོས་ཐོགས	parliament	dbyi hu'e gros thogs
དབྱི་ཧུའེ་གྲོས་ཐོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས	parliamentary system	dbyi hu'e gros thogs kyi lam lugs
དབྱི་ཧོ་ཐོན	boxers [in the rebellion]	dbyi ho thon
དབྱིག	SA nor, precious stone of liver color, jewel	dbyig
དབྱིག་གི་ཁུ་བ	name of sita river	dbyig gi khu ba
དབྱིག་གི་ཆར་འབེབས	rnam thos sras, Vaishravana	dbyig gi char 'bebs
དབྱིག་གི་སྙིང	1) excellent gem or expensive precious thing; 2) Bhrama	dbyig gi snying
དབྱིག་གི་ལྟེ་བ	1) Vishnu; 2) Te Se snow mt.	dbyig gi lte ba
དབྱིག་གི་གདངས་ཅན	like a gold vessel a sound mtho zhing zab pa	dbyig gi gdangs can
དབྱིག་གི་བློ་གྲོས་མ	earth	dbyig gi blo gros ma
དབྱིག་གུ	small stick, hiccough	dbyig gu
དབྱིག་དངོས	things of wealth	dbyig dngos
དབྱིག་ཆར་འབེབས	SA rnam thos sras	dbyig char 'bebs
དབྱིག་མཆོག	best of treasures	dbyig mchog
དབྱིག་གཉེན	Vasubandhu, [brother of Asanga]	dbyig gnyen
དབྱིག་ལྟེ་བ	a name of kailas mountain, name of kailas mountain	dbyig lte ba
དབྱིག་དུག	1) poison made of precious substances; 2) rin chen rigs mi'i khog pa'i nang du shor nas phog pa'i dug	dbyig dug
དབྱིག་རྡར	kind of rdar rdo	dbyig rdar
དབྱིག་ལྡན	epithet of maheshvara	dbyig ldan
དབྱིག་པ	stick	dbyig pa
དབྱིག་པ་གཅོད་པ	cut a stick	dbyig pa gcod pa
དབྱིག་པུ	implement for cleaning	dbyig pu
དབྱིག་བུ	1) sharpening stone; 2) khod snyoms byed shing bu'i implement	dbyig bu
དབྱིག་དབྱིག	dye ink etc dbur 'dul byed dus sound	dbyig dbyig
དབྱིག་མ	epithet of the goddess gauri	dbyig ma
དབྱིག་མང	much wealth	dbyig mang
དབྱིག་མེད	poor	dbyig med
དབྱིག་མོ	1) Tshon rtsi zhib mo; 2) Zhib mo dang, 'jam po,//gos dar dbyig mo	dbyig mo
དབྱིག་མཛོད	safe for valuables	dbyig mdzod
དབྱིག་འཛིན	the earth	dbyig 'dzin
དབྱིག་བཤེས	vasumitra	dbyig bshes
དབྱིགས	SA nor, precious stone of liver color	dbyigs
དབྱིགས་གཉིན	lord of wealth	dbyigs gnyin
དབྱིང་ཞ	summer-hat	dbying zha
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་བཀའ་སྲུང	the space dharma protectors	dbyings kyi bka' srung
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the kaya/ body of space (H	dbyings kyi sku
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གསུམ	the three kayas of (basic) space. Syn {ngo bo rang bzhin thugs rje}	dbyings kyi sku gsum
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	1 of sgron ma bzhi, the light of the primordial dimension	dbyings kyi sgron ma
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the viewpoint/ gaze of space	dbyings kyi lta stangs
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of the ultimate dimension, SA thig le drug	dbyings kyi thig le
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དོན་དམ	1 of dkor bdun	dbyings kyi don dam
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	SA mi skyod pa	dbyings kyi dbang phyug
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ	consort of Vairochana, Akashadatvishvari	dbyings kyi dbang phyug ma
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་མ་མོ་དྲུག	the six mamos of space CHN	dbyings kyi ma mo drug
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་གཞི	the ground of space	dbyings kyi gzhi
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཡུམ་ཆེན་ལྔ	the consorts of the five families	dbyings kyi yum chen lnga
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མ་ལྔ	Five Great Mothers of Space (the 5 elements)	dbyings kyi yum chen ma lnga
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	the range of space	dbyings kyi ra ba
དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས་མཆོད་པ	offering rites to the deities of the pure dimensions	dbyings kyi lha tshogs mchod pa
དབྱིངས་གྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	wrathful deities of space	dbyings gyi lha tshogs
དབྱིངས་གཅིག	(to be of the) same/ a single basic space; oneness of basic space	dbyings gcig
དབྱིངས་ཆེན	vast [teachings]	dbyings chen
དབྱིངས་སྟོང	empty space	dbyings stong
དབྱིངས་དག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the pristine cognition of the pure expanse 1914	dbyings dag pa'i ye shes
དབྱིངས་དང་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཝིསྡོམ་ནོན	dual w space, non-dual space and wisdom	dbyings dang gnyis su med pa'i ye shes wisdom non
དབྱིངས་དང་མཉམ	as limitless as space	dbyings dang mnyam
དབྱིངས་དང་གཟུགས	wisdom and form	dbyings dang gzugs
དབྱིངས་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས	space and wakefulness	dbyings dang ye shes
པའི་བདག་ཉིད	the sovereign of the same taste of space and wisdom	pa'i bdag nyid
དབྱིངས་དང་རིག་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable space and awareness	dbyings dang rig pa dbyer med
དབྱིངས་དང་རིག་པའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	the viewpoint of awareness and wisdom, the gaze of awareness and wisdom	dbyings dang rig pa'i lta stangs
དབྱིངས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	ultimate sphere of suchness	dbyings de bzhin nyid
དབྱིངས་དོན་དམ་པའི་བདེན་པ	ultimate/absolute truth of dharmadhatu	dbyings don dam pa'i bden pa
དབྱིངས་ནས་བཞེངས	approach from space	dbyings nas bzhengs
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་དག	pure space	dbyings rnam dag
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་དག་གི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of pure space	dbyings rnam dag gi sgron ma
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་པར་དག	SA thig le drug	dbyings rnam par dag
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་རྒྱུད	Pure Space Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana dbyings rnam par dag pa'i sgron ma lamp of the pure sphere of awareness	dbyings rnam par dag pa'i rgyud
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of the purity of the ultimate dimension	dbyings rnam par dag pa'i thig le
དབྱིངས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	the utterly pure nature of space	dbyings rnam par dag pa'i bdag nyid
དབྱིངས་སྣང	displays/ appearances of space	dbyings snang
དབྱིངས་དཔྱད	dgongs pas dpyad pa,//de don 'grig min dbyings dpyad yod pa zhu ???	dbyings dpyad
དབྱིངས་ཕྱུག	queen of space [Akasha]Dhatvishvari	dbyings phyug
དབྱིངས་ཕྱུག་མ	dhatisvari, Space Mistress	dbyings phyug ma
དབྱིངས་འཕོ་འགྱུར་མེད	unchanging space of the essential condition	dbyings 'pho 'gyur med
དབྱིངས་འཕོ་འགྱུར་མེད་པའི་ཀློང	1 of klong dgu	dbyings 'pho 'gyur med pa'i klong
དབྱིངས་བྱུང	derivative of/ from basic space	dbyings byung
དབྱིངས་ཞུགས	addicted	dbyings zhugs
དབྱིངས་ཞུགས་ཤག་པ	has become addicted	dbyings zhugs shag pa
དབྱིངས་ཡེ་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisibility of ultimate sphere and primordial wisdom	dbyings ye dbyer med
དབྱིངས་རང་བྱུང་གི་རོལ་པ	the play of	dbyings rang byung gi rol pa
དབྱིངས་རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་དག་པ	naturally pure space	dbyings rang bzhin gyis dag pa
དབྱིངས་རིག	unity of basic space and awareness	dbyings rig
དབྱིངས་རིག་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྲེས་པ	to mingle / merge space and awareness	dbyings rig gcig tu bsres pa
དབྱིངས་རིག་གཉིས་མེད	non-duality between the Ying and the Rigpa	dbyings rig gnyis med
དབྱིངས་རིག་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable space and awareness	dbyings rig dbyer med
དབྱིངས་རིག་མི་ཤིགས་པའི་སྒྲུམ་བུ	indestructible casket of the sphere of awareness	dbyings rig mi shigs pa'i sgrum bu
དབྱིངས་རིག་མི་ཤིགས་པའི་སྒྲོམ་བུ	indestructible casket of the sphere of awareness	dbyings rig mi shigs pa'i sgrom bu
དབྱིངས་རིག་རང་སོ་ལ་འཇོག་པ	rest in the natural state of space and awareness	dbyings rig rang so la 'jog pa
དབྱིངས་རུམ	the womb of space	dbyings rum
དབྱིངས་ལ་ལྟོས	to observe the ultimate dimension	dbyings la ltos
དབྱིངས་ལས་བྱུང	arise from space	dbyings las byung
དབྱིངས་ས	sde srid or lotus feet 'bod pa'i [h]	dbyings sa
དབྱིངས་སུ	in itself, spontaneously, in space	dbyings su
དབྱིངས་སུ་གྲོལ་བ	cleared away (the darkness, liberate into space, free into space	dbyings su grol ba
དབྱིངས་སུ་ངེས	are only the ultimate dimension	dbyings su nges
དབྱིངས་སུ་ཐིམ	dissolve into space	dbyings su thim
དབྱིངས་སུ་ཐིམ་པ	dissolve into space	dbyings su thim pa
དབྱིངས་སུ་དག	cleared away (the darkness), into space, freeing	dbyings su dag
དབྱིངས་སུ་དག་པ	cleared away [the darkness], into space, freeing, in its basic purity, spontaneously purified. Syn {gnas su dag pa} in its basic purity	dbyings su dag pa
དབྱིངས་སུ་འདུ	gather into space	dbyings su 'du
དབྱིངས་སུ་བསྡུ	gathered into space	dbyings su bsdu
དབྱིངས་སུ་ཞི	pacify into/ eliminate as space	dbyings su zhi
དབྱིངས་སུ་ཡལ	fades away, disappears	dbyings su yal
དབྱིངས་གསུམ	the three spaces CHN	dbyings gsum
དབྱིད་རྡོ་རྗེ	name of he ba dzra	dbyid rdo rje
དབྱིན	incite, instigate, sit on, English [person], England,	dbyin
དབྱིན་སྐད	english language, English language	dbyin skad
དབྱིན་གོ	England, UK	dbyin go
དབྱིན་གོ་བ	English [person]	dbyin go ba
དབྱིན་ཇི	English [person], England, westerner	dbyin ji
དབྱིན་ཇིའི་མི	british	dbyin ji'i mi
དབྱིན་ཇིའི་ཡུལ	britain	dbyin ji'i yul
དབྱིན་དྲུང	English-language secretary	dbyin drung
དབྱིན་པ	incite, instigate, set on	dbyin pa
དབྱིན་པང	UK pound	dbyin pang
དབྱིན་བོད	Anglo-TT	dbyin bod
དབྱིན་བྱེད་པ	incite, instigate, set on	dbyin byed pa
དབྱིན་གཞུང	government of England	dbyin gzhung
དབྱིན་ཟླ	W month	dbyin zla
དབྱིན་ཡིག་གྱི་འབྲེལ་རྟགས	hyphen	dbyin yig gyi 'brel rtags
དབྱིན་ཡུལ	England	dbyin yul
དབྱིན་ཡུལ་གྱི་སྒོར་མོ	pound	dbyin yul gyi sgor mo
དབྱིན་ཡུལ་གྱི་མི	english	dbyin yul gyi mi
དབྱིན་ཡུལ་གྱི་སློབ་མ	English students	dbyin yul gyi slob ma
དབྱིན་ཡུལ་ཝེལ	Wales	dbyin yul wel
དབྱིན་ལོ	W year	dbyin lo
དབྱིན་ཧྲན་རི་རྒྱུད	Yin Shan mt range	dbyin hran ri rgyud
དབྱིབ	(not in das)	dbyib
དབྱིབ་མོ	[arch] gyo mo: rdza ma	dbyib mo
དབྱིབས	shape, form, figure, outline [includes words like long and short tall]	dbyibs
དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Yoga of shape. A synonym for the development stage; the practice of visualizing the form of the deity	dbyibs kyi rnal 'byor
དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་ཟིལ་གནོན་བཞི	the four materials of form	dbyibs kyi zil gnon bzhi
དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	symmetrical shape	dbyibs kyi gzugs
དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 shapes	dbyibs kyi gzugs brgyad
དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བཅུ	the 10 shapes CHN	dbyibs kyi gzugs bcu
དབྱིབས་ཁ་དོག	shape and color	dbyibs kha dog
དབྱིབས་གྲུ་བཞི་མ	rectangular, square, quadrilateral	dbyibs gru bzhi ma
དབྱིབས་དགྱེ་བ	stooping, cringing, writhing	dbyibs dgye ba
དབྱིབས་འགྱུར	transformation	dbyibs 'gyur
དབྱིབས་བརྒྱད	the 8 shapes	dbyibs brgyad
དབྱིབས་སྔགས་ཆོས་གསུམ	shape, manta, and dharma [a developing stage yoga, the visualized is shape, the recited is mantra, luminosity ... bskyed pa dbyibs, bzlas pa sngags, 'od gsal 'jug ldang chos kyi rnal 'byor ro]	dbyibs sngags chos gsum
དབྱིབས་ཅན་ངར་ལྕགས	shaped steel	dbyibs can ngar lcags
དབྱིབས་ཆུང	small	dbyibs chung
དབྱིབས་ཆུང་ཁེ་ལས	small enterprises	dbyibs chung khe las
དབྱིབས་ཆེན	large	dbyibs chen
དབྱིབས་ཆེན་ཁེ་ལས	large enterprises	dbyibs chen khe las
དབྱིབས་འཆོ་བ	bzo lta 'don pa'am bzo ba,//dpe gsar 'phrul chas kyi dbyibs 'cho ba,//so nam lag cha'i dbyibs 'cho ba	dbyibs 'cho ba
དབྱིབས་ཐོན་པ	bzo dbyibs grub pa'am dod pa,//bris 'bur lag bzo'i dbyibs thon pa,//sbyangs 'bras yig gzugs kyi dbyibs thon pa	dbyibs thon pa
དབྱིབས་མཐའ་བཞི་མ	quadrilateral	dbyibs mtha' bzhi ma
དབྱིབས་དང་ཁ་དོག་གི་མུ་བཞི	the four extremes of shape and color [color and shape both la yin min gyi four extremes, the root four colors rtsa ba'i kha dog bzhi ni the extreme of color is shape is not, long and short, round a...	dbyibs dang kha dog gi mu bzhi
དབྱིབས་འདོན	make bloom	dbyibs 'don
དབྱིབས་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	blooming equipment	dbyibs 'don 'phrul 'khor
དབྱིབས་སྡུག་པ	1) beautiful shape; 2) bad shape [col]	dbyibs sdug pa
དབྱིབས་རྣམ་འགྱུར	shape or form	dbyibs rnam 'gyur
དབྱིབས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect shape	dbyibs phun sum tshogs pa
དབྱིབས་འབྲིང	middle-sized, medium	dbyibs 'bring
དབྱིབས་ཚད་རྩིས་རིག	geometry	dbyibs tshad rtsis rig
དབྱིབས་མཚུངས	similar shape	dbyibs mtshungs
དབྱིབས་མཛེས	pretty (shape, looking), nice	dbyibs mdzes
དབྱིབས་ཟིལ་གནོན་བཞི	the four masteries of form	dbyibs zil gnon bzhi
དབྱིབས་ཟུར་གསུམ	triangle	dbyibs zur gsum
དབྱིབས་ཟླུམ་པ	roundish in shape, bulbous	dbyibs zlum pa
དབྱིབས་གཟུགས	shape-forms	dbyibs gzugs
དབྱིབས་གཟུགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 shapes	dbyibs gzugs brgyad
དབྱིབས་བཟོ	1) design, shape, form, size [rlangs 'khor 'di dbyibs bzo 'bring zhig red]; 2) activities' situation, circumstances, status [thabs jus 'ding stangs [manner of making a plan] 'di'i dbyibs bzo khrig ...	dbyibs bzo
དབྱིབས་བཟོ་ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག	stable/ persistent/ unchanging situation/ circumstances/ status	dbyibs bzo khrig khrig
དབྱིབས་བཟོ་བྱེད	sculpture, mold	dbyibs bzo byed
དབྱིབས་བཟོ་འབྲིང	middle-sized	dbyibs bzo 'bring
དབྱིབས་བཟོའི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	plastic arts, sculpturing	dbyibs bzo'i sgyu rtsal
དབྱིབས་རིལ་ཟླུམ	globe	dbyibs ril zlum
དབྱིབས་ལ་ཟེར	diamond	dbyibs la zer
དབྱིབས་ལེ	[arch] chu bsro ba'i snod	dbyibs le
དབྱིབས་ལེགས	well-formed	dbyibs legs
དབྱིབས་ལེབ	tabulate	dbyibs leb
དབྱིབས་སུ	situation	dbyibs su
དབྱིབས་གསར	new model	dbyibs gsar
དབྱིས	Yi minority of PRC	dbyis
དབྱིས་པ	1) wipe/ rub off/ out, obliterate, annihilate; 2) pour/ rub plaster on	dbyis pa
དབྱུ་གུ	1) 1 day, 60 chu tshod chu tshod; 2) nyi tshod lta byed kyi little stick; 3) small stick; 4) tha skar [one of the rgyu skar nyer brgyad]; 5) gdos pa	dbyu gu
དབྱུ་གུ་བསྒྱུར	rdza mkhan	dbyu gu bsgyur
དབྱུ་གུ་ཟླ་བ	9th month {dbyug pa zla ba}-{dbyu gu}	dbyu gu zla ba
དབྱུ་གུའི་པོ་ལོ	polo	dbyu gu'i po lo
དབྱུག	mace	dbyug
དབྱུག་སྐོར	rgyag dbyug ste, g.yul las 'don skabs snye ma rdung byed cig	dbyug skor
དབྱུག་གུ	small staff, wand, rod, shaft, stick	dbyug gu
དབྱུག་གུ་སྐམ་ཁ	shing gi lde mig	dbyug gu skam kha
དབྱུག་གུ་ཅན	{bram ze dbyug gu can zhes pa} a brahmin called Dandana, Wielding a Cudgel	dbyug gu can
དབྱུག་གུ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	[TRS 130-4]	dbyug gu drug cu rtsa bzhi
དབྱུག་གུ་གསུམ	three poles	dbyug gu gsum
དབྱུག་གུའི་ཚེས	18th of the 9th month	dbyug gu'i tshes
དབྱུག་བཅོས	dpyad kyi nang tshan nad dmigs steng little stick rdeg pa'i means of curing, EG by pha dam pa sangs rgyas &, grub chen ao rgyan pa'i, de'u dmar dge bshes kyi dbyug bcos	dbyug bcos
དབྱུག་ལྕག་གཞུས་པ	to thresh	dbyug lcag gzhus pa
དབྱུག་ཏོ	stick/ staff	dbyug to
དབྱུག་ཏོ་ཅན	wielding a stick	dbyug to can
དབྱུག་ཐོ	mace	dbyug tho
དབྱུག་རྡོ	sling-stone	dbyug rdo
དབྱུག་པ	1) (Tha dad pa dbyugs pa, dbyug pa, dbyugs; 1) throw, hit beat w, 1916 stab; 2) throw away, abandon; 3) club, stick; 4) punishment; 5) swing, brandish, flourish	dbyug pa
དབྱུག་པ་རྒྱག	hit/ beat w a club/ stick	dbyug pa rgyag
དབྱུག་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	beat with a stick	dbyug pa rgyab pa
དབྱུག་པ་ཅན	1) Dandi; 2) Ashvagosha; 3) nyi ma'i 'khor; 4) lord of death; 5) carrying a stick/ club	dbyug pa can
དབྱུག་པ་ཟླ་བ	the ninth month	dbyug pa zla ba
དབྱུག་པའི་རྣ་ཅན	ox, bull	dbyug pa'i rna can
དབྱུག་པའི་སྣ་ཅན	stick nose, elephant	dbyug pa'i sna can
དབྱུག་པས་མཚན	ru rta	dbyug pas mtshan
དབྱུག་དབྱུག	gyug gyug //khu tshur gayas ga-yon gnyis dbyug dbyug byed pa	dbyug dbyug
དབྱུག་དབྱུག་བྱེད་པ	swing to and fro	dbyug dbyug byed pa
དབྱུག་འཛིན	epithet of vishnu	dbyug 'dzin
དབྱུག་བཞག	forget about, drop it	dbyug bzhag
དབྱུག་བཞག་པ	forget about it, drop it	dbyug bzhag pa
དབྱུག་ཟླ	dbyug gu month	dbyug zla
དབྱུག་ལས་འཇོག་པ	throw away	dbyug las 'jog pa
དབྱུགས	imp. of {dbyug pa}	dbyugs
དབྱུགས་འཇོག	leave aside, forsake, abandon	dbyugs 'jog
དབྱུགས་པ	pf. of {dbyug pa}	dbyugs pa
དབྱུགས་དབྱུང	to be assured, confirmed with [going to a pure realm], guaranteed	dbyugs dbyung
དབྱུགས་འབྱིན་པ	to enliven	dbyugs 'byin pa
དབྱུགས་ཞོག	let it go, that's all, all right, that's enough	dbyugs zhog
དབྱུགས་བཞག	left aside, forsook, abandoned	dbyugs bzhag
དབྱུང	expel; to expel, banish	dbyung
དབྱུང་པ	turn out, banish, expel, SA 'byin pa	dbyung pa
དབྱུང་པོའི་རལ་པ	vegetable incense	dbyung po'i ral pa
དབྱུང་བ	is accomplished	dbyung ba
དབྱུང་བ་གསོལ་བ	ask to expel	dbyung ba gsol ba
དབྱུང་མཛད་པ	to expel	dbyung mdzad pa
དབྱུངས་ཞོག	all right, that's enough	dbyungs zhog
དབྱུན	energy/ focal point/ enriching spot	dbyun
དབྱུལ་པོ	poor	dbyul po
དབྱུལ་བ	[arch] myul ba	dbyul ba
དབྱུས་རྒྱ་གྲ་རྡོ་རྗེ་གདན	1 of gnas chen lnga	dbyus rgya gra rdo rje gdan
དབྱེ	open, are free from opening and not opening, to differentiate, to subdivide, to classify, to distinguish, divide into categories, open, disclose	dbye
དབྱེ་དཀར	white lynx	dbye dkar
དབྱེ་སྒོ	means of classification	dbye sgo
དབྱེ་ཆོས	elements of a division [ggd]	dbye chos
དབྱེ་ཐང	g.ye thang	dbye thang
དབྱེ་ཐང་ག	g.ye thang	dbye thang ga
དབྱེ་དུ	in extent	dbye du
དབྱེ་བསྡུ	classifications, [divide into] categories	dbye bsdu
དབྱེ་བསྡུ་སྣ་ཚོགས	a variety of classifications	dbye bsdu sna tshogs
དབྱེ་ན	if it is classified, to classify/ divide	dbye na
དབྱེ་ན་མི་མང་བ	there are many divisions	dbye na mi mang ba
དབྱེ་ཕྱེས་པ	classification	dbye phyes pa
དབྱེ་བ	1) [f 'byed pa] differentiate, subdivide, classify, discriminate, distinguish, divide into categories, classify, open, disclose; 2) classification, [sub]division, bias, opening, distinction, differ...	dbye ba
དབྱེ་བ་གཅོད་པ	1) divide up; 2) make fine distinctions	dbye ba gcod pa
དབྱེ་བ་ཆེ་ལོང	rough divisions	dbye ba che long
དབྱེ་བ་འདི་རྣམས	these subdivisions	dbye ba 'di rnams
དབྱེ་བ་འདྲེན་པ	dam bcas pa'i tshig gi nang gses don tshan rnams 'dren pa'i lhag bcas kyi sgra zhig	dbye ba 'dren pa
དབྱེ་བ་ཕྱེ	differentiated, subdivided, classified, discriminated, distinguished, divided into categories	dbye ba phye
དབྱེ་བ་ཕྱེ་བ	classify, differentiate	dbye ba phye ba
དབྱེ་བ་ཕྱེ་མཚམས	demarcation, dividing line, boundary, limit	dbye ba phye mtshams
དབྱེ་བ་བྱས་པ	subdivided	dbye ba byas pa
དབྱེ་བ་འབྱེད	differentiate, subdivide, classify, discriminate, distinguish, divide into categories	dbye ba 'byed
དབྱེ་བ་འབྱེད་པ	sort	dbye ba 'byed pa
དབྱེ་བ་མེད	free from bias, inseparable, w/o distinction/ difference/ regard to	dbye ba med
དབྱེ་བ་མེད་པ	non-differentiation, indivisible, indivisible	dbye ba med pa
དབྱེ་བ་མཛད	acts as a demarcation	dbye ba mdzad
དབྱེ་བའི་བུ	epithet of planet saturn	dbye ba'i bu
དབྱེ་བའི་གསང	sha rus rtsa rgyus sogs kyi bar mtshams kyi stong gsang 1917	dbye ba'i gsang
དབྱེ་བས་ཐ་དད་པ	different by distinctions	dbye bas tha dad pa
དབྱེ་བྱེད	cheat	dbye byed
དབྱེ་བྲལ	1) indivisible; 2) dbye bsal	dbye bral
དབྱེ་འབྱེད	divide [up kinds], classify, distinguish, classification, differentiation, discrimination, analysis	dbye 'byed
དབྱེ་འབྱེད་བསྡོམས་རྩིས	statistical fact/ figures	dbye 'byed bsdoms rtsis
དབྱེ་འབྱེད་བསྡོམས་རྩིས་ཅུས	bureau of statistics	dbye 'byed bsdoms rtsis cus
དབྱེ་འབྱེད་བྱེད་པ	discriminate	dbye 'byed byed pa
དབྱེ་འབྱེད་མེད་མཁན	impartial	dbye 'byed med mkhan
དབྱེ་ཚུལ	way of classifying/ dividing	dbye tshul
དབྱེ་ཚོང	[arch] store	dbye tshong
དབྱེ་མཚམས	demarcation, dividing line, boundary, limit	dbye mtshams
དབྱེ་མཚམས་འབྱེད	draw/ demark a [demarcation, dividing line, boundary, limit]	dbye mtshams 'byed
དབྱེ་མཚམས་ས་ཐིག	demarcation line	dbye mtshams sa thig
དབྱེ་ཞིབ	fine distinctions, [subtle/ close] analysis	dbye zhib
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	analytical instruments	dbye zhib 'phrul chas
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་བྱེད	analyze	dbye zhib byed
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	to analyze	dbye zhib byed pa
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་འབྱེད	analyze	dbye zhib 'byed
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་འབྱེད་པ	analyze	dbye zhib 'byed pa
དབྱེ་ཞིབ་རིག་པ	analytical methods	dbye zhib rig pa
དབྱེ་གཞི	basis of division [ggd]	dbye gzhi
དབྱེ་ལུང་གང་བར	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun, 1 of 7 sacred bon places	dbye lung gang bar
དབྱེ་ཤིང	door bolt/ latch	dbye shing
དབྱེ་སལ	division or exclusion	dbye sal
དབྱེ་སྲོལ	traditionally subdivided	dbye srol
དབྱེ་གསལ	clear distinction, sometimes wrong spelling of dbye bsal	dbye gsal
དབྱེ་གསེས	divide [up kinds], classify, distinguish, classification, differentiation, discrimination, analysis	dbye gses
དབྱེ་གསེས་བྱེད་པ	assort, identify	dbye gses byed pa
དབྱེ་གསེས་བྱེད་པའི་ཆ་ལག	assortment	dbye gses byed pa'i cha lag
དབྱེ་བསལ	analyzing and removing, making distinctions and taking away	dbye bsal
དབྱེ་བསལ་མེད་པ	without division or exclusion; indivisible and (mutually) nonexclusive	dbye bsal med pa
དབྱེ་བསྲི	Separation or preference; synonymous with distant or close (nye ring)	dbye bsri
དབྱེངས	(not in das)	dbyengs
དབྱེད	(not in das)	dbyed
དབྱེན	to incite, instigate, sit on	dbyen
དབྱེན་དཀྲུག	dissension, discord, instigation	dbyen dkrug
དབྱེན་དཀྲུག་ཕྲ་མ	producer of disputes among those who are friendly	dbyen dkrug phra ma
དབྱེན་གྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	activity of disputation	dbyen gyi sbyor ba
དབྱེན་ཅོ་བ	(A; 1) sdang bar byed pa; 2) co 'dri ba	dbyen co ba
དབྱེན་བཅོས	[arch] the mind being involuntarily distracted by desire	dbyen bcos
དབྱེན་འདུམས	reconcile/ settle disputes	dbyen 'dums
དབྱེན་སྡུམ་མཆོད་རྟེན	dispute settling chorten	dbyen sdum mchod rten
དབྱེན་སྡུམ་བ	settling disputes	dbyen sdum ba
དབྱེན་བསྡུམས་པ	reconcile/ settle [disputes] [p sdum pa]	dbyen bsdums pa
དབྱེན་པ	difference, dissension, discord, schism	dbyen pa
དབྱེན་སྤྱོ	[arch] 'dod pas nyen pa, se dkrugs pa, bzi ba, co 'dri ba, sdang bar byed pa, mtho 'tsham pa rnams la 'jug	dbyen spyo
དབྱེན་སྤྱོད	disputation, disputatious conduct	dbyen spyod
དབྱེན་སྤྱོས་པ	dbyen spyo	dbyen spyos pa
དབྱེན་བྱེད	cheat	dbyen byed
དབྱེན་བྱེད་པ	create [dispute, discord, disagreement, dissension]	dbyen byed pa
དབྱེན་བྱེད་པའི་ལྷག་མ	lhag ma offense of making disputes [mtshams nang gcig tu bcas ldan dge slong gis rang mi the ba'i dge 'dun du longs pa gnyis chos min gyi lta bas making a mutual dispute, and even though bzlog thre...	dbyen byed pa'i lhag ma
དབྱེན་འབྱེད	create [dispute, discord, disagreement, dissension]	dbyen 'byed
དབྱེན་འབྱེད་དཀྲུག་ཤིང	dissension, discord, instigation	dbyen 'byed dkrug shing
དབྱེན་འབྱེད་པ	create [dispute, discord, disagreement, dissension]	dbyen 'byed pa
དབྱེན་སྦྱོར	cause/ instigate/ provoke [dissension, discord, disagreement, dispute]	dbyen sbyor
དབྱེན་སྦྱོར་དཀྲུག་ཤིང	phan tshun 'khon rtsod slong ba'i dkrug shing	dbyen sbyor dkrug shing
དབྱེན་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	cause/ instigate/ provoke [dissension, discord, disagreement]	dbyen sbyor byed
དབྱེན་མེད	inseparable, indistinguishable, w/o discord/ dissension	dbyen med
དབྱེན་ཟླུམ་མཆོད་རྟེན	[one of the {mchod rten cha brgyad}, by rgyal po'i khab tu lhas byin, dge 'dun gyi dbyen byas pa mchog zung gis reconciling time built four storied and sided zur mnyam par chorten	dbyen zlum mchod rten
དབྱེན་བཟླུམས་པ	reconcile/ settle disputes	dbyen bzlums pa
དབྱེན་སེལ	exorcism of discords	dbyen sel
དབྱེར	separate, separation	dbyer
དབྱེར་བྱས་པ	anything made distinct or classified	dbyer byas pa
དབྱེར་མི་ཕྱེད	inseparable	dbyer mi phyed
དབྱེར་མི་ཕྱེད་པ	inseparable indivisible	dbyer mi phyed pa
དབྱེར་མེད	indivisibility, undifferentiatedness, inseparable, not to be distinguished, union, simultaneously, inseparability, indivisible, to unify with, to unify with, indivisible unity	dbyer med
དབྱེར་མེད་ཀྱི་བརྡ	sign of inseparability in which experiences of gsal ba, mi rtog pa and bde ba are realized in one state of perfect inseparability, SA brda bzhi *rgya mtsho ocean of samsara	dbyer med kyi brda
དབྱེར་མེད་ཆོས་སྐུ	inseparable dharmakaya	dbyer med chos sku
དབྱེར་མེད་གཉུག་མའི་རང་འགྲོས	natural mode of innate inseparability	dbyer med gnyug ma'i rang 'gros
དབྱེར་མེད་དུ	indivisibly {sangs rgyas kun dang dbyer med du bzhugs pa yin pa} becomes indivisibly one with all the Buddhas	dbyer med du
དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་བསྟིམ	dissolve inseparably into	dbyer med du bstim
དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་འདྲེས་པ	mingle indivisible; ex {thugs yid dbyer med du 'dres pa} that my mind and yours may merge as one	dbyer med du 'dres pa
དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་སྦྱོར་བ	to merge indivisibly	dbyer med du sbyor ba
དབྱེར་མེད་དུ་བསྲེས	to inseparably unify, integrate inseparably	dbyer med du bsres
དབྱེར་མེད་བདེ་ཆེན	the indivisible great bliss 1918	dbyer med bde chen
དབྱེར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་གསུང	inseparable vajra speech [one of the nyingma gsung lnga, all sounds and words are	dbyer med rdo rje'i gsung
དབྱེར་མེད་བརྡ	Da of inseparability	dbyer med brda
དབྱེར་མེད་པ	without any differentiation	dbyer med pa
དབྱེར་མེད་པར་གྱུར་པ	became inseparable from	dbyer med par gyur pa
དབྱེར་མེད་བླ་མ	master of the state of inseparability	dbyer med bla ma
དབྱེར་མེད་མིག་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	being inseparable as the core of awareness	dbyer med mig pa'i snying po
དབྱེར་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	inseparable wisdom	dbyer med ye shes
དབྱེར་མེད་རིག	rigpa which is the inseparability	dbyer med rig
དབྱེར་མེད་རིག་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	being inseparable as the core of awareness	dbyer med rig pa'i snying po
དབྱེར་མེད་རོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས་པ	indissolubly united	dbyer med ro gcig tu 'dres pa
དབྱེར་མེད་བསྲེ	integrate inseparably	dbyer med bsre
དབྱེར་མེད་བསྲེས	mix inseparability	dbyer med bsres
དབྱེས	* magnitude, size, dimensions	dbyes
དབྱེས་ཆེ་བ	wide, spacious, broad	dbyes che ba
དབྱེས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra dimensions	dbyes pa rdo rje
དབྱོད་པ	think through/ about	dbyod pa
དབྱོད་པ་བ	analyzer	dbyod pa ba
དབྱོད་པའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the leg of miracle of analysis [one of the four legs of miracle]	dbyod pa'i rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
དབྱོལ	give way, SA 'byol ba	dbyol
དབྲ	{dbra} clan [one of the {bod kyi mi bu rigs drug}	dbra
དབྲག	intermediate space, interstice, ravine, glen, defile	dbrag
དབྲག་དབྲག་བར་བར	'phros mol byed pa'i dbrag dbrag la mtshams 'jog pa,//khang pa phan tshun gyi dbrag dbrag la tshal zhing 'debs pa	dbrag dbrag bar bar
དབྲད་པ	[f 'brad pa] will scratch	dbrad pa
དབྲབ་པ	flog, SA 'bral ba	dbrab pa
དབྲལ	separate, part, SA 'phral ba	dbral
དབྲལ་བ	[f p dbrol ba] take off, flay, tear, rip	dbral ba
དབྲལ་བཞིག	destroy by tearing/ ripping	dbral bzhig
དབྲལ་བཞིག་རྒྱག	destroy by tearing/ ripping	dbral bzhig rgyag
དབྲལ་བཞིག་གཏོང	destroy by tearing/ ripping	dbral bzhig gtong
དབྲལ་བཞིག་བྱེད	destroy by tearing/ ripping	dbral bzhig byed
དབྲི	subtract, SA 'phri ba	dbri
དབྲི་བསྣན་མེད་པ	without diminution or augmentation	dbri bsnan med pa
དབྲི་བ	ft. of {'brid pa}	dbri ba
དབྲིལ་དབྲིལ	ril ril round, spherical [lump]	dbril dbril
དབྲེ	sbre	dbre
དབྲེ་བཅོང	filth	dbre bcong
དབྲེ་གཏམ	filthy talk	dbre gtam
དབྲེ་པོ	filthy, skyug bro po,//spyod pa dbre po,//gyon chas dbre po,/	dbre po
དབྲེ་བ	1) unclean, evil; 2) [arch] gyen du rdze ba	dbre ba
དབྲེ་བོ	filth, dirt	dbre bo
དབྲེ་བཙོག	filth, dirt	dbre btsog
དབྲེས་ཀྱི་འཚམས	[arch] ocean waves	dbres kyi 'tshams
དབྲེས་པ	filth	dbres pa
དབྲོག	rob, SA 'phrog	dbrog
དབྲོག་པ	[f 'phrog pa], exchange forget[fulness], revolution, ravish, steal, plunder, rob, take by force	dbrog pa
དབྲོལ	tear!	dbrol
དབྲོལ་བ	(tha dad pa dbral ba, dbral ba, dbrol,, tear	dbrol ba
དབླང་དོར་གསས་ཀུན	way of discipline 'bag - 1) mask; 3) image; 4) replica; 5) [dis]guise [p 'bags, f dbag],, be defiled, polluted, desecrated 'bag - mask 'bag - image, replica, {'dra 'bag, sku 'bag}. mask, guise, dis...	dblang dor gsas kun
སཡ་ཇོཡ	producing words, he involuntarily passes into joy-reversing words] 'bad pas 'gog pa - refutation by one's own efforts [one of the ornaments of refutation ] 'bad pas sgrub pa - to strive to achieve ...	say joy
བརྒྱར་བཅས་པ	where five hundred	brgyar bcas pa
གྲེཨེན	necked sea monsters swarmed 'byung po chen po - great being, epithet of buddha 'byung po 'jigs - spirit scarer, white mustard 'byung po dung gi lhe pa zhes shin tu 'jigs	green
པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར	because 1 should be unafraid of immeasurable spirits 'byung po 'dzin byed - spirit grasper the earth 'byung po 'dzin ma - mother who sustains beings 'byung po srung - talisman, preservative against...	par bya ba'i phyir
ཨནད་ཨལལ	pervading, and, since its existence is of great extent it is "great"] 'byung ba che - the [great] elements [R] 'byung ba chen po - the [great] elements 'byung ba chen po - elements, great element, ...	and all
བོཨིལ	like black circles 'bras kyi khu - rice water 1938 'bras kyi khrag - vermilion 'bras kyi thug pa - rice soup 'bras kyi srus - husked rice, unripe shelled grain of rice 'bras dkar - 1) husked white ...	boil
མོདེས་ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	speech {gsung lnga}	modes of buddha
ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་ཀིནདས་ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	mind {thugs lnga}, the five enlightened attributes {yon tan lnga} and five enlightened activities {phrin las lnga} (gd-mk] 'bras chos nyer lnga - the 25 qualities / attributes of fruition, these ar...	the five kinds of buddha
སེ་ཨབོབེ༹	realization of one's own object] 'bras rtogs - realization of the fruition 'bras rtogs gnyis pa - the 2nd realization of the fruition [1of three fruition realizations [R] 'bras rtogs gnyis pa - the...	se above
ཨསྤེཅཏ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	realization [rang rtogs], the grasped object [gzung] to be evaluated, 'dzin rnam tshad ma is presented, the fruition of self- awareness [rang rig]. This is the presentation of 1939 the mind only ex...	aspect of self
ཐེ་སིགནས་ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཨ་སེལཕ༹	contradictory apparent object, after the sign of the fruition has been presented a causal power contradictory with it hinders its unobstructedness. For example the dharmin smoke by strongly rising ...	the signs which is a self
དེཨཐླེསསྣེསས་ཨནད་ནོན	deviation 'bras bu nyi tshe ba - a temporary result 'bras bu nye tshe ba - temporary fruition 'bras bu gnyis - the two kinds of fruition 'bras bu gnyis - the two kinds of fruition [direct and indir...	deathlessness and non
སྦྱིན་པ	the fruition bestowing the gift of extraordinary compassion 'bras bu gtong ba - 1) bestow fruition; 2) give up/ let go of fruition 'bras bu bton thub mkhan - efficacious 'bras bu bton pa - to castr...	sbyin pa
ཕ༹ྲུཨིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སྐིཔཔིང	the-grades stream enterer; stream-enterer of fruition by leaps 'bras bu thod rgal ba'i rgyun zhugs 'bras	fruition of a skipping
རེསུལཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོནཅེ	return, {phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu}; four results: stream-enterer {rgyun du zhugs pa}, once-returner {lan cig phyir 'ong ba}, nonreturner {phyir mi 'ong ba}, arhat / foe-slayer {dgra bcom pa} The four...	result of once
ཨོཕ༹་བེཨིང་ཨ་ནོན	returner [TSE] 'bras bu rim gyis pa'i phyir 'ong - the step of gradual fruition of being a oncereturner [TSE] 'bras bu rim gyis pa'i phyir 'ong - oncereturner of gradual fruition 'bras bu rim gyis ...	of being a non
བེཨིང་ཨ་ཨོནཅེ	returner [TSE rig] 'bras bu rim gyis pa'i phyir 'ong zhugs pa abide in the step of gradual fruition of	being a once
སྟཏེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་སྟྲེཨམ	enterer and so forth, 1 of the four fruitions of virtuous conduct, trying to abandon any kleshas that have not been abandoned]. 'bras bu la zhugs pa - 1) enter into the fruition; 2) dwell/ remain w...	state of a stream
གཟུགས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་དྷརྨ	ayatana] 'bras gzugs bcu gcig - the 11 resultant forms/ forms of effect 'bras gzugs bcu gcig - eleven forms of effort, effect forms, the eleven resultant forms, {dbang po lnga}, {don lnga}, {rnam r...	gzugs of the dharma
ཟུང་བཞི་ཡ་བརྒྱད	1) {rgyun du zhugs pa}; 2) {lan cig phyir 'ong}; 3) {phyir mi 'ong ba} four {dgra bcom pa} which are divided into eight ] 'bras la gnas pa - abider in the attainment 'bras la gnas pa - abider in th...	zung bzhi ya brgyad
བྱུང་ཚུལ་གསེར་གྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	by Tendzin Pema Gyaltsen 'bri gung dpal 'dzin - Drikung Paldzin 'bri gung dpal 'dzin - Drigung Paldzin 'bri gung dpal 'dzin nyi 'od bzang po 14th century scholar who claimed that nyang ston smra ba...	byung tshul gser gyi phreng ba
ཐེ་ལིཨོན	headed Dakini (seng ge dong ma) appeared to him in the form of a female of the wild yak, or Drong Dri ('brong 'dri), and showed him the path to a certain cave. There it vanished into one of the wal...	the Lion
qཨུཨལིཏཡ་སྤུས་ཀ	--.] 'bring nge ba - just of the middle rank, 'bring du - middling/ intermediate 'bring ni 'dod pa'i rig pa 'dzin pa phal pa the middling common awarenessholder of the desire realm (G 'bring pa - m...	quality spus ka
མོཨོན	like "byad bzhin" = "gdong" = face] 'bru mar - oil from oleaginous seeds, rape seed oil 'bru mar - grain oil. [sesame, mustard etc, in wind disease curing food] 'bru mar - oil {'bru mar bum pa bye ...	moon
ཨིནནུམེརབླེ་བུཏཏེར	lamps 'bru mar - grain oil 'bru mar gyi sdong bu - oil lamp 'bru mar tshag pa - draw off oil 'bru smar - unalloyed grain of good quality 'bru smin pa - ripe corn 'bru tsa - tshugs ma zur dod kyi ny...	innumerable butter
ཨས་ནོན	contradictory, [explain the --- of the words, outline the --- of the text.] 'brel chags - related as * become joined, continue 1 after another 'brel chags pa - related as [eg. early and later, non-...	as non
གོཨལ་ཨརེ	-- as earlier and later. produce --- of electric wiring. Though 1 may	goal are
པྲོདུཅེ་ཨན་ཨེ྾ཏེརྣལ་སེམབླནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹	--, mutual contradiction cannot be cleaned up.] 'brel mthud byed pa - contact, liaison 'brel mthun byed pa - [produce] contact/ liaison 'brel mthun byed pa - to contact, liaison 'brel 'dris - inter...	produce an external semblance of
བཞིན་འབྲེལ་པ	hands and feet were webbed like a swan's 'brel pa - 1) connection; 2) conjunction 'brel pa can - connected/ related 'brel pa can gzhan - related opposite [eg long and short] 'brel pa can gzhan - re...	bzhin 'brel pa
ཐེ་མེཨནིང་ཨིས	--, the source and one's thoughts are confused.] 'brel med - inseparably 'brel med - 1) unconnected, unrelated; 2) mutually exclusive 'brel med - single, simple, solitary, unconnected, unrelated, i...	the meaning is
ལས་དོན་ལ་གྲོས་སྡུར་བྱ་ཡུལ	--] 'brel mtshungs pa - fellow religious student 'brel 'tshub - irritable, impatient 'brel zab pa - together, in company 'brel zla - related object 'brel zla ma dmigs - (non-affirming) reason of ne...	las don la gros sdur bya yul
ཨོཕ༹་རེཨསོན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	perception of a related fact/ sign which is an nonobservation of a related object 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags - reason of	of reason of non
ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཨན་ནོན	observation of a related object [a kind of possibly apparent but unperceived true reason, above the basis of dispute, for dharmas to be refuted, the non- affirming negation that certainly establish...	which is an non
ཨ་ནོན	observation of a related object 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags - reason of	a non
སིགན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	observation of a related object 'brel zla ma dmigs ma'i rtags - nonperception of related fact reason, sign	sign of non
ཐེ་ནིནེ་སྤིརིཏུཨལ་ཧེཨརཏ	sons of Guru Padmasambhava 'brog mi dpal gyi ye shes - {'brog mi dpal gyi ye shes} [disciple of Guru Rinpoche] 'brog mi dpal gyi ye shes - {'brog mi dpal gyi ye shes} 'brog mi lo tsa - Drogmi Lotsa...	the nine spiritual heart
ཧཏ	like braids 'brog mo'i chas - things of a M nomad woman 'brog tshad - whoever is linked to/ encountered 'brog tshad - whoever is linked to / encountered 'brog tshad don ldan - whatever connection i...	hat
རྦ	* wrinkle, wave	rba
རྦ་ཀློང	waves	rba klong
རྦ་ཀློང་འཁྱོལ	buffeted by the swirling waves {'khor ba'i rgya mtshor bud med g.yo rgyu'i rba klong 'khyol} buffeted by the swirling waves of the deceit that flows from women on the ocean of samsara	rba klong 'khyol
རྦ་ཀློང་ཆེན་པོ	swelling waves	rba klong chen po
རྦ་ཀློངས	waves	rba klongs
རྦ་མཁར	cane/ walking stick, cone stick	rba mkhar
རྦ་ཆུ	wavy water	rba chu
རྦ་ཐལ་ཐལ་འོང	waves come flowing past	rba thal thal 'ong
རྦ་བཞེད	sba bzhed	rba bzhed
རྦ་རག	place in tibet	rba rag
རྦ་རླབས	wave, flood	rba rlabs
རྦ་རླབས་ཀྱིས་དཀྲུགས	swept away by the waves	rba rlabs kyis dkrugs
རྦ་རླབས་སྐྱེས	chu'i zegs ma	rba rlabs skyes
རྦ་རླབས་ཆུར་ཐིམ་པ་ལྟར	just like a wave subsiding into the body of water	rba rlabs chur thim pa ltar
རྦ་རླབས་ཆེན་པོ	massive waves	rba rlabs chen po
རྦ་རླབས་དྲག་པོ	powerful/ mighty waves rba rlabs drag po dbyar dus kyi gtsang	rba rlabs drag po
པོའི་ནང་འཕྱུར་བ	powerful waves arising in the summer rivers	po'i nang 'phyur ba
རྦ་རླབས་འཕྱུར	rise, surge, swell [waves/ flood]	rba rlabs 'phyur
རྦ་རླབས་བཞི	the four floods sm {zag pa bzhi}	rba rlabs bzhi
རྦ་རླབས་ལང་ལང་དུ་འཕྱུར	rise, surge, swell [waves/ flood]	rba rlabs lang lang du 'phyur
རྦ་གསལ་སྣང	{rba gsal snang}	rba gsal snang
རྦག་རྦག	1) gun; 2) circle	rbag rbag
རྦད	abruptly, completely, eagles; completely	rbad
རྦད་ཀྱིས་བཅད་པའི་ངན་སྤྱོད	resolute/ determined evil conduct	rbad kyis bcad pa'i ngan spyod
རྦད་སྐྱོགས	residue, residuum, dregs, husks	rbad skyogs
རྦད་ཁམ	kha ham dang 'ud shob boasting	rbad kham
རྦད་མགོ	forehead covering bangs [hair]	rbad mgo
རྦད་མགོ་ལིང་ལིང	bangs, fringe [hair]	rbad mgo ling ling
རྦད་སྒྱོགས	resudue, resuduum, dregs, husks	rbad sgyogs
རྦད་སྒྲ	harsh voice	rbad sgra
རྦད་གཅོད་པ	cut off entirely, extirpate	rbad gcod pa
རྦད་བཅད	absolutely determined, resolutely	rbad bcad
རྦད་ཆེ་བའི་གཏམ་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་མེད	not trusting very boastful talk	rbad che ba'i gtam la yid ches med
རྦད་དེ	abruptly, completely, resolutely; absolutely + neg; syn {rbad kyis}	rbad de
རྦད་དེ་ཁ་ལ	completely like -- [mi 'di rbad de kha la smyo 'dug //skad cha tshang ma rbad de kha la bshad tshar,//grong khyer de chu log gis rbad de kha la bsnubs 'dug]	rbad de kha la
རྦད་དེ་ཁས་མ་བླང་བ	completely denied	rbad de khas ma blang ba
རྦད་དེ་ཆོད	cut it abruptly	rbad de chod
རྦད་དེ་གནད་དོན་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	completely resolve the issue	rbad de gnad don thag gcod pa
རྦད་འདྲེ	cursing spirits	rbad 'dre
རྦད་པ	set on, incite, excite, instigate, animate [p f rbod pa]	rbad pa
རྦད་རྦད	hair etc. neither very long nor short	rbad rbad
རྦད་རྦད་དུ་བཅད་པའི་མགོ	hair cut in bangs/ fringe //neither very long nor short	rbad rbad du bcad pa'i mgo
རྦད་རྦོད	thick, dense, close	rbad rbod
རྦད་རྦོད་གྱི་སྐྲ	matted/ thick hair	rbad rbod gyi skra
རྦད་རྦོད་གྱི་བལ	matted/ thick wool	rbad rbod gyi bal
རྦད་ཙེར་གཅོད་པ	cut of entirely, extirpate	rbad tser gcod pa
རྦད་ལིང	bangs [hair]	rbad ling
རྦབ	rolling down; avalanche, to roll / tumble down, dropsy	rbab
རྦབ་གྲི	gyen gzar nas fall down or, die by falling on rocks	rbab gri
རྦབ་རྒོད	avalanche rbab sgril gyi rtsed mo phru gu rnams la	rbab rgod
རྦབ་སྒྲིལ་བ	rocks etc. throwing down	rbab sgril ba
རྦབ་ཆུ	waterfall	rbab chu
རྦབ་ཏུ	to roll down	rbab tu
རྦབ་ཏུ་ཤོར་བ་འཛེག་མ་ཐུབ	tumbled down, unable to climb	rbab tu shor ba 'dzeg ma thub
རྦབ་འདྲིལ	roll/ fall down	rbab 'dril
རྦབ་འདྲིལ་བ	roll/ fall down	rbab 'dril ba
རྦབ་རྡོ	fallen rocks, rolling stones	rbab rdo
རྦབ་རྡོ་གྱེན་དུ་ལྡོག་པ་ཅི་ལ་སྲིད	how is it possible for a rolling/ falling stone to go back up? rbab rdo ltar bzlog tu med pa'i sems thag	rbab rdo gyen du ldog pa ci la srid
རྦབ་ཞི་བས	after the rolling of detritus had ceased 1958	rbab zhi bas
རྦུ་གཅུག་ཏོར་དང་ལྡན་པ	a protuberance on the crown of the head	rbu gcug tor dang ldan pa
རྦུ་མ་ཐལ་འགྱུར་པ	middle way consequence school, prasangikas	rbu ma thal 'gyur pa
རྦུ་རྩེ	top story	rbu rtse
རྦུ་མཛད	cantor, headed	rbu mdzad
རྦུ་རྫོགས་ཕྱག་གསུམ	Madhayamika, mahamudra and great perfection	rbu rdzogs phyag gsum
རྦུ་ལོ	hair [on the head]	rbu lo
རྦུགས	breathe, respire, asthma, impeded breath, exhalations and inhalations of the breath	rbugs
རྦུད	stripped, fell away	rbud
རྦུད་རྒྱག	by arms legs and sticks etc. drive along	rbud rgyag
རྦེ	fur of the stone-fo	rbe
རྦོ	milt of fish	rbo
རྦོད	[p rbad],, rbod pa! turn loose, sic on	rbod
རྦོད་གཏོང	ritual to invoke the presence of one's guardian to destroy the enemy	rbod gtong
རྦོད་གཏོང་མ་མོ	see also {ma mo rbod gtong}	rbod gtong ma mo
རྦོད་པ	{rbod pa, rbad pa, rbad pa, rbod} trans. v.; to incite	rbod pa
རྦོད་མ	1) mthu byad dam, than ltas; 2) dpya khral (/ {rbod pa - (tha dad pa rbad pa, rbad pa, rbod,, send [out], urge on	rbod ma
རྦོད་མ་སྐྱེལ་བ	1) khral 'ul skyel ba; 2) perform sorcery, do harm	rbod ma skyel ba
རྦྱ་ཆེན	extensive	rbya chen
རྦྱན	"beauty", enhancement	rbyan
ལྦ	{lba} tree	lba
ལྦ་ནད	goiter/ excrescence disease	lba nad
ལྦ་འཕྱང	goat	lba 'phyang
ལྦ་བ	burl in wood	lba ba
ལྦ་བ་འཇོམས	wen, goiter, knots, excrescences sha rmen overcoming salt	lba ba 'joms
ལྦ་ཚྭ	goiter salt	lba tshwa
ལྦ་ར་ནའ་སི	Varanasi	lba ra na' si
ལྦ་ལེ	lucid, clear	lba le
ལྦག	bubbles	lbag
ལྦགས་སྦུ	bubbles	lbags sbu
ལྦང	sudden	lbang
ལྦང་ལྦང	spontaneously manifest	lbang lbang
ལྦབ	(not in das)	lbab
ལྦལ་གྱིས	suddenly, clearly and distinctly,	lbal gyis
ལྦལ་གྱིས་གསལ་འདེབས	suddenly visualize	lbal gyis gsal 'debs
ལྦལ་ལེ	clear (as mirror	lbal le
ལྦལ་ལེ་བ	vibrant	lbal le ba
ལྦུ་བཅས་ཉུང	producing little scum	lbu bcas nyung
ལྦུ་བ	bubbles, foam	lbu ba
ལྦུ་བ་འདོན་པ	effervesce	lbu ba 'don pa
ལྦུ་བ་རྡོས་པ	bursting of a bubble	lbu ba rdos pa
ལྦུ་བ་ལྡན	frothy, foamy, frost-covered	lbu ba ldan
ལྦུ་བ་འཕྱར་བྱེད	it sends up bubbles	lbu ba 'phyar byed
ལྦུ་བ་འཕྱུར་བྱེད	it sends up bubbles	lbu ba 'phyur byed
ལྦུ་བ་བསལ་བ	scum off, skim off	lbu ba bsal ba
ལྦུབ་བ	bubble, foam	lbub ba
ལྦུབ་བ་ཅན	frothy, foamy, frost-covered	lbub ba can
སྦ	1) genitals; 2) cane [kind of wood]; 3) [f sbed pa] will hide [p sbas] hide, conceal, keep secret 9	sba
སྦ་དཀར	kind of linen cloth	sba dkar
སྦ་བཀོང	threat, menace	sba bkong
སྦ་སྐུང	concealing, hiding	sba skung
སྦ་སྐུང་བྱེད	conceal, hide	sba skung byed
སྦ་སྐོར	hoop of bamboo	sba skor
སྦ་ཁུག	purse, billfold	sba khug
སྦ་ཁྲའི་སློ་མ	sba smyug tshon khra'i gzeb slo	sba khra'i slo ma
སྦ་ཁྲི་བཞིར	Ba Trisher; [was sent to invite Padmasambhava]	sba khri bzhir
སྦ་ཁྲི་བཞེར	{sba khri bzher	sba khri bzher
སྦ་འཁར	cane, [walking] stick, staff	sba 'khar
སྦ་འགུགས	wood-working tool	sba 'gugs
སྦ་འགེབས	[means of] hiding transgressions and faults	sba 'gebs
སྦ་འགེབས་བྱས་པའི་ནོར་འཁྲུལ	hidden errors	sba 'gebs byas pa'i nor 'khrul
སྦ་འགེབས་བྱེད	hide transgressions and faults	sba 'gebs byed
སྦ་རྒོད	cane tree growing on wild mt	sba rgod
སྦ་རྒྱུག	cane, [walking] stick, staff	sba rgyug
སྦ་ལྕག	whip made of cane	sba lcag
སྦ་ཆས	secretly made things	sba chas
སྦ་ཆིངས	ja mdong, zo ba, zom sogs la btang ba'i sba chings	sba chings
སྦ་རྟིར	lining of tea pots with brass	sba rtir
སྦ་ཐག	rope of twisted cane	sba thag
སྦ་ཐག་དྲིལ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like twisted robes	sba thag dril ba lta bu
སྦ་ཐག་ཟམ་པ	sba zam	sba thag zam pa
སྦ་ནག	a poor house, hovel, hut	sba nag
སྦ་བ	in possession of, privy parts, pudenda, to keep secret; hide; ft. of {sbed pa}	sba ba
སྦ་བ་ཅན	to have a goiter	sba ba can
སྦ་བར་བྱས་པ	kept her hidden	sba bar byas pa
སྦ་བེར	cane [stick/ staff]	sba ber
སྦ་དབྱུག	{lag pa'i sba dbyug} my walking stick	sba dbyug
སྦ་འབྲུམ	shug pa spa ma = tsher ma can [a kind of juniper] fruit	sba 'brum
སྦ་དམར	1) kind of tree; 2) zhal ba 'chag byed kyi sa dmar po zhig	sba dmar
སྦ་ཚ	mustard seed residue after oil pressing	sba tsha
སྦ་བཞད	chronicles written by {sba gsal snang} on the times of Trisong Deutsen	sba bzhad
སྦ་བཞེད	sba gsal snang gi bzhed par grags pa = bsam yas kyi dkar chag chen po	sba bzhed
སྦ་བཞེད་རྒྱས་བསྡུས	Bashey Annals, shorter and longer	sba bzhed rgyas bsdus
སྦ་ཟམ	sba'i lcug phran [small twig/willow] bsgrims [squeeze/ hold tight] nas phar tshur btang ba'i zam pa	sba zam
སྦ་ཡག་པ	{sba yag pa med herb	sba yag pa
སྦ་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབྱངས	Yeshe Yang of Ba. Tibetan translator predicted by Padmasambhava. The chief scribe for writing down the termas of Padmasambhava, he was an accomplished yogi, able to fly like a bird to the celestial...	sba ye shes dbyangs
སྦ་ར་ཛིལ	Brazil	sba ra dzil
སྦ་ར་ཟིལ	Brazil	sba ra zil
སྦ་རཏ་ན	{sba rat na	sba rat na
སྦ་རི་སྦི་རི	drunk, passing out, nauseous	sba ri sbi ri
སྦ་རེ་སྦོ་རེ	rugged	sba re sbo re
སྦ་ལུ་མིག་བྱིལ	insect	sba lu mig byil
སྦ་ལེ	collar [in the form of a lotus blossom]	sba le
སྦ་ཤན	sba chings	sba shan
སྦ་ཤིང	cane, rattan, fut. of {sbed}	sba shing
སྦ་ས	place a nomad tent is pitched	sba sa
སྦ་སྲི	hidden out of avarice	sba sri
སྦ་སློམ	sba khra'i slo ma	sba slom
སྦ་གསང	modesty; secret, hidden	sba gsang
སྦ་གསང་སྤྱོད་ལམ	secretive and concealed behavior	sba gsang spyod lam
སྦ་གསང་མེད	candid, frank	sba gsang med
སྦ་གསང་མེད་པ	without keeping anything back, openly, without hiding or keeping anything secret	sba gsang med pa
སྦ་གསལ་སྣང	{sba gsal snang	sba gsal snang
སྦ་བསྲི	conceal, keep secret, hide, withhold	sba bsri
སྦ་བསྲིས་མེད་པ	without stinginess and hiding	sba bsris med pa
སྦ་བསྲེ་སྦ	hiding	sba bsre sba
སྦ་བསྲེ་བསྲི	not giving all	sba bsre bsri
སྦ་ཨ་ཙར་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབྱངས	Atsara Yeshe Yang of Ba. Early Tibetan translator. Atsara is a corrupt form of the Sanskrit word 'acharya.' See under Yeshe Yang	sba a tsar ye shes dbyangs
སྦག	1) (CH mah jong; 2) [p sbags],, stain, soil, pollute	sbag
སྦག་དཀྲུག་པ	rgyan bzhag nas sbag rgyag pa	sbag dkrug pa
སྦག་ཁག	big tea box/ brick	sbag khag
སྦག་རྒྱག	(CH play mah jong	sbag rgyag
སྦག་རྒྱག་མཁན	1 who soils/ pollutes/ stains	sbag rgyag mkhan
སྦག་ལྕོག	mah jong table	sbag lcog
སྦག་ཆུང	little tea box 1/4 size of a big one khag gi bzhi thig gcig	sbag chung
སྦག་ཆེན	1) big tea box khag [part?]; 2) rtsed chas shig	sbag chen
སྦག་པ	saturate, stain, defile, pollute	sbag pa
སྦག་སྦག	gsig gsig byed pa te gyo ham gyi bsam ngan lam du ma lhongs pas khros te gzugs po, motorcycle, machine gun	sbag sbag
སྦག་སྦག་གསིག་གསིག	drag shul gyi khros pa'i rnam 'gyur	sbag sbag gsig gsig
སྦག་རྫིག	expert	sbag rdzig
སྦགས	saturate, SA sbag pa	sbags
སྦགས་འདྲེས	be defiled/ soiled	sbags 'dres
སྦགས་འདྲེས་སུ་གྱུར་པའི་སྤུས་ཀ་ལེགས་ཉེས	good and bad quality	sbags 'dres su gyur pa'i spus ka legs nyes
སྦགས་པ	pf. of {sbag pa}; filled, saturated with	sbags pa
སྦགས་མ	undefiled [by experience]	sbags ma
སྦགས་མི་ཚུགས	cannot be worsened	sbags mi tshugs
སྦགས་ཚུགས	{ngan pas sbags mi tshugs pa} cannot be worsened by something bad	sbags tshugs
སྦང	[f sbong] will soak/ wet, dung	sbang
སྦང་སྐམ	dried grain left from making chang	sbang skam
སྦང་སྐོམ	dried	sbang skom
སྦང་གླུམ	fermented grain used to brew chang	sbang glum
སྦང་ཆུ་ནང་བ	to soak, pickle	sbang chu nang ba
སྦང་བ	ft. of {sbong ba}	sbang ba
སྦང་བུ	flies	sbang bu
སྦང་བོ	soak sbang ma chang making [strained/pressed grain] residue	sbang bo
སྦང་མ	leftover grain after beer has been brewed (mash); dregs/ malt dregs after brewing beer	sbang ma
སྦང་ཟན་མ	sbang ma eater: insult	sbang zan ma
སྦང་ལུམས	having put med. in chang gi sbang ma used to cure na sar lums byed pa	sbang lums
སྦངས	[horse] manure, wetted, soaked	sbangs
སྦངས་སྐམ	dung dried for fuel	sbangs skam
སྦངས་གླུམ	wet malt	sbangs glum
སྦངས་དུགས	sbangs tsha po nad la gtugs te bcos pa'i sman dpyad cig	sbangs dugs
སྦངས་པ	[p sbong ba] wetted, soaked	sbangs pa
སྦངས་ཕུང	dung hill	sbangs phung
སྦངས་རྩམ	refuse barley when beer has been brewed out of it	sbangs rtsam
སྦངས་ལུད	dung manure	sbangs lud
སྦད	(not in das)	sbad
སྦན་སྦན་པ	{A 1) rgyun ma chad; 2) great power	sban sban pa
སྦབ	species of bird	sbab
སྦབ་ཅ	sbab cha	sbab ca
སྦབ་ཆ	mang po phyogs gcig bsdebs pa'i chag pa	sbab cha
སྦམ	[p sbams f sbom pa] put/ lace together, collect, gather	sbam
སྦམ་པ	place together, collect	sbam pa
སྦམ་རྫུ	gzhan ngor 'dra chags chags kyi zol ma	sbam rdzu
སྦམས	place together, SA sbam pa	sbams
སྦམས་པ	pf. of {sbom pa}	sbams pa
སྦའོ་ཅ་ལི་ཡ	Bulgaria	sba'o ca li ya
སྦར	kindled; a claw; to kindle	sbar
སྦར་སྐུམ་བྱས་འཛིན	hold between the fingers	sbar skum byas 'dzin
སྦར་སྐུམ་བྱས་འཛིན་པ	pinch	sbar skum byas 'dzin pa
སྦར་གང	handful	sbar gang
སྦར་ཉུལ	groping for things as in darkness	sbar nyul
སྦར་བ	pf. of {sbor ba}; ft. of {sbor ba}	sbar ba
སྦར་བ་གང	handful	sbar ba gang
སྦར་མ	Burma	sbar ma
སྦར་མོ	palm [of the hand]	sbar mo
སྦར་མོ་གང	a handful	sbar mo gang
སྦར་མོས་བཏབ	scratched by a paw, grabbed	sbar mos btab
སྦར་མྱུལ་རྒྱག་པ	feel with the hand	sbar myul rgyag pa
སྦར་འཛིང	fight face to face	sbar 'dzing
སྦར་འཛིར་གཏོང་བ	pinch, hold between the fingers	sbar 'dzir gtong ba
སྦར་ཟིན་བྱས	grabbed (vulgar)	sbar zin byas
སྦར་ཟིན་བྱེད	grabbing at, picking out; x {chos kyi tshig don re re nas sbar zin byed pa} picking out individual words and points 1960	sbar zin byed
སྦར་གཟུང	grip	sbar gzung
སྦར་ཡས	a number	sbar yas
སྦར་ར	a handful of	sbar ra
སྦར་ཤད་རྒྱག	scratch	sbar shad rgyag
སྦར་ཤད་རྒྱབ་པ	scratch	sbar shad rgyab pa
སྦལ	frog; tortoise	sbal
སྦལ་ཁེབས	{A hole cover	sbal khebs
སྦལ་མགོ	1) lungs, heart, intestines long mkhal ma etc swelling 'don byed kyi yo byad cig; 2) a nadi path [rtsa lam]; 3) frog head	sbal mgo
སྦལ་འགྲོས	'khyog por mchongs te 'gro ba'i 'gros	sbal 'gros
སྦལ་རྒྱབ	1) {sbal rgyab} med. stone; 2) a kind of fish skin	sbal rgyab
སྦལ་རྒྱབ་དཀར་པོ	rock med. w bumps like a toad's back white in color	sbal rgyab dkar po
སྦལ་ལྕོང	1) frog and tadpole; 2) frog tadpole	sbal lcong
སྦལ་ཆུང	young frog, tadpole	sbal chung
སྦལ་ཆེན	1) srog chags shig; 2) sdig srin	sbal chen
སྦལ་ཏི	sbal ti district	sbal ti
སྦལ་དུག	an animal med.	sbal dug
སྦལ་ནག	toad	sbal nag
སྦལ་སྣབས	water plants like rtswa bal	sbal snabs
སྦལ་པ	frog	sbal pa
སྦལ་པ་རྐང་མང	crab	sbal pa rkang mang
སྦལ་པ་ཅན	kind of tree, sesbana grandiflora	sbal pa can
སྦལ་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིགས་ཤིག	bullfrog	sbal pa chen po'i rigs shig
སྦལ་པ་དང་བྱ་རོག་གི་སྐད་སྒྲ	croak	sbal pa dang bya rog gi skad sgra
སྦལ་པ་རྡོ་ཟན	rock eating frog	sbal pa rdo zan
སྦལ་པ་རིགས་ཤིག	toad	sbal pa rigs shig
སྦལ་པ་ལག་པ	root of a medicinal plant which cures obstruction of urine	sbal pa lag pa
སྦལ་པའི་ཁྱིམ	house of Cancer	sbal pa'i khyim
སྦལ་པའི་འདབ་ཅན	parrot, red tree	sbal pa'i 'dab can
སྦལ་པའི་ཤ	frog meat animal med.	sbal pa'i sha
སྦལ་པོ	elaborate, many, much	sbal po
སྦལ་བ	frog?, rana tamporiaria chensinensis david	sbal ba
སྦལ་བའི་ཁྱིམ	house of Cancer	sbal ba'i khyim
སྦལ་མིག	bud, eye, gem, sprout, shoot	sbal mig
སྦལ་ཚང	frog's nest	sbal tshang
སྦལ་ལག	herb chu srin sder mo	sbal lag
སྦལ་ལེབ	flat chang vessel of clay etc.	sbal leb
སྦས་སྐུང	concealing, hiding	sbas skung
སྦས་སྐུང་བྱེད	conceal, hide	sbas skung byed
སྦས་བསྐུངས	hidden	sbas bskungs
སྦས་རྒྱ	hidden secrecy, seal of concealment GD	sbas rgya
སྦས་དོན	hidden meaning	sbas don
སྦས་དོན་གྱི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	mystic apparitional body	sbas don gyi sgyu lus
སྦས་དོན་གྱི་ཆོས་དྲུག	CHN	sbas don gyi chos drug
སྦས་དོན་མངོན་རྟོགས་བརྒྱད	CHN	sbas don mngon rtogs brgyad
སྦས་ནས་བཞག	{me tog gi tshal dang rwa bar sbas nas bzhag} concealed her in a walled garden	sbas nas bzhag
སྦས་པ	bury, covert, be hidden, concealed	sbas pa
སྦས་པ་ཀུན་གསལ	Revelation of All Secrets, Bepa Künsel, cave at Labchi	sbas pa kun gsal
སྦས་པ་གསང་བའི་དལ	the concealed secret mandala	sbas pa gsang ba'i dal
སྦས་པའི	hidden	sbas pa'i
སྦས་པའི་གཏེར་ཁ་བརྒྱད	CHN	sbas pa'i gter kha brgyad
སྦས་པའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	practicing in secret [Tt]	sbas pa'i brtul zhugs
སྦས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	secret yogi [who makes no show of his accomplishments]	sbas pa'i rnal 'byor
སྦས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	secret yoginis	sbas pa'i rnal 'byor ma
སྦས་པའི་རྩ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 concealed great nadis	sbas pa'i rtsa chen brgyad
སྦས་པའི་ཚུལ	{yum lha lcam mkha' 'gro'i dbang phyug sbas pa'i tshul gyi kha TwaM ga 'dzin pa} holds Mandarava, queen of Dakinis, in hidden form as his khatvanga	sbas pa'i tshul
སྦས་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱིས	in a hidden way	sbas pa'i tshul gyis
སྦས་པའི་ཚུལ་དུ	in a hidden way	sbas pa'i tshul du
སྦས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	hidden Buddha	sbas pa'i sangs rgyas
སྦས་པའི་གསང་བ	hidden secrecy	sbas pa'i gsang ba
སྦས་པའི་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	CHN	sbas pa'i lha srin sde brgyad
སྦས་པོའི་ཡུལ་བཞི	CHN	sbas po'i yul bzhi
སྦས་བ	Hidden One, cave at Labchi	sbas ba
སྦས་བློ་གྲོས་དབང་ཕྱུག	disciple of {nyang ting 'dzin bzang po} in the {snying thig} lineage	sbas blo gros dbang phyug
སྦས་མང་རྗེ་གསལ་སྣང	Mangje Selnang of Bey	sbas mang rje gsal snang
སྦས་ཚང	sbas tshang rdzong	sbas tshang
སྦས་ཚུལ	secret manner	sbas tshul
སྦས་ཚུལ་ཁ་ཏབཱ༹ཾ	hidden form of a khatvanga	sbas tshul kha tvAM
སྦས་ཟིན་པ	hid, hidden	sbas zin pa
སྦས་ཡིག	a certain dakini script	sbas yig
སྦས་ཡུལ	hidden land	sbas yul
སྦས་ཡུལ་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	Beyul Padma Karpo. See Hidden Land of the White Lotus	sbas yul pad ma dkar po
སྦས་ལུང	1) secret place/ valley; 2) lung khug btsan po	sbas lung
སྦས་ཤུལ་འཆང	follow a hidden way [Tt]	sbas shul 'chang
སྦས་ས	hiding place	sbas sa
སྦས་ས་གཏོང་བ	to bury	sbas sa gtong ba
སྦས་གསང	{byed pa} to conceal, hide	sbas gsang
སྦས་གསང་གིས	secretly	sbas gsang gis
སྦས་གསང་བྱེད་པ	conceal, hide	sbas gsang byed pa
སྦས་གསང་མེད	candid, frank	sbas gsang med
སྦས་གསང་མེད་པ	candid, frank	sbas gsang med pa
སྦས་གསང་མེད་པར	openly	sbas gsang med par
སྦི་ཏི	fuse, spark plug, sbi ti region	sbi ti
སྦི་སྡི	Tibetan gun fire cord/ fuse	sbi sdi
སྦི་གསང	because of being not clearly perceived the view conceptualizing the way things are gnas tshul lta rtog byed pa'i 'on gseng hard to hear?] or rdzi gsang [inscrutable]	sbi gsang
སྦིག	kind of wild animal	sbig
སྦིད་པ	bellows	sbid pa
སྦིར	get/be numb	sbir
སྦིར་སྒྲ	1) 'chal gtam, dkrog gtam; 2) gun etc. loud sound	sbir sgra
སྦིར་གཏམ	explaining by assuming whatever 1 likes	sbir gtam
སྦིར་སྨན	anesthetic [-esia]	sbir sman
སྦུ་སྐྲ་ལི་བ	disordered hair	sbu skra li ba
སྦུ་གུ	hollow, cavity, pipe, tube, bushings, straw	sbu gu
སྦུ་གུའི་སྒྲོ་འདྲ	in the flesh a blood nadi rkyang pa gtar byed kyi gtsag bu zhig	sbu gu'i sgro 'dra
སྦུ་བསྙུང་བཞེས་པ	swear by one's head	sbu bsnyung bzhes pa
སྦུ་ཕག	a trumpet (bag-pipe)	sbu phag
སྦུ་བ་ཅན	unhurt, safe	sbu ba can
སྦུ་ལ་ཁ	japanned or colored leather imported from china, sable, mustela zibellina	sbu la kha
སྦུ་སོབ	surf	sbu sob
སྦུ་ལྷན	plane	sbu lhan
སྦུ་ལྷན་རྒྱག	plane [w carpenter's plane]	sbu lhan rgyag
སྦུག	1) hollow, cavity, tube, bushings; 2) mdo sbug gnyis su phye ba'i sbug; khang pa'i sbug gzims; chung sbug; mdzod sbug 'khyag pa'i sbug blo;	sbug
སྦུག་གི	inner	sbug gi
སྦུག་ཆལ	cymbal	sbug chal
སྦུག་ཆུ	water pipe, cavity, hollow	sbug chu
སྦུག་ཆོལ	large bell-metal cymbals (hor sbug, rgya sbug, bal sbug)	sbug chol
སྦུག་འཇོག	depositing storing	sbug 'jog
སྦུག་མཐུན་བསུ་སྐྱེལ	ngan g.yo lto mthun gyis phar tshur 'bod skyel byed pa, dgra phyogs dang sbug mthun bsu skyel yin khul gyis dgra phyogs la myang zhib byed pa	sbug mthun bsu skyel
སྦུག་དམ	Tibetan govt Dalai Lama's office seal	sbug dam
སྦུག་དོག་པོ	narrow	sbug dog po
སྦུག་མདོ	interior and exterior	sbug mdo
སྦུག་འདྲེན་ཐལ་ལུས	sba gsang chad lhag byung song rtsis rgyag rigs sbug 'dren thal lus med pa zhig byung 'dug	sbug 'dren thal lus
སྦུག་པ	penetrate, perforate, pierce into	sbug pa
སྦུག་པོ	innermost part of a house where treasures are kept	sbug po
སྦུག་ཕྲན	capillaries	sbug phran
སྦུག་འབྱར	sbug dam 'byar ma ste, Tibetan govt t' la'i bla ma'i sbug tham phab yod pa'i gzhung yig	sbug 'byar
སྦུག་མ	innermost part	sbug ma
སྦུག་རྩ	phug gi don rtsa, mi'i bsam pa'i sbug rtsa ma lon par gsed bkrol byas kyang mi phan, las don gyi sbug rtsa lon pa	sbug rtsa
སྦུག་ཟོས	secretly zos pa [waste?], spyi pa'i rgyu nor sger gyis sbug zos byas pa	sbug zos
སྦུག་གཟོང	yi ge'i sbo rko byed gzong zhig	sbug gzong
སྦུག་བཟོས	something that was obtained but not officially/legally given	sbug bzos
སྦུག་རིལ	rtsva'am rtsid mthil can gyi zon pa	sbug ril
སྦུག་སོ	'gram sbug gi so	sbug so
སྦུགས	hollow stalk, tube, hole, excavation, interior space, cavity	sbugs
སྦུགས་དམ	royal seal	sbugs dam
སྦུགས་རྩ	the pulse	sbugs rtsa
སྦུགས་རླུང	act of tasting	sbugs rlung
སྦུགས་ཧག	panting, bossoon	sbugs hag
སྦུང་བ	heap	sbung ba
སྦུང་བ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	CHN	sbung ba yan lag drug
སྦུང་སྦུང	many in one place, a heap	sbung sbung
སྦུངས	[arch] 1) power, strength; 2) effort, exertion; 3) dam bca'	sbungs
སྦུངས་བསྐྱེད་པ	[arch] 1) produce/ arouse power/ strength; 2) have exerted oneself; 3) dam bca' brtan pa	sbungs bskyed pa
སྦུངས་པ	[arch] bsgrims pa, tighten	sbungs pa
སྦུད་རྐྱག་རྒྱབ་པ	flip	sbud rkyag rgyab pa
སྦུད་སྒམ	shing sgam gyi sbud pa	sbud sgam
སྦུད་མཆུ	tube or iron mouth of a bellows	sbud mchu
སྦུད་སྙན	accordion	sbud snyan
སྦུད་པ	1) bellows, blower; 2) light, kindle, set on fire	sbud pa
སྦུད་པ་རྒྱག	use bellows	sbud pa rgyag
སྦུད་པ་དབུགས་མངགས	don de rang la ched du dmigs pa'i dpe	sbud pa dbugs mngags
སྦུད་པ་འབུད	use bellows	sbud pa 'bud
སྦུད་པ་འབུད་པ	blow the bellows	sbud pa 'bud pa
སྦུད་པའི་ཁ	mouth of a bellows	sbud pa'i kha
སྦུད་པའི་མཆུ	mouth of a bellows	sbud pa'i mchu
སྦུད་སྦུད	way of pressing nadis, short, small	sbud sbud
སྦུད་ཙམ	short, small	sbud tsam
སྦུད་རུ	[arch] mouth of a bellows, shan mchu	sbud ru
སྦུད་ལིང་གིས་འགྲོ	[arch] 1) bud thum gyis 'gro; 2) mgo 'bur rgyu med par gyur pa	sbud ling gis 'gro
སྦུད་ཤན	sbud pa	sbud shan
སྦུན	husk, outer cover, peel {sbun ldan} untreshed	sbun
སྦུན་སྐོགས	strip bare, peeling	sbun skogs
སྦུན་སྐོགས་ལྟར་གྲོལ་བར་གྱུར་པ	was liberated by stripping --	sbun skogs ltar grol bar gyur pa
སྦུན་གོག	1) tree bark; 2) grain husks/ chaff	sbun gog
སྦུན་སྙིགས	grain husks and lhad	sbun snyigs
སྦུན་གཏེར	useless treasure like a pile of barley husks	sbun gter
སྦུན་ལྡན	unthreshed	sbun ldan
སྦུན་པ	SA spun pa, bark of trees, peel of fruit, pod of grain	sbun pa
སྦུན་ཕུབ	grain husks	sbun phub
སྦུན་མ	husks, chaff, peel	sbun ma
སྦུན་རྩིས	very high rate of interest, 50	sbun rtsis
སྦུན་ཟླ	brother	sbun zla
སྦུབ	(tha dad pa sbubs pa, sbub pa, sbubs,, turn/ place a vessel upside down/ mouth on the ground	sbub
སྦུབ་ཁོང	hollow ball	sbub khong
སྦུབ་གུ	legs [in trousers]	sbub gu
སྦུབ་ཆལ	pair of cymbals	sbub chal
སྦུབ་ཆུང	small cymbals	sbub chung
སྦུབ་ཆོལ	large bell-metal cymbals	sbub chol
སྦུབ་པ	(tha dad pa sbubs pa, sbub pa, sbubs,, turn/ place a vessel upside down/ mouth on the ground	sbub pa
སྦུབ་མོ	[arch] bor shugs	sbub mo
སྦུབ་སིལ	cymbals	sbub sil
སྦུབས་སྐྱེས	dz' ti med. fruit	sbubs skyes
སྦུབས་ཁོང	empty/ hole inside, hollow	sbubs khong
སྦུབས་གྲོལ	blossoming	sbubs grol
སྦུབས་གྲོལ་བ	1) let out from inside; 2) open	sbubs grol ba
སྦུབས་ཅན	nutmeg 1962	sbubs can
སྦུབས་ཅན་མོ	sbubs can ai khung nang du gzhang 'brum gcur byed kyi yo byad cig	sbubs can mo
སྦུབས་ཅན་སོག་ལེ་ཁ	instrument for piercing hole in a bone	sbubs can sog le kha
སྦུབས་ཅོག	shur sgam med pa'i table	sbubs cog
སྦུབས་ཆུང	1) small khog pa; 2) thin tube	sbubs chung
སྦུབས་སྟོང	hollow	sbubs stong
སྦུབས་བརྟོལ་བ	1) smyug sbug sogs 'gags pa bshangs pa; 2) open egg etc	sbubs brtol ba
སྦུབས་ཐུར	nang stong pa yin pa'i thur ma	sbubs thur
སྦུབས་ཐུར་སྨྱུ་གུ་ཁ	upper body rnag gsang dbye ba 'byed byed yo byad cig	sbubs thur smyu gu kha
སྦུབས་ཐོ	hammer for hollowing out metal etc.	sbubs tho
སྦུབས་དོང	hole	sbubs dong
སྦུབས་ལྡན	smyug ma	sbubs ldan
སྦུབས་པ	[p sbub pa] placed upside down [on the ground]	sbubs pa
སྦུབས་འཕོ་བ	to die	sbubs 'pho ba
སྦུབས་འབྱར	urine stopping disease	sbubs 'byar
སྦུབས་འབྲས	dz' ti pha la	sbubs 'bras
སྦུབས་མ	tube	sbubs ma
སྦུབས་ཡུར	covered subterraneous canal	sbubs yur
སྦུབས་ཤུབས	shell of insect	sbubs shubs
སྦུབས་བཤངས	brag phug sogs sbubs bshangs te che ru btang ba lta bu	sbubs bshangs
སྦུབས་བཤད	secret talk going from ear to ear	sbubs bshad
སྦུབས་ས	a clay mould, shell, hollow[ness]	sbubs sa
སྦུབས་ས་ཡི	a clay mold, shell, hollow[ness], space	sbubs sa yi
སྦུབས་སུ	sheath	sbubs su
སྦུབས་སུག་དོག་པོ	bored, depressed	sbubs sug dog po
སྦུབས་སོ	cheek tooth	sbubs so
སྦུར	ant	sbur
སྦུར་ཁྲ	worm which cures hydrophobia	sbur khra
སྦུར་འཁྱོག	beetle sbur lta bur g.yengs - skitter about like an insect	sbur 'khyog
སྦུར་ནག	srin bu sbur gog nag po	sbur nag
སྦུར་པ	beetle skogs shun can gyi 'bu'i spyi ming, bse sbur, grog sbur	sbur pa
སྦུར་བ	chaff, husks	sbur ba
སྦུར་མ	chaff, husks	sbur ma
སྦུར་མེ	grass sog ma etc. small fire	sbur me
སྦུར་ལེན	amber, thang chu'i rigs kyi 'gyur rdo 'jam po zhig ste, by rubbing it attracts by static electricity rdul phran nam sbang rdul, used in jewelry	sbur len
སྦུར་ལོང	gold/ silver khams phyogs ear ring zhig	sbur long
སྦུས་དག	meticulous	sbus dag
སྦུས་རུ	bar dbus gtsang ru bzhi'i nang gses, dbu ru'i ming gsar	sbus ru
སྦེ	scuffle, wrestle	sbe
སྦེ་ཀ	wrestling	sbe ka
སྦེ་ཁ	wrestling	sbe kha
སྦེ་མཁར	sbe mkhar	sbe mkhar
སྦེ་ག	MG: wrestling; va. -- 'chang to wrestle. [mss]	sbe ga
སྦེ་ག་རྒྱག་པ	wrestle	sbe ga rgyag pa
སྦེ་ག་འཆང	wrestle	sbe ga 'chang
སྦེ་ག་འཆང་བ	wrestle	sbe ga 'chang ba
སྦེ་ག་རྡོ་འགྱོགས	wrestling and rock lifting competition sbe ga rdo 'gyogs kyi 'gran sdur byed pa compete at wrestling and rock lifting	sbe ga rdo 'gyogs
སྦེ་ག་སྦྱོར་བ	wrestle	sbe ga sbyor ba
སྦེ་བ	scuffle, wrestle	sbe ba
སྦེ་སེར	place s.w. of lhasa	sbe ser
སྦེག	slender	sbeg
སྦེག་པ	lean, lank, thin	sbeg pa
སྦེག་སྦེག	gzugs thung la sbom pa	sbeg sbeg
སྦེད	to hide, bury; imp. conceal!	sbed
སྦེད་པ	hide, conceal, cover, bury, lean, thin, emaciated	sbed pa
སྦེད་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of concealing	sbed pa'i ltung byed
སྦེད་བྱེད	Gopaka	sbed byed
སྦེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི	burial	sbed byed kyi
སྦེད་བྱེད་པ	supintra	sbed byed pa
སྦེད་མ	any property or article that is hidden, not made public, concealed treasure that has come to light, veiled woman, a wife of buddha	sbed ma
སྦེད་བཞིན་པ	hiding	sbed bzhin pa
སྦེད་གསང་མ་བྱེད་མཁན	extrovert	sbed gsang ma byed mkhan
སྦེན་ཞ་ཏ	{A not true/ real, genuine	sben zha ta
སྦེབ་པ	1) swelling; 2) [arch] nyen pa	sbeb pa
སྦེལ	(not in das)	sbel
སྦོ	1) middle of the front of the torso, [upper] belly, side [sbo chu la sbang ma dgos par, rkyal nya 'dra po rgyag 'dod]; 2) dbo; 3) [p sbos],, swell, be inflated/ distended	sbo
སྦོ་རྐུན་པ	pickpocket	sbo rkun pa
སྦོ་ཁྭ་ཆི	ambassador, envoy, leading men	sbo khwa chi
སྦོ་འཁྲོག	in the belly	sbo 'khrog
སྦོ་འཁྲོག་པ	growling belly	sbo 'khrog pa
སྦོ་དགྱེད་དགྱེད	stomach growling	sbo dgyed dgyed
སྦོ་ཉལ་རྒྱལ	lie on 1's side	sbo nyal rgyal
སྦོ་སྙེ་རྒྱག	sit w elbows on something	sbo snye rgyag
སྦོ་རྡོག	rkang pa'i snga rting thad kyi lham gyi rdog pa	sbo rdog
སྦོ་བ	to swell, be swollen; to swell [up], to distend	sbo ba
སྦོ་བལ	sheep's belly wool	sbo bal
སྦོ་མ	mig gi ling thog yos sbo gas pa lta bu	sbo ma
སྦོ་ཚིལ	fat from upper part of the belly, bacon fat	sbo tshil
སྦོ་གཞོགས	sbo [yi zur]	sbo gzhogs
སྦོ་ཟླ	2nd month	sbo zla
སྦོ་འུར་བ	belly growling	sbo 'ur ba
སྦོ་རིལ	sbug ril	sbo ril
སྦོ་ལུག་པ	zhig pa [destroyed, died, dissolved], dmigs bsal gyi dbang cha sbo lug pa	sbo lug pa
སྦོ་ལུག་མ	loose clothes w/o belt etc.	sbo lug ma
སྦོ་ཤོབ	boastful, bragging, conceited,	sbo shob
སྦོ་ཤོབ་ཚ་པོ	boastful, bragging, conceited	sbo shob tsha po
སྦོག་སྦོག	baggy, boast	sbog sbog
སྦོགས	imp. of {sbag pa}	sbogs
སྦོང	(tha dad pa sbangs pa, sbang ba, sbongs,, steep, soak, drench, wet	sbong
སྦོང་བ	steep in water, soak, drench, abstain from	sbong ba
སྦོངས	sbong ba! steep! soak! wet! drench!	sbongs
སྦོད	silk cord phod rgyan	sbod
སྦོད་གཏོང	send for, one who has been sent for 1963	sbod gtong
སྦོད་པ	tassel, tuft	sbod pa
སྦོན་པ	[arch] eat	sbon pa
སྦོབ་པའི་རྣམ་པ	grass saccharum cylindricum	sbob pa'i rnam pa
སྦོབ་པའི་རྣམ་པ་ཅན	bulky	sbob pa'i rnam pa can
སྦོམ	opaque, gross, thick	sbom
སྦོམ་དགའ་མ	a buddhist nun	sbom dga' ma
སྦོམ་ལྡིར	thick body, bulging belly	sbom ldir
སྦོམ་པ	1) (Tha dad pa sbams pa, sbam p sboms,, sdom cha byed pa [make vow/ promise]; 2) sdud pa gather; 3) increase sre ba; 4) thickening, thick, coarse; 5) serious violation of {so tar} vows]	sbom pa
སྦོམ་པོ	rough, thick, coarse, fat, of large dimensions, big, bulky, considerable	sbom po
སྦོམ་པོ་བརྒྱད	8 serious downfalls TSE	sbom po brgyad
སྦོམ་པོའི་ལྟུང་བ	serious downfalls	sbom po'i ltung ba
སྦོམ་པོའི་ལྟུང་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 serious downfalls	sbom po'i ltung ba brgyad
སྦོམ་ཕྲ	dimensions, size, breadth	sbom phra
སྦོམ་ཕྲ་མཉམ་པ	= thickness	sbom phra mnyam pa
སྦོམ་ཕྲ་རག་གསུམ	subtle, tangible and gross	sbom phra rag gsum
སྦོམ་སྦེ	Bombay	sbom sbe
སྦོམ་ཚིག	abstract	sbom tshig
སྦོམ་རགས་བདེ་བ	big, thick and smooth	sbom rags bde ba
སྦོམ་ལོས	thickness	sbom los
སྦོམས	place together, SA sbam pa	sboms
སྦོམས་པོ	downfalls	sboms po
སྦོར	imp. of {sbor ba}; kindle, to ignite, illuminate, flash, blaze, light	sbor
སྦོར་བ	light, kindle, inflame, transfer, transfuse	sbor ba
སྦོར་ལོ	anemone palyantha	sbor lo
སྦོར་ཤོག་གཤོད་པ	brag, vaunt	sbor shog gshod pa
སྦོར་ཤོབ་ཚ་པོ	boastful	sbor shob tsha po
སྦོར་ཤོབ་བཤད་པ	to boast	sbor shob bshad pa
སྦོལ	imp. of {sbol ba}	sbol
སྦོལ་བ	pf. of {sbol ba}; ft. of {sbol ba}; {sbol ba, sbol ba, sbol ba, sbol} trans. v	sbol ba
སྦོས	bloat, swell, puff up	sbos
སྦོས་ཀྱི་སྐུད་པ	anoint, apply an ointment	sbos kyi skud pa
སྦོས་སྐྲངས	swollen, protruding, bloated	sbos skrangs
སྦོས་པ	swell, swelling in the bone	sbos pa
སྦོས་འཚང	khog pa sbos 'khrog	sbos 'tshang
སྦོས་ཤེལ	amber	sbos shel
སྦྱག	lose weight	sbyag
སྦྱག་ཁྱེམ	shovel	sbyag khyem
སྦྱག་པ	[arch] thin, meager, emaciated	sbyag pa
སྦྱག་མ	shovel	sbyag ma
སྦྱག་མའི་ཡུ་བ	shovel handle	sbyag ma'i yu ba
སྦྱག་ཚེ	physically weakened/ frail, thin, meager, emaciated	sbyag tshe
སྦྱག་ཡུ	shovel handle	sbyag yu
སྦྱག་སློག	w a big metal shovel turn/ plow] a field sbyag slog gting ring po zhing khar	sbyag slog
སྦྱང	jackal, wolf	sbyang
སྦྱང་ཀུ	wolf	sbyang ku
སྦྱང་དཀའ་བ	Difficult to Conquer, {sa bcu} the 5th]. [Syn {shin tu sbyang ba}. difficult to overcome, the Hard to Conquer	sbyang dka' ba
སྦྱང་དཀའ་བའི་ས	the Hard to Conquer stage / level	sbyang dka' ba'i sa
སྦྱང་གྲུང་གི	skillful	sbyang grung gi
སྦྱང་གྲུང་དོད་པོ	clever, smart, bright	sbyang grung dod po
སྦྱང་གྲུང་ལྡན་པ	wise, intelligent, bright, clever	sbyang grung ldan pa
སྦྱང་གྲུང་འཛོམ་པོ	clever, smart, bright	sbyang grung 'dzom po
སྦྱང་སྔགས	refining mantra	sbyang sngags
སྦྱང་བཅོས	contrived training	sbyang bcos
སྦྱང་ཆོག	purification ritual	sbyang chog
སྦྱང་མཐར	at the end of the purification	sbyang mthar
སྦྱང་དུ་བཅུག	continue the training, train like this	sbyang du bcug
སྦྱང་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	impossible to purify	sbyang du mi rung ba
སྦྱང་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་གཉིས	[TRS 57-4] expl; the twelve ascetic practices	sbyang pa'i yon tan bcu gnyis
སྦྱང་པོ	wise, intelligent, bright, clever, SA grung po	sbyang po
སྦྱང་ཕྱིར	in order to purify	sbyang phyir
སྦྱང་བ	intention, cultivation, washed, used, practiced, disciplined, clean, clearing, SA sbyong ba, method, to purify into, cleanse	sbyang ba
སྦྱང་བའི་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve ascetic virtues	sbyang ba'i yan lag bcu gnyis
སྦྱང་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 virtuous trainings	sbyang ba'i yon tan bcu gnyis
སྦྱང་བའི་རིམ་པ	steps of training	sbyang ba'i rim pa
སྦྱང་བའི་སླད	in order to purify	sbyang ba'i slad
སྦྱང་བྱ	element/ factor to be refined	sbyang bya
སྦྱང་བྱ་གློ་བུར་གྱི་དྲི་མ	temporary defilements to be purified	sbyang bya glo bur gyi dri ma
སྦྱང་བྱུར་གི་རྩ་བའི་ཁ་ཏོག	manufactured primary color	sbyang byur gi rtsa ba'i kha tog
སྦྱང་བྱེད	purifying process	sbyang byed
སྦྱང་འབྲས	result of purification, the fruit or result of one's studies	sbyang 'bras
སྦྱང་བརྩོན	effort/ diligence at training [in]/ studying/ purifying 1964	sbyang brtson
སྦྱང་བརྩོན་བྱེད	diligently train/ apply 1self in study/ purification/ practice	sbyang brtson byed
སྦྱང་གཞི	basis of purification, the ground that is to be purified; the ground that is to be purified; ground to be refined	sbyang gzhi
སྦྱང་གཞི་ལྔ	CHN	sbyang gzhi lnga
སྦྱང་གཞིའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞི	CHN	sbyang gzhi'i dkyil 'khor bzhi
སྦྱང་ཟིང་པ	learnt	sbyang zing pa
སྦྱང་ཤིང	yi ge 'bri sa'i pang leb = byang shing	sbyang shing
སྦྱང་ཤིང་པ	byang shing thog yi ge sbyong mkhan slob phrug	sbyang shing pa
སྦྱང་ས་པ	training	sbyang sa pa
སྦྱང་སློག	fur coat of wolf's skin	sbyang slog
སྦྱངས	purify	sbyangs
སྦྱངས་དཀའ་བ	{shin tu sbyangs dka' ba} the one who was trained what is (extremely/ very) difficult [5th spiritual level/ bhumi]	sbyangs dka' ba
སྦྱངས་དཀའ་བའི་ས	TSE the level difficult to accomplish, 5th bhumi	sbyangs dka' ba'i sa
སྦྱངས་གོམས	bslabs nas lobs pa'am byang chub pa * learning ability/ skill	sbyangs goms
སྦྱངས་སྟོབས	learning ability/ skill	sbyangs stobs
སྦྱངས་བརྡུངས	lhad bton nas brdungs pa	sbyangs brdungs
སྦྱངས་བརྡུངས་མ	things made of pure metal sbyangs brdungs ma'i gser gyi lag gdub bracelet of pure gold	sbyangs brdungs ma
སྦྱངས་པ	undergone training	sbyangs pa
སྦྱངས་པ་སྔོན་སོང	; x {lam sbyangs pa sngon song gi gang zag zhig yin na ma gtogs} unless you have already mastered the path	sbyangs pa sngon song
སྦྱངས་པ་བྱས	was educated	sbyangs pa byas
སྦྱངས་པ་ཡང་དག་སྡོམ	austere penance of the ascetic practices	sbyangs pa yang dag sdom
སྦྱངས་པའི་འཕྲོ	visualization	sbyangs pa'i 'phro
སྦྱངས་པའི་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 ascetic practices	sbyangs pa'i ba'i yon tan bcu gnyis
སྦྱངས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	fruition from training/ practice/ study/ purification	sbyangs pa'i 'bras bu
སྦྱངས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	talents or qualifications kept up, 12 ascetic practices (dgon pa pa, gzhi zi bzhin pa'o, phyag dar khrod pa, zas phyis mi len pa, stan gcig pa, 'phyings pa pa, dur khrod pa, bla gab med pa, shing d...	sbyangs pa'i yon tan
སྦྱངས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་གཉིས	practiced	sbyangs pa'i yon tan bcu gnyis
སྦྱངས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལ་གནས་པ	1 who abides in ascetic virtues, shravaka	sbyangs pa'i yon tan la gnas pa
སྦྱངས་པའི་ལས་འཕྲོ་ཚུལ་བཞིན	the karma of proper training practice	sbyangs pa'i las 'phro tshul bzhin
སྦྱངས་སྤེལ་བསྒྱུར་གསུམ	with on an hung, purify, multiply and offer	sbyangs spel bsgyur gsum
སྦྱངས་འབྲས	outcome of purification, result of refinement/ refined result	sbyangs 'bras
སྦྱངས་སྨིན་རྫོགས	cleansing & maturation & fulfillment	sbyangs smin rdzogs
སྦྱངས་རྩལ	experience/ result of learning/ training/ practice	sbyangs rtsal
སྦྱངས་ཚགས	filtered, purified by filtration	sbyangs tshags
སྦྱངས་གཞི་སྐུ་གསུམ	TSE	sbyangs gzhi sku gsum
སྦྱངས་ཡོན	(/ 1) learned knowledge, virtues resulting from training; 2) * ascetic virtues GD	sbyangs yon
སྦྱངས་ཤ	sbyangs pa'i nyams 'gyur	sbyangs sha
སྦྱངས་སོན	skilled, experienced	sbyangs son
སྦྱད་ལག་བརྗེ་བ	exchange articles, dispose of articles	sbyad lag brje ba
སྦྱད་ལག་འཚོང	exchange articles, dispose of articles	sbyad lag 'tshong
སྦྱན	(not in das)	sbyan
སྦྱན་ལྔ	the five eyes	sbyan lnga
སྦྱན་དྲངས	invite	sbyan drangs
སྦྱན་བྱ	arrange a marriage [making the contact]	sbyan bya
སྦྱར	join; ingredients, composed, relate, paste, stick together, join, compose, supply, {sbyor}. ingredient; united, joined; establish	sbyar
སྦྱར་ཀ	phan tshun sgrig ka, pang leb dang pang leb sbyar ka rgyag pa, shog bu dang shog bu sbyar ka mthud pa	sbyar ka
སྦྱར་ཀ་བྱེད་པ	borrow	sbyar ka byed pa
སྦྱར་ཁ	sbyar ka	sbyar kha
སྦྱར་འགྲེམ	poster	sbyar 'grem
སྦྱར་སྒྲིག	fixation	sbyar sgrig
སྦྱར་ལྕང	willow	sbyar lcang
སྦྱར་ཆགས	potter's tool for beating powdered clay	sbyar chags
སྦྱར་ཆང	bcos pa'i chang	sbyar chang
སྦྱར་ལྗང	"compounded green", a mixture of indigo and orpiment	sbyar ljang
སྦྱར་ཏེ་བརྟན	place	sbyar te brtan
སྦྱར་ཐབས	method of combination of medicines	sbyar thabs
སྦྱར་ཐུག	misery	sbyar thug
སྦྱར་མཐུན	sticking/ joining together	sbyar mthun
སྦྱར་མཐུན་བྱེད	stick/ join together	sbyar mthun byed
སྦྱར་དུ་ཡོད་པ	applicable, can be combined	sbyar du yod pa
སྦྱར་དུ་རུང་བ	full knowledge	sbyar du rung ba
སྦྱར་དུག	1) poison made of mixed substances; 2) mixed w food gang zhig dug	sbyar dug
སྦྱར་དྲི	smell of many meds etc. mixed	sbyar dri
སྦྱར་པ	poplar, aspen	sbyar pa
སྦྱར་པང	two joined flat pieces of wood held between the knees, between which 1 sews shoe soles etc.	sbyar pang
སྦྱར་སྤོས	prepared incense 1965	sbyar spos
སྦྱར་བ	dang sbyar ba - combined with	sbyar ba
སྦྱར་བ་བརྒྱ་པ	100 recipes or compounded medicines, medical work by nagarjuna	sbyar ba brgya pa
སྦྱར་བ་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་གཞན་བཀོད་པ	don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, brjod 'dod dngos po zhig gi gnas lugs bsgrub byar bkod nas de'i sgrub byed rigs mtshungs kyi don gzhan zhig sgra sbyar gyi sgo nas ston pa'i rgyan ...	sbyar ba can gyi don gzhan bkod pa
སྦྱར་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ་སྤྲུལ	to create various enhancing situations	sbyar ba sna tshogs su sprul
སྦྱར་བའི་འགལ་བ	'gal ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sgra gcig gis don gnyis ston pa sbyar ba'i sgo nas gzhi gcig gi khyad chos 'gal bas bya ba 'gal ba ston pa'i rgyan zhig	sbyar ba'i 'gal ba
སྦྱར་བའི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, rjod byed kyi tshig gam sgra'i gzugs gcig gis, brjod bya sbyar gzhi dngos po gnyis kyi khyad par sbyar chos rnam grangs gnyis la sogs pa gang rung phan tshun sbyar...	sbyar ba'i rgyan
སྦྱར་བའི་རྒྱན་དགུ	CHN	sbyar ba'i rgyan dgu
སྦྱར་བའི་ཆང	wine or beer prepared from 2 or 3 ingredients	sbyar ba'i chang
སྦྱར་བའི་དུག	poisons applied or made by mixture	sbyar ba'i dug
སྦྱར་བའི་དྲི	incense of 2 or 3 perfumes	sbyar ba'i dri
སྦྱར་བའི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	ldog pa can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe don gnyis khyad chos gsum gyi sgo nas mtshungs pa sgra sbyar nas thun min khyad chos re re'i sgo nas mtshungs pa las ldog ste so sor 'byed pa'i rgy...	sbyar ba'i ldog pa can
སྦྱར་བའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe dang don gnyis kar yod pa'i don gyi mtshungs chos 'ga' zhig	sbyar ba'i dpe
སྦྱར་བའི་ཟོལ་བསྟོད	stobs phun tshogs kyi zol bstod	sbyar ba'i zol bstod
སྦྱར་བའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi khyad gzhi de dpe'i khyad gzhi'i gzugs su bkod cing, khyad chos 'ga' zhig la sgra sbyar, 'ga' zhig la don sbyar ba'i rgyan zhig	sbyar ba'i gzugs can
སྦྱར་བའི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, gsal bya dngos po gnyis kyi khyad chos 'dra ba thun mong du sbyar zhing, gsal byed gang rung gcig gis khyad gzhi gnyis kyi gnas lugs gsal bar byed pa'i r...	sbyar ba'i gsal byed
སྦྱར་བས་བཀུ	to mix	sbyar bas bku
སྦྱར་བས་འགོག་པ	'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dgag bya gtso bo'i dngos po gang yang rung ba zhig 'gog byed phal pa'i dngos po gtso bo dang mtshungs chos 'dra ba zhig sgra sbyar gyis bkod nas don du gtso ...	sbyar bas 'gog pa
སྦྱར་བྱང	colophon	sbyar byang
སྦྱར་བྱུང	mixture, combination, compound, amalgam, composition, blend, concocted, prepared, mixed, manufactured, compounded, alloyed, combined, blended	sbyar byung
སྦྱར་བྱུང་གི་དྲི	mixed smell	sbyar byung gi dri
སྦྱར་བྱུང་གི་རྩ་བའི་ཁ་དོག	manufactured primary colors	sbyar byung gi rtsa ba'i kha dog
སྦྱར་སྦོམ	pomade, perfumery	sbyar sbom
སྦྱར་མ	shovel, spade	sbyar ma
སྦྱར་སྨན	plaster	sbyar sman
སྦྱར་རྩི	glue, gum	sbyar rtsi
སྦྱར་ཚི	glue, adhesive	sbyar tshi
སྦྱར་ཚིག	poster	sbyar tshig
སྦྱར་ཟས	g.yos pa'i food	sbyar zas
སྦྱར་ཟིན་པ	stuck	sbyar zin pa
སྦྱར་ཡིག	slogan, poster	sbyar yig
སྦྱར་ལམ	path of preparation	sbyar lam
སྦྱར་ཤོག	plaster	sbyar shog
སྦྱར་སོན	shing sbyar pa gsar du 'dzugs rgyu'i son	sbyar son
སྦྱར་གསར	gsar du skye ba'i shing sbyar pa	sbyar gsar
སྦྱལ་པའི་ལྡོག་པས་ཕེ་ན་བརྒྱད	CHN	sbyal pa'i ldog pas phe na brgyad
སྦྱི་དོན་གྱི་ཆོས་དྲུག	CHN	sbyi don gyi chos drug
སྦྱིག་པ	1) slide, slip, glide, wipe; 2) female cattle sdeb sbyor gyi dus la bab pa; 3) [arch] gos kyis mnan pa	sbyig pa
སྦྱིག་མོ	naked	sbyig mo
སྦྱིངས	(not in das)	sbyings
སྦྱིད་པ	bellows	sbyid pa
སྦྱིན	[overwhelming] atmosphere, giving, generosity, {phar phyin drug}, to give, donate, be generous, donation, charity; imp. of {sbyin pa}	sbyin
སྦྱིན་སྐྱེས	asura	sbyin skyes
སྦྱིན་དགའ	joyful gift	sbyin dga'
སྦྱིན་གཏེར	charitable person	sbyin gter
སྦྱིན་གཏོང	distribution of gifts	sbyin gtong
སྦྱིན་བཏག	donor	sbyin btag
སྦྱིན་དུ་མི་རུང་བའི་དངོས་པོ་ལྔ	the five objects unsuitable for giving [dug, bud med, mtshon cha, chang, gzhan gnod chen po 'byung ba'i rdzas]	sbyin du mi rung ba'i dngos po lnga
སྦྱིན་དུ་མེད་པ	can[not] be communicated	sbyin du med pa
སྦྱིན་བདག	royal patron, dispenser of gifts, benefactor, master, sponsor	sbyin bdag
སྦྱིན་བདག་ཁྱིམ	the homes of your benefactors	sbyin bdag khyim
སྦྱིན་བདག་གི་སྐྱོན་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	sbyin bdag gi skyon bcu gcig
སྦྱིན་བདག་གི་སྡོམ་པ	vows of an almsgiver	sbyin bdag gi sdom pa
སྦྱིན་ནོ་གསུངས	I must give them to you	sbyin no gsungs
སྦྱིན་གནས	Syn {mchod gnas}	sbyin gnas
སྦྱིན་གནས་ཀྱི་ས་ཐོབ་པ	attaining the stage of being worthy of worship	sbyin gnas kyi sa thob pa
སྦྱིན་བནས་ཀྱི་ས་ཐོབ་པ	attaining the stage of being worthy of worship	sbyin bnas kyi sa thob pa
སྦྱིན་པ་གཉིས	CHN	sbyin pa gnyis
སྦྱིན་པ་གཏོང་བ	{ma chags par sbyin pa gtong ba} be generous without attachment	sbyin pa gtong ba
སྦྱིན་པ་བཏང	gave away {zas nor 'bru gos sogs 'dod dgu'i sbyin pa btang} gave away food, jewels, grain, clothes, and everything else one could desire	sbyin pa btang
སྦྱིན་པ་བཏང་བ	to give alms	sbyin pa btang ba
སྦྱིན་པ་སྟེར་རྒྱུའི་དངོས་རྫས	things [to be] given	sbyin pa ster rgyu'i dngos rdzas
སྦྱིན་པ་ཐོང	{dbul po byung na sbyin pa thong} when you encounter destitute people, give to them generously!	sbyin pa thong
སྦྱིན་པ་ཐོངས	ex {chags med sbyin pa thongs shig} generously give up ...!	sbyin pa thongs
དོནའཏ་བེ་ཏིགྷཏ	fisted!	don't be tight
སྦྱིན་པ་ཐོངས་ཤིག	be generous! give in charity! sbyin pa dang brtson 'grus kyi chos bstan	sbyin pa thongs shig
སྦྱིན་པ་རྣམ་བཅུ	10 possessions a buddhist would be ready to give (rin chen, yo byad, zas, ba glang, rta, grang chen, bu mo, sa gzhi, 'dod pa'i chung ma, rang gi sha)	sbyin pa rnam bcu
སྦྱིན་པ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	CHN	sbyin pa rnam pa bzhi
སྦྱིན་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure giving	sbyin pa rnam par dag pa
སྦྱིན་པ་རྣམ་བཞི	4 kinds of gifts (zang zing, chos, mi 'jigs pa, byams)	sbyin pa rnam bzhi
སྦྱིན་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	TSE	sbyin pa rnam gsum
སྦྱིན་པ་པོ	giver, alms-giver, offerer of a gift	sbyin pa po
སྦྱིན་པ་ཕང་མེད་དུ་གཏོང་བ	unrestrained generosity	sbyin pa phang med du gtong ba
སྦྱིན་པ་བྱས་པ	having been generous, generosity	sbyin pa byas pa
སྦྱིན་པ་བྱིན་པ	generosity	sbyin pa byin pa
སྦྱིན་པ་བཞི	(zang zing, chos, mi 'jigs, byams)	sbyin pa bzhi
སྦྱིན་པ་རི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	unlimited charity	sbyin pa ri phar phyin
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་དགའ་བ	delighted in giving	sbyin pa la dga' ba
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་འགྱོད་པ་མེད	gave without regret	sbyin pa la 'gyod pa med
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་སྤྲོ་བ	many wonderful gifts	sbyin pa la spro ba
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་བརྩོན	strove always to give	sbyin pa la brtson
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	effort in giving	sbyin pa la brtson pa
སྦྱིན་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of generosity	sbyin pa gsum
སྦྱིན་པའི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	TSE sbyin pa'i grags pas sa steng kun khyab pa - his generosity is renowned throughout the world	sbyin pa'i go sgrub
སྦྱིན་པའི་དགེ་བ	x {bdag gi sbyin pa'i dge ba cung zad sgrub pa 'dis} by means of the small virtue achieved by my gift	sbyin pa'i dge ba
སྦྱིན་པའི་དགེ་འབྲས	{sbyin pa'i dge 'bras la yid ches shing gus pas} To honor the virtue of her gift	sbyin pa'i dge 'bras
སྦྱིན་པའི་དངོས་པོ	things [to be] given	sbyin pa'i dngos po
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of generosity	sbyin pa'i chos bzhi
སྦྱིན་པའི་མཆོག	the most supreme of gifts	sbyin pa'i mchog
སྦྱིན་པའི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	gradual practice of generosity	sbyin pa'i mthar gyis pa
སྦྱིན་པའི་མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བ	TSE	sbyin pa'i mthar gyis sbyor ba
སྦྱིན་པའི་དམ་བཅའ་བརྟན་པོས	standing firmly on his vow of generosity	sbyin pa'i dam bca' brtan pos
སྦྱིན་པའི་བདག་པོ	sponsor, patron	sbyin pa'i bdag po
སྦྱིན་པའི་གནས་བཞི	four cases when the teaching should be granted	sbyin pa'i gnas bzhi
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	danaparamita, transcendental giving, the paramita of generosity, {pha rol tu phyin pa drug}. transcendental giving	sbyin pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	<d'anp'armit'a> perfection of generosity	sbyin pa'i phar phyin
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	gesture of giving	sbyin pa'i phyag rgya
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	sbyin pa'i tshogs sgrub
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཞིང	fields/ objects of generosity	sbyin pa'i zhing
སྦྱིན་པའི་འོས	objects of charity	sbyin pa'i 'os
སྦྱིན་པའི་རང་བཞིན	generous	sbyin pa'i rang bzhin
སྦྱིན་པའི་བསམ་པ	intention to give sbyin pa'i bsam pa la g.yo ba med pa - his thoughts unwaveringly on giving	sbyin pa'i bsam pa
སྦྱིན་པར་བྱ	must be given to	sbyin par bya
སྦྱིན་བ	pouring forth	sbyin ba
སྦྱིན་བ་ཆུང་ངུ་ཞིག་བཏང་བ	giving even the smallest gift	sbyin ba chung ngu zhig btang ba
སྦྱིན་བྱུང	asura	sbyin byung
སྦྱིན་བྱེད	tshangs pa[Bhrama?], bestowal	sbyin byed
སྦྱིན་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྐོར	a teaching of the fruit of giving	sbyin 'bras kyi chos skor
སྦྱིན་མའི་བུ	asura	sbyin ma'i bu
སྦྱིན་མའི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess of gifts, lunar mansion	sbyin ma'i lha mo
སྦྱིན་ཚར་བྱས་པ	had received as a gift sbyin tshul bzod brtson bsam shes pha rol	sbyin tshar byas pa
ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དྲུག་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་བརྟེན	to	tu phyin pa drug la rtag tu brten
དེཔེནད་ཨལྭཡས་ཨོན་ཐེ་སི྾་པརམིཏས	the perfections of giving, moral practice, patience, effort, meditation, and wisdom	depend always on the Six Paramitas
སྦྱིན་ཡུལ	needy people	sbyin yul
སྦྱིན་ཡུལ་བྱུང་དུས	when needy people come to me	sbyin yul byung dus
སྦྱིན་རླབས	blessing, atmosphere, becoming possessed by it	sbyin rlabs
སྦྱིན་རླབས་ཅན	gtong phod can	sbyin rlabs can
སྦྱིན་བརླབ་རྣམ་ལྔ	fivefold blessing	sbyin brlab rnam lnga
སྦྱིན་ལེན	giving and receiving/ taking	sbyin len
སྦྱིན་སོགས	generosity and so forth, [generosity and the other paramitas]	sbyin sogs
སྦྱིན་སྲིག་གི་ཆོ་ག	fire puja liturgy	sbyin srig gi cho ga
སྦྱིན་སྲེག	burnt offerings GD fire offering, fire puja TSE	sbyin sreg
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་ཆོ་ག	fire offering puja	sbyin sreg gi cho ga
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་མེ	sacrificial fire ceremony 1967	sbyin sreg gi me
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་མེའི་དཀྱིལ་ཏུ	in the middle of the offering fire	sbyin sreg gi me'i dkyil tu
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་རྫས	clarified butter & articles necessary for burnt sacrifices	sbyin sreg gi rdzas
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་ལས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	fire puja activities	sbyin sreg gi las kyi rim pa
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་གི་ལྷའི་འོ་མས་གསོས་པ	nourished by nectar which came from burnt offerings made to the gods	sbyin sreg gi lha'i 'o mas gsos pa
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་དགའ་བ	one fond of oblation, fire	sbyin sreg dga' ba
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་ཆོ་ག	fire puja [ritual]	sbyin sreg cho ga
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་རྫས་ཆ	implements for fire puja	sbyin sreg rdzas cha
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་ཟ	fire god Agnideva	sbyin sreg za
སྦྱིན་སྲེག་ལག་པ	fire	sbyin sreg lag pa
སྦྱིན་སྲེགས	ritual fire offering made by burning different types of food and precious things	sbyin sregs
སྦྱིན་སྲེས	burnt offering	sbyin sres
སྦྱིན་གསུམ	the three kinds of generosity	sbyin gsum
སྦྱིན་བསྲེག	fire ceremony	sbyin bsreg
སྦྱིན་བསྲེག་མཁན	one who makes burnt offerings	sbyin bsreg mkhan
སྦྱིན་བསྲེག་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	sbyin bsreg gnyis kyi cho ga
སྦྱིའུ་ལ་ཕུག	medicinal plant	sbyi'u la phug
སྦྱིལ་བུ་ཕུབ་པ	built grass huts	sbyil bu phub pa
སྦྱིལ་མོ	smoothing, polishing tool	sbyil mo
སྦྱིལ་མོས་འདམ་བག་རློན་པ་དབུར	smooth wet cement	sbyil mos 'dam bag rlon pa dbur
སྦྱུད	think/ care about	sbyud
སྦྱུར	relating, to paste, stick, ingredients	sbyur
སྦྱུར་སྨན	herbal ingredients, popular, aspen	sbyur sman
སྦྱེག་པ	lean, lank, thin	sbyeg pa
སྦྱེད་མ	a veiled woman	sbyed ma
སྦྱོང་ཁ་བྱེད	heap, crooked device	sbyong kha byed
སྦྱོང་རྒྱུད	The purification tantra	sbyong rgyud
སྦྱོང་སྔོན	initial purification	sbyong sngon
སྦྱོང་ཐར	sbyong brdar	sbyong thar
སྦྱོང་བདར	exercise, practice training	sbyong bdar
སྦྱོང་བདར་སྤྲོད་མཁན	trainer	sbyong bdar sprod mkhan
སྦྱོང་བདར་བྱེད་མཁན	trainee	sbyong bdar byed mkhan
སྦྱོང་བདར་བྱེད་པ	train	sbyong bdar byed pa
སྦྱོང་རྡར	practice, exercise, train	sbyong rdar
སྦྱོང་རྡར་དེབ	exercise book	sbyong rdar deb
སྦྱོང་རྡར་བྱེད་པ	to exercise, practice, to train	sbyong rdar byed pa
སྦྱོང་བརྡར	train in again and again, training, practicing	sbyong brdar
སྦྱོང་བརྡར་སྤྲོད	give training in	sbyong brdar sprod
སྦྱོང་བརྡར་བྱེད	train in [again and again], practice	sbyong brdar byed
སྦྱོང་བརྡར་བྱེད་པ	practice	sbyong brdar byed pa
སྦྱོང་བརྡར་འཛིན་གརབ༹	training class	sbyong brdar 'dzin grva
སྦྱོང་པོ	great hardships	sbyong po
སྦྱོང་བ	(tha dad pa sbyangs pa, sbyang ba, sbyongs,, 1) study, train in, improve; 2) abandon faults, purify, clean, remove by cleaning; 3) purge; 4) give, bestow; 5) subtract, remove	sbyong ba
སྦྱོང་བ་བྱེད	to do training in	sbyong ba byed
སྦྱོང་བའི་བསྟི་གནས	dimension to purify	sbyong ba'i bsti gnas
སྦྱོང་བར་བྱ	should be purified	sbyong bar bya
སྦྱོང་བར་བྱེད་པ	completely purify, train in [again and again], practice	sbyong bar byed pa
སྦྱོང་བྱ	object of purification	sbyong bya
སྦྱོང་བྱེད	refining factor	sbyong byed
སྦྱོང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལམ	the path that purifies	sbyong byed kyi lam
སྦྱོང་བྱེད་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞི	CHN	sbyong byed dkyil 'khor bzhi
སྦྱོང་བྱེད་ལས་ལྔ	the five purifying actions	sbyong byed las lnga
སྦྱོང་བྱེད་གསུམ	the three purifiers [med]	sbyong byed gsum
སྦྱོང་བྲར་བྱས་ནས	having done practice on	sbyong brar byas nas
སྦྱོང་འབྲས	result of purification	sbyong 'bras
སྦྱོང་སྨན	bshal sman	sbyong sman
སྦྱོང་ཚུལ	purification practice	sbyong tshul
སྦྱོང་ཚུལ་གཉིས	two modes of purification *]	sbyong tshul gnyis
སྦྱོང་གཞི	ground of purification	sbyong gzhi
སྦྱོང་རིམས	'khru nad /bshal rims	sbyong rims
སྦྱོང་ལམ	way of purification	sbyong lam
སྦྱོང་ལུགས་གཉིས	two modes of purification	sbyong lugs gnyis
སྦྱོངས	(not in das)	sbyongs
སྦྱོངས་སྦྱོར	1) preparation, arrangement, prelude, preliminary part. 2) application, action, endeavor. 3) practice, action, deed. 4) union, combination, concoction etc {sbyar byung}. 5) syllogism. 4) joining, c...	sbyongs sbyor
སྦྱོད་རྒྱུད	performance/ upa tantra	sbyod rgyud
སྦྱོད་པ་མ་འདྲེས་པ་དྲུག	CHN	sbyod pa ma 'dres pa drug
སྦྱོད་པ་བཞི	CHN	sbyod pa bzhi
སྦྱོད་ཡུལ་འགྲོ་བ་ཉི་ཤུ	CHN	sbyod yul 'gro ba nyi shu
སྦྱོད་ཡུལ་བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	sbyod yul bcu gsum
སྦྱོད་ལམ་རྣམ་བཞི	CHN	sbyod lam rnam bzhi
སྦྱོར	execution, sexual union	sbyor
སྦྱོར་ཀློག	spelling of words and reading	sbyor klog
སྦྱོར་ཀློག་རྒྱག	read by spelling out	sbyor klog rgyag
སྦྱོར་ཀློག་རྒྱབ་པ	spell	sbyor klog rgyab pa
སྦྱོར་ཀློག་རྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	spelt	sbyor klog rgyab zin pa
སྦྱོར་དཀའ	difficult to obtain or acquire	sbyor dka'
སྦྱོར་བཀོད	entry, registration, marking down	sbyor bkod
སྦྱོར་བཀོད་བྱེད	entry, registration, marking down	sbyor bkod byed
སྦྱོར་ཁ	'byar rtsi sogs kyis sbyar ba'i srubs, sbyor kha med pa'i lcags sbug	sbyor kha
སྦྱོར་གྲུབ	achieving union	sbyor grub
སྦྱོར་གྲོལ	Union and liberation	sbyor grol
སྦྱོར་གྲོལ་གྱིས་སྤྱོད་པ	TSE	sbyor grol gyis spyod pa
སྦྱོར་སྒྲོ	rites of sexual union and "liberation"	sbyor sgro
སྦྱོར་སྒྲོལ	union and release/ liberation (=ta na ga na)	sbyor sgrol
སྦྱོར་སྒྲོལ་གྱི་མཆོད་པ	the offering of union and liberation	sbyor sgrol gyi mchod pa
སྦྱོར་སྒྲོལ་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	the practices of uniting and freeing	sbyor sgrol brtul zhugs
སྦྱོར་སྒྲོལ་རོལ་པ	application of sexual union and of destruction	sbyor sgrol rol pa
སྦྱོར་བརྒྱ་པ	epithet of vishnu	sbyor brgya pa
སྦྱོར་བརྒྱད	the eight unions. 1) {ye shes kyi sbyor ba}. 2) {phyag mtshan gyi sbyor ba} 3) {zhal gyi sbyor ba} 4) {dbu'i gyi sbyor ba} 5) {zhabs kyi sbyor ba} 6) dbang gi sbyor ba} 7) {rdzas kyi sbyor ba} 8) {...	sbyor brgyad
སྦྱོར་ངག	clear sign/ reason syllogism establishing speech	sbyor ngag
སྦྱོར་དངོས་རྔེས	preparation, the main body of the practice and conclusion	sbyor dngos rnges
སྦྱོར་དངོས་མཇུག་གསུམ	preliminaries, main body, and conclusion of an activity	sbyor dngos mjug gsum
སྦྱོར་དངོས་རྗེས	the three stages of a practice: preparation, main part, conclusion	sbyor dngos rjes
སྦྱོར་དངོས་རྗེས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	the preliminary, the main, and the concluding sections	sbyor dngos rjes kyi rim pa
སྦྱོར་དངོས་རྗེས་གསུམ	preparation, main part and conclusion	sbyor dngos rjes gsum
སྦྱོར་མཆོད	union-offering, the offering of union	sbyor mchod
སྦྱོར་འཇགས	* trust fund, things put in trust	sbyor 'jags
སྦྱོར་འཇགས་བྱས་པ	made of, fashioned out of [gold]	sbyor 'jags byas pa
སྦྱོར་འཇགས་བྱེད	* create a trust fund, put things in trust	sbyor 'jags byed
སྦྱོར་དང	along with, together with, as well	sbyor dang
སྦྱོར་དྲག	excessive union or mixture in medicine	sbyor drag
སྦྱོར་དྲུག	Jordruk	sbyor drug
སྦྱོར་དྲུག་པ	follower of Jordruk	sbyor drug pa
སྦྱོར་ལྡན	mtshan mo	sbyor ldan
སྦྱོར་ལྡན་མ	SA rgyal, constellation pusya	sbyor ldan ma
སྦྱོར་སྡེབ	sexual intercourse	sbyor sdeb
སྦྱོར་བ་ཁྱིམ་པ	highlanders, black tent, [acc. to das made of yaks hair]	sbyor ba khyim pa
སྦྱོར་བ་འགལ	contradictory syllogism, contradict a syllogism	sbyor ba 'gal
སྦྱོར་བ་བརྒྱ་པ	1) {sbyor ba brgya pa; 2) Vishnu	sbyor ba brgya pa
སྦྱོར་བ་དངོས་ཉི་ཤུ	CHN	sbyor ba dngos nyi shu
སྦྱོར་བ་ཉི་ཤུ	TSE	sbyor ba nyi shu
སྦྱོར་བ་ཉེར་བདུན	the 27 sbyor ba [influential astr conjunctions/ activities]	sbyor ba nyer bdun
སྦྱོར་བ་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	innate allground of application, the all-ground of adherence, true all-ground of application	sbyor ba don gyi kun gzhi
སྦྱོར་བ་དོན་གྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the natural state of adherence. [Syn. {sems nyid 'od gsal ba}, {bde gshegs snying po}	sbyor ba don gyi gnas lugs
སྦྱོར་བ་དྲུག	six unions	sbyor ba drug
སྦྱོར་བ་དྲུག་པའི	SA rlung sbyor lnga	sbyor ba drug pa'i
སྦྱོར་བ་དྲུག་པའི་རླུང་སྦྱོར	practice of prana with the 6 applications	sbyor ba drug pa'i rlung sbyor
སྦྱོར་བ་རྣམ་དག	correct figuring of the sbyor ba nyer bdun	sbyor ba rnam dag
སྦྱོར་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect sbyor ba [practice/ means/ application	sbyor ba phun sum tshogs pa
སྦྱོར་བ་འབྲོག	highland	sbyor ba 'brog
སྦྱོར་བ་སྨན	1 of gnas bcu gcig	sbyor ba sman
སྦྱོར་བ་བཞི	four unions	sbyor ba bzhi
སྦྱོར་བ་བཞི་ལྡན	4 applications of breathing, rhythmic breathing, SA rlung sbyor lnga	sbyor ba bzhi ldan
སྦྱོར་བ་བཞི་ལྡན་གྱི་རླུང་སྦྱོར	practice of prana of the four applications	sbyor ba bzhi ldan gyi rlung sbyor
སྦྱོར་བ་བཞིའི་ཆོས་སོ་དྲུག	36 dharmas symbolizing the sbyor ba bzhi	sbyor ba bzhi'i chos so drug
སྦྱོར་བ་ཡང་དག	valid logical statement	sbyor ba yang dag
སྦྱོར་བ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	the 10 limbs of practice	sbyor ba yan lag bcu
སྦྱོར་བ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག	shadanggayoga of the Kalachakra	sbyor ba yan lag drug
སྦྱོར་བ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	dngos gzhi dmigs med	sbyor ba sems bskyed
སྦྱོར་བ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་དམ་པ	the sublime resolve as the preparation	sbyor ba sems bskyed dam pa
སྦྱོར་བའི་སྐྱོན	mahayana gyi sbyor ba arising &, sgom pas gnas pa [remaining/ abiding in it], by perfection/ completion bar du gcod pa'i actions of the maras, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	sbyor ba'i skyon
སྦྱོར་བའི་དགེ་བ	dam pa bsten and chos mnyan bsam sgrub pa las thob pa	sbyor ba'i dge ba
སྦྱོར་བའི་ངག	connected statement, syllogistic argument	sbyor ba'i ngag
སྦྱོར་བའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	TSE	sbyor ba'i chos drug
སྦྱོར་བའི་མཆོད་པ	the offering of union	sbyor ba'i mchod pa
སྦྱོར་བའི་མཉམ་ཉིད	sems dpa'i rnal 'byor accomplished by prajna refuting/ eliminating attachment to object and perceiver as truly existing, an aspect of meditation on gzhi shes kyi sbyor ba;	sbyor ba'i mnyam nyid
སྦྱོར་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of union	sbyor ba'i ting nge 'dzin
སྦྱོར་བའི་མཐའ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	attention of the basis of application	sbyor ba'i mtha' yid la byed pa
སྦྱོར་བའི་མཐའི་འབྲས་བུ་ཡིད་བྱེད	attention of the result of the basis of application	sbyor ba'i mtha'i 'bras bu yid byed
སྦྱོར་བའི་རྣམ་པ	object or knowledge which is sbyor ba'i bsgom byar, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	sbyor ba'i rnam pa
སྦྱོར་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	[among kriya yoga path gyi mngon rtogs spyod pa'i sgo bzhi, sku'i rigs is rnam par snang mdzad, gsung gi rigs 'od dpag med, thugs kyi rigs mi bskyod pa ste rigs gsum gyi lha approaching and actual/...	sbyor ba'i spyod pa
སྦྱོར་བའི་མི་དགེ་བ	{tshe 'dir dge ba las bzlog pa'i las la brtson pa sbyor ba'i mi dge ba} 'Applied nonvirtues' are exertion in actions which, in this lifetime, deter one from virtue.	sbyor ba'i mi dge ba
ཨེཕ༹ཕོ༹རཙ་ཨིནཏོ་ནོན	virtuous activities	efforts into non
སྦྱོར་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	knowledge sbyor ba'i ngo bo'am nus pa mtshon byed, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	sbyor ba'i mtshan nyid
སྦྱོར་བའི་བཟོ	art of mixing up or compounding	sbyor ba'i bzo
སྦྱོར་བའི་ཡན་ལག	introductory section	sbyor ba'i yan lag
སྦྱོར་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	virtues of sbyor ba	sbyor ba'i yon tan
སྦྱོར་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་བཞི	TSE	sbyor ba'i yon tan bcu bzhi
སྦྱོར་བའི་ལམ	path of application/ linking phase	sbyor ba'i lam
སྦྱོར་བའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	neutral activity	sbyor ba'i lung ma bstan
སྦྱོར་བར་གྱིས	apply	sbyor bar gyis
སྦྱོར་བར་བྱེད་པ	to connect with / to, afford access	sbyor bar byed pa
སྦྱོར་བས་དགེ་བ	{dam pa bsten zhing chos mnyan bsam bsgrub pa las thob pa} 'Applied virtues' are obtained through following holy persons and through learning, reflection, and meditation.	sbyor bas dge ba
སྦྱོར་བས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{nyon mongs can dang dge ba'i sems gang yang min pas bskyed pa'i spyod lam dang bzo'i gnas so} 'Applied indeterminates' are the arts and crafts and behaviors, which are produced by neither disturbe...	sbyor bas lung ma bstan
སྦྱོར་བྱས	spiritual practice	sbyor byas
སྦྱོར་བྱུང	acquired	sbyor byung
སྦྱོར་བྱུང་གི་མུ་སྟེགས་པ་གཉིས	TSE	sbyor byung gi mu stegs pa gnyis
སྦྱོར་བྱེད	1) woman; 2) prostitute	sbyor byed
སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	enjoining; to prepare	sbyor byed pa
སྦྱོར་བྱེད་མ	woman in general, prostitute	sbyor byed ma
སྦྱོར་བྲལ་མ	a nadi	sbyor bral ma
སྦྱོར་འབུལ་ཞུས་པ	by a patron offer fields etc mchod rgyun la sbyar nas phul ba	sbyor 'bul zhus pa
སྦྱོར་རྩེ	village south of lhasa	sbyor rtse
སྦྱོར་ཚིག	preposition	sbyor tshig
སྦྱོར་ཚུལ	method of combining letters, method of practice	sbyor tshul
སྦྱོར་མཚམས	place of union (of deities in union)	sbyor mtshams
སྦྱོར་ཞུགས	candidate [for membership etc.]	sbyor zhugs
སྦྱོར་ཞུགས་དུས་ཚོད	period of being a candidate [for membership etc.]	sbyor zhugs dus tshod
སྦྱོར་བཞི	sbyor ba bzhi	sbyor bzhi
སྦྱོར་བཞི་གནད་ལྔ་སྟེ་དགུ	CHN	sbyor bzhi gnad lnga ste dgu
སྦྱོར་ར་རྩེ	village south of lhasa	sbyor ra rtse
སྦྱོར་ལ	along with, together with, as well	sbyor la
སྦྱོར་ལམ	{sbyor ba'i lam} path of application/ linking phase	sbyor lam
སྦྱོར་ལམ་ངེས་འབྱེད་ཆ་བཞི	the four defining parts of the path of preparation	sbyor lam nges 'byed cha bzhi
སྦྱོར་ལམ་ཆ་བཞི	Four aspects of the path of joining: Heat, summit, acceptance, and supreme attribute	sbyor lam cha bzhi
སྦྱོར་ལམ་ཆོས་མཆོག	supreme dharmas sbyor lam nyid las phye ba'i sa bcu bgrod	sbyor lam chos mchog
སྦྱོར་ལམ་དྲོད	feeling of warmth on the path of connection 1970	sbyor lam drod
སྦྱོར་ལམ་དྲོད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ	TSE sbyor lam drod phyir mi ldog ba'i rtags	sbyor lam drod kyi rnam pa bcu
སྦྱོར་ལམ་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	TSE	sbyor lam rtse sbyor
སྦྱོར་ལམ་རྩེ་མོ	virtuous roots g.yo ba'i rtse mor going path of preparation	sbyor lam rtse mo
སྦྱོར་ལམ་བཞི	the four [parts of the] path of preparation	sbyor lam bzhi
སྦྱོར་ལམ་བཟོད་པ	newly attained patience not afraid of the profound dharma of emptiness of the path of accumulation	sbyor lam bzod pa
སྦྱོར་ལུགས	way of applying the practice, system of unification	sbyor lugs
སྦྱོར་ལུད	fertilizer	sbyor lud
སྦྲ	1) dbra clan [will scratch?]; 2) re lde ste thick felt cloth made of long yak hair [tent]	sbra
སྦྲ་ཁག	sbra khyim khag	sbra khag
སྦྲ་ཁྱིམ	sbra'i khang pa	sbra khyim
སྦྲ་གུར	large black tent, tent of yak-hair blanket or felt, black yak hair tent	sbra gur
སྦྲ་གུར་ཕུབ་པ	pitch a nomad tent	sbra gur phub pa
སྦྲ་ཆུང	small tent	sbra chung
སྦྲ་ཆུང་གི་ཀ་ར	tent poles	sbra chung gi ka ra
སྦྲ་ཆེན	yak hair tent	sbra chen
སྦྲ་ཐག	rope on a nomad tent	sbra thag
སྦྲ་དུད	'brog ru'i them dud	sbra dud
སྦྲ་ནག་ཁག་གསུམ	Banak Khasum, the Three Black Camps, in Domey	sbra nag khag gsum
སྦྲ་ནག་ཤོག་པ	living in black felt 'brog pa'i sde tsho	sbra nag shog pa
སྦྲ་སྣམ	yak hair blanket	sbra snam
སྦྲ་པ	nomad	sbra pa
སྦྲ་ཚིལ	wax	sbra tshil
སྦྲ་འཛིན	nomad	sbra 'dzin
སྦྲ་འཛིན་རི་ཕྱུགས	nomad cattle/ sheep	sbra 'dzin ri phyugs
སྦྲ་ཡོལ	curtains made of yak hair	sbra yol
སྦྲ་ར	fence around nomad tent	sbra ra
སྦྲ་རེ	felt of long yak hair for making nomad tent	sbra re
སྦྲ་ཤིང	nomad tent's tent pole	sbra shing
སྦྲ་ས	place nomad tents are pitched	sbra sa
སྦྲ་ལྷ	sa bdag monster	sbra lha
སྦྲག	1) letter delivering, post, mail [SK d'aka gi zur chag]; 2) bunch/ put to-	sbrag
སྦྲག་ལྐོག	stamped envelope, post card	sbrag lkog
སྦྲག་ཁང	post carrier's house	sbrag khang
སྦྲག་པ	{sbrag pa, sbrags pa, sbrag pa, sbrogs} trans. v.; ft. of {sbrag pa}; to lay, to put	sbrag pa
སྦྲག་མ	hay-fork	sbrag ma
སྦྲགས	combine 1) bunched/ put together; 2) letter delivering, post, mail [SK d'aka gi zur chag]; 3) [dang + --] together/along w	sbrags
སྦྲགས་ལྐོག	stamped envelope, post card	sbrags lkog
སྦྲགས་ཁང	post carrier's house	sbrags khang
སྦྲགས་བགོད	bgod byed dividing grangs gnas gnyis yan chad yod pa'i division	sbrags bgod
སྦྲགས་དང	along w	sbrags dang
སྦྲགས་མདའ	place 25 miles south of Lhasa	sbrags mda'
སྦྲགས་པ	attach	sbrags pa
སྦྲགས་མ	hay-fork	sbrags ma
སྦྲང	beggar, lowly one, vagabond	sbrang
སྦྲང་དཀར	white honey	sbrang dkar
སྦྲང་སྐད	humming [of insects]	sbrang skad
སྦྲང་སྐྱབས	protective devices against insects	sbrang skyabs
སྦྲང་སྐྱོབ	nyal gur [sleeping tent, mosquito net] or rnga yab [yak tail fly whisk]	sbrang skyob
སྦྲང་གི་རོ	residue of honey after clarification, wax	sbrang gi ro
སྦྲང་གྱབ	fly whisk	sbrang gyab
སྦྲང་རྒུན	[arch] grape	sbrang rgun
སྦྲང་རྒོད	1) wild honey; 2) poisonous bee	sbrang rgod
སྦྲང་རྒྱས	offering of honey to the gods	sbrang rgyas
སྦྲང་ཆང	beer made of honey, honey beer	sbrang chang
སྦྲང་ཆར	seasonal rains	sbrang char
སྦྲང་ཆར་འཇམ་པོ	a gentle rain	sbrang char 'jam po
སྦྲང་སྙིགས	beeswax	sbrang snyigs
སྦྲང་ཐ	[arch] fly circling filth	sbrang tha
སྦྲང་དུས	sa ga month	sbrang dus
སྦྲང་དོང	honeycomb	sbrang dong
སྦྲང་ལྡན	a deity, large creeper gaertnera racemosa	sbrang ldan
སྦྲང་ནག	[black] fly *l	sbrang nag
སྦྲང་ནང་ཆུ	{sbrang nang chu river	sbrang nang chu
སྦྲང་ནང་ཚོ་དྲུག	{sbrang nang tsho drug	sbrang nang tsho drug
སྦྲང་ནོར་བུ	bee	sbrang nor bu
སྦྲང་གནས་ཅན	sbrang shing	sbrang gnas can
སྦྲང་བུ	fly, flies, bees	sbrang bu
སྦྲང་བུ་མཆུ་རིང	mosquito	sbrang bu mchu ring
སྦྲང་བུག	bees nest	sbrang bug
སྦྲང་བུའི་སྐད	buzz	sbrang bu'i skad
སྦྲང་བུའི་སྐྱུགས་པ	sbrang	sbrang bu'i skyugs pa
སྦྲང་བྱི	marten	sbrang byi
སྦྲང་འབུ	bees [and insects/ worms], honey	sbrang 'bu
སྦྲང་མ	[honey] bee	sbrang ma
སྦྲང་མ་པོ	drone	sbrang ma po
སྦྲང་མ་གསོ་སྐྱོང་ཁང	apiary	sbrang ma gso skyong khang
སྦྲང་མའི་ཚང	bee's nest	sbrang ma'i tshang
སྦྲང་མོ་ཆེ	large bee	sbrang mo che
སྦྲང་རྩི	honey	sbrang rtsi
སྦྲང་རྩི་སྐྱོང	honey guarder, bee	sbrang rtsi skyong
སྦྲང་རྩི་བསྐྱེད	4th month, producing honey	sbrang rtsi bskyed
སྦྲང་རྩི་ཆང	wine of honey, pulse, mead	sbrang rtsi chang
སྦྲང་རྩི་འཇོམས	bee	sbrang rtsi 'joms
སྦྲང་རྩི་འཐུང	sbrang bu	sbrang rtsi 'thung
སྦྲང་རྩི་བྱེད་པ	honey producer, bee	sbrang rtsi byed pa
སྦྲང་རྩི་མྱོང	honey taster, bee	sbrang rtsi myong
སྦྲང་རྩི་འཛིན	1) bee; 2) lotus	sbrang rtsi 'dzin
སྦྲང་རྩིགས་མ	beeswax	sbrang rtsigs ma
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	'dod lha, Kamadeva 1971	sbrang rtsi'i kha lo pa
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	lotus	sbrang rtsi'i rgyal mtshan
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་སྒྲ	sound of the cuckoo	sbrang rtsi'i sgra
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་དྲི་མྱོང	bee	sbrang rtsi'i dri myong
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་སྣོད	vessel of honey	sbrang rtsi'i snod
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་ཕོ་ཉ	aa mra tree	sbrang rtsi'i pho nya
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་བུ	1) Vishnu; 2) bee	sbrang rtsi'i bu
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་བློ་གྲོས	founder of kla klo dharma Islam? madhu mati	sbrang rtsi'i blo gros
སྦྲང་རྩིའི་ཚིགས་མ	honey btul ba'i snyigs ma	sbrang rtsi'i tshigs ma
སྦྲང་ཚང	hive, honeycomb, beehive	sbrang tshang
སྦྲང་ཟླ	3rd month	sbrang zla
སྦྲང་ཡབ	sbrang gyab	sbrang yab
སྦྲང་རོ	1) taste of honey; 2) dead bee	sbrang ro
སྦྲང་ཤིང	tree from whose flower wine is distilled	sbrang shing
སྦྲང་གཤོག	bee's/ fly's wing	sbrang gshog
སྦྲང་གསོད་ལས་འགུལ	fly eradication campaign	sbrang gsod las 'gul
སྦྲང་ལྷག	beeswax	sbrang lhag
སྦྲང་ལྷད	bees wax	sbrang lhad
སྦྲད	scratch, sneeze	sbrad
སྦྲད་པ	SA 'brad pa	sbrad pa
སྦྲད་པ་རྒྱག	scratch, sneeze	sbrad pa rgyag
སྦྲད་སྦྲད	busy	sbrad sbrad
སྦྲན	called out, summoned [p {sbron}	sbran
སྦྲན་པ	ft. of {sbron pa}; pf. of {sbron pa}; to call upon; pf. of {sbron pa}	sbran pa
སྦྲནད་ཆར	pleasant rain	sbrand char
སྦྲབས་པ	[arch] kha zas	sbrabs pa
སྦྲམ	largeness, bulk	sbram
སྦྲམ་ཆེན	gnyid che ba'i sbrul zhig	sbram chen
སྦྲམ་པོ	brling ba, dbyibs che ba, khog pa sbram po, sku lus sbram po	sbram po
སྦྲམ་བུ	square or leb lcug lta bu'i thing * unwrought gold	sbram bu
སྦྲམ་སྦུལ་ཆེན	a giant serpent	sbram sbul chen
སྦྲམ་སྦྲུལ་ཆེན	a giant serpent	sbram sbrul chen
སྦྲིད	to become numb, to sneeze, feel numb	sbrid
སྦྲིད་ཆི་ལེ་བ	going into shock	sbrid chi le ba
སྦྲིད་གཏམ	deceptive words	sbrid gtam
སྦྲིད་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa nerve/rtsa dkar disease etc kyis lus sbrid nas feeling is lost; 2) left/right nostrils tips of ro rkyang nadis la thal rdul phog pa sogs las byung ba'i hab sbrid rgyag pa	sbrid pa
སྦྲིད་པ་རྒྱག	sneeze	sbrid pa rgyag
སྦྲིད་བྱུང་སྨན	drugs which produce sneezing	sbrid byung sman
སྦྲིད་སྨན	nad par blugs nas gshag las byed pa, anaesthetic, surgery	sbrid sman
སྦྲིབ	(not in das)	sbrib
སྦྲིབས་པ	[arch] ltogs pa	sbribs pa
སྦྲུ	stir with one's hand, SA sbrud pa	sbru
སྦྲུ་བ	ft. of {sbru ba}; {sbru ba, sbrus pa, sbru ba, sbrus} trans. v	sbru ba
སྦྲུག་པ	[arch] exhaust	sbrug pa
སྦྲུད་པ	stir, knead	sbrud pa
སྦྲུམ་ལྡན་མ	pregnant woman	sbrum ldan ma
སྦྲུམ་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, pregnant, big w young	sbrum pa
སྦྲུམ་པར་འགྱུར་བ	conceive, become pregnant	sbrum par 'gyur ba
སྦྲུམ་པར་ཚོད་ནས	feeling pregnant	sbrum par tshod nas
སྦྲུམ་མ	pregnant	sbrum ma
སྦྲུམ་མ་སྨན་ཁང	maternity hospital sbrum ma'i rnam pa med par lo dus na had no visible signs of pregnancy and when she came to term	sbrum ma sman khang
སྦྲུམ་མར་འགྱུར་བ	get with child	sbrum mar 'gyur ba
སྦྲུམ་སྲིང	embryo	sbrum sring
སྦྲུམ་སྲིང་རིག་པ	embryology	sbrum sring rig pa
སྦྲུར་ཁྲ	worm which cures hydrophobia	sbrur khra
སྦྲུལ	snake/ serpent	sbrul
སྦྲུལ་སྐོགས	shed snake skin	sbrul skogs
སྦྲུལ་སྐྲག་བྱེད	musk	sbrul skrag byed
སྦྲུལ་འཁྱིལ	snake's coil	sbrul 'khyil
སྦྲུལ་འཁྱིལ་བ	coil up like a snake	sbrul 'khyil ba
སྦྲུལ་གྱི	serpentine	sbrul gyi
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	klu	sbrul gyi rgyal po
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་མཆེ་བ	fangs of a snake	sbrul gyi mche ba
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	{sbrul gyi snying po kind of sandal wood	sbrul gyi snying po
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་གདུབ་བུ	bangle in the shape of a snake's head	sbrul gyi gdub bu
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་གདེངས	snake's hood	sbrul gyi gdengs
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་གདེངས་ཀ	snake's hood	sbrul gyi gdengs ka
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་མདུད	coils of a snake	sbrul gyi mdud
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་པགས་པ	snake skin	sbrul gyi pags pa
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་དབུ་རྒྱན	snake's hood	sbrul gyi dbu rgyan
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་མཚོན་ཆ	vegetable incense	sbrul gyi mtshon cha
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་ཟམ་པ	{ganga' la sbrul gyi zam par phebs te} arrived at the Bridge of Snakes on the Ganges	sbrul gyi zam pa
སྦྲུལ་མགོ	finial ornaments	sbrul mgo
སྦྲུལ་མགོ་གྱེན་གདེངས	snake's hood	sbrul mgo gyen gdengs
སྦྲུལ་མགོ་ལེབ	cobra	sbrul mgo leb
སྦྲུལ་མགོ་ལོག	two headed snake	sbrul mgo log
སྦྲུལ་རྒྱན	snake ornaments	sbrul rgyan
སྦྲུལ་ཅན	a comet	sbrul can
སྦྲུལ་ལྕེ	Trulche, in Domey	sbrul lce
སྦྲུལ་ཉ	eel	sbrul nya
སྦྲུལ་གཉེར་ཅན	SA shu dag	sbrul gnyer can
སྦྲུལ་ལྟ་བུ	serpentine	sbrul lta bu
སྦྲུལ་དང་རྩང་པའི་རིགས	reptile	sbrul dang rtsang pa'i rigs
སྦྲུལ་དུག	snake poison	sbrul dug
སྦྲུལ་གདུག	poisonous snake/s [mss]	sbrul gdug
སྦྲུལ་གདུག་པ	venomous snake	sbrul gdug pa
སྦྲུལ་གདུབ	bracelets/anklets of snakes	sbrul gdub
སྦྲུལ་གདོང་གཉིས་པ	two headed snake	sbrul gdong gnyis pa
སྦྲུལ་གདོང་མ	snake-headed one, Ghanta, 1 of sgo ma bzhi	sbrul gdong ma
སྦྲུལ་མདུད་སྦྲུལ་བཤིག	snake knot undone by the snake, undo what 1 has done	sbrul mdud sbrul bshig
སྦྲུལ་ནག	black serpents, poisonous viper, venomous snake	sbrul nag
སྦྲུལ་ནག་གི་སྒོ་སྐྱེས	entrances of black vipers	sbrul nag gi sgo skyes
སྦྲུལ་ནག་ལྕེ	poisonous tongue of a viper	sbrul nag lce
སྦྲུལ་ནགས	a noose of snakes	sbrul nags
སྦྲུལ་ལྤགས	snake skin	sbrul lpags
སྦྲུལ་སྤགས	snake skin	sbrul spags
སྦྲུལ་མིག	to examine whether in the flesh there is mde'u remainder thur spyad sbrul mig can zhig	sbrul mig
སྦྲུལ་མེ	snake's venom	sbrul me
སྦྲུལ་ཚིལ	{sbrul tshil animal med.	sbrul tshil
སྦྲུལ་འཛིན	dug 'joms sman pa	sbrul 'dzin
སྦྲུལ་ཞགས	a snake lasso	sbrul zhags
སྦྲུལ་ཟླ	4th month 1972	sbrul zla
སྦྲུལ་རི་དྲག་པོ་བདུན	seven mountains covered with fierce serpents	sbrul ri drag po bdun
སྦྲུལ་རིགས་ལྔ	[TRS 147-5]	sbrul rigs lnga
སྦྲུལ་རིགས་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག	python	sbrul rigs chen po zhig
སྦྲུལ་ལ་མདུད་པ་བོར་བ་བཞིན	like a snake uncoiling	sbrul la mdud pa bor ba bzhin
སྦྲུལ་ལོ	snake year	sbrul lo
སྦྲུལ་ལོ་པ	man born in the snake year	sbrul lo pa
སྦྲུལ་ལོ་མ	woman born in the snake year	sbrul lo ma
སྦྲུལ་ཤ	1) herb {sbrul sha; 2) snake meat	sbrul sha
སྦྲུལ་ཤད	snake stroke (placed at the beginning of a new section in a tibetan text)	sbrul shad
སྦྲུལ་ཤུན	snake skin [lo ltar chags kyi dgun gnyid rjes su sbrul shun thengs re brje zer]	sbrul shun
སྦྲུས	[p ! sbru ba],, made/ stirred/ kneaded dough	sbrus
སྦྲུས་པ	to knead/ stir together	sbrus pa
སྦྲུས་བརྫིས	rlan nam, snum la phye bsres te brdzi ba, bsnyal ba'i gro zhib sbrus brdzis byed pa	sbrus brdzis
སྦྲེ	weasel, stone fox	sbre
སྦྲེ་དྲི	urine smell	sbre dri
སྦྲེ་བ	[arch] 'gre log byed pa	sbre ba
སྦྲེ་བོ	coarse yak hair tent cover	sbre bo
སྦྲེ་མོང	[arch] weasel	sbre mong
སྦྲེང	[p ! sbrengs] sprinkle *, line up, stand in line, shake, play an instrument	sbreng
སྦྲེང་ཐབས	vertical, standing up	sbreng thabs
སྦྲེང་ཐབས་སུ	vertical, standing up	sbreng thabs su
སྦྲེང་ཐུར	sgron thur - phud skyogs Spoon for amrita and rakta	sbreng thur
སྦྲེང་བ	musician, player; x {pi wang sbreng ba la mkhas sam gsungs} [the Buddha] asked him: you were a good	sbreng ba
བི༹ན	player, weren't you?	vina
སྦྲེང་ཚར	sbrengs tshar	sbreng tshar
སྦྲེང་ཟམ	rope pulley bridge	sbreng zam
སྦྲེངས	rattle, SA sbreng ba	sbrengs
སྦྲེངས་པ	[p sbreng ba], put in line/ rows/ series/ strings	sbrengs pa
སྦྲེངས་ཚར	put in line/ rows/ series/ strings	sbrengs tshar
སྦྲེབས་པ	rage (?); hungry	sbrebs pa
སྦྲེའུ	[arch] sand	sbre'u
སྦྲེལ	imp. of {sbrel ba}; bound together, attached, join, join, joined, tethered, bound together, attached, fettered; linked	sbrel
སྦྲེལ་གཅིག་དང་དུ་མར་མ་ཞིག	do not be attached to the one or the many	sbrel gcig dang du mar ma zhig
སྦྲེལ་ཐག	connection, relation	sbrel thag
སྦྲེལ་ཐག་གཏོང	to create relations, to extend a relationship	sbrel thag gtong
སྦྲེལ་མཐུད	follow 1 after another w/o gaps*	sbrel mthud
སྦྲེལ་གདུང	sne mthud pa'i gdung ma	sbrel gdung
སྦྲེལ་པོ	joint, old officer	sbrel po
སྦྲེལ་བ	{sbrel ba, sbrel ba, sbrel ba, sbrel} trans. v.; ft. of {sbrel ba}; pf. of {sbrel ba}; to stitch together, to stitch to, to sew on, to fasten on; to connect/ join/ forge a connection; bound togethe...	sbrel ba
སྦྲེལ་མ	mutually connected	sbrel ma
སྦྲེལ་རྩ་མང་པོས་ནས་འདུག་པ	bound together by veins	sbrel rtsa mang pos nas 'dug pa
སྦྲེལ་ཚིག	conjunction [grammar]	sbrel tshig
སྦྲེལ་ཟླ	joint official, colleague, comrade	sbrel zla
སྦྲེལ་ཟླ་ཅན	having an assistant	sbrel zla can
སྦྲེལ་གཟེར	rivet	sbrel gzer
སྦྲེས	frozen, stiff, hard	sbres
སྦྲེས་པ	frozen, stiff, hard	sbres pa
སྦྲོགས	sbrag pa! mutually connect! give! deliver! bring! transport! lay! put!	sbrogs
སྦྲོན	imp. of {sbron pa}	sbron
སྦྲོན་དུ་བཏང་བ	inform, warn	sbron du btang ba
སྦྲོན་པ	summon, call, announce to, sprinkle, squirt upon	sbron pa
སྦྲོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	call, summon, send for	sbron par byed pa
སྦྲོན་མེ་ལྡ་བུ	the torch like luminosity sbrom ston pa rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas Drom Tönpa; Gyalwey Jungney; 10041064, the closest Tibetan disciple of Lord Atisha; founded the monastery of Radreng (rwa sgreng)	sbron me lda bu
སྦྲོས	collapse, disperse 'rba mkhar - horn/ walking stick 'rba rlabs bzhi - the four floods [one {'dod pa sensuality}. two {srid pa}. belief in existence. three {ma rig pa} ignorance. four {lta ba [ngan ...	sbros
ཆོཨིཅེ་བུཏ་ཏོ	--, ma --- bar du: until -, feminine particle, below	choice but to
མ་ཀ་ར	SK/; 1) 7th month; 2) sea monster, crocodile)	ma ka ra
མ་ཀར	deceit, imposition, intrigue	ma kar
མ་ཀི	ma gi dang 'dra	ma ki
མ་ཀུ་ར	SK mirror	ma ku ra
མ་ཀེ་ལིས་པོ	Morocco	ma ke lis po
མ་ཀོ་ཏ་ཀ	kind of worm living in dry wood	ma ko ta ka
མ་ཀོ་ལེ	khri srong lde btsan skabs bod du byon te bod rin po che rba ratna dang bsdebs nas sher phyin 'bum thog mar bod yig tu sgyur mkhan rgya hva shang zhig	ma ko le
མ་ཀྱུར་མེད	no other than	ma kyur med
མ་ཀླས་པ	(A) ma gus pa'am khyad gsod	ma klas pa
མ་ཀླུངས	one's age in reference to mother's horoscope	ma klungs
མ་དཀན	lower part of the palate Syn {dkan}	ma dkan
མ་བཀོད	without having been set up, without needing to be created	ma bkod
མ་བཀོད་རྫོགས་པ	never arranged yet always complete	ma bkod rdzogs pa
མ་བཀོད་རང་བྱུང	not arranged but occurring naturally	ma bkod rang byung
མ་བཀྲུས	not arrived, not come, not happened	ma bkrus
མ་རྐང	share (stock)	ma rkang
མ་རྐང་འཇོག	buy shares in	ma rkang 'jog
མ་རྐང་འཇོག་མཁན	shareholder	ma rkang 'jog mkhan
མ་རྐང་མཉམ་བསྡུས	partnership, joint ownership	ma rkang mnyam bsdus
མ་རྐང་མཉམ་བསྡུས་བྱེད	[pool $ &] go into partnership	ma rkang mnyam bsdus byed
མ་རྐང་ཐེབས་རྩ	gtong sgo'i ma rtsa	ma rkang thebs rtsa
མ་རྐང་ཚད་ཡོད	limited liability	ma rkang tshad yod
མ་རྐང་ཚད་ཡོད་ཁེ་ལས	limited liability enterprise	ma rkang tshad yod khe las
མ་རྐང་བཞག	bought shares in	ma rkang bzhag
མ་རྐད	TSE	ma rkad
མ་རྐོ	country S of Dhanashri [with gentle prosperous people)	ma rko
མ་སྐུལ་དང་བླངས	automatic	ma skul dang blangs
མ་སྐུལ་དང་ལེན	initiative, of one's own accord	ma skul dang len
མ་སྐུལ་རང་མོས	automatic	ma skul rang mos
མ་སྐྱང	1) wild mt herding district W of Lhasa; 2) famous lama {ma skyang}	ma skyang
མ་སྐྱེ	unborn, never becomes what it seems to be unobstructed	ma skye
མ་སྐྱེ་སྐྱེ་མེད	unborn, never becomes what it seems to be unobstructed	ma skye skye med
མ་སྐྱེད	principal and interest	ma skyed
མ་སྐྱེད་ཉིད	that which is beginningless itself	ma skyed nyid
མ་སྐྱེས	non-produced, unborn, uncreated, unoriginated, never come into existence, not produced, unborn, nonproduction non-origination, primeval, primordial	ma skyes
མ་སྐྱེས་སྐྱེས	make arise what has not arisen	ma skyes skyes
མ་སྐྱེས་དགྲ	king {ma skyes dgra}	ma skyes dgra
མ་སྐྱེས་ན	not born in	ma skyes na
མ་སྐྱེས་པ	has not really arisen	ma skyes pa
མ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཆོས	non-created phenomena	ma skyes pa'i chos
མ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of the truth of non- origination	ma skyes pa'i chos la bzod pa
མ་སྐྱེས་པས་ན	never having been born	ma skyes pas na
མ་བསྐུལ	w/o coercion/ compulsion/ urging/ being summoned	ma bskul
མ་བསྐུལ་དང་བླངས	did w/o urging by others, 1's own initiative, voluntary	ma bskul dang blangs
མ་བསྐུལ་དང་བླངས་བྱས	volunteered	ma bskul dang blangs byas
མ་བསྐུལ་དང་ལེན	do w/o urging by others, 1's own initiative, voluntary	ma bskul dang len
མ་བསྐུལ་དང་ལེན་གྱིས	on 1's own initiative, voluntarily ma bskul dang len gyis rogs ram byed pa voluntarily help	ma bskul dang len gyis
མ་བསྐུལ་དང་ལེན་བྱེད	do w/o urging by others/ on 1's own initiative, volunteer	ma bskul dang len byed
མ་བསྐུལ་རང་མོས	do out of natural devotion/ w/o urging by others, on 1's own initiative, voluntarily	ma bskul rang mos
མ་བསྐུལ་རང་མོས་ཀྱིས་བྱེད་པ	do out of natural devotion not depending on urging by others, on 1's own initiative, voluntarily	ma bskul rang mos kyis byed pa
མ་བསྐོས་པའི་སྡེ་ཙན་བཅུ	the unentrusted 10 sections [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, bcu tsan gsum pa ma bskos pa'i sde tsan la, dge slong ma la chos ston pa'i ltung byed dang, nyi ma nub nas chos ston pa'i l...	ma bskos pa'i sde tsan bcu
མ་བསྐོས་པའི་སྡེ་ཚན་བཅུ	the unentrusted 10 sections	ma bskos pa'i sde tshan bcu
མ་བསྐོས་ཤིང	without mandate, unbidden	ma bskos shing
མ་བསྐྱུར	not abandon, not leave behind	ma bskyur
མ་བསྐྱོད་པ	unagitated, SA mi skyod pa, undisturbed	ma bskyod pa
མ་ཁ	1) lower jaw; 2) principal in terms of actual material wealth; 3) Mecca)/ [mi dmangs srid gzhung gis mi dmangs kyi 'tsho tshis ma kha gso ba	ma kha
མ་ཁད་དུ	as soon as; instantly 1974	ma khad du
མ་ཁའི་ཡུལ	Mecca [place where by sbrang rtsi'i blo gros the moslem religion was 1st founded	ma kha'i yul
མ་ཁལ	amount in bushels of grain lent out	ma khal
མ་ཁུ	mother and uncle	ma khu
མ་ཁེ་སྒོར	[german] mark	ma khe sgor
མ་ཁེ་སེའི་རིང་ལུགས	marxism	ma khe se'i ring lugs
མ་ཁེངས་པ	do not fill not full, not arrogant	ma khengs pa
མ་ཁོངས	1) spyi'am byings kyi khongs; 2) mother's part/ side, matrilineal)	ma khongs
མ་ཁོངས་སུ	on the mother's part, on the maternal side	ma khongs su
མ་ཁོམ་པ	without leisure, unrelaxed, suffering uninterruptedly, perpetual suffering, restless, continually at work, leisureless	ma khom pa
ཏིམེ་ཏོ	-	time to
མ་ཁྱབ	there is no pervasion! it doesn't follow!	ma khyab
མ་ཁྱབ་པའི་སྐྱོན	fallacy of nonpervasion	ma khyab pa'i skyon
མ་ཁྱོག་པ	not crooked or bent, straight, sincere	ma khyog pa
མ་ཁྲེལ་བའི་ཚུལ་བཞི	[TRS 121-1]	ma khrel ba'i tshul bzhi
མ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	mother dakinis	ma mkha' 'gro
མ་མཁལ	chin	ma mkhal
མ་མཁས་པ	unwise	ma mkhas pa
མ་འཁོད	the nether stone	ma 'khod
མ་འཁྲུགས་པར	without agitating	ma 'khrugs par
མ་འཁྲུལ	the fact that one is not deceived	ma 'khrul
མ་འཁྲུལ་པ	non-mistaken, unerring, not deluded	ma 'khrul pa
མ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་བློ	an unmistaken cognition/ mind	ma 'khrul pa'i blo
མ་འཁྲུལ་བ	unmistaken, nonmistakenness [ggd]	ma 'khrul ba
མ་འཁྲུལ་བའི་རིག་པ	non-mistaken cognizer	ma 'khrul ba'i rig pa
མ་འཁྲུལ་བའི་ཤེས་པ	unconfused awareness, awareness realizing the true state of some object	ma 'khrul ba'i shes pa
མ་འཁྲུལ་བར་བློ་ནས་ཤེས་པ	flawless recollection	ma 'khrul bar blo nas shes pa
མ་ག་དྷ	Magadha	ma ga dha
མ་ག་དྷར་བྱོན་ནོ	set out for Magadha	ma ga dhar byon no
མ་གད་རུས་པ	ornaments of human bone	ma gad rus pa
མ་གབ	so that it is no longer elusive	ma gab
མ་གར་མ	fibrous root of a water lily	ma gar ma
མ་གལ	poplar-tree/ bark med. [shing sman, ro kha la bska ba, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas glo ba'i nad dang, 'brum nad la phan	ma gal
མ་གས་པ	plant calotropis gigantea	ma gas pa
མ་གི	mother's, lower, downward, below, [that] down there	ma gi
མ་གི་ནག་པོ་ཀུན་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	musk D	ma gi nag po kun la rgyag pa
མ་གི་ནག་པོ་ཀུན་ལ་རྒྱུག་པ	musk	ma gi nag po kun la rgyug pa
མ་གི་ནས	from below/ down there	ma gi nas
མ་གི་ལ	below, down there	ma gi la
མ་གིའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	that city down there	ma gi'i grong khyer
མ་གིའི་གནས་ཚུལ	that/ the situation down there	ma gi'i gnas tshul
མ་གིར	down there	ma gir
མ་གུག་པར་བརྒྱང	extend until straight	ma gug par brgyang
མ་གུས	disrespect, rudeness, disregard, impoliteness, irreverence, insolence	ma gus
མ་གུས་པ	disrespectful; x {rang gi spyod lam ma gus pa la sogs pa sdom pa} refrain from all disrespectful conduct	ma gus pa
མ་གུས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of disrespect	ma gus pa'i ltung byed
མ་གུས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ	disrespectful conduct; x {ma gus pa'i spyod lam thams cad spang par bya'o} give up all types of disrespectful conduct	ma gus pa'i spyod lam
མ་གུས་པའི་ཚུལ	D disrespectful [feelings], dishonorable profession	ma gus pa'i tshul
མ་གུས་པས་འགོག་པ	['gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po zhig 'gog byed rang gi mngon 'dod gang yod kyi bsam 'char bstan pa'i sgo nas ma gus pa'i tshig sbyar te 'gog pa'i rg...	ma gus pas 'gog pa
མ་གེའི	ya ge'i ... ma ge'i	ma ge'i
མ་གོལ་བ	not to stray	ma gol ba
མ་གོས	unblemished, untainted, immaculate	ma gos
མ་གོས་པ	(being) untainted, uncovered, undefiled, immaculate	ma gos pa
མ་གྱར	stepmother	ma gyar
མ་གྱུར	for all of them have been your mothers	ma gyur
མ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་ཀུན	all mother-sentient beings	ma gyur 'gro kun
མ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་རྣམས	all sentient beings-their mothers	ma gyur 'gro rnams
མ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་བ	sentient beings, once my mothers	ma gyur 'gro ba
མ་གྱུར་འགྲོ་བ་རྣམས	[all] beings who have been our mothers	ma gyur 'gro ba rnams
མ་གྱུར་པ	unsuitable	ma gyur pa
མ་གྱུར་མེད	no other than	ma gyur med
མ་གྱུར་སེམས་ཅན	our mother-sentient beings	ma gyur sems can
མ་གྱུར་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད	all sentient beings who have been our mothers	ma gyur sems can thams cad
མ་གྱོག	kitchen-boy, scullion	ma gyog
མ་གྲགས	is not found	ma grags
མ་གྲགས་པའི་མིང	see {grags pa'i ming dang ma grags pa'i ming}	ma grags pa'i ming
མ་གྲུབ	nonexistent, not proven / established	ma grub
མ་གྲུབ་པ	non-existent, does not exist; not existing, not to be found [if inquired into]	ma grub pa
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་གཏན་ཙིགས	non-established reason [gtan tsigs ltar snang gsum gyi ya gyal, phyogs chos ma grub pa ste, shes 'dod chos can la rtags 'god pa ltar ma grub pa'am med pa'o, dper na sgr chos can, mi rtag ste, mig s...	ma grub pa'i gtan tsigs
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	non-established reason	ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་གཉིས	the two	ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs gnyis
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་གསུམ	the three unestablished unproven reason/ proof/ sign [gtan tshigs ltar snang las ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs la dbye na, don la ma grub pa dang, blo ngor ma grub pa dang, rgol ba la ltos te ma grub pa...	ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs gsum
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་རྟགས	deficient (invalid) reason	ma grub pa'i rtags
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་སྟོང་པ	indefinable emptiness	ma grub pa'i stong pa
མ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	TSE	ma grub pa'i yid dpyod
མ་གྲུབ་པར	not yet accomplished	ma grub par
མ་གྲོལ་པ	bondage	ma grol pa
མ་གྲོས་རང་མཐུན	[spontaneous[ly] [agreement] w/o prior plan/ discussion	ma gros rang mthun
མ་དགག་པ	do not try to stop me	ma dgag pa
མ་དགའ་བ	detest, disgust, dislike, displeasure, hatred, loathe	ma dga' ba
མ་དགའ་བ་བཟོ་བ	displease	ma dga' ba bzo ba
མ་དགའ་བའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཅན	cynic	ma dga' ba'i rnam 'gyur can
མ་དགའ་ཞེ་འཛིན	grasp unjoyful thoughts in one's heart	ma dga' zhe 'dzin
མ་དགོན	Mahakala and Mahakali	ma dgon
མ་དགོན་ལྕམ་དྲལ	Mahakala, Mahakali and their brothers and sisters	ma dgon lcam dral
མ་དགོན་ལྕམ་དྲལ་གཉིས	Mahakala and Mahakali	ma dgon lcam dral gnyis
མ་དགོན་གཉིས	Mahakalas and Mahakalis	ma dgon gnyis
མ་དགོས	without having to, not need to	ma dgos
མ་དགོས་པ	unnecessary	ma dgos pa
མ་དགྱེས	sad, sorrowful, displeased	ma dgyes
མ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་མ་སུན་པར་བྱས་པ	violating/ abusing one's mother who is an arhat	ma dgra bcom ma sun par byas pa
མ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་མ་སུན་ཕྱུང་བ	abusing one's mother who is an arhat, one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye ba lnga} five nearly boundless offenses	ma dgra bcom ma sun phyung ba
མ་བགྲོད	without gradual progress, not the result of a gradual path	ma bgrod
མ་བགྲོད་མ་སྦྱངས	not a gradual process of working on oneself	ma bgrod ma sbyangs
མ་བགྲོས་རང་མཐུན	agreement w/o previous discussion	ma bgros rang mthun
མ་མགལ	lower jawbone, SA kha'i ma le	ma mgal
མ་མགལ་མ་ལེ	lower row of teeth	ma mgal ma le
མ་མགུ	lower part of a vessel	ma mgu
མ་མགུ་བ	irked, displeased ma mgu ma rag ngan zhing sdug pa'i	ma mgu ba
དངོས་པོ་བྱུང་ཡང་མ་མགུ	good things not found even if you look for them	dngos po byung yang ma mgu
མ་མགོན	mah kali and mah kala	ma mgon
མ་མགོན་ལྕམ་དྲལ	Mahakala and Shridevi, in the context of the kar ma bka' brgyud refers to mgon po ber nag can and dpal ldan lha mo rang byung rgyal mo in union [tsd]	ma mgon lcam dral
མ་འགག་པ	incessant support, unconfined, unobstructed	ma 'gag pa
མ་འགགས	not stopped	ma 'gags
མ་འགགས་པ	{ma 'gag pa} unceasing; unimpeded	ma 'gags pa
མ་འགགས་པར་ཤར	to appear without interruption	ma 'gags par shar
མ་འགགས་པར་གསལ	unobstructedly aware	ma 'gags par gsal
མ་འགབ	rough, rude, wild, what shouldn't be done	ma 'gab
མ་འགོར་བ	w/o delay	ma 'gor ba
མ་འགྱངས་པ	without delay	ma 'gyangs pa
མ་འགྱུར་བ	unwavering	ma 'gyur ba
མ་འགྲིག་པ	too bad, terrible, awful, unfit, incomplete, imperfect, defective	ma 'grig pa
མ་འགྲིགས་པ	taking or giving money or things to another party if there be a difference in the accounts	ma 'grigs pa
མ་འགྲོ	not go, don't go	ma 'gro
མ་འགྲོ་ཀ་མེད	powerless not to go, cannot avoid going	ma 'gro ka med
མ་འགྲོ་ཀ་མེད་བྱུང	had no choice but to go	ma 'gro ka med byung
མ་འགྲོ་ཀུན	all sentient beings each one of whom was once our own mother	ma 'gro kun
མ་འགྲོ་བར་དུ	until [we] go	ma 'gro bar du
མ་འགྲོ་ཞེས	Please do not go	ma 'gro zhes
མ་རྒད	emerald, emerald, 1 of rin chen nor bdun	ma rgad
མ་རྒན	matron, grandma, old mothers [Syn {sems can}	ma rgan
མ་རྒན་རྣམས	old mothers [Ie, all sentient beings)	ma rgan rnams
མ་རྒས	D not old, shelter	ma rgas
མ་རྒས་པ	not old, shelter	ma rgas pa
མ་རྒེན	matron, grandam, old mothers sentient beings	ma rgen
མ་རྒོལ་རང་ཐོར	self destruction [w/o outside attack]	ma rgol rang thor
མ་རྒྱལ་བ	unconquered 1976	ma rgyal ba
མ་རྒྱུད	mother tantra [a class of unsurpassed yogatantra (subdivision of anuttara tantra emphazicing luminosity/ 'od gsal) (tserig) emptiness prajna TDCP	ma rgyud
མ་རྒྱུད་སྙིང་པོ་དོན་གསུམ	terma by {byang bdag bkra shis stobs rgyal}	ma rgyud snying po don gsum
མ་རྒྱུད་རིགས་དྲུག	six enlightened families of the Mother Tantras	ma rgyud rigs drug
མ་རྒྱུད་གསང་བའི་ལམ་ཁྱེར	Magyü Sangwey Lamkyer. Terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	ma rgyud gsang ba'i lam khyer
མ་རྒྱུད་ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་ག	Mother Tantra Anu Yoga	ma rgyud a nu yo ga
མ་སྒོ	principal gate, royal entrance	ma sgo
མ་སྒོམ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five dharmas of buddhahood without meditating [1 {btags sgrol} two {reg grol} three {myong grol} four {mthong grol} five thos grol}	ma sgom sangs rgyas chos lnga
མ་སྒོམས	uncultivated	ma sgoms
མ་སྒྲིབ	ethically neutral	ma sgrib
མ་སྒྲིབ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	neutral and not compromised	ma sgrib lung ma bstan
མ་སྒྲུངས་མ་རྩིགས	undissembled impurity, unmitigated uncleanliness	ma sgrungs ma rtsigs
མ་སྒྲུབ་པ	incomplete, imperfect, defective	ma sgrub pa
མ་བསྒོམ	uncultivated, unmade	ma bsgom
མ་བསྒོམ་རང་བཞག	self-abiding nonmeditation	ma bsgom rang bzhag
མ་བསྒོམས	non-cultivation, without having meditated / practiced	ma bsgoms
མ་བསྒོམས་སྣགས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five qualities of uncultivated buddhahood; {btags grol}, {reg grol}, {myong grol}, {mthong grol}, {thos grol}	ma bsgoms snags rgyas chos lnga
མ་བསྒོམས་པའི་སེམས	uncultivated mind, unrefined mentality/ frame of mind	ma bsgoms pa'i sems
མ་བསྒོམས་པར་སངས་རྒྱ་བ	attain buddhahood w/o cultivation, bring enlightenment w/o effort in meditation	ma bsgoms par sangs rgya ba
མ་བསྒོམས་པར་སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཆོས	a teaching which enlightens w/o meditation	ma bsgoms par sangs rgyas pa'i chos
མ་བསྒོམས་ཚངས་རྒྱ	{ma bsgoms tshangs rgya'i gdams pa} instructions for uncultivated enlightenment / buddhahood without meditation	ma bsgoms tshangs rgya
མ་བསྒོམས་སངས་རྒྱས	uncultivated buddhahood	ma bsgoms sangs rgyas
མ་བསྒོམས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ལྔ	the five qualities of uncultivated buddhahood, {btags grol}, {reg grol}, {myong grol}, {mthong grol}, {thos grol}	ma bsgoms sangs rgyas chos lnga
མ་བསྒྱུར	unaltered [, (= {ma bcos}	ma bsgyur
མ་བསྒྲིགས་རང་འགྲིགས	effortlessly naturally arranged 'grigs pa	ma bsgrigs rang 'grigs
མ་བསྒྲིགས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	naturally established w/o effort	ma bsgrigs lhun grub
མ་བསྒྲིབ་པ	unobscured	ma bsgrib pa
མ་བསྒྲིབ་པ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	nonobscured neutral [phenomenon]; opp {bsgrib pa lung ma bstan} obscured neutral [phenomenon];	ma bsgrib pa lung ma bstan
མ་བསྒྲིབས	unobscured	ma bsgribs
མ་བསྒྲིབས་པ	non=obscured	ma bsgribs pa
མ་བསྒྲིབས་པའང	unobscured [&/ though]	ma bsgribs pa'ang
མ་བསྒྲིབས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	w essence unobscured [by kleshas] w no possibility [of virtue and non-virtue]	ma bsgribs lung ma bstan
མ་ངག་གི་སྡེ	[esoteric] oral instruction class	ma ngag gi sde
མ་ངལ	not tired	ma ngal
མ་ངས་པའི་རྟགས་དྲུག	six unfixed signs	ma ngas pa'i rtags drug
མ་ངེས	that which is indefinite in all respects, not reliable, uncertain, doubtful, uncertain, indefinite, indefinable, expedient, superficial	ma nges
མ་ངེས་གནས་སྐབས	uncertain occasion/ situation	ma nges gnas skabs
མ་ངེས་པ	contingent factor, uncertain, dubious, it was not clear, unknown	ma nges pa
མ་ངེས་པ་གཉིས	2 kinds of doubtfulness	ma nges pa gnyis
མ་ངེས་པ་ན་ཡོད	do not inhabit fixed abodes	ma nges pa na yod
མ་ངེས་པ་བཞི	D the four kinds of doubt/ uncertain objects ma nges pa'i rgyun zhugs srid pa lan bdun	ma nges pa bzhi
པ་བ	uncertain stream enterer who will have 7 more lives TSE	pa ba
མ་ངེས་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	indefinite reason[ing]	ma nges pa'i gtan tshigs
མ་ངེས་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་གཉིས	the two indefinite reasons	ma nges pa'i gtan tshigs gnyis
མ་ངེས་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་གསུམ	the three indefinite reasons chn	ma nges pa'i gtan tshigs gsum
མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས	uncertain proof / reason	ma nges pa'i rtags
མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས་གཉིས	the two uncertain reasons chn	ma nges pa'i rtags gnyis
མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས་དྲུག	the six unfixed signs, in the bardo of becoming. dwelling place, company, food and clothing, support, behavior, mental occurrences	ma nges pa'i rtags drug
མ་ངེས་པའི་དུས	unfixed/ uncertain time	ma nges pa'i dus
མ་ངེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	[one of the {phung po gsum} the three sets of aggregates] indeterminate aggregates	ma nges pa'i phung po
མ་ངེས་པའི་ཡིད་དཔྱོད	uncertain engagement/ perception TSE	ma nges pa'i yid dpyod
མ་ངེས་པའི་རིགས	dubious family (Gdmk) [the indefinite type (of person), the undetermined type/ family/ kind of person, uncertain lineage; 1) of the {rigs can lnga} five lineages)	ma nges pa'i rigs
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས	uncertain bases	ma nges pa'i sa
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས་བརྒྱད	the eight uncertain bases	ma nges pa'i sa brgyad
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས་པ་བརྒྱད	rtog dpyod 'gyod gnyid khong khro ba/ /chags dang nga rgyal the tshom mo	ma nges pa'i sa pa brgyad
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 uncertain bases chn	ma nges pa'i sa ba brgyad
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས་མང	TSE	ma nges pa'i sa mang
མ་ངེས་པའི་ས་མང་བརྒྱད	TSE	ma nges pa'i sa mang brgyad
མ་ངེས་པར	indeterminately; at random; unpredictable/y	ma nges par
མ་ངེས་ས་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 uncertain bases	ma nges sa pa brgyad
མ་ངོམས	i am not satisfied	ma ngoms
མ་དངུལ	principal, capital, money	ma dngul
མ་དངུལ་འཁོར་རྒྱུག	capital turnover ma dngul 'khor rgyug gi grangs tshad amount of capital turnover	ma dngul 'khor rgyug
མ་དངུལ་འཇོག	invest/ contribute money/ capital	ma dngul 'jog
མ་དངུལ་བཞག་པ	invest	ma dngul bzhag pa
མ་དངུལ་གསོག་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	accumulate and invest capital	ma dngul gsog 'jog byed pa
མ་མངའ	consort	ma mnga'
མ་མངོན	invisible	ma mngon
མ་མངོན་པ	invisible, not outwardly visible, covert, latent	ma mngon pa
མ་མངོན་པའི་ནུས་ཤུགས	latent/ hidden/ invisible/ covert force/ strength	ma mngon pa'i nus shugs
མ་སྔུན་བུ་བཤའ	ma yig la bltas te bu yig bklags nas zhus dag gtong ba	ma sngun bu bsha'
མ་ཅིག་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	Single Mother and Queen of Siddhas	ma cig grub pa'i rgyal mo
མ་ཅིག་ལབ་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	Machik Labdr"n	ma cig lab kyi sgron ma
མ་ཅིག་ལབ་སྒྲོན	Machik Labdr"n	ma cig lab sgron
མ་གཅིག	the only mother, common wife of several brothers	ma gcig
མ་གཅིག་ཁྲོས་མ་ནག་མོ	Black Vajra Yogini	ma gcig khros ma nag mo
མ་གཅིག་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	Sole Mother Queen of the Siddhas, a female Indian siddha and one of Rechungpa's teachers	ma gcig grub pa'i rgyal mo
མ་གཅིག་གཉན་གྱི་ལྷ་མོ	protective goddess of the Nyingma school	ma gcig gnyan gyi lha mo
མ་གཅིག་པ	dissimilar	ma gcig pa
མ་གཅིག་པ་ཆགས་པ	diverge	ma gcig pa chags pa
མ་གཅིག་པའི་སྲིང་མོ	sister by the same mother	ma gcig pa'i sring mo
མ་གཅིག་དཔལ་ལྷ་ཞི་བའི་ཉམས་ཅན	a deity	ma gcig dpal lha zhi ba'i nyams can
མ་གཅིག་ལབ་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	Machik Lapdr"n	ma gcig lab kyi sgron ma
མ་གཅིག་ལབ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	1055-1143? Machik Labkyi Drönma, founder of the lineage of the Chö practice in Tibet (gcod)	ma gcig lab gyi sgron ma
མ་གཅིག་ལབ་སྒྲོན	Machik Labdron	ma gcig lab sgron
མ་གཅིག་ལབ་སྒྲོན་མ	1031-1129	ma gcig lab sgron ma
མ་གཅིག་ལབས་སྒྲོན	Machik lapdr"n	ma gcig labs sgron
མ་བཅད	D unshaken, uncut, not having happened	ma bcad
མ་བཅད་པ	without being limited by	ma bcad pa
མ་བཅིངས	without restriction	ma bcings
མ་བཅོས	1) unaltered, uncontrived, unmodified, unartificial, uncorrected, unfabricated. 2) simple, genuine, simplicity. 3) the true, genuine and unadulterated. without fabrication, unfabricated, opposite {...	ma bcos
མ་བཅོས་རྒྱུ་ཆ	raw materials	ma bcos rgyu cha
མ་བཅོས་རྒྱུན་གྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	unfabricated continuous instant	ma bcos rgyun gyi skad cig ma
མ་བཅོས་ཆོག་བཞག	unmodified natural contemplation	ma bcos chog bzhag
མ་བཅོས་གཉུག་མ	primordial simplicity	ma bcos gnyug ma
མ་བཅོས་གཉུག་མའི་ངང	the unfabricated natural state, within unfabricated naturalness	ma bcos gnyug ma'i ngang
མ་བཅོས་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the unfabricated great equality	ma bcos mnyam pa chen po
མ་བཅོས་རྡོ་སྣུམ	crude oil	ma bcos rdo snum
མ་བཅོས་རྣམ་འགྱུར	natural expression	ma bcos rnam 'gyur
མ་བཅོས་པ	natural, dry ground, unaltered, not improved, not trying to correct, uncontrived	ma bcos pa
མ་བཅོས་པའི་ངང	unaltered condition	ma bcos pa'i ngang
མ་བཅོས་པའི་གནས་ལུགས	the unfabricated way things are	ma bcos pa'i gnas lugs
མ་བཅོས་པའི་གཤིས	the unfabricated/ uncontrived nature, natural simplicity	ma bcos pa'i gshis
མ་བཅོས་བཟོ་མེད	uncontrived nonfabrication	ma bcos bzo med
མ་བཅོས་རང་བབ	uncontrived naturalness, unfabricated naturalness	ma bcos rang bab
མ་བཅོས་རང་བབ་སེམས	natural, unfabricated mind	ma bcos rang bab sems
མ་བཅོས་རང་བབས	unfabricated naturalness	ma bcos rang babs
མ་བཅོས་རང་བབས་རང་རིག	selfcognizance of unfabricated naturalness, uncontrived self-awareness as it is	ma bcos rang babs rang rig
མ་བཅོས་ཤིང་ཆ	unprocessed timber	ma bcos shing cha
མ་བཅོས་གསལ་བ	uncontrived clarity	ma bcos gsal ba
མ་བཅོས་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ	unfabricated and spontaneous	ma bcos lhan cig skyes pa
མ་བཅོས་ལྷུག་པ	uncontrived ease	ma bcos lhug pa
མ་བཅོས་ལྷུག་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	free and uncontrived conduct	ma bcos lhug pa'i spyod pa
མ་བཅོས་ལྷུག་བོའི་སྤྱོད་པ	unfabricated naturalness (conduct)	ma bcos lhug bo'i spyod pa
མ་བཅོས་ལྷོད་པ	uncontrived release, relaxed simplicity	ma bcos lhod pa
མ་ལྕོགས	not able to do something	ma lcogs
མ་ལྕོགས་མེད་པ	{ma lcogs pa med pa} indispensable [?]	ma lcogs med pa
མ་ཆགས	1) non-attachment, non-desire, detachment. 2) unobstructed, unobstructedly	ma chags
མ་ཆགས་ཆགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	passionless great passion, desireless great desire	ma chags chags pa chen po
མ་ཆགས་པ	nonattachment	ma chags pa
མ་ཆགས་པད་མ	Lotus of Nonattachment. The twelfth bhumi	ma chags pad ma
མ་ཆགས་པད་མའི་ས	lotus level of nonattachment	ma chags pad ma'i sa
མ་ཆགས་པའི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	virtuous	ma chags pa'i dge ba'i rtsa ba
རོཨོཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	attachment	root of non
མ་ཆགས་པའི་བདེ	the happiness of nonattachment	ma chags pa'i bde
མ་ཆགས་པར	uninterrupted, unremitting	ma chags par
མ་ཆགས་པར་སྦྱིན་པ་གཏོང་བ	be generous without attachment	ma chags par sbyin pa gtong ba
མ་ཆགས་སྤྱོད	unattached action	ma chags spyod
མ་ཆགས་སྤྱོད་པ	detached conduct ma chags mi sdang gti mug med des	ma chags spyod pa
བསྐྱེད་ལས་ནི་དགེ་བའོ	That which is produced by nonattachment, nonaggression and nondelusion is virtue.	bskyed las ni dge ba'o
མ་ཆགས་ལ་སོགས	non-attachment and so forth	ma chags la sogs
མ་ཆང	mah jong	ma chang
མ་ཆང་རྒྱག	play mah jong	ma chang rgyag
མ་ཆད	without falling, not diminishing, uninterrupted	ma chad
མ་ཆད་པ	perpetual	ma chad pa
མ་ཆུང	mother's younger sister	ma chung
མ་ཆེན	1) [head-]cook [& clothes preparer]; 2) mother's elder sister; 3) father's principal wife	ma chen
མ་ཆོག་སྦྱིན	greatest benefactor	ma chog sbyin
མ་ཆོད	not passed, traversed	ma chod
མ་ཆོས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	direct results	ma chos pa'i 'bras bu
མ་མཆིས་པ	do not have [arch]. impossible, not existent	ma mchis pa
མ་མཆུ	lower lip	ma mchu
མ་མཆོག	a bow's ma mchog	ma mchog
མ་འཆམ་མཁན	dissident	ma 'cham mkhan
མ་འཆམ་པ	not get slong, dislike, dissent, disagree	ma 'cham pa
མ་འཆམས་པ	not get slong, dislike, dissent, disagree	ma 'chams pa
མ་འཆུས་པ	straight, not crooked/ twisted, honest	ma 'chus pa
མ་འཆུས་པའི་སྐད	honest speaking	ma 'chus pa'i skad
མ་འཆུས་པའི་ཐིག	straight line	ma 'chus pa'i thig
མ་འཆོལ་བ	TSE	ma 'chol ba
མ་མཇེད	free	ma mjed
མ་འཇིགས་པ	self-confidence, fearless	ma 'jigs pa
མ་འཇིགས་པ་བཞི	four kinds of fearlessness	ma 'jigs pa bzhi
མ་འཇུ་བ	undigested	ma 'ju ba
མ་རྗོད	it is not pronounced	ma rjod
མ་བརྗེད	don't forget!	ma brjed
མ་བརྗེད་པ	without forgetting 1979	ma brjed pa
མ་བརྗེད་པའི་ཕྱིར	with a view to not forgetting	ma brjed pa'i phyir
མ་བརྗེད་པའི་ཡིད	mind that does not forget	ma brjed pa'i yid
མ་བརྗེད་པར	w/o forgetting, unforgettably	ma brjed par
མ་བརྗེད་པར་ཡིད་ལ་བཟུང་ནས	having grasped it unforgettably in the mind	ma brjed par yid la bzung nas
མ་བརྗེད་པར་ཡིད་ལ་བཟུང་བ	to remember, keep in mind	ma brjed par yid la bzung ba
མ་བརྗེད་ཡིད	{ma brjed pa'i yid} mind that does not forget	ma brjed yid
མ་བརྗོད	not say, not express, not come to pass	ma brjod
མ་ཉན	imperfection	ma nyan
མ་ཉན་པ	did not listen	ma nyan pa
མ་ཉམས	uncorrupted, unimpaired, undeteriorated, full strength, entire, uncorrupted, unblamable	ma nyams
མ་ཉམས་གྱི་བར	{bsam gtan de las ma nyams gyi bar du} until that [state of] dhyana declines	ma nyams gyi bar
མ་ཉམས་པ	faultless, never failing, not damaged, uncorrupted, not impaired, full strength, entire, uncorrupted, unblamable	ma nyams pa
མ་ཉམས་པའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	unimpaired economy	ma nyams pa'i dpal 'byor
མ་ཉམས་པར	faultless, never failing, not damaged, uncorrupted, not impaired, full strength, entire, uncorrupted, unblamable	ma nyams par
མ་ཉམས་པར་ཡོད་པ	has never been lost	ma nyams par yod pa
མ་ཉམས་བའི་ཚུལ	TSE	ma nyams ba'i tshul
མ་ཉམས་མ་གོད་པ	never be spoiled or lost	ma nyams ma god pa
མ་ཉི་ལ	Manila	ma nyi la
མ་ཉིང་གི་རླུང	neutral air (refers to successful detachment from the external reference of the sensory motor act)	ma nying gi rlung
མ་ཉིད	as soon as	ma nyid
མ་ཉུང་བ	sufficient, enough, not short/ few	ma nyung ba
མ་ཉེས་ཁ་ཡོག	unjust[ly]/ unfounded accused/ accusation/ blame	ma nyes kha yog
མ་ཉེས་པ	blameless	ma nyes pa
མ་ཉེས་པ་ཕྱིར་བྱུང	came out again unhurt	ma nyes pa phyir byung
མ་ཉེས་པའི་ཁ་ཡོག	unjust[ly]/ unfounded accused/ accusation/ blame	ma nyes pa'i kha yog
མ་ཉེས་པའི་འགྲོ་བ	innocent beings ma nyes pa'i nag g.yogs - unjust[ly]/ unfounded accused/ accusation/ blame	ma nyes pa'i 'gro ba
མ་གཉིས་པ	(met) nanny	ma gnyis pa
མ་གཉིས་མ	having two mothers [met) 1) master of the feast, Ga apati (oldest son of mah deva)	ma gnyis ma
མ་གཉེན	relations on mother's side	ma gnyen
མ་རྙེད་པ	loss [one of the {'jig rten chos brgyad} 8 worldly dharmas)	ma rnyed pa
མ་རྙེད་པ་ལ་མི་དགའ་བ་མེད་པ	being unhappy in not getting what one wants	ma rnyed pa la mi dga' ba med pa
མ་སྙན་པ	disgrace, one of the {'jig rten chos brgyad} eight worldly dharmas	ma snyan pa
མ་སྙོམས་པ	imbalance	ma snyoms pa
མ་བརྙས་ཤིག	do not despise	ma brnyas shig
མ་ཏ	motor	ma ta
མ་ཏང་ག	buddhist arhat of kasyapa sect who carried buddhism to china	ma tang ga
མ་ཏད་ཀ	SK outcast retreatant	ma tad ka
མ་ཊི་བ	maniwa, someone who simply recites the mani mantra	ma Ti ba
མ་ཏིག	pearl	ma tig
མ་ཏུ་མྱ་ངམ་གྱི་ཡུལ	{ma tu mya ngam gyi yul desert near Jhalandhara D	ma tu mya ngam gyi yul
མ་ཏུ་ལང་ཀ	med. plant {ma tu lang ka}	ma tu lang ka
མ་ཏུ་ལུང་ཀ	a plant	ma tu lung ka
མ་ཏུ་ལུང་ག	SK 'ju sa'i lung	ma tu lung ga
མ་ཏོག་བཟང	flower	ma tog bzang
མ་ཏོང	neuter, combined power or strength of all the male and female classes of protectors	ma tong
མ་ཏོར་བ	unmistaken	ma tor ba
མ་ཏྲམ་རུ་ཏྲ	Matram Rudra, the original ego-demon ma tram ru tra bsgral ba'i rdzas brgyad [TRS 140-6] {ma tram ru tra bsgral ba'i rdzas brgyad las gsang sngags kyi bstan pa byon pa'i gnas brgyad kyis la byin gy...	ma tram ru tra
མ་ཏྲི་ཀ	wild animal	ma tri ka
མ་ཏྲི་མ་ཏྲིས་ལ་འཛུ	b"n prayer	ma tri ma tris la 'dzu
མ་ཏྲི་མུ་ཏྲི་ས་ལ་འཛུ	b"n prayer	ma tri mu tri sa la 'dzu
མ་གཏོགས	unless	ma gtogs
མ་གཏོགས་པ	besides, exception, other than	ma gtogs pa
མ་གཏོགས་པར	does not include	ma gtogs par
མ་གཏོགས་མེད་པ	sole	ma gtogs med pa
མ་གཏོགས་གཞན་ན	besides, other than, except for	ma gtogs gzhan na
མ་གཏོགས་གཞན་མེད	it is merely and nothing other than 1980	ma gtogs gzhan med
མ་བཏང	don't let go!	ma btang
མ་བཏབ་བྲ་བོ	{ma btab bra bo} med. herb	ma btab bra bo
མ་བཏུབ་པོ	it is not convenient	ma btub po
མ་རྟ	mare	ma rta
མ་རྟག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	untruth, false speech, exponent of impermanence	ma rtag par smra ba
མ་རྟོགས	ignorance, not realized	ma rtogs
མ་རྟོགས་མཁའ་ཁྱབ་འགྲོ་བ	unrealized sentient beings pervading space	ma rtogs mkha' khyab 'gro ba
མ་རྟོགས་རྒྱུ་མཚོན་གྱི་དབང	the three first of the 4 {dbang}	ma rtogs rgyu mtshon gyi dbang
མ་རྟོགས་རྟོགས	non-realization and realization	ma rtogs rtogs
མ་རྟོགས་པ	those who have not realized it	ma rtogs pa
མ་རྟོགས་པ་ལོག་པའི་སྣང་བ	mistaken perceptions of the unrealized	ma rtogs pa log pa'i snang ba
མ་རྟོགས་པའི	... of non-realization	ma rtogs pa'i
མ་རྟོགས་པའི་བློ	non-realizing awareness	ma rtogs pa'i blo
མ་ལྟར	like a mother	ma ltar
མ་ལྟར་བཙེ་བ	mother's love	ma ltar btse ba
མ་ལྟོས་པ	independent	ma ltos pa
མ་ལྟོས་པར	disregarding, regardless of	ma ltos par
མ་སྟེས་པ	(A) not good	ma stes pa
མ་བརྟག	unknown, that which must be examined	ma brtag
མ་བརྟག་འདུག་པ	did not look more carefully	ma brtag 'dug pa
མ་བརྟག་པར་སྨྲ	untruth	ma brtag par smra
མ་བརྟག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	false speech	ma brtag par smra ba
མ་བརྟགས་ཁྱུར་མེད	accepting/ acting w/o [adequate] investigation/ thought	ma brtags khyur med
མ་བརྟགས་ཉམས་དགའ་བ	the unexamined seeming way	ma brtags nyams dga' ba
མ་བརྟགས་པ	unexamined, unchecked, uninvestigated	ma brtags pa
མ་བརྟགས་པའི	unconsidered	ma brtags pa'i
མ་བརྟགས་པའི་རིམ་པ	phase of nondeliberation	ma brtags pa'i rim pa
མ་བརྟགས་པར་ཡོད་པ	unanalyzed existence	ma brtags par yod pa
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད	neither examined not analyzed	ma brtags ma dpyad
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད་པ	unexamined and unanalyzed	ma brtags ma dpyad pa
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད་པའི་ངོ་བོ	an identity that is neither examined not analyzed	ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i ngo bo
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད་པའི་ངོར	in the experience of someone who has neither examined not analyzed ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i gnas skabs while neither examining not analyzing	ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i ngor
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད་པའི་བློ་ངོར	in the experience of someone who has neither examined not analyzed	ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i blo ngor
མ་བརྟགས་མ་དཔྱད་པའི་བློ་དོར	leave mind behind unexamined and unanalyzed ma brtags ma dpyad par nyams dga' ba referred to this entry from the entry for nyams dga' dga' tsam, but there was no such entry. I assume it is synonymo...	ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i blo dor
མ་བརྟེན	not touching	ma brten
མ་བརྟེན་པ	unconditioned	ma brten pa
མ་བལྟོས་པར	independently	ma bltos par
མ་བསྟན	not taught	ma bstan
མ་ཐ	neutral[ity]	ma tha
མ་ཐ་ན	at least/ minimum	ma tha na
མ་ཐག	immediately, as soon as, just after; just now, instantly; verb + ma thag just about to, at the point of (doing the verb)	ma thag
མ་ཐག་ཏུ	immediately; had scarcely done so and so	ma thag tu
མ་ཐག་ནས	as soon as	ma thag nas
མ་ཐག་པ	as soon as, just --	ma thag pa
མ་ཐན་པ	(A) discouraged	ma than pa
མ་ཐལ	restraint in speaking or running	ma thal
མ་ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར	not gone beyond, not exceeded	ma thal bar 'gyur
མ་ཐུ་ར	city of mathura in ancient india	ma thu ra
མ་ཐུག་གི་བར་དུ	verb + ma thug gi bar	ma thug gi bar du
མ་ཐུབ་པ	not able to	ma thub pa
མ་ཐུལ་བ	untamed	ma thul ba
མ་ཐེ་བ	exclude	ma the ba
མ་ཐེ་བའི	exclusive	ma the ba'i
མ་ཐེ་བར	not belonging to a thing	ma the bar
མ་ཐེག	he was not able to hold him up	ma theg
མ་ཐེབས	ma rtsar bzhag pa'i money etc.	ma thebs
མ་ཐེམ	lower steps at the threshold of a door, below the steps	ma them
མ་ཐོག	floor of a room	ma thog
མ་ཐོག་ཏུ་མ་རང་ཕྲད་པ	it directly encounters its own mother	ma thog tu ma rang phrad pa
མ་ཐོག་རིང་པོ	long upward aeon [from a lifespan of 10 up to "innumerable")	ma thog ring po
མ་ཐོག་རིང་མོ	[TRS 78-6]	ma thog ring mo
མ་ཐོགས་པ	without delay	ma thogs pa
མ་ཐོགས་པར	w/o touching, avoiding	ma thogs par
མ་ཐོགས་མྱུར་བ	immediately without delay	ma thogs myur ba
མ་ཐོགས་རིང་མོ	according to dharma tradition bar gyi khug pa 18 rjes when years of life go from 10 years upward until life is immeasurable	ma thogs ring mo
མ་ཐོད	loft in lower story	ma thod
མ་ཐོན	unfinished; not come out	ma thon
མ་ཐོན་གོང	before finishing	ma thon gong
མ་ཐོབ་པ	dispossession, as one of the	ma thob pa
མ་མཐའ	the last of it, at last	ma mtha'
མ་མཐར	at least, at the low extremity, even, as much as, the last of it, at last	ma mthar
མ་མཐར་ཡང	even at the least/ at the low extremity	ma mthar yang
མ་མཐུན་པ	incompatible, incompatible, unfriendly	ma mthun pa
མ་མཐོང	not see, not seen	ma mthong
མ་མཐོང་བ	unseen, misunderstanding	ma mthong ba
མ་འཐུན་གོང	before finishing	ma 'thun gong
མ་འཐུས་པ་མེད	there is nothing missing	ma 'thus pa med
མ་ད་ན	madana, feast liquor	ma da na
མ་ད་ནའི་སྣོད	chang snod - vessel for Liquor	ma da na'i snod
མ་དག	profane, the impure [ordinary beings]	ma dag
མ་དག་འཁོར་བའི་འོད	the impure lights of samsara	ma dag 'khor ba'i 'od
མ་དག་རྒྱུན་འབྱམས	continuing bad tradition, incorrect but widespread	ma dag rgyun 'byams
མ་དག་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་གཞན་དབང	bag chags kyi dbang gis khams gsum gyi sems dang sems byung bden dngos su snang ba	ma dag 'jig rten pa'i gzhan dbang
མ་དག་དག་པ	those both pure and impure	ma dag dag pa
མ་དག་བདུད་རིགས་ཚོགས	profane hordes of maras	ma dag bdud rigs tshogs
མ་དག་སྣང་བ	impure perception	ma dag snang ba
མ་དག་པ	impur[ity], incorrect	ma dag pa
མ་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་སྒོ	the door of impure samsara, the impure gate of samsara	ma dag pa 'khor ba'i sgo
མ་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་སྣང་བ	the impure experiences of samsara	ma dag pa 'khor ba'i snang ba
མ་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་རླུང་ལྔ	1) {sgrib pa'i rlung} obscuring. 2) {sdud pa'i rlung} gathering. 3) {'byed pa'i rlung} separating. 4) {g.yo ba'i rlung} moving. 5) {bsgyur ba} transforming	ma dag pa 'khor ba'i rlung lnga
མ་དག་པ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་བར་དོ	the impure confused bardo [experienced by unenlightened beings]	ma dag pa 'khrul pa'i bar do
མ་དག་པ་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in a manner) consistent with impurity*	ma dag pa ltar shar ba
མ་དག་པ་གཞན་གྱི་དབང	impure dependency	ma dag pa gzhan gyi dbang
མ་དག་པ་ས་བདུན	the and impure bhumis	ma dag pa sa bdun
མ་དག་པ་སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་གནང	the confused generosity of impure sentient beings	ma dag pa sems can gyi 'khrul gnang
མ་དག་པའི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	impure illusory body [Tserig). rdzogs rim rim drug gi nang gses shig ste, khams gsum snod bcud kyis bsdus pa'i phyi nang gi dngos po 'di thams cad snang la rang bzhin med pa sgyu ma dang rmi lam so...	ma dag pa'i sgyu lus
མ་དག་པའི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	impure nature	ma dag pa'i de bzhin nyid
མ་དག་པའི་སྣང་བ	impure experience / perception / outlook	ma dag pa'i snang ba
མ་དག་པའི་སྣོད་བཅུད	the impure world and its inhabitants ma dag pa'i snod bcud rnams sdug bsngal	ma dag pa'i snod bcud
བདེན་པའི་གཞིར་སྟོན་པ	having been pointed out that the whole impure world and its inhabitants are the basis for the truth of suffering ma dag pa'i sbyin pa sum cu rtsa gnyis [TRS 91-3]	bden pa'i gzhir ston pa
མ་དག་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ་སོ་གཉིས	chn	ma dag pa'i sbyin pa so gnyis
མ་དག་པའི་ཞིང	impure realm/ field	ma dag pa'i zhing
མ་དག་པའི་ཞིང་རྣམས	all the impure realms	ma dag pa'i zhing rnams
མ་དག་པའི་རླུང	impure winds	ma dag pa'i rlung
མ་དག་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings who are impure	ma dag pa'i sems can
མ་དག་མིན	not impure	ma dag min
མ་དག་ཚུར་མཐོང་ཚད་མ	the impure pramana/ perception of this side	ma dag tshur mthong tshad ma
མ་དག་ཚུར་རོལ་མཐོང་ཚད་མ	syn of {ma dag tshur mthong tshad ma}? [mss]	ma dag tshur rol mthong tshad ma
མ་དག་ཞིང	impure dimension	ma dag zhing
མ་དག་གཞན་དབང	impure dependent phenomena	ma dag gzhan dbang
མ་དག་ཡུས་ཆེ	impure big lies	ma dag yus che
མ་དག་རིགས་དྲུག་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	impure worlds of the six classes of beings	ma dag rigs drug gi 'jig rten
མ་དག་རིགས་དྲུག་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི	the impure worlds of the six classes of beings 1982	ma dag rigs drug 'jig rten gyi
མ་དག་རླུང་རིགས	mo rlung, ma ning, srog rlung, rtsol rlung, tsha grang rlung, phyi rlung, nang rlung)	ma dag rlung rigs
མ་དག་རླུང་རིགས་བདུན	seven impure types of prana (pho rlung	ma dag rlung rigs bdun
མ་དག་ལས་སྣང	impure karmic vision	ma dag las snang
མ་དག་ས་བདུན	the 7 impure bhumis	ma dag sa bdun
མ་དག་སེམས་ཅན	impure sentient beings	ma dag sems can
མ་དང	impure	ma dang
མ་དང་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དོ་ར	playground of mamos and dakinis	ma dang mkha' 'gro'i do ra
མ་དང་གཉེན་ཚན	mother and other relatives	ma dang gnyen tshan
མ་དད	disinterested	ma dad
མ་དད་པ	lack of/ w/o faith/ regard,	ma dad pa
མ་དད་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	to entertain disinterest	ma dad pa yid la byed pa
མ་དད་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྤོང་བ	never giving up one's faith	ma dad pa yongs su spong ba
མ་དད་བ	non-faith	ma dad ba
མ་དལ	mandala [offerings]	ma dal
མ་དལ་བཞི	the four mandalas	ma dal bzhi
མ་དུ	musical instrument	ma du
མ་དུ་ལུང་ག	SK skyur rtsi chen po	ma du lung ga
མ་དུལ་འདུལ་མཛད	taming the untamed	ma dul 'dul mdzad
མ་དུས་དུ	unidentified mahayoga master of mnyam pa nyid tradition	ma dus du
མ་དེབ	1) permanent original book, master copy; 2) principal for commerce account book, main register/ cash book; 3) Tibetan govt tax obligations and collections original book; 4) potter's wheel 'og gdan ...	ma deb
མ་དོད	indefinite	ma dod
མ་དྲངས	crude, uncultivated, disciplined, tamed	ma drangs
མ་དྲངས་དྲོལ་བ	(A) distracted by play, careless, wild, w/o good qualities	ma drangs drol ba
མ་དྲན་པ་ཡིན	don't think of, do not trouble about	ma dran pa yin
མ་དྲིན་ཅན	our kind mothers	ma drin can
མ་དྲིས	unworthy of inquiry, un?ed, improper	ma dris
མ་དྲིས་པ	improper, unquestioned	ma dris pa
མ་དྲུག་གི་བུ	Kartikeya	ma drug gi bu
མ་དྲུག་པ	Kartikeya [youngest son of Mah deva gdong drug, w six mothers: au ma, me lha, gangg'a, 'dam bu'i tshal, smin drug, sa ga	ma drug pa
མ་དྲུག་གཞོན་ནུ	Kartikeya gdong drug	ma drug gzhon nu
མ་དྲེས་པ	unique, unmixed; see {ma 'dres pa}	ma dres pa
མ་དྲེས་པའི་ཆོས	unique qualities; see {ma 'dres pa'i chos}	ma dres pa'i chos
མ་དྲོད་པ	the Unheated Lake, a naga [of that name living in the lake.]	ma drod pa
མ་དྲོད་པའི་མཚོ	Lake Manasarovar, [Syn. {ma pham g.yu mtsho} lake in western Tibet near Mt. Kailash]	ma drod pa'i mtsho
མ་དྲོད་མཚོ	Syn {ma drod pa'i mtsho}	ma drod mtsho
མ་དྲོས་གནས	that lives in water, swan, goose	ma dros gnas
མ་དྲོས་པ	1) Lake Manasarovar; 2) a naga who lives there)	ma dros pa
མ་དྲོས་པའི་མཐོ	Lake Manasarovar	ma dros pa'i mtho
མ་དྲོས་པའི་མདོ	Manarasowar Sutra	ma dros pa'i mdo
མ་དྲོས་པས་ཞུས་པ	Requested by Anavatapta. Syn {klu'i rgyal po ma dros pas zhus pa'i mdo}	ma dros pas zhus pa
མ་དྲོས་པས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	anavatap tanagara japariprccha sutra	ma dros pas zhus pa'i mdo
མ་དྲོས་མཚོ	Anavatapta, the Ever Cool Lake, another name of Manasarovar	ma dros mtsho
མ་གདན	ground, basis, foundation	ma gdan
མ་གདན་གྱི་རི་མོ	ground plan	ma gdan gyi ri mo
མ་གདུང	principal beam	ma gdung
མ་བདག	[belonging to the] mother's lord, something 1 does not own	ma bdag
མ་བདག་བདག་བཟུང	keeping what does not belong to 1	ma bdag bdag bzung
མ་བདག་བདག་བཟུང་བྱེད	keep what does not belong to 1	ma bdag bdag bzung byed
མ་བདག་བདག་བཟུང་བྱེད་མཁན	those who keep what does not belong to them	ma bdag bdag bzung byed mkhan
མ་བདུག་པ	unfumigated, w incense not yet offered 1983	ma bdug pa
མ་བདུད་རྒྱལ་མོའི་བརྟན་མདོས	mdos to stabilize queen of the ma bdud	ma bdud rgyal mo'i brtan mdos
མ་བདུན	Seven Mothers; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	ma bdun
མ་བདེ	depressed, uncomfortable, ill at ease	ma bde
མ་མདག	coal pan, chafing dish, fuming pan	ma mdag
མ་འདངས་པ	shortage	ma 'dangs pa
མ་འདས་པ	it is nothing other than, is not different from, cannot deviate from, not move away from, there is nothing but, not beyond, are nothing other than	ma 'das pa
མ་འདས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Reincarnation before death	ma 'das sprul sku
མ་འདུས་པ	not included within	ma 'dus pa
མ་འདེད	in Tibetan elemental divination depending on the son calculate the mother	ma 'ded
མ་འདོད	not want/ desire/ wish for	ma 'dod
མ་འདོད་པ	dislike	ma 'dod pa
མ་འདོད་པ་བྱེད	grumble, complain	ma 'dod pa byed
མ་འདོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	blame, grumble, complain	ma 'dod pa byed pa
མ་འདོད་པའི་སྐད	grumble	ma 'dod pa'i skad
མ་འདོད་བཞིན	as if not liking or wishing	ma 'dod bzhin
མ་འདོད་བཞིན་དུ	against one's wishes / will	ma 'dod bzhin du
མ་འདོས་པར	unspeakable	ma 'dos par
མ་འདྲ་བ	disparity, dissimilar	ma 'dra ba
མ་འདྲ་བ་བཟོ་བ	dissimilate	ma 'dra ba bzo ba
མ་འདྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག་གསུམ	the three unmixed objects of mindfulness	ma 'dran pa nyer bzhag gsum
མ་འདྲིས	unworthy of inquiry D	ma 'dris
མ་འདྲིས་པ	unacquainted	ma 'dris pa
མ་འདྲིས་པ་རྣམས་ཡིད་སན	place confidence in strangers	ma 'dris pa rnams yid san
མ་འདྲིས་པ་ཡིན་སྟབས	because it is unfamiliar	ma 'dris pa yin stabs
མ་འདྲིས་པའི་མཛའ་བཤེས	unacquainted friends	ma 'dris pa'i mdza' bshes
མ་འདྲེས་པ	unmixed, pure, unadulterated, unshared, without confusion, unscattered, undivided, absolute, distinct, singularity	ma 'dres pa
མ་འདྲེས་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 unshared/ unique dharmas [of a buddha]	ma 'dres pa bco brgyad
མ་འདྲེས་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	unmixed and completely perfected	ma 'dres pa yongs su rdzogs pa
མ་འདྲེས་པ་ལ་དམིགས་པ	perceive w/o mixing up	ma 'dres pa la dmigs pa
མ་འདྲེས་པའི་ཆོས	unshared qualities	ma 'dres pa'i chos
མ་འདྲེས་པའི་ཆོས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 unique qualities (of a buddha) [spyod pas bsdus pa drug dang, rtogs pas bsdus pa drug dang, mdzad pas bsdus pa gsum dang, dus kyis bsdus pa gsum ste bco brgyad do	ma 'dres pa'i chos bco brgyad
མ་འདྲེས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	unmixed ignorance, [the root klesha unmixed with anythng else, ignorance of not knowing the true nature	ma 'dres pa'i ma rig pa
མ་འདྲེས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities that are not mixed up	ma 'dres pa'i yon tan
མ་འདྲེས་པར	without confounding or mixing up together, sharply discriminating	ma 'dres par
མ་འདྲེས་གསལ	clear and not mixed up	ma 'dres gsal
མ་འདྲེས་གསལ་བ	to envision the unmixed / distinct	ma 'dres gsal ba
མ་འདྲོས་པའི་ཆོས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 unique dharmas (of a buddha)	ma 'dros pa'i chos bco brgyad
མ་རྡུ	thorn, prickle	ma rdu
མ་རྡུ་ཅན	thorny, prickly	ma rdu can
མ་རྡོ	weight/ lifting/ foundation stone	ma rdo
མ་ལྡང་བ	inadequate	ma ldang ba
མ་སྡམས་པ	unrestrained, not found	ma sdams pa
མ་སྡོད	do not stay	ma sdod
མ་བརྡུངས་པ	not beat, not strike	ma brdungs pa
མ་བསྡམས་པ	Shrimana	ma bsdams pa
མ་བསྡུས	not gathered/ included/ comprised	ma bsdus
མ་བསྡུས་པ	not gathered/ included/ comprised	ma bsdus pa
མ་བསྡུས་པ་མེད་པ	nothing transcends these	ma bsdus pa med pa
མ་བསྡུས་པའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	"Having an unabbreviated form." A grammatical term used in poetry manuals to refer to expressions or compound terms in which the grammatical connectives such as the sixth case {rnam dbye drug pa} a...	ma bsdus pa'i gzugs can
མ་ན་ད་ར	1 of 4 great mountains of jambudvipa, SA ri chen bzhi	ma na da ra
མ་ན་ནུ་ག་མ	SA 'gog pa	ma na nu ga ma
མ་ན་ནུ་ན་ཡ	SA kun 'byung ba	ma na nu na ya
མ་ན་ཧུ	kind of stone with which tobacco pipes are made in china	ma na hu
མ་ན་ཧོ	(CH) rta klad mineral med. [precious stone, gza' nad dang dug nad la phan ma nam mkha' dang mnyam pa'i sems	ma na ho
ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད	all sentient beings, my mothers, whose number is unfathomable like the sky	can thams cad
མ་ནས	fundamentally, completely	ma nas
མ་ཎི	to mutter prayers; to purr like a cat	ma Ni
མ་ནི་ཀ	SK jewel ornament	ma ni ka
མ་ནི་བཀའ་འབུམ	religious work	ma ni bka' 'bum
མ་ནི་བསྐོར	turn a prayer wheel	ma ni bskor
མ་ནི་འཁོར་ལོ	prayer wheel	ma ni 'khor lo
མ་ནི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར	turn a prayer wheel	ma ni 'khor lo bskor
མ་ནི་གློག་བསྐོར	electric prayer wheel	ma ni glog bskor
མ་ནི་བགྲང	recite mani mudras	ma ni bgrang
མ་ཎི་བགྲོངས	recite the mani!	ma Ni bgrongs
མ་ནི་ཆུ་འཁོར	water powered mani wheel	ma ni chu 'khor
མ་ནི་ཆོས་འཁོར	prayer wheel	ma ni chos 'khor
མ་ནི་ཐང	Mani Thang in Gurong, Domey	ma ni thang
མ་ནི་ཐང་གི་ལྷ་ཁང	Mani Thang Temple	ma ni thang gi lha khang
མ་ནི་ཐང་རྡོག	kha gdan gyi ri mo	ma ni thang rdog
མ་ནི་དུང	ma ni recitations 100 m dpang por btsugs pa; in Tibetan tradition mna' tshig cig	ma ni dung
མ་ནི་དུང་འཁོར	ma ni grangs 100 m yod pa'i 'khor chen	ma ni dung 'khor
མ་ནི་དུང་སྒྲུབ	100 million Mani recitations	ma ni dung sgrub
མ་ནི་འདྲེན་འདྲེན	1) w/o hindrance/ impediment; 2) just repeat oneself) ma ni 'dren 'dren chu rgyug lta bu shod speak w/o hindrance like a flowing stream	ma ni 'dren 'dren
མ་ནི་འདྲེན་འདྲེན་བྱེད་མཁན	fluent/ repetitive speaker	ma ni 'dren 'dren byed mkhan
མ་ནི་རྡོ་ཕུང	the mani mantra engraved on a rock	ma ni rdo phung
མ་ནི་པ	strolling storytellers	ma ni pa
མ་ནི་པ་ཏྲ	pure leaf gold	ma ni pa tra
མ་ནི་བ	mani-reciters; x {ltos thub chos las 'dug ge ma ni ba} Is there anything you can trust besides Dharma, manireciters?	ma ni ba
མ་ཎི་འབྲུ་གཅིག	a single mani [mantra]	ma Ni 'bru gcig
མ་ནི་མ	1) kind of cymbals; 2) ma ni picture silk; 3) ma ni dbyangs su 'then woman)	ma ni ma
མ་ནི་རླུང་བསྐོར	wind-operated prayer wheel	ma ni rlung bskor
མ་ཎི་རླུང་འཁོར	wind-driven mani wheel	ma Ni rlung 'khor
མ་ཎི་ལག་སྐོར	hand-held prayer wheel	ma Ni lag skor
མ་ནི་ལག་བསྐོར	hand operated prayer wheel	ma ni lag bskor
མ་ནི་བྷ་དྲ	{ma ni bha dra}	ma ni bha dra
མ་ནིང	other beings, eunuch, hermaphrodite who is neither man nor woman, without sexual distinction, unable to beget, barren, childless, neutral	ma ning
མ་ནིང་ཀོ་ཐ	{ma ning ko tha} med herb [dres ma rigs gsum gyi nang tshan, ri thang mtshams su skye ba zhig ste, ro mngar la tsha, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas sha dug sogs dug nad 'joms, smug dug thabs dang, mkhris...	ma ning ko tha
མ་ནིང་གི	hermaphrodite/ itic	ma ning gi
མ་ནིང་གི་རྒྱུད	{ma ning gi brgyud} hermaphrodite/ itic lineage; androgyne/ ous lineage	ma ning gi rgyud
མ་ནིང་གི་བརྒྱུད	hermaphrodite/ itic lineage; androgyne/ ous lineage	ma ning gi brgyud
མ་ནིང་གི་ཐེག་པ	the neuter vehicle, {u pa yo ga'i theg pa}, {gnyis ka rgyud kyi theg pa} (because the spyod pa is like kriya and the {lta ba} as in yoga)	ma ning gi theg pa
མ་ནིང་གི་རྩ	neutral pulse with long delicate steady beat	ma ning gi rtsa
མ་ནིང་རྒྱུད	{ma ning brgyud} hermaphrodite/ itic lineage; androgyne/ ous lineage	ma ning rgyud
མ་ནིང་བརྒྱུད	hermaphrodite/ itic lineage; androgyne/ ous lineage	ma ning brgyud
མ་ནིང་ལྕམ་པ	a kind of lcam pa med [ro mngar la bska, zhu rjes drod, nus pas chu bsags pa dang, skom dad byed pa la phan	ma ning lcam pa
མ་ནིང་ཆུ་སྐྱུགས	{ma ning chu skyugs} med. herb	ma ning chu skyugs
མ་ནིང་དྲེས་མ	iris lactea pall. var. chinensis maxim., iris potanini maxim.	ma ning dres ma
མ་ནིང་མོ	female hermaphrodite D	ma ning mo
མ་ནིང་རྩ	byang chub sems rtsa'i ming	ma ning rtsa
མ་ནིང་ཟླ་བྱེད་པ	eunuch guard D	ma ning zla byed pa
མ་ནིང་ཡི་གེ	tibetan letters which pertain to no gender (kha, cha, tha, pha, tsha)	ma ning yi ge
མ་ནིང་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of eunuch chn	ma ning rigs lnga
མ་ནིང་རླུང	neutral prana that circulates slowly and evenly	ma ning rlung
མ་ནིའི་གླུ་དབྱངས་ལེན་པ	sing the song of the mani	ma ni'i glu dbyangs len pa
མ་ནིའི་རྡོ་ཕུང	the mani mantra engraved on a rock	ma ni'i rdo phung
མ་ནུ	1) herb; 2) SK person; 3) mother's breast; 4) mineral drug; 5) the mind (6) Manu (7) 14	ma nu
མ་ནུ་ཁྲག་ཅན	fruit of med. tree bse shing dkar po	ma nu khrag can
མ་ནུ་འཁུན་པ	grumbling, complaining	ma nu 'khun pa
མ་ནུ་ཏ་ཀ	a medicine, kind of plant	ma nu ta ka
མ་ནུ་པ་ཏྲ	[Skt] pleasant 'dab ma can field herb [ro mngar zhing kha la tsha ba, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas khrag rlung gi nad dang, bad kan smug po, lhog pa, bad mkhris bcas la phan	ma nu pa tra
མ་ནུ་སྤོས་དཀར	camphor	ma nu spos dkar
མ་ནུ་སྦྱིན	epithet of wife of the sun	ma nu sbyin
མ་ནུ་བསེ་ཤིང	med. tree bse shing dkar po	ma nu bse shing
མ་ནུ་ཧུ	agate	ma nu hu
མ་ནུ་ཧོ	agate	ma nu ho
མ་ནུབ་པ	continuous, non-subsiding	ma nub pa
མ་ནུའི་བུ	(met) person	ma nu'i bu
མ་ནུས་ཉམ་ཐག	the weary and the helpless ma nus nyam thag nad par sman byin pa to give medicine to the disabled and the sick	ma nus nyam thag
མ་ནུས་པ	cannot, should not, must not	ma nus pa
མ་ནེ	chin	ma ne
མ་ནོ་ཧ	SK tshon ldong ros	ma no ha
མ་ནོགས	without consideration	ma nogs
མ་ནོར	unfailing/ infallible	ma nor
མ་ནོར་བ	unmistaken, flawless, unmistaken, unerring	ma nor ba
མ་ནོར་བར	properly	ma nor bar
མ་གནང	forbid, refuse	ma gnang
མ་གནང་ཀ་མེད	powerless not to give	ma gnang ka med
མ་གནས	original/ production price/ cost	ma gnas
མ་གནས་ཀྱི་རྩིས	cost accounting	ma gnas kyi rtsis
མ་གནས་གཅོག	reduce production cost	ma gnas gcog
མ་རྣམས	all, many	ma rnams
མ་པང་དུ་བུ་འཇུག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like a child jumping onto its mother's lap	ma pang du bu 'jug pa lta bu
མ་པད	lower lotus inscribed on an image	ma pad
མ་དཔེ	original manuscript / text	ma dpe
མ་དཔེ་ལྟར་འབྲི་བ	written like the original copy	ma dpe ltar 'bri ba
མ་དཔྱད	unanalyzed, unanalyzable, immeasurable	ma dpyad
མ་དཔྱད་པའི་ཐ་སྙད་ཏུ་འཇོག་པ	presentation of the non analytic conventional ma dpyad ma brtags pa'i 'jig rten gyi tha	ma dpyad pa'i tha snyad tu 'jog pa
མ་སྤང	without needing to be given up	ma spang
མ་སྤང་རང་གྲོལ	naturally free without being/ having to be renounced/ rejected	ma spang rang grol
མ་སྤངས	not abandoned/ thrown off	ma spangs
མ་སྤངས་པ	not abandoned/ thrown off	ma spangs pa
མ་སྤངས་བྲལ་བ	to transcend	ma spangs bral ba
མ་སྤུན	of the same mother	ma spun
མ་སྤོབས	without thinking, not hearing or keeping in mind	ma spobs
མ་སྤྲད་པ	deprive	ma sprad pa
མ་སྤྲོས	not complete	ma spros
མ་སྤྲོས་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	nature w/o complexity	ma spros pa'i bdag nyid
མ་ཕང	Lake manasarovar [WT near mt kailash, sacred to Cakasamvara	ma phang
མ་ཕམ	invincible, unconquerable, Lake Manasarovar	ma pham
མ་ཕམ་གྱུ་མཙོ	{ma pham gyu lake} [mtso zhig bod rang skyong ljongs kyi spu hreng rdzong gi dbus rgyud na yod cing, mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos nas smi 4588 yod Lake manasarovar, lake in western tibet near mt ka...	ma pham gyu mtso
མ་ཕམ་གྱུ་མཚོ	Lake Manasarovar	ma pham gyu mtsho
མ་ཕམ་པ	Maitreya	ma pham pa
མ་ཕམ་མཚོ	Lake Manasarovar	ma pham mtsho
ཨོཔེནེད་ཨེཨིགྷཏ	petaled lotus. [MR] ma pham g.yu mtsho - Manasarovar A lake in western Tibet, near Mount Kailash, sacred to Chakrasamvara ma pham g.yu yi mtsho - the turquoise lake of Manasarovar	opened eight
མ་ཕེབས་པ	not arrive/ go (H)	ma phebs pa
མ་ཕེར	(A) not be able to 1986	ma pher
མ་ཕོགས་པ	not [accidentlly] striking/ hitting/ hurting [mi la ma phogs pa'i phyir: so people don't get hurt]	ma phogs pa
མ་ཕོད	unable to do	ma phod
མ་ཕོད་པ	unable to do	ma phod pa
མ་ཕྱི	1) prototype, sketch, model, draft, design; 2) maternal grandmother)	ma phyi
མ་ཕྱི་མ	2nd mother, step-mother	ma phyi ma
མ་ཕྱིན་པར	w/o going	ma phyin par
མ་ཕྱིས	w/o consideration	ma phyis
མ་ཕྱེས་ན	if one does not divide it	ma phyes na
མ་ཕྱོགས	1) maternal relatives; 2) below, down there)	ma phyogs
མ་ཕྲད	not encountered [by oneself in the present incarnation [result of previous karma	ma phrad
མ་འཕགས	not risen, not exalted, w/o consideration D	ma 'phags
མ་འཕྲོད་པ	fail	ma 'phrod pa
མ་འཕྲོས	not to wander off	ma 'phros
མ་བིན	liar, cheat	ma bin
མ་བིན་བཤད	lie, cheat	ma bin bshad
མ་བུ	mother and son; mother and child	ma bu
མ་བུ་གོ་ལྡོག་གི་ཕྱྭ	by mother's lag rtsa children examining by mo divination whether the children will have obstacles and calamity etc. [R]	ma bu go ldog gi phywa
མ་བུ་དགྲ་གྲོགས	motherson enemy and friend [rgya nag lugs la shing dang, me, sa, lcags, chu khams te lnga yod cing, khams lnga'i ma bu dgra grogs brtsi tsul ni, shing ma chu dang chu ma lcags, lcags ma sa dang sa ...	ma bu dgra grogs
མ་བུ་མཐུན་པ་འབྲི་བ	copy carefully comparing to the original	ma bu mthun pa 'bri ba
མ་བུ་མཐུན་པར་འབྲི་བ	copy the original accurately	ma bu mthun par 'bri ba
མ་བུ་འདུ་ཤེས	associations of mother and son	ma bu 'du shes
མ་བུ་ན	a tree with bells and cymbals, at tree which grows in Sangdok Palri shing kham, that has bells and cymbals etc	ma bu na
མ་བུ་ཕྲད་པ	meeting of mother and son	ma bu phrad pa
མ་བུ་འཕྲད་པ	encounter of the mother and the son, meeting of the mother clear light and the son clear light	ma bu 'phrad pa
མ་བུ་འཕྲད་པའི་ཚུལ	in the manner of mother and child meeting	ma bu 'phrad pa'i tshul
མ་བུ་སྦྱོར་བ	uniting of the mother and the son	ma bu sbyor ba
མ་བུ་རྩལ་གསུམ	mother, son and manifestation [kun gzhi khyab gdal/rig pa ye shes/rtsal dang gsum	ma bu rtsal gsum
མ་བུ་བསུར་འོང	the mother goes to meet her son	ma bu bsur 'ong
མ་བུན	principal [in a loan]	ma bun
མ་བུན་གྱི་ཆ་ཤས	loan installment/ payment	ma bun gyi cha shas
མ་བུའི་བདེ་སྲུང	maternal and infant care	ma bu'i bde srung
མ་བུའི་འདུ་ཤེས	associations of mother and son	ma bu'i 'du shes
མ་བུའི་འཕྲོད་བརྟེན	maternal and infant hygiene	ma bu'i 'phrod brten
མ་བུའི་འཕྲོད་བསྟེན	means conducive/ beneficial to mother and son's comfort	ma bu'i 'phrod bsten
མ་བོས་པར་འོང་བ	come uninvited	ma bos par 'ong ba
མ་བྱང	mah jong	ma byang
མ་བྱང་རྒྱག	play mah jong	ma byang rgyag
མ་བྱང་ན	unless one becomes trained	ma byang na
མ་བྱན	cook	ma byan
མ་བྱན་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	chef	ma byan gyi gtso bo
མ་བྱས	uncreated/ unmade	ma byas
མ་བྱས་ཀྱང	even without doing	ma byas kyang
མ་བྱས་ན་མི	have to	ma byas na mi
མ་བྱས་ན་མི་འགྲིག་པ	must	ma byas na mi 'grig pa
མ་བྱས་པ	receiving the fruit of what was not done by oneself, argument to justify rebirth doctrine, without needing any action, uncreated	ma byas pa
མ་བྱས་པའི་ཆོས	non-produced phenomena	ma byas pa'i chos
མ་བྱས་རང་བྱས	have no choice but, have to	ma byas rang byas
མ་བྱས་ལ་བསགས་པ	collect/ included within the unproduced	ma byas la bsags pa
མ་བྱིན་པ་ལེན་པ	to steal	ma byin pa len pa
མ་བྱིན་པར་ལེན	SA ma sbyin len pa	ma byin par len
མ་བྱིན་པར་ལེན་པ	theft. to take what is not given, stealing, def. {gzhan gyi nor}	ma byin par len pa
མ་བྱིན་པར་ལེན་པ་སྤོང་བ	do not steal	ma byin par len pa spong ba
མ་བྱིན་ལེན	stealing, taking what is not given	ma byin len
མ་བྱིན་ལེན་གྱི་ཕམ་པ	the defeat of taking what is not given [pham pa bzhi'i nang gses, gzhi gzhan gyi dngos po rin thang tsang ba, bsam pa rku bar 'dod pa'i sems kyis, sbyor ba rang gis dngos su brkus pa'am gzhan la rk...	ma byin len gyi pham pa
མ་བྱིན་ལེན་པ	taking what is not given	ma byin len pa
མ་བྱིན་ལེན་སྤོང་བ	abandoning taking what is not given 1987	ma byin len spong ba
མ་བྱུང	did not appear, the act failed, did not answer the purpose, unborn, not produced	ma byung
མ་བྱུང་གི་བར	until the arrival of	ma byung gi bar
མ་བྱུང་སྔོན་འགོག	produce a means of stopping before something arises	ma byung sngon 'gog
མ་བྱུང་སྔོན་འགོག་བྱེད	produce a means of stopping before something arises	ma byung sngon 'gog byed
མ་བྱུང་ཕྱིན	until	ma byung phyin
མ་བྱུང་བ	non-existent, not arisen/ come into being, not occur/ happen, fault, mistake	ma byung ba
མ་བྱུང་བྱ་བ	not make it happen	ma byung bya ba
མ་བྱེད་གྱི་བར་དུ	until it is	ma byed gyi bar du
མ་བྱེད་ཅིག	do no do / do not feel	ma byed cig
མ་བྱེད་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཨུ་ཚུགས་རྒྱབ་པ	dissuade	ma byed zer te u tshugs rgyab pa
མ་བྱེད་རང་བྱེད	no alternative action or no choice	ma byed rang byed
མ་བྱོན	not arrived	ma byon
མ་བྱོན་པ	not arrived at, not come, not happened, not arise	ma byon pa
མ་བྲ	minimum	ma bra
མ་བྲལ	not overcoming something	ma bral
མ་བྲལ་བ	never part from, never separate from, keeping constant company with	ma bral ba
མ་བྲལ་བ་ཉིད	non-separation, inseparability	ma bral ba nyid
མ་བྲལ་བའི་དགོངས་པ་ཅན	possessing inseparable realization	ma bral ba'i dgongs pa can
མ་དབེན་པའི་སྲིང	step sister, by another mother	ma dben pa'i sring
མ་དབེན་པའི་སྲིང་མོ	half sister, stepsister by a different mother	ma dben pa'i sring mo
མ་དབྱེ	unshaken, uncut	ma dbye
མ་འབོ་བ་བྱུང	no spilling has occurred	ma 'bo ba byung
མ་འབྱར	baby	ma 'byar
མ་འབྱར་བ	analysis D	ma 'byar ba
མ་འབྱུང	not leave	ma 'byung
མ་འབྲུ	ma rtsa'i 'bru ste mchod rgyun du dmigs pa'i grain	ma 'bru
མ་འབྲེལ	to avoid involvement in [misdeeds]; no contact	ma 'brel
མ་འབྲེལ་བ	Syn {ngag kyal}	ma 'brel ba
མ་འབྲེལ་སྨྲ་བ	disconnected speech; syn {ngag kyal}	ma 'brel smra ba
མ་སྦགས་བ	purity	ma sbags ba
མ་སྦས་པར	openly	ma sbas par
མ་སྦྱངས	do not train/ purify	ma sbyangs
མ་སྦྱིན་པ་ལེན་པ	receive what is not given TSE	ma sbyin pa len pa
མ་སྦྱིན་ལེན་པ	theft, taking what is not given, stealing	ma sbyin len pa
མ་མ	baby sister, [children's] nurse, nanny, house keeper, ocean	ma ma
མ་མ་ཀི	Mamaki, [Syn {rdo rje ma ma ki} female buddha, consort of Akshobhya]	ma ma ki
མ་མ་མགོ་ཅག	herb {ma ma mgo cag}	ma ma mgo cag
མ་མ་རྒྱས་རྒྱས	herb {ma ma rgyas rgyas}	ma ma rgyas rgyas
མ་མ་བཞི	the four kinds of nurse [pang na 'tsho ba'i ma ma dang, nu ma snun pa'i ma ma, dri ma 'phyi ba'i ma ma, rtse na grogs byed kyi ma ma ste bzhi	ma ma bzhi
མ་མ་རིགས་བཞི	the four kinds of nurse	ma ma rigs bzhi
མ་མ་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་གཉིས	chn	ma ma sum cu so gnyis
མ་མད	(A) mother and child/ daughter	ma mad
མ་མས	(A) mother and child/ daughter	ma mas
མ་མི་གཅིག་པའི་སྤུན་ཟླ	half-brother {rgyal po la ma mi gcig pa'i spun zla zhig yod pa} the king had a half-brother	ma mi gcig pa'i spun zla
མ་མི་རྱ	tribe in E Assam	ma mi rya
མ་མིང	mother's name	ma ming
མ་མིན	besides, who is not	ma min
མ་མུན	abbr of ma rig mun pa	ma mun
མ་མེད	motherless, w/o the main part,	ma med
མ་མེས	maternal grandfather	ma mes
མ་མོ	female sheep, root, foundation, origin, medicinal plant, ewe that has brought forth a lamb, grandmother, kind of fearful demon, mamo spirits, ewe, 1 of sde brgyad, kind of wicked demon, class of fe...	ma mo
པྲེཏ	demon/ a ewe who has given birth; Mother deities; Mamos, wrathful dakinis 2) grandmother	preta
ཨཱ་ཅླསས་ཨོཕ༹་སེམི	divine beings who sometimes act as protectors of the Dharma	A class of semi
མ་མོ་མཁའ་འགྲོ	mamos and dakinis	ma mo mkha' 'gro
མ་མོ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི	of the mamos and kin s	ma mo mkha' 'gro'i
མ་མོ་འཁང་ཕབ་ཀྱི་མདོས	threadcross rites of the M tar s, vengeance GD	ma mo 'khang phab kyi mdos
མ་མོ་དགའ་བར་བྱེད་པའི་གདོན	kind of demon	ma mo dga' bar byed pa'i gdon
མ་མོ་རྒྱུད་ལུང	mamo tantras	ma mo rgyud lung
ཨནད་མིནད་ཨོཕ༹་ཨལལ་ཐེསེ་ཨིན་གེནེརལ	- respectively {thabs kyi zhags pa}, {dam tshig bkod pa}, and {gsang ba'i snying po} (gdmk)	and mind of all these in general
མ་མོ་བརྒྱད	eight Mamos	ma mo brgyad
མ་མོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve Mataris	ma mo bcu gnyis
ཨེཨརཐ་གད	mk)	earth gd
མ་མོ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	Twenty-one Mother Deities	ma mo nyi shu rtsa gcig
མ་མོ་དང་མཁའ་འགྲོ	mamos and dakinis	ma mo dang mkha' 'gro
མ་མོ་འདུས་པ	Assemblage of Mother Deities 1988	ma mo 'dus pa
མ་མོ་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Mother Deities Assemblage Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. Found in Vol. A of the Nyingma Gyübum	ma mo 'dus pa'i rgyud
མ་མོ་དབོད་གཏོང	a deity	ma mo dbod gtong
མ་མོ་རྦོ་གཏོང	M tar the liberating sorcery GD	ma mo rbo gtong
མ་མོ་རྦོད་གཏོང	1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad	ma mo rbod gtong
མ་མོ་འཛིན	holder of mystic diagram matrik D	ma mo 'dzin
མ་མོ་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Mother Deities Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga	ma mo rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
མ་མོ་སྲིད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ཤི་ས་བསྟན་པ་ཝོརལད	Wheel of the Mother Deities to Show the Place of Death. Text belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga composed by Guru Rinpoche	ma mo srid pa'i 'khor lo shi sa bstan pa World
མ་མོ་སྲིད་པའི་མཚོ་བཞི	Four Oceans of the Universal Mother Deities	ma mo srid pa'i mtsho bzhi
མ་མོག	silk	ma mog
མ་མོའི་སྐོང་མདོས	mdos of expiation to appease the Mamo	ma mo'i skong mdos
མ་མོའི་འཁྲུགས་སྐོང	ritual text by	ma mo'i 'khrugs skong
མ་མོའི་ཐུན་གྱི་ཟོར་བྱད	tantra of destructive magic of the thun zor of ma mo	ma mo'i thun gyi zor byad
མ་མོའི་མ	mother's mother, Parvati/ Uma	ma mo'i ma
མ་མོས	lack of firm belief in lack of devotion to	ma mos
མ་མོས་པ	disinterested	ma mos pa
མ་མོས་འཕེལ	(met) wind	ma mos 'phel
མ་མོས་བཞིན	as if not liking or wishing	ma mos bzhin
མ་མོས་བཞིན་དུ	unwillingly, reluctantly	ma mos bzhin du
མ་མྱོང	does not know, not at all	ma myong
མ་མྱོང་བ	{. . . ma myong ba} not to have known . . . (e.g., existence, yod ma myong ba)	ma myong ba
མ་མྱོས	not wish, not like, not intoxicated	ma myos
མ་མྱོས་པས་འདུལ་བ་སྦྱིན་པ	give taming even though it is not wished ['dul ba las bshad pa'i rtsod pa zhi byed kyi chos bdun gyi ya gyal zhig ste, sems ma myos pa'i gnas skabs ltung ba byung ma byung dran du bcug nas, ma byun...	ma myos pas 'dul ba sbyin pa
མ་མྱོས་པས་འདུལ་བར་འོས	worthy of taming even though not wishing for it, modest, not stupid	ma myos pas 'dul bar 'os
མ་མྱོས་བཟིན	as/ while/ even though not wanting/ wishing [to]	ma myos bzin
མ་དམིགས	non-existent, do not experience, not rely upon, without reliance upon, without using concepts, cannot be conceived	ma dmigs
མ་དམིགས་པ	nonobservation [ggd]	ma dmigs pa
མ་དམིགས་པའི་འགལ་བའི་གཏན་ཆིགས	the	ma dmigs pa'i 'gal ba'i gtan chigs
ཅོནཏྲདིཅཏིང་ཨ྾ཨིཨོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	observation	contradicting axiom of non
མ་དམིགས་པའི་འགལ་བའི་གཏན་ཙིགས	the contradicting axiom of non-observation ['gal ba'i gtan tsigs gsum gyi ya gyal, rtags dang dgag chos gnyis phyin ci log pa, dper na, bum pas dag pa'i sa phyogs chos can snang rung gi bum pa yod ...	ma dmigs pa'i 'gal ba'i gtan tsigs
མ་དམིགས་པའི་འགལ་བའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	the	ma dmigs pa'i 'gal ba'i gtan tshigs
མ་དམིགས་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	axiom of the	ma dmigs pa'i gtan tshigs
མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	non perception fact	ma dmigs pa'i rtags
མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས་གཉིས	the two signs	ma dmigs pa'i rtags gnyis
མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས་ཡང་དག	true sign of	ma dmigs pa'i rtags yang dag
མ་དམིགས་པའི་ཕྱིར	because it is not observed	ma dmigs pa'i phyir
མ་དམིགས་པར་བྱེད	without needing to concentrate	ma dmigs par byed
མ་རྨད	indisputable	ma rmad
མ་རྨོངས	not deluded	ma rmongs
མ་རྨོངས་པ	non-delusion	ma rmongs pa
མ་རྨོངས་པ་ར་མགྱེན་པ	know undeludedly/ w/o delusion 1989	ma rmongs pa ra mgyen pa
མ་རྨོངས་པར་མཁྱེན་པ	to know undeludedly, know without delusion; perceive undeludedly	ma rmongs par mkhyen pa
མ་རྨོས	needs no toil	ma rmos
མ་རྨོས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བའི་ལོ་ཏོག	uncultivated crops	ma rmos kyang skye ba'i lo tog
མ་རྨོས་པའི་ལོ	crop grown without being cultivated, maize, maize	ma rmos pa'i lo
མ་རྨོས་པའི་ལོ་ཏོག	wild crop, fabulous kind of grain in mythological age	ma rmos pa'i lo tog
མ་རྨོས་ལོ་ཏོག	maize, corn	ma rmos lo tog
མ་རྨོས་ལོ་ཏོག་གི་ཕྱེ་ཞིབ	corn	ma rmos lo tog gi phye zhib
མ་སྨད	1) mother and daughter; 2) supreme, especially good/ noble [yon tan, nus rtsal, lam lugs]	ma smad
མ་སྨད་མ	nun	ma smad ma
མ་སྨན	queen	ma sman
མ་སྨིན	not ripen	ma smin
མ་སྨིན་པ	immature, premature, SA ljang ba, immature	ma smin pa
མ་སྨིན་པའི་རིག་པ	unripened awareness	ma smin pa'i rig pa
མ་སྨིན་ཚ་བ	1 of tsha ba'i nad	ma smin tsha ba
མ་སྨོས	impossible	ma smos
མ་ཙང	lacking	ma tsang
མ་གཙང	1) gtsang po [river in gnya' nang rdzong = gnya' nang phu chu, lho ngos bal yul du 'bab]	ma gtsang
མ་གཙིགས	unimportant	ma gtsigs
མ་བཙལ	without having to be sought; unsought/ without trying (to); cannot be sought	ma btsal
མ་བཙལ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	unsought yet spontaneously present	ma btsal lhun grub
མ་རྩ	capital fund, capital	ma rtsa
མ་རྩ་ཅན	[rich] person w capital and bzo pa'i ngal rtsol lhag mar bshu gzhog byed mkhan	ma rtsa can
མ་རྩ་ཆག	lose 1's capital, have great losses	ma rtsa chag
མ་རྩ་འཇོག	invest capital	ma rtsa 'jog
མ་རྩ་སྟོངས་པ	bankrupt	ma rtsa stongs pa
མ་རྩ་རྡིབ་པ	stand a loss in business	ma rtsa rdib pa
མ་རྩ་ཕྱིར་གཏོང	capital exporting	ma rtsa phyir gtong
མ་རྩ་ཕྱིར་གཏོང་བྱེད	export capital	ma rtsa phyir gtong byed
མ་རྩ་ཕྱིར་འདྲེན	capital exporting	ma rtsa phyir 'dren
མ་རྩ་ཕྱིར་འདྲེན་བྱེད	export capital	ma rtsa phyir 'dren byed
མ་རྩ་སྦྱོར་འཇགས	trust fund	ma rtsa sbyor 'jags
མ་རྩ་བཞག	invest capital ma rtsa g.yar ba - borrow capital	ma rtsa bzhag
མ་རྩ་རིང་ལུགས	capitalism	ma rtsa ring lugs
མ་རྩའི་རྐང་གྲངས	shares of	ma rtsa'i rkang grangs
མ་རྩའི་རྐང་བདག	stock owner, share holder	ma rtsa'i rkang bdag
མ་རྩའི་རྣམ་བཤད	Marx's Das Kapital	ma rtsa'i rnam bshad
མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	capitalism [ma rtsa can la thon skyed rgyu chas dbang bar ma zad, wage earner's toil la bshu gzhog &, rin thang lhag ma btsir len byed pa'i spyi tshogs kyi lam lugs la zer]	ma rtsa'i ring lugs
མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་ཆ	capitalist sector/ element ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi thon skyed byed	ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi grub cha
མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	capitalist society ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi bzo tshong las rigs capitalist industry and commerce	ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi spyi tshogs
མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ལས་ལུགས	capitalist system	ma rtsa'i ring lugs kyi las lugs
མ་བརྩལ	effortlessly, spontaneous	ma brtsal
མ་ཚང	1) mother's [brother's] house; 2) dividing all people in two ma tshang ste khyim che ba) ma tshang kha skong gi rgyud sde gnyis	ma tshang
ཀྱི་སྐོར	two later tantras {phyi ma'i rgyud}. which contain supplements	kyi skor
མ་ཚང་བ	is absent	ma tshang ba
མ་ཚང་བ་ཁ་སྐོང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Amending Incompleteness. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. Vol. OM of the Nyingma Gyübum	ma tshang ba kha skong ba'i rgyud
མ་ཚང་བ་མེད	complete, whatever is needed, plentiful, nothing lacking, w/o incompleteness	ma tshang ba med
མ་ཚང་བ་མེད་པ	plentiful, nothing lacking, without incompleteness; whatever is needed	ma tshang ba med pa
མ་ཚད	in addition to	ma tshad
མ་ཚན	maternal relatives	ma tshan
མ་ཚབ	stepmother after the real one dies, nanny, nursery teacher, baby sitter	ma tshab
མ་ཚར་བར་ལ	until completing	ma tshar bar la
མ་ཚོགས་མཁའ་འགྲོ	assembly of mother dakinis	ma tshogs mkha' 'gro
མ་ཚོར	unnoticed	ma tshor
མ་ཚོར་བ	to not notice	ma tshor ba
མ་ཚོས་པ	unripe, raw	ma tshos pa
མ་མཚུངས་པ	derogatory misfit	ma mtshungs pa
མ་འཚམས་པ	unsuited, ill-suited	ma 'tshams pa
མ་འཚལ	not known/ realized	ma 'tshal
མ་འཚུབས་པ	unperturbed	ma 'tshubs pa
མ་འཚོས་པ	uncooked, raw	ma 'tshos pa
མ་ཛི	stand, tripod mañ dzu go Sha - Sometimes the same as Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	ma dzi
མ་མཛད	do not let ...	ma mdzad
མ་མཛེས	unconventional, not pretty	ma mdzes
མ་མཛེས་མཛེས	sarcasm	ma mdzes mdzes
མ་མཛེས་མཛེས་བྱེད	be sarcastic	ma mdzes mdzes byed
མ་འཛིངས	not shaggy	ma 'dzings
མ་འཛེམ	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from	ma 'dzem
མ་འཛེམ་པ	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from	ma 'dzem pa
མ་འཛེམ་པར	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from	ma 'dzem par
མ་འཛེམས	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from 1990	ma 'dzems
མ་འཛེམས་པ	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from	ma 'dzems pa
མ་འཛེམས་པར	w/o shirking/ fearing/ shying away from	ma 'dzems par
མ་འཛོམས	collection of potent things	ma 'dzoms
མ་འཛོམས་མཁན	absenter	ma 'dzoms mkhan
མ་འཛོམས་པ	absent	ma 'dzoms pa
མ་འཛོམས་པའི	absence	ma 'dzoms pa'i
མ་རྫོགས	incomplete	ma rdzogs
མ་རྫོགས་པ	incomplete, imperfect	ma rdzogs pa
མ་ཞང	mother and maternal uncle	ma zhang
མ་ཞང་ཁྲོམ་པ་སྐྱེས	minister hostile to the Dharma during the youth of King Trisong Deutsen	ma zhang khrom pa skyes
མ་ཞི	restlessness, unrest	ma zhi
མ་ཞི་བ	restlessness, non-tranquility	ma zhi ba
མ་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ	cause restlessness, cause unrest, disquiet	ma zhi bar byed pa
མ་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ་འདུ་བྱེད	restlessness causing formations	ma zhi bar byed pa 'du byed
མ་ཞིག	not opened	ma zhig
མ་ཞུ	not requested/ melted/ said, indigestion	ma zhu
མ་ཞུ་སྐྲན	swelling of indigestion	ma zhu skran
མ་ཞུ་འཇུ་བ	to decompose what is undigested	ma zhu 'ju ba
མ་ཞུ་པའི་ནད	indigestion	ma zhu pa'i nad
མ་ཞུ་བ	indigestion {bkres nas la phug rad pa zos chu 'thung pas ma zhu bar grongs so} grew very hungry and ate some rotten food, and after drinking some water, he died from indigestion	ma zhu ba
མ་ཞུ་བའི་ནད	1 of 6 chronic diseases, SA gcong chen nad drug	ma zhu ba'i nad
མ་ཞུམ་པ	not shy[ing] away	ma zhum pa
མ་ཞུམ་པའི་སེམས་གསུམ	chn	ma zhum pa'i sems gsum
མ་ཞུའི་ནད	indigestion	ma zhu'i nad
མ་ཞུས	unworthy of inquiry	ma zhus
མ་ཞེད་ཅིག	do not fear!	ma zhed cig
མ་ཞེན	See {zhen} non attachment	ma zhen
མ་ཞེན་པ	non-attachment	ma zhen pa
མ་གཞན	nanny, nurse, baby sitter, nursery school teacher	ma gzhan
མ་གཞལ	immeasurable, cannot be examined	ma gzhal
མ་གཞི	1) [original] [ground/ foundation/ basis]; 2) underlying seat, groundwork, original copy, elementary principle, component part, prime color, principal thing/ point, subject matter; 3) actually, rea...	ma gzhi
མ་གཞི་ནས	basically, actually, really, of course, fundamentally	ma gzhi nas
མ་གཞི་མང་པོ་མེད	[actually] there are not many [parts/ principles]	ma gzhi mang po med
མ་གཞིའི་ཐད	having regard for the chief subject	ma gzhi'i thad
མ་གཞུག	do not enter	ma gzhug
མ་བཞག	not created	ma bzhag
མ་བཞང་མ་བཞང	don't get up please	ma bzhang ma bzhang
མ་བཞན	CM2046 : ma ma. MG: = ma tshab = nanny, nursery teacher. [mss]	ma bzhan
མ་བཞི	four lamps	ma bzhi
མ་བཞེད་མཁན	dauntless	ma bzhed mkhan
མ་ཟད	not only that [but], not just merely, in addition to that	ma zad
མ་ཟད་ཉིན་ཤས་རྗེས	while there are still some days remaining	ma zad nyin shas rjes
མ་ཟད་དེ	not only, still more, further yet	ma zad de
མ་ཟད་ན	if it has not come to an end	ma zad na
མ་ཟད་པས་འདུག	was not finished {da dung sran phye ma zad pas 'dug} there	ma zad pas 'dug
ཝས་སྟིལལ་སོམེ་བེཨན	tsampa left	was still some bean
མ་ཟིན	not embraced [ma nus bgos lhag thig shar tshe rkang sdom stongs pas ma zin ces grags, rkang sngon gyi thad la'ang ltos	ma zin
མ་ཟིན་ན་ཁྱེད་རང་གསོད་དོ་ཟེར	if they did not capture [the peacock], they would be killed themselves	ma zin na khyed rang gsod do zer
མ་ཟིན་པ	not being the production of an action, not embraced by	ma zin pa
མ་ཟིན་པའི་སྒྲ	non-embraced sound [sound produced by sems rgyud kyis ma zin pa'i 'byung ba rgyur byas pa'i	ma zin pa'i sgra
མ་ཟིན་པའི་བེམ་པོ	non embraced/ unconscious matter	ma zin pa'i bem po
མ་ཟིན་པའི་འབྱུང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	nonembraced major elements ma zin pa'i 'byung ba chen po rgyur byas	ma zin pa'i 'byung ba chen po
པའི་སྒྲ	sound originating from nonembraced major elements/ elements not conjoined w consciousness ma zin pa'i 'byung ba chen po rgyur byas	pa'i sgra
མ་ཟིན་པའི་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	unconscious elemental cause ma zin pa'i 'byung ba'i rgyu las 'byung ba (sound) originating from non-embraced elemental causes ma zin pa'i 'byung ba'i rgyu las 'byung ba [sound] originating from non...	ma zin pa'i 'byung ba'i rgyu
མ་ཟུག་པ	be very impatient, remember, recollect	ma zug pa
མ་ཟླུམས	the sun	ma zlums
མ་གཟིགས	not see	ma gzigs
མ་བཟད་པ	cruel	ma bzad pa
མ་བཟི་བ་བྱུང	not got drunk	ma bzi ba byung
མ་བཟི་བ་བྱུང་ནས	not having become intoxicated	ma bzi ba byung nas
མ་བཟུང་མ་གློད་པར	without any regard to taking or giving	ma bzung ma glod par
མ་བཟོད	overwhelming	ma bzod
མ་བཟོད་པ	unbearable, overwhelming, unfabricated	ma bzod pa
མ་བཟོས་པ	unfabricated	ma bzos pa
མ་འོང་པའི་མདུན་མི་བསུ	don't anticipate the future	ma 'ong pa'i mdun mi bsu
མ་འོང་པའི་སྲིད་པ	future existence	ma 'ong pa'i srid pa
མ་འོང་བའི་དུས	the future 1991	ma 'ong ba'i dus
མ་འོངས	in the future	ma 'ongs
མ་འོངས་ཀྱི	futurity	ma 'ongs kyi
མ་འོངས་འགྲོ་མང	future generations	ma 'ongs 'gro mang
མ་འོངས་འགྲོ་ཡུལ	future course	ma 'ongs 'gro yul
མ་འོངས་སྔོན་མཐོང	see the future, foresight, anticipation	ma 'ongs sngon mthong
མ་འོངས་སྔོན་མཐོང་ཐུབ	able to see the future. anticipate	ma 'ongs sngon mthong thub
མ་འོངས་སྔོན་དཔག	predict the future	ma 'ongs sngon dpag
མ་འོངས་སྔོན་དཔག་དཀའ	difficult to predict	ma 'ongs sngon dpag dka'
མ་འོངས་སྔོན་དཔག་དཀའ་བ	difficult to predict ma 'ongs sngon dpag dka' ba'i chags	ma 'ongs sngon dpag dka' ba
མ་འོངས་རྗེས་འཇུག་གི་དོན་དུ	for the benefit of future disciples	ma 'ongs rjes 'jug gi don du
མ་འོངས་སྟོན་མཁན	futuristic	ma 'ongs ston mkhan
མ་འོངས་མཐོང་ཡུལ	object of seeing the future	ma 'ongs mthong yul
མ་འོངས་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་བྱ་ཚིག	will	ma 'ongs don ston pa'i bya tshig
མ་འོངས་དོན་དུ	for the benefit of those not yet come, for posterity	ma 'ongs don du
མ་འོངས་རྡུལ་ཅན	(met) pre-pubescent girl	ma 'ongs rdul can
མ་འོངས་པ	future; in the future	ma 'ongs pa
མ་འོངས་པ་ན	in the future,	ma 'ongs pa na
མ་འོངས་པ་ཡི་མདུན་མ་བསུ	don't invite the future	ma 'ongs pa yi mdun ma bsu
མ་འོངས་པ་ལ	in the future	ma 'ongs pa la
མ་འོངས་པའི་ཆར་གཞི	future plan[s], plan for the future	ma 'ongs pa'i char gzhi
མ་འོངས་པའི་དུས	the future	ma 'ongs pa'i dus
མ་འོངས་པའི་དུས་ལ	in [respect of] the future GD	ma 'ongs pa'i dus la
པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་འཇུག་པ	in the future (you) will enter into the seeing of unobstructed wisdom w/o attachment	pa'i ye shes gzigs pa 'jug pa
མ་འོངས་པའི་གདུལ་བྱ	future disciples	ma 'ongs pa'i gdul bya
མ་འོངས་པའི་མདུན་མི་བསུ	don't invite/ anticipate/ plan the future	ma 'ongs pa'i mdun mi bsu
མ་འོངས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddhas of the future	ma 'ongs pa'i sangs rgyas
མ་འོངས་པའི་སེམས	future mind	ma 'ongs pa'i sems
མ་འོངས་པར	in the future	ma 'ongs par
མ་འོངས་པར་ཀུ་རེ་བྱེད་པ	fooling others	ma 'ongs par ku re byed pa
མ་འོངས་བྱ་ཚིག་སྟོན་མཁན	shall	ma 'ongs bya tshig ston mkhan
མ་འོངས་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	the future has not yet arisen	ma 'ongs ma skyes pa
མ་འོངས་ལུང་བསྟན	prophesying the future; prophecy, prediction; prophecy of events to come; prophecies for the future	ma 'ongs lung bstan
མ་འོངས་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	soothsayer ma 'ongs lung bstan gsal ba'i sgron me manuscripts containing a collection of the prophecies of guru padma sambhava (being chapters 89-108 of the 'rnam thar chen mo mthong ba don ldan'),...	ma 'ongs lung bstan pa
མ་འོད་པར་འབྱུང་འགྱུར	the mother light will arise	ma 'od par 'byung 'gyur
མ་འོས་པ	ineligible	ma 'os pa
མཱ་ཡཱ	delusion	mA yA
མ་ཡགས་བྱ	console	ma yags bya
མ་ཡམ་རྒྱལ་མོའི་བཟློག་མདོས	mdos to repel disturbances from the queen of the ma yam	ma yam rgyal mo'i bzlog mdos
མ་ཡར	step mother	ma yar
མ་ཡི་སྐྲ་ཉེ	maternal uncle	ma yi skra nye
མ་ཡི་མངལ	the womb of the mother	ma yi mngal
མ་ཡི་ཐུག་མཐ་རྒྱ་ཤུག་སོགས	Even if you roll the entire earth into pills the size of juniper fruits, it would not suffice to equal the number of one's past mothers.	ma yi thug mtha rgya shug sogs
མ་ཡི་ཐུག་མཐའ	lineage of mothers	ma yi thug mtha'
མ་ཡི་མ	grandmother	ma yi ma
མ་ཡིག	the original manuscript / text	ma yig
མ་ཡིག་བར་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད	middle ma syllable negating particle [eg,//ma//sa ma rdo,//gangs ma char,//ra ma lug //bya ma bye'u,//sha ma tshil,//khrag ma rnag //dkar ma nag //cha ma ya,//ya ma zung,//gsa' ma gzig //'khyug ma ...	ma yig bar gyi gsal byed
མ་ཡིག་ཞུ་དག	proofread	ma yig zhu dag
མ་ཡིག་ཞུ་དག་གཏོང	proofread	ma yig zhu dag gtong
མ་ཡིག་ལས་བུ་དཔེ་བཤུས་པ	make a copy of an original pecha	ma yig las bu dpe bshus pa
མ་ཡིན་དགག	qualified/ provisional negation	ma yin dgag
མ་ཡིན་དགག་གི་སྟོང་ཉིད	the emptiness which is refutation as not being [suchand-such]	ma yin dgag gi stong nyid
མ་ཡིན་དགག་གི་གཞན་སེལ	affirming negation eliminating other	ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel
མ་ཡིན་དགག་གི་གཞན་སེལ་གཉིས	TSE	ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel gnyis
མ་ཡིན་དགག་བཞི	the four kinds of affirming negation chn	ma yin dgag bzhi
མ་ཡིན་དགག་གསུམ	the three kinds of affirming negation chn	ma yin dgag gsum
མ་ཡིན་འགག	affirming negation 1992	ma yin 'gag
མ་ཡིན་ཏེ	is not	ma yin te
མ་ཡིན་ན	unless	ma yin na
མ་ཡིན་ནམ་ཞེ་ན	if asked 'Is it?'	ma yin nam zhe na
མ་ཡིན་ནོ	is not	ma yin no
མ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཤེས་ཟེར་ན	if you say "it is not so"	ma yin no shes zer na
མ་ཡིན་པ	not exist in reality, specific	ma yin pa
མ་ཡིན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	is not not that	ma yin pa ma yin pa
མ་ཡིན་པ་ཞིག་གཟོད་གསལ་འདེབས་པ་མིན	it is not that we are temporarily creating something that does not really exist	ma yin pa zhig gzod gsal 'debs pa min
མ་ཡིན་པའི་དགག	implicitly affirmative negation GD	ma yin pa'i dgag
མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར	because it does not exist	ma yin pa'i phyir
མ་ཡིན་པར	is not	ma yin par
མ་ཡིན་པར་དགག་པ	refuting / rejecting as not being [such and such]	ma yin par dgag pa
མ་ཡིན་པར་དུས	when it is not	ma yin par dus
མ་ཡིན་ཡིན་ཚུལ	what really is not so yin khul	ma yin yin tshul
མ་ཡིན་ལ	is not	ma yin la
མ་ཡུམ	mother (h)	ma yum
མ་ཡུམ་ལ	ma yum pas [R]	ma yum la
མ་ཡུར	in a field water bringing place's large ditch/ main canal	ma yur
ཡོང	if the main ditch has no water how will it come to the smaller ones?	yong
མ་ཡེངས	non-distraction, nonwandering w/o wandering/ forgetting/ getting carried away/ losing it, undistracted	ma yengs
མ་ཡེངས་ཏིང་འཛིན	unwandering samadhi	ma yengs ting 'dzin
མ་ཡེངས་དྲན་པ	undistracted awareness	ma yengs dran pa
མ་ཡེངས་པ	without distraction, without being distracted, not distract from	ma yengs pa
མ་ཡེངས་པའི་དྲན་པ	undistracted presence ma yengs pa'i dran pa rang tsho bzung maintain a steady and unwavering presence of mind	ma yengs pa'i dran pa
མ་ཡེངས་པར་བསྐྱོང་བ	to sustain undistractedly	ma yengs par bskyong ba
མ་ཡེངས་མི་བསྒོམ་བཟོ་མེད	nondistraction non- meditation and nonfabrication	ma yengs mi bsgom bzo med
མ་ཡེངས་ཙམ	simply being undistracted, simply not distracted ma yengs tsam gyi ngang nas rang lugs su	ma yengs tsam
མ་ཡེངས་ཤིག	do not wander	ma yengs shig
མ་ཡོམ་ལ	ma yom pass	ma yom la
མ་ར་ཀ་ཏ	SK emerald	ma ra ka ta
མ་ར་ཏི་ཀ	maratika cave	ma ra ti ka
མ་ར་ཙེ	insect/wom living on/in female organ [de nad du gyur na mtshan ma gya' za byed pa zhig	ma ra tse
མ་རང	Ma rang tribe [in Himalayan terai and E Nepal = {mor rung}	ma rang
མ་རངས་པ	not rough, sad, ma mos pa	ma rangs pa
མ་རངས་བཞིན་དུ	unwillingly, reluctantly	ma rangs bzhin du
མ་རན	{ma ran} tribe	ma ran
མ་རབ	insolent	ma rab
མ་རབ་ཅན	rascal	ma rab can
མ་རབས	malicious people, lowest, badnatured, mean, vile, low, mean, illmannered, immoral, vulgar, without principles / manners, disreputable, malicious, bad-natured	ma rabs
མ་རབས་ཀྱི་ཞེན་ཆགས	vulgar/ unprincipled attachments	ma rabs kyi zhen chags
མ་རབས་ཐ་ཧད	to be vile	ma rabs tha had
མ་རབས་མཐོ་སར་བཞག	low person in a high place	ma rabs mtho sar bzhag
མ་རབས་སྤྱོད་ངན	unprincipled bad conduct	ma rabs spyod ngan
མ་རབས་རུས་ལྷུང	fall into depravity, become depraved/ a degenerate	ma rabs rus lhung
མ་རབས་སུ་ལྷུང	fall into depravity, become depraved/ a degenerate	ma rabs su lhung
མ་རི	downwards, expression to signify that you will not get so much	ma ri
མ་རི་མུ་རི	way of old [toothless] people's eating	ma ri mu ri
མ་རིག	ignorance 1993	ma rig
མ་རིག་འཁྲུལ་པ	confused ignorance, confusions of ignorance	ma rig 'khrul pa
མ་རིག་འཁྲུལ་པའི་བློ་རྟོག	ignorance and confused thinking	ma rig 'khrul pa'i blo rtog
མ་རིག་སྒོ་ལྔའི་སྦུབས	the ignorant nature/ covering of the five gates	ma rig sgo lnga'i sbubs
མ་རིག་སྒྲིབ་གཉིས	ignorance-based double obscuration	ma rig sgrib gnyis
མ་རིག་ང་རྒྱལ	ignorance-based pride	ma rig nga rgyal
མ་རིག་སྔོན་ཆགས	[Syn. {'khor ba}	ma rig sngon chags
མ་རིག་གཉིད་སྐྲོག	Awakening/ stirring from the sleep of ignorance, waking-up practice	ma rig gnyid skrog
མ་རིག་གཉིད་སྐྲོག་ཐོ་རངས	[the fist practice at dawn]	ma rig gnyid skrog tho rangs
མ་རིག་གཉིས	the two kinds of ignorance	ma rig gnyis
མ་རིག་གཏི་མུག	ignorance-based stupidity	ma rig gti mug
མ་རིག་སྡང་སེམས	ignorance-based hatred	ma rig sdang sems
མ་རིག་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of ignorance	ma rig rnam gsum
མ་རིག་པ	1) not see/ apprehend; 2) ignorance: 1) rtsa nyon drug gi nang gses, rig pa shes rab kyi mi mthun phyogs rten khams gsum la yod pa'i las 'bras dang bden pa sogs kyi tshul ji lta ba mi shes par kun ...	ma rig pa
བི༹རྟུཨེ་ཨནད་ནོན	virtue (tserig]	virtue and non
བེཏྭེཨེན་བི༹རྟུཨེ་ཨནད་ནོན	virtue. One of the twelve links. One of the {chu bo bzhi} four currents	between virtue and non
མ་རིག་པ་བཅུ་དགུ	19 types of ignorance	ma rig pa bcu dgu
མ་རིག་པ་དྲུག	the six kinds of ignorance chn	ma rig pa drug
མ་རིག་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	Three kinds of ignorance. Single identity ignorance, coemergent ignorance and conceptual ignorance	ma rig pa rnam gsum
མ་རིག་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of ignorance [rmongs tsam, the tshom, l par rtogs pa'i rnam pa can bcas gsum three interrelated aspects of ignorance (the ignorance of belief in individual selfhood {bdag nyid gcig ...	ma rig pa gsum
མ་རིག་པ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	unconscious/ instinctual/ coemergent/ innate ignorance/ misknowledge	ma rig pa lhan skyes
མ་རིག་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of ignorance [the mind does not see itself, it is not directly aware of its own nature)	ma rig pa'i sgrib pa
མ་རིག་པའི་ཆ	ignorant aspect, ignorance	ma rig pa'i cha
མ་རིག་པའི་ཆུ་བོ	river/ stream of ignorance	ma rig pa'i chu bo
མ་རིག་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related ignorance	ma rig pa'i rten 'brel
མ་རིག་པའི་སྦུབས་ནས་ཕྱིར་འཐོན	in order to be released from the state of notknowing.	ma rig pa'i sbubs nas phyir 'thon
མ་རིག་པའི་མུན་པ	the darkness of ignorance	ma rig pa'i mun pa
མ་རིག་པའི་ཟག་པ	the defilement of ignorance	ma rig pa'i zag pa
མ་རིག་པའི་ཟླ་བ	12th month sun in Capricorn	ma rig pa'i zla ba
མ་རིག་པའི་ཡན་ལག	the kinds/limbs of ignorance [rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis	ma rig pa'i yan lag
མ་རིག་པའི་བསླད་པ་མ་ཤུགས	undistorted by ignorance [ggd]	ma rig pa'i bslad pa ma shugs
མ་རིག་ཕྲག་དོག	ignorance-based jealousy	ma rig phrag dog
མ་རིག་མུན་པ	darkness of ignorance	ma rig mun pa
མ་རིག་མུན་པ་སེལ་བའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	the torch that dispelled the darkness of ignorance	ma rig mun pa sel ba'i sgron me
མ་རིག་མུན་པ་བསལ	clear away the darkness of ignorance	ma rig mun pa bsal
མ་རིག་མུན་སེལ	Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance ma rig mun sel rdzogs chen gyi khrid rim	ma rig mun sel
མ་རིག་མུན་སེལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྲོན་མེ	, Torch of Wisdom That Dispels the Darkness of Ignorance; explanation on	ma rig mun sel ye shes sgron me
མ་རིག་ཞེན་ཆགས	ignorance-based attachment	ma rig zhen chags
མ་རིག་གཞིད་ཀྱི་དུ	within ignorance of sleep	ma rig gzhid kyi du
མ་རིག་ཟླ་བ	the twelfth month	ma rig zla ba
མ་རིག་གཟུང་འཛིན	ignorant subject and object/ grasping and fixation	ma rig gzung 'dzin
མ་རིག་ལས་སྣང	karmic visions of ignorance	ma rig las snang
མ་རིག་ལིང་ཐོག	the cataract of our ignorance	ma rig ling thog
མ་རིག་གསུམ	Syn {ma rig rnam gsum; threefold loss of awareness. 1) {rgyu bdag nyid gcig pa'i rig pa} the sole potential self-nature loss of awareness, the primary cause inherent in mind as such. 2) {lhan cig s...	ma rig gsum
མ་རིག་གསུམ་ཚིག	the three terms for ignorance, {ma rig pa}, {lung ma bstan}, {tha mal btang snyoms}	ma rig gsum tshig
མ་རིངས	don't go away all, of a sudden [don't leave hastily]	ma rings
མ་རུ	castle and monastery in NE Lhasa	ma ru
མ་རུ་ལྔ	5 maru one ma sha ka	ma ru lnga
མ་རུ་རྩེ	the chief of 84000 classes of bgegs/ obstructing spirits, a country, medicinal tree/ fruit, [shing sman gyi rigs shig ste, ro tsha, zhu rjes drod, nus pas srin nad gsod, me drod skyed,//ming gi rna...	ma ru rtse
མ་རུང	unsuitable	ma rung
མ་རུང་པ	vicious, mischievous	ma rung pa
མ་རུང་བ	pernicious, dangerous, atrocious, spoiled, destroyed, ruined debauch	ma rung ba
མ་རུང་བ་བྱས་པ	making oneself unworthy	ma rung ba byas pa
མ་རུང་བར་བྱས	made unworthy	ma rung bar byas
མ་རུང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to destroy	ma rung bar byed pa
མ་རུང་སྲོག་ཆགས	vicious insects	ma rung srog chags
མ་རུངས	horrible, ferocious, wrathful, vicious, like {khro bo} malignant, the unsuitable	ma rungs
མ་རུངས་པ	evil man	ma rungs pa
མ་རུངས་བ	MG: malevolent, illintentioned, deceitful. [mss]	ma rungs ba
མ་རེ	do not expect, be hopeless	ma re
མ་རེག	not touch[ed][ing], do not touch	ma reg
མ་རེངས	not rough, sad, ma mos pa	ma rengs
མ་རེངས་པ	SA ma rangs pa	ma rengs pa
མ་རེད་དམ	is it not?, isn't it?	ma red dam
མ་རེས	unfixed, indefinite	ma res
མ་རླུང	while a child is in the mother's womb, fatal byis pa'i mgo nad cig	ma rlung
མ་ལ	excellent! capital!	ma la
མ་ལ་ཁན	snake-charmer, conjurer	ma la khan
མ་ལ་མཁན	snake-charmer, conjurer	ma la mkhan
མ་ལ་ཏི	flower jasminum grandiflorum	ma la ti
མ་ལ་ཡ	1) Mt Malaya [SK fragrant, W of the med, city lta na sdug a brag zhun &, cong zhi, chu tshan sogs mt where med herbs etc grow [= tshan dan ri bo &, lho phyogs sa 'dzin, ' sh' dha]; 2) the W Ghats m...	ma la ya
མ་ལ་ཡ་ཙེ	small lizard	ma la ya tse
མ་ལ་ཡའི་སྐྱེད་ཚལ	Malaya pleasure grove [in front of the rigdens's pLce in Kalapa du [dus 'khor gyi blos bslangs yod pa'i skyed mos tshal	ma la ya'i skyed tshal
མ་ལ་ཡར་སྐྱེས	white sandal wood	ma la yar skyes
མ་ལ་ཡར་གནས་མོ	epithet of durga	ma la yar gnas mo
མ་ལ་ལ་ཙེ	small lizard	ma la la tse
མ་ལ་ལ་ཚེ	small lizard	ma la la tshe
མ་ལག	summerset	ma lag
མ་ལག་རྒྱབ	do quickly	ma lag rgyab
མ་ལག་ཆ་ཚང་བ	possessing the main and subsidiary parts, complete	ma lag cha tshang ba
མ་ལག་དང་བཅས་པ	head monastery and affiliates	ma lag dang bcas pa
མ་ལག་བདེ་པོ	mgyogs rtsal bde po	ma lag bde po
མ་ལག་ལག་ལོག་བྱེད	do a somersault, roll on the ground w legs up	ma lag lag log byed
མ་ལག་ལོག་བྱེད	roll on the ground with legs turned up	ma lag log byed
མ་ལག་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	perform a somersault	ma lag log byed pa
མ་ལགས་སོ	it is not so	ma lags so
མ་ལགས་སོ་ཤོད་ཤིག	Say it ain't so!	ma lags so shod shig
མ་ལན	ma nyes, w/o fault/ transgression	ma lan
མ་ལབ་སྐྲོན	Machik Labdron	ma lab skron
མ་ལབ་སྒྲོན	Machik Labdrön	ma lab sgron
མ་ལབ་སྒྲོན་གྱིས་ཀྱང	Machik Labdrön says:	ma lab sgron gyis kyang
མ་ལམ	high road, broad passage	ma lam
མ་ལས་སྐྱེས་ནས	From the time my mother bore me	ma las skyes nas
མ་ལས་སྐྱེས་འཕྲལ	newborn babies	ma las skyes 'phral
མ་ལས་ཐོབ་པའི་མཛོད་གསུམ	TSE	ma las thob pa'i mdzod gsum
མ་ལི་ཀ	SK rgya gar gyi me tog 'dab ma dkar po yin pa zhig	ma li ka
མ་ལུས	lit. 'nothing left behind', without exception, all, everything. Syn {thams cad} many, without exception, nobody left behind, all, everyone, whole, entire	ma lus
མ་ལུས་ཀུན་འདུས	all embracing/ inclusive, comprehensive	ma lus kun 'dus
མ་ལུས་རྒྱལ་པོ	universal king	ma lus rgyal po
མ་ལུས་པ	all without exception, considerate, thoughtful, satisfactory, not remaining as, all	ma lus pa
མ་ལུས་པར	whole, all, w/o remainder	ma lus par
མ་ལུས་པར་སྤངས་པ	abandoned w/o remainder TSE	ma lus par spangs pa
མ་ལུས་མིན	not w/o exception	ma lus min
མ་ལེ	chin	ma le
མ་ལེ་རིང་ན་རྟ་རྒས་མཐོང	if the chin is long the horse is seen to be old	ma le ring na rta rgas mthong
མ་ལེགས	bad, unfortunate	ma legs
མ་ལེགས་པ	bad, unfortunate	ma legs pa
མ་ལེམ	garland	ma lem
མ་ལོ	good quality molasses	ma lo
མ་ལོག་ཤེས	, the perception of one w/o jaundice	ma log shes
མ་ཤ	pea	ma sha
མ་ཤ་ཀ	[Skt] sran ma dkar ril, small red seed bean/berry? of Nepal [used to weigh gold and silver D	ma sha ka
མ་ཤ་པ་ཏི	herb	ma sha pa ti
མ་ཤང་བཟའ་ཨང་ཅུང	Lady Angchung of Mashang	ma shang bza' ang cung
མ་ཤའི་འདབ་མ	plant Hemionites cordifolia	ma sha'i 'dab ma
མ་ཤར་བར	until they arise; x {dran snang thams cad chos skur ma shar bar} until all thoughts and perceptions arise as the Dharmakaya ma shi ka'i 'khrungs skar dus chen christmas	ma shar bar
མ་ཤི་བ	survivor ma shi bar tshe thar du lus pa gcig kyang	ma shi ba
མ་ཤིས་པའི་ལྟས	an omen foreboding ill	ma shis pa'i ltas
མ་ཤུམ་མཛོད	do not weep	ma shum mdzod
མ་ཤེས	did not know	ma shes
མ་ཤེས་བཀའ་སློབ	advice, instruction ma shes bka' slob skyabs 'jugs thugs rje	ma shes bka' slob
མ་ཤེས་བཀའ་སློབ་གནང་སྐྱོང་ཞུ	ask advice/ instruction [h] ma shes bka' slob gnang skyong yod pa	ma shes bka' slob gnang skyong zhu
མ་ཤེས་བཀའ་སློབ་ཞུ	ask advice/ instruction [h]	ma shes bka' slob zhu
མ་ཤེས་དགུ་ཤེས	SA ma dran dgu dran	ma shes dgu shes
མ་ཤེས་པ	unknown to him,	ma shes pa
མ་ཤེས་སློབ་སྟོན	advice, instruction ma shes slob ston skyabs 'jugs thugs rje	ma shes slob ston
མ་ཤེས་སློབ་སྟོན་གནང	give advice/ instruction [h] ma shes slob ston gnang skyong thugs rje	ma shes slob ston gnang
མ་ཤེས་སློབ་སྟོན་གནང་སྐྱོང་ཞུ	ask advice/ instruction [h] ma shes slob ston gnang skyong yod pa	ma shes slob ston gnang skyong zhu
མ་ཤེས་སློབ་སྟོན་ཞུ	ask advice/ instruction [h]	ma shes slob ston zhu
མ་ཤོར	not to stray	ma shor
མ་གཤམ་ཤིང	tree without fruit	ma gsham shing
མ་ས	flesh	ma sa
མ་སང	class of non-human beings who gradually dominated Tibet before being inhabited by men	ma sang
མ་སང་གི་སྒྲུང	The Legends of the Masang	ma sang gi sgrung
མ་སང་བདུད	Masang Demon	ma sang bdud
མ་སང་དཔུན་དགུ	9 Masang brothers	ma sang dpun dgu
མ་སངས་རུས་དགུ	chn	ma sangs rus dgu
མ་སངས་ལ་འཐེན	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	ma sangs la 'then
མ་སི་ཏ	name of mahomedan teacher	ma si ta
མ་སོ	lower teeth	ma so
མ་སོ་ཡོད་པ	lower teeth	ma so yod pa
མ་སོང	he did not go	ma song
མ་སོང་བ	not turn into anything, without becoming	ma song ba
མ་སྲིང	mother and sister	ma sring
མ་སྲིང་མཁའ་འགྲོ	tshogs	ma sring mkha' 'gro
མ་སྲིང་མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཚོགས	assembly of mother and sister kin s	ma sring mkha' 'gro tshogs
མ་སྲིད	impossible	ma srid
མ་སྲིད་ཅིག	may it not be, may it not happen	ma srid cig
མ་སྲིད་པ	impossible	ma srid pa
མ་སྲུ	mother and maternal aunt	ma sru
མ་སློབ	mother/ main school, no [more] learning	ma slob
མ་སློབ་པའི་ལམ	path of no-morelearning GD	ma slob pa'i lam
མ་གསན་པ	would not listen	ma gsan pa
མ་གསན་ཚུལ	pretending not to have heard	ma gsan tshul
མ་གསལ་བ	faint, hazy, obscure	ma gsal ba
མ་གསོད་པ	Matricide	ma gsod pa
མ་བསགས་པ	not accumulated	ma bsags pa
མ་བསད་པ	killing one's mother; 1) of the {mthams med pa lnga} = five boundless Offenses, not kill	ma bsad pa
མ་བསད་པའི་ཤ་ཁྲག	flesh and blood from someone not slaughtered 1996	ma bsad pa'i sha khrag
མ་བསམ	{mi bsam} without (requiring) deliberation	ma bsam
མ་བསམ་པ	without thinking, not hearing or keeping in mind	ma bsam pa
མ་བསམས	without premeditation	ma bsams
མ་བསལ	without having to purify, without having to give up, without need to reject them	ma bsal
མ་བསྲེ	without additions	ma bsre
མ་བསླངས	not erected/ standing/ raised	ma bslangs
མ་བསླད	uncorrupted, untainted, not polluted	ma bslad
མ་བསླད་ན	if one is not conditioned by	ma bslad na
མ་བསླད་པ	unspoiled, uncorrupted, unadulterated	ma bslad pa
མ་བསླད་པར	unspoiled, uncorrupted, unadulterated	ma bslad par
མ་བསླབས	never learnt before	ma bslabs
མ་ཧ	mah yoga	ma ha
མ་ཧ་ཀ་ར	great figure, SA phyugs chen po	ma ha ka ra
མ་ཧཱ་ཀཱ་ལ	Skt for {nag po chen po}	ma hA kA la
མ་ཧ་གུ་རུ་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	Mahaguru Padmakara	ma ha gu ru pad ma 'byung gnas
མ་ཧ་ནི་ལ	a precious stone	ma ha ni la
མ་ཧ་པ	mah pa ita, great scholar	ma ha pa
མ་ཧ་པན་དི་ཏ	mah pa ita great scholar GD	ma ha pan di ta
མ་ཧ་པན་དདི་ཏ	mah pa ita great scholar GD	ma ha pan ddi ta
མ་ཧ་མ་ཡ	Mahamaya, [a deity of {ma rgyud}	ma ha ma ya
མ་ཧ་མུ་དྲ་བིན་དུ	A tantric text	ma ha mu dra bin du
མ་ཧ་ཙི་ནི	Great China	ma ha tsi ni
མ་ཧ་ཡན་གྱི་མདོ	cited in bsam gtan mig sgron in cig char ba section	ma ha yan gyi mdo
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་ག	Mahayoga	ma ha yo ga
མ་ཧཱ་ཡོ་ག་ཏན་ཏྲ	Skt for {rnal 'byor chen po'i rgyud sde}	ma hA yo ga tan tra
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་ག་ཏན་དྲ	mah yogatantra	ma ha yo ga tan dra
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི	SA rgyud sde, sgrub sde	ma ha yo ga'i
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ	mahayoga class of tantras, class of means for attainment GD	ma ha yo ga'i rgyud sde
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི་སྒོམ	meditation of Mahayoga	ma ha yo ga'i sgom
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི་ཏན་ཏྲ་སྡེ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 tantrapi akas of mah yoga	ma ha yo ga'i tan tra sde bco brgyad
ཨནད་མིནད་ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	body-- respectively {glang po rab 'bog}, {glang po chur 'jug}, and Buddha Samayoga, three tantras representing the body,	and mind of buddha
སྤེཨེཆ་ཨནད་མིནད་ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	speech-respectively {ri bo brtsegs pa}, {pad ma dbang chen}, and Candraguhyatilaka, three tantras representing the body,	speech and mind of buddha
གེནེརལ	- respectively {thabs kyi zhags pa}, {dam tshig bkod pa}, and {gsang ba snying po} [GM]	general
མ་ཧ་ཡོ་གའི་སྡེ་གཉིས	Two Classes of Mahayoga. The class of tantra {rgyud sde} or tantravarga. and the class of means for attainment {sgrub sde} or sadhanavarga	ma ha yo ga'i sde gnyis
དྷནབ༹རྒ་གད	mk)	dhanavarga gd
མ་ཧ་ལིང་ཀ	kind of shoes used in india during buddha's time	ma ha ling ka
མ་ཧ་སན་དྷི	/ ti - Mahasandhi, great perfection, Syn {rdzogs chen} Syn maha Ati	ma ha san dhi
མ་ཧྭ་ཡོ་ག	mah yoga	ma hwa yo ga
མ་ཧྭ་ཡོ་གའི་ཐེག་པ	mah yogay na	ma hwa yo ga'i theg pa
མ་ཧཱའི་ཛ་པྲ་དགོངས་དྲུག	1) {yi ge phreng bzhi dgongs pa}. 2) {'phro 'du las bsnyen gyi dgongs pa} 3) {dgra dza pra kyi dgongs pa} 4) {thun zor las sbyor ltar bzlas pa'i dgongs pa} 5) {gzas po gnas spar ba'i dgongs pa} 6) ...	ma hA'i dza pra dgongs drug
མ་ཧའི་ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད་རྣམས	Mahayoga tantra	ma ha'i yo ga'i rgyud rnams
མ་ཧེ	buffalo/ oxen	ma he
མ་ཧེ་མོ	female buffalo	ma he mo
མ་ཧེ་རྭ་ཅོ	buffalo horn med. [cures disease of shunning light D	ma he rwa co
མ་ཧེའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཅན	the lord of death	ma he'i rgyal mtshan can
མ་ཧེས་འགྱེད་པ	buffalo fight	ma hes 'gyed pa
མ་གྷི་ཏ	SK musk, solidified bile etc	ma ghi ta
མ་དྷྱ་མ་ཀ	m dhym ka philosophy	ma dhya ma ka
མ་ལྷ	mother deity	ma lha
མ་ཨ་ལ	mandala, circle disk	ma a la
མ་ཨལ	mandala	ma al
མ་ཨི	mutter prayers, purr like a cat	ma i
མ་ཨི་བཀའ་འབུམ	teaching of Avalokiteshvara by king Songtsen Gampo	ma i bka' 'bum
མ་ཨི་འཁོར་ལོ	circle of the mani mantra, prayer wheel	ma i 'khor lo
མ་ཨི་ཆུ་འཁོར	mani water wheel	ma i chu 'khor
མ་ཨི་ཆོས་ཁོར	prayer wheel	ma i chos khor
མ་ཨི་པ་ཏྲ	pure gold leaf	ma i pa tra
མ་ཨི་བ	someone who simply recites the mani mantra	ma i ba
མ་ཨི་འབྲུ་གཅིག	a single mani (mantra)	ma i 'bru gcig
མ་ཨི་མ	musical instruments like cymbals	ma i ma
མ་ཨི་ལག་སྐོར	prayer wheel	ma i lag skor
མ་ཨི་བྷ་དྲ	rich householder who was devoted to buddhism	ma i bha dra
མག་གི་ཁྲིམས	a decree of war	mag gi khrims
མག་གི་མུག་གི	speak low/ w little sound	mag gi mug gi
མག་གི་མུག་གི་མ་གསལ་ལབ་པ	speak low and unclearly	mag gi mug gi ma gsal lab pa
མག་རྒན	oldest sister's husband	mag rgan
མག་པ	bridegroom	mag pa
མག་པ་སློང	take a son-in-law/ bridegroom [adoptive, matrilinally residing]	mag pa slong
མག་བོ་ཐུར	facing downward	mag bo thur
མག་མ་མཁན	low caste D	mag ma mkhan
མག་མལ	velvet	mag mal
མག་མུག	speak low/ w little sound	mag mug
མག་སར	Magsar, in Domey	mag sar
མང་གཀུར་བ	(mah sa mata) [one of four main schools of vinaya in India, 1 of 18 bye brag pa schools]	mang gkur ba
མང་དཀར	place gtsang	mang dkar
མང་དཀུར་རྒྱལ་པོ	king {mang dkur} [1st elected king of the world	mang dkur rgyal po
མང་བཀུར	{mang bkur}, m hasammata/ Mah sangmata	mang bkur
མང་བཀུར་རྒྱལ་པོ	king {mang bkur} [1st elected king of the world /in India king respected by all	mang bkur rgyal po
མང་བཀུར་སྡེ	sammitiyas	mang bkur sde
མང་བཀུར་སྡེ་པ	Mahasangmata, [one of 18 {bye brag smra ba'i sde pa}	mang bkur sde pa
མང་བཀུར་སྡེ་བ	m hasammata	mang bkur sde ba
མང་བཀུར་སྡེ་བ་གསུམ	the three schools of mah sangmatas	mang bkur sde ba gsum
མང་བཀུར་བ	those who should be respected	mang bkur ba
མང་བཀུར་བ་གསུམ	the three [schools of] mah sangmatas	mang bkur ba gsum
མང་བཀུར་བའི་སྡེ་བ	m hasammata [one of four main schools of Vinaya in India	mang bkur ba'i sde ba
མང་བཀུར་ཡར་དེད་ལྷ་དགུ	chn	mang bkur yar ded lha dgu
མང་སྐོལ	tea and noodles for monks in a monastery	mang skol
མང་སྐྱེ	pig	mang skye
མང་སྐྱེས	pig, wild boar	mang skyes
མང་བསྐུར་བ	honored of many	mang bskur ba
མང་ཁ་ཉུང་ཉན	many speaking few listening, the minority is subordinate to the majority	mang kha nyung nyan
མང་ཁུར་མ	presentation scarf of superior quality	mang khur ma
མང་མཁར	great tibetan mountain range	mang mkhar
མང་མཁར་མདོ་ཕུག	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	mang mkhar mdo phug
མང་ག་བུར	mang camphor	mang ga bur
མང་ག་ལ	well being auspicious, good	mang ga la
མང་ག་ལམ	well being auspicious, good	mang ga lam
མང་གུ་ར	red fish	mang gu ra
མང་གེ་མོ	1) gang zhig; 2) long ago/ long since D)	mang ge mo
མང་འགྱེད་ཐོ་སྒྲིག་ཆེན་མོ	the great list of major donors [in the 12th month before the yearly Lhasa smon lam chen mo nang rtse 'gag &, bla brang phyag mdzod, se 'bras dga' gsum sogs 'brel yod las sne rnams 'dzoms nas names ...	mang 'gyed tho sgrig chen mo
མང་སྒར	military encampment, fort in manyul	mang sgar
མང་ངག་སྡེ	Oral instruction section [of ati yoga]	mang ngag sde
མང་ཅིག	let it increase/ be many	mang cig
མང་ཆེ་བ	the majority, the most part	mang che ba
མང་ཆེན་བ	majority	mang chen ba
མང་ཇ	community tea offering	mang ja
མང་ཇ་བཏང་བ	to make a community tea offering, a general offering of tea, offered tea, offered tea to the whole community, offered tea to all	mang ja btang ba
མང་ཉུང	many and/ or few, quantity, amount	mang nyung
མང་ཉུང་ལ་གཤིགས	according to the quantity/ amount/ #	mang nyung la gshigs
མང་སྟོན་པ	one of {sde pa bco brgyad}	mang ston pa
མང་ཐུན	meat	mang thun
མང་ཐོས	1) hear many/ extensively; 2) [widely] learned)	mang thos
མང་ཐོས་པ	learned	mang thos pa
མང་མཐར	at most	mang mthar
མང་འཐེན་ཉུང་སྣོན	=ization mang 'then nyung snon gyis mi grangs	mang 'then nyung snon
ཆ་སྙོམས་བཟོ་བ	by =ization even out the # of people [in different groups]	cha snyoms bzo ba
མང་དག	many	mang dag
མང་དུ	a lot, plenty, many, mostly	mang du
མང་དུ་སྐྱེ	pig	mang du skye
མང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	expend, extend, enlarge	mang du gtong ba
མང་དུ་བཏང་བ	multiply	mang du btang ba
མང་དུ་སྟོན་པ	teach much	mang du ston pa
མང་དུ་ཐོས་པ	learned; extensive studies	mang du thos pa
མང་དུ་ཐོས་པ་ལ་སྦྱངས་པ	1 of 7 thams cad yod par smra ba	mang du thos pa la sbyangs pa
མང་དུ་ཐོས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	scholarly qualities	mang du thos pa'i yon tan
མང་དུ་གནས་པ	be many	mang du gnas pa
མང་དུ་སྣོན་པ	augment by a great number	mang du snon pa
མང་དུ་སྤྲོ	to think even more	mang du spro
མང་དུ་ཟད་པ	voraciousness	mang du zad pa
མང་དུ་ཡོད	there are many	mang du yod
མང་དུ་སོང་བ	to increase	mang du song ba
མང་དྲག་པ	excess	mang drag pa
མང་དྲགས	very much, in excess	mang drags
མང་ལྡན	possessing many	mang ldan
མང་ན་ཡང	although many	mang na yang
མང་ནེ	Mangneh, in Domey	mang ne
མང་སྣ	many, various kinds	mang sna
མང་པ་མང་པོ	very many	mang pa mang po
མང་པོ	many, a lot of, much, several, in large quantity, majority, abound, ample, considerable, enormous, great lots, multiple, numerous, umpteen	mang po
མང་པོ་བཀུར་བ	king {mang bkur}	mang po bkur ba
མང་པོ་གཅིག་ཏུ	many into 1	mang po gcig tu
མང་པོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱས་པ	multitude	mang po gcig tu byas pa
མང་པོ་ཉིད	abundance	mang po nyid
མང་པོ་ཉིད་མ་ཡིན	not many	mang po nyid ma yin
མང་པོ་ཐོན་པ	what is found in excess	mang po thon pa
མང་པོ་འཐུང	ox/ elephant	mang po 'thung
མང་པོ་རྣམས	many	mang po rnams
མང་པོ་སྣ་ཚོགས	many and various	mang po sna tshogs
མང་པོ་བྱིན	river srin dhu	mang po byin
མང་པོ་སྦྲེལ	camel	mang po sbrel
མང་པོ་མང་པོ	abundant	mang po mang po
མང་པོ་འཛིན	much	mang po 'dzin
མང་པོ་ཞིག	many	mang po zhig
མང་པོ་ས	continually	mang po sa
མང་པོད་བཀུར་བ	[one of rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi] Sammit yas	mang pod bkur ba
མང་པོའི་དངོས་པ	common property	mang po'i dngos pa
མང་པོའི་དངོས་པོ	common property	mang po'i dngos po
མང་པོའི་ནང་ནས	in the midst of a crowd	mang po'i nang nas
མང་པོར	much, mostly	mang por
མང་པོས	by many	mang pos
མང་པོས་བཀུར་བ	honored by many	mang pos bkur ba
མང་པོས་བཀུར་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	name of the first king of the world (India), 'King Honored by Many, who started the Mahasammata Dynasty	mang pos bkur ba'i rgyal po
མང་པོས་བཀུར་བའི་སྡེ	Sammit yas [nyan thos kyi rtsa ba'i sde ba bzhi'i nang gses, mang pos bkur ba zhes pa skye bo mang pos bkur ste byas pa'i rigs can yin pas de ltar grags la, mdo 'don pa na aa ba bhram sha'i skad du...	mang pos bkur ba'i sde
མང་པོས་འཀུར་བའི་སྡེ་གསུམ	three types of Sammitiyas	mang pos 'kur ba'i sde gsum
མང་པོས་བོས	called by many, invited by many	mang pos bos
མང་ཕྱོགས	majority, the most	mang phyogs
མང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ་ལྟར	according to the wishes of the majority	mang phyogs kyi 'dod pa ltar
མང་འཕྲི་ཉུང་སྣོན	take from those w much, add to those w little, =ization	mang 'phri nyung snon
མང་བ	long; x {gang mang ba} however long	mang ba
མང་བ་ར་གདའ	these are common things	mang ba ra gda'
མང་བའི་གྲོས་འཆམས	majority	mang ba'i gros 'chams
མང་བའི་དཔེ	ornament of showing the nature of 1 thing exemplified by many examples [dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig]	mang ba'i dpe
མང་བར	many	mang bar
མང་བར་འགྱུར	be become many	mang bar 'gyur
མང་བོས་བཀུར་བའི་སྡེ་པ་གསུམ	the three schools of mah sangmatas * TSE	mang bos bkur ba'i sde pa gsum
མང་མང་དང་མཐུན	popular	mang mang dang mthun
མང་མང་དུ	in great quantity, in large number	mang mang du
མང་མོས	[agreeable to/ preference of the] majority	mang mos
མང་མོས་འོས་འདེབས	majority [s]election/ approval	mang mos 'os 'debs
མང་མོས་འོས་འདེབས་ཀྱིས་བསྐོ་གཞག	appointed w majority approval	mang mos 'os 'debs kyis bsko gzhag
མང་མྱུར་ལེགས་བསྲི	greater, faster, better and moire economical	mang myur legs bsri
མང་ཙམ	quite a few, a little more	mang tsam
མང་ཙེ	kind of yellow silk scarf with red spots on it from china	mang tse
མང་གཙོ	democratic	mang gtso
མང་ཚིག	plural [bod yig gi rnam dbye dang po'i yan lag yin pa rnams zhes pa	mang tshig
མང་ཚིག་མཐའ་དག	plural sign	mang tshig mtha' dag
མང་ཚོགས	the masses/ people	mang tshogs
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོད་དུ་སྤེལ	take from the masses and give back to the masses	tshogs kyi khrod du spel
མང་ཚོགས་དང་བྲལ	separated/ alienated from the masses	mang tshogs dang bral
མང་ཚོགས་དང་འབྲེལ་འདྲིས	establishment/ maintenance of close relations/ mingling w the masses	mang tshogs dang 'brel 'dris
མང་ཚོགས་སྣེ་ལན་ས་ཚུགས	reception center for the masses	mang tshogs sne lan sa tshugs
མང་ཚོགས་ལམ་ཕྱོགས	krung go gung khran tang gis bya ba byed tshad kyi rtsa ba'i lam phyogs yin, de'i rtsa ba'i nang don ni mang tshogs kyi khrod nas blang te mang tshogs kyi khrod du spel rgyu de yin	mang tshogs lam phyogs
མང་ཚོགས་ལས་འགུལ	mass movement/ campaign	mang tshogs las 'gul
མང་འཛིན	a large number	mang 'dzin
མང་འཛོམས་བྱེད་པ	flock	mang 'dzoms byed pa
མང་ཞིག	diverse, many	mang zhig
མང་བཟའ་ཁྲི་ལྕམ	queen of srong btsan sgam po	mang bza' khri lcam
མང་ཡུལ	{mang yul} district [stod mnga' ris spu hreng nas gtsang gi ngam ring dang skyid grong bar bal yul dang thag nye ba'i sa rgyud kyi ming rnying pa	mang yul
མང་ཡུལ་གུང་ཐང	Sky Plain district	mang yul gung thang
མང་ཡུལ་དགུང་ཐང་ལ་ཁ	the Gungthang pass in the Land of Mang [from where Padmasambhava left Tibet]	mang yul dgung thang la kha
མང་ཡུལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐོར	Mang Yul, the Dharma Land of, one of the three districts of Ngari (mnga' ris skor gsum)	mang yul chos kyi skor
མང་ར	{mang ra} ]place da lta mtsho sngon zhing chen gyi mtsho lho bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi khongs kus nan rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung gnas yul yin	mang ra
མང་རབ	exceedingly many	mang rab
མང་རབས	many, much	mang rabs
མང་རི་བྱེ་མ	Mangri Chema, in Domey	mang ri bye ma
མང་ལ་དུ	longer	mang la du
མང་ལགས	there are many mang lam ri khrod pa bzang po grags pa {bzang po grags pa} mang lam ri khrod pa bzang po grags pa tertön and incarnation of {lha sras}, revealer of {le'u bdun ma}, the famous supplic...	mang lags
མང་ལུག	predominant custom	mang lug
མང་ལུགས	so many	mang lugs
མང་ཤོས	largest	mang shos
མང་ས	meat	mang sa
མང་ས་ནས་འཁྲི་བ	detract mang sa nas 'then nas nyung sa la kha	mang sa nas 'khri ba
མང་སའི་གཏོར་མ	gtor ma of human flesh	mang sa'i gtor ma
མང་སེམས་མཐུན་པ་ལྕགས་རི་ཡིན	unanimity of purpose is like an iron wall mang so byang chub gling pa dpal gyi	mang sems mthun pa lcags ri yin
མང་སྲོང་མང་བཙན	{mang srong mang btsan} [dpe rnying du mang slon mang rtsan zhes bris, gung ri gung btsan dang ' zha bza' mang rje khri dkar gnyis kyi sras, bod rgyal gdung rabs so lnga pa yin la, yab gung ri de'i...	mang srong mang btsan
མང་སྲོང་མར་བཙན	1 of early kings of tibet	mang srong mar btsan
མངས	increase, SA mang ba	mangs
མངས་ཚིག	plural D	mangs tshig
མད	true	mad
མད་ཏ་ལི་ཀ	{mad ta li ka} flower	mad ta li ka
མད་དོ	well, it is just so, exactly	mad do
མད་པ	true, truth	mad pa
མད་པར	truly, true	mad par
མད་པོ	true, truth	mad po
མན་ཁན	from above below skor ba'i gsor chung zhig	man khan
མན་ག་ལམ	may all beings be happy	man ga lam
མན་ངག་བཀའ་རྒྱ་མ	{man ngag bka' rgya ma} [medical text rab byung bcu gcig pa'i nang dar mo sman rams pa blo bzang chos grags kyis mdzad pa'i shin tu zab pa'i man ngag sna tshogs gcig tu bsdus pa'i bdag nyid can lun...	man ngag bka' rgya ma
མན་ངག་འཁོར་ལོ་འོད་གསལ	[b"n view teachng text] the Luminous Sphere of the Oral Instructions	man ngag 'khor lo 'od gsal
མན་ངག་གི་རྒྱུད	Oral Tradition/ instruction Tantra, (in medicine)	man ngag gi rgyud
མན་ངག་གི་ཆོས	the Dharma of Pith Instructions; often Syn for {rgyu 'bras las 'das pa'i chos, man ngag rdzogs pa chen po}	man ngag gi chos
མན་ངག་གི་སྙིང་པོ་གསུམ	the three essences of the oral instructions	man ngag gi snying po gsum
མན་ངག་གི་སྙེ་མ	Cluster of Instructions (T 1198)	man ngag gi snye ma
མན་ངག་གི་དམ་པ	supreme upadesha	man ngag gi dam pa
མན་ངག་གི་སྡེ	Category of Direct Transmission	man ngag gi sde
མན་ངག་གི་སྡེའི་དབྱེ་བ་གསུམ	three categories of the esoteric instructional class	man ngag gi sde'i dbye ba gsum
མན་ངག་གི་གནད་བདུན	the seven piths of the oral instructions chn	man ngag gi gnad bdun
མན་ངག་གི་དཔེ་དོན་རྟགས་གསུམ	[TRS 62-6] expl	man ngag gi dpe don rtags gsum
མན་ངག་གི་རྩ་བ	root upadesha	man ngag gi rtsa ba
མན་ངག་གི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	the three roots of the upadeshas	man ngag gi rtsa ba gsum
མན་ངག་གི་གཞུང	the text of instruction	man ngag gi gzhung
མན་ངག་གི་ཟབ་གནད	the profound key points of oral instructions	man ngag gi zab gnad
མན་ངག་གི་ལུགས	the tradition of pith instruction	man ngag gi lugs
མན་ངག་དགོངས་པ	the intent of these instructions	man ngag dgongs pa
མན་ངག་དགོངས་པས	by realization of the oral instructions	man ngag dgongs pas
མན་ངག་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	chn	man ngag rgyu 'bras rim pa lnga
མན་ངག་རྒྱུད	information medical treatise with detailed explanation on practice, standard medical work of tibet	man ngag rgyud
མན་ངག་ངང་དམར་ཁྲིད	inner direct essential instruction	man ngag ngang dmar khrid
མན་ངག་ཆེ	replete with secret methods	man ngag che
མན་ངག་ཆེ་བ	has a wealth of oral instructions	man ngag che ba
མན་ངག་ཆོག་བཞག	instructional natural contemplation	man ngag chog bzhag
མན་ངག་ཆོས	dharma of the oral instructions, pith instructions	man ngag chos
མན་ངག་ཉིང་ཁུ	essence of the oral instructions	man ngag nying khu
མན་ངག་སྙིང་ཐིག	instruction of the innermost essence	man ngag snying thig
མན་ངག་སྙིང་པོ	the essential instruction	man ngag snying po
མན་ངག་ལྟ་ཕྲེང	oral bka' ma tradition text attributed to 8th century Padmasambhava, The Garland of Views	man ngag lta phreng
མན་ངག་ལྟ་བའི་ཕྲེང་བ	Garland of Views by Padmasambhava	man ngag lta ba'i phreng ba
མན་ངག་སྟོན་པའི་བླ་མ	a master/ teacher who teaches the oral instructions	man ngag ston pa'i bla ma
མན་ངག་སྡེ	Instruction Section. The third of the Three Sections of Dzog- 2001 chen, arranged by Manjushrimitra and emphasizing the special key points	man ngag sde
མན་ངག་སྡེའི་རྒྱུད་བཅུ་བདུན	Seventeen Tantras of the Esoteric Instructional Class. Contained in NGB. Vols. 9-10, they are the Natural Arising of Awareness {rig pa rang shar} the Mirror of the Heart of Vajrasattva {rdo rje sem...	man ngag sde'i rgyud bcu bdun
ཨོཕ༹་བུདདྷ	Body {sku gdung 'bar ba}	of Buddha
མན་ངག་སྡེའི་རྒྱུད་བཅོ་བདུན	17 tantras of the esoteric/oral instructional class [contained in ngb vols 9-10, they are the natural arising of awareness {rig pa rang shar} the mirror of the heart of vajrasattva {rdo rje sems dp...	man ngag sde'i rgyud bco bdun
མན་ངག་སྡེའི་དབྱེ་བ་གསུམ	three divisions of the Instruction Section; three categories of the Esoteric Instructional Class	man ngag sde'i dbye ba gsum
མན་ངག་གནད་ཀུན	all mennag methods, all the main points of the upadeshas	man ngag gnad kun
མན་ངག་གནད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	the quintessence of vital instructions man ngag sprul pa'i glegs bam snyan	man ngag gnad kyi snying po
བརྒྱུད་ཆེན་མོ	Great Emanated Scriptures of the Oral Transmission	brgyud chen mo
མན་ངག་ཕྲན་བུ	a little advice	man ngag phran bu
མན་ངག་ཕྲེང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Garland of Instruction Tantra. One of the Twentyfive Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	man ngag phreng ba'i rgyud
མན་ངག་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ལུང་བཅུ་ཕོག	conferred the ten transmissions of the miraculous pith instructions	man ngag 'phrul gyi lung bcu phog
མན་ངག་དམར་ཁྲིད	essential instructions	man ngag dmar khrid
མན་ངག་མཛོད	Treasury of Oral Instructons [klong chen mdzod bdun gyi ya gyal zhig ste, rjod byed drug tshan du ma'i bdag nyid can gyi sgo nas zhal gdams kyi tshul du ston pa'i gzhung, dus rabs bcu bzhi par rnyi...	man ngag mdzod
མན་ངག་རྫོག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Ati yoga	man ngag rdzog pa chen po
མན་ངག་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Perfection of Pith Instructions; Syn {rgyu 'bras las 'das pa'i chos} man ngag rdzogs pa chen po'i theg pa the instruction vehicle of the great perfection	man ngag rdzogs pa chen po
མན་ངག་ཟབ་མོ	deep instruction, profound upadesha	man ngag zab mo
མན་ངག་ཡ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	the Ati yoga pith instructions	man ngag ya ti yo ga
མན་ངག་ལུགས	the tradition of pith instruction	man ngag lugs
མན་ངག་ལུང་གི་བོན	the bon of the essential oral instructions	man ngag lung gi bon
མན་ངག་ལུང་ཆེན	SA khyung chen lding ba, rig pa'i khu byug, rdo rje sems pa nam mkha' che, thig le drug pa, rtsal chen sprugs pa, sems nyid sgom pa, rmad byung, yid bzhin nor bu, rtse mo byung rgyal, rdzogs pa spy...	man ngag lung chen
མན་ངག་ལུང་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 texts of sems sde	man ngag lung chen bco brgyad
མན་ངག་གསེར་གྱི་ཐུར་མ	Golden Scalpel, a pith instruction, by Shabkar	man ngag gser gyi thur ma
མན་ངག་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the Atiyoga instructions, PithInstructions of Atiyoga	man ngag a ti yo ga'i bstan pa
མན་ཅད	below, downward, inferior to, under, subject to, since, from, henceforward	man cad
མན་ཅད་དུ	below, downward, under, from now on, since, inferior to, less/lower than, later	man cad du
མན་ཅིག	only one	man cig
མན་ཆད	up to and including; below	man chad
མན་ཆད་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	from ~ down to	man chad kyi bar du
མན་ཆད་དུ	up to and including	man chad du
མན་ཆིལ་ཙི	(CH) flat wheat flour noodles	man chil tsi
མན་ཆུ	man river	man chu
མན་ཆོད	below, SA man cad 2002	man chod
མན་ཇུ	Manchu	man ju
མན་ཇུ་གོང་མ	Manchu emperor	man ju gong ma
མན་ད་ར	tree of heaven, celestial flowers	man da ra
མན་ད་ར་བ	mandarava. The sutras mention mandarava flowers of various sizes. Some learned masters of the Jonang tradition hold that they are the flowers and fruits of the wishfulfilling tree. Jamdrak Rinpoche...	man da ra ba
མན་ད་ར་བ་མེ་ཏོག	Mandarava Flower. 1) coral tree; said to grow in Sukhavati (bde ba can). 2) name of one of Padmakara's consorts. Princess of Sahor and close disciple of Guru Rinpoche	man da ra ba me tog
ཨུཔོན་ཏྭེནཏཡ	one disciples the great rain of the Dharma by transmitting the tantras, scriptures and oral instructions of Kadü Chökyi Gyamtso, the Dharma Ocean Embodying All Teachings. Thus, the master establish...	upon twenty
མན་དཱ་ར་ཝ	Mandarava [princess of sahor and close disciple of guru rinpoche	man dA ra wa
མན་ད་ལ	SA dkyil 'khor, circle, disc, states s.w. of orissa, modern city of mandalay in burma	man da la
མཎ་ཌལ	mandala; a circle	maN Dal
མན་དལ་གྱི་ཆོ་ག	the ritual of the mandala	man dal gyi cho ga
མཎ་ཌལ་འབུལ	to offer the mandalas	maN Dal 'bul
མཎ་ཌལ་མེ་ཏོག་སོགས་འབུལ་པ	offer a mandala, flowers and other offerings	maN Dal me tog sogs 'bul pa
མན་དལ་བཞི	the four mandalas	man dal bzhi
མཎ་ཌལ་བཞི་ཆོག	The practice of the Four Mandalas [of Tara]	maN Dal bzhi chog
མཎ་ཌལ་བཞི་པའི་ཆོ་ག	The practice of the Four Mandalas [of Tara]	maN Dal bzhi pa'i cho ga
མན་དུ	below, downward, under, from now on, inferior to, less/ lower than, later	man du
མན་དུ་གཙིག་པ	grinning, snarling (?)	man du gtsig pa
མན་འདེབས	GJT: abbr. for "man nas 'debs pa" which means to "purify from below" and refers to the process of filling up, from the bottom up, with the amrita that decends from Vajrasattva. The second of three ...	man 'debs
མན་ནག་ཕྲན་བུ	a little advice D	man nag phran bu
མན་ནེ	stupid person, dull man, halfwit, turbid, muddy, dingy, dim, dusky	man ne
མན་ནེ་མུན་ནེ	unclear, unresolved, undecided	man ne mun ne
མན་ནེ་མུན་ནེ་མ་ཤོད	don't speak obscurely	man ne mun ne ma shod
མན་ཕད	[oral] instructions	man phad
མན་མུན	turbid, muddy, dingy, dim, dull, dusky	man mun
མན་ཙི	kind of silk cloth, blue & red spotted scarf of chinese silk	man tsi
མན་ཛི	square table, a tripod, stand	man dzi
མན་ཛི་ར	{man dzi ra} med. mineral	man dzi ra
མན་ཛུ	Ma¤ju. Ma¤ju(shri)	man dzu
མན་ཛུ་པུ་སྤི་ཀ	{man dzu pu spi ka} flower	man dzu pu spi ka
མན་ཛུ་ཤྲཱི	Ma¤jushri	man dzu shrI
མན་ཛུ་གྷོ་སཤ	Ma¤jugosha	man dzu gho ssha
མན་ཛུ་གྷོ་ས	Ma¤jugosha	man dzu gho sa
མན་ཡན	high and low, above and below, before and after	man yan
མན་ཤེལ	crystal, glass	man shel
མན་སྲོང་མར་བཙན	early tibetan king	man srong mar btsan
མན་དྷ་ར	mandarava	man dha ra
མན་ཨ་ར་ཝ	Mandarava	man a ra wa
མམ	?/ or for words ending in M	mam
མམ་ས	meat/ flesh (from Skt.)	mam sa
མའི	of the mother	ma'i
མའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	Bhrama	ma'i skye gnas
མའི་སྐྲ་ཉེ	maternal uncle 2003	ma'i skra nye
མའི་ཁྲ	Syn {phyi la'i gcin}	ma'i khra
མའི་རྒྱུད	mother tantra	ma'i rgyud
མའི་མངལ	your mothers womb	ma'i mngal
མའི་ནུ་ཞོ	mother's milk	ma'i nu zho
མའི་བྱམས་སེམས	mother's/ maternal love	ma'i byams sems
མའི་མ	grandmother	ma'i ma
མའི་ཞིག་བསྐུལ་བ་མ	rci ba'i las	ma'i zhig bskul ba ma
མའི་འོད་གསལ	mother clear light	ma'i 'od gsal
མའི་རིགས་སུ་ཉེ་བ	relation by the mother's side	ma'i rigs su nye ba
མའི་རུམ	mother's womb	ma'i rum
མའི་ལོ་ཀོ	Morocco	ma'i lo ko
མའོ	ma'o tse tung	ma'o
མའོ་ཀྲུའི་ཞི	Chairman ma'o	ma'o kru'i zhi
མའོ་གུང	ma'o communist	ma'o gung
མའོ་རྒོལ	anti-ma'o	ma'o rgol
མའོ་དབྱི	woolen sweater	ma'o dbyi
མའོ་ཙེ་ཏུང	Mao Zedong	ma'o tse tung
མའོ་ཙེ་ཐུང	ma'o tse tung	ma'o tse thung
མའོ་ཚེ་ཏུང	ma'o tse tung	ma'o tshe tung
མའོ་ཚེ་ཏུང་དགོངས་པ	ma'o tshe tung dgongs pa ni krung gor mar khe si le nyin ring lugs bed spyod dang 'brel 'phel rgyas btang ba zhig dang, lag len gyi thog nas ra gsal por 'phrod zin pa'i krung go'i gsar brje'i skor ...	ma'o tshe tung dgongs pa
མའོ་ཝུན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	ma'o wun
མར	butter, period of waning moon, down, oil, lower, downwards, termin. case of ma, place and clan in tibet, down, downwards, downhill, butter	mar
མར་ཀོ	butter covering/ containing leather [bag]	mar ko
མར་ཀོག	butter covering/ containing leather [bag]	mar kog
མར་ཀྲིན	vegetable oil	mar krin
མར་དཀར	white butter	mar dkar
མར་རྐན	lower palate	mar rkan
མར་རྐྱང	1) tax paid in butter; 2) {mar rkyang} [place in N snye mo rdzong snye mo ma chu'i stod rgyud du yod	mar rkyang
མར་རྐྱལ	butter bag	mar rkyal
མར་སྐོགས	mar thum gyi leather	mar skogs
མར་སྐྲོག	1) butter that has come out of the churn that very day; 2) butter packed in skin in two lb. balls D)	mar skrog
མར་སྐྲོག་ག	butter packed in skin in 2 pound balls	mar skrog ga
མར་ཁ་ལྒྲོ་དོང་བྱད་པ	{phyi la nyag}	mar kha lgro dong byad pa
མར་ཁག་པོ་སོང	butter has become rancid	mar khag po song
མར་ཁུ	ghee. melted butter	mar khu
མར་ཁུ་བཞུ	melt butter/ ghee	mar khu bzhu
མར་ཁུག	butter covering leather [bag]	mar khug
མར་ཁུའི་མདོག་སེར་པོ	butter-yellow [color mixed from li khri dkar rag snag tsha bcas]	mar khu'i mdog ser po
མར་ཁུར	in ghee	mar khur
མར་ཁེ་སི	Marx	mar khe si
མར་ཁེ་སི་རིང་ལུགས	Marxism	mar khe si ring lugs
མར་ཁེ་སི་ལེ་ཉིན་རིང་ལུགས	MarxismLeninism	mar khe si le nyin ring lugs
མར་ཁེ་སིའི་རིང་ལུགས	Marxism	mar khe si'i ring lugs
མར་འཁྱགས་པ	coagulated fat	mar 'khyags pa
མཱར་ག	{lam}	mAr ga
མར་གད	emerald, a green gem	mar gad
མར་གྱི	yonder, below; down below	mar gyi
མར་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་ནས་སྤུ་བཏོན་པ་བཞིན	like a hair plucked from butter	mar gyi dkyil nas spu bton pa bzhin
མར་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་ནས་སྤུ་བཏོན་བཞིན	like a hair plucked out of butter, like a hair pulled from butter	mar gyi dkyil nas spu bton bzhin
མར་གྱི་གང	{mar gyi gang} med. fruit	mar gyi gang
མར་གྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of ghee	mar gyi rgya mtsho
མར་གྱི་ཉིང་ཁུ	clarified butter, lit. "butter juice." [mss]	mar gyi nying khu
མར་གྱི་སྙིང་ཁུ	cream	mar gyi snying khu
མར་གྱི་གནས་བདུན	1) {rdzu 'grul mkha' la 'gro bsum cu gnyis}. 2) {sbyor dang sgrol la dbang bzhi king chen brgyad} 3) {lang-ka tshar gsum rtog tshad nyul ba dang} 4) {lus ngag lid gsum rtog pa'i 'bar ma brgyad} 5) ...	mar gyi gnas bdun
མར་གྱི་ཟང་ཐལ	the lower directness	mar gyi zang thal
མར་གྱི་ཡང་ཞུན	refined essence	mar gyi yang zhun
མར་གྱིས	with butter	mar gyis
མར་གྱིས་བཀུ་མཉེ	massage with butter	mar gyis bku mnye
མར་གྱིས་ཉམས་བྱེད	scorpion, scorpion which is killed by oil	mar gyis nyams byed
མར་གྱུར་འགྲོ་བ	regarded as a mother	mar gyur 'gro ba
མར་གྲོད	butter kept in the dried paunch of a sheep	mar grod
མར་མགྲོན	the lower guests	mar mgron
མར་མགྲོམ	the lower guests	mar mgrom
མར་འགྲིབ	decline, deteriorate, degenerate	mar 'grib
མར་འགྲིབ་པ	the decrease of the duration of life, degeneration, dwindling, falling down, decreasing	mar 'grib pa
མར་འགྲོ	to walk down	mar 'gro
མར་འགྲོ་མི་དགེའི་སྡིག་པ་སྤངས	the negative actions that will lead you to the inferior realms	mar 'gro mi dge'i sdig pa spangs
མར་འགྲོའི་སྡིག་མ་བྱེད	don't do the destructive acts that will hurl you down	mar 'gro'i sdig ma byed
མར་རྒན	rancid butter	mar rgan
མར་རྒྱན	butter dough etc beautifying dkar rgyan	mar rgyan
མར་རྒྱས	decadence	mar rgyas
མར་རྒྱས་ཕྱིན་པ	degenerate, deteriorate	mar rgyas phyin pa
མར་སྒམ	butter box of smyug ma [reeds?]	mar sgam
མར་ངོ	the waning moon, [Syn. {nag phyogs}, {dmar phyogs}. the last fifteen days of the month, including new moon. Syn {nag phyogs}, {dmar phyogs}	mar ngo
མར་ངོ་སྔོན་འགྲོ	in the waning part of the nag pa month, if 1 khyim du slebs na, mar ngo sngon 'gro byed do	mar ngo sngon 'gro
མར་ངོའི་བཅོ་ལྔ	full moon day, 15th of the month	mar ngo'i bco lnga
མར་ངོའི་ཉིན	days of the waning moon	mar ngo'i nyin
མར་ངོའི་ཚེས་བཅུ	25th day of the month	mar ngo'i tshes bcu
མར་བཅག	reduce, bring down	mar bcag
མར་ཆག	descend, [be] decrease[d], go down	mar chag
མར་ཆག་པ	descend, grown less, reduced	mar chag pa
མར་རྗེན	butter not melted	mar rjen
མར་རྙིང	old butter	mar rnying
མར་སྙིང་པ	old butter	mar snying pa
མར་གཏུབ	butter cutting up shovel-like tool	mar gtub
མར་གཏོར	butter offerings to evil spirits	mar gtor
མར་བཏེག	descend	mar bteg
མར་ལྟ	looked down	mar lta
མར་ལྟང	leather covered load of butter, butter covering/ containing leather [bag]	mar ltang
མར་ལྟང་གཅིག	a skin bag full of butter	mar ltang gcig
མར་ཐང	price of butter	mar thang
མར་ཐིམ་པ	nyi ma spyi bo nas mar thim - the sun dissolved into her through the top of her head,moving downwards	mar thim pa
མར་ཐུད	soft creamy cheese; residue on the side of a milking bucket [Khenpo Ngaga's metaphor for buildup of mental accretions/ habits]	mar thud
མར་ཐུར	mar gzhog byed kyi lcags khyem [spoon/ shovel?	mar thur
མར་དོ	load of butter	mar do
མར་གདར	shape square, round of butter	mar gdar
མར་འདེད་པ	chase down	mar 'ded pa
མར་འདོན	churning out butter from milk	mar 'don
མར་འདོན་པ	1) churn cream to butter; 2) phyir 'don pa)	mar 'don pa
མར་སྡོད་པ	sit down	mar sdod pa
མར་ནག	oil, mustard oil, sesame oil	mar nag
མར་ནག་གི་སྒྲོན་མེ	[mustard or sesame] oil lamp	mar nag gi sgron me
མར་ནང	lower valley or village's lower part	mar nang
མར་ནང་བེའུ་ཐང	Marnang Be'u Thang	mar nang be'u thang
མར་གནས	lower ranks; is short for the seven lower ranks (mar gyi gnas bdun). The seven lower ranks refers to the residual guests. The impure residual for the lower ranks (mar gnas tshogs lhag)	mar gnas
མར་གནས་ཚོགས་ལྷག	impure residual for the lower ranks	mar gnas tshogs lhag
མར་སྣ	the lower end	mar sna
མར་སྣུམས	butter or oil	mar snums
མར་སྣེ	lower part end/ tip	mar sne
མར་པ	native of mar	mar pa
མར་པ་མགོ་ལེགས	a chief disciple of Marpa the translator	mar pa mgo legs
མར་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	1012-1097; 1012-1099	mar pa chos kyi blo gros
མར་པ་ལོ་ཙཱ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	Marpa the Translator Chökyi Lodrö	mar pa lo tsA chos kyi blo gros
མར་པ་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Marpa the Translator	mar pa lo tsa ba
མར་པ་ལོ་ཙ་བ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	10121097 - Marpa Lotsawa Chökyi Lodrö, founder of the Kagyü tradition in Tibet	mar pa lo tsa ba chos kyi blo gros
མར་པ་ལོ་ཚཱ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བློ་གྲོས	marpa lotsawa chökyi lodro	mar pa lo tshA chos kyi blo gros
མར་པ་ལོ་ཚ་བ	Marpa the tr	mar pa lo tsha ba
མར་པའི་དངོས་སློབ་བཞི	the four main students of Marpa lotsawa	mar pa'i dngos slob bzhi
མར་པུར	butter and treacle	mar pur
མར་སྤགས	butter, parched grain flour balls	mar spags
མར་སྤོར	1/4 nyag of butter	mar spor
མར་ཕབས	lowered, demoted, degraded	mar phabs
མར་ཕྱུར	butter and cheese, dairy products	mar phyur
མར་བབ་པ	descend, go down	mar bab pa
མར་བབས	decline, deteriorate, degenerate	mar babs
མར་བུར	butter and molasses	mar bur
མར་བླུགས	oil pitcher mar dbul po ngan slong la sbyin pa gtong	mar blugs
མར་འབབ	to go down, to descend	mar 'bab
མར་འབབ་པ	descend	mar 'bab pa
མར་འབབས	go down, descend	mar 'babs
མར་འབེབས	lower, demote, degrade	mar 'bebs
མར་མ་འཁྱོལ་གྱི་བར	until reaching the end	mar ma 'khyol gyi bar
མར་མར་སྒྲ	a kind of war cry	mar mar sgra
མར་མར་བྲི	diminishing	mar mar bri
མར་མར་སོང་བ	will go lower and lower	mar mar song ba
མར་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་བསགས་ཀྱང	your negative actions, on the other hand, 2005	mar mi dge ba'i las bsags kyang
མར་མི་དྭགས་གསུམ	mar pa lo tsha, Milarepa, and dvags po lha rje (Gampopa), the three founders of the Kagyu lineage	mar mi dwags gsum
མར་མི་དབ༹གས་གསུམ	Marpa, Milarepa and Gampopa	mar mi dvags gsum
མར་མིའི་འོད	lamplight	mar mi'i 'od
མར་མུར	way of old [toothless] people's eating	mar mur
མར་མེ	[butter/oil/ votive] lamp, torch, light, pradipa (buddha)	mar me
མར་མེ་ཀོང་བུ	butter lamp vessel	mar me kong bu
མར་མེ་རྒྱུན་སྦར	{mar me rgyun sbar gyi dngul kong} silver butter-lamps which were to remain lit day and night	mar me rgyun sbar
མར་མེ་ཆུང་ངུ་ཞིག་ཕུལ་བ	offered a little butter for the lamps	mar me chung ngu zhig phul ba
མར་མེ་ལྟང་འབར་བའི་སྣང་བ	shine like a burning butter lamp	mar me ltang 'bar ba'i snang ba
མར་མེ་ལྟར་འབར་བ	shining like [the flame of] a butter lamp	mar me ltar 'bar ba
མར་མེ་ལྟར་འབར་བའི	shining like a burning butter lamp	mar me ltar 'bar ba'i
མར་མེ་ལྟར་འབར་བའི་སྣང་བ	burning like a butter lamp appearance	mar me ltar 'bar ba'i snang ba
མར་མེ་སྡོང་འཁོལ	rang 'gul gyis las 'gan sgrub dgos pa'i dpe	mar me sdong 'khol
མར་མེ་སྣང་གསལ	lamp, radiant lamp, butter lamp	mar me snang gsal
མར་མེ་སྤར	light a [butter] lamp	mar me spar
མར་མེ་ཕུལ་བ	offered butter-lamps	mar me phul ba
མར་མེ་འབུལ	offer butter lamps	mar me 'bul
མར་མེ་མ	Alok, lamp offering goddess	mar me ma
མར་མེ་སྨོན་ལམ	lamp aspiration	mar me smon lam
མར་མེ་མཛད	dipankara (25th predecessor of shakyamuni born on island with light show, protector of mariners), enlightener, illuminator, epithet of a past buddha	mar me mdzad
མར་མེ་མཛད་དཔལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	Dipa kara shri j¤ na Atisha	mar me mdzad dpal ye shes
མར་མེ་མཛད་བཟང	buddhist saint in w. india	mar me mdzad bzang
མར་མེ་མཛད་བཟང་པོ	dipankara bhadra	mar me mdzad bzang po
མར་མེ་མཛོད་ཡེ་ཤེས	dipamkarasrijnana	mar me mdzod ye shes
མར་མེ་རང་འབར	that a butter lamp kindles by itself	mar me rang 'bar
མར་མེ་རང་འབར་འབྱུང	the butter lamp will go ablaze by itself	mar me rang 'bar 'byung
མར་མེ་ཤི་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like a flame being extinguished, like a butter lamp burning down	mar me shi ba lta bu
མར་མེའི་སྐོང་བཤགས	lamp fulfillmentconfession	mar me'i skong bshags
མར་མེའི་རྩེ་མོ་བཞིན	like the flame of a butter lamp	mar me'i rtse mo bzhin
མར་མེའི་ཚབ་ཏུ	instead of a lamp, for a lamp	mar me'i tshab tu
མར་མེའི་འོད	the flame of a butter lamp	mar me'i 'od
མར་སྨོན	{mar me smon lam}	mar smon
མར་བཙོས	cooked in butter	mar btsos
མར་བཙོས་ཁུར་བ	cooked in butter	mar btsos khur ba
མར་ཚེས	count of the waning days of the month [zla ba mar ngo'i tshes grangs,//chu stod zla ba'i mar tshes kyi tshes gcig ni hor zla lnga pa'i tshes bcu drug yin	mar tshes
མར་ཚོན་ཁྲ	colored butter	mar tshon khra
མར་འཛིན	regarded as a mother	mar 'dzin
མར་འཛིན་པ	ma la mar 'du shes pa	mar 'dzin pa
མར་ཞག་གཅིག	spags za thengs gcig gi mar gyi tshad	mar zhag gcig
མར་ཞུན	clarified melted butter, ghee	mar zhun
མར་ཟན	ghee &, phyur zhib, w sweetened tsampa having mixed brdzis pa'i spags	mar zan
མར་ཟན་གཅིག	a plateful of buttery tsampa	mar zan gcig
མར་གཟར་བ	downfall	mar gzar ba
མར་འོག་ཏུ	below	mar 'og tu
མར་ཡགས་པ	mar gsar	mar yags pa
མར་ཡུལ	side, situation	mar yul
མར་ར་ཆུ	ma ra river	mar ra chu
མར་ལ	at last, at the end, ultimately, finally	mar la
མར་ལ་འགྲོ་དོང་བྱད་པ	Syn {phyi la nyag}	mar la 'gro dong byad pa
མར་ལ་ཡེར་གྱིས་བྱོན	descend	mar la yer gyis byon
མར་ལ་སྲེ་བ	mix with butter	mar la sre ba
མར་ལམ	high road, broad passage	mar lam
མར་ལུགས	Marpa Lotsawa's explanation tradition	mar lugs
མར་ལེའི་རིང་ལུགས	Marxism-Leninism	mar le'i ring lugs
མར་ལོག	when a monk reverts to the life of a householder	mar log
མར་ཤེ	1) snga dus gzhan la bzhon ma btang ba'i 'bab mar; 2) butter load mar ltang)	mar she
མར་ཤེས	regard as one's mother, understand as mother, know to be mothers TSE maternal understanding	mar shes
མར་ཤེས་པ	gratefulness to mother, regard as one's mother	mar shes pa
མར་གཤམ	the lowest of the low	mar gsham
མར་བཤིགས་པ	demolish	mar bshigs pa
མར་སོར	pho gcu bzo byed	mar sor
མར་གསར	fresh butter [today's, this years]	mar gsar
མར་གསུར	burned butter offering smoke	mar gsur
མལ	bed, seat, practice place / seat, sleeping place, mat, couch, resting place	mal
མལ་སྐབས	when [they are] sleeping	mal skabs
མལ་ཁྲག་ཅན	adulterer	mal khrag can
མལ་ཁྲི	sofa, bedstead	mal khri
མལ་གུར	sleeping tent	mal gur
མལ་གོས	bedding, bed clothes	mal gos
མལ་གྱི་འོག་ཏུ	under the bed	mal gyi 'og tu
མལ་གྱི་ཤུལ་དུ་ལུས	left behind on the death bed	mal gyi shul du lus
མལ་གྱི་ཤུལ་དུ་ལུས་པ	gets left behind on the death bed	mal gyi shul du lus pa
མལ་གྲོ	district s.e. of lhasa, name of a place east of Lhasa	mal gro
མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར	{mal gro gung dkar} rdzong [lha sa grong khyer gyi shar ngos skyid chu'i stod rgyud du chags shing, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung de gung dkar du yod;; fort of the town of mal gro	mal gro gung dkar
མལ་གྲོ་གུང་མཁར	fort in mal gro	mal gro gung mkhar
མལ་གྲོ་མཚོ	Lake Maldro	mal gro mtsho
མལ་གྲོ་མཚོ་ཤོད	1 of 37 holy bon places	mal gro mtsho shod
མལ་གྲོ་མཚོན་ཤོད	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	mal gro mtshon shod
མལ་གྲོ་ར་བ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	mal gro ra ba
མལ་གྲོ་ར་ཝ	1 of the 37 holy places of b"n	mal gro ra wa
མལ་གྲོལ་ར་བ	1 of 37 holy bon places	mal grol ra ba
མལ་སྒྲོམ	bed gding sa'i mtha' skyor du btang ba'i rectangular wooden box	mal sgrom
མལ་གཅིག་ཏོ་མི་འདུག	changeable	mal gcig to mi 'dug
མལ་བཅས	make one's seat/ dwelling place, sleeping and practice place, made one's practice seat	mal bcas
མལ་ཆ	bed clothes	mal cha
མལ་ཆས	bedding	mal chas
མལ་འཆའ་བ	prepare a bed	mal 'cha' ba
མལ་འཆུགས་པ	melt, dissolve, vanish, [power going down]	mal 'chugs pa
མལ་ཏིང་ལ	on the bed	mal ting la
མལ་བཏིང	bedding, pillow, blanket	mal bting
མལ་སྟན	sleeping cushions, bedding	mal stan
མལ་སྟན་གོས་ཀྱིས་མནན	all but suffocated by bedclothes	mal stan gos kyis mnan
མལ་སྟན་གྱི་ཞལ	one who looks after the requisites of the bed chamber	mal stan gyi zhal
མལ་སྟན་གྱི་ཞལ་ཏ་པ	chamberlain	mal stan gyi zhal ta pa
མལ་སྟན་གྱི་ཤལ་ཏ་པ	chamberlain	mal stan gyi shal ta pa
མལ་སྟེན	bed[room], dwelling place, sleeping quarters	mal sten
མལ་དུ	in bed	mal du
མལ་དུ་ཁུར	stretcher	mal du khur
མལ་དུ་འཁོད་པ	staying on one's bed	mal du 'khod pa
མལ་དུ་ཉལ་ཟིན	lay down in bed	mal du nyal zin
མལ་དུ་སྙོལ	mgron po mal du snyol see the visitors to bed!	mal du snyol
མལ་དུ་ཞོག	keep at home	mal du zhog
མལ་དུ་ལུས	be bed-ridden	mal du lus
མལ་གདན	mattress	mal gdan
མལ་བདེ་བ	quiet sleep	mal bde ba
མལ་ནས་ལངས	arise from sleep	mal nas langs
མལ་ནས་ཧར་ལངས	to get up from bed, got up	mal nas har langs
མལ་འབྱར	infant	mal 'byar
མལ་འབྱོར་བླ་མེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	highest yoga tantra	mal 'byor bla med kyi rgyud
མལ་མི་ཐུབ	cannot succeed	mal mi thub
མལ་མུལ	oval, lumpy, not bearing pressure	mal mul
མལ་གཟན	bedding, blanket [sleeping gzan: blanket wool bal las btags pa'i snam rigs mthug po'i nyal chas shig	mal gzan
མལ་ཡོལ	bed curtains	mal yol
མལ་ལ་མུལ་ལེ	luke-warm, eating without properly chewing like a toothless old man	mal la mul le
མལ་ལི་ཀ	Jasminium zambac	mal li ka
མལ་ལུས	bed-ridden	mal lus
མལ་ལེ	mile	mal le
མལ་གཤོམ	shelter	mal gshom
མལ་གཤོམ་བྱེད	make a bed/ shelter	mal gshom byed
མལ་ས	bed, dwelling place	mal sa
མལ་སའི་ཁང་མིག	bedroom	mal sa'i khang mig
མས	the lower part, downward, towards the lower parts; lower (realms)	mas
མས་ཀྱི་ཤིད	negative energies of death	mas kyi shid
མས་ཁོད	water wheel mas rdo	mas khod
མས་འགེབས	covered from below	mas 'gebs
མས་འགེམས	ya mchu thung la ma mchu ring bas yar 'gebs pa'i ming	mas 'gems
མས་འགྲམ	lower jaw	mas 'gram
མས་སྒྲིལ	srub zan between rdog mthil and lham mgo	mas sgril
མས་ལྕིབས	lower eyelid	mas lcibs
མས་མཆིག	chu 'khor/ lag skor/ gtun gyi mas rdo	mas mchig
མས་མཆུ	lower lip	mas mchu
མས་འཇབ	straps to fasten below a leather trunk	mas 'jab
མས་གཏུན	gtun gyi mas rdo	mas gtun
མས་བཏང་བ	move downward, purge gently	mas btang ba
མས་རྟེན	upward supporting	mas rten
མས་རྟེན་གྱི་དགའ་བཞི	the upward supporting four joys	mas rten gyi dga' bzhi
མས་སྟགས	B"n way of offering lha 'dre la klud gtor	mas stags
མས་བརྟན	ascend	mas brtan
མས་བརྟན་ཀྱི་དགའ་པ	the joys of stability from below	mas brtan kyi dga' pa
མས་བརྟན་གྱི་དགའ་བ	[above] the joys of stability from below	mas brtan gyi dga' ba
མས་བརྟན་གྱི་དགའ་བ་བཞི	the upward supporting four joys from below [bla med ma rgyud kyi rdzogs rim las bstan pa'i gtum mo'i rtogs pa zhig ste, byang sems brtan pa na nor bu nas lte ba dang snying ga mgrin pa spyi bo bcas...	mas brtan gyi dga' ba bzhi
མས་བརྟན་འབྲས་བུའི་དགའ་བ་བཞི	four resultant degrees of joy stabilized upward	mas brtan 'bras bu'i dga' ba bzhi
མས་ཐིག	fish catching rope	mas thig
མས་མཐའ	lower end	mas mtha'
མས་མཐར	in the lower part	mas mthar
མས་གདན	'og brtsegs, 'og gdan	mas gdan
མས་འདེད	TSE 2007	mas 'ded
མས་རྡོ	stone mortar and pestle or water-mill's lower stone	mas rdo
མས་ནས	from below	mas nas
མས་ནས་ཡར་བགྲངས་ཏེ	counted from below	mas nas yar bgrangs te
མས་འཕུལ	yi ge'i sngon 'jug MA yig gis 'phul ba	mas 'phul
མས་དབེན་པ	1) (A) half-sibling w different other; 2) mother who has died)	mas dben pa
མས་མ	lower one	mas ma
མས་མུལ	soft, supple	mas mul
མས་འཛེག་སྐལ་དམན་ལམ	paths for those of lesser fortune who progress upward in stages	mas 'dzeg skal dman lam
མས་འཛེགས	the climbing up [path]	mas 'dzegs
མས་ལ	downward	mas la
མས་ལེ	chin	mas le
མས་སོ	lower teeth	mas so
མས་བསྲུངས་པ	guarded by the mother	mas bsrungs pa
ནོ་ཆོཨིཅེ་བུཏ་ཏོ	- [mi vb rang vb; mi vb ka bka' med; mi vb mthuis mi vb thabs med]	no choice but to
མི་ཀ་མེད	i cannot help but, have to	mi ka med
མི་ཀི་རི	SK 9th month	mi ki ri
མི་ཀྱིམ	family	mi kyim
མི་ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག	thoughtless, childish man	mi krog krog
མི་དཀར	white man	mi dkar
མི་དཀར་ཞྭ་ནག	white man under a black hat, innocent man charged w guilt	mi dkar zhwa nag
མི་དཀར་སྲིད་གཞུང	white apartheid government	mi dkar srid gzhung
མི་དཀྱུས་མ	ordinary man, one who is neither an official nor a religious man	mi dkyus ma
མི་བཀུར་བ	1) gong du mi bkur ba'am mi brtsi ba; 2) (A) not promise/ assert)	mi bkur ba
མི་བཀྱིག་པ	(A) mi 'gyangs pa'am quick	mi bkyig pa
མི་བཀྲ་བ	lusterless	mi bkra ba
མི་རྐང	1) human leg/ foot [bone]; 2)	mi rkang
མི་རྐང་གླིང་བུ	thigh-bone trumpet (flute)	mi rkang gling bu
མི་རྐུན་མ་རྒྱབ	kidnap	mi rkun ma rgyab
མི་རྐྱང	free unemployed man	mi rkyang
མི་རྐྱང་པ	free, unemployed man, generally one that carries no burden	mi rkyang pa
མི་སྐད་སྨྲ	speaking human language	mi skad smra
མི་སྐད་སྨྲ་བ	could speak [human language]	mi skad smra ba
མི་སྐྱ	secular personage, one clothed in no particular color, layman	mi skya
མི་སྐྱ་ནག	widower	mi skya nag
མི་སྐྱག	human feces	mi skyag
མི་སྐྱེ	non-arising	mi skye
མི་སྐྱེ་ཕོ་མོ	men and women	mi skye pho mo
མི་སྐྱེ་བ	nonarising/ nonorigination; unborn	mi skye ba
མི་སྐྱེ་བ་དང་བཟོད་ཤེས	acceptance	mi skye ba dang bzod shes
ཨནད་ཅོགནིཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	arising, cognition of the patient acceptance of nonproduction	and cognition of non
མི་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡི་བཟོད་པ་ཉིད	acceptance of nonarising	mi skye ba yi bzod pa nyid
མི་སྐྱེ་བ་ཤེས་པ	knowledge/cognition of nonarising/non-origination {shes pa bcu gcig}} sdug bsngal mi skye ba la mi skye bar shes pa'o	mi skye ba shes pa
མི་སྐྱེ་བ་ཤེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the pristine cognition which perceives that corruption is/ defilements are not recreated GD, the wisdom of knowing nonarising	mi skye ba shes pa'i ye shes
ནོཏ་རེ	created, One of {ye shes gnyis}	not re
ཐེ་ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཀནོཝིང་ནོན	arising	the wisdom of knowing non
མི་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆོས	a type of experience on level 8	mi skye ba'i chos
མི་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having the nature /	mi skye ba'i chos can
qཨུཨལིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	arising	quality of non
མི་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ	Acceptance that dharmas are unproduced; anutpattika-dharma-ksanti	mi skye ba'i chos la bzod pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏྲུཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	arising, acceptance that dharmas are unproduced, patience concerning the dharma of nonarising	of the truth of non
མི་སྐྱེ་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of nonarising	mi skye bzod pa
མི་སྐྱེ་བཟོད་པ་ཐོབ་ཉིད	the attainment of acceptance of the truth of nonarising	mi skye bzod pa thob nyid
མི་སྐྱེ་བཟོད་པ་ཐོབ་པ་ཉིད	Syn {mi skye'i chos la bzod pa thob pa} attaining acceptance of the nonarising of phenomena	mi skye bzod pa thob pa nyid
མི་སྐྱེའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having the nature/	mi skye'i chos can
མི་སྐྱེའི་ཆོས་ལ་ནི་བཟོད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	the attainment of acceptance of the truth	mi skye'i chos la ni bzod pa thob pa
མི་སྐྱེའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attaining acceptance of the nonarising of phenomena	mi skye'i chos la bzod pa thob pa
མི་སྐྱོ་བ	not weary, enthusiastic	mi skyo ba
མི་སྐྱོང	not guard/ keep/ maintain	mi skyong
མི་སྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	eighth Karmapa, Mikyö Dorje	mi skyod rdo rje
མི་སྐྱོད་པ	the unmoved, akshobhya, dbyings kyi dbang phyug ma or spyan ma, me long, rdo rje, thugs, rnam shes, zhe sdang, nam mkha', ears, blue, east, rgyal ba rigs, 2nd dhyani buddha	mi skyod pa
མི་སྐྱོད་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having the nature/quality of not being sad/tired/depressed [nyan thos dgra bcom pa drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, nyams pa dang 'pho ba med par rang sar gnas nas mi skyod pa'i gang zag	mi skyod pa'i chos can
མི་སྐྱོན	no harm	mi skyon
མི་སྐྲག་པ	not being fearful	mi skrag pa
མི་སྐྲག་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཉིད	cause of fearlessness	mi skrag pa'i rgyu nyid
མི་སྐྲག་པར་བྱ་བ	should be fearless	mi skrag par bya ba
མི་སྐྲར	Mr.	mi skrar
མི་སྐྲོག	unafraid, undaunted	mi skrog
མི་བསྐྱོད	immutable/ unshakeable/ unmoving	mi bskyod
མི་བསྐྱོད་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	embodiment of Akshobhya	mi bskyod kyi ngo bo
མི་བསྐྱོད་ཆེན་པོ	large number	mi bskyod chen po
མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	n of Indian image of Buddha Shakyamuni originally in the lha sa 'phrul snang temple, brought to Tibet by the Nepalese queen of Songtsen Gampo	mi bskyod rdo rje
ཤོབྷྱ	vajra, the Immutable, unshakable, immovable. 2) Karmapa Mikyö Dorje {kar-ma pa} viii, 1507-1554. 3) Manjuvajra	shobhya
མི་བསྐྱོད་གནས	city, fixed habitation (vs nomads)	mi bskyod gnas
མི་བསྐྱོད་པ	Akshobhya, Buddha of the Vajra Family. Syn {mi 'khrugs pa}	mi bskyod pa
མི་བསྐྱོད་བའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	the four samayas of Akshobhya TSE	mi bskyod ba'i dam tshig bzhi
མི་ཁ	slander, scandal, thoughtless chatter, irresponsible advice, common talk	mi kha
མི་ཁ་ངན་པ་སྡུད	be an object of slander	mi kha ngan pa sdud
མི་ཁ་སྡུད	be an object of gossip/ slander	mi kha sdud
མི་ཁལ	load a person can carry, person and load	mi khal
མི་ཁུར	load a person can carry, person and load	mi khur
མི་ཁེངས་པ་ཆེ	conceited man	mi khengs pa che
མི་ཁེངས་པ་ཆེ་བ	arrogant/ conceited person	mi khengs pa che ba
མི་ཁེལ་བ	to not trust	mi khel ba
མི་ཁོག་འདྲེ་ཞུགས	mi'i khog par 'dre zhugs pa ste, a person of proper behavior by another person ngan slob kyis is changes: example of going wrong	mi khog 'dre zhugs
མི་ཁོངས	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi khongs
མི་ཁོངས་པ	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi khongs pa
མི་ཁོམ	not practiced	mi khom
མི་ཁོམ་བརྒྱད	the 8 nonfreedoms [not born as a hell being, hungry ghost, beast, long lived god, barbarian, in wrong views, in a time without buddhas, as an idiot without speech	mi khom brgyad
མི་ཁོམ་གནས	evil state (inhuman form of existence)	mi khom gnas
མི་ཁོམ་པ	not free, w/o leisure	mi khom pa
མི་ཁོམ་པ་བརྒྱད	8 nonfreedoms [not born as a hell being, hungry ghost, beast, long lived god, barbarian, in wrong views, in a time without buddhas, as an idiot without speech sems can dmyal ba/yi dwags/dud 'gro/lh...	mi khom pa brgyad
ཐེ་ཨེཨིགྷཏ་ཨ	ksana. The states in which there is no opportunity to practice the Dharma, namely being born in hell, as an animal, as a preta, among the longlived gods, or in a barbaric country where there are no...	the eight a
མི་ཁོམ་བའི་གནས	unfree state	mi khom ba'i gnas
མི་ཁོམས	no time/ chance/ opportunity/ freedom, not free, restless	mi khoms
མི་ཁོམས་བརྒྱད	the eight unfree / leisureless states	mi khoms brgyad
རིང་ལྷ་དང་ནི	a long-lived god or a barbarian; log lta sangs rgyas kyis stong	ring lha dang ni
དག་མི་ཁོམས་བརྒྱད	or being born deaf and mute; these are the eight states without freedom	dag mi khoms brgyad
མི་ཁོམས་པ	restricting conditions, [8] unfree states	mi khoms pa
མི་ཁོམས་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight unfree states	mi khoms pa brgyad
མི་ཁོམས་པའི་གནས	a place with no opportunity [to practise the Dharma]	mi khoms pa'i gnas
མི་ཁོམས་པའི་གནས་བརྒྱད	[TRS 29:1]; the eight unfree states	mi khoms pa'i gnas brgyad
མི་ཁོམས་པའི་གནས་བཅུ་དྲུག་པོ	16 unfree states	mi khoms pa'i gnas bcu drug po
མི་ཁྱབ	it doesn't follow/ pervade, there is no pervasion	mi khyab
མི་ཁྱིམ	family	mi khyim
མི་ཁྱིམ་བདུན	{mi khyim bdun} place in snang rdzong	mi khyim bdun
མི་ཁྱུ	company of men	mi khyu
མི་ཁྱུར་མ་ཚུད	not counted among people	mi khyur ma tshud
མི་ཁྱེད	there is not enough	mi khyed
མི་ཁྱོངས	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi khyongs
མི་ཁྱོངས་པ	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi khyongs pa
མི་ཁྲལ	cash tax paid by Tibetan govt	mi khral
ཕ༹རྨེརས	servants to the masters instead of work obligation	farmers
མི་ཁྲེལ་བ	not displease	mi khrel ba
མི་ཁྲེས་ཆུང་ཅན	a man with a small load	mi khres chung can
མི་ཁྲོད	troop	mi khrod
མི་ཁྲོམ་གྱི་མཐ་ནས	far back in the crowd	mi khrom gyi mtha nas
མི་མཁས	to lack discernment	mi mkhas
མི་མཁས་པ	unknowing/ unwise	mi mkhas pa
མི་འཁོངས་པ	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi 'khongs pa
མི་འཁོབས་ཆེ་བ	(A) vast human mind	mi 'khobs che ba
མི་འཁོར	cannot come full circle	mi 'khor
མི་འཁྱམས	wandering person, drifter	mi 'khyams
མི་འཁྱར	erring person, blundering man	mi 'khyar
མི་འཁྱར་འབྱོར་མེད	lumpen-proletariat	mi 'khyar 'byor med
མི་འཁྱོག་འགྲོ	arrow	mi 'khyog 'gro
མི་འཁྱོངས	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi 'khyongs
མི་འཁྱོངས་པ	not able to attempt for want of leisure	mi 'khyongs pa
མི་འཁྲུག་པ	name of the Buddha, Akshobhya	mi 'khrug pa
མི་འཁྲུགས	unshaken, name of 2nd dhyani buddha, SA mi skyod pa	mi 'khrugs
མི་འཁྲུགས་ཆེན་པོ	large number	mi 'khrugs chen po
མི་འཁྲུགས་པ	[the buddha] the Unshakable	mi 'khrugs pa
མི་འཁྲུགས་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having the dharma unshakableness	mi 'khrugs pa'i chos can
མི་འཁྲུགས་པའི་གཟུངས་ཆོག	ritual for the liturgical recitation of the formula (dharani) of the tathagata Akshobhya	mi 'khrugs pa'i gzungs chog
མི་འཁྲུགས་སེམས	undisturbed mind	mi 'khrugs sems
མི་འཁྲུལ་པ	infallibly	mi 'khrul pa
མི་གང	1) 'dom gang gi tshad; 2) the person who..)	mi gang
མི་གང་ཙམ	average/ mediocre person	mi gang tsam
མི་གུ	SA mi zhum	mi gu
མི་གོ	incapable of understanding	mi go
མི་གོ་ཆོད	1) not be able to perform the function of; 2) capable person [who can resolve/ accomplish something]	mi go chod
མི་གོ་བ	not notice	mi go ba
མི་གོས	untainted	mi gos
མི་གྱོ་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having the quality/dharmin of motionlessness [dgra bcom pa drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, dbang po rno bas rkyen ngan ji ltar phrad kyang rtogs pa las nyams mi srid pa'i gang zag	mi gyo ba'i chos can
མི་གྱོ་བའི་ལས	"motionless action" immovable/ unmoving karma, nontransferring action/karma, unshifting karma	mi gyo ba'i las
མི་གྱོ་བའི་ས	the eight bh mi the motionless one [tserig). the level of motionlessness byang chub sems dpa'i sa bcu'i brgyad pa, sa 'dir gnas pa'i byang chub sems dpa' rnams mtshan bcas dang mtshan med la rtsol ...	mi gyo ba'i sa
མི་གྱོང་པོ	crooked man, obstinate man	mi gyong po
མི་གྲ	servant's houses count la gzhigs nas master had to pay a tax	mi gra
མི་གྲགས་པ	disgrace, disparagement	mi grags pa
མི་གྲངས	count/ # of people, population 2010	mi grangs
མི་གྲངས་ཀྱི་མདའ་སེལ	exorcism by means of arrows of the same number of men	mi grangs kyi mda' sel
མི་གྲངས་འདུ་ཚད	population density	mi grangs 'du tshad
མི་གྲངས་འདུས་ཚད	population density	mi grangs 'dus tshad
མི་གྲལ	row in which men are seated	mi gral
མི་གྲལ་ནས་བུད	cast yourself out from your place among men; one of {bud bsnyegs thob gsum}	mi gral nas bud
མི་གྲོང	house in a village	mi grong
མི་གླ	hired hand	mi gla
མི་གླ་གླས	hire a hand	mi gla glas
མི་གླ་རྒྱུག	hire 1self out for wages	mi gla rgyug
མི་གླེན་པ	fool, stupid person	mi glen pa
མི་དག་བ་བཅུ	the 10 kinds of sadness	mi dga ba bcu
མི་དགག	do not suppress	mi dgag
མི་དགའ	sad, unpleasant, joyless, hateful	mi dga'
མི་དགའ་ཕྱོད་དེ་བ་ཞིག་ལ	haunted	mi dga' phyod de ba zhig la
མི་དགའ་བ	melancholy, disgust, contempt, deplore, enmity, unhappy	mi dga' ba
མི་དགའ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	perceive/ engage the mind in sadness	mi dga' ba yid la byed pa
མི་དགའ་བའི་འགྱུར་བཅོས	disliked/ unpopular reform	mi dga' ba'i 'gyur bcos
མི་དགའ་བྱེད་པ	produce sadness	mi dga' byed pa
མི་དགའ་མེད་པ	not sad	mi dga' med pa
མི་དགའ་ཤི་བར་བྱ	sadness should be pacified/ eliminated	mi dga' shi bar bya
མི་དགའོ	was displeased	mi dga'o
མི་དགེ	unwholesome	mi dge
མི་དགེ་ཁྲའི་རྩ་བ	the nonvirtuous roots; {chags sdang rmongs gsum} passion, agression, and ignoranceonly in the {'dod khams}	mi dge khra'i rtsa ba
མི་དགེ་བཅུ	10 unwholesome karma paths. Syn {mi dge ba bcu} the ten nonvirtues	mi dge bcu
མི་དགེ་བཅུ་ག	the 10 nonvirtues; {srog gcod} cutting off life {ma byin len} taking what is not given {mi gtsang spyod} impure sexual behavior {rdzun smra ba} false speaking {phra ma} slandrous/divisive talk {tsh...	mi dge bcu ga
མི་དགེ་བཅུ་སྤོང་གི་ཆོས་བསྟན	taught them the Dharma of abandoning the Ten Nonvirtuous Actions	mi dge bcu spong gi chos bstan
མི་དགེ་སྡིག་པ་སྤོངས	Give up doing wrong!	mi dge sdig pa spongs
མི་དགེ་སྡིག་པ་བྱས་པ	who have committed unvirtuous acts	mi dge sdig pa byas pa
མི་དགེ་སྡིག་པ་བྱེད་པ	to commit evil actions	mi dge sdig pa byed pa
མི་དགེ་སྤྱོད	one of low rank such as a fisherman	mi dge spyod
མི་དགེ་བ	non-virtue; unwholesome,	mi dge ba
གནོད་སེམས་ཨནད་ཐེཨིར་སེཨེདས་ནོན	virtue,	gnod sems and their seeds non
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ	ten non-virtuous	mi dge ba bcu
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་བཅུ	the 10 actions of the 10 non- virtues	mi dge ba bcu bcu
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་པོ	the ten nonvirtues; {srog gcod} cutting off life {ma byin len} taking what is not given {mi gtsang spyod} impure sexual behavior {rdzun smra ba} false speaking {phra ma} slandrous/divisive talk {ts...	mi dge ba bcu po
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་སྤངས	abandon the 10	mi dge ba bcu spangs
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of the 10 non-virtues	mi dge ba bcu'i 'bras bu
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	the three roots of nonvirtue, (= {dug gsum} [passion, agression, and ignorance)	mi dge ba bcu'i rtsa ba gsum
རོཨོཙ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue {dug gsum} [R]	roots of non
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས	the actions of the 10	mi dge ba bcu'i las
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས་བཅུ	the 10 nonvirtuous actions	mi dge ba bcu'i las bcu
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ལས་ལམ་བཅུ	the ten nonvirtuous ways of action {srog gcod} cutting off life {ma byin len} taking what is not given {mi gtsang spyod} impure sexual behavior {rdzun smra ba} false speaking {phra ma} slandrous/di...	mi dge ba bcu'i las lam bcu
མི་དགེ་བ་བཅུའི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ་གཉིས་ཐེ་ཏྭོ་མཇོར་བསེས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue	mi dge ba bcu'i sa mang chen po gnyis the two major bases of non
མི་དགེ་བ་ཆུད་མི	person who performs	mi dge ba chud mi
མི་དགེ་བ་ཉེན་མངས་པའི་རླུང	the	mi dge ba nyen mangs pa'i rlung
ཝིནད་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཀླེཤས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue mi dge ba rnam pa mang pos ngu zhing	wind of the kleshas of non
ཚིག་ལབ་མ་ཤེས	we can do nothing but cry at such discomfort, for we cannot say a word	tshig lab ma shes
མི་དགེ་བ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	engagement in nonvirtue	mi dge ba la 'jug pa
མི་དགེ་བ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	act/ behave/	mi dge ba la spyod pa
ཅོནདུཅཏ་ཨོནེསེལཕ༹་ནོན	virtuously	conduct oneself non
མི་དགེ་བ་ལ་འཛེམ་པ	shun evil	mi dge ba la 'dzem pa
མི་དགེ་བ་ལས་སྟོན་བའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the	mi dge ba las ston ba'i tshul khrims
དིསཅིཔླིནེ་ཤོཝན་བཡ་ནོན	virtue	discipline shown by non
མི་དགེ་བ་ལས་ལྡོག་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of turning away from nonvirtue	mi dge ba las ldog pa'i tshul khrims
མི་དགེ་བའི	unwholesome, non-virtuous	mi dge ba'i
མི་དགེ་བའི་གྲོགས	non-virtuous companions, bad company TSE	mi dge ba'i grogs
མི་དགེ་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	non-virtuous companions, bad company	mi dge ba'i grogs po
མི་དགེ་བའི་ཆོས	the dharmas of nonvirtue	mi dge ba'i chos
མི་དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	the	mi dge ba'i chos nyams par byed pa
དམགིང་དྷརྨས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue, do/ 1 who does damage by means of the	damaging dharmas of non
དྷརྨས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue	dharmas of non
མི་དགེ་བའི་རྟོག་པ	unvirtuous thoughts mi dge ba'i rtog pa dang bcas pa spang abandon all bad thoughts	mi dge ba'i rtog pa
མི་དགེ་བའི་སྡིག་པ	wrongdoing	mi dge ba'i sdig pa
མི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	the unvirtuous roots	mi dge ba'i rtsa ba
མི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	the three roots	mi dge ba'i rtsa ba gsum
མི་དགེ་བའི་ཡན་ལག	Sub-aspects of the unvirtuous actions. The sub-aspects of killing are to hit, beat or suppress others etc. The sub-aspects of stealing from others are to profiteer in business, soliciting and being...	mi dge ba'i yan lag
མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས	non-virtuous action	mi dge ba'i las
མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་བཅུ	the ten unvirtuous actions. Syn {mi dge ba bcu}	mi dge ba'i las bcu
མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལམ	unwholesome ways of action	mi dge ba'i las lam
མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལམ་བཅུ	the ten unwholesome ways of action	mi dge ba'i las lam bcu
མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལམ་རྫོགས་པ	exhaust unwholesome ways of action	mi dge ba'i las lam rdzogs pa
མི་དགེ་བའི་ས་པ	the non-virtuous mental factors	mi dge ba'i sa pa
མི་དགེ་བའི་ས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གཉིས	the two	mi dge ba'i sa pa chen po gnyis
གེནེརལ་ནོན	virtuous mental factors	general non
མི་དགེ་བའི་ས་མང	the general nonvirtuous mental factors. [sa mang lnga'i nang tshan zhig ste, mi dge ba'i sems thams cad kyi 'khor du 'byung la sems gzhan la mi 'byung ba	mi dge ba'i sa mang
མི་དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ་གཉིས	the	mi dge ba'i sa mang chen po gnyis
ཏྭོ་གེནེརལ་ནོན	virtuous mental factors	two general non
ཏྭོ་མཇོར་བསེས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	virtue	two major bases of non
མི་དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་གཉིས	the two general non-virtuous mental factors [ngo tsha med pa dang, khrel med pa gnyis so	mi dge ba'i sa mang gnyis
མི་དགེ་བའི་སེམས་བྱུང	anger, hostility, dissimulation, malice, jealousy, avarice, illusion, dishonesty, spitefulness, pride, contempt, indecorum, delusion, overexuberance, distrust, laziness, carelessness, forgetfulness...	mi dge ba'i sems byung
མི་དགེ་བའི་སྲིད་ཇུས	a reprehensible/ unwholesome policy	mi dge ba'i srid jus
མི་དགེ་བའི་སྲིད་ཇུས་ལག་ལེན་བསྟར	implement a reprehensible/ unwholesome policy	mi dge ba'i srid jus lag len bstar
མི་དགེའི་གནས	place of sin	mi dge'i gnas
མི་དགེའི་ལས	impious action	mi dge'i las
མི་དགེའི་ས་པ་གཉིས	the two non-virtuous mental factors	mi dge'i sa pa gnyis
མི་དགོས	there is no point in, need not, need not, there is no need to, without having to, inconsequential 2012	mi dgos
མི་དགོས་དགུ་དགོས	byung tshad dgos pa	mi dgos dgu dgos
མི་དགོས་རྒུ་དགོས	not desire and desire everything	mi dgos rgu dgos
མི་དགོས་བརྗོད་དུ	unspeakable	mi dgos brjod du
མི་དགོས་པ	don't, need not, be unnecessary, useless, to transcend	mi dgos pa
མི་དགོས་པ་བཟོ	cancel, call off, eliminate a need/ necessity, make unnecessary	mi dgos pa bzo
མི་དགོས་པ་བཟོ་བ	cancel	mi dgos pa bzo ba
མི་དགོས་པར	w no need for, not needing to	mi dgos par
མི་དགོས་རུང	though it is not necessary	mi dgos rung
མི་དགྱེས	sorrowful, sad, discomfited, dejected, angry, indignant	mi dgyes
མི་མགོ	1) human head; 2) count of people; 3) head man, leader)	mi mgo
མི་མགོ་མཁྲེགས་པོ	adamant	mi mgo mkhregs po
མི་མགོའི་དབུ་རྒྱན	crown ornament of the/ a human head	mi mgo'i dbu rgyan
མི་འགག	uninterrupted	mi 'gag
མི་འགབ	inappropriate, not acceptable/ permissible	mi 'gab
མི་འགར་བ	arrogant person	mi 'gar ba
མི་འགལ	no conflicts	mi 'gal
མི་འགལ་བ	absence of conflict	mi 'gal ba
མི་འགུལ་བ	immoveability	mi 'gul ba
མི་འགུལ་བ་གསུམ	three unmoving states, 3-fold motionlessness [1st of the four consolidations according to all surpassing realisation/{thod rgal} as explained in the {khrid yig ye shes bla ma} 1 without moving from...	mi 'gul ba gsum
མི་འགུལ་བ་གསུམ་ལ་གཞི་བཅའ	lay the basis of the 3-fold motionlessness	mi 'gul ba gsum la gzhi bca'
མི་འགོ	headman	mi 'go
མི་འགོ་བ	headman	mi 'go ba
མི་འགོག	not obstruct, hinder, contradict	mi 'gog
མི་འགོག་པ	uninterrupted	mi 'gog pa
མི་འགོགས་པ	does not block	mi 'gogs pa
མི་འགོང་བ	lose heart, be dejected, not afraid, not to go beyond, not transgressing, undaunted	mi 'gong ba
མི་འགོང་བ་ཉིད	absence of despondency	mi 'gong ba nyid
མི་འགོངས་པ	unafraid, undaunted	mi 'gongs pa
མི་འགྱང	don't delay	mi 'gyang
མི་འགྱུ་དགུ་འགྱུ	thinking all different things / of one thing after the other	mi 'gyu dgu 'gyu
མི་འགྱུ་རྒུ་འགྱུ	moving/ flickering thoughts, thinking of all kinds of different things/ 1 thing after another	mi 'gyu rgu 'gyu
མི་འགྱུར	changeless, unchanging, immutability, never becomes, never changes, unchangeable, steady	mi 'gyur
མི་འགྱུར་དགོངས་པའི་གཟེར	the nail of unchanging intention GD	mi 'gyur dgongs pa'i gzer
མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	unchangeable vajra state	mi 'gyur rdo rje
མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ་བདུད་འདུལ་རོལ་པ་རྩལ	Syn {gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje; reveler of the {gnam chos}. Syn {gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje}, revealer of the {gnam chos}	mi 'gyur rdo rje bdud 'dul rol pa rtsal
མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐུ	the changeless vajra body / kaya	mi 'gyur rdo rje'i sku
མི	Fourth Dzogchen Rinpoche, Mingyur Namkhai Dorje :1793-?	Mi 'gyur gnam mkha'i rdo rje
མི་འགྱུར་དཔལ་སྒྲོན	1) lady's name: Lamp of Changeless Splendor, Torch of Unchanging Glory. 2) Jetsün Mingyur Paldrön: 1699-1769	mi 'gyur dpal sgron
མི་འགྱུར་བ	immutable [one], changeless, unchanging, steady, space	mi 'gyur ba
མི་འགྱུར་བ་གསེར་གྱི་ཐུར་མ་ལྟ་བུ	like the unmoving golden spoon	mi 'gyur ba gser gyi thur ma lta bu
མི་འགྱུར་བའི	changeless, unchanging, steady	mi 'gyur ba'i
མི་འགྱུར་བའི་གཟེར་བཞི	Four Immutable Nails, at Kailash	mi 'gyur ba'i gzer bzhi
མི་འགྱུར་བར	unchangingly	mi 'gyur bar
མི་འགྱུར་རོ	does not change	mi 'gyur ro
མི་འགྱུར་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	changeless spontaneous	mi 'gyur lhun gyis grub pa
མི་འགྱུར་ལྷུན་པོ་མ	"unwavering men" a son of auspiciousness	mi 'gyur lhun po ma
མི་འགྲིབ	not grow less	mi 'grib
མི་འགྲུབ	not self-produced, not born, does not cause to turn back	mi 'grub
མི་འགྲུབ་པ	not produced, not selfproduced, does not cause to turn back	mi 'grub pa
མི་འགྲུལ	human traffic, travel	mi 'grul
མི་འགྲུལ་བཀག་བསྡོམས	travel/ tourist restriction	mi 'grul bkag bsdoms
མི་འགྲེང	human height/ stature	mi 'greng
མི་འགྲེང་གསུམ	3 lengths of a man	mi 'greng gsum
མི་འགྲོ	not go, messenger	mi 'gro
མི་འགྲོ་ཙབ༹་ཁ	{mi 'gro tsva kha salt source in ru thog rdzong	mi 'gro tsva kha
མི་འགྲོ་འོས་བབས	don gcod mi 'gro'i 'jon thang tshad gzhi	mi 'gro 'os babs
མི་འགྲོ་ཡས་སྟགས	Tibetan custom of sending human beings as glud by exiling people to desert lands from whence they could not possibly return for a certain period	mi 'gro yas stags
མི་འགྲོ་གསུང་བྱོན་མ	traditionally Lhasa's gtsug lag khang gi jo bo bzhugs khri der dang primordial buddha kyi clay statue zhig yod cing, phyis jo bo'i sku 'di nyid bzhugs su gsol dgos pas another statue spo rtsis byed...	mi 'gro gsung byon ma
མི་འགྲོ་གསུན་བྱོན	buddha image carried to lhasa in 630 a.d.	mi 'gro gsun byon
མི་འགྲོགས	1 does not meet with	mi 'grogs
མི་རྒད	wild man, savage, robber	mi rgad
མི་རྒན	1) old person; 2) much experienced person)	mi rgan
མི་རྒན་པ	old person	mi rgan pa
མི་རྒན་ལོ་བདུན་ཅུ་བ	septuagenarian	mi rgan lo bdun cu ba
མི་རྒན་སེམས་ཚད་མ་ལོན་པ	moron	mi rgan sems tshad ma lon pa
མི་རྒོད	wildman/ Yeti	mi rgod
མི་རྒོད་པོ	1) mi 'jon po'am grung po; 2) savage, wild, uncultivated/ uncivilized person)	mi rgod po
མི་རྒོད་བྱེད་པ	rob	mi rgod byed pa
མི་རྒྱག་པ་ཆུང་ཆུང	squat	mi rgyag pa chung chung
མི་རྒྱང་རྟ་རྐྱང	alone	mi rgyang rta rkyang
མི་རྒྱལ་བ་མེད་པ	invincible, evervictorious	mi rgyal ba med pa
མི་རྒྱལ་མེད་པ	invincible, evervictorious	mi rgyal med pa
མི་རྒྱུ་གཉིས་ཞན	mi rgyu both phongs pa	mi rgyu gnyis zhan
མི་རྒྱུག	foot race	mi rgyug
མི་རྒྱུག་པའི་དུས	slack season	mi rgyug pa'i dus
མི་རྒྱུད	generation, genealogy, lineage, descendants, character, nature, race [persons]	mi rgyud
མི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི	tribal	mi rgyud kyi
མི་རྒྱུད་དཀར་པོ	caucasian	mi rgyud dkar po
མི་རྒྱུད་ནག་པོ	negro	mi rgyud nag po
མི་རྒྱུད་བརླག	commit genocide	mi rgyud brlag
མི་རྒྱུད་སེར་པོ	mongoloid race	mi rgyud ser po
མི་སྒམ་པ	shallow, not deep	mi sgam pa
མི་སྒེར	individual/ private person, kher rkyang	mi sger
མི་སྒེར་ལ་རྨོངས་དད	[stupid] personality cult/ cult of the individual	mi sger la rmongs dad
མི་སྒོམ	not meditating	mi sgom
མི་བརྒྱ་ཁ་གཅིག	100 people 1 mouth, all the people kha gcig mthun	mi brgya kha gcig
མི་བརྒྱ་སེམས་གཅིག	100 people 1 mind, all the people united as 1	mi brgya sems gcig
མི་བརྒྱད	8 people	mi brgyad
མི་བརྒྱུད	family lineage, ancestry	mi brgyud
མི་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི	folk, hereditary	mi brgyud kyi
མི་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	genealogy	mi brgyud kyi 'byung khungs
མི་བརྒྱུད་དུ་བདག་པའི་ལམ་སྲོལ	hereditary	mi brgyud du bdag pa'i lam srol
མི་བསྒོམ	nonmeditation; uncultivated	mi bsgom
མི་བསྒོམ་པ་རང་བཞག་ཆེན་པོ	the great meditationless absorption in your own being, the great natural resting of nonmeditation	mi bsgom pa rang bzhag chen po
མི་བསྒྱུར་བ	unchanging mi nga rang ngan te bla ma bzang Though I am a worthless man, my guru is supreme; [famous quote from Milarepa's songs]	mi bsgyur ba
མི་ངན	dishonest/ bad/ vicious people, people of bad origin	mi ngan
མི་ངན་ཁྲོམ་རྐུན	scoundrel, rogue	mi ngan khrom rkun
མི་ངན་གྱི་ཐོ	black list	mi ngan gyi tho
མི་ངན་དོན་ངན	bad people and purpose	mi ngan don ngan
མི་ངན་ནག་ཅན	evil vicious people	mi ngan nag can
མི་ངན་བྱེད་པ	to behave in evil ways	mi ngan byed pa
མི་ངན་ལག་སྦྲེལ	accomplice, accessory [of a bad person]	mi ngan lag sbrel
མི་ངས	intermittent fever, infectious disease	mi ngas
མི་ངོ	1) owner/ master of a house; 2) the original person, not a substitute, in person; 3) human face; 4) count of people)	mi ngo
མི་ངོ་འགྲོ་དགོས	you have to go in person	mi ngo 'gro dgos
མི་ངོ་མ	1) owner/ master of a house; 2) the original person, not a substitute, in person; 3) human face; 4) count of people)	mi ngo ma
མི་ངོ་མ་འགྲོ་དགོས	you have to go in person	mi ngo ma 'gro dgos
མི་ངོ་མ་རང	the original person him/ herself, mi do bdag ngo thog	mi ngo ma rang
མི་ངོམས	insatiable	mi ngoms
མི་ངོམས་ཉིད	insatiableness	mi ngoms nyid
མི་དངངས་པ	frightening others	mi dngangs pa
མི་དངོས་དོན་དངོས	people and task both ka dngos gnas yin pa	mi dngos don dngos
མི་མངའ་བ	not possessing, nonpossession, non- mastery	mi mnga' ba
མི་མངའ་བ་གསུམ	three nonpossessions	mi mnga' ba gsum
མི་མངོན	do not bulge out, unmanifest	mi mngon
མི་མངོན་ནུས་ཤུགས	hidden power	mi mngon nus shugs
མི་མངོན་པ	king, ruler	mi mngon pa
མི་མངོན་པའི་དུས	latent period/ stage	mi mngon pa'i dus
མི་མངོན་པའི་ཚིག	unclear words	mi mngon pa'i tshig
མི་མངོན་པའི་གཟུགས	invisible/ unmanifest/ hidden form	mi mngon pa'i gzugs
མི་མངོན་པའི་ཤུགས	latent/ potential strength	mi mngon pa'i shugs
མི་མངོན་པར་གྱུར	pap disappear, vanish from sight, became invisible, vanished, disappeared	mi mngon par gyur
མི་མངོན་དབྱིངས	unmanifest realm, invisible space; invisible realm	mi mngon dbyings
མི་མངོན་དབྱིངས་སུ་གཟིམས	passed into the realm of the invisible [h died]	mi mngon dbyings su gzims
མི་སྔུག་པ་སྔུག་པ	mistaking what is repulsive for the beautiful	mi sngug pa sngug pa
མི་བསྔགས	not described, indescribable	mi bsngags
མི་གཅིག	diverse	mi gcig
མི་གཅིག་པ	discrepancy, different	mi gcig pa
མི་གཅེར་བུར་འཛིངས་པ	rugged naked person	mi gcer bur 'dzings pa
མི་བཅད	not separating	mi bcad
མི་བཅའ་བ	not to hold, not to take	mi bca' ba
མི་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 human worlds, [the 4 continents and 8 subcontinents]. {gling bzhi}, {gling phran brgyad}	mi bcu gnyis
མི་ལྕོགས	not able to do something, having no opportunity or leisure for doing a thing	mi lcogs
མི་ལྕོགས་པ	1) w/o the leisure for; 2) not able to	mi lcogs pa
མི་ལྕོགས་པ་མེད་པ	not incapable	mi lcogs pa med pa
མི་ལྕོགས་མེད	transit stage, threshold	mi lcogs med
མི་ཆ་བ	SA mi shes pa	mi cha ba
མི་ཆགས	will not be formed	mi chags
མི་ཆུ་བདུན	chn	mi chu bdun
མི་ཆུང	dwarf, elf	mi chung
མི་ཆུང་གི	elfin	mi chung gi
མི་ཆུང་བ	bon heaven	mi chung ba
མི་ཆུང་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	a small person producing big thoughts/ knowledge	mi chung sems bskyed
མི་ཆེ	non greater, one of the 28 classes of gods in the {gzugs kye khams} form realm of the {gnas gtsang ma'i} pure reaches	mi che
མི་ཆེ་དགུ་རིམ་དགུ	classes of great men in their order	mi che dgu rim dgu
མི་ཆེ་བ	none greater (1st the {gnas gtsang ma lnga} the five pure realms of the form realm), a b"n heaven [bsam gtan bzhi pa'i gnas ris bzhi pa ste, gnas gtsang ma'i ris su skyes pa'i nang nas 'di gong ma ...	mi che ba
མི་ཆེན	noble/important people, leaders	mi chen
མི་ཆེན་པོ	great man, an important person	mi chen po
མི་ཆོ་མེད	empty-headed man	mi cho med
མི་ཆོག	won't suffice	mi chog
མི་ཆོག་པ	bit	mi chog pa
མི་ཆོག་པའ་ཤུས་རེད	ought not, not supposed to	mi chog pa' shus red
མི་ཆོག་བའི་ཁུལ་རེད	ought not, it is not supposed to	mi chog ba'i khul red
མི་ཆོད	uncuttable, cannot be cut, not effective, not suffice	mi chod
མི་ཆོད་པ	invulnerability, cannot be interrupted	mi chod pa
མི་ཆོམ་མ	not new, a tribe	mi chom ma
མི་ཆོས	tradition, customs ways of men, customs and usages of common men or householders, house holder, religion of man	mi chos
མི་ཆོས་བཅུ་དྲུག	[TRS 21:2]	mi chos bcu drug
མི་ཆོས་པ	a worldly person	mi chos pa
མི་ཆོས་འཕེར་བ	[entirely] capable of worldly action	mi chos 'pher ba
མི་ཆོས་བྱ་སྤྱོད	human affairs mi chos bla ma bden par smra ba'i ltung	mi chos bya spyod
མི་ཆོས་བླ་མའི་རྫུན	falsely proclaiming oneself as a grown, the pretense of highest human qualities; the pretense of highest human qualities, falsely proclaiming oneself as a guru. [to falsely proclaim having attained...	mi chos bla ma'i rdzun
མི་ཆོས་བླ་མའི་རྫུན་གྱི་ཕམ་པ	the defeat of falsely proclaiming oneself as being a guru [pham pa bzhi'i nang gses, gzhi smra shes don go ba'i mi la, bsam pa bslu bar 'dod pas, sbyor ba mngon shes dang rdzu 'phrul sogs mi'i chos...	mi chos bla ma'i rdzun gyi pham pa
མི་ཆོས་བླ་མའི་རྫུན་བཤད་པ	[arch] worldly person) falsely claiming to have higher than human qualities/ be a guru	mi chos bla ma'i rdzun bshad pa
མི་ཆོས་བླ་མའི་བརྫུན	[arch] worldly person) falsely claiming to have higher than human qualities/ be a guru TSE	mi chos bla ma'i brdzun
མི་ཆོས་བླ་མར་སྨྲ་བ	a worldly person claiming to be a guru	mi chos bla mar smra ba
མི་ཆོས་གཙང་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 pure human laws	mi chos gtsang ma bcu drug
མི་ཆོས་གཙང་མ་བཅུ་བདུན	sixteen pure human laws	mi chos gtsang ma bcu bdun
མི་ཆོས་རིང་ལུགས	[secular] humanism	mi chos ring lugs
མི་ཆོས་ལས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	give himself over to the ways of the ordinary world	mi chos las la 'jug pa
མི་མཆོག	1) the supreme man, [Buddha]. 2) Particular epithet of {dus gsum mkhyen pa}	mi mchog
མི་འཆ་བ	not know	mi 'cha ba
མི་འཆད་པ	1) not speaking; 2) continuous, incessant)	mi 'chad pa
མི་འཆའ་བ	SA mi shes pa	mi 'cha' ba
མི་འཆི་བ	immortality, deathlessness, the immortals, (gods, devas)	mi 'chi ba
མི་འཆིང	unfettered	mi 'ching
མི་འཆུག་པ	unerring 2015	mi 'chug pa
མི་འཆོར	not fall under the sway of	mi 'chor
མི་འཆོལ་པོ་འདོ་མེད	las don sgrub mi shes pa'i mi glen pa	mi 'chol po 'do med
མི་ཇགས	mi 'phyags	mi jags
མི་ཇིགས་པའི་སྦིན་པ	the gift of fearlessness	mi jigs pa'i sbin pa
མི་མཇལ	See {mjal}	mi mjal
མི་མཇེད	sahaloka, world spheres (there are 1000 to the third power 'jam bu gling in one mi mjed), SA gzhi dang snying po me tog gis brgyan pa mi mjed, enduring sufferings, the suffering world	mi mjed
མི་མཇེད་ཀྱི་ཁམས	Saha world-system	mi mjed kyi khams
མི་མཇེད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	Saha World. Our known world system; the 'World of Endurance,' because the sentient beings here endure unbearable suffering. Saha can also mean 'Undivided' because the karmas and disturbing emotions...	mi mjed kyi 'jig rten
མི་མཇེད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	the Saha world system	mi mjed kyi 'jig rten gyi khams
མི་མཇེད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི	our present Saha World	mi mjed kyi 'jig rten 'di
མི་མཇེད་ཅན	mount sumeru	mi mjed can
མི་མཇེད་ཇི་མི་སྙམ་ཤེས	know the thoughts of the people of the Saha world	mi mjed ji mi snyam shes
མི་མཇེད་འཇིག་རྟེན	the suffering/ unbearable/ saha world/ universe, this world [of suffering]/fortitude	mi mjed 'jig rten
མི་མཇེད་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ཁམས	Saha world. The name of our present world system. Saha means 'enduring' because the sentient beings here endure unbearable suffering. Saha can also mean 'undivided' because the karmas and kleshas, ...	mi mjed 'jig rten gyi khams
མི་མཇེད་སྙིང་པོ	Buddha, essence of the saha world	mi mjed snying po
མི་མཇེད་བདག་པོ	lord of the Saha world, Buddha, Brahma	mi mjed bdag po
མི་མཇེད་མི་མཇེད་གྱི་ཁམས	the Saha world system	mi mjed mi mjed gyi khams
མི་མཇེད་བརྩེགས་པ	Abundant Tolerance	mi mjed brtsegs pa
མི་མཇེད་ཞིང	the field of forbearance/ endurance/ fortitude (this world system)	mi mjed zhing
མི་མཇེད་ཞིང་མགོན	Shakyamuni	mi mjed zhing mgon
མི་འཇབ	(A) harsh	mi 'jab
མི་འཇིག་པ	imperishable	mi 'jig pa
མི་འཇིག་པའི་གནས་ལྔ	the five places of fearlessness [indestructible??? [dbus rgya gar rdo rje gdan, shar ri bo rtse lnga, lho po ta la, nub ao ti ya na, byang sham bha la	mi 'jig pa'i gnas lnga
མི་འཇིགས	fearless	mi 'jigs
མི་འཇིགས་སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	offer the gift of fearless refuge	mi 'jigs skyabs kyi sbyin pa
མི་འཇིགས་པ	fearlessness. be fearless,	mi 'jigs pa
གྲོཨུནད་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	confidence. See {'jigs pa}	ground of self
མི་འཇིགས་པ་སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	the generosity of protection against fear; {sbyin pa gsum} smi 'jigs pa} Notes see mi {'jigs pa} fearlessness, self-confidence	mi 'jigs pa skyabs kyi sbyin pa
མི་འཇིགས་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	the generosity of fearlessness	mi 'jigs pa sbyin pa
མི་འཇིགས་པ་བཞི	four states of fearlessness	mi 'jigs pa bzhi
མི་འཇིགས་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས	c. 1100 - Abhayakara, an Indian master	mi 'jigs pa'i 'byung gnas
མི་འཇུག	not enter	mi 'jug
མི་འཇུག་རེ	definitely	mi 'jug re
མི་འཇེགས་པ་བཞི	the four fearlessnesses	mi 'jegs pa bzhi
མི་འཇོགས་པ	never placed	mi 'jogs pa
མི་འཇོགས་པར	never placed	mi 'jogs par
མི་འཇོན་འཇོན་ཚུལ	be able to do the impossible	mi 'jon 'jon tshul
མི་རྗེ	king, chief, ruler, governor	mi rje
མི་རྗེ་མངའ་དག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	title of the King of Bhutan	mi rje mnga' dag rin po che
མི་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	his lordship, his majesty	mi rje chen po
མི་རྗེ་མཛད	be king, rule, reign	mi rje mdzad
མི་རྗེ་མཛད་པ	be king, reign	mi rje mdzad pa
མི་རྗེ་བཟོད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	a ruler of men should have forbearance	mi rje bzod pa dang ldan pa
མི་བརྗེད	recall, memorization	mi brjed
མི་བརྗེད་དྲན་པའི	may have something to do with condensed form in which a gter is stored	mi brjed dran pa'i
མི་བརྗེད་དྲན་པའི་གཟུངས	maybe means the memory dharani of no forgetting	mi brjed dran pa'i gzungs
མི་བརྗེད་པ	not forget	mi brjed pa
མི་བརྗེད་པ་དོན་གྱི་གཟུངས	the power of remembering the meaning	mi brjed pa don gyi gzungs
མི་བརྗེད་པ་ཚིག་གི་གཟུངས	the power of remembering words	mi brjed pa tshig gi gzungs
མི་བརྗེད་པའི་དྲན་ཐོ	memorial, remembrance	mi brjed pa'i dran tho
མི་བརྗེད་པའི་གཟུངས	perfect recall, a memory that never forgets	mi brjed pa'i gzungs
ཨིས་ནོན	distraction	is non
མི་བརྗེད་པའི་གཟུངས་ཐོབ་པ	awaken the power of memory	mi brjed pa'i gzungs thob pa
མི་བརྗེད་པར་འཛིན	remember w/o forgetting	mi brjed par 'dzin
མི་བརྗེད་གཟུངས	never-failing memory	mi brjed gzungs
མི་ཉག	province of khams	mi nyag
མི་ཉག་རབ་སྒང	shar zla chu'i shar phyogs sa khul mgar thar man chad dar rtse mdo sogs kyi spyi ming	mi nyag rab sgang
མི་ཉག་སིའུ་རྒྱལ་པོ	rab byung dang po'i sa yos lor tang zhang chang zhes pa'i grangs nyung mi rigs kyis rma chu'i sked rgyud deng sang "nying zha" sa char "shis zha" zhes pa'i rgyal srid btsugs pa de rab byung bzhi pa...	mi nyag si'u rgyal po
མི་ཉན	useless	mi nyan
མི་ཉམ་ཆུང	humble man	mi nyam chung
མི་ཉམས	faultless, never failing, not damaged, uncorrupted, not impaired, full strength, entire, uncorrupted, unblamable	mi nyams
མི་ཉམས་གོང་འཕེལ	progress, advance, development, improvement	mi nyams gong 'phel
མི་ཉམས་རྒྱུན་འཛིན	keep up, maintain w/o decline	mi nyams rgyun 'dzin
མི་ཉམས་རྒྱུན་འཛིན་བྱེད	keep up, maintain w/o decline	mi nyams rgyun 'dzin byed
མི་ཉམས་པ	uncorrupted, undamaged, undegenerated, undeteriorated, undiminished, not collapsed	mi nyams pa
མི་ཉམས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five uncorrupted aggregates, {tshul khrims kyi}, {ting nge 'dzin gyi}, {shes rab kyi}, {rnam par grol ba'i ye shes mthong ba'i}, {rnam par grol ba'i phung po}	mi nyams pa'i phung po lnga
མི་ཉམས་པའི་ས	uneven land, land that does not fall in value or turn bad	mi nyams pa'i sa
མི་ཉམས་པར	uncorrupted, undamaged, undegenerated, undeteriorated	mi nyams par
མི་ཉམས་ཡུན་གནས	never-changing, everlasting	mi nyams yun gnas
མི་ཉམས་ཡུན་གནས་ཀྱི་བདེ་སྐྱིད	neverchanging/ everlasting happiness	mi nyams yun gnas kyi bde skyid
མི་ཉིད	humanity, honesty	mi nyid
མི་ཉིད་ཅན	human[e], honest	mi nyid can
མི་ཉུང	a fair deal of	mi nyung
མི་ཉུང་བ	sufficient, enough, not short/ few	mi nyung ba
མི་ཉེ་མི་རྒྱང	neither too/very close nor too distant	mi nye mi rgyang
མི་ཉེད་པ	crushing	mi nyed pa
མི་གཉིས	not two	mi gnyis
མི་གཉིས་འཐབ་འཛིངས	duel	mi gnyis 'thab 'dzings
མི་གཉེས་པ་བྱས་པ	to displease	mi gnyes pa byas pa
མི་མཉམ	matchless, unmixed, neutral absence of a state of sameness, incomparability	mi mnyam
མི་མཉམ་འདབ	alstonia tree	mi mnyam 'dab
མི་མཉམ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Atulyavajra	mi mnyam rdo rje
མི་མཉམ་པ	unequal, uneven	mi mnyam pa
མི་མཉམ་པ་ཡང་མཉམ་པར་འགྱུར	will accomplish what is unparalleled	mi mnyam pa yang mnyam par 'gyur
མི་མཉམ་པའི་དྲི	stains of non-=ity sman sna sbyor tshul gyis dri shas che ba'o	mi mnyam pa'i dri
མི་མཉམ་པའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	dpe can don gyi yan lag can dpe'i yan lag can gyi gzugs can du byas shing, yan lag rnams gzugs su bkod pa dang ma bkod pa ci rigs su byas pa'i rgyan zhig, gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	mi mnyam pa'i gzugs can
མི་རྙེད	unfindability, not find, not obtain, may not have found	mi rnyed
མི་རྙེད་པ	failing to find, unfound	mi rnyed pa
མི་རྙེད་མི་རུང	it must be procured by all means	mi rnyed mi rung
མི་སྙན	unpleasant	mi snyan
མི་སྙན་ཀུ་རེ་བྱས་པ	to make crude jokes	mi snyan ku re byas pa
མི་སྙན་ཐོས	hear blame/ unpleasantness	mi snyan thos
མི་སྙན་པ	disgrace, one of the {'jig rten chos brgyad} eight worldly dharmas; unpleasant, blame	mi snyan pa
མི་སྙན་པ་བརྗོད་འདོད	desire to express blame	mi snyan pa brjod 'dod
མི་སྙན་པ་འབྱུང་བ	the arising of disgrace/ blame/ unpleasantness	mi snyan pa 'byung ba
མི་སྙན་པ་བཟླས་པ	speaking crudely; making lewd sounds	mi snyan pa bzlas pa
མི་སྙན་པའི་གཏམ	heart-breaking news	mi snyan pa'i gtam
མི་སྙོན་པ	disavowing	mi snyon pa
མི་སྙོམས་པ	unbalanced	mi snyoms pa
མི་བསྙེངས	not to be afraid	mi bsnyengs
མི་ཏྲ་མཁའ་སྤྱོད	Mitra Khachö, [Vajra Yogini according to Mitra Joki]	mi tra mkha' spyod
མི་ཏྲ་ཙོ་ཀི	Mitradzoki, Mitrayogin, master who visited Tibet in 9th century	mi tra tso ki
མི་ཏྲ་ཛོ་གི	Mitra Yogi. A siddha from India who received teachings from Chenrezig who appeared to him. The transmission of his "Six Vajra Yogas" is still alive and can be found in Volume 16 (Ma) of the gdams n...	mi tra dzo gi
མི་གཏང་ཁྲོད	cesspool, heap of filth	mi gtang khrod
མི་གཏའ	hostage	mi gta'
མི་གཏའ་ཉར	keep as a hostage	mi gta' nyar
མི་གཏའ་མ	hostage	mi gta' ma
མི་གཏའ་མར་བཞག་པ	make a person a hostage	mi gta' mar bzhag pa
མི་གཏེ	hostage	mi gte
མི་གཏོང་སྒོམ་པ	unremitting/ uninterrupted/ unobstructed meditation	mi gtong sgom pa
མི་གཏོང་བ	to obstruct, hinder; relentless, unremitting	mi gtong ba
མི་གཏོང་བའི་སྒོམ་པ	unremitting/ uninterrupted/ unobstructed meditation	mi gtong ba'i sgom pa
མི་གཏོང་བར་སྒོམ	one who meditates unobstructed	mi gtong bar sgom
མི་གཏོང་བར་སྒོམ་པ	unremitting/ uninterrupted/ unobstructed meditation	mi gtong bar sgom pa
མི་བཏང	not send, not leave behind	mi btang
མི་བཏུབ་པ	be unable, be unwilling, have no mind to do, not succeed in	mi btub pa
མི་བཏུབ་པོ	Das: it is not convenient. [mss]	mi btub po
མི་རྟག	does not endure	mi rtag
མི་རྟག་སྐྱོ་ཤས	weary of impermanence	mi rtag skyo shas
མི་རྟག་སྐྱོ་ཤས་ཅན	being weary of impermanence	mi rtag skyo shas can
མི་རྟག་འཆི་བ	impermanence and death	mi rtag 'chi ba
མི་རྟག་འཆི་བའི་རྒྱུ	impermanent is subject to death	mi rtag 'chi ba'i rgyu
མི་རྟག་སྡུག་བསྔལ་སྟོང་བདག་མེད	impermanent, painful, empty, and devoid	mi rtag sdug bsngal stong bdag med
མི་རྟག་བརྡའ་རུ་གོ་བ	to understand the warnings of impermanence	mi rtag brda' ru go ba
མི་རྟག་པ	impermanen[t][ce] [destructible dhamras, changin and disapperaing each instant mi rtag 'dus byas chos nyid yin,//mi rtag pa'i tshe nam mkha'i glog dang 'dra [one of the fourteen	mi rtag pa
མི་རྟག་པ་ཉིད	impermanence	mi rtag pa nyid
མི་རྟག་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མདོ	Sutra of Impermanence	mi rtag pa nyid kyi mdo
མི་རྟག་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of impermanence chn	mi rtag pa gnyis
མི་རྟག་པ་རྟག་པ	regarding/ mistaking impermanent as permanent	mi rtag pa rtag pa
མི་རྟག་པ་རྟག་པར་འཛིན་པ	regarding the impermanent as permanent	mi rtag pa rtag par 'dzin pa
མི་རྟག་པའི་ཆོས	impermanent phenomenon	mi rtag pa'i chos
མི་རྟག་པའི་ཉམས་འགྱུར་བསྟན་པ	the shadow of impermanence cast upon their faces	mi rtag pa'i nyams 'gyur bstan pa
མི་རྟག་པའི་ཚུལ	the way/ manner of impermanence	mi rtag pa'i tshul
མི་རྟག་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	having the mark of impermanence	mi rtag pa'i mtshan nyid can
མི་རྟག་པའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of impermanence, impermanent nature	mi rtag pa'i rang bzhin
མི་རྟག་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	having / to be of an impermanent nature	mi rtag pa'i rang bzhin can
མི་རྟག་པར	impermanent[ly]	mi rtag par
མི་རྟག་པར་འགྱུར་སོང	fallen victim to impermanence	mi rtag par 'gyur song
མི་རྟག་པར་གཤེགས་པ	passed off into impermanence	mi rtag par gshegs pa
མི་རྟག་བ་རགས་པ	coarse impermanence TSE	mi rtag ba rags pa
མི་རྟག་རང་བཞིན	the nature of impermanence	mi rtag rang bzhin
མི་རྟག་སོགས་བཅུ་དྲུག	TSE	mi rtag sogs bcu drug
མི་རྟན་ཉམས་མྱོང་ཅན	veteran 2018	mi rtan nyams myong can
མི་རྟན་པ་རྟག་པ	mistaking what is impermanent for permanent [one of the {phyin ci log bzhi} four misapprehensions)	mi rtan pa rtag pa
མི་རྟེན་པ	not being sustained by	mi rten pa
མི་རྟོག	nonthought, non-conceptual, nonconceptualizing, nondiscursiveness, nonthought, nonconceptualization, conceptlessness, without thought; ex. {rnam rtog steng du mi rtog rnyed} discovered nonthought i...	mi rtog
མི་རྟོག་ངང་གནས	remain in the state of	mi rtog ngang gnas
མི་རྟོག་ངོ་མ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཆ	the trait of 'thoughtless nonrecognition'	mi rtog ngo ma shes kyi cha
མི་རྟོག་ཆེན་པོའི་ཐུགས	the mind of the great nonthought [beyond thinking and not thinking) the wisdom of emptiness,	mi rtog chen po'i thugs
ཐེ་མིནད་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་གྲེཨཏ་ནོན	thought of dharmakaya in Nyingma mantra	the mind of the great non
གྲེཨཏ་ནོན	thought	great non
མི་རྟོག་ཆོས	teaching of the nondiscursive state	mi rtog chos
མི་རྟོག་ཉིད	non-thought, nonconception	mi rtog nyid
མི་རྟོག་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	contemplation without any disturbing reflections	mi rtog ting nge 'dzin
མི་རྟོག་ཏིང་འཛིན	contemplation of nonthought	mi rtog ting 'dzin
མི་རྟོག་སྟོང་ཉིད	nonconceptual emptiness	mi rtog stong nyid
མི་རྟོག་ཐུབ་པ	Bodhisattva receiving instructions in nyi zla kha sbyor	mi rtog thub pa
མི་རྟོག་མཐའ་དབུ་མེད་པ	non-thought free from center of periphery/ limit	mi rtog mtha' dbu med pa
མི་རྟོག་བརྡ	Da of non-thought	mi rtog brda
མི་རྟོག་རྣམ་རྟོག་སྟེང་དུ་རྙེད	discovered non- thought in the midst of discursive thought	mi rtog rnam rtog steng du rnyed
མི་རྟོག་པ་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	thoughtfree suchness	mi rtog pa de bzhin nyid
མི་རྟོག་པ་ནང་འཕྲོད་པ	recognition	mi rtog pa nang 'phrod pa
ཝིཐིན་ནོན	thought	within non
ཨེནཅོཨུནཏེརིང་ཝིཐིན་ནོན	thought	encountering within non
མི་རྟོག་པ་ཟབ་མོ	profound nonthought	mi rtog pa zab mo
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ངང	state of non-thought mi rtog pa'i 'char sgo snang la ma nges	mi rtog pa'i ngang
པའི་གསལ་ཙམ	Thrangu Rinpoche: nges pa = zhen pa	pa'i gsal tsam
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཉམས	experience of nondiscursiveness/ emptiness/ nonthought/ non-conception	mi rtog pa'i nyams
ཨེ྾པེརིཨེནཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	judging, experience of no thought, experience of nonthought	experience of non
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཉམས་སྟོང་སང་ངེ་བ	the utterly empty experience of nonthought	mi rtog pa'i nyams stong sang nge ba
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	nonconceptual samadhi	mi rtog pa'i ting nge 'dzin
མི་རྟོག་པའི་དྲན་རྒྱུན	the stream of	mi rtog pa'i dran rgyun
མི་རྟོག་པའི་བརྡ	sign of nonconceptualization in which one is not conditioned or distracted by thoughts which arise during the practice of contemplation, SA brda bzhi	mi rtog pa'i brda
མི་རྟོག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་མནདལ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	conceptualizing yoga	mi rtog pa'i rnal 'byor gyi dkyil 'khor mandala of non
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregate of nonthought, {rtog pa med pa'i phung po}	mi rtog pa'i phung po
མི་རྟོག་པའི་གཟུངས	unidentified text cited in bsam gtan mig sgron in the rim gyis pa section	mi rtog pa'i gzungs
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of nonthought, nonconceptual wakefulness	mi rtog pa'i ye shes
མི་རྟོག་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	nonconceptual meditation	mi rtog pa'i bsam gtan
མི་རྟོག་པའི་ཧད་པོ	no-thought blankness; a mistaken meditation, see also {had po}	mi rtog pa'i had po
མི་རྟོག་པའུ་ཕུང་པོ	see {rtog pa med pa'i phun po}	mi rtog pa'u phung po
མི་རྟོག་པར	not forming any concepts	mi rtog par
མི་རྟོག་པར་གནས	thoughtfree calm	mi rtog par gnas
མི་རྟོག་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of nonthought/ non- conceptual wisdom TSE	mi rtog ba'i ye shes
མི་རྟོག་བྱང་ཆུབ	enlightened nonthought, the non- conception of enlightenment	mi rtog byang chub
མི་རྟོག་བླུང་པོ	dull and absent-minded	mi rtog blung po
མི་རྟོག་བླུན་པོ	dull and absentminded	mi rtog blun po
མི་རྟོག་བློ	the mind of non-thought [either samsaric nothingness or beyond concept, non-conceptual mind (of enlightenment)	mi rtog blo
མི་རྟོག་མི་རྟོག་སྟོང་སང་ངེ་བ	the utterly empty experience/ wakefulness of	mi rtog mi rtog stong sang nge ba
མི་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས	[Syn {mi rtog pa'i ye shes}. non-conceptual wisdom	mi rtog ye shes
ཐེ་ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	thought	the wisdom of non
མི་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ནི་སྐྱེས	giving birth to	mi rtog ye shes ni skyes
མི་རྟོག་ཧད་པོ	see {mi rtog pa'i had po}	mi rtog had po
མི་རྟོགས	not understand	mi rtogs
མི་རྟོགས་པ	not comprehensible 2019	mi rtogs pa
མི་རྟོགས་པའི་དམིགས་པ	the concepts of	mi rtogs pa'i dmigs pa
མི་རྟོན	not based on	mi rton
མི་རྟོན་པ་བཞི	the four things that should not be relied on	mi rton pa bzhi
མི་ལྟ་བ	no matter (how, what), regardless of, without considering	mi lta ba
མི་ལྟུང	infallible, bear, star	mi ltung
མི་ལྟོ	it does not matter	mi lto
མི་ལྟོས་པ	not depend upon, unrelated to	mi ltos pa
མི་ལྟོས་པར	independent of independently	mi ltos par
མི་སྟེས་པ	SA ma legs pa	mi stes pa
མི་སྟོ	not do harm/ wrong	mi sto
མི་སྟོང	man's price	mi stong
མི་སྟོང་པ	man without anything to carry, not empty	mi stong pa
མི་སྟོང་པའི་དངོས་པོ	empty things	mi stong pa'i dngos po
མི་བརྟན	transitory	mi brtan
མི་བརྟན་པ	move, SA g.yo ba, unsteady, not firm	mi brtan pa
མི་བརྟན་པའི་ཚོ་བ	unstable livelihood	mi brtan pa'i tsho ba
མི་བརྟན་པོ	judicious	mi brtan po
མི་བལྟོས	independent	mi bltos
མི་བསྟོད་པ	criticism	mi bstod pa
མི་ཐ་སྙད་གསུམ་ལྡན	person having the three conventionalities [smra shes, don go, shes pa rang bzhin du gnas pa bcas so	mi tha snyad gsum ldan
མི་ཐ་ར	vessel	mi tha ra
མི་ཐད	inexhaustible, exceptional, excellent	mi thad
མི་ཐད་ཀར	personally	mi thad kar
མི་ཐབས	politics	mi thabs
མི་ཐམས་ཅད	everyone	mi thams cad
མི་ཐི་ལའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་མུ་ཁྱུད	King Nemi of Mithila, past life of the Buddha	mi thi la'i rgyal po mu khyud
མི་ཐིག	not slip, not move	mi thig
མི་ཐུན	points to be shunned	mi thun
མི་ཐུབ	cannot, be unable/ incapable	mi thub
མི་ཐུབ་པ	insurmountable, unbeatable, formidable	mi thub pa
མི་ཐུབ་པ་ལྔ	chn	mi thub pa lnga
མི་ཐུབ་པའི་དགྲ	powerful / unbeatable enemies	mi thub pa'i dgra
མི་ཐུབ་ཟླ་བ	Invincible Moon, one of the mahasiddhas	mi thub zla ba
མི་ཐེ	not slip, not move	mi the
མི་ཐེ་བ	exclude	mi the ba
མི་ཐེག་ཁུར་ཅན	unportable, not to be carried	mi theg khur can
མི་ཐེག་པ	cannot bear [to be scolded]	mi theg pa
མི་ཐེག་པའི་ཁལ་མ་འགེལ	don't overburden [animals]	mi theg pa'i khal ma 'gel
མི་ཐེག་པའི་ཁུར་བཀལ	when the responsibilities you have to assume are too great	mi theg pa'i khur bkal
མི་ཐོག	generation	mi thog
མི་ཐོག་གཅིག་པ	of the same/ 1st generation	mi thog gcig pa
མི་ཐོག་ན་རིམ	member of a certain generation	mi thog na rim
མི་ཐོག་གསུམ་པ	[of the] 3rd generation	mi thog gsum pa
མི་ཐོངས	not let go/ not give it up	mi thongs
མི་ཐོད་པ	human skull	mi thod pa
མི་ཐོན་པ	to miss	mi thon pa
མི་ཐོབ་པ	not obtain/ attain	mi thob pa
མི་མཐུན	unsuitable discord, harm, contradiction	mi mthun
མི་མཐུན་པ	antithesis, factors discordant to	mi mthun pa
མི་མཐུན་པ་ཅིག་བྱུང	there was a disagreement	mi mthun pa cig byung
མི་མཐུན་པ་གཉིས	the two non-accoring factors [bsnyen rdzogs kyi dge 'dun mngon gyur nang gses, free from the mi mthun pa gnyis dang bral ba: las gral du dngos su ma 'dus pa'i mi mthun pa dang, 'dus pa phyir log gi...	mi mthun pa gnyis
མི་མཐུན་པ་བསྡུམ་པར	reconcile conflict/ dissimilarity	mi mthun pa bsdum par
མི་མཐུན་པ་བསྡུམས་པ	reconcile adversaries mi mthun pa bya rog dang 'ug pa ltar dissimilar like the raven and owl	mi mthun pa bsdums pa
མི་མཐུན་པ་བྱུང་བ	conflict with	mi mthun pa byung ba
མི་མཐུན་པ་མེད་པ	w/o conflict/ disharmony/ dissimilarity	mi mthun pa med pa
མི་མཐུན་པའི་གྲོགས	enemy mi mthun pa'i grogs po mthun par byed	mi mthun pa'i grogs
མི་མཐུན་པའི་རྒྱན	tshig phrad kyang sogs tshig don snga phyi mi mthun pa'i don la 'jug pa, kyang yang 'ang, khas blangs kyang lag tu ma blangs pa, bltas kyang ma mthong, bslabs kyang ma shes	mi mthun pa'i rgyan
མི་མཐུན་པའི་རྒྱུ	mere chance, a cause which is not similar to the effect	mi mthun pa'i rgyu
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས	disharmonious elements/ factors	mi mthun pa'i phyogs
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་འདུལ་བ	tame discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors mi mthun pa'i phyogs rnam par 'tshe ba	mi mthun pa'i phyogs 'dul ba
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་སྤང་བ	abandon discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity	mi mthun pa'i phyogs spang ba
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་འཕེལ་བ	increase discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors	mi mthun pa'i phyogs 'phel ba
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཆགས་པ	desire for/ clinging to discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity	mi mthun pa'i phyogs la chags pa
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཡུལ་དུ་གནས་པ	abide in the realm of discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity	mi mthun pa'i yul du gnas pa
མི་མཐུན་པའི་རླུང	unfavorable wind	mi mthun pa'i rlung
མི་མཐུན་པའི་ལས་རིགས	dissimilar/ conflicting kinds of actions/ work/ karma	mi mthun pa'i las rigs
མི་མཐུན་པའི་བསམ་འཆར	dissimilar/ conflicting ideas	mi mthun pa'i bsam 'char
མི་མཐུན་པའི་བསླབ་བྱ	dissimilar/ contradictory precepts	mi mthun pa'i bslab bya
མི་མཐུན་དཔེ	discordant example	mi mthun dpe
མི་མཐུན་དཔེ་ཡང་དག	true dissimilar example	mi mthun dpe yang dag
མི་མཐུན་སྤངས	abandon discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity	mi mthun spangs
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས	{mu stegs rnams rtag tu bcom ldan 'das kyi mi mthun phyogs yin zhes} said, “These tirthikas are always going against the Bhagavan.”	mi mthun phyogs
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བ	{dge ba'i gnyen po'am mi mthun pa sdig pa byed pa rnams mi mthun phyogs kyi mi dge ba} 'Discordant nonvirtues' are all engagement in wrongdoing, the antithesis of or factors discordant to virtue.	mi mthun phyogs kyi mi dge ba
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཞི་ཤེས	know the bases of discord/opposition/conflicting factors/dissimilarity [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, gzhi shes gang zhig thabs shes khyad par can gnyis dang bral ba gzhi'i gnas lugs la phyin...	mi mthun phyogs kyi gzhi shes
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ནི་སྤོང་བྱེད	abandon discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity mi mthun phyogs la khyab byed mthun	mi mthun phyogs ni spong byed
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་གསུམ	chn	mi mthun phyogs gsum
མི་མཐུན་ཞི་བ	pacify/ eliminate discord/ opposition/ conflicting factors/ dissimilarity	mi mthun zhi ba
མི་མཐོ	not high, low	mi mtho
མི་མཐོང	not perceive/ see	mi mthong
མི་མཐོང་ཕྱིར	one does not look about for	mi mthong phyir
མི་མཐོང་བའི་རྒྱུ་བརྒྱད	chn	mi mthong ba'i rgyu brgyad
མི་མཐོང་བར་སྦས	hidden	mi mthong bar sbas
མི་མཐོང་བར་སྦས་པ	concealed	mi mthong bar sbas pa
མི་འཐད	a little bit unacceptable, illogical, inadmissible, unsuitable, improper, unpleasant	mi 'thad
མི་འཐད་དེ	wrong	mi 'thad de
མི་འཐད་པ	[a little bit] unacceptable, illogical, inadmissible, unpleasant, improper, incorrect	mi 'thad pa
མི་འཐད་པར་འགྱུར	will be unfit	mi 'thad par 'gyur
མི་འཐད་པར་འགྱུར་རོ	it will not be pleasant	mi 'thad par 'gyur ro
མི་འཐན་པོ	steady man, resolute man	mi 'than po
མི་འཐུན་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	non harmonious action	mi 'thun pa'i spyod pa
མི་འཐུས་པ	not allowed/ acceptable	mi 'thus pa
མི་འཐེང	person w crooked legs	mi 'theng
མི་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	rickshaw	mi 'then 'khor lo
མི་འཐེབ་ཡོད་པ	a rich man; {mi 'theb yod pas blus ma btang du med} a rich man cannot buy his way out of it	mi 'theb yod pa
མི་འཐོམ་འཐོམ	stupid person, dull man,	mi 'thom 'thom
མི་དག	profane, impure (ordinary beings), incorrect	mi dag
མི་དག་འཁོར་བའི་འོད	the impure lights of samsara (in the bardo)	mi dag 'khor ba'i 'od
མི་དག་རྒྱུན་འབྱམས	continuing bad tradition, incorrect but widespread	mi dag rgyun 'byams
མི་དག་དག་པ	those both pure and impure	mi dag dag pa
མི་དག་བདུད་རིགས་ཚོགས	profane hordes of maras	mi dag bdud rigs tshogs
མི་དག་པ	impure	mi dag pa
མི་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་སྒོ	the door of impure samsara, the impure gate of samsara	mi dag pa 'khor ba'i sgo
མི་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་སྣང་བ	the impure experiences of samsara	mi dag pa 'khor ba'i snang ba
མི་དག་པ་འཁོར་བའི་རླུང་ལྔ	the five impure pranas of samsara	mi dag pa 'khor ba'i rlung lnga
མི་དག་པ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་བར་དོ	the impure confused bardo	mi dag pa 'khrul pa'i bar do
མི་དག་པ་གཞན་གྱི་དབང	impure dependency	mi dag pa gzhan gyi dbang
མི་དག་པ་ས་བདུན	the and impure bhumis	mi dag pa sa bdun
མི་དག་པ་སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་གནང	the confused generosity of impure sentient beings	mi dag pa sems can gyi 'khrul gnang
མི་དག་པའི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	impure illusory body mi dag pa'i dngos po brgyad 'chang ba chn	mi dag pa'i sgyu lus
མི་དག་པའི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	impure nature	mi dag pa'i de bzhin nyid
མི་དག་པའི་སྣང་བ	impure experience/ perception/ outlook	mi dag pa'i snang ba
མི་དག་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ་སོ་གཉིས	chn	mi dag pa'i sbyin pa so gnyis
མི་དག་པའི་ཞིང	impure realm/ field	mi dag pa'i zhing
མི་དག་པའི་རླུང	impure winds	mi dag pa'i rlung
མི་དག་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings who are impure	mi dag pa'i sems can
མི་དག་མིན	not impure	mi dag min
མི་དག་གཞན་དབང	impure paratantra/ relativity	mi dag gzhan dbang
མི་དག་རིགས་དྲུག་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	impure worlds of the six classes of beings	mi dag rigs drug gi 'jig rten
མི་དག་ས་བདུན	the 7 impure bhumis	mi dag sa bdun
མི་དང་དུད་འགྲོ	humans and animals	mi dang dud 'gro
མི་དང་འདྲ	monkey mi dang mi ma yin pa dang mkha' 'gro ma sogs dbang du sdud pa'i dngos grub siddhis mastered by humans, non- humans, kin s, and so forth	mi dang 'dra
མི་དངས	muddy water	mi dangs
མི་དར་མ	nature person, neither old nor young	mi dar ma
མི་དལ	inauspicious rebirth	mi dal
མི་དལ་བ	inopportune rebirth. unfree, [Syn {mi khoms pa}	mi dal ba
མི་དལ་བ་ནི་མི་ཁོམས་པའི་གནས་བརྒྱད་ནོན	freedom means the lack of the eight freedoms mi dal ba ni mi khoms pa'i gnas brgyad de - "lack of freedom" refers to those eight states where there is no such opportunity	mi dal ba ni mi khoms pa'i gnas brgyad non
མི་དུབ་པོ	untired ones	mi dub po
མི་དེ་བ་འཇིལ་བ	expelling the non-virtues	mi de ba 'jil ba
མི་དོ	not be able to	mi do
མི་དོ་ཆོད	SA mi go chod	mi do chod
མི་དོང	a fit of fire	mi dong
མི་དྲ་མ	(A) 1) mi kha stabs can nam kha bsod can; 2) mi 'jon thang yod pa)	mi dra ma
མི་དྲག	prominent citizens, nobles, aristocracy [bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin farmer servants lam lugs kyi spyi tshogs nang chab srid dpal 'byor gyi dmigs bsal ruler}	mi drag
མི་དྲག་གྲལ་རིམ	[class of] nobles, aristocracy	mi drag gral rim
མི་དྲག་ངན་པ	exploiting/ bad nobles/ aristocracy	mi drag ngan pa
མི་དྲག་པ	nobleman, gentleman, respectable man	mi drag pa
མི་དྲག་གཤེད་པ	landlord class	mi drag gshed pa
མི་དྲག་བསམ་ཤེས་ཅན	enlightened prominent citizens/ nobles/ aristocracy	mi drag bsam shes can
མི་དྲན	D senseless, unconscious, forgetful	mi dran
མི་དྲན་དགུ་དྲན	the thinker of disruptive thoughts	mi dran dgu dran
མི་དྲན་རྒུ་དྲན	wild thoughts/ ideas	mi dran rgu dran
མི་དྲན་ནམ་ཅི་ཉེས	is she out of her senses?	mi dran nam ci nyes
མི་དྲན་པའི་འོག་ཏུ	after becoming insensible	mi dran pa'i 'og tu
མི་དྲེད	[grizzly] bear	mi dred
མི་གདག	a ruler of men	mi gdag
མི་གདའ	there is no	mi gda'
མི་གདུང་བ	the Sorrowless [realm, second of {gnas gtsang ma lnga}	mi gdung ba
མི་བདག	1) king, ruler, master, serf owner; 2) buddha; 3) 10	mi bdag
མི་བདག་དགའ	herb aa ga ru, sandal wood, perfume	mi bdag dga'
མི་བདག་མཆོག	Buddha, king, kind of goose	mi bdag mchog
མི་བདག་གདུགས	D parasol, queen	mi bdag gdugs
མི་བདག་མ	queen	mi bdag ma
མི་བདག་མོ	queen	mi bdag mo
མི་བདེ	inconvenient, uncomfortable, pain, painful, anxious, depressed	mi bde
མི་བདེ་བ	sorrow, adversity, ache, unhappy	mi bde ba
མི་བདེ་བ་ཡེ་ནས་མེད	not the least bit ill	mi bde ba ye nas med
མི་བདེན	not true	mi bden
མི་བདེན་པ	untrue, false	mi bden pa
མི་བདེན་རྫུན	falsehood and not truth	mi bden rdzun
མི་བདེན་རྫུན་སྒྲིག	false words lhu sgrig pa	mi bden rdzun sgrig
མི་བདེའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མེད	there is no grief or pain	mi bde'i sdug bsngal med
མི་འདང་བ	lack, be short of	mi 'dang ba
མི་འདའ	1) not passed [away] passable, happened; 2) untransgressible; 3) space, heaven, the sky; 4) a gun)	mi 'da'
མི་འདའ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་དམ་ཚིག	intransgressible	mi 'da' rdo rje'i dam tshig
མི་འདའ་བ	not passing beyond/ transgressing	mi 'da' ba
མི་འདའ་བ་དམ་ཚིག	commitment which is not transgressed	mi 'da' ba dam tshig
མི་འདའ་བར་བྱ་བ	should not be transgressed	mi 'da' bar bya ba
མི་འདུག	haven't, not exist	mi 'dug
མི་འདུག་ཚུལ	why it is impossible	mi 'dug tshul
མི་འདོད	unacceptable, unwilling, reluctant, against 1's will	mi 'dod
མི་འདོད་རྐྱེན་ངན	hard circumstances	mi 'dod rkyen ngan
མི་འདོད་རྐྱེན་ངན་ཐེག་པ	be able to endure adverse circumstances	mi 'dod rkyen ngan theg pa
མི་འདོད་རྐྱེན་ངན་ཕྲ་མོ	the slightest difficulty	mi 'dod rkyen ngan phra mo
མི་འདོད་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering 2022	mi 'dod sdug bsngal
མི་འདོད་སྣ་དགུ་འབྱུང	reap 9 fold misfortunes	mi 'dod sna dgu 'byung
མི་འདོད་པ	not agreeable, repulsive, unwilling, disinclined, be not willing, not liking, not wished for, disagreeable, unpleasant, unwished for, injury, insult, dislike for, not desire	mi 'dod pa
པའི	welcomed	pa'i
མི་འདོད་པ་ཅི་བྱུང་ཡང	whenever any kind of misfortune befalls you mi 'dod pa thog tu 'bab pa'i sdug bsngal sudden unwished for suffering mi 'dod pa thog tu 'bab pa'i gnas skabs sudden unwished for situations	mi 'dod pa ci byung yang
མི་འདོད་པ་འབྱིན་པ	bring undesirable results	mi 'dod pa 'byin pa
མི་འདོད་པའི	threatening	mi 'dod pa'i
མི་འདོད་པའི་རྐྱེན	undesirable/ unwanted situation/ event/ circumstance	mi 'dod pa'i rkyen
མི་འདོད་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	unwanted consequence	mi 'dod pa'i thal 'gyur
མི་འདོད་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	unwished-for suffering	mi 'dod pa'i sdug bsngal
མི་འདོད་པའི་གནོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	to inflict a wrong on	mi 'dod pa'i gnod pa byed pa
མི་འདོད་པའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	expression of unwillingness/ reluctance/ dislike	mi 'dod pa'i rnam 'gyur
མི་འདོད་པའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་སྟོན	show an expression of unwillingness/ reluctance/ dislike	mi 'dod pa'i rnam 'gyur ston
མི་འདོད་པའི་བློ	a disinterested mind	mi 'dod pa'i blo
མི་འདོད་པའི་རིགས	undesirable/ unwishedfor events	mi 'dod pa'i rigs
མི་འདོད་པའི་རླུང	adverse winds	mi 'dod pa'i rlung
མི་འདོད་པའི་ལས	unpleasant work, hard drudgery	mi 'dod pa'i las
མི་འདོད་བཞིན་དུ	against one's will	mi 'dod bzhin du
མི་འདོར་བ	not giving up	mi 'dor ba
མི་འདྲ	dissimilar, different, unlike, unusual, like a person	mi 'dra
མི་འདྲ་བ	{mi dal ba} unfree	mi 'dra ba
མི་འདྲ་བ་ཁྲི་སྟོང	different in 10,000 ways	mi 'dra ba khri stong
མི་འདྲ་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས	variety mi 'dra ba sna tshogs bsam gyis mi khyab	mi 'dra ba sna tshogs
མི་འདྲ་བ་གསུམ་ཡོད	there are three different	mi 'dra ba gsum yod
མི་འདྲ་བའི་ཁྱད་པར	particular dissimilarities	mi 'dra ba'i khyad par
མི་འདྲར་འགྲོ	moving incomparably	mi 'drar 'gro
མི་རྡུལ	blood	mi rdul
མི་ལྡང་བ	no longer arise	mi ldang ba
མི་ལྡན	disjunction	mi ldan
མི་ལྡན་རྣམ་གཅོད	preclusion of lack of endowment	mi ldan rnam gcod
མི་ལྡན་རྣམ་བཅད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	TSE	mi ldan rnam bcad kyi sgra
མི་ལྡན་པ	not endowed with, without	mi ldan pa
མི་ལྡན་པའི་འདུ	interpretative schemata to represent relations between perceptions	mi ldan pa'i 'du
མི་ལྡན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	relational or disjunct	mi ldan pa'i 'du byed
མི་ལྡན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གཞི	the relational. or disjunctive entities	mi ldan pa'i 'du byed kyi gzhi
མི་ལྡེམ	allegory applied to people	mi ldem
མི་ལྡོག	non-returning	mi ldog
མི་ལྡོག་ཉིད	irreversibility	mi ldog nyid
མི་ལྡོག་པ	irreversible/ bility	mi ldog pa
མི་ལྡོག་པ་ཉིད	nonreturning, beyond return	mi ldog pa nyid
མི་ལྡོག་པའི་དད་པ	irreversible faith	mi ldog pa'i dad pa
མི་ལྡོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of nonreturn	mi ldog pa'i ye shes
མི་སྡང་བ་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	nonobservation sign of the non-appearing	mi sdang ba ma dmigs pa'i rtags
མི་སྡུག	repulsive, ugly; unlovely, repulsive, ugliness, hideous messengers, unpleasant, disgusting, foul, vile, ugly	mi sdug
མི་སྡུག་པ	hideous	mi sdug pa
མི་སྡུག་པ་སྒོམ་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of meditating on ugliness	mi sdug pa sgom pa'i rnal 'byor
མི་སྡུག་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	contemplation of the repulsive mi sdug pa dang prad pa'i sdug bsngal the misery of meeting w what one does not want	mi sdug pa bsgom pa
མི་སྡུག་པ་དང་ཕྲད་པ	meeting w what one does not want	mi sdug pa dang phrad pa
མི་སྡུག་པ་དང་ཕྲད་པ་ལྔ	chn mi sdug pa dang phrad pa'i sdug bsngal the misery of meeting with what one does not want mi sdug pa dang 'phrad pa'i sdug bsngal the suffering of meeting with what is not pleasant [enemies etc....	mi sdug pa dang phrad pa lnga
མི་སྡུག་པ་སྡུག་པ	mistaking what is repulsive for the beautiful. One of the {phyin log bzhi} four misapprehensions	mi sdug pa sdug pa
མི་སྡུག་པ་ལ་སྡུག་པར་འཛིན་པ	grasping what is unpleasant/ repulsive as being pleasant/ beautiful	mi sdug pa la sdug par 'dzin pa
མི་སྡུག་པའི་ཉམས	nyams ldan gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, btsog cing dri mnam pa sogs ha cang yi gar mi 'ong ba'i yul mthong ba'i rkyen gyis nang du skyug bro bar byed pa'i rnam 'gyur mi sdug pa'i nyams ston pa...	mi sdug pa'i nyams
མི་སྡུག་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	concentration on the repulsive 2023	mi sdug pa'i ting nge 'dzin
མི་སྡུག་པའི་དིང་ངེ་འཛིན	concentration on the repulsive	mi sdug pa'i ding nge 'dzin
མི་སྡུག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	the perception of the repulsive	mi sdug pa'i 'du shes
མི་སྡུག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་དགུ	the 'nine perceptions of repulsiveness': The perception of the bloated, the worm-infested, the bleeding, the livid, the festering, the gnawed, the scattered, the burning, and the rotting [corpse]	mi sdug pa'i 'du shes dgu
མི་སྡུག་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམས་པ	meditation on the repulsive	mi sdug pa'i rnam pa bsgoms pa
མི་སྡུག་པའི་མཚན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 marks of repulsiveness chn	mi sdug pa'i mtshan bco brgyad
མི་སྡུག་པའི་མཚན་མ་དགུ	{yi dvags gzugs mi sdug pa'i mtshan ma dgus brgyan pa zhig tu skyes pa yin} was reborn in a flower-garden as a preta with all nine marks of ugliness	mi sdug pa'i mtshan ma dgu
མི་སྡུག་པར་བྱེད	pollute, profane	mi sdug par byed
མི་སྡུག་པར་བྱེད་པ	disfigure	mi sdug par byed pa
མི་སྡུག་བ་སྒོམ་པ	meditation on repulsiveness TSE	mi sdug ba sgom pa
མི་སྡུག་བའི་མཚན་མ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 marks of repulsiveness TSE	mi sdug ba'i mtshan ma bco brgyad
མི་སྡུགས་པ	repulsiveness	mi sdugs pa
མི་སྡུད	unable to turn the eyes from the object of one's love or affection	mi sdud
མི་སྡུབ	unsuitable, be unable to stop looking at	mi sdub
མི་སྡེ	community, laity, lay class	mi sde
མི་སྡེ་རྣམས	people	mi sde rnams
མི་སྡེ་ལྷ་སྡེ	laity and clergy mi sdog pa dang phrad pa'i sdug bsngal the misery of meeting with what one does not want, one of the {sdog bsngal brgyad} eight miseries mi sdog pa dang phrad pa'i sdug bsngal the ...	mi sde lha sde
མི་སྡོག་པའི་དིང་ངེ་འཛིན	concentration on the repulsive	mi sdog pa'i ding nge 'dzin
མི་སྡོད་པའི་ཤུལ	deserted residence, place which was once inhabited	mi sdod pa'i shul
མི་བསྡུ	w/o concentrating	mi bsdu
མི་ན	health	mi na
མི་ན་བཞིན་དུ	although in good health; x {mi na bzhin du mgo g.yogs dang} who cover their heads although in good health	mi na bzhin du
མི་ནག	lay people, negro	mi nag
མི་ནག་སྐྱ་བོ	lay-people	mi nag skya bo
མི་ནག་སྐྱེ་བོ	laymen	mi nag skye bo
མི་ནག་ཅན	criminal, evil person	mi nag can
མི་ནག་གདུང་ཐུང་ཅན	Spear-Wielding Criminal	mi nag gdung thung can
མི་ནག་པ	layman, married man	mi nag pa
མི་ནག་པོ	negro	mi nag po
མི་ནག་པོའི་སྲིད་དབང	black power	mi nag po'i srid dbang
མི་ནག་ཕོ་མོ	lay people, negroes	mi nag pho mo
མི་ནང་མཐུན་པ	happy home where there is harmony	mi nang mthun pa
མི་ནས་འཛིན་པ	catch a man	mi nas 'dzin pa
མི་ནུབ	never waning; Burma [obsolete]	mi nub
མི་ནུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	The Victory Banner that Does Not Wane	mi nub rgyal mtshan
མི་ནུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཅུ	the 10 nonsubsiding victory banners chn mi nub rgyal mtshan nam mkha' che'i lung - Great Space Never Waning Banner Scripture. A tantra belonging the Mind Section of the Great Perfection	mi nub rgyal mtshan bcu
མི་ནུབ་པ	(that will) never falter/ be lowered; unfailing	mi nub pa
མི་ནུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	1 of snga 'gyur lnga, SA rdo rje sems dpa' nam mkha' che, The Victory Banner that Does Not Wane mi nub pa'i rgyal mtshan nam mkha' che 1 of 5 earlier translated sems sde tantras	mi nub pa'i rgyal mtshan
མི་ནུབ་ཡུན་གནས	endure for a long time	mi nub yun gnas
མི་ནུས་ན	if you cannot / are not capable of	mi nus na
མི་ནུས་པ	unable, powerless	mi nus pa
མི་ནེགས་པ	unworthy	mi negs pa
མི་ནོགས་པ	unworthy	mi nogs pa
མི་ནོན་པ	not able to keep it down, cannot suppress	mi non pa
མི་ནོར	unerring, unmistaken	mi nor
མི་ནོར་བ	correct, right	mi nor ba
མི་ནོར་ཟས་གོས	wealth, food, clothing	mi nor zas gos
མི་ནོར་ཟས་གསུམ	friends, food, and wealth	mi nor zas gsum
མི་ནོར་ཟས་གསུམ་འཛོམ	you enjoy families, wealth, and food	mi nor zas gsum 'dzom
མི་གནས	nondwelling, nonabiding, not insisting on the reality of, not take one's stand, absence of a continuous existent, unsupported	mi gnas
མི་གནས་ཐེག་ཆེན	unidentified text cited in bsam gtan mig sgron in cig char ba section	mi gnas theg chen
མི་གནས་མཐོ་པོ	royal	mi gnas mtho po
མི་གནས་པ	{mi gnas pa 'i} does not remain/ abide in any specific way; (fig.) transcending extremes/ any specific point of reference; unconfined to any specific limits; nonlocalized; in no way static or local...	mi gnas pa
མི་གནས་པ་ཉིད	non-abiding, nonexistence	mi gnas pa nyid
མི་གནས་པའི	nonlocalized; in no way static or localized	mi gnas pa'i
མི་གནས་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the nonabiding samadhi/ concentration	mi gnas pa'i ting nge 'dzin
མི་གནས་པའི་མྱ	unpredictable, unconditioned) nirvana	mi gnas pa'i mya
མི་གནས་པའི་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	(nonlocalized	mi gnas pa'i mya ngan las 'das pa
མི་གནས་པའི་མྱང	unpredictable) nirvana, nirvana about which nothing can be predicated, all-pervasive transcendence of suffering	mi gnas pa'i myang
མི་གནས་པའི་མྱང་འངས	Nirvana where one stays free [of extremes]	mi gnas pa'i myang 'ngas
མི་གནས་པའི་མྱང་འདས	(unlocalized	mi gnas pa'i myang 'das
མི་གནས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to disturb	mi gnas par byed pa
མི་གནོད་པ	not injurious, unbarred, unobstructing	mi gnod pa
མི་གནོད་པར	not harmful/ damaging/ contrary to/ injurious	mi gnod par
མི་རྣམས	the people	mi rnams
ལ་གནས	human beings dwell on the four continents and the eight subcontinents	la gnas
མི་རྣམས་ལ་བརྗོད་པ	told the people	mi rnams la brjod pa
མི་སྣ	race of men, class of people, messenger, delegate, personnel, people	mi sna
མི་སྣ་འཕྲི	reduce personnel	mi sna 'phri
མི་སྣང	invisible, (can't perceive) imperceptible, unmanifest, not seen, gone away, vanished	mi snang
མི་སྣང་བ	invisible (-, referent), not (present, to be seen, be, have), vanish, vanishing, gone away, invisible	mi snang ba
མི་སྣང་བ་གྱུར་པ	disappear, vanish	mi snang ba gyur pa
མི་སྣང་བ་ཉིད	non-appearance, nonexperience, invisibility	mi snang ba nyid
མི་སྣང་བ་མ	sign of the nonappearing	mi snang ba ma
མི་སྣང་བ་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	nonobservation mi snang ba'i 'gal zla dmigs pa'i rtags yang	mi snang ba ma dmigs pa'i rtags
མི་སྣང་བའི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, power of miraculously disappearing	mi snang ba'i dngos
མི་སྣང་བའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the accomplishment/ siddhi of invisibility	mi snang ba'i dngos grub
མི་སྣང་བའི་འབྲེལ་ཟླ	a non-appearing related object mi snang ba'i 'brel zla rgyu ma dmigs pa'i	mi snang ba'i 'brel zla
མི་སྣང་བའི་འབྲེལ་ཟླ་མ་དམིགས་པ	nonperception of a non-appearing related object mi snang ba'i 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags	mi snang ba'i 'brel zla ma dmigs pa
ཡང་དག	true sign of non-perception	yang dag
ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ནོན	appearing related object mi snang ba'i 'brel zla ma dmigs pa'i rtags	of a non
མི་སྣང་བར་གྱུར	disappeared, was no longer visible	mi snang bar gyur
མི་སྣང་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ	vanished	mi snang bar gyur to
མི་སྣང་བར་གྱུར་བ	disappeared	mi snang bar gyur ba
མི་སྣང་བར་འགྱུར	efface the traces of a thing	mi snang bar 'gyur
མི་སྣང་བར་འགྱུར་བ	become invisible	mi snang bar 'gyur ba
མི་སྣང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to disappear	mi snang bar byed pa
མི་སྣང་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	the reason of not seeing and therefore not knowing [for example we cannot conlude that no invisible demons are in this room just because we do not see any)ma dmigs pa'i rtags yang dag gi nang gses,...	mi snang ma dmigs pa'i rtags
མི་སྣང་ལ་རྟོག་པ	{med pa la med par 'dzin pa}	mi snang la rtog pa
མི་སྣན	unpleasant	mi snan
མི་པོ	man	mi po
མི་དཔང	one who is a defendant's advocate	mi dpang
མི་དཔང་བྱེད་པ	defend in a court of justice	mi dpang byed pa
མི་དཔུང	crowd	mi dpung
མི་དཔུང་དགྲ་བསྡེབས	many collected people quarrelling/ making trouble	mi dpung dgra bsdebs
མི་དཔོན	guide, leader	mi dpon
མི་དཔྱོད་པར་འཇོག་པ	non-analytical setting	mi dpyod par 'jog pa
མི་ལྤགས	human skin / hide	mi lpags
མི་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་འཕན	ribbons of human skin	mi lpags kyi 'phan
མི་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་བླ་བྲེས	canopies made from human skin	mi lpags kyi bla bres
མི་ལྤགས་མགོན་པོ་རོང	Human Skin Protector Ravine, Miphak Gönpo Rong, in Tsari	mi lpags mgon po rong
མི་སྤོང	non-forsaking	mi spong
མི་སྤོང་བ	[one who can] not give up/ abandon/ renounce	mi spong ba
མི་སྤོངས	not transcended	mi spongs
མི་སྤྱི	mankind	mi spyi
མི་སྤྱོད་ལས་འདས	inhuman	mi spyod las 'das
མི་སྤྱོད་ལས་འདས་པ་བཅད་པ་རེད	inhuman sentences were meted out	mi spyod las 'das pa bcad pa red
མི་སྤྲུག	not agitated	mi sprug
མི་སྤྲོ	not projecting, not diffusing, not proliferating (thoughts); without projecting	mi spro
མི་སྤྲོ་མི་བསྡོ	without diffusing nor concentrating	mi spro mi bsdo
མི་ཕན་པ	not be of use 2025	mi phan pa
མི་ཕམ	Ajita, invincible, unconquerable, maitreya, mipham rinpoche [1846 - 1912 great nyingma lama and rime teacher)	mi pham
མི་ཕམ་སྐྲའི་ལ་བ་ཅན	Ajita kasakambala	mi pham skra'i la ba can
མི་ཕམ་སྐྲའི་ལྭ་བ་ཅན	Ajita kasakambala [one of {mu stegs pa'i ston pa drug} who taught that everything is created by time)	mi pham skra'i lwa ba can
མི་ཕམ་སྐྲའི་ལབ༹་བ་ཅན	Ajita Kasakambala, one of {su stegs pa'i ston pa drug} everything is created by time	mi pham skra'i lva ba can
མི་ཕམ་མཁས་འཇུག	the Khenjug of Mipham Rinpoche [1846 - 1912 great nyingma lama and rime teacher)	mi pham mkhas 'jug
མི་ཕམ་དགེ་ལེགས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{mi pham dge legs rnam rgyal} [b in the 10th earth horse year, kagyu lineage holder, famous poet.]	mi pham dge legs rnam rgyal
མི་ཕམ་དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་ཆེན	{'dzi sgar bla ma}	mi pham dge legs rin chen
མི་ཕམ་དགོན	Ajita-natha	mi pham dgon
མི་ཕམ་མགོན	Ajita-natha, [Syn {rje btsun byams mgon}	mi pham mgon
མི་ཕམ་མགོན་པོ	Mipham Gönpo. Identical to Bomting Chöje Miphampa. A great master of the Drukpa Kagyü lineage	mi pham mgon po
མི་ཕམ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	SA mi pham	mi pham rgya mtsho
མི་ཕམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	{brag dkar rta so sprul sku} b. 1775	mi pham chos kyi dbang phyug
མི་ཕམ་འཇམ་པའི་དབྱངས	Invincible Manjushri mi pham 'jam byangs rnam gyal rgya	mi pham 'jam pa'i dbyangs
མི་ཕམ་འཇམ་དབྱངས	rnam rgyal rgya mtsho	mi pham 'jam dbyangs
མི་ཕམ་འཇམ་དབྱངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	SA mi pham	mi pham 'jam dbyangs rgya mtsho
མི་ཕམ་པ	unconquerable, invincible	mi pham pa
མི་ཕམ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཤེས་རབ	stag rtse sku ske	mi pham phun tshogs shes rab
མི་ཕམ་ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Lama Mipham, also known as Mipham Jamyang Gyatso (mi pham 'jam dbyangs rgya mtsho) and Jampal Gyepey Dorje ('jam dpal gyes pa'i rdo rje): 1846-1912	mi pham phyogs las rnam rgyal
མི་ཕམ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Mipham Rinpoche. Great Nyingma master and writer of the last century. A student of Jamgön Kongtrül, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and Paltrül Rinpoche. Blessed by Manjushri, he became one of the greatest...	mi pham rin po che
མི་ཕམས	Ajita, invincible, unconquerable, Maitreya	mi phams
མི་ཕམས་མགོན་པོ	epithet of maitreya	mi phams mgon po
མི་ཕལ་པ	1) ordinary/ common people; 2) individual people)	mi phal pa
མི་ཕུགས	1) human nature or rgyu dag; 2) mi rgyud kyi khungs)	mi phugs
མི་ཕེད་པ	gzhom gzhig mi thub pa, rgas 'khogs kyis lto chas mkhregs po mi phed pa, gshol lcags rtul pos zhing sa tha rgod rmo slog mi phed pa	mi phed pa
མི་ཕེར་བ	incapable, not serviceable	mi pher ba
མི་ཕོ	man, skyes pa rgod po	mi pho
མི་ཕོག	exemption from a particular duty or tax in lieu of another condition	mi phog
མི་ཕོངས་པ	not poor/ destitute/ impoverished	mi phongs pa
མི་ཕོད	hesitations, dare not; cannot bear to	mi phod
མི་ཕོད་པ	grudge	mi phod pa
མི་ཕྱགས	in time of war etc dza drag che skabs mi su yod skul ba'i khral zhig	mi phyags
མི་ཕྱད་པ	indestructible	mi phyad pa
མི་ཕྱིད	undivided	mi phyid
མི་ཕྱུགས་གཉིས་འཕེལ	both people and cattle increase	mi phyugs gnyis 'phel
མི་ཕྱུགས་དལ་ཡམ	plague for men and cattle	mi phyugs dal yam
མི་ཕྱུངས	not take out/ pull out/ remove/ draw put/ cause to come forth/ put out/ turn out/ banish/ expel	mi phyungs
མི་ཕྱེད	unshakable, indestructible, unswerving; undivided; {mi phyed dad pa} undivided faith	mi phyed
མི་ཕྱེད་གུས་པ	total devotion, complete respect	mi phyed gus pa
མི་ཕྱེད་དྭངས་པ	a mind that does not change and remains firm	mi phyed dwangs pa
མི་ཕྱེད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐུགས	indestructible vajra mind	mi phyed rdo rje'i thugs
མི་ཕྱེད་པ	1) changeless, stable indestructible, unwavering, limitless; 2) Michepa)/*	mi phyed pa
ཙུན	da} one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [staviras] / [arhats]	tsun
མི་ཕྱེད་པའི་དད་པ	undivided faith	mi phyed pa'i dad pa
མི་ཕྱེད་པའི་དད་པ་སྐྱེས་པ	experienced constant devotion	mi phyed pa'i dad pa skyes pa
མི་ཕྱེད་པའི་དད་པ་བྱུང་བ	his faith became irreversible	mi phyed pa'i dad pa byung ba
མི་ཕྱེད་མ	a nadi	mi phyed ma
མི་འཕམ	invincible	mi 'pham
མི་འཕེར་བ	unable to, unqualified as	mi 'pher ba
མི་འཕེལ	not exaggerating	mi 'phel
མི་འཕོ་བ	inexhaustible, indestructible, SA chen po lnga	mi 'pho ba
མི་འཕྲུལ	optical illusion	mi 'phrul
མི་འཕྲོ	stagnant	mi 'phro
མི་འཕྲོ་བར་གནས་པ	undistracted	mi 'phro bar gnas pa
མི་འཕྲོ་བར་གནས་པ་འི་བསམ་གཏན	undistracted concentration	mi 'phro bar gnas pa 'i bsam gtan
མི་འཕྲོ་བར་གནས་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	undistracted concentration	mi 'phro bar gnas pa'i bsam gtan
མི་འཕྲོག་པ	unassailable, inalienable, not able to be forfeited	mi 'phrog pa
མི་འཕྲོག་པའི་ཡིད་ཆེས	inalienable faith	mi 'phrog pa'i yid ches
མི་འཕྲོག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	inalienable praj¤	mi 'phrog pa'i shes rab
མི་འཕྲོགས་པ	inalienableness	mi 'phrogs pa
མི་འཕྲོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	inalienable / unassailable insight	mi 'phrogs pa'i shes rab
མི་འཕྲོད་པ	not acting (as when medicine has not the desired effect), unfit, disagreeable, not suitable, unsuited	mi 'phrod pa
མི་འཕྲོད་པ་ཡི་དུག	kha zas phan tshun mi 'phrod pa mnyam du sbyar nas zos pa las byung ba'i dug dang 'dra ba'i lus la gnod pa 'byung ba zhig	mi 'phrod pa yi dug
མི་འཕྲོད་ཟས	unwholesome food	mi 'phrod zas
མི་བབ	personal appearance	mi bab
མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ	personal interview	mi bab spyan zhu
མི་བབས	personal appearance, mi'i gzugs byad bzang ngan gyi rnam pa	mi babs
མི་བས་པ	(A) mi zad pa	mi bas pa
མི་བས་མ་པ་གསུམ	the three human thoughts	mi bas ma pa gsum
མི་བུ་གླུད་ཀྱིས་བསླུ་བའི་ཤ་བ	the deer that ransoms men through the glud	mi bu glud kyis bslu ba'i sha ba
མི་བུ་གདུང་དྲུག	6 descendants of the first man (se, rmu, ldong, stong, gra, bru)	mi bu gdung drug
མི་བུ་རིགས་དྲུག	the six human children families [mi'u gdung drug	mi bu rigs drug
མི་བུ་རིགས་བཞི	the four human children families	mi bu rigs bzhi
མི་བུ་རུས་དྲུག	the six human children clans [dmu tsha sga, aa spo ldong, se khyung dbra, aa lcags 'bru ste rus chen bzhi dang, dba' dang sda zhes rus chung gnyis bcas drug go	mi bu rus drug
མི་བུད་ཁྱིམ་སྟོངས	empty house where people have left	mi bud khyim stongs
མི་བུལ་མི་མྱུར	neither slow nor quick	mi bul mi myur
མི་བོགས	cash tax paid by Tibetan govt	mi bogs
མི་བྱ་བ	actionlessness, nirvana	mi bya ba
མི་བྱ་བར	do not, but instead	mi bya bar
མི་བྱས་མི་རུང	it ought to be done	mi byas mi rung
མི་བྱིན་ལེན	1 of mi dge bcu	mi byin len
མི་བྱེད	indestructible	mi byed
མི་བྱེད་ཀ་མེད	have no choice but to, have to, be obliged to, forced to, reluctant, cannot help doing	mi byed ka med
མི་བྱེད་དགུ་བྱེད	to do everything	mi byed dgu byed
མི་བྱེད་རྒུ་བྱེད	doing this and that/ all kinds of things	mi byed rgu byed
མི་བྱེད་ཐབས་མེད	have no choice but to, have to, cannot but, reluctant	mi byed thabs med
མི་བྱེད་ཐུ་མེད	cannot help but not do it	mi byed thu med
མི་བྱེད་མཐུ་མེད	cannot help but not do it	mi byed mthu med
མི་བྱེད་པ	without doing anything; unfabricated	mi byed pa
མི་བྱེད་པ་ཞེ་དྲུག	chn	mi byed pa zhe drug
མི་བྱེད་པའི་སྡོམ་པ་ཐོབ་པ	attain the	mi byed pa'i sdom pa thob pa
བོ༹ཝ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	action	vow of non
མི་བྱེད་རང་བྱེད	have no choice but to, have to	mi byed rang byed
མི་བྱོན	incapable	mi byon
མི་བྱོན་པ	not returning, not coming back	mi byon pa
མི་བྲ་བ	was stingy about	mi bra ba
མི་བྲེལ་བར	not sparingly, not niggardly	mi brel bar
མི་བླ	1) chief or leader; 2) 1 of the mi'i tshe srog bla gsum)	mi bla
མི་བླུ་བ	non-deceptive	mi blu ba
མི་བླུ་བའི	non-deceptive	mi blu ba'i
མི་བློ་གཏད་ཕྱོགས	people's minds' object of attention	mi blo gtad phyogs
མི་བློ་ནང་འགུགས	phyi mi'i blo kha rang phyogs la sgyur ba	mi blo nang 'gugs
མི་བློ་བསྲལ་ཅན	people w clear/ resourceful minds	mi blo bsral can
མི་དབང	lord of mankind, ruler, king	mi dbang
མི་དབང་གི	Your Majesty	mi dbang gi
མི་དབང་ཆེན་པོ	great king/ leader	mi dbang chen po
མི་དབང་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	dpal mi'i dbang po'i rtogs brjod 'jig rten kun tu dga' ba'i gtam zhes bya ba ['di mdo mkhar zhabs drung tshe ring dbang rgyal gyis rab byung bcu gnyis pa'i chu glang lor brtsams, pho lha bsod nams ...	mi dbang rtogs brjod
མི་དབང་བ	not allowed	mi dbang ba
མི་དབང་བའི་རྐང་གླ་འདོད་པ	to demand undeserved pay	mi dbang ba'i rkang gla 'dod pa
མི་དབང་བྱམས་པ	a deity	mi dbang byams pa
མི་དབང་སེང་གེ	lion of lords	mi dbang seng ge
མི་དབུལ་པོ	a poor person	mi dbul po
མི་དབུལ་པོ་ཞིག	a poor person	mi dbul po zhig
མི་འབག	face brnyan or mask	mi 'bag
མི་འབབ་པའི་དམ་བཅ	promise from which one will not shrink	mi 'bab pa'i dam bca
མི་འབོར	population, total people	mi 'bor
མི་འབོར་གྲངས་རྩིས	census	mi 'bor grangs rtsis
མི་འབོར་ཆུང	small population/ # of people	mi 'bor chung
མི་འབོར་ཆེ་ས	area of high population	mi 'bor che sa
མི་འབོར་ཉུང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	depopulate	mi 'bor nyung du gtong ba
མི་འབོར་ལ་འཇིགས་དངངས	acrophobia	mi 'bor la 'jigs dngangs
མི་འབྱུང	cannot spring up, impossibility	mi 'byung
མི་འབྱུར་རྡོ་འཇེའི་སྐུ	the changeless vajrak ya	mi 'byur rdo 'je'i sku
མི་འབྱེད	non-divisiveness	mi 'byed
མི་འབྱེད་འཇིག་རྟེན	this world	mi 'byed 'jig rten
མི་འབྱོན་གོང་དུ	before arriving	mi 'byon gong du
མི་འབྲང་བ	without following	mi 'brang ba
མི་འབྲལ་བ	not separate from, never separated	mi 'bral ba
མི་འབྲལ་བར	inseparable	mi 'bral bar
མི་འབྲེལ་བ	unrelated	mi 'brel ba
མི་ལྦགས་ཀྱི་བླ་བྲེས	canopies made from human skin	mi lbags kyi bla bres
མི་སྦེད་པ	revealing	mi sbed pa
མི་སྦྱིན་སྐྱེས	sun	mi sbyin skyes
མི་སྦྱིན་སྐྱེས་པ	sun	mi sbyin skyes pa
མི་སྦྱིན་པའི་གནས་བཞི	four cases when the teaching should not be granted [teaching should not be given to those who are faithless because of 1 being extremely aggressive or loquacious two having little perseverence, and...	mi sbyin pa'i gnas bzhi
མི་མ	tears	mi ma
མི་མ་སྤྲ	monkey w human-like shape, ape	mi ma spra
མི་མ་ཡིན	formless gods and demons	mi ma yin
མི་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་བུ་ཞིག་ཡིན་འདུག་པ	the	mi ma yin gyi bu zhig yin 'dug pa
ཆིལད་མུསཏ་བེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	human origin	child must be of non
མི་མ་ཡིན་པའི་བདུད	demons that are not human beings	mi ma yin pa'i bdud
མི་མ་ཡིན་པའི་མི་ཁོམས་པ་བཞི	the four nonhuman unfree states; {dmyal ba} {yi dvags} {dud 'gro} {lha tshe ring po}	mi ma yin pa'i mi khoms pa bzhi
མི་མ་ཡིན་པས་བརླམས་པ	consequences of the acts of the former states of life	mi ma yin pas brlams pa
མི་མ་རབས་ཐ་ཆད	low status	mi ma rabs tha chad
མི་མང	masses, common people, the public, many people	mi mang
མི་མང་ཁ་སྡེབས	uniform deposition	mi mang kha sdebs
མི་མང་གི	civilian	mi mang gi
མི་མང་འདུ་ཚོགས	public gathering	mi mang 'du tshogs
མི་མང་པོ	many people	mi mang po
མི་མང་སྤྱི་ཁང	commune	mi mang spyi khang
མི་མང་སྤྱི་འཐུས	people's representative, congressman etc.	mi mang spyi 'thus
མི་མང་སྤྱི་ཕན	public/ general welfare	mi mang spyi phan
མི་མང་དབང་གཙོ	democracy	mi mang dbang gtso
མི་མང་ཚོགས་པ	people's party, Republican Party [US]	mi mang tshogs pa
མི་མང་ལག་མང	many people many hands	mi mang lag mang
མི་མང་ལས་ཉུང	many people w little work, over- staffed	mi mang las nyung
མི་མང་བཤད་ཚུལ	public opinion	mi mang bshad tshul
མི་མང་སེམས་གཅིག	many people of the same mind	mi mang sems gcig
མི་མང་སྲོལ་འཛིན	democrat	mi mang srol 'dzin
མི་མངས	chess	mi mangs
མི་མའི་གཉེན་གྱུར	be the antidote for tears	mi ma'i gnyen gyur
མི་མི་སྙམ་པ	human beings and their thoughts	mi mi snyam pa
མི་མི་བཟང	people and non-excellent people, bad people, people who are not excellent	mi mi bzang
མི་མི་རུང་བ	bad people	mi mi rung ba
མི་མིན	Ghosts	mi min
མི་མིན་གྱི་གནོད་པ	harms of spirits	mi min gyi gnod pa
མི་མིན་ཚོགས	a host of spirits	mi min tshogs
མི་མུས་རྒྱུད	continuous descent line [though w adoptive bridegrooms]	mi mus rgyud
མི་མེད	unpeopled, wilderness, wood, forests	mi med
མི་མེད་ཀྱི་གནས	the place where there are no people	mi med kyi gnas
མི་མེད་ནགས	solitude, lonely forest	mi med nags
མི་མེད་པར	in private	mi med par
མི་མེད་རི་སྟོང	uninhabited mt	mi med ri stong
མི་མེད་ལུང་སྟོང	unpeopled empty valley/ place, wilderness	mi med lung stong
མི་མེད་ལུང་སྟོང་གི་རི་ཁྲོད	remote, uninhabited mountains	mi med lung stong gi ri khrod
མི་མེད་ལུང་པ	unpeopled valley	mi med lung pa
མི་མོ	woman	mi mo
མི་མོ་སྐྱིན་གདོང	ibex-headed Nari, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	mi mo skyin gdong
མི་མོ་མཁན	painter	mi mo mkhan
མི་མོ་རྩེ	coconut	mi mo rtse
མི་མོ་འོ་མ་ནུ་ཞུ་ཅན	nursing child	mi mo 'o ma nu zhu can
མི་མོའི་གླུ	woman's song	mi mo'i glu
མི་མོས	devoid of faith/ regard for	mi mos
མི་མོས་པ	devoid of faith or regard	mi mos pa
མི་མྱམ	would not equal	mi myam
མི་མྱོང	never experience	mi myong
མི་དམངས	common people, subjects, people, masses	mi dmangs
མི་དམངས་ཀུང་ཧྲི	people's commune	mi dmangs kung hri
མི་དམངས་ཀུང་ཧྲེ	people's commune	mi dmangs kung hre
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་དྲག་ཆས	people's armament	mi dmangs kyi drag chas
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་དགྲ	people's/ public enemy 2028	mi dmangs kyi spyi dgra
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་དམག་དཔུང	people's army	mi dmangs kyi dmag dpung
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་པ	people's/ mass organization/ party	mi dmangs kyi tshogs pa
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	nature of the people	mi dmangs kyi rang bzhin
མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་ཤོག་ཁག	people's/ mass organization/ party/ clique	mi dmangs kyi shog khag
མི་དམངས་ཁྲིམས་ཁང	people's court	mi dmangs khrims khang
མི་དམངས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	people's assembly/ council	mi dmangs gros tshogs
མི་དམངས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	republic	mi dmangs rgyal khab
མི་དམངས་དངུལ་ཁང	people's bank	mi dmangs dngul khang
མི་དམངས་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག	people's liberation army mi dmangs bcings 'grol dmag 'khrug people's war of liberation mi dmangs bcings 'grol u yon lhan khang people's liberation committee mi dmangs chab srid gros mthun tshags 'd...	mi dmangs bcings 'grol dmag
མི་དམངས་ཉི་རེའི་ཚགས་པར	People's daily paper Renmin Ribao	mi dmangs nyi re'i tshags par
མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི	people's representative	mi dmangs 'thus mi
མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མིའི་གྲོས་ཚོགས	people's representative assembly/ council/ congress	mi dmangs 'thus mi'i gros tshogs
མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མིའི་ཚོགས་ཆེན	people's representative assembly/ council/ congress	mi dmangs 'thus mi'i tshogs chen
མི་དམངས་དངས་བླངས་དམག	people's volunteer army	mi dmangs dangs blangs dmag
མི་དམངས་དྲག་དཔུང	people's army/ armed forces	mi dmangs drag dpung
མི་དམངས་སྤྱི་ཁང	people's commune	mi dmangs spyi khang
མི་དམངས་སྤྱི་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	People's Republic mi dmangs spyi la dbang ba'i lam lugs common ownership of property by the people, system of public property	mi dmangs spyi mthun rgyal khab
མི་དམངས་དབང་གཙོ	democracy	mi dmangs dbang gtso
མི་དམངས་དབང་སྲོལ	democracy	mi dmangs dbang srol
མི་དམངས་མང་ཚོགས	the people/ masses	mi dmangs mang tshogs
མི་དམངས་དམངས་གཙོ	people's democracy mi dmangs dmangs gtso srid dbang sger 'dzin - people's democratic dictatorship mi dmangs dmangs gtso'i 'thab phyogs	mi dmangs dmangs gtso
མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་ཁང་ཆེ་མོ	Great Hall of the People, Peking	mi dmangs tshogs khang che mo
མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ	people's congress/ assembly, council	mi dmangs tshogs pa
མི་དམངས་ཞིབ་དཔྱད་ཁང	People's Investigative Office mi dmangs yongs la dbang ba'i lam lugs common ownership of property by the people, system of public property	mi dmangs zhib dpyad khang
མི་དམངས་ཤོག་སྒོར	rang rgyal gyis gtan 'bebs byas te sgor rtsis gzhir byas pa'i paper money, people's currency	mi dmangs shog sgor
མི་དམངས་ཤོག་དངུལ	rang rgyal gyis gtan 'bebs byas te sgor rtsis gzhir byas pa'i paper money, people's currency	mi dmangs shog dngul
མི་དམངས་སྲིད་དབང	people's political power	mi dmangs srid dbang
མི་དམངས་སྲིད་གཞུང	rang rgyal gyi rim pa so so'i rgyal khab srid 'dzin las khungs spyi	mi dmangs srid gzhung
མི་དམངས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	people's council/ committee	mi dmangs u yon lhan khang
མི་དམན་པ	not bad, good, well	mi dman pa
མི་དམན་པ་ཉིད	non-humility	mi dman pa nyid
མི་དམན་པའི་རར་རྒྱས	not bad development	mi dman pa'i rar rgyas
མི་དམའ་བ	unbending, not humble, not bowed down	mi dma' ba
མི་དམའ་བར	not less/ lower than	mi dma' bar
མི་དམར	Tuesday [mars]	mi dmar
མི་དམིགས	nonconceptual	mi dmigs
མི་དམིགས་ཉིད	absence of grasping	mi dmigs nyid
མི་དམིགས་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the unperceived	mi dmigs stong pa nyid
མི་དམིགས་པ	non-objectifiable, nonreferential, inconceivable, state free of concepts, beyond concepts	mi dmigs pa
མི་དམིགས་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of	mi dmigs pa stong pa nyid
ཝིཐ་རེགརད་ཏོ་ཐེ་ནོན	objectifiable	with regard to the non
མི་དམིགས་པ་གསུམ	3 types of nonconceptuality (mos pa las mi dmigs pa, shin tu mi dmigs pa, rjes su mi dmigs pa), 3 types of not concentrating on an object	mi dmigs pa gsum
མི་དམིགས་པའི་ངང	non-referential sphere	mi dmigs pa'i ngang
མི་དམིགས་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	non conceptual samadhi	mi dmigs pa'i ting nge 'dzin
མི་དམིགས་པའི་ཏིང་དེ་འདྲིན	nonconceptual samadhi, objectless samadhi	mi dmigs pa'i ting de 'drin
མི་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	unobserved proof / reason	mi dmigs pa'i rtags
མི་དམིགས་འོད་གསལ་གཉུག་མའི་ངང	the innate state of nonconceptual luminosity	mi dmigs 'od gsal gnyug ma'i ngang
མི་དམིགས་བསམ་གཏན	pure concentration, unfocused meditation/ dhyana, dhyana not focusing on an object	mi dmigs bsam gtan
མི་རྨུན་པོ	(A) 1) fool; 2) D heavy, dull; 3) bearing burdens D; 4) ox D)	mi rmun po
མི་རྨོངས་པ	stupid/ deluded/ unintelligent people	mi rmongs pa
མི་སྨད་པ	praise	mi smad pa
མི་སྨོད་པའི་ཚུལ	the way of not disparaging/ condemning	mi smod pa'i tshul
མི་སྨོན་པ	dispense with	mi smon pa
མི་སྨོན་རང་སྐྱིད	mis yid smon byed pa dang rang skyed pa	mi smon rang skyid
མི་སྨོས་པར་བྱས	not having said [an elided word of a phrase]	mi smos par byas
མི་སྨོས་པར་བྱས་ཏེ	not having said	mi smos par byas te
མི་སྨྲ	to speak little	mi smra
མི་སྨྲ་བ	silent	mi smra ba
མི་སྨྲ་བར་འགྲོ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	th downfall of not speaking and going on to another [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, in gso sbyong etc. not speaking out, going on to another	mi smra bar 'gro ba'i ltung byed
མི་སྨྲར་འགྱུར	being stunned	mi smrar 'gyur
མི་ཙེ་མ་ཕྱིད	losing their means of livelihood	mi tse ma phyid
མི་གཙང	filth, dirty, foul, unclean, impure	mi gtsang
མི་གཙང་ཁྲོད	cess pool 2029	mi gtsang khrod
མི་གཙང་གི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན	a puja where impure gifts eg human sacrifices are offered	mi gtsang gi mchod sbyin
མི་གཙང་པའི་དད་པ	unshakable faith	mi gtsang pa'i dad pa
མི་གཙང་བ	uncleanness	mi gtsang ba
མི་གཙང་བ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to seduce [a monk or nun]	mi gtsang ba bskyed pa
མི་གཙང་བ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	the 36 impure substances	mi gtsang ba sum cu rtsa drug
མི་གཙང་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	impure samadhi	mi gtsang ba'i ting nge 'dzin
མི་གཙང་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས་དགུ	nine perceptions of uncleanness	mi gtsang ba'i 'du shes dgu
མི་གཙང་བའི་རྫས	an impure thing mi gtsang ba'i rdzas sum cu rtsa drug [TRS 104-3]	mi gtsang ba'i rdzas
མི་གཙང་བའི་རྫས་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 impure substances	mi gtsang ba'i rdzas so drug
མི་གཙང་བའི་ལས	tarnishing actions; syn {mi dge ba'i las}	mi gtsang ba'i las
མི་གཙང་བྱེད་པ	use as a chamber pot	mi gtsang byed pa
མི་གཙང་མ	shit, human excrement	mi gtsang ma
མི་གཙང་བཙོག་པ	unclean, dirty, unchaste	mi gtsang btsog pa
མི་གཙིགས་སྤྱོད་པ	(A) improper behavior	mi gtsigs spyod pa
མི་བཙིང	not force	mi btsing
མི་བཙུན་པ	uncultured	mi btsun pa
མི་རྩ	Tibetan bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin bran bdag individual persons empowered as masters's source or lineage	mi rtsa
མི་རྩ་མགོ་ལེན	dpon khungs gzhan gyi mi rtsa zhig rang nyid la mgo 'dogs par yong ba de khas len pa la mgo len zer	mi rtsa mgo len
མི་རྩ་ཅན	mi 'gangs chen	mi rtsa can
མི་རྩ་ཆེན	hallow	mi rtsa chen
མི་རྩ་ཕྱིར་འཁྱར	snga dus zhing bran bdag po'i dbang sgyur khral mis gnya' gnon bshu gzhog ma bzod par yul gzhan du 'khyar ba'i gras	mi rtsa phyir 'khyar
མི་རྩ་ཡན་སྡོད	mnga' bdag gi khral khongs nas bros te rang gar sdod pa'i mi'i gras	mi rtsa yan sdod
མི་རྩི་བ	no regard for	mi rtsi ba
མི་རྩུབ་པ	not harsh/ rough/ unpleasant, harsh/ rough/ unpleasant person	mi rtsub pa
མི་རྩོམ་པ	inactivity	mi rtsom pa
མི་རྩོལ	not dependent upon effort	mi rtsol
མི་བརྩི་བ	contempt, disdain, disrespect, scorn	mi brtsi ba
མི་བརྩོན་པ	not industrious	mi brtson pa
མི་ཚ་མ	life sized	mi tsha ma
མི་ཚང	family, family mi tshang family, household, filthy/dirty/impure, ?	mi tshang
མི་ཚང་བཅའ་བསྡུད	family planning	mi tshang bca' bsdud
མི་ཚང་སྤྱོད	sexual activity	mi tshang spyod
མི་ཚང་བ	filth, dirt, impurity	mi tshang ba
མི་ཚང་མ	everybody, everyone	mi tshang ma
མི་ཚངས་པ	impurity, impure conduct, having sex	mi tshangs pa
མི་ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	impurity, impure conduct, having sex [esp violating lay/monastic precepts one supposedly accepts and has vowed to keep	mi tshangs par spyod pa
མི་ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་སྤོང་བ	refrain from living an unchaste life [one of the {bslab pa'i gzhi brgyad} eight basic teachings	mi tshangs par spyod pa spong ba
མི་ཚངས་སྤྱོད	sexual misconduct	mi tshangs spyod
མི་ཚངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕམ་པ	the defeat of impure conduct/ having sex	mi tshangs spyod kyi pham pa
མི་ཚངས་སྤྱོད་པ	leading a worldly life, keeping female company, copulation	mi tshangs spyod pa
མི་ཚད	size of a full-grown man, not having enough, not resting satisfied, SA mi brtan po, ma zad, not enough, SA ma zad	mi tshad
མི་ཚད་པར	not only, in addition to	mi tshad par
མི་ཚད་མ	1) [size of] person of average height, cha sgam mi tshad ma; 2) person w cha 'jog 'pher la mtshan nyid)	mi tshad ma
མི་ཚད་མའི་འདྲ་སྐུ	statue the size of a human being	mi tshad ma'i 'dra sku
མི་ཚད་ཙམ་པ	man-sized, about the size of a man	mi tshad tsam pa
མི་ཚད་ལས་ལྷག་པ	larger than human size	mi tshad las lhag pa
མི་ཚན	the local section of [a monastery]	mi tshan
མི་ཚན་སྤྱི་འཐུས	grwa pa'i gzhi rims sde tshan gyi 'thus mi in a local section of a large monastery)	mi tshan spyi 'thus
མི་ཚབ	negotiator, mediator, hostage	mi tshab
མི་ཚབས་ཆེན	unscrupulous man	mi tshabs chen
མི་ཚིག་དང་མ་འདྲེས་པ	not mixed w ordinary talk	mi tshig dang ma 'dres pa
མི་ཚུགས	never struck	mi tshugs
མི་ཚུགས་པ	1) unharmable, not be harmed; 2) tshod mi zin pa, lus sdod mi tshugs par 'gro 'gro mang; 3) not having independent/ self-sufficient power to...)/)	mi tshugs pa
མི་ཚེ	life, life, lifetime	mi tshe
མི་ཚེ་སྐྱེལ	live/ spend 1's human life	mi tshe skyel
མི་ཚེ་གྲོན	I've frittered my life away	mi tshe gron
མི་ཚེ་སྟོང་སྐྱེལ	waste 1's human life	mi tshe stong skyel
མི་ཚེ་སྟོང་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	to let one's life go to waste	mi tshe stong log byed pa
མི་ཚེ་འདས	to pass a lifetime, to live a lifetime	mi tshe 'das
མི་ཚེ་སྡུག་གི་འདའ	our lives are consumed by suffering	mi tshe sdug gi 'da'
མི་ཚེ་མ་ཕྱིད	losing their means of livelihood	mi tshe ma phyid
མི་ཚེ་ཟད	grow old, age	mi tshe zad
མི་ཚེ་ཟད་པ	{don med rnam g.yeng gi ngang nas mi tshe zad pa} my life runs out in meaningless distractions	mi tshe zad pa
མི་ཚེ་རིང	long (human) life	mi tshe ring
མི་ཚེའི་རྒྱན་ནི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཡིན	the finest ornaments of mankind is virtue	mi tshe'i rgyan ni yon tan yin
མི་ཚེའི་རིང་ཐུང	life-span	mi tshe'i ring thung
མི་ཚེར་ལྟ་ཚུལ	view/ philosophy of life	mi tsher lta tshul
མི་ཚོ	people	mi tsho
མི་ཚོགས	group/ crowd of people 2030	mi tshogs
མི་ཚོགས་འཐུག་ཚད	population density	mi tshogs 'thug tshad
མི་ཚོགས་ཟ་ངེ་ཟིང་ངེ	rabble	mi tshogs za nge zing nge
མི་ཚོད	riddle about men	mi tshod
མི་ཚོར	not being able to [eat] sleep	mi tshor
མི་མཚམས་པ	distorted	mi mtshams pa
མི་མཚུགས་པ	have no resemblance, be not similar/ equal	mi mtshugs pa
མི་མཚུངས	dissimilar, unlike	mi mtshungs
མི་མཚུངས་པ	inconsistent	mi mtshungs pa
མི་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚབ་ཚིག	personal pronouns	mi mtshon byed kyi tshab tshig
མི་འཚམ	1) cruel, hostile; 2) unfit, unbecoming; 3) oppressive, exploitative)	mi 'tsham
མི་འཚམ་པ	cruel, oppressive, unfit, unbecoming	mi 'tsham pa
མི་འཚམས	1) cruel, hostile; 2) unfit, unbecoming; 3) oppressive, exploitative)	mi 'tshams
མི་འཚམས་པ	1) cruel, hostile; 2) unfit, unbecoming, improper, inappropriate; 3) oppressive, exploitative)	mi 'tshams pa
མི་འཚམས་པའི་འགྲོལ་ལུགས	inappropriate system/ way of doing things	mi 'tshams pa'i 'grol lugs
མི་འཚམས་པའི་ལས	hostile prosecution	mi 'tshams pa'i las
མི་འཚལ	not knowing, not searching, not inquisitive. need not	mi 'tshal
མི་འཚེ	w/o suitable regard for others	mi 'tshe
མི་འཚེ་བ	w mind that does not have a suitable level of compassion for others	mi 'tshe ba
མི་འཚོར་བ	imperceptible, to not notice	mi 'tshor ba
མི་འཚོལ་བ	not knowing/ inquisitive/ searching	mi 'tshol ba
མི་མཛའ་བ	enemies	mi mdza' ba
མི་མཛའ་བ་ཐམས་ཅད	all hostile malignant powers	mi mdza' ba thams cad
མི་མཛེས	ugly	mi mdzes
མི་མཛེས་པ	brute, unpleasant	mi mdzes pa
མི་འཛག	not trickle, firm, imperishable	mi 'dzag
མི་འཛག་པ	not trickling, firm, imperishable	mi 'dzag pa
མི་འཛིན	non-appropriation	mi 'dzin
མི་འཛིན་པ	irrelevance, to be avoided, to not regard as	mi 'dzin pa
མི་འཛིན་པ་ང	the five wrong ways of remembering	mi 'dzin pa nga
མི་འཛིན་པ་ལྔ	the five verbal irrelevancies	mi 'dzin pa lnga
མི་འཛུམ	open	mi 'dzum
མི་འཛུལ	not slip, not move	mi 'dzul
མི་འཛོམ་པ	incomplete, not full	mi 'dzom pa
མི་རྫབ་ཆེན	scoundrel	mi rdzab chen
མི་རྫི་བ	indomitable, invincible, unassailable, insuppressible	mi rdzi ba
མི་རྫི་བའི་གདེངས	indomitable confidence	mi rdzi ba'i gdengs
མི་བརྫི་བ	not disturbed by	mi brdzi ba
མི་བརྫི་བའི་གདེངས	indomitable confidences	mi brdzi ba'i gdengs
མི་ཞིག་རྟ་ལ	ride on horseback, fix something on a stick	mi zhig rta la
མི་ཞིག་རྟ་ལ་སྐྱོན་པ	cause a man to mount	mi zhig rta la skyon pa
མི་ཞིག་པ	MSS: imperishable [phenomenon]. (R75: 375.6) [mss]	mi zhig pa
མི་ཞིག་ལ་འབོད་པ	call to a man	mi zhig la 'bod pa
མི་ཞིག་གསལ་ཤིང་ལ་སྐྱོན་པ	impale a man	mi zhig gsal shing la skyon pa
མི་ཞིམ	stink	mi zhim
མི་ཞིམ་སྣ་གཉེར	if there is not tasty food sna khug brdzes nas showing a "yuch" expression	mi zhim sna gnyer
མི་ཞིམ་པ	foul-smelling	mi zhim pa
མི་ཞིམ་པའི་དྲི	unfragrant odor	mi zhim pa'i dri
མི་ཞིམ་པའི་དྲི་མཉམ་པ	equal unfragrant odor	mi zhim pa'i dri mnyam pa
མི་ཞུ་བའི་ནད	indigestion	mi zhu ba'i nad
མི་ཞུན	human rkang tshil zhun du byas pa ste [if rubbed on the body snying rlung gi nad 'joms shing, 'bras nad 'dul bar byed do	mi zhun
མི་ཞུམ་པ	uncowed	mi zhum pa
མི་གཞན་པ	others	mi gzhan pa
མི་གཞན་མེད་པ	seclude	mi gzhan med pa
མི་གཞན་ཞིག	someone else	mi gzhan zhig
མི་གཞི	person's nature/ character	mi gzhi
མི་གཞི་བཟང་པོ	good-natured	mi gzhi bzang po
མི་གཞི་སླ་མོ	weak [character]	mi gzhi sla mo
མི་གཞིག	continuous, SA rtag pa	mi gzhig
མི་བཞག	not be left	mi bzhag
མི་ཟ་གནོད་འབུ	pests mi za gnod 'bu yod tshad gtsang 'phyags	mi za gnod 'bu
བྱས་དགོས	we must sweep away all pests	byas dgos
མི་ཟད	1) inexhaustible; 2) me pho khyi lo, fire male dog year; 2) hardened sharp, obdurate D)	mi zad
མི་ཟད་འཁོར་ལོ	the inexhaustible wheel / mandala, [abbr. of {sku gsung thugs mi zad pa rgyan gyi 'khor lo}. inexhaustible, unending. Vyaya, [the 20th year, the Male Fire Dog]. [the year of] Akshaya. overwhelming,...	mi zad 'khor lo
མི་ཟད་རྒྱན་འཁོར	never-ending adornment wheels	mi zad rgyan 'khor
མི་ཟད་རྒྱན་འཁོར་ལྔ	Five NeverEnding Adornment Wheels, Five Inexhaustible Adornment-Wheels	mi zad rgyan 'khor lnga
མི་ཟད་རྒྱན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	ongoing cycle of the inexhaustible adornments of being	mi zad rgyan gyi 'khor lo
མི་ཟད་པ	a good deal, the greater part of, much, inexhaustible, excellent, exceeding the usual, hardened, obdurate, sharp, unexhausted	mi zad pa
མི་ཟད་པ་རྒྱན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	neverending adornment wheels	mi zad pa rgyan gyi 'khor lo
མི་ཟད་པ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ	the 80 inexhaustibles (of Mah yana)	mi zad pa brgyad bcu
མི་ཟད་པ་ཤེས་པ	cognition of nonexhaustion	mi zad pa shes pa
མི་ཟད་པའི་ཁོར་ལོ	inexhaustible mandalas 2031 mi zad pa'i gter mdzod man ngag gi glu the inexhaustible treasury instruction song, the "Queen Doha" by Saraha mi zad pa'i gter mdzod man ngag gi glu the inexhaustible t...	mi zad pa'i khor lo
མི་ཟད་པའི་བསྡུ་བ	tshig sdud kyi bye brag cig ste, shes rig gi yon tan la shes yon zer ba dang, bsam blo'i 'char sgo la bsam 'char zer ba lta bu ming tshig bar gyi rnam dbye tshig phrad sogs yig 'bru nyung ngur bsdu...	mi zad pa'i bsdu ba
མི་ཟད་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས	inexhaustible source	mi zad pa'i 'byung gnas
མི་ཟད་པའི་ཚིག་སྟུད	participial	mi zad pa'i tshig stud
མི་ཟད་པའི་ལོ	the year of in exhaustibility	mi zad pa'i lo
མི་ཟབ་པ	shallow water	mi zab pa
མི་ཟིན	not governed	mi zin
མི་ཟིམ་བུ་སྤུན་དགུ	the 9 sons of Mizim the blacksmith	mi zim bu spun dgu
མི་ཟིམ་བུ་སྤུན་དགུས་བརྡུངས་པའི་གྲི	the swords manufactured by the 9 Mizim brothers	mi zim bu spun dgus brdungs pa'i gri
མི་ཟིམ་བུ་སྤུན་དུག	9 sons of mi zim the blacksmith	mi zim bu spun dug
མི་ཟླ	# of people/ [untr]	mi zla
མི་ཟླ་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་ལྔ	35 [people]	mi zla sum cu so lnga
མི་གཟངས	careless	mi gzangs
མི་གཟར	not steep, not active, not striving	mi gzar
མི་གཟུགས	human form/ figure	mi gzugs
མི་གཟུགས་མ	thing made in the form of a person	mi gzugs ma
མི་གཟུགས་མ་འཇིམ་བརྙན	clay figure	mi gzugs ma 'jim brnyan
མི་གཟུགས་མ་ཤེལ་སྤྱད	figure of glass/ crystal	mi gzugs ma shel spyad
མི་གཟུགས་ཡག་པོ་འབྲི	draw the human figure well	mi gzugs yag po 'bri
མི་བཟང	inauspicious, bad [luck], misfortune, ill- fated	mi bzang
མི་བཟང་མིག	Syn {spyan mi bzang}, {rgyal chen bzhi}	mi bzang mig
མི་བཟད	terrible, inexhaustible, terrifying, terrible, overwhelming}	mi bzad
མི་བཟད་པ	intense, intolerable, irresistible, overwhelming, excruciating, unbearable	mi bzad pa
མི་བཟད་པ་འཇིགས་སུ་རུང་བ	terrifying	mi bzad pa 'jigs su rung ba
མི་བཟད་པ་ཡི་ཚེ	terrible times mi bzad pa'i sdug bsngal pos gdung ba utterly distraught	mi bzad pa yi tshe
མི་བཟད་པོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	mi bzad po
མི་བཟད་མིག	/; 1) the deity {dbang phyug chen po}; 2) rgyal chen {spyan mi bzang} Virupakasa; 3) Saturn)	mi bzad mig
མི་བཟད་བཞད	attahasa, 1 of 8 charnel grounds	mi bzad bzhad
མི་བཟད་གཟེ	(A) drag cing rno ba	mi bzad gze
མི་བཟད་སེམས	terrible, inexhaustible, terrifying, terrible, overwhelming mind/ attitude/ thought	mi bzad sems
མི་བཟུང	not grasping, to not regard as, not hold the air	mi bzung
མི་བཟོད	can't bear it	mi bzod
མི་བཟོད་ངོ་ཚ	unbearable shame/ timidity/ modesty, insufferably upright	mi bzod ngo tsha
མི་བཟོད་པ	cannot bear to	mi bzod pa
མི་བཟོད་པའི་བཙན་གནོན	unbearable oppression	mi bzod pa'i btsan gnon
མི་བཟོས	artificial, man-made	mi bzos
མི་བཟོས་སྐོར་སྐར	artificial/ man-made satellite	mi bzos skor skar
མི་བཟོས་གཙང་པོ	canal	mi bzos gtsang po
མི་བཟོས་ཚི་སྣ	artificial fibers	mi bzos tshi sna
མི་བཟོས་སྲུང་སྐར	artificial/ man-made satellite	mi bzos srung skar
མི་བཟློགས་པ	cannot be averted/ avoided/ prevented	mi bzlogs pa
མི་མཟེད་སྟོང་གསུམ་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the suffering universe/ 3,000-fold world sys- tem/ saha world/ universe of fortitude	mi mzed stong gsum pa'i 'jig rten
མི་མཟེད་བདག་པོ	lord of the Saha world, (Buddha, Brahma)	mi mzed bdag po
མི་འམ་ཅི	type of lha	mi 'am ci
མི་འོང་བ	not right/ pointless, no purpose	mi 'ong ba
མི་འོས	gzhan gyi mi 'os nor blangs pa - to take wealth improperly	mi 'os
མི་འོས་བསྙད་འཚོལ	'os min gyis khag 'dogs sa 'tshol ba	mi 'os bsnyad 'tshol
མི་འོས་པ	unlawful or discreditable matter	mi 'os pa
མི་འོས་པའི་ཆ	cha'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bsgrib bya gang yang rung ba zhig sgrib byed dngos po mi 'os pa zhig gis sgrib pa ston pa'i cha'i rgyan zhig	mi 'os pa'i cha
མི་འོས་པའི་དོན་གཞན་བཀོད་པ	don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, 'os pa'i rgyu las mi 'os pa'i 'bras bu skyed pa bsgrub byar bkod nas, sgrub byed skye bo rnams la mi 'dod pa'i 'bras bu ster ba dngos po'i byed las...	mi 'os pa'i don gzhan bkod pa
མི་འོས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	entertain illicit intercourse	mi 'os pa'i spyod pa byed pa
མི་འོས་པར	unworthily, unsuitably	mi 'os par
མི་འོས་ཙམ	unfit, unsuited, very common mi 'os shing 'os pa'i don gzhan bkod pa don gzhan bkod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bsgrub bya mi 'os pa dang 'os pa'i dngos po bye brag pa gnyis bkod nas, de'i s...	mi 'os tsam
མི་འོས་སོ	not worthy	mi 'os so
མི་ཡ་མེད	desperado	mi ya med
མི་ཡན	1) wandering person; 2) mi lhag po)	mi yan
མི་ཡི་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as a human being	mi yi skye gnas
མི་ཡི་ཁ	SA mi kha	mi yi kha
མི་ཡི་ཁུ་བ	the deity dbang phyug chen po	mi yi khu ba
མི་ཡི་འགྲོ་བ	human beings/ destiny	mi yi 'gro ba
མི་ཡི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the earth	mi yi 'jig rten
མི་ཡི་ཉི་མ་མཐོང་བ་དོན་ལྡན	[rab byung bdun pa'i nang bod chos rgyal gyi gdung rgyud bsod nams rdo rje zhes bya ba'i sras su 'khrungs shing, 2032 'phags yul gyi phan chen nags kyi rin chen dang, lo chen bsod nams rgya mtsho, ...	mi yi nyi ma mthong ba don ldan
མི་ཡི་ཐེག་པ	(met) Vishnu, the vehicle for humans [={lha mi'i theg pa}	mi yi theg pa
མི་ཡི་བདག་པ	lord of humans, king	mi yi bdag pa
མི་ཡི་བདག་མོ	lady, queen	mi yi bdag mo
མི་ཡི་འདྲེན་པ	king, priest	mi yi 'dren pa
མི་ཡི་འདྲེན་པོ	king, lama	mi yi 'dren po
མི་ཡི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	human suffering	mi yi sdug bsngal
མི་ཡི་གནས	human realm	mi yi gnas
མི་ཡི་བུ	child of man, mortal being	mi yi bu
མི་ཡི་དབང་ཕྱུག	king	mi yi dbang phyug
མི་ཡི་མི་ཁོམས་པ་བཞི	the four human unfree states, {log lta can}, {mtha' khob tu skye ba}, {las mtha' log pa}, {glen zhing lkug pa} compare again!!]	mi yi mi khoms pa bzhi
མི་ཡི་སྨོན་རྒྱུ་མཆིས	it is something you should wish for	mi yi smon rgyu mchis
མི་ཡི་གཟུགས་སུ་བྱོན་པ	magical emanation, incarnation; Syn {dngos snang, rnam 'phrul, sgyu 'phrul, dngos byon, sprul pa, yang sprul, rol gar, rtsal snang}	mi yi gzugs su byon pa
མི་ཡི་གཟུགས་སུ་ཤར་བ	reappeared in human form	mi yi gzugs su shar ba
མི་ཡི་ཡི་དྭགས	preta in human form	mi yi yi dwags
མི་ཡི་ཡུལ	human realm	mi yi yul
མི་ཡི་ས་བོན	seed of human beings	mi yi sa bon
མི་ཡི་སེང་གེ	the lion of men, [Syn Buddha]	mi yi seng ge
མི་ཡུལ	homeland, home area / district, familiar surroundings. the land of human beings, during your life [before dying]. homely / familiar surroundings, during your life; world of men; human world	mi yul
མི་ཡུལ་དུ་ཆས་སོ	when i go to the land of men	mi yul du chas so
མི་ཡུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	the coming	mi yul du byung ba'i lo rgyus
ཨོཕ༹་སུཆ	and-such to the human realm	of such
མི་ཡུལ་དུ་བྱོན་པ	appearing in this human world	mi yul du byon pa
མི་ཡུལ་ན་ཡོད་པའི་དུད་འགྲོ	the animals known to man	mi yul na yod pa'i dud 'gro
མི་ཡོང	incapable	mi yong
མི་ཡོང་བ	it would not do	mi yong ba
མི་ཡོངས་ཚད	all the people that have come mi g.yas - right eye mi g.yeng ba - non-distraction mi g.yeng ba - undistracted, indefatigable, untiring, not idle. non-distraction, attentive[ness] mi g.yeng ba - ind...	mi yongs tshad
མི་རང	1) other and self; 2) solitary [traveller [w/o load]; 3) he himself)	mi rang
མི་རབས	mankind, a generation/ retinue; generation	mi rabs
མི་རབས་ཀྱི	genealogical	mi rabs kyi
མི་རབས་བརྒྱུད་འཇགས	fields etc passed on from generation to generation	mi rabs brgyud 'jags
མི་རབས་སྔ་མ	former generation[s]	mi rabs snga ma
མི་རབས་སྔ་མའི་སྲོལ་རྒྱུན	the [continuous] custom of former generations	mi rabs snga ma'i srol rgyun
མི་རབས་གཅིག་པ	of the same generation	mi rabs gcig pa
མི་རབས་མཆེད་གསུམ	T's earliest tribes, sprung from the 1st patriarch	mi rabs mched gsum
མི་རབས་རྗེས་མ	the next generation, future generations	mi rabs rjes ma
མི་རབས་རིམ་པ	member of a certain generation	mi rabs rim pa
མི་རབས་གསར་པ	new generation	mi rabs gsar pa
མི་རི	price mi gnas sam, mi 'thob	mi ri
མི་རིགས	nationality, race, humanity, human kind, race of man, human race, mankind, it is not right, 1 of rigs gsum, nationality, ethnic group, race, unreasonable	mi rigs
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི	tribal	mi rigs kyi
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྐད	national/ ethnic language	mi rigs kyi skad
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་དབང	national/ ethnic/ racial rights	mi rigs kyi khe dbang
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས	national/ ethnic/ racial characteristics	mi rigs kyi khyad chos
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་འཛིན	national/ ethnic/ racial discrimination	mi rigs kyi khyad 'dzin
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་དགའ་ཞེན	national/ ethnic/ racial loyalty/ sentiment/ feelings	mi rigs kyi dga' zhen
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གཉའ་གནོན	national/ ethnic/ racial oppression	mi rigs kyi gnya' gnon
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་མཐོང་ཆུང	national/ ethnic/ racial discrimination	mi rigs kyi mthong chung
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་འཐབ་རྩོད	national/ ethnic/ racial struggle	mi rigs kyi 'thab rtsod
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གནད་དོན	national/ ethnic/ racial question/ issue	mi rigs kyi gnad don
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	be nationalized	mi rigs kyi rnam par can du 'gyur
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་དཔའ་བོ	national/ ethnic/ racial hero	mi rigs kyi dpa' bo
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	national/ ethnic/ racial relationship	mi rigs kyi 'brel ba
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་བརྩེ་དུང	national/ ethnic/ racial love/ sentiment/ feelings	mi rigs kyi brtse dung
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ལུགས	national/ ethnic/ racial culture	mi rigs kyi tshul lugs
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གཞིས་ལུགས	national/ ethnic/ racial culture	mi rigs kyi gzhis lugs
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	anthropology	mi rigs kyi rig pa
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་རིག་རྫས	anthropological, ethnological/ cultural relics/ artifacts	mi rigs kyi rig rdzas
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལ་རྒྱ	ethnic/ racial solidarity/ unity	mi rigs kyi la rgya
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྲོལ་རྒྱུན	national/ ethnic/ racial tradition/ custom	mi rigs kyi srol rgyun
མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གསར་བརྗེ	national/ ethnic/ racial revolution mi rigs skad yig mdzub 'khrid u yon lhan	mi rigs kyi gsar brje
མི་རིགས་འཁྲུག་སློང	national/ ethnic/ racial disturbances/ strife/ trouble	mi rigs 'khrug slong
མི་རིགས་གྲངས་ཉུང	national/ ethnic/ racial minority	mi rigs grangs nyung
མི་རིགས་འགྲེལ་བཤད་རིག་པ	ethnography	mi rigs 'grel bshad rig pa
མི་རིགས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	be nationalized	mi rigs can du 'gyur
མི་རིགས་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ	national liberation	mi rigs bcings 'grol
མི་རིགས་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གྱི་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	national liberation front	mi rigs bcings 'grol gyi 'thab phyogs
མི་རིགས་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གྱི་ལས་འགུལ	national liberation movement	mi rigs bcings 'grol gyi las 'gul
མི་རིགས་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཞིག	pygmy	mi rigs chung chung zhig
མི་རིགས་ཆེན་པོའི་རིང་ལུགས	great power chauvinism	mi rigs chen po'i ring lugs
མི་རིགས་མཉམ་འདྲེས	national/ racial/ ethnic integration	mi rigs mnyam 'dres
མི་རིགས་ཐུན་མོང་གི་སྐད	national language, common language of a number of nationalities/ ethnic groups	mi rigs thun mong gi skad
མི་རིགས་མཐུན་སྒྲིལ	national/ racial/ ethnic union/ solidarity	mi rigs mthun sgril
མི་རིགས་མཐོང་ཆུང	national/ ethnic/ racial discrimination	mi rigs mthong chung
མི་རིགས་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར	national/ ethnic/ racial united front	mi rigs 'thab phyogs gcig gyur
མི་རིགས་དང་དམངས་གཙོའི་ལས་འགུལ	national democratic movement	mi rigs dang dmangs gtso'i las 'gul
མི་རིགས་དང་དམངས་གཙོའི་གསར་བརྗེ	national democratic revolution	mi rigs dang dmangs gtso'i gsar brje
མི་རིགས་དོན་གཅོད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	Nationalities Affairs Commission	mi rigs don gcod u yon lhan khang
མི་རིགས་དོན་བྱེད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	Nationalities Affairs Commission	mi rigs don byed u yon lhan khang
མི་རིགས་འདུས་སྟོན་ས་ཁུལ	nationality/ ethnic region/ community	mi rigs 'dus ston sa khul
མི་རིགས་འདྲ་མཉམ	nationality/ ethnic/ racial =ity	mi rigs 'dra mnyam
མི་རིགས་འདྲེས་སྡོད་ས་ཁུལ	nationality/ ethnic/ racial diversity	mi rigs 'dres sdod sa khul
མི་རིགས་ནག་པོ	nigger, black race	mi rigs nag po
མི་རིགས་པ	it is not right	mi rigs pa
མི་རིགས་པའི་ཕྱིར	since that is illogical	mi rigs pa'i phyir
མི་རིགས་པར	unreasonably, unjustly	mi rigs par
མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང	Nationalities Languages Press	mi rigs dpe skrun khang
མི་རིགས་དབྱེ་འབྱེད	national/ ethnic/ racial discrimination	mi rigs dbye 'byed
མི་རིགས་དབྱེ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་བྱུས	apartheid	mi rigs dbye 'byed kyi srid byus
མི་རིགས་དབྱེ་འབྱེད་བྱེད	nationally/ ethnically/ racially discriminate	mi rigs dbye 'byed byed
མི་རིགས་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	racial origin	mi rigs 'byung khungs
མི་རིགས་འབྱོར་ལྡན	wealthy nation/ race/ ethnic group, national/ racial/ ethnic wealthy class/ bourgeoisie	mi rigs 'byor ldan
མི་རིགས་འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྲལ་རིམ	the ranks of the wealthy [mi ser spel yul lam mi ser spel yul phyed tsam gyi rgyal khab dang rang btsan gsar du byung ba'i rgyal khab kha shas nang gi 'byor 'bring gral rim	mi rigs 'byor ldan gral rim
མི་རིགས་འབྲེལ་བའི་རིག་པ	ethnology	mi rigs 'brel ba'i rig pa
མི་རིགས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པ	multi-national/ racial/ ethnic	mi rigs mang po yod pa
མི་རིགས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་མུལྟི	national/ racial/ ethnic state	mi rigs mang po yod pa'i rgyal khab multi
མི་རིགས་དམངས་གཙོའི་ལས་འགུལ	national democratic movement	mi rigs dmangs gtso'i las 'gul
མི་རིགས་དམངས་གཙོའི་གསར་བརྗེ	national democratic revolution	mi rigs dmangs gtso'i gsar brje
མི་རིགས་བཞི	the four castes	mi rigs bzhi
མི་རིགས་ཡུལ་ཚོ	minority region/ district	mi rigs yul tsho
མི་རིགས་རང་སྐྱོང་ས་ཁུལ	national/ ethnic/ racial autonomous region	mi rigs rang skyong sa khul
མི་རིགས་རང་ཁོངས་གྱི་ལས་བྱེད་པ	nationality cadre	mi rigs rang khongs gyi las byed pa
མི་རིགས་རང་ཐག་རང་ཆོད	national/ ethnic/ racial self- determination	mi rigs rang thag rang chod
མི་རིགས་རང་དབང	national/ ethnic/ racial sovereignty/ freedom	mi rigs rang dbang
མི་རིགས་རང་བཙན	national/ ethnic/ racial independence	mi rigs rang btsan
མི་རིགས་རང་བརྩེའི་བསམས	national/ ethnic/ racial self-respect/ esteem	mi rigs rang brtse'i bsams
མི་རིགས་རིག་གནས་ཕོ་བྲང	national cultural palace	mi rigs rig gnas pho brang
མི་རིགས་རིང་ལུགས	nationalism, racism, cultural chauvinism	mi rigs ring lugs
མི་རིགས་ལས་བྱེད་པ	minority cadre	mi rigs las byed pa
མི་རིགས་ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ	minority cadre school	mi rigs las byed slob grwa
མི་རིགས་ས་ཁོངས	regional ethnic groups	mi rigs sa khongs
མི་རིགས་ས་ཁོངས་རང་སྐྱོང	regional autonomy for nationalities	mi rigs sa khongs rang skyong
མི་རིགས་སྲིད་ཇུས	policy for [minority] nationalities/ races/ ethnic groups	mi rigs srid jus
མི་རིགས་སྲིད་བྱུས	policy for [minority] nationalities/ races/ ethnic groups	mi rigs srid byus
མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ	Nationalities Institute, Beijing	mi rigs slob grwa
མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	Nationalities Institute, Beijing	mi rigs slob grwa chen po
མི་རིང	not long/ far (in time or space	mi ring
མི་རིང་བ	not long/ far (in time or space	mi ring ba
མི་རིང་བར	after not long, in a short time, soon, before long	mi ring bar
མི་རིང་མྱུར་བ	soon	mi ring myur ba
མི་རིངས་པ	not in haste	mi rings pa
མི་རིས	among humans	mi ris
མི་རུ	as a human	mi ru
མི་རུ་སྲིད	produces the existence of humans	mi ru srid
མི་རུང	improper, unsuitable, not fit	mi rung
མི་རུང་བ	evil, offensive	mi rung ba
མི་རུང་བའི་ཚོན་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	chn	mi rung ba'i tshon chen brgyad
མི་རུང་བར	indecently, unbecomingly	mi rung bar
མི་རུངས་པ	rough, wild, uncultivated, rude	mi rungs pa
མི་རུས	human bone	mi rus
མི་རུས་རྐང་གླིང	thighbone trumpet	mi rus rkang gling
མི་རེ་ངོ་རེ	1 after another, respective[ly], individual, 1 by 1, each and every 1	mi re ngo re
མི་རེ་ཆུད་ཙམ	very narrow	mi re chud tsam
མི་རེ་ནྲོ་རེ་ངོ་སྤྲོད་གནང་བྱུང	[I] was introduced to every 1 of them	mi re nro re ngo sprod gnang byung
མི་རེ་བ་ལ་སྨན་རིན་ལེན	extort medical fees from the hopeful	mi re ba la sman rin len
མི་རེ་ཤོང་ཙམ	so narrow only 1 person at a time can go through	mi re shong tsam
མི་རེང	solitary person	mi reng
མི་རེངས	solitary person	mi rengs
མི་རོ	MSS (GDreyfus), R75: 144.5: "deathless" [mss]	mi ro
མི་རོ་འབྱོར་པ	1) human corpse; 2) disparaging term for yogin)	mi ro 'byor pa
མི་རོ་དམར	touching a bare corpse with one's hands	mi ro dmar
མི་རོ་གསེར་སྒྲུང	Tale of the Golden Corpse	mi ro gser sgrung
མི་རོལ	unpleasant, grim	mi rol
མི་རོལ་ལུང་པ	unpleasant/ grim region/ country	mi rol lung pa
མི་རླུང་ལང་པོ	hot-tempered, shorttempered	mi rlung lang po
མི་རློམ	modest, humble	mi rlom
མི་བརླང་པ	not abusive	mi brlang pa
མི་ལ	abbr of mi la ras pa, 1140-1223, fierce, frightful	mi la
མི་ལ་སྐྱོན་འདོགས་པ	to charge a person with fault	mi la skyon 'dogs pa
མི་ལ་མགུར་འབུམ	the Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa	mi la mgur 'bum
མི་ལ་འགྱིང་བ	despise people	mi la 'gying ba
མི་ལ་ཇ་བླུད་པ	pour out tea to a man	mi la ja blud pa
མི་ལ་གཏིང་ཆེ་བ	great depth in a person	mi la gting che ba
མི་ལ་ཐོས་པ་དགའ	Mila Th"paga	mi la thos pa dga'
མི་ལ་ཕོར་པ	place a drinking cup before a person	mi la phor pa
མི་ལ་འཚེ	rakshasa	mi la 'tshe
མི་ལ་ཞོན	rnam thos sras, Vaishravana	mi la zhon
མི་ལ་རས་པ	Milarepa. (1040-1123). One of the most famous yogis and poets in Tibetan religious history. Much of the teachings of the Karma Kagyü schools passed through him. For more details read The Life of Mi...	mi la ras pa
མེཨནས་འཅོཏཏོན	clad Mila.'	means 'Cotton
མི་ལ་རས་པ་ཐོས་པ་དགའ	Milarepa Thopaga	mi la ras pa thos pa dga'
མི་ལ་རས་པའི་རྣམ་ཐར	the Biography of Milarepa	mi la ras pa'i rnam thar
མི་ལག	1) servant, hired hand; 2) human hand; 3) other people's hands)	mi lag
མི་ལག་གླ	hire a laborer	mi lag gla
མི་ལག་རྒྱུགས	go to work as a laborer	mi lag rgyugs
མི་ལང་བ	inexhaustible, ceaseless, endless	mi lang ba
མི་ལངས་པ	human height	mi langs pa
མི་ལམ	footpath	mi lam
མི་ལམ་ངན་པ་བཟློག་ཐབས་བདུན	chn	mi lam ngan pa bzlog thabs bdun
མི་ལའི་མགུར་འབུམ	the collected songs of spiritual experience of {rje btsun mi la ras pa} edited by {gtsang smyon he ru ka}	mi la'i mgur 'bum
མི་ལུད་པ	not flow over	mi lud pa
མི་ལུས	human body, human existence	mi lus
མི་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་སྦང	human rights	mi lus kyi khe sbang
མི་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཆག་སྒོ	personal affairs/ problems	mi lus kyi chag sgo
མི་ལུས་ཀྱི་རང་དབང	personal freedom	mi lus kyi rang dbang
མི་ལུས་སྙིང་པོ་ལེན་པ	to use their human existence meaningfully	mi lus snying po len pa
མི་ལུས་སྙིང་པོ་ལོངས	use this human body for what is essential	mi lus snying po longs
མི་ལུས་ཐོབ་དུས	Now that you have gained this human body	mi lus thob dus
མི་ལུས་པ	human body, not left over/ remaining	mi lus pa
མི་ལུས་ཕལ་པ	ordinary human body	mi lus phal pa
མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན	ex {dal 'byor mi lus rin chen} the free, well-favored, precious human body	mi lus rin chen
མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན་རྙེད	obtain the precious human body/ the preciousness of human existence	mi lus rin chen rnyed
མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན་རྙེད་དཀའ	the precious human body so difficult to obtain	mi lus rin chen rnyed dka'
མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན་རྙེད་པ	obtain the precious human body/ the preciousness of human existence	mi lus rin chen rnyed pa
མི་ལུས་རིན་ཆེན་ཐོབ་དཀའ	the precious human body so difficult to obtain	mi lus rin chen thob dka'
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྙེད	obtain a precious human body	mi lus rin po che rnyed
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྙེད་དཀའ	the precious human body so difficult to obtain	mi lus rin po che rnyed dka'
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྙེད་པ	obtain a precious human body	mi lus rin po che rnyed pa
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཐོབ	obtain a precious human body	mi lus rin po che thob
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཐོབ་དཀའ	the precious human body so difficult to obtain	mi lus rin po che thob dka'
མི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཐོབ་པ	obtained this precious human existence	mi lus rin po che thob pa
མི་ལེགས་པ	improper, bad, ugly	mi legs pa
མི་ལེན་པ	not taking/ w/o taking	mi len pa
མི་ལོ	[human] year[s]	mi lo
མི་ལོ་བཅུ	a decade	mi lo bcu
མི་ལོ་བཅུ་ཕྲག་གཅིག	a decade	mi lo bcu phrag gcig
མི་ལོ་བ	unfit, useless	mi lo ba
མི་ལོབ་ལམ	path of non-cultivation	mi lob lam
མི་ཤ	human skin/ flesh (color), human/ enemies' flesh, vengeance, revenge, vendetta, mutual killing/ wounding	mi sha
མི་ཤ་སྐམ་པོ	thin person	mi sha skam po
མི་ཤ་འཕྲང་ཕྲད	dgra sha len mkhan [revenger] 'phrang 'gag dog por phrad pa [meet, rush on] attack from ambush? who attacks whom?	mi sha 'phrang phrad
མི་ཤ་ཟ་མཁན་མི	cannibal	mi sha za mkhan mi
མི་ཤ་ལེན་པ	feud[ing]	mi sha len pa
མི་ཤན་པ	non-differentiation	mi shan pa
མི་ཤི་རྟ་འགྱེལ	nyams rgud tshabs chen nam rtsa med du gyur pa	mi shi rta 'gyel
མི་ཤི་བའི་རོ	the person who has just passed away	mi shi ba'i ro
མི་ཤི་བའི་ཤུལ	after a man's death	mi shi ba'i shul
མི་ཤིག	{mi shigs} indestructible	mi shig
མི་ཤིགས	indestructible	mi shigs
མི་ཤིགས་འཇིག་པ་མེད་པ	indestructible	mi shigs 'jig pa med pa
མི་ཤིགས་པ	indestructibility; indestructible	mi shigs pa
མི་ཤིགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great indestructible	mi shigs pa chen po
མི་ཤིགས་པ་ཉིད	indestructibility	mi shigs pa nyid
མི་ཤིགས་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆོས་བདུན	seven indestructible vajra qualities; see {rdo rje'i chos bdun}	mi shigs pa rdo rje'i chos bdun
མི་ཤིགས་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ	indestructible/ selfcontained thig le/ drop/ essence/ bindu/ sphere 2036	mi shigs pa'i thig le
མི་ཤིམ་པ	unpalatable, unappetizing	mi shim pa
མི་ཤིས་གྱོང་པོ	wild people	mi shis gyong po
མི་ཤིས་པ་སེམས་ལ་བཅངས་ནས	his mind was set on misfortune	mi shis pa sems la bcangs nas
མི་ཤུགས	human/ a person's strength, manpower mi shugs kyis rang byung khams bsgyur transform nature by manpower	mi shugs
མི་ཤུགས་རྒྱུ་སྟོབས	mi rgyu gnyis ka'i stobs shugs	mi shugs rgyu stobs
མི་ཤུགས་ཆར་ཕབ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	humanoperated sprinkling machine	mi shugs char phab 'phrul 'khor
མི་ཤུགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	human-operated machine	mi shugs 'phrul 'khor
མི་ཤུམ་པ	uncowed mi she pa kun shes par byed pa'i dbang	mi shum pa
མི་ཤེས་དགུ་ཤེས	know various actions	mi shes dgu shes
མི་ཤེས་དགུ་ཤེས་པ	knowing even the unknown things	mi shes dgu shes pa
མི་ཤེས་རྒུ་ཤེས	know various actions	mi shes rgu shes
མི་ཤེས་གཏི་མུག	mental darkness	mi shes gti mug
མི་ཤེས་པ	ignorant	mi shes pa
མི་ཤེས་པ་དག	those who do not care for knowing	mi shes pa dag
མི་ཤེས་པ་གནས་བརྒྱད	chn	mi shes pa gnas brgyad
མི་ཤེས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	TSE	mi shes pa'i rgyu bzhi
མི་ཤེས་པར	not knowing how to	mi shes par
མི་ཤེས་དབང་གིས	due to ignorance	mi shes dbang gis
མི་ཤེས་བཞིན	inattentive	mi shes bzhin
མི་ཤེས་བཞིན་དུ་མོས་པ་བྱུང	the arising of respect/ devotion while one is ignorant	mi shes bzhin du mos pa byung
མི་ཤེས་སམ	Don't you know?	mi shes sam
མི་ཤོང	that is not to be got in, there is no room for it	mi shong
མི་ཤོད་དགུ་ཤོད	unnecessary/ reckless/ nonsensical/ excessive comments	mi shod dgu shod
སྐད་ཆ་བཤད་ན་མི་འགྲིག	it isn't right to make reckless baseless comments	skad cha bshad na mi 'grig
མི་ཤོད་དགུ་ཤོད་ཤོད	make unnecessary/ reckless/ nonsensical/ excessive comments/ *, talk too much	mi shod dgu shod shod
མི་ཤོམ་ཆ་བ	many thanks	mi shom cha ba
མི་གཤའ་བ	(A) not true/ genuine, unwise, unreasonable	mi gsha' ba
མི་གཤིག	permanent, indestructible	mi gshig
མི་གཤིགས་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ	indestructible drop / sphere	mi gshigs pa'i thig le
མི་གཤིགས་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེན་པོ	indestructible great bindu	mi gshigs pa'i thig le chen po
མི་གཤིས	human/ a person's nature/ character	mi gshis
མི་གཤིས་འཇམ་པོ	a gentle person	mi gshis 'jam po
མི་གཤིས་དང་འབྲལ་བའི་གདུག་རྩུབ	inhuman cruelty	mi gshis dang 'bral ba'i gdug rtsub
མི་གཤིས་དང་འབྲལ་བའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	inhuman war	mi gshis dang 'bral ba'i dmag 'khrug
མི་གཤིས་བཟང་པོ	a good-natured person	mi gshis bzang po
མི་གཤིས་ལས་འདས་པ	inhuman	mi gshis las 'das pa
མི་གཤིས་ལས་འདས་པའི་གདུག་རྩུབ	inhuman cruelty	mi gshis las 'das pa'i gdug rtsub
མི་གཤིས་ལས་འདས་པའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	inhuman war	mi gshis las 'das pa'i dmag 'khrug
མི་གཤེ་བ	indecent language	mi gshe ba
མི་གཤོར	not rough	mi gshor
མི་བཤད་དགུ་བཤད	unnecessary/ reckless/ nonsensical/ excessive comments	mi bshad dgu bshad
མི་བཤད་དགུ་བཤད་ཤོད	make unnecessary/ reckless/ nonsensical/ excessive comments/ *, talk too much	mi bshad dgu bshad shod
མི་སག་མ	light person	mi sag ma
མི་སད་པའི་རིགས	the unawakened type (of person)	mi sad pa'i rigs
མི་སར་རང་སྡོད	mi dpe rang la 'gebs tshig, gzhan gyi dka' ngal mthong dus mi sar rang sdod kyis rogs phan byed dgos	mi sar rang sdod
མི་སི	Miss	mi si
མི་སི་ཏར	Mr.	mi si tar
མི་སི་ཨར	Mr.	mi si ar
མི་སེམས	people's minds, not think	mi sems
མི་སེམས་འཇིན་པ	the grasping of human mind, subliminal grasping, grasp w/o thinking	mi sems 'jin pa
མི་སེམས་འདུལ	to capture people's minds	mi sems 'dul
མི་སེམས་པ	not conscious	mi sems pa
མི་སེམས་མ་ཟིན	not according w someone's desire	mi sems ma zin
མི་སེར	subject (of a ruler), agricultural tenants, husbandmen with lands subject to payments, serf, citizen, subject	mi ser
མི་སེར་དོན་གསུམ་རིང་ལུགས	three principles of the people [of Sun Yat Sen]	mi ser don gsum ring lugs
མི་སེར་སྤེལ	colonize	mi ser spel
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་མཁན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	colonialist country	mi ser spel mkhan rgyal khab
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བ	colonize	mi ser spel ba
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བའི་དབང་བསྒྱུར	colonial rule	mi ser spel ba'i dbang bsgyur
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བའི་དམག་དཔུང	colonialist troops	mi ser spel ba'i dmag dpung
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	colonialism [powerful capitalist countries conquer less powerful 1s &, dbang sgyur bran bkol, bshu gzhog bcas kyi srid jus 'dzin par zer]	mi ser spel ba'i ring lugs
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བྱེད	colonize	mi ser spel byed
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་བྱེད་རིང་ལུགས	colonialism	mi ser spel byed ring lugs
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་ཡུལ	colony [after a country is conquered by another or its territory seized rang gi mi ser gnas spos kyis btsan sdod byed pa'i sa khul la zer, not only places where capitalists or imperi- 2037 alists h...	mi ser spel yul
མི་སེར་སྤེལ་ཡུལ་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	semi- colonial [country] [though there is at least	mi ser spel yul phyed tsam
ནོམིནལ་སེལཕ༹	rule, government, economy, ideology and so forth are controlled and repressed by imperialists]	nominal self
མི་སེར་དབང་གཙོའི་ལམ་ལུགས	democracy	mi ser dbang gtso'i lam lugs
མི་སེར་དབང་གཙོའི་ལམ་སྲོལ	democracy	mi ser dbang gtso'i lam srol
མི་སེར་རྨོངས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་ཇུས	policy of duping the people	mi ser rmongs byed kyi srid jus
མི་སེར་རྨོངས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་བྱུས	policy of duping the people	mi ser rmongs byed kyi srid byus
མི་སོགས་སྐོམ་ཆེ་བ	one who is very thirsty	mi sogs skom che ba
མི་སོད	grudge	mi sod
མི་སྲ་བ	corruptible	mi sra ba
མི་སྲིད	impossible	mi srid
མི་སྲིད་ངོ་མཚར	most wonderful	mi srid ngo mtshar
མི་སྲིད་ངོ་མཚར་ཆེ	impossible	mi srid ngo mtshar che
མི་སྲིད་རྟམ་གཅོད	cut off talk of the impossible	mi srid rtam gcod
མི་སྲིད་རྣམ་གཅོད	cut off what is impossible [rnam gcod kyi sgra'i nang gses, gzhi de la chos de mi srid pa rnam par bcad nas srid pa kho nar ston pa'i sgra, dper na, autpal sngon po srid pa kho na'o zhes pa lta bu,...	mi srid rnam gcod
མི་སྲིད་རྣམ་བཅད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	words which completely cut off what is impossible TSE	mi srid rnam bcad kyi sgra
མི་སྲིད་པ	barely existing, impossible; impossible. See {srid pa}	mi srid pa
མི་སྲིད་པ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of the impossible, impossible and empty	mi srid pa stong pa nyid
མི་སྲིད་པའི་སྐྱོན	fallacy of nonoccurrence/ impossibility	mi srid pa'i skyon
མི་སྲིད་པའི་དངོས་མེད	ri bong gi rwa sogs sam/ bum pa med pa'i spyi'i lta bu	mi srid pa'i dngos med
མི་སྲིད་མོད	though indeed it does not exist/ is impossible	mi srid mod
མི་སྲིད་སྲིད་པ	impossible [actions arising as if/ being said to be] possible	mi srid srid pa
མི་སྲུན	not trained, wild, untamed, savage, evil, mischievous	mi srun
མི་སྲུན་པ	wild, wrathful, malicious	mi srun pa
མི་སྲོག	human life	mi srog
མི་སྲོལ	humaneness, humanity	mi srol
མི་སྲོལ་རིང་ལུགས	humanism	mi srol ring lugs
མི་སླུ་བ	incontrovertible, non-delusive, unfailing	mi slu ba
མི་སླུ་བའི་རིག་པ	nondeceptive cognition [ggd]	mi slu ba'i rig pa
མི་སླུ་བའི་ཤེས་པ	nondeceptive cognition [ggd]	mi slu ba'i shes pa
མི་སློན	(A) mi zlog, not cease, reverse, change one's story	mi slon
མི་སློབ	non-learning, beyond learning/ training, need not train again/ further	mi slob
མི་སློབ་པ	1) no more to learn, nonlearning; 2) abider on the path of no more learning)/*	mi slob pa
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཆོས	attainments for which we need no longer train ourselves (10 which occur on mthar phyin pa'i lam)	mi slob pa'i chos
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཆོས་བཅུ	ten qualities of the stage beyond training; the ten qualities of nonlearning, [def. {'phags lam brgyad} + {mi slob pa'i rnam par grol ba} + {mi slob pa'i yang dag pa'i ye shes}	mi slob pa'i chos bcu
ཋེཡ་ཨརེ་ཐེ་ཨེཨིགྷཏ	fold Noble Path plus {mi slob pa'i rnam par grol ba} and {mi slob pa'i yang dag pa'i ye shes} mi slob pa'i chos mthar phyin pa'i lam these are the 10 attainments for which one no longer needs train...	They are the eight
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཇུང་འཇུག	union of no more learning	mi slob pa'i jung 'jug
མི་སློབ་པའི་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	liberation of nonlearning	mi slob pa'i rnam par grol ba
མི་སློབ་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of no more learning	mi slob pa'i 'bras bu
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of no more learning TSE	mi slob pa'i zung 'jug
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་སྐུ	the unified kaya of the stage/ state beyond training	mi slob pa'i zung 'jug gi sku
མི་སློབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom beyond training	mi slob pa'i ye shes
མི་སློབ་པའི་ལམ	Path of no-learning. The fifth of the five path and the state of complete and perfect enlightenment	mi slob pa'i lam
མི་སློབ་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་རྟོགས་པ་གསུམ	the three realizations of the path of learning [1 {rgyun mtha' rdo rje lta bu'i ting nge 'dzin} the vajralike samadhi as the end of one's personal continuu, {rnam grol lam zad pa shes pa} knowledge...	mi slob pa'i lam gyi rtogs pa gsum
མི་སློབ་པའི་ས	non-learning, state of nonlearning	mi slob pa'i sa
མི་སློབ་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of nonlearning	mi slob zung 'jug
མི་སློབ་ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་གོ་འཕང	the unified	mi slob zung 'jug gi go 'phang
ལེབེ༹ལ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	learning	level of non
མི་སློབ་ལམ	path of no more learning, no more training, path beyond training, path of nothing left to do	mi slob lam
མི་གསང་བ	to not hide	mi gsang ba
མི་གསན་པ་འདུག	he would not listen [to reason]	mi gsan pa 'dug
མི་གསར་པ	person from another region newly come	mi gsar pa
མི་གསལ	not clear, barbarian	mi gsal
མི་གསལ་བརྗོད་པ	speaking indistinctly like a drunkard	mi gsal brjod pa
མི་གསལ་བ	indistinct, blurred, obscured, unclear	mi gsal ba
མི་གསལ་ཟླ་བ	Syn {gro bzhin zla ba}	mi gsal zla ba
མི་གསུང་བར་གསུངས་པ	teaching without speaking	mi gsung bar gsungs pa
མི་གསུམ	three people	mi gsum
མི་གསུམ་མགོན་པོ	a deity	mi gsum mgon po
མི་གསུར་གྱི་དུད་པ	incense made from human flesh	mi gsur gyi dud pa
མི་གསོད་མཁན	assassin	mi gsod mkhan
མི་གསོད་པ	assassinate, homicide	mi gsod pa
མི་གསོད་ལས	homicide	mi gsod las
མི་གསོད་སེ་ཤར	guard of sa bdag demigods	mi gsod se shar
མི་བསད	assassination	mi bsad
མི་བསད་ཁྲག་སྦྱོར	killing and bloodshed	mi bsad khrag sbyor
མི་བསད་ཁྲག་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	kill and shed blood	mi bsad khrag sbyor byed
མི་བསད་རྒྱུ་འཕྲོག	killing and plunder	mi bsad rgyu 'phrog
མི་བསད་རྒྱུ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	kill and plunder	mi bsad rgyu 'phrog byed
མི་བསད་རྟ་ཁྱེར	khrims 'gal gyi byas nyes tshabs che ba'i tshad	mi bsad rta khyer
མི་བསད་པ	killing a human being	mi bsad pa
མི་བསམ	{ma bsam} without (requiring) deliberation	mi bsam
མི་བསམ་དགུ་བསམ	wild/ fantastic thoughts/ ideas	mi bsam dgu bsam
མི་བསམ་དགུ་བསམ་བྱུང	[I had] wild/ fantastic thoughts/ ideas [occurred]	mi bsam dgu bsam byung
མི་བསམ་རྒུ་བསམ	wild thoughts/ ideas	mi bsam rgu bsam
མི་བསམ་པ་གསུམ	the three human thoughts [one {tshogs mthong ba'i tshe bza' yi snyam du mi bsam} {bdung gi snyam du mi bsam} {zhim gyi snyam du mi bsam mo} smi bcu bzhi} (Tserig)	mi bsam pa gsum
མི་བསམ་ཤེས་ཅན	broad-minded/ understanding person	mi bsam shes can
མི་བསལ་བར	grows unclear	mi bsal bar
མི་བསྲུན	impudent	mi bsrun
མི་བསྲུན་སྐྱེ་བོ	impudent/irritating/ rude/ abrasively coarse/ inappropriately behaving/ evil/ bad/ wicked people	mi bsrun skye bo
མི་བསྲུན་པ	impudent, (people) disturbing, irritating. rude, abrasively coarse, evil (people) inappropriate	mi bsrun pa
མི་བསྲུན་པ་ལྔ	the five inappropriate actions	mi bsrun pa lnga
མི་བསྲུན་པ་རྣམས	impudent/irritating/ rude/ abrasively coarse/ inappropriately behaving/ evil/ bad/ wicked people	mi bsrun pa rnams
མི་བསླུ	not deceive	mi bslu
མི་བསླུ་བ	true and genuine, don't err, not deceived, indisputable infallibility TSE	mi bslu ba
མི་བསླུ་བའི་དོན	infallibility	mi bslu ba'i don
མི་བསླུ་བར	non-deceptive	mi bslu bar
མི་ཧ་ཡོ་བ	immovable	mi ha yo ba
མི་ཧྲག	person able to do something	mi hrag
མི་ཧྲེང	man walking on foot without any load, SA mi rang	mi hreng
མི་ཧྲེང་གཅིག་པུར་གྱུར་པ	be[come] alone/ an unaccompanied person, solitary traveller (w/o load)	mi hreng gcig pur gyur pa
མི་ཧྲེངས	solitary person	mi hrengs
མི་ཧྲེངས་པ	mi spyod ngan gyi lam du shor ba	mi hrengs pa
མི་ལྷིང་པོ	mi 'tshab 'tshub med pa'am stable	mi lhing po
མི་ལྷུང	blood	mi lhung
མིག	1) hole; 2) eye, eye, sight, vision, visual [lta byed dang - 'dren byed dam, snang ba'i dbang po [/sha'i mig rnon po,//blo mig //zur mig //kha bas mig 'phyid pa,//mig gyas gyon 'phrig pa,//lta ba m...	mig
མིག་ཀོང	mig 'bras nang du rdib pa'i kong kong	mig kong
མིག་ཀྲབ་ཀྲབ	mig tshum tshum byed	mig krab krab
མིག་དཀྱུས་རིང་བ	mig 'phred dkyus ring ba	mig dkyus ring ba
མིག་བཀག་པ	blindfold	mig bkag pa
མིག་བཀྲ	eyes wide open	mig bkra
མིག་བཀྲ་མ	grouse	mig bkra ma
མིག་སྐོར	eye-ball	mig skor
མིག་སྐྱ་བ	rnam thos sras, Vaishravana	mig skya ba
མིག་སྐྱ་ལོག	eyes rolled up to show whites	mig skya log
མིག་སྐྱ་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག་བྱེད་པ	[vividly alert]	mig skya hrig hrig byed pa
མིག་སྐྱག	eye mucus	mig skyag
མིག་སྐྱི	mig 'bras phyi ngos kyi srab cing dvangs pa'i skyi mo	mig skyi
མིག་སྐྱུག	impurities in the eyes	mig skyug
མིག་སྐྱོ	eye defilement [syn: mig skyag, mig gi rngu ma, mig rnag	mig skyo
མིག་བསྐྲ	a magic trick D 2039	mig bskra
མིག་བསྐྲ་བ	certain magic trick	mig bskra ba
མིག་ཁམས	the eye dhatu/ element	mig khams
མིག་ཁུང	1) hole; 2) window/ skylight; 2) eye socket)	mig khung
མིག་ཁུང་གྲུབ་གྲུབ་བྱེད	blink, wink	mig khung grub grub byed
མིག་ཁུང་དུ་བྲོས	his eyes are sun	mig khung du bros
མིག་ཁྲ་ཧྲིག་གེ	piercing eyes	mig khra hrig ge
མིག་ཁྲོ་བས་ལྟ	look back with anger	mig khro bas lta
མིག་ཁྲོ་བས་ལྟ་བ	angry looks	mig khro bas lta ba
མིག་ཁྲོལ་ལེ་ཁྲོལ་ལེ་ལྟ་བ	stare at	mig khrol le khrol le lta ba
མིག་འཁྱིད་པ	turn or roll one's eyes	mig 'khyid pa
མིག་འཁྱུག་པ	mig 'bras gyo ba blta yul tshang mar mig 'khyug pa	mig 'khyug pa
མིག་འཁྲུལ	optical illusion; delusion, illusion, magical tricks	mig 'khrul
མིག་འཁྲུལ་མཁན	showman	mig 'khrul mkhan
མིག་འཁྲུལ་བ	visual confusion/ illusion/ mistake/ trick	mig 'khrul ba
མིག་གང	(A) ; 1) suitable eye object; 2) joy)	mig gang
མིག་གི་རྐང	earthy milk-white concretion in bamboo hollow, bamboo manna	mig gi rkang
ཅོནཅྲེཏཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་མིལཀ	white color formed in the hollow of bamboo	concretation of a milk
མིག་གི་སྐྱ་སྒྲིབ	a kind of mig 'grib	mig gi skya sgrib
མིག་གི་སྐྱ་རིབ	mig gi skya sgrib	mig gi skya rib
མིག་གི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	activity-field/ ayatana/ base/ source of the eye	mig gi skye mched
མིག་གི་སྐྱེས་བུ	person w beautiful eyes	mig gi skyes bu
མིག་གི་སྐྲི་ཀ	eye line [D ?? has SK]	mig gi skri ka
མིག་གི་སྐྲི་ཁ	eyeline	mig gi skri kha
མིག་གི་ཁམས	eye element, as one of the eighteen elements, eye-constituent, the eye dhatu, visual capacity	mig gi khams
མིག་གི་གྲུ	corner of the eye	mig gi gru
མིག་གི་དགའ་བྱེད	good looking D	mig gi dga' byed
མིག་གི་རྒྱལ་མོ	queen of the eye, pupil, iris	mig gi rgyal mo
མིག་གི་ལྕིབས་ཐོར	stye in the eye	mig gi lcibs thor
མིག་གི་ཆོས་ཅན	treasurer, storekeeper	mig gi chos can
མིག་གི་མཆི་མ	tears	mig gi mchi ma
མིག་གི་གཉེན	utpala lotus	mig gi gnyen
མིག་གི་མཐོང་རྒྱ	vision	mig gi mthong rgya
མིག་གི་མཐོང་གསལ	eyesight	mig gi mthong gsal
མིག་གི་དྲི་མ	dirt/ defilement in the eyes	mig gi dri ma
མིག་གི་བདུད་རྩི	handsome person, graceful appearance	mig gi bdud rtsi
མིག་གི་བརྡ་ཐབས	eye signal, wink	mig gi brda thabs
མིག་གི་ན་ཚ	eye disease	mig gi na tsha
མིག་གི་ནོ་བུའི་ཁྱིམ	eye-socket	mig gi no bu'i khyim
མིག་གི་ནོར་བུའི་ཁྱིམ	socket of the eye	mig gi nor bu'i khyim
མིག་གི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	expression of the eyes, different movements and gesticulations of the eye	mig gi rnam 'gyur
མིག་གི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	visual consciousness	mig gi rnam par shes pa
མིག་གི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	the eye consciousness element	mig gi rnam par shes pa'i khams
མིག་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས	eye consciousness. Syn {mig gi rnam par shes pa}; visual cognition	mig gi rnam shes
མིག་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	eye consciousness element/ dhatu	mig gi rnam shes kyi khams
མིག་གི་རྣོ་ཤུགས	sight, vision, outlook	mig gi rno shugs
མིག་གི་པགས་པ	skin of the eye	mig gi pags pa
མིག་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	fabulous mt in Purvavideha	mig gi phreng ba
མིག་གི་ཕྲེང་བ་ཞེས་བྱའི་རི	fabulous mt in Purvavideha	mig gi phreng ba zhes bya'i ri
མིག་གི་བུ་ཆུང	mig gi rgyal mo	mig gi bu chung
མིག་གི་དབང་མངོན	eye perception, sight [rang gi bdag rkyen mig dbang la brten nas byung zhing rtog bral ma 'khrul ba'i gzhan rig dper na, dung dkar por snang ba'i mig shes lta bu'o dbang mngon lnga'i nang gses	mig gi dbang mngon
མིག་གི་དབང་རྟེན	the sense organ base of the eye, the physical eye)	mig gi dbang rten
མིག་གི་དབང་པོ	eye sense/ power/ faculty/ organ, the eye, visual sense organ	mig gi dbang po
མིག་གི་དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན	the [material] eye organ	mig gi dbang po gzugs can
མིག་གི་འབྲས་བུ	the eye ball	mig gi 'bras bu
མིག་གི་འབྲུ	to scrutinize, probe/ the eyes	mig gi 'bru
མིག་གི་རྫི་མ	eye-lash, ray of light ?	mig gi rdzi ma
མིག་གི་རྫིམ	eyebrow	mig gi rdzim
མིག་གི་ཡུལ	the object of the eye, visual object	mig gi yul
མིག་གི་ཡུལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ	be a visual object	mig gi yul du gyur pa
མིག་གི་ལམ	w my own eyes	mig gi lam
མིག་གིས་ཇི་བཞིན་མི་མཐོང	we do not recognize anything with our eyes	mig gis ji bzhin mi mthong
མིག་གིས་བལྟ་བ	look w the eyes	mig gis blta ba
མིག་གིས་ཐོས	snake	mig gis thos
མིག་གིས་མཐོང་བའི་ཡུལ	eye object	mig gis mthong ba'i yul
མིག་གིས་མཐོང་ས	view, prospect	mig gis mthong sa
མིག་གིས་རྣམ་ཤེས	occult sight 2040	mig gis rnam shes
མིག་གིས་མི་མཐོང་བ	blindness	mig gis mi mthong ba
མིག་གིས་མི་བཟོད་པ	so that your eyes cannot bear to look at it	mig gis mi bzod pa
མིག་གིས་མིག་ལོག	angry look, see with upturned eyes D	mig gis mig log
མིག་གིས་གཟུང་བར་བྱ་བ	that which is perceived/ apprehended by the eye	mig gis gzung bar bya ba
མིག་གོར་གོར	globular eyes	mig gor gor
མིག་གྲུ	corner of the eye	mig gru
མིག་གྲུང་པོ	[clever eyes] sharp eyed	mig grung po
མིག་གྲོགས	sweetheart D	mig grogs
མིག་བགྲད་པ	stare, goggle	mig bgrad pa
མིག་འགྲན	disapproval	mig 'gran
མིག་འགྲམ	nearby visual object	mig 'gram
མིག་འགྲིབ	eye obscurations	mig 'grib
མིག་རྒྱ	eye, vision	mig rgya
མིག་རྒྱ་ཁབ་ལས་ཆུང་བ	short-sighted	mig rgya khab las chung ba
མིག་རྒྱ་ཁབ་ལས་ཆུང་བ་བྱེད	be	mig rgya khab las chung ba byed
ཤོརཏ	sighted/ narrow minded	short
མིག་རྒྱག་པ	1) grain rdog thog mar chags pa'i don; 2) bore a hole)	mig rgyag pa
མིག་རྒྱང	1) degree/ distance of intellectual vision; 2) distance of the object seen, vision, rta de gnyis kyi mgyogs khyad mig rgyang gang tsam zhig 'dug eye	mig rgyang
མིག་རྒྱང་ཅན	long sighted	mig rgyang can
མིག་རྒྱང་ཐུང་ཐུང	near/ short/ sighted, shallow	mig rgyang thung thung
མིག་རྒྱང་ཐུང་བ	1) phugs bsam chung ba; 2) object looked at not far away)	mig rgyang thung ba
མིག་རྒྱང་རིང་བ	1) w far-reaching/ anticipating thought; 2) object looked at far away, far- sighted)	mig rgyang ring ba
མིག་རྒྱུ	glittering before one's eyes	mig rgyu
མིག་རྒྱུན	example [of conduct]	mig rgyun
མིག་རྒྱུན་སྟོན	set an example [of conduct]	mig rgyun ston
མིག་རྒྱོང་བ	distend/ fill the eyes	mig rgyong ba
མིག་སྒྱུ	mirage	mig sgyu
མིག་སྒྱུ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྣང་བ	mirage-like appearance	mig sgyu lta bu'i snang ba
མིག་སྒྱུར་མ	female sprite, fairy	mig sgyur ma
མིག་བརྒྱ་མ	100 eyed 1, night	mig brgya ma
མིག་བརྒྱད་པ	8 eyed 1, Bhrama	mig brgyad pa
མིག་བསྒྱུར	Variant of {mig sgyur ma}? [mss]	mig bsgyur
མིག་བསྒྲད	stare / eyes open eyes staring focused; wide-open eyes	mig bsgrad
མིག་མངས	game of go	mig mngas
མིག་ལྔ	the five eyes / visions, {sha'i mig}, {lha'i mig}, {shes rab kyi mig}, {chos kyi mig}, {sangs rgyas kyi mig}, {spyan lnga}	mig lnga
མིག་ལྔན	graced w vision	mig lngan
མིག་སྔ	at present	mig snga
མིག་སྔར	before the eyes, field of vision, at present	mig sngar
མིག་སྔར་འཆར་བྱུང	[it] appeared before [my] eyes	mig sngar 'char byung
མིག་སྔར་མཐུན་པ	come before the eyes, tell what 1 saw	mig sngar mthun pa
མིག་སྔར་འབབས་པ	come before the eyes	mig sngar 'babs pa
མིག་སྔར་མི་འབབས	to dislike (?)	mig sngar mi 'babs
མིག་སྔར་ཟམ་པ་ཆེ་ཤོས་དེ་རེ	at present that is the biggest bridge	mig sngar zam pa che shos de re
མིག་སྔོ་ཅེ་རེ	look directly forward/at D	mig sngo ce re
མིག་སྔོན་ཅེ་རེ	look directly forward/at	mig sngon ce re
མིག་ཅན	ba ru ra tree, having eyes/ grain, w ears in fruit, needle	mig can
མིག་ཅེ་རེ	stare w gaping eyes [straight forward/ at], wide-eyed, staring	mig ce re
མིག་ཅེ་རེ་ལྟ	to stare at wide-eyed	mig ce re lta
མིག་ཅེ་རེ་བ	stare w gaping eyes [straight forward/ at] mig ce re bas dgra la sdang pas lta ba the enemy stared/ glared hatefully mig ce re bas bltas kyang long ba 'dra [though] staring w gaping eyes, [he] was ...	mig ce re ba
མིག་ཅེར་བ	stare w gaping eyes	mig cer ba
མིག་བཅར་བ	sngar spyi tshogs rnying par rdo zhva g.yogs nas mig bcar ba'i khrims gcod byed pa'i lugs kyang yod	mig bcar ba
མིག་བཅོས་མཁས་པ	eye doctor/ specialist	mig bcos mkhas pa
མིག་ལྕིབས	eyelids that protect the eyes, eyelid	mig lcibs
མིག་ཆིད	inflammation of the eyes through cold/ snow-blindness D	mig chid
མིག་ཆིད་པ	inflammation of the eyes through cold	mig chid pa
མིག་ཆུ	tears	mig chu
མིག་ཆུ་ཉིལ་ཉིལ	many tears falling	mig chu nyil nyil
མིག་ཆུ་ཉིལ་ལེ	abundant tears	mig chu nyil le
མིག་ཆུ་གཏོང	shed tears	mig chu gtong
མིག་ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	shed tears	mig chu gtong ba
མིག་ཆུ་བུར་ལྟ	one whose eyes resemble bubbles	mig chu bur lta
མིག་ཆུ་བུར་ལྟ་བུ	round eyes	mig chu bur lta bu
མིག་ཆུ་རིལ་རིལ	tear drops	mig chu ril ril
མིག་ཆུ་ལོང	in the eyes many tears 'khor	mig chu long
མིག་ཆུ་ཤོར	to shed tears	mig chu shor
མིག་ཆུ་ཤོར་བ	to burst into tears	mig chu shor ba
མིག་ཆུང་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, small eyes	mig chung ba
མིག་ཆུས་གང་ནས	tearful	mig chus gang nas
མིག་ཆེ་བ	1) big hole; 2) great desire/ jealousy/ greed/ envy, ham pa che ba; 3) generous D)	mig che ba
མིག་ཆེ་མེད་པ	free from greediness or envy	mig che med pa
མིག་ཆེན་པོ	[big eyes] greedy	mig chen po
མིག་ཆེར་རེ	to open the eyes	mig cher re
མིག་མཆི་མ་འཁྲུགས	eyes wet with tears	mig mchi ma 'khrugs
མིག་མཆི་མས་གང་ནས་ངུ་བ	bursts into tears	mig mchi mas gang nas ngu ba
མིག་འཆོལ་བ	visual error/ mistake	mig 'chol ba
མིག་གཏོད་པ	eyes directly focused on/ looking at	mig gtod pa
མིག་བཏོན	[p mig 'don],, plucked out the eyes [as punishment]	mig bton
མིག་ལྟ	look at	mig lta
མིག་ལྟ་སྟངས་ཤིག	gazing/ staring at	mig lta stangs shig
མིག་ལྟ་བྱེད	look after, watch over,l oversee	mig lta byed
མིག་ལྟ་ས	object of 1's hope	mig lta sa
མིག་ལྟས	looked at	mig ltas
མིག་ལྟོས	gcig la gcig lta'i mig rgyun nam mig 'gran, model, example	mig ltos
མིག་ལྟོས་ངན་འགྲན	follow evil conduct/ habits/ behavior	mig ltos ngan 'gran
མིག་ལྟོས་ངན་པ	malicious look, bad example/ model	mig ltos ngan pa
མིག་ལྟོས་ལྟ	look to as an example	mig ltos lta
མིག་ལྟོས་དཔེ་སྟོན	set/ be an example of [good and bad conduct], demonstration	mig ltos dpe ston
མིག་ལྟོས་དཔེ་སྟོན་བྱེད	demonstrate 2041	mig ltos dpe ston byed
མིག་ལྟོས་བྱས་ས	ATG: "reference-point". Also mig gis ltos sa. [mss]	mig ltos byas sa
མིག་ལྟོས་བྱེད	look to as an example	mig ltos byed
མིག་ལྟོས་བཟང་པོ	good mig srol/ mig rgyun	mig ltos bzang po
མིག་ལྟོས་ཡར་འགྲན	mig srol lam mig rgyun bzang phyogs la 'gran pa, mi bzang don bzang la mig ltos yar 'gran byed pa	mig ltos yar 'gran
མིག་ལྟོས་ཤས་རྐྱེན	mig rgyun bzang po 'grib nas condition of ngan pa increasing	mig ltos shas rkyen
མིག་སྟོང	the [god / deva] Surya, the sun	mig stong
མིག་སྟོང་ཅན	w 1,000 eyes, Indra D	mig stong can
མིག་སྟོན་བྱེད	show, demonstrate	mig ston byed
མིག་བལྟ	looked; x {khos mu stegs pa la mig blta zhing 'dug} he looked over at the tirthikas	mig blta
མིག་བལྟ་བ	to see one's own eyes	mig blta ba
མིག་བལྟ་ཞིང་ག་ལེ་ཕྱིན་པ	walked by them slowly and seductively	mig blta zhing ga le phyin pa
མིག་བལྟ་ས	object of 1's hope	mig blta sa
མིག་བལྟས་བསྟས་སྡོད་པ	glare	mig bltas bstas sdod pa
མིག་བལྟས་ལག་སྦྱོང	dngos thog nyams myong gi sbyong rdar	mig bltas lag sbyong
མིག་ཐུང	near/ short/ sighted, shallow	mig thung
མིག་ཐུར	1) mig nad bar 'grib removing thur ma [spoon?; 2) for eye disease med. delivering khyem zhig)?	mig thur
མིག་མཐོང	[actually] see	mig mthong
མིག་མཐོང་གཅིག	mig rgyang gang	mig mthong gcig
མིག་མཐོང་ཐུབ་པ	visible	mig mthong thub pa
མིག་མཐོང་རྣ་ཐོས	see w the eyes and hear w the ears	mig mthong rna thos
མིག་མཐོང་གཟུགས་གྲུབ	example of mngon sum gsal mthong	mig mthong gzugs grub
མིག་མཐོང་ལག་ཟིན	eye-witness	mig mthong lag zin
མིག་མཐོང་གསལ་གྲུབ	mngon sum du mthong and gsal por grub pa	mig mthong gsal grub
མིག་མཐོངས་ཁར་ལྟ་བར་བྱེད་པ	try to look up	mig mthongs khar lta bar byed pa
མིག་དར	TSE	mig dar
མིག་དར་བསལ་བ	slob ma rnams ma rig gnyis 'dzin gyis ldongs pa'i mtshon	mig dar bsal ba
མིག་དྲ	eye-protector made of long yak hair etc. [for snow-blindness]	mig dra
མིག་དྲི	dirt etc. in the eyes	mig dri
མིག་གདང	to open one's eyes	mig gdang
མིག་གདངས་ནས་མི་ཟུམ་པ	not winking/ closing the eyes, looking steadily	mig gdangs nas mi zum pa
མིག་གདོང	seeing ghosts/ spirits	mig gdong
མིག་གདོང་མཐོང	see ghosts/ spirits	mig gdong mthong
མིག་མདངས	to open the eyes	mig mdangs
མིག་མདངས་པ	get blind, be blinded, be deprived of sight	mig mdangs pa
མིག་མདའ	way of looking	mig mda'
མིག་མདའ་འཕེན་པ	zur mig gis lta ba	mig mda' 'phen pa
མིག་མདོངས	be blinded, become blind, be deprived of sight	mig mdongs
མིག་མདོངས་པ	get blind, be made blind	mig mdongs pa
མིག་འདོན	[p mig bton],, pluck out the eyes [as punishment]	mig 'don
མིག་འདོན་པ	pluck out the eyes [as punishment]	mig 'don pa
མིག་འདྲིས་རྣར་འཇགས	familiarity	mig 'dris rnar 'jags
མིག་འདྲིས་རྣར་འཇགས་ཆགས	become familiar	mig 'dris rnar 'jags chags
མིག་འདྲིས་པ	look again and again [and become familiar w], familiarity, acquaintance, be[come]/ get familiar w/ accustomed to mig 'dris su gyur yun ring nas bltas kyang	mig 'dris pa
མིག་འདྲེན	imitation	mig 'dren
མིག་འདྲེན་བྱེད	imitate, follow someone's example	mig 'dren byed
མིག་འདྲེས་པ	keep guard, care for, look after, minister to, serve	mig 'dres pa
མིག་རྡོག་ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ	eye ball	mig rdog hril hril
མིག་ལྡང	eyes open	mig ldang
མིག་ལྡན	graced with vision	mig ldan
མིག་ལྡན་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཤེས་གསལ	mig mthong gzugs grub kyi don	mig ldan kun gyis shes gsal
མིག་ལྡན་གྱང་མཆོངས	shes bzhin ngan lam 'gro ba'i dpe	mig ldan gyang mchongs
མིག་ལྡན་མ	endowed w seeing	mig ldan ma
མིག་ལྡིར་ནས་བལྟས་བྱུང	[they] glared at [me]	mig ldir nas bltas byung
མིག་ལྡིར་བ	eyes sticking out, protruding, glare, glaring stare	mig ldir ba
མིག་ལྡོག་པ	mig 'bras lta stangs 'gyur ba ste animals dying mig 'bras dkar nag log pa lta bu	mig ldog pa
མིག་ལྡོངས	become blind	mig ldongs
མིག་བརྡ	signs by the eye	mig brda
མིག་བརྡ་གཏོང	give an eye signal/ wink	mig brda gtong
མིག་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	give an eye signal/ wink	mig brda gtong ba
མིག་བརྡ་བྱེད	give an eye signal/ wink	mig brda byed
མིག་བརྡ་བྱེད་པ	give an eye signal/ wink	mig brda byed pa
མིག་ན་མཆི་མ་ཁྲ་རི་ལི་ལི་འགྲིལ་བ	trickle	mig na mchi ma khra ri li li 'gril ba
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཡོཨུར་ཨེཡེས་ཨས་ཏེཨར	drops	from your eyes as tear
མིག་ན་ལག་བཟོས	mig na ba lag pas bzos pa ste, rang sdug rang gis bzos pa'i dpe	mig na lag bzos
མིག་ནག་སེང་ངེ	to look hither and thither	mig nag seng nge
མིག་ནག་སེང་ངེ་བ	mig nag hril le ba lta bu way of looking, look hither and thither D	mig nag seng nge ba
མིག་ནག་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག	mig 'bras 'gul stangs shig	mig nag hrig hrig
མིག་ནག་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག་ལྟ་བ	to look hither and thither	mig nag hrig hrig lta ba
མིག་ནང་གི་གྲ་མ	hair in the eye, annoyance	mig nang gi gra ma
མིག་ནད	eye disease/ injury	mig nad
མིག་ནད་ལྔ	chn	mig nad lnga
མིག་ནད་བརྟག་དཔྱད་མཁས་པ	oculist	mig nad brtag dpyad mkhas pa
མིག་ནད་ཕྱི་སྒྲིབ	mig nad ling thog dang sha mdzer lta bus mthong byed kyi steng nas g.yogs te the eyes cannot see	mig nad phyi sgrib
མིག་ནད་བར་སྒྲིབ	by disorder of rlung mkhris bad kan or a combination between mthong byed and mig shun bar du zhugs nas, 1 becomes unable to see	mig nad bar sgrib
མིག་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	department of opthamology	mig nad tshan khag
མིག་ནད་ཞིག	sty	mig nad zhig
མིག་ནད་རབ་རིབ	disease where eyes do not see forms clearly and external objects are seen dimly and as if there were hairs in front of the eyes	mig nad rab rib
མིག་ནད་ཤ་འཛེར	mig la rdo dbyug phog pa'am ling thog byung ba sogs kyis mig gi steng du 'dzer bu btab pa lta bu'i thor pa zhig	mig nad sha 'dzer
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་འཁྲུགས་པ	tears welled up in the eyes	mig nas mchi ma 'khrugs pa
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་གཏོང་བ	in tears; tears fell from their eyes	mig nas mchi ma gtong ba
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་བྱུང	were in tears	mig nas mchi ma byung
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་བྱུང་བ	wept, in tears; tears fell from their eyes	mig nas mchi ma byung ba
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་འབྱིན་པ	cried, wept	mig nas mchi ma 'byin pa
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་འོང་བ	tears run down my face, one feels like crying mig nas mchi ma g.yo ba - wept, tears fell from their eyes; in tears 2042 mig nas mchi ma g.yo bzhin - unable to contain their tears	mig nas mchi ma 'ong ba
མིག་ནས་མཆི་མ་ཤོར	tears streamed from my eyes	mig nas mchi ma shor
མིག་ནེའུ་ལྟ་བུ	w round eyes like an icheumon	mig ne'u lta bu
མིག་ནོང་པ	squint eyed	mig nong pa
མིག་གནད	the key point(s) of eye(s)	mig gnad
མིག་གནོན་འདེབས་ཐུར	mig sgor rtsa mi 'gyur ba'i ched mig rtsa pressing implement	mig gnon 'debs thur
མིག་རྣ	eyes and ears	mig rna
མིག་རྣག	dirt/ sediment etc. in the eyes	mig rnag
མིག་རྣོ	sharp-eyed [person]	mig rno
མིག་རྣོ་པོ	sharp/ clear eyes/ eyed	mig rno po
མིག་སྣང	sight, eye object, mig lam,	mig snang
མིག་པགས	eyelid	mig pags
མིག་པད་མ་འདྲ་བ	with eyes like lotuses	mig pad ma 'dra ba
མིག་པུ	one who leads a blind person	mig pu
མིག་པོ	eye	mig po
མིག་པོ་ཆེ	great envy jealousy, greed, large eye	mig po che
མིག་དཔངས	aspirations, aims, goals	mig dpangs
མིག་དཔངས་མཐོ	look high, high aspirations/ aims/ goals mig dpangs mtho la 'jon thang chung ba high aspirations w low ability/ qualities of work, inability to live up to 1's aspirations mig dpangs mtho la 'jon th...	mig dpangs mtho
མིག་དཔེ	model, example	mig dpe
མིག་དཔེ་ངན་པ	bad example/ model	mig dpe ngan pa
མིག་དཔེ་སྟོན	set/ show a model/ example, demonstrate	mig dpe ston
མིག་དཔེ་བྱེད	set/ be/ take as a model, example, copy	mig dpe byed
མིག་དཔེ་བཟང་པོ	good example/ model	mig dpe bzang po
མིག་དཔེ་ལེན	imitate, take as an example	mig dpe len
མིག་དཔེའི	exemplary	mig dpe'i
མིག་དཔེའི་བཟོ་པ	exemplary worker	mig dpe'i bzo pa
མིག་རཔེ	model, example	mig rpe
མིག་ལྤགས	eye-lids	mig lpags
མིག་སྤུ	brow, eyelash	mig spu
མིག་སྤུ་ཟིམ་ཟིམ	1) with half-closed eyes. 2) down to the most minute detail [in development stage]	mig spu zim zim
མིག་སྤྲིན	cataract	mig sprin
མིག་ཕབ་སྟེ་བལྟ་བ	looking downwards	mig phab ste blta ba
མིག་ཕབ་སྟེ་བལྡ་བ	look downwards	mig phab ste blda ba
མིག་ཕོར	gzong ril gyi 'og gi bu ga tsam gyi lcags kor	mig phor
མིག་ཕྱིད	inflammation of the eyes through cold/ snow-blindness D	mig phyid
མིག་ཕྱིད་པ	inflammation of the eyes through cold/ snow-blindness D	mig phyid pa
མིག་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	inverted eye?	mig phyin ci log
མིག་ཕྱིར་གླན་པ	(A) rmig phab pa	mig phyir glan pa
མིག་ཕྱུང་ཞིག	let his eyes be removed	mig phyung zhig
མིག་ཕྱེ	have 1's eyes opened	mig phye
མིག་ཕྱེ་བ	opened his eyes	mig phye ba
མིག་ཕྲ་པོ	[narrow eyes] jealous	mig phra po
མིག་ཕྲ་བོ	narrow eyes, jealous, avaricious, stingy, miserly	mig phra bo
མིག་འཕེན་པ	1) mig gis so srung ba; 2) zur mig lta ba)	mig 'phen pa
མིག་འཕྱེད	snow-blindness	mig 'phyed
མིག་འཕྱེད་རྒྱབ	get snow-blindness	mig 'phyed rgyab
མིག་འཕྲུལ	[play of optical], magic[al display]/ trick[ery], illusion/ visual tricks	mig 'phrul
མིག་འཕྲུལ་མཁན	illusionist, magician	mig 'phrul mkhan
མིག་འཕྲུལ་ལྟ་བུའི་མཛད་པ	illusion-like actions	mig 'phrul lta bu'i mdzad pa
མིག་འཕྲུལ་ལྟ་བུར་བསྒྱུར་བ	performing illusion w movements TSE	mig 'phrul lta bur bsgyur ba
མིག་འཕྲུལ་ལྟད་མོ	black magic	mig 'phrul ltad mo
མིག་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན	do magic [tricks], create illusions	mig 'phrul ston
མིག་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན་མཁན	illusionist, magician	mig 'phrul ston mkhan
མིག་འཕྲུལ་ཤེས་པ	understood how to trick the eyes with apparitions	mig 'phrul shes pa
མིག་བུ	person who leads the blind	mig bu
མིག་བློ	eye consciousness	mig blo
མིག་དབང	eye sense/ power/ faculty/ organ/ consciousness	mig dbang
མིག་འབུར	goggle-eyed	mig 'bur
མིག་འབུར་ཚུགས་པ	mig thad kar 'bur dod pa	mig 'bur tshugs pa
མིག་འབུར་ཚུགས་སུ་ལྟ་སྟངས	look w the eyes sticking out mig 'bur tshugs su mdun phyogs la lta ba look before [him] w staring eyes	mig 'bur tshugs su lta stangs
མིག་འབེན	target	mig 'ben
མིག་འབྱེད་ཐུར་མ	eye opening spoon for putting in med.	mig 'byed thur ma
མིག་འབྱེད་ཐུར་གཙག	mig nad bar 'grib [a kind of eye disease] la hole piercing tool	mig 'byed thur gtsag
མིག་འབྱེད་པ	open the eyes	mig 'byed pa
མིག་འབྱེད་བཙུམ	eyes open or closed	mig 'byed btsum
མིག་འབྱེད་འཛུམ	a wink of the eye	mig 'byed 'dzum
མིག་འབྲས	the apple of the eye, eyeball, eyeball	mig 'bras
མིག་འབྲས་ལྟར་གཅེས	as dear as one's eyes	mig 'bras ltar gces
མིག་འབྲས་བཞིན་སྲུངས	guard it as you guard your own eyes	mig 'bras bzhin srungs
མིག་འབྲུ་ཚུགས་པ	to fix the eyes upon	mig 'bru tshugs pa
མིག་འབྲུམ	trachoma lha thor in the eyes, kind of eye disease, cutaneous eruption of the eyes D	mig 'brum
མིག་འབྲུམ་ཅན	cutaneous eruption in the eyes	mig 'brum can
མིག་སྦོམ་པ	generous, liberal D	mig sbom pa
མིག་སྦྲིད་པ	mig mi gsal ba'am, rab rib tu gyur pa, ltad mo che drags pas mig sbrid pa	mig sbrid pa
མིག་མ	eye	mig ma
མིག་མ་མཁན	low caste, low-born	mig ma mkhan
མིག་མ་ཟུམ་ཙམ་གྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	blinking	mig ma zum tsam gyi lta tshul
མིག་མང	chess	mig mang
མིག་མང་རྩེ་བ	play chess	mig mang rtse ba
མིག་མང་རིས	checker-board pattern	mig mang ris
མིག་མང་རིས་སུ་བྲིས་པ	designed like a chess board	mig mang ris su bris pa
མིག་མངས	checkered design, chess board	mig mangs
མིག་མངས་ཀྱི་ཐུལ	defeated at chess	mig mangs kyi thul
མིག་མངས་ཀྱི་ཐུལ་ལོ	defeated in chess play	mig mangs kyi thul lo
མིག་མངས་རྩེ་བ	play chess	mig mangs rtse ba
མིག་མངས་རིས	[picture w] checkered design, square pattern	mig mangs ris
མིག་མངས་རིས་སུ	painted like a chess board	mig mangs ris su
མིག་མངས་རིས་སུ་བྲིས	checkered, painted in checks	mig mangs ris su bris
མིག་མངས་རིས་སུ་བྲིས་པ	checkered	mig mangs ris su bris pa
མིག་མི་འཛུམ	1) not winking/ closing the eyes, looking steadily; 2) fish, Avalokiteshvara; 3) deva,	mig mi 'dzum
ལ་བལྟ་ཞིང་གནས་པ	gazed upon the Buddha's face with unblinking eyes	la blta zhing gnas pa
མིག་མི་འཛུམ་པར་ལྟ་ཞིང	have one's eyes immovably fixed upon mig mi 'dzum par sangs rgyas kyi zhal la	mig mi 'dzum par lta zhing
མིག་མི་བཟང	virupaksa (one of 4 jig rten skyong, west, king of nagas), 1 of guardian kings of the world, epithet of shiva	mig mi bzang
མིག་མེ་བཟང	SA mig mi bzang	mig me bzang
མིག་དམག	game of go	mig dmag
མིག་དམན	poor/ weak eyes	mig dman
མིག་དམའ	shame, shameless	mig dma'
མིག་དམར	1) Mars [syn: bkra shis, chu stod skyes, nam mkha'i steng 'gro ba, rtsibs ldan, gzhon nu, 'od zer dgu pa, rol 'gro, lus dmar can, sa skyes, sa las byung, sa'i bu]; 2) Tuesday; 3) the male wood mous...	mig dmar
མིག་དམར་བ	red eyes {skyes bu mig dmar ba 'jigs su rung ba} a terrifying being with red eyes	mig dmar ba
མིག་རྨོ	dice for teaching letters/ figures	mig rmo
མིག་སྨན	1) eye med.; 2) mineral med. mdung rtse smug po antimony D; 3) black; 4) the eye potion siddhi; 5) fair eyed/ flamingo D)/*	mig sman
མིག་སྨན་གྱི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, medicine for the eye	mig sman gyi dngos
མིག་སྨན་གྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the eye medicine siddhi	mig sman gyi dngos grub
མིག་སྨན་གྱི་ཤེས་པའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the eye medicine of knowledge siddhi	mig sman gyi shes pa'i dngos grub
མིག་སྨན་སྔོན་པོ	deep blue	mig sman sngon po
མིག་སྨན་བཅུད	black pigment/ corrylium mascara	mig sman bcud
མིག་སྨན་མཇུག་མ	crane	mig sman mjug ma
མིག་སྨན་མདོག་ཅན	kalpa fire dus me	mig sman mdog can
མིག་སྨན་འདེབས་བྱེད	spoon for putting med. in the eye	mig sman 'debs byed
མིག་སྨན་མིག་ཕན	eye medicine helps the eyes [dmigs yul de rang la phan pa byed dgos pa'i dpe	mig sman mig phan
མིག་སྨན་རྩྭ	rtsangs pa	mig sman rtswa
མིག་སྨན་ལུས་ཅན	bear, term used in addressing a flamingo, fair-eyed	mig sman lus can
མིག་སྨན་སངས་རྒྱས	med. herb zhim thig le	mig sman sangs rgyas
མིག་བཙའ	look at	mig btsa'
མིག་བཙའ་བ	look at	mig btsa' ba
མིག་བཙས	looked at	mig btsas
མིག་བཙུམ	closing your eyes	mig btsum
མིག་བཙུམ་པ	blink	mig btsum pa
མིག་བཙུམ་བཙུམ་བྱེད་པ	blink	mig btsum btsum byed pa
མིག་བཙུམས་པ	mountains, wink with the eye	mig btsums pa
མིག་བཙུམས་པའི་རི	{mig btsums pa'i ri} mt	mig btsums pa'i ri
མིག་རྩ	eye blood vessels, optic nerve	mig rtsa
མིག་རྩ་ཅན	stingy, miserly	mig rtsa can
མིག་རྩ་དམར་པོ	bloodshot eyes	mig rtsa dmar po
མིག་རྩ་དམར་པོ་ཆགས་པ	to have bloodshot eyes	mig rtsa dmar po chags pa
མིག་རྩེག	wrinkles of the eyelid	mig rtseg
མིག་ཚ	1) envy/jealously; 2) eyes hot/ w burning sensation [by disease, onion etc.]	mig tsha
མིག་ཚ་བ	1) envy/jealously; 2) eyes hot/ w burning sensation by disease etc.)	mig tsha ba
མིག་ཚག	to have twitching eyes	mig tshag
མིག་ཚག་པ	twitch in the eyes	mig tshag pa
མིག་ཚིལ	an eyeball	mig tshil
མིག་ཚུམས་ཤིག	close your eyes	mig tshums shig
མིག་མཚམས	mig gi thad mtshams, skra sil ma mig mtshams su slebs pa	mig mtshams
མིག་ཛག་པ	bleary eyes D	mig dzag pa
མིག་མཛེར	sediment etc in the eyes	mig mdzer
མིག་མཛེས	cuckoo	mig mdzes
མིག་འཛིན	forehead	mig 'dzin
མིག་འཛུམ	squint, twinkling of the eyes, eyes closing w sleepiness	mig 'dzum
མིག་འཛུམ་རྒྱབ་པ	wink	mig 'dzum rgyab pa
མིག་འཛུམ་པ	eyes closing with sleep, getting sleepy	mig 'dzum pa
མིག་རྫག་པ	blear eyes	mig rdzag pa
མིག་རྫི	eye-lash	mig rdzi
མིག་ཞར	1 eyed, blind	mig zhar
མིག་ཞར་བ	one-eyed/ half-blind	mig zhar ba
མིག་ཟིམ་མེ	half-closed eyes	mig zim me
མིག་ཟིམ་མེ་བ	mig 'dzum la khad pa	mig zim me ba
མིག་ཟིམ་ཟིམ	blinking	mig zim zim
མིག་ཟུམ་གྱུར་ཅིང	his eye being closed	mig zum gyur cing
མིག་ཟུམ་ཟུམ	blinking	mig zum zum
མིག་ཟུམ་ཟུམ་བྱེད་པ	to blink	mig zum zum byed pa
མིག་ཟུར	glance, corner of the eye	mig zur
མིག་ཟུར་ལྟ	look at from the corner of the eye/ w[sidelong] glance/ w angry glare	mig zur lta
མིག་ཟུར་བལྟས	look askance	mig zur bltas
མིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ལྟ་བ	stare	mig zer te lta ba
མིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ལྟ་བའི	staring	mig zer te lta ba'i
མིག་ཟླུམ་པ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, round eyes	mig zlum pa
མིག་ཟླུམ་པོ	round eyes	mig zlum po
མིག་གཟི	eye-lash mig gzigs stangs las mi 'gul bas snang ba'i 'phel 'dzin - w/o moving from the gazes 2044 of the eyes, appearances are enhanced GD	mig gzi
མིག་གཟོང	rmig lcags la [in a horse shoe] kind of hole piercer	mig gzong
མིག་བཟང་བློ་གྲོས	epithet of son of kamadeva	mig bzang blo gros
མིག་བཟང་མ	1) woman w beautiful eyes; 2) yaksha nymph {mig bzang ma}	mig bzang ma
མིག་ཡ	epithet of vaisravana who has 3rd eye on forehead	mig ya
མིག་ཡ་གཅིག་གིས་མི་མཐོང་བ	unable to see w 1 eye	mig ya gcig gis mi mthong ba
མིག་ཡ་བ	rnam thos sras, Vaishravana	mig ya ba
མིག་ཡངས་པ	generous-minded, liberal	mig yangs pa
མིག་ཡངས་མ	young woman yul gang la'ang lta rtog thub pa [about to take care of?]/ knowledgeable/ educated	mig yangs ma
མིག་ཡུལ	visual object	mig yul
མིག་ཡུལ་དུ་འཐད་པ	suitable eye object	mig yul du 'thad pa
མིག་ཡེངས	x {kha yengs dang mig yengs byas nas} saying whatever you like and looking around everywhere	mig yengs
མིག་ཡོ	cross-eyed	mig yo
མིག་ཡོད་པ	Jupiter	mig yod pa
མིག་ཡོན	cross-eyed	mig yon
མིག་ཡོན་པོར་ལྟ་བ	squint	mig yon por lta ba
མིག་ཡོར	{med pa la yod par snang ba mig yor lta bu} as in a visual aberration, things appear to be there, yet there is nothing	mig yor
མིག་ར	1) eye-brow; 2) mig dra eyeprotector made of long yak hair etc. [for snow-blindness]	mig ra
མིག་རས	eye-band, blindfold	mig ras
མིག་རས་བཙའ	look at	mig ras btsa'
མིག་རིག་རིག	look w the eyes sticking out, [timidly anxiously] looking to and fro	mig rig rig
མིག་རིག་རིག་བྱེད	look about	mig rig rig byed
མིག་རིག་རིག་བྱེད་པ	stare with revolving	mig rig rig byed pa
མིག་རིང་ཅན	long sighted	mig ring can
མིག་རིམས	infectious eye disease	mig rims
མིག་རིལ	eyeball	mig ril
མིག་རིས	artificial eyebrows	mig ris
མིག་རུས	eye bone D	mig rus
མིག་རུས་མནན་པ	khong khro ba	mig rus mnan pa
མིག་རློ	/ D ; 1) look askance w jealousy; 2) eye at end of a balance beam for holding pan strings)	mig rlo
མིག་ལ་འཁྱུག་པ	yid du 'gro ba'am, blo la 'bab pa, las stangs la legs bcos btang rjes mi tshang ma'i mig la 'khyug po byung song	mig la 'khyug pa
མིག་ལ་གྱོན་རྒྱུའི་ཤེལ་སྒོ	spectacles, glasses	mig la gyon rgyu'i shel sgo
མིག་ལ་རྒྱུག་པ	appearing to 1's view	mig la rgyug pa
མིག་ལ་མངར་བ	beautiful	mig la mngar ba
མིག་ལ་ཐོགས་པ	obstructed eyes	mig la thogs pa
མིག་ལ་ཕན	crystal	mig la phan
མིག་ལ་མཛེས་པ	good-looking, smart, handsome, beautiful	mig la mdzes pa
མིག་ལ་ཟུག	connected to the eyes	mig la zug
མིག་ལ་ཟུག་པ	1) lta snang la mdzes por mthong ba; 2) get in the eye)	mig la zug pa
མིག་ལམ	object seen, w (my) own eyes, before the eyes, field of vision	mig lam
མིག་ལམ་ཆད	(A) get dark, sa sribs pa	mig lam chad
མིག་ལམ་ཆད་པ	(A) get dark, sa sribs pa	mig lam chad pa
མིག་ལམ་དུ་འཆར	appeared before their eyes	mig lam du 'char
མིག་ལམ་དུ་མི་འཇོག	(A) look down on	mig lam du mi 'jog
མིག་ལས་རྡུལ་འཕྱི་བ	wipe out dust from the eye	mig las rdul 'phyi ba
མིག་ལོག	seeing with up-turned eyes	mig log
མིག་ལོག་ལྟ	look w angry eyes	mig log lta
མིག་ལོག་ལྟ་བ	look w angry eyes	mig log lta ba
མིག་ལོག་ལྟ་བའི་དགྲ་བོ	enemy looking w angry eyes	mig log lta ba'i dgra bo
མིག་ལོག་བལྟས་པ	to look angry, give an angry look	mig log bltas pa
མིག་ལོག་བྱེད་པ	responds with black looks	mig log byed pa
མིག་ལོང	go blind	mig long
མིག་ལོང་པ	blind	mig long pa
མིག་ལོང་བ	blind	mig long ba
མིག་ལོང་མོ	blind woman	mig long mo
མིག་ལོང་མོ་ཤམ	blind barren woman	mig long mo sham
མིག་ལོབ་ངན་པ	malicious look	mig lob ngan pa
མིག་ཤུགས	vision, sight, perception, shrewdness	mig shugs
མིག་ཤེད	vision, sight, perception, shrewdness	mig shed
མིག་ཤེལ	spectacles, glasses	mig shel
མིག་ཤེལ་ནག་པོ	sun glasses	mig shel nag po
མིག་ཤེལ་ཚོས་ལྡན	sun glasses mig shel sogs bzo tshong byed mkhan optician	mig shel tshos ldan
མིག་ཤེས	eye consciousness *, vision, sight	mig shes
མིག་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བཟུང་བྱ	the object grasped by the eye consciousness TSE	mig shes kyi bzung bya
མིག་ཤེས་གྱི་ཁམས	the eye consciousness element/dhatu, abbr of {mig gi rnam par shes pa'i khams} 1 of the eighteen dhatus)	mig shes gyi khams
མིག་སེར	jaundice, envy, jealousy	mig ser
མིག་སེར་རྒྱག	feel jealous	mig ser rgyag
མིག་སེར་ཅན	yellow eyed, owl	mig ser can
མིག་སེར་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, yellow eyes	mig ser ba
མིག་སེར་ཚ་པོ	jealous [person]	mig ser tsha po
མིག་སེར་ལང	feel jealous	mig ser lang
མིག་སོགས	eyes and the other sense organs	mig sogs
མིག་སོགས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five senses the eye and so forth	mig sogs kyi dbang po lnga
མིག་སོགས་ནང་གི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	the six inner ayatanas of the eye and so forth	mig sogs nang gi skye mched drug
མིག་སོགས་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five senses the eye and so forth mig sogs dbang po gzugs can lnga'i	mig sogs dbang po lnga
མིག་སླུ་བ	deceive the eyes	mig slu ba
མིག་སླེ་བོ	crooked/ yon po eyes	mig sle bo
མིག་སློག	roll the eyes	mig slog
མིག་སློག་པ	roll one's eyes	mig slog pa
མིག་སློབས	accustoming the eyes to something	mig slobs
མིག་སློབས་ངན་པ	a bad custom of seeing begins to prevail	mig slobs ngan pa
མིག་སློབས་ངན་པ་སྐྱེ	you habituate yourself to a faulty look	mig slobs ngan pa skye
མིག་གསུམ་གྲོགས་པོ	Vaishravana	mig gsum grogs po
མིག་གསུམ་པ	the deity dbang phyug chen po	mig gsum pa
མིག་གསུམ་པའི་གཙུག་གི་ནོར	moon	mig gsum pa'i gtsug gi nor
མིག་གསུམ་གཙུག་ནོར	moon	mig gsum gtsug nor
མིག་གསུམ་འཛིན	moon	mig gsum 'dzin
མིག་བསྲིངས་པ	1) look a long way off; 2) phugs don la bsam blo btang ba)	mig bsrings pa
མིག་བསླེ་བོ	mig sle bo	mig bsle bo
མིག་བསློགས	rolled the eyes	mig bslogs
མིག་ཧ་ཆང་ཆེ་བ	very large eyes	mig ha chang che ba
མིག་ཧར་པོ	dkar nag ma 'dres par gsal ba'i mig 'bras bkra po	mig har po
མིག་ཧུ་རུ་འདུག	he stares with wonder, he gazes with horror	mig hu ru 'dug
མིག་ཧུ་རེ་བལྟ་བ	gaze	mig hu re blta ba
མིག་ཧུར	steady/ intent gaze/ stare	mig hur
མིག་ཧུར་རེ	wide awake eyes	mig hur re
མིག་ཧུར་རེར་ལྟ	gaze/ stare at	mig hur rer lta
མིག་ཧུར་རེར་ལྟ་བ	gaze/ stare at	mig hur rer lta ba
མིག་ཧུར་རེར་ལྟ་བའི་མི་ཁྲོ་བོ	angrily staring person	mig hur rer lta ba'i mi khro bo
མིག་ཧུར་ཧུར་ལྟ་བ	glaring	mig hur hur lta ba
མིག་ཧྲིག་གེ	gazing/ staring at	mig hrig ge
མིག་ཧྲིག་གེར་ལྟ	look/ stare at	mig hrig ger lta
མིག་ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག	look/stare w the eyes sticking out/ terrified eyes D	mig hrig hrig
མིག་ཧྲིལ	eye ball	mig hril
མིང	name, term [ggd]	ming
མིང་ཀ་བ་ལ	compose, draw up, write a narrative, mention, insert in a writing, publish, make known	ming ka ba la
མིང་ཀ་བ་ལ་འགོད་པ	write name on a column	ming ka ba la 'god pa
མིང་བཀོད	signed	ming bkod
མིང་བཀོད་པའི་ཐོ་ཡིག	list of names, roll, register	ming bkod pa'i tho yig
མིང་རྐུས	impersonate, pose as, represent 1self as, pass for	ming rkus
མིང་རྐྱང	CM: don gyi ngo bo ston byed, that which expresses the essence of an object/the meaning. E.g. @ R75: 252.5 - here it seems to be mean "name only" or "merely nominal" [mss]	ming rkyang
མིང་རྐྱང་བརྟགས	word in common use	ming rkyang brtags
མིང་རྐྱང་པ	word that has no affix denoting case, name without any titles added to it	ming rkyang pa
མིང་སྐམ	mere titles; a mere name, title	ming skam
མིང་ཁུར་བ	receive a name	ming khur ba
མིང་ཁྱེར་བ	1) receive a name; 2) borrow another name	ming khyer ba
མིང་གི་ཀུན་བཤད	table of nouns (in grammar) GD	ming gi kun bshad
མིང་གི་དགེ་སློང	priest only by name	ming gi dge slong
མིང་གི་ཅོད་པན	the crown of a name / title	ming gi cod pan
མིང་གི་བརྗོད་པ	nominal expression	ming gi brjod pa
མིང་གི་ཐ་སྙད	nominal convention, expression of the name	ming gi tha snyad
མིང་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས	synonyms	ming gi rnam grangs
མིང་གི་ཕུང་པོ་བཞི	the four skandhas of name [the five skandhas excluding form)	ming gi phung po bzhi
མིང་གི་བྱང་བུ	notebook for names, name inscription/ table	ming gi byang bu
མིང་གི་དབང	name empowerment/ abhisheka TSE	ming gi dbang
མིང་གི་ཚབ་ཚིག	pronoun	ming gi tshab tshig
མིང་གི་ཚོགས	groups of words/ word stems/ names	ming gi tshogs
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་ཆེན	Mahanaman, 1)	ming gi tshogs chen
བུདདྷའས་ཕ༹ཐེར	in-law. 2) one of Bud- 2046 dha's first disciples, {'khor sde lnga} / {lnga sde bzang po}	Buddha's father
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་བཏགས	name, title. to name, designate by a name	ming gi tshogs btags
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་དང་གཟུགས	name and form, [mind and body / mind and matter], [the 4th of {rten 'brel yan lag bcu gnyis}	ming gi tshogs dang gzugs
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་པ	dictionary	ming gi tshogs pa
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་བྱང	name inscription/ table	ming gi tshogs byang
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་བྱང་གི་བྱང་བུ	name inscription/ table	ming gi tshogs byang gi byang bu
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་མེད་དུ་བཅོམ	obliterate, annihilate	ming gi tshogs med du bcom
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་ཙམ	mere word[s]	ming gi tshogs tsam
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་བཞིའི་ཕུང་པོ	the four aggregates of name,; {phung po lnga} excluding {gzugs}: {tshor ba} {'du shes} {'du byed} {rnam shes}	ming gi tshogs bzhi'i phung po
མིང་གི་ཚོགས་གཟུགས	Syn {ming dang gzugs} [- Syn {phung po lnga} def. {gzugs kyi phung po dang ming bzhi'i phung po}	ming gi tshogs gzugs
མིང་གི་མཛོད	dictionary	ming gi mdzod
མིང་གི་ལྷག་མ	ming shul	ming gi lhag ma
མིང་གིས་བརྗོད་པ	verbal formulation	ming gis brjod pa
མིང་གིས་གདགས་པ	verbal formulation	ming gis gdags pa
མིང་གིས་འདོགས་པ	nominal designation	ming gis 'dogs pa
མིང་གོ	republic	ming go
མིང་གྱིས་སྨོད་པ	slanderous namecalling	ming gyis smod pa
མིང་གྲགས	famous, well-known	ming grags
མིང་གྲགས་ཆེ་བ	well known, famous	ming grags che ba
མིང་གྲོགས	1) person w the = name as another; 2) ming gi cha shas; 3))	ming grogs
མིང་འགོད	[p bkod] sign	ming 'god
མིང་འགྲེལ	commentary showing the meaning of a name	ming 'grel
མིང་སྒྱུར	change an old name/ title, title transfer	ming sgyur
མིང་སྒྱུར་བྱེད	change an old name/ title, transfer title	ming sgyur byed
མིང་སྒྲ	mere word, syllable, language	ming sgra
མིང་བསྒྱུར	change one's name	ming bsgyur
མིང་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	change an old name/ title, transfer title	ming bsgyur byed
མིང་ངན	bad name, notoriety	ming ngan
མིང་ངན་པ་བཟོ་བ	denigrate	ming ngan pa bzo ba
མིང་ངན་ཡོངས་གྲོགས	infamous, notorious	ming ngan yongs grogs
མིང་ཅན	1) famous, well-known; 2) well spoken of; 3) having a name; 4) having a reputation; 5) med herb {ming can}	ming can
མིང་ཅན་གྱུང་བ	{ming can gyung ba} tree	ming can gyung ba
མིང་ཅན་ནག་པོ	black mingpa field herb med [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas lhog pa dang gnyan skrangs 'joms, khrag rlung gis lus stod gzer ba la phan, dug tshad sel	ming can nag po
མིང་ཅན་སེར་པོ	yellow ming can flower med [nus pa ming can nag po dang mtshungs	ming can ser po
མིང་ཅིག	deserving, becoming	ming cig
མིང་ཆེན	1) Mah naman; 2) fame, reputation, famous, well-known)	ming chen
མིང་ཆེན་འཁོར་སྡེ་ལྔ	Mah naman [one of buddha's first five disciples {'khor sde lnga}	ming chen 'khor sde lnga
པར་ཤེན་པའི་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	attachment to conceptualization of reality according to names	par shen pa'i rnam par rtog pa
མིང་རྗེས་སུ་བརྟགས	ascertained the meaning of the word	ming rjes su brtags
མིང་བརྗེ་བ	give a new name	ming brje ba
མིང་བརྗེས	change an old name/ title, title transfer	ming brjes
མིང་བརྗེས་བྱེད	change an old name/ title, transfer title	ming brjes byed
མིང་གཉིས	the two kinds of names	ming gnyis
མིང་བཏགས	to coin the expression, coining the terms	ming btags
མིང་བཏགས་ཐུག་པ	in large monasteries like Sera and Drepung monks on whom the title of dge bshes zhes mtho rim was newly bestowed for a celebration by that geshe like a tax dge 'dun pa la drang bar bya rgyu'i 'bras...	ming btags thug pa
མིང་བཏགས་པ	gave the name	ming btags pa
མིང་བཏགས་རག	obtain the name/ title of	ming btags rag
མིང་བཏགས་སྲོལ	nomenclature	ming btags srol
མིང་རྟགས	initial signature	ming rtags
མིང་རྟགས་བཀོད་པ	sign [& seal]	ming rtags bkod pa
མིང་རྟགས་རྒྱབ་མཁན	signatory	ming rtags rgyab mkhan
མིང་རྟགས་རྒྱབ་པ	sign	ming rtags rgyab pa
མིང་སྟོང་པ	empty name	ming stong pa
མིང་སྟོན	1) ming 'dogs kyi ston mo'am mdzad sgo; 2) mi phyugs dngos po sogs kyi ming brda ston pa)	ming ston
མིང་སྟོན་པའི་རྣམ་དབྱེ	noun	ming ston pa'i rnam dbye
མིང་བསྟན་པ	presentation of the title	ming bstan pa
མིང་ཐོ	name-list	ming tho
མིང་ཐོ་མཉམ་འགོད	jointly signed	ming tho mnyam 'god
མིང་ཐོ་མཉམ་འགོད་བྱེད	sign jointly	ming tho mnyam 'god byed
མིང་ཐོ་འདོན	produce/ issue publish a list of names/ roll/ register	ming tho 'don
མིང་ཐོག	name, in the name of, nominal	ming thog
མིང་ཐོགས	/ 'dogs - to name a child	ming thogs
མིང་ཐོབ	attain a title/ rank thang	ming thob
མིང་ཐོབ་པ	get the name of/ be called a	ming thob pa
མིང་ཐོར་བཀོད་པ	enrol	ming thor bkod pa
མིང་ཐོས	{de ring chu'i ming thos pa} Today we have heard the word 'water'!	ming thos
མིང་ཐོས་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	simply through hearing his name	ming thos pa tsam gyis
མིང་མཐའ	A term of grammar. Nameending. Means the letter, whatever it is,	ming mtha'
ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཨཕ༹ཕི༹྾ཨེད་ཨཕ༹ཏེར་ཐེ་ནམེ	base and which ends a name. E.g. if a namebase has both a suffix and a post-suffix	which is affixed after the name
ཐེན་ཐེ་པོསཏ	suffix is the name-ending; if there is only a suffix then that is the	then the post
མིང་མཐའ་འདྲེན་པ	ming mtha'i rjes 'jug gis rtags mtshungs kyi ming gzhi 'dren tshul dang, sgra mtshungs kyi brjod bde 'dren tshul	ming mtha' 'dren pa
མིང་མཐའི་པ་བ	PA or BA particle at the end of a name/ noun	ming mtha'i pa ba
མིང་དང་བརྗོད་པ	name and expression	ming dang brjod pa
མིང་དང་དོན་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	the nature of name and meaning	ming dang don ji lta ba
མིང་དང་འདྲེས་པ	combine w a name	ming dang 'dres pa
མིང་དང་བརྡའི་ཐ་སྙད	verbal and symbolic convention	ming dang brda'i tha snyad
མིང་དང་བརྡའི་ཡུལ	object of names and signs	ming dang brda'i yul
མིང་དང་བློའི་བཏགས་ཙམ	mere name and mental imputation TSE	ming dang blo'i btags tsam
མིང་དང་ཚིག་དང་ཡི་གེའི་གྲངས	account in terms of names, words, and letters	ming dang tshig dang yi ge'i grangs
མིང་དང་མཚན་མ་ཀུན་རྟོག	conceptualizing names and [distinguishing] marks	ming dang mtshan ma kun rtog
མིང་དང་གཟུགས	name and form, namar pa (mind and body/ mind and matter) [4th of the {rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba'i yan lag bcu gnyis} 12 links of dependent origination (mind and body/ mind and matter), (the 4th...	ming dang gzugs
མིང་དུ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	false conceptions of names	ming du kun tu rtog pa
མིང་དུ་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to names	ming du mngon par zhen pa
མིང་དུ་མངོན་པར་ཤེན་པ	attachment to names	ming du mngon par shen pa
མིང་དུ་བརྗོད་པ	designation	ming du brjod pa
མིང་དུ་གཏགས་པ	labelled w a name	ming du gtags pa
མིང་དུ་བཏགས་པ	labeled as, called, named	ming du btags pa
མིང་དུ་འདོགས	[give a] name	ming du 'dogs
མིང་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearances of names	ming du snang ba
མིང་དོན	name and meaning/designation [tha snyad dus kyi ming dang, brda dus kyi don te, gdags gzhi gang la 'dogs byed kyi ming chags pa'am grags shing grub pa'i mi ming dang, 'dogs byed kyi ming gdags par ...	ming don
མིང་དོན་གཅིག་པ	who live up to their names	ming don gcig pa
མིང་དོན་བརྡ་སྤྲོད	1) give commentary of the meaning of names/ words; 2) {ming don brda sprod [tr Vairochana's SK/ Tibetan dictionary	ming don brda sprod
མིང་དོན་མཚུངས་པ	genuine, authentic, bona fide	ming don mtshungs pa
མིང་གདག	give a name	ming gdag
མིང་གདགས་པ	give a name	ming gdags pa
མིང་བདག	give a name	ming bdag
མིང་བདགས	name, designate by a name	ming bdags
མིང་འདེམ་ཤོག	ballot	ming 'dem shog
མིང་འདེམ་ཤོག་འཕེན	cast a ballot, vote	ming 'dem shog 'phen
མིང་འདོགས	bad name, nick name, terminology, name, title	ming 'dogs
མིང་འདོགས་རྒྱག	give a nickname [pejorative]	ming 'dogs rgyag
མིང་འདོགས་སྣ་ཚོགས	many different khag 'dogs	ming 'dogs sna tshogs
མིང་འདོགས་པ	{ming btags pa} to (apply a) label/ term/ name	ming 'dogs pa
མིང་ལྡོག	nickname, sobriquet	ming ldog
མིང་བརྡ	individual things conventional names	ming brda
མིང་ནས	by name, from names	ming nas
མིང་ནས་བོད	to call by name	ming nas bod
མིང་ནས་བོས	call by name	ming nas bos
མིང་ནི་བཅོས་མ	names are artificialities/ fabrications	ming ni bcos ma
མིང་གནས	status, reputation, position	ming gnas
མིང་གནས་སྤྲོད་པ	designate	ming gnas sprod pa
མིང་པ	'phrin bskur gyi rjes su khengs bskyungs kyis rang ming 'god tshul zhig, dge ming pas phul, sprul ming pas phul	ming pa
མིང་པོ	brother	ming po
མིང་པོ་དང་སྲིང་མོ	brothers and sisters	ming po dang sring mo
མིང་པོས་བསྲུང་བ	cherished or protected by the brother	ming pos bsrung ba
མིང་སྤོ་བ	change name	ming spo ba
མིང་འཕྲོག་པ	deprive of a title	ming 'phrog pa
མིང་བྱང	1) pecha title; 2) notebook for names, name inscription/ table, label, tag	ming byang
མིང་དབང	name or prophetic empowerment	ming dbang
མིང་འབང	mask, false face, front	ming 'bang
མིང་འབང་གྱོན	put on a mask/ false face/ front	ming 'bang gyon
མིང་འབུར་བ	skad grags che ru 'gro ba	ming 'bur ba
མིང་སྦྱོར་རྟོག་པ	conception of connected names	ming sbyor rtog pa
མིང་སྦྲེལ་བ	ming mang po phrad rnam dbyes sbrel te tshig bzos pa	ming sbrel ba
མིང་མེད	1) nameless, anonymous; 2) little finger; 3) completely non-existent, not even the name exists)	ming med
མིང་མེད་ཀྱི	anonymous	ming med kyi
མིང་མེད་དུ་བཅོམ	to obliterate, annihilate	ming med du bcom
མིང་ཙམ	just a label	ming tsam
མིང་ཙམ་གྱི་ཆབ་སྲིད་པ	armchair politician, politician in name only	ming tsam gyi chab srid pa
མིང་ཙམ་དུ	nominal	ming tsam du
མིང་ཙམ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	nominal existence	ming tsam du yod pa
མིང་ཙམ་མེད་པ་བཟོ	annihilate, destroy completely	ming tsam med pa bzo
མིང་ཙམ་བཟུང་བའི་སྲིད་གཞུང	token/ titular government	ming tsam bzung ba'i srid gzhung
མིང་ཙམ་ལས་མེད	not more than a name, merely verbal	ming tsam las med
མིང་ཙམ་གསུངས་པ	teach mere words, teach that is mere words	ming tsam gsungs pa
མིང་ཚབ	pronoun	ming tshab
མིང་ཚར	starvation	ming tshar
མིང་ཚས་དུ་ཡོད་པ	nominal existence	ming tshas du yod pa
མིང་ཚིག	noun. names and words [don gyi ngo bo ston pa ming ste, bum pa, ka ba lta bu dang, don gyi khyad par ston pa tshig ste, ri mthon po, ngas bshad, khyod kyis nyan lta bu'o,//ming//tshig	ming tshig
མིང་ཚིག་གཉིས	names and words	ming tshig gnyis
མིང་ཚིག་ཡི་གེའི་ཚོགས	the groups of names, words, and syllables	ming tshig yi ge'i tshogs
མིང་ཚོགས	don gyi ngo bo ston pa'i all conventionalities	ming tshogs
མིང་འཚོལ་བའི་ཡང་དག་ཡེ་ཤེས	right cognition of names {yang dag ye shes bzhi}	ming 'tshol ba'i yang dag ye shes
མིང་མཛོད	book of many names/ ming tshig, dictionary, glossary	ming mdzod
མིང་རྫས	disgrace [someone]	ming rdzas
མིང་རྫས་ཁ་བསླུས	impersonate, assume a false name/ identity	ming rdzas kha bslus
མིང་རྫས་ཁ་བསླུས་བྱེད	impersonate, assume a false name/ identity	ming rdzas kha bslus byed
མིང་བརྫུས་མ	pseudonym	ming brdzus ma
མིང་གཞི	base letters of words [ming tshig brjod pa kun gyi gzhi rtsar gyur pa'i yi ge ste, spyir dbyangs gsal dril ba'i yi ge 34, in particular the 30 consonants, yang sgos the 20 ming gzhi rkyang pa	ming gzhi
ཨོནལཡ་བེ་ཨོནེ་ནམེ	base per name	only be one name
མིང་གཞི་རྐྱང་པ	solitary letters w/o prefix/ finals [ka kha	ming gzhi rkyang pa
མིང་གཞི་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 letters that are only base leters and not prefixes/ finals [KA KHA CA CHA JA NYA TA THA PA PHA TSHA TSHA DZA WA ZHA ZA YA SHA HA AA	ming gzhi nyi shu
མིང་གཞི་གཉིས་སྦྲེལ	two stacks of consonants [rka gya	ming gzhi gnyis sbrel
མིང་གཞི་གཙོ་ཕལ	bskyed lta bu sngon 'jug ba dang, rjes 'jug da, dbyangs 'greng bu bcas 'jug sa'i ming gzhi gtso bo ka dang, phal pa sa mgo dang ya btags yin pa bzhin no, bskyed, ba, da, 'greng bu, skya, ka, sa, ya	ming gzhi gtso phal
མིང་གཞི་སུམ་ཅུ	joinable to the rjes 'jug bcu po the 30 consonants	ming gzhi sum cu
མིང་གཞི་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་བཞི	the 33 baseletters	ming gzhi sum cu so bzhi
མིང་གཞི་གསུམ་སྦྲེལ	three stacks of consonants	ming gzhi gsum sbrel
མིང་གཞིའི་ཕོ་ཡིག	male base letters expressed w much force	ming gzhi'i pho yig
མིང་གཞིའི་མ་ནིང	the neuter base letters	ming gzhi'i ma ning
མིང་གཞིའི་མོ་ཡིག	feminine base letters expressed w little force [GA JA DA BA DZA WA ZHA ZA ' YA SHA SA	ming gzhi'i mo yig
མིང་གཞིའི་མོ་གཤམ	barren woman base letters expressed w extremely little force	ming gzhi'i mo gsham
མིང་གཞིའི་མཚན་མེད	eunuch base letter AA even weaker than the barren woman ones	ming gzhi'i mtshan med
མིང་གཞིའི་ཤིན་ཏུ་མོ	very feminine base letters expressed w very little force	ming gzhi'i shin tu mo
མིང་གཞུང	note[book] for names	ming gzhung
མིང་བཞི	four names. consciousness, sensation, conception, and formation	ming bzhi
མིང་བཞི་དང་གཟུགས	four names and form (1 of 5 phung po)	ming bzhi dang gzugs
མིང་བཞི་ལ་ལྡན་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Four Names, the Contemplation endowed with. These are the four mental components of feeling, perception, habitual tendencies and consciousness which are separated from the fifth component, form, du...	ming bzhi la ldan pa'i ting nge 'dzin
མིང་བཞིའི་ཕུང་པོ	the aggregates of the four names, {phung po lnga} excluding {gzugs}. [def. {tshor ba}, {'du shes}, {'du byed}, {rnam shes}. the four skandhas [excluding {gzugs} dissolved in the {dun gzhi}at death....	ming bzhi'i phung po
སྟགེས་ཨིན་ཐེ་བརྡོ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨཕ༹ཏེར	death experience. ignorance, stirring of conscious patterning, discursive consciousness, and labeling subject and object	stages in the bardo of the after
ཨིན་ཐེ་བརྡོ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨཕ༹ཏེར	death experience ignorance, stirring of conscious patterning, discursive consciousness, and labelling subject and object. tshor ba, 'du shes, 'du byed, rnam shes bzhi 'dus pa'i phung po yid kyi lus so	in the bardo of the after
མིང་ཟུར་ཆགས་པ	name is broken down to. name is shortened to. commonly know as	ming zur chags pa
མིང་ཟུར་ཆགས་པའི	name is shortened/ corrupted to, commonly known as	ming zur chags pa'i
མིང་ཟླ	1) ming gi brda chad 'dra ba; 2) ming yig gi tshig grogs)	ming zla
མིང་གཟུགས	{ming dang gzugs} (lit., "name and form") (formation of) mindbody (complex) (one of twelve links of interdependent connection)	ming gzugs
མིང་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related name and form	ming gzugs kyi rten 'brel
མིང་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	link of name-andform	ming gzugs kyi yan lag
མིང་གཟུགས་དང་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	ris mthun gyi lus kun tu 'dzin par byed pa'i rgyu	ming gzugs dang skye mched drug
མིང་གཟུགས་ཟླ་བ	3rd month w sun in Aries	ming gzugs zla ba
མིང་ཡང་མེད	never even heard of {chos kyi ming yang med pa} have never even heard of the Dharma	ming yang med
མིང་ཡང་མེད་པ	non-existence of even the name	ming yang med pa
མིང་ཡིག	ming gi yi ge	ming yig
མིང་ཡོད་ཀྱང་དོན་གྱིས་སྟོངས་པ	having a name but empty of meaning	ming yod kyang don gyis stongs pa
མིང་ཡོད་དོན་མེད	having a name but no meaning	ming yod don med
མིང་ལ་དམིགས་པ	conceptions/ perceptualization of names	ming la dmigs pa
མིང་ལ་སེམས་གནས་པ	mind abides within/ as names	ming la sems gnas pa
མིང་ལེན	taking office, receiving a name	ming len
མིང་ལེན་དམ་བཅའ	oath of office	ming len dam bca'
མིང་ལེན་དམ་བཅའ་འཇོག	take an oath of office	ming len dam bca' 'jog
མིང་ལེན་དམ་བཅའ་བྱེད	take an oath of office	ming len dam bca' byed
མིང་ཤས་བཟོ་བ	scandalize	ming shas bzo ba
མིང་བཤེར	roll call	ming bsher
མིང་བཤེར་བྱེད	call the roll	ming bsher byed
མིང་སོར	transfer title	ming sor
མིང་སྲིང	brother[s] and sister[s]	ming sring
མིང་གྷི	emperor of han dynasty	ming ghi
མིང་དྷི	{ming dhi} [han emperor]	ming dhi
མིཏ་གིས་ལྟོས་ས	ATG: "reference-point". Also mig ltos byas sa. [mss]	mit gis ltos sa
མིད་དཀྱུས	phlegm gre thogs	mid dkyus
མིད་ཁྱུར་བྱེད	swallow, gulp, devour	mid khyur byed
མིད་གི་ལམས	the eye elements	mid gi lams
མིད་པ	1) (Tha dad pa),, swallow, gulp, devour; 2) gullet, oesophagus, throat; 3); 4) fish of genus Sizopygopsis)	mid pa
མིད་པ་འགག	choke [on something]	mid pa 'gag
མིད་པ་འགག་པ	choke [on something]	mid pa 'gag pa
མིད་པ་མཆུས	by sadness etc hard breathing, be emotionally moved	mid pa mchus
མིད་པ་མཆུས་པ	by sadness etc hard breathing, be emotionally moved	mid pa mchus pa
མིད་པ་འཆུས	by sadness etc hard breathing, be emotionally moved	mid pa 'chus
མིད་པ་འཆུས་པ	by sadness etc hard breathing, be emotionally moved	mid pa 'chus pa
མིད་པ་གཉིས་པ	cows, goats, sheep etc 2050	mid pa gnyis pa
མིད་པའི་ཟ་བ	eat [w/o chewing], devour	mid pa'i za ba
མིད་བྱེད	swallow, devour	mid byed
མིད་སྦུབས	mgrin pa'i sbubs lam	mid sbubs
མིད་ཟོས	gnawing away; x {nas snod kyi lung byi bas mid zos te} [however, all this time] a rat had been gnawing away at the rope that was holding up the sack	mid zos
མིད་ལ	mi la ancient clan zhig	mid la
མིན	[is/ be] not, ['gro gyi min: won't go; dkar min: not white] neither being nor	min
མིན་ཀྱང	although it is not so, it is not even	min kyang
མིན་གྱི	isn't, but ..	min gyi
མིན་གྱི་རེད	seems not to be	min gyi red
མིན་གྱུར	what something is not	min gyur
མིན་གྲང	ma yin nam	min grang
མིན་འགྲོ	yin pa 'dra, seems to be	min 'gro
མིན་ད	mim - Madam	min da
མིན་འདྲ	probably is	min 'dra
མིན་ན	otherwise, if not, or else, or	min na
མིན་ནམ	probably isn't	min nam
མིན་པ	except, be without, be not, not only in	min pa
མིན་པ་འཆུགས་པ	not be confused about	min pa 'chugs pa
མིན་པ་ཉིད	not at all	min pa nyid
མིན་པ་འདྲ	probably not	min pa 'dra
མིན་པར	except, besides	min par
མིན་པར་དོགས་པ	probably not	min par dogs pa
མིན་པས་སོ	because something "is not"	min pas so
མིན་མེད་མཇུག་མ	sentence-ending negations MIN and MED	min med mjug ma
མིན་རྩི	excepting	min rtsi
མིན་ཟེར་བ	deny	min zer ba
མིན་ལ་ཆེ	expression of doubt	min la che
མིན་ལས་ཆེ	expression of doubt	min las che
མིན་ལོག	opposite from not being something	min log
མིན་ཤག	ma yin tshod none have	min shag
མིམ	Madam ???	mim
མིའམ་ཅི	kinnara, [class of beings included in the deva realm]	mi'am ci
མིའམ་ཅི་ལྗོན་པ་རྟ་མགོ་ཅན	one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad} the eight outer classes	mi'am ci ljon pa rta mgo can
མིའམ་ཅི་མོ	ugly woman, mongolian woman, female gandharva	mi'am ci mo
མིའམ་ཅི་མོ་མཛེས་ལྡན་མ	the beautiful gandharva lady	mi'am ci mo mdzes ldan ma
མིའམ་ཅི་ཡི་གདོན	ugly evil spirit	mi'am ci yi gdon
མིའམ་ཅིའི་མོ	female kinnara	mi'am ci'i mo
མིའམ་ཅེ	kinnaras [a class of beings included in the deva realm, = {dri za}	mi'am ce
མིའི	human	mi'i
མིའི་ཁྱུ	crowd of people	mi'i khyu
མིའི་ཁྱོན་འབོར	population, total people	mi'i khyon 'bor
མིའི་འཁོར་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	[the Buddha's] followers of the four different orders mi'i 'khor tshogs dpag tu med pa dang	mi'i 'khor rnam pa bzhi
བཅས་འདུས་པ	a great crowd of people gathered	bcas 'dus pa
མིའི་བགྲོད་ལམ	sidewalk, pavement, shortcut	mi'i bgrod lam
མིའི་འགྲོ་བ	human realm	mi'i 'gro ba
མིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	human kings	mi'i rgyal po
མིའི་བཅོས་པ	artificial, man-made	mi'i bcos pa
མིའི་ཆོལ་ཁ	province abounding with population	mi'i chol kha
མིའི་ཆོས་ལྡན	SA rnam thos sras, possessing the characteristics of man, worldly	mi'i chos ldan
མིའི་ཆོས་པ	religious people	mi'i chos pa
མིའི་ཆོས་བླ་མ	the highest human qualities, higher than human qualities (be enlightened/ a guru)	mi'i chos bla ma
མིའི་ཆོས་བླ་མའི་རྫུན	false claim to have higher than human qualities/ be a guru	mi'i chos bla ma'i rdzun
མིའི་ཆོས་བླ་མར་སྨྲ་བ	proclaiming to be higher than human qualities	mi'i chos bla mar smra ba
མིའི་བཆོག	most excellent of human beings, Buddha)	mi'i bchog
མིའི་མཆོག	supreme 1 of human beings, Buddha	mi'i mchog
མིའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of human beings mi'i rten can gyi rgyun zhugs srid pa lan	mi'i 'jig rten
བདུན་པ་བ	TSE	bdun pa ba
མིའི་ལྟག་སྐོར	circumference of a man's head	mi'i ltag skor
མིའི་ཐབས་ཀྱིས	artificial, man-made	mi'i thabs kyis
མིའི་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཐིག་ལེ	artificial insemination	mi'i thabs kyis thig le
མིའི་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་ཐིག་ལེ་འཇུག	artificially inseminate	mi'i thabs kyis thig le 'jug
མིའི་ཐུབ་པ་ཤ་ཀྱ་སེང་གེ	lion of the shakyas, sage of human beings	mi'i thub pa sha kya seng ge
མིའི་དོན་བྱེད་པ	promote a man's welfare	mi'i don byed pa
མིའི་བདག་པོ	lord/ master of human beings Buddha	mi'i bdag po
མིའི་ནད་ཕལ་པ་བཞི	the four common diseases	mi'i nad phal pa bzhi
མིའི་ནུས་པ་གནམ་ལས་རྒྱལ	human power victorious over heaven, man will conquer nature	mi'i nus pa gnam las rgyal
མིའི་གནས	the human realm	mi'i gnas
མིའི་གནས་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five ages of man	mi'i gnas skabs lnga
མིའི་བབ་དང་བསྟུན	do in accord w what is suitable/ appropriate for an individual	mi'i bab dang bstun
མིའི་བབ་དང་བསྟུན་ཏེ་ལས་ཀ་སྤྲད	give jobs in accord w what is suitable/ appropriate for an individual	mi'i bab dang bstun te las ka sprad
མིའི་བྲུན	human ordure	mi'i brun
མིའི་དབང་ཆ	human rights	mi'i dbang cha
མིའི་དབང་པོར་བཀུར་བ	consecrate as king	mi'i dbang por bkur ba
མིའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	1) king; 2) buddha; 3) lord/ ruler of human beings)	mi'i dbang phyug
མིའི་མི་ཁོམས་པ་བཞི	{mtha' 'khob kla klo, log lta can gyi rigs, sangs rgyas ma byon pa'i zhing, dbang shes blun lkug brda mi 'jal ba ste mi'i mi khoms pa bzhi} To belong to a primitive border tribe, to hold wrong view...	mi'i mi khoms pa bzhi
མིའི་སྨོན་གནས	{mi'i smon gnas pho mo gzhon nu yang} young people as well-in whom all put their hopes	mi'i smon gnas
མིའི་བཙད་པོ	king of human beings	mi'i btsad po
མིའི་བཙན་པོ	king of human beings	mi'i btsan po
མིའི་མཚན་ཉིད	human character/ nature, definition of human	mi'i mtshan nyid
མིའི་འཚོ་བ	human being, life, human existence	mi'i 'tsho ba
མིའི་གཟུགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	personify mi'i g.yog byed pa - serve, be in men's service, obey	mi'i gzugs su bkod pa
མིའི་རིགས་ལྔ	chn	mi'i rigs lnga
མིའི་རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེ་བ	after being a human being being born as a noble one	mi'i rigs nas rigs su skye ba
མིའི་རིགས་པ་བཅུ་བཞི	chn	mi'i rigs pa bcu bzhi
མིའི་ལག་ཏུ	be at a person's mercy	mi'i lag tu
མིའི་ལག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ	get into a person's power	mi'i lag tu 'gro ba
མིའི་ལང་ཚོ་དྲུག	chn	mi'i lang tsho drug
མིའི་ལུས་ཀྱི	corporal	mi'i lus kyi
མིའི་ལུས་རྟེན	a human body/ life, the bodily form/ support of a human being	mi'i lus rten
མིའི་ལུས་རྟེན་འདིའི་སྟེང་ནས	as a human being,	mi'i lus rten 'di'i steng nas
མིའི་ལུས་རྟེན་ཞིག	the support of a human form	mi'i lus rten zhig
མིའི་ལུས་གཟུགས	the human body	mi'i lus gzugs
མིའི་སེང་གེ	the Lion of men, Buddha	mi'i seng ge
མིའུ	little man, dwarf	mi'u
མིའུ་ཐུང	1) dwarf [syn: bongs thung dang, mi thung, lus chung ba bcas so; 2) (met) Vishnu	mi'u thung
མིའུ་གདུང་དྲུག	the six clans	mi'u gdung drug
མིའུ་ལྡོང་དྲུག	the six clans	mi'u ldong drug
མིའུ་རིན་ཆེན	person	mi'u rin chen
མིའོ	second [time], Miao nationality	mi'o
མིའོ་རིགས	Miao nationality	mi'o rigs
མིར	as/for/ to a human being	mir
མིར་སྐྱེ་བ་བཞེན	assume life	mir skye ba bzhen
མིར་སྐྱེ་བ་བཞེན་པ	take rebirth	mir skye ba bzhen pa
མིར་ཁི	(M) brgyal gzer te, klad dkyil gyi srin bu 'khrugs nas glo bur du mgo gzer nas brgyal bar 'gyur ba'i nad cig	mir khi
མིར་གྱུར	be[come] human	mir gyur
མིར་གྱུར་པ	be[come] human	mir gyur pa
མིར་གྱུར་པ་ཞིག	1 who has become a human being	mir gyur pa zhig
མིར་གྱུར་པ་ཞིག་ངེས་པར་དགོས	it is absolutely necessary to be a human being	mir gyur pa zhig nges par dgos
མིར་ཆགས་པ	desire to become man	mir chags pa
མིར་སྤྱོད་པ	human behavior/ habits D	mir spyod pa
མིས་ཀྱང་ལབ་པ	people have been gossiping scandal	mis kyang lab pa
མིས་གོ་བ	by the understanding of humanity D	mis go ba
མིས་དགང་བ	populate	mis dgang ba
མིས་གཉིས	two meters	mis gnyis
མིས་སྟོངས་ཁང་རོ	empty house	mis stongs khang ro
མིས་སྟོངས་པའི་ཁང་རོ	ruins forsaken by men	mis stongs pa'i khang ro
མིས་ཐེག་ཚད་གཅིག	as much as one man is able to carry	mis theg tshad gcig
མིས་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	rickshaw	mis 'then 'khor lo
མིས་འཕྱ	to blame, deride, criticize	mis 'phya
མིས་བཟོས	man-made, artificial	mis bzos
མིས་བཟོས་ཀོ་བ	artificial leather	mis bzos ko ba
མིས་བཟོས་སྐོར་སྐར	artificial satellite	mis bzos skor skar
མིས་བཟོས་འཁོར་སྐར	artificial satellite	mis bzos 'khor skar
མིས་བཟོས་རྒྱུག་སྐར	satellite	mis bzos rgyug skar
མིས་བཟོས་ཆར་འབེབས	artificial rain	mis bzos char 'bebs
མིས་བཟོས་བལ	man-made/ artificial wool	mis bzos bal
མིས་བཟོས་གཙང་པོ	canal	mis bzos gtsang po
མིས་བཟོས་ཚི་སྣ	artificial fibers	mis bzos tshi sna
མིས་བཟོས་མཚེའུ	artificial lake	mis bzos mtshe'u
མིས་བཟོས་སྲིང་བལ	man-made/ artificial cotton	mis bzos sring bal
མིས་བཟོས་སྲུང་སྐར	artificial satellite	mis bzos srung skar
མིས་གསོ་སྐྱོང	[human] cultivated	mis gso skyong
མིས་ཧྲུའུ	secretary	mis hru'u
མིས་ཨར	meter [Gold] mr?	mis ar
མུ	1) border, end, extreme, boundary, limit, edge; 2) [uncompleted] remainder and zhor ma'am, ngang; 3) kind, category [rgyal kha 'thob mu nas 'bad brtson lhur len byed dgos, , las don byed mu la slob...	mu
མུ་ཁ	1) SK face, mouth, head; 2) snam bu'am ras kyi snam pa'i mtha')	mu kha
མུ་ཁ་བརྒྱད	SA sim ha brgyad	mu kha brgyad
མུ་ཁམ་བུར	place in nepal	mu kham bur
མུ་ཁྱུ་མཐིང་ག	a blue border	mu khyu mthing ga
མུ་ཁྱུད	fence, circumference, horizon, hoop, rim, surround, bounded [ris mu khyud du skor ba: surrounded by mta]	mu khyud
མུ་ཁྱུད་བདལ་བའི་མཚོ	{mu khyud bdal ba'i mtsho} lake	mu khyud bdal ba'i mtsho
མུ་ཁྱུད་འཛིན	1 of gser gyi ri bdun, rim mountain range, 1 of gser gyi ri bdun 2052	mu khyud 'dzin
མུ་ཁྱུད་འཛིན་རི	Rim-holder, [one of {gser ri bdun}, the 7th]	mu khyud 'dzin ri
མུ་ཁྱུད་རི	enclosing wall, [Syn {lcags ri}	mu khyud ri
མུ་ཁྱུད་ཤིང	tree called harimantha	mu khyud shing
མུ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	mu khri btsan po	mu khri btsan po
མུ་གེ	famine, desire, appetite	mu ge
མུ་གེ་བསྐྱེད	heat, drought	mu ge bskyed
མུ་གེ་ཅན	eager for food	mu ge can
མུ་གེ་བཅོམ	averting famine	mu ge bcom
མུ་གེ་ཆེན་པོ་བྱུང་བ	a great famine ravaged the land	mu ge chen po byung ba
མུ་གེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི	for the teaching	mu ge chos kyi
མུ་གེ་གཏོང	have a famine	mu ge gtong
མུ་གེ་ཐང	Mugeh Thang, in Domey	mu ge thang
མུ་གེ་ཐེབས་ནས་ཤི་བ	SNT: to die from starvation, to starve to death [mss]	mu ge thebs nas shi ba
མུ་གེའི་བསྐལ་པ	the age of famine / starvation	mu ge'i bskal pa
མུ་གེའི་བསྐལ་པ་བར་མ	the intermediate kalpa of starvation/ famine	mu ge'i bskal pa bar ma
མུ་གེའི་ལྗོངས	starving country, poor country where food is scarce	mu ge'i ljongs
མུ་གེའི་ཉམས་ཉེས	suffering of starvation and thirst	mu ge'i nyams nyes
མུ་གེས་ཤི་བ	dying of starvation	mu ges shi ba
མུ་གྱེན	fine breed of horses	mu gyen
མུ་འགྲམ	shore, edge	mu 'gram
མུ་ཅོ་ཚ	(A) big noise/ shouting, impudent/ rough/ rude in speech, speaking w/o regard for others feelings	mu co tsha
མུ་ཅོར	impudent, audacious	mu cor
མུ་ཅོར་སྨྲ	talk nonsense/ falsely	mu cor smra
མུ་ཅོར་སྨྲ་བ	talk[er of] nonsense/ falsity	mu cor smra ba
མུ་ཅོར་ཚ	(A) big noise/ shouting, impudent/ rough/ rude in speech, speaking w/o regard for others feelings	mu cor tsha
མུ་ཅོར་ཚུགས་མེད	(A) shameless	mu cor tshugs med
མུ་གཅིག	1 side/ edge/ border/ kind	mu gcig
མུ་ཆུ	mu river ['bri chu'i yan lag cig mtso sngon zhing chen khongs yus hru'u bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi rdza stod rdzong du yod	mu chu
མུ་ཆོ་ལྡེམ་དྲུག	6 bon teaches, Mucho Demdrug	mu cho ldem drug
མུ་ཆོས	1 of sku sras brgyad	mu chos
མུ་ཏིག	pearl	mu tig
གྲོལ་བ་ཅན་ཏེ	nang gses su dbye na rigs drug mchis, ro bska, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas klad skyon gso, rtsa dkar gyi nad sel, dug nad la phan,//so mu tig tsam yang med pa,//bya khva ta'i kha nas mu tig med	grol ba can te
མུ་ཏིག་སྐྱེ་གནས	oyster, ocean	mu tig skye gnas
མུ་ཏིག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	The Maiden Muktalata	mu tig 'khri shing gi rtogs brjod
མུ་ཏིག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཞེས	Muktalata, Winding String of Pearls	mu tig 'khri shing zhes
མུ་ཏིག་ཅན	a tibetan king	mu tig can
མུ་ཏིག་སྟར་ལ་བརྒྱུས་པ	string of pearls	mu tig star la brgyus pa
མུ་ཏིག་བསྟན་པོ	one of the three sons of {khri srong lde'u bstan}	mu tig bstan po
མུ་ཏིག་ཐུག་ཁོག	lcam head ornament	mu tig thug khog
མུ་ཏིག་ཕྲེང་བ	Pearl Garland Tantra	mu tig phreng ba
མུ་ཏིག་ཕྲེང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Pearl Garland Tantra. One of the Dzogchen tantras. This tantra is taught for the sake of preventing awareness from straying back by means of bringing it to maturation. It teaches how to practice, r...	mu tig phreng ba'i rgyud
མུ་ཏིག་འཕྲེང	rosary of pearls	mu tig 'phreng
མུ་ཏིག་འཕྲེང་བ	pearl garland	mu tig 'phreng ba
མུ་ཏིག་འཕྲེང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Pearl Garland/ necklace Tantra	mu tig 'phreng ba'i rgyud
མུ་ཏིག་འབྱུང་གནས	oyster, ocean	mu tig 'byung gnas
མུ་ཏིག་འབྲུ	a pearl	mu tig 'bru
མུ་ཏིག་མ	oyster	mu tig ma
མུ་ཏིག་བཙད་པོ	Mutig Tseypo	mu tig btsad po
ཀནོཝན་ཨས་སེཡན	lek Jing-yön	known as Seyna
མུ་ཏིག་བཙན་པོ	{mu tig btsan po} [deb ther dmar po dang mkhas pa'i dga' ston du khri srong lde btsan la sras bzhi yod pa'i gsum pa yin la, blon po zhang gi bu bsad pas byang du spyugs, phyis su mu ne btsan po 'da...	mu tig btsan po
མུ་ཏིག་ཚེམ་བུ	ltag tshugs te kind of sewing	mu tig tshem bu
མུ་ཏིག་རྫས་མ	imitation pearls	mu tig rdzas ma
མུ་ཏིག་རྫུས་མ	cultured pearl	mu tig rdzus ma
མུ་ཏིག་རིགས་བདུན	the 7 kinds of pearls [wa lu, ga dza, si ka, ram pasmad kyi, rma lu, some are fabulous and some real D]	mu tig rigs bdun
མུ་ཏིག་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	mu tig rin po che'i phreng ba
མུ་ཏིག་ཤེལ་གྱི་སྤ་མ་གངས	Pearl Crystal Cave of Pama Ridge. This is the practice cave of Guru Rinpoche where he gave many of the Instructions found in Dakini Teachings	mu tig shel gyi spa ma gangs
མུ་ཏོ་ཏེ་ལོ་པ	Tilopa the Outcaste	mu to te lo pa
མུ་ཏོ་པ	beggar	mu to pa
མུ་ཏོ་བ	a beggar/ to beg, grovel for	mu to ba
མུ་ལྟར	SA bzhin du 2053	mu ltar
མུ་ལྟོ་པ	beggar	mu lto pa
མུ་ལྟོ་བ	beggar, destitute person	mu lto ba
མུ་སྟགས་ཅན་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག	six heterodox teachers	mu stags can kyi ston pa drug
མུ་སྟེག	extremist, SA mu stegs pa	mu steg
མུ་སྟེག་ཅན	heterodox, heretical	mu steg can
མུ་སྟེགས	extremist, forder, non-Buddhist, heretic, those who hold extreme views	mu stegs
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་རྒོལ་བ	attack of nonBuddhists mu stegs kyi rgol ba thams cad tshar bcad	mu stegs kyi rgol ba
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་ལྡན	possessing heretical views	mu stegs kyi lta ldan
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	chn	mu stegs kyi ston pa bco brgyad
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་གཉེན་གྱི་བུ	the son of a tirthika teacher	mu stegs kyi ston pa gnyen gyi bu
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག	TSE	mu stegs kyi ston pa drug
མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག་གསུམ	[TRS 436]	mu stegs kyi ston pa drug gsum
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན	heretic, non-buddhist	mu stegs can
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་གྱི་སྟོན་པ་དརྒུ	the six outsider teachers [1 'gro ba skying gyi bu rdzogs byed 'od srung two gnag lhas kyibu kun tu rgyu three smra 'dod kyi buyang dag rgyal bacan four mi 'pham skra'ila ba can five ka ta'i bu nog...	mu stegs can gyi ston pa drgu
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་གྱི་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག	the six outsider teachers	mu stegs can gyi ston pa drug
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་གྱི་ཐར་པ	the liberation of the heretics	mu stegs can gyi thar pa
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	non-Buddhist practice / practitioner	mu stegs can gyi rnal 'byor
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	the attachment of the heretics	mu stegs can mngon par zhen pa
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས	the shastras/ treatises of the heretics mu stegs can rnams dang khyad par med	mu stegs can rnams kyi bstan bcos
མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན་ཞུགས་པ	outsider views ma dor bzhin du bsnyen rdzogs blangs nas phyi nang gnyis ka'i gral du 'tsang ba'o, mu stegs ston pa drug sh'akya thub pa zhal bzhud skabs kyi phyi rol pa'i slob dpon rdzogs byed dang...	mu stegs can zhugs pa
མུ་སྟེགས་གཅེར་བུ་པའི་དོན་དགུ	chn TSE	mu stegs gcer bu pa'i don dgu
མུ་སྟེགས་བཅེར་བུ་བའི་དོན་དགུ	TSE	mu stegs bcer bu ba'i don dgu
མུ་སྟེགས་ཆད་པ་བ	nihilistic extremists	mu stegs chad pa ba
མུ་སྟེགས་རྟག་ལྟ་བ	eternalist view of the Tirthikas	mu stegs rtag lta ba
མུ་སྟེགས་རྟག་པ་བ	eternalistic extremists	mu stegs rtag pa ba
མུ་སྟེགས་ལྟ་བ	Tirthika view, heretical view / belief	mu stegs lta ba
མུ་སྟེགས་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག	the six Tirthika teachers, {'od srungs rdzogs byed}, {gnag lhas kyi bu}, {smra 'dod kyi bu mo'i bu yang dag rgyal ba can}, {mi pham skra'i lva ba can}, {kat-ya'i bu nog can}, {gcer bu pa gnyen gyi bu}	mu stegs ston pa drug
མུ་སྟེགས་པ	Tirthika. Non-Buddhist teachers of philosophy adhering to the extreme views of eternalism or nihilism. An adherent of a non-Buddhist religion, esp. a Hindu, Jain or Lokyata (materialist)	mu stegs pa
ཨ་ཨདྷེརེནཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་ནོན	Buddhist doctrine, follower / adherent of a non-Buddhist school. {rtog ge sde lnga}. forder, heretic, [not following the middle way] adherent of a non-Buddhist doctrine; (proponent/ holder of) extr...	a adherent of a non
ཊེཨཆེརས་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	Buddhist philosophy who adhere to the extreme views of eternalism or nihilism	Teachers of non
སྡེ་ལྔ	forder, (not following the middle way)	sde lnga
ཨལལ་ནོན	buddhist schools, a hindu (not a heretic), heretic, schismatic, nonbuddhist, non-Buddhist, Mutegpa philosophers, thrthika, hindu, view of Hindus who assert the real existence of a permanent abiding...	all non
མུ་སྟེགས་པ་གཉིས	TSE	mu stegs pa gnyis
མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་ཆོས	extremist doctrines	mu stegs pa'i chos
མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་སྟོན་པ་དྲུག	the six teachers of the extremists	mu stegs pa'i ston pa drug
མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་འདོད་པ	assertions of the heretics	mu stegs pa'i 'dod pa
མུ་སྟེགས་པའི་བཟླས་བརྗོད	brahmanical	mu stegs pa'i bzlas brjod
སྤེལལ	muttering	spell
མུ་སྟེགས་པལ་ཆེན	many dogmatists	mu stegs pal chen
མུ་སྟེགས་པས་བཟུང་པ	has fallen into the hands of the Tirthikas	mu stegs pas bzung pa
མུ་སྟེགས་སྤྱོད་པ་པ	heretical practitioner mu stegs pham byed kyi mchod rten stupa of overcoming the heretics [cho 'phrul mchod rten mu stegs pham byed kyi mchod rten stupa of overcoming the heretics	mu stegs spyod pa pa
མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད	Tirthikas	mu stegs byed
མུ་སྟེགས་བྱེད་པ	non-Buddhist [mngon shes thob pa dang rtog ge la byang ba du mas rang rang gi blos dpyad nas thar pa dang mtho ris thob byed kyi lam gyi rnam gzhag dang, de sgrub byed kyi gtan tsigs kyi	mu stegs byed pa
མུ་ཐི་ལ	a precious stone	mu thi la
མུ་ཐི་ལའི་ཕྲེང་བ	Pearl Garland, by the fifth Dalai Lama	mu thi la'i phreng ba
མུ་ཐི་ལི	mother of pearl	mu thi li
མུ་ཐུག་པ	(A) bgo bsha' bya ba, divided	mu thug pa
མུ་མཐའ	boundary, limit	mu mtha'
མུ་མཐའ་དང་བྲལ	free from extremes, boundless, limitless, endless, vast	mu mtha' dang bral
མུ་མཐའ་དང་བྲལ་བ	boundless	mu mtha' dang bral ba
མུ་མཐའ་བྲལ་བ	free from extremes, boundless, limitless, endless, vast	mu mtha' bral ba
མུ་མཐའ་མི་མངོན་པ	free from extremes, boundless, limitless, endless, vast, no end in sight, having a boundary but out of sight 2054	mu mtha' mi mngon pa
མུ་མཐའ་མེད	w/o/ free from extremes, boundless, limitless, endless, vast D: not going to the limit	mu mtha' med
མུ་མཐའ་མེད་པ	unlimited	mu mtha' med pa
མུ་མཐུད	continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily [rgyun mthud dam 'phro mthud, rgyal kha'i ngang mu mthud de mdun du skyod pa]	mu mthud
མུ་མཐུད་ཀྱིས	continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily	mu mthud kyis
མུ་མཐུད་ཀྱིས་གཏོང	do --- continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily	mu mthud kyis gtong
མུ་མཐུད་དེ	continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily	mu mthud de
མུ་མཐུད་ནས	continually, continuously, without a break or interruption	mu mthud nas
མུ་མཐུད་པ	to continue, def. {mu ma chad par lu gu rgyud du ma thud pa}	mu mthud pa
མུ་མཐུད་མར	continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily	mu mthud mar
མུ་མཐུད་མི་བྱེད་པ	discontinue	mu mthud mi byed pa
མུ་འཐུད	rgyun mthud	mu 'thud
མུ་དང་ཁ་ད་ཆད	(A) mtha' dang kha mtho dman mnyam par gang ba	mu dang kha da chad
མུ་དང་མཐའ་མེད	limitless, there is no end to	mu dang mtha' med
མུ་དུག་བཙན་པོ	a son of srong btsan sgam po	mu dug btsan po
མུ་དྲའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra, physical form [of a deity]	mu dra'i phyag rgya
མུ་འདི་ཅིག་ཡོད་དམ	is there one of this kind?	mu 'di cig yod dam
མུ་རྡོ	field's edge pile/ wall of rocks, river rocks/pebbles D	mu rdo
མུ་ནས	SA bzhin du	mu nas
མུ་ནི	saint, ascetic, anchorite, shakyamuni	mu ni
མུ་ནེ་བསྟན་པོ	one of the three sons of {khri srong lde'u bstan}	mu ne bstan po
མུ་འབྱམས	infinite, endless, boundless, limitless	mu 'byams
མུ་འབྲེལ	continually, w/o interruption/ break, steadily *, continue	mu 'brel
མུ་འབྲེལ་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	through transport	mu 'brel skyel 'dren
མུ་འབྲེལ་རི་མོ	comic strip/ book, illustrated story	mu 'brel ri mo
མུ་མ	breast mu ma chad par lu gu rgyud du ma thud	mu ma
མུ་མིན	sapphire, alternative	mu min
མུ་མུ	a sacred place in india	mu mu
མུ་མེད	{mtha' yas mu med} without end, without limits	mu med
མུ་མེད་པ	limitless; without bound; limitless, boundless	mu med pa
མུ་མེད་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	limitless [numbers of] sentient beings	mu med pa'i sems can
མུ་མེད་པར	vaguely D	mu med par
མུ་མེན	sapphire	mu men
ཨེཨརཐ	worm D	earth
མུ་མེན་མདོག	dark blue color	mu men mdog
མུ་མེན་དམར་པོ	red sapphire	mu men dmar po
མུ་ཙ་མེ	Mutsamey	mu tsa me
མུ་ཙུ་ཀུན་ད	1) tree {mu tsu kun da}; 2) king mu tsu kun da	mu tsu kun da
མུ་ཙོད	foul-mouthed, SA spyi brtol	mu tsod
མུ་རྩོད	colt's foot	mu rtsod
མུ་ཚ་ལྒ	1 of 6 early tibet tribes	mu tsha lga
མུ་མཚུངས་པ	fellow religious student	mu mtshungs pa
ཡིན་མིན་གྱི་མུ	tetralemma, a set of four alternate propositions [dngos po'i mtsan nyid la phyogs mi 'dra ba bzhi nas thag gcod byed lugs shig //skye 'gag rtag chad, yod med, snang stong ste mu bzhi,//mi yin la ph...	yin min gyi mu
མུ་བཞི་སྐྱེ་འགོག	the production and cessation of the four limits; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rgyu 'bras gnyis ka la	mu bzhi skye 'gog
དཔྱད་ནས་འགོག་པ	'khrul ngor sa bon gcig las myu gu gcig ces dang/ rkyen 2055 gsum las mig shes gcig ces dang/ pha gcig las bu du ma dang/ sa bon chu lud du ma las ston thog du ma zhes sogs 'gal ba med mod/ rigs ng...	dpyad nas 'gog pa
མུ་བཞི་སྐྱེ་འགོག་གི་གཏན་ཚིགས	reasons for the production and cessation of the four limits [gtan tsigs chen po lnga'i nang gses, rgyu 'bras gnyis ka la dpyod pa mu bzhi skye ba 'gog pa'i gtan tsigs te, dngos po chos can, bden pa...	mu bzhi skye 'gog gi gtan tshigs
མུ་བཞི་འི་སྐྱེ་འགོག	4-cornered refutation of origination/ production	mu bzhi 'i skye 'gog
མུ་བཞིན	in the course of D	mu bzhin
མུ་བཞིའི་སྐྱེ་འགོག	four-cornered refutation of origination / production, [a Prasangika argument establishing nonself / absence of a self-entity]. Four Limits. The limits of birth and death. or production and cessatio...	mu bzhi'i skye 'gog
མུ་བཞིའི་སྤྲོས་པ	complexities of the four extremes	mu bzhi'i spros pa
མུ་ཟི	match, sulfur brimstone, sulfur	mu zi
མུ་ཟི་ཅན	containing sulphur	mu zi can
མུ་ཟི་རྡོ	brimstone	mu zi rdo
མུ་ཟི་ནག་པོ	black sulphur	mu zi nag po
མུ་ཟི་སྤར	light a match	mu zi spar
མུ་ཟི་ལིམ	ai si lan dharma tradition grasper	mu zi lim
མུ་ཟི་སེར་པོ	yellow sulfer [sa sman gyi rigs shig ste, ro bska la tsa, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas gdon nad 'joms, rnag dang chu ser skem, bse dri zhi ba dang, dngul chu'i dug 'don par byed	mu zi ser po
མུ་ཟི་གསོད	put out a match	mu zi gsod
མུ་ཟིའི་སྒམ་ཆུང	match box	mu zi'i sgam chung
མུ་ཟིའི་ཆུ་ཚན	sulfur bath, hot [sulfur] spring	mu zi'i chu tshan
མུ་ཡལ	some large number	mu yal
མུ་ཡེ་སངས་གསལ་མཐིང་ནམ་ཏིག	{mu ye sangs gsal mthing nam tig [chapter on the 18 mercies of Shenrab	mu ye sangs gsal mthing nam tig
མུ་ར	med. herb mu ra	mu ra
མུ་ར་ཉ་ཛེ	the clay drum Goddess	mu ra nya dze
མུ་རན	rim, hoop; perimeter	mu ran
མུ་རི་བཙན་པོ	Muri Tsenpo	mu ri btsan po
མུ་རུག་བསྟན་པོ	one of the three sons of {khri srong lde'u bstan}	mu rug bstan po
མུ་རུག་བཙན་པོ	mu tig btsan po	mu rug btsan po
མུ་རུབ་བཙད་པོ	Murub Tseypo	mu rub btsad po
མུ་རེན	perimeter circle	mu ren
མུ་ལ	root	mu la
མུ་ལ་སྐྱེ	grows on the edge	mu la skye
མུ་ལ་སྐྱེས	growing on the edge	mu la skyes
མུ་ལ་འགྲོ	go together	mu la 'gro
མུ་ལ་པ་ཏི	one of the {phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad} the eight outer principal [medicines]	mu la pa ti
མུ་ལ་བཞག	kept together	mu la bzhag
མུ་ལ་འོད་རྒྱན	1 of 10 bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu mu la sangs g.yen la 'then - 1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	mu la 'od rgyan
མུ་ལི	mu li rdzong	mu li
མུ་ཤིགས	borders of a field	mu shigs
མུ་ཤིགས་ཅན	field	mu shigs can
མུ་སངས	the sky	mu sangs
མུ་སི	1) brimstone, sulfur; 2) match)	mu si
མུ་སི་རྡོ	brimstone, sulfur	mu si rdo
མུ་སི་ནག་པོ	black sulfur	mu si nag po
མུ་སི་སྤར	light a match	mu si spar
མུ་སི་སེར་པོ	yellow sulfur	mu si ser po
མུ་སི་གསོད	put out a match	mu si gsod
མུ་སིའི་སྒམ་ཆུང	match box	mu si'i sgam chung
མུ་སིའི་ཆུ་ཚན	sulfur bath, hot [sulfur] spring	mu si'i chu tshan
མུ་སུ་པ	(A) beggar	mu su pa
མུ་གསུམ	three possibilities TSE	mu gsum
མུག	hunger, famine	mug
མུག་སྐྱོ	(A) deceptions	mug skyo
མུག་སྐྱོ་གྱུ་ནམ	(A) deception mug skyob grabs gshom gyi 'bru khang famine reserve granary	mug skyo gyu nam
མུག་གུ	pigeon	mug gu
མུག་གེ	famine, starvation	mug ge
མུག་ཆུ་གུམ	kind of wild ass	mug chu gum
མུག་ནད་མཚོན་གསུམ	famine, sickness and war	mug nad mtshon gsum
མུག་པ	moth, worm	mug pa
མུག་ཕྲུག	illegitimate child	mug phrug
མུག་མ	clothes moth	mug ma
མུག་རྨེལ	small cardamom	mug rmel
མུག་ཟ	rim gyis ham za byed pa, mnga' bdag nang khul du phan tshun mug za byed pa, rgyal khab gzhan gyi mnga' khongs sa char btsan 'dzul mug za'i spyod ngan byed pa	mug za
མུག་ཟན	moth-eaten, destroyed by moth	mug zan
མུག་ཟོད	nibbling	mug zod
མུག་ཟོད་སྲིད་ཇུས	policy of nibbling	mug zod srid jus
མུག་ཟོད་སྲིད་ཇུས་ལག་ལེན་བྱེད	implement a policy of nibbling [Japanese in WWII]	mug zod srid jus lag len byed
མུག་རི	mt w/o things that benefit plants	mug ri
མུག་ཤི	starve to death	mug shi
མུག་སེང	moth holes	mug seng
མུང་མ	moth [= mug pa]	mung ma
མུན	darkness	mun
མུན་བསྐལ	a dark age; dark aeon, age of darkness, [a time where the light of a Buddha has not appeared]	mun bskal
མུན་ཁང	dark dungeon	mun khang
མུན་ཁུང	dungeon, {ma rig gnyid kyi mun khung du} within the ~of ignorant sleep	mun khung
མུན་ཁྱབ	complete darkness	mun khyab
མུན་ཁྲོད	darkness, gloom, thick darkness	mun khrod
མུན་འཁྲིགས	darkness, night, dim somber, gloomy, dismal	mun 'khrigs
མུན་གླིང	1) place the sun doesn't shine; 2) place where the dharma has not spread)	mun gling
མུན་ཅན	1) w glo mig stopped up by phlegm much mucus and breathing is labored; 2) Rahu)	mun can
མུན་ཅན་མ	night D	mun can ma
མུན་བཅོམ	conquers darkness	mun bcom
མུན་ཆེན་པོ	darkness	mun chen po
མུན་འཇོམས	/; 1) moon; 2) sun)	mun 'joms
མུན་ཉིང	country east of india	mun nying
མུན་ཏུ་འཁྱམས	wandering everywhere	mun tu 'khyams
མུན་ལྟར་གཏིབས་པ	{zhe sdang gi du ba mun ltar gtibs pa} caused the smoke of their hatred to obscure their minds like darkness	mun ltar gtibs pa
མུན་འཐོམས	confused by darkness, become unclear, action w/o consideration, blind action	mun 'thoms
མུན་འཐོམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	confused by darkness, become unclear, action w/o consideration, blind action	mun 'thoms kyi rang bzhin
མུན་འཐོམས་ཀྱིས་བྱེད	act blindly	mun 'thoms kyis byed
མུན་འཐོམས་ཐལ་བསྐྱོད	blind/ rash action, leaping into action w/o consideration	mun 'thoms thal bskyod
མུན་འཐོམས་ཐལ་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	leap into action w/o consideration/ blindly	mun 'thoms thal bskyod byed
མུན་དག	darkness	mun dag
མུན་རྡོ	darkness's nang tshod lta'i ched du hanging stone	mun rdo
མུན་ནག	dark forest, {'khrul pa'i} the ~of confusion, darkness	mun nag
མུན་ནག་དགོན་པ	mun nag monastery	mun nag dgon pa
མུན་ནག་ཅན	gloomy	mun nag can
མུན་ནག་ཏུ	in the darkness	mun nag tu
མུན་ནག་ཏུ་རེད་ནས་འདུག	it was pitch black	mun nag tu red nas 'dug
མུན་ནག་ལྟ་བུ	pitch-black darkness	mun nag lta bu
མུན་ནག་མདའ་འཕེན	arrow shot in darkness [dmigs yul mi mthong bar bya ba sgrub pa'i dpe,// mun nag sbar nyul, nag khung du lag pa yul yul byas te dngos po 'tsol ba ltar cha med rgyus med kyi las ka rnams tsod dpag g...	mun nag mda' 'phen
མུན་ནག་པའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས	because of the darkness	mun nag pa'i rkyen gyis
མུན་ནག་སྦར་ཉུལ	groping in the dark	mun nag sbar nyul
མུན་ནག་མོ	a woman whose life and attitude are entirely contrary to those of a practitioner, widow	mun nag mo
མུན་ནེ	1) stupid person; 2) turbid, muddy, dim, dusky dingy	mun ne
མུན་པ	(the) darkness (of ignorance); obscurity (Skt. tamas); (the state of) unknowing	mun pa
མུན་པ་ཅན	planet, SA sgra gcan	mun pa can
མུན་པ་ཆེ	great darkness hell according to the kalacakra	mun pa che
མུན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great darkness, [Syn {lhan skyes ma rig}. 2) Ghorandhakara, One of eight charnel grounds	mun pa chen po
མུན་པ་གཏིབ	darkness envelopes	mun pa gtib
མུན་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བཅོམ་པ	vanquishing all darkness	mun pa thams cad bcom pa
མུན་པ་དྲག་པོ	{mun pa drag po	mun pa drag po
མུན་པ་ནག་པོ	1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	mun pa nag po
མུན་པ་ནས་མུན་ཁྲོད་འགྲོ	go from darkness to still greater darkness	mun pa nas mun khrod 'gro
མུན་པ་བྲལ	knows no darkness	mun pa bral
མུན་པ་མི་ཤེས་བློ	the of my ignorance	mun pa mi shes blo
མུན་པ་མི་ཤེས་བློའི	the darkness of my ignorance	mun pa mi shes blo'i
མུན་པ་མུན་ནག	thick cloud of darkness mun pa mun nag mun pa shin tu nag pa , mun pa mun nag gi dus skabs dang bstun te dgra bor mshan 'thab byed pa	mun pa mun nag
མུན་པ་མེད་པ	without obscuration	mun pa med pa
མུན་པ་བཞི	(four in Bon are ma rig pa, 'khor ba, dbang po'i sgo, ri grib)	mun pa bzhi
མུན་པ་ཟེར་ལྡན	Radiant Darkness	mun pa zer ldan
མུན་པ་འི་བསྐལ་པ	the aeon of darkness, dark age	mun pa 'i bskal pa
མུན་པ་རུབ	become night darkness	mun pa rub
མུན་པ་སེལ	clearing away the darkness of ignorance	mun pa sel
མུན་པ་སེལ་བ	to dispel the darkness	mun pa sel ba
མུན་པ་སེལ་བའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	the torch that dispelled the darkness	mun pa sel ba'i sgron me
མུན་པ་སོལ	dispel darkness	mun pa sol
མུན་པ་བསྲབ་པ	there is not much of darkness	mun pa bsrab pa
མུན་པའི་བསྐལ་པ	dark kalpa {sangs rgyas ma byon pa'i bskal pa la mun bskal zhes grags pa} a kalpa in which a Buddha does not appear is called a "dark kalpa"	mun pa'i bskal pa
མུན་པའི་དགྲ	sun	mun pa'i dgra
མུན་པའི་སྒོང་ང	egg of darkness	mun pa'i sgong nga
མུན་པའི་སྨག་རུམ	dense gloom	mun pa'i smag rum
མུན་པའི་རྩ	a nadi	mun pa'i rtsa
མུན་པའི་ཡོལ་བ	curtain of darkness	mun pa'i yol ba
མུན་པའི་རུམ	darkness	mun pa'i rum
མུན་པར་འཐོམས	grope in darkness 2057	mun par 'thoms
མུན་པས་བསྒྲིབས་པ	obscured by darkness	mun pas bsgribs pa
མུན་པོ	dark[ness]	mun po
མུན་ལྤ་མེད་པ	w/o obscuration	mun lpa med pa
མུན་སྤྲུལ	fool[ish speech], lie, ignorance	mun sprul
མུན་སྤྲུལ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	speak falsehood	mun sprul du smra ba
མུན་མ	moth	mun ma
མུན་ཚམས	dark retreat	mun tshams
མུན་ཚུབ	darkness, gloom	mun tshub
མུན་མཚན	night	mun mtshan
མུན་མཚམས	retreat in darkness	mun mtshams
མུན་ཛ	rtsva gres ma	mun dza
མུན་ཛ་སྐྱེས་མ	a celestial courtesan	mun dza skyes ma
མུན་རུབ	become night, darkness, twilight	mun rub
མུན་རུབ་མ་རུབ	become night, darkness or not	mun rub ma rub
མུན་སེལ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མེ	lamp illuminating the darkness	mun sel gyi sgron me
མུན་སེལ་མགོན་པོ	sun	mun sel mgon po
མུན་སོང	become dark	mun song
མུན་སྲིབ	night, time when sun is set	mun srib
མུན་སྲིབས	night, time when sun is set	mun sribs
མུན་སྲེག	night	mun sreg
མུན་སྲོ	fury, passion	mun sro
མུན་སྲོས	night, time when sun is set, darkness	mun sros
མུན་སྲོས་པ	dusky, dark	mun sros pa
མུན་གསེལ་མ	full moon night, dawn	mun gsel ma
མུན་བསལ	daytime, sun mun bsres nas mig gis mi mthong ba night blindness	mun bsal
མུན་གྷོ	Mungho [TT settlement in Mysore]	mun gho
མུམ	fox	mum
མུའུ	6.6667 acres, a Chinese area measurement equal to 0.1647 acres	mu'u
མུའུ་རེའི་ཐོན་ཚད	yield per mu'u [CH) measure = .1647 acre]	mu'u re'i thon tshad
མུའུ་སི་ལིན	muslim	mu'u si lin
མུའུ་ཧན་མོ་ཏེ	Mohammed[an]	mu'u han mo te
མུར	to the extremity, till the end of	mur
མུར་གོང	the temples	mur gong
མུར་གོང་འཕར་རྩ	a pulse nadi	mur gong 'phar rtsa
མུར་འགྲམ	jawbone	mur 'gram
མུར་ཇ	green china tea	mur ja
མུར་ལྟ	absolutist view, [def. {ther zug tu rtag par smra ba}	mur lta
མུར་སྟུག་པ	nihilistic extremists GD	mur stug pa
མུར་སྟེགས	1 at the end/ limit, set of three things, sacred place	mur stegs
མུར་ཐུག	extremist, (half eternalist and half nihilist, thorough, complete, to the extreme, until/ in the end, in the long run, sooner or later	mur thug
མུར་ཐུག་པ	limited	mur thug pa
མུར་དུམ	dull	mur dum
མུར་འདུག	SA mu stegs pa, gills of a fish	mur 'dug
མུར་བ	(tha dad pa) gnaw, masticate, chew, crush w the jaws, bite asunder	mur ba
མུར་མུར	1) horse or mule gyi upper lip sha ril mo; 2) chew)/shew	mur mur
མུར་མུར་བྱེད་པ	chew	mur mur byed pa
མུར་མཛོག	khu tshur [fist?] ram mdzog mgo	mur mdzog
མུར་རྫོག	boxing	mur rdzog
མུར་རྫོགས	1st	mur rdzogs
མུར་ཟླུམ	dull	mur zlum
མུར་ལ	zhor la	mur la
མུར་ལན་གསལ	SA ngang la lan gsal	mur lan gsal
མུལ་ལྟོ་བ	beggar	mul lto ba
མུལ་ཐུག	fist	mul thug
མུལ་པ	petitioner, beggar, suitor	mul pa
མུལ་པོ	petitioner, beggar, suitor	mul po
མུལ་མུལ	joy and sgeg nyams gad mo a little smiling/ laughing	mul mul
མུས	village in gtsang, present tense particle	mus
མུས་ཁང་གསར	{mus khang gsar} [place, ngam ring rdzong gi byang shar rgyud]	mus khang gsar
མུས་ངན་ལམ་བཏང་ན	if you spoil me	mus ngan lam btang na
མུས་ཡིན	present tense complement	mus yin
མུས་ཡིན་འདུག	present tense complement	mus yin 'dug
མུས་ཡོད	present tense complement	mus yod
མུས་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement	mus yod pa red
མུས་རེད	present tense complement	mus red
མེ་ཀོང	camp-fire, hearth, fire place	me kong
མེ་དཀྲུག	go yog shing bu'am metal shovel khyem bu	me dkrug
མེ་སྐམ	gun cock/ hammer 2058	me skam
མེ་སྐར	1) sparks of fire; 2) stars of the fire element)	me skar
མེ་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 fire stars [bra nye dang, rgyal, smin drug mchu, gre, khrums stod, sa ga]	me skar bdun
མེ་སྐོང	camp-fire, hearth, fire place	me skong
མེ་སྐོར	(Mongolian) means of taking a wife	me skor
མེ་སྐྱེས	born of fire, any illuminating substance, number six, iron	me skyes
མེ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of Jyotiska's Realization	me skyes kyi rtogs brjod
མེ་སྐྱོགས	coal shovel, shovel for burning coal	me skyogs
མེ་སྐྱོན	fire [damage], conflagration	me skyon
མེ་སྐྱོན་ནས་ཁང་པ་ཤོར་བ	lose 1's house to a fire	me skyon nas khang pa shor ba
མེ་སྐྱོན་ཤོར	fire/ conflagration breaking out	me skyon shor
མེ་སྐྱོན་ཤོར་བརྡ	fire alarm	me skyon shor brda
མེ་ཁ་གསོ	light a fire	me kha gso
མེ་ཁང	house or enclosed space for the consecrated fire	me khang
མེ་ཁམས	fire element	me khams
མེ་ཁའི་རྟ	horse of the god of fire	me kha'i rta
མེ་ཁར	on the fire	me khar
མེ་ཁུག	pouch for flint and steel for making fire	me khug
མེ་ཁེབས	thab dang me phor khog ltir sogs kyi steng du gyog byed cig	me khebs
མེ་ཁོག	hibachi-type stove	me khog
མེ་ཁོང	mirror, Mekong River	me khong
མེ་ཁོང་དབང	mirror abhisheka	me khong dbang
མེ་ཁོར་འབབ་ཚུགས	railway station	me khor 'bab tshugs
མེ་ཁྱི	fire dog year	me khyi
མེ་ཁྱི་ལོ	fire dog year	me khyi lo
མེ་ཁྱེམ	me thal 'don spyad	me khyem
མེ་ཁྱེར	fire-flies [Gdmk) syn: skar skyod, mkha' snang	me khyer
མེ་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་བུ	the fire-fly-like [luminosity]	me khyer lta bu
མེ་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་བུའི་འོད་གསལ	fire-fly luminosity	me khyer lta bu'i 'od gsal
མེ་ཁྱེར་སྲིན་བུ	a firefly	me khyer srin bu
མེ་མཁའ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	403	me mkha' rgya mtsho
མེ་འཁུང	hearth	me 'khung
མེ་འཁོར	1) train, locomotive; 2) prayer wheel placed over an offering fire rang 'gul can fire circle	me 'khor
མེ་འཁོར་ཁང་ཕྲེང	assembling dispatching [elements of] trains	me 'khor khang phreng
མེ་འཁོར་འཁོར་སྒམ	train compartment	me 'khor 'khor sgam
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	RR engineer, locomotive driver	me 'khor gyi kha lo pa
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཁང་མིག	train compartment	me 'khor gyi khang mig
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་འཁོར་སྒམ	train compartment	me 'khor gyi 'khor sgam
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་མགོ	locomotive	me 'khor gyi mgo
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་གཏོང་མཁན	RR engineer, locomotive driver	me 'khor gyi gtong mkhan
མེ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཨ་མ	locomotive	me 'khor gyi a ma
མེ་འཁོར་ལྕགས་ལམ	railway	me 'khor lcags lam
མེ་འཁོར་བསྟར་ཕྲེང	train	me 'khor bstar phreng
མེ་འཁོར་འབབ་ཚུགས	railway station	me 'khor 'bab tshugs
མེ་འཁོར་ས་ཚིགས	railway station	me 'khor sa tshigs
མེ་འཁོར་ཨ་མ	locomotive	me 'khor a ma
མེ་འཁྲིད་སྐུད་པ	explosives fuse	me 'khrid skud pa
མེ་ག་ཝ	megawatt	me ga wa
མེ་ག་ཝཏ	megawatt	me ga wat
མེ་གོ	America, USA	me go
མེ་གོ་དང་རེ་པིན	US and Japan	me go dang re pin
མེ་གོ་བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས	US imperialism	me go btsan rgyal ring lugs
མེ་གོ་བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་པ	US imperialists me go'i sngon thon rtsol bzo pa'i tang US Progressive Labor Party	me go btsan rgyal ring lugs pa
མེ་གྲུང་པོ	fire wi little smoke and ash	me grung po
མེ་གྲོགས་ལྕགས	in Ch divination when stirring fire by metal explanation that metal is the companion of fire	me grogs lcags
མེ་གླང	fire ox year	me glang
མེ་གླང་ལོ	fire ox year	me glang lo
མེ་གླང་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire ox year	me glang lo pa
མེ་གླང་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire ox year	me glang lo ma
མེ་གླིང	America[n continent]	me gling
མེ་དགེ་བའི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ་གཉིས	the two major bases of nonvirtue {ngo tsha med pa} {khrel med pa}	me dge ba'i sa mang chen po gnyis
མེ་དགྲ་ཆུ	the enemy of fire is water	me dgra chu
མེ་མགལ	firebrand, partially burning piece of wood	me mgal
མེ་མགལ་གྱི་འཁོར	circle made by fire brand when quickly swung around	me mgal gyi 'khor
མེ་མགལ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	circle made by swinging a firebrand	me mgal gyi 'khor lo
མེ་འགག་ས་ཚུགས	fire prevention station	me 'gag sa tshugs
མེ་འགོག་ཁྲོའོ་རོགས	resist America aid Korea	me 'gog khro'o rogs
མེ་འགོག་རྒྱལ་སྐྱོབ	resist America defend the nation	me 'gog rgyal skyob
མེ་རྒན	learned person	me rgan
མེ་རྒོལ	anti-US	me rgol
མེ་རྒོལ་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ	anti-US united front	me rgol 'thab phyogs gcig sgril
མེ་རྒྱག	set a fire, set fire to, burn	me rgyag
མེ་རྒྱབ	set a fire, burned	me rgyab
མེ་རྒྱབ་པ	set on fire	me rgyab pa
མེ་རྒྱོགས་རྡོ་རྒྱོགས	gun, missile	me rgyogs rdo rgyogs
མེ་སྒོང་བཏང	to make a fire	me sgong btang
མེ་སྒྱོགས	cannon, artillery	me sgyogs
མེ་སྒྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཐལ་བ	cannon fodder	me sgyogs kyi thal ba
མེ་སྒྱོགས་རྒྱ་གླིང་ཁ	bazooka	me sgyogs rgya gling kha
མེ་སྒྱོགས་རྒྱག	shell, lay down an artillery barrage	me sgyogs rgyag
མེ་སྒྱོགས་ཆེ་བ	heavy artillery	me sgyogs che ba
མེ་སྒྱོགས་འཕངས	shell, lay down an artillery barrage	me sgyogs 'phangs
མེ་སྒྱོགས་འཕེན	shell, lay down an artillery barrage	me sgyogs 'phen
མེ་སྒྱོགས་འཕེན་མཁན	artillery man, gunner	me sgyogs 'phen mkhan
མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་ཁག	artillery battery/ unit/ regiment	me sgyogs dmag khag
མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་དཔུང	artillery unit/ troops	me sgyogs dmag dpung
མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་མི	artillery soldier	me sgyogs dmag mi
མེ་སྒྱོགས་ཞའོ་ཀང་ཕའོ	light artillery	me sgyogs zha'o kang pha'o
མེ་སྒྱོགས་ཧྲན་ཕའོ	howitzer, machine gun	me sgyogs hran pha'o
མེ་སྒྲོན	1) torch, lamp; 2) fiery blaze)	me sgron
མེ་བརྒྱབ	set afire	me brgyab
མེ་ངར	power of fire or me dbal	me ngar
མེ་ལྔ	the five fires, a form of austerity in Brahmanism	me lnga
མེ་ཅན	fiery	me can
མེ་ཅུ་རུ་དི	{me cu ru di}	me cu ru di
མེ་གཅིག་ཐོད་གཅིག	Single Fire and Sole Skull 2059	me gcig thod gcig
མེ་ལྕགས	flint, steel and tinder pouch, flint and steel for making fire	me lcags
མེ་ལྕགས་ཁུག་མ	tinder pouch with flint	me lcags khug ma
མེ་ལྕགས་རྒྱབ	make fire w a steel and tinder pouch	me lcags rgyab
མེ་ལྕགས་སྤར	make fire w a steel and tinder pouch	me lcags spar
མེ་ལྕེ	tongues of fire [syn: 'khyug byed pa dang, 'bar ba'i ro 'dzin, 'od bkra'i yan lag]	me lce
མེ་ལྕེ་འཁོར་ལོ	on body's flesh and skin wounds and pustules erupting gnyan nad cig	me lce 'khor lo
མེ་ལྕེ་མཆེད	flame, burn	me lce mched
མེ་ལྕེ་རྣམས	tongues of fire	me lce rnams
མེ་ལྕེ་བ	tongues of flame, btsag	me lce ba
མེ་ལྕེ་འབར	flame, burn	me lce 'bar
མེ་ལྕེ་མེད་པར་འབར་བ	smoulder	me lce med par 'bar ba
མེ་ལྕེའི་སྒྱོགས་མདའ	rocket launcher	me lce'i sgyogs mda'
མེ་ལྕེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	fire garland, spirits	me lce'i phreng ba
མེ་ཆ	flint, steel and tinder pouch, flint and steel for making fire	me cha
མེ་ཆ་རྒྱབ	make fire w a steel and tinder pouch	me cha rgyab
མེ་ཆ་སྤར	make fire w a steel and tinder pouch	me cha spar
མེ་ཆར	thunder	me char
མེ་ཆུ་གོ་ལྡོག	1 of the ngo mtshar rtsa bdung	me chu go ldog
མེ་ཆུག་གོ་ལྡོག	divination about the inversion of water and fire	me chug go ldog
མེ་ཆུར་འཛེམས་མེད	fearless, undaunted	me chur 'dzems med
མེ་ཆེ་དགུ་རིམ་དགུ	the classes of great men in order	me che dgu rim dgu
མེ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great fires chn me chen brgyad la gnas pa'i shugs 'gro	me chen brgyad
ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	chn	chen po brgyad
མེ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 127-4]	me chen po brgyad
མེ་ཆེན་པོ་འབར་བ	deflagrate	me chen po 'bar ba
མེ་ཆེན་སྦོར	Make a good fire!	me chen sbor
མེ་མཆེད	the fire spreads D	me mched
མེ་མཆེད་པ	fire spreads	me mched pa
མེ་མཆོད	fire offering	me mchod
མེ་མཆོད་འབུལ	perform fire offering	me mchod 'bul
མེ་མཆོད་མཛད	performed the fire offering	me mchod mdzad
མེ་འཇོམས	{byang chub la dmigs pas me rnams 'joms pa} overcame fire with enlightened vision	me 'joms
མེ་ཉམ	fire-accompanying prana	me nyam
མེ་ཉམས	1 of the bad kan rigs drug	me nyams
མེ་ཉལ་བ	put the fire to bed (scrape it together and cover it with ashes)	me nyal ba
མེ་ཉེན	danger of fire	me nyen
མེ་ཉེན་སྔོན་འགོག	having found out the danger of fire before it breaks out, stop it	me nyen sngon 'gog
མེ་ཉོན	metabolic rlung, SA me mnyam	me nyon
མེ་མཉམ	the fire-equalizing [wind / prana]. [def. {me dang mnyam du gnas pa'i rlung}	me mnyam
མེ་མཉམ་གྱི་རླུང	subtle motile energy stabilizing warmth governing digestive functions	me mnyam gyi rlung
མེ་མཉམ་རླུང	fire accompanying wind	me mnyam rlung
མེ་མཉམ་གསང	fire equalizing gsang [lhen sna'i 'og tu tshon gsum gzhal ba'i gnas su yod pa'i pho ba'i me gsang zhig ste, der me btsa' bzhag na pho ba'i me drod nyams pa la phan,// me tel,; 1) lcags bsregs te rt...	me mnyam gsang
མེ་ཏེ་ཐེ་རེ་ཨན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Mediterranean Sea	me te the re an rgya mtsho
མེ་ཏོག	county in 21th cent Tibet.	me tog
མེ་ཏོག་ཀ་ར་བི་ར	shog bu bzo rgyu'i sngo re lcag pa'i me tog	me tog ka ra bi ra
མེ་ཏོག་ཀུ་མུད	lily	me tog ku mud
མེ་ཏོག་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པས་ཞུས་པ	Requested by Ever-Blooming Flower	me tog kun tu rgyas pas zhus pa
མེ་ཏོག་ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐོར་བ	flowers were scattered everywhere	me tog kun tu 'thor ba
མེ་ཏོག་ཀུན་ད	epithet of dbyangs can ma	me tog kun da
མེ་ཏོག་དཀར་པོའི་ཆར་བབས	a rain of white flowers fell	me tog dkar po'i char babs
མེ་ཏོག་བཀོན་བུ	(A) garland of flowers	me tog bkon bu
མེ་ཏོག་བཀྲ་བའི་ཚལ་ཉམས་དགའ་བ	a pleasant grove full of beautiful flowers	me tog bkra ba'i tshal nyams dga' ba
མེ་ཏོག་བཀྲམ་པ	1) me tog gcal du bkram pa; 2) chapter of the brgyad stong pa)	me tog bkram pa
མེ་ཏོག་སྐྱེད་ཚལ	the flower-garden	me tog skyed tshal
མེ་ཏོག་ཁ་འབུས	flower blossoms	me tog kha 'bus
མེ་ཏོག་ཁ་འབུས་པ	flower opens	me tog kha 'bus pa
མེ་ཏོག་ཁོག་མ	flower pot	me tog khog ma
མེ་ཏོག་མཁན་པོ	flower garland maker	me tog mkhan po
མེ་ཏོག་མཁའ་སྤྱོད་དཀར་དམར	the flowers are the red and white khecari GD	me tog mkha' spyod dkar dmar
མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	sngar lha ldan smon lam gyi dus su mi dmangs kyi khyim du me tog nyar 'thus tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	me tog 'khrol 'dzin
མེ་ཏོག་གངས་ལ	snowy pass flower	me tog gangs la
མེ་ཏོག་གི་དཀོན་བུ	flower wreath	me tog gi dkon bu
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཆར	flower-shaped raindrops	me tog gi char
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཆར་པ་ཕབ་པ	letting fall a rain of flowers	me tog gi char pa phab pa
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཆར་བབ་པ	a rain of flowers fell 2060	me tog gi char bab pa
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཆར་བབས	flowers fell like rain	me tog gi char babs
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཆུན་འཕྱང་ཅན	wears a garlands of flowers	me tog gi chun 'phyang can
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཐེའུ	bud	me tog gi the'u
མེ་ཏོག་གི་རྣ་ཅན	flower ear ring	me tog gi rna can
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཕུར་མ	sheath of a flower	me tog gi phur ma
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	flower wreath	me tog gi phreng ba
མེ་ཏོག་གི་འཕྲེང	garland of flowers	me tog gi 'phreng
མེ་ཏོག་གི་འཕྲེང་བ	wreath	me tog gi 'phreng ba
མེ་ཏོག་གི་འཕྲེང་བ་རྒྱུད་ཅིང	was weaving a garland of flowers	me tog gi 'phreng ba rgyud cing
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཚལ	flower garden	me tog gi tshal
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཚོམ་བུ	bunch of flowers	me tog gi tshom bu
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ཟིལ་པ་དང་འདྲ	like dew on flowers	me tog gi zil pa dang 'dra
མེ་ཏོག་གི་གཟིགས་མོ་ལ་བྱོན་པ	traveled to see the flora of the area	me tog gi gzigs mo la byon pa
མེ་ཏོག་གི་རོ་མྱང་བ	taking nectar from the flowers	me tog gi ro myang ba
མེ་ཏོག་གི་ལྷ་མོ	flower goddess	me tog gi lha mo
མེ་ཏོག་གིས་གཏོར་རོ	strewed flowers	me tog gis gtor ro
མེ་ཏོག་གིས་འཚོ	garland	me tog gis 'tsho
མེ་ཏོག་གླང་སྣ	pedicularis integrifolia hook. f., plant sanseriera zeylanica	me tog glang sna
མེ་ཏོག་གླངས་ལྷ	saussurea gossypiphora d. don	me tog glangs lha
མེ་ཏོག་དགྲམ་པ	flowers to be strewn	me tog dgram pa
མེ་ཏོག་མགུལ་རིང	parrot, red tree	me tog mgul ring
མེ་ཏོག་མགོ་ལྕོགས	flower shaking, flower waving its head	me tog mgo lcogs
མེ་ཏོག་རྒྱལ	magnolia	me tog rgyal
མེ་ཏོག་སྒང	{me tog sgang} mt	me tog sgang
མེ་ཏོག་སྒྲོན	flower lamp, name of tshe spong bza'	me tog sgron
མེ་ཏོག་བརྒྱད་པ་མངར་ལྡན	aromatic plant	me tog brgyad pa mngar ldan
མེ་ཏོག་དངོས	real flowers	me tog dngos
མེ་ཏོག་མངོན་པར་བཀྲམ་པ	conspicuously displayed flowers	me tog mngon par bkram pa
མེ་ཏོག་ལྔ	the five flowers [used in {rak-ta'i rdzas so drug} / {lnga}, {ug chos}, {lug ru smug po}, {sran ma}, {rgya lcam}, {ram bu}	me tog lnga
མེ་ཏོག་ཅན	city of flowers	me tog can
མེ་ཏོག་བཅུད་ལེན	dka' thub kyi zas te chos pas me tog rnams kyi bcud blangs te ril bu bzos pa dka' thub byed skabs kyi zas shig	me tog bcud len
མེ་ཏོག་ལྕེ་ཚ	herb	me tog lce tsha
མེ་ཏོག་ཆང	wine of certain flowers, wine made of the mowa flower in india	me tog chang
མེ་ཏོག་ཆར་པ	1) raindrops like lotus petals [metaphor]; 2) rain of flowers)	me tog char pa
མེ་ཏོག་ཆར་འབེབས	falling rain of flowers	me tog char 'bebs
མེ་ཏོག་ཆུན་པོ	bunch of flowers	me tog chun po
མེ་ཏོག་འཇམ	tree acacia sirisa	me tog 'jam
མེ་ཏོག་འཇུག	bee	me tog 'jug
མེ་ཏོག་ཉི་མ	saffron	me tog nyi ma
མེ་ཏོག་མཉམ་བཞད	let 100 kinds of lowers bloom	me tog mnyam bzhad
མེ་ཏོག་རྙིང་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གྱུར་ཏོ	withered like an old flower	me tog rnying pa bzhin du gyur to
མེ་ཏོག་སྙིང་པོ་སྦྲང་རྩིའི་བཅུད	chos 'byung written by myang ral nyi ma 'od zer	me tog snying po sbrang rtsi'i bcud
མེ་ཏོག་ཏིང་བཞི	the four kinds of ting flowers; {ting li phyin/ting sag khyu/ting mu la/ting mu sa)	me tog ting bzhi
མེ་ཏོག་ཐོད	me tog gi forehead ornament	me tog thod
མེ་ཏོག་འཐུང	bee	me tog 'thung
མེ་ཏོག་འཐོར	tossed flowers {nam mkha' nas lha mo rnams kyis me tog 'thor} goddesses tossed flowers from the sky	me tog 'thor
མེ་ཏོག་འཐོར་བ	bee	me tog 'thor ba
མེ་ཏོག་དང་འབྲས་བུ	flowers and fruits	me tog dang 'bras bu
མེ་ཏོག་དུམ་ར	garden, flower garden	me tog dum ra
མེ་ཏོག་དོན་ཅན	saffron, wine made from Indian mowa flower	me tog don can
མེ་ཏོག་དོར་བ	nang 'jug gi nang gses te, slob ma rnams kyis rang gi rigs kyi lha las 'brel gang la phog pa de dag la bab pa'i rten 'brel du phyag rten gyi me tog dor ba'o	me tog dor ba
མེ་ཏོག་མདངས་འཕྲོག	ravishing beautiful flowers, Phullahari)	me tog mdangs 'phrog
མེ་ཏོག་མདའ་ཅན	'dod lta	me tog mda' can
མེ་ཏོག་རྡུལ	1) flower pollen; 2) woman's menses)	me tog rdul
མེ་ཏོག་ལྡན	spring	me tog ldan
མེ་ཏོག་ལྡན་དུས	1) spring; 2) solar/ lunar eclipse)	me tog ldan dus
མེ་ཏོག་ལྡན་པའི་ཟླ་བ	4th month	me tog ldan pa'i zla ba
མེ་ཏོག་ལྡན་མ	woman in menses	me tog ldan ma
མེ་ཏོག་ལྡུམ་ར	a flower garden	me tog ldum ra
མེ་ཏོག་སྡུད་པ	flower gathering	me tog sdud pa
མེ་ཏོག་སྡུམ་ར	[flower] garden	me tog sdum ra
མེ་ཏོག་རྣ་རྒྱན་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ	flower	me tog rna rgyan phal mo che
ཨོརྣམེནཏ	Avatamsaka An important Mahayana sutra associated with the Yogachara school	ornament
མེ་ཏོག་རྣ་རྒྱེན་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ	Avatamsaka	me tog rna rgyen phal mo che
མེ་ཏོག་རྣ་ཅན	flower earring	me tog rna can
མེ་ཏོག་པ	ma	me tog pa
མེ་ཏོག་པད་མ	lotus flower	me tog pad ma
མེ་ཏོག་པད་མ་འདབ་མ་སྟོང་ལྡན	a	me tog pad ma 'dab ma stong ldan
ཐོཨུསནད	petaled lotus 2061	thousand
མེ་ཏོག་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	garland	me tog spyod byed
མེ་ཏོག་ཕོན་པོ	me tog gi chun po'am tshom bu	me tog phon po
མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲ་མ	lily	me tog phra ma
མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲ་མོ	medicinal plant, lily	me tog phra mo
མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲེང་བ	me tog ci rigs brgyus pa'i star	me tog phreng ba
མེ་ཏོག་འཕྲེང་རྒྱུད	1) flower garland star brgyus kyi rgyan; 2) vinaya text {me tog 'phreng rgyud}	me tog 'phreng rgyud
མེ་ཏོག་བུམ་པ	flower vase	me tog bum pa
མེ་ཏོག་བྱ་རྐང	{me tog bya rkang} med herb	me tog bya rkang
མེ་ཏོག་བྱ་ཟེ	{me tog bya ze} med herb [sngo sman gyi me tog cig ste, me tog gi nus pas tshad pa sel, khrag rgyun gcod, gtso bor dmar bshal la phan, son gyi nus pas mchin tshad mig tshad sel, gtso bor mig dmar z...	me tog bya ze
མེ་ཏོག་བྱིན	gift of the flowers	me tog byin
མེ་ཏོག་བླ་མ	highest /most exalted of flowers	me tog bla ma
མེ་ཏོག་འབྲས་བུ	blossoms and fruit, fruits and flowers	me tog 'bras bu
མེ་ཏོག་མ	Pushpe, [female bodhisattva, offering goddess]. flower goddess, the female bodhisattva	me tog ma
མེ་ཏོག་མིག་སྨན	SA mthing	me tog mig sman
མེ་ཏོག་མྱང	bee	me tog myang
མེ་ཏོག་དམར་པོ	red flowers	me tog dmar po
མེ་ཏོག་ཙམ་པ་ཀ	campaka flowers GD	me tog tsam pa ka
མེ་ཏོག་རྩ་ནག	patala tree	me tog rtsa nag
མེ་ཏོག་རྩི	flower anther essence	me tog rtsi
མེ་ཏོག་རྩེ	tree	me tog rtse
མེ་ཏོག་བརྩེགས་པའི་གཟུངས	puspakutanama dharani	me tog brtsegs pa'i gzungs
མེ་ཏོག་ཚོང་མཁན	florist	me tog tshong mkhan
མེ་ཏོག་ཚོམ་བུ	heaps of flowers	me tog tshom bu
མེ་ཏོག་འཚོ	bur shing	me tog 'tsho
མེ་ཏོག་གཞུ་ཅན	Kamadeva, holding a bow of flowers	me tog gzhu can
མེ་ཏོག་ཟས་ཅན	bee, having flowers as food	me tog zas can
མེ་ཏོག་ཟུམ་པ	the flower closes	me tog zum pa
མེ་ཏོག་ཟེ	mthing	me tog ze
མེ་ཏོག་ཟེ་བ	anthers	me tog ze ba
མེ་ཏོག་གཟུང་བ	phyi 'jug gi nang gses, rig lnga'i sa bon las skyes pa'i mtshon	me tog gzung ba
མེ་ཏོག་རབ་ཏུ་སོག་བྱེད	garland	me tog rab tu sog byed
མེ་ཏོག་ལམ	female organ	me tog lam
མེ་ཏོག་ལུག་མིག	sheep's eye flower	me tog lug mig
མེ་ཏོག་ལུག་རུ	a species of Pedicularis	me tog lug ru
མེ་ཏོག་ལེ་བརྒན་རྩི	ldum rar 'dzugs pa'i gur gum [nus pas rma gso, rtsa chad pa mthud, khrag shor gcod	me tog le brgan rtsi
མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་བ	to bloom, blossom	me tog shar ba
མེ་ཏོག་སིལ་མ	scattered flowers	me tog sil ma
མེ་ཏོག་སིལ་མར	pieces of flowers auspicious flowers	me tog sil mar
མེ་ཏོག་སིལ་མས་གཏོར་བ	to toss flower petals	me tog sil mas gtor ba
མེ་ཏོག་སེར་ཆེན	{me tog ser chen} med. herb	me tog ser chen
མེ་ཏོག་སེར་པོ་ཞིག	daffodil	me tog ser po zhig
མེ་ཏོག་སོ་ཅན	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po	me tog so can
མེ་ཏོག་གསེར་ཆེན	trollius pumilus d. don	me tog gser chen
མེ་ཏོག་ཧ་ལོ	kind of flower	me tog ha lo
མེ་ཏོག་ལྷ	flower gods	me tog lha
མེ་ཏོག་ཨུ	pal - lotus blossoms	me tog u
མེ་ཏོག་ཨུ་པལ	lotus blossoms	me tog u pal
མེ་ཏོག་ཨུཏ་པལ	lotus blossoms	me tog ut pal
མE་ཏྲི	Skt. loving kindness, see {byams pa}	mE tri
མེ་ཏྲི་པ	Maitripa	me tri pa
མེ་གཏོང	light/ make a fire	me gtong
མེ་གཏོང་བ	light/ make a fire	me gtong ba
མེ་རྟ	fire horse year	me rta
མེ་རྟ་ལོ	fire horse year	me rta lo
མེ་རྟ་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire horse year	me rta lo pa
མེ་རྟ་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire horse year	me rta lo ma
མེ་རྟགས	sign of fire	me rtags
མེ་རྟར་ཚ་བ	fiery, intense	me rtar tsha ba
མེ་རྟར་ཚ་བའི་འཐབ་རྩོད	fiery/ intense struggle	me rtar tsha ba'i 'thab rtsod
མེ་རྟོག་པ་ནང་འཕྲོད་པ	recognition	me rtog pa nang 'phrod pa
མེ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse the bodhicitta like fire [Tserig) sems bskyed nyer gnyis kyi nang gses, byang sems sbyor lam pa'i rgyud kyi sbyor ba dang ldan pa'i sems bskyed sgrib pa'i bud shing sreg pas na me lta bu'o	me lta bu'i sems bskyed
མེ་ལྟར	fiery	me ltar
མེ་ལྟར་འབར	caught fire like a flame	me ltar 'bar
མེ་སྟག	a spark; spark [from fire], spark, sparkle; sparkling; sparks/ sparkling	me stag
ལིབེ༹	coal in the ashes, spark	live
མེ་སྟག་གི་ཚྭ་ཚྭ	sparks of fire	me stag gi tshwa tshwa
མེ་སྟག་ཅན	1 of 'od bdun pa	me stag can
མེ་སྟག་འཕྲོ	to spark	me stag 'phro
མེ་སྟག་འཕྲོ་བ	spark[kle], scintillate	me stag 'phro ba
མེ་སྟག་ཙམ་པ	a mere spark	me stag tsam pa
མེ་སྟག་ཡལ་བ་བཞིན	like a spark fading	me stag yal ba bzhin
མེ་སྟག་ལོ	fire tiger year	me stag lo
མེ་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	me gtong mtshams 'jog pa	me thag gcod pa
མེ་ཐབ	stove	me thab
མེ་ཐབ་རྒྱུ་ཆ	refractory materials	me thab rgyu cha
མེ་ཐབ་རྡོ	refractory ore	me thab rdo
མེ་ཐབ་སོ་པག	refractory bricks	me thab so pag
མེ་ཐུབ་པ	not destroyed by fire	me thub pa
མེ་ཐུར	matches	me thur
མེ་ཐུར་སྒམ་ཆུང	match box	me thur sgam chung
མེ་ཐེལ	branding iron	me thel
མེ་ཐེལ་རྒྱབ་པ	to brand [an animal]	me thel rgyab pa
མེ་ཐོག་འབྲས་མེད	tree without fruit	me thog 'bras med
མེ་ད་ཀ	water 2062	me da ka
མེ་དང་མཉམ་དུ་གནས་པའི་རླུང	the wind that is accompanied with fire, [used for digestion]	me dang mnyam du gnas pa'i rlung
མེ་དང་མཉམ་པའི་རླུང	subtle energy stabilizing warmth (governing digestive functions)	me dang mnyam pa'i rlung
མེ་དང་ཐུར་མ	fire & spoon, moxibustion	me dang thur ma
མེ་དང་དུག་གིས་མི་ཚུགས	fire and poison cannot harm	me dang dug gis mi tshugs
མེ་དང་འདྲ	like a fire	me dang 'dra
མེ་དང་ཕྲད་པ	encounter fire me dang lhan cig byung ba'i bud shing fuel arises coemergently w fire	me dang phrad pa
མེ་དམ	flower vase	me dam
མེ་དུ་ར	fit for a sacrifice, fat	me du ra
མེ་དུགས	mer bsro ba'i sman dpyad cig ste sman rdzas kyis thum hril bzos pa mer bsros nas sman bcos byed thabs shig	me dugs
མེ་དོག་གིས་རྒྱས་པ	India city were 1st four sects of Buddhism developed	me dog gis rgyas pa
མེ་དོང	a fire pit	me dong
མེ་དོང་གཉེར་བ	attend the fire pit	me dong gnyer ba
མེ་དོང་དུ་མཆོང་བ	jump into a fire pit	me dong du mchong ba
མེ་དྲོད	warmth from fire	me drod
མེ་དྲོད་ཚ་པོ	ardor	me drod tsha po
མེ་དྲོད་གསུམ	pho ba'i nang du zas skom myag bzhu sbyong ba sogs me dang mthun pa'i drod kyi las byed pa po gsum ste, bad kan myag byed dang, mkhris pa 'ju byed, rlung me mnyam bcas so	me drod gsum
མེ་བདུན་དང་ཆུ་གཅིག	seven fires and one deluge	me bdun dang chu gcig
མེ་མདག	glowing embers, cinders, burning embers	me mdag
མེ་མདམ	red hot coals	me mdam
མེ་མདའ	rifle	me mda'
མེ་མདའ་རྒྱག	shoot a rifle/ gun	me mda' rgyag
མེ་མདའ་རྒྱབ་པ	fire	me mda' rgyab pa
མེ་མདའ་ཅི་ཀོན་ཆང	machine gun	me mda' ci kon chang
མེ་མདའ་སྦག་སྦག	machine gun	me mda' sbag sbag
མེ་མདའི་ཁ	barrel, muzzle	me mda'i kha
མེ་མདའི་ལྡེའུ་མིག	me mda'i spor tog	me mda'i lde'u mig
མེ་མདའི་པོར་ཏོག	rifle bolt	me mda'i por tog
མེ་མདའི་སྤོར་ཏོག	rifle bolt	me mda'i spor tog
མེ་མདའི་བྱ་གཞུག	gun handle	me mda'i bya gzhug
མེ་མདའི་ཚ་ཁ	gun sight ??	me mda'i tsha kha
མེ་མདའི་རུ	gun rest	me mda'i ru
མེ་མདས་གསོད	execute by shooting	me mdas gsod
མེ་རྡེལ	bullet, cartridge, shell	me rdel
མེ་རྡོ	flint	me rdo
མེ་ལྡེ་བ	warm oneself at the fire	me lde ba
མེ་ན་ཀ	maiden, youthful woman, celestial courtesan, daughter of vrishanasva	me na ka
མེ་ན་ཀོ	{me na ko} mt range inhabited by Asuras and horse faced women	me na ko
མེ་ན་ཡ	mithila	me na ya
མེ་ནའི་བདག	himalaya mountains	me na'i bdag
མེ་ནའི་བདག་པོ	snow mt.	me na'i bdag po
མེ་ནུར	chafing dish, coal pan, fuming pan	me nur
མེ་ནེ	me ne	me ne
མེ་གནས	who lives in fire / flames	me gnas
མེ་གནས་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	concentration of abiding in fire	me gnas gyi bsam gtan
མེ་སྣོད	coal pan, chafing dish, fuming pan	me snod
མེ་པ	w/o	me pa
མེ་པ་རལ་པ་ཅན	{me pa ral pa can}	me pa ral pa can
མེ་པད་མ་སྐྱེས	Me Pemakye. One of {ma sang dpun dgu} Nine Masang Brothers	me pad ma skyes
མེ་པུང	cupping glass	me pung
མེ་པོ་ཆེ	large fire	me po che
མེ་པྲ	divination looking at sngar fire signs/ omens of color and shape to tell what inauspiciousness may come	me pra
མེ་དཔུང	{me phung} mass of fire	me dpung
མེ་སྤར	light a fire	me spar
མེ་སྤར་བ	excite fire, ignite, kindle	me spar ba
མེ་སྤར་རླུང་སྐུལ	lit fire fanned by wind [as a great fire will burn continually fanned by wind, so bad thoughts gis zing cha lang du 'jug pa]	me spar rlung skul
མེ་སྤོར	blow up/ light a fire	me spor
མེ་སྤོར་བ	light a fire	me spor ba
མེ་སྤྲིན	smoke	me sprin
མེ་སྤྲེ	fire monkey year	me spre
མེ་སྤྲེ་ལོ	fire monkey year	me spre lo
མེ་སྤྲེ་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire monkey year	me spre lo pa
མེ་སྤྲེ་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire monkey year	me spre lo ma
མེ་ཕག	fire pig year	me phag
མེ་ཕག་ལོ	fire pig year	me phag lo
མེ་ཕུང	{me dpung} mass of fire	me phung
ཅམཔ	fire	camp
མེ་ཕུང་འཁྲུགས་པའི་ཀློང	a roaring / blazing mass of fire	me phung 'khrugs pa'i klong
མེ་ཕུང་རྒྱག	light make a bonfire/ campfire	me phung rgyag
མེ་ཕུང་གཅིག་པ་ཆུ་ཕོར་གང	a bowlful of water to put out a bonfire, utterly inadequate	me phung gcig pa chu phor gang
མེ་ཕུང་འབར་བ	blazing mass of fire	me phung 'bar ba
མེ་ཕོ	fire male ---	me pho
མེ་ཕོར	brassier	me phor
མེ་ཕོར་ཁོག་ལྟིར	clay vessel for putting tea heated by fire	me phor khog ltir
མེ་ཕྱུང	flame	me phyung
མེ་འཕུང	mass of fire; {me phung} {me dpung}	me 'phung
མེ་འཕེན	fire/ shoot [gun]	me 'phen
མེ་འཕེན་བྱེད	fire/ shoot [gun]	me 'phen byed
མེ་འཕེན་མཚམས་འཇོག	cease fire	me 'phen mtshams 'jog
མེ་འཕེན་མཚམས་འཇོག་བྱེད	establish a cease fire	me 'phen mtshams 'jog byed
མེ་འཕེན་མཚམས་འཇོག་ས་ཐིག	cease fire line	me 'phen mtshams 'jog sa thig
མེ་འཕེན་མཚམས་འཇོག་ས་ཐིག་བྱེད	establish a cease fire line 2063	me 'phen mtshams 'jog sa thig byed
མེ་བུ་ས	sun of fire is earth ['byung ba ma bu dgra grogs brtsi bya'i bye brag cig	me bu sa
མེ་བུམ	1) flower vase; 2) cupping glass	me bum
མེ་བོ	large fire	me bo
མེ་བོ་ཆེ	conflagration	me bo che
མེ་བྱ་ལོ	fire bird year	me bya lo
མེ་བྱ་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire bird year	me bya lo pa
མེ་བྱ་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire bird year	me bya lo ma
མེ་བྱི	fire mouse year	me byi
མེ་བྱི་ལོ	fire mouse year	me byi lo
མེ་བྱི་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire mouse year	me byi lo pa
མེ་བྱི་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire mouse year	me byi lo ma
མེ་བྲག	igneous rocks	me brag
མེ་དབང	the fire empowerment [for tummo]	me dbang
མེ་དབལ	tongue of flame, top, summit, point, cutaneous disease, sort of dry spreading itch, erysipelatous inflammation	me dbal
མེ་འབར	fire burns	me 'bar
མེ་འབར་ཆོག་ཆོག	combustible	me 'bar chog chog
མེ་འབར་བ	catch fire	me 'bar ba
མེ་འབར་བ་ལྟ	plant with red blossoms	me 'bar ba lta
མེ་འབར་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like burning fire, plant w red flowers	me 'bar ba lta bu
མེ་འབར་བཞིན	aflame	me 'bar bzhin
མེ་འབར་རླུང་བསྐྱོད	blazing fire stirred up by wind [mi zhig khong khro langs pa'i thog la slar yang khong khro slong byed kyi skad cha bshad pa lta bu'i dpe	me 'bar rlung bskyod
མེ་འབར་སླ་པོ	inflammable	me 'bar sla po
མེ་འབུད་པ	light a fire	me 'bud pa
མེ་འབེན	target [shooting]	me 'ben
མེ་འབྱུང་ཤེལ	me shel - beryl	me 'byung shel
མེ་འབྲུག	fire dragon year	me 'brug
མེ་འབྲུག་ལོ	fire dragon year	me 'brug lo
མེ་འབྲུག་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire dragon year	me 'brug lo pa
མེ་འབྲུག་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire dragon year	me 'brug lo ma
མེ་སྦར	blow up/ light a fire	me sbar
མེ་སྦར་བ	light a fire	me sbar ba
མེ་སྦྱིན་སྐྱེས	the gods	me sbyin skyes
མེ་སྦྱིན་བུ	the gods	me sbyin bu
མེ་སྦྲུལ	fire snake year	me sbrul
མེ་སྦྲུལ་ལོ	fire snake year	me sbrul lo
མེ་སྦྲུལ་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire snake year	me sbrul lo pa
མེ་སྦྲུལ་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire snake year	me sbrul lo ma
མེ་མ	wife of Agnideva	me ma
མེ་མ་ཐལ	me min thal min te me phye 'dres pa'i tshan	me ma thal
མེ་མ་མུར	burning ground, ember, hell of embers, glowing like after a prairie fire	me ma mur
མེ་མ་མུར་གྱི་འོབས	pit of burning embers, fire pit [hell] {nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba} neighboring hell)	me ma mur gyi 'obs
མེ་མ་ཤིང	CH divination: fire female wood	me ma shing
མེ་མར	lamp	me mar
མེ་མར་མུར	{sme mar} burning ground, ember, hell of embers, glowing like after a prairie fire	me mar mur
མེ་མུར	one of the hells, asura	me mur
མེ་མུར་གྱི་འོབས	oven, fire pit, fire trench	me mur gyi 'obs
མེ་མུར་གནོད	SA kun 'byung ba	me mur gnod
མེ་མེར་པོ	oval shape (stage of embryonic growth)	me mer po
མེ་མོ	a woman	me mo
མེ་མོ་ཡོས	fire female rabbit yr	me mo yos
མེ་དམག	US Army/ soldiers	me dmag
མེ་དམིགས	1) mi'i lus la me btsa' bzhag nas bcos chog pa'i gsang dmigs te, rgyab kyi sgal tshigs nyi shu dang, mtshog gsang, spyi gtsug sdud sgo sogs so; 2) sngags kyi gtum mo'i dmigs rim)	me dmigs
མེ་སྨན	medicines from fire	me sman
མེ་ཙ	geomantic center / site. focal points of power on the surface of the earth, (and especially on the body of the supine ogress which represents the Tibetan landscape)	me tsa
མེ་ཙག	spark	me tsag
མེ་ཙག་འཐོར་བ	sparkle	me tsag 'thor ba
མེ་ཙོ	parrot?, psittacula alexandri fasciata muller	me tso
མེ་གཙའ	moxibustion	me gtsa'
མེ་བཙ	geomantic center	me btsa
མེ་བཙན	US imperialists	me btsan
མེ་བཙའ	moxabustion	me btsa'
མེ་བཙའ་བྱེད	spark, ember, cauterization, cauterize me btsa'i gdams pa shel dkar me long {me btsa'i gdams pa shel dkar me long} [dus rabs bcu bdun pa'i nang de'u dmar dge bshes bstan 'dzin phun tshogs kyis mdza...	me btsa' byed
མེ་རྩེད	playing w fire	me rtsed
མེ་རྩེད་བརྩེས་ན་རང་བསྲེག	play w fire and you'll get burned	me rtsed brtses na rang bsreg
མེ་ཚ	geomantic center	me tsha
མེ་ཚག	[sound of] sparks	me tshag
མེ་ཚང	hearth	me tshang
མེ་ཚུགས	disease from burning metal etc [rkang lag gi tshigs na nas me tshugs rgyag pa	me tshugs
མེ་ཚོགས	mass of fire; flames, fires	me tshogs
བཙལ	even if you have to face blazing	btsal
མེ་མཚན	fire arms	me mtshan
མེ་མཚམས	SE, cease-fire	me mtshams
མེ་མཚམས་ཞི་འཇགས	cease fire	me mtshams zhi 'jags
མེ་མཚོན	fire arms	me mtshon
མེ་འཛིན	fire keeper, kind of sacred fire, competent	me 'dzin
མེ་འཛིན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐམ་པ	gun-cock/ hammer	me 'dzin byed kyi skam pa
མེ་རྫ	1) clay vessel; 2) me tog btsugs pa'i clay vessel)	me rdza
མེ་རྫས	gun powder	me rdzas
མེ་རྫས་ཀྱིས་གཏོར	explode, bomb	me rdzas kyis gtor
མེ་རྫས་མེ་ཏོག	fire works	me rdzas me tog
མེ་ཞགས	lasso of flames	me zhags
མེ་ཞལ	deva	me zhal
མེ་ཞལ་ལམ	the sky	me zhal lam
མེ་གཞི	anvil	me gzhi
མེ་གཞོ	singe, brand[ing iron], stamp	me gzho
མེ་གཞོང	bowl made of burnt clay or iron in which fire is made	me gzhong
མེ་གཞོབ	burn, SA gzhob	me gzhob
མེ་བཞི	one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} =28 nakshatras gods of the constellations	me bzhi
མེ་བཞི་སྐྱེས	epithet of vrhaspati	me bzhi skyes
མེ་ཟིན	when fire has been conquered	me zin
མེ་ཟོན	fire prevention	me zon
མེ་ཟོན་བྱེད	practice fire prevention, be careful w fire	me zon byed
མེ་ཟླུམ	sun	me zlum
མེ་འུ་རུ་རུ	fire under a breeze	me 'u ru ru
མེ་འོད	fire light	me 'od
མེ་འོད་འཁྱུག་པ	flash	me 'od 'khyug pa
མེ་འོད་ཅན	aglow	me 'od can
མེ་འོད་ཆེན་པོ	blaze	me 'od chen po
མེ་འོབ	fire pit	me 'ob
མེ་འོབས	fire pit, pit of burning coals, fiery pit, pit of fire	me 'obs
མེ་འོབས་འཇོམས་པ	x {sangs rgyas dang dge 'dun te skyabs gsum bdud rtsis 'khor ba'i dug dang me 'obs 'joms pa yin}- The three refuges, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, are the nectar that overcomes the fire pit and t...	me 'obs 'joms pa
མེ་ཡལ	spurt/ flame of fire	me yal
མེ་ཡི་ཀ་བ	pillar of fire	me yi ka ba
མེ་ཡི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྟ་བུ	glowing like an ember	me yi dkyil 'khor lta bu
མེ་ཡི་ཁམས	[tsha ba'am dro ba] the fire element	me yi khams
མེ་ཡི་གུར	dome of fire/ flames	me yi gur
མེ་ཡི་མགྲིན	bird	me yi mgrin
མེ་ཡི་མགྲིན་པ་ཅན	bird	me yi mgrin pa can
མེ་ཡི་འགྲམ	fireside	me yi 'gram
མེ་ཡི་མཆོད་པ	fire offering	me yi mchod pa
མེ་ཡི་འཇིགས་པ	fear of fire	me yi 'jigs pa
མེ་ཡི་རྟེན	liver	me yi rten
མེ་ཡི་ཐལ་བ	ash	me yi thal ba
མེ་ཡི་དུས	period of fire	me yi dus
མེ་ཡི་བུད་ཤིང	firewood, kindling	me yi bud shing
མེ་ཡི་དབང་ཕྱུག	sun	me yi dbang phyug
མེ་ཡི་རྩེ་མོ	saffron	me yi rtse mo
མེ་ཡི་ཚ་ཚ	sparks	me yi tsha tsha
མེ་ཡི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of fire,	me yi mtshan nyid
མེ་ཡི་ཟེགས་མ	sparks	me yi zegs ma
མེ་ཡི་འོབ	fire pit	me yi 'ob
མེ་ཡི་འོབས	a pit of burning coals, pit of fire	me yi 'obs
མེ་ཡི་ཤུགས	consuming power of fire	me yi shugs
མེ་ཡི་ས་བོན	gold	me yi sa bon
མེ་ཡི་སྲུབ་ཤིང	white sandalwood	me yi srub shing
མེ་ཡིས་བསྲེགས	eclipse	me yis bsregs
མེ་ཡེ་ཁམས	fire element	me ye khams
མེ་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom flame	me ye shes
མེ་ཡོན	US dollar	me yon
མེ་ཡོལ	fire screen	me yol
མེ་ཡོས	fire rabbit year	me yos
མེ་ཡོས་ལོ	fire rabbit year	me yos lo
མེ་ཡོས་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire rabbit year	me yos lo pa
མེ་ཡོས་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire rabbit year	me yos lo ma
མེ་ར་ཧ	a hindu sect D	me ra ha
མེ་རབ་ཏུ་འབར་བ	ablaze with flames	me rab tu 'bar ba
མེ་རི	mountain of flames, volcano, fire mountain, cycle of Bonpo scripture	me ri
མེ་རི་སྒར	rdzogs chen 'dus sde under chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu in italy , Merigar near Arcidosso	me ri sgar
མེ་རི་འབར་བ	a buddha realm	me ri 'bar ba
མེ་རིས	fire picture	me ris
མེ་རུ་ཙེ	a worm, insect	me ru tse
མེ་རུས	mostly produced by the body's fire element red bone and rtsub pa zhig	me rus
མེ་རེ	vibrant	me re
མེ་རེ་ཀྱི་ལེ	severe bliss	me re kyi le
མེ་རེ་བ	all-embracing; overflowing	me re ba
མེ་རེ་རེ	thick, crowd, ocean, stars, swirls and churns	me re re
མེ་རེ་རེ་སྨིག་རྒྱུ་བཞིན་འཆར	shimmering like a mirage	me re re smig rgyu bzhin 'char
མེ་རེ་རེ་གཙང་ཆབ	the river swirls and churns	me re re gtsang chab
མེ་རོ	cinders, extinct embers	me ro
མེ་རོ་བསྐྱར་དུ་འབར་མི་འཇུག	dead ashes won't burn again	me ro bskyar du 'bar mi 'jug
མེ་རོ་ལྡང	smothered flame breaks out again	me ro ldang
མེ་རོ་རྩ་བ་ནས་བསད་པ	completely extinguished ashes	me ro rtsa ba nas bsad pa
མེ་རོ་སློང་བ	to rekindle	me ro slong ba
མེ་རླུང	prana of fire in liver which ripens, is red and gives a feeling of heat	me rlung
མེ་རླུང་དུས་སུ	in the period of the prana of fire (9-11am, 11am-1pm, 11pm-1am)	me rlung dus su
མེ་ལ	me pass	me la
མེ་ལ་འཆོར་བ	be consumed by fire 2065	me la 'chor ba
མེ་ལ་ལྡེ་བ	(A) me la bstan pa'am, sro ba	me la lde ba
མེ་ལ་སྤུ་བཤུར་བཏང་བ	cause hair to be singed	me la spu bshur btang ba
མེ་ལ་རེག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of touching fire	me la reg pa'i ltung byed
མེ་ལ་སྲོ་བ	make warm, make hot at the fire	me la sro ba
མེ་ལ་བསྲེག་པ	burned; x {de'i ro de dur khrod bsil ba'i tshal du me la bsreg par brtsams pa na} her corpse was taken to the cemetery and as she was about to be burned on a funeral pyre	me la bsreg pa
མེ་ལ་བསྲེགས	burned them	me la bsregs
མེ་ལ་བསྲེགས་ཏེ	grilled it over the fire	me la bsregs te
མེ་ལན	return fire	me lan
མེ་ལན་སྤྲོད	return fire	me lan sprod
མེ་ལན་སློག	return fire	me lan slog
མེ་ལས་སྐྱེས་པའི་བྱིས་པ	the child who had been born from the fire	me las skyes pa'i byis pa
མེ་ལས་འཐོན་པ	coming out of from the flames	me las 'thon pa
མེ་ལུག	fire sheep year	me lug
མེ་ལུག་ལོ	fire sheep year	me lug lo
མེ་ལུག་ལོ་པ	man born in the fire sheep year	me lug lo pa
མེ་ལུག་ལོ་མ	woman born in the fire sheep year	me lug lo ma
མེ་ལུང་ལྟ་བུའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the mirror like wisdom	me lung lta bu'i ye shes
མེ་ལུས་ཙམ་པོ་བ	ordinary human	me lus tsam po ba
མེ་ལེ	mile	me le
མེ་ལེ་གྲུ་བཞི	square mile	me le gru bzhi
མེ་ལེན	1) ember nippers, fire tongs; 2) implement for cauterizing infected weapon wounds [rma 'bras [wounds from weapons + 'bras boils/ lesions, sores], sudden swelling rma 'bras che ba la ai khung bzhi g...	me len
མེ་ལོང	1) mirror [syn: kun mthong dang, kun gsal, byi dor mel tshe, ma ku ra, gzugs 'char byed, gzugs brnyan skye gnas, bzhin snod]; 2) gyang gi sham bu dang sked ris bar gyi stong cha; 3) mthongs sam dky...	me long
མེ་ལོང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mirror mandala, mirror disc/ plate	me long gi dkyil 'khor
མེ་ལོང་གི་ངོས	surface of a mirror, in the state of a mirror	me long gi ngos
མེ་ལོང་གི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	1 of 12 sgyu ma'i dpe	me long gi gzugs brnyan
མེ་ལོང་གི་ཡེ	SA me long ye shes	me long gi ye
མེ་ལོང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the mirror-like pristine cognition [Gd-mk) (vajra family wisdom, one of the five wisdoms)	me long gi ye shes
མེ་ལོང་གི་ལོགས	surface of a mirror	me long gi logs
མེ་ལོང་གྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	image appearing in a mirror	me long gyi gzugs brnyan
མེ་ལོང་རྒྱང་གསལ	clairvoyant mirror	me long rgyang gsal
མེ་ལོང་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	Magical Mirror	me long sgyu 'phrul
མེ་ལོང་ངོས	in a mirror	me long ngos
མེ་ལོང་ཅན	mirror-like, prince in ancient india, lake like a mirror, lhasa temple door	me long can
མེ་ལོང་ལྟ་བུའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	mirror-like timeless awareness	me long lta bu'i ye shes
མེ་ལོང་ལྟ་བུའི་རིགས་བརྒྱད	chn	me long lta bu'i rigs brgyad
མེ་ལོང་རྡོ་རྗེ	Melong Dorje. (12431303) A great Tibetan master in the Oral Lineage of the Nyingma School	me long rdo rje
མེ་ལོང་ནང་སོང	go into/ appear in a mirror	me long nang song
མེ་ལོང་སྤུ་གྲི	mgo bo'i rma'i mtha' skor 'dra byed kyi razor	me long spu gri
མེ་ལོང་དབང	the mirror empowerment / abhisheka	me long dbang
མེ་ལོང་བཞིན	Darshamukha, Mirror Face {gdong pa me long lta bu} had a face like a mirror	me long bzhin
མེ་ལོང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	The story of the Justice of King Darshamukha	me long bzhin gyi rtogs brjod
མེ་ལོང་ཡེ་ཤེས	mirror-like primal awareness, reflective wisdom, mirror wisdom , mirror-like wisdom	me long ye shes
མེ་ལོང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	chn	me long ye shes lnga
མེ་ལོང་ལ་གཟུགས་བསྙན་ཤར་བ་ལྟར	like reflections appearing in a mirror	me long la gzugs bsnyan shar ba ltar
མེ་ལོང་ལུང་རིང	Persia	me long lung ring
མེ་ལོང་གཤིས	nature of the mirror	me long gshis
མེ་ལྱེར	fire fly	me lyer
མེ་ལྱེར་ལྡ་བུ	the fire fly luminosity	me lyer lda bu
མེ་ཤི་གི་རེད	fire is going out	me shi gi red
མེ་ཤི་བ	the fire dies	me shi ba
མེ་ཤིང	firewood fuel, firewood	me shing
མེ་ཤིང་ཐུས	gather wood	me shing thus
མེ་ཤིང་དབོར་འདྲེན་གྱི་ཁྲལ	fire wood dbor 'dren gyi 'u lag skul rgyug byed pa'i khral	me shing dbor 'dren gyi khral
མེ་ཤུགས	heat, therm thermo-	me shugs
མེ་ཤུགས་གློག་སྐྱེད་ས་ཚིགས	thermoelectric power plant	me shugs glog skyed sa tshigs
མེ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན	thermo-electric power generation	me shugs glog 'don
མེ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	thermoelectric generator	me shugs glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
མེ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	thermoelectric generating equipment	me shugs glog 'don 'phrul chas
མེ་ཤུགས་ཕུར་མདའ	rocket	me shugs phur mda'
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའ	rocket, missile	me shugs 'phur mda'
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའི་རྟེན་གཞི	rocket/ missile base	me shugs 'phur mda'i rten gzhi
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདའི་མེ་སྒྱོགས	rocket/ missile launcher	me shugs 'phur mda'i me sgyogs
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདེལ	missile, rocket	me shugs 'phur mdel
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕྲུ་མདའ	rocket	me shugs 'phru mda'
མེ་ཤུགས་འཕྲུ་མདའི་མེ་སྒྱོགས	rocket gun	me shugs 'phru mda'i me sgyogs
མེ་ཤུགས་འཛོམས་ས	firing range	me shugs 'dzoms sa
མེ་ཤུལ	extinguished cinders left by a fire	me shul
མེ་ཤེད	heat, therm thermo-	me shed
མེ་ཤེད་གློག་འདོན	thermo-electric power generation 2066	me shed glog 'don
མེ་ཤེད་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	thermoelectric generator	me shed glog 'don 'phrul 'khor
མེ་ཤེད་གློག་འདོན་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	thermoelectric generating equipment	me shed glog 'don 'phrul chas
མེ་ཤེད་འཕུར་མདའ	rocket, missile	me shed 'phur mda'
མེ་ཤེད་འཕུར་མདའི་རྟེན་གཞི	rocket/ missile base	me shed 'phur mda'i rten gzhi
མེ་ཤེད་འཕུར་མདའི་མེ་སྒྱོགས	rocket/ missile launcher	me shed 'phur mda'i me sgyogs
མེ་ཤེད་འཕུར་མདེལ	rocket, missile	me shed 'phur mdel
མེ་ཤེད་འཛོམས་ས	firing range	me shed 'dzoms sa
མེ་ཤེལ	fire crystal, burning glass or crystal, sun stone, sun crystal, crystal which emits fire when exposed to sun rays, sun, magnifying glass	me shel
མེ་ཤེལ་ཉི་མ	the fire-crystal sun	me shel nyi ma
མེ་ཤོར	fire breaks out	me shor
མེ་སངས་རྒྱག་པ	me rgyun bskyar du gso ba dang ngar che ru gtong ba, rlung thab kyi me 'chi grabs byed dus 'phral la me sangs rgyag pa	me sangs rgyag pa
མE་སོ་རེ	Mysore - a city in Karnataka state in South India [mss]	mE so re
མེ་སྲུང་འཁོར་ལོ	"the protecting wheel for fire"	me srung 'khor lo
མེ་སྲུབ་ཤིང	1) me gtsub byed kyi shing; 2) white sandalwood)	me srub shing
མེ་སྲེག	burn, roast	me sreg
མེ་སྲེག་གྲིས་རྨོས	slash and burn agriculture	me sreg gris rmos
མེ་སྲེག་རྒྱག	burn, roast	me sreg rgyag
མེ་སྲེག་གཏོང	burn, roast	me sreg gtong
མེ་སྲེག་བཏང	burned, roasted	me sreg btang
མེ་སྲེག་བྱེད	burn, roast	me sreg byed
མེ་སླང	portable fire bowl of iron/ clay	me slang
མེ་སློང	portable fire bowl of iron/ clay	me slong
མེ་གསུམ	the three kinds of fire	me gsum
མེ་གསུམ་ཤུང་བ	fallen into the three fires	me gsum shung ba
མེ་གསུམ་ལྷུང་བ	fallen into the three fires	me gsum lhung ba
མེ་གསོ	stir/ poke/ trim the fire	me gso
མེ་གསོ་བ	trim the fire	me gso ba
མེ་གསོད	1) extinguish a fire; 2) fire prevention measures)	me gsod
མེ་གསོད་ཆུ་སྒོ	fire hydrant	me gsod chu sgo
མེ་གསོད་པ	1) extinguish a fire; 2) fire prevention measures)	me gsod pa
མེ་གསོད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	fire extinguisher	me gsod 'phrul chas
མེ་གསོད་བྱེད	fire extinguisher	me gsod byed
མེ་གསོད་རུ་ཁག	fire brigade	me gsod ru khag
མེ་གསོད་རླངས་འཁོར	fire engine	me gsod rlangs 'khor
མེ་བསངས	smoke gtul ba'i bsangs mchod	me bsangs
མེ་བསོ	guard or watch kept by several persons round a fire	me bso
མེ་བསྲུབ	1) rubbing sticks for making fire; 2) fire flint; 3) wood of bodhi tree or plant Premna spinosa D)	me bsrub
མེ་བསྲེགས་གཏོང	burn, roast	me bsregs gtong
མེ་ཧ་ར	heretical hindu sect	me ha ra
མེ་ཧོམ	the fire pit [in fire puja]	me hom
མེ་གྷ	cloud	me gha
མེ་དྷུ	fat, fit for sacrifice	me dhu
མེ་དྷྱ	fat, fit for sacrifice	me dhya
མེ་ལྷ	Agni, anala	me lha
མེ་ལྷ་སྒྲུབ་པ	the practice of Agnideva	me lha sgrub pa
མེ་ལྷ་མོ	SE, associated w Agni-deva	me lha mo
མེ་ལྷའི་དགའ་མ	wife of Agnideva	me lha'i dga' ma
མེ་ལྷའི་ཆུང་མ	wife of Agnideva	me lha'i chung ma
མེ་ལྷའི་རྟ	horse of the god of fire	me lha'i rta
མེ་ལྷའི་ཕྱོགས	fire god direction SE me lhog 'byung bzhi'i khams kyis lhog pa rigs bzhir dbye ba'i nang tshan me	me lha'i phyogs
ཁམས་ཤས་ཆེ་བའི་ལྷོག་པ་སྟེ	nad rtags su drod che zhing me lce 'dra ba'i ri mo 'byung ba zhig	khams shas che ba'i lhog pa ste
མེ་ཨིག་ཨོན	metric ton	me ig on
མེག་སི་ཀོ	Mexico	meg si ko
མེག་སེར་སྐྱེས	feel jealousy	meg ser skyes
མེང་ཧྲི་ཝེ་ཀེ	Menshevik	meng hri we ke
མེད་ཀྱང་རུང	can also do without	med kyang rung
མེད་རྐྱང	plain absence / nonexistence	med rkyang
མེད་ཁྱབ་གཉིས	the two kinds of pervasive non- existence	med khyab gnyis
མེད་དགག	refuting as being nonexistent, direct/ non-affirming negation [cf {ma yin dgag}	med dgag
པའི་ནང་གསེས	rang dngos su rtogs pa'i blo'am rang brjod pa'i sgras rang gi dgag bya dngos su bcad tsam gyis rtogs par bya ba ste, gang zag gi bdag med lta bu, bdag bkag pa'i shul du don gzhan mi 'phen pa'o	pa'i nang gses
མེད་དགག་གི་གཞན་སེལ	sel ba'i nang gses, rang gi dgag bya bcad tsam gyi sgo nas rang gi bsal bya rigs mi mthun bsal ba, 2067 dper na ri med ces pas yod pa bsal ba lta bu'o	med dgag gi gzhan sel
ཨོཐེར་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ནོན	affirming negation TSE	other through non
མེད་དགག་གཉིས	chn the two kinds of absolute negation; {med dgag rdzas su grub pa} reified total negation; {med dgag rdzas su ma grub pa} nonreified total negation	med dgag gnyis
མེད་དགག་དང་མ་ཡིན་དགག	refuting as an absence and refuting as an identity	med dgag dang ma yin dgag
མེད་དགག་ཕྱང་ཆད	nihilistic, explicit negation	med dgag phyang chad
མེད་དགག་རྫས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	reified total negation	med dgag rdzas su grub pa
མེད་དགག་རྫས་སུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	nonreified total negation	med dgag rdzas su ma grub pa
མེད་བགགས	non-affirming negation, mere absence	med bgags
མེད་འགག་ཙམ་གྱི་སྟོང་པ	Syn {rnam grangs pa'i don dam pa}	med 'gag tsam gyi stong pa
མེརེ་ནོན	affirming negation	mere non
མེད་འགྲོ	probably there is --	med 'gro
མེད་འགྲོ་སྙམས	think that probably	med 'gro snyams
ཐེརེ་ཨིས	-	there is
མེད་ངེས	ascertained as non-existent	med nges
མེད་ཅང	absolute nothingness	med cang
མེད་ཉིད	non-being	med nyid
མེད་རྟོག	thoughts/ conceptions of nonexistence	med rtog
མེད་རྟོགས	realization of nonexistence,	med rtogs
པྲམན་རེཨལིཟིང་ནོན	existence	pramana realizing non
མེད་སྟོང	nihilism	med stong
མེད་ཐབས་ཆགས	no way of lacking it	med thabs chags
མེད་ཐབས་མེད	indispensable; x {med thabs med do dgos dus dran par gyis}	med thabs med
མེད་ཐབས་མེད་པ	to be indispensable/ sine qua non; cannot be omitted	med thabs med pa
མེད་མཐའ	extreme of non-existence, nihilist extreme, extreme of nonexistence	med mtha'
མེད་མཐར	nihilistic extreme	med mthar
མེད་མཐར་འཛིན་པ	nihilistic extremism	med mthar 'dzin pa
མེད་དམ་བྱས་ན	if [you] say it's not there	med dam byas na
མེད་དུ་འགྱུར	vanish, disappear, become	med du 'gyur
མེད་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་དོན	vanishing/ disappearing object/ sense, lost meaning/ sense	med du 'gyur ba'i don
མེད་དུ་འགྱུར་མི་རུང་བ	indispensable, essential, something that shouldn't properly disappear	med du 'gyur mi rung ba
མེད་དུ་བཏབ	tirelessly	med du btab
མེད་དུ་མི་འགྲོ	does not become nonexistent	med du mi 'gro
མེད་དུ་མི་དྲུང་བ	essential	med du mi drung ba
མེད་དུ་མི་རུང	to be indispensable	med du mi rung
མེད་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	indispensable	med du mi rung ba
མེད་དུས	absence, when absent	med dus
མེད་མདོག་བྱེད	kind of srin bu infesting the human body	med mdog byed
མེད་ན	in the case that these do not exist, whoever does not have it	med na
མེད་ན་མི་འབྱུང་བ	if x cannot exist without y [ggd]	med na mi 'byung ba
མེད་ན་མི་འབྱུང་བའི་འབྲེལ་བ	snga ma la ma brten par phyi ma yong thabs med pa'i dngos po'i 'byung tshul	med na mi 'byung ba'i 'brel ba
མེད་ནའང	(even) if it is nonexistent	med na'ang
མེད་སྣང	{med pa ltar snang} appearing, but not being what it appears to be; isc. apparent yet nonexistent	med snang
མེད་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་པ	what is not is mistaken for a presence	med snang 'khrul pa
མེད་སྣང་སྟོང་པ	empty appearances of what is ineffable med snang stong pa'i gzugs brnyan empty reflections appearing while they do not exist	med snang stong pa
མེད་པ་བཅུ	ten absences, real nature of the rang bzhin bcu	med pa bcu
མེད་པ་བཅུའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of the ten ineffable attributes; the ineffable nature of the ten attributes	med pa bcu'i rang bzhin
མེད་པ་ཆགས	to lose	med pa chags
མེད་པ་ཆགས་པ	lose	med pa chags pa
མེད་པ་ཉིད	non-existence	med pa nyid
མེད་པ་ཉིད་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	they have nonexistence for own being	med pa nyid ngo bo nyid
མེད་པ་ཉིད་དུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར	because there is/ it is nothingness/ nonexistent	med pa nyid du yod pa'i phyir
མེད་པ་གཏོང	wipe out, erase, annihilate, perish, eliminate, cancel, call off	med pa gtong
མེད་པ་གཏོང་དགོས	must/ should perish/ wipe out/ erase/ annihilate/ eliminate/ cancel/ call off	med pa gtong dgos
མེད་པ་བཏང	wiped out, erased, annihilated, perished, eliminated, canceled, called off 2068	med pa btang
མེད་པ་ལྟར་སྣང	appearing, but not being what it appears to be; isc. apparent yet nonexistent	med pa ltar snang
མེད་པ་པ	nihilist	med pa pa
མེད་པ་ཕྱལ་བ་གཅིག་པུ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	nonexistent, free, sole and spontaneous, nonexistence, all-pervasive, oneness and spontaneous presence	med pa phyal ba gcig pu lhun grub
མེད་པ་བ	{med par smra ba} nihilist, asserter of nonexistence	med pa ba
མེད་པ་བྱེད་ནས	w/o, having eliminated/ annihilated	med pa byed nas
མེད་པ་མ་ཡིན	not nonexistent, not negation / nihilism	med pa ma yin
མེད་པ་མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས	field of nonexistent dissimilar cases	med pa mi mthun phyogs
མེད་པ་མིན	not nonexistent	med pa min
མེད་པ་གཞན་སེལ	nonexistent elimination [ggd]	med pa gzhan sel
མེད་པ་བཟོ	wipe out, erase, annihilate, perish, eliminate, cancel, call off	med pa bzo
མེད་པ་བཟོ་དགོས	must/ should perish/ wipe out/ erase/ annihilate/ eliminate/ cancel/ call off	med pa bzo dgos
མེད་པ་བཟོ་བ	cancel, call off, perish, eliminate, wipe, erase, raze	med pa bzo ba
མེད་པ་བཟོས	wiped out, erased, annihilated, perished, eliminated, canceled, called off	med pa bzos
མེད་པ་འི་དངོས་པོར་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ	superimpose something onto/ exaggerate a nonexistent thing	med pa 'i dngos por sgro 'dogs pa
མེད་པ་ཡིན་པ	being a non-existent	med pa yin pa
མེད་པ་རེད	not exist	med pa red
མེད་པ་ལ་མེད་པ	the non-existent as	med pa la med pa
མེད་པ་ལ་ཡོད་པར་མཐོང་བ	see what	med pa la yod par mthong ba
མེད་པ་ལ་ཡོད་པར་སྣང་བ	{med pa la yod par snang ba mig yor lta bu} as in a visual aberration, things appear to be there, yet there is nothing	med pa la yod par snang ba
མེད་པ་ལ་ཡོད་པར་འཛིན་པ	grasp what is	med pa la yod par 'dzin pa
མེད་པ་ཤེས་ནས	found [Priyamkara] missing	med pa shes nas
མེད་པ་གསལ་སྣང	Nonexistent vivid presence	med pa gsal snang
མེད་པ་གསལ་སྣང་གི་སྟོང་གཟུགས	empty	med pa gsal snang gi stong gzugs
ཕོ༹རམས	clearly apparent yet nonexistent	forms
མེད་པ་གསལ་སྣང་ཅན་གྱི་བློ	mind w the luminous appearance of what does not exist TSE	med pa gsal snang can gyi blo
མེད་པའི་དངོས་པོར་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ	to superimpose something onto / exaggerate a nonexistent thing	med pa'i dngos por sgro 'dogs pa
མེད་པའི་ཆས་ནས	as regards the aspect of emptiness	med pa'i chas nas
མེད་པའི་ཆོས	truth of nonexistence	med pa'i chos
མེད་པའི་རྗེས་སུ	after it is nonexistent, traces of the nonexistent	med pa'i rjes su
མེད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	kun brtags ni bden pa gnyis ka'i skabs su rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa med pa dang	med pa'i stong pa nyid
མེད་པའི་ཐབས་མེད	indispensable	med pa'i thabs med
མེད་པའི་དོན	non-existent object	med pa'i don
མེད་པའི་རྣམ་གྲངས	categories of nonexistence	med pa'i rnam grangs
མེད་པའི་སྣང་བ	appearance of what doe not exist	med pa'i snang ba
མེད་པའི་བྱེ་བྲག	(all) kinds of nonexistence	med pa'i bye brag
མེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་བཅུ	the ten attributes whose nature is ineffable	med pa'i rang bzhin bcu
མེད་པར	non-existent, instead of, w/o [difference between] D	med par
མེད་པར་བཀག་པའི་སྟོང་པ	the emptiness which is reputation as not having [existence]	med par bkag pa'i stong pa
མེད་པར་གྱུར	to vanish, disappear	med par gyur
མེད་པར་དགག	refute as nonexistent	med par dgag
མེད་པར་དགག་པ	Syn {med dgag} refute as nonexistent; spros pa'i mtha' thams cad bkag pa tsam} dngos po'i rang bzhin med pa	med par dgag pa
རེཕུ༹ཏེ་ཨས་ནོན	existent	refute as non
མེད་པར་འགྱུར	become nothing, to come to be without, to come into the state of not existing	med par 'gyur
མེད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	passes away, is dissipated	med par 'gyur ba
མེད་པར་འགྲོ་བ	become nonexistent	med par 'gro ba
མེད་པར་ཆགས	lose	med par chags
མེད་པར་གཏོང	wipe out, erase, annihilate, perish, eliminate, cancel, call off	med par gtong
མེད་པར་གཏོང་དགོས	must/ should perish/ wipe out/ erase/ annihilate/ eliminate/ cancel/ call off	med par gtong dgos
མེད་པར་བཏང	wiped out, erased, annihilated, perished, eliminated, canceled, called off	med par btang
མེད་པར་འདོད་པ	maintain/ desire to be nonexistent	med par 'dod pa
མེད་པར་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ	conception of	med par rnam par rtog pa
མེད་པར་པྱེད	remove, say it does not exist	med par pyed
མེད་པར་བྱས་ཏེ	we can do without	med par byas te
མེད་པར་བྱས་པ	demolished	med par byas pa
མེད་པར་བྱས་ཡོང་བ	did not allow any	med par byas yong ba
མེད་པར་བྱེད	remove, say it does not exist	med par byed
མེད་པར་བྱེད་ནུས་ན	If you are able to get rid of	med par byed nus na
མེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	destroy, annihilate, put an end to	med par byed pa
ཏོ་བེ་ནོན	existent)	to be non
མེད་པར་མི་འགྱུར	not become nonexistent	med par mi 'gyur
མེད་པར་མི་རུང	cannot be done w/ o, indispensable, essential	med par mi rung
མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	asserter of nonexistence, nihilist	med par smra ba
མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ་འཛིན་པ	nihilism 2069	med par smra ba 'dzin pa
མེད་པར་འཛིན་པ	nihilism	med par 'dzin pa
མེད་པར་བཟོ	to destroy, annihilate	med par bzo
མེད་པར་བཟོ་དགོས	must/ should perish/ wipe out/ erase/ annihilate/ eliminate/ cancel/ call off	med par bzo dgos
མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	abolish, annihilate	med par bzo ba
མེད་པར་བཟོ་ཡག	abolition	med par bzo yag
མེད་པར་བཟོས	wiped out, erased, annihilated, perished, eliminated, canceled, called off	med par bzos
མེད་པར་ཡང་ནི་མི་བརྗོད	not say even that it does not exist	med par yang ni mi brjod
མེད་པས་སོ	because something does "not exist"	med pas so
མེད་པོ	those who weren't [rich]	med po
མེད་དཔོན་ཁང་པ	merchant's place, commercial building, shop	med dpon khang pa
མེད་མ	not without, some, a few	med ma
མེད་མ་ཡིན་དུ་དགག་པ	refuting identity as being absent	med ma yin du dgag pa
མེད་མི་རུང	indispensable	med mi rung
མེད་མིན	not nonexistent	med min
མེད་མིན་ཡོད་མིན	neither non-existence nor existence	med min yod min
མེད་མེད	paltry	med med
མེད་མོ	penniless woman D	med mo
མེད་བཞིན	while not existing	med bzhin
མེད་བཞིན་འཁྲུལ་ངོ་ལ་སྣང་བ	appearing in a confused perception, experience yet without / while not existing	med bzhin 'khrul ngo la snang ba
མེད་བཞིན་དུ	while non-existent, even though it does not exist, non-existent but	med bzhin du
མེད་བཞིན་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearance of	med bzhin du snang ba
མེད་བཞིན་སྣང	{med bzhin 'khrul ngo la snang ba rmi lam lta bu} as in a dream, they appear to the deluded while not being there	med bzhin snang
མེད་བཞིན་སྣང་པར་བྱེད	let be present what is nothing	med bzhin snang par byed
མེད་བཞིན་སྣང་བ	a presence and yet nothing, pure presentation, presents, nothing that exists, is there even though nothing, presence without anything present, illusion, nonexistent appearances	med bzhin snang ba
མེད་ཟེར་བ	without exception	med zer ba
མེད་ལ	in its nonexistence, nonexistence	med la
མེད་ལ་མངོན་ཤེན	attachment to nonexistence	med la mngon shen
མེད་ལ་སྣང་བ	appearing even though	med la snang ba
མེད་ལ་ཡོད་པར་སྣང་བ	appearing to be while not existing	med la yod par snang ba
མེད་ལགས	absent	med lags
མེན་དྲི	fur hat	men dri
མེན་དྲེ	(A) /; 1) ras; 2) gru'u tse)	men dre
མེན་པའོ	bread	men pa'o
མེན་དབྱེ	cotton-padded coat	men dbye
མེན་ཙི	a colored silk handkerchief	men tsi
མེན་ཧྲི	fur	men hri
མེའ་འོ	the mewing of cat	me' 'o
མེའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	sphere of a fire	me'i dkyil 'khor
མེའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྟ་བུ	glowing like an ember	me'i dkyil 'khor lta bu
མེའི་ཁམས	fire element, def. {kyis lus rnams smin par byed pas na khams so}	me'i khams
མེའི་གུར	dome of fire/ flames	me'i gur
མེའི་མགྲིན	birds, fire-throated	me'i mgrin
མེའི་མཆོད་པ	fire offering	me'i mchod pa
མེའི་འཇིགས་པ	fear of fire	me'i 'jigs pa
མེའི་རྟེན	liver, SA dbang rten lnga	me'i rten
མེའི་ཐལ་བ	ash	me'i thal ba
མེའི་ནང་དུ	aflame	me'i nang du
མེའི་རྩེ	very useful and important medicine	me'i rtse
མེའི་རྩེ་མོ	saffron	me'i rtse mo
མེའི་ཚ་ངར	heat	me'i tsha ngar
མེའི་ཚ་ཚ	sparks	me'i tsha tsha
མེའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristics of fire, [hot and burning)	me'i mtshan nyid
མེའི་ཟེགས་མ	sparks	me'i zegs ma
མེའི་འོབ	a fire pit	me'i 'ob
མེའི་འོབས	pit of fire, fiery pit	me'i 'obs
མེའི་རིགས་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་རྩེད་མོ	playing w fire	me'i rigs la brten pa'i rtsed mo
མེའི་རླུང	vibration of temperature	me'i rlung
མེའི་ལས་རླུང	the karma-prana of fire	me'i las rlung
མེའི་སྲུབ་ཤིང	white sandalwood	me'i srub shing
མེའུ	(not in das)	me'u
མེའུ་དད་པོ	1st chapter	me'u dad po
མེར	in the fire, fullness, heap, vomiting, repulsiveness [zhe mer langs)	mer
མེར་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚལ	{mer bkra shis tshal}	mer bkra shis tshal
མེར་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	king {mer khri btsan po} [son of so khri btsan po and dog mer mer, bod rgyal gdung rabs 5th, gnam gyi khri bdun du grags pa'i lnga pa	mer khri btsan po
མེར་གྱིས	full	mer gyis
མེར་གྱིས་བཀང	filled full [w]	mer gyis bkang
མེར་གྱིས་ཁེངས	completely filled	mer gyis khengs
མེར་གྱིས་ཁེངས་པ	completely filled	mer gyis khengs pa
མེར་གྱིས་ཁེངས་པའི་དཀར་ཡོལ	completely filled bowl/ cup	mer gyis khengs pa'i dkar yol
མེར་གྱིས་གང	full to the brim	mer gyis gang
མེར་གྱིས་གང་བ	filled to the brim, heaped full	mer gyis gang ba
མེར་ནུ	embryo	mer nu
མེར་གནས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད	mer gnas kyi de nyid ces bya ba bya rgyud [du bsam gtan gyi de kho na nyid kyi nang gses shig ste, rang nyid lhar gsal ba'i thugs kar me 'bar ba'i dbus su zla ba la sngags phreng bkod de srog bsdom...	mer gnas kyi de nyid
མེར་པུན	Melbourne 2070	mer pun
མེར་བ	sloppy, pappy, thin, expanded, distended, full	mer ba
མེར་མེར	{mer mer ba dang, nur nur po dang, nar nar ba dang, gor gor la sogs rim pas chags pa} we grow from a small oval egg to a lump, and limbs appear by stages	mer mer
མེར་མེར་པ	1) vibrating, shimmering, permeating; 2) oval shape	mer mer pa
མེར་མེར་པོ	(aarbudama) oval shape [1st of the five periods in the womb)	mer mer po
མེར་མེར་བ	shimmering, permeating D, oblong, oval = nur nur	mer mer ba
མེར་མེར་བོ	expanded, full blown TSE	mer mer bo
མེར་མེར་ཤིག་ཤིག	1) quivering, vibrating [waves]; 2) shaking/ crawling/ vibrating from presence of many insects etc	mer mer shig shig
མེར་ཚིག་པ	blaze	mer tshig pa
མེར་རེ་བ	filled	mer re ba
མེར་རེ་རེ་ཁེངས་པ	completely filled	mer re re khengs pa
མེར་རེ་རེ་གྷེངས་པ	completely filled	mer re re ghengs pa
མེར་བཤུར་ཏོ	scorches with fire	mer bshur to
མེར་སྲེག	bake, cook, roast, burn	mer sreg
མེར་སྲེག་གཏོང	cook, bake, roast, burn	mer sreg gtong
མེར་སྲེག་གཏོང་བ	cook, bake, roast	mer sreg gtong ba
མེར་སྲེག་བཏང་བ	to burn	mer sreg btang ba
མེར་སྲེག་ཟ	eat after baking in fire	mer sreg za
མེར་བསྲོས	dried in the sun or on a fire	mer bsros
མེལ་གེ	sib bu	mel ge
མེལ་ཆོ་བྱེད་པ	watchfulness	mel cho byed pa
མེལ་བརྩེ་བ	servant, attendant	mel brtse ba
མེལ་ཚེ	watchman, sentinel, watcher, watch, period of 3 hours at night	mel tshe
མེལ་ཚེ་ཅན	night	mel tshe can
མེལ་ཚེ་བ	one awakened, one who remains awake to give watch	mel tshe ba
མེལ་ཚེ་བྱེད	wait on, keep watch [over] at night	mel tshe byed
མེལ་ཚེ་བྱེད་པ	wait upon, keep watch over	mel tshe byed pa
མེལ་ཚེ་མ	night	mel tshe ma
མེལ་ལ་བསྲེག་པ	burnt, baked, singed	mel la bsreg pa
མེལ་ལི	mile	mel li
མེལ་ལི་གྲུ་བཞི	square mile	mel li gru bzhi
མེལ་ལེ	mile	mel le
མེལ་ལེ་གྲུ་བཞི	square mile	mel le gru bzhi
མེས	fore-father, ancestor, [paternal] grandfather	mes
མེས་རྒྱལ	motherland, fatherland	mes rgyal
མེས་རྒྱལ་ཁྱིམ་ཚང་ཆེན་པོ	big family of the fatherland	mes rgyal khyim tshang chen po
མེས་རྒྱལ་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	defend the fatherland	mes rgyal srung skyob byed
མེས་འཆིང	dngul chu	mes 'ching
མེས་འཇིག་པ	burned up, destroyed by fire	mes 'jig pa
མེས་འཇིག་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	the summit of that destroyed by fire, the 2nd dhyana	mes 'jig pa'i rtse mo
མེས་པོ	forefather, [paternal] grandfather, ancestor, progenitor	mes po
མེས་པོ་འཕངས་བརྩོན	a Tibetan patriarch	mes po 'phangs brtson
མེས་པོའི་ཞལ་ལུང	mes po'i zhal lung	mes po'i zhal lung
མེས་པོའི་རལ་ཀླུང	epithet of ganges river	mes po'i ral klung
མེས་དཔོན	ancestors	mes dpon
མེས་དཔོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three ancestral kings	mes dpon rnam gsum
མེས་དཔོན་གསུམ	the three ancestral kings [of the spread of buddhism in tibet)	mes dpon gsum
མེས་ཕོ	grandfather	mes pho
མེས་བྱིན	given by fire	mes byin
མེས་དབོན	ancestral king	mes dbon
མེས་དབོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	srong btsan sgam po dang, khri srong lde'u btsan, khri gtsug lde btsan te gsum	mes dbon rnam gsum
མེས་མོ	grandmother's mother	mes mo
མེས་བཙན	(A) mal sa btsan po	mes btsan
མེས་རྩི་སྦུར་བསྲེགས་པ་ལྟར	like dry grass consumed by fire	mes rtsi sbur bsregs pa ltar
མེས་ཚིག	be burned	mes tshig
མེས་ཚིག་ནས་འཆི	would die by fire	mes tshig nas 'chi
མེས་ཚིག་པ	be burned	mes tshig pa
མེས་ཚིག་རྨ	burn [wound]	mes tshig rma
མེས་མཚུན	sngar mes po'i dus nas brten pa'i lha	mes mtshun
མེས་རབས	[paternal] ancestors	mes rabs
མེས་བསྲེགས	burn	mes bsregs
མེས་བསྲོས་པ	rosted	mes bsros pa
མོ་ཀྲ	motor, car	mo kra
མོ་དཀར	softer variety of ka rag	mo dkar
མོ་རྐྱང	female wild ass	mo rkyang
མོ་སྐད	volume of voice low	mo skad
མོ་སྐྱེས	female, woman	mo skyes
མོ་ཁབ	very fine needle	mo khab
མོ་ཁྱི	bitch	mo khyi
མོ་མཁན	mo diviner	mo mkhan
མོ་མཁན་འདྲེ་མཐོང་བ	fortune teller who can see ghosts	mo mkhan 'dre mthong ba
མོ་གུམ་མ	single woman	mo gum ma
མོ་གོས	woman's garment, petticoat, woman's gown	mo gos
མོ་གོས་གྲོ་ཁ	black and white spotted garment worn by poor Tibetan women	mo gos gro kha
མོ་གོས་བྱོན	wear women's clothes mo gos byon dang chang khang la dus 'das la dga' po 'dug - likes to dress in women's clothing and hang around in bars	mo gos byon
མོ་གོས་བྱོན་ལ་དགའ་པོ་འདུག	likes to wear women's clothes	mo gos byon la dga' po 'dug
མོ་གླུད	ransom rite for the benefit of women, ransoms for women	mo glud
མོ་གློག	negative electricity	mo glog
མོ་གློག་གི་རྒྱུན་མཐའ	electron	mo glog gi rgyun mtha'
མོ་གློག་ཅན	having a negative charge	mo glog can
མོ་གློག་ཅན་གྱི་ཏེན་ཙི	negatively charged electron	mo glog can gyi ten tsi
མོ་རྒྱག	do mo divination	mo rgyag
མོ་རྒྱུད	female lineage	mo rgyud
མོ་བརྒྱུད	female line of descent	mo brgyud
མོ་ངན	evil/ bad prophecy	mo ngan
མོ་གཅུ	gzer gdan w many corners	mo gcu
མོ་གཅོད	TSE	mo gcod
མོ་ལྕགས	finer and ductile sort of iron, steel	mo lcags
མོ་ཆས	woman's things	mo chas
མོ་ཉམས	, bud med kyi nyams 'gyur	mo nyams
མོ་ཉེ	relatives on wife's/ mother's side	mo nye
མོ་ཏ	train	mo ta
མོ་ཏ་འཇིབ	jeep	mo ta 'jib
མོ་ཏར	motor, car	mo tar
མོ་ཏར་འཇིབ	jeep	mo tar 'jib
མོ་བཏབ་པ	to divine, foretell	mo btab pa
མོ་རྟ	mare	mo rta
མོ་རྟགས	female organ, feminine gender	mo rtags
མོ་ཐིག་པོ	sharp higher perception in mo divination	mo thig po
མོ་ཐོ	motorcycle	mo tho
མོ་ཐོ་ཁྲེ	motorcycle	mo tho khre
མོ་ཐོ་འཁོར་ལོ	motorcycle	mo tho 'khor lo
མོ་དོར	1) woman's pants; 2) woman's lower garment [skirt, leggings]	mo dor
མོ་དྲེ	she mule	mo dre
མོ་དྲེལ	female mule	mo drel
མོ་དྲེས	herb	mo dres
མོ་གདོང	female figure	mo gdong
མོ་གདོན	female evil spirit, gdon of women	mo gdon
མོ་བདར་བའི་སྨྲང	smrang to invoke the response	mo bdar ba'i smrang
མོ་བདུད	curses of bdud that strike females	mo bdud
མོ་འདུར	'dur for women	mo 'dur
མོ་འདེབས	do mo divination	mo 'debs
མོ་འདེབས་པ	cast lots	mo 'debs pa
མོ་འདྲེ	female ghost	mo 'dre
མོ་འདྲེས	a female demon	mo 'dres
མོ་རྡེ	stone in females	mo rde
མོ་རྡོ	dividing rocks into male and female female	mo rdo
མོ་ལྡུམ་ཤ་ལ་ཡུ་རིང	{mo ldum sha la yu ring} field herb [ro kha zhing tsa la mngar ba, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rma gso, rus chag sbyor	mo ldum sha la yu ring
མོ་ན་ནིང	female hermaphrodite	mo na ning
མོ་ན་ཟ	name of a celestial courtesan	mo na za
མོ་ན་རེ	she said	mo na re
མོ་ནད	diseases of womb, breasts etc only women can have [mngal nad lnga dang, rtsa nad bcu drug skran nad dgu, srin bu'i nad rigs gnyis, phal pa'i nad brgyad bcas bzhi bcu]	mo nad
མོ་ནད་མཁྲིས་ཙབས	a mo nad [symptoms skom dad che &, glo lu ba &, sha pags ser por 'gyur ba]	mo nad mkhris tsabs
མོ་ནད་མཁྲིས་ཚབས	a mo nad	mo nad mkhris tshabs
མོ་ནད་ཐོར་བུ	like khams dkar 'byams pa &, mngal gyi srin bu khros pa, mo nad kha thor	mo nad thor bu
མོ་ནད་དུག་ཐབས	after child-birth mkhris tshad skyes pa'i mo nad [symp- toms ro stod du gzer phran 'pho zhing lud pa dmar po 'byung ba zhig	mo nad dug thabs
མོ་ནད་སྤྱི་ལ་བཅུ་བདུན	chn	mo nad spyi la bcu bdun
མོ་ནད་ཕལ་པ	ordinary mo nad [women's mtsan ma'i nad dang, sha ma ma thon pa, phru gu btsa' ma thub pa, phru gu mgo 'jug log pa, bu snod lug pa, mngal khrag ma chod pa, phru gu btsas rjes kyi nad gzhug lus pa, ...	mo nad phal pa
མོ་ནད་ཕལ་བ་བརྒྱད	chn	mo nad phal ba brgyad
མོ་ནད་རྩ་སྐྲན	after childbirth rtsa 'grams nas skran du gyur te sha rus C nas na ba'i mo nad	mo nad rtsa skran
མོ་ནད་འོ་ཚབས	rgyu zhabs gzer and menstrual blood malawi white or like water mo nad	mo nad 'o tshabs
མོ་ནད་རླུང་ཙབས	old mo nad [dbye na mgo bo'i rlung tsabs, rus pa'i rlung tsabs, snying gi rlung tsabs, pho ba'i rlung tsabs, mkhal ma'i rlung tsabs, rgyu ma'i rlung tsabs bcas rigs drug]	mo nad rlung tsabs
མོ་ནད་རླུང་ཚབས	old mo nad	mo nad rlung tshabs
མོ་ནད་སྲིན་བུ་ཁྲོས་པ	woman's disease mngal gyi srin bu rigs gnyis kyi nang nas aa so ka zhes pa'i srin bu khros pa [anger: inflamed? attack] las byung ba'i mo nad	mo nad srin bu khros pa
མོ་ནད་གསར་པ	menstruation	mo nad gsar pa
མོ་ནོར	'bri, mdzo mo, cow, female cattle	mo nor
མོ་རྣམས	females	mo rnams
མོ་རྣམས་ལྡོག	females do this in the opposite way	mo rnams ldog
མོ་སྣེ	negative pole, cathode	mo sne
མོ་པ	fortune teller	mo pa
མོ་པ་འདྲེ་མཐོང་བ	fortune teller who can see ghosts	mo pa 'dre mthong ba
མོ་པྲ	mo divination and pra divination	mo pra
མོ་དཔེ	manual for the prognostication of events; prognosticatory texts, divination	mo dpe
མོ་ཕག	sow	mo phag
མོ་ཕཡབ༹	do mo divination	mo phyva
མོ་ཕྱུ	woman's chuba	mo phyu
མོ་ཕྱུགས	cow, female livestock	mo phyugs
མོ་བ་གཏོ་བ	Mowatowa, in Amnye Machen	mo ba gto ba
མོ་བོང	female donkey	mo bong
མོ་བོན	1) mo divination, bon gto bcos klog 'don; 2) mo diviners and bon priests)	mo bon
མོ་བྱ	female bird	mo bya
མོ་བྱིས	girl 2072	mo byis
མོ་བྱུང	women, females	mo byung
མོ་བྲན	serving woman	mo bran
མོ་དབང	female generative organ	mo dbang
མོ་དབྱིས	female child	mo dbyis
མོ་འབོག	upper garment for females	mo 'bog
མོ་མ	[female] mo diviner, female mendicant D	mo ma
མོ་མ་ནིང	dbang po'i bya ba nyams pa'i female, female hermaphrodite	mo ma ning
མོ་མིང	360 names of divination	mo ming
མོ་མོ་དགའ་བར་བྱེད་པ	Mamo that make happiness	mo mo dga' bar byed pa
མོ་སྨད	mother and daughter	mo smad
མོ་ཙམ་གྱི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	rjes 'jug gi mo yig NGA MA gnyis la yang 'jug zhugs pa ni sgra zhan pa'i drag par 'gyur bas mo tsam mo	mo tsam gyi 'jug tshul
མོ་ཙེ	jiao = .1 yuan	mo tse
མོ་མཙན	female sex/ gender/ genitals [mo rigs kyi rtags sam mtsan ma,//ming gi rnam grangs la skye gnas dang, skye 'dzin, mkha' nang, dga' ba'i bu ga, chu ma, chos 'byung, brjod bya'i phyogs, nyer gnas, gn...	mo mtsan
མོ་མཙོ་སྤུན་གཉིས	name of two salt lakes [N ngam ring rdzong]	mo mtso spun gnyis
མོ་རྩ	mo nadi [mkhris pa'i rang bzhin gyis bskyed pa'i nad med kyi rgyun rtsa'i 'phar tsul zhig ste, 'phar rtsa'i rgyud phra la myur bar 'phar ba zhig	mo rtsa
མོ་རྩིས	astrological calculations	mo rtsis
མོ་རྩིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods of divination and astrology	mo rtsis kyi lha
མོ་མཚན	the female sex / gender / genitals	mo mtshan
མོ་མཚོ་སྤུན་གཉིས	{mo mtsho spun gnyis} name of two salt lakes	mo mtsho spun gnyis
མོ་ཞི་ཀོ	Mexico	mo zhi ko
མོ་ཟོམ	woman's boots	mo zom
མོ་ཟོམ་མཐིལ་གཉིས་མ	Tibetan woman's boot soles nyis brtsegs yod pa'i zom pa	mo zom mthil gnyis ma
མོ་འོངས་རྡུལ་ཅན	maiden at puberty	mo 'ongs rdul can
མོ་ཡན	1) unmarried/ masterless woman alone; 2) tenant, lessee)	mo yan
མོ་ཡན་གཏོང	lease, rent	mo yan gtong
མོ་ཡན་གཏོང་ས	apartment house	mo yan gtong sa
མོ་ཡི་རྩ	female pulse with tenuous fast beat	mo yi rtsa
མོ་ཡིག	feminine letters	mo yig
མོ་ར	/; 2) female goat; 2) kind of bird)	mo ra
མོ་རག	same as above	mo rag
མོ་རང	single woman, unmarried woman, poor destitute female, she herself, she, she alone, woman herself, spinster	mo rang
མོ་རང་གི	hers	mo rang gi
མོ་རང་ལ	herself	mo rang la
མོ་རབ	noble woman [of gt accomplishments/ character]	mo rab
མོ་རབས་ཆད་མ	barren woman	mo rabs chad ma
མོ་རིགས	womankind, feminine	mo rigs
མོ་རིགས་མེ་ཏོག	female/ pistillate flower	mo rigs me tog
མོ་རེ	call to a woman	mo re
མོ་རེངས	single woman	mo rengs
མོ་རླུང	female air (refers to the incipient detachment from the external reference of the sensory motor act), female prana which is long and gentle, SA ma dag rlung rigs,	mo rlung
མོ་ལ	her	mo la
མོ་ལ་ཀོ	{mo la ko}	mo la ko
མོ་ལ་རབ་གནོན་ཉེ་བར་སྤྱོད	always keeping the hen under control (1 of 4 khyim bya'i spyod pa)	mo la rab gnon nye bar spyod
མོ་ལུག	ewe	mo lug
མོ་ལུང	1) sgrog lung [sdom byed kyi lung thag]; 2) mo divination and prophesy)	mo lung
མོ་ལུས	female body	mo lus
མོ་ལོ	female year of the rabjung	mo lo
མོ་ལོ་ཁོ	Morocco	mo lo kho
མོ་ལོ་དྲུག	the six female years of the rabjung [glang dang - yos, sbrul, lug bya, phag rnams so	mo lo drug
མོ་ཤམ	barren woman	mo sham
མོ་ཤམ་གྱི་བུ	the son / child of a barren woman	mo sham gyi bu
མོ་ཤམ་བུ	the son of a barren woman	mo sham bu
མོ་ཤར	bu mo dman shar	mo shar
མོ་ཤིང	female tree, type of willow	mo shing
མོ་ཤེལ	cool mild crystal easy on the eyes	mo shel
མོ་ཤོ	mo 'debs byed kyi sho	mo sho
མོ་གཤམ	barren, barren woman	mo gsham
མོ་གཤམ་གྱི་པ	child of a barren woman	mo gsham gyi pa
མོ་གཤམ་གྱི་པུ	child of a barren woman	mo gsham gyi pu
མོ་གཤམ་གྱི་བ	child of a barren woman	mo gsham gyi ba
མོ་གཤམ་གྱི་བུ	child of a barren woman	mo gsham gyi bu
མོ་གཤམ་གྱི་བུ་མོ	daughter of a barren woman	mo gsham gyi bu mo
མོ་གཤམ་བུ	child of a barren woman TSE	mo gsham bu
མོ་གཤམ་བུ་མོའི་ལུས་ཀྱི་འགྱིང་བག	posing as/ having the style of the daughter of a barren woman	mo gsham bu mo'i lus kyi 'gying bag
མོ་གཤམ་ཡི་གེ	barran woman letters [ngag thog nas yi ge rjod skabs so so'i skye gnas kyi rtsol shugs shin tu zhan la lhod pa yin pa'i yi ge rnams,//ra la ha aa	mo gsham yi ge
མོ་གཤམ་ཤིང	barren tree w no fruit/flowers	mo gsham shing
མོ་བཤམ	barren	mo bsham
མོ་བཤམ་གྱི་བུ	son of a barren woman	mo bsham gyi bu
མོ་སི་ཀོ	Moscow	mo si ko
མོ་སི་ཁའོ	Moscow	mo si kha'o
མོ་སི་ཁོ	Moscow	mo si kho
མོ་སེ	herb	mo se
མོ་གསར	young woman	mo gsar
མོ་ཧ་ཏི	SK 3rd month	mo ha ti
མོ་ཧྲང	single woman	mo hrang
མོ་ཧྲེངས	single woman	mo hrengs
མོ་ལྷ	deity of females	mo lha
མོ་ཨ	motor, car	mo a
མོ་ཨ་འཇིབ	jeep	mo a 'jib
མོ་ཨར	motor, car	mo ar
མོ་ཨར་འཇིབ	jeep	mo ar 'jib
མོག	famine	mog
མོག་གུག་ཙམ་བྱེད་པ	slightly bend the head	mog gug tsam byed pa
མོག་གེ་བ	dullness, nodding off, glimmering, dumbfounded 2073	mog ge ba
མོག་ཏོག	mog tog	mog tog
རྫོང	sngar mkha' 'gro ma 'gro ba bzang mo'i gtam rgyud du gnas yul der bdud mos rgyal po'i bu dang bu mo	rdzong
གཉིས་བཟུང་ནས་ག	yang rong du bskyur sa'i brag ri sogs yod skad	gnyis bzung nas ga
མོག་པ	dark color, faded color	mog pa
མོག་པར་སྣང	faded/ lusterless appearance	mog par snang
མོག་པོ	pale, lackluster, faded	mog po
མོག་ཕྲུ	mo mo steamer	mog phru
མོག་བན་བུན	gleaming / glimmering pale light	mog ban bun
མོག་མོག	steamed bread, dark-colored, small meat patty, meat balls	mog mog
མོག་མོག་པོ	pale, lackluster, faded [color, complexion, light]	mog mog po
མོག་མོག་པོར	momo	mog mog por
མོག་མོག་པོར་བྱེད	eclipsed	mog mog por byed
མོག་མོག་བོ	TSE	mog mog bo
མོག་དམར	horse color	mog dmar
མོག་ཟངས	food streamer	mog zangs
མོག་རོ	mushroom, yellowish-brown	mog ro
མོག་རོ་དཀར་པོ	jelly fungus	mog ro dkar po
མོག་ཤ	mog sha fungus [edible mushroom growing in swamps and wet meadows something like a mog ro]	mog sha
མོག་ཤད	khog ltir gyi mchu bzo byed lag cha shing dum zhig	mog shad
མོང	mongolian	mong
མོང་གལ་གྱི་བུ	Mah maudgalyana [one of hte buddha's two chief disciples	mong gal gyi bu
མོང་གལ་བུ	Mah maudgalyana [one of hte buddha's two chief disciples	mong gal bu
མོང་གོལ	mongolian	mong gol
མོང་ཏེ་ཝེ་དེ་ཨོ	Motevideo	mong te we de o
མོང་རྟུལ	dull, stupid, delusion, fool[ish]	mong rtul
མོང་བརྟུལ	dull, stupid, delusion, fool	mong brtul
མོང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	(A) comprehend, master, assimilate	mong du chud pa
མོང་པོ	excessive	mong po
མོང་བཟའ	king srong btsan sgam po's queen [stod lung mong nas zhang blon gyi bu mo mong bza' khri lcam zhes bya ba de yin zhing, 'di la gung ri gung btsan 'khrungs, yum sras gnyis kyi rten skal du dpal gyi ...	mong bza'
མོང་བཟའ་ཁྲི་ལྕམ	a queen of king srong btsan sgam po	mong bza' khri lcam
མོང་ཡོན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	mong yon
མོང་ལོ	knuckle, anklebone	mong lo
མོད	. . . (verb+) {mod} (while it is) indeed (the case that . . . )	mod
མོད་ཀྱི	but, SA yang	mod kyi
མOད་གལ་གྱི་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	Maudgalyayana, important monk follower of the Buddha	mOd gal gyi bu chen po
མོད་གལ་བུ	dgra bcom pa and compiler of Abhidharma	mod gal bu
མོད་གལ་བུས	arhat of the Abhidharma tradition	mod gal bus
མོད་ཆིལ་ལེ་བ	very many/ abundant	mod chil le ba
མོད་ཉོ་དཀོན་འཚོང	buy when things are many and sell when rare	mod nyo dkon 'tshong
མོད་སྙོམས	even, level, average	mod snyoms
མོད་དེར	just in that moment, in that very moment, just at that moment, at the same moment, in just that moment	mod der
མོད་པ	to be	mod pa
མོད་པོ	much, plenty, many, abounding [form looks like the other mod]	mod po
མོད་མི་དམའ	[open-mindedness]	mod mi dma'
མོད་མི་དམའ་བ	(A)/; 1) high; 2) not phra mo)	mod mi dma' ba
མོད་དམའ	stupid	mod dma'
མོད་ཚོང	flooding the market, dumping goods [selling below cost as a market strategy]	mod tshong
མོད་ཚོང་བྱེད	flood the market, dump goods	mod tshong byed
མོད་ལ	immediately, instantly, directly, suddenly, straight way, in a moment, in a flash, right away, forthwith, as soon as [slebs mod la: as soon as [I] arrived]	mod la
མོད་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	born on the instant with, born with, possessed of	mod las skyes pa
མོན	Bhutan; Mon, a district in Tibet	mon
མོན་ཀོ	mt w goblins, horse-faced women and pretty musical naga maidens	mon ko
མོན་དཀར་འབྲུ	{mon dkar 'bru} herb	mon dkar 'bru
མོན་ཁ	Mönkha	mon kha
མོན་ཁ་ནེའུ་རིང	Meadow of Mönkha. Possibly identical with Mönkha Senge Dzong, a cave situated to the east of Bumthang in Bhutan which was used by Padmasambhava and later by Yeshe Tsogyal as a sacred place for the ...	mon kha ne'u ring
མོན་ཁ་སེང་གེ་རྫོང	Mönkha Senge Dzong, in Bhutan 2074	mon kha seng ge rdzong
མོན་ཁྲེ	Mon pea	mon khre
མོན་མཁའ་འགྲོ་གླིང	Monastery in Mon Tawang	mon mkha' 'gro gling
མོན་གུར	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	mon gur
མོན་གོ་ཡུ	areca nut from the subhimalaya	mon go yu
མོན་གོང་བྲག་ཕུག	Mön-gong Cave	mon gong brag phug
མོན་གྱི་ཏིག་ཏ	bitter root growing in subhimalayan regions, gentiana cheretta	mon gyi tig ta
མོན་གྱི་རས་གཟན	cotton from mon yul /Mon Tawang	mon gyi ras gzan
མོན་གྱི་སྲིབ་བཙན་ལུང	Sibtsen land of Mön	mon gyi srib btsan lung
མོན་གྱི་སླེའུ	kind of striped manycolored shawl of soft goat or yak wool with some cotton intermingled	mon gyi sle'u
མོན་གྲུ	mon gru	mon gru
མོན་གྲེ	lambda aquarius, 1 of rgyu skar	mon gre
མོན་གླིང	region in southeast Tibetan on the border with Bhutan	mon gling
མོན་སྔོན	bluish mauve	mon sngon
མོན་ཆ་ར	1) med tree evergreen oak and its acorns [ro bska, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas 'khru ba tsa grang med par gcod,//ming gi rnam grangs la 'khru gcod dang, 'gram gcod, bha re ram, mo ra tsa li, shalma li]; 2)	mon cha ra
མོན་ཆག་གི་ཆང	millet beer, "tompa"	mon chag gi chang
མོན་ཏ་རི	name of a place	mon ta ri
མོན་རྟ་དབང	Ta Wang Raj	mon rta dbang
ཨོཕ༹་བྷུཏན་ཨིནཧབིཏེད་བཡ་སེམི	TT people reachable only via Assam]	of Bhutan inhabited by semi
མོན་མཐའ་བྲག་མཐའ་ཁྲ་མོ	Möntha Dragtha Tramo	mon mtha' brag mtha' khra mo
མོན་དར	raw silk stuff, silk petticoat or trowsers	mon dar
མོན་དར་གྱི་གོས	<kosha> rtsa shun	mon dar gyi gos
མོན་དོ	wool etc load weight, about rgya ma 80	mon do
མོན་དྲེ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, 22nd lunar mansion or constellation	mon dre
མོན་ནག་འབྲུ	{mon nag 'bru} med. herb	mon nag 'bru
མོན་སྣེ་དམར་པོ	herb {mon sne dmar po}	mon sne dmar po
མོན་པ	monpas [small autonomous mi rigs mainly in mon yul and nearby zhing, mostly farmers and hunting, w some crafts, mon pa'i skad logs su yod, Tibetan skad also universal, buddhists	mon pa
མོན་པ་གྲོ	town and province in w. bhutan	mon pa gro
མོན་པ་འགྲོ	town/ province pa ro	mon pa 'gro
མོན་པའི་མི	person from Mon	mon pa'i mi
མོན་ཕྲུག	a bastard/ misbegotten	mon phrug
མོན་ཕྲུག་ཡུལ་བོར	Mon child who brlags pa, example of don gang dang gang gi khungs lung mi shes pa	mon phrug yul bor
མོན་བལ	the lands of Mön and Nepal	mon bal
མོན་བུ	mon bu/ spang ram med. herb	mon bu
མོན་བུ་པུ་ཏྲ	savage tribesmen	mon bu pu tra
མོན་རྫུ་ནག་པོ	{mon rdzu nag po} [people said to have dog's tails and wear sog skin in direction of Kamaschatka]	mon rdzu nag po
མོན་ཞ	popularity, respect, reputation	mon zha
མོན་ཞ་ཅན	beloved, popular	mon zha can
མོན་ཞ་ཐོབ	he is highly respected	mon zha thob
མོན་ཡུལ	Mon[yul] district bod rang skyong ljongs kyi lho kha sa khul khongs mtso sna rdzong gi sa cha zhig ste, dus rabs bcu bdun par bod sa gnas srid gzhung gis sa khul de dbang sgyur byed 'go tsugs, de k...	mon yul
མོན་ཡུལ་གྱི་བན་དེ	monk from nepal mon yul gyi tso lding sum cu so gnyis the 32 tso or lding of Mon yul [TT govt, mtso sna rdzong khongs mon yul gyi tso'am lding ste, legs po tso bzhi, spang chen lding drug, dvags pa...	mon yul gyi ban de
མོན་ལ་དཀར་ཆུང་ལ	{mon la dkar chung} pass	mon la dkar chung la
མོན་ལུག	grass cyperus rotundus	mon lug
མོན་ལུག་གླ་སྒང	{mon lug gla sgang} med herb [ro bska la mngar, nus pa bsil, skad 'gags pa dang, glo ba la tsa ba zhugs pa, rgyu tsad kyis bshal ba gcod,//ming gi rnam grangs la rkyal 'gro dang, rkyal byed, 'khyog...	mon lug gla sgang
མོན་ཤ	popularity, respect, reputation	mon sha
མོན་ཤ་འཐོབ	[he] has gained respect	mon sha 'thob
མོན་ཤོག	paper from Mon	mon shog
མོན་སེང་གེ་རྫོང་གསུམ	the three Lion Fortresses of Mön	mon seng ge rdzong gsum
མོན་སྲན	indian pea	mon sran
མོན་སྲན་དཀར་པོ	a kind of white grain from Mon	mon sran dkar po
མོན་སྲན་དཀར་བུ	kind of white bean D Dolichas catjang	mon sran dkar bu
མོན་སྲན་གྲེའུ	kind of pea growing in	mon sran gre'u
མོན་སྲན་འགྲེའུ	a kind of pea/bean from Mon Phaseolus radiatus	mon sran 'gre'u
མོན་སྲན་རྡེའུ	phaseolus mungo	mon sran rde'u
མོན་སྲན་སྡེའུ	a kind of sran ma from Mon	mon sran sde'u
མོན་སྲན་ན་གུ	kind of kidney bean D	mon sran na gu
མོན་སྲན་ཟླུམ་པོ	brinjal	mon sran zlum po
མོན་སྲན་ལེབ་མོ	a kind of sran ma from Mon	mon sran leb mo
མོན་སླེ	kind of striped many-colored shawl of soft goat or yak wool with some cotton intermingled	mon sle
མོན་སླེའུ	striped many-colored shawl * from Mon	mon sle'u
མོའི	her, hers, her	mo'i
མོའི་འགལ་གྱི་བུ	the contradictory child of a woman TSE	mo'i 'gal gyi bu
མོའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	negative/ cathodic chemical reaction	mo'i rang bzhin gyi 'gyur ldog
མོའུ་གལ་གྱིས་བུས	maudgalyayaniputra	mo'u gal gyis bus
མོའུ་དགལ	family clan descended from the sage mudgala	mo'u dgal
མོའུ་དགལ་གྱི་བུ	1 of 2 earliest disciples of buddha, maugalyayana	mo'u dgal gyi bu
མོའུ་འགལ	Maudgalaputra	mo'u 'gal
མོའུ་འགལ་གྱི་བུ	Maudgalaputra	mo'u 'gal gyi bu
མོའུ་འགལ་བུ	Maudgalaputra, [one of {ston pa'i mchog zung gnyis}. the two foremost disciples of the Buddha	mo'u 'gal bu
མོའུ་ད་གལ་བུ	Maudgalaputra	mo'u da gal bu
མོའུ་ཙེ	PRC currency unit = 1/10 JMP	mo'u tse
མོའོ་ཐུའོ་འཁོར་ལོ	motorcycle	mo'o thu'o 'khor lo
མོར	to her, when/ at the time of	mor
མོར་སྤན	kind of fine satin D	mor span
མོར་ར་རེ	certainly, indeed, undoubtedly	mor ra re
མོལ	(tha dad pa),, say, speak, talk, explain, discuss, confer, order	mol
མོལ་ཁྱབ་ཞིབ་ནན	give detailed orders on the way of doing work bkod khyab zhib tu byed pa	mol khyab zhib nan
མོལ་མཆིད	conference, consultation	mol mchid
མོལ་མཆིད་ཀྱང་རིམ་པ་གྱིས	in discussing anything go over the individual points systematically/ in order	mol mchid kyang rim pa gyis
མོལ་བསྡུར	discussion, conference	mol bsdur
མོལ་བ	(tha dad pa),, say, speak, talk, explain, discuss, confer, order	mol ba
མོལ་བས་གཏན་ཁེལ་སོང	resolve by discussion	mol bas gtan khel song
མོས	motivation, interest, inspiration, longing, disposition, aspiration, devotion, intent, wish, determination, adherence, conviction, resolute faith, esteem, liking, belief, general notion, veneration...	mos
མོས་སྐྱུར	bza' tshang kha bral byed dus bden pa pho la che na	mos skyur
མོས་བསྐྱད་ཙམ	feeling of the presence of the deity/ retinue [as opposed to {gsal snang - vivid presence)	mos bskyad tsam
མོས་བསྐྱེད	self visualization, feeling of the presence of the deity/ retinue [as opposed to {gsal snang - vivid presence)	mos bskyed
མོས་ཁམས	interest and propensities	mos khams
མོས་གུས	devotion, respect	mos gus
མོས་གུས་ཀྱི་རྟེན	{mos gus kyi rten rgyal ba'i sku gzugs mjal ba} to see representations of the conqueror to inspire his devotion	mos gus kyi rten
མོས་གུས་ཀྱི་བློ་ཤུགས	fervent devotion	mos gus kyi blo shugs
མོས་གུས་སྐྱེད	generate devotion	mos gus skyed
མོས་གུས་རྟོགས་པ་རོ་མཉམ	the equal taste of devotion and realization	mos gus rtogs pa ro mnyam
མོས་གུས་དྲག་པོ	deep/ intense/ very fervent devotion	mos gus drag po
མོས་གུས་གདུང་བས	with devotion and yearning	mos gus gdung bas
མོས་གུས་ཕྱག་ཆེན	the Great Seal of Fervent Devotion; one of {phyag chen lnga ldan} The Fivefold Mahamudra of the Drigungpas	mos gus phyag chen
མོས་གུས་བྱེད་ཀྱིན་འདུག་པ	show him honor and devotion	mos gus byed kyin 'dug pa
མོས་གུས་བྱེད་པ	to admire and respect	mos gus byed pa
མོས་གུས་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the guru yoga of devotion	mos gus bla ma'i rnal 'byor
མོས་གུས་ཚད་མེད	{rang la mos gus tshad med pa yod pa} your own limitless devotion	mos gus tshad med
མོས་གུས་ཞུ་བ	to admire and respect	mos gus zhu ba
མོས་གུས་རབ	supreme devotion	mos gus rab
མོས་གུས་སུ་ལ་བྱེད	to whom can there be devotion	mos gus su la byed
མོས་སྒོམ	/; 1) meditate w devotion; 2) w defilement sgom lam sher phyin la yon tan can du nges par 'dzin pa'o [sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	mos sgom
མོས་སྒྲུབ	considered practice	mos sgrub
མོས་བསྒོམ	1) meditation of devotion (in daily ceremonies); 2) meditation of aspiration (mah yoga))/GD	mos bsgom
མོས་ཆམ	settlement	mos cham
མོས་ཆམ་བྱེད་པ	settle	mos cham byed pa
མོས་འཆམ	accordance	mos 'cham
མོས་སྙོམས	even, balanced, =	mos snyoms
མོས་རྟགས	vote by hand	mos rtags
མོས་བསྟུན	consultation	mos bstun
མོས་བསྟུན་བྱེད	consult	mos bstun byed
མོས་མཐུན	accord, agreement, embrace	mos mthun
མོས་མཐུན་གཏན་འབེབས་བྱེད	make an agreement	mos mthun gtan 'bebs byed
མོས་མཐུན་བྱེད	agree to	mos mthun byed
མོས་མཐུན་བྱེད་པ	accept, agree, approve	mos mthun byed pa
མོས་མཐུན་བྱེད་པ་དང་བསྟུན་པ	adhere	mos mthun byed pa dang bstun pa
མོས་མཐུན་བྱེད་འོས་པ	agreeable	mos mthun byed 'os pa
མོས་མཐུན་མི་པ	refuse, disagree, disapprove	mos mthun mi pa
མོས་མཐུན་མི་བྱེད་པ	disagree	mos mthun mi byed pa
མོས་མཐུན་ཞལ་བཞེས	agreements and promises	mos mthun zhal bzhes
མོས་མཐུན་ཞལ་བཞེས་བྱེད	agree and promise/ give assurances	mos mthun zhal bzhes byed
མོས་དད	devotion [and faith]	mos dad
མོས་འདེམས་བྱེད་པ	adopt	mos 'dems byed pa
མོས་ལྡན	devoted, respectful, unflagging faith	mos ldan
མོས་ནས་འབུལ	offered from devotion/veneration	mos nas 'bul
མོས་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	vast devotion	mos pa rgya chen po
མོས་པ་རྒྱས་པ	increase devotion	mos pa rgyas pa
མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	[sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses], w defilement a sgom lam sher phyin la yon tan can du nges par 'dzin pa'o	mos pa sgom lam
མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ་གྱི་ཕན་ཡོན	sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, mos pa sgom pa'i byang sems la, sangs rgyas dang byang sems previous devotedly praising mos pa sgom lam gyi phan yon gsum chn	mos pa sgom lam gyi phan yon
མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ་གསུམ	chn	mos pa sgom lam gsum
མོས་པ་ཆེན	great devotion	mos pa chen
མོས་པ་ཉིད	devotion, respect	mos pa nyid
མོས་པ་འཐོབ་པ	attain devotion	mos pa 'thob pa
མོས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing devotion	mos pa dang ldan pa
མོས་པ་རྣམ་པར་འཕེལ་བྱེད་པ	increase devotion	mos pa rnam par 'phel byed pa
མོས་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	the power of knowing diverse volitions	mos pa sna tshogs
མོས་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of knowing all objects of devotion/ the various wishes (of beings)	mos pa sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs
མོས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ	devoted conduct [yid kyi mos pas spyod pa) (engaging in bodhisattva conduct out of devotion especially the stage of devoted conduct (the two first of {lam lnga {tshogs lam} + {sbyor lam} (Tserig))	mos pa spyod pa
མོས་པ་སྤྱོད་པའི་གང་ཟག	a person (on the stage) of devoted conduct {tshogs lam} + {sbyor lam}	mos pa spyod pa'i gang zag
མོས་པ་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས	the stage of devoted conduct. [def. the two first of {lam lnga}	mos pa spyod pa'i sa
མོས་པ་སྤྱོད་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the aspiration of devoted conduct [on {tshogs lam} and {sbyor lam}	mos pa spyod pa'i sems bskyed
མོས་པ་བྱེད་པ	to admire	mos pa byed pa
མོས་པ་སྦྱོད་པ	the stage of devoted conduct; {tshogs lam} + {sbyor lam}	mos pa sbyod pa
མོས་པ་སྦྱོད་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the aspiration of devoted conduct [on {tshogs lam} and {sbyor lam} (Tserig)	mos pa sbyod pa'i sems bskyed
མོས་པ་མང་བ་ཉིད	greatness of devotion	mos pa mang ba nyid
མོས་པ་ཙམ་བསྐྱེད་པ	feeling of the presence of the deity/ retinue	mos pa tsam bskyed pa
མོས་པ་ཙམ་ཡང་མ་བྱེད་པ	to pay not the least respect	mos pa tsam yang ma byed pa
མོས་པ་བཞི	the four devotions	mos pa bzhi
མོས་པ་བཟློག	remove the objects of desire	mos pa bzlog
མོས་པ་འི་ལྷ	the deity of one's interest	mos pa 'i lha
མོས་པ་ཡིང་བྱེད	realize/ perceive/ arouse devotion	mos pa ying byed
མོས་པ་ཡིད་བྱེད	realize/ perceive/ arouse devotion	mos pa yid byed
མོས་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	realize/ perceive/ arouse devotion	mos pa yid la byed pa
མོས་པ་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu	mos pa la dbang
མོས་པ་ལ་དབང་པ	mastery over devotion {dbang bcu}byang chub sems dpa'i dbang bcu'i nang tsan zhig ste, 'jig rten gyi khams thams cad sangs rgyas kyi rab tu gang ba kun tu ston pa'o	mos pa la dbang pa
མོས་པ་ལ་དབང་བ	power to change one object into another according to pleasure	mos pa la dbang ba
མོས་པ་ལ་ཞུམ་པ་དགག་པ	stop faintheartedness/ depression w devotion	mos pa la zhum pa dgag pa
མོས་པ་ལམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ	as a mere wish	mos pa lam du byed pa
མོས་པ་ལམ་བྱེད	forging the path as/ through/ with firm conviction/ devoted intent	mos pa lam byed
མོས་པ་ལར་ཆེར་བསྐྱེད	roused further great devotion	mos pa lar cher bskyed
མོས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	attention resulting from interest	mos pa las byung ba'i yid byed
མོས་པ་ལས་མི	1 of mi dmigs pa gsum	mos pa las mi
མོས་པ་ལས་མི་དམིགས་པ	nonconceptuality based upon aspiration	mos pa las mi dmigs pa
མོས་པ་གསུམ	tshig bsdus pa dang / 'bring dang / rgyas pa 'dod pa'o /	mos pa gsum
མོས་པ་ལྷག་པ	very strong aspiration, longing, devotion, longing, {lar cher bskyed} aroused further great, intend, devotion, resolute faith	mos pa lhag pa
མོས་པ་ལྷག་པར	very strong aspiration/ longing/ devotion, longing, intend, devotion, resolute faith	mos pa lhag par
མོས་པ་ལྷག་པར་ལར་ཆེར་བསྐྱེད	very strong aspiration/ longing/ devotion aroused even further, devotion, resolute faith	mos pa lhag par lar cher bskyed
མོས་པའི་སྟོབས་བསྐྱེད་པ	produce/ arouse the power of devotion	mos pa'i stobs bskyed pa
མོས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས	the level of devoted conduct [the two first of {lam lnga {tshogs lam} + {sbyor lam}	mos pa'i spyod pa'i sa
མོས་པའི་ཕན་ཡོན	the benefits of devotion	mos pa'i phan yon
མོས་པའི་བར་དུ་གཅོད་པ	interruptions/ cutting off of devotion	mos pa'i bar du gcod pa
མོས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྡུ་བ	the whole/ all- inclusive fruit of devotion	mos pa'i 'bras bu yongs su bsdu ba
མོས་པའི་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the different merits of devotion	mos pa'i bsod nams kyi khyad par
མོས་པའི་ལྷ	the deity of one's interest, {lha 'bogs pa}	mos pa'i lha
མོས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to have/take an interest in, to believe. [mss]	mos par byed pa
མོས་པས་ཐོབ་པ	attainment of devotion	mos pas thob pa
མོས་པས་སྤྱོད་པ	one who acts out of a sense of dedication	mos pas spyod pa
སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva abiding on the level of devoted conduct	sems dpa'
མོས་པས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས	level of conduct due to intensified interest	mos pas spyod pa'i sa
མོས་པས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས་བཞི	the four stages of devoted conduct, {snang ba thob pa}, {snang ba mched pa}, {de kho na'i phyogs gcig la rjes su zhugs pa}, {bar chad med pa'i ting nge 'dzin}	mos pas spyod pa'i sa bzhi
མོས་པས་སྤྱོད་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	mindgeneration of devoted conduct, [def. {kun rdzob byang chub kyi sems bzhi}	mos pas spyod pa'i sems bskyed
མོས་པས་ཞུགས་རྣམས	those who follow the teaching mostly with a sense of devoted desire	mos pas zhugs rnams
མོས་པས་ས་བོན	devotion is the seed	mos pas sa bon
མོས་པོ	liking, admiration	mos po
མོས་པོ་བྱེད	like, admire	mos po byed
མོས་དཔྱོད	assumption	mos dpyod
མོས་སྤྱོད	mos pas spyod pa'i sems	mos spyod
མོས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ལམ	the path of devoted conduct, {so skye'i lam}	mos spyod kyi lam
མོས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ས	the stages of devoted conduct	mos spyod kyi sa
མོས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ལྷ་སྐུ་འགྲུབ	accomplishment of the divine body which acts as desired	mos spyod kyi lha sku 'grub
མོས་སྤྱོད་པ	devoted conduct, 1 on the bodhisattva path of preparation	mos spyod pa
མོས་སྤྱོད་བཞི་ཡི་ས	level of the four practices based on aspiration: 4 stages of the path of application or application before one knows emptiness	mos spyod bzhi yi sa
མོས་བའི་ལྷ	deity of one's interest	mos ba'i lha
མོས་བོར	bza' tshang kha bral byed dus bden pa pho la che na	mos bor
མོས་བྱེད་པ་རེད	she did it	mos byed pa red
མོས་བློ	devotion, veneration	mos blo
མོས་བློས	w veneration	mos blos
མོས་དབང	inclination and capacity	mos dbang
མོས་མི་བ	disliked, would like, be willing, wish, venerate	mos mi ba
མོས་བརྩོན	devotion & perseverance	mos brtson
མོས་འཛིན	devoted	mos 'dzin
མོས་ཡོད	want to	mos yod
མོས་ཤོག	votes	mos shog
མོས་ཤོག་བསྡུ	cast votes	mos shog bsdu
མོས་ཤོག་བསྡུ་ལེན	cast votes	mos shog bsdu len
མོས་ཤོག་བསྡུ་ལེན་རྒྱག	cast votes	mos shog bsdu len rgyag
མོས་ཤོག་བསྡུ་ལེན་བྱེད	cast votes	mos shog bsdu len byed
མོས་ཤོག་བླུགས	cast votes	mos shog blugs
མོས་སོང	liked, was pleased/ interested, wanted [to]	mos song
མོས་སློབ་འདྲ་འབག	emulating type of aspiring practitioner	mos slob 'dra 'bag
མོས་ལྷ	'inspirational deity' [the deity to whom we feel spontaneous devotion]	mos lha
མྱ་ངང་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not dwell in nirvana	mya ngang las 'das pa la mi gnas pa
མྱ་ངན	misery, grief, mourning, trouble, affliction	mya ngan
མྱ་ངན་གྱི	tragic	mya ngan gyi
མྱ་ངན་གྱི་ཁང	mourning house, body	mya ngan gyi khang
མྱ་ངན་གྱི་གདུངས་པ	torments of sorrow/ suffering	mya ngan gyi gdungs pa
མྱ་ངན་གྱི་ཟུག་རྔུ	the pains of suffering	mya ngan gyi zug rngu
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་འཁྲུགས་ཏེ	quaked in misery	mya ngan gyis 'khrugs te
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་འགོག་པ	painful blockage [among 'gog pa'i rgyan, dgag bya sgrub 'os kyi don gnad gang dag 'gog byed de dag sgrub ma thub par chud zos te ornament showin an occasion worthy of pain	mya ngan gyis 'gog pa
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་གདུང	afflicted by sorrow	mya ngan gyis gdung
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་གདུང་སྟེ	afflicted by sorrow	mya ngan gyis gdung ste
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	in (the period of) mourning	mya ngan gyis non pa
མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་རྣང་ཏེ	stifled by his grief	mya ngan gyis rnang te
མྱ་ངན་ལྔ	chn	mya ngan lnga
མྱ་ངན་ཅན་གྱི་མི	people who are in pain	mya ngan can gyi mi
མྱ་ངན་ཅི་ཡང་མེད	w/o any suffering/ uneasiness at all	mya ngan ci yang med
མྱ་ངན་ཆེན་པོ	great sorrow	mya ngan chen po
མྱ་ངན་རྗེས་དྲན	1) having recalled 'das por, mya ngan zhu ba; 2) remember previous suffering)	mya ngan rjes dran
མྱ་ངན་རྗེས་དྲན་ཞུ་བ	remember previous suffering	mya ngan rjes dran zhu ba
མྱ་ངན་ཐང	desert; ex {mya ngan thang dkyil du lus song} we are lost in a desert of despair mya ngan dang bcas skrag cing sgyid lug	mya ngan thang
མྱ་ངན་འདའ	1) to pass into nirvana. 2) to die, 'pass into peace'	mya ngan 'da'
མྱ་ངན་འདའ་བ	pass beyond suffering, attain nirvana	mya ngan 'da' ba
མྱ་ངན་འདའ་བཞེད	intend to pass into nirvana	mya ngan 'da' bzhed
མྱ་ངན་འདས	nirvana, disgust, suffering beyond nirvana	mya ngan 'das
མྱ་ངན་འདས་ཆུང	lesser nirvana 1) mdo sde myang 'das chung ba [text?]; 2) srong btsan sgam po's secret oral instructions mngon phyung and bka' chems ka bkol ma'i ming grags dang mtshungs pa'i bod kyi lo rgyus rnyi...	mya ngan 'das chung
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པ	nirvana	mya ngan 'das pa
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པ་སྟོན་པ	display nirvana, teacher of nirvana	mya ngan 'das pa ston pa
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པར་གཤེགས་མཛད	to pass away into nirvana	mya ngan 'das par gshegs mdzad
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པར་བཤེགས	pass away into nirvana	mya ngan 'das par bshegs
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པར་བཤེགས་མཛས	pass away into nirvana	mya ngan 'das par bshegs mdzas
མྱ་ངན་འདས་ལ་འཁོར་ཤི་རོ་གཅིག་པ	the 1 taste of samsara and peace within nirvana mya ngan 'das la'ang chags rab ma	mya ngan 'das la 'khor shi ro gcig pa
མྱ་ངན་བྱས	brought about misery	mya ngan byas
མྱ་ངན་བྱེད	produce [unhappiness, pain grief, despair, sorrow, misery, suffering, distress, trouble, affliction], mourn, grieve	mya ngan byed
མྱ་ངན་བྱེད་པ	mourn, lament, wail	mya ngan byed pa
མྱ་ངན་བྱེད་པོ	producer of suffering	mya ngan byed po
མྱ་ངན་མི་འདའ	not passing into nirvana	mya ngan mi 'da'
མྱ་ངན་མི་འདའ་བཞུགས་སོ་གསོལ	We ask that you remain without passing into nirvana	mya ngan mi 'da' bzhugs so gsol
མྱ་ངན་མེད	free from misery, name of ashoka, tree in india	mya ngan med
མྱ་ངན་མེད་པ	non-suffering	mya ngan med pa
མྱ་ངན་མེད་པའི་ཤིང	1) {mya ngan med pa} tree; 2) Juniper tree)	mya ngan med pa'i shing
མྱ་ངན་མེད་བྱིན	gift w/o sorrow	mya ngan med byin
མྱ་ངན་འཚང	free from misery 2079	mya ngan 'tshang
མྱ་ངན་ཞུ་བ	1) produce suffering in mind; 2) pass beyond suffering, attain nirvana; 3) talk about suffering)	mya ngan zhu ba
མྱ་ངན་ཞུ་ཡིག	memorial speech, note of condolence	mya ngan zhu yig
མྱ་ངན་ཟློ	pass into nirvana	mya ngan zlo
མྱ་ངན་བཟློ	pass beyond suffering	mya ngan bzlo
མྱ་ངན་ལས	from suffering	mya ngan las
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ	attain nirvana	mya ngan las 'da'
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བའི་འདུ་ཤེས	the consciousness of attaining nirvana	mya ngan las 'da' ba'i 'du shes
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བར་གསོལ་འདེབས་པ	supplicate for nirvana	mya ngan las 'da' bar gsol 'debs pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས	nirv a, gone beyond the sorrows of sa s ra, die. [h]	mya ngan las 'das
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa
ཐེ་གྲེཨཏ་ནོན	dwelling state of enlightenment which falls neither into the extreme of samsaric existence nor into the passive state of cessation attained by an arhat	the great non
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན་ཨལལ	pervading benefit/ goal reality/ of nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa kun tu 'gro ba'i don all
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahanirvana. The state of final buddhahood that dwells neither in samsaric existence nor in the passive nirvana of an arhat mya ngan las 'das pa chen po'i mdo Great Nirvana Sutra mya ngan las 'das ...	mya ngan las 'das pa chen po
མི་གནས་པའི་ཕྱིར	ph because of dwelling neither in samsara or nirvana	mi gnas pa'i phyir
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ནི་ཞི་བ	nirvana is peace, one the {chos kyi sdom bzhi} four dharma emblems	mya ngan las 'das pa ni zhi ba
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa rnam pa gnyis
དག་པར་ཐོབ་པ	perfect attainment of nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa rnam pa gnyis yang dag par thob pa 'i grong khyer du 'gro	dag par thob pa
དག་པར་ཐོབ་པ་འི་ལམ་ལ་གནས་པ	abiding on the path of/ to nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa rnam pa gnyis yang	dag par thob pa 'i lam la gnas pa
དག་པར་ཐོབ་པ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not abiding/ dwelling in nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa rnam pa gnyis yang	dag par thob pa la mi gnas pa
དག་པར་ཐོབ་པའི་ལམ་ལ་གནས་པ	abiding on the path of / to nirvana	dag par thob pa'i lam la gnas pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ཞི་བ	nirvana is peace	mya ngan las 'das pa zhi ba
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་རི་ཞི་བ	nirvana is peace, 1 of the ...	mya ngan las 'das pa ri zhi ba
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ་བཞི	the four questions whose answer depends on nivana [among by the Buddha not answered lta log gi dri ba rnams sde tsan bzhir dril ba, bdag dang 'jig rten shi nas 'byung mi 'byung gnyis ka yin pa dang...	mya ngan las 'das pa la brten pa bzhi
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not abiding / dwelling in nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa la mi gnas pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་ཞེན་པ	attachment to nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa la zhen pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ་ལ་ཤེན་པ	desire for/ conviction of nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa la lhag par dga' ba the supreme joy of nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa la shen pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་གོ་འཕང	the level of nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa'i grong khyer du 'gro	mya ngan las 'das pa'i go 'phang
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཆེ་བ་ཉིད	the greatness of nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa'i che ba nyid
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཆེད	for the sake of nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa'i chos kyi rnam	mya ngan las 'das pa'i ched
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	nirvana stupa	mya ngan las 'das pa'i mchod rten
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་བདེ་བ	the bliss of nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa'i bde ba
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་ལམ	the path of nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa'i lam la gnas pa abiding on the path of / to nirvana mya ngan las 'das pa'i lam la gnas pa abiding on the path of/ to nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa'i lam
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་བསམ་པ	the wish for nirvana	mya ngan las 'das pa'i bsam pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པར	gone beyond the sorrows of sa s ra/ into nirvana	mya ngan las 'das par
མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པར་འདོད་པ	desire nirvana mya ngan las 'ba' ba'i don du rab tu sbyor	mya ngan las 'das par 'dod pa
མྱ་ངན་ལས་ཡོངས་སུ་འདས་པ	passed into parinirvana	mya ngan las yongs su 'das pa
མྱ་ངན་སེམས་གསོ	ease/ refreshment of mind, clearing away suffering, console, condole	mya ngan sems gso
མྱ་ངན་སེམས་གསོ་བྱེད	ease/ refresh the mind, clear away suffering, console, condole	mya ngan sems gso byed
མྱ་ངན་སེལ	console	mya ngan sel
མྱ་ངན་བསང་བ	alleviating griefs, consoling	mya ngan bsang ba
མྱ་ངན་བསངས་ཏེ	consolatory, giving comfort	mya ngan bsangs te
མྱ་ངན་བསལ	time of mourning is at an end	mya ngan bsal
མྱ་ངན་བསལ་བ	dispel sorrow, end mourning D	mya ngan bsal ba
མྱ་ངན་བསལ་བའི་སྤྲིང་ཡིག	Letter of Dispelling Sorrow. A text of advices composed by Nagarjuna	mya ngan bsal ba'i spring yig
མྱ་ངབ་སེལ་བ	remove[r of] grief, console	mya ngab sel ba
མྱ་ངམ	a fearful desert	mya ngam
མྱ་ངམ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས	deserts	mya ngam gyi phyogs
མྱ་ངམ་གྱི་འབྲོག་ཆེན	waterless fearful solitary place	mya ngam gyi 'brog chen
མྱ་ངམ་གྱི་སྨིག་རྒྱུ	desert mirage	mya ngam gyi smig rgyu
མྱ་ངམ་ཐང	[saddening place like a] desert	mya ngam thang
མྱ་ངམ་བྱེད	bud, hell	mya ngam byed
མྱ་ངམ་བཤུལ་རིང	extensive waterless region/ plain	mya ngam bshul ring
མྱ་ངམ་ས་ཐང	[fearful] desert	mya ngam sa thang
མྱག	[p myags],, decompose, rot	myag
མྱག་པ	to chew, the chemical decomposition, to cause putrefaction; ft. of {myag ba}	myag pa
མྱག་ཕྲན	nyag phran	myag phran
མྱག་བ	{myag ba, myags pa, myag pa} intr. v	myag ba
མྱག་བྱེད	mixing???, decomposing agent	myag byed
མྱག་བྱེད་བད་ཀན	mixing phlegm	myag byed bad kan
མྱག་མྱོག	1) filth, loathsomeness; 2) unclear, confused; 3) muddy viscid, gluey)	myag myog
མྱགས	festering; decomposed, putrefied; decay, rot	myags
མྱགས་དྲི	rotten stench/ stains	myags dri
མྱགས་པ	putrid, decomposed, cause putrefication, chew	myags pa
མྱགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	decomposed, putrefied	myags par byed pa
མྱགས་རུལ	decay, rot	myags rul
མྱང	1) place; 2) Myang clan; 3) [f myong],, will taste experience) myang} -}-; 1) place [myang chu'i chu rgyud kyi spyi ming, including that today is deng sang khang dmar rdzong &, rgyal rtse rdzong &,...	myang
མྱང་གི་དམར་ཁྲིད	Nyang-gyi Martri, the Direct Instructions of Nyang. Padmasambhava's replies to questions from Yeshe Tsogyal on all aspects of practice; revealed by Nyang Ral Nyima Özer	myang gi dmar khrid
མྱང་གྲིབ	emotional defilement	myang grib
མྱང་གྲོལ	liberation by tasting	myang grol
མྱང་ངན་མེད	w/o sorrow/ suffering	myang ngan med
མྱང་ངན་མེད་མཆོག་དཔལ	1 of sman bla brgyad	myang ngan med mchog dpal
མྱང་ཆུ	myang chu river	myang chu
མྱང་ཏིང་འཛིན་བཟང་པོ	the good samadhi in Myang	myang ting 'dzin bzang po
མྱང་སྟོད	upper myang river [gtsang myang chu stod rgyud rgyal rtse yan chad	myang stod
མྱང་སྟོན་སྨྲ་བའི་སེན་གེ	accused by 'bri gung dpal 'dzin nyi 'od bzang po as being the author of the 18 sems sde tantras	myang ston smra ba'i sen ge
མྱང་འདས	nirvana, SA mya ngan 'das pa (3 types are phung po lhag ma - conditioned, phung po lhag med - unconditioned, mi gnas pa - unlocalized)	myang 'das
མྱང་འདས་ཀྱི་མདོ	Nirvana Sutra	myang 'das kyi mdo
མྱང་འདས་དངོས་པོར་འཛིན་པ	fixate nirvana as a thing	myang 'das dngos por 'dzin pa
མྱང་འདས་ཆེན་པོ	Mahaparinirvana Sutra	myang 'das chen po
མྱང་འདས་མཆོད་རྟེན	nirvana stupa [mchod rten cha brgyad kyi ya gyal zhig ste, ston pa thub pa'i dbang po mya ngan las 'das pa'i tse rtzva mchog grong du bzhengs pa'i mchod rten bang rim med pa gdan khri'i steng du bu...	myang 'das mchod rten
མྱང་འདས་གཉིས	nirvana without remainder of aggregates, Syn {phung po lhag ma med par mya ngan las 'das pa} Syn {mya ngan las 'das pa rnam pa gnyis}	myang 'das gnyis
མྱང་འདས་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate nirvana	myang 'das mthar thug
མྱང་འདས་ལས	the {mya ngan las 'das pa chen po'i mdo says	myang 'das las
མྱང་འདས་གསུམ	the three kinds of nirvana	myang 'das gsum
ཨགགྲེགཏེས་ཨནད་ནོན	dwelling nirvana phung po lhag p dang bcas ...med and gnas med	aggregates and non
མྱང་བར་འདོད་པ	wishing to taste	myang bar 'dod pa
མྱང་བར་བྱེད	tasting, faculty of taste	myang bar byed
མྱང་བྱ	tongue	myang bya
མྱང་མྱང	1), look at, examine; 2) check the taste)	myang myang
མྱང་མྱང་མྱུག་མྱུག	mgo myug tsam myug tsam 'don shul}-, grogs po yong min sge'u khung nas mgo	myang myang myug myug
མྱང་སྨད	lower myang river	myang smad
མྱང་རྩི	an officinal plant	myang rtsi
མྱང་རྩི་སྤྲས	{myang rtsi spras - med. herb	myang rtsi spras
མྱང་ཞིབ	look at, examine, investigate, inspect[ion]	myang zhib
མྱང་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	look at, examine, investigate, inspect[ion]	myang zhib byed pa
མྱང་ཡུལ	{myang yul, gtsang phyogs kyi district	myang yul
མྱང་རལ	village at W of Sera	myang ral
མྱང་རལ་ཉི་མ	author of me tog snying po sbrang rtsi'i bcud 2081	myang ral nyi ma
མྱང་རལ་ཉི་མ་འོད་ཟེར	1124-1192	myang ral nyi ma 'od zer
མྱང་རོ	{myang ro}	myang ro
མྱང་རོ་བྲོ	experiencing taste	myang ro bro
མྱངས	united, enjoy, SA myong ba	myangs
མྱངས་པ	[p myong ba] tasted, experienced	myangs pa
མྱངས་མྱོང	experience [of]	myangs myong
མྱད་པ	(A) true, truth	myad pa
མྱམ་འབྲེལ་རྒྱལ་ཚོགས	United Nations	myam 'brel rgyal tshogs
མྱམ་མེད	unequalled, matchless	myam med
མྱམས་ཁྲིད	instructions on experiential meditation	myams khrid
མྱི	human being, man, (A)	myi
མྱི་འོད	sunshine, sunlight	myi 'od
མྱི་ཧྲུད་ཧྲུད	before a new person coming from elsewhere a child's own virtues ngom mkhan child	myi hrud hrud
མྱིག	(A) eye	myig
མྱིག་མ་མཁན	(A) barbarous, low caste	myig ma mkhan
མྱིང	older form of ming	mying
མྱིད་པ	(A) mid pa	myid pa
མྱིན་པ	(A) min pa	myin pa
མྱིའུ	(A) mi'u dang mtshungs te gzugs thung gi ming	myi'u
མྱུ་གུ	bud, fresh shoots of leaves, reed, rush, flag, relations, new shoot, plantain tree, banana tree, fresh sprouts	myu gu
མྱུ་གུ་འབུས	bud, sprout, germinate	myu gu 'bus
མྱུ་གུ་ཚལ	grove of reeds	myu gu tshal
མྱུ་གུ་འཚོ་སྐྱོང་ཁང	[plant] nursery	myu gu 'tsho skyong khang
མྱུ་གུ་ཤིང	reed bamboo	myu gu shing
མྱུ་གུ་གསར	new shoot, plantain tree, banana tree	myu gu gsar
མྱུ་གུ་གསོ	raise seedlings	myu gu gso
མྱུ་གུ་གསོ་སྐྱོང	raise seedlings	myu gu gso skyong
མྱུ་གུ་གསོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	raise seedlings	myu gu gso skyong byed
མྱུ་གུའི་ཁ་འབུས་ཚད	rate of germination	myu gu'i kha 'bus tshad
མྱུ་གུའི་དུས	time of sprouting, spring	myu gu'i dus
མྱུ་གུའི་ཚལ	grove of reeds	myu gu'i tshal
མྱུག	germ, sprout	myug
མྱུག་མདའ	arrow of reed or bamboo	myug mda'
མྱུག་པ	slightly bend the head, run, roam, stroll about, show ostentatiously, boast about	myug pa
མྱུག་མྱུག	keep sticking the head out up a bit, trembling, wavering, flickering, move crookedly, run, roam, stroll, w top/ head bent over	myug myug
མྱུག་མྱུག་པ	SA myug pa	myug myug pa
མྱུག་ཙམ	stick the head up/ out for a bit myug tsam byed 'phral du rdung rdeg	myug tsam
མྱུག་ཙེ	cane basket	myug tse
མྱུག་རྩེ	sprout	myug rtse
མྱུག་གཟན་འབུ	caterpillar	myug gzan 'bu
མྱུགས	imp. of {myug pa}	myugs
མྱུགས་པ	pf. of {myug pa}	myugs pa
མྱུར	swift, quick, speedily, immediately, soon, rapid[ly]	myur
མྱུར་རྐང	the planets nyi bar las brtsams te in and not in order rkang earlier and later nor dang bu lon producing rkang coursing, since it is the myur dag byed kyi basis, hence the name	myur rkang
མྱུར་སྐྱོད	going/advancing quickly	myur skyod
མྱུར་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	go/ advance quickly	myur skyod byed
མྱུར་སྐྱོབ	name of sgrol ma	myur skyob
མྱུར་སྐྱོབ་འཇིག་རྟེན	shoe who quickly protects the world, epithet of sgrol ma	myur skyob 'jig rten
མྱུར་སྐྱོབ་སྨན་ཐུམ	1st aid kit	myur skyob sman thum
མྱུར་བསྐྱོད	going/advancing quickly	myur bskyod
མྱུར་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	go/ advance quickly	myur bskyod byed
མྱུར་མགྱོགས	very quick, high-speed, express	myur mgyogs
མྱུར་མགྱོགས་གཏུབ་གཞོད་བྱེད་ཐབས་ཧིགྷ	speed cutting method	myur mgyogs gtub gzhod byed thabs high
མྱུར་འགྲུབ	quick accomplishment/ success	myur 'grub
མྱུར་འགྲུབ་སློབ་གྲྭ	intensive/ accelerated school	myur 'grub slob grwa
མྱུར་འགྲོ	{bu'i ming la myur 'gro zhes btags} named the boy Sighraga, Moving Quickly	myur 'gro
མྱུར་འགྲོ་ལོང་བ	the blind man, Sighraga	myur 'gro long ba
མྱུར་འགྲོས	1) quick way of going; 2) the five planets 'gro lugs; 3) horse)	myur 'gros
མྱུར་འགྲོས་ཤར	the planets rim pa'i snga rkang thog ma'i sa nas E moving = myur 'gros	myur 'gros shar
མྱུར་སྒྲུབ་རུ་ཁག	shock troops, storm troopers	myur sgrub ru khag
མྱུར་བཅོས	quick repairs, 1st aid	myur bcos
མྱུར་བཅོས་བྱེད	make quick repairs, give 1st aid	myur bcos byed
མྱུར་ཏུ	quickly	myur tu
མྱུར་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	quickly, speedily	myur stobs kyi sgo nas
མྱུར་ཐོབ་ཤོག	may we quickly attain	myur thob shog
མྱུར་འཐབ་མྱུར་གཅོད	quick decision, rapid settlement	myur 'thab myur gcod
མྱུར་དག	for each planet's dal dag by its myur rkang adding/ subtracting, above the dal ba mgo brtsams te rang 'gros kyis the step's [rkang pa'i] coursing increasing/ decreasing lack/ surplus coursed = corr...	myur dag
མྱུར་དུ	immediately, right now	myur du
མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པ	be swiftly accomplished	myur du 'grub pa
མྱུར་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go quickly	myur du 'gro ba
མྱུར་དུ་གཏོང	speed up, accelerate	myur du gtong
མྱུར་དུ་བྱེད	quick performance of work	myur du byed
མྱུར་དུ་བྱོན་པ	swiftly return	myur du byon pa
མྱུར་དུ་འབྱུང	to swiftly produce	myur du 'byung
མྱུར་དུ་མ་འཕྲད་པ	be delayed	myur du ma 'phrad pa
མྱུར་དུ་བཙའ་རྟགས	signs of immediate parturition	myur du btsa' rtags
མྱུར་དུ་ལོག	quickly return home	myur du log
མྱུར་འདྲེན	quick/ express transport	myur 'dren
མྱུར་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport quickly/ by express 2082	myur 'dren byed
མྱུར་སྡུད	quick harvest/ collection	myur sdud
མྱུར་པོ	immediately, speedily, quick[ly], rapid[ly]	myur po
མྱུར་པོར	apace	myur por
མྱུར་ཕན་ལུད་རྫས	quick-acting fertilizer	myur phan lud rdzas
མྱུར་བ	faster, quicker, sooner, quick, swift, speedy	myur ba
མྱུར་བ་ཉིད་དུ	quickly	myur ba nyid du
མྱུར་བ་མྱུར་དུ	right away, as fast as I can	myur ba myur du
མྱུར་བ་མྱུར་བ	very quickly	myur ba myur ba
མྱུར་བའི་འབྲུ	music, particular note	myur ba'i 'bru
མྱུར་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	keen intelligence	myur ba'i shes rab
མྱུར་བར	swiftly, speedily, hurried	myur bar
མྱུར་བར་འདའ་བ	TSE	myur bar 'da' ba
མྱུར་བར་སད	easily wakeful	myur bar sad
མྱུར་བྱེད	/; 1) wind [god]; 3) vulture; 4) snake)	myur byed
མྱུར་བྱོན	swiftly return	myur byon
མྱུར་བྱོན་གསོལ་འདེབས	supplication for the swift return [of so-and-so lama]	myur byon gsol 'debs
མྱུར་མ	dancing woman	myur ma
མྱུར་མོར	quickly	myur mor
མྱུར་མྱུར་བ	very quick	myur myur ba
མྱུར་ཙམ	quickly, wavering, quickening D	myur tsam
མྱུར་རྩིས	quick calculation	myur rtsis
མྱུར་ཚད	[measure/ rate of] speed, velocity	myur tshad
མྱུར་ལམ	Swift Path, The Swift Path to Omniscience, Pith Instructions on the Graded Path to Enlightenment byang chub lam gyi rim pa'i dmar khrid thams cad mkhyen par bgrod pa'i myur lam dmar khrid, by Panch...	myur lam
བགྲོད་པའི་མྱུར་ལམ་དམར་ཁྲིད	by Panchen Lobsang Yeshe	bgrod pa'i myur lam dmar khrid
མྱུར་ལམ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went on the quick path/ short cut	myur lam du phyin pa
མྱུར་ལམ་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	by Shabkar	myur lam bla ma'i rnal 'byor
མྱུར་ལམ་དམར་ཁྲིད	Pith Instructions on the Swift Path	myur lam dmar khrid
མྱུལ	wandered, wandering, wandering over	myul
མྱུལ་པོ	wanderer, vagabond, tramp	myul po
མྱུལ་དཔྱོད	exploration	myul dpyod
མྱུལ་དཔྱོད་བྱེད	explore	myul dpyod byed
མྱུལ་བ	1) (Tha dad pa) search and resolve, examine closely, search into, scrutinize (Tha mi dad pa) wander [through], roam, spy, explore	myul ba
མྱུལ་མ	secret situation, seeker out, spy, secret/intelligence agent, detective	myul ma
མྱུལ་མི	wandering person	myul mi
མྱུལ་ཞིབ	seek out/ examine the situation, reconnaissance, spying, secret investigation	myul zhib
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་གནམ་གྲུ	spy plane	myul zhib gnam gru
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་པ	secret situation, seeker out, spy, secret/intelligence agent, detective	myul zhib pa
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་བྱེད	seek out/ examine the situation, make reconnaissance, reconnoiter spy, secretly investigate, probe	myul zhib byed
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་དབུགས་ལྒང	spy/ reconnaissance balloon	myul zhib dbugs lgang
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་དམག་མི	reconnaissance soldiers	myul zhib dmag mi
མྱུལ་ཞིབ་སྲུང་སྐར	spy/ reconnaissance satellite	myul zhib srung skar
མྱེ	(A) fire	mye
མྱེ་སེ་དགུ་སི	procrastination, dillydallying	mye se dgu si
མྱེ་སེ་དགུ་སི་བྱེད	procrastinate, dillydally	mye se dgu si byed
མྱེད	(A) med	myed
མྱེར་བཞག	firmly set up	myer bzhag
མྱེས	(A) grandfather	myes
མྱེས་པ	delight in	myes pa
མྱོ་བ	[be] insane/ intoxicated	myo ba
མྱོག་ཆུང	child, infant	myog chung
མྱོག་བྱེད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the arresting mudra	myog byed phyag rgya
མྱོགས	(not in das)	myogs
མྱོང་ཁྲིད	guidance through [personal] experience	myong khrid
མྱོང་འཁྲིད	instruction through experience	myong 'khrid
མྱོང་གོམས	experience	myong goms
མྱོང་གོམས་བྱུང	got experience	myong goms byung
མྱོང་གོམས་བྱུང་ཆེད་དུ	to get experience	myong goms byung ched du
མྱོང་གྲུབ	experience	myong grub
མྱོང་གྲོལ	1) liberation through taste. 2) sman sgrub; bdud rtsi chos sman	myong grol
མྱོང་གྲོལ་བདུད་རྩི་ཆོས་སྨན	amrita Dharma medicine which liberates through taste	myong grol bdud rtsi chos sman
མྱོང་གྲོལ་ཞལ་ཟས	food for liberation through taste	myong grol zhal zas
མྱོང་གྲོལ་རིལ་བུ	liberation pill, the pill that liberates through taste	myong grol ril bu
མྱོང་གྲོལ་རིལ་བུའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	the sadhana ritual for preparing pills that liberate through taste	myong grol ril bu'i sgrub thabs
མྱོང་དགའ་བས་ཆེར་པ	greatly by the joy of	myong dga' bas cher pa
མྱོང་འགྱུར	to be experienced	myong 'gyur
མྱོང་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས་བཞི	the four karmas to be experienced	myong 'gyur gyi las bzhi
མྱོང་འགྱུར་ཆོས	one's own experience	myong 'gyur chos
མྱོང་འགྱུར་ཐུན་མོང་མིན་པའི་ལས	the karma to be individually experienced myong 'gyur thun mong min pa'i las kyis	myong 'gyur thun mong min pa'i las
མྱོང་རྒྱུ་འདྲ་བ	like an experience	myong rgyu 'dra ba
མྱོང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	without any "thing" experienced	myong rgyu med pa
མྱོང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པའི་མྱོང་རྒྱུ	an experience without some 'thing' experienced; "something to experience that is free from something to experience" 2083	myong rgyu med pa'i myong rgyu
མྱོང་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	can be experienced	myong rgyu yod pa
མྱོང་ཅན	experienced [person]	myong can
མྱོང་ཆ	experience myong cha med na long ba thang la 'khyams pa dang mtshungs - w/o experience 1 is like a bland person wandering on a plain	myong cha
མྱོང་སྟོབས	the power of personal experience	myong stobs
མྱོང་ཐོག	in (1's own) experience	myong thog
མྱོང་ཐོག་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	[perceptually] experience myong thog nyams su myong ba'i steng [all this] having apprehended/ identified in experience, explain	myong thog nyams su myong ba
མྱོང་ཐོག་ནས	actually, through real experience, after bringing forth real experience	myong thog nas
མྱོང་ཐོག་ནས་འཁྲུངས	to arise from concrete experience myong thog la cha bzhag nas bshad pa having apprehended/ identified in experience, explain	myong thog nas 'khrungs
མྱོང་ཐོག་ཤེས་རྟོགས	know and realize by perceptual experience	myong thog shes rtogs
མྱོང་ཐོབས	direct experience	myong thobs
མྱོང་དུ་བཅུག	continue to gain experience	myong du bcug
མྱོང་འདྲིས	familiarity	myong 'dris
མྱོང་པ	experienced	myong pa
མྱོང་པ་ཕྲ་ཞིབ་ཅན	precise experience	myong pa phra zhib can
མྱོང་བ་སྐྱེས་པ	to reach personal experience	myong ba skyes pa
མྱོང་བ་བསྐྱེད	to bring forth personal experience	myong ba bskyed
མྱོང་བ་ཁྱད་ཅན	special experiences myong ba khyad par can dang ldan pa having a particular experience	myong ba khyad can
མྱོང་བ་དགའ་མོ	sound experience	myong ba dga' mo
མྱོང་བ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན	the experience similar to the cause, def. {srog bcad pas tshe thung ba sogs}, {kun brtags} imaginary, speculative, imputed, imputing [in philosophical context) - conceptual [in practical context]	myong ba rgyu mthun
མྱོང་བ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	Result of experience resembling the cause, one will, for each of the ten nonvirtues respectively, have short life span, be in lack of necessities, have much strife in family life, meet with a lot o...	myong ba rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu
མྱོང་བ་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས	karma with experience similar to the cause	myong ba rgyu mthun gyi las
མྱོང་བ་ངེས་པ་ཅན	concrete experience a ti'i dgongs pa the state of Ati	myong ba nges pa can
མྱོང་བ་ངོ་སྤྲད	to point out what the experience is	myong ba ngo sprad
མྱོང་བ་མངོན་གྱུར	actualized experience	myong ba mngon gyur
མྱོང་བ་མངོན་འགྱུར	concrete experience, actualized experience, to actualize the experience	myong ba mngon 'gyur
མྱོང་བ་བརྟན་པ	stable experience	myong ba brtan pa
མྱོང་བ་ཐན་ཐུན	having experienced/ perceived [just a little] D	myong ba than thun
མྱོང་བ་ཐོབ་པ	gain experience	myong ba thob pa
མྱོང་བ་སྣ་ཟིན	las ka'i goms myong have just begun to	myong ba sna zin
མྱོང་བ་མ་ཐོན	to lack personal experience	myong ba ma thon
མྱོང་བ་མ་ཡིན	cannot be experienced	myong ba ma yin
མྱོང་བ་མི་ཐོན	not bring forth real experience	myong ba mi thon
མྱོང་བ་མེད་པ	lacking personal experience	myong ba med pa
མྱོང་བ་ཚད་མ	TSE	myong ba tshad ma
མྱོང་བ་རང་ཐོག་ཕེབས	acquire direct experience in oneself	myong ba rang thog phebs
མྱོང་བའི་ཉམས	the experiences of savoring a meditative state	myong ba'i nyams
མྱོང་བར་འགྱུར་བ་ངེས་པ	certain to be experienced, not certain to be experienced	myong bar 'gyur ba nges pa
མྱོང་བར་འགྱུར་བ་མ་ངེས་པ	not certain to be experienced	myong bar 'gyur ba ma nges pa
མྱོང་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཆོས	dharmas to be experienced	myong bar 'gyur ba'i chos
མྱོང་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ལས་ལྔ	chn	myong bar 'gyur ba'i las lnga
མྱོང་བར་བྱེད	1) check the taste; 2) enjoy, perceive, taste, experience, feel (Tha mi dad pa); 3) lick; 4) undergo)	myong bar byed
མྱོང་བར་བྱེད་དོ	enjoyed, causes to enjoy	myong bar byed do
མྱོང་བར་བྱེད་པ	feel	myong bar byed pa
མྱོང་བར་བྱེད་པའི་རིག་པ་གསུམ	[chn]	myong bar byed pa'i rig pa gsum
མྱོང་བར་མ་ངེས་པའི་ལས	karma not certain to experienced	myong bar ma nges pa'i las
མྱོང་བྱ	object of experience	myong bya
མྱོང་བྱང	experience notebook, diary	myong byang
མྱོང་བྱེད	experience phlegm, experiencer	myong byed
མྱོང་བྱེད་བད་ཀན	tasting phlegm [one of the body's fundamental bad kan lnga, abiding in the tongue, its function to experience fgood and bad flovors on the tongue	myong byed bad kan
མྱོང་མ་མྱོང་མེད	neither experienced nor not experienced	myong ma myong med
མྱོང་རྩིས	by learned ones gong ma rtsi myong ba'i zin writings/ notes	myong rtsis
མྱོང་ཚུལ	ways of experiencing	myong tshul
མྱོང་ཚོར	to realize, know from experience; feelings	myong tshor
མྱོང་ཚོར་གཏིང་ཟབ	intense experience/ feelings 2084	myong tshor gting zab
མྱོང་ཚོར་བྱུང་བ	realize, know from experience	myong tshor byung ba
མྱོང་ཚོར་བསམ་འཆར	having examined and analyzed the source of thoughts/ mind/ phenomena arising from (1's own) experience, describe 1's experienced feeling/ sensation/ knowledge from experience	myong tshor bsam 'char
མྱོང་རིག	not attached to experiences	myong rig
མྱོངས	MG: imp of myong. [mss]	myongs
མྱོད	intoxicated	myod
མྱོད་དགའ་བས་ཆེར་པ	greatly by the joy	myod dga' bas cher pa
མྱོན་མོངས་པའི་ས	(ten smaller causes of moral misery are khro ba, 'khon 'dzin, ston pa, 'tshig pa, sgyu, g.yo, phrag dog, ser sna, nga rgyal, lhag pa'i rga rgyal; the ten greater causes are ma dad pa, 'gyod pa, brj...	myon mongs pa'i sa
མྱོན་མོངས་པར་འགྱུར	be distressed	myon mongs par 'gyur
མྱོན་མོངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	get into trouble	myon mongs par 'gyur ba
མྱོན་མོངས་ཚིག	words of idleness	myon mongs tshig
མྱོན་ཧམ་ཅན	conceited person	myon ham can
མྱོན་ཧམ་ཆེན	vain, conceited, pretentious person pretending to know more than is the case	myon ham chen
མྱོས	[sensually] intoxicated, loss of control, Poa cynosuroides grass, bodhi tree fire rubbing sticks D	myos
མྱོས་འགྱུར	intoxicator, chang	myos 'gyur
མྱོས་ཆུ	Rut-fluid, mala, danambhas; Fluid that exudes from bumps on the temples of a male elephant when he is in rut	myos chu
མྱོས་འཐོམས་པ	intoxicated/ disoriented and confused	myos 'thoms pa
མྱོས་རྡུལ་ཅན	elephant	myos rdul can
མྱོས་ལྡན	Pramathin, 13th year of the rabjung, female earth rabbit)	myos ldan
མྱོས་པ	to be drunk; {myos pa, myos pa, myos pa} intr. v.; intoxication, experience	myos pa
མྱོས་པའི་ཅ་ཅོ	drunken racket/ babble	myos pa'i ca co
མྱོས་པའི་ཕྲེང་ལྡན་མ	excited indecent woman	myos pa'i phreng ldan ma
མྱོས་པའི་མཚན་མ	that which excites lust, musk	myos pa'i mtshan ma
མྱོས་པར་བྱེད་པ	intoxicating	myos par byed pa
མྱོས་བུམ་ཅན	having an intoxicating vase, elephant	myos bum can
མྱོས་བྱེད	1) aa rag, chang, liquor; 2) Manmatha, 29th year of the rabjung, the female wood sheep); 3) 3rd month; 4) cloud; 5) Kama (6) female organ (7) 13 * (8) Kamadeva (9) intoxicator)	myos byed
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེམས	alcoholic beverage / drink	myos byed kyi skyems
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མདའ	intoxicating arrow	myos byed kyi mda'
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཁང	tavern, brothel	myos byed khang
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཁང་པ	brothel	myos byed khang pa
མྱོས་བྱེད་འཁྲི་ཤིང	penis	myos byed 'khri shing
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཆུ་བོ	Rut-fluid, mala, danambhas	myos byed chu bo
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཐུར་མ	grouse	myos byed thur ma
མྱོས་བྱེད་འབྲིང	male organ, drunken man	myos byed 'bring
མྱོས་བྱེད་འཚོང	barmaid	myos byed 'tshong
མྱོས་བྱེད་ཟླ་བ	3rd month	myos byed zla ba
མྱོས་འབྱེད་ལྕགས་ཀྱུ	intoxicating hook, penis	myos 'byed lcags kyu
མྱོས་མ	beautiful young woman	myos ma
མྱོས་མྱོས་པོ	unclear understanding [drink, disease]	myos myos po
མྱོས་ཟླ	7th month	myos zla
མྱོས་གསལ་མ	youthful accomplished woman	myos gsal ma
མྲི་ཏམ་ག	[Syn {rnga zlum}, round drum	mri tam ga
མྲི་ཏམ་གི	Round Drum Goddess	mri tam gi
མྲེ་མེ་རླུང་ལྟ་བུས	extinguished just as wind puts out a lamp	mre me rlung lta bus
གམ་ཕམ	invincible	gma pham
གམ་ཕམ་པ	Maitreya	gma pham pa
གམ་ཡིན་དགག	affirming negation/ negative	gma yin dgag
གམང་ལུག	predominant custom	gmang lug
གམིག་གི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense-field of the eye	gmig gi skye mched
གམོས་པ་སྤྱོད་པའི་གང་ཟག	person on the stage of devoted conduct {tshogs lam or {sbyor lam]	gmos pa spyod pa'i gang zag
དམག	1) combatant; 2) [battling, waging] war; 3) army, host troops, soldiers	dmag
དམག་ཀྲང	CH rank like LT Colonel	dmag krang
དམག་དཀྱུས	common/ regular soldier	dmag dkyus
དམག་བཀུར་ཁྱིམ་སྐྱོང	support the army and give preferential tratment to families of soldiers [mi dmangs dmag dpung la brtsi bkur byed pa &, gsar brje'i dmag mi'i khyim tshang la gzigs skyong byed pa]	dmag bkur khyim skyong
དམག་རྐང	land unit tax in soldiers	dmag rkang
དམག་རྐང་འཛུགས་པ	in former Tibetan govt military tax imposed in proportion to men, wealth and land of subject families	dmag rkang 'dzugs pa
དམག་རྐང་ས་རྟེན	land holdings as basis for tax obligation to send soldiers	dmag rkang sa rten
དམག་སྐྱོད	march [off], go to war	dmag skyod
དམག་སྐྱོད་བྱེད	march [off], go to war	dmag skyod byed
དམག་བསྐུལ	military recruitment	dmag bskul
དམག་བསྐུལ་རྒྱག	militarily recruit/ draft	dmag bskul rgyag
དམག་བསྐུལ་དང་ལེན	enlist for military service	dmag bskul dang len
དམག་བསྐུལ་དུས་བསྲིང	draft deferment	dmag bskul dus bsring
དམག་བསྐུལ་ནས	gathered an army	dmag bskul nas
དམག་བསྐུལ་ལམ་ལུགས	system of military recruiting/ conscription	dmag bskul lam lugs
དམག་བསྐྱོད	march, going to war	dmag bskyod
དམག་བསྐྱོད་བྱེད	march [off], go to war	dmag bskyod byed
དམག་ཁག	military unit/ group/ detachment	dmag khag
དམག་ཁང	soldiers's barracks	dmag khang
དམག་ཁུངས	[pertaining/ belonging to the] military	dmag khungs
དམག་ཁུལ	military district/ area	dmag khul
དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང	military district/ area headquarters	dmag khul khang
དམག་ཁོངས	[pertaining/ belonging to the] military	dmag khongs
དམག་ཁོངས་ནས་ཕྱིར་ལོག་པ	demobilize	dmag khongs nas phyir log pa
དམག་ཁོངས་ནས་ཕྱིར་ལོག་པའི	demobilized [from the military]	dmag khongs nas phyir log pa'i
དམག་ཁོངས་སུ་བཞུགས	joined the military	dmag khongs su bzhugs
དམག་ཁྱུ	troop of soldiers	dmag khyu
དམག་ཁྲལ	military tax	dmag khral
དམག་ཁྲལ་འགེལ་བ	impose a soldier gathering tax/ obligation dmag khral rgyug dgos pa'i sa zhing gi	dmag khral 'gel ba
དམག་ཁྲིམས	military/ martial law	dmag khrims
དམག་མཁོ	military needs/ supplies	dmag mkho
དམག་མཁོ་སྒྲིག་ཆས	military equipment	dmag mkho sgrig chas
དམག་མཁོ་སྒྲིག་ཆས་ཉུང་ཕྲི	reduction of military equipment, disarmament	dmag mkho sgrig chas nyung phri
དམག་མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་འདྲེན	military supply service	dmag mkho sgrub 'dren
དམག་མཁོའི་དངོས་རྫས	military needs/ supplies/ stores/ provisions	dmag mkho'i dngos rdzas
དམག་འཁྱམས	mercenary, soldier of fortune	dmag 'khyams
དམག་འཁྲི	military tax/ obligation/ responsibility of having to send soldiers/ serve as a soldier	dmag 'khri
དམག་འཁྲུག	wage war, battle, warfare [= 'khrug 'dzing, 'thab rtsod, g.yul 'gyed]	dmag 'khrug
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་གྲ་སྒྲིག	preparations to fight/ wage war	dmag 'khrug gi gra sgrig
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས	military discipline	dmag 'khrug gi sgrig khrims
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་འཇིགས་སྣང	military intimidation/ threats	dmag 'khrug gi 'jigs snang
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་འཇིགས་སྣང་སྐུལ	threaten w war	dmag 'khrug gi 'jigs snang skul
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་ཉེས་ཅན	war criminal	dmag 'khrug gi nyes can
དམག་འཁྲུག་གི་གནས་ཚུལ	state of war, war situation/ conditions/ news dmag 'khrug gi mtshams su skyel ba'i srid	dmag 'khrug gi gnas tshul
དམག་འཁྲུག་རྒྱག	to wage war	dmag 'khrug rgyag
དམག་འཁྲུག་པ	fight, wage war	dmag 'khrug pa
དམག་འཁྲུག་བྱེད	fight, wage war	dmag 'khrug byed
དམག་འཁྲུག་རློམ་པ	militant, warlike	dmag 'khrug rlom pa
དམག་འཁྲུག་ཤོར	to have a war break out	dmag 'khrug shor
དམག་འཁྲུག་སློང	to provoke a war	dmag 'khrug slong
དམག་འཁྲུག་སློང་མཁན	creator of causes and conditions of war, challenger, provoker/ inciter of a war, warmonger	dmag 'khrug slong mkhan
དམག་འཁྲུག་སློང་བ	to challenge	dmag 'khrug slong ba
དམག་འཁྲུག་བསླང་མཁན	creator of causes and conditions of war slong mkhan, challenger, provoker/ inciter of a war, war-monger	dmag 'khrug bslang mkhan
དམག་གར་འཆའ་བ	pitch a camp	dmag gar 'cha' ba
དམག་གི	military, militant	dmag gi
དམག་གི་གྲ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	make military preparations, establish military reserves	dmag gi gra sgrig byed pa
དམག་གི་སྔོན་དུ	army scouts	dmag gi sngon du
དམག་གི་སྔོན་དུ་རྒྱུ་བ	pioneer force	dmag gi sngon du rgyu ba
དམག་གི་གཏམ	talk of war or fighting	dmag gi gtam
དམག་གི་འདུ་བ	war gathering	dmag gi 'du ba
དམག་གི་འདྲེན་པ	general dmag gi nang du gnas pa'i ltung byed the downfall of remaining among soldiers dmag gi nang du gnas pa'i ltung byed the downfall of remaining among soldiers [among the ltung byed 'ba' zhig p...	dmag gi 'dren pa
དམག་གི་དཔའ་མར	military morale	dmag gi dpa' mar
དམག་གི་དཔུང་སྟོབས	military power	dmag gi dpung stobs
དམག་གི་དཔུང་ཚོགས་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four kinds of troops [rkang thang, rta pa, shing rta, glang chen]	dmag gi dpung tshogs yan lag bzhi
དམག་གི་དཔུང་སོག་པ	collect an army	dmag gi dpung sog pa
དམག་གི་སྨན་པ	military dr.	dmag gi sman pa
དམག་གི་ཚོགས	army	dmag gi tshogs
དམག་གི་ཚོགས་མང་པོ	a review of troops	dmag gi tshogs mang po
དམག་གི་ཡན་ལག	shing rta, rkang thang, rta dmag)	dmag gi yan lag
དམག་གི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	4 kinds of troops (glang	dmag gi yan lag bzhi
དམག་གི་རུ	brigade dmag gi ru bkod byed pa'i ltung byed the downfall of commanding/ directing military units dmag gi ru bkod byed pa'i ltung byed the downfall of commanding military units [R] dmag gi ru bkod ...	dmag gi ru
དམག་གི་ས་རྟེན	land unit basis of tax obligation of sending soldiers	dmag gi sa rten
དམག་གི་ས་གཞི	battle ground/ field	dmag gi sa gzhi
དམག་གིས་གང་བར་བྱས	filled with armed forces	dmag gis gang bar byas
དམག་གུར	military tent	dmag gur
དམག་གོས	uniform, military clothing	dmag gos
དམག་གྲ	war preparations	dmag gra
དམག་གྲ་སྒྲིག	make war preparations	dmag gra sgrig
དམག་གྲབས	war preparations	dmag grabs
དམག་གྲབས་སྒྲིག	make war preparations	dmag grabs sgrig
དམག་གྲབས་མེད་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	undefended/ open city	dmag grabs med pa'i grong khyer
དམག་གྲལ	rows/ ranks of soldiers	dmag gral
དམག་གྲུ	warship	dmag gru
དམག་གྲུའི་རུ་ཁག	naval fleet/ armada	dmag gru'i ru khag
དམག་གྲོགས	allies, allied forces	dmag grogs
དམག་གྲོན	military expenses/ costs	dmag gron
དམག་གླ	in former Tibetan govt wages given on first enlisting/ going to war by individual military commanders, enlisting soldiers, military wages	dmag gla
དམག་གླུ	military song, song praising valor dmag dgra bo'i btsan 'dzul 'khrug phyir	dmag glu
ཟློག་པ	counter-attack 2086	zlog pa
དམག་མགོ	front lines	dmag mgo
དམག་འགན་ཆག	get an exemption from military service	dmag 'gan chag
དམག་འགུགས་པ	summon/ gather up soldiers	dmag 'gugs pa
དམག་འགུལ	militant movement	dmag 'gul
དམག་འགུལ་བྱེད	make a militant movement	dmag 'gul byed
དམག་འགུལ་བྱེད་བཞིན་ཡོད་པ་རེད	are making a militant movement	dmag 'gul byed bzhin yod pa red
དམག་འགོ	military leader/ officer	dmag 'go
དམག་འགྱེད་པ	battle	dmag 'gyed pa
དམག་འགྲོ་བསྡུ་བསྐུལ	military recruiting/ conscription	dmag 'gro bsdu bskul
དམག་རྒོད་པོ	capable soldier	dmag rgod po
དམག་རྒོལ་ལན་སློག་པ	counter-attack	dmag rgol lan slog pa
དམག་རྒྱག	fight, make war, battle, combat, warfare	dmag rgyag
དམག་རྒྱག་པ	fight, wage war [syn 'khrug pa dang, 'khrug long, rgol ba, rdeg gsod, 'thab pa, 'thab rtzod, 'dzing pa, ga-yul 'gyed pa, ga-yul gshom pa]	dmag rgyag pa
དམག་རྒྱགས	military equipment/ supplies	dmag rgyags
དམག་རྒྱབ	fought, made war, fight, battle, combat, warfare	dmag rgyab
དམག་རྒྱབ་པ	war	dmag rgyab pa
དམག་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས	militarism	dmag rgyal ring lugs
དམག་སྒར	military encampment, barracks, military camp, battalion	dmag sgar
དམག་སྒར་རྒྱག	station/ billet troops, build barracks, set up camp	dmag sgar rgyag
དམག་སྒར་ཆེ་བ	regiment	dmag sgar che ba
དམག་སྒར་གནས་ས	military compound/ residential area	dmag sgar gnas sa
དམག་སྒྲིག་པ	1) make military preparations, establish military reserves; 2) arrange/ put soldiers in lines/ rows	dmag sgrig pa
དམག་བརྒྱ་པ	{dmag brgya pa} [king of the Shakya clan of the licchavis]	dmag brgya pa
དམག་བརྒྱ་བ	{rgya gar gyi rgyal po dmag brgya ba} an Indian king called Satanika; father of Nyatri Tsenpo	dmag brgya ba
དམག་བཅུག་གོ	sent an army	dmag bcug go
དམག་བཅུག་ནས	set loose his armies	dmag bcug nas
དམག་བཅུག་པ	set forth with their army	dmag bcug pa
དམག་ཆག	tax deduction for having sent soldiers	dmag chag
དམག་ཆས	military stores, requisites for war, ammunition, equipment	dmag chas
དམག་ཆས་འགྲན་བསྡུར	arms race	dmag chas 'gran bsdur
དམག་ཆས་འཕྲི	arms reduction, reduce armaments	dmag chas 'phri
དམག་ཆས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	arms/ ordnance factory	dmag chas bzo grwa
དམག་ཆས་བཟོ་ལས	arms industry	dmag chas bzo las
དམག་ཆེན	full scale/ all-out/ world war	dmag chen
དམག་ཆེན་གཉིས་པ	World War II	dmag chen gnyis pa
དམག་ཆེན་དང་པོ	World War I	dmag chen dang po
དམག་ཆེན་གསུམ་པ	World War III dmag jag gi sgo nas yul khams mang po	dmag chen gsum pa
བཏུལ་ཏེ་མངའ་འོག་ཏུ་བཙུད	subjugated and annexed a large number of countries by force of arms	btul te mnga' 'og tu btsud
དམག་ཇུས	military strategy/ tactics	dmag jus
དམག་ཇུས་ལས་ཁུངས	general staff headquarters	dmag jus las khungs
དམག་འཇོན་པོ	capable soldier	dmag 'jon po
དམག་གཏོང	send troops	dmag gtong
དམག་གཏོས	# count of soldiers	dmag gtos
དམག་རྟ	cavalry mount	dmag rta
དམག་རྟེན	land holdings as basis for tax obligation to send soldiers	dmag rten
དམག་སྟོང་རྟ་ཁྲི	thousands of men and 10s of thousands of horses, unstoppable army	dmag stong rta khri
དམག་སྟོབས	military power	dmag stobs
དམག་ཐང	military parade/ drill ground	dmag thang
དམག་ཐུག	be engaged at war/ in battle	dmag thug
དམག་ཐོབ	attain victory, win a battle/ war	dmag thob
དམག་ཐོབ་དངོས་རྫས	spoils/ booty of victory/ war	dmag thob dngos rdzas
དམག་ཐོབ་པ	attain victory, win a battle/ war	dmag thob pa
དམག་འཐབ	war[fare, battle, fight	dmag 'thab
དམག་འཐབ་གྱི་དགོས་པ	needs/ purposes of war[fare]	dmag 'thab gyi dgos pa
དམག་འཐབ་གྱི་དགོས་པ་ལྟར	according to the needs/ purposes of war[fare]	dmag 'thab gyi dgos pa ltar
དམག་འཐབ་ཆུང་ཆུང	skirmish	dmag 'thab chung chung
དམག་འཐབ་བྱེད	wage war[fare], battle, fight	dmag 'thab byed
དམག་འཐབ་བྱེད་པ	to fight a battle	dmag 'thab byed pa
དམག་འཐབ་ལ་དགའ་པོ	warlike	dmag 'thab la dga' po
དམག་འཐེན	withdraw/ demobilize troops, retreat	dmag 'then
དམག་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི	martial	dmag dang 'brel ba'i
དམག་དར	military banner/ standard/ colors	dmag dar
དམག་དུང	war-trumpet bugle	dmag dung
དམག་དོད	payment in lieu of sending soldier	dmag dod
དམག་དོད་ལག་འཛིན	payment instead of sending soldiers	dmag dod lag 'dzin
དམག་དོན	military affairs	dmag don
དམག་དོན་རྐྱང་པའི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	purely military viewpoint	dmag don rkyang pa'i lta tshul
དམག་དོན་ཁོ་ནའི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	purely military viewpoint	dmag don kho na'i lta tshul
དམག་དོན་ཁྲིམས་ར	court martial, military court	dmag don khrims ra
དམག་དོན་མཁས་པ	military expert	dmag don mkhas pa
དམག་དོན་འཁྲུག་རྐྱེན	military provocation	dmag don 'khrug rkyen
དམག་དོན་གྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	military viewpoint	dmag don gyi lta tshul
དམག་དོན་གྱི་བློ་འདྲི་ས	military advisor	dmag don gyi blo 'dri sa
དམག་དོན་གྱི་ལག་འདོན་འགྲོ་སོང	military expenses/ costs	dmag don gyi lag 'don 'gro song
དམག་དོན་གྲུ་ཁ	military port/ harbor/ dock	dmag don gru kha
དམག་དོན་རྟེན་གཞི	military/ war base	dmag don rten gzhi
དམག་དོན་ཐོག་གི་དགྲར་སློང	military conflict	dmag don thog gi dgrar slong
དམག་དོན་དུ་འགྱུར	become militarized/ a military affair dmag don do dam u yon lhan khang military government/ administration	dmag don du 'gyur
དམག་དོན་མནའ་མཐུན	military alliance	dmag don mna' mthun
དམག་དོན་པ	military strategist	dmag don pa
དམག་དོན་ཚོགས་ཁག	military bloc	dmag don tshogs khag
དམག་དོན་སྲིད་འགྱུར	military coup d'etat	dmag don srid 'gyur
དམག་དྲངས	draw up an army	dmag drangs
དམག་བདག	dmag mi glas nas gtong mkhan do bdag	dmag bdag
དམག་འདྲེན	to lead troops into battle	dmag 'dren
དམག་འདྲེན་པ	lead an army, wage war, send troops/ a military expedition	dmag 'dren pa
དམག་ལྡོག་པ	dmag phar tshur log pa,//dgra sde tshar bcad nas dmag ldog pa	dmag ldog pa
དམག་སྡེ	army, military forces/ division	dmag sde
དམག་སྡེ་བརྒྱད་པ	8th route army [PRC]	dmag sde brgyad pa
དམག་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་གྲངས	enumeration of army forces	dmag sde chen po rnam grangs
དམག་སྡེ་བཞི་པ་གསར་པ	the new 4th army [PRC]	dmag sde bzhi pa gsar pa
དམག་སྡོད	resident troops	dmag sdod
དམག་སྡོད་ས་སློག	cultivation of land by resident troops	dmag sdod sa slog
དམག་བརྡ	1) military signals/ message/ symbols/ emblems; 2) soldier calling signal; 3) declaration of war 2087	dmag brda
དམག་བརྡ་གཏོང	declare war	dmag brda gtong
དམག་ནང་མ	troops 1 can trust	dmag nang ma
དམག་རྣམས་ཕམ	the forces were conquered	dmag rnams pham
དམག་སྣེ་མཁན	person who shows the way to an army	dmag sne mkhan
དམག་པ	soldier, private	dmag pa
དམག་དཔའ	dmag dpa' pass [si khron province]	dmag dpa'
དམག་དཔུང	army, assembly of many soldiers [syn: dpung dang, dpung gi dkyil 'khor, dpung gi tsogs, dmag sgar, dmag tsogs, yan lag bzhi pa]	dmag dpung
དམག་དཔུང་ཁག	military units	dmag dpung khag
དམག་དཔུང་ཁག་མང	many military units	dmag dpung khag mang
དམག་དཔུང་ཁག་མང་ཚོགས་པ	army, military forces, troops, assembly of many military units	dmag dpung khag mang tshogs pa
དམག་དཔུང་གི་དུང	bugle, military horn	dmag dpung gi dung
དམག་དཔུང་གི་ཟིང་གློང	mutiny [of troops]	dmag dpung gi zing glong
དམག་དཔུང་གིས་མཐའ་བསྐོར་བ	siege	dmag dpung gis mtha' bskor ba
དམག་དཔུང་མཉམ་འཛོམས	combined forces/ troops	dmag dpung mnyam 'dzoms
དམག་དཔུང་མཉམ་འཛོམས་བྱེད	combine forces/ troops	dmag dpung mnyam 'dzoms byed
དམག་དཔུང་བསྡུས	{dge bsnyen nyer gcig la sogs mi dang mi ma yin rnams kyi dmag dpung bsdus} the twenty-one genyen, accompanied by humans and	dmag dpung bsdus
དམག་དཔུང་ཕྱིར་འཐེན	withdraw/ pull back troops/ forces	dmag dpung phyir 'then
དམག་དཔུང་ཕྱིར་འཐེན་བྱེད	withdraw/ pull back troops/ forces	dmag dpung phyir 'then byed
དམག་དཔུང་འཛུགས	build up the army/ military	dmag dpung 'dzugs
དམག་དཔུང་རིགས་གསུམ	the three branches of the military ]army navy air force, mkha' dmag, mtso dmag, rkang dmag bcas dmag mi'i rtza ba'i dbye ba gsum]	dmag dpung rigs gsum
དམག་དཔོན	officer, warlord, general, commander	dmag dpon
དམག་དཔོན་གོ་གནས་ཞིག	marshal	dmag dpon go gnas zhig
དམག་དཔོན་གྱི་གོ་གནས་ཞིག	sergeant	dmag dpon gyi go gnas zhig
དམག་དཔོན་ངན་པ	evil officer, war lord	dmag dpon ngan pa
དམག་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	high military officer	dmag dpon chen po
དམག་དཔོན་བྱེད་པ	make into a military commander	dmag dpon byed pa
དམག་དཔོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious general	dmag dpon rin po che
དམག་སྤུང	armies	dmag spung
དམག་སྤོ་བ	move/ change the position of troops	dmag spo ba
དམག་སྤྱི	commander-in-chief	dmag spyi
དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང	army headquarters	dmag spyi khang
དམག་སྤྱི་ལས་ཁུངས	[former Tibetan govt bod sa gnas[regional?? overall??] military headquarters, commander in chief's headquarters	dmag spyi las khungs
དམག་སྤྱོད	[pertaining to] military [needs/ use]	dmag spyod
དམག་སྤྱོད་གནམ་གྲུ	military planes	dmag spyod gnam gru
དམག་ཕམ	be defeated in/ lose a war	dmag pham
དམག་ཕོགས	military salaries	dmag phogs
དམག་ཕྱགས	Tibetan govt compulsory military tax/ obligation	dmag phyags
དམག་འཕྲིན	dmag gtam gyi lan, military letter/ postal service/ mail/ message/ news	dmag 'phrin
དམག་བྱས་པ	the army was made ready	dmag byas pa
དམག་བྱུས	military strategy, tactics	dmag byus
དམག་བྱུས་ལས་ཁུངས	general staff headquarters	dmag byus las khungs
དམག་བློན	military officer	dmag blon
དམག་འབངས	civil and military, army and people	dmag 'bangs
དམག་འབངས་གཅིག་མཐུན	civil and military/ army and people united	dmag 'bangs gcig mthun
དམག་འབྲུ	military equipment/ supplies	dmag 'bru
དམག་སྦྱོང	military training/ drill/ maneuvers	dmag sbyong
དམག་སྦྱོང་བ	drill	dmag sbyong ba
དམག་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	carry out military training/ drill/ maneuvers	dmag sbyong byed
དམག་སྦྲོན་པ	summon soldiers	dmag sbron pa
དམག་མ	soldier, private	dmag ma
དམག་མི	soldier	dmag mi
དམག་མི་བཀྲམ་ཐིག	front/ picket line	dmag mi bkram thig
དམག་མི་བཀྲུས	deploy soldiers/ troops	dmag mi bkrus
དམག་མི་སྟར་སྒྲིག་པ	arrange/ put soldiers in lines/ rows	dmag mi star sgrig pa
དམག་མི་དང་མི་དམངས	army and people, military and civilian	dmag mi dang mi dmangs
དམག་མི་སྡུད	draft/ conscript soldiers	dmag mi sdud
དམག་མི་བྱེད	serve as/ become a soldier	dmag mi byed
དམག་མི་བྱེད་རིང་ལ	while [they] are serving as soldiers	dmag mi byed ring la
དམག་མི་ལེན་པ	civilian	dmag mi len pa
དམག་མིའི་ཁྱིམ་ཚང	families/ dependents of soldiers	dmag mi'i khyim tshang
དམག་མིའི་ཁྱོན་འབོར	# count of soldiers	dmag mi'i khyon 'bor
དམག་མིའི་ནང་མི	families/ dependents of soldiers	dmag mi'i nang mi
དམག་མིའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	army general, commander in chief	dmag mi'i spyi khyab
དམག་མིའི་རོགས་བྱེད་མཁན་དམག	relief troops, reinforcements	dmag mi'i rogs byed mkhan dmag
དམག་མིར་གཞག	join the military, serve as a soldier	dmag mir gzhag
དམག་དམངས	army and people, military and civilian	dmag dmangs
དམག་རྩལ	military drills/ exercises	dmag rtsal
དམག་རྩལ་དགེ་རྒན	military teacher/ drill instructor	dmag rtsal dge rgan
དམག་རྩལ་བཅའ་མིག	military training code	dmag rtsal bca' mig
དམག་རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བརྡར	military training	dmag rtsal sbyong brdar
དམག་རྩེད	military drill/ exercises/ marching	dmag rtsed
དམག་རྩེད་རྩེ	do military drill/ exercises, march, parade	dmag rtsed rtse
དམག་ཚུགས	military station	dmag tshugs
དམག་ཚོགས	army, military forces, troops, assembly of many military units	dmag tshogs
དམག་ཚོགས་གཅིག་གི་དམག་དཔོན	brigadier	dmag tshogs gcig gi dmag dpon
དམག་ཚོགས་སྣོན་མ	reinforcements, auxiliary troops	dmag tshogs snon ma
དམག་ཚོགས་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	demilitarize	dmag tshogs med par bzo ba
དམག་མཚམས	cease fire, truce	dmag mtshams
དམག་མཚམས་འཇོག	make an armistice/	dmag mtshams 'jog
ཅེཨསེ	fire	cease
དམག་མཚམས་བཞག	made an armistice/ cease-fire	dmag mtshams bzhag
དམག་འཛུགས	build up the army/ military	dmag 'dzugs
དམག་འཛུགས་དུས་ཆེན	Army Day, August 1 PRC	dmag 'dzugs dus chen
དམག་འཛོམས	mobilization	dmag 'dzoms
དམག་འཛོམས་བྱེད	call up/ mobilize troops	dmag 'dzoms byed
དམག་ཞབ༹	soldier's hat 2088	dmag zhva
དམག་ཞུགས	military service, join the army, serve as a soldier	dmag zhugs
དམག་ཞུགས་དུས་བསྲིང	military service deferment	dmag zhugs dus bsring
དམག་ཞེན་རིང་ལུགས	militarism	dmag zhen ring lugs
དམག་ཟིང	war	dmag zing
དམག་ཟིང་ལངས	be in a state of war	dmag zing langs
དམག་ཟོར	army repelling malign sorcery torma	dmag zor
དམག་ཟོར་རྒྱལ་མོ	Shri Devi	dmag zor rgyal mo
དམག་ཟློག་པ	drive back/ expel an opposing army	dmag zlog pa
དམག་གཟིགས	military/ troop review	dmag gzigs
དམག་རྭ	[military] trench	dmag rwa
དམག་རིགས	different kinds of soldiers/ military forces/ branches	dmag rigs
དམག་རུ	military unit, section	dmag ru
དམག་རུབ	many military units at 1 time and place engaging in combat, pincer attack	dmag rub
དམག་རུབ་རྒྱག་པ	engage in combat w many military units at 1 time and place, make a pincer attack	dmag rub rgyag pa
དམག་རུམ	darkness	dmag rum
དམག་རོགས	relief troops, reinforcements	dmag rogs
དམག་ལ་ཇུས་ལེགས་པ	dexterous in military matters	dmag la jus legs pa
དམག་ལ་ལྟ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of looking at soldiers	dmag la lta ba'i ltung byed
དམག་ལ་ཞུགས	military service, join the army, serve as a soldier	dmag la zhugs
དམག་ལན	counter-attack/ offensive	dmag lan
དམག་ལན་འཇལ་བ	counter-attack	dmag lan 'jal ba
དམག་ལན་སློག་པ	counter-attack	dmag lan slog pa
དམག་ལས	military activities/ affairs	dmag las
དམག་ལིངས	general chase	dmag lings
དམག་ལོག	counter-attack/ offensive, fight back, go on the offensive	dmag log
དམག་ལོག་རྒྱག	make a counter-attack/ offensive, fight back, go on the offensive [rgya dmar la dmag log: fighting back against the red CH]	dmag log rgyag
དམག་ཤུགས	military force/ power/ strength	dmag shugs
དམག་ཤུགས་ཉུང་འཕྲི	reduce/ reduction in military force/ power/ strength	dmag shugs nyung 'phri
དམག་ཤུགས་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	depending on military force/ power dmag shugs la brten nas srid dbang 'dzin	dmag shugs la brten nas
དམག་ཤེད	military force	dmag shed
དམག་ཤེད་ཅན	1 who takes over the government by military force, militarist, warlord	dmag shed can
དམག་ཤེད་རིང་ལུགས	militarism, war-lordism	dmag shed ring lugs
དམག་ཤོར	lose a battle/ war	dmag shor
དམག་ས	battlefield	dmag sa
དམག་ས་བརྗེ་བ	move/ change the position of troops dmag sa'i bar du chod pa'i rgyal khab buffer state	dmag sa brje ba
དམག་སའི་དམག་འཐབ	positional warfare	dmag sa'i dmag 'thab
དམག་སེམས	military mind/ will	dmag sems
དམག་སྲིད	military and political	dmag srid
དམག་སྲིད་འགོ་པ	military and political leaders	dmag srid 'go pa
དམག་གསེབ	army	dmag gseb
དམག་བསྲུང་དུ་བཏང	sent to protect against the army	dmag bsrung du btang
དམག་ཧྲག	capable soldier	dmag hrag
དམངས	populace, mob, common fold	dmangs
དམངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུང	popular/ folk story	dmangs kyi sgrung
དམངས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་ནད	popular enmity/ indication	dmangs kyi snying nad
དམངས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་མོ	banquet for the public	dmangs kyi ston mo
དམངས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ	the wishes of the people/ public/ masses	dmangs kyi 'dod pa
དམངས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ་དན་བསྟུན	in accord w the wishes of the people/ public/ masses	dmangs kyi 'dod pa dan bstun
དམངས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ་དན་བསྟུན་ནས	in accord w the wishes of the people/ public/ masses	dmangs kyi 'dod pa dan bstun nas
དམངས་ཀྱི་འདོད་པ་དན་བསྟུན་པ	in accord w the wishes of the people/ public/ masses	dmangs kyi 'dod pa dan bstun pa
དམངས་དཀྱུས	'go dpon rigs phud pa'i spyi byings kyi mi dkyus ma rnams	dmangs dkyus
དམངས་ཁྲོད	common masses, [crowd of] common people, the folk	dmangs khrod
དམངས་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་རིག་རྩལ	folk art/ literature	dmangs khrod kyi rig rtsal
དམངས་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་རིག་རྩལ་པ	folk/ people's artist/ performer, writer of people's/ folk literature	dmangs khrod kyi rig rtsal pa
དམངས་ཁྲོད་སྒྱུ་རྩལ་རུ་ཁག	folk arts group/ troupe	dmangs khrod sgyu rtsal ru khag
དམངས་གྱི་སྟོན་མོ་འགྱེད་པ	distribute the viands of the table to the common people	dmangs gyi ston mo 'gyed pa
དམངས་གླུ	folk song	dmangs glu
དམངས་སྒྲུང	popular/ folk story	dmangs sgrung
དམངས་གཅེས	valuing/ cherishing the people	dmangs gces
དམངས་གཅེས་བྱེད	value/ cherish the people	dmangs gces byed
དམངས་ཆང	low quality/ ordinary/ inferior chang	dmangs chang
དམངས་ཆས	commoner dress/ things	dmangs chas
དམངས་གཏམ་གླེང་ཕྱོགས	public opinion	dmangs gtam gleng phyogs
དམངས་དོ་ཧ	Common People Dohas *, folk-song	dmangs do ha
དམངས་དོན	public affairs	dmangs don
དམངས་འདུལ་གནས	gown, city	dmangs 'dul gnas
དམངས་འདོད	popular opinion, wishes/ will of the people	dmangs 'dod
དམངས་འདོད་ཚོང་ལེན	public opinion poll	dmangs 'dod tshong len
དམངས་པོ	people	dmangs po
དམངས་སྤྱི་བྱིངས	majority of/ all the common people	dmangs spyi byings
དམངས་སྤྱོད	civil[ian], public	dmangs spyod
དམངས་སྤྱོད་མཁའ་འགུལ	civil aviation/ airlines	dmangs spyod mkha' 'gul
དམངས་སྤྱོད་གྲུ་གཟིངས	passenger ship	dmangs spyod gru gzings
དམངས་སྤྱོད་གནམ་གྲུ	passenger plane	dmangs spyod gnam gru
དམངས་ཕལ་པ	ordinary people	dmangs phal pa
དམངས་བྱིངས	majority of/ all the common people	dmangs byings
དམངས་མ	common people	dmangs ma
དམངས་མིང་ཅན	common people	dmangs ming can
དམངས་མོ	woman of low caste	dmangs mo
དམངས་གཙོ	democracy, democratic	dmangs gtso
དམངས་གཙོ་ཁོ་ན	pure/ absolute democracy dmangs gtso kho nas 'dzin pa'i srid dbang - pure/ absolute democratic dictatorship, dictatorship of the people	dmangs gtso kho na
དམངས་གཙོ་མགོ་གནན	bourgeois democracy	dmangs gtso mgo gnan
དམངས་གཙོ་གཅིག་སྡུད་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས	democratic centralism [R]	dmangs gtso gcig sdud kyi lam lugs
དམངས་གཙོ་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	democratic reforms	dmangs gtso bcos bsgyur
དམངས་གཙོ་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་གཏོང	make democratic reforms	dmangs gtso bcos bsgyur gtong
དམངས་གཙོ་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	make democratic reforms	dmangs gtso bcos bsgyur byed
དམངས་གཙོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	three great democratics	dmangs gtso chen po gsum
དམངས་གཙོ་ཐལ་ཆེ་བ	ultrademocracy	dmangs gtso thal che ba
དམངས་གཙོ་མནའ་མཐུན	democratic alliance	dmangs gtso mna' mthun
དམངས་གཙོ་སྤྱི་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	democratic republic	dmangs gtso spyi mthun rgyal khab
དམངས་གཙོ་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	Democratic Party US	dmangs gtso phyogs khag
དམངས་གཙོ་ཚོགས་སྔ	Democratic Party US	dmangs gtso tshogs snga
དམངས་གཙོ་ཚོགས་པ	Democratic Party US	dmangs gtso tshogs pa
དམངས་གཙོའི་གྲོས་མོལ	democratic discussion	dmangs gtso'i gros mol
དམངས་གཙོའི་གྲོས་མོལ་བྱེད	hold democratic discussions/ negotiations	dmangs gtso'i gros mol byed
དམངས་གཙོའི་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	democratic reforms [R]	dmangs gtso'i bcos bsgyur
དམངས་གཙོའི་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་གཏོང	make democratic reforms	dmangs gtso'i bcos bsgyur gtong
དམངས་གཙོའི་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	make democratic reforms	dmangs gtso'i bcos bsgyur byed
དམངས་གཙོའི་ཏང་ཕྱའེ	democratic parties	dmangs gtso'i tang phya'e
དམངས་གཙོའི་འདེམས་བསྐོ	democratic elections	dmangs gtso'i 'dems bsko
དམངས་གཙོའི་སྤྱི་མཐུན	democratic way of doing things	dmangs gtso'i spyi mthun
དམངས་གཙོའི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ	democratic way of doing things	dmangs gtso'i spyod tshul
དམངས་གཙོའི་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	Democratic Party US	dmangs gtso'i phyogs khag
དམངས་གཙོའི་མི་སྣ	democratic elements, democrats	dmangs gtso'i mi sna
དམངས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས	democracy	dmangs gtso'i ring lugs
དམངས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས་པ	democrat dmangs gtso'i ring lugs gsar pa'i gsar brje the new democratic revolution	dmangs gtso'i ring lugs pa
དམངས་གཙོའི་སྲིད་འཛུགས	development/building of democracy	dmangs gtso'i srid 'dzugs
དམངས་གཙོའི་གསར་བརྗེ	democratic revolution	dmangs gtso'i gsar brje
དམངས་བཙུགས	organized/ started by the people	dmangs btsugs
དམངས་བཙུགས་གཞུང་རོགས	organized/ started by the people and assisted by the government	dmangs btsugs gzhung rogs
དམངས་རྩམ	low quality tsampa [R]	dmangs rtsam
དམངས་ཚོགས	the masses/ public	dmangs tshogs
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འདུ་འཛོམ	mass rally	dmangs tshogs kyi 'du 'dzom
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལ་ཕྱོགས	mass line	dmangs tshogs kyi la phyogs
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལ་ཕྱོགས་ལག་ལེན	implement the mass line	dmangs tshogs kyi la phyogs lag len
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལས་འགུལ	mass movement/ company	dmangs tshogs kyi las 'gul
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བཤད་ཚུལ	public opinion	dmangs tshogs kyi bshad tshul
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཅན	popular	dmangs tshogs can
དམངས་ཚོགས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	become popular	dmangs tshogs can du 'gyur
དམངས་ཚོགས་ལྟ་ཚུལ	mass viewpoint, public opinion dmangs tshogs dang tha dad du 'gyur become isolated/ alienated from/ lose touch w the masses	dmangs tshogs lta tshul
དམངས་ཚོགས་དང་མཐུན་པ	in harmony/ touch w the masses, popular	dmangs tshogs dang mthun pa
དམངས་འཚོ	standard of living of the masses	dmangs 'tsho
དམངས་འཛུགས	organized/ started by the people	dmangs 'dzugs
དམངས་གཞས	folk/ local song	dmangs gzhas
དམངས་འུལ	bricklaying/ construction unskilled worker's tax obligation]	dmangs 'ul
དམངས་ཡོངས	all the/ the whole people	dmangs yongs
དམངས་རིགས	lowest class, lowest caste in india, menial class, 1 of rigs bzhi	dmangs rigs
དམངས་རིགས་མ	commoner woman	dmangs rigs ma
དམངས་སྲིད	civil administration	dmangs srid
དམད	abuse, cursing	dmad
དམད་པ	abuse, curse [-ing], swear [at], insult, defame	dmad pa
དམན	low, inferior, lowly, modest [comp dman pa]	dman
དམན་འགེངས	rkang gdub	dman 'gengs
དམན་ཆ་བཟུང	dma' sa bzung ba ste khengs skyung gi rnam 'gyur	dman cha bzung
དམན་ཆུང	young girl	dman chung
དམན་དང་མཆོག་ཏུ་གནས	low and supreme	dman dang mchog tu gnas
དམན་གནས	lower abodes	dman gnas
དམན་པ་ངན་སློང	the lowly and the poor	dman pa ngan slong
དམན་པ་ཉིད	deficiency	dman pa nyid
དམན་པ་དང་གྱ་ནོམ་པ	low and excellent dman pa dang 'bring dang khyad par can inferior, middling, and excellent	dman pa dang gya nom pa
དམན་པ་འབྲིང་མཆོག	inferior, middling, and excellent	dman pa 'bring mchog
དམན་པ་ལ་དགག་པའི་སྒྲ་སྦྱར་བ	speak words hindering what is base	dman pa la dgag pa'i sgra sbyar ba
དམན་པ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བའི་ལེ་ལོ	exertion in cutting off life and such unvirtuous activities	dman pa la sbyor ba'i le lo
དམན་པ་ལ་མོས་པ	humble devotion, seeing the lower states	dman pa la mos pa
དམན་པ་ས་བརྒྱད	the 8 lower stages, [shravakas and pratyekabuddhas]	dman pa sa brgyad
དམན་པའི་དགེ་བ	inferior virtuous actions	dman pa'i dge ba
དམན་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	low obscurations	dman pa'i sgrib pa
དམན་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	low pride	dman pa'i nga rgyal
དམན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	hinayana, the lesser vehicle	dman pa'i theg pa
དམན་པའི་གདུལ་བྱ	inferior students	dman pa'i gdul bya
དམན་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ལྔ	the five inferior conducts [explained in the vinaya chad las kyi precept taking beings gis dman pa'i spyod pa lnga dang du len dgos pa ste, nangs par dge slong rang bzhin du gnas pa rnams las snga ...	dman pa'i spyod pa lnga
དམན་པའི་བློ	inferior intellect	dman pa'i blo
དམན་པའི་རིགས	lowest people in india	dman pa'i rigs
དམན་པའི་ས་པ	the lowest place	dman pa'i sa pa
དམན་པའི་ས་བཟུང	take the lowest seat	dman pa'i sa bzung
དམན་པའི་སེམས	low attitude	dman pa'i sems
དམན་པར་མོས	humble devotion	dman par mos
དམན་པོ	bad inferior	dman po
དམན་སྤྲང་སློང	humble beggars	dman sprang slong
དམན་བའི་མྱང་འདས	lesser nirvana	dman ba'i myang 'das
དམན་བར་མཆོག་གསུམ	inferior, middling, excellent	dman bar mchog gsum
དམན་མ	old, stale, not fresh	dman ma
དམན་མི་ཤིམ་པ	disagreeable	dman mi shim pa
དམན་མོ	bad, inferior, despicable, common	dman mo
དམན་མོས་པ	lesser aspiration of relative reality	dman mos pa
དམན་མོས་སེམས་ཅན	beings seeing lower states	dman mos sems can
དམན་མཛེས	beautiful woman	dman mdzes
དམན་མཛེས་མ	beautiful woman	dman mdzes ma
དམན་རིགས	the lowest caste, outcast, wildmen	dman rigs
དམན་ལམ	the lower path(s) [shravakas and pratyekabuddhas]	dman lam
དམན་ཤར	maiden, growing girl, young woman	dman shar
དམན་ས	to remain humble, to keep a low profile; a low seat/ a low profile	dman sa
དམན་ས་འཛིན	remain humble	dman sa 'dzin
དམན་ས་འཛིན་པ	to remain humble	dman sa 'dzin pa
དམན་ས་བཟུང	keep a low profile, be modest, remain humble	dman sa bzung
དམན་ས་བཟུང་བ	modest	dman sa bzung ba
དམན་ས་འཟིན	x {rtag tu dman sa 'zin} always take a low position	dman sa 'zin
དམན་སེལ	exorcism of misfortunes	dman sel
དམན་ལྷག་ལོག	too little too much or the wrong kind [med.]	dman lhag log
དམའ	below	dma'
དམའ་སྐྱབ	protector of the humble, king	dma' skyab
དམའ་སྐྱོབ	king	dma' skyob
དམའ་གྲས	lower/ subordinate level	dma' gras
དམའ་ཆགས	to lower, depress	dma' chags
དམའ་ཆགས་པ	crestfallen	dma' chags pa
དམའ་བརྗོད	slander	dma' brjod
དམའ་ཐབ	open hearth furnace	dma' thab
དམའ་འདོད	inclination to go down, tendency to meanness	dma' 'dod
དམའ་གནོན	low pressure	dma' gnon
དམའ་པོ	low	dma' po
དམའ་ཕབ	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliation, disgrace, degradation	dma' phab
དམའ་ཕབ་གཏོང	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliate, disgrace, degrade	dma' phab gtong
དམའ་ཕབ་བྱེད	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliate, disgrace, degrade	dma' phab byed
དམའ་བ	1) low[ness]; 2) bad poor; 3) be low	dma' ba
དམའ་བབས་པ	bring down, curse	dma' babs pa
དམའ་བའི་སྟན	low seat	dma' ba'i stan
དམའ་བའི་ས	lower seat; x {rab tu dma' ba'i sa la 'dug} take the lowest seat	dma' ba'i sa
དམའ་བར་གྱུར	flattened, leveled	dma' bar gyur
དམའ་འབེབ	abasement, degrading, abashment, dishonor	dma' 'beb
དམའ་འབེབ་བྱེད་པ	to degrade, abase	dma' 'beb byed pa
དམའ་འབེབས	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliation, disgrace, degradation	dma' 'bebs
དམའ་འབེབས་ཀྱི	defamatory	dma' 'bebs kyi
དམའ་འབེབས་བརྙས་བཅོས	skyon 'dzugs khyad gsod,//mi la dma' 'bebs brnyas bcos ma byed	dma' 'bebs brnyas bcos
དམའ་འབེབས་གཏོང	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliate, disgrace, degrade	dma' 'bebs gtong
དམའ་འབེབས་པ	dishonor, profane, humiliate	dma' 'bebs pa
དམའ་འབེབས་བྱེད	publicly condemn/ belittle another, humiliate, disgrace, degrade	dma' 'bebs byed
དམའ་འབེབས་བྱེད་པ	abase, defame, degrade, disgrace, humiliate, malign	dma' 'bebs byed pa
དམའ་འབྱིན	by condemning belittle, blame, censure, reproach, reprimand	dma' 'byin
དམའ་འབྱིན་བྱེད	by condemning belittle, blame, censure, reproach, reprimand	dma' 'byin byed
དམའ་མོ	1) low[ness]; 2) bad, poor, inferior	dma' mo
དམའ་རིམ	elementary, primary, low-level	dma' rim
དམའ་རིམ་མཐོ་བའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	secondary school	dma' rim mtho ba'i slob grwa
དམའ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ	elementary/ primary school	dma' rim slob grwa
དམའ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་བ	elementary school	dma' rim slob grwa chung ba
དམའ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་འབྲིང་བ	middle school	dma' rim slob grwa 'bring ba
དམའ་རིམ་སློབ་གསོ	elementary education	dma' rim slob gso
དམའ་རུ་འགྲོ	go lower, become inferior	dma' ru 'gro
དམའ་རུ་གཏོང	lower[ing], make inferior	dma' ru gtong
དམའ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	lower	dma' ru gtong ba
དམའ་རུ་ཕྱིན	went lower	dma' ru phyin
དམའ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	abate	dma' ru phyin pa
དམའ་རུ་སོང་བ	degenerated	dma' ru song ba
དམའ་རླབས	low tide	dma' rlabs
དམའ་ས	low place/ area/ rank	dma' sa
དམའ་ས་འཛིན་པ	to take the lowest position {nga rgyal spangs nas dma' sa 'dzin pa phyags dar ba lta bu} like a sweeper, we should never be proud but take the lowest position	dma' sa 'dzin pa
དམའ་ས་ཟིན	act humble, be modest	dma' sa zin
དམའ་སེམས	depressed, discouraged, humble	dma' sems
དམར	blood[y], profit, gain, good success, red[dish], fresh, raw, direct [comp dmar po]	dmar
དམར་ཀོ	untanned leather/skin	dmar ko
དམར་རྐྱང	crimson	dmar rkyang
དམར་རྐྱང་གི་དར་ཆ	bright red flag	dmar rkyang gi dar cha
དམར་རྐྱང་གི་རིན་འབབ	payment in cash	dmar rkyang gi rin 'bab
དམར་སྐྱ	pink, light red	dmar skya
དམར་སྐྱང་ལྟ་བུ	reddish brown	dmar skyang lta bu
དམར་ཁམས	{dmar khams} district	dmar khams
དམར་ཁམས་སྒང	1 of 6 districts of khams, SA sgang drug	dmar khams sgang
དམར་ཁེ་རྒྱག་པ	[work as a] butcher	dmar khe rgyag pa
དམར་ཁེ་པ	butcher, executioner	dmar khe pa
དམར་ཁེ་བ	butcher	dmar khe ba
དམར་ཁྲ	red mottled	dmar khra
དམར་ཁྲིད	pure method, instructions on experiential meditation, finishing instruction in religion or medicine 2091	dmar khrid
ནཏུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་རེཨལིཏཡ་ནཀེདལཡ་ཨས་ཨིཕ༹	- revealing the red blood of the heart Book 2]	nature of reality nakedly as if
དམར་ཁྲིད་རྒྱག	nakedly tell the meaning, directly instruct, give practical guidance/ practical demonstration dmar khrid thams cad mkhyen par bgrod pa'i myur lam bzhin khrid skyong ba la nye bar mkho ba'i zhal she...	dmar khrid rgyag
བརྗེད་ཐོག	written by {blo bzang thogs med, rgyal rong chos mdzad}	brjed thog
དམར་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	nakedly tell the meaning, directly instruct, give practical guidance/ practical demonstration	dmar khrid byed
དམར་ཁྲིད་ལག་ལེན་དུ་བསྟན་པ	the direct	dmar khrid lag len du bstan pa
དམར་ཁྲིབ	bloody defilement	dmar khrib
དམར་མཁས་སློབ་གྲྭ	red expert school [usually rural, for training experts to work in the communist style]	dmar mkhas slob grwa
དམར་འཁྲིད	direct instruction, practical guidance, practical demonstration, explanation with instruction, explanation with illustrations)[{smar khrid} practical instruction, {don de gsal rjen du khrid pa} (ex...	dmar 'khrid
བརེ་ཐེ་ཏེཨཆིང་ཏེཨཆིངས་ཝཧིཆ་ཨེ྾པོསེ་ཐེ་ནཏུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་རེཨལིཏཡ་ནཀེདལཡ་ཨས་ཨིཕ༹	revealing the red blood of the heart Book 2]	bare the teaching teachings which expose the nature of reality nakedly as if
དམར་གད་ཚབ༹་ཁ	{dmar gad tshva kha}	dmar gad tshva kha
དམར་གྱི་ཕུད	the tenderest and freshest pieces of meat	dmar gyi phud
དམར་གྲིབ	bloody defilement	dmar grib
སླཻན་རེད	handed	slain red
དམར་གྲུམ	square piece of red colored rug	dmar grum
དམར་འགྱེད	the red feast in the chod offering, offering blood to the demons	dmar 'gyed
དམར་རྒྱངས	[arch] dmar chil chil, dmar thing thing, dmar ngo; 1) red; 2) bad sign; 3) cattle la shi rmas 'byung ltas	dmar rgyangs
དམར་རྒྱན	piece of raw-meat in tshogs	dmar rgyan
དམར་རྒྱུ	{ mi gces rgyu, mi dmar rgyu, mi phangs rgyu} the reason for not cherishing others, not regarding them as precious, feeling no empathy with them	dmar rgyu
དམར་སྒོམ་བསོད་ནམས་བློ་གྲོས	14561521	dmar sgom bsod nams blo gros
དམར་ངོ	the waning part (of the lunar month	dmar ngo
དམར་བཅིངས	directly applicable	dmar bcings
དམར་ཆ	1) red part; 2) waning part of the month/phases of the moon	dmar cha
དམར་ཆན	the red element, bright red, human blood	dmar chan
དམར་ཆམ་མྱུར་པོ	fresh baked cakes with natural color	dmar cham myur po
དམར་ཆིལ་ལེ་བ	[suffused with] red	dmar chil le ba
དམར་ཆུང	small profit	dmar chung
དམར་ཆུང་སྐོར་གསུམ	CHN	dmar chung skor gsum
དམར་ཆེན	bright red	dmar chen
དམར་ཆེན་སྐོར་གསུམ	CHN	dmar chen skor gsum
དམར་ཆེམ་མེ་བ	red gleam /radiance	dmar chem me ba
དམར་ཆེམས་སེ་བ	red gleam/ radiance	dmar chems se ba
དམར་ཆོག	Red offering/animal sacrifice	dmar chog
དམར་ཆོག་བྱེད་པ	animal sacrifices	dmar chog byed pa
དམར་མཆན	red letters	dmar mchan
དམར་མཆོད	red offering [flesh and blood of killed sentient beings]	dmar mchod
དམར་མཆོད་བྱེད	make a red offering/ sacrifice of living beings [R]	dmar mchod byed
དམར་མཆོད་འབུལ	make a red offering/ sacrifice of living beings [R]	dmar mchod 'bul
དམར་འཇབ	communist guerilla	dmar 'jab
དམར་འཇལ	if 1's cattle are wrongfully injured or killed, restitution by those responsible	dmar 'jal
དམར་རྗེན	quite naked, red raw meat, naked	dmar rjen
དམར་རྗེན་དུ་བཏོན	exposed/ revealed [nakedly]/ showed [the true nature]	dmar rjen du bton
དམར་རྗེན་དུ་བཏོན་པ	exposed/ revealed [nakedly]/ showed [the true nature]	dmar rjen du bton pa
དམར་རྗེན་དུ་འདོན	expose/ reveal [nakedly]/ show [the true nature]	dmar rjen du 'don
དམར་རྗེན་དུ་འདོན་པ	to expose, reveal	dmar rjen du 'don pa
དམར་རྗེན་དུ་སྲོག་གཅོད་པ	murder, slaughter, massacre [btsan 'dzul mkhan gyis nyes med mi dmangs rnams la dmar gsod 'dzem bag med par gtong ba]	dmar rjen du srog gcod pa
དམར་རྗེན་འདོན	expose/ reveal [nakedly]/ show [the true nature]	dmar rjen 'don
དམར་རྗེན་འདོན་པ	expose/ reveal [nakedly]/ show [the true nature]	dmar rjen 'don pa
དམར་ལྗང	greenish red	dmar ljang
དམར་སྙིང་པ	raw heart	dmar snying pa
དམར་གཏོར	the red torma	dmar gtor
དམར་གཏོར་རྩེ་རྣོ	sharp-pointed red torma	dmar gtor rtse rno
དམར་སྟོན	meat eating feast	dmar ston
དམར་སྟོན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	13th cent	dmar ston chos rgyal
དམར་ཐག་ཆོད་དུས	evening twilight	dmar thag chod dus
དམར་ཐབ	thab gzhob ste sngar rmongs dad kyi shod srol ltar me thab kyi nang du sha khrag pags spu sogs shor ba'i ming,/	dmar thab
དམར་ཐིག	1) red line; 2) snam bu dmar thig	dmar thig
དམར་ཐོར	measles	dmar thor
དམར་དད	delighting in flesh and blood	dmar dad
དམར་དྲི	fishy, stinking	dmar dri
དམར་གདུང་བཟོ་བ	mummify	dmar gdung bzo ba
དམར་གདུང་བཟོས་པའི་རོ	mummy	dmar gdung bzos pa'i ro
དམར་གདོན	blood-thirsty demon	dmar gdon
དམར་མདངས	red light/ radiance, fresh-/	dmar mdangs
ཧེཨལཐཡ	ruddy-complexioned	healthy
དམར་མདོག	crimson, maroon, scarlet	dmar mdog
དམར་འདོན	1) bad actions 'dzem zon med par byed pa; 2) 'bri mar tshag 2092 bcad steng dry tsampa + mutton stock te by dmar zas expelling wind disease	dmar 'don
དམར་ལྡོག་གེ	red and beating {rang gi snying dmar ldog ge blangs te thang du bzhag pa ltar} as if she is tearing out her own heart, red and beating, from her chest and abandoning it in a field	dmar ldog ge
དམར་སྡོར	minced meat, meat for broth	dmar sdor
དམར་ནག	dark red	dmar nag
དམར་པ	red	dmar pa
དམར་པོ	red, successful	dmar po
དམར་པོ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	red ocean	dmar po rgya mtsho
དམར་པོ་རྭ་ཅན	donkey	dmar po rwa can
དམར་པོ་རི	{dmar po ri}	dmar po ri
དམར་པོ་སྲིན་སྐྱེས	red dye produced by insect amyris agalloch	dmar po srin skyes
དམར་པོའི་ཀྲོན་ཅ	expert on communism	dmar po'i kron ca
དམར་པོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	communist country	dmar po'i rgyal khab
དམར་པོའི་ལྟ་བ	communism	dmar po'i lta ba
དམར་པོའི་རིང་ལུགས	communism	dmar po'i ring lugs
དམར་པོའི་སྲིད་དབང	communist/ red power	dmar po'i srid dbang
དམར་དཔེ	stuffed animal, exemplary specimen, show/ demonstration piece	dmar dpe
དམར་ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	phyir thon tshul of fire, blood etc.	dmar phyur phyur
དམར་ཕྱོགས	waning part (of the lunar month) [= mar ngo, phyogs phyi ma]	dmar phyogs
དམར་ཕྲུག	kind of red cloth	dmar phrug
དམར་བ	red	dmar ba
དམར་བའི་མདངས	ruddy complexion, reddish hue	dmar ba'i mdangs
དམར་བའི་སྤྱན	red eyes	dmar ba'i spyan
དམར་བར་བལྟ་བ	regard as precious	dmar bar blta ba
དམར་བྲེང་བྲེང་བ	gleaming / glimmering red	dmar breng breng ba
དམར་མོ	red [cow]	dmar mo
དམར་མོག	color of mixed red and black	dmar mog
དམར་དམག	red army	dmar dmag
དམར་དམར་ཏིང་ཏིང	bright/ completely red	dmar dmar ting ting
དམར་སྨུག	dark red	dmar smug
དམར་སྨྱུག	blackish-red	dmar smyug
དམར་ཙ	bloody	dmar tsa
དམར་ཙ་མཚལ་ཁ	ruddy speckled bull	dmar tsa mtshal kha
དམར་ཙ་རེ	fresh dmar tsa re khyod kyi glo snying dmar tsa	dmar tsa re
རེ་འཁྱེར	take your heart lungs fresh	re 'khyer
དམར་ཙ་རེ་བ	khrag dron, tshos dmar sogs kyi 'bab rgyun 'dzag bzhin pa,//'brong mgo la me mda'i mde'u phog nas khrag rgyun dmar tsa re bar thon pa,//snam bur rgya tshos brgyab nas gcus btsir byed dus tshos khu ...	dmar tsa re ba
དམར་ཙག་ལ	dmar tsag pass [SE mtsho smad rdzong]	dmar tsag la
དམར་གཙང་བྲག	{dmar gtsang brag}	dmar gtsang brag
དམར་བཙོད	med. tree [dmar] btsod [also provides dye for cloth]	dmar btsod
དམར་རྩི	dkar rtsi dang dmar rtsi byugs	dmar rtsi
དམར་ཚ་སྒང	1 of 5 smad mdo khams sbang	dmar tsha sgang
དམར་ཚན	purifying agent with different types of blood	dmar tshan
དམར་ཚལ་གུ་ཚལ་བཟོས	to get bloody	dmar tshal gu tshal bzos
དམར་ཚལ་གོ་ཚལ	bloody	dmar tshal go tshal
དམར་ཚལ་གོ་ཚལ་ཆགས་པ	become bloody	dmar tshal go tshal chags pa
དམར་ཚལ་གོ་ཚལ་བཟོས	to get bloody	dmar tshal go tshal bzos
དམར་ཚུར	red paint	dmar tshur
དམར་མཚན	footnotes written in red ink	dmar mtshan
དམར་མཚུར	mtshur gyi bye brag cig ste, tshos mdog dmar po rgyag par mkho ba zhig	dmar mtshur
དམར་འཚོད	copper-colored	dmar 'tshod
དམར་འཛིང	fight having mutually? drawn blood [R]	dmar 'dzing
དམར་རྫ་སྒང	{dmar rdza sgang} [from aa mdo rma chu S E, zla chu'i E phyogs region above, nowadays mgar thar yan chad in general]	dmar rdza sgang
དམར་རྫས	depiction of sacrifices	dmar rdzas
དམར་ཞད	reddish	dmar zhad
དམར་ཞིང་མཁས་པ	both a red/communist and an expert	dmar zhing mkhas pa
དམར་གཞུང	communist government	dmar gzhung
དམར་ཟང	scarlet-red	dmar zang
དམར་ཟལ	w red ground and bits of various other colors	dmar zal
དམར་ཟས	meat etc	dmar zas
དམར་ཟིང་ངེ	glows red	dmar zing nge
དམར་གཟོང	instrument for cutting up	dmar gzong
དམར་ཡག་སྟག	raging courageous tiger	dmar yag stag
དམར་ཡོལ	red chinaware	dmar yol
དམར་རུ	red	dmar ru
དམར་རུ་མགོ་ནག	rtsva'i 'bru	dmar ru mgo nag
དམར་རུང་པ	naked, naked person	dmar rung pa
དམར་རུང་བ	naked	dmar rung ba
དམར་རེངས	part of dawn at the end of skya rengs	dmar rengs
དམར་ལམ	Redness. The second stage of the subtle dissolution stages of appearance, increase and attainment	dmar lam
དམར་ལམ་པ	red light khra lam me ba, utter redness (bardo term	dmar lam pa
དམར་ལམ་མེ་བ	red light khra lam me ba, utter redness	dmar lam me ba
དམར་ལམ་ལམ	red light khra lam me ba, utter redness	dmar lam lam
དམར་ལུགས	communism	dmar lugs
དམར་ལུགས་འཛིན་པ	communist	dmar lugs 'dzin pa
དམར་ཤར་ཤར	pure brilliant red	dmar shar shar
དམར་ཤེད	craving	dmar shed
དམར་ཤོག	communist	dmar shog
དམར་ཤོག་ཚོགས་པ	communist party	dmar shog tshogs pa
དམར་ཤོག་ཡུལ་ཁག	communist countries	dmar shog yul khag
དམར་ཤོག་རིང་ལུགས	communism	dmar shog ring lugs
དམར་གཤག	communist	dmar gshag
དམར་གཤག་མིན་པའི་ཡུལ་ཁག	noncommunist countries	dmar gshag min pa'i yul khag
དམར་གཤག་ཚོགས་པ	communist party	dmar gshag tshogs pa
དམར་གཤག་ཡུལ་ཁག	communist countries	dmar gshag yul khag
དམར་གཤག་རིང་ལུགས	communism	dmar gshag ring lugs
དམར་བཤལ	dysentery, bloody flux	dmar bshal
དམར་སང་སང	brilliant pure red	dmar sang sang
དམར་སེང	somewhat light red 2093	dmar seng
དམར་སེར	orange [syn gi'u wang mdog, ngur kha, ser smug gser mdog]	dmar ser
དམར་སེར་ཅན	Pingala, 51st year, female fire snake	dmar ser can
དམར་སེར་ཅན་གྱི་གཞི	mi spro ba nan tur gyi phyir bcos byed pa'i gzhi ste, dmar ser can sogs 'thab krol byed pa'i dge slong la sdig pa nan tur sogs byas te, phyis bcos la bkod pas phyir bcos kyi gzhi la dmar ser can gy...	dmar ser can gyi gzhi
དམར་སེར་མིག	lion-eyed	dmar ser mig
དམར་སེར་ཚོན	li khri, vermillion	dmar ser tshon
དམར་སེལ	red exorcism	dmar sel
དམར་སྲུང	red guards	dmar srung
དམར་སྲུང་དམག་མི	red guards	dmar srung dmag mi
དམར་སྲུང་རུ་ཁག	red guards	dmar srung ru khag
དམར་གསལ	clear/ shining red, red visualization	dmar gsal
དམར་གསུམ	three red substances (flesh, blood, bones)	dmar gsum
དམར་གསུར	by practitioners to be given to gods and demons meat and fat mixed rtsam gsur, red fire offering	dmar gsur
དམར་གསོད	murder, slaughter, massacre	dmar gsod
དམར་གསོད་གཏོང	murder, slaughter, massacre	dmar gsod gtong
དམར་ཧྲང	bare, bleak, naked, nude, stark naked	dmar hrang
དམར་ཧྲང་བ	naked	dmar hrang ba
དམར་ཧྲང་བཟོ་བ	denude	dmar hrang bzo ba
དམར་ཧྲེང	naked	dmar hreng
དམར་ཧྲེང་བ	bare, naked	dmar hreng ba
དམར་ལྷང་ངེ་བ	clear and vivid red glow	dmar lhang nge ba
དམར་ལྷབ་ལྷབ	tongues of fire etc red colored 'gul tshul	dmar lhab lhab
དམས	be low, degraded, SA dma' ba	dmas
དམས་ཉམས	1) nyams gud; 2) 'phangs smad pa'i rnam 'gyur	dmas nyams
དམས་པ	{dmas pa, dmas pa, dmas pa} intr. v.; wounded	dmas pa
དམས་པའི་ལུས་སྟོབས	deteriorated health	dmas pa'i lus stobs
དམས་བྱེད	scorpion	dmas byed
དམས་ར	a place in the North	dmas ra
དམིག	hole	dmig
དམིག་ཁུང	ai khung, hole	dmig khung
དམིག་གུ	hole	dmig gu
དམིག་པ	hole	dmig pa
དམིག་བུ	kind of worm	dmig bu
དམིག་གསང	1) body kyi khong gseng; 2) hole	dmig gsang
དམིགས	1) object, support, focus, aim, purpose, objective, mental support, the thing observed, mental object, object of perception, conception, meditation, visualization, [imagination], attention, [though...	dmigs
དམིགས་ཀྱི་གསལ	clear to the mind	dmigs kyi gsal
དམིགས་ཀྱིས་དབྱེ་བ	discernment	dmigs kyis dbye ba
དམིགས་བཀར	specially/ exclusively for [the purpose of]/ to	dmigs bkar
དམིགས་རྐང	visualization root text / verses	dmigs rkang
དམིགས་རྐྱེན	object factor, object condition, objectivity, observed objectcondition, observed object condition. {rkyen bzhi}	dmigs rkyen
དམིགས་རྐྱེན་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 object conditions CHN	dmigs rkyen bcu gnyis
དམིགས་སྐོར	a contemplation-round, [of different subjects]	dmigs skor
དམིགས་ཁྲིད	steps of visualization	dmigs khrid
དམིགས་གྲད	referential	dmigs grad
དམིགས་སྒོ	[be] [set aside] for [the purpose of]	dmigs sgo
དམིགས་སྒོ་སྟོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚབ་ཚིག	demonstrative pronouns	dmigs sgo ston byed kyi tshab tshig
དམིགས་སྒོམ	visualizations [of practice]	dmigs sgom
དམིགས་ཅན	ingenious, skillful in contriving	dmigs can
དམིགས་བཅས	referential, w reference point/ conceptions, w an object focus	dmigs bcas
དམིགས་བཅས་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulation of conceptual merit	dmigs bcas bsod nams kyi tshogs
དམིགས་ཏེ	{. . . la dmigs te} with . . . in mind/ as one's frame of reference	dmigs te
དམིགས་གཏད	reference point, object one which one meditates, mind's object	dmigs gtad
དམིགས་གཏད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	object of attention/ meditation, reference point	dmigs gtad kyi yul
དམིགས་གཏད་ཆོས་མེད	[a state of freedom] devoid of any particular object of focus	dmigs gtad chos med
དམིགས་གཏད་བློའི་བསྒོམ་པ	the meditation of mind w reference points/ a focal object	dmigs gtad blo'i bsgom pa
དམིགས་གཏད་སེམས་ཀྱི་མཚན་མ	fixation of/ fixated reference points, characteristics of fixated mind	dmigs gtad sems kyi mtshan ma
དམིགས་གཏད་སེམས་གྱི་ཕ་སྒོམ་པ	be accustomed to the father of mind w reference point	dmigs gtad sems gyi pha sgom pa
དམིགས་རྟེན	meditation support, object of meditation, attention, object of observation, meditative object, support; support for visualization; focus of attention, the chosen object	dmigs rten
དམིགས་སྟོན་པ	give an idea of, make a suggestion	dmigs ston pa
དམིགས་དང་བཅས	fixation with an object, SA dmigs bcas	dmigs dang bcas
དམིགས་དོན	aim, objective, purpose	dmigs don
དམིགས་འདུན	visualization and devotion, determination, visualization and attitude	dmigs 'dun
དམིགས་ལྡེའུ	[Syn. {dmigs rten gyi lde'u}, {dmigs pa'i lde'u}, {mtshams lde'u}	dmigs lde'u
དམིགས་གནད	the key points of visualization, points of visualization	dmigs gnad
དམིགས་རྣམ	perceived phenomena	dmigs rnam
དམིགས་རྣམ་སྤྲད་པ	the object on which you focus should be associated / matched with the form	dmigs rnam sprad pa
དམིགས་པ་རྒྱུད་བཅད	without concentrating on anything in particular	dmigs pa rgyud bcad
དམིགས་པ་ཅན་ཡིན་པ	have conceptions/ reference points	dmigs pa can yin pa
དམིགས་པ་གཅིག་བ	single object of attention	dmigs pa gcig ba
དམིགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great intention	dmigs pa chen po
དམིགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཉིད	the great focal point	dmigs pa chen po nyid
དམིགས་པ་ཆོལ་བ	confused object of attention/ conceptualization/ reference point	dmigs pa chol ba
དམིགས་པ་ཆོས	dharma to which 1 is paying attention, fixated dharma/ reference point/ conceptualized dharma	dmigs pa chos
དམིགས་པ་གཏད	to direct the concentration, direct the concentration upon, to concentrate on	dmigs pa gtad
དམིགས་པ་བརྟག་པ	text on reasoning by Dignaga	dmigs pa brtag pa
དམིགས་པ་བརྟག་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ	Commentary on a text on reasoning by Dignaga	dmigs pa brtag pa'i 'grel pa
དམིགས་པ་བརྟག་པའི་འགྲེལ་བ	conceptually examining commentary	dmigs pa brtag pa'i 'grel ba
དམིགས་པ་བརྟག་པའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	explanation of reasoning by the Indian master 'dul ba lha	dmigs pa brtag pa'i 'grel bshad
དམིགས་པ་དག་པ	pure perception	dmigs pa dag pa
དམིགས་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཁམས	elements	dmigs pa dang bcas pa'i khams
ཝ་ཨན་ཨོབཇེཅཏ	focus	w an object
ཝིཐ་ཨན་ཨོབཇེཅཏ	focus	with an object
དམིགས་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཁམས་བདུན	the 7 elements w object focus, {sems khams bdun}, {chos khams kyi sems byung}	dmigs pa dang bcas pa'i khams bdun
སྒྱུར་བ་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབ་པ་ཉིད	the blessing of ...	sgyur ba byin gyis rlob pa nyid
དམིགས་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from, without focus, [Syn {dmigs med}	dmigs pa dang bral ba
དམིགས་པ་ནི་སེམས་ཡིན་ཏེ	conception is mind	dmigs pa ni sems yin te
དམིགས་པ་གནད་ཀྱི་དར་ཡ་ཀན	an herb	dmigs pa gnad kyi dar ya kan
དམིགས་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ་ལ་འཇུག	enter into the three objects	dmigs pa rnam pa gsum la 'jug
དམིགས་པ་བྱེད་པ	to impose restrictions/ a fixed construct/ a fixed frame of reference	dmigs pa byed pa
དམིགས་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unexcelled focus, {bla med gsum}	dmigs pa bla na med pa
དམིགས་པ་བླ་མ་ལ	are dedicated to the guru [belongings], mental object, object of perception, object of conception, object of meditation	dmigs pa bla ma la
དམིགས་པ་མ་བརྗེད	not forget the meditation object	dmigs pa ma brjed
དམིགས་པ་མི་དམིགས་པ	not focus on conceptions/ objects, not conceive of/ perceive reference points	dmigs pa mi dmigs pa
དམིགས་པ་མི་དམིགས་པ་རྟོགས་པ	nonconceptual realization, realization w/o reference point	dmigs pa mi dmigs pa rtogs pa
དམིགས་པ་མེད་དང་ལྡན་པ	absence of devotion to a basis	dmigs pa med dang ldan pa
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ	{dmigs su med pa} nonreferential/ without any (fixed) frame of reference; unconditional; inconceivable	dmigs pa med pa
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ་ལ	{pa'i snying rje} compassion taking nonconception as focus dmigs pa med pa la dmigs pa'i snying rje compassion taking nonconception as focus	dmigs pa med pa la
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཅོམཔསསིཨོན་ཏཀིང་ནོན	conception as focus	dmigs pa med pa la dmigs pa'i snying rje compassion taking non
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པའི་ངང	a state free from thought	dmigs pa med pa'i ngang
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པའི་རྙིང་རྗེ	undirected compassion, compassion beyond obsevation	dmigs pa med pa'i rnying rje
དམིགས་པ་མེད་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	completely	dmigs pa med pa'i snying rje
དམིགས་པ་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པ	emphasizing contemplation, meditation	dmigs pa gtso bor byed pa
དམིགས་པ་མཚུངས་ལྡན	possess common/similar perceptions [of same object: if the eye consciousness apperceives form, feeling likewise apperceives it]	dmigs pa mtshungs ldan
དམིགས་པ་ཞིག་སྟོན	make a suggestion	dmigs pa zhig ston
དམིགས་པ་ཞིག་སྟོན་པ	give an idea of	dmigs pa zhig ston pa
དམིགས་པ་བཞི	four dharmas which are dmigs yul of shamatha meditation [khyab pa'i dmigs pa, spyad pa rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa, mkhas pa'i dmigs pa, nyon mongs rnam sbyong gi dmigs pa]	dmigs pa bzhi
དམིགས་པ་གཟུང་བ	grasp the focal object/ conception, hold the visualization	dmigs pa gzung ba
དམིགས་པ་བཟང	excellent meditation object	dmigs pa bzang
དམིགས་པ་བཟུང	to keep concentration on, keep the concentration	dmigs pa bzung
དམིགས་པ་ཡི་ནི་མཆོག	supreme focus of attention	dmigs pa yi ni mchog
དམིགས་པ་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six dhatus of perceptual objects [among the 18 dhatus khams bco brgyad: gzugs, sgra, dri, ro, reg bya, chos]	dmigs pa yul gyi khams drug
དམིགས་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	sangs rgyas kyi gsung rab lam sgom pa'i dmigs yul du gyur pa	dmigs pa yongs su grub pa
དམིགས་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	completely pure attention	dmigs pa yongs su dag pa
དམིགས་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	search for/ attain a perfect object of attention	dmigs pa yongs su tshol ba
དམིགས་པ་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན	non-objective dmigs pa la mngon par 'du byed pa manifest the visualization/ perception of dmigs pa la nye bar gtod pa'i dngos po things completely fixated/ made into reference points	dmigs pa yod ma yin
དམིགས་པ་ལ་ཐོགས་པ	obstacle to attention, obstructions of reference point/ conceptions	dmigs pa la thogs pa
དམིགས་པ་ལས་མི་འཕྲོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	not emanate perceptions/ fixated objects	dmigs pa las mi 'phro bar byed pa
དམིགས་པ་ཤེས་པ	conceptual awareness, awareness of the object of meditation	dmigs pa shes pa
དམིགས་པ་གསུམ	the 3-fold focus	dmigs pa gsum
དམིགས་པའི་རྐྱེན	referential cause-factor, noematic contributory force, objective reference condition (color-patch, sound, etc.), object condition, objective condition	dmigs pa'i rkyen
དམིགས་པའི་སྐྱེན	which is the three interrelated aspects of ignorance, the referential condition	dmigs pa'i skyen
དམིགས་པའི་ཁམས	the external dhatus/ elements of the objects {gzugs sgra dri ro reg bya chos kyi khams}	dmigs pa'i khams
དམིགས་པའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six dhatus/ elements of objects {gzugs sgra dri ro reg bya chos]	dmigs pa'i khams drug
དམིགས་པའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	the samsaric confusion of conception/ reference point	dmigs pa'i 'khrul 'khor
དམིགས་པའི་དངོས་པོ	the observed thing	dmigs pa'i dngos po
དམིགས་པའི་ཆོས	conceptual framework(s)	dmigs pa'i chos
དམིགས་པའི་གཏད	reference point, aim, visualization, something to hold (mentally, objectify[ing focus], objective, goal, pursuit, fixation	dmigs pa'i gtad
དམིགས་པའི་གཏད་སོ	reference point, aim, visualization, something to hold (mentally, objectify[ing focus], objective, goal, pursuit, fixation	dmigs pa'i gtad so
དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	non perception fact	dmigs pa'i rtags
དམིགས་པའི་རྟེན	a thing only supposed, an object imagined, specific support 2096	dmigs pa'i rten
དམིགས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་དྲུག	the six fixated perceptions CHN	dmigs pa'i 'du shes drug
དམིགས་པའི་གནད	key point of visualization	dmigs pa'i gnad
དམིགས་པའི་འཕྲོ་འདུ	emanate and gather perceptions	dmigs pa'i 'phro 'du
དམིགས་པའི་བྱེ་བྲག	different visualizations	dmigs pa'i bye brag
དམིགས་པའི་བློ	conceptual/ focused mind	dmigs pa'i blo
དམིགས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ་སྐྱེ་བའི་ས	level of arising of the fruition of perceiving the [7th] bhumi	dmigs pa'i 'bras bu skye ba'i sa
དམིགས་པའི་སྨྲ	execration, reviling	dmigs pa'i smra
དམིགས་པའི་གཞི	operational foundation	dmigs pa'i gzhi
དམིགས་པའི་ཡུལ	objective object, focal/ conceived / meditation object	dmigs pa'i yul
དམིགས་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	complete presentation of the object	dmigs pa'i rab tu dbye ba
དམིགས་པར་འཆད	explain conceptually	dmigs par 'chad
དམིགས་པར་སྣང་བ	conceptualized appearance, appearance w reference point, appearance of the object of attention	dmigs par snang ba
དམིགས་པར་སྣང་བའི་ཡུལ	perceived objects of attention	dmigs par snang ba'i yul
དམིགས་པར་བྱས་པའི་ཀུན་བརྟགས་པ	fixated/ reference points of false conception	dmigs par byas pa'i kun brtags pa
དམིགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	conceptualize, perceive, focus, fixate	dmigs par byed pa
དམིགས་པར་མི་བྱེད་པ	not conceptualize/ perceive/ focus/ fixate	dmigs par mi byed pa
དམིགས་པར་མེད་པ	SA dmigs med	dmigs par med pa
དམིགས་པར་ལྷུང་བ	falls into an object oriented	dmigs par lhung ba
དམིགས་པས་ཟིན་ངེས	concentrating intently	dmigs pas zin nges
དམིགས་ཕྱེ	x {spang blang gi dmigs phye} opens our eyes to what to do and what not to do	dmigs phye
དམིགས་ཕྱེད་པ	perceptions	dmigs phyed pa
དམིགས་བུ	leader of/ guide for the blind	dmigs bu
དམིགས་བྱ	to be imagined	dmigs bya
དམིགས་བྱ་བསྐྱེད་པ	visualizing the object of attention	dmigs bya bskyed pa
དམིགས་བྱའི་ཡུལ	object of attention/ mediation	dmigs bya'i yul
དམིགས་བྱེད	conceive, perceive, imagine, visualize, pay attention to	dmigs byed
དམིགས་འབེན	goal, target	dmigs 'ben
དམིགས་འབྲས	aim, goal, objective	dmigs 'bras
དམིགས་མི་བྱེད་པ	not to direct toward an object	dmigs mi byed pa
དམིགས་མེད	without any external reference, fixation without an object, cannot be reduced to an objective reference, not limited to any specific object, not objectifiable, nonconceptualization, unobservability...	dmigs med
དམིགས་མེད་ཀྱི་རྙིང་རྗེ	compassion w/o reference point	dmigs med kyi rnying rje
དམིགས་མེད་ཀྱི་བཏང་སྙོམས	impartiality without concepts	dmigs med kyi btang snyoms
དམིགས་མེད་ཀྱི་དང་དུ་བཞག་པ	rest in the state from focus/ conception	dmigs med kyi dang du bzhag pa
དམིགས་མེད་ཀྱི་བློ	conceptionless/ perceptionless / unfocused mind, mind w/o reference point	dmigs med kyi blo
དམིགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ	non-conceptual prajna	dmigs med kyi shes rab
དམིགས་མེད་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion w/o reference point	dmigs med snying rje
དམིགས་མེད་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	great compassion beyond focus, great aimless compassion	dmigs med snying rje chen po
དམིགས་མེད་བཏང་སྙོམས	impartiality without concepts	dmigs med btang snyoms
དམིགས་མེད་ཐུགས་རྗེས	compassion w/o reference point	dmigs med thugs rjes
དམིགས་མེད་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga without an object	dmigs med rnal 'byor
དམིགས་མེད་འོད་གསལ་མདངས	the radiance	dmigs med 'od gsal mdangs
དམིགས་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulation of non-conceptual wisdom	dmigs med ye shes kyi tshogs
དམིགས་མེད་ལ	- pa - taking nonconception as focus, [observing the inapprehendable]	dmigs med la
དམིགས་མེད་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་འཇུག་སྒྲུབ	establish	dmigs med la 'jug pa'i 'jug sgrub
ཨེནཏརཡ་ཨིནཏོ་ནོན	conception	entry into non
དམིགས་མེད་ལ་དམིགས་པ	taking nonconception as focus, [observing the inapprehendable]; observing the inapprehendable	dmigs med la dmigs pa
དམིགས་མེད་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion observing the inapprehendable	dmigs med la dmigs pa'i snying rje
དམིགས་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པ	emphasizing contemplation, meditation	dmigs gtso bor byed pa
དམིགས་རྩེ	focus of attention	dmigs rtse
དམིགས་བརྩེ་མ	Aiming at Lovingkindness, a prayer to Tsongkhapa	dmigs brtse ma
དམིགས་ཚད	quota, objective, goal, target dmigs tshad dus bkag gi sngon du	dmigs tshad
དམིགས་མཚན	trace	dmigs mtshan
དམིགས་མཚུངས	common perception [in perceiving an object, if the eye consciousness apperceives form, feeling likewise apperceives it]	dmigs mtshungs
དམིགས་འཛིན	dependent, depending on a support	dmigs 'dzin
དམིགས་འཛུགས	assign, specify, designate; 2) security given at the time of a loan	dmigs 'dzugs
དམིགས་འཛུགས་བྱས་པའི་མི་ངེས་ཅན	certain designated person 2097 dmigs 'dzugs byas pa'i las don nges can certain designated purpose	dmigs 'dzugs byas pa'i mi nges can
དམིགས་འཛུགས་བྱེད	assign, specify, designate	dmigs 'dzugs byed
དམིགས་འཛུགས་བྱེད་པའི་ས་ཁུལ	assigned/ specified/ designated area	dmigs 'dzugs byed pa'i sa khul
དམིགས་ཡིད་ལ་བདེན་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	insight, awareness, object, mental support, concept[ion], grasping at true existence of conceptual mind	dmigs yid la bden 'dzin byed pa
དམིགས་ཡུལ	{dmigs pa'i yul} object of attention; objective construct/ framework/ frame of reference; scope of speculation	dmigs yul
དམིགས་ཡུལ་གྱི་ལས་ཀ	career	dmigs yul gyi las ka
དམིགས་ཡུལ་ཆེན་པོ	ambitious	dmigs yul chen po
དམིགས་ཡུལ་གཙོ་བོ	main objective	dmigs yul gtso bo
དམིགས་ཡོད་ཕྱོགས་བསྐྱོད	expedition	dmigs yod phyogs bskyod
དམིགས་རིམ	sequences of concentrations	dmigs rim
དམིགས་རིམས	stages/ procedure of visualization dmigs la nye bar gtod pa'i dngos po thing completely objectified/ fixated/ focused on/ made into reference points	dmigs rims
དམིགས་ཤེས	awareness of the object (of meditation	dmigs shes
དམིགས་སུ་བཀར	detailed	dmigs su bkar
དམིགས་སུ་བཀར་ནས	refer specifically to	dmigs su bkar nas
དམིགས་སུ་བཀར་ནས་གསུངས	emphasize, say w emphasis [h]	dmigs su bkar nas gsungs
དམིགས་སུ་བཀར་བ	special, especially	dmigs su bkar ba
དམིགས་སུ་བཀར་བའི་གནས་དོན	emphasized topic	dmigs su bkar ba'i gnas don
དམིགས་སུ་མེད་པ	absence of apprehension, unobservable, nonreferential, without any fixed frame of reference	dmigs su med pa
དམིགས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	conceived/ perceived, taken as focal object, held in mind	dmigs su bzung ba
དམིགས་སུ་རུང་བ	can be taken as an object, conceivable	dmigs su rung ba
དམིགས་སུ་གསུངས་པ	deliberated mentioned	dmigs su gsungs pa
དམིགས་གསལ	clear to the mind	dmigs gsal
དམིགས་བསམ	concepts & thinking	dmigs bsam
དམིགས་བསམ་བརྗོད་མེད	inconceivable, unimaginable, and inexpressible	dmigs bsam brjod med
དམིགས་བསམ་བྲལ	free from conception or thought	dmigs bsam bral
དམིགས་བསལ	special, particular, peculiar, specified	dmigs bsal
དམིགས་བསལ་གོང་ཕུད	among many bkar te gong du bkur ba	dmigs bsal gong phud
དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི	particular	dmigs bsal gyi
དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི་དབང་ཆ	special rights/ authority, privilege	dmigs bsal gyi dbang cha
དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི་བཙོན་གྲོལ	amnesty, pardon [of sentence] dmigs bsal gyis dga' bsu zhu bar phyin went especially to welcome [them]	dmigs bsal gyi btson grol
དམིགས་བསལ་ལྟ་བ	things specific to the view	dmigs bsal lta ba
དམིགས་བསལ་ཐོན་རྫས	special products	dmigs bsal thon rdzas
དམིགས་བསལ་བྱེད	give preferential treatment/ special consideration, special, particular, peculiar, specified	dmigs bsal byed
དམིགས་བསལ་བྱེད་པ	to give preferential treatment, special considerations to, special, particular, peculiar, specified	dmigs bsal byed pa
དམུ	1) 1st of the six clans = rmu; 2) kind of d"n, evil demon, mu spirits, malignant spirits causing dropsy Book 2; 2) [arch] unruly and inappropriate, evil mind	dmu
དམུ་དགེ་དགོན་ཆེན	monastery in si khron zhing chen zung chu rdzong, rje tshong kha pa'i slob ma snga tshal bzhi'i ya gyal tsha kho ngag dbang grags pas dgon brgya rtsa brgyad btab pa'i nang gses kyi dgon chen zhig d...	dmu dge dgon chen
དམུ་རྒོད	short-tempered, irascible, get angry over some slight thing, savage, untamed, wild, incorrigible, unruly, barbaric, cruel (comp rmu rgod	dmu rgod
དམུ་རྒོད་ཇག་པས་གཙེས་ལགས་སམ	Were you harassed by fierce bandits?	dmu rgod jag pas gtses lags sam
དམུ་རྒོད་བསྡུ་བ	gathering of incorrigible disciples	dmu rgod bsdu ba
དམུ་རྒོད་བྱེད	get angry over some slight thing, be short-tempered, act [savage, untamed, wild, incorrigible, unruly, cruel, barbaric]	dmu rgod byed
དམུ་ཆུ	dropsy	dmu chu
དམུ་ཆུ་འཁྱིམས་ཆུ	chu rigs shig thur sel rlung gis log pa'i las byas de dri chu'i rgyu lam bkag nas dri chu dvangs ma'i rgyu lam la shor nas rtsa kha log pa'i don	dmu chu 'khyims chu
དམུ་ཆུ་ཅན	one who is suffering from dropsy	dmu chu can
དམུ་ཆུ་དྲུག	CHN	dmu chu drug
དམུ་ཆུ་བྱེར་ཆུ	chu rigs shig kha zas ma zhu ba dvangs ma'i rgyu lam du shor nas rtsa la byer ba'i chu nad cig	dmu chu byer chu
དམུ་ཆུ་ཚག་པ	tap a dropsical person	dmu chu tshag pa
དམུ་ཆུ་ཟགས་ཆུ	among the chu rigs bco lnga zas ma zhu ba dvangs ma'i rtsa mig tu shor te be snabs kyis dvangs ma'i rgyu lam bkag nas don snod rang rang gi gnas su chu zags par gyur pa'i don	dmu chu zags chu
དམུ་ཐག	magic rope along which gods used to descend to meet men, rainbow cord, dmu cord	dmu thag
དམུ་འཐེན	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	dmu 'then
དམུ་དག	Mu cord, SA rmu thag	dmu dag
དམུ་མདོ	demon of dropsy	dmu mdo
དམུ་བོན	a bon po entrusted with worship of the dmu deities to obtain benefit for himself and others	dmu bon
དམུ་བོན་ཡེའུ་ཐན	bon of the dmu	dmu bon ye'u than
དམུ་བློ	black/ evil/ improper thoughts	dmu blo
དམུ་རྫིང	water disease: body bloating w water as collecting an filling in a pond	dmu rdzing
དམུ་རྫིང་ཅན	dropsy	dmu rdzing can
དམུ་འོར	dmu chu &, 'or nad	dmu 'or
དམུ་ཡི་བཙུན་མདོས	mdos to protect against the curses of the females of the dmu	dmu yi btsun mdos
དམུ་ལོང	blind	dmu long
དམུ་ལོང་དམུས	blind	dmu long dmus
དམུག་པ	darkening	dmug pa
དམུན་པ	benighted	dmun pa
དམུན་པོ	benighted	dmun po
དམུར་བ	gnaw, crush w the teeth, bite through, chew	dmur ba
དམུལ	smile	dmul
དམུལ་བ	(tha dad pa,, smiling and laughing a little	dmul ba
དམུས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, sad, depressed, mtsher ba	dmus pa
དམུས་བྱུང	[arch] spro ba shi ba, tshi chad pa, yi chad pa'am sun pa, 1 who	dmus byung
དམུས་ལོང	blinded	dmus long
དམུས་ལོང་ལྟར	like a blind [person], lacking definite aim	dmus long ltar
དམེ	impure [caste]	dme
དམེ་འཁྲུགས་བྱེད	to do deadly battle with	dme 'khrugs byed
དམེ་གྲིབ	murder of blood relations	dme grib
དམེ་གྲིབ་རྨེ་གྲིབ	moral defilements	dme grib rme grib
དམེ་ཆུ	dme chu [river in dpal 'bar rdzong, source on the north side of dung pass, a branch of the rgyal mo rngul chu]	dme chu
དམེ་གཏོར	unclean torma. The 'unclean torma' is the impure residual. The 'morsel of offering' is the pure residual offering. The 'legacy of the Glorious One' is the first pure part.	dme gtor
དམེ་པོ	murderer [of someone in the same clan]	dme po
དམེ་བ	SA rme ba, btsog pa	dme ba
དམེ་བོ	= rme bo, committers of murder/ incest within 1's clan people of the same clan gsod res byed mkhan nam gnyen sdong mkhan	dme bo
དམེ་བྱེད་པ	to fight, battle	dme byed pa
དམེ་མུག་ནལ	3 types of impure conditions	dme mug nal
དམེ་མུག་ནལ་གྱི	illegitimate children and incest	dme mug nal gyi
དམེ་མུག་ནལ་གྱི་བཙོག་སེལ	exorcism of the impurities derived from the murder of blood relations	dme mug nal gyi btsog sel
དམེ་མོ	murderer [of someone in the same clan] rus gcig pa gsod res byed mkhan nam gnyen sdong mkhan bud med	dme mo
དམེ་རག་མོ	a woman who has murdered her husband, woman tarnished by murder	dme rag mo
དམེ་ལག	contaminated hands	dme lag
དམེ་ཤ	contaminated meat	dme sha
དམེ་ཤུལ	Meshul, in Domey	dme shul
དམེགས་རྐྱེན	objective contributory cause	dmegs rkyen
དམེགས་གྲད	referential	dmegs grad
དམེགས་པ	mental image dmegs med la dmigs pa'i snying rje compassion observing the unapprehendable	dmegs pa
དམེའི་ལྷག་མ	{btsog lhag} leftover from the {tshogs} food-plate of the yogis; the impure residual, [Syn. {btsog lhag}	dme'i lhag ma
དམེའི་ལྷག་མ་བཙོག་ལྷག	leftover from the {tshogs} food-plate of the yogins	dme'i lhag ma btsog lhag
དམོད	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod
དམོད་ངན	perform bad sorcery, evil curse	dmod ngan
དམོད་སྔགས	charms for causing mischief to others	dmod sngags
དམོད་པ	Maledictory Fierce Mantra, Möpa; to curse, accurse, execrate; {dmod pa, dmod pa, dmod pa, dmod} trans. v.; maledictory/ cursing	dmod pa
དམོད་པ་བརྗོད་པ	{drang srong gi klog dang, bsam gtan, bzlas pa sogs la shin tu gnod pa byung bar khros nas dmod pa brjod pa} 'The vicious recitations of the sages, their meditations and incantations, arise from ha...	dmod pa brjod pa
དམོད་པ་དྲག་སྔགས	maledictory fierce/ subjugation mantras {sgrub pa bka' brgyad} 1 of {bka' brgyad} 1 of the {'jig rten pa'i sde gsum} = three categories of worldly deities, the worldly deities of exorcism]	dmod pa drag sngags
དམོད་པ་འདོར་བ	swear, throw a curse (upon	dmod pa 'dor ba
དམོད་པ་བྱེད	to curse, swear/ to insult 2099	dmod pa byed
དམོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	imprecation, execration, malediction	dmod pa byed pa
དམོད་པ་བཙུགས་པ	swear, throw a curse (upon	dmod pa btsugs pa
དམོད་པ་ལ་འཇིགས	fearing a curse dmod pa'i chu nam mkhar gtor ba spewed cursed water throughout the sky	dmod pa la 'jigs
དམོད་བོ	formula	dmod bo
དམོད་བོར་བ	swear to the truth of, put a curse (upon	dmod bor ba
དམོད་མོ	curse, malediction	dmod mo
དམོད་མོ་རྒྱག	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod mo rgyag
དམོད་མོ་འདེབས	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod mo 'debs
དམོད་དམོད་རྒྱག	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod dmod rgyag
དམོད་དམོད་འདེབས	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod dmod 'debs
དམོད་བཙུགས	swear to the truth of, put a curse (upon	dmod btsugs
དམོད་ཚིག	curse	dmod tshig
དམོད་ཚིག་སྤྲིང་ཡིག་གིས་སྲུང་བ	protective ritual using 'letter of curse'	dmod tshig spring yig gis srung ba
དམོད་ཚོད	abuse, insults	dmod tshod
དམོད་འཛུགས	curse, swear, insult, abuse	dmod 'dzugs
དམོད་ཟོར	evil power of cursing, malign torma	dmod zor
དམྱལ	hell	dmyal
དམྱལ་ཁམས	hell [realm]	dmyal khams
དམྱལ་ཁམས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 hells [8 hot, 8 cold, nyi tshe, nye 'khor]	dmyal khams bco brgyad
དམྱལ་ཁམས་སྲིད	produces the existence of	dmyal khams srid
དམྱལ་གླིང	the legend of king Gesar of Ling's conquest of hell	dmyal gling
དམྱལ་ཐག་གི་གཅོད	hellish torment	dmyal thag gi gcod
དམྱལ་གནས	hell realm [one of the 18 hells in the three lower realms ngan song gsum syn ngan 'gro'i mthil dang, bde med, 'dod pa'i 'bras bral, sdug bsngal gter]	dmyal gnas
དམྱལ་སྣང	manifestation of hell	dmyal snang
དམྱལ་པ	suffer	dmyal pa
དམྱལ་བ	hells. The lowest level of cyclical - existence occupied by sentient beings	dmyal ba
དམྱལ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 hells [hot or cold) gseg ma dang, bye ma, 'dam chu, du ba, me, mun pa che, ngu 'bod che, rdo rje'i me lce	dmyal ba brgyad
དམྱལ་བ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 hells	dmyal ba bcu drug
དམྱལ་བ་ཆུ་བུར་ཅན	the Hell of Blisters	dmyal ba chu bur can
དམྱལ་བ་མནར་མེད	Avici/ uninterrupted hell	dmyal ba mnar med
དམྱལ་བ་རྣམས	hell beings	dmyal ba rnams
དམྱལ་བ་པ	hell-being; hell beings; denizens of hell	dmyal ba pa
དམྱལ་བ་ཡི་དབ༹གས་དུད་འགྲོ་དང	being born in the hells, in the preta realm, as an animal	dmyal ba yi dvags dud 'gro dang
དམྱལ་བ་རིན་གྱིས་ཉོ་བ	to secure / reap [a rebirth in] hell	dmyal ba rin gyis nyo ba
དམྱལ་བ་ལ་ཚ་གྲང	hell beings suffer heat and cold	dmyal ba la tsha grang
དམྱལ་བའི	infernal	dmyal ba'i
དམྱལ་བའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as a hell being	dmyal ba'i skye gnas
དམྱལ་བའི་ཁྲོ་ཆུ	the molten bronze of the hells	dmyal ba'i khro chu
དམྱལ་བའི་ཉེ་འཁོར	the Neighboring Hells, adjoining hells. Mipham {tsha dmyal gyi phyogs bzhir nye 'khor bzhi bzhi ste bcu drug yod kyang dmyal ba'i nye 'khor zhes gcig tu byas so} In the four cardinal directions of ...	dmyal ba'i nye 'khor
དམྱལ་བའི་གདན	the residences of hell	dmyal ba'i gdan
དམྱལ་བའི་བུམ་པ	pots of boiling water etc. in hell w small mouths and extending 5, 10 dpag tshad etc.	dmyal ba'i bum pa
དམྱལ་བའི་ཟངས་ཆེན	the molten copper cauldron's of hell	dmyal ba'i zangs chen
དམྱལ་བའི་སེམས་ཅན	hell beings	dmyal ba'i sems can
དམྱལ་མེ	the fires of hell	dmyal me
དམྱལ་སྲུང	guardians of that hell	dmyal srung
དམྱིག	[arch] eye	dmyig
དམྱུག	[p dmyugs],, go	dmyug
དམྱུག་པ	{dmyug pa, dmyugs pa, dmyug pa, dmyugs} trans. v.; ft. of {dmyug pa}; to show	dmyug pa
དམྱུག་པ་བྱེད་པ	show repeatedly, boast	dmyug pa byed pa
དམྱུག་དམྱུག	1) 'tshol nyul //lcags kyi gter kha gar yod dmyug dmyug byed pa; 2) take out of	dmyug dmyug
དམྱུག་དམྱུག་པ	show repeatedly, boast	dmyug dmyug pa
དམྱུགས	imp. of {dmyug pa}	dmyugs
དམྱུགས་པ	pf. of {dmyug pa}	dmyugs pa
མམོས་པ	belief, interest, respect, devotion, veneration [one of the {yul nges byed lnga} five determinative states)	mmos pa
རྨ	1) wound [lus kyi pags pa sogs ral nas khrag dang chu ser 'dzags shing lus nyams dma' bar gyur pas na rma zhes zer te, de la nang gses su dbye na mda' mtshon sogs phog pa las byung ba'i glo bur gyi...	rma
རྨ་དཀྲིས	bandage, dressing	rma dkris
རྨ་སྐོགས	scab	rma skogs
རྨ་སྐྱེས	pus, matter, blood	rma skyes
རྨ་སྐྱོབ	1) bandage; 2) cure a wound	rma skyob
རྨ་ཁ	mouth/ surface of a wound	rma kha
རྨ་ཁ་བསྟུམ	dress/ bandage a wound 2100	rma kha bstum
རྨ་ཁ་མཐེབ་གནོན	rma skung ched mtheb mos gnon pa ste skyon mtshang 'gebs pa'i dpe	rma kha mtheb gnon
རྨ་ཁ་མི་ཟུམ་ཞིང	if the wound will not close	rma kha mi zum zhing
རྨ་ཁམས	petty state in khams	rma khams
རྨ་ཁར་རྟ་མགྲིན་རང་བྱུང	a miraculously-formed image of Hayagriva at Machuka	rma khar rta mgrin rang byung
རྨ་ཁོག	scab	rma khog
རྨ་ཁྲག་སྨིན་པ	pus in a wound	rma khrag smin pa
རྨ་ཁྲོས་པ	rma sdug tu song ba	rma khros pa
རྨ་ག་ཆད	(A) 1) universal interp[enetration [R]; 2) true, real, genuine [R]	rma ga chad
རྨ་གོས	garment given as recompense four a wound [R]	rma gos
རྨ་གྱང་ཕྱུག་མོ	valley near the source of the Rma Chu/ Yellow River	rma gyang phyug mo
རྨ་རྒན	old wound	rma rgan
རྨ་རྒོད	cure a wound, boil [Gold]	rma rgod
རྨ་རྒྱལ	mtso sngon na yod pa'i ri bo aa myes rma chen gyi ming gzhan zhig /	rma rgyal
རྨ་རྒྱལ་སྤོམ་ར	Magyel Pomra [mtsho sngon na yod pa'i ri bo = aa myes rma chen]	rma rgyal spom ra
རྨ་སྒོ	wound openings, body orifices	rma sgo
རྨ་སྒོ་དགུ	the 9 wound gates [mi lus kyi sna khung gnyis dang, rna khung gnyis, mig gnyis, kha, gcin lam, bshang lam bcas dgu nas rgyun du mi gtsang ba thon rgyu yod pas ming la rma sgo zer]	rma sgo dgu
རྨ་སྒོ་གསུམ	the three wound gates [kha dang, bshang lam, mo mtshan te gsum]	rma sgo gsum
རྨ་སྒྲོས	lus kyi rma srol	rma sgros
རྨ་ངན་དུག་མཆེད	tetanus	rma ngan dug mched
རྨ་བཅོས	surgeon	rma bcos
རྨ་བཅོས་བྱེད	treat a wound	rma bcos byed
རྨ་ཆས	wound curing apparatus, bandage	rma chas
རྨ་ཆས་བྱས	bandage	rma chas byas
རྨ་ཆིངས	basic treatise	rma chings
རྨ་ཆུ	Yellow River	rma chu
རྨ་ཆུ་ཁ	Machuka	rma chu kha
རྨ་ཆུ་ཁུག་དགུ	the 9 khug pa along the mdo khams rma chu	rma chu khug dgu
རྨ་ཆུ་ལུ་མ	Machu Luma	rma chu lu ma
རྨ་ཆུ་སེར་ཅན	chu ser emitting wound	rma chu ser can
རྨ་ཆུང	scratch	rma chung
རྨ་ཆུའི་ཁུག་པ	khug pa along the mdo khams rma chu	rma chu'i khug pa
རྨ་ཆེན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rma chen
རྨ་ཆེན་གངས་རི	rma chen snow mt [mtso sngon zhing chen khongs mgo log bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi sa char yod pa'i aa myes rma chen gangs ri]	rma chen gangs ri
རྨ་ཆེན་སྤོམ་ར	Machen/Magyal Pomra, a deity abiding on Mount Machen	rma chen spom ra
རྨ་འཇལ	gzhan la rma bzos pa'i rmas 'jal, dus skabs bcu bdun pa'i dus sked du gtsang pa karma bstan skyong dbang pos rma kha che chung la gzhigs te sman yon sprod dgos pa'i old legal custom	rma 'jal
རྨ་རྗེས	scar, cicatrix	rma rjes
རྨ་རྙིང	old wound	rma rnying
རྨ་གཏིང་ཟབ	gash	rma gting zab
རྨ་བཏོད་པ	rma bzos pa	rma btod pa
རྨ་བཏོན་པ	rma bzos pa	rma bton pa
རྨ་སྟོད	1) rma stod rdzong [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs mgo log bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi nub byang ngos dang rma chu'i stod rgyud du yod, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung de rma chu khar yod]; 2) upper ...	rma stod
རྨ་ཐོག་བྱང་འབར	person who debated with zur chung ba	rma thog byang 'bar
རྨ་ཐོན་པ	pustules etc breaking out	rma thon pa
རྨ་དྲུབ་པ	sew up/ cure a wound	rma drub pa
རྨ་མདུད	large scar	rma mdud
རྨ་འདྲུབ	sew up/ stitch a wound	rma 'drub
རྨ་རྡོལ་ནས་རྣག་ཁྲག་ཐོན་པ	pus and blood emitting lesion	rma rdol nas rnag khrag thon pa
རྨ་རྡོལ་བ	naturally occurring wound/ lesion 2101	rma rdol ba
རྨ་ནད	sores and ulcers, 2 kinds are lhan skyes (constitutional), glo bur (accidental)	rma nad
རྨ་ནད་རྩ་བྱེར	rma'i nye 'gram gyi rtsa la chu ser gram nas 'khyug w pain and swelling	rma nad rtsa byer
རྨ་ཕ་རི	Mapha Ri, in Domey	rma pha ri
རྨ་བ	to ask, to wound	rma ba
རྨ་བྱ	a peacock; peacock	rma bya
རྨ་བྱ་ཁ་འབབ	{rma bya kha 'bab} river [kha 'bab bzhi'i nang gses, spu hreng rdzong gi chu bo zhig ste, chu bo gang g'a'i chu 'go'am stod rgyud]	rma bya kha 'bab
རྨ་བྱ་ཅན	tshon spang ma	rma bya can
རྨ་བྱ་ཆེན་པོ	mahamayuri (1 of 5 gcan rim pa, magic art, snakebites), deity, 1 of 5 tantric deities, work glorifying goddess mahamayuri	rma bya chen po
རྨ་བྱ་ཆེན་མོ	1 of the gzungs chen grva lnga	rma bya chen mo
རྨ་བྱ་གཙང་པོ	rma bya gtsang po river [chu 'go hi ma la ya'i ri rgyud kyi byang ngos nas byung zhing bod rang skyong ljongs kyi spu hreng rdzong gi nub rgyud nas bal yul du 'bab cing, mthar rgya gar gyi chu bo g...	rma bya gtsang po
རྨ་བྱ་གཙུག	peacock's crest	rma bya gtsug
རྨ་བྱ་འོག་གླིང	Regions of Peacocks Below	rma bya 'og gling
རྨ་བྱ་ལོ་ཙ	peacock's crest tree	rma bya lo tsa
རྨ་བྱ་གསེར་སྣང་གི་སྐད	the sound of a golden peacock	rma bya gser snang gi skad
རྨ་བྱའི་མཁྲིས་པ	peacock's bile with the juice of bhring gi raja cooked in cow's butter	rma bya'i mkhris pa
རྨ་བྱའི་མགྲིན	a gem	rma bya'i mgrin
རྨ་བྱའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	can symbolized by a peacock, epithet of durga	rma bya'i rgyal mtshan
རྨ་བྱའི་མཇུག	peacock's tail	rma bya'i mjug
རྨ་བྱའི་ཐུལ་པ	peacock cloak	rma bya'i thul pa
རྨ་བྱའི་གདུགས	parasol of peacock feathers	rma bya'i gdugs
རྨ་བྱའི་མདོངས	eye of a peacock feather	rma bya'i mdongs
རྨ་བྱའི་མདོངས་བཀྲ	eye of a peacock feather	rma bya'i mdongs bkra
རྨ་བྱའི་ཕྲུ་གུ	peahen rma bya'i bu mo 'brug gi sgra thos pa	rma bya'i phru gu
བཞིན་དགའ་ཞིང	responded with great joy, as a peahen responds to the call of the peacock	bzhin dga' zhing
རྨ་བྱའི་ཚོགས	1 of 6 great mountains of lus 'phags pa, SA ri chen po drug, fabulous mountain	rma bya'i tshogs
རྨ་བྱའི་འཚོ་བ	food of the peacock, hemlock	rma bya'i 'tsho ba
རྨ་བྱའི་ཟློས་གར	peacock [thunder] dance [R]	rma bya'i zlos gar
རྨ་བྱའི་ཤ	peacock flesh [animal med.]	rma bya'i sha
རྨ་བྱར་ངོམ་རྒྱུ་སྒྲོ་མདོངས	ne tshor ngom rgyu yig drug spre'ur ngom rgyu rkub	rma byar ngom rgyu sgro mdongs
རྨ་བྱས་སྒྲོ་གུར་ཕུབ	peacock pitching the tent of its feathers	rma byas sgro gur phub
རྨ་བྱས་དབྱར་རྔ་ཐོས་པ	peacock hearing summer thunder, example of joy	rma byas dbyar rnga thos pa
རྨ་འབར་བ	rma nad che ru song ba	rma 'bar ba
རྨ་འབྱིན་པ	1) rma bzos pa; 2) discourage ( rma 'byin pa byed pa'i tshig rtsub mi rung - inappropriate discouraging harsh words	rma 'byin pa
རྨ་འབྲས	hard to cure kind of wound from arrows, rocks etc. arising weapon wounds and at the same time wounds and 'bras nad	rma 'bras
རྨ་འབྲས་སྒོར་མོ	a kind of wound	rma 'bras sgor mo
རྨ་མེད	unblemished	rma med
རྨ་སྨད	rang rgyal gyi rma chu'i smad rgyud	rma smad
རྨ་སྨན	wound curing med.	rma sman
རྨ་སྨན་འུ་ཙི	wound med herb 'u tsi	rma sman 'u tsi
རྨ་ཙ་ལ	rma tsha pass [in SE ri bo che rdzong]	rma tsa la
རྨ་རྩི	med. for wounds	rma rtsi
རྨ་ཚ་ལ	rma tsha Pass [in S ri bo che rdzong]	rma tsha la
རྨ་ཚད	rma la tshad pa zhugs pa'i don	rma tshad
རྨ་ཚོ་ཀུན་གཞི	1 of tibetan pupils of atisha	rma tsho kun gzhi
རྨ་མཚན	scar	rma mtshan
རྨ་བཟོ	get a wound/ sore	rma bzo
རྨ་བཟོ་བ	scathe	rma bzo ba
རྨ་འོག་གཤགས་ཞི	rma log tu gtam shi ba ste, former Tibetan legal custom: kha gtad kyi lus la rmas pa'i rma yod na rmas 'jal sprod len byas pa'i rjes su de gong phan tshun gshags bkyes pa la rtsad gcod mi dgos	rma 'og gshags zhi
རྨ་ཡི་རུས་ཟན	bone consuming wounds [med. placed on the mouth of a wound, since it is w/o heat mi 'ju ba or'am rma yi kha phyid nas becoming very damp te rma rkyen having pervaded the bone by pus the bones are e...	rma yi rus zan
རྨ་ར	scab	rma ra
རྨ་རས	bandage	rma ras
རྨ་རས་དཀྲི	bandage up	rma ras dkri
རྨ་རས་འཆིང	bandage up	rma ras 'ching
རྨ་རིན་ཆེན་མཆོག	one of the first seven monks in Tibet	rma rin chen mchog
གྲ་དང	lo ts' ba rab dgu'i nang gses bar ba gsum gyi gras so, glang dar mas chos bsnubs pa'i dus su bkrongs]	gra dang
རྨ་རོ	kha drag kyang nang du ma drag pa'i rma	rma ro
རྨ་ལ་རྣག་སོགས་བསགས་པ	abscess	rma la rnag sogs bsags pa
རྨ་ལས་འབབ་པ	blood	rma las 'bab pa
རྨ་ལས་འོ་མ་ཅན	plant calotropis gigantea 2102	rma las 'o ma can
རྨ་ཤུ	sore, skin ulcer, abscess, ulcer, festering, suppurating wound	rma shu
རྨ་ཤུལ	scar	rma shul
རྨ་ཤོ	herb rma sho	rma sho
རྨ་སོས	the wound closed	rma sos
རྨ་སོས་པ	wound naturally cured	rma sos pa
རྨ་གསར་པ	fresh wound	rma gsar pa
རྨ་གསོ	heal, cure a wound	rma gso
རྨ་གསོ་བ	heal a wound	rma gso ba
རྨ་གསོས་པ	employ means of curing a wound	rma gsos pa
རྨ་ལྷོ	rma lho [bod rigs rang skyong	rma lho
རྨག་ཆད	rma ga chad	rmag chad
རྨང	foundation of a building, creeping parasitical plants, ground, base, dream	rmang
རྨང་གི་བུ	[arch] only son	rmang gi bu
རྨང་འདིང	lay/ use as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang 'ding
རྨང་འདིང་མཁན	founder, creator, originator	rmang 'ding mkhan
རྨང་འདིང་བ	lay foundation of a house	rmang 'ding ba
རྨང་རྡོ	foundation (stone)	rmang rdo
རྨང་རྡོ་བཏིང	laid/ used as a foundation stone	rmang rdo bting
རྨང་རྡོ་འདིང	lay/ use as a foundation stone basis]	rmang rdo 'ding
རྨང་རྡོ་བྱེད	lay/ use as a foundation stone[ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang rdo byed
རྨང་རྡོ་འཛུགས	lay/ use as a foundation stone[ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang rdo 'dzugs
རྨང་པོ	children	rmang po
རྨང་བ	someone who is childless, a woman who has difficulty bearing children	rmang ba
རྨང་བྱས	using as a basis	rmang byas
རྨང་བྱེད	lay/ use as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang byed
རྨང་རྨང	different, SA so sor, gzhi gzhi	rmang rmang
རྨང་ཚེར	[arch] nose hair 'thog spyad	rmang tsher
རྨང་འཚེར	pincers	rmang 'tsher
རྨང་འཛུགས	lay/ use as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang 'dzugs
རྨང་གཞི	base, foundation	rmang gzhi
རྨང་གཞི་བཏིང	laid/ used as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang gzhi bting
རྨང་གཞི་འདིང	lay/ use as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang gzhi 'ding
རྨང་གཞི་འདིང་མཁན	founder, creator, originator	rmang gzhi 'ding mkhan
རྨང་གཞི་བྱས	using as a basis	rmang gzhi byas
རྨང་གཞི་བྱེད	lay/ use as a foundation stone	rmang gzhi byed
རྨང་གཞི་འཛུགས	lay/ use as a [ground, foundation, base, basis]	rmang gzhi 'dzugs
རྨང་གཞིའི	basic	rmang gzhi'i
རྨང་གཞིའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	economic basis/ foundation	rmang gzhi'i dpal 'byor
རྨང་གཞིའི་ཡུལ་སྐད	basic dialect	rmang gzhi'i yul skad
རྨང་ལམ	dream	rmang lam
རྨངས་འཇབ	aa ra 'thog byed kyi 'jab rtse	rmangs 'jab
རྨངས་པ	[arch] shes pa	rmangs pa
རྨངས་ཙེར	smang tsher	rmangs tser
རྨད	1) marvelous; 2) [p rmas],, ask a ? (	rmad
རྨད་ངོ་མཚར་བྱུང་བ	marvelous wonders	rmad ngo mtshar byung ba
རྨད་ཆད	universal interpenetration, true, genuine [R]	rmad chad
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང	marvelous	rmad du byung
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ	excellent, SA rmad byung, 1 of 12 gsung rab yan lag, marvels, marvelous	rmad du byung ba
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ་འི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the Dharma section on marvels {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	rmad du byung ba 'i chos kyi sde
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི	bodhisattva	rmad du byung ba'i
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	the Dharma section on marvels {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	rmad du byung ba'i chos kyi sde
རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་སྡེ	narratives of marvels [one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} = 12 divisions of the teachings nyan thos dang byang sems sangs rgyas rnams kyi yon tan dang zhing gi bkod pa bsam gyis mi khyab pa n...	rmad du byung ba'i sde
རྨད་པ	good, wondrous, marvelous	rmad pa
རྨད་པོ	good, wondrous, marvelous	rmad po
རྨད་བྱུང	1) marvelous; 2) {rmad du byung ba'i chos kyi sde} the Marvels; 3) superior, outstanding, excellent, admirable, great	rmad byung
རྨད་བྱུང་གི་ཉམས	rgyan showing how by apprehending an unprecedented wonder na wondrous experience arises internally	rmad byung gi nyams
རྨད་བྱུང་གི་དཔེ	rgyan of having given a rare and wondrous/ strange example showing that the sense exemplified is also like that, among nyams ldan gyi rgyan and dpe'i rgyan	rmad byung gi dpe
རྨད་བྱུང་གི་སློབ་དཔོན་གཉིས	Two Marvelous Masters. Shantideva and Chandragomin	rmad byung gi slob dpon gnyis
རྨད་བྱུང་གི་སློབ་དཔོན་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two wonderful teachers	rmad byung gi slob dpon rnam gnyis
རྨད་བྱུང་གོང་ན་མེད་པ	unprecedented marvel/ excellence	rmad byung gong na med pa
རྨད་བྱུང་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of Marvels; text name	rmad byung rgyal po
རྨད་བྱུང་གཏོར་མ	Mejung torma; Marvelous Torma	rmad byung gtor ma
རྨད་བྱུང་བསྟན་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	miraculous essence of the teachings	rmad byung bstan pa'i snying po
ག་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	the marvellous essence of the teachings known as Atiyoga	ga zhes bya ba
རྨད་བྱུང་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	Wondrous Emanated Scriptures, by Shabkar	rmad byung sprul pa'i glegs bam
རྨད་བྱུང་ས་ཡི་འཇིག་རྟེན	this superior world	rmad byung sa yi 'jig rten
རྨན	small wound	rman
རྨན་པ	wounded	rman pa
རྨམ་གཤོང་ལ	rnam gshong Pass [bod rang skyong ljongs khongs mal gro gung dkar dang kong po rgya mda' bar gyi la zhig yin zhing mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos nas smi 5000 yod]	rmam gshong la
རྨའི་ཐན་སྐོར	cleansing or dressing of a sore	rma'i than skor
རྨའི་ཕཡབ༹་མཁར	{rma'i phyva mkhar = mkhar rtse, now = 'phan yul lhun grub rdzong	rma'i phyva mkhar
རྨའི་ལྷ་བ	wound growing worse	rma'i lha ba
རྨའུ	CH area measure = 1/16 acre	rma'u
རྨར་ཁམས	{rmar khams} = {smar khams} place in Kham	rmar khams
རྨར་སྙུང	part of sera monastery	rmar snyung
རྨར་ལུད	rul zhing smin pa'i lud tson po	rmar lud
རྨར་སོང	wounded	rmar song
རྨར་ཧྲེང་བ	bare, naked	rmar hreng ba
རྨས	[got] wound[ed], injure[d] [p rma, rmad], asked a ?	rmas
རྨས་སྐྱོན	casualty hurt, injury	rmas skyon
རྨས་སྐྱོན་ཅན	wounded	rmas skyon can
རྨས་སྐྱོན་བྱེད་པ	maul	rmas skyon byed pa
རྨས་སྐྱོན་དམག་མི	wounded soldier	rmas skyon dmag mi
རྨས་འགྲམས	rma 'bras rgya mched pa	rmas 'grams
རྨས་པ	wounded	rmas pa
རྨས་པ་ཁྲག་གི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	blood of the wound zhal lce [zhal lce bcu drug gi nang gses shig ste, snga dus bsam bzhin lag reg gi rkyen gyis pha rol gyi lus la rmas khrag che chung gang byung la dpags pa'i nyes chad gcod lugs ...	rmas pa khrag gi zhal lce
རྨས་མ	wounded animal	rmas ma
རྨས་མ་ཐག་ཏུ	directly from that dream	rmas ma thag tu
རྨས་དམག	wounded soldier	rmas dmag
རྨས་རོགས	rmas pa'i steng du rmas skyon bzo ba	rmas rogs
རྨི	dream, meter	rmi
རྨི་གྲུ་བཞི	square meter	rmi gru bzhi
རྨི་རྒོད	super dream	rmi rgod
རྨི་རྒོད་རྨི་ལམ་ནང་ནས	among dreams, a super dream	rmi rgod rmi lam nang nas
རྨི་ཉམས	dream experiences	rmi nyams
རྨི་ལྟས	dream omens/signs. [mss]	rmi ltas
རྨི་ལྟས་ངན་པོ	bad signs/ omens in dreams	rmi ltas ngan po
རྨི་ལྟས་བཞི་རྨིས	had four symbolic dreams	rmi ltas bzhi rmis
རྨི་ལྟས་བཟང་པོ	good sign in a dream	rmi ltas bzang po
རྨི་སྣང	{rmi lam gyi snang ba} dream image	rmi snang
རྨི་བ	{rmi ba, rmis pa, rmi ba} intr. v.; ft. of {rmi ba}; to dream	rmi ba
རྨི་ལམ	dream[ing], dream-like	rmi lam
དྲེཨམ	like. 2) one of {chos drug}	dream
རྨི་ལམ་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	drop/bindu of the arising of dreams	rmi lam skabs kyi thig le
རྨི་ལམ་འཁྲུགས་པ	troubled/ bad dreams	rmi lam 'khrugs pa
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	dream image	rmi lam gyi snang ba
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་བར་དོ	Bardo of dreaming. The period from falling asleep until waking up again	rmi lam gyi bar do
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	10th smin drug month bcu pa	rmi lam gyi zla ba
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་གཟུགས	dream forms	rmi lam gyi gzugs
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་ཡུལ་སྣང་ལྟ་བུ	like the perception of objects in dreams	rmi lam gyi yul snang lta bu
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་རླུང་ལུས	TSE	rmi lam gyi rlung lus
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་ལུང་བསྟན་ལྟར	as was foretold in his dream	rmi lam gyi lung bstan ltar
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་ལུས	TSE	rmi lam gyi lus
རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་ཤེས	dreaming mind	rmi lam gyi shes
རྨི་ལམ་སྒྱུ་མ	illusory body of dream [dream body arising from habitual patterns, established by subtle mind and completely unobstructed, sgyu lus kyi nang gses shig ste]	rmi lam sgyu ma
རྨི་ལམ་ངན་པ	bad dream w mtshan ma rtsub po	rmi lam ngan pa
རྨི་ལམ་འཇམ་པོ	happy dream	rmi lam 'jam po
རྨི་ལམ་གཏེར	dream treasure	rmi lam gter
རྨི་ལམ་གཏོང	dream	rmi lam gtong
རྨི་ལམ་གཏོང་བ	dream	rmi lam gtong ba
རྨི་ལམ་བཏང	dreamed	rmi lam btang
རྨི་ལམ་ལྟ་བུ	vision-like, dream-like	rmi lam lta bu
རྨི་ལམ་བརྟག	interpret dream signs	rmi lam brtag
རྨི་ལམ་བརྟག་པ	interpret dream signs	rmi lam brtag pa
རྨི་ལམ་མཐོང་བ	to dream	rmi lam mthong ba
རྨི་ལམ་དུ	dreamed a dream	rmi lam du
རྨི་ལམ་དུ་ངོ་ཤེས	recognize that one is dreaming	rmi lam du ngo shes
རྨི་ལམ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	had a dream	rmi lam du byung ba
རྨི་ལམ་དུ་ལུང་བསྟན་པ་ལྟར	as foretold in a dream	rmi lam du lung bstan pa ltar
རྨི་ལམ་དུ་གསན	see in dreams	rmi lam du gsan
རྨི་ལམ་བདུད་ཀྱི་བསླུ་བྲིད	dreamlike deception of mara	rmi lam bdud kyi bslu brid
རྨི་ལམ་བདེ་སྡུག	pleasure & pain of a dream	rmi lam bde sdug
རྨི་ལམ་འདྲ	like a dream	rmi lam 'dra
རྨི་ལམ་འདྲ་བ	like a dream	rmi lam 'dra ba
རྨི་ལམ་ན	had a dream in which	rmi lam na
རྨི་ལམ་སྤྲུལ་བསྒྱུར	transformations of dream practice	rmi lam sprul bsgyur
རྨི་ལམ་སྤྲུལ་བསྒྱུར་གྱི་རྩལ་སྦྱོང	the dream practice of making apparitions and transformations	rmi lam sprul bsgyur gyi rtsal sbyong
རྨི་ལམ་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ལུས	the dream body of habitual patterns	rmi lam bag chags kyi lus
རྨི་ལམ་བན་བུན	vague, evasive confused appearances of sleep	rmi lam ban bun
རྨི་ལམ་བར་དོ	the dream state	rmi lam bar do
རྨི་ལམ་བུ་ཤི་འདྲ	like seeing one's child die in a dream	rmi lam bu shi 'dra
རྨི་ལམ་མི་བཟང་བ	a portentous illboding dream	rmi lam mi bzang ba
རྨི་ལམ་མེད	deity	rmi lam med
རྨི་ལམ་རྨི	dream	rmi lam rmi
རྨི་ལམ་རྨིས	dreamed	rmi lam rmis
རྨི་ལམ་འཚུབ་པོ	gnyid kyi sems snang rtsub mo	rmi lam 'tshub po
རྨི་ལམ་ཟ་ཟི	troubled dream, confused dream	rmi lam za zi
རྨི་ལམ་ཟིན	to recognize dream [to develop awareness while dreaming]; to take hold of / recognize dreams	rmi lam zin
རྨི་ལམ་ཟླ་བ	10th month	rmi lam zla ba
རྨི་ལམ་བཟང་པོ	good dream signs	rmi lam bzang po
རྨི་ལམ་བཟུང	practiced dream yoga	rmi lam bzung
རྨི་ལམ་ཡིན་པར	that it was a dream, that I was dreaming	rmi lam yin par
རྨི་ལམ་ཤར་བ	dreams arising [gnyid khug skabs kyi 'khrul snang byung ba]	rmi lam shar ba
རྨི་ལམ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ངན་པ་བྱུང་བ	began to have nightmares	rmi lam shin tu ngan pa byung ba
རྨི་ལམ་བཤད	interpret dream signs	rmi lam bshad
རྨི་ལམ་བཤད་པ	interpret dream signs	rmi lam bshad pa
རྨི་ལི	a district in Tibet	rmi li
རྨི་སུམ་སྟོང	3,000 meters	rmi sum stong
རྨིག	hooves, hoof-print	rmig
རྨིག་སྒ	a saddle	rmig sga
རྨིག་གཅིག་མ	animals w single hoof like horse	rmig gcig ma
རྨིག་ལྕགས	horse shoe	rmig lcags
རྨིག་ལྕགས་རྒྱག	shoe a horse	rmig lcags rgyag
རྨིག་ཆགས	hoofed animals	rmig chags
རྨིག་རྗེས	hoof print	rmig rjes
རྨིག་གཉིས་མ	animals w split hoof like goat	rmig gnyis ma
རྨིག་མཐིལ	sole of the hoof	rmig mthil
རྨིག་འདྲ	hoof trimming knife for shoeing a horse{rmig bu kha brag can -	rmig 'dra
རྨིག་པ	hoof, lizard, hoof of an animal	rmig pa
རྨིག་པ་ཁ་བྲག	cloven hoof	rmig pa kha brag
རྨིག་པ་ཁ་བྲག་རྨིག་བྲག	cloven hoof	rmig pa kha brag rmig brag
རྨིག་པ་ཁ་དབྲག	split hoofed animal	rmig pa kha dbrag
རྨིག་པ་ཁྲ་བྲག་ཅན	cloven-footed	rmig pa khra brag can
རྨིག་པ་ཅན	horse	rmig pa can
རྨིག་པ་བརྩེ་བ	horse etc unable to bear putting hoof on the ground	rmig pa brtse ba
རྨིག་ཚ	cattle hoof disease	rmig tsha
རྨིག་ཟླུམ	undivided hoof	rmig zlum
རྨིག་གཟེར	horse shoe nail, hob nail	rmig gzer
རྨིག་རལ	rmig par nad phog nas rdol ba	rmig ral
རྨིག་ཤ	rmig pa'i nang gi sha rgyus	rmig sha
རྨིགས་པ	rtsangs pa kha ral rock lizard	rmigs pa
རྨིགས་བུ	rtsangs pa kha ral rock lizard	rmigs bu
རྨིང	SA rmang	rming
རྨིང་བཏིངས	to lay a foundation/ founded	rming btings
རྨིང་རྡོ	foundation stone	rming rdo
རྨིངས	foundation	rmings
རྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང	monastery in tsangpo	rmin grol gling
རྨིན་ཅིང	policeman, militia, guard	rmin cing
རྨིན་ཆུའི་ཕའི	Min-tsu'i Party	rmin chu'i pha'i
རྨིན་ལམ	dream	rmin lam
རྨིའི	meter	rmi'i
རྨིས	dream, SA rmi ba	rmis
རྨིས་ཉམས	dream experience	rmis nyams
རྨིས་པ	pf. of {rmi ba}	rmis pa
རྨུ	rmu clan	rmu
རྨུ་རྒོད	unruly	rmu rgod
རྨུ་རྒོད་པ	lowest class of people in ancient tibet, SA dmu rgod	rmu rgod pa
རྨུ་རྒོད་ས་སྐྱེ	low-born savage	rmu rgod sa skye
རྨུ་ཐག	according to tradition from king gnya' khri btsan po 7 generations grongs skabs lag pas 'jus te nam mkhar 'gro sa'i dpyang thag lta bu zhig de'i rjes su phung po bya la 'grems srol byung	rmu thag
རྨུ་པ	dense fog, stupid	rmu pa
རྨུ་བ	dullness, heaviness, fog	rmu ba
རྨུ་ལི	place in kham	rmu li
རྨུག	1) sloth, dullness, foggy, sluggish, inert, languid, depressed, gloomy; 2) bark [dog] (	rmug
སོགས་སྐྱོན་བཅུ་གཅིག་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from the eleven defects, such as lethargy, sleep, excitement, doubt, mental pain, and so forth	sogs skyon bcu gcig dang bral ba
རྨུག་ཐིག	bruise	rmug thig
རྨུག་འདུར	'dur for someone choked to death	rmug 'dur
རྨུག་པ	sluggishness, lethargy, to bit, to hurt, to sting; {rmug pa, rmugs pa, rmug pa, rmugs} trans. v.; ft. of {rmug pa}	rmug pa
རྨུག་བསེ	1 of sman bla brgyad	rmug bse
རྨུགས	to bark, torpor, drowsiness	rmugs
རྨུགས་རྒོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ	sins of laziness and indolence, SA sgrib pa lnga	rmugs rgod kyi sgrib
རྨུགས་ཐིབ་པ	dense fog covering	rmugs thib pa
རྨུགས་པ	sloth, lethargy, gloominess, mibp 91, dense fog, stupid, inert, lan- 2105 guid, sluggish, bite, sting, SA rmug pa, obfuscation, dull, obscured	rmugs pa
རྨུགས་པ་ཅན	foggy rmugs pa'am lung ma bstan nam phyal ba - dull, absent-minded, or apathetic	rmugs pa can
རྨུགས་བྱེད	stuns	rmugs byed
རྨུགས་ཚིག	word saying mind is unclear	rmugs tshig
རྨུགས་འཛིན	sea	rmugs 'dzin
རྨུགས་འཛིན་འབྱོར་པ	the wealth of Jambhala	rmugs 'dzin 'byor pa
རྨུགས་སང་ཚེ་རིང་བླ་མ	{tshe ring bla ma 'jam dpal bzang po} {rmugs sang} 1900 or 1901	rmugs sang tshe ring bla ma
རྨུགས་སེ་བ	rig pa 'thoms pa lta bur nyob thibs se ba	rmugs se ba
རྨུགས་སྲི	sri of darkening	rmugs sri
རྨུན་པ	rmun po	rmun pa
རྨུན་པོ	dull, heavy, stupid	rmun po
རྨུར	grasp w the teeth, chew	rmur
རྨུར་བ	{rmur ba, rmur ba, rmur ba, rmur} trans. v; to chew	rmur ba
རྨུས་པ	[arch] 1) sad, depressed, disappointed, mtsher ba; 2) get dark	rmus pa
རྨུས་བྱུང་བ	1 who has experienced ups and downs/ good and bad in life	rmus byung ba
རྨེ	mole, birth mark	rme
རྨེ་གྲིབ	the killer's defilement, [from contact with murder, the site, murderer]	rme grib
རྨེ་ངན	[arch] bad sign	rme ngan
རྨེ་ཆུ	rme chu river [si khron zhing chen khongs rnga ba bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi mdzod dge rdzong du yod pa'i 'bab chu zhig ste, mthar si khron dang kan su'u zhing chen gyi mtha' mtsams nas rma chur...	rme chu
རྨེ་གཏོར	gtsog lhag - btsog lhag - dme	rme gtor
རྨེ་ནག	birthmark	rme nag
རྨེ་པོ	stained, defiled, moldy, spotted	rme po
རྨེ་བ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rme ba
རྨེ་བ་བྱས་པ	to criticize	rme ba byas pa
རྨེ་བད	a monastery in lhasa	rme bad
རྨེ་བའི་ཟླ་བ	7th gro bzhin month	rme ba'i zla ba
རྨེ་བུ	[arch] scar	rme bu
རྨེ་བོ	dme bo	rme bo
རྨེ་བྱས་པ	to criticize	rme byas pa
རྨེ་གཙང་མེད	making no difference as to clean or unclean food	rme gtsang med
རྨེ་རུ	1) king khri ral pa can'name of valley on rgya/T border; 2) rme ru Monastery Lhasa [khri srong lde btsan gyis btab par grags pa lha sa'i gtsug lag khang gi byang shar na yod, phyis rgyud smad grva ...	rme ru
རྨེ་རུ་སྙིང་པ	temple in the Barkor at Lhasa, state oracle's Lhasa seat	rme ru snying pa
རྨེ་ཤ་ཅན	rigs ngan pa	rme sha can
རྨེག་ངན	bad omen, inauspicious vision	rmeg ngan
རྨེག་གཏན་ནམ་རྩ་བ	wipe out, destroy, annihilate, root out, purge, liquidate	rmeg gtan nam rtsa ba
རྨེག་གཏའ	break, crush, destroy	rmeg gta'
རྨེག་བཏའ	[arch] break, crush, destroy	rmeg bta'
རྨེག་པ	root, order, series, row	rmeg pa
རྨེག་མེད	never, completely not	rmeg med
རྨེག་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	wipe out, destroy, annihilate, root out, purge, liquidate	rmeg med du gtong
རྨེག་མེད་དུ་གཏོང་བ	wipe out, destroy, annihilate, root out, purge, liquidate	rmeg med du gtong ba
རྨེག་མེད་དུ་བཏང་བ་དགྲ་བོ	annihilated enemy	rmeg med du btang ba dgra bo
རྨེག་མེད་དུ་བསལ་བའི་དཀའ་ཚེགས	eliminated difficulties/ exhaustion	rmeg med du bsal ba'i dka' tshegs
རྨེག་མེད་པ	disorder, not regulated	rmeg med pa
རྨེད	[p rmes],, [arch] ask, request, say	rmed
རྨེད་སྒྲོགས	saddle's crupper	rmed sgrogs
རྨེད་ཐག	saddle's crupper	rmed thag
རྨེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	cause to be ploughed and sown	rmed du 'jug pa
རྨེད་གདན	gzhi'i gdan under saddle crupper	rmed gdan
རྨེད་པ	[arch] ask, request, say	rmed pa
རྨེད་ཕྱིང	rmed gdan gyi felt	rmed phying
རྨེད་ཧྲིལ	horse, mule, donkey etc. saddle mjug tu btags nas dud 'gro'i gzhug rtsa'i placed under piece of felt or wool cloth etc.	rmed hril
རྨེན	mole, birth mark	rmen
རྨེན་སྐྲན	arising in young women, when mature after sex mngal 'grams te rmen bu ltar swelling feminine illness tshabs skran zhig	rmen skran
རྨེན་ངན	bad sign, ill omen, foreboding	rmen ngan
རྨེན་པ	black rma 'bras in the meat and fat of sheep, pig etc. 2106	rmen pa
རྨེན་བུ	1) cured wound skin sra mo; 2) throat and under shin etc black colored flesh and ril por grub pa zhig ste, de'i cha shas ni is everywhere inside the body and out and nus pas lus kyi chu khams srung...	rmen bu
རྨེན་བུའི་ནད	kind of spontaneous wound on throat and under chin sne sa bcas su yod pa'i rmen bu rnams drag shul gyis 'grams pa and rlung khrag 'khrugs pa sogs kyis swelling and pus	rmen bu'i nad
རྨེན་འབྲས	flesh black and ril por grub pa zhig gi don du go ba'i rmen bu	rmen 'bras
རྨེན་རྨེན	grain and shing 'bras etc. newly ripened nem nem pa	rmen rmen
རྨེའུ	sme'u	rme'u
རྨེའུ་ཟན	sme'u zan	rme'u zan
རྨེལ་བ	(tha dad pa),, [R] pluck out, spin, sort	rmel ba
རྨེས	ask, SA rmed pa	rmes
རྨོ	[p rmos],, plow	rmo
རྨོ་རྐོ	plow [& dig], farm	rmo rko
རྨོ་རྐོ་མཁན	plowman [& digger], farmer	rmo rko mkhan
རྨོ་མཁན	ploughman	rmo mkhan
རྨོ་འདེབས	1) plow and plant a field; 2) plowing time at the beginning of the 5th month sam brel 'debs kyi dus tshigs kyang zer	rmo 'debs
རྨོ་ཕྱུགས	plow cattle	rmo phyugs
རྨོ་བ	[will] plough, sow and plough in [f rmod pa]	rmo ba
རྨོ་བོ	grandmother, maternal grandmother, mother-in-law, grandmother	rmo bo
རྨོ་བོ་རྒན་མོ	crone	rmo bo rgan mo
རྨོ་བོ་མདོག་ཉེས	hag	rmo bo mdog nyes
རྨོ་བོ་ལགས	grandmother, granny	rmo bo lags
རྨོ་མ	old woman, father's mother	rmo ma
རྨོ་མོ	grandmother	rmo mo
རྨོ་མོད	plow	rmo mod
རྨོ་མོད་བྱེད	plow	rmo mod byed
རྨོ་མོད་བྱེད་མཁན	plowman	rmo mod byed mkhan
རྨོ་རྨོ	grandmother, granny, great grandmother	rmo rmo
རྨོ་རྨོད་མཁན	plowman	rmo rmod mkhan
རྨོ་རྨོད་པ	plow a field	rmo rmod pa
རྨོ་རྨོན་མཁན	plowman	rmo rmon mkhan
རྨོ་རྨོན་པ	plow a field	rmo rmon pa
རྨོ་ཞིང	field, cultivated/ farm land	rmo zhing
རྨོ་ཡས	number, steel helmet, full coat of mail	rmo yas
རྨོ་ཡུས	cuttle fish	rmo yus
རྨོ་རུང་བ	arable	rmo rung ba
རྨོ་རུང་བའི་ས་ཞིང	arable field	rmo rung ba'i sa zhing
རྨོ་ལགས	1) grandmother; 2) old woman	rmo lags
རྨོ་ལས	tillage	rmo las
རྨོ་བཤོལ	plough share	rmo bshol
རྨོ་ས	arable land	rmo sa
རྨོ་སློག	plow and dig and turn w a	rmo slog
རྨོ་སློག་ཕྲུ་གསུམ	plow turn and harrow [to smooth]	rmo slog phru gsum
རྨོ་སློག་བྱས་ནས་འབྲུ་སོན་འདེབས་པ	having plowed and turned sow	rmo slog byas nas 'bru son 'debs pa
རྨོག	helmet	rmog
རྨོག་མགོ་སྤྱི་ཟླུམ	'brum bu rigs kyi nang tshan 'brum dkar gyi rigs shig ste, nad rtags su 'brum thor gyi dbyibs rmog gi mgo bo ltar zlum por 'byung ba zhig	rmog mgo spyi zlum
རྨོག་རྒྱན	helmet crest/ ornament	rmog rgyan
རྨོག་ཅོག	place in tibet	rmog cog
རྨོག་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཐོད་དཀར	the great helmet white crown of victory	rmog chen rgyal ba'i thod dkar
རྨོག་སྟན	helmet worn under a hat	rmog stan
རྨོག་ཐུར	rmog gi dar 'phru'i srog thur	rmog thur
རྨོག་ཐོད	front side of helmet	rmog thod
རྨོག་དར	little flag at helmet tip	rmog dar
རྨོག་མོ་གནམ་ལྕགས་འབུམ་ཐུབ	helmet of meteoric iron that defeats 1 hundred thousand enemies	rmog mo gnam lcags 'bum thub
རྨོག་བརྩེགས་མ	heretical sect	rmog brtsegs ma
རྨོག་བརྩེགས་མའི་ལུགས	house having planets kyang khyim skar bzhin du not making S N transit piled 1 above the other, 'phyug med du 'dod tshul	rmog brtsegs ma'i lugs
རྨོག་ཞབ༹	helmet	rmog zhva
རྨོག་ཞུ	former CH style hat mo srub zan gsum brtsegs	rmog zhu
རྨོག་རིལ	helmet or hat	rmog ril
རྨོང	stupid	rmong
རྨོང་རྒྱུགས་བྱེད་པ	to follow blindly	rmong rgyugs byed pa
རྨོང་ཆེན་པོའི་ཁང་པ	refuge of utmost delusion	rmong chen po'i khang pa
རྨོང་འཇབ	rmangs 'jab	rmong 'jab
རྨོང་དད	blind faith	rmong dad
རྨོང་པ	delusion, stupidity, stupor [thd]	rmong pa
རྨོང་སྤུ	hair of the abdomen and pudenda	rmong spu
རྨོང་བ	to be obscured, obscurity, obscured, stultified	rmong ba
རྨོང་བར་བྱེད་པ	obscure, darken, confound, perplex	rmong bar byed pa
རྨོང་བུ	[arch] 'jab rtse	rmong bu
རྨོང་བྱེད་མ	Mohani, the confounderess	rmong byed ma
རྨོང་ཞེན	blind loyalty	rmong zhen
རྨོང་ཞེན་བྱེད་པ	to be blindly loyal	rmong zhen byed pa
རྨོངས	[p rmong],, delusion, confusion, stupidity, ignorance, dullness, stupid, be confused/ puzzled, dull	rmongs
རྨོངས་ཁ	mouth of urethra	rmongs kha
རྨོངས་གླུ	melancholy song	rmongs glu
རྨོངས་རྒན	very ignorant mind w/o understanding, seeing or apprehension	rmongs rgan
རྨོངས་རྒྱུགས	following blindly	rmongs rgyugs
རྨོངས་རྒྱུགས་བྱེད	follow blindly	rmongs rgyugs byed
རྨོངས་འཆར	thoughts of a stupid mind	rmongs 'char
རྨོངས་གཉིད	foolish shes rig like sleep, the sleep of ignorance, unawareness	rmongs gnyid
རྨོངས་གཉིད་ལས་སད	foolish shes rig like sleep, awaken from the sleep of ignorance/ unawareness	rmongs gnyid las sad
རྨོངས་གཉིད་ལས་སད་པའི་དམངས	awakened masses	rmongs gnyid las sad pa'i dmangs
རྨོངས་གཏམ	foolish talk, deluded chatter	rmongs gtam
རྨོངས་རྟུལ	blun mo	rmongs rtul
རྨོངས་བརྟུལ	stupidity, blindness	rmongs brtul
རྨོངས་དད	superstition, blind faith [gnas lugs sam rgyu mtshan ma rtogs pa'i dad pa,//gna' rabs kyi mi la rmongs dad byed pa,//rmongs dad sel ba]	rmongs dad
རྨོངས་དད་བྱེད	have superstition/ blind faith 2107	rmongs dad byed
རྨོངས་དད་བྱེད་པ	be superstitious	rmongs dad byed pa
རྨོངས་དད་རྩ་མེད་བཟོ	eradicate superstition	rmongs dad rtsa med bzo
རྨོངས་དྲེག	'doms kyi dreg pa	rmongs dreg
རྨོངས་འདོད	fool's desires	rmongs 'dod
རྨོངས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	dull ignorant, stupid, deluded, confused	rmongs pa dang bcas pa
རྨོངས་པ་སྤྱི་དང་བྱེ་བྲག	general and particular ignorance/ stupidity	rmongs pa spyi dang bye brag
རྨོངས་པ་ཕེལ་ཆེར	most fools	rmongs pa phel cher
རྨོངས་པ་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་ཅན	a closeminded fool	rmongs pa phyogs lhung can
རྨོངས་པ་མེད་པ	freedom from delusion	rmongs pa med pa
ཕྱག་བྱེད	even if you are a fool, you are honored by the wise	phyag byed
རྨོངས་པ་གསུམ	the three ignorances [sems byung dang/ gzugs dang/ gzugs sems gnyis ka la ril po'i bdag nyid du 'dzin pas rmongs pa'o]	rmongs pa gsum
རྨོངས་པའི་གྲོགས་པོ	desire to sleep, falling asleep	rmongs pa'i grogs po
རྨོངས་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	foolish pride	rmongs pa'i nga rgyal
རྨོངས་པའི་དཔེ	dpe don phan tshun 'dra drags pas dbye ba ma phye bar dpe can dpe dang nor te rmongs pa'i dbang gis dpe'i rjes su 'brang bar ston pa'i rgyan zhig; dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig	rmongs pa'i dpe
རྨོངས་པའི་སྤྲིན་དང་བྲལ་བ	freeing oneself from the clouds of ignorance	rmongs pa'i sprin dang bral ba
རྨོངས་པའི་བསམ་བློ	stupid thought/ idea	rmongs pa'i bsam blo
རྨོངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become obscured, darkened	rmongs par 'gyur ba
རྨོངས་པར་བྱེད	female organ	rmongs par byed
རྨོངས་པས	foolishly	rmongs pas
རྨོངས་པས་བཅིངས་པ	Fettered by my own stupidity	rmongs pas bcings pa
རྨོངས་པས་བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་པ	ego grasping due to ignorance	rmongs pas bdag tu 'dzin pa
རྨོངས་སྤུ	crotch hair	rmongs spu
རྨོངས་བྱེད་མདའ	stupefying arrow	rmongs byed mda'
རྨོངས་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	deception to fool/ confuse another	rmongs byed 'phrul 'khor
རྨོངས་བྱེད་མ	mohani	rmongs byed ma
རྨོངས་བློ	thoughts of a fool, stupidity, ignorance, delusion	rmongs blo
རྨོངས་བློ་འབྱེད	enlighten/ expand/ develop [thoughts of a fool, stupidity, ignorance, delusion]	rmongs blo 'byed
རྨོངས་བློ་འབྱེད་པ	develop/ expand children and fools's shes rig	rmongs blo 'byed pa
རྨོངས་སྦྲེ	dri chu'i snod kyi kha sgo'i mi gtsang ba'i dri	rmongs sbre
རྨོངས་མི་འགྱུར	never again be obscured in mind	rmongs mi 'gyur
རྨོངས་མེད	unimpaired mind	rmongs med
རྨོངས་རྨོངས་ཚོད་ཚོད	blind guess	rmongs rmongs tshod tshod
རྨོངས་ཚོད	1) level of thought of an inferior mind; 2) unexamined/ blind guess/attempt; 3) word of humility	rmongs tshod
རྨོངས་མཚམས	1) gsang gnas kyi thad mtshams; 2) lus kyi gsang zhig	rmongs mtshams
རྨོངས་མཛད	stupefying	rmongs mdzad
རྨོངས་ཞེན	foolish attachment, blind loyalty	rmongs zhen
རྨོངས་ཞེན་ཕྱོགས་ལངས	thick ignorance by attachment to aa 'thas kyi nye phyogs gang yin gyi rgyab skyor	rmongs zhen phyogs langs
རྨོངས་ཞེན་རིང་ལུགས	chauvinism	rmongs zhen ring lugs
རྨོངས་བསམ	thoughts of a fool	rmongs bsam
རྨོད	(tha dad pa rmos pa, rmo ba, rmos,, plow	rmod
རྨོད་གླང	ploughing ox	rmod glang
རྨོད་སྔགས	charms for causing mischief to others	rmod sngags
རྨོད་པ	to plough; {rmod pa, rmos pa, rmo ba, rmos} trans. v	rmod pa
རྨོད་པ་དྲག་སྔགས	Maledictory Fierce Mantra. One of the Eight Sadhana Teachings	rmod pa drag sngags
རྨོད་ཕྱུགས	plow animals	rmod phyugs
རྨོད་མོ་བྱེད	to curse	rmod mo byed
རྨོད་མོ་བྱེད་པ	speak ill	rmod mo byed pa
རྨོད་ལམ	[plow] furrow	rmod lam
རྨོད་སློག	(tha dad pa rmos pa, rmo ba, rmos,, plow	rmod slog
རྨོད་སློག་རྒྱག	(tha dad pa rmos pa, rmo ba, rmos,, plow	rmod slog rgyag
རྨོན་གླང	plow o	rmon glang
རྨོན་ཆས	plowing implement	rmon chas
རྨོན་དོར	yoke of oxen	rmon dor
རྨོན་དོར་གཅིག་གི་ས	field the size two plow cattle can plow in a day	rmon dor gcig gi sa
རྨོན་དོར་བསྡེབས	plow animals yoked in pairs	rmon dor bsdebs
རྨོན་འདེབས	5th month dbugs thob = rmon 'debs / brel 'debs season	rmon 'debs
རྨོན་པ	plowing	rmon pa
རྨོན་པ་རྒྱག	to plow	rmon pa rgyag
རྨོན་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	plough	rmon pa rgyab pa
རྨོན་པ་བརྒྱབ་པའི་རོལ་ཤུལ	plowed furrow	rmon pa brgyab pa'i rol shul
རྨོན་པ་དོར	yoke of oxen	rmon pa dor
རྨོན་པ་རྨོ	plow	rmon pa rmo
རྨོན་མཛོ	plow mdzo [yak/ cow cross]	rmon mdzo
རྨོན་མཛོ་དོར་སྦྲེལ	in plowing two plow mdzo connected by a yoke	rmon mdzo dor sbrel
རྨོན་མཛོའི་རྔ་དམར	plow mdzo's head ornament	rmon mdzo'i rnga dmar
རྨོའི་ལགས	rmo lags	rmo'i lags
རྨོའོ	grandma, grand-mother, mother in law	rmo'o
རྨོས	ploughed; imp. of {rmod pa}; a plough	rmos
རྨོས་འཁོར	tractors	rmos 'khor
རྨོས་གླང	a plowing ox	rmos glang
རྨོས་པ	[p rmod pa] plowed, toil	rmos pa
རྨོས་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to plow	rmos pa brgyab pa
རྨྱ	go down, deteriorate 2108	rmya
རྨྱ་བ	sickness, nausea, degenerate, grow worse, decay	rmya ba
རྨྱང	lessen, reduce, minimize	rmyang
རྨྱང་བ	[f rmyong ba] stretch one's self [sma- sma ra- beard smag- medicine smang tsher- smad- the lower part	rmyang ba
སྨད་པ	bend down, hand, reach	smad pa
དོཝན་སྨན	medicine, physic, remedy, medicinal herb, drub smar ba- ready	down sman
མོནེཡ་སྨལ་པོ	smas pa- smig rgyumirage smig bu- lizard smig ma- cane,	money smal po
རེཨེད་སྨིན་དྲུག	the Pleiades smin	reed smin drug
སྨུག་ཆུང	smug pa- fog smug posme bdun- sme ba- smo ba- smod pasmon pa- wish, desire smon mgrincomrade, companion, associate smyansmyar ba- stretch one's self smyi- thin, cane, writing cane, reed-pen smyig m...	smug chung
ཏལཀ་སྨྲང	word, speech smre bawail, lament]	talk smrang
རྨྱང་ཤད	stretch out the arms and legs	rmyang shad
རྨྱངས་པ	[p rmyong ba]	rmyangs pa
རྨྱི་ལམ	[arch] dream	rmyi lam
རྨྱེང་བ	bend towards, SA rmyang ba	rmyeng ba
རྨྱོང་བ	(tha dad pa rmyangs pa, rmyang ba, rmyongs,, rkyong ba	rmyong ba
རྨྱོངས	rmyong ba!	rmyongs
སྨ	[arch] 1) low; 2) inferior, poor quality, weak	sma
སྨ་སྐྲན	saddle cloth	sma skran
སྨ་ཁམས	name of a district	sma khams
སྨ་གྲུམ	darkness	sma grum
སྨ་ཕབ	humiliation, disgrace, degradation	sma phab
སྨ་འབེབས	blame, deprecate, disapprove, humiliate, humiliation, disgrace, degradation	sma 'bebs
སྨ་འབེབས་པ	humiliate, cast down, humble	sma 'bebs pa
སྨ་འབེབས་ཚིག	humiliating word, insult	sma 'bebs tshig
སྨ་སྨན	ointment	sma sman
སྨ་ར	beard, moustache, whiskers, beard	sma ra
སྨ་ར་ཅན	bearded	sma ra can
སྨ་ར་ཉུང	scanty beard	sma ra nyung
སྨ་ས	suitable	sma sa
སྨག	medicine with astringent taste	smag
སྨག་ཁྱིམ	house constructed of bamboos	smag khyim
སྨག་ཁྲན	(CH saddle blanket	smag khran
སྨག་རྒྱུ	{pho ril nag po} med.	smag rgyu
སྨག་ཆད	[arch] w/o ignorance/ darkness	smag chad
སྨག་སྦྲན	saddle blanket	smag sbran
སྨག་རུམ	dark, darkness	smag rum
སྨག་ལ་སྒྲོན་མེ་བཏེག་པ	light a lamp in darkness	smag la sgron me bteg pa
སྨག་ཤད	spiraea mongolica maxim.	smag shad
སྨག་ཤོག	seat cushion placed on a saddle	smag shog
སྨང	(not in das)	smang
སྨང་ཅི	name of a city in vietnam	smang ci
སྨང་ཙེ	Mangce North Vietnam	smang tse
སྨང་ཚེར	[arch] aa ra 'thog byed kyi 'jab rtse	smang tsher
སྨང་ལུང	Manglung, river in Tsang	smang lung
སྨད་དཀྲིས	leggings, skirt, {smad g.yogs}; skirt	smad dkris
སྨད་དཀྲིས་སྨད་ཤམ	lower garments, petticoats	smad dkris smad sham
སྨད་བཀབ	lower part of the body covered	smad bkab
སྨད་སྐུ་ཙམ	lower body/ part/ region, degrade, dishonor	smad sku tsam
སྨད་སྐྱོན་གཏོང་བ	damnify	smad skyon gtong ba
སྨད་ཁམས	[arch] mdo khams	smad khams
སྨད་ཁེབས	menstrual rag pad tampon etc	smad khebs
སྨད་ཁོག	body lower lus kyi smad khog lug sha smad khog tshags sha smad khog	smad khog
སྨད་གོས	lower garment	smad gos
སྨད་གྱི་བླ	supreme healer	smad gyi bla
སྨད་གྲྭ་ཚང	{se ra smad grwa tshang}; smad (mey) college of sera monastery	smad grwa tshang
སྨད་འགོ	'go nad of cattles's lower body	smad 'go
སྨད་རྒྱས་མ	woman in full sense	smad rgyas ma
སྨད་རྒྱུད	lower/ bottom part	smad rgyud
སྨད་རྒྱུད་པ	{smad rgyud pa} tantric monastic college	smad rgyud pa
སྨད་ལྔ	the five medicinal substances, {shu dag dkar po}, utpal, kandakari, {ga bra}, {rgya mtsho sbu ba}	smad lnga
སྨད་ཆ	the second of two parts (in a book or a lifetime)	smad cha
སྨད་ཆད	[arch] ma smad pa, last volume, lower part	smad chad
སྨད་ཆུ	smad chu river	smad chu
སྨད་ཆེན་མ	pretty woman	smad chen ma
སྨད་འཆལ	improper/ immoral actions, dissoluteness, licentiousness	smad 'chal
སྨད་འཆལ་བྱེད་པ	indulge in dissolute habits, practice prostitution	smad 'chal byed pa
སྨད་འཇལ	appraise punishment for adultery with another's wife	smad 'jal
སྨད་འཐོང	courtesan, prostitute	smad 'thong
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམ་སྒང་གསུམ	The Three Ridges /Heights of Dokham: are 1) Markham in Upper Kham (smar khams in mdo khams); 2) Yermo Thang in Lower Kham, Amdo (g.yer mo thang in mdo smad); and 3) Gyi Thang in Tshongkha (gyi than...	smad mdo kham sgang gsum
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྒང་དྲུག	lower Tibet = mdo khams sgang drug	smad mdo khams sgang drug
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྒང་གསུམ	three ranges of Dokham	smad mdo khams sgang gsum
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྒར་དྲུག	CHN	smad mdo khams sgar drug
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྦང	rab, spo 'bor, dmar tsha sgang, zal mo sgang)	smad mdo khams sbang
སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྦང་དྲུག	6 districts of lower mdo khams (skyu ra	smad mdo khams sbang drug
སྨད་འདུལ	regulations of the 'dul ba observed in khams amdo, lower lineage of vinaya from Buddha primarily followed by nyingmapas and gelukpas	smad 'dul
སྨད་འདོགས	subjoined letters, subscribed letter like ya ra la wa	smad 'dogs
སྨད་པ་བྱེད་པ	cursed {rang gis rang la smad pa byed pa} I have cursed myself	smad pa byed pa
སྨད་པ་ས་གཞན་ན་གནས་པ	perform the nan tur bzhi	smad pa sa gzhan na gnas pa
སྨད་པ་གསུད	spasmodic cholera	smad pa gsud
སྨད་པའི་དངོས་པོ	SA gdul ba'i dngos po	smad pa'i dngos po
སྨད་པའི་ཆ་ལས་བསྟོད་པ	cha'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, gyo zol gyi tshig gis bstod btang ba'i khul byas nas don la smad ra phab pa'i tshul ston pa'i cha'i rgyan zhig	smad pa'i cha las bstod pa
སྨད་པའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi gnas lugs cung zad lhag par ston pa'i phyir, dpe la smad ra btang ba'i tshul gyis don du dpe don mtshungs par ston pa'i rgyan zhig	smad pa'i dpe
སྨད་པའི་ཚིག	slander, words of slander, curses	smad pa'i tshig
སྨད་པའི་མཚུངས་སྦྱོར	brjod 'dod smad yul la nyes skyon gyi smad ra mtshungs par ston pa'i rgyan zhig, mtshungs sbyor gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	smad pa'i mtshungs sbyor
སྨད་དཔའ་བོ་གཅིག་ཐུབ	universal panacea	smad dpa' bo gcig thub
སྨད་བླ	[= {sangs rgyas bla}, Buddha supreme healer]	smad bla
སྨད་འབྲུག་ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ	{khams pa sgar}	smad 'brug chos sde chen po
སྨད་སྦྱར	herbal ingredient, med. compound, med. sadhana['s blessed med substance	smad sbyar
སུཆ་སདྷན	ritual]	such sadhana
སྨད་མ	lower part	smad ma
སྨད་འཙོང	prostitutes	smad 'tsong
སྨད་ཚིག	insults, abuse, curses, deprecating words	smad tshig
སྨད་ཚོང་མ	drab, harlot, whore	smad tshong ma
སྨད་ཚོང་མའི་ཁང་པ	brothel	smad tshong ma'i khang pa
སྨད་འཚོང	prostitute	smad 'tshong
སྨད་འཚོང་གནས	whore house	smad 'tshong gnas
སྨད་འཚོང་པའི་ལས་ཀ	prostitution	smad 'tshong pa'i las ka
སྨད་འཚོང་མ	prostitute, courtesan	smad 'tshong ma
སྨད་འཚོང་མའི་གནས	public house, prostitute's house, brothel	smad 'tshong ma'i gnas
སྨད་འཚོང་མའི་བུ	prostitute's son	smad 'tshong ma'i bu
སྨད་འཚོང་མའི་གཙོ	chief courtesan	smad 'tshong ma'i gtso
སྨད་འཚོང་མའི་གཙོ་མོ	queen of the harlots	smad 'tshong ma'i gtso mo
སྨད་ཞིང་ཆེ་བ	stretching forth the lower parts	smad zhing che ba
སྨད་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	later 8-fold, the 8-fold way of med practice	smad yan lag brgyad pa
སྨད་ར	1) demean, rebuke, insult, curse at, deprecate; 2) goatee; 3) lower fence/ enclosure	smad ra
སྨད་ར་གཏོང་བ	condemn, slander	smad ra gtong ba
སྨད་ར་བཏང་བ	to abuse	smad ra btang ba
སྨད་ར་མ་གཏོང	do not slander or blaspheme	smad ra ma gtong
སྨད་རའི་ཚིག་རྩུབ	insult	smad ra'i tshig rtsub
སྨད་རིགས	low or inferior class, lower race	smad rigs
སྨད་རུས	lower bones	smad rus
སྨད་ལ	downwards	smad la
སྨད་ལས	the 'lower activity'; comp. with {stod las}	smad las
སྨད་ལས་དགྲ་བགེགས་བསྒྲལ་བ	the lower activity of liberating enemies and obstructers	smad las dgra bgegs bsgral ba
སྨད་ལས་སྒྲོལ་དབང	"liberating" empowerment of the lower rite (of Vajrakilaya	smad las sgrol dbang
སྨད་ལུགས	eastern transmission of vinaya vows (9th cent., shared by rnying ma pa and dge lugs pa schools)	smad lugs
སྨད་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བླ	SA nye brgyud	smad lugs kyi bla
སྨད་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	masters of the higher zones	smad lugs kyi bla ma
སྨད་ཤམ	1) lower garment, skirt, petticoat, underskirt; 2) kind of gos chen	smad sham
སྨད་བཤའ་ཁ་མཆུ	being put down / critical, court case, fighting a case	smad bsha' kha mchu
སྨན	medicine, physic, remedy, medicinal herb	sman
སྨན་ཀུན་ནས་སྦྱར་བ	compound or mix up medicines	sman kun nas sbyar ba
སྨན་ཀུན་ནས་སྦྱོར་བ	to mix up medicine	sman kun nas sbyor ba
སྨན་ཀྱི་སྒོ་མོ	science	sman kyi sgo mo
སྨན་དཀར	a Tibetan turnip/ radish boiled juice	sman dkar
སྨན་དཀར་པོ་གཅིག་ཐུབ	the universal panacea	sman dkar po gcig thub
སྨན་བཀུ	medicinal extract	sman bku
སྨན་བཀུས	[p bku],, extracted med. by boiling, applied med.	sman bkus
སྨན་བཀུས་ཏེ་བོར	extract medicine by infusion	sman bkus te bor
སྨན་བཀུས་ཏེ་བོར་བ	medicine wellpurified	sman bkus te bor ba
སྨན་སྐུ	image made of the six medicinal metals (gold, silver, copper, iron, brass, zinc)	sman sku
སྨན་ཁང	1) hospital; 2) place meds. are stored	sman khang
སྨན་ཁང་ཆུང་བ	dispensary, clinic sman khang nang g.yog ma - sister	sman khang chung ba
སྨན་ཁབ	hypodermic needle, med. injection	sman khab
སྨན་ཁབ་རྒྱག	give an injection, inoculate	sman khab rgyag
སྨན་ཁུག	bag [usually for medicines]. cloth bag for medicine	sman khug
སྨན་ཁྱེམ	med. powder measuring instrument	sman khyem
སྨན་ཁྲོག	medicinal ingredients not yet pounded or mixed up, unpulverized ingredients of a medicine	sman khrog
སྨན་གོ་ལ	globular medicine	sman go la
སྨན་གྱི	medical, pharmaceutical	sman gyi
སྨན་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག	the med. city lta na sdug	sman gyi grong khyer lta na sdug
སྨན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	aa ru ra	sman gyi rgyal po
སྨན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་བཞི	the four med. tantras	sman gyi rgyud bzhi
སྨན་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཆེན	Medicine drubchen	sman gyi sgrub chen
སྨན་གྱི་ཆུ	1) like camphor [ga bur] &, white sandalwood [tshan dan dkar po] shin tu bsil ba'i sman gyis nus pa chu dang mthun pa'i las byed pa'i cha nas btags pa zhig; 2) rlung mkhris bad kan ldan 'dus sel ba...	sman gyi chu
སྨན་གྱི་ལྗོངས	country rich in medicinal plants, tibet	sman gyi ljongs
སྨན་གྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་བཞི	CHN	sman gyi bstan bcos bzhi
སྨན་གྱི་མཐུ	sman gyi gtso bo'i nus shugs te, tsha bas grang nad 'joms pa dang, bsil bas tsha nad 'joms pa lta bu'o	sman gyi mthu
སྨན་གྱི་ལྡེ་གུ	med. bskol ba'i paste/ porridge/ dough skyo ma	sman gyi lde gu
སྨན་གྱི་སྡོང་པོ	medicinal tree	sman gyi sdong po
སྨན་གྱི་ནུས་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 med. powers	sman gyi nus pa brgyad
སྨན་གྱི་ཕབས་རྟ	sman sbyor byed dus 'debs rgyu'i sman gyi nus pa 'don byed ru rtsi lta bu	sman gyi phabs rta
སྨན་གྱི་བྱ་བ	effect of medicine	sman gyi bya ba
སྨན་གྱི་བླ	supreme healer, the Buddha of Medicine. Syn {sangs rgyas sman bla}	sman gyi bla
སྨན་གྱི་དབང་པོ	moon, SA sman dbang	sman gyi dbang po
སྨན་གྱི་སྦྱོར་སྡེ	according to antidote for each disease med's taste, effect, zhu rjes heating power etc. sbyor ba'i sde tshan te, EG rin chen ril nag chen mo &, ratna bsam 'phel	sman gyi sbyor sde
སྨན་གྱི་གཞི	foundations of med.	sman gyi gzhi
སྨན་གྱི་གཞི་བཞི	CHN	sman gyi gzhi bzhi
སྨན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ་བདུན	the 17 good qualities of meds	sman gyi yon tan bcu bdun
སྨན་གྱི་རིག་གནས	medicine	sman gyi rig gnas
སྨན་གྱི་རོ	taste of medicine	sman gyi ro
སྨན་གྱི་རོ་དྲུག	[Tse]	sman gyi ro drug
སྨན་གྱི་ཤན	discrimination? of meds. [thun tshod du rung ba'i sman dang, zhag bdun pa'i sman rnams rang rang gi byin gyis brlabs pa'i thun tshod kyi mtha' las 'das pa na, gsog 'jog gi spang ba bskyed pa'o, rdz...	sman gyi shan
སྨན་གྱིས་རེ་ཞིག་གསོས་ནས	gave him various herbs which cured him	sman gyis re zhig gsos nas
སྨན་གྱིས་ལས་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	will the medicine work?	sman gyis las byed rgyu
སྨན་གྲྭ	medical school	sman grwa
སྨན་གྲུབ	various medicines	sman grub
སྨན་གླིང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	sman gling
སྨན་དགོན	Mengon, in Tsang	sman dgon
སྨན་རྒྱག	spay/ apply a disinfectant/ pesticide	sman rgyag
སྨན་རྒྱག་ཡོ་བྱད	med, disinfectant/ pesticide sprayer	sman rgyag yo byad
སྨན་སྒ	medicinal ginger	sman sga
སྨན་སྒ་སྐམ་པོ	sman bca' sga skam po	sman sga skam po
སྨན་སྒམ	med. chest	sman sgam
སྨན་སྒྲུབ	Sacred medicine	sman sgrub
སྨན་ངོས་འཛིན་སྟངས	how to recognize medicinal plants	sman ngos 'dzin stangs
སྨན་ལྔ	the five medicinal substances, {shu dag dkar po}, utpal, kandakari, {ga bra}, {rgya mtsho sbu ba}	sman lnga
སྨན་གཅིག་མ	one of {sman mo bzhi}	sman gcig ma
སྨན་གཅིའུ	tube for anal insertion of med.	sman gci'u
སྨན་བཅོས	medical treatment/ care	sman bcos
སྨན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀ	med. work	sman bcos kyi las ka
སྨན་བཅོས་སྐོར་བསྐྱོད	mobile med. care	sman bcos skor bskyod
སྨན་བཅོས་ཁང	clinic	sman bcos khang
སྨན་བཅོས་འཕྲོད་བསྟེན	public health, health care	sman bcos 'phrod bsten
སྨན་བཅོས་འཕྲོད་བསྟེན་སྡེ་ཁག	health clinics	sman bcos 'phrod bsten sde khag
སྨན་བཅོས་བྱེད	cure, remedy, treat	sman bcos byed
སྨན་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	to cure, remedy, treat	sman bcos byed pa
སྨན་བཅོས་ཡོ་བྱད	med. instruments/ equipment	sman bcos yo byad
སྨན་བཅོས་རུ་ཁག	med. team	sman bcos ru khag
སྨན་བཅོས་ལས་ཁུངས	med office/ institution	sman bcos las khungs
སྨན་བཅོས་ལས་དོན	med. affairs/ work	sman bcos las don
སྨན་བཅོས་ལས་བྱེད་པ	med. [aid] workers/ staff	sman bcos las byed pa
སྨན་བཅོས་སྲིང་བལ	med. cotton	sman bcos sring bal
སྨན་ཆང	med boiled in chang/ alcohol	sman chang
སྨན་ཆན	aconite	sman chan
སྨན་ཆས	med. equipment	sman chas
སྨན་ཆུ	1) med. boiled in water; 2) med. having ri'i chu; 3) curing waters; 4) sman river; 3) med. liquid; 4) disinfectant/ pesticide solution	sman chu
སྨན་ཆུ་རྒྱག	apply disinfectant/ pesticide	sman chu rgyag
སྨན་ཆུ་རྒྱག་པ	apply disinfectant/ pesticide	sman chu rgyag pa
སྨན་ཆུ་གཏོར	apply disinfectant/ pesticide	sman chu gtor
སྨན་ཆུ་གཏོར་བ	apply disinfectant/ pesticide	sman chu gtor ba
སྨན་ཆུ་གཏོར་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	sprayer	sman chu gtor byed 'phrul chas
སྨན་ཆུ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of med. water 2111	sman chu rigs lnga
སྨན་ཆེན	herb bong nga nag po	sman chen
སྨན་ཆེན་པོ	great medicine	sman chen po
སྨན་ཆོས	med. dharma	sman chos
སྨན་མཆོག	supreme medicine	sman mchog
སྨན་མཆོད	amrita offering, great med.	sman mchod
སྨན་ལྗོངས	1) place many meds are found; 2) excellent region; 3) spang ri, the land of herbs	sman ljongs
སྨན་ཉར་སྤྲོད་ཁང	pharmacy, drug store	sman nyar sprod khang
སྨན་ཉར་ཚོང་ཁང	pharmacy, drug store	sman nyar tshong khang
སྨན་ཉི་དགའ	med. herb {sman nyi dga'}	sman nyi dga'
སྨན་གཉེར	med. care giver	sman gnyer
སྨན་རྙིང	sman tshe rnying ma ste, srin 'bu'i dar skud las bzos pa'i gru'u tshe ser po shing lo dang shing tog gi ri mo yod pa zhig	sman rnying
སྨན་གཏོང་བ	administer medicine	sman gtong ba
སྨན་གཏོར	spay/ apply a disinfectant/ pesticide	sman gtor
སྨན་གཏོར་ཡོ་བྱད	med, disinfectant/ pesticide sprayer	sman gtor yo byad
སྨན་བཏགས	medicine pulverized	sman btags
སྨན་བཏགས་པ	1) powder med. ingredients; 2) employ med.	sman btags pa
སྨན་བཏང་ནས་འཚོ་བ	cured by taking an antidote	sman btang nas 'tsho ba
སྨན་བཏུང	take medicine; x {sman pa des ji ltar bsgo ba bzhin bsgrubs nas gang byin pa'i sman btung ste nad las grol ba'i bde ba don du gnyer ba} they follow the doctor's advice, take whatever medicine he pr...	sman btung
སྨན་རྟ	horse of med.	sman rta
སྨན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like a physician	sman lta bu'i sems bskyed
སྨན་བརྟགས་པ	be useful	sman brtags pa
སྨན་བསྟེན་པ	sman 'thung ba, sman thang, sman bskol ba'i khu ba dang, sman dang sbyar ba'i btung ba	sman bsten pa
སྨན་ཐང	potion, plain decoction, mixture to be drunk	sman thang
སྨན་ཐུན	dose[age] of med.	sman thun
སྨན་ཐུན་ཚད་ལས་ལྷག་པ	overdose	sman thun tshad las lhag pa
སྨན་ཐོ	prescription	sman tho
སྨན་མཐུ	power of meds.	sman mthu
སྨན་འཐུར	spoon for measuring powdered med.	sman 'thur
སྨན་འཐོར་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	med, pesticide/ disinfectant sprayer	sman 'thor 'phrul chas
སྨན་དང་མཁྱུད་དཔྱད	med. and treatment	sman dang mkhyud dpyad
སྨན་དང་མཁྱུད་སྤྱད	medicine and treatment sman dang g.yog byed pa - administering medicine to and nursing the sick	sman dang mkhyud spyad
སྨན་དང་ས་བོན་མཉམ་སྲེ	seed w pesticide	sman dang sa bon mnyam sre
སྨན་དུལ་མ	medicinal powders	sman dul ma
སྨན་ལྡེ	med. syrup	sman lde
སྨན་སྡོང་མཚམས་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	alias {kar-ma nges don bstan rgyas} author of the biography of {sgam po pa bsod nams rin chen} 1079-1153	sman sdong mtshams pa rin po che
སྨན་སྡོང་མཚོ	{sman sdong mtsho	sman sdong mtsho
སྨན་བརྡུང་སྦྱོར་ཁང	pharmacy	sman brdung sbyor khang
སྨན་བསྡུས	ae lab?	sman bsdus
སྨན་ནད	poisonous med.	sman nad
སྨན་ནུས	med. power	sman nus
སྨན་རྣམ་བཞི	[Tse]	sman rnam bzhi
སྨན་སྣ	samples of different medicinal plants	sman sna
སྨན་སྣ་རྒྱག	spice up	sman sna rgyag
སྨན་སྣ་རྒྱབ་པ	spice	sman sna rgyab pa
སྨན་སྣ་ཅན	spicy	sman sna can
སྨན་པ	beneficial [to the doctrine]. medicine, physician, sake, benefit, vaidya [Buddha]; {sman pa, sman pa, sman pa} intr. v	sman pa
སྨན་པ་དཀའ་བཅུ་བ	rgyud bzhi rtsa 'grel &, cha lag kha skong, mdo byang bcas blor thon cing, de dag lag len du spyod shes pa'i sman pa'i mtshan snyan	sman pa dka' bcu ba
སྨན་པ་མཁས་པ	skillful physician	sman pa mkhas pa
སྨན་པ་བསྟན	consult a physician	sman pa bstan
སྨན་པ་བསྟེན	to consult a doctor; x {nad tshab po ches btab pa'i nad pa des sman pa mkhas pa zhig bsten} when people are seriously ill, they go to consult a good doctor	sman pa bsten
སྨན་པ་བསྡུས་ར་བ	rtsa rgyud &, bshad rgyud, phyi ma rgyud bcas kyi rtsa 'grel cha lag dang bcas pa'i don blor tshud and lag len bya shes pa'i sman pa'i mtshan snyan [famous?]	sman pa bsdus ra ba
སྨན་པ་འབུམ་རམས་པ	physician 'bum rams pa	sman pa 'bum rams pa
སྨན་པ་ར་སྟེན་པ	consult a doctor, doctor, physician	sman pa ra sten pa
སྨན་པ་རབ་འབྱམས་པ	physician rab 'byams pa	sman pa rab 'byams pa
སྨན་པའི	medical	sman pa'i
སྨན་པའི་བཀའ་སློབ	helpful advice	sman pa'i bka' slob
སྨན་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	physician-king	sman pa'i rgyal po
སྨན་པའི་རྒྱུད་དྲུག	CHN	sman pa'i rgyud drug
སྨན་པའི་ཆེད	for the good of	sman pa'i ched
སྨན་པའི་སྡོམ་པ	vows of a physician	sman pa'i sdom pa
སྨན་པར་སྟེན་པ	consult a doctor	sman par sten pa
སྨན་པོ	effective/ beneficial	sman po
སྨན་དཔའ་བོ་གཅིག་ཐུབ	universal panacea	sman dpa' bo gcig thub
སྨན་དཔའ་བོ་ཆིག་ཐུབ	the medicine that cures all deceases, panacea	sman dpa' bo chig thub
སྨན་དཔྱད	med. cure/ treatment/ checkup/ examination, surgery	sman dpyad
སྨན་དཔྱད་ཁང	med. clinic	sman dpyad khang
སྨན་དཔྱད་བརྟེན	to follow a cure, rely on medical treatment	sman dpyad brten
སྨན་དཔྱད་བྱེད	go for/ perform med. checkup	sman dpyad byed
སྨན་དཔྱད་བྱེད་པ	treat medically	sman dpyad byed pa
སྨན་དཔྱད་ཟས་སྤྱོད	med., treatment, food, and exercise	sman dpyad zas spyod
སྨན་དཔྱད་ཟླ་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	{sman dpyad zla ba'i rgyal po	sman dpyad zla ba'i rgyal po
སྨན་དཔྱད་ལ་མཁས་པ	skillful in medical science	sman dpyad la mkhas pa
སྨན་སྤོད	amrita substance	sman spod
སྨན་སྤྲོད་ཁང	pharmacy	sman sprod khang
སྨན་ཕུད	the amrita vessel	sman phud
སྨན་ཕོར	kind of sman blug snod	sman phor
སྨན་ཕྱེ	med. powder 2112	sman phye
སྨན་ཕྱེ་གཏོར་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	med. powder/ powdered chemical sprayer	sman phye gtor byed 'phrul chas
སྨན་འཕྱག་ཕག་ཟེ	sman gyi ro snyigs 'phyag byed kyi implement	sman 'phyag phag ze
སྨན་འཕྲོད་པ	benefit w med.	sman 'phrod pa
སྨན་བྱིན་རླབས	bsnyen par rdzogs pas sman bzhi gang rung longs spyod pa na, sman de nyid byin len byas te, sbyor ba len yul de nyid rgan na phyag gsum bya, mdun du tshog pur 'dug gnyis ka'i lag pa gyon par bzhag ...	sman byin rlabs
སྨན་བྱེད་པ	examine a patient	sman byed pa
སྨན་བླ	{sangs rgyas sman bla}, Buddha Supreme Healer	sman bla
སྨན་བླ་བརྒྱད	8 medicine buddhas (mtshan legs yongs grags dpal, sgra dbyangs rgyal po, gser bzang dri med rin chen snang, myang ngan med mchog dpal, chos grags rgya mtsho'i dbyangs, mngon mkhyen rgyal po, rgyal ...	sman bla brgyad
སྨན་བླ་བདེ་གཤེགས་བརྒྱད	CHN	sman bla bde gshegs brgyad
སྨན་བླའི་མདོ་ཆོག	liturgical method for the worship of the medicine	sman bla'i mdo chog
བུདདྷས	bhaishajyaguru	buddhas
སྨན་དབང	moon believed to be the presiding deity of officinal plants	sman dbang
སྨན་འབུམ་དཀར་ནག	White and Black Collection of Medicines	sman 'bum dkar nag
སྨན་སྦྱར	herbal ingredient, medicinal compound; herbal ingredient, medicinal compound, medicine sadhana. the blessed medicinal substance [made in	sman sbyar
སྨན་སྦྱར་བ	mix up medicine	sman sbyar ba
སྨན་སྦྱིན་ཁང	clinic	sman sbyin khang
སྨན་སྦྱོར	compound/ mix meds. chemicals	sman sbyor
སྨན་སྦྱོར་ཁང	hospital, pharmacy, clinic	sman sbyor khang
སྨན་སྦྱོར་གྱི	medicinal	sman sbyor gyi
སྨན་སྦྱོར་བ	pharmacist	sman sbyor ba
སྨན་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	compound/ mix meds. chemicals	sman sbyor byed
སྨན་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་མཁན	pharmacist	sman sbyor byed mkhan
སྨན་སྦྲུལ	elaphe dione pallas	sman sbrul
སྨན་མ་ཟུག	medicine has not yet taken hold, medicine does not work	sman ma zug
སྨན་མར	liquid mixture, medicine butters	sman mar
སྨན་མིང་སྒྲ་སྦྱོར་ངེས་པ	{sman ming sgra sbyor nges pa	sman ming sgra sbyor nges pa
སྨན་མོ	Four Menmo sisters, guardians of Lake Kokonor	sman mo
སྨན་མོ་མཆེད་བདུན	7 menmo sisters [gd]	sman mo mched bdun
སྨན་མོ་གཟེད་ཀྱི་ཚང་མདོས	mdos to ransom families from the sman mo gzed	sman mo gzed kyi tshang mdos
སྨན་བཙུན	medicine lady	sman btsun
སྨན་བཙུན་མ	Mentsünma, dakini of the sman mo class	sman btsun ma
སྨན་རྩི	{kha btags}, long dyed {kha btags} w designs, med. [essence]	sman rtsi
སྨན་རྩིང	coarse med.	sman rtsing
སྨན་རྩིས	med. and astr.	sman rtsis
སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང	{sman rtsis khang}	sman rtsis khang
སྨན་རྩེ	kind of yellow silk scarf with red spots on it from china, SA mang tse	sman rtse
སྨན་རྩེའི་ཡུག	SA sman yug	sman rtse'i yug
སྨན་ཚགས	instrument for finely dividing coarse med.	sman tshags
སྨན་ཚད	dosage and time for taking med.	sman tshad
སྨན་ཚེ	sman tshi	sman tshe
སྨན་ཚོང་ཁང	apothecary, chemist	sman tshong khang
སྨན་ཚོང་ཁན	pharmacy	sman tshong khan
སྨན་ཚོང་མཁན	druggist	sman tshong mkhan
སྨན་ཚོས	kind of dye	sman tshos
སྨན་འཚོ་བའི་ཡོ་བྱད་བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	sman 'tsho ba'i yo byad bcu gsum
སྨན་རྫས	meds.	sman rdzas
སྨན་རྫས་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་མཁན	compounder	sman rdzas sbyor byed mkhan
སྨན་རྫུས	sman ngo ma ma yin pa	sman rdzus
སྨན་ཞབས	proponent of Svatantrika; Vitapaada	sman zhabs
སྨན་གཞུང	med. books/ records/ texts/ tradition	sman gzhung
སྨན་གཞོང	valley of medicinal herbs	sman gzhong
སྨན་བཞི	the four meds.	sman bzhi
སྨན་ཟ་ཚད	dosage, dose	sman za tshad
སྨན་ཟབ་པ	very beneficial med.	sman zab pa
སྨན་ཟུག་པ	employ med.	sman zug pa
སྨན་ཟོག	med, pesticide products	sman zog
སྨན་ཟོང	drugs	sman zong
སྨན་བཟང་པོ་དྲུག	CHN	sman bzang po drug
སྨན་བཟང་རོ་ཁ	bitter tasting good med.	sman bzang ro kha
སྨན་བཟང་རོ་ཁ་ནད་ལ་ཕན	bitter good med. which helps cure the disease	sman bzang ro kha nad la phan
སྨན་བཟང་ལོ	vegetable medicine for ringworm	sman bzang lo
སྨན་བཟོའི་བཟོ་གྲྭ	pharmaceutical factory	sman bzo'i bzo grwa
སྨན་འུ་སུ	herb 'u su	sman 'u su
སྨན་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	8 steps in treating a patient, 8 branches of medicine (curing, healing, expelling, pharmacology, application of oil, reciting mantras, surgery, and regeneration)	sman yan lag brgyad
སྨན་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	the eightfold way of medicinal practice; the eightfold way of medical practice, (Begins with diagnosis, pulse, urine, etc.--the eight steps in treating a patient), Eight branches of medicine: curin...	sman yan lag brgyad pa
སྨན་ཡིག	prescriptions; x {sman dang sman yig} medications and prescriptions	sman yig
སྨན་ཡུག	roll of mang tse scarf	sman yug
སྨན་ཡོན	physician's fee	sman yon
སྨན་རག	med. wine/ liquor	sman rag
སྨན་རབ་གསལ་བྱེད་མཐུས	by the power of certain herbs that he obtained	sman rab gsal byed mthus
སྨན་རམ	med. herb sman ram	sman ram
སྨན་རམས་པ	physician sman rams pa	sman rams pa
སྨན་རས	bandage	sman ras
སྨན་རས་འཆིང	bandage up	sman ras 'ching
སྨན་རི	a Bonpo monastery in Tibet	sman ri
སྨན་རི་ཤོད་ལྕགས་ཟམ	{sman ri shod lcags zam	sman ri shod lcags zam
སྨན་རིག	science of med., medical	sman rig
སྨན་རིག་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	med. school	sman rig slob grwa chen po
སྨན་རིགས	[different kinds of] meds.	sman rigs
སྨན་རིགས་ཚོང་ཁང	chemist's shop, drugstore	sman rigs tshong khang
སྨན་རིན	price of med.	sman rin
སྨན་རིལ	med. pills	sman ril
སྨན་རིས	school of painting founded in 15th cent.	sman ris
སྨན་རོ	1) khu ba bton pa'i sman snyigs; 2) taste of med.	sman ro
སྨན་རླབས་ཅན	very beneficial/ effective	sman rlabs can
སྨན་ལེན་ཁང	pharmacy, dispensary	sman len khang
སྨན་ལེན་པ	1) take med.; 2) doctor administering med.	sman len pa
སྨན་ལེབ	tablet	sman leb
སྨན་ལོག	have a bad reaction to med.	sman log
སྨན་ལོག་རྒྱབ	have a bad reaction to med.	sman log rgyab
སྨན་ལོག་པ	wrong med.	sman log pa
སྨན་ལོག་པར་སོང་བ	die by taking the wrong medicine	sman log par song ba
སྨན་ཤ་ཡུ་མོ	name of square in lde'u 'phrul	sman sha yu mo
སྨན་གཤོངས	region where many med. are found	sman gshongs
སྨན་སག	rus par rtsub rdar rgyag byed implement	sman sag
སྨན་སེམས	beneficial thoughts, wishes of benefitting	sman sems
སྨན་སྲང	two pounds of medicine	sman srang
སྨན་གསོ	med. treatment	sman gso
སྨན་གསོའི་སྐོར་ཁག	mobile med, health unit	sman gso'i skor khag
སྨན་བསང	incense compounded of various med ingredients	sman bsang
སྨན་བསྲེས་པ	med. compound	sman bsres pa
སྨན་ཧྲོབ	med. in coarse fragments	sman hrob
སྨན་ལྷ	a deity	sman lha
སྨན་ལྷད	fault/ pollutant/ adulterant in mixing med.	sman lhad
སྨནད་ཚོང་མ	prostitute	smand tshong ma
སྨར	ready money, cash	smar
སྨར་ཀྱང	ready money, cash	smar kyang
སྨར་རྐྱང	in cash, pure [& valuable] things	smar rkyang
སྨར་ཁམས	smar khams rdzong	smar khams
སྨར་ཁམས་སྒང	{smar khams sgang region	smar khams sgang
སྨར་ཁོག་ཆུ	smar khog river	smar khog chu
སྨར་ཁྲག་ཟོང་གསུམ	in former Tibetan legal tradition mi bsad pa'i nyes chad du mi stong zhes for 1 who must be evaluated de in giving and receiving gser sogs dngos po very valuable things la smar &, 'bru nor sogs use...	smar khrag zong gsum
སྨར་ཁྲིད	oral guidance	smar khrid
སྨར་གྱོ་གཙང་གསུམ	the three preceptsuccessors of {sba rat na}	smar gyo gtsang gsum
སྨར་ཆུ	smar river	smar chu
སྨར་ཐག་གཅོད	achieve elucidation, become completely clear about	smar thag gcod
སྨར་འདེགས	anything fried or preserved in butter	smar 'degs
སྨར་པོ	1) clean, faultless, good quality; 2) very useful/ beneficial	smar po
སྨར་བ	to speak, talk; ready money	smar ba
སྨར་བ་ཡོད་པ	gained success	smar ba yod pa
སྨར་སྨར་ལྡིག་ལྡིག	things that don't need merchandising essentially valuable things smar rkyang	smar smar ldig ldig
སྨར་ཚང	{smar tshang school	smar tshang
སྨར་ཚང་ཤེས་རབ་སེང་གེ	{smar tshang shes rab seng ge	smar tshang shes rab seng ge
སྨར་ཟོང	money and goods smar g.yo gtsang gsum - the three precept-successors of {sba rat na}, {'jad kyi gyel mi gtsang pa rab gsal}, {g.yo dge 'byung}, {stod lung pa smar shA kya mu ni}	smar zong
སྨར་རི	price of important/ very valuable things	smar ri
སྨར་ལུད	rul sungs kyi lud snum gsher can	smar lud
སྨལ་པོ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar, "deer-head", 5th star	smal po
སྨལ་པོ་ཟླ་ཕྱེད	five nyi skar + 50 chu tshod, about July 12 smal po 1/2 month or 15 days brtsi ba'o	smal po zla phyed
སྨལ་པོའི་གདོང་ཆར	in summer, dbyar nyi ldog nas log 20 days mtshams su smal po'i gdong char, when it arises	smal po'i gdong char
སྨལ་ཟླ	11th smal po/ mgo month	smal zla
སྨས་སྐྱོན	injury	smas skyon
སྨས་སྐྱོན་བྱེད་པ	injure	smas skyon byed pa
སྨས་པ	molest	smas pa
སྨས་པ་ལེན་པ	[arch] belittle, deprecate	smas pa len pa
སྨི	meter	smi
སྨི་གུ	reed pen	smi gu
སྨི་ལི	county in 21th cent Tibet.	smi li
སྨི་ཧྲུའུ་ཀྲང	secretary general	smi hru'u krang
སྨིག་རྒྱུ	mirage, optical illusion, visual distortion; def, {chu med pa la chur snang}	smig rgyu
སྨིག་བུ	small lizard	smig bu
སྨིག་མ	bamboo, reed	smig ma
སྨིགས་རྒྱུ	mirage	smigs rgyu
སྨིན	1) mature, ripen; 2) eyebrows	smin
ཕུ༹ལལཡ	-,] {smin grol} ripened and free, ripening and freeing. 2) eyebrows. Syn {smin ma}	fully
སྨིན་དཀྱུས	outer corner of the eye, eyebrow	smin dkyus
སྨིན་འཁྱོག་མ	fierce & frowning fretful woman	smin 'khyog ma
སྨིན་གྲོལ	ripened and free, ripening and freeing	smin grol
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གི་ལམ་ལ་འགོད་པ	established on the path of ripening / maturation and liberation	smin grol gi lam la 'god pa
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གྱི་ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བ	to turn the Dharma Wheel of ripening and liberation	smin grol gyi chos 'khor bskor ba
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གྱི་ལམ	the path of maturation and liberation / ripening and freeing. [def. {smin byed kyi dbang dang gril byed kyi khrid}	smin grol gyi lam
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གྱི་ལམ་ལ་ཁོད	bring them onto the path of maturation and liberation	smin grol gyi lam la khod
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང	monaster n.e. of lake yamdok	smin grol gling
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང་དགོན་པ	smin grol gling} Monastery	smin grol gling dgon pa
སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང་ལོ་ཆེན	Mindroling lochen dharma sri [1654 - 1717]	smin grol gling lo chen
སྨིན་གྲོལ་རྒྱབ་རྟེན	ripening, liberating and supporting: empowerment, instruction and reading transmission	smin grol rgyab rten
སྨིན་གྲོལ་རྒྱབ་བརྟེན	ripening, liberating and supportive [transmissions]; syn {dbang khrid lung gsum}	smin grol rgyab brten
སྨིན་གྲོལ་དབང་བཞི་ནོས	receive the four empowerments which ripen and liberate!	smin grol dbang bzhi nos
སྨིན་གྲོལ་ལ	to lead to conversion and salvation	smin grol la
སྨིན་གྲོལ་ལམ་ལ་འགོད་པ	bring onto the path of ripening and liberation smin gling sku mched rigs 'dzin tshe	smin grol lam la 'god pa
དབང་ནོར་བུ	Kathog Rigdzin Tsewang Norbu: (1698-1755). [mss] smin gling rgyal sras pad ma 'gyur med	dbang nor bu
གླིང་པ་འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Terdag Lingpa	gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje
སྨིན་གླིང་རྡོར་སེམས	revealed by gter	smin gling rdor sems
བདག་གླིང་པ་འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	16461714	bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje
སྨིན་གླིང་ལོ་ཆེན་དྷར་མ་ཤྲི	16541718 - Minling Lochen Dharma Shri, brother of Minling Terchen	smin gling lo chen dhar ma shri
སྨིན་སྒྲོལ་རྒྱབ་ཆོས་གསུམ	maturation, liberation and supporting transmission. respectively these are empowerment, guidance, and transmission {dbang lung khrid}	smin sgrol rgyab chos gsum
སྨིན་སྒྲོལ་འབོགས་པ	to impart empowerment and instruction	smin sgrol 'bogs pa
སྨིན་གཏེར	Terdag Lingpa of Mindrol Ling in central Tibet	smin gter
སྨིན་དྲུག	the Pleiades; one of the {rgyu skar nyi shu rtsa brgyad} 28 nakshatras gods of the constellations; Kartika	smin drug
སྨིན་དྲུག་ཅན	10th month	smin drug can
སྨིན་དྲུག་ཟླ་བ	the tenth month	smin drug zla ba
སྨིན་བདུན	constellation, rgyu skar zhig	smin bdun
སྨིན་ལྡན	ru rta	smin ldan
སྨིན་བརྡའ	signal by moving the eyebrows	smin brda'
སྨིན་པ་གསོད	name of brgya byin lha	smin pa gsod
སྨིན་པའི་རྟགས	mellow	smin pa'i rtags
སྨིན་པའི་དུས	season of ripening	smin pa'i dus
སྨིན་པར་ངེས་པའི་ལས	{smin par nges pa'i las chud mi za ba'i phyir bzod pa thob pa la ngan song du skye 'gyur gyi las dang, phyir mi 'ong thob pa la 'dod pa'i las dang, dgra bcom pa thob pa la khams gong mar skye 'gyur...	smin par nges pa'i las
ཝཧོ་ཨིས་ཨབོཨུཏ་ཏོ་ཨཏཏཻན་ནོན	return; and iii) actions that cause rebirth in the upper realms for the one who is about to attain the arhat state. [46A] Once these [states] have been achieved, there will be no opportunity for un...	who is about to attain non
སྨིན་པར་མ་ངེས་པ	not certain to ripen into its result	smin par ma nges pa
སྨིན་པར་མཛད་པ	to bring to spiritual maturity	smin par mdzad pa
སྨིན་པོ	ripe	smin po
སྨིན་པྱེད་དབང	ripening empowerment	smin pyed dbang
སྨིན་ཕག	eyebrow	smin phag
སྨིན་ཕྲག	spot between the eye]brows	smin phrag
སྨིན་ཕྲད	brow, center of your forehead	smin phrad
སྨིན་བྱེད	maturing, that which ripens/ brings to maturity	smin byed
སྨིན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དབང	ripening empowerments	smin byed kyi dbang
སྨིན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དབང་བཞི	four ripening empowerments	smin byed kyi dbang bzhi
སྨིན་བྱེད་དབང	ripening empowerment 2115	smin byed dbang
སྨིན་བྱེད་དབང་གི་ཆུ་བོ	the river of ripening empowerment	smin byed dbang gi chu bo
སྨིན་བྱེད་ལག་ལེན	procedure for ripening, empowerment ritual	smin byed lag len
སྨིན་དབྲག	between the eyebrows	smin dbrag
སྨིན་འབྱོག་མ	fierce, frowning fretful woman	smin 'byog ma
སྨིན་མ	eyebrow, ripe, mature, girl who has reached maturity, eyebrow	smin ma
སྨིན་མ་འཇམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of soft eyebrows	smin ma 'jam pa'i dpe byad
སྨིན་མ་སྡུད་པ	knitting the eyebrows, wrathful/ unhappy expression	smin ma sdud pa
སྨིན་མ་སྣུམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of glossy eyebrows	smin ma snum pa'i dpe byad
སྨིན་མའི་དཔེ་བྱད་བཞི	the four minor marks concerning the eyebrows	smin ma'i dpe byad bzhi
སྨིན་མའི་སྤུ་མཉམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of eyebrows of moderate length	smin ma'i spu mnyam pa'i dpe byad
སྨིན་མའི་དབུས	breast of a youthful woman	smin ma'i dbus
སྨིན་ཚྭ	SA kha ru tshwa	smin tshwa
སྨིན་ཚམས	eyebrows	smin tshams
སྨིན་ཚུགས	eye-brows	smin tshugs
སྨིན་ཚུགས་རིང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of long eyebrows	smin tshugs ring ba'i dpe byad
སྨིན་མཚམས	between the eyes	smin mtshams
སྨིན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ནམ་མཁའ	space between the eyebrows	smin mtshams kyi nam mkha'
སྨིན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་མཛོད་སྤུ	the coil of hair between the eyes	smin mtshams kyi mdzod spu
སྨིན་མཚམས་གྱི་མཇོང་སྤུ	the coil of hair between the eyes	smin mtshams gyi mjong spu
སྨིན་མཚམས་ན	between the eyebrows	smin mtshams na
སྨིན་མཚམས་མ་འབྱར	disjoined eyebrows	smin mtshams ma 'byar
སྨིན་མཚམས་མ་འབྱར་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad	smin mtshams ma 'byar ba
སྨིན་མཚམས་སུ	between the eyebrows	smin mtshams su
སྨིན་ལ་མ་སྨིན	smin nye ba'i mtshams, shing tog smin la ma smin pa, rma 'bras smin la ma smin	smin la ma smin
སྨིན་ལམ	prayer	smin lam
སྨིན་ལིང་པ	old school lineage	smin ling pa
སྨིན་ལུགས	the tradition of Mindroling Monastery; the tradition / system of Terdag Lingpa of Mindröl Ling	smin lugs
སྨིན་ལུགས་རྡོར་སེམས	terma by {smin gling gter chen o rgyan gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje}	smin lugs rdor sems
སྨིན་ལེགས	pretty face, pretty brown eyes, good	smin legs
སྨིན་ལེགས་མ	with good eyebrows, a handsome woman	smin legs ma
སྨིན་ལེགས་གཟུགས	body fully ripened	smin legs gzugs
སྨིན་ལོ	dhar ma shrI - Syn {smin gling lo chen}, the brother of Terdag Lingpa	smin lo
སྨིན་སློབ	matured practitioner	smin slob
སྨིས་ཧྲུའུ་ཀྲང	secretary general	smis hru'u krang
སྨུ	1 of the 6 early tribes of tibet	smu
སྨུག	purple, maroon, color of clotted blood	smug
སྨུག་སྐྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	freckle	smug skya chung chung
སྨུག་ཁུ	brownish purple dye	smug khu
སྨུག་ཁོག	dried carcass of sheep	smug khog
སྨུག་དགའ་གངས་རི	{smug dga'} snow mt	smug dga' gangs ri
སྨུག་སྒ	brown ginger	smug sga
སྨུག་ཆུང་མདན་ཡོན	{smug chung mdan yon} med. herb	smug chung mdan yon
སྨུག་ཆེན	[Syn {mi'i snying}	smug chen
སྨུག་ཏིག	bruise	smug tig
སྨུག་ཐིག	bruise	smug thig
སྨུག་ཐིག་ཆགས	get bruised	smug thig chags
སྨུག་ཐིག་བྱེད	get bruised	smug thig byed
སྨུག་ཐུང	cakes of wheat	smug thung
སྨུག་མཐིང	dark blue	smug mthing
སྨུག་དྲི	smell of old meat	smug dri
སྨུག་འདུས་འོད་གསལ	UV light	smug 'dus 'od gsal
སྨུག་ནག	dark maroon, deep black, dark brown	smug nag
སྨུག་ནག་རྒྱལ་མོ	dark maroon-colored queen, ekajati	smug nag rgyal mo
སྨུག་པ	fog, mist	smug pa
སྨུག་པ་འཁྱིམས	encircling fog	smug pa 'khyims
སྨུག་པ་ཅན	foggy, misty	smug pa can
སྨུག་པ་ཐིབ་ཐིབ	fogs thickening	smug pa thib thib
སྨུག་པའི་འབུ	slug, snail	smug pa'i 'bu
སྨུག་པོ	dark; {sprin smug po} dark cloud	smug po
སྨུག་པོ་གབ	bad kan smug po khrag mkhris tsha ba'i stobs de bad rlung grang bas mgo mnan nas 'og tu tsha ba gnas kyang phyir grang rtags ston pa'i don	smug po gab
སྨུག་པོ་གྲང་རྐྱེན	'ju dka' ba dang mi 'phrod pa'i zas bsten pas ma zhu grang ba'i rkyen gyis slong ba'i smug po grang shas che ba'i ming ste smug po mas chags kyang zer	smug po grang rkyen
སྨུག་པོ་གླང་འཐབ	bad kan smug po tsha grang 'thab ste nad rtags glang bu'i rvas bsnun pa ltar pho long rgyu ma'i gnas su nad zug drag po 'byung ba zhig	smug po glang 'thab
སྨུག་པོ་འགྱིངས་པ	bad kan smug po pho bar 'gyings te unable to purge below or vomit pho ba khengs and hrem mer na ba zhig	smug po 'gyings pa
སྨུག་པོ་རྒྱས་པ	bad kan smug po khrag mkhris stobs rgyas pa'i skabs te, nang gses su dbye na gyen du rdol ba dang, thur du ral ba gnyis mchis so	smug po rgyas pa
སྨུག་པོ་ཆིག་ཐུབ	rock med mdung rtse smug po	smug po chig thub
སྨུག་པོ་འཐབ་པ	{smug po 'thab pa disease	smug po 'thab pa
སྨུག་པོ་འདྲིལ	smug po ma zhu ba las byung ba dwangs ma dang snyigs not removing but remaining and causing swelling	smug po 'dril
སྨུག་པོ་རྡོལ་བ	bad kan smug po rgyas pa'i skabs su khrag gyen du skyugs pa'i don	smug po rdol ba
སྨུག་པོ་བྱེར	smug po'i nad de khrag nang zhugs nas srog rtsa nag por brgyud lus kyi gnas kun tu byer bar [destroyed] gyur pa'i don	smug po byer
སྨུག་པོ་བྱེར་བ	disturbance of the phlegm humor linked with the blood	smug po byer ba
སྨུག་པོ་སྦལ་རྒྱབ	{smug po sbal rgyab rock med.	smug po sbal rgyab
སྨུག་པོ་ཚ་རྐྱེན	lus 'grams pa dang, tsha skyur zas sogs khrag mkhris rgyas pa'i rkyen gyis slong ba'i smug po tsha shas che ba'i ming ste, smug po yas babs kyang zer, smug po 'or lhung, bad kan smug po chu gzhi da...	smug po tsha rkyen
སྨུག་པོ་རལ་བ	bad kan smug po rgyas pa'i skabs su khrag thur du bshal ba'i don	smug po ral ba
སྨུག་ཕུང་ངེ	color and shape mngon tshul zhig	smug phung nge
སྨུག་ཕུར	wooden dagger, peg	smug phur
སྨུག་ཕྱུར	purple-scar on skin	smug phyur
སྨུག་མ	stale rotting meat	smug ma
སྨུག་མ་བུ་ཁུར	country of cannibals	smug ma bu khur
སྨུག་རྩི	'bri mog med	smug rtsi
སྨུག་རྩིའི་མདོག	dark-red	smug rtsi'i mdog
སྨུག་ཚོས	smug po colored dye	smug tshos
སྨུག་ཞག	mist, fog	smug zhag
སྨུག་ཟ་འོག་གི་བེར	a maroon gown of brocade	smug za 'og gi ber
སྨུག་ཤིག་གེ་བ	tshos mdangs smug tsam gyi rnam 'gyur, me tog smug shig ge bar shar bzhag	smug shig ge ba
སྨུག་སེར	yellow-smug po [dark red, brown etc.]	smug ser
སྨུགས་པ	indolence, fog, mist	smugs pa
སྨུགས་པ་རང་ཡིན་འདུག	was only fog	smugs pa rang yin 'dug
སྨུགས་ལོང	thick fog	smugs long
སྨུས་ལོང	a blind man, congenially born blind	smus long
སྨེ	[arch] suffering, pain	sme
སྨེ་ཁབ	under garment of buddhist nuns	sme khab
སྨེ་འཁོར	cycle of 180 years in tibetan astrology, cycle of the sme ba	sme 'khor
སྨེ་གབ	[arch] garment covering the private parts	sme gab
སྨེ་སྔགས་འདོན	lamentation	sme sngags 'don
སྨེ་ཐིག	mole, freckle	sme thig
སྨེ་བདུན	a contellation, rgyu skar [skar ma aa brtan dang nye ba'i skar tshogs shig]	sme bdun
སྨེ་ནག	a black mole	sme nag
སྨེ་ཕྲེང	cycle of 60 years in tibetan astrology, 60 years in a sme ba cycle	sme phreng
སྨེ་བ	mole, freckle	sme ba
སྨེ་བ་དགུ	spot, speck, SA rme ba, nine astrological diagrams	sme ba dgu
སྨེ་བ་ནག་པོ	black mole on the body po	sme ba nag po
སྨེ་བ་གནག་བག	mole on the body	sme ba gnag bag
སྨེ་བ་སྤར་ཁ	sme ba dgu and spar kha brgyad	sme ba spar kha
སྨེ་བ་བརྩེགས་པ	Bhurkumkuta	sme ba brtsegs pa
སྨེ་བའི་གླིང་སྐོར	the seats of the sme ba	sme ba'i gling skor
སྨེ་བའི་དཔྱད	1) CH divination way of figuring and rectifying sme ba; 2) treatment for moles on the body	sme ba'i dpyad
སྨེ་བའི་ལྷ	gods of the CH sme ba	sme ba'i lha
སྨེ་གཙང	filth and purity	sme gtsang
སྨེ་བརྩེགས	wrathful deity {sme brtsegs}	sme brtsegs
སྨེ་ལ་རི	mt -	sme la ri
སྨེ་ཤ་ཅན	1) person w moles; 2) sdig pa rva tsha scorpion; 3) in India rigs ngan zer ba'i rigs rus shig	sme sha can
སྨེ་ཤ་ཆན	ghosmari (purity of tongue consciousness)	sme sha chan
སྨེ་ཤ་ནི	Smamani, 1 of ke'u ri brgyad	sme sha ni
སྨེ་ཤ་ནི་མཐིང་ནག	dark blue Smashani	sme sha ni mthing nag
སྨེག་པ	smreg pa	smeg pa
སྨེང་བ	[arch] utter words of suffering/ pain	smeng ba
སྨེད	rmed crupper? ask request say ?	smed
སྨེད་པ	rmed pa crupper? ask request say ?	smed pa
སྨེན	[arch] suffering, pain	smen
སྨེའུ	[arch] barley	sme'u
སྨེའུ་ཟན	in tsam pa mixing cheese, butter molasses mnyam du brdzis pa'i butter dough	sme'u zan
སྨེལ་བ	pluck out, summon, call, invite	smel ba
སྨེས	(not in das)	smes
སྨེས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	nature of mind	smes kyi gnas lugs
སྨོ་བ	call, name, remark, assert	smo ba
སྨོ་སྨོ	mother's mother	smo smo
སྨོད	smod pa!	smod
སྨོད་འདྲིན	[arch] very familiar friend	smod 'drin
སྨོད་པ	1) condemn, insult, disparage [the faults of others], slander, blame, reproach; 2) objection, refutation ??; 3) disparaging, loathing, revile, abuse	smod pa
སྨོད་པ་བརྙས་ཤིང་སྨོད་པ	contemptuous	smod pa brnyas shing smod pa
སྨོད་པའི་ལྕི་བ་བཞི	[TRS 30:3]	smod pa'i lci ba bzhi
སྨོད་བྱེད	1) slanderer; 2) Vishnu	smod byed
སྨོན་དཀར	las shog snye mo nas thon pa'i paper zhig	smon dkar
སྨོན་བསྐུལ	pray/ supplicate for	smon bskul
སྨོན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	pray/ supplicate for	smon bskul byed
སྨོན་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	pray/ supplicate for [h]	smon bskul zhu
སྨོན་མཁྱེན	{smon nas mkhyen pa} knowledge/ wisdom that arises through deliberate attention	smon mkhyen
སྨོན་གྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	the paramita of aspiration,	smon gyi pha rol tu phyin pa
སྨོན་གྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of aspiration	smon gyi tshul khrims
སྨོན་མགྲིན	comrade, companion, associate	smon mgrin
སྨོན་འགོག་སྨན་ཁབ	inoculation, vaccination	smon 'gog sman khab
སྨོན་འགོག་སྨན་ཁབ་རྒྱག	inoculate, vaccinate	smon 'gog sman khab rgyag
སྨོན་འགོག་སྨན་ཁབ་འཛུགས	inoculate, vaccinate	smon 'gog sman khab 'dzugs
སྨོན་འགྲིན	sincere friend or associate	smon 'grin
སྨོན་རྒྱུ	{mi yi smon rgyu mchis} it is something you should wish for	smon rgyu
སྨོན་རྔོད	aspiration [feast] roasting	smon rngod
སྨོན་ཅིང	ripen	smon cing
སྨོན་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ	the ten great vows / aspirations [of a bodhisattva on the 1st bhumi]	smon chen po bcu
སྨོན་འཇུག	aspiration and application, aspiring and entering, wish and its accomplishment	smon 'jug
སྨོན་འཇུག་གི་སེམས	bodhi-mind of aspiration and application	smon 'jug gi sems
སྨོན་འཇུག་གི་བསླབ་བྱ	the trainings of aspiration and application 2117	smon 'jug gi bslab bya
སྨོན་འཇུག་གཉིས	CHN	smon 'jug gnyis
སྨོན་འཇུག་བྱང་སེམས	Bodhichitta of aspiration and application	smon 'jug byang sems
སྨོན་རྟ	sngar lha sar smon lam gtor rgyag gi rjes 'gro rta pa'i bsdus ming	smon rta
སྨོན་དུས་ཆེན	the festival of aspirations [celebration in the first month of the Buddha's display of miracles]	smon dus chen
སྨོན་དྲིན	praised, lauded	smon drin
སྨོན་མདའ་ལ	{smon mda' la pass	smon mda' la
སྨོན་འདུན	hope/ wish [for], desire	smon 'dun
སྨོན་འདུན་བྱེད	to wish	smon 'dun byed
སྨོན་འདུན་ཞུ	hope/ wish [for], desire [h]	smon 'dun zhu
སྨོན་འདུན་བཟང་པོ	good aspiration/ wish	smon 'dun bzang po
སྨོན་འདྲིན	[arch] [very familiar] friend	smon 'drin
སྨོན་འདྲེན	sincere friend or associate	smon 'dren
སྨོན་ནས་མཁྱེན་པ	knowledge/ wisdom that arises through deliberate attention	smon nas mkhyen pa
སྨོན་ནས་མཁྱེན་པ་ཉིད	cognition which results from resolve	smon nas mkhyen pa nyid
སྨོན་གནས་མཁྱེན་པ	knowing aspirations	smon gnas mkhyen pa
སྨོན་གནས་མཁྱེན་པ་བཞི	Four knowledges of (other's) intent smon gnas mkhyen ba'i ting nge 'dzin TSE	smon gnas mkhyen pa bzhi
སྨོན་གནས་ཤེས་པ	perceiving the aims of [beings'] aspirations	smon gnas shes pa
སྨོན་པ	devoted attention, settled determination, fixation, aspiration, benediction, bless, wish, desire, intention, intention	smon pa
སྨོན་པ་མེད	absence of intention	smon pa med
སྨོན་པ་མེད་པ	wishlessness, aspirationlessness. One of {rnam thar sgo gsum}; absence of speculation	smon pa med pa
སྨོན་པ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of wishlessness smon pa med pa'i rnam par thar pa'i sgo the gate of liberation of wishlessness	smon pa med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
སྨོན་པ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	mindgeneration/arousing the bodhicitta of aspiration	smon pa sems bskyed
སྨོན་པའི་གནས	object of a wish or prayer	smon pa'i gnas
སྨོན་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	bodhicitta of aspiration	smon pa'i byang chub kyi sems
སྨོན་པའི་སེང་སུམ	sgra bla Lions of aspiration	smon pa'i seng sum
སྨོན་པའི་སེམས	mind of aspiration; bodhichitta/ attitude of aspiration	smon pa'i sems
སྨོན་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	aspiring resolve; attitudes of aspiration. generating the enlightened mind of aspiration	smon pa'i sems bskyed
སྨོན་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to give rise to/ arouse bodhicitta as aspiration	smon pa'i sems bskyed pa
སྨོན་པའི་བསླབ་བྱ	precepts of aspiration {tshad med bzhi bsgom pa}	smon pa'i bslab bya
སྨོན་ཕར་ཕྱིན	Syn {smon lam gyi pha rol tu phyin pa}	smon phar phyin
སྨོན་དབང་བསྐུར	[gyu brgyud pa] - the [lineage of] empowered aspiration	smon dbang bskur
སྨོན་མེད	absence of intention	smon med
སྨོན་ཚིག	words of supplication, prayers, good/ congratulatory wishes	smon tshig
སྨོན་ཚོགས	lha ldan smon lam dang tshogs mchod	smon tshogs
སྨོན་འོས་པ	admirable	smon 'os pa
སྨོན་ཡིད་བྱས	did [not] desire, desired	smon yid byas
སྨོན་ཡིད་བྱས་འབྲེལ	connection to aspiration	smon yid byas 'brel
སྨོན་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	completely pure aspiration	smon yongs su dag pa
སྨོན་ལ་དབང་བ	mastery over aspirations. {dbang bcu}	smon la dbang ba
སྨོན་ལམ	aspiration, supplication, wish, prayer *, good wishes, aspiration, prayed, vow	smon lam
སྨོན་ལམ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	prayer vow	smon lam kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
སྨོན་ལམ་མཁར་གྱི་གླིང་བཞི	four divisions of the fortresses of aspiration	smon lam mkhar gyi gling bzhi
སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་སྟོབས	TSE	smon lam gyi stobs
སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་མཐུ	the power of an altruistic wish {sems dri ma med pa'i smon lam gyi mthus} by the power of an altruistic wish from her undefiled mind	smon lam gyi mthu
སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfection of aspiring prayer. the paramita of aspiration, {phar phyin bcu}. perfection of aspiration, transcendental aspiration	smon lam gyi pha rol tu phyin pa
སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	abbr. of {smon lam gyi pha rol tu phyin pa}	smon lam gyi phar phyin
སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་འབྲེལ་པ	efficacy of prayer	smon lam gyi 'brel pa
སྨོན་ལམ་རྒྱག	pray, supplicate [for]	smon lam rgyag
སྨོན་ལམ་རྒྱག་པ	made wishes / aspirations	smon lam rgyag pa
སྨོན་ལམ་རྒྱབ་པ	pray	smon lam rgyab pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ངན་པ	bad/ wrong/ perverted aspiration	smon lam ngan pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ལྔ	CHN	smon lam lnga
སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ	Great prayer festival	smon lam chen po
སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ	the 10 great vows/ aspirations	smon lam chen po bcu
སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་མོ	Great Prayer Festival	smon lam chen mo
སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་མོའི་འགོ་བཙུགས	start of the Great Prayer (ceremony on the 4th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	smon lam chen mo'i 'go btsugs
སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་མོའི་དངོས་གཞི	the Great Prayer (ceremony on the 6th day of the 1st Tibetan month) smon lam gtad rgya dang bcas te mdzad	smon lam chen mo'i dngos gzhi
སྨོན་ལམ་གཏོར་རྒྱག	casting out the votive offering for the great prayer (ceremony on the 24th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	smon lam gtor rgyag
སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ	perform invocations	smon lam btab
སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་པ	made a prayer / an aspiration; made prayers	smon lam btab pa
སྨོན་ལམ་སྟོབས་ཆེན	power invocation	smon lam stobs chen
སྨོན་ལམ་སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེ	{kun bzang smon lam}	smon lam stobs po che
སྨོན་ལམ་ཐིམ་སྐས་པ	{smon lam thim skas pa	smon lam thim skas pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ཐེབས་པ	resolved	smon lam thebs pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ཐེམ་སྐས་མ	by Nagarjuna	smon lam them skas ma
སྨོན་ལམ་དག་པ	pure prayers	smon lam dag pa
སྨོན་ལམ་དུས་ཆེན	great prayer festival	smon lam dus chen
སྨོན་ལམ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	stainless prayers of dedication	smon lam dri ma med pa
སྨོན་ལམ་བདེན་ཚིག	the words of truth of his wishing prayer	smon lam bden tshig
སྨོན་ལམ་འདེབས	I pray to	smon lam 'debs
སྨོན་ལམ་འདེབས་པ	do wishing prayer, supplicate	smon lam 'debs pa
སྨོན་ལམ་འདོད་འབྱུང་ནོར་བུ་འོད་འབར	by Shabkar	smon lam 'dod 'byung nor bu 'od 'bar
སྨོན་ལམ་རྡོར་རྗེ	Mönlam Dorje, another name for Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	smon lam rdor rje
སྨོན་ལམ་ཕར་ཕྱིན	[Syn {smon lam gyi pha rol tu phyin pa}	smon lam phar phyin
སྨོན་ལམ་བླ་མ	a chief lama of u cum ching	smon lam bla ma
སྨོན་ལམ་དབང་བསྐུར	aspirational empowerment, empowered aspiration, [transmission of] aspirational empowerment	smon lam dbang bskur
སྨོན་ལམ་དབང་བསྐུར་གྱི་གཏད་རྒྱ་མིནད	mandate transmission of aspirational empowerment	smon lam dbang bskur gyi gtad rgya mind
སྨོན་ལམ་མང་ཞིག	many invocations	smon lam mang zhig
སྨོན་ལམ་ཚོགས་ཤིང	smon lam skabs bsdu ba'i me shing gi khral	smon lam tshogs shing
སྨོན་ལམ་འཚལ	I pray that	smon lam 'tshal
སྨོན་ལམ་འཚལ་ལོ	I pray that ..	smon lam 'tshal lo
སྨོན་ལམ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	completely pure aspiration	smon lam yongs su dag pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu	smon lam la dbang
སྨོན་ལམ་ལ་དབང་བ	mastery over aspirations	smon lam la dbang ba
སྨོན་ལམ་ལས་འཕྲོས་བརྒྱུད་པ	the bodhisattva lineage	smon lam las 'phros brgyud pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ལོག་པ	perverted aspiration	smon lam log pa
སྨོན་ལམ་ལོག་པར	perverted/ wrong aspiration	smon lam log par
སྨོན་ལོག་པ	perverted aspiration	smon log pa
སྨོན་སེམས	abbr. {smon pa'i sems bskyed} mind-generation of aspiration. aspirational mind of enlightenment, the	smon sems
སྨོན་སེམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་བྱ་ལྔ	CHN	smon sems kyi bslab bya lnga
སྨོན་སེམས་ཙམ	just wishing	smon sems tsam
སྨོན་སེམས་བསླབ་བྱ་བརྒྱད	TSE	smon sems bslab bya brgyad
སྨོབ་ཁྱད	thickness	smob khyad
སྨོས	call, SA smo ba	smos
སྨོས་ཅི	needless to say, no need to speak of, doubtless, no question about,	smos ci
སྟིལལ་ལེསས	-	still less
སྨོས་ཅི་དགོས	needless to say, no need to speak of, doubtless, no question about,	smos ci dgos
སྨོས་ཉེ་བར	the --to be close [to them], mentioned	smos nye bar
སྨོས་དྲག	loud voice	smos drag
སྨོས་འདྲིན	[arch] very familiar friend	smos 'drin
སྨོས་པ	(tha dad pa say	smos pa
སྨོས་པ་འཁྲུལ་སོ	occasion for making mistake, wrong way, peril	smos pa 'khrul so
སྨོས་པ་ལྟར	as mentioned	smos pa ltar
སྨོས་མ་དགོས་པ་རེད	"it is not necessary to say" which means it is absolutely certain and for sure	smos ma dgos pa red
སྨོས་མེད	no doubt, of course, certainly	smos med
སྨོས་མེད་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་མཁན	natural ruler	smos med kha lo sgyur mkhan
སྨོས་མེད་འཐུས་མི	natural representatives	smos med 'thus mi
སྨོས་བཞིན	as said	smos bzhin
སྨྱག་ཀ	[arch] husband and wife relationship, minds in accord smyan ka dang mtshungs te gnyen ka [danger?] friendship? gnyen sgrig 2119	smyag ka
སྨྱག་ཤད	herb smag shad	smyag shad
སྨྱགས་བཅད་དེ་བྲོས་པ	[arch] very exhaustedly flee	smyags bcad de bros pa
སྨྱང	stretch [out], extend	smyang
སྨྱང་བ	[arch] stretch [out], extend	smyang ba
སྨྱན	match-making, intermediation between a disagreeing pair	smyan
སྨྱན་ཀ	SA gnyen ka	smyan ka
སྨྱན་ཀ་བྱེད་པ	[arch] 1) giving/ taking a bride etc talk w minds in accord ???; 2) giving and taking a bride (/ matchmaking [er]	smyan ka byed pa
སྨྱན་ཁ	husband and wife relationship, minds in accord, matchmaking	smyan kha
སྨྱན་ཁ་སྦྱོར་བ	[arch] man and woman gnyen sgrig pa'am mthun sbyor byed pa, match-maker	smyan kha sbyor ba
སྨྱན་ག	husband and wife relationship, minds in accord	smyan ga
སྨྱན་པ	[arch] match-maker	smyan pa
སྨྱན་བྱེད་པ	match-maker	smyan byed pa
སྨྱན་བྱེད་པའི་ལྷག་མ	the lhag ma offence of match-making [R{smon lam	smyan byed pa'i lhag ma
སྨྱར་པོ	[arch] pure and fine smar po, smyi gu, ?? (A; 1) write a letter; 2) small smyug ma tree	smyar po
སྨྱར་བ	to stretch one's self	smyar ba
སྨྱལ་བ	denizen of hell, see {dmyal ba}	smyal ba
སྨྱི	thin, cane, writing cane, reed-pen	smyi
སྨྱི་གུ	reed pen	smyi gu
སྨྱི་གྲི	pen knife, SA smyug gri	smyi gri
སྨྱིག	pen	smyig
སྨྱིག་མ	[arch] smyug ma tree	smyig ma
སྨྱིག་ཚལ་བྲེགས་པ	cutting the seeds	smyig tshal bregs pa
སྨྱིན་མ	[arch] eyebrows	smyin ma
སྨྱུ་གུ	pen, pencil	smyu gu
སྨྱུ་གུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	sprouting seeds	smyu gu 'khrungs pa
སྨྱུ་གུ་ཅན	letter writer	smyu gu can
སྨྱུ་གུ་འཛིན་པ	pen-holder [person], letter writer	smyu gu 'dzin pa
སྨྱུ་གུ་འི་ཡུ་བ	pen-handle	smyu gu 'i yu ba
སྨྱུ་གུའི་ཁའམ་སོ	nib	smyu gu'i kha'am so
སྨྱུ་གུའི་ཡུ་བ	pen-holder	smyu gu'i yu ba
སྨྱུག	pen, sprout	smyug
སྨྱུག་ཁ	1) 'bri mkhan gyi 'bri smyug gi kha; 2) gtar rtsa'i steng gtsag bu gseg kha phran bu byas nas bzung ste gtar dgos pa'i gtsag bu brdeg thabs shig	smyug kha
སྨྱུག་ཁྱིམ	bamboo/reed house	smyug khyim
སྨྱུག་ཁྱོགས	smyug mas bzos pa'i 'gyogs byams	smyug khyogs
སྨྱུག་ཁྲོག	tube of bamboo, pen case, small churn	smyug khrog
སྨྱུག་མཁན	worker in bamboo and cane	smyug mkhan
སྨྱུག་གུ	bamboo pen, pen	smyug gu
སྨྱུག་གུ་འཇོག་སའི	brush pot	smyug gu 'jog sa'i
སྨྱུག་གུ་འཇོག་སའི་མདོང་མོ	pen container	smyug gu 'jog sa'i mdong mo
སྨྱུག་གྲི	pen knife	smyug gri
སྨྱུག་གླང	reed pipe	smyug glang
སྨྱུག་གླིང	1) bamboo garden; 2) bamboo flute	smyug gling
སྨྱུག་སྒམ	chest made of reed or bamboo, wicker work box	smyug sgam
སྨྱུག་སྒྲོམ	wicker chest	smyug sgrom
སྨྱུག་སྔོན་ཚི་བ	young bamboo phyi rtsi khanda byas pa'i zhun khu med	smyug sngon tshi ba
སྨྱུག་ཅུ་གང	ldum rar 'dzugs pa'i kind of bamboo gi rkang las byung ba'i sman, cu gang rigs gsum gyi nang tshan	smyug cu gang
སྨྱུག་ལྕག	bamboo cane	smyug lcag
སྨྱུག་ལྗང	greenish yellow	smyug ljang
སྨྱུག་ཐོགས	letter writer	smyug thogs
སྨྱུག་གདུགས	umbrella made of split reeds or bamboos	smyug gdugs
སྨྱུག་སྡེར	bamboo plate	smyug sder
སྨྱུག་སྡོང	bamboo stalk	smyug sdong
སྨྱུག་པ	dip in, immerse	smyug pa
སྨྱུག་ཕོན	split bamboo, chips of bamboo	smyug phon
སྨྱུག་ཕྱར	smyug bshags kyis bslas pa'i phyar ba	smyug phyar
སྨྱུག་ཕྲན	reed	smyug phran
སྨྱུག་བུ	1) pen; 2) small bamboo tree	smyug bu
སྨྱུག་བྱ	bird living in bamboo groves, forests etc	smyug bya
སྨྱུག་སྦུབས	cavity inside bamboo	smyug sbubs
སྨྱུག་མ	bamboo; arrow shaft; bamboo	smyug ma
སྨྱུག་མ་མཁན	1) person making things of bamboo; 2) arrow maker	smyug ma mkhan
སྨྱུག་མ་འཇོག་མ	make a reed pen	smyug ma 'jog ma
སྨྱུག་མ་མདའ་རྒྱུ	reed-bamboo of which arrows are made	smyug ma mda' rgyu
སྨྱུག་མ་སྦམས་པ་འདྲ	like reeds laid together	smyug ma sbams pa 'dra
སྨྱུག་མའི་སྡོང་པོ	bamboo trunk/ stalk	smyug ma'i sdong po
སྨྱུག་མའི་པར་བུ	woven bamboo/ reed vessel	smyug ma'i par bu
སྨྱུག་མའི་ཝ་ཤུ	aor pa or wa kha [gutter] made of a bamboo stalk	smyug ma'i wa shu
སྨྱུག་མའི་ར་བ	bamboo fence	smyug ma'i ra ba
སྨྱུག་རྩ	bamboo shoot	smyug rtsa
སྨྱུག་རྩི་ཅུ་གང	smyug cu gang	smyug rtsi cu gang
སྨྱུག་ཚད	thig tshad 'jal byed kyi bamboo	smyug tshad
སྨྱུག་ཚལ	bamboo grove	smyug tshal
སྨྱུག་ཚལ་སྦུག	holy place in tibet	smyug tshal sbug
སྨྱུག་ཚིག	knot of a cane	smyug tshig
སྨྱུག་ཚིགས	bamboo joints	smyug tshigs
སྨྱུག་འཛིན	clerk, reed-pen holder, scribe, writer	smyug 'dzin
སྨྱུག་ཞུ	bamboo hat	smyug zhu
སྨྱུག་གཞོན	yal ga ma rgyas pa'i smyug gsar	smyug gzhon
སྨྱུག་ཟེབས	wicker-work box resembling a trunk	smyug zebs
སྨྱུག་གཟེབ	basket	smyug gzeb
སྨྱུག་གཟེར	bamboo nail	smyug gzer
སྨྱུག་ར	bamboo fence	smyug ra
སྨྱུག་རིལ	1) ras gzhi'i mtha' rgyong byed kyi smyug ril phra po; 2) smyug ril khog stong phra mo; 3) smyu gu ril mo	smyug ril
སྨྱུག་རིས	1) bamboo dbyibs gzugs kyi picture; 2) smyug ris can gyi rum sogs	smyug ris
སྨྱུག་ཤད	bamboo comb	smyug shad
སྨྱུག་ཤད་རྒྱག་པ	comb w a bamboo comb	smyug shad rgyag pa
སྨྱུག་ཤིང	bamboo tree	smyug shing
སྨྱུག་བཤགས	srab mor bshags pa'i smyug leb	smyug bshags
སྨྱུག་བཤད	comb made of bamboo used in sikkim	smyug bshad
སྨྱུག་སློམ	plate made of wicker work	smyug slom
སྨྱུག་གསར	new green bamboo	smyug gsar
སྨྱུགས	SA bcug nas	smyugs
སྨྱུགས་པ	[arch] bcug pa entered, placed	smyugs pa
སྨྱུང	reduce, minimize, lessen	smyung
སྨྱུང་གནས	vow to fast every other day, fast, leaving off food, act of fasting as a religious observance	smyung gnas
སྨྱུང་གནས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	practice of fasting on prescribed days	smyung gnas kyi cho ga
སྨྱུང་གནས་ཆོ་ག	fasting practice/ ritual	smyung gnas cho ga
སྨྱུང་གནས་ལ་སྡོད	fast, go into retreat	smyung gnas la sdod
སྨྱུང་གནས་སུ་སྡོད	fast, go into retreat	smyung gnas su sdod
སྨྱུང་བ	1 (Tha dad pa smyungs pa, smyung ba, smyungs; 1) produce hunger, food and drink; 2) be few; 3) shape long and oblong	smyung ba
སྨྱུང་བར་གནས	fast[ing] vow/ practice, retreat	smyung bar gnas
སྨྱུང་བུ	leather piercing tool, awl	smyung bu
སྨྱུང་སྨྱུང	oblong/ egg shape	smyung smyung
སྨྱུངས	smyung ba!	smyungs
སྨྱུངས་པ	pf. of {smyung ba}	smyungs pa
སྨྱུར	quick, rapid	smyur
སྨྱུར་པ	stretch oneself after sleep	smyur pa
སྨྱུར་བ	to be quick, expeditious, in a hurry, to hasten	smyur ba
སྨྱེ་པ	SA zhen pa	smye pa
སྨྱེ་བ	[arch] damaged, impaired, poor quality	smye ba
སྨྱེ་བོ	wooer, courtier	smye bo
སྨྱེན	[arch] driver for children/ and women kha lo byed pa	smyen
སྨྱོ	[be] crazy, mad, insane, mental disorder, out of control, drunk	smyo
སྨྱོ་མཁན	madman	smyo mkhan
སྨྱོ་གླུ	crazy song	smyo glu
སྨྱོ་བཅོལ་ཁང	mental hospital/ clinic	smyo bcol khang
སྨྱོ་ཆེས་པ	so mad [that] [we take our own lives]	smyo ches pa
སྨྱོ་གདོན་གྱིས	possessed by the madness [of the kleshas]	smyo gdon gyis
སྨྱོ་འདྲེ	spirits of madness	smyo 'dre
སྨྱོ་ནད	mental disorder	smyo nad
སྨྱོ་སྤྱོད	crazy action / behavior	smyo spyod
གསོད	wantonly/ savagely massacre many people	gsod
སྨྱོ་བ	be insane, inflamed with insanity	smyo ba
སྨྱོ་བ་ནང་བཞིན	frenzy	smyo ba nang bzhin
སྨྱོ་བ་མིན་ནམ	is he --, to become out of control [drunk, insane]	smyo ba min nam
སྨྱོ་བྱེད	narcotic, 1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags, those that drive insane, Unmada	smyo byed
སྨྱོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གདོན	madness demons	smyo byed kyi gdon
སྨྱོ་བྱེད་ནད	madness producing disease	smyo byed nad
སྨྱོ་འབོག	insanity	smyo 'bog
སྨྱོ་འབོགས	insanity	smyo 'bogs
སྨྱོ་མེད	transcending madness	smyo med
སྨྱོ་ཚབ་ཚུབ	temporary insanity, occasionally becoming mad	smyo tshab tshub
སྨྱོ་ཚབས་ཆེ་བ	totally insane	smyo tshabs che ba
སྨྱོ་ཚུབ	rabid	smyo tshub
སྨྱོ་ཚུབ་ཚུབ	mad/ drunken manner	smyo tshub tshub
སྨྱོ་འཚབ	{smyo 'tshab rang che ba yin} they are worse than lunatics	smyo 'tshab
སྨྱོ་འཚུབ་འཚུབ	frantic	smyo 'tshub 'tshub
སྨྱོ་བརྫུ	pretend to be drunk/ mad	smyo brdzu
སྨྱོ་ལབ	crazy talk	smyo lab
སྨྱོ་ཧམ	delusional inflated boasting, preposterous claim/ statement, ferocious, unbridled, rampant	smyo ham
སྨྱོ་ཧམ་གྱི་ཚུར་རྒོལ	ferocious attack	smyo ham gyi tshur rgol
སྨྱོ་ཧམ་ཆེན་པོ	delusional inflated boasting, preposterous claim/ statement, ferocious, unbridled, rampant	smyo ham chen po
སྨྱོང་བ	[arch] rkyong ba	smyong ba
སྨྱོན	madmen	smyon
སྨྱོན་ཁང	asylum	smyon khang
སྨྱོན་ཆུ	intoxicating drink	smyon chu
སྨྱོན་གཏམ	mad/ preposterous talk	smyon gtam
སྨྱོན་འདོད	craze	smyon 'dod
སྨྱོན་པ	madman/ person/ lunatic; "crazy yogi"; insane/ crazy	smyon pa
སྨྱོན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	sane	smyon pa ma yin pa
སྨྱོན་པ་བཟོ་བ	madden	smyon pa bzo ba
སྨྱོན་པ་སེང་དབང	{lce btsun seng ge dbang phyug}	smyon pa seng dbang
སྨྱོན་སྤྱོད	lunacy	smyon spyod
སྨྱོན་མ	mad woman	smyon ma
སྨྱོན་སེམས་ཅན	mad, deranged	smyon sems can
སྨྱོས	[p smyo ba] was insane/ crazy/ deranged	smyos
སྨྱོས་འདུག	he is mad	smyos 'dug
སྨྱོས་པ	[p smyo ba] was insane/ crazy/ deranged	smyos pa
སྨྱོས་རབས	Nyo clan; in Bhutan	smyos rabs
སྨྲ	word; expression; abbr. of {smra ba} 1) to say, utter, express, advocate, expound, make an exposition. 2) word, speech, utterance, exposition, advocate, proponent, adherent of	smra
སྨྲ་མཁན་ནེ་ཚོ	talking parrot	smra mkhan ne tsho
སྨྲ་མཁས	eloquent, eloquent	smra mkhas
སྨྲ་མཁས་ཅན	a persuasive man; eloquent, well-spoken; {smra mkhas can gyis yus shags 'debs tu med} a persuasive man cannot not talk his way out of it	smra mkhas can
སྨྲ་མཁས་ལྡན་པ	articulate; Syn {bshad mkhas pa dang ldan pa} skillful articulation	smra mkhas ldan pa
སྨྲ་མཁས་པ	eloquent	smra mkhas pa
སྨྲ་དགོད་སྦྲིད་པ	talk, laugh, or sneeze	smra dgod sbrid pa
སྨྲ་རྒྱུ	speech to be explained, explication	smra rgyu
སྨྲ་རྒྱུ་དང་སྒོམ་རྒྱུ	explication and meditation	smra rgyu dang sgom rgyu
སྨྲ་སྒོ	gate of speech, mouth	smra sgo
སྨྲ་སྒོ་མཚོན་ཆ	{smra sgo mtshon cha 2121	smra sgo mtshon cha
སྨྲ་སྔགས་འདོན་པ	lamentation	smra sngags 'don pa
སྨྲ་བཅད	1) [keeping] silence; 2) dumb	smra bcad
སྨྲ་བཅད་པ	keep/ maintain silence	smra bcad pa
སྨྲ་བཅད་བྱས་པ	kept silence	smra bcad byas pa
སྨྲ་ལྕེ	tongue	smra lce
སྨྲ་ལྕེ་བདེ	tongue skilled in speaking	smra lce bde
སྨྲ་མཆུ	mouth	smra mchu
སྨྲ་མཆུ་ཅན	deceiver	smra mchu can
སྨྲ་འཆལ	meaningless talk	smra 'chal
སྨྲ་བརྗོད	utterance	smra brjod
སྨྲ་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས	beyond the realm of speech, inexpressible	smra brjod kyi yul las 'das
སྨྲ་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the realm of speech, inexpressible	smra brjod kyi yul las 'das pa
སྨྲ་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རང་དབང	freedom of speech	smra brjod kyi rang dbang
སྨྲ་སྟེ་མི་མཁན	1 of srid pa mo dgu	smra ste mi mkhan
སྨྲ་སྟེ་མི་མཁན་མ་མོ	woman who does not talk	smra ste mi mkhan ma mo
སྨྲ་བདེ	good at speaking	smra bde
སྨྲ་བདེ་ཞིང	knowing to speak well, being eloquent, well-spoken	smra bde zhing
སྨྲ་འདོད	desired to be spoken smra 'dod kyi bu mo'i pu yang dag rgyal	smra 'dod
བཅན	1 of {mu stegs pa'i snyon pa drug} samjayi-vajrattiputra smra 'dod kyi bu mo'i pu yang dag rgyal	bcan
སྨྲ་ལྡིབ	unclear talk	smra ldib
སྨྲ་པོ	Lang: teacher, lit. "propounder, proclaimer" [mss]	smra po
སྨྲ་བ་ངན་པ	wrong/ bad talk	smra ba ngan pa
སྨྲ་བ་བཅད	1) stop speaking, keep silence; 2) rishi	smra ba bcad
སྨྲ་བ་བཅད་པ	to keep / maintain silence	smra ba bcad pa
སྨྲ་བ་ཆག	couldn't speak; {kun gyi smra ba rnams chag} no one could speak	smra ba chag
སྨྲ་བ་ཆད་པར	have impeded speech	smra ba chad par
སྨྲ་བ་ཆད་པར་གཅོད་པ	be cut off from speaking	smra ba chad par gcod pa
སྨྲ་བ་པ	spokesman, speaker	smra ba pa
སྨྲ་བ་དཔའ་བོ	greatest of orators	smra ba dpa' bo
སྨྲ་བ་མང་པོ	loquacious, voluble, much talk	smra ba mang po
སྨྲ་བ་རིགས་པ་གྲུབ་མཐའ	philosophy [reason, theory]	smra ba rigs pa grub mtha'
སྨྲ་བའི་རྒྱལ	'jam dbyangs, Manjugosha, Manjushri	smra ba'i rgyal
སྨྲ་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of speech, epithet of 'jam dpal dbyangs	smra ba'i rgyal po
སྨྲ་བའི་སྒོ	commencement of speech, the mouth, opening or commencement of speech, exordium, grammatical work by sakya pandita, mouth	smra ba'i sgo
སྨྲ་བའི་ཉི་མ	sun of speech = Manjushri]	smra ba'i nyi ma
སྨྲ་བའི་བབས་སྟེགས	tongue	smra ba'i babs stegs
སྨྲ་བའི་འབབ་སྟེགས	tongue	smra ba'i 'bab stegs
སྨྲ་བའི་གཞི	subject of talk/ discussion gtam shod pa'i gleng gzhi	smra ba'i gzhi
སྨྲ་བའི་ཟླ	gtam shod sa'i kha gtad [opposite side]	smra ba'i zla
སྨྲ་བའི་སེང་གེ	1) Lion of Speech, [Syn Manjushri, Buddha]. 2) one of the 12 manifestations of Guru Rinpoche. {rnam 'phrul bcu gnyis} Mawey Senge	smra ba'i seng ge
སྨྲ་བའི་ལྷ	Manjushri 'jam dpal	smra ba'i lha
སྨྲ་བའི་ལྷ་མོ	Sarasvati/ dbyangs can ma	smra ba'i lha mo
སྨྲ་བར་བཅད་པ	ascetic smra bar bya ba'i yul sems can rnams sentient beings are also the basis as they are the object for uttering [the lie].	smra bar bcad pa
སྨྲ་བྱེད	mouth	smra byed
སྨྲ་བྱེད་པ	speak	smra byed pa
སྨྲ་འབའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of speech, epithet of 'jam dpal dbyangs smra ma nus pa gdong sa la phab nas 'dug - “I cannot say!” [cried the brahmin youth] as he fell with his face to the ground	smra 'ba'i rgyal po
སྨྲ་མི་ནུས	unable to utter a word	smra mi nus
སྨྲ་མི་ཤེས	tongue-tied	smra mi shes
སྨྲ་མི་ཤེས་པ	not being able to speak	smra mi shes pa
སྨྲ་མེད	dumb, indescribable	smra med
སྨྲ་ར	moustache	smra ra
སྨྲ་ཤེས	able to speak / articulate, speak clearly smra shes don go ba mi'i mtshan nyid the human ability to use and understand language	smra shes
སྨྲ་སེང	Syn {smra ba'i seng ge}. Syn {smra ba'i seng ge}	smra seng
སྨྲ་སེང་སྒྲུབ	tantric propitiation	smra seng sgrub
སྨྲ་བསམ	described or imagined	smra bsam
སྨྲ་བསམ་གྱི་བརྗོད་དང་བྲལ	MSS: "free from saying or thinking" (R75: 144); MSS: "devoid of speech, thought or description" R75: 251.5. "free from speech, thought or description" R75: 305.3. [mss]	smra bsam gyi brjod dang bral
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་བྲལ	inexpressible by words or thought, inexpressible, inconceivable & ineffable, beyond word, thought and explanation	smra bsam brjod bral
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་མེད	beyond word, thought and description, inexpressible, inconceivable and indescribable TSE	smra bsam brjod med
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་མེད་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the realm of words, thoughts and description	smra bsam brjod med yul las 'das pa
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond words, thought, or expression	smra bsam brjod yul las 'das pa
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་ལས	imagination, or expression	smra bsam brjod las
སྨྲ་བསམ་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond description, imagination, and/ or expression 2122	smra bsam brjod las 'das pa
སྨྲ་བསམ་དབང་དང་ལྡན་པ	able to speak and reflect	smra bsam dbang dang ldan pa
སྨྲང	proclamation of the origin, ritual proclamation	smrang
སྨྲང་ཆེན	great proclamation	smrang chen
སྨྲང་འདོན	[arch] 1) speak secretly/ in mantric syllabic code; 2) lung 'don pa	smrang 'don
སྨྲང་བ	speak	smrang ba
སྨྲང་ཚིག	speech, word	smrang tshig
སྨྲང་ཤེས་གཏོ་དགུ	he who performs the gto rites who knows how to proclaim the origin, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis, the bon of the gto rites, lore of the smrang, SA srid pa mi'u rgyud kyi gzhung, 'dre dang sri yi sgo	smrang shes gto dgu
སྨྲང་གསོལ་བ	[arch] speak secret talk	smrang gsol ba
སྨྲབ	speak	smrab
སྨྲའོ	he said	smra'o
སྨྲར	speak	smrar
སྨྲར་མི་གཏུབ	inexpressible	smrar mi gtub
སྨྲར་མི་གཏུབ་པ	inexpressible	smrar mi gtub pa
སྨྲས	talked about, say, composed, {pa} [about books]	smras
སྨྲས་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་པ	that you have talked about	smras khyod kyis pa
སྨྲས་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་པའི	that you have talked about	smras khyod kyis pa'i
སྨྲས་དགུ	many things to say	smras dgu
སྨྲས་ཉམས	pleasing, agreeable manner of speaking	smras nyams
སྨྲས་པ་ཙམ་དུ	as soon as it had been said	smras pa tsam du
སྨྲི་ཏི	[Skt] mindfulness. Syn {dran pa}	smri ti
སྨྲིག	[arch] dyed garment	smrig
སྨྲེ་ངག་འདོན་པ	weep, wail, lament	smre ngag 'don pa
སྨྲེ་ངགས	wailing, bewailing; wailing/bewailing	smre ngags
སྨྲེ་སྔག་འདོན་པ	to wail	smre sngag 'don pa
སྨྲེ་སྔགས	lamentation, weeping, cry, wailing	smre sngags
སྨྲེ་སྔགས་འདོན	weeping, wailing	smre sngags 'don
སྨྲེ་སྔགས་འདོན་པ	1) weep, wail, lament[ation]	smre sngags 'don pa
སྨྲེ་སྔགས་སུ་བླངས་པ	sang a lamenting / despairing song	smre sngags su blangs pa
སྨྲེ་བ	to wail, lament	smre ba
སྨྲེག་པ	[arch] 1) nyams and resourcefulness, shrewdness; 2) root; 3) remainder	smreg pa
སྨྲེང་བ	[arch] speak	smreng ba
སྨྲེང་གསོལ་བ	beg a word, beg leave to speak	smreng gsol ba
སྨྲོས	speak, SA smra ba	smros
སྨྲོས་ཞིབ་ཏུ་མ	not dealt with in detail	smros zhib tu ma
ཙ་ཀ་ལི	small cards like miniature thang ka on which are painted images of deities, offerings, etc. used during rites and initiations	tsa ka li
ཙ་ཀོ་ར	[arch] bya gong ma sreg pa, partridge	tsa ko ra
ཙ་ཀྲ་བ་ཀ	red goose, anas casarca	tsa kra ba ka
ཙ་ཀླི	SA tsa ka li	tsa kli
ཙ་ཁྲག་ཤོར་བ	constrain, render harmless	tsa khrag shor ba
ཙ་ཁྲག་ཤོར་བ་སྡོམ་པ	stopping of the bloody influx	tsa khrag shor ba sdom pa
ཙ་གེ་ཙོ་གེ	various small things, odds and ends, small-scale, petty	tsa ge tso ge
ཙ་རྟགས	mark making CA into TSA	tsa rtags
ཙ་ད	herb {tsa da}	tsa da
ཙ་དར	shawl	tsa dar
ཙ་མདངས	radiated the heat	tsa mdangs
ཙ་འདྲ	{tsa 'dra [place in Kham resembling Mount Kailash	tsa 'dra
ཙ་འདྲ་རིན་ཆེན་བྲག	tsarilike jewel rock [holy place of Chakrasamvara]	tsa 'dra rin chen brag
ཙ་སྡེ	1) TSA class	tsa sde
ཙ་ན	zhag bcu bzhi tsa na - after fourteen days	tsa na
ཙ་ན་ཀ	ancient king of india, chick pea, cicer arietinum	tsa na ka
ཙ་ན་ཀའི་འབྲུ	grain of chick pea	tsa na ka'i 'bru
ཙ་ནས	from the time	tsa nas
ཙ་པ	tsa nas pa bar so sor bsdu ba'i legs sbyar gyi gsal byed yi ge, ha sa la ltos, tsa pa//tsa//pa//tsa ta ta ka pa	tsa pa
ཙ་ཕུ་གང་ཞུར་མོ	place in upper tibet	tsa phu gang zhur mo
ཙ་འཕྲུ	tsa yig gi tog gam lag pa, tsa	tsa 'phru
ཙ་བ་ནས	completely	tsa ba nas
ཙ་བིག	SA tsha big	tsa big
ཙ་དབང	[= {tsa ri tra}. Kailash	tsa dbang
ཙ་མའི་སྙིང་པོ	kind of cake	tsa ma'i snying po
ཙ་མི་ལོ་ཙ་བ་སངས་རྒྱས་གྲགས	Tsami Lotsawa Sangye Trak, the only Tibetan	tsa mi lo tsa ba sangs rgyas grags
ཙ་མུན་ཛ	jute	tsa mun dza
ཙ་ཙ	small clay icon of deity	tsa tsa
ཙ་ཙི་རྡོ་སྦྱོར	medicine with 10 ingredients	tsa tsi rdo sbyor
ཙ་ར	flogging, whipping as a criminal punishment	tsa ra
ཙ་ར་ཀ	[Skt] medical examination/ diagnosis	tsa ra ka
ཙ་ར་ཁུང	tip of the breast bone and sgrog rus kyi sne gnyis connecting mtshams kyi khog gam gnas shig	tsa ra khung
ཙ་ར་གཅོད་པ	cut the root	tsa ra gcod pa
ཙ་ར་བཅད་པ	be flogged	tsa ra bcad pa
ཙ་ར་གནད	severe castigation in public	tsa ra gnad
ཙ་ར་གནད་འཕྲོད་བཏང་སྟེ	having been handed over to a severe flogging	tsa ra gnad 'phrod btang ste
ཙ་རི	Tsari	tsa ri
ཙ་རི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐང	Kyilkhor Thang. Mandala Plain of Tsari	tsa ri dkyil 'khor thang
ཙ་རི་བསྐོར་བ	circumambulating Tsa ri mt	tsa ri bskor ba
ཙ་རི་ང་ལའི་གངས	great tibetan mountain range	tsa ri nga la'i gangs
ཙ་རི་རྙིང་མ	old Tsari	tsa ri rnying ma
ཙ་རི་ཏྲ	Kailash	tsa ri tra
ཙ་རི་ཙ་གོང	Tsagong of Tsari	tsa ri tsa gong
ཙཱ་རི་རོང་སྐོར	pilgrimage circumambulating the Ravines of Tsari; the pilgrimage of the Tsari Ravines	tsA ri rong skor
ཙ་རི་རོང་བསྐོར	Circumambulation of the Ravines of Tsari	tsa ri rong bskor
ཙ་རི་གསར་མ	new Tsari	tsa ri gsar ma
ཙ་རུ	curled, frizzled, meat offering to the manes of the dead	tsa ru
ཙ་རུ་ན་ཡ	fine eyes, deer, antelope	tsa ru na ya
ཙ་རེ་བ	rgyun na re ba,//chu tsa re bar babs pa,//khrag tsa re bar thon pa	tsa re ba
ཙ་ལ	to, near, in the presence of	tsa la
ཙ་ལག	ca dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi tsa 'phru, tsa//ca	tsa lag
ཙ་ཤ	indian jay, coracias indica	tsa sha
ཙ་ལྷག	ca dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi tsa lag tsa//ca	tsa lhag
ཙ་ཨ་ཝ	medicinal grass	tsa a wa
ཙྭ་ཁ	pasture land, place where pastures abound	tswa kha
ཙྭ་འདྲ	tsandra	tswa 'dra
ཙག་གི་ཙིག་གེ	minor/ small things	tsag gi tsig ge
ཙག་གེ	black mark in a target	tsag ge
ཙག་གེ་ཙོག་གེ	various high and low shapes	tsag ge tsog ge
ཙག་གེ་ཙོག་གེའི་རི་ཆུང	little mts w various high and low shapes	tsag ge tsog ge'i ri chung
ཙག་སྒྲ	1) matches; 2) "tsag tsag" sound	tsag sgra
ཙག་སྒྲ་ཐོན་པ	make a "tsag tsag" sound	tsag sgra thon pa
ཙག་སྒྲ་དེ་རི	make a clucking sound by touching the roof of the palate with the tongue	tsag sgra de ri
ཙག་སྒྲ་འདོན་པ	make a clucking sound by touching the roof of the palate with the tongue	tsag sgra 'don pa
ཙག་ཅིག	accessory	tsag cig
ཙག་བཅད་པ	mar khu tsag thag bcad pa [mar khu bzhur nas tsag bcad pa]	tsag bcad pa
ཙག་བཅད་མར	bskol te tsag thag bcad pa'i mar khu	tsag bcad mar
ཙག་ཙིག	miscellaneous, sundry, tidbit	tsag tsig
ཙག་ཙིག་རྐུ་བ	filch, pilfer	tsag tsig rku ba
ཙག་ཙིག་ཉོ་དངུལ	petty cash fund	tsag tsig nyo dngul
ཙག་ཙིག་ཏུ་བསྒྱུར་བ	breakup	tsag tsig tu bsgyur ba
ཙག་ཙིག་ཚོང་མཁན	seller of [various small things, odds and ends, small [scale] petty] things, street vendor, peddler	tsag tsig tshong mkhan
ཙག་ཙོག	various small things, odds and ends, small [scale] petty, various high and low shapes	tsag tsog
ཙག་ཙོག་ཉོ་དངུལ	petty cash fund	tsag tsog nyo dngul
ཙག་ཙོག་ཚོང་མཁན	seller of [various small things, odds and ends, small [scale] petty] things, street vendor, peddler	tsag tsog tshong mkhan
ཙག་བཤགས	sha khog sogs dkyil nas bshags pa	tsag bshags
ཙགས་ཤ	tsag bshags	tsags sha
ཙང	since, because, therefore, consequently, nest	tsang
ཙང་ཀད	SA tsang ka	tsang kad
ཙང་ཀུན	a sa bdag king, monster	tsang kun
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེ་བོ	crawler, a sa bdag	tsang kun 'phye bo
ཙང་བཅད	annihilate	tsang bcad
ཙང་སྤྱོད	monastic discipline	tsang spyod
ཙང་མའི་ནང་གི་ཐོག་མ	first of all	tsang ma'i nang gi thog ma
ཙང་ཙིང་འཁྲིགས	Gahvara [one of 8 charnel grounds]	tsang tsing 'khrigs
ཙང་ཟླ	nest material	tsang zla
ཙངས	[Skt] brahma, whole, complete	tsangs
ཙངས་པ	[Skt] brahma, whole, complete	tsangs pa
ཙངས་པ་བ	Followers of brahma^ [gd]	tsangs pa ba
ཙངས་པའི་གནས་བཞི	four brahmaviharas	tsangs pa'i gnas bzhi
ཙངས་པའི་བུ་ག	aperture of brahma, brahmarandhra	tsangs pa'i bu ga
ཙངས་པའི་ཡུལ་ས	brahmarandhra, brahma realm	tsangs pa'i yul sa
ཙངས་པའི་ལམ	aperture of brahma, brahmarandhra, brahmapatha	tsangs pa'i lam
ཙངས་རིས་པ་སོགས་པ་གསུམ	three Realms beginning w brahmaka^yika [gd]	tsangs ris pa sogs pa gsum
ཙད་དུ་ཤེས	become the model [mkhas pa'i tsad du shes I've become the model of learnedness]	tsad du shes
ཙད་མར་གྱུར	convinced [mi mi min kun kyang tsad mar gyur all men and spirits are convinced]	tsad mar gyur
ཙན་ཁ་ཆེ	great	tsan kha che
ཙན་ཅུ	grain from which oil is extracted	tsan cu
ཙན་ཆེ	abundantly	tsan che
ཙན་ད་ལི	Chandali, [sm. {gtum mo}, heat, Fiery One	tsan da li
ཙན་དན	sandal wood [dri bzang po'i shing rigs shig //tsan dan la go gog dang, gos chen la thab phyis,//ming gi rnam grangs la gos sngon dang, dri'i snying po, dpal gyi dum bu, ma la yar 2124 skyes, tsim b...	tsan dan
ཙན་དན་དཀར་པོ	white sandalwood	tsan dan dkar po
ཙན་དན་གོ་ཤིར་ཤ	{tsan dan go shir sha white sandal wood [growing on Mt Malaya]	tsan dan go shir sha
ཙན་དན་གྱི་སྡོང་པོ	sandal wood tree	tsan dan gyi sdong po
ཙན་དན་གྱི་ཕྱེ་མ	sandal wood powder	tsan dan gyi phye ma
ཙན་དན་གྱི་བེང་ཆེན	a sandalwood club	tsan dan gyi beng chen
ཙན་དན་སྒྲོལ་མ་རང་བྱུང	naturally occuring sandal wood Tara [sku ngo mtsar can gsum gyi ya gyal zhig ste, sngar gyi bshad srol ltar tsan dan gyi sdong po'i nang nas rang byung gi sku rten zhig ste, bod rgyal srong btsan s...	tsan dan sgrol ma rang byung
ཙན་དན་མཆོག	{sbrul gyi snying po} sandal wood	tsan dan mchog
ཙན་དན་ཇོ་བོ	{tsan dan jo bo} sandal wood image of Buddha	tsan dan jo bo
ཙན་དན་ནགས	sandalwood forest	tsan dan nags
ཙན་དན་ནགས་ཚལ་གྱི་ཕུག་ནས	from a cave in a sandalwood forest	tsan dan nags tshal gyi phug nas
ཙན་དན་ཕུར་པ	sandal wood purpa	tsan dan phur pa
ཙན་དན་སྦྲུལ་གྱི	finest sandal wood growing in the malayan mountains	tsan dan sbrul gyi
ཙན་དན་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	rare and precious variaty of sandal wood [= skye can dang, khyab 'jug skyes, sngo sangs, til 'dab can, stong gsum rin gyis gzhal med shing, rna ba nag po, ba glang mgo, beed'urya'i mdog can, rma gs...	tsan dan sbrul gyi snying po
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོ	{tsan dan dmar po}, red sandal wood med. tree	tsan dan dmar po
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་འབྲུ	seeds of red sandal tree	tsan dan dmar po'i 'bru
ཙན་དན་སྨུག་པོ	brown sandal wood [one of the {phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad}. = the 8 outer principal [medicines]. tsan dan dmar po rigs gnyis kyi nang nas mdog dmar smug shas che ba zhig ste, nus pa tsan dan dmar po dan...	tsan dan smug po
ཙན་དན་ཚལ་གྱི་དུར་ཁྲོད	Sandal Grove charnel ground. The Golden Garland Chronicles (p. 179) describes this place as: 'The eminent celestial sacred place of the vidyadharas, the wild jungle which is a crossroad on the secr...	tsan dan tshal gyi dur khrod
ཙན་དན་ས་མཆོག	{tsan dan dkar po}, white sandal wood	tsan dan sa mchog
ཙན་དན་སེང་ལྡེང	{tsan dan seng ldeng} sandal wood [one of the {seng ldeng rigs gsum}, reddish sandal wood]	tsan dan seng ldeng
ཙན་དན་སེར་པོ	yellow species of sandalwood	tsan dan ser po
ཙན་དྲ	the moon, [Skt. chandra]; the Chandra (dynasty of India)	tsan dra
ཙན་དྲ་གོ་མི	Chandragomin, the famous Indian grammarian whose works are included in the bstan sgyur	tsan dra go mi
ཙན་དྲ་པའི་སྒྲ་མདོ	{tsan dra pa'i sgra mdo} [rgya gar pa tsandra go mis brtsams pa'i sgra'i bstan bcos sngar nas bod skad du bsgyur pa 'di'i dpe rgyun da lta'ang dar yod pa]	tsan dra pa'i sgra mdo
ཙན་དད་ལི	candali, [sm. {gtum mo}, heat, Fiery One	tsan dda li
ཙན་སྡོང	sandalwood tree	tsan sdong
ཙན་ནེ	direct, immediate, unmodified	tsan ne
ཙན་པོ་ཆེ	abundantly	tsan po che
ཙན་མིན	{tsen men ni rim gyis 'jug pa}; most often {tsen min} Ch for {rim gyis pa}, the gradual approach; comp {ston mun}; an impartial Tibetan explanation is found in {bsam gtan mig sgron}	tsan min
ཙན་རྫུས་མ	imitation sandalwood	tsan rdzus ma
ཙན་དྷ་ལི	Candali, 1 of ke'u ri brgyad	tsan dha li
ཙན་དྷ་ལི་སེར་སྐྱ	pale yellow candali	tsan dha li ser skya
ཙབ	intensity [, 'khor ba'i 'khrul tsab la bsam na skyo shas skye when I think of the intensity of sa\m s\ara's confusion, sadness arises. Notes: tsabs very great, very much; it's an intensive, usually...	tsab
ཙབ་ཏ་ཙུབ་ཏ	rushed, hurried 2125	tsab ta tsub ta
ཙབ་བེ་ཙུབ་བེ	rushed, hurried [blo bag mi phebs pa'i rnam 'gyur]	tsab be tsub be
མཁན་གྱིས་གསལ་པོར་གོ་མི་ཐུབ	if [you] talk too fast listeners won't understand clearly tsab be tsub be'i yi ge bris na nor yong [you']ll make mistakes if [you] write hurriedly	mkhan gyis gsal por go mi thub
ཙབ་བེ་ཙུབ་བེའི་ལས་ཀ་མ་བྱེད	don't do work in a rush	tsab be tsub be'i las ka ma byed
ཙབ་ཙབ	bzod glags med pa'am, in a rush/ hurry, very speedy and busy tsab tsab brel ba langs nas byed kyin 'dug - after [they] got busy [they] were in a rush	tsab tsab
ཙབ་ཙུབ	crude, restless, nervous, hurried, rushed, speedy	tsab tsub
ཙབ་ཙུབ་ཅན	crude, restless, nervous, hurried, rushed, speedy	tsab tsub can
ཙབ་ཙུབ་མ་བྱེད	don't rush	tsab tsub ma byed
ཙབ་ཙུབ་མི་བྱ	don't be in a hurry	tsab tsub mi bya
ཙབ་ཙོབ	in a hurry	tsab tsob
ཙབ་ཙོབ་ཏུ	hurriedly, hastily tsab tsob las ka byas na nor 'khrul 'byung if you rush [your] work [you']ll make mistakes	tsab tsob tu
ཙབ་རལ	torn, tattered, wrecked	tsab ral
ཙབ་རལ་བཟོ	tear, tatter, wreck, messed up, trashed	tsab ral bzo
ཙབ་རལ་བཟོས་པའི་གཞུང་སྲིད	[they] wrecked the government	tsab ral bzos pa'i gzhung srid
ཙབ་ལངས་པ	mind/get rushed/ hurried/ busy/ speedy	tsab langs pa
ཙབ་ལིང	hastily, in a hurry	tsab ling
ཙབ་ས	intensity	tsab sa
ཙབ་ཧྲལ་བ	clamor, raise a cry, loose & dissolute course of life	tsab hral ba
ཙབས་རུ	sour curds, kind of salt, tube of horn	tsabs ru
ཙབས་རུ་ཙབ༹	{tsabs ru tsva}, a kind of salt [med.] [ro lan tsa la skyur, nus pas pho ba'i drod nyams pa dang, zas mi 'ju ba, khog pa sbos brgyangs byed pa sogs la phan]	tsabs ru tsva
ཙབས་རུ་ཚ	kind of salt	tsabs ru tsha
ཙམ་ག	all	tsam ga
ཙམ་གྱི་འཕྲོ་ལ	at that moment	tsam gyi 'phro la
ཙམ་གྱི་བར་དུ	up until	tsam gyi bar du
ཙམ་གྱི་རིང་དུ	for the time of about	tsam gyi ring du
ཙམ་ཉིད	at the moment of, when	tsam nyid
ཙམ་ཉིད་ནས	from the very moment	tsam nyid nas
ཙམ་དུ	[at/ in/ to] about/ approximately, just, only, merely	tsam du
ཙམ་དུ་འདུག	is it merely	tsam du 'dug
ཙམ་དུ་མ་བཞག་པ	not only	tsam du ma bzhag pa
ཙམ་དུ་མ་བཞག་པར	not only	tsam du ma bzhag par
ཙམ་དུ་ཟད	to amount/ what amounts to nothing more than	tsam du zad
ཙམ་ན	verb + tsam na - once the verb is done	tsam na
ཙམ་ནས	after about	tsam nas
ཙམ་པ	roasted barley flour, about or of the size, flour from parched barley, country east of kashmir, ancient bhagalpur, ancient name of cambodia, the size of, tsampa flour, the size of	tsam pa
ཙམ་པ་ཀ	magnolia michelia champaka which removes fever	tsam pa ka
ཙམ་པ་ཀའི་ཡུལ	1 of 96 provinces of shambhala	tsam pa ka'i yul
ཙམ་པའི་མཆོག	finest/ great orchid tree	tsam pa'i mchog
ཙམ་པའི་མིག	eye of the orchid tree	tsam pa'i mig
ཙམ་པས་འཕྱིས	to clean with tsampa flour	tsam pas 'phyis
ཙམ་པོ	barely	tsam po
ཙམ་པོ་པ	commoner, regular person	tsam po pa
ཙམ་པོ་བ	ordinary; a person merely possessed of a body without an intellect	tsam po ba
ཙམ་པོ་བའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	improper/ incorrect, incomplete reason	tsam po ba'i gtan tshigs
ཙམ་པོ་བའི་རིགས་པ	improper/ incorrect, incomplete reasoning	tsam po ba'i rigs pa
ཙམ་འབེའུ	[arch] ber zlam, fur cloak	tsam 'be'u
ཙམ་ཙོམ	doubt	tsam tsom
ཙམ་ཞིག	at the very least	tsam zhig
ཙམ་ཞིག་གིས	Lang: "simply because"; merely because [mss]	tsam zhig gis
ཙམ་ཞིག་ཏུ	x. [mss]	tsam zhig tu
ཙམ་ཡང	even, so much as [gcig tsam yang ma gnang: didn't give even 1]	tsam yang
ཙམ་ཡང་མེད	not even a	tsam yang med
ཙམ་རིང་དུ	for about	tsam ring du
ཙམ་རེ	just, only, enough/ at least	tsam re
ཙམ་ལ	[at/ in/ to] about/ approximately, just, only, merely	tsam la
ཙམ་ལས	{. . . tsam las} . . . and nothing more (than that); isvfc. Other than than, . . .	tsam las
ཙམས་མཉམ་པ	uniform teeth	tsams mnyam pa
ཙའུ་རི	female deity in the {zhi khro} mandala	tsa'u ri
ཙར་གཅོད	annihilate(d, subjugates, taming, destroy	tsar gcod
ཙར་གཅོད་བཅད	annihilate(d, subjugates, taming, destroy tsar gcod rjes 'dzin mdzad du gsol please destroy those that need to be destroyed and care for those that need your care	tsar gcod bcad
ཙར་གཅོད་པ	search into, investigate	tsar gcod pa
ཙར་པ་ཏི་པ	indian buddhist saint	tsar pa ti pa
ཙར་མ	place in liyul	tsar ma
ཙར་ཙར	dngos po sogs sa thog tu sdeb gcig min par nar nar things etc. not hanging down/ occurring, oval etc. zags tshul	tsar tsar
ཙར་རེ	'phro can nam lhag lus,//las ka byed 'phro tsar re bzhag pa	tsar re
ཙལ	(not in das)	tsal
ཙལ་གྱི་བཀོད་པ	magnificent sight, rich/ regal display	tsal gyi bkod pa
ཙི་ཀྲ་ཀ	several plants, ricinus communis, SA drod sman rgyal po	tsi kra ka
ཙི་གི	rat, mouse	tsi gi
ཙི་གུ	1) fruit pit; 2) rat, mouse	tsi gu
ཙི་གེ་དར་མཙོ	{tsi ge dar mtso Lake [W aa mdo rdzong]	tsi ge dar mtso
ཙི་གེ་དར་མཚོ	{tsi ge dar mtsho} Lake	tsi ge dar mtsho
ཙི་ཆུང	any shrew	tsi chung
ཙི་ཏ	citta, mind, heart	tsi ta
ཙི་ཏིས་རྫོ་པ	cancer	tsi tis rdzo pa
ཙི་ཏྲ	[Skt] 3rd month	tsi tra
ཙི་ཏྲ་ཀ	[Skt] {tsi tra ka}, me yi 'khor lo, blo skyong med. tree	tsi tra ka
ཙི་སྟག	purgative medicine	tsi stag
ཙི་ན	CH	tsi na
ཙི་པ་ཏ	animal {tsi pa ta}	tsi pa ta
ཙི་མ་ར	Tsimara, a Dharma protector, especially of Samye monastery	tsi ma ra
ཙི་ཙི	rat, mouse, kind of millet grown in china, mouse	tsi tsi
ཙི་ཙི་གླ་ཙི་ཅན	muskrat	tsi tsi gla tsi can
ཙི་ཙི་ལྒང་པོ	bat	tsi tsi lgang po
ཙི་ཙི་སྒམ་པོ	byi ba'i rigs shig ste, [flying and also having teeth hence neither bird nor mouse]	tsi tsi sgam po
ཙི་ཙི་རྫོ་ལ	cancer	tsi tsi rdzo la
ཙི་ཙི་ས་འཛིན	herb {tsi tsi sa 'dzin}	tsi tsi sa 'dzin
ཙི་ཙེ	millet	tsi tse
ཙི་ཚེ	millet	tsi tshe
ཙི་རྫི་ཚ	kind of leprosy	tsi rdzi tsha
ཙི་ཝའེ་ཞན	UV rays	tsi wa'e zhan
ཙི་ལི་ཙིམ	species of fish	tsi li tsim
ཙིག་རྐང	verses, lines	tsig rkang
ཙིག་གེ་བ	[arch] just a little	tsig ge ba
ཙིག་ངན	insults	tsig ngan
ཙིག་སྡེ་སྦྱོར	rhetoric	tsig sde sbyor
ཙིག་ཙིག	irritate	tsig tsig
ཙིག་གཞི	foundation of a wall	tsig gzhi
ཙིགས	SA tshigs	tsigs
ཙིཏ་ཏ	the physical heart	tsit ta
ཙིཏ་ཏ་ཤའི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of flesh in the heart center*	tsit ta sha'i sgron ma
ཙིཏ་ཏའི་ཏོག	heart top-ornament	tsit ta'i tog
ཙིད	(not in das)	tsid
ཙིད་བུ	[arch] two year old goat	tsid bu
ཙིན་ཏ་མ་ཎི	wishfulfilling gem {yi bzhin nor bu}	tsin ta ma Ni
ཙིན་ད་མ་ནི	chintamani, yellow gem of fabulous virtues with 7 shades of color which adorns the crown of the king of the nagas	tsin da ma ni
ཙིན་དྷི་ལི་ཀྲ་མ	a border state of magadha	tsin dhi li kra ma
ཙིམ་པའི་ཉམས	contented	tsim pa'i nyams
ཙིའུ	fruit pit, rat mouse	tsi'u
ཙིའུ་དམར་པོ	{tsi'u dmar po	tsi'u dmar po
ཙིར	be squeezed/ crushed	tsir
ཙིར་འཛིན	to fixate upon	tsir 'dzin
ཙུ	figure 77	tsu
ཙུ་ཏ	a gem	tsu ta
ཙུ་ཏའི་ཤིང	mango tree	tsu ta'i shing
ཙུ་མ་ཏི	med. instrument sha ro [swelling left after a wound] &, rgyus pa [muscle, tendon, ligament], rus 'dzer [lump on re-knitted bones] sogs 'don byed [putting aside/ pulling out]	tsu ma ti
ཏྭེཨེཟེར	like pincers 2127	tweezer
ཙུ་མོ་ཏི	1) med. examination instrument; 2) mango tree	tsu mo ti
ཙུག	what, how, village unit of 10 families	tsug
ཙུག་ཀྲང	head of a village unit of 10 families	tsug krang
ཙུག་བྱས	how it was done, how he did it	tsug byas
ཙུག་བྱེད་དམ	how did [they] do it? [de skad gsungs pa ci tsug lags]	tsug byed dam
ཙུག་ཙུག	sound made by the palate in eating and drinking	tsug tsug
ཙུག་ཙེ	zhang zhung expression that means "to put into action through magic"	tsug tse
ཙུག་ལི	reed for sucking up beer	tsug li
ཙུག་ས	SA tshugs	tsug sa
ཙུགས་ཐུབ་དུ	confidently	tsugs thub du
ཙུང་ཀྲི	general branch	tsung kri
ཙུང་ཏུའེ	military column	tsung tu'e
ཙུང་ཏུའེ་གསུམ་པ	3rd [military] column	tsung tu'e gsum pa
ཙུང་ཐུང	president	tsung thung
ཙུང་ཐུང་གཞོན་པ	vice president	tsung thung gzhon pa
ཙུང་ལི	premier, prime minister, chancellor	tsung li
ཙུང་ལི་གཞོན་པ	vice/ deputy [premier, prime minister, chancellor]	tsung li gzhon pa
ཙུང་སི་ལིང	commander in chief	tsung si ling
ཙུང་ཧྲུའུ་ཅི	secretary general	tsung hru'u ci
ཙུད	locked	tsud
ཙུན་ད	a goddess	tsun da
ཙུན་དུ	cunda (emanation of rdo rje sems dpa', 4 arms peaceful, 16 arms wrathful)	tsun du
ཙུན་ཙུམ་པ་ཏི	1 of 5 great rivers, SA chu bo chen po	tsun tsum pa ti
ཙུབ་འཁྱིལ	skra su lu'am skra 'khyil	tsub 'khyil
ཙུབ་འགྱུར་ཚལ	thicket, wood, forest	tsub 'gyur tshal
ཙུབ་པོ	rough, rude, wild	tsub po
ཙུབ་མོ	rough, rude, wild	tsub mo
ཙུབ་མོའི་རེག་བྱ	officinal thorny plant	tsub mo'i reg bya
ཙུབ་ཙུབ	multicolored	tsub tsub
ཙུབས་པ	to churn	tsubs pa
ཙུམ་པ	[arch] 'o byed pa	tsum pa
ཙུའུ	team, brigade, group	tsu'u
ཙུའུ་ཀྲང	leader of a [team, brigade, group]	tsu'u krang
ཙུའུ་ཆིའུ	football = soccer	tsu'u chi'u
ཙུའུ་ཆིའུ་རུ་ཁག	football = soccer team	tsu'u chi'u ru khag
ཙུའུ་ཏེང	Sato [former Prime Minister of Japan]	tsu'u teng
ཙུའུ་ཏེང་སྲིད་གཞུང	Sato government [Japan]	tsu'u teng srid gzhung
ཙུའོ་ཙན་དར་སྐུད	tussah silk	tsu'o tsan dar skud
ཙུའོ་ཙན་དར་འབུ	tussore/ tussah silkworm	tsu'o tsan dar 'bu
ཙུར	inward	tsur
ཙུར་འདུས	gathered back	tsur 'dus
ཙེ་གུར	small tube, dose, little	tse gur
ཙེ་གུར་བཏང་བ	repeated administration of medicine to a patient	tse gur btang ba
ཙེ་རྒོད	monk supervisor	tse rgod
ཙེ་རྒྱལ་སྒར	rdzogs chen 'dus sde under chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu in massachusetts USA	tse rgyal sgar
ཙེ་གཅིག་ལུས་གཅིག	one life and one body tse nad med dang dbang phyug dang lordship, freedom from disease, long life [it is unnecessary to use tse ring in this example even though it would fit the metre]	tse gcig lus gcig
ཙེ་ནེ	1) sems mi go bar brtan por 'dug tshul; 2) [arch] all	tse ne
ཙེ་པོ	small basket carried on the back	tse po
ཙེ་མ་ཕྱིད	miserable	tse ma phyid
ཙེ་མོ	very peak	tse mo
ཙེ་ཙི	millet	tse tsi
ཙེ་ཟེ	SA ye tse, yel tse	tse ze
ཙེ་རེ	song, tune, SA tshe re	tse re
ཙེ་ལུ	disciple	tse lu
ཙེ་ལུང	string or strap for carrying a basket	tse lung
ཙེ་ལེ་རིག་འཛིན་སྣ་ཐོགས་རང་གྲོལ	author	tse le rig 'dzin sna thogs rang grol
ཙེག་དྲག	[Skt] visarga [indicating aspiration]	tseg drag
ཙེག་ཙེག	rustling sound	tseg tseg
ཙེག་ཙེག་བྱེད་པ	rustle, make a noise like dry hay or dry leaves	tseg tseg byed pa
ཙེན	type	tsen
ཙེན་གྱིས	utterly	tsen gyis
ཙེན་གྱིས་བླངས་ནས	snatching up	tsen gyis blangs nas
ཙེན་ནེ	instantness	tsen ne
ཙེན་ནེ་འཇོག་པ	remain with a sense of precision	tsen ne 'jog pa
ཙེན་མིན	{tsen men ni rim gyis 'jug pa}; Ch for {rim gyis pa}, the gradual approach; comp {ston mun}; an impartial Tibetan explanation is found in {bsam gtan mig sgron}	tsen min
ཙེན་མེན	see {tsen min}	tsen men
ཙེབ་ཙེབ	sharp-pointed like needles or thorns	tseb tseb
ཙེམ་ཙེ	small scissors	tsem tse
ཙེའུ་དམར	deity {tse'u dmar}	tse'u dmar
ཙེའུ་དམར་པོ	dharmapala of Samye	tse'u dmar po
ཙེར	squeaking noise	tser
ཙེར་ཙེར	trembling, shaking sgra'i khyad par zhig, sound made in great pain of illness etc skad ngan	tser tser
ཙེར་ཙེར་དུ་ཤོར	make sound of pain in illness etc.	tser tser du shor
ཙེར་ཙེར་བྱེད་པ	shake, quake, tremble	tser tser byed pa
ཙེལ་ཆག་པོ	broken dosser or pannier	tsel chag po
ཙེལ་པོ	big basket usu carried on the back	tsel po
ཙོ	medicinal plant which yields incense,	tso
ཙོ་བོ	main [principle], principal [thd]	tso bo
ཙོ་དམར	power obtained through control of the fire element	tso dmar
ཙོ་ཙ	[arch] apple	tso tsa
ཙོ་ལ་ཀ	country in southern india	tso la ka
ཙྭོ	rite of magic action	tswo
ཙོག་གེ	still, quiet[ly]	tsog ge
ཙོག་གེ་སྡོད	sit still, quietly	tsog ge sdod
ཙོག་གེ་བ	straight/ upright/ erect	tsog ge ba
ཙོག་གེ་ལངས	stand still, quietly	tsog ge langs
ཙོག་གེར	still, quiet[ly]	tsog ger
ཙོག་པ	dirty, upright posture, kneeling, sitting, squatting	tsog pa
ཙོག་པར་སྡོད་པ	squat down	tsog par sdod pa
ཙོག་པུ	squatting, posture of cowering, crouching upright posture, squatting posture with knees upright & together	tsog pu
ཙོག་པུ་ནི་ནུས	not able to cower, a very sick person	tsog pu ni nus
ཙོག་པུ་པ	sitter, 1 who sleeps sitting up {sbyangs pa'i yon tan bcu gsum}	tsog pu pa
ཙོག་པུར	squatting, crouching 2128	tsog pur
ཙོག་པུར་སྡོད	squat [on the haunches]	tsog pur sdod
ཙོག་པུར་སྡོད་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unable to sit still	tsog pur sdod mi thub pa
ཙོག་པོ	1) stone; 2) pestle gtun bu; 3) 1 who sleeps sitting up	tsog po
ཙོག་བུ་པ	sleeping sitting up; sitting without sleep	tsog bu pa
ཙོག་མི་ཙུགས་པ	unable to sit still	tsog mi tsugs pa
ཙོག་མི་ཙུགས་པའི་བྱིས་པ	newborn infant	tsog mi tsugs pa'i byis pa
ཙོག་ཙོག	krong krong gi tshul raised up/ upright sitting/ squatting, kneeling posture/ shape,,	tsog tsog
ཙོག་ཙོག་པུ	kneeling, sitting, squatting [upright]	tsog tsog pu
ཙོག་ཙོག་པུར	squatting [on the haunches]	tsog tsog pur
ཙོག་ཙོག་བྱེད	squat down	tsog tsog byed
ཙོག་ཙོག་བྱེད་པ	squat down	tsog tsog byed pa
ཙོགས་སྐོང	feast offering [skong literally means "fulfill	tsogs skong
ཙོགས་སྒྲུབ	group practice [might be a mahayoga practice that included gathering up 1,000 vajra brothers and sisters create an enormous mandala/ feast w 24 hour mantra recitation	tsogs sgrub
ཙོགས་གཏོར	feast torma offerings [gtor ma that one enjoys at a feast; TTs tend to refer to it as tsogs, not as gtor ma, = offerings to the higher and lower beings]	tsogs gtor
ཙོགས་རྣམས	all [mun pa'i tsogs rnams all the darkness]	tsogs rnams
ཙོགས་གསོག	the merit accumulated [yon bdag bzang po'i tsogs gsog the merit accumulated by this good benefactor] collected an offering [thams cad kyis tsogs gsog byas na 'thad if everyone collected an offering...	tsogs gsog
ཙོང	commerce; onion	tsong
ཙོང་རྐང	leek	tsong rkang
ཙོང་ཁ	onion bank	tsong kha
ཙོང་ཁ་མཁར	county in 21th cent Tibet.	tsong kha mkhar
ཙོང་ཁ་གྱི་ཐང	Tsongkha Gyi Thang, one of the Three Ranges of Dokham	tsong kha gyi thang
ཙོང་ཁ་བརྒྱད་བཅུ་པ	Eighty Tsongkhas, eighty verses in praise of Tsongkhapa by the Kashmiri Pandita Punya Shri	tsong kha brgyad bcu pa
ཙོང་ཁ་པ	Tsongkhapa 1357-1419 Fifteenth century founder of dge lugs pa school	tsong kha pa
ཙོང་ཁ་པ་བློ་བཟང་གྲགས་པ	{tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa [bod kyi dge lugs pa'i grub mtha' srol gtod pa po yin zhing, rab byung drug pa'i me bya lor mdo smad tsong kha'i yul du 'khrungs, khong gi yab la ta dben rgyal rabs...	tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa
ཙོང་གེ	trading at exorbitant prices	tsong ge
ཙོང་ཆུ	{tsong chu} River	tsong chu
ཙོང་དམར	red onion garlic, SA sgog bcud gsum	tsong dmar
ཙོང་ཙོང	raise/ stick/ prick up, straight up, erect, steep, flat, even	tsong tsong
ཙོང་ཙོང་བྱས་པའི་སྐེ	raising its neck	tsong tsong byas pa'i ske
ཙོང་ཙོང་བྱས་པའི་རྣ་བ	pricking up its ears	tsong tsong byas pa'i rna ba
ཙོང་ཙོང་འབྲེལ	matched	tsong tsong 'brel
ཙོད་པ	debate	tsod pa
ཙོན་ཁོ	mortar	tson kho
ཙོབ་ཙོབ་སྡོད་པ	sit in different groups (not in rows)	tsob tsob sdod pa
ཙོམ་པ	initiate [-ing], commence [-ing], undertake, start[ing]	tsom pa
ཙོམ་བུ	[piles of] grain, heap, assembly	tsom bu
ཙོམས	doubt, SA tshom pa	tsoms
ཙོའུ་མ་སེར་མོ	yellow Cauri	tso'u ma ser mo
ཙོའུ་རི	Cauri, 1 of ke'u ri brgyad	tso'u ri
ཙོར་མོ	five-finger pinch	tsor mo
ཙོས་རྗེ	manager of monastery affairs	tsos rje
གཙག	1) red earth; 2) red ochre med. mineral [tshos la'ang 'jug ...Mtsal rang la bzhag btsag mi la re,...Btsag [red ochre] dang bsdebs na dmar, rams [indigo] dang bstun na sngo [= me lce ba, tshon chen,...	gtsag
གཙག་ཁབ	medical bleeding lancet, acupuncture needle	gtsag khab
གཙག་ཁབ་རྒྱག	do medical bleeding/ acupuncture 2129	gtsag khab rgyag
གཙག་གདན	tongue depressor [used when bleeding/ doing acupuncutre at the root of the tongue to keep it steady]	gtsag gdan
གཙག་མདངས	granular dry shading	gtsag mdangs
གཙག་པ	(tha dad pa gtsags pa, gtsag pa, gtsogs,, gshag pa dang, bleed medically, bkas nas 'don pa, lancet	gtsag pa
གཙག་པ་པོ	one who does the operation of bleeding	gtsag pa po
གཙག་པའི་ཁྲག	drawn blood	gtsag pa'i khrag
གཙག་པའི་ཆང	strained beer	gtsag pa'i chang
གཙག་པར	stencil, tracing	gtsag par
གཙག་པུ	instrument for bleeding	gtsag pu
གཙག་བུ	bad blood extracting implement [divisions: sta re'i kha 'dra sogs different kinds]	gtsag bu
གཙག་བུ་སྟ་རེ་ཁ	axe-head bleeding lancet [mig dmar po chags pa, mgo gzer ba, snying mi bde ba, pho srin glang 'thab, mo nad khrag tshabs na ba bcas la used over a bone]	gtsag bu sta re kha
གཙག་བུ་འབྲི་ལྕེ	mchin khrag smug po rgyas pa dang, grang ba bcas na bar chu rgyus gseb tu rgyag byed kyi instrument	gtsag bu 'bri lce
གཙགས	will draw out [blood etc], strain [w strainer]	gtsags
གཙགས་པ	pf. of {gtsag pa}	gtsags pa
གཙང	Tsang, one of the two main provinces of Central Tibet	gtsang
གཙང་ཁང	shrine hall	gtsang khang
གཙང་ཁྲུས	wash gtsang mkhan chen 'jam dbyangs dpal	gtsang khrus
ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1610-1684	ldan rgya mtsho
གཙང་འཁྱེར	taking everything, cleaning out	gtsang 'khyer
གཙང་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	take everything, clean out	gtsang 'khyer byed
གཙང་འཁྲུས	purification	gtsang 'khrus
གཙང་གི་གྱེར་ཡུག	1 of 37 holy places of bon, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	gtsang gi gyer yug
གཙང་གི་ཕུག་མོ་ཆེ	Great Cave of Tsang	gtsang gi phug mo che
གཙང་གྲ	cleanliness	gtsang gra
གཙང་གྲ་བྱེད	clean	gtsang gra byed
གཙང་དགོན	Tsang Monastery	gtsang dgon
གཙང་འགྲམ་ལྷ་ཁང	{gtsang 'gram lha khang} [founded by srong btsan sgam po in gtsang gzhis ka rtse, 1 of the (mtha' 'dul gyi gtsug lag khang bzhi}	gtsang 'gram lha khang
གཙང་སྒྲིག	[cleaning up by] clearing away, rearrangement, clearance, liquidation	gtsang sgrig
གཙང་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	[clean up by] clearing away, rearrange, clear, liquidate	gtsang sgrig byed
གཙང་སྒྲིག་ལེགས་བསྡུ	put in order and simplify/ streamline	gtsang sgrig legs bsdu
གཙང་བསྒྲིགས	[cleaning up by] clearing away, rearrangement, clearance, liquidation	gtsang bsgrigs
གཙང་བསྒྲིགས་བྱེད	[clean up by] clearing away, rearrange, clear, liquidate	gtsang bsgrigs byed
གཙང་བསྒྲིགས་ལེགས་བསྡུ	put in order and simplify/ streamline	gtsang bsgrigs legs bsdu
གཙང་ཆག	not having to pay a tax	gtsang chag
གཙང་ཆག་རྡེལ་ཞིབ	a stone used to cure obstruction of urine	gtsang chag rdel zhib
གཙང་ཆབ	the Brahmaputra River, {gtsang chu}	gtsang chab
གཙང་ཆབ་བདེ་མོ་སྐོར་ཀྱིན	swims comfortably in the pure depths	gtsang chab bde mo skor kyin
གཙང་ཆུ	1) the Brahmaputra River. 2) any major river	gtsang chu
གཙང་ཆེན	Great Purity	gtsang chen
གཙང་མཆོད	pure offering [phud mnyams and undefiled [by dirt]	gtsang mchod
གཙང་ཉ	Fish in the Tsangpo/ river fish?	gtsang nya
གཙང་མཐོ་ཐོག	pure summit gtsang mtho thog spyi rgyug mdzod kyi	gtsang mtho thog
Hཨིགྷེསཏ་ཨནད་ཨཱལལ	Embracing, bon of treasury of the all embracing pure summit	Highest and All
གཙང་དག	pure/ clean w no remainder of stains, clean and correct	gtsang dag
གཙང་དག་ཏུ	wholly	gtsang dag tu
གཙང་དག་བྱེད	clean up, clear away, purge, liquidate	gtsang dag byed
གཙང་དག་བཟོ	clean up, clear away, purge, liquidate	gtsang dag bzo
གཙང་དུས	end of the period	gtsang dus
གཙང་བདག་བདེ་རྟག	purity, identity, happiness, permanence	gtsang bdag bde rtag
གཙང་བདེ་རྟག་བདག	purity, identity, happiness, permanence	gtsang bde rtag bdag
གཙང་བདེ་བདག་རྟག་དམ་པ	sublime purity, bliss, identity, and permanence	gtsang bde bdag rtag dam pa
གཙང་གནས	rishi	gtsang gnas
གཙང་གནས་རིགས་ལྔ	[TRS 26:6]	gtsang gnas rigs lnga
གཙང་སྣམ	gtsang phyogs nas btags pa'i snam bu	gtsang snam
གཙང་པ	people from Tsang, Tsang administration	gtsang pa
གཙང་པ་རྒྱ་རས	1161-1211, master of Drukpa Kagyu lineage also know as ye shes rdo rje	gtsang pa rgya ras
གཙང་པ་རྒྱ་རས་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	11611211 - Tsangpa Gyarey Yeshe Dorje, an eminent master of the Drukpa Kagyü tradition and the first Drukchen	gtsang pa rgya ras ye shes rdo rje
གཙང་པ་ཆོས་རྗེ	a deity	gtsang pa chos rje
གཙང་པ་བསྟན་སྐྱོང་དབང་པོ	about 17th century Tibetan ruler karma bka' brgyud kyi zhva dmar ba dang Jonangpa doctrine rgyab skyor dang dge lugs pa'i grub mtha' la sdang po byas pas in the 11th chu rta year gu shri bstan 'dzi...	gtsang pa bstan skyong dbang po
གཙང་པ་བདུན་བརྒྱུད	7 dga' ldan khri pa after Tsongkhapa died who were all Tsangpas [rgyal tshab rje &, mkhas grub rje, zha lu pa legs pa rgyal mtshan, blo gros chos skyong, ba so chos kyi rgyal mtshan, blo gros brtan...	gtsang pa bdun brgyud
གཙང་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	pure conduct, clean living	gtsang par spyod pa
གཙང་པོ	[large] river, Tsangpo River [= gling ldan ma, rgyun ldan, ngogs ldan, chu rgyun, nya lcibs can, 'bab chu, mtshor 'bab, g.yo ldan, rlabs ldan]	gtsang po
གཙང་པོར་འབབ་པའི་ཆུ་ཕྲན	tributary	gtsang por 'bab pa'i chu phran
གཙང་སྤྱོད	1) tshangs par spyod pa'am rnam par dag pa'i spyod pa,..; 2) (Yul gsang spyod	gtsang spyod
གཙང་སྤྱོད་སྤྲ	hygiene, health, sanitation, cleanliness, purity, purification	gtsang spyod spra
གཙང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	pure action, [Syn. {dge ba'i las}	gtsang spyod byed
གཙང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་ཟླ་བ	[hor. {zla drug pa}	gtsang spyod byed zla ba
གཙང་སྤྱོད་སྦྲ	cleanliness, purification pure and orderly	gtsang spyod sbra
གཙང་སྤྱོད་མ་ལྔ	Syn {gnas ma lnga, mi che ba}, {mi gdung ba}, {gya nom snang ba}, {shin tu mthong ba}, {'og min}	gtsang spyod ma lnga
གཙང་སྤྱོད་སིང་ངེ	flawlessly and perfectly	gtsang spyod sing nge
གཙང་སྤྲ	purity, external purity in living	gtsang spra
གཙང་སྤྲ་ཅན	cleanliness, clean, pure	gtsang spra can
གཙང་སྤྲ་བྱེད་པ	to keep clean, purify	gtsang spra byed pa
གཙང་སྤྲ་གསུམ	three fold cleanliness	gtsang spra gsum
གཙང་སྤྲར་སྤྱོད་པ	moral purity, pure conduct	gtsang sprar spyod pa
གཙང་སྤྲས	pure, handsome	gtsang spras
གཙང་སྤྲོད	bu lon sogs cha tshang 'jal ba,...Ga- yar dngul rnams gtsang sprod byas zin	gtsang sprod
གཙང་ཕུད	completely clear away/ eliminate, eradicate, exterminate liquidate, completely destroy, purge, pasteurize	gtsang phud
གཙང་ཕུད་བྱེད	completely clear away/ eliminate, eradicate, exterminate liquidate, completely destroy, purge, pasteurize	gtsang phud byed
གཙང་འཕྱར	'bru rlung la phyar te gad gtsa bzo ba	gtsang 'phyar
གཙང་འཕྲོག	take by force, rob everything someone has	gtsang 'phrog
གཙང་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	take by force/ rob everything someone has	gtsang 'phrog byed
གཙང་བ	be clean, be pure, purity, cleanliness, beauty	gtsang ba
གཙང་བ་བྱེད	clean purify	gtsang ba byed
གཙང་བའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent purity; def. {glo bur gyi dri ma bag chags dang bcas pa spang ba'i phyir}	gtsang ba'i pha rol tu phyin pa
གཙང་བའི་ཟས	clean and pure food	gtsang ba'i zas
གཙང་བར་གནས	ascetic	gtsang bar gnas
གཙང་བར་གནས་པ	sage	gtsang bar gnas pa
གཙང་བུ	screen, parasol	gtsang bu
གཙང་བྱེད	pure action, [Syn. {dge ba'i las}	gtsang byed
གཙང་བྱེད་མགོན་པོ	name of brgya byin lha	gtsang byed mgon po
གཙང་བྱེད་ཟླ་བ	[hor. {zla drug pa}	gtsang byed zla ba
གཙང་བྲ་ཆུང་བ	untidiness	gtsang bra chung ba
གཙང་བྲིས	1) document or picture gtan 'bebs kyi gtsang bshus,...Zin bris zhu dag btang nas gtsang bris byed pa,..; 2) picture or document by a person from tshang	gtsang bris
གཙང་དབྲེ	1) clean and dirty; 2) yi gar 'ong ba and yi gar mi 'ong ba [clean and dirty water, pleasing/tasty and not]	gtsang dbre
གཙང་འབུད	completely clear away/ eliminate, eradicate, exterminate liquidate, completely destroy, purge, pasteurize	gtsang 'bud
གཙང་འབུད་བྱེད	completely clear away/ eliminate, eradicate, exterminate liquidate, completely destroy, purge, pasteurize	gtsang 'bud byed
གཙང་སྦྱོར	[arch] monks's food kyi zhal ta ba	gtsang sbyor
གཙང་སྦྲ	cleanliness	gtsang sbra
གཙང་སྦྲ་ཅན	smart	gtsang sbra can
གཙང་སྦྲ་ཆུང་བ	to have little sense of cleanliness	gtsang sbra chung ba
གཙང་སྦྲ་ཆེ་བ	to be / keep very clean gtsang sbra dang gus pas mchod pa made offerings with cleanliness and respect	gtsang sbra che ba
གཙང་སྦྲ་འཕོད་བསྟེན	sanitation and hygiene	gtsang sbra 'phod bsten
གཙང་སྦྲ་མི་སྒེར	personal hygiene	gtsang sbra mi sger
གཙང་སྦྲ་ཡག་པོ་བྱས་པ	[did a] good cleaning	gtsang sbra yag po byas pa
གཙང་སྦྲའི་སྲིན་བུ	latrine maggot	gtsang sbra'i srin bu
གཙང་མ	clean, hygienic, sanitary, pure, sanctified, celestial, immaculate, clear, neat, sterile	gtsang ma
གཙང་མ་ལྔ	{gnas gtsang ma lnga, mi che ba}, {mi gdung ba}, {gya nom snang ba}, {shin tu mthong ba}, {'og min}. Syn {gnas gtsang ma lnga. {mi che ba, mi gdung ba, gya nom snang ba, shin tu mthong ba, 'og min}	gtsang ma lnga
གཙང་མ་གཙུག་ཕུད	novice monk of bon	gtsang ma gtsug phud
གཙང་མ་བཟོ	clean [up]	gtsang ma bzo
གཙང་མ་བཟོ་བ	defecate, purify	gtsang ma bzo ba
གཙང་མའི་ཆོས	flawless message	gtsang ma'i chos
གཙང་མའི་གནས	purest worldly realm(s)	gtsang ma'i gnas
གཙང་མའི་གནས་ལྔ	the five pure places {mi che ba}., {mi gdung ba}., {gya nom snang ba}., {shin tu mthong ba} {'og min} the highest god realms, where only noble ones live]	gtsang ma'i gnas lnga
གཙང་མའི་མི་ལུས	sound human body	gtsang ma'i mi lus
གཙང་མའི་ཟླ་བ	after full moon of 5th month until the full moon of the 6th, pure month	gtsang ma'i zla ba
གཙང་མའི་རང་བཙན	complete independence	gtsang ma'i rang btsan
གཙང་མའི་ལྷ་ས་སྐད	pure Lhasa dialect	gtsang ma'i lha sa skad
གཙང་མའི་ལྷ་སེལ	exorcism for the pure deities, rite carried out in house of unwed mother with illegitimate child	gtsang ma'i lha sel
གཙང་མི་ཆགས་པའི་ངར་ལྕགས	stainless steel	gtsang mi chags pa'i ngar lcags
གཙང་དམེ	[Syn {gtsang rme}	gtsang dme
གཙང་རྨེ	pure/ clean and dirty/ filthy/ defiled	gtsang rme
གཙང་རྨེའི་ལྷག་གཏོར	pure and impure residual torma	gtsang rme'i lhag gtor
གཙང་སྨན་ཡེ་ཤེས་བཟང་པོ	{gtsang sman ye shes bzang po} [lha sa lcags po ri'i gso rig 'gro phan gling gi sman pa mkhas chen zhig ste, rab byung bcu gnyis pa'i smadtsamdu rgyal dbang sku phreng bdun pa bskal bzang rgya mtsh...	gtsang sman ye shes bzang po
གཙང་སྨེ་འདྲེས་པའི་སྐྱོམ་མདོས	mdos for the elimination of mixing cleanliness and dirtiness	gtsang sme 'dres pa'i skyom mdos
གཙང་སྨྱོན་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	1452-1507	gtsang smyon he ru ka
གཙང་སྨྲེ	purity and impurity	gtsang smre
གཙང་གཙོང	steep, rugged, mountainous	gtsang gtsong
གཙང་བཙན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལེགས་པ	Tsangtsen Dorje Lekpa	gtsang btsan rdo rje legs pa
གཙང་བཙོག	clean and unclean	gtsang btsog
གཙང་བཙོག་མེད་པ	w/o clean and unclean	gtsang btsog med pa
གཙང་རྩིས	settle account[s] in full [CH custom at New Year; rtsis khams dvangs rgyag pa,...Lo 'khor gyi byung song tshang ma gtsang rtsis rgyag pa]	gtsang rtsis
གཙང་རྩིས་བྱེད	settle account[s] in full	gtsang rtsis byed
གཙང་ཟོན	gtsang la bzos pa'i zon pa	gtsang zon
གཙང་རིས	1) gtsang pa'i lag rgyun gyi letters and drawing forms; 2) the pure god realms {gtsang ma'i gnas}	gtsang ris
གཙང་རིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	deities of the pure regions	gtsang ris kyi lha
གཙང་རིས་གནས	pure abodes	gtsang ris gnas
གཙང་རིས་པ	being of the pure abodes	gtsang ris pa
གཙང་རུམ	Tsang carpet	gtsang rum
གཙང་ལ་སྟོད	Tsang Latö. See Latö	gtsang la stod
གཙང་ལེགས་གྲུབ	Lekdrub of Tsang. The companion of Vairochana on his journey to India. Lekdrub received half of the transmission of Dzogchen from Shri Singha, departed early and died on his way back to Tibet. He w...	gtsang legs grub
གཙང་ཤེས་སེལ་འདེབས	He who exorcises who knows how to purify, 1 of shes pa bcu gnyis	gtsang shes sel 'debs
གཙང་བཤང	gad snyigs sogs gtsang mar bshang ba,...Chu sbubs 'gags pa gtsang bshang byed pa	gtsang bshang
གཙང་བཤང་བྱེད	completely clear [path, canal etc.]	gtsang bshang byed
གཙང་བཤལ	chu gtsang mas dri ma'i lhag ma dag par bkru ba,...Skra dang gos bkrus te gtsang bshal btang ba,...Dkar yol gtsang bshal byed pa	gtsang bshal
གཙང་བཤུས	good copy of document or picture	gtsang bshus
གཙང་བཤེར	mthar thug par bsher ba,...Mdzod khang du nyar ba'i dngos rigs gtsang bsher byed pa	gtsang bsher
གཙང་བཤེར་བྱེད་པ	to put in order, clear, check up, sort out	gtsang bsher byed pa
གཙང་ས	clean/ comfortable place	gtsang sa
གཙང་སར་ཐོན་པ	reach a comfortable place	gtsang sar thon pa
གཙང་སིང་ངེ	flawlessly and perfectly	gtsang sing nge
གཙང་སིང་ངེ་བ	place w/o any kind of filth and dirt gtsang sing nge ba'i sa cha la ngal gso ba rest/ refresh 1self in a flawlessly clean place	gtsang sing nge ba
གཙང་སེམ	beauty & ugliness	gtsang sem
གཙང་སེལ	clean-up, purge	gtsang sel
གཙང་སེལ་བའི་དཀའ་ཚེགས	difficulties that were cleared up	gtsang sel ba'i dka' tshegs
གཙང་སེལ་བའི་བུ་ལོན	cleared debt	gtsang sel ba'i bu lon
གཙང་སེལ་བའི་ལུགས་ངན	bad custom/ system that was cleared away	gtsang sel ba'i lugs ngan
གཙང་སེལ་བྱེད	completely clear away/ eliminate, eradicate, exterminate liquidate, completely destroy, purge, pasteurize	gtsang sel byed
གཙང་སེལ་བཟོས་པའི་སྐྱོན	eliminated faults	gtsang sel bzos pa'i skyon
གཙང་གསར་ངག་ཕྲིན་བླ་མ	Tsangsar Ngaktrin Lama. Son of the daughter of Chokgyur Lingpa and root guru of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche, also known as Samten Gyamtso	gtsang gsar ngag phrin bla ma
གཙང་གསུམ	policy of the three atrocities [loot, kill and burn all]	gtsang gsum
གཙང་ལྷག	pure residual. Syn phud gtor - lhag phud - phud lhag - yar lhag 2132	gtsang lhag
གཙང་ལྷག་དང་རྨེ་ལྷག	pure and impure residual	gtsang lhag dang rme lhag
གཙང་ལྷག་བསྲེ	mingle the pure and the impure. Syn. phud lhag bsre, yar gnas mar gnas bsres	gtsang lhag bsre
གཙང་ཨ་རིག	Tsang Arik, in Domey	gtsang a rig
གཙན	Tsen spirit, SA btsan	gtsan
གཙན་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	abduct	gtsan 'khrid byed pa
གཙབ་སྟན	place to cut things up, cutting board/ block	gtsab stan
གཙབ་གདན	place to cut things up, cutting board/ block	gtsab gdan
གཙབ་པ	(tha dad pa,, btsabs pa, btsab pa, gtsobs,, cut up in little pieces, detach w a crow-bar	gtsab pa
གཙབ་སའི་མས་གདན	place to cut things up, cutting board/ block	gtsab sa'i mas gdan
གཙའ	rust, blight	gtsa'
གཙའ་རྒྱག	rust, tarnish	gtsa' rgyag
གཙའ་ཐུབ་ངར་ལྕགས	stainless steel	gtsa' thub ngar lcags
གཙའ་ནད	crop blight/ rust	gtsa' nad
གཙི་བ	delight in, set store by, be fond of, invite, summon, call, appoint	gtsi ba
གཙིག	[p gtsigs],, bare/ clench 1's teeth, snarl	gtsig
གཙིགས	bared/ clenched 1's teeth, snarled important [-ce], valued	gtsigs
གཙིགས་ཆུང་དུ་མཐོང་བ	regard as unimportant, not value/ consider highly	gtsigs chung du mthong ba
གཙིགས་ཆེ་བ	of great value, to value	gtsigs che ba
གཙིགས་ཆེ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to prize or value	gtsigs che bar byed pa
གཙིགས་ཆེན་པོ	very important, regarded/ valued highly	gtsigs chen po
གཙིགས་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད	value greatly, regard as very important	gtsigs chen po byed
གཙིགས་ཆེན་བ	affectionate, dear, lovely	gtsigs chen ba
གཙིགས་མཐོང	respect, esteem	gtsigs mthong
གཙིགས་སྣང	regard as very important/ valuable, regard highly	gtsigs snang
གཙིགས་སྣང་ཆུང་བ	have little regard/ value/ concern for	gtsigs snang chung ba
གཙིགས་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	regard/ value highly	gtsigs snang chen po byed pa
གཙིགས་པ	(tha mi dad pa clench/ bare the fangs *, show one's teeth, grin	gtsigs pa
གཙིགས་པའི་བློ	quick comprehension, retentive memory	gtsigs pa'i blo
གཙིགས་བློ	think/ thought of as important/ valuable/ esteemed	gtsigs blo
གཙིགས་བློ་ཅན	hard-working	gtsigs blo can
གཙིགས་གཙིགས	very important/ valuable	gtsigs gtsigs
གཙིགས་གཙིགས་བྱེད་པ	regard as very important/ valuable	gtsigs gtsigs byed pa
གཙིགས་བཟུང་བ	(A; 1) consider important, take very seriously; 2) Khas blangs pa [asserted, promised?]	gtsigs bzung ba
གཙིགས་ལ་འབེབས་པ	[arch] resolve, decide, be convinced	gtsigs la 'bebs pa
གཙིགས་སུ་ཆེ	very important	gtsigs su che
གཙིགས་སུ་ཆེ་བ	regard/ value very highly	gtsigs su che ba
གཙིར	squeeze, SA 'tshir ba	gtsir
གཙིར་གྱི་བཟུང	seize firmly	gtsir gyi bzung
གཙིར་གྱིས་བཟུང	seize firmly	gtsir gyis bzung
གཙིར་བ	squeeze, press, extract	gtsir ba
གཙིས	delight in, invite, SA gtsi ba	gtsis
གཙུག	crest, crown of the head, peak	gtsug
གཙུག་རྐྱང	single chief figure in a mandala	gtsug rkyang
གཙུག་སྐྲ	hair of the crown	gtsug skra
གཙུག་འཁོར	chief figure and entourage, principal and retinue	gtsug 'khor
གཙུག་འཁྱིལ	spu 'khyil at the crown of the head	gtsug 'khyil
གཙུག་གི་རྒྱན	crown/ crest ornament	gtsug gi rgyan
གཙུག་གི་ནོར་བུ	most high, supreme, preeminent, crest jewel	gtsug gi nor bu
གཙུག་མགོའི་སྤྱི་བོའམ་རྩེ་མོ	crown of the head	gtsug mgo'i spyi bo'am rtse mo
གཙུག་རྒྱན	head ornament, ornaments worn on the head	gtsug rgyan
གཙུག་སྒྲོ	bird's/ hat's crest feathers	gtsug sgro
གཙུག་ཏུ	at the top	gtsug tu
གཙུག་ཏུ་འཆིང་བ	fasten on the crown of the head	gtsug tu 'ching ba
གཙུག་ཏོར	at the crown of the head protuberance of flesh or imitation in bound hair, cowl. u n a, tuft of hair on head [of a buddha]	gtsug tor
གཙུག་ཏོར་དཀར་མོ	White Ushnika. A Mahayana sutra / deity	gtsug tor dkar mo
གཙུག་ཏོར་འཁོར་བསྒྱུར	a vidya mantra khro rgyal	gtsug tor 'khor bsgyur
གཙུག་ཏོར་གྱི་གསེབ	the very crown [of the head]	gtsug tor gyi gseb
གཙུག་ཏོར་ཅན	[n. of the second buddha in this aeon]	gtsug tor can
གཙུག་ཏོར་ཆེན་པོ	a sutra	gtsug tor chen po
གཙུག་ཏོར་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Mahoshnisha sutra	gtsug tor chen po'i mdo
གཙུག་ཏོར་བལྟར་མི་མངོན་པ	= the major mark of the usnisha	gtsug tor bltar mi mngon pa
གཙུག་ཏོར་དྲི་མེད	Immaculate Ushnisha	gtsug tor dri med
གཙུག་ཏོར་གདུགས་དཀར	White Canopy Ushnisha [ a deity]	gtsug tor gdugs dkar
གཙུག་ཏོར་རྩེ་མོའི་ས	supreme stage of the crown of the head	gtsug tor rtse mo'i sa
གཙུག་གཏོར	pre-eminent crest	gtsug gtor
གཙུག་གཏོར་གྱི་མདོ	a mahayana sutra	gtsug gtor gyi mdo
གཙུག་གཏོར་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	SA gtsug gtor gyi mdo	gtsug gtor chen po'i mdo
གཙུག་གཏོར་ནམ་མཁའ	1 of 'khor lo drug, cakra of space at the top of the head	gtsug gtor nam mkha'
གཙུག་ཐོར	crown of the head	gtsug thor
གཙུག་ལྡན	peacock	gtsug ldan
གཙུག་ན་ནོར་བུ	a mythological king	gtsug na nor bu
གཙུག་ན་མེ་ཏོག	crown of flowers	gtsug na me tog
གཙུག་ན་མེ་འབར	a yaksha	gtsug na me 'bar
གཙུག་ན་ཟླ་བ	epithet of maheshvara	gtsug na zla ba
གཙུག་ན་རིན་ཆེན	king of the nagas	gtsug na rin chen
གཙུག་ན་རིན་པོ་ཆེས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra requested by Crown Jewel; Ratnachudaparipriccha-sutra	gtsug na rin po ches zhus pa'i mdo
གཙུག་ནོར	crown/ crest ornament/ jewel	gtsug nor
གཙུག་སྤུ	hair of the crown	gtsug spu
གཙུག་ཕུད	1) hair thor cog gi rtse dang ral pa mdud pa'i zur phud,..; 2) hair lan bu'i sne; 3) first hair cutting of renunciation; 4) deity dbang phyug chen po, hair cutting	gtsug phud
གཙུག་ཕུད་འཁྱིལ་བ	skra lan bu' or lcang lo 'khyil mo can	gtsug phud 'khyil ba
གཙུག་ཕུད་རྒྱལ་མཚན་འཆང	epithet of maheshvara	gtsug phud rgyal mtshan 'chang
གཙུག་ཕུད་ལྔ་པ	lion	gtsug phud lnga pa
གཙུག་ཕུད་དོར་ནས་བྱོན་པ	manifested relinquishing his long hair [a bodhisattva who manifested as a shavenheaded monk]	gtsug phud dor nas byon pa
གཙུག་ཕུད་ལྡན	peacock, anyone with a crest, jack-fruit tree	gtsug phud ldan
གཙུག་ཕུད་ཕུལ་བ	hair-cutting ceremony	gtsug phud phul ba
གཙུག་ཕུད་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	1 of 4 bon sages	gtsug phud tshul khrims
གཙུག་ཕུད་འཛིན	peacock	gtsug phud 'dzin
གཙུག་འཕྲུ	1) bird's mgo sha'i ze prog; 2) hat's tog	gtsug 'phru
གཙུག་བུམ	the chief vase, [= -- {bo'i rnam rgyal gyi bum pa}., {rnam rgyal bum pa}	gtsug bum
གཙུག་བོ	chief, lord, principal, leader, foremost, main, central, essential, chief figure, leading principle, basis, the primary	gtsug bo
གཙུག་བོ་སེམས	primary mind/ cognitive act, [def. {rnam shes tshogs drug brgyad} = {sems}.]	gtsug bo sems
གཙུག་མོ	chief female	gtsug mo
གཙུག་ཞབ༹	cap covering only the crown of the head gtsug g.yu - turquoise headstone worn by Amdo women gtsug g.yu - turquoise crown ornament of M women gtsug g.yu thag pa - former Tibetan lha lcam head ornament	gtsug zhva
གཙུག་ལ་འཕྲེང་བ	Tsuglag Trengwa (1504-1566). The Second Pawo Rinpoche. Disciple of the Mikyö Dorje, the eighth Karmapa, known for his writings on astrology and religious history	gtsug la 'phreng ba
གཙུག་ལག	sciences, temple, vihara, [gtsug lag khang]; temple, vihara, [-- lag khang]	gtsug lag
གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	sanctuary, monastery, temple, chief hall of worship, cathedral, vihara, temple, the Cathedra temple (Jokang) in Lhasa, place where scriptures are kept	gtsug lag khang
གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་གི་ཡི་གེ	the scriptures of a temple	gtsug lag khang gi yi ge
གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་གི་ས་བཏུལ་ཏེ	pacified the site for the temple gtsug lag khang gi sa gzhi byin gyis rlob	gtsug lag khang gi sa btul te
གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་བཞེངས་པ	construction of a temple	gtsug lag khang bzhengs pa
གཙུག་ལག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	17851840 - Pawo Tsuklak Chökyi Gyatso, the eighth Pawo Rinpoche	gtsug lag chos kyi rgya mtsho
གཙུག་ལག་དང་པོ	world, wheel of transmigratory existence	gtsug lag dang po
གཙུག་ལག་གདོན་བཅུ	ten astrological gdon	gtsug lag gdon bcu
གཙུག་ལག་ཕྲེང་བ	Tsuglag Trengwa	gtsug lag phreng ba
གཙུག་ལག་འཕྲེང་བ	Pawo Tsukla Trengwa 2nd: 1504 /1454-1566	gtsug lag 'phreng ba
གཙུག་ལག་སྨྲ་བའི་དབང་པོ	expert in commenting on the scriptures	gtsug lag smra ba'i dbang po
གཙུག་ལག་རྩིས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the astrological sciences	gtsug lag rtsis kyi bon
གཙུག་ལག་བརྩིས་པ	to perform astrological calculations	gtsug lag brtsis pa
གཙུག་ལག་འཛིན	Vihardhara	gtsug lag 'dzin
གཙུག་ལག་བཞི	4 sciences (yi ge, sgra skad, rnam par rig byed, 'jug rten)	gtsug lag bzhi
གཙུག་ལག་རིག་པ	brda sprod gtsos all the conventional sciences	gtsug lag rig pa
གཙུག་ལག་སེལ	exorcism of astrological negativities	gtsug lag sel
གཙུག་ལག་གསུམ	the three shelters/ pitakas	gtsug lag gsum
གཙུག་སེམས	primary mind, main cognitive act	gtsug sems
གཙུག་སེམས་དྲུག	the six main cognitive acts {rnam shes drug gam tshogs drug}	gtsug sems drug
གཙུག་ཧུད་གྱི་དུས་སྟོན	1 of 9 dus ston	gtsug hud gyi dus ston
གཙུག་ལྷག་ཁང	vihara - temple hall	gtsug lhag khang
གཙུགས་པ	to plant, bore, scoop out, excavate, SA bkram pa	gtsugs pa
གཙུད་པ	put, insert	gtsud pa
གཙུབ	(tha dad pa gtsubs/btsubs pa, gtsub pa, gtsubs,, rub, stir, churn	gtsub
གཙུབ་གཏན	seat for fire drill	gtsub gtan
གཙུབ་སྟན	gtsub gtan	gtsub stan
གཙུབ་གདན	seat for fire drill	gtsub gdan
གཙུབ་པ	to rub; ft. of {gtsub pa}; {gtsub pa, gtsubs pa, gtsub pa, gtsubs} trans. v	gtsub pa
གཙུབ་ཤིང	wood to make fire by friction	gtsub shing
གཙུབ་ཤིང་ཏང་གཙུབ་སྟན	fire drill stick and seat	gtsub shing tang gtsub stan
གཙུབ་ཤིང་གཙུབ་སྟན	fire drill stick and seat	gtsub shing gtsub stan
གཙུབས	rubbed, stirred, churned	gtsubs
གཙུབས་པ	pf. of {gtsub pa}	gtsubs pa
གཙུབས་ཤིང	MSS: rubbing/churning stick [for starting fires]; one of two elements, the other is the {gtsubs brten [alt. stan]}, the rubbing/churning base [mss]	gtsubs shing
གཙེ	hurt, harm, SA 'tshe ba	gtse
གཙེ་བ	SA 'tshe ba	gtse ba
གཙེང་བ	SA gtsi ba	gtseng ba
གཙེའུ	med. instrument	gtse'u
གཙེར	oppressed [by sudden misfortunes]	gtser
གཙེར་སྐྱོན་པ	to argue, dispute	gtser skyon pa
གཙེར་རྒྱག	argue, debate	gtser rgyag
གཙེར་སྒྲ་ཅན	creaky	gtser sgra can
གཙེར་བརྒྱབ་པ	to argue, dispute	gtser brgyab pa
གཙེར་བ	SA 'tshe ba, disagreeable, offensive to the ear, not pleasant	gtser ba
གཙེར་ཚ་པོ	argumentative	gtser tsha po
གཙེར་སུན	rna ba gtser zhing sems sun par byed pa'i brdabs gsigs,...Rang 'dod khog bcangs kyis gzhan la gtser sun byas pa,...Sa bdag gis mi ser rnams la gtser sun tshad med btang ba	gtser sun
གཙེས	torment, SA 'tshe ba, to become stuck	gtses
གཙེས་པ	endangered, oppressed [p gtse ba]	gtses pa
གཙེས་སེར	a place where one has been harmed	gtses ser
གཙོ	[comp {gtso bo}	gtso
གཙོ་རྐྱང	single/ solitary chief figure in a mandala	gtso rkyang
གཙོ་སྐྱོང	leading/ chief role	gtso skyong
གཙོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	play the leading/ chief role	gtso skyong byed
གཙོ་ཁྲིད	dominant, leading	gtso khrid
གཙོ་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	dominant/ leading ideas/ thoughts/ ideology	gtso khrid kyi bsam pa
གཙོ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	dominate, lead	gtso khrid byed
གཙོ་འཁུར	main responsibility/ initiative/ burden	gtso 'khur
གཙོ་འཁུར་བྱེད	take the main responsibility/ initiative/ burden	gtso 'khur byed
གཙོ་འཁོར	principal deity and retinue, master and servant	gtso 'khor
གཙོ་འཁོར་ཀུན	the principal and all the retinue	gtso 'khor kun
གཙོ་འཁོར་སྤྲུལ་པར་བཅས་པ	the principal and retinue w their emanations	gtso 'khor sprul par bcas pa
གཙོ་གལ་ཆེ་བ	important, essential	gtso gal che ba
གཙོ་གལ་ཆེན་པོ	important, essential	gtso gal chen po
གཙོ་གྱུར	main, chief, most important	gtso gyur
གཙོ་འགན	chief responsibility	gtso 'gan
གཙོ་འགན་ཁུར	take the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan khur
གཙོ་འགན་ཁུར་མཁན	person who takes the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan khur mkhan
གཙོ་འགན་ཁུར་མི	person who takes the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan khur mi
གཙོ་འགན་བཞེས	take the chief responsibility [h]	gtso 'gan bzhes
གཙོ་འགན་བཞེས་མཁན	person who takes the chief responsibility [h]	gtso 'gan bzhes mkhan
གཙོ་འགན་བཞེས་མི	person who takes the chief responsibility [h]	gtso 'gan bzhes mi
གཙོ་འགན་ལེན	take the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan len
གཙོ་འགན་ལེན་མཁན	person who takes the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan len mkhan
གཙོ་འགན་ལེན་མི	person who takes the chief responsibility	gtso 'gan len mi
གཙོ་རྒན	rdzong's individual subregional leaders	gtso rgan
གཙོ་སྒྲུབ	main responsibility/ charge	gtso sgrub
གཙོ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	be responsible for/ in charge of, direct, manage	gtso sgrub byed
གཙོ་ངའི་ང་རྒྱལ	pride in being the principal deity	gtso nga'i nga rgyal
གཙོ་ཆུང	subordinate, secondary, less important, minor	gtso chung
གཙོ་ཆེ	important	gtso che
གཙོ་ཆེ་བ	the most important of all	gtso che ba
གཙོ་ཆེ་བའི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་སྟེ	mainly in terms of	gtso che ba'i dbang du byas ste
གཙོ་ཆེན	important, essential, chief, major	gtso chen
གཙོ་ཆེར	greatly, widely	gtso cher
གཙོ་གཉེར	person in charge, head, manager, principal caretaker	gtso gnyer
གཙོ་གཉེར་སྡེ་ཁག	directly controlled/ section/ department. office/ division	gtso gnyer sde khag
གཙོ་གཉེར་བྱེད	be in charge, head, manage, lead, administer	gtso gnyer byed
གཙོ་མཉམ	of = importance	gtso mnyam
གཙོ་དྲག	Tibetan govt. political, religious, and private sectors gyi gzhis ka khag gi gzhis sdod dang brgya tsho rgan po', high-ranking person, noble, leaders	gtso drag
གཙོ་བདག	chief leader, ruler	gtso bdag
གཙོ་འདོན	among many things, specially select and bring out 1 [De ring nyams myong phyogs sdom bya rgyu'i thad gtso 'don gyis bshad pa]	gtso 'don
སྐོར་གྱི་གནད་དོན་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	decide the main point of the many things that were thought about	skor gyi gnad don thag gcod pa
གཙོ་འདོན་བྱེད	regard/ take as the chief/ most important point/ task	gtso 'don byed
གཙོ་བསྡུས	assemblage of main deity	gtso bsdus
གཙོ་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	sadhana style condensed into the chief figure	gtso bsdus kyi sgrub lugs
གཙོ་པོ	principal	gtso po
གཙོ་ཕལ	chief and ordinary	gtso phal
གཙོ་བ	central deity, chief figure	gtso ba
གཙོ་བུམ	the chief vase. Syn {gtso bo'i rnam rgyal gyi bum pa}, {rnam rgyal bum pa}	gtso bum
གཙོ་བུམ་སྒྲུབ	consecration of the chief vase	gtso bum sgrub
གཙོ་བོ	'primal substance' or prakriti [eternalist view]	gtso bo
གཙོ་བོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve main aspects. See 'twelve manifestations' (rnam 'phrul bcu gnyis). They are twelve different forms of Guru Rinpoche as a 'magical net' of emanations to tame beings according to their needs	gtso bo bcu gnyis
གཙོ་བོ་ཉིད	superiority, excellency	gtso bo nyid
གཙོ་བོ་གཉིས	the two chief figures	gtso bo gnyis
གཙོ་བོ་དང་འཁོར	principal aspect and auxiliary aspects	gtso bo dang 'khor
གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་རིག	dominant perception	gtso bo rnam rig
གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་ཤེས	the main consciousness	gtso bo rnam shes
གཙོ་བོ་ཚོགས	highest in perfection, most excellent of its kind	gtso bo tshogs
གཙོ་བོ་སེམས	ordinary mind as the central principle	gtso bo sems
གཙོ་བོ་སེམས་ཀྱི་གཞི	chief mind basis [one of the 5-fold basis of knowables]	gtso bo sems kyi gzhi
གཙོ་བོའི་མགྲོན	guest of honor	gtso bo'i mgron
གཙོ་བོའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཙམ	merely an manifestation of the supreme (Godhead)	gtso bo'i rnam 'gyur tsam
གཙོ་བོའི་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྱི་བུམ་པ	chief/	gtso bo'i rnam rgyal gyi bum pa
གཙོ་བོའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	dominant consciousness	gtso bo'i rnam shes
གཙོ་བོའི་བུད་མེད	lady	gtso bo'i bud med
གཙོ་བོའི་འབངས	chief servant	gtso bo'i 'bangs
གཙོ་བོའི་ཡན་ལག	the primary feature	gtso bo'i yan lag
གཙོ་བོར	principally, essentially, especially, chiefly	gtso bor
གཙོ་བོར་གྱུར	became the chief of	gtso bor gyur
གཙོ་བོར་གྱུར་པ	mainly, chiefly	gtso bor gyur pa
གཙོ་བོར་འདོན	hold to be most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtso bor 'don
གཙོ་བོར་བསྡུ་ན	when condensed to the principal	gtso bor bsdu na
གཙོ་བོར་བྱ་བ	to give priority to {rgyu 'bras kyi spang blang la gtso bor bya ba} to give priority to choosing what you do in accordance with the principle of cause and effect	gtso bor bya ba
གཙོ་བོར་བྱས་པ	which is foremost	gtso bor byas pa
གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པ	make the principal focus	gtso bor byed pa
གཙོ་བོར་སྨྲ་བ	emphasize	gtso bor smra ba
གཙོ་བོར་འཛིན	hold as the most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtso bor 'dzin
གཙོ་བོར་གཟུང	hold as the most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtso bor gzung
གཙོ་བོར་གཟུང་བྱེད	hold as the most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtso bor gzung byed
གཙོ་བྱས	to act as head, chief, leader	gtso byas
གཙོ་མ	hemp, chief [dakini, principal female]	gtso ma
གཙོ་མོ	principal deity	gtso mo
གཙོ་མོ་མཛད་པ	be mistress	gtso mo mdzad pa
གཙོ་མོར་འོས་པ་ཞིག	the one that is the most deserving of being mistress	gtso mor 'os pa zhig
གཙོ་ཚིག	grammatical subject	gtso tshig
གཙོ་མཛད	leader, person in charge, director [h]	gtso mdzad
གཙོ་འཛིན	leader, president	gtso 'dzin
གཙོ་འཛིན་བྱེད	lead	gtso 'dzin byed
གཙོ་འཛིན་མི་སྣ	leading personnel, persons in leading positions	gtso 'dzin mi sna
གཙོ་བཞུགས	president, chairperson	gtso bzhugs
གཙོ་ཟས	staple food	gtso zas
གཙོ་གཟུང	tsho bor gzung [gold] ??	gtso gzung
གཙོ་གཟུང་བྱེད	hold as the most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtso gzung byed
གཙོ་རུ	most importantly	gtso ru
གཙོ་ཤུགས	main force	gtso shugs
གཙོ་ཤུགས་དམག་དཔུང	main military force	gtso shugs dmag dpung
གཙོ་སེམས	main / primary mind / cognitive act. Syn {gtso bo sems}, {rnam shes}, {yid}	gtso sems
གཙོ་སེམས་དྲུག	the six main cognitive acts/ conciousnesses 2136	gtso sems drug
གཙོག་པ	filthy	gtsog pa
གཙོག་ལྷག	btsog lhag - dme gtor - rme	gtsog lhag
གཙོགས	imp. of {gtsag pa}	gtsogs
གཙོང་ཁ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great Tsongkhapa	gtsong kha pa chen po
གཙོད	Tibetan antelope	gtsod
གཙོད་ཁྲག	antelope blood [sweet astringent, body heat neutral, by its powers 'khru ba gcod, skye rgyun 'gog]	gtsod khrag
གཙོད་ཕྲུག	the young antelope or unicorn	gtsod phrug
གཙོད་མ	mother ri dvags gtsod antelope	gtsod ma
གཙོད་མི་བསོད་པའི་དམ་བཅའ་བྱས	made them promise to stop hunting	gtsod mi bsod pa'i dam bca' byas
གཙོད་ཚོགས་ཐོལ	plateau of antelope herds, place in guge province	gtsod tshogs thol
གཙོད་གཞུ	antelope horn bow	gtsod gzhu
གཙོད་རུ	antelope ru [salty, body heat neutral, nus pas zla mtshan mi snyoms pa dang, mngal du khrag skran 'dril ba, bu ro lus pa, khog pa bshal ba sogs la phan]	gtsod ru
གཙོབས	gtsab pa!	gtsobs
གཙོར	mainly	gtsor
གཙོར་གྱུར	superior	gtsor gyur
གཙོར་འདོན	gtso 'don	gtsor 'don
གཙོར་འདོན་བྱེད	hold as the most important/ main/ chief/ principal	gtsor 'don byed
གཙོར་བྱེད་པ	be the principal 1	gtsor byed pa
གཙོས	headed/ led by, mainly, chiefly, the most important thing/ person	gtsos
གཙོས་པ	foremost, principal	gtsos pa
བཙ	sift, SA 'tshag pa	btsa
བཙ་སྒོ	mouth of the vagina	btsa sgo
བཙ་པ	be born, bring forth	btsa pa
བཙ་པོ་ཡ་མེད	black aconite	btsa po ya med
བཙ་བ	vagina	btsa ba
བཙག	born, red ocher, strain, SA 'tshag pa	btsag
བཙག་ཐང	plain of red earth	btsag thang
བཙག་གདན	shing la tshon gdan dang po btsag dang spyin bsres te gtong rgyu'i ming ???	btsag gdan
བཙག་རྡོ	red ocher	btsag rdo
བཙག་པ	alt. ft. of {'tshag pa}	btsag pa
བཙག་སྦུག	1) oil etc 'tsag byed sbu gu	btsag sbug
དྲིཔ	tube; 2) pi pi yod pa'i	drip
བཙག་མ	beverage brewed from roasted meal and water	btsag ma
བཙག་མོ	a beverage	btsag mo
བཙག་ཡུག	mineral substance of several colors	btsag yug
བཙག་རི	hill of red earth	btsag ri
བཙག་ལུང	valley of red earth	btsag lung
བཙགས	sift, born, strain, chop, vaccinate, blame, SA 'tshog pa, 'tshag pa	btsags
བཙགས་པ	[p 'tshag pa], [make] trickle, strain/ press [out] thick, fat, sleek	btsags pa
བཙགས་མ	fine wheat or barley flour that has been well sifted or passed through the sieve	btsags ma
བཙང	press into, complete, SA 'tshang ba	btsang
བཙང་བ	press forward or into, squeeze oneself in	btsang ba
བཙངས	[p 'tsang ba] pressed forward/ into [p btsang],, packed squeezed in	btsangs
བཙངས་པ	[p 'tsang ba] pressed forward/ into	btsangs pa
བཙད་པོ	nobleman	btsad po
བཙན	species of demon, strict, secure, binding, 1 of sde brgyad, class of spirits, furies, Tsen spirit, SA gtsan	btsan
བཙན་བཀག	[forcible] detention/ blockage/ obstruction/ prevention	btsan bkag
བཙན་བཀག་བྱེད	[forcibly] detentain/ block/ obstruct/ prevent	btsan bkag byed
བཙན་བཀའ་གཏོང	order command [backed by force]	btsan bka' gtong
བཙན་བཀུག	conscription, summons, induction [for military, government service, forced/ mandatory labor etc]	btsan bkug
བཙན་བཀུག་བྱེད	conscript, summon, induct	btsan bkug byed
བཙན་སྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	to compel, force	btsan skul byed pa
བཙན་སྐྱིལ	mounted side-saddle	btsan skyil
བཙན་བསྐུལ	forced labor/ activity, coercion, intimidation, compulsion	btsan bskul
བཙན་བསྐུལ་བཀའ་འབེབས	coercive/ forcible commands/ orders	btsan bskul bka' 'bebs
བཙན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	force, coerce, intimidate, compel	btsan bskul byed
བཙན་ཁང	1) building hard to attack because of being solid and hard; 2) temple where btsan spirits reside	btsan khang
བཙན་ཁྲིད	be led against 1's will, abduction holding under duress kidnaping, hijacking	btsan khrid
བཙན་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	be led against 1's will, abduct, hold under duress, kidnap, hijack	btsan khrid byed
བཙན་ཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	to abduct	btsan khrid byed pa
བཙན་མཁར	fortress	btsan mkhar
བཙན་འཁྱེར	rob, steal, forcibly take away	btsan 'khyer
བཙན་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	rob, steal, forcibly take away	btsan 'khyer byed
བཙན་འཁྲིག	rape 2137	btsan 'khrig
བཙན་འཁྲིད	abduction	btsan 'khrid
བཙན་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་མཁན	abductor	btsan 'khrid byed mkhan
བཙན་གོས	powerful god clothing made like the faith of the ignorant	btsan gos
བཙན་གྱི་སྐོང་མདོས	mdos of expiation to appease the btsan	btsan gyi skong mdos
བཙན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་སྲང	road that is frequented by btsan	btsan gyi rgyu srang
བཙན་གྱི་དལ་མདོས	mdo to protect against disturbances by the btsan	btsan gyi dal mdos
བཙན་གླའི་ས་ཆ	[foreign] concession/ settlement, ceded territory	btsan gla'i sa cha
བཙན་དགོན	a monastery in gsang phu	btsan dgon
བཙན་འགག	sa btsan po'i 'gag mdo	btsan 'gag
བཙན་འགེལ	forcible impositions	btsan 'gel
བཙན་འགེལ་བྱེད	impose on	btsan 'gel byed
བཙན་འགོག	anti-imperialist	btsan 'gog
བཙན་འགྲུས	effort	btsan 'grus
བཙན་རྒོད	kind of mi ma yin	btsan rgod
བཙན་རྒོལ	aggression, attack, combat imperialism btsan rgol dang zhi bde srung skyong combat imperialism and defend peace	btsan rgol
བཙན་རྒོལ་དཔུང་ཕྱོགས	aggressorcamp	btsan rgol dpung phyogs
བཙན་རྒོལ་གསར་བརྗེ	revolution against imperialism	btsan rgol gsar brje
བཙན་རྒྱལ	imperialist country	btsan rgyal
བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས	imperialism	btsan rgyal ring lugs
བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དཔུང་ཁག	imperialist camp	btsan rgyal ring lugs kyi dpung khag
བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག	imperialist war	btsan rgyal ring lugs kyi dmag 'khrug
བཙན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་ལ་ངོ་རྒོལ	combating imperialism btsan rgyal ring lugs la ngo rgol byed combat imperialism	btsan rgyal ring lugs la ngo rgol
བཙན་སྒྲིལ	forcible acquisition/ annexation, take-over	btsan sgril
བཙན་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད	forcibly acquire, annex,	btsan sgril byed
ཏཀེ	over	take
བཙན་ངག	ldog tu med pa'i skad cha	btsan ngag
བཙན་ལྔ	the five powerful 1s	btsan lnga
བཙན་གཅོད	decide by force	btsan gcod
བཙན་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	partake of the teachings	btsan cha byed pa
བཙན་ཆོད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	travel with great momentum	btsan chod du 'gro ba
དུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཡིན	paths will be traversed with great momentum btsan chod du lam thams cad btsan chod	du 'gro ba yin
བཙན་འཇིང	[arch] life-long friend, spouse	btsan 'jing
བཙན་བརྗིད	forceful and imposing/ grand	btsan brjid
བཙན་ཉམས	overbearing attitude, arrogance	btsan nyams
བཙན་སྙ	[arch] {btsan snya}	btsan snya
བཙན་སྙེག	extortion	btsan snyeg
བཙན་སྙེག་བྱེད	extort	btsan snyeg byed
བཙན་གཏམ	talk of force	btsan gtam
བཙན་ཐང་སྒོ་བཞི	{btsan thang sgo bzhi} temple	btsan thang sgo bzhi
བཙན་ཐབས	[sudden] force, coercion, compulsion, intimidation	btsan thabs
བཙན་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་དཀྲོག་པ	shake forcefully	btsan thabs kyis dkrog pa
བཙན་ཐབས་བྱེད	[sudden] force, coerce, compel, intimidate	btsan thabs byed
བཙན་ཐབས་འབེབས	use forceful means	btsan thabs 'bebs
བཙན་ཐབས་སུ	abruptly, forcefully, violently, suddenly, w strong impetus, w brisk energy, vigorously, energetically, swiftly	btsan thabs su
བཙན་ཐབས་སུ་འཁྲིད	leading by force	btsan thabs su 'khrid
བཙན་ཐབས་སུ་འགགས	abruptly stop	btsan thabs su 'gags
བཙན་ཐབས་སུ་སོང	to go directly	btsan thabs su song
བཙན་ཐར	breakout, escape	btsan thar
བཙན་ཐར་བྱེད	break out, escape	btsan thar byed
བཙན་ཐོད	[arch] force, violence	btsan thod
བཙན་དང་རྒྱལ་པོ	powerful king	btsan dang rgyal po
བཙན་དུག	aconite	btsan dug
བཙན་དེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go	btsan ded
བཙན་དེད་བྱེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go [into]	btsan ded byed
བཙན་གདོང	{btsan gdong} mt	btsan gdong
བཙན་མདོས	powerful thread cross [dedicated to the worldly btsan yas mdos]	btsan mdos
བཙན་འདེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go	btsan 'ded
བཙན་འདེད་བྱེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go [into]	btsan 'ded byed
བཙན་སྡིགས	threat of force -	btsan sdigs
བཙན་སྡིགས་གཏོང	threaten w force	btsan sdigs gtong
བཙན་སྡིགས་སྤྲོད	threaten w force	btsan sdigs sprod
བཙན་སྡུག	lethal poison	btsan sdug
བཙན་སྡོད	occupation [military]	btsan sdod
བཙན་སྡོད་བྱེད	occupy [military]	btsan sdod byed
བཙན་སྡོད་དམག་མི	occupation troops	btsan sdod dmag mi
བཙན་གནོད	violent harm	btsan gnod
བཙན་གནོན	repression	btsan gnon
བཙན་གནོན་བྱེད	repress, oppress, suppress	btsan gnon byed
བཙན་གནོན་བྱེད་པ	invade, oppress	btsan gnon byed pa
བཙན་པ	strict, binding; to be enforce/ prohibited; powerful, secure, lord, king, force, power, might	btsan pa
བཙན་པ་དམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of the teaching of the Dharma	btsan pa dam pa'i chos kyi 'byor pa
བཙན་པའི་མཁར་བཞི	the four powerful castles	btsan pa'i mkhar bzhi
བཙན་པར	po adverbial	btsan par
བཙན་པར་མཛད་པ	enforce strictly	btsan par mdzad pa
བཙན་པོ	1) king, ruler; 2) Gnyan po ste hard to cross, impossible to get by or change; 3) strong, violent; 4) strict, stern; 5) secure, safe	btsan po
བཙན་པོ་ནོ་མོན་ཧན	author of geographical work 'dzam gling chen po'i rgyas bshad snod bcud kun gsal me long 2138	btsan po no mon han
བཙན་པོ་ནོ་མོན་ཧན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	'jam dpal	btsan po no mon han sprul sku
ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་འཛིན་འཕྲིན་ལས	author of {'dzam gling rgyas bshad}	chos kyi bstan 'dzin 'phrin las
བཙན་པོ་དབང་ཡོད	press urge by wrathful words	btsan po dbang yod
བཙན་པོ་བཟོ་བ	fortify	btsan po bzo ba
བཙན་པོ་ཡ་མེད	black aconite	btsan po ya med
བཙན་པོ་ཨུ་བཙུགས	demand backed by force	btsan po u btsugs
བཙན་པོའི་མཛོད	secure treasury	btsan po'i mdzod
བཙན་ཕུག	a rich and powerful person	btsan phug
བཙན་ཕྱུག	power[ful] and wealth[y]	btsan phyug
བཙན་ཕྱུག་འཛོམས་པ	complete power and wealth	btsan phyug 'dzoms pa
བཙན་འཕྲོག	rob, snatch, plunder, take by force, annex, capture	btsan 'phrog
བཙན་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	rob, snatch, plunder, take by force, annex, capture	btsan 'phrog byed
བཙན་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་པ	rob, snatch, take by force, plunder, confiscate, extort, usurp	btsan 'phrog byed pa
བཙན་འཕྲོགས་སུ་ཐོབ་པ	to obtain by force, plunder	btsan 'phrogs su thob pa
བཙན་བོན་འཚལ་བཅགས	bon of the btsan	btsan bon 'tshal bcags
བཙན་བྱོལ	refuge, escaped from oppression	btsan byol
བཙན་བྱོལ་དུ་འགྲོ	go as a refugee	btsan byol du 'gro
བཙན་བྱོལ་དུ་ཕེབས	come as a refugee [h]	btsan byol du phebs
བཙན་བྱོལ་དུ་འོང	come as a refugee	btsan byol du 'ong
བཙན་བྱོལ་དུ་ཡོང	come as a refugee	btsan byol du yong
བཙན་བྱོལ་པ	refugee	btsan byol pa
བཙན་བྱོལ་བ	MG: refugee. [mss]	btsan byol ba
བཙན་བྲིད་བྱེད་པ	abduct	btsan brid byed pa
བཙན་དབང	by harsh force	btsan dbang
བཙན་དབང་ཁྲལ་འགེལ	involuntarily levy taxes	btsan dbang khral 'gel
བཙན་དབང་གྱིས	by force, coercively	btsan dbang gyis
བཙན་དབང་གྱིས་བྱེད	do by force/ coercively, make someone --	btsan dbang gyis byed
བཙན་དབང་གྱིས་ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་བཅུག	made [them] work	btsan dbang gyis las ka byed bcug
བཙན་དབང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	imperialist/ powerful country	btsan dbang rgyal khab
བཙན་དབང་གཏོང་བ	compel, constrain, force	btsan dbang gtong ba
བཙན་དབང་ཐོག	forcibly	btsan dbang thog
བཙན་དབང་པ	tyrant	btsan dbang pa
བཙན་དབང་བྱེད་པ	force, compel	btsan dbang byed pa
བཙན་སྦྲེལ	forced merger/ union, hostile	btsan sbrel
བཙན་མོ	queen	btsan mo
བཙན་མོ་ཐང	Tsenmo Thang, in Domey	btsan mo thang
བཙན་དམག	1) formless army of gods and demons; 2) powerful army	btsan dmag
བཙན་དམར	mi min gyi 'dre mi dmar rta dmar gyi btsan	btsan dmar
བཙན་དམར་པོ	Red Tsens; type of spirit	btsan dmar po
བཙན་བཙུགས	forceful seizure	btsan btsugs
བཙན་བཙུགས་བྱས	established teachings ???	btsan btsugs byas
བཙན་རྩུབ	cruelty and oppression	btsan rtsub
བཙན་འཛུལ	aggression, invasion, invasion	btsan 'dzul
བཙན་འཛུལ་མཁན	attacker, invader, aggressor	btsan 'dzul mkhan
བཙན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག	war of aggression	btsan 'dzul gyi dmag
བཙན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག	war of aggression	btsan 'dzul gyi dmag 'khrug
བཙན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག་རྒྱག	wage a war of aggression	btsan 'dzul gyi dmag 'khrug rgyag
བཙན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་རྒྱག	wage a war of aggression	btsan 'dzul gyi dmag rgyag
བཙན་འཛུལ་པ	attacker, invader, aggressor	btsan 'dzul pa
བཙན་འཛུལ་བྱེད	attack, get into a place [where others are] by force, invade, rush, dash, commit aggression	btsan 'dzul byed
བཙན་འཛུལ་བྱེད་མཁན	attacker, invader, aggressor	btsan 'dzul byed mkhan
བཙན་འཛུལ་བྱེད་པ	invade, rush, dash, intrude	btsan 'dzul byed pa
བཙན་རྫོང	castle hard to take, fortress, citadel, bulwark	btsan rdzong
བཙན་བརྫུལ་བྱེད་པ	encroach	btsan brdzul byed pa
བཙན་ཞ	crown	btsan zha
བཙན་ཞྭ	crown [hat worn by kings etc]	btsan zhwa
བཙན་ཞན	strong and weak, strength	btsan zhan
བཙན་ཞིང་ཆེ་བ	authority	btsan zhing che ba
བཙན་ཟོས	take/seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	btsan zos
བཙན་ཟོས་བྱེད	take/seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	btsan zos byed
བཙན་བཟུང	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	btsan bzung
བཙན་བཟུང་བྱེད	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	btsan bzung byed
བཙན་བཟུང་བྱེད་པ	to annex, take control of	btsan bzung byed pa
བཙན་བཟོས	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	btsan bzos
བཙན་བཟོས་བྱེད	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force btsan g.yar sa cha - [foreign] concession/ settlement, ceded territory btsan g.yem - rape btsan g.yem byed - rape btsan g.yog - forcible imposition bt...	btsan bzos byed
བཙན་རུབ་རྒྱབ་པ	assail	btsan rub rgyab pa
བཙན་ལེན	exaction	btsan len
བཙན་ཤུགས	force, violence, power, coercion, intimidation	btsan shugs
བཙན་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་བཅུག	force/ coerce/ compel to	btsan shugs kyis bcug
བཙན་ཤུགས་རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་རིང་ལུགས	expansionism	btsan shugs rgya bskyed ring lugs
བཙན་ཤུགས་སྲིད་ཇུས	politics of power	btsan shugs srid jus
བཙན་ཤུགས་སྲིད་བྱུས	politics of power	btsan shugs srid byus
བཙན་ཤེད	force, coercion, compulsion, intimidation	btsan shed
བཙན་ཤེད་གི་སྒོ་ནས་བཅུག	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	btsan shed gi sgo nas bcug
བཙན་ཤེད་གིས་བཅུག	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	btsan shed gis bcug
བཙན་ཤེད་བྱེད	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	btsan shed byed
བཙན་ཤེད་བྱེད་པ	to force, compel	btsan shed byed pa
བཙན་བཤགས	forced confession	btsan bshags
བཙན་བཤད	compel some1 to say something, forced statement	btsan bshad
བཙན་ས	safe, inaccessible retreat, exalted position	btsan sa
བཙན་ས་ཟིན	achieving stability, seizing the throne	btsan sa zin
བཙན་ས་ཟིན་པ	to reach/ take a firm stance	btsan sa zin pa
བཙན་སྲུང	fortification	btsan srung
བཙན་ཧམ	intimidation, coercion, dbang shed [force violence] bsnyon ham	btsan ham
བཙན་ཧམ་བྱེད	intimidate, coerce	btsan ham byed
བཙན་ལྷ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	btsan lha
བཙན་ལྷའི་ཆུ	{btsan lha'i chu}	btsan lha'i chu
བཙབ	* cut small, chop, hash, mince	btsab
བཙབ་སྟན	chopping block	btsab stan
བཙབ་པ	chop, cut small, mince	btsab pa
བཙབ་ཙག་པ	SA 'tshag pa, btsags, tshags kyi btsags	btsab tsag pa
བཙབས	cut small, SA btsab pa	btsabs
བཙབས་པ	[p gtsab pa] cut small, chopped, hashed, minced	btsabs pa
བཙབས་རལ	tattered	btsabs ral
བཙམ་པ	ft. of {'tsham pa}	btsam pa
བཙམས	suitable, mocked, scorned	btsams
བཙམས་པ	pf. of {'tsham pa}	btsams pa
བཙའ	rust, to give birth, to bear	btsa'
བཙའ་རྒྱབ་པ	rust	btsa' rgyab pa
བཙའ་སྒོ	mouth of the vagina [cervix?]	btsa' sgo
བིརཐ	canal	birth
བཙའ་བརྒྱབ	attacked by rust/ btsa' disease [plant]	btsa' brgyab
བཙའ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to get blight	btsa' brgyab pa
བཙའ་ཅན	rusty	btsa' can
བཙའ་ཆུ	rusty liquid	btsa' chu
བཙའ་ཐན	[blemishes in the harvest, from] rust/ blight and drought	btsa' than
བཙའ་དུས་ཏེ	being the time of giving birth	btsa' dus te
བཙའ་པ	be born, bring forth	btsa' pa
བཙའ་བ	1) (Tha dad pa,, guard something important; 2) [btsas pa, btsa' ba],, stare, look at; 2) (Tha mi dad pa btsas pa, btsa' ba,, bear, bring forth, be born	btsa' ba
བཙའ་མ	1) rust (2?? fruit	btsa' ma
བཙའ་མ་རྔ་བ	harvest	btsa' ma rnga ba
བཙའ་མེད་པ	stainless	btsa' med pa
བཙའ་ཟུག	birth-pains	btsa' zug
བཙའ་ཡིས་སྐྱོན་བཏང་བ	be blighted [harvest]	btsa' yis skyon btang ba
བཙའ་ལུགས་གསུམ	Three Ways to Bring Forth The Fruit of the Instructions. According to Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa, Dpa' bo chos 'byung, pp. 223 224, based on the Biography of Vairochana, they are to bring forth the harve...	btsa' lugs gsum
བཙལ་ཀྱང	even if you look btsal kyang ma rnyed pa'i sdug bsngal the suffering of desirable things not being found even if looked for btsal kyang ma rnyed pa'i sdug bsngal the suffering of desirable things n...	btsal kyang
བཙལ་ཀྱང་མི་རྙེད་པ	cannot be found even if you look for (them	btsal kyang mi rnyed pa
བཙལ་དུ་འཇུག	try to seek	btsal du 'jug
བཙལ་དུ་མེད་པ	cannot be sought; without being sought	btsal du med pa
བཙལ་དུ་གསོལ	please grant	btsal du gsol
བཙལ་བ	1) [tha dad par p f 'tsal ba]; 2) [p f 'tshol ], cultivate, seek	btsal ba
བཙལ་བས་མ་རྙེད་པ	looked for his… but could not find	btsal bas ma rnyed pa
བཙལ་བྱ	be cultivated, sought	btsal bya
བཙལ་མ་མྱོང	i have never yet sought	btsal ma myong
བཙལ་མེད	not seek to attain anything, without any effort	btsal med
བཙལ་ཟིན་པ	sought	btsal zin pa
བཙལ་ཡང་མ་རྙེད	although they were seeking, they did not find	btsal yang ma rnyed
བཙལ་ལགས	yes i have	btsal lags
བཙལ་ལས་འདས་པ	to transcend seeking	btsal las 'das pa
བཙས	bring forth, SA btsa' ba, past of btsa'	btsas
ནེཝལཡ	born, important [p btsa'] gave birth, looked at, rusted, was blighted	newly
བཙས་སྐར	birth star	btsas skar
བཙས་ཁྱེར་བ	be blighted [harvest]	btsas khyer ba
བཙས་རྔ་པ	reap the harvest	btsas rnga pa
བཙས་ཆེན	blight of most of the harvest	btsas chen
བཙས་སྟོན	1) after a child is born gshom pa'i ston mo; 2) Btsas ma brngas tsar ba'i rjes celebratory feast	btsas ston
བཙས་ནས	when in the process of birth	btsas nas
བཙས་ནས་ནར་སོང་པའི་བར	from the moment of birth to adult maturity	btsas nas nar song pa'i bar
བཙས་པ	1) [p btsa' ba] gave birth, looked at, rusted, was blighted; 2) [arch] skyag pa newly-born	btsas pa
བཙས་པའི་དུས	[one of the 8 times] from birth until old age	btsas pa'i dus
བཙས་འཕྲོག་པ	[arch] gya' chags pa ???	btsas 'phrog pa
བཙས་མ	harvest [ripened and ready to gather]	btsas ma
བཙས་མ་རྔ་བ	reap	btsas ma rnga ba
བཙས་མ་རྔ་བའི་དུས	harvest	btsas ma rnga ba'i dus
བཙས་མ་བརྔས	reaped the harvest	btsas ma brngas
བཙས་མ་བརྔས་པ	to harvest	btsas ma brngas pa
བཙས་མ་མ་ཡིན་པ	uncontrived	btsas ma ma yin pa
བཙས་ཟད་པ	corrode	btsas zad pa
བཙས་ཟླ	birth month	btsas zla
བཙིང	to force	btsing
བཙིར	crushed, squeeze, SA 'tshir ba	btsir
བཙིར་སྐད	squeal	btsir skad
བཙིར་གནོན	1) from pad kha sogs pressing oil; 2) former bad form of punishment by pressing/ crushing; 3) press, crush, squeeze	btsir gnon
བཙིར་བ	[f p 'tsir ba] grind, press, squeeze [out]	btsir ba
བཙིར་རི་འུར་རི	crowded, huddled together	btsir ri 'ur ri
བཙིར་རི་འུར་རི་བྱེད	be crowded/ huddled together	btsir ri 'ur ri byed
བཙུག	set, plant, SA 'dzug pa, piercing	btsug
བཙུག་པ	put in, insert	btsug pa
བཙུགས	planted, obtained, established, raised, produced, grown, stabbed, thrust into, SA 'dzugs pa, past of 'dzugs, to point towards	btsugs
བཙུགས་པ	[p 'dzugs pa] established, instigated, instituted, stabbed, planted	btsugs pa
བཙུགས་པའི་གྲིབ་མ	cast shadow [R]	btsugs pa'i grib ma
བཙུགས་ཕྲུག	winter mal gzan w long hairs	btsugs phrug
བཙུགས་ཕྲུག་མཛུབ་བཅད	btsugs phrug w the longest hair	btsugs phrug mdzub bcad
བཙུགས་ཤིང	planted tree	btsugs shing
བཙུང་ཆུང་མཁས་པ	the little learned one, name of mipham, SA mi pham	btsung chung mkhas pa
བཙུངས	(not in das)	btsungs
བཙུད	enter into, SA 'dzud pa, to be led onto	btsud
བཙུད་པ	[p bdzud pa]	btsud pa
བཙུན	respectability; the quality of a fully ordained monk who has not been stained by a defeating offense and who shuns deeds that are unwholesome by nature	btsun
བཙུན་དགོན	nunnery	btsun dgon
བཙུན་དགོན་མཁན་པོ	abbess	btsun dgon mkhan po
བཙུན་རྒན	old monk	btsun rgan
བཙུན་ཆུང	boy monk, young monk	btsun chung
བཙུན་པ	{rigs mtho zhing btsun pa rigs bzang ba'o} 'High station' means to be noble and of virtuous character	btsun pa
བཙུན་པ་ཁྲིམས་མེད	wanton monk	btsun pa khrims med
བཙུན་པ་གོ་ཆ་མཐའ་ཡས	Hinayana proponent	btsun pa go cha mtha' yas
བཙུན་པ་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས	Lord Bhagavan, Buddha btsun pa chen po dge 'dun srung Teacher in the Sautrantika tradition	btsun pa bcom ldan 'das
བཙུན་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	Hinayana proponents	btsun pa chen po bzhi
བཙུན་པ་རྣམས	ecclesiastics, priests	btsun pa rnams
བཙུན་པ་བུད་མེད	queen, consort, nun, reverend mother	btsun pa bud med
བཙུན་པ་ར་ཏ	Indian Sautrantika master	btsun pa ra ta
བཙུན་པ་བསླབ་པ་རྒན་པ	monk who has trained a long time	btsun pa bslab pa rgan pa
བཙུན་པ་བསླབ་པ་གཞོན་པ	monk new to the training	btsun pa bslab pa gzhon pa
བཙུན་པའི་གྲྭ་ཁང	monk's cell	btsun pa'i grwa khang
བཙུན་པའི་བུད་མེད	noble lady, lady of rank	btsun pa'i bud med
བཙུན་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtue of purity	btsun pa'i yon tan
བཙུན་པར་སྐྱེས་པ	nobly born	btsun par skyes pa
བཙུན་པར་བཅོས	pretend to be virtuous	btsun par bcos
བཙུན་པར་བྱ་བ	to venerate, worship, respect	btsun par bya ba
བཙུན་པོ	noble one, SA btsun pa	btsun po
བཙུན་པོར་བྱེད་པ	reverence	btsun por byed pa
བཙུན་མ	a nun	btsun ma
བཙུན་མ་ཕབ་པ	mo btsun bka' phab pa	btsun ma phab pa
བཙུན་མ་བྱེད་པ	to become a nun	btsun ma byed pa
བཙུན་མོ	lady, queen, consort, woman of rank	btsun mo
བཙུན་མོ་བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	part of {bka' thang sde lnga}, terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323)	btsun mo bka'i thang yig
བཙུན་མོ་སྔོན་མ	first wife {rgyal po'i btsun mo sngon ma dbyar gnas ma zhes} Queen Varsika, the king's first wife	btsun mo sngon ma
བཙུན་མོ་ཆུ་ལྕམ	wife of bon patriarch sangs po btsun mo dang bcas rgyal srid la dbang	btsun mo chu lcam
བཙུན་མོ་དང་པོ	chief wife	btsun mo dang po
བཙུན་མོ་དང་ཚུལ་མ	a nun who is of good character	btsun mo dang tshul ma
བཙུན་མོ་པད་མ་ལྡན	Queen Padmavati	btsun mo pad ma ldan
བཙུན་མོ་དཔལ་མོ	mother of dipankara srijnana or atisha	btsun mo dpal mo
བཙུན་མོ་དཔལ་མོ་འོད་ཟེར་ཅན	srimati prabhavati	btsun mo dpal mo 'od zer can
བཙུན་མོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	precious queen [one of the 8 treasures of a chakravartin. {rgyal srid sna bdun}	btsun mo rin po che
བཙུན་མོ་རེ་རལ	byang lugs kyi brag spos dang zur lugs kyis brag skya ha bo la ngos 'dzin mdzad	btsun mo re ral
བཙུན་མོ་རོལ་སྟབས	the posture of a reveling queen	btsun mo rol stabs
བཙུན་མོའི་སྐྱིད་ཚལ	lady's grove or pleasure garden	btsun mo'i skyid tshal
བཙུན་མོའི་ཁོལ་པོ	lady's attendant, eunuch	btsun mo'i khol po
བཙུན་མོའི་འཁོར	attendants of a lady	btsun mo'i 'khor
བཙུན་མོའི་ནང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go to the queen's house	btsun mo'i nang du 'gro ba
བཙུན་མོའི་ཕོ་བྲང	residence of a queen, SA kun nas 'gegs, female sanctum, lady's mansion	btsun mo'i pho brang
བཙུན་མོའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཞེ་ས	with the backing of the royal ladies	btsun mo'i tshogs kyi zhe sa
བཙུན་མོའི་ཟླ་མོ	ladies-in-waiting	btsun mo'i zla mo
བཙུན་མོའི་སྲུང་མ	guards of a lady	btsun mo'i srung ma
བཙུན་མོའི་སླས	queen's retinue	btsun mo'i slas
བཙུན་མོར་བླངས	made her his queen	btsun mor blangs
བཙུན་མོར་བསུས་པ	took as his queens	btsun mor bsus pa
བཙུན་འཚལ	royal pleasure grove	btsun 'tshal
བཙུན་གཞོན	young monk	btsun gzhon
བཙུན་གཟུགས	monk or nun's cha lugs	btsun gzugs
བཙུན་སིང་བ	handsomely dressed	btsun sing ba
བཙུབས	[p gtsub??],,	btsubs
བཙུམ	close; closed	btsum
བཙུམ་པ	[f 'dzum pa] will wink, close, shut	btsum pa
བཙུམ་རོགས	please be quiet!	btsum rogs
བཙུམས	closed	btsums
བཙུམས་པ	[p {btsum pa},, winked, closed	btsums pa
བཙེ	hurt, harm, SA 'tshe ba	btse
བཙེ་པ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	btse pa
བཙེ་བ	[p 'tshe]	btse ba
བཙེ་བའི་ཕྱག་བྲིས	your kind letter, your friendly correspondence	btse ba'i phyag bris
བཙེགས་པ	built [p rtseg pa]	btsegs pa
བཙེགས་མ	1) syllable w head letter [rka sna]; 2) stack, 1 above the other	btsegs ma
བཙེགས་མར་སྣང	be 1 above the other	btsegs mar snang
བཙེངས་པ	interchange, barter, shift	btsengs pa
བཙེམ	[tha dad par f 'tshem pa] will sew	btsem
བཙེམ་པ	[tha dad par f 'tshem pa] will sew	btsem pa
བཙེམས	sew, SA 'tshem pa, btsem pa	btsems
བཙེམས་པ	sewn	btsems pa
བཙེས	hurt, harm, cause mischief, SA 'tshe ba	btses
བཙེས་པ	SA 'tshe ba	btses pa
བཙོ	boil, hodgson's antelope, unicorn, dye, distilling, refining, SA 'tshod pa	btso
བཙོ་ཁང	washing/ dying/ smelting/ refining house	btso khang
བཙོ་བ	1) [p btsos f 'tsod pa; 2) means of curing a disease; 3) dye, color, bleach, distill, refin[ing] purifi[cation] smelt[ing]	btso ba
བཙོ་བླག་མཁན	dyer, washer, bleacher	btso blag mkhan
བཙོ་སྦྱང	refining, smelting, tempering, forging [metals]	btso sbyang
བཙོ་སྦྱང་སྒྲིག་ཆས	refining, smelting, tempering, forging [metals] equipment	btso sbyang sgrig chas
བཙོ་སྦྱང་བྱེད་པ	smelt, refine, temper, forge	btso sbyang byed pa
བཙོ་མ	1) Li khri + skyer kha mixed color; 2) Yang yang bzhu btul byas nas substance's unadulterated zhun ma, refined, regular orange, warm boiled	btso ma
བཙོ་མའི་གསེར	refined, smelted gold	btso ma'i gser
བཙོ་རྫ	kettle, cooking pan. ..snod kyi rdza ma	btso rdza
བཙོ་ཟན	oily food, residuum from cooking wheat and millet thrown away or fed to cattle	btso zan
བཙོ་ལ་མཁན	dyer	btso la mkhan
བཙོ་ལག	[arch] dye, bleach	btso lag
བཙོ་ལག་མཁན	dyer	btso lag mkhan
བཙོ་ལུམས	medicine btso ba'i vapor/ steam	btso lums
བཙོ་གསེར	refined, smelted gold	btso gser
བཙོ་བསྲེགས	boiled and burnt	btso bsregs
བཙོག	cut, chop, vaccinate, blame, SA 'tshog pa, 'chog pa	btsog
བཙོག་གུམ	kind of wild ass	btsog gum
བཙོག་གྲིབ	filthy obscuration/ defilement	btsog grib
བཙོག་ཆུ	foul/ dirty water, cesspool	btsog chu
བཙོག་ཆུ་འདྲེན་གཏོང	irrigate w foul/ dirty/ cesspool water	btsog chu 'dren gtong
བཙོག་གཏམ	filthy/ dirty talk	btsog gtam
བཙོག་ལྟ	btsog snang ngam mi gtsang bar 'dzin pa,...Zhing lud gsog 'don gyi las ka byed dus btsog lta grib dogs gang yang mi byed pa	btsog lta
བཙོག་དྲེག	filth, dirt	btsog dreg
བཙོག་པ	shit; intr. ft. of {'tshog pa}; dirty	btsog pa
བཙོག་པ་འགག་པ	constipation	btsog pa 'gag pa
བཙོག་པ་ཅན	filthy	btsog pa can
བཙོག་པ་སྟོན་པ	excrete	btsog pa ston pa
བཙོག་པ་བྱེད	make filthy/ dirty, pollute	btsog pa byed
བཙོག་པ་མེད་པ་བཟོ་བ	expurgate	btsog pa med pa bzo ba
བཙོག་པ་བཟོ	make filthy/ dirty, pollute	btsog pa bzo
བཙོག་པ་བཟོ་བ	contaminate, befoul, pollute	btsog pa bzo ba
བཙོག་པའི་གྲིབ	defilement from unclean things	btsog pa'i grib
བཙོག་པོ	1) wild and rough; 2) filth; 3) stone	btsog po
བཙོག་འཕྱར	grain only coarsely in the wind 'phyar ba, snyigs rnams 'don pa	btsog 'phyar
བཙོག་བླག་མཁན	washer, bleacher, dyer	btsog blag mkhan
བཙོག་དམེ	defiling filth	btsog dme
བཙོག་དམེ་བཙོག་པ	wash out dirt	btsog dme btsog pa
བཙོག་ལག་མཁན	washer, bleacher dyer	btsog lag mkhan
བཙོག་སེལ	exorcism of impurities	btsog sel
བཙོག་ལྷག	the impure residual, [Syn. dme'i lhag ma]	btsog lhag
བཙོགས	cut, SA 'chog pa	btsogs
བཙོགས་པ	intr. pf. of {'tshog pa}	btsogs pa
བཙོང	sell, SA 'tshong ba, onion, future of 'tshong	btsong
བཙོང་ཁ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great Tsongkhapa	btsong kha pa chen po
བཙོང་ཇ	tea for selling	btsong ja
བཙོང་ནག	a variety of the herb {btsong}	btsong nag
བཙོང་བ	1) will sell [f 'tshong ba]; 2) onion, leek	btsong ba
བཙོང་རྩ་དཀར་པོ	btsong root med.	btsong rtsa dkar po
བཙོངས	phod ma btsongs - Don't overestimate your capacities!	btsongs
བཙོངས་པ	pf. of {'tshong ba}	btsongs pa
བཙོངས་འཛོན	invoice	btsongs 'dzon
བཙོངས་ཟིན་པ	sold	btsongs zin pa
བཙོད	rubia cordifolia l, galium verum l., SA lcug phra ring pa, creeper	btsod
བཙོད་མདོག	dmar smug [maroon, dark red dye	btsod mdog
བཙོད་འབྲུ	seeds of btsod plant	btsod 'bru
བཙོད་ཞིང	plantation of madder, field wherein madder is grown	btsod zhing
བཙོན	imprison; a captive, prisoner, prison, jail, imprisonment	btson
བཙོན་བཀྲོལ་བཏང་བ	to pardon a prisoner, give amnesty	btson bkrol btang ba
བཙོན་ཁང	prison, jail, cage, penitentiary, prison, jail	btson khang
བཙོན་ཁང་དུ་བཅུག་པ	imprison	btson khang du bcug pa
བཙོན་ཁང་དུ་ཆུད	had been put into prison	btson khang du chud
བཙོན་ཁྲིད	imprisoned/ captured	btson khrid
བཙོན་གལ	indoor confinement	btson gal
བཙོན་གྲོལ	pardon, amnesty	btson grol
བཙོན་གྲོལ་བྱེད	give a pardon/ amnesty	btson grol byed
བཙོན་འགྲུས	strong effort	btson 'grus
བཙོན་འགྲོལ	btson nas glod pa	btson 'grol
བཙོན་འགྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ	general amnesty	btson 'grol chen po
བཙོན་སྒྲུས	vigor, diligence	btson sgrus
བཙོན་བཅུག	imprisonment	btson bcug
བཙོན་ཆས	1) prison clothes [in former Tibetan government clothes worn by prisoners de tsur bshus nas btson chas hrul gyar zhig gyog srol yod]	btson chas
བཙོན་འཇུག	go/ put into prison, imprisonment	btson 'jug
བཙོན་འཇུག་བྱེད	imprison	btson 'jug byed
བཙོན་ཏོ	provisions for a prisoner	btson to
བཙོན་ལྟོ	prison food and drink	btson lto
བཙོན་དུ་བཅུག	put in prison/ kept as a prisoner	btson du bcug
བཙོན་དུ་འཇུག	go/ put into prison, imprisonment	btson du 'jug
བཙོན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	take prisoner, put into captivity	btson du 'jug pa
བཙོན་དུ་འཇུག་བྱེད	imprison	btson du 'jug byed
བཙོན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	take prisoner, put into captivity	btson du 'dzin pa
བཙོན་དུ་ཟིན	successfully imprisoned	btson du zin
བཙོན་དུ་གཟུང་བ	confine	btson du gzung ba
བཙོན་དུ་བཟུང	kept [him] a prisoner	btson du bzung
བཙོན་དུས	time of a prison sentence	btson dus
བཙོན་དོང	dungeon, prison pit [underground]	btson dong
བཙོན་སྡོད་ལོ་ཚད	prison term	btson sdod lo tshad
བཙོན་ནས་སྔོན་བཏང	parole	btson nas sngon btang
བཙོན་ནས་སྔོན་བཏང་བྱེད	parole	btson nas sngon btang byed
བཙོན་ནས་ཐར་ཐབས	means to escape from prison	btson nas thar thabs
བཙོན་ནས་ཐར་འདོད	yearning to be set free from the prison	btson nas thar 'dod
བཙོན་ནས་འདོན་པ	set free from imprisonment	btson nas 'don pa
བཙོན་པ	prisoner, prisoner	btson pa
བཙོན་རྫི	prison guard/ superintendent	btson rdzi
བཙོན་ཡོན	time in prison/ jail	btson yon
བཙོན་ར	im[prison]ment	btson ra
བཙོན་རང་བཅིང	imprisoned in the jail	btson rang bcing
བཙོན་རར	im[prison]ment	btson rar
བཙོན་རར་ཚུད་པ	put in prison, be incarcerated, imprisoned, jailed	btson rar tshud pa
བཙོན་ལ་བཅུག	put in prison/ kept as a prisoner	btson la bcug
བཙོན་ལ་འཇུག	to put in jail	btson la 'jug
བཙོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	to imprison	btson la 'jug pa
བཙོན་ལ་ཟིན	successfully imprisoned	btson la zin
བཙོན་ལ་བཟུང	1) put in prison/ kept as a prisoner; 2) Aang yig la mu khyud kyi re khas bskor ba	btson la bzung
བཙོན་སྲུང	jailer	btson srung
བཙོན་སྲུང་པ	prison guard	btson srung pa
བཙོལ	seek, SA 'tshol ba	btsol
བཙོལ་བ	SA 'tshol ba	btsol ba
བཙོས	boil, dyed, colored, SA chos pa, 'tshod pa	btsos
བཙོས་གྱིན་ཡོད	has been cooking, has been boiling	btsos gyin yod
བཙོས་པ	pf. of {'tshod pa}	btsos pa
བཙོས་མ	purified substance, anything dyed	btsos ma
བཙོས་ཤ་རྗེན་ལོག	uncook meat	btsos sha rjen log
མཙན་མེད	nonconceptual, without fixation, formless, not centralized [Str from {mtsan ma} form, so {mtsan bcas} can mean practice with form, and {mtsan med} w/o	mtsan med
མཙར་ཆོས	fancies [Somebody's trip, gadget, scheme, style)	mtsar chos
མཙོ་སྨད	county in 21th cent Tibet. 'tsum pa - close 'tse ba - 1) [cause] harm; 2) difficulties 'tse med - secure 'tser ba - 1) apprehensive shiver; 2) neigh; 3) shining; 4) be lazy/ weary of 'tser rtsub - ...	mtso smad
རྩ	Tsa, in Domey	rtsa
རྩ་ཀ	rtsa kha in the body, pasture	rtsa ka
རྩ་ཀུ་ཤ	kusha grass	rtsa ku sha
རྩ་ཀླུ་བདུད་ནག་པོ	[ a herb that cures {klu nad} skin disorder]	rtsa klu bdud nag po
རྩ་དཀར	white nadis [branching from the brain, not containing blood, their function is facilitating apprehension of the objects of the five senses form etc bdag tu 'dzin par byed] nerves, lymphatic vessel	rtsa dkar
རྩ་དཀར་ནད	nerve disease [primarily affecting klad pa las branching white nadis = dbang rtsa]	rtsa dkar nad
རྩ་དཀར་འཕེལ་བའི་གག་མདོས	mdos for the elimination of obstacles to procreation	rtsa dkar 'phel ba'i gag mdos
རྩ་དཀར་འཕེལ་བའི་ཡར་སེལ	exorcisms upwards to enhance the white channel	rtsa dkar 'phel ba'i yar sel
རྩ་བཀོག་གཏོང་བ	extirpate	rtsa bkog gtong ba
རྩ་རྐྱང་མ	left channel	rtsa rkyang ma
རྩ་སྐུད	coir	rtsa skud
རྩ་སྐྱ་གཙང་པོ	{rtsa skya gtsang po} River	rtsa skya gtsang po
རྩ་སྐྲངས་བ	swollen/ enlarged nadis	rtsa skrangs ba
རྩ་སྐྲན་ལིང་པ	post partum disease {rtsa skran ling pa}	rtsa skran ling pa
རྩ་ཁ	lus kyi rtsa ka, pasture	rtsa kha
རྩ་ཁ་སྡོམ་པ	close an opened vein	rtsa kha sdom pa
རྩ་ཁ་ཕྱེས་པ	opened the nadis	rtsa kha phyes pa
རྩ་ཁང	thatched house shed	rtsa khang
རྩ་ཁབ	[arch] needle for med. bleeding	rtsa khab
རྩ་ཁབ་བརྒྱབ་པ	perform acupuncture	rtsa khab brgyab pa
རྩ་ཁམས	nadi constitutions	rtsa khams
རྩ་ཁའི་ཟིལ་པ	dew on the grass blades	rtsa kha'i zil pa
རྩ་ཁུ	sap of plants	rtsa khu
རྩ་ཁུངས	rtsa ba'i khungs,...Gtam bshad na rtsa khungs 'khyol ba bya dgos	rtsa khungs
རྩ་ཁྲག་འཆོར་བ	the blood exuding	rtsa khrag 'chor ba
རྩ་ཁྲག་སྡོམ་པ	block the flow of blood in the blood vessels	rtsa khrag sdom pa
རྩ་ཁྲིད	1) lecture/ tri explanation of the root text; 2) tri/ explanation on med. pulse taking (	rtsa khrid
རྩ་ཁྲིམས	constitution, the king's law of the country	rtsa khrims
རྩ་ཁྲིམས་བསྐྱར་བཅོས	constitutional amendment	rtsa khrims bskyar bcos
རྩ་ཁྲོད	heat, stack, rick of hay	rtsa khrod
རྩ་མཁྲིས	{rtsa mkhris} med. herb	rtsa mkhris
རྩ་མཁྲིས་མཆོག	{rtsa mkhris mchog} med herb	rtsa mkhris mchog
རྩ་མཁྲིས་བ་བོ་ཁ	saussurea eopygmaea hand.-mazz.	rtsa mkhris ba bo kha
རྩ་མཁྲིས་དམན་པ	{rtsa mkhris dman pa} med. herb	rtsa mkhris dman pa
རྩ་འཁུམ་པ	cramp	rtsa 'khum pa
རྩ་འཁུམས་པ	stiff nadis	rtsa 'khums pa
རྩ་འཁོར	nadi-wheels	rtsa 'khor
རྩ་འཁོར་གྱི་མདུད་པ	knots of the chakras TSE	rtsa 'khor gyi mdud pa
རྩ་འཁོར་ལྔ	the five basic nadi-wheels/ chakras	rtsa 'khor lnga
རྩ་འཁོར་དྲུག	the four basic chakras [head throat, hrat, navel] + gsang gnas bde skyong gi 'khor lo and nor bu'i dbus kyi 'khor lo	rtsa 'khor drug
རྩ་འཁོར་བཞི	the four basic chakras	rtsa 'khor bzhi
རྩ་འཁོར་ལོ	energy center / channel wheel [chakra]	rtsa 'khor lo
རྩ་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ	the five basic chakras	rtsa 'khor lo lnga
རྩ་འཁོར་ལོ་དྲུག	the six fundamental chakras [head throat heart navel + gsang gnas bde skyong gi 'khor lo and nor bu'i dbus kyi 'khor lo]	rtsa 'khor lo drug
རྩ་འཁོར་གསུམ	the three nadi chakras	rtsa 'khor gsum
རྩ་འཁྲིད	lineage	rtsa 'khrid
རྩ་གུད་པ	weak pulse in the nadis	rtsa gud pa
རྩ་གྱོག	1) servants given to lords's sons and daughters at time of marriage [gyog po gyog mo]; 2) bran gyog bdag pos rang khongs mi ser gras nas bkug ste nyar ba'i gyog po (	rtsa gyog
རྩ་གྲུམ	rheumatic pain in the muscles	rtsa grum
རྩ་དགོངས་ཞུ་བ	resign	rtsa dgongs zhu ba
རྩ་མགྱོགས་རྩ་མགྱོགས	lha mo bas rnam thar gtong dus mgyogs por thong zhes pa dang, mdor bsdus thong zhes pa'i gab tshig	rtsa mgyogs rtsa mgyogs
རྩ་འགགས་པ	skyag pa 'gags nas gtong mi thub pa	rtsa 'gags pa
རྩ་འགང	rtsa ba'i gal gnad 2144	rtsa 'gang
རྩ་འགང་ཆེ་བའི་ལས་དོན	, ...Rgyal kha su la 'thob min gyi 'gag gnad rtsa 'gang che shos shig dang thug pa,...Yig rigs rtsa 'gang chung ba	rtsa 'gang che ba'i las don
རྩ་འགང་ཆེན་པོ	sacred, rare, invaluable, important, precious	rtsa 'gang chen po
རྩ་འགངས	valuable	rtsa 'gangs
རྩ་འགོག	1) rtsa ba nas 'byin pa Shing sdong rtsa 'gog btang ba; 2) Rtsa ba nas bkag pa,...Khrims lugs dang mi mthunpa'i mgo bde glags tshong rgyag rgyu'i spyod ngan rtsa 'gog byedpa	rtsa 'gog
རྩ་འགྲེལ	root text and commentary	rtsa 'grel
རྩ་རྒོད་པོ	great passion/ desire	rtsa rgod po
རྩ་རྒྱུད	1) rtsa rgyud; 2) * root tantra, mulatantra	rtsa rgyud
རྩ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དུམ་བུ་བཞི	rtsa rgyud kyi dum bu bzhi	rtsa rgyud kyi dum bu bzhi
རྩ་རྒྱུད་འགྱུར་བ	pulse which changes continuously	rtsa rgyud 'gyur ba
རྩ་རྒྱུད་བརྟག་པ་གཉིས་པ	Two Segments of the Hevajra Tantra; The Hevajra Tantra in Two Sections	rtsa rgyud brtag pa gnyis pa
རྩ་རྒྱུད་རྡེལ་འགྲེམས	{rtsa rgyud rdel 'grems}	rtsa rgyud rdel 'grems
རྩ་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five basic Mahayoga Tantras (which are concerned with the five aspects of Buddhahood)	rtsa rgyud sde lnga
རྩ་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ལྔའི་ནང་ཚན	the five basic Mahayoga tantras concerned w the five aspects of buddhahood	rtsa rgyud sde lnga'i nang tshan
རྩ་རྒྱུད་སྡོང་འགྲེམས	{rtsa rgyud sdong 'grems}	rtsa rgyud sdong 'grems
རྩ་རྒྱུད་རྣམ་གསུམ	CHN	rtsa rgyud rnam gsum
རྩ་རྒྱུད་ལེའུ་འབུམ་པ	extensive root tantra of Chakrasamvara	rtsa rgyud le'u 'bum pa
རྩ་རྒྱུས	nadis and rgyus pa [muscle, tendon, ligament]	rtsa rgyus
རྩ་སྒོ	anus	rtsa sgo
རྩ་སྒྱེ	place in tibet where 'brom ston was born	rtsa sgye
རྩ་སྒྱེ་མོ	{rtsa sgye mo}	rtsa sgye mo
རྩ་སྒྲུབ	practice the root sadhana	rtsa sgrub
རྩ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་སྦྱར	made from eight main and 1000 secondary ingredients	rtsa brgyad stong sbyar
རྩ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་སྦྱར་གྱི་སྨན	amrita; amrita medicine of 8 root and 1000 subsidiary ingredients rtsa brgyad stong sbyar bdud rtsi mchog	rtsa brgyad stong sbyar gyi sman
རྩ་བརྒྱད་ཡན་ལག་སྟོང	8 major and 1000 minor parts	rtsa brgyad yan lag stong
རྩ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	root guru(s) and gurus of the lineage; my root guru(s) and those of the lineage	rtsa brgyud kyi bla ma
རྩ་བརྒྱུད་བླ་མ	root and lineage gurus	rtsa brgyud bla ma
རྩ་སྔགས	yi dam rang rang gi rtsa ba'i sngags	rtsa sngags
རྩ་སྔོན	green grass	rtsa sngon
རྩ་སྔོན་མི་གཅོད	not cutting grass	rtsa sngon mi gcod
རྩ་ཅན	covered with grass, grassy, town in ancient magadha	rtsa can
རྩ་གཅིག	sometimes 21	rtsa gcig
རྩ་གཅོད་པ	cut off the cause	rtsa gcod pa
རྩ་ཆག	fodder	rtsa chag
རྩ་ཆིངས	base-band [for the {rigs lnga} crown], often ornamented with gemstones	rtsa chings
རྩ་ཆུ	1) excrement and urine [bshang gci,...Nad kyis rkyen pas rtsa chu 'gags pa]; 2) physician's diagnosis by pulse taking and urine [Sman pas nad brtag thabs kyi nang thsan lag pa'i mkhrig ma'i 'phar r...	rtsa chu
རྩ་ཆུ་ཤིང་འཛོམ	fertile	rtsa chu shing 'dzom
རྩ་ཆུ་ཤིང་འཛོམ་པོ	abounding in grass and water and wood	rtsa chu shing 'dzom po
རྩ་ཆུས	cramp	rtsa chus
རྩ་ཆེ	precious, sacred, invaluable, rare	rtsa che
རྩ་ཆེན	1) sacred, rare, invaluable, important, precious 'am [Dngos po 'di rtsa chen yin pas bdag sprod yag po byed dgos]; 2) large nadi	rtsa chen
རྩ་ཆེན་ཉེར་བཞི	the 24 invaluable things [don snod nang 'brel gyi sbas pa lta bu'i rtsa chen brgyad dang, yan lag phyi 'brel gyi mngon pa'i rtsa chen bcu drug bcas dril bas nyer bzhi'o]	rtsa chen nyer bzhi
རྩ་ཆེན་པོ	valuable, dear	rtsa chen po
རྩ་ཆེན་པོ་མེད་པ་བཟོ་བ	desecrate	rtsa chen po med pa bzo ba
རྩ་ཆེན་རིགས་ལ་མཐོང་ཆུང	sacrilegious	rtsa chen rigs la mthong chung
རྩ་ཆོད	to uproot, eradicate, obliterate, annihilate. completely destroy / cut, track down, investigate in great detail, ascertain, become clear about	rtsa chod
རྩ་མཆོག	best of grass, sacred kusa grass	rtsa mchog
རྩ་མཆོག་གྲོང	town of kusa where buddha died	rtsa mchog grong
རྩ་འཆུས་པ	nadis yo ba'am 'khyogs pa,...Gzugs po'gyel brdabs shor nas rkang rtsa 'chus pa	rtsa 'chus pa
རྩ་མཇིང	meadow	rtsa mjing
རྩ་འཇིང	gnyen nye 'brel	rtsa 'jing
རྩ་འཇིང་ཆེན་པོ	sems brtse ba'i gnyen tshan dang grogs po	rtsa 'jing chen po
རྩ་འཇིང་སྡུག་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས	gnyen dang nye du sogs many and extensive ..Rang mgo rang gis mi 'don par rtsa 'jing sdug pa phun tshogs la re bas ci phan	rtsa 'jing sdug pa phun tshogs
རྩ་འཇུག་གི་རྣམ	6153	rtsa 'jug gi rnam
རྩ་འཇུག་གི་རྣམ་བཤད་ཆེན་མོ་གཉིས	2 texts by tsong kha pa 6143 2145	rtsa 'jug gi rnam bshad chen mo gnyis
རྩ་འཇུག་བཞི་གསུམ	dbu ma rtsa ba shes rab, dbu ma 'jug pa, dbu ma bzhi brgya pa	rtsa 'jug bzhi gsum
རྩ་ཉན	root-defilement	rtsa nyan
རྩ་ཉོན	root klesha [nyon mongs kyi rten gzhi'am rtsa bar gyur pa,.... [sm {rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa} rootdisturbance, primary klesha]	rtsa nyon
རྩ་ཉོན་བཅུ	the 10 root kleshas [nyon mongs can gyi lta min lnga dang, lta ba lnga bcas bcu'o,.... the ten rootdisturbances, {lta ba lnga} + {lta min lnga}	rtsa nyon bcu
རྩ་ཉོན་དྲུག	{rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa} drug six primary afflictive emotions	rtsa nyon drug
རྩ་གཉིད་ལོག	the arteries of sleep	rtsa gnyid log
རྩ་གཉིད་ལོག་གཉིས	the arteries of sleep	rtsa gnyid log gnyis
རྩ་བསྙེན	[rtsa ba'i bsnyen pa] root / principal recitation	rtsa bsnyen
རྩ་ཏོན	1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person	rtsa ton
རྩ་ཏྲེམ	{rtsa trem} grum bu disease	rtsa trem
རྩ་གཏོར	rbad de med pa bzo ba, ...Bshu gzhog lam lugs rtsa gtor byed pa	rtsa gtor
རྩ་གཏོར་གཏོང་བ	to overthrow	rtsa gtor gtong ba
རྩ་ལྟ་བ	feel a person's pulse, examine the pulse, feel the pulse	rtsa lta ba
རྩ་ལྟུང	root downfalls [sngags sdom gyi rtsa ba'i ltung ba ste, ljon shing gi rtsa ba ltar bsrungs na lam dang 'bras bu'i yon tan thams cad bskyed pa'i rtsa ba yin zhing, ma bsrungs na ngan 'gro'i rgyu dan...	rtsa ltung
རྩ་ལྟུང་བཅུ་དགུ	Nineteen Root Downfalls (of the bodhichitta vows in the tradition which comes through Nagarjuna). There are five root downfalls certain for kings, five for councilors, eight for ordinary persons, a...	rtsa ltung bcu dgu
ལོཨུད	mouthed. That which is common to all is to abandon the enlightened attitude of aspiration. [GM]	loud
རྩ་ལྟུང་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 root downfalls	rtsa ltung bcu bzhi
རྩ་ལྟུང་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 downfalls [TSE byang sems kyi rtsa ltung bco brgyad de, bdag bstod gzhan smod dang, chos nor mi ster ba, shad sbyangs mi len zhing gzhan la 'tsog pa, theg chen spong zhing dam chos 'drar sna...	rtsa ltung bco brgyad
རྩ་ལྟུང་ཉི་ཤུ	Twenty Root Downfalls. According to the Pagoda of Precious Gems, these comprise the nineteen root downfalls enumerated above, with the addition of the downfall which occurs when enlightened mind of...	rtsa ltung nyi shu
རྩ་ལྟུང་བདུན	the 7 root downfalls [in vinaya] 2146	rtsa ltung bdun
རྩ་ལྟུང་སྤྱོར་བ་བདུན	CHN	rtsa ltung spyor ba bdun
རྩ་སྟོང་འཁྱིལ་བ	empty	rtsa stong 'khyil ba
རྩ་སྟོང་པ	basic pulse rate before stress test	rtsa stong pa
རྩ་སྟོངས	people, cattle and goods all exhausted	rtsa stongs
རྩ་ཐག	grass rope, rope of grass	rtsa thag
རྩ་ཐང	steppe	rtsa thang
རྩ་ཐང་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	prairie	rtsa thang rgya chen po
རྩ་ཐིག	channels and essences	rtsa thig
རྩ་ཐིག་རླུང་གསུམ	nadi, prana and bindu, channels, energies and essences	rtsa thig rlung gsum
རྩ་ཐུན	grass gatherer, gatherer of grass	rtsa thun
རྩ་ཐོ	root list; main / chief list / manual; list of the topics	rtsa tho
རྩ་ཐོ་ཟིན་བྲིས	notes on main points	rtsa tho zin bris
རྩ་འཐུན	gatherer of grass	rtsa 'thun
རྩ་འཐོར	w/o remainder scatter/ destroy [Dgra bo'i btsan rdzong la me sgyogs phog nas rtsa 'thor du phyin 'dug]	rtsa 'thor
རྩ་དང་ནུས་པ་ཙམ	nothing but muscles and bones	rtsa dang nus pa tsam
རྩ་དང་གསེག་མ	weeds and roots	rtsa dang gseg ma
རྩ་དྭངས་མ་ལྔ	5 root essences, 5 juices (brag zhun, cong zhi, bu ram, sbrang rtsi, mar dkar)	rtsa dwangs ma lnga
རྩ་དུར་པ	dub grass, panicum dactylon	rtsa dur pa
རྩ་དུར་བ	dub-grass	rtsa dur ba
རྩ་དུར་བྷ	fine green sward grass	rtsa dur bha
རྩ་དོན	principle theme	rtsa don
རྩ་དྲེས་མ	a bodhisattva	rtsa dres ma
རྩ་གདན	grass mat on which brahmans generally sit	rtsa gdan
རྩ་གདར་གཅོད་པ	to investigate thoroughly	rtsa gdar gcod pa
རྩ་གདོང་མཇུག་གསུམ	the main part face and tail of Rahu [sgra gcan gyi rtsa ba ni go la'i gzhir rang 'gros gyas skor tshul gyis spyod pa'i dbang du byas pa yin la, gdong ni go la'i gzhir gyon skor gyi tshul du spyod p...	rtsa gdong mjug gsum
རྩ་བདར་ཆོད	to examine thoroughly, {bdar chod}	rtsa bdar chod
རྩ་བདུད་རྣམས	rigid interconnections of the pathways, entanglement of the pathways	rtsa bdud rnams
རྩ་མདའ	{rtsa mda' rdzong} [bod rang skyong ljongs kyi lho nub ngos dang glang chen kha 'bab kyi chu rgyud na yod, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung de mtho lding du yod]	rtsa mda'
རྩ་མདུད	channel knot, nadi-knots	rtsa mdud
རྩ་མདུད་མེད་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste nyon mongs pa'i mdud pa 'grol ba nyid kyis rtsa mdud pa med pa	rtsa mdud med pa'i dpe byad
རྩ་མདོ	1) rtsa rgyu sa'i mdo 'gag; 2) Rtsa lta stangs kyi gzhung (	rtsa mdo
རྩ་འདབ	nadi petals, around the {rtsa 'khor} nadi centers	rtsa 'dab
རྩ་འདམ	marsh grass, grassy swamp, grass belonging to government of lhasa n.w. of lhasa	rtsa 'dam
རྩ་འདར་ཉག	lha mo bas rnam thar thong zhig ces pa'i gab tshig	rtsa 'dar nyag
རྩ་འདུལ	control of the nadi	rtsa 'dul
རྩ་འདུལ་ལྔ	control of the channels, 5 yantra yoga exercise to control the channels are mnye ba, long shad, dpung skor, mchan 'bebs, rmyong ba	rtsa 'dul lnga
རྩ་འདུས	cramp	rtsa 'dus
རྩ་རྡོལ་བ	torn nadi	rtsa rdol ba
རྩ་སྡོན་མི་གཅོད	not to cut grass	rtsa sdon mi gcod
རྩ་བརྡར	to investigate, examine thoroughly	rtsa brdar
རྩ་བརྡར་གཅོད་པ	to investigate thoroughly	rtsa brdar gcod pa
རྩ་ན	near, close to	rtsa na
རྩ་ནག	khrag rgyu ba'i lus kyi rtsa spyi la zer te de la nang gses su dbye na sny- ing nas thur du rgyu ba'i 'phar rtsa dang, snying la phyogs nas gyen du rgyu ba'i mi 'phar ba'i sdod rtsa dang gnyis mchi...	rtsa nag
རྩ་ནག་འགྲིབ་པའི་མར་སེལ	exorcisms downwards to eliminate the black channel	rtsa nag 'grib pa'i mar sel
རྩ་ནད	paralyze	rtsa nad
རྩ་ནད་བཅུ་དྲུག	16-fold nadi disease	rtsa nad bcu drug
བྱེར་བ་ལ་རྩ་ནད་ཅེས་ཟེར་ཏེ	de yang glo ba dang, snying, mchin pa, mtser pa, mkhal ma, mkhris pa, rgyu ma, 'o tsabs, nu tsabs, khrag tsabs gor pa bcas khrag tsabs bcu dang, mgo dang, rus pa, snying, mkhal ma, pho ba, rgyu ma ...	byer ba la rtsa nad ces zer te
རྩ་ནས	simply, at all	rtsa nas
རྩ་ནས་ཕྱུང་པ	uprooted, fully extinguished, destroyed from the root	rtsa nas phyung pa
རྩ་གནད	key point of channels	rtsa gnad
རྩ་གནས	the nadis, channels, veins; focal points of nerves (nadis)	rtsa gnas
རྩ་གནས་འཁོར་ལོ	main chakra [dbu ma la brten pa'i rtsa 'dab rnams kyi dbyibs 'khor lo ltar yod pa'o]	rtsa gnas 'khor lo
རྩ་གནས་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ	the five main chakras [rtsa gnas 'khor lo bzhi'i steng du gsang gnas bde skyong gi 'khor lo rtsa 'dab sum cu rtsa gnyis can bsnan pa'o]	rtsa gnas 'khor lo lnga
རྩ་གནས་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི	the four main chakras [gsang sngags su gsal ba ltar rtsa'i gtso bo gsum las gyes pa'i rtsa 'dab rnams te, spyi bo bde chen gyi 'khor lo rtsa 'dab sum cu rtsa gnyis dang, mgrin pa longs spyod kyi 'k...	rtsa gnas 'khor lo bzhi
རྩ་རྣམས	channels	rtsa rnams
རྩ་དཔྱད	main diagnosis [by a physician taking the pulse]	rtsa dpyad
རྩ་དཔྱད་ཉི་འོད་རབ་གསལ	{rtsa dpyad nyi 'od rab gsal [in the 7th rab byung by zur mkhar ba mnyam nyid rdo rje med. shastra explaining deatails of diagnosis by taking the pulse]	rtsa dpyad nyi 'od rab gsal
རྩ་སྤོས	rtsi shing and sngo tshal gyi son rtsa spos pa, Shing son rtsa spos rgyag pa,...Me tog bkog nas gzhan du rtsa spos rgyag pa	rtsa spos
རྩ་སྤོས་རྒྱབ་པ	transplant	rtsa spos rgyab pa
རྩ་ཕུང	place in tibet	rtsa phung
རྩ་ཕུད	one of the 36 border countries	rtsa phud
རྩ་ཕྲ་མོ	small nadis 2147	rtsa phra mo
རྩ་ཕྲན	small nadis	rtsa phran
རྩ་འཕར	pulse is beating	rtsa 'phar
རྩ་བ	fundamental, basic, (-, plant, figurative, the very) root, origin, (primary, -) cause, source, primaries, really, in its very essence, from grass, creeping parasitical plants, apex, base, line, roo...	rtsa ba
རྩ་བ་ཁ་དོག་བཞི	the four primary colors, [blue, yellow, white and red]	rtsa ba kha dog bzhi
རྩ་བ་འགོག་པ	pull up the root	rtsa ba 'gog pa
རྩ་བ་བརྒྱ་པ	camphor/ gur gum	rtsa ba brgya pa
རྩ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 chief ingredients ]{rtsa ba, sdong po, yal ga}, {lo ma 'dab ma}, {me tog}, {shun pags}, {'bras bu}, {snying po} {phyi'i rtsa brgyad}[]	rtsa ba brgyad
རྩ་བ་ལྔ	five cardinal virtues (byams pa chen po, snying rje chen po, dge ba'i rtsa bas mi ngoms shing dge ba'i rtsa ba thams cad ngas yongs su bsngo ba, nyes pa brdul bas 'chags pa, theg pa gzhan mi 'dod),...	rtsa ba lnga
རྩ་བ་གཅོད་པ	{/ chod pa} to cut through the very root ([isc.] of the problem)	rtsa ba gcod pa
རྩ་བ་བཅད	cut away the root {skye rgu'i dpag bsam gyi shing 'di rtsa ba bcad} he would cut away the root of	rtsa ba bcad
རྩ་བ་བཅད་པ	to investigate	rtsa ba bcad pa
རྩ་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 root [samayas]	rtsa ba bcu bzhi
རྩ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	sacred, rare, invaluable, important, precious	rtsa ba chen po
རྩ་བ་ཆོད་པ	{/ gcod pa} to cut through the very root ([isc.] of the problem)	rtsa ba chod pa
རྩ་བ་དང་འགྲེལ་བ	commentary of the original work rtsa ba dang sdong po dang yal ga dang lo ma dang me tog dang 'bras bu'i gnas	rtsa ba dang 'grel ba
སྐབས་པ	root trunk branches and leaves flower and fruit gnas skabs pa	skabs pa
རྩ་བ་དང་ཡན་ལག	root scripture and supplementary text	rtsa ba dang yan lag
རྩ་བ་དང་ཡན་ལག་གི	primary and secondary . . .	rtsa ba dang yan lag gi
རྩ་བ་དང་ཡན་ལག་གི་དམ་ཚིག	Root and branch samayas	rtsa ba dang yan lag gi dam tshig
རྩ་བ་དྭངས་མ་ལྔ	5 root juices	rtsa ba dwangs ma lnga
རྩ་བ་དམ་པ	really holy	rtsa ba dam pa
རྩ་བ་དམ་ཚིག་ལྔ	Five Basic Commitments, according to Kriya tantra. Not to sleep on a high bed. or meditation throne {khri la nyal bar mi bya} not to eat meat {sha mi za} not to drink ale {chang mi btung}, and not ...	rtsa ba dam tshig lnga
རྩ་བ་དྲུག	six medicinal roots	rtsa ba drug
རྩ་བ་མདོ	1 of gnas bcu gcig	rtsa ba mdo
རྩ་བ་ན	under a tree	rtsa ba na
རྩ་བ་ནས	absolute, fundamentally, basically, radically, never (when used with present and future tenses), emphatic negative adverb, never, in double negative constructions	rtsa ba nas
རྩ་བ་ནས་བཏོན	drawn out with the roots	rtsa ba nas bton
རྩ་བ་ནས་འབྱིན	pull out with the root, eradicate, extirpate	rtsa ba nas 'byin
རྩ་བ་ནས་མ་སོང	was not at all good	rtsa ba nas ma song
རྩ་བ་ནས་མེད་པ	not at all	rtsa ba nas med pa
རྩ་བ་ནས་བཞར	scrape away	rtsa ba nas bzhar
རྩ་བ་ནས་བཞར་བ	shave entirely away	rtsa ba nas bzhar ba
རྩ་བ་ནི་གུ་ཆོས་དྲུག	The root is the Six Doctrines of Niguma	rtsa ba ni gu chos drug
རྩ་བ་ཕུང་པོའི་རླུང་ལྔ	the five principal winds of the body, {ldeg byed kyi rlung}, {khyab byed kyi}, {me dang mnyam pa'i}, {dvangs snyigs 'byed pa'i}, {srog 'dzin pa'i rlung}	rtsa ba phung po'i rlung lnga
རྩ་བ་བྱང་ཆུབ	mandala of original bodhicitta 2148 rtsa ba byang chub sems kyi dkyil 'khor the root/ fundamental mandala of enlightened mind [in anuyoga]	rtsa ba byang chub
རྩ་བ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	1 of dkyil 'khor rnam pa gsum rtsa ba byang chub sems kyi dkyil 'khor the root mandala of enlightened mind [in Anu Yoga], the fundamental mandala of enlightened mind which is [their] offspring rtsa...	rtsa ba byang chub sems kyi dkyil 'khor
རྩ་བ་འབྱིན	eradicated	rtsa ba 'byin
རྩ་བ་མ་ཆོད་པ	do not resolve [ the mind] to its depths	rtsa ba ma chod pa
རྩ་བ་མང	tree of numerous roots, tree, SA klu shing	rtsa ba mang
རྩ་བ་མེད	rootless	rtsa ba med
རྩ་བ་བཙུགས་པ	implant	rtsa ba btsugs pa
རྩ་བ་ཚུགས	root is established	rtsa ba tshugs
རྩ་བ་ཚུགས་པ	have a firm footing, take root	rtsa ba tshugs pa
རྩ་བ་བཞི	four root downfalls/[precepts] {mi tshangs spyod pa}, {ma byin len pa}, {srog gcog pa}, {rdzun smra ba} the four root downfalls [sm {rtsa ba'i ltung ba bzhi}. sor sdom gyi rtsa ba'i bslab bya ste, ...	rtsa ba bzhi
རྩ་བ་ཡན་ལག	root & secondary	rtsa ba yan lag
རྩ་བ་རླུང་ལྔ	five basic energies	rtsa ba rlung lnga
རྩ་བ་ལ་གཏར་བར་བྱེད་པ	let out blood from a vein	rtsa ba la gtar bar byed pa
རྩ་བ་ལུས་ལྟ་བུའི་བསྟན་ཆོས་གསུམ	l 'khor lha tshogs - assembly of deities of the mandal of the three roots	rtsa ba lus lta bu'i bstan chos gsum
རྩ་བ་ཤེས་རབ	Prajnamula	rtsa ba shes rab
ཚོགས་དྲུག	the six logical works of the maadhyamika by nargarjuna]	tshogs drug
རྩ་བ་གསུམ	Three Roots. guru {bla ma} meditational deity {yi dam} or devata. and dakini {mkha 'gro ma}. Three Roots	rtsa ba gsum
རྩ་བའི	principal/ primary (iso. guru/ samaya)	rtsa ba'i
རྩ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the root mandala, basic / principal mandala	rtsa ba'i dkyil 'khor
རྩ་བའི་སྐྱེ་བ	actual coming into existence	rtsa ba'i skye ba
རྩ་བའི་ཁ་དོག	primary colors [dkar po dang dmar po sogs rtsa bar gyur pa'i mdog go]	rtsa ba'i kha dog
རྩ་བའི་ཁ་དོག་བཞི	the four primary colors, [blue, yellow, white and red]	rtsa ba'i kha dog bzhi
རྩ་བའི་མཁྲིས་པ་ལྔ	the five basic biles [= mkhris pa lnga]	rtsa ba'i mkhris pa lnga
རྩ་བའི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	the eight principal ornaments [of a peaceful sambhogakaya buddha], {dbu rgyan} crown,	rtsa ba'i rgyan brgyad
ཤལ	long necklace, {se mo do - necklace, {'og pag - belt, {zhabs gdub - anklets, syn {rin po che'i rgyan brgyad}	shal
རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	original treatise, root tantra	rtsa ba'i rgyud
རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད་དགུ	Nine Root Tantras. The most important Mahayoga tantras of the Sadhana Section (sgrub sde). Listed in Chapter 19 of (zangs gling ma) rtsa ba'i rgyud de kho na nyid bsdus pa Tatvasamgraha Root Tantra...	rtsa ba'i rgyud dgu
རྩ་བའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	Mula sadhana, primary / principal / root practice	rtsa ba'i sgrub thabs
རྩ་བའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	root sadhana	rtsa ba'i sgrub pa
རྩ་བའི་ཆོ་ག་ནས་སྒྲུབ་པ	practice the root sadhana [Thog mar rtsa sgrub gong bzhin bya,...Re'u mig 'di ltar bzung bas rtsa sgrub bzhin 'khrul med shes]	rtsa ba'i cho ga nas sgrub pa
རྩ་བའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	the 6 roots of behavior [for the {dge slob ma}	rtsa ba'i chos drug
བྱ་དྲུག་སྟེ	gcig pur lam du 'gro ba dang, chur rkyal ba dang, skyes pa la reg pa dang, de dang lhan cig 'dug pa dang, pho mo phan tsun smyan byas pa dang, zla mo'i nyes pa 'chab pa spong ba ste drug go,.... th...	bya drug ste
རྩ་བའི་ཆོས་བདག	principal doctrineholder, major recipients of a teaching	rtsa ba'i chos bdag
རྩ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས	sin inherited from former births, original sin, root mental affliction	rtsa ba'i nyon mongs
རྩ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ་དྲུག	the six	rtsa ba'i nyon mongs pa drug
རྩ་བའི་བསྙེན་པ	root / principal recitation	rtsa ba'i bsnyen pa
རྩ་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the root samadhi	rtsa ba'i ting nge 'dzin
རྩ་བའི་ལྟུང་བ	a root downfall; root downfall[s]	rtsa ba'i ltung ba
རྩ་བའི་ཐིག	base line rtsa ba'i thugs sgrub gsal byed thugs nor main sadhana of {bla ma dgongs 'dus}, by {sangs rgyas gling pa}	rtsa ba'i thig
རྩ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག	root samayas {sku gsung thugs kyi dam tshig}	rtsa ba'i dam tshig
རྩ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	the four root samayas [rgyud sde gong 'og thams cad kyi thun mong ba'am rtsa bar gyur pa'i sngags kyi sdom pa bzhi ste, 'jig rten pa'i yang dag pa'i lta ba dang, dkon mchog gsum la skyabs su 'gro b...	rtsa ba'i dam tshig bzhi
རྩ་བའི་དོག་བཞི	four primary colors	rtsa ba'i dog bzhi
རྩ་བའི་མདོག	basic color	rtsa ba'i mdog
རྩ་བའི་འདུག་སྟངས་གསུམ	three primary postures	rtsa ba'i 'dug stangs gsum
རྩ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གསུམ	the three root/ principal sufferings [sdug bsngal gyi sdug bsngal dang, 'gyur pa'i sdug bsngal, khyab pa 'du byed kyi sdug bsngal bcas gsum mo]	rtsa ba'i sdug bsngal gsum
རྩ་བའི་སྡེ	four earliest divisions in buddhist society (thams cad yod par smra ba, phal chen sde ba, man pos bkur ba, gnas brtan pa)	rtsa ba'i sde
རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་དྲུག	the six major / principal [Hindu / non-Buddhist] schools, the six fundamental sects	rtsa ba'i sde drug
རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་པ	basic schools	rtsa ba'i sde pa
རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་པ་བཞི	{thams cad yod par smra ba / dge 'dun phal chen pa / gnas brtan pa / mang pod bkur ba bzhi} Four Basic Schools. Mahasanghikas, Sthaviras, Sammitiyas, and Mulasarvastivadins; of Hinayana: {thams cad...	rtsa ba'i sde pa bzhi
རྩ་བའི་སྡེ་བཞི	the four main schools [of {nyan thos kyi theg pa}, {thams cad yod smra}, {gnas brtan pa}, {phal chen pa}, {man bkur ba}	rtsa ba'i sde bzhi
རྩ་བའི་བརྡ་བྱང	root symbolic letter	rtsa ba'i brda byang
རྩ་བའི་ནད་དྲུག	the six basic kinds of diseases [rlung dang, mkhris pa, bad kan, khrag, chu ser, srin bu bcas drug, wind/ prana, bile, phlegm, blood, lymph/ serum, womrs/ insects]	rtsa ba'i nad drug
རྩ་བའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	Syn {kun gzhi'i rnam shes}	rtsa ba'i rnam shes
རྩ་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	root yoga	rtsa ba'i rnal 'byor
རྩ་བའི་ཕ་མ	root teacher / master, root guru	rtsa ba'i pha ma
རྩ་བའི་བད་ཀན་ལྔ	the five basic phlegms [bad kan lnga]	rtsa ba'i bad kan lnga
རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	rang la dbang khrid man ngag gnang ba'i thun min gyi bla ma,... root guru	rtsa ba'i bla ma
རྩ་བའི་དབང་བསྐུར	root empowerment	rtsa ba'i dbang bskur
རྩ་བའི་དབྱངས་དགུ	SK 9 root vowels [aa ai au ri li ae aee ao aoo bcas dgu,...Aa ai au ri li...Ae aee ao aoo]	rtsa ba'i dbyangs dgu
རྩ་བའི་མ	main mother, [mother of this life]	rtsa ba'i ma
རྩ་བའི་སྨིན་བྱེད	root empowerment	rtsa ba'i smin byed
རྩ་བའི་གཞུང	root text	rtsa ba'i gzhung
རྩ་བའི་གཞུང་ཆུང	small root text	rtsa ba'i gzhung chung
རྩ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོ	{rtsa ba'i ye shes chen po [one of the {chos bcu	rtsa ba'i ye shes chen po
རྩ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	[sm {gtso bo} the fundamental nature, [the primordial essence or uncaused cause of the Samkhya school]	rtsa ba'i rang bzhin
རྩ་བའི་རོ་དྲུག	the six root/ basic tastes [mngar ba dang, skyur ba dang, kha ba dang, bska ba dang, tsa ba dang, lan tsva ste drug]	rtsa ba'i ro drug
རྩ་བའི་རླུང	root pranas ['byung lnga'i rang bzhin can gyi rlung,.... basic winds]	rtsa ba'i rlung
རྩ་བའི་རླུང་ལྔ	five primary principal energies: the life-upholding, the upward-moving, the pervading, the fireequalizing, and the downward-clearing	rtsa ba'i rlung lnga
རྩ་བའི་རླུང་ཆེན་ལྔ	Five major root pranas. The winds circulating within the human body which have the nature of the five elements: the 'lifeupholding,' the 'downward-clearing,'	rtsa ba'i rlung chen lnga
ཐེ་འུཔྭརད	moving,' the 'equallyabiding,' and the 'pervading' wind	the 'upward
རྩ་བའི་ཤེ་རབ	{rtsa ba shes rab}	rtsa ba'i she rab
རྩ་བར	near, at, at the foot of	rtsa bar
རྩ་བར་གྱུར་པ	basic, fundamental, central	rtsa bar gyur pa
རྩ་བར་བཟུང	take as basis; sm. {gzhir byas}	rtsa bar bzung
རྩ་བས་མདོར་བསྟན	brief statement by means of the root text	rtsa bas mdor bstan
རྩ་བྲལ	without foundation, without any source, rootless	rtsa bral
རྩ་དབང	root empowerment, primary empowerment	rtsa dbang
རྩ་དབང་རྒྱས་པ	extensive root empowerment	rtsa dbang rgyas pa
རྩ་དབང་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་གསུམ	Extensive, medium or condensed root empowerments 2150	rtsa dbang rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum
རྩ་དབུ	the central channel	rtsa dbu
རྩ་དབུ་མ	central channel	rtsa dbu ma
རྩ་འབོར	* total capital	rtsa 'bor
རྩ་འབྱོ	a large number	rtsa 'byo
རྩ་འབྲས	1) on or near root w pain and swelling and [skrangs shing zug] 'byung ba'i 'bras kyi nad rigs shig; 2) a med.	rtsa 'bras
རྩ་འབྲུ	ophiopogon intermedius d. don, wood-eating worm, moth, writer	rtsa 'bru
རྩ་སྦུག	rtsa sbubs	rtsa sbug
རྩ་སྦུབས	nadi [walls]	rtsa sbubs
རྩ་སྦོས་པ	swollen/ enlarged nadis	rtsa sbos pa
རྩ་སྦྱོང	1) give a pugative [khog nad rtsa med bzo ba'i sman bcos shig]; 2) blood, bile, dug nad etc. rtsa la zhugs pa'i diseases from the urethra phyir sbyong bar byed pa'i thabs shig	rtsa sbyong
རྩ་སྦྲིད་པ	lose feeling [in the nerves]	rtsa sbrid pa
རྩ་མི	grassmen, principal man	rtsa mi
རྩ་མི་མངོན་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of veins that do not stand out	rtsa mi mngon pa'i dpe byad
རྩ་མིག	nadis, anus [Gzugs po'i khrag rgyun khog stod khog smad kyi rtsa mig 'grims pa]	rtsa mig
རྩ་མེད	1) not at all. 2) rootless, baseless	rtsa med
རྩ་མེད་གཏོང	perish, eliminate, eradicate, abolish, annihilate, destroy	rtsa med gtong
རྩ་མེད་བཏང་བ	destroyed completely	rtsa med btang ba
རྩ་མེད་དུ་འགྱུར	be annihilated/ eradicated/ destroyed	rtsa med du 'gyur
རྩ་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	to perish, eliminate, eradicate, abolish	rtsa med du gtong
རྩ་མེད་དུ་གཏོང་བ	perish	rtsa med du gtong ba
རྩ་མེད་མ	without basis	rtsa med ma
རྩ་མེད་བཟོ	annihilate, eradicate, destroy	rtsa med bzo
རྩ་མེད་བཟོ་བ	eradicate, exterminate	rtsa med bzo ba
རྩ་མེད་བཟོས་པ	to annihilate	rtsa med bzos pa
རྩ་མེད་བཟོས་པ་དགྲ་བོ	annihilated enemy	rtsa med bzos pa dgra bo
རྩ་མེད་ཤུལ་མེད་གཏོང་བ	annihilate w/o a trace remaining	rtsa med shul med gtong ba
རྩ་དམར	bloodshot	rtsa dmar
རྩ་དམིག	pore	rtsa dmig
རྩ་རྨེན	rtsa la chags pa'i rmen nad	rtsa rmen
རྩ་སྨྱོ	chags pa spyod yul ma rnyed pa'i rkyen gyis smyo ba	rtsa smyo
རྩ་ཙེམ་གློན་ཙེམ	nyis srub bam nyis tsem ste, sbyor tsem dang gnon tsem gnyis	rtsa tsem glon tsem
རྩ་རྩེ	base/ root and tip/ top [Shing gi rtsa rtse rgyas pa,...Lo tog gi rtsa rtse smin pa,...Gnas lugs yong rkyen gyi rtsa rtse khungs chod pa]	rtsa rtse
རྩ་ཚིག	notice, bulletin, original words, original letter, source document, public notice	rtsa tshig
རྩ་ཚིག་བཀྲམ	to distribute a public notice, make a public announcement	rtsa tshig bkram
རྩ་འཛིན	grasp the measure/ basis mdzub ston gyi nus pa thon pa'i yig cha la zer	rtsa 'dzin
རྩ་འཛིན་རྒྱུན་འཁྱོངས	having fundamentally grasped always rgyun 'khyongs byed pa rtsa 'dzin g.yo med - having fundamentally grasped don't change	rtsa 'dzin rgyun 'khyongs
རྩ་འཛིན་རླུང་ནད	{rtsa 'dzin rlung nad}	rtsa 'dzin rlung nad
རྩ་འཛུགས	sgrig 'dzugs te, dmigs yul dang khongs gtogs nges can zhig gzhir bzung nas btsugs pa'i tshogs pa	rtsa 'dzugs
རྩ་འཛུགས་བྱེད་པ	organize, form	rtsa 'dzugs byed pa
རྩ་ཞལ	the main head	rtsa zhal
རྩ་ཞིབ	fundamentally/ completely investigate/ examine rtsa zhib nan tan byed pa'i gnad don	rtsa zhib
རྩ་གཞིན་ནུ	fresh shoots of grass	rtsa gzhin nu
རྩ་གཞུང	root text	rtsa gzhung
རྩ་བཞི	4 roots (ra mnye, lca ba, ba spru, shug dag)	rtsa bzhi
རྩ་བཞིན	close by	rtsa bzhin
རྩ་ཟན	fragment or piece of grass	rtsa zan
རྩ་ཟླ་ལ	{rtsa zla la} pass [si khron zhing chen khongs dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi dkar mdzes rdzong gi la zhig]	rtsa zla la
རྩ་བཟོད་པ	grass which yields best cow milk	rtsa bzod pa
རྩ་ཡང	gtan nas mi dgos par chags pa	rtsa yang
རྩ་ཡི་སྙིང་པོ	banana plant	rtsa yi snying po
རྩ་ཡི་ཐག་པ	grass rope	rtsa yi thag pa
རྩ་ཡིག	nadi syllables	rtsa yig
རྩ་ར	punishment under law given in a court of justice	rtsa ra
རྩ་ར་བྱེད་པ	eradicate, annihilate, destroy	rtsa ra byed pa
རྩ་རས	gunny	rtsa ras
རྩ་རས་ཀྱི་ཕད་གོག	gunny	rtsa ras kyi phad gog
རྩ་རི	sacred place s.e. of lhasa	rtsa ri
རྩ་རིག	principal knowledge/ vidya mantra	rtsa rig
རྩ་རིང	bush	rtsa ring
རྩ་རོ་མ	ro ma nadi	rtsa ro ma
རྩ་རླུང	Nadi and prana, [Vajrayana practice with] nadi and prana, [Syn. {mtshan bcas rdzogs rim}; the yoga of channels and energies, Nadi vayu Yoga; (advanced yogic techniques of) subtle channels and energies	rtsa rlung
རྩ་རླུང་སྐབས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་དྲུག	the six chakras of the nadis and pranas CHN	rtsa rlung skabs kyi 'khor lo drug
རྩ་རླུང་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	channels, energies, and yogic exercises	rtsa rlung 'khrul 'khor
རྩ་རླུང་བསྒོམ་པ	to practice [rtsa rlung]	rtsa rlung bsgom pa
རྩ་རླུང་བསྒོམས་པའི་གནད་བཞི	the four piths of meditation on nadis and prana CHN	rtsa rlung bsgoms pa'i gnad bzhi
རྩ་རླུང་ཐིག་ལེ	channels, winds, and	rtsa rlung thig le
ཨེསསེནཅེས	Nadis, pranas, and bindus	essences
རྩ་རླུང་ཐིག་ལེ་གསུམ	energy channels, currents and seminal points TSE	rtsa rlung thig le gsum
རྩ་རླུང་ཐིག་ལེའི་འགྲོས	pulses of the energy channels, currents and seminal points	rtsa rlung thig le'i 'gros
རྩ་རླུང་ཐིག་ལེའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of nadis, vayus, and bindus	rtsa rlung thig le'i rnal 'byor
རྩ་བརླག	1) destroy, annihilate [Bshu gzhog lam lugs rtsa brlag gtong ba]; 2) lose thje essential meaning [Snying don shor ba,...Don med tshig lo la yengs nas gtso don rtsa brlag tu song ba]	rtsa brlag
རྩ་ལ	in the presence of	rtsa la
རྩ་ལ་རྒྱུག་པ	to move the bowels	rtsa la rgyug pa
རྩ་ལག	{mdza' bshes rtsa lag} friends and relatives	rtsa lag
རྩ་ལག་བྱེད	husband	rtsa lag byed
རྩ་ལག་མེད	without relatives	rtsa lag med
རྩ་ལག་འཚོ	one that supports his friends and relatives	rtsa lag 'tsho
རྩ་ལགས	relatives	rtsa lags
རྩ་ལན་གཅིག	1 beat of the pulse	rtsa lan gcig
རྩ་ལམ	1) nadis; 2) anus (	rtsa lam
རྩ་ལུང་ཐིག་ལེ	Channels, energies, and vital essences	rtsa lung thig le
རྩ་ལེན་པ	a small fine	rtsa len pa
རྩ་ཤེ	Mulamadhyamakakarikas	rtsa she
རྩ་ཤེར	mulamadhyamakakarika	rtsa sher
རྩ་ཤེས	Mulaprajna, [sm. {rtsa ba shes rab}, Prajnamula	rtsa shes
རྩ་ཤོར་བ	defecate	rtsa shor ba
རྩ་བཤད་པ	he who has explained the fundamental doctrine, epithet of naropa	rtsa bshad pa
རྩ་བཤིག	destroy completely [Dgra mkhar rtsa bshig btang ba,...Log spyod pa'i sgrig 'dzugs rtsa bshig btang ba]	rtsa bshig
རྩ་སུམ་ཀུན་འདུས	he is the union of the three kayas	rtsa sum kun 'dus
རྩ་གསུམ་ཀུན་འདུས	the embodiment of the three roots	rtsa gsum kun 'dus
རྩ་གསུམ་བཀའ་འདུས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས	sadhana style embodying the teachings of the Three Roots	rtsa gsum bka' 'dus kyi sgrub lugs
རྩ་གསུམ་འཁོར་ལོ	the three channels and the chakras	rtsa gsum 'khor lo
རྩ་གསུམ་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི་བཅས	the three channels together with the four wheels	rtsa gsum 'khor lo bzhi bcas
རྩ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ	deities of the three roots. guru, yidam and dakini	rtsa gsum gyi lha
རྩ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	deity assembly of the three roots	rtsa gsum gyi lha tshogs
རྩ་གསུམ་དགོངས་འདུས	terma by Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye	rtsa gsum dgongs 'dus
རྩ་གསུམ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of the three roots rtsa gsum rgyal ba zhi khro rab 'byams the three rots and infinite / allencompassing peaceful and wrathful buddhas / victorious ones rtsa gsum rgyal ba zhi khro rab 'byams ...	rtsa gsum rgya mtsho
རྩ་གསུམ་སྒྲིལ་སྒྲུབ	Tsasum Drildrub, the Combined Sadhana of the Three Roots; yangter by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	rtsa gsum sgril sgrub
རྩ་གསུམ་སྙིང་ཐིག	terma revealed by {gar dbang rdo rje} {mnga' ris gter ston} 1640-1685	rtsa gsum snying thig
རྩ་གསུམ་གཏེར་བདག་གླིང་པ	{gter ston} 17th cent; alias {gar dbang gnam lcags rdo rje}	rtsa gsum gter bdag gling pa
རྩ་གསུམ་གཏོར་དབང	torma empowerment for the three roots	rtsa gsum gtor dbang
རྩ་གསུམ་གཏོར་མ	Three Roots Torma	rtsa gsum gtor ma
རྩ་གསུམ་དྲིལ་སྒྲུབ	first terma in Tibet, revealed by {'dro 'dul sangs rgyas bla ma}; appeared again as a yangter to Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo; Combined Sadhana of the Three Roots. 1) a {yang gter} of Jamyang Khyentse W...	rtsa gsum dril sgrub
རྩ་གསུམ་པ	three-headed, demon of fever	rtsa gsum pa
རྩ་གསུམ་པའི་ལྷ	deities of the three roots [guru, meditational deity andd kini^ book 2, p]	rtsa gsum pa'i lha
རྩ་གསུམ་སྤྱི་འདུས་སྙིང་ཐིག	earth terma by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	rtsa gsum spyi 'dus snying thig
རྩ་གསུམ་སྤྱིར་སྒྲུབ	general sadhana of the Three Roots 2152	rtsa gsum spyir sgrub
རྩ་གསུམ་འབྲས་བུའི་དོན་ཁྲིད	terma by Ratna Lingpa	rtsa gsum 'bras bu'i don khrid
རྩ་གསུམ་ཟབ་མོ་ཀུན་འདུས	terma by {kun bzang bde chen rgyal po}	rtsa gsum zab mo kun 'dus
རྩ་གསུམ་ལས་བྱང	sadhana of the Three Roots	rtsa gsum las byang
རྩ་གསུམ་ལོག་འགྲོས	exiting gait of the Three Roots (in dance)	rtsa gsum log 'gros
རྩ་གསུམ་ལྷ	the deities of the Three Roots	rtsa gsum lha
རྩ་གསུམ་ལྷ་ཡི་ཕྱག་རྒྱར	mantra of the deities of the three roots	rtsa gsum lha yi phyag rgyar
རྩ་ཧྲམ	tough muscle	rtsa hram
རྩ་ཧྲལ	spyod pa 'chol nyog tu gyur pa ste, shameless law- breaking behavior	rtsa hral
རྩ་ཧྲེང	{rtsa hreng} [place in rtsa mda' rdzong]	rtsa hreng
རྩ་ཧྲེང་བ	lus kyi rtsa gyong po chags pa	rtsa hreng ba
རྩྭ	grass, straw, herb, small plant, hay, dry grass	rtswa
རཙབ༹	herb	rtsva
རྩྭ་ཀུ་ཤ	name for the dub grass	rtswa ku sha
རྩྭ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	{rtswa kun tu bzang po} med. herb	rtswa kun tu bzang po
རྩྭ་ཀོ་ཏམ་པ	kottamba [grass]	rtswa ko tam pa
རཙབ༹་ཀླུ་བདུད་ནག་པོ	an herb which cures {klu nad}	rtsva klu bdud nag po
རྩྭ་ཀླུ་བདུད་ནག་པོ	{rtswa klu bdud nag po} herb	rtswa klu bdud nag po
རྩྭ་བཀག	grazing restriction, restricted private grazing area [bkag rtswa; grazing area in summer and autumn guarded by the owner/ lord to keep other people's cattle from coming in and grazing]	rtswa bkag
རྩྭ་བཀྲམ་པ	dgag dbye sogs kyi skabs rtswa sa la bkram pa, 'dul bar rtswa phan tshun rtse sprod du nyal ba 'dra bar phyogs gnyis nas phan tshun 'dud par gyur pa'i brda thabs su gnang ba'i phyag len zhig	rtswa bkram pa
རྩྭ་བཀྲམ་པས་ཞིབ	rtswa bkram pa lta bu'i sgo nas zhi bar byed pa zhes pa dge 'dun phan tshun zing zing por phyag byas te having rectified the downfall, pacifiing a quarrel; [explained	rtswa bkram pas zhib
རཙབ༹་རྐང	blade of grass	rtsva rkang
རྩྭ་སྐམ་པོ	hay	rtswa skam po
རྩྭ་སྐྱེས་ཡོད་པའི་ཐང	grassy plain	rtswa skyes yod pa'i thang
རྩྭ་ཁ	1) pasture, grassy plain where cattle graze; 2) grass tip (	rtswa kha
རྒན་སྡོད་པའི་གནས་མ་ཡིན	{rtswa kha'i	rgan sdod pa'i gnas ma yin
ཟིལ་པ	dewdrops on the grass tips rtswa kha bzang sar 'tso ba'i phyugs rigs cattle grazing in a good pasture	zil pa
རྩྭ་ཁང	hut	rtswa khang
རཙབ༹་ཁང	posture rtswa kha'i zil pa phrom phrom du chags	rtsva khang
རཙབ༹་ཁའི་ཟིལ་བ་འདྲ	like the dew on	rtsva kha'i zil ba 'dra
གྲསས	tips	grass
རཙབ༹་ཁར	pasture	rtsva khar
རྩྭ་ཁར	pasture	rtswa khar
རྩྭ་ཁུ་བྱུག	kusha grass	rtswa khu byug
རྩྭ་ཁྲེས	load of grass	rtswa khres
རྩྭ་ཁྲེས་རྒྱབ་ལ་ཁུར་བ	carry a load of grass on the back	rtswa khres rgyab la khur ba
རྩྭ་མཁྲིས	ixeris chinensis (thunb.) nakai	rtswa mkhris
རྩྭ་མཁྲིས་བ་མོ	saussurea lancifolia hand.-mazz.	rtswa mkhris ba mo
རྩྭ་མཁྲིས་བ་མོ་ཁ	saussurea arenaria maxim.	rtswa mkhris ba mo kha
རྩྭ་འཁོར་མ	kind of molasses wrapped in grass	rtswa 'khor ma
རྩྭ་གུར་ཀུམ	carthamus tinctorius l.	rtswa gur kum
རྩྭ་གྱབ	grass/ thatch roof	rtswa gyab
རྩྭ་གྲི	grass cutting [up] knife	rtswa gri
རྩྭ་རྒྱུས	tissue	rtswa rgyus
རྩྭ་སྒོར	rtswa dang shing los dkris pa'i bu ram sgor sgor	rtswa sgor
རྩྭ་སྒྱེ	1) rtswa las bzos pa'i sgye mo; 2) Rtswa blug sa'i sgye mo (	rtswa sgye
རྩྭ་སྒྲོན	1) grass lamp; 2) 'dre me [fire blazing up at night???] (	rtswa sgron
རྩྭ་ངན	weeds [lo thog sogs la gnod pa'i rtswa,...Yur ma rgyag dus zhing nang gi rtswa ngan 'gog pa]	rtswa ngan
རྩྭ་ངན་རྐོ་བ	weed	rtswa ngan rko ba
རྩྭ་ངན་འཁོག	weed[ing]	rtswa ngan 'khog
རྩྭ་རྔ	cut/ mow grass/ hay	rtswa rnga
རྩྭ་རྔ་མཁན	hay mower	rtswa rnga mkhan
རྩྭ་རྔ་བྱེད	cut/ mow grass/ hay	rtswa rnga byed
རྩྭ་རྔའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hay mowing machine, lawn mower	rtswa rnga'i 'phrul 'khor
རྩྭ་སྔོ་ལྡུམ་བུ	green grass and other plants	rtswa sngo ldum bu
རྩྭ་སྔོན	new/ green grass rtswa sngon po dang sngo rigs gzhan	rtswa sngon
རྩྭ་བརྔའི་འུལ་མི	obligation to mow the master's private pasturage	rtswa brnga'i 'ul mi
རྩྭ་ཅན་ཚེར་མ་ཞིག	thistle	rtswa can tsher ma zhig
རྩྭ་ཆག	forage, fodder	rtswa chag
རྩྭ་ཆུ	grass and water	rtswa chu
རཙབ༹་མཆོག	{rtsva mchog drung} at Kushinagar	rtsva mchog
རྩྭ་མཆོག	supreme/ kusha grass	rtswa mchog
རཙབ༹་མཆོག་ཀླུ་བདུད་རྡོ་རྗེ་ནག་པོ	Supreme Herb, Black Diamond Naga's Devil, the bonnet	rtsva mchog klu bdud rdo rje nag po
རཙབ༹་མཆོག་གྲོང	Kushinagar. Location of the Buddha's Parinirvana	rtsva mchog grong
རྩྭ་མཆོག་གྲོང	Kushnigar	rtswa mchog grong
རྩྭ་འཇོག་སའི་ཁང་པ	hay barn	rtswa 'jog sa'i khang pa
རཙབ༹་ལྗང	on the green grass	rtsva ljang
རྩྭ་ལྗང	on the green grass	rtswa ljang
རྩྭ་ལྗང་གསར་པ	new grass	rtswa ljang gsar pa
རྩྭ་ཉག་མ	blade of grass	rtswa nyag ma
རཙབ༹་ཉོག	bush	rtsva nyog
རྩྭ་གཉེར་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt. office, providing food for l govt. horses and mules etc.	rtswa gnyer las khungs
རྩྭ་སྙིགས	stubble of grass grazed by cattle	rtswa snyigs
རྩྭ་གཏུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲི	grass cutting [up] knife	rtswa gtub byed kyi gri
རཙབ༹་ལྟར་གཏོར་བ	scattering like hay	rtsva ltar gtor ba
རྩྭ་ཐག	grass [hemp?] rope rtswa thag gis rta rgod gyong po 'dul mi	rtswa thag
རྩྭ་ཐང	grassy plain	rtswa thang
རྩྭ་ཐུན་པ	rtswa rnga mkhan	rtswa thun pa
རྩྭ་དང་སྔོ་རིགས་གཞན	grass and other herbs plants	rtswa dang sngo rigs gzhan
རཙབ༹་དང་འདྲ་བ	as worthless as grass	rtsva dang 'dra ba
རྩྭ་དུག	grazing animals gis sos ka rtswa gsar mi 'phrod pa zos pa las byung ba'i dug	rtswa dug
རཙབ༹་གདན	mat, straw mat, tatami	rtsva gdan
རྩྭ་གདན	grass/ straw mat	rtswa gdan
རྩྭ་འདག་རྒྱུས	herb {rtswa 'dag rgyus}	rtswa 'dag rgyus
རྩྭ་ལྡུམ	grass and other herbs plants	rtswa ldum
རྩྭ་ལྡུམ་མཁན་པ	a bsang la 'gro ba'i grass 2153	rtswa ldum mkhan pa
རཙབ༹་པད་མ	Chinese herbaceous peony	rtsva pad ma
རྩྭ་པད་མ	chinese herbaceous peony	rtswa pad ma
རྩྭ་པུ་ཤེལ་རྩེ	herb {rtswa pu shel rtse}	rtswa pu shel rtse
རྩྭ་སྤྱིལ	hut of grass/ straw	rtswa spyil
རྩྭ་བྱི་འཛིན	{rtswa byi 'dzin} grass	rtswa byi 'dzin
རྩྭ་དབྱི	grass lyn	rtswa dbyi
རྩྭ་འབུ	grass insect	rtswa 'bu
རྩྭ་འབོལ	grass stuffed cushion	rtswa 'bol
རྩྭ་འབྲུ	{rtswa 'bru} med. herb [glo gsud 'jags pa dang, lud pa gog pa, dri chu 'bebs pa sogs la phan]	rtswa 'bru
རྩྭ་སྦ་ལ	herb {rtswa sba la}	rtswa sba la
རྩྭ་མི་ཤིང་མི	grass and wood gatherer, poor/ low ranking person [pej]	rtswa mi shing mi
རྩྭ་མུན་ཛ	[arch] 1) {dres ma} grass; 2) skyer ma	rtswa mun dza
རྩྭ་མེ	grass fire	rtswa me
རྩྭ་མེ་མཆེད་པ	spreading grass fire	rtswa me mched pa
རྩྭ་རྨ་མདོངས	herb {rtswa rma mdongs}	rtswa rma mdongs
རྩྭ་རྩེ	grass tips	rtswa rtse
རྩྭ་རྩེའི་ཆུ་རྡུལ	dewdrops on the grass tips	rtswa rtse'i chu rdul
རྩྭ་རྩེའི་ཟིལ་པ	dewdrops on grass tips	rtswa rtse'i zil pa
རཙབ༹་ཞྭ	straw hat	rtsva zhwa
རྩྭ་ཞྭ	straw hat	rtswa zhwa
རྩྭ་ཞིབ	rtswa phub ma	rtswa zhib
རྩྭ་གཞོན	new grass	rtswa gzhon
རྩྭ་ཟ་མཁན་གྱི་རིགས	grass eating animals, herbivores	rtswa za mkhan gyi rigs
རྩྭ་ཟན	grass eating animals, herbivores	rtswa zan
རྩྭ་ཟོར	rtswa rnga byed kyi zor ba	rtswa zor
རྩྭ་གཟན	forage, fodder	rtswa gzan
རྩྭ་ཡན	weeds	rtswa yan
རྩྭ་ཡན་འཁོག	weed[ing]	rtswa yan 'khog
རྩྭ་ར	1) enclosure for putting grass/ hay; 2) place grass and plants grow, pasture	rtswa ra
རྩྭ་རམ་པ	herb {rtswa ram pa}/ {rtswa ram bu}	rtswa ram pa
རྩྭ་རམ་བུ	herb {rtswa ram pa}/ {rtswa ram bu} rtswa ra'i nang du sems can 'tsho ba graze animals in pasture	rtswa ram bu
རཙབ༹་རས	burlap	rtsva ras
རྩྭ་རས	matting	rtswa ras
རྩྭ་རས་སྐུད་པ	hempen cord	rtswa ras skud pa
རྩྭ་རས་ཐག་པ	hempen rope	rtswa ras thag pa
རྩྭ་རི	meadow, grass-covered hill	rtswa ri
རཙབ༹་རིས	depictions of grass	rtsva ris
རྩྭ་རིས	depictions of grass	rtswa ris
རྩྭ་ལ་འབར་བའི་མེ	grass fire	rtswa la 'bar ba'i me
རྩྭ་ལས་བཟོས་པའི་ཁང་པ	grass hut/ house	rtswa las bzos pa'i khang pa
རྩྭ་ལས་བཟོས་པའི་ཐོག་གྱབ	grass/ thatch roof	rtswa las bzos pa'i thog gyab
རྩྭ་ལས་བཟོས་པའི་གདན	grass/ straw mat	rtswa las bzos pa'i gdan
རྩྭ་ལས་བཟོས་པའི་ལྷམ	grass shoes	rtswa las bzos pa'i lham
རྩྭ་ཤིང	grass and trees, vegetation rtswa shing thang gsum gyi gtso sman rigs	rtswa shing
རྩྭ་ཤིང་འཐུ་མཁན	grass and wood gatherer, poor/ low ranking person [pej]	rtswa shing 'thu mkhan
རྩྭ་བསེ་རུ	herb {rtswa bse ru}	rtswa bse ru
རྩྭ་ལྷམ	grass shoes	rtswa lham
རྩྭ་ཨ་ཝ་དམན	lloydia serotina reichb.	rtswa a wa dman
རྩག་ཆད་མུ་བཞི	CHN	rtsag chad mu bzhi
རྩག་པ	slog pa, garment made of large sheep skin	rtsag pa
རྩག་རྩིག	small/ minor [articles/ tasks]	rtsag rtsig
རྩག་རྩིག་འཚོང་བ	huckster	rtsag rtsig 'tshong ba
རྩག་རཚིག	small/ minor [articles/ tasks] [Las don rtsag rtshig ...Tsong zog rtsag rtshig]	rtsag rtshig
རྩགས	celebrated rdzogs chen lama	rtsags
རྩང	1) Tser ma; 2) Shing skyer pa phra mor bshags nas gtor ma'i mtha' skor du khra ma lta bur btsugs pa'i thur ma rnams kyi ming; 3) [arch] trap, snare; 4) Chang (	rtsang
རྩང་ནན	[arch] drink	rtsang nan
རྩང་པ་རྒྱ་རྒན	SA rtsangs pa	rtsang pa rgya rgan
རྩང་བ	vague	rtsang ba
རྩང་དམར་མཚོན་ཆ	bloody thorny stakes as weapons	rtsang dmar mtshon cha
རྩང་རྩང	a sa bdag monster	rtsang rtsang
རྩངས་པ	lizard, agama himalayana sacra smith, chameleon, kind of lizard	rtsangs pa
རྩངས་པ་ཁ་རལ	rock-living srog chags rmigs pa	rtsangs pa kha ral
རྩངས་པ་གྱི་རླུང	the chameleon energy	rtsangs pa gyi rlung
རྩངས་པ་རྒྱ་རྒན	rmigs pa, chameleon?	rtsangs pa rgya rgan
རྩངས་པ་སྒལ་རལ	rmigs pa, chameleon?	rtsangs pa sgal ral
རྩངས་པག	skin of a lizard	rtsangs pag
རྩད	root; (place of) origin	rtsad
རྩད་ཁུངས	rtsa ba'i phugs,...Gnad don de skor rtsad khungs ma chod par da bar lus song	rtsad khungs
རྩད་གྱུང	{rtsad gyung} med. herb	rtsad gyung
རྩད་གཅོད	to search for, seek out	rtsad gcod
རྩད་གཅོད་གཏོང་མཁན	detective	rtsad gcod gtong mkhan
རྩད་གཅོད་གཏོང་བ	detect	rtsad gcod gtong ba
རྩད་གཅོད་ཐིག་ལེན	ask about, inquire, investigate, check	rtsad gcod thig len
རྩད་གཅོད་པ	investigate thoroughly	rtsad gcod pa
རྩད་གཅོད་བྱས་པ	investigated	rtsad gcod byas pa
རྩད་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	to ask about, inquire, investigate, check	rtsad gcod byed pa
རྩད་བཅད	investigate, cutting the root, clarify butter	rtsad bcad
རྩད་བཅད་པ	trace the root of, SA rtsad gcod , to make inquiries about	rtsad bcad pa
རྩད་ཆོད	uproot	rtsad chod
རྩད་གདར་ཞིབ་ཆ་བཅད	investigate in great detail	rtsad gdar zhib cha bcad
རྩད་བདར་ཆོད	examine thoroughly	rtsad bdar chod
རྩད་ལྡོག	Vigraha-vyAvartanI; one of the {rigs tshogs drug} the six logical works of the Madhyamika by Nagarjuna	rtsad ldog
རྩད་བརྡར་ཆོད	to resolve, investigate, search out / for, check, inquire into, clarify 2154	rtsad brdar chod
རྩད་ནས	completely	rtsad nas
རྩད་ནས་གཅོད	uproot, eradicate, obliterate, annihilate completely destroy/ cut, track down, investigate in great detail, ascertain, become clear about, cut at the root	rtsad nas gcod
རྩད་ནས་གཅོད་པ	to root out, eradicate	rtsad nas gcod pa
རྩད་ནས་གཅོད་པའི་སྡོང་པོ	tree cut at the root	rtsad nas gcod pa'i sdong po
རྩད་ནས་བཅད་པ	{rtsad nas gcod pa} to probe/ inquire/ investigate thoroughly	rtsad nas bcad pa
རྩད་ནས་ཆོད	to uproot, eradicate, obliterate, annihilate. completely destroy / cut, track down, investigate in great detail, ascertain, become clear about	rtsad nas chod
རྩད་ནས་ཕྱུང	drawn out with the roots	rtsad nas phyung
རྩད་ནས་འབྱིན་པ	to uproot, obliterate, eliminate, abolish, do away with; ex {nyon mongs rtsad nas 'byin pa} uproots the emotions	rtsad nas 'byin pa
རྩད་ནས་ཟད	consumed to the core / completely exhausted	rtsad nas zad
རྩད་པའི་རིགས་པ	{rtsad pa'i rigs pa/ vadanyaya *, investigate, check	rtsad pa'i rigs pa
རྩད་མ་ཆོད	{te lo pa gar bzhugs rtsad ma chod} had no idea where to find Tilopa	rtsad ma chod
རྩད་མར	bloodshot	rtsad mar
རྩད་ཞིབ	rtsad gcod zhib 'jug...Sa dbyibs rtsad zhib byed pa,...Rtsad zhib brtag dpyad	rtsad zhib
རྩད་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	investigate, check	rtsad zhib byed pa
རྩབ	1) Bar srub 'gog byed,...'Gul skyod byed pa'i cog rtse'i 'og tu shing rtsab chug cig; 2) root	rtsab
རྩབ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཚལ	roughening park	rtsab 'gyur gyi tshal
རྩབ་བཅད	eradicate	rtsab bcad
རྩབ་པ	SA tsab tsub	rtsab pa
རྩབ་མ	spokes	rtsab ma
རྩབ་མོ	tsab mo gruel	rtsab mo
རྩབ་རྩབ	SA tsab tsub	rtsab rtsab
རྩབ་རྩུབ	weeds	rtsab rtsub
རྩབ་རྩོབ	fickle, unsteady, not firm	rtsab rtsob
རྩབ་རྩོབ་ཏུ་སོང་འདུག	he has become very fickle	rtsab rtsob tu song 'dug
རྩབ་ལོགས	side	rtsab logs
རྩབ་ཧྲལ	torn, tattered	rtsab hral
རྩབས	wedge	rtsabs
རྩབས་ཁུར	sweetish sort of bread made with rtsabs pa	rtsabs khur
རྩབས་རྒྱབ་པ	wedge	rtsabs rgyab pa
རྩབས་དུ་ཚ	kind of salt like burnt treacle	rtsabs du tsha
རྩབས་པ	chop into small pieces, ferment, barm, yeast	rtsabs pa
རྩབས་མོ	rtsab mo, tsabmo gruel	rtsabs mo
རྩམ་ཁུག	rtsam pa storing khug ma	rtsam khug
རྩམ་རྒྱུ	barley, beans etc	rtsam rgyu
རྩམ་སྒྱེ	small bag for carrying tsamba	rtsam sgye
རྩམ་གཉེར	Tibetan govt. tsampa tax collection office and workers title	rtsam gnyer
རྩམ་ཐང	light tsampa soup	rtsam thang
རྩམ་ཐུག	rtsam pa btab nas bskol ba'i thug pa	rtsam thug
རྩམ་འཐག	parched barley or rice or wheat made into flour	rtsam 'thag
རྩམ་པ	[barley etc w water added ground to powder/ flour and roasted [Sran rtsam,...Dmangs rtsam rtsing po,...Bar rtsam,...Mchod rtsam,...Rtsam pa khag theg bul gyis byed, lhags pas khyer na khyer mnyam y...	rtsam pa
རྩམ་པ་སྐམ་གསོབ	poor quality tsampa made of grain w/p water	rtsam pa skam gsob
རྩམ་པ་བཏགས་པ	parched barley or rice or wheat made into flour	rtsam pa btags pa
རྩམ་པ་འཐག་པ	make flour of roasted grain	rtsam pa 'thag pa
རྩམ་པ་ནང་བཞིན	powder	rtsam pa nang bzhin
རྩམ་པ་རྩིང་པོ	coarse barley flour	rtsam pa rtsing po
རྩམ་པ་ཞིབ་དཀར་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པ	had a copious supply of white barley tsampa	rtsam pa zhib dkar mang po yod pa
རྩམ་པ་གཤོ་བ	1) rtsam pa phyi la gsho ba; 2) Ngo bstod byed pa'i dpe,...Mi la ngo bstod kyi rtsam pa gsho ba'i sprel lad byed pa	rtsam pa gsho ba
རྩམ་ཕོག	wages or allowance in parched barley flour	rtsam phog
རྩམ་ཕོགས	former times's rtsam pa'i phogs	rtsam phogs
རྩམ་ཕོར	tsam pa bowl	rtsam phor
རྩམ་བང	rtsam pa blug sa'i bang ba	rtsam bang
རྩམ་འབྲས	rice and tsampa	rtsam 'bras
རྩམ་རྩི	1) thug pa'i kha thal; 2) Rtsam pa cung zad tsam,...Gos la rtsam rtsi gos pa	rtsam rtsi
རྩམ་ཞིབ	finest parched barley flour	rtsam zhib
རྩམ་བཞེས་པ	rtsam gnyer	rtsam bzhes pa
རྩམ་བཞེས་ལས་ཁུངས	sngar bod sa gnas srid gzhung gi las khungs shig der do dam pa las tsan rim pa lnga pa ser skya gnyis dang, gnyer pa gnyis bcas yod, las 'gan ni, mchod rgyun khag la rtsam pa'i dod dam, rtsam pa ng...	rtsam bzhes las khungs
རྩམ་ཟན	1) tsampa eater; 2) Rtsam pas bzos pa'i zan gyi rigs	rtsam zan
རྩམ་ཟོམ	rtsam pa blug sa'i snod zom	rtsam zom
རྩམ་གཟར	rtsam pa measuring skyogs	rtsam gzar
རྩམ་ལོང	of long ga left right and center gsum du dbye ba'i center or upper part	rtsam long
རྩམ་གསུར	smell of tsamba burning	rtsam gsur
རྩམ་གསོག	dried and roasted/ parched poor quality tsampa	rtsam gsog
རྩམས་ཆོས	composition rtswa'am shing sdong chung chung hedge	rtsams chos
རྩའི་ཁང་པ	straw house, house thatched with straw	rtsa'i khang pa
རྩའི་ཁེབས་ཀྱིས་མི་མཐོང་བ་བྱས	covering it over carefully so that it could not be detected	rtsa'i khebs kyis mi mthong ba byas
རྩའི་ཁྲེས་པོ	load of grass	rtsa'i khres po
རྩའི་འཁོར་ལོ	focal point/ chakra	rtsa'i 'khor lo
རྩའི་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ	the five nadi-wheels	rtsa'i 'khor lo lnga
རྩའི་འགྲོ་སྟངས	pathways of the nerves and veins	rtsa'i 'gro stangs
རྩའི་གནད་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	by means of the nadi key point	rtsa'i gnad la brten nas
རྩའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the veins [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, rtsa mi mngon pa dang, rtsa mdud med pa'o]	rtsa'i dpe byad gnyis
རྩའི་སྤྱིལ་པོ	thatched hut	rtsa'i spyil po
རྩའི་འབྲོས་མཁྲང	stiff nadis, hardened blood vessels [by sickness]	rtsa'i 'bros mkhrang
རྩའི་གཙོ་བོ་གསུམ	the three principal channels	rtsa'i gtso bo gsum
རྩའི་ཚོར་བ་ཉམས་པ	lose feeling [in the nerves [Rkang pa yun ring bskums nas bsdad pas sgyid pa'i rtsa sbrid pa,...Gshags las ma byas gong du sbrid sman btang bas rtsa sbrid pa]	rtsa'i tshor ba nyams pa
རྩའི་གཟེགས་མ	fragment or piece of grass	rtsa'i gzegs ma
རྩྭའི	herbal	rtswa'i
རྩྭའི་ཁྲོད་དུ་གནས་པའི་འབུ་སྲིན	grass insect	rtswa'i khrod du gnas pa'i 'bu srin
རྩྭའི་ད་བྱིད	rtsangs pa rtswa'i nang tsangs can gyi 'bol gdan grass stuffed cushion	rtswa'i da byid
རྩྭའི་རྩེ་མོ	grass tip	rtswa'i rtse mo
རྩར	{rtsa la} near; beside; near, close to/ in the presence of	rtsar
རྩར་གཅོད	rtsa ra gcod pa ste dri rtsad byed pa	rtsar gcod
རྩར་གཅོད་པ	to eliminate, bring an end to, obliterate	rtsar gcod pa
རྩར་ཆེན་པོ	very important, precious, profound	rtsar chen po
རྩར་ཕེབས	come to the foot of	rtsar phebs
རྩར་ལ	near	rtsar la
རྩལ	1) skill, dexterity, adroitness, accomplishment, power, energy, creativity, strength, resourcefulness, might. 2) expression, function, manifesting power, [sm. {gdangs}. potency, capacity, potential...	rtsal
རྩལ་བསྐྱེད	energize, arouse the power	rtsal bskyed
རྩལ་བསྐྱེད་པ	arouse powerful, energize, arouse the power. energize	rtsal bskyed pa
རྩལ་ཁ	expression, power, strength	rtsal kha
རྩལ་ཁ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to increase the dynamic potential (for)	rtsal kha bskyed pa
རྩལ་ཁ་རྒྱས	develops in potency	rtsal kha rgyas
རྩལ་གྱི་བཀོད་པ	magnificent sight	rtsal gyi bkod pa
རྩལ་གྱི་མཆོངས	gymnastic feat	rtsal gyi mchongs
རྩལ་འགྲང་པ	vie in skill	rtsal 'grang pa
རྩལ་འགྲན	MSS: x. [mss]	rtsal 'gran
རྩལ་སྒྲུབ	business-like, expert	rtsal sgrub
རྩལ་ཅན	acrobat, adept, deft, nimble	rtsal can
རྩལ་ཅིར་ཡང་འཆར་བ	variously manifesting expression	rtsal cir yang 'char ba
རྩལ་ཆེན	great energy, potency, great creativity	rtsal chen
རྩལ་ཆེན་རྒྱས	expanded the great power	rtsal chen rgyas
རྩལ་ཆེན་དྲུག་པ	1 of 5 earlier translated sems sde tantras	rtsal chen drug pa
རྩལ་ཆེན་པོ	adroit, dexterous	rtsal chen po
རྩལ་ཆེན་སྤྲུག་པ	earlier translated sems sde tantra	rtsal chen sprug pa
རྩལ་ཆེན་སྤྲུགས་པ	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of snga 'gyur lnga	rtsal chen sprugs pa
རྩལ་ཆེན་རྫོགས	the great power of ... will be perfected	rtsal chen rdzogs
རྩལ་ཆེན་རྫོགས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of perfecting the great strength; [one of the stages in Anu Yoga]	rtsal chen rdzogs pa'i rnal 'byor
རྩལ་ཆེན་ཝ	very powerful	rtsal chen wa
རྩལ་ཆེན་སེང་གེ	lion of supreme strength, skill	rtsal chen seng ge
རྩལ་འཆང	power-wielding	rtsal 'chang
རྩལ་ཏུ་བཏོན	see {rtsal bton}. [mss]	rtsal tu bton
རྩལ་བཏོན	1) emphasize [nan tan nam dmigs su bkar ba, Tha snyad kyi dbye ba rnams rtsal bton gyis bshad pa,...Ya rabs kyi bya ba rtsal 'don byed]; 2) bring forth 1's power/ strenth, succeed Nus shugs 'don pa...	rtsal bton
རྩལ་སྟོབས	skill/ strength of body and mind	rtsal stobs
རྩལ་སྟོབས་ཆེ་བ	consummate strength	rtsal stobs che ba
རྩལ་ཐོན་པ	achieved the power of. perfected	rtsal thon pa
རྩལ་མཐོན་པ	efficient	rtsal mthon pa
རྩལ་འཐོན་པ་ཞིག	one has gained some degree of mastery	rtsal 'thon pa zhig
རྩལ་དང་སྟོབས་སྡུར་བ	try feats of strength	rtsal dang stobs sdur ba
རྩལ་དང་བློ་གཉིས	strength and intelligence	rtsal dang blo gnyis
རྩལ་དུ་བཏོན	see {rtsal bton}. [mss]	rtsal du bton
རྩལ་དུ་བཏོན་ནས	is stressed	rtsal du bton nas
རྩལ་དུ་བཏོན་པ	showing strength	rtsal du bton pa
རྩལ་དུ་འདོན་པ	showing strength	rtsal du 'don pa
རྩལ་དུ་རྫོགས་པ	to bring the dynamic energy of (something) to perfect completion; for the dynamic energy of (something) to come to perfect completion; to allow dynamic energy to reach full expression	rtsal du rdzogs pa
རྩལ་གདངས	manifestation, expression	rtsal gdangs
རྩལ་གདངས་རོལ་པ	Tsal & Dang & Rolpa energy	rtsal gdangs rol pa
རྩལ་མདངས	manifestation	rtsal mdangs
རྩལ་འདོན	1) emphasize, focus on; 2) bring forth 1's power/ strength, succeed * (	rtsal 'don
རྩལ་འདོན་བྱེད	1) emphasize, focus on; 2) bring forth 1's power/ strength, succeed * (	rtsal 'don byed
རྩལ་འདོན་བྱེད་པ	to focus on	rtsal 'don byed pa
རྩལ་འདོན་མཛད	1) emphasize, focus on; 2) bring forth 1's power/ strength, succeed * (	rtsal 'don mdzad
རྩལ་འདོན་མཛད་པ	to focus on	rtsal 'don mdzad pa
རྩལ་ལྡན	skillful, expert, adroit, (general name for a bodhisattva)	rtsal ldan
རྩལ་ལྡན་མངའ་ཐང་ཐོབ	have obtained power and might	rtsal ldan mnga' thang thob
རྩལ་ནུས་སྤྲུགས	invigorated by the energy [of.]	rtsal nus sprugs
རྩལ་སྣ་ཚོགས	the various manifestations{rtsal sna tshogs su snang ba - expression manifest in manifold ways	rtsal sna tshogs
རྩལ་སྣ་ཚོགས་སུ་སྣང་བ	Expression manifest in manifold ways	rtsal sna tshogs su snang ba
རྩལ་སྣང	manifestation	rtsal snang
རྩལ་སྣང་འགགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ	unceasing power of expression/ manifestation/ the play of appearance	rtsal snang 'gags med kyi nus pa
རྩལ་པ	powerful	rtsal pa
རྩལ་པ་ཆེན	powerful	rtsal pa chen
རྩལ་པོ་ཆེ	powerful	rtsal po che
ཆུད་པར་འགྱུར་རོ	it will be swiftly restored again like a strong athlete [recovering from] stumbling	chud par 'gyur ro
རྩལ་པོ་ཆེ་བ	very powerful	rtsal po che ba
རྩལ་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་འགྲན་མི་ཐུབ	unmatchable skill/ strength	rtsal po che la 'gran mi thub
རྩལ་སྤྲུགས	to strive, to consume energy	rtsal sprugs
རྩལ་དབང	expression-empowerment; Abbr. of {rig pa'i rtsal dbang}; the empowerment of the expression of awareness	rtsal dbang
རྩལ་འབྱོངས	achieved	rtsal 'byongs
རྩལ་འབྱོངས་པ	to progress	rtsal 'byongs pa
རྩལ་སྦྱང	exercise the creative ability, work with the energy, to cultivate	rtsal sbyang
རྩལ་སྦྱང་བ	to drill, exercise	rtsal sbyang ba
རྩལ་སྦྱོང	to exercise, train, get used to developing strength, generating the potential; forceful purification	rtsal sbyong
རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བ	practice, improve one's skill, to cultivate, to train oneself, to develop strength	rtsal sbyong ba
རྩལ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པ	to train, exercise, practice	rtsal sbyong byed pa
རྩལ་སྦྱོང་ར་བ	drill ground	rtsal sbyong ra ba
རྩལ་མ་རྫོགས	not fully grown, undeveloped	rtsal ma rdzogs
རྩལ་མེད	unskillful	rtsal med
རྩལ་རྩེད	acrobatics	rtsal rtsed
རྩལ་རྩེད་སྣ་ཚོགས	acrobats	rtsal rtsed sna tshogs
རྩལ་རྫོགས	the power will be perfected	rtsal rdzogs
རྩལ་རྫོགས་པ	training, perfecting the skill of	rtsal rdzogs pa
རྩལ་རྫོགས་ཤུགས	power, strength, force	rtsal rdzogs shugs
རྩལ་ལག	bodily skills [dper na, mthon por mchongs pa, shing rtser 'dzegs pa, mgyogs por rgyug pa lta bu]	rtsal lag
རྩལ་ལས་ཤར་བ	manifest from the Tsal energy	rtsal las shar ba
རྩལ་ཤར་བ	manifests as Tsal energy, Tsal energy arises as	rtsal shar ba
རྩལ་ཤུགས	power, strength, force 2157	rtsal shugs
རྩལ་ཤུགས་ཆེ་བ	great strength	rtsal shugs che ba
རྩལ་ཤེད་ནི་མ་རྫོགས	the strength [of my practice] is not mature	rtsal shed ni ma rdzogs
རྩལ་ཤོར	all skill is gone	rtsal shor
རྩལ་གསུམ	3 powers of practitioner (tshad 'dzin thun ba'i rtsal, ring bar bsgangs pa'i rtsal, bar snang du spar ba'i rtsal)	rtsal gsum
རྩས་མ	harvest, SA btsas ma	rtsas ma
རྩས་བཟོས་པའི་ཁང་པ	thatched	rtsas bzos pa'i khang pa
རྩི	{sang gi rtsi la mi 'bad par} rather than making plans for tomorrow	rtsi
རྩི་ཀོར་ཐང	{rtsi kor thang} [R]	rtsi kor thang
རྩི་དཀར	barley	rtsi dkar
རྩི་བཀུར	bzang por rtsi zhing gong du bkur ba,...Mi kun gyis rje bor rtsi bkur zhu ba	rtsi bkur
རྩི་ཁུ	fruit stone, kernel	rtsi khu
རྩི་གུ	fruit stone, kernel	rtsi gu
རྩི་གོར་ཐང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rtsi gor thang
རྩི་བགྲང	speculate on [scheme]	rtsi bgrang
རྩི་བགྲང་བྱེད	to speculate, make schemes	rtsi bgrang byed
རྩི་འགོ་ལྔ	five essential observations: see {rtsi 'go yan lag lnga}	rtsi 'go lnga
རྩི་འགོ་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	five kinds of essential observations: who the author is, what its scriptural sources are, how it is classified, for whose benefit it is written, and what the import of the work as a whole is	rtsi 'go yan lag lnga
རྩི་འགྲམ་བྱབས་པ	dig a hole looking for seeds	rtsi 'gram byabs pa
རྩི་སྒམ	newly printed pages having been bound khod snyoms brad brdar	rtsi sgam
རྩི་སྒམ་པང་ལེབ	glegs bam gyi mthar tson rtsi gtong dus glegs bam sdom byed kyi pang leb	rtsi sgam pang leb
རྩི་སྒྲ	sound of shrieking	rtsi sgra
རྩི་ལྔ	the five essences {gla rtsi}, {go che}, {bu ram}, {'bri smug}, {sbrang rtsi}, {(Error:)rak ta so drug}	rtsi lnga
རྩི་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	making one-pointed	rtsi gcig tu byed pa
རྩི་བཅུད	juice elixir, honey	rtsi bcud
རྩི་བཅུད་སྙིང་པོ	butter churned out of milk	rtsi bcud snying po
རྩི་ཆུ	1) tson rtsi dang, bkrag rtsi sogs dngos rigs kyi kha dog sgyur ba dang, sra bar byed pa'i rtsi rigs kyi khu ba; 2) Rdza chu'i yan lag cig ste, mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs yus hru'u bod rigs rang...	rtsi chu
རྩི་ཆེན	asafoetida	rtsi chen
རྩི་འཇོག	give importance/ consideration to	rtsi 'jog
རྩི་ལྗོན་ཤིང	leafy tree	rtsi ljon shing
རྩི་གཏོང་བ	polish	rtsi gtong ba
རྩི་སྟག་མོ	{rtsi stag mo med. [= chu ma rtsi]	rtsi stag mo
རྩི་ཐོག	plants	rtsi thog
རྩི་ཐོག་ཟླ་བ	the ninth month	rtsi thog zla ba
རྩི་མཐོང	have regard/ consideration for, see as important, put high value on [Ngal rtsol grub 'bras la rtsi mthong byed pa,...Sger gyi khe phan la'ang rtsi mthong byed dgos]	rtsi mthong
རྩི་དྲུད	yul gla ba pho'i mjug ma brdar ba, gla ba pho 'khor langs dus rtag tu sa cha nges can zhig gi rdo la rkub brdar bar brten rngon pas tshul de'i gzhir bzung nas dong rnyi btsugs te 'dzin pa'am gsod pa	rtsi drud
རྩི་གདན	tson dang sra rtsi sogs dngos gzhi ma btang gong du gtong ba'i rtsi zhig	rtsi gdan
རྩི་ནག་ཞིག	asphalt	rtsi nag zhig
རྩི་དཔོན	chief accountant	rtsi dpon
རྩི་བ	to care about, value / to count, reckon, enumerate, calculate, compute, grass, plants, greenery, thickets / luster [rtsi shing]. to count; {rtsi ba, brtsis pa, brtsi ba, rtsis} trans. v	rtsi ba
རྩི་བོ	[arch] ston thog	rtsi bo
རྩི་བོ་ཆེ	asafoetida	rtsi bo che
རྩི་སྦྲང	honey bee	rtsi sbrang
རྩི་མ	tson rtsi btang ba'i metals trees etc kyi dngos spyad rigs,...Phor pa rtsi ma,...Rta sga rtsi ma,...Cog tse rtsi ma	rtsi ma
རྩི་མ་གྷི	medicine which neutralizes all poisons	rtsi ma ghi
རྩི་མར	butter from cattle that rtswa dang sngo ldum sogs rtsi thog gi bcud myangs pa	rtsi mar
རྩི་དམར	1) tson rtsi dmar po; 2) Byu ru'i ming	rtsi dmar
རྩི་སྨན	Osadhi [buddha]	rtsi sman
རྩི་རྩི	rat, mouse, rodent	rtsi rtsi
རྩི་ཚོན	paint	rtsi tshon
རྩི་མཚར	amused	rtsi mtshar
རྩི་ཞྭ	pointed hats	rtsi zhwa
རྩི་གཞི	unit	rtsi gzhi
རྩི་ལས་འདས	countless, incalculable	rtsi las 'das
རྩི་ཤིང	1) grass and trees; 2) fruit trees; 3) greenery, thickets, plants (	rtsi shing
རྩིག	a wall	rtsig
རྩིག་ཁུག	khang pa'i phyi nang gang rung gi rtsig pa'i zur khug...Khyi rtsig khug tu bkar na kha log brgyab yong	rtsig khug
རྩིག་གུ	SA rtsig pa	rtsig gu
རྩིག་གེ	mouse	rtsig ge
རྩིག་འགྲམ	near a wall	rtsig 'gram
རྩིག་ངོས	side of a wall, face of a wall 2158	rtsig ngos
རྩིག་བརྟན	solid wall	rtsig brtan
རྩིག་གདོང	side/ face of a wall	rtsig gdong
རྩིག་རྡོ	rtsig pa rtsig byed kyi rdo	rtsig rdo
རྩིག་ལྡེབས	rtsig ngos sam, rtsig logs	rtsig ldebs
རྩིག་པ	1. (Tha dad pa brtsigs pa, brtsig pa, rtsigs,, rtsig pa rgyag pa,...Rdo gru bzhi brtsigs nas chu rags rgyag pa,...Bya rog tsang rtsig...2. Mkhar khang gi rtsig pa,...Rdo rtsig ...Phag rtsig...Gyang...	rtsig pa
རྩིག་པ་སྣ་ལྔ	fivefold wall; (Skt. rajobhuva)	rtsig pa sna lnga
རྩིག་པ་བརྩིགས	build a wall	rtsig pa brtsigs
རྩིག་པ་རིམ་ལྔ	walls of five layers	rtsig pa rim lnga
རྩིག་པའི་སྐྱ	khang pa'i nang du bcad rgyag pa'i rtsig pa	rtsig pa'i skya
རྩིག་པའི་གློ་འབུར	rtsig pa'i phyi logs nas 'bur du btod pa'i rtsig pa	rtsig pa'i glo 'bur
རྩིག་པའི་ངོས་སྣམ	gzhal yas khang gi 'dod snam,.... [= the {'dod snam} of a celestial palace]	rtsig pa'i ngos snam
རྩིག་པའི་ངོས་སྣམ་གསུམ	[rakta, {thal chen}, {zhag}	rtsig pa'i ngos snam gsum
རྩིག་པའི་བུ་ག	hole in a wall	rtsig pa'i bu ga
རྩིག་པའི་རྨང་གཞི	foundation of a wall	rtsig pa'i rmang gzhi
རྩིག་པའི་ཟུར་གདོང	side/ face of a wall	rtsig pa'i zur gdong
རྩིག་པའི་ར་སྐོར	rtsig pas bskor ba'i ra skyor	rtsig pa'i ra skor
རྩིག་པོ	(yul bska ba,...Thug pa rtsig po	rtsig po
རྩིག་དཔོན	master mason, architect	rtsig dpon
རྩིག་བུག	hole in a wall	rtsig bug
རྩིག་རྨང	rtsig gdan nam 'gram gzhi	rtsig rmang
རྩིག་རྩིག	squeaking of a mouse	rtsig rtsig
རྩིག་ཞལ	rtsig pa'i ngos kyi zhal ba,...Rtsig zhal brgyab nas 'jam po bzo ba	rtsig zhal
རྩིག་གཞི	foundation of a wall	rtsig gzhi
རྩིག་ཟུར	khang pa'i phyi nang gang rung du 'bur la thon pa'i sne'am gru	rtsig zur
རྩིག་བཟོ་བ	bricklayer, mason	rtsig bzo ba
རྩིག་ཡོལ	rtsig pa'i ngos kyi yol ba	rtsig yol
རྩིག་ར	rtsig pa'i ra ba	rtsig ra
རྩིག་རིག	mathematics	rtsig rig
རྩིག་རིམ	tier	rtsig rim
རྩིག་རླག	house martin	rtsig rlag
རྩིག་ལོགས	side of a wall	rtsig logs
རྩིགས	rtsig pa'i skul tshig	rtsigs
རྩིགས་པ	wall (of mansion)	rtsigs pa
རྩིགས་པ་སྣ་ལྔ	fivefold walls	rtsigs pa sna lnga
རྩིགས་མ	grounds, tea leaves, sediment, turbid matter of decoction, barley gruel	rtsigs ma
རྩིང་ཆོས	crude behavior. [a view or action that does not accord with a true tradition of the Dharma]	rtsing chos
རྩིང་ཐུད	coarse cheese	rtsing thud
རྩིང་པོ	crude, coarse	rtsing po
རྩིང་སྤྱོད	coarse / crude behavior	rtsing spyod
རྩིང་ཕྱེ	coarse meal, grits	rtsing phye
རྩིང་བ	coarse, clumsy, rough, rude, coarseness	rtsing ba
རྩིང་ཞད	ma thul ma zhi ba'i bya spyod rtsub po'i gya' 'am bag...Mi 'di rtsing zhad che tsam 'dug	rtsing zhad
རྩིང་ཞིབ	coarse and fine	rtsing zhib
རྩིང་བཟོ	crudely made merchandise	rtsing bzo
རྩིད་སྐུད	thread made of long yak/cattle hair	rtsid skud
རྩིད་གུར	yak-hair tent covering	rtsid gur
རྩིད་གོག	two year old goat	rtsid gog
རྩིད་གྲི	knife for cutting long yak hair	rtsid gri
རྩིད་འཇམ	gyong po min pa'i long yak hair	rtsid 'jam
རྩིད་སྟན	rtsid pa'i nang tsangs can gyi gdan	rtsid stan
རྩིད་ཐག	yak-hair rope, rope of the long hair of the yak	rtsid thag
རྩིད་པ	ox hair, coarse hair	rtsid pa
རྩིད་པའི་ཕྱིང་པ	felt of long yak hair	rtsid pa'i phying pa
རྩིད་པས་བཟོས་པའི་སྐུད་པ	thread made of long yak hair	rtsid pas bzos pa'i skud pa
རྩིད་ཕྱར	yak-hair rope	rtsid phyar
རྩིད་ཕྱིང	felt	rtsid phying
རྩིད་བུ	kid	rtsid bu
རྩིད་མོ	two year old female goat	rtsid mo
རྩིབ	a spoke; lizard	rtsib
རྩིབ་ཁྱིམ	hut made of the ribs of larger animals	rtsib khyim
རྩིབ་ཁྱིམ་གང	a handful of ribs	rtsib khyim gang
རྩིབ་འབིགས	a great number	rtsib 'bigs
རྩིབ་མ	rib	rtsib ma
རྩིབ་མའི་བར་ནས	from between the ribs	rtsib ma'i bar nas
རྩིབ་གཟེར	pleurisy	rtsib gzer
རྩིབ་རི	Tsibri, in Central Tibet	rtsib ri
རྩིབ་ལོགས་ན་བ	pain about the ribs	rtsib logs na ba
རྩིབས	spoke	rtsibs
རྩིབས་ཀྱི་མི་ཁྱུད	rim of a wheel	rtsibs kyi mi khyud
རྩིབས་སྐྱེས	'born from the side of the torso', [Buddha]	rtsibs skyes
རྩིབས་སྒོ	1) zur khug dog po'i sgo; 2) spoke of a wheel (	rtsibs sgo
རྩིབས་སྟོང་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel w 1,000 spokes	rtsibs stong 'khor lo
རྩིབས་སྟོང་ཅན	{'khor lo chen po rtsibs stong can} a thousand-spoked Dharmawheel	rtsibs stong can
རྩིབས་གདོངས	ornamented ribs or spokes	rtsibs gdongs
རྩིབས་ལྡན	Mars	rtsibs ldan
རྩིབས་མ	spokes [R]	rtsibs ma
རྩིབས་རི	spurs of mountain radiating from a nucleus	rtsibs ri
རྩིབས་ལོག	/ logs - the side of the torso	rtsibs log
རྩིབས་ལོགས	side	rtsibs logs
རྩིབས་ལོགས་སྐྱེས	'born from the side of the torso', [Buddha]	rtsibs logs skyes
རྩིབས་ཤ	flesh/ meat on the side	rtsibs sha
རྩིམ	unstripped [bark]	rtsim
རྩིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	prince of medicinal oils, kind of tree	rtsi'i rgyal po
རྩིའུ	a plant, panicum italicum 2159	rtsi'u
རྩིས	1) calculation, account, estimation, reckoning; counting, numbering, numeration. 2) horoscope; 3) astrology. 4) to count, plan, reckon, calculate. 5) imp. of {rtsi ba}; spell it out! [in debate]	rtsis
རྩིས་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	rtsis kun las btus pa [by karma rang byung rdo rjes in the 5th sa rta year astr text]	rtsis kun las btus pa
རྩིས་ཀྱི	worth; {dngul srang stong gi rtsis kyi rgyu nom pa} objects worth one thousand silver sang	rtsis kyi
རྩིས་ཀྱི་སྐོར་འགོ་རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	eight heads or sections of astrology	rtsis kyi skor 'go rnam pa brgyad
རྩིས་ཀྱི་སྐོར་ལ་བདར་ཤ་བཅད་པ	inspect, examine, audit, inventory	rtsis kyi skor la bdar sha bcad pa
རྩིས་ཀྱི་ཁྲ་མ	table of figures or accounts	rtsis kyi khra ma
རྩིས་ཀྱི་དོན་གནད	unit for counting/ calculating rtsis kyi gtsug lag las bshad pa'i 'dre lnga CHN	rtsis kyi don gnad
རྩིས་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེའི་ལས་ལྔ	aanggi and + - x	rtsis kyi yi ge'i las lnga
རྩིས་ཀྱི་རིག་བྱེད	mathematics, arithmetic	rtsis kyi rig byed
རྩིས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལེན	practice of mathematics	rtsis kyi lag len
རྩིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཁང	Tsi Temple	rtsis kyi lha khang
རྩིས་ཀྱིས	find by computation	rtsis kyis
རྩིས་བཀུར	obedience	rtsis bkur
རྩིས་བཀུར་ཆེན་པོ	obedient	rtsis bkur chen po
རྩིས་བཀུར་བྱེད་པ	obey	rtsis bkur byed pa
རྩིས་ཁང	1) accounting office; 2) Tibetan govt main accounting office [sa mi nor phyugs 'bru dngul khral bogs sogs gang ci'i gtong yong rtsis rgyag	rtsis khang
རྩིས་ཁྲ	account book, ledger	rtsis khra
རྩིས་ཁྲ་གཏོང	send a bill/ account statement	rtsis khra gtong
རྩིས་ཁྲ་ཕུལ	submitted an account statement/ book/ ledger	rtsis khra phul
རྩིས་ཁྲ་འབུལ	submit an account statement/ book/ ledger	rtsis khra 'bul
རྩིས་ཁྲ་བཟོ	make/ compile an account statement/ book/ ledger	rtsis khra bzo
རྩིས་མཁན	astrologer, mathematician, accountant, cashier	rtsis mkhan
རྩིས་འཁོར	computer, calculating machine	rtsis 'khor
རྩིས་འཁྲིས	making over or returning the articles of dress, weapons, etc. to government treasury	rtsis 'khris
རྩིས་གྲྭ	mathematics school, school where mathematics is taught	rtsis grwa
རྩིས་གྲངས་ལོངས་པ	ji tsam dgos pa'i grangs tshad kha tsang ba,...'Bru rtsis grangs longs pa zhig	rtsis grangs longs pa
རྩིས་མགོ་ལྔའི་ཚུལ	the manner of the five principal headings	rtsis mgo lnga'i tshul
རྩིས་འགོ་བསྟུང་བ	rtsis 'phro dang 'das lo mang ba'i hor khongs mi 'byung ba dang, ri mo thung na stabs bde ba'i ched du yin, rtsis 'phro dang 'das lo'i thad la'ang ltos	rtsis 'go bstung ba
རྩིས་འགོ་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of explanation [of explaining gzhung 'chad thabs shig ste, bstan bcos rnams 'chad skabs, rtsom pa gang gis mdzad pa, khungs gang las btus pa, phyogs gang du gtogs pa, dgos ched gang ...	rtsis 'go yan lag lnga
རྩིས་འགྲོ	paying attention to, heeding	rtsis 'gro
རྩིས་འགྲོ་གཏོང	pay attention to, heed	rtsis 'gro gtong
རྩིས་རྒྱག	to calculate, add up	rtsis rgyag
རྩིས་རྒྱག་ཁྲེ་ཙི	slide rule	rtsis rgyag khre tsi
རྩིས་རྒྱག་པ	to calculate, reckon, compute	rtsis rgyag pa
རྩིས་རྒྱག་པའི་ཐབས	way of calculating	rtsis rgyag pa'i thabs
རྩིས་རྒྱག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	electronic computer/ calculator	rtsis rgyag 'phrul 'khor
རྩིས་རྒྱག་ལེགས་པར་ཟིན་པ	well done calculation	rtsis rgyag legs par zin pa
རྩིས་རྒྱབ	calculate, reckon, compute	rtsis rgyab
རྩིས་རྒྱབ་པ	to do accounts; take into account	rtsis rgyab pa
རྩིས་སྒྲ	shrieking	rtsis sgra
རྩིས་སྒྲོམ	abacus	rtsis sgrom
རྩིས་བརྒྱབ་པ	did the accounting	rtsis brgyab pa
རྩིས་བརྒྱབ་པའི་ཐོ་ཡིག	account [notes/ book], credit, ledger	rtsis brgyab pa'i tho yig
རྩིས་ངན	bad/ evil intention/ plan	rtsis ngan
རྩིས་ངན་རྒྱག	make bad/ evil plans	rtsis ngan rgyag
རྩིས་ངན་བྱེད	make bad/ evil plans	rtsis ngan byed
རྩིས་ཆེན	MG: valuable, dear, esteemed; va. -- byed to treasure, to value, to cherish, to hold dear. [mss]	rtsis chen
རྩིས་ཆེན་བྱེད	value, hold dear, esteem, treasure, cherish	rtsis chen byed
རྩིས་འཇོག	give importance/ consideration to	rtsis 'jog
རྩིས་འཇོག་བྱེད	adhere to, respect/ have regard for, pay attention to, obey [law opinion etc]	rtsis 'jog byed
རྩིས་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	adhere to, respect/ have regard for, pay attention to, obey [law opinion etc]	rtsis 'jog byed pa
རྩིས་འཇོག་མ་བྱེད	disregard, pay no attention to	rtsis 'jog ma byed
རྩིས་འཇོགས	adhere to, respect/ have regard for, pay attention to, obey [law opinion etc]	rtsis 'jogs
རྩིས་འཇོགས་བྱེད	adhere to, respect/ have regard for, pay attention to, obey [law opinion etc]	rtsis 'jogs byed
རྩིས་འཇོགས་བྱེད་པ	adhere to, respect/ have regard for, pay attention to, obey [law opinion etc]	rtsis 'jogs byed pa
རྩིས་འཇོགས་མ་བྱེད	disregard, pay no attention to	rtsis 'jogs ma byed
རྩིས་གཉེར	book keeper	rtsis gnyer
རྩིས་བཏང་པ	to appraise	rtsis btang pa
རྩིས་རྟ	Tibetan govt gzhis 'bangs sogs la 'tsho rgyur rtsis sprad pa'i horse	rtsis rta
རྩིས་ཐབས	way of calculating [Sgyur sgril gyi rtsis thabs,...Sgyur 'then gyi rtsis thabs]	rtsis thabs
རྩིས་ཐོ	account, credit; account book 2160	rtsis tho
རྩིས་མཐོང	esteem, deference, respect, importance, regard/ consideration for, thinking highly of, attaching importance to	rtsis mthong
རྩིས་མཐོང་ཆེན་པོ	esteem, deference, respect, importance, regard/ consideration for, thinking highly of, attaching importance to	rtsis mthong chen po
རྩིས་མཐོང་བྱེད	esteem, have deference/ respect/ importance/ regard/ consideration for, think highly of, attach importance to	rtsis mthong byed
རྩིས་མཐོང་མེད་པ་ཆགས	become unimportant	rtsis mthong med pa chags
རྩིས་དག	account cleared, account settled	rtsis dag
རྩིས་དག་ཕུད་པ	well done calculation	rtsis dag phud pa
རྩིས་དག་ཞུས་པ	well done calculation/ divination	rtsis dag zhus pa
རྩིས་དུ་བཀོད	get into order	rtsis du bkod
རྩིས་དེབ	ledger, account book, book about rtsis rigs	rtsis deb
རྩིས་དེབ་གཙོ་བོ	ledger	rtsis deb gtso bo
རྩིས་གདན	clothe, seat on which one does astrological calculations; seat on which one does astrological calculations	rtsis gdan
རྩིས་གདབ	judging	rtsis gdab
རྩིས་གདབ་གཏོང་བ	'dor len byed pa,...Khe gyong rtsis gdab mi gtong ba	rtsis gdab gtong ba
རྩིས་གདབ་པ	to evaluate/ make deliberate considerations; evaluation	rtsis gdab pa
རྩིས་གདབ་བྱེད	to give significance to / take notice of, evaluate	rtsis gdab byed
རྩིས་གདབ་བྱེད་པ	give significance to/ take notice of, evaluate	rtsis gdab byed pa
རྩིས་གདབ་བྲལ་བ	beyond making any considerations	rtsis gdab bral ba
རྩིས་གདབ་མེད་པ	unconcerned	rtsis gdab med pa
རྩིས་འདེབས	do calculation, accounting, mathematics, arithmetic, divination, astr	rtsis 'debs
རྩིས་འདེབས་པ	[do] calculation, accounting, mathematics, arithmetic, divination, astr	rtsis 'debs pa
རྩིས་འདེབས་པའི་ཁེ་གྱོང	accounted/ calculated profit and loss	rtsis 'debs pa'i khe gyong
རྩིས་རྡེལ	# grasping rde'u	rtsis rdel
རྩིས་ལྡན	planned/ calculated	rtsis ldan
རྩིས་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར	planned economy	rtsis ldan dpal 'byor
རྩིས་ནོར་ཐེབས་པ	miscalculate	rtsis nor thebs pa
རྩིས་གནས་གསར	Tsinesar, a place in upper Nyang	rtsis gnas gsar
རྩིས་པ	bookkeeper	rtsis pa
རྩིས་པོ་ཆེ	valuable, important, highly regarded	rtsis po che
རྩིས་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	make much of	rtsis po chen po
རྩིས་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	value	rtsis po chen po byed pa
རྩིས་པོ་ཆེའི་དངོས་པོ	valuable items rtsis po che'i dngos po rnams pha lam dang gser sogs mdzod du bdag gces put valuable items like gold and diamonds in the treasury	rtsis po che'i dngos po
རྩིས་དཔེ	book about rtsis rigs, account book, ledger	rtsis dpe
རྩིས་དཔོན	treasury officer and inspector, finance minister, finance secretary	rtsis dpon
རྩིས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་པ	hand/turn over, transfer/ give to others, explain, make clear	rtsis spyod byed pa
རྩིས་སྤྲད	handed/ turned over/ transferred authority/ wealth etc.	rtsis sprad
རྩིས་སྤྲད་པ	to assign	rtsis sprad pa
རྩིས་སྤྲོད	handed/ turned over/ transfered authority/ wealth etc. [,...Gzhung gi ca lag rtsis sprod byed pa,...Las 'gan rtsis sprod]	rtsis sprod
རྩིས་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	hand over, explain, make clear	rtsis sprod byed pa
རྩིས་སྤྲོད་རྩིས་ལེན	phar rtsis sprod pa and tshur rtsis len pa [,...Snga phyi 'khor res rtsis sprod rtsis len gyi gra sgrig 'thus tsang byed dgos]	rtsis sprod rtsis len
རྩིས་སྤྲོད་ལེན་གྱི་ཡིག་དེབ	ledger, account book	rtsis sprod len gyi yig deb
རྩིས་ཕུལ	handed/ turned over/ transferred authority/ wealth [h] rtsis phrug sngar rtsis khang gi slob grwa	rtsis phul
རྩིས་འཕྲེང	abacus	rtsis 'phreng
རྩིས་འཕྲོ	previous planetary date coursing stong par zhugs rjes nges pa slar brtsams pa nas up to the present rgyun mi 'chad &, dus dang yul longs la 'das many years's hor khongs mi 'byung ba'i ched du the m...	rtsis 'phro
རྩིས་བྱས་ནས་ངོ་ཤེས་པ	find by computation	rtsis byas nas ngo shes pa
རྩིས་བྱེད	value	rtsis byed
རྩིས་བྱེད་པ	make account	rtsis byed pa
རྩིས་བྲལ	{rtsis gdab bral ba} free of any evaulation; beyond judgment/ deliberate consideration	rtsis bral
རྩིས་འབུལ	hand/ turn over/ transfer authority/ wealth etc. [h]	rtsis 'bul
རྩིས་འབྲས	answer to a calculation, sum, product	rtsis 'bras
རྩིས་མ་འཇོག	disregard, pay no attention to	rtsis ma 'jog
རྩིས་མ་འཇོགས	disregard, pay no attention to	rtsis ma 'jogs
རྩིས་མེད	disrespect, contempt, disregard, not considering/ taking into account, throwing away	rtsis med
རྩིས་མེད་དུ་བསྐྱར	have disrespect/ contempt, disregard, not consider/ take into account, throw away, discard, scrap	rtsis med du bskyar
རྩིས་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	have disrespect/ contempt, disregard, not consider/ take into account, throw away, discard, scrap	rtsis med du gtong
རྩིས་མེད་པ	not realized the value	rtsis med pa
རྩིས་མེད་བྱེད	have disrespect/ contempt, disregard, not consider/ take into account, throw away, discard, scrap	rtsis med byed
རྩིས་ཚུལ	way of calculating	rtsis tshul
རྩིས་ཞིབ་པ	auditor 2161	rtsis zhib pa
རྩིས་ཞིབ་བྱེད་པ	audit	rtsis zhib byed pa
རྩིས་ཞུས་གཏོང	inspect, examine, audit, inventory	rtsis zhus gtong
རྩིས་ཞུས་གཏོང་བ	inspect, examine, audit, inventory	rtsis zhus gtong ba
རྩིས་ཞུས་བཏང་བ	inspected, examined, audited, inventoried	rtsis zhus btang ba
རྩིས་གཞི	1) unit for counting/ calculating; 2) plan (	rtsis gzhi
རྩིས་གཞི་ནོར་བུའི་བན་མཛོད	account code of the government of lhasa	rtsis gzhi nor bu'i ban mdzod
རྩིས་གཞི་ཕྱོགས་བསྒྲིགས	standard work on subsidies, pensions, allowances	rtsis gzhi phyogs bsgrigs
རྩིས་གཞི་རེའི་རྒྱ་ཁྱོན	unit of area rtsis gzhi re'i rgya khyon gyi thon tshad yield per unit of area	rtsis gzhi re'i rgya khyon
རྩིས་གཞི་རེའི་དུས་ཚོད	unit of time	rtsis gzhi re'i dus tshod
རྩིས་གཞུང	1) text book/ root text of astrology/ mathematics/ arithmetic/ accounting/ rtsis thabs; 2) account/ record book	rtsis gzhung
རྩིས་གཞུང་མཁས་པ་དགའ་བྱེད	astr text {mkhas pa dga' byed} [u ston rin chen grub kyis rab byung lnga pa'i me stag lor brtsams pa zhig]	rtsis gzhung mkhas pa dga' byed
རྩིས་གཞུང་ཉིན་བྱེད་སྣང་བ	astr text {nyin byed snang ba}	rtsis gzhung nyin byed snang ba
རྩིས་གཞོང	rtsis rdel sgrig snod kyi gzhong pa'i ming	rtsis gzhong
རྩིས་བཞེས	receive rtsis 'khri'i dngos po [h] --len]	rtsis bzhes
རྩིས་ཟིན	embrace	rtsis zin
རྩིས་ཟིན་པ	embrace w, make significant unpleasant, harsh, fierce, ugly	rtsis zin pa
རྩིས་རིག	astr, mathmatics bstan rtsis, dbyangs 'char gyi rtsis, 'byung rtsis etc [rig gnas chung ba lnga'i ya gyal zhig de la]	rtsis rig
རྩིས་རིག་མཁས་པ	book-keeper, accountant, mathematician, astr, diviner	rtsis rig mkhas pa
རྩིས་རིག་པ	book-keeper, accountant, mathematician, astr, diviner	rtsis rig pa
རྩིས་ལས	accounting, book keeping	rtsis las
རྩིས་ལས་འདས	countless	rtsis las 'das
རྩིས་ལས་འདས་པ	innumerable	rtsis las 'das pa
རྩིས་ལས་བྱེད	keep accounts/ books	rtsis las byed
རྩིས་ལུང	Tsilung	rtsis lung
རྩིས་ལེན	taking over, assuming control	rtsis len
རྩིས་ལེན་བསྐྱར་སྒྲིག	take over and reorganize	rtsis len bskyar sgrig
རྩིས་ལེན་བདག་སྤྲོད	take over the management, take charge of a situation	rtsis len bdag sprod
རྩིས་ལེན་འཚོལ	find a mathematical solution, solve a mathematical problem	rtsis len 'tshol
རྩིས་ཤེར	inspection, examination, audit, inventory	rtsis sher
རྩིས་ཤེར་གཏོང་བ	inspect, examine, audit, inventory	rtsis sher gtong ba
རྩིས་བཤེར	inspection, examination, audit, inventory	rtsis bsher
རྩིས་བཤེར་གཏོང་བ	inspect, examine, audit, inventory	rtsis bsher gtong ba
རྩིས་སུ་བཀོད	set in order	rtsis su bkod
རྩིས་སུ་ཕབ	numbered [them]	rtsis su phab
རྩིས་སུ་བྱ	understand the great importance of	rtsis su bya
རྩིས་སུ་བྱ་བ	Thrangu Rinpoche: regard as essential	rtsis su bya ba
རྩིས་སུ་སྦྱར་བ	accounts added up, count together, sum up	rtsis su sbyar ba
རྩིས་སློབ	master of astrology / astronomy	rtsis slob
རྩུབ	abusive, rough, harsh, forceful, savage, revile, abuse, rough[ness], crude, bad, poor, fierce, unpleasant	rtsub
རྩུབ་འགྱུར	{rtsub 'gyur} forest [R]	rtsub 'gyur
རྩུབ་འགྱུར་གྱི་ཚལ	park of armory, 1 of tshal bzhi	rtsub 'gyur gyi tshal
རྩུབ་འགྱུར་ཚལ	{rtsub 'gyur tshal charnel ground [R]	rtsub 'gyur tshal
རྩུབ་ངག	harsh words	rtsub ngag
རྩུབ་ཆགས	gegs 'tsub	rtsub chags
རྩུབ་ཆེ	stronger methods of medical treatment	rtsub che
རྩུབ་ཉམས	experience of roughness, unpleasant experience, discomfort experience	rtsub nyams
རྩུབ་ཐུང	rough and short	rtsub thung
རྩུབ་བདར	coarse sharpening stone	rtsub bdar
རྩུབ་རྡར	coarse whetstone	rtsub rdar
རྩུབ་ལྡན	Jupiter	rtsub ldan
རྩུབ་པ	1 of 5 great mountains of the western continent of godaniya, SA ri chen po lnga, revile, abuse, javelin, uneven, rough, rugged, coarse, rough in temper, biting in remarks	rtsub pa
རྩུབ་པོ	naughty, crude, acrid, brutal, coarse, harsh, hoarse, rigorous, rough, rude, rugged, stern	rtsub po
རྩུབ་པོའི་ཚིག	rough words, abusive language	rtsub po'i tshig
རྩུབ་པོའི་ཚིག་གིས་བསྡིགས་པ	threaten w harsh words	rtsub po'i tshig gis bsdigs pa
རྩུབ་དཔྱད་གསུམ	CHN	rtsub dpyad gsum
རྩུབ་སྤྱོད	crude behavior	rtsub spyod
རྩུབ་བ	be harsh	rtsub ba
རྩུབ་མོ	rough, rude, wild	rtsub mo
རྩུབ་མོའི་ཚིག	harsh words 2162	rtsub mo'i tshig
རྩུབ་མོའི་རེག་བྱ	officinal thorny plant	rtsub mo'i reg bya
རྩུབ་མོས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po zhig 'gog byed yul la ltos med kyi tshig rtsub brjod pa'i sgo nas 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig, 'gog pa'i rgyan gyi nang tsan zhig	rtsub mos 'gog pa
རྩུབ་ཚིག	rna bar gzan pa'i tshig	rtsub tshig
རྩུབ་རེག	coarse sensation	rtsub reg
རྩུབ་རླུང	rigid breathing, SA drag rlung	rtsub rlung
རྩུབ་ཤས་ཆེན་པོ	coarse and rough	rtsub shas chen po
རྩེ	focal-point; point, peak, tip, top, summit, peak, apex, to play, {rtsed}	rtse
རྩེ་སྐོར	Tibetan govt. gi rtse drung	rtse skor
རྩེ་ཁོག	{rtse khog} rdzong	rtse khog
རྩེ་ཁྲུ	measure of 18 inches from elbow to the end of middle finger	rtse khru
རྩེ་གྲ	deluxe	rtse gra
རྩེ་གྲས	the best 1s/ kind	rtse gras
རྩེ་གྲི	bayonet	rtse gri
རྩེ་གྲོགས	playmate, 1 of 4 ma ma	rtse grogs
རྩེ་དགའ	rtsed mo rtse ba'i feast/ party	rtse dga'
རྩེ་དགའ་མ	grown woman	rtse dga' ma
རྩེ་དགའི་བླ་མ	Kamadeva	rtse dga'i bla ma
རྩེ་དགའི་རི་བོ	E mt	rtse dga'i ri bo
རྩེ་དགར་རོལ	play about the mountain peaks	rtse dgar rol
རྩེ་དགུ	nine-pronged	rtse dgu
རྩེ་དགུ་གཏོར	the votive offering of the	rtse dgu gtor
རྩེ་དགུ་པ	9-pronged [vajra]	rtse dgu pa
རྩེ་མགྲོན	Tibetan govt rtse 'gag gi mgron gnyer [Rtse 'gag sngar rtse po ta la'i gzims chung 'gag nas t' la'i bla ma'i bka' rnams brgyud bsgrags &, gsham 'og gi snyan seng zhu 'bul byed mkhan office der mkha...	rtse mgron
རྩེ་འགོ	tip, top	rtse 'go
རྩེ་རྒོད	1) play, pranks, amusement; 2) [arch] lha 'bangs dang g.yog po (	rtse rgod
རྩེ་རྒྱལ	victorious summit, victorious mountain peak	rtse rgyal
རྩེ་སྒྲེང་བ	a scimitar blade [of a knife]	rtse sgreng ba
རྩེ་སྒྲོ	feathers [offering]	rtse sgro
རྩེ་བརྒྱད་དགོན་པ	Tsegyeh Gompa; the only monastery on the banks of Rakkas Tal Lake, at Kailash. [MR]	rtse brgyad dgon pa
རྩེ་ལྔ	five-pronged	rtse lnga
རྩེ་ཅན་མགྲིན	tson spang ma	rtse can mgrin
རྩེ་གཅིག	1) one-pointed, one-pointedly,	rtse gcig
རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	endeavor	rtse gcig sgrub pa la brtson pa
ཨིན་པྲཅཏིཅེ་ཨོནེ	pointedly	in practice one
རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས	single-minded application	rtse gcig sgrub tshugs
རྩེ་གཅིག་བསྒོམ	practiced singleheartedly	rtse gcig bsgom
རྩེ་གཅིག་བསྒོམ་པ	experience onepointedly	rtse gcig bsgom pa
རྩེ་གཅིག་ངང་གནས	abide onepointedly	rtse gcig ngang gnas
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཆུང་ངུ	lesser onepointedness	rtse gcig chung ngu
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཆེ་འབྲིང་ཆུང་གསུམ	the three levels of [the Mahamudra yoga of] one-pointedness, greater, medium, and lesser	rtse gcig che 'bring chung gsum
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཆེན་པོ	greater onepointedness	rtse gcig chen po
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཉམས་ལེན་ལ་འབུངས	apply yourself single-mindedly to practice	rtse gcig nyams len la 'bungs
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས་པ	having	rtse gcig nyams su blangs pa
པྲཅཏིཅེད་ཨོནེ	pointedly	practiced one
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏིང་འཛིན	1 pointed samadhi	rtse gcig ting 'dzin
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ	concentrate intensely, in	rtse gcig tu
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྐྱོང	one-pointedly sustain	rtse gcig tu skyong
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བསྒྲིམ	focus one-pointedly	rtse gcig tu bsgrim
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་དྲིལ	merge them all into onepoint; merge into on; roll them into one, bundle them into one, bring them to a point	rtse gcig tu dril
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	to rest / abide onepointedly / in one- pointedness, in single-mindedness	rtse gcig tu gnas pa
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	to be single-minded, concentrate on, one-pointedness, single pointed application. {sems gnas dgu} the eighth. Being one-pointed in effort in order to reach effortlessness]	rtse gcig tu byed pa
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་ཞོག	remain one-pointed 2163	rtse gcig tu zhog
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་སེམས་བཞག་པ	place the mind 1 pointedly	rtse gcig tu sems bzhag pa
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གསོལ་བ	supplicate onepointedly	rtse gcig tu gsol ba
རྩེ་གཅིག་གཏད	to concentrate onepointedly	rtse gcig gtad
རྩེ་གཅིག་དད་མོས	complete faith	rtse gcig dad mos
རྩེ་གཅིག་དད་མོས་བྱེད	have complete faith in	rtse gcig dad mos byed
རྩེ་གཅིག་དད་མོས་ཞུ	have complete faith in [h]	rtse gcig dad mos zhu
རྩེ་གཅིག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of onepointedness; the first of the four yogas of Mahamudra	rtse gcig rnal 'byor
རྩེ་གཅིག་པ	one-pronged [vajra]	rtse gcig pa
རྩེ་གཅིག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	TSE	rtse gcig pa'i rnal 'byor
རྩེ་གཅིག་པའི་སེམས	1-pointed mind, single-minded, concentrated mind TSE	rtse gcig pa'i sems
རྩེ་གཅིག་འབྲིང	medium 1-pointedness	rtse gcig 'bring
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཡིད	one-pointed concentration of mind	rtse gcig yid
རྩེ་གཅིག་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	was engaged singlemindedly in [a practice]	rtse gcig la gzhol ba
རྩེ་གཅིག་སེམས	1-pointed mind, singleminded, concentrated mind	rtse gcig sems
རྩེ་ཆུ	Tsechu River, below Thayenchi, in Domey	rtse chu
རྩེ་ཆུང	1) 'jing pa'i ming; 2) {rtse chung} bleeding nadi	rtse chung
རྩེ་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང	Tsechen Drölma Lhakhang, in Tsang	rtse chen sgrol ma lha khang
རྩེ་ཆེན་བྲག	Tsechen Drak, in Tsang	rtse chen brag
རྩེ་འཇིལ་བ	blunted, mgo gnon pa [blunted axe blade Sta re'i rtse 'jil ba brdegs pa,.. blunted anger.Khong khro'i rtse 'jil ba,...Nga rgyal gyi rtse bcil ba]	rtse 'jil ba
རྩེ་འཇེ	entertainment, amusement	rtse 'je
རྩེ་འཇོ	play, theatrical performance	rtse 'jo
རྩེ་འཇོ་བྱེད	amuse/ entertain 1self, play	rtse 'jo byed
རྩེ་གཉིས་ཁབ	a double-pointed needle	rtse gnyis khab
རྩེ་གཉེར	rtse po ta la'i mchod gtong 'don gshom office and title of people working there	rtse gnyer
རྩེ་ཏུ	1-pointedly	rtse tu
རྩེ་ཏོག	tip [of the peak] [Gdugs kyi rtse tog...Zhva mo'i rtse tog]	rtse tog
རྩེ་གཏུབ	trim	rtse gtub
རྩེ་གཏུབ་པ	prune	rtse gtub pa
རྩེ་སྟོན་མཁན	sharpener	rtse ston mkhan
རྩེ་ཐང	play ground, {rtse thang} town in Lhoka	rtse thang
རྩེ་ཐོག	highest point of a house [Thog brtsegs can gyi khang pa'i rtse thog la sdod pa]	rtse thog
རྩེ་མཐུན	in agreement	rtse mthun
རྩེ་མཐོ་ཤོས	climax	rtse mtho shos
རྩེ་དྲུང	government official	rtse drung
རྩེ་དྲུང་མི་དྲག	Tibetan govt rtse drung pha gzhis yod pa'i rigs	rtse drung mi drag
རྩེ་གདུང	pointed lance	rtse gdung
རྩེ་རྡུམ	great tibetan mountain range	rtse rdum
རྩེ་ནས	from the top	rtse nas
རྩེ་ནེ	[arch] tse ne ste, all	rtse ne
རྩེ་རྣམ་གན་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt nas gzhung zhabs monastic and lay, bla brang khag tsong rigs che khag bcas la $/ debt giving out and receiving office	rtse rnam gan las khungs
རྩེ་རྣོ་པོ་ཅན	barbed	rtse rno po can
རྩེ་རྣོ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	sharpen	rtse rno po bzo ba
རྩེ་པོ་ཏ་ལ	{rtse po ta la} palace [bod rang skyong ljongs lha sa'i ri bo po ta la'i thog tu yod cing, spyi lo'i dus rabs bdun par chos rgyal srong btsan skabs gnas der rgyal po'i pho brang zhig gsar du bzheng...	rtse po ta la
རྩེ་སྤྲོད	greeted as an equal, with equal respect	rtse sprod
རྩེ་ཕུད	select/ 1st offering	rtse phud
རྩེ་ཕོ་བྲང	Potala palace, {rtse po ta la}	rtse pho brang
རྩེ་ཕོ་བྲང་པོ་ཏཱ་ལ	Potala, the Summit Palace	rtse pho brang po tA la
རྩེ་ཕྱག	{rtse phyag} treasury ['phral bde phyag mdzod de, [of Tibetan govt bla phyag and rtse phyag two great treasuries] rtse pho brang du btsugs nas t' la'i bla ma'i nyer mkho 'phral du gtong mkhan &, bu...	rtse phyag
རྩེ་ཕྱག་ལས་ཁུངས	a treasury office in traditional Tibetan government	rtse phyag las khungs
རྩེ་ཕྲན	crown, head ornament	rtse phran
རྩེ་བ	love, play, frolic, take recreation, play games	rtse ba
རྩེ་བ་དང་བཞད	SA rol ba	rtse ba dang bzhad
རྩེ་བ་དང་བཞད་པ	amuse one's self	rtse ba dang bzhad pa
རྩེ་བ་ཟིན་པས	as the playing has ceased, as he has done playing 2164	rtse ba zin pas
རྩེ་བའི་མཚོ	ocean in the celestial realms	rtse ba'i mtsho
རྩེ་བའི་ས་གཞི	playground of srin po'i rgyal po	rtse ba'i sa gzhi
རྩེ་བྲ་གཏོང་བ	skip about	rtse bra gtong ba
རྩེ་བྲན	crest ornaments	rtse bran
རྩེ་བྲོ	playful dance [for enjoyment]	rtse bro
རྩེ་བྲོ་འཁྲབ་པ	dance a playful dance	rtse bro 'khrab pa
རྩེ་སྦྱོར	[sm. {rtse mo'i sbyor ba}	rtse sbyor
རྩེ་མ	frolic, playing	rtse ma
རྩེ་མ་ཁབ་རལ	needle case	rtse ma khab ral
རྩེ་མེད་པ	headless, without the top	rtse med pa
རྩེ་མོ	1) highest point, summit, peak, pinnacle 2) Summit. One of the 'four aspects of ascertainment' on the path of joining. climax [on the path of connection]; (phase of) peak experience;. 2). Peak Scri...	rtse mo
རྩེ་མོ་གུག	bent point	rtse mo gug
རྩེ་མོ་དགུ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	9-pronged/ pointed vajra	rtse mo dgu pa'i rdo rje
རྩེ་མོ་བརྒྱ་པ	mount sumeru	rtse mo brgya pa
རྩེ་མོ་ཅན	arrow kind of tree	rtse mo can
རྩེ་མོ་ཉིད	pointedness	rtse mo nyid
རྩེ་མོ་ཐོབ་རྒྱལ	mantrayana chos kyi che ba 'don pa'i chos skad cig	rtse mo thob rgyal
རྩེ་མོ་རྣམ་བཀོད	mahasukha-chakra at the top of the head {spyi gtsug bde chen 'khor lo}	rtse mo rnam bkod
རྩེ་མོ་རྣམ་པར་བཀོད	summit-arrayed chakra rtse mo rnam par bkod pa'i 'khor lo summit arrayed wheel	rtse mo rnam par bkod
རྩེ་མོ་རྣམ་པར་བཀོད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ་མཧསུཁ	chakra at the top of the head rtse mo snang ba mched pa'i ting nge 'dzin - the concentration of the increased clarity of summit [drod snang ba thob pa'i ting nge 'dzin de slar yang bsgoms pas sngar...	rtse mo rnam par bkod pa'i 'khor lo mahasukha
རྩེ་མོ་སྣོན	adding a pinnacle	rtse mo snon
རྩེ་མོ་བྱུང་རྒྱལ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, tsegyalgar dzogchen community in conway USA named by namkhai norbu rinpoche after this tantra, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translate...	rtse mo byung rgyal
རྩེ་མོ་བྱུང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ལུང	Spontaneous Summit Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	rtse mo byung rgyal gyi lung
རྩེ་མོ་རྩེ་བའི་སྟོན་མོ	sports day/ competition/ festival	rtse mo rtse ba'i ston mo
རྩེ་མོ་གསུམ	three-pointed	rtse mo gsum
རྩེ་མོའི་སྐབས	stage of summit [on the path of joining/ preparation]	rtse mo'i skabs
རྩེ་མོའི་མངོན་རྟོགས	full understanding at its summit	rtse mo'i mngon rtogs
རྩེ་མོའི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	the 8 qualities of	rtse mo'i chos brgyad
སུམམིཏ	joining	summit
ཐེ་ཨེཨིགྷཏ་qཨུཨལིཏིཨེས་ཨོཕ༹་སུམམིཏ	joining, {sbyor ba bzhi'i chos so drug, drod rtse sbyor}, {rtse mo'i sbyor}, {bzod pa'i rtse sbyor}, {chos mchog rtse sbyor}, {mthong lam rtse sbyor}, {sgom lam rtse sbyor}, {bar chad med pa'i rtse...	the eight qualities of summit
རྩེ་མོའི་སྦྱོར་བ	the joining of [having reached] the summit	rtse mo'i sbyor ba
རྩེ་མོའི་སྦྱོར་བའི་ཆོས་བརྒྱད	the 8 dharmas of jo	rtse mo'i sbyor ba'i chos brgyad
རྩེ་མོའི་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	the summit-joining of summit {bsal bya log sgrub} bsdus sgom rab tu gyur pa gong du rnam par 'phel ba'i cha gang zhig sbyor lam rtse mos bsdus pa'o, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses]	rtse mo'i rtse sbyor
རྩེ་མོར་གྱུར་པ	summits	rtse mor gyur pa
རྩེ་མོར་འགྲོ	reach/ attain the highest level/ summit/ become the best	rtse mor 'gro
རྩེ་མོར་འགྲོ་བ	advance, move forward	rtse mor 'gro ba
རྩེ་མོར་ཕྱིན་པ	which has reached the summit	rtse mor phyin pa
རྩེ་མོར་ཕྱིན་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	the joining of [having reached] the summit	rtse mor phyin pa'i sbyor ba
རྩེ་མོར་སོང	gone to the top, reached the climax	rtse mor song
རྩེ་མོར་སོན	best	rtse mor son
རྩེ་དམན	low, short	rtse dman
རྩེ་གཙིལ་བ	break off the point, to blunt	rtse gtsil ba
རྩེ་བཙུགས་པ	poke	rtse btsugs pa
རྩེ་ཚོགས་པའི་དགོན་པ	{rtse tshogs pa'i dgon pa} monastery	rtse tshogs pa'i dgon pa
རྩེ་མཚར	amused, jokingly, teasing, playful	rtse mtshar
རྩེ་མཚར་ལྟ་བུ	for amusement	rtse mtshar lta bu
རྩེ་མཚར་དུ་བླངས་པ	sang lightheartedly	rtse mtshar du blangs pa
རྩེ་ཞྭ	a certain kind of pointed monk's hat/ cap [grwa pa'i tshogs zhva sgro btsems ma] 2165	rtse zhwa
རྩེ་ཞབས	above and below, top and bottom	rtse zhabs
རྩེ་ཞིང་དགའ་ལྡན	fond of play	rtse zhing dga' ldan
རྩེ་ཞིང་དགའ་ལྡན་པ	jolly	rtse zhing dga' ldan pa
རྩེ་ཞིང་འཕྱོ་བ	gambols and skips	rtse zhing 'phyo ba
རྩེ་ཞིང་རོལ	{skyed mos tshal du rtse zhing rol lo} went to disport in the pleasure gardens	rtse zhing rol
རྩེ་ཞོལ	1) top and bottom; 2) rtse pho brang and Lhasa zhol [Gold: an area of Lhasa/ below?]	rtse zhol
རྩེ་གཞིལ་བ	[arch] mgo gnon pa'am nus pa nyams par byed pa	rtse gzhil ba
རྩེ་གཞུང	Tseshung, in Domey	rtse gzhung
རྩེ་འོག	1) rtse gra aang dang gi 'og ma ...Gos chen 'di rtse 'og tsam red; 2) Lus kyi gsang gnad cig ( rtse g.yogs - covered the very best; x {gos kyi rtse g.yogs} covered the very best clothing	rtse 'og
རྩེ་རག	irritable	rtse rag
རྩེ་རོལ	humor	rtse rol
རྩེ་ལ་སྒང	ming gzhan rtse sgang dang, {[kong po] rtse [la] [sgang} [bod rang skyong ljongs sman gling rdzong gi ming rnying]	rtse la sgang
རྩེ་ལེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་རང་གྲོལ	16O8-? Tsele Natsok Rangdröl, an eminent master of the Nyingma and Kagyü lineages and a disciple of Jatsön Nyingpo	rtse le sna tshogs rang grol
རྩེ་ཤོད	top and bottom	rtse shod
རྩེ་ཤོད་གཉིས	1) above and below, top and bottom; 2) t' la'i bla ma and his regent; 3) monks and lay officials in Tibetan govt (	rtse shod gnyis
རྩེ་ཤོད་དྲུང་འཁོར	monks and lay officials in Tibetan govt	rtse shod drung 'khor
རྩེ་ཤོད་ལས་ཁུངས	[all] Tibetan govt offices	rtse shod las khungs
རྩེ་སེམས་ཅན	gay, light-hearted, funloving	rtse sems can
རྩེ་སོར་ལྔ	above four clenched fingers thumb tip gyen 'greng gi tshigs sbyar ba'i distance	rtse sor lnga
རྩེ་གསིག་བསམ་གཏན་བསྒྲུབ	practice onepointed meditation	rtse gsig bsam gtan bsgrub
རྩེ་གསུམ	trident TSE	rtse gsum
རྩེ་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་པོ	King Trident, king of fish	rtse gsum rgyal po
རྩེ་གསུམ་ཅན	deity dbang phyug chen po	rtse gsum can
རྩེ་གསུམ་པ	a trident	rtse gsum pa
རྩེ་གསུམ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	trident mudra	rtse gsum phyag rgya
རྩེ་གསུམ་ཚེར་མ་ཅན་གྱི་རི	a thorncovered mountain with three jagged peaks	rtse gsum tsher ma can gyi ri
རྩེག	[p [b]rtsegs f brtseg rtseg! pile, stack [one on another], build up, put together	rtseg
རྩེག་པ	amass, be avaricious, arrange, lay one thing upon another, pile up, pulsate, gasp, successive action, automatic movement	rtseg pa
རྩེག་རྩེག་བྱེད་པ	1) price for buying and selling things chung ngu la yang rtsis che che byed pa; 2) have to add yang nas yang du [Spom tshod kyis nyo cha rgyag dus rtseg rtseg nan tan byas yong]	rtseg rtseg byed pa
རྩེག་རིམ	tier	rtseg rim
རྩེག་ལོག	ease, less trouble	rtseg log
རྩེགས	[p ! rtseg],, piled, stacked, built up, put together	rtsegs
རྩེགས་གཅིག	the height of one story of a building	rtsegs gcig
རྩེགས་གཅིག་ལྷག	more than one floor in size	rtsegs gcig lhag
རྩེགས་པ	row, stratum	rtsegs pa
རྩེགས་པའི་སྔོན	green growing on the side of an exposed wall	rtsegs pa'i sngon
རྩེང་པ	{rtseng pa, brtsengs pa, brtseng ba, rtsengs} trans. v	rtseng pa
རྩེང་པོ	short	rtseng po
རྩེང་པོར་བརྫེས་པའི་གོས་གྱོན་པ	wear short clothes	rtseng por brdzes pa'i gos gyon pa
རྩེང་བ	tuck up, truss up	rtseng ba
རྩེངས	rtseng!	rtsengs
རྩེད་སྐྱོད	merriment	rtsed skyod
རྩེད་གྲོགས	playmate	rtsed grogs
རྩེད་དགའ	merriment	rtsed dga'
རྩེད་དགའ་མ	darling, she who gives delight	rtsed dga' ma
རྩེད་འགྲན	tournament	rtsed 'gran
རྩེད་འགྲོས	rtsed mo rtse ba'i 'gro stangs	rtsed 'gros
རྩེད་རྒྱན	bet [on a game]	rtsed rgyan
རྩེད་རྒྱན་ཆེ་རིགས	high stakes gambling	rtsed rgyan che rigs
རྩེད་རྒྱན་ཆེ་རིགས་པ	high roller, highstakes gambler	rtsed rgyan che rigs pa
རྩེད་ཅན	sho	rtsed can
རྩེད་ཆས	toy, plaything, games, sports equipment	rtsed chas
རྩེད་ཆས་འཐོང་ཡས་འདུག	[they] sell sporting equipment	rtsed chas 'thong yas 'dug
རྩེད་ཆས་ཝ་ཝ	doll	rtsed chas wa wa
རྩེད་འཇོ	amusement	rtsed 'jo
རྩེད་འཇོ་ཅན	sporting	rtsed 'jo can
རྩེད་འཇོའི་ཆུ་བོ	river narbadda, name of indus	rtsed 'jo'i chu bo
རྩེད་སྟོན	sports day/ competition/ festival	rtsed ston
རྩེད་ཐང་དགོན་པ	{rtsed thang dgon pa} Monastery [founded in the 6th lcags yos year by t'a'i si tu byang chub rgyal mtshan]	rtsed thang dgon pa
རྩེད་ཐང་སྣེའུ་གདོང	county in 21th cent Tibet. 2166	rtsed thang sne'u gdong
རྩེད་ཐེར	woolen cloth from lho kha rtsed thang	rtsed ther
རྩེད་མདའ	rtsed mo rtse byed kyi mda' dang me mda'a,... Rtsed 'dun pa, rtsed mor dga' mkhan	rtsed mda'
རྩེད་སྣ	a fair	rtsed sna
རྩེད་པ	play	rtsed pa
རྩེད་པོ་ཞིག	chess	rtsed po zhig
རྩེད་མ	disagreeable feeling in the teeth produced by acids	rtsed ma
རྩེད་མོ་ཅན	playful, sportive, merry	rtsed mo can
རྩེད་མོ་རྩེ	to play	rtsed mo rtse
རྩེད་མོ་རྩེ་གྲོགས	playmate	rtsed mo rtse grogs
རྩེད་མོ་རྩེ་བ	to play, have fun, play games / to joke, tease	rtsed mo rtse ba
རྩེད་མོ་རྩེ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	toy, plaything	rtsed mo rtse byed kyi yo byad
རྩེད་མོ་རྩེ་རོགས	playmate	rtsed mo rtse rogs
རྩེད་མོ་ཞིག	cricket	rtsed mo zhig
རྩེད་མོའི་འགྲན་བསྡུར	sports competition	rtsed mo'i 'gran bsdur
རྩེད་མོའི་སྣ་ཁ	sports	rtsed mo'i sna kha
རྩེད་མོའི་ཚིག	playful word	rtsed mo'i tshig
རྩེད་མོའི་གཞི	playground	rtsed mo'i gzhi
རྩེད་མོའི་ར་བ	playground	rtsed mo'i ra ba
རྩེད་མོའི་ས	playground	rtsed mo'i sa
རྩེད་མོར་དགའ་པོ	playful	rtsed mor dga' po
རྩེད་ཚོགས་རུ་ཁག	sports team	rtsed tshogs ru khag
རྩེད་ཟླ	playmate	rtsed zla
རྩེད་རིགས་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	circus	rtsed rigs 'khrab ston
རྩེད་རོགས	playmate	rtsed rogs
རྩེད་རོལ	humor	rtsed rol
རྩེད་ས	playground	rtsed sa
རྩེད་ཨམ	shivering, cold shudder	rtsed am
རྩེན	frolic, play, sport	rtsen
རྩེན་གོག	calf of the leg	rtsen gog
རྩེན་གྱིས	precisely	rtsen gyis
རྩེན་གྱིས་ཞོག	rest precisely/ just so	rtsen gyis zhog
རྩེན་འཇོ	public amusement, popular pleasure	rtsen 'jo
རྩེན་དུས	day time	rtsen dus
རྩེན་གནས	1) playground, place for playing; 2) stage; 3) sky, space (	rtsen gnas
རྩེན་པ	theatrical performance, frolic, play, sun, jocund, careless, SA rtsed pa	rtsen pa
རྩེན་མིན	chinese name for yogacarya school	rtsen min
རྩེན་མུན	{rtsen mun} buddhist doctrine	rtsen mun
རྩེབས་ཡོང	slebs yong,...'Di gar rtsebs yong	rtsebs yong
རྩེའུ	thorn, shower	rtse'u
རྩེའུ་ཆུང	veins of the neck	rtse'u chung
རྩེར	[back of the] neck, atop	rtser
རྩེར་མཁན	player, gambler, gamester	rtser mkhan
རྩེར་འགྲོ	principal, chief, superior	rtser 'gro
རྩེར་རྒྱས	principal, chief, superior	rtser rgyas
རྩེར་བསྒྲེངས་པ	uplifted/ stretched out neck	rtser bsgrengs pa
རྩེར་འཆུས་པ	bent/ twisted neck	rtser 'chus pa
རྩེར་ཕྱིན	go to the top of	rtser phyin
རྩེར་ཕྱིབས	perfected, thorough, finished	rtser phyibs
རྩེར་བཞུགས་པ	sitting at the top, mounted high	rtser bzhugs pa
རྩེར་སོན	in front	rtser son
རྩེར་སོན་པ	1) excellent, top peak summit acme [Brda sprod rig pa'i shes yon rtser son pa'i slob ma]; 2) reach the peak of [Tsan rig lag rtsal yang rtser son pa]	rtser son pa
རྩེར་སོན་པའི་ལག་རྩལ་སྟོན	show 1's best form	rtser son pa'i lag rtsal ston
རྩེར་སོན་པའི་སློབ་མ	top student	rtser son pa'i slob ma
རྩེར་སོན་ཚན་རིག	pinnacle of science	rtser son tshan rig
རྩེར་སོན་ལུས་རྩལ་པ	master of sports [CH title]	rtser son lus rtsal pa
རྩེལ	(not in das)	rtsel
རྩེས	{rtsed}; imp. of {rtse ba}	rtses
རྩེས་པ	variant of brtses pa (DKB's LRCM). See rtse ba. [mss]	rtses pa
རྩེས་རང	Chirang Bhutan	rtses rang
རྩོ་མ་ཡིག	article	rtso ma yig
རྩོག	ugliness	rtsog
རྩོག་པ	pioneer, one gone ahead, SA brtsog pa	rtsog pa
རྩོགས་པ	[arch] 'phel ba	rtsogs pa
རྩོང	tuck up, SA rtseng ba	rtsong
རྩོད	rtsod pa'i skul tshig	rtsod
རྩོད་མཁས	skilled in debate	rtsod mkhas
རྩོད་མཁས་པ	earnest, zealous, clever in disputation	rtsod mkhas pa
རྩོད་གྱར	rtsod pa'i gnas su gyar ba,...Khrims khang la rtsod gyar ba	rtsod gyar
རྩོད་གྲ	debate school/ ground	rtsod gra
རྩོད་གྲྭ	debate school / ground	rtsod grwa
རྩོད་གྲིབ	sexual misconduct	rtsod grib
རྩོད་གླེང	1) lawsuit; 2) mutually decide a topic; 3) debate, dispute, quarrel, contention, argument (	rtsod gleng
རྩོད་གླེང་བྱེད	argue, debate, hold a debate/ discussion, dispute, quarrel	rtsod gleng byed
རྩོད་གླེང་བྱེད་པ	argue, dispute, debate	rtsod gleng byed pa
རྩོད་འགྱེད	struggle	rtsod 'gyed
རྩོད་རྒྱབ་པ	to argue	rtsod rgyab pa
རྩོད་སྒྲུབ	dialectics	rtsod sgrub
རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་དངོས་གཙོ་རིང་ལུགས	mar khe si dang aen ke si rnam gnyis kyis gsar gt gnang zhing, rtsod sgrub kyi rig pa spyad de rang byung khams dang, mi'i rigs kyi spyi tshogs, bsam blo'i 'phel tshul bcas spyir btang gi chos nyid...	rtsod sgrub kyi dngos gtso ring lugs
རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས་རིག་པ	dialectical logic	rtsod sgrub kyi gtan tshigs rig pa
རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	dialectics	rtsod sgrub kyi rig pa
རྩོད་སྒྲུབ་རིག་པ	dialectics	rtsod sgrub rig pa
རྩོད་ངག་དྲུག	six divisions of speech in debate	rtsod ngag drug
རྩོད་ཅན	the river Yamuna	rtsod can
རྩོད་ཅིང	arguing	rtsod cing
རྩོད་རྙོག	dispute	rtsod rnyog
རྩོད་རྙོག་ཅན	controversial	rtsod rnyog can
རྩོད་རྙོག་ཐག་གཅོད	arbitration	rtsod rnyog thag gcod
རྩོད་རྙོག་ཐུག	get into a dispute/ controversy/ argument/ conflict	rtsod rnyog thug
རྩོད་རྙོག་བྱུང	trouble	rtsod rnyog byung
རྩོད་རྙོག་ལང	get into a dispute/ controversy/ argument	rtsod rnyog lang
རྩོད་རྙོག་སློང	start/ create, cause a dispute/ controversy/ argument	rtsod rnyog slong
རྩོད་ཐུག	get into a dispute/ controversy/ argument/ conflict	rtsod thug
རྩོད་འཐེན	1) fight, struggle, quarrel; 2) legal defense, plea for (	rtsod 'then
རྩོད་འཐེན་བྱེད	1) fight, struggle, quarrel; 2) conduct a legal defense, plea for (	rtsod 'then byed
རྩོད་དུང་བ	disputable	rtsod dung ba
རྩོད་དུས	the kalpa of strife	rtsod dus
རྩོད་དུས་ཀྱི་སྙིགས་མ་ལྔ	the five degenerations / corruptions of the age of strife / strife-filled age, {tshe'i snyigs ma}, {dus kyi}, {nyon mongs pa'i}, {lta ba'i}, {sems can gyi snyigs ma}; the five degeneracies / corrup...	rtsod dus kyi snyigs ma lnga
རྩོད་དོན	civil case/ dispute/ suit	rtsod don
རྩོད་དོན་སྐོར་གྱི་ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	civil law	rtsod don skor gyi khrims lugs
རྩོད་དོན་ཁྱད་གཞི	civil case	rtsod don khyad gzhi
རྩོད་དོན་གཏུག་བཤེར	hearing/ trial of a civil case	rtsod don gtug bsher
རྩོད་དོན་གཏུག་བཤེར་གཏོང	hear/ try of a civil case	rtsod don gtug bsher gtong
རྩོད་དོན་གཏུག་བཤེར་བྱེད	hear/ try of a civil case	rtsod don gtug bsher byed
རྩོད་དོན་བྱེད	institute a civil case/ dispute/ suit	rtsod don byed
རྩོད་ལྡན	{rtsod ldan gyi dus} age of strife (kaliyuga)	rtsod ldan
རྩོད་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས	the age of strife TSE	rtsod ldan gyi dus
རྩོད་ལྡན་སྙིགས་མ	degenerate Age of strife	rtsod ldan snyigs ma
རྩོད་ལྡན་དུས	the strife-filled [age], [age] of strife, the age of degeneration [sangs rgyas pa'i bshad srol ltar 'dzam gling mi rnams kyis chos dang, nor, 'dod pa, bde ba bzhi las cha gsum nyams nas cha gcig la...	rtsod ldan dus
རྩོད་ལྡོག	the Vigraha-vyavartani by Nagarjuna, {rigs tshogs drug}, {rtsod pa bzlog pa / rtsod bzlog}	rtsod ldog
རྩོད་གནས	debate ground/ topic	rtsod gnas
རྩོད་པ	furious	rtsod pa
རྩོད་པ་སྐྱོན་པ	to argue, debate	rtsod pa skyon pa
རྩོད་པ་ཁོ་ན	was harassing him continually	rtsod pa kho na
རྩོད་པ་རྒྱག་པ	argue, debate, dispute	rtsod pa rgyag pa
རྩོད་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	argue	rtsod pa rgyab pa
རྩོད་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to argue, debate	rtsod pa brgyab pa
རྩོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	contention, great quarrel	rtsod pa chen po
རྩོད་པ་ཐུག	get into a dispute/ argument/ quarrel/ debate	rtsod pa thug
རྩོད་པ་ཐུག་པ	to conflict with	rtsod pa thug pa
རྩོད་པ་རྣམས	subject of disputation	rtsod pa rnams
རྩོད་པ་པོ	disputants, debaters	rtsod pa po
རྩོད་པ་སྤང	clearing away or refuting others' objections	rtsod pa spang
རྩོད་པ་སྤོང་པ	dispelling objections	rtsod pa spong pa
རྩོད་པ་སྤོང་བ	dispelling objections, rejection of controversy/ objections [gzhan gyis rgol ba'am dgag pa btang ba der lan gyis gnod pa sel ba'o]	rtsod pa spong ba
རྩོད་པ་ཕྱིར་བཅོས་ཀྱི་གཞི	disputes among the sangha phal cher chos phyogs su zhi bar byed pa'i rim pa ste zhi byed kyi chos bdun rnams so	rtsod pa phyir bcos kyi gzhi
རྩོད་པ་ཕྱིར་བཅོས་ཀྱི་གཞི་གསུམ	las kyi rtsod pa zhi byed dang, 'khor lo'i rtsod pa zhi byed dang, de las gzhan pa'i rtsod pa zhi byed de gsum mo ['dul ba gzhi bcu bdun las, phyir bcos kyi gzhi bdun gyi nang gses]	rtsod pa phyir bcos kyi gzhi gsum
རྩོད་པ་བྱས་པ	harassed	rtsod pa byas pa
རྩོད་པ་བྱེད	dispute, argue, quarrel, debate	rtsod pa byed
རྩོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	dispute, argue, quarrel, debate rtsod pa byed pa'i rnam gzhag gsum CHN	rtsod pa byed pa
རྩོད་པ་མེད་པ	undisputed, unquestionable, beyond dispute	rtsod pa med pa
རྩོད་པ་སྨྲ་བ	provoke, quarrel by words	rtsod pa smra ba
རྩོད་པ་སྨྲ་བ་པོ་གསུམ	the three participants in a debate	rtsod pa smra ba po gsum
རྩོད་པ་བཛེས་པའི་རྒྱན་བདུན	CHN	rtsod pa bdzes pa'i rgyan bdun
རྩོད་པ་ཞི་བ	settling their quarrels and bring peace to them	rtsod pa zhi ba
རྩོད་པ་ཞི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བདུན	the 7 dharmas pacifying debate/ quarrels	rtsod pa zhi byed kyi chos bdun
རྩོད་པ་བཞི	the four rtsod pa [in the vinaya 1 'gyed phyir rtsod pa, two mi gdams pa'i.., three ltung ba'i .., four bya ba'i...]	rtsod pa bzhi
རྩོད་པ་བཟློག་པ	1) to refute accusations / attacks / criticism. 2) the -- {ldog} by Nagarjuna, {rigs tshogs drug}	rtsod pa bzlog pa
རྩོད་པ་རིགས་པ	rtsod pa rigs pa	rtsod pa rigs pa
རྩོད་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	one involved in dispute or litigation	rtsod pa la zhugs pa
རྩོད་པ་ཤོར	get into a dispute/ argument/ quarrel/ debate	rtsod pa shor
རྩོད་པ་ལྷུར་ལེན	rtsod pa dang du len pa,...Don la bdar sha mi gcod par tshig 'khri'i rtsod pa kho na lhur len pa la snying po rang med	rtsod pa lhur len
རྩོད་པ་ལྷུར་ལེན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	inviting controversy	rtsod pa lhur len pa'i lta ba
རྩོད་པའ་དཔེ་གསུམ	CHN	rtsod pa' dpe gsum
རྩོད་པའི་སྐྱོན་གསུམ	don blo sgra skyon nam, ngan gyo dang, khyad gsod, yid 'khrugs bcas gsum mo	rtsod pa'i skyon gsum
རྩོད་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་གསུམ	CHN	rtsod pa'i grub mtha' gsum
རྩོད་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	the four causes of dispute	rtsod pa'i rgyu bzhi
རྩོད་པའི་རྒྱུ་གསུམ	the three causes of quarrel/ debate	rtsod pa'i rgyu gsum
རྩོད་པའི་རྒྱུད་བཞི	CHN	rtsod pa'i rgyud bzhi
རྩོད་པའི་དུས	the time of strife [bskal pa gsum ldan gyi dus]	rtsod pa'i dus
རྩོད་པའི་དཔེ་དྲུག	CHN	rtsod pa'i dpe drug
རྩོད་པའི་འབྲས་བུ་དྲུག	CHN	rtsod pa'i 'bras bu drug
རྩོད་པའི་འབྲས་གསུམ	CHN	rtsod pa'i 'bras gsum
རྩོད་པའི་རྩ་བ་ཉེར་ལེན་བཞི	the four perpetuating roots of dispute	rtsod pa'i rtsa ba nyer len bzhi
རྩོད་པའི་གཞི	ground/ subject/ cause/ matter of dispute	rtsod pa'i gzhi
རྩོད་པའི་རིགས་པ	Treatise on Disputation,	rtsod pa'i rigs pa
ཐེ་Vཨད	nyaya [work on logic by Dharmakirti, {tshad ma sde bdun}	the Vada
རྩོད་པའི་ཤིང	ba ru ra tree	rtsod pa'i shing
རྩོད་པའི་ས་ཡུལ	property conflicts	rtsod pa'i sa yul
རྩོད་པས་ཐུབ་པ	to hold one's own in debate, unassailable	rtsod pas thub pa
རྩོད་དཔྱོད	examination/ investigation of a dispute/ quarrel	rtsod dpyod
རྩོད་སྤང	refuting criticism	rtsod spang
རྩོད་སྤོང	eliminating objections	rtsod spong
རྩོད་བྱེད་མ	tree pongamia glabra	rtsod byed ma
རྩོད་བྲལ	indisputable, beyond dispute	rtsod bral
རྩོད་མི་དགོས་པ	indisputable, beyond dispute	rtsod mi dgos pa
རྩོད་མེད	cannot be denied/ faulted [Phan tsun rtsod med yin] indisputable, beyond dispute 2169	rtsod med
རྩོད་སྨྲ་བ	provoke, quarrel by words	rtsod smra ba
རྩོད་འཛིང	'thab 'dzing,...Drag po'i rtsod 'dzing,...'Khrun thag gcod dka' ba'i rtsod 'dzing	rtsod 'dzing
རྩོད་ཞུ་ཞིབ་ཉན	hearing	rtsod zhu zhib nyan
རྩོད་ཞུ་ཞིབ་ཉན་བྱེད	hold a hearing	rtsod zhu zhib nyan byed
རྩོད་གཞི	subject of disputation, basis of contention, subject, issue	rtsod gzhi
རྩོད་གཞི་ཅན	'thab dang rtsod gzhi can	rtsod gzhi can
གྱི་ནོར	disputed wealth	gyi nor
རྩོད་ཟིང	rtsod pa mang ba'i zang zing,...Mgo rnyog che ba'i rtsod zing thag gcod dka'	rtsod zing
རྩོད་ཟླ	rtsod ya ste, rtsod pa rgyag mkhan kha gtad	rtsod zla
རྩོད་ཟློག	name of text rtsod bzlog} - Vigraha-vyavartani [by nagarjuna, {rigs tshogs drug}	rtsod zlog
རྩོད་བཟློག	{rtsod ldog/ bzlog} rtsod bzlog {rtsod ldog/ bzlog}[Nagarjuna's "refutation of objections"]	rtsod bzlog
རྩོད་འོས་པ	debatable	rtsod 'os pa
རྩོད་ཡིག	1) phan tsun rtsod pa byas pa'i yi ge; 2) Tshad ma sogs rtsod sgrub kyi yig cha (	rtsod yig
རྩོད་རིག	the art of debate, logic	rtsod rig
རྩོད་རིགས	reasoning of disputation, art of debate, logic	rtsod rigs
རྩོད་ལ་སྡང་བ་བྱུང་ཞིང	because they so hated violence	rtsod la sdang ba byung zhing
རྩོད་ལང	get into a dispute/ controversy/ argument	rtsod lang
རྩོད་ལན	debate, disputation	rtsod lan
རྩོད་ལན་འདེབས	give an answer in a debate/ dispute	rtsod lan 'debs
རྩོད་ལེན	1) fight, struggle, quarrel; 2) legal defense, plea for (	rtsod len
རྩོད་ལེན་བྱེད	1) fight, struggle, quarrel; 2) conduct a legal defense, plea for (	rtsod len byed
རྩོད་ཤགས	kha rtsod kyi shags,...Gyod ya phan tsun rtsod shags rgyag res byed pa	rtsod shags
རྩོད་ཤེར	hearing of a dispute/ case	rtsod sher
རྩོད་གཤགས་འགྱེད་པའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning of disputation, art of debate, logic	rtsod gshags 'gyed pa'i rigs pa
རྩོད་བཤེར	hearing of a dispute/ case	rtsod bsher
རྩོན	nausea, vomiting	rtson
རྩོམ	factor, instance, flux, composition, to author, compose	rtsom
རྩོམ་མཁན	author	rtsom mkhan
རྩོམ་མཁན་མཐུན་ཚོགས	writer's union/ association	rtsom mkhan mthun tshogs
རྩོམ་རྒྱག	compose, write	rtsom rgyag
རྩོམ་རྒྱག་མཁན	writer	rtsom rgyag mkhan
རྩོམ་རྒྱུགས	rtsom tshig legs nyes rtog byed kyi rgyugs	rtsom rgyugs
རྩོམ་སྒྱུར	write and tr	rtsom sgyur
རྩོམ་སྒྱུར་གཉིས་ཀར་མཁས་པ	skilled at both writing/ composition and tr	rtsom sgyur gnyis kar mkhas pa
རྩོམ་སྒྱུར་བྱེད	write and tr	rtsom sgyur byed
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག	[write &] edit	rtsom sgrig
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་ཁང	editorial department/ board	rtsom sgrig khang
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་གི	editorial	rtsom sgrig gi
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་པ	editor, compiler	rtsom sgrig pa
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	[write &] edit	rtsom sgrig byed
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	[write &] edit	rtsom sgrig byed pa
རྩོམ་སྒྲིབ་བྱེད་པོ	editor	rtsom sgrib byed po
རྩོམ་བཅོས	edit	rtsom bcos
རྩོམ་བཅོས་རྒྱག	edit	rtsom bcos rgyag
རྩོམ་རྙིང	old/ ancient/ classical writings/ literature	rtsom rnying
རྩོམ་བཏུས	selected works	rtsom btus
རྩོམ་སྟངས	writing/ literary style	rtsom stangs
རྩོམ་ཐིང	short literary pieces/ stories/ articles/ poems	rtsom thing
རྩོམ་བསྡུད	anthology	rtsom bsdud
རྩོམ་བསྡུས་ཕྱོགས་བསྡེབས	anthology	rtsom bsdus phyogs bsdebs
རྩོམ་པ	1) (Tha dad pa) brtsams pa, brtsam pa, rtsoms,, ; 1) write/ compose a pecha, composition [R]; 2) undertake/ begin a job/ task [R]; 3) Tshig rgyan gyi rtsom pa,...Gsung rtsom gces bsdus,...Go bde'i ...	rtsom pa
རྩོམ་པ་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to make extensive preparations	rtsom pa rgyas par byed pa
རྩོམ་པ་ཐད	all you do	rtsom pa thad
རྩོམ་པ་དང་པོ	the first beginning	rtsom pa dang po
རྩོམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	various undertakings	rtsom pa sna tshogs
རྩོམ་པ་པོ	writer, author, composer	rtsom pa po
རྩོམ་པ་པོ་གྲགས་ཆེན	famous writer/ author/ composer 2170	rtsom pa po grags chen
རྩོམ་པ་པོའི་གཏམ	writer's/ editors note	rtsom pa po'i gtam
རྩོམ་པ་པོའི་དབང་ཆ	copy right	rtsom pa po'i dbang cha
རྩོམ་པ་ལ་མཁས	elegant composer	rtsom pa la mkhas
རྩོམ་པ་ལ་མཁས་པ	clever writer	rtsom pa la mkhas pa
རྩོམ་པ་ལ་མཁས་པར	skilled at composition, writer	rtsom pa la mkhas par
རྩོམ་པའི་ཡི་གེ	essay, article, written work	rtsom pa'i yi ge
རྩོམ་པར་མཁས་པ	clever writer, elegant composer	rtsom par mkhas pa
རྩོམ་པར་དམ་བཅའ་བ	pledge to [complete] the composition	rtsom par dam bca' ba
རྩོམ་པར་མཛད	to begin to do a work	rtsom par mdzad
རྩོམ་འཕྲོ	elucidation, composition, exposition	rtsom 'phro
རྩོམ་བྱེད	compose, write, make, create, cause, commence, start, begin, cultivate, apply, work out, engineer	rtsom byed
རྩོམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་གསུམ	the three faults of composition [R]	rtsom byed kyi skyon gsum
རྩོམ་བྲིས	essay writing	rtsom bris
རྩོམ་བྲིས་བཅོས་སྒྲིབ་བྱེད་པ	edit	rtsom bris bcos sgrib byed pa
རྩོམ་མཛོད	library	rtsom mdzod
རྩོམ་ཞིབ	edit	rtsom zhib
རྩོམ་ཞིབ་བྱེད	edit	rtsom zhib byed
རྩོམ་གཞི	1) basis/ topic/ cause of composing a dpe cha/ instigating a task etc bcol sa [R]; 2) place for performing a job/ task [R]; 3) fundamental basis of arising [R] basic component/ material	rtsom gzhi
རྩོམ་གཞིས	literary style	rtsom gzhis
རྩོམ་ཡིག	essay, article, written work	rtsom yig
རྩོམ་ཡིག་གི་སྙིང་པོ་བསྡུས་པ	summarize the essence of [an essay, article, written work]	rtsom yig gi snying po bsdus pa
རྩོམ་ཡིག་གཅིག	a piece of writing, article, sheet	rtsom yig gcig
རྩོམ་ཡིག་གཅེས་བསྡུས	summarize the essence of [an essay, article, written work], anthology of written works	rtsom yig gces bsdus
རྩོམ་ཡིག་འབྲི་བ	write, compose [an essay, article, written work]	rtsom yig 'bri ba
རྩོམ་ཡིག་རྩག་རྩིག	miscellaneous writings	rtsom yig rtsag rtsig
རྩོམ་ཡོན	author's fees/ royalties	rtsom yon
རྩོམ་རིག	literature	rtsom rig
རྩོམ་རིག་གི	literary	rtsom rig gi
རྩོམ་རིག་གི་སྐད་ཆ	literary language	rtsom rig gi skad cha
རྩོམ་རིག་གི་བཞག་པ	literary heritage	rtsom rig gi bzhag pa
རྩོམ་རིག་གི་རིགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས	theory of literature	rtsom rig gi rigs pa'i gzhung lugs
རྩོམ་རིག་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	literature and art	rtsom rig sgyu rtsal
རྩོམ་རིག་པ	writer, the art/ science of composition, writing, literature, man of letters, scholar	rtsom rig pa
རྩོམ་རིག་གསར་པ	modern literature	rtsom rig gsar pa
རྩོམ་རིགས	literary work	rtsom rigs
རྩོམ་རིང	full length literary work	rtsom ring
རྩོམ་ལུགས	literary style	rtsom lugs
རྩོམས	begin, SA rtsom pa	rtsoms
རྩོམས་ཆོས	composition	rtsoms chos
རྩོམས་ཤིག	compose	rtsoms shig
རྩོར་པོ་གནང་རོགས་གནག	please do it quickly [h]	rtsor po gnang rogs gnag
རྩོལ	endeavor, take pains to do; exertion, effort; imp. of {rtsol ba}; sgrub persevere to acquire; persevere	rtsol
རྩོལ་ཀྱན་མི་གྲུབ	even if [you] try it won't be accomplished	rtsol kyan mi grub
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ	effort, exertion. to exert oneself, be diligent, effort and fabrication; effort and achievement, strive for or achieve, effort or striving	rtsol sgrub
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond establish by effort and cause and effect	rtsol sgrub rgyu 'bras las 'das pa
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་དང་བྲལ	suspend all effort	rtsol sgrub dang bral
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་དང་བྲལ་བ	suspend effort	rtsol sgrub dang bral ba
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	making an effort, exert 1self, be diligent * [working/truing/ endeavoring to] achieve/ attain	rtsol sgrub byed
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་མི་དགོས	{rtsol zhing sgrub mi dgos} there is no need for either effort or anything to be achieved; without requiring effort or needing ot be achieved	rtsol sgrub mi dgos
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་མི་བྱ་བ	uninvolved in striving	rtsol sgrub mi bya ba
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་མེད་པ	there is nothing to seek or achieve/ be sought or achieved	rtsol sgrub med pa
རྩོལ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་འདས་པ	that transcends effort and pursuit	rtsol sgrub las 'das pa
རྩོལ་ཅག	mgyogs rtsal	rtsol cag
རྩོལ་ཅག་གིས	...Las ka'i 'char gzhi mgyogs	rtsol cag gis
རྩོལ་བཅགས	going, walking, exercise	rtsol bcags
རྩོལ་བཅགས་བྱེད	go, walk, exercise	rtsol bcags byed
རྩོལ་བཅས	w effort, deliberate	rtsol bcas
རྩོལ་བཅས་ཀྱི་རྟོག་པ	thoughts of struggle	rtsol bcas kyi rtog pa
རྩོལ་བཅས་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དྲན་པ	Mindfulness of deliberate attention. Artificial or forced mindfulness	rtsol bcas 'du byed kyi dran pa
རྩོལ་འཆག	going, walking, exercise	rtsol 'chag
རྩོལ་འཆག་བྱེད	go, walk, exercise	rtsol 'chag byed
རྩོལ་བསྟུན་ཐོབ་སྤྲོད	to each according to his work	rtsol bstun thob sprod
རྩོལ་འདོན	las shugs skyed pa,...Tsan rig gi shes yon khong du chud rgyu rtsol 'don byed pa,...Dmag don rtsol 'don gyis bslab pa	rtsol 'don
རྩོལ་པོ	quick [h]	rtsol po
རྩོལ་བ	endeavour, take pains, zeal, exertion, diligence, bestow, 1 of lam yan lag brgyad, effort	rtsol ba
རྩོལ་བ་སྐྱེད་པ	use diligence	rtsol ba skyed pa
རྩོལ་བ་བསྐྱེད	make effort	rtsol ba bskyed
རྩོལ་བ་གློད་པ	to release effort	rtsol ba glod pa
རྩོལ་བ་མངོན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	to concretely apply effort	rtsol ba mngon du byed pa
རྩོལ་བ་ཅན	with effort, deliberate, diligent, painstaking	rtsol ba can
རྩོལ་བ་ཆེན་པོས་བྱེད	do w great zeal	rtsol ba chen pos byed
རྩོལ་བ་མེད་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡི་བྱེད	effortless application. lhun gyis grub par 'jug pa'i yid byed	rtsol ba med par 'jug pa'i yi byed
རྩོལ་བ་མེད་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	effortless application	rtsol ba med par 'jug pa'i yid byed
རྩོལ་བ་ཡང་དག	right effort [one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} = the eightfold noble path]	rtsol ba yang dag
རྩོལ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the sought-for truth	rtsol ba'i chos nyid
རྩོལ་བའི་ནད	disease of effort, disease of striving, affliction of effort	rtsol ba'i nad
རྩོལ་བའི་རླུང	force of prana	rtsol ba'i rlung
རྩོལ་བར	diligently, zealously	rtsol bar
རྩོལ་བྱུང	not naturally occurring	rtsol byung
རྩོལ་བྱེད་པ	make an effort, exert 1self, work/ endeavor/ try for	rtsol byed pa
རྩོལ་བྲལ	to transcend effort, without effort, effortless	rtsol bral
རྩོལ་མེད	effortless; effortless state; without effort; effortlessness; without / beyond effort, unforced, spontaneous	rtsol med
རྩོལ་མེད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the doctrine of the effortless state: Dzogchen	rtsol med kyi bstan pa
རྩོལ་མེད་འཇོག	leave in an effortless state	rtsol med 'jog
རྩོལ་མེད་བསྟན་པ	{sangs rgyas thams cad kyi rtsol med bstan pa'i bdag po}	rtsol med bstan pa
རྩོལ་མེད་དུ་འབྱུང་བ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	spontaneously accomplishing whatever emerges w/o effort	rtsol med du 'byung ba lhun grub
རྩོལ་མེད་དུ་འཚང་རྒྱ་བའི་ཆོས	the Dharma through which Buddhahood can be attained without effort rtsol med dbyig dang ldan par mdzad bestow on them this jewel free of all rtsol med 'bras bu a ti'i theg pa lhun gyis	rtsol med du 'tshang rgya ba'i chos
ཅིག་གིས་སངས་རྒྱས་སོ	in a single instant, he attained Buddhahood at the level of the effortless Great Perfection	cig gis sangs rgyas so
རྩོལ་མེད་རང་བྱུང་གི་དགོངས་པ	the spontaneous, effortless realization	rtsol med rang byung gi dgongs pa
རྩོལ་མེད་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	effortless spontaneous presence/ self-existence{rtsol po guick[ly], soon [h]	rtsol med lhun grub
རྩོལ་མེད་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་བསྟན་པ	the effortless Ati-yoga doctrine	rtsol med a ti yo ga'i bstan pa
རྩོལ་ཞིང་སྒྲུབ་མི་དགོས	there is no need for either effort or anything to be achieved; without requiring effort or needing ot be achieved	rtsol zhing sgrub mi dgos
རྩོལ་ཞིང་བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་མེད་པ	there is nothing to strive for or achieve	rtsol zhing bsgrub tu med pa
རྩོལ་ཞིང་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོས་བཅུ	the 10 dharmas of effort and establishing	rtsol zhing bsgrub pa'i chos bcu
རྩོལ་རླུང	fierce prana which circulates in the lower part	rtsol rlung
རྩོལ་ཤུགས	power of effort/ exertion, energy, drive, zeal	rtsol shugs
རྩོལ་ཤུགས་རྒྱག	intensify	rtsol shugs rgyag
སྩད་པ	assemblage	stsad pa
སྩལ	bestow [p stol]	stsal
སྩལ་དུ་གསོལ	I ask you to give me	stsal du gsol
སྩལ་པ	to bestow	stsal pa
སྩེལ་བ	SA sel ba	stsel ba
སྩོགས་པ	neighbor	stsogs pa
སྩོལ	bestow	stsol
སྩོལ་ཕོད	strength, capability	stsol phod
སྩོལ་བ	give, grant, bestow, confer, restore	stsol ba
སྩོལ་བར་མཛད	bestow	stsol bar mdzad
སྩོལ་མཛད	who bestowed	stsol mdzad
བརྩགས་པ	[arch] 1) evil deeds; 2) threaten, menace	brtsags pa
བརྩགས་ཤད	carding comb	brtsags shad
བརྩང་གཏོར	clean	brtsang gtor
བརྩང་རྩ	quiver [archery]	brtsang rtsa
བརྩངས	short robe or dress	brtsangs
བརྩད	[will] dispute[d]/ quarrel[ed] [f p rtsod pa] quarrel, argument	brtsad
བརྩད་གཅོད	investigation, inquiry, examination	brtsad gcod
བརྩད་གཅོད་བྱེད	investigate, inquire, examine	brtsad gcod byed
བརྩད་ཆོད	investigating	brtsad chod
བརྩད་པ	ft. of {rtsod pa}; pf. of {rtsod pa}	brtsad pa
བརྩད་པ་ཤོར	have a quarrel/ argument	brtsad pa shor
བརྩད་པའི་གཞི	ground/ topic of controversy	brtsad pa'i gzhi
བརྩད་རྩ	quiver [for arrows]	brtsad rtsa
བརྩད་འཚོལ	search [for]	brtsad 'tshol
བརྩད་འཚོལ་སྐོར	concerning the search	brtsad 'tshol skor
བརྩད་འཚོལ་བྱེད	search [for]	brtsad 'tshol byed
བརྩད་འཚོལ་ཞུ	search [for] [h]	brtsad 'tshol zhu
བརྩད་ཤོར	have a quarrel/ argument	brtsad shor
བརྩན	1) tsan demon; 2) powerful ghosts of hunting; 3) secure, strong, mighty; 4) lord, king, ruler; 5) force, power, might, strength	brtsan
བརྩན་བཀག	[forcible] detention/ blockage/ obstruction/ prevention	brtsan bkag
བརྩན་བཀག་བྱེད	[forcibly] detain/ block/ obstruct/ prevent	brtsan bkag byed
བརྩན་བཀའ་གཏོང	order command [backed by force]	brtsan bka' gtong
བརྩན་བཀུག	conscription, summons, induction	brtsan bkug
བརྩན་བཀུག་བྱེད	conscript, summon, induct	brtsan bkug byed
བརྩན་སྐུལ་བྱེད་པ	compel, force	brtsan skul byed pa
བརྩན་སྐྱིལ	mounted side-saddle	brtsan skyil
བརྩན་བསྐུལ	forced labor/ activity, coercion, intimidation, compulsion	brtsan bskul
བརྩན་བསྐུལ་བཀའ་འབེབས	coercive/ forcible commands/ orders 2172	brtsan bskul bka' 'bebs
བརྩན་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	force, coerce, intimidate, compel	brtsan bskul byed
བརྩན་ཁང	1) building hard to attack because of being solid and hard; 2) temple where btsan spirits reside	brtsan khang
བརྩན་ཁྲིད	be led against 1's will, abduction holding under duress kidnaping, hijacking	brtsan khrid
བརྩན་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	be led against 1's will, abduct, hold under duress, kidnap, hijack	brtsan khrid byed
བརྩན་མཁར	fortress, bulwark	brtsan mkhar
བརྩན་འཁྱེར	rob, steal, forcibly take away	brtsan 'khyer
བརྩན་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	rob, steal, forcibly take away	brtsan 'khyer byed
བརྩན་གོས	powerful god clothing made like the faith of the ignorant	brtsan gos
བརྩན་གླའི་ས་ཆ	[foreign] concession/ settlement, ceded territory	brtsan gla'i sa cha
བརྩན་འགག	sa btsan po'i 'gag mdo	brtsan 'gag
བརྩན་འགེལ	forcible impositions	brtsan 'gel
བརྩན་འགེལ་བྱེད	impose on	brtsan 'gel byed
བརྩན་འགོག	anti-imperialist	brtsan 'gog
བརྩན་འགྲུས	effort	brtsan 'grus
བརྩན་རྒོད	kind of mi ma yin	brtsan rgod
བརྩན་རྒོལ	aggression, attack, combat imperialism brtsan rgol dang zhi bde srung skyong combat imperialism and defend peace	brtsan rgol
བརྩན་རྒོལ་དཔུང་ཕྱོགས	aggressorcamp	brtsan rgol dpung phyogs
བརྩན་རྒོལ་གསར་བརྗེ	revolution against imperialism	brtsan rgol gsar brje
བརྩན་རྒྱལ	imperialist country	brtsan rgyal
བརྩན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས	imperialism	brtsan rgyal ring lugs
བརྩན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དཔུང་ཁག	imperialist camp brtsan rgyal ring lugs kyi dmag 'khrug imperialist war	brtsan rgyal ring lugs kyi dpung khag
བརྩན་རྒྱལ་རིང་ལུགས་ལ་ངོ་རྒོལ	combating imperialism brtsan rgyal ring lugs la ngo rgol byed combat imperialism	brtsan rgyal ring lugs la ngo rgol
བརྩན་སྒྲིལ	forcible acquisition/ annexation, take-over	brtsan sgril
བརྩན་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད	forcibly acquire, annex,	brtsan sgril byed
བརྩན་ངག	ldog tu med pa'i skad cha	brtsan ngag
བརྩན་ལྔ	the five powerful 1s	brtsan lnga
བརྩན་གཅོད	decide by force	brtsan gcod
བརྩན་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	partake of the teachings	brtsan cha byed pa
བརྩན་ཆོད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	travel w great momentum brtsan chod du lam thams cad btsan chod	brtsan chod du 'gro ba
བརྩན་འཇིང	[arch] life-long friend, spouse	brtsan 'jing
བརྩན་བརྗིད	forceful and imposing/ grand	brtsan brjid
བརྩན་ཉམས	overbearing attitude, arrogance	brtsan nyams
བརྩན་སྙ	[arch] brtsan snya}	brtsan snya
བརྩན་སྙེག	extortion	brtsan snyeg
བརྩན་སྙེག་བྱེད	extort	brtsan snyeg byed
བརྩན་གཏམ	talk of force	brtsan gtam
བརྩན་ཐང་སྒོ་བཞི	brtsan thang sgo bzhi} temple	brtsan thang sgo bzhi
བརྩན་ཐབས	[sudden] force, coercion, compulsion, intimidation	brtsan thabs
བརྩན་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་དཀྲོག་པ	shake forcefully	brtsan thabs kyis dkrog pa
བརྩན་ཐབས་བྱེད	[sudden] force, coerce, compel, intimidate	brtsan thabs byed
བརྩན་ཐབས་འབེབས	use forceful means	brtsan thabs 'bebs
བརྩན་ཐབས་སུ	abruptly, forcefully, violently, suddenly, w strong impetus, w brisk energy, vigorously, energetically, swiftly	brtsan thabs su
བརྩན་ཐབས་སུ་འཁྲིད	lead by force	brtsan thabs su 'khrid
བརྩན་ཐབས་སུ་འགགས	abruptly stop	brtsan thabs su 'gags
བརྩན་ཐར	breakout, escape	brtsan thar
བརྩན་ཐར་བྱེད	break out, escape	brtsan thar byed
བརྩན་ཐོད	[arch] force, violence	brtsan thod
བརྩན་དང་རྒྱལ་པོ	powerful king	brtsan dang rgyal po
བརྩན་དུག	1) herb {bong nga nag po}; 2) brtsan dug} disease; 3) deadly poison	brtsan dug
བརྩན་དེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go	brtsan ded
བརྩན་དེད་བྱེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go [into]	brtsan ded byed
བརྩན་གདོང	brtsan gdong} mt	brtsan gdong
བརྩན་མདོས	powerful thread cross	brtsan mdos
བརྩན་འདེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go	brtsan 'ded
བརྩན་འདེད་བྱེད	[forcibly] drive/ herd, force to go [into]	brtsan 'ded byed
བརྩན་སྡིགས	threat of force -	brtsan sdigs
བརྩན་སྡིགས་གཏོང	threaten w force	brtsan sdigs gtong
བརྩན་སྡིགས་སྤྲོད	threaten w force	brtsan sdigs sprod
བརྩན་སྡོད	occupation [military]	brtsan sdod
བརྩན་སྡོད་བྱེད	occupy [military]	brtsan sdod byed
བརྩན་སྡོད་དམག་མི	occupation troops	brtsan sdod dmag mi
བརྩན་གནོད	violent harm	brtsan gnod
བརྩན་གནོན	repression, oppression, suppression	brtsan gnon
བརྩན་གནོན་བྱེད	repress, oppress, suppress	brtsan gnon byed
བརྩན་པ	effective, powerful, secure, lord, king, force, power, might [comp po]	brtsan pa
བརྩན་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	diligent	brtsan pa dang ldan pa
བརྩན་པའི་མཁར་བཞི	the four powerful castles	brtsan pa'i mkhar bzhi
བརྩན་པར	po adverbial	brtsan par
བརྩན་པོ	1) king, ruler; 2) Gnyan po ste hard to cross, impossible to get by or change; 3) strong, violent; 4) strict, stern; 5) secure, safe	brtsan po
བརྩན་པོ་དབང་ཡོད	press urge by wrathful words	brtsan po dbang yod
བརྩན་པོ་ཡ་མེད	black aconite	brtsan po ya med
བརྩན་པོ་ཨུ་བཙུགས	demand backed by force	brtsan po u btsugs
བརྩན་པོའི་མཛོད	secure treasury	brtsan po'i mdzod
བརྩན་ཕྱུག	power[ful] and wealth[y]	brtsan phyug
བརྩན་ཕྱུག་འཛོམས་པ	complete power and wealth	brtsan phyug 'dzoms pa
བརྩན་འཕྲོག	rob, snatch, plunder, take by force, annex, capture	brtsan 'phrog
བརྩན་འཕྲོག་བྱེད	rob, snatch, plunder, take by force, annex, capture	brtsan 'phrog byed
བརྩན་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་པ	rob, snatch, plunder, take by force, annex, capture	brtsan 'phrog byed pa
བརྩན་འཕྲོགས་སུ་ཐོབ་པ	obtain by force, plunder	brtsan 'phrogs su thob pa
བརྩན་བྱོལ	refuge, escaped from oppression	brtsan byol
བརྩན་བྱོལ་དུ་འགྲོ	go as a refugee	brtsan byol du 'gro
བརྩན་བྱོལ་དུ་ཕེབས	come as a refugee [h]	brtsan byol du phebs
བརྩན་བྱོལ་དུ་འོང	come as a refugee	brtsan byol du 'ong
བརྩན་བྱོལ་དུ་ཡོང	come as a refugee	brtsan byol du yong
བརྩན་བྱོལ་པ	refugee	brtsan byol pa
བརྩན་དབང	force, oppression	brtsan dbang
བརྩན་དབང་ཁྲལ་འགེལ	involuntarily levy taxes	brtsan dbang khral 'gel
བརྩན་དབང་གྱིས	by force, coercively	brtsan dbang gyis
བརྩན་དབང་གྱིས་བྱེད	do by force/ coercively, make someone -- brtsan dbang gyis las ka byed bcug made [them] work	brtsan dbang gyis byed
བརྩན་དབང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	imperialist/ powerful country	brtsan dbang rgyal khab
བརྩན་དབང་བྱེད་པ	force, compel	brtsan dbang byed pa
བརྩན་སྦྲེལ	forced merger/ union, hostile take-over	brtsan sbrel
བརྩན་མོ	queen, noble lady	brtsan mo
བརྩན་དམག	1) formless army of gods and demons; 2) powerful army	brtsan dmag
བརྩན་དམར	mi min gyi 'dre mi dmar rta dmar gyi btsan	brtsan dmar
བརྩན་བཙུགས	establish the teachings ???	brtsan btsugs
བརྩན་བཙུགས་བྱས	established teachings ???	brtsan btsugs byas
བརྩན་རྩུབ	cruelty and oppression	brtsan rtsub
བརྩན་འཛུལ	attack, get into a place [where others are] by force, invade, rush, dash, aggression, invasion	brtsan 'dzul
བརྩན་འཛུལ་མཁན	attacker, invader, aggressor	brtsan 'dzul mkhan
བརྩན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག	war of aggression	brtsan 'dzul gyi dmag
བརྩན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག	war of aggression	brtsan 'dzul gyi dmag 'khrug
བརྩན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་འཁྲུག་རྒྱག	wage a war of aggression	brtsan 'dzul gyi dmag 'khrug rgyag
བརྩན་འཛུལ་གྱི་དམག་རྒྱག	wage a war of aggression	brtsan 'dzul gyi dmag rgyag
བརྩན་འཛུལ་པ	attacker, invader, aggressor	brtsan 'dzul pa
བརྩན་འཛུལ་བྱེད	attack, get into a place [where others are] by force, invade, rush, dash, commit aggression	brtsan 'dzul byed
བརྩན་འཛུལ་བྱེད་མཁན	attacker, invader, aggressor	brtsan 'dzul byed mkhan
བརྩན་འཛུལ་བྱེད་པ	attack, get into a place [where others are] by force, invade, rush, dash, commit aggression 2173 brtsan 'dzul la ngo rgol gyi dmag 'khrug war of aggression	brtsan 'dzul byed pa
བརྩན་རྫོང	castle hard to take, fortress, citadel, bulwark	brtsan rdzong
བརྩན་ཞ	crown	brtsan zha
བརྩན་ཞྭ	crown [hat worn by kings etc]	brtsan zhwa
བརྩན་ཞན	strong and weak, strength	brtsan zhan
བརྩན་ཟོས	take/seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	brtsan zos
བརྩན་ཟོས་བྱེད	take/seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	brtsan zos byed
བརྩན་བཟུང	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	brtsan bzung
བརྩན་བཟུང་བྱེད	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	brtsan bzung byed
བརྩན་བཟོས	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force	brtsan bzos
བརྩན་བཟོས་བྱེད	take/ seize [others's things]/ occupy by force brtsan g.yar sa cha - [foreign] concession/ settlement, ceded territory brtsan g.yem - rape brtsan g.yem byed - rape brtsan g.yog - forcible impositio...	brtsan bzos byed
བརྩན་ཤུགས	force, violence, power, coercion, intimidation	brtsan shugs
བརྩན་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་བཅུག	force/ coerce/ compel to	brtsan shugs kyis bcug
བརྩན་ཤུགས་རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་རིང་ལུགས	expansionism	brtsan shugs rgya bskyed ring lugs
བརྩན་ཤུགས་སྲིད་ཇུས	politics of power	brtsan shugs srid jus
བརྩན་ཤུགས་སྲིད་བྱུས	politics of power	brtsan shugs srid byus
བརྩན་ཤེད	force, coercion, compulsion, intimidation	brtsan shed
བརྩན་ཤེད་གི་སྒོ་ནས་བཅུག	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	brtsan shed gi sgo nas bcug
བརྩན་ཤེད་གིས་བཅུག	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	brtsan shed gis bcug
བརྩན་ཤེད་བྱེད	force, coerce, compel, intimidate	brtsan shed byed
བརྩན་ཤེད་བྱེད་པ	force, compel brtsan shed log g.yem - rape brtsan shed log g.yem byed - rape	brtsan shed byed pa
བརྩན་བཤགས	forced confession	brtsan bshags
བརྩན་བཤད	compel some1 to say something, forced statement	brtsan bshad
བརྩན་ས	barrier	brtsan sa
བརྩན་ས་ཟིན	achieve stability, seize the throne	brtsan sa zin
བརྩན་ཧམ	intimidation, coercion, dbang shed [force violence] bsnyon ham	brtsan ham
བརྩན་ཧམ་བྱེད	intimidate, coerce	brtsan ham byed
བརྩན་ལྷ	brtsan lha rdzong}	brtsan lha
བརྩན་ལྷའི་ཆུ	brtsan lha'i chu}	brtsan lha'i chu
བརྩམ	commence, cultivate, apply	brtsam
བརྩམ་གྱུར་ལས	work that has been undertaken	brtsam gyur las
བརྩམ་གྲྭ	pocket book, notebook, memorandum book, tablets	brtsam grwa
བརྩམ་པ	ft. of {rtsom pa}; to begin, commence; commence	brtsam pa
བརྩམ་བྱ	literary work	brtsam bya
བརྩམས	to make obstacles for; started, began to, tried; composed, wrote; begin	brtsams
བརྩམས་ཆོས	composition, composed teachings	brtsams chos
བརྩམས་ནས	when one has undertaken	brtsams nas
བརྩམས་ནས་མཐར་མ་ཕྱིན་ན	if you cannot finish what you have begun	brtsams nas mthar ma phyin na
བརྩམས་པ	commenced, commencement	brtsams pa
བརྩམས་པ་བྱ་བ	commenced, commencement	brtsams pa bya ba
བརྩམས་ཡོན	yig rtsom letter writing wages	brtsams yon
བརྩར	(not in das)	brtsar
བརྩལ	care and assiduousness	brtsal
བརྩལ་པ	prohibited, vomiting, nausea	brtsal pa
བརྩལ་བ	1) [will] appli[ed] 1self diligently/ exert 1self [p f rtsol ba]; 2) [arch] vomiting, nausea; 3) do, use; 4) prohibition ??	brtsal ba
བརྩལ་བ་མེད་པ	effortlessly	brtsal ba med pa
བརྩལ་བའི་བསམ་པ	thought tied to striving	brtsal ba'i bsam pa
བརྩལ་ཙགས	gsal tsags ???	brtsal tsags
བརྩས	[arch] reward, gift, wages	brtsas
བརྩི	calculate, count, SA rtsi ba, arithmetic, reckoning	brtsi
བརྩི་བཀུར	politeness, courtesy, manners, to respect, honor, esteem	brtsi bkur
བརྩི་བཀུར་བྱེད	support, uphold	brtsi bkur byed
བརྩི་བཀུར་བྱེད་པ	support, uphold	brtsi bkur byed pa
བརྩི་བཀུར་མེད་པ	MG, E->T: disrespectful. brtsi bkur + neg + byas pa, to act disrespectfully. See also {brtsi bkur}. [mss]	brtsi bkur med pa
བརྩི་བཀུར་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem	brtsi bkur zhu ba
བརྩི་བཀུར་རེམ	serve ... !	brtsi bkur rem
བརྩི་བསྐུར	respect, regard, adherence, observation of agreement]	brtsi bskur
བརྩི་བསྐུར་བྱེད	respect, regard, adhere to, observe [agreement]	brtsi bskur byed
བརྩི་བསྐུར་ཞུ	respect, regard [h]	brtsi bskur zhu
བརྩི་འཁུར	politeness, courtesy, manners, respect, honor, esteem	brtsi 'khur
བརྩི་འཁུར་བྱེད	support, uphold	brtsi 'khur byed
བརྩི་འཁུར་བྱེད་པ	support, uphold	brtsi 'khur byed pa
བརྩི་འཁུར་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem	brtsi 'khur zhu ba
བརྩི་བགྲང	speculate, calculate	brtsi bgrang
བརྩི་བགྲང་བྱ	count, speculate, calculate	brtsi bgrang bya
བརྩི་འཇོག	to give importance to, value	brtsi 'jog
བརྩི་འཇོག་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	have high regard for	brtsi 'jog chen po byed pa
བརྩི་འཇོག་མ་བྱེད་པ	disobey	brtsi 'jog ma byed pa
བརྩི་འཇོག་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem, value	brtsi 'jog zhu ba
བརྩི་མཐོང	esteem regard	brtsi mthong
བརྩི་མཐོང་བྱེད	have high regard/ respect/ consideration, / esteem for	brtsi mthong byed
བརྩི་བ	obey, subordinate	brtsi ba
བརྩི་བར་བྱེད་པ	count up, calculate	brtsi bar byed pa
བརྩི་མེད	disregard, disrespect, give no importance to	brtsi med
བརྩི་མེད་དུ་བསྐྱུར	disregard, be disrespectful, give no importance to, scrap	brtsi med du bskyur
བརྩི་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	disregard, be disrespectful, give no importance to, scrap	brtsi med du gtong
བརྩི་མེད་བྱེད	disregard, be disrespectful, give no importance to, scrap	brtsi med byed
བརྩི་འཛིན	politeness, courtesy, manners, respect, honor, esteem	brtsi 'dzin
བརྩི་འཛིན་བྱེད	support, uphold	brtsi 'dzin byed
བརྩི་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	support, uphold	brtsi 'dzin byed pa
བརྩི་འཛིན་ཞུ་བ	respect, honor, esteem	brtsi 'dzin zhu ba
བརྩི་བཞག	1 closely inspect/ count; 2) texts and writing having memorized give to individual 'dzin grwa or having produced a mental grasp give/ take an exam	brtsi bzhag
བརྩི་ཡས	uncountable, innumerable	brtsi yas
བརྩི་ཤག	roll call, review [military, inventory	brtsi shag
བརྩི་ཤག་བྱེད	take roll call, review troops, take inventory	brtsi shag byed
བརྩི་སེམས	respect, honor	brtsi sems
བརྩི་སྲུང	respect and keep, pay attention to	brtsi srung
བརྩི་སྲུང་བྱེད	pay attention to, support, maintain, sustain	brtsi srung byed
བརྩི་སྲུང་བྱེད་པ	abide	brtsi srung byed pa
བརྩི་སྲུང་བྱེད་བ	to pay attention to	brtsi srung byed ba
བརྩིག	will build [f rtsig pa]	brtsig
བརྩིག་མཁན	mason	brtsig mkhan
བརྩིག་པ	storied, layered/ wall; ft. of {rtsig pa}	brtsig pa
བརྩིགས	built [p rtsig pa]	brtsigs
བརྩིགས་པ	SA rtsigs pa, ugly, a god	brtsigs pa
བརྩིགས་པའི་ཁང་ཁྱིམ	the house they've built; constructed houses	brtsigs pa'i khang khyim
བརྩིགས་པའི་མགོན་གནང	Tsigpai Gön Nang, the Hermitage Built at the Order of the Gönpo, a hermitage in Tö, Mang Yul	brtsigs pa'i mgon gnang
བརྩིངས་པའི་ལུམས	fomentations	brtsings pa'i lums
བརྩིས	counted [up], calculated, divined [p rtsi ba]	brtsis
བརྩིས་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	las 'bras la brtsis 'jog	brtsis 'jog byed pa
བརྩིས་པ	counted [up], calculated, divined [p rtsi ba]	brtsis pa
བརྩིས་མེད	without calculating	brtsis med
བརྩིས་ཤིང་བགྲངས་ནས	assessed	brtsis shing bgrangs nas
བརྩིས་བཤེར་གནང	to make a recitationcheck	brtsis bsher gnang
བརྩིས་བཤེར་གནང་བ	make a recitationcheck	brtsis bsher gnang ba
བརྩུ་བ	welcome and receive a guest, SA bsu ba	brtsu ba
བརྩུན་པ་དཔལ་ལེགས	Tsunpa Pel Leg	brtsun pa dpal legs
བརྩུབ་མོར	a savage	brtsub mor
བརྩེ	love, affection, compassion, tenderness, gentleness, compassionate love, kindness, mercy, benevolence; sympathy	brtse
བརྩེ་སྐྱོང	to cherish, bring up, protect lovingly, with affection. to fell love, compassion, affection for. Irritating, annoying	brtse skyong
བརྩེ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	love and cherish, bring up w loving care/ affection	brtse skyong byed
བརྩེ་བསྐྱེད	have compassion	brtse bskyed
བརྩེ་གུས	affection and respect	brtse gus
བརྩེ་གུས་གནང	have affection and respect for [h]	brtse gus gnang
བརྩེ་གུས་བྱེད	have affection and respect for	brtse gus byed
བརྩེ་གུས་ཞུ	have affection and respect for [h]	brtse gus zhu
བརྩེ་ཆེན	most affectionate, loving, parents	brtse chen
བརྩེ་ཆེན་ཁྱེད	You who possess such great kindness	brtse chen khyed
བརྩེ་དང་ལྡན་པ	kind, loving	brtse dang ldan pa
བརྩེ་དུང	love, affection	brtse dung
བརྩེ་གདུང	feeling, emotion, sentiment, love and affection, love; love, affection	brtse gdung
བརྩེ་གདུང་བསྐྱེད་པ	be fond of	brtse gdung bskyed pa
བརྩེ་གདུང་ཅན	loyal	brtse gdung can
བརྩེ་གདུང་བྱེད	to be fond of	brtse gdung byed
བརྩེ་གདུང་བྱེད་པ	to love with affection	brtse gdung byed pa
བརྩེ་གདུང་ཞེན	loyalty	brtse gdung zhen
བརྩེ་ལྡན	compassionate	brtse ldan
བརྩེ་ལྡན་སྟོན་པ	the Loving teacher, (the Buddha	brtse ldan ston pa
བརྩེ་པོ	love	brtse po
བརྩེ་ཕྱིར	because of kindness	brtse phyir
བརྩེ་བ་ཅན	kind, loving	brtse ba can
བརྩེ་བ་དང་བཅས་པ	kind, loving	brtse ba dang bcas pa
བརྩེ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ	kind, loving	brtse ba dang ldan pa
བརྩེ་བ་བྱེད་པ	to recognize the other's value, to take things at their own value	brtse ba byed pa
བརྩེ་བ་བྱེད་རུང་བ	lovable	brtse ba byed rung ba
བརྩེ་བ་བྱེད་ས	beloved	brtse ba byed sa
བརྩེ་བ་མ	beloved one, spouse	brtse ba ma
བརྩེ་བ་མེད་པ	merciless, ruthless, unkind, unloving	brtse ba med pa
བརྩེ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	apprehension of kindness, produce an attitude of kindness	brtse ba yid la byed pa
བརྩེ་བའི་ཐུགས	affectionate	brtse ba'i thugs
བརྩེ་བའི་ཐུགས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོངས	Keep hold of us with your compassion	brtse ba'i thugs kyis skyongs
བརྩེ་བའི་ཐུགས་རྗེ	loving compassion	brtse ba'i thugs rje
བརྩེ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད	embodies loving kindness; genuine love	brtse ba'i bdag nyid
བརྩེ་བའི་ཕྱག་བྲིས	your very kind letter	brtse ba'i phyag bris
བརྩེ་བའི་ཚིག	words of love, kind exhortations	brtse ba'i tshig
བརྩེ་བའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱིས	merciful	brtse ba'i rang bzhin gyis
བརྩེ་བར་ལྡན་པ	kind, loving	brtse bar ldan pa
བརྩེ་བར་བྱེད་པ	act kindly 2175	brtse bar byed pa
བརྩེ་བར་འཛིན་པ	cherish	brtse bar 'dzin pa
བརྩེ་བས	out of love, out of kindness	brtse bas
བརྩེ་བས་སྐྱོང	affectionately exhort or treat	brtse bas skyong
བརྩེ་བས་སྐྱོངས	care for them tenderly	brtse bas skyongs
བརྩེ་བས་དགོངས	consider us with loving-kindness	brtse bas dgongs
བརྩེ་བས་འགྲོགས་པ	1) kind friend/ association; 2) kindly accompany	brtse bas 'grogs pa
བརྩེ་བས་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང	accept w kindness	brtse bas rjes su bzung
བརྩེ་བས་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	{bla mas brtse bas rjes su bzung ba} to be accepted with love by a teacher	brtse bas rjes su bzung ba
བརྩེ་བས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཁས་ལེན་པ	proclaim suffering because of kindness	brtse bas sdug bsngal khas len pa
བརྩེ་བས་བྱམས་པ	kind compassion,	brtse bas byams pa
བརྩེ་བས་སྦྱིན་པ	kind generosity	brtse bas sbyin pa
བརྩེ་བས་འཛིན	SA byams pas 'chang	brtse bas 'dzin
བརྩེ་བས་རོལ་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	{brtse bas rol pa'i blo gros} [ninth of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	brtse bas rol pa'i blo gros
བརྩེ་བས་གསུངས་པ	said out of affection	brtse bas gsungs pa
བརྩེ་མོ	kindness brtse zhing 'khyams dang g.yo dang dga'	brtse mo
དང་གླལ	our heads in the clouds, happily deceived	dang glal
བརྩེ་ལུགས	way of kindness	brtse lugs
བརྩེ་སེམས	a loving, compassionate frame of mind, affection	brtse sems
བརྩེག	1) will erect, heap up, pile, build, place on [f rtseg pa]; 2) storied, mounded, layered, in tiers	brtseg
བརྩེག་པ	1) will erect, heap up, pile, build, place on [f rtseg pa]; 2) storied, mounded, layered, in tiers	brtseg pa
བརྩེགས	erected	brtsegs
བརྩེགས་པ	to stack/ pile up; stacked/ piled up; pf. of {rtseg pa}	brtsegs pa
བརྩེགས་པའི་ཚིག་གྲུབ	compound sentence	brtsegs pa'i tshig grub
བརྩེགས་འཕུལ	syllable w head letter and prefix [bska]	brtsegs 'phul
བརྩེགས་མ	1) syllable w head letter [rka sna]; 2) stack, 1 above the other	brtsegs ma
བརྩེགས་མར་སྣང	one above the other	brtsegs mar snang
བརྩེང	tuck up, SA rtseng ba	brtseng
བརྩེང་བ	[f rtseng ba]	brtseng ba
བརྩེངས	tuck up, SA rtseng ba, short robe or dress	brtsengs
བརྩེངས་པ	[p rtseng ba]	brtsengs pa
བརྩེད་པ	{brtsed pa, brtsed pa, brtsed pa} intr. v	brtsed pa
བརྩེམས་པ	SA 'tshem pa	brtsems pa
བརྩེམས་ཟིན་པ	sewn	brtsems zin pa
བརྩེར་དགོངས	kind intention	brtser dgongs
བརྩེར་བཅས	w kindness	brtser bcas
བརྩེས	(not in das), in accordance with	brtses
བརྩེས་པ	[p rtse ba]	brtses pa
བརྩོག་ཆུའི་ཡུར་བ	sewer	brtsog chu'i yur ba
བརྩོག་པ	[p rtsog pa]???1) pour forth; 2) vomit; 3) go ahead; 4) pioneer; 5) [arch] soiled, dirty	brtsog pa
བརྩོངས	tuck up, SA rtseng ba	brtsongs
བརྩོད་པ	quarrel	brtsod pa
བརྩོན	effort, exertion, perseverance, diligence, to exert, rouse oneself, abuse oneself, practice, devote oneself to, persevere in, be diligent, energetic, study hard, make effort, vigor, vigorous pursui...	brtson
བརྩོན་གྲུས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	samadhi of exertion, the stage of miraculous ability which combines training in the contemplation of perseverance	brtson grus kyi ting nge 'dzin
བའི་གནད	key points for the industrious type to become enlightened through cultivation	ba'i gnad
བརྩོན་གྲུས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the feet of miraculous endeavor	brtson grus rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	establish the armor of effort	brtson 'grus kyi go sgrub
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four qualities of diligence [paramita], le lo sogs	brtson 'grus kyi chos bzhi
མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ཉམས་པ	to decrease adverse factors such as laziness, {chos kyi bdag med rtogs pa'i mi rtog pa} the nonconceptual state of realizing the non-self of phenomena, {'dod pa rdzogs par byed pa} perfecting what ...	mi mthun phyogs nyams pa
པའི་མི་རྟོག་པ	the non-conceptual	pa'i mi rtog pa
སྟཏེ་ཨོཕ༹་རེཨལིཟིང་ཐེ་ནོན	self of phenomena, 3) {'dod pa rdzogs par byed	state of realizing the non
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	the equality of diligence	brtson 'grus kyi mnyam pa nyid
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the concentration [resulting from] zeal	brtson 'grus kyi ting nge 'dzin
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས	the strength of diligence, the power of joyful effort/ skillful energy	brtson 'grus kyi stobs
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	perfecter of diligence * 1 who reaches the goal of effort, meditating on the paramita of diligence rim ldan du	brtson 'grus kyi mthar gyis pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent exertion, perfection of diligence {'khor gsum mi rtog pas dge ba la spro ba} by not conceptualizing the three worlds proliferate virtue]	brtson 'grus kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	paramita of exertion [<viryaparamita having its four special dharmas gyi spro ba'i sems pa dge ba together with its seeds, one of the six paramitas {phyin drug}	brtson 'grus kyi phar phyin
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	the faculty of diligence, zeal	brtson 'grus kyi dbang po
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	establish the accumulation of exertion	brtson 'grus kyi tshogs sgrub
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ་མིརཅླེ	leg of exertion	brtson 'grus kyi rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa miracle
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀྱི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	classification of exertion	brtson 'grus kyi rab tu dbye ba
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་གོ་ལོག	misunderstood exertion, distorted zeal, [putting effort into what is incorrect]	brtson 'grus go log
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་གྲགས་པ	SA zhang tshal pa	brtson 'grus grags pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལྔ	the five kinds of zeal, diligence, exertion, {go cha'i brtson 'grus} armor-like zeal, {sbyor ba'i brtson 'grus} zeal of application, {zhum med kyi brtson 'grus} relentless zeal, {mi ldog pa'i brtso...	brtson 'grus lnga
པའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	the zeal of not turning back, 5) {chog par mi 'dzin pa'i brtson 'grus - insatiable zeal, the cause of the arising of buddha qualities	pa'i brtson 'grus
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཅན	the diligent ones	brtson 'grus can
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཆེ	great diligence	brtson 'grus che
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཆེ་བ	diligent	brtson 'grus che ba
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཆེན་པོ	great diligence, exertion	brtson 'grus chen po
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཆེན་པོ་རྩོམ་པ	undertake w great effort	brtson 'grus chen po rtsom pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་མཆོག	supreme/ excellent exertion	brtson 'grus mchog
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཉམས་ཏེ	having lost one's zeal or energy, zeal having diminished	brtson 'grus nyams te
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཉམས་པ	harming exertion	brtson 'grus nyams pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཉམས་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	unfailing zeal, exertion that never wanes,	brtson 'grus nyams pa mi mnga' ba
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཉམས་པ་མེད་པ	in their perseverance	brtson 'grus nyams pa med pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་གཉིས	the two types of exertion {gus sbyor}, {rtag sbyor}	brtson 'grus gnyis
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of exertion brtson 'grus ting nge 'dzin spong ba'i 'du	brtson 'grus ting nge 'dzin
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བརྟན	firm effort	brtson 'grus brtan
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བསྟན་པ	the transcendental perfection of perseverance brtson 'grus tha ma dang 'bring dang	brtson 'grus bstan pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དང་ལྡན་པ	industrious, diligent	brtson 'grus dang ldan pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དྲག	intense effort	brtson 'grus drag
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དྲག་པོ	intense application	brtson 'grus drag po
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of exertion	brtson 'grus rnam gsum
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་པ	exertion diligent person	brtson 'grus pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བྱིན	gift of effort	brtson 'grus byin
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བྱུང་བ	grew diligent	brtson 'grus byung ba
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བྱེད་པ	study hard, be industrious	brtson 'grus byed pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་རྩོམ་པ	application of exertion, to cultivate diligence	brtson 'grus rtsom pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བརྩམས་པ	industriously undertake 2177	brtson 'grus brtsams pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་བཟང་པོ	a buddhist sage	brtson 'grus bzang po
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཡང་དག	correct exertion, enlightened effort	brtson 'grus yang dag
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཤེས་པར་བྱ	1) the object of knowledge of perfect effort; 2) perfect effort should be known	brtson 'grus yongs su shes par bya
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལ་བརྟེན	rely on exertion, depend on exertion	brtson 'grus la brten
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	rely on exertion, depend on exertion	brtson 'grus la brten pa
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	engage in exertion	brtson 'grus la sogs pa la sbyor ba
བརྩོན་འགྲུས་གསུམ	the three kinds of effort ???	brtson 'grus gsum
བརྩོན་ཅན	diligent	brtson can
བརྩོན་བཅས	diligent; {brtson 'grus dang ldan pa}	brtson bcas
བརྩོན་ལྡན	diligent, assiduous, studious	brtson ldan
བརྩོན་པ	{brtson pa, brtson pa, brtson pa, brtson} trans. v.; to strive; to exert oneself; endeavor, striving, endeavor, effort, to strive to, to exert oneself, exertion [one of {'du byed brgyad}. to persev...	brtson pa
བརྩོན་པ་བསྐྱེད	commitment	brtson pa bskyed
བརྩོན་པ་ཁྲི་མུན་དུ་བཅུག་པ	imprisoned	brtson pa khri mun du bcug pa
བརྩོན་པ་བརྒྱ་འགྱུར་དུ	hundred-fold effort	brtson pa brgya 'gyur du
བརྩོན་པ་ཅན	diligent, assiduous, studious	brtson pa can
བརྩོན་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	diligent	brtson pa dang bcas pa
བརྩོན་པ་དོན་དེན	branch tantra of anuyoga	brtson pa don den
བརྩོན་པ་དོན་ལྡན	anuyoga branch tantra	brtson pa don ldan
བརྩོན་པ་དྲག་པོས	w diligence	brtson pa drag pos
བརྩོན་པ་མ་གཏང་བ	not leave off exertion	brtson pa ma gtang ba
བརྩོན་པ་ལྷུར་ལེན་པ	earnest application of exertion	brtson pa lhur len pa
བརྩོན་པ་ལྷོད་པ	to slacken or give up being diligent	brtson pa lhod pa
བརྩོན་པ་ལྷོད་པར	one who has relaxed his industry or zeal in any work, one who has relaxed his industry in any work brtson pa'i ting nge 'dzin rdzu 'phrul gyi	brtson pa lhod par
རྐན་པ	{rkang pa}	rkan pa
བརྩོན་པའི་རང་བཤིན	the nature of exertion	brtson pa'i rang bshin
བརྩོན་པའི་རབ	supreme exertion	brtson pa'i rab
བརྩོན་པར	captivity	brtson par
བརྩོན་པར་བགྱི	to act energetically	brtson par bgyi
བརྩོན་པར་འགྱུར	be diligent	brtson par 'gyur
བརྩོན་པར་འདོམས་པ	exhort, to be diligent	brtson par 'doms pa
བརྩོན་པར་བྱ	act diligently	brtson par bya
བརྩོན་པར་རུང	suitable for exertion	brtson par rung
བརྩོན་པས	vigorously	brtson pas
བརྩོན་པོ	diligent	brtson po
བརྩོན་བྱས	to apply effort	brtson byas
བརྩོན་བྱེད	be diligent, exert 1self, make an effort	brtson byed
བརྩོན་བྱེད་པ	apply effort	brtson byed pa
བརྩོན་ཞིང་དཔའི་སྙིང་ཆེ་བ	industrious and courageous	brtson zhing dpa'i snying che ba
བརྩོན་ཞིབ	research, thorough study/ investigation	brtson zhib
བརྩོན་ར	prison	brtson ra
བརྩོན་རར་ཚུད་པ	be placed in prison, imprisoned	brtson rar tshud pa
བརྩོན་ལེན	striving, exertion	brtson len
བརྩོན་ལེན་བྱེད	strive for, exert 1self, do 1's best	brtson len byed
བརྩོན་ལེན་བྱེད་པ	strive for	brtson len byed pa
བརྩོན་སེམས	diligence, endeavor	brtson sems
བརྩོན་སེམས་ལྷོད་མེད	[unremitting] [diligence, endeavor, initiative, enthusiasm, fervor, activism]	brtson sems lhod med
བརྩོན་བསྲིར་ཧྲེ་གཉེར	aging a commune industriously and thriftily	brtson bsrir hre gnyer
བརྩོན་བསྲིས	industriousness and thrift/ economy/ frugality	brtson bsris
བརྩོན་བསྲིས་ཁེ་ལས	an economical enterprise	brtson bsris khe las
བརྩོན་བསྲིས་རྒྱལ་འཛུགས	constructing the nation industriously and economically/ thriftily	brtson bsris rgyal 'dzugs
བརྩོན་བསྲིས་རྒྱལ་འཛུགས་བྱེད	construct the nation industriously and economically/ thriftily[/through hard work and thrift]	brtson bsris rgyal 'dzugs byed
བརྩོན་བསྲིས་བྱེད	do w industriousness and thrift/ economy/ frugality	brtson bsris byed
བརྩོམ་པའི་དགོས་པ	the purpose of my undertaking	brtsom pa'i dgos pa
བརྩོམ་པའི་དགོས་པ་ཡིན	the purpose of my undertaking	brtsom pa'i dgos pa yin
བརྩོལ་བསྒྲུབ་མི་བྱེད	without having to strive	brtsol bsgrub mi byed
གསྩག་མདངས	granular dry shading	gstsag mdangs
བསྩགས་པ	accumulated, hoarded, earned	bstsags pa
བསྩངས་པ	[arch] bsangs pa	bstsangs pa
བསྩལ	instigate, past of stsol	bstsal
བསྩལ་དུ་གསོལ	please bestow	bstsal du gsol
བསྩལ་གནས	letter, correspondence [h]	bstsal gnas
བསྩལ་པ	any message, he spoke, he commanded, he bestowed	bstsal pa
བསྩལ་ཕྱག	letter, correspondence [h]	bstsal phyag
བསྩལ་བ	ft. of {stsol ba}; pf. of {stsol ba}	bstsal ba
བསྩལ་ཞིང	fief [h]	bstsal zhing
བསྩི	(not in das)	bstsi
བསྩོལ	[p {stsal ba} give, bestow, say [h]	bstsol
བསྩོལ་བ	to give, confer, grant, bestow; to assure benefit	bstsol ba
ཚ	heat, hot, warm	tsha
ཚ་སྐམ	dry by heat	tsha skam
ཚ་སྐམ་ཐེབས	dry by heat	tsha skam thebs
ཚ་སྐོར	grandchildren	tsha skor
ཚ་སྐྱོབ	parasol	tsha skyob
ཚ་སྐྱོལ་ཐོན་པ	hot and fresh	tsha skyol thon pa
ཚ་སྐྲང	inflammation, swelling	tsha skrang
ཚ་སྐྲང་འཐེབས	get inflammation/ swelling	tsha skrang 'thebs
ཚ་ཁ	target, black spot on target, object aimed at	tsha kha
ཚ་ཁ་ལྟ་བ	do target shooting	tsha kha lta ba
ཚ་ཁ་ལོན་པ	do target shooting	tsha kha lon pa
ཚ་ཁང	place where tsha tsha are kept	tsha khang
ཚ་ཁམ་ཁམ	tsha sob sob,//drod khang la slebs dus lus kun tsha kham kham byas yong	tsha kham kham
ཚ་ཁུ	salty	tsha khu
ཚ་ཁུལ	sub-tropical area	tsha khul
ཚ་ཁུལ་གྱི་གནམ་གཤིས	sub-tropical climate	tsha khul gyi gnam gshis
ཚ་ཁོ	place in rgyal mo rong	tsha kho
ཚ་ཁྱུག	by wind and blood lus kyi stod smad etc. sometimes tsha shar rgyag	tsha khyug
ཚ་ཁྱུག་རྐང་ལག་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	have tsha khyug in the arms and legs	tsha khyug rkang lag la rgyag pa
ཚ་འཁྲུ	diarrhea [tshad nad rgyu mar bab pa'i 'khru nad cig]	tsha 'khru
ཚ་ག	locust	tsha ga
ཚ་ག་པ	grasshopper	tsha ga pa
ཚ་ག་ཕྱག་ལེན	[H] way of performance of a ritual	tsha ga phyag len
ཚ་ག་འབུ	grasshopper	tsha ga 'bu
ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི	restless, excited, nervous, jittery [lhing po med pa,//skad cha lab dus tsha gi tshi gi ma byed,//las ka tsha gi tshi gi byas na nor 'khrul 'chor yong]	tsha gi tshi gi
ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི་བྱེད	do hurriedly	tsha gi tshi gi byed
ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི་མེད	calm, cool	tsha gi tshi gi med
ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི་མེད་པ	calm, cool	tsha gi tshi gi med pa
ཚ་གེ་ཚི་གེ	restless, excited, nervous, jittery	tsha ge tshi ge
ཚ་གེ་ཚི་གེ་བྱེད	do hurriedly	tsha ge tshi ge byed
ཚ་གེ་ཚི་གེ་མེད	calm, cool	tsha ge tshi ge med
ཚ་གེ་ཚི་གེ་མེད་པ	calm, cool	tsha ge tshi ge med pa
ཚ་གོང	morning tsha ba or time before 1 eats, breakfast	tsha gong
ཚ་གྱའ་བ	[arch] tshad pa che ba'am tsha por gyur pa	tsha gya' ba
ཚ་གྱོལ	from a very hot lung pa bsil sar gol ba [dbyar dus bsil sar tsha gol du 'gro ba]	tsha gyol
ཚ་གྲ	Tibetan govt's rtsam bzhes las khungs nas smon lam skabs grva par gshor sprod byed pa'i rtsam pa	tsha gra
ཚ་གྲང	heat and cold; x {dka' tshegs dang tsha grang thams cad bzod pa} bear heat, cold and all other difficulties	tsha grang
ཚ་གྲང་གལ་མདོ	1) tsha nad smin ma smin pa'i border; 2) {tsha grang gal mdo} [tsha nad and grang nad gnyis kyi nor 'phrang gal che ba'i mdo don rnams gsal bar ston pa'i man ngag rgyud kyi le'u bcu gsum pa la zer]	tsha grang gal mdo
ཚ་གྲང་གི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the sufferings of cold and heat	tsha grang gi sdug bsngal
ཚ་གྲང་སྙོམ་པོ	temperate	tsha grang snyom po
ཚ་གྲང་ལྟ་ཆས	thermometer	tsha grang lta chas
ཚ་གྲང་བརྟག་དཔྱོད་ཡོ་ཆས	thermometer	tsha grang brtag dpyod yo chas
ཚ་གྲང་བརྟག་དཔྱོད་ཡོ་བྱད	thermometer	tsha grang brtag dpyod yo byad
ཚ་གྲང་ཐུབ་པ	able to stand both joy and sorrow/ cold and heat	tsha grang thub pa
ཚ་གྲང་ཐུབ་པའི་མི	person able to stand both joy and sorrow/ cold and heat	tsha grang thub pa'i mi
ཚ་གྲང་འཐབ	clash of temperature, radical change of temperature [usu resulting in sickness]	tsha grang 'thab
ཚ་གྲང་ཚད་གཞི་ཞིག	centigrade	tsha grang tshad gzhi zhig
ཚ་གྲང་རླུང	hot and cold pranas which produce various diseases	tsha grang rlung
ཚ་གྲུམ	mostly hot grum nad disease	tsha grum
ཚ་གློག	thermo-electricity	tsha glog
ཚ་གློག་ས་ཚིགས	thermo-electric plant	tsha glog sa tshigs
ཚ་རྒྱས	thermal expansion	tsha rgyas
ཚ་རྒྱས་གྲང་འཁུམས	thermal expansion	tsha rgyas grang 'khums
ཚ་རྒྱུ	{na rgyu tsha rgyu byung kyang} I may have illness and fever	tsha rgyu
ཚ་སྒང	1 of 6 districts of khams, SA sgang drug, 1 of 6 sgang provinces of khams	tsha sgang
ཚ་སྒོ	salty	tsha sgo
ཚ་སྒོ་ཅན	salty land	tsha sgo can
ཚ་ངད	power/ degree of heat	tsha ngad
ཚ་ངད་ཀྱི་གདུང་བ་སྡུག་བསྔལ	pain of hot [weather]	tsha ngad kyi gdung ba sdug bsngal
ཚ་ངད་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	pain of hot [weather]	tsha ngad kyi sdug bsngal
ཚ་ངད་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	power/ degree of heat	tsha ngad kyi nus shugs
ཚ་ངད་ཆེ་བའི་ལུང་པ	very hot region	tsha ngad che ba'i lung pa
ཚ་ངམ་ངམ	tsha ngad phog stangs shig [me thab kyi 'khris su bsdad pas gzugs gzhi tshang ma tsha ngam ngam byas byung]	tsha ngam ngam
ཚ་ངར	power/ degree of heat	tsha ngar
ཚ་ངར་ཆེན་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་ཉི་འོད	very hot sun[light]	tsha ngar chen po yod pa'i nyi 'od
ཚ་ངེར	priority	tsha nger
ཚ་ངེར་འདོན	give priority to	tsha nger 'don
ཚ་རྔ་འགག	{tsha rnga 'gag} gorge	tsha rnga 'gag
ཚ་གཅིག་མ	thick blanket, quilt	tsha gcig ma
ཚ་གཅུན་གྲང་འདོམས	{tsha 'jun drang 'doms}	tsha gcun grang 'doms
ཚ་ལྕིབ	SA lcib	tsha lcib
ཚ་ལྕིབས	hot pad [for holding hot things]	tsha lcibs
ཚ་ལྕུག	welding/ soldering rod	tsha lcug
ཚ་ཆས	lam rgyags, lam chas * lunch 2179	tsha chas
ཚ་ཆས་དགོང་ཆས	lunch and the afternoon meal	tsha chas dgong chas
ཚ་ཆུ	elixir of life GD	tsha chu
ཚ་ཆུ་ཁ	hot spring, place w hot water	tsha chu kha
ཚ་ཇ	1) tsha rting ma'i ja; 2) tsha phog gi ja, noon tea	tsha ja
ཚ་འཇམ	rough harsh and smooth/ gentle	tsha 'jam
ཚ་འཇུན་དྲང་འདོམས	sgrigs khrims drag pos gcun nas bslab bya nan po rgyag pa,//nyes pa tshabs chen byed mkhan rnams la tsha 'jun drang 'doms kyis kha 'gul lag 'gul gang byung byed du mi 'jug pa	tsha 'jun drang 'doms
ཚ་ཉིད་གསུམ	three essential categories	tsha nyid gsum
ཚ་ཏིང	about 10 Am, mid-morning	tsha ting
ཚ་ཏིང་བ	about 10 Am, mid-morning	tsha ting ba
ཚ་ཏིང་མ	about 10 Am, mid-morning	tsha ting ma
ཚ་རྟགས	cha dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi tsha lag tsha//'' not '' ? //Cha	tsha rtags
ཚ་རྟིང	about 10 Am, mid-morning	tsha rting
ཚ་རྟིང་བ	about 10 Am [sun already up and getting hot nyi dros rgyab tsam gyi snga dro'i lto za ba'i dus]	tsha rting ba
ཚ་རྟིང་མ	about 10 Am, mid-morning	tsha rting ma
ཚ་ཐག་གཅོད	effective, to the point, appropriate, excellent	tsha thag gcod
ཚ་ཐག་གཅོད་པའི་ལན་སྤྲད	give an answer that is effective/ to the point/ appropriate/ excellent	tsha thag gcod pa'i lan sprad
ཚ་ཐལ་ཤོར་བ	1) me shugs sam drod ngar che drags pa,//za ma tsha thal shor nas 'tshig pa; 2) tsha gcun thal drags pa dang, tshad las brgal	tsha thal shor ba
ཚ་ཐུབ	heat-resistant	tsha thub
ཚ་ཐུར	thur ma'i cha byad mer bsregs nas nad kyi steng du 'bug pa la zer	tsha thur
ཚ་ཐེག་གྲང་ཐེག	able to stand both joy and sorrow/ cold and heat tsha thog tsha ngar ma yal ba'i dus skabs //lcags tsha thog tu rdung ba	tsha theg grang theg
ཚ་ཐོར	pags nad kyi rigs shig //ngo la tsha thor thon 'dug	tsha thor
ཚ་འཐབ	hot war [opposote of grang 'thab = cold war]	tsha 'thab
ཚ་འཐོར་བ	rtsa 'thor du gyur pa'am 'ub ma 'dus pa,//log spyod pa'i rtsa 'dzugs tsha 'thor ba	tsha 'thor ba
ཚ་དམ	thermos bottle	tsha dam
ཚ་དར	kha btags given to victor in marksmanship contest	tsha dar
ཚ་དར་མ	[arch] rtul phod can	tsha dar ma
ཚ་དུག	feel hot	tsha dug
ཚ་དུག་ཕོག	get sun stroke/ heat prostration	tsha dug phog
ཚ་དུག་ཚིག་པ	feel hot	tsha dug tshig pa
ཚ་དུས་འབྲུབ་ཆུ	summer floods	tsha dus 'brub chu
ཚ་དྲག	emergency, urgent, critical, drastic [situation], strongly [las brel ha cang tsha drag che ba [bun bdag kyis ngal rtsol mi dmangs la bu lon 'ded skul tsha drag chen po'i sgo nas bshu gzhog gnya' gn...	tsha drag
ཚ་དྲག་ཅན	emergency, urgent, critical, drastic [situation], strongly	tsha drag can
ཚ་དྲག་ཆེ	emergency, urgent, critical, drastic [situation], strongly	tsha drag che
ཚ་དྲག་ཆེན་པོ	emergency, urgent, critical, drastic [situation], strongly	tsha drag chen po
ཚ་དྲག་ཏུ	quickly, without delay	tsha drag tu
ཚ་དྲོད	1) hot weather, heat [of fire etc]; 2) fever/ heat of tshad nad	tsha drod
ཚ་དྲོད་ཀྱི་ནུས་ཤུགས	power of heat tsha drod rgyas nas nad pa rig pa mi gsal	tsha drod kyi nus shugs
ཚ་དྲོད་བརྒྱུད	conduct/ radiate heat	tsha drod brgyud
ཚ་དྲོད་ཆེ་བའི་ཡུལ	very hot region	tsha drod che ba'i yul
ཚ་གདུག	heat, unbearably hot weather, ma rungs pa	tsha gdug
ཚ་གདུག་ཆེ་བའི་ཉི་མ	very hot sun	tsha gdug che ba'i nyi ma
ཚ་གདུག་ཕོག	get sun stroke/ heat prostration	tsha gdug phog
ཚ་གདུག་ཚིག	feel hot	tsha gdug tshig
ཚ་གདུག་ཚིག་པ	feel hot	tsha gdug tshig pa
ཚ་གདུང	anguish; painful heat; the pain of the heat [of midday etc]	tsha gdung
སེལ་ཞིང	the quelling of the feverish torment of negative emotions	sel zhing
ཚ་གདུང་ཅན	1) spring; 2) fire	tsha gdung can
ཚ་མདངས	radiated the heat, heat wave, warmth	tsha mdangs
ཚ་འདེད	ask for/ demand prompt/ immediate payment of debt/ performance of service obligation	tsha 'ded
ཚ་འདེད་ཕྱིར་ལེན	demand/ dun for payment again and again of things that were borrowed	tsha 'ded phyir len
ཚ་འདེད་བྱེད	ask for/ demand prompt/ immediate payment of debt/ performance of service obligation	tsha 'ded byed
ཚ་འདེད་བྱེད་པ	ask for/ demand prompt/ immediate payment of debt/ performance of service obligation tsha 'ded byed pa'i bu lon dang khral 'ul debts and service obligations for which immediate payment/ performance...	tsha 'ded byed pa
ཚ་འདྲི	questioning under torture [by a court]	tsha 'dri
ཚ་འདྲི་གཏོང	question under torture [by a court]	tsha 'dri gtong
ཚ་འདྲི་བྱེད	question under torture [by a court]	tsha 'dri byed
ཚ་རྡུང་ལས་སྣོན	heat processing	tsha rdung las snon
ཚ་ལྡིང	morning between 8-9	tsha lding
ཚ་སྡུག	heat, unbearably hot weather, ma rungs pa	tsha sdug
ཚ་སྡུག་ཆེ་བའི་ཉི་མ	very hot sun	tsha sdug che ba'i nyi ma
ཚ་སྡུག་ཕོག	get sun stroke/ heat prostration	tsha sdug phog
ཚ་སྡུག་ཚིག	feel hot	tsha sdug tshig
ཚ་ན	pain	tsha na
ཚ་ནད	SA tsha ba'i nad	tsha nad
ཚ་ནད་ཕོག	get [tshad nad, fever, sunstroke, illness due to heat, malaria]	tsha nad phog
ཚ་ནན	tsha drag nan tan,//skul lcag tsha nan,//slob gso tsha nan,//kha rdung tsha nan,//ngo rgol tsha nan	tsha nan
ཚ་ནོན	pressing iron	tsha non
ཚ་གནོན	tsha non	tsha gnon
ཚ་སྣ	in nostrils of mdzo yak etc rope rgyu ba'i ming, anxiety, worry	tsha sna
ཚ་སྣ་ཅན	solicitous, careful, attached	tsha sna can
ཚ་སྣ་མེད་མཁན	indifferent, unfeeling, callous	tsha sna med mkhan
ཚ་པོ	hot, heat, warmth, [one who does something] [very/ extremely/ excellently]	tsha po
ཚ་པོ་ལོང་ལོང་དུ་འཁོལ	boiling fiercely/ hotly	tsha po long long du 'khol
ཚ་སྤུན	nephews and brothers	tsha spun
ཚ་སྤུན་ཕྱི་མ	younger siblings	tsha spun phyi ma
ཚ་ཕན་ཙེ	dresser, kitchen table	tsha phan tse
ཚ་ཕོག	when traveling, for refreshment eat and drink/ stop for lunch	tsha phog
ཚ་ཕོག་རྒྱག་པ	when traveling, for refreshment stop to eat and drink/ have lunch tsha phog rgyag sa'i bar gyi lam tshad 1/2 day journey to a lunch site	tsha phog rgyag pa
ཚ་ཕོགས	when traveling, for refreshment eat and drink/ have lunch	tsha phogs
ཚ་ཕོགས་རྒྱག་པ	when traveling, for refreshment eat and drink/ have lunch	tsha phogs rgyag pa
ཚ་ཕྱུ་མ	sog chas la dpe blangs nas bzos pa'i gyon pa zhig	tsha phyu ma
ཚ་ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	1) lus la tsha reg phog nyams shig //nyi mas gzugs dros ches nas mgo lus tsha phyur phyur byung ba; 2) ngo tsha skyes pa'i nyams 'gyur,//mi mang po'i dkyil du rdzun rkub rdol nas ngo gdong tsha phy...	tsha phyur phyur
ཚ་འཕྲུ	cha yig dang mi nor ba'i tsha rtags, tsha	tsha 'phru
ཚ་བ	heat; hot; to be hot	tsha ba
ཚ་བ་རྒྱས་པ	increasing heat [body or weather], have a fever	tsha ba rgyas pa
ཚ་བ་རྒྱས་ཞག	has a fever	tsha ba rgyas zhag
ཚ་བ་སྒང	Tsawa Gang, one of the Six Ranges of Dokham	tsha ba sgang
ཚ་བ་སྒྲིབ	parasol	tsha ba sgrib
ཚ་བ་ཆུང	little heat/ fever	tsha ba chung
ཚ་བ་ཆེ	gtrat heat [zla ba drug pa'i sgang la tsha ba che ba'i dus tshigs yin pas shing gi 'bras bu smin, dus gzer nyer bzhi'i nang gses]	tsha ba che
ཚ་བ་ཆེ་བའི་ས་ཁུལ	tropical areas	tsha ba che ba'i sa khul
ཚ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great heat *, high fever	tsha ba chen po
ཚ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག	[he] has a high fever	tsha ba chen po 'dug
ཚ་བ་ཉིད	heat	tsha ba nyid
ཚ་བ་རྙིང་པ	zla ba gcig phar 'das pa'i lus la tsha ba'i nad ro lus pa [nad rtags su lus stod tsha zhing glo snying 'phar ba dang, srod dus na zhing rngul kha snyi ba sogs 'byung ba zhig]	tsha ba rnying pa
ཚ་བ་ལྟ	take someone's temperature	tsha ba lta
ཚ་བ་དྲངས་པ	[arch] lto chas drangs pa	tsha ba drangs pa
ཚ་བ་འདུག	has a fever	tsha ba 'dug
ཚ་བ་འདྲེན	bringing hot refreshment	tsha ba 'dren
ཚ་བ་ལྡན	possessing warmth, hot	tsha ba ldan
ཚ་བ་སྡེ་དྲུག	the six kinds of tsha ba disease	tsha ba sde drug
སྨིན་པའི་ཚ་བ་དང	two rgyas pa'i tsha ba, three stong pa'i tsha ba, four gab pa'i tsha ba, five rnying pa'i tsha ba, six rnyog pa'i tsha ba	smin pa'i tsha ba dang
ཚ་བ་མ	a nadi	tsha ba ma
ཚ་བ་མ་སྨིན་པ	by phlegm and wind tsha ba smin du ma ster ba [nang gses su dbye na rang bzhin rgyu yis ma smin pa dang, nad khams kyis ma smin pa, rkyen gyis ma smin pa bcas gsum mchis]	tsha ba ma smin pa
ཚ་བ་མེད	without heat, cool	tsha ba med
ཚ་བ་ཙམ	slightly warm	tsha ba tsam
ཚ་བ་ཚུགས	yearly after the summer solstice bgrangs pa'i lcags pho gsum pa nas tsha ba tshugs, de nyid nas bgrangs pa'i bdun pa'i dbugs thob par tsha ba che chung 'jog pa yin zhing mkha' me zhag la gsum bzhi ...	tsha ba tshugs
ཚ་བ་འཛག་པ	{tsha ba 'dzag pa} disease	tsha ba 'dzag pa
ཚ་བ་གཟིགས	take someone's temperature [h]	tsha ba gzigs
ཚ་བ་ཡོད་ས	hot area	tsha ba yod sa
ཚ་བ་རི་ཐང་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ལེའུ	{tsha ba ri thang mtshams kyi le'u [tsha ba zhi nas grang ba ma langs pa'i mtshams kyi rtags dang bcos thabs rnams gsal bar ston pa'i man ngag rgyud kyi le'u bcu bzhi la zer]	tsha ba ri thang mtshams kyi le'u
ཚ་བ་རོང	tsha ba rong area [= {rgyal mo tsha ba rong}	tsha ba rong
ཚ་བ་ལ	at noon	tsha ba la
ཚ་བ་ལ་འདས	nad tsha ba beyond the time of cure [lus zungs yongs nad kyi grogs su gyur nas, sman pa'i dbugs phyi nang gi rgyu ba gcig la 'phar rtsa lan dgu dang bcu 'phar ba gso dka' bar gyur pa'i srog gcod na...	tsha ba la 'das
ཚ་བ་ལེན	fruit used in fever, tamarisk, popular medicinal plant 2181	tsha ba len
ཚ་བ་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ	{rin chen rnam rgyal}	tsha ba lo tsA ba
ཚ་བ་ཤིང	medicinal tree, terminalia catappa	tsha ba shing
ཚ་བ་གསུམ	the three med. hots [sga skya sga smug dang, pi pi ling, pho ba ris bcas gsum]	tsha ba gsum
ཚ་བའི་དུས	the hot season, the heat	tsha ba'i dus
ཚ་བའི་དུས་སུ	during the heat of the day, at noon	tsha ba'i dus su
ཚ་བའི་ན་ཚ	fever	tsha ba'i na tsha
ཚ་བའི་ནད	fever, kinds are (gal mdo, ri thang mtshams, ma smin tsha ba, rgyas tshad, stongs tshad, gab tshad, snying tshad, snyogs tshad, 'grams tshad, 'khrugs tshad, rims tshad, 'brum, rgyu gzer, gag pa, lh...	tsha ba'i nad
ཚ་བའི་ནུས་པ	thermal energy	tsha ba'i nus pa
ཚ་བའི་སྣུམ་ཅན	snum gyi rgyu pad kha	tsha ba'i snum can
ཚ་བའི་འབུ	cicada	tsha ba'i 'bu
ཚ་བའི་མ	pungent	tsha ba'i ma
ཚ་བའི་དམྱལ་བ་བརྒྱད	SA tsha dmyal brgyad	tsha ba'i dmyal ba brgyad
ཚ་བའི་རིག་པ	thermodynamics	tsha ba'i rig pa
ཚ་བའི་རེག་བྱ	hot touch[able], physical sensation of heat	tsha ba'i reg bya
ཚ་བའི་ས་ཁུལ	sub-tropical region	tsha ba'i sa khul
ཚ་བའི་ས་རྒྱུད	very hot region	tsha ba'i sa rgyud
ཚ་བའི་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 hot hells	tsha ba'i sems can dmyal ba brgyad
ཨེཨིགྷཏ་ཧོཏ་ཧེལལས་ཕོ༹ར་ཧེལལ	beings	eight hot hells for hell
ཚ་བར་སྣང་བའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness / cognition appearing as heat	tsha bar snang ba'i rnam shes
ཚ་བས་སྐད་འགགས་པ	tsha ba'i shugs kyis skad gdangs zhan por gyur pa'i nad	tsha bas skad 'gags pa
ཚ་བས་ཉེན	drought, want of rain	tsha bas nyen
ཚ་བས་གདུང་བ	be tormented by the heat of the day	tsha bas gdung ba
ཚ་བས་རྨྱ་བ	lose one's appetite in consequence of great heat	tsha bas rmya ba
ཚ་བིག་བིག	comfortable warm place of residence	tsha big big
ཚ་བིར་བིར	lus la tsha drod skye stangs shig //dgun dus me 'khris su bsdad na gzugs po tsha bir bir byas yong	tsha bir bir
ཚ་བུན	nad zug gi tsha shugs,//rma nad 'phar ba'i tsha bun che yang sman gyis 'joms nus pa	tsha bun
ཚ་བོ	grandson, grand children / nephew	tsha bo
ཚ་བོའི་སྐོར	grandchildren	tsha bo'i skor
ཚ་བྲ	ston mo dang gshin po'i rjes dran gyi dus su byin pa'i zas skal gyi ming	tsha bra
ཚ་དབང	empowerment of longevity GD	tsha dbang
ཚ་འབུམ	1) tsha tsha 'bum ther; 2) building/ stupa where tsha tshas are put	tsha 'bum
ཚ་འབོག	traveler's lunch	tsha 'bog
ཚ་འབྱར	a means of med. treatment	tsha 'byar
ཚ་འབྲབ	[arch] pain/ affliction of heat	tsha 'brab
ཚ་འབྲུམ	heat rash	tsha 'brum
ཚ་མེད་བཞི	four [immeasurables] GD	tsha med bzhi
ཚ་མོ	1) spun mched tsha mo; 2) granddaughter, niece, cousin; 3) heat [A]	tsha mo
ཚ་མྱགས	by heat rotted and spoiled	tsha myags
ཚ་དམྱལ	hot hells	tsha dmyal
ཚ་དམྱལ་བརྒྱད	{yang sos thig nag bsdus 'joms ngu 'bod ngu 'bod che ba tsha ba rab tu tsha ba mnar med} there are eight hot hells: the Hell of Revival, the Black Line Hell, the Hell of Crushing, the Hell of Weepi...	tsha dmyal brgyad
ཚ་ཚ	miniature conical figures molded of clay and used as offerings	tsha tsha
ཚ་ཚ་འདེབས་པའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of making tsatsa images	tsha tsha 'debs pa'i cho ga
ཚ་ཚ་འཕྲོ་བ	to glint, sparkle/ a spark	tsha tsha 'phro ba
ཚ་ཚ་འུར་འུར	hot and vigorously blazing [fire] [me rlung 'tshub ma tsha tsha 'ur 'ur du 'bar gyi 'dug //mang tshogs las 'gul tsha tsha 'ur 'ur du byed pa] vigorous, invigorating [work]{tsha tsha 1) s'atstsha, {...	tsha tsha 'ur 'ur
ཚ་ཚད	degree of heat and cold, temperature	tsha tshad
ཚ་ཚད་ལྟ་ཆས	thermometer	tsha tshad lta chas
ཚ་ཚད་ལྟ་བྱེད	thermometer	tsha tshad lta byed
ཚ་ཚད་མཐོན་པོ	high temperature	tsha tshad mthon po
ཚ་ཚད་མཐོན་པོའི་ལྕགས་བཞུ	high temperature metallurgy	tsha tshad mthon po'i lcags bzhu
ཚ་ཚད་མཐོན་པོའི་ལུད	high temperature compost	tsha tshad mthon po'i lud
ཚ་ཚད་མཐོན་པོའི་ལུད་ཕུང	high temperature compost heap	tsha tshad mthon po'i lud phung
ཚ་ཚའི་ཞག	rust	tsha tsha'i zhag
ཚ་ཝ	acrid taste	tsha wa
ཚ་ཞག	lam bar nyin mo'i tsha phog dang, mtshan mo'i zhag sdod	tsha zhag
ཚ་ཞང	tsha bo dang zhang po,//gnas gcig tu tsha zhang rnams mnyam du 'dzoms pa	tsha zhang
ཚ་ཞིང་སྲེག་པ	heat and capacity to burn	tsha zhing sreg pa
ཚ་གཞུག	stage of remission in fever, convalescent state after fever has left	tsha gzhug
ཚ་ཟུག	pain of sickness [cham pa phog pas mgo lus thams cad la tsha zug brgyab nas na ba]	tsha zug
ཚ་ཟེར	[rays of] heat, sun's rays 2182	tsha zer
ཚ་ཟེར་རྒྱས་པ	radiate the heat of	tsha zer rgyas pa
ཚ་ཟེར་ཅན	sun	tsha zer can
ཚ་ཟེར་འཇོམས	conqueror of the sun's rays, cloud	tsha zer 'joms
ཚ་ཟེར་འཕྲོས་པ	radiate heat	tsha zer 'phros pa
ཚ་ཟླ	sos dus	tsha zla
ཚ་གཟིགས	dgon khag gi mtho rim grva pa dmigs bsal can la ja thug gi skal ba gtong ba'i ming	tsha gzigs
ཚ་གཟེར	pain [attack] of [tsha ba'i nad] disease	tsha gzer
ཚ་འུར་འུར	1) very hot summer weather or, heat of fire/ sun nyams 'gyur//lus la drod skyes nas tsha 'ur 'ur byas byung; 2) skrag nas snying tsha 'ur 'ur byed tshul,//skrag nas snying ga tsha 'ur 'ur byas byung	tsha 'ur 'ur
ཚ་འོར	{tsha 'or disease [tsha ba khrag mkhris dang 'doms pa'i 'or nad rigs shig]	tsha 'or
ཚ་ཡ	grain of salt crystal	tsha ya
ཚ་ཡུལ	{tsha yul} district, tropics	tsha yul
ཚ་རག	SA tsha drag	tsha rag
ཚ་རིང་ངེ་བ	daily warm food	tsha ring nge ba
ཚ་རུ	lambskin	tsha ru
ཚ་རུ་མགོ	skra 'khyil ba'i rnam pa can gyi mgo	tsha ru mgo
ཚ་རུམ	center/ khrod of a very hot place sa cha tsha rum can du kha ba mi chags,/	tsha rum
ཚ་རེ་ཚུ་རེ	messy	tsha re tshu re
ཚ་རེག	hot touch, physical sensation of heat, {tsha ba'i reg bya}	tsha reg
ཚ་རོ	tsha ba'i nad ro	tsha ro
ཚ་རོང	Tsarong, in Tsang	tsha rong
ཚ་རླངས	1) steam from hot water etc [chu skol gyi tsha rlangs dang thug pas lag par chu bur thon byung]; 2) mist arising from the earth from heat [zhogs pa sa gzhi nas tsha rlangs 'phyur gyin 'dug]	tsha rlangs
ཚ་རླབས	force/ power of heat[ing], upsurge, swelling, rise, bubbling/ boiling water	tsha rlabs
ཚ་རླབས་འཁོལ	swell, rise, surge up tsha rlabs che yod pa'i rdo sol gyi me coal fire w great heating power	tsha rlabs 'khol
ཚ་རླབས་ལངས	swell, rise, surge up	tsha rlabs langs
ཚ་རླབས་ལངས་པའི་སྐབས	at the time of the upsurge of	tsha rlabs langs pa'i skabs
ཚ་རླུང	hot wind/ air	tsha rlung
ཚ་རླུང་གི་ཐབ་ཀ	blast furnace	tsha rlung gi thab ka
ཚ་ལ	salt mixed with ordinary rock-salt to color it white, salt purifier	tsha la
ཚ་ལ་རྒྱག་མཁན	welder, solderer	tsha la rgyag mkhan
ཚ་ལ་རྒྱག་མཁན་བཟོ་པོ	welder, solderer	tsha la rgyag mkhan bzo po
ཚ་ལ་རྒྱག་པ	solder, weld [gser dngul zangs lcags sogs]	tsha la rgyag pa
ཚ་ལ་རྒྱག་པའི་ཟངས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོགས	ladle/ cup etc of brazed/ soldered copper	tsha la rgyag pa'i zangs kyi skyogs
ཚ་ལ་རྒྱབ་པ	solder tsha lag cha dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi tsha 'phru - tsha//'' not '' ?//Cha	tsha la rgyab pa
ཚ་ལམ	1/2 day journey by travelers	tsha lam
ཚ་ལའི་ལས་ཀ	welding-soldering work	tsha la'i las ka
ཚ་ལས་སྦྱོར་མཐུད་བྱེད་པ	solder/ weld together	tsha las sbyor mthud byed pa
ཚ་ལི	borax	tsha li
ཚ་ལུ	red, SA tshal ba	tsha lu
ཚ་ལུ་མ	orange, orange (fruit)	tsha lu ma
ཚ་ལུ་མའི་དྲི	orange scent	tsha lu ma'i dri
ཚ་ལུམ	sweet orange grown in sikkim	tsha lum
ཚ་ལུམ་མའམ་དེའི་མཚོན་མདོག	orange	tsha lum ma'am de'i mtshon mdog
ཚ་ལུམ་ལུམ	boiling fiercely/ hotly	tsha lum lum
ཚ་ལུམས	med. blug pa'i chu tsha po'i lums	tsha lums
ཚ་ལུས	parrot, red tree	tsha lus
ཚ་ལེ	borax [does it also mean welding/ soldering??? = tsha li]	tsha le
ཚ་ལེ་བྱེད་པ	to solder	tsha le byed pa
ཚ་ལེན	commandeer, requisition	tsha len
ཚ་ལེན་གཏོང	commandeer, requisition	tsha len gtong
ཚ་ལེའི་སྐྱུར་རྩི	boracic acid	tsha le'i skyur rtsi
ཚ་ལོང་ལོང	1) tsha ba che tsam zhig //chu tsha long long zhig gis 'khrud pa; 2) great fear arising [sems tsha long long byed pa]	tsha long long
ཚ་ཤག	tshashak (a sound)	tsha shag
ཚ་ཤར	1) body being pained from rma 'bras etc. diseases the body; 2) by fear snying la tsha long skye tshul [glo bur dngangs skrag drag po zhig skyes nas snying la tsha shar brgyab byung]	tsha shar
ཚ་ཤུགས	1) heat/ thermal power; 2) gun's accuracy and range	tsha shugs
ཚ་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་ཁང	thermoelectric power plant	tsha shugs glog 'don khang
ཚ་ཤུགས་གཉིས་ལྡན་འི་མེ་མདའ	'i gun having both range and accuracy	tsha shugs gnyis ldan 'i me mda'
ཚ་བཤལ	1) wash a container in hot water; 2) tsha ba'i nad kyis grod pa bshal ba	tsha bshal
ཚ་ས	1) tsha phog rgyag pa'i sa cha; 2) tsha lam; 3) wound etc tsha sa	tsha sa
ཚ་སུབས	khol drags pa'i skyon,//ja bsrubs ma tsha subs thebs nas bro ba log 'dug //sman thang bskol drags pas tsha subs thebs nas nus pa nyams 'dug	tsha subs
ཚ་སེལ	tsha ba sel ba	tsha sel
ཚ་སྲེག	burn/ roast/ heat in fire	tsha sreg
ཚ་སྲེག་གཏོང	burn/ roast/ heat in fire tsha sreg btang ba'i shing rlon sol ba 'gyur - damp wood heated/ burned into charcoal	tsha sreg gtong
ཚ་གསུམ	three hots [sga skya sga smug, pi pi ling, pho ba ris]{tsha ba ma smin pa unripened heat disease [by phlegm and wind bad kan dang rlung heat does not ripen and is not bestowed, divisions: rang bzhi...	tsha gsum
ཚ་གསུར	offering made by roasting mixture of tsampa w the three whites and three sweets	tsha gsur
ཚ་གསེར	"hot gilt" [gold applied w mercury amalgam R]	tsha gser
ཚ་གསེར་གཏོང	apply hot gilt [gold applied w mercury amalgam]	tsha gser gtong
ཚ་ཧྲིལ	horse etc kyi gzhug tsha skyob byed rmed hril	tsha hril
ཚ་ལྷག	cha dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi tsha lag tsha//cha 2183	tsha lhag
ཚབ༹	salt[y]	tshva
ཚྭ	salt, 1 of 5 snying po lnga	tshwa
ཚྭ་ཁ	1) place/ region which is a salt source; 2) {tshwa kha [large salt source in W mtsho sngon po]	tshwa kha
ཚྭ་ཁ་རུ	black salt	tshwa kha ru
ཚྭ་ཁ་ལྷོ	{tshwa kha lho}	tshwa kha lho
ཚྭ་ཁང	building for storing salt	tshwa khang
ཚྭ་ཁུ	salty, briny, brackish	tshwa khu
ཚྭ་ཁུག	salt blug sa'i container/ vessel	tshwa khug
ཚྭ་ཁྲོན	salt well	tshwa khron
ཚྭ་རྒྱག	put salt on	tshwa rgyag
ཚྭ་རྒྱབ་པ	to salt something	tshwa rgyab pa
ཚྭ་རྒྱས་གྱུ་འཕྲུལ	{tshwa rgyas gyu 'phrul} pass [mtsho sngon province yus hru'u, T's rdza stod rdzong]	tshwa rgyas gyu 'phrul
ཚྭ་སྒོ	ba tshva, salt deposit	tshwa sgo
ཚྭ་སྒོ་ཅན	soil that owing to an admixture of soda or magnesia is not suited for any kind of vegetable produce	tshwa sgo can
ཚབ༹་སྒོ་ཅན	salty	tshva sgo can
ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	salty ocean	tshwa can gyi rgya mtsho
ཚྭ་ཅན་གྱི་མཚོ	lavanodaka, salt ocean	tshwa can gyi mtsho
ཚྭ་ཆུ	saline water	tshwa chu
ཚྭ་ཆུའི་མཚེའུ	saline lake	tshwa chu'i mtshe'u
ཚྭ་གཏོང	put salt on	tshwa gtong
ཚྭ་ཐུབ	salt-resistant	tshwa thub
ཚྭ་དུགས	tshva sla nga'i nang du bsros te ras thum byas nas na sa la sbyor ba'i 'chos thabs shig	tshwa dugs
ཚྭ་འདམ་ཐང་གཞུང	Tsaidam Basin	tshwa 'dam thang gzhung
ཚྭ་འདམ་གཞུང	Tsaidam Basin	tshwa 'dam gzhung
ཚྭ་འདམ་གཞོངས་ས	Tsaidam Basin	tshwa 'dam gzhongs sa
ཚྭ་རྡོག་པོ་གཅིག	grain of salt crystal	tshwa rdog po gcig
ཚྭ་སྡོར	salt and meal	tshwa sdor
ཚྭ་བུལ་སྣོད	tshva dang bul tog blug snod	tshwa bul snod
ཚྭ་མེད་མཚེའུ	fresh water lake	tshwa med mtshe'u
ཚྭ་དམར	kind of red rock-salt	tshwa dmar
ཚྭ་དམར་བྲག་ཚྭ	kid of red rock salt	tshwa dmar brag tshwa
ཚབ༹་ཚབ༹	Tsa-tsa. A small clay image of a buddha stamped from a mold	tshva tshva
ཚྭ་ཚྭ	sparks	tshwa tshwa
ཚྭ་ཚིལ	salted fat	tshwa tshil
ཚབ༹་ཚོང	sell[er of] salt	tshva tshong
ཚྭ་ཚོད	1) tshva yod pa'i tshod ma zhig; 2) amount of salt	tshwa tshod
ཚྭ་མཚོ	1) salt lake; 2) {tshwa mtsho} Lake [bod rang skyong ljongs kyi sger rtze rdzong gi lho rgyud na yod pa'i mtsho zhig]	tshwa mtsho
ཚྭ་ཞན་པ	tasteless	tshwa zhan pa
ཚྭ་ཞིང	salt field	tshwa zhing
ཚྭ་ཡ	1 sack of rock salt	tshwa ya
ཚྭ་ཡ་གཅིག	one sack of rock salt	tshwa ya gcig
ཚབ༹་ཡོད་པའི་མཚོ	salt lake	tshva yod pa'i mtsho
ཚྭ་རྭ	rva cos bzos pa'i phyugs la tshva ldud byed kyi ming	tshwa rwa
ཚྭ་རི་སྤུན་གསུམ	{tshwa ri spun gsum} mt [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs yus hru'u bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi khri 'du rdzong du yod	tshwa ri spun gsum
ཚྭ་རིགས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	eighteen kinds of salt	tshwa rigs bco brgyad
ཚྭ་ཤོ	[collector of] tax on salt [merchants]	tshwa sho
ཚག	yak	tshag
ཚག་སྐམ	dried beef of yak	tshag skam
ཚག་མགོ	yak's head	tshag mgo
ཚག་རྒྱག	do relief metal work	tshag rgyag
ཚག་སྒྲ	tshag tshag sound [mkhregs shing rlon pas me btang na tshag sgra brgyab yong]	tshag sgra
ཚག་ཐིག	dum bu star sgrig gi thig //ming tshig snga phyi'i bar gyi stong cha tshag thig gis sbrel ba	tshag thig
ཚག་ཐོ	copper, gold etc. relief work/ smithing hammer	tshag tho
ཚག་དེབ	journal, magazine	tshag deb
ཚག་འདེབས	in silver pieces etc engrave, do relief work	tshag 'debs
ཚག་པ	1) [gold/ silver] smith [snod spyad la tshag ris rgyag mkhan]; 2) locust	tshag pa
ཚག་པར	newspaper, journal	tshag par
ཚག་པོ	yak	tshag po
ཚག་བུག	carcass of yak without the head and inner contents	tshag bug
ཚག་བྱེད་པ	to save up	tshag byed pa
ཚག་མ	sieve	tshag ma
ཚག་ཚག	sgra'i khyad par zhig	tshag tshag
ཚག་ཚིག	larger and smaller joints of the arms and legs, dark spots or speckles on wood, freckles	tshag tshig
ཚག་ཚེ	bruised barley or wheat	tshag tshe
ཚག་ཞྭ	skull-cap lined with lamb skin	tshag zhwa
ཚག་ཞུ	robe line with lamb skin	tshag zhu
ཚག་གཟོང	gold, silver copper etc. relief work/ smithing tool	tshag gzong
ཚག་གཟོང་བརྐོས་ཀྱི་རི་མོ	snod spyad la gser tshag dngul tshag brgyab yod pa,//ka bar brkos pa'i ri mo'i tshag dod pa	tshag gzong brkos kyi ri mo
ཚག་རིས	engraved picture	tshag ris
ཚག་རིས་བཏབ་པ	engraved picture	tshag ris btab pa
ཚག་རོ	what remains in a sieve or filter	tshag ro
ཚག་རློན	fresh beef of yak	tshag rlon
ཚག་ལག	front leg of yak	tshag lag
ཚག་ལུག	yak and sheep	tshag lug
ཚག་ཤ	beef, yak meat	tshag sha
ཚག་ཤ་རློན	fresh beef of yak	tshag sha rlon
ཚག་ཤོག	newspaper, journal	tshag shog
ཚག་སུག	lower parts of the legs of slaughtered yak	tshag sug
ཚགས	filter, cap, sieve, thin-split bamboo for making baskets, right-sort, a choice article, save, spare, lay up as provision for the future, SA bdzags, strain, SA 'tshag pa	tshags
ཚགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར	offering ganacakra	tshags kyi 'khor lo bskor
ཚགས་ཀྱི་རྗེ	chief of the gathering	tshags kyi rje
ཚགས་ཀྱིས་བཙགས	sift with a sieve	tshags kyis btsags
ཚགས་རྐྱན	tshags brgyab pa'i ja 'bab sa'i snod spyad,//ja tshags nang du blug pa'i ja tshags rkyan du bab pa	tshags rkyan
ཚགས་གླིང	tshags sha bzhi gling	tshags gling
ཚགས་མགོ	1) yak head; 2) fool; 3) du ba 'then spyad kyi mgo	tshags mgo
ཚགས་རྒྱག་པ	strain, sift, filter, sieve	tshags rgyag pa
ཚགས་སྒྲིག་པ	dpe deb sogs ring thung tshags sgrig pa,//dpe cha'i mtha' sne ring thung cha snyoms kyi tshags sgrig pa, regulate, put in order, streamline	tshags sgrig pa
ཚགས་བཅོས་པ	ring thung snyoms po bzos pa,//ring thung mi snyom pa'i dpe cha'i ldeb grangs rnams tshags bcos pa	tshags bcos pa
ཚགས་དམ་པོ	tshags zhib mo,//yi ge tshags dam po bris na shog bu 'gro sgo chung compact, tight, tightly-packed	tshags dam po
ཚགས་དྲུག	six senses, six collections	tshags drug
ཚགས་དྲུག་གི་སྣང་བ་གང་ལ་ཡང	any of the experiences of the 6 senses	tshags drug gi snang ba gang la yang
ཚགས་དྲུག་དབང་པོའི་ཡུལ་སྣང	objects of six sense faculties	tshags drug dbang po'i yul snang
ཚགས་སྣོད	tea etc. straining vessel	tshags snod
ཚགས་པར	1) newspaper, journal; 2) lcags la yi ge'i tshags ris brkos pa'i par; 3) many holes bton pa'i ri mo gang rung gi dpe	tshags par
ཚགས་པར་ཀློག་ཚན	newspaper reading group	tshags par klog tshan
ཚགས་པར་ཁང	newspaper office	tshags par khang
ཚགས་པར་འགོད་མི	newspaper reporter	tshags par 'god mi
ཚགས་པོ	1) sha rgyur gso ba'i gyag; 2) ca ga dag po,//mi de las ka zhib tshags po byed mkhan zhig red	tshags po
ཚགས་དཔར	1) newspaper, journal; 2) lcags la yi ge'i tshags ris brkos pa'i par; 3) half-tone picture tshags dpar klog mkhan tshogs chung newspaper reading group	tshags dpar
ཚགས་དཔར་ཀློག་ཚན	newspaper reading group	tshags dpar klog tshan
ཚགས་དཔར་ཁང	newspaper office	tshags dpar khang
ཚགས་དཔར་འགོད་མི	newspaper reporter	tshags dpar 'god mi
ཚགས་སྤྱད	thal rngul sogs 'tshag byed tool	tshags spyad
ཚགས་བུ	vessel in which grain passing through a sieve is deposited	tshags bu
ཚགས་བུབས	tshags sha khog cha tshang,//tshags bubs gcig la tshags gling bzhi yod	tshags bubs
ཚགས་བྱེད་པ	dngos nor nyar tshags byed pa,//dpe debs tshags byed pa	tshags byed pa
ཚགས་མ	sieve, strainer, filter, dense, compacted, anything sifted	tshags ma
ཚགས་བཙུགས	bsko gzhag byas pa	tshags btsugs
ཚགས་ཚིགས	joints in the body [cham pa phog nas lus kyi tshags tshigs tshang ma na ba]	tshags tshigs
ཚགས་ཚུད	[las don gra 'grig 'thus sgo tshang ba,//byed sgo tshang ma thal lus 'thus shor med par tshags tshud byung 'dug //ka tshags tshud pa byung 'dug] efficient, well-organized	tshags tshud
ཚགས་ཚུད་པ	be sure of a thing, gentle	tshags tshud pa
ཚགས་ཚུད་པོ	efficient, well-organized	tshags tshud po
ཚགས་འཛུད་པ	las don 'grigs so byed pa,//dpung 'jug ma byed gong nas gra sgrig tshags su 'dzud pa	tshags 'dzud pa
ཚགས་ཞབ༹	bamboo hat, smyug ma'i zhva mo	tshags zhva
ཚགས་ཞུ	bamboo hat	tshags zhu
ཚགས་བཟང	lus zor yang ba dang tshags su tshud pa,//rgyun du lus rtsal sbyangs na gzugs po tshags bzang bar 'gyur	tshags bzang
ཚགས་བཟང་བྱས་ནས	having made a good choice	tshags bzang byas nas
ཚགས་ཡིག	records, documents	tshags yig
ཚགས་རམ་པ	second highest grade of Geshe	tshags ram pa
ཚགས་ལམ	path of accumulation	tshags lam
ཚགས་ལིང	tshags gling	tshags ling
ཚགས་ལུག	1) yaks and sheep; 2) bsha' lug raised for meat	tshags lug
ཚགས་ཤ	yak meat	tshags sha
ཚགས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	save, spare, lay up as provision	tshags su 'jug pa
ཚགས་སུ་ཚུད	be efficient/ wellorganized	tshags su tshud
ཚགས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	save, spare, lay up as provision	tshags su tshud pa
ཚགས་ལྷོད་པོ	loose, not dense/ compact	tshags lhod po
ཚང་ཀ	squeeze, crowd	tshang ka
ཚང་སྐམ	perfectly dry	tshang skam
ཚང་སྐྱེས	bya spyi'i ming	tshang skyes
ཚང་འཁྲིགས་པ	1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	tshang 'khrigs pa
ཚང་གི་མཐའ	foreign	tshang gi mtha'
ཚང་དགོས་པ	need to be complete	tshang dgos pa
ཚང་འགོ	skye thengs gcig gi khyi phrug sngon skyes	tshang 'go
ཚང་འགྲིག	complete arrangement of everything	tshang 'grig
ཚང་ངུ	nest, cradle	tshang ngu
ཚང་རྔམ	fearful	tshang rngam
ཚང་ཅན	cushion	tshang can
ཚང་གཅིག་མ	skye thengs gcig gi khyi phrug rdog gcig ma	tshang gcig ma
ཚང་བཅད	annihilate	tshang bcad
ཚང་བཅས་པ	making [a] nest	tshang bcas pa
ཚང་འཆའ་བ	build a nest, establish a household	tshang 'cha' ba
ཚང་མཇུག	skye thengs gcig gi khyi phrug rjes skyes	tshang mjug
ཚང་ཉལ	1) sleeping in a nest/ lair; 2) snake	tshang nyal
ཚང་སྟང	heat of the fire element	tshang stang
ཚང་ཐུར	[arch] gos shubs	tshang thur
ཚང་ན	in the household of [...]	tshang na
ཚང་ནག	woman to whom no son has been born, mother of girls only	tshang nag
ཚང་ནས་བསྡད་པ	I stayed in the den	tshang nas bsdad pa
ཚང་པ	Brahma	tshang pa
ཚང་པ་ཆེན་པོ	1) tshangs pa'i rgyal	tshang pa chen po
ཚང་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the Brahma world	tshang pa'i 'jig rten
ཚང་པའི་གནས་བཞི	the four abodes of Brahma	tshang pa'i gnas bzhi
ཚང་པའི་ཡུལ	Bhramaranda	tshang pa'i yul
ཚང་པའི་རླུང	connecting w the heart, of Brahm GD	tshang pa'i rlung
ཚང་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	brahmacarya, pure living, a chaste life	tshang par spyod pa
ཚང་པོ	forming a whole, full, not one less or left out	tshang po
ཚང་སྤྱོད	{tshangs spyod}	tshang spyod
ཚང་བ	(tha mi dad pa grangs ma chad pa dang, sne 'dzoms pa,//mthun rkyen kun tshang ba,//gang dgos ma tshang ba med pa,//ngan dgu tshang ba	tshang ba
ཚང་བང	kitchen	tshang bang
ཚང་བུ	the Brahman hole (in crown)	tshang bu
ཚང་བུག	{tshangs bug} terminal cranial aperture (lambda)	tshang bug
ཚང་མ	all, completely, entirely, everybody, everything, altogether, at the same time, total, whole, totally, one and all, wholly, every, entire, perfect, all	tshang ma
ཚང་མ་མཉམ་དུ	altogether	tshang ma mnyam du
ཚང་མ་ཐེངས་གཅིག་ལ	enmass	tshang ma thengs gcig la
ཚང་མ་འདྲ་མཉམ	all w/o discrimination	tshang ma 'dra mnyam
ཚང་མ་བསྡོམ་པ	all taken together	tshang ma bsdom pa
ཚང་མ་ལོག	everybody, all	tshang ma log
ཚང་མང	1) ka ko la; 2) [arch] kitchen	tshang mang
ཚང་མལ	bird's nest	tshang mal
ཚང་མལ་དུ་ཉལ་བའི་བྱ་རྣམས	birds sleeping in their nests	tshang mal du nyal ba'i bya rnams
ཚང་ཚིང	thicket, dense grove/ wilderness	tshang tshing
ཚང་ཚིང་འཁྲིགས	gahvara, 1 of 8 charnel grounds	tshang tshing 'khrigs
ཚང་ཚིང་འཁྲིགས་པ	the [charnel ground] Dense Wilderness	tshang tshing 'khrigs pa
ཚང་ཚིང་ཅན	forest, jungle	tshang tshing can
ཚང་ཚིན	thicket, dense grove	tshang tshin
ཚང་འཛོམ	plenary	tshang 'dzom
ཚང་འཛོམ་གྲོས་ཚོགས	plenary session	tshang 'dzom gros tshogs
ཚང་འཛོམས	general meeting, plenary session, gathering of all ['thus mi tshang 'dzoms,/, /mthun rkyen tshang 'dzoms]	tshang 'dzoms
ཚང་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	general meeting, plenary session	tshang 'dzoms gros tshogs
ཚང་ཟླ	nest material, spun zla	tshang zla
ཚང་ཡ	double-barrelled gun	tshang ya
ཚང་ར	mtshang ra	tshang ra
ཚང་རག་གཏོང་བ	rta rtsal ston pa	tshang rag gtong ba
ཚང་རའི་རུས་སྒྲོམ	gzugs po'i sked smad kyi rus sgrom	tshang ra'i rus sgrom
ཚང་ལ་གནས	small bird or child in nest or cradle	tshang la gnas
ཚང་ལ་མ་ནོར་བ	complete and w/o error	tshang la ma nor ba
ཚང་ལེན་པ	bitch's bu snod 'don pa	tshang len pa
ཚང་ལོག	1) go back into a house/ den; 2) mi rgyu tshang ma med par gyur pa	tshang log
ཚང་གསར་འཆི་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Tsangsar Chimey Dorje. The father of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche and brother of Samten Gyatso. For details, see The Life and Teachings of Chokgyur Lingpa, Rangjung Yeshe Publications	tshang gsar 'chi med rdo rje
ཚང་གསར་བྱང་ཆུན་གཞོན་ནུ	Jangchub shonnu of tsangsar	tshang gsar byang chun gzhon nu
ཚང་གསར་ལུས་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	Tsangsar Lumey Dorje. One of the masters in the Barom Kagyü lineage	tshang gsar lus med rdo rje
ཚང་གསར་ལྷའི་གདུང་རྒྱུད	Tsangsar	tshang gsar lha'i gdung rgyud
ལྷཻ་ཌུང	gyu. The 'divine blood-line of the Tsangsar family which is said to originate from a deva descending on earth	Lhai Dung
ཚངས	gos kyi bar tshangs,//srin bal gyi bar tshangs yod pa'i stod thung, whole, complete, Brahma, pure, holy, clean	tshangs
ཚངས་སྐུད	brahmin's thread/ string [worn over the shoulder] [also gsang sngags ma rgyud kyi rgyan cha'i gras shig 1 of the {phyag rgya drug}. the six symbolic ornaments/ symbols]	tshangs skud
ཚངས་སྐུད་མགུལ	bhramin	tshangs skud mgul
ཚངས་སྐྱེས	epithet of planet saturn, term for birds in general	tshangs skyes
ཚངས་འཁོར	Brahma's Attendants, n. of the 2nd and 3rd heaven of the first dhyana bhumi. [realm in the {bsam gtan dang po} of {gzugs khams bcu drug}	tshangs 'khor
ཚངས་རྒྱལ	heaven's victory	tshangs rgyal
ཚངས་བཅོམ	Kamadeva	tshangs bcom
ཚངས་བཅོམས	epithet of kamadeva	tshangs bcoms
ཚངས་ཆེན	the Abode of Maha Brahma	tshangs chen
ཚངས་ཆེན་གྱི་གནས	abode of Mahabrahma, [third realm in {bsam gtan dang po}	tshangs chen gyi gnas
ཚངས་ཆེན་པོ	Great brahma, mahabrahma	tshangs chen po
ཚངས་ཆེན་རིགས་ལྔའི་ཞིང	Realms of the five families of Great Purity / Maha Brahma: Sukhavati and so forth with the five teachers being the five buddha families of Amitabha, etc	tshangs chen rigs lnga'i zhing
ཚངས་ཉིད	brahmahood	tshangs nyid
ཚངས་ཐིག	diameter, brahma, line, axis	tshangs thig
ཚངས་ཐིག་ཟུར་ཐུག	8 directions signifying thig	tshangs thig zur thug
ཚངས་ཐུག	white roof ornament of temples etc tshangs dang khyab 'jug dbang po brahma, vishnu, and indra	tshangs thug
ཚངས་དུང་གི་ཐོར་ཚུགས་ཅན	Brahma w conch topknot, [head of all {rje'u rigs}	tshangs dung gi thor tshugs can
ཚངས་བདག་མ	mistress of the heavens	tshangs bdag ma
ཚངས་མདུན	Leading brahmas [realm]	tshangs mdun
ཚངས་མདུན་ན་འདོན	Leading brahmas realm	tshangs mdun na 'don
ཚངས་གནས	the abode of Brahma, crown of the head	tshangs gnas
ཚངས་གནས་གསུམ	Three Brahma Abodes	tshangs gnas gsum
ཚངས་པ	Brahma/ God; pure/ chaste	tshangs pa
ཚངས་པ་ཀུན་འཁོར་གྱི་ལྷ	{tshangs pa bdun na 'don} realm gods	tshangs pa kun 'khor gyi lha
ཚངས་པ་དཀར་པོ	a deity	tshangs pa dkar po
ཚངས་པ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Brahma and Indra	tshangs pa brgya byin
ཚངས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Great brahma, mahabrahma [highest abode in {bsam gtan dang po} 1st dhyana, 1 of the 28 classes of gods in the form realm = {gzugs kyi khams}	tshangs pa chen po
ཚངས་པ་དུང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	branching from the srog rtsa rtsa nag gnyis and snying nas brgyud pa'i gnyis log gnyis bcas four nadis said to gather at the bhramarandra tshangs pa dung gi thor tshugs can Brahma w conch topknot, ...	tshangs pa dung gi 'khor lo
ཚངས་པ་མདུན་ན་འདོན	Leading brahmas [realm] [tshangs pa chen po'i mdun na 'dug and rim gro byed pa'i tshig 'don pa'i lha'am gnas so, [second/ middle abode in {bsam gtan dang po}. Acolytes of brahma [brahmapurohita], 1...	tshangs pa mdun na 'don
ཚངས་པ་མདུན་ན་འདོན་གྱི་ལྷ	the gods of Brahma's Priests	tshangs pa mdun na 'don gyi lha
ཚངས་པ་བ	Followers of Brahma	tshangs pa ba
ཚངས་པ་སྦྲུལ་གདོང	snake-headed Brahmi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	tshangs pa sbrul gdong
ཚངས་པ་མཚུངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	perfectly observe the rules	tshangs pa mtshungs par spyod pa
ཚངས་པ་ལྷ་ཡི་མེ་ཏོག	Pure Flower of the Gods (epithet of Tibetan king Khri srong lDe'u btsan)	tshangs pa lha yi me tog
ཚངས་པ་ལྷའི་མེ་ཏོག	1) {tshangs pa lha'i me tog} herb; 2) an emblem of chos rgyal khri srong lde'u btsan	tshangs pa lha'i me tog
ཚངས་པའི་འཁོར	{tshangs pa mdun na 'don} realm + {tshangs ris}	tshangs pa'i 'khor
ཚངས་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	1) wheel [scepter] of Bhrama; 2) buddha's dharma chakra	tshangs pa'i 'khor lo
ཚངས་པའི་སྒྲ	the voice of Brahma, [Syn Buddha's voice]	tshangs pa'i sgra
ཚངས་པའི་སྒྲ་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབྱངས	the tone of Brahma's voice	tshangs pa'i sgra skad kyi dbyangs
ཚངས་པའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	the melodious voice of Brahma	tshangs pa'i sgra dbyangs
ཚངས་པའི་ངྲོ	celestial call tshangs pa'i dngos po dag la gshegs par	tshangs pa'i ngro
ཚངས་པའི་རྔ་སྒྲ	Thunder of the Drum of Brahma	tshangs pa'i rnga sgra
ཚངས་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	Brahma Loka, the world of Brahma, the Brahma abodes / realms. [the abodes of {bsam gtan dang po}	tshangs pa'i 'jig rten
ཚངས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	la la phud	tshangs pa'i snying po
ཚངས་པའི་རྟ	horse of Bhrama, sun	tshangs pa'i rta
ཚངས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of Brahma, see also {lha dang mi'i theg pa}	tshangs pa'i theg pa
ཚངས་པའི་དྲང་སྲོང	highest class of brahminical sages, brahminical saint	tshangs pa'i drang srong
ཚངས་པའི་མདུན་ན	1 of gzugs khams gnas rigs bcu bdun	tshangs pa'i mdun na
ཚངས་པའི་མདུན་ན་འདོན	priests of brahma heaven	tshangs pa'i mdun na 'don
ཚངས་པའི་སྡེ་བཞི	4 kinds of acquirements	tshangs pa'i sde bzhi
ཚངས་པའི་གནས	euphoric states	tshangs pa'i gnas
ཚངས་པའི་གནས་པ་བཞི	Four Immeasurably Pure States {snying rje, dga' ba, btang snyoms, byams pa} compassion, joy, equanimity, and love	tshangs pa'i gnas pa bzhi
ཚངས་པའི་གནས་བཞི	four brahmaviharas	tshangs pa'i gnas bzhi
ཚངས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ	maintaining its purity	tshangs pa'i spyod pa
ཚངས་པའི་བུ	brahmana, poison	tshangs pa'i bu
ཚངས་པའི་བུ་ག	brahmarandra, aperture of Brahma	tshangs pa'i bu ga
ཚངས་པའི་བླ་མ	lama of heaven	tshangs pa'i bla ma
ཚངས་པའི་དབང་པོ	Lord Brahma	tshangs pa'i dbang po
ཚངས་པའི་དབྱངས	brahmaghosa [Buddha], Brahmalike voice [the melodious voice of the buddha]	tshangs pa'i dbyangs
པ་ཚངས་པའི་དབྱངས	your speech	pa tshangs pa'i dbyangs
ཨིས་ཐེ་ཕ༹ྲེཨེ	flowing melody of Brahma	is the free
བྲཧམ	like voice, [the melodious voice of the Buddha]	Brahma
ཚངས་པའི་དབྱངས་ལྟར་སྙན་པ	sweet like Brahma's song	tshangs pa'i dbyangs ltar snyan pa
ཚངས་པའི་མེ	fire of Bhrama	tshangs pa'i me
ཚངས་པའི་རྩ	Brahma-channel	tshangs pa'i rtsa
ཚངས་པའི་ཚུལ	the way of purity [purity = nirvana and the way to attain it = dge sbyong gi tshul bar chad med lam mo]	tshangs pa'i tshul
ཚངས་པའི་ཡུལ་ས	brahmarandhra, brahma realm	tshangs pa'i yul sa
ཚངས་པའི་རིས	the Brahma realms	tshangs pa'i ris
ཚངས་པའི་ལམ	aperture of brahma, path of Brahma, the way of purification	tshangs pa'i lam
ཚངས་པའི་ཤིང	indian mulberry tree	tshangs pa'i shing
ཚངས་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	named Brahmaratha	tshangs pa'i shing rta zhes bya ba
ཚངས་པའི་སྲས་མོ	epithet of goddess sarasvati	tshangs pa'i sras mo
ཚངས་པའི་སྲིན་པོ	Brahma-raksasa. A type of demoniac spirit	tshangs pa'i srin po
ཚངས་པའི་བསོད་ནམས་བཞི	TSE	tshangs pa'i bsod nams bzhi
ཚངས་པའི་ལྷ	the Brahma gods/ devas	tshangs pa'i lha
ཚངས་པའི་ལྷ་མདོས	ransom for the tshangs pa'i lha	tshangs pa'i lha mdos
ཚངས་པར་གྱུར་ཅིག	become clean, be pure	tshangs par gyur cig
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད	purity of life, perfect abstinence from female company	tshangs par spyod
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་ཉིད	one lives a chaste life	tshangs par spyod nyid
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	brahmacharya, chastity, to observe celibate lifestyle, holy living, pure conduct, correct practice, celibacy; one who observes chastity	tshangs par spyod pa
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་བཟུང་བ	{rab tu byung nas rang gi dbang po thul la tshangs par spyod pa zung zhig} - become a monk and take up the pure life of subduing your senses!	tshangs par spyod pa bzung ba
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་ལ་གནས	living a pure life, 1 of the {gnas bzhi}. = four ways of living	tshangs par spyod pa la gnas
ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པའི་ཆ་བྱེད	the attire of pure conduct/ brahmacharya dress	tshangs par spyod pa'i cha byed
ཚངས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to grant absolution/ absolve	tshangs par byed pa
ཚངས་པར་མཚུངས	brothers and sisters	tshangs par mtshungs
ཚངས་པར་མཚུངས་པར་སྤྱོད	living like Brahma, pure conduct	tshangs par mtshungs par spyod
ཚངས་པར་མཚུངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	lead an honest upright life	tshangs par mtshungs par spyod pa
ཚངས་པར་མཛད་པ	to make whole/ as whole	tshangs par mdzad pa
ཚངས་པར་གསོལ	make as whole	tshangs par gsol
ཚངས་པས་བྱིན	brahmadatt, buddhist king of benares devoted to buddha	tshangs pas byin
ཚངས་པོ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahabrahma	tshangs po chen po
ཚངས་སྤོང	son of Mara	tshangs spong
ཚངས་སྤྱོད	chastity, Brahma-like conduct / living, {par spyod pa}. monastic discipline, pure conduct. There are the two meanings: (a) someone who does not have one of the higher ordinations but who observes c...	tshangs spyod
ཚངས་སྤྱོད་དགེ་བསྙེན	genyen of pure conduct [ji srid 'tsho'i bar du tshangs par spyod pa'i gzhi dag yongs su blangs nas mi tshangs spyod spong ba'i dge bsnyen]	tshangs spyod dge bsnyen
ཚངས་སྤྱོད་ལྡན	one who assiduously preserves his religious vows, epithet of kumara	tshangs spyod ldan
ཚངས་སྤྲུགས་སུ	in completeness	tshangs sprugs su
ཚངས་བའི་སྲས་མོ	goddess svarasvati, SA sgra dbyangs lha mo	tshangs ba'i sras mo
ཚངས་བུ་ག	brahmarandhra	tshangs bu ga
ཚངས་བུག	terminal cranial aperture (lambda)	tshangs bug
ཚངས་བྱིན	gift of heaven	tshangs byin
ཚངས་བྱུང	bhramin	tshangs byung
ཚངས་དབང	Bhrama and Indra Lord brahma	tshangs dbang
ཚངས་དབང་སྲས་པོ	me lha	tshangs dbang sras po
ཚངས་དབྱངས	divine voice, Brahmalike voice [snyan zhing brjid pa'i mchog tu gyur pa lha tshangs pa'i sgra dbyangs]	tshangs dbyangs
ཚངས་དབྱངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1683-1702 - sixth Dalai Lama, Tsangyang Gyatso	tshangs dbyangs rgya mtsho
ཚངས་དབྱངས་ལས་སྙན་པ	[a voice] more melodious than Brahma's	tshangs dbyangs las snyan pa
ཚངས་སྦྱོན	epithet of son of kamadeva	tshangs sbyon
ཚངས་མ	//1 grong pa'i chos kyis ma gos pa'i bud med gtsang ma; 2) sbrang bu; 3) 'jig rten pas mchod pa'i lha tshangs pa'i yum clean	tshangs ma
ཚངས་མཚོ	manasarovara, brahma's lake, woman of high rank	tshangs mtsho
ཚངས་བཟང	good presider over divinity	tshangs bzang
ཚངས་རབས	the highest of this lineage	tshangs rabs
ཚངས་རིགས	brahman caste traditionally originated from brahma	tshangs rigs
ཚངས་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods/ devas of the Brahma realm/ class	tshangs rigs kyi lha
ཚངས་རིས	realm of Bhrama [bsam gtan dang po'i gnas ris kyi 'og ma ste, sdig pas tshangs shing tshangs gnas bzhi la gnas pa dang, tshangs pa chen po'i 'khor dang sde ris skyes pa'i gnas the Brahma abodes, {b...	tshangs ris
ཚངས་རིས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	brahamakayika (1st dhyana)	tshangs ris kyi lha
ཚངས་རིས་པ	Brahmakayika. or Stratum Of Brahma	tshangs ris pa
ཚངས་རིས་པ་སོགས་པ་གསུམ	Three Realms Beginning with Brahmakayika	tshangs ris pa sogs pa gsum
ཚངས་སྲས་མོ	goddess svarasvati, SA sgra dbyangs lha mo	tshangs sras mo
ཚངས་གསར	Tsangsar Family, also referred to as {pha bu bco brgyad}	tshangs gsar
ཚངས་གསར་ལྷའི་གདུང་བརྒྱུད	the divine bloodline of tsangsar	tshangs gsar lha'i gdung brgyud
ཚངས་གསལ་བས	Brahma prayed	tshangs gsal bas
ཚངས་ལྷ	Brahma-devas, the gods of the brahma realms	tshangs lha
ཚངས་ལྷ་ཉེ་ཕན	tshangs pa mdun na 'don	tshangs lha nye phan
ཚད	(full) expression/ measure; extent; dimension(s); size	tshad
ཚད་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ	differentiation in the measure	tshad kyi dbye ba
ཚད་ཀྱིས་བཅད་མི་ནུས	undefinable	tshad kyis bcad mi nus
ཚད་བཀག	norm, standard, established size/ scale	tshad bkag
ཚད་བཀོད	set a standard/ scale/ measure of/ that [p tshad 'god]	tshad bkod
ཚད་སྐམ	potter's tool	tshad skam
ཚད་སྐྱེས	sweat, perspiration	tshad skyes
ཚད་སྐྱོབ	umbrella, protection against heat	tshad skyob
ཚད་ཁྲ	ang grangs kyi ri mo,//gza' nyi tshad khra kha byang bcas tshes khongs de ka nyid du 'god pa lta bu	tshad khra
ཚད་མཁྲིས	fever + mkhris pa/ bile disease	tshad mkhris
ཚད་འཁྱོལ	tshad longs pa, tshad du slebs pa	tshad 'khyol
ཚད་འཁྲུ	{tshad 'khru} disease	tshad 'khru
ཚད་གུ་ཡངས་པ	spacious	tshad gu yangs pa
ཚད་གྲངས	amount, quantity, #	tshad grangs
ཚད་གྲུབ	genuinely established, authentic	tshad grub
ཚད་དགུང	noon, dbyar tshad kyi dkyil	tshad dgung
ཚད་འགོད	set a standard/ scale/ measure of/ that [p tshad 'god]	tshad 'god
ཚད་རྒལ	excess	tshad rgal
ཚད་རྒྱག	measure, survey	tshad rgyag
ཚད་རྒྱག་པ	cha tshad thig tshad len pa,//sa cha 'di'i ring thung thig tshad cig rgyag dgos	tshad rgyag pa
ཚད་རྒྱག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཤིང	measuring stick	tshad rgyag byed kyi shing
ཚད་རྒྱབ་པ	gauge	tshad rgyab pa
ཚད་རྒྱབ་མ་ཐུབ་པ	immeasurable	tshad rgyab ma thub pa
ཚད་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	scholarship, science	tshad sgrub kyi rig pa
ཚད་བརྒལ	over the limit, in excess, abnormal	tshad brgal
ཚད་བརྒལ་ཀྱི་ཁེ་སྤོགས	profit [over the limit, in excess, abnormal, super]	tshad brgal kyi khe spogs
ཚད་བརྒལ་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང	price/ value [over the limit, in excess]	tshad brgal kyi rin thang
ཚད་བརྒལ་ཀྱི་རིན་ཐང་ལྷག་མ	price/ value [over the limit, in excess]	tshad brgal kyi rin thang lhag ma
ཚད་ངེས་ཅན་ཞིག	definite limit, scale, ration, allowance, quota	tshad nges can zhig
ཚད་ཅན	having a measure, dimensions	tshad can
ཚད་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	aggrandize	tshad che ru gtong ba
ཚད་ཇི་ཡོད་ཤེས་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	measure	tshad ji yod shes thabs byed pa
ཚད་མཇུག	convalescence from tshad nad [fever, malaria, illness from heat/ heat stroke/ prostration]	tshad mjug
ཚད་མཇུག་རྒྱས་ན་འཆི་ཉེན་ཡོད	in a long convalescence from tshad nad [fever, malaria, illness from heat/ heat stroke/ prostration] there is danger of dying	tshad mjug rgyas na 'chi nyen yod
ཚད་འཇལ	to measure, survey	tshad 'jal
ཚད་འཇལ་བ	measure, survey	tshad 'jal ba
ཚད་རྙོག	heat tormented body/ mind bying rnyog	tshad rnyog
ཚད་ཏིག	measuring/ plumb line	tshad tig
ཚད་རྟོགས	{'di 'dra shes rab kyi tshad tsam ni sus kyang mi rtogs so} Who could measure such wisdom!	tshad rtogs
ཚད་སྟོན་པ	dial	tshad ston pa
ཚད་བལྟ	experiment, test	tshad blta
ཚད་བལྟའི་ར་བ	test/ experimental station	tshad blta'i ra ba
ཚད་ཐུབ	authentic, verifiable	tshad thub
ཚད་མཐོ	height, attitude	tshad mtho
ཚད་མཐོ་ཤོས་སུ་སླེབས་པ	culminate	tshad mtho shos su slebs pa
ཚད་འཐིབས	tsha drod rgyas te khams mi gsal bar gyur pa,//nam zla'i tsha drod kyis rkyen pas rig pa tshad 'thibs nyog por gyur pa	tshad 'thibs
ཚད་འཐུམས	tsha drod ha cang ches pas shes pa bzi 'thoms ltar gyur pa,//nad pa'i dbang shes tshang ma tshad 'thums kyis dran pa nyams pa	tshad 'thums
ཚད་དང་ལྡན་པ	authentic(ally qualified)/ genuine; authentic measure/ expression	tshad dang ldan pa
ཚད་དུ	up to, as far as, as much as	tshad du
ཚད་དུ་སྐྱེས་པ	grown up, full-size	tshad du skyes pa
ཚད་དུ་སྐྱོལ	to reach the limit, bring to culmination 2190	tshad du skyol
ཚད་དུ་འཁྱོལ་བ	to complete, finish, bring to completion	tshad du 'khyol ba
ཚད་དུ་འཆོལ	to actualize	tshad du 'chol
ཚད་དུ་ཕྱིན	fulfilled, perfected	tshad du phyin
ཚད་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	to reach the full capacity of	tshad du phyin pa
ཚད་དུ་བྱེད	paying in price	tshad du byed
ཚད་དུ་བྱེད་པ	measure	tshad du byed pa
ཚད་དུ་ལོངས་པ	measurable, be of proper measure, to fit	tshad du longs pa
ཚད་དུ་ཤེས	become the model	tshad du shes
ཚད་དུ་སླེབས	be of proper measure, to fit, measurable	tshad du slebs
ཚད་དུག	nad dug [virus? cause of disease?] by which the body is maddened/ intoxicated and mind disturbed [R]	tshad dug
ཚད་དྲོད	1) heat of tsha ba'i nad/ fever; 2) confidence, nyams rtogs	tshad drod
ཚད་གདུགས	parasol	tshad gdugs
ཚད་གདུང	torment of heat	tshad gdung
ཚད་གདུང་དྲག་པོས་ལུས་གཟིར་བ	body tormented by fierce heat	tshad gdung drag pos lus gzir ba
ཚད་འདས	immeasureable [grangs dang khyon 'bor sogs kyi tshad gzhi las brgal ba,//mi grangs tshad 'das,//khang khyim tshad 'das,//dngos zog tshad 'das,..Gzugs bongs tshad 'das]	tshad 'das
ཚད་འདི་ཙམ་མོ	pre-established limit	tshad 'di tsam mo
ཚད་འདེབས	thig tshad len pa,//lam thag ring la le dbar gyi tshad 'debs pa	tshad 'debs
ཚད་འདེབས་པ	thig tshad len pa,//lam thag ring la le dbar gyi tshad 'debs pa	tshad 'debs pa
ཚད་ལྡང	be able to meet a [required] standard/ measurement/ qualification/ size [ras khre rtse brgyad kyis phru gu gcig gi stod thung gos thung gi tshad ldang ba]	tshad ldang
ཚད་ལྡན	standard	tshad ldan
ཚད་ལྡན་མཁས་གྲུབ	wise and accomplished sages	tshad ldan mkhas grub
ཚད་ལྡན་གྱི་སྐད	standard language	tshad ldan gyi skad
ཚད་ལྡན་གྱི་སྒྲ	standard pronunciation	tshad ldan gyi sgra
ཚད་ལྡན་གྱི་དུ་འགྱུར	be standardized	tshad ldan gyi du 'gyur
ཚད་ལྡན་གྱི་ལམ་ལྕགས	standard RR track	tshad ldan gyi lam lcags
ཚད་ལྡན་འདབ་མ	tree	tshad ldan 'dab ma
ཚད་ལྡན་བཟོ་བ	qualify, standardize	tshad ldan bzo ba
ཚད་ལྡམ་རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་རབ	the infallible words of the Victorious Ones	tshad ldam rgyal ba'i gsung rab
ཚད་སྡུར	comparison, competition, discuss [,//spus ka yag nyes kyi rim pa tshad sdur gtan 'bebs bzo ba,//dpe bzang tshad sdur 'dems sgrug byed pa]	tshad sdur
ཚད་སྡུར་བྱེད	compare, compete	tshad sdur byed
ཚད་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	compare, compete	tshad sdur byed pa
ཚད་བསྡུར	compared, competed, discussed	tshad bsdur
ཚད་ནད	[tshad pa phog pa'am tshad pa rgyas nas byung ba'i disease] fever, malaria, illness from heat/ heat stroke/ prostration	tshad nad
དུ་ཚ་བ་ན་ཡོང	when there is fever left from tshad nad [fever, malaria, illness from heat] it comes back again and again	du tsha ba na yong
ཚད་པ	1) (tha dad pa tshad pa, tshad pa, tshod,, measure; 2) compete in, compare; 3) heat, hot, the tropics, fever; 4) size	tshad pa
ཚད་པ་སྐྱོབ་པའི་ཉི་གདུགས	parasol	tshad pa skyob pa'i nyi gdugs
ཚད་པ་ནས་ཕོག	be struck by the heat, receive a sunstroke, be taken ill with dysentery	tshad pa nas phog
ཚད་པ་ཕོག་པ	become ill, be struck by sickness	tshad pa phog pa
ཚད་པ་བྱུང་ཚེ	when it grows hot	tshad pa byung tshe
ཚད་པ་ཞག་གཉིས་མ	fever over/ cured in two days	tshad pa zhag gnyis ma
ཚད་པའི་དུགས་ཀྱིས	by the heat of fever	tshad pa'i dugs kyis
ཚད་པའི་ནད	fever, dysentery	tshad pa'i nad
ཚད་པའི་ཤིང	birch tree	tshad pa'i shing
ཚད་པས་གདུང་བ	to suffer from fever, to be tormented by the heat	tshad pas gdung ba
ཚད་པས་མནར་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of being tormented by heat	tshad pas mnar ba'i sdug bsngal
ཚད་པས་ཕོག་པ	be struck by the heat, receive a sunstroke, be taken ill with dysentery	tshad pas phog pa
ཚད་དཔག	approximation, estimate, appraisal	tshad dpag
ཚད་དཔག་པ	evaluate	tshad dpag pa
ཚད་དཔག་བྱེད	approximate, estimate, appraise	tshad dpag byed
ཚད་དཔོག	measure	tshad dpog
ཚད་དཔོག་པ	fathom	tshad dpog pa
ཚད་དཔོག་པར་དཀའ	hard to measure	tshad dpog par dka'
ཚད་ཕེབས	perfection reaching fullness	tshad phebs
ཚད་ཕེབས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of reaching fullness,	tshad phebs kyi snang ba
ཚད་འཕེར	qualify[ing], meet[ing] a standard	tshad 'pher
ཚད་བྱེད་པ	to try/test the degree of [devotion, etc.]	tshad byed pa
ཚད་བྲལ	1) beyond measure, measureless; 2) thabs med dang ka med,//khyed rang gis bka' mngags gnang ba ltar dam don ma zhus tshad bral red	tshad bral
ཚད་འབུ	grass hopper, locust	tshad 'bu
ཚད་འབྲས	result of valid cognition [ggd]	tshad 'bras
ཚད་འབྲས་གཞལ་གསུམ	MSS: "the three, valid cognition, the result and the object of comprehension." CM: tshad 'bras kyi rnam gzhag ste/ tshad ma ni rnam par 'jog byed kyi rgyu'am mtshan nyid dang/ 'bras bu ni rnam par ...	tshad 'bras gzhal gsum
ཚད་མ་ཀུན་བཏུས	tshad ma kun las btus pa zhes bya ba, [rgya gar gyi slob dpon phyogs kyi glang pos brtsams pa'i rtog ge'i tshig don brgyad dang khyad par du yang dag pa'i shes pa don tshan drug tu bsdus nas gtan l...	tshad ma kun btus
ཚད་མ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	Compendium of Valid Knowledge, Pramana Samucchaya, by Dignaga	tshad ma kun las btus pa
ཚད་མ་གྲུབ་པ	Establishment of Validity [thd]	tshad ma grub pa
ཚད་མ་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	work by {rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen} 13641432	tshad ma dgongs pa rab gsal
ཚད་མ་འགྲེལ་བ	commentary to a logical work	tshad ma 'grel ba
ཚད་མ་མཆིས་པ	incomparable	tshad ma mchis pa
ཚད་མ་གཉིས	the two kinds of valid cognition, {mngon sum tshad ma and rjes [su] dpag [pa'i] tshad ma}	tshad ma gnyis
ཚད་མ་རྙིང་མ	nyingma epistemology	tshad ma rnying ma
ཚད་མ་བརྟག་པ	examining what is authentic	tshad ma brtag pa
ཚད་མ་བརྟག་པ་ཆུང་བ	{tshad ma brtag pa chung ba}	tshad ma brtag pa chung ba
ཚད་མ་བརྟག་པ་ཆེ་བ	{tshad ma brtag pa che ba}	tshad ma brtag pa che ba
ཚད་མ་དང་རྟོག་གེ་བ	logic and reasoning	tshad ma dang rtog ge ba
ཚད་མ་སྡེ་བདུན	title of a work on logic	tshad ma sde bdun
ཚད་མ་བསྡུས་པ	pramanasamuccaya 2192	tshad ma bsdus pa
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་འགྲེལ	Pramana-Vartika, [work on logic by Dharmakirti]. The "Commentary on the Compendium of Valid Cognition", the greatest work of Indian Buddhist epistemology and logic, an inquiry into the "valid means...	tshad ma rnam 'grel
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་འགྲེལ་གྱི་རྒྱན	{tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi rgyan}	tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi rgyan
བཤད	{tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi rgyan	bshad
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་འགྲེལ་རང་འགྲེལ	{tshad ma rnam 'grel rang 'grel [dpal ldan chos grags kyis btsams pa'i tshad ma rnam 'grel rang 'grel	tshad ma rnam 'grel rang 'grel
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་འགྲེལ་རང་འདྲེལ	{tshad ma rnam 'grel rang 'drel}	tshad ma rnam 'grel rang 'drel
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་ངེས	{tshad ma rnam nges}	tshad ma rnam nges
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་པར་ངེས་པ	Ascertainment of Valid Cognition, by Dharmakirti [ggd] tshad ma rnam par nges pa'i 'grel bshad {tshad ma rnam par nges pa'i 'grel bshad} [Indian master ye shes dpal bzang pos brtsams pa dang chos m...	tshad ma rnam par nges pa
ཚད་མ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three valid means of knowledge	tshad ma rnam gsum
ཚད་མ་པ	logician	tshad ma pa
ཚད་མ་འབྲིང་པོ	middle line	tshad ma 'bring po
ཚད་མ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not a valid means of knowing, inauthentic, non- valid	tshad ma ma yin pa
ཚད་མ་མེད	measurelessness	tshad ma med
ཚད་མ་དམིགས་པ	observed valid cognition	tshad ma dmigs pa
ཚད་མ་ཚིག་དོན་རབ་གསལ	{tshad ma tshig don rab gsal}	tshad ma tshig don rab gsal
ཚད་མ་གཞན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	extrinsic /external valid cognition [ggd]	tshad ma gzhan gyis grub pa
ཚད་མ་བཞི	the four kinds of valid cognition [mngon sum tshad ma dang, rjes dpag tshad ma, lung tshad ma, dpe nyer 'jal gyi tshad ma ste bzhi]	tshad ma bzhi
ཚད་མ་རང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	intrinsic / internal valid cognition, self-validity [ggd]	tshad ma rang nyid kyis grub pa
ཚད་མ་རིག	1 of rig gnas bcu, dialectics, logic	tshad ma rig
ཚད་མ་རིག་གཏེར	by sa skya pandi ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan	tshad ma rig gter
ཚད་མ་རིག་པ	logic, the science of what is authentic/ valid	tshad ma rig pa
ཚད་མ་རིག་པའི་ལམ་དང་འགལ་བ	illogical	tshad ma rig pa'i lam dang 'gal ba
ཚད་མ་རིགས་རྒྱན	{tshad ma rigs rgyan} [rjes dge 'dun grub kyis mdzad pa'i tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi spyi don zhig]	tshad ma rigs rgyan
ཚད་མ་རིགས་གཏེར	tshad ma rig pa'i gter zhes bya ba	tshad ma rigs gter
དི་ཏ་ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	1182-1251	di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan
ཚད་མ་རིགས་ཐིགས	tshad ma rigs pa'i thigs pa zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa [mngon sum dang, rang gi don rjes su dpag pa dang, gzhan don rjes su dpag pa bcas le'u gsum gyi bdag nyid can, slob dpon chos kyi grags pas ...	tshad ma rigs thigs
ཚད་མ་རིགས་པ	logic and epistemology	tshad ma rigs pa
ཚད་མ་རིགས་པའི་གཏེར	work by sa skya	tshad ma rigs pa'i gter
པཎ་དི་ཏ་ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	11821251	paN di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan
ཚད་མ་རིགས་པའི་གཏེར་གྱི་རང་འགྲེལ	work by {sa skya pan di ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan} 1182-1251	tshad ma rigs pa'i gter gyi rang 'grel
ཚད་མ་ལོང་པ	deficit, inadequate	tshad ma long pa
ཚད་མ་གསར་མ	new epistemology	tshad ma gsar ma
ཚད་མ་གསུམ	three Kinds of valid cognition	tshad ma gsum
ལུང་ཚད་མ	the perfect measure of the statements of masters rang gi rigs	lung tshad ma
པ་ཚད་མ	the perfect measure of personal reasoning	pa tshad ma
ཚད་མའི	validating	tshad ma'i
ཚད་མའི་སྐོར	logic	tshad ma'i skor
ཚད་མའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	perfectly right being, an authentic person	tshad ma'i skyes bu
ཚད་མའི་གྲུབ་པ	validly established	tshad ma'i grub pa
ཚད་མའི་འགལ་ཟླ་གསུམ	the three incompatible w valid cognition	tshad ma'i 'gal zla gsum
ཚད་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་སྡེ་བདུན	the 7 logcial treatises {thad ma sde bdun} the 7 treatises on logic by Dharmakirti. 1) {tshad ma rnam 'grel}. [pramaan.avaarttika] 2) {tshad ma rnam par ngas pa}. [Pramaan.vinis'caya]; 3) {rig pa'i...	tshad ma'i bstan bcos sde bdun
ཚད་མའི་སྣང་བ	manifestations	tshad ma'i snang ba
ཚད་མའི་བློ	valid cognition/ consciousness, pramanabuddhi	tshad ma'i blo
ཚད་མའི་སྦྱོར་བ་མ་བཀོད་ཅིག	do not set up logical connections	tshad ma'i sbyor ba ma bkod cig
ཚད་མའི་རྩོད་པ	metaphysical discussion	tshad ma'i rtsod pa
ཚད་མའི་གཞུང	principles of disputation; treatise on logic; logical texts, root scripture on logic / valid cognition	tshad ma'i gzhung
ཚད་མའི་གཞུང་ལྟ་མཁན	logician	tshad ma'i gzhung lta mkhan
ཚད་མའི་རིགས་པ	reasoning that correctly establishes [a proposition]	tshad ma'i rigs pa
ཚད་མའི་རིགས་ཤེས	validating rational cognition	tshad ma'i rigs shes
ཚད་མར	authoritative/ ruling/ authentic	tshad mar
ཚད་མར་གྱུར	convinced	tshad mar gyur
ཚད་མར་གྱུར་པ	genuine, are convinced	tshad mar gyur pa
ཚད་མར་གྲུབ་པ	establishment as valid [ggd]	tshad mar grub pa
ཚད་མར་འགྱུར་བ	serving as valid cognition [ggd]	tshad mar 'gyur ba
ཚད་མར་འཇོག་འོས་པ	authentic, verifiable	tshad mar 'jog 'os pa
ཚད་མར་སྣང་བ	manifest on the basis of logic	tshad mar snang ba
ཚད་མར་བྱེད་པ	NTC: to take as authoritative. [mss]	tshad mar byed pa
ཚད་མར་མ་གྱུར	with no logical basis, without qualities	tshad mar ma gyur
ཚད་མར་འཛིན་པ	regard as genuine/ authentic/ perfect	tshad mar 'dzin pa
ཚད་མར་ཟུང	hold them to be true!	tshad mar zung
ཚད་མར་གཟུང་བའི་གང་ཟག	perfectly right being, an authentic person	tshad mar gzung ba'i gang zag
ཚད་མར་བཟུང	see as genuine, recognize as real, hold as logical	tshad mar bzung
ཚད་མར་བཟུང་བ	to acknowledge their truth	tshad mar bzung ba
ཚད་མར་རུང་བའི་ཟླ་གྲོགས	help of authorities	tshad mar rung ba'i zla grogs
ཚད་མས་གྲུབ་པ	established through valid / prime cognition, genuinely established / proven, existing validly	tshad mas grub pa
ཚད་མས་ངེས་པ	ascertained by correct cognition	tshad mas nges pa
ཚད་མས་རྟོགས་པ	understand validly/ truly, realized by pramana	tshad mas rtogs pa
ཚད་མས་གནོད་འགལ	contradicted by pramana/ reasoning 2194	tshad mas gnod 'gal
ཚད་མས་དམིགས་པ	observed by a valid cognition [ggd]	tshad mas dmigs pa
ཚད་མས་བཤིགས་པས་མི་ཤིགས	not destroyed through logical dissection	tshad mas bshigs pas mi shigs
ཚད་མིན	inauthentic, non-valid	tshad min
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་བླ	non-associated compositional factor	tshad min gyi bla
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་བློ	invalid cognition/ understanding	tshad min gyi blo
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་བློ་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition/ understanding	tshad min gyi blo lnga
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་བློ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition / understanding, or mind clouded with illusion. {dpyad shes}, {log shes}, {the tshom}, {yid dpyod}, {snang la ma nges pa}	tshad min gyi blo rnam pa lnga
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	invalid cognition	tshad min gyi shes pa
ཚད་མིན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition/ understanding [bcad shes dang, log shes, the tshom, yid dpyod, snang la ma nges pa'i blo rnams so]	tshad min gyi shes pa lnga
ཚད་མིན་བློ་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition/ understanding	tshad min blo lnga
ཚད་མིན་ཤེས་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition/ understanding	tshad min shes lnga
ཚད་མིན་ཤེས་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of invalid cognition/ understanding	tshad min shes pa lnga
ཚད་མེད	immeasurable, countless, limitless, boundless; immeasurable, unlimited, innumerable	tshad med
ཚད་མེད་གྲངས་མེད	limitless, countless	tshad med grangs med
ཚད་མེད་དགེ	Measureless Virtue; one of the three abodes in {bsam gtan gsum pa}	tshad med dge
ཚད་མེད་སྙིང་རྗེ	immeasurable compassion, 1 of phur pa bzhi	tshad med snying rje
ཚད་མེད་པ	endless or having no limits; immeasurable	tshad med pa
ཚད་མེད་པ་བཞི	4 immeasurables (byams pa, thugs rje, dga' ba, btang snyoms)	tshad med pa bzhi
ཚད་མེད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conception, immeasurable; nam mkha' mtha' yas dang rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched kyis bsdus pa'i 'du shes / ci yang med pa'i 'du shes ci yang med pa'i sas bsdus pa'i 'du shes	tshad med pa'i 'du shes
ཚད་མེད་པར	endless, w/o limits	tshad med par
ཚད་མེད་བཞི	four boundless thoughts	tshad med bzhi
ཚད་མེད་བཞི་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་འཇུག་སྒྲུབ	TSE	tshad med bzhi la 'jug pa'i 'jug sgrub
ཚད་མེད་འོད	Boundless Light, [second abode in {bsam gtan gsum pa}	tshad med 'od
ཚད་མེད་གསུམ	the three immeasurables, {byams pa, snying rje}, {dga' ba}	tshad med gsum
ཚད་མྱོས	madness/ delirium accompanying tshad nad [fever, malaria, illness from heat/ heat stroke/ prostration] tshad myos kyi kha nas gang byung mang	tshad myos
བྱུང་བཤད་ཡོང	a person in delirium of tshad nad [fever, malaria, illness from heat/ heat stroke/ prostration] babbles w/o restraint	byung bshad yong
ཚད་རྨི་ལམ་གྱིས་བཟུང་བ	the measure of progress is marked through dreams	tshad rmi lam gyis bzung ba
ཚད་སྨྱོ	disturbance of mind/ delirium from tsha ba'i nad/ fever/ malaria	tshad smyo
ཚད་སྨྱོ་ཐེབས་ནས་འཆོལ་བ	become confused/ crazy after being afflicted by tsha nad	tshad smyo thebs nas 'chol ba
ཚད་བཙུགས	place as limit	tshad btsugs
ཚད་བཙུགས་པ	to place as limit / to keep as the measure	tshad btsugs pa
ཚད་མཚམས	limit	tshad mtshams
ཚད་མཚམས་གཅོད	put/ set a limit	tshad mtshams gcod
ཚད་འཛིན་ཐུན་བའི	SA rtsal gsum	tshad 'dzin thun ba'i
ཚད་འཛིན་ཐུན་བའི་རྩལ	power to make a small jump with great precision	tshad 'dzin thun ba'i rtsal
ཚད་འཛིན་པ	perfect measure; also {tshod 'dzin pa}	tshad 'dzin pa
ཚད་ཞལ་བ	measure	tshad zhal ba
ཚད་གཞལ	to weigh, estimate, measure	tshad gzhal
ཚད་གཞལ་མི་ནུས	cannot be weighed	tshad gzhal mi nus
ཚད་གཞི	degree, gauge, standard, size, standard, criteria, rate	tshad gzhi
ཚད་གཞིའི་ཚིག	numeral-classifier compounds	tshad gzhi'i tshig
ཚད་བཞི་ལྡན་པ	possessing the four standards	tshad bzhi ldan pa
ཚད་ཟླ	brother	tshad zla
ཚད་གཟུང	calculation, moderation. to measure / mark the progress	tshad gzung
ཚད་བཟུང་གིས་མི་ལང	immeasurable	tshad bzung gis mi lang
ཚད་བཟུང་བ	to regard as perfect, see as genuine. to acknowledge as real / true; keeping the measure	tshad bzung ba
ཚད་བཟུན་དུ་མེད	cannot be limited and confined	tshad bzun du med
ཚད་ཡངས་པ	spacious, commodious in reference to houses	tshad yangs pa
ཚད་ཡས	particular high number, loom, weaver	tshad yas
ཚད་ཡོད་པ	limited, bounded	tshad yod pa
ཚད་ཡོལ	exceed a limit	tshad yol
ཚད་རིམས	fever/ malaria/ heat sickness [= tsha nad] + rims nad	tshad rims
ཚད་ལ	every time, whenever, whoever, whatever construction, level, limit	tshad la
ཚད་ལ་ཕབ	keep balanced, moderation	tshad la phab
ཚད་ལས་རྒལ	surpass/ exceed a norm/ quota/ limit, immense	tshad las rgal
ཚད་ལས་རྒལ་བ	exceed	tshad las rgal ba
ཚད་ལས་རྒལ་བའི་དགའ་སྤྲོ	immense joy	tshad las rgal ba'i dga' spro
ཚད་ལས་རྒལ་བར་འགྲུབ	achieve more than/ over-fulfill the limit/ quota/ norm	tshad las rgal bar 'grub
ཚད་ལས་བརྒལ	surpass/ exceed a norm/ quota/ limit, immense	tshad las brgal
ཚད་ལས་བརྒལ་བའི་དགའ་སྤྲོ	immense joy	tshad las brgal ba'i dga' spro
ཚད་ལས་བརྒལ་བར་འགྲུབ	achieve more than/ over-fulfill the limit/ quota/ norm	tshad las brgal bar 'grub
ཚད་ལས་ཐལ་བ	exceed the proper measure	tshad las thal ba
ཚད་ལས་འདའ་བ	exceed the proper measure	tshad las 'da' ba
ཚད་ལས་འདས	beyond measure, surpass/ exceed a norm/ quota/ limit, immense	tshad las 'das
ཚད་ལས་འདས་པ	infinite	tshad las 'das pa
ཚད་ལས་འདས་པའི་དུས	time beyond measure / immeasurable time	tshad las 'das pa'i dus
ཚད་ལས་ལྷག་པ་དགང་བ	cram	tshad las lhag pa dgang ba
ཚད་ལེན	test, try out [= nyams --]	tshad len
ཚད་ལེན་པ	test, try out [= nyams --]	tshad len pa
ཚད་ལེན་བྱེད	measure, survey, determine the size	tshad len byed
ཚད་ལོང་པ	adequate	tshad long pa
ཚད་ལོང་བ	competent	tshad long ba
ཚད་ལོངས	be able to meet a [required] standard/ measurement/ qualification/ size	tshad longs
ཚད་ལོངས་པ	be able to meet a [required] standard/ measurement/ qualification/ size	tshad longs pa
ཚད་ལོན་པ	1) tshad zin pa,//ras cha 'dis gyon chas cha tshang gcig gi tshad lon pa; 2) gdeng tshod dpogs pa,//kha nas thon pa'i tshig shugs des kho'i bsam tshul gyi tshad lon pa red	tshad lon pa
ཚད་ཤིང	measuring stick	tshad shing
ཚད་གསུང་མཛོད	ask them all	tshad gsung mdzod
ཚན	1) rlabs sam tshad, power;//kha tshan chen po,//bzha' tshan,//lto chas za tshan,//aa rag 'thung tshan,//shed tshan; 2) skor ram tsho,//sde tshan,//gnyen tshan,//lnga tshan party, band, series order...	tshan
ཚན་དཀར	herb {tshan dkar}	tshan dkar
ཚན་དཀར་དམན་པ	herb {tshan dkar dman pa}	tshan dkar dman pa
ཚན་ཁ	power; potency, power, force, energy	tshan kha
ཚན་ཁག	department x	tshan khag
ཚན་ཁང	Academy of Sciences	tshan khang
ཚན་ཁྲུས	lustral aspersion rite, lustral water	tshan khrus
ཚན་གྱིས	forcefully, by its power	tshan gyis
ཚན་གྲངས	[dngos sna mang po'i rnam grangs,//dngos rigs tshan grangs mang po,//tshan rig dpyad gzhi tshan grangs mang ba] a great #	tshan grangs
ཚན་དགུ	nine types of lustral water	tshan dgu
ཚན་བགོས	divided into teams/ sections/ groups/ units	tshan bgos
ཚན་བགོས་སློབ་ཁྲིད	team/ unit teaching	tshan bgos slob khrid
ཚན་ཅན	full	tshan can
ཚན་ཅིག	faction	tshan cig
ཚན་གཅིག	1) sde tshan gcig [grong pa tshan gcig]; 2) sometimes [spyi tshogs rnying pa'i nang 'brog dud tshan gcig la nor phyugs gtan nas mi 'dug]	tshan gcig
ཚན་ཆེ	very strong	tshan che
ཚན་ཆེ་བ	large size/ quantity, w many [mi tshan che ba]	tshan che ba
ཚན་དེ	1) warm, hot; 2) spice pi pi ling	tshan de
ཚན་དོ	garland, rosary	tshan do
ཚན་དོད	mnga' bdag che khag la rten 'bul du 'jal rgyu'i dngos rdzas kyi dod &, skabs gzhan du ngal rtsol mi dmangs nas nyes chad 'bul dngos tshan grangs kyi dod dngul	tshan dod
ཚན་ནེར	quietly	tshan ner
ཚན་པ	class, team, squad, item	tshan pa
ཚན་པོ	many, a number of, implying a large number	tshan po
ཚན་པོ་ཆེ	great many, good deal	tshan po che
ཚན་དབྱི་ཡོན	senator	tshan dbyi yon
ཚན་མོ	hot	tshan mo
ཚན་མོའུ	staff officer	tshan mo'u
ཚན་མོའུ་ཀྲང	chief of staff	tshan mo'u krang
ཚན་དམར	purifying agent with different types of blood	tshan dmar
ཚན་ཙན	advisor, attache, Secretary [of legation]	tshan tsan
ཚན་ཚན	tshan pa tshan pa'am, tshan khag tshan khag //thon zog tshan tshan du bcad pa,//tshogs chung tshan tshan du 'tshogs nas gros sdur byed pa,//dpe cha'i le'u tshan tshan du 'thor ba,//me tog chun po t...	tshan tshan
ཚན་ཟུག	fever	tshan zug
ཚན་ཟླ	spun zla	tshan zla
ཚན་རིག	science	tshan rig
ཚན་རིག་མཁན	scientist	tshan rig mkhan
ཚན་རིག་མཁས་པ	scientist	tshan rig mkhas pa
ཚན་རིག་གི	scientific	tshan rig gi
ཚན་རིག་གི་ཚོད་ལྟ	scientific experimentation	tshan rig gi tshod lta
ཚན་རིག་གི་རང་བཞིན	scientific, w scientific character	tshan rig gi rang bzhin
ཚན་རིག་ཉམས་ཞིབ	scientific research	tshan rig nyams zhib
ཚན་རིག་ཉམས་ཞིབ་མཁན	scientific researcher	tshan rig nyams zhib mkhan
ཚན་རིག་ཉམས་ཞིབ་བྱེད	do scientific research	tshan rig nyams zhib byed
ཚན་རིག་ཉམས་ཞིབ་བྱེད་མཁན	scientific researcher	tshan rig nyams zhib byed mkhan
ཚན་རིག་རྟོག་དཔྱད	scientific research	tshan rig rtog dpyad
ཚན་རིག་རྟོག་དཔྱད་མཁན	scientific researcher	tshan rig rtog dpyad mkhan
ཚན་རིག་རྟོག་དཔྱད་བྱེད	do scientific research	tshan rig rtog dpyad byed
ཚན་རིག་རྟོག་དཔྱད་བྱེད་མཁན	scientific researcher	tshan rig rtog dpyad byed mkhan
ཚན་རིག་དང་མཐུན་པ	scientific tshan rig dang mthun pa'i spyi tshogs ring	tshan rig dang mthun pa
ཚན་རིག་དང་མཐུན་པའི་དབྱེ་ཞིབ	scientific analysis	tshan rig dang mthun pa'i dbye zhib
ཚན་རིག་པ	scientist	tshan rig pa
ཚན་རིག་དཔྱད་ཆས	scientific instruments/ apparatus	tshan rig dpyad chas
ཚན་རོ	hot, sensation of heat	tshan ro
ཚན་རློན	quite wet, wet through	tshan rlon
ཚན་ཧྲི	senator [US], councillor [Japan]	tshan hri
ཚབ་སྐྱིན	replacement, repayment, payment for something lost/ damaged	tshab skyin
ཚབ་སྐྱིན་བསྒྲུབ	replace, repay, pay for something lost/ damaged	tshab skyin bsgrub
ཚབ་སྐྱིན་སྤྲོད	replace, repay, pay for something lost/ damaged	tshab skyin sprod
ཚབ་སྒྲིག་པ	1) skyin pa'am dod sprod pa,// gzhan gyi yo byad brlags pa'i tshab sgrig pa; 2) look/ arrange for a substitute, agent, representative	tshab sgrig pa
ཚབ་སྒྲུབ་པ	give a substitute for, replace a thing	tshab sgrub pa
ཚབ་སྒྲུབ་ཚར་བ	liquidated	tshab sgrub tshar ba
ཚབ་བསྒྲུབ	replace, repay, pay for something lost/ damaged	tshab bsgrub
ཚབ་དངོས	replacement, repayment, payment for something lost/ damaged	tshab dngos
ཚབ་བཅུག་པ	displace, replace, substitute	tshab bcug pa
ཚབ་བཅུག་པའི	displacement	tshab bcug pa'i
ཚབ་ཆེ	intense, severe, strong, serious, grave, bad, wicked	tshab che
ཚབ་ཆེན	grievous	tshab chen
ཚབ་ཆེན་སྡིག་ལྟུང	severe wrongdoing and downfall[s]	tshab chen sdig ltung
ཚབ་ཆེན་པོ	intense, severe, strong, serious, grave, bad, wicked, intense, very great/ much/ strong	tshab chen po
ཚབ་འཇུག	substitute, replacing	tshab 'jug
ཚབ་ཏུ	instead of, in the place of	tshab tu
ཚབ་གཏོང་བ	depute	tshab gtong ba
ཚབ་དུ	as a replacement/ substitute/ representative, in place of, instead of	tshab du
ཚབ་པོ	1) for a thing rin dngul min pa'i tshab; 2) substitute, agent, representative	tshab po
ཚབ་པོ་ཆེ	seriously; x {nad tshab po ches btab pa'i nad pa des sman pa mkhas pa zhig bsten} when people are ill, they go to consult a good doctor	tshab po che
ཚབ་པོ་ཆེས	severe	tshab po ches
ཚབ་སྤྱོད་དངོས་རྫས	substitute, replacement [things]	tshab spyod dngos rdzas
ཚབ་སྤྱོད་རྫས	substitute, replacement [things]	tshab spyod rdzas
ཚབ་སྤྲོད་པ	gar brje'i dod dam rin 'jal ba,//kho'i ca lag gi tshab sprod pa	tshab sprod pa
ཚབ་བི་ཚུབ་བི	unstable, helter-skelter, busy and speedy [lhod lhod min par brel ba tshab tshub de 'dra ma byed]	tshab bi tshub bi
ཚབ་བྱེད	act as substitute/ representative, on behalf of/ for/ as, represent, replace, substitute	tshab byed
ཚབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཁང	agency	tshab byed kyi las khang
ཚབ་བྱེད་མཁན	replacement, substitute, representative [person]	tshab byed mkhan
ཚབ་བྱེད་དངོས་རིགས	replacement, substitute [things]	tshab byed dngos rigs
ཚབ་བྱེད་པ	to replace, substitute, to act for, act as	tshab byed pa
ཚབ་བྱེད་པའི་དངོས་རིགས	replacement, substitute [things]	tshab byed pa'i dngos rigs
ཚབ་བྱེད་མི་སྣ	representatives	tshab byed mi sna
ཚབ་བྱེད་རང་བཞིན	representation	tshab byed rang bzhin
ཚབ་མ	1) for a thing rin dngul min pa'i tshab; 2) substitute, agent, representative	tshab ma
ཚབ་མ་བྱེད་པ	to take someone's place	tshab ma byed pa
ཚབ་རྩིས་རིག་པ	algebra	tshab rtsis rig pa
ཚབ་ཚབ་བྱས་པ	sit	tshab tshab byas pa
ཚབ་ཚིག	pronouns	tshab tshig
ཚབ་ཚུབ	1) glimpses. 2) fluster, helterskelter, restless, agitated	tshab tshub
ཚབ་ཚུབ་གྱིས	helter-skelter	tshab tshub gyis
ཚབ་ཚུབ་དངངས་སྐྲག	running	tshab tshub dngangs skrag
ཨརོཨུནད་ཧེལྟེར	skelter w fear	around helter
ཚབ་ཚུབ་བྱེད་པ	be ruffled, disturbed, agitated	tshab tshub byed pa
ཚབ་འཛིན	undermined, scorning, despising	tshab 'dzin
ཚབ་ཞུ	act as substitute/ representative, on behalf of/ for/ as, represent, replace, substitute [h]	tshab zhu
ཚབ་ཞུ་མཁན	replacement, substitute, representative [person] [h]	tshab zhu mkhan
ཚབ་ཞུ་དངོས་རིགས	thing replacing/ substituting for another [h]	tshab zhu dngos rigs
ཚབ་ཞུ་པ	replace, substitute, act for/ as [h]	tshab zhu pa
ཚབ་རུང་ཙམ་མོ	this may perhaps be used instead, this may, if need be, this may perhaps be used as a substitute	tshab rung tsam mo
ཚབ་ལ	w/ genitive: in x's stead, in the place of	tshab la
ཚབས	intense, severe, strong, power of fault/ transgression/ wickedness/ evil * get excited/ nervous	tshabs
ཚབས་ཅན	deeply, dangerously	tshabs can
ཚབས་ཆུང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	relent	tshabs chung du gtong ba
ཚབས་ཆེ	intense, severe, strong, serious, grave, bad, wicked	tshabs che
ཚབས་ཆེ་བ	grave	tshabs che ba
ཚབས་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང	exacerbate	tshabs che ru gtong
ཚབས་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	aggravate	tshabs che ru gtong ba
ཚབས་ཆེན	serious, severe, atrocious, deeply, dangerously, serious, severe	tshabs chen
ཚབས་ཆེན་གི་རང་བཞིན	serious, important	tshabs chen gi rang bzhin
ཚབས་ཆེན་ནད	grave illness	tshabs chen nad
ཚབས་ཆེན་པོ	intense, severe, strong, serious, grave, bad, wicked	tshabs chen po
ཚབས་པ	be afraid	tshabs pa
ཚབས་པོ་ཆེ	intense, severe, strong, serious, grave, bad, wicked	tshabs po che
ཚབས་རུ་ཙབ༹	tshabs ru salt [ro lan tsa la skyur, nus pas pho ba'i drod nyams pa dang, zas mi 'ju ba, khog pa sbos brgyangs byed pa sogs la phan	tshabs ru tsva
ཚབས་སོང	[they] were nervous/ excited	tshabs song
ཚམ་ངམ་བསྐྱེད	get panicky/ frightened, panic, fright	tsham ngam bskyed
ཚམ་རྔམ	[arch] panic, fright	tsham rngam
ཚམ་རྔམ་བསྐྱེད	get panicky/ frightened	tsham rngam bskyed
ཚམ་རྔམས	[arch] panic, fright	tsham rngams
ཚམ་རྔམས་བསྐྱེད	get panicky/ frightened	tsham rngams bskyed
ཚམ་དམ	shrinking attitude	tsham dam
ཚམ་མི་ཚོམ་མི	undecided, hesitating, wavering, shrinking back	tsham mi tshom mi
ཚམ་མེ	hesitatingly, shrinking, cowardly	tsham me
ཚམ་མེ་ཚོམ་མེ	undecided [las ka byed stangs thag ma chod par tsham me tshom me byed pa,//'thab 'dzing gi nang du tsham tshom spu tsam med par zhugs pa]	tsham me tshom me
ཚམ་ཚམ	doubt	tsham tsham
ཚམ་ཚུབ	undecided, hesitating, wavering, shrinking back	tsham tshub
ཚམ་ཚུབ་མེད་པ	intrepid, daring	tsham tshub med pa
ཚམ་ཚུམ	undecided, hesitating, wavering, shrinking back	tsham tshum
ཚམ་ཚུམ་ཅན	doubtful, wavering, undecided	tsham tshum can
ཚམ་ཚེམ་མེད་པ	w/o hesitation	tsham tshem med pa
ཚམ་ཚོམ	doubt, hesitation, shrinking	tsham tshom
ཚམ་ཚོམ་མེད་པ	without hesitation	tsham tshom med pa
ཚམ་ཞིག	MG, : about, approximately (acc to SNT, used with either time or space) [mss]	tsham zhig
ཚམས་ངམ	panic, fright	tshams ngam
ཚམས་པ	{'phul thag}	tshams pa
ཚམས་ཚམས	sometimes	tshams tshams
ཚྭའི་འདམ	{tshwa'i 'dam} district	tshwa'i 'dam
ཚབ༹འི་འདམ	a district in Tibet	tshva'i 'dam
ཚའུ	1) in grain rocks and lhad zhib sifting device mig mang can; 2) [arch] nephew, cousin, grand-child	tsha'u
ཚར	1) times, instances [thengs sam lan,//yang bskyar tshar gcig bshad pa,//de nyid gnas drug tshar lnga bkod,//tshar drug steng 'og gnyis su bkod]; 2) row, series, string; 3) be finished/ completed	tshar
ཚར་ཁད	SA rdzogs la khad	tshar khad
ཚར་འགྲོ	scorpion	tshar 'gro
ཚར་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	tedious tshar rgyug tshar pa'i yal gas bzos pa'i	tshar rgyu med pa
གཞུ་བྱེད་རྒྱུག་པ་དང	tho ba sogs kyi yu ba byed pa'i rgyug pa	gzhu byed rgyug pa dang
ཚར་ལྔ	five times	tshar lnga
ཚར་གཅད་པ	to subjugate	tshar gcad pa
ཚར་གཅད་པའི་གནས	object of destruction [log rtog rgyud ldan gyi gang zag gam, de'i rgyud kyis bsdus pa'i 'khrul shes dang brjod pa skyon can]	tshar gcad pa'i gnas
ཚར་གཅད་པའི་གནས་གཉིས	the two objects of destruction [snga rgol tshar gcad pa'i gnas, phyi rgol tshar gcad pa'i gnas	tshar gcad pa'i gnas gnyis
ཚར་གཅིག	once, for the first time	tshar gcig
ཚར་གཅིག་ལ	in one moment	tshar gcig la
ཚར་གཅོད	[pham par byed pa'am 'joms par byed pa,//smra ba ngan pa tshar gcod byas pa,//dgra bo tshar gcod byed pa] annihilate, subjugate, destroy, tame, vanquish, defeat	tshar gcod
ཚར་གཅོད་བཅད	annihilate(d), subjugates, taming	tshar gcod bcad
ཚར་གཅོད་རྗེས་འཛིན	elimination and protection	tshar gcod rjes 'dzin
ཚར་གཅོད་པ	{tshar bcad pa} to annihilate	tshar gcod pa
ཚར་གཅོད་པའི་གནས	[person who is an] object of defeat	tshar gcod pa'i gnas
ཚར་གཅོད་པའི་གནས་གཉིས	the two kinds of [person who are] objects of defeat	tshar gcod pa'i gnas gnyis
ཚར་གཅོད་པར་འོས་སོ	he must be stopped	tshar gcod par 'os so
ཚར་གཅོད་བྱེད	* annihilate, exterminate, subjugate, destroy, tame, vanquish, defeat	tshar gcod byed
ཚར་གཅོད་བྱེད་པའི་དམག་འཐབ	war of annihilation	tshar gcod byed pa'i dmag 'thab
ཚར་གཅོད་དམག་འཐབ	war of annihilation	tshar gcod dmag 'thab
ཚར་གཅོད་གཙང་དག	complete annihilation/ eradication/ extermination	tshar gcod gtsang dag
ཚར་བཅད	annihilated, to finish	tshar bcad
ཚར་བཅད་པ	annihilated, eliminated, abolished, destroyed	tshar bcad pa
ཚར་ལྕོག	harvest hut	tshar lcog
རེཨཔེད་ཨིན་ཐེ་ཕི༹ཨེལད་ཨ་ཧོཨུསེ	like tshar lcog is built built of harvested grain]	reaped in the field a house
ཚར་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	{tshar chen blo gsal rgya mtsho} 1502-1566	tshar chen chos kyi rgyal po
ཚར་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	{tshar chen blo gsal rgya mtsho}	tshar chen rdo rje 'chang
ཚར་ཆེན་བློ་གསལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{tshar chen blo gsal rgya mtsho [terton and emanation of sangs rgyas bdun pa rab gsal]	tshar chen blo gsal rgya mtsho
ཚར་རྗེས	finished	tshar rjes
ཚར་གཉིས	twice	tshar gnyis
ཚར་དུ་བསྒྲིགས	arranged/ put in a row	tshar du bsgrigs
ཚར་དུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arranged/ put in a row	tshar du bsgrigs pa
ཚར་དུ་དངར་བ	put in order, arrange properly	tshar du dngar ba
ཚར་དུ་དངར་བ་བྱས་པ	came to welcome us in a beautiful procession	tshar du dngar ba byas pa
ཚར་དུ་དངར་བ་བྱེད	arrange in a series, row, line	tshar du dngar ba byed
ཚར་པ	{tshar pa} tree, tsharpa division of the Sakyapa school GD	tshar pa
ཚར་པ་ཤིང	cotoneaster frigidus wall. ex lindl.	tshar pa shing
ཚར་སྤེ	square shaped tshar ma'i bam rtsig	tshar spe
ཚར་སྤེའུ	square shaped tshar ma'i bam rtsig	tshar spe'u
ཚར་ཕུང	pile of harvested tshar ma'i phung po	tshar phung
ཚར་ཕུད	hanging bunches? chun 'phyang of grain ears tshar as offerings	tshar phud
ཚར་ཕོད	hanging bunches? chun 'phyang of grain ears tshar as offerings	tshar phod
ཚར་ཕོན	tshar ma'i bunch/ cluster]	tshar phon
ཚར་ཕྱིན	have done a thing thoroughly	tshar phyin
ཚར་ཕྱིན་པ	finished, completed	tshar phyin pa
ཚར་ཕྱིན་པ་གྲུབ་སོང	was finished/ completed	tshar phyin pa grub song
ཚར་བ	(tha mi dad pa finish[ed], complet[ed] [R]	tshar ba
ཚར་བུ	spu sdug tshar bu - soft lambskin fur	tshar bu
ཚར་བོང	{tshar bong} ldum sman	tshar bong
ཚར་འབྲུམ	tshar 'brum med. tree [tshar leb kyi 'bras bu ste, ro mngar la bska, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas dreg grum sogs yan lag gi chu ser byer ba sdud	tshar 'brum
ཚར་མ	harvested tshar ma	tshar ma
ཚར་ཚག	lambskin gyon pa rgyab sha can	tshar tshag
ཚར་ཚད	point of solution	tshar tshad
ཚར་ཚར	mtha' sne 'dzar 'dzar gyi rnam pa,//rgyan cha'i phyang phrul tshar tshar mdzes	tshar tshar
ཚར་ཞྭ	hat made of sheep's tsha rus	tshar zhwa
ཚར་ཟིན	finish, completion	tshar zin
ཚར་ལ་ཁད	quick performance of work	tshar la khad
ཚར་ལེབ	cotoneaster microphyllus wall. ex lindl.	tshar leb
ཚར་ལོང	grow, increase	tshar long
ཚར་ལོང་ཡོང་བ	grow	tshar long yong ba
ཚར་ལོངས	grow, increase	tshar longs
ཚར་ལོངས་ཡོང་བ	grow	tshar longs yong ba
ཚར་ཤས	field owners dividing harvest half and half etc. w tenant farmer	tshar shas
ཚར་སོང	finish, complete, the end, that's all	tshar song
ཚར་སློག	coat of lamb's skins	tshar slog
ཚར་སློག་ལུ་གུའི་ཚ་རུའི་སློག་པ	1) place w many trees, forest, [pleasure] grove; 2) (CH vegetable food	tshar slog lu gu'i tsha ru'i slog pa
ཚར་གསུམ	thrice	tshar gsum
ཚལ	garden, park, grove, vegetable dish [food]	tshal
ཚལ་ཀྱལ་བ་སྤོང་བ	abandoning idle gossip	tshal kyal ba spong ba
ཚལ་རྐང་བཞི	one four-lines verse, one shloka	tshal rkang bzhi
ཚལ་རྐྱང་པ	a single line / verse line	tshal rkyang pa
ཚལ་ཁྱེར	following mere words	tshal khyer
ཚལ་ཁྲོམ	vegetable market	tshal khrom
ཚལ་འཁྲི	following mere words / literal meaning	tshal 'khri
ཚལ་གི་སྒྲ་དག་པར་སྦྱོར་བ	[Syn {sgra nges par sbyor ba}	tshal gi sgra dag par sbyor ba
ཚལ་གི་དོན	the literal meaning {tshul bzhi}, the meaning/ sense of the word	tshal gi don
ཚལ་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	string of words, sentence, line	tshal gi phreng ba
ཚལ་གི་ཚོགས	group of words [inflected / compounded] / phrases / sentences, {ldan min 'du byed}	tshal gi tshogs
ཚལ་གིས་བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པ	indescribable through words	tshal gis brjod du med pa
ཚལ་གིས་བརྗོད་མི་ནུས	cannot be expressed/ inexpressible in words	tshal gis brjod mi nus
ཚལ་གིས་བྲིད	fooled/ deceived by words/ talk	tshal gis brid
ཚལ་གུང་ཐང	seat of Tsalpa Kagyü	tshal gung thang
ཚལ་གུང་ཐང་གི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	tshal gung thang gi gtsug lag khang} [founded in the 3rd me lug year by zhang gu brag pa dar ma gzhon nu lha khang chen po]	tshal gung thang gi gtsug lag khang
ཚལ་གུའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས	spangled leggings	tshal gu'i smad dkris
ཚལ་གྱི་བཀོད་པ	magnificent sight	tshal gyi bkod pa
ཚལ་གླང	frying pan	tshal glang
ཚལ་འགྲེལ	word-for-word commentary / explanation	tshal 'grel
ཚལ་རྒོད	wild edible herb/ vegetable	tshal rgod
ཚལ་སྒྲོག	horse/ mule 1 fore-leg and 1	tshal sgrog
ཚལ་ཅིག	a vegetable dish [food]	tshal cig
ཚལ་བཅད	verse	tshal bcad
ཚལ་ཆད	omission, missing word	tshal chad
ཚལ་ཉུང་དོན་འདུས	concise and synoptic / succinct	tshal nyung don 'dus
ཚལ་ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	ideal garden	tshal nye ba'i rin po che
ཚལ་ཏོ	cleaver	tshal to
ཚལ་ཏོའོ	CH style chopper/ cleaver	tshal to'o
ཚལ་བཏབ	planted a garden/ vegetables	tshal btab
ཚལ་ཐིག	red line	tshal thig
ཚལ་དོན	word and meaning, the literal meaning, {tshul bzhi}	tshal don
ཚལ་ལྡུམ	1) sngo tshal; 2) tshal zhing gi ldum ra [garden, orchard, park]	tshal ldum
ཚལ་ནན	[arch] drink	tshal nan
ཚལ་པ	1) fragments, pieces, splinters [shel sgo tshal par gas pa,//ras tshal par dbral ba]; 2) phyed pa,//tshal bshags; 3) tshal pa [lha sa grong khyer gyi sa cha bod khri skor bcu gsum gyi ya gyal zhig]...	tshal pa
ཚལ་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	{tshal pa bka' brgyud} school	tshal pa bka' brgyud
ཚལ་པ་བཞིར་གཤོག་པ	split into 4 pieces	tshal pa bzhir gshog pa
ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ	kind of long men's garment [worn by Sikkimese officials]	tshal phyu ma
ཚལ་ཕྲད	a sentence, phrase	tshal phrad
ཚལ་བ	pieces	tshal ba
ཚལ་བ་བརྒྱར་གས	torn into a hundred pieces	tshal ba brgyar gas
ཚལ་བུ	pieces, fragments, splinters	tshal bu
ཚལ་བུའི་དཔུང་རྒྱན	bone splinter arm band	tshal bu'i dpung rgyan
ཚལ་བོག་པ	make a morning halt on a journey for taking a meal, SA dro btab pa	tshal bog pa
ཚལ་བླ་དབ༹གས	word designation	tshal bla dvags
ཚལ་འབྲུ	word, sound of 1 word. the "letter" [as opposed to its meaning	tshal 'bru
ཚལ་འབྲུ་འབྱོར	/ sbyor ba - composition, compound	tshal 'bru 'byor
ཚལ་མ	breakfast	tshal ma
ཚལ་མ་ཟ་བ་རྣམས	breakfast companions	tshal ma za ba rnams
ཚལ་མའི་ལམ	half-a-day's journey	tshal ma'i lam
ཚལ་མི་མངོན	mystic term	tshal mi mngon
ཚལ་མྱུག་ར་བ	nursery [plants]	tshal myug ra ba
ཚལ་རྩུབ	harsh words, unpleasant speech [def. {gzhan gyi snying la mi 'thad pa'i tshig ngan pa smra ba}	tshal rtsub
ཚལ་རྩུབ་མོ་སྨྲ་བ་སྤོང་བ	abandon harsh words	tshal rtsub mo smra ba spong ba
ཚལ་མཛོད	dictionary, lexicon, glossary	tshal mdzod
ཚལ་ཞིག	tomato	tshal zhig
ཚལ་ཞིང	vegetable/ herb field garden	tshal zhing
ཚལ་བཞི	4 parks (shing rta sna tshogs kyi tshal, rtsub 'gyur gyi tshal, 'dres pa'i tshal, dga' ba'i tshal)	tshal bzhi
ཚལ་བཞིའི་བཅད	4-lined verse	tshal bzhi'i bcad
ཚལ་གཟུང་བར་འོས་པ	trustworthy words tshal yang dgon} -, {tshal yang dgon} monastery [lha sa'i shar phyogs tshal gung thang gi yul du rab byung gsum pa'i shing lug lo la bla ma zhang gis btab pa'i dgon pa zhig]	tshal gzung bar 'os pa
ཚལ་ཡང་དགོན	{tshal yang dgon} monastery [R]	tshal yang dgon
ཚལ་ཡང་རྩ	herb garden tshal g.yang tse - vegetable garden tshal rigs shes rab sgrol ma lha khang {tshal rigs shes rab sgrol ma lha khang} tshal rigs shes rab sgrol ma lha khang {tshal rigs shes rab sgrol ma ...	tshal yang rtsa
ཚལ་ལམ	half-a-day's journey	tshal lam
ཚལ་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	put into verse lines, poetry]	tshal le'u byas pa
ཚལ་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	put into verse lines, [Syn {tshigs su bcad pa} poetry]	tshal le'ur byas pa
ཚལ་སེ	a village in stod lung mtshur phu district	tshal se
ཚལ་སླང	frying pan [for vegetables etc]	tshal slang
ཚལ་གསལ	Prasana-pada, the Clear Words by Chandrakirti, [commentary on {rtsa ba shes rab} by Nagarjuna]	tshal gsal
ཚལ་གསལ་བར་བརྗོད་པ	to express / repeat clearly / precisely	tshal gsal bar brjod pa
ཚས	garden, woman in child birth	tshas
ཚས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	Dharma mudra	tshas kyi phyag rgya
ཚས་སྐྱོར	garden bed	tshas skyor
ཚས་ཁང	flower bed, garden	tshas khang
ཚས་མཁན	gardener	tshas mkhan
ཚས་ཆུན	gardens	tshas chun
ཚི	furrow, kernel, filth, tough, viscous resin	tshi
ཚི་གུ	fruit pit [shing 'bras nang gi rus pa,//kham bu'i tshi gu,//lo gsum kham bu'i tshi gu'i nang snying]	tshi gu
ཚི་གུའི་ནང་སྙིང	heart/ soft part inside a fruit pit kham bu'i tshi gu'i nang snying,//lo gsum kham bu'i tshi gu'i nang snying]	tshi gu'i nang snying
ཚི་གོང	fat of the breast	tshi gong
ཚི་ཅན	stone-fruit	tshi can
ཚི་ཆད	fatigue/ exhaustion; fatiguing/ exhausting	tshi chad
ཚི་ཆད་ནད	debilitating disease	tshi chad nad
ཚི་ཆད་པ	fall into despair, disappointing, shaken, discouraging, grieving, despairing	tshi chad pa
ཚི་ཐུང་བ	1) ring po nar rgyu med pa'i dam tshi; 2) sems kyi ngang rgyud thung thung	tshi thung ba
ཚི་དམ་པོ	strong/ long lasting glue [spyin chu sla drags pas tshi dam po mi 'dug]	tshi dam po
ཚི་བ	tree sap	tshi ba
ཚི་བ་ཅན	sticky, clammy, filthy	tshi ba can
ཚི་ཟད་པ	run out of glue	tshi zad pa
ཚི་རིང་པོ	1) ring po nar te 'ong ba'i dam tshi; 2) sems kyi ngang rgyud ring po	tshi ring po
ཚི་རེ་གནོན་པ	tightly/ continuously press down	tshi re gnon pa
ཚི་ལུ	fat, grease, suet	tshi lu
ཚི་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	strong glue	tshi shugs chen po
ཚིག	burn; literal; word, talk, expression, sentence, line, saying, grammar, speech, phrase, term, name, utterance	tshig
ཚིག་ཀ	lyric	tshig ka
ཚིག་ཀུན	all the words	tshig kun
ཚིག་ཀྱལ་པ	meaningless motormouthing	tshig kyal pa
ཚིག་ཀྱལ་བ	unconnected or irrelevant expressions	tshig kyal ba
ཚིག་ཀྱལ་བ་སྤོང་བ	abandoning idle gossip	tshig kyal ba spong ba
ཚིག་བཀྱལ་བ	confused prattling, irresponsible talk GD	tshig bkyal ba
ཚིག་རྐང	line of verse [of Tibetan prose and poetry, prose doen't have lines of verse, verse rkang pa bzhi bzhir sho lo ka re re rtsi dgos pa'i and each line/ rkang pa = tshig rkang, mostly w 7 9 etc syllab...	tshig rkang
ཚིག་རྐང་འགའ་ཞིག	some lines	tshig rkang 'ga' zhig
ཚིག་རྐང་བཞི	1 4-line verse/ shloka	tshig rkang bzhi
ཚིག་སྐམ་པོ	empty/ meaningless/ fantastic words/ talk	tshig skam po
ཚིག་སྐྱོན	faulty words/ writing w omissions/ interpolations, errors etc	tshig skyon
ཚིག་སྐྱོར་བ	repeat a word	tshig skyor ba
ཚིག་བསྐུམས་པ	don cha tshang ma bshad pa,//kho'i sems la dogs pa chen po yod pas skad cha shod 'phro bzhag nas tshig bskums song	tshig bskums pa
ཚིག་བསྐོར་བ	bskor ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bskor bya don mi 'dra ba'i gnas lugs 'ga' zhig skor byed tshig gi 2201 rnam 'gyur 'dra bas ldab skyor gyi tshul du ston pa'i rgyan zhig	tshig bskor ba
ཚིག་བསྐྱལ་བ	confused prattling	tshig bskyal ba
ཚིག་ཁ་སྐོང་བ	fill in incomplete meter [tshig cha ma tshang ba kha skong ba,//tshig rkang re re'i nang du yig 'bru gnyis re bsnan te tshig kha skong ba]	tshig kha skong ba
ཚིག་ཁ་ཤས	few words	tshig kha shas
ཚིག་ཁེབས	ring	tshig khebs
ཚིག་ཁྱེར	following mere words	tshig khyer
ཚིག་མཁྲེགས་པོ	words hard to understand/ rough/ harsh	tshig mkhregs po
ཚིག་འཁྱོར	'don tshig bskyar ba'i 'khyor po,//dpe cha'i tshig 'khyor song	tshig 'khyor
ཚིག་འཁྲི	be attached to the mere words/ literal meaning w/o thinking of the meaning	tshig 'khri
ཚིག་འཁྲུད་ཆོད་པ	speak definitely, give definite orders	tshig 'khrud chod pa
ཚིག་འཁྲུན་ཆོད་པ	1) skad cha thag chod pa,//mgyogs po 'gro rgyu'i tshig 'khrun chod pa; 2) tshig gi dogs pa chod pa,//yin min gyi bdar sha bcad nas don gnad kyi tshig 'khrun chod pa	tshig 'khrun chod pa
ཚིག་གི་ཁྱད་པར	tshig gi bro ba'am nus pa,//ma btab gnad du zug pa'i mtshon, ma 'thung khong du song ba'i sman, ma zos yid 'phrog sbrang rtsi'i ro, tshig gi khyad par rnams la yod	tshig gi khyad par
ཚིག་གི་རྒྱུད	literary tantra/ tantra as literature	tshig gi rgyud
ཚིག་གི་སྒོ་ནས	through words	tshig gi sgo nas
ཚིག་གི་སྒོ་ནས་མཚོན་པ	use words to point out the meaning	tshig gi sgo nas mtshon pa
ཚིག་གི་སྒོ་ནས་ཞུ་བ	verbally request	tshig gi sgo nas zhu ba
ཚིག་གི་སྒྲ་དག་པར་སྦྱོར་བ	[Syn {sgra nges par sbyor ba}	tshig gi sgra dag par sbyor ba
ཚིག་གི་སྒྲིག་གཞི	construction	tshig gi sgrig gzhi
ཚིག་གི་མཇུག	the last word, the conclusion of an expression	tshig gi mjug
ཚིག་གི་མཇུག་མ	end of 1's words tshig gi brjod rgyu mang zhing ga thag	tshig gi mjug ma
ཚིག་གི་ཉམས་འགྱུར	mood, modulation	tshig gi nyams 'gyur
ཚིག་གི་གཏང་རག	thanksgiving words of thanks, rough language, not straightforward	tshig gi gtang rag
ཚིག་གི་བཏང་རག	words of gratitude	tshig gi btang rag
ཚིག་གི་རྟ་ལ་བསྐྱོན་ཏེ	making use of verses	tshig gi rta la bskyon te
ཚིག་གི་རྟེན	chief items in treaty or document	tshig gi rten
ཚིག་གི་དོན	literal meaning	tshig gi don
ཚིག་གི་དོན་དང་འབྱུང་ཁུངས	etymology	tshig gi don dang 'byung khungs
ཚིག་གི་བདག	one who is skillful in speaking, orator	tshig gi bdag
ཚིག་གི་བདུད་རྩི	tshig bdud rtsi'i gzugs su bkod pa ste snyan zhing rna bar 'jebs pa	tshig gi bdud rtsi
ཚིག་གི་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆར་རྒྱུན	your words fall like nectar	tshig gi bdud rtsi'i char rgyun
ཚིག་གི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	beyond the scope of words	tshig gi spyod yul ma yin pa
ཚིག་གི་ཕྲད	accidental occurrence, grammatical term for adverbs, prepositions and conjunctions	tshig gi phrad
ཚིག་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	string of words, sentence, line	tshig gi phreng ba
ཚིག་གི་བེད་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་སྟངས	terminology	tshig gi bed spyod byed stangs
ཚིག་གི་བྱ་བ་ལྡན་པ	eloquent	tshig gi bya ba ldan pa
ཚིག་གི་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of speech	tshig gi dbang phyug
ཚིག་གི་འབྲུ	syllable	tshig gi 'bru
ཚིག་གི་ཚོགས	group of words [inflected / compounded] / phrases / sentences, {ldan min 'du byed}. as one of the fourteen non-concurrent formations; chos rnams kyi khyad par brjod du med kyang 'du byed thams cad ...	tshig gi tshogs
ཚིག་གི་མཚོན་ཆ	words which hit at the heart	tshig gi mtshon cha
ཚིག་གི་གཟུངས	whatever words 1 hears 1 can understand and keep them in mind	tshig gi gzungs
ཚིག་གི་རོ	just the words; x {bshad pa ni tshig gi ro yin pas des ci bya snyam ste khyad du bsad nas don zab mor sbar zin byas kyang tshig la ma bsten par don mi 'byung bas tshig don ya bral} do not disregard...	tshig gi ro
ཚིག་གི་ལམ	path of words, only words	tshig gi lam
ཚིག་གི་ལམ་ལ་གནས	Linger among mere words	tshig gi lam la gnas
ཚིག་གི་གསུང	linguistic communication	tshig gi gsung
ཚིག་གིས་རྒོལ་བ	hold discussion, verbal disputation	tshig gis rgol ba
ཚིག་གིས་བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པ	indescribable through words	tshig gis brjod du med pa
ཚིག་གིས་བརྗོད་མི་ནུས	cannot be expressed/ inexpressible in words	tshig gis brjod mi nus
ཚིག་གིས་བྲིད	fooled / deceived by words / talk	tshig gis brid
ཚིག་གིས་མཚོན་པ	that words can describe	tshig gis mtshon pa
ཚིག་གུ	SA tshi gu stone or kernel of fruit	tshig gu
ཚིག་གུའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས	spangled leggings	tshig gu'i smad dkris
ཚིག་གོ་ཕྱོགས་གཉིས་ལྡན	talk + meaning [kha gdangs glo mthong gi skad cha gsal po mi bshad par tshig go phyogs gnyis ldan gyi thog nas shod pa ci yin]	tshig go phyogs gnyis ldan
ཚིག་གོ་ཤེས	who can hear and understand	tshig go shes
ཚིག་གོང་འོག་མཚམས་སྦྱར་བ	connecting the previous words with the following	tshig gong 'og mtshams sbyar ba
ཚིག་གྱི་རྒྱུད	tantra as literature	tshig gyi rgyud
ཚིག་གྱོང་པོ	impolite words 2202	tshig gyong po
ཚིག་གྲུབ	sentence	tshig grub
ཚིག་གྲོགས	auxiliary word	tshig grogs
ཚིག་འགལ་བ	contradictory words/ inconsistent statements	tshig 'gal ba
ཚིག་འགྱུར་ཡང	even if burnt	tshig 'gyur yang
ཚིག་འགྲིག་འགྲིག་པ	arrange words properly	tshig 'grig 'grig pa
ཚིག་འགྲེལ	word-for-word commentary / explanation	tshig 'grel
ཚིག་རྒོལ་བ	1) verbally refute/ deny [gtso bo don la rgol dgos pa las tshig la rgol ba de dgos med yin]; 2) refuter, denier, disputant	tshig rgol ba
ཚིག་རྒྱག	insulting, critical, insulting, deprecating [gzhan sems la phog pa; drang gtam thad kar shod pa las tshig rgyag kyog gtam ma shod,//gzhas kyi rnam pa'i thog nas phan tshun tshig rgyag rgyag pa]	tshig rgyag
ཚིག་རྒྱན	word used to emphasize	tshig rgyan
ཚིག་རྒྱུད	tantric scriptures	tshig rgyud
ཚིག་རྒྱུད་གསུམ	Three types of "tantra of words": a] Tantra manifest as sound (sgrar snang ba'i rgyud) is mind transmission or both the transmission of mind and symbol. b] Tantra uttered as sound (sgrar grags pa'i...	tshig rgyud gsum
ཚིག་སྒྲིག་པ	connect words, arrange words	tshig sgrig pa
ཚིག་སྒྲུག་པ	from much writing the most important tshig len pa	tshig sgrug pa
ཚིག་སྒྲུབ	sentence, tha snyad rtsom sgrig	tshig sgrub
ཚིག་བརྒྱའི་དབང་པོ	gza' pa sangs	tshig brgya'i dbang po
ཚིག་བརྒྱུད	word transmission, scriptural lineage	tshig brgyud
ཚིག་བསྒྱུར	[literal/ word by word] tr	tshig bsgyur
ཚིག་བསྒྲིགས་པ	1) skad cha'i tshig lhu bsgrigs pa; 2) gzhung tshig phyogs gcig tu bsgrigs pa	tshig bsgrigs pa
ཚིག་ངན	insults/ harsh/ mean/ nasty/ abusive words	tshig ngan
ཚིག་ངན་སྨྲ་བ	to speak / treat rudely	tshig ngan smra ba
ཚིག་ངན་ཚབ་འཇམ་ཚིག	euphemism	tshig ngan tshab 'jam tshig
ཚིག་དངོས	true statement/ talk	tshig dngos
ཚིག་སྔ་ཕྱི་འགལ་བ	contradiction between earlier and later statement ['grel bshad kyi snga tshig dang phyi tshig 'gal ba ltag sprod du gyur 'dug]	tshig snga phyi 'gal ba
ཚིག་བཅད	verse	tshig bcad
ཚིག་བཅད་རྐང་པ	a single line / verse line	tshig bcad rkang pa
ཚིག་བཅད་རྐྱང་པ	a single line/ verse line	tshig bcad rkyang pa
ཚིག་བཅད་དང་ཚིག་ལྷུག	in verse and in prose	tshig bcad dang tshig lhug
ཚིག་བཅད་ལྷུག་གང་རུང	verse or prose	tshig bcad lhug gang rung
ཚིག་བཅས	verse [in poetics]	tshig bcas
ཚིག་བཅོས	editing, correction of words	tshig bcos
ཚིག་བཅོས་རྒྱག	editing, correction of words	tshig bcos rgyag
ཚིག་ལྕག	sharp words for reproof, rebuke	tshig lcag
ཚིག་ཆད	omission, missing word	tshig chad
ཚིག་འཆལ	ngag 'khyal te meaningless babble	tshig 'chal
ཚིག་འཇམ	parrot, soft/ gentle/ kind/ pleasant words	tshig 'jam
ཚིག་འཇམ་ལྡན	parrot	tshig 'jam ldan
ཚིག་འཇམ་པོ	soft/ gentle/ kind/ pleasant words tshig 'jam por grogs po'i skyon smra ba gently tell a friend of his faults	tshig 'jam po
ཚིག་འཇུག་པོ	fluent, articulate	tshig 'jug po
ཚིག་རྗེས་གཅོད་པ	explain/ resolve the verbal/ literal sense alone gcod pa ste tshig 'khri	tshig rjes gcod pa
ཚིག་རྗེས་དོན་གསབ	actually existing as said	tshig rjes don gsab
ཚིག་ཉན་པ	listen to the word	tshig nyan pa
ཚིག་ཉམས	skad rigs so so'i tshig gi rnam 'gyur,//snyan tshig 'di tshig nyams ha cang dod po 'dug	tshig nyams
ཚིག་ཉམས་པ	1) faulty words; 2) mute	tshig nyams pa
ཚིག་ཉུང་དོན་འདུས	concise and synoptic/ succinct	tshig nyung don 'dus
ཚིག་ཉུང་དོན་འདུས་པ	terse	tshig nyung don 'dus pa
ཚིག་ཉུང་དོན་ཚང	few words but all the meaning, summarizing w/o wandering or confusion	tshig nyung don tshang
ཚིག་སྙན་དོན་བཟང	pleasant words and good/ auspicious meaning [khong gis bshad pa'i gtam de tshig snyan don bzang zhig red]	tshig snyan don bzang
ཚིག་སྙན་པར	with pleasant words	tshig snyan par
ཚིག་ཏུ་འཛིན	conceive as mere words	tshig tu 'dzin
ཚིག་གཏེར	tshig gi gter [zhes bya ba don gcig ming gi rnam grangs rnams tshig le'ur byas pa'i mngon brjod kyi gzhung zhig ste, 13th century by sakya pandita kun dga' rgyal mtshan]	tshig gter
ཚིག་བཏོན་པ	said, recited, sang	tshig bton pa
ཚིག་རྟབས	refuted, disallowed	tshig rtabs
ཚིག་རྟུབ	harsh words	tshig rtub
ཚིག་ཐ་དད	answer	tshig tha dad
ཚིག་ཐག་གཅོད	to assert, say emphatically, state definitely 2203	tshig thag gcod
ཚིག་ཐག་གཅོད་ནས་བཤད	decide, settle, resolve ['gro'i -- decided to go], assert, say emphatically	tshig thag gcod nas bshad
ཚིག་ཐག་གཅོད་པའི	decisive	tshig thag gcod pa'i
ཚིག་ཐག་གཅོད་པའི་འཆར་གཞི	decisive plan tshig thag bcod pa mtshon byed kyi bya	tshig thag gcod pa'i 'char gzhi
ཚིག་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	speak definitely, give definite orders	tshig thag chod pa
ཚིག་ཐང	one moment	tshig thang
ཚིག་ཐར་ཐོར	scattered words	tshig thar thor
ཚིག་ཐལ	no longer valid	tshig thal
ཚིག་ཐལ་ཤོར་བ	speak in a way involving faults/transgressions/ crimes	tshig thal shor ba
ཚིག་ཐོ	statement [usu written]	tshig tho
ཚིག་ཐོ་ཕུལ	made a statement [usu written]	tshig tho phul
ཚིག་ཐོ་བླངས	took a statement [usu written, police etc]	tshig tho blangs
ཚིག་ཐོ་འབུལ	make a statement	tshig tho 'bul
ཚིག་ཐོ་ལེན	take a statement [usu written, police etc]	tshig tho len
ཚིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་གནས	keep a promise/ 1's word, maintain trust	tshig thog tu gnas
ཚིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་མ་གནས	break a promise/ 1's word/ a trust	tshig thog tu ma gnas
ཚིག་ཐོག་དོན་འཁེལ	parctice what 1 preaches [khong ni tshig thog don 'khel byed mkhan mi brtan po zhig yin]	tshig thog don 'khel
ཚིག་ཐོག་དོན་གནས	actually existing as said [mi 'dis gang bshad tshig thog don gnas yin pas yid ches byed rigs]	tshig thog don gnas
ཚིག་ཐོག་གནས	keep a promise/ 1's word, maintain trust	tshig thog gnas
ཚིག་ཐོག་མ་གནས	break a promise/ 1's word/ a trust	tshig thog ma gnas
ཚིག་མཐའ	end of 1's words	tshig mtha'
ཚིག་མཐུན་པ	in conformity with one's words	tshig mthun pa
ཚིག་མཐོན་པོ	words hard to understand	tshig mthon po
ཚིག་འཐེང་པོ	1) yig 'bru mang nyung cha mi snyoms pa'i tshig //ngag rtsom tshig 'theng po'i rigs rjod mi bde; 2) skad cha mi gsal ba,//smra rjod tshig 'theng po de shar mar go mi bde	tshig 'theng po
ཚིག་དང་མཐུན་པར	in conformity with one's words	tshig dang mthun par
ཚིག་དང་དོན	glossary	tshig dang don
ཚིག་དང་ཡི་གེ	words or letters	tshig dang yi ge
ཚིག་དན	kha dan nam kha chad,//phan tshun gros sdur byed rgyu'i tshig dan bzos pa	tshig dan
ཚིག་དམ་པོ	rtsom mkhregs po,//rtsom yig 'di tshig dam po yin pas go dka'	tshig dam po
ཚིག་དུམ་འཁྱེར་ནས་གོ་ལོག་ལེན	distort, deliberately misinterpret/ twist the meaning	tshig dum 'khyer nas go log len
ཚིག་དེབ	dictionary	tshig deb
ཚིག་དོན	word and meaning, the literal meaning of the words, {tshul bzhi}	tshig don
ཚིག་དོན་ཀུན	all the words & meanings	tshig don kun
ཚིག་དོན་གྱི་གནས་རྟོགས་པ	to understand both the words and the meaning	tshig don gyi gnas rtogs pa
ཚིག་དོན་གྱི་དབང	the empowerment of word and meaning {tshig dbang rin po che}, {dbang bzhi pa}	tshig don gyi dbang
ཚིག་དོན་འགྲེལ་པ	arranging or paraphrasing the meanings of words	tshig don 'grel pa
ཚིག་དོན་གཉིས་ཀ་བསྐོར་བ	skor byed tshig don gnyis kas bskor kyang, bskor bya'i gnas tshul mi 'dra bar ston pa'i rgyan zhig, bskor ba'i rgyan gyi nang gses	tshig don gnyis ka bskor ba
ཚིག་དོན་རྟོགས་པ	apprehend the meaning of words	tshig don rtogs pa
ཚིག་དོན་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ	arrive at the final conclusion as to the meaning of a word or business	tshig don mthar phyin pa
ཚིག་དོན་མཐུན་པར་སྡེབས་པ	harmonious integration of words and meaning	tshig don mthun par sdebs pa
ཚིག་དོན་དྲུག	TSE	tshig don drug
ཚིག་དོན་སྦྱར་བ	attach meaning to words	tshig don sbyar ba
ཚིག་དོན་དམར་རྗེན	clear words and meaning	tshig don dmar rjen
ཚིག་དོན་མཛོད	klong chen mdzod bdun gyi ya gyal zhig ste, gzhi'i gnas lugs la zhugs pa lam du goms pas 'bras bu mngon gyur gyi bar lam 'khyer man ngag gi tshul du bshad pa rdo rje'i gnas bcu gcig pa, dus rabs bc...	tshig don mdzod
ཚིག་དོན་འཛིན་པ	remember / memorize the words and meaning of the teachings	tshig don 'dzin pa
ཚིག་དོན་ཡ་བྲལ	separate word and its meaning	tshig don ya bral
ཚིག་དོན་རེ་རེ་ནས	individual words and points; x {chos kyi tshig don re re nas sbar zin byed pa} picking out individual words and points	tshig don re re nas
ཚིག་དོན་ལག་ཏུ་ལེན་པ	study and practice the import of a word	tshig don lag tu len pa
ཚིག་དོན་གསལ་འདེབས	vividly imagining the meaning of the words	tshig don gsal 'debs
ཚིག་དོན་གསོལ་འདེབས	the 7 line prayer	tshig don gsol 'debs
ཚིག་དོར	[arch] yang dag min pa	tshig dor
ཚིག་དོར་བ	indecent language	tshig dor ba
ཚིག་གདངས	tone of speaking, [pronunciation]	tshig gdangs
ཚིག་གདངས་མཐོན་པོ	high tone of speaking	tshig gdangs mthon po
ཚིག་བདུན་གསོལ་འདེབས	Seven Line Supplication, Seven Line Prayer. The famous supplication to Padmasambhava beginning with "On the northwest border of the country of Uddiyana, ..."	tshig bdun gsol 'debs
ཚིག་བདེན་པ	true words [bshad pa'i tshig ltar don la gnas pa]	tshig bden pa
ཚིག་མདའ	piercing insult	tshig mda'
ཚིག་མདའ་ཅན	deity	tshig mda' can
ཚིག་མདའི་མགོན་པོ	epithet of indra, name of brgya byin lha	tshig mda'i mgon po
ཚིག་འདུམ་པོ	few words but all the meaning	tshig 'dum po
ཚིག་འདུམ་པོ་བྱུང་ན་གོ་བདེ	if 1 explains fully in simple words it is easy to understand	tshig 'dum po byung na go bde
ཚིག་རྡེག	dancing girl	tshig rdeg
ཚིག་ལྡན	eloquent, Jupiter	tshig ldan
ཚིག་ལྡབ	1) tshig zlos skyon can; 2) yang yang nan tan lab pa	tshig ldab
ཚིག་ལྡབ་ལྡིབ	skad cha mi gsal ba,//bshad pa'i tshig ldab ldib yin na gzhan gyis go dka'	tshig ldab ldib
ཚིག་སྡུད	compound word [two or more ming rnam dbye rnams bsdus nas at the end of all rnam dbye gcig sbyar ba'i ming ste nang gses la las 'dzin dang, ba gnyis, de'i skyes bu, 'bru mang, zlas dbye, mi zad pa ...	tshig sdud
ཚིག་སྡུད་པ	combination of words, compound word 2204	tshig sdud pa
ཚིག་སྡེབ་སྦྱོར	rhetoric, grammar	tshig sdeb sbyor
ཚིག་བརྡ	SA tshig words	tshig brda
ཚིག་བརྡ་དོན	word, symbol, and meaning	tshig brda don
ཚིག་བརྡའ་དོན	the words and the meaning; x {tshig brda' don gong 'og thams cad ma nor ba yang dag pa'i lam nas 'dzin} remember everything-the words, the meaning and the order of the	tshig brda' don
ཚིག་ནན	forceful, emphatic, firm	tshig nan
ཚིག་ནན་དོན་དྲང	assertive/ form/ forceful and true [tshig 'doms che la, don ya yo 'khyag 'khyog med pa]	tshig nan don drang
ཚིག་ནན་པོ	forceful, emphatic, firm	tshig nan po
ཚིག་གནད	tshig gi gnad 'gag //gsung bshad kyi tshig gnad bsgrims te mnyan pa	tshig gnad
ཚིག་གནད་སྒྲུག་པ	1) skad cha'i shod stangs la bltas te snyad 'tshol ba,//skad cha nor ba'i tshig gnad sgrug pa; 2) skad cha'i snying po sgrug pa,//gsung bshad kyi nang don gal che rnams kyi tshig gnad sgrug pa	tshig gnad sgrug pa
ཚིག་རྣ་བར་སྙན་པོ	pleasant words	tshig rna bar snyan po
ཚིག་སྣག	writing ink [on a sign-board etc, made of ashes and whey	tshig snag
ཚིག་པ	anger	tshig pa
ཚིག་པ་ཟ	to feel irritated	tshig pa za
ཚིག་པ་ཟ་བ	irritated, get/ be angry at [khong khro skye ba,//mi de spro thung thung yin stabs tshig pa za chog cho red,//rna bar mi 'gro ba'i skad cha thos dus tshig pa ma za,//rgyu med rkyen med du tshig pa ...	tshig pa za ba
ཚིག་པོ	burnt, overbaked	tshig po
ཚིག་དཔྱོད	to analyze words	tshig dpyod
ཚིག་ཕྱིར་འབྲང་བ	to be preoccupied with words [as opp. to their meaning] tshig phra mo res kyang chags sdang 'phel - the slightest word sparks desire or hatred	tshig phyir 'brang ba
ཚིག་ཕྲད	sentence, phrase???, connective particle, conjunction [ming gnyis sam du ma sbrel ba'i tshe bar du mtshams sbyor ba'am, don gsal ba la phan 'dogs pa'i sgra'i rnam pa ste divisions: rang dbang can a...	tshig phrad
ཚིག་འཕྲད	tshig phrad	tshig 'phrad
ཚིག་འཕྲོ	1) mes tshig pa'i bud shing sogs kyi lhag ma,//bud shing gi tshig 'phro,//sol ba'i tshig 'phro,//me skyon shor ba'i khang pa'i tshig 'phro; 2) skad cha'i lhag ma,//khyed rang tog tsam sgug rogs nga...	tshig 'phro
ཚིག་བར་གཅོད	syllable tshig bed spyod byed stangs nor ba malapropism	tshig bar gcod
ཚིག་བྱེད་དམར	saffron	tshig byed dmar
ཚིག་བྲུས་པ	skad cha bsngogs pa,//kho'i kha nas skad cha bzang ngan gang shod tshig brus pa	tshig brus pa
ཚིག་བླ་དབ༹གས	word designation	tshig bla dvags
ཚིག་བླ་དྭགས	denomination	tshig bla dwags
ཚིག་བླ་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་རེག་པ	reg pa'i tshogs drug las yid kyi 'dus te reg pa = tshig bla dvags kyi reg pa, tshig bla dvags = ming, yid = gtso bor ming la dmigs pas yul ming yul can la btags pa'o	tshig bla dvags kyi reg pa
ཚིག་དབང	word empowerment; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 37]	tshig dbang
ཚིག་དབང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Precious word empowerment. Same as the 'fourth empowerment.'	tshig dbang rin po che
ཚིག་འབུད་པ	dislocate	tshig 'bud pa
ཚིག་འབྱམས	1) expressing words mang drags pa; 2) very vague/ meandering/ off the subject words	tshig 'byams
ཚིག་འབྱམས་ཉག་ཉོག	vague meandering confused words	tshig 'byams nyag nyog
ཚིག་འབྲུ	word, syllable, sound of 1 word, "letter" [vs word or meaning * proofread/ check word by word	tshig 'bru
ཚིག་འབྲུ་ལྕིབས་པ	(A; 1) write/ compose/ edit [words]; 2) not be able to answer; 3) Tibetan tsheg shad; 4) apprehend the meaning of words	tshig 'bru lcibs pa
ཚིག་འབྲུ་འབྱོར	{sbyor ba} composition, compound	tshig 'bru 'byor
ཚིག་འབྲུ་སྦྱོར་བ	put together letters and syllables	tshig 'bru sbyor ba
ཚིག་འབྲུ་བཟང་པོ	beautiful in expression	tshig 'bru bzang po
ཚིག་འབྲུའི་དོན	literal meaning, 1 of don rnam pa gsum	tshig 'bru'i don
ཚིག་འབྲེལ	1) expressing words above and blow gi 'brel ba; 2) skad cha shod stangs [snga phyi'i tshig 'brel]	tshig 'brel
ཚིག་སྦོམ་པོ	speaking impertinently, arrogantly, w/o respect	tshig sbom po
ཚིག་སྦྱངས་གསེད་བཀྲོལ	clearly explain the reason for profit	tshig sbyangs gsed bkrol
ཚིག་སྦྱོར	rhetoric, phrasing, composition	tshig sbyor
ཚིག་སྦྱོར་འདྲ་ཆགས	snying rtsom sgros yag po,//rtsom yig 'di tshig sbyor 'dra 2205 chags la nang don yang gting zab po 'dug	tshig sbyor 'dra chags
ཚིག་སྦྱོར་རིག་པ	rhetoric	tshig sbyor rig pa
ཚིག་མ	sinew, tissue	tshig ma
ཚིག་མ་གསལ་བ་ལབ་པ	mumble	tshig ma gsal ba lab pa
ཚིག་མང་ཅན	wordy	tshig mang can
ཚིག་མར	butter added to anything that is being roasted that it may not be singed	tshig mar
ཚིག་མི་མངོན	mystic term	tshig mi mngon
ཚིག་མི་ནུས་པ	inexpressible in words	tshig mi nus pa
ཚིག་མི་འཛིན	forgetting the words; x {don 'dzin la tshig mi 'dzin pa} remembering the meaning but forgetting the words	tshig mi 'dzin
ཚིག་དམའ་པོ	talk easy to understand	tshig dma' po
ཚིག་ཙམ	mere words, merely at the level of words	tshig tsam
ཚིག་ཙུབ	harsh words, rude language, rough speech, unpleasant expression	tshig tsub
ཚིག་བཙན	forceful, emphatic, firm	tshig btsan
ཚིག་བཙན་གྱིས	forcefully, emphatically, firmly	tshig btsan gyis
ཚིག་བཙན་གྱིས་གསུང	say [forcefully, emphatically, firmly]	tshig btsan gyis gsung
ཚིག་བཙན་པོ	bsgyur bkod gtong mi thub pa'i tshig //bka' rgya tshig btsan po	tshig btsan po
ཚིག་བཙུན་པ	creditable discourse	tshig btsun pa
ཚིག་བཙུན་པོ	tshig brtan po'am, bden pa,//tshig btsun po bshad pas gzhan sems sgul	tshig btsun po
ཚིག་རྩུབ	rough/ harsh/ abusive/ unpleasant words	tshig rtsub
ཚིག་རྩུབ་པོ་སྨྲ་བ	harsh speech	tshig rtsub po smra ba
ཚིག་རྩུབ་བོ་སྨྲ་བ	harsh speech	tshig rtsub bo smra ba
ཚིག་རྩུབ་བྱུང་དུས	when you hear harsh words	tshig rtsub byung dus
ཚིག་རྩུབ་མོ	abuse	tshig rtsub mo
ཚིག་རྩུབ་མོ་སྨྲ་བ་སྤོང་བ	to abandon harsh words	tshig rtsub mo smra ba spong ba
ཚིག་རྩུབ་མོ་སྨྲས་པ	spoken harshly	tshig rtsub mo smras pa
ཚིག་རྩུབ་སྨྲས་ཏེ	scolded	tshig rtsub smras te
ཚིག་རྩུབ་སྨྲས་པ	spoke sharply tshig rtsub tsher ma dang mtshungs pa harsh words like thorns	tshig rtsub smras pa
ཚིག་རྩུབ་ལབ་པ	affront	tshig rtsub lab pa
ཚིག་རྩུབ་ཤོར	to abuse	tshig rtsub shor
ཚིག་རྩེད	pun	tshig rtsed
ཚིག་རྩེད་བྱེད་པ	quibble	tshig rtsed byed pa
ཚིག་རྩོད	verbal effort	tshig rtsod
ཚིག་ཚོགས	collection of many words, dictionary, glossary, concordance, length/ chapter of a written piece	tshig tshogs
ཚིག་ཚོགས་ཆེ་བ	lengthy writing tshig tshogs mdzod khang gi gzugs su	tshig tshogs che ba
ཚིག་མཚམས	punctuation	tshig mtshams
ཚིག་མཚོན	words like weapons, harsh/ insulting/ slanderous words	tshig mtshon
ཚིག་མཚོན་འདེབས་པ	slander	tshig mtshon 'debs pa
ཚིག་མཛོད	dictionary, glossary	tshig mdzod
ཚིག་འཛིན	remembering the words; x {tshig 'dzin la don mi 'dzin pa} remembering the words but forgetting the meaning	tshig 'dzin
ཚིག་རྫུན	lie	tshig rdzun
ཚིག་གཞན་མ་འདྲེས་པར	without mingling other talk	tshig gzhan ma 'dres par
ཚིག་གཞི	1) rjod byed tshig gi rnam 'gyur; 2) sngon rjes ming gsum 'dus pa'i tshig rten te ming main point/ item, slogan	tshig gzhi
ཚིག་གཞུང	dictionary, glossary	tshig gzhung
ཚིག་བཞི	x {chos tshig bzhi re'i phyir du}	tshig bzhi
ཏོ་ཨོབཏཻན་ཨ་སིངླེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར	line verse	to obtain a single four
ཚིག་བཞིའི་ཚིག་བཅད	a four-lined verse	tshig bzhi'i tshig bcad
ཚིག་ཟིན	rang dngos su brjod pa'i sgra tshig gis zin pa'am dmigs kyis bzung nas bstan te don gzhan rnam par gcod pa'i tshig EG, perception is unconfused apprehension free from conception, zhes pa'i tshig zi...	tshig zin
ཚིག་ཟུར་རྒྱག་པ	dngos su ma bshad par zur nas mtshang la phog pa'i gtam shod pa,//phan tshun gcig gis gcig la tshig zur rgyag pa	tshig zur rgyag pa
ཚིག་ཟུར་གཉིས་སུ་སྦྱར	secondary sense hidden in the obvious one	tshig zur gnyis su sbyar
ཚིག་ཟུར་ཕྱིན་པ	correct/ zhib gsal thon pa words, skad cha	tshig zur phyin pa
ཚིག་ཟུར་མ་ཕྱིན་པ	corrupted word	tshig zur ma phyin pa
ཚིག་གཟུང་བར་འོས	praiseworthy	tshig gzung bar 'os
ཚིག་གཟུང་བར་འོས་པ	trustworthy words	tshig gzung bar 'os pa
ཚིག་བཟང	elegant sayings, pleasant words	tshig bzang
ཚིག་བཟང་པོ	[tse]	tshig bzang po
ཚིག་བཟོ་བ	write, compose	tshig bzo ba
ཚིག་ཡམ་ཆེ་བ	very vague/ meandering/ off the subject words	tshig yam che ba
ཚིག་ཡུལ	subject	tshig yul
ཚིག་རིས	tshig gi spu ris,//bshad khrid tshig ris phyogs 'dra bar, go ba rang rang so sor len	tshig ris
ཚིག་རེ་རེ་བཞིན་དུ	verbatim	tshig re re bzhin du
ཚིག་རོ	1) meaningless words; 2) ashes; 3) hackneyed/ trite phrases, stock arguments, cliches	tshig ro
ཚིག་བརླང་པོ	gzhan gyi skyon dang mtshang 'bru ba'i gtum tshig	tshig brlang po
ཚིག་ལ་མཁས་པ	skillful in selecting words	tshig la mkhas pa
ཚིག་ལ་མཁས་པ་ཡིན་གྱི	you are learned in words	tshig la mkhas pa yin gyi
ཚིག་ལ་དགག་པ་གཏོང་མཁན	refuter, denier, disputant	tshig la dgag pa gtong mkhan
ཚིག་ལ་དགག་པ་གཏོང་བ	verbally refute/ deny tshig la ma bsten par don mi 'byung bas you will no longer have the means through which to express the meaning	tshig la dgag pa gtong ba
ཚིག་ལ་མི་རྟོན་དོན་ལ་རྟོན	rely on the meaning, not on the words [one of the {rton pa bzhi}. = four reliances] 2206	tshig la mi rton don la rton
ཚིག་ལ་མི་རྟོན་པ	non-reliance on words	tshig la mi rton pa
ཚིག་ལ་བཙན་ལྔ	five tsigla tsen	tshig la btsan lnga
ཚིག་ལ་ཚིག་འགྲེལ་ཡོད་ན་གོ་བདེ	understanding is easy if 1 has a word by word commentary	tshig la tshig 'grel yod na go bde
ཚིག་ལ་ཟ་བ	be angry	tshig la za ba
ཚིག་ལན	to talk back to	tshig lan
ཚིག་ལན་ཚིག་རྒྱག	1) gtam rtsod kyi gshags 'debs; 2) spyir gyi dri ba dris lan	tshig lan tshig rgyag
ཚིག་ལེགས	articulate	tshig legs
ཚིག་ལེན་པ	1) truly perceive words into the mind; 2) dpe deb khag nas tshig sgrug pa	tshig len pa
ཚིག་ལེའུ	verse or prose chapter, section, division	tshig le'u
ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	put into verse lines, poetry	tshig le'u byas pa
ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	put into verse lines, [Syn {tshigs su bcad pa} poetry]	tshig le'ur byas pa
ཚིག་ལོ	words like leaves, meaningless/ merely ornamental words	tshig lo
ཚིག་ལོ་མང་པོ་ཤོད	talk off the point	tshig lo mang po shod
ཚིག་ལོག་གཏམ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་པ	wrong words erroneous speech	tshig log gtam phyin ci log pa
ཚིག་ཤ་ལོ་ཀ	tshig bcad bzhi	tshig sha lo ka
ཚིག་ཤད	punctuation mark	tshig shad
ཚིག་ཤུགས	skad cha'i shod stangs,//khong gi tshig shugs la bltas na nga'i bsam 'char la 'thad pa 'dra'o	tshig shugs
ཚིག་ཤོར	have a slip of the tongue	tshig shor
ཚིག་བཤད	chanted phase	tshig bshad
ཚིག་བཤེར་བ	skad cha bden rdzun dag bsher byed pa,//rtsod gzhi'i skor la phan tshun tshig bsher ba	tshig bsher ba
ཚིག་སུ་བཅད་པ	poetic	tshig su bcad pa
ཚིག་སུན	insults	tshig sun
ཚིག་སོང	has been burnt	tshig song
ཚིག་གསལ	Prasana-pada, the Clear Words by Chandrakirti, [commentary on rtsa ba shes rab by Nagarjuna]	tshig gsal
ཚིག་གསལ་བ	clearly	tshig gsal ba
ཚིག་གསལ་བར་བརྗོད	repeated precisely	tshig gsal bar brjod
ཚིག་གསལ་བར་བརྗོད་པ	to express / repeat clearly / precisely	tshig gsal bar brjod pa
ཚིག་གསུམ	three lines	tshig gsum
ཚིག་གསུམ་གནད་དུ	according to the essence of the three statements	tshig gsum gnad du
ཚིག་གསུམ་གནད་དུ་བརྡེག་པ	the Three Words Striking the Vital Point; the final words of Garab Dorje to Manjushrimitra	tshig gsum gnad du brdeg pa
ཚིག་གསུམ་གནད་བརྡེགས	Three Lines that Strike at the Vital Point	tshig gsum gnad brdegs
ཚིག་གསོལ	verbally request	tshig gsol
ཚིག་བསགས	vocabulary	tshig bsags
ཚིག་ལྷག	1) bstan bya'i tshig 'phro ma; 2) meaningless profusion of words/ verbiage	tshig lhag
ཚིག་ལྷད	fault of adding to verbal/ written words to make them say what 1 wants them to	tshig lhad
ཚིག་ལྷུག	prose	tshig lhug
ཚིག་ལྷུག་པར་བཀྲལ་བ	in prose	tshig lhug par bkral ba
ཚིགས་སྐབས	holiday, that which joins times of occupation	tshigs skabs
ཚིགས་ཁེབས	ornament worn above the wrist or elbow, finger ring	tshigs khebs
ཚིགས་དགུའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས	lower skirt like garment	tshigs dgu'i smad dkris
ཚིགས་དགུར	crooked back	tshigs dgur
ཚིགས་བརྒྱ་པ	1) dur ba grass; 2) bamboo	tshigs brgya pa
ཚིགས་བརྒྱའི་དབང	friday, venus	tshigs brgya'i dbang
ཚིགས་བརྒྱུ་བ	relocating dislocated joints	tshigs brgyu ba
ཚིགས་ངན	troops of the wicked	tshigs ngan
ཚིགས་སྔ་མ་སྔོན་དུ་སོང་བ	having previously gone through the preliminary links	tshigs snga ma sngon du song ba
ཚིགས་ཅན	mt	tshigs can
ཚིགས་གཅིག	1 verse/ 4-lined verse	tshigs gcig
ཚིགས་བཅད	verse; verse, composition of verse lines / poetry. {tshigs su bcad pa}	tshigs bcad
ཚིགས་བཅད་གཅིག	one / a single verse	tshigs bcad gcig
ཚིགས་བཅད་ཆུང་ཆུང	epigram	tshigs bcad chung chung
ཚིགས་བཅད་དང་ཚིག་ལྷུག	in verse and in prose	tshigs bcad dang tshig lhug
ཚིགས་བཅད་དུ	in verse form (as opposed to prose)	tshigs bcad du
ཚིགས་བཅད་དུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	arranged in verse form (as opposed to prose). Composed as poetry	tshigs bcad du bsgrigs pa
ཚིགས་བཅད་པ	compose verses	tshigs bcad pa
ཚིགས་བཅད་མང་ཞིག	many lines	tshigs bcad mang zhig
ཚིགས་བཅད་རྩོམ་པ	verses which he had composed	tshigs bcad rtsom pa
ཚིགས་བཅད་ལྷུག	verse and prose alternately	tshigs bcad lhug
ཚིགས་ཆེན་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 major joints [gru tshigs gnyis, phrag tshigs gnyis bcas lag pa la drug long tshigs gnyis, pus tshigs gnyis, dpyi tshigs gnyis bcas rkang pa la drug ste bcu gnyis so]	tshigs chen bcu gnyis
ཚིགས་འཆུད	dislocate/ sprain a joint	tshigs 'chud
ཚིགས་འཇུག་པ	reduce a dislocated joint	tshigs 'jug pa
ཚིགས་དོན་གི་དབང	true word empowerment	tshigs don gi dbang
ཚིགས་རྡོག	joint, ankle	tshigs rdog
ཚིགས་ལྡན་པ	reasonable, logical	tshigs ldan pa
ཚིགས་ལྡན་མ	intellectual reasonable woman	tshigs ldan ma
ཚིགས་ལྡོག་ཕྱོགས	antonym	tshigs ldog phyogs
ཚིགས་ན་བའི་ཟུག་རྔུ	pain of disease in the joints	tshigs na ba'i zug rngu
ཚིགས་པ	joints	tshigs pa
ཚིགས་པ་ན	pain in the joints	tshigs pa na
ཚིགས་ཕུད	dislocated/ sprained a joint	tshigs phud
ཚིགས་ཕྲན	sentence	tshigs phran
ཚིགས་བུད་པ	dislocated joints of the arms legs etc	tshigs bud pa
ཚིགས་འབུད	dislocate/ sprain a joint	tshigs 'bud
ཚིགས་འབུད་པ	put out of joint, dislocate, sprain	tshigs 'bud pa
ཚིགས་འབོག་པ	dislocated, unhinged	tshigs 'bog pa
ཚིགས་འབྲུ	root word	tshigs 'bru
ཚིགས་སྦོམ་པ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, large or swollen joints	tshigs sbom pa
ཚིགས་སྦྱོང	loosening the joints	tshigs sbyong
ཚིགས་སྦྱོང་ལྔ	5 yantra exercises to loosen the joints (sgrim pa, gsil ba, 'phul ba, 'bebs pa, bskor ba)	tshigs sbyong lnga
ཚིགས་སྦྱོད	a brahman	tshigs sbyod
ཚིགས་མ	ashes, dirt, filth, sediment, residue	tshigs ma
ཚིགས་མང	a thorny plant	tshigs mang
ཚིགས་མཚམས	joint	tshigs mtshams
སེགམེནཏ	intervals	segment
ཚིགས་གཞི	the basis of the joints	tshigs gzhi
ཚིགས་བཞི་པ	tshigs bzhi pa su bcad pa a four-lined verse	tshigs bzhi pa
ཚིགས་བཞི་པའི་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	a 4lined verse	tshigs bzhi pa'i tshigs su bcad pa
པོཨེཏརཡ་ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ཨརྲངེད་ཨིན་ཕོ༹ཨུར	lined verses	poetry which is arranged in four
ཚིགས་ཟུག	pain in the joints	tshigs zug
ཚིགས་བཟང	deity	tshigs bzang
ཚིགས་བཟུང་བ	ceremony of bdun tshigs bzung ba at the 49th day of a person's death	tshigs bzung ba
ཚིགས་ཡམ་ཆེ་བ	very vague/ meandering/ off the subject words	tshigs yam che ba
ཚིགས་རིགས	what is meant by	tshigs rigs
ཚིགས་རོ	SA tshigs ma	tshigs ro
ཚིགས་ལ་བཙན་ལྔ	Five Linking Kings called Tsen. Gyel Tore Longtsen, Tri	tshigs la btsan lnga
ཚིགས་སམ་རྟ་འཆུས་པ	sprain	tshigs sam rta 'chus pa
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད	speaking in verse; words in verse, see also {tshigs lhug}, meaning prose	tshigs su bcad
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་སྨྲས་པ	putting it into verse I said	tshigs su bcad de smras pa
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་ནས	zhu don tshigs su	tshigs su bcad nas
བཅད་ནས་ཕུལ་བ	presented this request in verse	bcad nas phul ba
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	line, SA tshigs bcad brgya pa, poem of one hundred sloka by acarya varauchi, cut or put to meter, poetry, 1 of 12 gsung rab yan lag, poetic pronouncements, lines, verses	tshigs su bcad pa
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ་བཅུ་དགུ་པ	poetry in lines of 19 syllables each	tshigs su bcad pa bcu dgu pa
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་བཀའ་ཡི་གླེགས་བུ	a letter in verse	tshigs su bcad pa'i bka' yi glegs bu
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	song in verse tshigs su bcad pa'i glu dbyangs blangs pa sang a song in verse	tshigs su bcad pa'i glu dbyangs
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་སྡེ	teaching in verse [4th of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} = 12 divisions of the teachings; tshigs su bcad pa gnyis la sogs pas don ston pa EG, tshoms dang {mdo sde rgyan} verses belonging to the ...	tshigs su bcad pa'i sde
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་མཛོད	one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	tshigs su bcad pa'i mdzod
ཚིགས་སུ་སྦྱར་བ	compile verse	tshigs su sbyar ba
ཚིགས་གསལ་བ	Clear Words [commentary on Nagarjuna's Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way]; Mulamadhyamaka-vrtti-prasannapada; Chandrakirti, 7th century	tshigs gsal ba
ཚིགས་ལྷུག	prose	tshigs lhug
ཚིང་ག	a medicinal drug	tshing ga
ཚིངས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་མཛོད	tshings su bcad pa'i mdzod	tshings su bcad pa'i mdzod
ཚིད	(not in das)	tshid
ཚིམ	satisfy, contend, be sated, satiated	tshim
ཚིམ་པ	(tha mi dad pa tshims pa, tshim pa,, ngoms pa'am mgu ba,//re 'dod ji bzhin 'grub pas blo kha tshim pa satisfy, content, be satisfied, sated, satiated	tshim pa
ཚིམ་པ་བྱེད	hero, champion	tshim pa byed
ཚིམ་པ་མེད	hero, champion	tshim pa med
ཚིམ་པ་མེད་པར	as though they would never be satisfied	tshim pa med par
ཚིམ་པའི་ཉམས	contented	tshim pa'i nyams
ཚིམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	satisfy	tshim par byed pa
ཚིམ་བྱེད	1 ba ru ra'i shing; 2) tsan dan; 3) hor zla bcu gcig pa	tshim byed
ཚིམ་བྱེད་སྐྱེས	gza' lhag pa	tshim byed skyes
ཚིམ་བྱེད་གོས་ཅན	tsan dan spyi	tshim byed gos can
ཚིམ་བྱེད་པ	21st constellation, 21st lunar mansion	tshim byed pa
ཚིམ་བྱེད་བད་ཀན	bad kan lnga'i ya gyal zhig ste, byed las spyi bor gnas nas dbang po rnams tshim par byed pa	tshim byed bad kan
ཚིམ་བྱེད་མ	constellation, lunar mansion pusya, SA rgyal	tshim byed ma
ཚིམ་བྱེད་དམར	saffron	tshim byed dmar
ཚིམ་བྱེད་ཤིང	1) bud shing; 2) sbyin sreg gi yam shing	tshim byed shing
ཚིམ་མེད	SA dang ga bde ba, grod che, appetite	tshim med
ཚིམས	(not in das), to be satisfied 2208	tshims
ཚིམས་པ	[p tshim pa] [was] satisfied, contented	tshims pa
ཚིར	1) [p !'tshir ba] squeezed, pressed [out]; 2) pouring water on fire; 3) in turn, by turns, alternately	tshir
ཚིར་གྱིས་བཟུང་བ	tightly grasp w the hand	tshir gyis bzung ba
ཚིར་བ	SA 'tshir ba	tshir ba
ཚིར་ཚིར	sound of water falling into fire	tshir tshir
ཚིལ	fat; fat, grease	tshil
ཚིལ་ཁུ	fat, grease, liquid fat, melted fat	tshil khu
ཚིལ་ཅན	fatty, fat	tshil can
ཚིལ་ཆེན	human fat	tshil chen
ཚིལ་ཆེན་གྱི་སྤོས	incense of fat	tshil chen gyi spos
ཚིལ་ལྡན	fatty, fat	tshil ldan
ཚིལ་སྡོང	tallow candle	tshil sdong
ཚིལ་སྣོན	kha snon tshil bu ste sha khog steng la tshi lu snon pa,//da dung dmag dpung bsdu rgyu de, sha khog steng la tshil snon red	tshil snon
ཚིལ་བུ	fat, grease, suet	tshil bu
ཚིལ་མར	melted fat or lard	tshil mar
ཚིལ་མེད	lean	tshil med
ཚིལ་རྨེན	sha rmen in fat	tshil rmen
ཚིལ་ཝ	swelling from fat	tshil wa
ཚིལ་རོ	melted fat tshil khu bton pa'i snyigs ma	tshil ro
ཚིལ་ལུ	fat, fat	tshil lu
ཚིལ་ལུ་ཅན	fatty	tshil lu can
ཚིལ་ལེན	undershirt, underwear	tshil len
ཚིས	1) helper, assistant, auxiliary; 2) means of	tshis
ཚིས་སུ	in friendship	tshis su
ཚིས་སུ་འགྲོ	help[er], assist[ant], auxiliary	tshis su 'gro
ཚུ	hitherward, on this side, here	tshu
ཚུ་ཁ	this side	tshu kha
ཚུ་བི	one of this side	tshu bi
ཚུ་རི	mt on this side tshu ri nas pha ri'i bar du glog skud btang run electric lines from this mt to that	tshu ri
ཚུ་རིལ	coming around the side	tshu ril
ཚུ་རོལ	this side	tshu rol
ཚུ་རོལ་གྱི་འགྲམ	this side/ bank [= samsara]	tshu rol gyi 'gram
ཚུ་རོལ་བགྲོད	walks on this side or this way	tshu rol bgrod
ཚུ་རོལ་ཏུ	this way, to this place	tshu rol tu
ཚུ་རོལ་ན	on this side	tshu rol na
ཚུ་རོལ་ནས	from this side	tshu rol nas
ཚུ་རོལ་པ	one on this side, one belonging to this party	tshu rol pa
ཚུ་རོལ་མཛེས་པ	Hedonist [ggd]	tshu rol mdzes pa
ཚུ་རོལ་མཛེས་པ་བ	hedonists	tshu rol mdzes pa ba
ཚུག	harm	tshug
ཚུག་ཀ	1) appearance, form [lus kyi sha tshugs rgyas pa,//che tshugs,//bris sku'i ri mo tshugs ka med pa]; 2) khang pa gcong can la ka ba'i rogs skyor du btsugs pa'i ka ba phan pa'am nyen ka	tshug ka
ཚུག་ཐུབ་པ	to stabilize	tshug thub pa
ཚུག་ལག་འཕྲེང་བ	1454-1566	tshug lag 'phreng ba
ཚུག་ཤིང	hairpin	tshug shing
ཚུག་ས	caravansary	tshug sa
ཚུགས	See {'bru tshugs}	tshugs
ཚུགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	vajra feast, ganachakra	tshugs kyi 'khor lo
ཚུགས་ཁང	level open place near a village where travellers may camp	tshugs khang
ཚུགས་འཁོར	vajra feast, ganachakra	tshugs 'khor
ཚུགས་ཆུང	{tshugs chung} dbu med letters	tshugs chung
ཚུགས་འཆར	plan to establish	tshugs 'char
ཚུགས་ཐབས་མེད	without means of resistance	tshugs thabs med
ཚུགས་ཐུང	{tshugs thung dbu med letters	tshugs thung
ཚུགས་ཐུབ	to withstand, remain stable / firm, bear, be steadfast	tshugs thub
ཚུགས་ཐུབ་ཏུ་གྲུབ་པ	existence through its own power/ able to set itself up	tshugs thub tu grub pa
ཚུགས་ཐུབ་དུ	confidently	tshugs thub du
ཚུགས་ཐུབ་པ	{rang tshugs thub pa} to	tshugs thub pa
བེ་སེལཕ༹	sustaining	be self
ཚུགས་ཐུབ་པོ	changeless, steadfast	tshugs thub po
ཚུགས་དང་ལྡན་པ	accord w the model, well proportioned	tshugs dang ldan pa
ཚུགས་དལ	ral gshigs lhod po,//tshab tshub spangs nas tshugs dal gyis zhib 'jug byed pa	tshugs dal
ཚུགས་ལྡན	have correct form, be well proportioned/ shaped	tshugs ldan
ཚུགས་པ	able; {bzhugs ma tshugs pa} unable to remain	tshugs pa
ཚུགས་པོ	immovable, steadfast, stable [//mi tshugs po,//phru gu sdod tshugs po,..Rta 'gros tshugs po]	tshugs po
ཚུགས་བབས	camp	tshugs babs
ཚུགས་བྱད	appearance, form, shape [mi rgan gzhon gyi tshugs byad mi 'dra ba 'dug]	tshugs byad
ཚུགས་འབབ་ས	camping place/ ground, way station, caravansary	tshugs 'bab sa
ཚུགས་འབབ་སར་ཞག་སྡོད་བྱས་པ	spend the night at a camping place/ ground, way station, caravansary	tshugs 'bab sar zhag sdod byas pa
ཚུགས་མ་ཤོར་བ	not losing stability	tshugs ma shor ba
ཚུགས་མི་ཟིན་པ	lose control	tshugs mi zin pa
ཚུགས་གཙང	1) sha tshugs byon gtsang ba'am bzo lta legs pa; 2) spyod bzang	tshugs gtsang
ཚུགས་ཚད	1) distance a traveler goes in a day; 2) amount 1 can do	tshugs tshad
ཚུགས་འཛིན	I will settle [in--]	tshugs 'dzin
ཚུགས་བཞི	the four beginnings [among the dus tshigs nyer bzhi, 1 hor zla dang po'i dbugs thob nyin dpyid kyi 'go tshugs pa, two hor zla bzhi pa'i dbugs thob nyin dbyar tshugs pa, three hor zla bdun pa'i dbug...	tshugs bzhi
ཚུགས་ཡིག	{tshugs yig} letters	tshugs yig
ཚུགས་རིང	{tshugs ring dbu med} letters	tshugs ring
ཚུགས་ཤིང	placed outside and inside a tent kar rgyug	tshugs shing
ཚུགས་ཤིང་ཅན	hairpin	tshugs shing can
ཚུགས་སའི་སྡོད་ཁང	station house, way station, caravansary	tshugs sa'i sdod khang
ཚུགས་སུ་བལྟ	to stare intently at	tshugs su blta
ཚུང	(not in das)	tshung
ཚུངས	(not in das)	tshungs
ཚུད	['dzud pa!] [put in lay lead guide]! [p 'tshud] went/ was put into, go/ sink/ get into, enter, be put inside of/ locked into, trapped, enter	tshud
ཚུད་ཀྱི་གདོང	dial	tshud kyi gdong
ཚུད་ཐུབ་པ	able to contain	tshud thub pa
ཚུད་པ	(tha mi dad pa 1) go on a journey; 2) contain	tshud pa
ཚུད་མོ་མཁན	[arch] rkos mkhan	tshud mo mkhan
ཚུད་རེ་རེའི	hourly	tshud re re'i
ཚུན	up to/ [even] down to/ until and including [here] [dgun dus shar tshun,//bcings 'grol thob tshun,//nad pa des sman thang 'thungs tshun nad gzhi rim drag byung 'dug]	tshun
ཐཏ	- [until now lo bcu tshun: in the last 10 years] including [phru gu tshun gsad: they were killed, including the kids], village	that
ཏིམེ་ཐཏ	- * including *, village	time that
ཚུན་ཅད	within, by, up to, so far as	tshun cad
ཚུན་ཆད	at most; up to and including	tshun chad
ཚུན་ཆོད	see {phan chod}	tshun chod
ཚུན་ལ	within, by, up to, so far as	tshun la
ཚུབ་ཆེབ	gale, hurricane	tshub cheb
ཚུབ་མ	whirlwind, vortex, storm [of unpleasantness from obstructing spirits]	tshub ma
ཚུབ་མོ	harsh, rough	tshub mo
ཚུབ་ཚུབ	multi-colored	tshub tshub
ཚུབ་ཚུབ་ཡེར་ཡེར	1) move to and fro [like children]; 2) be absent, leave, move away [= {'sro chog chog}; 3) multicolored	tshub tshub yer yer
ཚུབས	[p 'tshub],, moved, whirled, battled, choked drowned [fish]	tshubs
ཚུབས་ཚུབ་ཏུ	whirling	tshubs tshub tu
ཚུམ	smile, close, SA 'dzum pa	tshum
ཚུམས	1) close your mouth/ eyes! [sense of 'dzum pa!]; 2) [arch] just a little	tshums
ཚུའུ	(CH vinegar	tshu'u
ཚུར	inward	tshur
ཚུར་ཀ	to this side	tshur ka
ཚུར་དཀར	alum [R]	tshur dkar
ཚུར་བཀུག་པ	attract	tshur bkug pa
ཚུར་ཁ	on this side	tshur kha
ཚུར་རྒོལ	SA phyi rgol, plaintiff	tshur rgol
ཚུར་རྒོལ་བ	1) tshur gnod pa skyel ba [dgra bos tshur rgol byas pa pham nyes su btang ba]; 2) tshig gis tshur rgol bar byed pa, snga rgol	tshur rgol ba
ཚུར་རྒོལ་བྱེད	attack/ launch an offensive [against 1's own side]	tshur rgol byed
ཚུར་རྒོལ་བྱེད་པ	to be attacked	tshur rgol byed pa
ཚུར་སྒོམ་ལ་གཅུར	push to the side through meditation, drive away by meditating, force out by meditation	tshur sgom la gcur
ཚུར་བསྒྱུར	translated into	tshur bsgyur
ཚུར་ང་ལ་ཕྲོད	give me one, fetch me one	tshur nga la phrod
ཚུར་ཉོ	buying	tshur nyo
ཚུར་ཉོ་བྱེད	buy	tshur nyo byed
ཚུར་ལྟོས	look here	tshur ltos
ཚུར་སྟོན	a chief disciple of Marpa	tshur ston
ཚུར་བལྟས	facing, looking at tshur bltas g.yog med - looking inward, has no servant	tshur bltas
ཚུར་མཐོང	seeing this side, [samsaric outlook]. [Syn. {so skye} an ordinary person]. a common being / egocentric person	tshur mthong
ཚུར་མཐོང་གི་བློ	knowledge/ mind/ understanding of an ordinary person	tshur mthong gi blo
ཚུར་མཐོང་གི་ཡུལ	objects of confined perception	tshur mthong gi yul
ཚུར་འཐེན	withdraw	tshur 'then
ཚུར་འཐེན་བྱེད	withdraw	tshur 'then byed
ཚུར་འདུས	to be reabsorbed	tshur 'dus
ཚུར་སྣང	reflection	tshur snang
ཚུར་སྣང་བ	(manifesting) reflexively	tshur snang ba
ཚུར་སྣང་སྨྲ་བ	theory of reflection	tshur snang smra ba
ཚུར་སྤྱོན	ask to approach	tshur spyon
ཚུར་ཕུ	Tsurphu. The seat of H.H. the Karmapa in Tölung, Central Tibet	tshur phu
ཚུར་ཕེབས་པར་ཞུ	ask to approach	tshur phebs par zhu
ཚུར་ཕྱོགས	this direction	tshur phyogs
ཚུར་འཕར་བ	rebound	tshur 'phar ba
ཚུར་བྱུང་ཕར་སོང	byung song	tshur byung phar song
ཚུར་བླངས་པ	extracted	tshur blangs pa
ཚུར་འབྱོར་པ	receipts, income, revenue	tshur 'byor pa
ཚུར་མོ	paint, pigment	tshur mo
ཚུར་ཚུར	nearer and nearer	tshur tshur
ཚུར་བཞག	put to the side	tshur bzhag
ཚུར་འོང་བ	went back, return	tshur 'ong ba
ཚུར་ཡོང་བབས	revenue, income	tshur yong babs
ཚུར་རེ	this side, here	tshur re
ཚུར་ལ་ངན	to return evil	tshur la ngan
ཚུར་ལ་ཉོན	listen here	tshur la nyon
ཚུར་ལ་འོང་བའི་ལམ་བར་དུ	a little further along the road	tshur la 'ong ba'i lam bar du
ཚུར་ལེན	receive, take [back], get [things rights, etc] [R]	tshur len
ཚུར་ལོག	return	tshur log
ཚུར་ལོག་ནས	on our way back	tshur log nas
ཚུར་ལོག་པ	return home	tshur log pa
ཚུར་ལོག་པའི་ནུས་པ	chemical [chain?] reaction	tshur log pa'i nus pa
ཚུར་ལོག་བྱེད	return	tshur log byed
ཚུར་ལོགས	this side	tshur logs
ཚུར་ཤོག	come here!	tshur shog
ཚུར་སླེབ	come to this side	tshur sleb
ཚུར་གསོན་དང	Listen here!	tshur gson dang
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline; morality; moral discipline, moral precepts, [shila]; ethical conduct, ethics, rule, order, monastic discipline / mode of conduct, [Skt. shila]. one of the {phar phyin drug} the six para...	tshul khrims
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	[tse]	tshul khrims kyi go sgrub
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of discipline	tshul khrims kyi chos bzhi
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	gradual attainment/ practice of the perfection of discipline	tshul khrims kyi mthar gyis pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བ	[tse]	tshul khrims kyi mthar gyis sbyor ba
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the vows of discipline [monastic etc]	tshul khrims kyi sdom pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ནོར	the wealth of discipline ['phags nor bdun gyi nang gses, sgo gsum gyi nyes spyod sdom pa ste, yon tan gyi rgyan gyis kun yid 'phrog pas btsun mo rin po che dang chos mchungs pa'o]	tshul khrims kyi nor
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendental discipline / perfection of morality	tshul khrims kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	transcendental discipline/ perfection of morality	tshul khrims kyi phar phyin
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	embodiment of ethics	tshul khrims kyi phung po
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	the gift of discipline	tshul khrims kyi sbyin pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	tshul khrims kyi tshogs sgrub
བའི་དངོས་པོ་གསུམ	the three kinds of discipline, {nges 'byung gi}@@, {'jigs skyob kyi}., {legs smon gyi}. ]	ba'i dngos po gsum
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	ethical qualities	tshul khrims kyi yon tan
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	the training of discipline, rules of moral conduct	tshul khrims kyi bslab pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གོས	the garment of discipline	tshul khrims gos
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1816-1837 tenth Dalai Lama, Tsültrim Gyatso	tshul khrims rgya mtsho
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཅན	bound by monastic vows	tshul khrims can
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་འཆལ་བ	deranged/ violated/ degenerated discipline * break vows	tshul khrims 'chal ba
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་འཇིག་པ	break one's vows	tshul khrims 'jig pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྗེས་དྲན	recollection of discipline TSE tshul khrims rjes dran gyi mthar gyis sbyor	tshul khrims rjes dran
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of discipline/ morality/ moral practice {rjes su dran pa bcu}/ 1 of the {rjes su dran pa drug} = six mindfulnesses, tshul khrims kyi yon tan rjes su dran pa'o	tshul khrims rjes su dran pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཉམས་པ	one who is immoral, 1 of 6 nyams pa	tshul khrims nyams pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཉི་མ	(1796-1872) - founder of ri rdzong monastery - nges pa don gyi grub pa'i dbang phyug rje tshul khrims nyi ma dpal bzang po'i rnam par thar pa mdo tsam brjod pa dad gsum	tshul khrims nyi ma
ཉིན་བྱེད་འདྲེན་པའི་སྐྱ་རེངས	his biography	nyin byed 'dren pa'i skya rengs
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གཏེར	epithet of buddha	tshul khrims gter
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གཏོང	give up his morality	tshul khrims gtong
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	moral practice	tshul khrims brtul zhugs
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དག་པ	{rang gi btsun mo tshul khrims dag pa med} none of his queens/ wives had been faithful	tshul khrims dag pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དང་ངོ་ཚ་བྲལ་བ	lost all shame and moral standing tshul khrims dang brtul mchog tu 'dzin pa	tshul khrims dang ngo tsha bral ba
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དང་ལྡན་པ	ethical; living by ethical discipline	tshul khrims dang ldan pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལྡན་པ	ethical; disciplined; restrained	tshul khrims ldan pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	adopt pure ethics	tshul khrims rnam par dag pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྣམ་གསུམ	TSE	tshul khrims rnam gsum
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	[S. shilaparamita], transcendent discipline, the perfection of morality/ ethics, [def. {'khor gsum mi rtog pas srid zhi'i skyon spong ba'i sems pa sa bon dang bcas pa}	tshul khrims pha rol tu phyin pa
ཤིལ	paramita], transcendent discipline, the perfection of morality / ethics, [def. {'khor gsum mi rtog pas srid zhi'i skyon spong ba'i sems pa sa bon dang bcas pa}	shila
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གཙང	kept pure discipline tshul khrims gzhan phan chos kyi zla ba zur mang bstan 'dzin sprul sku, d. 1963?	tshul khrims gtsang
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཡོད་པ	to keep discipline tshul khrims yon tan kun gyi gzhi rten yin discipline is the basis of all virtues	tshul khrims yod pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཡོན་ཏན་བཞི	the four virtues of discipline [R]	tshul khrims yon tan bzhi
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རིན་ཆེན	zhu chen, 16971774	tshul khrims rin chen
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལས་བྱུང	of god, moral disposition tshul khrims las byung ba'i bsod nams bya	tshul khrims las byung
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བཤིག་པ	broken one's discipline	tshul khrims bshig pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་སྲུང་བ	keep vows, guard one's conduct	tshul khrims srung ba
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གསུམ	bodhisattva vehicle: dge ba['i] chos sdud pa'i tshul khrims} gathering virtuous dharmas; {sems can don byed pa'i tshul khrims}, benefitting sentient beings; controlling transgressions {nyes spyod s...	tshul khrims gsum
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བསྲུང	keep/ guard discipline/ moral conduct/ ethics [opp. of {'dod log}	tshul khrims bsrung
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བསྲུངས་པ	kept discipline	tshul khrims bsrungs pa
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བསླབ་པ	training in ethics	tshul khrims bslab pa
ཚུལ་གྱིས	by way of . . . ; through the process of . . .	tshul gyis
ཚུལ་གྱིས་གནས་པ	take one's stand on, as being	tshul gyis gnas pa
ཚུལ་འགྲོ་བ	proceeding by means of	tshul 'gro ba
ཚུལ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	gzugs can gyi rgyan	tshul can gyi rgyan
ཚུལ་གཅིག	one single principle 2213	tshul gcig
ཚུལ་གཅིག་པ	solitary way	tshul gcig pa
ཚུལ་བཅོས	1) hypocrisy, hypocritical, pretentious, charlatan, pretender [to virtue/ discipline]; 2) change, alter	tshul bcos
ཚུལ་བཅོས་མཁན	hypocrite, mimicker	tshul bcos mkhan
ཚུལ་བཅོས་པ	put on a manner, assume a style, mimic	tshul bcos pa
ཚུལ་འཆལ	immorality, deranged discipline	tshul 'chal
ཚུལ་འཆོས	hypocrisy, mibp 87, mere outward show, established rule, 1 of 5 log par 'tsho ba	tshul 'chos
ཚུལ་འཆོས་ཀྱིས་དམ་པ་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	pretending to be saints tshul 'chos kho nas blun po thams cad	tshul 'chos kyis dam pa ltar snang ba
མགོ་བོ་བསྐོར	is but a great hypocrite who has fooled all the naive	mgo bo bskor
ཚུལ་འཆོས་མཁན	hypocrite	tshul 'chos mkhan
ཚུལ་འཆོས་པ་མེད་པ	free from pretense / hypocrisy. / pretending to be virtuous	tshul 'chos pa med pa
ཚུལ་འཆོས་བྱེད་པ	be hypocritical/ a pretender to virtue/ discipline/ knowledge, change, alter	tshul 'chos byed pa
ཚུལ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན	what does it mean that	tshul ji ltar yin
ཚུལ་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	correct, proper	tshul ji bzhin pa
ཚུལ་གཉིས	the two systems [of Nagarjuna and asanga]	tshul gnyis
ཚུལ་སྟོན	ostentation, pretence, pretend	tshul ston
ཚུལ་སྟོན་མཁན	hypocrite	tshul ston mkhan
ཚུལ་བརྟུལ་མཆོག་འཛིན	holding a discipline/ rule or ritual to be paramount	tshul brtul mchog 'dzin
ཚུལ་བསྟན	pretend	tshul bstan
ཚུལ་མཐའ་དག	all the aspects	tshul mtha' dag
ཚུལ་མཐུན	lawful, law-abiding, moral, ethical, logical, rational	tshul mthun
ཚུལ་མཐུན་གྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས	ethical characteristics	tshul mthun gyi khyad chos
ཚུལ་མཐུན་གྱི་བསམ་འཆར	rational plan	tshul mthun gyi bsam 'char
ཚུལ་མཐུན་ལུགས་མཐུན	lawful, lawabiding, moral, ethical, proper tshul mthun lugs mthun gyi tshong las	tshul mthun lugs mthun
ཚུལ་མཐོང	way of seeing	tshul mthong
ཚུལ་མཐོང་སྣང་ངོར	appear in a way we can understand	tshul mthong snang ngor
ཚུལ་དང་མཐུན་པ	correct, proper, in accordance w tradition	tshul dang mthun pa
ཚུལ་དང་ལྡན	correct	tshul dang ldan
ཚུལ་དང་ལྡན་པ	proper, correct	tshul dang ldan pa
ཚུལ་དང་མི་མཐུན་པ	unconventional	tshul dang mi mthun pa
ཚུལ་དུ	way/ manner/ mode (of . . . ); through the process of . . . ; just like . . .	tshul du
ཚུལ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	access, access to, to apply	tshul du 'jug pa
ཚུལ་དུ་བཞག	rest in the manner of ..	tshul du bzhag
ཚུལ་དེ་ཁོ་ནས	by that very same way of proceeding	tshul de kho nas
ཚུལ་འདི	about/ as for this	tshul 'di
ཚུལ་འདིར	at this work, in this principle	tshul 'dir
ཚུལ་འདིས	accordingly	tshul 'dis
ཚུལ་ལྡན	civilized, cultured, wellbehaved, serious	tshul ldan
ཚུལ་གནས	disciplined, properly abiding	tshul gnas
ཚུལ་གནས་པ	remains like	tshul gnas pa
ཚུལ་རྣམས	all aspects	tshul rnams
ཚུལ་པ	rest house	tshul pa
ཚུལ་བྱད	spyod tshul dan cha byad	tshul byad
ཚུལ་བྱས	"pretend" construction	tshul byas
ཚུལ་བྱེད	pretend to be --	tshul byed
ཚུལ་མ	nun	tshul ma
ཚུལ་མ་ནོར་བ	precise manner	tshul ma nor ba
ཚུལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	improper, immoral	tshul ma yin pa
ཚུལ་མིན	unsuitable	tshul min
ཚུལ་མིན་སྐྱེ་བའི	assurances from a dishonest person	tshul min skye ba'i
ཚུལ་མིན་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཚིག	words of an unscrupulous man	tshul min skye ba'i tshig
ཚུལ་མིན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ	improper behavior	tshul min gyi spyod lam
ཚུལ་མིན་གྱི་བྱ་སྤྱོད	improper/ immoral behavior	tshul min gyi bya spyod
ཚུལ་མིན་རྙེད་པ	improper gain, [def. {rnyed pas rnyed pa 'tshol ba las byung ba'i rdzas}	tshul min rnyed pa
ཚུལ་མིན་ཡིད་བྱེད	improper/ incorrect thinking/ use of the mind	tshul min yid byed
ཚུལ་མིན་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རྟོག	TSE discursive thoughts/ conceptions of wrong thinking/ use of the mind	tshul min yid byed kyi rnam rtog
ཚུལ་མིན་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	improper/ incorrect/ wrong thinking/ use of the mind	tshul min yid la byed pa
ཚུལ་མེད	irregular, unjust	tshul med
ཚུལ་གཙང་བ	1) good behavior; 2) pure/ correct discipline (	tshul gtsang ba
ཚུལ་འཛིན	appears in the form, manifest [dge slong tshul 'dzin he ru ka heruka who appears in the form of a bhik\s hu., ras pa'i tshul 'dzin manifest as a repa]	tshul 'dzin
ཚུལ་ཞིག་པ	1) rang tshugs shor ba; 2) tshul khrims nyams par gyur pa	tshul zhig pa
ཚུལ་གཞན་མིན་པ	incomparable	tshul gzhan min pa
ཚུལ་བཞི	four modes. Four levels of meaning: the literal, the general, the hidden, and the ultimate	tshul bzhi
ཚུལ་བཞིན	proper[ly] [R]	tshul bzhin
ཚུལ་བཞིན་དུ	appropriately/ suitably/ properly/ correctly; in an appropriate manner	tshul bzhin du
ཚུལ་བཞིན་དུ་ཆོས་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བ	apply oneself correctly to the teachings/ Dharma	tshul bzhin du chos rab tu sbyor ba
ཚུལ་བཞིན་དུ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	correct thinking	tshul bzhin du yid la byed pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་གདིང་ཐོག་ཏུ་སླེབ	gaining confidence in the right way	tshul bzhin gding thog tu sleb
ཚུལ་བཞིན་པ	mannerly, one who assumes fine airs	tshul bzhin pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་བྱ་བ	to perform correctly	tshul bzhin bya ba
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ	inappropriate/ unsuitable/ improper; not self-justifying	tshul bzhin ma yin pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	incorrect attention	tshul bzhin ma yin pa yid la byed pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཏམ	improper talk	tshul bzhin ma yin pa'i gtam
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	incorrect application	tshul bzhin ma yin pa'i sbyor ba
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་ཡིད་བྱེད	improper mode of thinking	tshul bzhin ma yin yid byed
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མིན	irregular, improper	tshul bzhin min
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མིན་པའི་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	improper mode of thinking	tshul bzhin min pa'i yid la byed pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཡིད་བྱེད	correct thinking	tshul bzhin yid byed
ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད	proper mindfulness	tshul bzhin yid la byed
ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	correct thinking tshul bzhin yid la byed pa'i so sor rtog pa the discrimination of correct thinking	tshul bzhin yid la byed pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་ལས་དོན་བྱེད་པ	properly perform a task	tshul bzhin las don byed pa
ཚུལ་བཞིན་བཤད་པ	properly/ correctly explain	tshul bzhin bshad pa
ཚུལ་གཟོབ	only seeming/ pretending to be as it externally seems/ appears	tshul gzob
ཚུལ་བཟང་སྟོན་པ	to teach the good way	tshul bzang ston pa
ཚུལ་བཟང་པོ	beautiful manner	tshul bzang po
ཚུལ་བཟུང་བ	in the form of	tshul bzung ba
ཚུལ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	access to, to apply	tshul la 'jug pa
ཚུལ་ལ་གནས་པ	disciplined, properly abiding [def: dge slong dang 'bras bu las zhugs pa]	tshul la gnas pa
ཚུལ་ལས་ཉམས	growing remiss in one's conduct	tshul las nyams
ཚུལ་ལུགས	system, tradition, mode, manner, way of things, [Syn. {gnas lugs}, {srol lugs}	tshul lugs
བྱས་ན་ལེགས	system, tradition, mode, manner, way of things, way things are	byas na legs
ཚུལ་ཤིང	sangha counting stick [at the time of taking the pratimoksha vow [las chog byed] grva grang 'dren byed [counting the sangha] tamarisk wood thur ma [stick]	tshul shing
ཚུལ་གསུམ	the three aspects [of a syllogism in logic], {phyogs chos}, {rjes khyab}, {ldog khyab}, {rtags kyi @@gsum}. the three modes. Ts gzhal bya lkog gyur ji bzhin rtod byed kyi rtags yang dag 'god pa'i t...	tshul gsum
ཚུལ་གསུམ་སྒྲོན་མ	text by {slob dpon tre pi tta ka}	tshul gsum sgron ma
ཚུལ་གསུམ་སྒྲོན་མེ	Torch of the Three Ways	tshul gsum sgron me
ཚུལ་གསུམ་སྒྲོན་མེ་ལས	n. of text	tshul gsum sgron me las
ཚུལ་གསུམ་པའི་རྟགས	the sign/ proof of the three aspects/ modes	tshul gsum pa'i rtags
ཚུལ་གསུམ་པའི་རྟགས་སྟོན་པ	tshul gsum pa'i rtags ston par byed pa'i mtshan nyid gzhan gyi don gyi rjes su dpag pa'i skabs su bab nas bshad pa zhes bya ba [rgya gar gyi slob dpon chos mchog gis brtzam pa zhig]	tshul gsum pa'i rtags ston pa
ཚུས	[arch] food	tshus
ཚེ	time, when, life, life-force, long life, life, "when" connective, conditional connective, longevity, potential longevity, whenever	tshe
ཚེ་དཀར	White Amitayus, {tshe dpag med dkar po}	tshe dkar
ཚེ་དཀར་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར	revealed by mchog	tshe dkar sgrub skor
གྱུར་གླིང་པ	gter ston, 1829-1870. Comprises texts from the rediscoveries of Chokgyur Lingpa, with liturgical notes by kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas and others. Collection of ritual texts to be recited to ensur...	gyur gling pa
ཚེ་བཀྲག	lustre of life	tshe bkrag
ཚེ་སྐབས	A term of grammar. Timing. A	tshe skabs
ཚེ་སྐབས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	phrases telling a particular time	tshe skabs kyi sgra
ཚེ་སྐོར	set of teachings connected to Amitayus etc	tshe skor
ཚེ་སྐྱིད	happy life [= {skyur lo}	tshe skyid
ཚེ་སྐྱེད	longevity, increase of life	tshe skyed
ཚེ་སྐྱེལ་བ	my life is carried away by [evil deeds]	tshe skyel ba
ཚེ་སྐྲ	hor mo hair never cut for their whole lives	tshe skra
ཚེ་གང	whole/ entire life, a lifetime	tshe gang
ཚེ་གང་གྱོག་རྒྱུག	be made a [lifelong] slave	tshe gang gyog rgyug
ཚེ་གང་དུས་བརྒྱ	x {da res zab mo'i dam chos nyan pa 'di tshe gang dus brgya'i za ma lan cig yin} the fact that you are at this moment listening to the profound Dharma is the fruit of merits accumulated over innume...	tshe gang dus brgya
ཚེ་གང་བསགས་པའི་ནོར་རྫས	wealth accumulated over an entire life time	tshe gang bsags pa'i nor rdzas
ཚེ་གལ	food [h] [-{zhal zas}	tshe gal
ཚེ་གོང་མ	previous lives	tshe gong ma
ཚེ་གྱང	prosperous life	tshe gyang
ཚེ་གྲོགས	life's comp[anion, spouse tshe gling ngag dbang 'jam dpal tshul	tshe grogs
ཚེ་འགུགས	gathering back/ summoning	tshe 'gugs
སུམམོནིང་ལིཕེ༹	energy; 'gathering of life' ritual	summoning life
ཚེ་འགུགས་པ	summon long life	tshe 'gugs pa
ཚེ་འགྲིབ	life vanishes	tshe 'grib
ཚེ་འགྲོ	life is passing	tshe 'gro
ཚེ་རྒྱངས	distant sound such as that of fire burning wood	tshe rgyangs
ཚེ་རྒྱབ་པ	zip tshe rgyun bsring byed kyi sgrub rdzas	tshe rgyab pa
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ	long life practice, ayuhsadhana, process of realizing the attainment of long life	tshe sgrub
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་ལྕགས་སྡོང་མ	ritual of the Nyingmapa Jangter tradition for invoking the blessing of longevity	tshe sgrub lcags sdong ma
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་རྟེན་གྱི་བུམ་པ	vase used in long life practice	tshe sgrub rten gyi bum pa
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས་ཤེས་ཁ་སྦྱོར	terma revealed by yongs dge gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje - b. 1628	tshe sgrub thabs shes kha sbyor
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་དབ༹ངས་མ་བཅུད་འདྲེན	from the {dag snang rgya can} terma by the 5th Dalai Lama	tshe sgrub dvangs ma bcud 'dren
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་པ་སྙོམས་པ	you must practice the whole length of your life	tshe sgrub pa snyoms pa
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཐབས	long life sadhana/ practice	tshe sgrub pa'i thabs
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་གསང་འདུས	sambhogakaya sadhana of Padmasambhava by {ratna gling pa}	tshe sgrub gsang 'dus
ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	terma revealed by {rat-na gling pa rin chen dpal bzang po} 1403-1478	tshe sgrub gsang ba 'dus pa
ཚེ་ང་ཤོས	most long-lived	tshe nga shos
ཚེ་སྔ་ཕྱི	previous or future lifetimes	tshe snga phyi
ཚེ་སྔ་མ	earlier period of existence	tshe snga ma
ཚེ་སྔ་མ་རིག་པ	knowledge of previous lives	tshe snga ma rig pa
ཚེ་སྔ་མར	in your past lives	tshe snga mar
ཚེ་སྔོན	former life	tshe sngon
ཚེ་སྔོན་མ	former life	tshe sngon ma
ཚེ་སྔོན་མའི་གནས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of previous lives	tshe sngon ma'i gnas shes pa
ཚེ་གཅིག	whole life	tshe gcig
ཚེ་གཅིག་གི་གཏན་གྲོགས	life-long companion	tshe gcig gi gtan grogs
ཚེ་གཅིག་གྲོལ	MSS: liberation in a single life. ¦ Mipham, Nges shes sgron me. [mss]	tshe gcig grol
ཚེ་གཅིག་བར་ཆད་པ	one kind of phyir 'ong 'bras gnas	tshe gcig bar chad pa
ཚེ་གཅིག་ལུས་གཅིག	in this very life, with this very body	tshe gcig lus gcig
ཚེ་གཅིག་ལུས་གཅིག་སངས་རྒྱ་བ	Buddhahood attained in one lifetime	tshe gcig lus gcig sangs rgya ba
ཚེ་གཅིག་ལུས་གཉིས	worm used to cure plague	tshe gcig lus gnyis
ཚེ་གཅིག་སངས་རྒྱས	enlightenment in a single lifetime	tshe gcig sangs rgyas
ཚེ་གཅིག་སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས	a teaching that gives enlightenment in 1 lifetime	tshe gcig sangs rgyas chos
ཚེ་གཅིག་སངས་རྒྱས་ལམ	the path to	tshe gcig sangs rgyas lam
བུདདྷཧོཨོད་ཨིན་ཨོནེ་ལིཕེ༹	time	buddhahood in one life
ཚེ་བཅུ་ལེའུ་བརྒྱད་པ	Tenth Day Practice in Eight Chapters	tshe bcu le'u brgyad pa
ཚེ་བཅུད	longevity nectar	tshe bcud
ཚེ་ཆང	longevity wine [in ritual]	tshe chang
ཚེ་ཆད་པ	interruption of life	tshe chad pa
ཚེ་ཆུ	longevity-nectar, elixir of life; water of life, water of immortality	tshe chu
ཚེ་ཆོས	elixir of life	tshe chos
ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང	a monastery tshe mchog gling bka' chen ye shes rgyal	tshe mchog gling
ཚེ་ཇི་སྲིད་ཐུབ	span of life	tshe ji srid thub
ཚེ་ཇི་སྲིད་ཐུབ་པ	duration of life	tshe ji srid thub pa
ཚེ་ཇེ་ཐུང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	people's lives growing ever shorter	tshe je thung du 'gro ba
ཚེ་ཇེ་རིང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	people's lives growing ever longer	tshe je ring du 'gro ba
ཚེ་མཇུག	for the remainder of this life; in what remains of this life	tshe mjug
ཚེ་མཇུག་རྫོགས་པ	complete/ finish 1's life	tshe mjug rdzogs pa
ཚེ་རྗེས་མ	skye ba phyi ma	tshe rjes ma
ཚེ་བརྗེ	die, transmigrate, pass away, reincarnate	tshe brje
ཚེ་བརྗེ་བ	die, transmigrate, pass away, reincarnate	tshe brje ba
ཚེ་བརྗེས་པ	passed away, died, transmigrated	tshe brjes pa
ཚེ་གཉིས་པ	of an amphibious nature	tshe gnyis pa
ཚེ་སྙིགས་མ	degeneration of life	tshe snyigs ma
ཚེ་ཏ་ན	Chetana	tshe ta na
ཚེ་གཏོར	long life torma, cake, torma cake	tshe gtor
ཚེ་བཏང་གི་སློབ་མ	renunciant disciples	tshe btang gi slob ma
ཚེ་རྟ་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	Sadhana of Amitayus and Hayagriva Combined	tshe rta zung 'brel
ཚེ་རྟ་ཟུང་འབྲེལ་འཆི་མེད་དཔལ་གཏེར	by Tangtong Gyalpo	tshe rta zung 'brel 'chi med dpal gter
ཚེ་ལྟོགས	poor, starving, vagrant, beggar	tshe ltogs
ཚེ་སྟོད	the 1st half/ earlier part of life	tshe stod
ཚེ་བརྟན	1) stable/ tenacious life; 2) cotton plant	tshe brtan
ཚེ་བསྟུངས	a short life	tshe bstungs
ཚེ་ཐག་རིང་བ	longevity, long lifespan	tshe thag ring ba
ཚེ་ཐབས	livelihood	tshe thabs
ཚེ་ཐར	custom of freeing/ saving the life of animals to be killed by others [srog blu [gtong] //bshas lug, [= {srog blu}, [to buy animals supposed to be killed and set them free]	tshe thar
ཚེ་ཐར་གཏོང་བ	acquit	tshe thar gtong ba
ཚེ་ཐར་དུ་ལུས་པ	{ma shi bar tshe thar du lus pa gcig kyang med} no one will escape death	tshe thar du lus pa
ཚེ་ཐར་བ་བྱུང	which were meant to be butchered were thus set free	tshe thar ba byung
ཚེ་ཐར་ལ་བཏང	pardon, grant him his life, let live	tshe thar la btang
ཚེ་ཐུང	short life-span	tshe thung
ཚེ་ཐུང་བ	to have a short life	tshe thung ba
ཚེ་ཐུང་བའི་ཏུས་ན	in the short span of a lifetime	tshe thung ba'i tus na
ཚེ་ཐུང་བའི་དུས་ན	in the short span of a lifetime	tshe thung ba'i dus na
ཚེ་ཐུབ་པའི་ཚད	age 1 can attain, extent/ upper limit of life	tshe thub pa'i tshad
ཚེ་ཐོག་གཅིག་པ	mi thog gcig pa,//nga tsho tshang ma tshe thog gcig pa'i mi yin	tshe thog gcig pa
ཚེ་མཐའ་ཡས	Boundless Life, [Syn {tshe dpag med}	tshe mtha' yas
ཚེ་མཐའི་མདོ	a sutra	tshe mtha'i mdo
ཚེ་དང་སྒྲུབ་པ	life and practice	tshe dang sgrub pa
ཚེ་དང་སྒྲུབ་པ་སྙོམས་པ	to equalize life and practice, devoted his whole life to spiritual practice, making her life and sadhana one, [may] the life and sadhana become one tshe dang sgrub pa snyoms par mdzod Let the lengt...	tshe dang sgrub pa snyoms pa
ཚེ་དང་སྒྲུབ་པ་བསྙམས་པ	practice for the rest of your life	tshe dang sgrub pa bsnyams pa
ཚེ་དང་ལྡན་པ	1) venerable [used in old scriptures.] Syn {srog dang ldan pa}. Mr. (form of address); honorific term applied to someone who has gone forth (pravrajita) and keeps the monastic vows. The meaning is ...	tshe dang ldan pa
ཚེ་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཁྱོད	my good man	tshe dang ldan pa khyod
ཚེ་དང་སྡན་པ་ཤ་རིའི་བུ	venerable Sariputra	tshe dang sdan pa sha ri'i bu
ཚེ་དང་པ	1 of 27 coincidences in astrology, SA sbyor ba nyer bdun tshe dang ye shes dpag tu med pa Boundless life and wisdom, {tshe dpag med} tshe dang ye shes dpag tu med pa Boundless Life and Wisdom. Syn ...	tshe dang pa
ཚེ་དང་བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	longevity, merit and abundant luxuries	tshe dang bsod nams dpal 'byor
ཚེ་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་སྨིན་པ	ripens within this very life	tshe de nyid du smin pa
ཚེ་དེ་ལ་བྱས་པའི་ལས	action committed in this lifetime	tshe de la byas pa'i las
ཚེ་དེའི་སྣང་བ	Concerns for this life	tshe de'i snang ba
ཚེ་གདུང་ཁང	tomb of the fifth dala lama in Potala	tshe gdung khang
ཚེ་བདག	1) Lord of life; 2) lord of death; 3) mantrayana; 4) long-living GD	tshe bdag
ཚེ་བདུད་ནག་པོའི་བཟློག་མདོས	mdos to repel the black bdud that hamper life	tshe bdud nag po'i bzlog mdos
ཚེ་མདངས	healthy appearance, fresh complexion	tshe mdangs
ཚེ་མདའ	longevity arrow	tshe mda'
ཚེ་མདོ	the Amitayus Sutra	tshe mdo
ཚེ་མདོ་ཚེ་གཟུངས	dharani for longevity	tshe mdo tshe gzungs
ཚེ་འདའ	death	tshe 'da'
ཚེ་འདས	departed	tshe 'das
ཚེ་འདས་པ	late	tshe 'das pa
ཚེ་འདས་པ་ལ་བྱ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	ceremony performed for the benefit of the dead 2217	tshe 'das pa la bya ba'i cho ga
ཚེ་འདས་ལམ་སྣ་འདྲེན་པ	guiding the deceased onwards on the path	tshe 'das lam sna 'dren pa
ཚེ་འདས་ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྟེན་གསུམ	the triple body, speech and mind representation of the deceased	tshe 'das lus ngag yid kyi rten gsum
ཚེ་འདི	this present life	tshe 'di
ཚེ་འདི་ཉིད	this very / same life	tshe 'di nyid
ཚེ་འདི་ཉིད་དུ	in this very life	tshe 'di nyid du
ཚེ་འདི་སྣང	the involvements/ appearances of this life	tshe 'di snang
ཚེ་འདི་སྣང་བ	this life, present experiences	tshe 'di snang ba
ཚེ་འདི་ཕྱི	this life and the next tshe 'di phyi bar do gtan gyi skyabs dang	tshe 'di phyi
ཚེ་འདི་ཕྱིར	in this and later lifetimes, in this life and the next	tshe 'di phyir
ཚེ་འདི་བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས	give up thoughts of this life!	tshe 'di blo yis thongs
ཚེ་འདི་བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས་ཤིག	give up this life's concerns!	tshe 'di blo yis thongs shig
ཚེ་འདི་མི་རྟག	this life is transient	tshe 'di mi rtag
ཚེ་འདི་ཡི་བྱ་བ་བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས	dismiss concern for this life alone	tshe 'di yi bya ba blo yis thongs
ཚེ་འདིའི	temporal	tshe 'di'i
ཚེ་འདིའི་ཁོལ་པོ	a slave to this life	tshe 'di'i khol po
ཚེ་འདིའི་འཁྲི་བ་ཀུན་བཅད་པ	to sever all ties to this life tshe 'di'i bde ba la sems 'khrul na dus gtan	tshe 'di'i 'khri ba kun bcad pa
གྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཡིན	Happiness in this life is an illusion. Always there is suffering	gyi sdug bsngal yin
ཚེ་འདིའི་འདུན་མ	the goals of ordinary life	tshe 'di'i 'dun ma
ཚེ་འདིའི་སྣང	the involvements/ appearances of this life	tshe 'di'i snang
ཚེ་འདིའི་སྣང་བ	the experiences/ appearances of this life	tshe 'di'i snang ba
ཚེ་འདིའི་ཕྱིར	for the sake of this life	tshe 'di'i phyir
ཚེ་འདིའི་འཕེན་པ་རྫོགས་ནས་མི་འདུག	her life is coming to an end	tshe 'di'i 'phen pa rdzogs nas mi 'dug
ཚེ་འདིའི་བྱ་བ་བློ་ཡིས་བཏང་བ	gave up all the affairs of this life	tshe 'di'i bya ba blo yis btang ba
ཚེ་འདིའི་བྱ་བ་བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས	give up thoughts of this life	tshe 'di'i bya ba blo yis thongs
ཚེ་འདིའི་བྱ་བཞག	the dealings / schemes of this life	tshe 'di'i bya bzhag
ཚེ་འདིའི་ཞེན་པ་ཅན	people who cling to this life	tshe 'di'i zhen pa can
ཚེ་འདིའི་བསམ་བློ	trivial preoccupations	tshe 'di'i bsam blo
ཚེ་འདིར	this very life	tshe 'dir
ཚེ་འདིར་ཆུ་བུར་མིག་གི་ལམ་ལ	in this life	tshe 'dir chu bur mig gi lam la
ཚེ་འདིར་སྣང	the involvements/ appearances of this life	tshe 'dir snang
ཚེ་འདིར་སྣང་གི་བྱ་བ	the worldly involvements of this life	tshe 'dir snang gi bya ba
ཚེ་འདིར་བྱས་པ	whatever you do in this life	tshe 'dir byas pa
ཚེ་འདིས་བསྡུས་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	the thoughts comprised of this life	tshe 'dis bsdus pa'i rnam rtog
ཚེ་འདུ་བྱེད	conditions for our long lives tshe 'du byed dbang du ma thal bar since the conditions for our longevity have not waned in strength	tshe 'du byed
ཚེ་འདོན	coming of age	tshe 'don
ཚེ་ལྡན	alive, living [person]	tshe ldan
ཚེ་ན	at that time, on that occasion tshe nad med dang dbang phyug dang lordship, freedom from disease, long life and	tshe na
ཚེ་ནས	"life grains" [used in rituals]	tshe nas
ཚེ་ནོར	Abbr. of {tshe dbang nor bu}	tshe nor
ཚེ་གནས་པའི་རྩ	tshe gnas pa nadi	tshe gnas pa'i rtsa
ཚེ་པད	shrub ephedra saxatilis	tshe pad
ཚེ་དཔག	Amitayus buddha, [buddha of boundless light associated with the longlife initiation/ sambhogakaya aspect of Amitabha, spiritual source from which Avalokiteshvara emanates	tshe dpag
ཚེ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད	immortality	tshe dpag tu med
ཚེ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	eternal life	tshe dpag tu med pa
ཚེ་དཔག་མེད	Boundless life, Amitayus	tshe dpag med
ཚེ་དཔག་མེད་མགོན	Protector Amitayus	tshe dpag med mgon
ཚེ་དཔག་མེད་པ	Skt. Amitayus Boundless Life. 1) Buddha Amitayus. 2) A Mahayana sutra tshe dpag med rdzogs chen them med terma by {gu ru chos kyi dbang phyug} on the sambhogakaya aspect of Padmasambhava	tshe dpag med pa
ཚེ་དཔལ	longevity and well-being	tshe dpal
ཚེ་དཔལ་དོན་གྲུབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	king at Leh during the first half of the 19th century	tshe dpal don grub rnam rgyal
ཚེ་སྤང་བཟའ་དམར་རྒྱན	Lady Margyen of Tsepang. One of the queens of king Trisong Deutsen. Reputed to have been a major troublemaker	tshe spang bza' dmar rgyan
ཚེ་སྤེལ་བའི་ཐབས་སྦྱིན་པ	bestowing	tshe spel ba'i thabs sbyin pa
ཐེ་མེཨནས་ཕོ༹ར་ཨིནཅྲེཨསིང་ལིཕེ༹	length tshe spong bza' rma rgyal mtsho skar ma tshe spong bza' rma rgyal mtsho skar ma tshe spong bza' rma rgyal mtsho skar ma tshe spong bza' rma rgyal mtsho skar ma [one of the five wives of {khr...	the means for increasing life
ཚེ་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་འགྲོ	passing on; leaving this life	tshe pha rol du 'gro
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མ	(next, after) life, future (life, birth, existence, period of life), the next life	tshe phyi ma
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ཡུལ	the land of the next life	tshe phyi ma zhes bya ba'i yul
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མ་ལ	in the future / next life	tshe phyi ma la
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མ་ལ་ཕན་འདོགས་པ	beneficial for future lives	tshe phyi ma la phan 'dogs pa
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མའི་ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	faults of the next life	tshe phyi ma'i kha na ma tho ba
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མའི་བརྒྱགས་ཕྱེ	provisions for the next life	tshe phyi ma'i brgyags phye
ཚེ་ཕྱི་མའི་ཡུལ	the land of the next life	tshe phyi ma'i yul
ཚེ་ཕྱིད་པ	to sustain life	tshe phyid pa
ཚེ་འཕག་ལྷ་ཁང	a temple in lhasa	tshe 'phag lha khang
ཚེ་འཕེལ	life-extending tshe 'phel thabs kyi mdo sde dang gzungs	tshe 'phel
ཚེ་འཕེལ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	life extending ritual	tshe 'phel ba'i cho ga
ཚེ་འཕེལ་རྫས	substances for lifeextension	tshe 'phel rdzas
ཚེ་འཕོ	death, to die	tshe 'pho
ཚེ་འཕོ་བ	to die, transmigrate, pass away. [Syn. {tshe rabs brje ba}	tshe 'pho ba
ཚེ་འཕོས	passed away	tshe 'phos
ཚེ་འཕོས་པ	died	tshe 'phos pa
ཚེ་བར་ཆད	die, interruption of life	tshe bar chad
ཚེ་བུམ	life vase, vase of [immortal]/ long life/ {tshe dpag med} [he holds it] TSE, vase used in long life practice	tshe bum
ཚེ་བུམ་འཆི་མེད	vase of immortal life	tshe bum 'chi med
ཚེ་བློ་ཡིས་གཏོང་བ	gave up concerns limited to this life	tshe blo yis gtong ba
ཚེ་བློ་ཡིས་ཐོངས་པ	to relinquish all thoughts of this life tshe blo yis thongs par byin gyis rlobs grant your blessing that we may shatter all concern for this life	tshe blo yis thongs pa
ཚེ་བློས་གཏང་བ	given up thoughts of this life	tshe blos gtang ba
ཚེ་བློས་གཏོང་བ	gave up concerns limited to this life	tshe blos gtong ba
ཚེ་བློས་བཏང	to give up the things of this life, abandon concerns for this lifetime	tshe blos btang
ཚེ་བློས་བཏང་གི་སློབ་བུ	spiritual sons who had renounced all thoughts of this life	tshe blos btang gi slob bu
ཚེ་བློས་བཏང་གི་སློབ་མ	renunciate disciples	tshe blos btang gi slob ma
ཚེ་བློས་བཏང་བ	given up thoughts of this life	tshe blos btang ba
ཚེ་བློས་བཏང་བའི་རི་ཁྲོད་པ	a hermit who had given up the preoccupations of this life	tshe blos btang ba'i ri khrod pa
ཚེ་དབང	1) longevity/ life empowerment/ abhisheka; 2), powerful life, life faculty; 3) life mastery vidyadhara {tshe la dbang ba'i rig 'dzin} TSE]	tshe dbang
ཚེ་དབང་སྐུར	long life empowerment	tshe dbang skur
ཚེ་དབང་སྐུར་བ	bestowed longevity blessings	tshe dbang skur ba
ཚེ་དབང་བསྐུར	gave a long-life empowerment	tshe dbang bskur
ཚེ་དབང་བསྐུར་བ	gave a longevity blessing	tshe dbang bskur ba
ཚེ་དབང་གྲགས་པ	Tsewang Drakpa. Son of Chokgyur Lingpa	tshe dbang grags pa
ཚེ་དབང་མཆོག་གྲུབ་དཔལ་འབར	Tsewang Chokdrub Palbar. The name of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	tshe dbang mchog grub dpal 'bar
ཚེ་དབང་སྟོབས་རྒྱས	Mighty Lord of Life	tshe dbang stobs rgyas
ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ	{sprul sku}	tshe dbang rdo rje
ཚེ་དབང་ནོར་བུ	Tsewang Norbu 1) Famous lama of Katok monastery in Kham. 2) The son of Chokgyur Lingpa	tshe dbang nor bu
ཚེ་དབང་ནོར་བུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་དཔལ་འབར	the great master and writer of Katok Monastery {ka: thog rig 'dzin chen po tshe dbang nor bu}	tshe dbang nor bu rdo rje dpal 'bar
ཚེ་དབང་གནང་བ	to bestow a longevity empowerment	tshe dbang gnang ba
ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	khu nu bla ma, 1896-1973	tshe dbang rnam rgyal
ཚེ་དབང་རབ་བརྟན	{tshe dbang rab brtan}	tshe dbang rab brtan
ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན	{tshe la dbang ba'i rig 'dzin} master/ holder of awareness with power over longevity*	tshe dbang rig 'dzin
ཚེ་དབང་རིགས་འཛིན	vidyadhara w power over life, long life	tshe dbang rigs 'dzin
ཚེ་འབར	constantly burning lamp	tshe 'bar
ཚེ་འབར་ཀོང	kong bu' of a constantly burning lamp	tshe 'bar kong
ཚེ་འབུམ་ཁྲ་བོ	{tshe 'bum khra bo}	tshe 'bum khra bo
ཚེ་འབྲང	{tshe'i 'brang rgyas}	tshe 'brang
ཚེ་མ་ཕྱིད	mi tshe ma phud pa [losing means of livelihood??]	tshe ma phyid
ཚེ་མ་འཕོས་པ	while not yet having moved to the next life	tshe ma 'phos pa
ཚེ་མི་རྟག	the impermanence of life	tshe mi rtag
ཚེ་མི་རྟག་པ	the impermanence of life	tshe mi rtag pa
ཚེ་མི་བོན	tshe mi B"n	tshe mi bon
ཚེ་མེད	dead, w/o harm/ injury	tshe med
ཚེ་མེད་ཞི་བའི་ལམ	[path/ way of] nonviolence	tshe med zhi ba'i lam
ཚེ་སྨད	later life	tshe smad
ཚེ་སྨད་དུ	in the latter part of life 2219	tshe smad du
ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང	tshe smon gling Monastery	tshe smon gling
ཚེ་བཙོན	tshe gang btson khang du bcug pa'i btson pa	tshe btson
ཚེ་ཚད	duration of life	tshe tshad
ཚེ་ཚད་ཀྱི་འཕེན་པ	the force of life span / life-length	tshe tshad kyi 'phen pa
ཚེ་ཚད་རྫོགས་པ	the termination of	tshe tshad rdzogs pa
ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	length	the life
ཚེ་ཚར་བ	complete/ finish 1's life	tshe tshar ba
ཚེ་ཚེ	goat	tshe tshe
ཚེ་ཚོམ་མེད	it is certain	tshe tshom med
ཚེ་མཚམས་པ	anchorite, whole-liferetreatant	tshe mtshams pa
ཚེ་མཛད	appendage of gods made like a plate with fruit	tshe mdzad
ཚེ་འཛད	life ends, life becomes exhausted	tshe 'dzad
ཚེ་འཛད་པ	life as it draws to its end	tshe 'dzad pa
ཚེ་འཛིན	life holder	tshe 'dzin
ཚེ་ཞག	lunar day	tshe zhag
ཚེ་ཟད	depletion of life-length	tshe zad
ཚེ་ཟད་ཀར	at the hour of death	tshe zad kar
ཚེ་ཟད་པ་འཆི་བ	dying at the end of the life	tshe zad pa 'chi ba
ཚེ་ཟད་པ་ཡང	even though one's life span may be exhausted	tshe zad pa yang
ཚེ་གཟུངས	dharani for longevity	tshe gzungs
ཚེ་གཟུངས་འཆི་མེད་རྔ་སྒྲ	Drum of Deathlessness, the dharani of long-life	tshe gzungs 'chi med rnga sgra
ཚེ་བཟང་པོ	auspicious day	tshe bzang po
ཚེ་ཡི་དུས་བྱས་པ	death; life's end	tshe yi dus byas pa
ཚེ་ཡི་དུས་བྱེད་པ	[produce the time of] death, die	tshe yi dus byed pa
ཚེ་ཡི་བདག་པོ	lord of life	tshe yi bdag po
ཚེ་ཡི་མདའ	arrow of long life	tshe yi mda'
ཚེ་ཡི་འཕེན་ཟད	when your life span is exhausted	tshe yi 'phen zad
ཚེ་ཡི་འཕེལ་རྐྱེན་ཟད་པ	once the conditions for maintaining life have been exhausted	tshe yi 'phel rkyen zad pa
ཚེ་ཡི་ཡུམ	mother of life	tshe yi yum
ཚེ་ཡི་རིག་བྱེ་པ	healing, medicine, ayuveda, [Syn {'tsho byed sman pa}, healer, doctor, physician	tshe yi rig bye pa
ཚེ་ཡི་རིག་བྱེད	science of medicine, Ayurveda	tshe yi rig byed
ཚེ་ཡི་རིག་བྱེད་པ	physician	tshe yi rig byed pa
ཚེ་ཡི་རིལ་བུ	longevity pill; sacred longlife substances	tshe yi ril bu
ཚེ་ཡི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess of life	tshe yi lha mo
ཚེ་ཡུམ	mother of life tshe g.yang - life & prosperity tshe g.yog - [life-long] slave tshe g.yog byed - enslave	tshe yum
ཚེ་རབས	(succession of) lifetimes	tshe rabs
ཚེ་རབས་ཀུན་ཏུ	throughout all of our lives; in all my lives	tshe rabs kun tu
ཚེ་རབས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བར	through the succession of [my] former lives	tshe rabs kyi phreng bar
ཚེ་རབས་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	[his] teacher from previous lives	tshe rabs kyi bla ma
ཚེ་རབས་སྔོན	earlier lifetimes	tshe rabs sngon
ཚེ་རབས་སྔོན་གྱི་བླ་མ	having been your lama in a previous life	tshe rabs sngon gyi bla ma
ཚེ་རབས་བརྗེ་བ	to transmigrate, 'change life'. [Syn {tshe 'pho ba}	tshe rabs brje ba
ཚེ་རབས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	throughout our future lives	tshe rabs thams cad du
ཚེ་རབས་དྲན་པ	recollection of former lives/ lifetimes. [tse]	tshe rabs dran pa
ཚེ་རབས་ནས་འབྲེལ་བའི་བླ་མ	{rang nyid kyi tshe rabs nas 'brel ba'i bla ma de gtso che} the greatest of all teachers is the one with whom we are linked from former lives	tshe rabs nas 'brel ba'i bla ma
ཚེ་རབས་ནས་ཚེ་རབས་སུ་བསགས་པའཱི	accumulated in many lives	tshe rabs nas tshe rabs su bsags pa'I
ཚེ་རབས་ཕྱི་མ	future lives tshe rabs phyi ma'i rnams chu lon kyis	tshe rabs phyi ma
བཟློག་པའི་ཕྱིར	for damming up the stream of future rebirths	bzlog pa'i phyir
ཚེ་རབས་ཕྲེང་བ	the succession of [my] lives	tshe rabs phreng ba
ཚེ་རབས་འཕོ་བ	pass away, change life, transmigrate	tshe rabs 'pho ba
ཚེ་རབས་མང་པོ	numerous life-times	tshe rabs mang po
ཚེ་རབས་གཞན	another life-time	tshe rabs gzhan
ཚེ་རབས་ལས་རྩིས	in the succession of all 1's lives happiness and sorrow lta tshul gyi rtsis 'bras	tshe rabs las rtsis
ཚེ་རི	sorrow	tshe ri
ཚེ་རིག་པ	healing, medicine	tshe rig pa
ཚེ་རིང	long life, longevity	tshe ring
ཚེ་རིང་སྐྱིན་ཁེབས	{tshe ring skyin khebs hat}	tshe ring skyin khebs
ཚེ་རིང་སྐྲ་ཕུད	for long life lock of hair of boys and girls offered to bla ma khag	tshe ring skra phud
ཚེ་རིང་མཆེད	a deity	tshe ring mched
ཚེ་རིང་མཆེད་ལྔ	Five Sisters of Long Life	tshe ring mched lnga
ཚེ་རིང་ལྗོང	Jigme lingpa's residence	tshe ring ljong
ཚེ་རིང་ལྗོངས	Jigmey Lingpa' residence	tshe ring ljongs
ཚེ་རིང་ཐུང	life-length	tshe ring thung
ཚེ་རིང་ཐུང་གི་གནས་ཚད	life span/ duration	tshe ring thung gi gnas tshad
ཚེ་རིང་དྲུག་སྐོར	the six tshe ring [brag	tshe ring drug skor
ཚེ་རིང་དང	chu tshe ring, shing tshe ring, mi tshe ring, bya tshe ring, ri dvags tshe ring ste drug]	tshe ring dang
ཚེ་རིང་ནད་མེད	long life w/o sickness	tshe ring nad med
ཚེ་རིང་ནད་མེད་པ	to enjoy long and healthy lives	tshe ring nad med pa
ཚེ་རིང་པོ	long-living	tshe ring po
ཚེ་རིང་པོ་ཡོད་པ	long lived person	tshe ring po yod pa
ཚེ་རིང་སྤོས་སྐོར	Long life incense swing	tshe ring spos skor
ཚེ་རིང་བ	longevity	tshe ring ba
ཚེ་རིང་མ	a deity	tshe ring ma
ཚེ་རིང་མ་གཏོར་མ	Tseringma torma	tshe ring ma gtor ma
ཚེ་རིང་མ་མ	deity {tshe ring ma ma}	tshe ring ma ma
ཚེ་རིང་ལོ་བརྒྱ	long/ length of life of 100 years	tshe ring lo brgya
ཚེ་རིང་ལྷ	long-living gods	tshe ring lha
ཚེ་རིལ	longevity pills	tshe ril
ཚེ་རེ	sorrow, each life, SA tsher ka	tshe re
ཚེ་རེ་ལ	in each life, in each period of existence	tshe re la
ཚེ་རོགས	life-long companion tshe la rkun po shor ba ltar ma tshor	tshe rogs
ངང་ནས་རྒས	old age creeps up on us, unnoticed, like a thief	ngang nas rgas
ཚེ་ལ་གེགས་ཆེ	strong obstacle for one's life	tshe la gegs che
ཚེ་ལ་འཇབ་པ	make an attempt on a person's life	tshe la 'jab pa
ཚེ་ལ་གནོད་པ	injurious to life	tshe la gnod pa
ཚེ་ལ་བར་ཆད་ཡོང	your life will be endangered	tshe la bar chad yong
ཚེ་ལ་དབང་ཐོབ	gaining mastery over life [thd]	tshe la dbang thob
ཚེ་ལ་དབང་བ	Mastery of Life; mastery over life	tshe la dbang ba
ཚེ་ལ་དབང་བའི	SA rig 'dzin bzhi	tshe la dbang ba'i
ཚེ་ལ་དབང་བའི་རིག་འཛིན	master/ holder of awareness with power over longevity*	tshe la dbang ba'i rig 'dzin
ལེབེ༹ལ་ཨོཕ༹་ལིཕེ༹	mastery, {rig 'dzin bzhi}. Lord of Life; vidyadhara level of Life Mastery; holder of intrinsic awareness with power over longevity	level of life
ཚེ་ལས་འདའ་བ	die, transmigrate	tshe las 'da' ba
ཚེ་ལས་འདས་པ	the deceased, the dead person, passed away	tshe las 'das pa
ཚེ་ལུང	reading transmission for Amitayus mantra	tshe lung
ཚེ་ལུས་གཅིག་གིས	in one single / this very body and lifetime	tshe lus gcig gis
ཚེ་ལུས་འདིར	in this body and lifetime	tshe lus 'dir
ཚེ་ལེན	stealers of the vital capacity	tshe len
ཚེ་ལོ	period of human life, year	tshe lo
ཚེ་ལོ་བརྒྱ་པ	100 year life-span; the age in which the average life expectancy is 100 years; the time of Buddha Shakyamuni	tshe lo brgya pa
ཚེ་ལོ་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་པ	person at the time when the extent/ upper limit of life is 80,000 years	tshe lo brgyad khri pa
ཚེ་ལོ་བཅུ་པ	person at the time when the extent/ upper limit of life is 10 years	tshe lo bcu pa
ཚེ་ལོ་དཔག་མེད	{skye rgu rnams tshe lo dpag med dus} when people's lifespan was of an inestimable length	tshe lo dpag med
ཚེ་སྲིང་བ	tshe ring du spel ba	tshe sring ba
ཚེ་སྲོག	life [force], life span and vital energy	tshe srog
ཚེ་སྲོག་གི་རྟེན	support of the life-force	tshe srog gi rten
ཚེ་སྲོག་ཆད	die	tshe srog chad
ཚེ་སྲོག་ཉེན་སྲུང	life insurance	tshe srog nyen srung
ཚེ་སྲོག་བརྟན་པོ	stable/ tenacious life	tshe srog brtan po
ཚེ་སྲོག་ལྡན་མིན་འདུ་བྱེད	life-energy determining gathered in an individual's continuum determining life span	tshe srog ldan min 'du byed
ཚེ་སྲོག་བླ་གསུམ	life-length, life-force,	tshe srog bla gsum
ཨནད་ལིཕེ༹	energy	and life
པའི་རྟེན	life force/ life span and vital energy until people etc die supports their bring able to exist	pa'i rten
ཚེ་བསོད	longevity & merits	tshe bsod
ཚེ་བསོད་མངའ་ཐང	merit, power, and longevity	tshe bsod mnga' thang
ཚེ་བསོད་སྟོབས	longevity, merit and strength	tshe bsod stobs
ཚེ་བསོད་དཔལ་འབྱོར	life span, merit, and splendor	tshe bsod dpal 'byor
ཚེ་བསྲིང	lengthening life	tshe bsring
ཚེ་བསྲིང་བ	lengthening life	tshe bsring ba
ཚེ་བསྲིང་བར་བྱེད	lengthen life	tshe bsring bar byed
ཚེ་བསྲིང་བར་བྱེད་པ	life lengthening 2221	tshe bsring bar byed pa
ཚེ་བསྲིང་བར་བྱེད་པའི་ཆོ་ག	life lengthening practice	tshe bsring bar byed pa'i cho ga
ཚེ་བསྲིངས	prolonged life, longevity	tshe bsrings
ཚེ་བསླུ	ransom of longevity	tshe bslu
ཚེ་ཧྲིལ་པོ	whole/ entire life	tshe hril po
ཚེ་ཧྲིལ་པོར	for the whole life	tshe hril por
ཚེ་ལྷ	life gods, divinity of long life / longevity, god of life	tshe lha
ཚེ་ལྷ་རྣམ་གསུམ	{lha tshe dpag med}, sgrol dkar + rnam rgyal ma	tshe lha rnam gsum
ཚེ་ལྷ་མ	good quality kha btags w picture of {tshe dpag med}	tshe lha ma
ཚེག	', inter-syllabic point, palm-reading dot, point separating syllables, crack, short sharp sound, snapping noise	tsheg
ཚེག་ཁྱིམ	between tshes the contents of 1 to four syllables [yod [sa khongs,//ming gzhi//sgrub]	tsheg khyim
ཚེག་གི་རྒྱ	[one of the rgya rim pa bdun] tshig 'bru mi 'khrug par byed pa'i rtags '' ? '' Lta bu	tsheg gi rgya
ཚེག་སྒྲ	distant sound such as that of fire burning wood	tsheg sgra
ཚེག་ཆོམ	kind of utterance //byi bas zas dngos brkus te tsheg chom gyi sgra grag pa	tsheg chom
ཚེག་ཐིག	dotted line	tsheg thig
ཚེག་ཐུང	small/ short tsheg between syllables [TT writing]	tsheg thung
ཚེག་དྲག	visarga, Sanskrit grammatical term indicating aspiration	tsheg drag
ཚེག་དྲག་རྣམ་བཅད	: final aspiration, visarga	tsheg drag rnam bcad
ཚེག་ཕྲ་མོ	small/ short tsheg between syllables	tsheg phra mo
ཚེག་བར	syllable [yi ge'i tsheg gnyis bar gyi sa khongs, ming gzhi]	tsheg bar
ཚེག་མེད	easily/ a Tibetan script	tsheg med
ཚེག་ཚོམ	sound made by mice	tsheg tshom
ཚེག་རིང	Tibetan writing shad	tsheg ring
ཚེག་ཤད	Tibetan writing . and	tsheg shad
ཚེག་ཤིང	tree from kong po etc. rgya zhes pa which when burned makes a sharp, cracking sound	tsheg shing
ཚེག་ཤེད	ornamental dotted shad	tsheg shed
ཚེགས	1) trouble, toil, difficulty; 2) little, small, few [phran tshegs]	tshegs
ཚེགས་ཀྱིས	quickly, soon	tshegs kyis
ཚེགས་ཀྱིས་བསྒྲུབ	speedily executed	tshegs kyis bsgrub
ཚེགས་ཆུང	little effort/ trouble/ difficulty	tshegs chung
ཚེགས་ཆུང་ངུ	little effort/ trouble/ difficulty	tshegs chung ngu
ཚེགས་ཆུང་དོན་ཆེ	which entail little hardship yet have great meaning	tshegs chung don che
ཚེགས་ཆེ	very difficult	tshegs che
ཚེགས་ཆེ་དོན་ཆུང	lots of trouble and little success	tshegs che don chung
ཚེགས་ཆེན	painfully, very difficult	tshegs chen
ཚེགས་ཆེན་པོས་རྙེད	achieved through great hardship tshegs chen yun ring rtogs pa'i sbyor pa TSE	tshegs chen pos rnyed
ཚེགས་ཆེས་རྙེད	{tshegs chen pos rnyed} achieved through great hardship	tshegs ches rnyed
ཚེགས་པ	trouble, toil, difficulty	tshegs pa
ཚེགས་མེད	w/o difficulty, easily	tshegs med
ཚེགས་མེད་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	naturally established w/o difficulty [las don gang 'dra zhig yin kyang 'bad rtsol ma byas par rang bzhin gyis tshegs med lhun grub tu 'byung ba med do]	tshegs med lhun grub
ཚེགས་ཚེགས་སུ་བསྒྲུབས་པ	established by continued effort/ trouble/ difficulty [las don rnam grangs mang po tshegs tshegs su bsgrubs nas tshar song,// tshegs len, dka' tshegs rang steng du len pa]	tshegs tshegs su bsgrubs pa
ཚེང་བར་བྱེད་པ	be bent or turned away	tsheng bar byed pa
ཚེད	(not in das)	tshed
ཚེན	type	tshen
ཚེབ	autumn harvest gul 'don gyi tool	tsheb
ཚེམ	sew	tshem
ཚེམ་སྐུད	sewing thread	tshem skud
ཚེམ་དྲུབ	sewing work, needle work, embroidery, decorative stitching	tshem drub
ཚེམ་དྲུབ་བྱེད	do embroidery/ needle work/ decorative stitching	tshem drub byed
ཚེམ་དྲུབ་མ	embroidered article	tshem drub ma
ཚེམ་དྲུབ་མའི་གོས་ཆེན	embroidered silk?	tshem drub ma'i gos chen
ཚེམ་པ	tailor	tshem pa
ཚེམ་པོ	tailor	tshem po
ཚེམ་པོ་འགྲོལ	seam opens, seam comes loose	tshem po 'grol
ཚེམ་བུ	sewing [work]	tshem bu
ཚེམ་བུ་ཁང	tailor shop	tshem bu khang
ཚེམ་བུ་མཁན	tailor	tshem bu mkhan
ཚེམ་བུ་འཁོར་ལོ	sewing machine	tshem bu 'khor lo
ཚེམ་བུ་རྒྱག	sew	tshem bu rgyag
ཚེམ་བུ་རྒྱག་མཁན	sewer, tailor	tshem bu rgyag mkhan
ཚེམ་བུ་རྒྱག་པ	to sew	tshem bu rgyag pa
ཚེམ་བུ་ལྕགས་སྒྲོག	skud pa 'gug nas 'gug tu bkug pa'i tshem bu zhig	tshem bu lcags sgrog
ཚེམ་བུ་པ	tailor	tshem bu pa
ཚེམ་བུ་བ	sewer, seamstress, tailor	tshem bu ba
ཚེམ་བུ་ཧྲལ་པོ	rough stitching [w long intervals]	tshem bu hral po
ཚེམ་བུའི་འཁོར་ལོ	sewing machine	tshem bu'i 'khor lo
ཚེམ་བུའི་བར་མཚམས	gaps between stitches	tshem bu'i bar mtshams
ཚེམ་བེར	cloak made up of many pieces	tshem ber
ཚེམ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐུད་པ	sewing thread	tshem byed kyi skud pa
ཚེམ་མེད	without a seam	tshem med
ཚེམ་ཚེམ	[arch] patched/ patchwork garment	tshem tshem
ཚེམ་ཞབ༹	[arch] helmet	tshem zhva
ཚེམ་ཞུ	[arch] helmet	tshem zhu
ཚེམ་བཟོ	tailoring, sewing	tshem bzo
ཚེམ་བཟོ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	sewing factory	tshem bzo bzo grwa
ཚེམ་སྲུབ	gaps between stitches	tshem srub
ཚེམ་སྲུབས	gaps between stitches	tshem srubs
ཚེམས	tooth; imp. of {'tshem pa}	tshems
ཚེམས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་ལྔ	the five minor marks concerning the teeth	tshems kyi dpe byad lnga
ཚེམས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	the garland of teeth	tshems kyi phreng ba
ཚེམས་དཀར་བའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of white teeth [sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste skye bo thams cad bkur ba la sogs pas tshems dkar ba]	tshems dkar ba'i mtshan bzang
ཚེམས་སྐྱོན	bite [h]	tshems skyon
ཚེམས་ཉིང	gums [h]	tshems nying
ཚེམས་མཉམ་པ	uniform teeth. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	tshems mnyam pa
ཚེམས་མཉམ་པའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of uniform teeth	tshems mnyam pa'i mtshan bzang
ཚེམས་ཐགས་བཟང་པོ	good teeth [h]	tshems thags bzang po
ཚེམས་ཐགས་བཟང་བ	well-arranged teeth. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	tshems thags bzang ba
ཚེམས་པ	anything sewn, have the disadvantage, come off a loser, not receiving a fair share	tshems pa
ཚེམས་མེད	w/o remainder	tshems med
ཚེམས་བཞི་བཅུ་མངའ་བ	40 teeth	tshems bzhi bcu mnga' ba
ཚེམས་ལུས	without remainder	tshems lus
ཚེམས་ལུས་མེད	nothing left	tshems lus med
ཚེམས་ཤིང	toothpick	tshems shing
ཚེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་དཀར་བ	very white teeth. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan	tshems shin tu dkar ba
ཚེམས་ཤིན་དུ་དཀར་བ	very white teeth	tshems shin du dkar ba
ཚེའི་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	afflicting kleshas of life [7 of the 12 nidanas rten 'brel bcu gnyis: rnam shes, ming dang gzugs dang, skye mched drug, reg pa, tshor ba, skye ba, rga shi]	tshe'i kun nas nyon mongs pa
ཚེའི་སྙིགས་མ	the degeneration of life span * TSE, vase used in long life practice	tshe'i snyigs ma
ཚེའི་སྙིངས	the decrease of the duration of life	tshe'i snyings
ཚེའི་འཏུ་བྱེད་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ	blessed to have long life	tshe'i 'tu byed byin gyis brlabs pa
ཚེའི་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	reach the close of life	tshe'i mthar thug pa
ཚེའི་དུས་བྱས	died {chu ma 'ju bar tshe'i dus byas} could not digest the water properly and died	tshe'i dus byas
ཚེའི་དུས་བྱས་ཏེ	his life will come to an end	tshe'i dus byas te
ཚེའི་དུས་ལ་བབས	arriving at the time of death	tshe'i dus la babs
ཚེའི་འདུ་བྱེད	life-energy determining gathered in an individual' continuum determining life span {srog gi 'du byed} //sku tshe'i 'du byed gtong ba]	tshe'i 'du byed
ཚེའི་འཕེན་པ་ཟད་པ	the allotted lifespan running out tshe'i bum pa dpag bsam rjon shing gi kha	tshe'i 'phen pa zad pa
ཚེའི་མེ་ཏོག	apricot flower	tshe'i me tog
ཚེའི་རྩ	the life vein/ channel/ nadi/ aorta	tshe'i rtsa
ཚེའི་ཚད	the length of life-span	tshe'i tshad
ཚེའི་ཚད་རྫོགས	the termination of the	tshe'i tshad rdzogs
ལེངཐ་ཨོཕ༹་ལིཕེ༹	span	length of life
ཚེའི་རྫས	substances that maintain long life	tshe'i rdzas
ཚེའི་རིག་བྱེད	science of prolonging life, physician, science of preserving or prolonging life	tshe'i rig byed
ཚེའི་རིག་འཛིན	Vidyadhara level of longevity, (tshe la dbang ba'i rig 'dzin). The second of the four vidyadhara levels. Corresponds to the path of seeing. The practitioner's body turns into the subtle	tshe'i rig 'dzin
ཚེར	separate time, zip, SA shug tsher, tshar	tsher
ཚེར་ཀ	sorrow, grief, pain, application	tsher ka
ཚེར་དཀར	buckthorn	tsher dkar
ཚེར་སྔོན	aa byag tsher sngon	tsher sngon
ཚེར་ལྕག་གིས	with thorns	tsher lcag gis
ཚེར་ལྟར	like a thorn	tsher ltar
ཚེར་སྟར	enclosure of a row of thorn bushes	tsher star
ཚེར་ཐགས	enclosure surrounded by thorns	tsher thags
ཚེར་སྡོང	thorn tree/ bush	tsher sdong
ཚེར་ཕུང	mass of briars	tsher phung
ཚེར་ཕུང་གིས་བསྐོར་བའི་སྒོ་ཆེན	gate surrounded by a mass of briars	tsher phung gis bskor ba'i sgo chen
ཚེར་མ	thorn	tsher ma
ཐོརན	bush 2223	thorn
ཚེར་མ་སྐྱེས	jack fruit	tsher ma skyes
ཚེར་མ་ཅན	thorny	tsher ma can
ཚེར་མ་ཅན་གྱི་རི་ལ་རྐང་པ་ལ	at the foot of the mountain of thorns	tsher ma can gyi ri la rkang pa la
ཚེར་མ་དར་བཏུམས	kha 'jam gting rtsub kyi dpe	tsher ma dar btums
ཚེར་མ་གདོན་པའི་གདོན	a frightful and evil spirit	tsher ma gdon pa'i gdon
ཚེར་མ་འདོན་པ	those who pull out thorns	tsher ma 'don pa
ཚེར་མ་འདོམ་གཞལ	don dag chung chung gzhi chen por sgrog pa'i dpe tsher ma rno yang brag ri 'bigs mi thub though thorns are sharp they can't peirce rocks; 2) harm [rna ba'i tsher ma ma byed] tsher ma rno yang brag ...	tsher ma 'dom gzhal
ཚེར་མ་རྣོན་པོ་ཅན	having sharp thorns	tsher ma rnon po can
ཚེར་མ་མེད་པ	'thorn-free', undisturbed	tsher ma med pa
ཚེར་མ་ཚང་ཚིང	thicket of thorns	tsher ma tshang tshing
ཚེར་མ་ཞིམ	bull's eye-flower	tsher ma zhim
ཚེར་མ་ཟིང་ཟིང	bristle-like hair	tsher ma zing zing
ཚེར་མ་ཟུག	get pricked by a thorn	tsher ma zug
ཚེར་མ་འི་ར་བ	enclosure of a row of thorn bushes	tsher ma 'i ra ba
ཚེར་མ་ལས་རྩུབ་པའི་ཚིག	words sharper than thorns	tsher ma las rtsub pa'i tshig
ཚེར་མ་སྲུང	thorn guards, boots	tsher ma srung
ཚེར་མའི་ཁ	thorn tip	tsher ma'i kha
ཚེར་མའི་རྣོ	thorn tip	tsher ma'i rno
ཚེར་མའི་རྩེ་མོ	thorn tip	tsher ma'i rtse mo
ཚེར་མའི་ཚང	a thorny plant, crow (bird whose nest is made of thorns)	tsher ma'i tshang
ཚེར་མའི་ཚང་ཅན	vulture	tsher ma'i tshang can
ཚེར་མའི་ཚལ	thicket of thorns, grove of thorn trees	tsher ma'i tshal
ཚེར་མའི་ར་བ	thorn hedge	tsher ma'i ra ba
ཚེར་མས་བསྐོར་བའི་ར་བ	enclosure surrounded by thorns	tsher mas bskor ba'i ra ba
ཚེར་མོ	two year old goat/ ewe	tsher mo
ཚེར་རྩང	throwing torma [gtor zor] la 'dzugs rgyu'i small thorny sticks	tsher rtsang
ཚེར་ཚེར	many times, repeatedly	tsher tsher
ཚེར་ཚེར་མ	a kind of bee, a fly	tsher tsher ma
ཚེར་འཛིན	tweezers	tsher 'dzin
ཚེར་ལུམ	yellow raspberry	tsher lum
ཚེར་ཤིང	thorn tree/ bush	tsher shing
ཚེར་ཤུག	thorny juniper	tsher shug
ཚེར་ལྷོག	from pricks by thorns + gnyan nad blo bur du swelling and severe pain	tsher lhog
ཚེར་ལྷོད	tetanus	tsher lhod
ཚེས་ཁ	tshes kyi dang po [zla ba tshes kha stag gam sprel nas 'dzin pa]	tshes kha
ཚེས་འཁྱུད	nyi skar [zodiacal constellation in which the sun arises] dag pa la [corrected] zla skar rtag longs	tshes 'khyud
ཚེས་འཁྱུད་ཟླ་སྐར	embraced moon star for a certain lunar day; 3) 15 [rags par zla ba'i phyogs rer tshes zhag dang nyin zhag gnyis ka bco lnga re yod pas grangs bco lnga mtshon]	tshes 'khyud zla skar
ཚེས་གྲངས	date, consecutive	tshes grangs
ཚེས་གྲངས་ཀྱི་གཟའ་སྐར་བཟང་པོ	astr auspicious day	tshes grangs kyi gza' skar bzang po
ཚེས་གྲངས་རིམ་གྱི	chronology	tshes grangs rim gyi
ཚེས་གྲངས་རིམ་པར	chronologically	tshes grangs rim par
ཚེས་དགེ་དུས་བཟང	holy day [festival]	tshes dge dus bzang
ཚེས་དགེ་བ	auspicious day	tshes dge ba
ཚེས་མགོ	at the early part/ 1st 10 ten days [of the month]	tshes mgo
ཚེས་འགོ	at the early part/ 1st 10 ten days [of the month]	tshes 'go
ཚེས་འགྲིབ་དུས	lunar day at the time of the waning moon	tshes 'grib dus
ཚེས་བརྒྱད	the eight day of the month [auspicious day]	tshes brgyad
ཚེས་ལྔ	the fifth day of the month	tshes lnga
ཚེས་ཅན	(inverted commas?)	tshes can
ཚེས་གཅིག	the first day of the month	tshes gcig
ཚེས་བཅུ	10th day of the [waxing and waning periods of the] month [auspicious w festival and heruka [& dakini] feast] yar ngo'i tshes pa bcu dang, mar ngo'i tshes bcu ste nyi shu lnga,//yar ngo mar ngo'i ts...	tshes bcu
ཚེས་བཅུ་མཆོད་པ	religious service on the 10th day	tshes bcu mchod pa
ཚེས་བཅུ་མར་ངོ	the tenth day in the second half of the month	tshes bcu mar ngo
ཚེས་བཅུ་ཡར་ངོ	the tenth day of the first half of the month	tshes bcu yar ngo
ཚེས་བཅུའི་འཆམ་ཡིག	programme of the religious dances performed on 10th day	tshes bcu'i 'cham yig
ཚེས་བཅུའི་ཕན་ཡོན	the benefits from observance of the tenth day rites of the Nyingmapa tradition	tshes bcu'i phan yon
ཚེས་བཅོ་ལྔ	day of full moon	tshes bco lnga
ཚེས་བཅོ་ལྔ་ལ	on the fifteenth day	tshes bco lnga la
ཚེས་བཅོ་ལྔའི་ཉིན	15th day	tshes bco lnga'i nyin
ཚེས་ཆ	date [//phyogs su 'gro rgyu'i tshes cha da dung gtan khel ma song]	tshes cha
ཚེས་ཆད་ལྷག	shortage/ excess of lunar days [astr: gza' dag gi gza' gcig lan gnyis bldabs gyur na, chu tshod mang ba'i tshes de chad, mchongs na chu tshod nyung ba lhag don du tshes la chad lhag med, the reason...	tshes chad lhag
ཚེས་ཆུ	water at dawn on new years day	tshes chu
ཚེས་གཉིས	the second day of the month	tshes gnyis
ཚེས་གཏོར	day torma [TT govt. &, dgon sde khag gis on Tibetan new year's day zhogs pa torma offered to dpal ldan lha mo]	tshes gtor
ཚེས་བདག	moon	tshes bdag
ཚེས་གནམ་གང	30th of the month, new moon day [= nyi ma zla ba yang dag 'grogs, gnam stong, lhan cig mthong]	tshes gnam gang
ཚེས་པ	+ number - day of the month; {tshes pa, tshes pa, tshes pa} intr. v	tshes pa
ཚེས་པ་བཅོ་ལྔ	The fifteenth day	tshes pa bco lnga
ཚེས་སྤོང	important family clan in early Tibet	tshes spong
ཚེས་རྩིས	[from {nag rtsis} [CH divination] tshes grangs rtsi thabs	tshes rtsis
ཚེས་ཞག	1) lunar day [period of the phases of the moon, 15 each waxing and waning, ie 1/30 month, its duration [dus kyi rtag longs], is 59 chu tshod, three chu srang, four dbugs, + 16 ri mkha' ri'i cha. in...	tshes zhag
ཚེས་ཞག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	zodiacal year [360 days + 1 chu tshod tsam]	tshes zhag dkyil 'khor
ཚེས་ཞག་རྟག་ལོངས	lunar day period	tshes zhag rtag longs
ཚེས་གཞུང་ལ	around the middle day of a month	tshes gzhung la
ཚེས་ཟླ	lunar month	tshes zla
ཚེས་ཟླའི་འགོ	beginning of the days of the month [in the 'jig rten pa'i sysetem eclipses usually occur on the first day of the waxing phase of the moon la 'dzin pa shas che and also ..the waning.. lo 'go'i thad ...	tshes zla'i 'go
ཚེས་གཟའ	planets of the days of the week [sunday sun monday moon etc grub rtsis kyi gza' dag pa'i res gza']	tshes gza'
ཚེས་བཟང	holy day [festival]	tshes bzang
ཚེས་བཟང་པོ	tshes dge dus bzang [zla five tshes 15 bzang po la phul]	tshes bzang po
ཚེས་ལོ	lunar month [30 phase days of the moon = 1 lunar month of which 12 is a lunar year tshes lo]	tshes lo
ཚེས་ལོངས	gza'[planet/ solar day] 'og tu bkod pa'i tshes kyi longs spyod, daily motion [for a lunar day?]	tshes longs
ཚེས་ཤར	early part of, first days of the month	tshes shar
ཚེས་ཤར་གྱི་ཐོག་མ	at the early part/ 1st 10 ten days [of the month]	tshes shar gyi thog ma
ཚེས་གསུམ	3rd of the month	tshes gsum
ཚོ	1) Shog kha, sde tshan; 2) able to be independent [rang skya 'pher ba/ rang tshugs thub pa'i rten gzhi dang nus pa,//khyim tsho,//lus tsho,//sems tsho mi zin pas smyon par gyur pa]; 3) mon yul gyi ...	tsho
ཚོ་ཁག	fragments, pieces, group, tribe	tsho khag
ཚོ་ཁང	group, unit	tsho khang
ཚོ་ཁུ	fat gravy	tsho khu
ཚོ་ཁྱད	jeering, disdain	tsho khyad
ཚོ་འཁོས	trade, business, livelihood	tsho 'khos
ཚོ་ལྔ	Tso-nga	tsho lnga
ཚོ་གཅིག	a herd/ flock	tsho gcig
ཚོ་ཆུང	group, subcommittee, small group	tsho chung
ཚོ་ཆེས་པ	1) lto chas tshil zhag mang drags pa,//kha zas tsho tshes pa; 2) fat [+ sleek healthy] [usu good]	tsho ches pa
ཚོ་ཆེས་པའི་ཕག་པ	fat pig	tsho ches pa'i phag pa
ཚོ་ཆེས་པའི་གཟུགས་པོ	fat [+ sleek healthy]	tsho ches pa'i gzugs po
ཚོ་དང་ཚོ	groups and groups, fleets	tsho dang tsho
ཚོ་དང་ཚོ་བགོ	divide into groups etc. 2225 tsho dang tsho byas nas mthong yas 'dug [they] can be seen formed into herds	tsho dang tsho bgo
ཚོ་དང་ཚོ་བྱེད	form into groups [& groups], fleets, herds etc.	tsho dang tsho byed
ཚོ་འདུ	Tsodu, in Lingya, Domey	tsho 'du
ཚོ་འདུག་མི་འདུག	is it fat or not?	tsho 'dug mi 'dug
ཚོ་འདེམས་སྐམ་སྒྱུར	discriminating [taste]	tsho 'dems skam sgyur
ཚོ་འདེམས་སྐམ་སྒྱུར་བྱེད	be discriminating [taste]	tsho 'dems skam sgyur byed
ཚོ་ལྡིར	unwieldy with fat	tsho ldir
ཚོ་པ	CM: shog kha; unit, group, clique, sector (Def from MG). ¦ sde tsho pa re la dpon po re, "one group/sector, one leader". [mss]	tsho pa
ཚོ་པའི་འགོ་དཔོན	leader of sde tsho	tsho pa'i 'go dpon
ཚོ་པའི་བརྒྱ་དཔོན	leader of 100 sde tsho or households or mi khyim brgya re'i dpon po	tsho pa'i brgya dpon
ཚོ་པའི་སྟོང་དཔོན	leader of 1,000 sde tsho or households	tsho pa'i stong dpon
ཚོ་པའི་དཔོན་པོ	leader of a group/ tribe	tsho pa'i dpon po
ཚོ་པའི་གཙོ་བོ	leader of a group/ tribe	tsho pa'i gtso bo
ཚོ་པོ	sha khrag rgyas pa and much zhag tshi [butter, fat oil]	tsho po
ཚོ་དཔོན	leader of a group/ tribe [sde shog gam tsho pa'i dpon po]	tsho dpon
ཚོ་བ	fat, corpulent	tsho ba
ཚོ་བུད་མ་བུད	is it fat or not	tsho bud ma bud
ཚོ་གཙོ	leader of a group/ tribe	tsho gtso
ཚོ་མཛད	life-giver, physician	tsho mdzad
ཚོ་ཟིན	independent, self-sufficient	tsho zin
ཚོ་ཟིན་ཐུབ	able to be independent/	tsho zin thub
ཚོ་ཟིན་པོ	independent, self-sufficient, mature	tsho zin po
ཚོ་ཟིན་པོའི་ཕྲུ་གུ	mature child	tsho zin po'i phru gu
ཚོ་ཤ་དཀར	a non-shaded color gradation commonly used in the painting of woodwork, etc	tsho sha dkar
ཚོག	'tshag!	tshog
ཚོག་པུ་པ	sitter, 1 who sleeps sitting up {sbyangs pa'i yon tan bcu gsum}.]	tshog pu pa
ཚོག་ཕམ	business loss	tshog pham
ཚོག་ཚོག	craggy, precipitous	tshog tshog
ཚོག་བསགས་པའི་ཐབས་མང་པོ	it contains many methods for accumulating merit and wisdom	tshog bsags pa'i thabs mang po
པ་ལ་ཐུགས་གཏད་པར་ཞུ	"Please direct your mind on the consecration, purification and blessing of the feast"	pa la thugs gtad par zhu
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	feast mandala	tshogs kyi dkyil 'khor
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	gana chakra - feast wheel ceremony; For a feast wheel ceremony the dorje lobpön must have actually perfected both union and liberation	tshogs kyi 'khor lo
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར་བ	to 'turn the wheel of a gathering'; throw a tantric feast tshogs kyi 'khor lo rgya chen po bskor offered an elaborate ganachakra feast	tshogs kyi 'khor lo bskor ba
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོའི་ཆོ་ག	ganachakra ritual, {tshogs kyi 'khor lo'i cho ga	tshogs kyi 'khor lo'i cho ga
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་དགག་དབྱེ	dgag dbye'i nang gses, glo bur du dgag dbye byed pa ste, dmag 'khrug la sogs pa'i rkyen gyis glo bur du 'gyes dgos pa byung na phan tshun gcig gis gcig la tshogs kyi dgag dbye bya ba'o, dge slong g...	tshogs kyi dgag dbye
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ་ལ་རོལ	Enjoying the feast accomplishments; refers to the eating of the feast articles	tshogs kyi dngos grub la rol
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	feast ritual	tshogs kyi cho ga
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	1) the most eminent assembly; 2) the most eminent accumulation [of merit]	tshogs kyi mchog
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་མཆོག་དགེ་འདུན	x	tshogs kyi mchog dge 'dun
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	ganapuja/ feast offering	tshogs kyi mchod pa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ་རྒྱན་དུ་རོལ	Enjoy the feast offering as an adornment; Please enjoy the feast offering as an ornamentation	tshogs kyi mchod pa rgyan du rol
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གཏམ	sambharaparikatha	tshogs kyi gtam
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་མོ	feast banquet	tshogs kyi ston mo
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	lord of the feast	tshogs kyi bdag po
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	feast practice	tshogs kyi spyod pa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་བཞེས་མཛད་པ	feast implementation	tshogs kyi phyag bzhes mdzad pa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	SA tshogs bdag	tshogs kyi dbang phyug
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྨོན་ལམ	feast prayer	tshogs kyi smon lam
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གཙོ་བོ	the master of the gathering	tshogs kyi gtso bo
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ་པ	group feast practice	tshogs kyi tshogs sgrub pa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཞིང	the field of merit	tshogs kyi zhing
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	feast articles / implements tshogs kyi yo byad rnams bsangs sbyang byin gyis brlab pa la thugs gtad par zhu - Please direct your mind towards sanctifying, purifying and consecrating the feast subst...	tshogs kyi yo byad
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་བཞི	the four sequences of the feast ceremony. This refers to the primary feast offering (tshogs phud), the amendmentconfession offering (bskang bshags), the liberation offering (bsgral mchod) and the p...	tshogs kyi rim pa bzhi
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ	see {tshogs lam}	tshogs kyi lam
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་མཆོག	the best path of accumulating	tshogs kyi lam mchog
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་མ་ནོར་བ་ཡིན་པ	is an infallible way to accumulate merit	tshogs kyi lam ma nor ba yin pa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ས	path of accumulation	tshogs kyi sa
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྲད་བུ	nya rgya	tshogs kyi srad bu
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	master of the feast gathering	tshogs kyi slob dpon
ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	type of lha	tshogs kyi lha
ཚོགས་བཀོང	calling a meeting	tshogs bkong
ཚོགས་བཀོང་འགག་འཛིན	caller/ organizer/ convener of a meeting	tshogs bkong 'gag 'dzin
ཚོགས་སྐོང	feast and mending	tshogs skong
ཚོགས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to accumulate	tshogs bskyed pa
ཚོགས་ཁག	bloc, clique, group	tshogs khag
ཚོགས་ཁག་ཆུང	small group[s], bloc clique	tshogs khag chung
ཚོགས་ཁག་ཆུང་ཆུང	small group[s], bloc clique tshogs khag chung chung gi ring lugs small group mentality, cliquishness	tshogs khag chung chung
ཚོགས་ཁག་ཆུང་བ	small group[s], bloc clique	tshogs khag chung ba
ཚོགས་ཁག་ཆུང་བའི་རིང་ལུགས	small group mentality, cliquishness	tshogs khag chung ba'i ring lugs
ཚོགས་ཁག་ནག་པོ	anti socialist/ party group	tshogs khag nag po
ཚོགས་ཁང	1) [monastic] assembly hall; 2) shrine room, temple; 3) auditorium	tshogs khang
ཚོགས་ཁང་ཆེ་མོ	auditorium, hall of feast offering, large hall	tshogs khang che mo
ཚོགས་ཁང་ཆེན་མོ	auditorium	tshogs khang chen mo
ཚོགས་ཁང་པད་མ་དརབ༹་བ	Lotus Net Gathering Hall, name of a mendingapology chant written by Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche	tshogs khang pad ma drva ba
ཚོགས་ཁུག	grva pas tshogs su 'khyer rgyu'i rtsam khug chung ngu zhig	tshogs khug
ཚོགས་ཁྲི	feast table	tshogs khri
ཚོགས་ཁྲོ	large bronze cauldron used in making monks' tea	tshogs khro
ཚོགས་འཁོར	ganachakra	tshogs 'khor
ཚོགས་འཁོར་བསྐོར	a ganachakra feast was offered 2227	tshogs 'khor bskor
ཚོགས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བ	"turning the wheel of gathering" performance of ganachakra/ circle of feast gathering	tshogs 'khor bskor ba
ཚོགས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བར་འདུག་པ	are performing a ganachakra	tshogs 'khor bskor bar 'dug pa
ཚོགས་འཁོར་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	ganachakra commentary tshogs 'khor gyi rdzas su bshams sha feast meat	tshogs 'khor gyi 'grel bshad
ཚོགས་འཁོར་བྱེད་པ	performing a ganachakra	tshogs 'khor byed pa
ཚོགས་འཁོར་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	Enjoying the wheel of feast; means eating the feast articles	tshogs 'khor la longs spyod
ཚོགས་གྲལ	1) tshogs 'du 'tshogs pa'i gral; 2) grva pa 'tshogs pa'i tshogs gral	tshogs gral
ཚོགས་གྲལ་དུ	in the feast gathering	tshogs gral du
ཚོགས་གྲལ་དུ་བཀོད་པ	those assembled at the feast	tshogs gral du bkod pa
ཚོགས་གྲལ་དུ་ཆུད་ཅིང	well received in the ganachakra gatherings	tshogs gral du chud cing
ཚོགས་གྲི	feast knife	tshogs gri
ཚོགས་གླུ	Feast song	tshogs glu
ཚོགས་མགྲོན	feast guest [deities], guest [speaker] at a meeting	tshogs mgron
ཚོགས་མགྲོན་སྤྱན་དྲངས་པ	inviting the feast guests	tshogs mgron spyan drangs pa
ཚོགས་འགྱེ	an assembly dissolves	tshogs 'gye
ཚོགས་འགྱེད་པ	dismiss an assembly	tshogs 'gyed pa
ཚོགས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	1) an immense accumulation. 2) a lavish feast	tshogs rgya chen po
ཚོགས་རྒྱུད་ཆེ་ཆུང	Major and Minor Gathering Tantra. A Mahayoga scripture explaining the ritual of a ganachakra. See also 'feast offering.'	tshogs rgyud che chung
ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	group practice, Mahayoga practice that includes large gathering	tshogs sgrub
ཝིཐ་ཏྭེནཏཡ	four hour mantra recitation	with twenty
ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ་བཅུ་བདུན	TSE	tshogs sgrub bcu bdun
ཚོགས་བརྒྱ་བཏང	offered a hundred ganachakras	tshogs brgya btang
ཚོགས་བརྒྱ་བཏང་བ	offered a hundred ganachakras	tshogs brgya btang ba
ཚོགས་བརྒྱད	Eight collections. the eight groups of the cognitions of the eight consciousnesses; of the five sense consciousnesses, of mind consciousness,	tshogs brgyad
ཨེགོ་ཅོནསཅིཨོཨུསྣེསས་ཨནད་ཨལལ	ground consciousness	ego consciousness and all
ཚོགས་བརྒྱད་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberated eight consciousnesses	tshogs brgyad rang grol
ཚོགས་བསྒྲལ	liberation substances; in form of a piece of feast dough (tshogs zan dum bu) and a piece of meat. (zan	tshogs bsgral
ཚོགས་བསྒྲལ་བྱེད་པ	to perform the feast deliverance	tshogs bsgral byed pa
ཚོགས་དངུལ	dues of a society/ association/ meeting [if they had feat dues in Tibet it could mean that]	tshogs dngul
ཚོགས་ཅན	sran ma	tshogs can
ཚོགས་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king with great following	tshogs can gyi rgyal po
ཚོགས་ཅན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king with a following	tshogs can rgyal po
ཚོགས་ཅན་མ	prostitute	tshogs can ma
ཚོགས་ཆང	feast beer / wine	tshogs chang
ཚོགས་ཆུང	small gathering/ meeting/ group/ ganachakra, [sub-]committee	tshogs chung
ཚོགས་ཆེན	tshogs 'du chen po,//tshogs chen thog gros 'cham byas pa	tshogs chen
ཚོགས་ཆེན་མ	prostitute	tshogs chen ma
ཚོགས་ཆེན་རྫོགས་པ	1) perfect the great accumulation. 2) gain in merit	tshogs chen rdzogs pa
ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཞལ་ངོ	large monasteries' sgrigs khrims dbang 'dzin las sne	tshogs chen zhal ngo
ཚོགས་ཆོས	market gathering dharma [OK to explain to anyone]	tshogs chos
ཚོགས་མཆོག	supreme assembly	tshogs mchog
ཚོགས་མཆོད	{tshogs kyi mchod pa} ganapuja/ feast offering	tshogs mchod
ཚོགས་མཆོད་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	Sequence of the feast offering	tshogs mchod kyi rim pa
ཚོགས་མཆོད་ཅིག་ཕུལ	to perform a ganapuja	tshogs mchod cig phul
ཚོགས་མཆོད་ཆེན་མོ	the great assembly of worship (ceremony on the 19th day of the 2nd Tibetan month)	tshogs mchod chen mo
ཚོགས་མཆོད་དུས་ཆེན	name of a festival / the second month	tshogs mchod dus chen
ཚོགས་མཆོད་ཕུལ	holding a sacramental feast, funeral/ anniversary puja	tshogs mchod phul
ཚོགས་མཆོད་ཕུལ་བ	to perform a sacramental feast	tshogs mchod phul ba
ཚོགས་མཆོད་བྱིན་རླབས་ཆར་འབེབས	by	tshogs mchod byin rlabs char 'bebs
ཀརྨ་པ་བཅུ་བཞི་པ	theg mchog rdo	karma pa bcu bzhi pa
ཚོགས་མཆོད་འབུལ	performed ganachakra offerings	tshogs mchod 'bul
ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྤྲེང	the golden procession of the assembly of worship (ceremony on the 30th day of the 2nd Tibetan month)	tshogs mchod ser spreng
ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང	tshogs mchod ser sbreng puja/ ceremony [on the new moon day of the 2nd month w a line of monks w various offering substances going from Lhasa to rtse pho brang]	tshogs mchod ser sbreng
ཚོགས་མཆོད་གསེར་སྦྲེང	annual religious service conducted by assembled	tshogs mchod gser sbreng
པྲིཨེསཙ་ཨཏ་ལྷས་ཨིན་ཇན	feb	priests at lhasa in jan
ཚོགས་རྗེ	chief	tshogs rje
ཚོགས་རྗེས	feast materials	tshogs rjes
ཚོགས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	rjod byed kyi sgra gang zhig rang gi dngos kyi brjod byar gyur pa'i tshogs spyi yod pa ste, rang gi yan lag du ma tshogs pa'i spyi yin pa dper na, bum pa zhes pa rang gi lto ba dang mchu dang mgrin...	tshogs brjod kyi sgra
ཚོགས་བརྗོད་པའི་སྒྲ	collectionexpression	tshogs brjod pa'i sgra
ཚོགས་གཉིས	the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis
ཚོགས་གཉིས་གོང་དུ་སྤེལ	further increase the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis gong du spel
ཚོགས་གཉིས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟ་བུ	the	tshogs gnyis rgya mtsho lta bu
ཚོགས་གཉིས་པ	tshogs bar pa - second feast offering	tshogs gnyis pa
ཚོགས་གཉིས་རྫོགས་པ	perfection of the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis rdzogs pa
ཚོགས་གཉིས་རྫོགས་པར་བྱ་བ	to perfect the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis rdzogs par bya ba
ཚོགས་གཉིས་ཟུང་དུ་སྦྲེལ	combining the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis zung du sbrel
ཚོགས་གཉིས་བསགས་པ	to gather the two accumulations	tshogs gnyis bsags pa
ཚོགས་གཉེར་པ	Feast assistant	tshogs gnyer pa
ཚོགས་གཏམ	1) dge 'dun pa'am mi mang tshogs pa'i dbus su spang gi bslab bya 'doms pa'i gtam; 2) (yul) gshe gshe gtong ba'i bla dvags kyi tshig //mi la don med tshogs gtam btang na mi 'grig	tshogs gtam
ཚོགས་གཏམ་གཏོང	scold, give a dharma talk to a group of people tshogs gtam don med btang na mi 'grig purposeless scolding is no good	tshogs gtam gtong
ཚོགས་གཏམ་བྱེད	scold	tshogs gtam byed
ཚོགས་གཏོང་བ	offered a ganachakra feast	tshogs gtong ba
ཚོགས་གཏོར	feast offering and torma	tshogs gtor
ཚོགས་གཏོར་རིན་ཆེན་འབར་བ	name of the tshogs torma of the {mchog gling} tradition	tshogs gtor rin chen 'bar ba
ཚོགས་རྟེན	the support for accumulation	tshogs rten
ཚོགས་རྟེན་ཉོ་བོ	feast support effigy; refers to the effigy in the liberation offering made out of unconsecrated feast dough (tshogs zan)	tshogs rten nyo bo
ཚོགས་བསྟེན་པ	rely on the conditions for	tshogs bsten pa
ཚོགས་ཐ་མ	last feast offering - tshogs	tshogs tha ma
གསུམ་པ	third feast offering tshogs tha ma bsgral mchod gnang ba la	gsum pa
ཐུགས་གཏད་པར་ཞུ	Please direct your mind towards the performance of the third feast offering, the liberation offering	thugs gtad par zhu
ཚོགས་ཐ་མ་བསྒྲལ་བ	liberation offering, the last part 2229	tshogs tha ma bsgral ba
ཚོགས་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	boundless accumulation [of merit]	tshogs mtha' yas pa
ཚོགས་དང་བཅས་པ	together with a group / the assembly	tshogs dang bcas pa
ཚོགས་དང་མཆོད་རྗེས	feast and offering substances	tshogs dang mchod rjes
ཚོགས་དང་གཏོར་མ	feast gatherings and tormas	tshogs dang gtor ma
ཚོགས་དང་པོ	1st offering [R]	tshogs dang po
ཚོགས་ཕུད	tshogs phud dang po primary offering, the primary feast offering, the first offering	tshogs phud
ཚོགས་དང་སྤྱོད་པ	1 who goes among others	tshogs dang spyod pa
ཚོགས་དང་བསོད་ནམས	virtue, merit	tshogs dang bsod nams
ཚོགས་དུས	session	tshogs dus
ཚོགས་དོན	topics	tshogs don
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་རྟོག་པ	thoughts connected to the six types of cognition	tshogs drug gi rtog pa
ཐེ་སི྾	fold group	the six
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས	six senses/sense-consciousnesses	tshogs drug gi rnam shes
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་སྣང	perceptions of the six senses	tshogs drug gi snang
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་སྣང་བ	the perceptions of the six collections [of consciousness]	tshogs drug gi snang ba
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་ཡུལ	the objects of the six senses; x {phyi tshogs drug gi yul la rnam shes g.yengs pa} the tendency of consciousness to get engrossed in the objects of the six senses	tshogs drug gi yul
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་ཡུལ་སྣང	the appearance of the six apparent objects to the six senses	tshogs drug gi yul snang
ཚོགས་དྲུག་གི་ཤེས་པ	six sense consciousnesses; the consciousness of the	tshogs drug gi shes pa
སི྾	fold group	six
ཚོགས་དྲུག་ཡུལ་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་སྣང	the deluded perceptions of the six types of objects	tshogs drug yul gyi 'khrul snang
ཚོགས་དྲུག་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberation of the six senses, celebrated lam of amdo	tshogs drug rang grol
ཚོགས་དྲུག་སེམས	mind of the six-fold group	tshogs drug sems
ཚོགས་དྲུག་ལྷུག་པ	free relaxation of the 6 aggregates	tshogs drug lhug pa
ཚོགས་གདན	tshogs khang du gding rgyu'i gdan ring po tshogs khang ngam 'du khang	tshogs gdan
ཚོགས་བདག	Ganesha, Ganapati, a deity of wealth and prosperity	tshogs bdag
ཚོགས་བདུན	the seven collections	tshogs bdun
ཚོགས་འདུ	conference meeting, an assembly meets, meeting	tshogs 'du
ཚོགས་འདུ་གྲོལ་བ	to close, conclude	tshogs 'du grol ba
ཚོགས་འདུ་ཆེན་པོ	large meeting/ conference, congress, plenary assembly	tshogs 'du chen po
ཚོགས་འདུ་བ	grva tshang so so'i grva pas grva pa'i spyi don byed mkhan du bdams nas spyi don gyi tshod 'dur phyin chog pa'i 'thus mi	tshogs 'du ba
ཚོགས་འདུ་ཚོགས་པ	hold a meeting	tshogs 'du tshogs pa
ཚོགས་འདུ་འཚོགས་པ	to assemble, convene	tshogs 'du 'tshogs pa
ཚོགས་འདུ་ཞུགས་པ	to attend a meeting	tshogs 'du zhugs pa
ཚོགས་འདུར་མི་འབོར་དགོས་ཚད	quorum	tshogs 'dur mi 'bor dgos tshad
ཚོགས་འདུར་ཞུགས་པ	attend a meeting	tshogs 'dur zhugs pa
ཚོགས་ལྡན	someone endowed with the accumulations [of merit and wisdom]	tshogs ldan
ཚོགས་སྡུ་བ	call an assembly	tshogs sdu ba
ཚོགས་སྡེ	institution, squad	tshogs sde
ཚོགས་སྡེ་ལ་ཞེན	communalism	tshogs sde la zhen
ཚོགས་སྡེའི	communal	tshogs sde'i
ཚོགས་བརྡ	call by beating a drum, etc, sounding of the trumpet, etc	tshogs brda
ཚོགས་ན་སྤྱོད་པ	group practice	tshogs na spyod pa
ཚོགས་རྣམས	all	tshogs rnams
ཚོགས་རྣམས་རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	perfecting all the accumulations	tshogs rnams rdzogs par byed pa
ཚོགས་སྣོད	feast plate / vessel	tshogs snod
ཚོགས་པ་ཀུན	all of the people gathered there	tshogs pa kun
ཚོགས་པ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	special collections [of the same type of atoms] [ggd]	tshogs pa khyad par can
ཚོགས་པ་ལྔ	the five perfections [= {phun sum tshogs pa lnga.]	tshogs pa lnga
ཚོགས་པ་ཅན	harlot, courtesan	tshogs pa can
ཚོགས་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ	strive to accumulate something	tshogs pa la brtson pa
ཚོགས་པའི་ཁྲོམ་རྣམས	assembled crowd	tshogs pa'i khrom rnams
ཚོགས་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	see bdag nyid	tshogs pa'i bdag nyid
ཚོགས་པའི་བུད་མེད	prostitute	tshogs pa'i bud med
ཚོགས་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	countless [of dakinis]	tshogs dpag tu med pa
ཚོགས་དཔོན་མཛད་པ	presides over the ganachakra	tshogs dpon mdzad pa
ཚོགས་སྤྱད་པ	group-practicing	tshogs spyad pa
ཚོགས་སྤྱི	collection, generality	tshogs spyi
ཚོགས་སྤྱོད	congregating [solitary realizer], Group conduct, ganachakra activity	tshogs spyod
ཚོགས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རང་རྒྱལ	grouppracticing pratyekabuddha	tshogs spyod kyi rang rgyal
ཚོགས་སྤྱོད་པ	group-practicer	tshogs spyod pa
ཚོགས་ཕལ་མོ་ཆེ	most	tshogs phal mo che
ཕུད་དང་པོ	primary offering, the primary feast offering, the first offering	phud dang po
ཚོགས་ཕུད་ཆ་དང་པོ	primary feast offering, the first part	tshogs phud cha dang po
ཚོགས་ཕུད་ཆ་བཞི་པ་གཙང་ལྷག	the pure residual, fourth part	tshogs phud cha bzhi pa gtsang lhag
ཚོགས་ཕུད་གཉིས་པ	second primary feast offering	tshogs phud gnyis pa
ཚོགས་ཕུད་དང་པོ	tshogs phud tshogs dang po - primary offering, the primary feast offering, the first offering	tshogs phud dang po
ཚོགས་ཕུད་གསུམ་པ	third primary feast offering	tshogs phud gsum pa
ཚོགས་ཕུར	feast dagger	tshogs phur
ཚོགས་ཕུལ་བ	offered a ganachakra feast	tshogs phul ba
ཚོགས་ཕོར	1) grva pas tshogs 'tshog sar 'khyer rgyu'i phor pa'i bye brag cig; 2) (A) rdzogs pa'i brda rnying ste gang ba'am, mthar phyin pa'i don	tshogs phor
ཚོགས་འཕེལ་བ	increasing the accumulations	tshogs 'phel ba
ཚོགས་བར་པ	second feast offering. Syn. tshogs gnyis pa tshogs bar pa bskang bshags gnang ba la	tshogs bar pa
ཚོགས་བར་པ་ཆ་གཉིས་པ	amendmentconfession offering, the second part	tshogs bar pa cha gnyis pa
ཚོགས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབ་པ	Consecration of the feast	tshogs byin gyis brlab pa
ཚོགས་བྲང	KCLang (AD's 400) "the subject masses" n.b. SNT confirmed that tshogs brang was a synonym of 'bangs. [mss]	tshogs brang
ཚོགས་དབུར་ཕེབས་པ	preside at an assembly	tshogs dbur phebs pa
ཚོགས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ལམ	the paths of accumulation and joining 2231	tshogs sbyor gyi lam
ཚོགས་མ་བསག་པའི་མི	wicked & godless person	tshogs ma bsag pa'i mi
ཚོགས་མ་བསགས་པ	1) not gathering the accumulations/ good karma; 2) person w coarse/ crude/ cruel behavior	tshogs ma bsags pa
ཚོགས་མང	the whole congregation	tshogs mang
ཚོགས་མི	member	tshogs mi
ཚོགས་ཙམ	[tse]	tshogs tsam
ཚོགས་གཙོ	chairman	tshogs gtso
ཚོགས་ཚད	all the people assembled	tshogs tshad
ཚོགས་ཚོགས	an abundance	tshogs tshogs
ཚོགས་འཚོགས་པ	to assemble [for prayers]	tshogs 'tshogs pa
ཚོགས་འཛོམས	hold a meeting [mi mang tshogs 'dzoms thog tu gtam bshad byas pa]	tshogs 'dzoms
ཚོགས་རྫས	feast substances/ offering, things to be offered at a ganachakra	tshogs rdzas
ཡོ་བྱད	Feast substance - Feast goodies, feast materials, feast substances	yo byad
ཚོགས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	various miraculous actions	tshogs rdzu 'phrul
ཚོགས་རྫོགས	perfecting the accumulations	tshogs rdzogs
ཚོགས་རྫོགས་པ	perfected the [two] accumulations	tshogs rdzogs pa
ཚོགས་རྫོགས་པའི་སྒོ	opportunity to perfect the accumulations	tshogs rdzogs pa'i sgo
ཚོགས་ཞྭ	feast hat	tshogs zhwa
ཚོགས་ཞིང	field of merit [sangs rgyas pa tshos phyag mchod gsol 'debs sogs dge tshogs gsog sa'i zhing, the whole assembly/ the field of accumulation "assembly field". [tse]	tshogs zhing
ཚོགས་ཞིང་སྤྱན་འདྲེན	inviting the field of refuge	tshogs zhing spyan 'dren
ཚོགས་ཞིང་སྤྱན་འདྲེན་པ	field of accumulation	tshogs zhing spyan 'dren pa
ཚོགས་ཞིང་གསལ་གདབ་པ	visualizing the field of merit	tshogs zhing gsal gdab pa
ཚོགས་ཞིང་གསལ་འདེབས་པ	visualizing the field of merit	tshogs zhing gsal 'debs pa
ཚོགས་ཞིང་གསུམ	the three fields of accumulation	tshogs zhing gsum
ཚོགས་ཞིང་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the divinities of the field of accumulation	tshogs zhing lha tshogs
ཚོགས་ཞུ	feast request	tshogs zhu
ཚོགས་གཞོང	tshogs snod - Feast plate or feast vessel	tshogs gzhong
ཚོགས་ཟ་བ	enjoy, drinking and merriment	tshogs za ba
ཚོགས་ཟངས	large bronze cauldron used in making monks' tea	tshogs zangs
ཚོགས་ཟན	1) Feast dough 2) unconsecrated feast dough	tshogs zan
ཚོགས་ཟན་ཐ་མ	last feast dough	tshogs zan tha ma
ཚོགས་ཟན་དུམ་བུ	a piece of feast dough	tshogs zan dum bu
ཚོགས་ཟན་དུམ་བུ་གཅིག	zan dum - a piece of feast dough tshogs zan la dgra bo'i gzugs bcos pa Modeling the body of the enemies out of feast dough	tshogs zan dum bu gcig
ཚོགས་བཟང	excellent	tshogs bzang
ཚོགས་བཟླུམས	1) rlabs chen dge ba'i las bsags pa; 2) many people gathered in 1 place	tshogs bzlums
ཚོགས་ཡུལ	Objects of accumulation	tshogs yul
ཚོགས་ཡོངས་སུ་མ་རྫོགས་པ	not fully perfected accumulations	tshogs yongs su ma rdzogs pa
ཚོགས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	who had brought the accumulations to complete maturity	tshogs yongs su smin pa
ཚོགས་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to fully perfect the accumulations	tshogs yongs su rdzogs par byed pa
ཚོགས་ར	assembly hall, meeting place	tshogs ra
ཚོགས་རམ་པ	2nd highest of the four grades of geshe	tshogs ram pa
ཚོགས་རམས་པ	the second highest of the four grades of geshe	tshogs rams pa
ཚོགས་རོལ	tshogs la rol pa - Enjoying the feast	tshogs rol
ཚོགས་ལ་རོལ་པ	joined the feast	tshogs la rol pa
ཚོགས་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoying / partaking of the feast	tshogs la longs spyod pa
ཚོགས་ལངས	rising up in the assembly	tshogs langs
ཚོགས་ལམ	path of accumulation	tshogs lam
ཚོགས་ལམ་གྱི་ཉམས་ལེན་བཞི	tshul khrims la gnas pa dang, lam gyi chos la thos bsam bya ba, lam gyi chos la sgom bya ba, 'phags pa'i rigs bzhi la gnas pa bcas bzhi'o	tshogs lam gyi nyams len bzhi
ཚོགས་ལམ་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of the path of accumulation [1 so skye'i tshul khrims la brten pa, two dbang po'i sgo sdom pa, three zas kyi tshod rig pa, four nam gyi cha stod smad la mi nyal bar rnal 'byor la brt...	tshogs lam gyi yan lag lnga
ཚོགས་ལམ་ཆུང་ངུ	tshogs lam gsum gyi nang gses, dran pa nye bar bzhag pa bzhi sgom pa sbyor lam la 'jug pa ste skye ba'i dus ma nges pa'o	tshogs lam chung ngu
ཚོགས་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ	greater path of accumulation [tshogs lam gsum gyi nang gses, rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi sgom pa sbyor lam drod tshe 'dir skye bar nges pa'o]	tshogs lam chen po
ཚོགས་ལམ་འབྲིང་པོ	middling path of accumulation	tshogs lam 'bring po
ཚོགས་ལམ་གསུམ	the three divisions of the path of accumulation [tshogs lam la dbye na gsum, tshogs lam chung ngu dang, tshogs lam 'bring po dang, tshogs lam chen po ste gsum mo]	tshogs lam gsum
ཚོགས་ལས་པ	Feast helper	tshogs las pa
ཚོགས་ལས་རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ	Chö liturgy by the third Karmapa	tshogs las rin chen phreng ba
ཚོགས་ལས་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	see {gcod tshogs}	tshogs las rin po che'i phreng ba
ཚོགས་ལིང	the feast effigy	tshogs ling
ཚོགས་ཤ	feast meat [tshogs 'khor gyi rdzas su bshams sha]	tshogs sha
ཚོགས་བཤད	1) dharma talk to many people/ the assembly; 2) ganachakra commentary	tshogs bshad
ཚོགས་ས	assembly hall, meeting place.{tshogs sbyor gyi lam - the paths of accumulation and joining.{tshogs	tshogs sa
ཚོགས་སོ	assembled	tshogs so
ཚོགས་སོག་པ	SA tshogs bsags, collect, accumulate merits	tshogs sog pa
ཚོགས་གསུམ	ming gi tshogs dang, tshig gi tshogs dang, yi ge'i tshogs bcas gsum mo	tshogs gsum
ཚོགས་གསུམ་པ	tshogs tha ma - third feast offering	tshogs gsum pa
ཚོགས་གསུམ་གསལ་བ	tshogs gsum gsal ba	tshogs gsum gsal ba
ཚོགས་གསོག	the merit accumulated [R] collected an offering [R] provisions, accumulating merit	tshogs gsog
ཚོགས་གསོག་ཐབས	a way of accumulating merit	tshogs gsog thabs
ཚོགས་གསོག་པ	{tshogs bsag pa, tshogs bsags pa} to gather/ accrue accumulations/ stores	tshogs gsog pa
ཚོགས་གསོག་པའི་ཐབས	means of gathering the accumulations	tshogs gsog pa'i thabs
ཚོགས་གསོག་བྱས་པ	performed some meritorious deeds	tshogs gsog byas pa
ཚོགས་བསག་པ	{tshogs gsog pa, tshogs bsags pa} to gather/ accrue accumulations/ stores	tshogs bsag pa
ཚོགས་བསགས	(perfection, accumulation) of the (prerequisites, merits), acquirement of merit, virtue itself, accumulation of religious merits, hoarding money, gather the accumulations	tshogs bsags
ཚོགས་བསགས་གྱིས	accumulate merit!	tshogs bsags gyis
ཚོགས་བསགས་སྒྲིབ་སྦྱང	the gathering of the accumulations and purifications of the obscurations TSE	tshogs bsags sgrib sbyang
ཚོགས་བསགས་སྒྲིབ་སྦྱངས	the gathering of the accumulations and purifications of the obscurations	tshogs bsags sgrib sbyangs
ཚོགས་བསགས་པ	merits accumulated; x {bskal pa drang med pa'i bar du tshogs bsags pa'i 'bras bu} the fruit of merits accumulated over innumerable kalpas	tshogs bsags pa
ཚོགས་བསགས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཞིང	all opportunities for accumulating merit	tshogs bsags pa thams cad kyi zhing
ཚོགས་བསགས་པ་མཎ་ཌལ	the mandala offering to gather the accumulations	tshogs bsags pa maN Dal
ཚོགས་བསགས་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	the result of having gathered the accumulations	tshogs bsags pa'i 'bras bu
ཚོགས་བསགས་ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ	phyag 'tshal ba'i yan lag dang, mchod pa'i yan lag bshags pa'i yan lag rjes su yi rang ba'i yan lag chos kyi 'khor lo bskor bar bskul ba'i yan lag mya ngan las mi 'da' bar gsol ba gdab pa'i yan lag...	tshogs bsags yan lag bdun pa
ཚོགས་ལྷ་སྤྱན་འདྲེན	inviting the deities of the feast	tshogs lha spyan 'dren
ཚོགས་ལྷག	feast residual; leftovers of the feast	tshogs lhag
ཚོང	to sell / commerce; business	tshong
ཚོང་བཀྲམ	display wares	tshong bkram
ཚོང་སྐད	commercial language, business-like style, terms of trade	tshong skad
ཚོང་སྐད་རྒྱག་པ	speak in salesman's jargon, business language	tshong skad rgyag pa
ཚོང་སྐུར	merchandise rang nyid ma phyin par gzhan la tshong rogs zhes skur ba,//tshva bal tshong skur byas pa	tshong skur
ཚོང་ཁ་རྒྱུག་པོ	merchandise moving well/ quickly	tshong kha rgyug po
ཚོང་ཁ་རྒྱུག་པོའི་དུས་སྐབས	[time] when merchandise is moving well	tshong kha rgyug po'i dus skabs
ཚོང་ཁ་མི་རྒྱུག་པ	merchandise not moving	tshong kha mi rgyug pa
ཚོང་ཁང	shop, store/ market, bazaar [tshong zog 'tshong sa'i khang pa, = nges 'jug, brje gnas tshong lam]	tshong khang
ཚོང་ཁེ	profit	tshong khe
ཚོང་ཁྲ	do business by combining/ gathering/ pooling capital	tshong khra
ཚོང་ཁྲལ	sales/ commercial tax, duty, tariff	tshong khral
ཚོང་ཁྲལ་མེད་པ	tax/ duty free	tshong khral med pa
ཚོང་ཁྲལ་མེད་པའི་གྲུ་ཁ	tax/ duty free port	tshong khral med pa'i gru kha
ཚོང་ཁྲལ་མེད་པའི་གྲུ་ཁུ	tax/ duty free port	tshong khral med pa'i gru khu
ཚོང་ཁྲོམ	place wares are displayed for sale, market place, bazaar, fair	tshong khrom
ཚོང་མཁན	seller, trader	tshong mkhan
ཚོང་འཁོར་གཏན་འབེབས	sales limit/ ceiling	tshong 'khor gtan 'bebs
ཚོང་འཁོས	trading	tshong 'khos
ཚོང་འཁོས་འཐབ་ལེན	do sales/ merchant work	tshong 'khos 'thab len
ཚོང་འཁོས་འཐབ་ལེན་ལ་མཁས	expert at business	tshong 'khos 'thab len la mkhas
ཚོང་གི་ཁེ	profit, gain	tshong gi khe
ཚོང་གི་ཁེ་གུན་རྩི་བའི་རྩིས	calculate profit/ loss from sales	tshong gi khe gun rtsi ba'i rtsis
ཚོང་གི་ཁེ་བཟང	profit from selling	tshong gi khe bzang
ཚོང་གི་ཁེ་སླེབས	[make a] profit	tshong gi khe slebs
ཚོང་གི་གུན	loss in trading	tshong gi gun
ཚོང་གི་མ་རྩ	business capital	tshong gi ma rtsa
ཚོང་གུན	loss in selling/ business	tshong gun
ཚོང་གེ	trading at exorbitant prices	tshong ge
ཚོང་གྲུ	merchant [marine] ship, commercial vessel	tshong gru
ཚོང་གྲོགས	partner in trade, commercial friend, correspondent	tshong grogs
ཚོང་གྲོགས་ཏེ་རོགས་ཟླ	business helper/ partner	tshong grogs te rogs zla
ཚོང་འགྲིག	make/ close a deal	tshong 'grig
ཚོང་འགྲིག་ཟིན	have made/ closed a deal	tshong 'grig zin
ཚོང་འགྲིགས	make/ close a deal	tshong 'grigs
ཚོང་འགྲིགས་ཟིན	have made/ closed a deal	tshong 'grigs zin
ཚོང་འགྲིམ་པ	carry wares to market	tshong 'grim pa
ཚོང་འགྲུལ	1) travel to sell wares; 2) travelling salesman/ merchant; 3) commerce, trade	tshong 'grul
ཚོང་འགྲུལ་བཀག་འགོག	trade embargo	tshong 'grul bkag 'gog
ཚོང་འགྲུལ་གྲུ་ཁ	commercial port/ harbor	tshong 'grul gru kha
ཚོང་འགྲུལ་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	commercial city	tshong 'grul grong khyer
ཚོང་འགྲེམས	sales	tshong 'grems
ཚོང་འགྲེམས་ཁང	emporium	tshong 'grems khang
ཚོང་འགྲེམས་གནས	market place	tshong 'grems gnas
ཚོང་འགྲེམས་བྱེད	sell	tshong 'grems byed
ཚོང་རྒྱག	sell, do business/ trade tshong rgyag skabs kyi skad cha shod	tshong rgyag
ཚོང་རྒྱག་མཁན	merchant	tshong rgyag mkhan
ཚོང་རྒྱག་སྟངས་སློབ་མཁན	apprentice	tshong rgyag stangs slob mkhan
ཚོང་རྒྱག་པ	sell, do business/ trade tshong rgyag par 'gro 'ong byed mkhan travelling salesman/ merchant	tshong rgyag pa
ཚོང་རྒྱབ་པ	deal trade	tshong rgyab pa
ཚོང་རྒྱུ་དངོས་པོ	goods, merchandise	tshong rgyu dngos po
ཚོང་རྒྱུག	move/ sell merchandise quickly	tshong rgyug
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་དཀའ་བ	merchandise that moves poorly/ is hard to sell	tshong rgyug dka' ba
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་མགྱོགས་པ	moving/ selling merchandise quickly	tshong rgyug mgyogs pa
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་བདེ་བ	merchandise that moves well/ is easy to sell	tshong rgyug bde ba
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་པོ	sell merchandise quickly and easily, move merchandise tshong zog brin skyen po	tshong rgyug po
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་མི་བདེ་བ	merchandise that moves poorly/ is hard to sell	tshong rgyug mi bde ba
ཚོང་རྒྱུག་སླ་བ	merchandise that moves well/ is easy to sell	tshong rgyug sla ba
ཚོང་རྒྱུའི་དངོས་པོ	goods, articles of merchandise	tshong rgyu'i dngos po
ཚོང་སྒར	merchant camp	tshong sgar
ཚོང་སྒར་བཏབ	establish a merchant camp	tshong sgar btab
ཚོང་སྒྱུར	sell	tshong sgyur
ཚོང་བརྒྱུད་པ	carry on trade	tshong brgyud pa
ཚོང་བསྒྱུར	selling	tshong bsgyur
ཚོང་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད	sell	tshong bsgyur byed
ཚོང་ཅད	bill of purchase, deed of sale	tshong cad
ཚོང་བཅོལ་སྐུར་བ	consign	tshong bcol skur ba
ཚོང་བཅོལ་སྐུར་ཡུལ	consignee	tshong bcol skur yul
ཚོང་བཅོས	consignment 2234	tshong bcos
ཚོང་བཅོས་འཇོག	leave on consignment	tshong bcos 'jog
ཚོང་བཅོས་དུ་འཇོག	leave on consignment	tshong bcos du 'jog
ཚོང་ཆང	good chang drunk when a deal has been made	tshong chang
ཚོང་ཆིངས	trade treaty/ agreement tshong chings bzhag pa ji bzhin lag len	tshong chings
ཚོང་ཆུང་ཉི་ཚེ་བ	small trader/ vender/ peddler/ shop-keeper	tshong chung nyi tshe ba
ཚོང་ཉེས	business/ loss	tshong nyes
ཚོང་ཉེས་སྒོ་རྒྱག	bankruptcy	tshong nyes sgo rgyag
ཚོང་ཉེས་བྱུང་བ	take a business loss	tshong nyes byung ba
ཚོང་ཉོ	buying and selling, commerce	tshong nyo
ཚོང་ཉོ་བྱེད	engage in buying and selling/ commerce	tshong nyo byed
ཚོང་རྟགས	brand/ trade mark	tshong rtags
ཚོང་རྟགས་རྒྱག་པ	put a trade mark on merchandise	tshong rtags rgyag pa
ཚོང་རྟགས་དངོས་པོར་རྒྱག་པ	put a trade mark on merchandise	tshong rtags dngos por rgyag pa
ཚོང་ཐག་གཅོད	decide the sales price, settle a deal	tshong thag gcod
ཚོང་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	decide the sales price, settle a deal	tshong thag gcod pa
ཚོང་ཐོ	bill, account book, ledger, bill	tshong tho
ཚོང་ཐོ་རྒྱག	record in a [bill, account book, ledger, bill]	tshong tho rgyag
ཚོང་དུས	fair	tshong dus
ཚོང་དུས་མགྲོན་པོ	people met in a marketplace; like passersby met in a marketplace	tshong dus mgron po
ཚོང་དོན	commerce, trade	tshong don
ཚོང་དོན་ཀུང་སི	trading company	tshong don kung si
ཚོང་དོན་ཁང	commerce/ business bureau, Commerce Department	tshong don khang
ཚོང་དོན་གྱི་ཀུང་སི	trading company	tshong don gyi kung si
ཚོང་དོན་གྱི་གྲུ་ཁ	commercial port	tshong don gyi gru kha
ཚོང་དོན་གྱི་ཚན་ཙན	commercial agent/ charge d'affairs	tshong don gyi tshan tsan
ཚོང་དོན་གྱི་ལས་ཚབ	commercial agent/ charge d'affairs	tshong don gyi las tshab
ཚོང་དོན་གྲུ་ཁ	trading port	tshong don gru kha
ཚོང་དོན་དུ་འཇོག་པའི་ཆིངས་ཡིག	trade treaty	tshong don du 'jog pa'i chings yig
ཚོང་དོན་དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས	advertisement	tshong don dril bsgrags
ཚོང་དོན་དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	advertise	tshong don dril bsgrags byed
ཚོང་དོན་སྤྱི་གཉེར་ཁང	commercial/ general trading company/ corporation	tshong don spyi gnyer khang
ཚོང་དོན་ཚན་ཙན	commercial agent/ charge d'affairs	tshong don tshan tsan
ཚོང་དོན་ལས་ཚབ	commercial agent/ charge d'affairs	tshong don las tshab
ཚོང་བདག	owner of merchandise/ wares, merchant, shop-keeper	tshong bdag
ཚོང་འདུ	place wares are displayed for sale, market place, bazaar, fair	tshong 'du
ཚོང་འདུ་ཀྱི་ར་བ	market place	tshong 'du kyi ra ba
ཚོང་འདུ་མགྲོན་པོ	1) travellers to a market place, many people gathering in 1 place	tshong 'du mgron po
ཚོང་འདུ་འགྲིམ	gold	tshong 'du 'grim
ཚོང་འདུ་ས	merchants and wares gathering place, market place	tshong 'du sa
ཚོང་འདུས	temporary bazaar, market	tshong 'dus
ཚོང་འདུས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	market place	tshong 'dus kyi ra ba
ཚོང་འདུས་ཁེ་པ	trader, middleman	tshong 'dus khe pa
ཚོང་འདུས་མགྲོན་པོ	1) travellers to a market place, many people gathering in 1 place	tshong 'dus mgron po
ཚོང་འདུས་འགྲིམ	gold	tshong 'dus 'grim
ཚོང་འདུས་ས	merchants and wares gathering place, market place	tshong 'dus sa
ཚོང་རྡལ	1) [small] market place/ bazaar; 2) village	tshong rdal
ཚོང་བརྡལ	commercial place or circle, that quarter of the city which is chiefly inhabited by merchants	tshong brdal
ཚོང་པ	merchants	tshong pa
ཚོང་པ་ཁྲམ་པ	dishonest merchant	tshong pa khram pa
ཚོང་པ་ཆེན་པོ	tycoon	tshong pa chen po
ཚོང་པ་ཉི་ཚེ་བ	small trader/ vender/ peddler/ shop-keeper tshong pa rnams bzung ste nor chen po 'di dag 'phrog - seize the merchants and steal their great wealth	tshong pa nyi tshe ba
ཚོང་པ་ཚོ	body of merchants	tshong pa tsho
ཚོང་པ་བཟང་པོ་དྲང་པོ	honest & pious merchant	tshong pa bzang po drang po
ཚོང་པའི་ངོ་ཚབ	sales representative/ agent	tshong pa'i ngo tshab
ཚོང་པའི་སྡོད་སྒར	merchant's camp tshong pa'i g.yog po - merchant's servant	tshong pa'i sdod sgar
ཚོང་པའི་རིགས	merchant caste [R]	tshong pa'i rigs
ཚོང་པའི་ལམ	traders path, traffic	tshong pa'i lam
ཚོང་པས་མཆོད་པའི་ནོར་ལྷ	god of wealth worshipped by businessmen	tshong pas mchod pa'i nor lha
ཚོང་དཔོན	a merchant; merchant	tshong dpon
ཚོང་སྤོག་ཆུད་པ	gain money by commerce	tshong spog chud pa
ཚོང་སྤོགས	profit from selling [R]	tshong spogs
ཚོང་སྤོགས་བྱེད་པ	engage in commercial speculations	tshong spogs byed pa
ཚོང་སྤོགས་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	engage in commercial speculations	tshong spogs la 'gro ba
ཚོང་སྤྱི་ལྷན་ཁང	in gro mo and rgyal rtse Tibetan tshong pa khag gi sa nas selling/ merchant's tax collectors Tibetan govt office	tshong spyi lhan khang
ཚོང་སྤྲུལ	trading	tshong sprul
ཚོང་ཕམ་ཤོར	take a business loss	tshong pham shor
ཚོང་ཕྲུག	merchant's servant, apprentice, salesman, sales representative/ agent	tshong phrug
ཚོང་བ	sell	tshong ba
ཚོང་བ་ཡིན	i have sold, he has sold	tshong ba yin
ཚོང་བྱེད་པ	to trade	tshong byed pa
ཚོང་བྲིན	moving merchandise, selling merchandise quickly and easily	tshong brin
ཚོང་དབང་གཅིག	monopoly	tshong dbang gcig
ཚོང་དབང་གཅིག་བདག	monopoly	tshong dbang gcig bdag
ཚོང་དབང་གཅིག་བདག་བྱེད	have a monopoly, sell monopolistically tshong dbang gcig bdag byed mkhan monopolist	tshong dbang gcig bdag byed
ཚོང་འབྲེལ	trade [relations]	tshong 'brel
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་བཀག་སྡོམ	embargo 2235	tshong 'brel bkag sdom
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་གྱི	commercial	tshong 'brel gyi
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་གྲོས་མཐུན	trade agreement	tshong 'brel gros mthun
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་མཉམ་ལས	marketing cooperative	tshong 'brel mnyam las
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་དོན་གཅོད	trade delegation	tshong 'brel don gcod
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	have trade [relations]	tshong 'brel byed
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་གསར་དུ་འཛུགས	establish trade [relations]	tshong 'brel gsar du 'dzugs
ཚོང་འབྲེལ་ལྷན་ཚོགས	trade conference	tshong 'brel lhan tshogs
ཚོང་སྦྲེལ	two [+] merchants pooling their capital and going into a business [venture] together [R]	tshong sbrel
ཚོང་རྩ	business capital tshong rtsa mnyam sdud kyis tshong	tshong rtsa
ཚོང་རྩིས	business accounts	tshong rtsis
ཚོང་ཚབ	sales/ trade representative/ agent	tshong tshab
ཚོང་ཚོགས	sger tshong rgyag mkhan gyi skyid sdug	tshong tshogs
ཚོང་མཚམས་འཇོག་པ	not sell/ engage/ stop selling engaging in trade/ business [in]	tshong mtshams 'jog pa
ཚོང་རྫས	merchandise, wares, things for sale	tshong rdzas
ཚོང་བཞིན་པ	selling	tshong bzhin pa
ཚོང་ཟོག	goods, wares, merchandise, articles of merchandise	tshong zog
ཚོང་ཟོག་ལྐོག་འཁྱེར	smuggling	tshong zog lkog 'khyer
ཚོང་ཟོག་ལྐོག་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	smuggle	tshong zog lkog 'khyer byed
ཚོང་ཟོག་ལྐོག་འདྲེན	smuggling	tshong zog lkog 'dren
ཚོང་ཟོག་ལྐོག་འདྲེན་བྱེད	smuggle	tshong zog lkog 'dren byed
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྐོར་འགྲེལ	commodity circulation, trade	tshong zog skor 'grel
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྐྱེལ་ཐོ	invoice, manifest tshong zog skyel 'dren byed pa'i gru merchandise transporting ship	tshong zog skyel tho
ཚོང་ཟོག་ཁྲོམ་རར་འགྲོ་རྒྱུག	merchandise moving well/ quickly tshong zog khrom rar 'gro rgyug med pa merchandise not moving	tshong zog khrom rar 'gro rgyug
ཚོང་ཟོག་ཁྲོམ་རར་བྲིན་ཆེ་བ	merchandise moving well/ quickly	tshong zog khrom rar brin che ba
ཚོང་ཟོག་གི་རྟགས	brand/ trade mark [on merchandise]	tshong zog gi rtags
ཚོང་ཟོག་གི་བདག་པོ	owner of merchandise, merchant	tshong zog gi bdag po
ཚོང་ཟོག་གི་རྣམ་པ	kinds of merchandise/ wares	tshong zog gi rnam pa
ཚོང་ཟོག་འགྲེམས་སྤེལ	distribute [& sell] merchandise tshong zog 'grems spel sgo nas khe sgrub	tshong zog 'grems spel
ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	by distributing [& selling] merchandise making a profit	kyi bya ba
ཚོང་ཟོག་རྒྱུན་འཁོར	commodity circulation, trade	tshong zog rgyun 'khor
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྒྲིག་གཤོམ་བྱེད་ཁང	stall	tshong zog sgrig gshom byed khang
ཚོང་ཟོག་མངགས	order goods	tshong zog mngags
ཚོང་ཟོག་མངགས་ཐོ	purchase order	tshong zog mngags tho
ཚོང་ཟོག་ཆུང་བ	petty commodities	tshong zog chung ba
ཚོང་ཟོག་ཆུང་བའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	petty commodity economy	tshong zog chung ba'i dpal 'byor
ཚོང་ཟོག་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of commodities	tshong zog brje res
ཚོང་ཟོག་བཏོན་པ	display wares	tshong zog bton pa
ཚོང་ཟོག་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	production of commodities/ merchandise	tshong zog thon skyed
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྣ་བརྒྱའི་ཀུང་སི	department store	tshong zog sna brgya'i kung si
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྣ་མང	general merchandise	tshong zog sna mang
ཚོང་ཟོག་སྣ་མང་ཀུང་སི	department store tshong zog sna mang tshong khang general/ department store	tshong zog sna mang kung si
ཚོང་ཟོག་དཔལ་འབྱོར	commodity economy	tshong zog dpal 'byor
ཚོང་ཟོག་བྲིན་རྒྱུག	move/ sell merchandise quickly	tshong zog brin rgyug
ཚོང་ཟོག་འཚོང་མཁན	sales man	tshong zog 'tshong mkhan
ཚོང་ཟོག་ར་བ	market place	tshong zog ra ba
ཚོང་ཟོང	merchandise, goods	tshong zong
ཚོང་ཟོང་ལྐོག་འཁྱེར	smuggling	tshong zong lkog 'khyer
ཚོང་ཟོང་ལྐོག་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	smuggle	tshong zong lkog 'khyer byed
ཚོང་ཟོང་ལྐོག་འདྲེན	smuggling	tshong zong lkog 'dren
ཚོང་ཟོང་ལྐོག་འདྲེན་བྱེད	smuggle	tshong zong lkog 'dren byed
ཚོང་ཟོང་སྐོར་འགྲེལ	commodity circulation, trade	tshong zong skor 'grel
ཚོང་ཟོང་སྐྱེལ་ཐོ	invoice, manifest tshong zong skyel 'dren byed pa'i gru merchandise transporting ship tshong zong khrom rar 'gro rgyug med pa - merchandise not moving	tshong zong skyel tho
ཚོང་ཟོང་གི་རྟགས	brand/ trade mark [on merchandise]	tshong zong gi rtags
ཚོང་ཟོང་གི་བདག་པོ	owner of merchandise, merchant	tshong zong gi bdag po
ཚོང་ཟོང་གི་རྣམ་པ	kinds of merchandise/ wares	tshong zong gi rnam pa
ཚོང་ཟོང་འགྲེམས་སྤེལ	distribute [& sell] merchandise tshong zong 'grems spel sgo nas khe	tshong zong 'grems spel
སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	by distributing [& selling] merchandise making a profit	sgrub kyi bya ba
ཚོང་ཟོང་རྒྱུན་འཁོར	commodity circulation, trade	tshong zong rgyun 'khor
ཚོང་ཟོང་མངགས	order goods	tshong zong mngags
ཚོང་ཟོང་མངགས་ཐོ	purchase order	tshong zong mngags tho
ཚོང་ཟོང་ཆུང་བ	petty commodities	tshong zong chung ba
ཚོང་ཟོང་ཆུང་བའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	petty commodity economy	tshong zong chung ba'i dpal 'byor
ཚོང་ཟོང་བརྗེ་རེས	exchange of commodities	tshong zong brje res
ཚོང་ཟོང་བཏོན་པ	display wares	tshong zong bton pa
ཚོང་ཟོང་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	production of commodities/ merchandise	tshong zong thon skyed
ཚོང་ཟོང་སྣ་བརྒྱའི་ཀུང་སི	department store	tshong zong sna brgya'i kung si
ཚོང་ཟོང་སྣ་མང	general merchandise tshong zong sna mang tshong khang general/ department store	tshong zong sna mang
ཚོང་ཟོང་དཔལ་འབྱོར	commodity economy	tshong zong dpal 'byor
ཚོང་ཟོང་བྲིན་རྒྱུག	move/ sell merchandise quickly	tshong zong brin rgyug
ཚོང་ཟོང་འཚོང་མཁན	sales man	tshong zong 'tshong mkhan
ཚོང་ཟོང་ར་བ	market place	tshong zong ra ba
ཚོང་ཟླ	business helper/ partner	tshong zla
ཚོང་ཡ	tshong gi kha gtad,//gnyen ya ma dma', tshong ya ma mtho	tshong ya
ཚོང་ཡིག	business letter/ document	tshong yig
ཚོང་ཡུལ	market [place] tshong g.yo - private merchant's servant/ helper tshong g.yog - shop assistant, salesperson	tshong yul
ཚོང་ར	market, bazaar	tshong ra
ཚོང་ར་ཆུང་གྲས	[small] market place	tshong ra chung gras
ཚོང་རོགས	partner in trade	tshong rogs
ཚོང་ལ་གྱོང་ཕོག་པ	business/ loss	tshong la gyong phog pa
ཚོང་ལམ	1) commercial relationship [mthun phyogs rgyal khab khag bar tshong lam phye ba]; 2) trade journey/ route; 3) market	tshong lam
ཚོང་ལས	commerce, trade	tshong las
ཚོང་ལས་ཀྱི	mercantile	tshong las kyi
ཚོང་ལས་ཀྱི་ཐབས་ཤེས	trading expertise, trader	tshong las kyi thabs shes
ཚོང་ལས་ཁང	firm	tshong las khang
ཚོང་ལས་གྲོས་མཐུན	trade agreement	tshong las gros mthun
ཚོང་ལས་སྒོ་རྒྱབ	liquidate	tshong las sgo rgyab
ཚོང་ལས་ཇུས་འགྲོ	tshong las lam 'gro	tshong las jus 'gro
ཚོང་ལས་དྲ་བ	trading network 2236	tshong las dra ba
ཚོང་ལས་པ	salesman, business,man, shop employee	tshong las pa
ཚོང་ལས་བྱེད	to transact business, to engage in commerce	tshong las byed
ཚོང་ལས་མི་བྱེད་པ	not engage in trade/ business	tshong las mi byed pa
ཚོང་ལས་བཞག	go out of business	tshong las bzhag
ཚོང་ལས་ལམ་འགྲོ	tshong las jus 'gro	tshong las lam 'gro
ཚོང་ཤག	client	tshong shag
ཚོང་སྲང	1) commercial/ merchant's balance/ scales; 2) [arch] village house	tshong srang
ཚོང་སློག	after a sale has been made disregard the bargain * renege	tshong slog
དིསྲེགརད་ཐེ་བརྒཻན	[zog rin sngon 'don byas kyang tshong slog yong shes pa]	disregard the bargain
ཚོང་སློག་རྒྱག	after a sale has been made disregard the bargain * renege	tshong slog rgyag
ཚོང་ལྷ	god of wealth	tshong lha
ཚོངས	imp. of {'tshang ba}; imp. of {'tshong ba}	tshongs
ཚོངས་བསྒྲིགས་པ	to barter, bargain	tshongs bsgrigs pa
ཚོད	edible plants	tshod
ཚོད་ཀྱི་སྐར་ཆ	second	tshod kyi skar cha
ཚོད་ཀྱིས་བཟོས་པའི་ཁ་ལག	vegetable food	tshod kyis bzos pa'i kha lag
ཚོད་བགམ	test, try out khog tshod dam nyams [//rkyal rtsal ji 'dug tshod bgam]	tshod bgam
ཚོད་བགམ་པ	test, try out [khog tshod dam nyams tshod len, rkyal rtsal ji 'dug tshod bgam]	tshod bgam pa
ཚོད་བརྒལ	1) past its time, out of date; 2) unworthy, improper [gzhan sems sreg pa'i skad cha de 'dra bshad pa ni tshod brgal zhig ma red dam]	tshod brgal
ཚོད་ཅན	moderate, punctilious, strict, grave	tshod can
ཚོད་ཅིག	part, fraction, time, period	tshod cig
ཚོད་ཆུང	small-proportioned/ young	tshod chung
ཚོད་འཇལ་བ	measure	tshod 'jal ba
ཚོད་ཉུལ	tshod brtag //kha nas ci 'byung tshod nyul byos	tshod nyul
ཚོད་སྙམ་པ	suppose	tshod snyam pa
ཚོད་ལྟ	experiment, trial	tshod lta
ཚོད་ལྟ་ཁང	laboratory	tshod lta khang
ཚོད་ལྟ་བ	1) examine, investigate [the quality of] [another's character] [bzang ngan skyon yon che chung la rtog pa,//spus ka legs nyes kyi tshod lta ba] pha rol po'i rgyud tshod len pa,//dpa' gdeng ji 'dug ...	tshod lta ba
ཚོད་ལྟ་བྱེད་པ	try, test, make an experiment	tshod lta byed pa
ཚོད་ལྟ་བྱེད་ས	test/ experimental site	tshod lta byed sa
ཚོད་ལྟ་ཞིང་ཁ	test/ experimental plot	tshod lta zhing kha
ཚོད་ལྟ་ཞིང་ར	test/ experimental farm	tshod lta zhing ra
ཚོད་ལྟའི་ཆེད	in order to test	tshod lta'i ched
ཚོད་ལྟའི་གནས་སྐབས	probation	tshod lta'i gnas skabs
ཚོད་ལྟའི་ཞིང་ཁ	test/ experimental plot	tshod lta'i zhing kha
ཚོད་ལྟའི་ས་གནད	test/ experimental site	tshod lta'i sa gnad
ཚོད་ལྟར་འཛུགས	put into trial operation	tshod ltar 'dzugs
ཚོད་སྟོན་ཁང	building where tshod ma'i kha lag is made; 1) vegetables/ herbs; 2) flavor enhancing substance; 3) food eaten w tsampa dough = spags ma; 4) soup w vegetables	tshod ston khang
ཚོད་བལྟ་ཁང	laboratory	tshod blta khang
ཚོད་བལྟ་བ	/ examine, investigate	tshod blta ba
ཚོད་བལྟ་བྱེད་པ	try, test, make an experiment	tshod blta byed pa
ཚོད་བལྟ་བྱེད་ས	test/ experimental site	tshod blta byed sa
ཚོད་བལྟ་ཞིང་ཁ	test/ experimental plot	tshod blta zhing kha
ཚོད་བལྟ་ཞིང་ར	test/ experimental farm	tshod blta zhing ra
ཚོད་བལྟའི་ཞིང་ཁ	test/ experimental plot	tshod blta'i zhing kha
ཚོད་བལྟའི་ཤེལ་སྦུག	test tube	tshod blta'i shel sbug
ཚོད་བལྟའི་ས་གནད	test/ experimental site	tshod blta'i sa gnad
ཚོད་དེ་ལ	o'clock	tshod de la
ཚོད་དོར	meat or butter added to cooking vegetables	tshod dor
ཚོད་ལྡན	do in the right amount/ whatever is appropriate, limit, control, grasp	tshod ldan
ཚོད་སྡེར	CH vegetable container sder ma	tshod sder
ཚོད་སྡོར	grease used to roast vegetables	tshod sdor
ཚོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulation of merit	tshod nams kyi tshogs
ཚོད་པ་ཟོ་མཁན	watchmaker	tshod pa zo mkhan
ཚོད་དཔག	estimate, assessment, approximation	tshod dpag
ཚོད་དཔག་ཆུང་དྲགས	underestimation, under-rating	tshod dpag chung drags
ཚོད་དཔག་ཆུང་དྲགས་བྱེད	underestimate, under-rate	tshod dpag chung drags byed
ཚོད་དཔག་ཆེ་དྲགས	overestimation/rating	tshod dpag che drags
ཚོད་དཔག་ཆེ་དྲགས་བྱེད	overestimate/-rate	tshod dpag che drags byed
ཚོད་དཔག་པ	estimate	tshod dpag pa
ཚོད་དཔག་བྱེད	guess, estimate	tshod dpag byed
ཚོད་དཔག་བྱེད་པ	to approximate, estimate	tshod dpag byed pa
ཚོད་དཔག་དམའ་བ་ཆུང་དྲགས	underestimation, under-rating	tshod dpag dma' ba chung drags
ཚོད་དཔག་དམའ་བ་ཆུང་བྱེད	underestimate, under-rate	tshod dpag dma' ba chung byed
ཚོད་དཔག་འོལ་ཚོད	guess, estimate tshod dpag rang gar gi rigs pas gting mi	tshod dpag 'ol tshod
ཚོད་དཔགས	guess, estimate	tshod dpags
ཚོད་དཔགས་ཆུང་དྲགས	underestimation, under-rating	tshod dpags chung drags
ཚོད་དཔགས་ཆུང་དྲགས་བྱེད	underestimate, under-rate	tshod dpags chung drags byed
ཚོད་དཔགས་ཆེ་དྲགས	overestimation/rating	tshod dpags che drags
ཚོད་དཔགས་ཆེ་དྲགས་བྱེད	overestimate/-rate	tshod dpags che drags byed
ཚོད་དཔགས་བྱེད	guess, estimate 2237	tshod dpags byed
ཚོད་དཔགས་དམའ་བ་ཆུང་དྲགས	underestimation, under-rating	tshod dpags dma' ba chung drags
ཚོད་དཔགས་དམའ་བ་ཆུང་བྱེད	underestimate, under-rate	tshod dpags dma' ba chung byed
ཚོད་དཔགས་འོལ་ཚོད	guess, estimate tshod dpags rang gar gi rigs pas gting mi	tshod dpags 'ol tshod
ཚོད་བགས	test, try out	tshod bags
ཚོད་བྱ	riddle	tshod bya
ཚོད་བྱེད	judge, guess, estimate, approximate, do in the right amount	tshod byed
ཚོད་བྱེད་ན	[I] would estimate	tshod byed na
ཚོད་བྱེད་པ	1) guess, estimate; 2) ran pa'am 'tshams po byed pa,//mang nyung tshod byed pa; 3) stage, point	tshod byed pa
ཚོད་བྱེད་དབང་རྩ	sensory nerves	tshod byed dbang rtsa
ཚོད་མ	1) vegetables/ herbs; 2) flavor enhancing substance; 3) food eaten w tsampa dough = spags ma; 4) soup w vegetables [= skyo tsha dang, bya na]	tshod ma
ཚོད་མའི་སྐྱུ་རུམ	sauce made of	tshod ma'i skyu rum
བེ༹གེཏབླེ་ཨོར་པོཏ	herbs	vegetable or pot
ཚོད་མའི་མིང	kind of table vegetable	tshod ma'i ming
ཚོད་མི་ཟིན	[we] cannot judge / unable to measure	tshod mi zin
ཚོད་མི་ཤེས་པ	not keeping to measure, intemperate	tshod mi shes pa
ཚོད་མེད	intemperate, immoderate, impudent, immense, boundless, limitless	tshod med
ཚོད་བཙུགས་པ	to take as the standard	tshod btsugs pa
ཚོད་རྩིས	guess/ estimate calculation, anticipating/ guessing someone's char-	tshod rtsis
ཚོད་རྩིས་བྱས་ན	to take a guess	tshod rtsis byas na
ཚོད་རྩིས་བྱེད	guess/ estimate calculation, anticipate/ guess someone's character and reactions and acting accordingly	tshod rtsis byed
ཚོད་རྩིས་རིན་གོང	estimated price	tshod rtsis rin gong
ཚོད་ཚོད	phyogs tsam gyi guess/ estimate	tshod tshod
ཚོད་ཚོད་བྱེད	guess, speculate	tshod tshod byed
ཚོད་འཛིན	do in the right amount/ whatever is appropriate, limit, control, grasp [,//gtong yong gi tshod 'dzin pa,//mang nyung gi tshod gzung ba]	tshod 'dzin
ཚོད་འཛིན་གྲངས་ཀ	regulated #	tshod 'dzin grangs ka
ཚོད་འཛིན་འགག་སྒོ	water flow regulator, check gate, regulating sluice dam	tshod 'dzin 'gag sgo
ཚོད་འཛིན་དམ་པོ	tight/ strict regulation/ control	tshod 'dzin dam po
ཚོད་འཛིན་པ	perfect measure; also {tshad 'dzin pa}	tshod 'dzin pa
ཚོད་འཛིན་པོ	[very] self-controlled	tshod 'dzin po
ཚོད་འཛིན་བྱ	evaluate	tshod 'dzin bya
ཚོད་འཛིན་བྱེད	do in the right amount, limit, control, grasp	tshod 'dzin byed
ཚོད་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	control, grasp, limit	tshod 'dzin byed pa
ཚོད་ཞོལ	[arch] leftover tshod ma; 1) vegetables/ herbs; 2) flavor enhancing substance; 3) food eaten w tsampa dough = spags ma; 4) soup w vegetables	tshod zhol
ཚོད་ཟིན་པ	guess rightly, come within the guess, turn out as guessed	tshod zin pa
ཚོད་ཟིན་པར་བྱ	be careful, watch out	tshod zin par bya
ཚོད་བཟུང	keeping control over [1's actions], being independent, do in the right amount, limit, control	tshod bzung
ཚོད་བཟུང་བ	appraise, guess correctly, measure out, estimate, tax	tshod bzung ba
ཚོད་བཟོ	trial manufacture, try out	tshod bzo
ཚོད་བཟོ་བྱེད	trial manufacture, try out	tshod bzo byed
ཚོད་རང་གིས་བཟུང	keep control over [1's actions [independent]	tshod rang gis bzung
ཚོད་རན་པོ	good estimate/ guess, the right amount	tshod ran po
ཚོད་རན་པོར་སྟངས་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	do in the right amount/ whatever is appropriate, limit, control	tshod ran por stangs 'dzin byed pa
ཚོད་རེ་རེའི	hourly	tshod re re'i
ཚོད་ལེན	test, try out	tshod len
ཚོད་ལེན་པ	examine, investigate [whether]	tshod len pa
ཚོད་ལོངས	having guessed hidden meanings rtogs pa, [ngas kho'i tshod longs song] actually perceive, understand, realize how they are	tshod longs
ཚོད་ཤེས	riddle	tshod shes
ཚོད་ཤེས་པ	know the right time, action etc [gang dang gang gi ran 'tshams ji bzhin tshod thig pa,//phar gtong tshur len gyi tshod shes pa,//mi grangs mang nyung gi tshod shes pa,//tshogs 'du tshogs grol gyi d...	tshod shes pa
ཚོད་ཤེས་སྨྲ་བ	propose a riddle	tshod shes smra ba
ཚོད་བཤད	speculation, hypothesis	tshod bshad
ཚོད་གསོ	experimental raising/ breeding/ cultivating	tshod gso
ཚོད་གསོ་བྱེད	experimentally raise/ breed/ cultivate	tshod gso byed
ཚོན	colored; 1) colored sand. 2) paints, hue, colors, pigments; color	tshon
ཚོན་ཀན་ཆག	(CH by a physician in taking the patient's pulse mdzub mo la tshon and gung mo la kan, srin lag la chag ces CH med. text las byung ba'i brda zhig	tshon kan chag
ཚོན་ཀོང	paint pot [painter's implement [dkar yol gyi tshon kong nang du tshon dbur ba]	tshon kong
ཚོན་སྐུད	colored thread	tshon skud
ཚོན་སྐུད་བསྒྲིལ་བ	twisted multicolored yarn	tshon skud bsgril ba
ཚོན་སྐོར་གང	thumb-sized, thumbsized, size of the circumference of the thumb	tshon skor gang
ཚོན་ཁོ	[stone] mortar	tshon kho
ཚོན་ཁྲ	variegated/ various colors [glog brnyan tshon khra,//ri mo tshon khra can,//dar cha tshon khra]	tshon khra
ཚོན་ཁྲ་བའི་གློག་བརྙན	color movie	tshon khra ba'i glog brnyan
ཚོན་ཁྲ་བའི་དར་ཆ	multicolored flag	tshon khra ba'i dar cha
ཚོན་ཁྲ་ཡོད་པའི་རི་མོ	picture in color	tshon khra yod pa'i ri mo
ཚོན་གང	finger's breadth, thumb-sized	tshon gang
ཚོན་གང་གང་བ	the size of a thumb	tshon gang gang ba
ཚོན་གང་བ	the size of one inch	tshon gang ba
ཚོན་གྱི་ཁ་དོག	color [of pigment]	tshon gyi kha dog
ཚོན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	{tshon gyi 'khor lo} med. herb + taste enhancing	tshon gyi 'khor lo
ཚོན་གྱི་རི་མོ	drawing in colors	tshon gyi ri mo
ཚོན་གྱིས་མ་བཅལ་བ	[arch] tshon gyis kha ma bsgyur ba	tshon gyis ma bcal ba
ཚོན་གྱིས་འཚོ་བ	painter	tshon gyis 'tsho ba
ཚོན་འགྱེད་པ	apply various colors [khang pa gsar par tshon 'gyed pa]	tshon 'gyed pa
ཚོན་རྒྱབ་པ	dye	tshon rgyab pa
ཚོན་ཅན	[arch] silver, money	tshon can
ཚོན་ཆེན	1) unchanging mineral colors; 2) a kind of rock pigment (/ [tdzogs tshon ???]	tshon chen
ཚོན་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great colors [unsuitable for renunciates clothing rab tu byung ba'i gos kyi kha dog mi rung ba'i tshon chen brgyad de, li khri dmar ser, mthing shun sngo nag 'od can, rgya skyegs tshos dmar s...	tshon chen brgyad
ཚོན་ལྗང	"green color", a synonym for malachite	tshon ljang
ཚོན་ལྗིན	dye or color penetrating and remaining fixed in cloth	tshon ljin
ཚོན་གཏོང	paint [something]	tshon gtong
ཚོན་གཏོང་བ	paint	tshon gtong ba
ཚོན་དར	colored flag/ banner	tshon dar
ཚོན་གདན	tshon rtsi gtong yul gang yin la thog mar gtong ba'i rtsi gdan	tshon gdan
ཚོན་མདངས	color, sheen	tshon mdangs
ཚོན་མདངས་རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བ	variegated colors, colorful, brilliantly colored	tshon mdangs rnam par bkra ba
ཚོན་མདོག	color, coloring matter	tshon mdog
ཚོན་མདོག་ངོ་མ་ཤེས་མཁན	colorblind	tshon mdog ngo ma shes mkhan
ཚོན་མདོག་སྣ་ལྔ	five colored, the five colors tshon mdog sna tshogs kyis bris pa'i ri mo - picture painted in various colors	tshon mdog sna lnga
ཚོན་མདོག་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	decolorize	tshon mdog med par bzo ba
ཚོན་མདོག་དམར་པོ	red color	tshon mdog dmar po
ཚོན་མདོག་ཡལ་བ	faded/ [-ing] colors	tshon mdog yal ba
ཚོན་མདོག་གསུམ་ཅན	three-colored	tshon mdog gsum can
ཚོན་མདོག་ཧར་པོ	flashy	tshon mdog har po
ཚོན་ལྡན	colorful, colored	tshon ldan
ཚོན་ལྡན་སྤྱིན་ཤོག	color film	tshon ldan spyin shog
ཚོན་སྣ	different colors	tshon sna
ཚོན་སྣ་བརྒྱ	variety of colors, hundred different colors	tshon sna brgya
ཚོན་སྣ་ཅན	colorful	tshon sna can
ཚོན་པིར	artists brush [made from bamboo w hairs]	tshon pir
ཚོན་པོ	fat, plump, well-fed, resinous	tshon po
ཚོན་པོའི་ཁ་ཟས	fatty food	tshon po'i kha zas
ཚོན་པོའི་བ་གླང	fat ox ??	tshon po'i ba glang
ཚོན་པོའི་བ་མོ	fertile cow	tshon po'i ba mo
ཚོན་པྲ	color omens	tshon pra
ཚོན་བིར	artists brush [made from bamboo w hairs]	tshon bir
ཚོན་བྲིས	painting	tshon bris
ཚོན་འབྱུག	paint [something]	tshon 'byug
ཚོན་འབྱུག་པ	wet, moisten, smear, spread, paint	tshon 'byug pa
ཚོན་འབྱུག་པ་པོ	painter, one who applies paint on anything	tshon 'byug pa po
ཚོན་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ལག་ལེན	method of mixing and applying colors	tshon sbyor gyi lag len
ཚོན་སྦྱོར་བ	prepare colors, dye	tshon sbyor ba
ཚོན་མན	tshon khra min pa'i gos chen ri mo yod med ci rigs	tshon man
ཚོན་མེད	w/o color	tshon med
ཚོན་མེད་སྐྱ་བྲིས	charcoal drawing made before painting	tshon med skya bris
ཚོན་མེད་གློག་བརྙན	black and white movie	tshon med glog brnyan
ཚོན་མོ་སྟེང	[arch] zha nye nag po med. herb	tshon mo steng
ཚོན་དམར	1) mdog sgyur byed dmar po'i rigs; 2) vermillion; 3) red color	tshon dmar
ཚོན་དམར་པོ་གཏོང	paint [something] red	tshon dmar po gtong
ཚོན་དམར་པོ་འབྱུག	paint [something]	tshon dmar po 'byug
ཚོན་རྩི	1) paint, colored lacquer, enamel, varnish; 2) color [& paint, colored lacquer]	tshon rtsi
ཚོན་རྩི་གཏོང	apply paint, colored lacquer, enamel, varnish	tshon rtsi gtong
ཚོན་རྩིའི་ཡོ་ཆས	lacquer ware	tshon rtsi'i yo chas
ཚོན་མཚལ་དཀར་པོ	white paint	tshon mtshal dkar po
ཚོན་ཡིག	color notation or code	tshon yig
ཚོན་རིས	decorative painting	tshon ris
ཚོན་ལས	painting [work]	tshon las
ཚོན་ལེན་པོ	tshon zug po'am 'phrod po,//ras gzhi dkar po'i steng du tshon len po yong	tshon len po
ཚོན་ལོང	color blind	tshon long
ཚོན་སྲབ་པོ	tinge	tshon srab po
ཚོབ	give on equivalent, repay, SA 'dzab pa, tshab, 'tshab pa	tshob
ཚོབས	be afraid	tshobs
ཚོམ་རྔམས	fright, angry or wrathful attitude, noise, din, clatter 2239	tshom rngams
ཚོམ་ཆུང་འཐུག་འདེབས	close/ [serried]/ cluster planting	tshom chung 'thug 'debs
ཚོམ་ཇ	communal tea drinking	tshom ja
ཚོམ་འཇོག་པ	to just remain	tshom 'jog pa
ཚོམ་པ	bundle, bunch, doubt, hesitate, timid, bashful, ashamed	tshom pa
ཚོམ་པོ	bundle, SA tshom pa	tshom po
ཚོམ་བུ	focal points, bundle, SA tshom pa, grain, placing of precious stones and other things on top of a dkyil 'khor	tshom bu
ཚོམ་བུ་བཀོད་པ	arrayed with heaps	tshom bu bkod pa
ཚོམ་བུ་གཅིག་ཏུ	in one single group (the relation between master and students lasts until each practitioner following the same transmission attains enlightenment) tshom bu dang bcas tshogs kyi spyod pa group pract...	tshom bu gcig tu
ཚོམ་བུ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	groupassembly practice / sadhana	tshom bu tshogs kyi sgrub pa
ཚོམ་བུ་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	attainment of the	tshom bu tshogs sgrub
ཚོམ་བུ་སོ་བདུན	symbolic representation of the structure of the universe	tshom bu so bdun
ཚོམ་བུ་སོ་བདུན་མ	37 heaps	tshom bu so bdun ma
ཚོམ་བུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	grain-heap mandala	tshom bu'i dkyil 'khor
ཚོམ་བུར	in groups	tshom bur
ཚོམ་བུར་བརྡལ	manifest as a mass	tshom bur brdal
ཚོམ་ཚོམ	doubt, indecision	tshom tshom
ཚོམས	Udana Varga, {ched du brjod pa'i tshoms}	tshoms
ཚོམས་སྐོར	courtyard, chapel, SA tshoms, place of worship	tshoms skor
ཚོམས་ཆེན	large hall *, assembly hall	tshoms chen
ཚོམས་ཏེ	being surprised	tshoms te
ཚོར	to feel, realize; to hear of, notice; heard about/ noticed what was happening; + neg. : insensitive	tshor
ཚོར་སྐྱེན	[arch] tshor ba rnon po	tshor skyen
ཚོར་གྲོལ	liberation through sensing	tshor grol
ཚོར་ངད	power of sensation [rna ba'i tshor ngad che ba,//sna'i tshor ngad zhan pa]	tshor ngad
ཚོར་ངད་ཆེ་བ	great power of sensation	tshor ngad che ba
ཚོར་ངད་ཞན་བ	weak power of sensation	tshor ngad zhan ba
ཚོར་གཅོད་པ	to subjugate, destroy, finish off	tshor gcod pa
ཚོར་ཉམས	feeling, sensation, perception	tshor nyams
ཚོར་སྟངས	reaction, response	tshor stangs
ཚོར་སྟོང	feeling empty	tshor stong
ཚོར་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of feeling and emptiness	tshor stong zung 'jug
ཚོར་བདེ	pleasant sensation[s]	tshor bde
ཚོར་འདུ	[abbr. of {tshor ba} and {'du shes}	tshor 'du
ཚོར་འདུ་གཉིས	{tshor ba dang 'du shes gnyis} both sensations and perceptions	tshor 'du gnyis
ཚོར་འདུ་བྱེད་གསུམ	{tshor ba dang 'du shes dang 'du byed gsum} sensations, perceptions and formations	tshor 'du byed gsum
ཚོར་ན	if they have wind of this	tshor na
ཚོར་ནས	feeling oneself as	tshor nas
ཚོར་རྣོན་པོ	sensitive, keen in perception	tshor rnon po
ཚོར་པ	feeling	tshor pa
ཚོར་ཕུང	see {tshor ba'i phung po}	tshor phung
ཚོར་ཕུང་གི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ལྔ	TSE	tshor phung gi rigs kyi chos lnga
ཚོར་བ	1) (tha mi dad pa) perceive, apprehend, touch, be aware of, know, feel [lus kyi sdug bsngal lus kyis tshor ba,//kho'i skad cha ngas tshor byung]; 2) Reg pas yul yongs su spyad pa'i rnam par smin pa...	tshor ba
ཚོར་བ་འགག་པའི་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	the serenity in which sensation has ceased	tshor ba 'gag pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa
ཚོར་བ་འགགས་པ	withdrawal from the senses	tshor ba 'gags pa
ཚོར་བ་འགོག་པ	cessation of sensations	tshor ba 'gog pa
ཚོར་བ་ལྔ	the five feelings [lus kyi tshor ba bde sdug gnyis, yid kyi tshor ba yid bde dang yid mi bde gnyis, tshor ba btang snyoms dang lnga'o, might also mean the five sense perceptions]	tshor ba lnga
ཚོར་བ་ཉམས	lose the sense of feeling, be paralyzed	tshor ba nyams
ཚོར་བ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	see {tshor ba dran pa nye bar bzhag pa}	tshor ba nye bar bzhag pa
ཚོར་བ་བཏང་སྙོམས	indifferent/ neutral feeling [bar ma'i tshor ba ste sdug bsngal yang ma yin bde ba yang ma yin pa'i tshor ba]	tshor ba btang snyoms
ཚོར་བ་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ	application of mindfulness based on sensation(s)	tshor ba dran pa nye bar gzhag pa
ཚོར་བ་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	mindfulness of feelings [dran pa nye bar bzhag pa bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, nang dang phyi dang phyi nang gi lus la dmigs nas byung ba'i tshor ba dang, tshor ba bde sdug btang snyoms gsum char yang ...	tshor ba dran pa nye bar bzhag pa
ཚོར་བ་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག	feeling; mindfulness of feelings	tshor ba dran pa nyer gzhag
ཚོར་བ་དྲུག	six feelings / sensations resulting from contact of six organs and six objects and six consciousnesses	tshor ba drug
ཚོར་བ་བདེ་སྡུག	pleasant and painful sensations tshor ba bde sdug gang du'ang lung ma	tshor ba bde sdug
ཚོར་བ་བདེ་སྡུག་བར་མ	pleasant, painful and neutral sensations	tshor ba bde sdug bar ma
ཚོར་བ་བདེ་སྡུག་བར་མ་གསུམ	pleasant, painful and neutral sensations	tshor ba bde sdug bar ma gsum
ཚོར་བ་བདེ་བ	pleasant sensation	tshor ba bde ba
ཚོར་བ་བདེན་པར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	sensations not proven to be real	tshor ba bden par ma grub pa
ཚོར་བ་སྡུག་བསྔལ	painful sensation	tshor ba sdug bsngal
ཚོར་བ་རྣམ་དག	totally purified feeling	tshor ba rnam dag
ཚོར་བ་རྣོན་པོ	sensitive	tshor ba rnon po
ཚོར་བ་པོ	person, one who feels the objects that produce a sensation	tshor ba po
ཚོར་བ་མེད	void of feeling	tshor ba med
ཚོར་བ་མེད་པ	insensitive, not notice	tshor ba med pa
ཚོར་བ་ཟང་ཟིང་བཅས་པ	turbulent sensations	tshor ba zang zing bcas pa
ཚོར་བ་ཡོད་པ	conscious	tshor ba yod pa
ཚོར་བ་ལན་པ	to be taken up or adopted	tshor ba lan pa
ཚོར་བ་གསུམ	three feelings, sensations	tshor ba gsum
ཚོར་བའི	sensory	tshor ba'i
ཚོར་བའི་ཉམས་མྱོང	experience acquired through the medium of the senses	tshor ba'i nyams myong
ཚོར་བའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related feeling/ sensation, nidana of feeling [one of the yan lag bcu gnyis]	tshor ba'i rten 'brel
ཚོར་བའི་ནུས་པ	power of sensation	tshor ba'i nus pa
ཚོར་བའི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregate of sensations	tshor ba'i phung po
ཚོར་བའི་ཕུང་པོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	TSE	tshor ba'i phung po bcu gnyis
ཚོར་བའི་དབང་པོ	sense organ	tshor ba'i dbang po
ཚོར་བའི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five sense perceptions	tshor ba'i dbang po lnga
ཚོར་བའི་མིང	sour vegetable curry	tshor ba'i ming
ཚོར་བའི་ཟུག་རྔུ	pain of disease	tshor ba'i zug rngu
ཚོར་བའི་ཟླ་བ	6th month w the sun coursing in Cancer [R]	tshor ba'i zla ba
ཚོར་བའི་ཡན་ལག	link of feeling/ sensation	tshor ba'i yan lag
ཚོར་བའི་རང་བཞིན	sensitivity	tshor ba'i rang bzhin
ཚོར་བྱེད་དབང་པོ	organs of sense	tshor byed dbang po
ཚོར་དབང	organs of sense	tshor dbang
ཚོར་མི་བར	unnoticed	tshor mi bar
ཚོར་མེད	numb, senseless	tshor med
ཚོར་ཞིབ་རྟོགས	carefully examined	tshor zhib rtogs
ཚོར་ཟིན་པ	felt	tshor zin pa
ཚོར་ལ	report, rumor	tshor la
ཚོར་སླ་པོ	susceptible	tshor sla po
ཚོལ	seek, search, SA 'tshol ba	tshol
ཚོལ་ཁྲོ	frantic chase, frantic searching	tshol khro
ཚོལ་མཁན	searcher	tshol mkhan
ཚོལ་ཅིག	investigate	tshol cig
ཚོས	dye or lake, paint, rouge; imp. of {'tshod pa}; paint; rouge	tshos
ཚོས་ཀྱི་ཁུ་བ	liquid paint	tshos kyi khu ba
ཚོས་ཀྱི་མདོག་ཡལ་བ	fading colors/ dyes	tshos kyi mdog yal ba
ཚོས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལེན	dying	tshos kyi lag len
ཚོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya	tshos sku
ཚོས་ཁུ	mineral [tshos chen] dyes and various colors of modern dye gyi khu ba tshos khu len sla ba' snam ras dkar gtsang - white cotton easy to dye	tshos khu
ཚོས་མཁན	dyer, painter, washerman, bleacher	tshos mkhan
ཚོས་གྲ་མ་སྙོམས་པ	fault of uneven dying/ coloration	tshos gra ma snyoms pa
ཚོས་འགྲིབ	tshos brgyab pa lam du ma song ba'i skyon	tshos 'grib
ཚོས་རྒྱག	dye	tshos rgyag
ཚོས་རྒྱག་འཁོར་ཁང	dying shop tshos rgyag stangs lam 'gro ma byung ba bad/ uneven dying	tshos rgyag 'khor khang
ཚོས་རྒྱག་པ	dye	tshos rgyag pa
ཚོས་རྒྱབ་པ	dye, color	tshos rgyab pa
ཚོས་རྒྱུག	dye stirring stick	tshos rgyug
ཚོས་བཅད	tshon rtsi'i thog la rgyag pa'i gser ris	tshos bcad
ཚོས་ཆེན	shing tshos kyi rigs	tshos chen
ཚོས་ཉིས་མ	1) picture w only two colors; 2) gos chen zhig	tshos nyis ma
ཚོས་ཉེས	bad/ uneven dying	tshos nyes
ཚོས་ཉེས་བྱེད་པའི་ལག་རྩལ་ཞན	poor skill that produces bad dying	tshos nyes byed pa'i lag rtsal zhan
ཚོས་རྟ	1) [to make it easy to dye] whey [skyur rtsi] mixed w the dye; 2) tshos and tshos gden byed rgyu'i sa 2241	tshos rta
ཚོས་རྟགས	dye/ colored mark [R]	tshos rtags
ཚོས་ཐེབས	dye	tshos thebs
ཚོས་ཐེབས་སླ་བའི་ཤོག་བུ་དཀར་པོ	easily dyable white paper	tshos thebs sla ba'i shog bu dkar po
ཚོས་གདན	so that color will be unchanging 1st gtong ba'i sa mtshur	tshos gdan
ཚོས་མདོག	color	tshos mdog
ཚོས་མདོག་སྤེལ	dye/ print in color	tshos mdog spel
ཚོས་མདོག་དམར་པོའི་སྟོད་ཐུང	red shirt	tshos mdog dmar po'i stod thung
ཚོས་མདོག་ལེན	be dyed	tshos mdog len
ཚོས་མདོག་ལེན་པ	be dyed	tshos mdog len pa
ཚོས་མདོག་སློག	change colors	tshos mdog slog
ཚོས་སྣ་འཛོམ་པོ	variegated, manycolored	tshos sna 'dzom po
ཚོས་སྣག	ink made of dye	tshos snag
ཚོས་སྣག་དམར་པོ	red ink [made of dye]	tshos snag dmar po
ཚོས་པ	{tshos pa, tshos pa, tshos pa} intr. v	tshos pa
ཚོས་པོ	well cooked [meat etc] sha sogs legs par btsos pa]	tshos po
ཚོས་བྱི་བ	fading colors dyes	tshos byi ba
ཚོས་བྱེད	1) dye; 2) red sandal wood	tshos byed
ཚོས་བྱེད་པ	paint, color	tshos byed pa
ཚོས་མ	1) tshos mkhan, dyer; 2) dyed cloth etc. tshos mi 'dzin pa'i snam ras dreg pa can dirty cloth that won't take up dye	tshos ma
ཚོས་འཛིན་པ	be dyed	tshos 'dzin pa
ཚོས་གཞི	color	tshos gzhi
ཚོས་གཞི་འགྱུར་བ	become colored	tshos gzhi 'gyur ba
ཚོས་གཞི་གཅིག་པ	the same color	tshos gzhi gcig pa
ཚོས་གཞི་མེད་པ	black and white, noir	tshos gzhi med pa
ཚོས་གཞི་ཡལ་བ	color subsiding/ fading	tshos gzhi yal ba
ཚོས་གཞི་ལེགས་པོ	a good color	tshos gzhi legs po
ཚོས་གཞུང	2nd half of the month	tshos gzhung
ཚོས་ཟ་བ	accept dye	tshos za ba
ཚོས་ཟ་བྱེད་རྫས་ཕྲ	chromatin	tshos za byed rdzas phra
ཚོས་ཟུག་པ	dye	tshos zug pa
ཚོས་ལངས་པ	tshos khu bsnyal nas lam du song ba	tshos langs pa
ཚོས་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་སྣག་ཚ	ink made of dye	tshos las byung ba'i snag tsha
ཚོས་ལེན	be dyed	tshos len
ཚོས་ལེན་པ	be dyed	tshos len pa
ཚོས་ལོག་པ	fading [-ed colors	tshos log pa
ཚོས་ཤར	1st half of the month	tshos shar
ཚོས་སར	modern chemical dyes	tshos sar
ཚོས་སེར་སྡོང་པོ	Chinese scholar tree / locust tree	tshos ser sdong po
ཚོས་སོང	it has lost color, it is faded	tshos song
ཚོས་གསར	modern dyes [rgya tshos dmar ser sngo ljang sogs]	tshos gsar
ཚོས་བསང་རྒྱག་པ	wash after dying	tshos bsang rgyag pa
གཚུང་ནག	1) sems kyi gshis rgyud nag po; 2) ri dvags shig dtshe'i 'tu byed byin gyis brlabs pa blessed to have long life	gtshung nag
མཚག་པ	rgyags pa = 'tshag pa	mtshag pa
མཚགས	SA bdzags	mtshags
མཚང	that evil which is hidden in a person's heart or disposition, pent-up faults, secret sins, irritation, suppressed wrath, defects, hidden recesses, hidden dimensions, weak point	mtshang
མཚང་གྱུར	to expose someone's faults	mtshang gyur
མཚང་རྒོད་པ	commit faults	mtshang rgod pa
མཚང་རྗེན་པ	expose nakedly	mtshang rjen pa
མཚང་རྗེན་པར་སྟོན་པ	expose nakedly the faults	mtshang rjen par ston pa
མཚང་རྟགས་སྟོན	my hidden faults are revealed	mtshang rtags ston
མཚང་རྟོལ་བ	commit faults	mtshang rtol ba
མཚང་སྟོན་པ	rang mtshang rang gis	mtshang ston pa
མཚང་བརྟོལ	commit faults	mtshang brtol
མཚང་བརྟོལ་བ	commit faults	mtshang brtol ba
མཚང་དྲུས་པ	annoy	mtshang drus pa
མཚང་འདི་ལྟོས	look at this deception	mtshang 'di ltos
མཚང་འདྲུ་བ	reveal/ expose a crime/ fault	mtshang 'dru ba
མཚང་བརྡོལ	revealed, disclosed	mtshang brdol
མཚང་ནས་བྲུས་པ	to expose hidden faults	mtshang nas brus pa
མཚང་ཕྱར	expose the faults	mtshang phyar
མཚང་ཕྱར་ནས	exposing the faults	mtshang phyar nas
མཚང་བ	incomplete	mtshang ba
མཚང་བྲུ་མེད་པ	not insulting, SA dge sbyong gi chos	mtshang bru med pa
མཚང་བྲུས	irritated	mtshang brus
མཚང་འབྱིན་པ	skyon 'don pa'am sngog pa	mtshang 'byin pa
མཚང་འབྲུ	commit faults	mtshang 'bru
མཚང་འབྲུ་བ	{mtshang 'dru ba} to expose the hidden flaw/ weakness	mtshang 'bru ba
མཚང་འབྲུ་བའི་ཚིག	irritating words	mtshang 'bru ba'i tshig
མཚང་བཙལ	see {sems kyi mtshang btsal}	mtshang btsal
མཚང་བཙལ་བ	searching the innate mode	mtshang btsal ba
མཚང་འཚལ་བ	to root out the hidden flaw/ weakness	mtshang 'tshal ba
མཚང་བཟང་པོ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the 32 excellent marks / the 32 major marks of excellence	mtshang bzang po sum cu rtsa gnyis
མཚང་ར	pelvic bones	mtshang ra
མཚང་རིག	appreciate the vital point	mtshang rig
མཚང་ལ་རྒོལ་བ	to dispute the hidden flaw/ weakness	mtshang la rgol ba
མཚང་སློག་པ	commit faults	mtshang slog pa
མཚངས	hidden foundation, nest of confusion, hidden deception	mtshangs
མཚད་མེད	boundlessness	mtshad med
མཚན་དཀྱིལ	midnight	mtshan dkyil
མཚན་རྐུན	night thief	mtshan rkun
མཚན་རྐུབ་བར	lus kyi gsang gnad [acupuncture/ moxibustion point] cig	mtshan rkub bar
མཚན་སྐོར	evening rounds	mtshan skor
མཚན་ཁུང་མ	very useful and important medicine	mtshan khung ma
མཚན་མཁན	knower/ interpreter of signs and omens	mtshan mkhan
མཚན་མཁན་པ	astrologer, accountant	mtshan mkhan pa
མཚན་འཁྱོངས	spend the whole night doing	mtshan 'khyongs
མཚན་གང	the whole night, all night	mtshan gang
མཚན་གང་ཐུབ་པའི་མར་མེ	lamp that can burn all night	mtshan gang thub pa'i mar me
མཚན་གན་ལང་བསྡད	stayed up all night	mtshan gan lang bsdad
མཚན་གུང	midnight	mtshan gung
མཚན་གྱི་དོན	title [of a book]	mtshan gyi don
མཚན་གྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས	synonym, list of words [with similar meaning]	mtshan gyi rnam grangs
མཚན་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	flower of name	mtshan gyi me tog
མཚན་གྲང	prize, crown of victory	mtshan grang
མཚན་དགུང	midnight	mtshan dgung
མཚན་འགེབས	mtshan gtib .Dgong mo mtshan gtib gtong ba	mtshan 'gebs
མཚན་འགྱུར་བ	sex-change	mtshan 'gyur ba
མཚན་རྒོལ	night attack/ assault	mtshan rgol
མཚན་རྒོལ་བྱེད	carry out a night attack/ assault	mtshan rgol byed
མཚན་རྒྱ་སྡོམ་པ	mtshan dus 'gro bzhud bkag 'doms byed pa	mtshan rgya sdom pa
མཚན་རྒྱུ	animals that move about at night	mtshan rgyu
མཚན་རྒྱུ་བ	owl mtshan sgrogs mkhan chen blo bzang rab	mtshan rgyu ba
མཚན་བསྒྱུར་བ	changed names	mtshan bsgyur ba
མཚན་ངན	ill omen, bad reputation/ name	mtshan ngan
མཚན་ངུ	children etc. crying at night	mtshan ngu
མཚན་སྔགས	mantra containing the name (sometimes the secret name of the master invoked)	mtshan sngags
མཚན་ཅིག	faction	mtshan cig
མཚན་གཅིག་པ	1) of like name; 2) having only 1 excrement and urine hole; 3) having 1 sex - either male or female	mtshan gcig pa
མཚན་བཅས	with characteristics, fixation with an attribute, with symbolic attributes, with concepts, with characteristics, with attributes	mtshan bcas
མཚན་བཅས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga with signs / yoga with conceptions	mtshan bcas kyi rnal 'byor
མཚན་བཅས་ཀྱི་འཕོ་བ	phowa with concepts	mtshan bcas kyi 'pho ba
མཚན་བཅས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	concentration with object	mtshan bcas kyi bsam gtan
མཚན་བཅས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	Deity with attributes mtshan bcas 'du shes kyi phung po gsum TSE	mtshan bcas kyi lha
མཚན་བཅས་རྡོགས་རིམ་གྱི་ལམ	path of completion stage with attributes; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 36]	mtshan bcas rdogs rim gyi lam
མཚན་བཅས་རྣམ་རྟོག	gtso bor 'dod khams kyi sems dang sems las byung ba'i rnam rtog rnams dang/ bsam gtan dang po tshun chad kyi de rnams yin no	mtshan bcas rnam rtog
མཚན་བཅས་རྫོགས་རིམ	sampannakrama/ completion stage w signs	mtshan bcas rdzogs rim
མཚན་བཅས་ཞི་གནས	Shamatha with attributes	mtshan bcas zhi gnas
མཚན་བཅས་ལྷ	symbolic deity	mtshan bcas lha
མཚན་ཇུས	rgyal rabs dang, srid gzhung, dpon rigs etc kyi bya ba lam 'gro [h]	mtshan jus
མཚན་མཇུག	1) end part of the night; 2) end of a name)	mtshan mjug
མཚན་བརྗོད	nt. Reciting the Names [of Manjushri]; Namasangirti	mtshan brjod
མཚན་བརྗོད་པ	remark, calling upon the name of a deity, enumerating its characteristics and attributes	mtshan brjod pa
མཚན་ཉི་མེད་པ	(second turning of the wheel called) characteristiclessness	mtshan nyi med pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀུན་ཚང་བ	fully qualified	mtshan nyid kun tshang ba
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས	from the viewpoint/ by means of attributes/ definitions	mtshan nyid kyi sgo nas
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	conceptualized/ concretized things	mtshan nyid kyi dngos po
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ	philosophers	mtshan nyid kyi ston pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	The philosophical vehicles, definition vehicle [the vehicle of the perfections) {rgyu'i theg pa} hinayana and mah yana, not tantra)	mtshan nyid kyi theg pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the exact nature	mtshan nyid kyi de kho na nyid
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the suchness of attributes	mtshan nyid kyi de bzhin nyid
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	scriptures of the vehicles of characteristics	mtshan nyid kyi sde snod
མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ཆེ་མོ	the great books on philosophy	mtshan nyid kyi gzhung che mo
མཚན་ཉིད་མཁན	philosopher, bka' pod rigs lam teacher	mtshan nyid mkhan
མཚན་ཉིད་མཁན་པོ	philosopher, bka' pod rigs lam teacher	mtshan nyid mkhan po
མཚན་ཉིད་མཁས་པ	philosopher, bka' pod rigs lam teacher	mtshan nyid mkhas pa
མཚན་ཉིད་གྱི་ལུགས	epistemological school	mtshan nyid gyi lugs
མཚན་ཉིད་གྲྭ་ཚང	colleges of philosophy [TT dgon sde'i nang gzhung chen rtsod rigs yod pa'i gras	mtshan nyid grwa tshang
མཚན་ཉིད་གྲྭ་ས་ཞིག	school where the buddhist metaphysics is taught	mtshan nyid grwa sa zhig
མཚན་ཉིད་རྒྱུད་ཡི་ཐེག་པ	doctrine of essential causal characteristic	mtshan nyid rgyud yi theg pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ངེས་ཕྱིར	in order to ascertain the definition	mtshan nyid nges phyir
མཚན་ཉིད་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	identity / unreality	mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ་ཅུ་པ	Fifty Characteristics [thd]	mtshan nyid lnga cu pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ་བཅུ	chn -	mtshan nyid lnga bcu
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ་ལྡན་གྱི་བཏུང་བ	drink having the five characteristics ['dul ba las bshad pa'i thun tshod du rung ba'i sman te, chus btab pa dang, tshags kyis btsags pa, shin tu sla ba, bzhin snang ba, 'dam bu nyag ma'i mdog ltar ...	mtshan nyid lnga ldan gyi btung ba
མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན	authentic	mtshan nyid can
མཚན་ཉིད་གཅིག	single character	mtshan nyid gcig
མཚན་ཉིད་ཆད་པ	hypothetical	mtshan nyid chad pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཆད་པའི་ཀུན་བཏགས	def. see {mtshan nyid yongs su chad pa'i kun btags}	mtshan nyid chad pa'i kun btags
མཚན་ཉིད་ཆད་པའི་ཀུན་བརྟགས	imagined phenomena lacking attributes	mtshan nyid chad pa'i kun brtags
མཚན་ཉིད་ཆོས	philosophy	mtshan nyid chos
མཚན་ཉིད་མཆོག	supreme characteristics	mtshan nyid mchog
མཚན་ཉིད་འཇུག་གཞི་ཆོས་ལྔ	mtshan nyid gang la 'jug pa'i gzhi ni rgyu mtshan/ ming/ rnam par rtog pa/ de bzhin nyid/ yang dag pa'i ye shes so	mtshan nyid 'jug gzhi chos lnga
མཚན་ཉིད་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	voidness of definitions	mtshan nyid stong pa nyid
མཚན་ཉིད་ཐག་ཆོད	to understand the true characteristics mtshan nyid thams cad dang ldan pa'i bla ma dge ba'i bshes gnyen yang dag pa authentic spiritual friend, a teacher who has all the necessary qualifications	mtshan nyid thag chod
མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of defining characteristics	mtshan nyid theg pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཐེག་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	the topmost philosophical vehicle	mtshan nyid theg pa'i rtse mo
མཚན་ཉིད་དང་ལྡན	qualified, having the characteristics of	mtshan nyid dang ldan
མཚན་ཉིད་དང་ལྡན་པའི་བླ་མ	a qualified teacher / endowed with the right qualities	mtshan nyid dang ldan pa'i bla ma
མཚན་ཉིད་དྲུག་ལྡན	six characteristics, particular to the human body	mtshan nyid drug ldan
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྡན	competent mtshan nyid ldan pa'i dge ba'i gshe gnyen - authentic spiritual friend	mtshan nyid ldan
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	covert intention in respect of characteristics (Gdmk) plan for the distinguishing marks [one of the {ldem por dgongs pa bzhi} }-= four plans) [ngo bo nyid gsum la dgongs nas chos thams cad ngo bo n...	mtshan nyid ldem dgongs
མཚན་ཉིད་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	[TRS 134-2] expl; indirect purpose regarding the natures	mtshan nyid ldem por dgongs pa
མཚན་ཉིད་སྡེ་གསུམ	three classes of dialectics; {nyan thos} {rang rgyal} {byang chub sems dpa'} those of the pious attendants, self-centred buddhas, and bodhisattvas) (gd-mk)	mtshan nyid sde gsum
མཚན་ཉིད་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three classes of dialectics	mtshan nyid rnam pa gsum
པའི་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	nirv a w/o the various characteristics of things	pa'i mya ngan las 'das pa
མཚན་ཉིད་པ	dialectician; authentic/ genuine; having truly authentic status; indisputable; (in the) true (sense (of the term/ word)); isc. something that can be characterized in the ordinary sense	mtshan nyid pa
མཚན་ཉིད་སྤྱི	general characteristics	mtshan nyid spyi
མཚན་ཉིད་མ་ཚང	{bla ma'i mtshan nyid ma tshang na mi bsten pa} If some of the characteristics of a teacher are lacking, do not follow him	mtshan nyid ma tshang
མཚན་ཉིད་མི་འདྲ	dissimilar characteristics	mtshan nyid mi 'dra
མཚན་ཉིད་མེད་པ	absence of characteristics, meaninglessness, attributelessness	mtshan nyid med pa
མཚན་ཉིད་མེད་པ་ཉིད	absence of marks mtshan nyid med pa'i skad cig sbyor ba TSE mtshan nyid med pa'i skad cig ma'i sbyor	mtshan nyid med pa nyid
མཚན་ཉིད་མེད་པའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	turning of the wheel of dharma of marklessness [sangs rgyas kyis bskor ba'i chos 'khor rim pa gsum gyi bar pa ste, chos rnams rang bzhin ma grub par ston pa'i bka'	mtshan nyid med pa'i chos 'khor
མཚན་ཉིད་མེད་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle without characteristics	mtshan nyid med pa'i theg pa
མཚན་ཉིད་མེད་བ	marklessness TSE	mtshan nyid med ba
མཚན་ཉིད་ཚང་བ	{bla ma'i mtshan nyid tshang bar 'dug na bsten} should you find that he has all the characteristics of a teacher, then follow him	mtshan nyid tshang ba
མཚན་ཉིད་ཚང་བའི	actual, qualified mtshan nyid mtshon bya mtshan gzhi	mtshan nyid tshang ba'i
མཚན་ཉིད་འཛིན་པ	retain attributes	mtshan nyid 'dzin pa
མཚན་ཉིད་འཛིན་པའི	endowed with characteristics	mtshan nyid 'dzin pa'i
མཚན་ཉིད་འཛིན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdoms that retain/ apprehend attributes	mtshan nyid 'dzin pa'i ye shes
མཚན་ཉིད་བཞི	Four Omens. Those perceived by Shakyamuni which prompted his renunciation of the household life, namely, birth, old age, sickness and death	mtshan nyid bzhi
མཚན་ཉིད་ཡང་དག	true definition;	mtshan nyid yang dag
ཨསྤེཅཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ངེས་དོན	definitive meaning	aspect of nges don
མཚན་ཉིད་ཡིག་ཆ	pecha of the great [philosophical] texts of the sutra vehicle	mtshan nyid yig cha
མཚན་ཉིད་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	completely perfected in its attributes mtshan nyid yongs su chad pa'i kun btags - gang zag gi bdag tu 'dzin pa'i 'dzin stangs kyis gzung bya la sogs pa mtshan nyid yongs su chad pa'i kun btags te/ ...	mtshan nyid yongs rdzogs
མཚན་ཉིད་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	attributes in total completeness	mtshan nyid yongs su rdzogs pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ཡོན་ཏན	specific qualities mtshan nyid rab tu 'byed pa'i yid byed attention that fully discriminates characteristics mtshan nyid rab tu 'byed pa'i yid byed attention which fully discriminates characteristics	mtshan nyid yon tan
མཚན་ཉིད་རིག་པ	dialectics	mtshan nyid rig pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ལ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	covert intention in respect of characteristics (Gd-mk) plan for the distinguishing marks [one of the {ldem por dgongs pa bzhi} = four plans)	mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa
མཚན་ཉིད་ལ་སྣང	space of the liberation of visions concerning the essential characteristic mtshan nyid la snang sems grol ba'i klong - 1 of klong dgu 2245	mtshan nyid la snang
མཚན་ཉིད་ལ་འཚམ་པར་འཛིན་པ	properly grasp the definition/ characteristics	mtshan nyid la 'tsham par 'dzin pa
མཚན་ཉིད་སུམ་བཅུ་སོ་དྲུག	The Thirtysix Characteristics of Drama. According to Bharata, Natyashastra, Ch. 17, these are embellishment, bhushana. abbreviation, aksharasamghata. fortune / prosperity, s'obha. declaration, udah...	mtshan nyid sum bcu so drug
མཚན་ཉིད་སོ་གཉིས	the thirty-two marks [of the superman]	mtshan nyid so gnyis
མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ	three natures [1 {kun	mtshan nyid gsum
བརྟགས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	imaginary, parikalpita two {gzhan gyi bang gi	brtags pa'i mtshan nyid
མཚན་ཉིས་པ	hermaphroditic	mtshan nyis pa
མཚན་ཉིས་མ་ཉིང	hermaphrodite dwarf	mtshan nyis ma nying
མཚན་གཉིས	2 sexual organs	mtshan gnyis
མཚན་གཉིས་ཅན	bisexual	mtshan gnyis can
མཚན་གཉིས་ཅིག་ཆར་བྱུང་བ	the simultaneous occurrence of two genders	mtshan gnyis cig char byung ba
མཚན་གཉིས་ཅིག་ཆར་ཡོད་པ	hermafrodite, a person who is simultaneously of two genders	mtshan gnyis cig char yod pa
མཚན་གཉིས་པ	hermaphrodite	mtshan gnyis pa
མཚན་གཉིས་མ་ནིང	hermaphrodite, {mtshan gnyis ma ning gi 'jug tshul}	mtshan gnyis ma ning
མཚན་གཉིས་མ་ནིང་གི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	the neutral suffix letters NA RA LA ming gzhi mo la have a yang 'jug EG 'dzind, 'byord, rold etc with the main consonant weak and yang 'jug strong are called mtshan gnyis ma ning	mtshan gnyis ma ning gi 'jug tshul
མཚན་སྙན	fame, reputation	mtshan snyan
མཚན་སྙན་གྲགས	fame, reputation	mtshan snyan grags
མཚན་སྙན་ཆེན་པོ	famous, wellknown	mtshan snyan chen po
མཚན་སྙན་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན	title of honor	mtshan snyan gzi brjid can
མཚན་གཏིབ	mtshan mo 'jab rgol gyi dpung 'jug ste	mtshan gtib
མཚན་བཏགས	gave him the name	mtshan btags
མཚན་བཏགས་གནང་བ	to have one's geshe [examination]. [(h). for {dge bshes btang ba}	mtshan btags gnang ba
མཚན་རྟགས	astrological signs	mtshan rtags
མཚན་རྟོག	concepts/ thoughts concerning the (ordinary) characteristics of things	mtshan rtog
མཚན་ལྟས	dream prophecy	mtshan ltas
མཚན་ལྟས་མཁན་པོ	knower/ interpreter of signs and omens	mtshan ltas mkhan po
མཚན་ལྟས་ངན	bad omens	mtshan ltas ngan
མཚན་ལྟས་བརྟག་པའི་གཅིག་ལག	science of interpreting omens	mtshan ltas brtag pa'i gcig lag
མཚན་སྟོད	first half of the night	mtshan stod
མཚན་སྟོད་ཀྱི་རྨི་ལམ	a dream of the fore night	mtshan stod kyi rmi lam
མཚན་བརྟགས	divination, interpretation of omens	mtshan brtags
མཚན་བརྟགས་བཀོད	sing	mtshan brtags bkod
མཚན་ཐུན	evening session [9 to 12 pm]	mtshan thun
མཚན་ཐུན་སྔ་ཕྱི་བར་གསུམ	the early middle and late night sessions	mtshan thun snga phyi bar gsum
མཚན་ཐུབ	lamp that can burn all night	mtshan thub
མཚན་ཐུབ་ཀོང་བུ	mtshan gang thub pa'i lamp kong bu	mtshan thub kong bu
མཚན་ཐུབ་དཀར་མེ	lamp that can burn all night	mtshan thub dkar me
མཚན་ཐོ	list (of names) [h]	mtshan tho
མཚན་ཐོག་གཅིག་ལ	for one whole night	mtshan thog gcig la
མཚན་ཐོག་ཐག	the whole/ all night mtshan thog thag dga' ston gyis dus 'das pa'i mthar rgyu skar gyi mdangs nyams	mtshan thog thag
མཚན་ཐོས་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	just hearing the name	mtshan thos pa tsam gyis
མཚན་མཐུན་པ	of the same gender	mtshan mthun pa
མཚན་འཐབ	night combat	mtshan 'thab
མཚན་འཐབ་བྱེད	engage in night combat	mtshan 'thab byed
མཚན་དང་བཅས་པ	having characteristic buddhist virtues	mtshan dang bcas pa
མཚན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད	the major and minor marks; major and minor marks	mtshan dang dpe byad
པ་འབུམ་དུ་བསྒོམ་པ	to meditate for a hundred thousand kalpas on a deity with all the major and minor marks	pa 'bum du bsgom pa
མཚན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད་བཟང་པོ	major and minor marks	mtshan dang dpe byad bzang po
མཚན་དང་དབྱིབས	limbs and shape	mtshan dang dbyibs
མཚན་དུ་གསོལ་བ	called, so named, so called	mtshan du gsol ba
མཚན་དུས	night time	mtshan dus
མཚན་དུས་རྒྱུ་བ	night roamer, fox	mtshan dus rgyu ba
མཚན་དེ་སྐད་བཏགས་པ	called, so named. Syn {mtshan du gsol ba}	mtshan de skad btags pa
མཚན་དོད་པའི་དུས	when a male child's genitals first appear from the womb	mtshan dod pa'i dus
མཚན་དོན	the meaning of the title	mtshan don
མཚན་དོན་གཉིས་མཐུན	correspondence of name and meaning	mtshan don gnyis mthun
མཚན་དོན་དང་མཐུན་པ	correspondence of name and meaning	mtshan don dang mthun pa
མཚན་དོན་བཤད	explain name and meaning, damage 1's reputation	mtshan don bshad
མཚན་མདོངས	(A) torch	mtshan mdongs
མཚན་འདས་ནས	when the night has passed	mtshan 'das nas
མཚན་འདི་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	by the name so and so	mtshan 'di zhes bya ba
མཚན་འདོགས	to name, give a name	mtshan 'dogs
མཚན་ལྡན	authentic, genuine	mtshan ldan
མཚན་ལྡན་གྱི་བླ་མ	a qualified master, perfect master	mtshan ldan gyi bla ma
མཚན་ལྡན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	qualified teacher	mtshan ldan gyi slob dpon
མཚན་ལྡན་གྱི་གསང་ཡུམ	consort endowed with special qualities	mtshan ldan gyi gsang yum
མཚན་ལྡན་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	qualified spiritual teacher, authentic spiritual master	mtshan ldan dge ba'i bshes gnyen
མཚན་ལྡན་ད་མ་རུ	perfect damaru; must have the skull of a boy born in the horse year (rta lo), who has died of a natural death at the age of sixteen and a skull a of girl born in the pig year (phag lo), who died at...	mtshan ldan da ma ru
མཚན་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཀཱ་པཱ་ལ	a genuine vajra kapala	mtshan ldan rdo rje kA pA la
མཚན་ལྡན་པ	possessing favorable signs or some special good moral qualifications	mtshan ldan pa
མཚན་ལྡན་བླ་མ	a holy lama, qualified teacher	mtshan ldan bla ma
མཚན་ལྡན་མ	woman of good appearance and virtues	mtshan ldan ma
མཚན་ལྡན་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ	the authentic root-guru	mtshan ldan rtsa ba'i bla ma
མཚན་སྡོམ	summary / list of names	mtshan sdom
མཚན་བརྡུང	night raid	mtshan brdung
མཚན་བརྡུང་གཏོང	carry out a night raid	mtshan brdung gtong
མཚན་གནས	status, rank, position [h]	mtshan gnas
མཚན་རྣམས	names	mtshan rnams
མཚན་སྣང	lamp	mtshan snang
མཚན་པ	mounted, clustered, ornamented, manifests, marked	mtshan pa
མཚན་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	emblematic vajra	mtshan pa'i rdo rje
མཚན་པར་རྡོལ	{mtshan par rdol illness	mtshan par rdol
མཚན་དཔེ	marks, characteristics, attributes (major and minor auspicious marks or attributes of a buddha), marks & characteristics	mtshan dpe
མཚན་དཔེའི་གཟི་བྱིན	the majestic splendor of the marks and signs/ major and minor marks	mtshan dpe'i gzi byin
མཚན་དཔེས་བརྒྱན་པ	bearing the major and minor marks of Buddhahood	mtshan dpes brgyan pa
མཚན་དཔེས་བརྒྱན་པའི་སྐུ	the body adorned with the marks and signs	mtshan dpes brgyan pa'i sku
མཚན་སྤྱོད	animals that move about at night	mtshan spyod
མཚན་ཕྱེད	midnight, one half of the night	mtshan phyed
མཚན་ཕྱེད་ནས	ante meridiem, a.m.	mtshan phyed nas
མཚན་ཕྲིལ	whole night, full night	mtshan phril
མཚན་བར་རྡོལ	lhan skyes rma rigs kyi nang tshan on the genitals and anus rma byung ba'i nad	mtshan bar rdol
མཚན་བྱ	that which is pointed out	mtshan bya
མཚན་བྱ་དོན	the meaning which is symbolized / the indicated meaning	mtshan bya don
མཚན་བྱང	title	mtshan byang
མཚན་བྱི	bat	mtshan byi
མཚན་བྱེད	full moon	mtshan byed
མཚན་བྲལ	devoid of characteristics	mtshan bral
མཚན་བླ་དྭགས་རྣམས	various names	mtshan bla dwags rnams
མཚན་དབེ	name of the 32 marks of a great man and 80 physical perfections of Buddha	mtshan dbe
མཚན་དབྱེ	distinction of the sexes	mtshan dbye
མཚན་འབྱོངས	dinner, entertainment with food etc. at night	mtshan 'byongs
མཚན་མ	quality, signs, qualification, (simple, identifiable) characteristic (sound while bkra ba is the melody), distractions, semantic distinctions, SA bkra ba, mere semantic, symptom, fixation, omen, ge...	mtshan ma
མཚན་མ་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པ	concretely characterized activities, fixated activities, conceptualized activities	mtshan ma kun tu spyod pa
མཚན་མ་དགུ	many attributes	mtshan ma dgu
མཚན་མ་རྒྱག་པ	_	mtshan ma rgyag pa
མཚན་མ་བསྒོམ་པ	the forms you have been taking for realities	mtshan ma bsgom pa
མཚན་མ་དངོས་ཅན	concrete attributes	mtshan ma dngos can
མཚན་མ་ཅན	possessing signs of virility	mtshan ma can
མཚན་མ་བཅུ	the 10 designations	mtshan ma bcu
མཚན་མ་ཆོད	unable to pass the night	mtshan ma chod
མཚན་མ་གཏན་མེད	complete absence of signs / concepts / marks	mtshan ma gtan med
མཚན་མ་རྟོག་པ	prove, examine signs	mtshan ma rtog pa
མཚན་མ་སྟོན་པའི་བདུན་པ	mtshon byed gang zhig gis mtshon nas mtshan gzhi de nyid kyis khyad par du byed pa'i chos ston pa'i rnam dbye bdun pa'i nang gses shig: eg dar dmar steng na skar lnga'i ri mo 'dug zer ba	mtshan ma ston pa'i bdun pa
མཚན་མ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from all [concretized] signs/ marks	mtshan ma thams cad dang bral ba
མཚན་མ་དང་བཅས་པ	w attributes/ marks, w concretization	mtshan ma dang bcas pa
མཚན་མ་དང་བཅས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conceptions w marks, perception w conceptions	mtshan ma dang bcas pa'i 'du shes
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བའི་ཕྱིར	because concretized activities are renounced/ abandoned	nges par 'byung ba'i phyir
མཚན་མ་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཞི་གནས	shamatha with attributes	mtshan ma dang bcas pa'i zhi gnas
མཚན་མ་དང་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དག	attributes and pure suchness	mtshan ma dang de bzhin nyid dag
མཚན་མ་འདེབས་པ	make a mark, mark with paint	mtshan ma 'debs pa
མཚན་མ་ལྡང་བ་མེད་པ	to be impotent	mtshan ma ldang ba med pa
མཚན་མ་བརྡ་ཡི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the sign mandala	mtshan ma brda yi dkyil 'khor
མཚན་མ་རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པ	not conceiving any designations mtshan ma sna tshogs 'dzin pa'i 'du shes conception/ perception grasping various attributes	mtshan ma rnam par mi rtog pa
མཚན་མ་ཕྲ་མོ	at subtle attribute	mtshan ma phra mo
མཚན་མ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	free of conceptual attributes	mtshan ma ma grub pa
མཚན་མ་མི་རྟོག་པ	no concepts of designation	mtshan ma mi rtog pa
མཚན་མ་མི་ལྡང་བ	impotence	mtshan ma mi ldang ba
མཚན་མ་མེད	having no gender, absence of characteristics	mtshan ma med
མཚན་མ་མེད་པ	absence of characteristics/ defining characteristics; nonthematic	mtshan ma med pa
མཚན་མ་མེད་པ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	unconcretized/ markless perception mtshan ma med pa la gnas pa gnas yongs	mtshan ma med pa yid la byed pa
སུ་གྱུར་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	abiding in marklessness meditate on this transformed aspect mtshan ma med pa la rtsol ba'i 'du shes perception of conceptionless effort, conceptual concretization of conceptionless/ markless effort...	su gyur pa'i rnam pa bsgom pa
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	conceptionless perception/ markless conception	mtshan ma med pa'i 'du shes
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་གནས	signless abode	mtshan ma med pa'i gnas
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	bsam gtan dang po nas srid rtse'i bar dang/ brgyal ba dang gnyid log pa'i gnas skabs kyi sems sems byung rnams yin la de rnams la mtshan ma gtan nas med pa ni ma yin gyi/ dman pa la dgag ba'i sgra ...	mtshan ma med pa'i rnam rtog
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga w/o signs	mtshan ma med pa'i rnal 'byor
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་དབྱིངས	the space/ dhatu of the markless/ signless	mtshan ma med pa'i dbyings
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་ཞི་གནས	shamatha without attributes; shamatha without signs, signless shamatha	mtshan ma med pa'i zhi gnas
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་གཞི	signless ground, basis of signlessness mtshan ma med pa'i yid la byed pa signless attention	mtshan ma med pa'i gzhi
མཚན་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	unconcretized/ markless perception	mtshan ma med pa'i yid la byed pa
མཚན་མ་མེད་པར་གནས་པ	abide in signlessness	mtshan ma med par gnas pa
མཚན་མ་མེད་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	course in the signless, realize signlessness	mtshan ma med par spyod pa
མཚན་མ་ཚིག་གི་དོན་དམ་པ	the verbal absolute of attributes/ signs	mtshan ma tshig gi don dam pa
མཚན་མ་འཛིན	aesthetic perception	mtshan ma 'dzin
མཚན་མ་རྫས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the material symbol ma ala	mtshan ma rdzas kyi dkyil 'khor
མཚན་མ་རྫས་ཀྱི་དབང	usual process of empowerment involving ritual objects	mtshan ma rdzas kyi dbang
མཚན་མ་བཟང་པོ	good (signs, symptoms, prognostics)	mtshan ma bzang po
མཚན་མ་ཡིད་བྱེད	perceive/ conceive signs/ marks/ attributes	mtshan ma yid byed
མཚན་མ་ཡིད་ལ་མི་བྱེད་པ	not perceive/ conceive signs/ marks/ attributes	mtshan ma yid la mi byed pa
མཚན་མ་རགས་པ	coarse material conceptual characteristics	mtshan ma rags pa
མཚན་མ་རང་གྲོལ	nt. The Natural Freedom of Ordinary Characteristics, composed by Garab Dorje	mtshan ma rang grol
མཚན་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of (ordinary) characteristics	mtshan ma'i dkyil 'khor
མཚན་མའི་ཁ་དོག	conceptual colors	mtshan ma'i kha dog
མཚན་མའི་དངོས་པོ	conceptual things, perception	mtshan ma'i dngos po
མཚན་མའི་ཆོས	phenomenon with (ordinary) characteristics/ that can be characterized; thing to be characterized	mtshan ma'i chos
མཚན་མའི་འཆིང་བ	the bounds of [concretized] marks/ signs/ attributes	mtshan ma'i 'ching ba
མཚན་མའི་རྗེས་མི་འབྲང	do not pursue attributes mtshan ma'i gnyen po rnam par mi rtog	mtshan ma'i rjes mi 'brang
མཚན་མའི་རྟོག་པ	thoughts	mtshan ma'i rtog pa
མཚན་མའི་ཐ་སྙད	definitions tied to conceptual characteristics	mtshan ma'i tha snyad
མཚན་མའི་འདུ་ཤེས	attributeperception / perceiving taking attributes as real	mtshan ma'i 'du shes
མཚན་མའི་སྤྲོས་བཅོད	mtshan ma'i spros pa gcod pa	mtshan ma'i spros bcod
མཚན་མའི་སྤྲོས་པ	constructs of conceptual attributes	mtshan ma'i spros pa
མཚན་མའི་རྫུན་རིས	the falsity of signs/ attributes/ conceptions	mtshan ma'i rdzun ris
མཚན་མའི་ཡུལ	objects with (ordinary) characteristics; objects as they are usually characterized mtshan ma'i g.yeng ba - practice the dharma in terms of the eight worldly dharmas, distraction to a sign, distract...	mtshan ma'i yul
མཚན་མའི་སྲིན་ནད	genital srin bu disease	mtshan ma'i srin nad
མཚན་མའི་ལྷ	deity of signs/ characteristics	mtshan ma'i lha
མཚན་མར	identifying qualities	mtshan mar
མཚན་མར་གྱུར་པ	something worthy	mtshan mar gyur pa
མཚན་མར་འགྱུར་པ	signification process	mtshan mar 'gyur pa
མཚན་མར་སྒོམ་པ	take as an omen	mtshan mar sgom pa
མཚན་མར་བཅོས་པ	concretized / made into having concrete signs [of existence]	mtshan mar bcos pa
མཚན་མར་བཏགས་པ	identifiable phenomena	mtshan mar btags pa
མཚན་མར་རྟོག་པ	forming concepts about (such) attributes (as . . . )	mtshan mar rtog pa
མཚན་མར་ལྟ་བ	the point of view that there is reality or substance	mtshan mar lta ba
མཚན་མར་སྣང་བ	to manifest with/ as having (ordinary) characteristics	mtshan mar snang ba
མཚན་མར་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not consisting of any attributes	mtshan mar ma grub pa
མཚན་མར་མ་བཟུང	do not regard it as an evil omen, be not surprised or alarmed	mtshan mar ma bzung
མཚན་མར་མི་རྟོག་པ	not thinking of/ conceiving of defining/ concretized characteristics	mtshan mar mi rtog pa
མཚན་མར་འཛིན	hold on to surface features	mtshan mar 'dzin
མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པ	to conceive in terms of ordinary characteristics, grasp at/ invest with/ ascribe ordinary defin- 2249 ing characteristics. 2) fixation on signs; fixation on signs, signification process,	mtshan mar 'dzin pa
སིགན	habit / taking hold of as being [distinguishing]. mark	sign
མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	a thought that apprehends defining characteristics TSE	mtshan mar 'dzin pa'i rnam rtog
མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག་པ	discursive thoughts of fixation, ordinary thoughts	mtshan mar 'dzin pa'i rnam rtog pa
མཚན་མར་འཛིན་པའི་རིག་པ་བཞི	chn	mtshan mar 'dzin pa'i rig pa bzhi
མཚན་མར་ཞེན་པ	attachment/ clinging to [concretized signs/ marks/ attributes/ symbols	mtshan mar zhen pa
མཚན་མས་སྟོང་པ	devoid of the marks of	mtshan mas stong pa
མཚན་མས་མཚོན་པ	represent a thing by a sign or mark	mtshan mas mtshon pa
མཚན་མེད	without (characteristics, fixation), non-conceptual, SA rnam thar sgo gsum, fixation without an attribute, absence of identifying characteristics, devoid of gender, without signs, beyond any symbol...	mtshan med
པྲཅཏིཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	conceptual contemplation, practice without attributes, without attributes, absence of characteristics	practice of non
མཚན་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣལ	yoga without signs	mtshan med kyi rnal
མཚན་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga w/o signs/ of signlessness/ w/o characteristics	mtshan med kyi rnal 'byor
མཚན་མེད་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	concentration w/o object	mtshan med kyi bsam gtan
མཚན་མེད་རྒྱུད་འཕེལ	asexual propagation	mtshan med rgyud 'phel
མཚན་མེད་མཆོག་གི་ཞི་གནས	supreme shamatha without attributes	mtshan med mchog gi zhi gnas
མཚན་མེད་གནས་པ	markless resting, abiding w/o reference point	mtshan med gnas pa
མཚན་མེད་པ	w/o sex or gender/ reference point	mtshan med pa
མཚན་མེད་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	buddhahood w/o reference point	mtshan med pa'i sangs rgyas
མཚན་མེད་འབར་པའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	intermediate wheel of the doctrine concerning absence of attributes GD	mtshan med 'bar pa'i chos 'khor
མཚན་མེད་མ་ཉིང	genderless dwarf	mtshan med ma nying
མཚན་མེད་མ་ནིང	organless eunuch ; 1) w anus and urethra 1; 2) w neither male/ female organs)	mtshan med ma ning
མཚན་མེད་མ་ནིང་གི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	rjes 'jug gi ma ning NA RA LA ming gzhi ma ning la yang 'jug yod med gang rung ste, phyind, thard, rold sogs ming gzhi drag zhan gnyis ka dang ma phrad pas mtshan med ma ning ngo	mtshan med ma ning gi 'jug tshul
མཚན་མེད་རྫོགས་རིམ	Completion stage without marks	mtshan med rdzogs rim
མཚན་མེད་ཞི་གནས	Shamatha without attributes	mtshan med zhi gnas
མཚན་མོ	night, darkness of night, night, at night	mtshan mo
མཚན་མོ་སྐད	chicken	mtshan mo skad
མཚན་མོ་བརྒྱད	chn	mtshan mo brgyad
མཚན་མོ་འཇོམས	sun's rays	mtshan mo 'joms
མཚན་མོ་གཉིད་ཐོ་རངས་སད་ནས	at dawn, upon awakening	mtshan mo gnyid tho rangs sad nas
མཚན་མོ་སྟེགས	tin, lead	mtshan mo stegs
མཚན་མོ་བྱེད་པ	keep watch during the night	mtshan mo byed pa
མཚན་མོ་འབྲལ	ruddy goose	mtshan mo 'bral
མཚན་མོ་མ	a nadi	mtshan mo ma
མཚན་མོ་བཞད	water lily, SA ku mu da	mtshan mo bzhad
མཚན་མོ་གཟུགས་མི་མཐོང་བ	to suffer night-blindness	mtshan mo gzugs mi mthong ba
མཚན་མོ་བཟང་པོའི་མདོ	sutra of excellent night	mtshan mo bzang po'i mdo
མཚན་མོ་ཡང	even at night	mtshan mo yang
མཚན་མོ་རིག	domestic fowl, cock mtshan mo lo gcig gi yun ltar bsam bzhin	mtshan mo rig
གདུང་བའི་མེས་གདུངས་སོ	he was overcome by such despair as if it lasted a whole year	gdung ba'i mes gdungs so
མཚན་མོ་ཧྲིལ་པོ	the whole/ all night	mtshan mo hril po
མཚན་མོ་ཧྲིལ་པོ་འཁྱོལ་བ	spend the whole night doing..	mtshan mo hril po 'khyol ba
མཚན་མོའི	nightly	mtshan mo'i
མཚན་མོའི་སྐར་མ	{mtshan ma med pa} Signlessness	mtshan mo'i skar ma
མཚན་མོའི་གུང་སྔོན	period before midnight (9-11pm)	mtshan mo'i gung sngon
མཚན་མོའི་གོས	darkness	mtshan mo'i gos
མཚན་མོའི་མགོན་པོ	moon mtshan mo'i chu tshod bzhi dang phyed 4:30 am	mtshan mo'i mgon po
མཚན་མོའི་ཐུན་ཚོད	the [3] sessions of the night [nam gyi stod smad bar gsum	mtshan mo'i thun tshod
མཚན་མོའི་བདག་པོ	moon	mtshan mo'i bdag po
མཚན་མོའི་མདོངས	[arch] lamp	mtshan mo'i mdongs
མཚན་མོའི་ན་ཚོད་སྐྱེས	lho bur ma	mtshan mo'i na tshod skyes
མཚན་མོའི་ནོར་བུ	moon	mtshan mo'i nor bu
མཚན་མོའི་སྣང་བྱེད	lamp, light	mtshan mo'i snang byed
མཚན་མོའི་པགས་པ	darkness 2250	mtshan mo'i pags pa
མཚན་མོའི་ལྤགས་པ	night's skin or cover, darkness	mtshan mo'i lpags pa
མཚན་མོའི་ཕྲེང	SA 'jam 'bras	mtshan mo'i phreng
མཚན་མོའི་འོད་ཅན	SA cong zhi	mtshan mo'i 'od can
མཚན་མོའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	night school	mtshan mo'i slob grwa
མཚན་མོར	by night, at night mtshan mor skor g.yeng rgyag pa - watch/ guard/ patrol in the night	mtshan mor
མཚན་མོར་མཁའ་འགྲོ་འདུ་བ	the gathering of kin s by night GD	mtshan mor mkha' 'gro 'du ba
མཚན་མོར་རྡོལ་བའི་ནད	fissure of the anus	mtshan mor rdol ba'i nad
མཚན་མོར་བྱེད	moon	mtshan mor byed
མཚན་མོར་ཟ	owl	mtshan mor za
མཚན་མོས་མཐོང་བ	perception by inference	mtshan mos mthong ba
མཚན་དམས	denouncement [h]	mtshan dmas
མཚན་དམས་ཞུ	denounce, degrade [h]	mtshan dmas zhu
མཚན་སྨད	later 1/2 of the night	mtshan smad
མཚན་སྨོས	call upon	mtshan smos
མཚན་སྨོས་པ	state the title/ name, call upon, mention the name	mtshan smos pa
མཚན་སྨོས་པ་ཙམ	mere stating the title, mere calling upon/ calling the name of	mtshan smos pa tsam
མཚན་ཙམ་ཐོས་པ	even to hear his name	mtshan tsam thos pa
མཚན་ཚད	length of the night	mtshan tshad
མཚན་ཚོགས	night party	mtshan tshogs
མཚན་མཚོན	definitions and definienda, definition and defirendum	mtshan mtshon
མཚན་མཚོན་གཞི་གསུམ	mtshan nyid/ mtshon bya/ mtshan gzhi gsum	mtshan mtshon gzhi gsum
མཚན་འཚོ	night grazing	mtshan 'tsho
མཚན་འཛིན	fixation on conceptual attributes	mtshan 'dzin
མཚན་འཛིན་ཀྲུའུ་ཞི	honorary chairman	mtshan 'dzin kru'u zhi
མཚན་འཛིན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས	the habitual tendencies of apprehending attributes	mtshan 'dzin gyi bag chags
མཚན་འཛིན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	attribute grasping wisdom	mtshan 'dzin pa'i ye shes
མཚན་རྫོགས	perfect in qualities	mtshan rdzogs
མཚན་རྫོགས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	replete w the minor marks	mtshan rdzogs pa'i dpe byad
མཚན་ཞབས	1) great tulkus khag gi mtshan nyid zhabs phyi; 2) great lamas khag gi ming gsham 'jug tshig; eg dpal bzang po)	mtshan zhabs
མཚན་ཞེན	{mtshan mar zhen pa} to fixate on (thing in terms) of/ invest (things) with/ (ordinary) characteristics	mtshan zhen
མཚན་གཞི	definiendum; basis of characteristics; subject being characterized	mtshan gzhi
མཚན་གཞི་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	TSE	mtshan gzhi yid kyi rnam shes
མཚན་གཞིར་འཇུག་ཚུལ	mtshan gzhi la ji ltar 'jug pa'i tshul	mtshan gzhir 'jug tshul
མཚན་ཟུག	painful affection of the genitals	mtshan zug
མཚན་བཟང་པོ	1) good marks; 2) major marks)/ [Skyes bu chen po'i bsod nams kyi mthu las grub cing bsod nams de mtshon par byed pa'i phyag zhabs 'khor lo'i mtshan sogs sum cu rtsa gnyis po rnams so,...	mtshan bzang po
མཚན་བཟང་པོ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the 32 major marks [phyag zhabs 'khor los mtshan pa dang, rus sbal zhabs, phyag zhabs sor mo dra bas 'brel ba, phyag zhabs 'jam zhing gzhon sha chags pa, sku'i gnas bdun mtho ba, sor mo ring ba, rt...	mtshan bzang po sum cu rtsa gnyis
མཚན་བཟང་པོ་སུམ་བཅུ་སོ་གཉིས	the 32 major marks (Tserig) [.of taste, symmetrical body like a banyan tree, the usn sha proturberance on the head, long and beautiful tongue, brahm -like voice, lion-like jaws, teeth which are pur...	mtshan bzang po sum bcu so gnyis
མཚན་བཟང་སོ་གཉིས	32 major marks	mtshan bzang so gnyis
ཨནཏེལོཔེ	like calves, long and beautiful arms, supremely contracted sexual organ, golden complexion, delicate skin,	antelope
མཚན་ཡིག	signature [h]	mtshan yig
མཚན་ཡོངས་གྲགས	renowned as	mtshan yongs grags
མཚན་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས་པ	well-known expressions	mtshan yongs su grags pa
མཚན་ཡོད་རྒྱུད་འདྲེས་སྦྱོར་སྡེབ	sexual propagation/ crossing	mtshan yod rgyud 'dres sbyor sdeb
མཚན་ཡོད་རྒྱུད་འཕེལ	sexual propagation	mtshan yod rgyud 'phel
མཚན་རངས་པོ	mtshan mo sgang tshang	mtshan rangs po
མཚན་རབ་སུམ་ཅུ་པུ་གཉིས	the 32 major marks	mtshan rab sum cu pu gnyis
མཚན་ལ	at night	mtshan la
མཚན་ལ་དགུང་འདེགས	ming dang la rgya mthon por bkyag pa,...Dpa' bo byas rjes can gyi mtshan la dgung 'degs zhu ba	mtshan la dgung 'degs
མཚན་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར	what is your name?	mtshan la ci zer
མཚན་ལམ	dream [h]	mtshan lam
མཚན་ལམ་དུ	he dreamt	mtshan lam du
མཚན་ལས	night work/ shift	mtshan las
མཚན་ལས་བྱེད	do night work	mtshan las byed
མཚན་ལེགས་ཡོངས་གྲགས་དཔལ	1 of sman bla brgyad	mtshan legs yongs grags dpal
མཚན་ལོང	night blindness	mtshan long
མཚན་ཤས	ming ngan pa	mtshan shas
མཚན་ཤས་དམའ་འབྱིན	ming don la gnod pa'i smad ra	mtshan shas dma' 'byin
མཚན་ཤིང	torch	mtshan shing
མཚན་ཤེས	notoriety, bad reputation, shame, disgrace	mtshan shes
མཚན་བཤད་པ	explain the meaning of a name, disgrace, bad reputation	mtshan bshad pa
མཚན་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	the 32 major marks [of the buddha]	mtshan sum cu rtsa gnyis
མཚན་སོ	watch/ guard/ patrol in the night	mtshan so
མཚན་སོ་བྱེད	watch/ guard/ patrol in the night	mtshan so byed
མཚན་སོ་བྱེད་པ	watchman	mtshan so byed pa
མཚན་གསུམ་བཅུ་སོ་གཉིས	Thirty-two major marks. The perfect marks of a buddha	mtshan gsum bcu so gnyis
མཚན་གསོགས	evening party/ banquet/ assembly/ meeting	mtshan gsogs
མཚན་གསོལ	give/award a name title	mtshan gsol
མཚན་གསོལ་བ	assume a name, receive a name, give a name	mtshan gsol ba
མཚན་ཧྲིལ	whole night, full night	mtshan hril
མཚམ་སྦྱོར	rules for euphonic conjunction GD	mtsham sbyor
མཚམ་མེད་པ་ལྔ	five inexpiable sins	mtsham med pa lnga
མཚམ་མེད་པའི་ལས	5 uninterruptable karmas	mtsham med pa'i las
མཚམས	corollary rules, seclusion, retreat, interval, gap, solitary meditation, 1 hour break from meditation, junction, limit, intermediate space, border, points of the compass, demarcation, partition, pa...	mtshams
མཚམས་ཀྱི་བར་ཚིགས	joints at the borders between things	mtshams kyi bar tshigs
མཚམས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་པོ	1) 1 who keeps silent; 2) thief)	mtshams kyi byed po
མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྩ་འདབ་བཞི	TSE	mtshams kyi rtsa 'dab bzhi
མཚམས་བཀུམ་པར་བགྱིའོ	cut off the edge, fix a boundary to	mtshams bkum par bgyi'o
མཚམས་བསྐུམས་པ	(A) mtshams ma bcad pa	mtshams bskums pa
མཚམས་ཁང	hermitage	mtshams khang
མཚམས་ཁད་ཀྱིས་གྲོལ་བ	finish a retreat slowly	mtshams khad kyis grol ba
མཚམས་གྲོལ་བ	finish/ end a retreat	mtshams grol ba
མཚམས་རྒྱ	retreat	mtshams rgya
མཚམས་སྒྲུབ་པ་བྱས་པ	stayed in retreat	mtshams sgrub pa byas pa
མཚམས་སྒྲུབ་བྱས	to continue one's spiritual practice in retreat, perform retreats	mtshams sgrub byas
མཚམས་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	continue spiritual practice in retreat, perform retreats	mtshams sgrub byed
མཚམས་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་པ	to continue their retreat practice	mtshams sgrub byed pa
མཚམས་བརྒལ	yul dus khrims sogs kyi mtshams las 'das pa	mtshams brgal
མཚམས་བརྒྱགས	provision for the journey	mtshams brgyags
མཚམས་བརྒྱད	the 8 cardinal and intermediate directions	mtshams brgyad
མཚམས་གཅད	cut off at boundaries	mtshams gcad
མཚམས་གཅོད	cutting off evil spirits	mtshams gcod
མཚམས་གཅོད་གཏེར་ཚེགས	terma sign at the end of the line	mtshams gcod gter tshegs
མཚམས་གཅོད་དུ	at the end of each line	mtshams gcod du
མཚམས་གཅོད་པ	cutting off evil spirits 1) re zhig bar mtshams 'jog pa dang, 'phro rbad kyis gcod pa,...'Gro rgyun gyi mtshams gcod pa; 2) Bsnyen mtshams gcod pa; 3) (A) khrims gcod pa)	mtshams gcod pa
མཚམས་བཅད	bounded within limit	mtshams bcad
མཚམས་བཅད་དོ	are impeded [within)	mtshams bcad do
མཚམས་བཅད་པ	to establish a boundary (for a retreat)	mtshams bcad pa
མཚམས་ཆད	come to a halt, stop	mtshams chad
མཚམས་ཆད་པ	stop, halt ..'Grim 'grul gyi mtshams chad pa	mtshams chad pa
མཚམས་ཆེན་གཅོད་པ	1) phan tshun 'brel mtshams rbad de gcod pa; 2) Chos lugs pa tsho mtshams dam sdod pa)	mtshams chen gcod pa
མཚམས་ཆོད	cessation, termination	mtshams chod
མཚམས་ཆོད་བྱེད	be ended/ terminated, cease	mtshams chod byed
མཚམས་འཇོག	surcease	mtshams 'jog
མཚམས་འཇོག་པ	stop, cease, halt, pause	mtshams 'jog pa
མཚམས་འཇོག་བྱ་དགོས་བྱུང	had to abandon?	mtshams 'jog bya dgos byung
མཚམས་འཇོག་བྱེད	stop, cease, halt, terminate, suspend	mtshams 'jog byed
མཚམས་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	discontinue	mtshams 'jog byed pa
མཚམས་མཉམ་རོལ་འདེབས	seating in rows	mtshams mnyam rol 'debs
མཚམས་ཐིག	boundary line	mtshams thig
མཚམས་ཐོ	1) sa mtshams kyi rtags tho; 2) Bsnyen mtshams kyi tho bo)	mtshams tho
མཚམས་མཐའ	end of retreat	mtshams mtha'
མཚམས་དང་བཅས	connected with the delimitation of time	mtshams dang bcas
མཚམས་དམ་པོ	strict retreat	mtshams dam po
མཚམས་འདྲི	a visit	mtshams 'dri
མཚམས་འདྲི་གནང	[pay a] visit, call on [h]	mtshams 'dri gnang
མཚམས་འདྲི་བ	inquiry after one's health	mtshams 'dri ba
མཚམས་འདྲི་བྱེད	visit, call on, send regards, ask about someone's health, congratulate	mtshams 'dri byed
མཚམས་འདྲི་ཞུ	send regards, ask about someone's health, congratulate [h]	mtshams 'dri zhu
མཚམས་འདྲིའི་ཚོགས་པ	[good will] mission/ delegation	mtshams 'dri'i tshogs pa
མཚམས་འདྲིའི་ཡི་གེ་བཏང	send a letter of congratulation/ asking about another's health	mtshams 'dri'i yi ge btang
མཚམས་འདྲིར་འགྲོ	visit, call on	mtshams 'drir 'gro
མཚམས་འདྲིར་བཅར	visit, call on [h]	mtshams 'drir bcar
མཚམས་རྡེའུ	retreat stone; a pebble for each person allowed within the retreat	mtshams rde'u
མཚམས་རྡོའུ	retreat stone [a stone for each person allowed within the retreat)	mtshams rdo'u
མཚམས་ལྡན་མ	women	mtshams ldan ma
མཚམས་བསྡམ	meditate	mtshams bsdam
མཚམས་བསྡམས	stayed in strict retreat	mtshams bsdams
མཚམས་བསྡམས་པ	stayed in retreat	mtshams bsdams pa
མཚམས་པ	retreatant/ hermit, the right amount	mtshams pa
མཚམས་པ་བ	anchorite	mtshams pa ba
མཚམས་པའི་ལས་གན	the right amount of responsibility	mtshams pa'i las gan
མཚམས་སྤྲིན	morning/ evening cloud pierced w colored light rays (saffroncolored)	mtshams sprin
མཚམས་ཕྱེས	just ready to be sheared	mtshams phyes
མཚམས་འཕྲིན	message/ not of greeting/ congratulations	mtshams 'phrin
མཚམས་བ	retreatant/ hermit	mtshams ba
མཚམས་འབྱེ་བ	split, make partition	mtshams 'bye ba
མཚམས་སྦྱར	operate/ embody/ sew together; connect together, combine. unite, join; beginning with; a bridge	mtshams sbyar
མཚམས་སྦྱར་བ	1) to make contact with. 2) to join together, conjunction, reunion, conjoined, join. 3) to continue on; to come together	mtshams sbyar ba
མཚམས་སྦྱོར	practice; to connect with, to make up with, sometimes also. frame of mind, to enter the womb, linkage; rules for euphonic conjunction, liner notes (textual genre); creation	mtshams sbyor
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་ངན་པ	a negative state of mind	mtshams sbyor ngan pa
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་ལྔ	the 5... [sgra rig pa'i ming gi mtshams sbyor, dbyangs kyi mtshams sbyor, rang bzhin gyi mtshams sbyor, gsal byed kyi mtshams sbyor, rnam bcad kyi mtshams sbyor bcas lnga'o,...	mtshams sbyor lnga
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བ	to join together/ link; to ensure/ provide continuity	mtshams sbyor ba
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བྱས་པ	concluded with	mtshams sbyor byas pa
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	connect, link, join	mtshams sbyor byed
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་མཛོད	seal! [virtue with prayers of dedication]	mtshams sbyor mdzod
མཚམས་སྦྱོར་ཡི་གེ	the joining letters [Indian 16 vowels the four long: ae aee ao aoo, de yang aa dang ai sbyar ba ni ae yin no, aa dang ae sbyar ba ni aee yin no, aa dang au sbyar ba ni ao yin no, aa dang ao sbyar b...	mtshams sbyor yi ge
མཚམས་མི་སྦྱོར་བ	will not reconnect	mtshams mi sbyor ba
མཚམས་མིན་རྟེན	the female organ	mtshams min rten
མཚམས་མེད	transgression of immediate retribution/ boundless, w/o interval	mtshams med
ཝིཐོཨུཏ་ཨན་ཨིན	between (experienced directly after this life)	without an in
མཚམས་མེད་ང	the five acts of direct fruition	mtshams med nga
མཚམས་མེད་ལྔ	the five inexpiable actions [pha gsod pa dang, ma gsod pa, dgra bcom gsod pa, dge 'dun gyi dbyen byed pa, de bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems kyis khrag 'byin pa ste lnga'o	mtshams med lnga
མཚམས་མེད་ལྔ་པོ	the 5 crimes without interval	mtshams med lnga po
མཚམས་མེད་ལྔ་བྱས་པ	having committed the five acts with immediate result	mtshams med lnga byas pa
མཚམས་མེད་ལྔ་བྱེད་པ	those who have committed the five deeds with immediate retribution	mtshams med lnga byed pa
མཚམས་མེད་སྡིག་པ	inexpiable evil deeds	mtshams med sdig pa
མཚམས་མེད་པ	1) without break; uninterrupted 2) action entailing immediate retribution	mtshams med pa
མཚམས་མེད་པ་ལྔ	five inexpiable sins [matricide {ma gsod pa} matrigh ta, arhatcide {dgra bcom pa} arhadgh ta, patricide {pha gsod pa} pitrgh ta, creating schism in the community {dge 'dun gyi dbyen byas ba} sa gha...	mtshams med pa lnga
མཚམས་མེད་པ་དང་ཉེ་བ་ལྔ	five nearly boundless offenses: 1] {ma dgra bcom m sun phyung ba} abusing one's mother or an arhat. 2] {byang chub sems dpa' sa la gnas pa bsad pa} killing a Bodhisattva who has reached a certain s...	mtshams med pa dang nye ba lnga
མཚམས་མེད་པའི་ལས	the [five] actions with immediate result	mtshams med pa'i las
མཚམས་མེད་པའི་ལས་བྱེད་པ	perform the inexpiable deeds	mtshams med pa'i las byed pa
མཚམས་མེད་པར	without intermediate space, close together, continuous, densely	mtshams med par
མཚམས་མེད་ལས་ཀ་བྱེད	work w/o a break	mtshams med las ka byed
མཚམས་བཙོས	'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, mtshams gcig tu rung khang byin gyis ma brlabs par cooked food	mtshams btsos
མཚམས་ཚད	limit, restriction	mtshams tshad
མཚམས་ཚིགས	words of approval	mtshams tshigs
མཚམས་མཚམས	sometimes	mtshams mtshams
མཚམས་མཚམས་ལ	occasionally	mtshams mtshams la
མཚམས་མཛད་པ	doing retreat	mtshams mdzad pa
མཚམས་ཞུ	send regards, ask about someone's health, congratulate [h], phrase introducing main body of a letter	mtshams zhu
མཚམས་བཞག	stopped, ceased, halted, terminated, suspended	mtshams bzhag
མཚམས་བཞག་པ	to pause, halt; terminate, abort	mtshams bzhag pa
མཚམས་བཞི	the 4 intermediate directions	mtshams bzhi
མཚམས་བཟུང	[with this]. for his terminus	mtshams bzung
མཚམས་འོག་འཇུག་དགོས་རྣམས	retreat visitors, those 1 has to see during the retreat)	mtshams 'og 'jug dgos rnams
མཚམས་ཡས	w/o gaps mtshams g.yog - retreat servant/ recluse's helper/ attendant {bka' rgya ma} secret instruction mtshams g.yog - the helper or attendant of a recluse, retreat servant / the recluse's helper	mtshams yas
མཚམས་རིས	inse[r]t	mtshams ris
མཚམས་རེ	sometimes	mtshams re
མཚམས་ལ་བསྡད་པ	stayed in retreat	mtshams la bsdad pa
མཚམས་ལན་གནང་སྐྱེས	present sent in return for the sanction to one's prayers	mtshams lan gnang skyes
མཚམས་ཤེད	border area	mtshams shed
མཚམས་སུ	by the time that, at the borders	mtshams su
མཚམས་སྲུང	1) border guard; 2) guard the borders; 3) Bsnyen mtshams pa la zhabs tog byed mkhan)	mtshams srung
མཚམས་གསུམ	TSE	mtshams gsum
མཚའ	large wild dog = 'phar ba	mtsha'
མཚའ་མེས	(A) wild dog = 'phar ba	mtsha' mes
མཚའ་ལུ	1) red cock; 2) (A) rting pa dkar po)	mtsha' lu
མཚར	wonders; wondrous; odd, strange	mtshar
མཚར་སྐྱེས	was struck w wonder	mtshar skyes
མཚར་གྱི་ཚུལ	jokingly	mtshar gyi tshul
མཚར་དགའ	remuneration, reward, wager	mtshar dga'
མཚར་ཆོས	fancies	mtshar chos
མཚར་གཏམ	1) wondrous talk; 2) Kyal ka'i mtshar gtam)	mtshar gtam
མཚར་མཐོང་བློ་སྒྱུར	impressionable, easily swayed, changing 1's mind at the sight of something beautiful	mtshar mthong blo sgyur
མཚར་དུ་བརྩིས	surprise	mtshar du brtsis
མཚར་སྡུག	beauty [-iful]	mtshar sdug
མཚར་སྡུག་དང་ལྡན་པ	very handsome and bright	mtshar sdug dang ldan pa
མཚར་པ	fair, fine, beautiful, magnificent	mtshar pa
མཚར་པོ	astonishing, beautiful, wondrous	mtshar po
མཚར་བ	astonishing	mtshar ba
མཚར་རེ་ཆེ	ridiculous	mtshar re che
མཚལ	1) vermillion [rgya mtshal] med. mineral; 2) blood [h]; 3) red ink)	mtshal
མཚལ་ཀོང	ink-stand for red ink or vermillion	mtshal kong
མཚལ་དཀར	bright/ synthetic vermilion 1) red mule w white mixed; 2) med. mtshal dkar)	mtshal dkar
མཚལ་སྐྱ	vermilion pink	mtshal skya
མཚལ་སྐྱེ	preparation of quicksilver, mercury	mtshal skye
མཚལ་སྐྱེས	mercury	mtshal skyes
མཚལ་ཁ	red, vermillion	mtshal kha
མཚལ་ཁྲག་མ	Nasal-blood Image, a statue of Milarepa made by Rechungpa	mtshal khrag ma
མཚལ་གུང་ཐང	town s.e. of lhasa	mtshal gung thang
མཚལ་རྒོད	native vermilion med. mineral	mtshal rgod
མཚལ་ཆུ	dilute vermilion	mtshal chu
མཚལ་ཐང	a thangka in which vermillion predominates	mtshal thang
མཚལ་ཐལ	mtshal las dngul chu bton pa'i shul gyi thal ba med. [nus pas rma 'bras dang, sha ro 'joms	mtshal thal
མཚལ་བདེ	district with a fort s.e. of lhasa	mtshal bde
མཚལ་མདོག	vermillion color	mtshal mdog
མཚལ་ནག	darker vermilion	mtshal nag
མཚལ་པར	vermillion lettering	mtshal par
མཚལ་པར་མ	vermillion printed pecha	mtshal par ma
མཚལ་བྲིས	picture/ letters written in vermillion/ blood	mtshal bris
མཚལ་སྦྲམ	mtshal gyi lcug ma	mtshal sbram
མཚལ་མོ	red female mule	mtshal mo
མཚལ་དམར	1) rgya mtshal lcog la; 2) young red mule)	mtshal dmar
མཚལ་སྨུག	1) mule of mixed red/ black color; 2) mtshal dang snag tsha mixed color	mtshal smug
མཚལ་ཚབ༹	a kind of salt [ro lan tshva, zhu rjes drod, nus pas skran bshig pa dang, rma gso, 'khru bar byed,...	mtshal tshva
མཚལ་ཡིག	document written in red, deficit	mtshal yig
མཚལ་རིས	mtshal gyi ri mo'am thig dmar po	mtshal ris
མཚལ་ལུ	rting pa dkar po'i don du go ba'i mtsha' lu	mtshal lu
མཚལ་ལུ་བྱ་གདོང	Guru Rinpoche's horse	mtshal lu bya gdong
མཚལ་གཤར	lham zon pa'i yu bar btang ba'i 'ja' dmar po'i ming	mtshal gshar
མཚལ་ཨང	vermilion of the best quality	mtshal ang
མཚིངས་ཟླ་མེད	matchless, incomparable	mtshings zla med
མཚུག་ཏོར	crest or crown	mtshug tor
མཚུངས	1) equal, comparable, parallel, uniformity, the equivalent. 2) deserve, be worthy of. 3) to be like, resemble, be equal to	mtshungs
སྒྲས་ཟིན་གྱི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	[among ldog pa can gyi rgyan; dpe don gnyis phan tshun 'dra ba'i khyad chos shugs la bstan cing, so sor dbye ba 'byed byed kyi tshig dngos su ston pa'i rgyan zhig	sgras zin gyi ldog pa can
མཚུངས་འཇུག	the lord of death mtshungs gnyis bsor ba'i skyon mdos mdos for the conflicts of two matching contending forces	mtshungs 'jug
མཚུངས་རྟགས	= sign	mtshungs rtags
མཚུངས་མཐོང	egocentric person	mtshungs mthong
མཚུངས་ལྡན	on the same level with, connatural, associated, becomes associated with, SA kun 'gro, concomitant	mtshungs ldan
མཚུངས་ལྡན་ཀུན	universal aspect of basic cause situation, SA rgyu rkyen	mtshungs ldan kun
མཚུངས་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	equally matched causal force, concomitant cause	mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu
མཚུངས་ལྡན་གྱི་ཆོས	{dge ba'i sems byung dang mtshungs ldan gyi chos rnams 'brel bas dge ba} 'Related virtues' are all the phenomena concurrent with the [eleven] virtuous mental states	mtshungs ldan gyi chos
མཚུངས་ལྡན་གྱི་འདུ་བྱེད	a kind of 'du byed, mind and mental contents mutually inseparable don rnam pa lngas lhan cig mtshungs par ldan pa ste: all mental contents [sems byung] except the tshor 'du gnyis	mtshungs ldan gyi 'du byed
མཚུངས་ལྡན་གྱི་མ་རིག་པ	concurrent ignorance, ignorance mixed concurrently w all kleshas	mtshungs ldan gyi ma rig pa
མཚུངས་ལྡན་དགུ	chn 2255	mtshungs ldan dgu
མཚུངས་ལྡན་འདུ་བྱེད	concurrent formations mtshungs ldan 'du byed kyi phung po TSE	mtshungs ldan 'du byed
མཚུངས་ལྡན་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five parallels mtshungs ldan rnam pa lnga mtshungs sems byung gang zhig sems dang mtshungs pa lnga ldan gyis going into or being born in samsara [one rten dang, two dmigs pa dang, three rnam pa...	mtshungs ldan rnam pa lnga
མཚུངས་ལྡན་པ	concurrent	mtshungs ldan pa
མཚུངས་ལྡན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	nonconcurrent formations mtshungs ldan ma yin pa'i 'du byed kyi	mtshungs ldan ma yin pa'i 'du byed
མཚུངས་ལྡན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	nonconcurrent ignorance, nyon mongs gzhan dang mtshungs par mi ldan pa'i unmixed ignorance	mtshungs ldan ma yin pa'i ma rig pa
མཚུངས་ལྡན་མིན་པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	formations, non-concurrent; non-concurrent formations	mtshungs ldan min pa'i 'du byed
མཚུངས་པ་མགོ་སྙོམས་ཀྱི་ལན	answer of [undesired consequence] on the same footing [thal 'gyur gyi lan gang zhig not genuine but depending on what the other presented, refuting or arguing w it, eg, you are a thief because you ...	mtshungs pa mgo snyoms kyi lan
མཚུངས་པ་ལྔ	five concurrences	mtshungs pa lnga
མཚུངས་པ་ཉིད	sameness (shunyata)	mtshungs pa nyid
མཚུངས་པ་དེ་མ་ཐག་རྐྱེན	condition of ensuing resemblance, unparalleled immediately preceding condition	mtshungs pa de ma thag rkyen
མཚུངས་པ་དེ་མ་ཐག་པའི་རྐྱེན	immediately preceding condition / condition of ensuing resemblance; condition of ensuing resemblance, unparalleled	mtshungs pa de ma thag pa'i rkyen
མཚུངས་པ་རྣམ་པ	gsungs mtshungs pa, chos mtshungs pa, sku mtshungs pa)	mtshungs pa rnam pa
མཚུངས་པ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	4 kinds of parallels (yi ge mtshungs pa	mtshungs pa rnam pa bzhi
མཚུངས་པ་མེད་པ	peerless[ness], incomparable	mtshungs pa med pa
མཚུངས་པ་བཞི	chn	mtshungs pa bzhi
མཚུངས་པ་གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	word explaining the similarity	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra
མཚུངས་པའི་རྐྱེན	condition that provides cohesiveness/ congruency/ continuity	mtshungs pa'i rkyen
མཚུངས་པའི་དབྱངས་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 SK vowels	mtshungs pa'i dbyangs bcu bzhi
མཚུངས་པའི་ཡི་གེ	SK vowels [aa ai au ri li]	mtshungs pa'i yi ge
མཚུངས་པའི་ལན	reciprocal	mtshungs pa'i lan
མཚུངས་པར	equally, likewise, in such a manner, accordingly	mtshungs par
མཚུངས་པར་ལྡན	SA mtshungs ldan	mtshungs par ldan
མཚུངས་པར་ལྡན་པ	similarities, having the same kind	mtshungs par ldan pa
མཚུངས་པར་ལྡན་པའི་རྒྱུ	simultaneous cause, parallel cause, concomitant cause	mtshungs par ldan pa'i rgyu
མཚུངས་པར་མི་ལྡན་འདུ་བྱེད	like mental contents sems dang lhan cig mtshungs pa lngas dmigs pa la 'jug pa dang mi ldan pas mi ldan pa and since they are the occasion of 'du byas, called 'du byed	mtshungs par mi ldan 'du byed
མཚུངས་པོ	apt matching	mtshungs po
མཚུངས་སྤྱོད	spyod pa mtshungs pa'am skal ba mnyam pa,...Bdag gis sde snod gsum po bsdus pa na, tshangs pa mtshungs spyod sus kyang ldog mi nus	mtshungs spyod
མཚུངས་བྱ	ratio	mtshungs bya
མཚུངས་བྲལ	matchless, unrivalled	mtshungs bral
མཚུངས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, brjod 'dod dpe dang dpe can gnyis ngo bo'i sgo nas mi mtshungs kyang, ming ngam, rnam grangs kyi sgo nas phan tshun mtshungs par sbyor ba'i rgyan zhig ste, nang gs...	mtshungs sbyor gyi rgyan
མཚུངས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	chn	mtshungs sbyor gyi rgyan gnyis
མཚུངས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe yon tan lhag pa zhig dang, dpe can yon tan dman pa gnyis phan tshun bya ba byed lugs kyi gnas tshul 'dra ba'i sgo nas ris gcig tu mtshungs par sbyor ba'i rgy...	mtshungs sbyor gyi dpe
མཚུངས་མེད	un=led, unmatched, matchless, incomparable, peerless	mtshungs med
མཚུངས་མེད་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་གཏེར་མཛོད	incomparable treasure of compassion mtshungs med dpal mgon bla ma dam pa gting skyes dgon pa byang gi mchog sprul gyi 'khrungs rabs bcu'i rnam par	mtshungs med thugs rje'i gter mdzod
ཐར་པ་མདོ་ཙམ་བརྗོད་པ	biographies of the successive embodiments of the gting skyes dgon pa byang lamas; by {mtha' grol rdo rje}	thar pa mdo tsam brjod pa
མཚུངས་མེད་བླ་མ	incomparable master / matchless guru	mtshungs med bla ma
མཚུངས་མེད་བླ་མ་དམ་པ	peerless, sublime teacher mtshungs med bla ma dam pa'i zhal	mtshungs med bla ma dam pa
མཚུངས་མེད་བླ་མའི་བཀའ་ལུང	the oral teachings of the incomparable master mtshungs med bla ma'i zhabs la phyag 'tshal lo - Peerless teacher, at your feet I bow	mtshungs med bla ma'i bka' lung
མཚུངས་ཟླ	approximation; rival	mtshungs zla
མཚུངས་ཟླ་མ་མཆིས	having no equal	mtshungs zla ma mchis
མཚུངས་ཟླ་མ་མཆིས་པ	without a match	mtshungs zla ma mchis pa
མཚུན	ancestors, tutelary deities of a family from the time of its ancestors, meat for the manes of the dead	mtshun
མཚུན་ཁང	1) pha mes kyis bsten pa'i 'jig rten gyi lha gnas yul; 2) Gshin po'i bang so)	mtshun khang
མཚུན་གྱི་ལྷ	the lord of death	mtshun gyi lha
མཚུན་མཆོད	bon pha mes kyi charnel ground scattered flesh and blood offering to the worldly deities	mtshun mchod
མཚུན་གཏོང་བ	bring an offering to the dead	mtshun gtong ba
མཚུན་གཏོར	offerings for appeasing the hunger and thirst of the dead in the preta loka	mtshun gtor
མཚུན་འཐོར	make an offering of flesh and blood to pha mes dus kyi lha	mtshun 'thor
མཚུན་ཞལ	fire [god]	mtshun zhal
མཚུན་ལ་རོལ	king of death	mtshun la rol
མཚུན་གསོལ	scattered offering of flesh and blood for pha mes dus kyi charnel ground deities	mtshun gsol
མཚུན་ལྷ	1) pha mes kyis bsten pa'i lha; 2) king of death)	mtshun lha
མཚུན་ལྷ་གསོལ་བ	worship the old tutelary deities of a family	mtshun lha gsol ba
མཚུར	color, a color base earth	mtshur
མཚུར་དཀར	color base white earth, alum	mtshur dkar
མཚུར་སྔོ	color base blue earth	mtshur sngo
མཚུར་སྟོན་དབང་ངེ	{mtshur ston dbang nge} [mar pa lo ts'a'i slob ma grags can zhig	mtshur ston dbang nge
མཚུར་མཐོང	confused by duality	mtshur mthong
མཚུར་མཐོང་གི་རྒྱུད	ordinary being	mtshur mthong gi rgyud
མཚུར་མདོ་བོ་ལུང	the Tsurphu Valley	mtshur mdo bo lung
མཚུར་ནག	color base black earth	mtshur nag
མཚུར་ཕུ	place in stod lung	mtshur phu
མཚུར་ཕུ་དགོན་པ	Tsurpu monestery [in tolung district of central tibet, seat of the karmapas (tserig) rab byung gsum pa'i sa bya lo la karma pa dus gsum mkhyen pas btab pa'i karma bka' brgyud kyi dgon chen zhig ste...	mtshur phu dgon pa
མཚུར་མོ	paint, pigment	mtshur mo
མཚུར་དམར	color base red earth	mtshur dmar
མཚུར་ལུགས	mtshur phu don grub 'od zer gyis {ka rma pa rang byung rdo rje}'s rjes su 'brang ba'i rtsis kyi tradition	mtshur lugs
མཚུར་སེར	color base yellow earth	mtshur ser
མཚུལ	mode, (A) beautiful	mtshul
མཚུལ་པ	the lower part of the face, the muzzle, bill, beak	mtshul pa
མཚུལ་པ་འགགས	blocked-up nasal passages	mtshul pa 'gags
མཚུལ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ	disciple of marpa	mtshul dbang rdo rje
མཚུལ་ཤུ	nostrils gi mtshul khung nas shu 'debs pa'i sgra	mtshul shu
མཚུལ་གསུམ	three modes	mtshul gsum
མཚེ	evergreen grass which does not grow more than a cubit in length and is burnt as incense	mtshe
མཚེ་སྐྱོང	medicinal earth	mtshe skyong
མཚེ་རྡོ་ཚབ༹་ཁ	{mtshe rdo tshva kha}	mtshe rdo tshva kha
མཚེ་ལྡུམ	ephedra sinica stapf	mtshe ldum
མཚེ་ཕྲུག	twin	mtshe phrug
མཚེ་བའི་མཚོན	hog, wild boar	mtshe ba'i mtshon
མཚེ་མ	a holy plant, two, pair, twins, a celestial mansion	mtshe ma
མཚེ་མའི་ལྷ	the twin gods	mtshe ma'i lha
མཚེ་ཟོར	mtshe'i rdzas la brten pa'i zor	mtshe zor
མཚེད	place for burning the dead	mtshed
མཚེད་པ	1) charnel ground; 2) (A) enter the tomb	mtshed pa
མཚེའུ	small lake, pond	mtshe'u
མཚེར	imp. of {mtsher ba}	mtsher
མཚེར་ཀ	grief, sorrow	mtsher ka
མཚེར་རྒྱག་པ	cattle la sa nad when it strikes w a shing thur spleen piercing 'chos thabs shig	mtsher rgyag pa
མཚེར་ཅན	sad	mtsher can
མཚེར་རྙིང	old nomad staying place, old cattle lhas ra	mtsher rnying
མཚེར་ཐོ	nomad ru ba ma spos gong in a good spo yul building a marker of rock etc	mtsher tho
མཚེར་ནད་ལྔ	the five spleen ?? diseases CHN	mtsher nad lnga
མཚེར་སྣང	concern w [modesty, shame, care, apprehension, politeness, propriety]	mtsher snang
མཚེར་པ	spleen	mtsher pa
མཚེར་པ་རི	Tserpa Mountain, near Kokonor	mtsher pa ri
མཚེར་པའི་རྩ	spleen nadi	mtsher pa'i rtsa
མཚེར་པོ	ngo tsha po [shameful, disastrous]	mtsher po
མཚེར་བ	pf. of {mtsher ba}; ft. of {mtsher ba}; {mtsher ba, mtsher ba, mtsher ba, mtsher} intr. v.; shy, dazzling	mtsher ba
མཚེར་བ་རི	mt [mtsho sngon po'i nang du yod pa'i ri zhig de'i mtho tshad rgya mtsho'i ngos las smi sum stong lhag tsam yod,...	mtsher ba ri
མཚེར་བག	fearful, anxious to avoid	mtsher bag
མཚེར་བག་མི་བྱེད་པ	don's be skittish	mtsher bag mi byed pa
མཚེར་ཤུལ	nomad ru ba spos pa'i shul	mtsher shul
མཚེར་ས	nomad staying place, meadow, pasture	mtsher sa
མཚེར་ས་སྦོས་པ	where to set-up tent, nomadic dwelling, moved to nomadic dwelling, {mtsher lhang} neigh	mtsher sa sbos pa
མཚེར་ས་སྦོས་པའི	where to set-up a tent/ nomadic dwelling, moved to a nomadic dwelling	mtsher sa sbos pa'i
མཚེར་ལྷང	neigh	mtsher lhang
མཚེས	companion, person w whom 1 is associated 2257	mtshes
མཚོ་ཀུ་ཏྲའི་འགྲམ	on the bank of a lake called Kutra mtsho ku tra'i 'gram du khrus byas nas 'dug pa - she went to wash on the shore of Lake Kutra	mtsho ku tra'i 'gram
མཚོ་ཀོངས	territorial waters	mtsho kongs
མཚོ་དཀར	White Lake, in Tsari	mtsho dkar
མཚོ་དཀྱིལ་དུ	in the middle of the lake	mtsho dkyil du
མཚོ་སྐོར	1) patrol the ocean; 2) circumambulate a lake)	mtsho skor
མཚོ་སྐོར་དམག་གྲུ	cruiser [war ship]	mtsho skor dmag gru
མཚོ་སྐྱ་རིང	{mtsho skya ring lake	mtsho skya ring
མཚོ་སྐྱེས	(lit. lake-born) Lotus/ Padma	mtsho skyes
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྗེ	Lotus Lord	mtsho skyes rje
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྗེའི	lake born lord	mtsho skyes rje'i
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་སྙིང་ཐིག	Tsokye Nyingtig; terma of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	mtsho skyes snying thig
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Lake-born vajra	mtsho skyes rdo rje
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Lake-born vajra holder	mtsho skyes rdo rje 'chang
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུགས་སུ	according to the tradition of the teacher, Padmavajra	mtsho skyes rdo rje'i lugs su
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་བླ་མ	Lake-born Guru	mtsho skyes bla ma
མཚོ་སྐྱེས་མ་ཧ་གུ་རུ	the Great LakeBorn Master; Padmasambhava	mtsho skyes ma ha gu ru
མཚོ་བསྐམས	dry lake	mtsho bskams
མཚོ་བསྐྱོད	sailing, navigation	mtsho bskyod
མཚོ་ཁ	lake or ocean's shore/ coast/ port/ harbor	mtsho kha
མཚོ་ཁ་བསུབས	invisible	mtsho kha bsubs
མཚོ་ཁུག	bay, inlet	mtsho khug
མཚོ་ཁུག་ཁ་ཁྲལ	wharf/ anchorage fee	mtsho khug kha khral
མཚོ་ཁྲི་ཤོར་རྒྱལ་མོ	{khri shor rgyal mo}	mtsho khri shor rgyal mo
མཚོ་འཁོར	whirlpool	mtsho 'khor
མཚོ་འཁྱུག	ocean 'khyug cing g.yo ba	mtsho 'khyug
མཚོ་འཁྱོམ	dizziness, vertigo	mtsho 'khyom
མཚོ་གྲུ	ship	mtsho gru
མཚོ་གྲུའི་ལས་བཟོ་པ	sailor	mtsho gru'i las bzo pa
མཚོ་གླང	sea cow, walrus? [lus che zhing spu skyes med pa, mdog skya bo, mig phra la rna gshog med pa, so ha cang ring po gnyis yod, so de ba so'i tshab byed dngos rdzas byas chog	mtsho glang
མཚོ་གླིང	island	mtsho gling
མཚོ་གླིང་མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakini of the isle(s)	mtsho gling mkha' 'gro
མཚོ་གླིང་ཆུང་ཆུང	islet	mtsho gling chung chung
མཚོ་གླིང་ཞིག་ཏུ	toward an island	mtsho gling zhig tu
མཚོ་དགུ་རྒྱལ་ལ	{mtsho dgu rgyal} pass [in W rgya tsha rdzong	mtsho dgu rgyal la
མཚོ་འགོག	straits	mtsho 'gog
མཚོ་འགྲམ	[lake] shore/ coast	mtsho 'gram
མཚོ་འགྲམ་ནས	along the seashore	mtsho 'gram nas
མཚོ་འགྲུལ	navigation, voyage	mtsho 'grul
མཚོ་འགྲུལ་མཁས་པ	navigator	mtsho 'grul mkhas pa
མཚོ་འགྲུལ་བྱེད་པ	navigate	mtsho 'grul byed pa
མཚོ་འགྲུལ་སྲུང་སྐྱེལ	protect shipping/ navigation lanes, convoying mtsho 'grul srung skyel kyi sgyogs gru frigate	mtsho 'grul srung skyel
མཚོ་རྒྱལ	Tsogyal. Also known as Khandro Yeshe Tsogyal, the close disciple of Guru Rinpoche who compiled the major part of his teachings	mtsho rgyal
མཚོ་རྒྱལ་མ	Lady Tsogyal	mtsho rgyal ma
མཚོ་རྒྱུད	along the coast, off shore, coastal	mtsho rgyud
མཚོ་རྒྱུད་གླིང་ཕྲན	off-shore/ coastal islands	mtsho rgyud gling phran
མཚོ་རྒྱུན	rgun 'brum from mtsho sna rdzong	mtsho rgyun
མཚོ་སྒོ	Tsogo, in Tsang mtsho brgyad la gnas pa'i klu chen brgyad - the 8 great nagas living in the 8 lakes chn	mtsho sgo
མཚོ་ང་བྲིས་ཆུང	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	mtsho nga bris chung
མཚོ་ངོ	sea surface/ level	mtsho ngo
མཚོ་ངོགས	harbor, port	mtsho ngogs
མཚོ་ངོས	sea surface/ level mtsho ngos kyi snang tshul lta rtog byed	mtsho ngos
མཚོ་སྔོ་རིང	{mtsho sngo ring} lake	mtsho sngo ring
མཚོ་སྔོན	Kokonor, the Blue Lake	mtsho sngon
ཚངས་གླུ་གསར་སྙན	Annals of Kokonor, by Sumpa Khenpo Yeshe Paljor mtsho sngon gyi lo rgyus sogs bkod pa'i	tshangs glu gsar snyan
རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	lcang skya, aa kya, gser khri, stong skor, ra kho, smin grol, chu bzang, thu'u bkvan te brgyad	rnam pa brgyad
མཚོ་སྔོན་པོ	Blue Lake, in Mongolian, Kokonor; in Chinese, Qinghai, the Blue Sea	mtsho sngon po
མཚོ་སྔོན་ཞིང་ཆེན	Qinghai Province	mtsho sngon zhing chen
མཚོ་ཆ་གཙོ་བར་སྨྲ་བ	theory that weapons are the most important thing	mtsho cha gtso bar smra ba
མཚོ་ཆུང	small lake	mtsho chung
མཚོ་ཆུང་ངུ	small lake	mtsho chung ngu
མཚོ་ཆེན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	mtsho chen
མཚོ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	chn	mtsho chen brgyad
མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	great ocean mtsho chen ma pham g.yu mtsho - Manasarovar, the great turquoise lake	mtsho chen po
མཚོ་མཇལ	prophetic sign arising from the surface of a lake	mtsho mjal
མཚོ་མཇུག	at the end of the lake	mtsho mjug
མཚོ་འཇག	pirate	mtsho 'jag
མཚོ་ཉ	lake/ ocean fish [ro mngar, zhu rjes drod, nus pas pho ba'i drod skyod, bad kan gyi nad sel, lus zungs gso	mtsho nya
མཚོ་ཉིན	sunny side of a lake	mtsho nyin
མཚོ་སྙིང	Tsonying, the "Heart of the Lake", an Island in Lake Kokonor, also known as Tsonying Mahadeva	mtsho snying
མཚོ་སྙིང་མ་ཧ་དེ་ཝའི་གནས་ཡིག	by Orgyen Samten Lingpa	mtsho snying ma ha de wa'i gnas yig
མཚོ་རྟ	sea horse [che gras rnams sman rtsa chen zhig go	mtsho rta
མཚོ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like an ocean [one of the sems bskyed nyer gnyis TSE]	mtsho lta bu'i sems bskyed
མཚོ་ལྟར་ཟབ་དང་མེ་ལྟར་ཚྭ་བ	as deep as the ocean and as hot as fire	mtsho ltar zab dang me ltar tshwa ba
མཚོ་ལྟས	sign shown in/from a lake	mtsho ltas
མཚོ་ཐོག	by sea, maritime	mtsho thog
མཚོ་ཐོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	by sea/ maritime transport mtsho thog bskor g.yeng gru gzings cruiser [warship]	mtsho thog skyel 'dren
མཚོ་ཐོག་ཁ་ལོ་སྒྱུར་དབང	sea control/ power/ supremacy	mtsho thog kha lo sgyur dbang
མཚོ་ཐོག་གཏོང་བ	ship	mtsho thog gtong ba
མཚོ་ཐོག་དམག་འཁྲུག	naval battle/ war	mtsho thog dmag 'khrug
མཚོ་ཐོན	ocean products/ resources	mtsho thon
མཚོ་མཐའ	lake or ocean's shore/ coast/ port/ harbor	mtsho mtha'
མཚོ་དྲུག	the six lakes [sbrang rtsi	mtsho drug
མཚོ་དྲུང	bank of the ocean	mtsho drung
མཚོ་བདུན	The seven encircling lakes around Mt. Meru	mtsho bdun
མཚོ་མདའ	blue lotus flower, color of transmission of thugs of kun bzang	mtsho mda'
མཚོ་ལྡན་མ	1) tree dz' ba ka; 2) goddess Sarasvati)	mtsho ldan ma
མཚོ་ནག	1) {mtsho nag} salt lake; 2) {mtsho nag} lake *)	mtsho nag
མཚོ་ནང་ནས་སྟོན་པའི་ལྟས	sign shown in/from a lake mtsho nub sog rigs bod rigs ha sag rigs	mtsho nang nas ston pa'i ltas
རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ	{mtsho nub sog rigs bod rigs ha sag rigs rang skyong khul} [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs kyi mtsho sngon po'i nub phyogs su yod	rang skyong khul
མཚོ་སྣ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	mtsho sna
མཚོ་སྣ་ཆུ	mtsho sna river [mtsho sna rdzong khongs nas 'bab cing, de'i smad rgyud la rta dbang chu zer	mtsho sna chu
མཚོ་སྣ་བ་ཤེས་རབ་བཟང་པོ	Sherab Sangpo of mtsho sna	mtsho sna ba shes rab bzang po
མཚོ་པད་མ	small lake in mandi kingdom	mtsho pad ma
མཚོ་པད་མའི་གཟེ་མ་ར་མགོ	aquatic triangular med. herb	mtsho pad ma'i gze ma ra mgo
མཚོ་པྲ	lake divination	mtsho pra
མཚོ་དཔྱད	examining the surface of the ocean	mtsho dpyad
མཚོ་ཕག	hippopotamus	mtsho phag
མཚོ་ཕྲན	small lake, pond	mtsho phran
མཚོ་བོད	Qinghai-Tibet	mtsho bod
མཚོ་བོད་རླང་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ	Ch'inghai	mtsho bod rlang 'khor 'gro lam
པྲོབི༹ནཅེ	T highway	Province
མཚོ་བོད་ས་མཐོ	Ch'inghai Province-T plateau	mtsho bod sa mtho
མཚོ་བྱ	lake/ ocean bird, gull	mtsho bya
མཚོ་བྱང	region [bod rigs rang	mtsho byang
མཚོ་བྱུང་མ	dbyangs can ma	mtsho byung ma
མཚོ་བྱུང་ལྷ་མོ	goddess svarasvati, SA sgra dbyangs lha mo	mtsho byung lha mo
མཚོ་བྲན	lakes	mtsho bran
མཚོ་མ་དྲོས་པ	Ever-cool Lake, another name of Manasarovar	mtsho ma dros pa
ཧྲེང་རྫོང་གི་མཚོ་མ་ཕམ་ག	yu mtsho zhes pa, bod kyi deb ther du mtsho 'di ni rgya'i lo rgyus nang du gsal	hreng rdzong gi mtsho ma pham ga
བའི་ཡའོ་ཁྲི་སྟེ་ག	yang ti'i mtsho zer ba de yin zhing, de ltar na lo sum stong gi sngon la kro'u rgyal rabs kyi rgyal po mu dbang zhes pa nub phyogs gnas skor du phebs pa'i mtsho de yin zhes dang, mngon pa'i gzhung ...	ba'i ya'o khri ste ga
མཚོ་མ་ཕམ	Lake Manarasowar	mtsho ma pham
མཚོ་མན་དལ་ནག་པོ	Tso Mandal Nagpo, in Dakpo. See Lake of the Black Mandala	mtsho man dal nag po
མཚོ་མོ	ocean (female)	mtsho mo
མཚོ་མོ་གྲམ་གླིང	lake [gting skyes rdzong gi shar rgyud du yod	mtsho mo gram gling
མཚོ་མོ་ངང་ལྷ་རིང་པོ	{mtsho mo ngang lha ring po} lake in W ru thog rdzong	mtsho mo ngang lha ring po
མཚོ་དམག	navy, navy	mtsho dmag
མཚོ་དམག་རྟེན་གཞི	naval base	mtsho dmag rten gzhi
མཚོ་དམག་གནས་གཞི	naval base	mtsho dmag gnas gzhi
མཚོ་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	admiral	mtsho dmag spyi khyab
མཚོ་དམག་སྦྱོང་བདར་སློབ་གྲྭ	naval training school mtsho dma' ba g.yu yi man da la - round turquoise glacial lake near ra sgreng	mtsho dmag sbyong bdar slob grwa
མཚོ་དམར་པོ	Red Sea	mtsho dmar po
མཚོ་སྨད	mtsho smad rdzong	mtsho smad
མཚོ་སྨད་མཁན་ཆེན	ska ba sh'akya dbang phyug [rab byung brgyad pa'i nang stod lung glang grong du 'khrungs, dgung lo chung ngu'i dus nas zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje'i slob ma phrag dpon bsod nams bkra shis sogs dam...	mtsho smad mkhan chen
མཚོ་སྨན	class of feminine spirits, Lake Goddess, they belong to the class of the sman mo	mtsho sman
མཚོ་སྨན་རྒྱལ་མོའི་གུར་མདོས	mdos in the shape of a tent for the queen of the mtsho sman	mtsho sman rgyal mo'i gur mdos
མཚོ་ཚྭ	sea salt	mtsho tshwa
མཚོ་ཚབ༹	sea salt	mtsho tshva
མཚོ་ཚུལ	manifestation	mtsho tshul
མཚོ་རྫིང	lake, pond	mtsho rdzing
མཚོ་རྫོང	a jong in kong po	mtsho rdzong
མཚོ་བཞི	the four lakes	mtsho bzhi
གྱུ་མཚོ	kokonor {khri shor rgyal mo} or {mtsho sngon - and manasaowar {mtsho ma pham}	gyu mtsho
མཚོ་ཟག	pirate	mtsho zag
མཚོ་གཟིག	yellow black ocean animal [w white belly whose fat can be made into oil snum btso sbyang byed]	mtsho gzig
མཚོ་འོག་གྲུ་གཟིངས	submarine	mtsho 'og gru gzings
མཚོ་ཡས	a number	mtsho yas
མཚོ་ཡུར	canal	mtsho yur
མཚོ་ར་ཅན	{mtsho ra can lake	mtsho ra can
མཚོ་རླངས	vapors of a lake	mtsho rlangs
མཚོ་རླབས	tide, tidal wave	mtsho rlabs
མཚོ་རླབས་ཕྱུར་དུས	time of changing tides	mtsho rlabs phyur dus
མཚོ་རླབས་འཕེལ་འགྲིབ	flow and ebb tides	mtsho rlabs 'phel 'grib
མཚོ་རླུང་གིས་བསྐྱོད	a lake stirred by the wind	mtsho rlung gis bskyod
མཚོ་ལ་ཆར་བེབ	rain falling in a lake	mtsho la char beb
མཚོ་ལ་འབབ	streams descending from mountains and flowing into a lake, rivers that flow into the sea	mtsho la 'bab
མཚོ་ལག	little/ subsidiary lake connected to a big 1 by a stream	mtsho lag
མཚོ་ལམ	path to a lake, shipping route, navigation	mtsho lam
མཚོ་ལམ་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	buoy	mtsho lam mtshon byed kyi rtags
མཚོ་ལས་སྐྱེས	lotus	mtsho las skyes
མཚོ་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ	lotus flower, 'bornfrom-a-lake'	mtsho las skyes pa
མཚོ་ལས་པ	seaman	mtsho las pa
མཚོ་ལས་ཟབ་པ	deeper that the ocean	mtsho las zab pa
མཚོ་ལོང་ཁ	{mtsho long kha} lake	mtsho long kha
མཚོ་གཤམ་དགོན་པ	Tsogsham Monastery, in Tsang	mtsho gsham dgon pa
མཚོ་སྲིབ	shady side of a lake	mtsho srib
མཚོ་སྲུང	sea/ coastal defense	mtsho srung
མཚོ་བསུབས	invisible	mtsho bsubs
མཚོ་ལྷོ	region [bod rigs rang skyong	mtsho lho
མཚོག་མདུད་ཀྱི་སྒོ	spyi gtsug ka li'i srubs sgo	mtshog mdud kyi sgo
མཚོག་པ	SA 'tshog pa	mtshog pa
མཚོག་མ	cranium, hair of the head from root to 3 inches long, spot or tender part of the head, vacancy in the infant cranium	mtshog ma
མཚོག་གསང	from the edge of the hair up four fingers a bleeding nadi	mtshog gsang
མཚོགས	similar, like, equal	mtshogs
མཚོངས	(not in das)	mtshongs
མཚོན	index, forefinger, any pointed or sharp cutting instrument, sword, blade, starting, exemplified by, symbol	mtshon
མཚོན་སྐུད་སྒྲིལ་མ	colored threads twisted together	mtshon skud sgril ma
མཚོན་སྐྱོབ	armor	mtshon skyob
མཚོན་སྐྱོབས	armor	mtshon skyobs
མཚོན་ཁར་སྲ	proof against cut and thrust	mtshon khar sra
མཚོན་ཁྱེར་ལག་འཛིངས	carry weapons, fight face to face	mtshon khyer lag 'dzings
མཚོན་ཁྲ	colorful, variegated, bright, gay	mtshon khra
མཚོན་ཁྲག	blood drawn by weapons	mtshon khrag
མཚོན་འཁུར	position, post, title, name [h]	mtshon 'khur
མཚོན་འཁུར་གནང	take/ accept a [position, post, title, name] [h]	mtshon 'khur gnang
མཚོན་འཁོར	weapon-wheel	mtshon 'khor
མཚོན་གང	finger's breadth, the size of a thumb	mtshon gang
མཚོན་གང་བ	a finger-breath	mtshon gang ba
མཚོན་གང་མར	finger's breadth lower	mtshon gang mar
མཚོན་གྱི་བསྐལ་པ	kalpa of weaponry	mtshon gyi bskal pa
མཚོན་གྱི་བསྐལ་པ་བར་མ	the intermediate kalpa of warfare, age of weaponry	mtshon gyi bskal pa bar ma
མཚོན་གྱི་དྲུ་བུ	attribute of the gods, resembling a ball of thread	mtshon gyi dru bu
མཚོན་གྱིས་འཇིག་པ	destroy, conquer with arms	mtshon gyis 'jig pa
མཚོན་གྱིས་རལ་བུ	lacerated, slashed, cut to pieces by any weapon mtshon mgon sgra bla'i gzhung chen great rites for the armed protector sgra bla	mtshon gyis ral bu
མཚོན་ངར་མ	sharp/ powerful weapon	mtshon ngar ma
མཚོན་ཆ	arms, weapon	mtshon cha
མཚོན་ཆ་ཁང	armory	mtshon cha khang
མཚོན་ཆ་མཁན	epithet of parasurama, blacksmith	mtshon cha mkhan
མཚོན་ཆ་ཅན	armed	mtshon cha can
མཚོན་ཆ་ལྕི་རིགས	heavy weapons/ artillery	mtshon cha lci rigs
མཚོན་ཆ་ཆེ་རིགས	heavy weapons/ artillery	mtshon cha che rigs
མཚོན་ཆ་འཇོག	lay down arms/ weapons	mtshon cha 'jog
མཚོན་ཆ་ཐོགས་པ	wield the weapon	mtshon cha thogs pa
མཚོན་ཆ་གདེང་བ	brandish a weapon, flourish a weapon	mtshon cha gdeng ba
མཚོན་ཆ་རྣམ་བཞི	four kinds of weapons (sword, spear, dart, arrow)	mtshon cha rnam bzhi
མཚོན་ཆ་རྣོ་བའི་ཅར་འབེབས	sharp weapons raining down	mtshon cha rno ba'i car 'bebs
མཚོན་ཆ་རྣོན་པོ	sharp sword 2260	mtshon cha rnon po
མཚོན་ཆ་པ	low caste india tribe	mtshon cha pa
མཚོན་ཆ་བྱེད	use as a weapon, be armed w	mtshon cha byed
མཚོན་ཆ་འབྲུ་ཕྲ་ཅན	biological weapons	mtshon cha 'bru phra can
མཚོན་ཆ་འོད་རབ་གསལ	luminous weapon	mtshon cha 'od rab gsal
མཚོན་ཆ་ཡང་རིགས	light weapons/ artillery	mtshon cha yang rigs
མཚོན་ཆའི་འཁོར་ལོ	whirling/ spinning blade	mtshon cha'i 'khor lo
མཚོན་ཆའི་ཐང	The Steppe of Weapons	mtshon cha'i thang
མཚོན་ཆའི་གཙོ	arrow	mtshon cha'i gtso
མཚོན་ཆའི་མཛོད	arsenal	mtshon cha'i mdzod
མཚོན་ཆའི་གཞི	sword, knife mtshon char sbrang rtsi byugs pa'i mngar	mtshon cha'i gzhi
གྱིས་བསླུས་ནས་རྒྱུ་མ་གཅོད་པ་ལྟར	he is like someone who first entices you near by smearing honey on a sword and then cuts out your intestines	gyis bslus nas rgyu ma gcod pa ltar
མཚོན་ཆས་འཚོ་བ	foot soldier	mtshon chas 'tsho ba
མཚོན་བརྗོད	characterization/ illustration and (verbal) expression/ description	mtshon brjod
མཚོན་བརྗོད་མེད་པ	cannot be characterized/ illustrated and/ or expressed/ described; defying illustration or expression/ description	mtshon brjod med pa
མཚོན་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས	beyond characterization and expression	mtshon brjod las 'das
མཚོན་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond characterization/ illustration and/ or expression/ description	mtshon brjod las 'das pa
མཚོན་རྟགས	manifestation, symbol, sign	mtshon rtags
མཚོན་རྟུལ	blunt weapon	mtshon rtul
མཚོན་རྟེན་བྱེད	elephant, ox	mtshon rten byed
མཚོན་སྟོན	symbol, representation	mtshon ston
མཚོན་ཐུབ	weapon/ bullet-proof	mtshon thub
མཚོན་ཐུབ་འགྲུལ་འཁོར	armored car	mtshon thub 'grul 'khor
མཚོན་ཐོགས	carry weapons; x {gdugs dang mkhar ba mtshon thogs dang} who carry canes, weapons and parasols	mtshon thogs
མཚོན་ཐོགས་པ	to wield weapons	mtshon thogs pa
མཚོན་དང་བྲལ	beyond examples	mtshon dang bral
མཚོན་དོན	signification/ meaning of an example, indication	mtshon don
མཚོན་དོན་རི་མོ	caricature, cartoon	mtshon don ri mo
མཚོན་མདངས	tint	mtshon mdangs
མཚོན་ལྡན	armed	mtshon ldan
མཚོན་ལྡན་ཁྲབ་འཁོར	tank, armored vehicle mtshon ldan lcags khrab rlangs 'khor tank, armored vehicle	mtshon ldan khrab 'khor
མཚོན་ལྡན་མི་ཅིག	armed man	mtshon ldan mi cig
མཚོན་ལྡན་དམག་འཁོར	tank	mtshon ldan dmag 'khor
མཚོན་བརྡར་ཏོ	sharpened the weapons	mtshon brdar to
མཚོན་ན	for example	mtshon na
མཚོན་ནད	wounds etc. from weapons	mtshon nad
མཚོན་རྣོན་པོས་བཅད་པ	took up a sharp sword and cut	mtshon rnon pos bcad pa
མཚོན་རྣོན་ལུས་ལ་བརྒྱབ	striking one's body with sharp weapons	mtshon rnon lus la brgyab
མཚོན་བསྣུན་སྐྱེས	blood	mtshon bsnun skyes
མཚོན་པ	to characterize/ illustrate/ designate/ signify/ indicate/ point out/ represent/ define; (to) portray(al); characterization/ designation; illustrated (as)	mtshon pa
མཚོན་པའི་བརྡ	symbol-teaching; signteaching	mtshon pa'i brda
མཚོན་པའི་དཔེ	analogies to illustrate	mtshon pa'i dpe
མཚོན་པའི་ཡུལ	object that can be characterized	mtshon pa'i yul
མཚོན་པར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to illustrate	mtshon par dka' ba
མཚོན་པར་མཁས	able to communicate	mtshon par mkhas
མཚོན་པར་བྱས་པ	example, illustration	mtshon par byas pa
མཚོན་པར་བྱེད	give an example	mtshon par byed
མཚོན་པར་བྱེད་པ	give an example	mtshon par byed pa
མཚོན་དཔེ	example, diagram, chart, model	mtshon dpe
མཚོན་བ	definiendom	mtshon ba
མཚོན་བྱ	the object defined, definiendium	mtshon bya
མཚོན་བྱ་ལྟ་བུར	mark	mtshon bya lta bur
མཚོན་བྱ་དོན	the indicated meaning; meaning	mtshon bya don
མཚོན་བྱེད	(process of) definition/ illustration/ signification	mtshon byed
མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	key [of map/ chart], marker, symbol	mtshon byed kyi rtags
མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་པར་རིས	chart, diagram, sketch	mtshon byed kyi par ris
མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དཔར་རིས	chart, diagram, sketch	mtshon byed kyi dpar ris
མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དཔེ་ཅ	the book that reveals	mtshon byed kyi dpe ca
མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རིས་མོ	chart, diagram, sketch	mtshon byed kyi ris mo
མཚོན་བྱེད་བརྡ	the indicating signs / symbols / script	mtshon byed brda
མཚོན་བྱེད་བརྡའི་དཔེ	symbolic tent	mtshon byed brda'i dpe
མཚོན་བྱེད་དཔེ་རིས	chart, diagram, sketch	mtshon byed dpe ris
མཚོན་བྱེད་མི་སྣ	representatives	mtshon byed mi sna
མཚོན་མ	(A)/; 1) sa mkhan; 2) guide, steersman)	mtshon ma
མཚོན་མེད	not pinpointed	mtshon med
མཚོན་ཙམ	merely indicative, just a little, mngon tsam	mtshon tsam
མཚོན་རྩ	pulse felt by the forefinger	mtshon rtsa
མཚོན་རྩེ	spear head	mtshon rtse
མཚོན་རྩེ་གཅིག	a weapon with one point like an arrow or spear	mtshon rtse gcig
མཚོན་ཚམ	merely indicatory	mtshon tsham
མཚོན་ཚིག	words that characterize	mtshon tshig
མཚོན་མཚོན	blade	mtshon mtshon
མཚོན་ལམ	wounds of weapons	mtshon lam
མཚོན་སྲུང	bulletproof	mtshon srung
མཚོན་གསར	modern/ new weapons 2261	mtshon gsar
མཚོན་གསར་འཕྲུལ་མདའ	modern automatic guns	mtshon gsar 'phrul mda'
མཚོན་ལྷ	weapon god	mtshon lha
མཚོའི་ཁ	beach	mtsho'i kha
མཚོའི་ཁར	the shores of the lake	mtsho'i khar
མཚོའི་འགྲམ་ལ	at the lake, close to the lake	mtsho'i 'gram la
མཚོའི་མཐའ	lake/ ocean mtha'	mtsho'i mtha'
མཚོའི་བྱ	bird of the lake, goose	mtsho'i bya
མཚོའི་གཞུང	middle part of a lake	mtsho'i gzhung
མཚོར་འབབ	river	mtshor 'bab
བར་བྱ	even if censured, 1 does not respond with criticism; {dge sbyong chos bzhi} 1 of the four dharmas of those skilled in virtue] 'tshang brus kyang slar mtshang mi 'bru	bar bya
བ་བྱུང་བ	could subsist on samadhi as his only nourishment 'tsho ba - sustenance, support, subsistence; {'tsho ba, 'tshos pa, 'tsho ba, 'tshos} trans. v.; recover (from illness); one of the {'phags lam gyi y...	ba byung ba
རཚད	1) root; 2) rtshad thang sman [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas sha dug dang, sbrul dug sogs dug tshad la phan] root, core	rtshad
རཚད་པའི་རིགས་པ	{rtshad pa'i rigs pa/	rtshad pa'i rigs pa
བ༹ད	nyaya [one of the {tshad ma sde	vada
སཚལ་བ	bestow, grant, give, confer	stshal ba
སཚོགས་པ	[arch] collect [La sogs = La stshogs]	stshogs pa
ཛ	DZA, break through	dza
ཛ་མཁན	a potter	dza mkhan
ཛ་གད	beer	dza gad
ཛ་གད་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩི	beer-am ita	dza gad kyi bdud rtsi
ཛ་གད་ནི་ཆང	tshogs language	dza gad ni chang
ཛ་གལ	urgent and important	dza gal
ཛ་ཏ་རི	dza ta ri	dza ta ri
ཛ་ཏི	1) metrical feet; 2) nutmeg)/ [one of the {phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad} = the eight outer principal medicines]	dza ti
ཛ་ཏི་སྒ	nutmeg & ginger	dza ti sga
ཛ་ཏི་ཛ་ལ	a buddhist female saint	dza ti dza la
ཛ་རྟགས	Dza flag	dza rtags
ཛ་ཐའི	(M dza sag and tha'i ji ranks	dza tha'i
ཛ་དྲག	1) busy and quick; 2) importance/ weight	dza drag
ཛ་དྲག་གི་གནས་ཚུལ	emergency situation, state of emergency	dza drag gi gnas tshul
ཛ་དྲག་གི་ཚོགས་འདུ	emergency session/ meeting/ conference	dza drag gi tshogs 'du
ཛ་དྲག་ཅན	emergency, urgent, critical, intense, drastic	dza drag can
ཛ་དྲག་ཆེ་བ	tense	dza drag che ba
ཛ་དྲག་ཆེན	emergency, urgent, critical, intense, drastic	dza drag chen
ཛ་དྲག་ཆེན་པོ	emergency, urgent, critical, intense, drastic	dza drag chen po
ཛ་དྲག་དང་གལ་ཆེན་པོ	urgent and important	dza drag dang gal chen po
ཛ་དྲག་པོ	emergency, urgent, critical, intense, drastic	dza drag po
ཛ་དྲག་རོགས་རམ	emergency aid/ help	dza drag rogs ram
ཛ་བརྡུང་བྱ	1) banging on drum, blowing horns loudly [to bring in and subdue demons]; 2) making a clamor, raising a ritual din	dza brdung bya
ཛ་ན་མ	shadow, shade	dza na ma
ཛ་པ	SA 'dzab, mantra or sanskrit charm, recitation mentally	dza pa
ཛ་པར་ཁང	recitation mansion	dza par khang
ཛ་པར་ཁང་དབྱེ་བ	separation of the recitation mansion	dza par khang dbye ba
ཛ་པྲ	recitation	dza pra
ཛ་པྲ་ཀྱི་གླུ་དབྱངས་ལེན	sing the recitation song	dza pra kyi glu dbyangs len
ཛ་པྲ་ཀྱི་དབྱངས	recitation song	dza pra kyi dbyangs
ཛ་པྲ་བསྐུལ	chant-invocation	dza pra bskul
ཛ་པྲ་ཁང	recitation mansion	dza pra khang
ཛ་པྲ་ཁང་དབྱེ	separation of the recitation mansion	dza pra khang dbye
ཛ་པྲ་ཁང་དབྱེ་བ	separation of the recitation mansion	dza pra khang dbye ba
ཛ་པྲ་སྒྲ	the words of recitation	dza pra sgra
ཛ་པྲ་མཆོད་ཀྱི་དམིགས་པ	recitation visualization	dza pra mchod kyi dmigs pa
ཛ་པྲ་དབྱངས་བྱེད་པ	to chant melodiously	dza pra dbyangs byed pa
ཛ་པྲ་བཟླས	do the recitation dza sprul ngag dbang bstan 'dzin nor bu Dzatrul Ngawang Tendzin Norbu: 1867	dza pra bzlas
ཛ་འཕྲུ	DZA'i tog ste dza lag dza	dza 'phru
ཛ་བ	dza to ba SK consonants [dza da da ga ba]	dza ba
ཛ་བ་ཤིང	china rose, hibiscus rosa sinensis	dza ba shing
ཛ་བུ་གླིང་པ	the southern Jambu continent, [where jambu, rose apple, fruits fall into lake {ma dros mtsho} w the sound "jambu"]	dza bu gling pa
ཛ་བོ་ཤིང	mdzo mo med. tree [chur gdus pa'i khu ba tshos byas chog pa, a hollow tree]	dza bo shing
ཛ་ཛོར	untidy, dirty, sloppy, slipshod	dza dzor
ཛ་ཛོར་བྱེད	make [messy, untidy, disorderly, dishevelled, junk]	dza dzor byed
ཛ་ཛོར་བཟོ	make [messy, untidy, disorderly, dishevelled, junk]	dza dzor bzo
ཛ་ཟི་ཛུ་ཟི	untidy, careless persona	dza zi dzu zi
ཛ་ཡ	muddy deposit, the markings of wood	dza ya
ཛ་ཡ་སི་པ་ཏ	name by which site of kapilavastu (buddha birth place) is now known	dza ya si pa ta
ཛ་ཡན་ཏིའི་རྩ་བ	root of the jayanti tree	dza yan ti'i rtsa ba
ཛ་ཡན་ཏུ	SK become victorious	dza yan tu
ཛ་ཡི་ཕལ	nutmeg	dza yi phal
ཛ་ར་ཛོ་རེ	untidy, dirty, sloppy, slipshod	dza ra dzo re
ཛ་རག	1) offering substance {bya ma bum}; 2) dngul gyi dam be bye brag pa zhig; 3) small clay vase/ pot	dza rag
ཛ་རི་ཁན་ད	an indian province	dza ri khan da
ཛ་རེ་ཛོ་རེ	untidy, dirty	dza re dzo re
ཛ་ལ་ཏ་ན	crane	dza la ta na
ཛ་ལག	DZA flag/ sign	dza lag
ཛ་ལང	undisciplined, wild	dza lang
ཛ་ལང་ལང	{dza lang lang 'gyu ba} racing, spurting, dashing, speeding	dza lang lang
ཛ་ལང་ཤོར	be spoiled [behavior]	dza lang shor
ཛ་ལན་ཏྲ	province in punjab, now jalundur	dza lan tra
ཛ་ལས	screen, silver	dza las
ཛ་ལུ་ཀ	water-spider, leech	dza lu ka
ཛ་སག	ja sag - Jasag, title for a chieftain of a Mongolian "banner," or district	dza sag
ཛ་སགས	prefect, district magistrate	dza sags
ཛ་ཧུའི་བུ་མོ	ganges river, epithet of the ganges	dza hu'i bu mo
ཛ་བྷི་ར	herb {dza bhi ra}	dza bhi ra
ཛ་ལྷག	ja dang mi nor ba'i rtags kyi dza lag dza	dza lhag
ཛྭ་ལ	Skt. for {'bar ba}	dzwa la
ཛང་ཁྲག	menstrual blood	dzang khrag
ཛད་པས་བསྡུས་པ་གསུམ	CHN	dzad pas bsdus pa gsum
ཛན་བུའི་འབྲས	glomerous fig tree	dzan bu'i 'bras
ཛབ	mantra repetition	dzab
ཛབ་ཁང་དབྱེ་བ	to disclose the recitation palace, to open the mansion of mantra repetition; to set the stage for mantra repetition	dzab khang dbye ba
ཛབ་དགོངས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four intents of recitation	dzab dgongs rnam pa bzhi
ཛབ་ཏི	SA 'dzab, mantra or sanskrit charm, recitation mentally	dzab ti
ཛབ་བཟླ་བ	performing recitation	dzab bzla ba
ཛམ	(splash sound	dzam
ཛམ་ཐང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	dzam thang
ཛམ་ཐང་ཆོས་རྗེ་དགོན	{dzam thang chos rje} Monastery	dzam thang chos rje dgon
ཛམ་ཐང་གཙང་པ་དགོན	{dzam thang gtsang pa} monastery	dzam thang gtsang pa dgon
ཛམ་ཐང་གཏཟང་པ་དགོན	{dzam thang gtzang pa} monastery [in si khron great region dzam thang rdzong 1 of two large jonangpa monasteries thog mar Taranatha'i dngos slob cha lung ba ngag dbang phrin las kyi tsha bo ngag db...	dzam thang gtzang pa dgon
ཛམ་བུ	gold, fabulous fruit of the kalpadruma, wishing tree of the gods, rose apple tree engenia	dzam bu
ཛམ་བུ་ཀ	jackal	dzam bu ka
ཛམ་བུ་གླིང	Jambudvipa, land of jambu	dzam bu gling
ཛམ་བུ་གླིང་པ	the S Jambu continent	dzam bu gling pa
ཛམ་བུ་ཆུ་བོའི་གསེར	Jambu river gold	dzam bu chu bo'i gser
ཨོརིགིནཏེ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཨུནེཨཏེན་ཕི༹ཤ་ཏྲནསཕོ༹རྨེད་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་Jཨམབུ	briksa fruits by the naga king in lake {ma dros mtsho}; Jambu river gold, the purest gold in this world, said to originate from the uneaten fish transformed from the Jambubriksha fruits by the naga...	originate from the uneaten fish transformed from the Jambu
ཛམ་བུ་བྲི་ཀ་ཤ	tree w fruit mngar rdza tsam, which when ripe fall into lake {ma dros mtsho} making the sound {dzam bu} rose apple tree dzam bu brI Ka Sha shing sdong 'bras bu	dzam bu bri ka sha
མངར་རྫ་ཙམ་ཡོད་པ	the fruits when ripe fall into the lake {ma dros mtsho} making the sound {dzam bu}	mngar rdza tsam yod pa
ཛམ་བུའི་གླིང	ancient buddhist name for india, SA 'dzam bu'i gling	dzam bu'i gling
ཛམ་བུའི་གླིང་ལྷོ	the southern Jambu continent, so called due to the Jambu briksha fruits falling into lake {ma dros mtsho} make s the sound "Jambu"	dzam bu'i gling lho
ཛམ་བུའི་ཆུ་བོའི་གསེར	Jambu river gold	dzam bu'i chu bo'i gser
ཛམ་ལ	Jambhala	dzam la
ཛམ་སེར	dzam bha la yin yellow aspect	dzam ser
ཛམ་བྷ་ལ	jambhala (yidam), tibetan pluto or god of riches	dzam bha la
ཛམ་བྷ་ལ་ནག་པོ	manifestation of dzam bha la in black	dzam bha la nag po
ཛམ་བྷ་ལ་སེར་པོ	dzam bha la in yellow aspect	dzam bha la ser po
ཛམ་ལྷ	tibetan pluto or god of riches	dzam lha
ཛའ་ཏི	myristica fragrans, nutmeg	dza' ti
ཛར་ཛར	'dzar 'dzar	dzar dzar
ཛར་ཛོར	dza re dzo re	dzar dzor
ཛར་ཛོར་གང་བྱུང་བྲིས་པ	scribble	dzar dzor gang byung bris pa
ཛར་ཛོར་ཅན	ragged	dzar dzor can
ཛར་རེ་བ	'phro dang bcas pa, 'phro can,//las 'phro dzar re ba	dzar re ba
ཛི་ད་ན་གཉིས	{dzi na mi tra} and {da na shi la}	dzi da na gnyis
ཛི་ན་མི་ཏྲ	[Skt] Jinamitra ['victorious spiritual friend.' great pandit in 8th century Kashmir. Invited to Tibet during the reign of Trisong Deutsen] tr many sutras and shastras, spread vinaya 1 of the {bod l...	dzi na mi tra
ཛི་བ་ཀ	honey, nectar	dzi ba ka
ཛི་ལི་ཛ་ལ	cancer, plague	dzi li dza la
ཛིག	four	dzig
ཛིལ	(not in das)	dzil
ཛུ	figure 79	dzu
ཛུ་ཏ	shoe	dzu ta
ཛུ་རི་ཅི	Zurich	dzu ri ci
ཛུང་ཛུང	3rd son of emperor dzung of han dynasty	dzung dzung
ཛུན་དུ	falsely	dzun du
ཛུབ་ཛུབ	to wag, to whisk	dzub dzub
ཛུའི་ཆིའུ	soccer	dzu'i chi'u
ཛུས་ཏེ	miraculously	dzus te
ཛེ	figure 109	dze
ཛེ་ཏ་རི	buddhist saint of bengal	dze ta ri
ཛེ་ཏའི་ཚལ	grove in sravasti where buddha resided for many years	dze ta'i tshal
ཛེ་ཙེ	chimney	dze tse
ཛེ་ཚེ	chimney	dze tshe
ཛེར	[p 'dzer],, said, hung on [rope], pierced	dzer
ཛོ	figure 139	dzo
ཛོ་ཀི	practitioner	dzo ki
ཛོ་དབལ་ཐིས་ཀྱི་སྔགས་བྱད	tantra of destructive magic of dzo dbal thi mantra	dzo dbal this kyi sngags byad
ཛོད་པ་ཞི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བདུན	CHN	dzod pa zhi byed kyi chos bdun
ཛོར་པོ	dirty	dzor po
བཛ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	vajra heruka	bdza he ru ka
བཛུན་དུ	falsely	bdzun du
མཛ་གཙུགས	make/ cultivate friends	mdza gtsugs
མཛང་བླུན་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་མདོ	Skt.	mdzang blun zhes bya ba'i mdo
ཌམོམུརཁ	nama-sutra, T. 341	Damomurkha
མཛང་ར	cradle, "cozy fence" {thugs} {mdzang	mdzang ra
མཛངས	wise	mdzangs
མཛངས་པ	1) brave; 2) learned, wise; 3) noble, virtuous	mdzangs pa
མཛངས་པའི་ཁང	house of a hero, house where heroes exhibit feats of arms	mdzangs pa'i khang
མཛངས་སྤྱོད	learned/ wise-brave/	mdzangs spyod
མཛངས་བླུན	the wise and the foolish	mdzangs blun
མཛངས་བླུན་མདོ	sutra of the wise and the foolish	mdzangs blun mdo
མཛངས་བླུན་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Wise and the Foolish; Skt. damomurkha-nama-sutra, T 341 mdzangs blun zhes bya ba'i mdo {mdzangs blun zhes bya ba'i mdo} * S tra of the Wise and Foolish mdzangs blun zhes bya ba'i mdo {...	mdzangs blun zhes bya ba'i mdo
མཛངས་མ	good/ learned woman	mdzangs ma
མཛངས་མ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་སྙེ་ཁུར	vegetable medicine used to heal sores and wounds	mdzangs ma 'bras kyi snye khur
མཛངས་ཤིང་མཁས་པ	learned, wisebrave, noble- virtuous, clear, smart, wise, intelligent, shyness, upright	mdzangs shing mkhas pa
མཛད་ཀ	activating HVG 2269	mdzad ka
མཛད་ཀྱིན	practicing	mdzad kyin
མཛད་དཀའ	difficulty, problem	mdzad dka'
མཛད་འཁུར	responsibility [h]	mdzad 'khur
མཛད་འཁུར་བཞུ	take responsibility [h]	mdzad 'khur bzhu
མཛད་འགན	responsibility [h]	mdzad 'gan
མཛད་འགན་བཞུ	take responsibility [h]	mdzad 'gan bzhu
མཛད་སྒོ	function	mdzad sgo
མཛད་སྒོ་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	ceremony/ function/ official celebration [for a business/ profession], things 1 has to do, activities	mdzad sgo rten 'brel
མཛད་སྒོ་གཟབ་རྒྱས	elaborate/ grand ceremony	mdzad sgo gzab rgyas
མཛད་སྒོའི་གྱོན་ཆས	clothes for an official function	mdzad sgo'i gyon chas
མཛད་སྒོའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	master of ceremonies	mdzad sgo'i spyi khyab
མཛད་སྒོའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ	master of ceremonies	mdzad sgo'i spyi khyab pa
མཛད་བརྒྱ	biography of Buddha's skyes rabs 108	mdzad brgya
མཛད་ཆེན	[important] official function/ celebration/ ritual	mdzad chen
མཛད་ཇུས	plan, policy [h]	mdzad jus
མཛད་རྗེས	result of action, accomplishment, success, achievement	mdzad rjes
མཛད་སྟོན	ceremony/ function/ official celebration [business/ professional, things 1 has to do, activities	mdzad ston
མཛད་སྟོན་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	master of ceremonies	mdzad ston kyi spyi khyab
མཛད་སྟོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	ceremony/ function/ official celebration [for a business/ profession], things 1 has to do, activities	mdzad ston rten 'brel
མཛད་སྟོན་གཟབ་རྒྱས	elaborate/ grand ceremony	mdzad ston gzab rgyas
མཛད་དུ་གསོལ	pray do it, let it be done	mdzad du gsol
མཛད་རྣམ	biography [h]	mdzad rnam
མཛད་པ	1.(Tha dad pa) mdzad pa, mdzad pa, mdzod,, do, act, buddha activity tradition, composed, deeds, acts, write, compose (h	mdzad pa
མཛད་པ་སྐོར་མང	many stories	mdzad pa skor mang
མཛད་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish actions	mdzad pa sgrub pa
མཛད་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the eleven deeds of Padmasambhava; biography revealed by Ratna Lingpa	mdzad pa bcu gcig
མཛད་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 deeds, 12 great deeds performed by gshen rab mi bo che	mdzad pa bcu gnyis
མཛད་པ་ཐ་མ་བསྟན་པ	show the last deed (h), pass away)	mdzad pa tha ma bstan pa
མཛད་པ་དོན་མངའ་བ	beneficial/ meaningful actions	mdzad pa don mnga' ba
མཛད་པ་པོ	author, writer; creator, maker, doer	mdzad pa po
མཛད་པ་ཕུལ་བྱུང	masterpiece, outstanding deed/ work [h]	mdzad pa phul byung
མཛད་པ་འབྲས་བུ་ཡོད་པ	action having a fruition	mdzad pa 'bras bu yod pa
མཛད་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་ནས	having accomplished all his deeds	mdzad pa yongs su rdzogs nas
མཛད་པའི་སྐུ	effect	mdzad pa'i sku
མཛད་པའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	actions of buddha activity	mdzad pa'i phrin las
མཛད་པའོ	do, act, tradition, composed, deeds - write, compose (H)	mdzad pa'o
མཛད་པར	perform	mdzad par
མཛད་པས	carry	mdzad pas
མཛད་པས་བསྡུས་པ་གསུམ	the three inclusions of action	mdzad pas bsdus pa gsum
མཛད་སྤྱོད	actions and behavior, conduct, manners [h]	mdzad spyod
མཛད་སྤྱོད་སྐྱོང་ལུགས	behavior patterns	mdzad spyod skyong lugs
མཛད་སྤྱོད་བཟང་པོ	ceremony for {byed sgo} = business, profession, things one has to do, activities 2270	mdzad spyod bzang po
མཛད་ཕྱོགས	course, policy	mdzad phyogs
མཛད་ཕྲིན	buddha activity. Abbr. of {mdzad pa'i phrin las} activity of deeds (h)	mdzad phrin
མཛད་འཕྲིན	activities, buddha activity [h]	mdzad 'phrin
མཛད་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 deeds of the supreme emanational body [one remaining in tusita, two descent and entry into the womb, three taking birth, four proficiency in the arts, five renouncing the world, six practising a...	mdzad ba bcu gnyis
མཛད་བྱང	author's colophon	mdzad byang
མཛད་བྱུས	plan, policy [h]	mdzad byus
མཛད་བྲེལ	busy [h]	mdzad brel
མཛད་ཚུལ	life story	mdzad tshul
མཛད་ཚུལ་ལོ་རྒྱུས	the tale of [...]	mdzad tshul lo rgyus
མཛད་གཞུང	schedule, program [h]	mdzad gzhung
མཛད་གཟིགས	mdzad sgor gzigs pa, rgyal khab khag gi sku mgron lhan rgyas kyis rang rgyal gyi dus chen rten 'brel la mdzad gzigs gnang ba, reviewing [EG a ceremony] [h]	mdzad gzigs
མཛད་གཟིགས་གདེངས་ཆ	reviewing stand, rostrum [h]	mdzad gzigs gdengs cha
མཛད་གཟིགས་སྡིངས་ཆ	reviewing stand, rostrum [h]	mdzad gzigs sdings cha
མཛད་གཟིགས་གནང	review [EG a ceremony by officials] [h]	mdzad gzigs gnang
མཛད་བཟང	our good deeds	mdzad bzang
མཛད་རིམ	schedule	mdzad rim
མཛའ	friend; loving	mdza'
མཛའ་མཁན	head whore, madam	mdza' mkhan
མཛའ་གྲོགས	relatives and friends	mdza' grogs
མཛའ་གྲོགས་མཐུན་ཚོགས	friendship association	mdza' grogs mthun tshogs
མཛའ་གྲོགས་དང་དོ་ནུབ་མཁོན	a friend who loves you in the morning hates you by the evening	mdza' grogs dang do nub mkhon
མཛའ་འགྲོགས	relatives and friends, very good friend, friendship, good will	mdza' 'grogs
མཛའ་འགྲོགས་མཐུན་ཚོགས	friendship association	mdza' 'grogs mthun tshogs
མཛའ་འགྲོགས་དང་དོ་ནུབ་མཁོན	a friend who loves you in the morning hates you by the evening	mdza' 'grogs dang do nub mkhon
མཛའ་གཅུགས	love	mdza' gcugs
མཛའ་གཅུགས་པ	cultivated friendship	mdza' gcugs pa
མཛའ་སྙིང་དུ་སྡུག་པའི་བཤེས	lovers and friends	mdza' snying du sdug pa'i bshes
མཛའ་མཐུ་ཀྱི་འཚམས་འདྲི	friendship visit	mdza' mthu kyi 'tshams 'dri
མཛའ་མཐུན	blo sems mthun po, mdza' mthun rgyal khab, mdza' mthun chings yig, mdza' mthun sel med, mdza' mthun 'thus tshogs, mdza' mthun rogs res	mdza' mthun
མཛའ་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	friendly nations	mdza' mthun rgyal khab
མཛའ་མཐུན་ཆིངས་ཡིག	treaty of friendship	mdza' mthun chings yig
མཛའ་མཐུན་མཉམ་འབྲེལ	friendly relations	mdza' mthun mnyam 'brel
མཛའ་མཐུན་མཉམ་ལས	friendship and cooperation mdza' mthun mnyam las kyi chings yig treaty of friendship and cooperation	mdza' mthun mnyam las
མཛའ་མཐུན་མཉམ་ལས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationship of friendship and cooperation	mdza' mthun mnyam las kyi 'brel ba
མཛའ་མཐུན་འཐུས་ཚོགས	friendship mission/ delegation mdza' mthun mna' 'brel rogs res ching yig - treaty of friendship alliance and mutual assistance	mdza' mthun 'thus tshogs
མཛའ་མཐུན་བྱེད	have a friendship be friends [- ly]/ close/ intimate/ cordial	mdza' mthun byed
མཛའ་མཐུན་རོགས་རེས	friendship and mutual assistance	mdza' mthun rogs res
མཛའ་མཐུན་སེལ་མེད	unbreakable/ perfect friendship	mdza' mthun sel med
མཛའ་སྡུག	friendly	mdza' sdug
མཛའ་ན་མོ	the beloved	mdza' na mo
མཛའ་པ་ལས་མཛའ	become more and more friendly, increase intimacy	mdza' pa las mdza'
མཛའ་པ་ལས་མཛའ་བོར་ཕྱུར	improve friendship	mdza' pa las mdza' bor phyur
མཛའ་པོ	friendly,	mdza' po
མཛའ་སྤུན	mdza' [spouses?] zhing mthun pa'i siblings	mdza' spun
མཛའ་ཕྱོགས	[beloved] relatives	mdza' phyogs
མཛའ་བ	close, compatible, intimate, friends	mdza' ba
མཛའ་བ་རྣམས	loving married couple	mdza' ba rnams
མཛའ་བ་འབྱེད	break a friendship	mdza' ba 'byed
མཛའ་བའི་གཉེན་བཤེས	beloved spouses and relatives	mdza' ba'i gnyen bshes
མཛའ་བའི་ཚིག་ལ་རྣ་བ་ཉན	hang onto words of intimacy	mdza' ba'i tshig la rna ba nyan
མཛའ་བའི་སེམས་རྟེན་བྱེད	as tokens of our love	mdza' ba'i sems rten byed
མཛའ་བར་གྱུར	{phan tshun mdza' bar gyur te} they became friends	mdza' bar gyur
མཛའ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིང	became fast friends	mdza' bar gyur cing
མཛའ་བས་བཅིངས	SA gnyen phyogs	mdza' bas bcings
མཛའ་བོ	1) friend; 2) spouse; 3) mdza' bo astr conjunction [one of the 27 astr conjunctions, sbyor ba nyer bdun]	mdza' bo
མཛའ་བོའི་ལྷ	the star lha mtshams	mdza' bo'i lha
མཛའ་བོས་བསླུས་པ	betrayed by intimates	mdza' bos bslus pa
མཛའ་བྱེད	cultivate friendship, make friends	mdza' byed
མཛའ་བྲལ	enemy	mdza' bral
མཛའ་འབྲེལ	friendship, friendly relations	mdza' 'brel
མཛའ་མོ	1) mistress, girlfriend, female friend; 2) chu skyar bird [fish-eating water-bird]	mdza' mo
མཛའ་གཙུགས	make/ cultivate friends	mdza' gtsugs
མཛའ་གཙུགས་པ	cultivate friendship	mdza' gtsugs pa
མཛའ་བརྩེ	love, friendship	mdza' brtse
མཛའ་བརྩེ་མཉམ་ལས	friendly cooperation	mdza' brtse mnyam las
མཛའ་བརྩེ་དམ་ཟབ	brtse dung gi 'brel ba dam zhing zab pa, 'thab grogs mdza' brtse dam zab can	mdza' brtse dam zab
མཛའ་བརྩེ་ལྡན་པ	dear, beloved mdza' brtse ldan pa'i blo mthun rnams la dear comrades	mdza' brtse ldan pa
མཛའ་བརྩེའི	affectionate, cordial	mdza' brtse'i
མཛའ་མཛའ་བཤེས	companions	mdza' mdza' bshes
མཛའ་ལོག་པ	unfriendly, in disagreement	mdza' log pa
མཛའ་བཤེས	friends, relatives	mdza' bshes
མཛའ་བཤེས་ཁྱིམ	your family home	mdza' bshes khyim
མཛའ་བཤེས་གཉེན་འདུན	one's spouse, relatives, and companions	mdza' bshes gnyen 'dun
མཛའ་བཤེས་མཉམ་ལས	friendly cooperation	mdza' bshes mnyam las
མཛའ་བཤེས་རྩ་ལག	friends and relatives	mdza' bshes rtsa lag
མཛའ་སེམས	love, friendship	mdza' sems
མཛའ་ལྷའི་གྲོགས་པོ	Mercury	mdza' lha'i grogs po
མཛར་བ	provisions for a journey, lunch taken to work	mdzar ba
མཛར་ར་མཛེར་རེ	pitted with small pox,	mdzar ra mdzer re
པོཅཀ	marked, warty, blotchy	pock
མཛས་རིག་པར་ཁང	fine arts publishing house	mdzas rig par khang
མཛས་རིག་རྩོམ་རིགས	literary works	mdzas rig rtsom rigs
མཛས་རིག་ལག་རྩལ	fine arts	mdzas rig lag rtsal
མཛས་རིག་སློབ་ཚན	art lessons/ classes	mdzas rig slob tshan
མཛུ་གུ	fingers, toes	mdzu gu
མཛུ་གུ་བཙུགས	pointed at	mdzu gu btsugs
མཛུ་གུ་བཙུགས་པ	point	mdzu gu btsugs pa
མཛུ་གུ་འཛུགས	point at	mdzu gu 'dzugs
མཛུ་གུའི་ཚིགས	knuckle	mdzu gu'i tshigs
མཛུག་གུ	fingers, toes	mdzug gu
མཛུག་གུ་བཙུགས	pointed at	mdzug gu btsugs
མཛུག་གུ་འཛུགས	point at	mdzug gu 'dzugs
མཛུག་གུ་འཛུགས་ས	sor mdzub 'dzugs sa'i dmigs yul	mdzug gu 'dzugs sa
མཛུག་གུ་ཤིང་ཏོག	banana	mdzug gu shing tog
མཛུག་རྒྱུས	finger ring	mdzug rgyus
མཛུག་ཆུང	little finger/ toe	mdzug chung
མཛུག་ཐུང	little finger/ toe	mdzug thung
མཛུག་མོ	finger	mdzug mo
མཛུབ	finger, toe	mdzub
མཛུབ་ཀེར	stiff finger	mdzub ker
མཛུབ་ཀྱང	stiff finger	mdzub kyang
མཛུབ་ཀྱེར	stiff finger	mdzub kyer
མཛུབ་ཀྲབ་ལྕགས་པར	typewriter	mdzub krab lcags par
མཛུབ་དཀྲིས	[gold/ silver] ring in form of a coil	mdzub dkris
མཛུབ་སྐྱིས	finger ring	mdzub skyis
མཛུབ་བརྐྱངས	extended finger	mdzub brkyangs
མཛུབ་ཁྲིད	1) finger-pointing instruction/ intimation/ guidance; 2) instruction pointing out "this" is the meaning *)	mdzub khrid
མཛུབ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	instruct, guide	mdzub khrid byed pa
མཛུབ་འཁྲིད	1) finger-pointing instruction/ intimation/ guidance; 2) instruction pointing out "this" is the meaning *)	mdzub 'khrid
མཛུབ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	instruct, guide	mdzub 'khrid byed pa
མཛུབ་གང	measure = the space between the tops of thumb and forefinger [index finger = mdzub mo &, de'i mo'i dreg pa yod med mtshams nas tshigs gsum pa'i bar gyi cha shas de la mdzub gang zer bas de dang sor...	mdzub gang
ཕོ༹རེ	finger, six fingers in size	fore
མཛུབ་གུ	measure = distance between the tops of thumb and middle finger	mdzub gu
མཛུབ་གུ་གང	measure = distance between the tops of thumb and middle finger	mdzub gu gang
མཛུབ་རྒྱུས	gold/ silver etc finger ornament	mdzub rgyus
མཛུབ་ངོ	copper smith's tool mgo skon bye brag cig	mdzub ngo
མཛུབ་ངོའི་མགོ་སྐོན	copper tool	mdzub ngo'i mgo skon
མཛུབ་ལྕིབས	thimble, gloves	mdzub lcibs
མཛུབ་ཆུང	little finger [syn: tha chung dang mthe'u chung ngo	mdzub chung
མཛུབ་ཉུལ	eat by kneading w the fingers	mdzub nyul
མཛུབ་ཉུལ་རྒྱག	eat by kneading w the fingers	mdzub nyul rgyag
མཛུབ་སྟོན	point out, indicate, guid[ance], direct[ion], instruct[ion], directive	mdzub ston
མཛུབ་སྟོན་གྱི་ནུས་པ	guiding function/ power	mdzub ston gyi nus pa
མཛུབ་སྟོན་གྱི་བསམ་བློ	guiding idea/ theory	mdzub ston gyi bsam blo
མཛུབ་སྟོན་མཐོ་ཤོས	the highest instruction	mdzub ston mtho shos
མཛུབ་སྟོན་བྱེད	point out, indicate, guide, direct, instruct	mdzub ston byed
མཛུབ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	point out, indicate	mdzub ston byed pa
མཛུབ་སྟོན་དམིགས་བསལ	special directive	mdzub ston dmigs bsal
མཛུབ་ཐུང	little finger/ toe	mdzub thung
མཛུབ་ཐེལ	fingerprint	mdzub thel
མཛུབ་ཐེལ་རྒྱག	make/ take fingerprints	mdzub thel rgyag
མཛུབ་ཐེལ་རྒྱག་པ	make/ take fingerprints	mdzub thel rgyag pa
མཛུབ་མཐོ	mtheb mdzub gnyis brkyangs pa'i bar gyi ring tshad	mdzub mtho
མཛུབ་གནོན་ལྕགས་པར	typewriter	mdzub gnon lcags par
མཛུབ་མོ	1) index finger/ toe [ston byed dang, lag pa'i yal ga, sor mo]; 2) finger, toe)	mdzub mo
མཛུབ་མོ་ཀེར་བ	to point a finger	mdzub mo ker ba
མཛུབ་མོ་དང་པོ	index finger	mdzub mo dang po
མཛུབ་མོ་མེད་པ	one without fingers	mdzub mo med pa
མཛུབ་མོ་འཛུགས་པ	point at, point out 2272	mdzub mo 'dzugs pa
མཛུབ་མོས་གར་བསྟན་ཤར	it arose where [s]he pointed the finger	mdzub mos gar bstan shar
མཛུབ་མོས་བཏོན་པ	tried to take it out with her forefinger	mdzub mos bton pa
མཛུབ་མོས་བཙུགས	thrust in the finger	mdzub mos btsugs
མཛུབ་མོས་རི་སྟོན	superficially/ partially show/ point out mdzub mos ri ston zhib brtag med par	mdzub mos ri ston
བྱེད་མི་རུང	superficial pointing out w/o detailed examination is no good	byed mi rung
མཛུབ་མོས་སློང	point out	mdzub mos slong
མཛུབ་ཙུགས	finger	mdzub tsugs
མཛུབ་བཙུགས	put your finger on that	mdzub btsugs
མཛུབ་རྩེ	finger tip	mdzub rtse
མཛུབ་ཚིགས	finger joints	mdzub tshigs
མཛུབ་ཚུགས	[a pointing] finger	mdzub tshugs
མཛུབ་ཚུགས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	to point out	mdzub tshugs su bstan pa
མཛུབ་ཞ	finger cap, thimble	mdzub zha
མཛུབ་གཟུགས	a kind of * chisel, graver, puncheon	mdzub gzugs
མཛུབ་བཟོ་མགོ་སྐོན	copper tool	mdzub bzo mgo skon
མཛུབ་རེས་ཀྱི་ཐེལ་ཚེ	fingerprint	mdzub res kyi thel tshe
མཛུབ་ཤ	thimble	mdzub sha
མཛུབ་ཤུབས	leather etc. index finger guard/ covering, gloves	mdzub shubs
མཛུབ་ཤུབས་ལྕིབས་མོ	leather etc. index finger guard/ covering, gloves	mdzub shubs lcibs mo
མཛེ	leprosy, leprosy	mdze
མཛེ་ཀླད	brains of one who has died from leprosy	mdze klad
མཛེ་སྐྱ	kind of leprosy	mdze skya
མཛེ་ཁྲག	blood of a person who died of leprosy	mdze khrag
མཛེ་རྒོད	very virulent kind of leprosy	mdze rgod
མཛེ་རྒོད་འབྲུམ	leprosy type disease w many lesions	mdze rgod 'brum
མཛེ་རྒྱག	get leprosy	mdze rgyag
མཛེ་ཅན	leprosy	mdze can
མཛེ་ཐོད་མ	a deity	mdze thod ma
མཛེ་ལྡུམ་བཀྲ་ཤིས	{mdze ldum bkra shis} ldum med.	mdze ldum bkra shis
མཛེ་ནད	leprosy class diseases, Hanson's disease [chu ser nag po dang gnyan srin parpa ta gnyis 'doms pa la rgyab rten klus byas par grags pa'i lus kyi gnas kun ma rung ba rul myag ltar 'gyur ba'i nad de, ...	mdze nad
མཛེ་ནད་ཀྱིས་ཐེབས་པ	stricken with leprosy	mdze nad kyis thebs pa
མཛེ་ནད་ཀྱིས་ཤི་བའི་ཁྲག	blood of a person who died of leprosy	mdze nad kyis shi ba'i khrag
མཛེ་ནད་པ	leper	mdze nad pa
མཛེ་ཕོ	male leper	mdze pho
མཛེ་མོ	female leper	mdze mo
མཛེ་རྨོག	helmet	mdze rmog
མཛེ་ཚབ༹	{mdze tshva} salt	mdze tshva
མཛེ་རིགས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 kinds of leprosy class diseases CHN	mdze rigs bco brgyad
མཛེམ་མ་བྱེད	you are welcome, don't mention it, not at all	mdzem ma byed
མཛེར་དུམ	piece of wood	mdzer dum
མཛེར་པ	excrescence ; 1) knot in wood; 2) wart on the skin	mdzer pa
མཛེར་ཕྲན	small wood knot/ wart, excrescence	mdzer phran
མཛེར་བ	wart, growth excrescence, know in wood	mdzer ba
མཛེར་བུ	small wood knot/ wart, excrescence	mdzer bu
མཛེར་མལ	knothole in wooden boards	mdzer mal
མཛེས་ཀོང	mkhur 'dzum gyi kong bu	mdzes kong
མཛེས་ཀྱོང	skyes pa pho mo gad mo shor dus 'gram pa gyas gyon du 'char ba'i 'dzum kong	mdzes kyong
མཛེས་བཀྲག	lustrous, beautiful, bright	mdzes bkrag
མཛེས་སྐུ	beautiful body	mdzes sku
མཛེས་གྲགས	mdzes pa'i ming grags	mdzes grags
མཛེས་དགའ	delightful	mdzes dga'
མཛེས་དགའ་བོ	Nanda mdzes dga' bo mdzes ma dang yud tsam 'bral mi phod pa - Nanda and Sundari, who could not bear to be apart for even an instant	mdzes dga' bo
མཛེས་དགའ་བོའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of Nanda and Sundari	mdzes dga' bo'i rtogs brjod
མཛེས་རྒྱན	a beautiful ornament	mdzes rgyan
མཛེས་རྒྱན་བཏགས་པ	ornate	mdzes rgyan btags pa
མཛེས་རྒྱན་སྤྲས་པ	make up, dress up	mdzes rgyan spras pa
མཛེས་ཅན	a leper	mdzes can
མཛེས་ཆ	beauty	mdzes cha
མཛེས་ཆ་བཏོད་པ	makes for an aesthetic [drawing]	mdzes cha btod pa
མཛེས་ཆོས	one who naturally indulges in pleasure	mdzes chos
མཛེས་ཆོས་མཆོར་སྒེག་ཅན	sgeg nyams khengs dregs dang ldan pa	mdzes chos mchor sgeg can
མཛེས་འཆོས	make beautiful, create beauty, dressed up	mdzes 'chos
མཛེས་འཆོས་སྤྲས	dress up mdzes 'jam longs spyod kyis mchod pa made offerings of various beautiful and soft articles	mdzes 'chos spras
མཛེས་ལྗོང	scenery, landscape	mdzes ljong
མཛེས་ལྗོངས	scenery, landscape	mdzes ljongs
མཛེས་བརྗིད	beautiful and grand 2273	mdzes brjid
མཛེས་བརྗིད་གཉིས་ལྡན	beautiful and grand	mdzes brjid gnyis ldan
མཛེས་ཉམས	charm, beauty, attractiveness, elegance	mdzes nyams
མཛེས་ཉམས་ཅན	charming, beautiful, attractive, elegant	mdzes nyams can
མཛེས་ཉམས་དོད་པོ	graceful	mdzes nyams dod po
མཛེས་ཉམས་མེད་པ	graceless	mdzes nyams med pa
མཛེས་སྙན	wonderful, marvelous, nice	mdzes snyan
མཛེས་ཐོག་མཛེས་བརྩེགས	beauty piled on beauty, wasted effort, paint the lily	mdzes thog mdzes brtsegs
མཛེས་མདངས	beauty, radiance, gorgeousness	mdzes mdangs
མཛེས་མདངས་ཅན	beautiful, radiant, gorgeous	mdzes mdangs can
མཛེས་འདོད་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས	occasion of desiring beauty	mdzes 'dod kyi gnas skabs
མཛེས་ལྡན	endowed with beauty	mdzes ldan
མཛེས་ལྡན་འགྲོ	causing in beauty	mdzes ldan 'gro
མཛེས་ལྡན་མ	Kantamati,	mdzes ldan ma
མཛེས་སྡུག	handsome, beauty [-iful], pleasing	mdzes sdug
མཛེས་སྡུག་ལྡན	handsome, beautiful, pleasing	mdzes sdug ldan
མཛེས་སྡུག་ལྡན་པ	handsome, beautiful, pleasing	mdzes sdug ldan pa
མཛེས་སྡུག་ལྡན་པའི་ཡུལ་ལྗོངས	beautiful place/ scenery	mdzes sdug ldan pa'i yul ljongs
མཛེས་སྡུག་ཡིད་འོང	beautiful and pleasant	mdzes sdug yid 'ong
མཛེས་སྣང	handsome, beauty [-iful], pleasing	mdzes snang
མཛེས་སྣང་ལྡན་པ	handsome, beautiful, pleasing	mdzes snang ldan pa
མཛེས་པ་སྐྱོན་མེད	{byis pa shin tu mdzes pa skyon med} perfectly formed, beautiful boy	mdzes pa skyon med
མཛེས་པ་ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པ	the most spectacular	mdzes pa khyad par 'phags pa
མཛེས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན་པ	was perfect in everyway	mdzes pa yon tan ldan pa
མཛེས་པ་སྲིད་ན་རྣམ་པར་པ	the world's chief	mdzes pa srid na rnam par pa
མཛེས་པའི་བཀྲག་མདངས	lustrous, beautiful, bright	mdzes pa'i bkrag mdangs
མཛེས་པའི་གོམ་སྟབས	elegant walk	mdzes pa'i gom stabs
མཛེས་པའི་འགྱིང་བག	elegant carriage	mdzes pa'i 'gying bag
མཛེས་པའི་རྒྱན	beautifying ornaments	mdzes pa'i rgyan
མཛེས་པའི་རྨ་ཅན	yos	mdzes pa'i rma can
མཛེས་པར	beautifully	mdzes par
མཛེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	make beautiful	mdzes par byed pa
མཛེས་པར་གཤེགས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of going gracefully [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, mdzes par mkhas pa nyid kyis mdzes shing yid du 'ong bar gshegs pa	mdzes par gshegs pa'i dpe byad
མཛེས་པོ	pretty, good-looking, smart, handsome, beautiful, beauty, charm, fair, sightly, sweet, pretty, beautiful	mdzes po
མཛེས་པོ་བཟོ་བ	beautify	mdzes po bzo ba
མཛེས་བོ	beautiful	mdzes bo
མཛེས་བྱད	1) beautiful face; 2) cosmetic implements/ substances)	mdzes byad
མཛེས་བྱས	ornament, jewelry	mdzes byas
མཛེས་བྱེད	37the year of {rab byung} Syn {chu mo yos}	mdzes byed
མཛེས་སྦྱིན	finest sandal wood perfume	mdzes sbyin
མཛེས་སྦྱིན་བྱེད	{aa ga ru} herb	mdzes sbyin byed
མཛེས་མ	beautiful woman, pretty girl	mdzes ma
མཛེས་མ་མཆོག	charming young woman or girl	mdzes ma mchog
མཛེས་མི་མཛེས	beautiful or ugly	mdzes mi mdzes
མཛེས་མོ	beautiful woman	mdzes mo
མཛེས་རྩལ	fine arts	mdzes rtsal
མཛེས་རྩལ་གློག་བརྙན	art movie	mdzes rtsal glog brnyan
མཛེས་རྩལ་རིག་པ	aesthetics	mdzes rtsal rig pa
མཛེས་རྩལ་སློབ་གྲྭ	school of fine arts	mdzes rtsal slob grwa
མཛེས་རྩལ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	college of fine arts	mdzes rtsal slob grwa chen po
མཛེས་རྩལ་སློབ་གསོ	fine arts education	mdzes rtsal slob gso
མཛེས་མཚོན	ltar snang gi 'dra chags, mdzes mtshon gyi 'cham po, gzhan gyi mig sngar mdzes mtshon byed pa, kha'i mdzes mtshon tsam du 'di skad zhus pa	mdzes mtshon
མཛེས་མཛེས	pomp, extravagance, debauchery	mdzes mdzes
མཛེས་མཛེས་བྱེད	1) 'dzem byed pa ste dbus kyi phal skad la mdzangs byed pa; 2) mdzes pa'i rnam 'gyur ched du ston pa)	mdzes mdzes byed
མཛེས་ཟོལ	pretty facade, pretending everything is beautiful	mdzes zol
མཛེས་བཟང	rnam pa mdzes and gshis ka bzang ba, khyim thab mdzes bzang	mdzes bzang
མཛེས་བཟོ	make beautiful	mdzes bzo
མཛེས་བཟོའི་བླུག་རྫས	cosmetics	mdzes bzo'i blug rdzas
མཛེས་ཡ་ལེ	elegant	mdzes ya le
མཛེས་རིག	fine arts	mdzes rig
མཛེས་རིག་གློག་བརྙན	art movie	mdzes rig glog brnyan
མཛེས་རིག་རིག་པ	aesthetics	mdzes rig rig pa
མཛེས་རིག་སློབ་གྲྭ	school of fine arts	mdzes rig slob grwa
མཛེས་རིག་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	college of fine arts	mdzes rig slob grwa chen po
མཛེས་རིག་སློབ་གསོ	fine arts education	mdzes rig slob gso
མཛེས་རིགས་ལ་དགའ་པོ་བྱེད་མཁན	aesthetic	mdzes rigs la dga' po byed mkhan
མཛེས་ལམ	mig sngar mdzes chos, ltar snang mdzes lam gyis mi phan pa, phyi tshul tsam du mdzes lam byed pa	mdzes lam
མཛེས་ལེགས	beautiful and good/ auspicious	mdzes legs
མཛེས་ཤིང་སྡུག	exquisite	mdzes shing sdug
མཛེས་ཤིང་ཡིད་དུ	charming, attractive, fascinating	mdzes shing yid du
མཛེས་ཤིང་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ	beautiful	mdzes shing yid du 'ong ba
མཛེས་གཤེགས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of going gracefully [mdzes par gshegs pa'i dpe byad dang don gcig mdzo,//1) glang dang, 'bri'am gyag dang, ba mo 'dus pa las byung ba'i phyugs rigs shig //mdzo 'gro ba mi rig shig 'g...	mdzes gshegs kyi dpe byad
མཛོ	{dzo}, ale, cross between a yak bull and a cow	mdzo
བེཏྭེཨེན་ཡཀ	bull and the common 2274 cow, cross between a yak and a cow or between a bull and a 'bri	between yak
མཛོ་དཀར	white mdzo	mdzo dkar
མཛོ་ཁལ་ར་འགེལ	las 'gan sogs mi theg bzhin du dkri ba'i dpe, 'khos babs dang mi mthun pa'i mdzo khal ra 'gel	mdzo khal ra 'gel
མཛོ་ཁལ་ལུག་ཁལ	mdzo la mdzo khal dang lug la lug khal te, las 'gan sogs gang la de 'tsham 'gel ba'i dpe, rang 'khos dang 'tshams pa'i mdzo khal lug khal so sor dkri ba	mdzo khal lug khal
མཛོ་གབ༹་པ	white faced mdzo	mdzo gva pa
མཛོ་གེ	a district in Tibet	mdzo ge
མཛོ་གྱུང་པོ	bzhon par 'os pa'i dul ma	mdzo gyung po
མཛོ་དགེ	Dzogeh, in Domey	mdzo dge
མཛོ་རྒོད	wild cattle	mdzo rgod
མཛོ་སྒང	tsha ba mdzo sgang rdzong [bod rang skyong ljongs kyi shar rgyud du yod cing rgyal mo rngul chu rdzong de brgyud nas 'bab, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung ni wa mda' ru yod]	mdzo sgang
མཛོ་སྒལ	load for a mdzo to carry	mdzo sgal
མཛོ་སྔུན་སྦལ་བས་བཅད་པ	bar bcad pa'am lam bkag pa'i dpe	mdzo sngun sbal bas bcad pa
མཛོ་གཉའ་སྦྲེལ	plow yoked to two mdzo	mdzo gnya' sbrel
མཛོ་གདང	rope to tie many mdzos in line	mdzo gdang
མཛོ་བདག་ལ་མཛོ་རྒྱུས	cha rgyus cha tshang yod mkhan la gzhan gyis rgyus mnga' yod khul byas pa'i dpe, khos nga la nga'i nang gi gnas tshul bshad pa ni mdzo bdag la mdzo rgyus bshad pa zhig rang red	mdzo bdag la mdzo rgyus
མཛོ་རྡང	rope to tie many mdzos in line	mdzo rdang
མཛོ་སྣ	1) nail bug can nam khug pa can; 2) sman dpyad las bshad pa'i lus kyi rus pa'i bye brag cig; 3) mdzo sna bone *)	mdzo sna
མཛོ་དཔོན	mdzo herder	mdzo dpon
མཛོ་ཕོ	male cross of yak and cow	mdzo pho
མཛོ་ཕྲུག	young mdzo, calf of a mdzo mo	mdzo phrug
མཛོ་སྦྲེལ	two mdzo connected by a rope	mdzo sbrel
མཛོ་མར	butter of jomo yaks	mdzo mar
མཛོ་མོ	female of hybrid birth, common dairy beast in tibet	mdzo mo
མཛོ་མོ་མཁར	{mdzo mo mkhar	mdzo mo mkhar
མཛོ་མོ་འཇོ་བ	milk a yak-cow	mdzo mo 'jo ba
མཛོ་མོ་ནུ་རྩེ	{mdzo mo nu rtse} mt [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs mtsho lho bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi thung te rdzong gi ri bo zhig]	mdzo mo nu rtse
མཛོ་མོ་ཤིང	caragana tibetica kom., tree whose wood resembles red sandal wood	mdzo mo shing
མཛོ་མོའི་རྟོལ	mdzo mo's calf	mdzo mo'i rtol
མཛོ་ཚྭ	medicinal salt	mdzo tshwa
མཛོ་མཛངས་བླུན	a mahayana sutra mdzo g.yung - cross between cow and yak, place in tibet	mdzo mdzangs blun
མཛོ་ར	mdzo pen	mdzo ra
མཛོ་ཤད	three year old mdzo	mdzo shad
མཛོད་ཀྱི་འགོ་པ	storehouse/ treasury caretaker/ phyag mdzod	mdzod kyi 'go pa
མཛོད་ཀྱི་ཏི་ཀ	abhidharmakosa tika	mdzod kyi ti ka
མཛོད་ཀྱི་སྦུག	treasure-safe	mdzod kyi sbug
མཛོད་ཁང	treasure house	mdzod khang
མཛོད་ཁང་པ	storekeeper	mdzod khang pa
མཛོད་གོས	fine garments kept in storage for special occasions, 'brug tshang 'khor gyi ri mo having yellow brocade	mdzod gos
མཛོད་དགེ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	mdzod dge
མཛོད་འགྲེལ	commentary on the Abhidharma Kosha of Vasubandhu	mdzod 'grel
མཛོད་འགྲེལ་མངོན་པའི་རྒྱན	{mdzod 'grel mngon pa'i rgyan} Tibetan commentary on abhidharma	mdzod 'grel mngon pa'i rgyan
མཛོད་འགྲེལ་ལས	the commentary on the Abhidharmakosha says:	mdzod 'grel las
མཛོད་སྒོ	door to the storeroom	mdzod sgo
མཛོད་ལྔ	five treasuries they are either the five stores GD	mdzod lnga
མཛོད་ལྔ་སྟག་རྩེ	guardian deity of Sikkim	mdzod lnga stag rtse
མཛོད་ཅིག	bring, make	mdzod cig
མཛོད་གཅིག་མ	{'phags pa'i gsol 'debs mdzod gcig ma} reverential petition to Avalokiteshvara; attributed to the Tibetan king Songtsen Gampo	mdzod gcig ma
མཛོད་ཆེན	large storehouse/ treasury	mdzod chen
མཛོད་ཆེན་རྣམ་པར་ལྔ	five great treasuries, the major works of {'jam mgon kong sbrul blo gros mtha' yas} Jamgön Kongtrül the Great [18131899]	mdzod chen rnam par lnga
མཛོད་ཆེན་པོ	big store house	mdzod chen po
མཛོད་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	Five Great Treasuries, collected, structured, and completed by Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye	mdzod chen po lnga
མཛོད་འཆང	uphold	mdzod 'chang
མཛོད་ཇུས	kind of fine satin, jus zhes pa'i gos chen bye brag pa zhig	mdzod jus
མཛོད་འཇོག	stockpile 2275	mdzod 'jog
མཛོད་འཇོག་བྱེད	stockpile, store up	mdzod 'jog byed
མཛོད་བཏགས	finest kind of kata/ white scarf	mdzod btags
མཛོད་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta that is like a treasury TSE	mdzod lta bu'i sems bskyed
མཛོད་ཐ་མ	patala tree	mdzod tha ma
མཛོད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	put in a safe place/ hiding	mdzod du 'jug pa
མཛོད་དུ་སྦེད་པ	put in a safe place/ hiding	mdzod du sbed pa
མཛོད་བདུན	Seven Treasuries, by Longchen Rabjam	mdzod bdun
མཛོད་ལྡན	Kaushambhi, capital in ancient India	mdzod ldan
མཛོད་ལྡན་མ	ri byi'i chung ma	mdzod ldan ma
མཛོད་ནས་འདོན་པ	bring out of safekeeping	mdzod nas 'don pa
མཛོད་པ	treasurer, person in charge of a store house/ warehouse	mdzod pa
མཛོད་དཔོན	treasurer	mdzod dpon
མཛོད་སྤུ	circle of hair between the eyebrows. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being. Urna [buddha]. hair-tuft. psychic aperture. urnakesha. hair ringlet...	mdzod spu
མཛོད་སྤུ་ཅན	woollen blanket, spider, ram	mdzod spu can
མཛོད་སྤུས	hair-tuft	mdzod spus
མཛོད་ཕུག	Abhidharma (Bönpo)	mdzod phug
མཛོད་བྱེད	bur shing, treasurer, person in charge of a store house/ warehouse	mdzod byed
མཛོད་ཙ་བ	text on Abhidharma by Vasubandhu	mdzod tsa ba
མཛོད་ཚ་བ	{mdzod tsha ba} text on Abhidharma by Vasubandhu	mdzod tsha ba
མཛོད་འཛིན	1) treasurer; 2) Indian region of koo sa la)	mdzod 'dzin
མཛོད་འཛིན་པ	treasurer	mdzod 'dzin pa
མཛོད་ལས	from the abhidharmakosa	mdzod las
མཛོད་ལས་བཤད་པའི་ཤེས་པ་བཅུ	TSE	mdzod las bshad pa'i shes pa bcu
མཛོད་ལུས	chu shing ?	mdzod lus
མཛོའི་སྐེ་རྒྱན	gzhi snam ras kyis bzos pa'i dkyil du ting ting gcig dang, mtha' skor du mgron bu'i tshom bu bsgrigs pa rmon mdzo'i ske rgyan zhig	mdzo'i ske rgyan
མཛོའི་དོ་དམ་བྱེད་མཁན	mdzo herder	mdzo'i do dam byed mkhan
མཛོལ་བུ	grief, dejection, a snare, a trap	mdzol bu
རྨད་བྱུང་གཉིས་ཏེ་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN 'dzam gling rgyan drug mchog gnyis - = rgyan drug mchog gnyis 'dzam gling rgyal 'dus - UN 'dzam gling rgyal po - the king [Trisong Deutsen], the great king 'dzam gling rgyal po - 1 of 4 guardia...	rmad byung gnyis te bcu gnyis
གསལ་བར་མཐོང་བྱེད་དུ་རྦ་ན	or 'dzam gling chen po'i rgyas bshad snod	gsal bar mthong byed du rba na
བཅུད་ཀུན་གསལ་མེ་ལོང	the rare 1830 redaction of the monumental Tibetan work on the geography of the world; by {the fourth btsan po no mon han sprul sku 'jam dpal chos kyi bstan 'dzin 'phrin las} 'dzam gling rgyas bshad...	bcud kun gsal me long
མནའ་འབྲེལ	World Federation of Democratic Youth 'dzam bu gling dmar shog tshogs chen World Communist Meetings 'dzam bu gling mdzes pa'i rgyan drug [CHN] 'dzam bu gling zhi bde - World Peace 'dzam bu gling zhi...	mna' 'brel
བའི་མི	peace loving people of the world 'dzam bu gling las kyi sa pa - previously collected good and bad fruitions happiness and suffering automatic very great and quick causal power zhing hence called la...	ba'i mi
ཡོཨུ	"the holder" "fixation" "the watcher "] 'dzin pa - (6) black aconite Black aconite grows in upper valley meadows bong nga nag po with white flowers shas can. divisions: the leaves, pith, and flower...	you
ཐེ་ཏེཨཆིང་ཝིཐོཨུཏ་ཨིདེནཏིཕ༹ྱིང་ཐེ་དིཕ༹ཕེ༹རེནཏ་ལེབེ༹ལས	the expedient meaning, the real meaning and the indirect	the teaching without identifying the different levels
རྫ	terracotta	rdza
རྫ་ཀོང	clay oil burner	rdza kong
རྫ་ཀོར	earthen cup or vessel turned out, earthen bowl, little dish	rdza kor
རྫ་སྐུ	clay statue	rdza sku
རྫ་ཁང	pottery	rdza khang
རྫ་ཁུང	rdza sa 'don yul sa khung	rdza khung
རྫ་ཁོག	jar, crock, vat, SA sa'i khog ma	rdza khog
རྫ་ཁོག་ཆེན་པོ	arrogant	rdza khog chen po
རྫ་ཁྲལ	to Tibetan govt. tax in vessels that must be paid by potters	rdza khral
རྫ་མཁན	potter	rdza mkhan
རྫ་མཁན་གྱི་འཁོར་སྐོར་བ	turn the potter's wheel	rdza mkhan gyi 'khor skor ba
རྫ་མཁན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	potter's wheel	rdza mkhan gyi 'khor lo
རྫ་མཁན་གྱི་རིགས	potter caste	rdza mkhan gyi rigs
རྫ་གྱམ	tile	rdza gyam
རྫ་གྲི	potter's knife	rdza gri
རྫ་རྔ	Mrdanga. A kind of large drum	rdza rnga
རྫ་རྔ་ཁ་གཅིག་པ	kind of drum	rdza rnga kha gcig pa
རྫ་རྔ་ཆེན་པོ	large kind of kettle drum	rdza rnga chen po
རྫ་རྔ་རྡུང	to sound the drum; ngang pas mgrin pa'i + - wild geese sound the sonorous drum of their throats	rdza rnga rdung
རྫ་རྔ་མ	clay-drum goddess	rdza rnga ma
རྫ་ལྕུམ	rdza khrod la skyes pa'i lcum	rdza lcum
རྫ་ཆབ	See {sa mtsho'i rdza chab} rocky [highland]. spring	rdza chab
རྫ་ཆས	implement made of clay 2285	rdza chas
རྫ་ཆུ	1) water flowing among mt. rocks; 2) river zla chu / * [= lan-ts'ang chiang]	rdza chu
རྫ་ཆུ་ཁ	an area in Kham [mss]	rdza chu kha
རྫ་ཆུ་ཁ་དགེ་མང་དགོན་པ	Gemang Monastery, in Kham Dzachuka	rdza chu kha dge mang dgon pa
རྫ་ཆུ་བསིལ་མ	cool streams	rdza chu bsil ma
རྫ་ཆུང	small pot	rdza chung
རྫ་ཆེན	large earthen pot or vessel	rdza chen
རྫ་ཉུངས	med. aa bhi sha	rdza nyungs
རྫ་ཏི	nutmeg	rdza ti
རྫ་ཏིབ	earthen teapot	rdza tib
རྫ་གཏུགས	rdza snod kyi gas chag gso ba	rdza gtugs
རྫ་སྟོད	rdza stod rdzong [mtsho sngon zhing chen khongs yus hru'u bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi lho rgyud dang gdang la'i byang phyogs su yod, rdzong mi dmangs srid gzhung de bya phug thang du yod	rdza stod
རྫ་དམ	clay liquor jug	rdza dam
རྫ་དུག	headache and vomiting from going in high passes or hot humid places	rdza dug
རྫ་དྲག	exigent, urgent	rdza drag
རྫ་དྲག་དང་དངང་སྐྲག	tension	rdza drag dang dngang skrag
རྫ་མདོག	brown, pigment li smug [li khri [red lead] and black ink [snag tsha], mthing [lapis, azurite, dark blue], ba bla [mineral med.] mixed color]	rdza mdog
རྫ་རྡོ	landslide	rdza rdo
རྫ་སྡེར	clay dish	rdza sder
རྫ་ནག་རི	rdza rdo nag thibs ber yod pa'i mt.	rdza nag ri
རྫ་སྣོད	clay vessel	rdza snod
རྫ་པག	tile, brick	rdza pag
རྫ་པར	clay rdza khog gi par	rdza par
རྫ་དཔལ་སྤྲུལ	alias {o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po} {dpal sprul rin po che} b. 1808	rdza dpal sprul
རྫ་དཔལ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	SA dpal sprul rin po che	rdza dpal sprul rin po che
རྫ་སྤང	rocky mts and those w meadows rdza sprul ngag dbang bstan 'dzin nor bu 1867-1940 - Dzatrül Ngawang Tendzin Norbu	rdza spang
རྫ་ཕག	tile, brick	rdza phag
རྫ་ཕུར	stone rdo la bzo dbyibs 'don byed kyi lcags phur	rdza phur
རྫ་ཕོར	clay cup/ bowl [kham phor]	rdza phor
རྫ་བུམ	clay pot/ vase/ bottle/ jar	rdza bum
རྫ་བེན	clay water vessel	rdza ben
རྫ་བོ	clay pot/ vessel	rdza bo
རྫ་བྲ	species of bra ba, species of lagomys, small tailless rodent	rdza bra
རྫ་བྲག	rock on a clay mt	rdza brag
རྫ་མ	jar, crock, vat, vessel, earthenware, pitcher, pot (unglazed, urnshaped, bellied vessels), small pot, pipkin, clay	rdza ma
རྫ་མི	small creature living among the rocks shaped like a little man	rdza mi
རྫ་མུ	Jammu [province of India]	rdza mu
རྫ་མོ་ཧུང་འདྲ	Hung-like Rock Formation; rocks in the form of the letter Hung at Samye Chimphu	rdza mo hung 'dra
རྫ་མོ་ཧཱུཾ་འདྲ་མ	hung-like rocky mountain	rdza mo hUM 'dra ma
རྫ་གཞོང	clay basin/ trough	rdza gzhong
རྫ་ཟོར་བ	Dzasorwa, on the road from Domey to Lhasa	rdza zor ba
རྫ་གཟོང	clay vessel making tool	rdza gzong
རྫ་བཟོ་བ	potter	rdza bzo ba
རྫ་ཡུང	med. aa bhi sha	rdza yung
རྫ་ཡུལ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	rdza yul
རྫ་ཡུལ་ཆུ	rdza yul chu river	rdza yul chu
རྫ་ར	bra ba or aa bra living among the rocks	rdza ra
རྫ་རི	slate, rocky mountains, crags, boulder, solid rock, dense rock	rdza ri
རྫ་རི་ཁ་སྦྱོར	having used a stirring stick, example of proper/improper mixing	rdza ri kha sbyor
རྫ་རི་མཐོན་པོ	rocky heights	rdza ri mthon po
རྫ་རི་རས་པ་ཤེས་རབ་དཔལ	a bka' rgyud pa master	rdza ri ras pa shes rab dpal
རྫ་རེ་ཛོ་རེ་ཛ་ཛོར་གྱིས	helter skelter	rdza re dzo re dza dzor gyis
རྫ་རེ་ཛོ་རེ་ར་སྤུང་བ	huddle	rdza re dzo re ra spung ba
རྫ་རེ་ཛོ་རེར་སྤུང་བ	to huddle	rdza re dzo rer spung ba
རྫ་རེ་རྫོ་རེ	burdensome, cumbersome, redundant	rdza re rdzo re
རྫ་རོང	gorge or valley or plain filled with boulders	rdza rong
རྫ་རོང་ཕུ་བླ་མ	{ngag dbang bstan 'dzin nor bu} 1867-1940	rdza rong phu bla ma
རྫ་ལེབ	tile	rdza leb
རྫ་ལེབ་ལ	{rdza leb la} Pass [Sikkim-T]	rdza leb la
རྫ་ས	place clay articles are made	rdza sa
རྫ་སོ	firing clay	rdza so
རྫ་སོ་གཏོང	fire clay	rdza so gtong
རྫ་སོ་བཏང་བ	fired bricks/ clay things	rdza so btang ba
རྫ་སོ་མ་བཏང་བ	unfired clay	rdza so ma btang ba
རྫ་སོའི་ར་སྐོར	place where clay vessels are fired	rdza so'i ra skor
རྫ་སླང	earthen pan for cooking, heating stove which uses charcoal or dried	rdza slang
ཅཏཏླེ	dung	cattle
རྫ་གསར	new clay things	rdza gsar
རྫ་གསེང	among rocky mts.	rdza gseng
རྫ་གསེབ	among rocky mts.	rdza gseb
རྫ་གསོང	frying vessel rdza lheb g.yu rtsi can - glazed tile	rdza gsong
རྫག་ཏོ	lots, much	rdzag to
རྫག་དོ	lots, much	rdzag do
རྫག་རྫོག	dirty, muddy	rdzag rdzog
རྫག་རྫོབ	mire, marl	rdzag rdzob
རྫང	chest, box	rdzang
རྫང་བ	SA rdzong ba	rdzang ba
རྫངས	send	rdzangs
རྫངས་ཐོ	list or register of messages and messengers for revenue collection	rdzangs tho
རྫངས་པ	SA mi mngags pa	rdzangs pa
རྫད	(not in das)	rdzad
རྫད་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	substantially established	rdzad su grub pa
རྫབ	mud, mire 2286	rdzab
རྫབ་ཅན	heinous thug	rdzab can
རྫབ་ཅན་གྱི	outrageous	rdzab can gyi
རྫབ་ཆེ་བ	1) 'dam rdzab che ba; 2) ya med tsha po'am nyes pa'i las kar mi 'jigs pa	rdzab che ba
རྫབ་ཆེན	ya med tsha po'am nyes pa'i las la mi 'jigs pa	rdzab chen
རྫབ་རྟོལ་མཆིན་མ	rdzab ya zhes pa mchin pa'i ri mo lta bu yod pa'i shing gi wa ba zhig	rdzab rtol mchin ma
རྫབ་དོང	muck/ mire [hole], cesspool, sewer	rdzab dong
རྫབ་ཕག་སྤུ་མ	rdzab ya zhes pa phag pa'i spu ris lta bu yod pa'i shing gi wa ba zhig	rdzab phag spu ma
རྫབ་ཕོར	rdzab ya'i bowl/ cup	rdzab phor
རྫབ་བི་རྫུབ་བི	uncertain/ deceptive, phony	rdzab bi rdzub bi
རྫབ་བེ་རྫོབ་བེ	1) false in nature; 2) loathsome filthy muck/ rubbish	rdzab be rdzob be
རྫབ་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus lha ldan ordinary people's village houses outside and inside du rdzab chu rdzab lud gsog nyar chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	rdzab 'dzin
རྫབ་རྫུབ	sham, emptiness, falsehood	rdzab rdzub
རྫབ་རྫོབ	mire, marl	rdzab rdzob
རྫབ་ཞལ	rdzab wood bowl	rdzab zhal
རྫབ་འུག་སྒྲོ་མ	rdzab ya ri mo owl feather like markings ris	rdzab 'ug sgro ma
རྫབ་ཡ	phor pa dkrug byed shing gi wa ba zhig	rdzab ya
རྫབ་ཡ་མེ་འབར་མ	best bowl turning shing gi wa ba rdzab ya la mtshan mo me 'od 'phro skad	rdzab ya me 'bar ma
རྫབ་ཡའི་ཕོར་པ	shing rdzab ya las bzos pa'i drinking vessel	rdzab ya'i phor pa
རྫབ་ཡུར	sewage canal	rdzab yur
རྫབ་ལུད	manure, dung	rdzab lud
རྫམ་གླིང་རྒྱན་གཅིག	a deity	rdzam gling rgyan gcig
རྫམ་ཤིང	drel la sga rgyag skabs brla sha'i 'phred du gtong rgyu'i shing hril	rdzam shing
རྫར་རྫོར	shabby, haphazardly	rdzar rdzor
རྫར་རྫོར་ཅན	shaggy	rdzar rdzor can
རྫས	(material) substance; substantial entity; article, object, thing/ matter, substance/ riches, possessions; real, material thing, materials, thing, matter, object. ritual objects 11.1	rdzas
རྫས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	substance in relation to the sense spheres [ggd]	rdzas kyi skye mched
རྫས་ཀྱི་དགག་དབྱེ	dgag dbye dngos kyi cho ga'i gras shig ste, dbyar nang gi rnyed pa bgo ba'i ched du, bskos pa'i dge slong gis khab la sogs pa'i rdzas phran tshegs kyis rdzas kyi dgag dbye'i sgo phye nas sbyin bdag...	rdzas kyi dgag dbye
རྫས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	Syn {rdzas yod kyi dngos po}	rdzas kyi dngos po
རྫས་ཀྱི་ཆ	substantial parts [ggd]	rdzas kyi cha
རྫས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	substantial bindus	rdzas kyi thig le
རྫས་ཀྱི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	substantial atoms [ggd]	rdzas kyi rdul phran
རྫས་ཀྱི་འཕོ་བ	substance phowa	rdzas kyi 'pho ba
རྫས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	concrete existence	rdzas kyi bye brag
རྫས་ཀྱི་བླ	[arch] khang skyong ngam mkho ba'i yo byad srung mkhan	rdzas kyi bla
རྫས་ཀྱི་དབང	nominal empowerment through material substances	rdzas kyi dbang
རྫས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པ	rang bzhin brjod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses bdag po dang 'brel ba'i rdzas gang rung gi gnas lugs drang por brjod pa'i rgyan zhig	rdzas kyi rang bzhin brjod pa
རྫས་ཀྱི་རིག་འཛིན	vidyadhara of substances	rdzas kyi rig 'dzin
རྫས་ཀྱི་ཤན	substances defiling by association	rdzas kyi shan
རྫས་བཀྲམ་ཁང	exhibition hall	rdzas bkram khang
རྫས་ཁུག	1) dngos rdzas blug snod khug ma; 2) bod mda'i 'bar rdzas blug snod	rdzas khug
རྫས་ཁུང	1) brag rdo gshag skabs rdzas blug sa'i mig khung; 2) bod mda'i sna rdzas blug sa'i lcags lheb ai khung can	rdzas khung
རྫས་གང་ཡོད་པ་རྣམས	all his property	rdzas gang yod pa rnams
རྫས་གྲི	me mda'i rdzas dbur dus dgos pa'i shing gi gri chung zhig	rdzas gri
རྫས་གྲིབ	the defiled ---/position [of a dam nyams]	rdzas grib
རྫས་གྲུབ	substantial establishment [ggd]	rdzas grub
རྫས་གྲུབ་རྫས་སུ་མ་གྲུབ་ཅིང	does not exist as substance	rdzas grub rdzas su ma grub cing
རྫས་འགལ	{rdzas 'gal ba} substantial discrepancy/ contradiction	rdzas 'gal
རྫས་འགྱུར	chemistry	rdzas 'gyur
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་འགྱུར་བ	chemical changes	rdzas 'gyur gyi 'gyur ba
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྒྱུ	chemical element	rdzas 'gyur gyi rgyu
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	chemical reaction	rdzas 'gyur gyi rgyu 'gyur ldog
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་ཆ	chemical raw materials, chemicals	rdzas 'gyur gyi rgyu cha
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་དངོས་རྫས	chemicals	rdzas 'gyur gyi dngos rdzas
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་ནུས་པ	chemical power/ energy/ action	rdzas 'gyur gyi nus pa
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas 'gyur gyi lud
རྫས་འགྱུར་གྲུབ་ཆ	chemical element	rdzas 'gyur grub cha
རྫས་འགྱུར་ཉམས་ཞིབ	chemical experiment	rdzas 'gyur nyams zhib
རྫས་འགྱུར་བརྟག་དཔྱད	chemical test/ investigation/ analysis/ examination	rdzas 'gyur brtag dpyad
རྫས་འགྱུར་དབྱེ་ཞིབ	chemical analysis 2287	rdzas 'gyur dbye zhib
རྫས་འགྱུར་སྨན་རིགས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	pharmaceutical factory	rdzas 'gyur sman rigs bzo grwa
རྫས་འགྱུར་འཚོ་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas 'gyur 'tsho lud
རྫས་འགྱུར་བཟོ་ལས	chemical industries	rdzas 'gyur bzo las
རྫས་འགྱུར་རིག་པ	chemistry	rdzas 'gyur rig pa
རྫས་རྒྱུ	matter, substance	rdzas rgyu
རྫས་རྒྱུན	1) substantial entity; 2) continuity of substance rdzas rgyun} - 1) substantial entity; 2) continuity of substance [a thing's persistance over many moments EG, from barley seed the sprout growing' ...	rdzas rgyun
རྫས་སྒྲིབ	the defiled --- / position [of a dam nyams]	rdzas sgrib
རྫས་བརྒྱད	the eight substances as is rdzas brgyad kyi rdul pha rab "subtlest atoms of the eight substances". GET list. [mss]	rdzas brgyad
རྫས་ངན	evil smelling/ noxious/ poisonous substance, dug yod pa'i rdzas cha	rdzas ngan
རྫས་སྔགས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	substances, mantras and gestures	rdzas sngags phyag rgya
རྫས་གཅིག	same substantial entity	rdzas gcig
རྫས་གཅིག་པ	substantially identical	rdzas gcig pa
རྫས་གཅིག་ལ་ལྡོག་པ་ཐ་དད	distinct within being the same substance, distinct within being substantially identical [ggd]	rdzas gcig la ldog pa tha dad
རྫས་ཆུང་ངུ	small object	rdzas chung ngu
རྫས་ཆོས	1) substantial thing/dharma, having a real absolute ability to perform a function; 2) substantial nature du gyur pa'i quality of form EG, its impermanence	rdzas chos
རྫས་བརྗོད་པ་ཐོག་མའི་གསལ་བྱེད	thog mar bkod pa'i rdzas kyi gsal byed des phyi ma kun gsal bar byed pa'i rgyan zhig, gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses	rdzas brjod pa thog ma'i gsal byed
རྫས་ཉིད་དུ་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence of/ passing into substantiality	rdzas nyid du thal 'gyur
རྫས་གཏེར	terma of materials	rdzas gter
རྫས་བཏགས	abbr. of {rdzas yod dang btags yod}	rdzas btags
རྫས་བཏགས་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the difference between being substantial and imputed	rdzas btags gyi khyad par
རྫས་ཐ་དད	substantially different	rdzas tha dad
རྫས་ཐ་དད་པ	different substantial entity [rdzas kyi sgo nas so so bar skyes pa'i chos gzugs shes gnyis lta bu'o	rdzas tha dad pa
རྫས་ཐག	fuse	rdzas thag
རྫས་ཐིག	substance drop	rdzas thig
རྫས་ཐུན	for every time a gun is shot rdzas 'bor gyi tshad gzhi	rdzas thun
རྫས་འཐུམ	satchel charge	rdzas 'thum
རྫས་འཐུམ་རྒྱག	set off a satchel charge	rdzas 'thum rgyag
རྫས་དམ	1) sman dang mngar cha sogs blug snod cig; 2) me mda'i rdzas blug snod dam be	rdzas dam
རྫས་དྲི	'bar byed kyi rdzas dri	rdzas dri
རྫས་དྲུག	CHN	rdzas drug
རྫས་མདེའུ	ammunition	rdzas mde'u
རྫས་མདེལ	ammunition	rdzas mdel
རྫས་ལྡན	one possessing property, rich man	rdzas ldan
རྫས་སྤྱི་ཉིས་མགོ	x. [mss]	rdzas spyi nyis mgo
རྫས་ཕུར	material kilaya	rdzas phur
རྫས་ཕྲ	bacteria, microbe	rdzas phra
རྫས་ཕྲ་བ	subtle things, things too small to be seen	rdzas phra ba
རྫས་སྦྱོར	chemistry, chemicals	rdzas sbyor
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་འགྱུར་བ	chemical changes	rdzas sbyor gyi 'gyur ba
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུ	chemical element	rdzas sbyor gyi rgyu
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་འགྱུར་ལྡོག	chemical reaction	rdzas sbyor gyi rgyu 'gyur ldog
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་ཆ	chemical raw materials, chemicals	rdzas sbyor gyi rgyu cha
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་དངོས་རྫས	chemicals	rdzas sbyor gyi dngos rdzas
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ནུས་པ	chemical power/ energy/ action	rdzas sbyor gyi nus pa
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas sbyor gyi lud
རྫས་སྦྱོར་གྲུབ་ཆ	chemical element	rdzas sbyor grub cha
རྫས་སྦྱོར་ཉམས་ཞིབ	chemical experiment	rdzas sbyor nyams zhib
རྫས་སྦྱོར་བརྟག་དཔྱད	chemical test/ investigation/ analysis/ examination	rdzas sbyor brtag dpyad
རྫས་སྦྱོར་བརྟག་དཔྱོད	chemical test/ investigation/ analysis/ examination	rdzas sbyor brtag dpyod
རྫས་སྦྱོར་དབྱེ་ཞིབ	chemical analysis	rdzas sbyor dbye zhib
རྫས་སྦྱོར་སྨན་རིགས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	pharmaceutical factory	rdzas sbyor sman rigs bzo grwa
རྫས་སྦྱོར་འཚོ་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas sbyor 'tsho lud
རྫས་སྦྱོར་ཞིང་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas sbyor zhing lud
རྫས་སྦྱོར་བཟོ་ལས	chemical industries	rdzas sbyor bzo las
རྫས་སྦྱོར་རིག་པ	chemistry rdzas ma tshang ba'i khyad par brjod pa khyad par brjod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, brjod 'dod dngos po gang zhig gi rdzas sam, yo byad kyi cha lag ma tshang yang, tshang ba dang '...	rdzas sbyor rig pa
རྫས་མ་ཡིན་པ	not a form having cause/ thing	rdzas ma yin pa
རྫས་མེ	explosives, dynamite	rdzas me
རྫས་མེ་རྒྱག	blow up	rdzas me rgyag
རྫས་མཚུངས	rigs 'dra grangs mnyam pa ste mig shes rdzas gcig yin pa na de'i 'khor tshor ba'ang rdzas gcig kho na yin pa lta bu	rdzas mtshungs
རྫས་མཚུངས་པ	similar substances rdzas mtshungs pa mar dang zho gnyis similar substances butter and cheese	rdzas mtshungs pa
རྫས་འཛིན	concretizing	rdzas 'dzin
རྫས་རྫོང་རྒྱག	ramrod powder	rdzas rdzong rgyag
བཞིན་ཀྱི་རྟགས	nature sign which implies a qualification or agent which is not another substantial entity	bzhin kyi rtags
རྫས་གཞོང	gunpowder 'dul gzhong	rdzas gzhong
རྫས་ཟོམ	gunpowder and keg	rdzas zom
རྫས་བཟོའི་སྐོར་ཐང	in gunpowder mu zi sogs mang nyung sre lugs kyi skor thang	rdzas bzo'i skor thang
རྫས་འོས་པ	lawful	rdzas 'os pa
རྫས་ཡོད	to exist substantially; substantially existent [ggd]	rdzas yod
རྫས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག	substantially existent person	rdzas yod kyi gang zag
རྫས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'byung ba'i rdul la sogs pa rnams la bem po'i rdzas dang/ yul gyi rnam par shes pa la 'char zhing rnam par rig pa la ni shes pa'i rdzas zhes 'jog go}	rdzas yod kyi dngos po
རྫས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	real/ substantially existent dharmas	rdzas yod kyi chos
རྫས་ཡོད་ཀྱི་བདག	substantially existent self	rdzas yod kyi bdag
རྫས་ཡོད་ཆོས་གསུམ	the three kinds of dharmas of substantial existences	rdzas yod chos gsum
རྫས་ཡོད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	claiming substantial existence	rdzas yod du smra ba
རྫས་ཡོད་དྲུག	CHN	rdzas yod drug
རྫས་ཡོད་བཞི	the four kinds of substantial existence	rdzas yod bzhi
རྫས་རབ༹	powder horn	rdzas rva
རྫས་རགས་པ	coarse visible things	rdzas rags pa
རྫས་རིགས	goods, things	rdzas rigs
རྫས་རིགས་གཅིག	same substantial type, same type of substantial entity, similarity of substantial type	rdzas rigs gcig
རྫས་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	different things arising in the perpretuation/ proliferation of a single continuity [EG black and white pots made from the same clay, different thoughts arising from the same mental continuum lta b...	rdzas rigs gcig pa
རྫས་རིལ	1) gunpowder 'dul byed rdo ril; 2) substantial pill/ small lump	rdzas ril
རྫས་རུ	powder horn	rdzas ru
རྫས་རླུང	natural gas	rdzas rlung
རྫས་ལས་མིན་པ	formless things not arising substantially like mind	rdzas las min pa
རྫས་ལུད	chemical fertilizer	rdzas lud
རྫས་ལུས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the siddhis of physical action [siddhi producing practice [rdzas ral gri dang mig sman sogs la brten nas mkha' spyod du 'gro ba dang, lus phung po rags pa sbyangs nas phra ba dang yang ba sogs kyi ...	rdzas lus longs spyod kyi dngos grub
རྫས་སུ	substantially really, truly	rdzas su
རྫས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	substantially established	rdzas su grub pa
རྫས་སུ་བཅུ	ten basic categories	rdzas su bcu
རྫས་སུ་ནི་མེད	substance does not exist, it is not substantial/ real	rdzas su ni med
རྫས་སུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	insubstantial	rdzas su ma grub pa
རྫས་སུ་མེད་པ	w/o form/ substance / reality	rdzas su med pa
རྫས་སུ་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	those who say there is no substantial existence	rdzas su med par smra ba
རྫས་སུ་ཡོད	really/ substantially/ truly exist	rdzas su yod
རྫས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	substantially existing, truly existing	rdzas su yod pa
རྫས་སུ་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	those who say there is substantial existence	rdzas su yod par smra ba
རྫས་སེ་ལ	{rdzas se la} Pass [Sikkim-T]	rdzas se la
རྫས་སྲིབ	the defiled ---/position [of a dam nyams]	rdzas srib
རྫི	wind	rdzi
རྫི་སྐོར	shepherd's hut	rdzi skor
རྫི་ཆར	rain with wind	rdzi char
རྫི་ཆར་དྲག་པོ	rain storm	rdzi char drag po
རྫི་དུག	wind, smoke etc. poison spread by wind	rdzi dug
རྫི་རྡིབ	be in deteriorated health/ senile	rdzi rdib
རྫི་རྣོན་པོ	sharp-nosed/smelling	rdzi rnon po
རྫི་རྣོན་པོའི་སྒོ་ཁྱི	sharp nosed watch dog	rdzi rnon po'i sgo khyi
རྫི་པ	herdsman	rdzi pa
རྫི་ཕོ	male shepherd	rdzi pho
རྫི་ཕྱོགས	direction of the wind	rdzi phyogs
རྫི་ཕྱོགས་མིན	contrary wind, adverse wind	rdzi phyogs min
རྫི་བ	to trample	rdzi ba
རྫི་བོ	herdsman, shepherd, keeper; a herdsman	rdzi bo
རྫི་བོ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like a hardsman [sngon du sems can thams cad sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang la bkod de rjes su rang nyid 'tshang rgya bar bya snyam pa'i sems bskyed de dpe med pa'i sems bskyed ces kya...	rdzi bo lta bu'i sems bskyed
རྫི་བོ་མེ་ཏོག	{dpyid bsu} flower	rdzi bo me tog
རྫི་བོན་ཕྱུར་བ	bon of livestock	rdzi bon phyur ba
རྫི་མ	eye-lashes	rdzi ma
རྫི་མ་སྟུག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of thick eyebrows [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, sems can gyi tshogs drangs pa nyid kyis rdzi ma stug pa	rdzi ma stug pa'i dpe byad
ཨོཕ༹་ཐིཅཀ་ཨེཡེ	lashes	of thick eye
རྫི་མ་སྟུག་པོ	thick eye-lashes	rdzi ma stug po
རྫི་མི་བའི་གདེངས	indomitable confidence	rdzi mi ba'i gdengs
རྫི་མེད	1) dri tshor rgyu med pa; 2) spyang grung med pa; 3) w/o guard/protector; 4) w/o eyelashes	rdzi med
རྫི་མོ	female shepherd	rdzi mo
རྫི་ཡག་པོ	good sense of smell rdzi yag po'i khyis gcan gzan yong ba	rdzi yag po
རྫི་ར	anise; {Syn sngo dri zhim}	rdzi ra
རྫི་རིག	getting a scent of, perceiving, understanding	rdzi rig
རྫི་རིག་པ	known by smell, know from just a bit	rdzi rig pa
རྫི་རླུང	wind, breeze	rdzi rlung
རྫི་རླུང་འཇམ་པོ	soft breeze	rdzi rlung 'jam po
རྫི་རླུང་དྲག་པ	strong wind	rdzi rlung drag pa
རྫི་ཤ་ལུག་པ	bowel protruding from the anus	rdzi sha lug pa
རྫི་ཤེས་པ	smell, snuff, snuffle, knowing by smell	rdzi shes pa
རྫི་གསང	1) sense of smell; 2) clear/ bright intelligence, sensitivity, alertness	rdzi gsang
རྫི་གསང་དོད་པོ	sensitive, alert, awake to	rdzi gsang dod po
རྫི་གསང་བ	1) very intelligent/ clever, sensitivity, alertness; 2) dog	rdzi gsang ba
རྫི་གསང་བྱེད	be sensitive/ alert	rdzi gsang byed
རྫིག་ཉམས	elegance, magnificence, dignity, prestige ['dra chags mdog kha po]	rdzig nyams
རྫིག་ཉམས་དོད་པོ	elegant, dignified, magnificent	rdzig nyams dod po
རྫིག་ཉམས་ལྡན	elegant, dignified, magnificent	rdzig nyams ldan
རྫིག་ཉམས་ལྡན་པ	elegant, dignified, magnificent	rdzig nyams ldan pa
རྫིག་ཉམས་རྦད་དེ་ཤོར	completely lost their prestige	rdzig nyams rbad de shor
རྫིག་གཏམ	talk threatening others	rdzig gtam
རྫིག་འཐེན	nyams kyis 'then pa,//khyis rdzig 'then thag pa chad na med	rdzig 'then
རྫིག་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	elegant, dignified, magnificent	rdzig mdog kha po
རྫིག་པོ	grandeur, pomp, splendid	rdzig po
རྫིག་ཕྱི་ནང་སྟོང	external magnificence inner emptiness	rdzig phyi nang stong
རྫིག་བྱེད་མཁན	huffer	rdzig byed mkhan
རྫིག་རྫིག	1) scold, speak harsh words, address harshly, fly at; 2) frighten	rdzig rdzig
རྫིག་རྫིག་ལབ་པ	address one harshly and threateningly	rdzig rdzig lab pa
རྫིང	pool/ pond/ reservoir	rdzing
རྫིང་སྐྱོར	perimeter of a pond	rdzing skyor
རྫིང་གི་ཁའི་མཐའ་སྐྱོར	perimeter of a pond	rdzing gi kha'i mtha' skyor
རྫིང་གི་ནང་ན་ཁྲུས་བྱེད་པ	bathe in a pond	rdzing gi nang na khrus byed pa
རྫིང་དལ་བ	draw up water from a tank	rdzing dal ba
རྫིང་དྲུང་སྐྱེས	camphor	rdzing drung skyes
རྫིང་མནན་པ	[arch] water collected in a pond	rdzing mnan pa
རྫིང་ཕྱི	Gyelwa Jampa's residence	rdzing phyi
རྫིང་བུ	pool/ pond/ reservoir	rdzing bu
རྫིང་བུ་དལ་འབབ	rdzing bu dal 'bab	rdzing bu dal 'bab
རྫིང་བུ་དབྲལ་བ	take out water from a pond	rdzing bu dbral ba
རྫིང་བུའི་མཚན་མ	a kind of water bird	rdzing bu'i mtshan ma
རྫིང་དབོལ	take out water from a pond	rdzing dbol
རྫིངས	ship, ferry	rdzings
རྫིངས་ཆེན	large pond	rdzings chen
རྫིངས་གཏོང	float/ paddle on a raft	rdzings gtong
རྫིའུ	shepherd, fish fin	rdzi'u
རྫིའུ་ཆོས	preparing dishes for a nobleman or lama	rdzi'u chos
རྫིས	imp. of {rdzi ba}; to roll, crush	rdzis
རྫིས་ཐོག	stamping on, trample	rdzis thog
རྫིས་རྡོག་གཏོང་བ	to stomp, tread, step on	rdzis rdog gtong ba
རྫིས་པ	to trample	rdzis pa
རྫུ	pretence, false air, false show, falsehood, to pretend, impersonate	rdzu
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ	supernormal/ miraculous power	rdzu 'phrul
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྐང་པ	support of their miraculous powers	rdzu 'phrul rkang pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྐང་པ་བཞི	{rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi}	rdzu 'phrul rkang pa bzhi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྐང་བཞི	four stages of miraculous ability [R]	rdzu 'phrul rkang bzhi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི	miraculous, supernatural	rdzu 'phrul gyi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་བཀོད་པ	miraculous displays [R]	rdzu 'phrul gyi bkod pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་བཀོད་པ་བསྟན	showed [this] miracle, miraculous creations	rdzu 'phrul gyi bkod pa bstan
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང	SA rdzu 'phrul rkang pa	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the feet of miracuous concentration/ discernment/ endeavour [R]	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ་བཞི	four bases of supernormal/ miraculous power(s)	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ་བཞི་དཔྱོད	investigation as one of the four legs of miraculous action rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi brtson grus exertion rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi brtson grus exertion as one of the four legs of miraculou...	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi dpyod
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ་བཞི་བསམ	contemplation as one of the four legs of miraculous action	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi bsam
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐྱང་པ་བཞི	the four feet of miraculous power, the feet of miracuous enthusiasm	rdzu 'phrul gyi rkyang pa bzhi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མངོན་ཤེས	clairvoyance of magical emanation	rdzu 'phrul gyi mngon shes
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	(spiritual) miracles based on supernormal powers	rdzu 'phrul gyi cho 'phrul
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མཐུ་འགྲན་དུ་འཇུག	challenge to a contest of powers / magical abilities	rdzu 'phrul gyi mthu 'gran du 'jug
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་བྱ་བ	psychic power	rdzu 'phrul gyi bya ba
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མིག	1 of mngon shes lnga	rdzu 'phrul gyi mig
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མིག་གི་མངོན་ཤེས	miraculous clairvoyance	rdzu 'phrul gyi mig gi mngon shes
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཚོ་འཕྲུལ	miracles, magical display of miracles	rdzu 'phrul gyi tsho 'phrul
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱིས་ཕེབས་ཡོང	come miraculously	rdzu 'phrul gyis phebs yong
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་མངོན་ཤེས	higher forms of cognition	rdzu 'phrul mngon shes
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ལྔ	[Tserig]	rdzu 'phrul lnga
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཅན	weird, gifted with magic powers, miraculous	rdzu 'phrul can
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	the follower foremost in miraculous abilities	rdzu 'phrul can rnams kyi mchog
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་འཇིག་པ	destroy the illusion by seeing through it	rdzu 'phrul 'jig pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་སྟོན་པ	demonstrations of magical form {khengs dregs kyis rdzu 'phrul ston pa} demonstrations of magical form are often made through pride	rdzu 'phrul ston pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	unlimited miraculous powers	rdzu 'phrul thogs pa med pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་མཐུ་ཆེན	Dzutrül Tuchen	rdzu 'phrul mthu chen
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་བསྡིགས	threaten with miracles	rdzu 'phrul bsdigs
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་པ	lus kyis 'gro ba, yid ltar mgyogs pas)	rdzu 'phrul rnam pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	3 kinds of miracles (chos pas bsgyur ba	rdzu 'phrul rnam pa gsum
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་སྣ་ཚོགས་སྟོན་པ	to display various miracles	rdzu 'phrul sna tshogs ston pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་སྣ་ཚོགས་བསྟན་པ	showed various miraculous feats	rdzu 'phrul sna tshogs bstan pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཕུག	Cave of Miracles [on the eastern face of Kailash]	rdzu 'phrul phug
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་བཞི	Four magical powers. In the general vehicles, the 'four legs of miraculous action' (rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi) are mentioned as intention, determination, diligence, and dis- cernment; four caus...	rdzu 'phrul bzhi
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཡ་མ་ཟུང	a pair of miracles above and below [EG upper body blazing w fire and lower body flowing w water cho 'phrul lo	rdzu 'phrul ya ma zung
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཡེ་ཤེས	1 of drang srong bdun	rdzu 'phrul ye shes
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu	rdzu 'phrul la dbang
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ལ་དབང་པ	power to exhibit wonderful feats for bringing about the conversion of others	rdzu 'phrul la dbang pa
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ལ་དབང་བ	the power of miracle [byang chub sems dpa'i dbang bcu'i nang tshan zhig ste sangs rgyas kyi zhing thams cad du 'gro ba sogs rdzu 'phrul gyi bkod pa sna tshogs ston pa la dbang ba'o	rdzu 'phrul la dbang ba
རྫུ་བ	(tha dad pa) brdzus pa, brdzu ba, rdzus,, sgyur ba dang, make something like something it is not sgyur ba dang, ma yin pa yin pa ltar byed pa,//ri bong rdor brdzus,// rdzu bag rdzu'i nyams,//mkhas ...	rdzu ba
རྫུ་བ་ལགས	you are faking	rdzu ba lags
རྫུ་བག	manifestation, miracle, wonders; wonders	rdzu bag
རྫུ་བག་སྟོན་པ	appear in [various] manifestations	rdzu bag ston pa
རྫུ་བག་བྱེད་པ	SA rdzad kyi ngo 'dzum byed pa	rdzu bag byed pa
རྫུ་བྱེད་པ	ma yin yin khul byed pa	rdzu byed pa
རྫུ་བྱེད་པའི་ནད	faked illness	rdzu byed pa'i nad
རྫུ་བཟང	g.yo thabs bzang po 2291	rdzu bzang
རྫུ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	disguise	rdzu la chags pa
རྫུང་པོ་རྐྱང་རྐྱང	only false, falsehood pure and simple	rdzung po rkyang rkyang
རྫུན	untruthful speech, falsehood, lie, fiction, fable [Tserig] syn: de nyid bral dang, bden min, sbyar rdzun, log par mngon, slu tshig	rdzun
རྫུན་རྐུབ	rdzun gyi phug	rdzun rkub
རྫུན་རྐྱལ	rtag tu rdzun sha stag shod mkhan gyi ngan ming,//mi de rdzun rkyal zhig yin pa go byung bas khos bshad pa la yid ches ma byung	rdzun rkyal
རྫུན་འཁྲབ	adroit liar, deceiver	rdzun 'khrab
རྫུན་གྱི་མངོན་ཤེས་འཆད་པ	falsely claiming higher perceptions	rdzun gyi mngon shes 'chad pa
རྫུན་གྱི་ཆར་གཏོགས་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 included in falsity [dge tshul gyi bslab bya blangs 'das so gsum gyi nang gses, rdzun gyi char gtogs gzhi med dang, bag tsam gyis skur 'debs, dge 'dun dbyen, de rjes phyogs pa, khyim sun 'by...	rdzun gyi char gtogs bcu gnyis
རྫུན་རྒྱབ་རྫུན་གནོན	rdzun pa'i rgyab langs rdzun pas byas pa	rdzun rgyab rdzun gnon
རྫུན་བསྒྲིགས	many false words lhu bsgrigs nas bden mdog kha po ltar bcos pa	rdzun bsgrigs
རྫུན་བསྔགས	skyag rdzun gyi bsngags brjod	rdzun bsngags
རྫུན་ཆས	gyon chas brdzus ma	rdzun chas
རྫུན་ཆོས	{zol dang rdzun chos} deceit and falsehood	rdzun chos
རྫུན་གཏམ	lie	rdzun gtam
རྫུན་གཏམ་བཟོས་པ	mi bden pa'i skad cha rang gar bzos pa rdzun dang g.yo sgyu - lies and cheats	rdzun gtam bzos pa
རྫུན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	{ngag rdzun du smra ba spang} avoid lying	rdzun du smra ba
རྫུན་སྣང	deceptive	rdzun snang
རྫུན་པ	false; untrue	rdzun pa
རྫུན་པའི་རྣམ་པ	false aspect, illusory aspect [ggd]	rdzun pa'i rnam pa
རྫུན་པའི་རང་བཞིན	{yul gyi snang ba rdzun pa'i rang bzhin du go} come to understand that appearances are false by their very nature	rdzun pa'i rang bzhin
རྫུན་པར་ཡང་མེད་པ	nonexistent even as falsehoods	rdzun par yang med pa
རྫུན་པོ་ཤ་སྟག	only false, falsehood pure and simple	rdzun po sha stag
རྫུན་དཔང	false witness	rdzun dpang
རྫུན་ཕུག	false structure/ cave	rdzun phug
རྫུན་ཕུག་གཏིབ་པ	to cause the false structure/ cave to collapse	rdzun phug gtib pa
རྫུན་ཕུག་རྡིབ་པ	to cause the false structure/ cave to collapse	rdzun phug rdib pa
རྫུན་ཕུགས	core lie, core of falsity	rdzun phugs
རྫུན་ཕུགས་རྡིབ་པ	the collapse of their falsehood	rdzun phugs rdib pa
རྫུན་ཕྲ་མ་ཚིག་རྩུབ་ངག་འཁྱལ	lying, slander, harsh words, and gossip	rdzun phra ma tshig rtsub ngag 'khyal
རྫུན་ཕྲ་མོ	small lie	rdzun phra mo
རྫུན་བྱེད་པ	tell a lie	rdzun byed pa
རྫུན་འབག	ma yin yin bzo byed pa'i rnam 'gyur	rdzun 'bag
རྫུན་མ	false, unreal, lie, liar, dishonest, fake, fraudulent, mendacious	rdzun ma
རྫུན་མ་བྱེད་པ	feint	rdzun ma byed pa
རྫུན་མ་བཟོ་བ	falsify	rdzun ma bzo ba
རྫུན་སྨྲ	lie, speak falsely, false/ deceptive speech [def {shes bzhin mi bden pa'i rdzun smra ba} mi dge ba bcu'i nang gses shig]	rdzun smra
རྫུན་སྨྲ་བ	tell a lie, lie	rdzun smra ba
རྫུན་སྨྲ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of false speakig [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, pham pa bzhi'i nang tshan gyi rdzun ma yin pa shes bzhin du rdzun smra ba'o	rdzun smra ba'i ltung byed
རྫུན་ཚིག	falsehood	rdzun tshig
རྫུན་ཚིག་མི་བདེན་པའི་སྐད་ཆ	/	rdzun tshig mi bden pa'i skad cha
རྫུན་མཚང	rdzun gyi nyes mtshang	rdzun mtshang
རྫུན་བཞི	[tserig]	rdzun bzhi
རྫུན་བཟོས	rdzun ma bzos pa	rdzun bzos
རྫུན་བཟོས་བདེན་འགྱུར	bcos mar bzos pa'i gtam dang dngos po bcos min bden par 'gyur ba	rdzun bzos bden 'gyur
རྫུན་རིས	false impression/ design	rdzun ris
རྫུན་གཤོད་མཁན	liar	rdzun gshod mkhan
རྫུན་གཤོད་པ	lying	rdzun gshod pa
རྫུན་བཤད་པ	tell a lie, lie	rdzun bshad pa
རྫུན་གསུང་བ	tell a lie, tell lies, speak falsely	rdzun gsung ba
རྫུན་གསོབ	ma yin yin khul	rdzun gsob
རྫུབ	deceit, imposture	rdzub
རྫུབ་པ	(a) deceive, pretend to be, be disguised as	rdzub pa
རྫུབ་བྱེད་པ	make false assertions	rdzub byed pa
རྫུབ་རླུང	rough breathing	rdzub rlung
རྫུས	disguise, SA rdzu ba, guise	rdzus
རྫུས་སྐྱེས	miraculously born [skye gnas bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, mtho ris kyi lha rnams dang 'dre srin yi dvags dmyal ba la sogs pa'o	rdzus skyes
རྫུས་སྐྱེས་སུ་འབྱུང་བ	are born spontaneously	rdzus skyes su 'byung ba
རྫུས་ཏེ	miraculously	rdzus te
རྫུས་ཏེ་སྐྱེ་བ	instantaneous birth	rdzus te skye ba
རྫུས་ཏེ་སྐྱེས་པ	of miraculous birth	rdzus te skyes pa
རྫུས་སྟག	deceit, imposture, SA g.yo sgyu	rdzus stag
རྫུས་བག	false pose	rdzus bag
རྫུས་མ	artificial, false	rdzus ma
རྫུས་མའི་མཁས་པ	master of dissimulation	rdzus ma'i mkhas pa
རྫུས་མའི་སྤྲང་པོ	disguised beggar	rdzus ma'i sprang po
རྫེ	(tha dad pa brdzes pa, brdze ba, rdzes,, tuck/ truss/ raise/ roll up, hem	rdze
རྫེ་བ	to tuck up, truss up; {rdze ba, brdzes pa, brdze ba, rdzes} trans. v	rdze ba
རྫེ་བ་ནི་གྱེན་དུ་སྡོག་པ	rdze ba means tuck up	rdze ba ni gyen du sdog pa
རྫེ་མ	water wheel's axle's shing shubs 2292	rdze ma
རྫེ་མས	pho ba'i nang ldebs su yod pa'i zas skom myag byed kyi sul lam gnyer ma lta bu zhig	rdze mas
རྫེ་བཙུན	reverend lord	rdze btsun
རྫེ་ལོ	tuck up the end of 1's clothes high/ short rdze lo byed pa'i gos gsham chu chen rgal	rdze lo
དུས་དགོས	at the time of crossing a large river 1 has to tuck up 1's clothes	dus dgos
རྫེའུ	small pot, pipkin	rdze'u
རྫེའུ་བུམ	little clay pot	rdze'u bum
རྫེའུ་ཚོད	pot	rdze'u tshod
རྫེའུ་ཚོས	food cooked in a little clay pot	rdze'u tshos
རྫེའུ་ཚོས་ཁ་ཟས	delicious food cooked in a little clay pot	rdze'u tshos kha zas
རྫེས	rdze ba!,, [tuck/ truss/ raise/ roll up, hem]!	rdzes
རྫེས་ཐོབ	subsequent attainment	rdzes thob
རྫེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་དྲུག	list and explanation	rdzes su dran pa drug
རྫོ་ཀི	yogi, dzoki [casual laborer, who may be a religious practitioner too]	rdzo ki
རྫོག	fist	rdzog
རྫོག་ཁུང	rtsig pa'i thod nas phyir rdzog rock throwing hole	rdzog khung
རྫོག་མགོ	hand, fist?	rdzog mgo
རྫོག་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	Dzogchen Vajrasattva	rdzog chen rdo rje sems dpa'
རྫོག་རྡུང	grind/pulverize [in a mortar]	rdzog rdung
རྫོག་རྡུང་གཏོང་བ	grind/pulverize [in a mortar]	rdzog rdung gtong ba
རྫོག་ལྡན	krtayuga	rdzog ldan
རྫོག་སྣོད	mortar [for pulverizing]	rdzog snod
རྫོག་པ	1) pound, pulverize, smash, bash [rus pa rdzog pa]; 2) throw down, overthrow, overturn	rdzog pa
རྫོགས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་མཆོད	farewell ganacakra	rdzogs kyi tshogs mchod
རྫོགས་སྐུ	Body of perfection, perfected dimension in Bonpo ontology, perfection Body	rdzogs sku
རྫོགས་ཁུང	small window in the wall of a house to see outside objects	rdzogs khung
རྫོགས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	endless immortal	rdzogs rgyu med pa
རྫོགས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པའི་སྐད་ཆ	endless words	rdzogs rgyu med pa'i skad cha
རྫོགས་རྒྱུའི	expiry	rdzogs rgyu'i
རྫོགས་ཆེན	great perfection, great completeness, mahasandhi, maha ati, total completeness, absolute perfection, total natural perfection TSE	rdzogs chen
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཀུན་བཟང་དགོངས་འདུས	SA kun bzang dgongs 'dus	rdzogs chen kun bzang dgongs 'dus
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ་ཊྭེནཏཡ	five Tantras of the Great Perfection. twenty-five tantras, belonging to the Mind Section and possibly also the Space Section, taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana. Listed in Chapter 14 of Sanglingma	rdzogs chen kyi rgyud nyi shu rtsa lnga Twenty
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྐོར་བཞི	four cycles of the great perfection [the outer, inner, secret and extremely secret cycles of the esoteric instructional class refer to fundamentals, pt4 pp --	rdzogs chen skor bzhi
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཁྲིད་ཡིག་ཡེ་ཤེ་བླ་མ	Yeshe Lama, the Unsurpassable Primordial Wisdom, a guide to Dzogchen practice by Jigmey Lingpa	rdzogs chen khrid yig ye she bla ma
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གི་ལམ་གཉིས	two paths of the great perfection	rdzogs chen gi lam gnyis
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གུ་རུ་བཞི་པ	Four Dzogchen Masters rdzogs chen gyi khrid rim ma rig mun sel	rdzogs chen gu ru bzhi pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྲོན་མེ	Torch of Wisdom That Dispels the Darkness of Ignorance, explanation on the Wish-fulfilling Gem	ye shes sgron me
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Dzogchen tantra	rdzogs chen gyi rgyud
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་བཅུ་བདུན	Seventeen Dzogchen Tantras	rdzogs chen gyi rgyud bcu bdun
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	see list at {rdzogs chen rgyud bco brgyad}	rdzogs chen gyi rgyud bco brgyad
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་སྣང་བ་བཞི	four visions of dzogchen	rdzogs chen gyi snang ba bzhi
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་དབང་བསྐུར	empowerments of the great perfection	rdzogs chen gyi dbang bskur
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་ལམ་གཉིས	the two paths of the Great Perfection. {khegs chod}, {thod rgal}	rdzogs chen gyi lam gnyis
རྫོགས་ཆེན་དགོན་པ	khams rdzogs chen dgon pa ao rgyan bsam gtan chos gling	rdzogs chen dgon pa
རྫོགས་ཆེན་རྒྱུད་བཅུ་བདུན	part of rnying ma rgyud 'bum	rdzogs chen rgyud bcu bdun
ཊནཏྲ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	manifest Awareness, the Tantra of Studded Jewels, the Tantra of	Tantra of Self
རྫོགས་ཆེན་རྒྱུད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Dzogchen Tantras (received by Padmasambhava from Shri Singha): Dra Talgyur Root Tantra, the Tantra of Graceful Auspiciousness, the Tantra of the Heart Mirror of Samantabhadra, the Blazing ...	rdzogs chen rgyud bco brgyad
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྙིང་ཏིག	Heart Essence of the Great Perfection	rdzogs chen snying tig
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྙིང་ཐིག	the heart essence of the great perfection [specifically the teachings of dzogchen brought to tibet by vimalamitra and guru rinpoche as arranged by longchenpa]	rdzogs chen snying thig
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྟོན་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 Dzogchen teachers; see {ston pa bcu gnyis}	rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis
རྫོགས་ཆེན་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	19th cent. - Dzogchen Tenpey Gyaltsen, reincarnation of Chöying Topden Dorje	rdzogs chen bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཐོད་རྒལ་སྒོམ་པ	to train in the Dzogchen practice of Tögal rdzogs chen mthar thig gi chos kyi brgyud	rdzogs chen thod rgal sgom pa
ལེཨདས་ཏོ་ཐེ་ཕི༹ནལ་གོཨལ་ཨིཕ༹་ཐེ་ཨཏི	yoga rdzogs chen mthar thig gi chos kyi brgyud	leads to the final goal if the ati
རྫོགས་ཆེན་འདུས་སྡེ	Dzogchen Community	rdzogs chen 'dus sde
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྡེ་བཞི	four sections of dzogchen	rdzogs chen sde bzhi
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྡེ་གསུམ	Three Sections of Dzogchen. After Garab Dorje established the six million four hundred thousand tantras of Dzogchen in the human world, his chief disciple, Manjushrimitra, arranged these tantras in...	rdzogs chen sde gsum
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྡེ་གསུམ་ཀློང་སྡེ	space section	rdzogs chen sde gsum klong sde
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྡེ་གསུམ་མན་ངག་སྡེ	instruction section	rdzogs chen sde gsum man ngag sde
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སྡེ་གསུམ་སེམས་སྡེ	mind section of the three sections of ati yoga	rdzogs chen sde gsum sems sde
རྫོགས་ཆེན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གླིང	Dzogchen Namgyal Ling	rdzogs chen rnam rgyal gling
རྫོགས་ཆེན་པ	dzogchen practitioner, practitioner of rdzogs chen	rdzogs chen pa
རྫོགས་ཆེན་པད་མ་རིག་འཛིན	Dzogchen Padma Rigdzin: 1625-1697	rdzogs chen pad ma rig 'dzin
རྫོགས་ཆེན་དཔལ་དགེ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	18081887 - Dzogchen Palgey Tulku, another name for Paltrül Rinpoche	rdzogs chen dpal dge sprul sku
རྫོགས་ཆེན་དབང་བཞི	Four Empowerments of the Great Perfection. These are the outer empowerment of conceptual elaboration {phyi spros bcas kyi dbang} the inner empowerment which is free from conceptual elaboration {nan...	rdzogs chen dbang bzhi
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སེམས་སྡེ	Mind Section of Dzogchen	rdzogs chen sems sde
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སེམས་ཕྱོགས	mind section of dzogchen, Dzogchen texts on the nature of mind	rdzogs chen sems phyogs
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སེམས་ཕྱོགས་པ	followers	rdzogs chen sems phyogs pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་མིནད	section of dzogchen	of the mind
རྫོགས་ཆེན་སེམས་ཕྱོགས་པ་རྣམས	the	rdzogs chen sems phyogs pa rnams
ཕོ༹ལློཝེརས་ཨོཕ༹་མིནད	section of Dzogchen	followers of Mind
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གསང་སྐོར	Secret Cycle of Dzogchen	rdzogs chen gsang skor
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གསེར་གྱི་ཐུར་མ	a revealed cycle of Bönpo rdzogs chen practice recovered from its place of concealment by bon zhig g.yung drung gling pa (b. 1228)	rdzogs chen gser gyi thur ma
རྫོགས་ཆེན་གསེར་གྱི་ཡང་ཞུན	The Pure Gold Great Perfection; Künzang Tuktig. Syn {rdzogs pa chen po gser zhun}. A terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	rdzogs chen gser gyi yang zhun
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཁྲིད	system founded by dgongs mdzad ri khrod (1038-1096)	rdzogs chen a khrid
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཏི་ཟབ་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	Ati Zabdön, Profound Unsurpassable Meaning of the Great Perfection, revealed by Minling Terchen Terdag Lingpa	rdzogs chen a ti zab don snying po
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	total perfection of Atiyoga	rdzogs chen a ti yo ga
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཏི་ཨོ་ག	Dzogchen ati yoga	rdzogs chen a ti o ga
རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་རོའི་ལུགས	Dzogchen Aro Lug	rdzogs chen a ro'i lugs
རྫོགས་ཉེ	near the end/ finish, about to run out	rdzogs nye
རྫོགས་མཐའ	limit of completion, the end	rdzogs mtha'
རྫོགས་མཐའ་མེད་པ	never finish	rdzogs mtha' med pa
རྫོགས་ལྡན	krtayuga golden age, SA bskal pa bzhi, dus bzhi	rdzogs ldan
རྫོགས་ལྡན་བསྐལ་པ	the kalpa having completion	rdzogs ldan bskal pa
རྫོགས་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས	age of perfection, Golden Age; Satyayuga	rdzogs ldan gyi dus
རྫོགས་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས་རབས	the time of completion, golden age, [name of a kalpa] the perfect age	rdzogs ldan gyi dus rabs
རྫོགས་ལྡན་དུས	the time of completion ['dzam gling mi rnams kyi chos dang, nor, 'dod pa, bde ba bzhi yongs su tshang bar longs spyod pa'i dus te, de'i yun tshad la lo grangs sa ya gcig dang, bdun 'bum nyi khri br...	rdzogs ldan dus
རྫོགས་པ	perfect(ion)/ complete(ness)/ completion; to be perfect and/ perfectly complete	rdzogs pa
རྫོགས་པ་ཅི་ཆིབས་ཀྱི་ས	Riding on Perfection	rdzogs pa ci chibs kyi sa
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེ	total perfection	rdzogs pa che
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great perfection	rdzogs pa chen po
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད	cutting through resistance to the great perfection	rdzogs pa chen po khregs chod
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་སྙིང་ཏིག	TSE rdzogs pa chen po snying thig gi khrid yig go bde bklag chog tu bkod pa lhun grub rtogs pa'i rang sgra kun bzang thugs mdzod gu yangs snying gi thig le - Heart Essence of Openness and Ease, Guy...	rdzogs pa chen po snying tig
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་སྡེ་གསུམ	{rdzogs pa	rdzogs pa chen po sde gsum
ཆེན་པོ་སྡེ་གསུམ	the three sections of the great perfection	chen po sde gsum
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་མན་ངག་གི་སྡེ	instruction section of dzogchen	rdzogs pa chen po man ngag gi sde
མེད་པའི་སྐོར	innermost unexcelled cycle of the great perfection rdzogs pa chen po ye shes spyi gzugs universal wisdom of Dzogchen rdzogs pa chen po shin tu rnal 'byor gyi	med pa'i skor
བྱིན་རླབས་ཆར་འབེབས་བཞུགས	by klong	byin rlabs char 'bebs bzhugs
ཆེན་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	Kanjur Rinpoche	chen pa ye shes rdo rje
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གསེར་ཞུན	The Pure Gold Great Perfection; Künzang Tuktig; a terma of Chokgyur Lingpa	rdzogs pa chen po gser zhun
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	the great perfection ati yoga	rdzogs pa chen po a ti yo ga
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད	trekcho of the great perfection	rdzogs pa chen po'i khregs chod
རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མན་ངག	the teachings of the Great Perfection	rdzogs pa chen po'i man ngag
རྫོགས་པ་གཉིས་པ	10th day of the waxing/ waning period of the month	rdzogs pa gnyis pa
རྫོགས་པ་གཉིས་པ་དཀར་ཕྱོགས	the 10th	rdzogs pa gnyis pa dkar phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་གཉིས་པ་ནག་ཕྱོགས	the 25th	rdzogs pa gnyis pa nag phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་དང་པོ	5th day of waxing/waning period of the month	rdzogs pa dang po
རྫོགས་པ་དང་པོ་དཀར་ཕྱོགས	the 5th	rdzogs pa dang po dkar phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་དང་པོ་ནག་ཕྱོགས	the 20th	rdzogs pa dang po nag phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་པོའི་སྒོམ་ཚུལ་གསུམ	CHN	rdzogs pa po'i sgom tshul gsum
རྫོགས་པ་སྤྱི་གཅོད	1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	rdzogs pa spyi gcod
རྫོགས་པ་སྤྱི་ཆིངས	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	rdzogs pa spyi chings
རྫོགས་པ་སྤྱི་ཆིབས་ཀྱི་ས	the level of the perfect universal steed [sngags rnying ma'i gzhung du, rnal 'byor lnga pa'i skabs su thob pa'i sa bcu pa ste, mthar	rdzogs pa spyi chibs kyi sa
རྫོགས་པ་སྤྱི་སྤྱོད	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras	rdzogs pa spyi spyod
རྫོགས་པ་རང་བྱུང	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	rdzogs pa rang byung
རྫོགས་པ་རིམ་བཞིན་དུ	gradually & completely	rdzogs pa rim bzhin du
རྫོགས་པ་གསུམ་པ	15th day of the waxing/ waning period of the month	rdzogs pa gsum pa
རྫོགས་པ་གསུམ་པ་དཀར་ཕྱོགས	the 15th	rdzogs pa gsum pa dkar phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་གསུམ་པ་ནག་ཕྱོགས	the 30th	rdzogs pa gsum pa nag phyogs
རྫོགས་པ་ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་ག	the completion stage Anu Yoga	rdzogs pa a nu yo ga
རྫོགས་པའི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	the posture of perfection of a buddha	rdzogs pa'i skyil krung
རྫོགས་པའི་ངང	perfect condition	rdzogs pa'i ngang
རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ	full enlightenment, complete enlightenment. Same as 'buddhahood.' perfect enlightenment	rdzogs pa'i byang chub
རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་མངོན་པ	attained Buddhahood	rdzogs pa'i byang chub mngon pa
རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་མདོན་པར	attained buddhahood	rdzogs pa'i byang chub mdon par
རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་འདོད་བདུན	CHN	rdzogs pa'i byang chub 'dod bdun
རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་མ་ཐོབ	did not obtain full enlightenment	rdzogs pa'i byang chub ma thob
རྫོགས་པའི་རྫོགས་པ	the completing of perfection	rdzogs pa'i rdzogs pa
རྫོགས་པའི་ཡངས་རྫོགས	the most absolute perfection	rdzogs pa'i yangs rdzogs
རྫོགས་པའི་རིམ་པ	completion stage, stage of completion, sampannakrama	rdzogs pa'i rim pa
རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	Sambuddha	rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas
རྫོགས་པར	perfectly, completely, fully, in its entirety	rdzogs par
རྫོགས་པར་བཀླགས	finished reading	rdzogs par bklags
རྫོགས་པར་འགྱུར	be finished/ completed/ exhausted/ perfected	rdzogs par 'gyur
རྫོགས་པར་བསྙད་པ	report fully	rdzogs par bsnyad pa
རྫོགས་པར་བྱ	to perfect	rdzogs par bya
རྫོགས་པར་བྱ་བ	to be finished/ completed/ exhausted/ perfected	rdzogs par bya ba
རྫོགས་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་པ	complete/ perfect enlightenment	rdzogs par byang chub pa
རྫོགས་པར་བྱས་པ	has been brought to completion	rdzogs par byas pa
རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	finish, complete, exhaust, perfect	rdzogs par byed pa
རྫོགས་པར་འཚང་རྒྱ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	become completely enlightened	rdzogs par 'tshang rgya bar 'gyur ba
རྫོགས་པར་ཤེས་པ་ཞིག	one thoroughly conversant	rdzogs par shes pa zhig
རྫོགས་པར་བསླབ་པ	learn thoroughly	rdzogs par bslab pa
རྫོགས་བྱང	complete enlightenment	rdzogs byang
རྫོགས་བྱང་གི་ཡན་ལག	the limbs of complete enlightenment	rdzogs byang gi yan lag
རྫོགས་བྱེད	rdzogs byed [Indian teacher]	rdzogs byed
རྫོགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས	completing karma, determines ones condition in the realm of birth	rdzogs byed kyi las
རྫོགས་བྱེད་བསམ་གཏན	first perfecting meditation	rdzogs byed bsam gtan
རྫོགས་སྨིན་སྦྱང་གསུམ	completion, maturation and cultivation	rdzogs smin sbyang gsum
རྫོགས་སྨིན་སྦྱངས་གསུམ	TSE	rdzogs smin sbyangs gsum
རྫོགས་ཚིག	A term of grammar. Completing word. Synonyms are {slar bsdu} and {zla sdud}. See {slar bsdu}. Most commonly used of the three synonyms even though {slar bsdu} is the original term coined in Thumi S...	rdzogs tshig
རྫོགས་ཚོན	"complete colour" [painting w opaque colours applied in distemper	rdzogs tshon
རྫོགས་མཚམས	expiration	rdzogs mtshams
རྫོགས་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	completely enlightened	rdzogs 'tshang rgya ba
རྫོགས་རྫོགས་བར་དུ	stage of completion	rdzogs rdzogs bar du
རྫོགས་རིམ	Completion stage	rdzogs rim
ཏནཏྲ	[tserig] rdo rje'i lus la gnad du bsnun te rtsa thig rlung gsum las su rung ba la brten nas stong bzhis drangs pa'i 'od gsal dang, dga' bzhis drangs pa'i lhan skyes ye shes mngon du byed pa'i shes ...	tantra
པའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཅུ	CHN rdzogs rim gyi dpyad pa'i gnas bcu gcig CHN	pa'i dam tshig bcu
རྫོགས་རིམ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	{rdzogs rim gyi ye shes rgyud la skyes pa thams cad} all the ways in which wisdom develops in the perfection phase	rdzogs rim gyi ye shes
རྫོགས་རིམ་བསྒོམ་པ	practices of the perfection phase	rdzogs rim bsgom pa
རྫོགས་རིམ་དངོས་བརྒྱད	CHN	rdzogs rim dngos brgyad
རྫོགས་རིམ་བཏགས་པ་བ་དྲུག	CHN	rdzogs rim btags pa ba drug
རྫོགས་རིམ་དྲུག	CHN	rdzogs rim drug
རྫོགས་རིམ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བཞི	the four yogas of the completion stage	rdzogs rim rnal 'byor bzhi
རྫོགས་རིམ་སྣང་བཞི	the four visions of the completion stage	rdzogs rim snang bzhi
རྫོགས་རིམ་པ	1 working on the completion practice, completing stage practitioners	rdzogs rim pa
རྫོགས་རིམ་བྱིན་རླབས་བཞི	CHN	rdzogs rim byin rlabs bzhi
རྫོགས་རིམ་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	TSE	rdzogs rim rim pa lnga
རྫོགས་རིམ་རིམ་པ་དྲུག	TSE	rdzogs rim rim pa drug
རྫོགས་རིམ་ལས་སུ	rung ba realization of the perfection stage	rdzogs rim las su
རྫོགས་རིམ་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	an adequate realization of the perfection stage	rdzogs rim las su rung ba
རྫོགས་ལ་ཁད	not fully finished, stopping short of completion, quick performance of work	rdzogs la khad
རྫོགས་ཤོ	[arch] rdzogs so	rdzogs sho
རྫོགས་སངས	the sambuddhas, the completely enlightened	rdzogs sangs
རྫོགས་སངས་སྐུ	the dharmakaya of perfect buddhahood	rdzogs sangs sku
རྫོགས་སངས་སྐུ་ནི	as for the perfection of the Buddha's [dharma]kaya	rdzogs sangs sku ni
རྫོགས་སངས་རྒྱས	perfect buddhahood	rdzogs sangs rgyas
རྫོགས་སངས་སྙིང་པོ	the essence of perfect buddhahood	rdzogs sangs snying po
རྫོགས་སངས་སྲིན་པོ་ཆེ	the most precious, perfect buddha [nature], enlightened great rakshasa	rdzogs sangs srin po che
རྫོགས་སུ་འདེབས	send away	rdzogs su 'debs
རྫོགས་སོང	it's over	rdzogs song
རྫོང་དཀར	Dzong Kar, in Domey	rdzong dkar
རྫོང་རྐང	Tibetan govt. gi khongs su 'du dgos pa'i khral rkang	rdzong rkang
རྫོང་སྐྱེལ	Tibetan govt. from rdzong to rdzong 'u lag thog dos and send letters etc	rdzong skyel
རྫོང་ཁ	{rdzong dga'} Dzongka, in Tö, Mangyul	rdzong kha
རྫོང་ཁག	districts	rdzong khag
རྫོང་ཁག་སོ་སོ	individual districts	rdzong khag so so
རྫོང་ཁང	house of the rdzong leader or his representative	rdzong khang
རྫོང་ཁུལ	Dzongkhul; monastery in Zanskar {zangs dkar} in Ladakh	rdzong khul
རྫོང་མཁར	castle-fortress of earth and stone rdzong mkhar btsan po'i nang dgra dmag	rdzong mkhar
དང་འཐབས་པ	in a strong fortress battle w the enemy	dang 'thabs pa
རྫོང་གྱི་ཚོགས་མཆོད	farewell feast offering	rdzong gyi tshogs mchod
རྫོང་དགའ	{rdzong dga'}	rdzong dga'
རྫོང་དགའ་འཕེལ་རྒྱས་གླིང	{rdzong dga' 'phel rgyas gling	rdzong dga' 'phel rgyas gling
རྫོང་འགོ	commander of a fort 2297	rdzong 'go
རྫོང་རྒྱབ་ཀླུ་ཁང	{rdzong rgyab klu khang}	rdzong rgyab klu khang
རྫོང་རྒྱབ་ཞབས་འབེལ	the gallop behind the fort (ceremony on the 26th day of the 1st Tibetan month)	rdzong rgyab zhabs 'bel
རྫོང་རྒྱབ་ཞར་འཕེན	on the 1st month 26th day smon lam gtor mjug dga' ston rdzong rgyab horse racing holiday	rdzong rgyab zhar 'phen
རྫོང་སྔོན	Dzong Ngön, Blue Fortress, in Domey	rdzong sngon
རྫོང་སྔོན་བྱམས་པ་ལྷ་ཁང	Maitreya Temple at Dzong Ngon	rdzong sngon byams pa lha khang
རྫོང་སྔོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	18-19th cent. Dzong Ngön Rinpoche/Alak, a lama from Domey, disciple of Dola Jigmey Kalsang	rdzong sngon rin po che
རྫོང་ཆེན	big district, big castle	rdzong chen
རྫོང་ཐུར	metal/ wood bod mda'i mde'u rdzong byed &, 'phrul mda'i mdel khog 'don byed kyi gsor 'bigs	rdzong thur
རྫོང་དང་གཞིས་ཀ	districts and estates	rdzong dang gzhis ka
རྫོང་དམ་པོ	strict and strong jongpon	rdzong dam po
རྫོང་བདག	leader of subjects ['gan khur nas sdod mkhan] in a dzong	rdzong bdag
རྫོང་བདའ	be sent/ dispatched somewhere	rdzong bda'
རྫོང་བདའ་རྒྱག་པ	1) send a messenger; 2) expel, banish	rdzong bda' rgyag pa
རྫོང་འདུ	a rdzong district and what it includes, eg taxes, serfs	rdzong 'du
རྫོང་རྡོ	Dzongdo, at Kailash	rdzong rdo
རྫོང་སྡོད	rdzong dpon or his substitute	rdzong sdod
རྫོང་བརྡ	be sent/ dispatched somewhere	rdzong brda
རྫོང་པ་ཀུན་དགའ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	rdzong pa kun dga' rnam rgyal	rdzong pa kun dga' rnam rgyal
རྫོང་དཔོན	leader of subjects * in/ official in charge of a dzong	rdzong dpon
རྫོང་དཔོན་སྡེ་པ	governor of the fortress	rdzong dpon sde pa
རྫོང་ཕྲན	small district, small castle	rdzong phran
རྫོང་འཕྲང་སྲོག་གསུམ	The fortress,	rdzong 'phrang srog gsum
ཐེ་རབི༹ནེ་ཨནད་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	force; means that the fortress of the view (lta ba'i rdzong) is the recognition of aware-	the ravine and the life
རྫོང་བ	{rdzong ba, brdzangs pa, brdzang ba, rdzongs} trans. v.; to send, to dispatch, to expedite, send off, dismiss, to give to take along with	rdzong ba
རྫོང་བ་འདུག	you will be sent	rdzong ba 'dug
རྫོང་བ་བྱས	gave as a parting gift	rdzong ba byas
རྫོང་བ་ཡིན	we will send you to	rdzong ba yin
རྫོང་སྦྲེལ	two districts/ lay and clerical rdzong leaders joined together{rdzong sdod kyi khang pa house of the rdzong leader or his representative	rdzong sbrel
རྫོང་གཙོ	rdzong dpon and principal 1s of the inhabitants	rdzong gtso
རྫོང་བཙན	fortress	rdzong btsan
རྫོང་བཙན་པོ	strict and strong jongpon	rdzong btsan po
རྫོང་ཚགས	putting things in a vessel/ container, lhod kyi tshags	rdzong tshags
རྫོང་གཞིས	districts and estates	rdzong gzhis
རྫོང་གཞིས་སྣེ་སྡོད	districts and estates's las kyi sne mor sdod mkhan	rdzong gzhis sne sdod
རྫོང་ཤོད	Dzongshö; near Derge	rdzong shod
རྫོང་སར་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ	'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros	rdzong sar mkhyen brtse
རྫོང་སྲུང	castle/ fortress guard rdzong gsar mkhyen brtse chos kyi blo	rdzong srung
རྫོང་གསར་དགོན་པ	rdzong gsar bkra shis lha rtse Monastery [khams sde dge'i shar phyogs sman shod ces pa'i sa char rab byung bzhi pa'i chu glang lor 'gro mgon chos rgyal 'phags pas phyag btab, 'jam dbyangs mkhyen br...	rdzong gsar dgon pa
རྫོང་ཨུ	district committee	rdzong u
རྫོང་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	district committee	rdzong u yon lhan khang
རྫོངས	farewell present custom when some1 departs, sent [you to me], rdzong ba!	rdzongs
རྫོངས་ཀྱི་ཙོགས་མཆོད	farewell ganacakra	rdzongs kyi tsogs mchod
རྫོངས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་མཆོད	farewell ganachakra	rdzongs kyi tshogs mchod
རྫོངས་བསྐུར་བ	give a [farewell] present	rdzongs bskur ba
རྫོངས་ཆས	lam du 'gro ba'i rgyags phye'am 'grul pa 'gro khar sprod pa'i dngos rigs	rdzongs chas
རྫོངས་ཏ	rdzongs sta	rdzongs ta
རྫོངས་སྟ	skyes rdzongs kyi dngos po ched bskur	rdzongs sta
རྫོངས་མདའ	expulsion, deportation, banishment	rdzongs mda'
རྫོངས་མདའ་རྒྱག	expel, deport, banish	rdzongs mda' rgyag
རྫོངས་པ	skyes,//skal rdzongs,//thon rdzongs sam 'gro rdzongs	rdzongs pa
རྫོངས་པ་གྱིས	send them on their way!	rdzongs pa gyis
རྫོངས་སུ་འདེབས	send away	rdzongs su 'debs
རྫོད	imp. of {rdzod pa}	rdzod
རྫོད་པ	{rdzod pa, brdzad pa, brdzad pa, rdzod} trans. v	rdzod pa
རྫོབ	effigy or outfit	rdzob
རྫོབ་རྟགས	sign of being a fool	rdzob rtags
རྫོབ་པ	(tha dad pa brdzabs pa, brdzab pa, rdzobs,; 1) snon pa, add, mix; 2) be obscured	rdzob pa
རྫོབ་པོ	vain, empty, spurious, void, false, fickle	rdzob po
རྫོབ་མ	false speaking woman	rdzob ma
རྫོབས	imp. of {rdzob pa}	rdzobs
རྫོར་པོ	dirty, grim	rdzor po
རྫོར་པོ་བཟོ་བ	soil	rdzor po bzo ba
རྫོས	(not in das)	rdzos
རྫོས་གྲུབ	substantial existence	rdzos grub
བརྫང	forward, SA rdzongs pa	brdzang
བརྫང་བ	[f rdzong ba]	brdzang ba
བརྫངས	dispatched; {rgya gar la brdzangs} they were sent to India	brdzangs
བརྫངས་པ	[p rdzong ba]	brdzangs pa
བརྫད་པ	[f p rdzod pa]	brdzad pa
བརྫབ་པ	[f rdzob pa]	brdzab pa
བརྫབས་པ	pf. of {rdzob pa}	brdzabs pa
བརྫི	{brdzi ba}	brdzi
བརྫི་གནོན	will [repress, challenge, trample/ step on, not respect, subdue]	brdzi gnon
བརྫི་གནོན་བྱེད	will [repress, challenge, trample/ step on, not respect, subdue]	brdzi gnon byed
བརྫི་པ་མེད་ཉིད	no occasion for	brdzi pa med nyid
བརྫི་བ	to trample; ft. of {rdzi ba} trample on / down, flatten, stamp on, squash, crush	brdzi ba
བརྫི་བ་མེད་པ	irrepressible, unchallenged	brdzi ba med pa
བརྫི་བོ	cot {brdzi bor nang bsnyal ba} lay you down to sleep in your cot	brdzi bo
བརྫི་མི་བའི་གདིངས	indomitable confidence	brdzi mi ba'i gdings
བརྫི་མི་བའི་གདེངས	indomitable confidence	brdzi mi ba'i gdengs
བརྫིས	to tread down; trample, trampled, 2) dough	brdzis
བརྫིས་པ	pf. of {rdzi ba}	brdzis pa
བརྫིས་བ	knead	brdzis ba
བརྫུ	posing as, disguised as, impersonating	brdzu
བརྫུ་བ	will disguise as/ pretend/ conceal [f brdzu]	brdzu ba
བརྫུ་བྱས	large box or chest	brdzu byas
བརྫུ་བྱས་པ	pompous	brdzu byas pa
བརྫུན	lie, falsehood; false, untruth	brdzun
བརྫུན་ཅན	false, counterfeit	brdzun can
བརྫུན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	falsehood, lie	brdzun du smra ba
བརྫུན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ་སྤོང་བ	refrain from telling falsehoods [one of the {bslab pa'i gnyi brgyad} 8 basic teachings]	brdzun du smra ba spong ba
བརྫུན་པ	lie, fals[ity]	brdzun pa
བརྫུན་པར་གྲུབ་པ	delusive	brdzun par grub pa
བརྫུན་སྨྲ	telling lies	brdzun smra
བརྫུན་ཚིག	false statement, falsehood	brdzun tshig
བརྫུན་མཚང	inherent falsity	brdzun mtshang
བརྫུས	transformed into, SA sprul, disguise, SA rdzu ba, past of rdzu	brdzus
བརྫུས་སྐྱེ	be miraculously born	brdzus skye
བརྫུས་སྐྱེས	(spontaneous, miraculous) birth, SA rdzus skyes, miraculous growth, medicinal grass	brdzus skyes
བརྫུས་ཏེ་སྐྱེ་བ	miraculous birth. born miraculously, one of the {skye gnas bzhi} four types of birth	brdzus te skye ba
བརྫུས་ཏེ་སྐྱེ་བས	by taking birth instantaneously	brdzus te skye bas
བརྫུས་ཏེ་སྐྱེས་པ	instantaneously, miraculously born	brdzus te skyes pa
བརྫུས་ཏེ་མྱུར་དུ་སྐྱེ་པར་འགྱུར	be miraculously and swiftly reborn	brdzus te myur du skye par 'gyur
བརྫུས་པ	[p rdzu ba] posed as impersonated, deceived, disguised as, rebirth, impostor	brdzus pa
བརྫུས་མ	impostor, fake, false [not real]	brdzus ma
བརྫུས་མ་རྣམས	impostors	brdzus ma rnams
བརྫུས་མ་བཟོ་བ	forge	brdzus ma bzo ba
བརྫུས་ཤིང	transforming	brdzus shing
བརྫེ	tuck up, SA rdze ba	brdze
བརྫེ་བ	will forget [f rdze ba]	brdze ba
བརྫེད་ངས	forgetfulness	brdzed ngas
བརྫེན་ནས་སྐྱེ་བ	dependently produce	brdzen nas skye ba
བརྫེས	to stream [e.g. her dark brown hair streams upward]. stream	brdzes
བརྫེས་པ	streamed [p rdze ba her dark brown hair streams upward]	brdzes pa
བརྫོང	send, dispatch	brdzong
བརྫོང་བཏབ་པ	to take along/ load (?); to send along	brdzong btab pa
ཝ	WA, fox, drain pipe, gutter	wa
ཝ་སྐད	barking of the fox	wa skad
ཝ་སྐོར	fox skin sbubs bshus las hat	wa skor
ཝ་སྐྱེས	fox [syn: wa mo dang sa myos so]	wa skyes
ཝ་སྐྱེས་སྡར་མ	example of a person without introspection [wa skyes sdar ma fought like a lion.]	wa skyes sdar ma
ཝ་ཁ	drain pipe/ gutter/ place/ strip where water goes at the top of the houses	wa kha
ཝ་ཁུང	1) hole into which water runs; 2) fox hole/ den/ lair	wa khung
ཝ་ཁུར	herb wa khur [one of two divisions of med herb khur mong, rgya khur and wa khur; bitter, cooling, by its power fever is cured, and ga 'gags pa 'byed, phlegm smug po is cured, glang thabs benefitted]	wa khur
ཝ་ཁྱུ	pack of foxes	wa khyu
ཝ་ཁྱེམ	scoop	wa khyem
ཝ་འཁྱིལ	Tibetan govt lay nobles rim bzhi yan chad winter hat w black fox skin top	wa 'khyil
ཝ་འཁྱུག	quick [as a] fox / [lus zor yang	wa 'khyug
བ་གོ	-- ]	ba go
ཝ་གར	fox fur hat	wa gar
ཝ་གྲོ	bluish fox	wa gro
ཝ་གྲོ་གྲོ	grey fox	wa gro gro
ཝ་གློ	fox lung, animal med. [sweet, body heat neutral, by its power glo rnag skem, glo rdol is cured	wa glo
ཝ་མགོ་མ	fox head	wa mgo ma
ཝ་རྒན	old fox, sly person	wa rgan
ཝ་རྒྱ	fox trap	wa rgya
ཝ་བརྒྱལ	fox yelps	wa brgyal
ཝ་བརྒྱལ་བ	after a fox drinks water making sounds like words	wa brgyal ba
ཝ་ཆུ	water coming from a gutter/ ditch/ irrigation channel	wa chu
ཝ་མཆུ	gutter	wa mchu
ཝ་སྙིང	fox heart med [sweet tasting, by its power dropsy is thur du sbyong bar byed]	wa snying
ཝ་ཏ	1) kind of white cotton cloth; 2) white thang phrom med	wa ta
ཝ་ཏི	[Skt] 1 of the chief rten in mang yul skyid grong [one of the 'phags pa mched bzhi]	wa ti
ཝ་ཏི་བཟང་པོ	Wati Sangpo; A most famous sandal wood image of Avalokiteshvara in the form of Khasarpani. Preserved by His Holiness the 14th Dalai, at Dharamsala in India	wa ti bzang po
ཝ་བཏགས	W under a letter [like ra la and ya]	wa btags
ཝ་ལྟར་འཁྱུག་པ	run as quickly as a fo	wa ltar 'khyug pa
ཝ་དུག	arsenic	wa dug
ཝ་གདོང	body tshang ra'i mjug	wa gdong
ཝ་གདོང་རུས་པ	1) fox's gdong rus; 2) mjug rus w shape like fox face bones	wa gdong rus pa
ཝ་བདེ	TSE	wa bde
ཝ་ལྡེམ	fox catching snare	wa ldem
ཝ་ནག	black fo	wa nag
ཝ་པག	gutter tile	wa pag
ཝ་པགས	fox skin	wa pags
ཝ་ལྤགས	fox skin	wa lpags
ཝ་ཕོ	male fox	wa pho
ཝ་ཕྱེད	wa 'dogs, , fox , ba ???	wa phyed
ཝ་ཕྲུག	fox cub	wa phrug
ཝ་འཕྱང	[arch] corral, enclosure for animals	wa 'phyang
ཝ་བ	goiter	wa ba
ཝ་བྲག་དཀར	place in tibet	wa brag dkar
ཝ་འབྲོས	flee like a fo	wa 'bros
ཝ་མོ	fox	wa mo
ཝ་ཙེ	socks, stockings, barking of the fox	wa tse
ཝ་ཚ	medicinal salt for goitre	wa tsha
ཝ་ཚང	fox's lair	wa tshang
ཝ་ཞྭ	hat of fox skin	wa zhwa
ཝ་ཞག	nyi skar {wa zhag}	wa zhag
ཝ་ཟུར	WA mark, fo	wa zur
ཝ་ཡེ	address for inferiors	wa ye
ཝ་ར	tea	wa ra
ཝ་ར་སྐད་ཆེན	TSE	wa ra skad chen
ཝ་ར་ང་སེ	Varanasi	wa ra nga se
ཝ་ར་ཎ་སི	Varanasi, Benares	wa ra Na si
ཝ་ར་ཎ་སི་ཞེས་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ	in the city of Varanasi	wa ra Na si zhes pa'i grong khyer du
ཝ་ར་ན་སིའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	the dharma retinue of Varanasi	wa ra na si'i chos 'khor
ཝ་ར་ཎ་སིར	to Varanasi	wa ra Na sir
ཝ་རུ་ཎ	Varuna [god of water/ the sea]	wa ru Na
ཝ་རོག་པོ	black fo	wa rog po
ཝ་ལ	color of the bird 'ol ba	wa la
ཝ་ལམ་ཅན	A charnel ground	wa lam can
ཝ་ལུང	place in rdza yul rdzong, wa lung Valley, Nepal	wa lung
ཝ་ལེ	clear, vivid, resplendent, alert,	wa le
ཐེ་མིནད	-- realized all the worlds and menaings, , bsgom pa the guru's face, if it arising in the mind, 1 s not doing the meditation. Manjushri's face is --- to the mind]	the mind
ཝ་ལེ་བ	vivid, clear	wa le ba
ཝ་ལེ་ཝལ་ལེ	CM: sems la lam lam du shar tshul, the mode of appearing vividly/vividly clear to/before the mind. E.g., tshig don thams can yid la wal wal shar/// bsgom pa bla ma'i shl ras/ yid la 'char rgys mi '...	wa le wal le
ཝ་ལེར	vividness, directness	wa ler
ཝ་ལོང	ear ring	wa long
ཝ་ཤུར	gutter	wa shur
ཝ་ཤུལ	{wa shul} clan	wa shul
ཝ་ས	for water falling on a house: wa zhabs fathom ['dom gang] cut out? brkos pa'i [dug up] under sa chur bgrungs pa'i dvangs mas [by straining] if a sman rta [kind of medicine] has been made rma 'bras ...	wa sa
ཝ་སི	apple	wa si
ཝ་སྲན	peas	wa sran
ཝ་སློག	fox skin wearer, coat lined w fox fur	wa slog
ཝ་ཧ	gas	wa ha
ཝ་ཧྲེང་ཏོན	Washington	wa hreng ton
ཝང	chinese title of high order	wang
ཝང་ཁྱི	a sa bdag monster	wang khyi
ཝང་གུང	wang gung	wang gung
ཝང་ཆེའུ	tennis	wang che'u
ཝང་མོ	A kind of sweet wood	wang mo
ཝང་ཙུན	first chinese envoy sent to india	wang tsun
ཝང་ཝང	spontaneously manifest	wang wang
ཝང་ལེ་མོ	CH Tibetan nobles byes su 'gro mkhan etc. hat	wang le mo
ཝང་ལོང	A kind of ear ornament	wang long
ཝང་ཤིང་དམར་པོ	general of king of sa bdag	wang shing dmar po
ཝང་ཤུ	CH request/ petition by the Tibetan government to the aam ban residing in Tibet	wang shu
ཝན་ལུང	Bandung	wan lung
ཝན་ལུང་གྲོས་ཚོགས	Bandung conference	wan lung gros tshogs
ཝམ	(not in das)	wam
ཝམ་ཤེ	SK flute	wam she
ཝར་ཏི་ཀ	SK commentary	war ti ka
ཝར་ཏུ	SK Vivarta script	war tu
ཝར་ཏུ་ལ	Vivarta script	war tu la
ཝལ་གྱིས	as it happens, as it goes along , [the meaning of words arises --- in the mind]	wal gyis
ཝལ་གྱིས་ཤར་བ	to suddenly appear	wal gyis shar ba
ཝལ་རྒ་སུ	Walgasu	wal rga su
ཝལ་པོ	{mi gsal ba wal po} unclear and hazy	wal po
ཝལ་ཝལ	vivid, clear, sudden. nonconcrete	wal wal
ཝལ་ཝལ་ཤར	clearly and vividly	wal wal shar
ཝལ་ལེ	vivid, clear, sudden. Inconcrete; distinctiveness	wal le
ཝལ་ལེ་བ	very vividly	wal le ba
ནེ་བ	vivid and serene, lucid and unbound; Thrangu Rinpoche: {wal le ba cham me ba = 'jam po; song nge ba = gsal cha; bun ne ba = gsal po}	ne ba
ཝལ་ལེ་ཝ་ལེ	vivid, clear, sudden, nonconcrete	wal le wa le
ཝལ་ལེར	vivid, clear, sudden, non-concrete	wal ler
ཝི	figure 50	wi
བི༹་དྱོཏ་ཏ་མ་འབུམ་སྡེ	Hundred Thousand Sections of Unexcelled Knowledge. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	vi dyot ta ma 'bum sde
ཝི་པ་དྭ	a place	wi pa dwa
ཝིང་ཛུང	younger brother of dzung dzung	wing dzung
ཝིའེ་ན	Vienna	wi'e na
ཝུ	figure 80	wu
ཝུ་ཐོང་ཤིང	chinese parasol tree	wu thong shing
ཝུ་རྡོ	sling, pumice stone	wu rdo
ཝུ་ཙི་པེ་ཁེ	Uzbek	wu tsi pe khe
ཝུ་ལན་པ་ཐུར	Ulan Bator	wu lan pa thur
ཝུ་ལན་པ་ཐོར	Ulan Bator	wu lan pa thor
ཝུང་ཙི	CH liquor 'bebs byed kyi implement	wung tsi
ཝུན་ཤིང་ཀོང་ཇོ	Princess Wun Shing	wun shing kong jo
ཝུའུ་ལྕགས	tungsten	wu'u lcags
ཝུའུ་ལན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	wu'u lan
ཝུའུ་སུའུ་རིའི	Ussuri River	wu'u su'u ri'i
ཝུར་ལེན	amber	wur len
ཝེ	figure 110	we
བ༹E་དུར་ཞུན་མ	refined lapis lazuli parchment	vE dur zhun ma
ཝེ་ཧྲེང་སུའུ	vitamins	we hreng su'u
ཝེན་ཚེག	CH thang zan bla ma''s student khra'o zhan's teacher	wen tsheg
ཝེན་དྷི	famous chinese emperor of sui dynasty	wen dhi
ཝེར་མ	drala, victory/ weapon god, patron deity	wer ma
ཝེལ	Wales	wel
ཝེལ་ལེ་བ	very vivid	wel le ba
ཝོ	figure 140	wo
ཝོ་བརྒྱལ	TSE	wo brgyal
ཝོ་ཏི	corruption of bodhi	wo ti
ཝོ་ཏི་བཟང་པོ	celebrated image of buddha at skyed grong	wo ti bzang po
ཝོ་ཐོའུ	steamed bread of corn	wo tho'u
ཝོར་ག	Volga River	wor ga
བབ༹ླུགས་སྣོད	container	bvlugs snod
ཞ	ZHA [bod yig gsal byed nyer gcig pa 'di'i nga ro 'don tshul la skye gnas rkan dang, byed pa lce dbus, nang gi rtsol ba mgrin pa phye ba dang, phyi'i rtsol ba srog chen dro zhing sgra med pa, ming g...	zha
ཞ་ཀྱོག	yan lag zha nas kyog por gyur pa} -//rkang pa zha kyog //Lag pa ya gcig zha kyog tu gyur pa	zha kyog
ཞ་དཀར	zinc, tin	zha dkar
ཞ་དཀར་ཤོག	tin foil	zha dkar shog
ཞ་སྐུད	lead metal wire	zha skud
ཞ་འཁུམས	paralysis, palsy	zha 'khums
ཞ་གི་ཞི་གི	1) enclosure, wall etc. about to fall down/ apart, things about to wear out; 2) knot etc which is not tight zhig chog chog)	zha gi zhi gi
ཞ་གི་ཞི་གིའི་ཁང་པ་རྙིང་པོ	old house about to fall down	zha gi zhi gi'i khang pa rnying po
ཞ་གི་ཞི་གིའི་ཆ་ལག	things about to fall apart/ wear out	zha gi zhi gi'i cha lag
ཞ་སྒྲེ	earless	zha sgre
ཞ་ཆག	1) incomplete, deficient, imperfect, deceptive; 2) cripple	zha chag
ཞ་ཆག་མེད་པ	in full, in sound/ perfect condition	zha chag med pa
ཞ་ཆེན	cage	zha chen
ཞ་མཆག	1) incomplete, deficient, imperfect, deceptive; 2) cripple	zha mchag
ཞ་མཆག་མེད་པ	in full, in sound/ perfect condition	zha mchag med pa
ཞ་མཆུ	pipe of the bellows through which wind rushes when blown	zha mchu
ཞ་འཆག	incomplete, imperfect, defective	zha 'chag
ཞ་ཉེ	lead, fragrant grass, cyperus rotundes, bud of a flower, ruby, cinnabar, metal lead	zha nye
ཞ་ཉེ་སྐྱེས	li khri, sindhura [color]	zha nye skyes
ཞ་ཉེ་རྡོ	lead ore	zha nye rdo
ཞ་ཉེ་ནག་པོ	black lead	zha nye nag po
ཞ་ཉེ་མཚོན	leaden sword	zha nye mtshon
ཞ་ཉེའི་གཏིང་རྡོ	sounding lead, plummet	zha nye'i gting rdo
ཞ་ཉེའི་བདར	black salt, cyperus rotundus	zha nye'i bdar
ཞ་ཉེའི་ཡིག་དཔར	printing w lead type	zha nye'i yig dpar
ཞ་སྙུག	pencil	zha snyug
ཞ་ཐུལ	zla gam, phyam rtse	zha thul
ཞ་ཐེང	lame, crippled	zha theng
ཞ་ཐེང་ཐེང	lame, crippled	zha theng theng
ཞ་འཐབ	non-violent struggle	zha 'thab
ཞ་འཐེང	crooked legged way of walking 2301	zha 'theng
ཞ་འཐེང་འཐེང	lame, crippled	zha 'theng 'theng
ཞ་འཐེང་པོ	lame, crippled	zha 'theng po
ཞ་རྡོ	lead ore	zha rdo
ཞ་སྡེ	ZHA class [ebod yig gsal byed kyi sde pa drug pa ste, zha za ' ya,//zha za ' ya	zha sde
ཞ་ནེ	zha nye	zha ne
ཞ་ནེ་སྐྱེས	li khri, sindhura [color]	zha ne skyes
ཞ་ནེ་རྡོ	lead ore	zha ne rdo
ཞ་ནེ་མ	pounded dry cheese	zha ne ma
ཞ་ནེའི་ཡིག་དཔར	printing w lead type	zha ne'i yig dpar
ཞ་པར	lead type plate/ cast for printing	zha par
ཞ་བ	(tha mi dad pa,, lame [person], cripple[d]	zha ba
ཞ་བི་ཞི་བི་དྲན་འགྲོ་བ	unnoticed thinking/ undercurrent	zha bi zhi bi dran 'gro ba
ཞ་བོ	cripple	zha bo
ཞ་འབྲིང	man servant	zha 'bring
ཞ་མོ	cap, [top] hat	zha mo
ཞ་སྨི	shrimp	zha smi
ཞ་སྨྱུག	[zha nye pen] pencil	zha smyug
ཞ་ཚན	wetness, moisture	zha tshan
ཞ་ཞ	sgur sgur, gug gug //Kha 'phred 'phred sgyid zha zha	zha zha
ཞ་ཞི	small child	zha zhi
ཞ་འོ	a cripple	zha 'o
ཞ་ར	blind	zha ra
ཞ་རིལ	yan lag 'khum skyon shor ba	zha ril
ཞ་རིལ་འཁུམས་པ	grum bu'i nad where the arms and legs zha ril du gyur pa	zha ril 'khums pa
ཞ་རླག	wetness, moisture, humidity	zha rlag
ཞ་ལ	plaster, floor	zha la
ཞ་ལ་ཁང	1 of the cells of the dalai lama at potala in lhasa	zha la khang
ཞ་ལ་རྒྱག	plaster [wall etc]	zha la rgyag
ཞ་ལ་འདིང	lay/ put down a floor [floors are often plaster, concrete, plastered cow dung etc]	zha la 'ding
ཞ་ལ་རྩིག་པ་ལ་བརྒྱབ་པ	plaster a wall	zha la rtsig pa la brgyab pa
ཞ་ལུ	district in tsang	zha lu
ཞ་ལུ་སྐྱེས	pad kha [oil seed] etc. newly opening leaves	zha lu skyes
ཞ་ལུ་དགོན་པ	{zha lu dgon pa} Monastery [in the 11th century gzhis rtse'i sa khul du btab pa'i dgon pa zhig yin zhing, der dus rabs bcu bzhi par bu ston rin chen grub yun ring bzhugs te rgyud sde mang po'i 'cha...	zha lu dgon pa
ཞ་ལུ་པ	{zha lu pa} [late 13th century and early 14th bu ston rin chen grub kyis gsar gtod byas pa'i chos lugs kyi grub mtha' 'dzin mkhan	zha lu pa
ཞ་ལུ་ལོ་ཆེན	buton the author	zha lu lo chen
ཞ་ལོང	be crippled. Syn {gyol po}	zha long
ཞ་ཤོག	tin foil, thin plates of lead	zha shog
ཞ་ཧྲི	corporal	zha hri
ཞྭ	cap, crown, hat, covering for the head	zhwa
ཞྭ་དཀར	1) white hat; 2) Tibet kyi rtse drung gis mdzad sgor gyon rgyu'i summer hat; 3) monks' summer hat)	zhwa dkar
ཞྭ་ཁྲ	multicolored hat [for certain Kagyü monks]	zhwa khra
ཞྭ་གོན	put on/ wear a hat	zhwa gon
ཞྭ་གོན་པ	put a cap on	zhwa gon pa
ཞྭ་གོས	cap & robe	zhwa gos
ཞྭ་གོས་བཟང་པོས་ཀླུབ་པ	adorned w fine hat and clothes	zhwa gos bzang pos klub pa
ཞྭ་གོས་སོགས་གྱོན	put on your cap and robe	zhwa gos sogs gyon
ཞྭ་གྱ་ལ	monks' riding hat	zhwa gya la
ཞྭ་གྱོན	put on/ wear a hat	zhwa gyon
ཞྭ་གྱོན་པ	put a cap on	zhwa gyon pa
ཞྭ་ཏོག	hat-top	zhwa tog
ཞྭ་སྟེགས	hat-rack/stand	zhwa stegs
ཞྭ་ཐུལ	semi-circular red patch on back of priest's winter cloak	zhwa thul
ཞྭ་ཐེབ	kind of hat, bse theb	zhwa theb
ཞྭ་འདབ	flaps [of a hat]	zhwa 'dab
ཞྭ་ནག	Karmapa's black crown/ hat	zhwa nag
བྲོཨད	brimmed black hat; 4) the black hat / crown of the Karmapas	broad
ཞྭ་ནག་གི་ཅོད་པན	the crown of the black hat	zhwa nag gi cod pan
ཞྭ་ནག་པ	black crown of the Karmapas	zhwa nag pa
ཞྭ་ནག་པོ	black crown of the Karmapas	zhwa nag po
ཞྭ་རྣ་རིང	hat w long "rna ba" like Tsongkhapa's	zhwa rna ring
ཞྭ་སྣམ	woolly felt of yellow or red of which lam caps are made	zhwa snam
ཞྭ་སྣེ	hat tip	zhwa sne
ཞྭ་པར	hat press	zhwa par
ཞྭ་དཔེ་ལྷམ་འགེབས	contradicting the texts, using [the example of] a hat to cover a shoe, saying something irrelevant to avoid answering, merely rote/ literal application	zhwa dpe lham 'gebs
ཞྭ་འབུད་པ	take a cap off	zhwa 'bud pa
ཞྭ་འབོག	Tibetan govt gi las kyi sne mor 'khod pa rim pa lnga pa man gyis worn yellow round hat	zhwa 'bog
ཞྭ་མོ	cap, hat, top hat [syn: skye bo'i cod pan dang, mgo bo'i gos, mgo bo'i zhwa, mgo reg chu skyob]	zhwa mo
ཞྭ་མོ་གྱོན་པ	wear, put on	zhwa mo gyon pa
ཞྭ་མོ་ལྕགས་མདའ	Tibetan govt gi rim pa 4th yan gyis worn summer hat	zhwa mo lcags mda'
ཞྭ་མོ་འབུད་པ	pick, pluck	zhwa mo 'bud pa
ཞྭ་མོ་འབོག་ཐོ	soft felt hat with a broad brim trimmed with long hairy fur	zhwa mo 'bog tho
ཞྭ་མོའི་ཏོག	point of helmet or chinese cap	zhwa mo'i tog
ཞྭ་དམར	[red] pandit hat	zhwa dmar
ཞབ༹་དམར་དཀོན་མཆོག་འབངས	{dkon mchog yan lag}; the fifth {zhva dmar} (1525-1583)	zhva dmar dkon mchog 'bangs
ཞྭ་དམར་དཀོན་མཆོག་ཡན་ལག	the fifth, 1525-1583 zhwa dmar khri zur gar dbang rgya mtsho - b. around 1735 - Shamar Trisur, Garwang Gyatso	zhwa dmar dkon mchog yan lag
ཞྭ་དམར་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག	15841630	zhwa dmar chos kyi dbang phyug
ཞྭ་དམར་པ	Shamarpa [R]	zhwa dmar pa
ཞྭ་རྨོག	mongolian helmet	zhwa rmog
ཞྭ་ཙོག	hat worn by khenpos of monastic colleges of Sera, Drepung and Ganden mkhan po'i gsol dpon gyi zhwa mo}	zhwa tsog
ཞྭ་རྩེ་རིང	hat with high crown	zhwa rtse ring
ཞྭ་གཞོལ	brim of a cap	zhwa gzhol
ཞྭ་ཟེ	hat's ze sgro	zhwa ze
ཞྭ་ཟླུམ	worn by monks in Amdo btsun zhwa	zhwa zlum
ཞྭ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	hat factory	zhwa bzo grwa
ཞྭ་བཟོ་བ	hatter	zhwa bzo ba
ཞྭ་ལུ	Buton Rinpoche's residence	zhwa lu
ཞྭ་ལུ་ངང་པ	yellow ochre from	zhwa lu ngang pa
ཞྭ་ལུང	Zhalung, in U	zhwa lung
ཞྭ་ལུས་པ	Zhalupa	zhwa lus pa
ཞྭ་སེར	tradition established by bu ston rin chen grub and later spread by Tsongkhapa as Gelukpa btsun zhwa.	zhwa ser
ཞྭ་སེར་ཅོད་པན་འཆང་བའི་ལུགས	tradition wearing the yellow hat, Gelukpa	zhwa ser cod pan 'chang ba'i lugs
ཞྭ་སེར་ཆོས་འབྱུང་བེའི་སེར	dpal mnyam med ri bo dga' ldan pa'i bstan pa zhwa ser cod pan 'chang ba'i ring lugs chos thams cad kyi rtsa ba gsal bar byed pa bee d'urya ser po'i me long zhes bya ba ['di sde srid sangs rgyas rgy...	zhwa ser chos 'byung be'i ser
ཞྭ་སེར་བ	as a yellow hat was worn by the former vinaya holdersd and and later after the vinaya was reformed by Tsongkhapa by him hence called Gelukpa yellow hat	zhwa ser ba
ཞྭ་གསེར་མདངས	black crown with golden ornaments	zhwa gser mdangs
ཞག	1) grease, oil [liquid] fat/ butter; 2) body oil; 3) Tibetan tea bsrubs ma'i kha la chags pa'i butter tshi; 3) period of 1 day and 1 night	zhag
ཞག་ཀག	bad sign/ obstacle for a certain day	zhag kag
ཞག་ཀེག	bad sign/ obstacle for a certain day	zhag keg
ཞག་སྐག	bad day	zhag skag
ཞག་སྐེག	hindrances of the day	zhag skeg
ཞག་ཁ་ཤས	a few days	zhag kha shas
ཞག་ཁྲག	clotted blood	zhag khrag
ཞག་གི་ཕུང་པོ	month	zhag gi phung po
ཞག་གི་ཟོ་རིས	grease smears	zhag gi zo ris
ཞག་གི་ཤན	explained in the vinaya among the shan gsum, zhag snga ma la rnyed pa'i yo byad la bdag 'dzin zhugs pa'i nus pas zhag phyi ma la rnyed pa'i yo byad gsar pa la gos par byed pa'o, among which are the...	zhag gi shan
ཞག་གྲངས	the date	zhag grangs
ཞག་འགའ	for a couple of days, for a few days, for several days	zhag 'ga'
ཞག་འགའ་ནས	a few days ago	zhag 'ga' nas
ཞག་འགའི་བར་དུ	for a couple of days	zhag 'ga'i bar du
ཞག་འགར	for a couple of days	zhag 'gar
ཞག་རྒྱགས	in travelling zhag por sdod ring ldeng ba'i za chas	zhag rgyags
ཞག་ལྔ་པ	Five Days [thd]	zhag lnga pa
ཞག་ལྔ་ཙམ	for about 5 days	zhag lnga tsam
ཞག་ཅན	greasy	zhag can
ཞག་ཅིག་སྐྱིལ	make listen!	zhag cig skyil
ཞག་གཅིག	a day, once	zhag gcig
ཞག་གཅིག་འཐེབ	one day over, one day too much	zhag gcig 'theb
ཞག་གཅིག་མ་ཐེམ་པ་ལ	one day being still wanting	zhag gcig ma them pa la
ཞག་ཆེན	1) person's bones or tshil bu bskol ba'i zhag; 2) human fat)	zhag chen
ཞག་ཉ་མིག	drop of oil	zhag nya mig
ཞག་ཉབ་བདོ་ཙ་ན	(A) zhag mang 'das pa	zhag nyab bdo tsa na
ཞག་གཉིས་སོང་དུས	when 2 days had passed	zhag gnyis song dus
ཞག་རྟིང་མ	zhag grangs rjes ma	zhag rting ma
ཞག་ཐུབ་པ	[gso sbyongs] that can be done in a day [R]	zhag thub pa
ཞག་དང་ཞག	every day, day after day	zhag dang zhag
ཞག་དང་ཟ་མ	days and hours	zhag dang za ma
ཞག་དུ་མ་ལོན་པར	after many days	zhag du ma lon par
ཞག་བདུན	seven days, a week	zhag bdun
ཞག་བདུན་ནས	after seven days	zhag bdun nas
ཞག་བདུན་པའི་སྨན	7 day med. [rlung nad sel ba la gtso bor gnang ba'i sman te, bcas ldan dge slong gis zhag bdun pa'i mtha'i bar byin gyis brlabs nas longs spyad du rung ba mar dang, zhun mar dang, 'bru mar, phye hv...	zhag bdun pa'i sman
ཞག་བདུན་ཕྲག	week	zhag bdun phrag
ཞག་བདུན་ཕྲག་བདུན	49 days [in the bardo]	zhag bdun phrag bdun
ཞག་བདུན་ཚུན་ཆད	from 7 days on	zhag bdun tshun chad
ཞག་འདོན	shine, polish	zhag 'don
ཞག་ལྡན	the earth	zhag ldan
ཞག་སྡོད	night's lodging, temporary quarters, overnight stop, halting place on trip	zhag sdod
ཞག་ནས་ཞག་ཏུ	from day to day	zhag nas zhag tu
ཞག་པ	torn, broken in pieces	zhag pa
ཞག་པར	ja zhag blug snod	zhag par
ཞག་པོ	1) a day and a night; 2) 1 night //bzhugs zhag.	zhag po
ཞག་པོ་ཁ་ཤས	a few days	zhag po kha shas
ཞག་པོ་སྡོད་ས	SA bab mal	zhag po sdod sa
ཞག་པོར	cup, vessel for grease	zhag por
ཞག་པོར་སྡོད་ས	place to stay/ sleep for the day/ night	zhag por sdod sa
ཞག་ཕོར	bowl for collecting ja zhag ? etc.	zhag phor
ཞག་འཕུལ	nyi ma skyel ba,//gtam stong gis zhag 'phul,//don med nyin 'phul zhag 'phul gyis dus tshod stong zad du gtong ba	zhag 'phul
ཞག་འཕུལ་ཉིན་འགྱངས	nyin zhag zad du 'jug pa	zhag 'phul nyin 'gyangs
ཞག་བླུག	ja zhag blug snod	zhag blug
ཞག་མ	1) 1 day and night; 2) 1 night zhag ma} - 1) 1 day and night; 2) 1 night)	zhag ma
ཞག་མང་དུ	for quite a few days	zhag mang du
ཞག་མལ	place to stay and sleep for a day/ the night	zhag mal
ཞག་མི་ཐུབ་པ	'dul ba las bshad pa'i gso sbyong bcu bzhi pa rnams ni, tshes zhag gis nyin zhag gi dod ma thub pa'i dbang gis byung ba'i gso sbyong yin pas zhag mi thub ces bya ste, tshes zhag de nyin zhag las ch...	zhag mi thub pa
ཞག་མེད	lean, barren (countryside)	zhag med
ཞག་རྩི	zhag tshi	zhag rtsi
ཞག་རྩིས	calculations relative to the day	zhag rtsis
ཞག་ཚི	grease	zhag tshi
ཞག་ཚི་ཅན་གི་ཁ་ལག	greasy/ oily food	zhag tshi can gi kha lag
ཞག་ཚི་བཏོན	absorb/ get rid of [grease], shine, polish	zhag tshi bton
ཞག་ཚི་བཏོན་བའི་ཤིང་བལ	absorbent cotton 2304	zhag tshi bton ba'i shing bal
ཞག་ཚི་འདོན	absorb/ get rid of [grease], shine, polish	zhag tshi 'don
ཞག་ཚིལ	grease/ [liquid] fat of butter, oil, etc, oil and fat	zhag tshil
ཞག་ཞིག	about to fall down/ apart/ come undone	zhag zhig
ཞག་ཞེ་དགུ	49 days	zhag zhe dgu
ཞག་རེ་ཙམ	for a few days	zhag re tsam
ཞག་རེ་སོང་བཞིན	as each day passes	zhag re song bzhin
ཞག་ལེན	ja bsrubs ma and sha khu sogs kyi kha nas zhag zur du 'don pa	zhag len
ཞག་ལོག་ཟླ་ལོག	monthly and yearly	zhag log zla log
ཞག་ལོན	1) a day old; 2) day old food	zhag lon
ཞག་ཤས	some days	zhag shas
ཞག་ཤས་སོང་ཙ་ན	Several days later,	zhag shas song tsa na
ཞག་ས	a place for a nights rest on a journey	zhag sa
ཞག་གསུམ	the three kinds of days	zhag gsum
ཞགས	noose, lasso	zhags
ཞགས་ཀྱི་ལོང་མོའི་ཚིགས་མི་མངོན་པ་ཨནཀླེ	joints	zhags kyi long mo'i tshigs mi mngon pa ankle
ཞགས་གྲོལ	(met) River Sit'a	zhags grol
ཞགས་རྒྱབ་པ	throw a noose	zhags rgyab pa
ཞགས་ཐག	noose, lasso	zhags thag
ཞགས་རྡོལ	leaky bottom	zhags rdol
ཞགས་ནག	black rope	zhags nag
ཞགས་པ	noose. lasso ['gugs byed kyi thag pa'am, 'ching byed syn: sgrim ba dang, sgril ma, bcings thag thag pa, 'phen thag bzung thag, for {'dzin byed}. ro {sdom byed}. for seizing/ binding {'phen thug} [T...	zhags pa
ཞགས་པ་ཅན	varuna, god of the sea	zhags pa can
ཞགས་པ་མ	pasa, the noose	zhags pa ma
ཞགས་པ་འཛིན་པ	water god	zhags pa 'dzin pa
ཞགས་པའི་རྒྱ	zhags pa'i phyag rgya binding mudra	zhags pa'i rgya
ཞགས་པའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	binding mudra	zhags pa'i phyag rgya
ཞགས་དབྱུག	noose	zhags dbyug
ཞང	township, uncle by the mother's side, mother's brother, district of tsang, maternal uncle	zhang
ཞང་ཀ་མ	place in tibet	zhang ka ma
ཞང་ཀ་མ་པ	great lama from zhang ka ma	zhang ka ma pa
ཞང་ཀང	Honk Kong	zhang kang
ཞང་ཁ་ཆེན་པོ	broad	zhang kha chen po
ཞང་ཁྲག	menstrual blood	zhang khrag
ཞང་གོ	[h] address for an ordinary old monk	zhang go
ཞང་གོ་ཤིང་གཉེར	lha sa'i smon lam las byed shing gnyer ba'i 'go pa zhig zhang 'gro ba'i mgon po gyu brag pa	zhang go shing gnyer
ཞང་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	famous lama from zhang	zhang rgyal ba'i yon tan
ཞང་ཅི	CH chess	zhang ci
ཞང་ལྕམ	aunt	zhang lcam
ཞང་ཆི	chinese chess	zhang chi
ཞང་ཉེ	maternal relatives	zhang nye
ཞང་རྟགས	kind of long knife manufactured in zhang	zhang rtags
ཞང་སྟོན་བཀྲ་ཤིས	he wrote lo rgyus chen mo	zhang ston bkra shis
ཞང་སྟོན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཆོས་འབར	disciple of {lce btsun seng ge dbang phyug} in the {snying thig} lineage	zhang ston bkra shis chos 'bar
ཞང་སྟོན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྡོ་རྗེ	1097-1167	zhang ston bkra shis rdo rje
ཞང་དུ་བཅུག་པ	humiliate, deprecate	zhang du bcug pa
ཞང་སྣ་ནམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	zhang sna nam ye shes sde
ཞང་པོ	uncle	zhang po
ཞང་བླ་མ	{zhang g.yu brag pa brtson 'grus g.yung drung} 1123-1193	zhang bla ma
ཞང་བློན	important minister family in early Tibet	zhang blon
ཞང་བློན་སྤྲེལ་ཞ་ཅན	Monkey-faced Chieftain of Shang	zhang blon sprel zha can
ཞང་བློན་རྦ་མི་ཁྲི་གཟིགས	8th cent. Bami Trhizi, a Buddhist minister of King Trisong Deutsen	zhang blon rba mi khri gzigs
ཞང་བློན་མུ་མེན་ག་ཤ་ཅན	tiger's flesh	zhang blon mu men ga sha can
ཞང་དབོན	zhang po and dbon po	zhang dbon
ཞང་ཚ་བྱ	1 of 36 border lands of tibet	zhang tsha bya
ཞང་ཚན	uncle and nephew	zhang tshan
ཞང་ཚལ་པ	1123-1193, also know as brtson 'grus grags pa, founder of Tsalpa branch of the Kagyu School	zhang tshal pa
ཞང་ཚལ་པ་རིན	tshal pa bka' brgyud master	zhang tshal pa rin
ཞང་ཚལ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1123-1193	zhang tshal pa rin po che
ཞང་ཞང	maternal uncle	zhang zhang
ཞང་ཞུང	a district in Tibet	zhang zhung
ཞང་ཞུང་གི་དགྲ་ལྷ	War Goddess of Shangshung. A protectoress of the Bönpo doctrine. She was subjugated by Padmasambhava and given the name Great Glacier Lady of Invincible Turquoise Mist	zhang zhung gi dgra lha
ཞང་ཞུང་གྱི་སྨར	SA nye brgyud zhang zhung gyi smar gyi grub chen great sages of zhang zhung	zhang zhung gyi smar
ཞང་ཞུང་ཇུ་ཐིག	method of divination	zhang zhung ju thig
ཞང་ཞུང་སྙན་རྒྱུད	oral transmission of zhang zhung which is an important transmission of bonpo, Oral Transmission from the Country of 2305 Zhang Zhung, SA phyi lta ba spyi gcod du bshad pa, nang man ngag dmar khrid ...	zhang zhung snyan rgyud
ཞང་ཞུང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	most important cycle of teachings in the bon tradition, written down in 8th century from 'ja' lus of Tapihritsa	zhang zhung snyan brgyud
ཞང་ཞུང་བོན་ཡུལ	zhang zhung region where gyung drung bon first spread	zhang zhung bon yul
ཞང་ཞུང་མེ་རི	Fire Mountain Deity	zhang zhung me ri
ཞང་ཞུང་བཟའ	{zhang zhung bza'}	zhang zhung bza'
ཞང་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ	{zhang ye shes sde} [rgyal po khri srong lde btsan skabs byung ba'i lo ts' ba ska cog zhang gsum du grags pa'i ya gyal zhig yin zhing, khong gis lta ba'i khyad par, bzang spyod kyi 'grel pa bzhi'i ...	zhang ye shes sde
ཞང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Uncle Rinpoche	zhang rin po che
ཞང་རོམ	lama of atisha's time	zhang rom
ཞང་ལགས	maternal uncle [h]	zhang lags
ཞང་གསུམ་བློན་བཅས་བཞི	srong btsan sgam po'i skabs su 'bro, mchims and sna nam gsum = zhang gsum &, sbas ni blon gcig zer, de dag gis dbus kyi 'dun sa 'dzin pa ni bod kyi khod drug gi gras yin	zhang gsum blon bcas bzhi
ཞང་ཧྲེང	cross talk, comic dialogue	zhang hreng
ཞང་ལྷ	deity of the maternal uncle	zhang lha
ཞད	stain, dirt, rust, tarnish	zhad
ཞད་ཀྱིས་མནར་བཞི་ནད་པ	person afflicted by sickness	zhad kyis mnar bzhi nad pa
ཞན	hsien = county, inferior poor, bad, weak, ray	zhan
ཞན་ཀང	Danang, South Vietnam	zhan kang
ཞན་ཀྲང	hsioen = county head/ magistrate	zhan krang
ཞན་བཀོད་མཛད	gave advice	zhan bkod mdzad
ཞན་གྱི་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཀྱང	county = hsien [party] committee	zhan gyi u yon lhan kyang
ཞན་རྒྱབ་པ	to influence in a negative way [ggd]	zhan rgyab pa
ཞན་སྒོ	ugly face	zhan sgo
ཞན་ཆ	fault, bad aspect	zhan cha
ཞན་ཆབ	spit	zhan chab
ཞན་ཉེ	lead	zhan nye
ཞན་པ	bad inferior, weak, adherence	zhan pa
ཞན་པའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	sngon 'jug gi mo yig ' dang, rjes mjug gi mo yig nga ma ' bcas rang rang 'jug yul gyi ming gzhi dag la sgra dang rtsol ba zhan par 'jug pa,//'A,//nga ma 'a/	zhan pa'i 'jug tshul
ཞན་པིང	military police, international gendarmes	zhan ping
ཞན་པིང་དམག་དཔུང	military police, international gendarmes	zhan ping dmag dpung
ཞན་པིང་དམག་དཔུང་བྱེད	act as military police/ international gendarmes	zhan ping dmag dpung byed
ཞན་པིང་དམག་དཔུང་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	acting as military police/ international gendarmes	zhan ping dmag dpung byed rgyu
ཞན་པོ	weak, feeble, thin, weakened	zhan po
ཞན་ཚལ	salted vegetable, pickly	zhan tshal
ཞན་ས	weak spot/ point/ place	zhan sa
ཞན་ཨུ	county = hsien [party] committee	zhan u
ཞབ་ཕྱི	attendant, servant	zhab phyi
ཞབས	1) feet [h]; 2) [h] particle, honored, lord, pada SK?, honorable, venerable	zhabs
ཞབས་ཀྱག	stool, chair, sofa [h]	zhabs kyag
ཞབས་ཀྱག་གནང	sit on [h]	zhabs kyag gnang
ཞབས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་མགྲོན	royal guests [Bhutan]	zhabs kyi sku mgron
ཞབས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་པ་ཡངས་པ	broad heels [R]	zhabs kyi ting pa yangs pa
ཞབས་ཀྱི་རྟིང་པ་ཡངས་པ	this heels are broad	zhabs kyi rting pa yangs pa
ཞབས་ཀྱི་དྲུང་འཚོ	royal physician [Bhutan]	zhabs kyi drung 'tsho
ཞབས་ཀྱི་པད་མོ	footstool	zhabs kyi pad mo
ཞབས་ཀྱི་པད་མོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	pure lotus feet	zhabs kyi pad mo dri ma med pa
ཞབས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	the three minor marks of the feet [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, 1 zhabs long bu mi mngon pa dang, two zhabs mnyam pa dang, three zhabs gom pa che snyoms pa ste gsum mo	zhabs kyi dpe byad gsum
ཞབས་ཀྱི་ལོང་མོའི་ཚིགས་མི་མངོན་པ་ཨིནཅོནསྤིཅུཨོཨུས་ཨནཀླེ	joints	zhabs kyi long mo'i tshigs mi mngon pa inconspicuous ankle
ཞབས་ཀྱི་ལོང་མོའི་ཚིགས་མི་མངོན་པ་ཨིནཅོནསྤིཅིཨོཨུས་ཨནཀླེ	joints [R]	zhabs kyi long mo'i tshigs mi mngon pa inconspicious ankle
ཞབས་ཀྱི་ལོང་མོའི་ཚིགས་མི་མངོན་པ་ཨནཀླེ	joints; inconspicuous ankle-joints. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	zhabs kyi long mo'i tshigs mi mngon pa ankle
ཞབས་ཀྱིས་བཅག	go, arrive, visit [h] 2306	zhabs kyis bcag
ཞབས་ཀྱིས་བཅག་པ	go, arrive, visit [h] zhabs kyis bcag shing byin gyis brlabs pa blessed by the presence of	zhabs kyis bcag pa
ཞབས་ཀྱིས་བཅགས	go, arrive, visit [h]	zhabs kyis bcags
ཞབས་ཀྱིས་བཅགས་པ	h has walked on this earth	zhabs kyis bcags pa
ཞབས་ཀྱུ	U [mark below syllable]	zhabs kyu
ཞབས་དཀར	{zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol}	zhabs dkar
ཞབས་དཀར་པོ	White footprint, Shab Karpo, of Buddha Shakyamuni, at Kailash zhabs dkar ba tshogs drug rang grol {zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol}	zhabs dkar po
ཞབས་དཀར་ཚོགས་དྲུག་རང་གྲོལ	Shabkar Tsokdrug Rangdröl: 1781-1850/1 zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol gyi bka' 'bum - the collected works of zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol	zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
ཞབས་བཀྱག	chair	zhabs bkyag
ཞབས་རྐྱུ	U [mark below syllable]	zhabs rkyu
ཞབས་སྐས	servant, attendant	zhabs skas
ཞབས་སྐྱེལ	see off, bid farewell [h]	zhabs skyel
ཞབས་སྐྱེལ་འབུལ	see off, bid farewell [h]	zhabs skyel 'bul
ཞབས་སྐྱེལ་ཞུ	see off, bid farewell [h]	zhabs skyel zhu
ཞབས་སྐྱེས	(met) servant	zhabs skyes
ཞབས་བསྐུལ	reminder [h]	zhabs bskul
ཞབས་བསྐུལ་བ	refresh one's memory, remind	zhabs bskul ba
ཞབས་བསྐུལ་འབུལ	remind [h]	zhabs bskul 'bul
ཞབས་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	remind [h]	zhabs bskul zhu
ཞབས་བསྐུལ་ཞུ་བ	urge, exhort	zhabs bskul zhu ba
ཞབས་ཁམ	boot, shoe [h]	zhabs kham
ཞབས་ཁྱེན	skirt [h]	zhabs khyen
ཞབས་གོམ	step, pace [h]	zhabs gom
ཞབས་གོམ་སྐྱོན	walk [h]	zhabs gom skyon
ཞབས་གོམ་པ་སྙོམས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of even steps [R]	zhabs gom pa snyoms pa'i dpe byad
ཞབས་གྲས	servant, attendant	zhabs gras
ཞབས་གྲས་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ	obligation of providing servants for the rdzong governor	zhabs gras kyi khral
ཞབས་གླ	wages, fee [h]	zhabs gla
ཞབས་འགྱུར	aid, help [h]	zhabs 'gyur
ཞབས་འགྱུར་ཞུ	aid, help [h]	zhabs 'gyur zhu
ཞབས་འགྲེད	feet slide/ slip 'gred pa	zhabs 'gred
ཞབས་རྒྱན	on a bowl's zhabs ra etc gtub byed phyogs gnyis kar so can gyi lag cha	zhabs rgyan
ཞབས་བཅགས	ground, territory, SA zhabs 'chag pa, zhabs chags	zhabs bcags
ཞབས་བཅར	attendance	zhabs bcar
ཞབས་ཆག	shoe, boot	zhabs chag
ཞབས་ཆགས	shoe, boot [h]	zhabs chags
ཞབས་འཆག	shoe, boot [h]	zhabs 'chag
ཞབས་འཆགས	shoe, boot [h]	zhabs 'chags
ཞབས་འཆམ	walk, stroll [h]	zhabs 'cham
ཞབས་འཆམ་གནང	go for a walk/ stroll [h]	zhabs 'cham gnang
ཞབས་རྗེན	bare feet [h]	zhabs rjen
ཞབས་རྗེན་པ	bare feet [h]	zhabs rjen pa
ཞབས་རྗེན་པར	barefooted	zhabs rjen par
ཞབས་རྗེན་པར་གདའ་བ	go bare-footed	zhabs rjen par gda' ba
ཞབས་རྗེན་པར་གཤེགས་པ	going barefoot [h]	zhabs rjen par gshegs pa
ཞབས་རྗེན་མ	bare feet/ footed [h]	zhabs rjen ma
ཞབས་རྗེས	footprint [h]	zhabs rjes
ཞབས་རྗེས་གནོན་པ	to tread on someone's footprints {rjes nas song na zhabs rjes gnon pas mi 'gro} do not walk behind him, because you would be treading on his footprints	zhabs rjes gnon pa
ཞབས་རྗེས་བབས་ཡོད་པ	had left footprints	zhabs rjes babs yod pa
ཞབས་རྗེས་བཞག་པ	left footprints	zhabs rjes bzhag pa
ཞབས་རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	went after [the Buddha] on foot	zhabs rjes su 'gro ba
ཞབས་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས	{mchod sprin dang bcas te zhabs rjes su 'brangs} followed with clouds of offerings	zhabs rjes su 'brangs
ཞབས་གཉིས	two feet, two legs	zhabs gnyis
ཞབས་གཉིས་རོལ་སྟབས	two feet in the reveling posture	zhabs gnyis rol stabs
ཞབས་མཉམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of equally sized feet [R]	zhabs mnyam pa'i dpe byad
ཞབས་རྙོངས་པ	[arch] shriveled/ emaciated/ paralyzed legs [h]	zhabs rnyongs pa
ཞབས་རྙོངས་པ་མེད་པ	w/o shriveled/ emaciated/ paralyzed legs [h]	zhabs rnyongs pa med pa
ཞབས་ཏོག	help	zhabs tog
ཞབས་ཏོག་བགྱིད་བ	tender service	zhabs tog bgyid ba
མཉེས་པར་བྱ་བ	three ways to please the teacher and serve him. Paltrul Rinpoche: {rab sgrub pa'i mchod pa zhes bya ste, bla mas ji ltar, bstan pa'i chos thams cad dka' spyod dang snying rus kyi sgo nas nyams su l...	mnyes par bya ba
ཞབས་ཏོག་རྣམ་གསུམ	three ways of service * [h]	zhabs tog rnam gsum
ཞབས་ཏོག་པ	servant [male] [h]	zhabs tog pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱ་ཡུལ	someone to care for	zhabs tog bya yul
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱས	had honored him	zhabs tog byas
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱས་པ	rendered a great service	zhabs tog byas pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱེད	to pay respect 2307	zhabs tog byed
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱེད་དུ་བཅུག་པ	was set to / offered to take care of	zhabs tog byed du bcug pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་བྱེད་པ	to serve	zhabs tog byed pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་བློན་པོ	Minister of Public Works	zhabs tog blon po
ཞབས་ཏོག་མ	servant [female] [h]	zhabs tog ma
ཞབས་ཏོག་མཛད	served, gave valuable help	zhabs tog mdzad
ཞབས་ཏོག་མཛད་པ	to render service	zhabs tog mdzad pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་ཞུ	serve, pay respect [h]	zhabs tog zhu
ཞབས་ཏོག་ཞུས་པ	serve, pay respect [h]	zhabs tog zhus pa
ཞབས་ཏོག་བཟང་པོ་བྱས	served him well	zhabs tog bzang po byas
ཞབས་ཏོག་སྲི་ཞུ་ལུས་ངག་བཀོལ་བའི་ལས	to honor and serve [him] with body and speech,	zhabs tog sri zhu lus ngag bkol ba'i las
ཞབས་ཏོག་གསུམ	three ways of service to please the root guru [R]	zhabs tog gsum
ཞབས་གཏན	Healing ceremonies. Rituals to dispel obstacles to life, health and spiritual practice	zhabs gtan
ཞབས་བཏགས	LKh: mouthful [mss]	zhabs btags
ཞབས་རྟིང	heel	zhabs rting
ཞབས་རྟེན	Long life prayer or longevity prayer	zhabs rten
ཞབས་རྟེན་ཕ་གཞིས	estate given by the government for service to an official	zhabs rten pha gzhis
ཞབས་ལྟན	perfect conduct	zhabs ltan
ཞབས་སྟེགས	foot stool [h]	zhabs stegs
ཞབས་སྟེབས	footstool	zhabs stebs
ཞབས་བརྟན	a prayer for "stability of life", sku rim mam rim gro'i [h]	zhabs brtan
ཞབས་བརྟན་སྒྲུབ་པ	[do] long life practice	zhabs brtan sgrub pa
ཞབས་བརྟན་གནང	perform a prayer/ service/ ceremony for "stability of life" [h]	zhabs brtan gnang
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཕུལ	offered prayers for his long life	zhabs brtan phul
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཕུལ་བ	offered prayers for	zhabs brtan phul ba
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ	ceremony for long life	zhabs brtan tshe sgrub
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་གནང	perform a ceremony for the long life [of.]	zhabs brtan tshe sgrub gnang
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་བྱས་པ	performed a longevity practice for the	zhabs brtan tshe sgrub byas pa
བེནེཕི༹ཏ་ཨོཕ༹་སོ	and-so	benefit of so
ཞབས་བརྟན་ཞུ་བ	[do] long life practice	zhabs brtan zhu ba
ཞབས་བརྟན་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt office for service to Dalai Lama's long-life sadhana practitioners	zhabs brtan las khungs
ཞབས་བརྟེན	Supportive rituals. Supporting ceremonies. Rituals performed to remove obstacles for life and health	zhabs brten
ཞབས་ཐང	afoot, on foot	zhabs thang
ཞབས་ཐང་ལ་ཕེབས	[travel] on foot [h]	zhabs thang la phebs
ཞབས་ཐང་ལ་ལོག	started home on foot	zhabs thang la log
ཞབས་ཐུང	pants, short feet [h]	zhabs thung
ཞབས་ཐོ	sound of walking feet, clattering hooves [h]	zhabs tho
ཞབས་ཐོག	service	zhabs thog
ཞབས་ཐོག་བཟབས་པ	abundant food, good service	zhabs thog bzabs pa
ཞབས་མཐིལ	soles [feet]	zhabs mthil
ཞབས་དག་རྒྱབ་པ	bottoms up	zhabs dag rgyab pa
ཞབས་དོར	trousers [h]	zhabs dor
ཞབས་དྲུང	1) front of the body, rkang pa'i 'khris; 2) great lama drung du 'khod myong ba'i ser mo ba; 3) great lama's zhabs 'brang ser mo ba'i skye srid)	zhabs drung
ཞབས་དྲུང་ངག་དབང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	lineage of {zhabs drung ngag dbang rnam rgyal} [highest lama of Bhutan]	zhabs drung ngag dbang rin po che
ཞབས་དྲུང་དུ	at the feet of, into the presence of, in front of	zhabs drung du
ཞབས་གདུབ	anklet, foot ornaments [h]	zhabs gdub
ཞབས་འདེགས	service, service, serving	zhabs 'degs
ཞབས་འདེགས་སྐོར་གྱི་ལས་རིགས	service trades [h]	zhabs 'degs skor gyi las rigs
ཞབས་འདེགས་པ	attendant, orderly, oddjob man, one who serves as a servant, support the feet of another, help	zhabs 'degs pa
ཞབས་འདེགས་བྱེད	serve, work for [h]	zhabs 'degs byed
ཞབས་འདེགས་བྱེད་པ	serve 2308	zhabs 'degs byed pa
ཞབས་འདེགས་ཞུ	serve, work for [h]	zhabs 'degs zhu
ཞབས་འདེགས་ཞུ་སྟངས	way in which 1 gives service	zhabs 'degs zhu stangs
ཞབས་འདེགས་ཞུ་བ	give service/ attend to the needs of	zhabs 'degs zhu ba
ཞབས་འདེགས་ཞུ་བའི་ལས་རིགས	service trades [h]	zhabs 'degs zhu ba'i las rigs
ཞབས་འདེགས་ལས་རིགས	service trades [h]	zhabs 'degs las rigs
ཞབས་འདེགས་ས་ཚིགས	service station	zhabs 'degs sa tshigs
ཞབས་འདྲེད	feet slipping/ sliding	zhabs 'dred
ཞབས་འདྲེད་ཤོར	feet slipping/ sliding	zhabs 'dred shor
ཞབས་འདྲེན	drag down, give a bad name, disgrace, shame	zhabs 'dren
ཞབས་འདྲེན་པ	disgrace, bring shame, insult	zhabs 'dren pa
ཞབས་འདྲེན་བྱེད་པ	to disgrace, defame	zhabs 'dren byed pa
ཞབས་འདྲེན་ཞུ	drag down, give a bad name, disgrace, shame	zhabs 'dren zhu
ཞབས་འདྲེན་ཞུ་བ	drag down, give a bad name, disgrace, shame	zhabs 'dren zhu ba
ཞབས་རྡོལ	leaking bottom	zhabs rdol
ཞབས་རྡོལ་ལྟ་བུ	like a pot with a hole in it	zhabs rdol lta bu
ཞབས་རྡོལ་བ	feet or vessel's bottom ai khung leaking//Thag ring du phyin pas zhabs rdol ba	zhabs rdol ba
ཞབས་རྡོལ་བའི་བུམ་པ	jar/ vase w a leaky bottom	zhabs rdol ba'i bum pa
ཞབས་ལྡན	perfect conduct	zhabs ldan
ཞབས་སྡོད	government servant or official	zhabs sdod
ཞབས་སྡོད་པ	Tibetan govt. gi dpon rigs lowest rank su sdod mkhan	zhabs sdod pa
ཞབས་སྡོད་ཞུ	to serve as a government official	zhabs sdod zhu
ཞབས་བསྡོལ	broken, w hole in the bottom	zhabs bsdol
ཞབས་ནས་གནང་བའི་བཀའ	the king's command [Bhutanese]	zhabs nas gnang ba'i bka'
ཞབས་པད	1) lotuses of the feet; 2) Tibetan govt council minister	zhabs pad
ཞབས་པད་རྟག་བརྟན	[may your]. life be long and steadfast	zhabs pad rtag brtan
ཞབས་པད་བརྟན	SA zhabs brtan	zhabs pad brtan
ཞབས་པད་དྲུང	in the presence of	zhabs pad drung
ཞབས་པིས་ངར་དུང	shin bone [h]	zhabs pis ngar dung
ཞབས་པུས	knee [h]	zhabs pus
ཞབས་སྤྱི་བོར་བླངས	placed the [master's] feet above his head	zhabs spyi bor blangs
ཞབས་སྤྱི་བོར་བླངས་པ	touching their heads to his feet	zhabs spyi bor blangs pa
ཞབས་སྤྱི་འབོར་ལེན་པ	to touch the guru's feet with your head	zhabs spyi 'bor len pa
ཞབས་ཕོངས	anus	zhabs phongs
ཞབས་ཕྱག	foot and hand [h]	zhabs phyag
ཞབས་ཕྱགས	shoes/ boots	zhabs phyags
ཞབས་ཕྱི	servant, attendant	zhabs phyi
ཞབས་ཕྱི་དཀྱུས་མ	servant who does phyi'i las don	zhabs phyi dkyus ma
ཞབས་ཕྱི་ཁང	servant's quarters	zhabs phyi khang
ཞབས་ཕྱི་ནང་མ	chamber servant	zhabs phyi nang ma
ཞབས་ཕྱི་བྱེད་པ	serve, render any service	zhabs phyi byed pa
ཞབས་ཕྱི་ཞུ་བ	cater serve	zhabs phyi zhu ba
ཞབས་ཕྱི་སློབ་མ	attendants and disciples	zhabs phyi slob ma
ཞབས་ཕྱིད	accompanying [h]	zhabs phyid
ཞབས་ཕྱིར་འབྲང་བ	follow as a servant	zhabs phyir 'brang ba
ཞབས་ཕྱིས	1) service; 2) servant	zhabs phyis
ཞབས་ཕྱིས་དཀྱུས་མ	servant who does phyi'i las don	zhabs phyis dkyus ma
ཞབས་ཕྱིས་ཁང	servant's quarters	zhabs phyis khang
ཞབས་ཕྱིས་ནང་མ	blos 'khel ba'am nang gi las don byed mkhan chief servant	zhabs phyis nang ma
ཞབས་ཕྱིས་ཞུ་བ	serve, offer services	zhabs phyis zhu ba
ཞབས་ཕྱེ་བྱེད་པ	doing whatever he needs	zhabs phye byed pa
ཞབས་འཕེན	rgyug pa	zhabs 'phen
ཞབས་བྲོ	dance	zhabs bro
ཞབས་བྲོ་རྐྱག་པ	to dance	zhabs bro rkyag pa
ཞབས་བྲོ་འཁྲབ་པ	danced	zhabs bro 'khrab pa
ཞབས་བྲོ་རྒྱག	dance	zhabs bro rgyag
ཞབས་བྲོ་རྒྱག་པ	dance	zhabs bro rgyag pa
ཞབས་བྲོ་བརྒྱབ་བྱུང་བ	performed dances	zhabs bro brgyab byung ba
ཞབས་བྲོ་མཛད་པ	dance to music, dance as a manifestation of gladness and mirth	zhabs bro mdzad pa
ཞབས་བྲོའི་རྗོད་བྱེད	dance movements	zhabs bro'i rjod byed
ཞབས་བྲོའི་འདུ་ཚོགས	dance [party]	zhabs bro'i 'du tshogs
ཞབས་བྲོའི་རོལ་དབྱངས	dance music	zhabs bro'i rol dbyangs
ཞབས་བྲོའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	dance school	zhabs bro'i slob grwa
ཞབས་འབམ	rheumatism [h]	zhabs 'bam
ཞབས་འབུར་མི་མངོན	his ankle-joints are inconspicuous zhabs 'bur mi mngon pa'i mtshan bzang the major mark of inconspicuous ankles [R] zhabs 'bur mi mngon pa'i mtshan bzang the major mark of inconspicuous ankles [san...	zhabs 'bur mi mngon
ཞབས་འབྲང	following [behind] [h]	zhabs 'brang
ཞབས་འབྲིང	[retinue] servant	zhabs 'bring
ཞབས་འབྲིང་དུ	as attendant {gshegs pa'i tshe zhabs 'bring du 'gro ba} when walking with him as his attendant	zhabs 'bring du
ཞབས་འབྲིང་དུ་བསྡད	spent time as attendant	zhabs 'bring du bsdad
ཞབས་འབྲིང་པ	[retinue] servant	zhabs 'bring pa
ཞབས་འབྲིང་བ	rgyal po'i + - officer; to follow as a servant	zhabs 'bring ba
ཞབས་འབྲིང་བྱེད་པ	{lo nyi shu rtsa bzhir bcom ldan 'das kyi zhabs 'bring byas} served the Buddha for twentyfour years	zhabs 'bring byed pa
ཞབས་མ	later/ lower part	zhabs ma
ཞབས་རྩ	shoes	zhabs rtsa
ཞབས་ཚིགས་འཕྲོག	sprain [h]	zhabs tshigs 'phrog
ཞབས་མཛུབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱུངས	[The Buddha] lifted the boulder with his toe	zhabs mdzub kyis phyungs
ཞབས་འཛུགས་དགའ་སྟོན	child's feet on the ground 1st 'dzugs pa'i celebration	zhabs 'dzugs dga' ston
ཞབས་ཞུ	service	zhabs zhu
ཞབས་ཞུ་བ	cortege	zhabs zhu ba
ཞབས་གཞས	dances and songs	zhabs gzhas
ཞབས་གཞས་གནང	dance [& sing] [h]	zhabs gzhas gnang
ཞབས་ཟུང	pair of feet	zhabs zung
ཞབས་ཟུང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ་འགོད་པ	resided, placed the chakras on both his feet	zhabs zung gi 'khor lo 'god pa
ཞབས་ཟུར	sngar gyi gzhung zhabs zur pa	zhabs zur
ཞབས་འོག	below his feet zhabs g.yas bzhag pa - stepped with his right foot zhabs g.yon bsnyel - side of the left leg is on the ground	zhabs 'og
ཞབས་ར	vessels snod chas kyi mthil skyor,//dkar yol gyi zhabs ra,//rdza bum gyi zhabs ra,//Mi 'di la zhabs ra mi 'dug //'ju ba la lung med, 'jog pa la zhabs ra med	zhabs ra
ཞབས་རིང	1) service; 2) servant	zhabs ring
ཞབས་རིམ	rites of aid, virtuous one	zhabs rim
ཞབས་རོགས་སྲིད་ཚབ	three regent officials in Bhutan	zhabs rogs srid tshab
ཞབས་ལ་མཀོ་བོས་ཕྱག་འཚལ	prostrate oneself at [his]. feet	zhabs la mko bos phyag 'tshal
ཞབས་ལ་གུས་པས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	We prostrate ourselves with veneration at your feet zhabs la mgo bo btud de song ngo bowed his head to [the Buddha's] feet and returned home	zhabs la gus pas phyag 'tshal ba
ཞབས་ལ་མགོ་བོ་བཙུགས་ཏེ་གསོལ་པ	bowing with his head to the Buddha's feet, he said,	zhabs la mgo bo btsugs te gsol pa
ཞབས་ལ་གཏུགས་པ	1) touch [teacher's feet to the head]; 2) attend [teacher]	zhabs la gtugs pa
ཞབས་ལ་འདུད	I bow down at the feet of ...	zhabs la 'dud
ཞབས་ལ་འདུད་པ	bow at a person's feet	zhabs la 'dud pa
ཞབས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ	bowed to the [Buddha's] feet	zhabs la phyag 'tshal
ཞབས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ	{mchod cing zhabs la phyag 'tshal ba} making offerings and bowing to the feet of zhabs long bu mi mngon pa'i dpe byad minor mark of inconspicuous ankles [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu...	zhabs la phyag 'tshal ba
ཞབས་ཤིན་ཏུ་གནས་པ	his feet are wellplaced []h	zhabs shin tu gnas pa
ཞབས་ཤུབས	stocking, sock	zhabs shubs
ཞབས་ཤོག	pecha's gsham shog [last page? back cover?]	zhabs shog
ཞབས་སུ	sock	zhabs su
ཞབས་སུ་ལྡན་པ	stanza, possessed of, feet virtuous one	zhabs su ldan pa
ཞབས་སེན	toe nail	zhabs sen
ཞབས་སེམས་སྐྱིལ	SK sattvasana	zhabs sems skyil
ཞབས་སོར	toe	zhabs sor
ཞབས་སོར་འགོད	arrive, come [h]	zhabs sor 'god
ཞབས་སྲོངས་དྲེའུ་ལ་མཛད	let rest by riding the mule	zhabs srongs dre'u la mdzad
ཞབས་གསིལ	Skt padam, washing water	zhabs gsil
ཞབས་བསིལ	water for cooling the feet, foot water	zhabs bsil
ཞབས་བསུར་ཕེབས	go to see off [h]	zhabs bsur phebs
ཞབས་ལྷ་ཁང་གཉེར	a caretaker in rtse pho brang nang gi khang gnyer zhig	zhabs lha khang gnyer
ཞབས་ལྷམ	boots [h]	zhabs lham
ཞམ་ཆ	pipe of the bellows through which wind rushes when blown	zham cha
ཞམ་ཆུ	1) gzar sa nas dal bur mar 'bab pa'i chu; 2) Lus tsha bas rngul ba las byung ba'i chu	zham chu
ཞམ་མེ་ཞོམ་མེ	1) sa khod protruding and uneven; 2) vessel etc breaking down/ crubling/ collapsing)	zham me zhom me
ཞམ་ཞམ	rngul nag gi chu sogs khrum khrum du 'bab tshul zhig //Lus po yongs rdzogs nas rngul nag zham zham du thon pa	zham zham
ཞམ་ཞོམ	1) sa khod protruding and uneven; 2) vessel etc breaking down/ crubling/ collapsing)	zham zhom
ཞམ་རིང	presence of a great man	zham ring
ཞམ་རིང་པ	personal attendant, private secretary, officer in waiting, aide de camp	zham ring pa
ཞམ་རིན	servant	zham rin
ཞམས་པར་མི་འགྱུར་བ	future development	zhams par mi 'gyur ba
ཞའོ་ཀྲང	president, chancellor, headmaster, principal	zha'o krang
ཞའོ་ཐིན་ཆིན	violin	zha'o thin chin
ཞའོ་ཐིན་ཆིན་གཏོང་མཁན	violinist zha'o thin chin gtong mkhan dbu mdzad 1st violinist	zha'o thin chin gtong mkhan
ཞའོ་དཔོན་ཆུང་བ	major [military]	zha'o dpon chung ba
ཞའོ་དཔོན་ཆེ་བ	colonel	zha'o dpon che ba
ཞའོ་དཔོན་འབྲིང་བ	lieutenant colonel	zha'o dpon 'bring ba
ཞའོ་ཟོན	nitric acid	zha'o zon
ཞའོ་ཡན་ཕེན	sulfadiazine	zha'o yan phen
ཞའོ་སོན	nitric acid	zha'o son
ཞར	blind, succeeding	zhar
ཞར་ཆག་མེད་པ	without break, without defect	zhar chag med pa
ཞར་ལྟ	1) look at w blind eyes; 2) Mig gi rgyal mo 'khyog por lta ba	zhar lta
ཞར་ལྟས	winking	zhar ltas
ཞར་འཕེན	arising/going quickly	zhar 'phen
ཞར་འཕེན་གློད་པ	flashing lightning	zhar 'phen glod pa
ཞར་བ	1) (Tha mi dad pa,, blind, having 1 eye lost/ defective [person]; 2) unclear nadi pressing style; 3) lame, crippled	zhar ba
ཞར་བའི་རྐང	crippled leg zhar ba'i mig g.yon - blind in the left eye	zhar ba'i rkang
ཞར་བྱུང	by-product	zhar byung
ཞར་བྱུང་ཐོན་རྫས	by products	zhar byung thon rdzas
ཞར་བྱུང་དུ	in addition to	zhar byung du
ཞར་བྱུང་ཚགས་པར	supplement in a newspaper/ magazine	zhar byung tshags par
ཞར་འབྱུང	addendum	zhar 'byung
ཞར་མ་བྱུང་པ	connected with, consequent upon	zhar ma byung pa
ཞར་ཞོར	ched du ma yin pa'am dmigs bkar min par zhar du byung ba,//khyed kyis brtsams pa'i dpe cha der ngas zhar zhor la cha tshang zhig lta rtsis yin	zhar zhor
ཞར་ཞོར་དུ་ལྟ་ཙམ་བྱས་པ	an incidental glance/ look	zhar zhor du lta tsam byas pa
ཞར་ཞོར་དུ་བྱེད་པའི་སྒེར་དོན	incidentally accomplished private benefit	zhar zhor du byed pa'i sger don
ཞར་ར	blind in 1 eye	zhar ra
ཞར་ལ	incidentally, by the way, additional	zhar la
ཞར་ལ་སྤྲོས་པ	digression, aside	zhar la spros pa
ཞར་ལ་བྱུང་བ	as a matter of course	zhar la byung ba
ཞར་ལས	work done after hours/ in spare time	zhar las
ཞར་ལས་བྱེད	do work after hours/ in spare time	zhar las byed
ཞལ	face, countenance, presence, mouth, expression	zhal
ཞལ་ཀོ	chin	zhal ko
ཞལ་ཀྱག	stand for a cup, saucer [h]	zhal kyag
ཞལ་ཀྱལ	verbal banter/ play	zhal kyal
ཞལ་ཀྱི་ལུང	oral transmission	zhal kyi lung
ཞལ་ཀྱིས་བཞེས་པ	promised	zhal kyis bzhes pa
ཞལ་དཀར	porcelain plate or cup	zhal dkar
ཞལ་དཀར་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག	people of one mind staying phyogs gcig	zhal dkar phyogs gcig
ཞལ་དཀོད	order, direction	zhal dkod
ཞལ་དཀྱིལ	face, presence	zhal dkyil
ཞལ་དཀྱིལ་མ་མཇལ་སྐྱོ	sad at not personally meeting	zhal dkyil ma mjal skyo
ཞལ་དཀྲིས	scarf [h]	zhal dkris
ཞལ་བཀོད	advice	zhal bkod
ཞལ་བཀོད་བྱེད	give [advice, instruction, command, specifications] * [h]	zhal bkod byed
ཞལ་བཀྱག	platform for china	zhal bkyag
ཞལ་སྐོང	supplement. Syn {kha skong}	zhal skong
ཞལ་སྐོད	appendix	zhal skod
ཞལ་སྐོམ	thirst	zhal skom
ཞལ་སྐོམ་པ	drink, thirst zhal skom pa la tshad med pa me 'bar ba	zhal skom pa
ལྟ་བུ་བྱུང་ངོ	a limitless thirst like blazing fire arose	lta bu byung ngo
ཞལ་སྐོམས	beverage, beer	zhal skoms
ཞལ་སྐྱིན	regent, successor	zhal skyin
ཞལ་སྐྱུག	vomit [h]	zhal skyug
ཞལ་སྐྱུག་གནང	vomit [h]	zhal skyug gnang
ཞལ་སྐྱེང་བ	be unable to reply out of shame	zhal skyeng ba
ཞལ་སྐྱེམས	drink[s], be thirsty [h]	zhal skyems
ཞལ་སྐྱེམས་པ	grew thirsty	zhal skyems pa
ཞལ་སྐྱེལ	kissing	zhal skyel
ཞལ་སྐྱེལ་གནང	kiss	zhal skyel gnang
ཞལ་སྐྱོགས	lip-cup	zhal skyogs
ཞལ་ཁ	curses	zhal kha
ཞལ་ཁ་ཕྱེ	bloom	zhal kha phye
ཞལ་ཁ་བྱེ་བ	to bloom, to blossom	zhal kha bye ba
ཞལ་ཁ་བཞུགས	keep silent	zhal kha bzhugs
ཞལ་ཁེབས	1) cover; 2) thang ga etc, covering curtain, cover, lid	zhal khebs
ཞལ་ཁྱགས	guaranty, surety, bail, bond [h]	zhal khyags
ཞལ་ཁྱགས་གནང	give a [guaranty, surety, bail, bond] [h]	zhal khyags gnang
ཞལ་ཁྱིམ	face 2311 zhal khyim mdzes pa lha yi bu mo 'dra beautiful face like a daughter of the gods	zhal khyim
ཞལ་ཁྲིད	oral instruction	zhal khrid
ཞལ་མཁན	bricklayer	zhal mkhan
ཞལ་འཁྲིད	verbal instruction/ teaching	zhal 'khrid
ཞལ་གུ་སིམ་བུ	quiet, tranquil [h]	zhal gu sim bu
ཞལ་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	face	zhal gyi dkyil 'khor
ཞལ་གྱི་མཁུར་ཚོས	cheek	zhal gyi mkhur tshos
ཞལ་གྱི་སྒོ	mouth	zhal gyi sgo
ཞལ་གྱི་བདུད་རྩི་འཐུང་བ	/drink/ receive the nectar of his words	zhal gyi bdud rtsi 'thung ba
ཞལ་གྱི་བདུད་རྩི་ནོད	receive the amrita of his words [directly] from [his] mouth	zhal gyi bdud rtsi nod
ཞལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་འགྱུར་བ	facial expression changing	zhal gyi rnam pa 'gyur ba
ཞལ་གྱི་པད་མོ	{bcom ldan 'das zhal gyi padmo tshems kyi ge sar 'dzum pa} smiling like a lotus in full bloom	zhal gyi pad mo
ཞལ་གྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the face	zhal gyi dpe byad gnyis
ཞལ་གྱི་བུམ་བཟང	the perfect vase of your throat	zhal gyi bum bzang
ཞལ་གྱིས་འཆེས	accepted	zhal gyis 'ches
ཞལ་གྱིས་ཕུ་བཏབས་པ	blew on	zhal gyis phu btabs pa
ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས	assert, promise [h]	zhal gyis bzhes
ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས་ཏེ	promised to	zhal gyis bzhes te
ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས་པ	[Tserig]	zhal gyis bzhes pa
ཞལ་གྱིས་བཞེས་སོ	agreed	zhal gyis bzhes so
ཞལ་གྱེས	to separate, depart, leave	zhal gyes
ཞལ་གྱོགས	1) servant; 2) lips	zhal gyogs
ཞལ་གྲངས	[face-]count [h]	zhal grangs
ཞལ་གྲངས་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete face count [h]	zhal grangs ma tshang ba
ཞལ་གླིང	flute [h]	zhal gling
ཞལ་བགྱིད་པ	plaster with cement, plaster with lime	zhal bgyid pa
ཞལ་བགྲད	mouth is open zhal bgrad nas bzhad mo bzhad pa open the mouth wide and laugh	zhal bgrad
ཞལ་བགྲད་པ	gape, open the mouth wide	zhal bgrad pa
ཞལ་འགྱུར་བ	look askance, turn sideways	zhal 'gyur ba
ཞལ་འགྲམ	jaw	zhal 'gram
ཞལ་རྒྱན	beard, moustache	zhal rgyan
ཞལ་རྒྱབ	consultation, conference	zhal rgyab
ཞལ་རྒྱས	lhan rgyas	zhal rgyas
ཞལ་རྒྱུག	staff, walking stick, cane [h]	zhal rgyug
ཞལ་རྒྱུད	oral tradition	zhal rgyud
ཞལ་རྒྱུན	the instructions of	zhal rgyun
ཞལ་རྒྱུན་ལྟར་བྲིས་པ	faithful to the words of	zhal rgyun ltar bris pa
ཞལ་ལྒོ	the skin of his face	zhal lgo
ཞལ་སྒོམ	oral teaching and meditation practice	zhal sgom
ཞལ་སྒྲུང	story, tale [h]	zhal sgrung
ཞལ་བརྒྱ	joking/ playing talk	zhal brgya
ཞལ་བསྒྱུར	to direct the focus	zhal bsgyur
ཞལ་བསྒྲད	CM: kha 'phred 'phred byed pa. ¦ zhal bgrad nas bzhad mo bzhad pa, "[He] laughed with his mouth open wide/[He] opened his mouth and laughed." [mss]	zhal bsgrad
ཞལ་ངོ	1) face [h]; 2) head discipline monk; 3) commander of 25 soldiers (/ [Gold says 50]	zhal ngo
ཞལ་ངོ་སྐྱུད་ལ	to outface (?)	zhal ngo skyud la
ཞལ་ངོ་བསྒྱུར་ཝར་བྱ	to turn away from	zhal ngo bsgyur war bya
ཞལ་དངོས	bodily, in one's own body	zhal dngos
ཞལ་དངོས་སུ་མཇལ་བ	see your face; meet him in person	zhal dngos su mjal ba
ཞལ་དངོས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	appear in person/ a vision	zhal dngos su bstan pa
ཞལ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ	while alive (h)	zhal mngon du gyur pa'i tshe
ཞལ་སྔ	in the presence of	zhal snga
ཞལ་སྔ་ནས	in the presence of	zhal snga nas
ཞལ་སྔ་ནས་ཕེབས་པ	came from the presence of [h]	zhal snga nas phebs pa
ཞལ་སྔ་ནས་ཡོང་བ	came from the presence of [h]	zhal snga nas yong ba
ཞལ་སྔ་ནས་གསུངས་པ	said in the presence of [h]	zhal snga nas gsungs pa
ཞལ་ཅེ	[arch] law	zhal ce
ཞལ་ཅོར	(M [face] towel	zhal cor
ཞལ་གཅིག་ཕྱག་གཉིས	has one face, two arms	zhal gcig phyag gnyis
ཞལ་གཅོད	cover	zhal gcod
ཞལ་གཅོད་བསྐྱོན	cover, put on a lid	zhal gcod bskyon
ཞལ་གཅོད་འགྲོན	cover, put on a lid	zhal gcod 'gron
ཞལ་བཅོས	bkod jus,//'O na mkhar gyi zhal bcos mdzad par zhu	zhal bcos
ཞལ་ལྕེ	law, lawsuit; law, lawsuit?	zhal lce
ཞལ་ལྕེ་གཅོད	decide, pass judgement	zhal lce gcod
ཞལ་ལྕེ་གཅོད་མཁན	judge	zhal lce gcod mkhan
ཞལ་ལྕེ་གཅོད་པ	decide, pass judgement	zhal lce gcod pa
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅད་པ	decided on their cases	zhal lce bcad pa
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 laws [R]	zhal lce bcu gnyis
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 laws	zhal lce bcu drug
ཚན་བཅུ་དྲུག་སྟེ	dang po dpa' bo stag gi zhal lce, gnyis pa sdar ma wa'i zhal lce, gsum pa sne mo las 'dzin gyi zhal lce, bzhi pa zhu bzhes bden rdzun gyi zhal lce, lnga pa bzung bkyigs khrims ra'i zhal lce, drug p...	tshan bcu drug ste
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་དྲུག་པ	the code of laws in 16 enactments in 4 sections	zhal lce bcu drug pa
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 laws [gtsang sde srid karma bstan skyong dbang pos bod la dbang sgyur byed skabs, zhal lce bco lnga nas dpa' bo stag gi zhal lce dang, sdar ma wa'i zhal lce gnyis dor nas zhal lce bcu gsum d...	zhal lce bcu gsum
ཞལ་ལྕེ་ཆོད	to follow advice	zhal lce chod
ཞལ་ལྕེ་བ	gzu dpang byed mkhan, khrims gcod mkhan	zhal lce ba
ཞལ་ཆད	the holy bible in Tibetan	zhal chad
ཞལ་ཆད་སྔ་ཕྱི་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མདོ	the holy bible in Tibetan	zhal chad snga phyi gnyis kyi mdo
ཞལ་ཆབ	spittle, snow-water, spittle	zhal chab
ཞལ་ཆབ་བྲན	kha phru 'debs pa - kha	zhal chab bran
ཕྲུས་བྲན་པ	spitting	phrus bran pa
ཞལ་ཆུ	saliva [h]	zhal chu
ཞལ་ཆེ	judgment, decision	zhal che
ཞལ་ཆེ་གཅོད	decide, pass judgement	zhal che gcod
ཞལ་ཆེ་གཅོད་པ	decide, pass judgement	zhal che gcod pa
ཞལ་ཆེ་བ	gzu dpang byed mkhan, khrims gcod mkhan	zhal che ba
ཞལ་ཆེགས	will, testament [h]	zhal chegs
ཞལ་ཆེམ	testament	zhal chem
ཞལ་ཆེམས	last will and testament	zhal chems
ཞལ་ཆེམས་དིང་རིའི་སྐོར	instructions of {pha dam pa sangs rgyas}	zhal chems ding ri'i skor
ཞལ་ཆེམས་བཞག་པ	leave a testament	zhal chems bzhag pa
ཞལ་ཆེམས་སུ་གསུངས་པ	gave as his testament	zhal chems su gsungs pa
ཞལ་ཆོད	agreement/ promise [h]	zhal chod
ཞལ་ཆོར	(M [face] towel	zhal chor
ཞལ་མཆུ	lip	zhal mchu
ཞལ་མཆུ་མཛེས་པའི་འཛུམ་དཀར	{rgyal pos zhal mchu mdzes pa'i 'dzum dkar bstan nas gsungs pa} the king showed his beautiful white teeth in a smile and replied	zhal mchu mdzes pa'i 'dzum dkar
ཞལ་འཆེམས	last testament, final words	zhal 'chems
ཞལ་འཆེས	assert, promise	zhal 'ches
ཞལ་འཆོས	advice, instruction, command, specifications * [h]	zhal 'chos
ཞལ་མཇལ	meeting [the lama]; to see [his] face, meeting	zhal mjal
ཞལ་མཇལ་བ	met	zhal mjal ba
ཞལ་མཇལ་བ་ཙམ	simply to meet him	zhal mjal ba tsam
ཞལ་འཇམ	soft words [h]	zhal 'jam
ཞལ་འཇམ་པོ	soft words [h]	zhal 'jam po
ཞལ་ཏ	pith instructions, advice, guidance an account of 2, messenger [h]	zhal ta
ཞལ་ཏ་གནང་བ	spoke, taught, instructed, give pith instructions, advice, guidance an account of [h]	zhal ta gnang ba
ཞལ་ཏ་བ	advisor	zhal ta ba
ཞལ་ཏ་བྱེད་པ	to serve, inspect, review, visit	zhal ta byed pa
ཞལ་ཏ་མ	chamber maid	zhal ta ma
ཞལ་ཏན	promise [h]	zhal tan
ཞལ་ཏོག	snack [h]	zhal tog
ཞལ་ཏོན	zhal 'don - recitation	zhal ton
ཞལ་སྟབས	(gesture of) serving food	zhal stabs
ཞལ་སྟོང	yawning [h]	zhal stong
ཞལ་སྟོང་སྐྱོན	yawn [h]	zhal stong skyon
ཞལ་བརྟན	promise [h]	zhal brtan
ཞལ་བསྟན	revealed herself	zhal bstan
ཞལ་བསྟན་པ	revealed herself to him	zhal bstan pa
ཞལ་བསྟབ	zhal bstabs - zhal du bstabs	zhal bstab
ཞལ་བསྟབས	zhal bstab - zhal du bstabs	zhal bstabs
ཞལ་ཐང	portrait, painting	zhal thang
ཞལ་མཐུན	SA kha mthun	zhal mthun
ཞལ་མཐུན་གནང་བ	to be allied	zhal mthun gnang ba
ཞལ་མཐོང	{bcom ldan 'das kyi zhal mi mthong} - could not see the Bhagavan	zhal mthong
ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	to gaze upon [the Buddha's] face	zhal mthong ba
ཞལ་ད	harsh words	zhal da
ཞལ་དུ་སྟོབ་པ	to serve to the lips of . . .	zhal du stob pa
ཞལ་དུ་བསྟབ	offered up	zhal du bstab
ཞལ་དུ་བསྟབ་པ	to serve to the lips of . . .	zhal du bstab pa
ཞལ་དུ་བསྟབས	proffered	zhal du bstabs
ཞལ་དུ་བསྟབས་པ	zhal bstab - zhal	zhal du bstabs pa
བསྟབས	placing into the mouth	bstabs
ཞལ་དུ་ཕག་འཚལ་ལོ	I prostrate to [h]/the presence of	zhal du phag 'tshal lo
ཞལ་དུ་བླངས	RC: dang du blangs dang don gcig. probably zhe sa for dang du blangs/len. (R75: 155). [mss]	zhal du blangs
ཞལ་དུ་ཞུགས	enters through the mouth	zhal du zhugs
ཞལ་དུ་བཞེས	drink and eat	zhal du bzhes
ཞལ་དུ་གསོལ་བ	put it in his mouth	zhal du gsol ba
ཞལ་དོན	agreement	zhal don
ཞལ་དོན་ཚིག་ལ་གནས	keep an agreement	zhal don tshig la gnas
ཞལ་དོན་ལ་གནས	keep an agreement 2313	zhal don la gnas
ཞལ་དྲོ་བ	auspicious, welcome, lucky [h]	zhal dro ba
ཞལ་གདང་བ	gape	zhal gdang ba
ཞལ་གདངས	open/ gaping mouth [h]	zhal gdangs
ཞལ་གདངས་པ	1) open/ gaping mouth; 2) for others property produce ham sems)	zhal gdangs pa
ཞལ་གདམས	advice, oral instructions, command, specifications * [h]	zhal gdams
ཞལ་གདམས་ཀུན་གྱི་ཐ་མ	the final instruction, final advice	zhal gdams kun gyi tha ma
ཞལ་གདམས་གབ་པ་མངོན་ཕྱུངས	Revealing the Hidden Points of Oral Instruction	zhal gdams gab pa mngon phyungs
ཞལ་གདམས་སྙིང་བྱང	Sheldam Nyingjang is the basic root text and the first volume of the Barchey Künsel cycle revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa	zhal gdams snying byang
ཞལ་གདམས་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate advice	zhal gdams mthar thug
ཞལ་གདམས་ནང་བཞིན་མཛད་པ	following the advice	zhal gdams nang bzhin mdzad pa
ཞལ་གདམས་བྲིས་མཁན	author	zhal gdams bris mkhan
ཞལ་གདམས་སྩལ་བ	to give advice	zhal gdams stsal ba
ཞལ་གདམས་ཞུ	please give some advice	zhal gdams zhu
ཞལ་གདམས་ཟབ་མོ	profound advice zhal gdams lam rim ye shes snying po Oral Instruction Lamrim Yeshe Nyingpo. The Wisdom Essence, a most	zhal gdams zab mo
ཞལ་གདམས་གསུང་བ	give advice	zhal gdams gsung ba
ཞལ་གདམས་བསླབ་བྱ	personal advice	zhal gdams bslab bya
ཞལ་གདེབས	free-will offering, present, subscription to any religious movement	zhal gdebs
ཞལ་གདེབས་སྒམ	donation box	zhal gdebs sgam
ཞལ་གདེབས་བསྡུ	collect donations	zhal gdebs bsdu
ཞལ་གདེབས་བསྡུས	collected donations	zhal gdebs bsdus
ཞལ་གདེབས་འབུལ	give donations	zhal gdebs 'bul
ཞལ་གདེབས་རོགས་སྐྱོར	contributions and help	zhal gdebs rogs skyor
ཞལ་གདེབས་རོགས་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	give contributions and help	zhal gdebs rogs skyor byed
ཞལ་གདེབས་སློང	ask for donations	zhal gdebs slong
ཞལ་གདོང	gaping mouths [h]	zhal gdong
ཞལ་བདག	monastery treasurer/ stores chief etc.	zhal bdag
ཞལ་མདངས	radiance of the face	zhal mdangs
ཞལ་འདེབས	donation, gzhan gyis gtong ba'i 'gro song lte ba'i thog la brgyab pa'i kha snon,//Lam bzo ba'i 'gro song la zhal 'debs rgyag pa	zhal 'debs
ཞལ་འདེབས་རྒྱབ་པ	contribute	zhal 'debs rgyab pa
ཞལ་འདེབས་སྒམ	donation box	zhal 'debs sgam
ཞལ་འདེབས་བསྡུ	collect donations	zhal 'debs bsdu
ཞལ་འདེབས་བསྡུས	collected donations	zhal 'debs bsdus
ཞལ་འདེབས་སྤྲོད་མཁན	donor	zhal 'debs sprod mkhan
ཞལ་འདེབས་སྤྲོད་པ	donate	zhal 'debs sprod pa
ཞལ་འདེབས་བྱས་པ	contributed, donated	zhal 'debs byas pa
ཞལ་འདེབས་འབུལ	give donations	zhal 'debs 'bul
ཞལ་འདེབས་རོགས་སྐྱོར	contributions and help	zhal 'debs rogs skyor
ཞལ་འདེབས་རོགས་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	give contributions and help	zhal 'debs rogs skyor byed
ཞལ་འདེབས་སློང	ask for donations	zhal 'debs slong
ཞལ་འདོན	prayers, chant, supplication [h]	zhal 'don
ཞལ་འདོན་དུ་མཛད་པ	was reciting	zhal 'don du mdzad pa
ཞལ་འདོན་གནང	offer prayer	zhal 'don gnang
ཞལ་བརྡ	speech talk, advice	zhal brda
ཞལ་བསྡུར	deliberate together	zhal bsdur
ཞལ་བསྡུར་ཀྱང་མི་རྙེད	you will never find one even if you compare this teaching with any others	zhal bsdur kyang mi rnyed
ཞལ་ནག	a medicine	zhal nag
ཞལ་ནག་ཐམ	to look very displeased	zhal nag tham
ཞལ་ནམ་བཞུགས་ཀྱི་བར་དུ	as long as you were alive	zhal nam bzhugs kyi bar du
ཞལ་ནས	The so-and-so said:	zhal nas
ཞལ་ནས་ཀྱང	used to say	zhal nas kyang
ཞལ་ནས་སྐྱེས	(met) bhramin	zhal nas skyes
ཞལ་ནས་སྐྱེས་པ	TSE	zhal nas skyes pa
ཞལ་ནས་ཐོན	emerges through your mouth	zhal nas thon
ཞལ་ནས་བྱུང་བ	recounted	zhal nas byung ba
ཞལ་ནས་གསུངས་པ	orally transmitted	zhal nas gsungs pa
ཞལ་ནས་གསུངས་པའི་བཀའ	personally taught sutras [R]	zhal nas gsungs pa'i bka'
ཞལ་པ	plastering on walls	zhal pa
ཞལ་པར	loud-speaker [h], telephone	zhal par
ཞལ་པར་གཏོང་བ་གནང	telephone [-ing] [h]	zhal par gtong ba gnang
ཞལ་པར་ཐོག་གསུང་བཤད་གནང	spoke	zhal par thog gsung bshad gnang
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨ་ལོཨུད	speaker [h]	through a loud
ཞལ་པར་གནང	telephone [-ing] [h]	zhal par gnang
ཞལ་པོ	SA dkar yol	zhal po
ཞལ་དཔར	loud-speaker [h], telephone	zhal dpar
ཞལ་དཔར་གཏོང་བ་གནང	telephone [ing] [h]	zhal dpar gtong ba gnang
ཞལ་དཔར་ཐོག་གསུང་བཤད་གནང་སྤོཀེ་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨ་ལོཨུད	speaker [h]	zhal dpar thog gsung bshad gnang spoke through a loud
ཞལ་དཔར་གནང	telephone [-ing] [h]	zhal dpar gnang
ཞལ་དཔོན	head of a house's zhal ba gtong mkhan [plasterers?]	zhal dpon
ཞལ་ཕུད	1st/ select portion offering [h] 2314	zhal phud
ཞལ་ཕུད་འབུལ	to make the first offering	zhal phud 'bul
ཞལ་ཕོར	tea cup, SA kha phor	zhal phor
ཞལ་ཕྱག	faces and arms of the deities	zhal phyag
ཞལ་ཕྱེས	to open, opened	zhal phyes
ཞལ་ཕྱེས་པ	to disclose/ unveil; to open the mouth	zhal phyes pa
ཞལ་ཕྲུས་བཏབ	spitting	zhal phrus btab
ཞལ་འཕང་བ	refer	zhal 'phang ba
ཞལ་འཕངས	1) "gzhan du yod" [de ni si tu'i 'grel chen la ltos zer ba lta bu]; 2) evade responsibility, give burden/ responsibility to others)	zhal 'phangs
ཞལ་བ	te clay/ mud floor/ plastering [skyang nul/ khang pa'i skya dang mthil gyi ngos 'jam po,//Mthil zhal,//rtsub zhal,//aar zhal	zhal ba
ཞལ་བ་མཁན	brick-layer, plasterer	zhal ba mkhan
ཞལ་བ་རྒྱག	plaster [wall etc]	zhal ba rgyag
ཞལ་བ་འདིང	lay/ put down a floor	zhal ba 'ding
ཞལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	pave, plaster	zhal ba byed pa
ཞལ་བ་རྩིག་པ་ལ་བརྒྱབ་པ	plaster a wall	zhal ba rtsig pa la brgyab pa
ཞལ་བས་སྙན་དུ	from mouth to ear	zhal bas snyan du
ཞལ་བུ	small cup	zhal bu
ཞལ་བྱང	pecha's title page/ table of contents	zhal byang
ཞལ་བྱང་བ	well accustomed to/ good at/ easily in reading and explaining pechas etc.	zhal byang ba
ཞལ་འབག	mask	zhal 'bag
ཞལ་འབུག་པ	speak, utter	zhal 'bug pa
ཞལ་འབྱེད་པ	inaugurate, open the mouth	zhal 'byed pa
ཞལ་རྦད	1) joking, playful talk; 2) false or exaggerated talk	zhal rbad
ཞལ་སྦྱོར	[join] in union	zhal sbyor
ཞལ་སྦྱོར་གནང	kiss	zhal sbyor gnang
ཞལ་མ་འཚོ	[hon.? = ngo ma shes] not to recognize; unrecognized	zhal ma 'tsho
ཞལ་མལ	chin [h]	zhal mal
ཞལ་མི་བཞུགས་པའི་སྐབས་སུ	now that he has passed away	zhal mi bzhugs pa'i skabs su
ཞལ་མི་གསལ་བ	unclearly worded	zhal mi gsal ba
ཞལ་མོ	laugh, smile [h]	zhal mo
ཞལ་མོ་བྲོ་པོ	laughable [h]	zhal mo bro po
ཞལ་མོ་བཞེས	laugh, smile [h]	zhal mo bzhes
ཞལ་མོ་ཤོར	burst out laughing [h]	zhal mo shor
ཞལ་བཙན་པོ	powerful/ strong/ angry words, shut 1's mouth, keep quiet [h]	zhal btsan po
ཞལ་རྩེ	argument, debate [h]	zhal rtse
ཞལ་རྩེ་སྐྱོན	argue, debate [h]	zhal rtse skyon
ཞལ་རྩོད་སྐྱོན་པ	to argue	zhal rtsod skyon pa
ཞལ་ཚ་པོ	hot mouth/ food, sharptongued [h]	zhal tsha po
ཞལ་ཚད	model, "face measures", {cha chen}	zhal tshad
ཞལ་ཚད་ལས་འདས་པ	inestimable	zhal tshad las 'das pa
ཞལ་ཚུལ	pastry	zhal tshul
ཞལ་ཚུས	(A) 1) food [h]; 2) divine food/ cakes)	zhal tshus
ཞལ་ཚོམ	[aog tshom] beard/ moustache [h]	zhal tshom
ཞལ་ཚོར	know [a person], be acquainted w [h]	zhal tshor
ཞལ་ཚོར་གྱི་མེད	not know [a person], be acquainted w [h]	zhal tshor gyi med
ཞལ་ཚོར་བ	to be acquainted	zhal tshor ba
ཞལ་ཚོས	cheek bone area [h]	zhal tshos
ཞལ་མཚལ	red color applied to the lips of deities	zhal mtshal
ཞལ་འཚུས	1) food [h]; 2) divine food/ cakes	zhal 'tshus
ཞལ་འཚེར་འཚེར	mouth and face smiling, pleasant, merry	zhal 'tsher 'tsher
ཞལ་འཚོ	ex. {zhal ma 'tsho} go unrecognized	zhal 'tsho
ཞལ་འཚོ་ཐུབ	able to recognize	zhal 'tsho thub
ཞལ་འཚོར	know [a person], be acquainted w [h]	zhal 'tshor
ཞལ་འཚོར་གྱི་མེད	not know [a person], be acquainted w [h] zhal mdzod spus brgyan pa'i mtshan	zhal 'tshor gyi med
ཞལ་འཛིན	MSS: x. [mss]	zhal 'dzin
ཞལ་འཛུམ	smile	zhal 'dzum
ཞལ་འཛུམ་མདངས	bright smile, smiling expression	zhal 'dzum mdangs
ཞལ་འཛུམ་པ	smile	zhal 'dzum pa
ཞལ་འཛུམ་པ་དང་བཅས	smiled joyfully	zhal 'dzum pa dang bcas
ཞལ་འཛུམ་པའི་ཉམས་ཅན	smiling expression zhal 'dzum pa'i 'od sems can la khyab	zhal 'dzum pa'i nyams can
ཞལ་འཛུམ་མཛད་ནས	smiled	zhal 'dzum mdzad nas
ཞལ་འཛོམས	1) meet, mutually encounter; 2) tshang 'dzoms	zhal 'dzoms
ཞལ་རྫུན	1) false and ham bshad; 2) tease, joke, play)	zhal rdzun
ཞལ་རྫུན་གནང	lie [h]	zhal rdzun gnang
ཞལ་ཞལ	plaster	zhal zhal
ཞལ་ཞལ་མཁན	plasterer, bricklayer, cement worker	zhal zhal mkhan
ཞལ་ཞལ་བྱས	spread plaster	zhal zhal byas
ཞལ་ཞལ་བྱེད	spread plaster	zhal zhal byed
ཞལ་ཞོལ	1) dris' and yaks' long hair hanging down; 2) nyal nyil [capacious, baggy dirty)	zhal zhol
ཞལ་བཞུགས	alive [h]	zhal bzhugs
ཞལ་བཞུགས་དུས	during in the lifetime of	zhal bzhugs dus
ཞལ་བཞུགས་པ	be alive [h]	zhal bzhugs pa
བཞུགས་པའི་ཚེ	during the time of the Buddha	bzhugs pa'i tshe
ཞལ་བཞེད	biscuit, cake, spittoon, spitting box	zhal bzhed
ཞལ་བཞེས	promise, admit, assert [h]	zhal bzhes
ཞལ་བཞེས་གནང	accept the precepts for. to observe, acceptances, take precepts	zhal bzhes gnang
ཞལ་བཞེས་གནང་བ	(h) of khas len pa to accede	zhal bzhes gnang ba
ཞལ་བཞེས་པ	to promise, undertake (a commitment)	zhal bzhes pa
ཞལ་བཞེས་བཟང་ཐོབ	get someone's favorable word/ promise/ assurance	zhal bzhes bzang thob
ཞལ་ཟག	tobacco pipe [h]	zhal zag
ཞལ་ཟས	1) foods. 2) naividya, food offering .3) food torma	zhal zas
ཞལ་ཟས་དཀར་རྒྱན་མར	cakes that are painted white and red with colored butter	zhal zas dkar rgyan mar
ཞལ་ཟས་རྣམ་ལྔ	offerings of the five senses	zhal zas rnam lnga
ཞལ་ཟླ་མོ	ladies in waiting	zhal zla mo
ཞལ་ཟླ་མོ་བཙུན་མོ	ladies in waiting	zhal zla mo btsun mo
ཞལ་གཟིགས	(to be graced with) a vision (of)	zhal gzigs
ཞལ་གཟིགས་པ	seeing face to face	zhal gzigs pa
ཞལ་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡི་དམ་ལྷ	witnessed yidam deity	zhal gzigs pa'i yi dam lha
ཞལ་གཟིགས་བྱུང་བ	appear in person/a vision	zhal gzigs byung ba
ཞལ་གཟིགས་འབྱུང་བ	to have a vision of, see the face of ..	zhal gzigs 'byung ba
ཞལ་གཟིགས་མ	vision	zhal gzigs ma
ཞལ་བཟེད	lud phor [spittoon, [vessel for manure/ fertilizer?]	zhal bzed
ཞལ་ཡམ	play joke, put on	zhal yam
ཞལ་ཡས་ཁང	celestial palace	zhal yas khang
ཞལ་ར	moustache, beard	zhal ra
ཞལ་རལ	hare lip	zhal ral
ཞལ་རས	face, presence, expression	zhal ras
ཞལ་རས་ཀྱི	facial	zhal ras kyi
ཞལ་རས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	[circle of the] face	zhal ras kyi dkyil 'khor
ཞལ་རས་མཇལ	to meet in person, face to face	zhal ras mjal
ཞལ་རས་ཉ་གང་གི་ཟླ་བ	the clear full moon of your face	zhal ras nya gang gi zla ba
ཞལ་རས་ཉམས	[syn: drag po'i phyogs, nag phyogs, phyod phyi ma, dbang phyogs, mar ngo, dmar cha	zhal ras nyams
ཞལ་རས་མཐོང་བ	to behold his face	zhal ras mthong ba
ཞལ་རས་འཛུམ་པ	smiling	zhal ras 'dzum pa
ཞལ་རིང་པ	personal attendant, private secretary, officer in waiting	zhal ring pa
ཞལ་རུབ	rub brgyab nas kha rdung btang ba	zhal rub
ཞལ་རོག	1) shut the mouth and not say anything; 2) black face like [charcoal, wood ashes]	zhal rog
ཞལ་རོག་བཞུགས	keep quiet [h]	zhal rog bzhugs
ཞལ་ལ	clay, lime-wash, cement	zhal la
ཞལ་ལ་ཉན	obey, be obedient [h]	zhal la nyan
ཞལ་ལ་ཉན་པོ	obedient [h]	zhal la nyan po
ཞལ་ལ་མི་ཉན	be disobedient	zhal la mi nyan
ཞལ་ལག	food, face, food	zhal lag
ཞལ་ལུ	boiling/ cooking pot, bowl/ cup	zhal lu
ཞལ་ལེ	chin [h]	zhal le
ཞལ་ལེ་ཞོལ་ལེ	1) dris' and yaks' long hair hanging down; 2) nyal nyil [capacious, baggy dirty)	zhal le zhol le
ཞལ་ཤར་ལ་གཟིགས	facing E	zhal shar la gzigs
ཞལ་ཤེས	[direct/ oral advice/ directions/ clarification	zhal shes
ཞལ་ཤེས་སྐོར	cycle of oral advice	zhal shes skor
ཞལ་ཤོབ	jokingly false or playful talk	zhal shob
ཞལ་ཤོབ་གནང	joke, kid [h]	zhal shob gnang
ཞལ་བཤལ	face-rinsing [ritual]	zhal bshal
ཞལ་བཤུས	true copy	zhal bshus
ཞལ་སེར་སྒྲོན	"golden enlightener", term of address to great lamas	zhal ser sgron
ཞལ་སློབ	disciple [who actually met the teacher]	zhal slob
ཞལ་གསང	frank speech, speaking out [h]	zhal gsang
ཞལ་གསང་ཐུགས་དྲང	speaking not secretly and straightforward thoughts	zhal gsang thugs drang
ཞལ་གསང་བ	skad cha ma sbas par bshad pa	zhal gsang ba
ཞལ་གསལ	clear face 2316	zhal gsal
ཞལ་གསལ་འཁོད་པ	kha gsal po 'khod yod pa explain?	zhal gsal 'khod pa
ཞལ་གསལ་དུ་འཁོད་ཡོད	clearly written down	zhal gsal du 'khod yod
ཞལ་གསལ་དུ་བསྟན	very clear explanation	zhal gsal du bstan
ཞལ་གསལ་བའི	which clarified	zhal gsal ba'i
ཞལ་གསལ་བར་མཇལ	saw clearly	zhal gsal bar mjal
ཞལ་གསུང	voice	zhal gsung
ཞལ་གསུང་སྙན་པ	sweet voice	zhal gsung snyan pa
ཞལ་གསུང་དུ་མ་བྱོན	he spoke to me at length	zhal gsung du ma byon
ཞལ་གསུང་མ	an oral account	zhal gsung ma
ཞལ་གསུང་བཞིན	in accord with the words [of ...]	zhal gsung bzhin
ཞལ་གསེར	deity's face/ personal appearance la gtong rgyu'i grang gser,//Lha sa'i jo bo la zhal gser bsgron pa	zhal gser
ཞལ་གསོ	nyams pa gso ba dang nyung ba la snon pa brgyab ste gso ba,//spyi rdzas la zhal gso mang tsam phul ba	zhal gso
ཞལ་བསིལ	face/ mouth washing water, SK achamanam	zhal bsil
ཞལ་བསིལ་བ	wash the mouth and face	zhal bsil ba
ཞལ་བསྲོ	1) spyan dbye ste rab gnas; 2) rmang gzhi btsugs pa'am gzhi btsugs pa	zhal bsro
ཞལ་ཧ་ཅང་མི་རིང་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of {zhal ha cang mi ring ba [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, bslab pa rab tu mang po kun ston par mdzad pa nyid kyis zhal ha cang mi ring bar che chung ...	zhal ha cang mi ring ba'i dpe byad
ཞལ་ཨོག	chin	zhal og
ཞས་ལྕེ	decision, judgement	zhas lce
ཞི	calm down, be pacified, subside, karma of pacifying, liberation, nirvana, quiescence, quietude, pensive, peace, pacification, be peaceful, [nirvanic] calm, quiet	zhi
ཞི་ཀྭ	watermelon	zhi kwa
ཞི་རྐང་དྲག་དལ	the steps of the [2] peaceful planets and the dal ba of the [3] wrathful ones [which depends on it]	zhi rkang drag dal
ཞི་སྐུ	chos sku	zhi sku
ཞི་ཁྲོ	peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ཁྲོམ་དཀྲུགས	the peaceful and wrathful deities as an assemblage	zhi khro khrom dkrugs
ཞི་ཁྲོ་འཁོར་འདས་རང་གྲོལ	root initiation by byang chub rdo rje	zhi khro 'khor 'das rang grol
ཞི་ཁྲོ་དགོངས་པ་རང་གྲོལ	the selfliberated mind of the peaceful and wrathful ones [R]	zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol
ཞི་ཁྲོ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	Magical Display of the Peaceful and Wrathful Ones	zhi khro sgyu 'phrul
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ངེས་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	root initiation of zhi khro by 'ja' tshon snying po	zhi khro nges don snying po
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ལྟ་བ་ཀློང་ཡངས	revelations of {rdo rje gling pa}	zhi khro lta ba klong yangs
ཞི་ཁྲོ་དམ་པ་རིགས་བརྒྱ	Hundred Supreme Deities	zhi khro dam pa rigs brgya
ཞི་ཁྲོ་དོང་སྤྲུགས	1) combined sadhana of the peaceful and wrathful. 2) Abbr. of {zhi khro na rak dong sprugs}; see also {na rak dong sprugs}	zhi khro dong sprugs
ཞི་ཁྲོ་སྤེལ་མའི་ཕོ་བྲང	the palace of consecutive peaceful and wrathful [deities]	zhi khro spel ma'i pho brang
ཞི་ཁྲོ་སྦྲགས་སྒྲུབ	a sadhana combining the peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro sbrags sgrub
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཐོང་གྲོལ	Shitro Yeshe Tongdröl, revealed by Tennyi Lingpa	zhi khro ye shes mthong grol
ཞི་ཁྲོ་རིགས་བསྡུས	the family that condenses the peaceful and wrathful ones	zhi khro rigs bsdus
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ལྷ	peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro lha
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro lha tshogs
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་སྐུ	peaceful and wrathful forms	zhi khro'i sku
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་སྣང་བ	the visions of peaceful and wrathful ones	zhi khro'i snang ba
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	sadhana of the peaceful and wrathful [deities]	zhi khro'i phrin las
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་རྩ་དབང	root initiation of the peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro'i rtsa dbang
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་ལྷ	Peaceful and wrathful deities	zhi khro'i lha
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་ལྷ་བརྒྱ	Hundred peaceful and wrathful divinities. The 42 peaceful and 58 wrathful deities representing the different qualities of the buddha nature. Syn {dam pa rigs brgya}	zhi khro'i lha brgya
ཞི་ཁྲོའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	peaceful and wrathful deities, {yi dam zhi khro'i lha tshogs}	zhi khro'i lha tshogs
པེཨཅེཕུ༹ལ་ཨནད་ཝྲཐཕུ༹ལ་ཡིདམ	deities	peaceful and wrathful yidam
ཞི་འགྲིག	peaceful settlement [of disputes/ wars etc]	zhi 'grig
ཞི་འགྲིག་ཆེད	for a peaceful settlement [of disputes/ wars etc]	zhi 'grig ched
ཞི་འགྲིག་ས་ལྷན་ཚོགས	peace conference	zhi 'grig sa lhan tshogs
ཞི་འགྲིག་ལྷན་ཚོགས	peace conference	zhi 'grig lhan tshogs
ཞི་འགྲོས	peaceful gait (in dance) 2317	zhi 'gros
ཞི་རྒས	coarse and subtle, peaceful and coarse	zhi rgas
ཞི་རྒྱས	pacifying & enriching actions	zhi rgyas
ཞི་རྒྱས་དབང་དྲག	pacifying enriching, magnetizing and destroying [the four karmas las bzhi	zhi rgyas dbang drag
ཞི་སྒོ	MSS: the door to peace, a syn. for the path to Buddhahood. ¦ Khenpo Kunpel, 46.10. [mss]	zhi sgo
ཞི་སྒྲུབ	sadhana of the peaceful aspect; comp. {drag sgrub}; sadhana of the peaceful aspect	zhi sgrub
ཞི་ཅིག	only, all the same kind	zhi cig
ཞི་ཅུན	bacteria	zhi cun
ཞི་ཆགས	peaceful joyous form of deity	zhi chags
ཞི་ཆགས་ཁྲོ་གསུམ	three aspects of peaceful, joyful, and wrathful deities	zhi chags khro gsum
ཞི་ཆས	peaceful attire	zhi chas
ཞི་ཆས་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteenfold attire of a peaceful deity: dar gyi chas gos lnga the five silk garments + rat na'i chas	zhi chas bcu gsum
ཞི་ཆིངས	peace treaty	zhi chings
ཞི་ཆོས	gentleness	zhi chos
ཞི་ཇམ	mild, gentle, moderate	zhi jam
ཞི་འཇགས	peaceful happy and tranquil/ undisturbed, not buzy	zhi 'jags
ཞི་འཇགས་སུ་གཏོང	calm, pacify, quell, suppress	zhi 'jags su gtong
ཞི་འཇམ	rnam 'gyur ram gshis ka 'jam po	zhi 'jam
ཞི་འཇམ་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས	peacefully zhi 'jam gyi sgo nas bcings sgrol btang peacefully liberated	zhi 'jam gyi sgo nas
ཞི་གཉིས	the two peaceful p[lanets [gza' lhag pa dang gza' pa sangs	zhi gnyis
ཞི་གཉིས་རྐང་འཛིན	the two peaceful planets, step graspers [R]	zhi gnyis rkang 'dzin
ཞི་གཉིས་དལ་བར	dal bar of the two peaceful planets = nyi bar	zhi gnyis dal bar
ཞི་ལྟག་དབྱེར་མེད	the unity of shamatha and vipashayana	zhi ltag dbyer med
ཞི་ཐབས	peaceful means	zhi thabs
ཞི་མཐའ	the extreme of peace	zhi mtha'
ཞི་མཐའ་ཞི་གནས	[Tserig]	zhi mtha' zhi gnas
ཞི་མཐར་བྱེད	'dod lha	zhi mthar byed
ཞི་མཐུན	peace	zhi mthun
ཞི་མཐུན་མཉམ་གནས	peaceful coexistence	zhi mthun mnyam gnas
ཞི་མཐུན་སྤྱི་ཆིངས	peace treaty	zhi mthun spyi chings
ཞི་མཐུན་ཕུག་རོན	peace dove	zhi mthun phug ron
ཞི་དུལ	peaceful/ mind and gentle, tempered [rgyud bzang zhing spyod lam 'jam po	zhi dul
ཞི་དུལ་ཅན	placid	zhi dul can
ཞི་དུལ་བདེ་ལེགས	peace and blessings	zhi dul bde legs
ཞི་དུལ་ནང་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཡིན	is a Buddhist practitioner, subdued and peaceful	zhi dul nang par byed pa yin
ཞི་དུལ་བག་དང་ལྡན་པ	peaceful	zhi dul bag dang ldan pa
ཞི་དུལ་སེམས་བཟང	peaceful and kind	zhi dul sems bzang
ཞི་དྲག	peaceful and wrathful/ violent/ militant, civil[ian] and military	zhi drag
ཞི་དྲག་གཉིས་འཇོན	peaceful and wrathful activities gnyis 'pher	zhi drag gnyis 'jon
ཞི་དྲག་གཉིས་འཟོན	capable in both war and peace/ civilian and military affairs	zhi drag gnyis 'zon
ཞི་དྲག་དཔོན་རིགས	peaceful and wrathful 'go byed mi sna	zhi drag dpon rigs
ཞི་དྲག་ཕྱེད་མའི་ཚུལ	half/ semi peaceful and half/ semi wrathful	zhi drag phyed ma'i tshul
ཞི་དྲག་ཕྱེད་མའི་ཚུལ་ཅན	half peaceful and half wrathful, in a semi peaceful	zhi drag phyed ma'i tshul can
ཨནད་སེམི	wrathful way	and semi
ཞི་བདེ	personal salvation and peace (goal of arhats)	zhi bde
ཞི་བདེ་དཀྲུགས་པ	riot	zhi bde dkrugs pa
ཞི་བདེ་ཅན	peaceful	zhi bde can
ཞི་བདེ་མཉམ་གནས	spyi tshogs kyi lam lugs mi 'dra ba'i rgyal khab bar zhi ba'i thabs shes la brten nas phan tshun bar gyi rtsod gzhi thag gcod dang, 'dra mnyam gnyis phan gyi gzhi rtsa'i thog phan tshun bar gyi dpa...	zhi bde mnyam gnas
ཞི་བདེ་ལས་སྐྱོང་ལྷན་ཁང	Committee for the Defense of Peace	zhi bde las skyong lhan khang
ཞི་བདེ་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	defending/ safeguarding peace	zhi bde srung skyob
ཞི་བདེའི་ཁ་དན	peace offer	zhi bde'i kha dan
ཞི་བདེའི་ཕྱི་འབྲེལ	peaceful diplomacy/ foreign relations	zhi bde'i phyi 'brel
ཞི་བདེའི་མི་སྣ	pacifist, peace partisan	zhi bde'i mi sna
ཞི་བདེའི་རིང་ལུགས	pacifist	zhi bde'i ring lugs
ཞི་བདེའི་ལས་འགན	peaceful mission/ task	zhi bde'i las 'gan
ཞི་བདེར་དགའ་བ	peace loving	zhi bder dga' ba
ཞི་བདེར་དགའ་བའི་མི་དམངས	peace loving people	zhi bder dga' ba'i mi dmangs
ཞི་བདེར་བཅུག་པ	pacify	zhi bder bcug pa
ཞི་བདེར་གནས	abide in a peaceful state	zhi bder gnas
ཞི་ནག་པ	black guard	zhi nag pa
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	causes of shamatha [R]	zhi gnas kyi rgyu
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་འཛིན	sems rtse gcig pa	zhi gnas kyi ting 'dzin
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་དྲུག	six powers of shamatha [thos pa'i stobs dang - bsam pa'i stobs, dran pa'i stobs, shes bzhin gyi stobs, brtson 'grus kyi stobs, 'dris pa'i stobs rnams so	zhi gnas kyi stobs drug
མཁྱེན་ཏེ	by insight gained in meditation he knew that	mkhyen te
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་དམིགས་པ་བཞི	the four dmigs pa of shamatha [R]	zhi gnas kyi dmigs pa bzhi
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	the collection of shamata [R]	zhi gnas kyi tshogs
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཚོམས་སྒྲུབ	[Tserig]	zhi gnas kyi tshoms sgrub
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡིད་བྱེད་བཞི	the four apprehensions of shamatha [bsgrims te 'jug pa'i yid byed dang, chad cing 'jug pa'i yid byed, chad pa med par 'jug pa'i yid byed, rtsol ba med par 'jug pa'i yid byed bcas bzhi'o	zhi gnas kyi yid byed bzhi
ཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་གསོ་སྦྱོང	[gso sbyong gi nang gses, sngon bsags kyi las sgrib sbyong phyir gzhi tshul khrims rnam par dag pa la brten, lam nang rig pa'i sde snod la thos bsam tshul bzhin du byas nas de'i don bsgom pas nyams...	zhi gnas kyi gso sbyong
ཞི་གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཉེས་པ་ལྔ	the five faults of shamatha [R]	zhi gnas skabs kyi nyes pa lnga
ཞི་གནས་འགོག་པ	Shamatha state of cessation. In the context of Mahayana or Vajrayana practice, this state is used in a derogatory sense and is renowned as	zhi gnas 'gog pa
ཨ་སེབེ༹རེ་སིདེ	track from the path of the enlightenment of the buddhas. The mistake comes from regarding meditation practice as being the act of cultivating and fixating on a state in which sensations and thought...	a severe side
ཞི་གནས་བསྒོམས་པ	cultivating inner calm	zhi gnas bsgoms pa
ཞི་གནས་རྗེས་མཐུན་པ	approximate tranquility [shin sbyangs kyi bde bas zin pa'i sems gnas dgu pa zhi gnas cha 'dra ba'o	zhi gnas rjes mthun pa
ཞི་གནས་རྟེན་བཅས	Shamatha with support. The practice of calming the mind while using an object of concentration, material or mental, or simply the breath	zhi gnas rten bcas
ཞི་གནས་རྟེན་མེད	Shamatha without support. The act of calming the mind without any particular object, resting undistractedly. This practice serves as a prelude for Mahamudra and should not be mistaken for being 'or...	zhi gnas rten med
ཞི་གནས་ལྟེང་པོ	lethargic, calmness	zhi gnas lteng po
ཞི་གནས་སྟེང་པོ	tranquil inertia	zhi gnas steng po
ཞི་གནས་འཐུག་པོ	dense / thick shamatha, thick calm abiding; refers to a shamatha in which you practice repeatedly at cutting down thoughts to the point where you can stay in that samadhi for extraordinary lengths ...	zhi gnas 'thug po
ཞི་གནས་འཐོམ་དུ་ཤོར་བ	The 'straying	zhi gnas 'thom du shor ba
ཨིནཏོ་ཨབསེནཏ	minded shamatha' means your mind goes stagnant so that you are unaware of the nature of dharmata. def {shes pa ltengs nas chos nyid kyi don ma gsal ba}	into absent
ཞི་གནས་མ	night, midnight	zhi gnas ma
ཞི་གནས་ཙམ་པོ	ordinary states of shamatha	zhi gnas tsam po
ཞི་གནས་མཚན་བཅས	shamatha with attributes	zhi gnas mtshan bcas
ཞི་གནས་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	actual shamatha [by the access concentration to the 1st dhyana [nyer bsdogs] gathered	zhi gnas mtshan nyid pa
ཞི་གནས་གཤའ་མ	natural calm state	zhi gnas gsha' ma
ཞི་གནས་ལྷག་མཐོང	stillness and insight	zhi gnas lhag mthong
ཞི་པན་ཡ	Spain	zhi pan ya
ཞི་དཔོན	leader of peaceful las don byed mkhan rnams	zhi dpon
ཞི་དཔྱི་སྨན་པ	W doctor	zhi dpyi sman pa
ཞི་བ་དཀར	aromatic plant	zhi ba dkar
ཞི་བ་སྐྱེས་པ	tshang bdag	zhi ba skyes pa
ཞི་བ་འཁོར་ལོ	peaceful wheel	zhi ba 'khor lo
ཞི་བ་གཅིག་པུ་པའི་ཉན་ཐོས	shravaka who progress solely to peace	zhi ba gcig pu pa'i nyan thos
ཞི་བ་ཆུ་སྲིན	SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	zhi ba chu srin
ཞི་བ་ཆུ་སྲིན་གདོང	makara-headed Santi	zhi ba chu srin gdong
ཞི་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great peace	zhi ba chen po
ཞི་བ་ཆོས་སྐུ	spros pa'i mtshan ma thams cad nye bar zhi ba'i chos kyi sku	zhi ba chos sku
ཞི་བ་མཆོད་པ	nandi the personal attendant mahadeva	zhi ba mchod pa
ཞི་བ་སྙིང་པོ	{zhi ba snying po} [R]	zhi ba snying po
ཞི་བ་འཐུང	drink out of pitchers, a ceremony	zhi ba 'thung
ཞི་བ་དམ་པ་ལྷའི་རྒྱུད	Sacred Peace Deity Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras. In the Golden Garland Chronicles this same text is named Peaceful Vajradhatu Tantra (zhi ba rdo rje dbyings kyi rgyud)	zhi ba dam pa lha'i rgyud
ཞི་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	Vajradhatu Mandala of Peaceful Deities. An important sadhana of Mahayoga.	zhi ba rdo rje dbyings kyi dkyil 'khor
སེཨེ་ཨལསོ་འFཨོརཏཡ	two peaceful deities.'	See also 'Forty
ཞི་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Peaceful Vajradhatu Tantra zhi ba rdo rje dbyings kyi lha tshogs Peaceful deities of vajradhatu. The	zhi ba rdo rje dbyings kyi rgyud
ཕོ༹རཏཡ	two peaceful deities: Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri, the five male and female buddhas, the eight male and female bodhisattvas, the six munis, and the four male and female	forty
ཞི་བ་གནས་དག	the naturally pure peaceful ones	zhi ba gnas dag
ཞི་བ་པ	[Tserig]	zhi ba pa
ཞི་བ་བར་མ་དྲག་པོ	placid, temperate and unbridled	zhi ba bar ma drag po
ཞི་བ་བྱེད་པ	the pacified mind [in concentration practice]	zhi ba byed pa
ཞི་བ་སྦས་པ	buddhist saint born at jalamandala	zhi ba sbas pa
ཞི་བ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	nirvanic peace, quiescence beyond sorrow	zhi ba mya ngan las 'das pa
ཞི་བ་མྱང་འདས	peace beyond suffering; peace, nirvana [R]	zhi ba myang 'das
ཞི་བ་མྱང་འདས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	the aspect of nirvanic peace	zhi ba myang 'das kyi phyogs
ཞི་བ་དམྱད་འདས	1) passive quietetude; 2) quiet, still, calm, tranquil, peaceful, at peace, pacified, come to rest; 3) happiness; 4) liberation; 5) appeased; 6) subsided; 7) Shiva, the Auspicious one; 8) Saumya, 4...	zhi ba dmyad 'das
ཞི་བ་མཚོ	Shantarakshita, SA zhi ba 'tsho	zhi ba mtsho
ཞི་བ་འཚོ	Shantarakshita [R]	zhi ba 'tsho
ཞི་བ་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་གཉིས	42 peaceful ones	zhi ba bzhi bcu zhe gnyis
ཞི་བ་བཟང་པོ	Shantibhadra, one of Marpa's gurus, Kukkuripa	zhi ba bzang po
ཞི་བ་འོད	1 of ten bon teachers, SA ston pa bcu, a bon deity	zhi ba 'od
ཞི་བ་འོད་ཀྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	fancied world of bon situated to the east of this world	zhi ba 'od kyi zhing khams
ཞི་བ་འོད་མ་འཇམ་སྐྱ	a fancied world of the bon to the east	zhi ba 'od ma 'jam skya
ཞི་བ་ཡེ་དག	the naturally pure peaceful ones	zhi ba ye dag
ཞི་བ་ལམ་ཟབ་གཅོད	unidentified	zhi ba lam zab gcod
ཞི་བ་སེལ	complacency	zhi ba sel
ཞི་བ་ལྷ	Shantideva; (685-763) one of	zhi ba lha
ཐེ་ཨེཨིགྷཏཡ	four mahasiddhas of India. He composed the famous Bodhicaryavatara (byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa la 'jug pa, T 3871), Engaging in the Bodhisattva's Activity	the eighty
ཞི་བ་ལྷ་རྒྱུད	anuyoga rare tantra, rare tantra of anuyoga	zhi ba lha rgyud
ཞི་བའི་སྐུ	peaceful form 2320	zhi ba'i sku
ཞི་བའི་གར	dance of the peaceful spirits, ordinary dance	zhi ba'i gar
ཞི་བའི་གོ་ཆ	santivarman	zhi ba'i go cha
ཞི་བའི་གྲོང	hermitage, mountain retreat of saints	zhi ba'i grong
ཞི་བའི་འགྲན་བསྡུར	peaceful competition	zhi ba'i 'gran bsdur
ཞི་བའི་འགྲོས	1) going slowly/ peacefully; 2) swan	zhi ba'i 'gros
ཞི་བའི་རྒོལ་སྟངས	peace offensive/ attack aggression	zhi ba'i rgol stangs
ཞི་བའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Pacific Ocean	zhi ba'i rgya mtsho
ཞི་བའི་རྒྱན	the ornaments of the peaceful divinities, peaceful ornaments	zhi ba'i rgyan
ཞི་བའི་རྒྱན་ནི་ཆགས་བྲལ་ཡིན	the finest ornament of peace is freedom from attachment	zhi ba'i rgyan ni chags bral yin
ཞི་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Peace [thd]	zhi ba'i rgyud
ཞི་བའི་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ	peaceful liberation	zhi ba'i bcings 'grol
ཞི་བའི་ཆིངས་འགྲོལ	peaceful liberation	zhi ba'i chings 'grol
ཞི་བའི་ཉམས་དགུ	9 peaceful expressions	zhi ba'i nyams dgu
ཞི་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	Shantigarbha	zhi ba'i snying po
ཞིང	It is vital that you meditate on the samadhi of peace zhi ba'i ting nge 'dzin sgom pa la bar du	zhing
གཅོད་པའི་བདུད	the demon who hinders the meditation of the samadhi of peace	gcod pa'i bdud
ཞི་བའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	peaceful gaze, peaceful gaze	zhi ba'i lta stangs
ཞི་བའི་མཐའ	extreme of serenity	zhi ba'i mtha'
ཞི་བའི་བདེ་བ	self-complacency	zhi ba'i bde ba
ཞི་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	peaceful vajra [lha'i phyag mtshan gyi bye brag cig	zhi ba'i rdo rje
ཞི་བའི་གནས	charnel ground	zhi ba'i gnas
ཞི་བའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་ལ་བསླབ་དགོས་པ	learn to behave in a controlled manner	zhi ba'i spyod lam la bslab dgos pa
ཞི་བའི་ཕྱོགས	moon's waxing/peaceful phase	zhi ba'i phyogs
ཞི་བའི་ཕྲིན་ལས	pacifying activity	zhi ba'i phrin las
ཞི་བའི་དབྱིངས	the expanse of peace zhi ba'i dbyings su mdzad pa'i tha ma	zhi ba'i dbyings
ཞི་བའི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	peaceful fire puja [R]	zhi ba'i sbyin sreg
ཞི་བའི་མེ་ཏོག	white species of plant calotropis gigantea	zhi ba'i me tog
ཞི་བའི་རྩལ	the natural wisdom skill of the peaceful deities	zhi ba'i rtsal
ཞི་བའི་ཚིག	good words, (mild, polite) expression, mild language, conciliatory	zhi ba'i tshig
ཞི་བའི་ཚུལ་དགུ	the nine modes of peaceful deities / divinities; the nine signs of the wisdom body; pliant, welltoned, delicate, perfectly proportioned, youthful appearance, clear, radiant, attractive, and splendo...	zhi ba'i tshul dgu
ཞི་བའི་ཚུལ་ལྔ	five modes of peacefulness/ peaceful deities	zhi ba'i tshul lnga
ཞི་བའི་མཛེས་པའི་སྦྱར་བ	Applications of the Beauty of Peace [thd]	zhi ba'i mdzes pa'i sbyar ba
ཞི་བའི་རང་དངས	the natural selfluminosity of the peaceful deities	zhi ba'i rang dangs
ཞི་བའི་རིམ་འགྱུར	peaceful evolution	zhi ba'i rim 'gyur
ཞི་བའི་ལམ	path of peace	zhi ba'i lam
ཞི་བའི་ལས	* pacifying activities/ karma	zhi ba'i las
ཞི་བའི་སྲིང་མོ	River Yamuna	zhi ba'i sring mo
ཞི་བའི་ལྷ་ཞེ་གཉིས	42 peaceful deities [R]	zhi ba'i lha zhe gnyis
ཞི་བར་འགྱུར་བ	become pacified	zhi bar 'gyur ba
ཞི་བར་འཇུག	night	zhi bar 'jug
ཞི་བར་གནས་པ	(met) deity dbang phyug chen po	zhi bar gnas pa
ཞི་བར་བའི་བར་དོ	the bardo of he peaceful deities	zhi bar ba'i bar do
ཞི་བར་བྱེད	quieting, settle, pacifying, subduing, quell	zhi bar byed
ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ	quieting, settle, pacifying, subduing, quell	zhi bar byed pa
ཞི་བར་སྦྱོར་བའི་ལས	karma of liberative deeds	zhi bar sbyor ba'i las
ཞི་བར་ལམ	the path of peace	zhi bar lam
ཞི་བར་ལས	pacifying activity	zhi bar las
ཞི་བར་གཤེགས་པ	1) attain liberation, pass into Nirvana; 2) pass away, die	zhi bar gshegs pa
ཞི་བར་གསལ	clearly manifests in peaceful form	zhi bar gsal
ཞི་བར་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the peaceful deities	zhi bar lha tshogs
ཞི་བེད	peace and comfort	zhi bed
ཞི་བྱེད	Pacification of Suffering, the cycle of teaching initiated in Tibet by Padampa Sangye	zhi byed
ཞི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Pacifying	zhi byed kyi rgyud
ཞི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྨན	disease eliminating med.	zhi byed kyi sman
ཞི་བྱེད་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	Pacific Ocean	zhi byed rgya mtsho chen po
ཞི་བྱེད་སྔ་བར་ཕྱི་གསུམ་གྱི་སྐོར	a treasured collection of the teachings transmitted in the tradition of pha dam pa sangs rgyas; by {thugs sras kun dga'}	zhi byed snga bar phyi gsum gyi skor
ཞི་བྱེད་ཆུ་བོ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Great Pacifying River Tantra	zhi byed chu bo chen po'i rgyud
ཞི་བྱེད་པ	those who hold the lineage of pacifying all sufferings through the practice of tantra and mantra	zhi byed pa
ཞི་བྱེད་སྨན་གྱི་མདོ	{zhi byed sman gyi mdo}	zhi byed sman gyi mdo
ཞི་བྱེད་ལུགས་གསུམ	three traditions of Pacification [R]	zhi byed lugs gsum
ཞི་སྦྱོང་གཉིས	pacifying and expelling [sman khong du btang nas nad rang bzhin du zhi bar byed pa la zhi byed ces dang, lus kyi gyen thur gyi gnas nas sbyong bar byed pa la sbyong byed ces te gnyis so	zhi sbyong gnyis
ཞི་མ	sieve of cane or wood	zhi ma
ཞི་མ་ཁྲོ	semi-wrathful "peaceful and wrathful"	zhi ma khro
ཞི་མ་ཕོངས་སྐྱོབ	epithet of the goddess sgrol ma	zhi ma phongs skyob
ཞི་མི	cat	zhi mi
ཞི་མིའི	feline	zhi mi'i
ཞི་མིའི་སྐད	purr	zhi mi'i skad
ཞི་མོ	girl	zhi mo
ཞི་མོལ	peace talks	zhi mol
ཞི་སྨན	tranquillizer [med.], sleeping pill, sedative	zhi sman
ཞི་ཚུལ་དགུ	the 9 modes of a peaceful deity	zhi tshul dgu
ཞི་ཚུལ་དགུའི་ཉམས	the 9 peaceful expressions	zhi tshul dgu'i nyams
ཞི་འཚོ	Shantarakshita	zhi 'tsho
ཞི་འཚོ་ཡབ་སྲས	Shantarakshita and chief disciple [Kamalashila]	zhi 'tsho yab sras
ཞི་འཚོལ	shravakas	zhi 'tshol
ཞི་མཛད་པ	to extinguish	zhi mdzad pa
ཞི་འཛིན་པ	(met) samsara	zhi 'dzin pa
ཞི་ཞི་ལ་མི་གནས	you will not dwell in peace	zhi zhi la mi gnas
ཞི་ཞིང་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	is peaceful and content	zhi zhing chog shes pa
ཞི་ཞིང་དུལ་བ	peaceful and gentle	zhi zhing dul ba
ཞི་ཞིང་ནུབ	come to rest	zhi zhing nub
ཞི་བཞག	anger, wrath	zhi bzhag
ཞི་གཟའ་གཉིས	the two peaceful planets gnyis	zhi gza' gnyis
ཞི་གཟའ་བཞི	the four peaceful planets [R]	zhi gza' bzhi
ཞི་བཟང	{zhi ba bzang po}, Shantibhadra	zhi bzang
ཞི་ཡའོ་སྨན་རིགས	W medicines	zhi ya'o sman rigs
ཞི་རགས	subtle/ peaceful and coarse	zhi rags
ཞི་རགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་ཅན	imbued with a coarse kind of calmness	zhi rags kyi rnam pa can
ཞི་རགས་རྣམ་ཆན་གྱི་ལམ	[Tserig]	zhi rags rnam chan gyi lam
ཞི་རབ	pacified	zhi rab
ཞི་རོལ	sil snyan - medium size cymbals	zhi rol
ཞི་ལ་མི་གནས	you will not dwell in peace	zhi la mi gnas
ཞི་ལ་འཛུམ་པ	to smile serenely	zhi la 'dzum pa
ཞི་ལ་སོང	became quiet	zhi la song
ཞི་ལམ	peaceful path, non-violence	zhi lam
ཞི་ལུ	bu	zhi lu
ཞི་བསིལ	serenity	zhi bsil
ཞི་ཧུང་ཧྲི	tomato	zhi hung hri
ཞི་ཧྲུང་ཧྲི	tomato	zhi hrung hri
ཞི་ལྷག	abbr. for zhi gnas lhag mthong	zhi lhag
ཞི་ལྷག་གི་སྒོམ་རིམ	the stages of meditation of Shamatha and Vipashyana	zhi lhag gi sgom rim
ཞི་ལྷག་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga practice of shamatha and vipashyana	zhi lhag gi rnal 'byor
ཞི་ལྷག་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparability of zhi gnas and lhag mthong	zhi lhag dbyer med
ཞི་ལྷག་ཟུང་འཇུག	union of Vipashyana and Shamatha	zhi lhag zung 'jug
ཞི་ལྷིང	peace and tranquillity	zhi lhing
ཞི་ལྷུན་རྗེས་ཆོག	kun bzang dgongs pa zang thal las rdzogs pa chen po chos nyid mngon sum zhi khro lhun grub kyi	zhi lhun rjes chog
ཞི་ལྷོད	softening, easing, toning down, relaxing, lessening	zhi lhod
ཞི་ལྷོད་དུ་འགྲོ	get [softened, eased, toned down, relaxed, lessened]	zhi lhod du 'gro
ཞི་ལྷོད་དུ་གཏོང	soften, ease, tone down, relax, lessen	zhi lhod du gtong
ཞི་ཨན	Sian	zhi an
ཞིག་དཀའ	hard to destroy, indestructible	zhig dka'
ཞིག་གླིང	{gar dbang zhig po gling pa}	zhig gling
ཞིག་ཏུ	at/ to/ in 1/ a, as	zhig tu
ཞིག་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན	SA don gyi kun gzhi 2322	zhig don gyi kun
ཞིག་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	the true base of all	zhig don gyi kun gzhi
ཞིག་ནས་མེད་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sngar yod zhig nas med pa'i dngos med kyi rgyu des 'bras bu'i dngos po gzhan zhig bskyed pa ston pa'i rgyu'i rgyan	zhig nas med pa'i byed rgyu
ཞིག་པ་དངོས་པོ	"non-entity as a thing"	zhig pa dngos po
ཞིག་པར་སྣང	appear to dissolve	zhig par snang
ཞིག་པོ	1) broken in peices; 2) individual taming grasping at true existence and	zhig po
ཞིག་པོ་བདུད་རྩི	1149-1199, bka' ma lineage master	zhig po bdud rtsi
ཞིག་པོའི་རྐུབ་སྟེགས	stool broken in pieces	zhig po'i rkub stegs
ཞིག་འབྱུང་བ	get a sense of	zhig 'byung ba
ཞིག་མེར	dense throng, crowd	zhig mer
ཞིག་ཡོད	the transmission of blessings is the specialty of the Kagyüs and is unequaled, special training	zhig yod
ཞིག་རལ	chag grum gog hrul	zhig ral
ཞིག་རལ་བའི་ཁང་རྙིང	old house in ruins	zhig ral ba'i khang rnying
ཞིག་རལ་བྱུང་བ	dilapidated, damaged, in ruins, worn out	zhig ral byung ba
ཞིག་རོ	ruins [chag grum gog hrul]	zhig ro
ཞིག་ལ	Greece	zhig la
ཞིག་ལ་སོང	will dissolve	zhig la song
ཞིག་ཤུལ	ruins, remains	zhig shul
ཞིག་གསོ	repairs	zhig gso
ཞིག་གསོ་བ	repair a house, refresh, comfort	zhig gso ba
ཞིག་གསོ་བའི་ཁང་པ	renovated house	zhig gso ba'i khang pa
ཞིག་གསོ་བའི་འཇག་སྤྱིལ	repaired straw nest	zhig gso ba'i 'jag spyil
ཞིག་གསོ་བའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	repaired machine	zhig gso ba'i 'phrul 'khor
ཞིག་གསོ་འཛིན་སྤྲས	self-cherishing refreshment, clinging to repair [nyams gso [rest, refresh, repair, renovate] and bdag gces [grasp/cling,	zhig gso 'dzin spras
ཞིགས	fall apart	zhigs
ཞིང་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	pervading all realms	zhing kun khyab
ཞིང་བཀོད	ordered dimension, map, design, design of mansion or residence of gods	zhing bkod
ཞིང་སྐལ	allotted field	zhing skal
ཞིང་སྐྱེད	agricultural production/ output	zhing skyed
ཞིང་སྐྱེད་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	agricultural producers cooperative	zhing skyed mnyam las khang
ཞིང་སྐྱེས	born in a grove	zhing skyes
ཞིང་སྐྱེས་མ	in the 24 regions skyes pa'i lady messengers or yoginis of the sampannakrama of ordinary beings	zhing skyes ma
ཞིང་སྐྱེས་སྨན	medicines from cultivated plants	zhing skyes sman
ཞིང་སྐྱོང	SK kshetrapala, lokapala [R]	zhing skyong
ཞིང་སྐྱོང་ཀུན་དགའ་གཞོན་ནུ	Kagyupa protective deity, particularly associated with Benchen monastery and the Sangye Nyenpa Rinpoches, also known as the special protector of the pure realm of the Buddha Amithaba, Dewachen. Sai...	zhing skyong kun dga' gzhon nu
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར	armed Mahakala {ye shes kyi mgon po phyag bzhi pa} who, in turn, is an emanation of Chakrasamvara {'khor lo bde mchog}. His seat is said to be {dpal gyi tsa ri tra}, one of the three most important...	the four
མོཨུནཏཻན་ཨིས་སིཏུཨཏེད་ཨིན་པྲེསེནཏ	day Arunchal Pradesh, a federal state of India [tsd]	mountain is situated in present
ཞིང་སྐྱོང་གི་མཁའ་འགྲོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 122-1]	zhing skyong gi mkha' 'gro brgyad
ཞིང་སྐྱོང་རྒྱལ་མོ	queen of protectors of sacred places	zhing skyong rgyal mo
ཞིང་སྐྱོང་དབང་མོ	gnas yul da ki'i gtso mo, Nyingmapa protective deity	zhing skyong dbang mo
ཞིང་སྐྱོང་མ	protectress of sacred places, Shingkyongma	zhing skyong ma
ཞིང་ཁ	field, farmland; farmland, field	zhing kha
ཞིང་ཁ་ཆུ་མ	irrigated field	zhing kha chu ma
ཞིང་ཁ་ཐ་གོག	fallow field	zhing kha tha gog
ཞིང་ཁ་འདེབས་པ	to do farm work, till land 2323	zhing kha 'debs pa
ཞིང་ཁ་རྣམས་ཐ་གོག་ཏུ་ལུས་པ	fields left fallow	zhing kha rnams tha gog tu lus pa
ཞིང་ཁ་རྨོ་བ	farm	zhing kha rmo ba
ཞིང་ཁ་རྨོས་པའི་རྗེས་ཤུལ	furrow in a plowed field	zhing kha rmos pa'i rjes shul
ཞིང་ཁ་སེར་ལངས	plowed field w the right amount of irrigation/water for sowing	zhing kha ser langs
ཞིང་ཁང	field house, barn, ?? fields and houses	zhing khang
ཞིང་ཁང་ནོར་གསུམ	fields, houses, and property	zhing khang nor gsum
ཞིང་ཁམས	1) place, region; 2) pure fields that are the relms/ abodes of buddhas and bodhisattva [EG bde ba can], universe, realm, heavenly, buddhafield	zhing khams
ཞིང་ཁམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	oceans of buddha fields	zhing khams rgya mtsho
ཞིང་ཁམས་རྒྱ་མཚོར་ཁྱབ	pervades oceans of buddha fields	zhing khams rgya mtshor khyab
ཞིང་ཁམས་ཆེན་པོ	vast buddhafield	zhing khams chen po
ཞིང་ཁམས་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལང	25 fields on Vairochana's hands.	zhing khams nyi shu rtsa lang
ཞིང་ཁམས་དག་པ	pure land	zhing khams dag pa
ཞིང་ཁམས་དག་པར་མཛོད	purify the realms! zhing khams sprod kyi sgron ma lam ci ltar nyams su blang pa sku gsum dmar	zhing khams dag par mdzod
ཐག་བཅད་པའི་གནད	method that introduces the Pure Dimensions zhing khams sbyong ba sems stobs chen	thag bcad pa'i gnad
པོའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཡིན་པ	to transform your perception of the world require a strong and open mind	po'i spyod yul yin pa
ཞིང་ཁམས་གཞན་དུ་གཤེགས་སོང	has passed on to another Buddhafield [h passed away]	zhing khams gzhan du gshegs song
ཞིང་ཁམས་སུམ་བརྩེགས	[TRS 140-5]	zhing khams sum brtsegs
ཞིང་ཁའི་བུ་མོ	girls in the field	zhing kha'i bu mo
ཞིང་ཁའི་མཚམས	edges/ borders of fields	zhing kha'i mtshams
ཞིང་ཁའི་ལས	agriculture, farming	zhing kha'i las
ཞིང་ཁའི་ལས་ཀ	agriculture, farming	zhing kha'i las ka
ཞིང་ཁར་འགྲོ	work in the fields	zhing khar 'gro
ཞིང་ཁར་འགྲོ་བ	work in the fields	zhing khar 'gro ba
ཞིང་ཁར་ས་བོན་འདེབས	sow/ plant seeds in the fields	zhing khar sa bon 'debs
ཞིང་ཁུལ	agricultural area	zhing khul
ཞིང་ཁྲལ	field tax	zhing khral
ཞིང་མཁན	wood cutter	zhing mkhan
ཞིང་ག	field	zhing ga
ཞིང་ག་འདེབས་པ	sow a field	zhing ga 'debs pa
ཞིང་ག་བོགས་མར་གཏོང་བ	rent providing field	zhing ga bogs mar gtong ba
ཞིང་ག་ས་རྒྱུ་སྡུག་པ	field w bad soil	zhing ga sa rgyu sdug pa
ཞིང་གི་བཀོད་པ	SA zhing bkod	zhing gi bkod pa
ཞིང་གི་ཐ་གྲུ	extent of a [buddha] field	zhing gi tha gru
ཞིང་གི་ཐུལ་འདེབས་པ	clear land for tillage	zhing gi thul 'debs pa
ཞིང་གི་ཐོག་ཤས	1) crops gi phud nas sprod pa field tax; 2) [arch] field's 'bru skal	zhing gi thog shas
ཞིང་གི་རྡུལ་སྙེད	as many as there are atoms in the universe	zhing gi rdul snyed
ཞིང་གི་རྡུལ་སྙེད་དུ	as numerous as the atoms in the universe	zhing gi rdul snyed du
ཞིང་གི་རྡུལ་སྙེད་ལུས	as many bodies as there are atoms in the universe	zhing gi rdul snyed lus
ཞིང་གི་བྱ་བ	husbandry	zhing gi bya ba
ཞིང་གི་དབྱུག་ཐོ	a corpse used as a club/staff	zhing gi dbyug tho
ཞིང་གི་ལས་ལ་ཇུས་བདེ	skillful in agriculture	zhing gi las la jus bde
ཞིང་གི་སོ་ནམ་གྱི་བྱ་བ	field work, farming	zhing gi so nam gyi bya ba
ཞིང་གི་ལྷུ	way of figuring the size of a field from how much seed it needs [by landlords from the time of king khri ral pa can]	zhing gi lhu
ཞིང་གྲོང	farm village	zhing grong
ཞིང་གླ	field rent to the landlord	zhing gla
ཞིང་གླ་པ	farm hand	zhing gla pa
ཞིང་བགེགས	frost drought, disease bad signs etc. harming crops	zhing bgegs
ཞིང་རྒོད	rough & uncultivated field	zhing rgod
ཞིང་སྒྲུབ་ཚོགས་མཆོད	tshogs	zhing sgrub tshogs mchod
མཆོད་བྱིན་རླབས་ཆར་འབེབས	by karma	mchod byin rlabs char 'bebs
པ་བཅུ་བཞི་པ	theg mchog rdo rje the 14th Karmapa (1797-1867)	pa bcu bzhi pa
ཞིང་ངན	bad field, field w bad soil/ hard to grow crops on	zhing ngan
ཞིང་དངོས་རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང	agricultural producers mutual aid group/ team	zhing dngos rogs res tshogs chung
ཞིང་ཅང	Sinkiang PRC	zhing cang
ཞིང་བཅུ	10-fold guilt, 10 fields/ objects of destruction	zhing bcu
ཞིང་བཅུ་སྒྲོལ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Liberation of the Ten Objects. A Mahayoga scripture	zhing bcu sgrol ba'i rgyud
ཞིང་བཅུ་ཚང་བའི་བསྟན་དགྲ	enemies of the teaching in whom the 10 [conditions] are complete and who are fields [of destruction] [taught in the trantras; enemies of the teaching who should be destroyed in whom 10 coinditions ...	zhing bcu tshang ba'i bstan dgra
ཞིང་ཆ	turmoil, confusion, hurryscurry, disturbance	zhing cha
ཞིང་ཆས	farm implements/tools, province	zhing chas
ཞིང་ཆས་བཅོས་སྒྱུར	improvement of farm implements/ tools	zhing chas bcos sgyur
ཞིང་ཆས་ཆུང་རིགས	small farm implements/ tools	zhing chas chung rigs
ཞིང་ཆས་དཔེ་གསར	new style farm implements/ tools	zhing chas dpe gsar
ཞིང་ཆུ	irrigation [water]	zhing chu
ཞིང་ཆུ་གཏོང	irrigate	zhing chu gtong
ཞིང་ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	irrigate	zhing chu gtong ba
ཞིང་ཆུ་འདྲེན	irrigate	zhing chu 'dren
ཞིང་ཆུ་འདྲེན་གཏོང	irrigation	zhing chu 'dren gtong
ཞིང་ཆུ་འདྲེན་པ	irrigate	zhing chu 'dren pa
ཞིང་ཆུ་འདྲེན་འབུད	irrigation operations	zhing chu 'dren 'bud
ཞིང་ཆུ་མ	zhing la chu 'dren sa yod pa	zhing chu ma
ཞིང་ཆུང	a child's skin	zhing chung
ཞིང་ཆུང་ཐན་པས་འཚིགས་སོང	small field destroyed by obstacles	zhing chung than pas 'tshigs song
ཞིང་ཆུང་འཛིན་པ	one who cultivates a small field, small farmer	zhing chung 'dzin pa
ཞིང་ཆུན	one that is watering a field	zhing chun
ཞིང་ཆེན	large field/ region, province	zhing chen
ཞིང་ཆེན་གི་ལྟེ་གནས	provincial capital	zhing chen gi lte gnas
ཞིང་ཆེན་གྱི་ལྟེ་གནས	provincial capital	zhing chen gyi lte gnas
ཞིང་ཆེན་གྱི་པགས་པ	human-skin cloak	zhing chen gyi pags pa
ཞིང་ཆེན་པགས་པ	1) human-skin [cloak]; 2) skin of a person w all the limbs in whom the 10 conditions for being a field of destruction were complete	zhing chen pags pa
ཞིང་མཆོག	Pure Land zhing khams, dag pa'i zhing). a realm inhabited entirely by Arya bodhisattvas, where	zhing mchog
ཞིང་མཆོད་པ	recipient of offerings	zhing mchod pa
ཞིང་མཆོད་པའི	recipient of offerings	zhing mchod pa'i
ཞིང་བརྗེ་བ	dead person [h]	zhing brje ba
ཞིང་བརྗེས་སོང	had passed on to another Buddhafield	zhing brjes song
ཞིང་གཉེར	farm steward	zhing gnyer
ཞིང་སྙིགས་མ	a yellowish sprout growing up on land	zhing snyigs ma
ཞིང་བཏབ	sowed/ planted seeds in the fields	zhing btab
ཞིང་བཏབ་ས་མཉེན	cultivation	zhing btab sa mnyen
ཞིང་བཏབ་ས་མཉེན་པོ	fertile field	zhing btab sa mnyen po
ཞིང་སྟོང	fallow	zhing stong
ཞིང་ཐ་ཆད	unproductive field	zhing tha chad
ཞིང་ཐ་རྡ	not cultivated for a long time	zhing tha rda
ཞིང་ཐ་བ	hard fields, virgin land that hasn't been plowed	zhing tha ba
ཞིང་ཐག་མ	irrigated field	zhing thag ma
ཞིང་ཐང	farm	zhing thang
ཞིང་དག་པ	pure land, pure realm	zhing dag pa
ཞིང་དག་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	practice of the pure fields	zhing dag pa'i sbyor ba
ཞིང་དག་སྦྱོར་བ	[Tserig]	zhing dag sbyor ba
ཞིང་དང་ཚོང་ལས་མ་ཡིན	we are not farmers or merchants	zhing dang tshong las ma yin
ཞིང་དང་བསམ་པ	object and intent {dge sdig gang yang zhing dang bsam pa dang nan tan gyis rgyun du byed pa sogs las stobs che chung gnyis su 'gyur ro} The virtue or evil deed will have either greater or lesser im...	zhing dang bsam pa
ཐོབ་བོ	obtained based on an object, [harboring] the intention, and taking the pledge.	thob bo
ཞིང་དམ་པ	a sublime object / person	zhing dam pa
ཞིང་དུ་ཕེབས	left for the Buddhafield [h died]	zhing du phebs
ཞིང་དུ་གཤེགས་པ	departed for the pure realms; passed away	zhing du gshegs pa
ཞིང་དུ་སོར་གང	one-half width of finger	zhing du sor gang
ཞིང་དུད	farm village house	zhing dud
ཞིང་དོར	plow	zhing dor
ཞིང་དྲག་པོ	a formidable object	zhing drag po
ཞིང་དྲོད་མོ	fertile land/ field	zhing drod mo
ཞིང་བདག	landlord * land owner [of fields]	zhing bdag
བཟུང་ཞིང	rang nyid kyis ngal rtsol mi byed par sa zhing bogs mar btang nas zhing par bshu gzhog byed pa de 'tsho ba'i yong khungs gtso bor byed mkhan la zer	bzung zhing
ཞིང་བདག་གྲལ་རིམ	the ranks of the landlords	zhing bdag gral rim
ཞིང་བདག་གཉིས་པ	sub-landlord	zhing bdag gnyis pa
ཞིང་བདག་གཤེད་མ	despotic landlord	zhing bdag gshed ma
ཞིང་འདེབས	sow/ plant seeds in/ cultivate the fields	zhing 'debs
ཞིང་འདེབས་པ	til or sow a field	zhing 'debs pa
ཞིང་རྡུལ་གྲངས་རྙེད་ཀྱི་ཞིང	realms equal to the number of dust notes in the universe	zhing rdul grangs rnyed kyi zhing
ཞིང་སྡེ	group/ village of farmers, rural town	zhing sde
ཞིང་ནགས་ཕྱུགས་གསུམ	farming forestry and animal husbandry	zhing nags phyugs gsum
ཞིང་སྣང	buddha-field	zhing snang
ཞིང་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ	great realm-display	zhing snang chen po
ཞིང་པ	who cultivate crops; peasant, farmer	zhing pa
ཞིང་པ་གླ་པ	farm hand	zhing pa gla pa
ཞིང་པ་ཕྱུག་པ	rich farmers	zhing pa phyug pa
ཞིང་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ	rich peasant zhing pa bran g.yog - field servants, serfs zhing pa bran g.yog bdag po - lord/ master of field servants, serfs	zhing pa phyug po
ཞིང་པ་དབུལ་པོ	poor farmer	zhing pa dbul po
ཞིང་པ་འབྲིང་པོ	middle level peasant zhing pa tshe g.yog - field servants, serfs	zhing pa 'bring po
ཞིང་པགས	human skin cloak, a cloak of human skin	zhing pags
ཞིང་པའི་གྱེན་ལོག	peasant revolt/ insurrection	zhing pa'i gyen log
ཞིང་པའི་མཐུན་ཚོགས	peasant association	zhing pa'i mthun tshogs
ཞིང་པའི་དུད་ཚང	peasant household	zhing pa'i dud tshang
ཞིང་པའི་ཚོགས་པ	peasant association	zhing pa'i tshogs pa
ཞིང་པའི་འོས་ལངས	peasant revolt/ uprising, insurrection	zhing pa'i 'os langs
ཞིང་པའི་གསར་བརྗེ	peasant revolution	zhing pa'i gsar brje
ཞིང་དཔྱ	[arch] field tax	zhing dpya
ཞིང་ལྤགས	a human skin; human skin	zhing lpags
ཞིང་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	banners made from skins of youths zhing lpags kyi sgo khebs dang rgyal	zhing lpags kyi rgyal mtshan
ཞིང་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་ཐོག་ཁེབས	ceilings of human skin	zhing lpags kyi thog khebs
ཞིང་ཕྱུག	rich farmers	zhing phyug
ཞིང་ཕྱེད་འབྲོག་ཕྱེད	agro-pastoral (+ farming, + herding)	zhing phyed 'brog phyed
ཞིང་ཕྲུ	[arch] plow a field	zhing phru
ཞིང་བོགས	profit/ gain from field tax	zhing bogs
ཞིང་བྱ	husbandry	zhing bya
ཞིང་བྲན	field servants, serfs [R]	zhing bran
ཞིང་བྲན་བདག་པོ	lord/ master of field servants, serfs	zhing bran bdag po
ཞིང་བྲན་ལམ་ལུགས	system of serfdom	zhing bran lam lugs
ཞིང་དབུལ	poor farmer	zhing dbul
ཞིང་དབྱུག	corpse-staff	zhing dbyug
ཞིང་འབུ	crop-harming insect	zhing 'bu
ཞིང་འབྲས	crop	zhing 'bras
ཞིང་འབྲིང	middle level peasant	zhing 'bring
ཞིང་འབྲིང་གོང་མ	upper middle level peasant	zhing 'bring gong ma
ཞིང་འབྲིང་ཕྱུག་པ	well to do middle level peasant	zhing 'bring phyug pa
ཞིང་འབྲོག	farmers and nomads	zhing 'brog
ཞིང་སྦྱོང་བའི་སྨོན་ལམ	the aspiration of purifying the realms	zhing sbyong ba'i smon lam
ཞིང་མ་དག་པ	impure	zhing ma dag pa
ཞིང་མིག	count of fields	zhing mig
ཞིང་མུ	borders/ edges of the fields	zhing mu
ཞིང་རྨུ་རུ་ཁག	field planting brigade	zhing rmu ru khag
ཞིང་རྨོ	ploughs a field	zhing rmo
ཞིང་རྨོ་བ	plough, plough fields	zhing rmo ba
ཞིང་རྨོ་འོས་པའི་ས་ཆ	arable	zhing rmo 'os pa'i sa cha
ཞིང་རྨོས་པ	to plow his field	zhing rmos pa
ཞིང་སྨན	agricultural insecticide	zhing sman
ཞིང་སྨོན	prayer to be reborn in the Sukhavati paradise of Amitabha buddha Amitabha; {rnam dag bde chen zhing gi smon lam} work by {kar-ma chags med}	zhing smon
ཞིང་ཚན	farmer's le tshan	zhing tshan
ཞིང་ཚིགས	ediges/ borders of fieldszhing kha'i mtshams	zhing tshigs
ཞིང་ཚོགས	peasant association	zhing tshogs
ཞིང་མཚམས	borders/ perimeters of the fields	zhing mtshams
ཞིང་རྫས	agricultural products	zhing rdzas
ཞིང་གཞན་གཤེགས	has departed for another Buddhafield [h passed away]	zhing gzhan gshegs
ཞིང་གཞན་གཤེགས་པ	gone on to another buddhafield	zhing gzhan gshegs pa
ཞིང་གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང	celestial abodes	zhing gzhal yas khang
ཞིང་གཟེར	wooden peg	zhing gzer
ཞིང་བཟང	good field	zhing bzang
ཞིང་བཟང་ལ་སོན་བཟང་འདེབས་པ	plant good seed in a good field	zhing bzang la son bzang 'debs pa
ཞིང་ཡང་བ	what is soft and light, commodious and easy, weak	zhing yang ba
ཞིང་ཡན	ownerless uncultivated field	zhing yan
ངན་གྱིས་ཁེངས་པ	ownerless uncultivated field filled w weeds	ngan gyis khengs pa
ཞིང་ཡུར	zhing kha'i nang gi chu 'khrid lam gyi rka	zhing yur
ཞིང་ཡུལ	objects	zhing yul
ཞིང་ཡོད་དབང་ཆ	right to own property zhing g.yog - field servant, serf zhing g.yog bdag po - master of field servants, serfs zhing g.yog lam lugs - system of serfdom	zhing yod dbang cha
ཞིང་ར	large farm mechanically worked, farm	zhing ra
ཞིང་རབ་འབྱམས	universe, infinite realms	zhing rab 'byams
ཞིང་རི	Shingri, in Latö	zhing ri
ཞིང་རིན	price of a field	zhing rin
ཞིང་རེངས	hard coarse/ never cultivated field	zhing rengs
ཞིང་རེངས་སུ་ལུས	land falling into disuse/ being left abandoned	zhing rengs su lus
ཞིང་རོལ	plowed shul	zhing rol
ཞིང་ལ་སྔ་ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	have previously irrigated a field	zhing la snga chu gtong ba
ཞིང་ལ་ཆུ་འདྲེན་ས་ཡོད་པ	irrigated field	zhing la chu 'dren sa yod pa
ཞིང་ལ་ཕེབ་པ	go to bliss, die	zhing la pheb pa
ཞིང་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	gone to the pure fields, died	zhing la phebs pa
ཞིང་ལ་ལ་ཆགས་བཞིན་པ	some worlds are being formed	zhing la la chags bzhin pa
ཞིང་ལ་ལ་འཇིག་པ	some worlds are disintegrating	zhing la la 'jig pa
ཞིང་ལ་ལ་གནས་པ	some worlds are remaining	zhing la la gnas pa
ཞིང་ལ་ལུད་བཀྲམ་པ	manure a field 2326	zhing la lud bkram pa
ཞིང་ལ་གཤེགས་པ	gone to the pure fields, died	zhing la gshegs pa
ཞིང་ལས	agriculture	zhing las
ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱི་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	agricultural front	zhing las kyi 'thab phyogs
ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱི་དཔྱ་ཁྲལ	agricultural tax zhing las kyi spyi tshogs ring lugs bsgyur	zhing las kyi dpya khral
ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱི་ཡིག་བརྒྱད་རྩ་ཁྲིམས	8 point charter of agriculture	zhing las kyi yig brgyad rtsa khrims
ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱིས་འཚོ	farming	zhing las kyis 'tsho
ཞིང་ལས་ཀྱིས་འཚོ་བ	(met) farmer	zhing las kyis 'tsho ba
ཞིང་ལས་ཁང	agricultural cooperative	zhing las khang
ཞིང་ལས་འགྲེམས་སྟོན	agricultural exhibit	zhing las 'grems ston
ཞིང་ལས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	agricultural country	zhing las rgyal khab
ཞིང་ལས་ངལ་རྩོལ	agricultural labor	zhing las ngal rtsol
ཞིང་ལས་ཆུང་བ	small [peasant] farming	zhing las chung ba
ཞིང་ལས་ཆུང་བའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	small [peasant] farming economy	zhing las chung ba'i dpal 'byor
ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ལས་ཅན	collectivized farming	zhing las mnyam las can
ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	farming being collectivized	zhing las mnyam las can du 'gyur
ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་སྒྱུར	collectivize farming	zhing las mnyam las can du sgyur
ཞིང་ལས་ཐུན་མོང་ཅན	collectivized farming	zhing las thun mong can
ཞིང་ལས་ཐུན་མོན་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	farming being collectivized	zhing las thun mon can du 'gyur
ཞིང་ལས་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	agricultural production	zhing las thon skyed
ཞིང་ལས་ཐོན་དངོས	agricultural production/ output zhing las thon dngos mnyam las khang agricultural producers cooperative	zhing las thon dngos
ཞིང་ལས་ཐོན་རྫས	farm goods/ produce/ products zhing las thon rdzas rin thang bsdoms 'bor - value of total agricultural output	zhing las thon rdzas
ཞིང་ལས་དུལ་དུས	agricultural off-season	zhing las dul dus
ཞིང་ལས་དུས་ཚོད	agricultural season	zhing las dus tshod
ཞིང་ལས་གནམ་གཤིས	agricultural weather	zhing las gnam gshis
ཞིང་ལས་མནམ་ལས་སྒྲུབ་ཁང	agricultural cooperative	zhing las mnam las sgrub khang
ཞིང་ལས་པ	farmer	zhing las pa
ཞིང་ལས་པུའུ	Ministry of Agriculture	zhing las pu'u
ཞིང་ལས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	agricultural economy	zhing las dpal 'byor
ཞིང་ལས་དཔེ་ལེགས་ཅན	model agricultural worker	zhing las dpe legs can
ཞིང་ལས་ཕྲན་ཆུང་བ	small farmer	zhing las phran chung ba
ཞིང་ལས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	agricultural machinery	zhing las 'phrul 'khor
ཞིང་ལས་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	agricultural machinery	zhing las 'phrul chas
ཞིང་ལས་འཕྲུལ་ཆས་ཅན	mechanized agriculture zhing las 'phrul chas can du sgyur mechanize agriculture	zhing las 'phrul chas can
ཞིང་ལས་བྱེད	do farm work, till land, work in the fields	zhing las byed
ཞིང་ལས་བྱེད་པ	do farm work, till land, work in the fields	zhing las byed pa
ཞིང་ལས་བྲེལ་ཆེ	busy period in farm work	zhing las brel che
ཞིང་ལས་མི་གྲངས	agricultural population	zhing las mi grangs
ཞིང་ལས་རྨོ་འདེབས་བྱེད་ལུགས	agrotechnology	zhing las rmo 'debs byed lugs
ཞིང་ལས་སྨན་རིགས	agricultural insecticides	zhing las sman rigs
ཞིང་ལས་ཚན་ཁག	department of agriculture	zhing las tshan khag
ཞིང་ལས་ཚན་རིག	science of agriculture, agronomy zhing las tshan rig brtag dpyod khang science of agriculture/ agronomy research institute	zhing las tshan rig
ཞིང་ལས་ཚོད་ལྟའི་ས་ཚིགས	agricultural experiment station	zhing las tshod lta'i sa tshigs
ཞིང་ལས་ཡོ་ཆས	agricultural tools/ implements	zhing las yo chas
ཞིང་ལས་ཡོ་བྱད	agricultural tools/ implements	zhing las yo byad
ཞིང་ལས་ལག་རྩལ	agricultural techniques/ skills	zhing las lag rtsal
ཞིང་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་ཁྱབ་སྤེལ་ས་ཚིགས	agricultural technique development station	zhing las lag rtsal khyab spel sa tshigs
ཞིང་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་དགེ་རྒན	agronomist	zhing las lag rtsal dge rgan
ཞིང་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་རིག་པ	agronomy	zhing las lag rtsal rig pa
ཞིང་ལས་ལོ་ཏོག	crop	zhing las lo tog
ཞིང་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ	agricultural school/ institute	zhing las slob grwa
ཞིང་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ	agricultural college	zhing las slob grwa che ba
ཞིང་ལུད	field manure, fertilizer	zhing lud
ཞིང་ཤག་པ	{zhing shag pa} [R]	zhing shag pa
ཞིང་ཤིས་པ	prosperous and peaceful kingdom	zhing shis pa
ཞིང་ཤེས་པ	one who knows husbandry, agriculturist	zhing shes pa
ཞིང་གཤིན་པ	fertile field	zhing gshin pa
ཞིང་གཤིན་པོ	field w good sa rgyu [allotment? soft, mthun po? soil? ]	zhing gshin po
ཞིང་གཤེགས	gone to the pure buddha fields, deceased	zhing gshegs
ཞིང་ས	earth of a farm region	zhing sa
ཞིང་ས་ཆེན་པོ	large province	zhing sa chen po
ཞིང་ས་ཉན་པ	arable land zhing sa gshin por sgyur ba'i zhing rgod wild field turned into cultivated ones zhing sa gshin por sgyur ba'i zhing rgod wild field turned into cultivated 1s	zhing sa nyan pa
ཞིང་སར་ཆུ་གཏོང་བ	irrigate	zhing sar chu gtong ba
ཞིང་སླག	flayed human skin	zhing slag
ཞིང་ཧྲུང་རེ	scarlet fever	zhing hrung re
ཞིང་ལྷ	field gods	zhing lha
ཞིངས་ཁམས	heavenly sphere	zhings khams
ཞིངས་ཁམས་རྒྱ་མཙོར་ཁྱབ	pervades oceans of buddhafields	zhings khams rgya mtsor khyab
ཞིན	(not in das)	zhin
ཞིན་ཅང་ཡུ་གུར	Xinjiang Uigher Autonomous Region	zhin cang yu gur
ཞིན་ཅན	Sinkiang Province	zhin can
ཞིན་པ	clinging	zhin pa
ཞིན་བོད	Xinjiang-Tibet	zhin bod
ཞིན་སྦྱངས	perfect case, perfectly trained	zhin sbyangs
ཞིབ	detailed, accurate	zhib
ཞིབ་བཀོད	details, detailed list or information	zhib bkod
ཞིབ་ཁང་ལས་ཁུངས	auditing office	zhib khang las khungs
ཞིབ་ཁུག	rtsam khug	zhib khug
ཞིབ་གླེང	detailed discussion	zhib gleng
ཞིབ་གླེང་བྱེད	discuss in detail	zhib gleng byed
ཞིབ་འགོད	detailed statement/ account	zhib 'god
ཞིབ་འགོད་བྱེད	give a detailed statement/ account	zhib 'god byed
ཞིབ་འགོད་ཞུ	give a detailed statement/ account [h]	zhib 'god zhu
ཞིབ་འགྲེལ	[detailed] explanation/ commentary	zhib 'grel
ཞིབ་འགྲེལ་བྱེད	give a [detailed] explanation/ commentary	zhib 'grel byed
ཞིབ་རྒྱས	in full detail, detailed [, //Phyag bris zhib rgyas,//'grel pa zhib rgyas,//gnas lugs rgyu rkyen zhib rgyas su zhu ba]	zhib rgyas
ཞིབ་རྒྱས་སུ་ཞུ་བ	describe in detail	zhib rgyas su zhu ba
ཞིབ་རྒྱས་སུ་བཤོད་པ	recount	zhib rgyas su bshod pa
ཞིབ་ཅིང་ཆ་ཚང་བ	detailed and complete	zhib cing cha tshang ba
ཞིབ་ཅིང་ཕྲ་བ	thorough, painstaking, meticulous, careful	zhib cing phra ba
ཞིབ་ཅིང་མཚར་བ	detailed and beautiful	zhib cing mtshar ba
ཞིབ་གཅོད	decide/resolve after detailed examination whether it is or is not so]	zhib gcod
ཞིབ་གཅོད་པའི་གནས་ལུགས	investigated situation zhib gcod byas pas yang dag yin min the	zhib gcod pa'i gnas lugs
ཚོམ་མེད	by having resolved [the matter] there was no doubt about whether it was true/ real or not	tshom med
ཞིབ་གཅོད་བྱེད	decide/ resolve after detailed/ thorough examination/ research/ investigation, research/ investigate thoroughly	zhib gcod byed
ཞིབ་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	censor	zhib gcod byed pa
ཞིབ་བཅད	investigate	zhib bcad
ཞིབ་ཆ	finely divided/ small and subtle/ detailed/ thorough/ minute [parts/ aspects/ details]	zhib cha
ཞིབ་ཆ་ལྟ	look into -- in detail	zhib cha lta
ཞིབ་ཆ་བལྟ་བ	looking into the details	zhib cha blta ba
ཞིབ་ཆ་རྣམས་གཞན་དུ་གསལ་བ	explain the minute details to others	zhib cha rnams gzhan du gsal ba
ཞིབ་ཆེན	full of details, one who inquires into every detail, inquiring, inquisitive	zhib chen
ཞིབ་མཆན	investigation/ scrutinizing and approval/ sanction	zhib mchan
ཞིབ་མཆན་བྱེད	investigate/ scrutinize and approve/ sanction	zhib mchan byed
ཞིབ་འཇམ་བཟོ་བ	soothe	zhib 'jam bzo ba
ཞིབ་འཇུག	examination [& analysis] survey, exploration, examination	zhib 'jug
ཞིབ་འཇུག་བྱེད་མཁས་པ	analyst	zhib 'jug byed mkhas pa
ཞིབ་འཇུག་བྱེད་པ	research, study, assess, analyze	zhib 'jug byed pa
ཞིབ་འཇུག་རྩད་གཅོད	examine in detail and decide	zhib 'jug rtsad gcod
ཞིབ་འཇུག་རྩིས་ལེན	examine and make an accounting of	zhib 'jug rtsis len
ཞིབ་འཇུག་རྩིས་ལེན་བྱེད་པའི་ནོར་རྫས	examine and make an accounting of the property	zhib 'jug rtsis len byed pa'i nor rdzas
ཞིབ་འཇུག་ཚད་ལེན	after examining closely, take and lay out as a proportional grid [tangka etc.]	zhib 'jug tshad len
ཞིབ་འཇུག་ཚོགས་པ	inspection/ research group/ committee	zhib 'jug tshogs pa
ཞིབ་འཇུག་བཟོ་བཅོས	examine and repair	zhib 'jug bzo bcos
ཞིབ་བརྗོད	detailed explanation/ narration	zhib brjod
ཞིབ་བརྗོད་བྱེད	explain/ narrate in detail	zhib brjod byed
ཞིབ་ཏིག	fine and detailed	zhib tig
ཞིབ་ཏུ	minutely/ in detail	zhib tu
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བཀོད	present in detail	zhib tu bkod
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བཀོད་པའི	detailed	zhib tu bkod pa'i
ཞིབ་ཏུ་འགྲོ	{rgyu 'bras la zhib tu 'gro ba} pay minute attention to your actions and their effects	zhib tu 'gro
ཞིབ་ཏུ་རྟོག	study/ examine/ investigate/ scrutinize thoroughly/ carefully/ minutely/ in detail	zhib tu rtog
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བརྟག	study/ examine/ investigate/ scrutinize thoroughly/ carefully/ minutely/ in detail	zhib tu brtag
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བརྟག་ནས་ཐག་གཅོད	decide after studying/ examining/ investigating/ scrutinizing thoroughly/ carefully/ minutely/ in detail	zhib tu brtag nas thag gcod
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བརྟགས	examine minutely/in detail	zhib tu brtags
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བལྟས་པ	looked very carefully	zhib tu bltas pa
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བསྟན	to teach in detail	zhib tu bstan
ཞིབ་ཏུ་འཐག་པའི་ཕྱེ་མ	finely gound flour	zhib tu 'thag pa'i phye ma
ཞིབ་ཏུ་ཕྱིས་འཆད	will give a more detailed explanation below	zhib tu phyis 'chad
ཞིབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ	make an detailed/ precise classification/ analysis, dissect	zhib tu dbye
ཞིབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	[make a] detailed/ precise classification/ analysis, dissection	zhib tu dbye ba
ཞིབ་ཏུ་བཤད	explain in detail	zhib tu bshad
ཞིབ་བཏགས	reduced to fine powder, to flour	zhib btags
ཞིབ་བཏགས་བྱེད	grind into flour	zhib btags byed
ཞིབ་བཏས	ground into powder	zhib btas
ཞིབ་བཏེགས	weighed accurately	zhib btegs
ཞིབ་རྟགས་བྱེད་པ	scan	zhib rtags byed pa
ཞིབ་ལྟ	look at/ examine closely/ meticulously	zhib lta
ཞིབ་ལྟ་བྱེད	look at/ examine closely/ meticulously	zhib lta byed
ཞིབ་བརྟག་བྱེད་པ	scrutinize 2328	zhib brtag byed pa
ཞིབ་བལྟས	look at/ examine closely/ meticulously	zhib bltas
ཞིབ་བལྟས་བྱེད	look at/ examine closely/ meticulously	zhib bltas byed
ཞིབ་ཐལ	fine flour or tsampa for making thug pa	zhib thal
ཞིབ་ཐོན	precision	zhib thon
ཞིབ་ཐོན་འཁོར་སྟེགས	precision lathe	zhib thon 'khor stegs
ཞིབ་ཐོན་དཔྱད་ཆས	precision tools/ instruments	zhib thon dpyad chas
ཞིབ་འཐག	grind finely, finely ground	zhib 'thag
ཞིབ་འཐག་སྨན་ཕྱེ	finely ground medicinal powder	zhib 'thag sman phye
ཞིབ་འཐེམས	detailed and complete	zhib 'thems
ཞིབ་འདྲོང	detailed and straightforward	zhib 'drong
ཞིབ་རྡུང	make into powder	zhib rdung
སྨན་རྣམས་ཕྱེ་མར་རྫོག་པ	by pulverizing grind medicines in a mortar to powder	sman rnams phye mar rdzog pa
ཞིབ་རྡུང་བྱེད	make into powder, pulverize	zhib rdung byed
ཞིབ་སྡུར	detailed discussion/ review/ comparison	zhib sdur
ཞིབ་སྡུར་བྱེད	discuss/ review/ compare in detail	zhib sdur byed
ཞིབ་བརྡུངས	reduced to powder	zhib brdungs
ཞིབ་འརྡུག་བྱེད་པ	to research, study	zhib 'rdug byed pa
ཞིབ་བསྡུར	detailed discussion/ review/ comparison	zhib bsdur
ཞིབ་བསྡུར་བྱེད	discuss/ review/ compare in detail	zhib bsdur byed
ཞིབ་ནན་དུ	accurately, precisely	zhib nan du
ཞིབ་ནན་དུ་མཇལ་བ	to look carefully	zhib nan du mjal ba
ཞིབ་པ	fine, subtle, detailed, closely, precise, exact, thorough	zhib pa
ཞིབ་པར	in detail	zhib par
ཞིབ་པར་བཏགས	grind into a powder	zhib par btags
ཞིབ་པོ	fine * close together *, in detail, carefully, deeply minutely	zhib po
ཞིབ་པོར	in detail, accurately, minutely, thoroughly	zhib por
ཞིབ་པོར་བཙབ་པ	pulverize, reduce to powder	zhib por btsab pa
ཞིབ་དཔྱད	1) investigate [-tion], examine [-ation], analyze [-sys] [closely/ in detail]; 2) reflect on, study, consider; 3) research)	zhib dpyad
ཞིབ་དཔྱད་པ	inquire, investigate	zhib dpyad pa
ཞིབ་དཔྱད་དབང་ཆ	right of investigation/ prosecution	zhib dpyad dbang cha
ཞིབ་དཔྱད་ལས་ཁུངས	bureau of inspection/ investigation/ prosecution	zhib dpyad las khungs
ཞིབ་དཔྱད་ཨུ་ཡོན	investigative committee	zhib dpyad u yon
ཞིབ་དཔྱད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	investigative committee	zhib dpyad u yon lhan khang
ཞིབ་དཔྱོད	1) investigate, examine, analyze [closely/ in detail]; 2) reflect on, stiudy, consider)	zhib dpyod
ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་པ	distinguis[er] whether las don are good or bad	zhib dpyod pa
ཞིབ་ཕོར	tsampa putting in and mixing bowl	zhib phor
ཞིབ་ཕྲ	careful, specific, fine, detail, details, in detail	zhib phra
ཞིབ་ཕྲའི་ཐོན་རྫས	precision products	zhib phra'i thon rdzas
ཞིབ་ཕྲའི་རྩིས	detailed/ accurate calculation/ astrology	zhib phra'i rtsis
ཞིབ་ཕྲའི་རྩིས་ཁྲ	detailed account	zhib phra'i rtsis khra
ཞིབ་བྱེད	analysis, discernment	zhib byed
ཞིབ་བྱེད་བྱེད	analyze, discern, sort out, separate	zhib byed byed
ཞིབ་བྲ	buckwheat flour	zhib bra
ཞིབ་བྲིས་རི་མོ	intricate/ detailed drawing/ design	zhib bris ri mo
ཞིབ་འབྱེད	analysis, discernment	zhib 'byed
ཞིབ་འབྱེད་བྱེད	analyze, discern, sort out, separate	zhib 'byed byed
ཞིབ་མ	from reeds/ bamboo etc las bslas pa'i [fine, small grain winnowing] basket	zhib ma
ཞིབ་མོ	fine, subtle, detailed, closely	zhib mo
ཞིབ་མོ་དང་རྩིང་པོ	fine and coarse	zhib mo dang rtsing po
ཞིབ་མོ་རྣམ་འཐག	the Finely Woven,	zhib mo rnam 'thag
Vཨཨཻདལྱ	suutra [R]	Vaaidalya
ཞིབ་མོ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	a detailed analysis	zhib mo rnam par 'byed pa
ཞིབ་མོ་བསེད་པ	enter into details	zhib mo bsed pa
ཞིབ་མོར	into impalpable powder	zhib mor
ཞིབ་མོར་བཀོད་པ	detailed description	zhib mor bkod pa
ཞིབ་མོར་གཏུབ་པ	cut up finely	zhib mor gtub pa
ཞིབ་མོལ	negotiations, discussions, talks	zhib mol
ཞིབ་མོལ་བྱེད	conduct negotiations/ discussions/ talks	zhib mol byed
ཞིབ་མྱུལ	[wander about and] explore in detail	zhib myul
ཞིབ་རྩ	small and fine, detailed, thorough, precise, precision	zhib rtsa
ཞིབ་རྩད་གཅོད་པ	examine in detail and decide	zhib rtsad gcod pa
ཞིབ་རྩད་འཚོལ་མྱུལ	[wander about and] explore in detail	zhib rtsad 'tshol myul
ཞིབ་རྩའི་ཐོན་རྫས	precision products	zhib rtsa'i thon rdzas
ཞིབ་རྩའི་རྩིས	detailed/ accurate calculation/ astrology	zhib rtsa'i rtsis
ཞིབ་རྩའི་རྩིས་ཁྲ	detailed account	zhib rtsa'i rtsis khra
ཞིབ་རྩིང	zhib mo dang rtsing po,//rtsam pa zhib rtsing gnyis las zhib pa zhim	zhib rtsing
ཞིམ	of coarse and fine tsampa the fine tastes better	zhim
ཞིབ་རྩིས	detailed/ accurate calculation/ astrology	zhib rtsis
ཞིབ་རྩིས་རྒྱག	make a detailed/ accurate calculation/ astrology	zhib rtsis rgyag
ཞིབ་རྩིས་རྒྱག་པ	make a detailed/ accurate calculation/ astrology	zhib rtsis rgyag pa
ཞིབ་རྩིས་ཞུ	make a detailed/ accurate calculation/ accounting/ astrology [h]	zhib rtsis zhu
ཞིབ་རྩིས་ཞུ་བ	make a detailed/ accurate calculation/ accounting/ astrology [h]	zhib rtsis zhu ba
ཞིབ་རྩོད	dogs gnad yod rigs la phan tshun 'dri zhib zab gsal byed pa	zhib rtsod
ཞིབ་བརྩད	1) investigate [-tion], examine [-ation], analyze [-sys] [closely/ in detail]; 2) reflect on, study, consider; 3) research)	zhib brtsad
ཞིབ་བརྩད་པ	distinguish[er of] whether las don are good or bad, investigator, inspector	zhib brtsad pa
ཞིབ་བརྩད་དབང་ཆ	right of investigation/ prosecution	zhib brtsad dbang cha
ཞིབ་བརྩད་ལས་ཁུངས	bureau of inspection/ investigation/ prosecution 2329	zhib brtsad las khungs
ཞིབ་ཚགས	[not only coarsely/ superficially but] detailed, w care, certainty, precise, detailed, thorough	zhib tshags
ཞིབ་ཚགས་བརྒལ་བ	ultra-precision	zhib tshags brgal ba
ཞིབ་ཚགས་བརྒལ་བའི་ཕྲུལ་འཁོར	ultraprecision machine	zhib tshags brgal ba'i phrul 'khor
ཞིབ་ཚགས་ཅན	detailed/, careful, precise, thorough	zhib tshags can
ཞིབ་ཚགས་ཅན་གྱི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	precision machine	zhib tshags can gyi 'phrul 'khor
ཞིབ་ཚགས་ཆེ་བ	precision	zhib tshags che ba
ཞིབ་ཚགས་པ	fine, careful	zhib tshags pa
ཞིབ་ཚགས་པོ	detailed/, careful, precise, thorough	zhib tshags po
ཞིབ་ཚགས་པོར	thoroughly	zhib tshags por
ཞིབ་ཚགས་བྱེད	be detailed/, careful, precise, thorough	zhib tshags byed
ཞིབ་ཚགས་མེད་པ	imprecise, shoddy, slipshod, careless	zhib tshags med pa
ཞིབ་ཚགས་སུ་བཀྲོལ་པའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	detailed commentary	zhib tshags su bkrol pa'i 'grel bshad
ཞིབ་ཚགས་སུ་བཀྲོལ་བའི་བརྡ་དོན	meaning of a text explained in detail	zhib tshags su bkrol ba'i brda don
ཞིབ་ཚད	accuracy, precision	zhib tshad
ཞིབ་ཚིག་ཚགས	precise words	zhib tshig tshags
ཞིབ་འཚོལ	thorough/ detailed search	zhib 'tshol
ཞིབ་འཚོལ་བྱེད	make a thorough/ detailed search	zhib 'tshol byed
ཞིབ་ཞིབ	fine like powder	zhib zhib
ཞིབ་ཞིབ་བཟོ་ཆས	grinder	zhib zhib bzo chas
ཞིབ་ཞིབ་བཟོ་བ	crumble, chop, grind	zhib zhib bzo ba
ཞིབ་གཞིགས	analysis, investigation	zhib gzhigs
ཞིབ་གཟིགས	look at/ examine closely/ meticulously/ thoroughly [h]	zhib gzigs
ཞིབ་གཟིགས་ཆོག་མཆན	investigation/ scrutinizing and approval/ sanction [h]	zhib gzigs chog mchan
ཞིབ་གཟིགས་ཆོག་མཆན་བྱེད	investigate/ scrutinize and approve/ sanction [h]	zhib gzigs chog mchan byed
ཞིབ་གཟིགས་གནང་བ་སྣང་ཚུལ	[h]	zhib gzigs gnang ba snang tshul
ཞིབ་གཟིགས་མཛད་པའི་འཆར་གཞི	thoroughly investigated plan/ source [h]	zhib gzigs mdzad pa'i 'char gzhi
ཞིབ་རོགས	assistant	zhib rogs
ཞིབ་ལ་ཆ་ལག་ཚང་བ	in full detail, detailed	zhib la cha lag tshang ba
ཞིབ་ལ་གསལ་བ	clearly and precisely	zhib la gsal ba
ཞིབ་ལོ་རྒྱུས་པར་བྱས	gave a complete and detailed account	zhib lo rgyus par byas
ཞིབ་ཤིང	SA khron bu	zhib shing
ཞིབ་ཤེར	count/ examine each 1 meticulously, check up, inspection, examination	zhib sher
ཞིབ་ཤེར་འཁྲུན་གཅོད	decide by examining closely	zhib sher 'khrun gcod
ཞིབ་ཤེར་གཏོང	check, examine, inspect	zhib sher gtong
ཞིབ་ཤེར་གཏོང་བ	count/ examine each 1 meticulously zhib sher gtong bas spus tshad longs min	zhib sher gtong ba
ཞིབ་ཤེར་བ	checker, examiner, inspector zhib sher byas pas gyod gzhir 'khrun gcod	zhib sher ba
ཞིབ་ཤེར་བྱེད	check, examine, inspect	zhib sher byed
ཞིབ་ཤེར་བྱེད་པ	check, examine, inspect	zhib sher byed pa
ཞིབ་ཤེར་བྱེད་པའི་འགྲུལ་པ	searched/ inspected travelers	zhib sher byed pa'i 'grul pa
ཞིབ་ཤེར་རྩིས་ལེན	having examined a situation/ problem meticulously mathematically calculate the answer * inspect and take charge of	zhib sher rtsis len
ཞིབ་ཤེར་ལས་ཁུངས	investigator's prosecutor's office	zhib sher las khungs
ཞིབ་ཤེར་ས་ཚིགས	check point, inspection station	zhib sher sa tshigs
ཞིབ་བཤད	detailed explanation/ narration	zhib bshad
ཞིབ་བཤད་བྱེད	explain/ narrate in detail	zhib bshad byed
ཞིབ་བཤེར	check, investigation	zhib bsher
ཞིབ་བཤེར་འཁྲུན་གཅོད	decide by examining closely	zhib bsher 'khrun gcod
ཞིབ་བཤེར་སྙན་ཞུ	investigatory report	zhib bsher snyan zhu
ཞིབ་བཤེར་གཏོང	check, examine, inspect	zhib bsher gtong
ཞིབ་བཤེར་གཏོང་བ	count/ examine each 1 meticulously zhib bsher gtong bas spus tshad longs	zhib bsher gtong ba
མིན་ཤེས	by examining each 1 meticulously know whether the quality longs min	min shes
ཞིབ་བཤེར་བ	checker, examiner, inspector zhib bsher byas pas gyod gzhir 'khrun	zhib bsher ba
གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	by close examination	gcod byed pa
དེཅིདེ	--	decide
ཞིབ་བཤེར་བྱེད	check, examine, inspect	zhib bsher byed
ཞིབ་བཤེར་བྱེད་པ	to check, examine, inspect	zhib bsher byed pa
ཞིབ་བཤེར་བྱེད་པའི་འགྲུལ་པ	searched/ inspected travelers	zhib bsher byed pa'i 'grul pa
ཞིབ་བཤེར་རྩིས་ལེན	having examined a situation/ problem meticulously mathematically calculate the answer * inspect and take charge of	zhib bsher rtsis len
ཞིབ་བཤེར་ལས་ཁུངས	investigator's prosecutor's office	zhib bsher las khungs
ཞིབ་གསལ	thoroughly, clear and in detail, vivid, explicit	zhib gsal
ཞིབ་གསེད་ཤན་འབྱེད	analyze	zhib gsed shan 'byed
ཞིབ་གསོལ	tell in detail	zhib gsol
ཞིབ་གསོལ་བྱེད	tell in detail	zhib gsol byed
ཞིབ་ལྷན་གམ་བཅར	interview with a detailed statement	zhib lhan gam bcar
ཞིབ་ལྷན་གམ་བཅར་བ	present the explanation of details	zhib lhan gam bcar ba
ཞིབ་ལྷིང	detailed/ meticulous and persistent	zhib lhing
ཞིབ་ལྷིངས	deliberation, deliberate consideration	zhib lhings
ཞིབ་ལྷུག	detailed and not keeping secrets	zhib lhug
ཞིམ་དགུ	much/ all delicious food yod	zhim dgu
ཞིམ་མངར	good tasting things	zhim mngar
ཞིམ་མངར་ཁ་ལག	good tasting food	zhim mngar kha lag
ཞིམ་ལྟོ	delicious food	zhim lto
ཞིམ་ཐིག	herb zhim thig le	zhim thig
ཞིམ་ཐིག་དཀར་པོ	{zhim thig dkar po med. herb [zhim thig le'i rigs w white flowersme tog dkar po 'char ba zhig]	zhim thig dkar po
ཞིམ་ཐིག་ནག་པོ	plectranthus irroratus g. forrest et diels	zhim thig nag po
ཞིམ་ཐིག་དམར་པོ་དམན་པ	herb {zhim thig [le] dmar po dman pa}	zhim thig dmar po dman pa
ཞིམ་ཐིག་ལ	medicinal herb whose fruit is used in eye disease 2330	zhim thig la
ཞིམ་ཐིག་ལེ	med. herb zhim thig le	zhim thig le
ཞིམ་ཐིག་ལེ་དཀར་པོ	marrubium incisum benth.	zhim thig le dkar po
ཞིམ་པ	sweet, aromatic	zhim pa
ཞིམ་པའ་སྦྱར་བྱུང་གི་དྲི	manufactured fragrance	zhim pa' sbyar byung gi dri
ཞིམ་པའི་དྲི	fragrant odor	zhim pa'i dri
ཞིམ་པའི་དྲི་མཉམ་པ	equal ?? fragrant odor	zhim pa'i dri mnyam pa
ཞིམ་པའི་སྦྱར་བྱུང་གི་དྲི	fragrant manufactured, odor	zhim pa'i sbyar byung gi dri
ཞིམ་པོ	tasty, fragrant, sweet, delicious	zhim po
ཞིམ་པོ་མི་འདུག	it is not nice	zhim po mi 'dug
ཞིམ་པོ་མེད་པ	unpleasant to the taste	zhim po med pa
ཞིམ་པོའི་ཆང	delicious chang	zhim po'i chang
ཞིམ་པོའི་དྲི་མ	fragrant/ delicious aroma/ savor	zhim po'i dri ma
ཞིམ་པོའི་བྲོ་བ	fragrant/ delicious aroma/ savor	zhim po'i bro ba
ཞིམ་པོའི་ཟས	delicious food	zhim po'i zas
ཞིམ་ཕྲུག	kitten	zhim phrug
ཞིམ་བུ	cat	zhim bu
ཞིམ་ཞིམ་མངར་མངར	sweet delicious food	zhim zhim mngar mngar
ཞིམ་ཞིམ་ལྟར་ཟ	eat with relish	zhim zhim ltar za
ཞིམ་ཟས	dainty	zhim zas
ཞིམ་ཟས་སྣ་འཛོམས་ཀྱི་ཟས	snack	zhim zas sna 'dzoms kyi zas
ཞིམ་ཤིང	lcum rtsa field herb	zhim shing
ཞིར་ཞུགས	zhi bar zhugs pa	zhir zhugs
ཞིལ་གིལ	chaff and other impurities removed from the grain by washing	zhil gil
ཞིལ་མ	basket of bamboo, SA kon bu, skun bu	zhil ma
ཞིས་ཨན	Sian	zhis an
ཞུ་སྐྱོག	crucible, spoon used in melting	zhu skyog
ཞུ་སྐྱོགས	melting spoon, crucible	zhu skyogs
ཞུ་བསྐུལ	request	zhu bskul
ཞུ་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	make an appeal/ request	zhu bskul byed
ཞུ་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	make an appeal/ request [h]	zhu bskul zhu
ཞུ་ཁྲ	petition, application	zhu khra
ཞུ་མཁན	1) requester, teller about anything; 2) med herb zhbu mkhan leaf of a tree of a genus Symplocos, [yielding a yellow dye and mordant [ro kha, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas glo tshad dang, mkhal tshad, 'g...	zhu mkhan
ཞུ་གྲབས	about to ask	zhu grabs
ཞུ་གླེང	petitionary letter	zhu gleng
ཞུ་གླེང་བྱེད་པ	address, accost	zhu gleng byed pa
ཞུ་རྒྱ	zhu yig, 'byar ma	zhu rgya
ཞུ་རྒྱུ	subject of a petition	zhu rgyu
ཞུ་སྒོ	requesting favors	zhu sgo
ཞུ་བརྒྱུད	helping someone deal w higher authorities	zhu brgyud
ཞུ་ངོ	zhus ngo	zhu ngo
ཞུ་ངོ་མགྲོན་བརྒྱུད	re don mgron gnyer brgyud nas zhu ba	zhu ngo mgron brgyud
ཞུ་ངོ་བྱེད་པ	don dag zhu ba la ngo chen gyi grogs byed pa	zhu ngo byed pa
ཞུ་སྔ	SA zhu ngo	zhu snga
ཞུ་ཆག་མེད་པར	there being no room for either asking or abating zhu chag zhu ba 'then rgyu dang chag	zhu chag med par
ཞུ་ཆར	rain [h]	zhu char
ཞུ་ཆས	money or gifts w request	zhu chas
ཞུ་ཆེ	revisor of translation	zhu che
ཞུ་ཆེན	tshul khrims rin chen, 16971774	zhu chen
ཞུ་ཆེན་གྱི་ལོ	commentator)	zhu chen gyi lo
ཞུ་ཆེན་གྱི་ལོ་ཙ་བ	chief editor translator	zhu chen gyi lo tsa ba
ཞུ་ཆོག	I am ready to reply	zhu chog
ཞུ་མཆིད	letter, discussion, appeal [h]	zhu mchid
ཞུ་རྗེས	1) power arising from taking medicine; 2) zas 'ju ba'i rjes)	zhu rjes
ཞུ་རྗེས་ན	after digesting food a wind disease that arises	zhu rjes na
ཞུ་རྙོག་ཀ་ཀོར	zhu don 'dzing rnyog mang po	zhu rnyog ka kor
ཞུ་གཏུག	khrims gtug //Khrims khang la zhu gtug byed pa	zhu gtug
ཞུ་གཏུག་བྱེད	take a case to court, prosecution	zhu gtug byed
ཞུ་གཏུག་བྱེད་མཁན	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtug byed mkhan
ཞུ་གཏུག་བྱེད་པ	take a case to court, prosecution	zhu gtug byed pa
ཞུ་གཏུག་བྱེད་པ་པོ	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtug byed pa po
ཞུ་གཏུག་བྱེད་པོ	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtug byed po
ཞུ་གཏུགས	take a case to court, prosecution	zhu gtugs
ཞུ་གཏུགས་བྱེད	take a case to court, prosecution	zhu gtugs byed
ཞུ་གཏུགས་བྱེད་མཁན	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtugs byed mkhan
ཞུ་གཏུགས་བྱེད་པ་པོ	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtugs byed pa po
ཞུ་གཏུགས་བྱེད་པོ	plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant	zhu gtugs byed po
ཞུ་གཏུགས་ལ་བཏང	(lit. to take a case to court) to bring forth from 2331	zhu gtugs la btang
ཞུ་རྟེན	gift, donation, {phyag rten} [h] [in support for a request], flowers kata etc sent w letter	zhu rten
ཞུ་རྟེན་དངུལ་དངོས	money or gifts w request	zhu rten dngul dngos
ཞུ་དག	improvement, correction, revision, examination, practice, exercise	zhu dag
ཞུ་དག་མཁན	reviser, corrector, censor	zhu dag mkhan
ཞུ་དག་གཏོང	proofread, check, edit	zhu dag gtong
ཞུ་དག་གཏོང་མཁན	editor, proofreader	zhu dag gtong mkhan
ཞུ་དག་གཏོང་མཁན་གཙོ་བོ	chief editor	zhu dag gtong mkhan gtso bo
ཞུ་དག་གཏོང་བ	to proofread, check	zhu dag gtong ba
མེད་མཐོང	by proofreading see if there are any errors	med mthong
ཞུ་དག་བྱེད	check for/ correct mistakes in a text, proofread, textual editing	zhu dag byed
ཞུ་དག་བྱེད་མཁན	editor, proofreader	zhu dag byed mkhan
ཞུ་དེ	melting bliss	zhu de
ཞུ་དོན	1) essence of what is being said; 2) [subject of a] petition, appeal, request, entreaty	zhu don
ཞུ་དོན་གླུ་རུ་ཕུལ་བ	expressed their request as a song	zhu don glu ru phul ba
ཞུ་དོན་ལྟར་བཀའ་འཁྲོལ	approve/ consent to a request	zhu don ltar bka' 'khrol
ཞུ་དོན་པ	pleader, advocate	zhu don pa
ཞུ་དོན་ཚིག་གསུམ	a few meaningful words, petition, subject and tshig?	zhu don tshig gsum
ཞུ་དོན་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་ནས་ཕུལ་བ	presented this request in verse	zhu don tshigs su bcad nas phul ba
ཞུ་དོན་གསོལ་མཁན	1 who makes a petition/ request	zhu don gsol mkhan
ཞུ་དོན་གསོལ་བ	make a petition/ request	zhu don gsol ba
ཞུ་བདེ	melting pleasure (referring to melting HAM which enkindles sensations of pleasure)	zhu bde
ཞུ་བདེ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	the co-=emergent melting into bliss	zhu bde lhan skyes
ཞུ་འདེགས	token of respect w a letter	zhu 'degs
ཞུ་ལྡེབ	additional paper besides the main zhu yig	zhu ldeb
ཞུ་གནང་མཛད	ask, request, melt, smelt, tell, say, report, hat, take receive, be called *, verbalizer [h+]	zhu gnang mdzad
ཞུ་སྣ	1) don dag zhu ba'i mgo 'dren pa'am sne 'khrid mkhan; 2) zhu yig sogs la ming first or chief)	zhu sna
ཞུ་པོ	petitioner	zhu po
ཞུ་ཕོད་ཆེ་བ	rang 'dod zhu bar spobs pa che ba'am ham shugs che ba	zhu phod che ba
ཞུ་འཕྲིན	letter, message, answer, reply [h]	zhu 'phrin
ཞུ་བ	request, receive, melt, edit	zhu ba
ཞུ་བ་གླུས་བསྐུལ	certain mode of recitation	zhu ba glus bskul
ཞུ་བ་འཐེན	plead a petition, appeal, request, case	zhu ba 'then
ཞུ་བ་འཐེན་པ	plead a petition, appeal, request, case	zhu ba 'then pa
ཞུ་བ་ནན་གྱིས་ཕུལ་བ	insisted	zhu ba nan gyis phul ba
ཞུ་བ་ནན་གྱིས་ཕུལ་ཚེ	when they thus entreated me	zhu ba nan gyis phul tshe
ཞུ་བ་པོ	petitioner	zhu ba po
ཞུ་བ་ཕུལ་བ	beg, beseech, implore, plead	zhu ba phul ba
ཞུ་བ་འབུལ་བ	make an application, to apply	zhu ba 'bul ba
ཞུ་བ་འབེན་པ	to request, ask	zhu ba 'ben pa
ཞུ་བ་བཞེས	hear/ inquire into a request/ appeal/ petition, cross- examine [h]	zhu ba bzhes
ཞུ་བ་ལས་ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང་བྱུང་ངོ	It then vanished, leaving in its place a child	zhu ba las khye'u chung byung ngo
ཞུ་བ་ལེན	hear/ inquire into a request/ appeal/ petition, cross- examine 2332	zhu ba len
ཞུ་བ་ལེན་པ	hear/ inquire into a request, appeal, petition, cross- examine	zhu ba len pa
ཞུ་བ་སློང་འབེབས	gyod don bar 'dum pas kha mchu rgyag mkhan phyogs gnyis kyi sngar phul snyan zhu mar gnang rogs zhu ba	zhu ba slong 'bebs
ཞུ་བ་གསོལ	request [humbly]	zhu ba gsol
ཞུ་བ་གསོལ་བ	request [humbly]	zhu ba gsol ba
ཞུ་བའི་ཁམས	whatever is melting or fusible	zhu ba'i khams
ཞུ་བའི་ཕྲིན་ཡིག	petition	zhu ba'i phrin yig
ཞུ་བར་སྙམ་ཀྱང	wanted to request but	zhu bar snyam kyang
ཞུ་བོན	bon interrogators	zhu bon
ཞུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྨན	med to aid digestion	zhu byed kyi sman
ཞུ་དབང་མེད་པར་མགོ་འདོགས	surrender unconditionally	zhu dbang med par mgo 'dogs
ཞུ་འབུལ	1) snyan seng 'bul ba; 2) zhu ba 'then pa	zhu 'bul
ཞུ་འབོད	appeal [h] *{zhu yul gyi mtshan bos nas bde sdug zhu ba]	zhu 'bod
ཞུ་འབོད་གནང	appeal [h]	zhu 'bod gnang
ཞུ་འབོད་པ	person offering an appeal, petition	zhu 'bod pa
ཞུ་འབྲས	the fruit of my request	zhu 'bras
ཞུ་སྦྱོར་སྔ་མ	in court, first zhu gtug byed mkhan	zhu sbyor snga ma
ཞུ་སྦྱོར་ཕྱི་མ	in court, respondent	zhu sbyor phyi ma
ཞུ་མ་ནུས་པ	unable to pray	zhu ma nus pa
ཞུ་མ་སྤོབས་པ	unable to pray	zhu ma spobs pa
ཞུ་མར	butter lamp, lamp, light, torch	zhu mar
ཞུ་མར་སྤར	light/ turn on a lamp/ torch	zhu mar spar
ཞུ་མར་གསོད	extinguish/ turn off a lamp/ torch	zhu mar gsod
ཞུ་མར་བསད	extinguished/ turned off a lamp/ torch	zhu mar bsad
ཞུ་སྨྱུག	pencil	zhu smyug
ཞུ་རྩོད་མཁས་པ	pleader, lawyer	zhu rtsod mkhas pa
ཞུ་ཚིག	testimony, affidavit, deposition	zhu tshig
ཞུ་ཝ	dissolve	zhu wa
ཞུ་ཞུ	discussion (?)	zhu zhu
ཞུ་བཞིན	while receiving, asking	zhu bzhin
ཞུ་བཞེར	tibetan clan	zhu bzher
ཞུ་བཞེས་བདེན་རྫུན་གྱི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	[zhal lce bcu drug gi nang gses] from place criminals live receiving testimony and true and false dag bsher gtong ba'i law	zhu bzhes bden rdzun gyi zhal lce
ཞུ་འོད་དུ་བ	melt into light	zhu 'od du ba
ཞུ་ཡིག	application	zhu yig
ཞུ་ཡིག་ཀློག་པར་མཛད་པ	read the letter	zhu yig klog par mdzad pa
ཞུ་ཡིག་དཀྱུས་མ	letter [public] spyir btang?	zhu yig dkyus ma
ཞུ་ཡིག་གི་དཀྲིས་ཤོག	envelope for a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhu yig gi dkris shog
ཞུ་ཡིག་གི་ཆིངས	envelope for a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhu yig gi chings
ཞུ་ཡིག་གི་རྟེན	present, SA zhu rten	zhu yig gi rten
ཞུ་ཡིག་མགོ་མཆན	note/ answer on the front sheet of a letter	zhu yig mgo mchan
ཞུ་ཡིག་ཆེ་ཐང་མ	letter of great import	zhu yig che thang ma
ཞུ་ཡིག་ནང་ལྟར	according to my written petition	zhu yig nang ltar
ཞུ་ཡིག་ཕུལ་བ	gave the letter	zhu yig phul ba
ཞུ་ཡིག་འབུལ	submit a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhu yig 'bul
རོ	respectfully asked the merchants to take a letter	ro
ཞུ་ཡུལ	the person from whom one received [a teaching] zhu yul gyi mtshan bos nas bde sdug zhu	zhu yul
ཞུ་རམས	green dye from zhu mkhan and indigo	zhu rams
ཞུ་རལ	clothes w torn edges	zhu ral
ཞུ་རུ	place in dwagpo	zhu ru
ཞུ་རུ་མཚོ	zhu ru salt lake	zhu ru mtsho
ཞུ་རེ་འཐེན་ཁྱེར	discrepancy, disagreement in statements	zhu re 'then khyer
ཞུ་ལན	answer to a petition, exchanges	zhu lan
ཞུ་ལན་འབུལ་མཁན	defendant	zhu lan 'bul mkhan
ཞུ་ལི་ཡ	Syria	zhu li ya
ཞུ་ལུབ	(A) uninterupted, all-pervading	zhu lub
ཞུ་ལེན་པ	oral/ verbal answer ba len mkhan zhu len sman mchog bdud rtsi phreng ba - Supreme Medicinal Nectar of the Garland of Questions and Answers, by Lhodrak Drubchen zhu len sman mchog bdud rtsi phreng b...	zhu len pa
ཞུ་ལོ་ཐོས་ལོ	superficial way	zhu lo thos lo
ཞུ་ལོག	feigned petition	zhu log
ཞུ་ལོག་རྒྱབ་མཁན	complainant	zhu log rgyab mkhan
ཞུ་ལོག་རྒྱབ་པ	complain	zhu log rgyab pa
ཞུ་ལོག་ཕུལ་བ	backbite, accuse one falsely	zhu log phul ba
ཞུ་ལོག་འབུལ་བ	to appeal	zhu log 'bul ba
ཞུ་ཤོག	letter [h] written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message, plea	zhu shog
ཞུ་བཤེར	mutual words of regret gyi zhu tshig true and false zhib bsher	zhu bsher
ཞུ་ས	object of request, receive, melt, edit	zhu sa
ཞུ་ས་བ	request, receive, melt, edit	zhu sa ba
ཞུ་སློག	zhus don bdag sprod ma byas par snyan zhu phyir slog pa} -	zhu slog
ཞུ་གསོལ	1) request. 2) to make a request	zhu gsol
ཞུ་གསོལ་ནན་ཏན་འདེབས་པ	urgently request	zhu gsol nan tan 'debs pa
ཞུ་གསོལ་ཡང་ཡང་བྱེད	request again and again	zhu gsol yang yang byed
ཞུ་གསོས	appeal, request	zhu gsos
ཞུ་ཧམ	1) ham pa che ba'i zhu ba; 2) rdzun zhu	zhu ham
ཞུག་པ	tribal name in tibet	zhug pa
ཞུག་པ་བཞུར་ནས་བཞེས	take the broth after straining it	zhug pa bzhur nas bzhes
ཞུགས་ཀྱི་དུམ་བུ	(met) sparks	zhugs kyi dum bu
ཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཤིང	(met) fire puja offering sticks	zhugs kyi shing
ཞུགས་ཆར	rain [h]	zhugs char
ཞུགས་ཉི	sun [h]	zhugs nyi
ཞུགས་ཏོག	(met) a flower	zhugs tog
ཞུགས་འཐུས་ལག་འཛིན	admission ticket	zhugs 'thus lag 'dzin
ཞུགས་ནས	pour into	zhugs nas
ཞུགས་ནས་ཡོད་པས	as they had begun zhugs gnas kyi bye brag las skyes bu zung	zhugs nas yod pas
བཞི་ཡ་བརྒྱད	the beings of the 4/8 particular places of abiding zhugs gnas kyi bye brag las skyes bu zung	bzhi ya brgyad
ཞུགས་གནས་བརྒྱད	Syn {phyir 'ong zhugs pa} candidate for once-returner	zhugs gnas brgyad
ཞུགས་གནས་ཐིམ་གསུམ	[Tserig]	zhugs gnas thim gsum
ཞུགས་རྣམས	those who follow the teaching	zhugs rnams
ཞུགས་སྣུམ	oil, kerosene, gasoline [h]	zhugs snum
ཞུགས་པ་བཞི	zhugs gnas brgyad kyi nang gses, dge sbyong gi 'bras bu la zhugs pa bzhi ste, rgyun zhugs zhugs pa dang, phyir 'ong zhugs pa dang, phyis mi 'ong zhugs pa dang, dgra bcom zhugs pa rnams so	zhugs pa bzhi
ཞུགས་པས	with this link	zhugs pas
ཞུགས་བར་ཆད་སམ	have obstacles entered?	zhugs bar chad sam
ཞུགས་འབུལ	burn in a fire, cremation	zhugs 'bul
ཞུགས་འབུལ་བའི་སྐུ་དུང	burning corpse [h]	zhugs 'bul ba'i sku dung
ཞུགས་འབུལ་བའི་སྐུ་པུར	burning corpse [h]	zhugs 'bul ba'i sku pur
ཞུགས་འབུལ་ཞུ	burn in a fire, cremate	zhugs 'bul zhu
ཞུགས་མར	lamp, torch	zhugs mar
ཞུགས་མར་སྤར	light/ turn on a lamp/ torch	zhugs mar spar
ཞུགས་མར་གསོད	extinguish/ turn off a lamp/ torch	zhugs mar gsod
ཞུགས་མར་བསད	extinguished/ turned off a lamp/ torch	zhugs mar bsad
ཞུགས་མེ	fire	zhugs me
ཞུགས་མེ་མུ་ཟི	match [h]	zhugs me mu zi
ཞུགས་མེ་མུ་སི	match [h]	zhugs me mu si
ཞུགས་ལ	entered	zhugs la
ཞུགས་ལ་འཕེན་པ	implicity suggest	zhugs la 'phen pa
ཞུགས་ལམ	'gro ba'i lam	zhugs lam
ཞུགས་ལིང	burning embers	zhugs ling
ཞུགས་ཤིང	fire wood, fuel [h]	zhugs shing
ཞུང	authoritative treatises, [probably {gzhung}.], set up a bureaucracy/ government	zhung
ཞུང་ཕྱི་མོའི་དབུ་མ	Middle Way of the Original Scriptures [thd]	zhung phyi mo'i dbu ma
ཞུང་ཞུང	nod repeatedly, bow repeatedly of a pigeon	zhung zhung
ཞུང་ཟུང	#	zhung zung
ཞུང་ཡ་ལི	Hungary	zhung ya li
ཞུངས་གནས་བརྒྱད	the 8 dwelling places [zhugs]	zhungs gnas brgyad
ཞུད་འཁལ	tight rope/ cord	zhud 'khal
ཞུད་འཁོར	spindle, distaff	zhud 'khor
ཞུད་དགྱེད་མེད་པའི་སྲང་མདའ	2) diminish, be impaired, disappear; 3) gcu ba, sgrim pa	zhud dgyed med pa'i srang mda'
ཞུད་ཐག	suspending cord	zhud thag
ཞུད་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa) ; 1) hanging down, mar gug pa,	zhud pa
ཞུད་མ	best quality kind of cloth	zhud ma
ཞུད་འོག	middle quality kind of cloth	zhud 'og
ཞུན	fat, purified; molten	zhun
ཞུན་ཆེན	human fat, molten	zhun chen
ཞུན་ཆེན་གྱི་མར་མེ	lamp of grease	zhun chen gyi mar me
ཞུན་ཐཏ་བཅད་པ	to resolve definitively	zhun that bcad pa
ཞུན་ཐར	1) smelting and refining; 2) scrutiny, critical examination, examine [& analyze]	zhun thar
ཞུན་ཐར་གཅོད	smelt and refine, scrutinize thoroughly, resolve completely	zhun thar gcod
ཞུན་ཐར་གཅོད་པ	smelt and refine, scrutinize thoroughly, resolve completely	zhun thar gcod pa
ཞུན་ཐར་བཅད	smelted and refined, scrutinized thoroughly, resolved completely	zhun thar bcad
ཞུན་ཐར་བཅད་པ	scrutinize thoroughly, resolve completely	zhun thar bcad pa
ཞུན་ཐར་བཅད་པའི་ལྕགས་སྤུས་ལེགས	good quality metal free of dross [and tarnish]	zhun thar bcad pa'i lcags spus legs
ཞུན་ཐར་ཆོད་པ	1) cut through doubt; 2) having melted metals brdung thar byas zin pa	zhun thar chod pa
ཞུན་ཐར་ཉམས་ལེན་མི་བྱེད	the practice remain, superficial and lacks thoroughness. Penetrate to the core of practice	zhun thar nyams len mi byed
ཞུན་ཐར་ལུགས་ལེགས་པ	highly refined iron	zhun thar lugs legs pa
ཞུན་ཐིག	crystallization	zhun thig
ཞུན་ཐིག་ཆགས	crystallize	zhun thig chags
ཞུན་ཐིགས	sparks flying from red-hot iron	zhun thigs
ཞུན་དག	thorough, intensive	zhun dag
ཞུན་བརྡར	training, discipline	zhun brdar
ཞུན་བརྡར་གཅོད	train, discipline	zhun brdar gcod
ཞུན་བརྡར་བྱེད	train, discipline	zhun brdar byed
ཞུན་སྣུམ	melted fat	zhun snum
ཞུན་པ	[after heating] melted, molten, liquified	zhun pa
ཞུན་མ	[after heating] melted, molten, liquified	zhun ma
ཞུན་མར	melted butter	zhun mar
ཞུན་མར་གསོད་པ	extinguish a torch, put out a light	zhun mar gsod pa
ཞུན་མོ	melted, whatever melts easily	zhun mo
ཞུན་གཟུང	a number	zhun gzung
ཞུབ	[arch] [put on] armor	zhub
ཞུབ་ཅན	[arch] person in armor, armored	zhub can
ཞུབ་ཆེན	armor	zhub chen
ཞུབ་པ	(A) armor	zhub pa
ཞུམ	be discouraged/ disenheartened/ low in spirits/ afraid/ intimidated	zhum
ཞུམ་སྐད	involuntary words of fear	zhum skad
ཞུམ་དགོས་མེད	- isn't something 1 has to be discouraged at/ afraid of	zhum dgos med
ཞུམ་རྒོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscurations of depression and wildness/ discursiveness	zhum rgod kyi sgrib pa
ཞུམ་རྒོད་གཉིས་བྲལ	with neither depression or wildness	zhum rgod gnyis bral
ཞུམ་རྒྱུ་མེད	- isn't something to be discouraged at/ afraid of	zhum rgyu med
ཞུམ་རྟགས	discourages/ depressed expression/ signs	zhum rtags
ཞུམ་དག	edited	zhum dag
ཞུམ་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa dpa' 1) discouragement, hesitant; 2) fear; 3) sinking, depression, dullness TSE	zhum pa
ཞུམ་པ་མ་བྱེད	don't lose heart!	zhum pa ma byed
ཞུམ་པ་མི་མངའ	fearless, intrepid, of great mental fortitude, hero	zhum pa mi mnga'
ཞུམ་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	w/o regard, undiminished, dauntless, fearless, courageous	zhum pa mi mnga' ba
ཞུམ་པ་མེད	w/o regard, undiminished, dauntless, fearless, courageous	zhum pa med
ཞུམ་པ་མེད་པ	without regard, undiminished, dauntless	zhum pa med pa
ཞུམ་པ་མེད་པར	energetically, with zeal, without relaxation, not indolent	zhum pa med par
ཞུམ་པ་སེམས	disheartened, fainthearted	zhum pa sems
ཞུམ་པ་སེལ་བར་སེམས་གཏོད་པ	banishing fear/ discouragement focus the mind zhum pa'i gnyen po ting nge 'dzin gyi	zhum pa sel bar sems gtod pa
རྣམ་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	as an antidote for discouragement meditate in [on the phenomena of] samadhi zhum pa'i gnyen po ting nge 'dzin gyi	rnam pa bsgom pa
ཞུམ་པའི་རྣམ་པ	discouraged expression	zhum pa'i rnam pa
ཞུམ་པའི་སེམས	disheartened, fainthearted, fearful	zhum pa'i sems
ཞུམ་པའི་སེམས་ལ་རྩ་ནས་མེད	completely w/o discouragement, faintheartedness, fear	zhum pa'i sems la rtsa nas med
ཞུམ་ཕྲུག	kitten	zhum phrug
ཞུམ་བུ	cat, SA zhi mi, cat	zhum bu
ཞུམ་བློ་པ་མེད	I am not discouraged	zhum blo pa med
ཞུམ་བློལ་པ་མེད	I am not discouraged 2335	zhum blol pa med
ཞུམ་མ་པ	not shying away	zhum ma pa
ཞུམ་མེད	relentless, unimpaired	zhum med
ཞུམ་མེད་སྟོབས་ལྡན	courageous and strong	zhum med stobs ldan
ཞུམ་མཚེར	mtsher snang	zhum mtsher
ཞུམ་ཞུམ	1) stalking like a cat; 2) fear arising)	zhum zhum
ཞུམ་ཞུམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	stalking	zhum zhum du 'gro ba
ཞུམ་བཤོལ	shrink, draw in	zhum bshol
ཞུར	snout, muzzle, trunk	zhur
ཞུར་བ	deliquesce	zhur ba
ཞུལ	grown less, reduced	zhul
ཞུལ་བ	1) byul ba,//skra zhul ba,//sma ra zhul ba; 2) Nyung ba'am, mar chag pa,//'bor tshad zhul ba,//gtsang chu cung zad zhul ba	zhul ba
ཞུལ་ཞུལ	byul byul	zhul zhul
ཞུས་འཁྲོལ	after a request bka' 'khrol ba	zhus 'khrol
ཞུས་ངོ	don gnad zhus pa'i ngo so	zhus ngo
ཞུས་དག	review, edited	zhus dag
ཞུས་དག་གཏན་འབེབས	after examining gtan 'khel bzo ba	zhus dag gtan 'bebs
ཞུས་དག་གཏོང	proofread, check, edit	zhus dag gtong
ཞུས་དག་གཏོང་མཁན	editor, proofreader	zhus dag gtong mkhan
ཞུས་དག་གཏོང་མཁན་གཙོ་བོ	chief editor	zhus dag gtong mkhan gtso bo
ཞུས་དག་གཏོང་བ	to edit, proof-read, correct	zhus dag gtong ba
ཞུས་དག་བྱེད	check for/ correct mistakes in a text, proofread, textual editing	zhus dag byed
ཞུས་དག་བྱེད་མཁན	editor, proofreader	zhus dag byed mkhan
ཞུས་དག་བྱེད་པ	to edit, proof-read, correct	zhus dag byed pa
ཞུས་དོན	subject of a plea, appeal, request	zhus don
ཞུས་སྣ	head or leader of a deputation, chief leader among joint memorialists, ring leader	zhus sna
ཞུས་པ	went to discuss; x {bcom ldan 'das la zhus pas} went to discuss the matter with the Buddha	zhus pa
ཞུས་བྱེད	shame	zhus byed
ཞུས་ཡིག	letter [h] written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message	zhus yig
ཞུས་ཡིག་དཀྱུས་མ	letter [public] spyir btang?	zhus yig dkyus ma
ཞུས་ཡིག་གི་དཀྲིས་ཤོག	envelope for a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhus yig gi dkris shog
ཞུས་ཡིག་གི་ཆིངས	envelope for a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhus yig gi chings
ཞུས་ཡིག་མགོ་མཆན	note/ answer on the front sheet of a letter	zhus yig mgo mchan
ཞུས་ཡིག་ཆེ་ཐང་མ	letter of great import	zhus yig che thang ma
ཞུས་ཡིག་འབུལ	submit a letter/ written petition/ appeal/ request/ application/ message [h]	zhus yig 'bul
ཞུས་ལན	replies to ?s, particular style of religious texts, ?s and answers	zhus lan
ཞུས་ལི་ཡ	Syria	zhus li ya
ཞུས་ལེན	answers to questions	zhus len
ཞུས་ལོ	nominal inquirer	zhus lo
ཞུས་ལོ་ར་མ་སོང	do not let remain at the stage of having merely requested them	zhus lo ra ma song
ཞེ	1) mind, mood; 2) kind; 3) 40's # particle [bzhi bcu zhe lnga)	zhe
ཞེ་བཀོན་པ	bitter hatred, hostility [khong nas khros pa]	zhe bkon pa
ཞེ་བཀོན་བྱེད	hate	zhe bkon byed
ཞེ་རྐམ་པ	covetous	zhe rkam pa
ཞེ་བརྐམ	envying	zhe brkam
ཞེ་བརྐམ་ཅན	envious, greedy, covetous	zhe brkam can
ཞེ་ཁ	kha zhe	zhe kha
ཞེ་ཁ་གཉིས་མེད	w/o difference between inner and surface	zhe kha gnyis med
ཞེ་ཁམས་པ	[arch] anger	zhe khams pa
ཞེ་ཁྲེལ	1) complete unhappiness arising; 2) having seen faults renounce /feel revulsion toward them; 3) having seen faults be unhappy; 4) knocking/ putting down manner, scornful laugh for/ manner	zhe khrel
ཞེ་ཁྲེལ་བདའ	{kho la zhe khrel bda' dgos so} I will make him eat his words	zhe khrel bda'
ཞེ་འཁམས་པ	anger, agression	zhe 'khams pa
ཞེ་འཁུ	(A) anger, agression	zhe 'khu
ཞེ་འཁོན	malice	zhe 'khon
ཞེ་འཁོན་སྡང་འཛིན	hatred and animosity	zhe 'khon sdang 'dzin
ཞེ་འཁོན་པ	hate from the bottom of the mind 2336	zhe 'khon pa
ཞེ་འཁོན་ཞུགས་པ	hate	zhe 'khon zhugs pa
ཞེ་འཁྲེལ	shameful, disgusting	zhe 'khrel
ཞེ་གྱོང	mischievous, bad-hearted	zhe gyong
ཞེ་དགུ	49	zhe dgu
ཞེ་དགུ་རྫོགས་པ	complete the 49 [R]	zhe dgu rdzogs pa
ཞེ་འགེམས་པ	lose spirit, be depressed	zhe 'gems pa
ཞེ་འགྲང	satisfaction	zhe 'grang
ཞེ་འགྲས	animosity, hostility, hate	zhe 'gras
ཞེ་འགྲས་པ	mutual thoughts of regarding each other as enemies arising	zhe 'gras pa
ཞེ་འགྲས་པ་མེད་པའི་སེམས	a nonaggressive attitude / free from anger	zhe 'gras pa med pa'i sems
ཞེ་འགྲས་བྱེད	display animosity, be hostile, hate	zhe 'gras byed
ཞེ་འགྲས་བྱེད་པ	display animosity, be hostile hate	zhe 'gras byed pa
ཞེ་རྒོད	sems kyi rang gshis ngar po,//zhe rgod stag mo'i ngar glu len	zhe rgod
ཞེ་སྒུག་པ	be waiting for an opportunity to find fault	zhe sgug pa
ཞེ་སྒྲུག	1) remain and await future good/ evil; 2) w hatred wait for a chance to do harm	zhe sgrug
ཞེ་བརྒྱད	48	zhe brgyad
ཞེ་ངན	evil thoughts	zhe ngan
ཞེ་ངན་པ	cruel person	zhe ngan pa
ཞེ་ལྔ	45	zhe lnga
ཞེ་བསྔགས	[arch] aspiration	zhe bsngags
ཞེ་གཅིག	1) of the same/similar kind, only, just //Nad pa zhe gcig; 2) [bzhi bcu] zhe gcig	zhe gcig
དང་སྟག་གཟིག	lion tiger and leopard are of the same kind as predators	dang stag gzig
ཞེ་གཅོད	rough in temper, biting in remarks	zhe gcod
ཞེ་གཅོད་པ	lose courage, resign an intention	zhe gcod pa
ཞེ་གཅོད་པའི་ཚིག	[arch] harsh words	zhe gcod pa'i tshig
ཞེ་བཅད	determination, resolution, dedication	zhe bcad
ཞེ་བཅད་དྲག་པོ	deeply, strongly anchored in your being, decided, stable, strong [determination, resolution, dedication]	zhe bcad drag po
ཞེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་ཚབ	padma rnam rgyal zhe chen rgyal tshab 'gyur med pad ma	zhe chen rgyal tshab
སྔགས་བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	17601817 - Shechen Gyaltsab, second, Pema Sangnak Tendzin Chögyal zhe chen dbon sprul 'gyur med mthu	sngags bstan 'dzin chos rgyal
སྟོབས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Shechen Ongtrül Gyurme Tutob Namgyal:1787	stobs rnam rgyal
ཞེ་གཉིས	42	zhe gnyis
ཞེ་སྙོམས	1) equanimity; 2) of the same kind, similar)	zhe snyoms
ཞེ་གཏིང	deep in 1's heart	zhe gting
ཞེ་གཏིང་ན་དགའ་བ	deeply/ sincerely rejoice	zhe gting na dga' ba
ཞེ་གཏིང་ལ	deep in 1's heart	zhe gting la
ཞེ་སྟང	hatred	zhe stang
ཞེ་ཐག་པ	the core/bottom of one's heart, sincerely, truly, wholeheartedly	zhe thag pa
ཞེ་ཐག་པ་ནས	from the core/bottom of one's heart, sincerely, truly, wholeheartedly	zhe thag pa nas
ཞེ་མཐུན	compatible thoughts	zhe mthun
ཞེ་དུག	harm, injury	zhe dug
ཞེ་དུག་བྱེད	harm, injure, damage	zhe dug byed
ཞེ་དུག་བྱེད་པ	cause misery, inflict damage	zhe dug byed pa
ཞེ་དྲག	very [much]/ many	zhe drag
ཞེ་དྲག་གི	highly	zhe drag gi
ཞེ་དྲག་ཆེན་པོ་རེད	it is very big	zhe drag chen po red
ཞེ་དྲགས	much, many, very	zhe drags
ཞེ་དྲགས་རང་མེད	not too	zhe drags rang med
ཞེ་དྲགས་རང་མེད་པ	not very	zhe drags rang med pa
ཞེ་དྲུག	46	zhe drug
ཞེ་གདེང	profound confidence	zhe gdeng
ཞེ་བདུན	47	zhe bdun
ཞེ་བདེའི་གནས	sanctuary	zhe bde'i gnas
ཞེ་འདོད	heart's desire; the innermost wish / desire, sincere wish	zhe 'dod
ཞེ་འདོད་གྲུབ་ཆེད་དུ	to fulfil 1's [desire, wish, aspiration, hope]	zhe 'dod grub ched du
ཞེ་འདོད་དང་ལག་ལེན	1's innermost wish and what 1 actually does	zhe 'dod dang lag len
ཞེ་འདོད་བྱས	entertain ambitions	zhe 'dod byas
ཞེ་འདྲངས་པ	obstructed	zhe 'drangs pa
ཞེ་ལྡང	hatred, anger, aggression, aversion, animosity	zhe ldang
ཞེ་ལྡང་བྱེད	hate, be angry/ aggressive	zhe ldang byed
ཞེ་ལྡང་འཛིན	hate, be angry/ aggressive zhe ldang las gyur pa'i rtog tshogs sum cu	zhe ldang 'dzin
ཞེ་ལྡོག	turn away from/ renounce desire/ attachment, revulsion	zhe ldog
ཞེ་ལྡོག་པ	turn away from/ renounce desire/ attachment, revulsion	zhe ldog pa
ཞེ་སྡང	hatred, one of the three poison {dug ga sum}	zhe sdang
ཞེ་སྡང་བསྐྱེད	became angry	zhe sdang bskyed
ཞེ་སྡང་གི་ཚིལ་བུ	snake's fat	zhe sdang gi tshil bu
ཞེ་སྡང་གྱི་ཚིག	words of aggression	zhe sdang gyi tshig
ཞེ་སྡང་མགོ་དགུ	nine-headed anger	zhe sdang mgo dgu
ཞེ་སྡང་སྒྲིབ་པ	obstacle of hatred	zhe sdang sgrib pa
ཞེ་སྡང་ཆུང་བ	rarely moved to anger	zhe sdang chung ba
ཞེ་སྡང་འདམ་རིང	long grudge	zhe sdang 'dam ring
ཞེ་སྡང་རྡོ་རྗེ	'jigs rten mgon po Drigung Jigten Gongpo, Rinchen Pal, Shedang Dorje or Drigung Kyobpa (Disciple of Phagmo Drupa): 11431217	zhe sdang rdo rje
ཞེ་སྡང་བྱེད	hate, be angry/ aggressive	zhe sdang byed
ཞེ་སྡང་མེད་པ	non-aggression/ anger/ hatred	zhe sdang med pa
མེནཏལ་སྟཏེས	, having no feeling of indignation- sdang pa'i yul la mnar sems med pa dge ba'i sems byung bcu gcig gi ya gyal zhig ste, sems can dang sdug bsngal gyi chos la kun nas mnar sems med pa dang nyes spy...	mental states
ཞེ་སྡང་མེད་པའི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	virtuous roots w/o aggression TSE	zhe sdang med pa'i dge ba'i rtsa ba
ཞེ་སྡང་ཚིལ་བུ	snake fat [R]	zhe sdang tshil bu
ཞེ་སྡང་འཛིན	hate, be angry/ aggressive	zhe sdang 'dzin
ཞེ་སྡང་ལངས་ནས	angrily	zhe sdang langs nas
ཞེ་སྡང་ལན་ཅིག	one fit of anger	zhe sdang lan cig
ཞེ་སྡང་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་བརྣབ་སེམས	selfishness/ covetice/ greed arisen from aggression/ anger	zhe sdang las byung ba'i brnab sems
ཞེ་སྡང་ཤས་ཆེ	indignant	zhe sdang shas che
ཞེ་སྡང་ཤས་ཆེ་བ	furious	zhe sdang shas che ba
ཞེ་ནད	'khon 'dzin dam po	zhe nad
ཞེ་ནས	fundamentally, From the bottom of the heart	zhe nas
ཞེ་ནས་དགའ་པོ་བྱེད	fundamentally/ sincerely like	zhe nas dga' po byed
ཞེ་ནས་རྒྱུན་ཆགས་སུ་མེད་པ	fundamentally there was no breach of trust on my part	zhe nas rgyun chags su med pa
ཞེ་ནས་བཙའ	cherishes dearly	zhe nas btsa'
ཞེ་ནས་བཙའ་བ	to cherish dearly	zhe nas btsa' ba
ཞེ་ནིང	year before last, two years ago	zhe ning
ཞེ་གནག	cruel vicious, mean	zhe gnag
ཞེ་གནག་ཁོག་བཅངས	harbor a wish to harm others	zhe gnag khog bcangs
ཞེ་གནག་པ	cruel vicious, mean	zhe gnag pa
ཞེ་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	the conditions for prerequisites for shamatha	zhe gnas kyi yan lag
ཞེ་གནས་བཙལ་བ	to cultivate calm abiding, to begin by practicing shamatha	zhe gnas btsal ba
ཞེ་གནོང་བ	be sorry, regret [having seen 1's faults gzhan la ngo tsha ba]	zhe gnong ba
ཞེ་གནོང་སེམས་འགྱོད་པ	be conscience-stricken	zhe gnong sems 'gyod pa
ཞེ་མནའ	heartfelt/ sincere oath	zhe mna'
ཞེ་པོ	1) hatred, anger, aggression, aversion, animosity; 2) a lot, very much	zhe po
ཞེ་པོ་བྱེད	hate, be angry/ aggressive	zhe po byed
ཞེ་པོ་མེད་པ	non-aggression/ anger/ hatred	zhe po med pa
ཞེ་པོ་འཛིན	hate, be angry/ aggressive	zhe po 'dzin
ཞེ་ཕུགས་སུ་བཅུག	keep in one's innermost heart	zhe phugs su bcug
ཞེ་བའི་བདེ་བ	happiness of rest, happy tranquillity	zhe ba'i bde ba
ཞེ་བློ་བདེ་བ	happy thoughts, be happy/ glad	zhe blo bde ba
ཞེ་བློ་བདེ་བྱུང	[I'm] glad that --	zhe blo bde byung
ཞེ་འབྲད་པ	be wrathful	zhe 'brad pa
ཞེ་མི	cat	zhe mi
ཞེ་མེར	vomiting, repulsiveness, nausea	zhe mer
ཞེ་མེར་རྒྱག	vomit	zhe mer rgyag
ཞེ་མེར་རྒྱག་པ	vomit	zhe mer rgyag pa
ཞེ་མེར་བ	nausea, loathsome, offensive, contemptuous	zhe mer ba
ཞེ་མེར་ལངས	repulsiveness/ nausea arising	zhe mer langs
ཞེ་མེར་ལངས་པ	repulsiveness/ nausea arising	zhe mer langs pa
ཞེ་གཙང	virtuous thoughts, sincere,	zhe gtsang
ཞེ་གཙང་བ	virtuous thoughts, sincere,	zhe gtsang ba
ཞེ་གཙང་ཞབས་འདེགས	sincere service	zhe gtsang zhabs 'degs
ཞེ་གཙང་ཞབས་འདེགས་བྱེད	sincerely serve	zhe gtsang zhabs 'degs byed
ཞེ་རྩ	complete, sincere, the bottom of 1's heart	zhe rtsa
ཞེ་རྩ་བ	the core/ bottom of one's heart, sincerely, truly, wholeheartedly, deeply felt	zhe rtsa ba
ཞེ་རྩ་བ་ནས	the core/ bottom of one's heart, sincerely, truly, wholeheartedly, deeply felt	zhe rtsa ba nas
ཞེ་རྩིས	1) regard as important; 2) khog rtsis intentionality	zhe rtsis
ཞེ་རྩུབ	harshness, malice, creulty	zhe rtsub
ཞེ་བརྩོན	snying thag pa nas brtson pa	zhe brtson
ཞེ་ཚིག	honorific word	zhe tshig
ཞེ་ཚིམ	completely joyful/ rejoicing 2338	zhe tshim
ཞེ་མཚེར	sems mtsher sad discouraged ashamed, embarrassed, conscience stricken	zhe mtsher
ཞེ་འཛིན	(all-consuming) fixation	zhe 'dzin
ཞེ་བཞག	vindictiveness, malice	zhe bzhag
ཞེ་བཞི	44	zhe bzhi
ཞེ་ཟོན	cautioion, cautiouszon	zhe zon
པོའི་ས	very dangerous place where 1 must be cautious	po'i sa
ཞེ་རུས	exertion and effort zhe rus chen pos slob sbyong la brtson pa - study w great exertion and effort	zhe rus
ཞེ་རེ་སྐྱིད	JScott (Milarepa song): "What a relief!" [mss]	zhe re skyid
ཞེ་རེ་ཁྲེལ	shameful, disgusting	zhe re khrel
ཞེ་རེ་འཇིགས	how horrible! appalling!	zhe re 'jigs
ཞེ་རེ་མོངས	How unfortunate!	zhe re mongs
ཞེ་ལ	to/ in the mind/ heart	zhe la
ཞེ་ལ་ཕོག	touch the heart	zhe la phog
ཞེ་ལ་ཕོག་པའི་སྐད	words that touch the heart	zhe la phog pa'i skad
ཞེ་ལ་མེད	insincere, not deeply held/ felt	zhe la med
ཞེ་ལ་མེད་པ	insincere, not deeply held/ felt	zhe la med pa
ཞེ་ལ་བཞག	hold on to	zhe la bzhag
ཞེ་ལོག	turn away from/ renounce desire/ attachment, revulsion, nausea, dislike, antipathy	zhe log
ཞེ་ལོག་པ	turn away from/ renounce desire/ attachment, cessation of hunger/ desire, revulsion, nausea, dislike, antipathy	zhe log pa
ཞེ་ལོག་པ་བྱེད་པའི་མཁྲིས་ནད	nausea producing bile disease	zhe log pa byed pa'i mkhris nad
ཞེ་ལོག་བྱེད	detest, dislike, be sick of/ fed up w, feel revulsion for	zhe log byed
ཞེ་ས	1) [h] [speech] two respect/ homage	zhe sa
ཞེ་ས་དང་བཅས	respectful	zhe sa dang bcas
ཞེ་ས་དང་བཅས་པ	with reverence	zhe sa dang bcas pa
ཞེ་ས་བྱེད	faith	zhe sa byed
ཞེ་ས་བྱེད་པ	show respect, pay one's respect, show homage or respect	zhe sa byed pa
ཞེ་ས་ཞུ	use honorifics [h]	zhe sa zhu
ཞེ་སར་བཅས	{phyag dang zhe sar bcas} bowing and paying respect	zhe sar bcas
ཞེ་སུན	angry, cross, ill-humored, vexed	zhe sun
ཞེ་སུན་པ་ཆང་ཐུང་པའི་ཕྱིར	discouraged/ disenheartened/ irritated/ annoyed because of drinking chang	zhe sun pa chang thung pa'i phyir
ཞེ་སུན་པའི་དམག	discouraged army	zhe sun pa'i dmag
ཞེ་གསུམ	43	zhe gsum
ཞེ་བསམ་རྙེད་པ	bsam blo 'khor shes pa	zhe bsam rnyed pa
ཞེ་ཧོར་པོ་ཏ	city in china where emperor kyenlong built a palace for the dalai & tashi lamas	zhe hor po ta
ཞེ་ཧོར་པོ་ཏ་ལ	jehor	zhe hor po ta la
ཞེ་ལྷོད	relaxation/ openness of mind	zhe lhod
ཞེ་ལྷོད་ངང་རིང	calm and patient	zhe lhod ngang ring
ཞེང	breadth, width	zheng
ཞེང་དཀྱུས	width and length	zheng dkyus
ཞེང་ཁ	width, breadth	zheng kha
ཞེང་ཁ་ཆུང་ཆུང	MG, E-T: narrow. Syn., dog po. [mss]	zheng kha chung chung
ཞེང་ཁ་ཆེ་བ	great width, broad, wide, spacious	zheng kha che ba
ཞེང་ཁ་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	widen	zheng kha che ru gtong ba
ཞེང་ཁ་ཆེན་པོ	wide, broad	zheng kha chen po
ཞེང་ཁ་ཐུང་བ	narrow	zheng kha thung ba
ཞེང་ག	width, breadth	zheng ga
ཞེང་ག་ཆེ་བ	great width, broad, wide, spacious	zheng ga che ba
ཞེང་ག་ཆེན་པོ	wide, broad, spacious	zheng ga chen po
ཞེང་གླེགས	writing desk or table	zheng glegs
ཞེང་ཅན	wide, broad, spacious	zheng can
ཞེང་ཆུང	narrow	zheng chung
ཞེང་ཆེ	great width, broad, wide, spacious	zheng che
ཞེང་ཆེན	wide, broad, spacious	zheng chen
ཞེང་ཆེན་པོ	broad	zheng chen po
ཞེང་ཐུང	narrow	zheng thung
ཞེང་དུ	across, in breath, wide	zheng du
ཞེང་ཕྲ་མོ	narrow	zheng phra mo
ཞེང་མེད	of small width	zheng med
ཞེང་ཚད	diameter, width	zheng tshad
ཞེང་ཤིང	writing desk or table	zheng shing
ཞེང་གྷ་ཆུང་བ	narrow	zheng gha chung ba
ཞེང་གྷ་ཐུང་བ	narrow	zheng gha thung ba
ཞེངས་བསྐྲུན་གནང	started building	zhengs bskrun gnang
ཞེད	to be afraid	zhed
ཞེད་སྐུལ	threat	zhed skul
ཞེད་སྐྲག	terrific	zhed skrag
ཞེད་སྐྲག་སྐུལ	scare, frighten	zhed skrag skul
ཞེད་སྐྲག་སྐུལ་བ	scare, frighten	zhed skrag skul ba
ཞེད་སྐྲག་སྐུལ་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed skrag skul byed
ཞེད་སྐྲག་ཚ་པོ	terrible	zhed skrag tsha po
ཞེད་སྐྲག་སློང་བ	scare, frighten phangs sems sam brkam chags	zhed skrag slong ba
ཞེད་སྐྲག་སློང་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed skrag slong byed
ཞེད་ནས་བྲོས་པ	flee from fright	zhed nas bros pa
ཞེད་སྣང	afraid, fear, fright	zhed snang
ཞེད་སྣང་སྐུལ	scare, frighten	zhed snang skul
ཞེད་སྣང་སྐུལ་བ	scare, frighten	zhed snang skul ba
ཞེད་སྣང་སྐུལ་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed snang skul byed
ཞེད་སྣང་བསྐུལ་བ	scare	zhed snang bskul ba
ཞེད་སྣང་གིས་འདར་བ	nervous	zhed snang gis 'dar ba
ཞེད་སྣང་ཅན	hideous	zhed snang can
ཞེད་སྣང་དང་ཁྱད་མཚར	eerie	zhed snang dang khyad mtshar
ཞེད་སྣང་དང་ཚག་ཚི་གེ	panic	zhed snang dang tshag tshi ge
ཞེད་སྣང་ཚ་པོ	fierce, frightful, grisly	zhed snang tsha po
ཞེད་སྣང་སློང	scare, frighten	zhed snang slong
ཞེད་སྣང་སློང་བ	scare, frighten	zhed snang slong ba
ཞེད་སྣང་སློང་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed snang slong byed
ཞེད་པ	afraid	zhed pa
ཞེད་པ་སྐུལ	scare, frighten	zhed pa skul
ཞེད་པ་སྐུལ་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed pa skul byed
ཞེད་པ་སློང་བྱེད	scare, frighten	zhed pa slong byed
ཞེད་པོ	very much, a great deal and wonderful/ astonishing/ shocking,//byas rjes rlabs chen de 'dra 'jog thub pa ni zhed po byung	zhed po
ཞེད་པོ་གཏོར	waste, squander	zhed po gtor
ཞེན	[have] [loyalty, attachment, fidelity, attachment, love, affection] [rgyal zhen patriotism]	zhen
ཞེན་ཁ	feeling, emotion, sentiment, [desire &] attachment, fondness	zhen kha
ཞེན་ཁ་བྱེད	be attached to/ fond of	zhen kha byed
ཞེན་ཁྲིས	adhesion, longing for	zhen khris
ཞེན་འཁོན་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང་བ	embitter	zhen 'khon che ru gtong ba
ཞེན་འཁྲིས	passionate attachment	zhen 'khris
ཞེན་ཆགས	fixated attachment	zhen chags
ཞེན་ཆགས་སྤོང་བ	to give up craving	zhen chags spong ba
ཞེན་ཆགས་བྱེད	be attached to/ fond of	zhen chags byed
ཞེན་ཆགས་བྱེད་པ	to be attached	zhen chags byed pa
ཞེན་ཆགས་མ་ཆེ	don't cling too much! give up grasping attachment!	zhen chags ma che
ཞེན་གཏིང་ནས་ལོག	revulsion arises from our depths	zhen gting nas log
ཞེན་རྟོག	fixating concepts/ thought (pattern)s	zhen rtog
ཞེན་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འཇུག་པ	to operate by the power of grasping [ggd]	zhen stobs kyis 'jug pa
ཞེན་དོན	goal, wish, object of desire/ attachment/ fondness, love	zhen don
ཞེན་དོན་ངོ་མ་འདི་རྟོགས་དཀའ་བ	this original object of attachment is hard to conceive of	zhen don ngo ma 'di rtogs dka' ba
ཞེན་འདོད	fixated/ obsessive desire	zhen 'dod
ཞེན་སྣང	illusions/ confused perceptions	zhen snang
ཞེན་པ	{zhen pa, zhen pa, zhen pa} intr. v.; craving, attachment; to become attached; to cling to; to fixate/ seize (upon); to cling, to hold or cling tenaciously, to desire, insistence, conviction, clinging	zhen pa
ཞེན་པ་གཏིང་ལོག	renounce/ be disgusted w improper behavior from the bottom of 1's heart	zhen pa gting log
ཞེན་པ་ལོག་པ	renounce/ be disgusted w improper behavior from the bottom of one's heart	zhen pa log pa
ཞེན་པ་རྟེན་པའི་ཚོར་བ	feeling that supports clinging, the feeling supporting / that supports clinging; sensations that support clinging	zhen pa rten pa'i tshor ba
ཞེན་པ་དོར	forsaken, given up altogether	zhen pa dor
ཞེན་པ་ལྡོག་པ	to extinguish their thirst	zhen pa ldog pa
ཞེན་པ་བྱེད	feel yearning, yearn	zhen pa byed
ཞེན་པ་བཞི་བྲལ	Parting from the Four Attachments [thd]	zhen pa bzhi bral
ཞེན་པ་རང་ལོག	natural/ spontaneous revulsion	zhen pa rang log
ཞེན་པ་ལོག	revulsion, renunciation, nauseated, feeling like throwing up	zhen pa log
ཞེན་པ་ལོག་གམ	have you experienced revulsion towards attachment?	zhen pa log gam
ཞེན་པ་ཨ་འཐས	solidly fixated	zhen pa a 'thas
ཞེན་པའི་བརྗོད་བྱ	conceived signified [ggd]	zhen pa'i brjod bya
ཞེན་པའི་བརྗོད་བྱེད	conceived signifier [ggd]	zhen pa'i brjod byed
ཞེན་པའི་རྩལ	power held back	zhen pa'i rtsal
ཞེན་པའི་འཛིན་སྟངས	attitude of clinging; rigid way of perceiving	zhen pa'i 'dzin stangs
ཞེན་པའི་ཡུལ	Objects of attachment	zhen pa'i yul
ཞེན་པས་བཅིངས་པ	bound by fixation	zhen pas bcings pa
ཞེན་མ	unattached	zhen ma
ཞེན་མེད	impassive, without desire, without attachment	zhen med
ཞེན་འཛིན	inclination, passion, attachment, fixation, clinging	zhen 'dzin
ཞེན་འཛིན་མེད	w/o grasping	zhen 'dzin med
ཞེན་འཛིན་མེད་པ	without grasping	zhen 'dzin med pa
ཞེན་འཛེན་མེད་པ	w/o grasping	zhen 'dzen med pa
ཞེན་ཞེན་པ	completely entangled in	zhen zhen pa
ཞེན་གཞི	something taken as existing of and by itself	zhen gzhi
ཞེན་ཡང	it is also said	zhen yang
ཞེན་ཡུལ	taken/ referent/ conceptual/ determined object	zhen yul
ཞེན་རིག	determinative knower	zhen rig
ཞེན་ལོག	{zhen pa log pa} to repudiate fixation; (to experience) revulsion	zhen log
ཞེན་ལོག་ངེས་འབྱུང	decisive weariness with	zhen log nges 'byung
ཞེན་ལོག་ཅན	ghastly	zhen log can
ཞེན་ལོག་པ	to dislike	zhen log pa
ཞེན་ཤ་གཏིང་ལོག	complete/ total dislike/ [loss of loyalty/ affection]	zhen sha gting log
ཞེའམ	or whether	zhe'am
ཞེའོ	nga na ma ' ra la dang, mtha' med bcas kyi rjes su sbyar rgyu zer ro dang don gcig pa'i tshig mtshams ston byed phrad gzhan dbang can zhig //Nga na ma ' ra la//drang po'i gtam la yid ches byed dgos...	zhe'o
ཞེར་འདེབས	gzhan gyi zhe gcod pa	zher 'debs
ཞེར་པོ	poor quality	zher po
ཞེར་བ	poor quality, bad, coarse, poor	zher ba
ཞེལ	worst quality, bad, mean, inferior	zhel
ཞེས	this (referring back to a citation / quote)	zhes
ཞེས་གང་ལ་ཟེར་ཅེ་ན	what is meant by	zhes gang la zer ce na
ཞེས་གྲགས	so it is called, by this name he goes, bind, SA grags pa, to be called	zhes grags
ཞེས་བགྱི་བ	the so-called	zhes bgyi ba
ཞེས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བརྣགས་པས	striving after that on thing	zhes gcig tu brnags pas
ཞེས་མཆིའོ	thus he said	zhes mchi'o
ཞེས་བརྗོད་པ	said	zhes brjod pa
ཞེས་དང	And also:	zhes dang
ཞེས་དེ་ལ་བྱ	it is called	zhes de la bya
ཞེས་ལྡན་པར	politely	zhes ldan par
ཞེས་ནས	who says ..	zhes nas
ཞེས་ནི	such-and-such	zhes ni
ཞེས་པ	Syn {ces pa}; so saying; thus (follows a quote)	zhes pa
ཞེས་པ་བརྗོད་ནས	having so or thus said	zhes pa brjod nas
ཞེས་པ་ལྟར	as this quotation indicates	zhes pa ltar
ཞེས་པ་ལྟར་རོ	as such-and-such says	zhes pa ltar ro
ཞེས་པ་ནས	and so forth	zhes pa nas
ཞེས་པའི	called, known as, by the name of	zhes pa'i
ཞེས་པས	so saying	zhes pas
ཞེས་པས་སོ	because	zhes pas so
ཞེས་སྤྲིང་ངོ	so i sent him word	zhes spring ngo
ཞེས་བྱ	known as	zhes bya
ཞེས་བྱ་སྟེ	is called	zhes bya ste
ཞེས་བྱ་བ	named, termed, called, known as, entitled. Syn {ces bya ba}	zhes bya ba
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་བ་ཞུགས་སོ	[thus] entitled, "thus named is herein contained"	zhes bya ba ba zhugs so
ཞེས་བྱ་བ་བཞུགས་སོ	thus entitled, "thus named is herein contained"	zhes bya ba bzhugs so
ཞེས་བྱ་བས	called, named	zhes bya bas
ཞེས་བྱས་བ	thus was it mentioned	zhes byas ba
ཞེས་མེས	great grandfather	zhes mes
ཞེས་སྨྲས་མོད་ཀྱི	though indeed you may say so	zhes smras mod kyi
ཞེས་མཚུངས	similarity in appearance or shape or color	zhes mtshungs
ཞེས་གཞུང་རྣམས་ལས་གསུངས	it is taught in the scriptures that	zhes gzhung rnams las gsungs
ཞེས་བཞིན	vigilance	zhes bzhin
ཞེས་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས་སོ	so he was universally famed	zhes yongs su grags so
ཞེས་བཤིན	vigilance	zhes bshin
ཞེས་ས	esteem, honorific	zhes sa
ཞེས་སམ	say that or that	zhes sam
ཞེས་སུ་གྲགས	called, known as	zhes su grags
ཞེས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	we call it	zhes su bstan pa
ཞེས་སོགས	such as, including 2341	zhes sogs
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ	the phrase ".."	zhes gsungs pa
ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར	this is why it is said	zhes gsungs pa ltar
ཞེས་གསུངས་སོ	thus it was said	zhes gsungs so
ཞེས་གསོལ་ནས	had instructed	zhes gsol nas
ཞོ	1) thick drink made when skyur rtsi is added to milk; 2) curds, yogurt; 3) wt for gold silver etc [1.2 tola = 1/0 srang= 10 skar]	zho
ཞོ་ཀ	thick cream	zho ka
ཞོ་དཀྲོག་པ	churning curds for butter	zho dkrog pa
ཞོ་དཀྲོགས་པ	churn yogurt to make butter	zho dkrogs pa
ཞོ་སྐ་བ	thick curds	zho ska ba
ཞོ་སྐྱ	buttermilk [like milk after used for cheese]	zho skya
ཞོ་སྐྱེད	zla srang zho skyed de, zla gcig la srang gang rer skyed zho re 'khri ba'i dngul skyed rtsi stangs shig	zho skyed
ཞོ་སྐྱེས	1) cattle blood sucking insect; 2) bya sreg pa'i ming roast chicken? (/ dabzay	zho skyes
ཞོ་སྐྲོག་པ	churn milk or curds for butter	zho skrog pa
ཞོ་ཁ	zho ka [R]	zho kha
ཞོ་ཁ་ཆུ	whey	zho kha chu
ཞོ་ཁང	place in tibet	zho khang
ཞོ་ཁོག	potato	zho khog
ཞོ་ག་ཆུ	liquid part of curdled milk	zho ga chu
ཞོ་གག	potato	zho gag
ཞོ་གང	1 zho weight	zho gang
ཞོ་གྲོད	zho blug snod grod pa	zho grod
ཞོ་འགྱེད	zho 'dren pa'i feast/ celebration	zho 'gyed
ཞོ་འགྱེད་གཏོང་བའི་སྟོན་མོ	zho 'dren pa'i feast/ celebration	zho 'gyed gtong ba'i ston mo
ཞོ་འགྲོའི་ཀླུང	river ganges	zho 'gro'i klung
ཞོ་བརྒྱད་ཞོ	gold of the weight of a sovereign	zho brgyad zho
ཞོ་མངར	sweet curds [R]	zho mngar
ཞོ་བསྔལ་བ	place milk to curdle	zho bsngal ba
ཞོ་ཅན	(A) oily, fatty, greasy [R]	zho can
ཞོ་ཆ	pair of scales for gold and silver weighing	zho cha
ཞོ་ཆང	curds and beer	zho chang
ཞོ་འཇོ	milking	zho 'jo
ཞོ་འཇོ་བྱེད	milking	zho 'jo byed
ཞོ་བསྙལ	put skyur rtsi in milk to make cheese	zho bsnyal
ཞོ་བསྙོལ	make curds from milk	zho bsnyol
ཞོ་རྟ	curd making skyur rtsi	zho rta
ཞོ་སྟོན	zho summer festival [dbyar dus kyi dga' ston zhig ste, bod zla bdun pa'i tshes gnam gang nyin 'bras spungs su lha mo ba rnams kyis lha mo 'khrab nas gzigs phud 'bul ba dang, se rar skor bya ba dang...	zho ston
ཞོ་སྟོན་འགོ་བཙུགས	the start of the Curd Feast (ceremony on the 29th day of the 6th Tibetan month)	zho ston 'go btsugs
ཞོ་འཐུང	infant	zho 'thung
ཞོ་འཐུང་དུས་ན	during the time of suckling	zho 'thung dus na
ཞོ་འཐུང་བ	new born child	zho 'thung ba
ཞོ་དང་སྦྱར་བ	mixed with curds, mixture of curds	zho dang sbyar ba
ཞོ་དང་འོ་མ་སོགས་ཚོང་ཁང	dairy	zho dang 'o ma sogs tshong khang
ཞོ་དང་སྲང	the table of exchanging zho and srang	zho dang srang
ཞོ་དོ	wt. of two zho	zho do
ཞོ་བདུན་སྒོར་མོ	CH t' yang zho bdun sgor mo in Khams	zho bdun sgor mo
ཞོ་འདགས	mixing up or curdling of curd	zho 'dags
ཞོ་རྡོ་དམར་པོ	mineral drug	zho rdo dmar po
ཞོ་ལྡོང	churn for milk	zho ldong
ཞོ་དཔྱང	banner	zho dpyang
ཞོ་སྤྲི	curd sweetened with sugar or honey	zho spri
ཞོ་སྤྲིས	oil exuded by cheese	zho spris
ཞོ་ཕབ	yeast, ru ma/ skur rtsi for making curd	zho phab
ཞོ་ཕྲུམ	buttermilk like milk after used for cheese	zho phrum
ཞོ་བ	zho ba mt [R]	zho ba
ཞོ་བླུག	curds vessel	zho blug
ཞོ་འབྲས	dish of boiled grain and zho bsres pa	zho 'bras
ཞོ་འབྲས་ཅན	kapettha tree	zho 'bras can
ཞོ་རྩབས	ru ma or skur rtsi for making milk into curds	zho rtsabs
ཞོ་རྩི	ru ma put into the milk to make curds	zho rtsi
ཞོ་འཛོམ་ལ་ཁ	Shodzom Lakha, in Domey	zho 'dzom la kha
ཞོ་བཞོ	milking	zho bzho
ཞོ་བཞོ་བ	milk	zho bzho ba
ཞོ་འོང	spelled zho 'phong in RO Shohong	zho 'ong
ཞོ་འོང་དཔྱི	Shohong Chi, in Domey	zho 'ong dpyi
ཞོ་འོང་ལ་ཁ	Shohong Lakha, in Domey	zho 'ong la kha
ཞོ་རལ	'o ma shi ba [phyur ba] &, rotten curds	zho ral
ཞོ་ལོང་ཞིག	fetch some curds	zho long zhig
ཞོ་ཤ	sustenance	zho sha
ཞོ་ཤ་རྣམ་བདུན་པ	(met)one w the 7 kinds of strength, guide	zho sha rnam bdun pa
ཞོ་ཤ་བཞི	the four kinds of zho sha [R]	zho sha bzhi
ཞོ་ཤ་གསུམ	the three kinds of zho	zho sha gsum
ཞོ་ཤས་འཚོ་བ	one who subsists by the wages he earns, soldier, any officer that receives pay	zho shas 'tsho ba
ཞོ་སྲང་སྐར་མ་ས་གཞལ	measured and weighed out	zho srang skar ma sa gzhal
ཞོ་སྲུང་བྱེད	milk cow	zho srung byed
ཞོ་བསྲུབས་པ	churn milk or curds for butter	zho bsrubs pa
ཞོག	put, rest, give up, posit, state![is debate] {bzhag pa}! let [it] be/ go/ remain, leave, rest!, place!	zhog
ཞོག་ཁ	early morning	zhog kha
ཞོག་ཁར	in the early morning	zhog khar
ཞོག་ཁོག	gtsang and aa mdo'i regions by some rgya gro ma zer ba de yin	zhog khog
ཞོག་ཁོག་མངར་མོ	sweet potato	zhog khog mngar mo
ཞོག་ཅིག	relax!	zhog cig
ཞོག་ཇ	breakfast, morning tea	zhog ja
ཞོག་ལྟོ	breakfast	zhog lto
ཞོག་པ	morning	zhog pa
ཞོག་མ	zhogs ma	zhog ma
ཞོགས	cut, SA 'jog pa, morning, forenoon	zhogs
ཞོགས་ཀ	time of arising, morning	zhogs ka
ཞོགས་སྐད	morning	zhogs skad
ཞོགས་ཁ	early morning	zhogs kha
ཞོགས་ཁོག	potato	zhogs khog
ཞོགས་ཁོག་མངར་མོ	sweet potato	zhogs khog mngar mo
ཞོགས་ཁོག་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཏོག	tuberous crops	zhogs khog rigs kyi lo tog
ཞོགས་གེ	morning	zhogs ge
ཞོགས་རྒྱུགས	rdab zhogs te brel 'tshab bam, sudden 'ur 'drog	zhogs rgyugs
ཞོགས་རྒྱུགས་རྡབ་ཞོགས་ཏེ	brel 'tshab bam, sudden 'ur 'drog	zhogs rgyugs rdab zhogs te
ཞོགས་ཇ	morning tea	zhogs ja
ཞོགས་ཇ་གྲུབ་མ་ཐག	just after breakfast	zhogs ja grub ma thag
ཞོགས་ཉུག	morning hunting	zhogs nyug
ཞོགས་མཉལ	sleep late	zhogs mnyal
ཞོགས་པ	morning, morning	zhogs pa
ཞོགས་པ་སྔ་མོ	early morning	zhogs pa snga mo
ཞོགས་པར	on the morning	zhogs par
ཞོགས་མ	pieces/fragments of chopped wood	zhogs ma
ཞོགས་ཟ	morning tea, breakfast	zhogs za
ཞོགས་ཟས	breakfast	zhogs zas
ཞོགས་འུར	rdab zhogs kyi 'ur 'drog	zhogs 'ur
ཞོགས་ལས	morning work	zhogs las
ཞོང	lower, nether	zhong
ཞོང་ཁང་པ	lower part of the house	zhong khang pa
ཞོང་རྩེ	lower and upper part	zhong rtse
ཞོང་ཞོང	deepened, excavated, hollow, uneven	zhong zhong
ཞོད	very heavy, abundant	zhod
ཞོད་ཀྱི་གེགས	severe damage from floods	zhod kyi gegs
ཞོད་ཀྱི་བགེགས	drought	zhod kyi bgegs
ཞོད་སྐྱོན	damage from [floods due to] rain	zhod skyon
ཞོད་གེགས	drought	zhod gegs
ཞོད་གྱི་བགེགས	drought, want of rain, rainless	zhod gyi bgegs
ཞོད་ཆར	streams of rainwater, pouring rain	zhod char
ཞོད་ཆུ	1) rain; 2) flood water after rain)	zhod chu
ཞོད་ཆུང་བའི་དུས	time of little rain	zhod chung ba'i dus
ཞོད་ཆེ་བའི་དུས	time of great rains	zhod che ba'i dus
ཞོད་འཇགས	w/o business/activity tranquility/ quiet and relaxation	zhod 'jags
ཞོད་འཇགས་པའི་དུས་བདེ	time of peace and happiness	zhod 'jags pa'i dus bde
ཞོད་ལ་ཕུའི་གངས་རི	{zhod la phu snow mt.	zhod la phu'i gangs ri
ཞོན	imp. of {zhon pa}; to ride, to milk	zhon
ཞོན་ཁལ	riding pony & pack horse	zhon khal
ཞོན་རྒྱུའི་རྟ	horses to ride	zhon rgyu'i rta
ཞོན་ཏེ	having mounted	zhon te
ཞོན་རྟ	riding pony	zhon rta
ཞོན་སྟེགས	mounting platform	zhon stegs
ཞོན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	let mount, cause one to be conveyed	zhon du 'jug pa
ཞོན་དྲེ	riding mule	zhon dre
ཞོན་ནས	having mounted	zhon nas
ཞོན་པ	(tha dad pa) bzhon pa, bzhon pa, zhon,, ride	zhon pa
ཞོན་དམག	calvary	zhon dmag
ཞོབ་མོ་རྣམ་འཐག	the Vaidalya-Sutra by Nagarjuna	zhob mo rnam 'thag
ཞོམ	be subdued/ demolished/ destroyed [f 'joms]	zhom
ཞོམ་པ	(tha mi dad pa),, in a vessel rdib skyon [place that has come off, crumbled/ broken away/ down	zhom pa
ཞོའི་སྤྲིས་མ	sweetened curd	zho'i spris ma
ཞོར	incidental, spare time, "coincidental" particle	zhor
ཞོར་སྐྱོང	in addition to 1's main responsibility/ task * additionally/ incidentally accomplish another	zhor skyong
ཞོར་སྐྱོན	other additional/ incidental fault[s]	zhor skyon
ཞོར་ཁྲིད	zhor chos, guide on the way	zhor khrid
ཞོར་བཅོག	do a thing incidentally	zhor bcog
ཞོར་ལྕོགས	secondary zhor lcogs khyim tshang dang gtso bo	zhor lcogs
གཞུང་དུ་འཛིན	hold the family to be secondary and the government the main thing	gzhung du 'dzin
ཞོར་ལྕོགས་སུ་གཉེར	take charge of something besides 1's main duties	zhor lcogs su gnyer
ཞོར་གཉེར	take charge of something besides 1's main duties	zhor gnyer
ཞོར་ཐོན་དངོས་རྫས	by product	zhor thon dngos rdzas
ཞོར་དུ	coincidental/ secondary to another main activity, while	zhor du
ཞོར་དུ་ཚུད་པ	get involved in, be drawn into, be implicated in	zhor du tshud pa
ཞོར་དྲུད་ཐེབས	get involved in, be drawn into, be implicated in	zhor drud thebs
ཞོར་འདོན་དངོས་ཟོག	by-product	zhor 'don dngos zog
ཞོར་འདྲུད	criminal khrims la thug tshe 'brel ba yod la nag nyes med pa'i mi gzhan yang de'i zhor du tshud pa lta bu	zhor 'drud
ཞོར་འཕྲོས་སུ	at the same time, along w, incidental to	zhor 'phros su
ཞོར་མ	decrepid, defective	zhor ma
ཞོར་བཙུགས	las ka rkang byed rgyu de'i zhor la btsugs pa'am logs su btsugs pa	zhor btsugs
ཞོར་འཛིན	work for which one is responsible lte ba de'i zhor la las ka gzhan dag 'dzin pa	zhor 'dzin
ཞོར་འཛིན་ལས་འགན	side-job, supplementary duty	zhor 'dzin las 'gan
ཞོར་ཟས	non staple food *, snack	zhor zas
ཞོར་ལ	on the way	zhor la
ཞོར་ལ་ཁྲིད་པ	guide on the way	zhor la khrid pa
ཞོར་ལ་ལུས	slips away and is lost	zhor la lus
ཞོར་ལས	subsidiary activity	zhor las
སིདེ	job/ line secondary occupation	side
ཞོར་ལས་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	subsidiary production [aside from one's main line of work]	zhor las thon skyed
ཞོར་ལས་ཐོན་རྫས	subsidiary products	zhor las thon rdzas
ཞོལ	lower part, bottom, foot of the mts, town section of Lhasa below the Potala	zhol
ཞོལ་ཁང	lower flat or storey of a house	zhol khang
ཞོལ་ཁྲལ་འུ་ལག	zhol du sdod pa'i commoners were gathed at the zhol las khungs and had to do various unpaid work	zhol khral 'u lag
ཞོལ་གྱག	bull yak	zhol gyag
ཞོལ་འགྲོ	lower or sub-issuant stream	zhol 'gro
ཞོལ་ཆེན	yak-bull	zhol chen
ཞོལ་གཉེར	Tibetan govt. rtse po ta la'i zhol las khungs kyi 'go byed mkhan	zhol gnyer
ཞོལ་དུ་སྡོད་པ	inhabitants of Lhasa town district	zhol du sdod pa
ཞོལ་པ	dweller in monastery/ mts/ zhol district of Lhasa	zhol pa
ཞོལ་པར་ཁང་ཆེན་མོ	the {gangs can phan bde'i gter mdzod gling} in Lhasa	zhol par khang chen mo
ཞོལ་པོ	yak	zhol po
ཞོལ་ཕོ	bya dang, long hair uncut 'i bull yak	zhol pho
ཞོལ་ཕོགས་ཁང	Tibetan govt military and state office workers' salary grain giving etc office	zhol phogs khang
ཞོལ་བ	flares	zhol ba
ཞོལ་བ་རིམ་གྱིས	smoothly	zhol ba rim gyis
ཞོལ་འབབ	flowing or falling down slowly	zhol 'bab
ཞོལ་མ་ཞོལ་མོ	long-haired goat	zhol ma zhol mo
ཞོལ་མེད	without beard	zhol med
ཞོལ་མོ	'bri khyu'i nang gi the best bzhon ma	zhol mo
ཞོལ་ཞོལ	lower part/ hem, bottom	zhol zhol
ཞོལ་ར་དཀར	angora goat	zhol ra dkar
ཞོལ་རོང་གཙང་པོ	{zhol rong gtsang po} river [R]	zhol rong gtsang po
ཞོལ་ལས་ཁུངས	Zhol office	zhol las khungs
ཞོས	1) 'Jo ba!; 2) (A) rest/ relax/ refresh/ ease the mind)	zhos
ཞོས་ཆེན་ཁ	{zhos chen kha} pass [si khron zhing chen khongs rnga ba bod 2344 rigs rang skyong khul gyi 'dzam thang rdzong gi la zhig	zhos chen kha
ཞོས་སྤངས་ཟས་ཟའི་དུས་ན	after the child has been weaned	zhos spangs zas za'i dus na
གཞག་ཐབས	method for setting the mind	gzhag thabs
གཞག་ཐབས་བཞི	four means of resting [R]	gzhag thabs bzhi
གཞག་ཐབས་བཞི་པ	four methods of contemplation, [testament of Jñanasutra to Vimalamitra	gzhag thabs bzhi pa
གཞག་པའམ་མ་བཞག་པ	to be either placed or not placed	gzhag pa'am ma bzhag pa
གཞག་བྱ	variant of bzhag bya (used by KR) [mss]	gzhag bya
གཞག་མི	will not let [them]. remain, kept ex. {snying la} kept in [their]. heart, poured, {chu la chu} [like]. water into water	gzhag mi
གཞག་མེད	without being brought to rest (deliberately)	gzhag med
གཞག་ས་ནོར་བ	misplace	gzhag sa nor ba
གཞགས	(not in das)	gzhags
གཞགས་པ	bzhags pa	gzhags pa
གཞང	anus or, lower gate and female organ,, the region of shung, anus	gzhang
གཞང་ཁང	brothel	gzhang khang
གཞང་ཁང་བདག་པོ	pimp	gzhang khang bdag po
གཞང་གྱི་ཆུང་མ་སྤྱད་པ	to make love with someone else's partner	gzhang gyi chung ma spyad pa
གཞང་གྲིབ	filth with which a prostitute is covered	gzhang grib
གཞང་འཕྱས་པ	throw blame upon another	gzhang 'phyas pa
གཞང་འབྲུམ	hemorrhoids	gzhang 'brum
གཞང་འབྲུམ་ཅན	one suffering from piles	gzhang 'brum can
གཞང་ཚོང་མ	drab, harlot, prostitute, slut, street-walker, whore	gzhang tshong ma
གཞང་འཚོང་མ	prostitute	gzhang 'tshong ma
གཞང་ལུག་པ	bshang lam rgyu ma phyir lug pa/ rdzi sha lug pa	gzhang lug pa
གཞང་ལོག་པ	entrails exuding fromm the anus	gzhang log pa
གཞང་སྲིན	disease where in the anus srin bus za 'phrug skyed pa	gzhang srin
གཞད	wrongly written for bzhad	gzhad
གཞད་གད	laughter, joking	gzhad gad
གཞད་བགད	{bzhad gad}, laughter, joking	gzhad bgad
གཞན་ཀུན	all others	gzhan kun
གཞན་རྐྱེན	some other contributing cause	gzhan rkyen
གཞན་སྐྱི	other-production, "arising from other', {gzhan las skye ba}	gzhan skyi
གཞན་སྐྱེ	arising from/of other	gzhan skye
གཞན་སྐྱེས	1) (met) servant; 2) arising from other [grangs can pa, Smakya view]	gzhan skyes
གཞན་སྐྱེས་པ	"born another's", slave	gzhan skyes pa
གཞན་སྐྱོན	faults of others	gzhan skyon
གཞན་སྐྱོར་ངོ་སྲུང	ngo srung gis rgyab skyor byed pa,//Khrims sar mi tshang ma 'dra mnyam yin pas gzhan skyor ngo srung byas mi chog	gzhan skyor ngo srung
གཞན་ཁ་ཤས	a few others	gzhan kha shas
གཞན་ཁྱད་གསོད་བྱེད་བ	undermining others	gzhan khyad gsod byed ba
གཞན་གྱི་རྐེན་གྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	the fact that he goes for help to outsiders	gzhan gyi rken gyis 'gro ba
གཞན་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་འགྲོ	go for help to outsiders	gzhan gyi rkyen gyis 'gro
གཞན་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	the fact that he goes for help to outsiders gzhan gyi rkyen gyis mngon par rtogs ma	gzhan gyi rkyen gyis 'gro ba
གཞན་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་རྟོགས་མིན་པ	not realized through external causes	gzhan gyi rkyen gyis rtogs min pa
གཞན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་གླེང	speak ill of others, slander, blame, criticize	gzhan gyi skyon gleng
གཞན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་གླེང་བརྗོད་པ	name the faults of others	gzhan gyi skyon gleng brjod pa
གཞན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	words of insult or disgrace to another person	gzhan gyi skyon brjod
གཞན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པ	libel	gzhan gyi skyon brjod pa
གཞན་གྱི་དགེ་བ་གང་བྱེད	someone else's positive action	gzhan gyi dge ba gang byed
གཞན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	the being of others	gzhan gyi rgyud
གཞན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	something else [ggd]	gzhan gyi ngo bo
གཞན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	other-existence, existence dependent on what is inherently other, other-being (vs.{rang bzhin}	gzhan gyi dngos po
གཞན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of other substance/being/entity things that are other [dharmata realized	gzhan gyi dngos po stong pa nyid
བཡ་ཝོརལད	transcending non-conceptual wisdom]	by world
གཞན་གྱི་ལྕེ་རྟེན	another's bslab bya	gzhan gyi lce rten
གཞན་གྱི་ཆུང་མ	another man's wife gzhan gyi chung ma la g.yem byas pa - to have illicit sex with another man's wife	gzhan gyi chung ma
གཞན་གྱི་སྙིང་བརྩེ་བ	being under the care of a compassionate person, one of the {gzhan 'byor lnga} five events occurring through others, five circumstantial endowments {gzhan gyi snying la mi 'thad pa'i tshig ngan pa s...	gzhan gyi snying brtse ba
གཞན་གྱི་དོན	benefit for others	gzhan gyi don
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་གྱི་ཆེ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད	a great being who benefits others	gzhan gyi don gyi che ba'i bdag nyid
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་གྱི་ཐབས་རྙེད་པ	find means to benefit others 2345	gzhan gyi don gyi thabs rnyed pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་གྱིས་སྐབས	opportunity of benefitting others gzhan gyi don gyis rgyu mtshan can gyi	gzhan gyi don gyis skabs
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ཐོབ་པའི་མཆོག	the excellency of accomplishing benefit for others	gzhan gyi don thob pa'i mchog
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	the ultimate benefit of others	gzhan gyi don mthar thug pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དང་ལྡན་པ	having benefit for others	gzhan gyi don dang ldan pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དང་རང་གི་དོན	the benefit of others and one's own benefit	gzhan gyi don dang rang gi don
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དུ	as a benefit for others	gzhan gyi don du
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	entering into benefittting others	gzhan gyi don du 'jug pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དུ་བསྟན་པ	the teaching of benefit for others	gzhan gyi don du bstan pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ནི་རང་གི་དོན་ཡིན་པ	the benefit of others is one's own benefit	gzhan gyi don ni rang gi don yin pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	fulfillment of benefit for others	gzhan gyi don phun sum tshogs pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ཕྱིར	for the sake of benefitting others gzhan gyi don byed pa'i rgyu mtshan gyi	gzhan gyi don phyir
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་མེད་པ	with no benefit for others	gzhan gyi don med pa
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ཡང་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད	also accomplishing benefit for others	gzhan gyi don yang sgrub par byed
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་ལ་སྤྲོ་བ	delight in helping others	gzhan gyi don la spro ba
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་སེམས་པ	think of/ wish for benefit for others	gzhan gyi don sems pa
གཞན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from perception of other	gzhan gyi 'du shes dang bral ba
གཞན་གྱི་འདོད་པ་བརྗོད་པ	express the wishes of others gzhan gyi sdug bsngal skye bas shin tu 'jigs - be very fearful because of the arising of fear of other	gzhan gyi 'dod pa brjod pa
གཞན་གྱི་ནོར་ལ་རློམ་པ	hanker after another's property	gzhan gyi nor la rlom pa
གཞན་གྱི་གནོད་པ	harm for others	gzhan gyi gnod pa
གཞན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་འཁྱེར་བ	disguise	gzhan gyi rnam pa 'khyer ba
གཞན་གྱི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད	perceive other	gzhan gyi rnam par rig byed
གཞན་གྱི་ཕྱིར	for the sake of others	gzhan gyi phyir
གཞན་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུན་འབྱིན	refute the position of others	gzhan gyi phyogs sun 'byin
གཞན་གྱི་བུད་མེད་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	adultery	gzhan gyi bud med la spyod pa
གཞན་གྱི་བྲན་མོར་གྱུར་པ	become the slave of yet another	gzhan gyi bran mor gyur pa
གཞན་གྱི་དབང	relativity, paratantra [div. {ma dag pa gzhan gyi dbang}. and {dag pa gzhan gyi dbang}	gzhan gyi dbang
གཞན་གྱི་དབང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the essence of relativity	gzhan gyi dbang gi ngo bo nyid
གཞན་གྱི་དབང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic of relativity [relative; 1 of the mtshan nyid gsum, arising from rgyu rkyen gzhan gyi dbang, substantial things, within kun btags and kun gzhi'i cha yin pa, false kun rtog having...	gzhan gyi dbang gi mtshan nyid
གཞན་གྱི་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	become relative	gzhan gyi dbang du gyur pa
གཞན་གྱི་མི་འོས་ནོར་བླངས་པ	to take wealth improperly	gzhan gyi mi 'os nor blangs pa
གཞན་གྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལ་མི་སྨོད་པ	not disparaging the discipline of others	gzhan gyi tshul khrims la mi smod pa
གཞན་གྱི་གཞི	other-base	gzhan gyi gzhi
གཞན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	virtues of others	gzhan gyi yon tan
གཞན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་པ	celebrate others' good qualities;	gzhan gyi yon tan brjod pa
གཞན་གྱི་ལག་ནས་ནོར་འཕྲོག་པ	taking wealth from others	gzhan gyi lag nas nor 'phrog pa
གཞན་གྱི་ལུགས་དགག	refuting the other's tradition	gzhan gyi lugs dgag
གཞན་གྱི་ལོག་བསྒྲུབ་བཟོད་པ	to bear other's ingratitude / mistreatment	gzhan gyi log bsgrub bzod pa
གཞན་གྱི་སེམས་ཤེས	1 of mngon shes lnga	gzhan gyi sems shes
གཞན་གྱི་སེམས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge / cognition of other's minds	gzhan gyi sems shes pa
གཞན་གྱི་སེམས་ཤེས་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས	the	gzhan gyi sems shes pa'i mngon shes
གཞན་གྱི་སྲས་སུ་བདག་བྱ་བ	making oneself another's child; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 99, 184]	gzhan gyi sras su bdag bya ba
གཞན་གྱི་སྲོག་འདོན	kill a person	gzhan gyi srog 'don
གཞན་གྱི་སྲོག་འདོན་པ	pull out another's life	gzhan gyi srog 'don pa
གཞན་གྱིས	by other[s] gzhan gyis bgyis pa la rjes su yi rang ba to rejoice in what is done by others / another person	gzhan gyis
གཞན་གྱིས་རྒྱས	(met) cuckoo	gzhan gyis rgyas
གཞན་གྱིས་བརྒལ་བ	make others cross over	gzhan gyis brgal ba
གཞན་གྱིས་ལྕེས་རྟེན་པ	rely on what is said by others	gzhan gyis lces rten pa
གཞན་གྱིས་མཆོད་པར་འདོད་པ	desire what is offered by others	gzhan gyis mchod par 'dod pa
གཞན་གྱིས་བསྙེངས་པ	fear of others	gzhan gyis bsnyengs pa
གཞན་གྱིས་བསྟན་པ	taught by others	gzhan gyis bstan pa
གཞན་གྱིས་བར་མ་ཆོད་པར	not being obstructed by others, not obstructing others	gzhan gyis bar ma chod par
གཞན་གྱིས་བྱས	done by others	gzhan gyis byas
གཞན་གྱིས་མ་བཟུང་བ	independence	gzhan gyis ma bzung ba
གཞན་གྱིས་མི་ཐུབ་པ	1) not able to be harmed by others; 2) a wrathful deity; 3) (met) spang rgyan)	gzhan gyis mi thub pa
གཞན་གྱིས་མི་ཐུབ་པ་དཀར་པོ	(met) shu dag dkar po, med. herb	gzhan gyis mi thub pa dkar po
གཞན་གྱིས་མི་བརྫི	irrepressible, hero's residence	gzhan gyis mi brdzi
གཞན་གྱིས་མི་བཟོད་པའི་སེམས་པ	the hasty conclusions drawn by others	gzhan gyis mi bzod pa'i sems pa
གཞན་གྱིས་ཟིན	SA gzhan dbang	gzhan gyis zin
གཞན་གྱིས་གསོས	(met) cuckoo	gzhan gyis gsos
གཞན་གྲགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་དཔག	public [dialectical) syllogism	gzhan grags kyi rjes dpag
གཞན་གྲགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་དབག	public dialectical syllogism	gzhan grags kyi rjes dbag
གཞན་གྲགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	other-approved reason, dialectical [public) reason	gzhan grags kyi rtags
གཞན་གྲགས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	other approved/renowned syllogism	gzhan grags kyi sbyor ba
གཞན་དགའ	1871-1927 2346	gzhan dga'
གཞན་འགའ་ཞིག	some others	gzhan 'ga' zhig
གཞན་འགྱུར	changeable, variable	gzhan 'gyur
གཞན་འགྱུར་གྱི་དངོས་མེད	/so sor brtags 'gog lta bu sngar dngos po yod pa phyis zhig nas med pa	gzhan 'gyur gyi dngos med
གཞན་འགྱུར་བཞི	4 (variables, potentialities), mibp 99, (gnyid, 'gyod, rtog, dpyod)	gzhan 'gyur bzhi
གཞན་འགྱུར་བཞི་འགྲོད་པ	regret	gzhan 'gyur bzhi 'grod pa
གཞན་འགྱུར་བཞི་གཉིད	sleep	gzhan 'gyur bzhi gnyid
གཞན་འགྱུར་བཞི་རྟོག་པ	coarse conceptual understanding	gzhan 'gyur bzhi rtog pa
གཞན་འགྱུར་བཞི་དཔྱོད་པ	fine conceptual understanding gzhan 'gyod pa'i gnas ma yin pa la 'gyod	gzhan 'gyur bzhi dpyod pa
པ་བསྐྱེད་པ	have a conscience/ regret but not with respect to others gzhan 'gyod pa'i gnas ma yin pa la 'gyod	pa bskyed pa
གཞན་འགྲན་ནད་ལངས	the arising of the disease of competition/ contending with others	gzhan 'gran nad langs
གཞན་རྒོལ་མ་ནུས	others were not able to resist them, nobody could do them any harm	gzhan rgol ma nus
གཞན་རྒྱུད	the stream of being of another person	gzhan rgyud
གཞན་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཆགས་སྡང	the attachment and aversion in others' minds	gzhan rgyud kyi chags sdang
གཞན་རྒྱུད་དཀྲུགས་པའི་ཚིག་རྩུབ	harsh words that can upset others	gzhan rgyud dkrugs pa'i tshig rtsub
གཞན་རྒྱུད་སྒྲུབ་པ	establishment of other's continua [ggd]	gzhan rgyud sgrub pa
གཞན་རྒྱུད་ཅན་གྱི་ནད	multiple disorder diseases [bad + mkhris, bad+ rlung]	gzhan rgyud can gyi nad
གཞན་རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	to cultivate the minds of others	gzhan rgyud smin par byed pa
གཞན་རྒྱུད་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་བསྐྱེད་པ	produce faith/ belief in anonther['s cotinnuum]	gzhan rgyud la yid ches bskyed pa
གཞན་རྒྱུད་ལ་ཡོད་པ	exist in thecontinuum of another	gzhan rgyud la yod pa
གཞན་ངོ	other's perception, as seen by others	gzhan ngo
གཞན་ངོ་སྣང་ཚུལ	how they present themselves to others	gzhan ngo snang tshul
གཞན་ངོ་ལ་བརྟས་པ	to criticize[se]	gzhan ngo la brtas pa
གཞན་ངོས	the side/ viewpoint of the other, the other side	gzhan ngos
གཞན་དངོས	other-being	gzhan dngos
གཞན་ཅི་ཡང་དགོས་པ་མི་འདུག	nothing else matters!	gzhan ci yang dgos pa mi 'dug
གཞན་གཅེས	bdag pas gzhan gces - that others were dearer than myself; to treat others as more important than oneself	gzhan gces
གཞན་གཅེས་ཀྱི་བློ	ex {bdag pas gzhan gces kyi blo} to hold others dearer than oneself / yourself	gzhan gces kyi blo
གཞན་གཅེས་སྒོམ་པ	to trin in considering others more important than ourselves	gzhan gces sgom pa
གཞན་རྗེས་འཛིན	accepting others	gzhan rjes 'dzin
གཞན་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	caring for others	gzhan rjes su 'dzin pa
གཞན་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་དབང་བཅུ	the ten powers [of a bodhisattva]. tending to the benefit of others	gzhan rjes su 'dzin pa'i dbang bcu
གཞན་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པས་དགའ་བ	joy in tending to others	gzhan rjes su 'dzin pas dga' ba
གཞན་ཉམས་པ	1 of 6 nyams pa	gzhan nyams pa
གཞན་ཉིད	otherness, difference [vs {de nyid]	gzhan nyid
གཞན་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become other gzhan mnyam bstun sgrigs byed pa cope	gzhan nyid du 'gyur ba
གཞན་བརྙད་པ	have oppressed the weak	gzhan brnyad pa
གཞན་བསྙེམས་བཟོད	epithet of indra	gzhan bsnyems bzod
གཞན་རྟེན་ཅན	having the support of another	gzhan rten can
གཞན་རྟེན་འབུ	parasite	gzhan rten 'bu
གཞན་ལྟ་ཨ་ཅང་ཡང་ཆེས	needless to say	gzhan lta a cang yang ches
གཞན་ལྟར	as it is in the other	gzhan ltar
གཞན་ལྟོས	to look elsewhere than to itself	gzhan ltos
གཞན་སྟོང	extrinsic emptiness, "other empty" school; qualified emptiness/ emptiness of other factors; extrinsic emptiness; parashunya; otheremptiness, extrinsic emptiness. [all nirvanic attributes are empty ...	gzhan stong
གཞན་སྟོང་གི་ལྟ་བ	emptiness-of-other view [ggd]	gzhan stong gi lta ba
གཞན་སྟོང་པ	proponent of qualified emptiness	gzhan stong pa
གཞན་སྟོང་དབུ་མ	the Shentong Madhyamika School	gzhan stong dbu ma
གཞན་སྟོང་སྨྲ་བ	proponent of Shentong	gzhan stong smra ba
གཞན་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་གདམས་ངག	instruction through others, [not self-reliant]	gzhan stobs kyi gdams ngag
གཞན་བརྟེན་ཐོས་སྒྲོག	[literal meaning of] shravaka	gzhan brten thos sgrog
གཞན་བརྟེན་འཚོ་སྐྱེལ	live by exploiting others	gzhan brten 'tsho skyel
གཞན་ཐབས་མ་རྙེད་པ	could not find any solution	gzhan thabs ma rnyed pa
གཞན་དག	an alternate 2347	gzhan dag
གཞན་དག་ལ	in other texts	gzhan dag la
གཞན་དག་ཤེས་པ	one knowing the secrets of others	gzhan dag shes pa
གཞན་དང་མཉམ་པ	abreast	gzhan dang mnyam pa
གཞན་དང་མཐུན་པར་སྣང་བ	to manifest in accord with the perceptions of others	gzhan dang mthun par snang ba
གཞན་དང་འདྲ་བ	like another /others	gzhan dang 'dra ba
གཞན་དང་ནོར་ས	confusing this with another	gzhan dang nor sa
གཞན་དང་མ་འདྲེས	not mixing with others	gzhan dang ma 'dres
གཞན་དང་མ་འདྲེས་པ	exclusive	gzhan dang ma 'dres pa
གཞན་དང་མི་མཐུན་མཁན	black sheep	gzhan dang mi mthun mkhan
གཞན་དང་མི་འདྲ་བ	unique	gzhan dang mi 'dra ba
གཞན་དང་མི་འདྲ་བ་ཞིག་ཡིན	is different from that of any others	gzhan dang mi 'dra ba zhig yin
གཞན་དང་གཞན	[have] different, [will do] which	gzhan dang gzhan
གཞན་དང་གཞན་འབྱུང་བ	other and rising from other	gzhan dang gzhan 'byung ba
གཞན་དུ	{gzhan du yang} otherwise; elsewhere; [isc. Tib. requires "any" constructions]	gzhan du
གཞན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	become [an]other, be transformed	gzhan du gyur pa
གཞན་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	establish/ exist as other	gzhan du grub pa
གཞན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become [an]other, be transformed	gzhan du 'gyur ba
གཞན་དུ་འགྱུར་མེད	never becomes something else	gzhan du 'gyur med
གཞན་དུ་འགྲོ	go to another, become other	gzhan du 'gro
གཞན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go away, start	gzhan du 'gro ba
གཞན་དུ་བསྒྱུར་བའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	active causal force for the transformation into something else	gzhan du bsgyur ba'i byed rgyu
གཞན་དུ་ཅི་ཡང	other than this/ beyond this, aside from this	gzhan du ci yang
གཞན་དུ་དྲང་མི་ཐུབ་པ	MSS: cannot be led elsewhere/astray. Used bu Patrul Rin. as a gloss on gzhan dring mi'jog pa. [mss]	gzhan du drang mi thub pa
གཞན་དུ་ན	if not, if it is otherwise	gzhan du na
གཞན་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearing / experienced as something other than	gzhan du snang ba
གཞན་དུ་སྤགས	remove elsewhere	gzhan du spags
གཞན་དུ་སྤགས་པ	(A) move to another place	gzhan du spags pa
གཞན་དུ་སྤོ་བ	go elsewhere	gzhan du spo ba
གཞན་དུ་ཕྱོགས	go beyond one's boundary or jurisdiction, go over to the enemy	gzhan du phyogs
གཞན་དུ་མ་ཡེངས་པར	without wandering elsewhere / to other things	gzhan du ma yengs par
གཞན་དུ་མ་སེམས	not thinking otherwise, intend, purpose, have in view, do not think that the matter can be otherwise, of course	gzhan du ma sems
གཞན་དུ་མ་སེམས་ཤིག	suppose or believe nothing else	gzhan du ma sems shig
གཞན་དུ་མི་རྙེད	not found elsewhere outside of oneself	gzhan du mi rnyed
གཞན་དུ་མི་རྙེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	a knowledge not found elsewhere outside of oneself	gzhan du mi rnyed pa'i ye shes
གཞན་དུ་མེད་པ	without other	gzhan du med pa
གཞན་དུ་ཚོལ་བ	to seek elsewhere	gzhan du tshol ba
གཞན་དུ་འཛིན	fasten to another	gzhan du 'dzin
གཞན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	perceive things incorrectly	gzhan du 'dzin pa
གཞན་དུ་བརྫངས	sent elsewhere	gzhan du brdzangs
གཞན་དུ་ཡང	otherwise; elsewhere	gzhan du yang
གཞན་དུ་ཡོད་པ	to exist as something "other"/ else	gzhan du yod pa
གཞན་དུ་ཤེས་པ	to know other[wise]	gzhan du shes pa
གཞན་དུ་བསོད་ནམས་བསགས་པ	by reason of other virtue	gzhan du bsod nams bsags pa
གཞན་དོ་ཙམ་དུ་ཁས་བླང་བ	proclaiming only, "it is other"	gzhan do tsam du khas blang ba
གཞན་དོན	1) benefit/welfare of others, altruism; 2) gzhan gyi don dag //gzhan don lhur len,//., what is meaningful to others, public [syllogism], what is meaningful to others, the meaning of "other"	gzhan don
གཞན་དོན་གྱི་རྟགས	[true] sign for the benefit of others [R]	gzhan don gyi rtags
གཞན་དོན་སྒྲུབས་ཤིག	work for the benefit of others!	gzhan don sgrubs shig
གཞན་དོན་རྗེས་དཔག	inference for others, public syllogism/ inference [true establishing speech showing/ presenting to others the meaning/ object that one sees oneself, by means of a true sign/ reason producing an app...	gzhan don rjes dpag
གཞན་དོན་གཉེར་བ	to pursue to welfare of others	gzhan don gnyer ba
གཞན་དོན་སྙིང་རྗེ་བརྟན་པ	stable/stabilize compassion that benefits others	gzhan don snying rje brtan pa
གཞན་དོན་རྟེན	support of benefit of others	gzhan don rten
གཞན་དོན་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna that realizes the benefit of others	gzhan don rtogs pa'i shes rab
གཞན་དོན་ལྟར་སྣང	it looks like you are helping other beings	gzhan don ltar snang
གཞན་དོན་དུ	for others	gzhan don du
གཞན་དོན་དུ་དགོངས་སྔས	passed away too soon, other's benefit	gzhan don du dgongs sngas
གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཏོང	dedication	gzhan don du gtong
གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཏོང་བ	dedicate	gzhan don du gtong ba
གཞན་དོན་དུ་མ་འགྱུར་བ	not benefiting others	gzhan don du ma 'gyur ba
གཞན་དོན་ཕུན་ཚོགས	perfect[ion of] benefit of others	gzhan don phun tshogs
གཞན་དོན་བྱེད	helping others	gzhan don byed
གཞན་དོན་བྱེད་པ	benefit others	gzhan don byed pa
གཞན་དོན་མོས་པ	devotion to the benefit of others	gzhan don mos pa
གཞན་དོན་མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	the oath of meditation devoted to the benefit of others	gzhan don mos pa sgom lam
གཞན་དོན་བརྩོན་ལྡན	striving for the benefit of others 2348	gzhan don brtson ldan
གཞན་དོན་བརྩོན་པའི་སྙིང་སྟོབས	heroic efforts to act for others	gzhan don brtson pa'i snying stobs
གཞན་དོན་མཛད་པ	to benefit others	gzhan don mdzad pa
གཞན་དོན་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་གཉིས	[TRS 1162] samayas from {rdo rje gsal bkra}	gzhan don bzhi bcu zhe gnyis
གཞན་དོན་གཟུགས་སྐུ	the Rupakayas that benefit others	gzhan don gzugs sku
གཞན་དོན་ལ་རྩོལ་བ	strive for the benefit of others	gzhan don la rtsol ba
གཞན་དོན་སེམས	wish to benefit others	gzhan don sems
གཞན་དྲིང	gzhan gyi power or consideration/kindness	gzhan dring
གཞན་དྲིང་མི་འཇོག་པ	//skad gnyis smra ba la gzhan dring mi 'jog pa'i byang chub pa	gzhan dring mi 'jog pa
གཞན་དྲིང་མི་འཇོགས་པ	MG: free, independent. See also MG (example under dring): not dependent on others. [mss]	gzhan dring mi 'jogs pa
གཞན་དྲིང་མེད་པ	without a match, unrivalled, self-sufficient	gzhan dring med pa
གཞན་དྲིངས་མི་འཇོགས་པ	Mispelling of {gzhan dring mi 'jogs pa}. [mss]	gzhan drings mi 'jogs pa
གཞན་དྲིས་མ་ཕོག་པ	not “known” / untouched by any other {bud med rang gi bza' mi ma gtogs gzhan dris ma phog pa tshul khrims dag pa zhig} a woman with pure morality who has known no other man than her husband	gzhan dris ma phog pa
གཞན་གདུང	thief, robber, oppressing others, tyranny	gzhan gdung
གཞན་གདུང་ཅན	tyrant, oppressor	gzhan gdung can
གཞན་བདེ་རང་སྐྱིད	the happiness and proseperity of onself and others	gzhan bde rang skyid
གཞན་འདྲེན་ལྷག་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	connective showing more to come [ste, te, ni]	gzhan 'dren lhag bcas kyi sgra
གཞན་རྡུགས	exhaust other means	gzhan rdugs
གཞན་ལྡན་རྣམ་གཅོད	elimination of possession elsewhere [thd]	gzhan ldan rnam gcod
གཞན་སྡུག	evil to others	gzhan sdug
གཞན་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བསྡོམས་པ	the totality of others' suffering	gzhan sdug bsngal bsdoms pa
གཞན་སྡུག་སྙིང་ཚིམ	feel joy if suffering arises in others dga' tshor byed pa	gzhan sdug snying tshim
གཞན་སྡེ	extraneous group	gzhan sde
གཞན་སྡེ་པ	outsider	gzhan sde pa
གཞན་ན	elsewhere	gzhan na
གཞན་ནས	from some other place, otherwise, else, on the other hand, from outside, outside	gzhan nas
གཞན་ནས་འགྲུབ་ཏུ	it can't be done by anybody else	gzhan nas 'grub tu
གཞན་ནས་འགྲུབ་ཏུ་མེད	it cannot be accomplished from any other quarter	gzhan nas 'grub tu med
གཞན་ནས་འབྱུང	drive from something else	gzhan nas 'byung
གཞན་ནས་བཙལ་བ	to seek outside	gzhan nas btsal ba
གཞན་ནས་གཞན་དུ	to deviate from the right path, to go further and further away	gzhan nas gzhan du
གཞན་ནས་ལས	elsewhere, in another place	gzhan nas las
གཞན་ནས་བཤུ་མཁན	copycat	gzhan nas bshu mkhan
གཞན་ནོར་སྒེར་བདག་བྱེད་པ	misappropriate	gzhan nor sger bdag byed pa
གཞན་ནོར་སྒེར་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	embezzle	gzhan nor sger 'dzin byed pa
གཞན་གནོད་གཞི་བཅས་སྤོང་བ	abandoning harm to others and its cause [essence of the pratimoksha vow so thar sdom pa, harm to others, abandoning lus ngag gi mi dge ba bdun &, their ground or cause, the {yid kyi mi dge ba gsum}...	gzhan gnod gzhi bcas spong ba
གཞན་རྣམས	all others	gzhan rnams
གཞན་སྣང	external perception, as seen by others; condition under which	gzhan snang
གཞན་སྣང་གི་གཟུགས་སྐུ	the form kayas experienced by others	gzhan snang gi gzugs sku
གཞན་སྣང་བསྒྱུར	people's outlooks are transformed	gzhan snang bsgyur
གཞན་སྣང་དུ	in the eyes of the other, as it appears to others, appearing as other	gzhan snang du
གཞན་སྣང་བ་སྒྱུར	people's outlooks are transformed gzhan snang dbang med bsgyur bar people's outlooks are involuntarily transformed	gzhan snang ba sgyur
གཞན་སྣང་ལ་སྤྲུལ	the ability to manifest in the perception of the other	gzhan snang la sprul
གཞན་པ	1) [the] other [syn: cig shos, tha dad, dbye ba, gzhan, gzhan dag, la la]; 2) bdag min pa'i pha rol pa thams cad)	gzhan pa
གཞན་པ་མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས	field of uncertain dissimilar cases gzhan pa'i byang chub sems dpa' dang	gzhan pa mi mthun phyogs
གཞན་པས	than the others	gzhan pas
གཞན་པས་ལྷག་པར	more than the other	gzhan pas lhag par
གཞན་ཕན	benevolence	gzhan phan
གཞན་ཕན་གྱི་བསྒྲུབ་པ	practice for the benefit of others	gzhan phan gyi bsgrub pa
གཞན་ཕན་གྱི་བསྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་ཞུགས	practicing for the benefit of others	gzhan phan gyi bsgrub pa la zhugs
གཞན་ཕན་གྱི་འཕྲིན་ལས	charismatic activity 2349	gzhan phan gyi 'phrin las
གཞན་ཕན་སྒྲུབ	accomplish the benefit of others	gzhan phan sgrub
གཞན་ཕན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	Khenpo Zhenga {gzhan dga'} 1871-1927	gzhan phan chos kyi snang ba
གཞན་ཕན་མཐའ་ཡས	{rdzogs chen rgyal sras} b. 1740	gzhan phan mtha' yas
གཞན་ཕན་པ	philanthropist	gzhan phan pa
གཞན་ཕན་བརྩོན་འགྲུས	means/ effort to benefit others	gzhan phan brtson 'grus
གཞན་ཕན་སེམས	considering the welfare of others, altruism, helping others	gzhan phan sems
གཞན་ཕྱིར་སྙིང་ནི་བརྩེ་བའོ	there	gzhan phyir snying ni brtse ba'o
ཨརེ་ཐོསེ་ཝཧོ་ཨརེ་ཀིནད	hearted toward others	are those who are kind
གཞན་ཕྱོགས	other's opinions/ doctines/ side	gzhan phyogs
གཞན་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སྡང་བ	aversion toward others	gzhan phyogs la sdang ba
གཞན་འཕྲུལ	{gzhan 'phrul dbang byed}	gzhan 'phrul
གཞན་འཕྲུལ་པ	[Mastery Over] Others' Creations; see {gzhan 'phrul dbang byed}	gzhan 'phrul pa
གཞན་འཕྲུལ་དབང་བྱེད	mastery over other's creations heaven, 1 of 'dod lha rigs drug	gzhan 'phrul dbang byed
གཞན་འཕྲུལ་དབང་བྱེད་པ	paranirmitavasavarti gods	gzhan 'phrul dbang byed pa
གཞན་བྱ་བ	other activity	gzhan bya ba
གཞན་བྱུང	arisen from another	gzhan byung
གཞན་དབང	enchantment, relative, dependent on others, (absolutely specific constitutive principle, that which fits into the world order, that which arises in dependence on causes and conditions and is the re...	gzhan dbang
གཞན་དབང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	[the essence of] relativ reality	gzhan dbang gi ngo bo nyid
གཞན་དབང་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness of relativiy	gzhan dbang gi rnam shes
གཞན་དབང་གི་སྣང་བ	in Dzogchen indicates belief in and hence control by "externals" such as emotions and outer phenomena	gzhan dbang gi snang ba
གཞན་དབང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	[the definition/ characteristcs of] relative reality	gzhan dbang gi mtshan nyid
གཞན་དབང་གི་རང་བཞིན	heteronomous nature	gzhan dbang gi rang bzhin
གཞན་དབང་གིས	through/ by some external force/ power	gzhan dbang gis
གཞན་དབང་གིས་འགོག་པ	refutation by gzhan dbang [among 'gog pa'i rgyan, a thesis that one does not want to refute, in undertaking to establish it, 'gog byed gzhan dbang la khag bzhag nas, zur gyis 'gog pa'i rgyan zhig]	gzhan dbang gis 'gog pa
གཞན་དབང་སྔོན་ནད	karmic diseases	gzhan dbang sngon nad
གཞན་དབང་གཉིས	the two kinds of relativity [R]	gzhan dbang gnyis
གཞན་དབང་དུ་གྱུར	conditioned by, to be captured by	gzhan dbang du gyur
གཞན་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	not be autonomous, be caused/controlled by others	gzhan dbang du gyur pa
གཞན་དབང་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	under another's power	gzhan dbang du 'gyur ba
གཞན་དབང་དུ་སོང་བ	overwhelmed	gzhan dbang du song ba
གཞན་དབང་མི་འགྱུར	unconditioned by 2350 gzhan dbang las 'phros pa'i rnam rig bcu	gzhan dbang mi 'gyur
གཞན་དབང་ཤོར	influenced by other [main goal is lost]	gzhan dbang shor
གཞན་དབང་སོང	vassal	gzhan dbang song
གཞན་འབོར་ལྔ	the five favors conditioned by/ occuring through others [R]	gzhan 'bor lnga
གཞན་འབྱོར	impersonal endowments	gzhan 'byor
གཞན་འབྱོར་ང	the five favors conditioned by/ occuring through others [R]	gzhan 'byor nga
གཞན་འབྱོར་ལྔ	the five favors conditioned by/ occuring through others [R]	gzhan 'byor lnga
གཞན་འབྱོར་ལྔ་ལས	five circumstantial advantages	gzhan 'byor lnga las
གཞན་མ	[an]other [one]	gzhan ma
གཞན་མ་ཡིན	are not other than, are not anything else, are not something different from	gzhan ma yin
གཞན་མ་ཡིན་པ་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness that is not other	gzhan ma yin pa de bzhin nyid
གཞན་མི	the other men	gzhan mi
གཞན་མིན	not other, there is no othr	gzhan min
གཞན་མེད	do not exist apart from, are not other than, there is no other, nothing exists other than	gzhan med
གཞན་སྨེས་མེད་པ	inconsiderate	gzhan smes med pa
གཞན་སྨོད	slanderer, cynic, to blame others	gzhan smod
གཞན་སྨོད་བྱེད་པ	to slander others	gzhan smod byed pa
གཞན་རྩོད་འཐེན་འཁྱེར	being attached to and bringing into debate only rang 'dod phyogs regardless of truth	gzhan rtsod 'then 'khyer
གཞན་འཚེ	(met) thief	gzhan 'tshe
གཞན་ཞིག	at another point	gzhan zhig
གཞན་ཞིག་ཏུ	elsewhere	gzhan zhig tu
གཞན་ཞེ་འདོད	another aim	gzhan zhe 'dod
གཞན་ཞོར་རང་དྲུད	gzhan gyi zhor la rang yang tshud pa	gzhan zhor rang drud
གཞན་གཞུང་ལ་སྦྱར་བ	incorporated with other teachings	gzhan gzhung la sbyar ba
གཞན་ཟེར་ན	if one says anything else	gzhan zer na
གཞན་ཡང	Most of all	gzhan yang
གཞན་ཡང་རྐྱེན	a difficult situation	gzhan yang rkyen
གཞན་ཡང་དག་པར་ལེན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	enter into true apprehension of other	gzhan yang dag par len du 'jug pa
གཞན་ཡིད་ཆེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	have faith in other	gzhan yid ches par byed pa
གཞན་ཡིན	the other	gzhan yin
གཞན་ཡུལ་གྱི	alien	gzhan yul gyi
གཞན་ཡུལ་བསྙེགས་པ	took to other countries	gzhan yul bsnyegs pa
གཞན་ཡོད་མིན	is there another or not? gzhan g.yam - say something following others that one has not examined oneself	gzhan yod min
གཞན་རིག	/knower knowlege of [things] other than the perceiver itself [engaged w external form etc. likke sense perception]	gzhan rig
གཞན་རིག་ཏུ་འདོད་པ	opp. to rang rig	gzhan rig tu 'dod pa
གཞན་རིགས་འཕེན་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequences that impell the minds/reasoning of others [sgrub byed 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur gang zhig bzlog pa rang dang rigs tha dad pa gzhan 'phen pa. eg, the dharmin sometimes having smoke, entails...	gzhan rigs 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur
གཞན་རིས	another's party	gzhan ris
གཞན་ལ	with respect to others gzhan la skyabs dang re ba bcol mkhan dependent gzhan la go bar byed pa'i rnam pa bsgom	gzhan la
གཞན་ལ་གྲགས་པ	renowned to others	gzhan la grags pa
གཞན་ལ་བཅོལ	instigated others to	gzhan la bcol
གཞན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	to pursue something else	gzhan la 'jug pa
གཞན་ལ་བརྙས་པ	deprecate others	gzhan la brnyas pa
གཞན་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས	in respect to others	gzhan la ltos nas
གཞན་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས་ཁྲེལ་ཡོད	being ashamed in repect to others, being conscientious in respect to others	gzhan la ltos nas khrel yod
གཞན་ལ་སྟོན་པ	teaching others	gzhan la ston pa
གཞན་ལ་ཐོ་བརྩམ་པ	undertake to elevate others	gzhan la tho brtsam pa
གཞན་ལ་གདབ	to advise others	gzhan la gdab
གཞན་ལ་འདོམས་པ	teach/ admonish /exhort others	gzhan la 'doms pa
གཞན་ལ་འདྲི་མི་དགོས་པ	not necessary to ask others	gzhan la 'dri mi dgos pa
གཞན་ལ་བསྡོས་ནས་རྐུ་བ	rob a thing by slandering another person	gzhan la bsdos nas rku ba
གཞན་ལ་གནོད་པ	harm to others 2351	gzhan la gnod pa
གཞན་ལ་གནོད་པ་མི་བྱེད	do not cause others any more harm	gzhan la gnod pa mi byed
གཞན་ལ་གནོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	harm others	gzhan la gnod par byed pa
གཞན་ལ་ཕན	benefit others	gzhan la phan
གཞན་ལ་ཕན་པ	altruism	gzhan la phan pa
གཞན་ལ་བྱམས་པ	be kind toward others; opp of {gnod sems}	gzhan la byams pa
གཞན་ལ་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	induce others to commit, make others do	gzhan la byed du 'jug pa
གཞན་ལ་སྨྲ་བ	claims to make gzhan la gzhan gyi 'du shes dang bral ba'i	gzhan la smra ba
གཞན་ལ་ཡང་གནོད་པར་བྱེད	harm others	gzhan la yang gnod par byed
གཞན་ལ་རག་མ་ལས	from dependence upon others	gzhan la rag ma las
གཞན་ལ་རག་ལ	dependent	gzhan la rag la
གཞན་ལ་རག་ལས་མེད	not conditioned by anyone else	gzhan la rag las med
གཞན་ལ་རེ་ལྟོས	repose hope on another	gzhan la re ltos
གཞན་ལ་རེ་ལྟོས་བྱེད་པ	depend upon another	gzhan la re ltos byed pa
གཞན་ལ་གཤོད་མི་རུང་བ	confidential	gzhan la gshod mi rung ba
གཞན་ལ་སེམས	(met) cuckoo	gzhan la sems
གཞན་ལས	compared to that	gzhan las
གཞན་ལས་ཀྱང	compared to others	gzhan las kyang
གཞན་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ	production from other	gzhan las skye ba
གཞན་ལས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	superior to others	gzhan las khyad par du 'phags pa
གཞན་ལས་རྒྱལ	victorious, triumphant over another, a flower	gzhan las rgyal
གཞན་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	prime cognizer/pramana when ascertainment is induced by another [one's own pramana assistend in being ascertained by another eg, in the continnuum of a person who does not recognize an utpala an ut...	gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma
གཞན་ལས་ངེས་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of ascertainment of pramana by another [R]	gzhan las nges pa gsum
གཞན་ལས་རྟོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of the realization of others	gzhan las rtogs pa'i phyir
གཞན་ལས་སྟོབས་ཆེ་སྟེ	are more powerful than those of other	gzhan las stobs che ste
གཞན་ལས་དམན་པ	less/ lower than others	gzhan las dman pa
གཞན་ལས་ཚད་མ	externally valid cognitions [ggd]	gzhan las tshad ma
གཞན་ལས་ལོག་པའི་ཆ	the wrong aspect of other	gzhan las log pa'i cha
གཞན་ལས་ཤེས་པར་བྱ	should / can be found in other sources	gzhan las shes par bya
གཞན་ལས་ལྷག་པ	surpasses any other	gzhan las lhag pa
གཞན་ལུགས	the other's position	gzhan lugs
གཞན་ལུགས་དགག་པ	refute another's system	gzhan lugs dgag pa
གཞན་ལུས	another's body	gzhan lus
གཞན་ལུས་སྙོམས་འཇུག	union with another's body	gzhan lus snyoms 'jug
གཞན་ལུས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	yoga of another's body as the seal gzhan lus phyag rgya'i lam la brten pa make use of the path of mudra relying on another's body	gzhan lus phyag rgya
གཞན་ལུས་འོག་སྒོ	lower door of one's partner's body	gzhan lus 'og sgo
གཞན་ལུས་ཤེས་རབ	another's body as the source of sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge [euph. for karmamudra]	gzhan lus shes rab
གཞན་ལོགས	MSS: other than, aside from (?) [mss]	gzhan logs
གཞན་ཤས	a few others	gzhan shas
གཞན་སེམས	the minds/ wishes of others	gzhan sems
གཞན་སེམས་ཀྱི	humanitarian	gzhan sems kyi
གཞན་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	considerate	gzhan sems chen po
གཞན་སེམས་འཕྲོག་ལ་མཁས་པ	tshul 'chos kyis + - good at fooling people	gzhan sems 'phrog la mkhas pa
གཞན་སེམས་མེད་པ	inconsiderate	gzhan sems med pa
གཞན་སེམས་ཡིད་གསོས	meton, cuckoo	gzhan sems yid gsos
གཞན་སེམས་ཤེས	know the minds of others	gzhan sems shes
གཞན་སེམས་ཤེས་པ	know the minds of others	gzhan sems shes pa
གཞན་སེམས་ཤེས་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས	clairvoyance of knowing other's mind [one of the mngon shes drug]	gzhan sems shes pa'i mngon shes
གཞན་སེམས་སྲུང་བ	protect the wishes of others	gzhan sems srung ba
གཞན་སེལ	exclusion [ggd]	gzhan sel
གཞན་སེལ་གྱི་བློ	the attitude of excluding the other	gzhan sel gyi blo
གཞན་སེལ་དགག་སྒྲུབ	negative phenomena and positive phenomena	gzhan sel dgag sgrub
གཞན་སེལ་གཉིས	the two kinds of exclusion of the other	gzhan sel gnyis
གཞན་སེལ་བརྟག་པའི་ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	the chapter examining exclusion of the other [pramana text by the Indian master dge srung]	gzhan sel brtag pa'i tshig le'u byas pa
གཞན་སེལ་པའི་སྒྲའི་དོན	the meaning of the phrase "excluding the other"	gzhan sel pa'i sgra'i don
གཞན་སེལ་བ	exclusion of others	gzhan sel ba
གཞན་སེལ་བའི་སྤྱི	eliminative universal [ggd] gzhan sel zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa treatise on "excluding the other" gzhan sel zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa rgya gar gyi slob dpon chos mchog gis brtsams pa'i tshad ...	gzhan sel ba'i spyi
གཞན་སེལ་གསུམ	the three kinds of exclusion of the other	gzhan sel gsum
གཞན་སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་པ	to protect the lives of others	gzhan srog skyob pa
གཞན་སྲོག་སྙིང་རྗེ་བསམ	felt pity at the thought of sacrificing someone	gzhan srog snying rje bsam
གཞན་གསོ	(met) crow	gzhan gso
གཞན་གསོ་རབ་དགའ	(met) raven	gzhan gso rab dga'
གཞན་གསོས	(met) 1) cuckoo; 2) servant)	gzhan gsos
གཞན་བསླུ་བའི་བསམ་པ	intent to mislead others	gzhan bslu ba'i bsam pa
གཞབ་པ	rub or touch with the hand, lick	gzhab pa
གཞབས་པ	(A) 1) thabs kyis brtags pa; 2) bzhags pa)	gzhabs pa
གཞའ	1 of 36 border countries	gzha'
གཞའ་བ	to sport, joke, play, sing 2352	gzha' ba
གཞའ་བོན་ཁུག་ཏང	bon of rainbows	gzha' bon khug tang
གཞའ་མ	kind of helmet	gzha' ma
གཞའ་ཚོན	rainbow	gzha' tshon
གཞའ་རིས	raibow picture	gzha' ris
གཞའ་ལི	helmet made of bell-metal	gzha' li
གཞའ་གསང	swastika sign, grace, blessing	gzha' gsang
གཞར	shave	gzhar
གཞར་བ	{gzhar ba, bzhar ba, gzhar ba, gzhor} trans. v.; ft. of {gzhar ba}	gzhar ba
གཞར་ཡང	SA nam yang, seldom, scarcely, again afterwards	gzhar yang
གཞར་ཡང་མི	never	gzhar yang mi
གཞལ	weigh, SA 'jal ba	gzhal
གཞལ་འཁོར	a number	gzhal 'khor
གཞལ་དགོས་ཀྱི་རྫས	articles that should be weighed, liable to custom duty	gzhal dgos kyi rdzas
གཞལ་ཐག	a #	gzhal thag
གཞལ་ཐིམ	a #	gzhal thim
གཞལ་དུ་མེད	immeasurable	gzhal du med
གཞལ་དུ་མེད་པ	unable to/ cannot be measured	gzhal du med pa
གཞལ་དུ་མེད་པ་ཆུ་བོ	a fabulous river	gzhal du med pa chu bo
གཞལ་དུ་མེད་པའི	immeasurable	gzhal du med pa'i
གཞལ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	measurable, limited; able to be measured. [mss]	gzhal du yod pa
གཞལ་ནས	through logic	gzhal nas
གཞལ་ནུས་པ	able to fathom / estimate	gzhal nus pa
གཞལ་དཔག	a #	gzhal dpag
གཞལ་ཕུལ	a number	gzhal phul
གཞལ་འཕྱོས	a number	gzhal 'phyos
གཞལ་བ	evaluate	gzhal ba
གཞལ་བར་བྱ	must be examined	gzhal bar bya
གཞལ་བར་ལང་བ	repay	gzhal bar lang ba
གཞལ་བྱ	an object of right cognition, object of comprehension, epistemological object, object of comprehension	gzhal bya
གཞལ་བྱ་གཉིས	{mngon sum dang rjes dpag}	gzhal bya gnyis
གཞལ་བྱ་རྟོག་པ	projection	gzhal bya rtog pa
གཞལ་བྱ་དམ་ཆོས	the dharma to be fathomed	gzhal bya dam chos
གཞལ་བྱ་གསུམ	the three kinds of objects of valid cognition [R]	gzhal bya gsum
གཞལ་བྱའི་གནས་གསུམ	the three kinds of objects of valid cognition [R]	gzhal bya'i gnas gsum
གཞལ་བྱར་བྱས	to take as a basis for evaluation	gzhal byar byas
གཞལ་བྱེད་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 measures [in the Abhidharmakosha, measures of coarse external form: rdul phra rab, rdul phran, lcags rdul, chu rdul, ri bong gi rdul, lug rdul, glang gi rdul, nyi zer gyi rdul, sro ma, shig ...	gzhal byed bcu drug
གཞལ་བྱེད་ཆ་བཅུ་གཅིག	in Kalachakra measures of coarse external form: rdul phra rab, rdul phra mo, skra rtse, ske tshe, shig nas, sor mo rnams 8 &, 24 fingers = 1 cubit khru, x four = bowlength 'dom, x 2,000 = rgyang gr...	gzhal byed cha bcu gcig
གཞལ་བྱེད་ཚད་མ་གསུམ	te three kinds of evaluating pramana [mngon sum dang, rjes dpag, yid ches tshad ma; perception, inference, and faith/opinion]	gzhal byed tshad ma gsum
གཞལ་བླུགས	'bo volume measure	gzhal blugs
གཞལ་མེད	unfathomable	gzhal med
གཞལ་མེད་ཁང	celestial palace; immeasurable celestial mansion; inconceivable caste, palace, celestial mansion	gzhal med khang
གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་ཆེན	immense celestial abode	gzhal med khang chen
གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་ཆེན་པི	great palace	gzhal med khang chen pi
གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་ཆེན་པོ	great palace	gzhal med khang chen po
གཞལ་མེད་ཅན	(met) deity	gzhal med can
གཞལ་མེད་ཕོ་བྲང	divine palace	gzhal med pho brang
གཞལ་ཚད	measure, scale, standard	gzhal tshad
གཞལ་ཚད་ཞིག	litre	gzhal tshad zhig
གཞལ་གཞི	a number	gzhal gzhi
གཞལ་ཡལ	a number	gzhal yal
གཞལ་ཡས	large shrine, immeasurable, incomparable palace, castle in the air, superb mansion, castles in which the gods are supposed to live	gzhal yas
གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང	palace, inestimable mansion, divine palace, celestial abodes	gzhal yas khang
གཞལ་ལད	a number	gzhal lad
གཞལ་ལས་རྩེར	in the uppermost chamber of the palace	gzhal las rtser
གཞལ་ལུགས	existential mode	gzhal lugs
གཞལ་སངས	a number	gzhal sangs
གཞས	play, sport, jest, joke, song	gzhas
གཞས་ཁྲབ་མཁན	dancer	gzhas khrab mkhan
གཞས་ཁྲབ་པ	dance 2353	gzhas khrab pa
གཞས་འགོ	a song's 'gor ngag gi gdangs ring por gtong ba gzhas chen}, mi chen sku drag dag gis chang sa rgyag skabs skyes pa phos rten 'brel mtshon byed du sgra gdangs dma' zhing ring bar glu blangs nas gzha...	gzhas 'go
གཞས་རྙིང	old song	gzhas rnying
གཞས་གཏོང་མཁན	singer, songster	gzhas gtong mkhan
གཞས་གཏོང་མཁན་གྱི་རུ་ཁག	choir	gzhas gtong mkhan gyi ru khag
གཞས་གཏོང་བ	to sing, song	gzhas gtong ba
གཞས་བཏང་ཟིན་པ	sung	gzhas btang zin pa
གཞས་གདངས	tune/melody of a song	gzhas gdangs
གཞས་དཔོན	song leader/master	gzhas dpon
གཞས་ཕུད	first day performance of an opera	gzhas phud
གཞས་མ	songstress, female joker	gzhas ma
གཞས་མ་གཏམ	cross talk, comic dialogue	gzhas ma gtam
གཞས་མ་གཏམ་གི	storytelling, etc.	gzhas ma gtam gi
གཞས་མ་གཏམ་གི་རིགས	variety show of ballad	gzhas ma gtam gi rigs
གཞས་མ་རྣམ་ཐར	gdangs ring gdangs thung gi gzhas dang, 'gyur khug spel ma'i rnam thar,//gzhas ma rnam thar btang nas dga' dga' skyid skyid byed pa,/	gzhas ma rnam thar
གཞས་ཚིག	words of a song	gzhas tshig
གཞས་གཞུག	gzhas kyi mjug bsdu sa ni 'khyug gzhas}	gzhas gzhug
གཞས་ར	singing place	gzhas ra
གཞས་ཤགས	gdong thug rtsed 'gran gyis sing songs	gzhas shags
གཞི	1) place [R]; 2) root, origin [R]; 3) thing dharma [R]; 4) cause, seed [R] source of, basis, ground, referent, object, objective support, foundation, basic ground, basic nature,[R]	gzhi
གཞི་ཀ་གོང་འོག	senior and junior treasurers	gzhi ka gong 'og
གཞི་ཀ་དག་ཆེན་པོ	fundamental great primordial purity	gzhi ka dag chen po
གཞི་ཀ་དག་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	1 of three sections summarizing the essential teachings of the {yang gsang snying tig}	gzhi ka dag lhun grub
གཞི་ཀ་རྩེ	town in gtsang	gzhi ka rtse
གཞི་ཀློང	basic space	gzhi klong
གཞི་དཀར་པོ	white ground [cloth, picture]	gzhi dkar po
གཞི་རྐང	rtsa ba, ma mo, ma gzhi	gzhi rkang
གཞི་རྐྱེན	initial foundation, fundamental condition	gzhi rkyen
གཞི་སྐྱེ་མེད	without origin or birth	gzhi skye med
གཞི་ཁུངས	Syn {skye khungs}	gzhi khungs
གཞི་གོང	folio	gzhi gong
གཞི་གྲུབ	established basis [ggd]	gzhi grub
གཞི་གྲོལ	basically free, basic freedom, ex. {yul la 'dzin pa ye grol}	gzhi grol
གཞི་གྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ	great self-liberation of the base	gzhi grol chen po
གཞི་དགོན	gzhis dgon	gzhi dgon
གཞི་རྒྱ	tha gru'i khyon yongs,//gzhi rgya che chung,//Las gzhi rgya che ba	gzhi rgya
གཞི་རྒྱས་དབང་དྲག	pacifying, increasing, magnetizing and destroying [the four karmas las bzhi]	gzhi rgyas dbang drag
གཞི་རྒྱུད	ground tantra, the continuity of the ground	gzhi rgyud
གཞི་རྒྱེན	initial foundation	gzhi rgyen
གཞི་དངོས་པོ	being in itself	gzhi dngos po
གཞི་ལྔ	the five topics [R]	gzhi lnga
གཞི་སྔོན་སྐྱེས	lightning	gzhi sngon skyes
གཞི་ཅན	forest, wilderness, having a basis, foundation, having a floor	gzhi can
གཞི་ཅན་མིན	has no base	gzhi can min
གཞི་གཅིག	one common base gzhi gcig gi rdzas chos du ma 'gal ba many dharmas contradicting the substance of the single ground [R] gzhi gcig gi rdzas chos du ma 'gal ba many dharmas contradicting the substanc...	gzhi gcig
གཞི་གཅིག་གི་རྫས་དང་ལས་འགལ་བ	contradict the substance of the single ground [R]	gzhi gcig gi rdzas dang las 'gal ba
གཞི་གཅིག་གི་ཡོན་ཏན་འགལ་བ	contradict the qualities of the single ground [among 'gal ba'i rgyan, ornament showing byed po'i dngos po gzhi gcig gi yon tan gyi khyad par phan tshun 'gal ba] 2354	gzhi gcig gi yon tan 'gal ba
གཞི་གཅིག་གི་ལས་འགལ་བ	contradicting a single ground [R]	gzhi gcig gi las 'gal ba
གཞི་གཅིག་ཏུ་མི་འཇོག་པ	not focus on a single view	gzhi gcig tu mi 'jog pa
གཞི་གཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 grounds	gzhi gco lnga
གཞི་བཅའ	lay the basis	gzhi bca'
གཞི་བཅའ་བ	to establish the foundation	gzhi bca' ba
གཞི་བཅུ་བདུན	the 14 gshi [R]	gzhi bcu bdun
གཞི་ཆེན་པོ	the vinaya Pitaka of the lokottaravidis, a maha sanghika subschool	gzhi chen po
གཞི་ཆེས	very important	gzhi ches
གཞི་ཆོས་གཅིག་པ	1 of the ldog pa gcig pas ma grub pa gsum, nonestablishment because subject and dharma are indentical; eg, the dharmin sound, is sound, because it is produced]	gzhi chos gcig pa
གཞི་ཆོས་ཉིད	cause	gzhi chos nyid
གཞི་མཆོག	the suprme ground	gzhi mchog
གཞི་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	begging in turns [among the sbyangs pa'i yon tan bcu gnyis, mal stan la chags pa'i gnyen po dben sar gnas gar bab bab tu 'dug cing bde ba mi 'dam par 'dug pa]	gzhi ji bzhin pa
གཞི་འཇམ	gentle	gzhi 'jam
གཞི་ཉིད་ལ་གྲོལ་བ	liberated into the state of the ground	gzhi nyid la grol ba
གཞི་གཉིས	the two grounds	gzhi gnyis
གཞི་གཉེར	estate manager gzhi snying gcig tu dril ba'i sgrub thabs Unified Basic Essence Sadhana. Text belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga composed by Guru Rinpoche	gzhi gnyer
གཞི་བསྙེན	rtsa ba'i bsnyen tshad kyi grangs approach the ground, approach the basis	gzhi bsnyen
གཞི་བཏག་ཅེས	shift, change lodging, remove	gzhi btag ces
གཞི་རྟགས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་བ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	among the don la ma grub pa'i rtags drug, not established since connection between ground and reason is impossible eg, the dharmin sound is impermanent, because by the eye gzung bya sgrub byed and ...	gzhi rtags kyi 'brel ba ma grub pa
གཞི་རྟགས་གཅིག་པ	identical ground and reason [one of the ldog pa gcig pas ma grub pa gsums, kinds of nonestablishment, eg, the dharmin sound, is impermanent, because it is sound]	gzhi rtags gcig pa
གཞི་རྟེན	foundation, basis, support	gzhi rten
གཞི་རྟོགས་པ	realiz[ation of] the ground	gzhi rtogs pa
གཞི་ཐ་དད་པའི་བྱ་བ་འགལ་བ	the contradiction of making the basis different [among 'gal ba'i rgyan, ornament showing byed po'i dngos po gzhi dissimilar gnyis kyi bya ba mi mthun pa 'gal ba]	gzhi tha dad pa'i bya ba 'gal ba
གཞི་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {sde pa thams cad kyi gzhi yin pa dang shes bya'i gzhi lnga rdzas yod du smra bas de ltar grags la/ sde pa de ni gsung rab sang skrii ta legs sbyar gyi skad du 'don/ mkhan po ...	gzhi thams cad yod par smra ba
གཞི་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ	M lasarv stiv da tradition. yod par smra ba'i sde gzhi thams cad yod par smra bzhi sde the four sarvastivada schools gzhi thams cad shes pa nyid la mtshon	gzhi thams cad yod par smra ba'i sde
བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་དགུ	the 9 dharmas that symbolize knowldge of all bases	byed kyi chos dgu
གཞི་ཐོག	in the ground; directly on the basis {rang rig zhi thog la sgrub} directly on the basis of self-knowing awareness	gzhi thog
གཞི་ཐོག་ཉིད་གྲོལ	liberation in the condition of the basis	gzhi thog nyid grol
གཞི་ཐོག་ཏུ	in the primordial ground	gzhi thog tu
གཞི་ཐོག་དང་པོ	1st primordial ground	gzhi thog dang po
གཞི་མཐུན	comon locus/ possessor of differetnt properties, eg, a gold vase is both gold and a vase	gzhi mthun
གཞི་མཐུན་གྱི་དྲུག་པ	among the rnam dbye drug pa rdzas su grub pa gnyis med kyi dngos po gcig gi steng du gzhi mthun par sbyor ba, zla ba'i dkar mdangs,//Nyi ma'i tsha zer,//gser gyi rgyan,//dpal gyi be'u	gzhi mthun gyi drug pa
གཞི་མཐུན་པ	same predicament, common substratum	gzhi mthun pa
གཞི་དག་པ	the pure ground	gzhi dag pa
གཞི་དང་ངོ་འཕྲད་པ	introduced to the ground	gzhi dang ngo 'phrad pa
པའི་ཞིང	the Nirmanakaya realm of Buddha Vairochana gzhi dang snying po me tog gis brgyan	pa'i zhing
གཞི་དུས	the time of the ground	gzhi dus
གཞི་དུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	mahamudra at the time of the ground	gzhi dus kyi phyag rgya chen po
གཞི་དུས་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	the bardo at the time of the ground [srid pa bar do, the main bardo] 2355	gzhi dus kyi bar do
གཞི་དུས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	luninosity at the time of the ground [R]	gzhi dus kyi 'od gsal
གཞི་དུས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	the five wisdoms at the time of the ground [transformation of the five kleshas into the five wisdoms: zhe sdang rang grol me long dang, nga rgyal rang grol mnyam pa nyid, 'dod chags rang grol so so...	gzhi dus kyi ye shes lnga
གཞི་དེབ	ma deb	gzhi deb
གཞི་གདན	foundation	gzhi gdan
གཞི་གདོད་མ་ནས་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	primordially awakward ground. [syn. {sems kyi rang bzhin ye nas 'dog sal ba}	gzhi gdod ma nas sangs rgyas pa
གཞི་གདོད་མའི་དབྱིངས	basic primordial space	gzhi gdod ma'i dbyings
གཞི་བདག	Local deity. A powerful spirit of the region	gzhi bdag
གཞི་བདག་གཉུག་མར་གནས་པ	worldly deities who always stays and pretects a certain place	gzhi bdag gnyug mar gnas pa
གཞི་བདུན	of Mahayana: shes bya'i gnas dang mtshan nyid der 'jug dang/ /de yi rgyu 'bras de rab dbye ba dang/ /bslab pa gsum dang de 'bras spangs pa dang/ /ye shes theg pa mchog gyur khyad par 'phags// or: s...	gzhi bdun
གཞི་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ	the fundamental Buddha nature, our basis is the sugata essence	gzhi bde gshegs snying po
གཞི་བདེན་སྟོང	{gzhi chos thams cad}	gzhi bden stong
གཞི་བདེན་པ་གཉིས	the fundamental two truths	gzhi bden pa gnyis
གཞི་འདིང་བ	to lay the foundation	gzhi 'ding ba
གཞི་འདུན	basic motivation	gzhi 'dun
གཞི་འདུན་པ	motivation	gzhi 'dun pa
གཞི་ལྡོག	illustration-isolate	gzhi ldog
ཨ་གོལད་བ༹སེ་ཨིས་ཨ་གཞི་ལྡོག་ཨོཕ༹་ཨ་བ༹སེ་ཨིལླུསྟྲཏིཨོན	isolates, ground differential, ground, ground of symbolic	a gold vase is a gzhi ldog of a vase illustration
གཞི་སྡུང་ཆུས་སྡུང་བྱེད་པ	but bring together and make them into one family	gzhi sdung chus sdung byed pa
གཞི་བསྡུ་བ	the yogacarya bumau vastu- samgraha [one of Asangha's sa sde lnga rjod byed kyi gzhung rnams sde snod gsum du bsdu bar bstan pa'o]	gzhi bsdu ba
གཞི་ནག་པོ	a black ground [cloth, picture etc.]	gzhi nag po
གཞི་ནས	within/ as the ground of being; fundamental(ly)	gzhi nas
གཞི་གནས	dwell/rest in the ground, basic nature	gzhi gnas
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི	abiding as/ within the ground of being; naturally/ inherently indwelling . . .	gzhi gnas kyi
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya as it abides in the ground of being naturally/ inherently indwelling dharmakaya	gzhi gnas kyi chos sku
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom dwelling in the ground. ground wisdom of the natural state	gzhi gnas kyi ye shes
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་གསུམ	the three wisdoms dwelling in the ground: 1) {no bo ka dag gi ye shes}. 2) {rang bshin lhun grub kyi ye shes}. 3) {thugs rjes gun grol gyi ye shes}	gzhi gnas kyi ye shes gsum
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	insight dwelling in the ground	gzhi gnas kyi rig pa
གཞི་གནས་ཀྱི་གཤིས	primordial state	gzhi gnas kyi gshis
གཞི་གནས་ངོ་བོ	essence of the primordial state	gzhi gnas ngo bo
གཞི་གནས་ཆོས་སྐུ	dharmakaya of the primordial basis gzhi gnas snying po byang chub sems essence of the bodhicitta of the base	gzhi gnas chos sku
གཞི་གནས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	nirmanakaya of the primordial basis	gzhi gnas sprul sku
གཞི་གནས་མའི་འདོ་གསལ	[mother] luminescence dwelling in the ground [R]	gzhi gnas ma'i 'do gsal
གཞི་གནས་མའི་འོད་གསལ	Luminescence dwelling in the ground, the ground abiding mother luminosity. Syn {chos sku gzhi'i 'od gsal}. the Mother Clear Light that abides as the ground	gzhi gnas ma'i 'od gsal
གཞི་གནས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	ground wisdom of the natural state	gzhi gnas lugs kyi ye shes
གཞི་གནས་ལོངས་སྐུ	sambhogakaya of the primordial basis	gzhi gnas longs sku
གཞི་གནས་སུ	as being intrinsically present	gzhi gnas su
གཞི་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three aspects of the ground, the three fundamental aspects	gzhi rnam pa gsum
གཞི་སྣང	Ground manifestation, ground display	gzhi snang
གཞི་སྣང་གི་འཆར་ལུགས	the way of arising of appearance of the ground gzhi snang gi lhun grub rin po che'i sbubs - the ground-display precious spare of spontaneous presence gzhi snang gi lhun grub rin po che'i sbubs - th...	gzhi snang gi 'char lugs
གཞི་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ	supreme manifestion of the ground of being as appearances	gzhi snang chen po
གཞི་སྣང་མཆེད་པ	burgeoning ground appearance, spreading fundamental appearance, growing fundamental appearance, the arising within the foundational phenomena	gzhi snang mched pa
གཞི་སྣང་འཆར་ཚུལ	mode in which the ground of being arises as manifest appearances	gzhi snang 'char tshul
གཞི་སྣང་བའི་འོད་གསལ	ground's visionproducing radiant light	gzhi snang ba'i 'od gsal
གཞི་སྣང་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	spontaneously present ground-appearance	gzhi snang lhun grub
གཞི་པ	SA brtag pa	gzhi pa
གཞི་སྤྱིལ་བ	(A) sa gzhi khod snyoms po bzos pa	gzhi spyil ba
གཞི་ཕུང་ཁམས་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the ground is the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas, the fundamental skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas	gzhi phung khams skye mched
གཞི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Syn {gnas lugs phyag chen} ground Mahamudra	gzhi phyag rgya chen po
གཞི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	Ground Mahamudra; ground Mahamudra	gzhi phyag chen
གཞི་ཕྱག་ཆེན་གྱི་རང་ཞལ	natural face of ground mahamudra	gzhi phyag chen gyi rang zhal
གཞི་ཕྱལ་ཕྱལ	the utterly even ground	gzhi phyal phyal
གཞི་ཕྱོགས	subject-basis	gzhi phyogs
གཞི་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	1) gzhi rtsa chung chung; 2) a vinaya text)	gzhi phran tshegs
གཞི་བ	dweller	gzhi ba
གཞི་བ་འཐུང	a child just when it is born	gzhi ba 'thung
གཞི་བོ	basis	gzhi bo
གཞི་བྱས	based upon	gzhi byas
གཞི་བྱས་ཏེ	{. . . gzhi byas pa/ te} taking . . . as a/ the basis	gzhi byas te
གཞི་བྱས་པ	{. . . gzhi byas pa/ te} taking . . . as a/ the basis	gzhi byas pa
གཞི་བྱེད	possessed of capital	gzhi byed
གཞི་བྱེས	gzhis byes	gzhi byes
གཞི་བྲའ	lay the basis	gzhi bra'
གཞི་བྲལ	no-basis	gzhi bral
གཞི་དབང	basis empowerment	gzhi dbang
གཞི་དབྱིངས	basic space, ground of being as basic space; ground space	gzhi dbyings
གཞི་དབྱིངས་ཀ་དག	the primordially pure ground space, ground space of primordial purity	gzhi dbyings ka dag
གཞི་དབྱིངས་ཀློང	Ying of the basis	gzhi dbyings klong
གཞི་འབེབས་པ	settle, establish oneself in a place	gzhi 'bebs pa
གཞི་འབྲས་ཟུང་འཇུག	unity of ground and fruition	gzhi 'bras zung 'jug
གཞི་མ	gzhi rtsa	gzhi ma
གཞི་མ་གྲུ་བཞི	square floor	gzhi ma gru bzhi
གཞི་མ་གྲུབ	the unestablished ground	gzhi ma grub
གཞི་མ་གྲུབ་པ	unfounded, unbased	gzhi ma grub pa
གཞི་མ་བྱེད	receptacle, subject	gzhi ma byed
གཞི་མེད	1) emptiness; 2) baseless, foundationless, groundless)	gzhi med
གཞི་མེད་ཀྱི་ལྷག་མ	lhag ma that the gound does not exist [R]	gzhi med kyi lhag ma
གཞི་མེད་ངེས་མེད་ཀློང	expanse in which everything is without true basis and indeterminate	gzhi med nges med klong
གཞི་མེད་རྟ་བྲལ	without any root or source	gzhi med rta bral
གཞི་མེད་དུ་རྟོགས	the realization of	gzhi med du rtogs
གཞི་མེད་པ	absence of entities	gzhi med pa
གཞི་མེད་རྩ་བྲལ	groundless and rootless	gzhi med rtsa bral
གཞི་མེད་རྩལ་བྲལ	groundless and rootless	gzhi med rtsal bral
གཞི་མེས	great-great grandfather, great grand father	gzhi mes
གཞི་མེས་མོ	great great grandmother	gzhi mes mo
གཞི་ཙུགས	so be it! Tibetan translation of "svaha"	gzhi tsugs
གཞི་བཙུགས་པ	established the foundation, founded	gzhi btsugs pa
གཞི་རྩ	(basis or) foundation; isc. underlying basis	gzhi rtsa
གཞི་རྩ་ཀུན་འདས	transcends any base	gzhi rtsa kun 'das
གཞི་རྩ་སྐྱེ་མེད	without root, basis, or origin	gzhi rtsa skye med
གཞི་རྩ་དངོས་པོ་མེད	without foundation or substantiality [Khenpo Chödzö says treat as separate components]	gzhi rtsa dngos po med
གཞི་རྩ་དངོས་མེད	{gzhi rtsa dngos po med} without foundation or substantiality [Khenpo Chödzö says treat as separate components]	gzhi rtsa dngos med
གཞི་རྩ་གཅོད་པ	to have/ come to/ bring total conviction	gzhi rtsa gcod pa
གཞི་རྩ་གཅོད་པ་དོན་གྱི་ཕཊ	the ultimate phat cuts the ground and root [of mind]	gzhi rtsa gcod pa don gyi phaT
གཞི་རྩ་བཅོད་པ	sever the underlying root, undermine	gzhi rtsa bcod pa
གཞི་རྩ་ཆོད་པ	to have/ come to/ bring total conviction	gzhi rtsa chod pa
གཞི་རྩ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	free from origin	gzhi rtsa ma grub pa
གཞི་རྩ་མེད་པ	rootless & groundless, that which is without a root 2357	gzhi rtsa med pa
གཞི་རྩ་འཛིན་གྱི་བྲལ	free from the ground and root of fixating	gzhi rtsa 'dzin gyi bral
གཞི་རྩ་འཛིན་པ	to form a basis	gzhi rtsa 'dzin pa
གཞི་རྩ་གཞི་མེད་རྩ་བྲལ	groundless and rootless	gzhi rtsa gzhi med rtsa bral
གཞི་རྩ་སེམས་ཀྱི་མ་ཆོད་ན	if you do not fully resolve your mind to its depths	gzhi rtsa sems kyi ma chod na
གཞི་རྩ་གསེམས་ཀྱི་མ་ཆོད་ན	if you do not fully resolve your mind to its depths	gzhi rtsa gsems kyi ma chod na
གཞི་རྩའི	radical	gzhi rtsa'i
གཞི་རྩའི་མཁེ་དབང	fundamental right	gzhi rtsa'i mkhe dbang
གཞི་རྩལ	basis and expression (mind & perceptions)	gzhi rtsal
གཞི་རྩེ་ཁུལ	within the jurisdiction or province of gshis ga tse	gzhi rtse khul
གཞི་ཚ	great great grandchild, any descendant	gzhi tsha
གཞི་ཚུགས	rtsa ba tshugs pa, so be it, "svaha"	gzhi tshugs
གཞི་ཚུས	so be it!, svaha	gzhi tshus
གཞི་མཚུངས	the same, similar	gzhi mtshungs
གཞི་འཛིན	grasp the subject	gzhi 'dzin
གཞི་འཛིན་པ	take up one's residence in a place world, transmigratory existence	gzhi 'dzin pa
གཞི་འཛིན་པའི་རིག་པ	insight that grasps the ground, understanding that grasps the subject	gzhi 'dzin pa'i rig pa
གཞི་འཛིན་ས	khungs lung	gzhi 'dzin sa
གཞི་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	ground great perfection/ ati, The ground is the great perfection [Nyingma chos skad de,	gzhi rdzogs pa chen po
གཞི་གནས་ཨིས་སེལཕ༹	arising wisdom, the essenc of insight=awareness, 'khor 'das kyi chos thams cad are complete and perfect, dreamlike med snang nyag gcig yin but rig rtsal bdag tu bzung ba las not other and, all the ...	gzhi gnas is self
གཞི་གཞག	resting in the ground (of being) [?]	gzhi gzhag
གཞི་བཞག་གི་ཐོག་ནས	based on	gzhi bzhag gi thog nas
གཞི་བཞག་ནས	based on	gzhi bzhag nas
གཞི་ཟི་བཞིན་པའོ	begs food door to door	gzhi zi bzhin pa'o
གཞི་གཟུང་བ	to establish the base of	gzhi gzung ba
གཞི་བཟུང	"according to" connective	gzhi bzung
གཞི་བཟུང་ས	taken for a basis	gzhi bzung sa
གཞི་ཡི་ངོ་བོ	essence which is the base	gzhi yi ngo bo
གཞི་ཡི་གནས	basic nature	gzhi yi gnas
གཞི་ཡི་གནས་ལུགས	fundamental enduring condition	gzhi yi gnas lugs
གཞི་ཡི་འོད་གསལ	fundamental luminosity	gzhi yi 'od gsal
གཞི་ཡི་སེམས་ཉིད	ground mind itself	gzhi yi sems nyid
གཞི་ཡུམ	the consort ground, {gzhi'i gnas tshul gang yin pa}	gzhi yum
གཞི་ཡེ་བབས	primordial state	gzhi ye babs
གཞི་རང་དབང	fundamental mastery	gzhi rang dbang
གཞི་རང་མལ	ground of being as the natural place of rest/ resting place	gzhi rang mal
གཞི་རས	cloth which is spread on a table or ground for the placing of offerings	gzhi ras
གཞི་རིམ	rmang gzhi, rim pa 'og ma	gzhi rim
གཞི་ལ་གཏོད་པ	direct oneself to the ground	gzhi la gtod pa
གཞི་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	dissolved/ absorbed into the ground of being	gzhi la thim pa
གཞི་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	1 of the gzhol ba gsum gyi bzlas pa, self visualization and front visualization of the deity, exert oneself with the ground, maintain the ground gzhi lam gyi 'od gsal gnyis dbyer med the inseparabi...	gzhi la gzhol ba
གཞི་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ	the ground, the Path, and the Fruit; ground, path and fruition	gzhi lam 'bras bu
གཞི་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་ཆོས	the dharmas of ground, path, and fruition	gzhi lam 'bras bu chos
གཞི་ལམ་འབྲས་གསུམ	ground, path and fruition [all vehicles have it: ground is resolving the view, path doing and experiencing the practice, frution getting enlightened gzhi lta ba gtan la phab pa dang, lam sgom pas n...	gzhi lam 'bras gsum
གཞི་ལས་འཕགས	emerging from the ground of being*	gzhi las 'phags
གཞི་ལས་གཞི་སྣང་དུ་ཤར་བ	groundappearance manifesting from the ground	gzhi las gzhi snang du shar ba
གཞི་ལས་ཤར་བའི་གཞི་སྣང	the manifest aspect of the ground of being that arises from that ground	gzhi las shar ba'i gzhi snang
གཞི་ལུགས	JBL: "the most basic nature/disposition/condition." Kh Namdrol of NNI uses this term to describe the inseparability of {chos nyid} and {chos can} in the view of anuttara[yoga tantra] of secret mant...	gzhi lugs
གཞི་ལུས	basic body	gzhi lus
གཞི་ཤེས	knowledge of the (foundation, subject), basic knowledge, omniscience, (1 of 3 types, knowledge of the foundation for meditation), SA thams cad mkhyen	gzhi shes
གཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་དགུ	9 dharmas symbolizing knowd	gzhi shes kyi chos dgu
གཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཐོང་ལམ	the path of seeing of knowledge of the foundation [R]	gzhi shes kyi mthong lam
གཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ	the aspects of knowledge of the foundation [R]	gzhi shes kyi rnam pa
གཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་ཉེར་བདུན	the 27 aspects of knowledge of the foundation	gzhi shes kyi rnam pa nyer bdun
གཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	the sbyor ba of knowledge of the foundation [among the sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses, gzhi attatchment to form etc having been refuted by meditation nyan rang gi sbyor ba shugs la 'phen byed k...	gzhi shes kyi sbyor ba
གཞི་ཤེས་སྦྱོར་བ་བཅུ	the 9 sbyor ba of knowledge of the foundation	gzhi shes sbyor ba bcu
གཞི་ཤེས་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་དགུ	the 9 dharmas exemplifying	gzhi shes mtshon byed kyi chos dgu
གཞི་སེམས་ཉིད	cause	gzhi sems nyid
གཞི་གསུམ	the three grounds [dbyar gnas dang gso sbyong dgag dbye]	gzhi gsum
གཞི་གསུམ་ཆོ་ག	the three practices of posadha, summer retreat gso sbyong dang, dbyar gnas, dgag dbye dngos su byed pa'i skor gyi gzhung, de yang zla 2358 ba re re bzhin 15th day &, new moon la gso sbyong is done ...	gzhi gsum cho ga
གཞི་གསུམ་གསལ་བྱེད	elucidate the three grounds [dbyar gnas dang gso sbyong dgag dbye ste text explaing how to do them 15th century by dka' chen ye shes rgyal mtshan	gzhi gsum gsal byed
གཞི་བསམ་སྦྱོར་བ་མཐར་ཐུག	basis, intent, engagement and completion	gzhi bsam sbyor ba mthar thug
གཞི་ལྷུང་གྲུབ་རྩ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	one of the {dkyil 'khor rnam gsum}	gzhi lhung grub rtsa ba'i dkyil 'khor
གཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	spontaneously present ground of being; isc. ground of being as spontaneous presence	gzhi lhun grub
གཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	natural state of the ground of spontaneous presence, the ground condition of spontaneous presence	gzhi lhun grub kyi gnas lugs
གཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	buddhahood that is/ as the spontaneously present ground of being	gzhi lhun grub kyi sangs rgyas
གཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྩ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of the ground, the root of spontaneous presence [R]	gzhi lhun grub rtsa ba'i dkyil 'khor
གཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྦུབས	the ground precious space of spontaneous presence	gzhi lhun grub rin po che'i sbubs
གཞིག	examine, scrape, shave	gzhig
གཞིག་གི་འཕྲོད	examine, ponder	gzhig gi 'phrod
གཞིག་ཅིང	when I consider	gzhig cing
གཞིག་ཏུ་རུང་བ	liable to destruction, destructible	gzhig tu rung ba
གཞིག་ན	when I examine	gzhig na
གཞིག་པ	(tha dad pa) gzhigs pa, gzhig pa, gzhigs,, analyze examine, think about, search, try, destroy	gzhig pa
གཞིག་འབྲེལ	{bsam blo gzhig 'brel zhib tu btang} think it over, examine well, reason carefully	gzhig 'brel
གཞིག་འབྲེལ་བྱ་བ	examining	gzhig 'brel bya ba
གཞིགས	gzhig pa!	gzhigs
གཞིགས་ནས	according to	gzhigs nas
གཞིགས་པ	to scrutinize, examine, referring to. Syn {dpud pa, gzhig na} when examine, {gzhig cing} when I consider; pf. of {gzhig pa}	gzhigs pa
གཞིན་རྗེ	lord of death	gzhin rje
གཞིན་མདོག་འགྱུར	one's face can change color	gzhin mdog 'gyur
གཞིན་ཟས	food of the dead, food given to lamas at funerals	gzhin zas
གཞིབ	suck, SA 'jib pa	gzhib
གཞིབ་འཐུང	1) suck and drink; 2) (met) infant)	gzhib 'thung
གཞིབ་པ	SA 'jib pa, sos bca' ba, lce 'jib pa	gzhib pa
གཞིབ་སྦུབས	'o ma etc. suckling sbu gu lta bu	gzhib sbubs
གཞིབས	suck, SA 'jib pa	gzhibs
གཞིབས་པ	put in order, lay in order	gzhibs pa
གཞིའི	ground aspect of . . .	gzhi'i
གཞིའི་སྐུ་གསུམ	the three kayas of the ground [the ground of ordnay birth nirmanakaya, dharmakaya, the ground of ordinary death, the ground of the ordinary bardon sambhogakaya]	gzhi'i sku gsum
གཞིའི་རྒྱུད	tantra as ground/ ground aspect of tantra	gzhi'i rgyud
གཞིའི་སྒྱུ་ལུས	fundamental illusory body of the bardo	gzhi'i sgyu lus
གཞིའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ	the fundamental svabhavikakaya	gzhi'i ngo bo nyid sku
གཞིའི་ཆོས	'fundamental dharmas [R]	gzhi'i chos
གཞིའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	ground dharmakaya	gzhi'i chos sku
གཞིའི་གཉེན་པོ	the ground as antidote [R]	gzhi'i gnyen po
གཞིའི་ཐིག་ལེ	bindu as ground/ ground aspect of bindu	gzhi'i thig le
གཞིའི་དུས	the time of the ground	gzhi'i dus
གཞིའི་འདོད་ལུགས་བདུན	1) {gzhi lhun grub tu 'dod pa'i lugs}. 2) {gzhi ma nges par} 3) {gzhi nges pa don kyi dongs gzhir} 4) {gzhi cir yang bsgyur du btub par} 5) {gzhi cir yang khas blang du btub pa} 6) {gzhi sna tshogs...	gzhi'i 'dod lugs bdun
གཞིའི་རྡོར་བཟླས	ground vajra recitation? [from birth to death rlung arising and entering, gzhi'i gnas lugs, accoding to B"n, 'od gsal stong pa bon sku'i ngo bo rang bzhin rnam dag rtsol med lhun grub in all sentie...	gzhi'i rdor bzlas
གཞིའི་གནས་ཚུལ	ground of the existential self	gzhi'i gnas tshul
གཞིའི་གནས་ལུགས	the basic condition	gzhi'i gnas lugs
གཞིའི་རྣམ་བྱང	complete purity of the ground	gzhi'i rnam byang
གཞིའི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	the nirmanakaya of the ground	gzhi'i sprul sku
གཞིའི་དབུ་མ	ground madhyamaka	gzhi'i dbu ma
གཞིའི་གཞིར	the ground of the ground	gzhi'i gzhir
གཞིའི་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of the ground	gzhi'i zung 'jug
གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ	clear light of the base	gzhi'i 'od gsal
གཞིའི་འོད་གསལ་ཀ་དག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the primordially pure dharmakaya of ground luminosity	gzhi'i 'od gsal ka dag chos kyi sku
གཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Ground Wisdom 2359	gzhi'i ye shes
གཞིའི་རིག་པ	the fundamental awareness	gzhi'i rig pa
གཞིའི་ལོངས་སྐུ	foundation sambhogakaya	gzhi'i longs sku
གཞིའི་སེམས་དབེན	fundamental solitary mind [death luminosity snga logs kyi snang mched thob gsum	gzhi'i sems dben
གཞིར	on the basis of	gzhir
གཞིར་གྱུར	which is the basis of	gzhir gyur
གཞིར་གྱུར་པ	is the common basis	gzhir gyur pa
གཞིར་འགྱུར	form a basis for, cause, which causes, which is the foundation. [Notes. According to u.S., this refers to one's ordinary body, others hold that it refers to one's body as the visualized deity. Dzig...	gzhir 'gyur
གཞིར་བཅས	of a certainty, as a matter of course, SA yod bshags	gzhir bcas
གཞིར་གནས	abide as the base, remain as the base	gzhir gnas
གཞིར་གནས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	basic luminosity; the Clear Light which abides as the ground	gzhir gnas kyi 'od gsal
གཞིར་གནས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	Awareness which abides as the ground	gzhir gnas kyi rig pa
གཞིར་གནས་གྱི་ཆོས་སྐུ	The basic dharmakaya	gzhir gnas gyi chos sku
གཞིར་སྣང་སྲིད་བཞག	the natural existence of the phenomena world	gzhir snang srid bzhag
གཞིར་བྱས	take as basis; sm. {rtsa bar bzung}	gzhir byas
གཞིར་བྱས་ནས	based on, taking for granted that	gzhir byas nas
གཞིར་བྱས་པ	to make/ take as the ground	gzhir byas pa
གཞིར་བྱེད་པ	to make/ take as the ground	gzhir byed pa
གཞིར་བྲས་ལ	based on that	gzhir bras la
གཞིར་གཞེངས	ground manifest	gzhir gzhengs
གཞིར་བཞག	based on	gzhir bzhag
གཞིར་བཞུགས	abiding in the ground	gzhir bzhugs
གཞིར་བཞེངས	spontaneously existing; manifested in the ground; manifested ground	gzhir bzhengs
གཞིར་བཟུང	rtsa bar bzung ba,//srid jus gzhir bzung ste las don sgrub pa,//'Char gzhi gzhir bzung ghis legs par bsgrubs pa	gzhir bzung
གཞིར་བཟུང་ནས	according to	gzhir bzung nas
གཞིལ	depose, expel, SA 'jil ba, bcil, pressing	gzhil
གཞིལ་བ	literally forcing the breath to one side of trunk/abdomen, pushing, SA 'jil ba, bcom pa, 'joms pa, gshibs pa, bsgribs, to hold forced downward, SA rlung bsang brgyad	gzhil ba
གཞིས	native	gzhis
གཞིས་ཀ	estate	gzhis ka
གཞིས་ཀ་ཙེ	Capital of Tsang province	gzhis ka tse
གཞིས་ཀ་རྩེ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gzhis ka rtse
གཞིས་སྐྱེལ	gzhis ka zhig nas gzhis ka gzhan zhig tu skyel dgos pa'i dbor 'dren gyi khral	gzhis skyel
གཞིས་ཁག	gzhis ka khag	gzhis khag
གཞིས་ཁག་གི་ཐོན	proceeds of an estate	gzhis khag gi thon
གཞིས་ཁག་གི་ཐོན་སྐོར	income	gzhis khag gi thon skor
གཞིས་ཁང	1) sger pa'i khang khyim lte ba; 2) sa gnas kyi gzhis gnyer sdod khang)?	gzhis khang
གཞིས་གྱོག	gzhis ka'i las gyog	gzhis gyog
གཞིས་གྲོང	colony	gzhis grong
གཞིས་དགོན	the one monastery in a town, the one monaster in a village or town	gzhis dgon
གཞིས་མགྲོན	1) pha yul nas yong ba'i 'grul pa; 2) Khyim tshang nang la resident &, phyogs nas yong ba'i mgron po)	gzhis mgron
གཞིས་རྒྱལ་དིང་གསུམ	gzhis rtse dang, rgyal rtse, ding ri gsum,	gzhis rgyal ding gsum
གཞིས་བསྒྲིལ	two khyim tshang combined into 1	gzhis bsgril
གཞིས་བཅས་པ	someone continually stayingin a place	gzhis bcas pa
གཞིས་ཆགས	settlement, resettlement camp	gzhis chags
གཞིས་ཆགས་མཁན	settler	gzhis chags mkhan
གཞིས་ཆགས་པ	1) someone continually staying in 1 place; 2) sa gnas nges can zhig tu gzhis chags nas resident)	gzhis chags pa
གཞིས་གཉེར	manager of a farm	gzhis gnyer
གཞིས་དུད	in the gzhis ka'i included little dud tshang khral rten sa zhing med pa	gzhis dud
གཞིས་དེབ	book of gzhis kyi sa khang mi gsum and who comes and goes	gzhis deb
གཞིས་སྡོད	gzhis su gtan sdod kyi las byed gtso bo, gzhis su bsdad nas mnga' bdag gi las ka byed mkhan gyi 'go gtso	gzhis sdod
གཞིས་པ	gzhis thog gam khyim du sdod mkhan,/	gzhis pa
གཞིས་སྤོ་བ	move one's residence	gzhis spo ba
གཞིས་བྱེས་ཞལ་འཛོམས	khyim gzhis su sdod mkhan dang, phyogs 'gro'i mi mnyam 'dzoms byung ba,//gzhis byes zhal 'dzoms thog gsung gleng zhib rgyas gnang song	gzhis byes zhal 'dzoms
གཞིས་འབབ	gzhis ka'i yaong 'bab	gzhis 'bab
གཞིས་འབྲུ	gzhis ka'i ston thog 'bru rigs	gzhis 'bru
གཞིས་འབྲོག	1) gzhis pa and 'brog pa; 2) Mang' bdag gsum gyi gzhis ka'i khongs gtogs kyi 'brog pa)	gzhis 'brog
གཞིས་མ་ལག	gzhis gtso bo and its limbs	gzhis ma lag
གཞིས་རྩ་ལེན	gzhis ka rtsa ba nas len pa ste gzhung bzhes btang ba	gzhis rtsa len
གཞིས་རྩེ	gzhis ka rtse	gzhis rtse
གཞིས་བཟུང་ནས	they settled	gzhis bzung nas
གཞིས་འོག	one under or belonging to an estate, tenant or farmer in an estate	gzhis 'og
གཞིས་ལག	gzhis ka'i yan lag	gzhis lag
གཞིས་ལུགས	natural state, way things are	gzhis lugs
གཞིས་སྲུང་ཁྲ་མོ་རྫོང་དྲུག	six	gzhis srung khra mo rdzong drug
མུལྟི	colored fortresses that protect the home	multi
གཞུ	1) bow [syn: mda' skyod dang, mda' stan, mda' lto ba, mda' snun byed, mda' 'phen, mda' za, mda' zas can, gnam ru bcas so] 2360	gzhu
གཞུ་ཀྲད	bow-string	gzhu krad
གཞུ་བཀང	nock an arrow and draw the bow	gzhu bkang
གཞུ་བཀང་བ	a bow with an arrow ready to shoot	gzhu bkang ba
གཞུ་བཀུག་པ	bent the bow	gzhu bkug pa
གཞུ་སྐྲ	buzzing of the string of a bow	gzhu skra
གཞུ་ཁྱིམ	Sagitarrius: nyi khyim zhag nyi bar skar gnas 18 char tshe sun goes into the house of Saggitarius, lho glong shar ma'i tshangs thig steng dgun nyi ldog 'char	gzhu khyim
གཞུ་མཁན	bow maker	gzhu mkhan
གཞུ་གུ	tail	gzhu gu
གཞུ་འགུགས་པ	unbend a bow	gzhu 'gugs pa
གཞུ་འགེང་བ	bend a bow	gzhu 'geng ba
གཞུ་འགེངས་པ	to pull the string of a bow gzhu 'gengs pa ste mda' dang sbyar te 'then pa - to pull the string of a bow with an arrow for shooting gzhu 'gengs pa ste mda' dang sbyar te 'then pa - pull the string ...	gzhu 'gengs pa
གཞུ་རྒྱའི་རྣམ་པ	position of the bow	gzhu rgya'i rnam pa
གཞུ་རྒྱལ	asura, bowstring	gzhu rgyal
གཞུ་རྒྱུད	bow-string	gzhu rgyud
གཞུ་རྒྱུད་འཐེན་པ	bend the bow-string	gzhu rgyud 'then pa
གཞུ་སྒྲ	after drawing the bow, glod skabs by ung ba'i skad	gzhu sgra
གཞུ་ཅན	bow man	gzhu can
གཞུ་བཅོས	constructed a bow	gzhu bcos
གཞུ་མཆོག	bow end	gzhu mchog
གཞུ་མཆོག་འཛུག་པ	set the string to a bow	gzhu mchog 'dzug pa
གཞུ་ལྟར་དགུག	to draw in air like a bow	gzhu ltar dgug
གཞུ་ཐུང	1) mda' stan thung ba; 2) Ka steng gi gzhu chung on a small pillar)	gzhu thung
གཞུ་ཐོག	arch of a bridge	gzhu thog
གཞུ་འཐེན་པ	unbend a bow	gzhu 'then pa
གཞུ་བདུང་བ	(A) draw the bow	gzhu bdung ba
གཞུ་བདུངས	bent the bow	gzhu bdungs
གཞུ་འདོམ	a fathom	gzhu 'dom
གཞུ་འདོམ་གང	one bow, one fathom measure	gzhu 'dom gang
གཞུ་འདོམས	cord, fathom, thong or rope made of yak skin nine fathoms long	gzhu 'doms
གཞུ་འདོམས་གང་བ	four cubits	gzhu 'doms gang ba
གཞུ་འདོམས་གང་ཙམ	one fathom	gzhu 'doms gang tsam
གཞུ་རྡུང་བ	bend the bow	gzhu rdung ba
གཞུ་ལྡན	furnished with a bow	gzhu ldan
གཞུ་བརྡུངས་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	by merely bending his bow	gzhu brdungs pa tsam gyis
གཞུ་སྤྱན	"bow eye"	gzhu spyan
གཞུ་བ	to strike, to lack, bow for shooting; ft. of {gzhu ba} [TC}; {gzhu ba, bzhus pa, gzhu ba, gzhus} trans. v	gzhu ba
གཞུ་བའམ་འཕོག་པ	stroke	gzhu ba'am 'phog pa
གཞུ་དབྱིབས	shaped like a bow	gzhu dbyibs
གཞུ་མ	gzhug gi	gzhu ma
གཞུ་མོ	bow	gzhu mo
གཞུ་རྩ	a nadi shaped like a bow	gzhu rtsa
གཞུ་རིང	1) mda' tan gyi long bow; 2) gzhu ring on top of a pillar	gzhu ring
གཞུ་རུ	place in tibet	gzhu ru
གཞུ་ལས་སྐྱེས	(met) asura	gzhu las skyes
གཞུ་ཤུབས	gzhu 'jug snod	gzhu shubs
གཞུག	put, enter and accept, put into, end, extremity, SA 'jug pa, to take part in, to participate in, to leave in	gzhug
གཞུག་གུ	rump, ventlet of a bird	gzhug gu
གཞུག་ཆུང	rump, ventlet of a bird	gzhug chung
གཞུག་ཏོ	1) sgal tshigs mjug gi bone gzhug gu chung zer ba de'i ming gi rnam grangs shig; 2) tip of the tail)	gzhug to
གཞུག་སྟེགས	a board to place things on	gzhug stegs
གཞུག་ཐུང	1) sgal rus kyi mtha' ma gsum po; 2) short tail; 3) phyi thag thung ba)	gzhug thung
གཞུག་པ	to launch	gzhug pa
གཞུག་པ་ལྡེམ་དགོངས	plan for incarnation [one of the {ldem por dgongs pa bzhi} four plans) [one of the ldem dgongs bzhi], bstan pa la gzhug pa'i don du gang zag gi bdag yod par gsungs pa lta bu'o]	gzhug pa ldem dgongs
གཞུག་པ་ལ་ལྔེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	plan for incarnation [one of the {ldem por dgongs pa bzhi} four plans]	gzhug pa la lngem por dgongs pa
གཞུག་པ་ལ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	plan for incarnation, one of the {ldem por dgongs pa bzhi} four plans	gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa
གཞུག་མ	tail of a bird	gzhug ma
གཞུག་རྩ	root-text	gzhug rtsa
གཞུག་རིལ	mjug ma 'khyil ril te khyi gzhug lta bu	gzhug ril
གཞུག་ལ	after, following	gzhug la
གཞུག་ལ་འགྲོ	to follow	gzhug la 'gro
གཞུག་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	follow	gzhug la 'gro ba
གཞུག་ལ་ལུས་པ	to be late, be behind [schedule]	gzhug la lus pa
གཞུག་ཤོར	{sngon 'gro'i chos gzhug shor ba'i nyams len la snying po til 'bru tsam yang med pa} to practise the preliminaries without going right through to the end makes no sense whatsoever	gzhug shor
གཞུགས་སྐུ	a seated figure	gzhugs sku
གཞུགས་སྟངས	manner of sitting	gzhugs stangs
གཞུགས་གནས	dwelling place	gzhugs gnas
གཞུགས་པ	enter	gzhugs pa
གཞུགས་པ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	[TRS 134-1] expl	gzhugs pa ldem por dgongs pa
གཞུགས་པ་ལ་ལྡེམ་པོར་དགོངས་པ	covert intention with respect to entry into the teaching	gzhugs pa la ldem por dgongs pa
བི༹ཨེཝས་ཨནད	--, textual tradition, fundamental root text, the middle, midst, spinal marrow, scriptual system, major text, Authoritative scripture	views and
གཞུང་ཀོ	chu bo'i gzhung du gtong ba'i ko ba	gzhung ko
གཞུང་རྐྱང	mi tshang mi rgyu gnyis 'dzoms la rang khongs nas 'bod pa'i zhe tshig //gzhung rkyang gi gtong yong rgyu nor,//gzhung rkyang gi 'tsho tshis,/	gzhung rkyang
གཞུང་ཁང	principal or central room	gzhung khang
གཞུང་ཁྲ	don phra zhib phyogs gcig tu bkod pa'i yi ge	gzhung khra
གཞུང་ཁྲག	healthy blood	gzhung khrag
གཞུང་ཁྲལ	revenue, government revenue	gzhung khral
གཞུང་ཁྲལ་དངོས་གཞི	srid gzhung rang la babs pa'i khral ngo ma	gzhung khral dngos gzhi
གཞུང་ཁྲིད་དང་ཡན་ལག	Root and subsidiary guidance texts	gzhung khrid dang yan lag
གཞུང་གི་དོན	the main body of the text; the meaning of the work	gzhung gi don
གཞུང་གི་སྤྱི་ཐོག་ནས	the local authorities concertedly	gzhung gi spyi thog nas
གཞུང་གི་ལུགས	the tradition of the great treatises	gzhung gi lugs
གཞུང་གི་ལུས	the text as a whole	gzhung gi lus
གཞུང་གྲལ	Main sitting row	gzhung gral
གཞུང་གྲལ་དབུས	central area; refers to the space between the two parallel main sitting rows	gzhung gral dbus
གཞུང་གྲོན	rgyal khab bam tshogs khag gis btang ba'i 'gro gron	gzhung gron
གཞུང་འགྲེལ	authoritative commentary	gzhung 'grel
གཞུང་རྒྱུག	Tibetan govt rang la khral 'ul rgyug mkhan mi ser	gzhung rgyug
གཞུང་རྒྱུག་འཁྱེར་ཞན	Tibetan govt kyi gzhung rgyug mi ser dbul phongs	gzhung rgyug 'khyer zhan
གཞུང་རྒྱུག་མི་སེར	Tibetan govt rang la gtogs pa'i khral rgyug mi ser	gzhung rgyug mi ser
གཞུང་རྒྱུག་ས་འཛིན	Tibetan govt rang la khral rgyug mkhan gyi khral pa	gzhung rgyug sa 'dzin
གཞུང་སྒེར	spyi sger,//gzhung sger gnyis lta,//gzhung sger gnyis phan,//gzhung sger mnyam gnyer	gzhung sger
གཞུང་སྒེར་ཆོས་གསུམ	Tibetan govt srid gzhung and sger pa mi drag dgon sde khag bcas te mnga' bdag gsum	gzhung sger chos gsum
གཞུང་སྒོ	big main gate gzhung brgya pa dngos grub dpal 'bar (16th cent); author of {byams pa'i smon lam gyi 'grel pa	gzhung sgo
གཞུང་བསྒྲིགས་པ	compile or compose texts	gzhung bsgrigs pa
གཞུང་ངན	bad character	gzhung ngan
གཞུང་ངན་པོ	phyi thag med pa	gzhung ngan po
གཞུང་དངུལ	gzhung ngam spyi pa'i dngul te, rgyal khab dang, las khungs, khe las, tshogs khag bcas la dbang ba'i dngul	gzhung dngul
གཞུང་དངོས	main part of the text	gzhung dngos
གཞུང་བཅད	1) dar gos sogs gzhung nas bcad pa; 2) dkyus ring ba'i phyogs brgyud nas phyin pa)	gzhung bcad
གཞུང་བཅད་རིན་གོང	government resolved price	gzhung bcad rin gong
གཞུང་ཆ་ཚང	whole text	gzhung cha tshang
གཞུང་ཆུ	1) lung pa'i dkyil nas rgyug pa'i chu; 2) bod rang skyong ljongs kyi lha ri rdzong khongs kyi chu bo zhig dang, yid 'ong gtsang po'i yan lag cig yin)?	gzhung chu
གཞུང་ཆུ་བོ	a wide river, 1 of the three parts of gzhung bstan bcos, government, middle, center, central spine, main, classical writing, text	gzhung chu bo
ཐྲེཨེ་པརཙ་ཨོཕ༹་གཞུང་བསྟན་བཅོས	government, middle, center, central spinal, main, classical writing, text	three parts of gzhung bstan bcos
གཞུང་ཆེན	chu bo'i gzhung chen - the great coursing of a river. Syn {chu bo'i rgyun}	gzhung chen
གཞུང་ཆེན་ལྔ	five major subjects	gzhung chen lnga
གཞུང་ཆེན་བཅུ་གསུམ	Thirteen major philosophical texts / great root texts of philosophy. The fundamental treatises on Buddhist philosophy covering the topics of Vinaya, the bodhisattva trainings, Maitreya's five treat...	gzhung chen bcu gsum
གཞུང་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	five major basic texts: 1) {'dul ba mdo rtsa ba}. 2) mngon pa mdzod}. 3) {dbu ma 'jug pa}. 4) {phar phyin}. 5) {tsad ma rnam 'grel}	gzhung chen po lnga
གཞུང་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས	fundamental scriptures, texts	gzhung chen po rnams
གཞུང་ཆེན་པོད་ལྔ	five major basic texts, 1) {'dul ba mdo rtsa ba}. 2) mngon pa mdzod} 3) {dbu ma 'jug pa} 4) {phar phyin} 5) {tshad ma rnam 'grel}	gzhung chen pod lnga
གཞུང་ཆེན་མོ	tsong kha pa's lam rim	gzhung chen mo
གཞུང་ཉིད	original texts	gzhung nyid
གཞུང་གཉེར	taken care of by the govt	gzhung gnyer
གཞུང་ཏོག	government (employ, service)	gzhung tog
གཞུང་བཏང་མི་འགྲོ	srid gzhung nas phyogs la btang ba'i mi sna	gzhung btang mi 'gro
གཞུང་ལྟར	according to the treatises	gzhung ltar
གཞུང་ཐ་སྙད	scholastic sophists	gzhung tha snyad
གཞུང་ཐ་སྙད་མཁན	scholastic sophists	gzhung tha snyad mkhan
གཞུང་ཐག	tent's gzhung thag	gzhung thag
གཞུང་ཐིག	1) dkyil thig; 2) dkyus su btab pa'i thig)	gzhung thig
གཞུང་ཐུབ	dignified	gzhung thub
གཞུང་དུ	according to the root text	gzhung du
གཞུང་དོན	the meaning of the work; the main body of the text	gzhung don
གཞུང་དོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to be away on official business	gzhung don du 'gro ba
གཞུང་དོས	Tibetan govt khral gyi do po	gzhung dos
གཞུང་གདམས	instructional scriptures	gzhung gdams
གཞུང་ལྡན	to have a good character	gzhung ldan
གཞུང་ནས	in a direct way	gzhung nas
གཞུང་གནས	1) government [place]; 2) Tibetan govt srid gzhung la gzhung gnas)	gzhung gnas
གཞུང་རྣམས	literature	gzhung rnams
གཞུང་རྣམས་ལས	from the texts	gzhung rnams las
གཞུང་སྣེ	srid gzhung gi las sne ste, Tibetan govt las byed dpon rigs	gzhung sne
གཞུང་པ	uplander, government officer, middle finger 2362	gzhung pa
གཞུང་པ་སྤྱི	general scriptual student	gzhung pa spyi
གཞུང་པད་ཆེན	most important disciplines	gzhung pad chen
གཞུང་པོ་ཏི་ལྔ	the main four sutra texts [phar phyin, dbu ma, tshad ma rnam 'grel, 'dul ba, mdzod [Abhidharmakosha]	gzhung po ti lnga
གཞུང་ཕྱི་མོའི་དབུ་མ	the Middle Way of the Original Scriptures	gzhung phyi mo'i dbu ma
གཞུང་ཕྱོགས	1) srid gzhung gi phyogs sam ngos; 2) rgyun phyogs sam dkyus phyogs,/	gzhung phyogs
གཞུང་བཕྲང	do the main practice	gzhung bphrang
གཞུང་བ	attend, be heedful, attention	gzhung ba
གཞུང་བུན	1) srid gzhung gis sger so sor btang ba'i bu lon; 2) deng skabs ni rgyal khab kyis spyi dmangs sam phyi rgyal nas g.yar ba'i bu lon)	gzhung bun
གཞུང་བྱིན་པོ	dpe cha'i gzhung yongs rdzogs	gzhung byin po
གཞུང་བྱེད་པ་པོ་གསུམ	Three Authors of Fundamental Texts. Nagarjuna, Asanga, and Dignaga	gzhung byed pa po gsum
གཞུང་བྲིས	gzhung ris	gzhung bris
གཞུང་བླ་མ	1 of the 'dul ba lung sde bzhi	gzhung bla ma
གཞུང་འབུལ	rgyal khab la rtsis 'bul ba,//gzhung 'bul khe 'bab	gzhung 'bul
གཞུང་འབྲུ	government grain	gzhung 'bru
གཞུང་འབྲེལ་སྐུ་ཚབ	diplomat	gzhung 'brel sku tshab
གཞུང་མ	middle, center	gzhung ma
གཞུང་བཙུགས་པ	to found a scriptural system	gzhung btsugs pa
གཞུང་རྩ	root-text	gzhung rtsa
གཞུང་ཚབ	government subsitute person	gzhung tshab
གཞུང་ཚབ་ཀྱི་ལས་ཁུངས	embassy	gzhung tshab kyi las khungs
གཞུང་ཚབ་ཀྱི་ལས་རོགས	attache	gzhung tshab kyi las rogs
གཞུང་ཚབ་ཆེན་མོ	rgyal khab so so'i srid gzhung gi sku tshab chen mo,	gzhung tshab chen mo
གཞུང་ཚབ་པ	ambassador	gzhung tshab pa
གཞུང་ཚིག	textual learning	gzhung tshig
གཞུང་ཚོང	government buying and selling	gzhung tshong
གཞུང་ཚོང་པ	government agent who buys and sells	gzhung tshong pa
གཞུང་འཛུག	set up bureaucracy	gzhung 'dzug
གཞུང་འཛུགས	set up bureaucracy	gzhung 'dzugs
གཞུང་རྫོགས་པ	the whole tradition gzhung zhag nyi skar brgyad dang chu	gzhung rdzogs pa
ཚོད་ང་བརྒྱད	spyi zla brgyad pa'i tshes nyer bdun skor nas gzhung zhag nyer gcig 'dren, sad nges par yod pa'i skabs so	tshod nga brgyad
གཞུང་ཞབས	Tibetan govt dpon rigs ser skya	gzhung zhabs
གཞུང་གཞན་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	[scriptures] incorporated with other scriptures	gzhung gzhan la brten pa
གཞུང་གཞིས	Tibetan govt dbang ba'i gzhis ka	gzhung gzhis
གཞུང་བཞིན	correct manner	gzhung bzhin
གཞུང་བཞེས	confiscation	gzhung bzhes
གཞུང་བཞེས་གཏོང་བ	nationalize	gzhung bzhes gtong ba
གཞུང་བཟང	phyi thag ring ba	gzhung bzang
གཞུང་བཟོ་བ	gzhung gi bzo pa	gzhung bzo ba
གཞུང་ཡིག	1) gzhung don gyi yi ge; 2) yig gzugs gzhung ris kyi rus dbyibs)	gzhung yig
གཞུང་རིས	Lhasa'i rtse slob grva bas calligraphy form	gzhung ris
གཞུང་རུ	Tibetan govt la gtogs pa'i ru ba	gzhung ru
གཞུང་ལ་ངོ་ལོག	treason	gzhung la ngo log
གཞུང་ལམ	highway, thoroughfare, highway, main road, approach	gzhung lam
གཞུང་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ	the main road	gzhung lam chen po
གཞུང་ལས	1) sger don gyi ldog phyogs; 2) Tibetan govt lag shes bzo pa bkol spyod kyis rgyug 'jug pa'i khral 'ul)	gzhung las
གཞུང་ལས་ཆེན་མོ	Tibetan govt, lag shes bzo las mi mang bskongs bsdus kyis dus yun ring po'i bar gla phogs sne sel tsam sprad nas gzhung las sna tshogs byed du 'jug pa'i khral chen zhig	gzhung las chen mo
གཞུང་ལུགས	scriptural tradition	gzhung lugs
གཞུང་ལུགས་རྒྱུགས་ཕྲོད	examination in Metaphysics	gzhung lugs rgyugs phrod
གཞུང་ལུགས་རྒྱུགས་ཡྲོད	examination in Metaphysics	gzhung lugs rgyugs yrod
གཞུང་ལུགས་ཆེན་པོ	the tradition of the great treatises	gzhung lugs chen po
གཞུང་ལུགས་པ	a follower of the scriptural system, scholar	gzhung lugs pa
གཞུང་ལུགས་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of a scriptural tradition	gzhung lugs smra ba
གཞུང་ལུགས་འཛིན	(met) minister	gzhung lugs 'dzin
གཞུང་ལུགས་འཛིན་པ	minister of state, government officials	gzhung lugs 'dzin pa
གཞུང་ལུགས་ལེགས་བཤད	13 century by sa skya pandi ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan phyi rol mu stegs pa and nang pa sangs rgyas pa'i doctrines explaining text	gzhung lugs legs bshad
གཞུང་ལུས	main part/ subject of a text	gzhung lus
གཞུང་ཤིང	life pillar	gzhung shing
གཞུང་ཤེང	life filler	gzhung sheng
གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན	mahayana path and fruit showing buddha's teachings, textual prajnaparamita	gzhung sher phyin
གཞུང་གཤག	1) dkyus su gshag pa - // dgra bo'i dmag dpung gzhung gshag gis dpa' bo rnams mdun mchongs byed pa; 2) dkyil du gshag pa	gzhung gshag
གཞུང་གཤགས་བྱེད་པ	justice or investigation done by government	gzhung gshags byed pa
གཞུང་བཤད	textual commentaries	gzhung bshad
གཞུང་བཤད་བྱས་པ	explained	gzhung bshad byas pa
གཞུང་ས	government, court	gzhung sa
གཞུང་ས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང	name of traditional government of Tibet	gzhung sa dga' ldan pho brang
གཞུང་སེམས	the thought of universal benefit	gzhung sems
གཞུང་སྲོང་བ	1) tll the story of lha mo bas 'khrab gzhung; 2) gtam dang las don gyi gzhung drang por srong ba)	gzhung srong ba
གཞུང་སྲོལ	textual tradition	gzhung srol
གཞུང་གསེར	crown gold	gzhung gser
གཞུང་བསྲང	to do the main practice 2363	gzhung bsrang
གཞུང་བསྲངས	don gzhung drang por bsrangs pa,//drang pos gzhung bsrangs na sgo ngas rta khyog	gzhung bsrangs
གཞུང་བསྲིངས	rgyun yun ring du btang ba,//gzhung bsrings nas mthun sgril dam zab byas,//Mdza' mthun 'brel ba gzhung bsrings byed pa	gzhung bsrings
གཞུང་བསླངས	Thrangu Rinpoche: emphasize, maintain	gzhung bslangs
གཞུངས	attend, SA gzhung ba	gzhungs
གཞུངས་བརྒྱུངས	gzhungs pa'am brgyungs pa ste, sgal tshigs nang gi klad pa	gzhungs brgyungs
གཞུངས་ཐོགས	kind	gzhungs thogs
གཞུངས་པ	1) sgal rnag; 2) clear of skillful mind)	gzhungs pa
གཞུངས་རིང	phyi thag ring ba,//gzhungs ring gi grogs po	gzhungs ring
གཞུད་པ	go, walk, put into, excellent in its kind	gzhud pa
གཞུན	tame, subdue, SA 'jun pa	gzhun
གཞུན་པོ	1) good, pleasing; 2) with total sincere effort las la easily done)	gzhun po
གཞུན་བསླངས	to promote	gzhun bslangs
གཞུམ	cause to shudder, SA 'jum pa	gzhum
གཞུམ་པ	[f 'jum pa]	gzhum pa
གཞུའི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion of Sagittarius, eleventh of {skar khyim bcu gnyis}	gzhu'i khyim
གཞུའི་འཆང་བཟུང	ends or notches of bow which hold the string	gzhu'i 'chang bzung
གཞུའི་འཕྲུལ་གྱིས་མདའ་འགྲོ་བ་ལྟར	like an arrow from a bow	gzhu'i 'phrul gyis mda' 'gro ba ltar
གཞུའུ	small bow	gzhu'u
གཞུར	(A) gzhung	gzhur
གཞུར་འགྲོ་བ	flow	gzhur 'gro ba
གཞུར་བརྟག	(A) zur za	gzhur brtag
གཞུར་བརྟག་པ	a little faulty, defective	gzhur brtag pa
གཞུར་བ	{gzhur ba, gzhur ba, gzhur ba, gzhur} trans. v.; to shear, shave, cut off	gzhur ba
གཞུར་མེད	(A) gzhom med	gzhur med
གཞུས	imp. of {gzhu ba}	gzhus
གཞུས་པ	to hit; {sta res gzhus pa} to hit with an ax	gzhus pa
གཞེ་ནིང	SA gzhes ning	gzhe ning
གཞེ་ར	parsley	gzhe ra
གཞེང	SA zheng	gzheng
གཞེད་དགོངས	probable wrong spelling, see bzhed dgongs	gzhed dgongs
གཞེན	remembering or reminding	gzhen
གཞེན་བསྐུལ	goodness or benefit la bskul ba'i dran bskul,//blo mthun gyi bsam blo 'khyog 'gro ba la drang por srong ba'i gzhen bskul byed pa,/	gzhen bskul
གཞེན་བསྐུལ་བ	remind a person, refresh the memory	gzhen bskul ba
གཞེན་གྱི་སྙིང་བརྩེ་བ	being under the care of a compassionate person [R]	gzhen gyi snying brtse ba
གཞེན་བཏད་པ	admonish, exhort	gzhen btad pa
གཞེན་བཏབ་པ	admonish, exhort	gzhen btab pa
གཞེན་འདེབས	dran skul,//'Phral 'phral gzhen 'debs byed pa	gzhen 'debs
གཞེན་འདེབས་པ	admonish, exhort	gzhen 'debs pa
གཞེན་པ	to light, kindle, inflame	gzhen pa
གཞེབ་མ	wicker chest	gzheb ma
གཞེར་པ	SA bsten pa	gzher pa
གཞེར་བ	(A) attend, see [a physician]	gzher ba
གཞེས	2nd day after to-morrow	gzhes
གཞེས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཉིན་དཀར་པོ	gzhes nyin	gzhes kyi lha nyin dkar po
གཞེས་འཆར	nyin mo bzhi pa'i thog gi dus tshigs re mos,// Ma gzhes 'char thog tshogs 'du re 'tshog	gzhes 'char
གཞེས་འཇགས	1) gzhes nyin nam shar; 2) sit down)	gzhes 'jags
གཞེས་ཉིན	three days from now [today]. gnangs nyin gyi rjes ma	gzhes nyin
གཞེས་རྙིང	the day after tomorrow	gzhes rnying
གཞེས་ནིང	the year before last	gzhes ning
གཞེས་ནིང་ལོ	the year before last	gzhes ning lo
གཞེས་པ	(A) stay live remin, sit, stay, wait	gzhes pa
གཞེས་ཕོད	gnangs phod kyi lo'i rjes ma	gzhes phod
གཞེས་རིང་ལོ	the year before last	gzhes ring lo
གཞོ་སྟོད་གཏེར་སྒྲོམ་ཨོར་ཏི་སྒྲོ	Shotö Terdrom or Titro, in Drigung	gzho stod gter sgrom or ti sgro
གཞོ་བ	incorrect for bzho ba, SA 'jo ba	gzho ba
གཞོག	cut up, cut, SA 'jog pa	gzhog
གཞོག་གྱས་ས་ལ་ཕབ	place with the right side on the mat	gzhog gyas sa la phab
གཞོག་རྒྱག་པ	split wood with an axe	gzhog rgyag pa
གཞོག་སྟེགས	lathe, arch, playful, sportive	gzhog stegs
གཞོག་སྟེགས་སྒེག་པ	to look in a coquettish manner	gzhog stegs sgeg pa
གཞོག་འདྲིད་ཀྱི་ཚིག	hinting with lip movement	gzhog 'drid kyi tshig
གཞོག་པ	scrape, shave early morning, SA 'jog pa	gzhog pa
གཞོག་སློང	pretend to be needy, indirectly beg, hint by praise at one's desire for a gift	gzhog slong
གཞོག་སློང་ཐོབ་འཇལ་བྱེད་པ	con and swindle, [note asking for money, hosting]	gzhog slong thob 'jal byed pa
གཞོག་སློངས	1 of 5 log par 'tsho ba	gzhog slongs
གཞོགས	clandestine, prejudicial, one half of the body, one side of the body, the side of	gzhogs
གཞོགས་འགྱེལ	tshem bu gcig brgyab nas phyogs gcig tu bltabs pa'i tshem srub kyi ming	gzhogs 'gyel
གཞོགས་འགྲད	rdog sna thur du shor ba	gzhogs 'grad
གཞོགས་བསྙེས་པ	zur phab pa'i sdod stangs,//snye 'bol la gzhod gyas bsnyes pa	gzhogs bsnyes pa
གཞོགས་ཏེ་རྩུབ་པ	concealed harsh words	gzhogs te rtsub pa
གཞོགས་སྟེགས	sgeg chos sam sgeg nyams	gzhogs stegs
གཞོགས་དྲུང	zur ram, 'khris sam, 'gram,//Phran gyi gzhogs drung du bzhugs pa 'di slob grva'i dge rgan red	gzhogs drung
གཞོགས་འདེགས	mutual help	gzhogs 'degs
གཞོགས་འདྲིད	zur ram clever deception	gzhogs 'drid
གཞོགས་ཕྱེད	1) lus kyi gzhogs phyed,//gzhogs phyed na ba,//gzhogs phyed skam pa; 2) Khang pa sogs kyi logs phyed)	gzhogs phyed
གཞོགས་འཕྱས	deceive and disparage	gzhogs 'phyas
གཞོགས་སྨོས	prejudice a person against another	gzhogs smos
གཞོགས་སྨྲས	conning speech	gzhogs smras
གཞོགས་ཟུར	logs sam zur	gzhogs zur
གཞོགས་ཟློད	cons [notes. Asking for money, hustling] gzhogs g.yas - 1) lus kyi gzhogs sam glo g.yas pa; 2) Khang pa sogs kyi lod gayas pa) gzhogs g.yas - right side of body 2364 gzhogs g.yas g.yon - right and ...	gzhogs zlod
གཞོགས་གཤོགས	side, side of the body	gzhogs gshogs
གཞོགས་བཤལ	lus gzhogs drud nas 'gro ba	gzhogs bshal
གཞོགས་སུ	sideways	gzhogs su
གཞོགས་སློང	cons, asking for money, hustling	gzhogs slong
གཞོགས་སློང་བྱེད་པ	speak indirectly	gzhogs slong byed pa
གཞོགས་སློད	cons, asking for money, hustling	gzhogs slod
གཞོང	vessel	gzhong
གཞོང་ཁུང	gzhong pa	gzhong khung
གཞོང་སྒོར	round trough of wood etc	gzhong sgor
གཞོང་ཐོགས	ri rab kyi bang rim la gnas pa'i gnod sbyin rigs lag na gzhung thogs	gzhong thogs
གཞོང་ཐོགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the	gzhong thogs kyi lha
གཞོང་པ	basin	gzhong pa
ཝཤིང	tub; a wooden trough	washing
གཞོང་པ་ལྷ་ཆུ	on the west side of Lhasa skyor mo lung du yod pa'i slob dpon padmas phyag 'khar gyis gter du bton par grags pa'i chu mig ngo mtshar can zhig divine vlley water (spring drawn by Padmakara in {stod ...	gzhong pa lha chu
གཞོང་པའི་ནང	interior of the basin	gzhong pa'i nang
གཞོང་པའི་ལྷ་ཆུ	divine valley water, a spring drawn by Padmakara in {stod lung gzhong pa'i mdo}	gzhong pa'i lha chu
གཞོང་བུ	shing snod gzhong pa chung chung	gzhong bu
གཞོང་དབྱིབས་ས་ཁུལ	gzhong pa'i dbyibs 'dra'i sa phyogs	gzhong dbyibs sa khul
གཞོངས	(A) yul ljongs	gzhongs
གཞོངས་སྤྱོད	ljongs spyod pa'am ljongs rgyu ba	gzhongs spyod
གཞོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	monk who frequents small towns	gzhongs spyod pa
གཞོན	1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person	gzhon
གཞོན་སྐབས་ཀྱི	juvenile	gzhon skabs kyi
གཞོན་ཁྲལ	after a new monk is made las sne zhig ma byung bar chu len rgyu dang rdog khres dbor rgyu, ja blug rgyu, spyi khang la gad phyis byed rgyu etc mandatory gzhon khral	gzhon khral
གཞོན་ཆ་ཆགས	tender	gzhon cha chags
གཞོན་ཉམས	na tshod gzhon nu'i rnam pa,//gzhon nyams dod po	gzhon nyams
གཞོན་དུ་བསྐྱར་ཕྱིན	rejuvenation	gzhon du bskyar phyin
གཞོན་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	rejuvenate	gzhon du phyin pa
གཞོན་དུས་བུ་མེད	who in their younger years had no children	gzhon dus bu med
གཞོན་བདེ	alacrity, youthful activity	gzhon bde
གཞོན་ནུ་སྐ་རགས་ཞེས་པ	was known as Kumaramanika; past life of the Buddha	gzhon nu ska rags zhes pa
གཞོན་ནུ་སྐྱེས	(met) bee d'uraya phal pa	gzhon nu skyes
གཞོན་ནུ་མགྲིན་ལྡན	SA chu'i bya gag	gzhon nu mgrin ldan
གཞོན་ནུ་ཅན	white aconite, SA chu lha'i shing	gzhon nu can
གཞོན་ནུ་དྲེད་གདོང	snow bear-headed Kumari, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	gzhon nu dred gdong
གཞོན་ནུ་གདོང་དྲུག	epithet of kumara shadanana, kumara the son of mahadeva who is possessed of 6 faces	gzhon nu gdong drug
གཞོན་ནུ་ནོར་བཟང	Youth Excellent Wealth, Sudhana, another personification of the perfect disciple	gzhon nu nor bzang
གཞོན་ནུ་དཔའ་བོ	Youthful Warrior; sixth of {ston pa bcu gnyis}	gzhon nu dpa' bo
གཞོན་ནུ་དཔའ་བོ་སྟོབས་ལྡན	Powerful warrior youth [R]	gzhon nu dpa' bo stobs ldan
གཞོན་ནུ་དཔལ	1392-1481, author of deb ther sngon po, (1392-1481), author of deb ther sngon po	gzhon nu dpal
གཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་སྐུ	the youthful vase body [R]	gzhon nu bum sku
ཡོཨུཐཕུ༹ལ་བ༹སེ	body, youthful vase-like body (with six qualifications which are khyad chos drug ldan named rang ngor rnam dag, skye ba med pa, ka dag, lhun grub, 'dus ma byas, gdangs 'gags pa med pa)	youthful vase
གཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་པ་སྐུ	Syn {gzhon nu bum sku}	gzhon nu bum pa sku
གཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་པའི	existential mode of the inner light of reality	gzhon nu bum pa'i
གཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་པའི་སྐུ	youthful vase body	gzhon nu bum pa'i sku
སེཨེ་ཨུནདེར་བུདདྷ	body]	see under buddha
གཞོན་ནུ་མ	maiden	gzhon nu ma
གཞོན་ནུ་མར་མོ་དྲེད་ཀྱི་མགོ	Kumari, Virgin, red with the head of a yellow bear	gzhon nu mar mo dred kyi mgo
གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོ	youths, epithet of the youngest son of mahadeva	gzhon nu tsho
གཞོན་ནུ་མཛེས་མ	very young and beautiful	gzhon nu mdzes ma
གཞོན་ནུ་རོལ་པ་རྣམ་པར་རྩེ་བ	/ brtse ba / - the fourth of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	gzhon nu rol pa rnam par rtse ba
གཞོན་ནུ་རོལ་པ་རྣམ་པར་བརྩེ་བ	Youth Delighting in Playfulness; fourth of {ston pa bcu gnyis}	gzhon nu rol pa rnam par brtse ba
གཞོན་ནུའི་དུས	walk dang rtse nus la until puberty	gzhon nu'i dus
གཞོན་ནུའི་ཕྲེང་བ	(met) dz' ti'i flower 2365	gzhon nu'i phreng ba
གཞོན་ནུའི་བུམ་པ	youthful vase body*	gzhon nu'i bum pa
གཞོན་ནུའི་བུམ་པ་སྐུ	youthful vase body	gzhon nu'i bum pa sku
གཞོན་ནུའི་ཤ་ཙུགས་ཅན	youthful	gzhon nu'i sha tsugs can
གཞོན་ནུའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན	youthful	gzhon nu'i sha tshugs can
གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ	became a youth, turned young	gzhon nur gyur pa
གཞོན་ནུས	maiden	gzhon nus
གཞོན་ནོ	youthful	gzhon no
གཞོན་པ	vehicle junior younger, youth, young, the younger one, youth	gzhon pa
གཞོན་པ་འགའ་ཞིག	some young people	gzhon pa 'ga' zhig
གཞོན་མ	young woman	gzhon ma
གཞོན་མ་མའི་བདེ་བ	the ecstasy of a young woman	gzhon ma ma'i bde ba
གཞོན་མའི་ཚོགས	SA bu chung ba'i tshogs	gzhon ma'i tshogs
གཞོན་མེ	continuous	gzhon me
གཞོན་གཞོན	young	gzhon gzhon
གཞོན་གཞོན་ཡོང་གཞོན་ནུ	youth	gzhon gzhon yong gzhon nu
གཞོན་བཟོ་དོད་པོ	ageless, looking youthful	gzhon bzo dod po
གཞོན་རབས	youthful or rising generation, younger classes	gzhon rabs
གཞོན་ཤ	gzhon nyams,//gzhon sha chags pa	gzhon sha
གཞོན་ཤ་ཅན་གྱི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of fresh and delicate youthful appearance [R]	gzhon sha can gyi dpe byad
གཞོན་ཤ་ཅན་ཉིད	[fresh and delicate]. like that of beautiful youth	gzhon sha can nyid
གཞོན་ཤ་ཆགས	tender	gzhon sha chags
གཞོན་སོ་དཀར	time of being small with white teeth	gzhon so dkar
གཞོན་སྲི	disturber of the young	gzhon sri
གཞོབ	singeing, singed, a mark; singe, scorch	gzhob
གཞོབ་དྲི	spu dang sha rus sogs burning bad smell	gzhob dri
གཞོབ་པ	{gzhob pa, gzhob pa, gzhob pa} intr. v	gzhob pa
གཞོབ་སྲི	sri of the impurities of burnt substances	gzhob sri
གཞོམ	maintain, be diligent, work hard, be well accustomed to], exercise, save, eliminate	gzhom
གཞོམ་དུ་མེད་པ	undepressed, never dejected	gzhom du med pa
གཞོམ་པ	to break in two, to tear, bent or bruised; ft. of {'joms pa}	gzhom pa
གཞོམ་བྱ་བྱེད	the destroyer and the destroyed	gzhom bya byed
གཞོམ་མེད	invincible, steady, constant, perpetual, eternal	gzhom med
གཞོམ་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་གསུམ	the three indestructible vajras	gzhom med rdo rje gsum
གཞོམ་ཞིག	indestructible and imperishable	gzhom zhig
གཞོམ་གཞིག	dissolution or destruction	gzhom gzhig
གཞོམས	be split, cracked, bruised, dinted	gzhoms
གཞོམས་ཤིང་བྲལ་བ	having become cracked, came apart	gzhoms shing bral ba
གཞོར	hoe, SA 'jor	gzhor
གཞོར་བུ	'jor bu, tog tse chung ba	gzhor bu
གཞོལ	maintain, be diligent, work hard, be well accustomed to, exercise, sow	gzhol
གཞོལ་འགྲོ་བ	1) descend, flow/ fal down; 2) (met) water)	gzhol 'gro ba
གཞོལ་ཐུགས་བ	exert himself, intend to practice, endeavour	gzhol thugs ba
གཞོལ་བ	train, trail, retinue, flow down, alight, dismount, remain fixed, absorbed in, be low, open out to, to apply a method, aim at, lead to	gzhol ba
གཞོལ་བ་གསུམ་གྱི་བཟླས་པ	Kriya tantra bya rgyud kyi bzlas brjod kyi de kho na nyid gsum [gzhi la gzhol ba, sems la gzhol ba, sgra la gzhol ba'o]	gzhol ba gsum gyi bzlas pa
གཞོལ་འབབ	(met) water	gzhol 'bab
གཞོལ་མ	a nadi	gzhol ma
གཞོས	after three days, SA bzhos, 'jo ba	gzhos
གཞོས་ཐོག་འོ་མ	milk just after being milked	gzhos thog 'o ma
བཞག་གིན	to rest	bzhag gin
བཞག་གྲོལ	liberation into the establishment of reality	bzhag grol
བཞག་སྒོར	small intestine	bzhag sgor
བཞག་དངུལ	bank deposit, savings	bzhag dngul
བཞག་འཇོག་གི་ཚུལ	practical point of view	bzhag 'jog gi tshul
བཞག་སྟེགས	stand [for vase etc]	bzhag stegs
བཞག་ཐབས	the method to maintain, how to maintain, the way to maintain, meditation method 2366	bzhag thabs
བཞག་ཐབས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བརྒྱད	1) {brdal ba nam mkha'i bzhin}. 2) {btang ba spre'u bzhin} 3) {zin pa phyin bzhin} 4) {rnyogs med chu bzhin} 5) {dran pa bzhin} 6) {bor ba bzhin} 7) {snyegs pa bzhin} 8) {bcad pa bzhin no}	bzhag thabs kyi rnal 'byor brgyad
བཞག་ཐབས་བཞི་པ	the Four Meditation Methods; final words of Jnana Sutra to Vimalamitra	bzhag thabs bzhi pa
བཞག་ན་སྡོད་པ	where placed it remains, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	bzhag na sdod pa
བཞག་ནས	put aside	bzhag nas
བཞག་པར་བྱ་བ	add on to	bzhag par bya ba
བཞག་པར་ལུང་བསྟན་པ	a revelation to be put off	bzhag par lung bstan pa
བཞག་བྱ	see bzhag par bya ba [mss]	bzhag bya
བཞག་བྲ	mi nyag shar stod bzhag bra dkar po snow mt	bzhag bra
བཞག་མི་འོང	I shall not abandon you	bzhag mi 'ong
བཞག་ཙམ	only established	bzhag tsam
བཞག་འོག	armpit	bzhag 'og
བཞག་ཤ	bshul sha ste, brla'i nang logs kyi sha	bzhag sha
བཞག་ས	a location to be placed in	bzhag sa
བཞག་སོང	left, departed	bzhag song
བཞགས	(not in das)	bzhags
བཞགས་པ	[arch] = adorned/ beautiful	bzhags pa
བཞགས་པའི་བུ	Mandavya-Sutra	bzhags pa'i bu
བཞགས་པའི་བུའི་མདོ	Mandavya-Sutra	bzhags pa'i bu'i mdo
བཞང་འཚོང་མ	prostitute, harlot	bzhang 'tshong ma
བཞད	swan, laughter, smiling, blooming	bzhad
བཞད་ཁ་མ	flower kha 'bus la khad pa [1st opening]	bzhad kha ma
བཞད་གད	laugh out, laughter, jest, joke, smile, laughter, 1 of zlos gar, comic representations, laughing	bzhad gad
བཞད་གད་ཀྱི་ཉམས	by condition of seeing a faulty yul internally dgod bro increasing rnam 'gyur bzhad gad kyi nyams showing rgyan, among nyams ldan gyi rgyan	bzhad gad kyi nyams
བཞད་གད་ཀྱི་གནས	subject of jest	bzhad gad kyi gnas
བཞད་གད་མཁན	buffoon, jester	bzhad gad mkhan
བཞད་གད་ཆི་ལེ	buzz of laughter/ merriment	bzhad gad chi le
བཞད་གད་པ	someone who makes a joke, rtse dgod slong mkhan ???	bzhad gad pa
བཞད་མཐོང་སྨོན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	bzhad mthong smon
བཞད་མཐོང་སྨོན་རྫོང	name of a district	bzhad mthong smon rdzong
བཞད་ལྡན་མ	goddess	bzhad ldan ma
བཞད་པ	swan, noise of joy, blossom, develop, laugh, smile	bzhad pa
བཞད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	rje mi la bzhad pa rdo	bzhad pa rdo rje
བཞད་པ་མོ	goddess	bzhad pa mo
བཞད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Shepai Dorje. See Milarepa	bzhad pa'i rdo rje
བཞད་འཕྱ	disparaging joke/ laughter [blun pos mkhas mkhas	bzhad 'phya
བཞད་འཕྱ་རྒྱུ	ludicrous, ridiculous	bzhad 'phya rgyu
བཞད་བྲོ་བ	funny, farcial, ridiculous	bzhad bro ba
བཞད་མོ	smile, laughing, laughter	bzhad mo
བཞད་མོ་བཞད	laugh [h]	bzhad mo bzhad
བཞད་མོ་བཞད་པ	laugh	bzhad mo bzhad pa
བཞད་མོ་ཤོར	burst out laughing bzhan don gzugs sku'i rten 'brel bsgrigs	bzhad mo shor
བཞན་པ	a butcher	bzhan pa
བཞན་དབང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the essence of interdependence	bzhan dbang gi ngo bo nyid
བཞན་དབང་འོག	captivity	bzhan dbang 'og
བཞན་ལས་བརྙས	borrowed from others	bzhan las brnyas
བཞབ	sneak, SA 'jab pa	bzhab
བཞབ་པ	SA 'jab pa	bzhab pa
བཞབས	sneak, SA 'jab pa	bzhabs
བཞབས་པ	[arch] 'jabs pa ??? n/l 'jab = bshab	bzhabs pa
བཞམས	[arch] gathered	bzhams
བཞམས་བསྒོ	1) bslab bya gently give; 2) mention, remind	bzhams bsgo
བཞམས་བསྒོ་བྱེད་པ	remind of, recall to mind	bzhams bsgo byed pa
བཞམས་པ	1) soft gentle; 2) stroke, coax, caress	bzhams pa
བཞམས་པོ	soft, gentle	bzhams po
བཞའ་སྐམ	dehydration, drying	bzha' skam
བཞའ་སྐམ་བྱེད	dehydrate, dry	bzha' skam byed
བཞའ་ཁུག་པ	be[come] wet/ moist/ damp	bzha' khug pa
བཞའ་སྤབས	damp	bzha' spabs
བཞའ་བ	wet, moist	bzha' ba
བཞའ་ཚད	moist[ure]/ wet[ness, humidity	bzha' tshad
བཞའ་ཚད་ཆེན་པོ	moist, damp, humid, high humidity	bzha' tshad chen po
བཞའ་ཚན	moist[ure]/ wet[ness, humidity	bzha' tshan
བཞའ་ཚན་ཆེན་པོ	moist, damp, humid, high humidity	bzha' tshan chen po
བཞའ་རླན	moist	bzha' rlan
བཞའ་བརླན	wetness, moisture, humidity	bzha' brlan
བཞར	/ (1(Tha dad pa bzhar ba, bzhar ba, bzhor,, scraped, shaved, sheared, cut; 2) [p gzhar ba]; 3) (A; 1) mthud pa; 2) slender, delicate	bzhar
བཞར་སྐྲ་པ	to have a haircut, to shave	bzhar skra pa
བཞར་རྒྱག	1) smooth a flat surface ['bur len gyis shing leb la bzhar brgyab pa]; 2) par shing bzos tshar bar gris 'jam du gtong ba ???	bzhar rgyag
བཞར་འཕྲུལ་དབང་བྱེད	name of a Heaven	bzhar 'phrul dbang byed
བཞར་བ	/ (1(Tha dad pa bzhar ba, bzhar ba, bzhor,, scraped, shaved, sheared, cut; 2) [p gzhar ba]; 3) (A; 1) mthud pa; 2) slender, delicate	bzhar ba
བཞས་བཏང་ཟིན་པ	sang	bzhas btang zin pa
བཞི་ཀ	all four	bzhi ka
བཞི་སྐོར	field seed 1 khal 'gro bar thon 'bab four khal thon pa ???	bzhi skor
བཞི་ཁ	the four of them	bzhi kha
བཞི་ཁྲི	forty thousand	bzhi khri
བཞི་ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང	48,000	bzhi khri brgyad stong
བཞི་ག	the four, all the four, four pieces	bzhi ga
བཞི་གླིང	1/ four	bzhi gling
བཞི་བརྒྱ	400, 400	bzhi brgya
བཞི་བརྒྱ་པ	Aryadeva's 400 verse treatise [chiefly teaching emptiness]	bzhi brgya pa
བཞི་བརྒྱ་པ་འི་འགྲེལ་པ	Candrakirti's Commentary on the 400	bzhi brgya pa 'i 'grel pa
བཞི་བརྒྱ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ	Chandrakirti's "Commentary on the Four Hundred"	bzhi brgya pa'i 'grel pa
བཞི་ལྔ་འགྲོ	four becoming five [skyed ka'i tshad gzhi zhig spring 'bru khal four obligation received instead in autumn giving five	bzhi lnga 'gro
བཞི་ཅན	foursome	bzhi can
བཞི་བཅུ	forty	bzhi bcu
བཞི་བཅུ་ཐམ་པ	40	bzhi bcu tham pa
བཞི་བཅུ་པོ	40th	bzhi bcu po
བཞི་ཆ	1/ 4, quarter	bzhi cha
བཞི་ཆ་གཅིག	quarter, one quarter	bzhi cha gcig
བཞི་ཆ་སུམ་བྲལ	four parts w/o three,	bzhi cha sum bral
བཞི་ཆ་གསུམ	three quarters	bzhi cha gsum
བཞི་མཆོད	10th month 24th day Sera monastery phyag 'debs mkhan byams chen chos rje zhi bar gshegs pa'i dus mchod	bzhi mchod
བཞི་མཉམ	[arch] shit, intestines	bzhi mnyam
བཞི་མཉམ་རི་དྲི་ཆེན	shit	bzhi mnyam ri dri chen
བཞི་སྟོང	4000, 4,000	bzhi stong
བཞི་ཐང	4 moments	bzhi thang
བཞི་མདོ	place where four roads meat	bzhi mdo
བཞི་མདོ་བ	bhramin	bzhi mdo ba
བཞི་ལྡན	possessing four qualifications	bzhi ldan
བཞི་ལྡན་ཆོས	dharma with four qualifications	bzhi ldan chos
བཞི་ལྡབ	quadruple	bzhi ldab
བཞི་ལྡབ་ཏུ་སྒྱུར་བ	quadruplicate	bzhi ldab tu sgyur ba
བཞི་སྡེ	Shide, Lhasa	bzhi sde
བཞི་སྡེ་གྲྭ་ཚང	College in Lhasa	bzhi sde grwa tshang
བཞི་ནམ	[arch] 1/ four	bzhi nam
བཞི་པ	fourth, the fourth, fourth	bzhi pa
བཞི་པ་སྒྲུབ་པ	'phags pa bzhi pa sgrub pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo,	bzhi pa sgrub pa
བཞི་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་ཐབས་དང་བཅས་པ	1 of the {chos bcu bzhi} 14 treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs-rgyas ye shes} bzhi pa la 'jug pa thabs dang bcas pa one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja...	bzhi pa la 'jug pa thabs dang bcas pa
བཞི་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	fourth stage of life (old-age from sixty upwards)	bzhi pa'i gnas skabs
བཞི་པའི་དབང	fourth empowerment	bzhi pa'i dbang
བཞི་པར	fourthly	bzhi par
བཞི་པོ	four[th], the four of us/ them	bzhi po
བཞི་བ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་མདོ	sutra w four main classifications	bzhi ba sgrub pa'i mdo
བཞི་བ་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་མདོ	any sutra containing different studies each arranged under four heads or classes	bzhi ba bsgrub pa'i mdo
བཞི་འབུམ	400,000	bzhi 'bum
བཞི་ཚད	melting point	bzhi tshad
བཞི་ཚན	fourfold	bzhi tshan
བཞི་འཛིན་པ	basis	bzhi 'dzin pa
བཞི་བཞིར	four by four	bzhi bzhir
བཞི་ཟུར	1/ four part/ share	bzhi zur
བཞི་ལིང	1/ four	bzhi ling
བཞི་ཤད	four strokes [= end of sentence, verse, chapter etc]	bzhi shad
བཞི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	the drop of transcendental wisdom	bzhi shes kyi thig le
བཞི་གཤེད	in the 12 year cycle four more or less	bzhi gshed
བཞིག	destroy, SA 'jig pa	bzhig
བཞིག་པ	'jig/ (b)zhig pa - to be destroyed/ disintegrate; (phase of) destruction; isc. to collapse	bzhig pa
བཞིན་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	[circle of the] face	bzhin kyi 'khor lo
བཞིན་ཁྱིམ	[circle of the] face	bzhin khyim
བཞིན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of his face	bzhin gyi dkyil 'khor
བཞིན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	face	bzhin gyi 'khor lo
བཞིན་འགྱུར	change expression	bzhin 'gyur
བཞིན་སྒྲ་ཅན་གྱི་རབ་རྟོག	among the rab rtog gi rgyan samadhi rab rtog ???	bzhin sgra can gyi rab rtog
བཞིན་ངན	ugly face 2368	bzhin ngan
བཞིན་ཉིད	suchness, absolute	bzhin nyid
བཞིན་ཏུ	while, -ing [present continuous tense of verb] accordingly	bzhin tu
བཞིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོ་ཉན་པ	1) listen joyfully; 2) form adverb of adjective	bzhin tu spro nyan pa
བཞིན་སྟབས	aspect of appearance or expression	bzhin stabs
བཞིན་དུ	according to, as, while, in, according to, in conformity with, present tense complement, "while", simultaneous with, even though, but at the same time	bzhin du
བཞིན་དུ་འཁོར	ever it turns	bzhin du 'khor
བཞིན་དུ་ཉེ་བར	yet, nearly like	bzhin du nye bar
བཞིན་དུ་སྤྲོ་ཉན་པ	to listen joyfully, form adverb of adjective	bzhin du spro nyan pa
བཞིན་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	remained like this	bzhin du bzhugs pa
བཞིན་མདངས	face	bzhin mdangs
བཞིན་མདངས་འཛུམ་པ	to smile, keep a smiling face	bzhin mdangs 'dzum pa
བཞིན་མདོག་འགྱུར	one's face can change color	bzhin mdog 'gyur
བཞིན་འདུག	present tense complement	bzhin 'dug
བཞིན་འདྲ	the same image	bzhin 'dra
བཞིན་ལྡོག་པ	change expression	bzhin ldog pa
བཞིན་སྡུད	1) sems sdug gi expression; 2) angry expression	bzhin sdud
བཞིན་སྡུད་པོ	black/ angry face	bzhin sdud po
བཞིན་ནག	black/ angry face	bzhin nag
བཞིན་ནག་པ	black/ angry face	bzhin nag pa
བཞིན་གནག་པ	black/ angry face	bzhin gnag pa
བཞིན་སྣང	appear according to	bzhin snang
བཞིན་སྣུམ་པ	ngo mdangs dang ldan pa	bzhin snum pa
བཞིན་སྣོད	mirror	bzhin snod
བཞིན་པ	ing	bzhin pa
བཞིན་པ་ཡིན་པ་རེད	present tense complement	bzhin pa yin pa red
བཞིན་པ་རེད	present tense complement	bzhin pa red
བཞིན་པར	present tense complement, the "while" adverbializer	bzhin par
བཞིན་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག	this is the way to do it	bzhin byed du 'jug
བཞིན་མ	embroidered cloth, cloth of gold	bzhin ma
བཞིན་དམན	be embarrassed, feel shy	bzhin dman
བཞིན་སྨད་པ	cast down the face from shame	bzhin smad pa
བཞིན་མཛེས་པ་ནི་སྟོན་པ	display its beautiful face	bzhin mdzes pa ni ston pa
བཞིན་འཛུམ	smile, slightly smiling/ laughing humorous expression	bzhin 'dzum
བཞིན་འཛུམ་གནང	smile [h]	bzhin 'dzum gnang
བཞིན་འཛུམ་མཛད	smile [h]	bzhin 'dzum mdzad
བཞིན་ཟགས་ཏེ	the face dripping with perspiration	bzhin zags te
བཞིན་བཟང	handsome	bzhin bzang
བཞིན་བཟང་མ	fair face, polite address to women	bzhin bzang ma
བཞིན་ཡོད	while I was	bzhin yod
བཞིན་ཡོད་པ་རེད	present tense complement	bzhin yod pa red
བཞིན་རང་སྡོད	keep on -- [dos ldan rlangs 'khor kyis skyel 'dren bzhin rang sdod: keep on trucking]	bzhin rang sdod
བཞིན་རས	appearance, face	bzhin ras
བཞིན་ལག	form and shape	bzhin lag
བཞིན་ལེགས	1) beautiful/ good proportioned face; 2) king of the nagas; 3) noble face, noble coinfluenced 1	bzhin legs
བཞིན་ལེགས་མ	noble face, beautiful face, good proportioned countenance, noble countenance	bzhin legs ma
བཞིབ	suck, SA 'jib pa	bzhib
བཞིབས	suck, SA 'jib pa, arrange evenly, SA bshib pa	bzhibs
བཞིབས་པ	anything arranged, arrangement	bzhibs pa
བཞིར	(not in das)	bzhir
བཞིས	(not in das)	bzhis
བཞིས་ཁྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཁྲི་ལ་ཁུར	carried on a litter borne by four men	bzhis khyogs kyi khri la khur
བཞིས་བྱེས	gzhis ni gnas mal dang, byes ni phyogs ???	bzhis byes
བཞུ	[tha dad pa bzhus pa, bzhu ba, bzhus],, [s]melt, refine, dissolve, digest	bzhu
བཞུ་ཁུ	molten liquid, chemical solution	bzhu khu
བཞུ་འཇུག	[s]melt, refine, dissolve	bzhu 'jug
བཞུ་ཐོར	sores	bzhu thor
བཞུ་འདུལ	melt and 'dul ba [gold] shape?	bzhu 'dul
བཞུ་བ	[tha dad pa bzhus pa, bzhu ba, bzhus],, [s]melt, refine, dissolve, digest	bzhu ba
བཞུ་བྱ	brass	bzhu bya
བཞུ་བྱེད	[tha dad pa bzhus pa, bzhu ba, bzhus],, [s]melt, refine, dissolve, digest, chemical solvent	bzhu byed
བཞུ་བྱེད་སྒྲིག་ཆས	[s]melting/ refining equipment	bzhu byed sgrig chas
བཞུ་བྱེད་བཟོ་གྲྭ	[s]melting/ refining factory	bzhu byed bzo grwa
བཞུ་འབུལ	cremation	bzhu 'bul
བཞུ་འབུལ་ཞུ	cremate [h]	bzhu 'bul zhu
བཞུ་མར	1) melted butter/ oil; 2) lamp	bzhu mar
བཞུ་མར་སྤར	light/ turn on a lamp	bzhu mar spar
བཞུ་མར་གསོད	extinguish/ turn off a lamp	bzhu mar gsod
བཞུ་རྫས	solvent	bzhu rdzas
བཞུ་ཤེལ	artificial crystal, melted crystal, glass, kind of pebble or crystal	bzhu shel
བཞུགས	stay, remain, dwell, reside	bzhugs
བཞུགས་ཁང་ལ་ཕྱགས་དར་བྱེད་པ	to sweep his room	bzhugs khang la phyags dar byed pa
བཞུགས་ཁྲི	throne	bzhugs khri
བཞུགས་ཁྲིའི་སྟེང	on the throne	bzhugs khri'i steng
བཞུགས་གུར	tent used by great man for his residence	bzhugs gur
བཞུགས་གྲལ	seated ranks (in dance/ ritual)	bzhugs gral
བཞུགས་གྲལ་ལ་འཁོད	seat in rows [h]	bzhugs gral la 'khod
བཞུགས་གྲལ་ལ་གཏོང	seat in rows [h]	bzhugs gral la gtong
བཞུགས་གྲོགས	spouse or parents living w one	bzhugs grogs
བཞུགས་གླིང	park garden [h]	bzhugs gling
བཞུགས་སྒར	1) traveller's encampment; 2) military encampment house, tent etc.; 3) Dalai Lama's residence in India * [h]	bzhugs sgar
བཞུགས་སྒྲིག	living arrangements for visitors [h]	bzhugs sgrig
བཞུགས་སྒྲོམ	sdod sa'i shing sgrom ???	bzhugs sgrom
བཞུགས་ཆོལ་ཚོགས་འདུ	forum	bzhugs chol tshogs 'du
བཞུགས་ཏུ་གསོལ	please enter me (in and accept me	bzhugs tu gsol
བཞུགས་སྟངས	way of living/ sitting [h]	bzhugs stangs
བཞུགས་སྟངས་གསུམ	the three postures / ways of sitting [in Tögal practice]	bzhugs stangs gsum
བཞུགས་སྟན	seat (h	bzhugs stan
བཞུགས་དུ་གསོལ	please enter me [in and accept me]	bzhugs du gsol
བཞུགས་གདན	(h) seat, pillow	bzhugs gdan
བཞུགས་གདན་འཇག	please sit down	bzhugs gdan 'jag
བཞུགས་གདན་བརྫི་བ	to tread on his cushion	bzhugs gdan brdzi ba
བཞུགས་འདུག	was sitting	bzhugs 'dug
བཞུགས་སྡངས་གསུམ	the three ways of sitting (in thod rgal	bzhugs sdangs gsum
བཞུགས་གནང་བ	stayed	bzhugs gnang ba
བཞུགས་གནས	dwelling place, seat	bzhugs gnas
བཞུགས་གནས་གང་ཡིན	where is your home?	bzhugs gnas gang yin
ལག་ཁང	a temple that houses ..	lag khang
བཞུགས་པའི་རྟེན	small temple in which a deity resides	bzhugs pa'i rten
བཞུགས་པའི་དུས་ན	when he sits	bzhugs pa'i dus na
བཞུགས་པའི་ཕོ་བྲང	castle for residence	bzhugs pa'i pho brang
བཞུགས་པར་གསོལ་བ	ask to stay, dwell, reside, remain	bzhugs par gsol ba
བཞུགས་བྱང	list of books, index; sm.{dkar chag}	bzhugs byang
བཞུགས་བྲང	dwelling place, seat	bzhugs brang
བཞུགས་འབོལ	mattress, Tibetan sofa	bzhugs 'bol
བཞུགས་མ་ཚུགས་པ	unable to remain	bzhugs ma tshugs pa
བཞུགས་མོལ	sit and talk, discussion [h]	bzhugs mol
བཞུགས་མོལ་ཐོགས་འདུ	forum, symposium, conference, round- table discussion [h]	bzhugs mol thogs 'du
བཞུགས་མོལ་གནང	sit and talk, discuss [h]	bzhugs mol gnang
བཞུགས་མོལ་མཛད	sit and talk, discuss [h]	bzhugs mol mdzad
བཞུགས་ཚུལ	abiding mode; mode of presence	bzhugs tshul
བཞུགས་ཚུལ་གི་རང་བཞིན	nature and workings of, posture, way of existing, way it is, sitting position	bzhugs tshul gi rang bzhin
བཞུགས་མཛད་པ	seated	bzhugs mdzad pa
བཞུགས་མཛད་བ	sit seated	bzhugs mdzad ba
བཞུགས་ཡུལ	domain	bzhugs yul
བཞུགས་ཡོད་པ	used to dwell	bzhugs yod pa
བཞུགས་རོགས་གནང	please be seated	bzhugs rogs gnang
བཞུགས་ཤིག	do sit	bzhugs shig
བཞུགས་ས	place of residence, living quarters, seat [h]	bzhugs sa
བཞུགས་སུ་གསོལ	please sit	bzhugs su gsol
བཞུགས་སུ་གསོལ་བ	(to) request to remain; to install	bzhugs su gsol ba
བཞུགས་གསོལ	{bzhugs su gsol ba} (to) request to remain; to install	bzhugs gsol
བཞུད	leave, depart, go, come [h] set [sun/ moon]	bzhud
བཞུད་ཀར	at the time of departure	bzhud kar
བཞུད་གྲུལ	trip, tour, journey	bzhud grul
བཞུད་དེ་ཐལ	[he] has gone	bzhud de thal
བཞུད་ནས་འགྲོ	go on to	bzhud nas 'gro
བཞུད་པ	start, depart, go away	bzhud pa
བཞུད་པར་དགོངས	intend to leave, depart	bzhud par dgongs
བཞུད་སོང	left, went away	bzhud song
བཞུན	subdue, SA 'jun pa, energetic, zealous, SA zhun	bzhun
བཞུན་ཐུད་དཀར་པོ	white thud food of brdzis pa'i [kneaded/ pressed] butter and cheese	bzhun thud dkar po
བཞུན་བརྡར་བཅད་པ	smith smelting/ refining gold etc., [hence careful/ meticulous work]	bzhun brdar bcad pa
བཞུན་པོ	diligent, conscientious, the highest/ best	bzhun po
བཞུར	to melt	bzhur
བཞུར་འགྲོ	flow, run [water]	bzhur 'gro
བཞུར་འགྲོ་བ	flowing, running [water]	bzhur 'gro ba
བཞུར་རྒྱག	buzz [planes]	bzhur rgyag
བཞུར་པོ	fast flowing/ running [water]	bzhur po
བཞུར་བ	to strain, filter, to melt; {bzhur ba, bzhur ba, bzhur ba, bzhur} trans. v	bzhur ba
བཞུར་རྩི	solution	bzhur rtsi
བཞུར་ཚད	volume of flow	bzhur tshad
བཞུར་རུང་བ	soluble	bzhur rung ba
བཞུས	digest, melt, SA 'ju ba, zhu ba	bzhus
བཞུས་དག་པར་པ	transcribed correctly	bzhus dag par pa
བཞུས་པ	[p zhu ba gzhu ba bzhu ba] melted, digested	bzhus pa
བཞུས་མ	melted/ molten, chemical solution	bzhus ma
བཞུས་ཤེལ	manufactured crystal	bzhus shel
བཞེང	erected	bzheng
བཞེང་རྒྱུ	[for] building	bzheng rgyu
བཞེང་ནས་ཕེབས་པ	[they] got up and went	bzheng nas phebs pa
བཞེང་བ	raise, erect, set up, manufacture, compose	bzheng ba
བཞེངས	manifests, raise, arise, SA bzheng ba, bzeng, sang, past of bzheng, to construct	bzhengs
བཞེངས་བསྐྲུན་མཁས་པ	engineer	bzhengs bskrun mkhas pa
བཞེངས་བསྐྲུན་གནང	started building	bzhengs bskrun gnang
བཞེངས་བསྐྲུན་ལས་ཐབས	engineering	bzhengs bskrun las thabs
བཞེངས་ཏེ	was built	bzhengs te
བཞེངས་སྟབས	standing posture	bzhengs stabs
བཞེངས་འདུག	standing or sitting	bzhengs 'dug
བཞེངས་ཚེ	when he stands up bzhengs bzhin du ma btud par phyag pus	bzhengs tshe
མོར་སླེབས་པ	standing straight his hands reach to the knees. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being bzhengs bzhin du ma bdud par phyag	mor slebs pa
པུས་མོར་སླེབས་པ	standing straight his hands reach to the knees	pus mor slebs pa
བཞེངས་བཞུགས	standing or sitting	bzhengs bzhugs
བཞེངས་བཞུགས་གཉིས	standing or sitting	bzhengs bzhugs gnyis
བཞེངས་ཤིག	arise!	bzhengs shig
བཞེད	approach, is viewed as	bzhed
བཞེད་མཁན	one who asserts, accepts [a philosophical position]	bzhed mkhan
བཞེད་དགོངས	sayings and thoughts, wish, aim, intention	bzhed dgongs
བཞེད་དོ	it is held that	bzhed do
བཞེད་དོན	wish	bzhed don
བཞེད་དོན་འབོད་ཚིག	slogan	bzhed don 'bod tshig
བཞེད་ནས	full of apprehensions	bzhed nas
བཞེད་སྣང་གིས་འཁུམ་པ	cower	bzhed snang gis 'khum pa
བཞེད་པ	recognized, is said to be, instructions, states that, wish, desire, propose, maintain, assert, statement, accept, take, SA gsungs pa, tradition, to state something	bzhed pa
བཞེད་པ་འགོད་པ	to expose a theory	bzhed pa 'god pa
བཞེད་པ་ཡིན	is understood, are enumerated, is regarded	bzhed pa yin
བཞེད་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ	it is held that	bzhed pa yin te
བཞེད་པའི་ལུགས	tradition	bzhed pa'i lugs
བཞེད་ཚུལ	various methods, manner of speaking, tradition	bzhed tshul
བཞེད་ཚུལ་གཅིག་པ	identical view (on this point	bzhed tshul gcig pa
བཞེད་གཞི	object of intention	bzhed gzhi
བཞེད་གཞུང	approach and expositions	bzhed gzhung
བཞེད་ཟས	food for acceptance	bzhed zas
བཞེད་ལུགས	philosophical position/ tradition	bzhed lugs
བཞེད་སྲོལ	tradition, philosophical position, custom	bzhed srol
བཞེད་སྲོལ་གཞན	other traditions	bzhed srol gzhan
བཞེན	[arch] burnt	bzhen
བཞེན་བསྙེམས་བཟོད	name of brgya byin lha	bzhen bsnyems bzod
བཞེན་འདེབས་པ	to admonish and exhort, to exhort the deities to keep their vow, to issue threats to induce them to action	bzhen 'debs pa
བཞེར	wet, moist	bzher
བཞེས	1) items food and drink clothing etc. to be enjoyed, joined as [h]; 2) put on, wear, dress [clothes]; 3) accept, take, receive [precepts, [h] of len]; 4) reaching the age of; 5) eat; 6) [h] particl...	bzhes
བཞེས་ཁམ	peach [h]	bzhes kham
བཞེས་ཁུག	tobacco pouch [h]	bzhes khug
བཞེས་ཁྲུང	chang to be drunk	bzhes khrung
བཞེས་གྲོ	cakes	bzhes gro
བཞེས་རྒྱོང	sausage [h]	bzhes rgyong
བཞེས་སྒང	egg [h]	bzhes sgang
བཞེས་སྒོ	door	bzhes sgo
བཞེས་སྒྱུ	sausage [h]	bzhes sgyu
བཞེས་ཆས	[h]	bzhes chas
བཞེས་ཉུང	turnip [h]	bzhes nyung
བཞེས་གཉེན་ཅན	intelligent	bzhes gnyen can
བཞེས་ཐ	tobacco, cigarettes [h]	bzhes tha
བཞེས་ཐག	tobacco, cigarettes [h]	bzhes thag
བཞེས་ཐུག	noodles, soup, broth [h]	bzhes thug
བཞེས་ཐུར	spoon, ladle [h]	bzhes thur
བཞེས་དྲུངས	beer for the use of a great person	bzhes drungs
བཞེས་ལྡན	SA bkol ldan, kind of sweet prepared on new year's day	bzhes ldan
བཞེས་སྡོར	thug pa'i sdor ???	bzhes sdor
བཞེས་ན	if he would take it, if it should be to his liking	bzhes na
བཞེས་པ	pf. of {bzhes pa}; ft. of {bzhes pa}; {bzhes pa, bzhes pa, bzhes pa, bzhes} trans. v. to accept/ partake; to take, receive, accept, to seize, confiscate, proclaimed, accept; take, receive	bzhes pa
བཞེས་པ་འདྲེན་པ	offer food, serve up meat	bzhes pa 'dren pa
བཞེས་པག	cake or bread	bzhes pag
བཞེས་པར་མཛོད་ཅིག	please take it!	bzhes par mdzod cig
བཞེས་པོ	suitable [h]	bzhes po
བཞེས་སྤྲོ	cakes, biscuit	bzhes spro
བཞེས་ཕོར	rtsam pa vessel	bzhes phor
བཞེས་བྱད	[h]	bzhes byad
བཞེས་འབྲས	rice [h]	bzhes 'bras
བཞེས་མོག	particular meal	bzhes mog
བཞེས་རྩེ	chop sticks [h]	bzhes rtse
བཞེས་ཚལ	vegetables [h]	bzhes tshal
བཞེས་ཚིལ	fat [h]	bzhes tshil
བཞེས་ཚུལ	interpretations	bzhes tshul
བཞེས་ཚོགས	banquet [h]	bzhes tshogs
བཞེས་ཟག	tobacco pipe [h]	bzhes zag
བཞེས་རག	liquor [h]	bzhes rag
བཞེས་ལག	radish [h]	bzhes lag
བཞེས་ལུ་མ	orange [h]	bzhes lu ma
བཞེས་ཤ	meat [h]	bzhes sha
བཞེས་ཤ་སྐམ་པོ	skinny, thin, emaciated [h]	bzhes sha skam po
བཞེས་ཤིག	partake, please at [h]	bzhes shig
བཞེས་ཤུ	apple	bzhes shu
བཞེས་སུ་གསོལ	please receive [h]	bzhes su gsol
བཞེས་སྲོལ	interpretations, thought[s], doctrine [h]	bzhes srol
བཞོ	[p bzhos],, will milk [f 'jo ba]	bzho
བཞོ་སྟེགས	milking platform	bzho stegs
བཞོ་ཐག	in milking bzho zog gam bzhon ma'i rope binding the two hands	bzho thag
བཞོ་བ	{'o ma bzho ba} to milk [a cow]	bzho ba
བཞོ་མ	milk cow	bzho ma
བཞོ་ཞྭ	char pa'i nang worn while milking felt char gos	bzho zhwa
བཞོ་ཟོ	milk vessel wood gi zo ba	bzho zo
བཞོག་པ	[p bzhogs],, cut, split, chip, smooth	bzhog pa
བཞོག་སྤྱད	cutting/ splitting tool	bzhog spyad
བཞོགས	cut, SA 'jog pa	bzhogs
བཞོགས་པ	cut shave scrape/ strip off cut up [p 'jog pa]. cut, split, chipped	bzhogs pa
བཞོང	trough	bzhong
བཞོད	imp. of {bzhad pa}	bzhod
བཞོན	dkar chu, curds?, ride	bzhon
བཞོན་ཁལ	riding horse etc vehicle and? 'gel khal	bzhon khal
བཞོན་འཁོར	vehicle	bzhon 'khor
བཞོན་རྟ	riding horse	bzhon rta
བཞོན་དྲེལ	riding mule	bzhon drel
བཞོན་ནས་ཕྱིན	rode away	bzhon nas phyin
བཞོན་པ	conveyance {bla ma'i stan dang bzhon pa} the teacher's seat and his conveyance	bzhon pa
བཞོན་པ་ཅན	sweet smell, scent	bzhon pa can
བཞོན་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse	bzhon pa lta bu'i sems bskyed
བེ༹ཧིཅླེ	like bodhicitta	vehicle
བཞོན་པ་ཞོན་པ	mount a horse, sit in a carriage	bzhon pa zhon pa
བཞོན་པ་ཤོམ་པ	equip a riding horse, order the horses to be put to	bzhon pa shom pa
བཞོན་པའི་རྟ	a riding horse	bzhon pa'i rta
བཞོན་ཕྱུགས	milking animals	bzhon phyugs
བཞོན་མ	milch cow, milk cow, cow or	bzhon ma
ཨེཝེ་ཨོར་ཤེ	goat that is yielding milk	ewe or she
བཞོན་མ་ར་བ	diary farm	bzhon ma ra ba
བཞོན་བཞིན་པ	riding	bzhon bzhin pa
བཞོར	shave! cut! bzhar ba!	bzhor
བཞོས	milch, milk, SA 'jo ba	bzhos
བཞོས་སྐམ	dry cow	bzhos skam
བཞོས་པ	1) milked [p 'Jo ba]; 2) [arch] eased/ refreshed mind	bzhos pa
མཞོན་དུ་བུམ་པ་སྐུའི་གནས་ལུགས	the natural state of the youthful vase body	mzhon du bum pa sku'i gnas lugs
མཞོན་ནུ	fresh (flower) youth	mzhon nu
མཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་པ	youthful vase	mzhon nu bum pa
མཞོན་ནུ་བུམ་པའི་སྐུ	youthful vase body	mzhon nu bum pa'i sku
མཞོན་ནུ་མ	maiden	mzhon nu ma
མཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ	become a youth	mzhon nur gyur pa
མཞོན་པ	younger	mzhon pa
མཞོན་མ་མའི་བདེ་བ	the ecstasy of a young woman	mzhon ma ma'i bde ba
མཞོན་གཞོན	young	mzhon gzhon
མཞོབ་གྲིབ	scorching defilement 'zhu - ft. of zhus. to receive, request, ask	mzhob grib
ཟ	ZA [bod yig gsal byed nyer gnyis pa 'di'i nga ro 'don tshul la skye gnas so dang, byed pa lce rtse, nang gi rtsol ba mgrin pa phye ba dang, phyi'i rtsol ba srog chen dro zhing sgra med pa, ming gzh...	za
ཟ་དཀའ་བ	unpleasant to the taste	za dka' ba
ཟ་རྐང	sngar dpon khungs kyi ngo tshab mi sna la khral ltar sprod pa'i gla lto	za rkang
ཟ་རྐོང	za rkong skin disease	za rkong
ཟ་རྐོན	rkon	za rkon
ཟ་སྐལ	provisions thob thang	za skal
ཟ་ཁ་བུད་པ	fy food kha phyid pa [keep in the mouth?	za kha bud pa
ཟ་ཁང	dining room / hall, restaurant	za khang
ཟ་ཁུ	za khu disease [R]	za khu
ཟ་ཁུའི་ནད	disease w discharge of semen	za khu'i nad
ཟ་མཁས་འཐུང་མཁས	eating and drinking bed spyod mkhas pa	za mkhas 'thung mkhas
ཟ་མཁས་སྤྱོད་མཁས	gron chung gi thog nas 'tsho ba skyel mkhas pa	za mkhas spyod mkhas
ཟ་འཁྲུག	SA za 'phrug	za 'khrug
ཟ་གྲི	little knife for cutting up meat	za gri
ཟ་གྲོགས	woman, wife, mistress	za grogs
ཟ་གྲོགས་འཚོལ་བ	on the lookout for companions to eat with	za grogs 'tshol ba
ཟ་འགྲམ	cheeks	za 'gram
ཟ་འགྲམ་པ	cheeks	za 'gram pa
ཟ་རྒྱག་སྤྱོད་གསུམ	not according w custom and making a living out of whatever occurs 2372	za rgyag spyod gsum
ཟ་རྒྱན	(met) sho and sbag [plaything]	za rgyan
ཟ་རྒྱུ་གྱོན་རྒྱུ	food and clothing, necessities of life	za rgyu gyon rgyu
ཟ་རྒྱུ་མེད	nothing to eat	za rgyu med
ཟ་རྒྱུ་ཡིན	will eat	za rgyu yin
ཟ་རྒྱུའི་ཟས	food to eat	za rgyu'i zas
ཟ་སྒོ	zas nor yong sgo	za sgo
ཟ་ང་ཟིང་ངེ	commotion, SA za nge zing nge	za nga zing nge
ཟ་ངེ་ཟིང་ངེ	anarchy, commotion, disorder, fuss, unkempt	za nge zing nge
ཟ་རྔམ	hunger	za rngam
ཟ་རྔམ་པ	raging, gluttonous, ravenous	za rngam pa
ཟ་བཅུད	1) za long or short time gi ldang shed; 2) zas kyi ro nus	za bcud
ཟ་ཆ	foodstuffs	za cha
ཟ་ཆག	nettle	za chag
ཟ་ཆས	foodstuffs	za chas
ཟ་ཆེ་བ	lto chas bzas drags pa	za che ba
ཟ་ཆོག་འཐུང་ཆོག	1) actions only as means of looking for food and drink; 2) gyo bskol byas zin pa'i edible/ drinkable substances	za chog 'thung chog
ཟ་འཆག་ཉལ་འདུག	daily activities	za 'chag nyal 'dug
ཟ་འཇུག་པ	begin/ cause to eat, entertain w food	za 'jug pa
ཟ་ཉན་པ	edible	za nyan pa
ཟ་ཉལ	eat and sleep za nyal 'gro 'dug spyod lam rnam pa bzhi the four actions of eating sleeping going and staying	za nyal
ཟ་ཉེས	1) improper food/ way of eating; 2) not able to earn a livelihood	za nyes
ཟ་ཉེས་པ	eating wrongly/ not in a good way	za nyes pa
ཟ་སྙད	lkog rngan by desire to eat snyad look for	za snyad
ཟ་བསྙད	blackmail	za bsnyad
ཟ་བཏུང	food, eating and drinking	za btung
ཟ་བཏུང་སྣ་ཚོགས	gourmet	za btung sna tshogs
ཟ་བཏུང་ལ་ཚད་གཅོད་པ	observe the proper measure in eating and drinking	za btung la tshad gcod pa
ཟ་འཏུང	eating and drinking	za 'tung
ཟ་ཐང	provisions thob skal gyi lam 'gro	za thang
ཟ་ཐུར	spoon, chop sticks	za thur
ཟ་དམ	za dam place	za dam
ཟ་འདོད	1) hunger, greed; 2) extortion, bribry, corruption)	za 'dod
ཟ་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ	very corrupt, bribery	za 'dod chen po
ཟ་འདྲེ	ltogs byed kyi 'dre, vampire demon	za 'dre
ཟ་འདྲེ་དགུ	the 9 za 'dre	za 'dre dgu
ཟ་ནམ་ཟིན་ལྡེ	king {za nam zin lde} [R]	za nam zin lde
ཟ་ནུས་པར་ལྡན	able to eat	za nus par ldan
ཟ་ནུས་པར་བྱེད	is able to eat	za nus par byed
ཟ་སྣུམ	cooking oil	za snum
ཟ་པོ	Contraction of za ba po? (See entry for za ba po). E.g., R75: 567.2 [mss]	za po
ཟ་ཕ	owner of a house	za pha
ཟ་ཕོད་པ	able to eat	za phod pa
ཟ་ཕྱི་ཨ་ཡ	med. za phyi a ya	za phyi a ya
ཟ་ཕྲུག་གྱན་པ	mgo la skogs skyi chags te za phrug langs pa,//gzugs por tsha thor skyes nas za phrug langs pa	za phrug gyan pa
ཟ་འཕྲུག	itching	za 'phrug
ཟ་འཕྲུག་ལང	itch	za 'phrug lang
ཟ་འཕྲུག་ལང་བ	itching of the skin	za 'phrug lang ba
ཟ་འཕྲུག་ལངས་པ	itchy	za 'phrug langs pa
ཟ་འཕྲོ	1) leftovers [food/drink]; 2) zas za bzhin pa'i mtshams bzhag pa	za 'phro
ཟ་འཕྲོ་འཐུང་འཕྲོ	leftovers of food and drink	za 'phro 'thung 'phro
ཟ་བ	1) [Tha dad pa bzas pa, bza' ba, zos],, food, eat, get into a certain mental state	za ba
ཟ་བ་འགོག་བྱེད	lam	za ba 'gog byed
ཟ་བ་རྒོད་གདོང	vulture-headed Bhaksini, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	za ba rgod gdong
ཟ་བ་དང་ཐུག་པ	was in the middle of dinner	za ba dang thug pa
ཟ་བ་པོ	CM: 'bras bu la longs spyod pa'i za ba po zhes gang zag gi bdag gi rnam grangs su grangs can pas 'dod. MSS: "enjoyer" [mss]	za ba po
ཟ་བ་དམར་ལྗང་བྱ་རྒོད་མགོ	Bhaksini, eater,	za ba dmar ljang bya rgod mgo
དརཀ	green,	dark
ཟ་བ་སེལ་བ	1) cessation; 2) za ba sel ba	za ba sel ba
ཟ་བབས	kind of brocade	za babs
ཟ་བའི་བསྒང	time of eating	za ba'i bsgang
ཟ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག	samaya/ fixed time of eating, vow of monk not to eat after noon	za ba'i dam tshig
ཟ་བའི་རྩ་བ	the cause of suffering	za ba'i rtsa ba
ཟ་བའི་ཚད	the time it takes to eat a meal, mealtime	za ba'i tshad
ཟ་བའི་ཚོད	the time it takes to eat a meal, mealtime	za ba'i tshod
ཟ་བར་འདོད་པ	desire to eat	za bar 'dod pa
ཟ་བུན	itch	za bun
ཟ་བེ་ཟོ་བེ	without care/ exertion, sloppily lackidasically	za be zo be
ཟ་བེད	mi ser gyi sa nas ham za byed pa	za bed
ཟ་བེར	brocade cloak	za ber
ཟ་བེར་ཆོས་གོས་ཕོད་ཀ	a brocade cape, a monk's robe, and a longsleeved blue gown 2373	za ber chos gos phod ka
ཟ་བེར་བ	za phrug langs pa	za ber ba
ཟ་བྱེད	1) mouth, face; 2) Indra's vajra; 3) gdong; 4) fire [god]; 5) rakshasa[i]	za byed
ཟ་བྱེད་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Devouring Dakini	za byed mkha' 'gro
ཟ་བྱེད་རོལ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Sporting Devourer Tantra. A Mahayoga scripture	za byed rol pa'i rgyud
ཟ་འབོར	za ba and 'bor ba	za 'bor
ཟ་འབོར་ཁ་འཐབ	gtong yong mgo gtug pa,//lo gcig khyud 'khor gyi za 'bor kha 'thab sdom rtsis rgyag pa	za 'bor kha 'thab
ཟ་འབྲུ	food grain	za 'bru
ཟ་མ	food	za ma
ཟ་མ་ཏོག	basket, chest, box, receptacle to put things; 2) the Basket of Books Sutra [Gdmk]; 3) womb)/ [Tserig]	za ma tog
ཟ་མ་ཏོག་བཀོད་པ	{za ma tog bkod pa} [spyan ras gzigs kyi mdo sde zhig bam po phyed dang lnga le'u gnyis pa, pandi ta dzi na mi tra sogs dang, lo ts' ba bande ye shes sdes bsgyur cing zhus pa'o	za ma tog bkod pa
ཟ་མ་ཏོག་བཀོད་པའི་མདོ	{za ma tog bkod pa'i mdo}	za ma tog bkod pa'i mdo
ཟ་མ་ཏོག་ཅན	(met) 1) 'gron bu; 2) srin bu pad pa)	za ma tog can
ཟ་མ་སྟག་མོ	female tiger, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	za ma stag mo
ཟ་མ་མ་ནིང	male or female 'dod pa tshul bzhin du spyod mi nus pa zhig	za ma ma ning
ཟ་མ་མ་ཟོས་པ	fasting {zhag bdun du za ma ma zos par 'dug} spent the week fasting	za ma ma zos pa
ཟ་མ་མོ	woman	za ma mo
ཟ་མ་ཟ་སྟངས་མ་ལེགས་པ	bad way of eating	za ma za stangs ma legs pa
ཟ་མ་ཟས་ནས	after eating	za ma zas nas
ཟ་མ་ལན་ཅིག	x {da res zab mo'i dam chos nyan pa 'di tshe gang dus brgya'i za ma lan cig yin} the fact that you are at this moment listening to the profound Dharma is the fruit of merits accumulated over innume...	za ma lan cig
ཟ་མའི་འགྲོ་སོང	provisions/ food expenses	za ma'i 'gro song
ཟ་མི་ཟིམ་མི	lightly sleeping	za mi zim mi
ཟ་ཚན	total of provisions, many or few	za tshan
ཟ་ཚོ	married couple	za tsho
ཟ་ཚོད	measure of food eaten	za tshod
ཟ་འཚོ	married couple	za 'tsho
ཟ་བཞིན་པ	eating	za bzhin pa
ཟ་ཟའི་སྣང་བ	dim light	za za'i snang ba
ཟ་ཟི	food and other necessaries of life, not clear, obscure, confused, troubled, troublesome chattering	za zi
ཟ་ཟི་ན་བུན	vague and vacillating	za zi na bun
ཟ་ཟི་བན་བུན	vague and vacillating, dissapear, vanish, dissolve	za zi bna bun
ཟ་ཟི་བན་བུན	vague and vacillating, disappear, vanish, dissolve	za zi ban bun
ཟ་ཟིང	itching	za zing
ཟ་ཟིའི་རྨི་ལམ	confused/ troubled dream	za zi'i rmi lam
ཟ་ཟིས་སྨིག་རྒྱུ་མགོ་རྨོངས	deluded and stupefied by confusion	za zis smig rgyu mgo rmongs
ཟ་འོག	satin, glossy silk cloth, [fine multicolored] brocade	za 'og
ཟ་འོག་གི་གོས	garment made of silk	za 'og gi gos
ཟ་འོག་གི་བར་ཁྱམས	courtyard overhang of brocade	za 'og gi bar khyams
ཟ་འོག་གི་བེར་ཆེན	the great brocade cloak	za 'og gi ber chen
ཟ་འོག་གི་བེར་སྨུག	the maroon brocade cloak	za 'og gi ber smug
ཟ་འོག་གི་ཡུག་ཆེན	an entire length of brocade	za 'og gi yug chen
ཟ་འོག་བེར	silken garments {za 'og ber mdzod gsar pa'i sgo phyes} open up my new store of silken garments	za 'og ber
ཟ་འོག་སྨུག་བེར	a brocade cloak	za 'og smug ber
ཟ་ཡིག་གེ	shivered [chills up the back]. See {yid za yig ge song}	za yig ge
ཟ་ཡོན	1) cock; 2) wages for working for others; 3) chos klog pa'i yon	za yon
ཟ་ར	latter part of the afternoon	za ra
ཟ་ར་ཚགས	water course's wa kha	za ra tshags
ཟ་རི་ཟ་རི	not clear, obscure, confused, troubled	za ri za ri
ཟ་རི་ཟི་རི	unreliable, undependable	za ri zi ri
ཟ་རུ	wooden ladle	za ru
ཟ་རུ་འཇུག་པ	cause to eat, begin to eat, entertain with food	za ru 'jug pa
ཟ་རུ་སོང་བའི་ཚེ	about to sit down to his meal	za ru song ba'i tshe
ཟ་རོག	eating companions	za rog
ཟ་རློམ	cheating others of their share of food	za rlom
ཟ་ལ་མི་དགའ་བ	not a greedy eater	za la mi dga' ba
ཟ་ལུང	za lung [R]	za lung
ཟ་ལུང་པ	native of za lung	za lung pa
ཟ་ཤེད	power of eating, total eaten	za shed
ཟ་བསོད	fortune of eating'am lam 'gro	za bsod
ཟ་ཧམ	ltogs rngam,	za ham
ཟ་ཧོར	1) SK za ho ra, once called rgya gar bhangga la now meng ca la; 2) ham pa chen po byas lto za ba 2374	za hor
ཟ་ཧོར་ཀུ་ཤུ	good fruit	za hor ku shu
ཟ་ཧོར་རྒྱལ་པོ་གཙུག་ལག་འཛིན	Arsadhara, King of Zahor	za hor rgyal po gtsug lag 'dzin
ཟྭ	{zwa} pho nettle	zwa
ཟྭ་ཁུ	nettle soup	zwa khu
ཟྭ་གྱུང	zwa gyung med. herb	zwa gyung
ཟྭ་རྒོད	{zwa rgod} med. herb	zwa rgod
ཟྭ་འདྲ	{zwa 'dra} med. herb	zwa 'dra
ཟྭ་པོ	zwa po med. herb	zwa po
ཟྭ་ཕོ	kind of nettle	zwa pho
ཟྭ་ཕྱི་ཨ་ཡི	species of nettle used in medicine	zwa phyi a yi
ཟྭ་འབྲུམ	{zwa 'brum} field med. [zva po'i 'bras bu ste, ro kha la tsha, zhu rjes drod, nus pas pho ba'i drod nyams pa dang, rlung nad 'dres pa'i tsha ba rnying pa sogs la phan	zwa 'brum
ཟྭ་ཚོད	nettle soup	zwa tshod
ཟྭ་ར་བ་སྐལ་ལྡན་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེང་གེ	{zwa ra ba skal ldan ye shes seng ge}	zwa ra ba skal ldan ye shes seng ge
ཟག	menstrual flow	zag
ཟག་ཁུ	chu ma brgyab pa'i chang gi snying khu	zag khu
ཟག་མགོ	kha la du ba 'then byed kyi yo spyad cig	zag mgo
ཟག་བཅས	affectively toned, sullied, fragility, presence of that which arouses affective states, sullied state of instability, unstable, contaminated, with flaws, with stains, conditioned, burdened with mis...	zag bcas
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	conditioned virtue. Spiritual practice in which a dualistic point of reference is used. Includes the preliminaries, seven branches and so forth. Unconditioned virtue is the recognition of buddha na...	zag bcas kyi dge ba
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་མངོན་ཤེས	contaminated higher perceptions	zag bcas kyi mngon shes
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	defiled dharmas [w kleshas]	zag bcas kyi chos
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་མཆོད་པ	conditioned offering	zag bcas kyi mchod pa
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	defiled bliss/ happiness	zag bcas kyi bde ba
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་སྨིན	the ripenings of tainted/ defiling [virtues and nonvirtues]	zag bcas kyi rnam smin
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	defiled aggregates/skandhas [Tserig]	zag bcas kyi phung po
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five defiled/down- flowing skandhas [rang rgyu las nyon gyis bskyed pa'i gzugs dang, tshor ba, 'du shes, 'du byed, rnam par shes pa bcas kyi phung po lnga'o	zag bcas kyi phung po lnga
དོཝན	flowing aggregates	down
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ལས	defiling actions {yang 'khor ba'i 'bras bu skyed pa'i dge mi dge thams cad zag bcas kyi las} All virtues and nonvirtues that produce samsaric effects are 'defiling actions'	zag bcas kyi las
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ལས་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two kinds of defiled actions: 1) {nges pa'i las}. 2) {ma nges pa'i las}. 2) 1) {phan byed kyi las}. 2) {'grub byed kyi las} 1) {bsam pa'i las}. 2) {sems pa'i las}	zag bcas kyi las rnam gnyis
ཟག་བཅས་ཀྱི་ལས་གསུམ	3 sinful works	zag bcas kyi las gsum
ཟག་བཅས་འཁོར་བའི་བཏགས་ཆོས་སུ	labeled as the defiling phenomena of samsara zag bcas 'khor ba'i phung po 'di dag these defiling samsaric aggregates	zag bcas 'khor ba'i btags chos su
ཟག་བཅས་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	constituents of sullied individual existence	zag bcas gyi phung po
ཟག་བཅས་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five defiling aggregates	zag bcas gyi phung po lnga
ཟག་བཅས་དགེ་བ	virtue belonging to world of desires and subject to decay	zag bcas dge ba
ཟག་བཅས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་སུ་མི་གཏོགས་པ	do not belong to the causation of defiling states	zag bcas rgyu 'bras su mi gtogs pa
ཟག་བཅས་སྒོམ་ལམ	TSE	zag bcas sgom lam
ཟག་བཅས་མངོན་ཤེས	defiled /wordly higher perception	zag bcas mngon shes
ཟག་བཅས་ཉེར་ལེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregates that perpetuate defilements	zag bcas nyer len gyi phung po
ཟག་བཅས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྡུག་བསྔལ	everything that deteriorates is suffering, one of the {chos kyi sdom bzhi} four Dharma emblems	zag bcas thams cad sdug bsngal
ཟག་བཅས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ	all that is corrupt/ defiled/ deteriorates is suffering [Gdmk]	zag bcas thams cad sdug bsngal ba
ཟག་བཅས་རྣམས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ	{'phags pa rnams kyis gzigs ngor zag bcas rnams sdug bsngal ba nyid du bden pa'o} noble beings experience everything defiling as truly being suffering	zag bcas rnams sdug bsngal ba
ཟག་བཅས་པའི་ལས	sullied action, downflowing actions / karmas	zag bcas pa'i las
ཟག་བཅས་འབྲས་གྱུར	defiled fruitions zag bcas 'bras gyur gyi cha thams cad everything that is a product of defiling states	zag bcas 'bras gyur
ཟག་བཅས་ཟག་མེད	conditioned and unconditioned	zag bcas zag med
ཟག་བཅས་ཟས	unclean foods; comp {zag med bcud zas} food of the pure essences	zag bcas zas
ཟག་བདེ	defiled bliss/happiness	zag bde
ཟག་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa) 1) zags pa, zag pa,, fall; 2) [p 'dzag pa]; 3) kleshas; 4) excrement, urine, tears, mucus etc bodily impure substances, corruption, the flux of world forming deedscaused by ignor...	zag pa
ཕོ༹རྨིང་དེཨེདས	caused by ignorance.	forming deeds
དེཨེདས	caused by ignorance, Book 1/2, Gd], impure, dissipated, defilement, contamination, sullying influence; 6) conditioning; 7) misery, affliction, sorrow	deeds
ཟག་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	subject to degeneration/ decay; exhaustible, defiling	zag pa dang bcas pa
ཟག་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of/ not subject to degeneration/ decay; inexhaustible	zag pa dang bral ba
ཟག་པ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	mind connected to defilemetn [zag pa dang lhan cig 'byung ba'i sems byung dang bdag rkyen mig dbang sogs te, zag pa'i sgo drug gi nang tshan zhig	zag pa dang 'brel ba
ཟག་པ་མེད་ཆོས	qualities without outflows	zag pa med chos
ཟག་པ་མེད་པ	not subject to cotamination/ degeneration/ decay; inexhaustible	zag pa med pa
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	the	zag pa med pa'i mngon par shes pa
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	unconditioned samadhi	zag pa med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	stainless samadhi	zag pa med pa'i ting 'dzin
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་འཛིན་སྐྱེས	I gave birth to undefiled samadhi	zag pa med pa'i ting 'dzin skyes
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་བདེ་བ	unconditioned bliss	zag pa med pa'i bde ba
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	great bliss which is free from karmic outflows	zag pa med pa'i bde ba chen po
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་སྡོམ་པ	unconditioning vows	zag pa med pa'i sdom pa
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་དབྱིངས	unpolluted dimension, the pollutionless dimension (of the mind)	zag pa med pa'i dbyings
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	unconditioned qualities, undefiled virtues	zag pa med pa'i yon tan
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ལམ་གསུམ	Three Uncorrupted Paths. The path of insight {mthong lam} or darshanamarga. the path of meditation {bsgom lam} or bhavanamarga. and the final path {mthar lam} or antamarga	zag pa med pa'i lam gsum
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ལས	undefiled action/ karma} -	zag pa med pa'i las
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	untainted intelligence, unsullied deeds [R]	zag pa med pa'i shes pa
ཟག་པ་བཞི	the four outflows/ sullying influences/ defilements	zag pa bzhi
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པ	the cessation of corruption/ kleshas GD	zag pa zad pa
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པ་མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of knowing that all defilements are exhausted	zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa'i stobs
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པ་ལ་མི་འཇིགས་པ	spangs pa phun tshogs la mi 'jigs pa	zag pa zad pa la mi 'jigs pa
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པ་ཤེས་པ	cognition of the extinction of the outflows	zag pa zad pa shes pa
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས	higher perception of exhaustion of defilements	zag pa zad pa'i mngon shes
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པའི་རིག་པ	insight that all defilements are exhausted [R]	zag pa zad pa'i rig pa
ཟག་པ་ཟད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	the wisdom of the termination of defilements, pristine cognition of the extinction of the outflows	zag pa zad pa'i shes pa
ཟག་པ་རང་ཟད	natural resolution/ falling away of the perishable	zag pa rang zad
ཟག་པ་གསུམ	the three defilements / contaminations, three corruptions. {'dod pa'i zag pa}, {srid pa'i zag pa}, {lta ba'i zag pa}	zag pa gsum
ཟག་པ་གསོག་པ	collecting defilement [R]	zag pa gsog pa
ཟག་པའི་རྒྱུ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	the fruits/ results of defilement [defiled perpetuating skandhas] possessing defiled gnas ngan len, conditioned dharmas not included in the truth of the path, [zag pa'i sgo drug gi nang tshan zhig]	zag pa'i rgyu las byung ba
ཟག་པའི་སྒོ་དྲུག	the six gates of defilement	zag pa'i sgo drug
རུང་བའི་སྒོ་དྲུག་སྟེ	[1 zag pa'i bdag nyid, two zag pa dang 'brel ba, three zag pas bcings pa, four zag pa'i rjes su 'brel ba, five zag pa'i rjes su mthun pa, six zag pa'i rgyu las byung ba]	rung ba'i sgo drug ste
ཟག་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པ	defiled objects, form etc.[zag pa'i sgo drug gi nang tshan zhig	zag pa'i rjes su mthun pa
ཟག་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲེལ་བ	results of defilement	zag pa'i rjes su 'brel ba
ཟག་པའི་བདག་ཉིད	the nature of defilement [R]	zag pa'i bdag nyid
ཟག་པས་བཅིངས་པ	being bound by defilement	zag pas bcings pa
ཟག་ཕུང	phung	zag phung
ཟག་བྱེད	masculine/feminine organs	zag byed
ཟག་བྱེད་པ	make water	zag byed pa
ཟག་བྲལ	{zag pa dang bral ba} free of/ not subject to degeneration/ decay; inexhaustible	zag bral
ཟག་དབང་པོ	{dbang po gsum}	zag dbang po
ཟག་མེད	undissipated, uncontaminated, untainted, non-defiling, not causing downfall, immaculate, uncontaminated, stainless, unconditioned, undefiled, w/o kleshas, non-conditioning, unconditioned, immaculat...	zag med
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁམས	non-defiling elements	zag med kyi khams
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	unconditioned virtues	zag med kyi dge ba
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས	unconditioned/uncompounded dharmas [truth of the path] 2377	zag med kyi chos
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་བདེ	happiness which never terminates	zag med kyi bde
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	unconditioned / undefiled bliss	zag med kyi bde ba
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	beyond the three realms and by the level of the noble ones bsdus pa'i sdom pa'o {sdom pa gsum}	zag med kyi sdom pa
ལ་ཡོད	excluding the gods in the perceptionless state, the gods in the desire and form [realms] can also possess the undefiling vow	la yod
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་གྲུབ་པ	attained the undefiled aggregates. Syn {'ja' lus thob pa}	zag med kyi phung po grub pa
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the undefiled five accumulations	zag med kyi phung po lnga
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་གསུམ	the three	zag med kyi dbang po gsum
སུཔྲ	mundane dominants/ nonconditioning faculties	supra
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་གསུམ	the three undefiled accumulations [bsod nams dang, tshul khrims dang, ye shes	zag med kyi tshogs gsum
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	undefiled virtues, unconditioned qualities	zag med kyi yon tan
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five undefiled paths [tshul khrims kyi zag med lam dang, ting nge 'dzin gyi.., shes rab kyi..., rnam par grol ba'i ye shes kyi.., rnam par grol ba'i mthong ba'i phung po'i ..]	zag med kyi lam lnga
ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་ལས	undefiling actions {'bras bu myang 'das skyed pa'i las lam bden ni zag med kyi las te zag bcas kyi las zad par byed pa'i gnyen po'o} Under the truth of the path, actions that produce nirvana as eff...	zag med kyi las
ཟག་མེད་སྐད་ཅིག་དང་པོ	first undefiled moment	zag med skad cig dang po
ཟག་མེད་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	Mipham Rinpoche: {zag med la gtan nyams med kyang, theg dman gyi 'bras bu thob pa las re shig nyams pa las gtong yang de ni rtsal po che ldog 'dred pa ltar myur du sor chud par 'gyur ro zhes bshad,...	zag med gyi sdom pa
ཟག་མེད་དགེ་བ	indestructible virtue	zag med dge ba
ཟག་མེད་སྒོམ་ལམ	[Tserig]	zag med sgom lam
ཟག་མེད་བཅུད	immaterial essence	zag med bcud
ཟག་མེད་བཅུད་ཟས	food of the pure essences; comp {zag bcas zas} unclean foods	zag med bcud zas
ཟག་མེད་ཏིང་འཛིན	undefiled samadhi	zag med ting 'dzin
ཟག་མེད་བདེ་བ	unconditioned bliss	zag med bde ba
ཟག་མེད་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	undefiling great bliss	zag med bde ba chen po
ཟག་མེད་སྡོམ་པ	Mipham Rinpoche: {gzugs med 'phags pa la rang sa na 'byung ba med pa'i sdom pa mngon gyur med kyang sngar 'byung khams kyi zag med sdom pa gtong rgyu ma byung bas gzugs med du skyes pa la yang ldan...	zag med sdom pa
ཟག་མེད་འཕགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the unfailing noble pristine cognition, undefiled wisdom of the noble ones [R]	zag med 'phags pa'i ye shes
སུ	labeled as the undefiling phenomena of nirvana	su
ཟག་མེད་ཟག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	passionless deep passion	zag med zag pa chen po
ཟག་མེད་འོད་ཀྱི་ལུས	Unconditioned body of light. Same as rainbow body	zag med 'od kyi lus
ཟག་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས	uncontaminated wisdom zag med ye shes kyi sde tshan nyer gcig 21 categories of undefiled wisdom; listed in	zag med ye shes
ཟག་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ་ཚན་ཉེར་གཅིག་ཏྭེནཏཡ	one categories pertaining to timeless awareness that are not subject to degeneration	zag med ye shes sde tshan nyer gcig twenty
ཟག་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ་ཚན་ཉེར་གཅིག	the	zag med ye shes sde tshan nyer gcig
ཚན་ཉེར་གཅིག་ནི	byang phyogs so bdun, tshad med bzhi, rnam thar brgyad, mthar gnas snyoms 'jug dgu, zad par bcu, zil gnon brgyad, nyon mongs med pa'i ting nge 'dzin, smon gnas mkhyen pa, mngon shes drug so so yang...	tshan nyer gcig ni
ཟག་མེད་ལམ་གྱི་རྟོགས་པ	the realization of the undefiled path	zag med lam gyi rtogs pa
ཟག་མེད་ལས	unsullied deeds, activity not dominated by emotional instability	zag med las
ཟག་མེད་ས་དགུ	[Tserig]	zag med sa dgu
ཟག་མེད་གསུམ	the three supra-mundane dominants/ non-conditioning faculties	zag med gsum
ཟག་མེད་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Unconditioned coemergent wisdom	zag med lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes
ཟག་རྫས	feces and urine	zag rdzas
ཟག་ཟད	exhaustion of defilement	zag zad
ཟག་ཟད་ཀྱི་དངོས་ཤེས	the purification of all defilement. zad kyi mngon shes	zag zad kyi dngos shes
ཟག་ཟད་ཀྱི་མངོན་ཤེས	higher perception of exhaustion of defilement	zag zad kyi mngon shes
ཟགས	dissipate, drop down, lose, fall down, flowed, fallen	zags
ཟགས་ཁུང	loophole, weak point	zags khung
ཟགས་ཐོན	secretion	zags thon
ཟགས་པ	[p zag pa]	zags pa
ཟང་ཀ	1) the genuine, unadulterated, true, first class, inartificial. 2) Syn. {zang thal} / {rang ga ma} abbr. of {zang ka thal ma 'byin pa} penetrating wakefulness. 3) Syn {rgya yan} open, free, just so...	zang ka
ཟང་ཀ་རྗེན་པ	laid utterly bare	zang ka rjen pa
ཟང་ཀ་ཐལ་མ་འབྱིན་པ	penetrating wakefulness	zang ka thal ma 'byin pa
ཟང་ཀ་མ	just so, ordinary, simply, the true, genuine, real, naked and direct {zang thal}	zang ka ma
ཟང་དཀར	a district in Tibet	zang dkar
ཟང་རྐྱང	[arch] alone	zang rkyang
ཟང་ག་མ	{zang ka ma} as such/ (bare . . . ) in itself/ per se; the unique/ singular state of . . . ; nothing other than . . . ; pure and simple	zang ga ma
ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི	1) kha khu sim po min pa'am lhing mi 'jags pa dang brel ba tshab tshub; 2) go rim 'khrugs pa	zang ngi zing ngi
ཟང་ངེ	{zang nge ba} bare; isc. in all	zang nge
ཟང་ངེ་ཐལ	penetrating, transparent, transparency, all-penetrating	zang nge thal
ཟང་ངེ་ཐལ་ལེ	penetrating, transparent, transparency, all-penetrating	zang nge thal le
ཟང་ངེ་ཐལ་ལེར	penetrating wakefulness	zang nge thal ler
ཟང་ངེ་ཟིང་ངེ	disorderly, messy	zang nge zing nge
ཟང་ཐལ	All-pervasiveness	zang thal
ཟང་ཐལ་ཁ་ཡན	a free vastness of unimpeded clarity [free from all thoughts and reference points, but still without falling unconscious, like dustless pure space]. Syn {har sang rgyan yan}	zang thal kha yan
ཟང་ཐལ་རྒྱ་ཡན	unimpeded openness	zang thal rgya yan
ཟང་ཐལ་ངང་ཉིད་དུ	in the unimpeded state	zang thal ngang nyid du
ཟང་ཐལ་གཅེར་བུ	transparent nakedness	zang thal gcer bu
ཟང་ཐལ་རྗེན་པའི་རིག་པ	a directly penetrating naked Awareness	zang thal rjen pa'i rig pa
ཟང་ཐལ་ཐལ	moving freely through things	zang thal thal
ཟང་ཐལ་དུ	freely; directly	zang thal du
ཟང་ཐལ་དུ་ཁ་ཡན	penetrating awareness	zang thal du kha yan
ཟང་ཐལ་དུ་འགྲུབ་བ	pass back and forth/transverse freely	zang thal du 'grub ba
ཟང་ཐལ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go unobstructedly	zang thal du 'gro ba
ཟང་ཐལ་བ	1) to penetrate, traverse freely [through matter]. 2) freely pervasive, transparent	zang thal ba
ཟང་ཐལ་འོད་ཀྱི་ལུས	unimpeded body of light	zang thal 'od kyi lus
ཟང་ཐལ་ལེ	openness	zang thal le
ཟང་ཐལ་ལེ་བ	totally open, unobstructed transparency	zang thal le ba
ཟང་མ	naked, direct, truly perceived, obvious 2379	zang ma
ཟང་མ་ཐལ	zang thal	zang ma thal
ཟང་མ་ཐལ་བྱུང	utter openness, laid bare to the core	zang ma thal byung
ཟང་མ་ཐལ་འབྱུང	impeded	zang ma thal 'byung
ཟང་ཟང	1) good; 2) place in Lho brag; 2) material things/ offerings; 3) confessed; 4) turbulence, tumult, turmoil TSE chaos; 5) hairs standing on end	zang zang
ཟང་ཟང་ལྷ་བྲག	1 of 37 holy bon places	zang zang lha brag
ཟང་ཟིང	earthly things (wealth, fame, etc.) material goods, trifles, matter, object, disarranged, confused, disarray, disturbance, havoc, melee, shambles,	zang zing
ཏོཔསཡ	turvy, tumult, not clear, obscure, confused, troubled, matter, object, animal food	topsy
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་དངོས་པོ	material things	zang zing gi dngos po
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་མཆོད་པ	material offering	zang zing gi mchod pa
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་ནོར	wealth	zang zing gi nor
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་འབུལ་བ	material offerings	zang zing gi 'bul ba
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་སྦྱིན་པ	the generosity of [giving?]. material things	zang zing gi sbyin pa
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་རོགས་རམ	material help	zang zing gi rogs ram
ཟང་ཟིང་གི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	{zang zing gi longs spyod phra mo re tsam} with the least material offering	zang zing gi longs spyod
ཟང་ཟིང་གིས་འབྱོར་པ	material wealth	zang zing gis 'byor pa
ཟང་ཟིང་གྱོབ་པ	flaunts material goods	zang zing gyob pa
ཟང་ཟིང་ངེ	chaos	zang zing nge
ཟང་ཟིང་ཅན	turbulent	zang zing can
ཟང་ཟིང་ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ	a small material contribution	zang zing cung zad tsam
ཟང་ཟིང་བཅས་པའི་ཚོར་བ	turbulent feeling, with craving	zang zing bcas pa'i tshor ba
ཟང་ཟིང་ཆུང་ཟད་ཙམ	the most trifling matter	zang zing chung zad tsam
ཟང་ཟིང་རྙེད་པ	material gain and possessions	zang zing rnyed pa
ཟང་ཟིང་དང་སྐད་ཅོར	row	zang zing dang skad cor
ཟང་ཟིང་དང་བཅས་པ	food partly consisting of animal food, material, troubled	zang zing dang bcas pa
རྒུ་ཚིམ་པར་མཛད	satisfied beings by providing them material needs as well as the Dharma	rgu tshim par mdzad
ཟང་ཟིང་ཕན་ཕུན	[arch] zang zing dam dum	zang zing phan phun
ཟང་ཟིང་ཕྱི་རོལ	outer material goods	zang zing phyi rol
ཟང་ཟིང་མེད་པ	disinterested	zang zing med pa
ཟང་ཟིང་མེད་པའི་ཚོར་བ	sensations free from turbulence; feeling free from turbulence	zang zing med pa'i tshor ba
ཟང་ཟིང་མེད་པར་ཆོས་སྟོན་པ	to teach the dharma without being distracted by worldly things	zang zing med par chos ston pa
ཟང་ཡག	fabulous numerical figure	zang yag
ཟངས	copper; a copper (pot); cauldron	zangs
ཟངས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	[TRS 102-3]	zangs kyi 'khor lo can
ཟངས་ཀྱི་གླེགས་བུ	a copper tablet	zangs kyi glegs bu
ཟངས་ཀྱི་དོང་ཙེ	(CH zangs kyi tam ka	zangs kyi dong tse
ཟངས་ཀྱི་མདོག	fabulous mountain	zangs kyi mdog
ཟངས་ཀྱི་མདོག་ཅེས་བྱ་བའི་རི་བོ	{zangs kyi mdog ces bya ba'i ri bo}	zangs kyi mdog ces bya ba'i ri bo
ཟངས་ཀྱི་མེ་ཏོག	1) copper flower; 2) kind of flower	zangs kyi me tog
ཟངས་ཀྱི་མོ་ཁབ་གཤིབས་པ	parallel copper needles	zangs kyi mo khab gshibs pa
ཟངས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ཕུད	domestic fowl, cock with its crest of glowing copper	zangs kyi gtsug phud
ཟངས་ཀྱི་བཙའ	verdigris zangs kyi g.ya' - oxide of copper, verdigris	zangs kyi btsa'
ཟངས་ཀྱིས་ཐོན	he escaped unobstructed	zangs kyis thon
ཟངས་དཀར	district in nga ri	zangs dkar
ཟངས་དཀར་པ	native of zangs dkar	zangs dkar pa
ཟངས་དཀར་ལོ་ཙ་བ	{zangs dkar lo tsa ba} tulku	zangs dkar lo tsa ba
ཟངས་རྐྱན	copper drinking vessel [R]	zangs rkyan
ཟངས་སྐུད	copper wire	zangs skud
ཟངས་སྐྱེས	copper-bronze	zangs skyes
ཟངས་སྐྱོགས	copper skyogs	zangs skyogs
ཟངས་བསྐོལ་བ	molten copper	zangs bskol ba
ཟངས་ཁ	/ zangs mo - a copper pot	zangs kha
ཟངས་ཁོག	1) copper khog ma; 2) bald [pej]	zangs khog
ཟངས་ཁོག་མགོ	bald, bare	zangs khog mgo
ཟངས་ཁོགས	bald [pej]	zangs khogs
ཟངས་ཁོལ	melted copper, boiling kettle 2380	zangs khol
ཟངས་ཁོལ་བ	boiling kettle	zangs khol ba
ཟངས་ཁོལ་ལུགས་སུ་བླུག་པ	cast [of molten] copper	zangs khol lugs su blug pa
ཟངས་ཁྲབ	copper armor	zangs khrab
ཟངས་ཁྲོ	1) zangs rag lugs su blug pa'i khro; 2) lugs su ma blugs pa'i zangs rag mnyam bsres kyi lcags rigs shig)	zangs khro
ཟངས་མཁན	coppersmith	zangs mkhan
ཟངས་གྱའ	green tarnish on copper	zangs gya'
ཟངས་གྱའ་དུག་ལྕགས་གྱའ་སྨན	copper tarnish metallic poison med.	zangs gya' dug lcags gya' sman
ཟངས་གྱོག་ཏུ་འབར་བ	gleam like copper	zangs gyog tu 'bar ba
ཟངས་གྲི	copper knife	zangs gri
ཟངས་གླིང	1) {zangs gling} subcontinent in this world; 2) copper musical pipe	zangs gling
ཟངས་གླིང་མ	Sanglingma. Life story of Padmasambhava revealed by Nyang Ral Nyima Özer	zangs gling ma
ཟངས་མགར	copper smith	zangs mgar
ཟངས་རྔ	copper drum	zangs rnga
ཟངས་ཅན	water pot or vessel made of copper	zangs can
ཟངས་ཆས	copper-ware	zangs chas
ཟངས་ཆུ་ཁོལ་མ	liquid boiling copper	zangs chu khol ma
ཟངས་ཆུང	small cooking vessel of copper, small degchi	zangs chung
ཟངས་ཆེན	copper pot	zangs chen
ཟངས་མཆོག	natural copper from the earth	zangs mchog
ཟངས་ཏིག	tig ta w red flower med. [R]	zangs tig
ཟངས་ཏིབ	copper teapot	zangs tib
ཟངས་ཏེལ	copper tel pa ste, 'bras dang lhog pa sogs kyi nad dmigs sreg byed kyi lag cha zhig	zangs tel
ཟངས་གཏེར	copper mine	zangs gter
ཟངས་ཐ་བ	copper gyong po'am ma thul ba	zangs tha ba
ཟངས་ཐལ	copper oxidized	zangs thal
ཟངས་ཐིབ	copper tea pot	zangs thib
ཟངས་ཐུམ	copper ladle	zangs thum
ཟངས་དུག	poison of copper	zangs dug
ཟངས་དུང	copper trumpet/ horn	zangs dung
ཟངས་དུང་འབུད་པ	blow a copper horn	zangs dung 'bud pa
ཟངས་དྲེག	1) copper making impurities; 2) by a coppersmith mer bsregs te brdungs pa'i dreg pa med.	zangs dreg
ཟངས་གདུབ་སྣ་མ	battered bangle	zangs gdub sna ma
ཟངས་མདོག	copper color	zangs mdog
ཟངས་མདོག་དཔལ་གྱི་རི་བོ	glorious / noble Copper-colored Mountain, the pure land of Guru Rinpoche	zangs mdog dpal gyi ri bo
ཟངས་མདོག་དཔལ་རི	Sangdok Palri. The Glorious Copper colored Mountain,	zangs mdog dpal ri
ཐེ་པུརེ་ལནད་ཨོཕ༹་གུརུ་ཪིནཔོཆེ་སིཏུཨཏེད་ཨོན་ཐེ་སོཨུཐ	western continent of Chamara (rnga g.yab)	the pure land of Guru Rinpoche situated on the south
གློརིཨོཨུས་ཅོཔཔེར	colored Mountain	Glorious Copper
ཟངས་འདོན	mine copper	zangs 'don
ཟངས་འདོན་བྱེད	mine copper	zangs 'don byed
ཟངས་རྡིག	kind of copper vessel	zangs rdig
ཟངས་རྡུང་བ	1) coppersmith; 2) beat co[pper w hammer)	zangs rdung ba
ཟངས་རྡོ	copper ore	zangs rdo
ཟངས་རྡོ་དམར་པོ	cuprite	zangs rdo dmar po
ཟངས་ལྡན	species of juniper copper colored when dried	zangs ldan
ཟངས་སྡིག	copper utensils/ ware	zangs sdig
ཟངས་སྡེར	copper dish	zangs sder
ཟངས་པར	copper printing plates	zangs par
ཟངས་ཕུར	copper purpa	zangs phur
ཟངས་ཕོར་རྒྱག་པ	by a physician a copper bowl having been heated, applying where the disease is as method of curing	zangs phor rgyag pa
ཟངས་བན	copper water/ chang vessel	zangs ban
ཟངས་བུ	small pot	zangs bu
ཟངས་བུམ	copper vase	zangs bum
ཟངས་དབྱི	red lynx	zangs dbyi
ཟངས་མ	1) [natural] copper; 2) zangs dkyus ma	zangs ma
ཟངས་མིག	(met) cuckoo	zangs mig
ཟངས་མོ	copper (pot)	zangs mo
ཟངས་དམར	copper, coppery red	zangs dmar
ཟངས་རྩི	{zangs rtsi} med. herb	zangs rtsi
ཟངས་རྩི་དཀར་པོ	galium aparine l.	zangs rtsi dkar po
ཟངས་རྩི་ནག་པོ	artemisia hedinii ostenf. zangs tsha bsod nams rgyal mtshan {zangs tsha bsod nams rgyal mtshan} [R] zangs tsha bsod nams rgyal mtshan {zangs tsha bsod nams rgyal mtshan}	zangs rtsi nag po
ཟངས་ཚགས	zangs kyi ja tshags sogs tshags spyad	zangs tshags
ཟངས་ཞུ་བའི་ཁུ་བ	melted copper	zangs zhu ba'i khu ba
ཟངས་ཞུན	molten copper	zangs zhun
ཟངས་ཞུན་ཁོལ་མ	person boiled in moletn copper [in hell] 2381	zangs zhun khol ma
ཟངས་ཟེ་ཅན	domestic fowl, cock with its crest of glowing copper, SA khyim bya	zangs ze can
ཟངས་བཟོ་བ	coppersmith	zangs bzo ba
ཟངས་ཡག་བྲག	Sang Yak Drak, a cave in U	zangs yag brag
ཟངས་ཡིག	zangs glegs dang zangs chas la tshag brgyab pa'i yi ge	zangs yig
ཟངས་རག	copper [& brass]	zangs rag
ཟངས་རི	zangs ri rdzong *, copper mt/ hill	zangs ri
ཟངས་རི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་མཐོང་སྨོན	{zangs ri bkra shis mthong smon} [jong of zangs ri]	zangs ri bkra shis mthong smon
ཟངས་རི་མཀར་དམར	Machik labdron's hermitage [R]	zangs ri mkar dmar
ཟངས་རི་ཁ་དམར	a monastery	zangs ri kha dmar
ཟངས་རི་མཁར་དམར	Sangri Kharmar; The Red Citadel (Kharmar) is thus called because is was built upon a red rock, at the southern extremity of the Copper Mountain (Sangri), overlooking the northern banks of the Tsang...	zangs ri mkhar dmar
ཟངས་རིའི་བཞི་ཀ	administrator at Zangri	zangs ri'i bzhi ka
ཟངས་རུ་བཞི་མ	kind of copper vessel	zangs ru bzhi ma
ཟངས་ལུང་བཞི་མ	kind of copper vessel [= zangs ru bzhi ma kind of copper vessel]	zangs lung bzhi ma
ཟངས་ཤན	zo ba sogs sdom byed	zangs shan
ཟངས་ཤོག	thin copper sheet	zangs shog
ཟངས་ས་ལེ་སྦྲམ	best quality copper	zangs sa le sbram
ཟངས་སུ་སྐོལ	boil in a kettle	zangs su skol
ཟངས་སུ་སྐོལ་བ	boil in a kettle	zangs su skol ba
ཟངས་སེར	yellow copper	zangs ser
ཟངས་ཧྲུག	zangs rdog chung ngu rigs	zangs hrug
ཟད	nor rnams zad - the jewels were gone	zad
ཟད་དཀའ	an endless task, exhaustingly difficult	zad dka'
ཟད་སྐྱོན	wear and tear	zad skyon
ཟད་བསྐལ	kalpa of destruction	zad bskal
ཟད་གྲོན	'gro song	zad gron
ཟད་གྲོན་གྱི་ཚད	rate of attrition/ expenditure	zad gron gyi tshad
ཟད་གྲོན་དམག་འཐབ	war of attrition	zad gron dmag 'thab
ཟད་འགྲོ	1) exhaust, waste, finish, terminate, wear out, run out of, spend; 2) extinct, finished, exhausted, terminated; 3) extinction, exhaustion, termination	zad 'gro
ཟད་སྒོ	'gro gron gyi gzhi ma	zad sgo
ཟད་གཏུགས	reach emptiness/ exhaustion	zad gtugs
ཟད་སྟོང་པ	to extinguish and empty	zad stong pa
ཟད་སྟོངས	gone/ exhausted w/o remainder	zad stongs
ཟད་མཐའ	end	zad mtha'
ཟད་མཐའ་མེད་པ	inexhaustible, endless, unending	zad mtha' med pa
ཟད་མཐའ་མེད་པའི་ནམ་མཁའ	endless space/ sky	zad mtha' med pa'i nam mkha'
ཟད་འཐུད	1) used up goods/ property compensatory replacement; 2) things complied to replace those used	zad 'thud
ཟད་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to be wasted	zad du 'gro ba
ཟད་དེ	and none besides, it is only, and no more	zad de
ཟད་དོ	that's it	zad do
ཟད་པ	resolution; to resolve/ fall away	zad pa
ཟད་པ་སྔོན་པོ	the totality of blue zad pa dang mi skye ba shes pa'i byang	zad pa sngon po
པརྲོཏ	like rang sangs rgyas} zad pa dang mi skye ba shes pa'i byang	parrot
ཟད་པ་མེད་པ	he never becomes extinguished	zad pa med pa
ཟད་པ་ཤེས་པ	'Knowing Extinction' [of defilements] [in {bye smra} cognition of exhaustion, liberates when realized]. knowledge that (afflictive emotions and karma/ negative factors) have been exhausted	zad pa shes pa
ཟད་པ་ཤེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the pristine cognition/wisdom which perceives/cognizes the cessation/exhaustion of corruption/ defile ments [R]	zad pa shes pa'i ye shes
ཟད་པ་བསྲིང	prolong life	zad pa bsring
ཟད་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	(true) nature in which phenomena resolve/ fall away	zad pa'i chos nyid
ཟད་པའི་སྟོངས་པ	bsgyur bgod kyi gnas rnams zad de thig le stong par gyur pa, EG, bsgyur bya stongs par bsgyur rgyu med, sgyur byed stongs na bsgyur gzhi dbyi, bsgyur bgod bar stongs thig les 'dzin	zad pa'i stongs pa
ཟད་པའི་ས	the level of extinction of existence	zad pa'i sa
ཟད་པའི་སར་ཐུག	to arrive at the level/ point of resolution	zad pa'i sar thug
ཟད་པར	all, the whole world, universe, exhaustively, totalities	zad par
ཟད་པར་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཅུ	the allpervading 10 ayatanas	zad par skye mched bcu
ཟད་པར་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	spheres of totality, all-pervading ayatanas [a yogin who has attained bsam gtan la dbang by the power of samadhi 'byung ba bzhi etc. gang la dmigs pa de ji ltar 'dod pa bzhin du can transform, "zad...	zad par gyi skye mched
ཟད་པར་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཅུ	the allpervading 10 ayatanas [R]	zad par gyi skye mched bcu
ཟད་པར་བཅུ	ten totalities: The totality of earth, water, fire, wind, blue, yellow, red, white, space and consciousness; ten totalities; bcu; [TRS 55-6]	zad par bcu
ཟད་པར་ཇིལ་ནོན	overpowering the elements	zad par jil non
ཟད་པར་བྱེད་པ	bring to extinction	zad par byed pa
ཟད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་གཉེན་པོ	the remedy that brings an end to	zad par byed pa'i gnyen po
ཟད་པར་མི་འགྱུར་པ	inexhaustible	zad par mi 'gyur pa
ཟད་པར་ཟིལ་གནོན	totalities and masteries, overpowering the elements	zad par zil gnon
ཟད་པོ	old cloth, rags	zad po
ཟད་ཕྱོགས	waning period of the moon	zad phyogs
ཟད་བ་བཅུ	[Tserig]	zad ba bcu
ཟད་མ	thrower, archer, night	zad ma
ཟད་མ་ཐུབ་པ	could not exhaust [the flow]	zad ma thub pa
ཟད་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	disturbing affective states have been eliminated	zad mi skye ba
ཟད་མི་ཤེས་པ	inexhaustible; endless; knows no limits zad mi shes pa} -- inexhaustible	zad mi shes pa
ཟད་མེད	innumerable [about beings]	zad med
ཟད་མེད་ཀྱི	endless, measureless	zad med kyi
ཟད་མེད་ཀློང	inexhaustible sphere	zad med klong
ཟད་མེད་ཀློང་ནས	from the inexhaustible sphere	zad med klong nas
ཟད་གཙང	suddhodana	zad gtsang
ཟད་ཚོད་རན་པར་ཟ་བ	eat moderately	zad tshod ran par za ba
ཟད་རྫོགས	erosion	zad rdzogs
ཟད་རྫོགས་ཕྱིན་པ	erode worn out	zad rdzogs phyin pa
ཟད་ཟ་ཡུན	the time taken to eat a meal	zad za yun
ཟད་ཟད	until it is finished/ exhausted	zad zad
ཟད་ལེན	former exhausted and later len pa,//dgos mkho zad len	zad len
ཟད་ས	state/ point of resolution	zad sa
ཟད་སར	extinction	zad sar
ཟད་སར་སྐྱོལ་བ	to be brought to the state of resolution	zad sar skyol ba
ཟད་སར་འཁྱོལ་བ	exhaustion	zad sar 'khyol ba
ཟད་སོང	cost, expense, expenditure, order, sequence, was exhausted, used up, ended	zad song
ཟད་སོང་གི་སྡོམ་རྩིས་རྒྱག་པ	calculate total expenses	zad song gi sdom rtsis rgyag pa
ཟད་ཧྲུལ	old and torn, worn out	zad hrul
ཟན	bag - grain meal	zan
ཟན་ཁམ	kha la shong tsam gyi spag	zan kham
ཟན་ཁྲུས	cup in which dough balles are made of tsampa + tea/ whey	zan khrus
ཟན་གོང	spag rdog rdog //skyugs nad can gyis zan gong mthong ba dang mtshungs	zan gong
ཟན་གྱོ	spag brdzi ba	zan gyo
ཟན་སྒོང	provisions	zan sgong
ཟན་སྒྲིལ	means of examining; zan ril 'dra ba gnyis kyi nang brtag bya'i ming mi 'dra ba gnyis bcug ste rten rtsa che'i mdun du bden pa bdar te dkrug dkrug btang nas gcig phyir zag pa der brtag dpyad byed pa...	zan sgril
ཟན་བསྒོངས	zan brdzis te gong bu bzos pa	zan bsgongs
ཟན་ཆང	food and drink	zan chang
ཟན་ཆང་གཅིག	a handful of plain tsampa	zan chang gcig
ཟན་ཆིང	Ch princess married to King Songtsen Gampo, rgya bza' kong jo	zan ching
ཟན་སྙིག	mistake	zan snyig
ཟན་དུམ	piece of dough - tshogs zan	zan dum
དུམ་བུ་གཅིག	a piece of feast dough	dum bu gcig
ཟན་དྲོན	rtsam pa brdzis pa'i hot dough, warm food	zan dron
ཟན་རྡོ་གཅིག་ཟ་བའི་ཡུན་ཙམ	even for the duration of a meal	zan rdo gcig za ba'i yun tsam
ཟན་རྡོག་གཅིག་ཟ་བའི་ཡུན་ཙམ	for as long as it takes to eat a meal	zan rdog gcig za ba'i yun tsam
ཟན་ལྡོག་ཟ་བ	take unlawful interest	zan ldog za ba
ཟན་སྣོག་པ	[arch] zas zhim la gya nom pa	zan snog pa
ཟན་པ	advice, suggestions	zan pa
ཟན་པོ	great expense, harsh, harmful, bad for [gzan po]	zan po
ཟན་ཕྱེ	spag gi phye ma	zan phye
ཟན་བྲུལ་གྱི་ཞབས་སུ་ཆུ་བླུགས་པ	water poured into the bottom of fodder, maybe = {zan khrus}. fodder, food bowl	zan brul gyi zhabs su chu blugs pa
ཟན་སྦྲུས	zan brdzis pa	zan sbrus
ཟན་མ	1) tsampa; 2) a cook	zan ma
ཟན་བཙོས	1) boiled/ warm food/ dough; 2) wind disease 'chos thabs zan btsos)	zan btsos
ཟན་བཙོས་པ	boiled food	zan btsos pa
ཟན་རྫ	cooking pan, pot	zan rdza
ཟན་ཟ	eat	zan za
ཟན་ཟ་བ	eat	zan za ba
ཟན་ཟ་ཡུན	duration of a meal	zan za yun
ཟན་ཟོས	has eaten his meal, meal in general	zan zos
ཟན་ཡང	(CH) ; 1) Samye zan yang unchanging naturally existing gtsug lag khang [R]; 2) three styles of arcbhitechture	zan yang
ཟན་རིལ	ball of dough	zan ril
ཟན་ལིང	dough-effigy	zan ling
ཟབ་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་མོ	deep great ocean	zab kyi rgya mtsho chen mo
ཟབ་སྐུད	threads of silk, brocade	zab skud
ཟབ་ཁྱད་ཐོན་པ	zab pa'i khyad chos gsal por thon pa	zab khyad thon pa
ཟབ་ཁྲིད	profound instruction	zab khrid
ཟབ་འཁྲིད	[Tserig]	zab 'khrid
ཟབ་བགྲང	#	zab bgrang
ཟབ་མགྲོན	brocade and mgron bu	zab mgron
ཟབ་རྒྱས	the depth and breadth of	zab rgyas
ཟབ་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	Profound and extensive teachings. Same as Sutra and Mantra	zab rgyas kyi chos
ཟབ་རྒྱས་ཅན	exuberant	zab rgyas can
ཟབ་རྒྱས་ཆོས	the depth and breadth of Dharma	zab rgyas chos
ཟབ་རྒྱས་ཏིང་འཛིན	profound and vast contemplations Gd	zab rgyas ting 'dzin
ཟབ་རྒྱས་དོན	deep and vast meaning	zab rgyas don
ཟབ་རྒྱས་གདམས་པ	profound and vast instructions	zab rgyas gdams pa
ཟབ་ཅིང་རྒྱ་ཆེར་བཤད་པ	po lnga	zab cing rgya cher bshad pa
ཟབ་ཅིང་རྒྱ་ཆེར་བཤད་པ་པོ་ལྔ	the five profound and extensive explainers	zab cing rgya cher bshad pa po lnga
ཟབ་ཅིང་འཐུག་པ	profound, deep and lasting	zab cing 'thug pa
ཟབ་ཆན	brocade	zab chan
ཟབ་ཆོས	profound Dharma	zab chos
ཟབ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག	lord of the profound teachings	zab chos kyi mnga' bdag
ཟབ་འཇུག་བྱེད	go into deeply, get totally involved in	zab 'jug byed
ཟབ་གཉན	profound and significant	zab gnyan
ཟབ་ཏ་ཟོབ་ཏ	deception	zab ta zob ta
ཟབ་ཏིག	profound essence zab tig chos dbyings rang grol gyi sgrub	zab tig
ཟབ་ཏུ་གཏོང	deepen, intensify	zab tu gtong
ཟབ་གཏེར	profound treasure GD	zab gter
ཟབ་གཏེར་བཀའ་བབས	upon whom authority over the profound treasure descended	zab gter bka' babs
ཟབ་གཏེར་འབྱུང་བའི་ཡུམ	fertile mother of deep Treasures	zab gter 'byung ba'i yum
ཟབ་ཐལ	ashes of brocade or dar zab	zab thal
ཟབ་ཐིག	profound essence	zab thig
ཟབ་དར	Ch silk/ satin	zab dar
ཟབ་དོན	deep meaning, profound instruction	zab don
ཟབ་དོན་ཀུན	all the profound instructions	zab don kun
ཟབ་གདམས	profound instructions, profound teaching	zab gdams
ཟབ་བདུན་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	terma revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa zab bdun sgyu 'phrul zangs byang ma'i	zab bdun sgyu 'phrul
ཟབ་བདུན་ཕུར་པ	One of the major termas revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa focused on Vajra Kilaya, the sacred dances of which are performed biyearly at Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim and Benchen Monastery in Nepal. One of t...	zab bdun phur pa
ཟབ་བདུན་ཕུར་བ	Sabdün Phurba. One of the major termas revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa focused on Vajra Kilaya, the sacred dances of which are performed yearly at Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim	zab bdun phur ba
ཟབ་བདུན་རྩ་གསུམ་ཚེ་ཟབ	terma by Chokgyur Lingpa	zab bdun rtsa gsum tshe zab
ཟབ་ནན	emphatic	zab nan
ཟབ་གནད	profound import; profound key points; the profound pith	zab gnad
ཟབ་གནད་ཀྱི་གདམས	profound teaching	zab gnad kyi gdams
ཟབ་གནད་བཅུད	profound essence	zab gnad bcud
ཟབ་གནད་སྙིང་པོ	fundamental principle	zab gnad snying po
ཟབ་པ	profound (referring to stong pa), make deep, deepen, dense, depth, rich, figured silk dress	zab pa
ཟབ་པ་སྐོར་བདུན	rediscovered by the gter ston o rgyan mchog gyur gling pa (1829-1870)	zab pa skor bdun
ཟབ་པ་ཁབ་འདི་ལྟ་བུར་གྱུར་ཅིག	may it reach as deeply as this needle	zab pa khab 'di lta bur gyur cig
ཟབ་པ་དགོངས་གཏེར	profound mind dharma treasure	zab pa dgongs gter
ཟབ་པ་ཉིད	depth	zab pa nyid
ཟབ་པ་དང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་གདམས་པ	profound and vast instructions	zab pa dang rgya che ba'i gdams pa
ཟབ་པ་དང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminating knowledge of the profound and the extensive	zab pa dang rgya che ba'i shes rab
ཟབ་པ་གསུམ	the three desirable depths of the body [R]	zab pa gsum
ཟབ་པའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས	profound special teachings/ qualities of something	zab pa'i khyad chos
ཟབ་པའི་གཏེར་ཆེན་ཉེར་ལྔ	25 great profound treasures	zab pa'i gter chen nyer lnga
ཟབ་པའི་ཤེས་པ	ultimate consciousness	zab pa'i shes pa
ཟབ་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the profound knowledge	zab pa'i shes rab
ཟབ་པར་བྱེད	be of fundamental importance, be most important	zab par byed
ཟབ་པོ	deep, profound	zab po
ཟབ་པོའི་དགོངས་པ	profound thoughts/ realization	zab po'i dgongs pa
ཟབ་ཕུ་ལུང	gtsang khul shangs kyi phur yod pa'i slob dpon padma'i sbas lung zhig	zab phu lung
ཟབ་བེ་ཟེབ་བེ	vague/ imprecise	zab be zeb be
ཟབ་བེ་ཟོབ་བེ	1) loose/ sloppy minded; 2) relaxed/ loose	zab be zob be
ཟབ་བེ་ཟོབ་བེའི་ཐག་པ་བསྡམས་པ	tie up a loose rope	zab be zob be'i thag pa bsdams pa
ཟབ་བེ་ཟོབ་བེའི་རིག་པ	sloppy understanding zab be zob ber nyan na ha go 'di go mi	zab be zob be'i rig pa
ཟབ་བེར	brocade robe	zab ber
ཟབ་བེར་འདུད་མ	broade cape	zab ber 'dud ma
ཟབ་དབང་གསུམ	Three Profound Empowerments. The secret empowerment {gsang dbang} the empowerment of discriminating pristine cognition of {shes rab ye shes kyi dbang} and the empowerment of word and meaning {tshig...	zab dbang gsum
ཟབ་དབྱངས	deep voice, musical tone	zab dbyangs
ཟབ་འབོལ	silk covering for a bolster	zab 'bol
ཟབ་སྦྱོང	profound/ in depth study	zab sbyong
ཟབ་སྦྱོར	well fitting, complete costume	zab sbyor
ཟབ་མོ	1) deep; 2) profound /hard to understand; 3) phra zhib; 4) good quality, pure [R]	zab mo
ཟབ་མོ་དགོངས་གཏེར	profound mind treasure	zab mo dgongs gter
ཟབ་མོ་དགོངས་པའི་གཏེར	profound mind treasure, See also {dgongs gter}	zab mo dgongs pa'i gter
ཟབ་མོ་བརྒྱད	as in {zab mo brgyad ldan rtogs pa'i shes rab kyi spyan} the eight qualities of understanding the ultimate truth	zab mo brgyad
ཟབ་མོ་ཉི་ཤུ་པ	20 profound topics	zab mo nyi shu pa
ཟབ་མོ་གཏེར་གྱི་སྒོ་ཕྱེས	reveal these profound treasures	zab mo gter gyi sgo phyes
ཟབ་མོ་ལྟ་བརྒྱུད	lineage of the profound view	zab mo lta brgyud
ཟབ་མོ་ལྟ་བའི་ཆ	mainly by Nagarjuna	zab mo lta ba'i cha
ཟབ་མོ་ལྟ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ	Chariot of the Profound View	zab mo lta ba'i shing rta
ཟབ་མོ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	profound emptiness [R]	zab mo stong pa nyid
ཟབ་མོ་དག་སྣང	Pure Vision	zab mo dag snang
ཟབ་མོ་དག་སྣང་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	after the excellent deity has appeared in person, the [lineage of] oral instructions that are taught	zab mo dag snang gi brgyud pa
ཟབ་མོ་ནང་དོན	profound inner meaning	zab mo nang don
ཟབ་མོ་སྣང་བ	profound illumination	zab mo snang ba
ཟབ་མོ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཞིང	deep abode of bodhi	zab mo byang chub kyi zhing
ཟབ་མོ་དབུ་མ་པ	profound madhyamaka [klu sgrub kyis srol phye ba'i mtha' bzhi spros bral gyi lta ba 'dzin pa'i grub mtha' zhig	zab mo dbu ma pa
ཟབ་མོ་དབུ་མའི་ལྟ་བ	view of profound madhyamaka [R]	zab mo dbu ma'i lta ba
ཟབ་མོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ནགས	{zab mo zhes bya ba'i nags}	zab mo zhes bya ba'i nags
ཟབ་མོ་ཞེས་བྱའི་ནགས	{zab mo zhes bya'i nags}	zab mo zhes bya'i nags
ཟབ་མོ་ཡང་ཏིག	part of Longchen Rabjam's snying thig ya bzhi	zab mo yang tig
ཟབ་མོ་ཡང་ཐིག	by {klong chen rab 'byams} part of {snying thig ya bzhi}	zab mo yang thig
ཟབ་མོ་རི	Zabmo Ri, in Lhagyari	zab mo ri
ཟབ་མོ་གསང་བའི་དབང	the profound secret empowerment	zab mo gsang ba'i dbang
ཟབ་མོ་ཧཱུཾ་གི་བཟླས་པ	profound hung recitation	zab mo hUM gi bzlas pa
ཟབ་མོའི་བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས	profound development and completion	zab mo'i bskyed rdzogs
ཟབ་མོའི་དགོངས་པ	profound thoughts/ realization	zab mo'i dgongs pa
ཟབ་མོའི་སྒོམ་ཁྲིད	profound meditation tri	zab mo'i sgom khrid
ཟབ་མོའི་ང་རོ་ཁ་གླིང་སྒྲ	a kind of war cry	zab mo'i nga ro kha gling sgra
ཟབ་མོའི་ཆོས	profound teachings	zab mo'i chos
ཟབ་མོའི་ཆོས་ཉིད་རྣམ་པ་བརྒྱད	TSE zab mo'i chos nyid rnam pa brgyad [Tserig]	zab mo'i chos nyid rnam pa brgyad
ཟབ་མོའི་ཆོས་ལ་བཟོད་པ	Acceptance of the profound Dharma	zab mo'i chos la bzod pa
ཟབ་མོའི་ལྟ་བའི་གནས	the deep view	zab mo'i lta ba'i gnas
ཟབ་མོའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	profound emptiness	zab mo'i stong pa nyid
ཟབ་མོའི་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate profound	zab mo'i mthar thug
ཟབ་མོའི་དམ་ཆོས	the profound Dharma	zab mo'i dam chos
ཟབ་མོའི་དོན	the profound meaning [R]	zab mo'i don
ཟབ་མོའི་དོན་གཏན་ལ་འབེབས་པ	that the profound truth should be established zab mo'i don la mi skrag pa'i bzod pa the patience of not fearing the profound meaning [R] zab mo'i don la mi skrag pa'i bzod pa the patience of not fe...	zab mo'i don gtan la 'bebs pa
ཟབ་མོའི་གདམས་ངག	the profound instructions	zab mo'i gdams ngag
ཟབ་མོའི་གདམས་པ	deep teachings	zab mo'i gdams pa
ཟབ་མོའི་གདམས་པ་གནང་བ	given profound instructions	zab mo'i gdams pa gnang ba
ཟབ་མོའི་མདོ་སྡེ	profound sutras	zab mo'i mdo sde
ཟབ་མོའི་གནད	profound method	zab mo'i gnad
ཟབ་མོའི་གནས	profound topics	zab mo'i gnas
ཟབ་མོའི་བླ་སྒྲུབ་སྐོར་བཞི	Four Profound Cycles of Guru Sadhana	zab mo'i bla sgrub skor bzhi
ཟབ་མོའི་དབང་གསུམ	three profound empowerments	zab mo'i dbang gsum
ཟབ་མོའི་ཚིག	profound aphorism	zab mo'i tshig
ཟབ་མོའི་རིམ་པ་གཉིས	Two profound stages. The development stage and the completion stage	zab mo'i rim pa gnyis
ཟབ་རྨོ	deep plowing	zab rmo
ཟབ་ཚད	depth	zab tshad
ཟབ་ཞི	profound and peaceful: 1) sangs rgyas kyi thugs 'od gsal chos sku; 2) zab pa ni gting rtogs dka' ba dang, zhi ba ni 'gog pa mya ngan las 'das pa,//;	zab zhi
ཟབ་ཞི་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	profundity, peace, and simplicity [spros pa'i mtha' brgyad dang bral ba'i zab mo stong pa nyid	zab zhi spros bral
ཟབ་བཞེས	firm, steady, in excellent condition	zab bzhes
ཟབ་ཟབ	tidy looking [clothes]	zab zab
ཟབ་ཟབ་མོ	{ji tsam zab zab mo dang mtshar ba ltar 'dug kyang} however profound and marvelous it may seem 2386	zab zab mo
ཟབ་ཟབ་མོ་ཞིག་གཞན་དུ་འཚོལ་བ	to look for all kinds of profundities elsewhere	zab zab mo zhig gzhan du 'tshol ba
ཟབ་ཟབ་མོའི་ཁ་སྐད	{dngos gzhi'i chos kyi zab zab mo'i kha skad la re nas} filled with high hopes after hearing how profound the teachings of the main practice are	zab zab mo'i kha skad
ཟབ་ཟེབ	{zab zob} {zab be zeb be} vague/ imprecise	zab zeb
ཟབ་ཟོབ	1) loose/ sloppy minded; 2) relaxed/ loose	zab zob
ཟབ་ཡངས	vast	zab yangs
ཟབ་བརླིང	deep and changeless, profound, deep, lofty	zab brling
ཟབ་བརླིང་གི་ཚིག	profound [& lofty] words	zab brling gi tshig
ཟབ་ལ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	both vast and profound, as vast as it is profound	zab la rgya che ba
ཟབ་ལ་ཟབ་སྣང་བ	deep profound manifestation	zab la zab snang ba
ཟབ་ལག་ཅན	{chu rtsva} field herb [root], cut water plants	zab lag can
ཟབ་ལམ	profound path/ ways, tantra, madhyamaka	zab lam
གཅོད་པའི་སྟ་རེ	by Shabkar zab lam gcod kyi ngag 'don bdag 'dzin	gcod pa'i sta re
ཟབ་ལམ་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ནོར་བུ	terma by {chos gling}	zab lam thugs kyi nor bu
ཟབ་ལམ་ཐེག་རྩེའི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the profound path, summit of all vehicles zab lam bde stong phyag rgya chen po profound path of mahamudra of bliss and emptiness zab lam bde stong phyag rgya chen po profound path ...	zab lam theg rtse'i bstan pa
ཆེས་གསུམ་ལྡན	by Tsongkhapa zab lam na ro chos drug gi khrid rim yid	ches gsum ldan
ཟབ་ལམ་ནཱ་རོའི་ཆོས་དྲུག	six teachings of Naropa; esoteric approach to Bud-	zab lam nA ro'i chos drug
ཟབ་ལམ་པ	followers of the profound path	zab lam pa
ཟབ་ལམ་འཕོ་བ	the profound path of transference	zab lam 'pho ba
ཟབ་ལམ་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the profound path of Guru Yoga	zab lam bla ma'i rnal 'byor
ཟབ་ལམ་རིམ་ལྔ	five stages of the profound path	zab lam rim lnga
ཟབ་བཤེས	firm, steady, in good order/ condition	zab bshes
ཟབ་སལ་བ	profound brilliance	zab sal ba
ཟབ་གསང	profound and secret	zab gsang
ཟབ་གསལ	profound and luminous / brilliant	zab gsal
ཟབ་གསལ་གཉིས་མེད	non-duality of profound and manifest	zab gsal gnyis med
ཟབ་གསལ་གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of	zab gsal gnyis med kyi rnal 'byor
ཟབ་གསལ་གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	yoga of	zab gsal gnyis med kyi ye shes
ཟབ་གསལ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahamudra of profound luminosity, [term used by 8th Karmapa]	zab gsal phyag rgya chen po
ཟབ་ལྷིང་བརྟན་གསུམ	gting dpag dka' bas zab pa, tshab tshub med pas lhing ba, 'gyur ldog med pas brtan pa ste gsum,//las don zab lhing brtan gsum gyi sgo nas sgrub pa	zab lhing brtan gsum
ཟབས	thick, thickness, depth, make deep, SA zab pa	zabs
ཟམ	line, continuity, succession, velvet cushion, woolen rug, series, kinds, sort	zam
ཟམ་ཁའི་འཐབ་རྫིང	brigehead	zam kha'i 'thab rdzing
ཟམ་གྲོང	village w a bridge	zam grong
ཟམ་ཆུ	water under a bridge	zam chu
ཟམ་ཆུང	small bridge	zam chung
ཟམ་ཆེན	large bridge	zam chen
ཟམ་ཏོག	a casket	zam tog
ཟམ་རྟེན	bridge support	zam rten
ཟམ་སྟེགས	support platform under bridge supports of rock etc	zam stegs
ཟམ་གདན	abutment	zam gdan
ཟམ་གདུང	bridge girder	zam gdung
ཟམ་ལྡེམ	1) crooked bridge; 2) zam pa'i sked pa ldem ldem du moving)	zam ldem
ཟམ་སྣ	bridge's sna gdong	zam sna
ཟམ་པ	bridge	zam pa
ཟམ་པ་རྒྱག	build a bridge zam pa lta bur bzang ngan thams cad	zam pa rgyag
ཟམ་པའི་ཀ་བ	supports/ piers of a bridge	zam pa'i ka ba
ཟམ་པའི་རྐང་པ	piers of a bridge	zam pa'i rkang pa
ཟམ་པའི་འོག་ཏུ་འབོར་བ	precipitate a person from a bridge	zam pa'i 'og tu 'bor ba
ཟམ་བུ་ལུང	{zam bu lung} [R]	zam bu lung
ཟམ་མ་ཆད་པ	unbroken, uninterrupted conytinuous sucession	zam ma chad pa
ཟམ་མ་ཆད་པའི་ལས་ཀ	uninterrupted work	zam ma chad pa'i las ka
ཟམ་མི་འཆད་པར	continuously, uninterrupted zam mi 'chad par 'gro ba'i rlangs 'khor continuously going steam engine/ vehicle 2387 zam mi 'chad par nyin mtshan 'bab pa continuous succession of day and night	zam mi 'chad par
ཟམ་མི་ཟིམ་མི	1) quickly blinking; 2) way of rain falling	zam mi zim mi
ཟམ་མིག	hole/ arch where water goes under a bridge	zam mig
ཟམ་མིག་དགུ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཟམ་ཆེན	big bridge w 9 arches	zam mig dgu ldan gyi zam chen
ཟམ་མེ་ཟོམ་མེ	careless work	zam me zom me
ཟམ་ཟིམ	1) quickly blinking; 2) way of rain falling; 3) #	zam zim
ཟམ་ཟོ	soft cushion of velvet-like cloth	zam zo
ཟམ་ཟོམ	careless work	zam zom
ཟམ་ལམ	the profound path	zam lam
ཟམ་ལམ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཐུགས་ཐིག	by bdud 'joms 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje - 190489?	zam lam mkha' 'gro'i thugs thig
ཟམ་གསུང	bridge girder	zam gsung
ཟར	district in tibet, SA za ba, pitch fork, hay fork, dung fork	zar
ཟར་ཁུའི་སྣུམ་རྩི	linseed oil	zar khu'i snum rtsi
ཟར་གྱུང	med. herb {zar gyung}	zar gyung
ཟར་ལྕ	med. herb	zar lca
ཟར་འཇུག་པ	begin to eat	zar 'jug pa
ཟར་བབས	tassel, gold brocade	zar babs
ཟར་བུ	tassel	zar bu
ཟར་མ	flax. A flat, shiny seed	zar ma
ཟར་མ་སོགས	fibers	zar ma sogs
ཟར་མའི་གོས	linen	zar ma'i gos
ཟར་མའི་འབྲུ	flax/ sesame seeds [R]	zar ma'i 'bru
ཟར་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	a sesame flower	zar ma'i me tog
ཟར་མའི་རས	sesame, fibers, muslin	zar ma'i ras
ཟར་ཚག	lattices of white gemstones	zar tshag
ཟར་ཞིང	zar ma 'debs pa'i zhing sa	zar zhing
ཟར་ཟིར	za ri zi ri	zar zir
ཟར་ཟུར	#	zar zur
ཟར་ཟེར	#	zar zer
ཟར་རས	linen	zar ras
ཟར་རི་ཟིར་རི	unimportant, insignificant, confused, disconnected	zar ri zir ri
ཟར་རི་ཟེར་རི	unimportant, insignificant, confused	zar ri zer ri
ཟལ	1) color of hair; 2) island in small uninhibited river	zal
ཟལ་ཁྲབ	fur corselet	zal khrab
ཟལ་ཐོན	SA rdog thon	zal thon
ཟལ་པོ	1) variegated [gzhi dkar por nag thig yod pa la dkar zal dang, gzhi nag por dkar thig yod pa la nag zal zer]; 2) mdzo gyag zal po, dbus gtsang du gyag dang glang ze dang sgal gzhung dkar po la zal ...	zal po
ཟལ་ཕོ	spotted [male] gyag /glang ze/ sgal gzhung dkar po	zal pho
ཟལ་མོ	spotted [female] 'bri / ba phyugs ze/ sgal gzhung dkar mo	zal mo
ཟལ་མོ་སྒང	{zal mo sgang} [R]	zal mo sgang
ཟལ་དམར	red color of an ox	zal dmar
ཟལ་ཟུག	#	zal zug
ཟལ་ཟུལ	#	zal zul
ཟལ་འོད	moonlight	zal 'od
ཟས་ཀྱི་བཅུད	food nutriment	zas kyi bcud
ཟས་ཀྱི་དང་པོ་མངར་བའི་ནུ་ཞོ	your first nourishment, her sweet breast milk	zas kyi dang po mngar ba'i nu zho
ཟས་ཀྱི་དྭངས་མ	relish of food	zas kyi dwangs ma
ཟས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	1) practice the yoga of food being like medicine; 2) practice of inner fire offering)	zas kyi rnal 'byor
ཟས་ཀྱི་ཕུད	the very best of her food	zas kyi phud
ཟས་ཀྱི་ཕུད་བྱིན	gave the best of food	zas kyi phud byin
ཟས་ཀྱི་འབྲེལ་པ	a little bit of food zas kyi 'tsho ba rnam par dag pa zhes bya	zas kyi 'brel pa
ཟས་ཀྱི་ཟ་འཕྲོ	food uneaten	zas kyi za 'phro
ཟས་ཀྱིས་གྲོད་ཁོག་རྒྱངས་པ	ingest	zas kyis grod khog rgyangs pa
ཟས་ཀྱིས་དུག་པ	poisoned by food	zas kyis dug pa
ཟས་ཀྱིས་རྣང་ཏེ	food choking him	zas kyis rnang te
ཟས་ཀྱིས་འཕོངས་པ	one who is destitute, one who has nothing to subsist upon	zas kyis 'phongs pa
ཟས་དཀར	1) white/ dairy food; 2) 1 of king of the shakyas zas gtsang's mched bzhi)	zas dkar
ཟས་དཀར་གསུམ	the three white foods [R]	zas dkar gsum
ཟས་དཀོན	food scarcity	zas dkon
ཟས་སྐལ	portion of food, ration	zas skal
ཟས་སྐོམ	meat and drink, solid and liquid food	zas skom
ཟས་སྐོམ་འཁྲེན་པ	wish for food and drink	zas skom 'khren pa
ཟས་སྐོམ་ལ་འདོད་པ་ཆེ་བ	one very fond of dainty dishes and drink	zas skom la 'dod pa che ba
ཟས་བསྐྲུས	food cut up	zas bskrus
ཟས་ཁ	amount of food 2388	zas kha
ཟས་ཁམ་གཅིག	mouthful of food	zas kham gcig
ཟས་ཁམ་གཅིག་ཙམ་དྲངས་པ	offering him even a mouthful of food	zas kham gcig tsam drangs pa
ཟས་ཁམས	a meal, bite of food	zas khams
ཟས་གོང	food prices	zas gong
ཟས་གོས	clothes worn when eating??, food and clothing	zas gos
ཟས་གོས་བསྒྲུབ་པ	trying to seek food and clothing	zas gos bsgrub pa
ཟས་གོས་བཟང་འབོལ	abundant clothes and food	zas gos bzang 'bol
ཟས་གྲིབ	unclean food, pollution of food	zas grib
ཟས་གྲོགས	spod sman	zas grogs
ཟས་གྲོན	provisions or za ma'i 'gro song	zas gron
ཟས་གྲོན་ཆེ་དྲགས	large provisions/ food expenses	zas gron che drags
ཟས་མགྲོན	feast	zas mgron
ཟས་མགྲོན་འདྲེན་པར་འདོད་པ	decided to present him with a great feast	zas mgron 'dren par 'dod pa
ཟས་རྒྱུ་ལམ	passage for food to the stomach, gullet	zas rgyu lam
ཟས་ངན	1) bad/toxic food; 2) inferior food	zas ngan
ཟས་ངན་ལྕི་བ་ཟ	to swear	zas ngan lci ba za
ཟས་མངར	sweet food	zas mngar
ཟས་གཅོད་པ	1) eliminate unhealthy/ hard to digest food, restrict the diet; 2) fast, not eat)	zas gcod pa
ཟས་བཅད་པ	fast, not eat	zas bcad pa
ཟས་བཅུད	essence/ power of food, nutrients, nourishment	zas bcud
ཟས་བཅུད་ཅན	nourishing food	zas bcud can
ཟས་བཅུད་གཉིད་བྲལ	digested essence of food when 1 eats	zas bcud gnyid bral
ཟས་བཅུད་སྦྱིང་པ	nurture	zas bcud sbying pa
ཟས་བཅུད་མེད་པ	malnutrition	zas bcud med pa
ཟས་བཅུད་རོ་བདའ་བ	essence of food of delicious taste	zas bcud ro bda' ba
ཟས་མཆོག	the most excellent tasty food	zas mchog
ཟས་མཆོག་སྟེར་བ	treat/ entertain w the bast food	zas mchog ster ba
ཟས་འཇུ་བ	digestion, digest the food	zas 'ju ba
ཟས་འཇུ་བའི་ནུས་པ	digestion	zas 'ju ba'i nus pa
ཟས་གཉེར	cook, superintendent of the department of cooking	zas gnyer
ཟས་སྙོག་པ	zas kyi rjes su 'brang ba	zas snyog pa
ཟས་སྙོད་པ	food from the mouth khar 'jug pa'am ldug pa,//byis pa chung ngu la nom bu'i zas snyod pa	zas snyod pa
ཟས་གཏད	dedication of food	zas gtad
ཟས་འཐུ་བ	1) zas sgrug pa'am len pa; 2) zas bsdu cha rgyag pa)	zas 'thu ba
ཟས་འཐུང་ཐེབས་སོང	distributed food and drink	zas 'thung thebs song
ཟས་དང་སྐོམ	food and drink	zas dang skom
ཟས་དང་གོས	food and clothing	zas dang gos
ཟས་དང་ནོར་རྟ་དང་གླང་པོ	food and gems and horses and elephants	zas dang nor rta dang glang po
ཟས་དང་ནོར་རྫས	food and wealth	zas dang nor rdzas
ཟས་དུག	poisoning from having eaten unsuitable/ bad food	zas dug
ཟས་དུག་ཟ་ཉེས་ཀྱིས་བྱུང་བ	food poisoning from improper food/ way of eating	zas dug za nyes kyis byung ba
ཟས་དེ་དག	these types of sustenance	zas de dag
ཟས་དྲངས	served food	zas drangs
ཟས་དྲན་ཏེ་སྔར་གྱི་སར་སླེབས་པ	remembering the place where he was fed	zas dran te sngar gyi sar slebs pa
ཟས་དྲོད	warm types of food	zas drod
ཟས་དྲོད་བསྟེན	feed on warm types of food	zas drod bsten
ཟས་དྲོན་མོ	warm food	zas dron mo
ཟས་བདའ་བ	tasty/delicious food	zas bda' ba
ཟས་འདོད་པ་ལ་ཟས	give food to whoever is in need of it	zas 'dod pa la zas
ཟས་འདོད་ཟས་སྤྱོད	give food to those who need it	zas 'dod zas spyod
ཟས་འདྲེན	serve food	zas 'dren
ཟས་འདྲེན་པ	zas blug pa'am sprod pa	zas 'dren pa
ཟས་བསྡམས་པ	fast, not eat	zas bsdams pa
ཟས་ནས་འགྲོ་རྒྱུ་ཡིན	will go after taking food	zas nas 'gro rgyu yin
ཟས་ནས་ཡོད	has been eaten	zas nas yod
ཟས་ནོར	food and gifts	zas nor
ཟས་ནོར་གྱིས་ཕོངས་པ	destitute of food and wealth	zas nor gyis phongs pa
ཟས་ནོར་བྲོ་ཟན	food and possessions zas nor med pa nyam nga ba de lta bu such a terrible and wretched apparition	zas nor bro zan
ཟས་ནོར་འཚོལ་བ	to seek wealth and food	zas nor 'tshol ba
ཟས་ནོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	possessions, food, and wealth	zas nor longs spyod
ཟས་མནོག	moderate fare, frugal diet zas rnams dug gi sbags nas med ces “Now I have only poisoned food ready to serve you.” he said	zas mnog
ཟས་རྣོག་པ	[arch] zas zhim la gya nom pa	zas rnog pa
ཟས་སྣ	1) lto chas kyi rnam grangs,//ston gral la zas sna sgrig pa; 2) various kinds of food)	zas sna
ཟས་པ	burned away {mar me thams cad snum zas kyang} even though the oil in all the lamps had burned away	zas pa
ཟས་སྤངས	fasting	zas spangs
ཟས་སྤངས་པ	fasting	zas spangs pa
ཟས་སྤྱོད	1) food and bhavior/excercise; 2) eat)	zas spyod
ཟས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	gastronomy	zas spyod kyi rig pa
ཟས་སྤྲོད་པ	give/ serve food	zas sprod pa
ཟས་ཕུད	zas kyi 'go ma	zas phud
ཟས་ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང	abundance of food and drink	zas phul du byung
ཟས་ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	cornucopia zas phyir chos ston zer ba'i ltung byed the downfall of saying a bhikshu is teaching because of food [R] zas phyir chos ston zer ba'i ltung byed the downfall of saying a bhikshu is teach...	zas phul du byung ba
ཟས་ཕྱིས་མི་ལེན་པ	never eats after midday	zas phyis mi len pa
ཟས་བྱིན་ལེན་མེད	food which is not properly offered [to the gelong]	zas byin len med
ཟས་བྱེད	cook, prepare food	zas byed
ཟས་བྲིམས་པ	1) gral rim bzhin du zas ston 'gyed pa; 2) lto chas dngos su bshams pa)	zas brims pa
ཟས་བླངས	took food, had eaten	zas blangs
ཟས་བླུག་པ	serve food	zas blug pa
ཟས་འབྲེལ	to guru and objects of offering offer food	zas 'brel
ཟས་སྦྱིན	gave food	zas sbyin
ཟས་སྦྱིན་པ	give food	zas sbyin pa
ཟས་མ	food	zas ma
ཟས་མ་ཞུ་བ	undigested food, spasmodic cholera, dyspepsia	zas ma zhu ba
ཟས་མ་ཟོས་གོང་དུ	before taking my meal	zas ma zos gong du
ཟས་མང་གོས་མང	much food and clothing	zas mang gos mang
ཟས་མི་ཐར	food cannot pass through	zas mi thar
ཟས་མི་ཟ་བ	not eat,	zas mi za ba
ཟས་དམར་བསྡམས་པ	refrain from meat	zas dmar bsdams pa
ཟས་གཙང	1) clean/ pure food; 2) king zas gtsang ma [the Buddha's father]; 3) white mustard	zas gtsang
ཟས་གཙང་མ	Shuddodana, clean food, name of Buddha's father	zas gtsang ma
ཟས་གཙང་སྲས	the son of king zas gtsang ma, the Buddha	zas gtsang sras
ཟས་ཚུལ	species of food	zas tshul
ཟས་ཚོད	due proportion of food	zas tshod
ཟས་ཚོད་མ་ཟིན	not one's usual allowance of food	zas tshod ma zin
ཟས་འཚེད་པ་པོ	one who cooks	zas 'tshed pa po
ཟས་འཚོལ་བ	look for food	zas 'tshol ba
ཟས་ཞི་མ་པོ	delicacy	zas zhi ma po
ཟས་ཞིམ	{zas kyang mi zhim gnyid kyang med} one cannot enjoy either food or sleep	zas zhim
ཟས་ཞིམ་པོ	tasty/delicious food	zas zhim po
ཟས་བཞི	four types of sustenance, SA kham gyi zas, reg pa'i zas, yid la sems pa'i zas, rnam par shes pa'i zas	zas bzhi
ཟས་བཞིས་གནས་པར་བྱེད	remain by means of four types of sustenance	zas bzhis gnas par byed
ཟས་ཟ་ཉེས་པ	bad way of eating	zas za nyes pa
ཟས་ཟ་ནུས་པ	power/ ability to eat	zas za nus pa
ཟས་ཟ་བ	take meals	zas za ba
ཟས་ཟ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of eating [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, remain and eat/take meals in a place where there is an unrelated nonbuddhist householder for more than 1 day	zas za ba'i ltung byed
ཟས་ཟ་མི་ཤེས་པ	not knowing how to eat properly	zas za mi shes pa
ཟས་ཟ་རུ་ལོག་པ	started home to eat his meal	zas za ru log pa
ཟས་ཟ་ལུགས་ནོར་བ	not knowing how to eat properly	zas za lugs nor ba
ཟས་ཟིན་པ	ate	zas zin pa
ཟས་ཟོས་པའི་དངས་མ	the goodness in the food eaten	zas zos pa'i dangs ma
ཟས་བཟང་པོ	good food, well-prepared food	zas bzang po
ཟས་ཡིད	yi dwags for bon	zas yid
ཟས་ཡོན	gift consisting of food	zas yon
ཟས་རང་གྲུབ	natural food	zas rang grub
ཟས་རིགས	[different kinds of] foods	zas rigs
ཟས་རོ	food remnants/ leftovers	zas ro
ཟས་ལ་སྐྲུ	cut meat	zas la skru
ཟས་ལ་བསྐོ་བ	distribute food	zas la bsko ba
ཟས་ལ་གེགས་བྱས་པ	prevent [sentient beings] from eating	zas la gegs byas pa
ཟས་ལ་དུག་བཏབ་ནས	prepared poisoned food	zas la dug btab nas
ཟས་ལ་དུར་བ	hasten to dinner	zas la dur ba
ཟས་ལ་མྱང་བ	ston pa'i zas la myang	zas la myang ba
ཟས་ལ་སྲེད་པ	desirous of food	zas la sred pa
ཟས་ལེགས་པ	a good eater	zas legs pa
ཟས་ལེགས་པར་ཟ	the manner of taking meals properly	zas legs par za
ཟས་ལེགས་པར་ཟ་བ	to take meals	zas legs par za ba
ཟས་ལེན	eat	zas len
ཟས་ལེན་པའི་ཚུལ་བརྒྱད	nyes byas kyi sde tshan bzhi pa, zas len pa'i sde la, zas lhung bzed kyi kha las mtho bar len pa dang, 'bras chan dang tshod ma mnyam par len pa, gral rim mthar chags su mi len pa, lhung bzed la zu...	zas len pa'i tshul brgyad
ཟས་སུ་ཅི་ཟ	what does it eat as food	zas su ci za
ཟས་སློང་བ	begging for food	zas slong ba
ཟས་བསོད	good food, rich pastry	zas bsod
ཟས་བསོད་པ	good/ delicious food	zas bsod pa
ཟས་བསོད་པ་སློང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, from an unrelated householder good food ci bder ma bstabs kyang, chog mi shes par bslangs te zos pa'o	zas bsod pa slong ba'i ltung byed
ཟས་ལྷ	deities of foods, deity of food, red	zas lha
ཟས་ལྷག	leftovers [syn: sder zhabs, pha la, za 'phro, lhag ma]	zas lhag
ཟི	something of a very small size or quantity, figure 52	zi
ཟི་འཀྱམས	get dizzy/ giddy	zi 'kyams
ཟི་འཀྱོམས	get dizzy/ giddy	zi 'kyoms
ཟི་ཁྱིམ	dzeheshakim 1) natural copper; 2) many precious things)	zi khyim
ཟི་ཁྲིན	Szechuan Province	zi khrin
ཟི་འཁོར	get dizzy/ giddy	zi 'khor
ཟི་ལྡི་ར	kind of large bee	zi ldi ra
ཟི་ལྡིར	silken ribbons	zi ldir
ཟི་བུན་ནེ	drunk	zi bun ne
ཟི་བུན་ནེ་བ	diy	zi bun ne ba
ཟི་བེར	uncertain sgra zar zir mang po	zi ber
ཟི་མ	eye lashes	zi ma
ཟི་ཚག་ཚག་པ	gleaming / glimmering colors	zi tshag tshag pa
ཟི་ར	sparks. Comes out when welding,	zi ra
བེ༹རཡ་བྲིགྷཏ	bluish, not necessarily from fire	very bright
ཟི་ར་དཀར་པོ	med. herb zi ra dkar po [ro tsha la cung skyur, zhu rjes drod, nus pas glo tshad kyi nad dang, kha zas mi 'ju ba, dang ga 'gag pa bcas la phan	zi ra dkar po
ཟི་ར་ནག་པོ	med. herb zi ra nag po [ro kha la cung tsha, zhu rjes drod, nus pas mchin nad grang ba dang pho ba'i drod nyams nas zas mi 'ju ba la phan, yi ga 'byed par byed	zi ra nag po
ཟི་ར་ནག་པོ་དམན་པོ	aconitum gymnandrum maxim.	zi ra nag po dman po
ཟི་ར་སེར་པོ	{zi ra ser po} med. herb	zi ra ser po
ཟི་རི་བི་རི	body/ mind unstable bzi khyom khyom	zi ri bi ri
ཟི་རི་རི	droning of bees, the wind	zi ri ri
ཟི་རི་རི་སྦྲང་མ་མང་པོས་སྒྲ	humming sound of many bees	zi ri ri sbrang ma mang pos sgra
ཟི་རུ	SA gzer bu	zi ru
ཟི་ལ	electrum, silver and gold alloy [gsha' dkar [tin] or ti tsa [zinc] like]	zi la
ཟི་ལང	electrum, silver and gold alloy [gsha' dkar or ti tsha like metal alloy] Siling	zi lang
ཟི་ལངས	to bristle	zi langs
ཟི་ལིང	chinese town in kansu, Silling (city)	zi ling
ཟི་ལིང་སྒ་དམར	sga rigs mostly red [nus pas drod skyed cing, bad rlung sel bar byed	zi ling sga dmar
ཟི་ལིང་ལྕགས་ཁྲ	kind of Tibetan arrow	zi ling lcags khra
ཟི་ལིང་སྟོང་འཁོར	province in lower kham	zi ling stong 'khor
ཟི་ལིང་སྟོན་འཁོར	province of ston 'khor in lower Khams	zi ling ston 'khor
ཟི་ལིང་མཚོ	ser gling mtsho	zi ling mtsho
ཟི་ཧུང	pale mauve	zi hung
ཟི་ཧུན	pale white Ch satin	zi hun
ཟིང	disturbance, unrest, turmoil, uprising, stand on end, be upright	zing
ཟིང་དཀར	pink mostly white	zing dkar
ཟིང་སྐྱ	pink	zing skya
ཟིང་འཁྲུག	disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising	zing 'khrug
ཟིང་འཁྲུག་ནང་ཁུལ	revolt, revolution	zing 'khrug nang khul
ཟིང་འཁྲུག་ལངས	be/ get into a state of [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing 'khrug langs
ཟིང་འཁྲུག་སློང	cause/ incite [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing 'khrug slong
ཟིང་འཁྲུག་སློང་བྱེད	cause/ incite [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing 'khrug slong byed
ཟིང་འཁྲུགས	riot	zing 'khrugs
ཟིང་ངེ	hastily. Onomatopoeia, connotes the bustle of getting things together and leaving	zing nge
ཟིང་ངེ་བ	1) uneven, rugged; 2) disturbed, buzy)	zing nge ba
ཟིང་ཆ	breach of the peace quarrel, dispute 2391	zing cha
ཟིང་ཆ་སློང་བ	to agitate, cause trouble	zing cha slong ba
ཟིང་ཆང་འབིང་ཆང	turmoil, unrest, disorder	zing chang 'bing chang
ཟིང་རྙོག	hurry, hurry-scurry	zing rnyog
ཟིང་རྙོག་ལངས	be/ get into a state of [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing rnyog langs
ཟིང་རྙོག་སློང	cause/ incite [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing rnyog slong
ཟིང་འདུག་པའི་སྐྲ	hair standing on end	zing 'dug pa'i skra
ཟིང་པོ	lhing mi 'jags pa	zing po
ཟིང་ཕུང་ནག་པོ	{zing phung nag po} a milignant spirit/ monster	zing phung nag po
ཟིང་བ	{zing ba, zing ba, zing ba} intr. v	zing ba
ཟིང་བའི་དུས	time of trouble	zing ba'i dus
ཟིང་བའི་བ་སྤུ	body hairs standing on end	zing ba'i ba spu
ཟིང་བའི་སེམས	distrubed mind	zing ba'i sems
ཟིང་མུ	land/ field boundary	zing mu
ཟིང་དམར	pink mostly red	zing dmar
ཟིང་འཚུབ	disturbance, strife, battle	zing 'tshub
ཟིང་འཚུབ་གནས་ཚུལ	tense, strained situation	zing 'tshub gnas tshul
ཟིང་འཚུབ་པའི་གནས་ཚུལ	tense, strained situation	zing 'tshub pa'i gnas tshul
ཟིང་ཟམ	velvet like cotton cloth made in Si ning = zi ling	zing zam
ཟིང་ཟིང	disturbance, unrest, turmoil, uprising, stand on end, be upright	zing zing
ཟིང་ཟིང་པོ	chaos	zing zing po
ཟིང་ལངས	be disturbed/ in a state of unrest/ turmoil, have an uprising, stand on end	zing langs
ཟིང་ལངས་པའི་སྐྲ	hair standing on end	zing langs pa'i skra
ཟིང་ལོང	1) battle; 2) 'du long)	zing long
ཟིང་ལོང་ལོང	busy and restlessly moving to and frow	zing long long
ཟིང་ཤིག	breach of the peace quarrel, dispute	zing shig
ཟིང་སློང་བ	make trouble	zing slong ba
ཟིང་སློང་བྱེད	cause/ incite [disturbance, turmoil, unrest, riot, uprising]	zing slong byed
ཟིང་སློང་བྱེད་བ	make trouble	zing slong byed ba
ཟིང་སློང་མི་ཚོགས	mob	zing slong mi tshogs
ཟིད་ཐུང་བ	nyi ma 'khyol sla ba'am mgo 'khor po,//slob gnyer byas pas dpe cha legs po ma shes kyang sems la shin tu phan pa dang zid thung ba zhig byung	zid thung ba
ཟིན	accepted; {dge ba'i bshes gnyen gyis zin} accepted by a spiritual teacher	zin
ཟིན་འཁྲིད	capturing, taking prisoner	zin 'khrid
ཟིན་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	capture, take prisoner	zin 'khrid byed
ཟིན་དགྲ་གྱི་དབྱེ་མཚམས་འབྱེད་པ	distinguish enemy and friend	zin dgra gyi dbye mtshams 'byed pa
ཟིན་ངེས	concentrating intently	zin nges
ཟིན་ཏ་རེ	one ends up, one will end up	zin ta re
ཟིན་ཏིག	1) means of curing sickness gsal bar 'khod pa'i compendium of important medical texts; 2) med. herb zin tig [ro kha la tsha, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas gnyan nad dang, gza' nad, srin nad bcas la phan...	zin tig
ཟིན་ཏོ	this concludes	zin to
ཟིན་རྟགས	signs of spiritual progress	zin rtags
ཟིན་ཐུན	reg zig, rough draft, note, memo	zin thun
ཟིན་ཐུན་བརྗེད་བྱང	bya rim zin thun du bris pa notes	zin thun brjed byang
ཟིན་ཐོ	note book, record	zin tho
ཟིན་ཐོ་འགོད	record, take notes	zin tho 'god
ཟིན་ཐོ་འགོད་པ	to record, take notes	zin tho 'god pa
ཟིན་ཐོ་ལས་བརྒལ	breaking the record [sports etc.]	zin tho las brgal
ཟིན་དང་མ་ཟིན་པའི་སྒྲ	sounds of the animate and inanimate worlds	zin dang ma zin pa'i sgra
ཟིན་དུས་མེད་པ	never-ending	zin dus med pa
ཟིན་ནས	used after verbs makes completed past tense {lhung zin nas} having fallen	zin nas
ཟིན་པ	to arrest; Syn {'jus pa}	zin pa
ཟིན་པ་རྗེས་མེད་ཡིན་གྱི་རྗེས་མ་གཅོད	no trace of them remains. Don't run after them!	zin pa rjes med yin gyi rjes ma gcod
ཟིན་པ་དང་མ་ཟིན་པ	sounds of the animate and inanimate worlds : word, w/o word; words that make sense etymologically and words that do not * language, melodic sounds, voice, instrument	zin pa dang ma zin pa
ཟིན་པ་མེད་པ	endless	zin pa med pa
ཟིན་པའི་སྒྲ	articulate sound, human speech sound that can be caught or heard and understood	zin pa'i sgra
ཟིན་པའི་བདུད་རྩིས	nectar of natural perfection	zin pa'i bdud rtsis
ཟིན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	perishable mortal body	zin pa'i phung po
ཟིན་པའི་འབྱུང་ཆེན	elements included within an individual's continuum	zin pa'i 'byung chen
ཟིན་པའི་འབྱུང་བ	embraced elements	zin pa'i 'byung ba
དུ་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	acticulate sound caused by elements conjoined with consciousness zin pa'i 'byung ba lus kyur pa'i sems can	du ston pa'i sgra
ཟིན་པའི་གཟུགས	form included within an individual's continuum	zin pa'i gzugs
ཟིན་པར་བྱ	make sure to attain	zin par bya
ཟིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	{byang chub sems kyis zin par byed pa} - to infuse with bodhichitta	zin par byed pa
ཟིན་པས	accomplished from the beginning (20 qualifications in sems sde), as everything is already accomplished, all being already perfect, has been conquered	zin pas
ཟིན་ཕུང་ནག་པོ	a malignant spirit, sa bdag monster	zin phung nag po
ཟིན་བྲིས	manuscripts, Notes. Refers to	zin bris
ཟིན་བྲིས་བཀོད་དེབ	note book	zin bris bkod deb
ཟིན་བྲིས་སྐོར	collected detailed instructions	zin bris skor
ཟིན་བྲིས་རྒྱག	write notes/ a draft/ ms	zin bris rgyag
ཟིན་བྲིས་རྒྱག་པ	record, take notes	zin bris rgyag pa
ཟིན་བྲིས་རྒྱག་པའི་ཤོག་བུ	writing paper for notes/ ms	zin bris rgyag pa'i shog bu
ཟིན་བྲིས་ཆུང	Short Notes	zin bris chung
ཟིན་བྲིས་བརྗེད་བྱང	notes	zin bris brjed byang
ཟིན་བྲིས་གནད་བསྡུས	rough outline	zin bris gnad bsdus
ཟིན་བྲིས་བྱེད་པ	to write down, record	zin bris byed pa
ཟིན་བྲིས་སུ་བཏབ	write down some notes, wrote down some notes	zin bris su btab
ཟིན་བྲིས་སུ་བྱས་པ	has been recorded; recorded here	zin bris su byas pa
ཟིན་འབྱུང	zin pa'i 'byung ba}	zin 'byung
ཟིན་མ་ཟིན	[mind-]embraced and nonembraced [elements]	zin ma zin
ཟིན་མེད	unfinished	zin med
ཟིན་མེད་བྲེལ	las ngan pa'i bya bas zin	zin med brel
མེད་བྲེལ	endlessly occupied with wrong activities	med brel
ཟིན་མེད་སོ་ནམ	never-finished round of karma	zin med so nam
ཟིན་གཟན	(CH monk's gzan	zin gzan
ཟིན་ཡང	even when embracing that	zin yang
ཟིན་རིས	text/ letter/ note	zin ris
ཟིན་རིས་རྒྱག	write [letters/ notes]	zin ris rgyag
ཟིན་རིས་པ	text/ letter/ note writer	zin ris pa
ཟིན་ལ་ཁང	SA rdzogs la khad	zin la khang
ཟིན་ལ་ཁད	quick performance of work	zin la khad
ཟིན་ཤིང	(CH) zin shing [R]	zin shing
ཟིན་ཤོག	writing paper for notes ms	zin shog
ཟིན་ཤོག་ཐིག་བརྒྱབ་པ	lined paper	zin shog thig brgyab pa
ཟིན་སིས	receipt, bill of debt, bod of obligation J	zin sis
ཟིན་སོ་གསུམ	MSS: no def. R75: 270.4 [mss]	zin so gsum
ཟིམ་བུ	finely divided, minute, fine, thin, slender	zim bu
ཟིམ་བུའི་ཆར	fine rain	zim bu'i char
ཟིམ་བུའི་ཆར་པ	drizzle	zim bu'i char pa
ཟིམ་བུར་མིག་བྱས	squinting zim bur mig byas te nyi mar lta ba squinting look at the sun	zim bur mig byas
ཟིམ་མེ	looking w half opened eyes, squinting	zim me
ཟིམ་མེར་གཟིགས་པ	looking w half opened eyes, squinting	zim mer gzigs pa
ཟིམ་ཟིམ	1) mig 'byed ma 'dzum gyi lta stangs; 2) little/ soft rain; 3) very fine,	zim zim
ཟིམ་ཟིམ་འབབ་པའི་འཇམ་ཆར	drizzle, fine soft rain	zim zim 'bab pa'i 'jam char
ཟིར་སྒྲ	insect-like humming	zir sgra
ཟིར་མོ	slide, glissade	zir mo
ཟིར་ཟིར	insect-like humming zir zir du sgrog pa'i bung ba'i gshog sgra humming of bees/ flies wings	zir zir
ཟིལ	splendor, brilliance	zil
ཟིལ་འཁོར	splendrous circle (in dance)	zil 'khor
ཟིལ་གྱིས་ནོན་པ	outshine; overcome by splendor/ brilliance ###	zil gyis non pa
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནན	overpower	zil gyis gnan
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན	overpower	zil gyis gnon
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	overpowers	zil gyis gnon pa
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས	overpowering wisdom	zil gyis gnon pa ye shes
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	basis of overcoming [R]	zil gyis gnon pa'i skye mched
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བརྒྱད	the 8 bases of overcoming [R]	zil gyis gnon pa'i skye mched brgyad
ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་གད་མོ	overpowering laughter	zil gyis gnon pa'i gad mo
ཟིལ་གྱིས་མནན	to suppress	zil gyis mnan
ཟིལ་དངར	amrita, honey, nectar	zil dngar
ཟིལ་མངར	amrita, honey	zil mngar
ཟིལ་མངར་གྱིས་གཅིན་པ	[arch] honey rtsis sbrus pa'am sbags pa	zil mngar gyis gcin pa
ཟིལ་མངར་སྦྲང་རྩི	sweet nectar	zil mngar sbrang rtsi
ཟིལ་མངར་ཞིམ་པོ་བྱིན་པ	gives off a most delicious scent	zil mngar zhim po byin pa
ཟིལ་རྔམ	power of awesome brilliance/ splendor, intimidation, suppression, impact	zil rngam
ཟིལ་ཅན	brilliant	zil can
ཟིལ་ཆགས་པོ	very lustrous, brilliant	zil chags po
ཟིལ་ཆེ་བ	magnificent	zil che ba
ཟིལ་ཆེན	a great resplendence [of blessings]	zil chen
ཟིལ་ཆེན་གསང་ཕུག	Magnificent Secret Cave, in Tsari	zil chen gsang phug
ཟིལ་ནོན	{zil gnon} {zil gyis non pa} to overwhelm/ suppress with splendor/ brilliance; to outshine; to overshadow	zil non
ཟིལ་གནན	Parabhava, 40th year of the {rab byung}. Syn {me pho rta}	zil gnan
ཟིལ་གནོན	{zil non} {zil gyis gnon pa} to overwhelm/ suppress with splendor/ brilliance; to outshine; to overshadow	zil gnon
ཟིལ་གནོན་ཁྱུང་ནག་རལ་ཆེན	tantra of black	zil gnon khyung nag ral chen
ཟིལ་གནོན་བརྒྱད	eight masteries: : 1-2] The two masteries over all external sentient and insentient forms by means of the conception that they are inner forms. 3-4] The two masteries over all external sentient and...	zil gnon brgyad
ཟིལ་གནོན་བུ	prince	zil gnon bu
ཟིལ་གནོན་དབང་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ	b. 1647	zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rje
ཟིལ་པ་དཀར་པོ	1) in almanac/ astr tables explained dus tshigs ston byed cig; 2) dewdrops on tips of grass, flowers, etc.; 3) bits of hoar frost	zil pa dkar po
ཟིལ་པ་ཁྲོམ་མེ	sparkling dew drop	zil pa khrom me
ཟིལ་པ་འཁོར	dew has arisen	zil pa 'khor
ཟིལ་པ་ཅན	a deity	zil pa can
ཟིལ་པ་ཆགས་པ	dew drops	zil pa chags pa
ཟིལ་པ་ནག་པོ	dew drop	zil pa nag po
ཟིལ་པའི་འོད་འཚེར་བ	sparkling dew drops	zil pa'i 'od 'tsher ba
ཟིལ་པས་བངས	get wet w dew	zil pas bangs
ཟིལ་བ	drop	zil ba
ཟིལ་མ	brightness, splendor, brilliancy, glory	zil ma
ཟིལ་མི་ནོན	unsurpassable	zil mi non
ཟིལ་ཤུགས	power of awesome brilliance/ splendor, intimidation, suppression, impact	zil shugs
ཟིས་པོ	lcug mas bslas pa'i slel po	zis po
ཟུ	figure 82	zu
ཟུག	1) pierce[ing], touch 2) rooted, planted [firmly] 3) reaches to; 4) connects disease afflication, pain, torment, distemper in animals)	zug
ཟུག་ག	sharp/ acute pain	zug ga
ཟུག་གེ་བ	1) na tsha mngon gsal thon pa'i nyams; 2) way of occurring in the mind	zug ge ba
ཟུག་རྒྱག	to be in pain	zug rgyag
ཟུག་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	not smarting	zug rgyu med pa
ཟུག་ངུ	{zug rngu}	zug ngu
ཟུག་རྔུ	1) pain [of disease], ache, sorrow; 2) 1 of the sbyor ba nyer bdun; 3) pain of the lower realms; 4) sore; 5) uneasiness)	zug rngu
ཟུག་རྔུ་ཅན	sick person, someone in pain	zug rngu can
ཟུག་རྔུ་འདོན	suffer, show grief/ pain, sorrow	zug rngu 'don
ཟུག་རྔུ་འདོན་པ	suffer, show grief/ pain, sorrow	zug rngu 'don pa
ཟུག་རྔུ་མནར་བ	laid up w disease, tormented by suffering	zug rngu mnar ba
ཟུག་རྔུ་བྲལ	free from disease/ pain/ affliction/ sorrow	zug rngu bral
ཟུག་རྔུ་བྲལ་བ	free from illness, fully recovered from disease	zug rngu bral ba
ཟུག་རྔུ་འབྱིན	soothing the pangs???, suffer, show grief/ pain, sorrow	zug rngu 'byin
ཟུག་རྔུ་འབྱིན་པ	soothing the pangs???, suffer, show grief/ pain, sorrow	zug rngu 'byin pa
ཟུག་རྔུ་ཞི་བ	allayed the sharp pains	zug rngu zhi ba
ཟུག་རྔུ་སེལ་བ	soothed the agonizing pain	zug rngu sel ba
ཟུག་རྔུའི་ཆ་རེག་གིས་མ་གོས	untouched by suffering/ pain/ disease	zug rngu'i cha reg gis ma gos
ཟུག་རྔུའི་གཟེར	affliction of pain/ sorrow zug rngus nyin mtshan med par mnar ba tormented w pain day and night	zug rngu'i gzer
ཟུག་རྔུས་ཟུག་པ	with pain and aching troubles	zug rngus zug pa
ཟུག་རྔུས་ཟུག་པའི	w pain and aching troubles	zug rngus zug pa'i
ཟུག་ཆེ་བྱེད་དེ	causing great pain	zug che byed de
ཟུག་ཏུ་འཕྲལ་བ	cut cattle into quarters	zug tu 'phral ba
ཟུག་དྲག་པོ	virulent disease	zug drag po
ཟུག་རྡེལ	rdel 'gags nad kyi nang tshan, rde'u lgang pa'i kha la zug nas chu thigs thigs tsam las mi thon pa rgyun du sdom zhing gting du zug na na zhing gzer la dri chu gtan 'gags ma yin pa thon dka' ba zhig	zug rdel
ཟུག་ན་ཚ	from grang rlung pain arising in the body	zug na tsha
ཟུག་ནུས	power to pierce	zug nus
ཟུག་ནུས་མེད་པའི་མདའ་འཕེན	shoot an arrow w/o piercing power	zug nus med pa'i mda' 'phen
ཟུག་པ	pain, building, erection, thrust into, SA 'dzugs pa, zug	zug pa
ཟུག་པའི་ཁྱི	barking dog	zug pa'i khyi
ཟུག་ཕྱུང	tusk, bracket projecting from a wall	zug phyung
ཟུག་སྨན	sedative, pain killing med.	zug sman
ཟུག་གཟེར	[have] pain [from disease]	zug gzer
ཟུག་གཟེར་རྒྱག་པ	be afflicted w pain [from disease] 2395	zug gzer rgyag pa
ཟུག་གཟེར་དུམ་བུ	fierce pangs {snying sdug sems la bkod pa'i zug gzer dum bu de} the fierce pangs that build up in the mind when it yearns for a loved one	zug gzer dum bu
ཟུག་ལངས	pain afflicting the body	zug langs
ཟུག་ལངས་ནས་སྨན་ཁང་ལ་ཕྱིན་པ	after I began to be afflicted w pain I went to the hospital	zug langs nas sman khang la phyin pa
ཟུགས	thrust into, SA 'dzugs pa, gzugs	zugs
ཟུགས་ཅན	composed of matter, substantial	zugs can
ཟུང	a couple/ join, marry; a pain, couple. accept!/ keep!; imp. of {'dzin pa}; {ldan bya dka'i khyad par} distinctive features of difficult constructions, in poetics. geometric poetry which comprises l...	zung
ཨནད	lines read in all directions [sarvatobhadra]	and
ཟུང་གི་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག	chickens, hen and cock, those that crow together	zung gi sgra sgrog
ཟུང་གི་སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས	domestic fowl, the cock and the hen	zung gi sgra sgrogs
ཟུང་ང	pair of doors	zung nga
ཟུང་ཅུ	province, local governor (CH	zung cu
ཟུང་གཅིག	one pair	zung gcig
ཟུང་ཆུ	1) {zung chu} rdzong [R]; 2) zung chu river chu [R] province, local governor (CH))	zung chu
ཟུང་ཆེན་བཞིའི་སྐོང་བ	the mending of the four major parts	zung chen bzhi'i skong ba
ཟུང་མཆོག	1) supreme/ model pair; 2) Shariputra and Mau gal gyi bu, Buddha's chief disciples	zung mchog
ཟུང་ཇུག	their coalescence union [Gdmk]	zung jug
ཟུང་འཇུག	{zung du 'jug pa} unity, unified, united, [yuganaddha]; union, yoked; indivisible, indivisible unity, coemergence, indivisible, indivisibility, spiritual intermediation, union, unified. coalescence...	zung 'jug
ཟུང་འཇུག་སྐུ་བཞི	four kayas of union	zung 'jug sku bzhi
ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་སྐུ	the body of coemergence/ unity/ coalescence [Gdmk]	zung 'jug gi sku
ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་གོ་འཕང	stage of unity; unified state	zung 'jug gi go 'phang
ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་མགོན་པོ	TSE	zung 'jug gi mgon po
ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་འབྲས་བུ	Fruition of unity. Complete enlightenment, the unified level of a vajra holder	zung 'jug gi 'bras bu
ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་ལྷ་སྐུ	the deity form of unity	zung 'jug gi lha sku
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཉེར་གསུམ	TSE	zung 'jug nyer gsum
ཟུང་འཇུག་གཉིས	TSE	zung 'jug gnyis
ཟུང་འཇུག་བདག	indivisible identity	zung 'jug bdag
ཟུང་འཇུག་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་གི་གོ་འཕང	the Vajradhara stage of unity; unified state of Vajradhara zung 'jug rdo rje 'chang gi go 'phang Unified level of Vajradhara. Synonymous with the state of complete enlightenment. The 'unified' stan...	zung 'jug rdo rje 'chang gi go 'phang
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐུ	the indivisible great symbol form, the unified form of mahamudra	zung 'jug phyag rgya chen po'i sku
ཟུང་འཇུག་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	form of coemergence/ unity," indivisible zung 'jug gzugs kyi sku} -the form of coemergence	zung 'jug gzugs kyi sku
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཡེ་ཤེས	union wisdom, wisdom unity	zung 'jug ye shes
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the wisdom body of unity	zung 'jug ye shes kyi sku
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་ཐིམ	unity dissolving into wisdom	zung 'jug ye shes la thim
ཟུང་འཇུག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	Unity dissolving into wisdom. One of the phases of the bardo of dharmata	zung 'jug ye shes la thim pa
ཟུང་འཇུག་ལྷུན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the coemergent wisdom of unity	zung 'jug lhun skyes kyi ye shes
ཟུང་གཉིས	two aspects	zung gnyis
ཟུང་དུ་སྐྱེས	orange, that which grows in pairs	zung du skyes
ཟུང་དུ་ཆུད	are united	zung du chud
ཟུང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	Jamgön Kongtrül: {zung 'jug tu chud pa} become a unity	zung du chud pa
ཟུང་དུ་འཇུག	united, unity, unified, inseparably united, interpenetration, combined	zung du 'jug
ཟུང་དུ་འཇུག་དགོས་པ	the need to join a with b	zung du 'jug dgos pa
ཟུང་དུ་འཇུག་པ	unity, unified, coemergence, indivisible, indivisibility, spiritual intermediator, union, unified, make compatible 2396	zung du 'jug pa
ཟུང་དུ་བསྡེབས་པ	united	zung du bsdebs pa
ཟུང་དུ་འབྲེལ་བ	integrated	zung du 'brel ba
ཟུང་དུ་མ་མཆིས	not occurring in pairs	zung du ma mchis
ཟུང་དུ་མ་མཆིས་པ	not occurring in pairs	zung du ma mchis pa
ཟུང་ལྡན	having 2/ a pair	zung ldan
ཟུང་ལྡན་གྱི་རྒྱན	yig gzugs 'dra ba tshig rkang gi thog mtha' bar gsum du bkod pa'i sgo nas mtha' thog sbyar ba dang, bar du chod pa dang ma chod pa sogs zung ldan gyi rnam pa sna tshogs sgra kho nas ston pa'i rgyan...	zung ldan gyi rgyan
ཟུང་སྡེབ	gnyis mnyam du yod pa	zung sdeb
ཟུང་འབྲེལ	yuganaddha, union, connection, junction, unification	zung 'brel
ཟུང་འབྲེལ་བཀའ་ཤོག	joint statement	zung 'brel bka' shog
ཟུང་འབྲེལ་བཀའ་ཤོག་འདོན	release/ issue a joint statement	zung 'brel bka' shog 'don
ཟུང་འབྲེལ་དུ	one with the other, jointly, unitedly	zung 'brel du
ཟུང་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	join together, combine	zung 'brel byed
ཟུང་སྦྱོར	zung 'jug tu sbyar ba	zung sbyor
ཟུང་སྦྲེལ	gnyis sdeb, both together, a pair	zung sbrel
ཟུང་སྦྲེལ་བཀའ་ཤོག	joint statement	zung sbrel bka' shog
ཟུང་སྦྲེལ་བཀའ་ཤོག་འདོན	release/ issue a joint statement	zung sbrel bka' shog 'don
ཟུང་སྦྲེལ་དུ	1 w the other jointly, unitedly, in union	zung sbrel du
ཟུང་སྦྲེལ་བྱེད	join together, combine	zung sbrel byed
ཟུང་ཞིག	grab onto	zung zhig
ཟུང་གཟིག	1 pair	zung gzig
ཟུང་གཟུག	force the prana of the two main nadis into the central channel [to unify consciousness and eliminate distraction]	zung gzug
ཟུངས་ཁྲག	vital blood	zungs khrag
ཟུངས་རྒྱག	by sewing thread zungs rgyag pa'am len rgyag pa	zungs rgyag
ཟུངས་རྒྱག་གཟུངས་རྒྱག་ཀྱང་ཟེར	by sewing thread zungs rgyag pa'am len rgyag pa	zungs rgyag gzungs rgyag kyang zer
ཟུངས་ངན	physical weakness, sadness	zungs ngan
ཟུངས་འཇུགས	great union	zungs 'jugs
ཟུངས་ཏིག	1 of 6 kinds of bitters which have healing powers, SA dngul tig	zungs tig
ཟུངས་གདབ	khab tshugs ring len byas pa'i tshem bu'am len rgyag pa	zungs gdab
ཟུངས་མ	energy	zungs ma
ཟུངས་མེད	no categories	zungs med
ཟུངས་ཙམ	a mere spark zungs tsam} -a mere spark	zungs tsam
ཟུངས་ཞན	physical weakness, sadness	zungs zhan
ཟུངས་ཟད	weakened	zungs zad
ཟུངས་ཤོར	impaired physical strength	zungs shor
ཟུངས་གསུམ་ཤོར	the three kinds of loss of strength	zungs gsum shor
ཟུད	enter into, SA 'dzud pa	zud
ཟུན	(A) friend	zun
ཟུན་དགྲ་གཉིས	friends and enemies zun dgra gnyis kyi dbye ba 'byed shes pa know how to distinguish friends and enemies	zun dgra gnyis
ཟུན་ཆ་གཅོང་ཞི	medicinal white stone which cures diarrhea	zun cha gcong zhi
ཟུབ	(tha mi dad pa,, cease and become invisible/ disappear, vanish, be erased	zub
ཟུབ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	indelible	zub rgyu med pa
ཟུབ་པ	{zub pa, zub pa, zub pa} intr. v	zub pa
ཟུབ་པའི་སྣང་བ	depression	zub pa'i snang ba
ཟུབ་ཤེ	kind of kata	zub she
ཟུམ	smile, close, SA 'dzum pa	zum
ཟུམ་ཁབ	pin, brooch	zum khab
ཟུམ་པ	{zum pa, zum pa, zum pa} intr. v	zum pa
ཟུམ་པའི་མིག	closed eye	zum pa'i mig
ཟུམ་ཟུམ	mig zum zum byed pa - to blink	zum zum
ཟུར	side, avoid, SA 'dzur ba, margin, corner, edge, outline, woman, brim, brink, verge	zur
ཟུར་བཀར	zur du bkar ba ste logs su bton pa	zur bkar
ཟུར་བཀོད	zur du bkod pa ste, logs su bris pa	zur bkod
ཟུར་བཀོལ	zur du bkol pa ste, logs su phye ba'am bton pa take / draw / abridge from	zur bkol
ཟུར་བཀོལ་དཀར་ཆག	index	zur bkol dkar chag
ཟུར་མཀར་རྡོ	the emperor's white chortens, Samye 2397	zur mkar rdo
ཟུར་སྐོག་གེ	sit in bent posture	zur skog ge
ཟུར་སྐྱོག་གེ	sit in a bent posture	zur skyog ge
ཟུར་ཁ	edge, borderline	zur kha
ཟུར་ཁྲལ	surtax, surcharge, additional tax	zur khral
ཟུར་ཁྲོམ་འདོན	peddle, hawk goods	zur khrom 'don
ཟུར་མཁར་མཉམ་ཉིད་རྡོ་རྗེ	{zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje}	zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje
ཟུར་མཁར་ཐེག་ཆེན་གླིང	Zurkar Thekchen Ling, in U	zur mkhar theg chen gling
ཟུར་མཁར་རྡོ	The emperor's white stupas, Samye	zur mkhar rdo
ཟུར་མཁར་བ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	zur mkhar ba
ཟུར་མཁར་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་པོ	{zur mkhar blo gros rgyal po}[zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rje dang gdung rgyud gcig ste, rang byung dgu pa'i sa sbrul lor sku 'khrungs, chung ngu'i dus nas thun min dang thun mong gi rig gnas rnams gs...	zur mkhar blo gros rgyal po
ཟུར་མཁར་ལྷ་སྡེང	Zurkar Lhadeng, in U	zur mkhar lha sdeng
ཟུར་འཁྲིད	tutoring, coaching [outside class]	zur 'khrid
ཟུར་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	give tutoring, coaching [outside class]	zur 'khrid byed
ཟུར་གྱི་ཐོག་ཕིབས	house top corner gyi gyab phibs	zur gyi thog phibs
ཟུར་གྱི་ཕྲ་མོ	bsam blo sngon btang gi sgo nas go bya'i nang don brda thabs zur gyis ston pa'i phra mo'i rgyan zhig, phra mo'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig	zur gyi phra mo
ཟུར་གྱི་མཚོན	shape	zur gyi mtshon
ཟུར་གྱིས	indirectly, incidentally	zur gyis
ཟུར་གྱིས་བརྗོད་པ	say by hints/ indirectly	zur gyis brjod pa
ཟུར་གྱིས་སྟོན་པ	gesticulation	zur gyis ston pa
ཟུར་གྱིས་སྟོན་མ	(met) graceful woman, gesture of dancing woman	zur gyis ston ma
ཟུར་གྱིས་སྨོད་པ	slander disparage	zur gyis smod pa
ཟུར་གྱིས་མཚོན་པ	note, point out by hints	zur gyis mtshon pa
ཟུར་འགོད	stating something separately	zur 'god
ཟུར་རྒྱན	accessory	zur rgyan
ཟུར་རྒྱུན	appendix	zur rgyun
ཟུར་སྒྲོན	zur du 'bul ba,//snyan zhu zur sgron,//mjal dar zur sgron zhu ba	zur sgron
ཟུར་བརྒྱད	8-cornered/faceted, octagon	zur brgyad
ཟུར་ལྔ་ལ	zur lnga pass [S dge rgyas rdzong	zur lnga la
ཟུར་གཅིག	a part/ aspect [R]	zur gcig
ཟུར་བཅག་པ	having broken edges, knocked around	zur bcag pa
ཟུར་ལྕམ	1) gzhal yas khang gi zur lcam phra'u; 2) khang pa'i thog zur du 'khel ba'i lcam	zur lcam
ཟུར་ལྕོག	little houses at housetop corners	zur lcog
ཟུར་ཆ	complex, component, fragment	zur cha
ཟུར་ཆག	1) words/ letters zur chag pa; 2) having broken edges, knocked aroundzur nyams pa	zur chag
ཟུར་ཆག་གི་སྐད	1) <aababhramsha>; 2) letters/ speech zur nyams pa skad	zur chag gi skad
ཟུར་ཆག་སྒྲ	faulty words and grammatical forms, corrupted word zur chag sgra} -faulty corrupted/ words/ grammar	zur chag sgra
ཟུར་ཆག་པ	1) incomplete/ partially damaged/ faulty/ corrupted words/ let- ters; 2) having broken edges, knocked around	zur chag pa
ཟུར་ཆགས་པ	corrupted	zur chags pa
ཟུར་ཆས	1) dmigs bsal can la sprod rgyu'i dngos skyes; 2) things to the side; 3) private property/articles	zur chas
ཟུར་ཆུང་པ་ཤེས་རབ་གྲགས་པ	Zurchungpa Sherab Drakpa: 1014-1074	zur chung pa shes rab grags pa
ཟུར་ཆུང་བ་ཤེས	master of bka' ma lineage	zur chung ba shes
ཟུར་ཆུང་བ་ཤེས་རབ་གྲགས་པ	(10141074)	zur chung ba shes rab grags pa
ཟུར་ཆུང་ཤེས་རབ་གྲགས་པ	{zur chung shes rab grags pa}	zur chung shes rab grags pa
ཟུར་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རང་གྲོལ	Zur Chöying Rangdröl: 1604-1669	zur chos dbyings rang grol
ཟུར་མཆན	yi ge'i rtsa ba'i zur la btags pa'i 'grel mchan	zur mchan
ཟུར་མཇལ	logs su 'phrad pa'am thug pa	zur mjal
ཟུར་འཇུག་ཤོག་ལྷེ	supplement page/ section	zur 'jug shog lhe
ཟུར་འཇོག	reservation [tickets]	zur 'jog
ཟུར་འཇོག་བྱེད	reserve [tickets]	zur 'jog byed
ཟུར་ཉན	listen from the side, non-voting observer at a meeting, auditor of a course	zur nyan
ཟུར་ཉན་གྲལ	visitors seats	zur nyan gral
ཟུར་ཉམས	1) w ends broken, damaged, missing; 2) words incomplete/ partially damaged/ faulty/ corrupted	zur nyams
ཟུར་ཉམས་པ	1) sne mo chag pa'am zad pa,//so phag gi zur nyams pa; 2) sgra zur nyams pa)	zur nyams pa
བརྡ་མི་འཕྲོད	when there are broken speech and corrupted writing it won't be understood	brda mi 'phrod
ཟུར་གཉིས	two aspects	zur gnyis
ཟུར་ཏུ་བཀོལ་བ	set aside, keep out	zur tu bkol ba
ཟུར་གཏོགས	append/ adjunct to, subsidiary	zur gtogs
ཟུར་གཏོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	dependent country	zur gtogs rgyal khab
ཟུར་གཏོགས་དནོགས་པོ	accessories	zur gtogs dnogs po
ཟུར་བཏོན	zur 'don	zur bton
ཟུར་ལྟ	look on w/o participating, sidelong glance, reference book	zur lta
ཟུར་ལྟ་དཔེ་ཆ	reference book	zur lta dpe cha
ཟུར་ལྟ་བྱེད	observe [w/o participating]	zur lta byed
ཟུར་ལྟ་མ	(met) woman	zur lta ma
ཟུར་བལྟ	look on w/o participating, sidelong glance, reference book	zur blta
ཟུར་བལྟ་དཔེ་ཆ	reference book	zur blta dpe cha
ཟུར་བལྟ་བྱེད	observe [w/o participating]	zur blta byed
ཟུར་བལྟ་མ	woman, 1 who looks w sidelong glances	zur blta ma
ཟུར་བལྟས	look on w/o participating, sidelong glance, reference book	zur bltas
ཟུར་བལྟས་དཔེ་ཆ	reference book	zur bltas dpe cha
ཟུར་བལྟས་བྱེད	observe [w/o participating]	zur bltas byed
ཟུར་བལྟས་མ	woman, 1 who looks w sidelong glances	zur bltas ma
ཟུར་བསྟན་པ	been/ staying on the fringe, supplementary, extra	zur bstan pa
ཟུར་བསྟན་ལེབ་མཐོང	brda tsam bstan pas yongs rdzogs shes pa'i dpe zur thams cad mkhyen pa chos dbyings rang grol gyi rnam thar theg mchog	zur bstan leb mthong
བསྟན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟ	{rgyal ba lnga pa chen po ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtshos mdzad pa, zhu dag byed pa po slob dpon gnag mdog} Dalai Lama V (1617-1682)	bstan pa'i shing rta
ཟུར་ཐིག	corner/ diagonal line /string	zur thig
ཟུར་ཐོག	house's corner gyi thog ka	zur thog
ཟུར་དང་རྒྱབ	side and back	zur dang rgyab
ཟུར་དུ	separately, nearly, in a corner, indirectly	zur du
ཟུར་དུ་བཀོད	summary	zur du bkod
ཟུར་དུ་བཀོད་པ	logs su bris pa	zur du bkod pa
ཟུར་དུ་བཀོལ	set aside, excerpt, * take / draw / abridge from, stow in a corner, save, hoard	zur du bkol
ཟུར་དུ་བཀོལ་པ	set aside, excerpt, * take / draw / abridge from	zur du bkol pa
ཟུར་དུ་བཀོལ་བ	save, hoard, stow in a corner	zur du bkol ba
ཟུར་དུ་ཉར་བ	reserve	zur du nyar ba
ཟུར་དུ་འདོན་པ	to isolate, separate, segregate	zur du 'don pa
ཟུར་དུ་སྡོད	live/ stay separately	zur du sdod
ཟུར་དུ་འཕུད	exclude, treat separately/ exclusively	zur du 'phud
ཟུར་དུ་བག་ཕབ	to lower & relax the gaze with the eyes looking independently to the sides	zur du bag phab
ཟུར་དུ་འབུལ་བ	fofer to someone privately [letter]	zur du 'bul ba
ཟུར་དུ་བཞུགས	live separately	zur du bzhugs
ཟུར་དུ་ལབ་པ	speak indirectly, partially, only hingting	zur du lab pa
ཟུར་དུ་བཤད་པ་ལྟར	as explained elsewhere	zur du bshad pa ltar
ཟུར་གདོང	zur sne	zur gdong
ཟུར་འདེབས	1) add[itional], supplement[al], replenish, reinforce[ments], augment * make up a deficit, fill out	zur 'debs
ཟུར་འདོགས	appendage	zur 'dogs
ཟུར་འདོན	isolation, jut	zur 'don
ཟུར་རྡོ	1) corner stone; 2) khang pa'i rtsa ba'i zur gdong du bslangs pa'i rdo nar mo	zur rdo
ཟུར་བརྡ	clue, hint	zur brda
ཟུར་བརྡ་གཏོང	give a clue/ hint	zur brda gtong
ཟུར་བརྡ་འདོན	give a clue/ hint	zur brda 'don
ཟུར་ནས	from the side	zur nas
ཟུར་ནས་འགྲོ	avoid, shun	zur nas 'gro
ཟུར་ནས་ལྟ	look on w/o participating, sidelong glance	zur nas lta
ཟུར་ནས་ལྟོད་མོ་ལྟ	look on w/o participating, sidelong glance	zur nas ltod mo lta
ཟུར་གནས	neutral	zur gnas
ཟུར་གནས་ཡུལ་ཁག	neutral countries	zur gnas yul khag
ཟུར་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three Zur	zur rnam pa gsum
ཟུར་སྣོན	addition, supplement, replenishment, reinforcement, subsidy	zur snon
ཟུར་སྣོན་རྒྱག	add, supplement, replenish, reinforce, subsidize	zur snon rgyag
ཟུར་སྣོན་རྒྱག་པའི་མི་གྲངས	augmented/ replenished total of people	zur snon rgyag pa'i mi grangs
ཟུར་སྣོན་བྱེད	add, supplement, replenish, reinforce, subsidize	zur snon byed
ཟུར་སྣོན་ཤོ	supplement issue of a magazine/ paper	zur snon sho
ཟུར་པ	1) ex- former [official] [srid 'dzin zur pa: ex president]; 2) las 'gan 'phos tshar ba'i zur pa //mkhan zur,//bka' zur; 3) person not living in the central areas; 4) person not in public office	zur pa
ཟུར་པོ་ཆེ་ཤཱ་ཀྱ་འབྱུང་གནས	{zur po che shA kya 'byung gnas} -	zur po che shA kya 'byung gnas
ཟུར་དཔང	circumstantial evidence	zur dpang
ཟུར་སྤོ་བ	remove to/ throw in a corner, something not prominent	zur spo ba
ཟུར་སྤོ་ཝ	remove to a corner, not prominent, shelved	zur spo wa
ཟུར་ཕུག	place where Padmakara bound all the {bdud}. under oath	zur phug
ཟུར་ཕུག་རྒྱ་ལྕང་ཚལ	the Gyachang forest in Surphuk, comp. {zul phug}	zur phug rgya lcang tshal
ཟུར་ཕུད	top, topmost, topknot, hairknot, braid/ plait/ tuft/ tress/ [knotted] locks of hair, curl	zur phud
ཟུར་ཕུད་ལྔ་པ	a gandharva raja, epithet of 'jam dpal, a klu guardian	zur phud lnga pa
ཟུར་ཕུད་ཅན	(met) zur phud lnga pa = 'jam dpal dbyangs	zur phud can
ཟུར་ཕོགས	allowance	zur phogs
ཟུར་ཕྱིན	retire, go into a corner	zur phyin
ཟུར་ཕྱིན་མཐར་ཕྱིར	retire from activities	zur phyin mthar phyir
ཟུར་ཕྱིན་པ	retire, go into a corner	zur phyin pa
ཟུར་ཕྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	retire, go into a corner	zur phyin par byed pa
ཟུར་ཕྱུང	supplement, appendix	zur phyung
ཟུར་ཕྱོགས	side	zur phyogs
ཟུར་འཕྱོང་རབ་གསལ	house corner du bstan pa'i dkar gsal	zur 'phyong rab gsal
ཟུར་འཕྲད	logs su 'phrad pa'am privately gtug pa	zur 'phrad
ཟུར་བ	bent, angular, push	zur ba
ཟུར་བྱང	appendix; additional text	zur byang
ཟུར་དབྱིབས	variation	zur dbyibs
ཟུར་འབུལ	give to someone privately/ separately [note letter] lag rtags gla rngan sogs]	zur 'bul
ཟུར་འབུལ་ཞུ	send/ give to someone privately/ separately * [h]	zur 'bul zhu
ཟུར་འབེན	shing gi zur la rgyag byed kyi 'bur len zhig	zur 'ben
ཟུར་མ	zur sner gnas pa'i rigs, corner	zur ma
ཟུར་མ་ཆག	unfailing	zur ma chag
ཟུར་མང	Surmang monastery, in Kham Nangchen	zur mang
ཟུར་མང་གི་དབྱིབས	polygon	zur mang gi dbyibs
ཟུར་མང་དགོན་པ	Surmang Monastery	zur mang dgon pa
ཟུར་མང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	Surmang Nyengyü, the tradition of the Nine Cycles of the Formless Dakini	zur mang snyan brgyud
ཟུར་མི་བཅས	with side long look, looking askance	zur mi bcas
ཟུར་མིག	sidelong glances, slight attention, ogle	zur mig
ཟུར་མིག་གིས་བལྟས	{mig cung zad phye ba'i zur mig gis bltas te skyo ba'i tshul byas pa} her eyes wide, looked after him longingly	zur mig gis bltas
ཟུར་མིག་བཅས	w sidelong glances	zur mig bcas
ཟུར་མིག་ལྟ	glancing out of the corners of their eyes	zur mig lta
ཟུར་མིག་ལྟ་བ	look askance, ogle	zur mig lta ba
ཟུར་མིག་བལྟ	flirtatious glances, glancing out of the corners of their eyes	zur mig blta
ཟུར་མིག་བལྟས	glancing out of the corners of their eyes	zur mig bltas
ཟུར་མིག་མ	sly woman, woman looking askance	zur mig ma
ཟུར་མེད	zur cha med pa, w/o corners/ angles, round, circular	zur med
ཟུར་མེས་དབོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	zur mes and dbon [R]	zur mes dbon rnam gsum
ཟུར་མེས་དབོན་གསུམ	the three teachers zur mes and dbon [gsang sngags rnying ma'i slob dpon zur mes dbon rnam gsum ni, dang po zur po che sh'akya 'byung gnas te, khong gis bstan pa phyi dar la snga 'gyur gyi bstan pa'...	zur mes dbon gsum
ཟུར་མོ	pain	zur mo
ཟུར་ཙམ	slightly, just, only a little, some aspects; a fraction/ a little bit	zur tsam
ཟུར་ཙམ་གྱི་གོ་བ	understand by merely outlining, by just a partial presentation	zur tsam gyi go ba
ཟུར་ཙམ་གྱིས་གོ་བ	understand by merely outlining, by just a partial presentation	zur tsam gyis go ba
ཟུར་ཙམ་རྟོགས་པ	realize only partially	zur tsam rtogs pa
ཟུར་ཙམ་བསྡུ་བ	abridge, shorten	zur tsam bsdu ba
ཟུར་ཙམ་བསྡུས་པ	compendium, abridgement	zur tsam bsdus pa
ཟུར་ཚད	degree of an angle	zur tshad
ཟུར་ཚོ	Zurtso, at Nyanang	zur tsho
ཟུར་འཚོགས	assembled to the side	zur 'tshogs
ཟུར་ཞུ	don dag logs su smra ba,//dgongs skor snyan seng zur zhu byed pa	zur zhu
ཟུར་ཞུགས	logs su 'dzul ba,//'brel yod kyi mi sna gzhan rnams tshogs 'dur zur zhugs byed pa	zur zhugs
ཟུར་བཞི	rectangular	zur bzhi
ཟུར་བཞི་ཅན	quadrangle	zur bzhi can
ཟུར་བཞུགས	zur du sdod pa	zur bzhugs
ཟུར་བཞུགས་པ	one who has retired from public life	zur bzhugs pa
ཟུར་ཟ	satire, sarcasm	zur za
ཟུར་ཟ་བ	a little faulty, defective	zur za ba
ཟུར་ཟའི་རི་མོ	cartoon	zur za'i ri mo
ཟུར་བཟའ	the Princess of Zur, a disciple of Padmasambhava	zur bza'
ཟུར་ཡོལ	retirement zur g.yas du sdod pa - remaining in the right corner/ pon the right side	zur yol
ཟུར་ལ་བྲིས	written in the margin zur la g.yol ba - to move aside	zur la bris
ཟུར་ལུགས	the zur tradition 2400	zur lugs
ཟུར་ལུགས་ཆབ་འདྲེན	zur mkhar tradition urine 'gags pa phyir 'dren pa'i med. herb	zur lugs chab 'dren
ཟུར་ལུགས་ཆུ་རྩི	zur mkhar tradition med. {chu rtsi}	zur lugs chu rtsi
ཟུར་ལུགས་སྙི་བ	zur mkhar tradition's kind of med. snyi ba	zur lugs snyi ba
ཟུར་ལུགས་བོང་དཀར	zur mkhar tradition kind of herb {bong nga dkar po}	zur lugs bong dkar
ཟུར་ལུགས་གསང་སྙིང་ཡིག་ཆའི་སྐོར	a collection of texts explaining the Guhyagarbha tantra - the fundamental example of the Mahayoga class - according to the teachings of the zur tradition; by {zur 'tsho btsun pa dkon mchog tshul kh...	zur lugs gsang snying yig cha'i skor
ཟུར་ལོགས་སུ	sideways	zur logs su
ཟུར་བཤད	side comment, an aside	zur bshad
ཟུར་སོང་རྩིས་ལེན	zur du btang ba'i dngos po de rtsis len dgos zer ba'i don	zur song rtsis len
ཟུར་གསལ	supplementary, additional	zur gsal
ཟུར་གསུམ	triangle	zur gsum
ཟུར་གསུམ་གླིང	peninsula, delta	zur gsum gling
ཟུར་གསུམ་པ	triangular	zur gsum pa
ཟུར་གསུམ་མ	something w triangular shape	zur gsum ma
ཟུར་གསུམ་རྩིས་རིག	trigonometry	zur gsum rtsis rig
ཟུར་གསུམ་རྩེ་གཅིག	one-pointed fixation like a triangle	zur gsum rtse gcig
ཟུར་གསོག	reservation	zur gsog
ཟུར་གསོག་བྱེད་པ	reserve	zur gsog byed pa
ཟུར་གསོས	privately nursed, educated by strangers	zur gsos
ཟུལ	creep in, SA 'dzul ba	zul
ཟུལ་གྱིས	rim gyis sam ga ler	zul gyis
ཟུལ་པོ	1 of 3 places west of lhasa, SA dga' skyo zul gsum	zul po
ཟུལ་ཕུག	Sulphuk	zul phug
ཟུལ་མ	cornered, angular	zul ma
ཟུས	1) pierce[ing], touch two rooted, planted [firmly] three reaches to; 4) connects disease affliction, pain, torment, distemper disease in animals	zus
ཟེ	bristle	ze
ཟེ་ཀ	hump, decorated pad or cushion	ze ka
ཟེ་ཁ	mane, hump, crest, [mt] top/ ridge/ slope [cliff] edge	ze kha
ཟེ་ཁེབས	horse's mane covering ornament used by high ranking persons	ze khebs
ཟེ་ཁྲག	chicken's gtsug khrag	ze khrag
ཟེ་སྒྲོ	1) ze ba dang sgro [feathers?]; 2) rtse zhva'i [kind of pointed [monk's] hat] ze sgro)	ze sgro
ཟེ་རྔུམ	rtse mo thung ba'i ze [mane?/ mt top?	ze rngum
ཟེ་རྔོག	mane of horse/ mule	ze rngog
ཟེ་ཆེན་དགོན	Zhechen Monastery; also {zhe chen}	ze chen dgon
ཟེ་མཇུག	main and tail	ze mjug
ཟེ་ཏའོ	bayonet	ze ta'o
ཟེ་ཏོའོ	bayonet	ze to'o
ཟེ་ལྡེ	one of early kings of tibet	ze lde
ཟེ་པྲོག	1) bya de'i mgo'i sha 'phru/ gtsug 'phru; 2) lock's nang rtsib; 3) (A) polish, rub, grind, sharpen; 4) wisr, prudent, thorough)	ze prog
ཟེ་ཕུག	Zephuk, at Labchi. See Cave: Crest	ze phug
ཟེ་བ	precious stone	ze ba
ཟེ་བའི་རྩིད་པ	mane, one tuft of its hair; {lag pas ze ba'i rtsid pa la 'jus nas} my hands clutching at its mane	ze ba'i rtsid pa
ཟེ་འབུག	4th stomach of ruminants J	ze 'bug
ཟེ་འབྲུ	anthers/ stamens, term of endearent to women	ze 'bru
ཟེ་མ	eye lashes	ze ma
ཟེ་མ་ར་མགོ	barbed	ze ma ra mgo
ཟེ་མོ	gzugs mo, weasel	ze mo
ཟེ་མོ་སྒང་ཐུར	porcupine	ze mo sgang thur
ཟེ་མོང	animal gzugs mo weasel	ze mong
ཟེ་ཙྭའི་ཁ་སྒྱུར་གྱི་སྐྱུར་རྩི	nitric acid	ze tswa'i kha sgyur gyi skyur rtsi
ཟེ་ཚ	a kind of salt [ro lan tshva, zhu rjes drod, nus pas rdo skran dang, lgang pa'i rde'u, ma zhu ba'i nad rnams bzhu bar byed	ze tsha
ཟེ་ཚྭ	a kind of salt [R] saltpeter	ze tshwa
ཟེ་ཚབ༹	a kind of salt * saltpeter	ze tshva
ཟེ་ཚྭ་ཅན	contains salt peter, nitrous	ze tshwa can
ཟེ་ཚའི་སྐྱུར་རྩི	nitric acid	ze tsha'i skyur rtsi
ཟེ་ཚའི་ཁ་སྒྱུར་གྱི་སྐྱུར་རྩི	nitric acid	ze tsha'i kha sgyur gyi skyur rtsi
ཟེ་ཚྭའི་སྐྱུར་རྩི	nitric acid	ze tshwa'i skyur rtsi
ཟེ་གཞུག	horse/ mule's mane and tail ze{ze chen dgon - ze chen Monastery [sde dge 'bri chu'i shar rgyud khams rdzogs chen dgon gyi nye 'dabs kyi rnying ma'i dgon chen zhig]	ze gzhug
ཟེ་ལ	ze pass	ze la
ཟེ་ལངས་པ	1) horse/ mule mane hairs standing up; 2) lips etc. kyi rkyen langs pa)	ze langs pa
ཟེག་པ	1 w red fur	zeg pa
ཟེག་མའི་ལྟེ	whirlpool	zeg ma'i lte
ཟེག་མའི་ལྟེ་བ	whirlpool, eddy	zeg ma'i lte ba
ཟེགས	drop[let] particle	zegs
ཟེགས་པ	1) fall lhung ba; 2) old)	zegs pa
ཟེགས་མ	a drop droplets, particles of water, spray	zegs ma
ཟེགས་མ་གྱོ་བྱེད	(met) med. pi pi ling	zegs ma gyo byed
ཟེགས་མ་ནག་མོ	a food taste attracting med.	zegs ma nag mo
ཟེགས་མའི་ལྟེ	(met) 'khor chu	zegs ma'i lte
ཟེང	skirts of coat on left or right side tucked up	zeng
ཟེད	'dzed pa! brush, bristles, edge broken off, damaged, injured	zed
ཟེད་ལངས	sen rtsa logs pa'am sen skyi logs pa,//sen zed langs pa ??? chink crack rent tear	zed langs
ཟེབ	small basket	zeb
ཟེམ	1) awe fear; 2) piece of willow tree hollowed to hold liquids, cask	zem
ཟེམ་འཇོག་པ	regard someone w awe and respect	zem 'jog pa
ཟེམ་མཐིལ	bottom of a cask	zem mthil
ཟེའུ	anthers	ze'u
ཟེའུ་འབྲུ	1) anther, stamen [poetical], pollen bed; 2) center; 3) ball; 4) small zo ba [measuring vessel/ bowl]	ze'u 'bru
ཟེའུ་འབྲུ་ཅན	(met) lotus	ze'u 'bru can
ཟེའུ་འབྲུའི་སྦྱོར་བ	pollination	ze'u 'bru'i sbyor ba
ཟེར	1) light rays; 2) is being said, which would then [wrongly] say [R]; 3) talk; 4) weasel)	zer
ཟེར་སྐད	nges gtan med pa'i don	zer skad
ཟེར་མཁན	called, named, the so-called	zer mkhan
ཟེར་གྱི་ཡོད་འདུག	is called	zer gyi yod 'dug
ཟེར་གྱིས་སྒྲག་གོ	ray of sound in bardo, SA sgra 'od zer gsum	zer gyis sgrag go
ཟེར་དགུ	many talks	zer dgu
ཟེར་དགུ་ཅོག	all that is said, many speakers	zer dgu cog
ཟེར་རྒྱུ	grounds for an affirmation, why say something	zer rgyu
ཟེར་རྒྱུན	traditional saying	zer rgyun
ཟེར་སྒྲོས	shod srol lam zer rgyun	zer sgros
ཟེར་སྒྲོས་སྒྲུང་གཏམ	sayings and fables	zer sgros sgrung gtam
ཟེར་སྒྲོས་སུ་འབྲངས	echo someone's words/ thoughts/ ideas, follow tradition/ custom	zer sgros su 'brangs
ཟེར་ཅི་དགོས	why say, not to mention, no need to say, still less	zer ci dgos
ཟེར་ཆེན	glare	zer chen
ཟེར་ཐག	shafts of light, beam	zer thag
ཟེར་དུག	[sbyar dug gi nang tshan] sun's rays la rta byas nas bskur ba'i dug cig	zer dug
ཟེར་གདངས	radiant light rays	zer gdangs
ཟེར་མདངས	brilliance	zer mdangs
ཟེར་ན	sm. {ce na}, if someone says..., so to speak	zer na
ཟེར་ནས་སོང	So saying, he left.	zer nas song
ཟེར་ཕུང་ཕུང་བ	blazing {me chen po rlung gis bskyod pa}	zer phung phung ba
ཟེར་ཕྲོམ་ཕྲོམ་པ	sparkling, glinting; {'gar gyi zhun me lta bu zer phrom phrom pa}	zer phrom phrom pa
ཟེར་བ	refers to	zer ba
ཟེར་བ་ལྟར	as is said in the proverbs	zer ba ltar
ཟེར་བ་ལྟར་ཡིན	x {'jig rten pa'i kha skad la'ang zer ba ltar yin} as the proverb puts it:	zer ba ltar yin
ཟེར་བ་སྣང	it is said	zer ba snang
ཟེར་བའི་དོན	means	zer ba'i don
ཟེར་བའི་ཚིགས་རིགས	what is meant by saying	zer ba'i tshigs rigs
ཟེར་བར་འདུག་པས	so having said	zer bar 'dug pas
ཟེར་བུ་བདུན་པ	the Seven Nails; final words of Shri Singha to Jnanasutra	zer bu bdun pa
ཟེར་བོན་གདང་སྙན	bon of rays	zer bon gdang snyan
ཟེར་མ	a drop	zer ma
ཟེར་མོ	a small animal, small yellow feathered bird with red stripes on head	zer mo
ཟེར་མོ་ར་མགོ	quickly going/ passing	zer mo ra mgo
ཟེར་ཚད་ཐམས་ཅད	all that is said	zer tshad thams cad
ཟེར་ཟེར	rumor	zer zer
ཟེར་ཟེར་སྐད	SA gcong skad	zer zer skad
ཟེར་ཡག	according to what is said	zer yag
ཟེར་རིགས	shod srol, zer rgyun, way of speaking	zer rigs
ཟེར་རིས	picture of light rays	zer ris
ཟེར་རོ	declared 2402	zer ro
ཟེར་ལུགས	articulate with traditional words	zer lugs
ཟེར་ལོ	1) would have it that ...; 2) mere talk/ explanation)	zer lo
བསྐྲུན་པའོ	they would have it that the world was created by Bhrama zer lo tsam min par lag len bstar dgos not just talking you have to practice	bskrun pa'o
ཟེར་སྲོལ	a traditional & customary saying	zer srol
ཟེར་སྲོལ་སྔ་མ་ལྟར	as the saying goes	zer srol snga ma ltar
ཟེལ	chips, shavings	zel
ཟེལ་མ	small chip	zel ma
ཟོ	appearance, poise, demeanor; imp. of {za ba}	zo
ཟོ་རྒྱུན	TSE	zo rgyun
ཟོ་ཆགས	showing mouldy spots	zo chags
ཟོ་ཆུ	water wheel	zo chu
ཟོ་ཆུན	watermill for irrigation	zo chun
ཟོ་ཆུན་ཁྱུད་མོ	water-wheel	zo chun khyud mo
ཟོ་ཆུན་འཁོར་ལོ	sa mtho sar chu rgyun 'dren pa'i machine	zo chun 'khor lo
ཟོ་ཆུན་འཁྱུད་མོ	water raising wheel/ machine	zo chun 'khyud mo
ཟོ་ཆུན་རྒྱུད	machine for raising water from a well	zo chun rgyud
ཟོ་ཆུན་རྒྱུད་མོ	zo chun 'khyud mo	zo chun rgyud mo
ཟོ་ཆུའི་ཁྱུད་མོ	rim of the water wheel	zo chu'i khyud mo
ཟོ་འཆུན	water wheel/ mill	zo 'chun
ཟོ་འཆུན་འཁོར་ལོ	sa mtho sar chu rgyun 'dren pa'i macnine	zo 'chun 'khor lo
ཟོ་འཆུན་འཁྱུད་མོ	water raising wheel/ machine	zo 'chun 'khyud mo
ཟོ་འཆུན་རྒྱུད	machine for raising water from a well	zo 'chun rgyud
ཟོ་འཆུན་རྒྱུད་མོ	water raising wheel/ machine	zo 'chun rgyud mo
ཟོ་ཐོན་ནས་མཆི	[arch] mna' bskyal	zo thon nas mchi
ཟོ་དོར	local guardian	zo dor
ཟོ་མདོག	gzi mdangs of the body complexion appearance	zo mdog
ཟོ་མདོག་བདེ་བ	good complexion/ appearance	zo mdog bde ba
ཟོ་མདོག་ཡང་བ	1) khams good and workable; 2) radiant face/complexion; 3) having exertion	zo mdog yang ba
ཟོ་མདོག་ལུས་ལ་རྒྱས་པ	good complexion/ appearance/ physical strength/ endurance increasing in the body	zo mdog lus la rgyas pa
ཟོ་མདོག་ལེགས་བ	good complexion/ appearance	zo mdog legs ba
ཟོ་བ	1) wooden measuring vessel mda' zo; 2) milk[-ing] pitcher/ pail, bucket; 3) porridge bowl	zo ba
ཟོ་བ་བཏགས་པ་ལྟར	hung like a food vessel	zo ba btags pa ltar
ཟོ་བའི་ལྕུག་དཀྲིས	zo ba'i snod dkri byed lcug thag	zo ba'i lcug dkris
ཟོ་མ	bucket	zo ma
ཟོ་མར	zo ba'i nang du chags pa'i spris ma, moldy butter	zo mar
ཟོ་མོ	long time spyad pa'i 'o zho blug snod shing zo'i nang la chags pa'i mar dang 'o spris	zo mo
ཟོ་བཟང	good nature/ complexion	zo bzang
ཟོ་བཟང་བ	good nature/ complexion	zo bzang ba
ཟོ་ར	sickle	zo ra
ཟོ་རིས	smears	zo ris
ཟོ་ལག	wooden bucket	zo lag
ཟོ་ཤ	mouldy meat	zo sha
ཟོ་ཤེ	zo ba'i nang lcug ma sil bu bskor te bzhag par 'o ma blugs te chags pa'i bcud ldan gyi rtsi zhig	zo she
ཟོག	1) wares, things to be sold, merchandise; 2) sgo phyugs; 3) deception, fraud deceit	zog
ཟོག་ཁྲལ	tax on wares/ cattle	zog khral
ཟོག་གོང	price of wares/ commercial goods	zog gong
ཟོག་གོང་གཏན་འཇགས	fixed/ stabilized price	zog gong gtan 'jags
ཟོག་གྲུ	cargo ship, freighter	zog gru
ཟོག་སྒམ	box for wares	zog sgam
ཟོག་སྒྱུ	deciet religious charlatanism	zog sgyu
ཟོག་སྒྲོམ	box for wares	zog sgrom
ཟོག་སྙིགས	ma brin pa'am not beneficial zog ro	zog snyigs
ཟོག་སྟོང	deceptive empty talk	zog stong
ཟོག་ཐང	price of wares	zog thang
ཟོག་ཐོ	notes/ list of goods	zog tho
ཟོག་བདག	1) owner of merchandise/ cattle [that are for sale]; 2) [Nepali] merchant	zog bdag
ཟོག་འདྲེན	freight transport	zog 'dren
ཟོག་འདྲེན་གྲུ་གཟིངས	freighter, cargo ship	zog 'dren gru gzings
ཟོག་འདྲེན་གནམ་གྲུ	cargo plane	zog 'dren gnam gru
ཟོག་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport freight	zog 'dren byed
ཟོག་འདྲེན་མེ་འཁོར	freight train	zog 'dren me 'khor
ཟོག་པོ	cheats, phonies, deceivers, charlatans, deceitful, false	zog po
ཟོག་པོ་ཁྱི་དཀྲོག་མཁན	g.yo sgyus mi gzhan la zing 'drog slong ba po'i dpe	zog po khyi dkrog mkhan
ཟོག་དཔེ	samples of merchandise	zog dpe
ཟོག་སྤུས	quality of wares	zog spus
ཟོག་སྤུས་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད	examine the quality of merchandise	zog spus zhib dpyod
ཟོག་ཕང	warehouse	zog phang
ཟོག་མ	deceitful, false, dissimulating	zog ma
ཟོག་མ་བགྱིད	play the hypocrite/ charlatan	zog ma bgyid
ཟོག་མོ	deceptive lying woman	zog mo
ཟོག་རྫུ	zog rdzun	zog rdzu
ཟོག་རྫུན	say what is not is	zog rdzun
ཟོག་རྫུས	{zog po}	zog rdzus
ཟོག་བརྫུས	deceptive selling	zog brdzus
ཟོག་རིན	price of wares	zog rin
ཟོག་རིན་ཆད་འཇོག	buy on credit	zog rin chad 'jog
ཟོག་རོ	ma brin pa'am unneccessary dngos zog	zog ro
ཟོག་ཤ	beef	zog sha
ཟོང	CM: dngos po'am tshong zog, things or good/wares. [mss]	zong
ཟོང་ཁྲལ	tshong zog tax	zong khral
ཟོང་གིས་འཚོ་བ	merchant	zong gis 'tsho ba
ཟོང་གོང	price of wares/ commercial goods zong gong chung na rgyu spus zher po'i	zong gong
ཟོང་གོང་གཏན་འཇགས	fixed/ stabilized price	zong gong gtan 'jags
ཟོང་གྲུ	cargo ship, freighter	zong gru
ཟོང་འགྲུལ	commodity circulation	zong 'grul
ཟོང་འགྲེམ་གནས	warehouse, shop	zong 'grem gnas
ཟོང་འགྲེམས་གནས	market place/ gathering, warehouse, shop	zong 'grems gnas
ཟོང་སྒམ	box for wares	zong sgam
ཟོང་སྒྲོམ	box for wares	zong sgrom
ཟོང་ཅུ	(CH gna' rabs kyi place, now si khron zhing chen gyi zung 'phan region	zong cu
ཟོང་ཆུ	(CH) gna' rabs kyi place, now si khron zhing chen gyi zung 'phan region	zong chu
ཟོང་མཆོག	the most excellent merchandise, gold	zong mchog
ཟོང་སྙིགས	unsold/ unsalable/ not useful leftover merchandise	zong snyigs
ཟོང་སྟོང	deceptive empty talk	zong stong
ཟོང་ཐང	price of wares	zong thang
ཟོང་ཐོ	notes/ list of goods	zong tho
ཟོང་དུ་མཛད	engage in salesmanship	zong du mdzad
ཟོང་དོས	tshong zog do po	zong dos
ཟོང་གདན	goods as compensation paid for one's life	zong gdan
ཟོང་བདག	owner of merchandise, merchant	zong bdag
ཟོང་འདྲེན	freight transport	zong 'dren
ཟོང་འདྲེན་གྲུ་གཟིངས	freighter, cargo ship	zong 'dren gru gzings
ཟོང་འདྲེན་གནམ་གྲུ	cargo plane	zong 'dren gnam gru
ཟོང་འདྲེན་བྱེད	transport freight	zong 'dren byed
ཟོང་འདྲེན་མེ་འཁོར	freight train	zong 'dren me 'khor
ཟོང་པ	merchant, trader	zong pa
ཟོང་དཔེ	samples of merchandise	zong dpe
ཟོང་དཔོན	chief merchant, leader of a caravan	zong dpon
ཟོང་སྤུས	quality of wares	zong spus
ཟོང་སྤུས་ཞིབ་དཔྱོད	examine the quality of merchandise	zong spus zhib dpyod
ཟོང་ཕང	warehouse	zong phang
ཟོང་མིན་སྨར	not goods but ready cash	zong min smar
ཟོང་ཚོང་པ	merchant	zong tshong pa
ཟོང་ཟོག	merchandise	zong zog
ཟོང་ཟོག་ཚོང་རྫས	merchandise	zong zog tshong rdzas
ཟོང་རིན་ཆད་འཇོག	buy on credit	zong rin chad 'jog
ཟོང་རོ	unsold/ unmarketable/ unnecessary merchandise, rejects	zong ro
ཟོད	(not in das)	zod
ཟོན	1) (CH zon spar kha; 2) [pre]caution, heed, doubt, fear, apprehension [about]	zon
ཟོན་གྲབས	precaution, preventive measure	zon grabs
ཟོན་པ	lham gyi bye brag zom pa, shoes	zon pa
ཟོན་ཕན	abacus; {zon phan btang ba} to use an abacus	zon phan
ཟོན་བག	careful, cautious	zon bag
ཟོན་བྱིས	beware!	zon byis
ཟོན་བྱེད་པ	shrink from, shun avoid, be cautious, take heed, mind	zon byed pa
ཟོན་མེད	heedless	zon med
ཟོན་རླུང	(CH) spar kha zon and element wind	zon rlung
ཟོབ	[arch] lies deceptions, hypocritical, deceitful	zob
ཟོབ་རྐྱལ	charlatan, bag of lies	zob rkyal
ཟོབ་རྒྱལ	charlatan	zob rgyal
ཟོབ་རྒྱལ་གྱི་བླ་མ	charlatan guru, bag of lies	zob rgyal gyi bla ma
ཟོབ་སྟོང	hypocrite	zob stong
ཟོམ	1) vessel, barrel, pail, tub [esp for milk]; 2) inside/ among. the place of; 3) peak, tip, point summit sgang; 4) decrepit worn out worm- eaten, damaged by use; 5) cave)	zom
ཝོརམ	eaten, damaged by use, point, top, peak, cave, wooden cask, cylindrical vessel, wooden barrel	worm
ཟོམ་སྐྱུར་བྱས	rotten and thrown out	zom skyur byas
ཟོམ་སྐྱོན	he bag and bar gseng gi fault	zom skyon
ཨོལད་ཝོརམ	eaten spoiled records	old worm
ཟོམ་བསྐྱུར	bar lding du lhod bskyur btang ba'am bzhag pa,//phar khag 2404 tshur dkris kyis zom bskyur bzhag pa	zom bskyur
ཟོམ་ཁོག	dull-witted	zom khog
ཟོམ་མགོ	lham zom pa'i mgo rkyang pa	zom mgo
ཟོམ་རྔ	drum that van be beaten on two sides zom dbyibs can	zom rnga
ཟོམ་ཆེན	large barrel	zom chen
ཟོམ་འཇོག	negligence	zom 'jog
ཟོམ་འཇོག་བྱེད	neglect	zom 'jog byed
ཟོམ་མཐིལ	sewn lham mthil	zom mthil
ཟོམ་པ	kind of boots	zom pa
ཟོམ་རྩི	in a milk container for a long tome chags pa'i rtsi ste zo she'am zo mar	zom rtsi
ཟོམ་ལུས	bar zom du lus pa'am, mended by sewing	zom lus
ཟོམ་ལུས་མེད་པ	w/o anything left out as damaged	zom lus med pa
ཟོམ་ལྷམ	boots w snam bu'i uppers	zom lham
ཟོམ་ལྷམ་མཐིལ་གཅིག་མ	kind of men's boots	zom lham mthil gcig ma
ཟོར	1) sorcery, magic, enchanted, magic	zor
ཝེཨཔོནས	malign torma Gd; 2) degree of light/ heavy; 3) sickle, knife	weapons
ཟོར་ཁ	direction of throwing malign torma	zor kha
ཟོར་ལྕེ	sickle blade	zor lce
ཟོར་ཆིང	chopper	zor ching
ཟོར་ཆུང	chopper	zor chung
ཟོར་པ	zor pa med. herb	zor pa
ཟོར་འཕེན་པ	throw malign torma at gdon and bgegs	zor 'phen pa
ཟོར་བ	sickle	zor ba
ཟོར་བས་རྔ་བ	shear with a knife or sickle	zor bas rnga ba
ཟོར་བུ	grass and brush cutting small sickle, chopper	zor bu
ཟོར་མ	wide, spacious, roomy, hymns, religious songs	zor ma
ཟོར་མའི་གླུ་དབྱངས	hymns, religious songs	zor ma'i glu dbyangs
ཟོར་མའི་གླུ་དབྱངས་ལེན	sing religious songs	zor ma'i glu dbyangs len
ཟོར་མའི་གླུ་ལེན	sing religious songs	zor ma'i glu len
ཟོར་ཞྭ	sorcery hat [black and painted with a big rim]	zor zhwa
ཟོར་ཡང	1) easy to carry, not heavy; 2) words few or simple and convenient; 3) simple, convenient, handy	zor yang
ཟོར་ཡང་བ	1) easy to carry, not heavy; 2) words few or simple and convenient; 3) simple, convenient, handy	zor yang ba
ཟོར་ཡང་བའི་འགྲོ་ཆས	easy to carry/ convenience/ simple travel requisites	zor yang ba'i 'gro chas
ཟོར་ཡང་བའི་ཡིག	few/ simple and convenient words	zor yang ba'i yig
ཟོར་ར	sickle	zor ra
ཟོར་ལས	sorcery	zor las
ཟོལ	deception, cheating, falsity, cunning	zol
ཟོལ་སྒྲིབ	deceptively conceal faults	zol sgrib
ཟོལ་ཅན	false	zol can
ཟོལ་བཅོས་རིང་ལུགས	revisionism	zol bcos ring lugs
ཟོལ་འཇོག	negligence	zol 'jog
ཟོལ་འཇོག་བྱེད	neglect	zol 'jog byed
ཟོལ་བསྟོད	gyo khram gyi ngo bstod,//sprel lad zol bstod	zol bstod
ཟོལ་བསྟོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, brjod 'dod kyi yul gang yang rung ba zhig la rnam pa skyon brjod kyi smad khul byas nas, don gyi ngo bo yon tan gyi che ba brjod pa'i rgyan zhig ste, nang gses rna...	zol bstod kyi rgyan
ཟོལ་མཐུན	gyo zol gyi mthun 'jug	zol mthun
ཟོལ་དང་རྫུན་ཆོས	deceit and falsehood	zol dang rdzun chos
ཟོལ་དུ་སྣང་བ	manifested in the form [of]	zol du snang ba
ཟོལ་པོ	deceptive, imposter, charlatan rogue	zol po
ཟོལ་བུ	deceptive	zol bu
ཟོལ་བྱེད	pretext pretender	zol byed
ཟོལ་བྱེད་པ	pretender	zol byed pa
ཟོལ་སྦྱོར	gyo khram gyi bya ba	zol sbyor
ཟོལ་སྦྱོར་ཐ་གུས་ལྕེས	shallow-tongued; x {mi gzhi ngan pa'i zol sbyor tha gus lces} shallow-tongued men with evil natures	zol sbyor tha gus lces
ཟོལ་སྦྱོར་སྤངས་པ	without artifice, free of all artfulness / deceit / pretence	zol sbyor spangs pa
ཟོལ་མ	1) rdzun ma; 2) deceptive woman)	zol ma
ཟོལ་མེད	beyond pretense, not deceiving	zol med
ཟོལ་ཚིག	CM, 2474: g.yo zol gyi gtam, a dishonest story. ¦ rdzun dang zol tshig, false, deceptive/cunning words. [mss]	zol tshig
ཟོལ་ཚོ	SA 'dzol ba	zol tsho
ཟོལ་ཟོག	deception, phonyness, charlatanism fraud	zol zog
ཟོས	eat, SA za ba	zos
ཟོས་ཀྱི་ཟས་འཇུ་བའི་བཅུད	the digested essence of eaten food	zos kyi zas 'ju ba'i bcud
ཟོས་རྔ	shing la bzos pa'i rnga	zos rnga
ཟོས་དང་མ་ཟོས	gzas rkang longs spyad zin and ma zin te, snga rkang zos zin bsdam bya zhing, phyi rkang la ni za rgyu sdom zhes pa ltar ro	zos dang ma zos
ཟོས་བདེ	at ease, free from worry/ anxiety about	zos bde
ཟོས་བདེ་གུ་ཡངས	1) w/o annoyance/ disturbance relaxed/ comfortable/ at ease; 2) dmigs bsal [especially] gu yangs [carefree, open vast, spacious]	zos bde gu yangs
ཟོས་བདེ་གུ་ཡངས་ལ་གནས་པ	rest in comfort and [spacious] ease 2405	zos bde gu yangs la gnas pa
ཟོས་བདེ་བ	at ease, free from worry/ anxiety about	zos bde ba
ཟོས་ནས་ཡོད	he was eating	zos nas yod
ཟོས་པ	pf. of {'dza' ba}; ate	zos pa
ཟོས་པོ་ཁ་བརྙོགས	food and wealth la spyad drags pa'i lang shor,//ri rtsva la zos po kha brnyogs,//bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin gyi bdag po zos po kha brnyogs can	zos po kha brnyogs
ཟོས་བྱེད་པ	to waste	zos byed pa
ཟོས་ཟོས	nourished	zos zos
ཟོས་ལྷག	gtsog lhag - btsog lhag - dme	zos lhag
ཟླ	companion, spouse [R]	zla
ཟླ་དཀར	moon disk/ light	zla dkar
ཟླ་དཀར་གྱི་ཟུར་ཆ	crescent	zla dkar gyi zur cha
ཟླ་དཀྱིལ	1) tshes grangs 1 to 15 sked pa'i cha'am tshes bco lnga'i yas mas; 2) moon disk)	zla dkyil
ཟླ་བཀྲག་ཟླ་བའི་འོད་མདངས	night when zla bkrag shar ba and kumut lotuses open	zla bkrag zla ba'i 'od mdangs
ཟླ་རྐང	moon steps [R]	zla rkang
ཟླ་སྐག	unlucky month	zla skag
ཟླ་སྐར	moon	zla skar
ཟླ་སྐེག	hindrances of the month	zla skeg
ཟླ་སྐྱལ	escorts, guide	zla skyal
ཟླ་སྐྱེས	moon born 1 Mercury = Budha two river Sindhu; 3) constellation mgo m gashira	zla skyes
ཟླ་བསྐོད་འཕུར་འཁོར	moon rocket	zla bskod 'phur 'khor
ཟླ་བསྐྱེལ	escort	zla bskyel
ཟླ་ཁྲུལ	intercalary month	zla khrul
ཟླ་ཁྲོམ	= {mar ram yang na thud}	zla khrom
ཟླ་འཁོར	monthly	zla 'khor
ཟླ་འཁོར་འཆར་གཞི	monthly plan	zla 'khor 'char gzhi
ཟླ་འཁྱིམས	circle/ tent of rainbow light around the moon	zla 'khyims
ཟླ་གང	full moon	zla gang
ཟླ་གམ	1) adj. half-circle / crescentshaped. 2) cape	zla gam
ཟླ་གམ་དགུ་པ	Nine Crescents zla gam dgu pa dam rdzas rlon sbyor gyi	zla gam dgu pa
ཟླ་གམ་ལྔ་བཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	Fifty-eight Crescents	zla gam lnga bcu rtsa brgyad
ཟླ་གམ་གཅིག་པ	Single Crescent	zla gam gcig pa
ཟླ་གམ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	Sixty-eight Crescents. Name of a mandala connected to the teachings of Vishuddha Heruka	zla gam drug cu rtsa brgyad
ཟླ་གམ་མ	something w 1/2 moon/ crescent shape	zla gam ma
ཟླ་གམ་གཟུགས	1/2 circle shape	zla gam gzugs
ཟླ་གམ་གསུམ་པ་བང་རིམ་གསུམ་པ་ཋྲེཨེ	storied Three Crescents	zla gam gsum pa bang rim gsum pa Three
ཟླ་གུར	zla ba 'khyims	zla gur
ཟླ་གོར་ཞོ་ཤ	{zla gor zho sha} med. tree [R]	zla gor zho sha
ཟླ་གྲགས	Candrakirti	zla grags
ཟླ་གྲོགས	friends and companions, life companion, couple, friends, husband, wife; companionship	zla grogs
ཟླ་གླ་པ	worker paid by the month	zla gla pa
ཟླ་དགའ	joy of the moon	zla dga'
ཟླ་དགུ་ངོ་བཅུ	9 months 10 days a child stays in the womb	zla dgu ngo bcu
ཟླ་དགུ་འདས་ནས	after an elapse of 9 months	zla dgu 'das nas
ཟླ་འགོ	beginning [part] of the month	zla 'go
ཟླ་འགྲིལ	1) many gathered in 1 place; 2) two united as 1)	zla 'gril
ཟླ་རྒྱགས	every month's food and drink	zla rgyags
ཟླ་རྒྱས	Syn {mar} butter. Syn {zho dang khur ba, tshogs} language]	zla rgyas
ཟླ་སྒང་ནག་པ	in Ch astr every year nam dus so so'i zla ba bar ma'i zhag po bcu phrag gnyis pa'i ring 'phrod sbyor ngan pa yin pa	zla sgang nag pa
ཟླ་སྒྲིག	rogs pa sgrig pa - las rogs zla sgrig	zla sgrig
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ	combine, join many things	zla sgril
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ་གཏོང་བའི་ནོར་ཕྱུགས	combined wealth zla sgril gtong ba'i dmag mi'i dpung sde	zla sgril gtong ba'i nor phyugs
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ་བསྣོན	to add, plus	zla sgril bsnon
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ་བསྣོན་པ	add, plus	zla sgril bsnon pa
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ་བ	combine, join	zla sgril ba
ཟླ་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད	combine, join, merger	zla sgril byed
ཟླ་སྒྲུབ	monthly practice	zla sgrub
ཟླ་ངོ	month	zla ngo
ཟླ་ངོ་བཞི	four months	zla ngo bzhi
ཟླ་ངོ་བཞི་རིང	for four months	zla ngo bzhi ring
ཟླ་ལྔན་མ	lady of the moon	zla lngan ma
ཟླ་བཅན	moonlit zla bcu spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi gsar rje October Socialist Revolution zla bcu spyi tshogs ring lugs kyi gsar rje October Revolution [Russia, 1917]	zla bcan
ཟླ་ཆུ	zla river	zla chu
ཟླ་མཆོད་དུས་ཆེན	mid-autumn festival	zla mchod dus chen
ཟླ་མཇུག	final part of the month	zla mjug
ཟླ་འཇོག་གི་སྤང་བ	the downfall of omission of [proper robes for up to] a month	zla 'jog gi spang ba
ཟླ་ཉི་ཁ་ལ་རོང་སྒོ	Danyi Khala Rongo. A sacred place in the East Tibetan province of Kham	zla nyi kha la rong sgo
ཟླ་ཉིན	last year	zla nyin
ཟླ་རྙིང	last month	zla rnying
ཟླ་གཏུགས་པོ	1) w only a few needful things; 2) lag thogs po'am lag 'dzangs po; 3) short of workers/ supplies	zla gtugs po
ཟླ་ལྟར	1) within the month; 2) every month)	zla ltar
ཟླ་སྟོད	the early part of the month [first ten days]. Syn {tshos 'go} first phase of the moon	zla stod
ཟླ་སྟོད་ནག་པོ	nag rtsis kyi bshad srol du nam dus so so'i zla ba dang po'i zhag po bcu phrag dang po'i ring 'phrod sbyor ngan pa yin zer	zla stod nag po
ཟླ་སྟོབས་ཅན	strength of the moon	zla stobs can
ཟླ་ཐ་ཆུང	the last month of a season	zla tha chung
ཟླ་ཐུང་ཐུང	mkho chas sam yo byad exhausted or few	zla thung thung
ཟླ་ཐེབ	intercalary month	zla theb
ཟླ་ཐོ	date and gza' skar lta byed kyi le'u tho	zla tho
ཟླ་མཐོང	time of seeing the moon	zla mthong
ཟླ་དག	gza' rnams rang rang gi tshes zla'i	zla dag
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དང	nyin zla'i dkyil 'khor, khyim zla'i dkyil 'khor bcas las skabs	dkyil 'khor dang
ཟླ་དང་ཟླ	every month	zla dang zla
ཟླ་དུམ	SA zla gam	zla dum
ཟླ་དུས	period of 1 month 30 days	zla dus
ཟླ་དུས་ཐེམ་པ	when the space of months was fulfilled	zla dus them pa
ཟླ་དུས་ཐེམ་པ་དང	expiration of months of pregnancy	zla dus them pa dang
ཟླ་དུས་ཐེམས་པ	at the expiration af a month/ those months	zla dus thems pa
ཟླ་དུས་རྫོགས་པ	the completion of a month's time	zla dus rdzogs pa
ཟླ་དྲུག	six months	zla drug
ཟླ་གདན	moon seat, the lunar throne [R]	zla gdan
ཟླ་གདུགས	moon umbrella	zla gdugs
ཟླ་མདུང	arrow spear = {mda' mdung}	zla mdung
ཟླ་འདོ་ལྟར་བསིལ་བ	cooling like moonlight	zla 'do ltar bsil ba
ཟླ་འདྲེས	mixed up two or many, composite/ eclectic company	zla 'dres
ཟླ་ལྡན	land of moons	zla ldan
ཟླ་ལྡན་མ	lady of the moon	zla ldan ma
ཟླ་སྡུད	1) gathering in of the moon on the 30th day; 2) reduplicated consonant terminative)/ [R]	zla sdud
ཟླ་སྡེབ	mnyam du 'grogs pa accompany	zla sdeb
ཟླ་སྡོང	reserves, reinforcements	zla sdong
ཟླ་ནག	new moon	zla nag
ཟླ་པ་ཕྱི་མ	the second month of a double Tibetan month	zla pa phyi ma
ཟླ་སྤྲུལ་ངེས་དོན་བསྟན་པ་རབ་རྒྱས	1st Dabzang Tulku; lineage holder of Chokgyur Lingpa	zla sprul nges don bstan pa rab rgyas
ཟླ་ཕོག	monthly salary	zla phog
ཟླ་ཕོགས	monthly salary	zla phogs
ཟླ་ཕྱེད	1) 15 days; 2) 1/2 moon shape)	zla phyed
ཟླ་ཕྱེད་རྐྱང་པ	sna ldan mtshon byed kyi rtags	zla phyed rkyang pa
ཟླ་ཕྱེད་ཐིག་ལེ	sna ldan mtshon byed kyi rtags	zla phyed thig le
ཟླ་ཕྱེད་རྡོ་རྗེ	on top of a half-moon shape 1/2 four pointed vajra /rdo rje gyen 'greng yod pa	zla phyed rdo rje
ཟླ་ཕྲམ	{thud} cheese made of buttermilk	zla phram
ཟླ་འཕུལ	zla yun phyir bshol ba,//nyin 'phul zla 'phul kho nas dus tshod phyi bshol byed	zla 'phul
ཟླ་འཕྲོ	in one [tshes zla] lunar month a siderial month [khyim zla]'i dod mi thub pas since mda' ro'i cha gnyis lhag pas na,it is also called mda' ro'i lhag, that is the ground of determining dbugs sgang l...	zla 'phro
ཟླ་བ	1) moon; 2) month; 3) 1; 4) semen; 5) handsome/ beautiful; 5) consort/ spouse)	zla ba
ཟླ་བ་བཀས་པ	a split moon disk	zla ba bkas pa
ཟླ་བ་སྐར་ཕྲེང	Moon w garland of stars	zla ba skar phreng
ཟླ་བ་སྐར་ཕྲེང་ལྟ་བུ	like the moon with a garland of stars	zla ba skar phreng lta bu
ཟླ་བ་སྐྱེས	(met) river Sindhu	zla ba skyes
ཟླ་བ་སྐྱེས་པ	a month old	zla ba skyes pa
ཟླ་བ་ཁམ་པ	half moon, 1st or last quarter, semicircle	zla ba kham pa
ཟླ་བ་ཁྲ་གདོང	hawk-headed Candra, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	zla ba khra gdong
ཟླ་བ་འཁྱིམས་པ	circle/ tent of rainbow light around the moon	zla ba 'khyims pa
ཟླ་བ་གོང་མ	last/ previous month	zla ba gong ma
ཟླ་བ་གྲགས་པ	Chandrakirti	zla ba grags pa
ཟླ་བ་དགུ་པ	the month of october	zla ba dgu pa
ཟླ་བ་དགུའི་བར	for nine months	zla ba dgu'i bar
ཟླ་བ་སྒྲོ་མའི་མདོ	Moon Lamp Sutra Chandra Pradipa Sutra Syn {ting 'dzin rgyal po}	zla ba sgro ma'i mdo
ཟླ་བ་སྒྲོན་མའི་མདོ	candra pradipa sutra	zla ba sgron ma'i mdo
ཟླ་བ་སྒྲོན་མེའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	Absorption of Moon Lamp [thd]	zla ba sgron me'i ting nge 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་སྒྲོན་མེའི་མདོ	Moon Lamp S?tra [thd]	zla ba sgron me'i mdo
ཟླ་བ་བརྒྱད་སོང་ཙ་ན	when eight months had passed	zla ba brgyad song tsa na
ཟླ་བ་ངོ་མཐོང་དྲུག་ཙམ་ལ	within six months	zla ba ngo mthong drug tsam la
ཟླ་བ་སྔ་མ	last month	zla ba snga ma
ཟླ་བ་ཅན	moonlit	zla ba can
ཟླ་བ་གཅིག	one month	zla ba gcig
ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་པ	footstool, foot-stool	zla ba gcig pa
ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་ལ	by the end of the month	zla ba gcig la
ཟླ་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 months [R] -	zla ba bcu gnyis
ཟླ་བ་ཆ	even months	zla ba cha
ཟླ་བ་ཆ་འཛིན	partial obscuration/ eclipse of the moon [R]	zla ba cha 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་ཆུ་ཤེལ	finest crystal gem	zla ba chu shel
ཟླ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Mahachandra	zla ba chen po
ཟླ་བ་འཇོམས	Rahu	zla ba 'joms
ཟླ་བ་འཇོམས་པ	Rahu	zla ba 'joms pa
ཟླ་བ་ཉ	full moon	zla ba nya
ཟླ་བ་ཉ་གང	full moon, 15th day	zla ba nya gang
ཟླ་བ་ཉ་གང་བ	the moon as full fish	zla ba nya gang ba
ཟླ་བ་ཉ་པ	full moon	zla ba nya pa
ཟླ་བ་ཉ་བ	full moon	zla ba nya ba
ཟླ་བ་ཉམས	(met) time when part of the moonis obscured	zla ba nyams
ཟླ་བ་གཉིས་སྣང་ལྟ་བུ	mig btsir bas zla ba gnyis su snang ba ltar	zla ba gnyis snang lta bu
ཟླ་བ་གཉིས་རེར་ཐེངས་གཅིག	bimonthly	zla ba gnyis rer thengs gcig
ཟླ་བ་རྟིང་མ	next/ following month	zla ba rting ma
ཟླ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like the moon, bleached, white like the moon	zla ba lta bu
ཟླ་བ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	moon like arousal of bodhicitta [R]	zla ba lta bu'i sems bskyed
ཟླ་བ་དྲགས་པའི་ཕ་དང་འདྲ	you are like the father of Famous Moon!	zla ba drags pa'i pha dang 'dra
ཟླ་བ་གདུབ་འཛིན	lunar eclipse	zla ba gdub 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་ནོར་བུ	(met) crystal	zla ba nor bu
ཟླ་བ་ཕུག	Moon Cave, Dawa Phuk, at Drak Yerpa	zla ba phug
ཟླ་བ་ཕྱི་མ	next/ following month	zla ba phyi ma
ཟླ་བ་ཕྱེད	fortnight, half a month	zla ba phyed
ཟླ་བ་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	about one-half of a month	zla ba phyed tsam
ཟླ་བ་བྱུང་ངོ་ཅོག	every month zla ba 'byung ngo cog gi dus bzang bzhi [Tserig] zla ba 'byung ngo cog gi dus bzang bzhi TSE	zla ba byung ngo cog
ཟླ་བ་སྦས་པ	Chandragupta	zla ba sbas pa
ཟླ་བ་མ་གང་བར་སྐྱེས་པ	premature birth	zla ba ma gang bar skyes pa
ཟླ་བ་མར་ངོ	waning part of the month [R]	zla ba mar ngo
ཟླ་བ་མོག་པ	moon light becoming obscured/ dark	zla ba mog pa
ཟླ་བ་དམར་མོ་ཁྲའི་མགོ	Chandra Moon, red hawk-headed {dbang phyug ma}	zla ba dmar mo khra'i mgo
ཟླ་བ་ཙམ	just/ about a month	zla ba tsam
ཟླ་བ་ཚང་དུ་ཉ་བ	approach/ near the completion of pregnancy	zla ba tshang du nya ba
ཟླ་བ་ཚང་དུ་ཉེ་བས	towards the expiration of the months of pregnancy, towards the end of the months of pregnancy	zla ba tshang du nye bas
ཟླ་བ་ཚང་བ	months completed [of pregnancy] [R]	zla ba tshang ba
ཟླ་བ་ཚེས་པ	tshes pa gsum bzhi'i zla gzugs	zla ba tshes pa
ཟླ་བ་འཛིན	lunar eclipse	zla ba 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་འཛིན་པ	1) eclipse of the moon; 2) (met) skra mkhan; 3) deity dbang phyug chen po)	zla ba 'dzin pa
ཟླ་བ་འཛུམ་བྱེད	sword	zla ba 'dzum byed
ཟླ་བ་གཞོན་ནུ	zla ba tshes pa, cardomum	zla ba gzhon nu
ཟླ་བ་ཟ་བ	Rahu	zla ba za ba
ཟླ་བ་གཟའ་འཛིན	lunar eclipse	zla ba gza' 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་བཟང་པོ	Suchandra	zla ba bzang po
ཟླ་བ་ཡ	odd months [R]	zla ba ya
ཟླ་བ་ཡར་གྱི་ངོ	waxing phase of the moon [R]	zla ba yar gyi ngo
ཟླ་བ་ཡར་ངོ	enlightened half of the month	zla ba yar ngo
ཟླ་བ་རིལ་པོ	entire month	zla ba ril po
ཟླ་བ་རིལ་འཛིན	eclipse of the full moon	zla ba ril 'dzin
ཟླ་བ་ལ་སྐྱེས་པ	one month old	zla ba la skyes pa
ཟླ་བ་ལས་བྱུང་རྟེན་དང་བཅས	it manifests like the moon and its support	zla ba las byung rten dang bcas
ཟླ་བ་ཤོལ	intercalary moth	zla ba shol
ཟླ་བ་གསུམ་རེར	quarterly	zla ba gsum rer
ཟླ་བའི	lunar	zla ba'i
ཟླ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	sphere/ orb of the moon	zla ba'i dkyil 'khor
ཟླ་བའི་ཁམ་པ	1/2 moon	zla ba'i kham pa
ཟླ་བའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	very useful and important medicine	zla ba'i 'khri shing
ཟླ་བའི་གོ་ལ	lunar orbit, moon [disk]	zla ba'i go la
ཟླ་བའི་གྲོགས	ocean	zla ba'i grogs
ཟླ་བའི་གྲོགས་པོ	(met) ocean	zla ba'i grogs po
ཟླ་བའི་གླིང	candra-dvipa	zla ba'i gling
ཟླ་བའི་དགྲ	(met) Rahu	zla ba'i dgra
ཟླ་བའི་མགུལ་པ་ཅན	med. {zla ba'i mgul pa can}	zla ba'i mgul pa can
ཟླ་བའི་རྒྱལ	so ma r' dz'a	zla ba'i rgyal
ཟླ་བའི་ཅོད་པན	(met) Chakrasamvara, lord of the feast	zla ba'i cod pan
ཟླ་བའི་བཅུད	camphor	zla ba'i bcud
ཟླ་བའི་ལྕུག་མ	(met) so ma r' dz'a	zla ba'i lcug ma
ཟླ་བའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	moon disk	zla ba'i 'jig rten
ཟླ་བའི་ཉ་དྲུག་ལ	on the 6th day of the moon	zla ba'i nya drug la
ཟླ་བའི་ཉིན་ཞག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	moon's solar day rtag longs sgrub gzhi'i aang grangs	zla ba'i nyin zhag dkyil 'khor
ཟླ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	sphere/ orb of the moon; isc. moon as source	zla ba'i snying po
ཟླ་བའི་སྙེ་མ	very useful and important medicine	zla ba'i snye ma
ཟླ་བའི་ཏོག	a tathagata	zla ba'i tog
ཟླ་བའི་སྟེང	upon a moon	zla ba'i steng
ཟླ་བའི་ཐལ	dust of the moon, plagiarist	zla ba'i thal
ཟླ་བའི་ཐལ་བ	(met) camphor	zla ba'i thal ba
ཟླ་བའི་ཐུན་མིན་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	rgyu skar chu tshod 1620 mkha' mes divided te 54 : nyi ma dang thun mong ma yin pa'i rtag longs yin la, by adding the sun's lunar day coursing tshes longs zla ba'i tshes longs is established	zla ba'i thun min longs spyod
ཟླ་བའི་ཐོག་མ	chitra constellation, SA skar ma nag pa	zla ba'i thog ma
ཟླ་བའི་དྲི	water lily, SA ku mu da	zla ba'i dri
ཟླ་བའི་བདག་གཟའ	ruling planet of the month [R]	zla ba'i bdag gza'
ཟླ་བའི་སྡེ	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	zla ba'i sde
ཟླ་བའི་ཕྲེང་བ	year	zla ba'i phreng ba
ཟླ་བའི་བབས་འཁོར	lunar landing ship	zla ba'i babs 'khor
ཟླ་བའི་བུ	Mercury	zla ba'i bu
ཟླ་བའི་བྱེ་མ	med. ka ko la, cardamum	zla ba'i bye ma
ཟླ་བའི་བླ་མཁན	lama astrologer	zla ba'i bla mkhan
ཟླ་བའི་བླ་མཁྱེན	astrologer	zla ba'i bla mkhyen
ཟླ་བའི་བློ	mind of the moon	zla ba'i blo
ཟླ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས	Moon-like Intelligence	zla ba'i blo gros
ཟླ་བའི་དབང་པོ	Somendra	zla ba'i dbang po
ཟླ་བའི་མ་མ	outer ocean	zla ba'i ma ma
ཟླ་བའི་མིང་ཅན	1) person named zla ba; 2) (met) camphor)	zla ba'i ming can
ཟླ་བའི་ཙང་ཀུན	{zla ba'i tsang kun}	zla ba'i tsang kun
ཟླ་བའི་གཙུག་ཕུད	moon-crest, SA chu bya gag	zla ba'i gtsug phud
ཟླ་བའི་རྩ	moon nadi	zla ba'i rtsa
ཟླ་བའི་ཞག་གསུམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	time of orbit of the moon in terms of the three kinds of days [R]	zla ba'i zhag gsum dkyil 'khor
ཟླ་བའི་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང	moon's palace/ disk	zla ba'i gzhal med khang
ཟླ་བའི་གཞོན་ནུ་མ	med. ka ko la	zla ba'i gzhon nu ma
ཟླ་བའི་འོད་ཟེར	1) moonlight/rays/ beams	zla ba'i 'od zer
ཟླ་བའི་ཡལ་ག	(met) a kind of incense	zla ba'i yal ga
ཟླ་བའི་ཡུལ་ལོངས	khyim longs yul gyi chu tshod 60 and chu srang 9 dbugs five mda' 'byung me chu'i cha 670 yin, tshes longs skar thig chu tshod 58 chu srang 21 dbugs five ri ro'i cha 43 yin, nyin longs skar thig chu...	zla ba'i yul longs
ཟླ་བའི་ར་རི	moon disk ngos kyi ri mo nag nog	zla ba'i ra ri
ཟླ་བའི་རི་བོ	fabulous mountain beyond mig btsums pa mountains	zla ba'i ri bo
ཟླ་བའི་རླུང	moon wind	zla ba'i rlung
ཟླ་བའི་ལག	(met) river, stream	zla ba'i lag
ཟླ་བའི་ལག་པ	river, stream	zla ba'i lag pa
ཟླ་བའི་ལོ་མ	{zla ba'i lo ma} flower	zla ba'i lo ma
ཟླ་བའི་ཤུག་པ	1 of 5 great rivers, SA chu bo chen po	zla ba'i shug pa
ཟླ་བའི་ས་རྒྱལ	class of sa bdg spirits 2409	zla ba'i sa rgyal
ཟླ་བའི་སྲིང་མོ	goddess Sarasvati, dbyangs can ma	zla ba'i sring mo
ཟླ་བས་དགའ	(met) 1) ku mu da = white lotus; 2) sleep)	zla bas dga'
ཟླ་བས་འཇུག	(met) gold bzo ba	zla bas 'jug
ཟླ་བས་འཕེལ	ocean (that is increased by the moon)	zla bas 'phel
ཟླ་བས་བཞད	ku mu da lotus	zla bas bzhad
ཟླ་བས་བཞད་ཚལ	patch of ku mu da lotus	zla bas bzhad tshal
ཟླ་བུ	son of the moon, SA lhag pa	zla bu
ཟླ་བོ	spouse	zla bo
ཟླ་བོ་དངོས་པོའི་དཔེ	dpe'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi ngo bo'i gnas tshul zhig sngar bkod nas, de dang 'dra ba'i dpe zhig zla bo'am rogs kyi tshul du phyis bkod de shugs kyis mtshungs par ston pa'i r...	zla bo dngos po'i dpe
ཟླ་བོ་བྱེད་པ	help assist	zla bo byed pa
ཟླ་བོ་མེད་པ	single, single-handed	zla bo med pa
ཟླ་བོན་ཚེས་པ	bon of the moon	zla bon tshes pa
ཟླ་བྱེད	to equate, equalize, match	zla byed
ཟླ་བྲལ	matchless	zla bral
ཟླ་བྲལ་བའི་སྙིང་སྟོབས	matchless courage/ spirit	zla bral ba'i snying stobs
ཟླ་སྦེད	hidden moon	zla sbed
ཟླ་སྦྱེད	hidden moon	zla sbyed
ཟླ་མི་ཐུང་བ	abundant, plenty	zla mi thung ba
ཟླ་མེད	unrivaled, unmatched, matchless	zla med
ཟླ་མེད་པ	1) matchless, better than others; 2) Buddha; 3) friendless, w/o help single, alone; 4) celibate	zla med pa
ཟླ་མེད་བློ	1) matchless understanding/ prajna; 2) buddha zla med blo	zla med blo
ཟླ་མོ	female friend, concubine, wife	zla mo
ཟླ་སྨད	waning/final part of the month the final part of the month, syn. {zla mjug}	zla smad
ཟླ་སྨད་ནག་པོ	zla mjug nag po ste, in Ch astr every year nam dus so so'i zla ba tha ma'i zhag po bcu phrag gsum pa'i ring 'phrod sbyor ngan pa yin pa	zla smad nag po
ཟླ་ཙེ་ས	crescent moon	zla tse sa
ཟླ་རྩིས	calculations relative to the month	zla rtsis
ཟླ་ཚེ	crescent moon	zla tshe
ཟླ་ཚེས	1) date of the month; 2) crescent moon/ sickle shape; 3) hum syllable &, mchod rten sogs at the top crescent moon shape	zla tshes
ཟླ་ཚེས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་དང་པོ	1st day of the month	zla tshes phyogs kyi dang po
ཟླ་མཚན	{pha'i khu ba dang ma'i zla mtshan mngal du 'dres} the parent's sperm and egg mix in the mother's womb	zla mtshan
ཟླ་མཚན་འཁྱིལ་བ	at time of a woman's menstruation ma babs te 'gag par gyur pa'i tshabs nad cig	zla mtshan 'khyil ba
ཟླ་མཚན་མེད་པ	one without menses	zla mtshan med pa
ཟླ་མཚམས	months of retreat	zla mtshams
ཟླ་མཛེས	1) goddess Sarasvati; 2) kumud lotus	zla mdzes
ཟླ་འཛིན	lunar eclipse	zla 'dzin
ཟླ་ཞག	month[s] and days	zla zhag
ཟླ་ཞལ	the full moon of his rebirth	zla zhal
ཟླ་ཞལ་མ	1) beautiful woman; 2) dbyangs can ma	zla zhal ma
ཟླ་ཞལ་མཛེས་མ	term for a beautiful woman	zla zhal mdzes ma
ཟླ་གཞོན	a full moon	zla gzhon
ཟླ་གཞོན་ནུ	day after new moon	zla gzhon nu
ཟླ་ཟེར	moon beam/ light/ rays	zla zer
ཟླ་ཟོ	measuring vessel for grain, tsampa etc.	zla zo
ཟླ་ཟླུམ	round full moon	zla zlum
ཟླ་གཟན	woman whose husband is dead, widow	zla gzan
ཟླ་བཟང་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	Syn {zla sprul kar ma nges don bstan pa rab rgyas}	zla bzang sprul pa'i sku
ཟླ་འོད	Chandraprabha	zla 'od
ཟླ་འོད་ཀྱི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	{zla 'od kyi rtogs brjod}	zla 'od kyi rtogs brjod
ཟླ་འོད་སྒྲ་ཅན	lammergayer	zla 'od sgra can
ཟླ་འོད་ཅན	(met) night	zla 'od can
ཟླ་འོད་ལྟ་བུ	resembles moonlight	zla 'od lta bu
ཟླ་འོད་འཐུང	(met) tsa ko ra bird	zla 'od 'thung
ཟླ་འོད་སྣང་ལྡན་མ	(met) night	zla 'od snang ldan ma
ཟླ་འོད་མ	(met) night	zla 'od ma
ཟླ་འོད་གཞོན་ནུ	Youthful Moon Light, Chandra Prabha kumara. the ever youthful Chandra Prabha; Gampopa's past life as a bodhisattva	zla 'od gzhon nu
ཟླ་འོད་ཟས་ཅན	(met) tsa ko ra bird	zla 'od zas can
ཟླ་ཡ	enemy, opponenet	zla ya
ཟླ་ར་བ	season	zla ra ba
ཟླ་རབ	the first month of a season; / zla	zla rab
ར་བ	the first month (of a season)	ra ba
ཟླ་རལ་གྱི་དཔེ	counter example	zla ral gyi dpe
ཟླ་རིས	zla ba'i ra ri	zla ris
ཟླ་རེ་ངོ་རེ	[each] individual month	zla re ngo re
ཟླ་རེའི	monthly	zla re'i
ཟླ་རེའི་དུས་དེབ	monthly periodical	zla re'i dus deb
ཟླ་རེའི་ཕྱོགས་གཉིས	waxing and waning parts of the month	zla re'i phyogs gnyis
ཟླ་རེའི་ཞུ་ཐོ	monthly report	zla re'i zhu tho
ཟླ་རོགས	wife, friend, fellow traveller	zla rogs
ཟླ་ལ་ཁྱེད་གྱེས་མི་ཟུག	you do not cling to a companion	zla la khyed gyes mi zug
ཟླ་ཤུན	cardamon	zla shun
ཟླ་ཤོལ	intercalary month	zla shol
ཟླ་ཤོལ་ཡོད་པའི་ལོ	year w intercalary month	zla shol yod pa'i lo
ཟླ་གཤོལ	intercalary month	zla gshol
ཟླ་གཤོལ་ཡོད་པའི་ལོ	year w intercalary month	zla gshol yod pa'i lo
ཟླ་བཤོལ	zla ba lhag ma'am, zla ba nyis brtsed te tshes zla rer chu tshod rtsis 'phro gnyis re lhag pa bsags nas tshes zla so gsum re'i thog zla bshol re 'byung ngo, de ni lo gcig gi khyim zhag dang, tshes ...	zla bshol
ཟླ་སྲང་སྐར་སྐྱེད	for a srang during a month skyed ka five skar ma lnga re 'khri ba'i debt	zla srang skar skyed
ཟླ་སྲང་ཁ་སྐྱེད	for a srang during a month skyed ka two 1/2 skar ma 'khri ba'i debt	zla srang kha skyed
ཟླ་སྲང་ཞོ་སྐྱེད	for a srang la during a month skyed ka zho gang re 'khri ba'i debt	zla srang zho skyed
ཟླ་གསང	secret moon	zla gsang
ཟླ་གསང་ཆེན་པོ	anuyoga rare tantra	zla gsang chen po
ཟླ་གསང་ཆེན་མོ	rare tantra of anuyoga	zla gsang chen mo
ཟླ་གསང་ཐིག་ལེ	Secret Moon Essence. A Mahayoga scripture. Vol. MA of the Nyingma Gyübum. Sometimes counted among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras as the tantra of enlightened speech	zla gsang thig le
ཟླ་གསང་ནག་པོ	Secret Black Moon. The tantra of Manjushri Body. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	zla gsang nag po
ཟླ་ལྷག	intercalary month	zla lhag
ཟླ་ལྷག་ཟླ་བཤོལ	on top of famine zla lhag	zla lhag zla bshol
ཟླག	(not in das)	zlag
ཟླམ་པོ་མཉམ་པ	roundish	zlam po mnyam pa
ཟླའི	companion, spouse, helper	zla'i
ཟླའུ	SA grogs po, rogs po	zla'u
ཟླར	friendly (?)	zlar
ཟླས་གྲང་བ	derive in dichotomy	zlas grang ba
ཟླས་ཕྱེ་བ	reverse, contrary	zlas phye ba
ཟླས་ཕྱེབ	pair, couple, combination	zlas phyeb
ཟླས་དབྱེ	pair, couple, combination	zlas dbye
ཟླས་དབྱེ་བའི་བསྡུ་བ	las don sogs divisions bsdus nas finally gather into 1: India, Kashmir, Nepal etc su 'gro zhes brjod pa bzhin no	zlas dbye ba'i bsdu ba
ཟླས་འབྱེད་པ	distinguish opposites in terms of mutual dependence	zlas 'byed pa
ཟླུག་པ	pour into, cast, put in, send word, report, inform	zlug pa
ཟླུགས	imp. of {zlug pa}	zlugs
ཟླུགས་པ	pour into, cast, send word, SA zlug pa	zlugs pa
ཟླུམ	1) circular, round [comp zlum po]; 2) [p bzlums, f bzlum],, put together, gather up, settle, bring to an end	zlum
ཟླུམ་སྐོར	1) [paint a] round picture; 2) bskor nas ri mo 'bri byed kyi implement)/ circular	zlum skor
ཟླུམ་སྐོར་མུ་ཁྱུད་ཅན	spherical and rimmed	zlum skor mu khyud can
ཟླུམ་བསྐོར	draw a circle	zlum bskor
ཟླུམ་འཁོར	1) round, circular, spherical; 2) sgor 'khyil 'khyil du 'khor ba	zlum 'khor
ཟླུམ་འཁྲིགས	circles, many-ringed, circular formations	zlum 'khrigs
ཟླུམ་འཆོས་བྱེད	1) mi mthun pa mthun thabs kyi bar 'dum byed pa; 2) make something round/ spherical	zlum 'chos byed
ཟླུམ་ཐིག	sgor thig	zlum thig
ཟླུམ་པ	(tha dad pa) bzlums pa, bzlum pa, zlums,, 1) gathered together into 1; 2) make compatible, econcile; 3) round, circular, bulbous	zlum pa
ཟླུམ་པོ	round, circular, 1 of dbyibs gzugs brgyad, spherical	zlum po
ཟླུམ་པོ་འཛིན	sun	zlum po 'dzin
ཟླུམ་པོ་བཞི་དབང	Four circular empowerments. Synonym for the four empowerments	zlum po bzhi dbang
ཟླུམ་པོའི་ཆ་ཤས	arc	zlum po'i cha shas
ཟླུམ་པོར་ཙིག་པ	erect a round or cylindrical wall 2411	zlum por tsig pa
ཟླུམ་པོར་རྩིག་པ	erect a cylindrical wall	zlum por rtsig pa
ཟླུམ་ཕུ་སེ	mole like animal	zlum phu se
ཟླུམ་ཕྱེད	hemisphere, semi-circle	zlum phyed
ཟླུམ་བུམ	circle	zlum bum
ཟླུམ་བོ	TSE	zlum bo
ཟླུམ་དབུ	shaven/ round headed	zlum dbu
ཟླུམ་ཞྭ	zhwa mo round or ril ril	zlum zhwa
ཟླུམས	zlum pa!	zlums
ཟློ	passes beyond, we will speak of it, pass beyond, transcend {bzlo}	zlo
ཟློ་བ	(tha dad pa) bzlas pa, bzla ba, zlos,, 1) repeat, recite; 2) be liberated from, pass beyond; 3) say)	zlo ba
ཟློག	repulse, divert, reverse, exorcise	zlog
ཟློག་སྒྱུར	means of exorcising/ averting gegs and obstacles	zlog sgyur
ཟློག་ཏུ་གསོལ	we ask you to give it up, change your mind, dismiss the thought of	zlog tu gsol
ཟློག་ཐབས	means of making cease/ averting/ repelling/ avoiding	zlog thabs
ཟློག་ཐབས་ཅན་བཅུ	10 means of diverting others	zlog thabs can bcu
ཟློག་ཐབས་བྲལ་བ	impossible to repel/ avert/ avoid	zlog thabs bral ba
ཟློག་ཐབས་མེད	impossible to repel/ avert/ avoid	zlog thabs med
ཟློག་ཐབས་མེད་པ	inexorable	zlog thabs med pa
ཟློག་པ་ལྔ	the five steps of exorcism [R]	zlog pa lnga
ཟློག་པ་གསུམ	the three steps of exorcism	zlog pa gsum
ཟློག་པའི་སེམས	changed mind/ thoughts, give up something	zlog pa'i sems
ཟློག་པར་བྱེད་པ	to repel	zlog par byed pa
ཟློགས	expel, SA zlog, zlog pa	zlogs
ཟློད་གར	drama, dramatic performance, dance, 1 of 4 branches of sabda vidya, science of external expression	zlod gar
ཟློས	zlo ba! charm spell	zlos
ཟློས་སྐྱོན	bshad zin pa'i tshig de dgos pa med bzhin slar yang bshad pa'i skyon,//gtam snga phyi zlos skyon med pa	zlos skyon
ཟློས་གར་ཁང	theatre	zlos gar khang
ཟློས་གར་མཁན	1) actor, singer, dancer; 2) peacock; 3) mistress	zlos gar mkhan
ཟློས་གར་འཁྲབ	perform a drama/ play	zlos gar 'khrab
ཟློས་གར་འཁྲབ་པ	to put on a play, act in a play	zlos gar 'khrab pa
ཟློས་གར་འཁྲབ་ཚན	program for a drama/ play	zlos gar 'khrab tshan
ཟློས་གར་འཁྲབ་ཚིག	lines for a drama/ play	zlos gar 'khrab tshig
ཟློས་གར་གྱི་ཁང	stage, theater	zlos gar gyi khang
ཟློས་གར་གྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས	theatrical shastra	zlos gar gyi bstan bcos
ཟློས་གར་གྱི་བསྟན་ཆོས	dramatic works	zlos gar gyi bstan chos
ཟློས་གར་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five kinds of theater	zlos gar gyi yan lag lnga
ཟློས་གར་གཏམ་མོལ	dialogue	zlos gar gtam mol
ཟློས་གར་བ	actor	zlos gar ba
ཟློས་གར་བྱེད་པ	dance	zlos gar byed pa
ཟློས་གར་ཚོགས་པ	troupe	zlos gar tshogs pa
ཟློས་གར་བཞད་གད་ཅན	comedy	zlos gar bzhad gad can
ཟློས་གར་རིག་པ	[Tserig]	zlos gar rig pa
ཟློས་གར་རིགས་ལྔ	the five divisions of theater	zlos gar rigs lnga
ཟློས་གར་སློབ་པ	teach or learn dancing	zlos gar slob pa
ཟློས་གྱར	rtsod pa'i gnas su gyar ba	zlos gyar
ཟློས་སྒྲ་ཅན	after every letter tshig don gsal por ston mi nus shing 'di zhes nges gzung med par nam rgyun yi ge dang, ngag thog tu bkol ba'i sgra tshig bskyar ldab can zhig ste zhag zhig chang chung, yang yeng...	zlos sgra can
ཟློས་གཏམ	recitation	zlos gtam
ཟློས་པ	(tha mi dad pa 1) 'char ba'am 'phro ba,//slar yang mi'i gzugs su zlos pa; 2) bskyar ldab pa,//yang zlos bskyar zlos,//nyis repeat	zlos pa
ཟློས་པ་སྔགས	mantra recitation	zlos pa sngags
ཟློས་བུ	speak repeating again and again	zlos bu
ཟློས་རྩོད	kha mchu'i rtsod shags,//khrims sa'i zlos rtsod	zlos rtsod
ཟློས་ཡ	1 of the parties in a law suit	zlos ya
ཟློས་སུམ་ཟློས་བྱས་ནས་ལབས་པ	//gzhan gyi lad zlos ma byed,//khyod kyi skad cha de dag zlos pa	zlos sum zlos byas nas labs pa
ཟློས་ཧྲལ	brtsegs 'dogs can gyi yig chen,//ka mad sum cu'i yig gzugs legs par sbyangs rjes gzhi nas zlos hral slob dgos	zlos hral
གཟ་གདོང	Rahula	gza gdong
གཟག	drop, SA 'dzag pa	gzag
གཟག་པ	SA 'tshag pa, 'dzag pa	gzag pa
གཟག་སྦྲུང་རུ་ཁག	guard of honor	gzag sbrung ru khag
གཟགས	drop, SA 'dzag pa	gzags
གཟགས་པ	{gzags pa, gzags pa, gzags pa, gzogs} trans. v.; to magnify, multiply; ft. of {gzags pa}; pf. of {gzags pa}	gzags pa
གཟང	sharp, pointed	gzang
གཟང་ཟག་གི་བདག	self-identity of persons	gzang zag gi bdag
གཟང་རིང	sharp point and long	gzang ring
གཟངས་རིང	SA tsher ma ra mgo	gzangs ring
གཟད	district in lhokha	gzad
གཟད་བསྐུར་བ	to fall into the trap of . . . ; to foster/ remain caught up in [?]	gzad bskur ba
གཟན	(monastic) shawl; irritating, shawl. 2) Painful, hassle, irritate	gzan
གཟན་རྐྱང	a single cotton shawl	gzan rkyang
གཟན་སྐྱུར	monk's gzan gyi sne mo thur du 'bebs pa'i gus tshul	gzan skyur
གཟན་ཁང	hay storage room	gzan khang
གཟན་ཁྲ	multicolored shawl	gzan khra
གཟན་གོད	chud zos su song ba dang zad pa,//gyon pa gzan god chen po 'dug	gzan god
གཟན་གོས	upper garment	gzan gos
གཟན་རྒྱག	wasteful harm and expense	gzan rgyag
གཟན་སྒྲོག	monk's gzan binding cord	gzan sgrog
གཟན་ངར	beasts of prey	gzan ngar
གཟན་ཆག	gzan pa and chag, fodder	gzan chag
གཟན་ཆས	fodder	gzan chas
གཟན་ཆས་ལོ་ཏོག	fodder crops	gzan chas lo tog
གཟན་སྙིགས	remains of grass eaten by cattle	gzan snyigs
གཟན་སྟན	monk's gzan and seat	gzan stan
གཟན་བརྟག	lottery	gzan brtag
གཟན་ཐག	monk's gzan's outer sgrog thag	gzan thag
གཟན་དྲོན	zan dron	gzan dron
གཟན་འདྲ་བའི་དཀྲིས་གོས་ཤིག	shawl	gzan 'dra ba'i dkris gos shig
གཟན་སྡོམ	monk's gzan gyi phyi nas sgrog thag	gzan sdom
གཟན་སྣ་ལྔ	gzan worn as part of rgya lu chas	gzan sna lnga
གཟན་པ	food, hay, cattle feed, devour, consume, pick out, worry, worn out, thread bare, forage, hay	gzan pa
གཟན་པ་རྒྱག་པ	horse mule etc: eat or be given grass	gzan pa rgyag pa
གཟན་པོ	1) great expense gron che ba; 2) harsh, harmful, bothersome, bad for	gzan po
གཟན་པོ་བྱས	did harm	gzan po byas
གཟན་པོ་བྱུང	was expensive/ harmful	gzan po byung
གཟན་པོ་ཡོང	was expensive/ harmful	gzan po yong
གཟན་ཕྲག་པར་གཟེད	carries one's shawl on the shoulders	gzan phrag par gzed
གཟན་རྩ	fodder grass	gzan rtsa
གཟན་རྩྭ	fodder grass	gzan rtswa
གཟན་ཤམ	robes	gzan sham
གཟན་ཤིང	fodder and fire wood	gzan shing
གཟབ	take care, be earnest/ serious, [comp {gzab gzab} careful, serious, attentive, watchful, cautious	gzab
གཟབ་གོས	dress up * elegant/ dressy garment	gzab gos
གཟབ་རྒྱས	elaborate, grand, elegant, [try hard to be] dressed up/ stylish	gzab rgyas
གཟབ་རྒྱས་གཤོམ་པའི་གསོལ་སྟོན	elaborately prepared/ arranged banquet	gzab rgyas gshom pa'i gsol ston
གཟབ་མཆོར	good clothing and ornaments, dressing up	gzab mchor
གཟབ་མཆོར་སྤྲས	dress up	gzab mchor spras
གཟབ་མཆོར་སྤྲས་པ	dress up	gzab mchor spras pa
གཟབ་མཆོར་སྤྲོས	dress up	gzab mchor spros
གཟབ་མཆོར་སྤྲོས་པ	dress up	gzab mchor spros pa
གཟབ་མཆོར་བྱེད	dress up	gzab mchor byed
གཟབ་མཆོར་བྱེད་པ	too gaudily dressed	gzab mchor byed pa
གཟབ་འཆོས	done w careful effort	gzab 'chos
གཟབ་འཆོས་པ	to dress	gzab 'chos pa
གཟབ་བརྟན	work hard, stably, and carefully	gzab brtan
གཟབ་ནན	trying hard to be very careful, serious, prudent, careful	gzab nan
གཟབ་ནན་གྱིས	w careful effort, carefully	gzab nan gyis
གཟབ་ནན་གྱིས་ཉན་པ	listen w careful effort	gzab nan gyis nyan pa
གཟབ་པ	use care, SA gzabs pa	gzab pa
གཟབ་པ་རེམ	be careful {rem} word of warning to endeavor, put effort into]	gzab pa rem
གཟབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	{zhag bdun du gzab par byas} for seven days I had better be very careful	gzab par byed pa
གཟབ་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	dress neatly and cleanly, be well-dressed	gzab sprod byed pa
གཟབ་སྤྲོས	dress[ed] up * best clothes	gzab spros
གཟབ་སྤྲོས་རྒྱག	dress up	gzab spros rgyag
གཟབ་སྤྲོས་རྒྱག་བྱེད	dress up	gzab spros rgyag byed
གཟབ་སྤྲོས་སྤྲས	dress up	gzab spros spras
གཟབ་བྱེད	to be careful/	gzab byed
གཟབ་མ	1) bundle, bunch; 2) letters in dbu can	gzab ma
གཟབ་བཞེས	1) 'khri khur/ spyod lam gyi careful effort; 2) dress up[ed] up * best clothes [h]	gzab bzhes
གཟབ་གཟབ	try to be very careful, pay attention, take care, careful, serious, attentive, cautious, watchful	gzab gzab
གཟབ་གཟབ་ངང	cautiously	gzab gzab ngang
གཟབ་གཟབ་ཅན	diligent, discreet, judicious, meticulous	gzab gzab can
གཟབ་གཟབ་གཏོང	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzab gtong
གཟབ་གཟབ་གཏོང་བ	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzab gtong ba
གཟབ་གཟབ་ཐོག་ཀློག་པ	peruse	gzab gzab thog klog pa
གཟབ་གཟབ་ནན་ནན	concentrate strongly gzab gzab nan nan gyis thag gcod byed	gzab gzab nan nan
པའི་དོན་གནད	decide the main point w strong concentration	pa'i don gnad
གཟབ་གཟབ་གནང	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzab gnang
གཟབ་གཟབ་གནང་བ	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzab gnang ba
གཟབ་གཟབ་གནང་ཨ	be careful, watch out, take care	gzab gzab gnang a
གཟབ་གཟབ་བྱིས་ཨ	be careful, watch out, take care	gzab gzab byis a
གཟབ་གཟབ་བྱེད	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzab byed
གཟབ་གཟབ་བྱེད་པ	to be careful, pay attention, take care	gzab gzab byed pa
གཟབ་གཟབ་མིན་པ	rash, reckless	gzab gzab min pa
གཟབ་གཟབ་མེད་པ	careless	gzab gzab med pa
གཟབ་གཟབ་གཟེངས་གཟེངས	w joy and strong interest make a great effort, try hard	gzab gzab gzengs gzengs
གཟབ་གཟབ་གཟེངས་གཟེངས་ཀྱིས	w joy and strong interest make a great effort, try hard	gzab gzab gzengs gzengs kyis
གཟབ་གཟེངས	w joy and strong interest make a great effort, try hard	gzab gzengs
གཟབ་གཟོབ	try to be very careful, pay attention, take care, careful, serious, attentive, cautious, watchful	gzab gzob
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གཏོང	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob gtong
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གཏོང་བ	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob gtong ba
གཟབ་གཟོབ་ནན་ནན	concentrate strongly gzab gzob nan nan gyis thag gcod byed	gzab gzob nan nan
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གནང	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob gnang
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གནང་བ	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob gnang ba
གཟབ་གཟོབ་བྱེད	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob byed
གཟབ་གཟོབ་བྱེད་པ	be careful, pay attention, take care, treat well, do 1's best for	gzab gzob byed pa
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གཟེངས་གཟེངས	w joy and strong interest make a great effort, try hard	gzab gzob gzengs gzengs
གཟབ་གཟོབ་གཟེངས་གཟེངས་ཀྱིས	w joy and strong interest make a great effort, try hard	gzab gzob gzengs gzengs kyis
གཟབ་ཡིག	{dbu can} letters	gzab yig
གཟབ་བརླིང	trying hard to be very careful, serious, prudent, careful	gzab brling
གཟབ་བརླིང་གྱིས་ཉན་པ	w careful effort, carefully	gzab brling gyis nyan pa
གཟབ་གཤར	dbu can and dbu med writing	gzab gshar
གཟབ་བཤར	dbu can and dbu med writing	gzab bshar
གཟབ་གསོལ	elaborate/ purifying puja w burning incense/juniper	gzab gsol
གཟབ་ལྷིང	careful work, stable/ steady and calm/ tranquil	gzab lhing
གཟབ་ལྷིངས	careful, cautious	gzab lhings
གཟབས	took care, was earnest/ serious	gzabs
གཟབས་པ	[p gzob pa] use care, diligence	gzabs pa
གཟབས་བྱེད	took care, was earnest/ serious	gzabs byed
གཟབས་མོ	elegant	gzabs mo
གཟབས་གཟབས	careful	gzabs gzabs
གཟའ	1) Planets, graha. The seven planets are the familiar sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn; the eighth is the fictitious and malevolent Rahu, causer of eclipses. Often a ninth is add...	gza'
གཟའ་སྐར	planets and stars	gza' skar
གཟའ་སྐར་མཁན	astronomer, astrologer	gza' skar mkhan
གཟའ་སྐར་དགེ་བ	auspicious stars	gza' skar dge ba
གཟའ་སྐར་དགེ་བའི	w good configuration/ auspices of planets and stars	gza' skar dge ba'i
གཟའ་སྐར་རྒྱུ་ལམ	the sky, the go la/ zodiacal path	gza' skar rgyu lam
གཟའ་སྐར་ངན་པ་ལ་འཛེམ	avoids going on a journey or doing anything at an inauspicious hour when the malignant stars are in the ascendant	gza' skar ngan pa la 'dzem
གཟའ་སྐར་ཉེར་བརྒྱད	the twenty-eight planets and stars; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	gza' skar nyer brgyad
གཟའ་སྐར་གནས	space/ sky	gza' skar gnas
གཟའ་སྐར་པ་སངས	venus	gza' skar pa sangs
གཟའ་སྐར་འཕྲོད་པའི	conjunction of the stars and planets for harmonious marriage, connection	gza' skar 'phrod pa'i
གཟའ་སྐར་འཕྲོད་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	auspicious coincidences	gza' skar 'phrod pa'i sbyor ba
གཟའ་སྐར་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་ལེགས་པར	{gza' skar ma yog po zhig dus la} ???	gza' skar sbyor byed legs par
གཟའ་སྐར་ཚེས་རྩིས	means of astronomical calculation	gza' skar tshes rtsis
གཟའ་སྐར་བཟང་པོ	good configuration/ auspices of planets and stars	gza' skar bzang po
གཟའ་སྐར་ལེགས་དུས	time w good configuration/ auspices of planets and stars	gza' skar legs dus
གཟའ་སྐར་ལྷག་པ	mercury	gza' skar lhag pa
གཟའ་ཁྱིམ	planetary houses	gza' khyim
གཟའ་འཁོར	* week, planet's orbit	gza' 'khor
གཟའ་འཁོར་སྔོན་མ	last week	gza' 'khor sngon ma
གཟའ་འཁོར་རྗེས་མ	next week	gza' 'khor rjes ma
གཟའ་འཁོར་གཉིས་རེའི་དུས་དེབ	biweekly periodical	gza' 'khor gnyis re'i dus deb
གཟའ་འཁོར་རེའི་དུས་དེབ	weekly periodical	gza' 'khor re'i dus deb
གཟའ་འཁོར་རེའི་ཚགས་པར	weekly newspaper	gza' 'khor re'i tshags par
གཟའ་གྲིབ	eclipse	gza' grib
གཟའ་དགུ	1) {nyi ma} sun. 2) {zla ba} moon. 3) {mig dmar} mars. 4) {gza' lhag} mercury. 5) {phur bu} Jupiter. 6) {ba wa sangs} venus. 7) {spen pa} Saturn. 8) {sgra gcan} eclipse-maker. 9) {mjug rings} comet	gza' dgu
གཟའ་དགུ་པ	the 9th planet, du ba mjug ring 2414	gza' dgu pa
གཟའ་རྒོད	Rahu	gza' rgod
གཟའ་རྒོད་སྲོག་གི་སྤུ་གྲི	protective deity	gza' rgod srog gi spu gri
གཟའ་རྒྱག	be struck w epilepsy/ stroke/ apoplexy	gza' rgyag
གཟའ་རྒྱག་པ	be struck w epilepsy/ stroke/ apoplexy	gza' rgyag pa
གཟའ་རྒྱབ་པ	stroke, apoplexy	gza' rgyab pa
གཟའ་སྒྲ་གཅན	Rahu [ecliper/ eater of sun and moon, lha ma yin gyi dbang po]	gza' sgra gcan
གཟའ་སྒྲིབ་ཀྱི་ནད	epilepsy	gza' sgrib kyi nad
གཟའ་བརྒྱད	the 8 planets	gza' brgyad
གཟའ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་གདུང་མ	beams of the eight rahulas	gza' brgyad kyi gdung ma
གཟའ་བརྒྱད་པ	the 8th planet [R'ahula' or Rahu, gza' sgra gcan, eater of the sun and moon]	gza' brgyad pa
གཟའ་ངན་པ	in CH divination gshed gza' etc. inauspicious planetary configurations	gza' ngan pa
གཟའ་ལྔ	five planets	gza' lnga
གཟའ་བཅུ	10 planets [Sun {nyi ma}. or ditya., Moon {zla ba}. or candra., Mars {mig dmar}. or an.g raka., Mercury {lhag pa}. or budha., Jupiter {phur bu}. or b.rhaspati., Venus {pa sangs}. or s'ukra., Saturn...	gza' bcu
གཟའ་ཆེན	the sun/ a star	gza' chen
གཟའ་ཆེན་རྒྱ་མཚོར་ལྷགས་པ་ལྟར	like the moon casting its reflection on the sea	gza' chen rgya mtshor lhags pa ltar
གཟའ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	the 8 great planets	gza' chen brgyad
གཟའ་མཆོག་བྱི་ཧྲི་པ་ཏྲ	1 of sde brgyad	gza' mchog byi hri pa tra
གཟའ་མཇུག་རིང	the comet du ba mjug ring	gza' mjug ring
གཟའ་ཉི་མ	sunday, sunday, Sunday	gza' nyi ma
གཟའ་གཏད	fixed reference point	gza' gtad
གཟའ་གཏད་དང་བྲལ་པ	free from reference point	gza' gtad dang bral pa
གཟའ་གཏད་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of all conceptions; free from reference point; see {gza' gtad}	gza' gtad dang bral ba
གཟའ་གཏད་དང་བྲལ་བའི་ལྟ་བ	Maharaja of Uddiyana and Vimalamitra's view which is free of all conceptions	gza' gtad dang bral ba'i lta ba
གཟའ་གཏད་བྲལ་བ	beyond reference point; without particular intent	gza' gtad bral ba
གཟའ་གཏད་མེད་པ	without reference point; no aim	gza' gtad med pa
གཟའ་དག	planets dag pa [lnga bsdus kyi nang gses, tshes longs rdzogs mtshams: in res gza [days], chu tshod, chu srang, breaths etc]	gza' dag
གཟའ་དུག	{gza' dug} med. herb	gza' dug
གཟའ་དུག་ནག་པོ	officinal plant used in apoplexy	gza' dug nag po
གཟའ་གདོན	unforeseen danger, evil, trouble	gza' gdon
གཟའ་བདག	chief of the planets, sun	gza' bdag
གཟའ་བདུད་དཀར་པོ	thermopsis barbata benth.	gza' bdud dkar po
གཟའ་བདུད་མགོ་དགུ	{gza' bdud mgo dgu} med. herb	gza' bdud mgo dgu
གཟའ་བདུད་ནག་པོ	med. herb gza' bdud/dug w blue- black flowers	gza' bdud nag po
གཟའ་བདུན	the 7 planets [nyi ma, zla ba, mig dmar, lhag pa, phur bu, pa sangs, spen pa]	gza' bdun
གཟའ་ནད	epilepsy	gza' nad
གཟའ་གནས་དྲུག	the six planetary measures	gza' gnas drug
གཟའ་སྣར	stars and planets	gza' snar
གཟའ་པ་སངས	Venus/ Friday [6th of the seven planets]	gza' pa sangs
གཟའ་སྤེན་པ	Saturn/ Saturday	gza' spen pa
གཟའ་ཕུར་བུ	1) Jupiter/ Thursday [5th of the 7 planets, light red, skyes khyim me bzhi'i chu tshod thig nyin dkyil 4,332, tshes dkyil bzhi stong bzhi brgya mda' 'dod drag cha 9,500 + gya bzhi; lha'i bla ma, = ...	gza' phur bu
གཟའ་ཕོག	epilepsy	gza' phog
གཟའ་ཕོག་པ	be struck w epilepsy/ stroke/ apoplexy	gza' phog pa
གཟའ་ཕྱེད་དག་པ	half correcting the planets [for the sake of correcting planetary positions gza' bar la zla rkang gis adding or subtracting, but since the nyi rkang is not added or subtracted	gza' phyed dag pa
ཡེཏ་ཅལླེད་ཧལཕ༹	corrected phyed dag zer	yet called half
གཟའ་བ	to get fixed on, to fix in a concept	gza' ba
གཟའ་བར་གྲུབ	constant/ provisional planetary motion	gza' bar grub
གཟའ་བར་བ	provisional position of the planets	gza' bar ba
གཟའ་མིག་དམར	Mars/ Tuesday	gza' mig dmar
གཟའ་འཛིན	eclipse of sun/ moon	gza' 'dzin
གཟའ་ཟིན	eclipse	gza' zin
གཟའ་ཟླ་བ	1) moon/ Monday [2nd of the 7 planets, 1st day of the week]	gza' zla ba
གཟའ་ཟླ་བ་ནས་སྤེན་པ་བར	weekday	gza' zla ba nas spen pa bar
གཟའ་ཡི་རྟེན	north star, Polaris	gza' yi rten
གཟའ་ཡི་གདོན	demonic rulers of planets causing epilepsy, rulers of planetary forces	gza' yi gdon
གཟའ་ཡི་རྣ་བ་འཛིན	Rahu	gza' yi rna ba 'dzin
གཟའ་ཡི་མ་ཁྱུད	moon	gza' yi ma khyud
གཟའ་ཡི་མུ་ཁྱུད	moon	gza' yi mu khyud
གཟའ་ཡིས་ཟིན་པ	eclipse	gza' yis zin pa
གཟའ་ཡིས་བཟུང	eclipse of the moon	gza' yis bzung
གཟའ་རོ	epileptic [pej], epilepsy, apoplexy, paralysis	gza' ro
གཟའ་རོང	gorge or valley or plain filled with boulders	gza' rong
གཟའ་དྷྲུ	planetary dhru	gza' dhru
གཟའ་ལྷག	mercury [Budhah]	gza' lhag
གཟའ་ལྷག་པ	wednesday	gza' lhag pa
གཟའ་ལྷགས་པ	wednesday	gza' lhags pa
གཟའི་བསྐང་གསོལ	mending and petition ritual for Rahula	gza'i bskang gsol
གཟའི་ཁམས	planetary elements [nyi ma mig dmar me yi khams, zla ba lhag pa chu yi khams, pa sangs spen pa sa yi khams, phur bu sgra gcan rlung gi khams, also, CH divination says phur bu shing, pa sangs lcags]	gza'i khams
གཟའི་རྟག་ལོངས	de la three days rtag longs three yod &, de las as for lunar days period = chu tshod 59, chu srang 3, dbugs four ri mkha' ri'i cha shas 16	gza'i rtag longs
གཟའི་རྟེན	fixed/ pole star	gza'i rten
གཟའི་བདག་པོ	sun	gza'i bdag po
གཟའི་ནང་གསེས་ཀྱི་བགྲོད་པ	the transit of the planets [zla ba'i rang 'gros myur bas nyi ma'i mdun nas 'char te rgyab tu nub, lhag sangs mjug ring gsum nyi ma dang, ,,]	gza'i nang gses kyi bgrod pa
གཟའི་རྣ་བ	epithet of rahu or sgra gcan	gza'i rna ba
གཟའི་རྣ་བ་འཛིན	Rahu	gza'i rna ba 'dzin
གཟའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	milky way	gza'i mu khyud
གཟའི་ཡུམ	religious work treating of planets	gza'i yum
གཟའི་དྷྲུ་བ	gza' dhru	gza'i dhru ba
གཟར	steep, rugged, precipitous [comp gzar po], peg, hook, wooden nail, kind of stan under a saddle, fringe, tassel, hang down	gzar
གཟར་མགོ	tobacco or du ba 'then spyad dgang gzar gyi mgo	gzar mgo
གཟར་ཅན	SA gzar po	gzar can
གཟར་ཆེན	under a saddle 'ding rgyu'i gos chen gyi stan	gzar chen
གཟར་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ	alias {pad dkar rgya mtsho} {spa gro chos rje}	gzar chen chos rje
གཟར་སྟན	stan under a saddle	gzar stan
གཟར་ཐག	rope for hanging something	gzar thag
གཟར་པོ	steep, rugged, precipitous, steep	gzar po
གཟར་པོའི་འགྲམ་དུ	at the brink of the precipice	gzar po'i 'gram du
གཟར་བ	steep, rugged, precipitous; {gzar ba, gzar ba, gzar ba, gzar} trans. v	gzar ba
གཟར་བུ	ladle	gzar bu
གཟར་བུ་མགོ	snake	gzar bu mgo
གཟར་བུ་འཕྱར	lifting up a ladle for a blow	gzar bu 'phyar
གཟར་མོ	steep, rugged, precipitous	gzar mo
གཟར་ཚད	degree of slope	gzar tshad
གཟར་ཟིན་པ	fell	gzar zin pa
གཟར་ཡུ	tobacco smoking dgang gzar gyi kan tshe'am mda'a	gzar yu
གཟར་རུ	wooden ladle	gzar ru
གཟར་སླང	peg for hanging things up	gzar slang
གཟལ་པ	rent or split, anything split	gzal pa
གཟལ་བ	[arch] bkas pa	gzal ba
གཟས	grazing	gzas
གཟས་པ	set about, be on the point of, prepare for, brandish	gzas pa
གཟས་པ་པོ	effigy. Syn ling ga - nya bo gzas pa	gzas pa po
གཟས་འཛིན	eclipse	gzas 'dzin
གཟས་ཟིན	eclipse [of the sun or moon]	gzas zin
གཟས་ས	nomad's living/ grazing place	gzas sa
གཟི	1) zi onyx	gzi
གཟའ་ནད་ཁྲག་ལ་བབས་པ་ཟི	stone, burnishing stone (Kind of onyx w zebralike banded designs, two eyes--regular,	gza' nad khrag la babs pa zi
ཐྲེཨེ་ཨེཡེས	-good, 9 eyes--best), shine, brightness, clearness, splendour, burnisher]	three eyes
གཟི་བཀྲག	luminosity	gzi bkrag
གཟི་རྒྱག་པ	gser ris la gzi yis emitting light	gzi rgyag pa
གཟི་རྔམ	dignity, majesty, awesomeness, brilliance and splendor 2416	gzi rngam
གཟི་ཅན	majestic	gzi can
གཟི་བརྗིད	(to be) radiant and resplendent; resplendent radiance	gzi brjid
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཀྱི་མིང་བྱང	board of honor	gzi brjid kyi ming byang
གཟི་བརྗིད་སྐྱེས	gold	gzi brjid skyes
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན	confident, dignified, radiant, splendid, charismatic, w overwhelming presence, majestic [brilliance], magnificent, honorable, esteemed	gzi brjid can
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན་ཀྱི་སྙན་གྲགས	honorable reputation	gzi brjid can kyi snyan grags
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	'ga' zhig dpa' ba'i rgyan gyis rang nyid gzi brjid che che dang gzhan dag nyam chung chung ltar ston pa'i rgyan zhig, among don rgyan	gzi brjid can gyi rgyan
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཅན་མ	lady of vast brilliance	gzi brjid can ma
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཆེ་བ	resplendent	gzi brjid che ba
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཆེན་པོ	1) great brilliance rngam zil che ba'am bkrag mdangs chen po; 2) {gzi brjid chen po} buddha	gzi brjid chen po
གཟི་བརྗིད་དང་ལྡན	confident, dignified, radiant, splendid, charismatic, w overwhelming presence, majestic [brilliance], magnificent, honorable, esteemed	gzi brjid dang ldan
གཟི་བརྗིད་དང་ལྡན་པ	confident, dignified, radiant, splendid, charismatic, w overwhelming presence, majestic [bril-	gzi brjid dang ldan pa
གཟི་བརྗིད་ལྡན་པ	brilliant	gzi brjid ldan pa
གཟི་བརྗིད་དཔལ་འབར	glorious splendid	gzi brjid dpal 'bar
གཟི་བརྗིད་འབར	blaze w radiance	gzi brjid 'bar
གཟི་བརྗིད་འབར་བ	blazing charisma and radiance	gzi brjid 'bar ba
གཟི་བརྗིད་བརྩོན་ལེན	fight for honor	gzi brjid brtson len
གཟི་བརྗིད་མཚུང་པ་མེད་པ	unparalled splendour	gzi brjid mtshung pa med pa
གཟི་བརྗིད་བཟང་པོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	gzi brjid bzang po
གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད	glorious/ brilliant light	gzi brjid 'od
གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད་སྟོང	1,00 glorious/ brilliant lights, glorious, magnificent	gzi brjid 'od stong
གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད་སྟོང་འབར	blazing w 1,00 glorious/ brilliant lights, glorious, magnificent	gzi brjid 'od stong 'bar
གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད་སྟོང་འབར་བ	blazing w 1,00 glorious/ brilliant lights, glorious, magnificent	gzi brjid 'od stong 'bar ba
གཟི་བརྗིད་ཡངས་པ	vast brilliance	gzi brjid yangs pa
གཟི་བརྗིད་རབ་འབར	dazzlingly resplendent	gzi brjid rab 'bar
གཟི་བརྗིད་གསལ་བ	clear brilliance, brilliant clarity	gzi brjid gsal ba
གཟི་བརྗིད་ལྷ་མོ	1 of sman bla brgyad	gzi brjid lha mo
གཟི་རྙིང	{gzi rnying} med. mineral	gzi rnying
གཟི་རྟེན	burnisher support	gzi rten
གཟི་སྟོབས་ལྡན་པ	magnificent, grand	gzi stobs ldan pa
གཟི་མཐུ	power of gzi brjid	gzi mthu
གཟི་དོམ	gdon gnod sel zhing mig khrag 'joms pa dang gzi byin skyed pa'i dom ra khyad par ba zhig	gzi dom
གཟི་གདངས་ཞིང་ལྤགས	the human skin of luster	gzi gdangs zhing lpags
གཟི་མདངས	1) good/ healthy complexion/ luster; 2) radiance, majestic brilliance, light; 3) {gzi mdangs} buddha	gzi mdangs
གཟི་མདངས་རྒྱས	spreading radiance	gzi mdangs rgyas
གཟི་མདངས་རྒྱས་པ	spreading radiance	gzi mdangs rgyas pa
གཟི་མདངས་ཅན	majestically brilliant, w good/ healthy complexion/ luster	gzi mdangs can
གཟི་རྡོ	med. mineral, bu snod kyi drod skyed	gzi rdo
གཟི་ལྡན	brilliance, brilliant	gzi ldan
གཟི་ལྡན་འབར་བ་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Majestic Blazing Retreat Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga tantras	gzi ldan 'bar ba mtshams kyi rgyud
གཟི་པང	gser ris la gzi 'od 'don dus lag gdan gyi pang leb/ shing leb	gzi pang
གཟི་བྱི་མཆོག་ཏུ་འབར	blazing w supreme brilliance/ supreme confident dignity	gzi byi mchog tu 'bar
གཟི་བྱིད	splendor	gzi byid
གཟི་བྱིན	overwhelming presence; splendor; shining	gzi byin
གཟི་བྱིན་ཅན	glorious	gzi byin can
གཟི་བྱིན་ཆེར་འབར	blaze w great glory	gzi byin cher 'bar
གཟི་བྱིན་ཉམས་པ	looking poor, emaciated, worn out	gzi byin nyams pa
གཟི་བྱིན་མཐའ་ཡས་པ	immeasurably glorious	gzi byin mtha' yas pa
གཟི་བྱིན་བར	flashing	gzi byin bar
གཟི་བྱིན་འབར	blazing w brilliance/ confident dignity	gzi byin 'bar
གཟི་འབར	shining brilliance	gzi 'bar
གཟི་མ	eye lash	gzi ma
གཟི་མིག་དགུ་པ	9 eye zi onyx [the best]	gzi mig dgu pa
གཟི་ཞགས	necklace/ mala of zi onyx	gzi zhags
གཟི་འོད	radiance, luster	gzi 'od
གཟི་འོད་འཕྲོ་བ	resplendent	gzi 'od 'phro ba
གཟི་འོད་འབར	shining w brilliant light	gzi 'od 'bar
གཟི་འོད་འབར་བ	a deity	gzi 'od 'bar ba
གཟི་ཡི་ཕྲེང་བ	The Necklace of Gzi, book by Chogyal Namkhai Norbu	gzi yi phreng ba
གཟི་རིས	gser chu byugs pa'i steng du gzi yis bris pa'i ri mo, designs drawn w the tip of the burnisher on gold	gzi ris
གཟི་རུ	a little nail	gzi ru
གཟི་ལོག	[blind [in 1 eye?]	gzi log
གཟི་བཤད	mediation, conciliation	gzi bshad
གཟིག	leopard [one of the {gcan gzan che dgu}	gzig
གཟིག་གོས	he who wears a leopard's skin, epithet of mahadeva	gzig gos
གཟིག་སྒམ	in a hole for trapping leopards a rdo sgam	gzig sgam
གཟིག་མཇུག	a sa bdag monster	gzig mjug
གཟིག་ཐིག་མ	leopard spots	gzig thig ma
གཟིག་གདན	leopard skin rug	gzig gdan
གཟིག་ནག	black panther	gzig nag
གཟིག་ལྤགས	leopard skin	gzig lpags
གཟིག་མོ	female leopard, porcupine	gzig mo
གཟིག་མོང	porcupine	gzig mong
གཟིག་ཚང་གི་སྒོ་འགྲམ་ལ	gla ba'i 'phag 'tshag	gzig tshang gi sgo 'gram la
གཟིག་རིས	leopard skin spots	gzig ris
གཟིག་ཤུབས	leopard skin quiver	gzig shubs
གཟིག་སློག	SA gzig mjug	gzig slog
གཟིགས	consider; 1) [(h).]. to see, fathom, gaze, look, watch, regard, understand, observe, perceive, witness, behold. 2) [(h).]. to buy. 3) to study. 4) to care for. 5) witnessing, fathom, care for, look...	gzigs
གཟིགས་སྐོར	tour, inspection, sightseeing [h]	gzigs skor
གཟིགས་སྐྱོང	taking care of, looking after	gzigs skyong
གཟིགས་སྐྱོང་དངུལ	relief funds	gzigs skyong dngul
གཟིགས་སྐྱོང་གནང་བ	give preferential treatment/ special consideration to, take care of, look after [h]	gzigs skyong gnang ba
གཟིགས་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	give preferential treatment/ special consideration to, take care of, look after [h]	gzigs skyong byed
གཟིགས་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	to give preferential treatment / special consideration to	gzigs skyong byed pa
གཟིགས་བསྐོར	tour, inspection, sightseeing [h]	gzigs bskor
གཟིགས་ཁོམས	great man's trunk	gzigs khoms
གཟིགས་མཁྱེན་སྤྲིང་ཡིག	phyi 'brel letter from 1 king[dom] to another	gzigs mkhyen spring yig
གཟིགས་དགོས	it must be regarded, ought to give	gzigs dgos
གཟིགས་མགོ་མ	leopard-head lady, {dbang phyug ma}	gzigs mgo ma
གཟིགས་མཆན	pecha w annotations	gzigs mchan
གཟིགས་རྟེན	offerings to be given w an interview white scarf etc. [h]	gzigs rten
གཟིགས་རྟེན་སྟོང་པ་མིན་ཙམ་དུ	simply to have something to offer to your eyes [I send you a few presents]	gzigs rten stong pa min tsam du
གཟིགས་རྟེན་སྟོང་མིན	not w/o interview offerings	gzigs rten stong min
གཟིགས་རྟོག	look at, think over, look after, take care of supervise, do surveillance [h]	gzigs rtog
གཟིགས་རྟོག་མཛད	look at, think over, look after, take care of supervise, do surveillance [h]	gzigs rtog mdzad
གཟིགས་ལྟངས	Syn {lta stangs}	gzigs ltangs
གཟིགས་སྟང	glance	gzigs stang
གཟིགས་སྟངས	way of looking, gaze [h]	gzigs stangs
གཟིགས་སྟངས་གསུམ	the three gazes	gzigs stangs gsum
གཟིགས་སྟེགས	review stand [h]	gzigs stegs
གཟིགས་ཐོ	almanac, calendar	gzigs tho
གཟིགས་དང	look	gzigs dang
གཟིགས་འདྲ་བའི་རི་དྭགས་ཤིག	cheetah	gzigs 'dra ba'i ri dwags shig
གཟིགས་སྣང	vision, [had a]. vision; a vision	gzigs snang
གཟིགས་སྣང་འོད་ཀྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the buddha field of visionary light	gzigs snang 'od kyi zhing khams
གཟིགས་སྣང་ལ	beheld a vision; syn {snang ba la} it seemed to him/her that	gzigs snang la
གཟིགས་པ	to buy	gzigs pa
གཟིགས་པ་སྒྲིབ་མེད་དག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of pure, unobscured vision [one of the sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu', because the meanings of his words are very clear]	gzigs pa sgrib med dag pa'i dpe byad
གཟིགས་པ་ལྔ	the five gzigs pa [1 yul ser skya [Kapilivastu?] two rigs rgyal po three rus bu ram shing pa sh'akya'i rgyud, four yum sgyu ma lha mdzes five dus snyigs ma lnga bdo] [h]	gzigs pa lnga
གཟིགས་པ་ལྔ་ལྡན	rgyal ba dam pa tog dkar gyi gzigs pa lnga [1 yul ser skya [Kapilivastu?] two rigs rgyal po three rus bu ram shing pa sh'akya'i rgyud, four yum sgyu ma lha mdzes five dus snyigs ma lnga bdo] [h]	gzigs pa lnga ldan
གཟིགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	1) regard/ esteem highly, give much consideration to, give many favors, like very much; 2) buddha gzigs pa chen po (/ [h]	gzigs pa chen po
གཟིགས་པ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five gzigs pa [1 yul ser skya [Kapilivastu?] two rigs rgyal po three rus bu ram shing pa sh'akya'i rgyud, four yum sgyu ma lha mdzes five dus snyigs ma lnga bdo] [h]	gzigs pa rnam pa lnga
གཟིགས་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure vision/ insight [h]	gzigs pa rnam par dag pa
གཟིགས་པས་མི་འདུག	when he looked there was nothing to be seen	gzigs pas mi 'dug
གཟིགས་དཔྱད	examine, inspect, analyze [h]	gzigs dpyad
གཟིགས་ཕུད	first day performance of an opera, preview of operas	gzigs phud
གཟིགས་བྱང	yi ge'i kha byang	gzigs byang
གཟིགས་བྱེད	eye	gzigs byed
གཟིགས་འབུལ	1) gzigs zhib tu 'bul ba; 2) offer testimony; 3) gzigs phud 'bul ba	gzigs 'bul
གཟིགས་འབུལ་ཞུ་བ	show/ present plays, art, books etc.] [h]	gzigs 'bul zhu ba
གཟིགས་མོ	[-- la phebs pa - to come to witness]	gzigs mo
གཟིགས་མོ་འབུལ་བ	offer testimony, present a play/ entertainment	gzigs mo 'bul ba
གཟིགས་མོ་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	come to witness [h], go to a play etc.	gzigs mo la phebs pa
གཟིགས་ཚུལ	way of looking/ knowing/ seeing [h]	gzigs tshul
གཟིགས་འཚལ	look, gaze 2418	gzigs 'tshal
གཟིགས་ཞིབ	look at closely, observation, supervision [h]	gzigs zhib
གཟིགས་ཞིབ་འབུལ་བ	look at closely, observe, examine supervise [h]	gzigs zhib 'bul ba
གཟིགས་གཟོས	reward [h]	gzigs gzos
གཟིགས་གཟོས་གནང	[give a] reward [h]	gzigs gzos gnang
གཟིགས་གཟོས་སྩལ	[give a] reward [h]	gzigs gzos stsal
གཟིགས་བཟོས	byas rjes kyi legs skyes	gzigs bzos
གཟིགས་བཟོས་སྐུལ་ལྕག	gzi brjid mtshan snyan nam legs skyes gnang ste skul lcag gtong ba	gzigs bzos skul lcag
གཟིགས་བཟོས་ཉེས་འགེལ	byas rjes bdag rkyen sprod pa dang byas nyes la nyes chad 'gel ba	gzigs bzos nyes 'gel
གཟིགས་བཟོས་རྟགས་མ	byas rjes 'jog mkhan la gnang ba'i rtags ma	gzigs bzos rtags ma
གཟིགས་བཟོས་ཡིག་རིགས	byas rjes 'jog mkhan la bdag rkyen gnang ba'i bka' gtan tshigs	gzigs bzos yig rigs
གཟིགས་བཟོས་གསོལ་རས	byas rjes kyi legs skyes	gzigs bzos gsol ras
གཟིགས་རོགས་གནང	please look on/ consider [me] [h]	gzigs rogs gnang
གཟིགས་ཤིག	Look upon [me]! [h]	gzigs shig
གཟིགས་སུ་བྱོན་པ	went to look upon	gzigs su byon pa
གཟིགས་སུ་གསོལ	praying that you look upon, asking to look upon	gzigs su gsol
གཟིང	SA 'dzings pa	gzing
གཟིང་བ	(tha mi dad pa gzings pa, gzing pa,, stand up [in disorderly way]	gzing ba
གཟིང་བའི་སྨ་ར་དང་སྨིན་མ	roughed up whiskers and eyebrows	gzing ba'i sma ra dang smin ma
གཟིངས	vessel, ship, float, ferry, to bristle, [comp. {'dzangs pa}; a ship	gzings
གཟིངས་རྐྱོང	candle, lamp	gzings rkyong
གཟིངས་ཁ	port, dock	gzings kha
གཟིངས་ཆུང	small vessel, boat	gzings chung
གཟིངས་ཆེན་པོ	large sea-going vessel	gzings chen po
གཟིངས་བཏང	{rgya mtshor gzings btang nas} sailed a ship over the ocean	gzings btang
གཟིངས་དང་སྲོག	{rgya mtsho'i nang du gzings dang srog zhig nas} in the middle of the ocean, the ship was wrecked by a storm, and the captain died	gzings dang srog
གཟིངས་གནང་དང	look!	gzings gnang dang
གཟིངས་པ	shipmaster, captain, bristled	gzings pa
གཟིངས་པའི་སྤུ	hair roughed up	gzings pa'i spu
གཟིངས་ལ་ཞུགས	{rgya mtshor gzings la zhugs} proceeded to go to sea	gzings la zhugs
གཟིངས་ལ་ཞུགས་ཕྱིན་པ	to board a ship going to	gzings la zhugs phyin pa
གཟིངས་ལ་ཞོན	rode in a ship	gzings la zhon
གཟིངས་ཤིག	behold	gzings shig
གཟིམ	[p gzims],, go to sleep/ bed, [h] former [h]	gzim
གཟིམ་ཁང	house, bedroom	gzim khang
གཟིམ་ཁམ	house, home, abode	gzim kham
གཟིམ་ཁེབས	quilt	gzim khebs
གཟིམ་ཁོམ	cloak bag	gzim khom
གཟིམ་ཁྱི	dog, pet dog	gzim khyi
གཟིམ་ཁྲི	bed [h]	gzim khri
གཟིམ་གུར	sleeping tent	gzim gur
གཟིམ་གྲོགས	bedfellow	gzim grogs
གཟིམ་འགག	guard at the door of the place Dalai and Panchen Lamas etc stay * [h]	gzim 'gag
གཟིམ་འགག་པ	waiter, valet, sentinel	gzim 'gag pa
གཟིམ་སྒོ	door [h]	gzim sgo
གཟིམ་ཆ	bedding, bed clothes	gzim cha
གཟིམ་ཆས	bedding [h]	gzim chas
གཟིམ་ཆུང	chamber, dwelling, house for retirement, living room	gzim chung
གཟིམ་ཆུང་ཆབ་ཞུགས	the bathing festival (ceremony early in the 8th Tibetan month)	gzim chung chab zhugs
གཟིམ་ཆུང་པ	chamberlain of the dalai lama's abode	gzim chung pa
གཟིམ་ཆུང་བ	little sleeping place set up for king's soldier bodyguard at time of dus smon lam chen po [h]	gzim chung ba
གཟིམ་འཇགས་གནང་རོགས	good night	gzim 'jags gnang rogs
གཟིམ་ཐུལ	sheep skins for night quarters	gzim thul
གཟིམ་སྡུམ	bed room	gzim sdum
གཟིམ་བརྡ	summons to bed	gzim brda
གཟིམ་གནས	lodging, place for spending the night	gzim gnas
གཟིམ་པ	to fall asleep	gzim pa
གཟིམ་པ་ལས	from sleep to waken	gzim pa las
གཟིམ་དཔོན	[h]	gzim dpon
གཟིམ་སྤོས	h. of spos, incense. ? [mss]	gzim spos
གཟིམ་སྤྱོད	toilet, bathroom	gzim spyod
གཟིམ་ཕྲུག	page, boy servant of a great man	gzim phrug
གཟིམ་བྲང	night-quarters, halting place	gzim brang
གཟིམ་མལ	(h) bed	gzim mal
གཟིམ་མལ་པ	chamberlain [h]	gzim mal pa
གཟིམ་དམག	gzim chung ba ste sa rten la 'khri ba'i bod snga rabs pa'i chas gos can gyi dmag mi [h]	gzim dmag
གཟིམ་འཛོ	bag for packing bedding when traveling [h]	gzim 'dzo
གཟིམ་ཞག	(h) abode	gzim zhag
གཟིམ་བཞུ	lamp [h]	gzim bzhu
གཟིམ་བཞུགས	went to bed [h]	gzim bzhugs
གཟིམ་གཟིམ	[h] gzim g.yog - servant, attendant, butler, chamberlain [h] gzim g.yog rgyug mkhan - servant, attendant, butler, chamberlain [h]	gzim gzim
གཟིམ་ཤག	house, home, abode	gzim shag
གཟིམ་ས	bedstead with gzim cha or mal cha bedding on it	gzim sa
གཟིམས	posture	gzims
གཟིམས་རྐྱོང	for sleeping 'ding rgyu'i rkyong gdan [h]	gzims rkyong
གཟིམས་ཁང	house [h]	gzims khang
གཟིམས་ཁང་པ	chamberlain [h]	gzims khang pa
གཟིམས་ཁེབས	nyal chas 'gebs byed [h]	gzims khebs
གཟིམས་ཁྲི	bed[stead] [h]	gzims khri
གཟིམས་གུར	tent	gzims gur
གཟིམས་སྒོ་མཚན་འབྱར་མ	house's door name/ address [h]	gzims sgo mtshan 'byar ma
གཟིམས་ཆ	bedding	gzims cha
གཟིམས་ཆས	mal cha'am things involved w sleeping [h]	gzims chas
གཟིམས་ཐུལ	zla gam mam thul ba [h]	gzims thul
གཟིམས་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa sleep [h]; 2) [h] particle for things involved w sleep (/ [h]	gzims pa
གཟིམས་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ	chamberlain mkhan po	gzims dpon mkhan po
གཟིམས་ཕྲུག	nyal gzan w long pile [h]	gzims phrug
གཟིམས་འབོག	1) mal chas blug snod 'bog 'jol; 2) Tibetan govt dbang sgyur gras 2419 nobles gyi g.yog pos rgyab tu 'khyer rgyu'i 'bog sgril [h]	gzims 'bog
གཟིམས་མལ	bedroom	gzims mal
གཟིམས་མལ་ནས་བཞེངས	got out of bed	gzims mal nas bzhengs
གཟིམས་མལ་ནས་བཤེངས	got out of bed [h]	gzims mal nas bshengs
གཟིམས་མལ་བ	early Tibetan kings bedchamber servant, like the later gzim dpon [h]	gzims mal ba
གཟིམས་བཞུགས	went to bed	gzims bzhugs
གཟིམས་ལམ	dream [h] [h]	gzims lam
གཟིམས་ལམ་བརྟག་པ	[h]	gzims lam brtag pa
གཟིམས་ཤག	house [h]	gzims shag
གཟིམས་ས	bed, sleeping place [h]	gzims sa
གཟིར	1) be oppressed/ tormented afflicted, suffer; 2) thrust stare at/ about, gaze, aim at; 3) [f 'tshir] will squeeze, wring, crush	gzir
གཟིར་རྔམས	imposing/ majestic appearance	gzir rngams
གཟིར་བལྟས	wrathful/ threatening gaze	gzir bltas
གཟིར་པོ	accurate/ sharp	gzir po
གཟིར་བ	suffer, be afflicted, harassed, troubled, overpowered, tormented, aim, to gaze	gzir ba
གཟིར་དབབ་གཅད་གསུམ	destructive magic to visualize the target, invoke the wrathful deities, and cut	gzir dbab gcad gsum
གཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ	frighten	gzil gyis gnon pa
གཟིལ་བུན་པ	SA spu zing byed pa	gzil bun pa
གཟུ་གང་ཚད	'dom pa gang gi tshad	gzu gang tshad
གཟུ་གུ	tail	gzu gu
གཟུ་རྔས	prop	gzu rngas
གཟུ་གཅོད	arbitrate	gzu gcod
གཟུ་འདེབས	arbitrate	gzu 'debs
གཟུ་པ	[arch] dpang po, 'dum pa	gzu pa
གཟུ་དཔང	witness, mediator, honest & truthful witness	gzu dpang
གཟུ་བ	a lever, bar	gzu ba
གཟུ་བོ	1) rtsod gleng bar 'dum byed mkhan; 2) straightforward, genuine, right, upright, honest, moral	gzu bo
གཟུ་བོར་གནས་པ	be impartial and straightforward, be on the side of honesty	gzu bor gnas pa
གཟུ་བློ	mind that is straightforward, genuine, right, upright, honest	gzu blo
གཟུ་བློན	honest minister distinguishing true and false	gzu blon
གཟུ་བློའི་གཏམ	straightforward, genuine, right, upright, honest candid talk	gzu blo'i gtam
གཟུ་མས་བཀོད	gsham 'og nas thag gcod pa,//lugs dang 'gal ba'i gzu mas bkod byas mi chog	gzu mas bkod
གཟུ་འཚོ་མ	[arch] prostitute	gzu 'tsho ma
གཟུ་བཟང	Indian king gzu bzang	gzu bzang
གཟུ་ལུམ	pretentious, false, rash, impetuous	gzu lum
གཟུ་ལུམ་ཅན	lying, liar	gzu lum can
གཟུ་ལུམ་དུ་སྨྲ	telling lies	gzu lum du smra
གཟུ་ལུམ་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	speaking falsehood	gzu lum du smra ba
གཟུ་ལུམ་བྱེད་པ	act rashly, act rashly	gzu lum byed pa
གཟུ་ལུམ་རང་བཟོ	fabricating/ making up something	gzu lum rang bzo
གཟུ་ལུམས	see {gzu lum} E.g. @ R75: 331.4 [mss]	gzu lums
གཟུག	top, peak, summit, ache, pain, piece, bit form of {'dzugs}, {btsugs}	gzug
གཟུག་གེ་བ	hurt, give pain	gzug ge ba
གཟུག་རྒྱག	suffer, hurt	gzug rgyag
གཟུག་རྣམ	apprehension aspect	gzug rnam
གཟུག་པ	babble, hear, sustain	gzug pa
གཟུག་བ	apprehend	gzug ba
གཟུག་བ་འཛིན་པ	mental habit	gzug ba 'dzin pa
གཟུག་བྱ	object held	gzug bya
གཟུག་མོ	porcupine	gzug mo
གཟུག་འཛིན་གྲངས་མཉམ་པ	proponents of an equal # of subject and objects	gzug 'dzin grangs mnyam pa
གཟུག་གཟེར	headache	gzug gzer
གཟུག་ཡུལ	apprehended object	gzug yul
གཟུག་ཤ་ཁོག་གཅིག	part divided into four	gzug sha khog gcig
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	SA gzugs sku	gzugs kyi sku
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five kinds of luminosity of rupakaya	gzugs kyi sku'i 'od gsal rnam pa lnga
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	visible form base, form source, sphere of the visible,	gzugs kyi skye mched
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་གཉིས	the two types of form ayatanas #	gzugs kyi skye mched gnyis
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	form realms [of form mind matter, form-constituent] Heaven of the form realm [rupa-dhatu]	gzugs kyi khams
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བཅུ	10 form-dhatus of the 18	gzugs kyi khams bcu
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོ	of the first absorption	gzugs kyi khams bsam gtan dang po
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི	of the 1st absorption gzugs kyi khams bsam gtan dang po'i	gzugs kyi khams bsam gtan dang po'i
གཉིས་པོའི	of the 2nd absorption gzugs kyi khams bsam gtan dang po'i	gnyis po'i
གསུམ་པོ	of the third absorption gzugs kyi khams bsam gtan dang po'i	gsum po
གསུམ་པོའི	of the 3rd absorption	gsum po'i
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་གླུད	nad pa'i srog tshab tu glud du gtong ba'i 'dra gzugs	gzugs kyi glud
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	form of deity which arises from light emanating from the mantra	gzugs kyi sgra
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	things of form	gzugs kyi dngos po
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་འཆིང་བ	bond of form, attachment to the form realm	gzugs kyi 'ching ba
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of form [vessel and essence]	gzugs kyi 'jig rten
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ	gzugs kyi nyi ma	gzugs kyi nyi ma
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྙེ་མ	madam of a whorehouse	gzugs kyi snye ma
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཐུང	short in size, dwarf	gzugs kyi thung
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	finality of form	gzugs kyi mtha'
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of form	gzugs kyi 'du shes
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་འདོད་ཆགས	attachment to form [the realm of form]	gzugs kyi 'dod chags
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ	form things kyi rtsom gzhi'i atoms	gzugs kyi rdul phra rab
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ་མ	goddess representing visible form [white, holds a mirror]	gzugs kyi rdo rje ma
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ	the aspect of form	gzugs kyi rnam pa
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	perception of form	gzugs kyi rnam par rig pa
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregate of forms	gzugs kyi phung po
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the fifteen aspects of the aggregate of forms	gzugs kyi phung po bco lnga
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་དབྱེ་བ་གཉིས	the two divisions of the skandha of form	gzugs kyi phung po dbye ba gnyis
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལས་ཁམས་བཅུ	10 elements from the aggregate of forms [of the 18 elements]	gzugs kyi phung po las khams bcu
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མ	the mudr w form	gzugs kyi phyag rgya ma
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	ming du snang ba, gzugs su snang ba, phyag rgyar snang ba), 1 of chos brgyad	gzugs kyi bye brag
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་སྣང་བ་བཞི	the 4 particular appearances of form (sgrar snang ba	gzugs kyi bye brag tu snang ba bzhi
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 divisions of form	gzugs kyi dbye ba nyer lnga
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་གཞི	form-basis	gzugs kyi gzhi
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བོ	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	gzugs kyi zla bo
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	form-object	gzugs kyi yul
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སས་བསྡུས་པའི་སེམས	a mind of the form realm	gzugs kyi sas bsdus pa'i sems
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ	becoming/ craving of the form realm	gzugs kyi srid pa
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྲེད་པ	carnal desire	gzugs kyi sred pa
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	form deity	gzugs kyi lha
གཟུགས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	comprised of physical form	gzugs kyis bsdus pa
གཟུགས་ཀྱིས་འཚོ	prostitute	gzugs kyis 'tsho
གཟུགས་ཀྱིས་འཚོ་བ	that makes her body the means of livelihood, prostitute, harlot	gzugs kyis 'tsho ba
གཟུགས་དཀའ	difficult & tortuous body, frog	gzugs dka'
གཟུགས་སྐུ	dmigs bcas bsod nams kyi tshogs mthar phyin pas from the viewpoint of students pure and impure gzhan don du sambhogakaya chags can &, nirmanakaya chags bral gyi gzugs snang ston pa'i sku'o, the bod...	gzugs sku
གཟུགས་སྐུ་གཉིས	Two rupakayas. Sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya	gzugs sku gnyis
གཟུགས་སྐུ་འབྱུང་བ	will manifest the rupakaya	Gzugs sku 'byung ba
གཟུགས་སྐུ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	Spontaneously present luminosity of the rupakayas. The display during the bardo of dharmata	gzugs sku lhun grub kyi 'od gsal
གཟུགས་སྐུའི་སྣང་བ	the display of rupakaya/form bodies	gzugs sku'i snang ba
གཟུགས་སྐུར་བཞེངས	to incarnate, take form	gzugs skur bzhengs
གཟུགས་ཁམས	1) lus khams; 2) form relmas [dhyana realms above Mt Meru in space, dvangs pa'i rang bzhin gyi realm of form, visible form element, 1 of the 18 dhatus]	gzugs khams
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 elements of the form realm gzugs khams kyi sgom spang brgya	gzugs khams kyi khams bcu bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་སྒོམ་སྤང་ལྔ	the five things to be abandoned in the form realm by the path of meditation [ma rig pa, 'dod chags, nga rgyal, 'jig lta, mthar lta]	gzugs khams kyi sgom spang lnga
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་སྒོམ་སྤང་གསུམ	in the form realm to be abandoned by the path of meditation [ma rig pa, 'dod chags, nga rgyal}	gzugs khams kyi sgom spang gsum
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་གནས་བཞི	the four levels of the form realm	gzugs khams kyi gnas bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་གནས་རིགས་བཅུ་བདུན	the 17 Heavens of the form realm	gzugs khams kyi gnas rigs bcu bdun
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་གནས་རིས་བཅུ་བདུན	Seventeen abodes of the Realms of Form. The four Dhyana Realms of three each plus the five Pure Abodes. For details, see Mipham Rinpoche's Gateway to Knowledge	gzugs khams kyi gnas ris bcu bdun
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་གནས་རིས་བཞི	Four domains of the Realm of Form. The abodes of beings who have cultivated the meditative states of the 'four dhyanas.'	gzugs khams kyi gnas ris bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ས་བཞི	the four levels of the form realm gzugs khams kyi sas bsdus pa'i 'du shes perception of all the levels of the form realm	gzugs khams kyi sa bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁམས་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 abodes of the Realm of form [in Kalachakra ri rab kyi dpral ba'i cha bzhi la, 'og min, shin tu mthong, mi gdung ba, mi che ba bcas bzhi gnas, sna yi cha bzhir, 'bras bu che, bsod nams skyes,...	gzugs khams bcu drug
གཟུགས་ཁམས་བཅུ་བདུན	the 17 Heavens of the form realm	gzugs khams bcu bdun
གཟུགས་ཁམས་བཅུ་བདུན་གནས	the seventeen abodes of the form realms gzugs khams chags tshul gyi rig pa physiology gzugs khams na lung ma bstan gsum {rnam smin las skyes pa dang, spyod lam pa dang, sprul pa'i sems gsum bsdus p...	gzugs khams bcu bdun gnas
གཟུགས་ཁམས་གནས་རིགས	tshangs pa'i mdun na 'don, tshangs chen, 'od chung, tshad med 'od, 'od gsal, dge chung, tshad me dge, dge rgyas, sprin med, bsod nams skyes, 'bras bu che, mi che ba, mi gdung ba, gya nom snang ba, ...	gzugs khams gnas rigs
གཟུགས་ཁམས་གནས་རིགས་བཅུ་དྲུག	Sixteen Abodes of the Realms of Form	gzugs khams gnas rigs bcu drug
གཟུགས་ཁམས་གནས་རིགས་བཅུ་བདུན	seventeen form realm heavens (tshangs ris	gzugs khams gnas rigs bcu bdun
གཟུགས་ཁམས་གནས་རིས་བཅུ་བདུན	the 17 Heavens of the form realm	gzugs khams gnas ris bcu bdun
གཟུགས་ཁམས་པ	form realm	gzugs khams pa
གཟུགས་ཁམས་མི་བདེ་བ	unwell	gzugs khams mi bde ba
གཟུགས་ཁམས་བཞི	the four form realms [of the 1st-4th dhyanas]	gzugs khams bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁམས་གཤགས་ལས	anatomy	gzugs khams gshags las
གཟུགས་ཁམས་ས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 stages of the Realm of Form	gzugs khams sa bco brgyad
གཟུགས་ཁམས་བསམ་གཏན་བཞི	the four dhyanas of the form realms	gzugs khams bsam gtan bzhi
གཟུགས་ཁྲག	blood of the body	gzugs khrag
གཟུགས་མཁན་སྤྱི་འགྲེས	to adopt the outer appearance, image	gzugs mkhan spyi 'gres
གཟུགས་གྱི་སྣང་བ	visual perception	gzugs gyi snang ba
གཟུགས་གྱི་ཕུང་པོ	form aggregate	gzugs gyi phung po
གཟུགས་གྲུབ་རྟགས་མཚན	color and shape having gyi rnam 'gyur ram yongs mthong gi rtags mtshan	gzugs grub rtags mtshan
གཟུགས་སྒྲ	sights and sounds	gzugs sgra
གཟུགས་ངན	ugly looking	gzugs ngan
གཟུགས་མངས	sala tree incense [spos dkar]	gzugs mngas
གཟུགས་སྔགས	{rig sngags}	gzugs sngags
གཟུགས་ཅན	[entities] having [physical] form	gzugs can
ཅན་ཐུགས	heart formed of mantra]	can thugs
གཟུགས་ཅན་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	things w form 2422	gzugs can kyi dngos po
གཟུགས་ཅན་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཅུ	the 10 dhatus w form	gzugs can skye mched bcu
གཟུགས་ཅན་ཁམས་བཅུ	the 10 dhatus w form [dbang po lnga and yul lnga]	gzugs can khams bcu
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཅུ	the 10 dhatus w form [dbang po lnga and yul lnga]	gzugs can gyi skye mched bcu
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས	elements having physical form	gzugs can gyi khams
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས་ལྔ	the five elements with physical form	gzugs can gyi khams lnga
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས་བཅུ	the 10 dhatus w form [dbang po lnga and yul lnga]	gzugs can gyi khams bcu
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་དགྲ	enemy w physical form	gzugs can gyi dgra
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	[=] form having rgyan	gzugs can gyi rgyan
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 kinds of [=] form having rgyan	gzugs can gyi rgyan nyi shu
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	all that is touchable and visible	gzugs can gyi dngos po
གཟུགས་ཅན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཅན	the actual thing exemplified itself presented in the form of an example, and that too w another example	gzugs can gyi gzugs can
གཟུགས་ཅན་སྙིང་པོ	king bimbis'ara [king who lived at the time of Buddha]	gzugs can snying po
གཟུགས་ཅན་ཕྲ་མོ	a small object	gzugs can phra mo
གཟུགས་ཅན་མ	beautiful woman	gzugs can ma
གཟུགས་ཅན་མ་ཡིན	unsubstantial	gzugs can ma yin
གཟུགས་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པ	w/o form [shape color visibility etc.]	gzugs can ma yin pa
གཟུགས་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	the skandhas that are not form [tshor ba, 'du byed, 'du shes, rnam shes]	gzugs can ma yin pa'i phung po
གཟུགས་ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings w/o form	gzugs can ma yin pa'i sems can
གཟུགས་ཅན་མིན་རྣམ་རིག་པ	perception of what is w/o form gzugs can gzugs rnams la lta ba rnam par	gzugs can min rnam rig pa
ཐར་པ་བརྒྱད	"Having form, he sees form." [Tib. version]. "Without destroying his recognition of internal form, he sees external form" gzugs can gzugs rnams la lta ba rnam par	thar pa brgyad
གཟུགས་ཅན་གཟུགས་ལ་ལྟ་བའི་རྣམ་ཐར	liberation from form and the view of form	gzugs can gzugs la lta ba'i rnam thar
གཟུགས་བཅོས	1) deities bodies etc. bzos pa; 2) dngos gnas ma yin pa'i gzugs	gzugs bcos
གཟུགས་ཆེན	burly	gzugs chen
གཟུགས་མཆོག	glorious body	gzugs mchog
གཟུགས་མཆོག་མངའ་ཐ	with glorious body	gzugs mchog mnga' tha
གཟུགས་འཆར་བ་བྱེད	cause an image to be reflected	gzugs 'char ba byed
གཟུགས་འཆར་བྱེད	mirror	gzugs 'char byed
གཟུགས་རྗེས་གྲིབ་འབྲང	inseparable	gzugs rjes grib 'brang
གཟུགས་ལྗིད	body weight	gzugs ljid
གཟུགས་ལྗིད་ལྕི་པོའི་རིམ་པ	a heavy weight [sports]	gzugs ljid lci po'i rim pa
གཟུགས་ལྗིད་ཡང་བའི་རིམ་པ	a light weight [sports]	gzugs ljid yang ba'i rim pa
གཟུགས་ལྗིད་ཡང་ཤོས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	a bantam [lightest] weight [sports]	gzugs ljid yang shos kyi rim pa
གཟུགས་ཉིད	matter	gzugs nyid
གཟུགས་ཉེ་བར་ལེན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	the skandhas that perpetuate/ grasp form	gzugs nye bar len pa'i phung po
གཟུགས་ཉེར་ལྔ	the five skandhas that perpetuate/ grasp form	gzugs nyer lnga
གཟུགས་གཉིས	in context of {gzugs shes pa} and {ldan min 'du byed} 1) {dbyibs kyi gzugs}. 2) {kha dog gi gzugs}	gzugs gnyis
གཟུགས་མཉམ	alike, similar, =, the same	gzugs mnyam
གཟུགས་བརྙན	1) statue, picture, image,, representation; 2) [mirror] reflection; 3) mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba; 4) facade; 5) manifestation; 6) dummy, effigy	gzugs brnyan
གཟུགས་བརྙན་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	representational mandala	gzugs brnyan dkyil 'khor
གཟུགས་བརྙན་བཀྲ	appear/ be reflected [images]	gzugs brnyan bkra
གཟུགས་བརྙན་བཀྲ་བ	appear/ be reflected [images]	gzugs brnyan bkra ba
གཟུགས་བརྙན་སྐྱེ་གནས	mirror	gzugs brnyan skye gnas
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	representational mandala	gzugs brnyan gyi dkyil 'khor
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གྱི་དགའ་བ	cause of joy not really seen but only a reflection showing ornament, among dga' ba'i rgyan	gzugs brnyan gyi dga' ba
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	grub mtha' log pas btags pa'i bdag tu 'dzin pa lta bu	gzugs brnyan gyi rgyu mtshan
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གྱི་སྣང་བ	{snang la rang bzhin med pas gzugs brnyan gyi snang ba lta bu} as in a reflection, things appear but have no reality of their own	gzugs brnyan gyi snang ba
གཟུགས་བརྙན་འཆར་འཕྲུལ	movie projector	gzugs brnyan 'char 'phrul
གཟུགས་བརྙན་འཆར་བྱེད	mirror gzugs brnyan 'char byed 'phrul 'khor movie projector	gzugs brnyan 'char byed
གཟུགས་བརྙན་འདྲི་བ	a picture someone has made	gzugs brnyan 'dri ba
གཟུགས་བརྙན་སྣ་ཚོགས	various reflections	gzugs brnyan sna tshogs
གཟུགས་བརྙན་པ	reflection	gzugs brnyan pa
གཟུགས་བརྙན་རྫོགས	complete with all the reflected images; in sgra thal 'gyur, in this dimension the animate and inanimate worlds manifest like a reflection in a mirror, and nothing material exists	gzugs brnyan rdzogs
གཟུགས་བརྙན་ལོངས་སྐུ	the reflected sambhogakaya	gzugs brnyan longs sku
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གསལ་རྫོགས	vivid and complete image 2423	gzugs brnyan gsal rdzogs
གཟུགས་སྟོབས	bodily strength/ size gzugs stobs gzi brji dpa' rtsal dang ldan	gzugs stobs
གཟུགས་བརྟན	reflection [of an image in a mirror]	gzugs brtan
གཟུགས་བསྟན་ནས	appeared to him	gzugs bstan nas
གཟུགས་ཐག	dharani cord	gzugs thag
གཟུགས་ཐང	quarters [of yak meat], healthy	gzugs thang
གཟུགས་ཐུང	gzugs dkyus short	gzugs thung
གཟུགས་ཐོབ་པ	attain form	gzugs thob pa
གཟུགས་མཐོང་གློག་འཕྲིན	TV	gzugs mthong glog 'phrin
གཟུགས་མཐོང་གློག་འོད་ཡོ་བྱད	fluoroscope	gzugs mthong glog 'od yo byad
གཟུགས་མཐོང་རླུང་འཕྲིན	television	gzugs mthong rlung 'phrin
གཟུགས་དང་བ	clear/ subtle form; dbang po having the support of consciousness	gzugs dang ba
གཟུགས་དང་གཟུགས་མེད	form and the formless	gzugs dang gzugs med
གཟུགས་དང་གཟུགས་མེད་པ	form and the formless	gzugs dang gzugs med pa
གཟུགས་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དར་ཞིང	gaining the finest form and pleasure	gzugs dang longs spyod dar zhing
གཟུགས་དབ༹ང་པ	clear /subtle form	gzugs dvang pa
གཟུགས་དྭང་པ	clear form, subtle form	gzugs dwang pa
གཟུགས་དྭངས་པ	sense faculty dhatus's dvangs pa. clear/ subtle form	gzugs dwangs pa
གཟུགས་དུ་མེད	imperceptible	gzugs du med
གཟུགས་དོན	apprehended object	gzugs don
གཟུགས་འདས་རིག་པ	metaphysics	gzugs 'das rig pa
གཟུགས་འདི་ནི་འདི་ལྟ་བུ	this form is such and such	gzugs 'di ni 'di lta bu
གཟུགས་རྡུལ་གྱི་མཐའ	the finality of material atoms / form-particles	gzugs rdul gyi mtha'
གཟུགས་སྡུག་པ	beautiful form/ body	gzugs sdug pa
གཟུགས་ན་སྤྱོད་པ	walking in the world of form	gzugs na spyod pa
གཟུགས་ནས་རྣམ་མཀྱེན་གྱི་བར	from A to z, from form to omniscience gzugs nas rnam mkhyen gyi bsdus pa'i	gzugs nas rnam mkyen gyi bar
གཟུགས་ནས་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་གྱི་བར	from A to Z, from form to omniscience	gzugs nas rnam mkhyen gyi bar
གཟུགས་ནུས་རིག་གནས	physics	gzugs nus rig gnas
གཟུགས་རྣམ	perceiving subject aspect	gzugs rnam
གཟུགས་རྣམ་པ་སྣང་མཛད	form is Vairochana	gzugs rnam pa snang mdzad
གཟུགས་རྣམས	phenomena	gzugs rnams
གཟུགས་སྣང	apparent forms	gzugs snang
གཟུགས་སྣང་འཛིན་ནུས་པའི་མིག་ཤེས	the visual consciousness capable of apprehending perceptions of form	gzugs snang 'dzin nus pa'i mig shes
གཟུགས་པ	"planted", made, body; ft. of {'dzugs pa}	gzugs pa
གཟུགས་པོ	body	gzugs po
གཟུགས་པོ་བཀྲུས་པ	to bathe	gzugs po bkrus pa
གཟུགས་པོ་སྐུམ་པ	contract, shrink	gzugs po skum pa
གཟུགས་པོ་སྐྱོ་པོ	weak/ poor [health]	gzugs po skyo po
གཟུགས་པོ་འཁོར་བ	in the mother's womb a fetus chags pa	gzugs po 'khor ba
གཟུགས་པོ་འཁྲུ་བ	bathe	gzugs po 'khru ba
གཟུགས་པོ་འཁྲུད་པ	bathe, take a bath	gzugs po 'khrud pa
གཟུགས་པོ་དགུར་བ	stoop	gzugs po dgur ba
གཟུགས་པོ་ཆུང་བ	short	gzugs po chung ba
གཟུགས་པོ་གཏེ་པོ	a short person, dwarf	gzugs po gte po
གཟུགས་པོ་ཐང་ངམ	are you strong?	gzugs po thang ngam
གཟུགས་པོ་ཐང་པོ	strong	gzugs po thang po
གཟུགས་པོ་མཐོ་བ	a tall person	gzugs po mtho ba
གཟུགས་པོ་འཐང་པོ	bodily defect, personal deformity	gzugs po 'thang po
གཟུགས་པོ་བདེ་པོ	healthy	gzugs po bde po
གཟུགས་པོ་མི་བདེ	unbearable, distressed	gzugs po mi bde
གཟུགས་པོ་མི་བདེ་བ	feeling bad gzugs po g.ya' ba'i nad - scratching the body for relief	gzugs po mi bde ba
གཟུགས་པོའི	physical	gzugs po'i
གཟུགས་པོའི་མཐོ་ཚད	bodily height	gzugs po'i mtho tshad
གཟུགས་པོའི་ནང་གི་ཆགས་སྟངས	anatomy	gzugs po'i nang gi chags stangs
གཟུགས་པོའི་བང་ཚད	size of body	gzugs po'i bang tshad
གཟུགས་ཕུང	{sha khrag rus pa'i gzugs phung 'dra ba} like a mass of flesh, blood and bones	gzugs phung
གཟུགས་ཕུང་པོ	form skandha	gzugs phung po
གཟུགས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect form	gzugs phun sum tshogs pa
གཟུགས་ཕྲ་བ	subtle form, atom	gzugs phra ba
གཟུགས་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle form, small body	gzugs phra mo
གཟུགས་བག་ཆག་དྲན་པ	recollection	gzugs bag chag dran pa
གཟུགས་བུ	simile, metaphor	gzugs bu
གཟུགས་བྱད	face and form	gzugs byad
གཟུགས་བྱད་ངན་པ	ugly figure and face/ image	gzugs byad ngan pa
གཟུགས་བྱད་མཛེས་པ	to be beautiful	gzugs byad mdzes pa
གཟུགས་བྱད་ལ་ལེགས་ཉེས	beautiful or ugly	gzugs byad la legs nyes
གཟུགས་བྱད་ལེགས་པ	of lovely beauty, a lovely girl whose beauty [...]	gzugs byad legs pa
གཟུགས་བྱས	the body of {rgyal po'i gzugs byas} - this person who has the body of a king	gzugs byas
གཟུགས་བྱེད་མཛེས་པ	handsome appearance	gzugs byed mdzes pa
གཟུགས་དབྱིབས	1) obstructively touchable	gzugs dbyibs
ཤཔེ	forms; 2) form/ figure/ shape of the body * physical appearance	shape
གཟུགས་དབྱིབས་རིག་གནས	geometry	gzugs dbyibs rig gnas
གཟུགས་མ	graceful, silver	gzugs ma
གཟུགས་མ་ཡིན་པ	that are not form	gzugs ma yin pa
གཟུགས་མང	1) Vishnu; 2) sun; 3) Kamadeva; 4) Avalokiteshvara; 5) the deity dbang phyug chen po; 6) many forms	gzugs mang
གཟུགས་མི་སྡུག་པ	bodily ugliness	gzugs mi sdug pa
གཟུགས་མེད	arupyaloka, world of formlessness, immaterial, SA chen po lnga, shapeless, without form, etherial, spiritual	gzugs med
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་མུ་བཞི	four formless spheres of finality	gzugs med kyi skye mched mu bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཞི	four states of formless spheres	gzugs med kyi skye mched bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁམས	Formless Realms	gzugs med kyi khams
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བཞི	Four Formless Realms	gzugs med kyi khams bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁམས་གསུམ	the three elements of the formless realms	gzugs med kyi khams gsum
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག་བཞི	the four samapattis of the formless realms	gzugs med kyi snyoms 'jug bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་གནས་བཞི	Formless states, four	gzugs med kyi gnas bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཐར་བཞི	the four liberations of the formless realms [their samadhis shes rab mtshungs ldan dang bcas pa, from defiled attachments of the form realm and realms lower than themself liberating four absorption...	gzugs med kyi rnam thar bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྲིད་པ	becoming of the formless realm	gzugs med kyi srid pa
གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྲེད་པ	craving of the formless [realm]	gzugs med kyi sred pa
གཟུགས་མེད་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་མུ་བཞི	the four formless absorptions	gzugs med skye mched mu bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་མུ་བཤི	four formless realms	gzugs med skye mched mu bshi
གཟུགས་མེད་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་བཞི	the four formless ayatanas	gzugs med skye mched bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས	formless realm, arupyadhatu	gzugs med khams
གཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས་ཀྱི་རིས་བཞི	four abodes of the formless realm	gzugs med khams kyi ris bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས་པའི་གནས་བཞི	Four Formless Realms. The activity field infinite as the sky {nam mkha' mtha' yas skye mched} or akashanantyayatana. the activity field of infinite consciousness {rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched} or...	gzugs med khams pa'i gnas bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས་བཞི	gzugs med skye mched mu bzhi	gzugs med khams bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས་ས་བཞི	four formless realms [the activity field of limitless space {nam mkha' mtha' yas skye mched}. or k s' nanty yatana., the activity field of infinite consciousness {rnam shes mtha' yas skye mched}. o...	gzugs med khams sa bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་གྱི་བགེགས	the obstructions of formlessness	gzugs med gyi bgegs
གཟུགས་མེད་གྲིབ་ཆགས	the faultless manifesting faults	gzugs med grib chags
གཟུགས་མེད་གྲིབ་བཟོ	fabricate [faults]	gzugs med grib bzo
གཟུགས་མེད་ཉེར་འགྲོ	one kind of {phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas} def {skye ba phyi mar gzugs med dang po gsum gang rung du skyes nas mthar srid rtse'i rten la mya ngan las 'da' ba'i rigs can no}	gzugs med nyer 'gro
གཟུགས་མེད་ཉེར་འགྲོའི་ཕྱིར་མི་འོང	because of the encounter w the formless realms, in the future gzugs med nyer 'gro'i phyir mi 'ong skyes 'da' ba - because of the encounter w the formless realms, in the future passing into birth gz...	gzugs med nyer 'gro'i phyir mi 'ong
བྱེད་དང་བཅས་པར་འདའ་བ	because of the encounter w the formless realms, in the future passing into formation gzugs med nyer 'gro'i phyir mi 'ong 'du	byed dang bcas par 'da' ba
བྱེད་མེད་པར་འདའ་བ	because of the encounter w the formless realms, in the	byed med par 'da' ba
ཕུ༹ཏུརེ་པསསིང་ཨིནཏོ་ནོན	formation	future passing into non
གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམ་འཇུག་བཞི	the four formless absorptions [nam mkha' mtha' yas, rnam shes mtha' yas, ci yang med pa'i skye mched, srid rtse'i snyoms 'jug]	gzugs med snyom 'jug bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་འཇུག	SA gzugs med pa'i snyoms 'jug	gzugs med snyoms 'jug
གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་གཟུག་གཉིས	the two formless absorptions	gzugs med snyoms gzug gnyis
གཟུགས་མེད་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ	being reborn in the formless realms	gzugs med du skye ba
གཟུགས་མེད་དུ་སྐྱེས་པ	those born in the formless realms	gzugs med du skyes pa
གཟུགས་མེད་དུ་ཉེ་བར་འགྲོ་བ	in the formless realms attain nirvana	gzugs med du nye bar 'gro ba
གཟུགས་མེད་དུ་ཉེ་བར་འགྲོ་བ་བཞི	the four encounters w the formless realms	gzugs med du nye bar 'gro ba bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་རྣམ་ཐར	kun dkris mngon gyur pa bral bar mthun par gnas pa'i lam gyi rang bzhin la four formless ayatanas	gzugs med rnam thar
གཟུགས་མེད་པ	formless 2425	gzugs med pa
གཟུགས་མེད་པ་བཟི	the four formless realms	gzugs med pa bzi
གཟུགས་མེད་པ་ལ་འདོད་ཆགས་པ	attachment to form	gzugs med pa la 'dod chags pa
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྐད	ghost-like voice	gzugs med pa'i skad
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་ཁམས	arupadhatu, formless world plane	gzugs med pa'i khams
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་ཁམས་བཞི	the four formless realms [one {nam mkha' mtha' yas}. two {rnam shes mtha' yas}. three {ci yang med pa}. four {yod min med min}	gzugs med pa'i khams bzhi
རེཨལམས་ཨརེ་ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར་པེརཅེཔཏིཨོན	spheres of Infinite Space, Infinite Consciousness, Nothing Whatsoever, and Neither Presence Nor Absence [of Perception]	realms are the four perception
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས	nam shes mtha' yas skye mched, ci yang med pa'i skye mched, 'du shes med 'du shes med min skye mched)	gzugs med pa'i snyoms
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	the formless absorptions	gzugs med pa'i snyoms 'jug
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག་བཞི	Four Formless Absorptions. They correspond respectively to the four activity fields. or four formless realms at the summit of existence in samsara	gzugs med pa'i snyoms 'jug bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ	four formless absorptions	gzugs med pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	formless samadhi	gzugs med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་ཡུལ	formless realms	gzugs med pa'i yul
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་ས་བཞི	the four formless realms [one {nam mkha' mtha' yas skye mched} two {rnam shes mtha' yas skye ched}. three {ci yang med pa'i yas skye ched}. four {'du shes med 'du shes med min}	gzugs med pa'i sa bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྲིད་པའི་དགའ་བ	delight in formless samsara	gzugs med pa'i srid pa'i dga' ba
གཟུགས་མེད་པར་འདུ་ཤེས་པ	formless perception	gzugs med par 'du shes pa
གཟུགས་མེད་པས་གཟུགས་སྟོན་པ	formless beings showing a form	gzugs med pas gzugs ston pa
གཟུགས་མེད་པས་གཟུགས་སྡོན་པ	formless beings showing a form	gzugs med pas gzugs sdon pa
གཟུགས་མེད་སྤྱོད་པ	formless realization	gzugs med spyod pa
གཟུགས་མེད་འཕགས་པ	noble beings in the formless realms	gzugs med 'phags pa
གཟུགས་མེད་མིན	not formless	gzugs med min
གཟུགས་མེད་མུ་བཞི	four alternative states of the formless realm	gzugs med mu bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་བཞི	four formless states	gzugs med bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་རིགས་བཞི	the four kinds of formlessness [nam mkha' mtha' yas, rnam shes mtha' yas, ci yang med, srid rtse]	gzugs med rigs bzhi
གཟུགས་མེད་ལ་འདོད་ཆགས	desire for the formless world	gzugs med la 'dod chags
གཟུགས་མེད་ལ་གནས་ཐ་དད་མེད	the formless realms have no separate location	gzugs med la gnas tha dad med
གཟུགས་མོ	weasel * porcupine	gzugs mo
གཟུགས་མོ་བྱི་ཐུར	porcupine	gzugs mo byi thur
གཟུགས་རྩལ	gymnastic	gzugs rtsal
གཟུགས་ཚད	body height	gzugs tshad
གཟུགས་ཚབ	effigy gzugs tshor 'du shes 'du byed rnam shes	gzugs tshab
གཟུགས་མཚན	physical characteristics	gzugs mtshan
གཟུགས་མཚུངས	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba	gzugs mtshungs
གཟུགས་འཚོང་མ	harlot, prostitute	gzugs 'tshong ma
གཟུགས་མཛེས	beautiful/ pleasing form	gzugs mdzes
གཟུགས་མཛེས་པ	beautiful form/ body	gzugs mdzes pa
གཟུགས་འཛིན	eye, apprehending a form	gzugs 'dzin
གཟུགས་འཛིན་གྱི་རྟོག་པ	form grasping thoughts/ conceptions	gzugs 'dzin gyi rtog pa
གཟུགས་འཛིན་པ	perceiver	gzugs 'dzin pa
གཟུགས་འཛིན་དབང་མངོན	form grasping sense perception [its predominant condition is the eye faculty mig gi dbang po las dngos su skyes pa'i]	gzugs 'dzin dbang mngon
གཟུགས་འཛིན་མིག་ཤེས	form grasping visual consciousness	gzugs 'dzin mig shes
གཟུགས་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད	subject object substantial dichotomy/ being different substances	gzugs 'dzin rdzas tha dad
གཟུགས་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད་ཀྱིས	of subject object substantial dichotomy	gzugs 'dzin rdzas tha dad kyis
གཟུགས་འཛིན་ཡིད་མངོན	form grasping mental perception	gzugs 'dzin yid mngon
གཟུགས་གཞི	body of human etc.	gzugs gzhi
གཟུགས་གཟུགས་བརྙན	object and reflected image	gzugs gzugs brnyan
གཟུགས་བཟང	good body, pleasing face and form	gzugs bzang
གཟུགས་བཟང་བ	a beautiful physical form; one of {mtho ris kyi yon tan bdun} the seven virtues of a high rebirth	gzugs bzang ba
གཟུགས་ཡས	a # [grangs kyi gnas drug cu'i rtsi stangs gzhan zhig gi nang yod pa'i grangs ka'i ming]	gzugs yas
གཟུགས་ཡོད་པ	having form	gzugs yod pa
གཟུགས་རགས་རྣམས	physical universe	gzugs rags rnams
གཟུགས་རགས་པ	1) flesh and blood body; 2) visible things	gzugs rags pa
གཟུགས་རིང་ཐུང	height	gzugs ring thung
གཟུགས་རུང	1) {su}. 2) {ba}	gzugs rung
གཟུགས་ལ་འདོད་ཆགས	desire for the form realm	gzugs la 'dod chags
གཟུགས་ལ་ནི་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡང་མེད་འགག་པ	for form birth is absolutely negated	gzugs la ni skye ba yang med 'gag pa
གཟུགས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡུལ་ལྔ	the five objects, form and so forth gzugs la sogs pa yod pa nyid du bstan pa - the teaching of the existence of form and so forth	gzugs la sogs pa yul lnga
གཟུགས་ལ་སོགས་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་གཞི	the knowable bases of form and so on	gzugs la sogs zhes bya ba'i gzhi
གཟུགས་གཤིས	gzugs thang lod kyi measure or nature	gzugs gshis
གཟུགས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	embody	gzugs su bkod pa
གཟུགས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	materialize	gzugs su grub pa
གཟུགས་སུ་ཉེ་བར་འགྲོ་བ	among phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas khyad par can, 'dod pa'i rten can gyi phyir mi 'ong gang gzugs	gzugs su nye bar 'gro ba
གཟུགས་སུ་ཉེ་བར་འགྲོ་བ་གསུམ	phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas khyad par can las gzugs su nye bar 'gro ba gsum ste, bar dor 'da' ba	gzugs su nye bar 'gro ba gsum
གཟུགས་སུ་ཉེར་འགྲོ	one kind of phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas/ Three types: bar dor 'da' ba/ skyes nas 'da' ba/ gong du 'pho ba	gzugs su nyer 'gro
གཟུགས་སུ་དོད་པ	come out in relief	gzugs su dod pa
གཟུགས་སུ་འདུ་ཤེས་པ	conceiving / discriminating as [being) form	gzugs su 'du shes pa
གཟུགས་སུ་སྣང་བ	composed of matter, material, substantial, appearance as form, 1 of gzugs kyi bye brag tu snang ba bzhi	gzugs su snang ba
གཟུགས་སུ་ཡོད	have form	gzugs su yod
གཟུགས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	have form	gzugs su yod pa
གཟུགས་སུ་རུང	formable	gzugs su rung
གཟུགས་སུ་རུང་ཉིད	formability	gzugs su rung nyid
གཟུགས་སུ་རུང་བ	formable, able to have/ fit to be form, [be] visible form/ objects of the sense consciousnesses	gzugs su rung ba
གཟུགས་སུ་རུང་བ་ཉིད	formability	gzugs su rung ba nyid
གཟུགས་སུ་ཤར་བ	mi yi gzugs su shar ba reappeared in human form	gzugs su shar ba
གཟུགས་སོགས་ཕྱི་དོན་ལྔ	the five external objects, form and so on	gzugs sogs phyi don lnga
གཟུགས་སོགས་ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ལྔ	the five external objects, form and so on	gzugs sogs phyi rol gyi don lnga
གཟུགས་སོགས་ཕྱིའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དྲུག	the six external ayatanas form and so on gzugs sogs yul gzugs can lnga'i khams the realm of the five objects w form, form and so on	gzugs sogs phyi'i skye mched drug
གཟུགས་ཨ་ཚོར	are you unwell, you are ill?	gzugs a tshor
གཟུང	object, will hold/ grasp/ apprehend [f 'dzin]	gzung
གཟུང་བསྐྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང	object-creating wind (symbolically referred to by sun, ye shes in ro ma)	gzung bskyed kyi rlung
གཟུང་ལྕག	clip	gzung lcag
གཟུང་ཆ	objectifiable part	gzung cha
གཟུང་རྟོག	what is believed to be an object	gzung rtog
གཟུང་སྟེ་འདུག	held, surrounding, embraced	gzung ste 'dug
གཟུང་ཐག་རྡོ་རྗེ	little vajra connected to the vase by five colored cord and used in vase consecration	gzung thag rdo rje
གཟུང་དུ་མེད་པར	in dualistic terms	gzung du med par
གཟུང་དོན	the held thing [ggd]	gzung don
གཟུང་དོན་ལྔ	the five perceived objects	gzung don lnga
གཟུང་དྲན	also {bzung dran} - tenacious mindfulness, a tenacious presence of mind	gzung dran
གཟུང་ལྡན་མ	retentive	gzung ldan ma
གཟུང་ནས	having seized	gzung nas
གཟུང་རྣམ	apprehension aspect	gzung rnam
གཟུང་རྣམ་དང་འཛིན་རྣམ	the perceiving and perceived aspects	gzung rnam dang 'dzin rnam
གཟུང་བ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད	selflessness of the object	gzung ba chos kyi bdag med
གཟུང་བ་དང་འཛིན་པ	grasper and grasped/ fixation	gzung ba dang 'dzin pa
གཟུང་བ་དང་འཛིན་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free from grasper and grasped, grasping and fixation/ subject and object gzung ba dang 'dzin pa'i chos su brtags	gzung ba dang 'dzin pa dang bral ba
གཟུང་བ་བདག་མེད	object not truly existing from, its own side	gzung ba bdag med
གཟུང་བ་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཆ་མེད	partless atoms gzung ba med pa dang 'dzin pa med pa'i	gzung ba rdul phran cha med
གཟུང་བ་འཛིན	objectifying and grasping,	gzung ba 'dzin
ཐེ་སུབཇེཅཏ	object dichotomy, the Grasper and the Grasped	the subject
གཟུང་བ་འཛིན་པ	mental habit	gzung ba 'dzin pa
གཟུང་བ་ཡི་རྣམ་པར་གྱེང་བ	distraction by external objects	gzung ba yi rnam par gyeng ba
གཟུང་བ་ཡུལ	grasped [external] object	gzung ba yul
གཟུང་བ་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པར་རྟོགས་པ	to realize that the perceived is devoid of a	gzung ba rang bzhin med par rtogs pa
གཟུང་བའི་རྟོག་པ	percept, objective thought, concept of the perceived	gzung ba'i rtog pa
གཟུང་བའི་དོན	grasped object, meaning of grasping gzung ba'i rnam par g.yeng ba - distraction of grasped objects	gzung ba'i don
གཟུང་བའི་རྩ	{gzung ba'i rtsa} nadi	gzung ba'i rtsa
གཟུང་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic of grasping	gzung ba'i mtshan nyid
གཟུང་བའི་རྫས	grasped substances	gzung ba'i rdzas
གཟུང་བའི་ཡུལ	the grasped object, the 'field' where objects are grasped	gzung ba'i yul
སེམས་ཚུར་མ་སྒྲུབ	"objects not being externalized and the subjectively perceiving mind not being internalized"	sems tshur ma sgrub
གཟུང་བའི་ཤེས་པ	perceptions	gzung ba'i shes pa
གཟུང་བའི་སེམས	capacious mind	gzung ba'i sems
གཟུང་བར་སྐྱེས་པ་ཅན	having an object	gzung bar skyes pa can
གཟུང་བར་གྱུར་པ	will be grasped	gzung bar gyur pa
གཟུང་བར་བྱ་བ	[to/ should be] grasped	gzung bar bya ba
གཟུང་བར་འོས་པ	worthy to be heard	gzung bar 'os pa
གཟུང་བྱ	apprehended object	gzung bya
གཟུང་བྱ་འཛིན་བྱེད	the perceiving subject and the perceived object	gzung bya 'dzin byed
གཟུང་བྱའི་ཡུལ	grasped object, external object/ thing	gzung bya'i yul
གཟུང་འབྲེལ	unity	gzung 'brel
གཟུང་མ	wife	gzung ma
གཟུང་མེད	imperceptible	gzung med
གཟུང་མོ	[arch] weasel, porcupine	gzung mo
གཟུང་འཛིན	object and subject duality, graspable object and grasping subject, grasping and fixation, dualistic fixation,	gzung 'dzin
སུབཇེཅཏ	object dichotomy, grasping and grasper, apprehended and apprehender, perceived object and perceiver, dualistic perception	subject
གཟུང་འཛིན་སྐྱེས	subject and object arise	gzung 'dzin skyes
གཟུང་འཛིན་གྱི་རྟོག་ཚོགས	thoughts of subject and object/ grasping and fixation	gzung 'dzin gyi rtog tshogs
གཟུང་འཛིན་གྱི་སྣང་བ	experience of perceiver and perceived/ subject and object/ grasping and fixation	gzung 'dzin gyi snang ba
གཟུང་འཛིན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of grasping and fixation/ subject and object gzung 'dzin gyi rdzas tha dad kyis stong	gzung 'dzin gyi bag chags
གཟུང་འཛིན་གྲངས་མཉམ	Equal Number of Objective and Subjective Features [thd]	gzung 'dzin grangs mnyam
གཟུང་འཛིན་གྲངས་མཉམ་པ	Equal Number Perceiver and Perceived; def {dkar dmar la sogs pa'i rdzas tha dad pa'i gzung ba'i rnam pa ji snyed pa 'dzin pa'i shes pa yang rdzas tha dad pa de snyed du grangs mnyam zhing/ snang ya...	gzung 'dzin grangs mnyam pa
གཟུང་འཛིན་ཆོས་རྣམས	all the dharmas of fixation and grasping	gzung 'dzin chos rnams
གཟུང་འཛིན་གཉིས	grasper and grasped, grasping and fixation/ subject and object	gzung 'dzin gnyis
གཟུང་འཛིན་གཉིས་སྟོང	emptiness of duality of subject and object/ grasping and fixation	gzung 'dzin gnyis stong
གཟུང་འཛིན་གཉིས་སྟོང་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness devoid of grasper and grasped. Syn {rang rig rang gsal} gzung 'dzin gnyis stong gi rnam shes consciousness devoid of grasper and grasped/ subject and object */ grasping and fixati...	gzung 'dzin gnyis stong gi rnam shes
གཟུང་འཛིན་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པ	w/o duality of grasping and fixation/ subject and object	gzung 'dzin gnyis su med pa
གཟུང་འཛིན་རྟོག་པ	ego-grasping of dharmas and individuals or conception attached to true existence of object and perceiver/ grasping and fixation	gzung 'dzin rtog pa
གཟུང་འཛིན་དག་པ	pure of object and subject, without object and subject	gzung 'dzin dag pa
གཟུང་འཛིན་བདུད་བགེགས	the maras and obstructing spirits of grasping and fixation 2428	gzung 'dzin bdud bgegs
གཟུང་འཛིན་རྣམ་རྟོག	concepts/ thoughts of grasping and fixation/ subject and object	gzung 'dzin rnam rtog
གཟུང་འཛིན་བྲལ	being free from interest, unbiased, apathetic	gzung 'dzin bral
གཟུང་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད	substantial	gzung 'dzin rdzas tha dad
གཟུང་འཛིན་ཞེན་པ	dualistic fixation(s)	gzung 'dzin zhen pa
གཟུང་གཟེར	peg on a wall	gzung gzer
གཟུང་འོས	agreeable	gzung 'os
གཟུང་ཡུལ	object grasped/ graspable by grasping mind	gzung yul
གཟུང་སླ་བ	easy to grasp	gzung sla ba
གཟུངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra Requested by the King of Dharanis	gzungs kyi rgyal zhus pa'i mdo
གཟུངས་ཀྱི་སྒོ	door of retention	gzungs kyi sgo
གཟུངས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་བཞི	the four doors of retention	gzungs kyi sgo bzhi
གཟུངས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས	power of retention gzungs kyi dbang phyug rgyal pos zhus	gzungs kyi stobs
གཟུངས་ཀྱི་ཚིག	dharanis and mantras	gzungs kyi tshig
གཟུངས་བཀོད	embodiment	gzungs bkod
གཟུངས་ཁེབས	[silk] cover for scroll of dharanis	gzungs khebs
གཟུངས་གྲྭ	incantation	gzungs grwa
གཟུངས་གྲྭ་ལྔ	collection of tantric Buddhist protection formulae	gzungs grwa lnga
གཟུངས་གརབ༹་ལྔ	Five Sets of Sacred Incantations. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	gzungs grva lnga
གཟུངས་རྒྱག	gos kyi thog la lhan pa rgyag skabs sngon la lhan pa'i steng du rob rgyag pa	gzungs rgyag
གཟུངས་རྒྱལ	{gzungs kyi dbang phyug rgyal po}	gzungs rgyal
གཟུངས་ངན	feeble	gzungs ngan
གཟུངས་ལྔ	five kinds of dharanis to be offered together	gzungs lnga
གཟུངས་སྔགས	Dharani mantras, dharani formula	gzungs sngags
གཟུངས་ཆེན་གྲྭ་ལྔ	the five types of dharani	gzungs chen grwa lnga
གཟུངས་ཆེན་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five types of dharani	gzungs chen sde lnga
གཟུངས་ཆེན་པོ	count of dharanis	gzungs chen po
གཟུངས་གཉིས	2 instruments	gzungs gnyis
གཟུངས་བརྙན་ལོངས་སྐུ	{phyed snang sprul sku}	gzungs brnyan longs sku
གཟུངས་རྟེན	prop, support	gzungs rten
གཟུངས་ཐག	mantra thread	gzungs thag
གཟུངས་ཐག་རྡོ་རྗེ	little vajra connected to the vase by five colored cord and used in vase consecration	gzungs thag rdo rje
གཟུངས་ཐོབ	attain a grasp / dharani	gzungs thob
གཟུངས་ཐོབ་པ	attain non-forgetting retention, attain empowerment, dbang thob pa, obtain the imprint of the mental patterning of dharani	gzungs thob pa
གཟུངས་མཐོང་བ	sight	gzungs mthong ba
གཟུངས་མདོ	also {mdo mang}; a collection of important Tibetan Buddhist texts	gzungs mdo
གཟུངས་འདུས	{gzungs 'dus}	gzungs 'dus
གཟུངས་འདེབས	1) mala cord pas rgyas btab ste bless; 2) gzungs sngags bzlas pa'i phus 'debs pa	gzungs 'debs
གཟུངས་བསྡུས	collection of religious works	gzungs bsdus
གཟུངས་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	limitless #s of dharanis and mantras	gzungs dpag tu med pa
གཟུངས་སྤོངས	acceptance and rejection	gzungs spongs
གཟུངས་སྤོབས	retention and ready speech /eloquence, command of a subject	gzungs spobs
གཟུངས་སྤྱིན་ཡེ་ཤེས	cloud of spiritual pristine cognition	gzungs spyin ye shes
གཟུངས་སྤྲིན	clouds of spiritual sustenance	gzungs sprin
གཟུངས་ཕྱི	a number	gzungs phyi
གཟུངས་བྱེད་པ་པོ་གསུམ	three authors of fundamental texts	gzungs byed pa po gsum
གཟུངས་འབུལ་ལག་ལེན	on the design and consecration of sacred images	gzungs 'bul lag len
གཟུངས་སྦོབས	retention and eloquence, command of a subject	gzungs sbobs
གཟུངས་སྦྱིན	1) Large #; 2) gzungs kyi lung 'bog pa	gzungs sbyin
གཟུངས་མ	female spiritual consort	gzungs ma
གཟུངས་མ་ལོས་བརྟེན	You must use a wisdom consort	gzungs ma los brten
གཟུངས་གཙུག་ཏོར་སྡེ་ལྔ	[TRS 80-2]	gzungs gtsug tor sde lnga
གཟུངས་མཛེས་པ	very handsome, of beautiful form	gzungs mdzes pa
གཟུངས་ཞན	loose, weak, without a hold	gzungs zhan
གཟུངས་གཞུག	ring bsrel, dharanis, to be put into a chorten or statue 2429	gzungs gzhug
གཟུངས་གཞུག་འབུལ་བ	1) in a stupa or statue put ring bsrel, dharanis etc.; 2) having circumambulated khog pa brgyangs pa	gzungs gzhug 'bul ba
གཟུངས་ཟད	weakened, debilitated	gzungs zad
གཟུངས་གཟེར	sgo'i mjo sna	gzungs gzer
གཟུངས་ཡས	another number	gzungs yas
གཟུངས་རིང	SA sngags ring	gzungs ring
གཟུངས་ཤུལ	a place to stay	gzungs shul
གཟུངས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	attain the imprint of the mental patterning of dharani	gzungs su bzung ba
གཟུངས་སུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ	Three Hundred and Sixty Sacred Incantations. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	gzungs sum brgya drug cu
གཟུངས་གསུམ	the three kinds of gzungs	gzungs gsum
གཟུད	enter into, SA 'dzud pa	gzud
གཟུད་པ	{'dzud pa} to enter (into)/ engage in	gzud pa
གཟུམ	smile, close, SA 'dzum pa	gzum
གཟུམ་པ	SA 'dzum pa	gzum pa
གཟུར	avoid, edge, give way, SA 'dzur ba	gzur
གཟུར་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	to decline	gzur thabs byed pa
གཟུར་གནས	witness	gzur gnas
གཟུར་གནས་སྐྱེ་བོ	straight-forward/ impartial person	gzur gnas skye bo
གཟུར་གནས་སྐྱེས་བུ	impartial straightforward person	gzur gnas skyes bu
གཟུར་གནས་དྲང་འབྲེལ	w/o bias and partiality	gzur gnas drang 'brel
གཟུར་གནས་བློ	mind not extreme but remaining in the middle, impartial and	gzur gnas blo
སྟྲཻགྷཏ	forward	straight
གཟུར་བ	avert, budge, by-pass, shirk	gzur ba
གཟུར་བོར་གནས་པ	sensible, impartial, rational, reasonable	gzur bor gnas pa
གཟུར་མེད	inevitable gzur g.yol byed pa - shunt	gzur med
གཟུལ	[f 'dzul],, join, attend, participate, rush/ get in	gzul
གཟེ་ཆུང	dull, blunt	gze chung
གཟེ་ཆུང་བའི་བསྙུང་བུ	dull awl	gze chung ba'i bsnyung bu
གཟེ་བ	pannier, dossier	gze ba
གཟེ་མ	{gze ma} field herb med.	gze ma
གཟེ་མ་ར་མགོ	thorny {gze ma [ra mgo]} field herb med.,	gze ma ra mgo
གཟེ་མ་ར་མགོའི་དབྱིབས	rhombus	gze ma ra mgo'i dbyibs
གཟེ་མ་རྭ་མགོ	tribulus terrestris l.	gze ma rwa mgo
གཟེ་མའི་འབྲུ	thorny {gze ma ra mgo} fruit	gze ma'i 'bru
གཟེ་མོ	weasel, porcupine	gze mo
གཟེ་ཚོང	[arch] tshong las	gze tshong
གཟེ་རུ	[small] spike, nail	gze ru
གཟེ་རེ	looking poorly	gze re
གཟེག	little grain, atom	gzeg
གཟེག་ཆ	patience, ability to bear	gzeg cha
གཟེག་ཆ་ཆུང	small particle	gzeg cha chung
གཟེག་མོ་བྱི	hedgehog	gzeg mo byi
གཟེག་ཟན	founder of vaisesika philosophy, eater of particles of grain	gzeg zan
གཟེག་ཟན་པ	followers of the kanada school	gzeg zan pa
གཟེགས	smithereens, small fragments, particles, grains	gzegs
གཟེགས་མ	smithereens	gzegs ma
གཟེགས་ཟན་པ	follower of Kanada	gzegs zan pa
གཟེང་བསྟོད	see {gzengs bstod}	gzeng bstod
གཟེང་བསྟོད་པ	uplift [the mind]	gzeng bstod pa
གཟེང་བ	to stream upward (as of hair)	gzeng ba
གཟེངས	height, loftiness, sublimity, gloriousness	gzengs
གཟེངས་ཅན	a rishi	gzengs can
གཟེངས་རྟགས	award, medal	gzengs rtags
གཟེངས་བསྟོད	gzigs bzos, uplift [1self], hold w dignity, praise, approve, compliment, medal, reward, award	gzengs bstod
གཟེངས་བསྟོད་ཀྱི་མཚན་རྟགས	award, medal	gzengs bstod kyi mtshan rtags
གཟེངས་བསྟོད་པ	to extol	gzengs bstod pa
གཟེངས་བསྟོད་པང་ལེབ	billboard	gzengs bstod pang leb
གཟེངས་བསྟོད་བྱེད་པ	reward, award, encourage and reward	gzengs bstod byed pa
གཟེངས་བསྟོད་ལག་ཁྱེར	certificate of merit, testimonial	gzengs bstod lag khyer
གཟེངས་ཐོན	praiseworthy, meritorious, outstanding	gzengs thon
གཟེངས་མཐོ	good, better than others, high, lofty	gzengs mtho
གཟེངས་མཐོ་བ	height, loftiness, sublimity, gloriousness, widespread, spacious	gzengs mtho ba
གཟེངས་པ	height, loftiness, sublimity, gloriousness, wide spread, spacious, uplifted	gzengs pa
གཟེངས་པོ	1) high, tall, lofty; 2) excellent/ perfect and especially good/ noble	gzengs po
གཟེངས་ཞྭ	long tipped hat	gzengs zhwa
གཟེངས་ཞབ༹	long tipped hat	gzengs zhva
གཟེངས་གཟེངས	stand up, lift up	gzengs gzengs
གཟེངས་སུ་ཐོན་པ	praiseworthy, meritorious, outstanding	gzengs su thon pa
གཟེད	to suffer, get	gzed
གཟེད་བསྐུར	Syn {sgrin po'i gzed du bskur ba}	gzed bskur
གཟེད་པ	{gzed pa, gzed pa, gzed pa, gzed} trans. v.; to hit	gzed pa
གཟེད་མ	small wicker work basket or wicker enclosure	gzed ma
གཟེན	(CH fried food	gzen
གཟེབ	trap, mire. Syn {sbubs}	gzeb
གཟེབ་ཀྱི་པྲོག་མ	container, basket, tray	gzeb kyi prog ma
གཟེབ་ཀྱི་སྤྲོག་མ	bamboo etc basket	gzeb kyi sprog ma
གཟེབ་རྒྱ	cage	gzeb rgya
གཟེབ་སྣོད	[elongated]. basket 2430	gzeb snod
གཟེབ་མ	[square bamboo] basket	gzeb ma
གཟེབས	small wicker work basket or wicker enclosure	gzebs
གཟེབས་སུ་ཚུད་པ	go into the middle, put in a basket	gzebs su tshud pa
གཟེམ	blush, shrink, avoid, shun, SA 'dzem pa	gzem
གཟེམ་པ	to do a thing gently	gzem pa
གཟེར	pivotal point; linking principle; linchpin	gzer
གཟེར་ཁ	pain of disease, nail	gzer kha
གཟེར་ཁ་རྒྱག་པ	be struck w the pain of disease	gzer kha rgyag pa
གཟེར་ཁ་རྡུང་བ	nail	gzer kha rdung ba
གཟེར་ག་རྒྱག་པ	nail	gzer ga rgyag pa
གཟེར་གྱི་མགོ	nail head	gzer gyi mgo
གཟེར་གྱིས་འདེབས་པ	fasten with nails, mental help, mnemonic verse	gzer gyis 'debs pa
གཟེར་གླང	colic, gripes, spasms in the stomach	gzer glang
གཟེར་མགོ	nail head	gzer mgo
གཟེར་རྒོད་ཕྲ་རྒས་འབྱུང་བ	arising of subtle and gross pains and anxieties	gzer rgod phra rgas 'byung ba
གཟེར་རྒྱག	[pound a] nail	gzer rgyag
གཟེར་རྒྱག་པ	[pound a] nail	gzer rgyag pa
གཟེར་རྒྱག་བཟོ་པ	riveter	gzer rgyag bzo pa
གཟེར་རྒྱབ་པ	nail	gzer rgyab pa
གཟེར་ལྔ	Zernga	gzer lnga
གཟེར་ལྔའི་མན་ངག	upadesha of Zernga	gzer lnga'i man ngag
གཟེར་འཇོམས	pyrethrum tatsienense (bur. et fr.) ling	gzer 'joms
གཟེར་འཇོམས་སེར་པོ	oxygraphis glacialis (fisch.) bge., saxifraga montana h. smith	gzer 'joms ser po
གཟེར་བཏབ	intensify [devotion in your heart]; nailed down	gzer btab
གཟེར་བཏབ་པ	{'debs / gdab/ btab pa} to drive home a/ the point; to pin down a pivotal point	gzer btab pa
གཟེར་ཐག	rope for hanging something	gzer thag
གཟེར་ཐུང	1) being struck w pain of sickness for a short time; 2) {stod gzer glo tshad}; 3) short nail	gzer thung
གཟེར་ཐེབས	having pounded a nail zug pa [las don mi 'gyur ba'i gnad gzer thebs pa after a nail was pounded have penetrated	gzer thebs
གཟེར་གདན	nail and 'og gzhi'i bar gyi gdan	gzer gdan
གཟེར་གདབ་པ	plant the stake	gzer gdab pa
གཟེར་འདེབས	1) [pound a] nail [shing la lcags kyi gzer 'debs pa]; 2) sick person; 3) intensify	gzer 'debs
གཟེར་འདེབས་པ	hammer nails in	gzer 'debs pa
གཟེར་སྡོམ	nail/ staple together	gzer sdom
གཟེར་སྡོམ་བརྒྱབ་པ	nail/ staple together	gzer sdom brgyab pa
གཟེར་ནད	pain, ache, illness	gzer nad
གཟེར་ནས	pain, ache	gzer nas
གཟེར་རྣ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	gzer rna
གཟེར་པོ	MG, E-T: steep. [mss]	gzer po
གཟེར་བ	skon pa dang, 'gel ba, 'dzugs pa,//sked par gri gzer,//gong bar khab gzer,//rna bar smyu gu gzer	gzer ba
གཟེར་བུ	spike, nail; spike	gzer bu
གཟེར་བུ་བཏབ	drive a nail in; x {lus la lcags kyi gzer bu stong btab pa} drove a thousands of iron nails into his body	gzer bu btab
གཟེར་བུ་བཏབ་ནས་ཟུག་པ	after a nail was pounded be penetrated	gzer bu btab nas zug pa
གཟེར་བུ་བཏབ་པ	pound a nail/ tack	gzer bu btab pa
གཟེར་བུ་བདུན་པ	7 nails	gzer bu bdun pa
གཟེར་བུ་ཟུག་པ	penetrating nail	gzer bu zug pa
གཟེར་མ	nail	gzer ma
གཟེར་མ་རྒྱག་པ	pound a nail	gzer ma rgyag pa
གཟེར་མིག	bon text	gzer mig
གཟེར་མོ	hedgehog	gzer mo
གཟེར་མྱིག	bonpo sutra telling life story of gshen rab	gzer myig
གཟེར་དམིགས	illness/ pain yod sa'i gnad gsang	gzer dmigs
གཟེར་ཚོམ	way of sewing w thread/ string	gzer tshom
གཟེར་བཞི	Four Nails. These are the four	gzer bzhi
ནཻལས་ཝཧིཆ་ཅོནཏྲོལ་ལིཕེ༹	breath {srog sdom gzer bzhi} according to Yoga Tantra, namely, the nail of unchanging intention {mi 'gyur dgongs pa'i gzer} the nail of contemplation on the deity {ting 'dzin lha'i gzer} the nail o...	nails which control life
གཟེར་ཟུག	1) pain of disease; 2) penetrating nail	gzer zug
གཟེར་བཟོ་པ	goldsmith gzer g.ya' ba - colic, feeling severe pain	gzer bzo pa
གཟེར་སྲོང་བ	beat out nails	gzer srong ba
གཟོ	remember/ repay kindness	gzo
གཟོ་བ	to remember, keep in mind, own, acknowledge; {gzo ba, bzo ba, bzo ba, bzo} trans. v	gzo ba
གཟོག་མ་ནས	from the first	gzog ma nas
གཟོགས	imp. of {gzags pa}	gzogs
གཟོང	chisel, graving-tool, puncheon	gzong
གཟོང་ཁ	hole piercing/ punching implement	gzong kha
གཟོང་ཁ་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ	reducing a punch to 1 [point]	gzong kha gcig sgril
གཟོང་ཆག	kind of carpenter's wood punch/ awl	gzong chag
གཟོང་བུ	carpenter's wood piercing little metal cutting tool chisel, gravingtool, puncheon, awl	gzong bu
གཟོང་རིལ	metal punch	gzong ril
གཟོད	at present, primordial[ly], at 1st, the beginning/ start	gzod
གཟོད་བསྐྱར	anew, again in this moment	gzod bskyar
གཟོད་བསྐྱར་ནས	by repeating what is already so/ the case	gzod bskyar nas
གཟོད་གླགས་མེད	intolerable, insupportable	gzod glags med
གཟོད་ནས	from the very beginning	gzod nas
གཟོད་པ	the beginning	gzod pa
གཟོད་མ	at present, primordial[ly], at 1st, the beginning/ start	gzod ma
གཟོད་མ་ཉིད	the beginning/ start, the primordial state	gzod ma nyid
གཟོད་མ་ཉིད་ནས	SA dang po nyid nas	gzod ma nyid nas
གཟོད་མ་ནས	from the 1st/ beginning, primordially	gzod ma nas
གཟོད་མ་ནས་སྟོང་པ	primordial emptiness	gzod ma nas stong pa
གཟོད་མ་ནས་ཞི་བ	stong pa nyid	gzod ma nas zhi ba
གཟོད་མའི་དུས	earliest time	gzod ma'i dus
གཟོད་མའི་དུས་ནས་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	unborn from the beginning/ primordially	gzod ma'i dus nas mi skye ba
གཟོན	imp. of {gzon pa}	gzon
གཟོན་པ	1) (Tha dad pa gzan pa, gzan pa, gzon,, go to waste, be spoiled; 2) [arch] not [want to] listen	gzon pa
གཟོབ་པ	(tha dad pa gzabs pa, gzab pa, gzobs,, careful/ concentrated and attentive, quick, sharp, clever, caution, circumspection, take care, be earnest/ serious, [comp {gzab gzab} careful, serious, attent...	gzob pa
གཟོབ་པ་ལྷུར་ལེན་པ	to exercise the utmost prudence	gzob pa lhur len pa
གཟོབ་པོ	careful, serious, attentive, watchful, cautious	gzob po
གཟོབ་གཟབ་པ	very nice	gzob gzab pa
གཟོབས	imp. of {gzob pa}; imp. of {gzab pa}	gzobs
གཟོལ་བ	[arch] crack[ed], split	gzol ba
བཟ་ཚང	couple, husband and wife	bza tshang
བཟང་སྐྱོང	Bhadrapala [a bodhisattva at the time of Buddha]	bzang skyong
བཟང་ཁྱི	tibetan lap-dog	bzang khyi
བཟང་ཁྲག	w the power of freedom from disease mi phyugs [rich? and cattle? kyi zungs khrag powerful blood	bzang khrag
བཟང་མཁན	make clothes	bzang mkhan
བཟང་གོམས	good habit	bzang goms
བཟང་གོས	chinese satin of the measure of a gentleman's robe	bzang gos
བཟང་གོས་བུམ་ལྡན་མ	chinese satin displaying the figures of water jars	bzang gos bum ldan ma
བཟང་དགའ	rejoicing in goodness	bzang dga'
བཟང་དགུ	all that is good	bzang dgu
བཟང་འགྲོ	improved	bzang 'gro
བཟང་རྒུ	all that is good	bzang rgu
བཟང་སྒྲིག	agreement of peace	bzang sgrig
བཟང་བསྒྱུར	reform, improve	bzang bsgyur
བཟང་ངན	division into better or worse; quality (of being (either) good or bad)	bzang ngan
བཟང་ངན་གྱི་སྣང་བ	appearance of good and bad	bzang ngan gyi snang ba
བཟང་ངན་གྱི་འབྲེལ་པ	have good or bad rapport, relations of good and bad	bzang ngan gyi 'brel pa
བཟང་ངན་གཅོད	judge/ distinguish good and bad	bzang ngan gcod
བཟང་ངན་བར་མ་གསུམ	attractive repulsive or neutral	bzang ngan bar ma gsum
བཟང་ངན་བླང་དོར	accepting the good and rejecting the bad	bzang ngan blang dor
བཟང་ངན་འབྱེད	judge/ distinguish good and bad	bzang ngan 'byed
བཟང་ངན་འབྱེད་པ	distinguish good and bad	bzang ngan 'byed pa
བཟང་ངན་འབྲིང་གསུམ	good & bad & middling	bzang ngan 'bring gsum
བཟང་ངན་མེད	no difference in quality	bzang ngan med
བཟང་ངན་མེད་པ	without distinction(s) of better or worse/ good or bad; neither (one) better or worse than the other	bzang ngan med pa
བཟང་ངན་འཛིན་པ	fixation on as good or bad	bzang ngan 'dzin pa
བཟང་ངན་ལས་འདས	beyond all consideration of good & bad	bzang ngan las 'das
བཟང་ངན་ཤན་འབྱེད	what makes [something] good or bad	bzang ngan shan 'byed
བཟང་ཆུ	bzang chu river	bzang chu
བཟང་ཉམས	1) good manner or exterior seeming; 2) good sign/ indication	bzang nyams
བཟང་རྟགས	good sign or token	bzang rtags
བཟང་རྟོག	noble thoughts	bzang rtog
བཟང་དུ་སོང་བ	exacted	bzang du song ba
བཟང་དྲུག	six precious substances, essential ingredients	bzang drug
བཟང་འདོད	self-complacency	bzang 'dod
བཟང་ལྡན	Bhadrika	bzang ldan
བཟང་པ	goodness	bzang pa
བཟང་པའི་ཟུང	foremost of goodness	bzang pa'i zung
བཟང་པར་བརྩི་བ	highly cherished	bzang par brtsi ba
བཟང་པོ་གྲགས་པ	revealer of {gsol 'debs le'u bdun ma}; gter ston, 14th cent	bzang po grags pa
བཟང་པོ་བཅུ་འཛོམས	in local custom auspicious time from noon of the 6th to 7th days of the 11th month, conquering all evil kyi phyi nyin 'char ba'i-??	bzang po bcu 'dzoms
བཟང་པོ་དྲུག	6 drugs or medicinal spices	bzang po drug
བཟང་པོ་སྤྱོད་པ	Excellent Conduct	bzang po spyod pa
བཟང་པོ་སྤྱོད་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ	aspiration for excellent conduct	bzang po spyod pa'i smon lam
བཟང་པོ་མ	a yaksini queen	bzang po ma
བཟང་པོ་ལ་བརྙས་ཤིང་སྨོད་པ	contemptuous of those who practice virtue	bzang po la brnyas shing smod pa
བཟང་པོ་ལུང་བསྟན་པའི་མདོ	Sutra Foretelling Goodness	bzang po lung bstan pa'i mdo
བཟང་པོའི་ངང་ཚུལ	impressive	bzang po'i ngang tshul
བཟང་པོའི་གདམས་ངག	excellent oral instructions	bzang po'i gdams ngag
བཟང་པོའི་འདུ་སྟངས	manner of sitting of the good & great	bzang po'i 'du stangs
བཟང་པོའི་འདུག་སྟངས	way of sitting of the good and great, Maitreya	bzang po'i 'dug stangs
བཟང་པོའི་ནས	SA dug mo nyung gi 'bras bu	bzang po'i nas
བཟང་པོའི་གནས་སུ་སྐྱེས་པ	be born in an auspicious place	bzang po'i gnas su skyes pa
བཟང་པོའི་དཔལ	white sandal wood, Splendor of Excellence	bzang po'i dpal
བཟང་པོའི་བློ་གྲོས	good-hearted, generous, noble-hearted	bzang po'i blo gros
བཟང་པོའི་ཚུལ	good morals, good behavior	bzang po'i tshul
བཟང་པོའི་ཚུལ་དགུ	9 categories of excellence	bzang po'i tshul dgu
བཟང་པོའི་ཟླ་བ	in 2nd month vajra dakini's rgyud etc. from good month	bzang po'i zla ba
བཟང་པོའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtue of excellence	bzang po'i yon tan
བཟང་པོའི་སླུ་ཁྲིད	enticement to a god, purpose, elopement	bzang po'i slu khrid
བཟང་པོའི་གསེར	auspicious gold	bzang po'i gser
བཟང་པོར	well	bzang por
བཟང་པོར་བརྩིས	regarded as good	bzang por brtsis
བཟང་པོར་སོང	has come to good bzang pos brgyan mi tshugs ngan pas	bzang por song
སྦགས་མི་ཚུགས་པ	cannot be improved by something good or worsened by something bad	sbags mi tshugs pa
བཟང་སྤྱོད	1) good/ moral conduct; 2) the noble bzang po spyod pa'i smon lam gyi rgyal po: a sutra, the Arya bhadracaryapranidhanaraja	bzang spyod
བཟང་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི	virtuous	bzang spyod kyi
བཟང་སྤྱོད་འཆི་བླུ	bzang spyod smon lam gyi mdo [sutra?] tshar brgya rtsa [100 times] and 100 offerings depending on that deceiving/ reversing death liturgy 'chi blu	bzang spyod 'chi blu
བཟང་སྤྱོད་སྨོན་འགྲེལ	commentary on the samantabhadracary'apranidh'anar'aja	bzang spyod smon 'grel
བཟང་སྤྱོད་སྨོན་ལམ	bhadracarya pranidhana	bzang spyod smon lam
བཟང་ཕེབས	to be selected as the best one by divine lottery	bzang phebs
བཟང་བ་གཉིས་པ	2nd good	bzang ba gnyis pa
བཟང་བ་དང་པོ	1st good	bzang ba dang po
བཟང་བ་གསུམ་པ	3rd good	bzang ba gsum pa
བཟང་བར་བརྩི་བ	count as good	bzang bar brtsi ba
བཟང་བར་བརྩི་བ་ཞིག	something counted as good	bzang bar brtsi ba zhig
བཟང་བྱས་པ	lucky, fortunate, meritorious, w white karma	bzang byas pa
བཟང་བྱེད	good action	bzang byed
བཟང་འབྲལ་བྱས	parting in a pleasant way	bzang 'bral byas
བཟང་འབྲེལ	good connection	bzang 'brel
བཟང་མང་རྙེད་པ	obtain many good things	bzang mang rnyed pa
བཟང་མོ	kindness [female]	bzang mo
བཟང་མོའི་རྣམ་ཐར	in a goddess play a woman first tells her biography	bzang mo'i rnam thar
བཟང་བཙོན	hostage, people that are snowed up	bzang btson
བཟང་བརྩོན	SA brtson	bzang brtson
བཟང་ཚུལ	how it would help	bzang tshul
བཟང་འཛོམས	gathering of legs pa mang po	bzang 'dzoms
བཟང་ཞན	good and bad	bzang zhan
བཟང་ཞེན་མི་བྱ	do not be attracted [to these] as 'good'	bzang zhen mi bya
བཟང་ཟླ	8th month	bzang zla
བཟང་བཟང	very auspicious, pretty good	bzang bzang
བཟང་ཡང་སྟོན་སྙགས	{bzang yang ston snyags} [one of the {'phrul blon mdzangs mi bdun} the 7 wise ministers, = gnyags khri bzang yang ston, srong btsan sgam po's minister, bod kyi lo rgyus thog bod kyi mi rnams de sng...	bzang yang ston snyags
བཟང་ཡང་བཟང	superior	bzang yang bzang
བཟང་ལན	a good reward	bzang lan
བཟང་ལན་ངན་འཇལ	repay good w evil	bzang lan ngan 'jal
བཟང་ལན་སློག	to respond with kindness	bzang lan slog
བཟང་ལས་བྱོལ	scorpion	bzang las byol
བཟང་ཤོས	highest	bzang shos
བཟང་སློབ	good precept/ subject of study	bzang slob
བཟངས	storied [of house of gods] 2433	bzangs
བཟད	be intolerable/ irresistible/ exhausted	bzad
བཟད་པ	intolerable, were exhausted	bzad pa
བཟན	food of animals	bzan
བཟན་ཆག	forage, fodder	bzan chag
བཟན་དུ་སྐྱུར་བ	scorn, slight, despise	bzan du skyur ba
བཟན་ལ་རུབ་པ	pounce on the prey, fall upon the food	bzan la rub pa
བཟབ	[will] be careful/ diligent	bzab
བཟབ་པ	[will] be careful/ diligent	bzab pa
བཟབ་བུ	stealth	bzab bu
བཟབས	abundance, plenty	bzabs
བཟབས་པ	be abundant, be plentiful [p gzab pa] was careful/ diligent	bzabs pa
བཟའ	Rahu, the planet-god	bza'
བཟའ་སྐར	heavenly bodies, planets and stars	bza' skar
བཟའ་སྐར་མཁན	accountant, astrologer	bza' skar mkhan
བཟའ་ཁང	restaurant, dining hall	bza' khang
བཟའ་མཁོན་བྱེད་པ	to be spiteful to your spouse	bza' mkhon byed pa
བཟའ་འཁོན་བྱེད	to be spiteful to one's spouse	bza' 'khon byed
བཟའ་གྲོགས	husband and wife, family members	bza' grogs
བཟའ་དགའ	{bza' dga' 'thung skyid la dga' ba} who take delight only in food and drink	bza' dga'
བཟའ་རྒྱུ	something to eat {ltog nas bza' rgyu ma rnyed pa} was hungry and could find nothing else to eat	bza' rgyu
བཟའ་བཅའ	foodstuffs; food and drinks	bza' bca'
བཟའ་བཅའ་ལྔ	the five foods and drinks	bza' bca' lnga
བཟའ་བཅའ་བཏང་པའི་རིགས	all sorts of edible, chewable, and drinkable	bza' bca' btang pa'i rigs
བཟའ་བཅའ་བཏང་བའི་རིགས	all sorts of edible, chewable, and drinkable bza' bca' btung ba'i rigs su gyur tshad 'byor - all provisions that are edible, chewable, and drinkable	bza' bca' btang ba'i rigs
བཟའ་བཅའི་ཚོང་ཁང	grocery store	bza' bca'i tshong khang
བཟའ་ཆ	household business	bza' cha
བཟའ་ཆའི་སྐོར	household business	bza' cha'i skor
བཟའ་ཆས	1) necessary provisions, foods; 2) household affairs	bza' chas
བཟའ་ཆས་གཙོ་བོ	staple food	bza' chas gtso bo
བཟའ་ཆས་བཟོ་ལས	food industry	bza' chas bzo las
བཟའ་གཏད	store of provisions	bza' gtad
བཟའ་བཏུང	eating and drinking; food and drink	bza' btung
བཟའ་བཏུང་བཅུད་ཅན	nutritious food and drink	bza' btung bcud can
བཟའ་བཏུང་ཕུད་མཆོད	consecratory offering of the first taste of food and drink	bza' btung phud mchod
བཟའ་བཏུང་བྱེད་པ	to eat and drink	bza' btung byed pa
བཟའ་བཏུང་ཞིམ་པ	makes good food and drink	bza' btung zhim pa
བཟའ་སྟོན་དམན་པ	bad food	bza' ston dman pa
བཟའ་འཐུང་བྱེད་ས	eatery	bza' 'thung byed sa
བཟའ་དྲུག	a family, a company at table, six people eating	bza' drug
བཟའ་སྣུམ	cooking oil	bza' snum
བཟའ་སྣོད	bza' btung byed sa'i snod ??	bza' snod
བཟའ་དཔོན	head of family/ owner of house	bza' dpon
བཟའ་ཕ	husband or man that is owner/ master of the house	bza' pha
བཟའ་ཕྲན	husband and wife	bza' phran
བཟའ་བ	food and drink, eating and drinking, to fix in a concept, having an aim	bza' ba
བཟའ་བ་ལྔ	1) {'bras chen}. 2) {zan dron} 3) {snum 'khur} 4) {sha dang} 5) {nya sha bcas la}	bza' ba lnga
བཟའ་བ་དང་བཏུང་བ་དང་བཅའ་བ	eat drink and chew bza' ba dang btung ba sna tshogs sbyin	bza' ba dang btung ba dang bca' ba
བཟའ་བ་མེད་པ	not getting fixed on a concept	bza' ba med pa
བཟའ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག	The samaya to eat; means (phung khams skye mched gdan gsum tshang ba'i dkyil 'khor du shes pas bza' ba'i dam tshig nang gi bsreg blugs kyi cho gar bstar nas tshims pa drug ldan du rol)	bza' ba'i dam tshig
བཟའ་འབྲུ	edible grains	bza' 'bru
བཟའ་མ	1) edibles; 2) wife	bza' ma
བཟའ་མང	many family members	bza' mang
བཟའ་མངས་ནང་ན	among a numerous household	bza' mangs nang na
བཟའ་མི	husband, wife	bza' mi
བཟའ་མི་གཉིས	parents, the two, husband and wife, couple	bza' mi gnyis
བཟའ་མི་བྱེད་པ	to marry	bza' mi byed pa
བཟའ་མི་རུང་བ	inedible	bza' mi rung ba
བཟའ་མེད	thin, emaciated	bza' med
བཟའ་ཚང	SA bza' mi couple	bza' tshang
བཟའ་ཚང་ཁ་བྲལ་བ	divorce	bza' tshang kha bral ba
བཟའ་ཚང་ཁྱིམ་ཐབས	householder couple/ family	bza' tshang khyim thabs
བཟའ་ཚང་གྱེས	be divorced/ separated [husband and wife]	bza' tshang gyes
བཟའ་ཚང་ལམ་ཕྲད	ster slong sogs chang sa'i cho ga ma byas pa'i bza' tshang ['dod dang 'dod mthun gyis bza' tshang lam 'phrad byung ba]	bza' tshang lam phrad
བཟའ་ཚོ	husband and wife, married couple	bza' tsho
བཟའ་ཚོ་དང་ཉེ་འབྲེལ	husband wife and near relatives	bza' tsho dang nye 'brel
བཟའ་ཚོགས	feast offerings	bza' tshogs
བཟའ་ཚོད	curry, any condiment to eat with rice	bza' tshod
བཟའ་འཚོ	husband and wife, [parents]	bza' 'tsho
བཟའ་ཟླ	1) husband and wife; 2) spouse [parents]	bza' zla
བཟའ་ཟླ་གཅིག་རང་ལེན་སྲོལ	monogamy	bza' zla gcig rang len srol
བཟའ་ཟླ་གཉིས་པ་ལེན་པ	digamy	bza' zla gnyis pa len pa
བཟའ་ཟླ་མང་པོ་ལེན་སྲོལ	polygamy	bza' zla mang po len srol
བཟའ་ཟླའི་པ་ལགས	father-in-law	bza' zla'i pa lags
བཟའ་ཟླའི་ཨ་མ	mother-in-law	bza' zla'i a ma
བཟའ་བཟོས་པ	prepare food	bza' bzos pa
བཟའ་རིགས	household affairs	bza' rigs
བཟའ་རུང་བ	edible	bza' rung ba
བཟའ་རོགས	husband, lover 2434	bza' rogs
བཟའ་ལི་ཐིག་སྨན	zhang zhung princess married to srong btsan sgam po	bza' li thig sman
བཟའ་ཤིང	fruit tree	bza' shing
བཟའ་ཤིང་གི་ར	grove of fruit trees	bza' shing gi ra
བཟའ་ཤིང་གི་ར་བ	orchard	bza' shing gi ra ba
བཟའ་ཤིང་ར་བ	grove of fruit trees	bza' shing ra ba
བཟའ་ཤུག	SA khyim shug	bza' shug
བཟའ་གསུམ	bigamy	bza' gsum
བཟའི་ན་བ	planet, SA sgra gcan	bza'i na ba
བཟར	1) eat; 2) hung down; 3) pitchfork	bzar
བཟར་ཐག	a kind of bee	bzar thag
བཟར་བུ	a ladle, spoon	bzar bu
བཟས	eat, SA za ba	bzas
བཟས་པ	ate [p za]	bzas pa
བཟི	(tha mi dad pa [get] drunk, drugged, intoxication, drunken fit, stupefaction	bzi
བཟི་ཁྱོམ་ཁྱོམ	rang tshod mi zin pa'i 'dar yom yom, mgo yu 'khor te bzi khyom khyom byed pa ??? shiver	bzi khyom khyom
བཟི་འཁྱོམ་འཁྱོམ་རྒྱུག	dizzy with intoxication	bzi 'khyom 'khyom rgyug
བཟི་འཐོན་འཁྱོར	body/ mind unclear, unreliable, disordered, dizziness	bzi 'thon 'khyor
བཟི་འཐོན་འཁྱོར་བྱེད	feel dizzy	bzi 'thon 'khyor byed
བཟི་འཐོམ	body/ mind unclear, unreliable, disordered, dizziness	bzi 'thom
བཟི་འཐོམ་འཐོམ	body/ mind unclear, unreliable, disordered	bzi 'thom 'thom
བཟི་འཐོམ་འཐོམ་བྱེད	feel dizzy	bzi 'thom 'thom byed
བཟི་འཐོམ་བྱེད	feel dizzy	bzi 'thom byed
བཟི་དྭངས་པ	recover from intoxication	bzi dwangs pa
བཟི་བ	(tha mi dad pa [get] drunk, drugged, intoxication	bzi ba
བཟི་བར་བྱེད་པ	intoxicate, make drunk	bzi bar byed pa
བཟི་བེར	tipsy, slight intoxication	bzi ber
བཟི་སྨན	drug	bzi sman
བཟི་ཡོམ་ཡོམ	lus kyi rang tsho shor ba'i 'dar tshul, nad pa bzi yom yom du 'gro ba ??? shiver	bzi yom yom
བཟུ་བོའི་བློ	pure mind	bzu bo'i blo
བཟུགས	form material substances	bzugs
བཟུགས་མེད་ཁམས་བཞི	the four formless realms	bzugs med khams bzhi
བཟུང་བཀྱིགས	taken/ captured and bound	bzung bkyigs
བཟུང་བཀྱིགས་ཁྲིམས་རའི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	[one of the {zhal lce bcu drug} snga dus khrims 'gal nag ???	bzung bkyigs khrims ra'i zhal lce
བཟུང་ཁྲིད	kidnapping	bzung khrid
བཟུང་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	kidnap	bzung khrid byed
བཟུང་འཇོམས་བརྐུས་བསད	by robbers an bandits etc. faults of robbing and killing	bzung 'joms brkus bsad
བཟུང་སྟེ	since	bzung ste
བཟུང་ཐགས	string with a noose	bzung thags
བཟུང་དུ་གསོལ	please accept	bzung du gsol
བཟུང་དྲན	tenacious mindfulness, a tenacious presence of mind	bzung dran
བཟུང་ནས	having taken, seized	bzung nas
བཟུང་རྣམ	that which has the aspect of the apprehended	bzung rnam
བཟུང་བ	seized	bzung ba
བཟུང་བའི་ཡུལ	perceived objects	bzung ba'i yul
བཟུང་བར་བྱ་བ་ཅི་ཡང་མེད	w/o anything to be grasped	bzung bar bya ba ci yang med
བཟུང་བར་འོས་པ	suitable to grasp	bzung bar 'os pa
བཟུང་བས	by holding the breath, if one holds the breath	bzung bas
བཟུང་བས་མ་ཟིན	unapproachable through reification	bzung bas ma zin
བཟུང་བྱ	object held	bzung bya
བཟུང་བྱར་མེད	not [to be] grasped	bzung byar med
བཟུང་དམག	captured enemy soldier, POW	bzung dmag
བཟུང་འཛིན	apprehended apprehend, subject object fixation, subject and object. Syn {mtha' gnyis} Being and nonbeing. or subject and object	bzung 'dzin
བཟུང་འཛིན་གྱི་ཆོས	fixating and grasped phenomena, object and subject, dualistic phenomena bzung 'dzin grangs mnyam sems tsam	bzung 'dzin gyi chos
བཟུང་ཡུལ	object of apprehension	bzung yul
བཟུང་ལ་ཐུག	just about to seize	bzung la thug
བཟུངས་འཇུགས	great union	bzungs 'jugs
བཟུངས་ཏེ	from that time, ever since/	bzungs te
བཟུངས་དུས	from that time/ beginning with that time	bzungs dus
བཟུམ	close, SA 'dzum pa	bzum
བཟུར	avoid[ed], step[ped] aside, shy away from, change[d] course	bzur
བཟུར་ཏེ་ཁེར་ཉལ་བྱས་པ	have set you apart, and you live alone	bzur te kher nyal byas pa
བཟུར་བ	pf. of {'dzur ba}; to dodge, shy away from	bzur ba
བཟུལ	creep in, SA 'dzul ba	bzul
བཟེ	pain	bze
བཟེ་རུ	a little nail	bze ru
བཟེ་རེ	pain, anxiety, being susceptible or overly sensitive, impatience, paranoia, panic	bze re
བཟེ་རེ་ཅན	short-tempered, impatient, fretful, offended easily	bze re can
བཟེ་རེ་ཆུང	short-tempered, impatient, fretful, offended easily	bze re chung
བཟེ་རེ་ཆེ་བ	very patient, good tempered, having the power of endurance	bze re che ba
བཟེ་རེ་བྱེད་པ	inflict pain, torment, be angry with	bze re byed pa
བཟེང	rise, write	bzeng
བཟེད	basin, bowl, receive, suffer, get [something bad] [p 'dzed], was unable to bear, held as a receptacle for something poured	bzed
བཟེད་སྣོད	bzed zhal - plate	bzed snod
བཟེད་པ	hold out, SA 'dzed pa	bzed pa
བཟེད་ཞལ	basin, zhag sogs blug snod	bzed zhal
བཟེབ་སྣོད	elongated basket	bzeb snod
བཟེམ	blush, shrink, avoid, shun, SA 'dzem pa	bzem
བཟེར་བ	bore into, drive into, pound into, nail	bzer ba
བཟེར་བུ	little nail, tack	bzer bu
བཟེས	to the left (?)	bzes
བཟོ	technology and the fine arts, fabrication, work, labor, occupation, trade, handicraft, workmanship, figure, image, picture, resemblance, appearance, "seem" constructions, to make, causative particle	bzo
བཟོ་དཀྲུན	creation	bzo dkrun
བཟོ་བཀོད	shaping/ designing and making, model, design, project, works	bzo bkod
བཟོ་བཀོད་པ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfectly designed and executed	bzo bkod pa phun sum tshogs pa
བཟོ་བཀོད་དཔེ་གསར	new model/ project	bzo bkod dpe gsar
བཟོ་བཀོད་བྱེད	shape/ design and make	bzo bkod byed
བཟོ་རྐུན	a strike-breaker, scab	bzo rkun
བཟོ་སྐྱོར་བྱེད་པ	to amend	bzo skyor byed pa
བཟོ་སྐྲུན	produce manufacture things	bzo skrun
བཟོ་སྐྲུན་དགེ་རྒན	civil engineer	bzo skrun dge rgan
བཟོ་སྐྲུན་བྱེད་པ	to produce, make, manufacture	bzo skrun byed pa
བཟོ་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཡུལ	construction site	bzo skrun las yul
བཟོ་སྐྲུན་ལས་རིགས	manufacturing/ construction industry	bzo skrun las rigs
བཟོ་སྐྲུན་ལས་ས	construction site	bzo skrun las sa
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན	produce/ manufacture things, construction, building	bzo bskrun
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་དགེ་རྒན	civil engineer	bzo bskrun dge rgan
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད་པ	produce, make, manufacture, build	bzo bskrun byed pa
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་ལས་ཡུལ	construction site	bzo bskrun las yul
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་ལས་རིགས	manufacturing/ construction industry	bzo bskrun las rigs
བཟོ་བསྐྲུན་ལས་ས	construction site	bzo bskrun las sa
བཟོ་ཁང	workshop	bzo khang
བཟོ་ཁྱད	excellent work of art	bzo khyad
བཟོ་མཁན	worker, artist, craftsman	bzo mkhan
བཟོ་གྲ	factory, industry, workshop	bzo gra
བཟོ་གྲྭ	factory, workshop	bzo grwa
བཟོ་གྲྭའི་བློན་ཆེན	minister for industry	bzo grwa'i blon chen
བཟོ་གླ	1) cost of/ charge for manufacture; 2) wages	bzo gla
བཟོ་འགོ	foreman	bzo 'go
བཟོ་འགོ་ངན་པ	labor broker/ middle man [pej], bad foreman	bzo 'go ngan pa
བཟོ་རྒྱལ་ཀར་མ་བི་ཤབ༹	the King of Artists Vishvakarma was the greatest artist of the Buddha's time. Three statues that he made representing the Buddha were blessed by the Buddha himself	bzo rgyal kar ma bi shva
བཟོ་རྒྱུ	material to manufacture something with, working materials	bzo rgyu
བཟོ་ཅན	selfishness	bzo can
བཟོ་བཅོས	fabrication	bzo bcos
བཟོ་བཅོས་ཀྱི་ལྷན་པ	artificial patches	bzo bcos kyi lhan pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་རྒྱག	change, transform, alter, revise repair, mend	bzo bcos rgyag
བཟོ་བཅོས་རྒྱག་པ	change, transform, alter, revise repair, mend	bzo bcos rgyag pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་རྒྱབ་པ	to alter	bzo bcos rgyab pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་བརྒྱབ་པ	to amend, alter	bzo bcos brgyab pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་གཏོང	repair, alter, revise, change, transform	bzo bcos gtong
བཟོ་བཅོས་གཏོང་ཐབས་མེད་པ	irreparable	bzo bcos gtong thabs med pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་བཏང	repaired, altered, revised, changed, transformed	bzo bcos btang
བཟོ་བཅོས་བཏང་བ	repaired, altered, revised, changed, transformed	bzo bcos btang ba
བཟོ་བཅོས་བྱེད	change, transform, alter, revise repair, mend	bzo bcos byed
བཟོ་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	gsung la bzo bcos	bzo bcos byed pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་བྱེད་རུང་བ	reparable	bzo bcos byed rung ba
བཟོ་བཅོས་མ་བྱས་པ	neither correct nor modify	bzo bcos ma byas pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་མེད་པ	without modifying anything	bzo bcos med pa
བཟོ་བཅོས་རིང་ལུགས	revisionism	bzo bcos ring lugs
བཟོ་བཅོས་ལྷུ་སྒྲིག	repair and assembly	bzo bcos lhu sgrig
བཟོ་བཅོས་ལྷུ་སྒྲིག་གི་བཟོ་གྲྭ	repair shop	bzo bcos lhu sgrig gi bzo grwa
བཟོ་ཆས	tool[s]	bzo chas
བཟོ་ཆུང	lha bris pa'i skyid sdug tshogs chung zhig ???	bzo chung
བཟོ་ཉེས	deformation	bzo nyes
བཟོ་ཉེས་དྲས་ཐལ	thal che ba'i dpe	bzo nyes dras thal
བཟོ་ཏ	bzo lta	bzo ta
བཟོ་གཏེར	an arts/creativity treasure	bzo gter
བཟོ་གཏེར་ཁེ་ལས	manufacturing and mining enterprise	bzo gter khe las
བཟོ་རྟགས	brand	bzo rtags
བཟོ་ལྟ	manner, shape, look, appearance, style	bzo lta
བཟོ་ལྟ་ངན་པ	ugly	bzo lta ngan pa
བཟོ་ལྟ་འཆོས	create an image	bzo lta 'chos
བཟོ་ལྟ་འཆོས་པ	create an image	bzo lta 'chos pa
བཟོ་ལྟ་ཉེས་ཅན	deformity	bzo lta nyes can
བཟོ་ལྟ་སྟོན	show/ manifest an appearance/ look/ sign[s of]	bzo lta ston
བཟོ་ལྟ་སྟོན་པ	fashion mould	bzo lta ston pa
བཟོ་ལྟ་ཐོན་པ	dbyibs dod pa	bzo lta thon pa
བཟོ་ལྟ་མདོག་ཉེས་བཟོ་བ	deform	bzo lta mdog nyes bzo ba
བཟོ་ལྟ་སྤྲད་པ	ha cang khag po'i gnas su gyar bcug pa, gzhan la bzo lta sprad 2436 nas 'gro sdod mi shes pa bzos pa ???	bzo lta sprad pa
བཟོ་ལྟ་བུ	resembling, like	bzo lta bu
བཟོ་ལྟ་བཟོ་བ	shape	bzo lta bzo ba
བཟོ་ལྟ་ཤོར	damaged, defective, injured, broken form/ shape, lose 1's front/ facade	bzo lta shor
བཟོ་ལྟ་ཤོར་བ	chos pa'i bzo lta shor ba cease to appear as real Dharma practitioners	bzo lta shor ba
བཟོ་ལྟ་བཤིག་པ	deface	bzo lta bshig pa
བཟོ་ལྟའི་རིང་ལུགས	formalism	bzo lta'i ring lugs
བཟོ་སྟངས	style	bzo stangs
བཟོ་སྟེགས	an anvil	bzo stegs
བཟོ་བལྟ	form, fashion, look, shape, make, style of a house	bzo blta
བཟོ་ཐོན	formation	bzo thon
བཟོ་ཐོན་པ	dbyibs tshugs yag po dod pa ???	bzo thon pa
བཟོ་བདག	workers and owners, labor and management	bzo bdag
བཟོ་འདོན	production, manufacturing	bzo 'don
བཟོ་འདོན་བྱེད	produce, manufacture	bzo 'don byed
བཟོ་འདྲ	likely	bzo 'dra
བཟོ་འདྲ་པོ	seem, look like	bzo 'dra po
བཟོ་འདྲ་ཞིག་འདུག	to appear as, seems to be, have the appearance of	bzo 'dra zhig 'dug
བཟོ་གནས	cover term for skill in arts and crafts	bzo gnas
བཟོ་གནས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	mechanical art	bzo gnas kyi rig pa
བཟོ་སྣོན	processing [products]	bzo snon
བཟོ་པ	worker, artist, craftsman	bzo pa
བཟོ་པ་སྣོན་ཐོན་པ	advanced workers [artist, craftsman, laborer]	bzo pa snon thon pa
བཟོ་པ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	gifted artist	bzo pa sprul sku
བཟོ་པ་བུད་མེད	woman worker/ artist/ craftsman/ laborer	bzo pa bud med
བཟོ་པ་ལག་རྩལ་ཅན	skilled worker	bzo pa lag rtsal can
བཟོ་པའི་གྲལ་རིམ	working class	bzo pa'i gral rim
བཟོ་པའི་འགོ་པ	foreman	bzo pa'i 'go pa
བཟོ་པའི་ནང་རུལ་མི	scab, strike breaker [-ing]	bzo pa'i nang rul mi
བཟོ་པའི་རྩ་འཛུགས	trade/ labor union	bzo pa'i rtsa 'dzugs
བཟོ་པོ	gzan gron chung ba'am skyon ma shor ba byed pa, bed spyod gtong thabs bzo po byed pa	bzo po
བཟོ་པོ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	nirmanakaya in the form of a gifted artist or master craftsman, {sprul sku gsum}	bzo po sprul sku
བཟོ་དཔོན	1) good at making something; 2) supervisor/ foreman of work	bzo dpon
བཟོ་སྤྱད	tools	bzo spyad
བཟོ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	created nirmanakaya	bzo sprul sku
བཟོ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར་ཆས	industrial plant	bzo 'phrul 'khor chas
བཟོ་བ	1) (Tha dad pa bzos pa, bzo ba, bzos,; 1) dbyibs 'don pa, [dngos spyad-/ gro sa--/ 'gal rkyen--]; 2) gron chung ba'am skyon ma 'byung ba [za 'bru la--/	bzo ba
གཟུགས་པོ་ལ	-/ snga ru rta la --, phyi ru	gzugs po la
སྒ་ལ	-]; 2) pacify/ tame put up, put over, build, shape, create, manufacture, worker, artist, craftsman, laborer	sga la
བཟོ་བ་པོ	craftsman, manufacturer	bzo ba po
བཟོ་བའི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	emanation of artistry; created nirmanakaya	bzo ba'i sprul sku
བཟོ་བའི་སྤྲུལ་པ	emanation (who benefits) through artistry/ artistic expression; nirmanakaya artist; emanation of artistry	bzo ba'i sprul pa
བཟོ་བོ	craftsman	bzo bo
བཟོ་བོ་སྐུ	{bzo pa sprul sku}	bzo bo sku
བཟོ་བོ་སྣ་ཚོགས	various workers, maker of the world	bzo bo sna tshogs
བཟོ་བོ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅན	divine architect	bzo bo sna tshogs can
བཟོ་བོ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	{bzo ba'i sprul sku}	bzo bo sprul sku
བཟོ་བོའི་སྐྱོན་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 faults of craftsmanship	bzo bo'i skyon bcu gsum
བཟོ་བོར་བསྐོས	appointed as craftsman; {brgya byin gyis bi shwa karma bzo bor bskos te} Sakra appointed Visvakar- man, the master craftsman of the gods, to build	bzo bor bskos
བཟོ་བྱེད	do crafts	bzo byed
བཟོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 faults of craftsmanship	bzo byed kyi skyon bco brgyad
བཟོ་དབྱིབས	feature, figure, form, shape	bzo dbyibs
བཟོ་དབྱིབས་འགྱུར	change [design, shapes, forms, figures, image], be transformed	bzo dbyibs 'gyur
བཟོ་དབྱིབས་འགྱུར་བ	transform	bzo dbyibs 'gyur ba
བཟོ་དབྱིབས་བཤིག་པ	deform, distort	bzo dbyibs bshig pa
བཟོ་འབྲེལ་རིང་ལུགས	labor federalism	bzo 'brel ring lugs
བཟོ་སྦྱོར་གྱི་རྟགས	twisted evidence [ggd]	bzo sbyor gyi rtags
བཟོ་མ་བཅོས་པ	unfabricated	bzo ma bcos pa
བཟོ་མ་ཉམས	this aspect is not modified	bzo ma nyams
བཟོ་མ་བྱས	unfabricated nonfabrication	bzo ma byas
བཟོ་མི་འཆོས	not alter	bzo mi 'chos
བཟོ་མི་འཆོས་པ	to not alter	bzo mi 'chos pa
བཟོ་མི་འདུག	"does not seem" construction	bzo mi 'dug
བཟོ་མེད	unaffected/ unforced/ uncontrived	bzo med
བཟོ་མོ	female worker	bzo mo
བཟོ་རྨས	work accident	bzo rmas
བཟོ་རྩལ	making/ manufacturing work, means, skill etc., technology	bzo rtsal
བཟོ་རྩལ་གྱི་ཇུས་འགོད	technological design	bzo rtsal gyi jus 'god
བཟོ་རྩལ་གྱི་ཐོན་རྫས	technological products	bzo rtsal gyi thon rdzas
བཟོ་ཚོགས	labor union, trade union	bzo tshogs
བཟོ་ཚོགས་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ	federation of trade unions 2437	bzo tshogs mnyam 'brel tshogs pa
བཟོ་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས	trade/ labor unionism	bzo tshogs ring lugs
བཟོ་ཚོང	industry and commerce	bzo tshong
བཟོ་ཚོང་ཞིང་ཕྱུགས	industry commerce farming and animal husbandry	bzo tshong zhing phyugs
བཟོ་ཚོང་ལས་རིགས	industrial and commercial enterprises	bzo tshong las rigs
བཟོ་ཚོད	the extent to which something is being made	bzo tshod
བཟོ་རྫས	industrial/ manufactured products	bzo rdzas
བཟོ་རྫས་ཆེས་ལྷག	over-production of industrial/ manufactured products	bzo rdzas ches lhag
བཟོ་ཞིང	workers and peasants	bzo zhing
བཟོ་ཞིང་མནའ་འབྲེལ	worker/ peasant alliance	bzo zhing mna' 'brel
བཟོ་ཞིང་མང་ཚོགས	the masses of workers and peasants	bzo zhing mang tshogs
བཟོ་ཞིང་དམག་གསུམ	workers peasants and soldiers	bzo zhing dmag gsum
བཟོ་ཞིང་དམར་དམག	workers and peasants red army	bzo zhing dmar dmag
བཟོ་ཞིང་ལས་བྱེད་པ	workers and peasants cadres	bzo zhing las byed pa
བཟོ་ཞིང་ལས་རིགས	agricultural and industrial enterprises	bzo zhing las rigs
བཟོ་གཞིས	industrial settlement	bzo gzhis
བཟོ་བཞིན་པ	making	bzo bzhin pa
བཟོ་ཟིན་པ	made	bzo zin pa
བཟོ་ཡི་གནས	all acts and crafts	bzo yi gnas
བཟོ་ཡི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	artisan emanation	bzo yi sprul sku
བཟོ་ར	work site/ shop	bzo ra
བཟོ་རིག	arts, technology, arts and crafts	bzo rig
བཟོ་རིག་གི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ་སུམ་ཅུ	the 30 making crafts	bzo rig gi sgyu rtsal sum cu
བཟོ་རིག་གནས	arts	bzo rig gnas
བཟོ་རིག་པ	bzo and 'phong rtsal etc. mkhas par bya ba'i gnas so arts and crafts	bzo rig pa
བཟོ་རིགས	craftsman, arts, technical work	bzo rigs
བཟོ་རིགས་རེ་བཞི	64 arts	bzo rigs re bzhi
བཟོ་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ	vocational/ technical school	bzo rigs slob grwa
བཟོ་རིགས་སློབ་སྦྱོང	vocational training	bzo rigs slob sbyong
བཟོ་རིས	design	bzo ris
བཟོ་རིས་ཀྱི་དཔེ	design	bzo ris kyi dpe
བཟོ་ལག	handicraft	bzo lag
བཟོ་ལག་ཤེས	handicraft work	bzo lag shes
བཟོ་ལམ་གཞིས་གསུམ	industries, road construction and settlements [three activities of Tibetan refugees in India]	bzo lam gzhis gsum
བཟོ་ལས	industry	bzo las
བཟོ་ལས་ཀྱི་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	industrial front	bzo las kyi 'thab phyogs
བཟོ་ལས་གོང་འཕེལ	industrial development	bzo las gong 'phel
བཟོ་ལས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	industrial city	bzo las grong khyer
བཟོ་ལས་དགེ་རྒན	engineer	bzo las dge rgan
བཟོ་ལས་རྒུ་ཆ	industrial raw materials	bzo las rgu cha
བཟོ་ལས་རྒུ་ཆའི་ལོ་ཏོག	crops that are industrial raw materials	bzo las rgu cha'i lo tog
བཟོ་ལས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	industrial country	bzo las rgyal khab
བཟོ་ལས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལ་དབང་བ	state ownership of industry	bzo las rgyal khab la dbang ba
བཟོ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	industrialize	bzo las can du 'gyur
བཟོ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	industrialize	bzo las can du 'gyur ba
བཟོ་ལས་ལྕི་བ	heavy industry	bzo las lci ba
བཟོ་ལས་ཐོན་ཆས	industrial product	bzo las thon chas
བཟོ་ལས་ཐོན་རྫས	industrial product	bzo las thon rdzas
བཟོ་ལས་ཐོན་ཟོག	industrial product	bzo las thon zog
བཟོ་ལས་པ	engineer, technical expert	bzo las pa
བཟོ་ལས་དཔལ་འབྱོར	industrial economy	bzo las dpal 'byor
བཟོ་ལས་མ་ལག	industrial system	bzo las ma lag
བཟོ་ལས་ཚན་ཁག	technical department	bzo las tshan khag
བཟོ་ལས་འཛུགས་སྐྲུན	industrial development/ construction	bzo las 'dzugs skrun
བཟོ་ལས་གཞིས་ཆགས	industrial settlement	bzo las gzhis chags
བཟོ་ལས་ཡང་བ	light industry	bzo las yang ba
བཟོ་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་གྱི་བྱ་རིམ	technological process	bzo las lag rtsal gyi bya rim
བཟོ་ལས་གཤོལ་བ	strike	bzo las gshol ba
བཟོ་ལས་ས་ཁུལ	industrial area/ district	bzo las sa khul
བཟོ་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	engineering college	bzo las slob grwa chen po
བཟོ་ཤེས	know how to make/ the science of manufacture	bzo shes
བཟོ་སློབ་ཁང	technical school	bzo slob khang
བཟོ་གསུམ	the three skills/ arts, crafts of body speech and mind	bzo gsum
བཟོག	(not in das)	bzog
བཟོད	adequate, consent to, [be able to] bear, [with]stand, endure, suffer	bzod
བཟོད་དཀའ	unbearable realm	bzod dka'
བཟོད་དཀའ་བ	unbearable	bzod dka' ba
བཟོད་དཀའ་རེངས	Indra	bzod dka' rengs
བཟོད་དཀའི་སྡིག་གདུང	stricken by the torment of unbearable misdeeds	bzod dka'i sdig gdung
བཟོད་དཀས་རངས	epithet of indra, name of brgya byin lha	bzod dkas rangs
བཟོད་གླགས	to tolerate, bear, support; endure	bzod glags
བཟོད་གླགས་ཆེ་བར་བྱ	you should have great patience	bzod glags che bar bya
བཟོད་གླགས་མད	to run after	bzod glags mad
བཟོད་གླགས་མེད་པ	unbearable	bzod glags med pa
བཟོད་གླགས་མེད་པའི་སེམས	cannot bear x {nyin zhag kha shas tsam zhig bzod glags med pa'i sems mdza' ba'i lang tshos blo gros kyi mig long} We cannot bear to be away from our lover for even a day; with minds distracted in s...	bzod glags med pa'i sems
བཟོད་སྒོམ	sufferance	bzod sgom
བཟོད་སྒོམ་བྱེད	bear, be patient/ restrained, tolerate, endure, forbear	bzod sgom byed
བཟོད་སྒོམ་བྱེད་པ	be patient, restrain oneself	bzod sgom byed pa
བཟོད་སྒོམ་མ་ཐུབ་མཁན	intolerant	bzod sgom ma thub mkhan
བཟོད་མངའ་བ	enduring much, name of a buddha	bzod mnga' ba
བཟོད་མཆོག	{bzod pa chos mchog}	bzod mchog
བཟོད་མཆོག་གཉིས	both acceptance and supreme attribute	bzod mchog gnyis
བཟོད་འཇུག་པ	make forgive, cause to forgive	bzod 'jug pa
བཟོད་ཐབས་གཏན་བྲལ	unbearable, overwhelming, intolerable	bzod thabs gtan bral
བཟོད་ཐབས་བྲལ་བ	unbearable, overwhelming, intolerable	bzod thabs bral ba
བཟོད་ཐབས་མེད་པ	unbearable, overwhelming, intolerable	bzod thabs med pa
བཟོད་ཐེག	patience, restraint, tolerance, endurance, forbearance	bzod theg
བཟོད་དུ་མེད་པ	irresistible (i.e., bliss); unbearable (i.e., suffering)	bzod du med pa
བཟོད་ལྡན	1) mule; 2) the earth	bzod ldan
བཟོད་ལྡན་མ	1) 11th or mgo month; 2) the earth	bzod ldan ma
བཟོད་ནས	from the beginning	bzod nas
ཨཅཅེཔཏནཅེ	forgiveness, receptiveness, bear, endure, suffer, forgive	acceptance
བཟོད་པར	could not bear the brahmin's suffering	bzod par
བཟོད་པ་དཀའ	unbearable	bzod pa dka'
བཟོད་པ་སྒོམ་པ	tolerate	bzod pa sgom pa
བཟོད་པ་སྒོམ་མ་ཐུབ་པ	intolerable	bzod pa sgom ma thub pa
བཟོད་པ་སྒོམས	cultivate patience!	bzod pa sgoms
བཟོད་པ་སྒོམས་ཤིག	ex {kun la bzod pa sgoms shig} cultivate patience toward everyone!	bzod pa sgoms shig
བཟོད་པ་བསྒོམ	be tolerant; meditate on patience	bzod pa bsgom
བཟོད་པ་བསྒོམ་པ	contemplating patience	bzod pa bsgom pa
བཟོད་པ་བསྒོམས་པ	to cultivate patience	bzod pa bsgoms pa
བཟོད་པ་བསྟན་པ	the transcendental perfection of patience	bzod pa bstan pa
བཟོད་པ་འཐོབ	attain patience	bzod pa 'thob
བཟོད་པ་དང་ལྡན	patient	bzod pa dang ldan
བཟོད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	endowed with patience	bzod pa dang ldan pa
བཟོད་པ་དང་ཤེས་པ	patient acceptance of cognition	bzod pa dang shes pa
བཟོད་པ་དང་ཤེས་པའི	patient acceptance of cognition	bzod pa dang shes pa'i
བཟོད་པ་དམ་པའི་གོས	the noble garments of patience bzod pa phyir mi ldog pa'i rtags gnyis the two signs of irreversibility because of patience	bzod pa dam pa'i gos
བཟོད་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unsurpassable patience	bzod pa bla na med pa
བཟོད་པ་མང	many restraints/ forbearances	bzod pa mang
བཟོད་པ་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	reach the peak of patience	bzod pa rtse sbyor
བཟོད་པ་བཞེས	patiently accept	bzod pa bzhes
བཟོད་པ་འི་སྐབས	stage of acceptance (on the path of joining bzod pa yongs su smin pa'i mtshan bzod	bzod pa 'i skabs
པ་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	classification of patience in terms of complete ripening of patience	pa rab tu dbye ba
བཟོད་པ་ལ་དགའ་བ	rejoice in patience	bzod pa la dga' ba
བཟོད་པ་སྲན	unwearied patience	bzod pa sran
བཟོད་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of patience	bzod pa gsum
བཟོད་པའི་སྐབས	stage of acceptance [on the path of joining]	bzod pa'i skabs
བཟོད་པའི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	establish the armor of patience	bzod pa'i go sgrub
བཟོད་པའི་གོ་ཆ	the armor of patience	bzod pa'i go cha
བཟོད་པའི་གོ་ཆ་གྱོན་པ	to don the armor of patience	bzod pa'i go cha gyon pa
བཟོད་པའི་རྟེན	catalyst for developing patience	bzod pa'i rten
བཟོད་པའི་སྟོབས	power of forbearance/ enduring/ patience/ seeing through	bzod pa'i stobs
བཟོད་པའི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	produce ultimate patience	bzod pa'i mthar gyis pa
བཟོད་པའི་མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བ	reach ultimate patience	bzod pa'i mthar gyis sbyor ba
བཟོད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	occasion of patience	bzod pa'i gnas skabs
བཟོད་པའི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendental patience, the perfection of patience	bzod pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa
བཟོད་པའི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	the perfection of patience kshantaparamita	bzod pa'i phar phyin
བཟོད་པའི་ཕར་ཕྱིན་རྫོགས་པ	perfecting the paramita of patience	bzod pa'i phar phyin rdzogs pa
བཟོད་པའི་མུ་ཁྱུད	donkey	bzod pa'i mu khyud
བཟོད་པའི་རྩེ་སྦྱོར	reaching the peak of patience	bzod pa'i rtse sbyor
བཟོད་པའི་གཟུངས	{bzod pa'i gzungs}, a patience producing meditation	bzod pa'i gzungs
བཟོད་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ནི་གཟུང་བར་བྱ	Be patient!	bzod pa'i yon tan ni gzung bar bya
བཟོད་པའི་སེམས	forbearance, patient endurance, fortitude, constancy	bzod pa'i sems
བཟོད་པར་དཀའ	difficult to bear	bzod par dka'
བཟོད་པར་དཀའ་བ	overwhelming	bzod par dka' ba
བཟོད་པར་འགྱུར	bear, will bear	bzod par 'gyur
བཟོད་པར་བྱ	I must bear!	bzod par bya
བཟོད་པར་བྱ་དགོམ	I must bear!	bzod par bya dgom
བཟོད་པར་བྱ་དགོས་སྙམ་དུ	vowing to bear	bzod par bya dgos snyam du
བཟོད་པར་བཞེས	please bear with me!	bzod par bzhes
བཟོད་པར་བཞེས་འཚལ	Please forgive!	bzod par bzhes 'tshal
བཟོད་པར་གསོལ	Please forgive!, ask for forgiveness, request tolerance	bzod par gsol
བཟོད་པར་གསོལ་བ	to request forbearance	bzod par gsol ba
རྩིའི་ཆར་ལྟ་བུ	like a rain of nectar that clears the dust of anger through patience	rtsi'i char lta bu
བཟོད་པས་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་ཐོབ་པ	by patience attain equanimity	bzod pas mnyam pa nyid thob pa
བཟོད་སྤྲོ	[arch] sdug khur dang du len pa	bzod spro
བཟོད་བ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of patience	bzod ba rnam gsum
བཟོད་བླག	unbearable	bzod blag
བཟོད་བླག་མེད	unbearable, irresistible	bzod blag med
བཟོད་བླག་མེད་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	overwhelming compassion	bzod blag med pa'i snying rje
བཟོད་འབྲིང	middling degree of receptiveness on the path of connection	bzod 'bring
བཟོད་མ	the earth	bzod ma
བཟོད་མི་ཐུབ་པ	feeling bad, unbearable, distressed	bzod mi thub pa
བཟོད་མེད	overwhelming, overwhelm	bzod med
བཟོད་མེད་སྙིང་རྗེ	overwhelming compassion, irresistible compassion	bzod med snying rje
བཟོད་མེད་དུ་འཁུལ	overwhelmed	bzod med du 'khul
བཟོད་བཞེས	Forgive!	bzod bzhes
བཟོད་འོས་པ	tolerable	bzod 'os pa
བཟོད་ཡས	number [grangs kyi gnas drug cu'i rtsi stangs bzhan zhig nang yod pa'i grangs ka'i ming]	bzod yas
བཟོད་བརླག	unbearable	bzod brlag
བཟོད་ཤེས	acceptance of subsequent cognition	bzod shes
བཟོད་བཤེས	Forgive!	bzod bshes
བཟོད་སེམས	patient	bzod sems
བཟོད་སེམས་མེད་པ	impatient	bzod sems med pa
བཟོད་སྲན	patient, tolerant	bzod sran
བཟོད་སྲན་ཅན	patient 2439	bzod sran can
བཟོད་སྲན་བྱེད་པ	endure	bzod sran byed pa
བཟོད་གསོལ	bshags pa - apology, confession	bzod gsol
བཟོད་གསོལ་ཞུ	ask for forgiveness/ pardon, request tolerance, apologize	bzod gsol zhu
བཟོད་གསོལ་ཞུ་བ	to ask forgiveness, apologize; Syn {dgongs sel zhu ba}	bzod gsol zhu ba
བཟོད་བསྲན	patient, one who exercises forgiving patience	bzod bsran
བཟོད་བསྲན་སྒོམ་པ	patient, forbearing produce power of patience	bzod bsran sgom pa
བཟོད་བསྲན་ཆུང	short-tempered, impatient, fretful, offended easily	bzod bsran chung
བཟོད་བསྲན་ཆེ་བ	very patient, good tempered, having the power of endurance	bzod bsran che ba
བཟོད་བསྲན་ཆེ་བ་ཀ་བ་ལྟ་བུ	like a pillar, untiringly bear any load; be ready to bear anything, like a pillar	bzod bsran che ba ka ba lta bu
བཟོད་བསྲན་པ	meditate on the virtue of forbearance	bzod bsran pa
བཟོབ་པ	assiduity, SA gsob pa	bzob pa
བཟོམ	tub	bzom
བཟོམ་པ	tub, bucket, cask	bzom pa
བཟོའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	treatises on arts/ crafts/ manufacture	bzo'i bstan bcos
བཟོའི་གནས	arts; craft, the study of arts and crafts, creation, sciences	bzo'i gnas
བཟོའི་གནས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	the study of arts and crafts/ manufacture	bzo'i gnas kyi rig pa
བཟོའི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	working tulku	bzo'i sprul sku
བཟོའི་བྱེ་བྲག་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 64-4]	bzo'i bye brag bco brgyad
བཟོའི་ལས་ཀྱི་གནས	place of manufacture, craft, the study of arts and crafts, creation, sciences	bzo'i las kyi gnas
བཟོར་བཏགས་པ་སུམ་ཅུ	Thirty Designated Arts. These include creative techniques, writing, drawing, arithmetic, wrestling, hairstyling, deportment, elephant-riding, sword- fencing, javelinthrowing, archery and so forth. ...	bzor btags pa sum cu
བཟོས	bzo ba!	bzos
བཟོས་སྒོ	income, earnings, proceeds, praising, expression of respect to one who does good service to the state, profit	bzos sgo
བཟོས་དངུལ	lkog tu bzos pa'am or stolen money	bzos dngul
བཟོས་པ	build, SA 'chos pa, fed, anything eaten up, made from	bzos pa
བཟོས་ལམ	byas rjes gzigs bzos kyi lam srol ???	bzos lam
བཟླ	will consecrate, repeat, recite, recitation, mantra recitation [f zlo ba]	bzla
བཟླ་བ	(mantra) repetition; to repeat (mantras)	bzla ba
བཟླ་བའི་དམིགས་པ	visualization for reciting	bzla ba'i dmigs pa
བཟླ་བྱའི་སྔགས	the mantra to recite	bzla bya'i sngags
བཟླབ་བྱ་ལ་མི་ཉན་པ	not to attend to the course of moral discipline	bzlab bya la mi nyan pa
བཟླས་གྲངས	count of recitations	bzlas grangs
བཟླས་བསྒོམ	recitation meditation	bzlas bsgom
བཟླས་བརྗོད	recitation [of mantras]	bzlas brjod
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of recitation. One of sngags kyi yan lag lnga	bzlas brjod kyi kho na nyid
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the nature of reciting mantra bzlas brjod dang bcas pa'i bsam gtan concentration with repetition bzlas brjod dang bcas pa'i bsam gtan recitation meditation	bzlas brjod kyi de kho na nyid
བཟླས་བརྗོད་བྱེད་པ	to recite prayers and mantras	bzlas brjod byed pa
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four limbs of reciting mantras	bzlas brjod yan lag bzhi
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ཡན་ལག་བཞི་ལྔན	4branched repetition	bzlas brjod yan lag bzhi lngan
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ཡན་ལག་བཞི་ལྡན	fourbranched repetition	bzlas brjod yan lag bzhi ldan
བཟླས་བརྗོད་ལ་ལྟོས་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	concentration w recitation bzlas brjod la ltos pa'i bsam gtan brgyad the 8 kinds of concentration w recitation bzlas brjod la ma bltos pa'i bsam gtan concentration without repetition bzlas brjod la...	bzlas brjod la ltos pa'i bsam gtan
བཟླས་པ	pleaded	bzlas pa
བཟླས་པ་ཁག་གསུམ	the three divisions of recitation	bzlas pa khag gsum
བཟླས་པ་བྱ་ཚུལ་གཉིས	the two ways of doing recitation	bzlas pa bya tshul gnyis
བཟླས་པ་བཞི	recitation, four types. The recitation that is like the moon with a garland of stars is also known as the 'arrayed recitation.' The recitation that is	bzlas pa bzhi
ལིཀེ་ཨ་སྭིརླིང་ཕི༹རེ	brand is also known as the 'conveyed recitation.' The recitation that is like sending out the king's emissaries is also known as the 'emanated and absorbed recitation.' The recitation that is like ...	like a swirling fire
བཟླས་པ་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	four limbs of recitation in upa	bzlas pa yan lag bzhi
བཟླས་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of recitation	bzlas pa gsum
བཟླས་པའི་སྐྱོན་དྲུག	the six faults of recitation	bzlas pa'i skyon drug
བཟླས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of recitation	bzlas pa'i rnal 'byor
བཟླས་པའི་དམིགས་པ	recitation visualization	bzlas pa'i dmigs pa
བཟླས་པའི་ཛ་པྲ་དགོངས	intention of recitation	bzlas pa'i dza pra dgongs
བཟླས་པའི་རིམ་པ	Recitation stage. The part of sadhana practice which covers mantra recitation	bzlas pa'i rim pa
བཟླས་བྱའི་སྔགས	the mantra to be recited 2440	bzlas bya'i sngags
བཟླས་དམིགས	visualizations for recitation	bzlas dmigs
བཟླས་དམིགས་སོ་སོ	individual recitationvisualization	bzlas dmigs so so
བཟླས་ལུང	recitation transmission	bzlas lung
བཟླུག་པ	will ask/ inquire [f zlug pa]	bzlug pa
བཟླུགས	send word, report, inform	bzlugs
བཟླུགས་པ	pf. of {zlug pa}	bzlugs pa
བཟླུམ་པ	make globular, rounded	bzlum pa
བཟླུམས	unified, surrounded	bzlums
བཟླུམས་པ	SA bsdums pa	bzlums pa
བཟློ	pass beyond	bzlo
བཟློ་བ	pass beyond	bzlo ba
བཟློག་དཀའ	unobstructible	bzlog dka'
བཟློག་བསྒྱུར	exorcism	bzlog bsgyur
བཟློག་ཉིད	the reverse, the opposite	bzlog nyid
བཟློག་གཏོ	rite that repels negativity, a kind of gtor ma	bzlog gto
བཟློག་ཐབས	methods to overcome	bzlog thabs
བཟློག་དུ་གསོལ	Please dispel.bzlog med	bzlog du gsol
བཟློག་པ	deter {dge ba las bzlog pa'i las la brtson pa} exertion in actions which deter one from virtue	bzlog pa
བཟློག་པ་དཀའ	impossible to turn back, have a hard time controlling	bzlog pa dka'
བཟློག་པ་དཀའ་བ	difficult to cast away, ward off, turn back	bzlog pa dka' ba
བཟློག་པ་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	among the {rgyu'i rgyan}, ornament showing nonthing/ unreal cause producing like effect	bzlog pa skyed byed kyi rgyu
བཟློག་པ་བགྱི་བ	to perform repelling rituals	bzlog pa bgyi ba
བཟློག་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	clap	bzlog pa rgyab pa
བཟློག་པ་བསྒོ་གྱུར་བྱེད་པའི་ལས་བཅུ	the 10 actions of doing the opposite of what was instructed	bzlog pa bsgo gyur byed pa'i las bcu
བཟློག་པའི་དཔེ	among {dpe'i rgyan}, ornament showing by the exemplified, the exemplifying example's khyad chos phar 'jal ba worldly opinion dang go bzlog ???	bzlog pa'i dpe
བཟློག་པའི་ཟུང་ལྡན་གསུམ	the three pairs of opposites	bzlog pa'i zung ldan gsum
བཟློག་པར་དཀའ་བ	difficult to refute/ drive away	bzlog par dka' ba
བཟློག་པར་བྱས་པ	refutation, exorcism, reversal	bzlog par byas pa
བཟློག་ཕྱོགས	carrying away, substraction	bzlog phyogs
བཟློག་མ་ནུས་པ	I could not resist	bzlog ma nus pa
བཟློག་མེད	irrevocably	bzlog med
བཟློག་མེད་པ	unavoidable	bzlog med pa
བཟློག་སེལ	exorcism to repel	bzlog sel
བཟློས	[p zlo ba] summon, call, proclaim, consecrated, repeated, recited	bzlos
བཟློས་བརྗོད	soft recitation of mantra	bzlos brjod
བཟློས་པ	proclaiming	bzlos pa
བཟློས་པ་བྱུང་བ	challenge enemies, commence quarrels, start a feud	bzlos pa byung ba
བཟློས་རྩོད་པ	revive old feuds, quarrels and fighting	bzlos rtsod pa
ལཟོག་པ	reverse	lzog pa
བརཟེད་ངེས	forgetting	brzed nges
བལཟས་པ	lzo/bzla/ - to recite, repeat, impart 'a cag - us, we 'a ci - vow! oh! oh my! 'a ti wa - turn a somersault, tumble over, roll 'a ti wa - to perform somersaults, to tumble over, to roll 'a 'dogs - c...	blzas pa
ཝཧོ་ཝས་བེཨརདླེསས་ཨནད་བལད	headed 'u dum btsan - King Langdarma 'u rdugs - wreck, one shattered by indiscreet actions, entangled with debts, destitute person 'u ni - [arch] as for this, that., there 'u nir - [arch] that, the...	who was beardless and bald
ཐིན་བ༹རི	colored threads and ris mig dgu 'ur rdo 'phen - throw a stone w a sling 'ur rdo 'phen pa - throw a stone w a sling	thin vari
ཝངཆུཀ་ཨོཕ༹་O	Dren. A great scholar and tantrika, he attained siddhi through practicing Guru Drakpo, the wrathful aspect of Padmasambhava. Palgyi Wangchuk means 'Resplendent Lord.' 'o mdong - wooden churn 'o 'do...	Wangchuk of O
ཐེ་སོཨུཐ	western direction of Uddiyana 'o ma can gyi rgya mtsho - Milky Lake 'o ma 'ching - cow 'o ma 'ching - milking cow 'o ma 'jo - milk [a cow etc.] 'o ma 'jo ba - to milk 'o ma 'jo ba - to milk [a cow]...	the south
ཐེ་པྲེ	dawn twilight 'o zo - milk bucket 'o zo - zo ba, a milk pouring vessel 'o zom - * a milk vessel, milking bucket 'o bze - [arch] 1) quick and efficient; 2) spyod lam cha lugs mdzes pa 'o bzos thon r...	the pre
ཨརྲཡེད་བུདདྷ	field of Akanishta 'og min gyi zhing - Realm of Akanishtha; Akanishtha realm 'og min gyi longs sku - the sambhogakaya realm of Akanishta 'og min 'gro - go to/ the beings of Akanishta 'og min 'gro -...	arrayed buddha
ཕ༹ྲོམ་མཧཡནའས་ཨོབེ༹ར	emphasis on emptiness which can lead to nihilism. According to Mipham Rinpoche, 'luminosity' means 'free from the darkness of unknowing and endowed with the ability to cognize.' 'od gsal - (state o...	from Mahayana's over
ཝིནདས་སུཆ་ཨས་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	upholding wind (srog 'dzin gyi rlung) 'od gsal gyi rlung - wind of luminosity 'od gsal gyi lha - 1) luminous deity; 2) divine luminosity 'od gsal 'gyur med - changeless light 'od gsal rgyun chad me...	winds such as the life
དའུར་བ	durva grass rtswa ran pa	d'ur ba
དའུར་ཝ	durva grass rtswa ran pa	d'ur wa
མའུ་ལམ	SK root	m'u lam
རའ་ག	ruby	r'a ga
ཡ	smallness, littleness, equal, above, up odd	ya
ཡ་ཀོབ་བེ་ལ	iacobella	ya kob be la
ཡ་ཀྲུའུ་གླིང	Asia	ya kru'u gling
ཡ་དཀན	upper part of the palate Syn {dkan}	ya dkan
ཡ་དཀྲིས་ལྕགས་ཟམ	ya dkris iron bridge	ya dkris lcags zam
ཡ་བཀྱག	pestle	ya bkyag
ཡ་རྐན	[upper] palate	ya rkan
ཡ་རྐྱང	cha min pa - //dkar yol sngon po ya rkyang gcig	ya rkyang
ཡ་ཁ	upper teeth	ya kha
ཡ་ཁུང	depressed place between eye and ear srin tshang	ya khung
ཡ་ཁོག	people, cattle, etc. kyi khong pa'i stod kyi cha ste where lungs and heart are	ya khog
ཡ་ཁྱེར	remainder, excess	ya khyer
ཡ་འཁོད	upper stone	ya 'khod
ཡ་ག	1) disparaging/ mocking, joking; 2) deprecation, harsh words; 2) the good one, better [of the 2]	ya ga
ཡ་ག་ངན་པ	bad reputation D	ya ga ngan pa
ཡ་ག་ཅ་རྱ	1) yogacara system; 2) dbu ma rin po che'i phreng ba	ya ga ca rya
ཡ་ག་ཅན་གི་མི	harsh speaking person	ya ga can gi mi
ཡ་གང	#	ya gang
ཡ་གངས	# D	ya gangs
ཡ་གད	[arch] 1) flight of stairs; 2) foot stool or library type	ya gad
ཡ་གི	on the upper side, on top of, up there, yonder	ya gi
ཡ་གི་ཚུར	up here	ya gi tshur
ཡ་གི་ལ	up there, yonder	ya gi la
ཡ་གེ	there, over there	ya ge
ཡ་གེའི	... ma ge'i from ... to	ya ge'i
ཡ་གྱད	rung [ladder]	ya gyad
ཡ་གྱལ	one alone; alone, single (one among many)	ya gyal
ཡ་གྱལ་མཆོག	supreme among	ya gyal mchog
ཡ་གྱེས	divided	ya gyes
ཡ་གྲངས	integer, odd # [Gold]	ya grangs
ཡ་གླིང	Asia	ya gling
ཡ་གླིང་ཤར་ལྷོ	SE Asia	ya gling shar lho
ཡ་མགལ	upper jawbone, upper jaw	ya mgal
ཡ་མགལ་ལེ	upper row of teeth	ya mgal le
ཡ་མགུ	upper cover of vessel from which water is sprinkled on torma D 2458	ya mgu
ཡ་འགྲན་འོས་མི	rival candidate	ya 'gran 'os mi
ཡ་རྒྱག	pestle	ya rgyag
ཡ་རྒྱལ	alone, single, solitary, it alone?, among, 1 of	ya rgyal
ཡ་རྒྱལ་གཅིག	one of the	ya rgyal gcig
ཡ་ང	fear; danger, repentance/ anguish; anguish, fright, shuddering, terrible, dangerous. 1) Syn {'jigs su rung ba}. 2) Syn {skye gya' ba}	ya nga
ཡ་ང་ཁུ་འཕྲིག	intimidation, being frightened, feeling, threatened	ya nga khu 'phrig
ཡ་ང་དགྲ་བོར་སྟོན་མི་དགོས	1 should not show fear to the enemy	ya nga dgra bor ston mi dgos
ཡ་ང་དགྲ་བོར་བྱེད་མི་དགོས	1 should not pity the enemy	ya nga dgra bor byed mi dgos
ཡ་ང་སྙིང་རྗེ	brutal	ya nga snying rje
ཡ་ང་སྙིང་རྗེ་མེད	w/o pity and compassion, ruthless, merciless	ya nga snying rje med
ཡ་ང་སྙིང་རྗེ་མེད་པ	cruel	ya nga snying rje med pa
ཡ་ང་བ	frightened. Syn {'jigs skrag}; fearsome; sympathetic, merciful/ generous	ya nga ba
ཡ་ང་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	acting compassionately	ya nga ba spyod pa
ཡ་ང་བ་མ་སྤངས་པ	not abandoning compassion	ya nga ba ma spangs pa
ཡ་ང་བའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	pitying compassion	ya nga ba'i snying rje
ཡ་ང་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	three ya nga ba'i g.yang sa gsum - the three dreadful abysses ya nga ba'i g.yang sa gsum - the three dreadful abysses [in the bardo of becoming, three colors of three poisons] ya nga ba'i bshu gzho...	ya nga ba'i sdug bsngal
རྣམས་ཀྱི་འཚོ་བ	ya nga ba'i nad kyis mnar bas	rnams kyi 'tsho ba
ཡ་ང་མེད	w/o compassion, ruthless, pitiless	ya nga med
ཡ་ང་མེད་པ	w/o compassion, ruthless, pitiless	ya nga med pa
ཡ་ང་མེད་པའི་ཉེས་རྡུང	merciless beating [for punishment]	ya nga med pa'i nyes rdung
ཡ་ང་རྩ་བ་ནས་མེད	completely w/o compassion, ruthless, pitiless	ya nga rtsa ba nas med
ཡ་ང་རྩ་བ་ནས་མེད་པ	completely w/o compassion, ruthless, pitiless	ya nga rtsa ba nas med pa
ཡ་ངའི་གེགས	terrible danger	ya nga'i gegs
ཡ་ངའི་དམག་ཚོགས	a formidable host D	ya nga'i dmag tshogs
ཡ་ངེ་ཡེ་ངེ	shaky, unsteady, wavering, in flux	ya nge ye nge
ཡ་གཅིག	refers to one of a pair	ya gcig
ཡ་མཆུ	upper lip	ya mchu
ཡ་མཆོག	bow's ya mchog	ya mchog
ཡ་འཆང	place in tibet	ya 'chang
ཡ་འཆོར	able to rival	ya 'chor
ཡ་ཉག་པ	1) high place low ru nyag pa 2) rich becoming poor	ya nyag pa
ཡ་གཉག	mountain's ya gnyag	ya gnyag
ཡ་གཉིས	pair	ya gnyis
ཡ་གཉིས་མ་གཉིས	four year old horse/ mule [not a list]	ya gnyis ma gnyis
ཡ་ཏ	YA subscript	ya ta
ཡ་ཏི	mandala	ya ti
ཡ་ཏོག	tower, market	ya tog
ཡ་བཏགས	yata mark	ya btags
ཡ་སྟགས	Bon mdos glud dam gto mdos kyi rdzas	ya stags
ཡ་ཐེམ	{sgo yi ya them yan chad} right up to the lintels	ya them
ཡ་ཐོག	1) 1st kalpa; 2) the time at the beginning; 3) old/ primitive/ primeval times, antiquity; 4) roof	ya thog
ཡ་ཐོག་གུང་ཁྲན་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	primitive communist society	ya thog gung khran spyi tshogs
ཡ་ཐོག་རིང་མོ	long decline	ya thog ring mo
ཡ་ཐོག་རིང་མོའི་དུས	long ago at the beginning/ 1st bar bskal	ya thog ring mo'i dus
ཡ་ཐོད	skull	ya thod
ཡ་མཐའ	1) upward limit/ extreme; 2) beginning, 1st stage	ya mtha'
ཡ་གདུང	mental suffering	ya gdung
ཡ་འདེགས	SA yar 'degs	ya 'degs
ཡ་པ	SK consonants YA to PA	ya pa
ཡ་པད	padma ya log: lotus shape w petal tip upward,	ya pad
ཡ་པེ་ཡོ་པེ	carelessly, hastily	ya pe yo pe
ཡ་པོ	rival, adversary, butcher, executioner	ya po
ཡ་ཕུབ	1) house top covering mud and grass etc.; 2) highest top of a house	ya phub
ཡ་བ་རྐྱ་བརྒྱད	the eight btsan ya ba	ya ba rkya brgyad
ཡ་བ་རྒྱ་གཅིག	the lord of death who appears alone without any entourage	ya ba rgya gcig
ཡ་བ་ཏི	attendant of the lord of death	ya ba ti
ཡ་བེ་ཡོ་བེ	do do tan tan med pa, careless and slipshod, not careful and persistent	ya be yo be
ཡ་བོ	1) ya po; 2) [arch] 1 of	ya bo
ཡ་བྱེད	answer	ya byed
ཡ་བྱེད་པ	pay attention to, take notice of	ya byed pa
ཡ་བྲལ	1) separate[d], break away from; 2) solitary, separate, apart, different, not inherent to, disrupted, dislocated, split up	ya bral
ཡ་བྲལ་བ	separated. [mss]	ya bral ba
ཡ་བྲལ་བྱེད	1) separate, break away from split apart/ up, disrupt, dislocate	ya bral byed
ཡ་བྲལ་མ་ཡིན་པ	not disconnected / seperate	ya bral ma yin pa
ཡ་བྲལ་མ་ཡིན་ཟུང་དུ་འཇུག	should not be separated, but unified	ya bral ma yin zung du 'jug
ཡ་འབྲོག་གྱུ་མཚོ	Palti Lake	ya 'brog gyu mtsho
ཡ་འབྲོག་མཚོ	yar 'brog gyu mtsho = Palti Lake	ya 'brog mtsho
ཡ་མ	temple (near ear)	ya ma
ཡ་མ་དཀར་པོ	wind and phlegm gyi sdong zla ldan pa'i srin nad w slight pain and mostly cold	ya ma dkar po
ཡ་མ་རྒྱ་གཅིག	the lord of death who appears alone without any entourage	ya ma rgya gcig
ཡ་མ་ཅན་གྱི་གོས	impure attire belonging to an unknown person	ya ma can gyi gos
ཡ་མ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve Yama Goddesses. Retinue of the Twelve Tenma Goddesses	ya ma bcu gnyis
ཡ་མ་ན	have a sinus cold	ya ma na
ཡ་མ་ནག་པོ	blood and bile sdong zla ldan pa'i srin nad w much pain and mostly w fever	ya ma nag po
ཡ་མ་བར་ལ	vain	ya ma bar la
ཡ་མ་བྲལ	inseparability	ya ma bral
ཡ་མ་བྲལ་བ	not separate[d]	ya ma bral ba
ཡ་མ་བྲལ་བར	without seperation, side by side {lta ba dang spyod pa ya ma bral bar nyams su blang ba} view and actions should be cultivated side by side	ya ma bral bar
ཡ་མ་འབྲལ་འཛིན་བདག	stay intact, keep control of self	ya ma 'bral 'dzin bdag
ཡ་མ་ཟིན	strive to rival but not succeed	ya ma zin
ཡ་མ་ཟུང	without proportion, incongruous, not fitting together	ya ma zung
ཡ་མ་ཟུང་གི་ལུགས	heterogenous religious tradition/ customs	ya ma zung gi lugs
ཡ་མ་ཟུང་གི་ལྷམ	two shoes from different pairs	ya ma zung gi lham
ཡ་མ་ཟུང་བའི་གྱོན་ཆས	clashing garments	ya ma zung ba'i gyon chas
ཡ་མ་ཟུང་བའི་ཚོས་གཞི	incongruous colors	ya ma zung ba'i tshos gzhi
ཡ་མ་ཟུང་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	become disfigured, deformed/ unpaired/ asymmetrical	ya ma zung su 'gyur ba
ཡ་མ་གཟུགས	disfigurement, deformity, asymmetry, unpaired, something made/ formed in an unusual/ improper way	ya ma gzugs
ཡ་མ་གཟུགས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	become disfigured, deformed/ unpaired/ asymmetrical	ya ma gzugs su 'gyur ba
ཡ་མ་བརླ	vain	ya ma brla
ཡ་མ་ལ་པོ	substantial, hollow, worthless	ya ma la po
ཡ་མད	#	ya mad
ཡ་མན་ཅན	dirty clothes of which one does not know the owner, where they come from, or which one has never seen before	ya man can
ཡ་མན་ཏ་ཀ	epithet of lord of death, discrepancy in expressions, term of wonder	ya man ta ka
ཡ་མའི་ནད	in the body worm 'khrugs pa las byung ba'i nad in the head, lower jaw, teeth, ears etc causing intense pain and fatigue	ya ma'i nad
ཡ་མས་ཁ	Jamaica	ya mas kha
ཡ་མི་མཚན	nothing to be wondered at	ya mi mtshan
ཡ་མིན	office {ya min}	ya min
ཡ་མུ་ན	[Skt] Yamuna River	ya mu na
ཡ་མུ་ནའི་སྤུན	lord of death	ya mu na'i spun
ཡ་མེ	# not included in {grangs kyi gnas drug cu}	ya me
ཡ་མེ་ཡོ་མེ	doing anything uncertainly, purposelessly or nonsensically	ya me yo me
ཡ་མེད	single, matchless, incomparable, unrivaled, harum-scarum	ya med
ཡ་མེད་དོ་མེད	unequalled, matchless	ya med do med
ཡ་མེད་དོ་མེད་ཤུགས	matchless strength/ power	ya med do med shugs
ཡ་མེད་དམག་དཔོན་གྱུལ་ལས་རྒྱལ	matchless general victorious in/ over war	ya med dmag dpon gyul las rgyal
ཡ་མེད་བཙོང་བ	ro btsong ba	ya med btsong ba
ཡ་མེད་ཚ་པོ	desperate	ya med tsha po
ཡ་ཙི	CH duck	ya tsi
ཡ་ཙེ	duck	ya tse
ཡ་ཙེའི་སྒོ་ང	duck's egg	ya tse'i sgo nga
ཡ་ཚ་བ	fearful, hairs standing up and goose bumps	ya tsha ba
ཡ་ཚད	1) above nearby place; 2) very high measured; 3) challenge in a game, give an answer, take revenge	ya tshad
ཡ་ཚུལ	inspiring exterior; Thrangu Rinpoche: = spa tshul, gzi brjid	ya tshul
ཡ་མཚན	strangeness, curiosity, amazement, amazing, wondrous, wonder, miracle, supernatural occurrence, mystery, peculiar, surprised, astonished	ya mtshan
ཡ་མཚན་སྐྱེས	wondering	ya mtshan skyes
ཡ་མཚན་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	astonished	ya mtshan skyes te
ཡ་མཚན་སྐྱེས་ནས	amazed at	ya mtshan skyes nas
ཡ་མཚན་གྱི་སྒྲུང	mythology	ya mtshan gyi sgrung
ཡ་མཚན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	curious views [nonBuddhist]	ya mtshan gyi lta ba
ཡ་མཚན་གྱི་གནས	a thing to be wondered at	ya mtshan gyi gnas
ཡ་མཚན་རྒྱུ་མེད	that is not to be wondered at	ya mtshan rgyu med
ཡ་མཚན་ཅན	1) unusual, wondrous/ phul byung gi thing; 2) [arch] mu stegs pa'i rab byung	ya mtshan can
ཡ་མཚན་ཅན་གྱི	heretical teachings ya mtshan can gyi lta ba dgu bcu rtsa	ya mtshan can gyi
དྲུག་བཤད་པ	the 96 curious views	drug bshad pa
ཡ་མཚན་ཅན་གྱི་བ	curious doctrines	ya mtshan can gyi ba
ཡ་མཚན་ཆེ	very [wondrous, curious, heretical, strange, amazing, astonishing, wonderful, surprising, miraculous, extraordinary, weird, unusual]	ya mtshan che
ཡ་མཚན་ཆེ་ནས	marveled at	ya mtshan che nas
ཡ་མཚན་དུ་བཟུང	considered wonderful	ya mtshan du bzung
ཡ་མཚན་པ	amaze, marvel, surprise, wonder, astonishing	ya mtshan pa
ཡ་མཚན་པོ	wondrous, curious, heretical, strange, amazing, astonishing, wonderful, surprising, miraculous, extraordinary, weird, unusual	ya mtshan po
ཡ་མཚན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	by Shabkar	ya mtshan sprul pa'i glegs bam
ཡ་མཚན་བྱེད་པ	to amaze	ya mtshan byed pa
ཡ་མཚན་ཞིང་དགྱེས	filled with wonder, rejoiced	ya mtshan zhing dgyes
ཡ་རྫི	Yadzi, in Domey	ya rdzi
ཡ་ཝ་ཏི	an attendant of the lord of death	ya wa ti
ཡ་ཞར	one-eyed	ya zhar
ཡ་ཞི་ཡ	Asia	ya zhi ya
ཡ་བཞི་ཟུང་བརྒྱད	the four great and 8 lesser [Kagyu] lineages	ya bzhi zung brgyad
ཡ་བཞེར	{ya bzher} tribe 2460	ya bzher
ཡ་ཟད	{yar thag ring tsam	ya zad
ཡ་ཟི	invincible sword	ya zi
ཡ་ཟི་མཁར་དམར	{ya zi mkhar dmar}	ya zi mkhar dmar
ཡ་ཟིགས	village in tibet	ya zigs
ཡ་ཟུ	{ya zu} CH tea D	ya zu
ཡ་ཟུང་དུ	in many different ways	ya zung du
ཡ་ཟླ	rival, opponent	ya zla
ཡ་བཟུང	opposition, rivalry, enmity	ya bzung
ཡ་བཟུང་བྱེད	oppose, be a rival/ enemy	ya bzung byed
ཡ་འུད་ཅན	one who progresses quickly	ya 'ud can
ཡ་ཡ	1) words of assertion/ promising; 2) hostility/ malice showing brda tshig; 3) diverse, different	ya ya
ཡ་ཡ་བོ	1) mind having been irresistibly moved not staying stable; 2) diverse, different	ya ya bo
ཡ་ཡ་ལགས་སོ	words of assertion/ promising	ya ya lags so
ཡ་ཡུག	1) gya tshom dang, bab col; 2) som nyi bral ba, spobs pa che	ya yug
ཡ་ཡུད	empower, confer authority, adventure	ya yud
ཡ་ཡུད་འདེབས	empower, confer authority	ya yud 'debs
ཡ་ཡུད་རྩེ་བ	gamble	ya yud rtse ba
ཡ་ཡུད་འཚོལ་མཁན	adventurer	ya yud 'tshol mkhan
ཡ་ཡོ	crooked, awry	ya yo
སྲོང	straightening a crooked piece of wood	srong
ཡ་ཡོ་རྒྱུ	leaning towards	ya yo rgyu
ཡ་ཡོ་བ	1) hypocritical/ devious/ deceptive action; 2) not direct/ suitable, crooked, bent awry	ya yo ba
ཡ་ཡོ་བའི་གཏམ	devious/ deceptive talk	ya yo ba'i gtam
ཡ་ཡོ་མེད	w/o crookedness/ deceit, straight[forward]	ya yo med
ཡ་ཡོ་མེད་པ	w/o crookedness/ deceit, straight[forward]	ya yo med pa
ཡ་ཡོ་མེད་པའི་ཁ་བ	straight[forward] speech/ pillar	ya yo med pa'i kha ba
ཡ་ཡོར	[arch] thags 'thag pa'i tshe bar bar du spun ma bcug pa'i dbang gis hral hral chags pa	ya yor
ཡ་རབ	polite, righteous	ya rab
ཡ་རབ་ཅན	noble	ya rab can
ཡ་རབ་བྱས་ཏེ	politely	ya rab byas te
ཡ་རབས	noblemen, respectable class of persons, high class people, eminent lords, courtesy	ya rabs
ཡ་རབས་ཀྱི་གྲལ	{'jig rten na khrel yod ya rabs kyi gral yin pa} modesty is a noble thing in this world	ya rabs kyi gral
ཡ་རབས་གོང་མ	those superior persons gone before, persons in more exalted stations	ya rabs gong ma
ཡ་རབས་ཅན	courteous	ya rabs can
ཡ་རབས་ཅན་གྱི་མི	gentleman	ya rabs can gyi mi
ཡ་རི་ཡུ་རི	shaky, unsteady	ya ri yu ri
ཡ་རུ	1 year old be'u	ya ru
ཡ་རེ་ང	how appalling!	ya re nga
ཡ་རེ་ཆ	how incredible!	ya re cha
ཡ་རེ་ཚ་བ	frightened ya re tsha ba'i glang chen seng ge mthong - frightened elephant seeing a lion	ya re tsha ba
ཡ་རེ་ཡོ་རེ	moving left and right, not stable	ya re yo re
ཡ་ལ	fault, crime, transgression	ya la
ཡ་ལ་དཀྲིས་པ	to blame; {ya la bzhag pa, khag 'phang bzhag pa}	ya la dkris pa
ཡ་ལ་བཞག	blame, accuse	ya la bzhag
ཡ་ལ་བཞག་པ	to blame; {ya la dkris pa, khag 'phang bzhag pa}	ya la bzhag pa
ཡ་ལ་ལ	flashes and flashes; so amazing!	ya la la
ཡ་ལད	corselet and helmet mail, armor	ya lad
ཡ་ལད་བགོས	equipped w armor	ya lad bgos
ཡ་ལད་བཙན་པོ་ལུས་ལ་གྱོན	wear mighty armor	ya lad btsan po lus la gyon
ཡ་ལན	1) [give a] [penetrating] answer, response [in a dispute/ discussion]; 2) take revenge	ya lan
ཡ་ལན་སྤྲོད	deal with, cope with, handle, answer, respond to, counter, pay back	ya lan sprod
ཡ་ལན་སྤྲོད་པ	deal with, cope with, handle, answer, respond to, counter, pay back	ya lan sprod pa
ཡ་ལན་བྱེད	deal with, cope with, handle, answer, respond to, counter, pay back	ya lan byed
ཡ་ལན་བྱེད་པ	deal with, cope with, handle	ya lan byed pa
ཡ་ལི་ཧྲན་ཏ	Alexandria	ya li hran ta
ཡ་ལུའི་ཅང་གཙང་པོ	Yalu Chiang River	ya lu'i cang gtsang po
ཡ་ལེ	Syn {yul, ya rkan}. Syn {yul, ya rkan}	ya le
ཡ་ལེ་བ	{kha bkrag ya le ba} an eloquent, radiant person; comp {yal le ba}	ya le ba
ཡ་ལེ་མ་ལེ	upper and lower parts separate	ya le ma le
ཡ་ལེ་ཡོ་ལེ	1) nyi ma gang 'khyol; 2) w/o regard/ respect, carelessly; 3) indistinct	ya le yo le
ཡ་ལེ་ཡོལ་ལེ	indistinctly	ya le yol le
ཡ་ལེན་བྱེད་རྒྱུའི་སྒྲ་གྲིག་བྱེད	prepare to answer/ respond	ya len byed rgyu'i sgra grig byed
ཡ་ཤ	esteem	ya sha
ཡ་ཤ་ཕྱུག་མོ	she who rides a deer and protects livestock, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	ya sha phyug mo
ཡ་ཤིན་ཏུ་མཚན	very surprised	ya shin tu mtshan
ཡ་ཤེར	fine satin of variegated colors	ya sher
ཡ་བཤའ་བ	[arch] joke, false etc.	ya bsha' ba
ཡ་སེ་ཡོ་ལངས	not thinking of profit hard work	ya se yo langs
ཡ་སེ་ཡོ་སེ	negligent, careless, incomplete	ya se yo se
ཡ་སོ	upper teeth	ya so
ཡ་སོ་ཅན	Bull with upper teeth	ya so can
ཡ་སོ་ཡོད་པ	upper teeth	ya so yod pa
ཡ་སོར་ཁྲི་པ	lha ldan smon lam gtor rgyag gi dmag ru'i leader	ya sor khri pa
ཡ་སོས་མ་མཆུ་མནན་པ	teeth biting the lower lip	ya sos ma mchu mnan pa
ཡ་སྲིན	small insect/ worm causing ya ma nad disease	ya srin
ཡ་གསུང	mental suffering D	ya gsung
ཡ་ཧ་ཏ	Jakarta	ya ha ta
ཡག	nominalizing particle	yag
ཡག་ཁ	prosperity of the generations, ritual formulae for the prosperity of the generations	yag kha
ཡག་ག	the good 1, better [of the 2]	yag ga
ཡག་སྒྲུག	selecting [the best	yag sgrug
ཡག་སྒྲུག་བྱེད	select [the best	yag sgrug byed
ཡག་སྒྲུག་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	selecting [the best	yag sgrug byed rgyu
ཡག་སྒྲུག་བྱེད་པ	select [the best	yag sgrug byed pa
ཡག་ཆུ	yag river	yag chu
ཡག་ཉེས	quality, good and bad	yag nyes
ཡག་ཉེས་མེད་པ	w/o partiality, discrimination/ difference in quality	yag nyes med pa
ཡག་ཉེས་ཡོད་བ་རེད་དམ	is there a difference in quality?	yag nyes yod ba red dam
ཡག་ཉེས་ཡོད་བས	is there a difference in quality?	yag nyes yod bas
ཡག་ཉེས་ཧ་གོ་ཤེས་པ	rational 2461	yag nyes ha go shes pa
ཡག་ཏུ་གཏོང་པ	improve, make better	yag tu gtong pa
ཡག་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	improve, make better	yag tu gtong ba
ཡག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	ameliorate	yag tu phyin pa
ཡག་ཏུ་མི་སྟེར་ཉེས་པའི་འདྲེ	'dre who cause making mistakes and do not allow to do well	yag tu mi ster nyes pa'i 'dre
ཡག་ཐོག་ཆོད	very good	yag thog chod
ཡག་ཐོག་ཡག་བརྩེགས	add good to good	yag thog yag brtsegs
ཡག་པ	small mattock, hoe	yag pa
ཡག་པོ	good, nice, right, nicely	yag po
ཡག་པོ་འདུག	it is good, it is nice	yag po 'dug
ཡག་པོ་འདུག་འགྲིག	fine, nice	yag po 'dug 'grig
ཡག་པོ་འདུག་འགྲིག་ག	good	yag po 'dug 'grig ga
ཡག་པོ་བྱས་ཏེ	properly	yag po byas te
ཡག་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པ	crude	yag po ma yin pa
ཡག་བ	superior	yag ba
ཡག་མ	1) under a saddle 'jug rgyu'i thick seat; 2) new; 3) good 1	yag ma
ཡག་ཙམ	a little better	yag tsam
ཡག་བརྩི	regard/ consider as good, regard highly, value	yag brtsi
ཡག་ཡག	alright	yag yag
ཡག་ཡུག་ཙམ	[arch] rab rub tsam, moving back and forth	yag yug tsam
ཡག་རིགས་ཡག་ཚད	best among many	yag rigs yag tshad
ཡག་ལ་སྟག་རྩེ	{yag la stag rtse} mt	yag la stag rtse
ཡག་ཤ་ལྟག་འོག་ཉི་མ་དང་ཟླ་བ	two Yaksa Temples, upper and lower, represented the sun and moon	yag sha ltag 'og nyi ma dang zla ba
ཡག་ཤོས	best {rtse gra}	yag shos
ཡགས	present made to a bereaved person as a token of condolence, present of condolence	yags
ཡང་ཀྲོའུ	Yangchow	yang kro'u
ཡང་དཀར	white wash	yang dkar
ཡང་དཀོར	additional or occasional gifts for the support of a religious institution	yang dkor
ཡང་སྐོར་སྐྱར་སྐོར	repeatedly	yang skor skyar skor
ཡང་སྐོར་བསྐྱར་སྐོར	reiterating, many times, going backwards and forewords	yang skor bskyar skor
ཡང་སྐྱན་ཡང	again and again	yang skyan yang
ཡང་སྐྱར	again, repeat	yang skyar
ཡང་སྐྱར་སྐྱེས	grown or born again	yang skyar skyes
ཡང་སྐྱར་ཡང	again and again	yang skyar yang
ཡང་བསྐྱར	again, encore, again	yang bskyar
ཡང་བསྐྱར་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	reproduction	yang bskyar thon skyed
ཡང་བསྐྱར་འདྲི་གཅོད	re-examine/ reinvestigate	yang bskyar 'dri gcod
ཡང་བསྐྱར་འདྲི་གཅོད་བྱེད	re-examine/	yang bskyar 'dri gcod byed
ཡང་བསྐྱར་ཚུར་རྒོལ	counter-attack, attack again	yang bskyar tshur rgol
ཡང་བསྐྱར་ཚུར་རྒོལ་བྱེད	counterattack, attack again	yang bskyar tshur rgol byed
ཡང་ཁང་ཆུང་པ	second degree occupant of small room	yang khang chung pa
ཡང་ཁུ	[ultimate essence], quintessence	yang khu
ཡང་ཁེང	servant's servant	yang kheng
ཡང་ཁྲོད	upper hermitage, upper retreat	yang khrod
ཡང་འཁོབ	distant border land	yang 'khob
ཡང་འཁོར	repeated cycling	yang 'khor
ཡང་གི	it is light	yang gi
ཡང་གེ	light, SA yang po	yang ge
ཡང་གྲངས	numbers	yang grangs
ཡང་དགོན	1) completely secluded, upper retreat 2) Yangön, hermitage, in Domey. 3) Yangön, hermitage, in Tsari	yang dgon
ཡང་དགོན་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དཔལ	(12131258)	yang dgon pa rgyal mtshan dpal
ཡང་དགོས	is especially true in this particular	yang dgos
ཡང་དགོས་སུ	especially, particularly, in even more detail	yang dgos su
ཡང་འགྲེལ	'grel pa bskyar bzlos, //mkhas pa'i myong khrid gdams ngag dang, rjes zlos yang nas yang 'grel gnyis, 'dra dang 'dra ste nor dogs yod	yang 'grel
ཡང་འགྲོ་མར་འགྲོའི་ས་མཚམས	the dividing point between going up and down	yang 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams
ཡང་རྒོད	very/ the most rgod po	yang rgod
ཡང་རྒྱུ	circulating-in-purity prana for smelling	yang rgyu
ཡང་རྒྱུའི་ཆུ་ཚོད	yang dag rgyu ba'i chu tshod de rkang longs brtsi ba'i skabs mda' yon zlas thob pa'i chu tshod	yang rgyu'i chu tshod
ཡང་སྒོས	especially, in particular; in particular	yang sgos
ཡང་སྒོས་སུ	especially, particularly, in even more detail	yang sgos su
ཡང་ང་དཀར་པོ	{yang nga dkar po} B"n sect	yang nga dkar po
ཡང་ངེ་ཡིང་ངེ	shaky, unsteady	yang nge ying nge
ཡང་ངེ་ཡེང་ངེ	1) careless distracted mind, distraction; 2) nyin 'gyangs zhag 'phul; 3) shaky, unsteady [mind]	yang nge yeng nge
ཡང་ཅིན	Chines musical instrument	yang cin
ཡང་བཅུད	innermost quintessence	yang bcud
ཡང་ལྕི	weight	yang lci
ཡང་ལྕི་ལྟ་བ	examine the weight	yang lci lta ba
ཡང་ལྕི་མེད་པ	weightless, balanced =ly	yang lci med pa
ཡང་ཆ	much space and little responsibility/ burden	yang cha
ཡང་ཆ་དང་ཁྲོལ་ཆ་སྟེར་བ	give much space and little responsibility/ burden	yang cha dang khrol cha ster ba
ཡང་ཆས	light things	yang chas
ཡང་ཆས་བཟོ་ལས	light industry	yang chas bzo las
ཡང་ཆིན	(CH kind of pleasant sound [sgra snyan]	yang chin
ཡང་ཆུང	still smaller	yang chung
ཡང་འཇུག	suffix letter at end of word	yang 'jug
ཡང་འཇུག་གཉིས	A term of grammar. The	yang 'jug gnyis
ཏྭོ་པོསཏ	suffices. The two letters {sa/ da/} which can be placed after a suffix	two post
ཡང་འཇུག་ས	suffix letter SA at end of word 2462	yang 'jug sa
ཡང་འཇོག	replace, rearrange	yang 'jog
ཡང་རྗེ	lord over, overlord, lord of lords	yang rje
ཡང་རྗེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	title of early sa skya pa hierarch	yang rje chos kyi rgyal po
ཡང་ལྗིད	weight, light and heavy	yang ljid
ཡང་ལྗིད་ལྟ་བ	examine the weight	yang ljid lta ba
ཡང་ལྗིད་མེད་པ	weightless, balanced =ly	yang ljid med pa
ཡང་ལྗིད་གཞལ་ཆས	scale, weighing machine	yang ljid gzhal chas
ཡང་ལྗིད་གཞལ་བ	weigh	yang ljid gzhal ba
ཡང་སྙིང	innermost essence/ heart	yang snying
ཡང་སྙིང་བཅུད	quintessence	yang snying bcud
ཡང་སྙིང་འདུས་པ	terma on Avalokiteshvara revealed by {gu ru chos dbang} called {thugs rje chen po yang snying 'dus pa}. Revealed at lho brag mkhar chu dpal gyi phug ring. {gu ru chos kyi dbang phyug} 1212-1273	yang snying 'dus pa
ཡང་ཏག	genuine	yang tag
ཡང་ཏི	yang gsang thun mong ma yin pa'i snyan brgyud ston pa	yang ti
ཡང་ཏི་ནག་པོ	Black Quintessence	yang ti nag po
ཡང་ཏི་ནག་པོ་གསེར་གྱི་འབྲུ་གཅིག	Single Golden Syllable of the Black Quintessence, revealed by Dungtso Repa	yang ti nag po gser gyi 'bru gcig
ཡང་ཏིག	Yantig, in Domey	yang tig
ཡང་ཏིག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱུད	Quintessence King Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	yang tig rgyal po'i rgyud
ཡང་ཏིག་ཅིག་གནང་དང	please give me a discount	yang tig cig gnang dang
ཡང་ཏིག་ཅིག་གནང་རོགས་གནང	please give me a discount	yang tig cig gnang rogs gnang
ཡང་ཏིག་སྙིང་པོ	ultimate essence of the meaning	yang tig snying po
ཡང་ཏིག་ནག་པོ་གསེར་གྱི་འབྲུ་གཅིག	the sole golden syllable of the black quintessence; terma of Dungtso Repa	yang tig nag po gser gyi 'bru gcig
ཡང་ཏིག་ཡིད་བཞིན	SA bla ma yang tig	yang tig yid bzhin
ཡང་ཏིག་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	longchenpa book	yang tig yid bzhin nor bu
ཡང་ཏིག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཟང་ཐལ	The Quintessence Wisdom Openness, the fourth chapter in Sheldam Nyingjang	yang tig ye shes zang thal
ཡང་གཏེར	twice concealed/ reconcealed/ rediscovered treasure/ ter, reconcealment and rediscovery of terma	yang gter
ཡང་གཏེར་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	the lineage of rediscovered teachings	yang gter gi brgyud pa
ཡང་གཏེར་དྲི་མེད་བླ་སྒྲུབ	terma by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	yang gter dri med bla sgrub
ཡང་སྟེང	a monastery, on top, roof	yang steng
ཡང་ཐ	ultimate end	yang tha
ཡང་ཐིག	even more essential, important system of rdzogs chen man ngag sde practices, ultimate essence	yang thig
ཡང་ཐོག	highest story of a house, dome, upper story	yang thog
ཡང་མཐའ་ལ་ཡང	in the very least	yang mtha' la yang
ཡང་མཐར	utmost end	yang mthar
ཡང་དག་ཀུན་རྫོབ	actual relative truth; correct relative truth. {snang la don byed nus pa} correct conventional / relative truth / actual or real truth, conventionally real truth	yang dag kun rdzob
ཡང་དག་ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	Correct superficial truth	yang dag kun rdzob kyi bden pa
ཡང་དག་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	real conventional truth yang dag skyon bral lha yi lha la gyur devi of the devis, completely w/o faults	yang dag kun rdzob bden pa
ཡང་དག་དགའ	really glad, indeed delighted	yang dag dga'
ཡང་དག་འགུགས་བྱེད	evil spirit	yang dag 'gugs byed
ཡང་དག་འགྲུབ་པ	complete attainment	yang dag 'grub pa
ཡང་དག་འགྲུབ་པ་ཐོབ	thorough accomplishment	yang dag 'grub pa thob
ཡང་དག་འགྲོ	thoroughfare, free passage in every direction	yang dag 'gro
ཡང་དག་འགྲོགས	perfect company, sexual union	yang dag 'grogs
ཡང་དག་འགྲོགས་དུས	full moon day	yang dag 'grogs dus
ཡང་དག་རྒྱལ	Sanjayi Vairadiputra; one of {mu stegs kyi ston pa drug} at the time of Buddha Shakyamuni	yang dag rgyal
ཡང་དག་རྒྱས་པ	copious, abundant plentiful	yang dag rgyas pa
ཡང་དག་རྒྱུ་བ	wind	yang dag rgyu ba
ཡང་དག་རྒྱུག	that which indeed blows, wind	yang dag rgyug
ཡང་དག་རྒྱུར	wind	yang dag rgyur
ཡང་དག་མངོན་གྱུར	[one of the bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i mngon gyur bcu] w/o the chad kyi chos bzhi etc. and de bzhin dge 'dun gyis kyang khong du chud pa'o	yang dag mngon gyur
ཡང་དག་ཆགས	real love/ affection, very attached 2463	yang dag chags
ཡང་དག་ཆོས་ཉིད	authentic nature of phenomena	yang dag chos nyid
ཡང་དག་མཇལ	full interview	yang dag mjal
ཡང་དག་འཇོག	complete rest[ing]	yang dag 'jog
ཡང་དག་འཇོག་པ	meditation	yang dag 'jog pa
ཡང་དག་རྗེས་སུ་ལྟ་བ	complete belief in. Syn {lta ba} to believe in, belief in	yang dag rjes su lta ba
ཡང་དག་ཉིད	the True Nature, the true state	yang dag nyid
ཡང་དག་ཉིད་ལ	true reality, truly real, as it truly is	yang dag nyid la
ཡང་དག་ཉིད་ལ་ཡང་དག་བལྟ	look truly into the true	yang dag nyid la yang dag blta
ཡང་དག་བསྙེན	close proximity	yang dag bsnyen
ཡང་དག་ཏུ་གྲུབ་པ	established in actual truth/ to have authentic existence	yang dag tu grub pa
ཡང་དག་རྟོག	reflection, imagination, consideration, sound deliberation. Syn {rnam rtog} / {bsam mno} / {mno bsam} perfect comprehension. Syn {khong du chud}; reflection, imagination, consideration, sound delib...	yang dag rtog
ཡང་དག་རྟོགས	perfect comprehension	yang dag rtogs
ཡང་དག་ལྟ	should be seen authentic/ true view	yang dag lta
ཡང་དག་ལྟ་བ	authentic/ true view	yang dag lta ba
ཡང་དག་ལྟ་བ་རྟོགས་པ	realized the true / pure view	yang dag lta ba rtogs pa
ཡང་དག་སྟོན་པ	to teach perfectly	yang dag ston pa
ཡང་དག་ཐུགས	a deity	yang dag thugs
ཡང་དག་ཐོས	1) well heard/ learned; 2) doctrine; 3) khas len, promise, assertion	yang dag thos
ཡང་དག་ཐོས་པ	well informed, promising, one who knows much	yang dag thos pa
ཡང་དག་མཐའ	real limit, the ultimate, the ultimate true nature. Syn {stong pa nyid, yang dag pa'i mtha'}	yang dag mtha'
ཡང་དག་མཐའ་མངོན་གུ་བྱེད་པ	realises the ultimate perfection	yang dag mtha' mngon gu byed pa
ཡང་དག་མཐོང་བ	have seen the truth	yang dag mthong ba
ཡང་དག་འཐོབ	accomplish, gain	yang dag 'thob
ཡང་དག་དད	have genuine faith; x {bla ma la ni yang dag dad} have genuine faith in your teacher	yang dag dad
ཡང་དག་དད་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང་བ	followers of right faith	yang dag dad pa'i rjes 'brang ba
ཡང་དག་དུ་མ་གྲུབ	not enable true realization	yang dag du ma grub
ཡང་དག་དོན	intrinsic reality, shamatha [Ll] the truth	yang dag don
ཡང་དག་དོན་གྱི་འོག་མིན	the real and absolute Akanishta	yang dag don gyi 'og min
ཡང་དག་དྲིས	asked carefully, well asked	yang dag dris
ཡང་དག་བདེ་ཆེན་སྙིང་པོ	Vishuddha Essence of Great Bliss	yang dag bde chen snying po
ཡང་དག་འདས	transcending	yang dag 'das
ཡང་དག་སྡོམ	perfect abstinence	yang dag sdom
ཡང་དག་བསྡུས་པ	are summed up in	yang dag bsdus pa
ཡང་དག་བསྡུས་པར	are summed up in	yang dag bsdus par
ཡང་དག་གནས	stability	yang dag gnas
ཡང་དག་པ	authentic, real [thd]	yang dag pa
ཡང་དག་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན	as they really are [ultimate reality]	yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin
ཡང་དག་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ	as it really is [the ultimate state of reality, freed of all superimpositions.] yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin du shes pa cognition according to fact; to know correctly as it truly is	yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin du
ཡང་དག་པ་ཇེ་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན	as they really are [ultimate reality]	yang dag pa je lta ba bzhin
ཡང་དག་པ་ཇེ་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ	as it really is [reality, w/o superimpositions] yang dag pa je lta ba bzhin du shes pa cognition according to fact = {shes pa bcig}	yang dag pa je lta ba bzhin du
ཡང་དག་པ་འཇོག	complete rest	yang dag pa 'jog
ཡང་དག་པ་ཉིད	the true state of things, reality itself, the noumenal aspect of reality	yang dag pa nyid
ཡང་དག་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཐའ	ultimate perfection yang dag pa dang yang dag pa ma yin pa - what does or does not accord with (conventional) reality	yang dag pa nyid kyi mtha'
ཡང་དག་པ་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	[correct emptiness]	yang dag pa de kho na nyid
ཡང་དག་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	untrue/ false relative	yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun rdzob
ཡང་དག་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་དོན་སྟོན་པ	giving a false impression	yang dag pa ma yin pa'i don ston pa
ཡང་དག་པ་རབ་ཏུ་གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	perfectly and fully illuminates	yang dag pa rab tu gsal bar byed pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	the authentic relative	yang dag pa'i kun rdzob
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	correct relative truth GD	yang dag pa'i kun rdzob bden pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་དགེ་སློང	bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i dge slong	yang dag pa'i dge slong
ཡང་དག་པའི་ངག	right speech	yang dag pa'i ngag
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཆོས	the perfect Dharma, a correct teaching, correct dharma practice	yang dag pa'i chos
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	a fit vessel for the true Dharma {yang dag pa'i chos kyi snod ma nor ba yin pa} is without doubt a fit vessel for the true Dharma 2464 yang dag pa'i chos kyi snod ma nor ba yin	yang dag pa'i chos kyi snod
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཆོས་དང་གང་ཟག	the authentic Dharma and authentic masters yang dag pa'i chos rnal ma zhig bsgrub pa - to practice the real, authentic Dharma	yang dag pa'i chos dang gang zag
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཆོས་མི་འགྲོ་བ	is not the way of the true Dharma	yang dag pa'i chos mi 'gro ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	right meditative absorption, samadhi, correct concentration; correct concentration, right meditative absorption, samadhi	yang dag pa'i ting nge 'dzin
ཡང་དག་པའི་གཏམ	holy discourse, sermon	yang dag pa'i gtam
ཡང་དག་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	true interdepence	yang dag pa'i rten 'brel
ཡང་དག་པའི་རྟོག་པ	one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} the eightfold noble path; one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} the eightfold noble path, Perfect Intention, second of the {'phags pa'i lam yan lag b...	yang dag pa'i rtog pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་རྟོགས་པ	correct understanding	yang dag pa'i rtogs pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལྟ་བ	right view [ggd]	yang dag pa'i lta ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལྟ་བ་རྒྱུད་བསྟེན་པ	keep the correct view in mind	yang dag pa'i lta ba rgyud bsten pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་མཐ	the authentic limit	yang dag pa'i mtha
ཡང་དག་པའི་མཐའ	suchness/ emptiness/ dharmadhatu, the true goal, the essence of reality	yang dag pa'i mtha'
ཡང་དག་པའི་དད་པ	genuine faith	yang dag pa'i dad pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་དམ་པའི་ཆོས	the true and sacred Dharma	yang dag pa'i dam pa'i chos
ཡང་དག་པའི་དོན	reality	yang dag pa'i don
ཡང་དག་པའི་དོན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	engagement in the true meaning yang dag pa'i don la mnyam par bzhag pa - to remain evenly in the true meaning; assimilate the ultimate meaning	yang dag pa'i don la 'jug pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་དྲན་པ	right/ correct mindfulness	yang dag pa'i dran pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་དྲན་བ	right mindfulness	yang dag pa'i dran ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་བཞི་བསྟེན	the four correct conceptions / ideas	yang dag pa'i 'du shes bzhi bsten
ཡང་དག་པའི་གནས་ལ	in what is [perfect / correct / true]	yang dag pa'i gnas la
ཡང་དག་པའི་འབྲས	real fruit	yang dag pa'i 'bras
ཡང་དག་པའི་འབྲས་བུ	actual result	yang dag pa'i 'bras bu
ཡང་དག་པའི་དམིགས་པ	1) a correct object of observation. 2) correct focus; 1) a correct object of observation. 2) correct focus	yang dag pa'i dmigs pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་རྩལ་བ	right/ effort TSE	yang dag pa'i rtsal ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་རྩོལ་བ	right effort	yang dag pa'i rtsol ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་འཚོ་བ	correct livelihood; correct livelihood	yang dag pa'i 'tsho ba
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	true wisdom	yang dag pa'i ye shes
ཡང་དག་པའི་རིགས་ལམ	correct [method of] reasoning	yang dag pa'i rigs lam
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལམ	sublime path, true way	yang dag pa'i lam
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་ཆོས	qualities / attributes of the pure paths	yang dag pa'i lam gyi chos
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་ས་མཁན	the guide on the true path	yang dag pa'i lam gyi sa mkhan
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཡིན	will be on the authentic path	yang dag pa'i lam du 'gro ba yin
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལམ་ནས	properly	yang dag pa'i lam nas
ཡང་དག་པའི་ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	perfect activity, correct/right action	yang dag pa'i las kyi mtha'
ཡང་དག་པའི་ཤེས་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {lam gyi shes pa mnyam gzhag 'jig rten las 'das pa dang/ rjes thob 'jig rten las 'das ma 'das 'dres pa'i mtshan nyid can ni yang dag pa'i shes pa'o}	yang dag pa'i shes pa
ཡང་དག་པའི་བསླབ་པ་གསུམ	the three pure/ correct trainings	yang dag pa'i bslab pa gsum
ཡང་དག་པའོ	is true!	yang dag pa'o
ཡང་དག་པར	correctly, really, authentically, accurately; in fact, in truth, in reality	yang dag par
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྐུལ་བ	to attract [with rays of light]	yang dag par bskul ba
ཡང་དག་པར་ཁ་སྦྱོར	perfectly united'	yang dag par kha sbyor
ཡང་དག་པར་གྲུབ་པ	established in actual truth/ to have authentic existence	yang dag par grub pa
ཡང་དག་པར་འགྲུབ་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unexcelled true accomplishment	yang dag par 'grub pa bla na med pa
ཡང་དག་པར་འགྲོ	x {chos yang dag par mi 'gro} they will never be the pure Dharma	yang dag par 'gro
ཡང་དག་པར་རྒྱུ	really moving one	yang dag par rgyu
ཡང་དག་པར་རྒྱུ་བ	perfectly moving energy. TSE	yang dag par rgyu ba
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྒྲུབས་པ	fully accomplished	yang dag par bsgrubs pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྒྲུབས་པའི་རིགས	evolved mahayana family (have same power as rang bzhin gyis gnas pa'i rigs but as a result of doing good in the past)	yang dag par bsgrubs pa'i rigs
ཡང་དག་པར་ངེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	{'phags pa rnams yang dag par nges pa'i phung po} Noble beings are defined as the 2465 'aggregates determined to perfection'.	yang dag par nges pa'i phung po
ཡང་དག་པར་རྟོགས་པ	correct understanding	yang dag par rtogs pa
ཡང་དག་པར་ལྟ་བ	search into minutely	yang dag par lta ba
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྟན་པ	to reveal	yang dag par bstan pa
ཡང་དག་པར་ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད་པ	to have comprehended perfectly	yang dag par thugs su chud pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བདེན	really authentic	yang dag par bden
ཡང་དག་པར་སྡོམ་པ	to restrain completely	yang dag par sdom pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྡམ	restrained	yang dag par bsdam
ཡང་དག་པར་བསྡམས	completely restrained	yang dag par bsdams
ཡང་དག་པར་སྤོང	the 4 acts which should be entirely abandoned	yang dag par spong
ཡང་དག་པར་སྤོང་བ	w virtuous dharmas as antidote abandon nonvirtuous ones	yang dag par spong ba
ཡང་དག་པར་སྤོང་བ་བཞི	four aspects of correct renunciation	yang dag par spong ba bzhi
ཡང་དག་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	to apply correctly	yang dag par spyod pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ	truly mastered	yang dag par byang chub
ཡང་དག་པར་བླངས་པ	vow, formal undertaking	yang dag par blangs pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བླངས་པ་ལས་གྱུར་པ	TSE	yang dag par blangs pa las gyur pa
ཡང་དག་པར་བླངས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from a formally undertaken vow yang dag par blangs pa las byung ba sdom pa yang dag par blangs pa'i spongs sems gtan du ba'i gzugs te / 'di la kun slong gzhan gyis rig par byar med pas rn...	yang dag par blangs pa las byung ba
ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the truly and completely enlightened one / buddha, perfect and complete buddhahood; the perfect and complete Buddha; complete and perfect Buddha, totally and completely awakened buddha yang dag par...	yang dag par rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas
གོ་འཕང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious state of true and complete enlightenment, the precious level of Buddhahood	go 'phang rin po che
ཡང་དག་པར་གཞེངས་སྟོད	transcendent glorification	yang dag par gzhengs stod
ཡང་དག་པར་རིགས་པ	correct understanding	yang dag par rigs pa
ཡང་དག་པར་རོགས་པ	correct understanding	yang dag par rogs pa
ཡང་དག་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི	four right cognition [of the mode of being of phenomena]	yang dag par shes pa'i ye shes bzhi
ཡང་དག་པར་བསླང་བ་ཉིད	genuine source	yang dag par bslang ba nyid
ཡང་དག་པར་བསླབ་པའི་གཞི	vinaya rules of taking and avoiding	yang dag par bslab pa'i gzhi
ཡང་དག་སྤོང་བ	right exertions	yang dag spong ba
ཡང་དག་སྤོང་བ་བཞི	four right exertions/ correct endeavors/efforts/ renunciations / stages of complete abandonment	yang dag spong ba bzhi
ནང་གསེས་སྡེ་ཚན་ཞིག་སྟེ	mi dge ba skyes pa spong ba dang, mi dge ba ma skyes pa mi bskyed pa, dge ba ma skyes pa bskyed pa, dge ba skyes pa spel ba ste bzhi, in {nyan thos}.] {tshogs lam}. abandoning. 1) nonvirtuous actio...	nang gses sde tshan zhig ste
ཡང་དག་སྤོངས་པ	efforts)	yang dag spongs pa
ཡང་དག་སྤོངས་པ་བཞི	4 perfect (purifications	yang dag spongs pa bzhi
ཡང་དག་སྤྱོང་བ་བཞི	TS	yang dag spyong ba bzhi
ཡང་དག་སྤྲོ་བ	to take full delight in, overjoyed with	yang dag spro ba
ཡང་དག་བའི་ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	TSE	yang dag ba'i las kyi mtha'
ཡང་དག་བྱང་ཆུབ	complete enlightenment	yang dag byang chub
ཡང་དག་བླང་བ	proper adoption 2466	yang dag blang ba
ཡང་དག་བླངས་པ	restraint, undertaking	yang dag blangs pa
ཡང་དག་བླངས་པའི་རིགས	perfectly developed aspect of spiritual affinity	yang dag blangs pa'i rigs
ཡང་དག་འབྱུང་འགྱུར	start working	yang dag 'byung 'gyur
ཡང་དག་མ་ཡིན	erroneous	yang dag ma yin
ཡང་དག་མ་ཡིན་པ	false, incorrect	yang dag ma yin pa
ཡང་དག་མིན	the untrue	yang dag min
ཡང་དག་མིན་རྟོགས	wrong thoughts	yang dag min rtogs
ཡང་དག་རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ	full enlightenment	yang dag rdzogs pa'i byang chub
ཡང་དག་རྫོགས་སངས་རྒྱས	Perfect	yang dag rdzogs sangs rgyas
བུདདྷ་སམྱཀ	sambuddha	Buddha samyak
ཡང་དག་གཞེངས་སྟོད	transcendent glorification	yang dag gzhengs stod
ཡང་དག་ཡང་དུ	over and over again	yang dag yang du
ཡང་དག་ཡེ་ཤེས	right cognition, full knowledge; full knowledge, right cognition	yang dag ye shes
ཡང་དག་ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི	Syn {yang dag par shes pa'i ye shes bzhi}; {yang dag par shes pa'i ye shes bzhi}	yang dag ye shes bzhi
ཡང་དག་རིག་པ	1) see well; 2) realization of emptiness; 3) buddha	yang dag rig pa
ཡང་དག་རིག་པ་བཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of the fourfold correct knowledge	yang dag rig pa bzhi'i ye shes
ཡང་དག་ལམ་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	is on the authentic path.	yang dag lam la 'gro ba
ཡང་དག་ཤེས་པ	right cognition [ggd]	yang dag shes pa
ཡང་དག་ས	level of truth	yang dag sa
ཡང་དག་སེམས་ཀྱི་དོན་དམ	{yang dag gshes kyi don dam}	yang dag sems kyi don dam
ཡང་དག་གསུང	pronouncement	yang dag gsung
ཡང་དག་ཧེ་རུ	thugs	yang dag he ru
ཡང་དག་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	Yangdag Heruka, Vishuddhe Heruka. One of the Eight Sadhana Teachings. The wrathful deity of vajra mind	yang dag he ru ka
ཡང་དག་ལྷག་ལྡན	having a true remainder	yang dag lhag ldan
ཡང་དང་རྒྱས་པ	abundant, plenteous, copious, indeed	yang dang rgyas pa
ཡང་དང་ཡང	always, again and again	yang dang yang
ཡང་དང་ཡང་དུ	over and over again	yang dang yang du
ཡང་དར་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་སང་རྒྱས	totally and completely awakened buddha(hood)	yang dar par rdzogs pa'i sang rgyas
ཡང་འདུལ	minor; temple to pin down neg. force; Further Taming [temple], one of Songtsen Gampo's geomantic temples to guard Tibet; temples built by Songtsen Gampo	yang 'dul
ཡང་འདུལ་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	further taming temples	yang 'dul gtsug lag khang
ཡང་འདུལ་ལྷ་ཁང	further taming temples	yang 'dul lha khang
ཡང་འདུལ་ལྷ་ཁང་བཞི	Four Temples for Further Taming. established by King Songtsen Gampo at Kongpo Puchu, Lhodrak Khoting, Chamtrin Degye, and Changdra Dumtso	yang 'dul lha khang bzhi
ཡང་རྡུལ	hydrogen	yang rdul
ཡང་ན	[either...]or, or else, and again	yang na
ཡང་ན་ནི	and again, and again	yang na ni
ཡང་ན་འབྲིང	next best, middling	yang na 'bring
ཡང་ན་རབ	at best	yang na rab
ཡང་ན་ལུས་ལ་གོས་མེད་པ	naked person	yang na lus la gos med pa
ཡང་ནས་ཡང་དུ	well, again and again, continually, repeatedly, over and over	yang nas yang du
ཡང་ནས་ཡང་དུ་བྱུང་བ	frequency	yang nas yang du byung ba
ཡང་པོ	light, lightness, soft, light in weight	yang po
ཡང་པོ་བཟོ་བ	lighten	yang po bzo ba
ཡང་དཔོན	assistant [below a {bcu dpon} in a large monastery]	yang dpon
ཡང་སྤྲུལ	reincarnation; magical emanation, incarnation; Syn {dngos snang, rnam 'phrul, sgyu 'phrul, dngos byon, sprul pa, rol gar, rtsal snang, mi yi gzugs su byon pa}	yang sprul
ཡང་སྤྲུལ་འཁྲུལ་མེད	an authentic incarnation	yang sprul 'khrul med
ཡང་སྤྲུལ་གང་ཟག	who is the emanation of an emanation	yang sprul gang zag
ཡང་སྤྲུལ་འབྱོན་པ	swift return	yang sprul 'byon pa
ཡང་སྤྲུལ་མྱུར་དུ་བྱོན་པ	the swift return of an incarnation	yang sprul myur du byon pa
ཡང་སྤྲུལ་གསལ་པོ	an authentic incarnation	yang sprul gsal po
ཡང་ཕུག་རིང་མོ	Long Upper Cave	yang phug ring mo
ཡང་ཕྱི	[maternal] great grandmother	yang phyi
ཡང་ཕྱི་ཡང་མེས	maternal grandmother's + paternal grandfather's rabs gnyis	yang phyi yang mes
ཡང་འཕྱང་མར་འཕྱོངས	jumbling back and forth	yang 'phyang mar 'phyongs
ཡང་བ	light, lightness	yang ba
ཡང་བ་ཉིད	lightness	yang ba nyid
ཡང་བའི་ཁུར་པོ	yang ba'i sman nus [not powerful or causes lightness?]	yang ba'i khur po
ཡང་བའི་བཟོ་ལས	light industry	yang ba'i bzo las
ཡང་བའི་འོད་ཅན	[arch] camphor	yang ba'i 'od can
ཡང་བྱང	a guide-book; supplementary inventory; move detailed 'address' of a ter, inner [prophetic guide]	yang byang
ཡང་བྲན	second order serfs	yang bran
ཡང་འབད་བསྐྱར་འབད	not only have exerted oneself w previously, but now do so again	yang 'bad bskyar 'bad
ཡང་མ	grandmother 2467	yang ma
ཡང་མ་གངས་ལ	yang ma snow pass	yang ma gangs la
ཡང་མ་དག་པ	incorrect, imperfect, not true/ genuine	yang ma dag pa
ཡང་མ་ཡེང་མ	see {yang yeng}	yang ma yeng ma
ཡང་མིག	[arch] 1) aa long; 2) sgo'i ru	yang mig
ཡང་མེད	not at all	yang med
ཡང་མེད་ན	or	yang med na
ཡང་མེད་པ	nothing at all	yang med pa
ཡང་མེས	ancestral, grandparents. greatgrandfather	yang mes
ཡང་མེས་པོ	great grandfather	yang mes po
ཡང་མེས་མོ	great grandmother	yang mes mo
ཡང་མོ	light	yang mo
ཡང་མོ་ཕྲག་ལ་མི་ལོན	'jam po gri yis mi chod	yang mo phrag la mi lon
ཡང་མོར	lightly	yang mor
ཡང་ཙར	light and heavy, weight	yang tsar
ཡང་རྩལ	physical prowess [ power to leap and jump]. highest skill; highest skill	yang rtsal
ཡང་རྩིའི་ཀློང་ཆེན	bonpo text	yang rtsi'i klong chen
ཡང་རྩེ	summit, apex, pinnacle, the highest, final point; pinnacle, highest summit, apex, the highest, final point; the pinnacle, the highest peak	yang rtse
ཡང་རྩེ་བླ་མེད	1 of 'bras bu'i bon	yang rtse bla med
ཡང་རྩེ་བླ་མེད་ཐེག་པ	supreme way	yang rtse bla med theg pa
ཡང་རྩེ་ལྷུར་ལེན	aim high [in goals]	yang rtse lhur len
ཡང་རྩེའི་ཀློང་ཆེན	a bon work	yang rtse'i klong chen
ཡང་རྩེའི་སྒང་ལ་ལས་གྲོན	waste effort when it is not needed	yang rtse'i sgang la las gron
ཡང་རྩེར་སོན	reach the summit, attain perfection, be a masterpiece	yang rtser son
ཡང་རྩེར་སོན་པའི་རོལ་མོ	musical masterpiece	yang rtser son pa'i rol mo
ཡང་ཚ	great grandchild, great grandson	yang tsha
ཡང་རྫོང་ཕུག	Yangdzong Phuk	yang rdzong phug
ཡང་ཞིང་གྱོ་བ	light and motile yang zhing g.yo ba - lightness and motility	yang zhing gyo ba
ཡང་ཞུ	crest	yang zhu
ཡང་ཞུན	refined	yang zhun
ཡང་ཞུན་སྙིང་ཐིག	refined heart essence	yang zhun snying thig
ཡང་ཟབ	very deep, most profound	yang zab
ཡང་ཟབ་དཀོན་མཆོག་སྤྱི་འདུས	by 'ja' tshon snying po	yang zab dkon mchog spyi 'dus
ཡང་ཟབ་བདེ་ཆེན་རླུང་བཟླས	most profound prana recitation of great bliss	yang zab bde chen rlung bzlas
ཡང་ཟབ་མན་ངག	the profound instruction yang zab man ngag gnad kyi gdams pa ni - the most profound instruction of key advice	yang zab man ngag
ཡང་ཟེར	also named; renamed	yang zer
ཡང་ཟོར་ཅན	having supreme strength power	yang zor can
ཡང་བཟོས	recommitting a fault	yang bzos
ཡང་ཡང	again and again, often, over and over again	yang yang
ཡང་ཡང་སྐུལ་ལྕག་གཏོང་བ	whip/ incite again and again	yang yang skul lcag gtong ba
ཡང་ཡང་བསྐྱར	continue with repetition	yang yang bskyar
ཡང་ཡང་འཁོར་བ	haunt	yang yang 'khor ba
ཡང་ཡང་གི་སྡེ་ཚན་བཅུ	the set of 10 of "again and again" etc.	yang yang gi sde tshan bcu
ཡང་ཡང་འགྲོ་བ	frequent yang yang nying mtshams sbyor ba'i sdug	yang yang 'gro ba
ཡང་ཡང་བརྟག་དཔྱད་བྱེད་པ	examine again and again	yang yang brtag dpyad byed pa
ཡང་ཡང་བལྟ	repeatedly look into yang yang mtho dman du 'gyur ba'i sdug	yang yang blta
ཡང་ཡང་དུ	quite often, again and again, many times	yang yang du
ཡང་ཡང་བྱེད་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཚིག	cliche	yang yang byed spyod kyi tshig
ཡང་ཡང་ཟ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of eating again and again	yang yang za ba'i ltung byed
ཡང་ཡང་འོང་བ	walk round, circumambulate, come often	yang yang 'ong ba
ཡང་ཡང་བསམ་བློ་གཏོང་བ	think about it again and again	yang yang bsam blo gtong ba
ཡང་ཡེ	the sound of longing	yang ye
ཡང་ཡེང	1) careless distracted mind, distraction; 2) nyin 'gyangs zhag 'phul; 3) shaky, unsteady [mind]	yang yeng
ཡང་ཡོད་པར་གསུངས་སོ	It is also said that yang g.yog - servant's servant	yang yod par gsungs so
ཡང་ར	place in tibet, religious circumambulation	yang ra
ཡང་རབ	an individual of exceedingly superior capacity	yang rab
ཡང་རབ་དབང་པོ	superior intelligence	yang rab dbang po
ཡང་རུང	whether	yang rung
ཡང་རླུང	hydrogen	yang rlung
ཡང་རླུང་འབར་མདེའུ	hydrogen bomb	yang rlung 'bar mde'u
ཡང་རླུང་འབར་མདེལ	hydrogen bomb	yang rlung 'bar mdel
ཡང་ལ	candle	yang la
ཡང་ལག	branch	yang lag
ཡང་ལག་ཅན	a whole [ggd]	yang lag can
ཡང་ལེ་ཤོད	Yangleshö	yang le shod
ཡང་ལེ་ཤོད་ཀྱི་པན་དི་ཏ	Pandita of Yangleshö. One of the 12 manifestations. Same as Mawey Senge	yang le shod kyi pan di ta
ཡང་ལེ་ཤོད་ཀྱི་བྲག་ཕུག	Cave of Yangleshö. Situated in the southern end of the Kathmandu Valley, near the village of Pharping. The 'Upper Cave of Yangleshö"' is also known as Asura Cave	yang le shod kyi brag phug
ཡང་ལོག	correct and incorrect	yang log
ཡང་ལོག་ཀུན་རྫོབ	correct and incorrect relative [truth]	yang log kun rdzob
ཡང་ཤ	lightness of foot, nimbleness, agility	yang sha
ཡང་ཤ་དོད་པོ	agile	yang sha dod po
ཡང་ཤི་ཡང་སོས་དམྱལ་བ	(yang sos) Revival Hell	yang shi yang sos dmyal ba
ཡང་ཤིག་ཤིག	w/o heaviness chags tshul zhig 2468	yang shig shig
ཡང་ཤོད	yang le shod - Yangleshö, the sacred place of Padmasambhava in the southern part of the Kathmandu Valley	yang shod
ཡང་སངས་རྒྱས	buddha nature reassumed/resumed/reasserted, again enlightened	yang sangs rgyas
ཡང་སེ	often	yang se
ཡང་སོད	hell of revival / reviving	yang sod
ཡང་སོན	ston 'bras smin myur ba'i son	yang son
ཡང་སོས	Reviving Hell	yang sos
ཡང་སྲིད	new / transmigrating existence, reincarnation, rebirth. Syn {'khor ba}	yang srid
ཡང་སྲིད་ཅན	yang son	yang srid can
ཡང་སྲིད་རྙེད་པ	to find reincarnation	yang srid rnyed pa
ཡང་སྲིད་གཏན་འཁེལ	confirm reincarnation	yang srid gtan 'khel
ཡང་སྲིད་ཕྱི་མ	later births	yang srid phyi ma
ཡང་སྲིད་འཕེན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལས	action which propells one to rebirth, action which impells rebirth. [mss]	yang srid 'phen byed kyi las
ཡང་སྲིད་འཕེན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ས་བོན	the seed which propels one to rebirth	yang srid 'phen byed kyi sa bon
ཡང་སྲིད་མེད	w/o further births, liberation	yang srid med
ཡང་སྲོས	reviving hell	yang sros
ཡང་སློབ	pupil's pupil	yang slob
ཡང་གསང	innermost, most secret	yang gsang
ཡང་གསང་སྐུ་གསུམ་གྱི་མན་ད་ལ	innermost mandala of the three kayas yang gsang sgrub pa rdo rje drag rtsal Innermost Sadhana Dorje Draktsal	yang gsang sku gsum gyi man da la
ཡང་གསང་ཆུ	yang gsang river in S Tibet	yang gsang chu
ཡང་གསང་སྙིང་ཏིག	the Innermost Heart Essence	yang gsang snying tig
ཡང་གསང་སྙིང་ཐིག	most profound/ secret heart essence	yang gsang snying thig
ཡང་གསང་སྙིང་པོ	the Innermost Essence, the most secret quintessential Dharma	yang gsang snying po
ཡང་གསང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཕུར་གཅིག	{zab bdun phur pa} of Chokgyur Lingpa	yang gsang thugs kyi phur gcig
ཡང་གསང་བརྡ་ཡི་སྐད	secret symbolic sound	yang gsang brda yi skad
ཡང་གསང་གནས་ལུགས	highly esoteric doctrines transmitted from master to one disciple, SA zhang zhung snyan rgyud	yang gsang gnas lugs
ཡང་གསང་གནས་ལུགས་ཕུག་ཆོད	discovery of the innermost secret natural state of being	yang gsang gnas lugs phug chod
ཡང་གསང་སྤུ་གྲི	chos dbang phur pa	yang gsang spu gri
ཡང་གསང་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	most secret and unexcelled	yang gsang bla na med pa
ཡང་གསང་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་སྡེ	Innermost Unexcelled Cycle consists of seventeen tantras. There are eighteen when adding the Ngaksung Tröma Tantra which is focused on the protective rites of Ekajati. According to the system of Pa...	yang gsang bla na med pa'i sde
ཡང་གསང་བླ་མེད་སྙིང་ཏིག	most secret unexcelled heart essence	yang gsang bla med snying tig
ཡང་གསང་འོད་གསལ	Syn {rdzogs pa chen po} yang gsang 'od gsal gyi rgyud bcu bdun the 17 tantras of Innermost Luminosity	yang gsang 'od gsal
ཡང་གསང་ལུགས	the most secret tradition	yang gsang lugs
ཡང་གསལ	more and more clarity	yang gsal
ཡང་གསོས	Reviving Hell	yang gsos
ཡངས	immensity, vast and open	yangs
ཡངས་ཁྱད	width	yangs khyad
ཡངས་ཁྲོལ་ལེ	vast and spacious, openness	yangs khrol le
ཡངས་གྱུར	which is spacious	yangs gyur
ཡངས་འཇོ་མ	ba drus ma'am bzhon ma	yangs 'jo ma
ཡངས་དོག	breadth, area, big and small, wide and narrow	yangs dog
ཡངས་དོག་གཉིས་མེད	being neither spacious nor narrow	yangs dog gnyis med
ཡངས་དོག་མཐོ་དམན་མེད་པ	with no fixed reach or range	yangs dog mtho dman med pa
ཡངས་དོག་མེད་པ	having no fixed dimension/ reach	yangs dog med pa
ཡངས་ལྡན	large and spacious	yangs ldan
ཡངས་པ	spacious(ness); isc. expansive(ness); isc. infinite	yangs pa
ཡངས་པ་ཅན	1) temple at dga' ldan Monastery; 2) Vaishali [Indian city]; 3) place in W 'dam gzhung rdzong; 4) 2469 {thub bstan yangs pa can}; 5) byang yangs pa can Monastery w relic stupa of Tsongkhapa (/ TSE	yangs pa can
ཡངས་པ་ཅན་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	the city of Vaishali yangs pa dang dri ma med pa ldan pa yangs pa dang dri ma med pa ldan pa zhes bya tshad ma kun las btus pa'i 'grel bshad	yangs pa can gyi grong khyer
ཡངས་པའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	Sutra of Entering the City of Vaishali yangs pa'i grong khyer du 'jug pa'i mdo Sutra of Entering the City of Vaishali	yangs pa'i grong khyer du 'jug pa
ཡངས་པའི་གྲོང་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་མདོ	yangs pa'i grong du 'jug pa'i mdo	yangs pa'i grong du 'jug pa'i mdo
ཡངས་པའི་མཐའ	nam mkha' yangs pa'i	yangs pa'i mtha'
མཐའ་ལ་བལྟས་པ་ལྟར	like looking out into the reaches of the boundless sky	mtha' la bltas pa ltar
ཡངས་པའི་མིག	large eyes, handsome woman, a goddess	yangs pa'i mig
ཡངས་པའི་ཤུན	alstonia tree	yangs pa'i shun
ཡངས་པའི་བསམ་པ	vast/ spacious/ open/ free thoughts	yangs pa'i bsam pa
ཡངས་པོ	extensive, large, vast expanse, vast, [wide] open, free, wide, broad, extensive, spacious	yangs po
ཡངས་མ	the earth	yangs ma
ཡངས་ཡེངས	distracted	yangs yengs
ཡངས་ཤིང་རྒྱ་ཆེ	vast and spacious	yangs shing rgya che
ཡངས་ཤིང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	large and spacious	yangs shing rgya che ba
ཡངས་ཤིང་འཇམ་པའི་པད་མོའི་མཚོར	on a soft and silky lotus in the middle of a lake	yangs shing 'jam pa'i pad mo'i mtshor
ཡད	(not in das)	yad
ཡད་དེ་ཡུད་དེ	{gsal po med pa}	yad de yud de
ཡད་མ་ཡུད	a furtive gesture	yad ma yud
ཡད་ཡུད	momentary, only a moment, flickering, fickle, brief, not clear, talk and action rngam chen w/o view of profit or danger	yad yud
ཡད་ཡུད་དུ་གསལ་བ	shone forth for an instance	yad yud du gsal ba
ཡན	more than, setting upper border * what is uppermost	yan
ཡན་ཁྱར་བ	put aside, separated, scattered, scarce, sparse, isolated, alone, single	yan khyar ba
ཡན་ཁྱར་བའི་དཀར་ཡོལ	separated chinaware	yan khyar ba'i dkar yol
ཡན་གར	put aside, separated, isolated, alone, single	yan gar
ཡན་གར་དུ་མེ	nothing other than	yan gar du me
ཡན་གར་དུ་མེད	nothing other than	yan gar du med
ཡན་གར་བ	discrete, separate, isolated, other than, unattached, disconnected	yan gar ba
ཡན་ཆད	above, in the upper part, up to and including, up to this point, up to and including; at least; more than, over/ everyone; onwards, above/ up to; up to; above	yan chad
ཡན་ཆད་ཀྱི	above	yan chad kyi
ཡན་ཆད་ལ	above, in the upper part, up to this point	yan chad la
ཡན་ཆོད	Syn {yan chad}	yan chod
ཡན་ཆོད་ལ	above, in the upper part	yan chod la
ཡན་ཏན་ཀུན་ལྡན	had all good qualities	yan tan kun ldan
ཡན་ཏན་འཕེལ་འགྱུར་བ	good qualities increase	yan tan 'phel 'gyur ba
ཡན་ཏིག་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཐོང་གྲོལ	revealed by	yan tig ye shes mthong grol
ཡན་སྟང	up to	yan stang
ཡན་སྟབས	remain in it freely	yan stabs
ཡན་ཐབས	above, in the upper part,, more than, over, after, onwards, up to and including, up to this point, at least	yan thabs
ཡན་ཐོན	advanced	yan thon
ཡན་དུ	spontaneously	yan du
ཡན་དུ་ཆུག	wander free	yan du chug
ཡན་དུ་འཇུག	go ownerless	yan du 'jug
ཡན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	go ownerless	yan du 'jug pa
ཡན་བདུན	7 limbed	yan bdun
ཡན་འདེབས	GJT: abbr for "yan nas 'debs pa" which means to "purify from above" and refers to the process of purification thru the decent of amrita from Vajrasatta. The first of three modes of purification in ...	yan 'debs
ཡན་ན	above, in the beginning, in the 1st place	yan na
ཡན་ནས	from above, since	yan nas
ཡན་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa wander, roam; 2) broken, destroyed [dngos po 'di ma yan pa zhig gnang dgos]; 3) invisible, disappeared; 4) the other, another; 5) vacant, free, ownerless	yan pa
ཡན་པ་ཅི་ཞིག་འདི་མིན་ཡོད	1) free, loose, vagrant; 2) vacant, unoccupied, ownerless, no master; 3) someone not afraid of anyone, thus doing anything he likes; 4) Unbridled [horse or yak]; 5) unruly, undisciplined [person]; ...	yan pa ci zhig 'di min yod
ཡན་པ་བཏང	to let run wild	yan pa btang
ཡན་པ་བ	particular bye brag pa, logs gar ba [put aside?]	yan pa ba
ཡན་པ་བློ་བདེ	1) unconcerned, carefree. 2) Carefree Vagrant	yan pa blo bde
ཕ༹ྲེཨེ་ཨནད་སེརེནེ	{rig pa gu yangs yan pa blo bde} a vast, free, and serene awareness	free and serene
ཡན་པར་གཏང	give rein to; x {'khrul rtog yan par ma gtang ma ni ba} do not give rein to deluded thoughts, mani-reciters!	yan par gtang
ཡན་པར་གཏོང་བ	disappeared, became invisible	yan par gtong ba
ཡན་པར་བཏང	let loose	yan par btang
ཡན་པར་བཏང་བ	to let free / loose / to roam wild / free	yan par btang ba
ཡན་པར་བཞག	set free	yan par bzhag
ཡན་པར་བཞག་པ	to leave freely / openly	yan par bzhag pa
ཡན་བྱང	supplementary inventory GD	yan byang
ཡན་མན	above and below, more or less, approximately	yan man
ཡན་མར	one above & the other below	yan mar
ཡན་མར་ཙམ་པ	about	yan mar tsam pa
ཡན་ཚད	above, up to	yan tshad
ཡན་ལ	above, in the upper part, up to and including, up to this point, at least, more than, over, after, onwards	yan la
ཡན་ལག་ཀི་རླུང་ལྔ	the five subsidiary winds	yan lag ki rlung lnga
ཡན་ལག་སྐུམ་པ	draw in the limbs	yan lag skum pa
ཡན་ལག་སྐྱེས	penis	yan lag skyes
ཡན་ལག་སྐྱོན་ཅན	injured/ defective limb	yan lag skyon can
ཡན་ལག་འཁུམས་པ	be contracted of the limbs	yan lag 'khums pa
ཡན་ལག་གི	subsidiary, element, subject, appendage, contributory [river], section, appendix, supplement	yan lag gi
ཡན་ལག་གི་སྐོར	subsidiary cycle of teachings	yan lag gi skor
ཡན་ལག་གི་ཁ་དོག	subsidiary / secondary colors	yan lag gi kha dog
ཡན་ལག་གི་ཁ་དོག་བརྒྱད	the 8 subsidary colors [cloud, smoke, dust sprin du ba, rdul, khug rna, grib ma, nyi 'od, snang ba, mun pa]	yan lag gi kha dog brgyad
ཡན་ལག་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	the chakras of the limbs	yan lag gi 'khor lo
ཡན་ལག་གི་ལྟུང་བ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 112-5] related to {rtsa ltung bcu bzhi}	yan lag gi ltung ba brgyad
ཡན་ལག་གི་མཐིལ	the palm of his hand	yan lag gi mthil
ཡན་ལག་གི་དམ་ཚིག	branch samayas	yan lag gi dam tshig
ཡན་ལག་གི་དམ་ཚིག་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 branch samayas	yan lag gi dam tshig nyer lnga
ཡན་ལག་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	subsidiary yogas; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 118]	yan lag gi rnal 'byor
ཡན་ལག་གི་དབང	Subsidiary empowerments	yan lag gi dbang
ཡན་ལག་གི་ཚིག་གྲུབ	clause [of a sentence]	yan lag gi tshig grub
ཡན་ལག་གི་ཚོན་འབྲིང་པོ	intermediate branch colors	yan lag gi tshon 'bring po
ཡན་ལག་གི་རླུང	secondary winds/ pranas	yan lag gi rlung
ཡན་ལག་གི་རླུང་ལྔ	then the five ancillary energies/ minor branch pranas GD TSE	yan lag gi rlung lnga
ཡན་ལག་གི་རླུང་ཕྲན་ལྔ	five minor branch pranas	yan lag gi rlung phran lnga
ཡན་ལག་གི་ལུང་ཕྲན་ལྔ	Five minor branch pranas	yan lag gi lung phran lnga
ཡན་ལག་དགུ	9 branches of the scriptures. GD	yan lag dgu
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	war chariot	yan lag brgyad
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན	ganges river, 8 qualities	yan lag brgyad ldan
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན་གྱི་ཆུ	water having the 8 limbs	yan lag brgyad ldan gyi chu
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན་གྱི་རྩོམ་ཚུལ	jargon, stereotyped writing	yan lag brgyad ldan gyi rtsom tshul
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	eight branches; also Daily Apology in Eight Branches	yan lag brgyad pa
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པའི་ཁྲིམས	bsnyen gnas having the 8 limbs yan lag brgyad pa'i snying po bsdus pa {yan lag brgyad pa'i snying po bsdus pa}	yan lag brgyad pa'i khrims
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པའི་རྩོམ་ཚུལ	jargon, stereotyped writing yan lag brgyad pa'i rtsom tshul gsar pa modern jargon/ stereotyped writing	yan lag brgyad pa'i rtsom tshul
ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པའི་རང་འགྲེལ	{yan lag brgyad pa'i rang 'grel}	yan lag brgyad pa'i rang 'grel
ཡན་ལག་ངན	pilferer, thief	yan lag ngan
ཡན་ལག་དངུལ་ཁང	branch bank	yan lag dngul khang
ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	1) the five limbs [arms, legs, head]; 2) astr five fold conjunction; 3) five limbs/ members)	yan lag lnga
ཡན་ལག་ལྔ་ལྡན་གྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	the five limbed practice	yan lag lnga ldan gyi sbyor ba
ཡན་ལག་ལྔ་པ	tortoise	yan lag lnga pa
ཡན་ལག་ལྔ་སྦས་པ	tortoise yan lag lnga sa la phab pa'i phyag dpral	yan lag lnga sbas pa
ཡན་ལག་ཅན	1) assembly w parts; 2) moon	yan lag can
ཡན་ལག་གཅིག་པའི་གཟུགས་ཅན	[gzugs can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dpe can don gyi yan lag gcig kho na dpe'i yan lag gcig gi gzugs can du byas shing, yan lag lhag ma dang, yan lag can gzugs su ma bkod pa'i rgyan zhig 24...	yan lag gcig pa'i gzugs can
ཡན་ལག་གཅོད་པ	mutilate	yan lag gcod pa
ཡན་ལག་བཅུ	10 limbs of kriya tantra approaching and accomplishing liturgies {bsnyen sbyor yan lag bcu} [gang du sgrub pa'i gnas, de nyid gsum, bsam gtan gsum, sngags sgrub pa la 'jug pa'i cho ga, sbyin sreg g...	yan lag bcu
ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve links	yan lag bcu gnyis
ཡན་ལག་བཅོས་མ	artificial limb	yan lag bcos ma
ཡན་ལག་མཆོག	supreme limb, head	yan lag mchog
ཡན་ལག་མཆོག་ལྡན	handsome person	yan lag mchog ldan
ཡན་ལག་མཆོག་ལྡན་མ	pretty woman	yan lag mchog ldan ma
ཡན་ལག་འཇུག	kar myang rtsis su yan lag 'jug gi ri mo ste gnyis shar na yul gru la lar char 'bab cing, la lar mi 'bab, 'bru tshogs nyams	yan lag 'jug
ཡན་ལག་ཉམས་པ	weak, decrepit, lame	yan lag nyams pa
ཡན་ལག་མཉམ	very useful and important medicine	yan lag mnyam
ཡན་ལག་མཐིལ་དུ	on the palm of his hand	yan lag mthil du
ཡན་ལག་དང་ཉིང་ལག	limbs and subsidiary limbs	yan lag dang nying lag
ཡན་ལག་དང་ཉེ་བའི་ཡན་ལག	limbs and subsidiary limbs yan lag dang yan lag can gyi 'brel pa among the six genitives	yan lag dang nye ba'i yan lag
ཡན་ལག་དྲུག་པ	having six limbs, bird	yan lag drug pa
ཡན་ལག་བདུད་ལྡན	SA rlung sbyor lnga	yan lag bdud ldan
ཡན་ལག་བདུད་ལྡན་གྱི་རླུང་སྦྱོར	practice of prana with the 7 attributes	yan lag bdud ldan gyi rlung sbyor
ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ	seven-branched prayer; seven offices of worship; sevenfold service, seven aspects. Seven-Branch Prayer	yan lag bdun pa
ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ་འབུལ་བ	offering the seven branches	yan lag bdun pa 'bul ba
ཡན་ལག་པུའི་ཁང	branch unit	yan lag pu'i khang
ཡན་ལག་འབྱུང	An.gira^ja	yan lag 'byung
ཡན་ལག་མ་ཚང་བ	incomplete limbs	yan lag ma tshang ba
ཡན་ལག་མེད་པ	Kamadeva	yan lag med pa
ཡན་ལག་མེད་པའི	anangavajra	yan lag med pa'i
ཡན་ལག་མེད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Yenlag Meypey Dorje; Yenlak Meypey Dorje	yan lag med pa'i rdo rje
ཡན་ལག་དམག་ཁོངས	military sub- division/ district	yan lag dmag khongs
ཡན་ལག་དམར	Mars	yan lag dmar
ཡན་ལག་ཚགས	branch organization	yan lag tshags
ཡན་ལག་ཚོང་ཁང	branch store	yan lag tshong khang
ཡན་ལག་ཞ་བོ	crippled	yan lag zha bo
ཡན་ལག་བཞི་པ	the four kinds of troops	yan lag bzhi pa
ཡན་ལག་བཞི་པའི་དཔུང	army of the four kinds of troops	yan lag bzhi pa'i dpung
ཡན་ལག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	branch factory	yan lag bzo grwa
ཡན་ལག་རུ་ཁག	sub/ branch unit, detachment	yan lag ru khag
ཡན་ལག་ལས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	subsidiary activity rituals yan lag las don u yon lhan khang branch/ sub committee yan lag shin tu rnam par 'byes pa'i dpe	yan lag las kyi cho ga
ཡན་སོན	HCL	yan son
ཡན་དྷ་ཤེན་ཧུང་ཞི	{yan dha shen hung zhi}	yan dha shen hung zhi
ཡན་ཨན	Yenan	yan an
ཡབ	masculine consort/ principle	yab
ཡབ་ཀྱི་ཆ་འཛིན་པའི་རིགས	family/ type adhering to the male aspect	yab kyi cha 'dzin pa'i rigs
ཡབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་དྲུག	yab kyi six mudras [one dbu rgyan dang - 1 rna rgyan, three mgul rgyan, four gdu bu, five mchod phyir thogs, six thal chen gyi tshom bu	yab kyi phyag rgya drug
ཡབ་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་འཛིན་པ་ཞིག	had the same qualities as his father	yab kyi yon tan 'dzin pa zhig
ཡབ་བཀའ	father inspiration	yab bka'
ཡབ་རྐྱང	a single male/deity [no consort]	yab rkyang
ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོ	this princely father	yab rgyal po
ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཨུ་པ་རའ་ཙ	daughter of King Uparaja	yab rgyal po u pa ra' tsa
ཡབ་ལྔ	Five male buddhas	yab lnga
ཡབ་གཅིག	only father	yab gcig
ཡབ་ཆ	things kept securely, under safe keeping	yab cha
ཡབ་ཆེན	address for noblemen's children to father [h]	yab chen
ཡབ་རྗེ	address to king by relatives etc. [h]	yab rje
ཡབ་དང་འཁོར་རྣམས	her father and followers	yab dang 'khor rnams
ཡབ་དང་བུའི་སྦྱར་བ	Application of the Father and Son [thd]	yab dang bu'i sbyar ba
ཡབ་དང་སྲས་མཇལ་བའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Meeting of Father and Son; Skt. pitaputra-samagamana, (T 60); also {yab sras mjal ba}	yab dang sras mjal ba'i mdo
ཡབ་དམ་པ	deceased father	yab dam pa
ཡབ་བདུད	guardian deity of Sikkim	yab bdud
ཡབ་པ	[arch] 1) rtogs; 2) lock up, keep safe; 2) skim the surface of a fluid; 3) move to and fro, fan; 4) attract provoke	yab pa
ཡབ་ཕ་ཇོ	lord father yab pha jos gsungs ba'i rgyud 'grel rnams the tantras and commentaries taught by my lord father	yab pha jo
ཡབ་འབངས	subject/ serf on the father's side	yab 'bangs
ཡབ་འབངས་རུས་དྲུག	six clans of the {yab 'bangs rus drug}	yab 'bangs rus drug
ཡབ་མེས	paternal ancestors	yab mes
ཡབ་མེས་ཀྱི་དུས	in our grandfather's time, in the time of our ancestors	yab mes kyi dus
ཡབ་མེས་ཀྱི་ཡིག་ཙང་གཟིགས་པ	consulting his ancestors'archives	yab mes kyi yig tsang gzigs pa
ཡབ་མེས་གོང་མ་ཐམས་ཅད	forebears, ancestors	yab mes gong ma thams cad
ཡབ་མོ	act of fanning, waving, anything waved to and fro, fan, anything beaten as a cymbal, attracting, provoking	yab mo
ཡབ་ཚང	family, household, {yab tshang} family ET	yab tshang
ཡབ་གཞི	estates granted parents of Dalai and Panchen Lamas; 2) inheritance of property [h]	yab gzhi
ཡབ་གཞིས	title of families who have produced a Dalai Lama	yab gzhis
ཡབ་གཞིས་སྟག་འཚེར	stag 'tsher} family of the [14th] Dalai Lama	yab gzhis stag 'tsher
ཡབ་ཡབ་པོ	1) mind unable to stay in its own place; 2) hide/ conceal	yab yab po
ཡབ་ཡུམ	the Lord and the Lady	yab yum
ཡབ་ཡུམ་རྒྱལ་པོ	king as father and mother to the country	yab yum rgyal po
ཡབ་ཡུམ་གཉིས་པོ་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ	when he and his wife	yab yum gnyis po lhan cig tu
ཡབ་ཡུམ་ཞལ་སྦྱོར	in union with his consort	yab yum zhal sbyor
ཡབ་ཡོབ	ya be yo be	yab yob
ཡབ་ཡོབ་པ	hide, conceal	yab yob pa
ཡབ་རིང་པོ	portico, veranda [of a monastery]	yab ring po
ཡབ་གཤེགས	his father died	yab gshegs
ཡབ་ས	covered place, cache, shelter	yab sa
ཡབ་སྲས	father and son (hierarchs)	yab sras
ཡབ་སྲས་ཀྱི་བཞེད་པ	father-son instruction	yab sras kyi bzhed pa
ཡབ་སྲས་མཇལ་མདོ	Sutra of the Meeting of Father and Son; (T 60)	yab sras mjal mdo
ཡབ་སྲས་མཇལ་བ	Meeting of Father and Son Sutra	yab sras mjal ba
ཡབ་སྲས་མཇལ་བའི་མདོ	pitaputra samagamana sutra	yab sras mjal ba'i mdo
ཡབ་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	the father Heruka	yab he ru ka
ཡབ་གྷ་ནི་སི་ཐན	Afghanistan	yab gha ni si than
ཡམ	yams	yam
ཡམ་པ་ལ	a great river	yam pa la
ཡམ་བུ	* Khatmandu	yam bu
ཡམ་མེ་བ	moderate, middling, not severe, tolerable, blunderingly, coarsely, roughly	yam me ba
ཡམ་མེ་བའི་བཀའ་བབས	vague sentence	yam me ba'i bka' babs
ཡམ་མེ་བའི་སློབ་སྦྱོང་བག་མེད	disorganized careless study	yam me ba'i slob sbyong bag med
ཡམ་མེ་ཡོམ་མེ	Syn {yam yom} shaky, unsteady	yam me yom me
རྟོགས་ལ་ཕན་མི་ཐོགས	understanding a vague/ nonsensical explanation is of no use yam yam shig shig tu g.yo ba - swirl yam yam shig shig tu g.yo ba - to swirl	rtogs la phan mi thogs
ཡམ་ཡོམ	1) shaky, unsteady, swaying; 2) meaning only rough/ approximate; 3) of uncertain purpose, nonsensical	yam yom
ཡམ་ཡོམ་དུ་འབར་བ	flicker	yam yom du 'bar ba
ཡམ་ཡོམ་བྱེད་པ	to waver / flicker	yam yom byed pa
ཡམ་ཡོམ་ལ་ལུས་ཏེ	remaining in doubt	yam yom la lus te
ཡམ་ཡོམ་ལ་ལུས་པ	unclear explanation/ commentary, be left/ remain in doubt	yam yom la lus pa
ཡམ་ཤིང	{nags nas yam shing len du phyin pa} had gone into the forest to gather wood	yam shing
ཡམས	epidemic, infectious disease	yams
ཡམས་འགོག	epidemic p[revention	yams 'gog
ཡམས་ཐབས	calamity, epidemic, contagious rims nad	yams thabs
ཡམས་དལ	non-epidemic infectious disease	yams dal
ཡམས་ནད	epidemic	yams nad
ཡའོ	Yao (a minority group in South China)	ya'o
ཡར	1) above, up[per][wards], higher; 2) 'phar ba, 'thor ba	yar
ཡར་ཀེར་བ	to erect	yar ker ba
ཡར་ཀྱག	lift, raise	yar kyag
ཡར་ཀྱག་པ	lift	yar kyag pa
ཡར་ཀླུང	yar klung	yar klung
ཡར་ཀླུང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཞོལ་པ	{yar klung bkra shis zhol pa}	yar klung bkra shis zhol pa
ཡར་ཀླུང་ཁ་རིལ	yar klungs boots zon pa'i mthil zhig	yar klung kha ril
ཡར་ཀླུང་གནས་རྟེན་གསུམ	the three receptacles and three sanctuaries of Yarlung	yar klung gnas rten gsum
ཡར་ཀླུང་ཙང་པོ	the Brahmaputra River	yar klung tsang po
ཡར་ཀླུང་གཙང་པོ	{yar klungs gtsang po/ Bhramaputra river	yar klung gtsang po
ཡར་ཀླུང་བཙན་ཐང་གི་ལྷ་ཁང	Tsentang temple in Yarlung	yar klung btsan thang gi lha khang
ཡར་ཀླུངས	valley in lhokha	yar klungs
ཡར་ཀླུངས་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཞོལ་པ	{yar klungs bkra shis zhol pa}	yar klungs bkra shis zhol pa
ཡར་ཀླུངས་ཁ་རིལ	yar klungs boots zon pa'i mthil zhig	yar klungs kha ril
ཡར་ཀླུངས་གནས་རྟེན་གསུམ	the three receptacles and three sanctuaries of Yarlung	yar klungs gnas rten gsum
ཡར་ཀླུངས་གཙང་པོ	{yar klungs gtsang po river	yar klungs gtsang po
ཡར་དཀན	gyen gzar po	yar dkan
ཡར་བཀྱག	lift, raise	yar bkyag
ཡར་སྐུལ	stimulation, promotion of development/ improvement, urging forward 2473	yar skul
ཡར་སྐུལ་གཏོང	stimulate, promote development/ improvement, urge forward	yar skul gtong
ཡར་སྐྱེད	increase, rise 'tshar longs	yar skyed
ཡར་སྐྱེད་ཅིག	let it grow up, let it thrive	yar skyed cig
ཡར་བསྐྱེད་པ	grown up, anything full blown	yar bskyed pa
ཡར་བསྐྱོད	ascent	yar bskyod
ཡར་ཁྱིམ	Yarkhand	yar khyim
ཡར་འཁྱམ་མར་མྱུལ	wander up and down	yar 'khyam mar myul
ཡར་འཁྱམས	dissipated	yar 'khyams
ཡར་འཁྱོག	lift, raise	yar 'khyog
ཡར་གྱི་ངོ	waxing period of the moon	yar gyi ngo
ཡར་གྱི་གནས་བདུན	the seven who dwell above	yar gyi gnas bdun
ཡར་གྱི་མཚམས་མེད་ཀྱི་ལས	TSE	yar gyi mtshams med kyi las
ཡར་གྱི་ཟང་ཐལ	(direct and) unobstructed ascent (to enlightenment)	yar gyi zang thal
ཡར་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ཞིག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱང	your positive actions, on the one hand	yar dge ba'i las zhig sgrub kyang
ཡར་འགྲོ	to walk up	yar 'gro
ཡར་འགྲོ་དམ་པའི་ཆོས	the sublime Dharma that will cause you to ascend	yar 'gro dam pa'i chos
ཡར་འགྲོ་བ	go up	yar 'gro ba
ཡར་འགྲོ་མན་འགྲོ	go up or down; x {yar 'gro man 'gro'i sa mtshams ji ltar yin te} how could such a moment be the turning point at which you control whether you go up or down?	yar 'gro man 'gro
ཡར་འགྲོ་མར་འགྲོ	to walk up and down	yar 'gro mar 'gro
ཡར་འགྲོ་མར་འགྲོ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ས་མཚམས	at the crossroad which leads up and down	yar 'gro mar 'gro gnyis kyi sa mtshams
ཡར་འགྲོ་མར་འགྲོ་རྣམ	everyone passing by	yar 'gro mar 'gro rnam
ཡར་འགྲོ་མར་འགྲོའི་ས་མཚམས	can still go up or down x {drong chog pa rnams shi bo'i ro sngas su phyin nas yar 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba dang 'dra zhes zer gyin 'dug} those who conduct village cere...	yar 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams
དེཨཐ	bed you can still go up or down, as if you were steering a horse by the reins	death
ཡར་འགྲོའི་དགེ་བ་གྱིས	do positive deeds that will exalt you	yar 'gro'i dge ba gyis
ཡར་རྒྱས	progress, development, improvement, expansion, spreading	yar rgyas
ཡར་རྒྱས་གོང་འཕེལ	vigorous, exuberant	yar rgyas gong 'phel
ཡར་རྒྱས་འགྲོ	progress, develop, improve, expand, spread	yar rgyas 'gro
ཡར་རྒྱས་འགྲོ་བཞིན་པའི	progressing, developing, improving, expanding, spreading	yar rgyas 'gro bzhin pa'i
ཡར་རྒྱས་འགྲོ་བཞིན་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	[progressing, developing, improving, expanding, spreading] countries	yar rgyas 'gro bzhin pa'i rgyal khab
ཡར་རྒྱས་གཏོང	to develop	yar rgyas gtong
ཡར་རྒྱས་གཏོང་བ	develop, improve	yar rgyas gtong ba
ཡར་རྒྱས་ཕྱིན་པ	meliorate, progress	yar rgyas phyin pa
ཡར་རྒྱས་དམན་པ	under-development [ed]	yar rgyas dman pa
ཡར་རྒྱས་དམན་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	underdeveloped country	yar rgyas dman pa'i rgyal khab
ཡར་རྒྱས་སུ་འགྲོ	progress, develop, improve, expand, spread	yar rgyas su 'gro
ཡར་རྒྱས་སུ་འགྲོ་བཞིན་པའི	progressing, developing, improving, expanding, spreading yar rgyas su 'gro bzhin pa'i rgyal khab [progressing, developing, improving, expanding, spreading] countries	yar rgyas su 'gro bzhin pa'i
ཡར་རྒྱས་སུ་གཏོང	extend, further, make progress, develop, improve	yar rgyas su gtong
ཡར་རྒྱུ	one rising in rank and office	yar rgyu
ཡར་རྒྱུ་མར་རྒྱུ	wandering up and down	yar rgyu mar rgyu
ཡར་སྒྲུག	pick up	yar sgrug
ཡར་སྒྲུག་པ	pickup	yar sgrug pa
ཡར་ངོ	waxing moon period	yar ngo
ཡར་ངོ་སྔོན་འགྲོ	in the waxing period of the nag pa month khyim du slebs pa	yar ngo sngon 'gro
ཡར་ངོའི་ཚེས་བརྒྱད་པ	8th day of the waxing moon	yar ngo'i tshes brgyad pa
ཡར་ངོའི་ཟླ་བ	waxing period of the moon/month + full	yar ngo'i zla ba
ཡར་སྔོན	LKh: before, up to, until; used with dates, etc. E.g., phyi lo 1959 lo'i yar sngon..., "before/upto 1959...." [mss]	yar sngon
ཡར་བཅད་པ	gong du phud pa ste dmigs bsal btang ba,//lo na rgan po dang byis pa nad pa nyam chung ba bcas yar bcad nas tshang ma las kar zhugs pa	yar bcad pa
ཡར་ཆབ	upper waters	yar chab
ཡར་ཆབ་གཙང་པོ	yar klungs gtsang po in 'phyongs rgyas rdzong dang sne gdong rdzong	yar chab gtsang po
ཡར་ཆོབ་ཆོབ	1) yar 'phar ba; 2) spung ba	yar chob chob
ཡར་མཆོང་མར་མཆོང	jumping up and down	yar mchong mar mchong
ཡར་མཆོད་མར་སྦྱིན	upward make offerings to the three jewels and downward give offerings to evil spirits	yar mchod mar sbyin
ཡར་རྗེ་ལྷ་ཁང	Orgyen Lingpa's hermitage	yar rje lha khang
ཡར་རྗེས་སུ་སོང་བ	rose higher and higher	yar rjes su song ba
ཡར་སྙོག་མར་སྙོག	moving up and down	yar snyog mar snyog
ཡར་བཏེག	lift, raise	yar bteg
ཡར་བཏེག་པ	elevate	yar bteg pa
ཡར་བཏེགས	lift, raise	yar btegs
ཡར་ལྟ	looked up	yar lta
ཡར་ལྟ་ཕྱིར་ལྟ	look around everywhere	yar lta phyir lta
ཡར་ལྟ་བ	look upwards	yar lta ba
ཡར་ལྟ་མར་ལྟ	looked up and down	yar lta mar lta
ཡར་ལྟོས	good mig dpe lta ba	yar ltos
ཡར་སྟོད་ཤམ་པོ་གངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	Yartö Shampo Khangkyi Rawa, in Lokha	yar stod sham po gangs kyi ra ba
ཡར་བསྟོད	extolling, raising up	yar bstod
ཡར་བསྟོད་མར་སྨད	praise and deprecate	yar bstod mar smad
ཡར་ཐིམ་པ	zla ba rkang mthil nas yar	yar thim pa
ཡར་ཐོན	progressive	yar thon
ཡར་ཐོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	developed country	yar thon gyi rgyal khab
ཡར་ཐོན་གྱི་སྤོབས་པ	vigor, animation, vitality, life	yar thon gyi spobs pa
ཡར་ཐོན་གྱི་ཡུལ་རྣམས	developed countries	yar thon gyi yul rnams
ཡར་ཐོན་གྱི་རི་མོ་བ	progressive painter	yar thon gyi ri mo ba
ཡར་ཐོན་གྱི་ལག་རྩལ	advanced skills	yar thon gyi lag rtsal
ཡར་ཐོན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	developed/ advanced country	yar thon rgyal khab
ཡར་ཐོན་ཅན	progressive	yar thon can
ཡར་ཐོན་པ	civilized	yar thon pa
ཡར་ཐོན་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་བཟོ་བསྐྲུན	civilization	yar thon spyi tshogs bzo bskrun
ཡར་ཐོན་ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ཁང	Advanced Farm Cooperative	yar thon zhing las mnyam khang
ཡར་འཐུད་མར་རྟིས	average account, taking max and min figures	yar 'thud mar rtis
ཡར་འཐུད་མར་རྩིས	average, take the highest and lowest figures	yar 'thud mar rtsis
ཡར་འཐེན	pull up, promote, advance	yar 'then
ཡར་འཐོན	come/ bring up again	yar 'thon
ཡར་འཐོན་པ	come up again from a depth 2474	yar 'thon pa
ཡར་དར	increase [further and further]	yar dar
ཡར་དེག་གོ	keep it above, put it up	yar deg go
ཡར་འདེགས	climb up	yar 'degs
ཡར་འདེགས་པ	raise up raise	yar 'degs pa
ཡར་འདེད་པ	drive upwards	yar 'ded pa
ཡར་རྡོ	dmigs sar ma phog par gzhan du 'khyogs pa'i rdo,//dmigs pa'i gnad la ma thebs par yar rdo gzhan la phog nas bsnad skyon bzos pa	yar rdo
ཡར་ལྡང	arise from place of sleep etc.	yar ldang
ཡར་ལྡན	upwardly evolving (fashion/ manner); higher incorporating lower	yar ldan
ཡར་ལྡན་དུ	for the higher reaches	yar ldan du
ཡར་ལྡིང	fly or rise up	yar lding
ཡར་ལྡོག་གྱེན་ལྡོག	bka' la yar ldog	yar ldog gyen ldog
ཡར་ན	either	yar na
ཡར་ནང	mt, valley, village's upper side	yar nang
ཡར་ནང་འདམ་བུ་བྲག་དཀར	Yarnang Dambu Trakar, in Domey. See Dambu Trakar	yar nang 'dam bu brag dkar
ཡར་ནམ་འཕང་བསྟོད་པ	high above in the sky	yar nam 'phang bstod pa
ཡར་ནས་མར་ལ	from top to bottom	yar nas mar la
ཡར་ནོན་ནོ	keep it above, put it up	yar non no
ཡར་གནས	yar gyi gnas bdun - higher ranks	yar gnas
ཡར་གནས་བདུན་གྱི་ལྷག་མ	residual for the seven upper ranks	yar gnas bdun gyi lhag ma
ཡར་གནས་མར་གནས་བསྲེས	mingling the higher and the lower ranks. Syn. gtsang	yar gnas mar gnas bsres
ལྷག་བསྲེ	phud lhag bsre	lhag bsre
ཡར་སྣ	upper end	yar sna
ཡར་སྣེ	upper tip/ end	yar sne
ཡར་ཕུག	the upper hollow, shoulder [of a bell]	yar phug
ཡར་ཕེབས	returned, come in [h]	yar phebs
ཡར་ཕྱིན	ascend, go upward	yar phyin
ཡར་ཕྱུང	took out	yar phyung
ཡར་འཕགས་པ	1) steng du thon pa, high/ tall; 2) especially noble	yar 'phags pa
ཡར་འཕར་བ	1) become many; 2) rise/ climb up	yar 'phar ba
ཡར་འཕར་བའི་ཁྲོམ་གོང	rising prices	yar 'phar ba'i khrom gong
ཡར་འཕར་བའི་མཚོ་ཆུ	rising lake water	yar 'phar ba'i mtsho chu
ཡར་འཕེལ	progressing	yar 'phel
ཡར་འཕེལ་དུ་འགྲོ	progress	yar 'phel du 'gro
ཡར་འཕེལ་བ	increase	yar 'phel ba
ཡར་འཕྱར	lift, raise	yar 'phyar
ཡར་འཕྲལ་ལེན་པ	SNT (oral comm.): to extract forcibly (said of a king taxing his subjects), syn. (btsan shugs kyis len pa) [mss]	yar 'phral len pa
ཡར་བ	(tha mi dad pa,, scatter[ed], spread, go astray, lose, lost, dissipated, sent adrift, ramble {gyar ba} [lend borrow]	yar ba
ཡར་བའི་མེ་སྟག	scattered sparks	yar ba'i me stag
ཡར་བེའུ	1 year old be'u yar bla ma dkon mchog la mchod pa 'bul	yar be'u
ཡར་འབྲོག	yamdok pastures	yar 'brog
ཡར་འབྲོག་གྱུ་མཚོ	yar 'brog turquoise Lake	yar 'brog gyu mtsho
ཡར་འབྲོག་སྟག་ལུང	{yar 'brog stag lung yar 'brog g.yu mtsho - Yamdrok Yutso	yar 'brog stag lung
ཡར་མ	after a calf is born 1 year khog stong du bsdad only half milked 'bri etc. ar mar, barren dri, cross between 'bri and mdzo	yar ma
ཡར་མར	on the one hand, on the other hand,	yar mar
ཐམས་ཅད་ནས་འོངས་པ	have come from everywhere, highlands and lowlands	thams cad nas 'ongs pa
ཡར་མར་ཀུན་ནས	from different provinces, east and west	yar mar kun nas
ཡར་མར་འགྲོ་བ	go up and down	yar mar 'gro ba
ཡར་མར་འཆག་པ	walk up and down	yar mar 'chag pa
ཡར་མར་ཚེས་བཅུ	tenth day of the waxing and waning moon	yar mar tshes bcu
ཡར་མོ་ཀླུངས	yar klungs ancient name	yar mo klungs
ཡར་མོ་ཐང	a district in amdo	yar mo thang
ཡར་མོ་སྣ་བཞི	yar mo sna bzhi district in lho ka	yar mo sna bzhi
ཡར་ཙམ	just a little above	yar tsam
ཡར་རྩེ་གསུམ	three points	yar rtse gsum
ཡར་བརྩེགས་པ	construct	yar brtsegs pa
ཡར་ཚེས	days of the waxing moon	yar tshes
ཡར་ཚེས་བཅོ་སུམ་པ	13th day of the waxing period of the month	yar tshes bco sum pa
ཡར་འཛེག	to go up, go to	yar 'dzeg
ཡར་འཛེག་པ	climb up, go up, go to	yar 'dzeg pa
ཡར་ཞུ	submit/ present a report/ appeal/ request to a superior	yar zhu
ཡར་ཞུ་མར་གནང	granting a request made to a superior	yar zhu mar gnang
ཡར་ཞུགས	to enter [a monastery]	yar zhugs
ཡར་ཞོ	curds made from 'bri etc. yar ma milk	yar zho
ཡར་བཞེང	erect, build [h]	yar bzheng
ཡར་ཟག	well-behaved	yar zag
ཡར་བཟེད	1) yas sgron; 2) snod kyi kha gyen du yar bzed pa	yar bzed
ཡར་འོང་བ	who was coming up [from ...]	yar 'ong ba
ཡར་ཡར	1) go higher and higher, increase further and further; 2) chad pa'am 'phar ba (	yar yar
ཡར་ཡར་སྙེག་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	traveling, you will come closer and closer to	yar yar snyeg tu yod pa
ཡར་ཡར་སོང་བ	ascend higher and higher	yar yar song ba
ཡར་ཡོང་བ	come in	yar yong ba
ཡར་རེ་ཡོར་རེ	khyar khyor weak feeble, unstable??	yar re yor re
ཡར་ལ	above, higher	yar la
ཡར་ལ་ཁྱར་ཤོག	bring it up!	yar la khyar shog
ཡར་ལ་ཁྱེར་ཤོག	fetch it up	yar la khyer shog
ཡར་ལ་ལོངས	Get up!	yar la longs
ཡར་ལག་གཟིགས་པ	look upwards	yar lag gzigs pa
ཡར་ལང	rising	yar lang
ཡར་ལང་བ	stand up rise, get up	yar lang ba
ཡར་ལངས	got to its feet	yar langs
ཡར་ལངས་པ	stand up, get up, rise	yar langs pa
ཡར་ལམ	on the way	yar lam
ཡར་ལིང་མར་ལིང	pulled/ torn apart, not whole	yar ling mar ling
ཡར་ལུང	Yarlung yar klungs	yar lung
ཡར་ལུང་དར་རྒྱས་རྫོང	yar lung dar rgyas rdzong monastery	yar lung dar rgyas rdzong
ཡར་ལུང་གཙང་པོ	name of main eastwest river in Tibetan	yar lung gtsang po
ཡར་ལུང་ཤེལ་བྲག	Yarlung Sheldrak, in Lokha	yar lung shel brag
ཡར་ལུང་སོག་ཁ	1 of 37 bon sacred places, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	yar lung sog kha
ཡར་ལུར་ཇོ་བོའི་ཆོས་འབྱུང	{yar lur jo bo'i chos 'byung	yar lur jo bo'i chos 'byung
ཡར་ལོག	layman becoming a monk late in life	yar log
ཡར་ལོག་པ	1) gyen log byed pa; 2) kha yar phyogs pa	yar log pa
ཡར་ལོག་པའི་མེ་ཏོག་གི་འདབ་མ	3) from below come up	yar log pa'i me tog gi 'dab ma
ཡར་ལོག་བླ་མ	monk who becomes layman then again a monk, monk who 2475 again becomes a layman late in life	yar log bla ma
ཡར་ཤོག	come in	yar shog
ཡར་ས་མར་སྐྱེལ	yar dkrug mar dkrug, exchange above and below	yar sa mar skyel
ཡར་སེལ	exorcism upwards	yar sel
ཡར་སོང་དུས	traveling on	yar song dus
ཡར་སོང་བའི་ལམ་དུ	further on our journey	yar song ba'i lam du
ཡར་སྲིད	exists primordially, eternally	yar srid
ཡར་གསལ་ཞུ་མཁན	he who communicates wishes of applicant to superior person	yar gsal zhu mkhan
ཡར་ལྷ་ཤམ་པོ	yar lha sham po	yar lha sham po
ཡར་ལྷ་ཤམ་པོ་གངས	Yarlha Shampo snow mountain	yar lha sham po gangs
ཡར་ལྷ་ཤམ་པོའི་ཆུ	yar lha sham po'i river	yar lha sham po'i chu
ཡར་ལྷ་ཤམ་བྷོ	Yar lha shambho	yar lha sham bho
ཡར་ལྷག	gtsang lhag - phud gtor - lhag	yar lhag
ཡལ	1) fade away, disappear, vanish, fade, dissolve, subside, dwindle, wilt. 2) seasoning	yal
ཡལ་ཁ་ལམ་ཁྱེར་རྣམ་གསུམ	the branches are the three ways of carrying realization on the path GD	yal kha lam khyer rnam gsum
ཡལ་ཁ་ལམ་ཁྱེར་གསུམ	the branches are the three ways of carrying realization on the path GD	yal kha lam khyer gsum
ཡལ་ག	branch, twig, bough, branch, branches	yal ga
ཡལ་ག་སྐྱུར	walnut tree	yal ga skyur
ཡལ་ག་ལྔ	five branches (sbyin pa, tshul khrims, bzod pa, brtson 'grus, bsam gtan)	yal ga lnga
ཡལ་ག་ལྔ་པ	hand	yal ga lnga pa
ཡལ་ག་ཅན	tree	yal ga can
ཡལ་ག་ཆུང་ཆུང	shoot	yal ga chung chung
ཡལ་ག་འཆང	tree trunk	yal ga 'chang
ཡལ་ག་མཐུན་སྦྱོར	graft tree branches	yal ga mthun sbyor
ཡལ་ག་འདྲེག་བཅོས	prune/ trim trees	yal ga 'dreg bcos
ཡལ་ག་ཕྲ་མོ	twig	yal ga phra mo
ཡལ་ག་བྲེས	tree	yal ga bres
ཡལ་ག་འབྲེག	prune/ trim trees	yal ga 'breg
ཡལ་ག་འབྲེག་བཅོས	prune/ trim trees	yal ga 'breg bcos
ཡལ་ག་འབྲེལ	tree	yal ga 'brel
ཡལ་ག་འཛིན	tree	yal ga 'dzin
ཡལ་ག་བཞིན	like branches	yal ga bzhin
ཡལ་གམ	pledge	yal gam
ཡལ་གའི་མེ་ཏོག	yal ga flower	yal ga'i me tog
ཡལ་གའི་རལ་པ	trunk of a tree sticking up w/o branches, a vine	yal ga'i ral pa
ཡལ་གའི་རི་དབ༹གས	monkey	yal ga'i ri dvags
ཡལ་གའི་རུས་པ	bones of the limbs	yal ga'i rus pa
ཡལ་གས་ལྷག	tree	yal gas lhag
ཡལ་གྱིས་སོང་བ	to utterly vanish	yal gyis song ba
ཡལ་འགྲོ	dissolve by itself	yal 'gro
ཡལ་ཐལ་བ	having disappeared, vanished	yal thal ba
ཡལ་དུ་ཆུག	let it fade	yal du chug
ཡལ་འདབ	greenery, foliage {yal ga dang lo ma}	yal 'dab
ཡལ་འདབ་ཅན	tree	yal 'dab can
ཡལ་འདབ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པ	Chapter Twelve	yal 'dab bcu gnyis pa
ཡལ་སྡོང	branch and trunk	yal sdong
ཡལ་ཕྱོང	# other than grangs kyi gnas drug cu	yal phyong
ཡལ་འཕྱོང	#	yal 'phyong
ཡལ་བ	(tha mi dad pa,, disappear, fade away, vanish, lower, decrease, diminish, shrink, subside, wilt	yal ba
ཡལ་བབས་ཀྱི་དགའ་བ	the joys of descent from above	yal babs kyi dga' ba
ཡལ་བར་དོར་བ	abandoned	yal bar dor ba
ཡལ་བར་འདོར་བ	not cherish/ take care of/ accept/ undertake pa, let fall away	yal bar 'dor ba
ཡལ་བར་མ་དོར	do not let ... dissipate	yal bar ma dor
ཡལ་བར་མི་དོར་བ	to never forsake	yal bar mi dor ba
ཡལ་བར་མི་འདོར་བ	do not let fall away yal bar mi 'dor ba'i thugs bskyed go cha your armor of bodhichitta which has not been let fall away	yal bar mi 'dor ba
ཡལ་བར་མི་འདོར་བར	don't leave us to perish here	yal bar mi 'dor bar
ཡལ་མ་ཡོལ	{yal yol} ephemeral	yal ma yol
ཡལ་མ་ཡོལ་བའི་ན་ཚོད	{yal ma yol ba'i age/ stage of life	yal ma yol ba'i na tshod
ཡལ་མེ	1) sparks; 2) tongues of flame	yal me
ཡལ་འཛུགས་པ	[arch] 1) rgyal lam skugs 'dzugs pa; 2) nag btsugs pa	yal 'dzugs pa
ཡལ་བཞུར་རྒྱག	prune trees, bring down those in power	yal bzhur rgyag
ཡལ་ཟིན་པ	departed	yal zin pa
ཡལ་ཟུག	[arch] rgyal btsugs pa	yal zug
ཡལ་ཡལ	1) 47th of the 60 #; 2) joyful; 3) disappear, vanish, dissolve, indistinct; 4) uselessly spend time/ action, waste things etc.	yal yal
ཡལ་ཡལ་ཆེན་པ	a million	yal yal chen pa
ཡལ་ཡལ་ཆེན་པོ	#	yal yal chen po
ཡལ་ཡུལ	moment, short time	yal yul
ཡལ་ཡོལ	{yal ma yol} ephemeral	yal yol
ཡལ་ལེ་བ	{kha bkrag yal le ba} a beautiful, bright countenance; comp {ya le ba}	yal le ba
ཡལ་ལེ་ཡོལ་ལེ	uselessly spend time/ action, waste things etc., careless, vague, indistinct yal le yol le'i ngang nas nyi ma gang 'khyol	yal le yol le
ཡལ་ས	vanishing point	yal sa
ཡས་ཀྱི	the upper, the 1 above	yas kyi
ཡས་ཀྱི་མཆུ་ཏོ	upper lip	yas kyi mchu to
ཡས་ཁོད	1) rang 'thag gi yas rdo; 2) yas gtun	yas khod
ཡས་གུང	upper garment, shirt	yas gung
ཡས་གླུད	glud rdzas dang glud	yas glud
ཡས་འགེམ	ya khas ma kha 'joms pa'am gnon pa	yas 'gem
ཡས་འགྲམ	upper jaw/ cheeks	yas 'gram
ཡས་རྒྱུའི་དགའ་བ་བཞི	four causal degrees of joy descending from above	yas rgyu'i dga' ba bzhi
ཡས་སྒྲོན	in Tibetan rten 'brel [ceremony, celebration] at the mouth of chang vessels etc. putting butter and tsampa ornaments	yas sgron
ཡས་མཆིག	1) rang 'thag gi yas rdo; 2) yas gtun	yas mchig
ཡས་མཆུ	upper lip	yas mchu
ཡས་འཇབ	red/brown leather for lining trunks	yas 'jab
ཡས་གཉིས་མས་གཉིས	four year old horse/ mule [not a list]	yas gnyis mas gnyis
ཡས་གཏུན	1) rang 'thag gi yas rdo; 2) sgog gtun gyi yas rgyag	yas gtun
ཡས་སྟ་མས་འཇོར	pick (tool)	yas sta mas 'jor
ཡས་སྟགས	in Bon ransom torma cha zhig given as food to lha and 'dre	yas stags
ཡས་ཐགས	in Bon ransom torma cha zhig given as food to lha and 'dre	yas thags
ཡས་ཐིག	fish line	yas thig
ཡས་ཐེམ	sgo'i ru bzhi'i thod kyi 'phred shing [piece of wood placed across the door]	yas them
ཡས་འདེད	TSE	yas 'ded
ཡས་རྡོ	chu 'khor gyi yas rdo,//chu 'khor yas rdo 'khor yong, mas rdo brel ba ma byed	yas rdo
ཡས་ནས	from above	yas nas
ཡས་ནས་མར་རིམ་པ་ལྟར	listed from above to below	yas nas mar rim pa ltar
ཡས་སྣོད	kind of lamp kong bu	yas snod
ཡས་པ	w/o, beyond, -less	yas pa
ཡས་ཕྱིན	gong 'og. a certain large estate	yas phyin
ཡས་བབ	1) fall [from above to below]; 2) damage; 3) down path	yas bab
ཡས་བབ་ཀྱི་དགའ་བཞི	the descending four joys	yas bab kyi dga' bzhi
ཡས་བབ་མས་བརྟན	descending and stabilizing below	yas bab mas brtan
ཡས་བབས	descending manner	yas babs
ཡས་བབས་ཀྱི་དགའ་བ	the joys of descent from	yas babs kyi dga' ba
ཡས་འབབ་པ	come down from above	yas 'bab pa
ཡས་འབབས	descend, come down from above	yas 'babs
ཡས་མ	previous, higher, upper ones	yas ma
ཡས་མར་ཞུང་གིས་བྱུང་བ	[arch] lower/ later arising from the upper/ previous	yas mar zhung gis byung ba
ཡས་མས	about, around, or so, ancestors, vicinity, up and down, about, approximately	yas mas
ཡས་མཚམས	yas kyi mtshams sam ltag ma'i bar mtshams	yas mtshams
ཡས་རྫོང	mdos glud gtong ba	yas rdzong
ཡས་བཟེད	yas sgron	yas bzed
ཡས་ཡས་མས་མས	[said] this and that	yas yas mas mas
ཡས་ལ	[arch] nyid la'am khyed la	yas la
ཡས་སོ	upper teeth	yas so
ཡས་བསུ་མས་སྐྱེལ	[R] 1) =ize, even out; 2) early and late sowing of grain	yas bsu mas skyel
ཉུང་སྙོམས་པོར་བྱེད་པ	by =izing even out numbers of people that are too few and too much yas bsu mas skyel gyis ring thung gcig pa	nyung snyoms por byed pa
ཡས་བསུ་མས་འགེབས	[R] equalize, even out	yas bsu mas 'gebs
ཡི	figure 54, instrumental of yid, SA kyi yi kri dmangs gtso spyi mthun rgyal khab Democratic Republic of E Germany	yi
ཡི་ག	appetite, taste	yi ga
ཡི་ག་འགག	appetite is los	yi ga 'gag
ཡི་ག་འགོག	lose one's appetite	yi ga 'gog
ཡི་ག་འཆུས་པ	feel repulsion in swallowing food, paranoid	yi ga 'chus pa
ཡི་ག་ཤོར	lost my mind	yi ga shor
ཡི་གར	appetite	yi gar
ཡི་གར་འཕྲོད་པ	1) dang ga dang 'phrod pa; 2) coming into/ occurring to the mind	yi gar 'phrod pa
ཡི་གར་འོང	it is grateful to the taste	yi gar 'ong
ཡི་གར་འོང་བ	1) tasty [food]; 2) pleasing; 3) chu dvangs ma	yi gar 'ong ba
ཡི་གེ་ཀེ་ཤ་ཅན	SK yi ge 'greng bu dang rna ru nyis brtsegs can	yi ge ke sha can
ཡི་གེ་ཀློག་བྲིས་ཤེས་མཁན	literate	yi ge klog bris shes mkhan
ཡི་གེ་དཀར་པོ	{dbu chen} letters	yi ge dkar po
ཡི་གེ་བཀོད་པ	calligraphy	yi ge bkod pa
ཡི་གེ་རྐྱང་པ	a letter that forms by itself a syllable	yi ge rkyang pa
ཡི་གེ་སྐུར་ས	address	yi ge skur sa
ཡི་གེ་སྐྱེལ་གླ	postage	yi ge skyel gla
ཡི་གེ་སྐྱེལ་བ	send/ transport a latter	yi ge skyel ba
ཡི་གེ་བསྐུར་བ	send/ mail a letter	yi ge bskur ba
ཡི་གེ་མཁན	secretary, script-man, copyist, person who takes dictation	yi ge mkhan
ཡི་གེ་མཁན་པོ	1 versed in reading and writing	yi ge mkhan po
ཡི་གེ་མཁས་པ	learned	yi ge mkhas pa
ཡི་གེ་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of letters, 1 of sangs rgyas sa gsum	yi ge 'khor lo
ཡི་གེ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཚོགས་ཆེན	cloud mass wheel of syllables	yi ge 'khor lo tshogs chen
ཡི་གེ་འཁྱར་བ་པོ	one who makes mistakes in writing	yi ge 'khyar ba po
ཡི་གེ་འགོད་པ	inscribe, arrangement of letters in a book or letter	yi ge 'god pa
ཡི་གེ་བརྒྱ་པ	the 100 syllable mantra	yi ge brgya pa
ཡི་གེ་བརྒྱ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ	1) commentary of 100 syllables; 2) commentary on a/the 100 syllable mantra	yi ge brgya pa'i 'grel pa
ཡི་གེ་གཅིག་མ	Single Syllable. A short Prajnaparamita sutra. Refers to the letter a, the syllable symbolizing the nonarising nature of emptiness	yi ge gcig ma
ཡི་གེ་བཅུ་པ	10 syllable mantra of Tibet r GD	yi ge bcu pa
ཡི་གེ་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	language reform	yi ge bcos bsgyur
ཡི་གེ་མཆན་བཀོད	annotate 2477	yi ge mchan bkod
ཡི་གེ་འཇུག་པའི་གནས་བརྒྱད	the 8 letter 'jug gnas	yi ge 'jug pa'i gnas brgyad
ཡི་གེ་འཇུག་སའི་ཕྱིའི་རྒྱ	envelope	yi ge 'jug sa'i phyi'i rgya
ཡི་གེ་བརྗོད་ཚུལ་དྲུག	'a a ha sha sa ma	yi ge brjod tshul drug
ཡི་གེ་གཉིས	the two kinds of letters, vowels and consonants	yi ge gnyis
ཡི་གེ་གཏོང	send a letter	yi ge gtong
ཡི་གེ་གཏོང་གླ	postage	yi ge gtong gla
ཡི་གེ་གཏོང་བ	post	yi ge gtong ba
ཡི་གེ་གཏོང་ཡུལ	addressee	yi ge gtong yul
ཡི་གེ་བཏང་བ	sent a letter	yi ge btang ba
ཡི་གེ་རྟགས་འབྱར་མ	the'u brgyab pa'am phab yod pa'i yi ge	yi ge rtags 'byar ma
ཡི་གེ་ལྟ་བུ	erase like a letter, cover, shut up	yi ge lta bu
ཡི་གེ་ལྟ་བུ་སུབ་པ	blot out	yi ge lta bu sub pa
ཡི་གེ་ཐོབ་པ	one who has obtained a written order or document, receive a letter	yi ge thob pa
ཡི་གེ་དྲུག་པ	six syllable mantra	yi ge drug pa
མ་ནི་པད་མེ་ཧུང	the Mani Mantra of Avalokiteshvara	ma ni pad me hung
ཡི་གེ་དྲུག་མ	1) aom ma ni pad me h'um mantra; 2) Avalokiteshvara, spyan ras gzigs	yi ge drug ma
ཡི་གེ་དྲུག་མའི་རིག་སྔགས	vidya mantra of six syllables	yi ge drug ma'i rig sngags
ཡི་གེ་ན་གཅིག	each word	yi ge na gcig
ཡི་གེ་བསྣོལ་བ	earlier consonants later spos la and later consonants earlier spos pa,//hidra + ? Sa,//hraaidra + ? Sraa,//sraaidra + ? Hraa,//sidha,//sidhe,//sengge	yi ge bsnol ba
ཡི་གེ་པ	writer, writer, copyist	yi ge pa
ཡི་གེ་པ་བྱས	was dictated to	yi ge pa byas
ཡི་གེ་པ་རུ་བསྐོས	secretary	yi ge pa ru bskos
ཡི་གེ་དཔོད་རྩོམ	compose by dictating to another	yi ge dpod rtsom
ཡི་གེ་དཔྱོད	dictate a letter	yi ge dpyod
ཡི་གེ་སྤྲིང་བ	send of a letter	yi ge spring ba
ཡི་གེ་བྲལ་བ	the letterless, emptiness	yi ge bral ba
ཡི་གེ་བྲིས་སའི་ཅོག་ཙེ	desk	yi ge bris sa'i cog tse
ཡི་གེ་དབུ་ཅན	tibetan printed letters	yi ge dbu can
ཡི་གེ་དབུ་ཆེན	capital letters of tibet	yi ge dbu chen
ཡི་གེ་དབུ་མེད	Ume/ headless script	yi ge dbu med
ཡི་གེ་འབྲི	write a letter	yi ge 'bri
ཡི་གེ་འབྲི་བ	write a letter	yi ge 'bri ba
ཡི་གེ་འབྲི་སྲོལ་ལྟར་གྱི་སྐད	literary language	yi ge 'bri srol ltar gyi skad
ཡི་གེ་འབྲི་སྲོལ་ལྟར་གྱི་སྐད་ཆ	literary language	yi ge 'bri srol ltar gyi skad cha
ཡི་གེ་སྦྱོར་བ	ming gzhir rjes sngon dbyangs sogs sgrig pa	yi ge sbyor ba
ཡི་གེ་མང་གིས་དོགས་པ	afraid of using too many words	yi ge mang gis dogs pa
ཡི་གེ་མི་ཤེས་པ	illiterate [person]	yi ge mi shes pa
ཡི་གེ་མེ	w/o letter	yi ge me
ཡི་གེ་མེད	without letter	yi ge med
ཡི་གེ་མེད་པ	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	yi ge med pa
ཡི་གེ་མེད་པའི་རྒྱུད	letterless tantra	yi ge med pa'i rgyud
ཡི་གེ་མེད་པའི་དོན	that w/o letter yi ge med pa'i za ma tog rnam par snang	yi ge med pa'i don
མཛད་སྙིང་པོ	{yi ge med pa'i za ma tog rnam par snang mdzad snying po}	mdzad snying po
ཡི་གེ་རྩིས	writing and figuring	yi ge rtsis
ཡི་གེ་མཚུངས་པ	1 of 4 mtshungs pa rnam pa, similarity in writing	yi ge mtshungs pa
ཡི་གེ་བཞག	sign a document	yi ge bzhag
ཡི་གེ་བཞག་པ	sign a document	yi ge bzhag pa
ཡི་གེ་བཞི་པ	four syllables	yi ge bzhi pa
ཡི་གེ་བཞི་ལ་མི་སྡད་པ་གསུམ	three movements w reference to the four syllables	yi ge bzhi la mi sdad pa gsum
ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་སཡལླབླེ་བཱམ་དུརིང་ཐེ་པྲཅཏིཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་གཏུམ	mo. [GM]	from the syllable BAm during the practice of gtum
ཡི་གེ་བཟོ་མི	note taker, recorder	yi ge bzo mi
ཡི་གེ་འམ་རི་མོ་ཛར་ཛོར་བྲིས་པ	scrawl	yi ge 'am ri mo dzar dzor bris pa
ཡི་གེ་ལ་འགོད་པ	record in writing	yi ge la 'god pa
ཡི་གེ་ཤ་ཆེན	yig rus yag po'am, yig gzugs sbom shas che ba	yi ge sha chen
ཡི་གེ་ཤིང	writing board	yi ge shing
ཡི་གེ་ཤེས	to learn to read	yi ge shes
ཡི་གེ་ཤེས་པ	could read	yi ge shes pa
ཡི་གེ་སུམ་ཅུ་ཐམ་པ	30 letters	yi ge sum cu tham pa
ཡི་གེ་སླེབ	letter arrives	yi ge sleb
ཡི་གེ་གསལ་པོ	plain & legible handwriting	yi ge gsal po
ཡི་གེ་བསྲིངས	dispatched a letter	yi ge bsrings
ཡི་གེ་བསླབ་པ	learn one's letters	yi ge bslab pa
ཡི་གེའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	points of articulation/ pronunciation	yi ge'i skye gnas
ཡི་གེའི་འཁོར་ལོ	sphere / display of letters	yi ge'i 'khor lo
ཡི་གེའི་རྒྱུ་ལྔ	sgra rig pa las gsal ba'i sgra'i gzhi yi ge'i rgyu lnga [brjod 'dod dang, rlung, gnas, byed pa, rtsol]	yi ge'i rgyu lnga
ཡི་གེའི་མཆན་བུ	words printed in smaller character than the original text	yi ge'i mchan bu
ཡི་གེའི་རྗེས་སུ	access by application of the letter	yi ge'i rjes su
ཡི་གེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	1 of 'jug pa rnam gsum	yi ge'i rjes su 'jug pa
ཡི་གེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད	the mind in pursuit of syllables GD	yi ge'i rjes su 'jug pa'i yid
ཡི་གེའི་རྟགས་གསུམ	masculine, feminine and neuter signs	yi ge'i rtags gsum
ཡི་གེའི་དོན	word-for-word meaning	yi ge'i don
ཡི་གེའི་སྡེབ་སྦྱོར	orthography	yi ge'i sdeb sbyor
ཡི་གེའི་གནས་ཚད	generally yi ge re re ba'i sgra 'byin pa'i yun tshad mig 'dzum gyi tshad du bshad	yi ge'i gnas tshad
ཡི་གེའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	form of letters (written or printed)	yi ge'i rnam 'gyur
ཡི་གེའི་རྣམ་གཞག	1) generally yi ge la division of vowels and consonants and among consonants; 2) text explaining yi ge sbyor tshul etc	yi ge'i rnam gzhag
ཡི་གེའི་ཕྱི་རྒྱ	envelope	yi ge'i phyi rgya
ཡི་གེའི་ཕྱི་མོ	1) yi ge'i rtsa ba'am, ka sogs sum cu; 2) original text to read/ copy	yi ge'i phyi mo
ཡི་གེའི་བྱེད་རྩོལ	articulation, pronunciation	yi ge'i byed rtsol
ཡི་གེའི་དབྱངས	the [5] vowels	yi ge'i dbyangs
ཡི་གེའི་སྦྱོར་བ	ming tshig yi ge sogs kyi sdeb sbyor gyi bya ba	yi ge'i sbyor ba
ཡི་གེའི་མ་དཔེ	1) original copy of a document Ka deb bam yi ge gzab gshar gyi ma yig yag po dper lta sa	yi ge'i ma dpe
ཡི་གེའི་ཚགས	stop to divide a sentence 2478	yi ge'i tshags
ཡི་གེའི་ཚོགས	groups of letters/ syllables	yi ge'i tshogs
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུརྟེཨེན་ནོན	concurrent formations; / {gang dag phan tshun 'dus pa las ming tshig gnyis ka 'byung ba'i gnas su gyur pa ste / sgra'i rdul phran nam rigs 'dra 'dus pas tshogs so} groups of letters, sounds, or syl...	the fourteen non
ཡི་གེའི་ཚོགས་པ	sngon rjes ming gsum 'dus pa'i ming tshig gnyis kyi rtsom gzhir gyur pa'i yi ge thams cad kyi phyi mo A dang KA la sogs pa mang po 'dus pa [ldan min 'du byed kyi nang gses shig]	yi ge'i tshogs pa
ཡི་གེའི་གཞི	substance on which a letter is written	yi ge'i gzhi
ཡི་གེའི་གཞི་ཅན	wood tiger year	yi ge'i gzhi can
ཡི་གེའི་གཟུགས	calligraphic design / style	yi ge'i gzugs
ཡི་གེའི་གཟུངས	mantra syllables	yi ge'i gzungs
ཡི་གེའི་རིག་པ	philology	yi ge'i rig pa
ཡི་གེའི་རིས་སུ་བཀོད	started writing, to write down	yi ge'i ris su bkod
ཡི་གེའི་རིས་སུ་འགོད	to write down	yi ge'i ris su 'god
ཡི་གེའི་རིས་སུ་བཏབ་པ	start to write down	yi ge'i ris su btab pa
ཡི་གེའི་རིས་སུ་བྲིས	have written down	yi ge'i ris su bris
ཡི་གེའི་ལན	written answer	yi ge'i lan
ཡི་གེའི་ཤུབས	envelope	yi ge'i shubs
ཡི་གེའི་ལྷ	letter deity stong nyid de having been transformed into the relative moon disk meditate on the mantra syllable seed	yi ge'i lha
ཡི་གེར་གང་ཡོད་ལྟར	literal	yi ger gang yod ltar
ཡི་གེར་འགོད་ཀྱིན	started writing it down	yi ger 'god kyin
ཡི་གེར་འགོད་པ	to write down	yi ger 'god pa
ཡི་གེར་བཏབ་པ	put into words	yi ger btab pa
ཡི་གེར་བྲིས	wrote down, dictated	yi ger bris
ཡི་གེར་བྲིས་འཇོག་པ	dictate	yi ger bris 'jog pa
ཡི་གེར་བྲིས་པ	set forth	yi ger bris pa
ཡི་གེར་འབྲི་བ	put into writing	yi ger 'bri ba
ཡི་གྱི་མུན་པར་འཁྱིད	lead to the darkness of despair	yi gyi mun par 'khyid
ཡི་གཅོད་པ	become sad, depressed, dejected	yi gcod pa
ཡི་ཆད	disappointment, worried; despair; weary, tired of	yi chad
ཡི་ཆད་བསྒོམས	I lose heart	yi chad bsgoms
ཡི་ཆད་པ	sadness, worry, depression, despair	yi chad pa
ཡི་ཆད་བྱ	[become] frustrated	yi chad bya
ཡི་ཆད་བྱིད	one despairs	yi chad byid
ཡི་ཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ	confident faith	yi ches kyi dad pa
ཡི་ཏ་ལི	Italy	yi ta li
ཡི་བཏགས	yi dwags for bon	yi btags
ཡི་རྟོན	reliance, trust	yi rton
ཡི་རྟོན་རུང་བ	reliable, dependable, trustworthy	yi rton rung ba
ཡི་ཐང་ཆད་པ	sadness, depression, worry, disappointment, despair	yi thang chad pa
ཡི་དགས	ghost	yi dags
ཡི་དྭགས	preta, hungry ghost	yi dwags
ཡི་དབ༹གས	Preta. 'Hungry ghost.' One of the six classes of sentient beings	yi dvags
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	world/ realm of the pretas	yi dvags kyi 'jig rten
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་ཐུབ་པ་ཁ་འབར་མ	Jvalamukha, Flaming Mouth, the sage of the hungry ghosts	yi dvags kyi thub pa kha 'bar ma
ཡི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་ཐུབ་པ་ཁ་འབར་མ	Jvalamukha/ flaming mouth, sage of the hungry ghosts	yi dwags kyi thub pa kha 'bar ma
ཡི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་གནས	the realm of the hungry ghosts	yi dwags kyi gnas
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་གནས	the realm of the hungry ghosts	yi dvags kyi gnas
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	the place of the hungry ghosts. realm of the hungry ghosts	yi dvags kyi yul
ཡི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	the realm of the hungry ghosts	yi dwags kyi yul
ཡི་དྭགས་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as a preta	yi dwags skye gnas
ཡི་དབ༹གས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	city of ghosts	yi dvags grong khyer
ཡི་དྭགས་བདག་པོ	lord of pretas	yi dwags bdag po
ཡི་དྭགས་ནང་གི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན	pretas w very small mouth/ throat and immense bellies	yi dwags nang gi sgrib pa can
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ནང་སྒྲིབ་ཅན	pretas w very small mouth/ throat and immense bellies	yi dvags nang sgrib can
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཕྱི་སྒྲིབ་ཅན	pretas who do not find food and drink, or if they do are unable to enjoy it	yi dvags phyi sgrib can
ཡི་དྭགས་ཕྱིའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཅན	pretas who do not find food and drink, or if they do are unable to enjoy it	yi dwags phyi'i sgrib pa can
ཡི་དྭགས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཆེ་བ	powerful pretas	yi dwags rdzu 'phrul che ba
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ཟུང	byings na gnas pa dang, kha 'thor ba gnyis so	yi dvags zung
ཡི་དྭགས་རིགས་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 kinds of pretas [gul bum headless semon, sha za ignis fatuus, 'byung po ghost, srul po female demon causing disease in cidren, lus srul po goblin, smyo byed insane demon, skyem byed leaping ...	yi dwags rigs bcu gnyis
ཡི་དྭགས་རིགས་བཞི	the four kinds of pretas [zas skom la phyi'i sgrib pa yod outwardly obstructed from food and drink, by spirits or foul appearance; 2) zas skom la nang gi sgrib pa yod inner obstructions of very sma...	yi dwags rigs bzhi
ཡི་དྭགས་ལ	yi dwags pass	yi dwags la
ཡི་དབ༹གས་ལ་བཀྲེས་སྐོམས	hungry ghosts suffer hunger and thirst	yi dvags la bkres skoms
ཡི་དྭགས་ས་བོན	seed of the pretas	yi dwags sa bon
ཡི་དྭགས་སྲིད	produces the existence of pretas	yi dwags srid
ཡི་དབ༹གས་གསུམ	the three kinds of pretas	yi dvags gsum
ཡི་དམ	tutelary deity, SA kye rdo rje, ma ha ma ya, dzam bha la, kalachakra, dpal gsang ba bsdus pa, gsang ba bdus pa, solemn promise, vow, oath, confirmation by oath, Yidam, meditation deity, devata	yi dam
ཡི་དམ་ཀྱི་ལྷ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the yidam deity	yi dam kyi lha rjes su dran pa
ཡི་དམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the divine assembly of the mandala of the yidam	yi dam dkyil 'khor gyi lha tshogs
ཡི་དམ་བཀའ་འདུས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{yi dam bka' 'dus chos kyi rgya mtsho yi dam bka' 'dus chos kyi rgya mtsho terma revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa	yi dam bka' 'dus chos kyi rgya mtsho
ཡི་དམ་སྐོར	yidam practices	yi dam skor
ཡི་དམ་གྱི་སྔགས	yidam's mantra[s]	yi dam gyi sngags
ཡི་དམ་གྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Yidam practice. The main practice which traditionally follows the preliminaries. It includes the two stages of development and completion and is a perfect stepping stone for approaching the more su...	yi dam gyi rnal 'byor
ཡི་དམ་གྱི་ལྷ	yidam deity	yi dam gyi lha
ཡི་དམ་དགོངས་འདུས	terma revealed by	yi dam dgongs 'dus
ཡི་དམ་རྒྱུད་བཞི་དྲུག	the yidams of the four and six tantras	yi dam rgyud bzhi drug
ཡི་དམ་བསྒོམ་བཟླས	the visualizations and recitations of the yidam deities	yi dam bsgom bzlas
ཡི་དམ་བཅའ	promise, make a vow, swear an oath	yi dam bca'
ཡི་དམ་བཅའ་བ	lodge a vow	yi dam bca' ba
ཡི་དམ་བཅས	to avow	yi dam bcas
ཡི་དམ་འཆའ་བ	promise by oath	yi dam 'cha' ba
ཡི་དམ་དམ་བཅའ	[make an] oath, vow, assertion, promise	yi dam dam bca'
ཡི་དམ་དུ་འཆ་བ	keep a vow	yi dam du 'cha ba
ཡི་དམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ	make into one's daily practice	yi dam du byed pa
ཡི་དམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	the yidam Vajrasattva	yi dam rdo rje sems dpa'
ཡི་དམ་བྱེད	promise, make a vow, swear an oath	yi dam byed
ཡི་དམ་བླངས་པ	take up the commitment	yi dam blangs pa
ཡི་དམ་རྩ་གསུམ་དྲིལ་སྒྲུབ	terma by Ratna Lingpa	yi dam rtsa gsum dril sgrub
ཡི་དམ་ཞི་ཁྲོ	peaceful and wrathful yidams	yi dam zhi khro
ཡི་དམ་ཞི་ཁྲོའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས	The peaceful	yi dam zhi khro'i lha tshogs
ཨནད་ཝྲཐཕུ༹ལ་ཡིདམ	deities	and wrathful yidam
ཡི་དམ་ཡབ་ཡུམ	yidam with consort	yi dam yab yum
ཡི་དམ་ལྷ	yidam deity	yi dam lha
ཡི་དམ་ལྷ་ཚོགས	host of divine yidams	yi dam lha tshogs
ཡི་དམ་ལྷའི་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	Yidam, approaching and accomplishing practices on	yi dam lha'i bsnyen sgrub
ཡི་དམ་ལྷའི་ཕྱག་ཆེན་ཀྱི་ལུས	Mahamudra form of the yidam deity. The attainment, chiefly through Mahayoga Tantra, of the illusory wisdom body on the vidyadhara level of Mahamudra which corresponds to the path of cultivation. It...	yi dam lha'i phyag chen kyi lus
ཡི་དམ་ལྷའི་ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	having a vision of the yidam deity	yi dam lha'i zhal mthong ba
ཡི་ལྡང	sadness arises	yi ldang
ཡི་ཕྱ་དུང་ངེ	sadness, repent, regret	yi phya dung nge
ཡི་འཕྲིག་པ	[arch] dogs pa'am rnam rtog za ba	yi 'phrig pa
ཡི་མ་རངས་པའི་སེམས་སྐྱེས་པ	he felt no joy in	yi ma rangs pa'i sems skyes pa
ཡི་མུག	despair, unhappy, displeased, sorry, sad, dejected, gloomy, depression, sadness, gloomy, despair	yi mug
ཡི་མུག་སྐྱེས	I am saddened	yi mug skyes
ཡི་མུག་ག་ཆད	being quite exhausted	yi mug ga chad
ཡི་མུག་ག་ཆད་པ	giving up in despair yi mug mchi ma gtong bzhin gnas so broke down in tears	yi mug ga chad pa
ཡི་མུག་ལྡང	become depressed	yi mug ldang
ཡི་མུག་ནས་འདུག	grew greatly disheartened	yi mug nas 'dug
ཡི་མུག་པ	was saddened	yi mug pa
ཡི་མུག་མ་བྱེད་ཅིག	do not be sad	yi mug ma byed cig
ཡི་རྨུག་ལྡང་བ	feel saddened	yi rmug ldang ba
ཡི་རྨོ	[arch] joy	yi rmo
ཡི་ཙི	(CH soap	yi tsi
ཡི་ཙི་བླུག་སའི་སྒམ་ཆུང	soap box	yi tsi blug sa'i sgam chung
ཡི་རྩི	soap	yi rtsi
ཡི་རྩི་ལྡན་པ	soapy	yi rtsi ldan pa
ཡི་རྩི་བླུག་སྣོད	soap case, soap dish	yi rtsi blug snod
ཡི་ཚི	(CH soap	yi tshi
ཡི་བཞིན	wish-fulfilling	yi bzhin
ཡི་བཞིན་ནོར་བུའི་ལུང	Wishfulfilling Jewel Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	yi bzhin nor bu'i lung
ཡི་ཟི་རེ་ལ	Israel	yi zi re la
ཡི་ཟི་རོ	Israel	yi zi ro
ཡི་རག	Iraq	yi rag
ཡི་རང	rejoicing	yi rang
ཡི་རང་གྱིས་ཤིག	rejoice! {khyod rang kyang dge la yi rang gyis shig} you should rejoice in virtue	yi rang gyis shig
ཡི་རང་བ	rejoicing, joy, to rejoice; joy, to rejoice, rejoicing	yi rang ba
ཡི་རང་བྱེད་པ	admire, sympathize w	yi rang byed pa
ཡི་རངས་པ	joy	yi rangs pa
ཡི་རེ་མུག	sad, how sad, despair, How unfortunate!, gloomy. How sorrowful! What despair, despairing	yi re mug
ཡི་ལ་ཁེ	Iraq	yi la khe
ཡི་ལ་ཁོ	Iraq	yi la kho
ཡི་ལང	Iran	yi lang
ཡི་ལའ་ཁེ	Iraq	yi la' khe
ཡི་ལའ་ཁོ	Iraq	yi la' kho
ཡི་ཤི་བ	sadness, depression, worry, disappointment, despair discouraged	yi shi ba
ཡི་ཤུབས	envelope	yi shubs
ཡི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	wisdom knowledge woman	yi shes kyi rig pa
ཡི་ཤེས་དག	pristine awareness	yi shes dag
ཡི་གཤོར	lost my mind	yi gshor
ཡི་སེ	letter	yi se
ཡི་སེ་ལེ	Israel	yi se le
ཡི་ཧོ་ཐོན་ལས་འགུལ	Boxer Rebellion	yi ho thon las 'gul
ཡིག་ཀོག	envelope	yig kog
ཡིག་ཀོག་གི་འཛིན་རྟགས	post mark	yig kog gi 'dzin rtags
ཡིག་དཀར	{dbu chen} letters	yig dkar
ཡིག་དཀྱུས	1) length of a written line; 2) root text [vs notes]; 3) ordinary letter forms	yig dkyus
ཡིག་རྐྱང	1) letter solitary w/o prefix/ suffix letters, mgo can; 2) letter w/o accompanying offering	yig rkyang
ཡིག་སྐད	literary/ written language	yig skad
ཡིག་སྐོགས	envelope	yig skogs
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ	postal service, delivering letters	yig skyel
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ་ཁང	post office	yig skyel khang
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ་གློག་འཕྲིན	telecommunications office	yig skyel glog 'phrin
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ་གློག་འཕྲིན་ཁང	post office	yig skyel glog 'phrin khang
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ་པ	letter carrier	yig skyel pa
ཡིག་སྐྱེལ་བ	postman, mailman	yig skyel ba
ཡིག་སྐྱོན	1) mistake in the writing/ meaning; 2) poorly formed letters	yig skyon
ཡིག་བརྐོས་པ	printer	yig brkos pa
ཡིག་བསྐུར	correspondence, epistolary guide containing different addresses and customary phrases used in writing letters	yig bskur
ཡིག་བསྐུར་ཁང	post office	yig bskur khang
ཡིག་བསྐུར་གཏོང་བ	correspond	yig bskur gtong ba
ཡིག་བསྐུར་རྣམ་བཞག	popular work on correspondence, complete letter writer	yig bskur rnam bzhag
ཡིག་བསྐུར་བ	correspond	yig bskur ba
ཡིག་བསྐུར་བྱེད	correspond	yig bskur byed
ཡིག་བསྐུར་རང་དབང	freedom of communication	yig bskur rang dbang
ཡིག་བསྐྱུར	tr	yig bskyur
ཡིག་བསྐྱུར་བ	tr	yig bskyur ba
ཡིག་ཁང	post office	yig khang
ཡིག་ཁང་འགོ་འཛིན	postmaster	yig khang 'go 'dzin
ཡིག་ཁྲ	rtsod pa thag bcad kyi dpyad mtshams yi ge	yig khra
ཡིག་མཁན	one who is versed in the art of reading and writing	yig mkhan
ཡིག་འཁོར	written	yig 'khor
ཡིག་འཁོར་ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	written law, statute	yig 'khor khrims lugs
ཡིག་འཁྱེར	carry a letter	yig 'khyer
ཡིག་འཁྱེར་དམག	signal corps, communications troops	yig 'khyer dmag
ཡིག་གི་མགོ་རིས	head of dbu med and dbu can letters	yig gi mgo ris
ཡིག་གེ	letters	yig ge
ཡིག་གེ་དྲུག་པ	Six-syllable mantra, the Mani mantra	yig ge drug pa
ཡིག་གེ་པར་བསྟེན	secretary, clerk	yig ge par bsten
ཡིག་གྲྭ	writing school	yig grwa
ཡིག་གྲངས	line of writing	yig grangs
ཡིག་གློག	telegraph, post and telecommunications	yig glog
ཡིག་མགོ	head of dbu med and dbu can letters	yig mgo
ཡིག་འགྲུལ	correspondence	yig 'grul
ཡིག་འགྲུལ་བྱེད	correspond w	yig 'grul byed
ཡིག་རྒྱ	1) envelope; 2) sgo thel lta bu'i bkag yig; 3) seal on an envelope	yig rgya
ཡིག་རྒྱུགས	exam	yig rgyugs
ཡིག་རྒྱུགས་ལེན	take an exam	yig rgyugs len
ཡིག་རྒྱུགས་ལེན་པ	take an exam	yig rgyugs len pa
ཡིག་སྒམ	post office box, letter box, mailbox, pillar box	yig sgam
ཡིག་སྒྱུར	translation	yig sgyur
ཡིག་སྒྱུར་བ	interpreter, translator	yig sgyur ba
ཡིག་སྒྲིལ	files, archives, mail bag	yig sgril
ཡིག་བརྒྱ	Hundred Syllable Mantra. The mantra of the buddha Vajrasattva consisting of one hundred syllables	yig brgya
ཡིག་བརྒྱ་བཟླ	recite the Hundred Syllables	yig brgya bzla
ཡིག་བསྒྲིལ	cloth, paper etc kyi khud du bsgril ba'i letters	yig bsgril
ཡིག་ལྕོག	desk	yig lcog
ཡིག་ཆ	1) dpe cha[s] and various kinds of writings; 2) philosophy/ definition text, document, obligatory manuals, records, notes, [monastic]/scholastic text[book]/manual TSE	yig cha
ཡིག་ཆ་ཙམ	mere book	yig cha tsam
ཡིག་ཆ་ཚད་ལྡན	documentary records	yig cha tshad ldan
ཡིག་ཆའི་མ་དཔེ	manuscript	yig cha'i ma dpe
ཡིག་ཆའི་རིང་ལུགས	bureaucratism, ret	yig cha'i ring lugs
ཏཔེ	ism	tape
ཡིག་ཆའི་སྲོལ་གཏོད་པ	set down the curriculum	yig cha'i srol gtod pa
ཡིག་ཆས	writing implements, stationery	yig chas
ཡིག་ཆུང	1) 'small letters'; [text in small point size within a liturgy, not to be said loud]. 2) short notes	yig chung
ཡིག་ཆུང་ཉེར་གཅིག	on the Guhyasamaja Tantra by Tsongkhapa	yig chung nyer gcig
ཡིག་ཆེན	capital	yig chen
ཡིག་མཇུག	end of the writing	yig mjug
ཡིག་ཉོག	useless/ meaningless letters/ writing	yig nyog
ཡིག་གཉེར	yig cha do dam byed mkhan	yig gnyer
ཡིག་རྙིང	archaic	yig rnying
ཡིག་བརྙན	movie sub-titles	yig brnyan
ཡིག་རྟེན	thing offered w a letter	yig rten
ཡིག་ཐོག	written	yig thog
ཡིག་ཐོག་གི་སྐད	written language	yig thog gi skad
ཡིག་ཐོག་གི་སྐད་ཆ	written language	yig thog gi skad cha
ཡིག་ཐོག་གི་སྙན་ཆུ	written report	yig thog gi snyan chu
ཡིག་ཐོག་གི་གཏམ་བཤད	written speech/ statement	yig thog gi gtam bshad
ཡིག་ཐོག་རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད	give a written exam	yig thog rgyugs sprod
ཡིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཀོད	put in writing yig thog tu bkod nas btang ba'i gnas tshul - correspondence, letter	yig thog tu bkod
ཡིག་ཐོག་ནས་རྒྱུགས་ལེན	take a written examination	yig thog nas rgyugs len
ཡིག་ཐོག་ཕབ་བཤུས་བྱེད་པ	transcribe	yig thog phab bshus byed pa
ཡིག་ཐོག་མ་འགོད་པ	unwritten	yig thog ma 'god pa
ཡིག་ཐོག་མ་འགོད་པའི་ཁྲིམས་ལུགས	unwritten law	yig thog ma 'god pa'i khrims lugs
ཡིག་ཐོག་སློབ་ཁྲིད	correspondence teaching	yig thog slob khrid
ཡིག་ཐོག་སློབ་གྲྭ	correspondence school	yig thog slob grwa
ཡིག་འཐུམས	letter, correspondence	yig 'thums
ཡིག་འཐུམས་སྐུར	send a letter	yig 'thums skur
ཡིག་འཐུམས་བསྐུར	send a letter	yig 'thums bskur
ཡིག་འཐུམས་གཏོང	send a letter	yig 'thums gtong
ཡིག་དན	1) documents, records, notes gnyis mos kyis bzhag pa'i yi ge; 2) tshags yig	yig dan
ཡིག་དུག	mi mngon par tshig don la skyo tong ba'i yig dug	yig dug
ཡིག་དྲུག	yi ge drug ma	yig drug
ཡིག་དྲུག་ལ	yig drug pass	yig drug la
ཡིག་གདང	yi ge 'gel sa'i gdang bu	yig gdang
ཡིག་འདྲི	writing	yig 'dri
ཡིག་བརྡ	grammatical termination	yig brda
ཡིག་ནག	a particular style of {dbu med} writing which was very popular in Kham	yig nag
ཡིག་ནག་ཆུ་བཤལ	gnyis mos kyis bzhag pa'i yig rigs rtsi med rdog rol du btang ba'i dpe	yig nag chu bshal
ཡིག་ནོར	wrong letter[ing]	yig nor
ཡིག་སྣོད	file	yig snod
ཡིག་པར	print block	yig par
ཡིག་དཔར	print block	yig dpar
ཡིག་དཔེ	copy book	yig dpe
ཡིག་དཔོད	by one person bklags te by another 'bri ba	yig dpod
ཡིག་ཕུད	[1st writing offering	yig phud
ཡིག་ཕྲན	note, small letter	yig phran
ཡིག་ཕྲེང	secession/ line of writing	yig phreng
ཡིག་ཕྲེང་མང་ཞིག	many verses	yig phreng mang zhig
ཡིག་འཕྲིན	correspondence, letter	yig 'phrin
ཡིག་འཕྲེང	row of letters, a line	yig 'phreng
ཡིག་འཕྲེང་གསར་པ	paragraph	yig 'phreng gsar pa
ཡིག་བར	space between letters/ lines	yig bar
ཡིག་འབུ	seed syllable	yig 'bu
ཡིག་འབྲི	write [a letter]	yig 'bri
ཡིག་འབྲི་བ	write [a letter], secretary	yig 'bri ba
ཡིག་འབྲིའི་ཅོག་ཙེ	writing desk	yig 'bri'i cog tse
ཡིག་འབྲིའི་ཉེར་སྤྱོད	writing materials, stationery	yig 'bri'i nyer spyod
ཡིག་འབྲུ	individual letters, seed syllables, syllable, letter, point/ part [of discourse]	yig 'bru
ཡིག་འབྲུ་བཀོད་པ	marking, engrave letters	yig 'bru bkod pa
ཡིག་འབྲུ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་རྩ་ཁྲིམས	8 point [agriculture] charter	yig 'bru brgyad kyi rtsa khrims
ཡིག་འབྲུ་གཅིག	single letter	yig 'bru gcig
ཡིག་འབྲུའི་ཚུལ	the manner of the seedsyllables GD	yig 'bru'i tshul
ཡིག་འབྲེ	letter	yig 'bre
ཡིག་འབྲེལ	correspondence	yig 'brel
ཡིག་འབྲེལ་གྱི་གྲོགས་པོ	pen pal	yig 'brel gyi grogs po
ཡིག་སྦྱོང་སློབ་དེབ	reading primer	yig sbyong slob deb
ཡིག་རྨོངས	illiterate person	yig rmongs
ཡིག་ཙང	archives {yab mes kyi yig tsang gzigs pa} consulting his ancestors' archives	yig tsang
ཡིག་རྩིས	1) writing and figuring; 2) written calculation	yig rtsis
ཡིག་རྩོམ་མཁས་ཅན	writer, author	yig rtsom mkhas can
ཡིག་རྩོམ་རིག་གནས	literature	yig rtsom rig gnas
ཡིག་ཚགས	yig rigs bdag gnyer	yig tshags
ཡིག་ཚང	diplomas, emblems of rank, credentials, insignia of rank office	yig tshang
ཡིག་ཚང་གི་ལས་ཀའི	clerical	yig tshang gi las ka'i
ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་པ	[monastic documents caretaker	yig tshang gnyer pa
ཡིག་ཚང་འཚོགས	{yig tshang las khungs} meeting, gather documents to take care of	yig tshang 'tshogs
ཡིག་ཚང་ལས་ཁུངས	[monastic] documents office yig tshang las khungs kyi drung yig chen	yig tshang las khungs
མོ་བཞི	the four general secretaries of the Tibetan govt monastic yig tshang office	mo bzhi
ཡིག་ཚང་ལས་བྱེད	officer	yig tshang las byed
ཡིག་ཚངས	by king srong btsan gampo to ministers awarded letters	yig tshangs
ཡིག་ཚངས་དྲུག	the six kinds of letterings	yig tshangs drug
ཡིག་ཚད	1) yig gzugs sbyangs 'bras chu tshad; 2) written exam/ test	yig tshad
ཡིག་ཚད་གཏོང་བ	examine, test	yig tshad gtong ba
ཡིག་ཚུགས	handwriting, penmanship, calligraphy	yig tshugs
ཡིག་ཚོགས	writing, text	yig tshogs
ཡིག་མཛོད	archive	yig mdzod
ཡིག་འཛིན	receipt	yig 'dzin
ཡིག་འཛིན་བཞག་པ	enter into an agreement	yig 'dzin bzhag pa
ཡིག་རྫུ	letter filled with falsehoods, lying epistle	yig rdzu
ཡིག་རྫུས	counterfeit letter writing	yig rdzus
ཡིག་རྫོབ་ཆེ་བ	wordy, long-winded, verbose, redundant	yig rdzob che ba
ཡིག་བཞུག	archive, file	yig bzhug
ཡིག་ཟམ	'phrin yig skyel 'dren	yig zam
ཡིག་ཟོར	total of yig tshogs	yig zor
ཡིག་གཟུགས	shape of the letters, calligraphy [-ic design] / style, penmanship, handwriting	yig gzugs
ཡིག་གཟུགས་མཁས་པ	calligrapher	yig gzugs mkhas pa
ཡིག་གཟུགས་བྲིས་པ	calligraphy yig gzugs mdzes kyang dag cha med na	yig gzugs bris pa
ཕན་ཐོགས་ཆུང	though the calligraphy may be beautiful if it isn't also correct it isn't of much use	phan thogs chung
ཡིག་རིག	literature	yig rig
ཡིག་རིག་པ	literature expert/ critic	yig rig pa
ཡིག་རིགས	various arts	yig rigs
ཡིག་རིགས་ཁོ་ནར་ལྟ་བའི་རིང་ལུངས	red	yig rigs kho nar lta ba'i ring lungs
ཡིག་རིགས་ཉར་སྐོགས	take care of documents	yig rigs nyar skogs
ཡིག་རིགས་ཉར་ཚགས	taking care of documents/ books/ writings	yig rigs nyar tshags
ཡིག་རིགས་ཉར་ཚགས་བྱེད	taking care of documents/ books/ writings	yig rigs nyar tshags byed
ཡིག་རིགས་རྙིང་ཁང	archive	yig rigs rnying khang
ཡིག་རིགས་རྙིང་པ་ཉར་མཁན	archivist	yig rigs rnying pa nyar mkhan
ཡིག་རིགས་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	[TRS 66-1]	yig rigs drug cu rtsa bzhi
ཡིག་རིགས་འདྲ་གཉིས	two similar documents/ scripts/ orthographies	yig rigs 'dra gnyis
ཡིག་རིགས་མི་འདྲ་གཉིས	two similar documents/ scripts/ orthographies	yig rigs mi 'dra gnyis
ཡིག་རིས	[regional etc] way of writing	yig ris
ཡིག་རུས	[regional etc] way of writing	yig rus
ཡིག་ལན	answer to a petition	yig lan
ཡིག་ལན་གཏོང	answer by letter	yig lan gtong
ཡིག་ལན་བཏང་བ	to answer, send reply	yig lan btang ba
ཡིག་ལན་དུ་བརྫངས	to send in reply	yig lan du brdzangs
ཡིག་ལན་ལོག	answer by letter	yig lan log
ཡིག་ལན་ལོག་པ	to answer a letter, reply mail	yig lan log pa
ཡིག་ལམ	1) awarded letters, letter of award; 2) in writing/ a letter	yig lam
ཡིག་ལོང	1) illiterate person, illiteracy; 2) dkar cha zub pa'i yi ge	yig long
ཡིག་ཤུབས	envelope	yig shubs
ཡིག་ཤེས་སློབ་གྲྭ	shool for teaching people to read	yig shes slob grwa
ཡིག་ཤོག	letter paper, writing pad, envelope, air letter	yig shog
ཡིག་བསང	weed through papers	yig bsang
ཡིག་བསང་རྒྱག	weed through papers	yig bsang rgyag
ཡིག་ཧྲུལ	1) useless yi ge hrul hrul; 2) old tattered document	yig hrul
ཡིག་ལྷད	interpolation in writing, mistakes in grammar	yig lhad
ཡིང	gazing around, looking	ying
ཡིང་ཀྲང	battalion commander	ying krang
ཡིང་ཆེས	trust	ying ches
ཡིང་ཐའོ	cherry	ying tha'o
ཡིང་མི་བདེ་པ	unhappiness	ying mi bde pa
ཡིངས	coarse	yings
ཆོས་ཡིད་ཡིད	kyi rnam-shes), 1 of 28 astrological terms for harmony of influence in the destiny of a person, intellect, powers of perception and imagination, mental talents, sentiment, disposition, functional m...	chos yid yid
ཡིད་ཀར་འོང	very handsome, without impurity, pellucid, pure water	yid kar 'ong
ཡིད་ཀྱང་ཕྱད་ཕྱོད	my perception becomes uncertain	yid kyang phyad phyod
ཡིད་ཀྱི	the intellect GD	yid kyi
ཡིད་ཀྱི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ	taking refuge mentally	yid kyi skyabs 'gro
ཡིད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense-field of mind, mental faculty sphere, mind base; rnam par shes pa'i khams bdun	yid kyi skye mched
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཁ	individual mind	yid kyi kha
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཁམས	mind faculty/ element	yid kyi khams
ཡིད་ཀྱི་དགུ	yid kyi gting / kun slong	yid kyi dgu
ཡིད་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ་གསུམ	TSE	yid kyi dge ba gsum
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མགོན་སུམ	mental direct perception	yid kyi mgon sum
ཡིད་ཀྱི་འགྲོ	mental engagement	yid kyi 'gro
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྒུ	fraction	yid kyi rgu
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མངོན་སུམ	mental direct perceiver, 1 of mngon sum bzhi, mental knowledge	yid kyi mngon sum
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ	the validity/ pramana of direct mental perception	yid kyi mngon sum tshad ma
ཡིད་ཀྱི་འཆར་སྒོ	way of thinking	yid kyi 'char sgo
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ	SA ri bo chen po bcu	yid kyi rjes su
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་མཐུན་པ	1 of 10 great mountains	yid kyi rjes su mthun pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཉེ་བར་རྒྱུ་བ	repeated moving of mind	yid kyi nye bar rgyu ba
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཉེས་པ	mental transgressions	yid kyi nyes pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་གཏིང	depths of the mind	yid kyi gting
ཡིད་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	peace of mind	yid kyi bde ba
ཡིད་ཀྱི་འདུ་བྱེད	mental action	yid kyi 'du byed
ཡིད་ཀྱི་འདུས་ཏེ་རེག་པ	yid tshor bskyed pa'i rkyen	yid kyi 'dus te reg pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	mental vow; Mipham Rinpoche: {sems pa rgyun chags pa sa bon dang bcas pa ste, de'i dbang gis lus ngag gi sdom ba'ang 'thob par byed la, bsam gtan zag med kyi sdom pa ni sems kyi rjes su 'brang ba'o...	yid kyi sdom pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་བརྡ	formulative activity of the cover level, the inner forum of thoughts and images	yid kyi brda
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རྟོག	Manovijnana, mind consciousness	yid kyi rnam rtog
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	mind consciousness 2483	yid kyi rnam par shes pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	mind consciousness dhatu/ element	yid kyi rnam par shes pa'i khams
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	mind consciousness	yid kyi rnam shes
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	mind consciousness element/ dhatu	yid kyi rnam shes kyi khams
ཡིད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the sphere/ objects of mind	yid kyi spyod yul
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	chief meditation, concentration of mind on the attributes of deity	yid kyi phyag rgya
ཡིད་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	karmic traces of mental functioning	yid kyi bag chags
ཡིད་ཀྱི་བྱེད་པ	categorizing	yid kyi byed pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	1) mental faculty {dbang po nyer gnyis}. 2) mind, intellectual faculty	yid kyi dbang po
ཡིད་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་ལྐུགས	mental disability {yid kyi dbang po lkugs te shin tu blun rmongs su gyur pa} those whose mental disability makes them unable to comprehend	yid kyi dbang po lkugs
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་གསུམ	the three	yid kyi mi dge ba'i las gsum
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	mirror of the mind	yid kyi me long
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྩལ་གསུམ	the three powers of mind [pho rtsal sna dgu'i nang gses, mdzangs la blo 'gyu ba dang, dpa' la bsran tshugs pa, kha gsal zhing gting mi dpog pa ste gsum	yid kyi rtsal gsum
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བ	mental sensations	yid kyi tshor ba
ཡིད་ཀྱི་མཚོ	pretty lake	yid kyi mtsho
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཞེན་རྟོག	thoughts of mental attachment	yid kyi zhen rtog
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཟུག་རྔུ	mental pain/ torment	yid kyi zug rngu
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཟེའུ་འབྲུ	anther of the heart, beloved, dearest	yid kyi ze'u 'bru
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ	beloved friend, newly risen moon of one's heart	yid kyi zla ba
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ་གསར་པོ	friend	yid kyi zla ba gsar po
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་གསར	new moon of my heart, dear companion	yid kyi zla gsar
ཡིད་ཀྱི་གཟུང	holding in mind	yid kyi gzung
ཡིད་ཀྱི་འོང	mental disengagement	yid kyi 'ong
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཡུམ་དུ་བྱས	using a mental image, visualized, imagined	yid kyi yum du byas
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	content of mind	yid kyi yul
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	essentially mental body	yid kyi rang bzhin
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ཀྱི་ལུས	mental body	yid kyi rang bzhin kyi lus
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ལུས	mental body	yid kyi rang bzhin gyi lus
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ལས	mental activity (a force that forms attitude and allows other psychic function events to work), SA rnam rtog, imagination, thought, operation of the mind, mental or intellectual work, 1 of las gsum	yid kyi las
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད	the activities of their minds GD	yid kyi las thams cad
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ལུས	mental body/ embodiment	yid kyi lus
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཤིང་རྟ	desire, wish, expectation	yid kyi shing rta
ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	Syn {yid kyi rnam par shes pa}; mind consciousness	yid kyi shes pa
ཡིད་ཀྱི་སྲུབ་ཤིང	the mara dga' rab dbang phyug	yid kyi srub shing
ཡིད་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ་རྒྱུའི་ཀུན་སློང	the 'causal motivation' is the initial intent	yid kyi bsam pa rgyu'i kun slong
ཡིད་ཀྱིས	imaginary	yid kyis
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་བསྒོམས	imagine	yid kyis bsgoms
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་དབུལ་བ	offering of joy at	yid kyis rjes su yi rang dbul ba
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་བརྗོད་པ	internal verbalization,	yid kyis brjod pa
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་རྣམ་པར་སྤྲུལ་པའི་མཆོད་པ	offerings created in the imagination yid kyis rnam par sprul pa'i mchod pa envisioned offerings; offerings created in the imagination	yid kyis rnam par sprul pa'i mchod pa
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་རྣམ་སྤྲུལ	mentally created, imagined	yid kyis rnam sprul
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་སྤྲུལ	visualized in the mind	yid kyis sprul
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་སྤྲུལ་པའི་མཆོད་པ	{yid kyis rnam par sprul pa'i mchod pa} envisioned offerings; offerings created in the imagination	yid kyis sprul pa'i mchod pa
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་སྤྲུལ་བ	mentally created	yid kyis sprul ba
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་བྱེད་པ	do a thing according with one's mind or fancy	yid kyis byed pa
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་གཟུང	holding in mind yid kyis gzung ba'i sangs rgyas byang	yid kyis gzung
ཡིད་ཀྱིས་རོལ	enjoyed, entertained	yid kyis rol
ཡིད་དཀྱེལ	khog pa'am blo rgya	yid dkyel
ཡིད་སྐུ	TSE	yid sku
ཡིད་སྐྱེ	mind ayatana, {yid kyi skye mched}	yid skye
ཡིད་སྐྱེས	1) 'dod lha; 2) person	yid skyes
ཡིད་སྐྱོ	repentance, heart-trouble, be sad/ discouraged/ depressed	yid skyo
ཡིད་སྐྱོ་པོ	gloomy	yid skyo po
ཡིད་སྐྱོ་པོ་འབྱུང་བ	to be sad, be gloomy	yid skyo po 'byung ba
ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བ	repentance, heart-trouble, depression, sadness, discouraged	yid skyo ba
ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	mindfulness of agitation [one of the {rjes su dran pa	yid skyo ba rjes su dran pa
ཡིད་ཁམས	mind faculty	yid khams
ཡིད་ཁར་མི་འགྲོ་བ	displeasure	yid khar mi 'gro ba
ཡིད་ཁེངས་པ	1) satisfy desire; 2) arouse pride/ arrogance	yid khengs pa
ཡིད་ཁྱེད་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ	conscience	yid khyed shes kyi dad pa
བ་འདེབས་པ	to pray with fervent devotion and complete faith	ba 'debs pa
ཡིད་འཁུགས་པར་བྱེད	move, influence	yid 'khugs par byed
ཡིད་འཁུལ་པ	sems rgyud 'byongs pa'am thul ba, sems 'khul thebs pa	yid 'khul pa
ཡིད་འཁོལ་བ	1) sems 'tshab pa; 2) joyful mind	yid 'khol ba
ཡིད་འཁྲུགས་པ	disturbed mind	yid 'khrugs pa
ཡིད་འཁྲུལ	mistaken, uneasy, troubled, harassed	yid 'khrul
ཡིད་འཁྲུལ་བ	mental suffering, be uneasy, troubled, harassed, be mistaken	yid 'khrul ba
ཡིད་གྱི་མུན་པར་འཁྲིད	lead to the darkness of despair	yid gyi mun par 'khrid
ཡིད་དགའ	happy heart	yid dga'
ཡིད་དགའ་བ	glad in heart	yid dga' ba
ཡིད་དགའི་ལྗོན་པ	lha shing	yid dga'i ljon pa
ཡིད་མགུ་བ	satisfaction, joy	yid mgu ba
ཡིད་མགྱོགས	yid mgyogs	yid mgyogs
ཡིད་འགག	want of appetite	yid 'gag
ཡིད་འགུལ	moved, touched [emotional]	yid 'gul
ཡིད་འགུལ་ཐེབས་པ	impress	yid 'gul thebs pa
ཡིད་འགྱུ་བ	discursive thoughts	yid 'gyu ba
ཡིད་འགྱུར་གྱི་མྱོང་བ	mental/ meditation experience	yid 'gyur gyi myong ba
ཡིད་འགྱུར་སྟོབས་ཆེ་བ་ཞིག་བྱུང	mind was powerfully transformed	yid 'gyur stobs che ba zhig byung
ཡིད་འགྲོགས	heart companion	yid 'grogs
ཡིད་རྒོད་པོ	sems la sna tshogs dran nus pa'am blo gyer po	yid rgod po
ཡིད་རྒྱུགས	examination	yid rgyugs
ཡིད་ངོ	idea	yid ngo
ཡིད་ངོམ་པ	satisfied, content	yid ngom pa
ཡིད་ངོམས་པ	blo tshims pa'am 'dod pa gang ba,//phyogs gnyis ka yid ngoms pa byung ba	yid ngoms pa
ཡིད་དངངས	fear for yid dngangs shar dus 'di ci byung snyam	yid dngangs
ཡིད་མངོན	mental perception	yid mngon
ཡིད་མངོན་ལྔ	the five kinds of mental perception	yid mngon lnga
ཡིད་མངོན་ཚད་མ	pramana/ valid cognition of mental perception	yid mngon tshad ma
ཡིད་ཅན	living / sentient beings	yid can
ཡིད་གཅུགས	friendly, affectionate towards friends or relatives	yid gcugs
ཡིད་གཅུགས་པ	mdza' ba, yid mthun pa, sems mthun pa	yid gcugs pa
ཡིད་བཅད་པ	become depressed/ discouraged/ pessimistic	yid bcad pa
ཡིད་བཅུགས	friendly, affectionate towards friends or relatives	yid bcugs
ཡིད་ཆགས	be infatuated w/ attached to	yid chags
ཡིད་ཆགས་པ	infatuated with	yid chags pa
ཡིད་ཆད	despair, disappointment, worry, depression, pessimism	yid chad
ཡིད་ཆད་གཏིང་ནས་སྐྱེས	deeply despairs	yid chad gting nas skyes
ཡིད་ཆད་པ	SA yi chad pa	yid chad pa
ཡིད་ཆད་བྱེད་པ	to lose heart	yid chad byed pa
ཡིད་ཆེ་པའི	self-confident	yid che pa'i
ཡིད་ཆེད་ཀྱི་ངེས་ཤེས	the certainty of trust	yid ched kyi nges shes
ཡིད་ཆེད་མ་རྙེད་པ	I do not trust	yid ched ma rnyed pa
ཡིད་ཆེས	confidence, conviction, trust [thd]	yid ches
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་ཁེངས་པ	deeply held faith/ belief	yid ches kyi khengs pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign of faith/ belief	yid ches kyi rtags
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་འདུན	the faith and longing of trust, confident faith	yid ches kyi dad 'dun
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ	trusting faith	yid ches kyi dad pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	inference through belief/ faith	yid ches kyi tshad ma
ཡིད་ཆེས་སྐྱེ	come to believe/ be confident, have faith	yid ches skye
ཡིད་ཆེས་སྐྱེས་པ	believe	yid ches skyes pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་གྱི་དད་པ	accepting confidence-trust	yid ches gyi dad pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་གྱིས	become certain!	yid ches gyis
ཡིད་ཆེས་བརྒྱ་འགྱུར	unlimited faith/ confidence/ belief	yid ches brgya 'gyur
ཡིད་ཆེས་བཅོལ་བ	entrust	yid ches bcol ba
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཆེན་པོ	deeply held faith/ belief	yid ches chen po
ཡིད་ཆེས་རྗེས་དཔག	inference through belief	yid ches rjes dpag
ཡིད་ཆེས་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	credit union/ association	yid ches mnyam las khang
ཡིད་ཆེས་བརྟན་པོ	firm/ deep belief/ confidence	yid ches brtan po
ཡིད་ཆེས་དད་པ	conviction, trusting confidence, deeper confidence, mibp 39	yid ches dad pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་གདེང་འཁེལ	belief, confidence, trust	yid ches gdeng 'khel
ཡིད་ཆེས་པའི་དད	full confidence	yid ches pa'i dad
ཡིད་ཆེས་པའི་དད་པ	faith based on trust/ belief/ born of conviction	yid ches pa'i dad pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	acting cause for trusting	yid ches pa'i byed rgyu
ཡིད་ཆེས་པའི་ལུང	gzhal bya shin tu lkog gyur dpog par byed pa'i gzhi, dpyad pa gsum gyis dag pa'i lung	yid ches pa'i lung
ཡིད་ཆེས་པར་བྱ་ཕྱིར	to induce faith	yid ches par bya phyir
ཡིད་ཆེས་པར་བྱ་བ	to put trust in	yid ches par bya ba
ཡིད་ཆེས་པར་སྦྱར་བ	to inspire confidence	yid ches par sbyar ba
ཡིད་ཆེས་བུན་གཏོང	credit, loaning	yid ches bun gtong
ཡིད་ཆེས་བུན་གཏོང་གི་ལས་དོན	credit operation	yid ches bun gtong gi las don
ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད་པ	believe, confide, deem, trust	yid ches byed pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད་འོས་པ	trustworthy	yid ches byed 'os pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་བྱེད་སླ་པོ	credulous	yid ches byed sla po
ཡིད་ཆེས་བློ་གཏད	belief and trust	yid ches blo gtad
ཡིད་ཆེས་མ་བྱེད	mistrust	yid ches ma byed
ཡིད་ཆེས་མ་བྱེད་པ	distrust	yid ches ma byed pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་མི་ཡོང	they will not believe it, they will not believe it	yid ches mi yong
ཡིད་ཆེས་མི་རུང་བ	incredible	yid ches mi rung ba
ཡིད་ཆེས་མེད་པ	faithless	yid ches med pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་གཙང་མ	confident	yid ches gtsang ma
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཚད་མ	absolute faith/ confidence/ belief	yid ches tshad ma
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཚད་མེད	boundless faith/ confidence/ belief	yid ches tshad med
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཞེ་དྲག་མེད་མཁན	skeptic	yid ches zhe drag med mkhan
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཟབ་མོ	firm/ deep belief/ confidence	yid ches zab mo
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཡོད་པ	doubtless	yid ches yod pa
ཡིད་ཆེས་སམ	Are you convinced?	yid ches sam
ཡིད་ཆེས་སླ་བ	gullible, credulous	yid ches sla ba
ཡིད་ཆེས་གསུམ	three confidences	yid ches gsum
ཡིད་ཆེས་གསུམ་ལྡན	Threefold Confidence, a life story of Padmasambhava by Taranatha according to Indian sources. Tibetan title: {slob dpon padma'i rnam thar rgya gar lugs yid ches gsum ldan}. Included by Jamgön Kongt...	yid ches gsum ldan
ཡིད་ཆོས	mind and mental dharmas/ objects	yid chos
ཡིད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ་ཆོད་པ	to have cut through constructs of mind and objects	yid chos kyi spros pa chod pa
ཡིད་འཆུས་པ	sems gzhan du 'khyogs pa'am blo kha 'gyur ba	yid 'chus pa
ཡིད་འཆེས	belief, faith, confidence, trust, firm conviction, believe, rely/ depend upon, have/ be worthy of confidence/ faith, rely on, credit [financial]	yid 'ches
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཀྱི་ཁེངས་པ	deeply held faith/ belief	yid 'ches kyi khengs pa
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign of faith/ belief	yid 'ches kyi rtags
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་འདུན	the faith and longing of trust, confident faith	yid 'ches kyi dad 'dun
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ	confident/ convincing/ trusting faith	yid 'ches kyi dad pa
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	inference through belief/ faith	yid 'ches kyi tshad ma
ཡིད་འཆེས་སྐྱེ	come to believe/ be confident, have faith	yid 'ches skye
ཡིད་འཆེས་བརྒྱ་འགྱུར	unlimited faith/ confidence/ belief	yid 'ches brgya 'gyur
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཆེན་པོ	deeply held faith/ belief	yid 'ches chen po
ཡིད་འཆེས་རྗེས་དཔག	inference through belief/ faith	yid 'ches rjes dpag
ཡིད་འཆེས་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	credit union/ association	yid 'ches mnyam las khang
ཡིད་འཆེས་བརྟན་པོ	firm/ deep belief/ confidence	yid 'ches brtan po
ཡིད་འཆེས་གདེང་འཁེལ	belief, confidence, trust	yid 'ches gdeng 'khel
ཡིད་འཆེས་པ	[worthy of/ attain] confidence/ trust, have faith in, trust, proof	yid 'ches pa
ཡིད་འཆེས་པའི་དད་པ	confident/trusting faith, confidence, conviction GD	yid 'ches pa'i dad pa
ཡིད་འཆེས་པའི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	acting/producing cause for trust	yid 'ches pa'i byed rgyu
ཡིད་འཆེས་པའི་ལུང	gzhal bya shin tu lkog gyur dpog par byed pa'i gzhi, dpyad pa gsum gyis dag pa'i lung	yid 'ches pa'i lung
ཡིད་འཆེས་པར་བྱ་ཕྱིར	to induce faith	yid 'ches par bya phyir
ཡིད་འཆེས་བུན་གཏོང	credit, loaning	yid 'ches bun gtong
ཡིད་འཆེས་བུན་གཏོང་གི་ལས་དོན	credit operation	yid 'ches bun gtong gi las don
ཡིད་འཆེས་བྱེད་པ	believe	yid 'ches byed pa
ཡིད་འཆེས་བློ་གཏད	belief and trust	yid 'ches blo gtad
ཡིད་འཆེས་མེད་པའི་གྲོས་ཤོག	nonconfidence motion	yid 'ches med pa'i gros shog
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཚད་མ	absolute faith/ confidence/ belief	yid 'ches tshad ma
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཚད་མེད	boundless faith/ confidence/ belief	yid 'ches tshad med
ཡིད་འཆེས་ཟབ་མོ	firm/ deep belief/ confidence	yid 'ches zab mo
ཡིད་འཆེས་སམ	Are you convinced?	yid 'ches sam
ཡིད་འཆེས་སླ་བ	gullible, credulous	yid 'ches sla ba
ཡིད་འཇགས	mentally certain	yid 'jags
ཡིད་འཇོག	attention, notice, place the mind on, rest the mind, keep in mind, take care of	yid 'jog
ཡིད་འཇོག་བྱེད	pay attention, notice, place the mind on, rest the mind, keep in mind, take care of	yid 'jog byed
ཡིད་འཇོག་གཟབ་ནན	concentrating on, paying attention to	yid 'jog gzab nan
ཡིད་ཉེ	friend, intimate	yid nye
ཡིད་ཉེ་བར་རྒྱུ་བ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	ex. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {dbang shes drug la tshor ba gsum gyi dbye bas so} yid nye bar rgyu ba'i tshor ba bco brgyad the 18 sensations feelings of mental motion/ that move the mind/ accompanying a ...	yid nye bar rgyu ba bco brgyad
ཡིད་གཉིས	hesitation, second thoughts, doubt	yid gnyis
ཡིད་གཉིས་བྱེད	doubt, hesitate, have 2nd thoughts	yid gnyis byed
ཡིད་གཉིས་ཟ་བ	to be uncertain, be of two minds regarding something; be wavering, be hesitant	yid gnyis za ba
ཡིད་གཏད་པ	1) mi gzhan la blos bkal ba; 2) dmigs yul la bsam blo gtad pa	yid gtad pa
ཡིད་གཏད་བྲལ་བ	free from fixed mind/ the direction or aim of mind/ mental contents	yid gtad bral ba
ཡིད་གཏུགས	misery, suffering	yid gtugs
ཡིད་གཏུངས	misery, suffering	yid gtungs
ཡིད་གཏོད་པ	believed [in]	yid gtod pa
ཡིད་བཏགས	preta	yid btags
ཡིད་རྟོག་བཅས	mind w conceptualization, conceptual mind	yid rtog bcas
ཡིད་རྟོན	confidence, trust, reliance, trustworthy, reliable	yid rton
ཡིད་རྟོན་ཆ་འཇོག་བྱེད	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid rton cha 'jog byed
ཡིད་རྟོན་ཐུབ་པ་བཤད་པ	reliable explanation	yid rton thub pa bshad pa
ཡིད་རྟོན་བྱེད	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid rton byed
ཡིད་རྟོན་རུང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable	yid rton rung ba
ཡིད་རྟོན་རུང་བ་དྲང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable [& straightforward/ truthful]	yid rton rung ba drang ba
ཡིད་རྟོན་རུང་བའི་ཐབས་ལམ	trustworthy/ reliable method/[path of means]	yid rton rung ba'i thabs lam
ཡིད་ལྟར་མགྱོགས་པ	move according to one's wish, 1 of rdzu 'phrul rnam pa	yid ltar mgyogs pa
ཡིད་བརྟན	confidence, reliance	yid brtan
ཡིད་བརྟན་དཀའ་བ	not to be relied on/ believed	yid brtan dka' ba
ཡིད་བརྟན་ཁེལ	confident	yid brtan khel
ཡིད་བརྟན་གྱི་གནས་མ་ཡིན་པ	unreliable	yid brtan gyi gnas ma yin pa
ཡིད་བརྟན་དངུལ་བུན	credit funds/ loans	yid brtan dngul bun
ཡིད་བརྟན་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	credit cooperative	yid brtan mnyam las khang
ཡིད་བརྟན་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	not to be relied on/ believed	yid brtan du mi rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟན་དུ་རུང	reliable, trustworthy, true	yid brtan du rung
ཡིད་བརྟན་དུ་རུང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable	yid brtan du rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟན་དུ་རུང་བ་དྲང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable [& straightforward/ truthful]	yid brtan du rung ba drang ba
ཡིད་བརྟན་པ	confidence, reliance, depend on, be believed, trust, faith, consider safe	yid brtan pa
ཡིད་བརྟན་པར་བྱ་བྱ	object in which confidence can be reposed, safe	yid brtan par bya bya
ཡིད་བརྟན་བྱེད	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid brtan byed
ཡིད་བརྟན་བྱེད་པ	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid brtan byed pa
ཡིད་བརྟན་མེད	one cannot count on anything at all	yid brtan med
ཡིད་བརྟན་རུང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable	yid brtan rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟན་རུང་བ་དྲང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable [& straightforward/ truthful]	yid brtan rung ba drang ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན	confidence, trust, reliance, trustworthy, reliable, respect, worship, credit	yid brten
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དཀའ་བ	not to be relied on/ believed	yid brten dka' ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན་ཁེལ	confident[ce]	yid brten khel
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དངུལ་བུན	credit funds/ loans	yid brten dngul bun
ཡིད་བརྟེན་མཉམ་ལས་ཁང	credit cooperative	yid brten mnyam las khang
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དུ	trust, have confidence in, rely on, depend upon	yid brten du
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	not to be relied on/ believed	yid brten du mi rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དུ་རུང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable	yid brten du rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན་དུ་རུང་བ་དྲང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable [& straightforward/ truthful]	yid brten du rung ba drang ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན་པ	confidence, reliance, depend on, be believed, trust, faith, consider safe	yid brten pa
ཡིད་བརྟེན་པར་བྱ་བྱ	object in which confidence can be reposed, safe	yid brten par bya bya
ཡིད་བརྟེན་བྱེད	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid brten byed
ཡིད་བརྟེན་བྱེད་པ	have confidence in, trust, rely/ depend on, worship, respect	yid brten byed pa
ཡིད་བརྟེན་རུང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable	yid brten rung ba
ཡིད་བརྟེན་རུང་བ་དྲང་བ	trustworthy, reliable, believable [& straightforward/ truthful]	yid brten rung ba drang ba
ཡིད་བསྟུན་པ	gzhan blo dang mthun par byed pa	yid bstun pa
ཡིད་ཐང་ཆད	be discouraged/ disappointed/ sad/ dismayed	yid thang chad
ཡིད་ཐང་ཆད་པ	to be discouraged	yid thang chad pa
ཡིད་ཐིག་ལེའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of the mind bindu	yid thig le'i sgrib pa
ཡིད་མཐུན	congenial, friendly, agreement	yid mthun
ཡིད་མཐུན་གྲོགས་པོ	good companions	yid mthun grogs po
ཡིད་མཐུན་པ	SA gnyen phyogs	yid mthun pa
ཡིད་མཐུན་བྱུང	there was an agreement	yid mthun byung
ཡིད་མཐུན་བྱེད	agree [w]	yid mthun byed
ཡིད་མཐུན་བྱེད་པ	to agree	yid mthun byed pa
ཡིད་མཐུན་རོགས་རམ	support, backing, help, agreement and aid/ support	yid mthun rogs ram
ཡིད་འཐད	are attracted to	yid 'thad
ཡིད་དབ༹གས	Hungry ghosts. One of the six classes of sentient beings. Such beings are tormented by their own impure karmic perception causing them to suffer tremendously from craving, hunger and thirst	yid dvags
ཡིད་དང་འཐད་པ	favorable, welldisposed	yid dang 'thad pa
ཡིད་དང་བྲལ	beyond mind	yid dang bral
ཡིད་དང་མིན་པའི་ཤེས་པ	cognition of "is" and "is not"	yid dang min pa'i shes pa
ཡིད་དང་སེམས	the discriminating and cognizing mind	yid dang sems
ཡིད་དྭངས་བས་མཆོད་པ་བྱས	had made offerings with pure minds	yid dwangs bas mchod pa byas
ཡིད་དམ	personal sacred deity	yid dam
ཡིད་དམ་གྱི་ལྷ	personal deity	yid dam gyi lha
ཡིད་དམ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	firm adherence to one's word	yid dam la brten pa
ཡིད་དམ་ལེན་པ	[taking] a vow	yid dam len pa
ཡིད་དམ་ལེན་བ	vow	yid dam len ba
ཡིད་དལ་བ	relaxed mind	yid dal ba
ཡིད་དུ་འཐད	well-favored	yid du 'thad
ཡིད་དུ་འཐད་པོ	interesting	yid du 'thad po
ཡིད་དུ་མི་འོང	ugly	yid du mi 'ong
ཡིད་དུ་མི་འོང་བ	repugnant	yid du mi 'ong ba
ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ	pleasant, take to heart, beautiful, pretty, handsome, agreeable, SA yid 'ong, beautiful, pleasing, attractive, appealing	yid du 'ong ba
ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ་དང་མི་འོང་བ	pleasant and the unpleasant	yid du 'ong ba dang mi 'ong ba
ཡིད་དུ་འོང་མི་འོང	pleasant and unpleasant	yid du 'ong mi 'ong
ཡིད་དུ་འོང་མི་འོང་བར་མ་གསུམ	pleasant, unpleasant and neutral	yid du 'ong mi 'ong bar ma gsum
ཡིད་དུང་ངེ	growth of real attachment or regard	yid dung nge
ཡིད་དུང་ངེ་བ	brtse gdung one pointed or natural and effortless,//skom pas gzir ba rnams chu 'dod kyis yid dung nge bar sdod	yid dung nge ba
ཡིད་དུང་དུང	sems sdug pa'am sems skyo ba	yid dung dung
ཡིད་དུངས	loving, affectionate	yid dungs
ཡིད་དུངས་པ	1) kindness, affection; 2) attachment to desirable qualities	yid dungs pa
ཡིད་དོགས	doubt	yid dogs
ཡིད་དོགས་ཤར་བ	doubt	yid dogs shar ba
ཡིད་དྲངས	busy the mind	yid drangs
ཡིད་གདུང	depressed, sadness, misery, suffering	yid gdung
ཡིད་གདུང་བ	disheartened {ngal zhing dub pa dang yid gdung ba} became weary and disheartened yid gdung bas skrag pa'i mig g.yo - miserable and afraid, averted her eyes	yid gdung ba
ཡིད་གདུང་བྱེད	be depressed/ sad, miserable, suffer	yid gdung byed
ཡིད་གདུངས	depressed	yid gdungs
ཡིད་བདེ	peaceful mind	yid bde
ཡིད་བདེ་བ	mental pleasure 2487	yid bde ba
ཡིད་བདེ་བའི་དབང་པོ	mental pleasure faculty	yid bde ba'i dbang po
ཡིད་མདོག་ཁ	pretend	yid mdog kha
ཡིད་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	plausible	yid mdog kha po
ཡིད་འདུན	sems kyi mos pa	yid 'dun
ཡིད་འདོམས	yid la brjed med du 'jags pa	yid 'doms
ཡིད་འདྲེན་པ	persuade, induce	yid 'dren pa
ཡིད་ལྡན	living beings, humanity	yid ldan
ཡིད་ལྡན་མ	yakshini princess {yid ldan ma}	yid ldan ma
ཡིད་ལྡན་ལེགས་མོ	lady of fine mind	yid ldan legs mo
ཡིད་ལྡོག་མེད	not changing one's mind	yid ldog med
ཡིད་ལྡོག་སེམས་ལོག་པའམ་འགྱུར་བ	bsam sbyor rtsub pas gzhan yid ldog	yid ldog sems log pa'am 'gyur ba
ཡིད་བསྡུས	distrust	yid bsdus
ཡིད་ནང་གི་བྱེད་པོ	the doer in the heart	yid nang gi byed po
ཡིད་ནང་དུ་ཆུད	1) sadness; 2) suffering, misery	yid nang du chud
ཡིད་ནང་དུ་ཆུད་པ	1) sadness; 2) suffering, misery	yid nang du chud pa
ཡིད་ནི་འཕྲོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	which captivates [the hearts]	yid ni 'phrog par byed pa
ཡིད་ནོར	wishfulfilling; Abbr. of {yid bzhin nor bu}	yid nor
ཡིད་རྣལ་དུ་ཕབ	be dispassionate/ cool/ quiet/ calm	yid rnal du phab
ཡིད་པ་རེད	linking verb construction	yid pa red
ཡིད་དཔྱད	metal analysis	yid dpyad
ཡིད་དཔྱོད	correct assumption/ assuming consciousness, speculation, mental fabrication/ discrimination, conceptualized ideas * investigation into mind	yid dpyod
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཀུན་ལས་འདས་པ	every type of assumption is transcended	yid dpyod kun las 'das pa
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི	tied to intellectual analysis	yid dpyod kyi
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་བསྒོམ	training in an assumption. Syn {blo yis bsgom} mentally fabricated meditation	yid dpyod kyi bsgom
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	a view which is speculation	yid dpyod kyi lta ba
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་བློས་བཞག་པ	established through discursive reflection / intellectual investigation / intellectual reasoning	yid dpyod kyi blos bzhag pa
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཆོས་ཉིད	intellectualize dharmata	yid dpyod chos nyid
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་རྟོག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the conceptual knowledge of assumptions	yid dpyod rtog pa'i shes rab
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་སྤྲོས་པ	conceptualized judgements	yid dpyod spros pa
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle form of assumption	yid dpyod phra mo
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་འཛིན་པ	retaining assumptions	yid dpyod 'dzin pa
ཡིད་དཔྱོད་འཛིན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	views retaining assumptions	yid dpyod 'dzin pa'i lta ba
ཡིད་སྤྲུལ	dngos 'byor yid sprul mchod pa 'bul - present [the glorious lama] with real and imagined offerings	yid sprul
གྱི་མཆོད་པ	real and imagined offerings	gyi mchod pa
ཡིད་སྤྲོ	happy, pleased	yid spro
ཡིད་སྤྲོ་བ	ease of mind, carefree, glad, happy, pleased, cheerful, delighted, joyful, pleasant	yid spro ba
ཡིད་ཕངས་པ	gces spras byed pa,//spyi nor la yid phangs byed pa	yid phangs pa
ཡིད་ཕངས་པོ	gces sems kyi blo	yid phangs po
ཡིད་ཕམ	regret, feel sad	yid pham
ཡིད་ཕམ་པ	yi chad pa'am yi mug pa	yid pham pa
ཡིད་ཕམ་པོ	sorry, miserable, low spirited, dejected person	yid pham po
ཡིད་ཕེབས	trustworthy, blo dang 'tsham pa,//gzhan la gtam yid phebs par smras te blo 'gugs pa	yid phebs
ཡིད་ཕྱ་དུང་ངེ	sad mind	yid phya dung nge
ཡིད་ཕྱུང་བ	feel sad	yid phyung ba
ཡིད་ཕྲེང	nostalgia [lovingly w fascination], attachment	yid phreng
ཡིད་ཕྲེང་བ	nostalgia [lovingly w fascination], attachment	yid phreng ba
ཡིད་ཕྲོགས	captivate the mind	yid phrogs
ཡིད་འཕམ་པ	be cast down, dejected, depressed	yid 'pham pa
ཡིད་འཕྱམ་པ	be cast down/ dejected/ depressed	yid 'phyam pa
ཡིད་འཕྱོ	#	yid 'phyo
ཡིད་འཕྲེང་བ	desire or dung sems kyis 'dor mi bra ba	yid 'phreng ba
ཡིད་འཕྲོག	beautiful, attract[ive], charm[ing], appealing, agreeable, enchant[ing], captivate [-ing], engrossing, engaging, delight[ful=, entice [-ing], please [-ing], allure [-ing], graceful, enthrall [-ing]...	yid 'phrog
ཡིད་འཕྲོག་མཁན	glamour	yid 'phrog mkhan
ཡིད་འཕྲོག་པ	enchanted {lha'i mdzes mas yid 'phrog pa} enchanted by the beauty of the goddesses	yid 'phrog pa
ཡིད་འཕྲོག་པའི་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ	agreeable/ enchanting pleasure grove	yid 'phrog pa'i skyed mos tshal
ཡིད་འཕྲོག་པོ	attractive	yid 'phrog po
ཡིད་འཕྲོག་མ	yakshini hariti (protector of children, bestower of wealth, goddess who planted first medicinal herbs), charming woman with both personal and mental accomplishments, a yaksa princess	yid 'phrog ma
ཡིད་འཕྲོགས་པ	to be attracted	yid 'phrogs pa
ཡིད་འཕྲོས་པ	sems ma gnas pa	yid 'phros pa
ཡིད་བག་ཕེབས་པ	sems kyi tshugs ka lhod por gnas pa	yid bag phebs pa
ཡིད་བྱི་བྱེད་པ	act in accord w 1's fancy, do as 1 likes	yid byi byed pa
ཡིད་བྱིང་བ	slothfulness	yid bying ba
ཡིད་བྱུང་བ	Aversion, being distressed, ruefulness	yid byung ba
ཡིད་བྱེད	mental doings, to hold a notion about, speculation	yid byed
ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འཕྲུལ	the magical illusions of mind	yid byed kyi 'phrul
ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	mind-made knowledge	yid byed kyi shes pa
ཡིད་བྱེད་དྲུག	TS	yid byed drug
ཡིད་བྱེད་བདུན	seven types of attention	yid byed bdun
ཡིད་བྱེད་ལྡན་པའི་རྟགས	signs of correct mental engagement	yid byed ldan pa'i rtags
ཡིད་བྱེད་པ་པོ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	mind and doer, Samantabhadra	yid byed pa po kun tu bzang po
ཡིད་བྱེད་བཞི	four types of attentions [developed in the nine stages of shamatha, four mental engagements. forcible, interrupted, uninterrupted, spontaneous	yid byed bzhi
ཡིད་བྱེད་བཞིའི་གནས་སྐབས་ཅན	the periods of the four mental engagements	yid byed bzhi'i gnas skabs can
ཡིད་བློ	mind	yid blo
ཡིད་བློ་ཚིམ	be satisfied/ content	yid blo tshim
ཡིད་བློང་བློང་བ	1) unclear apprehension; 2) mind not happy/ well and unstable; 3) mental objects/ knowledge uncertain	yid blong blong ba
ཡིད་དབང་འཕྲོག	beautiful, attract[ive], charm[ing], appealing, agreeable, enchant[ing], captivate [-ing], engrossing, engaging, delight[ful=, entice [-ing], please [-ing], allure [-ing], graceful, enthrall [-ing]...	yid dbang 'phrog
ཡིད་དབང་འཕྲོག་པ	ravish away one's mind	yid dbang 'phrog pa
ཡིད་དབེན་མཉམ་བཞག	meditation state of the solitude of mind	yid dben mnyam bzhag
ཡིད་དབྱུང་བ	be depressed in mind, anxious, disquieted	yid dbyung ba
ཡིད་དབྱོད་གསུམ	TSE	yid dbyod gsum
ཡིད་འབབ	ex {rnar snyan yid 'bab} sweetsounding, and satisfying to the mind	yid 'bab
ཡིད་འབོད་མ	ldong ros	yid 'bod ma
ཡིད་འབྱིན	discontented, weary	yid 'byin
ཡིད་འབྱིན་པ	be discontented or weary	yid 'byin pa
ཡིད་འབྱུང	1) depressed, anxious, disquieted. 2) repulsion, revulsion	yid 'byung
ཡིད་འབྱུང་སྟེ	became distressed	yid 'byung ste
ཡིད་འབྱུང་བ	depression, despair, dispirited	yid 'byung ba
ཡིད་འབྱུང་ཞེན་པ	obsession	yid 'byung zhen pa
ཡིད་མ་ཆེད་པ	not trusting, having no trust	yid ma ched pa
ཡིད་མ་ཆེས	I have no conviction in this	yid ma ches
ཡིད་མ་ཆེས་པ	disbelieve	yid ma ches pa
ཡིད་མ་འཆེས	I have no conviction in this	yid ma 'ches
ཡིད་མ་བདེ	became unhappy	yid ma bde
ཡིད་མ་བློང་བ	[arch] not gloomy despairing/ pessimistic	yid ma blong ba
ཡིད་མ་ཚམ	unsatisfied, discontented	yid ma tsham
ཡིད་མ་ཚམས	unsatisfied, discontented	yid ma tshams
ཡིད་མི་ཆེས	they would not believe, does not believe, not believe in	yid mi ches
ཡིད་མི་ཆེས་པའི་སྐྱོན	the fault of not believing	yid mi ches pa'i skyon
ཡིད་མི་འཆེས	[they] would not believe	yid mi 'ches
ཡིད་མི་བདེ	mental pain	yid mi bde
ཡིད་མི་བདེ་བ	mental discomfort / pain, unhappiness	yid mi bde ba
ཡིད་མི་བདེ་བའི་དབང་པོ	painful feeling	yid mi bde ba'i dbang po
ཡིད་མི་ནུར	[arch] not depressed/ pessimistic	yid mi nur
ཡིད་མི་བྱེད	non-attention	yid mi byed
ཡིད་མི་འབྱུང	no desire for	yid mi 'byung
ཡིད་མི་འོང་བ	kun gyis yid mi 'ong ba lack of sympathy from everyone	yid mi 'ong ba
ཡིད་མིག་རླུང་གསུམ	mind, eyes, and prana; - + rtse gcig gtad - focus your mind, eyes, and prana, one-pointedly	yid mig rlung gsum
ཡིད་མུག	gloom	yid mug
ཡིད་མུག་པ	gloomy, pessimistic, depressed	yid mug pa
ཡིད་མོས	plant calotropis gigantea	yid mos
ཡིད་མོས་པ	1) pleasant; 2) white utpala	yid mos pa
ཡིད་མོས་ཚལ	place w many ku mud lotuses	yid mos tshal
ཡིད་མྱོས	fuddled, tipsy	yid myos
ཡིད་མྱོས་པ	intoxication, tipsy, fuddled	yid myos pa
ཡིད་རྨུགས	gloomy, pessimistic, depressed	yid rmugs
ཡིད་རྨུགས་པ	unclear mind	yid rmugs pa
ཡིད་རྨུས་པ	yid sun pa, sad	yid rmus pa
ཡིད་སྨོན	1) wish, desire. 2) glad, happy, blissed	yid smon
ཡིད་སྨོན་ཅན	blessed heart, blessed	yid smon can
ཡིད་སྨོན་པ	dga' and gus bkur, re 'dun yod pa	yid smon pa
ཡིད་སྨོན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གྲུབ་འགྱུར་ཅིག	May this prayer be fulfilled!	yid smon pa bzhin du grub 'gyur cig
ཡིད་སྨོན་བྱ	I pray that	yid smon bya
ཡིད་སྨོན་བྱས་པ	wished 2489	yid smon byas pa
ཡིད་སྨོན་བྱེད་འོས་པ	admirable	yid smon byed 'os pa
ཡིད་སྨོན་བཞིན་འགྲུབ་པ	that the wishes may come true	yid smon bzhin 'grub pa
ཡིད་སྨོན་འོས	worth-wishing, desirable	yid smon 'os
ཡིད་སྨྱོན་པ	madman	yid smyon pa
ཡིད་ཙམ	slightly	yid tsam
ཡིད་ཙམ་འཐེན	a slight mental pulling	yid tsam 'then
ཡིད་ཙམ་དྲངས་པས	by pulling slightly	yid tsam drangs pas
ཡིད་རྩ་ཁོལ	become depressed [my heart is sad]	yid rtsa khol
ཡིད་རྩལ	power of mind	yid rtsal
ཡིད་ཚིམ	satisfaction, contentment, gratification, be satisfied/ content	yid tshim
ཡིད་ཚིམ་པ	satisfied, contented, satisfying, charming	yid tshim pa
ཡིད་ཚིམ་པར་གྱུར	he was satisfied	yid tshim par gyur
ཡིད་ཚིམས་པ	satisfactorily	yid tshims pa
ཡིད་ཚིམས་པར	satisfactorily	yid tshims par
ཡིད་ཚོད	tshod dpag	yid tshod
ཡིད་འཚིམ་པར་འགྱུར	contented	yid 'tshim par 'gyur
ཡིད་འཚིམ་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become satisfied	yid 'tshim par 'gyur ba
ཡིད་འཛིན	enchanting	yid 'dzin
ཡིད་འཛིན་པ	agreeable, pleasing to the mind, pleasant	yid 'dzin pa
ཡིད་ཞི	tranquil mind	yid zhi
ཡིད་ཞུམ་ནས་མདུན་སྐྱོད་མི་ཐུབ་པ	after becoming discouraged--	yid zhum nas mdun skyod mi thub pa
ཡིད་ཞུམ་པ	sad, discouraged, pessimistic, depressed	yid zhum pa
ཡིད་ཞུམ་རིང་ལུགས	pessimism	yid zhum ring lugs
ཡིད་གཞན་དུ་མ་ཡེངས་པར	without letting your mind wander	yid gzhan du ma yengs par
ཡིད་གཞུང	SA rnam rtog, illusive or unreal thoughts, imaginary thoughts, parrot	yid gzhung
ཡིད་གཞུང་ཅན	deluded	yid gzhung can
ཡིད་གཞུང་ལྡན	deluded	yid gzhung ldan
ཡིད་གཞུང་པ	trustworthy/perceptive,	yid gzhung pa
ཤརཔ	minded/ honest	sharp
ཡིད་གཞུངས	1) clear/ learned mind, prudent, acute perceptive, intelligent, knowledgeable; 2) dran skyen pa honest, straightforward, upright	yid gzhungs
ཡིད་གཞུངས་པ	perspicacity; genuine	yid gzhungs pa
ཡིད་གཞོ་བ	[arch] sems gso ba	yid gzho ba
ཡིད་བཞིན	wish-fulfilling	yid bzhin
ཡིད་བཞིན་ཀུན་འབྱུང	ocean, a gem	yid bzhin kun 'byung
ཡིད་བཞིན་སྐོང་བ	to fulfill like a wishfulfilling jewel	yid bzhin skong ba
ཡིད་བཞིན་འཁོར་ལོ	Wishfulfilling Wheel, White Tara	yid bzhin 'khor lo
ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་ཁོག་རྩིས	calculations based on wishes rather than facts	yid bzhin gyi khog rtsis
ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་ནོར་བུ	wish-fulfilling gem,	yid bzhin gyi nor bu
ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་ནོར་ལས་ལྷག་པ	more valuable than the wish-fulfilling gem	yid bzhin gyi nor las lhag pa
ཡིད་བཞིན་གྲུབ	heaven, bliss	yid bzhin grub
ཡིད་བཞིན་འགྲུབ་པ	establish as we wish	yid bzhin 'grub pa
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར	the wish-fulfilling jewel	yid bzhin nor
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	wish-granting jewel	yid bzhin nor bu
ཨ་ཝིཤ	fulfilling gem	a wish
པྲེཅིཨོཨུས་ཝིཤ	fulfilling gem, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	precious wish
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་ལྟ་བའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཝིཤཕུ༹ལཕི༹ལླིང་ཇེཝེལ	like resolve	yid bzhin nor bu lta ba'i sems bskyed wishfulfilling jewel
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཨརོཨུསེ་བོདྷིཅིཏཏ་ལིཀེ་ཨ་ཝིཤ	fulfilling gem	yid bzhin nor bu lta bu'i sems bskyed arouse bodhicitta like a wish
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་ལྟར་རེ་འདོད་སྩོལ་བ	like	yid bzhin nor bu ltar re 'dod stsol ba
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བའི་མི་ལུས	human	yid bzhin nor bu 'dra ba'i mi lus
བོདཡ་ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ལིཀེ་ཨ་ཝིཤ	fulfilling gem	body which is like a wish
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	Yishin Norbu Sampa Lhündrub	yid bzhin nor bu bsam pa lhun grub
ཡིད་བཞིན་དཔལ་འབྱུང	Wish-fulfilling Source of Splendor	yid bzhin dpal 'byung
ཡིད་བཞིན་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	prince of all	yid bzhin dbang gi rgyal po
ཨོཕ༹་ཝིཤ	fulfilling gems	of wish
ཡིད་བཞིན་མ་མ	the great ocean	yid bzhin ma ma
ཡིད་བཞིན་སྩོལ་བའི་ནོར་བུ	wish- fulfilling gem	yid bzhin stsol ba'i nor bu
ཡིད་བཞིན་མཛོད	the Precious Wishing Treasure by Longchen Rabjam; Wishfulfilling Treasury	yid bzhin mdzod
ཡིད་བཞིན་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཛོད	Wishfulfilling Precious Treasury [thd]	yid bzhin rin po che'i mdzod
ཡིད་བཞུངས་པ	genuine	yid bzhungs pa
ཡིད་བཞོ་བ	mind gso byed pa [refresh/ ease/ restore]	yid bzho ba
ཡིད་བཞོས་ཏེ་སྨྲ་བ	[arch] speak one's heart	yid bzhos te smra ba
ཡིད་ཟ་ཡིག་གེ	song, shivered, chills up the back	yid za yig ge
ཡིད་ཟ་ཡིག་གེ་སོང	shivered, chills up the back	yid za yig ge song
ཡིད་ཟབ	carefulness, prudence	yid zab
ཡིད་ཟབ་བྱེད	be careful/ prudent	yid zab byed
ཡིད་ཟུག	fall in love w, lose 1's heart to	yid zug
ཡིད་ཟློག་མེད	to not change the mind	yid zlog med
ཡིད་གཟབ	attentive, alert, mindful, cautious	yid gzab
ཡིད་གཟབ་བྱེད	be [attentive, alert, mindful, cautious]	yid gzab byed
ཡིད་བཟང	good mind, just as [we] wish, thought, desire	yid bzang
ཡིད་བཟང་སྐྱེས	dz' ti'i tree	yid bzang skyes
ཡིད་བཟང་མ	1) woman w good thoughts; 2) {yid bzang ma} heart nadi	yid bzang ma
ཡིད་བཟིན་ནོར་པོ	fabulous wishing gem	yid bzin nor po
ཡིད་བཟླས	mental recitation	yid bzlas
ཡིད་འོང	attractive/ enticing	yid 'ong
ཡིད་འོང་དངོས་གྲུབ་མཆོག་སོལ་བ	bestower of the supreme siddhi pleasing to the mind	yid 'ong dngos grub mchog sol ba
ཡིད་འོང་ལྡན	epithet of the river Gandak (at city Yangs pa can	yid 'ong ldan
ཡིད་འོང་བ	handsome	yid 'ong ba
ཡིད་འོང་བྱམས	having realized love, all beings are pleasing	yid 'ong byams
ཡིད་འོང་བྱམས་པ	immaculate love	yid 'ong byams pa
ཡིད་འོང་བློ་གྲོས་མ	lady of delightful intellect	yid 'ong blo gros ma
ཡིད་འོང་མ	adorable one	yid 'ong ma
ཡིད་འོང་མོ་སྨན	beautiful woman	yid 'ong mo sman
ཡིད་འོང་གཙང་པོ	yid 'ong gtsang po river	yid 'ong gtsang po
ཡིད་འོང་མཛེས་སྡུག	pretty	yid 'ong mdzes sdug
ཡིད་འོང་མཛེས་སྡུག་ལྡན་པ	beautiful	yid 'ong mdzes sdug ldan pa
ཡིད་འོང་ཡུལ་རྣམས	attractive things	yid 'ong yul rnams
ཡིད་ཡུལ	house	yid yul
ཡིད་ཡུལ་དུ་འདོམས་པ	certainty	yid yul du 'doms pa
ཡིད་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས	transcends any object of mind yid g.yo - deeply moved, touched, emotionally affected yid g.yo ba - to feel inspired/ moved [KNT]	yid yul las 'das
ཡིད་ར་ཁོལ	depressed, heart is sad	yid ra khol
ཡིད་རང	sympathetic ?	yid rang
ཡིད་རང་བ	joyful	yid rang ba
ཡིད་རངས་པ	rejoiced	yid rangs pa
ཡིད་རིག	mental consort	yid rig
ཡིད་རིང	have forbearance	yid ring
ཡིད་རེ	[the mind's] hope	yid re
ཡིད་ལ	mind	yid la
ཡིད་ལ་བཀོད	be preoccupied w	yid la bkod
ཡིད་ལ་ཁེངས་པ	{rang gi mdzes ma yid la khengs pa} his mind was filled with thoughts of his beloved Sundari	yid la khengs pa
ཡིད་ལ་གྱིས	imagine; Keep in mind!	yid la gyis
ཡིད་ལ་བགྱིད་པ	mental engagement	yid la bgyid pa
ཡིད་ལ་འགྱུ་བ	mind-movements	yid la 'gyu ba
ཡིད་ལ་ངེས་པ	retained in mind	yid la nges pa
ཡིད་ལ་གཅག་པ	mdzes ma yid la gcag pa love for his Sundari	yid la gcag pa
ཡིད་ལ་གཅགས	make sad, feel nostalgic, miss	yid la gcags
ཡིད་ལ་གཅགས་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ་ཡོད	there are three things which make me sad	yid la gcags pa rnam gsum yod
ཡིད་ལ་གཅིགས	miss, feel nostalgic	yid la gcigs
ཡིད་ལ་བཅུགས་པ	firm in the mind	yid la bcugs pa
ཡིད་ལ་འཆང་བ	sems la 'jog pa	yid la 'chang ba
ཡིད་ལ་འཆར་བ	thoughts dawning or rising in the mind	yid la 'char ba
ཡིད་ལ་བརྗོད་པ	mentally formulate	yid la brjod pa
ཡིད་ལ་ཉལ	'dod lha	yid la nyal
ཡིད་ལ་འཐད	feeling satisfied	yid la 'thad
ཡིད་ལ་འཐད་པ	attractive, be pleased, like yid la 'gro ba/ 'bab pa	yid la 'thad pa
ཡིད་ལ་དྲན་པར་གྱིས	remmeber!	yid la dran par gyis
ཡིད་ལ་མནགས་པ	yid la brnags pa	yid la mnags pa
ཡིད་ལ་བརྣགས	turned over in the mind, thought over	yid la brnags
ཡིད་ལ་བརྣགས་པ	in mind bzod pa/ bsam pa	yid la brnags pa
ཡིད་ལ་བབ་པ	please	yid la bab pa
ཡིད་ལ་བྱ	to memorize	yid la bya
ཡིད་ལ་བྱ་རྒྱུ	mind's activity	yid la bya rgyu
ཡིད་ལ་བྱར་མེད	mind free from occupation	yid la byar med
ཡིད་ལ་བྱར་མེད་པ	no object for the mind; exp {rnam rtog gi yul du byar med pa}	yid la byar med pa
ཡིད་ལ་བྱས	contemplated, rest the mind	yid la byas
ཡིད་ལ་བྱས་པ	entertained the idea	yid la byas pa
ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད	attention	yid la byed
ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	1) consider, think over, investigate; 2) perceive, apprehend, comprehend, realize, distinguish, understand things individually, mental event/ work/ demanding/ application/ activity/ engagement, ena...	yid la byed pa
ཡིད་ལ་འབབ	delightful to the mind, pleasing, like, be pleased	yid la 'bab
ཡིད་ལ་འབབ་པ	delightful to the mind, pleasing, like, be pleased	yid la 'bab pa
ཡིད་ལ་མ་བགྱིས	I did not care	yid la ma bgyis
ཡིད་ལ་མ་བྱས	inconceivable	yid la ma byas
ཡིད་ལ་མ་བཟུང་ན	if you don't remember	yid la ma bzung na
ཡིད་ལ་མི་འཆར	does not occur to them	yid la mi 'char
ཡིད་ལ་མི་འཆར་བ	does not occur to them	yid la mi 'char ba
ཡིད་ལ་མི་བརྗེད་པ	was always on her mind	yid la mi brjed pa
ཡིད་ལ་མི་བྱེད	without mental activity, do not fix mind on an idea, not to keep in mind	yid la mi byed
ཡིད་ལ་མི་བྱེད་པ	inattention	yid la mi byed pa
ཡིད་ལ་མི་བྱེད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེ	mahamudra of mental non-fabrication	yid la mi byed phyag rgya che
ཡིད་ལ་མི་འཛིན	not retain/ remember	yid la mi 'dzin
ཡིད་ལ་མེད་པར	unexpectedly	yid la med par
ཡིད་ལ་འཛིན	keep/ retain in mind, remember	yid la 'dzin
ཡིད་ལ་འཛིན་པ	keep/ retain in mind, remember	yid la 'dzin pa
ཡིད་ལ་བཞག	remember, keep in mind, take to heart	yid la bzhag
ཡིད་ལ་བཞགས	able to hold/ rest in the mind	yid la bzhags
ཡིད་ལ་ཟུངས	bear in mind, remember, understand	yid la zungs
ཡིད་ལ་ཟུངས་ཤིག	remember [these words!]	yid la zungs shig
ཡིད་ལ་བཟུང	remember, keep in mind, take to heart	yid la bzung
མེཨནིང་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཏེཨཆིང	which is no different from not having heard it at all	meaning of the teaching
ཡིད་ལ་འོང་བ	attractive, enticing	yid la 'ong ba
ཡིད་ལ་རེ་བ	to entertain hope / expectations	yid la re ba
ཡིད་ལ་ཤར	arise in mind, think about	yid la shar
ཡིད་ལ་ཤར་ཀྱང	although you may fancy it in your mind	yid la shar kyang
ཡིད་ལ་ཤར་ཀྱང་རོ་མོ་མྱོང	though it arises in your mind/ the idea pleases you, you do not experience the taste	yid la shar kyang ro mo myong
ཡིད་ལ་ཤར་བ	to remember	yid la shar ba
ཡིད་ལ་ཤར་བ་ལྟར	as it arose in my mind, improvised	yid la shar ba ltar
ཡིད་ལ་ཤིན་ཏུ་བབས	be in the mind in complete agreement	yid la shin tu babs
ཡིད་ལ་སེམས་པའི་ཟས	motivational sustenance	yid la sems pa'i zas
ཡིད་ལ་སོམས	reflect!, reflect on!	yid la soms
ཡིད་ལ་བསམ་པ	don yid la soms - reflect on their meaning!	yid la bsam pa
ཡིད་ལས་སྐྱེས	mind-born, epithet of kamadeva	yid las skyes
ཡིད་ལས་བྱུང	mental	yid las byung
ཡིད་ལས་བྱུང་བ	mind born TSE yid las byung ba dbang po kun tshang gi	yid las byung ba
ཡིད་ལས་འབྱུང	arising in/ from the mind1) bar srid kyi ming ste arisen from mind not the elements; 2) person; 2) the mara dga' rab dbang phyug	yid las 'byung
ཡིད་ལུས	mental body	yid lus
ཡིད་ལོག	aversion	yid log
ཡིད་ལོག་པ	be tired or weary	yid log pa
ཡིད་ཤི་བ	yi thang chad pa &, khong khro zhi ba	yid shi ba
ཡིད་ཤེས	mental cognitions, mental consciousness. Syn {yid kyi rnam par shes pa}	yid shes
ཡིད་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	mind consciousness dhatu	yid shes kyi khams
ཡིད་ཤེས་སྐྱེད་པའི་དབང་པོ	the faculty for producing a mental cognition	yid shes skyed pa'i dbang po
ཡིད་ཤེས་རྟོག་བཅས	conceptual mind consciousness	yid shes rtog bcas
ཡིད་ཤེས་རྟོག་མེད	mental cognition w/o concepts	yid shes rtog med
ཡིད་ཤེས་པ	cognition of the mind	yid shes pa
ཡིད་ཤེས་ལོག་ཤེས	wrong mental knowledge	yid shes log shes
ཡིད་བཤིན་ནོར་བུ	wishing jewel	yid bshin nor bu
ཡིད་སུན་པ	grown tired	yid sun pa
ཡིད་སེམས	mind	yid sems
ཡིད་སེམས་ཕྲོགས	steal 1's heart, attract	yid sems phrogs
ཡིད་སྲུབ་པ	sems dkrugs pa, mind born	yid srub pa
ཡིད་སྲུབས	epithet of kamadeva, 3rd month of tibetan calendar, refractory stubborn mind	yid srubs
ཡིད་སྲུབས་བདག་པོ	Kamadeva	yid srubs bdag po
ཡིད་གསོད་པ	become sad/ discouraged	yid gsod pa
ཡིད་བསད་པ	sad	yid bsad pa
ཡིད་བསད་པར་གྱུར	incurs blaming	yid bsad par gyur
ཡིད་བསམ	wish-granting	yid bsam
ཡིད་བསམ་དུ	in my mind	yid bsam du
ཡིད་བསྲུང་བ	sems bsrung ba	yid bsrung ba
ཡིད་ཧུར་རེ་འདུག	clear to my mind	yid hur re 'dug
ཡིན་ཀྱང	nevertheless, even though, but, however	yin kyang
ཡིན་སྐད	say it is, words that it is	yin skad
ཡིན་ཁུལ	pretend to be	yin khul
ཡིན་ཁྱབ	pervasion of being	yin khyab
ཡིན་ཁྱབ་མཉམ	identity, co-entailment	yin khyab mnyam
ཡིན་གང་ཡང་མ་ཡིན	is not anything concrete	yin gang yang ma yin
ཡིན་གང་ཡང་མ་ཡིན་པ	cannot be defined in any way	yin gang yang ma yin pa
ཡིན་གོ་ལེ་ཤོག	yin par shog	yin go le shog
ཡིན་གྱི་རེད	phal cher yin te 'ong,//yi ge de tsho khos bris pa yin gyi red	yin gyi red
ཡིན་གྲང	yin rung,//lo rgyus bden pa yin grang, ae bden mi shes	yin grang
ཡིན་གྲང་ན	yin na ni,//de ltar yin grang na nga tsho'i bar bsam 'char mi mthun pa mi 'dug	yin grang na
ཡིན་དགོས་བྱུང	1) must be so, is certainly so; 2) though it is not so, it has to be said it is	yin dgos byung
ཡིན་འགོད	copula "to be"	yin 'god
ཡིན་འགྲོ	are/ is mostly, probably, apparently, seems to be	yin 'gro
ཡིན་རྒྱུ་དག	yin pa dag, yin pa ste don ngo ma ni	yin rgyu dag
ཡིན་བརྒྱ་མིན་སྟོང	100 are 1,000 are not, say various things that are true and not true	yin brgya min stong
ཡིན་གཅིག་མིན་གཅིག	be sure	yin gcig min gcig
ཡིན་གཅིག་མིན་གཅིག་འགྲོ་དགོས	[I] must certainly go in any case	yin gcig min gcig 'gro dgos
ཡིན་ཆགས	{chos pa yin chags byed dgos na} if I am supposed to be a practitioner	yin chags
ཡིན་ལྟ་ཡིན	certainly, by all means	yin lta yin
ཡིན་ཐག་ཆོད	doubtlessly exist	yin thag chod
ཡིན་ཐང	yin 'os pa, yin mdog kha po	yin thang
ཡིན་ཐོག	what actually is/ is actually the case in all its immediacy; immediacy of what is	yin thog
ཡིན་ཐོག་ཏུ	in the immediacy of what (something) is	yin thog tu
ཡིན་ཐོག་ཏུ་བཞག	to stay with the reality of what is; in isness	yin thog tu bzhag
ཡིན་དང་མིན་པའི་ཤེས་པ	cognition of "is" and "is not"	yin dang min pa'i shes pa
ཡིན་དུ་ཆུག	is indeed	yin du chug
ཡིན་དུ་གཤའ་བ	yin tshod red dam, yin mdog kha po red,//khyed rang sku khams bde po yin du gsha' ba la rab tu spro	yin du gsha' ba
ཡིན་མདོག་ཁ	pretend	yin mdog kha
ཡིན་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	1) pretend that it is; 2) probably; 3) attractive, nice looking	yin mdog kha po
ཡིན་མདོག་ཁ་མོ	1) pretend that it is; 2) probably	yin mdog kha mo
ཡིན་འདུག་མིན་འདུག	is it so or is it not	yin 'dug min 'dug
ཡིན་ན	if, suppose, in case, so long as, as long as, since, as	yin na
ཡིན་ན་མིན་ན	however, whatever, in any case	yin na min na
ཡིན་ན་ཡང	but, yet, however, even if, even, nevertheless	yin na yang
ཡིན་ནམ	what	yin nam
ཡིན་ནམ་སྙམ་པ	wondering, hesitation	yin nam snyam pa
ཡིན་ནམ་མིན་ནམ	is it or isn't it?	yin nam min nam
ཡིན་ནའང	but, however, nevertheless, even though	yin na'ang
ཡིན་ནའང་འདྲ	either-- or	yin na'ang 'dra
ཡིན་ནའི	but, nevertheless, however	yin na'i
ཡིན་ནས	but, nevertheless, however	yin nas
ཡིན་ནོ	yes	yin no
ཡིན་ནོ་ཅོག	all that exists	yin no cog
ཡིན་པ་ཐག་ཆོད	must surely be	yin pa thag chod
ཡིན་པ་འདྲ	seems to be, probably is	yin pa 'dra
ཡིན་པ་རྣམ་པ	mo, gnyis med	yin pa rnam pa
ཡིན་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	3 ways of being: kun tu bzang po	yin pa rnam pa gsum
ཡིན་པ་མི་སྲིད་པའི་ཤེས་བྱ	objects of knowledge of which being [them] is not possible	yin pa mi srid pa'i shes bya
ཡིན་པ་ཞེས	is spoken of	yin pa zhes
ཡིན་པ་ཡིན	being this or that	yin pa yin
ཡིན་པ་ཡོད	probably/ mostly is, seems to be	yin pa yod
ཡིན་པ་རེད	it exists	yin pa red
ཡིན་པ་ལ་ཡིན་པར་ཤེས་པ	knowing/ perceiving it to be what it is, knowing things to be as they really are	yin pa la yin par shes pa
ཡིན་པ་ལ་ཡིན་པར་ཤེས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to understand how things are in reality	yin pa la yin par shes par byed pa
ཡིན་པ་ལས	only, just	yin pa las
ཡིན་པ་སྲིད་པའི་ཤེས་བྱ	knowables that can possibly exist	yin pa srid pa'i shes bya
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར	because it is	yin pa'i phyir
ཡིན་པར	fx . . . (verb root) + r - given that . . .	yin par
ཡིན་པར་གྱུར་པ	actual, real, existent, existence	yin par gyur pa
ཡིན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ	yin pa'i khungs skyel ba'am tell the reason	yin par sgrub pa
ཡིན་པས	is it?	yin pas
ཡིན་པས་སོ	because is	yin pas so
ཡིན་ཕྱིན	are certainly	yin phyin
ཡིན་བས	is it?	yin bas
ཡིན་མིན	being and/ or nonbeing; is and/ or is not; isc. being something or not	yin min
ཡིན་མིན་གོ་ལྡོག	reversing right and wrong/ is and is not	yin min go ldog
ཡིན་མིན་ཆེན་པོ	major question of right and wrong/ principle	yin min chen po
ཡིན་མིན་མཉམ་བསྲེ	confuse right and wrong/ is and is not	yin min mnyam bsre
ཡིན་མིན་གསལ་འབྱེད	distinguish clearly between right and wrong/ is and is not	yin min gsal 'byed
ཡིན་མེད	whether it is or not right and wrong	yin med
ཡིན་མེན	existence & non-existence	yin men
ཡིན་མོད	though indeed it is like that	yin mod
ཡིན་ཙ་ན	since	yin tsa na
ཡིན་ཙི	atom	yin tsi
ཡིན་ཙིའི་ནུས་པ	atomic energy	yin tsi'i nus pa
ཡིན་ཚད	proper	yin tshad
ཡིན་ཚུལ	Acc to LKh: 1) "as if," "like." ¦ bod mi rigs kyi brgya cha 95 bran g.yog yin tshul, "95% of the Tibetan peoples were like/as if slaves." 2) "because of" [mss]	yin tshul
ཡིན་ཚུལ་གྱི་ངོ་སྤྲོད	he explained that it was (indirect report not a direct quote)	yin tshul gyi ngo sprod
ཡིན་ཚུལ་བྱེད་པ	presume	yin tshul byed pa
ཡིན་ཟེར	he said, it is	yin zer
ཡིན་ཟེར་རོ	he said, its	yin zer ro
ཡིན་ཟོལ་བྱེད་པ	say what is not so is so	yin zol byed pa
ཡིན་ཡང	but, however, well	yin yang
ཡིན་ཡིན་པ	obvious	yin yin pa
ཡིན་ཡོད་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	establishing identity as being present	yin yod du sgrub pa
ཡིན་རེ་སྐན	take an oath it is not so	yin re skan
ཡིན་རེ་ཤི	swear an oath	yin re shi
ཡིན་ལ	{. . . yin la} since/ given that . . . is the case, . . .	yin la
ཡིན་ལ་མིན་ལ	ground of doubt whether it is or is not	yin la min la
ཡིན་ལས་ཆེ	must surely be	yin las che
ཡིན་ལས་ཆེ་འདུག	it is more than likely that	yin las che 'dug
ཡིན་ལུགས	actual condition, way of being [thd]	yin lugs
ཡིན་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཤད་པ	explained the Dharma according to your situation	yin lugs kyi chos bshad pa
ཡིན་ལུགས་ངོ་ཐོག	actual nature, way things are	yin lugs ngo thog
ཡིན་ལུགས་རྟོགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	superior knowledge that realizes the true nature	yin lugs rtogs pa'i shes rab
ཡིན་ལུགས་ཤེས་པ	know what is	yin lugs shes pa
ཡིན་ལོ	mere information {yin khul	yin lo
ཡིན་ལོག	the opposite of is, is not	yin log
ཡིན་ཤག	certainly exists	yin shag
ཡིན་ཤག་བྱས	MG: certainty, unquestionable belief in the authenticity of the nominal it modifies. [mss]	yin shag byas
ཡིན་ཤག་བྱེད་པ	assume	yin shag byed pa
ཡིན་ཤས་ཆེ	yin las che'am yin 'gro snyam	yin shas che
ཡིན་ཤེས	to know something to be the situation	yin shes
ཡིན་གཤིས	yin pas na'am yin phyir	yin gshis
ཡིན་ས་མིན་སྐྱེལ	true and false kyi reasons mtha' skyel	yin sa min skyel
ཡིན་བསམ	thinking it was	yin bsam
ཡིབ	to hide	yib
ཡིབ་ནས་བལྟ་བ	peep	yib nas blta ba
ཡིབ་པ	(tha mi dad pa yibs pa, yib pa, yibs,, hide, conceal, shelter	yib pa
ཡིབ་ཞུ	mgo nas gzugs por mar bskon rgyu'i kong yul and spo yul sleeveless men's/ women's garment = mgo shubs	yib zhu
ཡིབ་ཟིན་པ	hid	yib zin pa
ཡིབ་ཤིང	officinal plant used for wounds and sores	yib shing
ཡིབ་ས	hiding place, shelter	yib sa
ཡིབས	imp. of {yib pa}	yibs
ཡིབས་པ	[p yib pa]	yibs pa
ཡིབས་སུ	situation	yibs su
ཡིམ་པའི་སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ	three vows of the householders	yim pa'i sdom pa gsum
ཡིའུ་ཏིང	Dau tieng S Viet nam	yi'u ting
ཡིའུ་ཐེ་མི	jew	yi'u the mi
ཡིའུ་ཕིའོ	post stamp	yi'u phi'o
ཡིའུ་ཕེའོ	postage stamp	yi'u phe'o
ཡིའུ་ཕེའོ་བསྡུ་གསོག	stamp collecting	yi'u phe'o bsdu gsog
ཡིའུ་ཕྱིའོ	postage stamp	yi'u phyi'o
ཡིའུ་ཕྱིའོ་བསྡུ་གསོག	stamp collecting	yi'u phyi'o bsdu gsog
ཡིར	(not in das)	yir
ཡིས	instrumental	yis
ཡིས་འགུལ་ཐེབས	be moved/ touched [emotional]	yis 'gul thebs
ཡིས་སྨོན་འོས	be wished, desirable	yis smon 'os
ཡུ	the shaft of a boot	yu
ཡུ་ཁུ	oats	yu khu
ཡུ་ག	rubbing sticks [for making fire], oats	yu ga
ཡུ་གན་ཀྲ	Uganda	yu gan kra
ཡུ་གུ་ཤིང	saussurea epilobioides maxim., officinal tree yielding a remedy for wounds and sores	yu gu shing
ཡུ་གུ་ཤིང་ནག་པོ	sambucus adnata wall.	yu gu shing nag po
ཡུ་གུ་ས་ལ་ལྭི་ཀི་ཡ	Yugoslavia	yu gu sa la lwi ki ya
ཡུ་གུར	a country and its people, part of mongolia	yu gur
ཡུ་གུར་གྱི་ཡུལ	Sinkiang	yu gur gyi yul
ཡུ་གེ་ར	yu ge ra = Uighur region/ people	yu ge ra
ཡུ་མགོ	handle	yu mgo
ཡུ་ང	place in 'phan yul	yu nga
ཡུ་ང་དཔལ་འབྱོར	chief town w fort and monastery in 'phan yul	yu nga dpal 'byor
ཡུ་ང་དཔལ་འབྱོར་གླིང	chief town with fort and monastery in 'phan yul	yu nga dpal 'byor gling
ཡུ་ཇ	chinese tea	yu ja
ཡུ་ཏང	ancient monastery in nepal	yu tang
ཡུ་ཏི	chang, offering chang	yu ti
ཡུ་ཐི་ཀ	sweet scented flower, jasminum auriculatum	yu thi ka
ཡུ་ནེ་ས་ཀོ	UNSECO	yu ne sa ko
ཡུ་བ	handle, stalk, stem, stock, life-tree, stick, that part of anything which the hand can grasp, handle	yu ba
ཡུ་བ་ཅན	1) thing w handle; 2) Indra's vajra	yu ba can
ཡུ་བ་ལྡན	one with a stick	yu ba ldan
ཡུ་བུ	[arch] I, we	yu bu
ཡུ་བུ་ཅག	we, ourselves	yu bu cag
ཡུ་བུའི་ལག་ཏུ	in our hands	yu bu'i lag tu
ཡུ་བོ	hornless	yu bo
ཡུ་བྱེད་པ	culminate	yu byed pa
ཡུ་མ	hornless cattle aa yu ma, weeds	yu ma
ཡུ་མ་རྒྱག	weeding	yu ma rgyag
ཡུ་མ་ཡུ་བ	weed out, remove weeds from a garden	yu ma yu ba
ཡུ་མའོ་ཆིའུ	shuttlecock, badminton	yu ma'o chi'u
ཡུ་མར་ཇ	buttered tea	yu mar ja
ཡུ་མེད	rtsa med	yu med
ཡུ་མོ	doe, female deer	yu mo
ཡུ་མོ་མདེའུ་འབྱིན	{yu mo mde'u 'byin med. herb [R]	yu mo mde'u 'byin
ཡུ་མོ་མི་བསྐྱོད་རྡོ་རྗེ	{yu mo mi bskyod rdo rje [R]	yu mo mi bskyod rdo rje
ཡུ་མོ་རུ་རྟ	of ru rta divided male and female, the female	yu mo ru rta
ཡུ་རིང	'chang zungs ring po	yu ring
ཡུ་རོབ	Europe	yu rob
ཡུ་རོབ་གླིང་ཕྲན	Europe	yu rob gling phran
ཡུ་རོབ་དང་ཨེ་ཤི་ཡ་འདྲེས་པའི	eurasian	yu rob dang e shi ya 'dres pa'i
ཡུ་ལུ་མ	hornless cattle, goats and sheep	yu lu ma
ཡུ་ཤ	thin thug pa [soup, gruel porridge, noddle dish]	yu sha
ཡུག	piece of cloth, SA yud	yug
ཡུག་གྱུང་བ	(A) attachment	yug gyung ba
ཡུག་གཅིག་ཏུ	in 1 piece	yug gcig tu
ཡུག་གཅིག་ཏུ་འགྱུར	become 1 w, merge w, form a whole	yug gcig tu 'gyur
ཡུག་གཅིག་ཏུ་འབྲེལ་བ	connected in 1 piece	yug gcig tu 'brel ba
ཡུག་བཅས	complete, uncut	yug bcas
ཡུག་རྡོག	lham mthil khebs pa'i rdog pa	yug rdog
ཡུག་སྣམ	1) snam bu bubs tshang; 2) (A) btsag rdo	yug snam
ཡུག་པ	(A) 1) desire, passion, attachment; 2) (A) leg and foot)	yug pa
ཡུག་པ་ཅིག་སྟོན	(A) rib tsam zhig ston	yug pa cig ston
ཡུག་པོ	oats	yug po
ཡུག་ཕོ	widower yug pho yug mo dwa phrug mi hreng widowers widows, orphans and the homeless	yug pho
ཡུག་ཕྲན	yug chung ngam lteb hril chung ba	yug phran
ཡུག་མོ	widow	yug mo
ཡུག་ཚང	bubs tshang 2494	yug tshang
ཡུག་ཚར	gos chen, dar kha, ras, ther snam etc yug tshang kha tshar can	yug tshar
ཡུག་ཟ	widow	yug za
ཡུག་ཟ་མ	woman whose husband has died	yug za ma
ཡུག་ཟ་མོ	woman whose husband has died	yug za mo
ཡུག་ཟའི་བུ	son born after death of the husband	yug za'i bu
ཡུག་ཡུག	moving to and fro, wave, wag, whirl, waving, swaying	yug yug
ཡུག་ཡུག་རྒྱག	move to and fro, wave, wag, whirl, sway	yug yug rgyag
ཡུག་ཡུག་རྒྱབ་པ	whirl round, wag	yug yug rgyab pa
ཡུག་ཡུག་བྱེད	move to and fro, wave, wag, whirl, sway	yug yug byed
ཡུག་ཡུག་ལག་པས་བྱས་ནས་ཕྱིན་སོང	having waved [they] left	yug yug lag pas byas nas phyin song
ཡུག་ཤུད	(M) go sa'i cho lo zhig	yug shud
ཡུག་ས	mourning for deceased spouse	yug sa
ཡུག་ས་མའི་ཟླ་བ	chu stod 6th month [R]	yug sa ma'i zla ba
ཡུག་ས་མོ	widow	yug sa mo
ཡུགས་གྲིབ	mourning defilement	yugs grib
ཡུགས་རྡོ	yugs rdo med. mineral [R]	yugs rdo
ཡུགས་པ	anoint, rub, daub with	yugs pa
ཡུགས་ཕོ	widower	yugs pho
ཡུགས་མོ	widow	yugs mo
ཡུགས་ཟ	mourning [& attendant uncleanliness]	yugs za
ཡུགས་ཤིག	anoint!	yugs shig
ཡུགས་ས	mourning for a deceased spouse	yugs sa
ཡུགས་ས་པ	man whose wife has died/ in mourning, widower	yugs sa pa
ཡུགས་ས་མ	widow	yugs sa ma
ཡུགས་ས་མོ	widow	yugs sa mo
ཡུགས་ས་མོའི་བདག་པོ	1 who marries a widow}-	yugs sa mo'i bdag po
ཡུང་ང	turmeric	yung nga
ཡུང་དྲུང	early state of bon religion	yung drung
ཡུང་མདོག	turmeric [yellow] color	yung mdog
ཡུང་བ	turmeric, place in 'phan yul, curcuma longa, turmeric	yung ba
ཡུང་བ་དང་རྨ	[arch] 'phan po yung ba and rma zer ba'i lung pa khag gnyis	yung ba dang rma
ཡུང་བའི་མདོག	turmeric color, yellow	yung ba'i mdog
ཡུང་མ	turnip	yung ma
ཡུང་ཚ	great great grandchild	yung tsha
ཡུངས	mustard	yungs
ཡུངས་ཀར	mustard seed, white mustard	yungs kar
ཡུངས་ཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ	ske tshe	yungs kar rgyal po
ཡུངས་ཀར་བྲབ	throw white mustard	yungs kar brab
ཡུངས་དཀར	nyung dkar - Mustard seeds	yungs dkar
ཡུངས་ཐུན	charmed substances	yungs thun
ཡུངས་ནག	black mustard	yungs nag
ཡུངས་འབྲུ	mustard seed, grain of mustard	yungs 'bru
ཡུངས་འབྲུ་ཙམ	as small as a grain of mustard	yungs 'bru tsam
ཡུངས་མར	oil of mustard	yungs mar
ཡུངས་ཟོར	lump of white mustard btsugs pa'i gtor zor	yungs zor
ཡུད	moment, instant	yud
ཡུད་ཀྱི	in a flicker, flash	yud kyi
ཡུད་ཀྱིས	in a moment, quickly, instantly	yud kyis
ཡུད་ཅན	striped black or white	yud can
ཡུད་ཅིག	yud tsam zhig	yud cig
ཡུད་དུ	in a moment	yud du
ཡུད་པ	(A) weight, heaviness	yud pa
ཡུད་ཙམ	+ neg not for even an instant. [which is] a mere instant, a mere fraction, a tiny bit; momentary	yud tsam
ཡུད་ཙམ་གློག་འོད་གྱིས་གསལ་བ	illuminated by lightning for an instant	yud tsam glog 'od gyis gsal ba
ཡུད་ཙམ་གཅིག	48 minutes, 'an hour'	yud tsam gcig
ཡུད་ཙམ་ལྟ་བ	glance	yud tsam lta ba
ཡུད་ཙམ་དུའང	even for an instant	yud tsam du'ang
ཡུད་ཙམ་གདའ	is just an instant	yud tsam gda'
ཡུད་ཙམ་ན	for a brief instant	yud tsam na
ཡུད་ཙམ་གནས་པ	momentary presence, momentary flash of the present, remained like that for awhile	yud tsam gnas pa
ཡུད་ཙམ་པ	a brief moment; momentary	yud tsam pa
ཡུད་ཙམ་ཕྱིན་པ	a short time passed, after a moment	yud tsam phyin pa
ཡུད་ཙམ་ཞིག	instant	yud tsam zhig
ཡུད་ཙམ་བཞུགས	remain for awhile	yud tsam bzhugs
ཡུད་ཙམ་ཡིན	last but an instant	yud tsam yin
ཡུད་ཙམ་རིང	momentary	yud tsam ring
ཡུད་ཙམ་སོང	after a moment passed	yud tsam song
ཡུད་ཡུད	momentarily, only a moment	yud yud
ཡུད་ཡུད་པ	1) praise; 2) momentarily, only a moment)	yud yud pa
ཡུད་རེ	for a moment	yud re
ཡུན	duration, time, length/ period of time	yun
ཡུན་གྱི་སྲིང་དུ	long-lasting	yun gyi sring du
ཡུན་གྱིས	dus rim gyis	yun gyis
ཡུན་འགོར	delay, take a long time to do	yun 'gor
ཡུན་འགོར་བ	delay, take long time to do a thing	yun 'gor ba
ཡུན་འགོར་བྱེད	delay, take a long time to do	yun 'gor byed
ཡུན་འགྱངས	prolongation	yun 'gyangs
ཡུན་འགྱངས་བྱེད	prolong	yun 'gyangs byed
ཡུན་ཅི་སྲིད	how long?	yun ci srid
ཡུན་ཅི་སྲིད་དུ	how long	yun ci srid du
ཡུན་ཅི་སྲིད་བར་དུ་གནས་པ	how long will it last?	yun ci srid bar du gnas pa
ཡུན་ཅིག	for a while	yun cig
ཡུན་ཅིག་ནས	after a moment	yun cig nas
ཡུན་ཆེན་མོ	prajnaparamita	yun chen mo
ཡུན་ཇི་ཙམ	for how long	yun ji tsam
ཡུན་གཏན	permanent, everlasting, enduring, eternal	yun gtan
ཡུན་བརྟན	lasting a long time	yun brtan
ཡུན་བརྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་སྲིད	enduring rule	yun brtan pa'i rgyal srid
ཡུན་ཐུང	short periods 2495	yun thung
ཡུན་ཐུང་ངུ	short periods	yun thung ngu
ཡུན་ཐུང་ངུ་སོང	become shorter	yun thung ngu song
ཡུན་ཐུང་ཐུང	brief, for a short while	yun thung thung
ཡུན་ཐུང་བ	short time, of short duration	yun thung ba
ཡུན་ཐུང་སྦྱོང་གྲས	short term training class	yun thung sbyong gras
ཡུན་དུ	always/ for a long time/ forever; a long time	yun du
ཡུན་དུ་འགྲོགས	stay forever	yun du 'grogs
ཡུན་དུ་གནས་མིན	continuation of, fact of not abiding forever	yun du gnas min
ཡུན་དུ་འཚོ	existing/ living/ surviving for a long time	yun du 'tsho
ཡུན་དུ་བསྲིང་བ	to extend a period of time	yun du bsring ba
ཡུན་ནན་ཞིང་ཆེན	Yunnan Province	yun nan zhing chen
ཡུན་ནས་ཡུན་དུ	always, eternal, perpetual, forever, forever	yun nas yun du
ཡུན་ནེན	province in CH	yun nen
ཡུན་གནས	permanent, durable, everlasting, enduring, eternal	yun gnas
ཡུན་མི་རིང་ཙམ	not too long a time, not too long, short	yun mi ring tsam
ཡུན་ཙམ	short time, moment	yun tsam
ཡུན་ཙམ་སོང་བ་དང	after a short time passed	yun tsam song ba dang
ཡུན་ཚད	1) length of time, duration time limit, space of time, term; 2) blink duration	yun tshad
ཡུན་འཚོ	existing/ living/ surviving for a long time	yun 'tsho
ཡུན་རིང	eternal, perpetual, forever, long time, long time, long-lasting	yun ring
ཡུན་རིང་གི་ཁ	gradually	yun ring gi kha
ཡུན་རིང་གི་ཁ་ནས	by little and little	yun ring gi kha nas
ཡུན་རིང་འགོར	delay, procrastinate	yun ring 'gor
ཡུན་རིང་འགྲོགས་པའི	whom I had known a long time	yun ring 'grogs pa'i
ཡུན་རིང་ཐུང	of long or short duration	yun ring thung
ཡུན་རིང་ཐུབ	last a long time	yun ring thub
ཡུན་རིང་འཐབ་པ	protracted war[fare]	yun ring 'thab pa
ཡུན་རིང་དུ	during a long time	yun ring du
ཡུན་རིང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	prolong	yun ring du gtong ba
ཡུན་རིང་དུ་སོང	a long time has passed yun ring sdod gshom byed pa'i blo rgya plans that assume we will live a long time	yun ring du song
ཡུན་རིང་ནད་པ	someone who has long been sick	yun ring nad pa
ཡུན་རིང་གནས་མ་ཐུབ་མཁན	perishable	yun ring gnas ma thub mkhan
ཡུན་རིང་གནས་མི་ཐུབ་མཁན	ephemeral	yun ring gnas mi thub mkhan
ཡུན་རིང་པོ	long time/ range yun ring po ci tsam du 'grogs kyang however much time you have to spend with	yun ring po
ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ལྡད	stayed or remained for a longtime	yun ring po ldad
ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ནས	from a long time, a long time since, a long time since or past	yun ring po nas
ཡུན་རིང་པོའི་འཆར་གཞི	long-range plan	yun ring po'i 'char gzhi
ཡུན་རིང་པོར	during a long time	yun ring por
ཡུན་རིང་པོར་མི་སྡོད་པ	but we won't stay for long yun ring por g.yog mo'i lus su skyes pa yin - was born as a servant girl for many lives	yun ring por mi sdod pa
ཡུན་རིང་མ	late, old, stale	yun ring ma
ཡུན་རིང་མི་སྡོད་པ	it won't endure	yun ring mi sdod pa
ཡུན་རིང་འཚོ	long-lived	yun ring 'tsho
ཡུན་རིང་ཞིག་ནས	For some time,	yun ring zhig nas
ཡུན་རིང་ལོན་ནས	after a long time passed; at long last	yun ring lon nas
ཡུན་རིང་ཤོས	of the longest duration	yun ring shos
ཡུན་རིངས་ཤོས	the longest time	yun rings shos
ཡུན་རེ	for a moment	yun re
ཡུན་བསྲིངས	postponement, delay	yun bsrings
ཡུན་བསྲིངས་བྱེད	postpone, delay	yun bsrings byed
ཡུབ	(not in das)	yub
ཡུམ	consort, mother, female energy, title of abhidharma literature, the original from which a copy is made	yum
ཡུམ་ཀ	mother. Vajrayogini Tantra w the single goddess sadhana	yum ka
ཡུམ་ཀ་བདེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མོ	{klong chen snying thig} dakini	yum ka bde chen rgyal mo
ཡུམ་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་མོ	the mother Samantabhadri	yum kun tu bzang mo
ཡུམ་ཀྱི་མཁའ	the womb of the female figure	yum kyi mkha'
ཡུམ་བཀའ	mother inspiration	yum bka'
ཡུམ་བཀའ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	Syn {yum bka' lhan cig skyes ma}, Vajra Varahi	yum bka' lhan skyes
ཡུམ་སྐུ་ཞབས	mother [h]	yum sku zhabs
ཡུམ་གྱི་མཁའ	the womb of the female figure yum gyi 'grel rkang brgya dang brgyad TS yum gyi 'grel rkang brgya dang brgyad TSE	yum gyi mkha'
ཡུམ་གྱི་ཆ་འཛིན་པའི་རིགས	family / type adhering to the female aspect	yum gyi cha 'dzin pa'i rigs
ཡུམ་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ལྔ	Tibet	yum gyi phyag rgya lnga
ཡུམ་གྱི་འབག་ཟློས	gar 'khrab dus yum aa mas gyon rgyu'i gdong 'bag	yum gyi 'bag zlos
ཡུམ་རྒྱས་བསྡུས	Prajnaparamita in 100,000 shlokas, and 8,000	yum rgyas bsdus
ཡུམ་རྒྱས་པ	Prajnaparamita in 100,000 sho lo ka, 'bum	yum rgyas pa
ཡུམ་རྒྱས་པ་སྐོར་གསུམ	[TRS 99-6]	yum rgyas pa skor gsum
ཡུམ་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་གསུམ	Prajnaparamita in 100,000 shlokas, 20,000, and 8,000	yum rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum
ཡུམ་བརྒྱད	eight female deities	yum brgyad
ཡུམ་ལྔ	five consorts	yum lnga
ཡུམ་ཆེན	supreme mother consort	yum chen
ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ	Prajñaparamita	yum chen mo
ཡུམ་མཆོག	supreme consort	yum mchog
ཡུམ་མཆོག་མ	supreme consort yum ye shes mkha' 'gro, wisdom dakini consort	yum mchog ma
ཡུམ་མཆོག་གསང་ཡེ་ཤེས	the supreme consort, guhyaj~nana Hayagriva's consort	yum mchog gsang ye shes
ཡུམ་ཐང	{yum thang}	yum thang
ཡུམ་དུམ་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	1) the extended, middle length and abridged prajna paramita; 2) aa mdo and bar khams etc kyi mna' tshig cig	yum dum pa bcu drug
ཡུམ་དྲུག	[TRS 99-6]	yum drug
ཡུམ་མདོ	Prajnaparamita Sutra	yum mdo
ཡུམ་སྡུད་པ་སྐོར་གསུམ	[TRS 100-1]	yum sdud pa skor gsum
ཡུམ་བསྡུས་པ	Prajnaparamita in 8,000 shlokas	yum bsdus pa
ཡུམ་སྣང་གསལ་འོད་ལྡན་མ	daughter of Queen Alokabhasvati	yum snang gsal 'od ldan ma
ཡུམ་པ	strew salt on food, ashes on the snow	yum pa
ཡུམ་དཔེ	original of a book	yum dpe
ཡུམ་བར་བ	middle length prajnaparamita	yum bar ba
ཡུམ་བར་མ	Medium Prajnaparamita 2496	yum bar ma
ཡུམ་བུ་བླ་མཁར	{pho brang yum bu bla mkhar} the Yumbu Lhakhar Palace	yum bu bla mkhar
ཡུམ་བུ་བླ་སྒང	{yum bu bla sgang}	yum bu bla sgang
ཡུམ་བུ་ལྷ་མཁར	yum bu lha mkhar}	yum bu lha mkhar
ཡུམ་བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་མཚོ	mother of Dalai Lama Kalsang Gyatso	yum blo bzang chos mtsho
ཡུམ་འབངས	yum gyi phyogs su yod pa'i servant/ attendant	yum 'bangs
ཡུམ་འབུམ་པ	Prajnaparamita in 100,000 shlokas	yum 'bum pa
ཡུམ་འབྲིང་བ	the Prajnaparamita ion 25,000 [or 20,000] shlokas	yum 'bring ba
ཡུམ་བཙུན་མོ	1) queen; 2) mother and queen	yum btsun mo
ཡུམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁའ་འགྲོ	wisdom dakini consort	yum ye shes mkha' 'gro
ཡུམ་སངས་རྒོད་ལ་འཐེན	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	yum sangs rgod la 'then
ཡུམ་སངས་འོལ་ལ་འཐེན	{yum sangs 'ol la 'then}	yum sangs 'ol la 'then
ཡུམ་སྲས	mother and son	yum sras
ཡུམ་སྲས་བཅུ་བདུན	[TRS 99-6]	yum sras bcu bdun
ཡུམ་སྲས་གཉིས	his wife and son	yum sras gnyis
ཡུམ་ཧྱི་མཁའ	the womb of the female figure	yum hyi mkha'
ཡུམ་ཨ་བེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the venerable mother Abbey	yum a be rin po che
ཡུའུ་གོ་སི་ལ་ལྭ་ཡ	Yugoslavia	yu'u go si la lwa ya
ཡུའུ་ཐའོ	taro	yu'u tha'o
ཡུའེ་ཧན་ཞུན	LB Johnson	yu'e han zhun
ཡུའེ་ཧན་ཞུན་སྲིད་གཤུང	Johnson administration	yu'e han zhun srid gshung
ཡུར་ཆུ	water brought to the fields from an irrigation ditch/ channel	yur chu
ཡུར་ཆུ་འདྲེན	irrigate	yur chu 'dren
ཡུར་ཆུང	small irrigation channel/ water course	yur chung
ཡུར་པ	to smooth	yur pa
ཡུར་པོ	irrigation channel	yur po
ཡུར་པོ་ཆེ	large irrigation channel etc.	yur po che
ཡུར་ཕྲན	small water/ irrigation channel/ ditch	yur phran
ཡུར་བ	tunnel, (irrigation) ditch or (by extension) pipe (as in water pipe) (from ATG). [mss]	yur ba
ཡུར་བའི་ཆུ	water conveyed by a canal	yur ba'i chu
ཡུར་བའི་གཤོར	passage for water, water channel	yur ba'i gshor
ཡུར་བུ	irrigation ditch/ canal, drain, gutter	yur bu
ཡུར་མ	act of weeding, weeds	yur ma
ཡུར་མ་རྒྱག	weed [a field]	yur ma rgyag
ཡུར་མ་རྒྱག་པ	hoe	yur ma rgyag pa
ཡུར་མ་རྒྱག་པའི་དུས་ཆེན	weeding festival	yur ma rgyag pa'i dus chen
ཡུར་མ་རྒྱག་རན་པའི་དུས	time for weeding	yur ma rgyag ran pa'i dus
ཡུར་མ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to weed	yur ma brgyab pa
ཡུར་མ་ཡུར	weed [a field]	yur ma yur
ཡུར་མ་ཡུར་བ	pull out weeds, purify the mind, cleanse the heart, weed out, remove weeds from a garden	yur ma yur ba
ཡུར་མའི་སྐབས	1) weeding festival; 2) time for weeding	yur ma'i skabs
ཡུར་རྩྭ	1) weeding, bad grass to be weeded out from crops; 2) grass on the bank of the yur chu	yur rtswa
ཡུལ	(sense) object; (objective) environment/ field; isc. domain/ scope/ purview/ reach; objective factor; isc. mode; isc. confines; visionary field*	yul
ཡུལ་ཀུན་ལ་འཇུག་པ	{yul kun la 'jug pa}	yul kun la 'jug pa
ཡུལ་ཀེག	babs sme gnyis nag la babs so	yul keg
ཡུལ་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	object source	yul kyi skye mched
ཡུལ་བཀོད	chags dbyibs of the region	yul bkod
ཡུལ་རྐྱེན	object and circumstance	yul rkyen
ཡུལ་རྐྱེན་སྣ་ཚོགས	circumstances of different types of objects	yul rkyen sna tshogs
ཡུལ་རྐྱེན་འབྱུང་བའི་ངོ་བོ	essence of occurring perceptions	yul rkyen 'byung ba'i ngo bo
ཡུལ་ལྐོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	hidden objects	yul lkog tu gyur pa
ཡུལ་སྐད	dialect	yul skad
ཡུལ་སྐད་དུ	in the provincial dialect	yul skad du
ཡུལ་སྐབས	place and occasion/ time	yul skabs
ཡུལ་སྐོར	wander from region to region	yul skor
ཡུལ་སྐོར་བརྗེད་ཐོ	travel notes	yul skor brjed tho
ཡུལ་སྐོར་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	travel	yul skor du 'gro ba
ཡུལ་སྐོར་སྤྲོ་འཆམ	visiting, sight seeing	yul skor spro 'cham
ཡུལ་སྐྱོང	king	yul skyong
ཡུལ་ཁག	nations, countries	yul khag
ཡུལ་ཁམས	land, kingdom; country	yul khams
ཡུལ་ཁམས་གྱི་འཚོགས་འདུ	national assembly yul khams su g.yeng - flow over a country	yul khams gyi 'tshogs 'du
ཡུལ་ཁལ	in Tsang grain measure "'bo" che chung ru'i khal gyi 1/2 tsam	yul khal
ཡུལ་ཁུགས	boondocks, backwoods, remote area	yul khugs
ཡུལ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	unique individual	yul khyad par can
ཡུལ་ཁྱབ	{yul khyab kyi ye shes} (timeless awareness that) permeates the sensory domain [CYDz 133.b.1; note reference to extended treatment in TCDz]	yul khyab
ཡུལ་ཁྱིམ	country/ region and home	yul khyim
ཡུལ་ཁྲིམས	country's usages, customs or laws of a country 2497	yul khrims
ཡུལ་འཁོར	country and servants, home area, metropolis, country and servants, province, estate	yul 'khor
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱེས	plant solanum jacquini	yul 'khor skyes
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱོང	1 of 4 'jig rten skyong, ruler	yul 'khor skyong
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱོང་གིས་ཞུས་པ	{yul 'khor skyong gis zhus pa * K ko nga 427	yul 'khor skyong gis zhus pa
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱོང་གིས་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	{yul 'khor skyong gis zhus pa'i mdo	yul 'khor skyong gis zhus pa'i mdo
ཡུལ་འཁོར་ལྡན	king's brother-in-law	yul 'khor ldan
ཡུལ་འཁོར་དབང	sheriff, chief of a city, king, potentate	yul 'khor dbang
ཡུལ་འཁོར་དབང་པོ	king of a small region	yul 'khor dbang po
ཡུལ་འཁོར་འཛིན	king of geese, 1 of 4 guardian kings	yul 'khor 'dzin
ཡུལ་འཁོར་ཟླ་བ	moon of the land	yul 'khor zla ba
ཡུལ་འཁོར་བཟང	good horizons	yul 'khor bzang
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྲུང	name of the guardian king of the East, lord of the Gandharvas	yul 'khor srung
ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྲུང་བ	protective ritual for the environment / locality	yul 'khor srung ba
ཡུལ་འཁོར་བསྲུང	dhrtarastra, (1 of 4 'jig rten skyong, guardian in the east, king of demons feeding on incense)	yul 'khor bsrung
ཡུལ་འཁྱམ	moving/ wandering from place to place, exile	yul 'khyam
ཡུལ་འཁྱམས	moving/ wandering from place to place, exile	yul 'khyams
ཡུལ་འཁྱར	immigrant, people who leave to other lands	yul 'khyar
ཡུལ་འཁྱར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become an immigrant	yul 'khyar du 'gyur ba
ཡུལ་འཁྱར་པ	wanderer, exile, vagabond	yul 'khyar pa
ཡུལ་འཁྱར་སྲིད་གཞུང	government in exile	yul 'khyar srid gzhung
ཡུལ་གངས་ཅན	Tibet	yul gangs can
ཡུལ་གུང་ཐང	district of gung thang in western tsang	yul gung thang
ཡུལ་གོང	regional/ market price	yul gong
ཡུལ་གོམས་གཤིས་ལུགས	region's customs/ way of life	yul goms gshis lugs
ཡུལ་གྱར	to move from place to place, wandering about, exile	yul gyar
ཡུལ་གྱར་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become an immigrant	yul gyar du 'gyur ba
ཡུལ་གྱར་པ	wanderer, exile, vagabond	yul gyar pa
ཡུལ་གྱར་སྲིད་གཞུང	government in exile	yul gyar srid gzhung
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྐད	provincial dialect, provincialism	yul gyi skad
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	object ayatana/ proliferation	yul gyi skye mched
ཡུལ་གྱི་བསྐལ་དོན	object unapprehendable because an object is very [large and hence partly] far away	yul gyi bskal don
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཁམས་ལྔ	five dhatus/ elements of the sense objects [R]	yul gyi khams lnga
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six object elements. Syn {dmigs pa'i khams drug}	yul gyi khams drug
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར	particular place, particular province	yul gyi khyad par
ཡུལ་གྱི་དགེ་བཅུ	the 10 virtues of a region	yul gyi dge bcu
ཡུལ་གྱི་བཅུད	the auspiciousness of the land	yul gyi bcud
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཆུ་ཚོད	chos tshod of area	yul gyi chu tshod
ཡུལ་གྱི་མཆོག	chief place, capital	yul gyi mchog
ཡུལ་གྱི་རྟག་ལོངས	period of coursing of the planets in the regions of the individual motion stars	yul gyi rtag longs
ཡུལ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	objective view	yul gyi lta ba
ཡུལ་གྱི་ལྟེ་བ	center of a region/ object	yul gyi lte ba
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྟེང་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	objective existence	yul gyi steng nas grub pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་མཐིལ	capital of the region/ province	yul gyi mthil
ཡུལ་གྱི་བདག་པོ	sheriff, chief of a city	yul gyi bdag po
ཡུལ་གྱི་གནས	region, area, country	yul gyi gnas
ཡུལ་གྱི་རྣམ་ལྡན	noematic aspect of an objective field	yul gyi rnam ldan
ཡུལ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	an object's observable quality/ aspect	yul gyi rnam pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྣང་པ	thoughts of homeland, appearances of objects	yul gyi snang pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	appearances of objects	yul gyi snang ba
ཡུལ་གྱི་པོ་བརྒྱ	100 countries	yul gyi po brgya
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཕྲ་མེན་བརྒྱད	the eight tramens of the sacred countries, the eight pisachis of the holy places	yul gyi phra men brgyad
ཡུལ་གྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	a part of the country, province	yul gyi bye brag
ཡུལ་གྱི་བློ་ཅན	one whose mind state is one of ordinary consciousness of sense objects	yul gyi blo can
ཡུལ་གྱི་དབང་རིས	the [18] divisions of regions/ the country	yul gyi dbang ris
ཡུལ་གྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of place	yul gyi 'byor pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	primary / main object [ggd]	yul gyi gtso bo
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཚད་པ	measure or extent of a country	yul gyi tshad pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་ཚུགས་པ	sho gam pa'am sgo khral sdud mkhan	yul gyi tshugs pa
ཡུལ་གྱི་འཛིན་རྟོག	{yul snang ma 'gags la yul gyi 'dzin rtog zhi} perceived objects do not stop appearing, but the concepts that take them as having any true existence subside	yul gyi 'dzin rtog
ཡུལ་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	unfabricated/ unconditioned dharmakaya, objective clear light TSE	yul gyi 'od gsal
ཡུལ་གྱི་གཤེད་མ	local tyrant	yul gyi gshed ma
ཡུལ་གྱིས་བསྐལ་པ	far apart	yul gyis bskal pa
ཡུལ་གྲུ	country divided into sections, district, place, village, town	yul gru
ཡུལ་གྲུ་སོ་སོའི་སྐད་མི་འདྲ་བ	the different dialects/ languages of individual regions/ countries	yul gru so so'i skad mi 'dra ba
ཡུལ་གྲོང	district	yul grong
ཡུལ་གླིང	island	yul gling
ཡུལ་གླུ	folk/ regional songs	yul glu
ཡུལ་དགུགས་པ	confiscate property, resume lands	yul dgugs pa
ཡུལ་དགོན	village and monastery	yul dgon
ཡུལ་འགོག་པ	cessation of the objectively given	yul 'gog pa
ཡུལ་རྒྱང་རིང་བ	long, far 2498	yul rgyang ring ba
ཡུལ་བརྒྱད	the 8 spheres [of consciousness] [R]	yul brgyad
ཡུལ་ངན	tempest, public calamities, famine	yul ngan
ཡུལ་ངན་གྱི་ཙུབ་མ	turmoil of the tempest	yul ngan gyi tsub ma
ཡུལ་ངན་གྱི་ཚུབ་མ	turmoil of the storm yul ngan chen po byung bas bza' 'bru	yul ngan gyi tshub ma
ཡུལ་ངན་འབོད	jackdaw	yul ngan 'bod
ཡུལ་ངེས	determining factor	yul nges
ཡུལ་ངེས་ལྔ	five object-determining mental factors/states [see {yul nges byed lnga}. five determinative states. 1) {'dun pa}. = resolution or intention leads to striving after the object; 2) {mos pa}. = intere...	yul nges lnga
ཕི༹བེ༹་ཨོབཇེཅཏ	determining mental factors / states, see {yul nges byed lnga}	five object
ཡུལ་ངེས་པ	spatially determinate; comp with {dus nges pa} temporally determinate [ggd]	yul nges pa
ཡུལ་ངེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ་ལྔ	five object-determining mental factors ['dun pa dang, mos pa dang, dran pa dang, ting 'dzin dang, shes rab rnams so	yul nges byed kyi shes pa lnga
ཡུལ་ངེས་བྱེད་ལྔ	five determinative states. 1) {'dun pa} resolution or intention leads to striving after the object. 2) {mos pa} interest or examination of the object of concentration. 3) {dran pa} recollection or ...	yul nges byed lnga
ཡུལ་དངོས	isc. things of the sensory world [watch this one]	yul dngos
ཡུལ་དངོས་ཞེན་བག་ཆགས	habitual grasping to objects	yul dngos zhen bag chags
ཡུལ་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	to perceive an object [ggd]	yul mngon sum du rtogs pa
ཡུལ་ལྔ	the five sense objects. {gzugs} form, {sgra} sound, {dri} smell, {ro}, taste {reg bya} touch	yul lnga
ཡུལ་ལྔ་འབབ་པའི་རྩ	the five objects 'bab pa'i nadi	yul lnga 'bab pa'i rtsa
ཡུལ་ལྔའི་སྣང་བ	{phyi yul lnga'i snang ba thams cad med bzhin 'khrul ngo la snang ba rmi lam lta bu} as in a dream, all the external objects perceived with the fives senses are not there, but appear to the deluded	yul lnga'i snang ba
ཡུལ་ཅང་ཅང	stong hang hang, skyo lhang lhang blank emptiness	yul cang cang
ཡུལ་ཅན	subject, (subjective) owner of object; subjective agent; perceiversubject, sphere, object holder, the consciousness, the subject. object possessor, subject, 'relating to an object of sense', sense ...	yul can
ཡུལ་ཅན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	subjective view	yul can gyi lta ba
ཡུལ་ཅན་གྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	the consciousness which is the subject / perceiver-subject	yul can gyi rnam par shes pa
ཡུལ་ཅན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	subjective clear light	yul can gyi 'od gsal
ཡུལ་ཅན་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five sense perceiving faculties	yul can dbang po lnga
ཡུལ་ཅན་མི་བསླུ་བ	unerring subject	yul can mi bslu ba
ཡུལ་ཅན་ཡིད་ལ	one who has nothing else but business to think upon	yul can yid la
ཡུལ་ཅན་ཡིད་ལ་སྐྱེས	businessman	yul can yid la skyes
ཡུལ་ཅན་ཡེ་ཤེས	Syn {phyin ci ma log pa'i yongs grub}	yul can ye shes
ཡུལ་ཅན་གསུམ	the three perceivers	yul can gsum
ཡུལ་གཅིག་ཏུ	in a certain place	yul gcig tu
ཡུལ་ཆས	country's usages, customs or laws of a country	yul chas
ཡུལ་ཆེན་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 major countries of {dzam bu gling}	yul chen bcu drug
ཡུལ་ཆེན་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི	the 24 great holy places / regions	yul chen nyi shu rtsa bzhi
ཡུལ་ཆེན་ཉེར་གཞི	Twenty four great sacred places	yul chen nyer gzhi
ཡུལ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱ	100 countries	yul chen po brgya
ཡུལ་ཆེན་སོ་གཉིས	thirty-two major countries	yul chen so gnyis
ཡུལ་ཆོས	entities	yul chos
ཡུལ་ལྗོངས	land, world, scenery, inhabited tract where lands are cultivated, district 2499	yul ljongs
ཡུལ་ལྗོངས་གྲགས་ཅན	famous [scenic] places, places of interest	yul ljongs grags can
ཡུལ་ལྗོངས་མཛེས་སྡུག་ཅན	a beautiful/ scenic region	yul ljongs mdzes sdug can
ཡུལ་ལྗོངས་མཛེས་པོ	scenic	yul ljongs mdzes po
ཡུལ་ལྗོངས་རི་མོ	landscape picture	yul ljongs ri mo
ཡུལ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི	24 sacred places	yul nyi shu rtsa bzhi
ཡུལ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	dakinis of	yul nyi shu rtsa bzhi mkha' 'gro
ཡུལ་ཉི་ཤུ་ར་བཞི	24 sacred places [R]	yul nyi shu ra bzhi
ཡུལ་ཉེར་བཞིའི་རྩ	nadis of the 24 places of the body	yul nyer bzhi'i rtsa
ཡུལ་གཉེན་པ	an important person or object	yul gnyen pa
ཡུལ་བཏོན་པ	left their homeland	yul bton pa
ཡུལ་རྟ	horses in a particular region	yul rta
ཡུལ་རྟོག	to judge objects	yul rtog
ཡུལ་སྟོང	lonely	yul stong
ཡུལ་ཐག་རིང	a remote place	yul thag ring
ཡུལ་ཐག་རིང་པོ་བར་དུ་ཆོད་པ	far away place	yul thag ring po bar du chod pa
ཡུལ་ཐང	local price	yul thang
ཡུལ་ཐབས	local/ indigenous methods	yul thabs
ཡུལ་ཐོག་ཏུ	in the immediate perception of sense objects	yul thog tu
ཡུལ་ཐོན	produce locally, local products	yul thon
ཡུལ་ཐོན་ཀུང་སི	local products company	yul thon kung si
ཡུལ་ཐོན་པ	produce locally	yul thon pa
ཡུལ་ཐོན་རྫས	local products	yul thon rdzas
ཡུལ་མཐའ	abroad/ the wilds, hinterland, wilderness	yul mtha'
ཡུལ་མཐའ་ཁོབ	border countries; x {yul mtha' khob tu skyes na sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa med pas chos byed du mi khoms} those born in border countries have no opportunity to practise the Dharma because the doctrin...	yul mtha' khob
ཡུལ་མཐའ་ཁོབ་ཐོ་གར	the wild marches of Thokar	yul mtha' khob tho gar
ཡུལ་མཐའ་འཁོབ	wild tribes living in the border countries	yul mtha' 'khob
ཡུལ་དང་ཉེ་བའི་དབུས	in the middle of the road near the city	yul dang nye ba'i dbus
ཡུལ་དང་ཡུལ་ཅན	perceiver and object	yul dang yul can
ཡུལ་དུ་གྱུར	became the object of	yul du gyur
ཡུལ་དུ་འགྱུར	become the object of	yul du 'gyur
ཡུལ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to return home	yul du 'gro ba
ཡུལ་དུ་ཆོས་ཉིད་གཏན་ཡུལ་བཟུང	take hold of dharmata as your homeland	yul du chos nyid gtan yul bzung
ཡུལ་དུ་མེད་པ	nonexistent/ not to exist as some/ any object; having no (specific) context	yul du med pa
ཡུལ་དུས	place and time/ occasion, condition	yul dus
ཡུལ་དུས་སྐྱ་ཕམ	in some places bad harvest occurring	yul dus skya pham
ཡུལ་དུས་གནས་ཚུལ	place and time/ occasion, condition	yul dus gnas tshul
ཡུལ་དུས་རྣམ་པ	place, time and kind yul dus rang bzhin gang la ltos te drub	yul dus rnam pa
བདེ་རྫས་གཅིག	identical simultaneous substance from the point of view of place, time and nature [ggd]	bde rdzas gcig
ཡུལ་དུས་རང་བཞིན་མ་འདྲེས་པ	unmixed oject time and nature [gzhi gcig la gnas dang dus ngo bo bcas ldog pa'i khyad par so sor yod pa, dper na yul bum pa lta bu shar nub gnyis ka na yod kyang shar la yod pa'i cha de ni nub la y...	yul dus rang bzhin ma 'dres pa
ཡུལ་དེ་གའི	native	yul de ga'i
ཡུལ་དེ་ན	in these parts	yul de na
ཡུལ་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the object suchness	yul de bzhin nyid
ཡུལ་དེའི་མི་རྣམས	the local people	yul de'i mi rnams
ཡུལ་དོན	object	yul don
ཡུལ་དོན་ལྔ	the five sense objects	yul don lnga
ཡུལ་དྲུག	6 objects of the senses	yul drug
ཡུལ་བདག	local deity	yul bdag
ཡུལ་བདག་མོ	mistress, female protector of the country	yul bdag mo
ཡུལ་འདི	this place	yul 'di
ཡུལ་འདོད་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	the desirable objects	yul 'dod pa'i yon tan
ཡུལ་འདོན	banish	yul 'don
ཡུལ་སྡུད་པ	among the rnam dbye lnga pa//from Lhasa to be cin	yul sdud pa
ཡུལ་སྡེ	1) local village; 2) province, district, settlement	yul sde
ཡུལ་སྡེ་འཁྱོམས་པ	village or group of villages, district	yul sde 'khyoms pa
ཡུལ་སྡེའི་སྲུང་སྐྱོབས	home guard	yul sde'i srung skyobs
ཡུལ་ནང	internal	yul nang
ཡུལ་ནང་གི	internal	yul nang gi
ཡུལ་ནས	from a country/ place/ region, on the spot	yul nas
ཡུལ་ནས་སྟོན	show/ teach on the spot	yul nas ston
ཡུལ་ནས་བསྡད	I stayed in my homeland	yul nas bsdad
ཡུལ་ནས་སྤྱུག	banish out of country	yul nas spyug
ཡུལ་གནོན་པ	1) by force take over another country; 2) by moving residences take over yul gzhis [local houses/ homesteads]	yul gnon pa
ཡུལ་རྣམ	object aspect. Syn {yul gyi rnam pa}	yul rnam
ཡུལ་རྣམས	all phenomena	yul rnams
ཡུལ་སྣང	object appearance, apparent objects; apparent phenomenon presenting itself as an object	yul snang
ཡུལ་སྣང་གཏན་ཕབ	gaining confidence in appearances being illusion	yul snang gtan phab
ཡུལ་སྣང་བའི་ཁམས	external objectphenomena. Syn {snod kyi khams}	yul snang ba'i khams
ཡུལ་པ	people, local folk	yul pa
ཡུལ་པ་དང་བྱེས་པ	local people and travellers/ visitors	yul pa dang byes pa
ཡུལ་པོ	sems stong lhang lhang,//tshogs spyi dang bral na mi gcig pur 'tsho ba ha cang yul po yong	yul po
ཡུལ་པོ་གསུམ	/ the three yul bo = phung bo [1) {yang dag par nges pa'i phung 2500 bo}; 2) {log par nges ba'i phung bo}. 3) {ma nges pa'i phung bo}	yul po gsum
ཡུལ་དཔོན	master of the region, local official/ headman/ magistrate	yul dpon
ཡུལ་སྤོ་བ	migrate	yul spo ba
ཡུལ་ཕག	village pig	yul phag
ཡུལ་ཕུ་བླ་མཁར	ancient palace of king gnya' khri btsan po in yarlung	yul phu bla mkhar
ཡུལ་ཕུང་བ	to destroy the country	yul phung ba
ཡུལ་ཕུད	to root out (?)	yul phud
ཡུལ་ཕྱི	native/ local and foreign	yul phyi
ཡུལ་ཕྱི་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	native/ local and foreign ways	yul phyi zung 'brel
ཡུལ་ཕྱུང་བ	person who is banished/ exiled	yul phyung ba
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས	the whole of the land	yul phyogs
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་པ	compatriot	yul phyogs gcig pa
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ	throughout the region	yul phyogs thams cad la
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་ཚོ	your homelands	yul phyogs tsho
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་བཟང་པོ	this good land	yul phyogs bzang po
ཡུལ་ཕྲ་བ	little things	yul phra ba
ཡུལ་ཕྲན	small[er outlying] districts	yul phran
ཡུལ་བབ	local conditions/ character/ circumstances	yul bab
ཡུལ་བབ་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in accord w local conditions	yul bab dang bstun pa
ཡུལ་བབས	local conditions/ character/ circumstances	yul babs
ཡུལ་བབས་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in accord w local conditions	yul babs dang bstun pa
ཡུལ་བལ	wool from a farmer's sheep	yul bal
ཡུལ་བྱོལ	taking refuge, going into exile, fleeing	yul byol
ཡུལ་བྱོལ་འགྲོ	take/ seek refuge, go into exile, flee	yul byol 'gro
ཡུལ་བྱོལ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཞིང་བདག	runaway landlords	yul byol 'gro ba'i zhing bdag
ཡུལ་བྱོལ་དུ་འགྲོ	take/ seek refuge, go into exile, flee	yul byol du 'gro
ཡུལ་བྱོལ་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཞིང་བདག	runaway landlords	yul byol du 'gro ba'i zhing bdag
ཡུལ་བྱོལ་ཞིང་བདག	runaway landlords	yul byol zhing bdag
ཡུལ་བློན	civil officer	yul blon
ཡུལ་དབང་བྱེད	senses	yul dbang byed
ཡུལ་དབང་ཤེས་གསུམ	sense object organs and consciousness	yul dbang shes gsum
ཡུལ་དབུས	{chos kyi yul dbus} a land where the Dharma flourishes	yul dbus
ཡུལ་དབུས་ཀྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དྲུག	TSE	yul dbus kyi grong khyer drug
ཡུལ་དབུས་སྐྱེས	/ coming from the central region	yul dbus skyes
ཡུལ་དབུས་སུ་སྐྱེས	/ coming from the central region	yul dbus su skyes
ཡུལ་དབུས་སུ་སྐྱེས་པ	have been born in a civilized country	yul dbus su skyes pa
ཡུལ་དབྱིངས་རྣམ་དག་གི་སྒྲོན་མ	the field, the camp of fine space	yul dbyings rnam dag gi sgron ma
ཡུལ་འབབ	local conditions/ character/ circumstances	yul 'bab
ཡུལ་འབབ་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in accord w local conditions	yul 'bab dang bstun pa
ཡུལ་འབབས	local conditions/ character/ circumstances	yul 'babs
ཡུལ་འབབས་དང་བསྟུན་པ	in accord w local conditions	yul 'babs dang bstun pa
ཡུལ་འབྱེད	widen the gap	yul 'byed
ཡུལ་མ་འདྲེས་པ	spatially determinate, unmixed in place [ggd]	yul ma 'dres pa
ཡུལ་མི	1) local people; 2) people born there; 3) neighbors; 4) fellow countrymen	yul mi
ཡུལ་མི་གྲོང་བ	villager, local people	yul mi grong ba
ཡུལ་མི་གཅིག	of various origins	yul mi gcig
ཡུལ་མི་རྟོག	not to judge objects	yul mi rtog
ཡུལ་མི་གཙོ་ཆེན	prominent citizens	yul mi gtso chen
ཡུལ་མི་གཙོ་བོ	prominent citizens	yul mi gtso bo
ཡུལ་མི་འཛིན་པ	perceive things incorrectly	yul mi 'dzin pa
ཡུལ་མི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་སྐད	TSE	yul mi rang bzhin gyi skad
ཡུལ་མི་ལས་པ	local/ civilian laborers	yul mi las pa
ཡུལ་མི་བསླུ་བ	undeceptive object [rang 'dzin gyi blos ji ltar bzung ba ltar don du yod pa, eg vase in the water in it don rang mtshan du grub pa'o	yul mi bslu ba
ཡུལ་མིའི་སྐད	local people's dialect/ language/ way of talking	yul mi'i skad
ཡུལ་མིའི་ལྟེ་གནས	housing estate, residential quarters	yul mi'i lte gnas
ཡུལ་མིའི་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	neighborhood committee	yul mi'i u yon lhan khang
ཡུལ་མེད	placeless, nonexistent/ not to exist as some/ any object; objectless. Syn {'dzin med} nonreferential	yul med
ཏོ་qཨུཨསི	subject, i.e., rig pa); isc. having no context/ object	to quasi
ཡུལ་མེད་དུ	without a trace	yul med du
ཡུལ་མེད་པའི་བློ	a concept for which there is no object	yul med pa'i blo
ཡུལ་མེད་ཟང་ཀ་མ	objectless thoroughness	yul med zang ka ma
ཡུལ་མེད་ཟང་ཐལ	(free and) unobstructed nonreferential state (in which no object [truly] exists) yul med zang thal kyi rang gding zin pa having the confidence of objects being unobstructed yul med zang thal kyi ra...	yul med zang thal
ཡུལ་མེད་ཟང་ཐལ་ངང་དུ་རོལ	abiding in the unobstructed nature beyond objects/ objectless transparency	yul med zang thal ngang du rol
ཡུལ་མོ་ངན	poor regions w bad soil etc yul mo ngan rnams zhing las thon tshad	yul mo ngan
ཡུལ་དམག	militia	yul dmag
ཡུལ་རྨུས	bad weather	yul rmus
ཡུལ་སྨད	Yulmeh, village in Tsari	yul smad
ཡུལ་གཙོ	prominent citizens	yul gtso
ཡུལ་ཚོ	village, cluster of hamlets, number of villages under a head man	yul tsho
ཡུལ་ཚོགས	village, community, country parish	yul tshogs
ཡུལ་མཚམས	district, area, section	yul mtshams
ཡུལ་འཛིན	1) grasping/ apprehending objects by the perceiver; 2) yul 'khor srung ba; 3) buddhist [king]	yul 'dzin
ཡུལ་འཛིན་ཚུལ	the way of apprehending an object	yul 'dzin tshul
ཡུལ་འཛིན་རེ་དོགས་མཚང་ལ་རྒོལ	confused by holding onto objects and hopes and fears	yul 'dzin re dogs mtshang la rgol
ཡུལ་རྫས	things brought from 1's own region, local products	yul rdzas
ཡུལ་རྫས་ཁྱད་རྫས	special local products	yul rdzas khyad rdzas
ཡུལ་གཞན་དུ་སྤྱུགས	banish to another country	yul gzhan du spyugs
ཡུལ་གཞན་དུ་མི་ཡེངས་པ	not being distracted by / wandering towards another object	yul gzhan du mi yengs pa
ཡུལ་གཞན་དུ་མི་ཡེངས་པར	not being distracted by/ wandering towards another object	yul gzhan du mi yengs par
ཡུལ་གཞན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	grasp objects as something other than what they are	yul gzhan du 'dzin pa
ཡུལ་གཞན་ལ་གཞིས་ཆགས་པ	immigrate	yul gzhan la gzhis chags pa
ཡུལ་གཞིས	estate	yul gzhis
ཡུལ་གཞོངས	[arch] 1) place w many villages/ dwellings; 2) setup of the region; 3) land; 4) world; 5) cultivated region	yul gzhongs
ཡུལ་བཞི	four sense-objects [form {gzugs}. or ru^pa, sound {sgra}. or shabda, smell {dri}. or gandha, and taste {ro} or rasa	yul bzhi
ཡུལ་ཟོག	yul rdzas	yul zog
ཡུལ་བཟང	fair weather, country with goodly climate & food	yul bzang
ཡུལ་བཟང་སྐྱེས	very useful and important medicine	yul bzang skyes
ཡུལ་ཡང་དཀ་འཁོར་ལོ	chakras of the completely pure world	yul yang dka 'khor lo
ཡུལ་ཡང་དག་འཁོར་ལོ	chakras of the completely pure world,	yul yang dag 'khor lo
ཡུལ་ཡིད་དུ་མི་འོང་པ	repulsive object	yul yid du mi 'ong pa
ཡུལ་ཡིད་འོང་གི་རྣམ་པ	image of an attractive object	yul yid 'ong gi rnam pa
ཡུལ་ཡུལ་ཅན	object and subject. Syn {rnam pa dang shes pa} / {yul shes}; expl. - subject and object	yul yul can
ཡུལ་ཡུལ་དི་གྱུར	jealousy, envy	yul yul di gyur
ཡུལ་ཡུལ་པོ	1) ngo tsha ba', mtsher mtsher po', zhum zhum po; 2) w/o what is important sems 'phreng 'phreng por gyur pa	yul yul po
ཡུལ་ཡོངས་སུ་གཅོད་པ	yul gzhal ba	yul yongs su gcod pa
ཡུལ་ཡོད་པ	SA yul can	yul yod pa
ཡུལ་རགས་པ	coarse things	yul rags pa
ཡུལ་རང་ངོས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	TSE	yul rang ngos nas grub pa
ཡུལ་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordial wisdom which sees the objects	yul rig pa'i ye shes
ཡུལ་རིང	long	yul ring
ཡུལ་ལ་ཁྱབ་པ	encompass objects	yul la khyab pa
ཡུལ་ལ་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdoms that encompass objects	yul la khyab pa'i ye shes
ཡུལ་ལ་ངེས་པ་ལྔ	five mental functions for ascertaining objects	yul la nges pa lnga
ཡུལ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	involved, engaged in or occupied with an object	yul la 'jug pa
ཡུལ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དྲུག	become involved in objects	yul la 'jug pa drug
ཡུལ་ལ་གཉིས་སུ་དབྱེ་བའི་རྣམ་གྲངས	TSE	yul la gnyis su dbye ba'i rnam grangs
ཡུལ་ལ་བསྙོན་པ	among bsnyon dor gyi rgyan, dbang yul so so'i rang gi bye as dngos la bsnyon nas de min byed las gzhan zhig ston pa'i rgyan	yul la bsnyon pa
ཡུལ་ལ་ཐོགས་པ	hindered objects yul la rnam par g.yeng ba - x {sems phyi rol gyi yul la rnam par g.yeng ba} getting distracted by external events	yul la thogs pa
ཡུལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	to be engaged in (perceiving) an object (dualistically)	yul la spyod pa
ཡུལ་ལ་མི་རྟོག	absence of objectification	yul la mi rtog
ཡུལ་ལ་མི་སྟོན་པ	not affirming any object	yul la mi ston pa
ཡུལ་ལ་དམིགས་པ་མེད་པ	not focused on an object	yul la dmigs pa med pa
ཡུལ་ལ་གཟུང་འཛིན	subject & object	yul la gzung 'dzin
ཡུལ་ལག	tongue of land	yul lag
ཡུལ་ལས་འགོང་བ	higher than its extent	yul las 'gong ba
ཡུལ་ལས་འདས	beyond the realm of --	yul las 'das
ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	transcend the idea	yul las 'das pa
ཡུལ་ལུ་ལུ་རྒྱུ་བ	[arch] 'phral 'phral du 'gro ba	yul lu lu rgyu ba
ཡུལ་ལུགས	local custom/ tradition	yul lugs
ཡུལ་ལུང	country, region, place, location, local, object	yul lung
ཡུལ་ལུང་སོ་སོར་དར་བའི་ལམ་ལུགས	traditions spreading in different regions	yul lung so sor dar ba'i lam lugs
ཡུལ་ཤེས	object & consciousness	yul shes
ཡུལ་ཤེས་འདོད་ཡོན་གྱི་བོན	bon of the sense enjoyments	yul shes 'dod yon gyi bon
ཡུལ་ཤོད	complain	yul shod
ཡུལ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	[TRS 140-2]	yul sum cu rtsa gnyis
ཡུལ་སེམས་རྟོག	objective mental concepts	yul sems rtog
ཡུལ་སོ་གཉིས	the thirty-two countries	yul so gnyis
ཡུལ་སོ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་རྩ	32 byang chub sems rtsa	yul so gnyis kyi rtsa
ཡུལ་སོ་སོའི་སྐད་ཆ	dialects/ languages of individual regions/ countries	yul so so'i skad cha
ཡུལ་སོ་སོར་ངེས་པ་ལྔ	five objectdetermined ones	yul so sor nges pa lnga
ཡུལ་སོ་སོར་གནས་པའི་ལྷ	local gods/ deity	yul so sor gnas pa'i lha
ཡུལ་སྲིད	local government	yul srid
ཡུལ་སྲུང	to defend the country {yul srung gi 'phrul thabs sna tshogs la rten te} used miraculous means to defend the country	yul srung
ཡུལ་སྲུང་དམག་སྡེ	Home Guard Unit	yul srung dmag sde
ཡུལ་སྲེད་པ་ཆུང་བ	not much attached to his native country	yul sred pa chung ba
ཡུལ་སྲོལ	custom	yul srol
ཡུལ་སྲོལ་གོམས་འདྲིས	habits and customs	yul srol goms 'dris
ཡུལ་སྲོལ་གོམས་གཤིས	habits and customs	yul srol goms gshis
ཡུལ་སྲོལ་གྱི་ཐབས་ཤེས	local/ indigenous methods	yul srol gyi thabs shes
ཡུལ་གསུམ	Three fields of objects. (snang yul, dbang yul, yid kyi yul). The form of the deity appearing as either a perceptual object, in the experience of the senses by someone else, or as a mental object	yul gsum
ཡུལ་གསུམ་གྱད་དུ་གྱུར	attain proficiency in three fields	yul gsum gyad du gyur
ཡུལ་གསུམ་གྱད་དུ་གྱུར་པ	three aspects of objective perception being consummated [development stage]	yul gsum gyad du gyur pa
ཡུལ་ལྷ	local gods/ deity	yul lha
ཡུལ་ལྷ་གཞི་བདག་བརྔོན་པ	pleasing the local guardians with offerings	yul lha gzhi bdag brngon pa
ཡུས	bragging, accusation, distraught, boastfulness, swollen with pride, exultation, fervor, making the most of things, charge, blame, false accusation	yus
ཡུས་ཀྱིས་བརྣངས	choked with exaltation, fervor, unable to speak/ heartbroken 2502	yus kyis brnangs
ཡུས་ཀྱིས་བརྣངས་པ	throat choked w exultation	yus kyis brnangs pa
ཡུས་ཅན	bragging, braggart	yus can
ཡུས་ཆེ་བ	exultant, very proud, one who thinks much of himself	yus che ba
ཡུས་ཆེས	distraught	yus ches
ཡུས་ཏེ	it being true, in fact, in truth	yus te
ཡུས་པ	boastful/ swollen with pride/ blame, false accusation	yus pa
ཡུས་པའི་ཚིག	words of deep feeling	yus pa'i tshig
ཡུས་ཤགས་འདེབས་པ	talk his way out of it; {smra mkhas can gyis yus shags 'debs tu med} a persuasive man cannot not talk his way out of it	yus shags 'debs pa
ཡུས་བཤད་པ	blame, rebuke	yus bshad pa
ཡུས་གསོལ	make an accusation	yus gsol
ཡུས་ཧྲུའུ	yus hru'u	yus hru'u
ཡེ	eternally, primordially, beginning, first, primordial, original; good, best/ primordial; primordial; beginning, first, primordial, original, eternally, primordially	ye
ཡེ་ཁྱབ	pervade since the beginning	ye khyab
ཡེ་མཁྱེན	possessed of prophetic knowledge, foreknowledge, primordial knowledge	ye mkhyen
ཡེ་མཁྱེན་སྒྲ་བླའི་མངོན་ཤེས	clairvoyance of the sgra bla of primordial knowledge	ye mkhyen sgra bla'i mngon shes
ཡེ་མཁྱེན་འཕྲུལ་གྱི	1 of srid pa pho dgu	ye mkhyen 'phrul gyi
ཡེ་མཁྱེན་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྒྱལ	miraculous king of primordial knowledge	ye mkhyen 'phrul gyi rgyal
ཡེ་ག་ཤེན	Bon primordial sage	ye ga shen
ཡེ་ག་བཤེན	primordial sage. {bshen} perhaps should be {gshen}	ye ga bshen
ཡེ་གེ་འབྲི་བ	transcribing the teachings	ye ge 'bri ba
ཡེ་གྲུབ	already established; primordial being	ye grub
ཡེ་གྲོལ	primordially free; primordial liberation. already freed, original freedom [not necessary to free again], primally liberated, originally / primordially free	ye grol
ཡེ་གྲོལ་ཀློང་ཡངས་ཆེན་པོ	great primordially free expanse of openness	ye grol klong yangs chen po
ཡེ་རྒྱ	{ye shes kyi phyag rgya} jñanamudra; (timeless) awareness consort; (practice with) visualized consort	ye rgya
ཡེ་རྒྱལ་ནམ་མཁའ་མཛོད	mountain behind Riwoche	ye rgyal nam mkha' mdzod
ཡེ་རྒྱས་ཐེབས	to apply the timeless seal	ye rgyas thebs
ཡེ་བསྒོམ	meditation from the very beginning, primordial mediation	ye bsgom
ཡེ་ངམ	light & dark	ye ngam
ཡེ་ངམ་འཁྲུགས་པའི་འགྲམས་བཅོས	rites to repair and adjust disharmonies between light and dark	ye ngam 'khrugs pa'i 'grams bcos
ཡེ་བཅེར་གཙུག་ཕུད	{ye bcer gtsug phud} predecessor of the founder of B"n	ye bcer gtsug phud
ཡེ་ཆུ	ye river	ye chu
ཡེ་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	primordial isness	ye ji bzhin pa
ཡེ་ཇི་བཞིན་པའི	mandala of the primordial condition	ye ji bzhin pa'i
ཡེ་ཇི་བཞིན་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	1 of dkyil 'khor rnam pa gsum	ye ji bzhin pa'i dkyil 'khor
ཡེ་ཇེ་བཞིན་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	primordial mandala of isness; the unconstructed basis space of nonarising is the pure expansive sky of the consort Samantabhadri, also called 'the primordial mandala of isness.'	ye je bzhin pa'i dkyil 'khor
ཡེ་རྗེ་སྨོན་པ	primordial aspiration	ye rje smon pa
ཡེ་རྗེ་སྨོན་པའི་རྨི་ལམ	dream of the lords of primordial aspiration	ye rje smon pa'i rmi lam
ཡེ་ཉིད	original state	ye nyid
ཡེ་ཉིད་སྟོན་པ	self-arising awareness, primordial master	ye nyid ston pa
ཡེ་བཏང་གྱི་ནར་བཞག	one leaves everything freely and naturally	ye btang gyi nar bzhag
ཡེ་སྟོང	already empty; empty already from the beginning [and not first substantial and then later made empty]	ye stong
ཡེ་སྟོང་ཆེན་པོ	great primordial emptiness	ye stong chen po
ཡེ་སྟོང་ཐོག་མའི་ཆོས་སྐུ	primally empty primordial dharmakaya; primor- dial dharmakaya of original emptiness	ye stong thog ma'i chos sku
ཡེ་སྟོང་རྩ་བྲལ	primordially empty and baseless	ye stong rtsa bral
ཡེ་ཐིག	jnana line	ye thig
ཡེ་ཐོག	(in all its) timeless/ atemporal immediacy	ye thog
ཡེ་མཐོང་མྱོང	never seen before	ye mthong myong
ཡེ་དག	originally/ primordially pure, pure from the beginning	ye dag
ཡེ་དོན	primordial nature	ye don
ཡེ་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན	all-ground of the primordial nature	ye don gyi kun
ཡེ་དོན་གྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	ultimate primordial universal ground	ye don gyi kun gzhi
ཡེ་གདངས	primordial (glow, manifestation)	ye gdangs
ཡེ་གདལ	timeless infinity	ye gdal
ཡེ་གདོད	primordial	ye gdod
ཡེ་གདོད་ནས་དག་པ	MSS: emphatic variant of {gdod nas dag pa}. Used by KN. [mss]	ye gdod nas dag pa
ཡེ་གདོད་མ	primordial	ye gdod ma
ཡེ་གདོད་མ་ཉིད་ནས	forever and always	ye gdod ma nyid nas
ཡེ་གདོད་མ་ནས	forever and always	ye gdod ma nas
ཡེ་གདོད་མའི་ཀ་དག་གི་གནས་ལུགས	original state of primordial purity	ye gdod ma'i ka dag gi gnas lugs
ཡེ་གདོད་མའི་འོད་གསལ	primordial luminosity	ye gdod ma'i 'od gsal
ཡེ་གདོད་མའི་འོད་གསལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	dharmakaya of primordial luminosity ye gdod ma'i 'od gsal chos kyi sku Dharmakaya of primordial luminosity	ye gdod ma'i 'od gsal chos kyi sku
ཡེ་གདོད་མའི་གཤིས	original nature	ye gdod ma'i gshis
ཡེ་འདུག	already have	ye 'dug
ཡེ་འདུག་པ	primordially present	ye 'dug pa
ཡེ་འདུལ་དམག་གཞུང་ནག་པོ	black tradition of the armies of the primordial conquerors	ye 'dul dmag gzhung nag po
ཡེ་འདྲོག	accident induced by negative forces	ye 'drog
ཡེ་ལྡན	intrinsically endowed	ye ldan
ཡེ་ལྡན་དུ་ཡོད་པ	already present, your original possession, to be present atemporally and pristinely as attributes	ye ldan du yod pa
ཡེ་ནས	timelessly; atemporally; isc. forever/ never (with negative constructions)	ye nas
ཡེ་ནས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	original knowing'	ye nas kyi shes pa
ཡེ་ནས་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	primordial mandala. in Anu Yoga	ye nas dkyil 'khor
ཡེ་ནས་ཁྱབ	pervade since the beginning	ye nas khyab
ཡེ་ནས་གྲུབ་ཟིན	present from the very beginning	ye nas grub zin
ཡེ་ནས་གྲོལ་བ	primordially self-liberates ye nas chos nyid rang gi rig pas rtogs pa primordial realization through innate	ye nas grol ba
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨིནནཏེ་སེལཕ༹	cognizance	through innate self
ཡེ་ནས་དག	pure from the beginning	ye nas dag
ཡེ་ནས་དག་པ	SA ye dag	ye nas dag pa
ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	Sadhana of Primordially Pure Innate Nature of Awakened Mind	kyi sgrub pa
ཡེ་ནས་གནས	atemporally present	ye nas gnas
ཡེ་ནས་གནས་པ	timelessly abiding; isc.	ye nas gnas pa
ཡེ་ནས་གནས་པའི་མི་ཤེས་པ	primordially present ignorance,	ye nas gnas pa'i mi shes pa
ཡེ་ནས་གནས་པའི་རིགས	Syn {de gshegs snying po}	ye nas gnas pa'i rigs
ཡེ་ནས་མ་ཞིག	not hurt at all D	ye nas ma zhig
ཡེ་ནས་མི་བྱེད་དགོས	that is not to be done by any means	ye nas mi byed dgos
ཡེ་ནས་མེད་པ	primordially non-existent ye nas rdzogs chen yang rtse bla med kyi	ye nas med pa
ཡེ་ནས་རྫོགས་པ	perfectly contained from the beginning	ye nas rdzogs pa
ཡེ་ནས་བཟང་པོ	primordial/ basic goodness, altogether good D	ye nas bzang po
ཡེ་ནས་ཡིན་པ	(to be) timelessly/ atemporally so/ the case ye nas yin pa la yin par shes pa'i blo	ye nas yin pa
ཡེ་ནས་ཡིན་ཚུལ	primordial condition	ye nas yin tshul
ཡེ་ནས་ཡོད་པ	atemporally and pristinely present	ye nas yod pa
ཡེ་ནས་རང་ཆས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	inherently present since the beginning	ye nas rang chas su yod pa
ཡེ་ནས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	ever-existing precious jewel	ye nas rin po che
ཡེ་ནས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge, gnosis, cognition, primal awareness, Primordial Awareness, [jnana]	ye nas shes pa
ཡེ་ནས་སངས་རྒྱས	{sems kyi rang bzhin ye nas sangs rgyas ste} mind's nature is Buddha from the beginning.	ye nas sangs rgyas
ཡེ་ནས་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Primordial Buddhahood Tantra. One of the	ye nas sangs rgyas kyi rgyud
ཡེ་ནས་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	enlightened from the very beginning, attained Buddhahood from the very beginning; primordially perfected	ye nas sangs rgyas pa
ཡེ་ནས་ལྷ	primordial divinity	ye nas lha
ཡེ་ནས་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	spontaneously present since the beginning	ye nas lhun gyis grub pa
ཡེ་ནས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	primordially selfexistent, primordial presence	ye nas lhun grub
ཡེ་གནས	{ye nas gnas pa} timelessly abiding; isc. ever-present	ye gnas
ཡེ་གནས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་པ	original awareness, primordially dwelling consciousness	ye gnas kyi shes pa
ཡེ་སྣང	primordial manifestations	ye snang
ཡེ་ཕྱི་མོ	the Primordial Grandmother	ye phyi mo
ཡེ་བབ	timeless/ atemporal state of utter relaxation	ye bab
ཡེ་བབ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme timeless/ atemporal state of utter relaxation; supreme true nature occurring timelessly/ atemporally	ye bab chen po
ཡེ་བབས	{ye bab} timeless/ atemporal state of utter relaxation	ye babs
ཡེ་བབས་ཆེན་པོ	supreme timeless/ atemporal state of utter relaxation; supreme true nature occurring timelessly/ atemporally	ye babs chen po
ཡེ་བབས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	timeless and spontaneously present state of utter relaxation	ye babs lhun grub
ཡེ་དབང་གཉན་གཞུང་ཁྲ་བོ	manycolored tradition of the Nyen with primordial power	ye dbang gnyan gzhung khra bo
ཡེ་དབང་མཐུ	primordial power	ye dbang mthu
ཡེ་དབང་ལྷ་ཡི	bka' babs oracle of the deities of primordial power	ye dbang lha yi
ཡེ་འབྱམས	emptiness	ye 'byams
ཡེ་འབྱུང	already occurred	ye 'byung
ཡེ་འབྲེལ	timeless integration	ye 'brel
ཡེ་འབྲོག	obstacle creating and undesired la sbyor bar byed pa'i spirit	ye 'brog
ཡེ་མ	indeed	ye ma
ཡེ་མ་སྣང	never seen/ appeared/ seen	ye ma snang
ཡེ་མ་སྤངས	gtan ma spangs pa 2504	ye ma spangs
ཡེ་མ་བྱེད	do not ever do, at all, continually	ye ma byed
ཡེ་མ་བྱེད་པ	does not at all do	ye ma byed pa
ཡེ་མ་ལོག་པ	not return at all (?)	ye ma log pa
ཡེ་མ་སོང	was not at all good	ye ma song
ཡེ་མི	never	ye mi
ཡེ་མི་སྣང	not at all conceived or seen	ye mi snang
ཡེ་མི་བྲ་བ	gtan nas mi phod pa	ye mi bra ba
ཡེ་མིག་མི་ཡེངས་པ	3) certain, definite	ye mig mi yengs pa
ཡེ་མིན	Yemen	ye min
ཡེ་མུ་ལ་འཐེན	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	ye mu la 'then
ཡེ་མེད	nothingness, primordially nonexistent[ce], never having	ye med
ཡེ་མེད་པ	non-existent	ye med pa
ཡེ་མེན	Yemen	ye men
ཡེ་སྨོན་རྒྱལ་པོ	patriarch king of tibet	ye smon rgyal po
ཡེ་སྨོན་ནག་པོ	{ye smon nag po clan	ye smon nag po
ཡེ་ཙེ	type of wild sheep, SA yel tse, tse ze, gna' ba	ye tse
ཡེ་ཙེ་སྔོན་མོ	blue hawk	ye tse sngon mo
ཡེ་རྫོགས	completely perfected from the very beginning, primordially perfected, quite perfect, primordially perfected, primordially present	ye rdzogs
ཡེ་ཞུ་ཆོས	Christianity	ye zhu chos
ཡེ་ཞུའི་ཆོས	Christianity	ye zhu'i chos
ཡེ་ཞུའི་ཆོས་འཆད་མཁན	Christianity clergyman	ye zhu'i chos 'chad mkhan
ཡེ་གཞི	primordial ground; original ground nature; the Primordial ground; primordial source	ye gzhi
ཡེ་གཞི་ཀ་དག་ཕྱོགས་ཡན	the primordial ground, pure from the beginning, free of directions ye gzhi snying po byang chub kyi sems the primordial ground of being, the very core of the state of pure and total presence; the B...	ye gzhi ka dag phyogs yan
ཡེ་གཞིའི་ངང་ཉིད	primordial conditions	ye gzhi'i ngang nyid
ཡེ་གཞིའི་གདངས	Dang energy of the primordial basis	ye gzhi'i gdangs
ཡེ་གཞིའི་གཤིས	condition of the primordial basis	ye gzhi'i gshis
ཡེ་ཟིན	{ye zin pa} timelessly/ already completed/ ensured; (to be) already just what it is	ye zin
ཡེ་གཟེར	crucial position of YE	ye gzer
ཡེ་བཟང་རྩེ་བ	'gos lo gzhon nu dpal	ye bzang rtse ba
ཡེ་ཡིན	{ye nas yin pa} (to be) timelessly/ atemporally so/ the case	ye yin
ཡེ་ཡིན་གྱི་ངང	original state	ye yin gyi ngang
ཡེ་ཡོད	existing from the very beginning	ye yod
ཡེ་ར་ལྦ་ཏི	Irawaddy River	ye ra lba ti
ཡེ་རང	ancient capital of nepal, a city in nepal	ye rang
ཡེ་རིག	original awareness	ye rig
ཡེ་རིག་དོན་གྱི་ཧེ་རུའི་ངང	the primordial awareness space of the ultimate heruka	ye rig don gyi he ru'i ngang
ཡེ་རེ	{ye re ba} lucidness; really present [?]	ye re
ཡེ་རེ་བསྐྱང	rest	ye re bskyang
ཡེ་རེ་ཁྱིལ་ལེར་དགྱེས་བཞིན་དུ	joyously	ye re khyil ler dgyes bzhin du
ཡེ་རེ་བ	lucid openness	ye re ba
ཡེ་རེ་བུད	stand out clearly/ brilliantly among many	ye re bud
ཡེ་རེ་བྱོན	once visited	ye re byon
ཡེ་རེ་ལས་འགྲོ་མ་མྱོང	did not go more than once	ye re las 'gro ma myong
ཡེ་རེ་ལྷོད་དེ	mngon gsal che and brel ba med pa	ye re lhod de
ཡེ་རླུང	wisdom prana. Syn {ye shes kyi rlung}	ye rlung
ཡེ་ཤུ	Jesus, ye shu bodhisattva [Japanese]	ye shu
ཡེ་ཤུ་ཆོས	Christianity	ye shu chos
ཡེ་ཤུའི་ཆོས	Christianity	ye shu'i chos
ཡེ་ཤུའི་ཆོས་འཆད་མཁན	Christianity clergyman	ye shu'i chos 'chad mkhan
ཡེ་ཤུའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	Christianity	ye shu'i chos lugs
ཡེ་ཤུའི་ཆོས་ལུགས་པ	Christian	ye shu'i chos lugs pa
ཡེ་ཤུའི་དཔེ་ཆ	bible	ye shu'i dpe cha
ཡེ་ཤུའི་མ་ཤི་ཀ	christ	ye shu'i ma shi ka
ཡེ་ཤུའི་ལུགས	Christian	ye shu'i lugs
ཡེ་ཤུའི་གསུང་རབ	the Bible	ye shu'i gsung rab
ཡེ་ཤེ	wakefulness [thd]	ye she
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the wisdom mandala	ye shes kyi dkyil 'khor
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཀའ་འགྲོ	wisdom dakini	ye shes kyi mka' 'gro
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	timeless awareness embodiment	ye shes kyi sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུས་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུང	he appeared to me in a vision and accepted me 2505	ye shes kyi skus rjes su bzung
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	wisdom dakini	ye shes kyi mkha' 'gro
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཁའ་འགྲོ་ནི་གུ་མ	the wisdom dakini Niguma	ye shes kyi mkha' 'gro ni gu ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	a wisdom dakini	ye shes kyi mkha' 'gro ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཁྱེན་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	vast wisdom	ye shes kyi mkhyen rgya che ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplishing of the wisdom-circle; [among the subsidiary yogas] [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 121]	ye shes kyi 'khor lo sgrub pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མགོན་པོ	Wisdom protectors are the protectors of Body, Speech, Mind, Qualities and Activities	ye shes kyi mgon po
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྒོ	avenue to/ of timeless awareness	ye shes kyi sgo
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	the superknowledge of wisdom	ye shes kyi mngon par shes pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཏོག	TSE	ye shes kyi tog
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་གཏེར	treasure of pristine awareness	ye shes kyi gter
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	wisdom bindu	ye shes kyi thig le
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of pristine cognition GD	ye shes kyi theg pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of wisdom	ye shes kyi de kho na nyid
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དོན་དམ	1 of dkor bdun	ye shes kyi don dam
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ	master of pristine awareness	ye shes kyi bdag nyid chen po
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩི	wisdom nectar	ye shes kyi bdud rtsi
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྡོར་དྲིལ	nang gi thabs shes or bliss and emptiness symbolizing rdo rje rva dgu and ghanta	ye shes kyi rdor dril
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the wisdom which binds together	ye shes kyi sdom pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	pure appearance of kayas and buddha fields etc.	ye shes kyi snang ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན	the eye of wisdom	ye shes kyi spyan
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	wisdom	ye shes kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	jnanamudra, wisdom mudra, visualized consort, awareness	ye shes kyi phyag rgya
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མ	wisdom seal	ye shes kyi phyag rgya ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མིག	eye of knowledge, wisdom eye	ye shes kyi mig
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མེ	fire of timeless awareness	ye shes kyi me
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མེས་སྦྱངས	purify with the fire of wisdom	ye shes kyi mes sbyangs
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྩལ	functioning of ye shes (= shes rab)	ye shes kyi rtsal
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulation of wisdom ye shes kyi tshogs} - accumulation of wisdom	ye shes kyi tshogs
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	ye shes kyi tshogs sgrub
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་འོད་སྐུ	the wisdom body of light	ye shes kyi 'od sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རང་རྩལ་དུ་བསྐྱོང་བ	sustain as the natural expression of original wakefulness	ye shes kyi rang rtsal du bskyong ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རིག་མ	wisdom knowledge woman	ye shes kyi rig ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	wisdom energy	ye shes kyi rol pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རླུང	Wisdom wind, wisdom prana. The unconditioned functioning of the buddha nature	ye shes kyi rlung
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐར་མདའི་ཕྱག	wisdom shooting star mudra	ye shes skar mda'i phyag
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐུ	epithet of 'jam dpal, pristine wisdom dimension of awakening	ye shes sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐུ་མཆོག་གི་བཤགས་པ	Confession of the Supreme Wisdom Body	ye shes sku mchog gi bshags pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐྱེ	to manifest as wisdom	ye shes skye
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པའི་ལེའུ་གསུམ	the three chapters on perceiving wisdom [dgra bcom pa'i le'u dang phyir mi 'ong ba'i le'u, rgyun zhugs kyi le'u bcas so	ye shes khong du chud pa'i le'u gsum
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁའ་འགྲོ	d kin s of pristine cognition GD	ye shes mkha' 'gro
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	jnana-dakini, wisdom dakini	ye shes mkha' 'gro ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁའ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པ	wisdom dakini	ye shes mkha' la spyod pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་འཁོར་ལོའི་རྒྱུད	tantra belonging to rdzogs chen man ngag sde	ye shes 'khor lo'i rgyud
ཡེ་ཤེས་གང་ཆེན་མཚོ	the Buddha Wisdom Ocean	ye shes gang chen mtsho
ཡེ་ཤེས་གྲུབ་པ	bde chen chos 'khor	ye shes grub pa
ཡོངས་འཛིན་བ༹	(1781-1845)	yongs 'dzin v
ཡེ་ཤེས་དགའ	joyful awareness	ye shes dga'
ཡེ་ཤེས་འགུགས་བསྟིམ	summoning and incorporating a wisdom deity	ye shes 'gugs bstim
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Wisdom Ocean	ye shes rgya mtsho zhus pa'i mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱལ་བ	great bon lama	ye shes rgyal ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{tshe mchog gling ye shes rgyal mtshan} 1713-1793	ye shes rgyal mtshan
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱས་པའི་མདོ	Blooming Wisdom Sutra ye shes sgyu 'phrul grwa ba'i rol gar manifestation of the magical net of wisdom ye shes sgyu 'phrul grwa ba'i rol gar manifestation of the magical net of wisdom; [h. for eman...	ye shes rgyas pa'i mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	magical net of original wakefulness	ye shes sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྱུ་མ	wisdom magic	ye shes sgyu ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྱུ་མའི་སྐུ	form of wisdom magic	ye shes sgyu ma'i sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྱུ་མར	as wisdom magic	ye shes sgyu mar
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྲོན་མའི་རྒྱུད	Wisdom Lamp Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	ye shes sgron ma'i rgyud
ཡེ་ཤེས་ང	the five wisdoms	ye shes nga
ཡེ་ཤེས་མངོན་འགྱུར	realize the wisdom	ye shes mngon 'gyur
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྔམ་གློག	anuyoga root tantra, mahayoga action tantra, mahayoga tantra of activity, root sutra of anuyoga ye shes rngam pa glog gi 'khor lo'i mdo Scripture of the Wisdom Wheel of Awesome Lightning. An Anu Yo...	ye shes rngam glog
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྔམས་གློག	Awesome Wisdom Lightning. See Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	ye shes rngams glog
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔ	five wisdoms	ye shes lnga
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔའི་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the experience / manifestation of the space of the five wisdoms	ye shes lnga'i dbyings kyi snang ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྔའི་རང་མདངས	the selfmanifestation of the five wisdoms	ye shes lnga'i rang mdangs
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཅུང་ཟད་བབས་པ	those upon whom a little wisdom has descended	ye shes cung zad babs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཅུ་དྲུག	16 moments of pristine cognition [R]	ye shes bcu drug
ཐེ་ཨཕ༹ཏེར	effect of the perception of the doctrine of the truth of suffering {sdug bsngal la rjes su rtogs pa'i shes pa'i bzod pa}. These four moments are then applied in the same order to the truths of the ...	the after
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 aspects of wisdom	ye shes bco brgyad
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོ	great wisdom	ye shes chen po
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོ་ལུས་ལ་གནས	the great wisdom dwells in the body	ye shes chen po lus la gnas
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོའི	SA thig le drug	ye shes chen po'i
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of total wisdom	ye shes chen po'i thig le
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	body of wisdom qualities / attributes	ye shes chos kyi sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆོས་སྐུ	wisdom dharmakaya: wisdom truth body, body of wisdom qualities	ye shes chos sku
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆོས་ཉིད	wisdom nature	ye shes chos nyid
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཆོད་རྟེན	wisdom stupa	ye shes mchod rten
ཡེ་ཤེས་འཆོལ་བ	crazy-wisdom	ye shes 'chol ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་འཇུག་པ	enter into wisdom	ye shes 'jug pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་བརྗོད་བྲལ	an inexpressible primal awareness	ye shes brjod bral
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཉམས་འབར	ablaze with wisdom experience	ye shes nyams 'bar
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཉིས	Twofold Pristine Cognition. The pristine cognition which perceives the cessation of corruption. twofold pristine cognition of arhats. or defilements {zad pa shes pa'i ye shes} and the pristine cogn...	ye shes gnyis
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྙིང་པོ	{ye shes snying po Jnanagarbha	ye shes snying po
དིསཅིཔླེ་ཨནད་པྲེཅེཔཏ	successor in the Vinaya lineage of {slob dpon dpal sbas} The guru of Bodhisattva Shantarakshita	disciple and precept
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྟར་ཤར་བ	arising (in the manner) consistent with timeless awareness*	ye shes ltar shar ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྟོབས	strength of wisdom	ye shes stobs
ཡེ་ཤེས་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Yeshe Tenpey Gyaltsen, the third incarnation of Lama Shabkar	ye shes bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	wisdommagic of the skillful means	ye shes thabs kyi cho 'phrul
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐིག་ལེ	Wisdom Bindu	ye shes thig le
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐིག་ལེའི་རྒྱུད	Wisdom Essence Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	ye shes thig le'i rgyud
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	unobstructed wisdom	ye shes thogs pa med pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་དག་པ	pure wisdom [know all knowable dharmas chags thogs mi mnga' bar among the dag pa bzhi, 2507	ye shes dag pa
ལྷ་སྐུ་འགྲུབ	accomplishment of the divine body in which pristine cognition and pure learning are coalesced ye shes dang dag pa'i slob pa'i zung 'jug gi	lha sku 'grub
ཡེ་ཤེས་དྲུག	[TRS 60-3]	ye shes drug
ཡེ་ཤེས་མདོ	Jnanasutra, passed away 994 years after the parinirvana of the Buddha	ye shes mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	indestructible bindu in the heart	ye shes rdo rje
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	Compendium of Vajra Wisdom; text name	ye shes rdo rje kun las btus pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྡོ་རྗེ་རང་དང་འགྲོགས	Keep company with the vajra of pure wisdom. keep with you the vajra of wisdom	ye shes rdo rje rang dang 'grogs
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེ	Yeshe Dey / - Prolific Tibetan translator and disciple of Padmasambhava; participated in the translation of more than 200 texts; alias: {sna nam ye shes sde}, {zhang gi bhan dhe ye shes sde}	ye shes sde
ཡེ་ཤེས་བསྡུས་པ	composed of	ye shes bsdus pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་བསྡུས་པའི་རྒྱང་ཞགས	farreacher composed of wisdom	ye shes bsdus pa'i rgyang zhags
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure wisdom	ye shes rnam par dag pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་པ	nonconceptual wakefulness, wisdom without concepts	ye shes rnam par mi rtog pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྣམ་གསུམ	three kinds of pristine cognition according to the Su^tra of the descent to Lan.k .*	ye shes rnam gsum
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རྒྱན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of the Ornament of the Appearances of Wakefulness [thd]	ye shes snang ba rgyan gyi mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རྒྱས་པ	spreading the light of wisdom	ye shes snang ba rgyas pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རྒྱེན་གྱི་མདོ	Sutra of the Ornament of the Light of Wisdom; Jñanalokalamkara-sutra	ye shes snang ba rgyen gyi mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་མཛད་པ	to spread wisdom light	ye shes snang ba mdzad pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་ལྷམ་མེ་བ	brilliant light of wisdom	ye shes snang ba lham me ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་པ	1) deity visualized in front, wisdom deity jnanasattva; 2) having invited primordial deity bstims pa'i worldtranscending deity (/ TSE	ye shes pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་པ་གཞུག་པ	entry of a wisdom being	ye shes pa gzhug pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་པའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of the wisdom being	ye shes pa'i dkyil 'khor
ཡེ་ཤེས་དཔའ་བོ	hero of awareness	ye shes dpa' bo
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྱན	eye of knowledge	ye shes spyan
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྱི	general or universal primal awareness	ye shes spyi
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྱི་བླུགས	omnipervasive wisdom	ye shes spyi blugs
ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྲིན	wisdom cloud	ye shes sprin
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	seal of pristine cognition GD	ye shes phyag rgya
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཕྱག་རྒྱའི་མདོ	{ye shes phyag rgya'i mdo the Seal of Wisdom Sutra	ye shes phyag rgya'i mdo
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཕྲ་བ་གསུམ	three subtle pristine cognitions. Those of appearances {snang ba} emptiness {stong pa} and their coalescence {zung jug} See Mipham Rinpoche, {spyi don 'od gsal snying po} p. 194	ye shes phra ba gsum
ཡེ་ཤེས་བྱིན	gift of pristine awareness	ye shes byin
ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	unexcelled wisdom	ye shes bla na med pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་མ	rdzogs chen khrid yig ye	ye shes bla ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་མའི་ས	the bhumi of unexcelled wisdom	ye shes bla ma'i sa
ཡེ་ཤེས་དབབ་པ	the descent of the wisdom beings	ye shes dbab pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་དབྱངས	Yeshe Yang. Tibetan translator predicted by Padmasambhava. The chief scribe for writing down the termas of Padmasambhava. He was an accomplished yogi, able to fly like a bird to the celestial realm...	ye shes dbyangs
ཡེ་ཤེས་དབྱིངས	sphere of primordial wisdom	ye shes dbyings
ཡེ་ཤེས་འབེབས་པའི་སྔགས	jnanasattva inviting mantra	ye shes 'bebs pa'i sngags
ཡེ་ཤེས་མ་བསྒྲིབས་པ	unobscured original wakefulness	ye shes ma bsgribs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་མ་ཆགས་མ་ཐོགས་པ	unobstructed original wakefulness	ye shes ma chags ma thogs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་མ་ཐོགས་པ	unhindered wisdom	ye shes ma thogs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་མིག་གཅིག་དྲི་མ་མེད	"Faultless single eye of wisdom"	ye shes mig gcig dri ma med
ཡེ་ཤེས་མེ་ལོང	Manjushri, mirror of wisdom	ye shes me long
ཡེ་ཤེས་མེའི་ཆས	attribute of wisdom fire	ye shes me'i chas
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་ལུང	Wonderful Wisdom Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	ye shes rmad du byung ba'i lung
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཙུག་ཕུད	{ye shes gtsug phud	ye shes gtsug phud
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྩེ་རྒྱལ་ལྟ་བའི་འཕྱོང	meditative wisdom practices	ye shes rtse rgyal lta ba'i 'phyong
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྩེ་མོ	Wisdom Peak; text name ye shes rtsol ba mi mnga' ba'i sgrub pa TSE	ye shes rtse mo
ཡེ་ཤེས་བརྩེགས་པ	summit of awareness	ye shes brtsegs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	1 of four bon saints	ye shes tshul khrims
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཚོ་རྒྱལ	Victorious See of Wisdom, Yeshe Tsogyal	ye shes mtsho rgyal
སྤེཨེཆ	emanation of Vajra Varahi	Speech
ཡེ་ཤེས་མཚོན་ཆ	weapon of wisdom	ye shes mtshon cha
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྫོགས་པ	major klong sde tantra	ye shes rdzogs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཞབས	proponent of Svatantrika	ye shes zhabs
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཞབས་ལུགས	sangs rgyas ye shes tradition of Guhyasamaja	ye shes zhabs lugs
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཞོན་ནུ	Yeshe Shönnu, one of	ye shes gzhon nu
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི	Four Kinds of Pristine Cognition. The outer, inner, and secret pristine cognitions which pertain respectively to the outer, inner and secret major and minor marks, and the pristine cognition of rea...	ye shes bzhi
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི་ལྡན་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the experience endowed with fourfold wisdom	ye shes bzhi ldan gyi snang ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི་སྦྱོར་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of the combined four wisdoms, the experience of the four wisdoms combined	ye shes bzhi sbyor gyi snang ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་བཞི་སྦྱོར་གྱི་འོད་ལམ	light path of the four wisdoms combined	ye shes bzhi sbyor gyi 'od lam
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཟང་ཐལ	directly penetrating knowledge, unimpeded wisdom	ye shes zang thal
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཟང་ཐལ་ཆེན་པོ	unobstructed great wisdom, the great openness of wisdom	ye shes zang thal chen po
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད	royal lineage from glang dar ma kyi mi rabs lnga pa ste jo bo rje bod du gdan 'dren gyi grabs gshom byas pa'i rkyen la brten nas gar log gis bkrong pa'i stod mnga' ris kyi lha bla ma'i ming	ye shes 'od
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་ཅེས	light of pristine awareness	ye shes 'od ces
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་པོ	King of Wisdom Light ye shes 'od gsal gyi dwangs ma chen po the great wisdom essence of luminosity ye shes 'od gsal gyi dvangs ma chen po the great wisdom essence of luminosity	ye shes 'od zer rgyal po
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་གསལ་བ	luminous wakefulness	ye shes 'od gsal ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་གསལ་བའི་དགོངས་པ	luminous realization of innate wakefulness	ye shes 'od gsal ba'i dgongs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡངས་པ	the immensity of original wakefulness	ye shes yangs pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་གསལ	self-cognizant wakefulness	ye shes rang gsal
ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་གསལ་བའི་གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང་ཐེ་པལཅེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	cognizant wisdom	ye shes rang gsal ba'i gzhal yas khang the palace of self
ཡེ་ཤེས་རིགས་ལྔའི་དབང	the empowerment of the five wisdom families	ye shes rigs lnga'i dbang
ཡེ་ཤེས་རོལ་པ་རྩལ	Yeshe Rölpa Tsal. The second son of King Trisong Deutsen who later incarnated as Terchen Chokgyur Lingpa	ye shes rol pa rtsal
ཡེ་ཤེས་རོལ་པའི་ངང	the display of wisdom	ye shes rol pa'i ngang
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་ཅུང་ཟད་དབང་ཐོབ་པ	those who have achieved slight mastery w respect to wisdom, those upon whom a little wisdom has descended	ye shes la cung zad dbang thob pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	{ye shes la 'jug pa	ye shes la 'jug pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་རྟོན་པ	reliance of [direct, nonconceptual]	ye shes la rton pa
ཝིསྡོམ	knowledge	wisdom
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu	ye shes la dbang
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་དབང་བ	power to understand all writings on religion	ye shes la dbang ba
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལས་ཀྱི	commitment to union with the 5 dakinis' modes of awareness, SA phyag rgya	ye shes las kyi
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	jnana karma mudra	ye shes las kyi phyag rgya
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཤེས་པ	cognition of wisdom	ye shes shes pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སངས་རྒྱས	dhyani buddhas	ye shes sangs rgyas
ཡེ་ཤེས་སུ་གཟིགས་པའི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་ཐེ་སུཔེར	knowledge of perceiving wisdom ye shes su gzigs pa'i mngon par shes pa the superknowledge of perceiving the wisdom 2509	ye shes su gzigs pa'i mngon par shes pa the super
ཡེ་ཤེས་སུམ་ལྡན	endowed with the three wisdoms (ngo bo stong, rang bzhin gsal, thugs rje 'gags med), endowed with the three primordial wisdoms	ye shes sum ldan
ཡེ་ཤེས་སེང་གེ	{rwa} 12th cent	ye shes seng ge
ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་པ	wisdom being; pristine awareness aspect of a deity	ye shes sems pa
ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་དཔའ	{ye shes pa} deity as the expression of/ that expresses timeless awareness; (timeless) awareness aspect (of a deity)	ye shes sems dpa'
ཡེ་ཤེས་གསང་བ་སྒྲོན་མ	major klong sde tantra	ye shes gsang ba sgron ma
ཡེ་ཤེས་གསལ་བའི་འོད་ལྔ	the five luminous lights of wisdom	ye shes gsal ba'i 'od lnga
ཡེ་ཤེས་གསུམ	three kinds of pristine cognition according to the Su^tra of the descent to Lan.k . 1 mundane {'jig rten pa'i ye shes}. two supramundane {'jig rten las 'das pa'i ye shes}. and three most supramunda...	ye shes gsum
ཡེ་ཤེས་གསུམ་ལྡན	threefold pristine awareness; pristine awareness endowed with three attributes	ye shes gsum ldan
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷ	wisdom deities	ye shes lha
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷའི་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་ལྔ	Five Classes of Means for Attainment of Pristine Cognition. Those of the deities Yamantaka, Hayagriva, Yangdag, Vajra Amrita or Chemchok, and Vajrakilaya	ye shes lha'i sgrub sde lnga
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	self-perfection of wisdom, fourth of 4 rnal 'byor bzhi, selfperfected wisdom ye shes lhun grub rig 'dzin la thim pa wisdom dissolving into the vidyadhara of spontaneous presence ye shes lhun grub r...	ye shes lhun grub
ཡེ་ཤོར	basic straying	ye shor
ཡེ་གཤེན	bon word for buddha, primordial sage	ye gshen
ཡེ་གཤེན་བཀོད་པ་དོན་གྱི་འབུམ	Bon practice cycle textual tradition	ye gshen bkod pa don gyi 'bum
ཡེ་གཤེན་ཐེག་པ	Way of Primordial Shen, way of the primordial shen, 1 of 'bras bu'i bon	ye gshen theg pa
ཡེ་བཤེན	primordial sage	ye bshen
ཡེ་བཤེར་བཙུལ་ཕུད	predecessor of gshen rab	ye bsher btsul phud
ཡེ་སང་དཀར་པོ	tribe in tibet, bon deity	ye sang dkar po
ཡེ་སངས	original awakening	ye sangs
ཡེ་སངས་རྒྱས	primordial enlightenment;	ye sangs rgyas
ཡེ་སུ	chinese buddhist teacher born in miraculous manner	ye su
ཡེ་སྲས	primordial prince	ye sras
ཡེ་སྲིད་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཇུ་ཐིག	ju thig of the manifestation of primordial existence	ye srid 'phrul gyi ju thig
ཡེ་སྲིད་ལྷ་གཞུང་དཀར་པོ	white tradition of the lha of primordial existence	ye srid lha gzhung dkar po
ཡེ་སྲིད་ལྷ་གཟུང་དཀར་པོ	White ritual of the Primordial Existent Deity	ye srid lha gzung dkar po
ཡེ་བསྲུངས	timelessly upheld	ye bsrungs
ཡེ་ཧམ	1 of 8 sman bla ritual objects	ye ham
ཡེ་ཧམ་ཆི་དམ	bezoar	ye ham chi dam
ཡེ་དྷར	the Yedharma mantra; beginning with: om yedharma hetu and so forth	ye dhar
ཡེགས་པ	rough, shaggy, hairy	yegs pa
ཡེང་ངེ་བ	1) careless distracted mind, distraction; 2) nyin 'gyangs zhag 'phul; 3) shaky, unsteady [mind]	yeng nge ba
ཡེང་ཆེད	mental agitators	yeng ched
ཡེང་བ	ft. of {yeng ba}; {yeng ba, yengs pa, yeng ba} intr. v	yeng ba
ཡེང་མེད	unagitated, undistracted	yeng med
ཡེང་ཡེང	disposing things properly, putting those of one size or kind together, those different separately	yeng yeng
ཡེང་ཡེང་བཏིབ་བཏིབ	[arch] distracted shifting mind and brtab brel che ba	yeng yeng btib btib
ཡེངས	g.yeng! distract!	yengs
ཡེངས་འཁྲུལ་པར་མ་ཤོར་བ	not stray in confusion	yengs 'khrul par ma shor ba
ཡེངས་འགྲོ་ཡི་འདུག་ན	if one gets distracted	yengs 'gro yi 'dug na
ཡེངས་སྟབས	maintain it openly	yengs stabs
ཡེངས་ན	if you wander, wideness	yengs na
ཡེངས་ནས་བལྟས་ཀྱང་མི་མཐོང་བ	after being agitated/ distracted, look but not see	yengs nas bltas kyang mi mthong ba
ཡེངས་པ་རྒྱ་འབྱམས	continuous wandering	yengs pa rgya 'byams
ཡེངས་པ་མེད་པ	nondistraction, nonwandering, awareness, free from wandering, undistracted	yengs pa med pa
ཡེངས་པ་མེད་པའི	of non-distraction	yengs pa med pa'i
ཡེངས་མ་ཡེངས་མེད	neither distracted	yengs ma yengs med
ཡེངས་མ་ལམ	the paths of distraction	yengs ma lam
ཡེངས་མེད	1) unwavering, nonwandering, undistracted, undisturbed. 2) awareness; undistracted, unwavering, not wandering, awareness, undisturbed	yengs med
ཡེངས་མེད་བསྒོམས་པ	meditated without distraction	yengs med bsgoms pa
ཡེངས་མེད་ངང	the state of nondistraction	yengs med ngang
ཡེངས་མེད་པ	non-distraction, nonwandering	yengs med pa
ཡེངས་ཡུལ	object of distraction 2510	yengs yul
ཡེངས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	letting the attention wander	yengs su 'jug pa
ཡེད་པོ	SA yag po	yed po
ཡེད་ཡེད་པ	unsteady, flicker, waver, flutter; see {shes pa phyo phyo ba} unsteady mind	yed yed pa
ཡེན	be distracted, bountiful, plentiful	yen
ཡེན་པ	be distracted, bountiful, plentiful	yen pa
ཡེའི	Lhoka dialect	ye'i
ཡེའི་ཉ་མོ་སྲོག་གི	earliest king of Tibet born in a shell	ye'i nya mo srog gi
ཡེའུ	[arch] despair, unhappy, displeased, sorry, dejected, gloomy, depression, sad[ness]	ye'u
ཡེར	scattered	yer
ཡེར་ཁེན	yer khen district	yer khen
ཡེར་གྱིས	quickly, very clearly	yer gyis
ཡེར་གྱིས་འགྱུར	vividly stir	yer gyis 'gyur
ཡེར་གྱིས་འགྱུས་པ	Thrangu Rinpoche: = {thol gyis 'gyus pa}	yer gyis 'gyus pa
ཡེར་གྱིས་བཏེག་པ་དར་དམར	raised red flag	yer gyis bteg pa dar dmar
ཡེར་གྱིས་བྱོན་པ	quickly arrived	yer gyis byon pa
ཡེར་གྱིས་གསལ་བའི་གློག་ཞུ	quickly/ very clearly lighting electric lights	yer gyis gsal ba'i glog zhu
ཡེར་པ	a place, a gesture of offering	yer pa
ཡེར་པ་ཕུག	Yerpa Phuk	yer pa phug
ཡེར་པ་ཚེས་བཅུ	The Tenth Day Festival at Yerpa (ceremony on the 10th day of the 7th Tibetan month)	yer pa tshes bcu
ཡེར་པ་གསང་སྔགས་གླིང	{yer pa gsang sngags gling	yer pa gsang sngags gling
ཡེར་པ་ལྷ་རི	sacred mountain 10 miles from lhasa	yer pa lha ri
ཡེར་འཕྲོས་པ	to abruptly arise	yer 'phros pa
ཡེར་བ	{yer ba, yer ba, yer ba, yer} trans. v	yer ba
ཡེར་བུ	rlung rims disease	yer bu
ཡེར་ཡེང	clear, light, bright	yer yeng
ཡེར་ཡེར	limpid; immaculate	yer yer
ཡེར་ཡེར་དུ་བསྒུལ་བའི་མེ་སྟག	song	yer yer du bsgul ba'i me stag
ཡེར་ཡེར་པོ	scattering, dispersing	yer yer po
ཡེར་ཡེར་བ	rising upward	yer yer ba
ཡེར་རེ	pure, clear, genuine, unadulterated	yer re
ཡེར་རེ་བ	pure, clear, genuine	yer re ba
ཡེར་རེ་སེང་ངེ	pure, clean, clear, genuine, unadulterated	yer re seng nge
ཡེར་རེ་སེང་ངེ་བ	pure, clean, clear, genuine, unadulterated, 1 rig pa gsal zhing dvangs pa; 2) yang ba	yer re seng nge ba
ཡེར་རེ་སེང་ངེ་བར་བློ་སད	clear and undefiled awakened mind	yer re seng nge bar blo sad
ཡེར་ཤར་བ	abrupt movement of thought	yer shar ba
ཡེར་ཤོང	yer shong	yer shong
ཡེལ་འཆོས	forcing of sems into principal channel	yel 'chos
ཡེལ་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	yel pa kagyu	yel pa bka' brgyud
ཡེལ་འཕྱོས	SA zung 'jug	yel 'phyos
ཡེལ་བ	be careless, indolent, lazy, idle, neglect	yel ba
ཡེལ་ཙེ	type of wild sheep, maybe a water bird with a flat bill	yel tse
ཡེལ་ཡེལ	clear, light, bright	yel yel
ཡེས་མས	ancestors -	yes mas
ཡོ	figure 144	yo
ཡོ་ཀྱོག	crooked, devious	yo kyog
ཡོ་ཀྱོག་པའི་བསམ་བློ	devious thoughts	yo kyog pa'i bsam blo
ཡོ་ཁྱོག	crooked, devious	yo khyog
ཡོ་ཁྱོག་པའི་རྒྱུག་ཆུ	crooked/ twisting river	yo khyog pa'i rgyug chu
ཡོ་འཁྱོག	yo kyog ste 'khyog por gyur pa	yo 'khyog
ཡོ་འཁྱོམས	quarrel, disturbance, condition of harm	yo 'khyoms
ཡོ་ག	systematic religious mediation, SA rnal 'byor	yo ga
ཡོ་ག་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three yogas	yo ga rnam gsum
ཡོ་ག་པ	[Skt] {yo gi}	yo ga pa
ཡོ་ག་ཕྱི་པ	outer yogas (kriya, carya, yoga)	yo ga phyi pa
ཡོ་ག་མ	Syn {yo gi ni}	yo ga ma
ཡོ་ག་ཙ་རྒྱ	= {rnal 'byor spyod pa}	yo ga tsa rgya
ཡོ་ག་ཙ་རྱ	Syn {rnal 'byor spyod pa}	yo ga tsa rya
ཡོ་ག་གསུམ	the three yogas	yo ga gsum
ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད	yoga tantra	yo ga'i rgyud
ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་བཞི	Four Major Sections of Yoga Tantra	yo ga'i rgyud sde chen po bzhi
ཡོ་གའི་སྡེ་གསུམ	maha yoga, anu yoga, ati yoga	yo ga'i sde gsum
ཡོ་གི	Syn {yo ga pa}	yo gi
ཡོ་གི་ནི	[Skt] yogini	yo gi ni
ཡོ་གུར	yo gur, Uighur Region	yo gur
ཡོ་གླིང	Europe	yo gling
ཡོ་གླིང་ཤར	E Europe	yo gling shar
ཡོ་བཅོས	to restore harmony	yo bcos
ཡོ་འཇུག	[arch] kun 'jug	yo 'jug
ཡོ་ཏན	scarf of assent	yo tan
ཡོ་བཏང	[arch] thams cad blos btang ba'am ster ba	yo btang
ཡོ་ནན	Viet Nam	yo nan
ཡོ་ནན་སྨངས་གཙོའི་སྤྱི་མཐུན	Democratic Republic of Viet Nam	yo nan smangs gtso'i spyi mthun
ཡོ་ནན་ལྷོ་རྒྱུད	S Viet Nam	yo nan lho rgyud
ཡོ་ནན་ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས	S Viet Nam	yo nan lho phyogs
ཡོ་ནན་ལྷོ་མ	S Viet Nam	yo nan lho ma
ཡོ་སྣང	[arch] be/ see all	yo snang
ཡོ་དཔྱད	wrong interpretation, false judgement	yo dpyad
ཡོ་དཔྱོད	wrong interpretation, false judgement	yo dpyod
ཡོ་སྤྱད	yo byad	yo spyad
ཡོ་བ	aslant, sloping, awry, crooked, obliquity, crafty, distorted, perverted, deceitful	yo ba
ཡོ་བའི་ཁ་བ	crooked/ slanting pillar	yo ba'i kha ba
ཡོ་བའི་མགོ	head aslant	yo ba'i mgo
ཡོ་བའི་གཏམ	devious talk	yo ba'i gtam
ཡོ་བྱང	rituals	yo byang
ཡོ་བྱད་ཀྱི་འབྲལ་བ	lack what is needed	yo byad kyi 'bral ba
ཡོ་བྱད་ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་པ	{glang po rgyal mtshan nor bu gdugs sogs yo byad khyad par 'phags pa} elephants, victory banners, royal umbrellas, and other especially fine things	yo byad khyad par 'phags pa
ཡོ་བྱད་མངོན་གྱུར	manifest the implements [of a bhikshu	yo byad mngon gyur
ཡོ་བྱད་བཅུ་གཉིས	TS	yo byad bcu gnyis
ཡོ་བྱད་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 implements	yo byad bcu gsum
ཡོ་བྱད་བསྙུངས་པ	less furnished	yo byad bsnyungs pa
ཡོ་བྱད་བཏབ་པ	{yo byad bstabs pa}	yo byad btab pa
ཡོ་བྱད་བཏབ་པའི་དྲིན་དྲན	remember her kindness in providing all your material needs	yo byad btab pa'i drin dran
ཡོ་བྱད་བསྟབས་པ	{yo byad btab pa} providing material needs	yo byad bstabs pa
ཡོ་བྱད་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱིས་སྟོབ་པ	provide a person with everything within one's power	yo byad thams cad kyis stob pa
ཡོ་བྱད་དྲུག	bhikshu's six implements of livelihood	yo byad drug
ཡོ་བྱད་ལྡན	man of property	yo byad ldan
ཡོ་བྱད་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	TSE	yo byad phran tshegs
ཡོ་བྱད་བྱིན་རླབས	blessing of the implements	yo byad byin rlabs
ཡོ་བྱད་འབྱོར་བ	procure articles needed for preparations	yo byad 'byor ba
ཡོ་བྱད་འཚོག་ཆས	mkho chas kyi mthun rkyen	yo byad 'tshog chas
ཡོ་བྱད་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་བདུན	[TRS 74-4]	yo byad rin po che sna bdun
ཡོ་བྱད་རུང་བ	goods and necessities befitting [a monk]	yo byad rung ba
ཡོ་བྱད་ལ་ཆགས་པའི་ལྷག་མ་གཉིས	dge 'dun lhag ma bcu gsum gyi nang gses, khang pa'i lhag ma dang, khang chen gyi lhag ma gnyis ni yo byad la chags pa las gyur pa'i lhag ma'o	yo byad la chags pa'i lhag ma gnyis
ཡོ་བྱད་ལ་དབང་བ	power of the necessities of life	yo byad la dbang ba
ཡོ་བྱད་ལེགས་བཅོས	reform/ improvement/ upgrading of tools/ equipment	yo byad legs bcos
ཡོ་བྱིན	materials	yo byin
ཡོ་བྱེད་ལ་དབང	SA dbang bcu	yo byed la dbang
ཡོ་བྱེད་ལ་དབང་བ	power to shower down provisions for the support of creatures	yo byed la dbang ba
ཡོ་འབོག	medicinal tree whose bark helps fevers, ulmus glaucescens franch.	yo 'bog
ཡོ་འབོག་ཤིང	elm	yo 'bog shing
ཡོ་མེད་ཕྱོགས་མ་ལྷུང	unbiased	yo med phyogs ma lhung
ཡོ་ཡོན་པོ	crooked, curved	yo yon po
ཡོ་རེ་བ	ominous, dark shade	yo re ba
ཡོ་རོབ	Europe	yo rob
ཡོ་རོབ་གླིང	Europe	yo rob gling
ཡོ་ལང	movement [of the mind]; nature. Syn {rang bzhin}, shifting thoughts, coll. {mang po mang po}	yo lang
ཡོ་ལང་གི་དངོས་རྫས་མི་འདྲ་བ	many different things	yo lang gi dngos rdzas mi 'dra ba
ཡོ་ལང་ཆེ་བའི་རྒྱུ་ནོར་གཏོང་བ	spend much wealth	yo lang che ba'i rgyu nor gtong ba
ཡོ་ལངས	= {ngang}. continuity = {yo lang}	yo langs
ཡོ་ལངས་ཁྲོད	clutter	yo langs khrod
ཡོ་ལེ་ཕྱོད་དེ	1) crooked, devious, deceptive actions two 'gro thabs 'dug thabs	yo le phyod de
ཡོ་ལོ	[arch] everything beneficial/ workable, crooked, curved	yo lo
ཡོ་ལོག	unhappy w/o joy	yo log
ཡོ་སྲོང་བ	make the crooked straight	yo srong ba
ཡོ་བསྲང	correction, rectification, straightening	yo bsrang
ཡོ་བསྲང་བྱེད	correct, rectify, straighten	yo bsrang byed
ཡོ་བསྲང་བྱེད་པའི་སྐྱོན	corrected fault	yo bsrang byed pa'i skyon
ཡོ་བསྲང་ལེགས་བཅོས	correction, rectification, straightening	yo bsrang legs bcos
ཡོ་བསྲང་ལེགས་བཅོས་བྱེད	correct, rectify, straighten	yo bsrang legs bcos byed
ཡོག	below, downstairs, spin thread, exist, have	yog
ཡོག་ཁང	ground floor, cellar	yog khang
ཡོག་ག	spindle	yog ga
ཡོག་ག་ཡོག	spin thread	yog ga yog
ཡོག་མགོ	1) rgyu spun thread spinning/ twisting etc. yog shing [spindle] gi mgo; 2) mgo yang po; 3) phan tshun dkrug shing byed pa'i mi'i ming 'dogs	yog mgo
ཡོག་རྒྱལ	fruit for all classes	yog rgyal
ཡོག་གཅིན	person that wets the bed	yog gcin
ཡོག་ཆུང	{yog chung} herb	yog chung
ཡོག་ཆེན	{yog chen} herb	yog chen
ཡོག་གཉིས	two periods after midnight & after noon (1-3am, 1-30m)	yog gnyis
ཡོག་ཐོད	a spatula	yog thod
ཡོག་པ	ft. of {yog pa}; {yog pa, yogs pa, yog pa, yogs} trans. v	yog pa
ཡོག་པ་གཟན་སྒྲིལ	consolidated in 1 figure/ amount	yog pa gzan sgril
ཡོག་པ་གཟན་བསྒྲིལ	rtsva 'bru can gyi yog pa de gzan pa 'bru med kyi nang du zla bsgril btang na gzan pa dang chag gnyis kyi go chod pa ltar don tshan khag gnyis khag gcig tu bsgril ba'i don,//gla dang lto dod yog pa...	yog pa gzan bsgril
ཡོག་པོ	pole or stick for stirring the fire, SA g.yog po	yog po
ཡོག་བུར	lower bolt	yog bur
ཡོག་མོ	caragana jubata (pall.) poir.	yog mo
ཡོག་ཡོག	pervading many and thick	yog yog
ཡོག་རེད	there are --	yog red
ཡོག་རེད་པས	is are/ was there --?	yog red pas
ཡོག་རེད་བ	is are/ was there --?	yog red ba
ཡོག་ཤིང	[lag pa skor gyug gis srad bu sgrim byed kyi shing] fire stirring stick, poker, spindle	yog shing
ཡོགས	yog pa!	yogs
ཡོགས་པ	pf. of {yog pa}	yogs pa
ཡོགས་པའི་སྐུད་ནས་ཐག་པ་བཟོ	make a rope of twisted threads	yogs pa'i skud nas thag pa bzo
ཡོགས་བོན་གཏོ་རྒྱལ	bon of widowhood	yogs bon gto rgyal
ཡོང་རྐྱེན	source, cause, origin 2512	yong rkyen
ཡོང་སྐྱོད	coming and going	yong skyod
ཡོང་ཁ	at the time of coming	yong kha
ཡོང་ཁུངས	resources	yong khungs
ཡོང་ཁུལ	yong gi yod pa'i srol	yong khul
ཡོང་ཁུལ་བྱེད་པ	2) arise, happen; 2) will [future]	yong khul byed pa
ཡོང་མཁན	comer	yong mkhan
ཡོང་གྲུབ	{yong su grub pa} absolute(ly) ideal; thoroughly established; to bring to a complete finish; (to be) complete/ ensured in and of itself	yong grub
ཡོང་དགོས	had to leave	yong dgos
ཡོང་འགྲུབ	thoroughly established [nature] [thd]	yong 'grub
ཡོང་རྒྱུ	forthcoming	yong rgyu
ཡོང་སྒོ	income	yong sgo
ཡོང་སྒོ་ཐོབ	receive an income	yong sgo thob
ཡོང་སྒོ་བཞེས་ཆང	SA bzhes khrung, beer	yong sgo bzhes chang
ཡོང་སྒོར་བསྟུན	in accord w income	yong sgor bstun
ཡོང་སྒོར་བསྟུན་འགྲོ་སོང་གཏོང	measure expenditure in accord w income	yong sgor bstun 'gro song gtong
ཡོང་ང	yes, all right	yong nga
ཡོང་ངེ	that will do, that's enough	yong nge
ཡོང་ངེས	inevitably, necessarily	yong nges
ཡོང་ཆད	appointed time and place	yong chad
ཡོང་ཆོག	you may come	yong chog
ཡོང་ཉེན་འདུག་པ	run the risk of	yong nyen 'dug pa
ཡོང་ཐག་ཆོད	inevitably, necessarily	yong thag chod
ཡོང་ཐང	means of occurring /lo legs byung ste 'bru rigs kyi yong thang 'phar ba	yong thang
ཡོང་དུ་མ་བཅུག་པ	prevented them from entering	yong du ma bcug pa
ཡོང་དེབ	account book	yong deb
ཡོང་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	1) sleb rgyu'i bzo thon po; 2) phan thogs pa'i gnas yod pa,//khang pa de yong mdog kha po 'dug	yong mdog kha po
ཡོང་སྡུད	collection of things received/ income	yong sdud
ཡོང་སྡུད་པ	collector of revenue	yong sdud pa
ཡོང་སྡུད་པ་རྫོང་ཐོ་ལྟར	collect the rent according to the district records	yong sdud pa rdzong tho ltar
ཡོང་བ	{yong ba, yong ba, yong ba} intr. v	yong ba
ཡོང་བ་བྱེད་པ	let, ask, tell, make, cause	yong ba byed pa
ཡོང་བ་ཤེས་ཏེ	knowing that he was on his way	yong ba shes te
ཡོང་འབབ	income	yong 'bab
ཡོང་འབབ་ཁེ་གཙང	net income	yong 'bab khe gtsang
ཡོང་འབབ་ཁེར་གཙང	net income	yong 'bab kher gtsang
ཡོང་འབབ་ལས་ལྷག་པའི་འགྲོ་སོང	deficit	yong 'bab las lhag pa'i 'gro song
ཡོང་འབབས	proceeds	yong 'babs
ཡོང་འབབས་བསྡོམས་འབོར	total income	yong 'babs bsdoms 'bor
ཡོང་མི་ཤེས	cannot happen	yong mi shes
ཡོང་མི་སྲིད	cannot happen	yong mi srid
ཡོང་རྩིས	1) book of income/ receipts; 2) tshur 'ong rgyu'i preparations/ plans/ calculations	yong rtsis
ཡོང་གཞི	source, condition, cause	yong gzhi
ཡོང་ཡེ	certainly, surely	yong ye
ཡོང་ཡོང	yongs	yong yong
ཡོང་ཡོང་འདྲ	just about able to do	yong yong 'dra
ཡོང་ལས་ཆེ	'byor shas che'am 'thob shas che ba,//slob ma mang shos 'dir yong las che	yong las che
ཡོང་ས	road	yong sa
ཡོང་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	see {yongs su grub pa} absolutely ideal; thoroughly established; to bring to a complete finish	yong su grub pa
ཡོང་སུ་བསྔོ་བ	turning over	yong su bsngo ba
ཡོང་སུ་འདྲིས་པའི་སྟོབས	power of full acquaintance	yong su 'dris pa'i stobs
ཡོངས	totally . . .	yongs
ཡོངས་ཀྱི་འཁྲུལ་གཞི	the ground of all confusion	yongs kyi 'khrul gzhi
ཡོངས་ཀྱི་གྲོལ་གཞི	the ground of all liberation	yongs kyi grol gzhi
ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་གཞི	the universal ground of everything	yongs kyi spyi gzhi
ཡོངས་ཀྱི་གཙོ	supreme chief, lord of all	yongs kyi gtso
ཡོངས་ཀྱི་ལམ	the universal way	yongs kyi lam
ཡོངས་ཀྱིས་མེད	totally beyond	yongs kyis med
ཡོངས་དཀྲིས	circumference	yongs dkris
ཡོངས་སྐྱོ་བ	are sucked into	yongs skyo ba
ཡོངས་སྐྱོ་བའི	are sucked into	yongs skyo ba'i
ཡོངས་སྐྱོབ	chariot, copper	yongs skyob
ཡོངས་བསྐོར	full circle	yongs bskor
ཡོངས་བསྐྱོད	cart	yongs bskyod
ཡོངས་ཁུངས	resources	yongs khungs
ཡོངས་ཁུལ	all together/ included	yongs khul
ཡོངས་ཁེབས	roof, cover	yongs khebs
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ	universal, widespread, surrounded	yongs khyab
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	universal law/ rule	yongs khyab kyi chos nyid
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་འདེམས་བསྐོ	general election	yongs khyab kyi 'dems bsko
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་ཀྱི་ཞིང་འཇུག	general investigation	yongs khyab kyi zhing 'jug
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་ཏུ	general, allencompassing	yongs khyab tu
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་བདེན་དོན	universal truth	yongs khyab bden don
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་བརྡ་ཡིག	public notice/ communication	yongs khyab brda yig
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་འོས་གན་སློབ་གསོ	universal compulsory education	yongs khyab 'os gan slob gso
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་འོས་འགན	universal/ widespread/ nationwide obligation	yongs khyab 'os 'gan
ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་གསལ་བསྒྲགས	universal declaration	yongs khyab gsal bsgrags
ཡོངས་གང	completely full	yongs gang
ཡོངས་གང་སྣོད	full vessel	yongs gang snod
ཡོངས་གྱུར	[completely] transformed, natural [perfume]	yongs gyur
ཡོངས་གྱུར་པ	[completely] transformed, natural [perfume]	yongs gyur pa
ཡོངས་གྲགས	universal fame, well-known, famous, oft-quoted, as is generally the case, much spoken of, known as	yongs grags
ཡོངས་གྲགས་རྩོད་ཞུ་ཞིབ་ཉན	public hearing/ trial	yongs grags rtsod zhu zhib nyan
ཡོངས་གྲགས་སུ་འགྱུར	be[come] known by all, well-known, famous	yongs grags su 'gyur
ཡོངས་གྲུབ	absolute; unchanging ('gyur med yongs grub). unmistaken (phyin ci ma log pa'i yongs grub)	yongs grub
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	the nature of perfection. perfect establishment/ reality	yongs grub kyi ngo bo nyid
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	perfect reality	yongs grub kyi mtshan nyid
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་དགུ	de bzhin nyid dang/ ma nor ba'i de bzhin nyid dang/ gzhan ma yin pa de bzhin nyid dang/ chos nyid dang/ chos kyi dbyings dang/ chos gnas pa nyid dang/ chos skyon med pa nyid dang/ yang dag pa'i mth...	yongs grub dgu
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་གཉིས	the two kinds of perfect establishment	yongs grub gnyis
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་ཚེ་ནད	life diseases	yongs grub tshe nad
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་བཞི	rang bzhin yongs grub/ dri med yongs grub/ lam yongs grub/ dmigs pa yongs su grub pa	yongs grub bzhi
ཡོངས་གྲོལ	totally free	yongs grol
ཡོངས་དགེ་གཏེར་སྟོན་མི་འགྱུར་རྡོ་རྗེ	b. 1628	yongs dge gter ston mi 'gyur rdo rje
ཡོངས་བགྲང	lo	yongs bgrang
ཡོངས་འགྲིབ	moon	yongs 'grib
ཡོངས་འགྲེམ	dissemination, diffusion, propagation	yongs 'grem
ཡོངས་འགྲོ	all-pervading, darkness	yongs 'gro
ཡོངས་སྒྲགས	proclamation, declaration	yongs sgrags
ཡོངས་སྒྲགས་གློག་འཕྲིན	public circular telegram	yongs sgrags glog 'phrin
ཡོངས་སྒྲགས་གཏོང	proclaim, declare, promulgate	yongs sgrags gtong
ཡོངས་བསྒྲགས	proclamation, declaration	yongs bsgrags
ཡོངས་བསྒྲགས་གློག་འཕྲིན	public circular telegram	yongs bsgrags glog 'phrin
ཡོངས་བསྒྲགས་གཏོང	proclaim, declare, promulgate	yongs bsgrags gtong
ཡོངས་བསྒྲགས་བཟོ་བ	promulgate	yongs bsgrags bzo ba
ཡོངས་བསྒྲུབས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	fully established nature	yongs bsgrubs kyi rang bzhin
ཡོངས་ངལ	fatigue, weariness	yongs ngal
ཡོངས་བསྔོ	completely dedicate the merit	yongs bsngo
ཡོངས་གཅོད	cognitive operation of determining, SA rnam gcod, limit, beginning	yongs gcod
ཡོངས་གཅོད་ཀྱི་དགོས་པ	positive purpose	yongs gcod kyi dgos pa
ཡོངས་གཅོད་དུ	in any definitive sense	yongs gcod du
ཡོངས་གཅོད་དུ་གྲུབ	cognitive operation of determining	yongs gcod du grub
ཡོངས་གཅོད་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	exclusively established	yongs gcod du grub pa
ཡོངས་གཅོད་འབྱུང	the origin of suffering	yongs gcod 'byung
ཡོངས་འཇོ་མ	milk cow	yongs 'jo ma
ཡོངས་འཇོམ	cow	yongs 'jom
ཡོངས་འཇོམས	iron beam	yongs 'joms
ཡོངས་བརྗེས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	brjod 'dod kyi dngos po gang rung gi yon tan dang bya ba la sogs pa phar tshur bsnol te go brjes byas pa'i rgyan zhig, don rgyan gyi nang gses shig	yongs brjes kyi rgyan
ཡོངས་གཏད	entrusting	yongs gtad
ཡོངས་རྟོག་པ	thorough/ comprehensive/ detailed investigation/ examination/ consideration, complete understanding/ comprehension	yongs rtog pa
ཡོངས་རྟོགས	complete/ perfect knowledge/ understanding, full consideration/ discussion, exhaustive inquiry	yongs rtogs
ཡོངས་ཐོས	chang	yongs thos
ཡོངས་འཐོར	mon lug gla sgang	yongs 'thor
ཡོངས་དག་པ	Perfectly pure	yongs dag pa
ཡོངས་དག་འབུལ་བ	[gso sbyong] offering by 1 completely pure	yongs dag 'bul ba
ཡོངས་དག་བཞི	dag pa bzhi, four complete purities	yongs dag bzhi
ཡོངས་གདུང	great heat/ affliction	yongs gdung
ཡོངས་འདས་པ	to utterly transcend	yongs 'das pa
ཡོངས་འདུ	1) all gathering/ combining; 2)	yongs 'du
ཡོངས་འདུ་ཅན	mt spos ngad ldan	yongs 'du can
ཡོངས་འདུ་ས་བརྟོལ	the wishfulfilling tree, piercing the earth, where all the gods assemble northeast of the capital of India	yongs 'du sa brtol
ཡོངས་འདུ་ས་བརྟོལ་ལྗོན་ཤིང	{yongs 'du sa brtol ljon shing} wishing tree	yongs 'du sa brtol ljon shing
ཡོངས་འདུད	tree	yongs 'dud
ཡོངས་འདུས	{yongs 'dus} wish-fulfilling tree	yongs 'dus
ཡོངས་འདུས་བརྟོལ	coral tree, erythrina indica, tree of paradise	yongs 'dus brtol
ཡོངས་འདུས་ས་རྡོལ	{yongs 'dus sa rdol}	yongs 'dus sa rdol
ཡོངས་འདྲེན	1) rgyan 'jog gi game; 2) buddha; 3) Indra	yongs 'dren
ཡོངས་འདྲེན་པ	leader	yongs 'dren pa
ཡོངས་འདྲེས	gab tshig gi rgyan gyi sa bcad dang po nas 15 bar gyi mtshan nyid various mixing gab tshig	yongs 'dres
ཡོངས་ལྡན་མ	the earth	yongs ldan ma
ཡོངས་བསྡུས	acquiring	yongs bsdus
ཡོངས་པ	distracted	yongs pa
ཡོངས་སྤོང་ཉིད	avoid	yongs spong nyid
ཡོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	1) complete longs spyod pa practice, enjoy, realize; 2) servant	yongs spyod pa
ཡོངས་ཕྱོགས	chariot	yongs phyogs
ཡོངས་ཕྲོགས	gang du tshig sbyor mang po'i phreng ba snga ma snga ma'i don phyi ma phyi mas phrogs pa ltar du gab pa'i bdag nyid tsam de ni yongs su phrogs pa zhes bya ba'i gab tshig	yongs phrogs
ཡོངས་འཕོས	utterly transferred	yongs 'phos
ཡོངས་བྱང་ལམ	path of utter purity	yongs byang lam
ཡོངས་བྲལ་བ	completely overcome	yongs bral ba
ཡོངས་དབང	lion	yongs dbang
ཡོངས་འབབ	[alcohol in] chang	yongs 'bab
ཡོངས་འབྲེལ་བ	combine with	yongs 'brel ba
ཡོངས་སྦྱོར	friendship, company 2514	yongs sbyor
ཡོངས་མི་གཏོང་བ	non abandonment	yongs mi gtong ba
ཡོངས་མི་འབྱུང	not transcend	yongs mi 'byung
ཡོངས་སྨིན	maturing	yongs smin
ཡོངས་ཚོལ	craving, hankering	yongs tshol
ཡོངས་ཚོལ་བ	through investigation/ search, name, given thing, designation for essential nature/ particularity	yongs tshol ba
ཡོངས་འཛིན	tutor (hon.)	yongs 'dzin
ཡོངས་འཛིན་ཀུན་དགའ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	bde chen	yongs 'dzin kun dga' lhun grub
ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡོངས་འཛིན	the second, kun dga' lhun grub, 1617-1676	chos 'khor yongs 'dzin
ཡོངས་འཛིན་སྐུ་བགྲེས	senior tutor [of Dalai Lama]	yongs 'dzin sku bgres
ཡོངས་འཛིན་སྐུ་གཞོན	junior tutor [of Dalai Lama]	yongs 'dzin sku gzhon
ཡོངས་འཛིན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	appropriating cause	yongs 'dzin gyi rgyu
ཡོངས་འཛིན་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	spiritual master / teacher	yongs 'dzin dge ba'i bshes gnyen
ཡོངས་འཛིན་ངག་དབང་གྲགས་པ	16th cent. Bhutanese {gter ston}	yongs 'dzin ngag dbang grags pa
ཡོངས་འཛིན་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Yongdzin Lodrö Gyaltsen	yongs 'dzin blo gros rgyal mtshan
ཡོངས་འཛིན་ལྷོ་པ	tutor of Panchen Lama	yongs 'dzin lho pa
ཡོངས་རྫོགས	complete; entirety, entire	yongs rdzogs
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་དབང	{dbang bzhi pa}	yongs rdzogs kyi dbang
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་ལུགས	complete system	yongs rdzogs kyi lugs
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	plenary session	yongs rdzogs gros tshogs
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་དགེ་བསྙེན	genyen keeping the four root precepts and chang bcas lnga	yongs rdzogs dge bsnyen
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་འདྲ་མཉམ	complete =ity	yongs rdzogs 'dra mnyam
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་པ	altogether, fully perfected / completed, entire	yongs rdzogs pa
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་དཔྱད	Total Miraculous Reading in lde'u 'phrul	yongs rdzogs 'phrul gyi dpyad
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་མི་རྣམས	whole/ all the people	yongs rdzogs mi rnams
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་རབ་དགའི་ལྷ་ཁང	{yongs rdzogs rab dga'i lha khang	yongs rdzogs rab dga'i lha khang
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ལས་མཚམས་འཇོག་པ	general strike	yongs rdzogs las mtshams 'jog pa
ཡོངས་རྫོགས་སུ	altogether	yongs rdzogs su
ཡོངས་ཟིན་པ	being taken hold of	yongs zin pa
ཡོངས་ཟླུམ་མིག	chicken	yongs zlum mig
ཡོངས་བཟང་ཅན	juniper, tree of paradise growing on lofty peaks of himalaya	yongs bzang can
ཡོངས་ལ	throughout	yongs la
ཡོངས་ལ་ཁྱབ	all-embracing	yongs la khyab
ཡོངས་ལགས	yes sir, it will be or it will do	yongs lags
ཡོངས་ལུགས་གཉིས་བསྟན	spiritual and temporal teachings	yongs lugs gnyis bstan
ཡོངས་ཤེས	certainty	yongs shes
ཡོངས་ཤེས་པ	through knowledge	yongs shes pa
ཡོངས་སུ	completely, exhaustively, thoroughly	yongs su
ཡོངས་སུ་དཀར་བ	truly pristine	yongs su dkar ba
ཡོངས་སུ་དཀྲིས	ensnared, entangled, all round	yongs su dkris
ཡོངས་སུ་བཀག	wholly forbidden, stopped	yongs su bkag
ཡོངས་སུ་བཀྲུས	well-washed	yongs su bkrus
ཡོངས་སུ་སྐོར	completely surrounded	yongs su skor
ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོ་བ	completely repentant, sincere regret	yongs su skyo ba
ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོབས་པ	wholly protected/ saved	yongs su skyobs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྐན	completely extended/ stretched out	yongs su brkan
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྐྱང	completely stretched out	yongs su brkyang
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྐོར་བ	completely surrounded by	yongs su bskor ba
ཡོངས་སུ་ཁེབས་ཏེ	being covered all over	yongs su khebs te
ཡོངས་སུ་ཁྱབ	completely pervading	yongs su khyab
ཡོངས་སུ་ཁྱབ་པའི	all[-pervading], completely pervaded, universal complete, surrounded, wide-spread, largescale, broad, general	yongs su khyab pa'i
ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	transformed, natural, wholly changed, matured	yongs su gyur pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་པ་ལས	from the transformation [of.]	yongs su gyur pa las
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས	1) public, open, rigs according to ordinary opinion; 2) known by all, well-known, famous	yongs su grags
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས་པ	everywhere renowned	yongs su grags pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲགས་པའི	1) public, open, rigs according to ordinary opinion; 2) known by all, well-known, famous	yongs su grags pa'i
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	perfect identity	yongs su grub pa'i mtshan nyid
ཡོངས་སུ་གྲོལ་བ	total freedom; totally free (use "completel(ly)" for rnam grol) 2515	yongs su grol ba
ཡོངས་སུ་དགའ་བ	Complete Joy realm	yongs su dga' ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བགྲེང	binding, counting	yongs su bgreng
ཡོངས་སུ་མགུ་བ	be very joyful	yongs su mgu ba
ཡོངས་སུ་མགུ་ཝ	be very joyful	yongs su mgu wa
ཡོངས་སུ་འགུལ་བ	tremble violently, thrash about, be very moved	yongs su 'gul ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འགེབས་པ	cover completely	yongs su 'gebs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འགེམས	completely enlightening	yongs su 'gems
ཡོངས་སུ་འགོག་པ	stop completely, pull out, take away entirely	yongs su 'gog pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་པ	exchange	yongs su 'gyur pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	deterioration	yongs su 'gyur ba
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒོལ	dispute hotly	yongs su rgol
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒོལ་བ	hotly dispute	yongs su rgol ba
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒྱ་མ་ཆད་པ	unlimited expansiveness	yongs su rgya ma chad pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒྱས་པ	flooded	yongs su rgyas pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྒྱུད	succession, regular series	yongs su rgyud
ཡོངས་སུ་སྒྲོགས་བྱེད	resounding	yongs su sgrogs byed
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྒྱུར	entirely changed	yongs su bsgyur
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྒྱུར་པ	[act of ] causing to grow, development, ripening	yongs su bsgyur pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྒྲགས་པ	proclaimed	yongs su bsgrags pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྒྲིབས	utterly obscured or covered	yongs su bsgribs
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྔོ་བ	make full prayer	yongs su bsngo ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྔོ་བའི་འཁོར་ལོ	'phags pa yongs su bsngo ba'i 'khor lo zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo	yongs su bsngo ba'i 'khor lo
ཡོངས་སུ་གཅོད	cut off entirely, completely decide/ resolve	yongs su gcod
ཡོངས་སུ་གཅོད་པ་བྱེད་པ	see yongs su gcod pa. [mss]	yongs su gcod pa byed pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གཅོད་པར་བྱ་བ	the determined object [ggd]	yongs su gcod par bya ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བཅད་པ	the particularities of an object discerned through touching, discerned. Syn {shes pa} cognition, determination	yongs su bcad pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	put in all	yongs su 'jug pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྗོད	is proclaimed	yongs su brjod
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྗོད་པ	speak without reserve	yongs su brjod pa
ཡོངས་སུ་ཉམས་པ	to lose all inherent strength, degenerate completely, be exhausted	yongs su nyams pa
ཡོངས་སུ་ཉམས་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན	having completely exhausted dharmas	yongs su nyams pa'i chos can
ཡོངས་སུ་ཉམས་པའི་སྟོབས	strength is completely gone	yongs su nyams pa'i stobs
ཡོངས་སུ་མཉེན་པར་བྱེད་པ	make completely soft/ smooth/ pliable	yongs su mnyen par byed pa
ཡོངས་སུ་མཉེན་བྱེད	make very soft, pliable, smooth	yongs su mnyen byed
ཡོངས་སུ་གཏུགས་པ	the state of being able to overlook differences	yongs su gtugs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གཏུགས་པའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	TSE	yongs su gtugs pa'i sgrub pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	completely letting go	yongs su gtong ba
ཡོངས་སུ་རྟོག་པ	completely comprehending, parikalpita, hypothesis, assumption, imputation, fancy, hypothesize, suppose, conceive, imagine, consideration, reflection, thought. Syn {kun tu rtog pa}	yongs su rtog pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྟོགས་པ	decision having arisen from completely reliable knowledge	yongs su rtogs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྟོགས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	having arisen from quite reliable information of	yongs su rtogs pa las byung ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྟག་པ	evaluation of the qualities of things	yongs su brtag pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྟགས་པ	imagination, imaginatively constructed	yongs su brtags pa
ཡོངས་སུ་བརྟགས་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	imaginatively constructed [reality]	yongs su brtags pa'i ngo bo nyid
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྟན་པ	announced	yongs su bstan pa
ཡོངས་སུ་ཐོབ	furniture, shaving	yongs su thob
ཡོངས་སུ་ཐོས	chang	yongs su thos
ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	immaculate, fully purified, quite clean, absolute purification, state of nirvana, purification by righteousness, purity of one's doctrine	yongs su dag pa
ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ་བཞི	TSE	yongs su dag pa bzhi
ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ་གསུམ	the three complete purities	yongs su dag pa gsum
ཡོངས་སུ་དོར་བ	abandoned	yongs su dor ba
ཡོངས་སུ་དྲིས་པ	thorough acquaintance, 1 of 6 stobs	yongs su dris pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གདུང་བ	extreme torment	yongs su gdung ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བདུང་བ	extreme torment	yongs su bdung ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འདས	totally beyond	yongs su 'das
ཡོངས་སུ་འདོགས་པ	fasten well	yongs su 'dogs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲི	investigation, enquiry	yongs su 'dri
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲི་བ	investigation, inquiry	yongs su 'dri ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲིས་པ	complete acquaintance, familiarity	yongs su 'dris pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲིས་པའི་སྟོབས	power of full acquaintance	yongs su 'dris pa'i stobs
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲིས་པའི་སྟོབས་དྲུག	six powers of/ thorough acquaintance/familiarity	yongs su 'dris pa'i stobs drug
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲེན	guide	yongs su 'dren
ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲེན་པ	guide	yongs su 'dren pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྡོགས་པ	complete perfection	yongs su rdogs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་གནས་པ	obsession [defiling mental factors]	yongs su gnas pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Atiyoga, SA sems sde, klong sde, man ngag sde, Anuyoga	yongs su rnal 'byor
ཡོངས་སུ་བསྣུན	completely pricked/ pierced/ loosened	yongs su bsnun
ཡོངས་སུ་དཔྱོད་པ	completely investigating	yongs su dpyod pa
ཡོངས་སུ་སྤང་བ	give up entirely	yongs su spang ba
ཡོངས་སུ་སྤངས་པ	to have forsaken, to forsake	yongs su spangs pa
ཡོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད	servants, slaves, honeymoon of a brahman	yongs su spyod
ཡོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ	appreciation	yongs su spyod pa
ཡོངས་སུ་སྤྲས	completely adorned with	yongs su spras
ཡོངས་སུ་བྲལ་བ	utterly transcend	yongs su bral ba
ཡོངས་སུ་དབང	lion	yongs su dbang
ཡོངས་སུ་དབུལ་བྱ	makes lavish gifts to poor and monks	yongs su dbul bya
ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱིན་པ	completely/ freely give/ bestow	yongs su sbyin pa
ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱོང་བ	preparation	yongs su sbyong ba
ཡོངས་སུ་མ་རྫོགས་པའི་འགོག་པ	TSE	yongs su ma rdzogs pa'i 'gog pa
ཐམས་ཅད་འགགས་པའམ	lan gcig phyir 'ong ba'i 'bras bus bsdus pa'i 'dod khams kyi sgom spang drug 'gags	thams cad 'gags pa'am
ཡོངས་སུ་མ་བཟུང	not upheld yongs su ma shes pa shes pa'i dbang po faculty of omniscience	yongs su ma bzung
ཡོངས་སུ་མི་སྐྱོ	indefatigability	yongs su mi skyo
ཡོངས་སུ་མི་ངལ	[persistent] indefatigability	yongs su mi ngal
ཡོངས་སུ་མི་གཏོང	non-abandonment	yongs su mi gtong
ཡོངས་སུ་མི་ཤེས	[no] comprehension	yongs su mi shes
ཡོངས་སུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདའ་བ	nirvana beyond the extremes of the world and peace	yongs su mya ngan las 'da' ba
ཡོངས་སུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས	final nirvana. the final passing away of buddhas such as Shakyamuni	yongs su mya ngan las 'das
ཡོངས་སུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	parinirvana. 'Completely passing beyond suffering.' 1) The final entry into nirvana. 2) Honorific term for the passing away of a buddha or a fully accomplished master	yongs su mya ngan las 'das pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྨོངས	completely stupid/ obscured, perplexed	yongs su rmongs
ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན	quite ripe	yongs su smin
ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་གྱུར་ནས	comes to maturity	yongs su smin gyur nas
ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	[complete] maturing, ripening	yongs su smin pa
ཡོངས་སུ་སྨོད	disrespectful, infidel	yongs su smod
ཡོངས་སུ་ཚང་བ	to complete, be complete, full in all parts	yongs su tshang ba
ཡོངས་སུ་ཚོལ་བ	thorough investigation / search	yongs su tshol ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འཚོལ་བ་དྲུག	TSE	yongs su 'tshol ba drug
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན	appropriation	yongs su 'dzin
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	1) assistance, receive into one's care/help; 2) gain, obtain	yongs su 'dzin pa
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་དགེ་བ	{bsod nams bya ba'i dngos pos mtho ris dang byang grol skyed pa} 'Fully embraced virtues' produce the higher realms, enlightenment, and emancipation by means of meritorious actions.	yongs su 'dzin pa'i dge ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་མི་དགེ་བ	undesired fruitions of transgressions of the three gates 'byin pa'o	yongs su 'dzin pa'i mi dge ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	bzo gnas goms pas slad ma'i tshe de la goms pa myur du rdzogs pa lta bu'o	yongs su 'dzin pa'i lung ma bstan
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པས་མི་དགེ་བ	{sgo gsum gyi nyes spyod kyi 'bras bu mi 'dod pa 'byin pa yongs su 'dzin pas mi dge ba} 'Fully embraced nonvirtues' are negative deeds of the three doors which bring undesirable results.	yongs su 'dzin pas mi dge ba
ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{dper na bzo gnas goms pas slad ma'i tshe de la goms pa myur du rdzogs pa lta bu'o,} 'Fully embraced indeterminates' are, for instance, having grown accustomed to arts and crafts, one will quickly ...	yongs su 'dzin pas lung ma bstan
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པའི་འགོག་པ	TSE	yongs su rdzogs pa'i 'gog pa
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པའི་དཔའ་པོ་གཅིག་པུ	the matchless heroism of the Bodhisattva	yongs su rdzogs pa'i dpa' po gcig pu
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པའི་འབྱུང་བ་ལྔ	the five fully perfected elements	yongs su rdzogs pa'i 'byung ba lnga
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པར	entirely, the whole completed	yongs su rdzogs par
ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་བྱས་ནས	in developing	yongs su rdzogs byas nas
ཡོངས་སུ་གཟིར་བ	oppress	yongs su gzir ba
ཡོངས་སུ་བཟུང་བའི་དངོས་པོ	something which has been appropriated	yongs su bzung ba'i dngos po
ཡོངས་སུ་ཤེས་པའི་དབང་པོ	faculty of omniscience	yongs su shes pa'i dbang po
ཡོངས་སུ་བསླད	completely lost in perversity	yongs su bslad
ཡོངས་སུ་བསླད་དེ	quite lost in perverseness	yongs su bslad de
ཡོངས་བསལ	utterly dispel	yongs bsal
ཡོངས་ལྷུང	lost, swerved, heavy rain	yongs lhung
ཡོངས་ལྷུངས	strong rain	yongs lhungs
ཡོད་སྐད	say something exists, they say...	yod skad
ཡོད་སྐད་འདུག	I heard that there is	yod skad 'dug
ཡོད་སྐྱོ་བ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	[udveganusmr.ti] - mindfulness of agitation, one of the {rjes su dran pa bcu} ten mindfulnesses	yod skyo ba rjes su dran pa
ཡོད་ཁམས་ཀུན་གསལ	sgra bla that illuminate existence	yod khams kun gsal
ཡོད་ཁྱབ	pervasion of existence	yod khyab
ཡོད་དགུ	all that exists, everything, all matter	yod dgu
ཡོད་དགུ་ཅོག	NyTh: yod do cog dang 'dra, that is, "all that/what exists." See 2517 entry for cog for MG's usage notes. [mss]	yod dgu cog
ཡོད་དགུ་བྱིན་པ	bestows all wealth	yod dgu byin pa
ཡོད་དགུ་རྩལ་སྤྲུག	do 1's best, do w all 1's strength	yod dgu rtsal sprug
ཡོད་འགོད	copula "to have -- to exist"	yod 'god
ཡོད་འགྲོ	yod pa'i bzo,//kho la las ka'i bsam 'char yod 'gro	yod 'gro
ཡོད་རྒུ	yod dgu	yod rgu
ཡོད་རྒུ་ཅོག	NyTh: yod do cog dang 'dra, that is, "all that/what exists." See entry for cog for MG's usage notes. [mss]	yod rgu cog
ཡོད་རྒུ་རྩལ་སྤྲུག	do 1's best, do w all 1's strength	yod rgu rtsal sprug
ཡོད་རྒྱུའི་ཀུན་བརྟགས	mind-only school kyi yod pa yin pa'i kun btags te gzung 'dzin rdzas gzhan du sgro 'dogs pa'o	yod rgyu'i kun brtags
ཡོད་ཅེས་པ	thus existing	yod ces pa
ཡོད་རྟོགས	existence realizing pramana	yod rtogs
ཡོད་ཐང	that existing, thoroughly clear	yod thang
ཡོད་ཐང་གང་པོ	all that exists	yod thang gang po
ཡོད་ཐང་པ	there seems to be	yod thang pa
ཡོད་ཐོས་སྣང་གྲག་ཐམས་ཅད	all that is	yod thos snang grag thams cad
བི༹སིབླེ་ཨནད་ཨཽདིབླེ	all forms and sounds	visible and audible
ཡོད་ཐོས་སྣང་བ	(what is/ all that is) tangible	yod thos snang ba
ཡོད་མཐའ	extreme of existence, absolutist extreme	yod mtha'
ཡོད་དམ་ཅི	{thar pa yod dam ci} so how could you be free?	yod dam ci
ཡོད་དམ་བྱས་ན	if [you] ask is it something	yod dam byas na
ཡོད་དུ་མི་སྟེར་མེད་པའི་འདྲེ	'dre who annihilate and do not allow to exist	yod du mi ster med pa'i 'dre
ཡོད་དེས་ཆོག	having that is sufficient	yod des chog
ཡོད་དོ་ཅོག	CM: gang yod tshang ma, "all what/that exists." See entry for cog for MG's usage notes. [mss]	yod do cog
ཡོད་མདོག་ཁ་པོ	1) while something is	yod mdog kha po
ཡོད་འདུག	there is	yod 'dug
ཡོད་འདུག་པ	was	yod 'dug pa
ཡོད་ན	if it were, if it existed	yod na
ཡོད་ན་སྙམ	"I wish I had that."	yod na snyam
ཡོད་ན་མེད་ན	R/GD (colloq): = {rtsa chen po} very important, crucial. R explained this as meaning: "if this one	yod na med na
ཡོད་པ་སྐད	I had heard that there was	yod pa skad
ཡོད་པ་འཇིག་པ	1 of log lta	yod pa 'jig pa
ཡོད་པ་ཉིད	existence	yod pa nyid
ཡོད་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་མཐའ	the extreme of existence	yod pa nyid kyi mtha'
ཡོད་པ་ཉིད་ཏུ་ཡོངས་སུ་བརྟགས་པ	absolutistic imagination	yod pa nyid tu yongs su brtags pa
ཡོད་པ་ཐག་ཆོད	there must surely be	yod pa thag chod
ཡོད་པ་དེ་ཡིན	Here he is	yod pa de yin
ཡོད་པ་འདྲ	of course, no doubt	yod pa 'dra
ཡོད་པ་མ་ཡིན	there is no, it doesn't exist	yod pa ma yin
ཡོད་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ་འཛིན་པ	TSE	yod pa ma yin pa 'dzin pa
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན	exists, I had	yod pa yin
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་པས	did you have--?	yod pa yin pas
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་པས་ན་རེད	because something exists	yod pa yin pas na red
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་པས་ནའོ	because something exists	yod pa yin pas na'o
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་ཙང་རེད	because something exists	yod pa yin tsang red
ཡོད་པ་ཡིན་ལ	does have	yod pa yin la
ཡོད་པ་རེད	existential verb	yod pa red
ཡོད་པ་རེད་པས	did he/ she/ it/ they	yod pa red pas
ཧབེ༹	-?, are/ was there --?	have
ཡོད་པ་ལས	only, alone	yod pa las
ཡོད་པའི་ཀུན་བཏགས	accountable, rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags false conceptions	yod pa'i kun btags
ཡོད་པའི་ངང་དེར	while thus occupied	yod pa'i ngang der
ཡོད་པའི་དངོས་པོ	apparently existent thing	yod pa'i dngos po
ཡོད་པའི་དངོས་པོ་ལ་ལོག་ལྟ	wrong view about existing things	yod pa'i dngos po la log lta
ཡོད་པའི་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of existence	yod pa'i stong pa nyid
ཡོད་པའི་དོན་ལ་མེད་པར་ལྟ་བ	regard an existent fact as being nonexistent	yod pa'i don la med par lta ba
ཡོད་པའི་གནས	place one is in	yod pa'i gnas
ཡོད་པའི་ཚེ	when it is, when it was	yod pa'i tshe
ཡོད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	endowed w selfexistence, inherently existent	yod pa'i rang bzhin can
ཡོད་པར	as being	yod par
ཡོད་པར་གྱུར་པ	{gang la gnyis po yod par gyur pa de} he who comes to possess both of these	yod par gyur pa
ཡོད་པར་འགྱུར	shall have, will have	yod par 'gyur
ཡོད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become, begin to exist, gain possession	yod par 'gyur ba
ཡོད་པར་འདུག་པ	there is	yod par 'dug pa
ཡོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	provide, beget, produce, effect	yod par byed pa
ཡོད་པར་སྨྱ་བ	absolution	yod par smya ba
ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ་རྣམས	advocates of being	yod par smra ba rnams
ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བའི་སྡེ	Sarvastivadins	yod par smra ba'i sde
ཡོད་པར་འཛིན་པ	consider to be existing	yod par 'dzin pa
ཡོད་པས	interrogative form "is it?"	yod pas
ཡོད་པས་དབང་གིས་རེད	because something exists	yod pas dbang gis red
ཡོད་པས་རེད	because something exists	yod pas red
ཡོད་པས་སོ	because something exists	yod pas so
ཡོད་འབུལ་བ	bestow a gift, bring an offering	yod 'bul ba
ཡོད་འབྱོར་བྱེད	show off, put on	yod 'byor byed
ཡོད་མ་ཡིན	would not exist	yod ma yin
ཡོད་མི་ཚོར	not feel its existence, not feel to exist	yod mi tshor
ཡོད་མི་སྲིད	there does not exist	yod mi srid
ཡོད་མིན	not existing as this, nonexistence, guilandina plant	yod min
ཡོད་མིན་ཉིད	non-existence	yod min nyid
ཡོད་མིན་མེད་མིན	Neither Presence nor Absence [of conceptions]. The third abode in the Formless Realm dwelling on the thought "My perception is neither absent nor present!"	yod min med min
ཡོད་མིན་མེད་མིན་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	the ayatana of neither existence nor nonexistence	yod min med min skye mched
ཡོད་མིན་མེད་མིན་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་པ	syn {srid pa'i rtse mo}, Mipham: The perception-sphere of Neither Presence Nor Absence [of Perception] is also called the Summit of Existence.	yod min med min skye mched pa
ཡོད་མིན་མེད་མིན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	realm	yod min med min gyi skye mched
ཨོཕ༹་ནེཨིཐེར	existence-nor-nonexistence	of neither
ཡོད་མེད	existence and non-existence	yod med
ཡོད་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	the distinctions of being and not being / having and not having	yod med kyi khyad par
ཡོད་མེད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་ཙམ་མ་གཏོགས	apart from that there was no difference between	yod med kyi khyad tsam ma gtogs
ཡོད་མེད་ཀྱི་བློས	analyses that confirm or refute	yod med kyi blos
ཡོད་མེད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	something that exists or does not exist	yod med kyi yul
ཡོད་མེད་སྐྱེ་འགོག	the production and cessation of existence and non existence; existence and nonexistence, arising and ceasing; 'bras bu la dpyad	yod med skye 'gog
ནས་འགོག་པ	'bras bu la dpyod pa ni myu gu skye na sa bon gyi skabs yod pa skye'am med pa skye zhes dpyad pas/ sa bon gyi skabs yod pa skye na myu gu sa bon las ma skyes pa dang/ rgyu la ma ltos par grub zin p...	nas 'gog pa
ཡོད་མེད་སྐྱེ་འགོག་གི་གཏན་ཚིགས	reason for the production and cessation of existence and non existence	yod med skye 'gog gi gtan tshigs
ཡོད་མེད་གོ་བཟློག་སྣང	optical illusion, seeming to see what is not there or vice versa	yod med go bzlog snang
ཡོད་མེད་འགལ་འདུ	contradictions regarding existence or non-existence	yod med 'gal 'du
ཡོད་མེད་མཐའ	limits of existence & nonexistence	yod med mtha'
ཡོད་མེད་མཐའ་གྲོལ	self-liberation from the limits of existence and nonexistence	yod med mtha' grol
ཡོད་མེད་དྲིས་པ	asked after	yod med dris pa
ཡོད་མེད་མ་ཡིན	not both existence and nonexistence	yod med ma yin
ཡོད་མེད་མེད་མེད	not existent and not	yod med med med
ཡོད་མེད་ལས་འདས	beyond existence and nonexistence	yod med las 'das
ཡོད་མེད་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མེད	I don't know if there are any or not	yod med shes kyi med
ཡོད་མོད	SA byung mod	yod mod
ཡོད་མོད་ཀྱི	though indeed it exists	yod mod kyi
ཡོད་སྨྲ	Sarvastivadins	yod smra
ཡོད་སྨྲའི་སྡེ་པ་བདུན	the 7 schools of exponents of existence	yod smra'i sde pa bdun
ཡོད་ཚད	all, completely, entirely, everything, altogether, at the same time, totally, one and all, all, everything	yod tshad
ཡོད་ཚུལ	way of existing, existence, presence	yod tshul
ཡོད་ཚུལ་དེ་གོ་མ་ཐག་ཉོས་སོང	as soon as they heard there was any [they] bought it	yod tshul de go ma thag nyos song
ཡོད་ཚོད་ཡིན	there is probability of its being, semblance of being	yod tshod yin
ཡོད་ཞན་འདྲ	yod pa 'dra,//snang tshul mi 'dra ba 'ga' shas yod zhan 'dra	yod zhan 'dra
ཡོད་བཞིན	[while] existing	yod bzhin
ཡོད་བཞིན་དུ	while present	yod bzhin du
ཡོད་བཞིན་པ	existing	yod bzhin pa
ཡོད་ཡོད	really existent, very real	yod yod
ཡོད་ཡོད་པ	ready-made	yod yod pa
ཡོད་ཡོད་མེད་མེད	R/GD (colloq.): = {yod na med na}. [mss]	yod yod med med
ཡོད་རེ་ཀན	on oath, I swear not	yod re kan
ཡོད་རེ་སྐན	oath that something is w/o hope of existence, certainly nonexistent	yod re skan
ཡོད་རེ་ཤི	oath saying something certainly does not exist	yod re shi
ཡོད་རེད	there are --	yod red
ཡོད་རེད་པས	is are/ was there --?	yod red pas
ཡོད་རེད་བ	is are/ was there --?	yod red ba
ཡོད་ཤག	yod pa gzhir bcas //rang bzhin du skyes pa'i rtsi shing gi rigs la skye stobs chen po zhig yod shag red	yod shag
ཡོད་བཤགས	of a certainty, as a matter of course	yod bshags
ཡོད་ས	place where a person or thing is	yod sa
ཡོད་སྲིད་ཀྱང	is perhaps	yod srid kyang
ཡོན	to repay, present given to priests for religious service or alms, qualities	yon
ཡོན་ཀྱོག	crooked	yon kyog
ཡོན་ཀྲང	head of department	yon krang
ཡོན་ཁར	[arch] not true/ pure/ holy/ real/ genuine	yon khar
ཡོན་ཁྱེར་ད	profane, not very pure, not holy	yon khyer da
ཡོན་གྱི་གནས	religious symbols, images	yon gyi gnas
ཡོན་གྱི་གནས་པ	Syn {sbyin gnas} / {mchod gnas} officer or sacrifice	yon gyi gnas pa
ཡོན་འགྱེད་པ	make offerings	yon 'gyed pa
ཡོན་བསྔོ་བ	dedicating the merit	yon bsngo ba
ཡོན་ཅི་འདོད་གསུང་བ	asked what he wished in return	yon ci 'dod gsung ba
ཡོན་ཆབ	oblation water	yon chab
ཡོན་ཆབ་ཆུ	water offerings	yon chab chu
ཡོན་ཆོད་ལ	above, in the upper part	yon chod la
ཡོན་མཆོད	patron-priest	yon mchod
ཡོན་ཏན་ཀུན་ལྡན	who has developed all good qualities	yon tan kun ldan
ཡོན་ཏན་ཀུན་རྫོགས	{yon tan kun rdzogs buddha	yon tan kun rdzogs
ཡོན་ཏན་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	specialist, 1 w special ability, [w] extraordinary attributes	yon tan khyad par can
ཡོན་ཏན་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་བཞི	four extraordinary attributes [of the ground]	yon tan khyad par can bzhi
ཡོན་ཏན་ཁྲིད་པ	instruction, teaching	yon tan khrid pa
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི	khyad-par bdun - 7 distinctions of enlightened attributes GD	yon tan gyi
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར་བདུན	seven distinctions of enlightened attributes	yon tan gyi khyad par bdun
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་མགྲོན	guests of qualities	yon tan gyi mgron
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་རྒྱན་ནི་དབེན་པ་ཡིན	the finest ornament is solitude yon tan gyi rgyud dpal mchog dang po the tantra dealing with excellent capabilities, one of the {rtsa rgyud sde lnga'i nang tshan} the five basic Mahayoga Tantras wh...	yon tan gyi rgyan ni dben pa yin
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་ཆོས་དྲུག་བཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	Sixtyfour Enlightened Attributes. ten powers, four fearlessnesses, eighteen distinct doctrines of the buddhas and	yon tan gyi chos drug bcu rtsa bzhi
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་བྱིན་རླབས	potentialities of qualities	yon tan gyi byin rlabs
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	cultural bond/ tie	yon tan gyi 'brel ba
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་ཚད	ability, qualifications, standard, degree	yon tan gyi tshad
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་གཞི་གྱུར་མ	a prayer	yon tan gyi gzhi gyur ma
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པ	a thing's qualities gyi khyad chos kyis gzhan rgyud la nus pa skyed tshul drang por brjod pa'i rgyan zhig	yon tan gyi rang bzhin brjod pa
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱིས་བརྒྱན	improved by qualities	yon tan gyis brgyan
ཡོན་ཏན་གྲགས་པ	virtuous glory	yon tan grags pa
ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱལ	one of sku lnga rgyal po	yon tan rgyal
ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Unnadhvaja [Buddha]	yon tan rgyal mtshan
ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱས་པའི་དྲི་ཆུ	urine of a child reaching 8 years old	yon tan rgyas pa'i dri chu
ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve times one hundred qualities. At the level of the first bodhisattva bhumi one is able to simultaneously manifest one hundred nirmanakayas for the benefit of beings. There are eleven other suc...	yon tan brgya phrag bcu gnyis
ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱད	8 good qualities yon tan mngon par bsgrub pa'i bsam gtan - the quality accomplishing samadhi	yon tan brgyad
ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ	1) five enlightened attributes. Pure buddhafields {rnam dag pa'i zhing khams} dimensionless celestial palaces {rgya tshad bral ba'i gzhal yas khang} the radiant and pure rays of light {gsal zhing d...	yon tan lnga
ཡོན་ཏན་ཅན	possessed of merit, having qualifications, learned, wise, talented	yon tan can
ཡོན་ཏན་ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ	has no redeeming qualities at all	yon tan ci yang med pa
ཡོན་ཏན་བཅུ	text cited in bsam gtan mig sgron as an example of man ngag and ascribed to dga' rab rdo rje	yon tan bcu
ཡོན་ཏན་ཆེན་པོ	knowledgeable, educated, learned, talented holy, virtuous, wise	yon tan chen po
ཡོན་ཏན་ཆེན་པོའི	of supreme quality	yon tan chen po'i
ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་པ	to applaud that person's virtues	yon tan brjod pa
ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་པ་ཐོག་མའི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, thog mar bkod pa'i yon tan gyi gsal byed des, phyi ma'i yon tan kun la phan zhing gsal bar byed pa'i rgyan zhig	yon tan brjod pa thog ma'i gsal byed
ཡོན་ཏན་རྟོགས་པ	to think of [someone's] good qualities	yon tan rtogs pa
ཡོན་ཏན་སྟོབས་བཅུ	Ten Powers. The power of knowing places, definite and indefinite {gnas dang gnas ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}, the maturation of deeds {las kyi rnam smin}, diverse volitions {mos pa sna tshogs}, di...	yon tan stobs bcu
ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱིས་བརྒྱན་པ	was ornamented with all virtues yon tan thams cad sdud pa rin po che Precious Gathering of All Qualities	yon tan thams cad kyis brgyan pa
ཡོན་ཏན་མཐའ་ཡས	{rje mkhan po} xiii, 1724-1783	yon tan mtha' yas
ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་པ	embodying all good qualities	yon tan dang ldan pa
ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཞིག་དུ་གྱུར	possessed every good quality	yon tan dang ldan pa zhig du gyur
ཡོན་ཏན་དང་བྲལ་བ	{dpyad na yon tan dang bral ba} if you look at it closely, you can see that it is devoid of positive qualities	yon tan dang bral ba
ཡོན་ཏན་དྲུག	legs pa'i yon tan drug	yon tan drug
ཡོན་ཏན་བདུད་རྩི་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	Syn {bdud rtsi rol pa'i skor}	yon tan bdud rtsi rol pa'i skor
ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན	a spiritual person	yon tan ldan
ཡོན་ཏན་རྣམ་ཐར	life of accomplishment. accomplishments	yon tan rnam thar
ཡོན་ཏན་པ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendental qualities yon tan dpal 'byor lha'i grong khyer la 'gran zla tsam yod pa - had wealth and glory that rivaled the splendor of the gods yon tan phun sum tshogs pa zhig tu gyur	yon tan pa rol phyin pa
ཡོན་ཏན་ཕྲན་བུ	the slightest virtue	yon tan phran bu
ཡོན་ཏན་འཕྲེང་ལྡན	a sugata	yon tan 'phreng ldan
ཡོན་ཏན་བྱིན	gift of virtue	yon tan byin
ཡོན་ཏན་བློ་གྲོས	wise qualities yon tan dben gnas yar klong shel brag power place of Guru Rinpoche's qualities yon tan dben gnas yar klong shel brag {yon tan dben gnas yar klong shel brag	yon tan blo gros
ཡོན་ཏན་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparability from the qualities	yon tan dbyer med
ཡོན་ཏན་འབྱུང་གནས	the source of all good qualities	yon tan 'byung gnas
ཡོན་ཏན་སྦྱོང་བ	train in the virtues yon tan ma tshang ba'i khyad par brjod pa - rgyan expression in which qualities of a thing 1 wants to talk about are incomplete but its action especially high/ noble	yon tan sbyong ba
ཡོན་ཏན་མེད	not talented	yon tan med
ཡོན་ཏན་མེད་ཀྱང་ཡོན་དུ་བསྐུར	[with wealth] even if you lack merit, people give you gifts	yon tan med kyang yon du bskur
ཡོན་ཏན་མེད་པ	w/o virtues/ good qualities, ignorant	yon tan med pa
ཡོན་ཏན་ཚང་བ	{mdo rgyud nas gang bshad pa'i yon tan tshang ba zhig dgos pa yin} must have all the qualities described in the sutras and tantras	yon tan tshang ba
ཡོན་ཏན་ཚད་མེད	infinite qualities	yon tan tshad med
ཡོན་ཏན་ཚིག་བརྗོད	words of praise	yon tan tshig brjod
ཡོན་ཏན་མཛོད	yon tan mdzod	yon tan mdzod
ཡོན་ཏན་མཛོད་ལས	the Treasury of Precious Qualities describes	yon tan mdzod las
ཡོན་ཏན་རྫོགས	perfected qualified	yon tan rdzogs
ཡོན་ཏན་རྫོགས་པ	perfect all attainments	yon tan rdzogs pa
ཡོན་ཏན་ཞིང་མཆོག	greatness and virtue	yon tan zhing mchog
ཡོན་ཏན་འོད	Gunaprabha; The chief student of Vasubhandu in the subject of Vinaya. Composed the Basic Teachings of the Discipline Code ('dul ba mdo rtsa) and the Hundred Karma (las rgya)	yon tan 'od
ཡོན་ཏན་ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པ་ཉིད	complete grasp of enlightened attributes GD	yon tan yongs su 'dzin pa nyid
ཡོན་ཏན་རང་ཆས	its own intrinsic quality yon tan rin chen me tog ku tu rgyas pa yon tan rn chen me tog ku tu rgyas pa bodhisattva	yon tan rang chas
ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྡུད་པ	Gathering of Precious Qualities [thd]	yon tan rin po che sdud pa
ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཛོད	the "Precious Treasury of Virtues" a root text by Jigmey Lingpa on the complete path of enlightenment	yon tan rin po che'i mdzod
ཡོན་ཏན་ཤེས	talented, w useful knowledge	yon tan shes
ཡོན་ཏན་སློབ་པ	learn the properties/ virtues [medicine etc.] buddha qualities	yon tan slob pa
ཡོན་ཏན་གསུམ	Three Attributes, [in {grangs can pa, snying stobs} spiritual power, {rdul} energy, {mun pa} inertia. Spiritual power, according to the Samkhya philosophy yon tan gsum} -3 qualities [of the S mkhya...	yon tan gsum
ཡོན་ཏན་གསུམ་པ	Adherents of the Three Attributes; positor of three attributes	yon tan gsum pa
ཡོན་ཏན་བསླབ	study a lot	yon tan bslab
ཡོན་ཏན་བསླབས་པའི་ཡོན་དུ	as a gist for giving his teaching	yon tan bslabs pa'i yon du
ཡོན་ཏན་ལྷག་པ	eminent; also {yon tan ches lhag pa}	yon tan lhag pa
ཡོན་ཏན་ལྷན་ཅིག་བརྗོད་པ	rgyan where qualities of example and meaning of the thing 1 wants to talk about snga are not earlier or later but occur at the same time	yon tan lhan cig brjod pa
ཡོན་ཏུང་ས་ཁུལ	far E	yon tung sa khul
ཡོན་དག	dad can + - faithful patrons	yon dag
ཡོན་དུ་འགྱུར	{khyod kyis bslangs nas nga la 'bul nus na yon du 'gyur} should you bring her to me, that would be payment enough	yon du 'gyur
ཡོན་དུ་འབུལ	bestow a gift, bring an offering	yon du 'bul
ཡོན་དུ་འབུལ་བ	present as a gift	yon du 'bul ba
ཡོན་བདག	donors offering, patron, priest who performs a sacrifice, householder	yon bdag
ཡོན་བདག་དད་ཅན	devoted patrons	yon bdag dad can
ཡོན་བདག་ཕོ་མོ	men and women patrons	yon bdag pho mo
ཡོན་བདག་ཕྱུག་མོ	wealthy patroness	yon bdag phyug mo
ཡོན་བདག་བྱས	is sponsoring, benefactor, patron, sponsor	yon bdag byas
ཡོན་བདག་བསོད་ནམས་ཅན	meritorious patron	yon bdag bsod nams can
ཡོན་བདབ་བྱས	is sponsoring, benefactor, patron, sponsor	yon bdab byas
ཡོན་གནས	1) object of offerings/ worship [eg the three jewels]; 2) patron and recipient of offerings; 3) having virtues/ good qualities	yon gnas
ཡོན་གནས་རྣམ་བཞི	the four recipients of offerings [bla ma, 'jam pa'i dbyangs, dbyangs can ma, srung ma]	yon gnas rnam bzhi
ཡོན་པོ	crooked, not straight, slope	yon po
ཡོན་པོའི་ལས	{g.yo las skyes pa'i sgo gsum gyi las} 'crooked actions' which are actions of the three doors produced through deceitfulness	yon po'i las
ཡོན་དཔྱོད	wrong interpretation, false judgment	yon dpyod
ཡོན་ཕུལ་བ	to make offerings	yon phul ba
ཡོན་འབུལ	bestow a gift, bring an offering	yon 'bul
ཡོན་འབུལ་བ	bestow a gift, bring an offering	yon 'bul ba
ཡོན་འབུལ་འོས	worth of a present	yon 'bul 'os
ཡོན་མི་དགོས་པ	free	yon mi dgos pa
ཡོན་ཙི	atomic, nuclear	yon tsi
ཡོན་ཙི་ཏན	atomic bomb	yon tsi tan
ཡོན་ཙི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན	atomic	yon tsi rdul phran
ཡོན་ཙི་ནང་སྙིང	atomic nucleus	yon tsi nang snying
ཡོན་ཙི་ནང་སྙིང་དངོས་གཞིས	nuclear physics	yon tsi nang snying dngos gzhis
ཡོན་ཙིའི་འཁྱགས་གཏོར་གྲུ་གཟིངས	nuclear icebreaker	yon tsi'i 'khyags gtor gru gzings
ཡོན་ཙིའི་སྙིང་པོ	atomic nucleus	yon tsi'i snying po
ཡོན་ཙིའི་ནང་སྙིང	atomic nucleus	yon tsi'i nang snying
ཡོན་ཙིའི་ནུས་པ	nuclear power	yon tsi'i nus pa
ཡོན་ཙིའི་ནུས་པའི་གློག་འདོན་ས་ཚིགས	nuclear power station	yon tsi'i nus pa'i glog 'don sa tshigs
ཡོན་ཙིའི་དམག་འཁྲུག	nuclear war	yon tsi'i dmag 'khrug
ཡོན་ཙིའི་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapons	yon tsi'i mtshon cha
ཡོན་ཚང	standard of knowledge or education, qualification	yon tshang
ཡོན་ཚད	1) shes yon gyi chu tshad; 2) wages or las don gyi thob tshad	yon tshad
ཡོན་ཚད་ལ་བལྟས་ནས	in accord w ability	yon tshad la bltas nas
ཡོན་ཚིག་བརྗོད	words of praise	yon tshig brjod
ཡོན་ཟོང	things to be offered to the sangha etc.	yon zong
ཡོན་བཟང	wisely	yon bzang
ཡོན་ལ་བསྔོ་བ་མཛད་པ	dedicated the merit	yon la bsngo ba mdzad pa
ཡོན་བཤད	explain the benefits of offering and the word dedicating the virtuous roots	yon bshad
ཡོན་སློབ	patron and student	yon slob
ཡོན་ཧྲོའེ	commander n chief, marshall of the army	yon hro'e
ཡོབ	stirrup, steps, trench, ditch	yob
ཡོབ་ཀྱིས་བརྡུངས་ཏེ་རྟ་བསྐུལ	spurring on	yob kyis brdungs te rta bskul
ཡོབ་གང	instep	yob gang
ཡོབ་གོང	instep [bleeding nadi]	yob gong
ཡོབ་རྒྱན	ornaments on stirrups	yob rgyan
ཡོབ་ཆེན	stirrups	yob chen
ཡོབ་ཏུ་རྐང་པ	putting the feet into the stirrups	yob tu rkang pa
ཡོབ་ཏུ་རྐང་པ་བཅུག	putting 1's feet in the stirrups, riding a horse	yob tu rkang pa bcug
ཡོབ་སྟན	stirrups kyi thad du rta'i spu srung byed phying pa sogs	yob stan
ཡོབ་ཐག	stirrup's lung thag, stirrup leather	yob thag
ཡོབ་མཐིལ	place to put feet in the stirrups	yob mthil
ཡོབ་རྡུང	spurring on	yob rdung
ཡོབ་བརྡུངས	spurring on	yob brdungs
ཡོབ་བརྡུངས་གཏོང	spur on	yob brdungs gtong
ཡོབ་པ	g.yob pa	yob pa
ཡོབ་བྱ	stirrup	yob bya
ཡོབ་ཡོབ	[arch] 1) full; 2) foot; 3) yam yom	yob yob
ཡོབ་ཡོབ་བྱེད་པ	trembling spasmodically	yob yob byed pa
ཡོབ་ལང	mount a horse using the stirrups	yob lang
ཡོབ་ལུང	1) yob thag; 2) yob kyi aa lung	yob lung
ཡོམ	quiver, shake flap, swing, sway, be unsteady, roll	yom
ཡོམ་འཁྱོམ་བྱེད་པ	rocking	yom 'khyom byed pa
ཡོམ་པ	quiver, shake flap, swing, sway, be unsteady, roll	yom pa
ཡོམ་པར་བྱེད་པའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང	swaying tree yom par byed pa'i dar cha dmar po g.yas g.yon g.yo - flapping flag waving left and right	yom par byed pa'i ljon shing
ཡོམ་པོ	unsteady	yom po
ཡོམ་འབོག	shun pas 'dag rdzas yong ba'i shing zhig	yom 'bog
ཡོམ་ཡོམ	flickering / fluttering; see {snang ba ban bun} fluttering appearances	yom yom
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་ཅན	wavy	yom yom can
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་དུ་འཁྱོམ་པ	rock, sway, roll	yom yom du 'khyom pa
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་དུ་འཁྱོམ་པའི་མཚོ	rocking ocean yom yom du g.yo ba - rock, sway, totter, shake yom yom du g.yo ba'i shing sdong - swaying tree	yom yom du 'khyom pa'i mtsho
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་བྱས་པའི་ས	shaking earth	yom yom byas pa'i sa
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་བྱེད	swing, tremble, sway, be unsteady, totter, roll	yom yom byed
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་བྱེད་པ	swing, waver	yom yom byed pa
ཡོམ་ཡོམ་བྱེད་པའི་སྙིང་རྩ	quivering heart nadi	yom yom byed pa'i snying rtsa
ཡོའུ་ཆང	one of the emperors of china	yo'u chang
ཡོར	rinderpest	yor
ཡོར་སྟོད	Yerpa country, a subdivision of Upper {mdo khams}	yor stod
ཡོར་དན	Jordan	yor dan
ཡོར་པོ	shaking, flapping, trembling, tottering, slanting	yor po
ཡོར་བ	{yor ba, yor ba, yor ba} intr. v	yor ba
ཡོར་བུ	gutter	yor bu
ཡོར་བུ་འགག་ཡོད་པ	stopped up gutter	yor bu 'gag yod pa
ཡོར་མོ	salmon	yor mo
ཡོར་ཡོར་འགྲོ་བའི་རྐང་པ	tottering legs	yor yor 'gro ba'i rkang pa
ཡོར་ཡོར་པོ	shaking, flapping, trembling, tottering, slanting	yor yor po
ཡོར་ཡོར་བ	trembling/ rotting	yor yor ba
ཡོར་ཡོར་བའི་དར་ཆེན	flapping/ waving banner	yor yor ba'i dar chen
ཡོར་ཤིང	1) a kind of weeping willow; 2) * tamarisk	yor shing
ཡོལ	place in tibet	yol
ཡོལ་དཀར	white curtain, movie screen	yol dkar
ཡོལ་གོ	cup of precious stone, vessel of precious metal, receptacle	yol go
ཡོལ་གོར	vessel	yol gor
ཡོལ་ཆེན	ritual skull-cup	yol chen
ཡོལ་ཆེན་གློག་བརྙན	wide screen film, cinemascope etc.	yol chen glog brnyan
ཡོལ་བ	past, over, finished/ curtain; curtain, past, drapery; {yol ba, yol ba, yol ba} intr. v	yol ba
ཡོལ་བ་རྒྱ	draw;/ close the curtains	yol ba rgya
ཡོལ་བ་ཅན	med. herb {la la phud}	yol ba can
ཡོལ་བ་གཅོད	close the curtain	yol ba gcod
ཡོལ་བ་གཅོད་པ	close the curtain	yol ba gcod pa
ཡོལ་བ་ཐེན	draw the curtains	yol ba then
ཡོལ་བ་ཐེན་པ	draw a curtain	yol ba then pa
ཡོལ་བ་འཐེན	1) cloth etc curtain bre ba'am bkal ba; 2) draw/ open a curtain	yol ba 'then
ཡོལ་བ་འཐེན་པ	draw a curtain	yol ba 'then pa
ཡོལ་བ་ཕྱེ	raise the curtain	yol ba phye
ཡོལ་བའི་རྒྱབ	behind the curtains/ scenes	yol ba'i rgyab
ཡོལ་བའི་ཉི་མ	sun which has set	yol ba'i nyi ma
ཡོལ་བས་འབྲེལ་བ	draw curtains over	yol bas 'brel ba
ཡོལ་མ	dish, cup	yol ma
ཡོལ་མིན	never untimely	yol min
ཡོལ་མོ	bowl	yol mo
ཡོལ་མོ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ	{yol mo ba} {bstan 'dzin nor bu} the 3rd, b. 1598	yol mo sprul sku bstan 'dzin nor bu
ཡོལ་མོ་བ	{bstan 'dzin nor bu} the 3rd, b. 1598	yol mo ba
ཡོལ་ལེ་ཕྱོད	gyel ba, gcig tu mi gnas pa	yol le phyod
ཡོལ་སོང	has past	yol song
ཡོས	puffed barley, 1 of 12 dus tshod, parched corn (mostly barley and wheat), rabbit, hare	yos
ཡོས་དཀྲུག	grain parching implement	yos dkrug
ཡོས་བཀྲ	popped grain, colors of popped barley	yos bkra
ཡོས་ཁུར	shing gi lcug mas bslas pa'i yos lpags bgrus rgyag pa'i snod	yos khur
ཡོས་འགྲོ	chu 'khor gyi yos 'gro sa'i khung bu	yos 'gro
ཡོས་སྒྱེ	sack for parched grain	yos sgye
ཡོས་རྔོ	in a frying pan parch barley etc	yos rngo
ཡོས་རྔོ་བ	parch grain	yos rngo ba
ཡོས་བརྔོས་པ	to roast grains	yos brngos pa
ཡོས་ཆང	in parched barley chang rtsi btab ste bsnyal ba'i chang	yos chang
ཡོས་ཐུག	parched wheat etc boiled thug pa	yos thug
ཡོས་འཐག	parched barley or rice or wheat made into flour	yos 'thag
ཡོས་འཐག་པ	tsampa etc made into flour	yos 'thag pa
ཡོས་དུགས	parched grain kyi tsha ngad	yos dugs
ཡོས་བུ	rabbit [year]	yos bu
ཡོས་ཟླ	2nd month	yos zla
ཡོས་ལོ	year of the rabbit	yos lo
ཡོས་ལོ་པ	person born in the year of the rabbit	yos lo pa
ཡོས་ཧྲལ	hrob rtsam btags pa'i yos g.ya - rust, oxide of iron g.ya ri gong - Slate Mountain Ridge g.yag - yak g.yag - the yak g.yag - male yak g.yag - ox, cow, bull yak, tibetan male yak, bos grunniens, du ...	yos hral
ཋེ་Hཨེཨརཏ་པྲཅཏིཅེ	Dispeller Of All Obstacles" [found separately in vol.2 of the {mchog gling gter gsar} and as part of the {sngags gso}], composed by {'jam mgon kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas} in the "Turquoise-cover...	The Heart Practice
ཝཏཆ	guard g.yul bsrung byed - act as sentry/ guard g.yeng - 1) distracted, disturbed, agitated. 2) wavering. 3) to forget. 4) diversion g.yeng - distracted g.yeng - [p g.yengs],, 1) distracted, disturb...	watch
མྱྱ་ངན་བསལ་བ	clear away suffering	myya ngan bsal ba
ར་ཀྱལ	goat skin bag{ra la gyung drung	ra kyal
ར་ཀླད	goat brain animal med. [ro mngar, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas rkang lag gi chu rgyus rmas pa dang, rengs 'khums gyur pa sod la phan	ra klad
ར་རྐྱལ	bag of goat skin	ra rkyal
ར་སྐད་ལུག་སྐད	wild/ unrestrained talk	ra skad lug skad
ར་སྐོར	fence, courtyard	ra skor
ར་སྐྱིས	he-goat	ra skyis
ར་སྐྱེས	gelded male goat	ra skyes
ར་སྐྱོང	goat herd	ra skyong
ར་སྐྱོར	[surrounding] fence	ra skyor
ར་བསྐོར་ཁང་པ	1) rtsig pa'i ra bas bskor ba'i small/ flat house; 2) surrounding houses	ra bskor khang pa
ར་ཁྲག	goat blood animal med. [ro mngar, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas reg dug dang, 'brum nag zungs khrag nyams pa, grum bu, chu ser sogs la phan	ra khrag
ར་འཁོར	1) fenced empty space around a house, yard etc.; 2) fence/ enclosure, corral	ra 'khor
རཱ་ག	ruby	rA ga
རཱ་ག་ཨ་སྱ	karma chags med, 17th cent	rA ga a sya
ར་གན	brass	ra gan
ར་གན་གསེར་བརྩི	account brass as gold	ra gan gser brtsi
ར་གན་གསེར་བརྫུས	be deceived by taking brass for gold	ra gan gser brdzus
ར་གུ	baby goat, kid	ra gu
ར་གུར	1) enclosure, fence, wall; 2) [court]yard, area inside an enclosure; 3) range	ra gur
ར་མགོ	1) ra superscript; 2) goat head	ra mgo
ར་མགོ་མ	goat-head med herb	ra mgo ma
ར་མགོ་ལུག་སྦྱར	goat's head on a sheep	ra mgo lug sbyar
ར་རྒན	old goat	ra rgan
ར་རྒོད	wild goat	ra rgod
ར་རྒྱབ་པ	ro rgyab pa	ra rgyab pa
ར་སྒུག	expect, hope, look forward to	ra sgug
ར་སྒོ	gate of fence etc.	ra sgo
ར་སྒོག	sgog pa zhig growing on a mt.	ra sgog
ར་སྒྲེང	Reting Monastery/ tulku	ra sgreng
ར་རྔོ	sheep mange	ra rngo
ར་ཅོ	horn of yak or cow, mountain peak, sting	ra co
ར་ཆེ	abbr. of ra mo che	ra che
ར་ཆེ་སྨོན་ལམ	The Prayers at Ramoche (ceremony on the 30th day of the 12th Tibetan month)	ra che smon lam
ར་ཆོད	definite arrangements, settlement of an affair	ra chod
ར་ཉ་ཛ་ཀ	gourd	ra nya dza ka
ར་ཉེ	lead	ra nye
ར་མཉེ	the herb {ra mnye}	ra mnye
ར་མཉེ་གྱུང་བ	herb {ra mnye gyung ba}	ra mnye gyung ba
ར་མཉེ་དམན་པ	herb {ra mnye dman pa}	ra mnye dman pa
ར་མཉེའི་རིགས	a kind of the herb {ra mnye}	ra mnye'i rigs
ར་ཏ	{ra ta} smeared substance	ra ta
ར་ཏའི་ཐིག་ལེ	drops of blood	ra ta'i thig le
ར་ཏའི་རྩ་བ་བརྒྱད	CHN	ra ta'i rtsa ba brgyad
ར་ཏི་གུབ་ཏ	an indian sage	ra ti gub ta
ར་ཏོག་ཏམ་བཟི་བ	tipsy	ra tog tam bzi ba
ར་གཏུགས	ra 'phrod par byas pa	ra gtugs
ར་བཏགས	subjoined ra	ra btags
ར་སྟོང	two year old goat	ra stong
ར་སྟོད་བདེ་བ་ཅན	{ra stod bde ba can} Monastery [near Lhasa snye thang du rab byung gsum pa'i shing glang lor rgya 'ching ru ba zer bas btab pa'i dgon rnying 'di skabs de'i dbus gtsang gdan sa chen po drug gi gras ...	ra stod bde ba can
ར་ཐུག	ram he-goat, ram	ra thug
ར་ཐུག་ཁྲབ་མ	stains on billy goat's long hair	ra thug khrab ma
ར་ཐུག་པ	thick headed	ra thug pa
ར་ཐུག་སྦྲེ	stains on billy goat's crotch hair	ra thug sbre
ར་ཐུལ	thul pa of a goat skin	ra thul
ར་ཐེར	serge or shawl	ra ther
ར་ཐོང	three year old goat	ra thong
ར་འཐུམས	encased in the	ra 'thums
ར་དུག	thermopsis lanceolata r. br. 2533	ra dug
ར་དུག་པ	growing in kha smad, mu etc., a dark blue btsan dug flower	ra dug pa
ར་དུག་དམར་པོ	kind of btsan dug w red flowers [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas gnyan srin 'joms]	ra dug dmar po
ར་དེ་རོ་དེ	bumpy, uneven	ra de ro de
ར་གདང	rope tying a goat	ra gdang
ར་མདའ	friend, companion, assistant, helper, assistance	ra mda'
ར་མདའ་པ	assistant, helper	ra mda' pa
ར་མདའ་སྤྲོད	give assistance/ help	ra mda' sprod
ར་མདའ་སྤྲོད་པ	give assistance/ help	ra mda' sprod pa
ར་མདའ་སྦྲན	call upon for help	ra mda' sbran
ར་མདའ་སྦྲན་པ	call upon for help	ra mda' sbran pa
ར་མདའ་སྦྲོན	call upon for rescue	ra mda' sbron
ར་མདའ་སྦྲོན་པ	call upon for rescue	ra mda' sbron pa
ར་མདའ་འཚོལ་བ	seek help, ask for aid, chasing, pursuing one who is running away	ra mda' 'tshol ba
ར་མདའ་ལ་རྒྱུག་ཅིག	Be my rescuer!	ra mda' la rgyug cig
ར་མདའི་དཔུང་ཚོགས	auxiliary/ support troops	ra mda'i dpung tshogs
ར་མདར་རྒྱགས་པ	come rushing to your aid	ra mdar rgyags pa
ར་མདར་སྦྲོན	call upon for rescue	ra mdar sbron
ར་མདར་སློག	{klu des lha 'dre thams cad ra mdhar slog} the naga called all the spirits to his aid	ra mdar slog
ར་མདེགས	assistance, help	ra mdegs
ར་འདེགས་པ	help, assist	ra 'degs pa
ར་འདྲ	a kind of stone or mineral substance	ra 'dra
ར་འདྲེན་པ	help, assist	ra 'dren pa
ར་རྡང	rope tying a goat	ra rdang
ར་སྡེ	RA class	ra sde
ར་སྡོང	weeping willow	ra sdong
ར་ན་གླིང་པ	Ratna Lingpa [one of the three chief lingpas; w 25 profound termas; reincarnation of langdro lotsava {lang gro lo tsa ba} ; also called {rat-na zhig po 'dro 'dul gling pa}	ra na gling pa
ར་ན་ཞིག་པོ་འདྲོ་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	rat na gling pa	ra na zhig po 'dro 'dul gling pa
ར་ནད་ལུག་དཀྲི	when the goat is sick, tie up the sheep, attribute 1 person's transgressions to another	ra nad lug dkri
ར་སྣ	a medicinal herb, fir tree	ra sna
ར་སྣམ	thick serge of goat's hair	ra snam
ར་པགས	goat skin	ra pags
ར་ལྤགས	goat skin	ra lpags
ར་སྤུ	goat hair	ra spu
ར་སྤྲགས	confronting/exposing a person's misdoings in the presence of the person and others, proving something	ra sprags
ར་སྤྲགས་གཏོང	ngo sprod pa, confront, expose	ra sprags gtong
ར་སྤྲད་པ	bring together personally, confront	ra sprad pa
ར་སྤྲོད	allegation, proof, evidence	ra sprod
ར་སྤྲོད་ཁུངས་འཚོལ	ra sprod thub pa'i khungs 'tshol ba'am btsal ba,//yid ches kyi ra sprod khungs 'tsol byas pa	ra sprod khungs 'tshol
ར་སྤྲོད་པ	verify, prove, verify evidence, verify terms	ra sprod pa
ར་སྤྲོད་བྱུང་བ	to prove, confirm, testify	ra sprod byung ba
ར་སྤྲོད་བྱེད	prove, confirm, testify, verify, attest to	ra sprod byed
ར་སྤྲོད་བྱེད་པ	confirm, prove	ra sprod byed pa
ར་ཕོ	he goat	ra pho
ར་ཕྱར	[arch] goat hair phyar ba	ra phyar
ར་ཕྲུག	kid goatling	ra phrug
ར་ཕྲོད་པ	found correct, proved, verification	ra phrod pa
ར་འཕྲོད	prove, confirm, testify, verify	ra 'phrod
ར་འཕྲོད་བརྡ	identification	ra 'phrod brda
ར་འཕྲོད་པ	to verify; to align	ra 'phrod pa
ར་འཕྲོད་བྱུང	proved, confirmed, testified, verified	ra 'phrod byung
ར་འཕྲོད་བྱེད	prove, confirm, testify, verify	ra 'phrod byed
ར་བ་སྐྱེས	aromatic plant	ra ba skyes
ར་བ་རྒྱབ་པ	barricade	ra ba rgyab pa
ར་བ་ཆད	give up hope	ra ba chad
ར་བ་ཏི	a kashmirian monk	ra ba ti
ར་བ་སྟོད	{ra ba stod}	ra ba stod
ར་བ་བཞི	1st months of each of the four seasons [the 1st month of spring = {dpyid ra ba} the 1st month of summer = {dbyar ra ba} the 1st month of autumn = {ston ra ba} the 1st month of winter = {dgun ra ba}	ra ba bzhi
ར་བ་བཞི་པོ	4 initial months of the four seasons	ra ba bzhi po
ར་བ་ལས་མ་འདས་པ	never strayed from	ra ba las ma 'das pa
ར་བ་ཤིང	kind of tree	ra ba shing
ར་བ་བསྲུང	chief prostitute	ra ba bsrung
ར་བས་སྐོར་བ	enclose with a fence	ra bas skor ba
ར་བེ་རི་བེ	indistinct, blurred, obscured	ra be ri be
ར་བེ་རིབ་བེ	unclear, blurry, ambiguous	ra be rib be
ར་བེ་རོབ་བེ	slipshod, rough	ra be rob be
ར་མ	an insect, she-goat, mixture, medley	ra ma
ར་མ་དཀར་མོའི་འབག	white [she-]goat mask [lha mo 'khrab dus gyon rgyu'i mask adorned w goat hair	ra ma dkar mo'i 'bag
ར་མ་ག་བུར	species of fragrant grass, mountain palm, date tree	ra ma ga bur
ར་མ་ཉེ	polygonatum erythrocarpum hua, polygonatum odoratum	ra ma nye
ར་མ་བཟི་བ	sober	ra ma bzi ba
ར་མ་རི	= {ra ri}	ra ma ri
ར་མ་ལུག	dissimilar bases/ things, sheepgoat cross	ra ma lug
ར་མར	goat butter	ra mar
ར་མེ་ཤ་ར	holy place near ceylon	ra me sha ra
ར་མེད	infallible, pure, faultless	ra med
ར་མོ	she goat 2534	ra mo
ར་མོ་ཆེ	Ramochey. One of two important temples in Lhasa housing the statue of Buddha Shakyamuni brought to Tibet by the queens of King Songtsen Gampo	ra mo che
ར་མོ་ཆེ་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	Ramoche Temple	ra mo che gtsug lag khang
ར་མོ་ཆེའི་ཇོ་བོ	Jowo of Ramochey. See Jowo Mikyö Dorje	ra mo che'i jo bo
ར་མོ་ཆེའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	Ramoche Temple	ra mo che'i gtsug lag khang
ར་མོ་ཆེའི་གཙུགས་ལག་ཁང	Ramoche Temple	ra mo che'i gtsugs lag khang
ར་མོ་ཤ	hornet	ra mo sha
ར་མོ་ཤག	herb {ra mo shag}	ra mo shag
ར་མོ་ཤག་འདྲ་མཆོག	{ra mo shag 'dra mchog} herb	ra mo shag 'dra mchog
ར་མོ་ཤེལ་སྨན	{ra mo shel sman}	ra mo shel sman
ར་མྱོང་ནམ་མཁའ་དཔལ་བཟང	Ranyong Namkha Palsang, 11th throne holder of Drug Sangnak Chöling : 1398-1425	ra myong nam mkha' dpal bzang
ར་ཙ	ra tsa med. mineral	ra tsa
ར་ཙང	ra 'dzud sa'i khang pa	ra tsang
ར་རྩག	goat skin slog pa	ra rtsag
ར་རྩིགས་ཁང་པ	castle in tibet	ra rtsigs khang pa
ར་མཚེ	ra mtshe med. tree [glo 'jags pa dang rngul chu 'byin par phan, yongs rdzogs sman du 'gro]	ra mtshe
ར་ཛ	raja. an Indian prince or petty king [rgyal-po]	ra dza
ར་ཛ་ཀ	tongue	ra dza ka
ར་ཛོར་གྱི་ཤུལ	stain	ra dzor gyi shul
ར་རྫི	goat-herd	ra rdzi
ར་བཞོན་མ	milch goat	ra bzhon ma
ར་བཟི	be [habitually] drunk	ra bzi
ར་བཟི་བཅུག་པ	intoxicate	ra bzi bcug pa
ར་བཟི་བ	get intoxicated, drunk, he is drunk	ra bzi ba
ར་བཟི་བའི	drunken	ra bzi ba'i
ར་བཟི་བའི་མི	drunkard	ra bzi ba'i mi
ར་འོག་མཚོ	{ra 'og} lake	ra 'og mtsho
ར་ཡི་མཆིན་པ	goat liver animal med.	ra yi mchin pa
ར་ཡི་ཤིང	fragrant wood, species of sandalwood	ra yi shing
ར་ཡིག	the letter ra surmounting another letter	ra yig
ར་ཡིག་གཉིས་པ	(met) two r's [SK la bhra ma ra zer, EG bhra ma ra has two R's	ra yig gnyis pa
ར་ར	vessel's mouth wide open	ra ra
ར་རི	{ra ma ri} vague/ imprecise	ra ri
ར་རི་མེད	infallible, pure, faultless	ra ri med
ར་རི་མེད་པ	infallible, pure, faultless	ra ri med pa
ར་རི་མེད་པའི་རས་དཀར	white cloth w/os stains	ra ri med pa'i ras dkar
ར་རི་ཟླ་དཀྱིལ་ལ་རི་བོང་ལྟར	stains like the rabbit on the moon	ra ri zla dkyil la ri bong ltar
ར་རིད་གྱུར་པ	glimpses	ra rid gyur pa
ར་རིལ	treadles, dung	ra ril
ར་རུ	goat horn	ra ru
ར་རེས	one by one, by turns	ra res
ར་རོ	intoxication, drunkenness	ra ro
ར་རོ་ཅན	drunk	ra ro can
ར་རོ་བ	to be intoxicated, drunk	ra ro ba
ར་རོ་བ་ལས་སངས་ཏེ	being sober again	ra ro ba las sangs te
ར་རོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to make drunk	ra ro bar byed pa
ར་རོག་ཕད་རོག	(R75: 134) DPR (oral comm.): = ham bshad. [mss]	ra rog phad rog
ར་ལ་གྱུང་དྲུང་གླིང	{ra la gyung drung gling} [Bon Monastery [very old, in rin spungs rdzong]	ra la gyung drung gling
ར་ལ་ཟ་འོག་ཕུག	Brocade Cave of Rala, in Tö, Mangyul	ra la za 'og phug
ར་ལང་ཆ་ལང	mgo mjug gam sgrigs khrims med pa	ra lang cha lang
ར་ལུག	sheep	ra lug
ར་ལུང	{ra lung} village [near Gyantse]	ra lung
ར་ལོ་ཆེ་བ	old goat	ra lo che ba
ར་ཤ	"mutton", goat meat	ra sha
ར་ཤུལ	remnants or an old enclosure	ra shul
ར་ས	goat's land, old name for lhasa	ra sa
ར་ས་ན	{rkyang ma}	ra sa na
ར་ས་ན་ཁྲག་གི་རྩ	rasana blood nadi	ra sa na khrag gi rtsa
ར་ས་འཕྱུལ་སྣང	Syn {jo khang}; {jo khang}	ra sa 'phyul snang
ར་ས་འཕྲུལ་སྣང	{ra sa 'phrul snang} temple	ra sa 'phrul snang
ཅལླེད་ཆོ	khang, name of the Cathedral temple	called cho
ར་ས་འཕྲུལ་སྣང་གི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	{ra sa 'phrul snang gi gtsug lag khang} temple 2535	ra sa 'phrul snang gi gtsug lag khang
ར་ས་འཕྲུལ་སྣང་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	Rasa Trülnang Tsuklagkhang, in Lhasa	ra sa 'phrul snang gtsug lag khang
ར་ས་ཡ་ན	chemical preparation of mercury for medicinal purposes	ra sa ya na
ར་ས་རི	ancient city in india	ra sa ri
ར་སངས་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ	Rasang Lugyal	ra sangs klu rgyal
ར་སའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	Syn {jo khang}; {jo khang}	ra sa'i gtsug lag khang
ར་སའི་སྲོག་ཤིང	in NE Lhasa brag yer pa zer ba'i brag phug	ra sa'i srog shing
ར་སི	rope	ra si
ར་སིད	receipt	ra sid
ར་སུག	1) goat's legs; 2) herb {ra sug}	ra sug
ར་སློག	coat with goat's skin lining	ra slog
ར་གསུམ	the three "ra" herbs [aa ru ra dang, ba ru ra, skyu ru ra gsum gyi bsdus ming	ra gsum
ར་གསུམ་པ	[lcags ri] fence???	ra gsum pa
ར་ཧ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཧ་ས	HA SA order without RA HA [from the 34 SK consonants omitting ksha = 33 tshig sbyor gyi 'gro lugs la gzhigs nas [examine refer, involved w] are put in a new order called ha sa, the letters ra ha ma...	ra ha ma yin pa'i ha sa
ར་ཧུ	planet rahu	ra hu
རཱ་ཧུ་ལ	1) Rahu; 2) Rahula [son of the Buddha]; 3) Rahula [tantric wrathful deity]	rA hu la
ར་དྷ	province near bengal ra lho 'dod pa mthun pa thun mong lam	ra dha
སྲོལ་གྱི་ན་རྒྱན་སོ་ལྔ	CHN	srol gyi na rgyan so lnga
ར་ཨར	radar	ra ar
རྭ	horn/ prong/ spoke [of a vajra], peak of mt	rwa
རྭ་ཀེར་མཇུག་རྩུབ	rwa co ker and mjug ma rtsub pa:, don ni mi byings dang spyod tshul mi mthun pa'i dpe	rwa ker mjug rtsub
རྭ་དཀྲི	marks on the horns of cattle etc by which 1 can tell their age	rwa dkri
རྭ་སྐོར	fence, enclosure, corral	rwa skor
རྭ་ཁ	chu 'khor gyi steng yos blug snod kyi rkyal pa'am lding gi kha nas yos sogs thon sa	rwa kha
རྭ་ག	ruby	rwa ga
རྭ་རྒྱ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང	Ragya Monastery, Tashi Kunde Ling, founded by Arik Geshe, in Domey	rwa rgya bkra shis kun bde gling
རྭ་རྒྱ་དགོན་པ	rwa rgya Monastery	rwa rgya dgon pa
རྭ་རྒྱག	w a horn suck out bad blood [med.]	rwa rgyag
རྭ་རྒྱན	ornament for the hornms [rmon mdzo sogs kyi rwa cor btags pa'i rtsid pa dmar po]	rwa rgyan
རྭ་སྒ	snare 'dzugs byed kyi rwa dum zhig rwa rnyi la ltos	rwa sga
རྭ་སྒེང་དགོན་པ	Roling monastery	rwa sgeng dgon pa
རྭ་སྒྲེང	Reting (Rinpoche); Reting Monastery, the first Kadampa monastery later became Gelukpa	rwa sgreng
རེགེནཏ	king of Tibet	regent
རྭ་སྒྲེང་གཙང་པོ	{rwa sgreng gtsang po} river	rwa sgreng gtsang po
རྭ་སྔོན	'blue horns'. the sign of a beast's maturity	rwa sngon
རྭ་ཅན	horned animals, species of conch shell which has horny projections or thorns	rwa can
རྭ་ཅན་མ	1) tortoise; 2) {lug ru} flower; 3) cow	rwa can ma
རྭ་ཅོ	horn	rwa co
རྭ་ཅོ་སྒྱེ་བླུག	mthun sgril med pa dang sgrigs khrims med pa'i dpe	rwa co sgye blug
རྭ་ཅོ་ཅན	rivulet, dishwater	rwa co can
རྭ་གཅིག་མ	1) rhinoceros; 2) Vishnu (	rwa gcig ma
རྭ་བཅུ	ten-branched antlers	rwa bcu
རྭ་བཅུ་པ	stag	rwa bcu pa
རབ༹་ཆད་པ	broken horns	rva chad pa
རྭ་ཆོས་རབ	{rwa chos rab [nephew of rwa lo ts' ba rdo rje grags, invited the Indian pandita samanta shri, tr Kalachakra &, phag mo mngon 'byung &, mgon po mngon 'byung etc.]	rwa chos rab
རྭ་མཉམ་པ	1 of 10 great mountains, SA ri bo chen po bcu	rwa mnyam pa
རྭ་རྙི	horn trap [ri dvags 'dzin byed phyugs rwa las bzos pa'i yo byad cig yin pa 'di'i cha shas su kha zungs dang, go leb, go yu, rnyi mdel, rnyi thig sga ru bcas yod]	rwa rnyi
རྭ་སྟག	abbr Reting and Taktra (2 regents after the death of the 13th *Dalai Lama)	rwa stag
རབ༹་སྟོད	the rva ba stod tradition	rva stod
རབ༹་སྟོད་བསྡུས་གརབ༹	the famed presentation of the principles of Tibetan Buddhist logic according to the teachings to the rva ba stod tradition; by {'jam dbyangs phyogs lha 'od zer}	rva stod bsdus grva
རྭ་སྟོན་གཏེར་སྟོན་སྟོབས་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	1819th cent. - Ratön Tertön Topden Dorje	rwa ston gter ston stobs ldan rdo rje
རྭ་ཐག	from horns of plow mdzo to yoke 'then pa'i rope	rwa thag
རྭ་དྭགས་མངའ་གསུམ	abbr of rwa sgreng & dwags po & mnga' ris	rwa dwags mnga' gsum
རྭ་དང་བེའུ་ཡི་སྐད	bleat	rwa dang be'u yi skad
རྭ་དམ	sgo phyugs kyi horns la lcags bsregs btab pa'i thel tshe	rwa dam
རྭ་དུང	horn, trumpet	rwa dung
རྭ་དུམ	fragment/ piece of horn	rwa dum
རྭ་གདེང་བ	with prongs spread	rwa gdeng ba
རྭ་རྡུམ	mutilated horn	rwa rdum
རྭ་སྤྱིན	glue made of horn	rwa spyin
རྭ་ཕོར	horn medical sucking apparatus	rwa phor
རྭ་བ	horn, prong, tip	rwa ba
རྭ་དབལ	flaming horns	rwa dbal
རྭ་སྦྲེལ	1) sgo phyugs gsar pa gzhan du mi 'bros pa'i ched du rnying pa dang rwa 'brel byas nas 'dogs pa; 2) plow mdzo and glang dor gyi gnya' sbrel ba	rwa sbrel
རྭ་ཙབ༹	kind of salt made from horns	rwa tsva
རྭ་རྩ	root/ base of a horn	rwa rtsa
རྭ་རྩེ	tip of a horn	rwa rtse
རྭ་རྩེ་ཕུག	Ratse Phug, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	rwa rtse phug
རྭ་རྩེད	game w horns	rwa rtsed
རྭ་ཚྭ	kind of mineral salt resembling ra ru phye ba	rwa tshwa
རབ༹་ཚིགས	marks on the horns of cattle etc by which 1 can tell their age	rva tshigs
རྭ་ཚུགས	horn til pa shing la brdar te reg mi bzod par gyur pa'i tshe nad dmigs steng brdeg dgos pa zhig	rwa tshugs
རྭ་གཞུ	horn bow	rwa gzhu
རྭ་གཞུ་འཛིན	one holding a bow made of horn rva yar g.yug pa - tossed its head up	rwa gzhu 'dzin
རྭ་ཡི་ཁང་པ	Horn-fence huts, in Lhasa	rwa yi khang pa
རྭ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེང་གེ	12th cent. grandson of {rwa lo tsA ba rdo rje grags}	rwa ye shes seng ge
རྭ་ལངས་པ	an upright standing fence 2536	rwa langs pa
རྭ་ལུགས	mantra lineage of rwa lo ts' ba rdo rje grags pa	rwa lugs
རྭ་ལོ	[rwa zhes pa'i yul nas byung ba'i] rwa lo ts' ba rdo rje grags pa	rwa lo
རྭ་ལོ་ཙ་བ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འགྲགས	Ra Lotsawa Dorje Drak	rwa lo tsa ba rdo rje 'grags
རྭ་གསུམ་པ་སཱ་རི་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	3peaked mountain	rwa gsum pa SA ri chen po lnga
རྭ་བསོད་ནམས་དབང་རྒྱལ	the 15th abbot of {bkra shis 'khyil}	rwa bsod nams dbang rgyal
རག	1) get, gain, obtain; 2) copper, brass; 3) depends on; 4) touch	rag
རག་ཀོང	rag gi kong bu - brass lamp,	rag kong
བྲསས་བུཏཏེར	lamps	brass butter
རག་སྐུད	brass wire	rag skud
རག་སྐྱོགས	copper skyogs	rag skyogs
རག་གི་ཀོང་བུ	rag kong - brass lamp,	rag gi kong bu
རག་གི་མདོག་ཅན	brass colored	rag gi mdog can
རག་མགོ	monastery	rag mgo
རག་མགོ་མཆོག་སྤྲུལ	thub bstan bshad sgrub rgya mtsho, 1890-1973. alias padma kun bzang rang grol rag mgo mchog sprul thub bstan bshad	rag mgo mchog sprul
སྒྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	1890-1973	sgrub rgya mtsho
རག་འགག	small brass plate	rag 'gag
རག་རྒྱབ	Ragyap, in Lhasa	rag rgyab
རག་ཆས	brass ware	rag chas
རག་གཏེར	chalcopyrite	rag gter
རག་བཏུལ	[copper]/ brass powder ag stegs, rag las bzos pa'i dkar yol sogs kyi stegs	rag btul
རག་སྟེགས	small brass tray for tea	rag stegs
རག་ཐག	brass chain	rag thag
རག་ཐུམ	brass ladle	rag thum
རག་དུག	poison of brass	rag dug
རག་དུང	copper/ brass offering substance dung chen [trumpet, horn]{rag	rag dung
གེ་རོག་གེ	w black color	ge rog ge
རག་འདན	drink of liquor and butter + tsam pa boiled together	rag 'dan
རག་རྡུལ	powdered-brass, imitation gold	rag rdul
རག་རྡོ	rag rdo/ chalcopyrite mineral med.	rag rdo
རག་སྡེར	copper sder ma	rag sder
རག་བསྡུས	summary, outline, brief, sketchy	rag bsdus
རག་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	generalization, abstract	rag bsdus kyi rang bzhin
རག་བསྡུས་ཙམ	summary, outline, briefly	rag bsdus tsam
རག་པ	depend {rag pa, rag pa, rag pa} intr. v	rag pa
རག་པ་ཐང་ཟླུམ	1 of 37 sacred bonpo places, 1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	rag pa thang zlum
རག་པ་མེད	not discerned	rag pa med
རག་པའི་རྟ	horse/ mule rag gi mdog can	rag pa'i rta
རག་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	coarse thoughts	rag pa'i rnam rtog
རག་སྦི	Rugby school in England	rag sbi
རག་མ	rag gi mdog can mare/ female mule	rag ma
རག་མ་བྱང་ཆུབ་རྫོང	Ragma Jangchub Dzong, one of Milarepa's meditation cave, in Tö, Mangyul	rag ma byang chub rdzong
རག་མ་ལུས་པ	not dependent upon	rag ma lus pa
རག་མོ	mostly dkar la ser mare/ female mule	rag mo
རག་ཙེ	stone	rag tse
རག་བཟླས	coarse recitation	rag bzlas
རག་རག	rag pa'i color horse mule	rag rag
རག་རིམས	rough [not detailed]	rag rims
རག་རོག	w black color	rag rog
རག་ལས	depend/ rely on	rag las
རག་ལས་པ	to rely/ depend/ hinge (up)on	rag las pa
རག་ལས་ས	main link, chief factor that on which 1/ something depends/ relies on	rag las sa
རག་ལུས	depend/ rely on	rag lus
རག་ལུས་པ	dependent on depend	rag lus pa
རག་ལུས་ས	main link, chief factor that on which 1/ something depends/ relies on	rag lus sa
རག་ཤ	berries as rosary beads, tartar	rag sha
རག་ཤན	brass hoop / band	rag shan
རག་ཤི	a country, liquor from mowah flowers	rag shi
རག་ཤོག	copper/ brass sheet	rag shog
རག་ས	recipient	rag sa
རགས	dam, mole, dike, embankment, depends, obtain, get	rags
རགས་ཁ	dam, mole, dike, embankment	rags kha
རགས་ཁ་ཤོར	get a breach/ crack in a [dam, mole, dike, embankment]	rags kha shor
རགས་གྲངས	approximate numbers	rags grangs
རགས་རྒྱག	build a dam/ dike/ embankment	rags rgyag
རགས་རྒྱག་པ	build a dam/ dike/ embankment	rags rgyag pa
རགས་རྒྱབ་པ	Lhasa corpse carriers [in Lhasa people who carry corpses to the charnel ground tshogs pa, so called since they lived behind Lhasa sa chu rags	rags rgyab pa
རགས་རྒྱབ་དཔོན་པ	leader of Lhasa corpse carriers	rags rgyab dpon pa
རགས་ཐིག	rough survey	rags thig
རགས་ཐིག་ལེན་པ	take a rough survey	rags thig len pa
རགས་གདོང	dam, mole, dike, embankment	rags gdong
རགས་རྡོ	rough stones	rags rdo
རགས་བསྡུས	summary, outline, brief, sketchy	rags bsdus
རགས་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	generalization, abstract	rags bsdus kyi rang bzhin
རགས་བསྡུས་ཙམ	summary, outline, briefly	rags bsdus tsam
རགས་སྣང	impression of coarseness [ggd]	rags snang
རགས་པ	tangible, to touch, feel; physical, substantial, objective, concrete, sensible, material, palpable, corporeal; discernible by touch, palpable, tactile; having actual reality, real, substantial, con...	rags pa
རགས་པ་བསྐྱེད་རིམ	Purification through the coarse creation stage. coarse development stage	rags pa bskyed rim
རགས་པ་ཆེ་ལོང	principal/ highest	rags pa che long
རགས་པ་ཉེར་ལྔ	TSE	rags pa nyer lnga
རགས་པ་དང་ནི་ཕྲ་བ	coarse and fine/ subtle	rags pa dang ni phra ba
རགས་པ་དྲན་པ་གཅིག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga	rags pa dran pa gcig pa'i rnal 'byor
ཨོཕ༹་སིངླེ	mindedness of the coarse	of single
རགས་པ་རྣམས	physical world	rags pa rnams
རགས་པ་ཕྱིའི་དབུ་མ	same as rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu ma pa	rags pa phyi'i dbu ma
རགས་པ་ཕྱིའི་དབུ་མ་པ	mdo sde spyod pa'i dbu ma pa	rags pa phyi'i dbu ma pa
རགས་པ་རྩོམ་གཞི	the basis for assembling gross matter, atoms	rags pa rtsom gzhi
རགས་པའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	gross three doors. The subtle three doors are the nadis, pranas and bindus. The gross three doors are body, speech and mind.	rags pa'i sgo gsum
རགས་པའི་དེ་གོ་ན་ཉིད	vague reality	rags pa'i de go na nyid
རགས་པའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	coarse thoughts	rags pa'i rnam rtog
རགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ	TSE	rags pa'i rnam pa
རགས་པའི་དཔངས་ཚད	[arch] four fingers yan chad	rags pa'i dpangs tshad
རགས་པའི་འབྱུང་བ	the coarser elements	rags pa'i 'byung ba
རགས་པའི་མི་རྟག་པ	coarse impermanence	rags pa'i mi rtag pa
རགས་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	material forms	rags pa'i gzugs brnyan
རགས་པའི་རླུང་བཅུ	10 gross pranas (ldang rgyu, rnam rgyu, yang rgyu, rab rgyu, nges rgyu, kun rgyu, sa rlung, chu rlung, me rlung, rlung rlung, mkha' rlung)	rags pa'i rlung bcu
རགས་པར་སྣང་བ	epistemological object	rags par snang ba
རགས་བྲིས	just roughly written/ painted	rags bris
རགས་དབྱིབས	rough shape, outline, initial sketch, model	rags dbyibs
རགས་ཙམ	briefly, roughly, generally speaking, for the most part, superficial	rags tsam
རགས་ཙམ་མཐོང	look only superficially	rags tsam mthong
རགས་ཙམ་མཐོང་བ	superficial view	rags tsam mthong ba
རགས་ཙམ་བྱས་པའི་བརྟག་དཔྱད	rough/ brief explanation	rags tsam byas pa'i brtag dpyad
རགས་ཙམ་ཤེས	broadly determine	rags tsam shes
རགས་ཙམ་བཤད་པ	explain briefly/ roughly	rags tsam bshad pa
རགས་རྩིས	rough accounting/ calculation, approximation	rags rtsis
རགས་རྩིས་རྒྱག	make a rough accounting/ calculation/ approximation	rags rtsis rgyag
རགས་ཞིབ	rtsing ba and zhib mo	rags zhib
རགས་ཞིབ་པའི་རྩམ་པ	coarse-ground tsampa	rags zhib pa'i rtsam pa
རགས་ཟུར་མགོ་རྣོ	Thrangu Rinpoche: = obsessive	rags zur mgo rno
རགས་བཟོ་རྫོབ་ལས	roughly/ crudely/ cheaply made products	rags bzo rdzob las
རགས་རིམ	roughly, merely summarized, not complete/ in detail/ subtle, simple, general	rags rim
རགས་རིམ་ཙམ	roughly	rags rim tsam
རགས་རིམ་ཙམ་ཞིག	few principal ones	rags rim tsam zhig
རགས་རོབ	zhib cha ma yin pa'i lam rob	rags rob
རགས་ལས	depend upon, superficial/ simple/ incomplete/ rough work	rags las
རགས་ལས་པ	depending on	rags las pa
རགས་ལས་པ་ཡིན	depends upon	rags las pa yin
རགས་ལས་མ་ཞིབ་བྱེད་མི་རུང	1 shouldn't do merely rough/ superficial work	rags las ma zhib byed mi rung
རགས་བཤད	generality	rags bshad
རགས་བཤད་བྱེད	speak in generalities/ approximations	rags bshad byed
རགས་བཤེང	general way of speaking	rags bsheng
རང	1) I, [1]-self, own; 2) itself*, just that, exactly; 3) - hood -ness; 4) intrinsic, natural, spontaneous; 5) real[ly], definite[ly], sure[ly], actual[ly], very much; 6) no choice but to; 7) [p rang...	rang
རང་ཀ	vague [?]	rang ka
རང་ཀ་ཐམ་ཐོམ	a vague, oblivious, ordinary state	rang ka tham thom
རང་ཀ་ཐམ་ཐོམ་ལྟ་བུར་བསྡད་པ	to stagnate in nebulous immobility / to rest ordinary and vague rang ka tham thom lta bur bsdad pa stagnate in nebulous immobility/ rest ordinary and vague	rang ka tham thom lta bur bsdad pa
རང་ཀ་མ	just as it is	rang ka ma
རང་ཀར་འདུག་པ	to be immediately present	rang kar 'dug pa
རང་ཀྱ་བ	self-sufficient	rang kya ba
རང་རྐང་ཚུགས་ཐུབ་པ	capable of autonomous existence	rang rkang tshugs thub pa
རང་རྐྱ	1 not needing to depend on others, able to act autonomously/ independently	rang rkya
རང་རྐྱ་ཐུབ	one who is so learned that he needs no advice	rang rkya thub
རང་རྐྱ་ཐུབ་པ	self-sufficient, independent / to be able to do on one's own; independent / to be able to do on one's own	rang rkya thub pa
རང་རྐྱ་ཐུབ་པའི་རྫས	TSE	rang rkya thub pa'i rdzas
རང་རྐྱ་ཐུབ་པའི་རྫས་ཡོད	substantially existent in the sense of being selfsufficient rang rkya thub pa'i rdzas yod kyi bdag ego TSE	rang rkya thub pa'i rdzas yod
རང་རྐྱ་བ	self-sufficient, independent; independent [scriptures]	rang rkya ba
རང་རྐྱ་འཛིན་ཐུབ་པའི་རྫས་ཡོད	selfsufficiently apprehendable substantial entities	rang rkya 'dzin thub pa'i rdzas yod
རང་རྐྱང	independent	rang rkyang
རང་རྐྱང་ཚུགས་པ	self-sufficient, independent autonomous	rang rkyang tshugs pa
རང་སྐལ	individual lot/ fortune	rang skal
རང་སྐྱ	not needing to depend on others, able to act autonomously/ independently	rang skya
རང་སྐྱ་ཐོབ་པ	self-sufficient	rang skya thob pa
རང་སྐྱིད་གཞན་སྨོན	be happy 1self and others aspiring to that	rang skyid gzhan smon
རང་སྐྱུར	SA rang bskyar, vinegar 2538	rang skyur
རང་སྐྱེངས	be ashamed of/ modest about 1self	rang skyengs
རང་སྐྱེད	world	rang skyed
རང་སྐྱེས	self-grown, extraction, race, family, blood	rang skyes
རང་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་བུ་ཕྲུག	child coming from 1self	rang skyes kyi bu phrug
རང་སྐྱོང	autonomy, self-governing, autonomous	rang skyong
རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས	autonomy, autonomous region	rang skyong ljongs
རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས་གཉིས་བོད་སོག	the two autonomous regions of T& M	rang skyong ljongs gnyis bod sog
རང་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	implement [automomy, self-government] [by a people, group, association, region etc. country and government to whose orders they have to listen phud having a true power to accomplish their own ends]	rang skyong byed
རང་སྐྱོང་ཞན	autonomous county, autonomous county	rang skyong zhan
རང་སྐྱོང་ས་ཁོང་གྱི་མི་རིགས	people[s] of the region[s] of a selfprotecting country	rang skyong sa khong gyi mi rigs
རང་སྐྱོན	people's individual faults	rang skyon
རང་སྐྱོན་རྗོད་པ	to self-criticize	rang skyon rjod pa
རང་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད་པ	criticizes you openly	rang skyon brjod pa
རང་སྐྱོན་བརྟག་པ	to self-examine	rang skyon brtag pa
རང་སྐྱོན་སྦས་པ	deny rang skyon rang zhib} -}	rang skyon sbas pa
རང་ཁ	1) its own. 2) ordinary. 3) frivolous, thoughtless, careless. 4) {rnam rtog rang kha ma}. 5) {tha mal pa lta	rang kha
རང་ཁ་མ	plain, normal	rang kha ma
རང་ཁག་གཞན་འགེལ	ascribe 1's own fault to others	rang khag gzhan 'gel
རང་ཁའི་ལས	ordinary actions	rang kha'i las
རང་ཁར་འདུག	as one naturally is	rang khar 'dug
རང་ཁུངས	1st natural source/ place of arising	rang khungs
རང་ཁུལ	so so rang gi sa phyogs	rang khul
རང་ཁེ	selfish	rang khe
རང་ཁེ་བློ་མང	many thoughts of wanting to establish 1's own profit	rang khe blo mang
རང་ཁོངས	one's own jurisdiction or country or territory	rang khongs
རང་ཁྲིམས་ཐེག་པ་ཁུར་ལེན	not depending on the skul lcag of others guard 1's own discipline	rang khrims theg pa khur len
རང་མཁོ་རང་སྒྲུབ	accomplish what 1 needs 1self	rang mkho rang sgrub
རང་མཁོ་རང་འདང	exert 1self and accomplish what 1 needs 1self	rang mkho rang 'dang
རང་འཁོར	1) naturally/ automati[cally turning] [wheel, machine]; 2) selfripening [karmic fruition]	rang 'khor
རང་འཁོར་རྒྱག	turn/ run automatically/ naturally	rang 'khor rgyag
རང་འཁྲི	1's own responsibility	rang 'khri
རང་འཁྲི་ལག་ལེན	practice on 1's own responsibility	rang 'khri lag len
རང་འཁྲི་སློབ་སྦྱོང	study on 1's own responsibility	rang 'khri slob sbyong
རང་འཁྲིའི་བྱེད་སྒོ	1's duty/ assignment	rang 'khri'i byed sgo
རང་འཁྲིའི་ལས་འགན	1's duty/ assignment	rang 'khri'i las 'gan
རང་འཁྲིས	selfishness	rang 'khris
རང་འཁྲོལ	self-liberated	rang 'khrol
རང་ག	naturally	rang ga
རང་ག་བ	1) ordinary; 2) whatever comes out w/o examining, unreflective/ undiscriminating; 3) coarseness, meanness	rang ga ba
རང་ག་མ	at the will of, spontaneous, ordinary, unreflective/ undiscriminating, saying whatever comes to mind, just so, suchness that alone [, = {de gar rang red} = {de kho na nyid} = {kho rang gcig pu} = {...	rang ga ma
རང་གགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	self-approved/renowned reason	rang gags kyi rtags
རང་གགས་རྗེས་དཔག	self-approved/renowned inference	rang gags rjes dpag
རང་གང་མོས་ཤིག	in any form we find pleasing	rang gang mos shig
རང་གའི་གནད་ཤེས་ན	if one knows the natural essence	rang ga'i gnad shes na
རང་གར	1) casual. 2) spontaneously. 3) Syn {de ga se} just, simply, merely; 1)casual. 2) spontaneously. 3) Syn {de ga se} just, simply, merely	rang gar
རང་གར་སྡོད	to sit around idly 11.3	rang gar sdod
རང་གར་གནས་པ	self-sufficient abiding	rang gar gnas pa
རང་གར་ཞིག	spontaneously fell apart	rang gar zhig
རང་གར་ཞུགས་པའི་ལས	actions naturally engaged in	rang gar zhugs pa'i las
རང་གར་ཞོག	MSS: = rang sar zhog? "rest naturally." E.g., R75: 300.6 and R69: 300.4 [mss]	rang gar zhog
རང་གར་བཞག	remain artless	rang gar bzhag
རང་གར་བཞག་པ	neglected, ignored	rang gar bzhag pa
རང་གར་ཡན་པ	to remain idle, vacant	rang gar yan pa
རང་གི	his {rang gi pho brang du byon} returning to his palace	rang gi
རང་གི་ཀུ་བ་ཕྱུང་བ	masturbation	rang gi ku ba phyung ba
རང་གི་སྐལ་པས་འབྱོར་པ	the advantage of our own good fortune	rang gi skal pas 'byor pa
རང་གི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	each 1's own doctrine/ way of maintaining	rang gi grub mtha'
རང་གི་དགར་སྤྱོད	do what you please	rang gi dgar spyod
རང་གི་དགོས་མཁོ	necessities of life	rang gi dgos mkho
རང་གི་མགུལ་ལ	suicide	rang gi mgul la
རང་གི་མགུལ་ལ་གཅོད་པ	cut one's own throat	rang gi mgul la gcod pa
རང་གི་རྒྱ་སད	Chinese rose 2539	rang gi rgya sad
རང་གི་རྒྱ་སྲད	chinese rose	rang gi rgya srad
རང་གི་རྒྱུ	a cause of itself	rang gi rgyu
རང་གི་རྒྱུད་སྦྱངས	purify your being	rang gi rgyud sbyangs
རང་གི་རྒྱུད་ལ་བརྟག་དཔྱད་པ	examining your own mind	rang gi rgyud la brtag dpyad pa
རང་གི་རྒྱུད་ལ་ལེགས་པར་སྐྱེ་པ	fully arisen in your being	rang gi rgyud la legs par skye pa
རང་གི་ངང	naturally, spontaneously	rang gi ngang
རང་གི་ངང་གིས	naturally, automatically	rang gi ngang gis
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ	[svarupa], its own entity; as opposed to {gzhan gyi ngo bo} something else [ggd]	rang gi ngo bo
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	[intrinsic] reality, objective reality, self-nature, their own nature	rang gi ngo bo nyid
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་པ	objective reality/existence status	rang gi ngo bo nyid kyi grub pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	intrinsic	rang gi ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	intrinsic reality/existence-status	rang gi ngo bo nyid gyis grub pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	intrinsic realitylessness	rang gi ngo bo nyid med pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་འཛིན་པ	to bear its own entity [def of dharmas] [ggd]	rang gi ngo bo 'dzin pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ལ་གནས་པ	abiding within their own entity [ggd]	rang gi ngo bo la gnas pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ས་ཡོད་གྱུར་པ	existence by its own nature	rang gi ngo bo sa yod gyur pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོས	through its own medium, through their own forms, by means of their own forms, in itself, according to its own nature, by nature, naturally, through its own nature	rang gi ngo bos
རང་གི་ངོ་བོས་གྲུབ་པ	objectivity/ objective universal	rang gi ngo bos grub pa
རང་གི་ངོ་བོས་སྟོང་པ	empty of its own essence	rang gi ngo bos stong pa
རང་གི་ངོས་ནས	from one's own side	rang gi ngos nas
རང་གི་ངོས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existing in its own right	rang gi ngos nas grub pa
རང་གི་བཅས་པ	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	rang gi bcas pa
རང་གི་ལྕེ་བཅད	cutting off his tongue	rang gi lce bcad
རང་གི་གཉེན་པོར་རང་ཉིད་ཆེ	it itself constitutes the greatest antidote	rang gi gnyen por rang nyid che
རང་གི་ཐུགས་ཀར	in your heart center	rang gi thugs kar
རང་གི་ཐོག་ཏུ	in the state itself	rang gi thog tu
རང་གི་མཐུ	natural power	rang gi mthu
རང་གི་དོན	self-interest, SA rang don	rang gi don
རང་གི་དོན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	fulfillment of self-benefit	rang gi don phun sum tshogs pa
རང་གི་དྲན་པ	[one's] awareness	rang gi dran pa
རང་གི་བདག་ཉིད	1) reflective pronoun; 2) own substance/ self-nature	rang gi bdag nyid
རང་གི་འདོད་པ	one's own position / belief / opinion	rang gi 'dod pa
རང་གི་སྡེ་པ	[those] of 1's own religion, fellow Buddhists	rang gi sde pa
རང་གི་ནང་ཁྲོལ	one's own blunders	rang gi nang khrol
རང་གི་ནང་ནས	within oneself	rang gi nang nas
རང་གི་ནོར་སྦྱིན་དེ་དག་བསྐྱབས	x {protected them by giving his own jewels}	rang gi nor sbyin de dag bskyabs
རང་གི་གནས་སྟོངས་ཤིང	your own place becoming desolate rang gi rna ba'i shes pa yul gzhan du mi	rang gi gnas stongs shing
རང་གི་རྣམ་ཐར	autobiography	rang gi rnam thar
རང་གི་སྣང་བ	one's own projection / experience / perception; one's own experience perception	rang gi snang ba
རང་གི་སྣང་བ་དག་མ་དག	the purity or impurity of our perceptions	rang gi snang ba dag ma dag
རང་གི་སྣང་བའི་སྟོང་གཟུགས	the empty forms of personal experience	rang gi snang ba'i stong gzugs
རང་གི་སྤྱི་བོར་ཁུར་ཅིག	place him on the crown of your head!	rang gi spyi bor khur cig
རང་གི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	through his own actions	rang gi spyod tshul la brten nas
རང་གི་ཕྱོགས	one's party or side	rang gi phyogs
རང་གི་བུ་བཞིན་བསྐྱངས་པ	someone you've cared for as lovingly as your own child	rang gi bu bzhin bskyangs pa
རང་གི་བུ་བཞིན་དུ	as if they were your own children	rang gi bu bzhin du
རང་གི་བུད་མེད་བསད	killed your own wife	rang gi bud med bsad
རང་གི་བྱད་གཞིན	one's own face	rang gi byad gzhin
རང་གི་བྱད་བཞིན	one's own face	rang gi byad bzhin
རང་གི་དབང་པོ་སྒོ་ལྔ	1's own five sense faculties	rang gi dbang po sgo lnga
རང་གི་འབྱུང་བ	your own elements	rang gi 'byung ba
རང་གི་མ་རིག་པའ་བག་ཆགས	1's habitual tendencies of ignorance	rang gi ma rig pa' bag chags
རང་གི་མིན་པ	alien	rang gi min pa
རང་གི་མྱོང	personal experience	rang gi myong
རང་གི་བཙུན་མོ	his own queen	rang gi btsun mo
རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	1) own character/ nature, particular/ specific characteristic/ function, particular/ distinctive/ defining characteristic, intrinsic identity; 2) specifically characterized object [a thing's own fu...	rang gi mtshan nyid
རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གྲུབ་པ	inherent establishment	rang gi mtshan nyid kyi grub pa
རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	existence by way of its own nature/ objective character, inherent establishment, natural existence TSE	rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa
རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཏོ་ཧད་མ་པ	ultimate particular	rang gi mtshan nyid to had ma pa
རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	emptiness of individual characteristics	rang gi mtshan nyid stong pa nyid
རང་གི་གཞི་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	TSE	rang gi gzhi la gzhol ba
རང་གི་ཡེན་ཏན	one's own good qualities	rang gi yen tan
རང་གི་ཡོན་ཏན	1's own good qualities	rang gi yon tan
རང་གི་རང་གྲོལ	inherently liberated in itself	rang gi rang grol
རང་གི་རང་བཞིན	its own nature, my true nature, one's natural condition, by its own nature	rang gi rang bzhin
རང་གི་རང་ལ་འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་སོ	I said to myself	rang gi rang la 'di skad ces smras so
རང་གི་རིག་པ	1's own mind, 1's awareness, self-awareness, individual selfcognizant mind, self-experiencing consciousness	rang gi rig pa
ཨཉ་ཨེ྾ཏེརྣལ་ཐིང	only consciousness, one's own mind, one's awareness;	any external thing
ཨོནེའས་ཨོཝན་སེལཕ༹	cognizing (intrinsic)awareness	one's own self
རང་གི་རིག་པའི་རང་མདངས	natural manifestation of one's own mind, the natural radiance of one's mind	rang gi rig pa'i rang mdangs
རང་གི་རིག་པའི་རང་རྩལ	the spontaneous play of your own mind	rang gi rig pa'i rang rtsal
རང་གི་རིག་རྩལ	display of 1's own mind	rang gi rig rtsal
རང་གི་རིགས	their respective species	rang gi rigs
རང་གི་རིགས་འདྲ	homogene	rang gi rigs 'dra
རང་གི་རིགས་པ་ཚད་མ	the perfect measure of personal reasoning	rang gi rigs pa tshad ma
རང་གི་རིང་པའི་རང་མདངས	the natural radiance of your own mind	rang gi ring pa'i rang mdangs
རང་གི་ལག་ན་ཡོད་པ	is in your hands	rang gi lag na yod pa
རང་གི་ལམ་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	its very nature of the path	rang gi lam gyi ngo bo
རང་གི་ལུགས་བཞག	establishing one's own tradition	rang gi lugs bzhag
རང་གི་ལུས	one's body	rang gi lus
རང་གི་ལུས་ལ་ལྟ་བ	wrong view of one's body	rang gi lus la lta ba
རང་གི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	story of oneself, autobiography	rang gi lo rgyus
རང་གི་ཤ་ཐམས་ཅད་བཅད	He cut all his flesh	rang gi sha thams cad bcad
རང་གི་ཤེས་ནས	having recognized himself	rang gi shes nas
རང་གི་ཤེས་པ	noetic capacity	rang gi shes pa
རང་གི་ས་པ	each level of dhyana	rang gi sa pa
རང་གི་སེམས	mind in itself, 1's mind, your mind, natural mind	rang gi sems
རང་གི་སེམས་ཉིད	the nature of 1's mind	rang gi sems nyid
རང་གི་སེམས་དང་ལུས་བྲེལ་བ	your body and mind separated	rang gi sems dang lus brel ba
རང་གི་སེམས་ནི་ཡོངས་སུ་འདུལ	Tame your mind completely	rang gi sems ni yongs su 'dul
རང་གི་སེམས་སྣང	one's own mental experience	rang gi sems snang
རང་གི་སྲོག་དང་སྡོ་བ	risk my own life rang gi srog dang bu dang chung ma sogs	rang gi srog dang sdo ba
གཏོང་སྙམ་པ	to think of giving away his life or those of his wife and children	gtong snyam pa
རང་གིར་བྱེད	independence	rang gir byed
རང་གིར་བྱེད་པ	to own, make it one's own, accept, take in	rang gir byed pa
རང་གིས	by themselves	rang gis
རང་གིས་ཆོག	is enough	rang gis chog
རང་གིས་ཐོབ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of personal growth	rang gis thob pa'i yon tan
རང་གིས་བྱེད་པ	personally done, committed by oneself	rang gis byed pa
རང་གིས་སྦས་པ	self-concealed	rang gis sbas pa
རང་གིས་མི་ཚོར	without ones knowing, without noticing	rang gis mi tshor
རང་གིས་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberated by itself	rang gis rang grol
རང་གིས་རང་ཉིད་འཆོས	correct yourself!	rang gis rang nyid 'chos
རང་གིས་རང་ཉིད་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	{rangs byed kyi bu lhag spyod} [Indian outsider rishi]	rang gis rang nyid med par bzo ba
རང་གིས་རང་རིག་པ	self-aware by itself, to know itself by itself	rang gis rang rig pa
རང་གིས་རང་རིག་པའི་ཤེས་པ	wakefulness that knows itself by itself	rang gis rang rig pa'i shes pa
རང་གིས་རང་ལ	one leads to another	rang gis rang la
རང་གིས་གསངས་པ	self-concealed	rang gis gsangs pa
རང་གྲགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	self-approved reason	rang grags kyi rtags
རང་གྲགས་རྗེས་དཔག	self-approved inference	rang grags rjes dpag
རང་གྲགས་པ	self-resounding	rang grags pa
རང་གྲུབ	self-contained spontaneously made, natural, not artificial or produced by men, self-evolved, selfformed	rang grub
རང་གྲུབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེ་བ	appear suddenly	rang grub tu skye ba
རང་གྲུབ་དུས	[things exist for the span of] time during which they are established [ggd]	rang grub dus
རང་གྲུབ་བཙན་ས	natural barrier	rang grub btsan sa
རང་གྲོན་རང་གཏོང	'gro song tshang ma so sos 'don pa	rang gron rang gtong
རང་གྲོལ	Rangdröl. 'Self-liberated' or 'spontaneously freed.'	rang grol
ནཏུརལ་ཨིནསིགྷཏ	awareness itself without fabrication of any antidote at all all that 2541	natural insight
ཨརིསེས་ཨིས་ལིབེརཏེད་ལིཀེ་ཨ་སྣཀེ	know unravelling itself, and since this depends	arises is liberated like a snake
ཨོན་ནོཐིང་ཨོཐེར་ཨིཏ་ཨིས་ཅལླེད་སེལཕ༹	liberation] intrinsic freedom, self-liberation, natural liberation[ed], self liberation of an evil spirit, self-freed, natural freedom, naturally, automatically, spontaneously freed, freed by/in it...	on nothing other it is called self
རང་གྲོལ་སྐོར་གསུམ	{rang grol skor gsum} [rnying ma'i slob dpon klong chen rab 'byams kyis mdzad pa'i rdzogs pa chen po'i chos skor gsum ste: sems nyid rang grol, chos nyid rang grol, mnyam nyid rang grol 'grel dang ...	rang grol skor gsum
རང་གྲོལ་གྱི་དགོངས	principle of the	rang grol gyi dgongs
སྟཏེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	liberation	state of self
རང་གྲོལ་ཅོག་གཞག	self-liberated freely resting	rang grol cog gzhag
རང་གྲོལ་ཅོག་གཞག་གི་གནད་བཞི	four	rang grol cog gzhag gi gnad bzhi
ཀེཡ་པོཨིནཙ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	liberated freely resting	key points of self
རང་གྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ	total self-liberation	rang grol chen po
རང་གྲོལ་གདངས	dang energy of selfliberation	rang grol gdangs
རང་གྲོལ་དབྱིངས	in the dimension of	rang grol dbyings
རང་གྲོལ་ཟང་ཐལ	self-liberated openness	rang grol zang thal
རང་དགའ	happy-go-lucky	rang dga'
རང་དགའ་པ	unmarried man	rang dga' pa
རང་དགའ་བ	free, independent	rang dga' ba
རང་དགའ་བའི་ཤེས	common sense	rang dga' ba'i shes
རང་དགའ་བྱེད	to do as one pleases	rang dga' byed
རང་དགའ་མ	housewife	rang dga' ma
རང་དགའི་འཇུག་པ	unreflective usage	rang dga'i 'jug pa
རང་དགའི་བརྟག་པ	unreflective inquiry	rang dga'i brtag pa
རང་དགར	casual, careless, at pleasure, leaving something as it is, free	rang dgar
རང་དགར་སྤྱོད	independence	rang dgar spyod
རང་དགར་བཞག་པ	to just rest naturally	rang dgar bzhag pa
རང་དགར་ལུས་པ	be left w/o control/ possession of, involuntarily	rang dgar lus pa
རང་མགོ་གཅོད་པ	to cut off your head	rang mgo gcod pa
རང་མགོ་ཆུ་འདྲེན	= rang mgo chu blug, put 1's head in the water, harm 1self	rang mgo chu 'dren
རང་མགོ་བཏོན	self-reliance, be independent	rang mgo bton
རང་མགོ་ཐོན་ཐུབ་པའི་འཚོ་བ	livelihood that 1 can earn independently	rang mgo thon thub pa'i 'tsho ba
རང་མགོ་ཐོན་པ	able to accomplish 1's purpose independently	rang mgo thon pa
རང་མགོ་ཐོན་པའི་མི་རབས་གསར་པ	independent new mi rabs	rang mgo thon pa'i mi rabs gsar pa
རང་མགོ་ཐོན་ཙམ	at least for one's own sake	rang mgo thon tsam
རང་མགོ་འདོན་པ	find.produce means of independence rang mgo rang gis ma g.yog pa - not fool 1self rang mgo rang gis ma g.yog pa - not to fool oneself	rang mgo 'don pa
རང་མགོ་རང་ཐོན	pull out 1's head 1self, w/o depending on others, accomplish independently, take responsibility for	rang mgo rang thon
རང་མགོ་རང་འདོན	take responsibility for myself; to stand on one's own two feet/ be responsible/ self-reliant	rang mgo rang 'don
རང་མགོ་རང་ལྤགས་ཀྱིས་འཐུམ་པ	gzhan la re ma dgos par rang gi rgyu nor gyis rang gi kha gso thub pa'i dpe	rang mgo rang lpags kyis 'thum pa
རང་འགགས	stop by itself	rang 'gags
རང་འགན	1's responsibility/ duty	rang 'gan
རང་འགན་གཞན་དཀྲི	shift 1's responsibility/ duty to another	rang 'gan gzhan dkri
རང་འགན་གཞན་དཀྲི་བྱེད	shift 1's responsibility/ duty to another	rang 'gan gzhan dkri byed
རང་འགུལ	automatic, initiative, of one's own accord	rang 'gul
རང་འགུལ་ཁ་པར	automatic telephone rang 'gul kha par brje res kyi 'phrul 'khor automatic telephone exchange machine	rang 'gul kha par
རང་འགུལ་འཁོར་སྟེགས	automatic lathe	rang 'gul 'khor stegs
རང་འགུལ་གྱི་འཁོར་སྟེགས	automatic lathe	rang 'gul gyi 'khor stegs
རང་འགུལ་གྱི་ནུས་པ	self power/ motivation	rang 'gul gyi nus pa
རང་འགུལ་གྱི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	automatic machine	rang 'gul gyi 'phrul 'khor
རང་འགུལ་གྱི་འཕྲུལ་སྟེགས	automatic lathe	rang 'gul gyi 'phrul stegs
རང་འགུལ་གྱི་རོགས་རམ	voluntary help	rang 'gul gyi rogs ram
རང་འགུལ་ཅན	automatic	rang 'gul can
རང་འགུལ་ཅན་གྱི་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	automatized production	rang 'gul can gyi thon skyed
རང་འགུལ་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	be automatized	rang 'gul can du 'gyur
རང་འགུལ་ཅན་དུ་གཏོང	automatize	rang 'gul can du gtong
རང་འགུལ་ཅན་ཕྱེད་ཙམ	semi-automatic rang 'gul ched spyod kyi 'khor stegs automatic lathe rang 'gul ched spyod kyi 'phrul stegs automatic lathe	rang 'gul can phyed tsam
རང་འགུལ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	automatic machine	rang 'gul 'phrul 'khor
རང་འགུལ་འཕྲུལ་ཆས་ཅན་དུ་འགྱུར	be automatized and mechanized	rang 'gul 'phrul chas can du 'gyur
རང་འགུལ་འཕྲུལ་ཆས་ཅན་དུ་གཏོང	automatize and mechanize	rang 'gul 'phrul chas can du gtong
རང་འགུལ་འཕྲུལ་སྟེགས	automatic lathe	rang 'gul 'phrul stegs
རང་འགུལ་འཕྲུལ་མདའ	machine gun, automatic weapon	rang 'gul 'phrul mda'
རང་འགུལ་བའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	automatic machine	rang 'gul ba'i 'phrul 'khor
རང་འགོ་གང་ཐོན	act w only 1's own goals in mind, selfish, individualistic	rang 'go gang thon
རང་འགོ་ཐོན	act w only 1's own goals in mind, selfish, individualistic	rang 'go thon
རང་འགྲུབ་བཙན་ས	natural barrier	rang 'grub btsan sa
རང་འགྲེལ	Auto-commentary [thd]	rang 'grel
རང་འགྲོས	1) natural way of going; 2) planets and stars natural motion; 3) leave to itself, set free, let be, let go to do whatever it likes [freely and independently [opp of controling and correcting]; 4) s...	rang 'gros
རང་རྒྱ	Syn {rang sangs rgyas} Solitary Realizer(s)	rang rgya
རང་རྒྱ་བ	self-sufficient	rang rgya ba
རང་རྒྱལ	1) our/ my kingdom; 2) 1's own victory; 3) victory over 1self [be victorious over others, conquer others then 1self]; 3) [solitary realizer[s]/ conqueror/ enlightened one, self[-centred] buddha] pr...	rang rgyal
རང་རྒྱལ་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of pratyekabuddhas	rang rgyal kyi theg pa
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་པ	the practice of the pratyekabuddha	rang rgyal gyi sgrub pa
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཐེག	SA rang sangs rgyas	rang rgyal gyi theg
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of silent buddhas, pratyekabuddha-yana	rang rgyal gyi theg pa
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་རིགས	the pratyekabuddha family/ gotra [rang rgyal slob lam pa'i rgyud nang la rang rgyal gyi byang chub thob rung gi nus pa]	rang rgyal gyi rigs
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་རིགས་ཅན	of the family of pratyekabuddhas	rang rgyal gyi rigs can
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ལམ	the path crossing over to the liberation/ realization of a pratyekabuddha [which leaves 1/2 of 1 of the two egolessnesses unrealized]	rang rgyal gyi lam
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ལམ་ལྔ	the five paths of pratyekabuddhas [rang rgyal gyi tshogs lam dang, sbyor lam, mthong lam, sgom lam, mi slob lam bcas lnga'o]	rang rgyal gyi lam lnga
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ལམ་ཤེས་པའི་ལམ་ཤེས	path knowledge knowing the path of pratyekabuddhas [having accomplished dedication of arousing bodicitta and prajna realizing emptiness, for the sake of accepting those to be tamed of the pratyekab...	rang rgyal gyi lam shes pa'i lam shes
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ས	pratyekabuddha level	rang rgyal gyi sa
རང་རྒྱལ་གྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	to live after one's own option or pleasure	rang rgyal gyis 'gro ba
རང་རྒྱལ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ	pratyekabuddha arhat rang rgyal sgrub pa'i rten rang bzhin gnas	rang rgyal dgra bcom pa
རིགས	TSE	rigs
རང་རྒྱལ་བཅུ་གཉིས	{rang rgyal bse ru lta	rang rgyal bcu gnyis
རང་རྒྱལ་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of selfcentered buddhas/pratyekabuddhas	rang rgyal theg pa
རང་རྒྱལ་ཐེག་པའི་སྒོམ	meditation of	rang rgyal theg pa'i sgom
རང་རྒྱལ་འཕགས་པ	pratyekabuddha perceptually seeing the truth	rang rgyal 'phags pa
རང་རྒྱལ་བ	Pratyeka-jina. A synonym for pratyekabuddha	rang rgyal ba
རང་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཐེག་པ	self-centered buddhas	rang rgyal ba'i theg pa
རང་རྒྱལ་མི་སློབ་པ	pratyekabuddha arhat on the path of no more learning	rang rgyal mi slob pa
རང་རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་ན་སྤྱོད་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {ne tsho ltar khyus lding ba la bshad pa'i phyir zla grogs dang bcas te sgom pa gzhir byas nas/ tshogs spyod chung ngu tshogs bsags sngar dang 'dra ba las/ srid pa tha ma p...	rang rgyal tshogs na spyod pa
རང་རྒྱལ་ཞིང་གཞན་ཕམ་པ	be victorious 1self and defeat others	rang rgyal zhing gzhan pham pa
རང་རྒྱལ་རང་སངས་རྒྱས	Solitary Realizer[s]	rang rgyal rang sangs rgyas
རང་རྒྱལ་རིགས	the pratyeka-buddha type [of person]	rang rgyal rigs
རང་རྒྱལ་སློབ་པ	pratyekabuddha on the paths of learning who is not yet an arhat	rang rgyal slob pa
རང་རྒྱལ་གསུམ	the three kinds of pratyekabudhas [1) {tshogs spyod chung du}; 2) {tshogs spyod chen po}; 3) {bse ru lta bu}	rang rgyal gsum
རང་རྒྱལ་བསེ་རུ་ལྟ་བུ	pratyekabuddhas, rhinoceros-like; rhinoceroslike pratyekabuddhas; shin tu dbang po rnon po yin te/ dud 'gro bse la rwa gcig las med pa ltar 'du 'dzi g.yeng bas 'jigs nas gcig pur gnas pas der gtags...	rang rgyal bse ru lta bu
རང་རྒྱུད	Autonomy [thd]	rang rgyud
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀོ་སྐམ	the dry hide that is our mind	rang rgyud ko skam
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་མི་མཐོང	not see the faults in 1's being/ thesis	rang rgyud kyi skyon mi mthong
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྔེས་དཔག	autonomous influence	rang rgyud kyi rnges dpag
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཆགས་སྡང	the attachment and aversion in our own mind	rang rgyud kyi chags sdang
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འཆིང་བ	knots of one's mind	rang rgyud kyi 'ching ba
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་དཔག	autonomous inference	rang rgyud kyi rjes dpag
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས	[independent] reason/ inference from 1's own side	rang rgyud kyi gtan tshigs
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	autonomous sign/ reason/ inference, private [dogmatic] reason	rang rgyud kyi rtags
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དམ་བཅའ	private dogmatic thesis	rang rgyud kyi dam bca'
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་དུག་ལྔ	the five poisons in one's stream of being	rang rgyud kyi dug lnga
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བསྡུས་པའི་གཟུགས	TSE	rang rgyud kyi bsdus pa'i gzugs
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	personal five aggregates	rang rgyud kyi phung po lnga
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	autonomous syllogism	rang rgyud kyi sbyor ba
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྩ	self-reliant channels	rang rgyud kyi rtsa
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བས་ཟིན་པ	embraced by personal sensation	rang rgyud kyi tshor bas zin pa
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བས་ཟིན་པའི་ཁམས	9 elements embraced by personal sensation rang rgyud kyi tshor bas zin pa'i khams	rang rgyud kyi tshor bas zin pa'i khams
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	Svatrantika master	rang rgyud kyi slob dpon
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	comprised of 1's stream of being	rang rgyud kyis bsdus pa
རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱིས་ཟིན་པའི་འབྱུང་བ	elements embraced by 1's stream of being	rang rgyud kyis zin pa'i 'byung ba
རང་རྒྱུད་སྐལ་པའི་འབྱོར་པ་ལྔ	the five riches of individual fortune	rang rgyud skal pa'i 'byor pa lnga
རང་རྒྱུད་གོང་མ	higher svatantrika school	rang rgyud gong ma
རང་རྒྱུད་གྱེངས་པ	mental distraction, disturbance of mind	rang rgyud gyengs pa
རང་རྒྱུད་ངན་པ	unwholesomeness in one's being	rang rgyud ngan pa
རང་རྒྱུད་ངན་པའི་ཤུལ་དུ་ལྷུང	revert to your former bad habits	rang rgyud ngan pa'i shul du lhung
རང་རྒྱུད་ཆུད་ཟོས	leaving 1's own continuum ordinary	rang rgyud chud zos
རང་རྒྱུད་ཆོས་དང་འདྲེས་པ	merged the stream of my mind with the Dharma, blend my mind with the Dharma	rang rgyud chos dang 'dres pa
རང་རྒྱུད་རྗེས་དཔག	autonomous inference, syllogism, dogmaticist	rang rgyud rjes dpag
རང་རྒྱུད་དག་པ	one's own pure condition	rang rgyud dag pa
རང་རྒྱུད་དུ	in themselves, in practice, in one's mind	rang rgyud du
རང་རྒྱུད་དུ་མེད	devoid of a self nature	rang rgyud du med
རང་རྒྱུད་དུལ་བ	tamed beings	rang rgyud dul ba
རང་རྒྱུད་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight Svatantrika systems / schools	rang rgyud pa brgyad
རང་རྒྱུད་པ་མེད	devoid of independent existence	rang rgyud pa med
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཆོས་རྣམས	discrete entities	rang rgyud pa'i chos rnams
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་རྣམ་གཞག	the Svatantrika system	rang rgyud pa'i rnam gzhag
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་མུ་སྟེགས་པ	TSE	rang rgyud pa'i mu stegs pa
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་མུ་སྟེགས་པ་གཉིས	TSE	rang rgyud pa'i mu stegs pa gnyis
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ལུགས	the Svatantrika system	rang rgyud pa'i lugs
རང་རྒྱུད་འཕེན་པ	state 1s own thesis by means of a reason in which the three modes are complete	rang rgyud 'phen pa
རང་རྒྱུད་སྦས་ཚུལ་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	who hide their true nature	rang rgyud sbas tshul du bzhugs pa
རང་རྒྱུད་འོག་མ	lower svatantrika school	rang rgyud 'og ma
རང་རྒྱུད་ཡེ་གཞི	primordial state of consciousness rang rgyud g.yengs pa - mental distraction, disturbance of mind rang rgyud g.yengs pa - a distraction; x {rang rgyud g.yengs pa'i rgyu yin pas legs par spangs te} ...	rang rgyud ye gzhi
རང་རྒྱུད་རང་ལོན	to know oneself	rang rgyud rang lon
རང་རྒྱུད་རིང	enduring self-confidence	rang rgyud ring
རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་པ	{thugs rgyud rtogs pa'i ye shes rang rgyud la skyes pa} consist of giving birth to the wisdom of the teacher's realization within yourself	rang rgyud la skyes pa
རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་བླངས	taken to heart, assimilated into one's being	rang rgyud la blangs
རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱར་བ	take to heart, assimilate in 1self/1's being	rang rgyud la sbyar ba
རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་བརྟགས་ནས	having minutely examined 1's mind	rang rgyud la zhib tu brtags nas
རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་ལོན	take to heart	rang rgyud la lon
རང་རྒྱུད་ལུགས	the Svatantrika system	rang rgyud lugs
རང་རྒྱུད་ཤར་གསུམ	The three eastern svatantrikas	rang rgyud shar gsum
རང་རྒྱུད་སྲེག་པའི་ཚིག་རྩུབ	harsh words that can scorch one's heart	rang rgyud sreg pa'i tshig rtsub
རང་རྒྱུད་བསམ་ངན	the stream of my negative thoughts	rang rgyud bsam ngan
རང་རྒྱུས་རང་ལོན	realize how things are for 1 by 1self	rang rgyus rang lon
རང་སྒུལ་འཕྲུལ་མདའ	automatic rifle	rang sgul 'phrul mda'
རང་སྒེར	rang nyid kher rkyang	rang sger
རང་སྒྲ	self-utterance, natural sound	rang sgra
རང་སྒྲ་གྲགས་པ	naturally resounding	rang sgra grags pa
རང་སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས་པ	resound naturally/ spontaneously, self-resounding	rang sgra sgrogs pa
རང་སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས་པ	its melody, though unplayed, filled [instrument]	rang sgra bsgrags pa
རང་སྒྲ་དང་བཅས	self-resounding	rang sgra dang bcas
རང་སྒྲ་ལྡིར་བ	vibrating with their own sound	rang sgra ldir ba
རང་སྒྲ་འབྲུག་ལྟར་སྒྲོགས	natural sound/ naturally resounding like thunder	rang sgra 'brug ltar sgrogs
རང་ངན	Rang Ngen, in Domey	rang ngan
རང་ངེ་རོང་ངེ	rough, coarse	rang nge rong nge
རང་ངེས	self-ascertainment	rang nges
རང་ངོ	1) natural face, own essence, one's own nature, self-nature. 2) its very essence; (one's own) true nature; one's own nature; natural face; selfface, original face, true nature. own nature; one's ow...	rang ngo
རང་ངོ་མཐོང་བ	see 1's own nature	rang ngo mthong ba
རང་ངོ་ན་མེད་པ	not to exist in its own right	rang ngo na med pa
རང་ངོ་ན་གསལ་བ	to become evident in its own right	rang ngo na gsal ba
རང་ངོ་སྤྲད་པ	introducing directly in oneself	rang ngo sprad pa
རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད	receiving the transmission, realize our own nature]	rang ngo 'phrod
རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	recognized	rang ngo 'phrod pa
རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the nature of one's mind	rang ngo 'phrod pa'i ye shes
རང་ངོ་མ་འཕྲོད་ན	if direct introduction is not effective in oneself	rang ngo ma 'phrod na
རང་ངོ་མ་ཤེས་པ	not know 1's own nature, [stand] unrecognized, fail to recognize	rang ngo ma shes pa
རང་ངོ་མ་ཤེས་པས	not know 1's own nature, [stand] unrecognized, fail to recognize	rang ngo ma shes pas
རང་ངོ་རང	own nature	rang ngo rang
རང་ངོ་རང་གིས་མ་རིག་པ	1 doesn't cognize/ perceive// is unaware of 1's own essence	rang ngo rang gis ma rig pa
རང་ངོ་རང་གིས་ཤེས	realize one's own nature	rang ngo rang gis shes
རང་ངོ་རང་ཐོག	directly	rang ngo rang thog
རང་ངོ་རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཕྲོད	to discover one's state directly	rang ngo rang thog tu 'phrod
རང་ངོ་རང་ཐོག་འཕྲོད་པ	directly recognize in themselves	rang ngo rang thog 'phrod pa
རང་ངོ་རང་དུ	meeting oneself face to face, one's own nature meets itself	rang ngo rang du
རང་ངོ་རང་དུ་ཕྲད་པ	one's own face encountering itself, meeting oneself face to face	rang ngo rang du phrad pa
རང་ངོ་རང་རིག	to know one's natural face	rang ngo rang rig
རང་ངོ་རང་ལ་འཕྲོད	realize one's own nature	rang ngo rang la 'phrod
རང་ངོ་རང་གསལ་གྱི	profound insight as the natural lucidity of the very essence (of being)	rang ngo rang gsal gyi
རང་ངོ་རིག་པ	awareness of one's own nature, one recognizes one's essence, to know one's natural face, recognition of one's state	rang ngo rig pa
རང་ངོ་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom that sees one's own nature	rang ngo rig pa'i ye shes
རང་ངོ་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས	based on personal perception	rang ngo la ltos nas
རང་ངོ་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས་ཚང	to be complete with regard to one's own makeup	rang ngo la ltos nas tshang
རང་ངོ་ཤེས	know 1's nature	rang ngo shes
རང་ངོ་ཤེས་ན	if you recognize your nature	rang ngo shes na
རང་ངོ་ཤེས་པ	to recognize the very essence; to recognize (something) for what it (truly) is; to recognize the true nature (of something)	rang ngo shes pa
རང་ངོར་བལྟས་པ	look at oneself	rang ngor bltas pa
རང་ངོར་རྣམ་དག	intrinsic purity	rang ngor rnam dag
རང་ངོས	1) its own side; 2) 1's own viewpoint/ experience	rang ngos
རང་ངོས་སྟོང་པ	empty of its own essence	rang ngos stong pa
རང་ངོས་ནས	in its own right	rang ngos nas
རང་ངོས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existing in its own right, existence/ establishment from the object's own side	rang ngos nas grub pa
རང་དངོས	own-being	rang dngos
རང་སྔས་རྒྱས	pratyekabuddha	rang sngas rgyas
རང་སྔས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	pratyekabuddha-yana	rang sngas rgyas kyi theg pa
རང་ཅག	we, us	rang cag
རང་གཅིག་པ	singular unique state	rang gcig pa
རང་གཅིག་པུ	singular unique state	rang gcig pu
རང་གཅིག་པུའི་འདུན་མ	selfish goals	rang gcig pu'i 'dun ma
རང་གཅེས་ཆེན་པོ	narcissism	rang gces chen po
རང་གཅེས་པ	egocentric	rang gces pa
རང་གཅེས་པར་བཟུང	caring only about oneself	rang gces par bzung
རང་གཅེས་འཛིན	self-cherishing	rang gces 'dzin
རང་བཅབས	self-concealed	rang bcabs
རང་ལྕེབས	commit suicide	rang lcebs
རང་ཆ	one's own (share, portion, side)	rang cha
རང་ཆགས	self-formed, self-created	rang chags
རང་ཆར	in itself; natural property	rang char
རང་ཆས	natural(ly)/ inherent(ly) (occurring) quality/ attribute (of being)	rang chas
རང་ཆས་སུ	as a natural possession, intrinsically, inherently	rang chas su
རང་ཆས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	self-arrangement	rang chas su bkod pa
རང་ཆས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	inherent, intrinsic, innate, natural possession, spontaneously present	rang chas su grub pa
རང་ཆས་སུ་དག་པ	self-purity, intrinsically pure	rang chas su dag pa
རང་ཆས་སུ་གནས་པ	abiding as a natural(ly occurring) quality/ attribute (of being)	rang chas su gnas pa
རང་ཆས་སུ་བཞུགས་པ	intrinsically/ naturally present, present as an innate qualities	rang chas su bzhugs pa
རང་ཆས་སུ་ཡོད་པ	immanent, intrinsic, present as an innate quality / natural possession; inherently present as a natural attribute (of being)	rang chas su yod pa
རང་ཆས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	spontaneously present natural possession	rang chas lhun grub
རང་ཆུང་ཤིང	olive tree, a plant	rang chung shing
རང་ཆེ	arrogant self-sufficient, selfaggrandizement	rang che
རང་ཆེ་རང་བཀུར	conceited	rang che rang bkur
རང་ཆེ་རང་མཐོ	example of producing strong pride/ arrogance	rang che rang mtho
རང་འཆིའོ	i will seek death	rang 'chi'o
རང་ཇུས	= rang byus, ??? rang don [1's own benefit?]	rang jus
རང་མཇལ་ཐུབ	able to see	rang mjal thub
རང་འཇགས	as before, unchanged	rang 'jags
རང་འཇགས་འཇོག	leave as it was	rang 'jags 'jog
རང་འཇགས་འཇོག་པ	leave as it was 2546	rang 'jags 'jog pa
རང་འཇགས་ཐོབ	attain as before	rang 'jags thob
རང་འཇགས་གནས	abode/ rest w/o change	rang 'jags gnas
རང་འཇགས་ཕྱིར་ལོག	return to place 1 formerly stayed	rang 'jags phyir log
རང་འཇགས་སུ་འཇོག	leave as it was	rang 'jags su 'jog
རང་འཇགས་སུ་འཇོག་པ	leave as it was	rang 'jags su 'jog pa
རང་འཇགས་སུ་བཞག	left as it was	rang 'jags su bzhag
རང་འཇགས་སུ་བཞག་པ	left as it was	rang 'jags su bzhag pa
རང་འཇགས་སུ་སོང་བ	returning as before	rang 'jags su song ba
རང་འཇགས་སུ་སོང་བའི་ཆུ་ལོག	flood water returning as they were before	rang 'jags su song ba'i chu log
རང་འཇགས་སུ་སློག	send back to the former address	rang 'jags su slog
རང་འཇགས་སུ་སློག་པ	return	rang 'jags su slog pa
རང་འཇིགས་རང་སྐྱོབ	for 1's problems which arise produce means of protection by 1self	rang 'jigs rang skyob
རང་འཇིགས་རང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	for 1's problems which arise produce means of protection by 1self	rang 'jigs rang skyob byed
རང་འཇིགས་རང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད་པ	for 1's problems which arise produce means of protection by 1self	rang 'jigs rang skyob byed pa
རང་ལྗོངས	1's own region	rang ljongs
རང་བརྗོད	self/ natural-expression, [Gold] selflessness???	rang brjod
རང་ཉམས	1) 1's own experience/ continuum; 2) rang nyid nyams dams pa ???; 3) rang bzhin, nature	rang nyams
རང་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས	practiced it myself	rang nyams su blangs
རང་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན	to apply as personal practice, to devote oneself to the practice of, practice for oneself	rang nyams su len
རང་ཉིད	1self, itself, 1's own, individual, personal	rang nyid
རང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལོ་གྲངས	1's age	rang nyid kyi lo grangs
རང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	autobiography	rang nyid kyi lo rgyus
རང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	by 1self/ itself	rang nyid kyis
རང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རང་ལ་བརྙས་པ	I, 1self, yourself [alone]	rang nyid kyis rang la brnyas pa
རང་ཉིད་སྐྱིད་རློམ	conceit, selfglorification, considering 1self special/ exceptional [when 1 isn't]	rang nyid skyid rlom
རང་ཉིད་ཁྱེར་རྒྱང	1self/ itself alone	rang nyid khyer rgyang
རང་ཉིད་མཁས་རློམ	conceit, selfglorification, considering 1self special/ exceptional [when 1 isn't]	rang nyid mkhas rlom
རང་ཉིད་བསྒྱུར་བཀོད	self-re-education/ remolding	rang nyid bsgyur bkod
རང་ཉིད་ངོ་མ	oneself, personally	rang nyid ngo ma
རང་ཉིད་གཅིག་པུ	all alone	rang nyid gcig pu
རང་ཉིད་གཅིག་པུ་ཐར་པ	setting yourself free	rang nyid gcig pu thar pa
རང་ཉིད་ཆེར་རློམ	conceit, selfglorification, considering 1self special/ exceptional [when 1 isn't]	rang nyid cher rlom
རང་ཉིད་འཆི་ཁར་ཡིན་ཡང	even if they are on the point of death	rang nyid 'chi khar yin yang
རང་ཉིད་འཐད་ལ	voluntarily, spontaneously	rang nyid 'thad la
རང་ཉིད་དཔའ་རློམ་རིང་ལུགས	individual conceitism/ prudism	rang nyid dpa' rlom ring lugs
རང་ཉིད་ལ་རྩི་མཐོང	self-conceited,	rang nyid la rtsi mthong
རང་ཉིད་སློབ་གསོ	self-education	rang nyid slob gso
རང་ཉིད་གསལ་བ	self-presenting; selfluminous [ggd]	rang nyid gsal ba
རང་ཉིས་ནས་གྲུབ་པ	existing in its own right	rang nyis nas grub pa
རང་ཉེན་གཞན་སྐྱུར	blame others for 1's crimes	rang nyen gzhan skyur
རང་ཉེས	own crime	rang nyes
རང་ཉེས་ཁས་ལེན	confess/ admit 1's crimes	rang nyes khas len
རང་ཉེས་ཁས་ལེན་བྱེད	confess/ admit 1's crimes	rang nyes khas len byed
རང་ཉེས་རྗེན་བརྗོད	confess/ admit 1's crimes	rang nyes rjen brjod
རང་ཉེས་དྲང་པོར་བཤད་པ	to confess	rang nyes drang por bshad pa
རང་ཉེས་གཞན་སྐྱུར	blame others for 1's crimes rang nyes gzhan g.yogs - blame others for 1's crimes	rang nyes gzhan skyur
རང་ཉེས་རང་ཞུ	confess/ admit 1's crimes	rang nyes rang zhu
རང་གཉིད	itself/ 1self	rang gnyid
རང་བཏགས་སུ	{rna ba rin po che'i rna rgyan rang btags su yod pa} ears that seemed to be adorned with earrings of precious gems	rang btags su
རང་རྟ	1) 1's own horse; 2) individually composed song/ tune	rang rta
རང་རྟ་རང་ཞོན	ride 1's own horse 1self	rang rta rang zhon
རང་རྟགས	1) sign/ character[istics] rtags showing what the essence is/ which is signified; 2) 1's own true sign/ character[istics]; 3) intrinsic/ true sign/ character[istics]	rang rtags
རང་རྟགས་སྟོན་པ	show 1's/ something's true sign/ character[istics]	rang rtags ston pa
རང་རྟགས་བསྟན་པ	showed/ taught 1's/ something's true sign/ character[istics]	rang rtags bstan pa
རང་རྟགས་ཐོན་པ	describe/ develop something's true sign/ character[istics]	rang rtags thon pa
རང་རྟགས་མཚོན	characterize, symbolize	rang rtags mtshon
རང་རྟགས་མཚོན་པ	characterize, symbolize rang rtags rdzun pa gsal rjen du ston pa clearly show that the signification was false	rang rtags mtshon pa
རང་རྟེན་གྱི་ཆོས་ཅན	basal subject	rang rten gyi chos can
རང་རྟོགས	self consciousness/ awareness, volunteering	rang rtogs
རང་རྟོགས་ཀྱིས	voluntarily	rang rtogs kyis
རང་རྟོགས་རན་མོས	voluntarily, of 1's own free will	rang rtogs ran mos
རང་རྟོགས་གཤེན་རབ་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Way of Those who Understand by Themselves and who Follow Shenrab	rang rtogs gshen rab kyi theg pa
རང་ལྟ	view of selfhood/ egohood [= {bdag lta}	rang lta
རང་ལྟ་མཆོག་འཛིན	hold 1's own view as supreme	rang lta mchog 'dzin
རང་སྟོང	"self-empty" school; unqualified emptiness/ self-emptiness	rang stong
སཡསྟེམ་ཨོཕ༹་ཕིལོསོཕཡ	self-emptiness, the rangtong system of philosophy, intrinsic emptiness, also jo nang pa'i view of shentong relative or kun rdzob: chos thams cad rang ngos su bden pas stong pa'i lta ba'o	system of philosophy
རང་སྟོང་གི་ལྟ་བ	emptiness-of-self view [ggd]	rang stong gi lta ba
རང་སྟོང་པ	proponent of unqualified emptiness	rang stong pa
རང་སྟོངས	self-emptied/ emptying	rang stongs
རང་སྟོད	self-praise/ glorification, bragging	rang stod
རང་སྟོད་ཅན	self-admirer, extol, glorify 2547	rang stod can
རང་སྟོད་བྱེད	indulge in self-praise/ glorification, brag	rang stod byed
རང་སྟོད་རང་བསྒྲགས	self-praise/ glorification, bragging	rang stod rang bsgrags
རང་སྟོད་རང་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	indulge in	rang stod rang bsgrags byed
རང་སྟོབས	{rang stobs kyis} (through/ by) natural/ inherent/ its own power/ strength	rang stobs
རང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས	through/ by one's own power	rang stobs kyis
རང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བགྲོད	infantry, foot soldier	rang stobs kyis bgrod
རང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བགྲོད་པ	1) go by 1's own power; 2) foot soldier	rang stobs kyis bgrod pa
རང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འཆུན་པ	able by one's own power	rang stobs kyis 'chun pa
རང་སྟོབས་རང་སྤེལ	self-reliance and hard work	rang stobs rang spel
རང་སྟོབས་གཤེན་རབ	class of bon who aim at resembling buddhist pratyeka buddhas	rang stobs gshen rab
རང་སྟོབས་གཤེན་རབས	Bon pratyekabuddha	rang stobs gshen rabs
རང་བསྟོད	praise 1self	rang bstod
རང་བསྟོད་བྱེད	indulge in self-praise/ glorification, brag	rang bstod byed
རང་བསྟོད་གཞན་སྨད	praise 1self and disparage others	rang bstod gzhan smad
རང་བསྟོད་རང་བསྒྲགས	self-praise/ glorification, bragging	rang bstod rang bsgrags
རང་བསྟོད་རང་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	indulge in	rang bstod rang bsgrags byed
རང་བསྟོད་ལ་མི་ཉན	don't listen to selfpraise	rang bstod la mi nyan
རང་ཐག་གིས	grind in a mill	rang thag gis
རང་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	to decide once and for all	rang thag gcod pa
རང་ཐག་བཅད	decide/ resolve 1self w/o ?s by others	rang thag bcad
རང་ཐག་བཅད་པ	decide/ resolve 1self w/o ?s by others	rang thag bcad pa
རང་ཐག་ཆུ་སྐོར	water mill, selfgrinding mill	rang thag chu skor
རང་ཐག་ཆོད	to gain ultimate certainty, obtain by oneself precise knowledge	rang thag chod
རང་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	to certainly gain	rang thag chod pa
རང་ཐག་ཆོད་པར་འགྱུར	to gain ultimate certainty	rang thag chod par 'gyur
རང་ཐག་བདག་པོ	miller	rang thag bdag po
རང་ཐག་རང་གཅོད	decide/ resolve 1self w/o ?s by others, selfdetermination	rang thag rang gcod
རང་ཐག་རང་གཅོད་གི་དབང་ཆ	right	rang thag rang gcod gi dbang cha
ཏོ་སེལཕ༹	determination	to self
རང་ཐག་རང་བཅད	decide/ resolve 1self w/o ?s by others	rang thag rang bcad
རང་ཐག་སོ	(molar, corner, canine) tooth	rang thag so
རང་ཐང	artless	rang thang
རང་ཐུབ	one capable of doing a work independently	rang thub
རང་ཐོག	in themselves	rang thog
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ	in one's own condition, in one's own natural state, in one's condition, within oneself	rang thog tu
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་ངོ་འཕྲོད་པ	to rediscover directly	rang thog tu ngo 'phrod pa
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཇོག	maintain the presence of one's state, presence in one's own state	rang thog tu 'jog
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཇོག་པ	dwell in awareness itself	rang thog tu 'jog pa
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་འཕྲོད	to discover directly	rang thog tu 'phrod
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་ལེན	take upon oneself	rang thog tu len
རང་ཐོག་ཏུ་ལེན་པ	assume	rang thog tu len pa
རང་ཐོག་ཕེབས	acquire in oneself directly	rang thog phebs
རང་ཐོག་ཕེབས་ཤིང་རིག	understand in one's condition	rang thog phebs shing rig
རང་ཐོག་འཕྲོད	to directly recognize	rang thog 'phrod
རང་ཐོག་འཕྲོད་པ	directly recognize, to directly discover	rang thog 'phrod pa
རང་ཐོན་རང་འཚོང	producing and selling by 1self	rang thon rang 'tshong
རང་ཐོབ་འབེབས་པ	to have direct experience in one's state	rang thob 'bebs pa
རང་མཐོ	self-important	rang mtho
རང་མཐོ་རང་ཆེ	vain, conceited, arrogant, self-important	rang mtho rang che
རང་མཐོང	self-conceited/ regard/ importance	rang mthong
རང་མཐོང་སྐྱེས	become conceited	rang mthong skyes
རང་མཐོང་གི་ང་རྒྱལ	self-conceited pride	rang mthong gi nga rgyal
རང་མཐོང་ཅན	self-conceited, selfregard	rang mthong can
རང་མཐོང་ཆུང་བ	self-deprecation/ effacement, feelings of inferiority	rang mthong chung ba
རང་མཐོང་ཆེ	self-glorification/ importance, conceit	rang mthong che
རང་མཐོང་ཆེ་བ	self-aggrandizement	rang mthong che ba
རང་མཐོང་ཆེ་བ་ལྟས་ངན་ཡིན	pride	rang mthong che ba ltas ngan yin
རང་མཐོང་ཆེན་པོ	self-glorification/ importance, conceit rang mthong che'i phyogs ris ring lugs arrogant sectarianism	rang mthong chen po
རང་མཐོང་མ་བྱེད	be not selfsufficient	rang mthong ma byed
རང་མཐོང་རང་གཅོག	self-deprecation/ effacement, feelings of inferiority	rang mthong rang gcog
རང་འཐག	a watermill	rang 'thag
རང་འཐག་བསྐོར་བ	turning millstones	rang 'thag bskor ba
རང་འཐག་གི་ལྟག་ཆུ	naturally dried up water flow from a pond	rang 'thag gi ltag chu
རང་འཐག་ཏུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཡུར་ཆུ	naturally dried up irrigation water	rang 'thag tu 'gyur ba'i yur chu
རང་འཐག་ཤ་ཁུ	naturally dried meat broth	rang 'thag sha khu
རང་དག	self-purified, naturally pure, selfclearing	rang dag
རང་དག་ལ་སོང	to dissolve	rang dag la song
རང་དང་སྣོད་བཅུད	yourself and the world with its inhabitants	rang dang snod bcud
རང་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	found within oneself, connected with oneself	rang dang 'brel ba
རང་དངས	Chagdud R: sgrib pa'i dri mas ma gos pa/ gzhan gyi rgyu rkyen la ma brten pa	rang dangs
རང་དབ༹ངས	naturally pristine/ unsullied [Chagdud R: = sgrib pa'i dri mas ma gos pa/ gzhan gyi rgyu rkyen la ma brten pa]	rang dvangs
རང་དྭངས	naturally cleared	rang dwangs
རང་དབ༹ངས་སྤྲིན་བྲལ་ནམ་ཁའ་ལྟར	like a sparklingly clear and cloudless sky	rang dvangs sprin bral nam kha' ltar
རང་དུ་ངོ་ཤེས	to recognize each other	rang du ngo shes
རང་དུ་བྱས་པ	I made	rang du byas pa
རང་དུས	natural/ specific context; isc. in the very context/ moment of . . .	rang dus
རང་དེངས	naturally cleared away/ vanishing	rang dengs
རང་དོན	concern for himself	rang don
རང་དོན་ཁོ་ན་གཉེར་བ	be concerned only w 1's own purposes/ benefit	rang don kho na gnyer ba
རང་དོན་ཁོ་ནའི་རིང་ལུགས	egotism	rang don kho na'i ring lugs
རང་དོན་གྱི་འཁྲིས་པ	attached to one's interest	rang don gyi 'khris pa
རང་དོན་གྱི་རྟགས	a reason for 1's own benefit	rang don gyi rtags
རང་དོན་རྒྱབ་བསྐྱུར	selflessness, be selfless rang don sgrub pa'i bsam sbyor gyi 'gong	rang don rgyab bskyur
རང་དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཕྱོགས	gzhung gis sprad pa'i las 'gan phar bzhag nas rang gi don dag kho na sgrub pa'i phyogs su song ba	rang don sgrub phyogs
རང་དོན་ཆེན་འགྲུབ་པ	the attainment of great benefit for oneself	rang don chen 'grub pa
རང་དོན་ཆོས་སྐུ	the dharmakaya that benefits oneself	rang don chos sku
རང་དོན་རྗེས་དཔག	inference for 1self	rang don rjes dpag
རང་དོན་ཉི་ཚེ་པའི་བློ	petty selfishness	rang don nyi tshe pa'i blo
རང་དོན་རྟོགས་པ་བརྟན་པ	stabilized realization of the benefit for 1self	rang don rtogs pa brtan pa
རང་དོན་དང་གཞན་དོན	benefit for 1self and benefit for others inference/ syllogism for 1self and for others, dogmaticist [private]	rang don dang gzhan don
རང་དོན་དུ	for myself	rang don du
རང་དོན་བྱེད	accomplish/ act for 1's own purpose/ benefit/ advantage	rang don byed
རང་དོན་བྱེད་པ	to look to one's own advantage, be selfish	rang don byed pa
རང་དོན་བློས་གཏོང་བ	sacrifice	rang don blos gtong ba
རང་དོན་བློས་བཏང་བ	selflessness, be selfless	rang don blos btang ba
རང་དོན་འབ་ཞིག	only benefit for 1self, selfish, egoistic	rang don 'ba zhig
རང་དོན་འབ་ཞིག་པ	person accomplishing only benefit for 1self, selfish person	rang don 'ba zhig pa
རང་དོན་སྦུག་འདྲེན	take care of private/ personal benefit	rang don sbug 'dren
རང་དོན་སྦུག་འཙང	bear private benefit in mind	rang don sbug 'tsang
རང་དོན་མོས་པ་སྒོམ་ལམ	TSE	rang don mos pa sgom lam
རང་དོན་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད	accomplish/ act for 1's own purpose/ benefit/ advantage	rang don gtso bor byed
རང་དོན་གཙོ་བོར་བྱེད་པ	accomplish/ act for 1's own purpose/ benefit/ advantage	rang don gtso bor byed pa
རང་དོན་ཡིད་བྱེད	selfish application	rang don yid byed
རང་དོན་རང་གཅེས	cherishing 1's own benefit/ purposes	rang don rang gces
རང་དོན་རིང་ལུགས	individualism rang don shor ba'i gzhan don ltar snang it looks like you are helping other beings, but you have not perfected yourself at all	rang don ring lugs
རང་དོར་སྤྱི་སྐྱོང	set aside personal interests for public 1s	rang dor spyi skyong
རང་དོར་གཞན་བསྟུན	following others w/o thinking of 1's own interest, making concessions to accomplish a goal	rang dor gzhan bstun
རང་དྲིན་རང་ཆུང་དུ་གཏོང	waste/ ruin/ spoil 1self	rang drin rang chung du gtong
རང་གདངས	reflection [like in a mirror], the natural expression	rang gdangs
རང་གདངས་སུ་ངོ་ཤེས་པ	recognize as being self/ 1's own manifestation	rang gdangs su ngo shes pa
ཨས་བེཨིང་སེལཕ༹	manifestation / one's own manifestation	as being self
རང་གདིང	innate confidence	rang gding
རང་གདེང	self-confidence	rang gdeng
རང་གདེང་ཐོབ་པའི་བསམ་པ	selfconfident thought	rang gdeng thob pa'i bsam pa
རང་བདག	independent, privately owned	rang bdag
རང་བདེ་དོར་བའི་བློ	to not be concerned with one's own happiness	rang bde dor ba'i blo
རང་བདེ་མི་འདོད་པ	not desiring 1's own happiness	rang bde mi 'dod pa
རང་མདངས	natural "glow"; "glow" of inherent potential*	rang mdangs
རང་མདངས་སྣང་བ	the self-display appears	rang mdangs snang ba
རང་མདངས་འབར་བ	naturally blazing	rang mdangs 'bar ba
རང་མདུན་ནམ་མཁར	in the sky before me	rang mdun nam mkhar
རང་འདུ་བ	self-evolved	rang 'du ba
རང་འདོད	1) [of] 1's desire/ goal; 2) selfish[ness], self-centered [reasons], egotism; 3) voluntarily	rang 'dod
རང་འདོད་ཀྱི་འཁྲིས་ཡོད་པ	has selfish desires	rang 'dod kyi 'khris yod pa
རང་འདོད་ཀྱིས	with abandon, lack of inhibition	rang 'dod kyis
རང་འདོད་ཀྱིས་ལེན་པའི་ལས་འགན	voluntarily assumed responsibility	rang 'dod kyis len pa'i las 'gan
རང་འདོད་ཁ་ཤེད་མཁྲང་པོ	inflexibly maintaining 1's viewpoint	rang 'dod kha shed mkhrang po
རང་འདོད་ཁེར་སྒྲུབ	willful/ arbitrary action	rang 'dod kher sgrub
རང་འདོད་གང་ཡོད	as 1 likes/ wishes, at will	rang 'dod gang yod
རང་འདོད་དགོས་དབང	gang dran ched du byed pa	rang 'dod dgos dbang
རང་འདོད་སྒྲུབ་པའི་འགོང་པོ	demon of	rang 'dod sgrub pa'i 'gong po
རང་འདོད་ངན་རྒྱབ	do evil as 1 likes/ according to 1's desires	rang 'dod ngan rgyab
རང་འདོད་ཆེ	very selfish, egotistical	rang 'dod che
རང་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ	selfish	rang 'dod chen po
རང་འདོད་ལྟར	as 1 likes/ wishes, at will	rang 'dod ltar
རང་འདོད་དུ་བརྩམ་པ	decided to write	rang 'dod du brtsam pa
རང་འདོད་དུ་བརྩམས	i decided to write 2549	rang 'dod du brtsams
རང་འདོད་པ	egotist	rang 'dod pa
རང་འདོད་བྱེད	act w concern only for 1self [& disregarding others]	rang 'dod byed
རང་འདོད་བློ་བཟོ	rtog bzo - rig bzo personal invention, fancy, imagination, fabrication	rang 'dod blo bzo
རང་འདོད་སྦུག་བཅུག	rang don khog bcug	rang 'dod sbug bcug
རང་འདོད་མ	woman that acts freely according to her own wish	rang 'dod ma
རང་འདོད་མེད་པ	selfless	rang 'dod med pa
རང་འདོད་བཙན་བཀོལ	1's own passion inciting others	rang 'dod btsan bkol
རང་འདོད་ཞེན་པ	self-love	rang 'dod zhen pa
རང་འདོད་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འགོང་པོ	the demon of self-centredness	rang 'dod yid byed kyi 'gong po
རང་འདོད་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྟོག་པ་བཅད་པ་ཅུཏཏིང་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨོཨུར་སེལཕ༹	centredness	rang 'dod yid byed kyi rtog pa bcad pa cutting through our self
རང་འདོད་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བློ	selfishness, selfish attitude, self-centred considerations	rang 'dod yid byed kyi blo
རང་འདོད་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	selfcentred preoccupations	rang 'dod yid byed kyi bsam pa
རང་འདོད་རང་འཐད	think that what 1 dran [perceive/ remember] is true	rang 'dod rang 'thad
རང་འདྲ	like me/ like oneself	rang 'dra
རང་འདྲའི་རྣམ་པ	a replica of itself	rang 'dra'i rnam pa
རང་འདྲར	assimilation, amalgamation, incorporation	rang 'drar
རང་འདྲར་སྒྱུར	assimilate, amalgamate, incorporate	rang 'drar sgyur
རང་རྡོལ་བ	sprang out spontaneously	rang rdol ba
རང་རྡོལ་བྱུང་བ	to flow freely	rang rdol byung ba
རང་ལྡོག	the same and different las log pa'i chos [the symbolized thing itself or its ldog cha [characteristic] rtog ngor shar ba, EG a vase's rang ldog = vase, categorical differential, self-isolate]	rang ldog
རང་ལྡོག་གཅིག་པ	the same self-isolate/ subject itself or its characteristic	rang ldog gcig pa
རང་ལྡོག་ཐ་དད་པ	different selfisolates	rang ldog tha dad pa
རང་སྡུག་རང་ཉོ	produce 1's own unhappiness	rang sdug rang nyo
རང་སྡེ	1's own side	rang sde
རང་སྡེ་དངོས་སྨྲ་བ	Buddhist proponents of concreteness	rang sde dngos smra ba
རང་སྡེ་ནང་པ་སངས་རྒྱས་པ	buddhists on	rang sde nang pa sangs rgyas pa
རང་སྡོད་པའམ་གཏན་པ	one capable of doing a work independently	rang sdod pa'am gtan pa
རང་བརྡོལ	flow freely	rang brdol
རང་ནང	inner self, the mind	rang nang
རང་ནུས	own power/ strength, instinct	rang nus
རང་ནུས་ངོམ་པ	boastful, egotistic	rang nus ngom pa
རང་ནོག	inherent state	rang nog
རང་ནོངས	guilt, crime, wrongdoing	rang nongs
རང་ནོངས་སྐྱོན་བརྗོད	self-criticism	rang nongs skyon brjod
རང་ནོངས་འགྱོད་མེད	incorrigible, not regretting 1's crimes	rang nongs 'gyod med
རང་ནོངས་ངོས་ལེན་བྱེད	confess 1's [guilt, crime, wrongdoing]	rang nongs ngos len byed
རང་ནོངས་ལབ་པ	confess	rang nongs lab pa
རང་ནོངས་ཤེས	know 1's [guilt, crime, wrongdoing]	rang nongs shes
རང་ནོར་ངོས་ལེན	confess	rang nor ngos len
རང་གནས	natural abode. {rang la gnas pa} that dwells in yourself	rang gnas
པྲེབི༹ཨོཨུས་མོཏིཨོན་སེལཕ༹	resting; 4) inherent, innate, independent, self-existing; 5) attitude, position, situation standpoint	previous motion self
རང་གནས་ཀྱི	inherently indwelling	rang gnas kyi
རང་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	innate wakefulness, wisdom existing within [1]	rang gnas kyi ye shes
རང་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྗེན་པ	a naked self sustaining primal awareness	rang gnas kyi ye shes rjen pa
རང་གནས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	self existing/ abiding dhyana	rang gnas kyi bsam gtan
རང་གནས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	meditative absorption as the supreme state of natural abidin	rang gnas chen po'i ting nge 'dzin
རང་གནས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་སམདྷི་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་གྲེཨཏ་སེལཕ༹	abiding/ resting	rang gnas chen po'i ting nge 'dzin samadhi of the great self
རང་གནས་རྗེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-existing naked wisdom	rang gnas rjen pa'i ye shes
རང་གནས་པ	thief	rang gnas pa
རང་གནས་ཡེ་ཤེས	intrinsic wisdom	rang gnas ye shes
རང་གནས་རིང་ལུགས	localism, parochialism, [selfish] departmentalism	rang gnas ring lugs
རང་གནས་ས་ཕྱོགས	my dwelling and surroundings	rang gnas sa phyogs
རང་གནས་སུ་བསྐྱལ	{sa rdo thams cad rang gnas su bskyal} putting all the earth and stones back where they had come from	rang gnas su bskyal
རང་གནས་སུ་བསྡད	[they] stayed in their situation	rang gnas su bsdad
རང་གནས་སུ་བཞག་པ	to naturally let be	rang gnas su bzhag pa
རང་གནས་སུ་གཤེགས་པ	TSE	rang gnas su gshegs pa
རང་གནས་སུ་གཤེས་ལམ	TSE	rang gnas su gshes lam
རང་གནོང་ངོས་ལེན	recognize 1's own faults	rang gnong ngos len
རང་རྣ་བཀག་ནས་དྲིལ་བུ་རྐུ་བ	stuff 1's ears when stealing a bell, fool 1self	rang rna bkag nas dril bu rku ba
རང་རྣམ	autobiography	rang rnam
རང་རྣམས	we	rang rnams
རང་སྣང	personal appearance, personal experience, self-appearance [thd]	rang snang
རང་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་པར་འདུག	i have mistaken	rang snang 'khrul par 'dug
རང་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་བ	illusion of fancy	rang snang 'khrul ba
རང་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་འཛིན	confused fixation on personal manifestations	rang snang 'khrul 'dzin
རང་སྣང་གང་དྲན	unrestrained/ reckless behavior/ actions, doing whatever 1 likes, whatever 1 experiences	rang snang gang dran
རང་སྣང་གང་ཤར	casual, careless	rang snang gang shar
རང་སྣང་གི་སྐུ་གསུམ	the three kayas	rang snang gi sku gsum
རང་སྣང་གི་སྒོ་ནས	from a subjective viewpoint	rang snang gi sgo nas
རང་སྣང་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the subjective/ phenomenal world	rang snang gi 'jig rten
རང་སྣང་གི་རེ་འདུན	subjective wishes/ desires/ hopes	rang snang gi re 'dun
རང་སྣང་སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	the densely	rang snang stug po bkod pa
ཨརྲཡེད་སེལཕ༹	display / individual experience. Syn {longs spyod rdzogs pa'i zhing khams}	arrayed self
རང་སྣང་དག	sacred outlook	rang snang dag
རང་སྣང་དག་པ	sacred outlook, pure experience	rang snang dag pa
རང་སྣང་དག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	pure realm of personal experience	rang snang dag pa'i zhing khams
རང་སྣང་དག་པོ	think that what 1 has done is OK	rang snang dag po
རང་སྣང་དུ་རིག་པ	ro recognize as selfdisplay	rang snang du rig pa
རང་སྣང་དོན་གྱི་འོག་མིན	ultimate	rang snang don gyi 'og min
ཨཱཀནིཤཐ་རེཨལམ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	display	Akanishtha realm of self
རང་སྣང་གདོད་མའི་ས	the original	rang snang gdod ma'i sa
རང་སྣང་རྣམ་དག	completely sacred outlook	rang snang rnam dag
རང་སྣང་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	1's own completely sacred outlook	rang snang rnam par dag pa
རང་སྣང་བ	to appear spontaneously, show, take place, self-appearing, selfmanifesting. Syn {rang shar ba} selfvisible, as in {rang la snag ba} [appearing to oneself]. sacred outlook	rang snang ba
རང་སྣང་མ་དག	negative attitude, profane sacred outlook, [Notes see the world as impure, tremendous complaint]	rang snang ma dag
རང་སྣང་མ་དག་པའི་ཀུན་སློང	the motivation which profanes sacred outlook	rang snang ma dag pa'i kun slong
རང་སྣང་འོག་མིན་དག་པའི་ཞིང	my experience is the pure realm of Akanishtha	rang snang 'og min dag pa'i zhing
རང་སྣང་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature of self-display luminosity	rang snang 'od gsal gyi chos nyid
རང་སྣང་ཡུལ	one's projections become objects	rang snang yul
རང་སྣང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	wisdom wheel of personal perception	rang snang ye shes kyi 'khor lo
རང་སྣང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	the wisdom	rang snang ye shes kyi rol pa
མནིཕེ༹སྟཏིཨོནས་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	display	manifestations of self
རང་སྣང་རིག་པའི་རྩལ	one's own projections, the play of the mind	rang snang rig pa'i rtsal
རང་སྣང་རིང་ལུགས	subjectivism	rang snang ring lugs
རང་སྣང་རིས་མེད	experience without bias; unbiased experience	rang snang ris med
རང་སྣང་རིས་མེད་ཆེན་པོ	great unbiased experience	rang snang ris med chen po
རང་སྣང་ལོངས་སྐུ	The self-visible sambhogakaya	rang snang longs sku
རང་སྣང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ་ཐེ་སམབྷོགཀཡ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	display / individual experience	rang snang longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku the sambhogakaya of self
རང་པ	embracing, in union with	rang pa
རང་པའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	the two neutral prefix letters ga da and three neutral suffix letters na ra la each 1's 'jug yul gyi ming gzhi dag la sgra tshol ba ran par 'jug pa	rang pa'i 'jug tshul
རང་པོ	unmarried/ celibate man	rang po
རང་དཔང་ཐོབ	attain stability	rang dpang thob
རང་དཔེ་གཞན་སྟོན	show 1's own good behavior where others can see the example, set a good example for others, play a leading role	rang dpe gzhan ston
རང་སྤྱད	without needing to undergo especially great hardship	rang spyad
རང་སྤྱི	specific and general	rang spyi
རང་སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད	specific or universal defining characteristics	rang spyi'i mtshan nyid
རང་ཕན	1's own benefit	rang phan
རང་ཕན་གཞན་གནོད	to benefit 1self harm others	rang phan gzhan gnod
རང་ཕན་རིང་ལུགས	self benefit-ism	rang phan ring lugs
རང་ཕམ	self-defeat	rang pham
རང་ཕུང	self-defeat	rang phung
རང་ཕྱོགས	own opinions	rang phyogs
རང་ཕྱོགས་མ་ཡིན་པ	alien, opposing	rang phyogs ma yin pa
རང་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཆགས་པ	attachment to oneself	rang phyogs la chags pa
རང་ཕྱོགས་བསྲུང་བར་བྱ་བ	to guard their own opinions	rang phyogs bsrung bar bya ba
རང་བ	be delighted, cheerful, joyous, rejoice	rang ba
རང་བབ	natural state, automatically 2551	rang bab
རང་བབ་ངང་ལ་གནས	rest in the state of natural [mind]	rang bab ngang la gnas
རང་བབ་འཇོག་པ	natural resting	rang bab 'jog pa
རང་བབ་བཞག	let rest naturally	rang bab bzhag
རང་བབ་ཤེས་པ	natural mind	rang bab shes pa
རང་བབ་གཤིས	natural state	rang bab gshis
རང་བབས	unfabricated and natural state, natural, naturalness, self-occurring, spontaneously happening, spontaneous, self-manifesting, natural flow, natural mind, as it is, naturalness, as it is naturally, ...	rang babs
རང་བབས་ཀྱི་དྲན་པ	natural mindfulness	rang babs kyi dran pa
རང་བབས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	natural meditation	rang babs kyi bsam gtan
རང་བབས་གཉུག་མའི་དྲན་པ	a natural self occurring mindfulness	rang babs gnyug ma'i dran pa
རང་བབས་དུ་བཞག	to place, leave or let be	rang babs du bzhag
རང་བབས་མ་བཅོས	unfabricated naturalness, var. of {ma bcos rang babs}???. E.g., R75: 290.4 [mss]	rang babs ma bcos
རང་བབས་རང་གནས	self-manifesting and	rang babs rang gnas
རང་བབས་རང་གསལ	spontaneous selfcognizance	rang babs rang gsal
རང་བབས་ལ	in the flow	rang babs la
རང་བབས་སུ	as it naturally is, in naturalness	rang babs su
རང་བབས་སུ་ཀློད་པ	release into the natural state	rang babs su klod pa
རང་བབས་སུ་སྐྱོང་བ	maintain as it naturally is; {rang babs su skyong dus} while I was remaining in the natural flow	rang babs su skyong ba
རང་བབས་སུ་བཞག་པ	to rest naturally	rang babs su bzhag pa
རང་བབས་ལྷུག་པར	in a natural and free way	rang babs lhug par
རང་བའི་རྒྱུ	ultimate cause of diseases, ignorance	rang ba'i rgyu
རང་བས་ངན་པ	worse than self	rang bas ngan pa
རང་བུ	single, alone, single life, one's own child	rang bu
རང་བུར	singly, alone, without a consort	rang bur
རང་བྱང་ཆུབ	[enlightenment of] pratyekabuddhas	rang byang chub
རང་བྱན་ཆུད	has mastered	rang byan chud
རང་བྱན་ཆུད་པ	mastered/ assimilated, completely trained in	rang byan chud pa
རང་བྱན་ཆུབ་པ	to attain mastery	rang byan chub pa
རང་བྱན་དུ་ཆུད	to perfect, to completely master	rang byan du chud
རང་བྱན་ཙུད་པ	totally master, be completely trained in	rang byan tsud pa
རང་བྱན་ཚུག་པ	self-contained	rang byan tshug pa
རང་བྱན་ཚུད	is mastered	rang byan tshud
རང་བྱན་ཚུད་པ	has totally mastered	rang byan tshud pa
རང་བྱས	one's own doing	rang byas
རང་བྱས་རང་མྱོང	fruit of karma 1 has done 1self ripening within 1self, suffer the consequences of 1's actions	rang byas rang myong
རང་བྱིན་རླབས	self-consecration	rang byin rlabs
རང་བྱུང	Miraculously/spontaneouslyformed image	rang byung
རང་བྱུང་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ལྷ	the selfexisting mandala deities	rang byung dkyil 'khor lha
རང་བྱུང་ཁམས	the natural world	rang byung khams
རང་བྱུང་ཁམས་འདུལ	conquer the natural realm/ nature	rang byung khams 'dul
རང་བྱུང་ཁམས་དབང་དུ་འདུལ	conquer the natural realm/ nature	rang byung khams dbang du 'dul
རང་བྱུང་ཁམས་ལས་འདས	beyond the natural realm	rang byung khams las 'das
རང་བྱུང་ཁམས་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the natural realm	rang byung khams las 'das pa
རང་བྱུང་གི་རྐྱེན་ངན	natural disaster/ catastrophe	rang byung gi rkyen ngan
རང་བྱུང་གི་གེགས་བར	natural disaster/ catastrophe/ obstacles	rang byung gi gegs bar
རང་བྱུང་གི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	natural condition	rang byung gi cha rkyen
རང་བྱུང་གི་མཆོད་རྟེན	self-existing stupa rang byung gi rtogs pa rgyud la skyes spontaneous realization was born within me	rang byung gi mchod rten
རང་བྱུང་གི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	natural resources	rang byung gi mthun rkyen
རང་བྱུང་གི་གནས་ཚུལ	natural environment/ situation/ condition	rang byung gi gnas tshul
རང་བྱུང་གི་གནས་ལུགས	natural environment/ situation/ condition/ laws 2552	rang byung gi gnas lugs
རང་བྱུང་གི་གནོད་སྐྱོན	natural calamity	rang byung gi gnod skyon
རང་བྱུང་གི་རྣམ་པ	natural phenomena	rang byung gi rnam pa
རང་བྱུང་གི་སྤྲུལ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ	the	rang byung gi sprul pa chen po gsum
ཐྲེཨེ་གྲེཨཏ་སེལཕ༹	appearing emanations: an image of precious substance, the Tantra of the Single Son of the Doctrine {bstan pa bu gcig gi rgyud} and rays of light to liberate beings	three great self
རང་བྱུང་གི་འོད་གསལ	self-existing luminosity	rang byung gi 'od gsal
རང་བྱུང་གི་འོབས་ཆེན	natural moat/ barrier, Yangtse River	rang byung gi 'obs chen
རང་བྱུང་གི་ཡུལ་མཚམས	natural boundary	rang byung gi yul mtshams
རང་བྱུང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-existing wakefulness/ basic intelligence, the selforiginated primordial/ natural wisdom	rang byung gi ye shes
རང་བྱུང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	dge slong ma kun dga' mo's view of the selforiginated knowledge	rang byung gi ye shes kyi lta ba
རང་བྱུང་གི་རིག་པ	naturally present awareness	rang byung gi rig pa
རང་བྱུང་གི་སེམས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	the essence of the self-arising mind	rang byung gi sems kyi ngo bo
རང་བྱུང་གི་སེམས་ཀྱི་ནོ་བོ	the essence of the self-arising mind	rang byung gi sems kyi no bo
རང་བྱུང་རྒྱལ་མོ	Rangjung Gyalmo [a mahakali, older sister of vetali] (chn]	rang byung rgyal mo
རང་བྱུང་ལྔ་ལྡན	the five naturally occuring statues [lha sa'i gtsug lag khang du yod pa'i sku rten zhig sngar gyi shod srol la phyi'i sku thugs rje chen po bcu gcig zhal phyag stong spyan stong rang byung gcig nan...	rang byung lnga ldan
རང་བྱུང་ཆེན་པོ	supreme naturally/	rang byung chen po
རང་བྱུང་ཆེན་པོ་པད་མ	the great	rang byung chen po pad ma
རང་བྱུང་ཆེན་པོའི་ཚིག	statements	rang byung chen po'i tshig
ཅོནཅེརྣིང་ཐེ་སུཔྲེམེ་སེལཕ༹	occurring nature	concerning the supreme self
རང་བྱུང་བསྟེན་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	naturalism	rang byung bsten pa'i ring lugs
རང་བྱུང་ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་གཅིག	self-existing single circle	rang byung thig le nyag gcig
རང་བྱུང་ཐུགས་རྗེ	natural compassion	rang byung thugs rje
རང་བྱུང་ཐུགས་རྗེས	by natural compassion	rang byung thugs rjes
རང་བྱུང་དུ་བཞུགས་པ	natural [image]	rang byung du bzhugs pa
རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཇིགས་མེད་གླིང་པ	'jigs med gling pa rang byung rdo rje (1729 or 30-1798), Rigdzin Jigmey Lingpa	rang byung rdo rje 'jigs med gling pa
རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་འགྲོས་ཀྱིས་སོང	[go by) the spontaneous Vajra-leap; [go by]	rang byung rdo rje'i 'gros kyis song
ཐེ་སྤོནཏནེཨོཨུས་Vཨཇྲ	leap	the spontaneous Vajra
རང་བྱུང་གནོད་སྐྱོན	famine	rang byung gnod skyon
རང་བྱུང་གནོད་པ	natural harm [from the elements rang byung gi khams las byung ba'i gnod 'tse dper na sa gyo dang chu log lo nyes sogs lta bu	rang byung gnod pa
རང་བྱུང་སྣུམ	natural oil	rang byung snum
རང་བྱུང་སྣུམ་ཀྱི་རླངས་པ	natural gas	rang byung snum kyi rlangs pa
རང་བྱུང་སྣོད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the naturally occurring vessel, the world	rang byung snod kyi 'jig rten
རང་བྱུང་པད་མ	Self-born Lotus / Padma Syn {pad ma 'byung gnas}	rang byung pad ma
རང་བྱུང་པད་མའི་སྙིང་ཐིག	terma by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche	rang byung pad ma'i snying thig
རང་བྱུང་འཕགས་པ	self-arisen image of Avalokiteshvara in the {jo khang}	rang byung 'phags pa
རང་བྱུང་འཕགས་པ་མཆེད་ལྔ	{rgya gar dang zangs gling gi mtshams bye ma'i gling tsan dan sprul gyi snying po'i khong nas rang byung 'phags pa mched lnga spyan drangs} found five spontaneously arisen statues of Avalokiteshvar...	rang byung 'phags pa mched lnga
རང་བྱུང་བ	to arise spontaneously; Swayambhu, self-appeared, self-born,	rang byung ba
རང་བྱུང་བར་སྣང་བ	spontaneously appearing, self-manifest	rang byung bar snang ba
རང་བྱུང་ཚང་པ	epithet of brahma	rang byung tshang pa
རང་བྱུང་ཚན་ཉིད	natural sciences	rang byung tshan nyid
རང་བྱུང་ཚན་རིག	natural sciences	rang byung tshan rig
ཚན་རིག་ཅིག་ཡིན	de'i khongs su: dngos khams rig pa, rdzas 'gyur rig pa, srog chags rig pa, rtsi shing rig pa, gter rdzas rig pa, gzugs khams chags tshul rig pa, rtsis rig sogs]	tshan rig cig yin
རང་བྱུང་ཟངས	natural copper	rang byung zangs
རང་བྱུང་ཡིན་དང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་qཨུཨལིཏིཨེས་ཝཧིཆ་ཨརེ་ཨནད་ཨརེ་ནོཏ་སེལཕ༹	/ naturally existing	rang byung yin dang ma yin pa'i yon tan qualities which are and are not self
རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-existing wisdom,	rang byung ye shes
རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the form of	rang byung ye shes kyi sku
རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རླུང	wind of	rang byung ye shes kyi rlung
རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་གི་ཐུགས	the mind of intrinsic wisdom	rang byung ye shes gi thugs
རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་པ	natural wisdom	rang byung ye shes pa
རང་བྱུང་རགས	natural dam	rang byung rags
རང་བྱུང་རང་དག	self-existing natural purity	rang byung rang dag
རང་བྱུང་རང་བབས	self-existing natural flow	rang byung rang babs
རང་བྱུང་རང་གསལ	self-existing selfcognizance 2553	rang byung rang gsal
རང་བྱུང་རིག་པ	self-originated awareness	rang byung rig pa
རང་བྱུང་རིག་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	karma pa xvi, 1924-81	rang byung rig pa'i rdo rje
རང་བྱུང་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-existing insight wisdom	rang byung rig pa'i ye shes
རང་བྱུང་རིང་ལུགས	naturalism	rang byung ring lugs
རང་བྱུང་རླངས་པ	natural gas	rang byung rlangs pa
རང་བྱུང་རླངས་པའི་ཐོན་ཁུངས	natural gas field	rang byung rlangs pa'i thon khungs
རང་བྱུང་རླངས་རིགས	natural gas	rang byung rlangs rigs
རང་བྱུང་ལུད	manure, natural/ organic fertilizer	rang byung lud
རང་བྱུང་ཤེལ	natural crystal	rang byung shel
རང་བྱུང་ས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	natural/ physical geography rang byung sems sde'i dgongs pa bla na	rang byung sa khams kyi rig pa
རང་བྱུང་སོལ་ཀྱི་རླངས་པ	natural gas	rang byung sol kyi rlangs pa
རང་བྱུང་སོལ་རླངས	natural gas	rang byung sol rlangs
རང་བྱུང་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable spontaneous arising, the spiritual song ??	rang byung bsam gyis mi khyab pa
རང་བྱུང་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	selfexisting and spontaneously present	rang byung lhun gyis grub pa
རང་བྱུང་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	self-originated &	rang byung lhun grub
མོངས་པའི་ཚ་གདུང་སེལ་ཞིང	the quelling of the feverish torment of negative emotions by the nectar of the naturally arising Ati teachings	mongs pa'i tsha gdung sel zhing
རང་བྱུས	self interest	rang byus
རང་བྱེར་གྱུར	to open by itself	rang byer gyur
རང་བྱོང་ལྔ	five images contained in the cho khang temple of lhasa which	rang byong lnga
ཨརེ་བེལིཨེབེ༹ད་ཏོ་བེ་སེལཕ༹	grown	are believed to be self
རང་བྱོན	naturally/ self-appeared,	rang byon
རང་བྱོན་ལྔ་ལྡན	1) a deity; 2) rang byung lnga	rang byon lnga ldan
རང་བྱོན་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddha in person	rang byon sangs rgyas
རང་བློ་མ་འཁྲུལ་པ	unmistaken experience	rang blo ma 'khrul pa
རང་བློར་ཇི་བཞིན་ངེས་བཞིན	as I have remembered rang blor ji bzhin nges bzhin 'dir bshad kyi - I will here explain it exactly as I have understood	rang blor ji bzhin nges bzhin
རང་བློས་མ་སྤོབས་པ	1's surprise	rang blos ma spobs pa
རང་དབང	autonomy; autonomous (existence)	rang dbang
ཕ༹ྲེཨེ	will, liberty, own power actions not depenbding on others [syn: 'gog pa med pa dang, nga yir ba, ltos pa med pa, bdag gir ba, bdag dbang ba, gzhan gyis ma bzung ba, gzhan la ma rag pa, rang gar spy...	free
རང་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	independent country	rang dbang gi rgyal khab
རང་དབང་གི་འཇིག་རྟེན	free world	rang dbang gi 'jig rten
རང་དབང་སྒེར་ལངས	uprising for freedom	rang dbang sger langs
རང་དབང་སྒེར་ལངས་པ	freedom fighter	rang dbang sger langs pa
རང་དབང་སྒྱུར	has command [over]	rang dbang sgyur
རང་དབང་སྒྱུར་བ	{rang dbang bsgyur ba} to gain/ attain inherent mastery	rang dbang sgyur ba
རང་དབང་བསྒྱུར	will master	rang dbang bsgyur
རང་དབང་བསྒྱུར་བ	to gain/ attain mastery	rang dbang bsgyur ba
རང་དབང་ཅན	independent, sovereign, possessing mastery, svatantra, free	rang dbang can
རང་དབང་ཅན་གྱི་མི་ལུས	free human body	rang dbang can gyi mi lus
རང་དབང་ཐོབ	attained mastery	rang dbang thob
རང་དབང་ཐོབ་པ	has attained mastery over	rang dbang thob pa
རང་དབང་དུ	under one's sway	rang dbang du
རང་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	freedom, autonomy	rang dbang du gyur pa
རང་དབང་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	established through its own power	rang dbang du grub pa
རང་དབང་འདུ་བ	master	rang dbang 'du ba
རང་དབང་སྤྲོད་པ	emancipate	rang dbang sprod pa
རང་དབང་བ	independent	rang dbang ba
རང་དབང་བའི་ངོ་བོར་ཡོད་པ	TSE	rang dbang ba'i ngo bor yod pa
རང་དབང་བྲལ	vassal, not independent	rang dbang bral
རང་དབང་མི་ཐོབ་པ	unable to control 1self	rang dbang mi thob pa
རང་དབང་མེད	not be master of, not be free to, not have a choice, one not master of himself, one dependent on another, subject, vassal	rang dbang med
རང་དབང་མེད་དུ	involuntarily	rang dbang med du
རང་དབང་མེད་པ	powerless	rang dbang med pa
བ་བསམ་ཞིང	sadly thinking how powerless she was as a servant	ba bsam zhing
རང་དབང་མེད་པར	involuntarily, uncontrollably	rang dbang med par
རང་དབང་མེད་པར་མིག་ཆུ་ཤོར་བ	cry uncontrollably	rang dbang med par mig chu shor ba
རང་དབང་དམངས་གཙོའི་ཏང	Liberal Democratic Party	rang dbang dmangs gtso'i tang
རང་དབང་བརྩོད་ལེན	struggle/ fight for freedom	rang dbang brtsod len
རང་དབང་ཞི་བདེར་གཅེས་པ	peace and freedom loving	rang dbang zhi bder gces pa
རང་དབང་ཡོད་དུས	while you have this chance	rang dbang yod dus
རང་དབང་ཡོད་པ	have the freedom to choose; x {rang la rang dbang yod pa'i dus 'dir 'dun ma gtan legs dang gtan nyes kyi so mtshams yin pa} our decision at this juncture, when we have the freedom to choose, marks ...	rang dbang yod pa
རང་དབང་རང་བདག	independent, free	rang dbang rang bdag
རང་དབང་རང་བཙན	independent, free	rang dbang rang btsan
རང་དབང་རང་ལ་ཡོད་དུས་འདིར	at this time, when I have complete freedom	rang dbang rang la yod dus 'dir
རང་དབང་རིང་ལུགས	liberalism, permissivism	rang dbang ring lugs
རང་དབང་རོལ	enjoying freedom	rang dbang rol
རང་དབང་ལས་རིགས	professions	rang dbang las rigs
རང་དབྱིངས	natural/ inherent basic space	rang dbyings
རང་འབབ	naturally occurring	rang 'bab
རང་འབབ་ཁྲོན་པ	artesian well	rang 'bab khron pa
རང་འབབ་གི་ཆུ	tap water, water supply	rang 'bab gi chu
རང་འབབ་ཆུ	tap/ running water	rang 'bab chu
རང་འབབ་ཆུའི་གཅུས་སྒོ	running water tap	rang 'bab chu'i gcus sgo
རང་འབབ་ཞིང་ཆུ	artesian well irrigation	rang 'bab zhing chu
རང་འབར	which glows of itself	rang 'bar
རང་འབར་འབྱུང	go ablaze by itself	rang 'bar 'byung
རང་འབྱམས	infinite	rang 'byams
རང་འབྱུང	one's own accord	rang 'byung
རང་འབྱུང་ལྔ་ལྡན	Image of the Five Miracles, Avalokiteshvara	rang 'byung lnga ldan
རང་འབྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	1284-1339 - third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje	rang 'byung rdo rje
རང་འབྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-originated wisdom	rang 'byung ye shes
རང་འབྱོར	personal endowments	rang 'byor
རང་འབྱོར་ལྔ	five individual advantages {mi nyid dbus skyes dbang po tsang} born a human, in a central place, with all one's faculties; {las mtha' ma log gnas la dad} without a conflicting	rang 'byor lnga
རང་འབྱོར་དམ་པ	right juncture, SA 'byor ba	rang 'byor dam pa
རང་འབྱོར་དམ་པ་ལྔ	five events affecting oneself directly	rang 'byor dam pa lnga
རང་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ	highest & mediocre & inferior	rang 'bring tha ma
རང་སྦྱང་བ	train exclusively to purify	rang sbyang ba
རང་སྦྱོང	homework	rang sbyong
རང་སྦྱོང་ལྗོངས	autonomous region	rang sbyong ljongs
རང་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པ	have private study, study by oneself	rang sbyong byed pa
རང་མ	flour pounded in a watermill	rang ma
རང་མལ	own place/position, original place	rang mal
རང་མི	person belonging to 1's group	rang mi
རང་མི་འདོད་པའི་རྐྱེན	event disagreeable to oneself	rang mi 'dod pa'i rkyen
རང་མི་ཕྱི་སྡོད	people of 1's own nationality living in foreign countries	rang mi phyi sdod
རང་མིང	1's name	rang ming
རང་མིན་པ	not very, not too	rang min pa
རང་མིར་གྱུར	to be a human being	rang mir gyur
རང་མེད་གཞན་འཚོལ	though self is nonexistent look for others	rang med gzhan 'tshol
རང་མོ	woman herself, spinster	rang mo
རང་མོས	each individual's desire 'dod mos	rang mos
རང་མོས་ཀྱི་འགྲན་རྩོད	free competition	rang mos kyi 'gran rtsod
རང་མོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁ	majority victory rang mos kyis mgo btags zhus pa red [they] voluntarily surrendered	rang mos kyi rgyal kha
རང་མོས་དང་རིན་མཉམ་བརྗེ་རེས	free participation and exchange of = values	rang mos dang rin mnyam brje res
རང་མོས་འདོད་འདེམས	freedom of choice	rang mos 'dod 'dems
རང་མོས་བྱེད	agree, accept	rang mos byed
རང་མོས་རིང་ལུགས	liberalism	rang mos ring lugs
རང་མོས་ལས་རིགས	professions	rang mos las rigs
རང་དམག་ཐུག་འཛོམས	rang phyogs dmag dpung phyogs so so nas 'dzoms pa [assemble/ meet] [one or two armies?]	rang dmag thug 'dzoms
རང་དམན་གྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	inferiority comple	rang dman gyi 'du shes
རང་རྨོ་ཕྱེད་ཙམ་གྱི་ཞིང་པ	semiowner peasant	rang rmo phyed tsam gyi zhing pa
རང་རྨོའི་ཞིང་པ	land-owner peasant	rang rmo'i zhing pa
རང་གཙོ	independent, privately owned	rang gtso
རང་བཙན	not needing to depend on others, autonomous, independent	rang btsan
རང་བཙན་གྱི་དབང་ཆ	right of autonomy/ independence	rang btsan gyi dbang cha
རང་བཙན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	autonomous country	rang btsan rgyal khab
རང་བཙན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	autonomous kingdom	rang btsan rgyal po'i rgyal khab
རང་བཙན་རང་བདག	autonomous, indep[endent	rang btsan rang bdag
རང་བཙན་རང་དབང	autonomy	rang btsan rang dbang
རང་འཙམ	'ol tshod [guess, assumption] or khungs [source/ reason or w/o reason	rang 'tsam
རང་འཙམ་ཁྲིམས་རྐུན	presumptions are a thief of the law rang 'tsam gyis thag bcad med dmangs	rang 'tsam khrims rkun
ཀྱིས་གྲོས་བསྡུར་བྱས	the people discussed it in guesses w/o deciding the matter	kyis gros bsdur byas
རང་རྩལ	self-potency, inherent potency, natural expression, manifestation, inherent potentiality, inherent energy, inherent creative energy, one's own potentiality, its tsal energy, natural Tsal energy, Ts...	rang rtsal
རང་རྩིས	rang gi rang la brtsi mthong byed pa	rang rtsis
རང་རྩིས་ཀྱི་བསམ་པ	self-respect/ esteem, pride	rang rtsis kyi bsam pa
རང་བརྩི	self-respect/ esteem, pride	rang brtsi
རང་བརྩིའི་བསམ་པ	self-respect/ esteem, pride	rang brtsi'i bsam pa
རང་ཚགས	take care of/ control/ look after/ 1self	rang tshags
རང་ཚང་དུ་སྦྱང་ཀི་འཁྲིད་པ	lead the wolf to 1's door, bring disaster on 1self	rang tshang du sbyang ki 'khrid pa
རང་ཚང་གཟིག་ལ་སྟོན་པ	bring disaster on 1self	rang tshang gzig la ston pa
རང་ཚིག	the words explained by 1self/ itself	rang tshig
རང་ཚིག་གིས་གནོད་པ	refuted by its/ 1's own words	rang tshig gis gnod pa
རང་ཚིག་གིས་བསལ་བ	refuted by its/ 1's own words	rang tshig gis bsal ba
རང་ཚིས	produce 1's own livelihood	rang tshis
རང་ཚུགས	one capable of doing a work independently	rang tshugs
རང་ཚུགས་ཐུབ་པ	to be self-sustaining, capable of standing alone	rang tshugs thub pa
རང་ཚུགས་མ་ཐུབ་བར་དུ	until you attain real confidence in practice, until stability	rang tshugs ma thub bar du
རང་ཚུགས་འཛིན་པ	keep 1's independence see {rang so zin pa}	rang tshugs 'dzin pa
རང་ཚུགས་ཟིན	self-controlled, not impulsive	rang tshugs zin
རང་ཚུགས་ཟིན་པ	tolerance	rang tshugs zin pa
རང་ཚུགས་ཟིན་པོ	self-controlled, not impulsive	rang tshugs zin po
རང་ཚུགས་རང་བཞིན	independence	rang tshugs rang bzhin
རང་ཚུགས་སུ་གནས་པ	to remain stable in itself	rang tshugs su gnas pa
རང་ཚུལ	one's own condition	rang tshul
རང་ཚུལ་རིག་པ	discovering one's own condition	rang tshul rig pa
རང་ཚོ	steady	rang tsho
རང་ཚོ་ཟིན་པ	prevailing, standing firm, stable in itself	rang tsho zin pa
རང་ཚོ་བཟུང	keep unwavering stability; {ma yengs pa'i dran pa rang tsho bzung} maintain a steady and unwavering presence of mind	rang tsho bzung
རང་ཚོད	rang gi babs tshad [own worth??	rang tshod
རང་ཚོད་བྱེད	judge/ evaluate/ appraise 1's capacity/ strength/ capability	rang tshod byed
རང་ཚོད་མི་ཐིག་པ	unable to [judge/ evaluate/ appraise 1's capacity/ strength/ capability]	rang tshod mi thig pa
རང་ཚོད་ཟིན	control 1self	rang tshod zin
རང་ཚོད་ཟིན་ན་མཁས་པ་ཡིན	it is smart to control 1self	rang tshod zin na mkhas pa yin
རང་ཚོད་ཟིན་པ	keeping your power / capacity, know your own capability, keep you cool, behave yourself, be content, be true to yourself	rang tshod zin pa
རང་ཚོད་བཟུང	self-controlled/ restrained/ contained	rang tshod bzung
རང་ཚོན	self-emptiness	rang tshon
རང་མཚང	nature	rang mtshang
རང་མཚང་སྟོན་པའི་ཚེ	when the faults begin to show	rang mtshang ston pa'i tshe
རང་མཚང་འབྱིན་པ	reveal my own faults	rang mtshang 'byin pa
རང་མཚང་རང་གིས་སྟོན	our faults are brought to light	rang mtshang rang gis ston
རང་མཚངས	nature	rang mtshangs
རང་མཚངས་སྟོན་པ	shows my own faults	rang mtshangs ston pa
རང་མཚངས་ཕོག	hits the secret faults, the nest of secret faults	rang mtshangs phog
རང་མཚངས་སུན་འབྱིན་གྱི་ཚུལ་དུ	as a way of exposing his faults	rang mtshangs sun 'byin gyi tshul du
རང་མཚན	own/ self- [particular[izing]/ identifying]/ individual mark[s]/ character[istics], individual, specifically characterized phenomenon/ object	rang mtshan
ཅོནསིདེརེད་སེལཕ༹	contradictory from the viewpoint of madhyamika]	considered self
ཨོཔཔོསེད་ཏོ་སྤྱི་མཚན	generally characterized [phenomena]; "own defining characteristics" [ggd]	opposed to spyi mtshan
རང་མཚན་ཀྱིས	by nature, naturally. Syn {ngo bo nyid kyis}	rang mtshan kyis
རང་མཚན་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	intrinsically identifiable status, identifiability [intrinsic], established [as what it is] by its own characteristics	rang mtshan kyis grub pa
རང་མཚན་གིས་གྲུབ་པ	established by its specific characteristics [thd]	rang mtshan gis grub pa
རང་མཚན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	established by its specific characteristics	rang mtshan gyis grub pa
རང་མཚན་གྲུབ་པ	established naturally, by its own particular characteristics rang mtshan grub pa'i ngo bo nyid kyis	rang mtshan grub pa
ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	identifiable intrinsic objectivity established by its own nature rang mtshan grub pa'i rang gi ngo bo nyid	kyis grub pa
རང་མཚན་གྲུབ་པའི་རང་མཚན	intrinsically identifiable; intrinsic identity	rang mtshan grub pa'i rang mtshan
རང་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་འབྲེལ་བ	in connection with their own essential characteristics	rang mtshan nyid kyi rjes 'brel ba
རང་མཚན་དུ་གྲུབ་པ	to have ever existed in any self-justifying/ sustaining/ autonomous way	rang mtshan du grub pa
རང་མཚན་དུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	not to have	rang mtshan du ma grub pa
ཨེབེ༹ར་ཨེ྾ཨིསྟེད་ཨིན་ཨཉ་སེལཕ༹	justifying/ sustaining/ autonomous way	ever existed in any self
རང་མཚན་པ	independently existing. Syn {rang rgyud pa}; to be inherently endowed with its own defining characteristics	rang mtshan pa
རང་མཚན་མེད་པ	identitylessness	rang mtshan med pa
རང་མཚམས	1) joyful [in 1's own mind]; 2) ordinary; 3) whatever comes out w/o examining, unreflective; 4) coarseness, meanness	rang mtshams
རང་འཚོ	economic independence/ selfsufficiency	rang 'tsho
རང་འཚོའི་བཟོ་གྲ	self-help center	rang 'tsho'i bzo gra
རང་འཛིན	sense of ownership, naturally grasped	rang 'dzin
རང་འཛིན་གྱི་བློ	idea	rang 'dzin gyi blo
རང་འཛིན་རྟོག་པའི་གཞལ་བྱ	an object of comprehension of the thought consciousness apprehending it	rang 'dzin rtog pa'i gzhal bya
རང་འཛིན་མེད	no sense of ownership	rang 'dzin med
རང་འཛིན་ཚད་མ	naturally grasped pramana [non-confused awareness/ perception of gzugs sgra dri ro reg bya lnga grasping five gates of the senses	rang 'dzin tshad ma
རང་རྫོགས	complete in yourself	rang rdzogs
རང་ཞབས	those under 1's mastery	rang zhabs
རང་ཞལ	(one's own) true face	rang zhal
རང་ཞལ་མཇལ་བ	to meet your natural face, encounter the true face	rang zhal mjal ba
རང་ཞལ་མ་བལྟས	have not beheld the mind's natural face	rang zhal ma bltas
རང་ཞལ་ལ་གཅེར་ལྟས་པས	on closer inspection	rang zhal la gcer ltas pas
རང་ཞི	subside by itself / of its own accord	rang zhi
རང་ཞི་དོན་གཉེར	SA rang sangs rgyas	rang zhi don gnyer
རང་ཞི་བ་འགྱུར་བ	to spontaneously abate	rang zhi ba 'gyur ba
རང་ཞི་བར་འགྱུར	it abates by itself	rang zhi bar 'gyur
རང་ཞིག	naturally destroyed/ disappearing/ eliminated	rang zhig
རང་ཞིག་ཏུ་གྲོལ་བ	be liberated by automatically dissolving	rang zhig tu grol ba
རང་ཞིག་སྦྲུལ་བདུད	self-unravelling	rang zhig sbrul bdud
རང་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པ	abundant, flourishing, prosperous	rang zhing rgyas pa
རང་ཞིར་གནས་པ	abide in personal peace	rang zhir gnas pa
རང་ཞུས་སྤྱི་གྲོས	self-assessment and public discussion	rang zhus spyi gros
རང་གཞག	settle in and of themselves	rang gzhag
རང་གཞན	(lit. self and others) everyone	rang gzhan
རང་གཞན་གྱི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	subjective and objective conditions	rang gzhan gyi cha rkyen
རང་གཞན་གྱི་དོན	the welfare of self and others	rang gzhan gyi don
རང་གཞན་གྱི་དོན་གཉིས་བསྒྲུབ་པ	to work for both myself and for others rang gzhan gyi sems la phan pa'i gsung	rang gzhan gyi don gnyis bsgrub pa
ཉེ་མཁོ་ཁ་ཤས	Words of Advice to Self and Others, by Shabkar rang gzhan gyi sems la phan pa'i gsung	nye mkho kha shas
རང་གཞན་གཉིས་ཀའི་དོན	welfare of 1self and others	rang gzhan gnyis ka'i don
རང་གཞན་གཉིས་ཀའི་དོན་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish the welfare of 1self and others rang gzhan gnyis kyi don gang byas na	rang gzhan gnyis ka'i don sgrub pa
རང་གཞན་གཉིས་ཕན	benefit 1self and others	rang gzhan gnyis phan
རང་གཞན་གཉིས་སུ་བྱུང	originate as oneself and as another	rang gzhan gnyis su byung
རང་གཞན་བསྟན་འགྲོ་ཡོངས	themselves and others, and the Dharma as well	rang gzhan bstan 'gro yongs
རང་གཞན་ཐམས་ཅད	yourself and others	rang gzhan thams cad
རང་གཞན་དོན	welfare of 1self and others	rang gzhan don
རང་གཞན་དོན་གཉིས	welfare of oneself and others	rang gzhan don gnyis
རང་གཞན་ཕན་བྱ་དོན་བྱེད་པ	accomplish goal of benefitting self and others	rang gzhan phan bya don byed pa
རང་གཞན་ཡོངས་ལ་ཕན་ཕྱིར	for my own benefit and that of others	rang gzhan yongs la phan phyir
རང་གཞན་སངས་རྒྱས་འཐོབ་ཕྱིར	that I and others may attain buddhahood	rang gzhan sangs rgyas 'thob phyir
རང་གཞར	automatically	rang gzhar
རང་གཞི	(one's own) natural/ inherent ground of being	rang gzhi
རང་གཞུང	1's own government	rang gzhung
རང་བཞག	{rang gzhag} natural (state of) rest/ settling; to rest/ settle in and of itself; self-settling/ deciding; selfaffirming	rang bzhag
རང་བཞག་ཆེན་པོ	great natural state	rang bzhag chen po
རང་བཞག་པ	left to itself	rang bzhag pa
རང་བཞག་ས་ཞིང	private/ household plot of land	rang bzhag sa zhing
རང་བཞན	he and myself	rang bzhan
རང་བཞི་གྱི་དུག	natural poison (snake venom, vegetable, moral)	rang bzhi gyi dug
རང་བཞིན	nature (of being*); the very nature (of things); isc. (one's) true nature	rang bzhin
ནཏུརལ་ཨེ྾པྲེསསིཨོན	essential [original] nature, state of own being, there has been born, actuality, frame of reference- by nature, naturally, be of the nature of fundamental/ inherent/ultimate nature, essence, own-be...	natural expression
ཐྲེཨེ་སེལཕ༹	existence, four frame of reference, natural expression [of mind] five natural[ly], = {rang bzhin gyis} six manifesting 7 character, consist of 8 essence, its completely pure essence is unborn its c...	three self
ཅནནོཏ	- as it is *, natural, ordinary	cannot
རང་བཞིན་སྐབས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	happen coincidentally	rang bzhin skabs su byung ba
རང་བཞིན་སྐྱེ་གནས་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	the nature bardo of the birthplace	rang bzhin skye gnas kyi bar do
རང་བཞིན་སྐྱེས་གནས་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	the bardo of birth, the natural bardo of being alive	rang bzhin skyes gnas kyi bar do
རང་བཞིན་བསྐྱུར	perversity, changed nature	rang bzhin bskyur
རང་བཞིན་གལ་བ	the luminous nature	rang bzhin gal ba
རང་བཞིན་གི་གཏན་ཚིགས	the axiom of identity	rang bzhin gi gtan tshigs
རང་བཞིན་གྱི	ordinary	rang bzhin gyi
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of the nature	rang bzhin gyi dkyil 'khor
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་སྐད	prakriti [Samkhya system]	rang bzhin gyi skad
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་སྐྱེས་པ	real intrinsic production	rang bzhin gyi skyes pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བསྐལ་དོན	naturally invisible	rang bzhin gyi bskal don
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་བ	sins which are committed naturally and semiconsciously	rang bzhin gyi kha na ma tho ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་མཁས་པ	gifted	rang bzhin gyi mkhas pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གྱེང་བ	natural distraction	rang bzhin gyi gyeng ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གྲུབ་པ	inherent existence	rang bzhin gyi grub pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གྲུབ་པའི་བདག	inherently existent ego/ self	rang bzhin gyi grub pa'i bdag
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དགྲ་བོ	natural enemy	rang bzhin gyi dgra bo
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	bag chags snang brnyan sna tshogs pa'i mtshan ma 'khor bar lhan skyes kyi blor snang ba rnams	rang bzhin gyi rgyu mtshan
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	innate essence, essence of the nature	rang bzhin gyi ngo bo nyid
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དངོས་པོ	how a thing is naturally in itself	rang bzhin gyi dngos po
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གཏན་ཚིགས	axiom of identity, One of {dngos stobs rjes dpag gi gtan tshigs gsum}; axiom of identity, One of {dngos stobs rjes dpag gi gtan tshigs gsum}	rang bzhin gyi gtan tshigs
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟགས་གཉིས	the two kinds of signs of sameness of entity	rang bzhin gyi rtags gnyis
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟགས་ཡང་དག	evidence of identical essence [ggd]	rang bzhin gyi rtags yang dag
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྟགས་ཡང་དག་གཉིས	TSE	rang bzhin gyi rtags yang dag gnyis
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ལྟུང་བ	automatic downfall, deed inherently violating ordination by its very nature	rang bzhin gyi ltung ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དུག	naturally poisonous	rang bzhin gyi dug
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དོན	natural condition	rang bzhin gyi don
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བདེན་གྲུབ	true existence of the nature	rang bzhin gyi bden grub
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་སྡིག་པ	innate/ intrinsic wrongdoing	rang bzhin gyi sdig pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ནུས་པ	instinct, intuition	rang bzhin gyi nus pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གནས	natural abode	rang bzhin gyi gnas
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གནས་པའི་རིགས	the selfexisting mahayana family spontaneous realm	rang bzhin gyi gnas pa'i rigs
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	purification of self-nature	rang bzhin gyi rnam par dag pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དཔའ	natural bravery	rang bzhin gyi dpa'
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་དཔའ་ཆེ་བ	naturally brave	rang bzhin gyi dpa' che ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བར་དོ	naturally occurring/ self-existing interval/ intermediate state	rang bzhin gyi bar do
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བྱོན་པ	naturally occurring	rang bzhin gyi byon pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་འབྲེལ	lesser-to-greater extension, greater- to-lesser comprehension, affinity	rang bzhin gyi 'brel
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ	relationship of identity rang bzhin gyi myang ngan las 'das pa naturally existing nirvana	rang bzhin gyi 'brel ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་མྱང་འདས	naturally existing nirvana [because sems can gyi rgyud kyi sems is empty of true existence bden grub kyis stong pa'o]	rang bzhin gyi myang 'das
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	natural/ discipline [srog gcod pa dang, ma byin par len pa, log par gyem pa, rdzun du smra ba bcas bzhi sangs rgyas kyi bcas khrims la ma ltos par spangs na if one abandons them naturally w/o depen...	rang bzhin gyi tshul khrims
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད	natural/ innate characteristics, definition of "rang bzhin"	rang bzhin gyi mtshan nyid
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་མཚན་མ	natural/ innate characteristics	rang bzhin gyi mtshan ma
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་མཛེས་པ	by nature beautiful	rang bzhin gyi mdzes pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཞི་གནས	natural tranquillity	rang bzhin gyi zhi gnas
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཞི་བ	naturally pacified	rang bzhin gyi zhi ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	the limb of nature [chos rab rnam 'byed yang dag byang chub kyi yan lag go	rang bzhin gyi yan lag
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	by nature completely pure	rang bzhin gyi yongs su dag pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཡོད་པ	inherent existence	rang bzhin gyi yod pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རིག་པ	innate awareness/ insight, awareness of the nature	rang bzhin gyi rig pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་རིགས	natural spiritual affinity; spiritual affinity as the nature\ of being	rang bzhin gyi rigs
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་ཤེས་ཚོར	instinct	rang bzhin gyi shes tshor
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བཤགས་པ	Natural Confession. A synonym for the Confession of the Expanse of the View, 'Tawa Longshag.'	rang bzhin gyi bshags pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་གསང་བ	the secret of the nature, naturally/ self secret	rang bzhin gyi gsang ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱི་བསམ་གཏན	natural/ inherent meditative stability	rang bzhin gyi bsam gtan
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས	naturally, by nature, by itself, spontaneously, natural spontaneously, of itself, by its very nature, by nature, by its self-nature	rang bzhin gyis
ཅན་མ་ཡིན་པ	by nature w/o the source of the kleshas	can ma yin pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གྲུབ	existence)	rang bzhin gyis grub
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	inherent (establishment	rang bzhin gyis grub pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ཕག་རྒྱ	naturally existing mudra	rang bzhin gyis grub pa'i phag rgya
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	natural coarseness	rang bzhin gyis rgya che ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་སྒྲོལ་བའི་ལྟ་བ	view that delivers by nature	rang bzhin gyis sgrol ba'i lta ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་རྟག་པའི་ཕྱིར	because it is/ would be permanent by nature	rang bzhin gyis rtag pa'i phyir
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་སྟོང་པ	empty of nature, void of self-existence	rang bzhin gyis stong pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	by nature emptiness	rang bzhin gyis stong pa nyid
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་དག	pure by nature	rang bzhin gyis dag
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་དག་པ	naturally pure	rang bzhin gyis dag pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གནས	naturally present affinity with being	rang bzhin gyis gnas
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གནས་པའི་རིགས	the naturally present, intrinsic gotra/ potential of buddhahood	rang bzhin gyis gnas pa'i rigs
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	naturally liberated	rang bzhin gyis rnam par grol ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	naturally pure; totally pure by nature, natural purity	rang bzhin gyis rnam par dag pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་འབྱུང་བ	spontaneous	rang bzhin gyis 'byung ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་མ་སྐྱེས་པ	noninherent production, not inherently produced	rang bzhin gyis ma skyes pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་མ་གྲུབ	naturally nonexistent	rang bzhin gyis ma grub
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་མ་གྲུབ་པ	non-inherent existence	rang bzhin gyis ma grub pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་མེད་པ	non-existent in its real nature	rang bzhin gyis med pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་མེད་པར་འགྱུར་བ	naturally becoming non-existent	rang bzhin gyis med par 'gyur ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་ཞིག་པ	by nature destructible	rang bzhin gyis zhig pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་འོད་གསལ་བ	naturally luminous	rang bzhin gyis 'od gsal ba
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་ཡོད་པ	inherently existent rang bzhin gyis yon tan dang ldan pa naturally possessing virtues/ good qualities rang bzhin gyis g.yeng ba - natural distraction rang bzhin gyis g.yeng ba - natural distraction...	rang bzhin gyis yod pa
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་གསང་བ	naturally secret	rang bzhin gyis gsang ba
རང་བཞིན་གྲུབ	reality-status	rang bzhin grub
རང་བཞིན་གྲུབ་པ	naturally existing	rang bzhin grub pa
རང་བཞིན་འགལ་བའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	reason contradicting the nature [to be proved] [essence of reason and thesis [rtags dang bsgrub bya] erroneously contradictory and hence reason is a merelyapparent reason gtan tsigs ltar snang: EG,...	rang bzhin 'gal ba'i gtan tshigs
རང་བཞིན་འགལ་དམིགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign/ reason contradictory w the nature	rang bzhin 'gal dmigs kyi rtags
རང་བཞིན་འགྱུར་བ	naturally changing, changing nature	rang bzhin 'gyur ba
རང་བཞིན་རྒྱུན་གྱི་རྟག་པ	permanent and fixed continuity of nature [?]	rang bzhin rgyun gyi rtag pa
རང་བཞིན་རྒྱུའི་གཙོ་བོ	TSE	rang bzhin rgyu'i gtso bo
རང་བཞིན་སྒྱུར	lunar eclipse	rang bzhin sgyur
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་ཅུའི་ཀུན་རྟོག	80 indicative conceptions	rang bzhin brgyad cu'i kun rtog
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་ཅུའི་རྟོག་པ	Eighty inherent thought states. 33 resulting from anger, 40 from desire and 7 from delusion. First, the thirty-three thought states resulting from anger, according to the Spyod bsdus composed by Ar...	rang bzhin brgyad cu'i rtog pa
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་ཅུའི་རྣམ་རྟོག	eighty innate thought states	rang bzhin brgyad cu'i rnam rtog
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་ཅུས	by the 80 natures	rang bzhin brgyad cus
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་བཅུའི	33 rooted in zhe sdang, 40 in 'dod chags, 7 in gti mug	rang bzhin brgyad bcu'i
རང་བཞིན་བརྒྱད་བཅུའི་རྟོག་པ	80 selfcontained reaction patterns	rang bzhin brgyad bcu'i rtog pa
རང་བཞིན་ངང	natural state	rang bzhin ngang
རང་བཞིན་ཅན	that is the nature of	rang bzhin can
རང་བཞིན་གཅིག	essential identity [ggd]	rang bzhin gcig
རང་བཞིན་གཅིག་པ	having one single essential original nature; having one single essential original nature, the same nature	rang bzhin gcig pa
རང་བཞིན་བཅུ	the ten attributes	rang bzhin bcu
རང་བཞིན་བཅུའི་ཆོས	dharmas of the 10 natures	rang bzhin bcu'i chos
རང་བཞིན་ཆོས་དབྱིངས	natural ultimate sphere	rang bzhin chos dbyings
རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད	straightforward expression, natural descriptions * describe [something's nature/ character	rang bzhin brjod
རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པ	natural descriptions [in poetics]. the first ornament of sense or arthalamkara	rang bzhin brjod pa
རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན	rgyan of straightforward expression of the nature	rang bzhin brjod pa'i rgyan
རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན་བཞི	the four kinds of rgyan of straightforward expression of the nature	rang bzhin brjod pa'i rgyan bzhi
རང་བཞིན་མཉམ་ཉིད	nature of sameness	rang bzhin mnyam nyid
རང་བཞིན་མཉམ་པ	nature of equality	rang bzhin mnyam pa
རང་བཞིན་ཏུ་རྫོགས་པ	by nature perfectly contained	rang bzhin tu rdzogs pa
རང་བཞིན་གཏན་ལ་དབབ་པ	resolve the nature	rang bzhin gtan la dbab pa
རང་བཞིན་ལྟ་བའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	[TRS 120-2]	rang bzhin lta ba'i dam tshig bzhi
རང་བཞིན་སྟོང་ཉིད	voidness of nature/ essence	rang bzhin stong nyid
རང་བཞིན་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད	natural/ intrinsic emptiness ['dus byas dang 'dus ma byas kyi chos thams cad ye nas stong pa nyid kyis khyab pa ste, rang bzhin gyis stong par gnas pa, stong nyid bcu drug gi nang gses shig	rang bzhin stong pa nyid
རང་བཞིན་བརྟན་པོ	stable nature	rang bzhin brtan po
རང་བཞིན་བསྟན	show/ teach the nature, naturally displayed	rang bzhin bstan
རང་བཞིན་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate nature	rang bzhin mthar thug
རང་བཞིན་མཐོང་བ	seeing selfnatured	rang bzhin mthong ba
རང་བཞིན་དག་པ	naturally pure	rang bzhin dag pa
རང་བཞིན་དག་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment which is natural purity, One of {spang ba rnam gnyis} renunciation which is naturally pure	rang bzhin dag pa'i spang ba
ཨེསྟབླིཤེས་ཐེ་ནོན	existence of cold, 'gal ba'i 'bras bu dmigs pa bzhi'i nang gses] rang bzhin dang 'gal ba'i 'bras bu dmigs	establishes the non
རང་བཞིན་དང་འགལ་བའི་རང་བཞིན	nature contradictory w the nature rang bzhin dang 'gal ba'i rang bzhin dmigs	rang bzhin dang 'gal ba'i rang bzhin
རང་བཞིན་དང་རྒྱས་པའི་རིགས	the naturally blossoming gotra	rang bzhin dang rgyas pa'i rigs
རང་བཞིན་དང་བཅས་པ་ཉིད	endowed	rang bzhin dang bcas pa nyid
ཝ་སེལཕ༹	existence, inherently existent 2561	w self
ཝིཐ་སེལཕ༹	existence, inherently existent	with self
རང་བཞིན་དང་བཅས་པའི་སྣང་བ	experience with self-nature	rang bzhin dang bcas pa'i snang ba
རང་བཞིན་དང་བཅོས་མ	natural and artificial	rang bzhin dang bcos ma
རང་བཞིན་དང་བྲལ་བའི་སྣང་བ	experience devoid of a self-nature	rang bzhin dang bral ba'i snang ba
རང་བཞིན་དྭངས་པ	natural & pure	rang bzhin dwangs pa
རང་བཞིན་དུ	naturally	rang bzhin du
རང་བཞིན་དུ་སྒྲུབ་མཁན	automatic	rang bzhin du sgrub mkhan
རང་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ	naturally abide/ present, abide in the nature/ natural state rang sor gnas pa	rang bzhin du gnas pa
རང་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པའི་རིག	The Naturally Present Affinity [with Being], the enlightened faculty in which natural expression abides; The Naturally Present Affinity [with Being], the enlightened faculty in which natural expres...	rang bzhin du gnas pa'i rig
རང་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པའི་རིགས	naturally present affinity with being	rang bzhin du gnas pa'i rigs
རང་བཞིན་དུ་འབྱུང་བའི	natural	rang bzhin du 'byung ba'i
རང་བཞིན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	theory of selfexistence	rang bzhin du smra ba
རང་བཞིན་དུ་འཛིན་པ	grasp at the nature, naturally grasp	rang bzhin du 'dzin pa
རང་བཞིན་དུ་ཡོད་པ	inborn	rang bzhin du yod pa
རང་བཞིན་དུ་གསལ་གདབ	you can think as	rang bzhin du gsal gdab
རང་བཞིན་དྲི་མེད	spotless/ immaculate nature	rang bzhin dri med
རང་བཞིན་གདུག་པ	vicious/ cruel; nature	rang bzhin gdug pa
རང་བཞིན་གདོད་མ་ནས་སྟོང་པ	primordially empty nature	rang bzhin gdod ma nas stong pa
རང་བཞིན་བདུན	seven particular attributes of natural expression	rang bzhin bdun
རང་བཞིན་བདེན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	intrinsically truly-existing things	rang bzhin bden grub kyi dngos po
རང་བཞིན་ལྡན་པ	naturally	rang bzhin ldan pa
རང་བཞིན་ནས	from its very nature, naturally, spontaneously	rang bzhin nas
རང་བཞིན་གནས	continuous, steady, constant, perpetual	rang bzhin gnas
རང་བཞིན་གནས་པ	naturally present	rang bzhin gnas pa
རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་བར་དོ	the natural bardo of living. Syn {rang bzhin skye gnas kyi bar do}	rang bzhin gnas pa'i bar do
རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་རིགས	naturally present affinity, enlightened family that naturally abides, One of {rigs rnam gnyis}	rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs
རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་རིགས་གཉིས	2-fold enlightened family which naturally abides, the two types of naturally present affinity/ independent existence	rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs gnyis
རང་བཞིན་གནས་པའི་རིགས་དེ་གཉིས་པོ	2fold enlightened family which naturally abides	rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs de gnyis po
རང་བཞིན་གནས་རིགས	Naturally present potential applies to the mind essence present as the unobstructed potential for the qualities of dharmakaya arising from its empty aspect and the qualities of rupakaya arising fro...	rang bzhin gnas rigs
རང་བཞིན་རྣམ་བཅུ	the 10 natures	rang bzhin rnam bcu
རང་བཞིན་རྣམ་དག	naturally pure	rang bzhin rnam dag
རང་བཞིན་རྣམ་དག་གི་སྐུ	kaya that is totally pure by nature (one of the two aspects of svabhavikakaya) rang bzhin rnam dag gi char gyur pa'i ngo	rang bzhin rnam dag gi sku
བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ	TSE	bo nyid sku
རང་བཞིན་རྣམ་དག་གི་ཆོས་སྐུ	Naturally pure Dharma-body	rang bzhin rnam dag gi chos sku
རང་བཞིན་རྣམ་དག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	inherently pure original cognitiveness	rang bzhin rnam dag gi ye shes
རང་བཞིན་པ	ordinary, common, everyday	rang bzhin pa
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	Natural nirmanakaya. The pure nirmanakaya realms manifested by the buddhas of the five families, such as the realm of Sukhavati 2562	rang bzhin sprul sku
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ཞིང	natural nirmanakaya realm	rang bzhin sprul sku'i zhing
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་པ	emanations of natural expression	rang bzhin sprul pa
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་པ་སྐུའི་ཞིང	natural nirmanakaya realm	rang bzhin sprul pa sku'i zhing
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	natural nirmanakaya rang bzhin sprul pa'i sku'i zhing khams the natural nirmanakaya realms	rang bzhin sprul pa'i sku
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཞིང	natural nirmanakaya realm	rang bzhin sprul pa'i zhing
རང་བཞིན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་ཞིང་སྣང	the manifestations of the natural nirmanakaya realms	rang bzhin sprul pa'i zhing snang
རང་བཞིན་བབས	innate nature/ natural state of utter relaxation	rang bzhin babs
རང་བཞིན་བབས་ཀྱི	utterly natural	rang bzhin babs kyi
རང་བཞིན་བབས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	the natural meditation of the innate	rang bzhin babs kyi bsam gtan
རང་བཞིན་བབས་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ	naturally existing rang bzhin babs kyis ye nas gnas pa spontaneously present since the beginning	rang bzhin babs kyis grub
རང་བཞིན་བར་དོ	intermediate period of nature	rang bzhin bar do
རང་བཞིན་མ་གྲུབ	devoid of self-nature	rang bzhin ma grub
རང་བཞིན་མ་གྲུབ་པ	has no self-nature	rang bzhin ma grub pa
རང་བཞིན་མ་འགགས	space of the unobstructed nature	rang bzhin ma 'gags
རང་བཞིན་མ་འགགས་པའི་ཀློང	1 of klong dgu	rang bzhin ma 'gags pa'i klong
རང་བཞིན་མ་དམིགས་པ	nonobservation of a nature	rang bzhin ma dmigs pa
རང་བཞིན་མ་དམིགས་པའི་རྟགས	sign/ reason of non-observation of a nature	rang bzhin ma dmigs pa'i rtags
རང་བཞིན་མ་དམིགས་བ	non-observation of a nature	rang bzhin ma dmigs ba
རང་བཞིན་མི་གཉིས	not dual in the real nature	rang bzhin mi gnyis
རང་བཞིན་མི་གཟུགས་ལྟ་བུར་ཡོད	have human form	rang bzhin mi gzugs lta bur yod
རང་བཞིན་མེད	no reality in itself, nothing in itself, no being of its own, nothing specific in itself, entirely essenceless, nothing has a self-nature	rang bzhin med
རང་བཞིན་མེད་པ	devoid of a selfnature / concrete essence, intrinsic realitylessness. Syn {bdag med pa} not inherently existent, noninherent existence, identitylessness, realitylessness. Syn {ngo bo nyid kyis ston...	rang bzhin med pa
རང་བཞིན་མྱང་འདས	natural nirvana	rang bzhin myang 'das
རང་བཞིན་དམིགས་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	consequence of a conception of the nature	rang bzhin dmigs pa'i thal 'gyur
རང་བཞིན་མཚན་ཉིད	property, characteristic	rang bzhin mtshan nyid
རང་བཞིན་རྫོགས་ཆེན	natural great perfection	rang bzhin rdzogs chen
རང་བཞིན་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the natural Great Perfection; great perfection as the inherent nature of reality	rang bzhin rdzogs pa chen po
རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of the vajra core, the heart essence of the natural great perfection rang bzhin rdzogs pa chen po yang gsang bla na med pa rdo rje'i snying po'i theg	rdo rje snying po'i theg pa
པ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	by mnga' ris paN chen padma dbang rgyal (1487 or 8-1542 or 3)	pa zhes bya ba'i bstan bcos
རང་བཞིན་གཞིའི་གནས་ལུགས	the condition of the fundamental / ground nature [state of affairs], the fundamental condition of the basic nature	rang bzhin gzhi'i gnas lugs
རང་བཞིན་བཞག	in its natural state	rang bzhin bzhag
རང་བཞིན་གཟས་བཞིན་གནས་རིགས	TSE	rang bzhin gzas bzhin gnas rigs
རང་བཞིན་བཟང	innate goodness, one who is by nature good	rang bzhin bzang
རང་བཞིན་བཟང་པོ	excellent/ good/ wholesome/ auspicious nature	rang bzhin bzang po
རང་བཞིན་འོད་ལྔའི་སྣང་བ	the natural shining of the five lights	rang bzhin 'od lnga'i snang ba
རང་བཞིན་འོད་གསལ	its nature is clear light, luminous nature, natural luminosity, the clear light nature of mind	rang bzhin 'od gsal
རང་བཞིན་ཡེ་བབས་ཀྱི་བསམ་གཏན	natural meditative stability as a timeless and innate abiding [KOT=rDzogs chen equivalent of zhi gnas; cf. rang ngo rang gsal gyi lhag mthong; cf. rang ngo rang gsal gyi lhag mthong]	rang bzhin ye babs kyi bsam gtan
རང་བཞིན་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	rang bzhin gyis dag pa'i cha	rang bzhin yongs grub
རང་བཞིན་ཡོངས་གྲུབ་ཆེན་པོར་བལྟ	regard as the natural great absolute	rang bzhin yongs grub chen por blta
རང་བཞིན་རང་ངོར་སྔས་པ	the nature becoming purified by itself	rang bzhin rang ngor sngas pa
རང་བཞིན་ལ་བསྙོན་པ	rgyan of denying the nature	rang bzhin la bsnyon pa
རང་བཞིན་ལས་མ་འདས	{'o skol rnams kyang de'i rang bzhin las ma 'das} none of us is beyond it 2563	rang bzhin las ma 'das
རང་བཞིན་ལས་གཞན་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	change one's natural constitution	rang bzhin las gzhan du 'gyur ba
རང་བཞིན་ཤུགས་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་རྗེ	responsiveness as a natural power	rang bzhin shugs kyi thugs rje
རང་བཞིན་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	naturally	rang bzhin shugs kyis
རང་བཞིན་གསལ	its nature is luminous	rang bzhin gsal
རང་བཞིན་གསལ་བ	Luminous nature, character clear [deity]; character clear [deity]. Luminous nature	rang bzhin gsal ba
རང་བཞིན་གསུམ	the three natures. 1)	rang bzhin gsum
ཕ༹བྲིཅཏེད	parikalpita, 2) {gzhan dbang} relative / dependency nature paratantra, 3) {yongs grub} ideally absolute - parinispanna	fabricated
ཕེནོམེན	three natural expressions the three essential categories Book 1, p - three natural categories three essential characteristics of the imaginary, dependent and absolute see studies of the lank vat ra...	phenomena
རང་བཞིན་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the nature of spontaneous meditation rang bzhin lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes natural inborn wisdom [devoid of all at-	rang bzhin bsam gtan gyi chos nyid
ཅླརིཏཡ་ཨནད་ནོ	thought]	clarity and no
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྱིས	mandala of the nature of self-perfection	rang bzhin lhun gyis
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ	self-existing nature, naturally and spontaneously present rang bzhin lhun gyis grub pa'i dkyil 'khor the mandala which is by nature/naturally spontaneously/ self perfect[ed]/ present rang bzhin lhu...	rang bzhin lhun gyis grub
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	self-existing nature [one natural and unfabricated by effort; 2) in rdzogs pa chen po in the nature of mind all the buddha qualities of trikaya are promordially complete and	rang bzhin lhun grub
སྤོནཏནེཨོཨུསལཡ་པྲེསེནཏ་སེལཕ༹	perfected character, spontaneously present nature, TSE]	spontaneously present self
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	[In Anu Yoga] The mandala of spontaneous	rang bzhin lhun grub kyi dkyil 'khor
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of spontaneously present nature	rang bzhin lhun grub kyi ye shes
གསལ་ཡེ་གདངས་ཆེན་པོ	The primordial wisdom of spontaneous nature rang bzhin lhun grub kyi ye shes stong	gsal ye gdangs chen po
རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་སྒོ་བརྒྱད་པ	the natural eight gates of spontaneous presence	rang bzhin lhun grub sgo brgyad pa
རང་བཞིས་བཟང་པོ	good character	rang bzhis bzang po
རང་བཞུང	root texts	rang bzhung
རང་བཞེད	our tradition	rang bzhed
རང་ཟོན	danger to 1self	rang zon
རང་ཟོན་ངོ་བསྟོད	fearing danger to 1self flatter others	rang zon ngo bstod
རང་ཟོན་མེད་པ	audacious	rang zon med pa
རང་ཟོན་འཛེམ་མེད	not think of danger to 1self	rang zon 'dzem med
རང་གཟུགས	1) 1's own body; 2) essence; 3) form, natural forms {rang gi snang cha}; 4) true shape/ appearance	rang gzugs
རང་གཟུགས་རྗེན་མངོན	show 1's true colors	rang gzugs rjen mngon
རང་གཟུགས་བསྟན་ནས	resumed his own form	rang gzugs bstan nas
རང་གཟུགས་ལུས་སྲོག་གཏོང	sacrificed my own life and body	rang gzugs lus srog gtong
རང་གཟོ	fabrication, one's own design, reform, innovator, reformer, selfdetermination	rang gzo
རང་བཟང་འདོད	self-complacency, vanity 2564	rang bzang 'dod
རང་བཟོ	fabricated [ggd]	rang bzo
རང་བཟོའི་གཟུ་ལུམས	to make something up on one's own	rang bzo'i gzu lums
རང་བཟོར་སྨྲ་བ	speak falsely, lie	rang bzor smra ba
རང་འོད	the very light [of.]; natural light, one's own light, self-luminous	rang 'od
རང་འོད་ཡུམ	the self-luminous consort, the consort of innate luminosity	rang 'od yum
རང་འོད་རིག་མའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the mudra	rang 'od rig ma'i phyag rgya
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སེལཕ༹	luminous consort, the consort of innate luminosity	of the self
རང་འོད་གསལ	shines by its own luminous clarity	rang 'od gsal
རང་ཡན	to let be, abandon, to treat casually	rang yan
རང་ཡན་བཞག་པ	rest freely, sim. to kha yan	rang yan bzhag pa
རང་ཡལ	disappear in itself, fade away by itself	rang yal
རང་ཡིད་རང་ཆེས	self-confidence	rang yid rang ches
རང་ཡིན	that's it	rang yin
རང་ཡིན་པ	one's own state of existence	rang yin pa
རང་ཡིན་པར་ངོ་ཤེས་པ	recognizing it as one's own state of being	rang yin par ngo shes pa
རང་ཡུ	rang 'thag gam, lag mchig gi handle	rang yu
རང་ཡུལ	{lha rnams rang yul du ldog go} the gods returned to their own land	rang yul
རང་ཡུལ་དུ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་པ	repatriate	rang yul du phyir log pa
རང་ཡུལ་དུ་ལོག་པ	returned to his own land	rang yul du log pa
རང་ཡུལ་དུ་སླེབས་སོ	arrived home	rang yul du slebs so
རང་ཡུལ་སྤངས་པ	gave up my homeland rang g.yog - self-delusion	rang yul spangs pa
རང་རང	personal, individual	rang rang
རང་རང་གི	specific; respective	rang rang gi
རང་རང་གི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	causes and conditions	rang rang gi rgyu rkyen
རང་རང་གི་རྒྱུད	independence	rang rang gi rgyud
རང་རང་གི་རྒྱུད་པ	individual temperament	rang rang gi rgyud pa
རང་རང་གི་ཆ	one's own share or portion or side	rang rang gi cha
རང་རང་གི་འདོད་པ	each 1's desires	rang rang gi 'dod pa
རང་རང་གི་རྣམ་ཤེས	appropriate sensation	rang rang gi rnam shes
རང་རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	each 1's characteristics rang rang gi yum dang mnyam par sbyor	rang rang gi mtshan nyid
རང་རང་གི་ལམ་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	the nature of those paths itself	rang rang gi lam gyi ngo bo
རང་རང་གི་ལུགས	each 1's tradition	rang rang gi lugs
རང་རང་གི་ཤེས་པ	respective cognitions	rang rang gi shes pa
རང་རང་གིས་གྲོལ	to self-liberate by itself	rang rang gis grol
རང་རང་ཕྲད་པ	each comes to encounter itself	rang rang phrad pa
རང་རང་ལས་བྱེད	accomplish one's own actions	rang rang las byed
རང་རང་སོ་སོ	each its own -- each [dissolve into each, respective [places], individual, 1's own, each 1 themselves{rang rdol ba - sprang out spontaneously	rang rang so so
རང་རང་སོ་སོར	each to his own	rang rang so sor
རང་རིག	Self-cognizance	rang rig
རང་རིག་ཀ་དག	primordially pure selfcognizance	rang rig ka dag
རང་རིག་ཁོང་ཤར	external arising of awareness	rang rig khong shar
རང་རིག་གི་དྲན	naturally aware presence, naturally aware mindful presence, naturally aware presence of mind	rang rig gi dran
རང་རིག་གི་དྲན་པ	a naturally aware presence of mind	rang rig gi dran pa
རང་རིག་མངོན་སུམ	direct perception of intrinsic awareness. self- knowing direct perceiver	rang rig mngon sum
རང་རིག་མངོན་སུམ་ཚད་མ	pramana of direct perception of intrinsic awareness/ self-cognizance	rang rig mngon sum tshad ma
རང་རིག་མངོན་གསུམ	the direct perception of self-cognizance	rang rig mngon gsum
རང་རིག་ཆོས་སྐུ	Dharmakaya of selfcognizance	rang rig chos sku
རང་རིག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་ངོ་བོ	self-cognizant essence of dharmakaya	rang rig chos sku'i ngo bo
རང་རིག་ཆོས་སྐུའི་གསལ་མདངས	luminous dharmakaya manifestation of selfcognizance	rang rig chos sku'i gsal mdangs
རང་རིག་རྗེན་ནེ	naked self-awareness, own naked mind	rang rig rjen ne
རང་རིག་རྗེན་པ	own naked mind	rang rig rjen pa
རང་རིག་ཐིག་ལེ་ཉག་གཅིག	single circle of	rang rig thig le nyag gcig
རང་རིག་དོན་གྱི་བླ་མ	the ultimate guru, who is one's own insight	rang rig don gyi bla ma
རང་རིག་གདངས	Dang energy of one's rigpa	rang rig gdangs
རང་རིག་པ	individually self-cognizant, my own mind; self-cognizing, one's own intrinsic Awareness	rang rig pa
རང་རིག་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས	the selfknowing state of awakened mind	rang rig pa byang chub kyi sems
རང་རིག་པ་ལས་མ་གཏོགས་པ	can be understood only thanks to one's own rigpa	rang rig pa las ma gtogs pa
རང་རིག་པའི་དག་པ	purity of one's rigpa	rang rig pa'i dag pa
སོ་སེལཕ༹	liberation is possible through	so self
བོཐ་ཅོནཅེཔཏུཨལ་ཨནད་ནོན	conceptual meditation	both conceptual and non
རང་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-cognizant wisdom, the self-aware wisdom, selfawareness wisdom, wisdom of selfexisting; pristine cognition that is intrinsically aware	rang rig pa'i ye shes
རང་རིག་པའི་གསལ་སྟོང	a self-knowing aware emptiness rang rig pas nyams su myong ba'i tha	rang rig pa'i gsal stong
ཨེ྾པེརིཨེནཅིང་ཝ་སེལཕ༹	cognizance rang rig pas nyams su myong ba'i tha	experiencing w self
ཨེ྾པེརིཨེནཅིང་ཝིཐ་སེལཕ༹	cognizance	experiencing with self
རང་རིག་བློ་འདས	self-cognizance beyond concepts	rang rig blo 'das
རང་རིག་མ་དག	impure rigpa	rang rig ma dag
རང་རིག་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	rang dang ngo bo gcig pa'i don gyi rnam par rig pas rang rig mtshan nyid pa	rang rig mtshan nyid pa
རང་རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	experienced or seen by the mind itself [blo rang gis EG in addition to vase grasping eye consciousness rang gis rang	rang rig 'dzin rnam gyi shes pa
མྱོང་བའི་ཀནོཝླེདགེ་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	duality of object and perceiver or rang yul gyi rnam pa med pa]	myong ba'i knowledge of non
རང་རིག་འོད་གསལ	self-cognizant luminosity, luminosity of self-cognizance	rang rig 'od gsal
རང་རིག་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	the observation of the luminescent self-awareness,	rang rig 'od gsal gyi lta ba
ཐེ་བི༹ཨེཝ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	aware luminosity	the view of self
བི༹ཨེཝ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	aware luminosity	view of self
རང་རིག་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-knowing timeless awareness	rang rig ye shes
རང་རིག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མཁྱེན་པ	knowledge of self-cognizant wisdom	rang rig ye shes kyi mkhyen pa
རང་རིག་རང་གསལ	innate clarity of selfawareness, lucid awareness, selfluminous mind, self-clarity of 1's own mind, self-aware natural cognizance	rang rig rang gsal
ཨིནནཏེ་ཅླརིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	awareness, lucid awareness, the self-clarity of one's own mind, self-aware natural cognizance	innate clarity of self
རང་རིག་རང་གསལ་གྱི་ངང་དུ་བཞག	to	rang rig rang gsal gyi ngang du bzhag
རེསཏ་ཨིན་ཐེ་ནཏུརེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོནེའས་སེལཕ༹	luminous mind rang rig rang gsal gyi ngang du bzhag rest in the nature of 1's self-luminous mind	rest in the nature of one's self
རང་རིག་རས་ཆེན	the 'brug pa bka' rgyud pa yogi of Spiti; alias {rang rig ras pa}	rang rig ras chen
རང་རིག་རས་པ	alias {rang rig ras chen}	rang rig ras pa
རང་རིག་གསལ	MSS: self-luminous mind. syn of rang rig rang gsal? E.g., R75: 299.5 [mss]	rang rig gsal
རང་རིག་ལྷུན་སྐྱེས	coemergent insight	rang rig lhun skyes
རང་རིགས	kinsman	rang rigs
རང་རིགས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattvas of their own family / type	rang rigs kyi byang chub sems dpa'
རང་རིགས་ཀྱི་མྱུ་གུ	sprouts of 1's family tree, sons and daughters of 1's family	rang rigs kyi myu gu
རང་རིགས་འཕེན་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	a consequence drawn from 1's own reasoning [a proof stating consequence thal 'gyur gang zhig bzlog pa rang rgyud rang dang rigs gcig pa 'phen pa ste, EG, since it is cold, it follows there is no fi...	rang rigs 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur
རང་རིགས་འཕེན་པའི་ཐལ་འགྱུར་བཞི	the four kinds of consequence drawn from 1's own reasoning	rang rigs 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur bzhi
རང་རིས	one's own party	rang ris
རང་རེ	we, us; we	rang re
རང་རེ་ཆོས་ཉན་པའི་འཁོར	we, as the assembly gathered to listen to the teaching rang re chos nyan pa'i 'khor rnams kyang we, the audience	rang re chos nyan pa'i 'khor
རང་རེ་གཉིས	we	rang re gnyis
རང་རེ་སྙིགས་མའ་སེམས་ཅན	degenerate beings like us	rang re snyigs ma' sems can
རང་རེ་རྣམས	those of us	rang re rnams
རང་རེད	that's it	rang red
རང་རེའི	our	rang re'i
རང་རེའི་སྒོ་དྲུང་ན	at our own door	rang re'i sgo drung na
རང་རོང	rough, coarse, uneven [ground], rocky	rang rong
རང་རོང་ཅན	rough, craggy	rang rong can
རང་རློམ	self-important 2566	rang rlom
རང་བརླག་པར་འགྱུར	to ruin oneself	rang brlag par 'gyur
རང་ལ	for oneself, in oneself, with respect to oneself, on me, to me	rang la
རང་ལ་བཀུར་སྟི་འབྱུང་དུས	when honor is shown to oneself	rang la bkur sti 'byung dus
རང་ལ་འཁོར	have a bad action bounce back on 1/ backfire	rang la 'khor
རང་ལ་གྲགས་པ	renowned to oneself	rang la grags pa
རང་ལ་རྔན་བགྲོངས	Consider your own defects!	rang la rngan bgrongs
རང་ལ་ཆེས	believing/ confidence in 1self	rang la ches
རང་ལ་འཇོག	take [task] on 1self	rang la 'jog
རང་ལ་ལྟོས་ནས	{rang la ltos ngo tsha	rang la ltos nas
རང་ལ་བསྟིམ	dissolve [Guru Rinpoche] into yourself rang la bdog pa'i dngos po kun sbyin pa I gave everything that I possessed	rang la bstim
རང་ལ་བསྡུས	gather in oneself	rang la bsdus
རང་ལ་གནས་པ	that dwells in yourself	rang la gnas pa
རང་ལ་སྣང་བ	visible/ appearing to 1self	rang la snang ba
རང་ལ་ཕན་བྱས	personal mastery	rang la phan byas
རང་ལ་བུ་མེད་ན	if a man has no son of his own	rang la bu med na
རང་ལ་བྱན་ཚུད་པ	concrete personal experiences with regard to oneself	rang la byan tshud pa
རང་ལ་བློ་ཕུགས་གཏད་པ	who are reliant on you	rang la blo phugs gtad pa
རང་ལ་དབང་བ	independent, privately owned	rang la dbang ba
རང་ལ་མི་ཁྲེལ་བ	self-reproach/ ashamed of oneself	rang la mi khrel ba
རང་ལ་རྫོགས	will be perfected within you	rang la rdzogs
རང་ལ་བཞག	took [task] on 1self	rang la bzhag
རང་ལ་ཡི་ཆད	ashamed of oneself	rang la yi chad
རང་ལ་ཡིད་གཏོད་པ་དག	those who rely upon me	rang la yid gtod pa dag
རང་ལ་རགས	it is up to us; x {thugs rje de la brten nas thar pa'i lam du 'gro mi 'gro rang la rags las shing} it is up to us whether or not we take advantage of this compassion and actually pursue the path of...	rang la rags
རང་ལ་ལེན	to take on oneself	rang la len
རང་ལམ	1) {shog dril rang lam} a scroll which rolls itself up; 2) naturalness	rang lam
རང་ལམ་རང་འགོག	blocking 1's own way	rang lam rang 'gog
རང་ལམ་རང་འགྲོ	each going on his/her own path, different strokes for different folks	rang lam rang 'gro
རང་ལས	naturally; in and of itself	rang las
རང་ལས་ངས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	prime cognizer which induces ascertainment by itself	rang las ngas kyi tshad ma
རང་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ	prime cognizer/ pramana which induces ascertainment by itself [tshad ma gang zhig rang nyid tshad ma yin par rang stobs kyis nges pa 'dren pa, EG, "sound is impermanent" realizing inferential prama...	rang las nges kyi tshad ma
རང་ལས་ཆེ་བ	greater than one's self	rang las che ba
རང་ལས་ཐ་དད	different from self	rang las tha dad
རང་ལས་ཚད་མ	self-ascertained valid cognition; see also {rang las nges kyi tshad ma} [ggd]	rang las tshad ma
རང་ལུགས	1) our/ 1's own system/ approach/ view/ tradition; 2) natural; 3) tradition, way	rang lugs
རང་ལུགས་བཞག་པ	presentation of our system	rang lugs bzhag pa
རང་ལུགས་སུ	as it naturally is, natural way, in its own natural state, in its natural way, in the natural state	rang lugs su
རང་ལུགས་སུ་བཏང་བ	natural	rang lugs su btang ba
རང་ལུགས་སུ་གནས	abide in the natural state, to remain calm in its own natural state	rang lugs su gnas
རང་ལུགས་སུ་བཞག	leave as it naturally is	rang lugs su bzhag
རང་ལུགས་སུ་བཞག་པ	leave as it naturally is	rang lugs su bzhag pa
རང་ལུས	1's own body	rang lus
རང་ལུས་གཏིང་བརྗེད	selflessness, fundamentally forgetting 1's own body	rang lus gting brjed
རང་ལུས་སྟེང་དང་འོག་སྒོ་གཉིས	upper and lower doors of 1's own body	rang lus steng dang 'og sgo gnyis
རང་ལུས་ཐབས་ལྡན	yoga of 1's own body as the means	rang lus thabs ldan
རང་ལུས་འབུལ	sacrifice/ offer up 1's own body [for a cause]	rang lus 'bul
རང་ལུས་མི་གཙང་བའི་རྫས་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 impure substances of 1's own body CHN	rang lus mi gtsang ba'i rdzas so drug
རང་ལུས་རང་དབང	individual freedom	rang lus rang dbang
རང་ལོ	1) sign of year a person was born in from the 12 year cycle; 2) 1's age	rang lo
རང་ལོག	self-reverting	rang log
རང་ཤར	1) self-occuring/ -arising/ originating, projections, arise spontaneously; 2) rang shar [one one of the 17 dzogchen tantras - {rig pa rang shar chen po'i rgyud}	rang shar
རང་ཤར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Rangshar Tantra.	rang shar gyi rgyud
རང་ཤར་དུ	to arise spontaneously	rang shar du
རང་ཤར་དུ་སྣང་བ	appearing as selfmanifest	rang shar du snang ba
རང་ཤར་བ	spontaneous manifestation	rang shar ba
རང་ཤར་རང་གྲོལ	Self-occurring selfliberation, self-manifest and self-freed,	rang shar rang grol
རང་ཤར་ལས	the {rig pa rang shar chen po'i rgyud} says	rang shar las
རང་ཤར་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	self-manifest and spontaneously present	rang shar lhun grub
རང་ཤུགས	1) own power; 2) nature; 3) spontaneously, naturally	rang shugs
རང་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	spontaneously, of one's own accord	rang shugs kyis
རང་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་རྟོགས་པ	naturally realized/ apprehended	rang shugs kyis rtogs pa
རང་ཤུགས་ལ	of itself, spontaneous, naturally	rang shugs la
རང་ཤུགས་སུ	naturally	rang shugs su
རང་ཤུགས་སུ་སྐྱེ	arise spontaneously	rang shugs su skye
རང་ཤུགས་སུ་འདྲེས	spontaneously integrated	rang shugs su 'dres
རང་ཤུགས་སུ་བྱུང	naturally occurring, spontaneous	rang shugs su byung
རང་ཤུགས་སུ་བྱུང་བ	naturally occurring, spontaneous rang shugs su byung ba'i 'thab rtsod naturally occurring/ spontaneous fight/ struggle rang shugs su byung ba'i phyogs lhung spontaneous trend/ tendency	rang shugs su byung ba
རང་ཤུགས་སུ་ཡོང་བའི་རང་བཞིན	spontaneity	rang shugs su yong ba'i rang bzhin
རང་ཤུལ་སྟོང་ནས	your own place becoming empty	rang shul stong nas
རང་ཤུལ་སྟོངས་ནས	your own place becoming desolate	rang shul stongs nas
རང་ཤེད	what 1 wants, says, sees, experiences, subjectivity, egocentric, arbitrary	rang shed
རང་ཤེད་ཀྱིས་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	arbitrary/ subjective decision	rang shed kyis thag gcod pa
རང་ཤེད་ཚ་པོ	that which 1 has told about what 1 has done maintain to the end, stubborn, obstinate	rang shed tsha po
རང་ཤེད་རིང་ལུགས	subjectivism	rang shed ring lugs
རང་ཤེལ	natural crystal	rang shel
རང་ཤེས	self-awareness, self-knowing	rang shes
རང་ཤེས་པ	direct introduction	rang shes pa
རང་ཤེས་རིག་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king who is	rang shes rig gi rgyal po
རང་ཤེས་རིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of selfcognizance	rang shes rig pa'i rgyal po
རང་ཤེས་སུ	by himself	rang shes su
རང་ཤོང	just large enough to accommodate oneself	rang shong
རང་གཤིས	innate	rang gshis
རང་གཤིས་ཡིན	it is its nature, their natural disposition	rang gshis yin
རང་གཤིས་སུ	in one's state	rang gshis su
རང་བཤིན	consist of, [essential][original] nature, [in its] [state of] own being, there has been born	rang bshin
རང་བཤིན་གཅིག་པ	having 1 single essential original nature	rang bshin gcig pa
རང་བཤིན་མེད	absence of own-being	rang bshin med
རང་ས	(one's) own natural condition/ own place; natural state; isc. own ground	rang sa
རང་ས་ན	{rang sar / rang sa nas} (within/ in) its own/ natural context/ place/ abode; isc. in its own ground	rang sa na
མངོན་གྱུར་མེད	have no physical elements within their respective states and, therefore, possess no visible vows	mngon gyur med
རང་ས་ནས	{rang sa na/ rang sar} (within/ in) its own/ natural context/ place/ abode; isc. in its own ground	rang sa nas
རང་ས་འཛིན་པ	to hold to one's own place	rang sa 'dzin pa
རང་ས་ཟིན	taken hold of natural place	rang sa zin
རང་ས་ཟིན་པ	prevailing, standing firm	rang sa zin pa
རང་ས་བཟུང	remain in one's own state	rang sa bzung
རང་ས་བཟུང་བ	to hold to one's own place	rang sa bzung ba
རང་སང་རྒྱས	solitary realizer/ pratyekabuddha	rang sang rgyas
རང་སང་རྒྱས་རང་རྒྱལ	solitary realizer/ pratyekabuddha	rang sang rgyas rang rgyal
རང་སངས	naturally pristine, dissolve by itself, self-dissolving	rang sangs
རང་སངས་རྒྱས	those who are content with being independent, solitary realizer, pratyeka buddha (bse ru lta bu, tshogs dang spyod), Solitary Buddhas, solitary sage, solitary sage	rang sangs rgyas
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག	pratyekabuddha individuals	rang sangs rgyas kyi gang zag
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Pratyekabuddha yana 2568	rang sangs rgyas kyi theg pa
རྟོགས་པའི་རིགས	lineage truly realizing the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha, one of the {rigs can lnga} five lineages rang sangs rgyas kyi theg pa mngon pa	rtogs pa'i rigs
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་འཕགས་པ	pratyekabuddha-arya	rang sangs rgyas kyi 'phags pa
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ	the enlightenment of pratyekabuddhas [rang rgyal gyi mi slob lam dang 'gog bden	rang sangs rgyas kyi byang chub
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་གཉིས	two stages of the Pratyekabuddha [1) {bse ru lta bu} = one who is like a unicorn 2) {tshogs dang spyod pa} = one who goes among others	rang sangs rgyas kyi rim pa gnyis
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ས	pratyekabuddha level [rang rgyal gyi mngon rtogs te, srid pa mtha' ma'i tse slob dpon gzhan la brten mi dgos pa'i yon tan dang ldan pa'i mkhyen pa, dman pa sa brgyad kyi nang tsan zhig	rang sangs rgyas kyi sa
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་གཉིས	TSE	rang sangs rgyas gnyis
རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of selfcentered buddhas	rang sangs rgyas theg pa
རང་སངས་ཐེག་པ	hermit vehicle	rang sangs theg pa
རང་སངས་རང་དག་རང་གྲོལ	selfdissolving, self-clearing and selfliberated	rang sangs rang dag rang grol
རང་སངས་རང་རིག	self awakened selfawareness	rang sangs rang rig
རང་སངས་ལ་སོང་བ	dissolves by itself	rang sangs la song ba
རང་སངས་སུ་སོང	to loosen themselves by themselves	rang sangs su song
རང་སད	self-awakened	rang sad
རང་སའི་བསྡུས་པ	included within that respective state	rang sa'i bsdus pa
རང་སའི་ལུགས	manner/ tradition of 1's fatherland	rang sa'i lugs
རང་སར	naturally, spontaneously; naturally/ spontaneous/ leave alone/ in its own place	rang sar
རང་སར་འཁོར	coming back by itself	rang sar 'khor
རང་སར་གྲོལ	liberated into its own condition, disappear by themselves, releases on its own, freed in its own place, self-liberates in its own condition, liberated into its own condition,	rang sar grol
རང་སར་གྲོལ་བ	to self-liberate in its selfcondition, to be liberated right where it is, self-liberate in one's own state	rang sar grol ba
རང་སར་གློད	to relax in the natural condition, relax in its natural condition	rang sar glod
རང་སར་འགག	naturally stops	rang sar 'gag
རང་སར་འགྲོལ	liberated on the spot automatically, liberated where it stands	rang sar 'grol
རང་སར་ཐིམ	dissolves into itself	rang sar thim
རང་སར་ཐིམ་པ	dissolve into itself	rang sar thim pa
རང་སར་ཐེམ་པ	dissolving into itself	rang sar them pa
རང་སར་དག	self-purified, pure in themselves, purified in its own condition, naturally dissolved, purified in their own condition	rang sar dag
རང་སར་དག་པ	naturally dissolve	rang sar dag pa
རང་སར་དེངས་སོ	went each to his own place	rang sar dengs so
རང་སར་གནས	abiding in its own condition, to be present in its own condition, to leave in their natural condition	rang sar gnas
རང་སར་གནས་པ	naturally stable condition	rang sar gnas pa
རང་སར་མི་བཞག	put 1self in the place of others, being empathetic	rang sar mi bzhag
རང་སར་ཞི	naturally subside	rang sar zhi
རང་སར་ཞི་བ	to pacify naturally	rang sar zhi ba
རང་སར་ཞོག	rest naturally	rang sar zhog
རང་སར་བཞག་པ	to rest naturally	rang sar bzhag pa
རང་སར་ཟིན	resuming its natural state / own stable; remaining in its own (original) condition	rang sar zin
རང་སར་ཡལ	naturally wilt [about flowers] disappear where it is, in itself, in its own place	rang sar yal
རང་སར་རང་གྲོལ	to self-liberate in its	rang sar rang grol
རང་སར་སླེབས་པ	to reach spontaneously	rang sar slebs pa
རང་སར་ལྷོད་པ	having relaxed in its own condition, relaxation	rang sar lhod pa
རང་སེམས	one's frame of mind, attitude	rang sems
རང་སེམས་ཀྱི་འཆར	self-display of one's own mind	rang sems kyi 'char
རང་སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the nature of this mind	rang sems kyi gnas lugs
རང་སེམས་བསྐོར	speculation	rang sems bskor
རང་སེམས་འཁྲུལ་པའི་སྣང་བ	the deluded experience of one's own mind	rang sems 'khrul pa'i snang ba
རང་སེམས་གྱོང་པོ	my rigid mind	rang sems gyong po
རང་སེམས་གཏན་པ	regulate, fashion, train, set right	rang sems gtan pa
རང་སེམས་སྟོན་པ	your own mind is the teacher	rang sems ston pa
རང་སེམས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	the suchness of your mind	rang sems de bzhin nyid
རང་སེམས་འདུལ་བ	to subdue one's mind	rang sems 'dul ba
རང་སེམས་སྡུག་ཁུར	disappointment	rang sems sdug khur
རང་སེམས་དཔང་དུ	be conscious of speaking the truth	rang sems dpang du
རང་སེམས་དཔང་དུ་འཛུག་པ	be sincere	rang sems dpang du 'dzug pa
རང་སེམས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེ	the Mahamudra of one's mind	rang sems phyag rgya che
རང་སེམས་བླ་མ་དབྱེར་མེད	your mind inseparable from the guru	rang sems bla ma dbyer med
རང་སེམས་བླ་མར་བརྟེན	tha ma + - In the end I took my own mind as teacher rang sems g.yo med drang por srang straightened out my inflexible mind	rang sems bla mar brten
རང་སེམས་རང་གྲོལ	self-liberation of one's mind	rang sems rang grol
རང་སེམས་ལ	before one's mind rang sems gshis kyi gnas lugs ngo shes na - if you realize your mind as the nature of what is	rang sems la
རང་སེམས་སངས་རྒྱས	Buddha of your own mind, buddha of one's own mind; buddha of one's own mind	rang sems sangs rgyas
རང་སོ	(one's) own true/ natural condition/ place/ state; naturalness	rang so
རང་སོ་སྐྱེ	self and others	rang so skye
རང་སོ་ཉིད	natural state	rang so nyid
རང་སོ་ཟིན	achieved	rang so zin
རང་སོ་ཟིན་པ	has totally mastered	rang so zin pa
རང་སོ་གཟུང	remain in its own state	rang so gzung
རང་སོ་བཟུང་བ	maintain one's own place or station	rang so bzung ba
རང་སོང	naturally ensured (in and of itelf)	rang song
རང་སོངས་བ	vanished of their own accord	rang songs ba
རང་སོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	our country	rang so'i rgyal khab
རང་སོར	width [zheng] of a person's fingers	rang sor
རང་སོར་གློད	to relax in the real nature, to relax in the natural condition	rang sor glod
རང་སོར་གནས	stay where it is, keep intact/ untouched/ unchanged	rang sor gnas
རང་སོར་གནས་པ	stay where it is, keep intact/ untouched/ unchanged	rang sor gnas pa
རང་སོར་གཞུག་པ	remaining in freshness, self-sustaining freshness, placing the mind in its original state, keeping in place	rang sor gzhug pa
རང་སོར་བཞག	remain naturally, leave it as it is	rang sor bzhag
རང་སོར་བཞག་པ	retain, preserve, reserve	rang sor bzhag pa
རང་སོར་ཟིན	remaining in its own (original) condition	rang sor zin
རང་སྲུང	self defense/ protection	rang srung
རང་སྲུང་རྒོལ་ལན	self defense, defensive counter attack	rang srung rgol lan
རང་སྲུང་རྡུལ་མཚོན	defensive nuclear weapons	rang srung rdul mtshon
རང་སྲུང་བྱེད	defend/ protect 1self	rang srung byed
རང་སྲུང་ལས་འགུལ	self defense movement	rang srung las 'gul
རང་སྲོག	1's own life	rang srog
རང་སྲོག་གཅོད	commit suicide	rang srog gcod
རང་སྲོག་གཅོད་བྱེད	commit suicide	rang srog gcod byed
རང་སྲོག་བཅད	committed suicide	rang srog bcad
རང་སྲོག་དོན་མེད་དོར	uselessly throw away 1's life	rang srog don med dor
རང་སྲོག་དོན་མེད་དོར་བ	uselessly throw away 1's life	rang srog don med dor ba
རང་སྲོག་བླུས་གཏོང་མཁན	martyr	rang srog blus gtong mkhan
རང་སྲོག་རང་གིས་གཅོད	commit suicide	rang srog rang gis gcod
རང་སྲོག་རང་གིས་གཅོད་ལ	suicide	rang srog rang gis gcod la
རང་སྲོག་རང་གཅོད	commit suicide	rang srog rang gcod
རང་སྲོག་རང་གཅོད་བྱེད	commit suicide	rang srog rang gcod byed
རང་གསང	1) naturally existing gsang in the body [points used in medicine; 2)	rang gsang
རང་གསལ	(re mind:) naturally/ inherently lucid; natural/ inherent lucidity; isc. (to be) naturally evident (re sensory appearances:) naturally/ inherently clear/ vivid; natural/ inherent clarity/ vividness...	rang gsal
རང་གསལ་གྱི་དྲན་པ	the naturally awake mindfulness, self-cognizant mindfulness; the naturally awaked mindfulness	rang gsal gyi dran pa
རང་གསལ་གྱི་ཤེས་པ	self-luminous cognizance	rang gsal gyi shes pa
རང་གསལ་དུ་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་པ	to experience self-cognizingly	rang gsal du nyams su myong pa
རང་གསལ་བ	self-luminous, [selfpresencing, inherently reflexive]; selfrevelatory; abbr of {rang nyid gsal ba} [ggd]	rang gsal ba
རང་གསལ་མི་རྟོག་པའི་ངང	the nonconceptual state of self-cognizance	rang gsal mi rtog pa'i ngang
རང་གསལ་ཤེས་པ	self-luminous consciousness	rang gsal shes pa
རང་གསལ་ལྷག་གེ	self-luminous wakefulness	rang gsal lhag ge
རང་བསགས་གཞན་འཁྱེར	wealth collected by 1self, carried by others	rang bsags gzhan 'khyer
རང་བསགས་རང་མྱོང	the fruition of wealth or karma collected by 1self [is] experience by 1self	rang bsags rang myong
རང་བསམ་བདེན་རློམ	thinking 1 is infallible/ always right 2570	rang bsam bden rlom
རངས	be delighted, SA rang ba, to depend upon	rangs
རངས་གདངས	phenomenal display, luminosity, self-radiance	rangs gdangs
རངས་བདུན་ཚུན་ཆད	within 7 generations	rangs bdun tshun chad
རངས་པ	rang ba	rangs pa
རངས་པོ	1) rough, rocky, rude, unpolished; 2) complete, full	rangs po
རངས་པོའི་དམག་ཆས	full military gear	rangs po'i dmag chas
རངས་པོའི་ལམ	rough road	rangs po'i lam
རངས་བྱེད	stage of grain growth	rangs byed
རངས་མ	{rangs ma} nadi	rangs ma
རངས་སར་གྲོལ	liberated into its own condition, SA rang sar grol	rangs sar grol
རཏ་ན་གླིང་པ	Ratna Lingpa: 1403-1478	rat na gling pa
རཏ་ན་ཞིག་པོ་འདྲོ་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	See also {rat na gling pa}	rat na zhig po 'dro 'dul gling pa
རཏ་ནའི་ཆས་བརྒྱད	eight jewel ornaments: The eight jewel ornaments are the crown, earrings, choker, short necklace, long necklace, arm rings, bracelets and anklets, belt.	rat na'i chas brgyad
རཏ་ནའི་ཆོས་འབྱུང	Ratna's History of the Dharma	rat na'i chos 'byung
རཏ་ནའི་གདུགས	jeweled parasols	rat na'i gdugs
རད་པ	1) skam rnyid [wilted?/ desiccated] (2(A gos	rad pa
རད་རོད	SA rod po, uneven, any uneven place containing ditches	rad rod
རད་སྲབ	thin clothing	rad srab
རན	verb + ran - it's time to (do the verb)	ran
རན་བཀུར	self-esteem/ respect	ran bkur
རན་གུན	Rangoon	ran gun
རན་འགྲིག	fitness	ran 'grig
རན་འགྲིག་བཟོ་བ	fitting	ran 'grig bzo ba
རན་བརྟེན	Indra's divine elephant with 33 heads	ran brten
རན་ད	a plane	ran da
རན་པ	1) {ran pa} [kind of] rtsva; 2) be proportionate, fitting, just right, balanced, moderate; 2) the right moment, time has come	ran pa
རན་པའི་གོས	clothes that fit/ are appropriate	ran pa'i gos
རན་པའི་ཚོད	proper [measure of]	ran pa'i tshod
རན་པའི་ཚོད་ཀྱི་ལྟོ་གོས	proper [measure of] food and clothing	ran pa'i tshod kyi lto gos
རན་པར	timely	ran par
རན་པར་གཏད	fixate in a balanced way	ran par gtad
རན་པར་བྱ	keep a balance between; x {grim lhod ran par bya} keep a balance between tight and loose	ran par bya
རན་པར་སྲོ	warm yourself moderately	ran par sro
རན་པོ	1) be proportionate, fitting, just right, balanced, moderate; 2) the right moment, time has come	ran po
རན་པོ་མེད་པ	inappropriate, misfit	ran po med pa
རན་པོ་བཟོ་བ	adjust	ran po bzo ba
རན་མ	weaving of cloth or sewing	ran ma
རན་མ་བྲན་པ	before a rope is tied the beginning and end la phur pa re btang nas rgyu skud bran pa	ran ma bran pa
རན་ཙམ	1) near/ almost the time for; 2) 'tsams pa'am 'os pa tsam	ran tsam
རན་ཚད	enough	ran tshad
རན་འོས	validity	ran 'os
རན་སོང	it is time to--	ran song
རབ་ཀ་ལ	rab ka pass	rab ka la
རབ་ཀྱིས	at best, in the best case, optimally, ideally	rab kyis
རབ་དཀའ	utter delight	rab dka'
རབ་དཀར	very white	rab dkar
རབ་དཀར་སྙིང	{dom} bear	rab dkar snying
རབ་དཀར་ལྷ་རྫས	special small white scarf	rab dkar lha rdzas
རབ་དཀྲུས	purified, cleansed	rab dkrus
རབ་བཀྲམ	ten trillion, well-scattered or spread over, large number	rab bkram
རབ་བཀྲམ་ཆེན་པོ	#	rab bkram chen po
རབ་སྐྱེ	unrelenting process of production (of various forms of suffering)	rab skye
རབ་སྐྱེད	father	rab skyed
རབ་སྐྱེས	beautiful woman	rab skyes
རབ་སྐྱེས་མང	that breeds many, sow	rab skyes mang
རབ་སྐྲའི་འོག་ནས	also with a full head of hair	rab skra'i 'og nas
རབ་སྐྲུན	mother	rab skrun
རབ་བསྐྱེད	the third of the four {kun 'byung bden pa'i mtshan nyid}	rab bskyed
རབ་བསྐྱེད་པ	analyze 2571	rab bskyed pa
རབ་བསྐྲད	banishment, expulsion, turning out from a place as in the case of an evil spirit	rab bskrad
རབ་འཁྱམས	wandering, moving freely	rab 'khyams
རབ་འཁྲུགས	very wicked, very wrathful	rab 'khrugs
རབ་གྱུར	excellence	rab gyur
རབ་གྱུར་པ	most; x {skal pa rab gyur pa} most fortunate	rab gyur pa
རབ་གྲགས	very well/ universally known	rab grags
རབ་གྲུབ	fully accomplished	rab grub
རབ་གྲོགས་པ	well-known	rab grogs pa
རབ་དགའ	extremely happy; delight, extremely happy	rab dga'
རབ་དགའ་བྱེད	Kamadeva	rab dga' byed
རབ་དགའི་ས་ཐོབ་ལྟ་བུ	as if I had attained the bhumi of Complete Joy	rab dga'i sa thob lta bu
རབ་དགའི་ས་ཐོབ་བཞིན་དུ	as if attaining the level of Perfect Joy	rab dga'i sa thob bzhin du
རབ་དགོད	the deity dbang phyug	rab dgod
རབ་འགྲོ་བ	walk well, move gently	rab 'gro ba
རབ་འགྲོ་བྱེད་པ	move freely, unhindered	rab 'gro byed pa
རབ་རྒྱགས	SA rab byams	rab rgyags
རབ་རྒྱན	17th year of the rabjung	rab rgyan
རབ་རྒྱལ	16th year of the rabjung	rab rgyal
རབ་རྒྱས	fully blown	rab rgyas
རབ་རྒྱུ	supremely circulating prana for tasting	rab rgyu
རབ་སྒང	1 of 6 districts of khams, SA sgang drug	rab sgang
རབ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་མཆོད་པ་ཞེས་བྱ་སྟེ	the best way is known as the offering of practice	rab sgrub pa'i mchod pa zhes bya ste
རབ་བསྒོས་སྐྱེས	gngas	rab bsgos skyes
རབ་བསྒྲགས	proclaimed	rab bsgrags
རབ་བསྒྲུབ	realize	rab bsgrub
རབ་སྔ་གསལ	morning, day break	rab snga gsal
རབ་བསྔགས	om, praise, heaven, state of beatitude	rab bsngags
རབ་ཆགས	zho	rab chags
རབ་མཆོག	excellence, excellent one	rab mchog
རབ་མཆོག་མིག	wood-apple	rab mchog mig
རབ་མཆོག་ས	'gram stegs of Mt Meru	rab mchog sa
རབ་མཆོད་ལྡན	Agni Deva, fire god	rab mchod ldan
རབ་འཇུག	completely permeates	rab 'jug
རབ་འཇོམས	god of wind	rab 'joms
རབ་འཇོམས་བདག་པོ	deity dbang phyug chen po	rab 'joms bdag po
རབ་འཇོམས་བྱེད	lord of death	rab 'joms byed
རབ་འཇོམས་མ	daughter of a god	rab 'joms ma
རབ་ཉམས	downfall, destruction, deterioration	rab nyams
རབ་ཉམས་པ	ruined, downfall, destruction	rab nyams pa
རབ་ཉི	12th year of rabjung	rab nyi
རབ་སྙན	perfect sweetness [of your voice]	rab snyan
རབ་ཏུ	absolutely, complete[ly], well, finely, well	rab tu
རབ་ཏུ་དཀ་བ	the supremely joyful [1st of the 10ten bodhisattva bhumis/levels], very joyful, extreme joy	rab tu dka ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྐོམ་པ	dying of thirst	rab tu skom pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྐོར་བ	turn round and round, deliver a sermon, preach over and again	rab tu skor ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེ	strong production/ growth	rab tu skye
རབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེ་བ	strong production/ growth of suffering [6th of the {'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi rnam pa bcu drug} = 16 aspects of the four noble truths	rab tu skye ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་བ	strongly arising	rab tu skyes ba
རབ་ཏུ་བརྐྱང་བ	quite stretched out	rab tu brkyang ba
རབ་ཏུ་ཁྲོ་བ	rab tu 'bar ba'i khong khro	rab tu khro ba
རབ་ཏུ་ཁྲོས་པར་གྱུར་ཏེ	became very angry	rab tu khros par gyur te
རབ་ཏུ་འཁྲུག	shaking of the earth	rab tu 'khrug
རབ་ཏུ་གང་བ	completely full	rab tu gang ba
རབ་ཏུ་གུས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	with great respect	rab tu gus pa'i sgo nas
རབ་ཏུ་གྱུ་བ	very moving energy	rab tu gyu ba
རབ་ཏུ་གྲགས་པ	famous, celebrated	rab tu grags pa
རབ་ཏུ་གྲུབ་པ	famous, celebrated	rab tu grub pa
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ	rejoicing	rab tu dga'
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་ནས	rejoicing greatly	rab tu dga' nas
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ	the Joyful [1st bhumi] joyous	rab tu dga' ba
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ས་བཅུ	the Joyous and the other ten bhumis	rab tu dga' ba la sogs pa'i sa bcu
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ	song of rejoicing	rab tu dga' ba'i glu
རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བའི་ས	the level of supreme joy [1st bhumi byang chub sems dpa'i sa bcu'i dang po, sa 'dir gnas pa'i byang chub sems dpa' rnams kyis sngar ma mthong ba'i chos nyid kyi don mthong bas rang don byang chub m...	rab tu dga' ba'i sa
རབ་ཏུ་འགུལ	earth shaking	rab tu 'gul
རབ་ཏུ་འགོད་པ	fully establish	rab tu 'god pa
རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ	greatly increased in volume	rab tu rgyas pa
རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་པ	[Tse]	rab tu rgyu pa
རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་བ	speedily-moving one	rab tu rgyu ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྒྲུབ་པ	fully accomplishing	rab tu sgrub pa
རབ་ཏུ་བརྒྱན	well-adorned, very handsome	rab tu brgyan
རབ་ཏུ་བསྒྲིམས	fully concentrate yourself	rab tu bsgrims
རབ་ཏུ་བསྔགས	eulogized, extolled	rab tu bsngags
རབ་ཏུ་བསྔགས་པ	TSE	rab tu bsngags pa
རབ་ཏུ་ཆགས་པ	become a cleric	rab tu chags pa
རབ་ཏུ་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	1) brightly shining/ gleaming; 2) way of shaking of the earth rab tu chem chem 'tsher ba'i nyi ma brightly shining sun	rab tu chem chem
རབ་ཏུ་ཆེམ་མོ	make a thundering noise	rab tu chem mo
རབ་ཏུ་འཇིག་པ	easily destroyed, perishable	rab tu 'jig pa
རབ་ཏུ་འཇིགས	absolutely terrifying	rab tu 'jigs
རབ་ཏུ་འཇིགས་ནས	grew troubled	rab tu 'jigs nas
རབ་ཏུ་འཇིགས་པ	absolutely terrifying	rab tu 'jigs pa
རབ་ཏུ་འཇོམས་པ	quite subdued	rab tu 'joms pa
རབ་ཏུ་བརྗོད	taught	rab tu brjod
རབ་ཏུ་གཏུམ་པ	furious	rab tu gtum pa
རབ་ཏུ་རྟོགས་པ	totally aware	rab tu rtogs pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྟོང་པ	utter emptiness	rab tu stong pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྟོན་པ	instructing others. one of the {chos spyod bcu} 10 religious practices	rab tu ston pa
རབ་ཏུ་བསྟན་པ་ཉིད	sound/ excellent teaching	rab tu bstan pa nyid
རབ་ཏུ་བསྟེན	faith, reverence, veneration	rab tu bsten
རབ་ཏུ་བསྟེན་པ	serve respectfully	rab tu bsten pa
རབ་ཏུ་ཐལ་བས	1 of thal ba bcu gsum	rab tu thal bas
རབ་ཏུ་ཐལ་བས་ཁྱབ	Supreme Pervasive Thalwa	rab tu thal bas khyab
རབ་ཏུ་ཐོབ་པ	fully attained	rab tu thob pa
རབ་ཏུ་འཐིམས་པ	sleepy, wishing to sleep, fond of sleep rab tu dang the tshom bsal ba rtogs pa serene realization clearing away doubt	rab tu 'thims pa
རབ་ཏུ་དང་བ	serenity	rab tu dang ba
རབ་ཏུ་དང་བའི་ཡིད	[mind of] serenity	rab tu dang ba'i yid
རབ་ཏུ་དད་པ་སྐྱེས	moved to deep trust, developing great faith	rab tu dad pa skyes
རབ་ཏུ་དུལ་བ	completely tamed/ subdued	rab tu dul ba
རབ་ཏུ་གདུང་བ	white species of plant calotropis gigantea	rab tu gdung ba
རབ་ཏུ་འདུད་པ	salutation, saluting reverentially	rab tu 'dud pa
རབ་ཏུ་ལྡན་པ	fully incorporate	rab tu ldan pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྡོམ	lock the door well	rab tu sdom
རབ་ཏུ་གནས	depends upon/ lies on the tip of 1's attitude	rab tu gnas
རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པ	[performing] consecration, to consecrate; [performing) consecration, to consecrate	rab tu gnas pa
རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པའི་ཆོ་ག	consecration ritual	rab tu gnas pa'i cho ga
རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པའི་ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ	details/ stages of the consecration liturgy	rab tu gnas pa'i cho ga'i rim pa
རབ་ཏུ་གནས་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	TSE	rab tu gnas pa'i ting nge 'dzin
རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ	Completely Victorious	rab tu rnam par rgyal
རབ་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	fully discriminating, investigation, analysis, correct discrimination	rab tu rnam par 'byed pa
རབ་ཏུ་རྣོ་བ	perky, extremely sharp	rab tu rno ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་བ	which includes elucidation	rab tu snang ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་བྱེད	charnel ground in India, Pramaasa	rab tu snang byed
རབ་ཏུ་པད་དཀར	very useful and important medicine	rab tu pad dkar
རབ་ཏུ་སྤངས་པ	to have shunned	rab tu spangs pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲུལ་པ	to manifest miraculously	rab tu sprul pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོ	delighted	rab tu spro
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོ་བ	overjoyed	rab tu spro ba
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད	extremely unelaborate; utterly unelaborate/ utterly without (conceptual) elaborations	rab tu spros med
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད་ཀྱི་དབང་བསྐུར	the extremely unelaborate empowerment	rab tu spros med kyi dbang bskur
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད་དབང	the extremely unelaborate empowerment	rab tu spros med dbang
རབ་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད་དབང་བསྐུར	the extremely unelaborate empowerment rab tu spros med tshig dbang rin po che extremely unelaborate precious word empowerment	rab tu spros med dbang bskur
རབ་ཏུ་ཕྱུང	gave ordination, made take ordination	rab tu phyung
རབ་ཏུ་འཕྱང་བའི་རྨ	[by weapons] wound w flesh and skin hanging down loose	rab tu 'phyang ba'i rma
རབ་ཏུ་བགས	absolute prohibition	rab tu bags
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང	taking monastic vows, - becoming a renunciate [when speaking of the buddha]; taking monastic vows, becoming a renunciate [when speaking of the Buddha]	rab tu byung
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་ངོ	they became monks	rab tu byung ngo
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་སྟེ	were ordained as monks	rab tu byung ste
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་འདོད	{rab tu byung 'dod kho na bsam pa} who wanted above all to renounce the world and become a monk	rab tu byung 'dod
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་ནས	having been initiated, ordained	rab tu byung nas
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ	1) monastic person, ordained monk or nun, ordination; 2) become homeless, 1 who has left the world two enter a religious order/ monastic life/; 3) become excellent/ attain excellence	rab tu byung ba
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ་བདེན་ན	If, in truth, he becomes a monk	rab tu byung ba bden na
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ་མཛད་པ	become a monk {khyod rab tu byung ba mdzod gsungs pa} suggested that he become a monk	rab tu byung ba mdzad pa
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བའི	one having the marks of an ecclesiastic rab tu byung ba'i bsgyur mi rung ba'i	rab tu byung ba'i
ཚོན་བརྒྱད	CHN	tshon brgyad
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བའི་རྟགས་ཡོད་པ	badge or distinction of monkhood	rab tu byung ba'i rtags yod pa
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བའི་མཚན	the ordination name	rab tu byung ba'i mtshan
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བའི་གཞི	the basis for taking ordination	rab tu byung ba'i gzhi
རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བར་བཅུག	let him become a practitioner rab tu byung zhing 'bras bu thob par	rab tu byung bar bcug
མཛད་དོ	will then become monks and obtain the fruit of liberation rab tu byung zhing zhi dul grol ba'i	mdzad do
མཆོག་ཐོབ་བོ	asked to become a monk, and obtained peace and liberation from samsara	mchog thob bo
རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ	1) chapter/ le'u; 2) name of chapter of shastra by Vasubandhu/ 2573 dbyig gnyen; 3) treatise, discussion, explanation, subject, topic ???	rab tu byed pa
རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་དང་པོ	Chapter 1 rab tu byed pa lag ba'i tshad kyi tshig le'u	rab tu byed pa dang po
རབ་ཏུ་བྱོན་ནས	having been initiated, ordained	rab tu byon nas
རབ་ཏུ་དབེན་པ	total seclusion/isolation. [mss] rab tu dben pa las byung ba'i yid byed attention resulting from total seclusion	rab tu dben pa
རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ	detailed analysis; to analyze in detail	rab tu dbye ba
རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་ཉིད	classification	rab tu dbye ba nyid
རབ་ཏུ་འབར་བ	completely blazing	rab tu 'bar ba
རབ་ཏུ་འབར་བའི་དམྱལ་བ	the Very Hot Hell [tsa dmyal brgyad kyi nang gses rab tu tsa ba'o]	rab tu 'bar ba'i dmyal ba
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱིན	take ordination	rab tu 'byin
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱིན་པ	rab tu byung ba	rab tu 'byin pa
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱུང	proceed, act, function, start working, entering activity, functioning, starting function engage w, enter a monastic community, take monastic vows, renounce	rab tu 'byung
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱུང་བ	become a priest, become a cleric, enter the priesthood, embrace religious life as a profession, leave one's home for the homeless life of an ascetic, be ordained, take vows of purity and celibacy	rab tu 'byung ba
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱུང་བའི་གཞི	pravrajy'avastu of the m'ulasarv'astiv'adavinaya	rab tu 'byung ba'i gzhi
རབ་ཏུ་འབྱེད་པ	fully able to separate	rab tu 'byed pa
རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱིན	generosity	rab tu sbyin
རབ་ཏུ་མི་གནས་པ	completely nondwelling [division in {dbu ma rang rgyud pa svatantrika madhyamaka	rab tu mi gnas pa
རབ་ཏུ་མི་གནས་པའི་དབུ་མ་པ	completely non-dwelling madhyamika	rab tu mi gnas pa'i dbu ma pa
རབ་ཏུ་མྱོས་བྱེད་མ	a celestial courtesan	rab tu myos byed ma
རབ་ཏུ་དམའ་བ	lowest, very low	rab tu dma' ba
རབ་ཏུ་དམར	thoroughly red/ communist rab tu dmar zhing mchog tu mkhas pa thoroughly red/ communist and specialized	rab tu dmar
རབ་ཏུ་སྨྲ་ཏེ	speaking well	rab tu smra te
རབ་ཏུ་སྨྲ་རྣམས་རྒྱུད་མར་རྒོལ	the theoreticians who utter disputations and talk	rab tu smra rnams rgyud mar rgol
རབ་ཏུ་ཚ་བ	very hot [hell]	rab tu tsha ba
རབ་ཏུ་ཚ་བྱེད	husband	rab tu tsha byed
རབ་ཏུ་ཚེས་པ	completely dawned	rab tu tshes pa
རབ་ཏུ་མཛེས་པ	graceful	rab tu mdzes pa
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི	perfectly at peace/ pacified/ eliminated	rab tu zhi
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བ	utterly calm	rab tu zhi ba
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བ་དང་བྲལ་བ	will keep you from peace and contentment	rab tu zhi ba dang bral ba
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	perfectly tranquil meditation	rab tu zhi ba'i ting nge 'dzin
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བའི་བློ་གྲོས	wisdom of tranquility rab tu zhi ba'i tshul khrims kyis 'dul ba truly subdued with the law of peaceful practice	rab tu zhi ba'i blo gros
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བར་བྱེད་པ	completely pacify	rab tu zhi bar byed pa
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བར་བཞུགས་པ	to abide in complete peace	rab tu zhi bar bzhugs pa
རབ་ཏུ་བཞུགས	presided over	rab tu bzhugs
རབ་ཏུ་བཞོན་པ	instantaneous swiftness	rab tu bzhon pa
རབ་ཏུ་གཟིགས	behold carefully	rab tu gzigs
རབ་ཏུ་འུར་འུར	1) very loud noise; 2) 1 of the six way of moving of the earth)/ [sa gyo tsul drug]	rab tu 'ur 'ur
རབ་ཏུ་ཤར	blossoming	rab tu shar
རབ་ཏུ་ཤེས	to be aware of	rab tu shes
རབ་ཏུ་གསར་པ	very fresh	rab tu gsar pa
རབ་ཏུ་གསལ་བ་དང་བ་ཐོབ་པ	become	rab tu gsal ba dang ba thob pa
ཅླེཨར	minded	clear
རབ་ཏུའི་དད་པ	serene faith	rab tu'i dad pa
རབ་གཏུམ་མ	Ferocious Lady	rab gtum ma
རབ་བཏགས	exaggeration	rab btags
རབ་བཏགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	rgyan of exaggeration	rab btags kyi rgyan
རབ་བཏགས་གྱི་རྒྱན་གསུམ	the three kinds of rgyan of exaggeration CHN	rab btags gyi rgyan gsum
རབ་བཏགས་དཔེ	exaggerated example	rab btags dpe
རབ་བཏགས་རི་མོ	cartoon, caricature	rab btags ri mo
རབ་རྟོག་གི་རྒྱན	sentient or non-sentient things's gnas lugs rang bzhin ji ltar gnas pa de nyid dgos dbang gi 'dod pas rnam pa gzhan zhig tu sgro btags nas brjod pa'i rgyan	rab rtog gi rgyan
རབ་རྟོགས	perfect reflection, full consideration	rab rtogs
རབ་རྟོགས་ནས	thinking well	rab rtogs nas
རབ་ལྟ་བས་བཅོས་པ	one of the {bcos thabs gsum}	rab lta bas bcos pa
རབ་སྟོད་ཙར་སྒང	rab stod tsar sgang	rab stod tsar sgang
རབ་སྟོན	instruct[or]	rab ston
རབ་སྟོབས	Mara	rab stobs
རབ་བརྟག	discrimination	rab brtag
རབ་བརྟན	very steady; steadfast, the name of Shakra's elephant, very steady; steadfast, the name of Shakra's elephant	rab brtan
རབ་བརྟན་སྤྲིན་གྲོལ	epithet of the elephant on which indra rides, airavata	rab brtan sprin grol
རབ་ཐིམ	kalpa of destruction	rab thim
རབ་མཐོ	medicinal plant that kills ringworm, plant cassia alata or tora 2574	rab mtho
རབ་དང	abr. of {rab tu dang ba}	rab dang
རབ་དང་བྱེད	1) food; 2) the deity dbang phyug	rab dang byed
རབ་དང་རིམ་པ	a #/ series of	rab dang rim pa
རབ་དང་སེམས་དང	ldan, lucid mind	rab dang sems dang
རབ་དྭངས་བཏུང་བ	food and drink	rab dwangs btung ba
རབ་དུ་བསྐུར་བ	prolonged, send to a distance	rab du bskur ba
རབ་དྲག	11th yr of rabjung	rab drag
རབ་བདེ	Susarma {bram ze rab bde zhes bya ba} a brahmin by the name of Susarma, Most Joyful	rab bde
རབ་འདས	utterly transcended	rab 'das
རབ་འདུར	'dur for an important person	rab 'dur
རབ་འདོད	13th year of the rabjung	rab 'dod
རབ་ལྡོག	categorical differential	rab ldog
རབ་ན	the best is --	rab na
རབ་གནས	[ritual] consecration [of a sacred image] [rten gsum sogs ye shes kyi dkyil 'khor du mngon par dbang bskur ba'am brtan por gnas byed kyi cho ga,//dpe med kyi mchod rten la lung med kyi rab gnas	rab gnas
རབ་གནས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	consecration liturgy	rab gnas kyi cho ga
རབ་གནས་ཆོ་ག	{rab tu gnas pa'i cho ga} consecration ritual	rab gnas cho ga
རབ་གནས་བསྡུས་པ	Short Consecration Ritual, by Shabkar	rab gnas bsdus pa
རབ་གནས་གནང	consecrate [h]	rab gnas gnang
རབ་གནས་བྱས་པ	consecrated	rab gnas byas pa
རབ་གནས་བྱེད	consecrate	rab gnas byed
རབ་གནས་བྱེད་པ	consecrate	rab gnas byed pa
རབ་གནས་མེ་ཏོག	pomelo-flower	rab gnas me tog
རབ་གནས་མེ་ཏོག་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆོ་ག	on the consecration and vivification of Buddhist images and stupas through strewing of flowers	rab gnas me tog bsgrub pa'i cho ga
རབ་གནས་མེ་ཏོག་ལན་གསུམ་དུ་འཐོར	threw flowers for its consecration three times	rab gnas me tog lan gsum du 'thor
རབ་གནས་མཛད་པ	blessed	rab gnas mdzad pa
རབ་གནོན	{rab gnon} [ruler of the asura city brtan pa]	rab gnon
རབ་རྣོ་བ	extremely sharp ?	rab rno ba
རབ་སྣང	king who saw light the day buddha was born	rab snang
རབ་སྤངས	shunned	rab spangs
རབ་སྤེལ་གྱི་རྒྱན	in 1 sentence have no fewer than three combined rgan	rab spel gyi rgyan
རབ་སྤྱོད	habit, custom	rab spyod
རབ་སྤྲས	well-adorned, very handsome	rab spras
རབ་ཕྱེ	subdivided	rab phye
རབ་ཕྱོགས	resort to	rab phyogs
རབ་འཕྲུལ	'phrul dga' Nirmanarati deities	rab 'phrul
རབ་འཕྲོ	sparks of fire	rab 'phro
རབ་བི་རིབ་བི	1) unclear; 2) mind not straightforward, deceptive devious behavior; 3) dim [hard to see]	rab bi rib bi
རབ་བེ་དགའ་བ	[arch] tsugs se yod pa	rab be dga' ba
རབ་བེ་རིབ་བེ	dim, hard to see, murk[y]	rab be rib be
རབ་བེ་རོབ་བེ	rough, superficial, partial, slipshod, rough, unpolished, bulky, huge rab be rob be'i brtag dpyad ma byed zhib	rab be rob be
ཙགས་བྱེད	don't examine superficially but thoroughly	tsags byed
རབ་བེ་རོབ་བེའི་རྡོ	massive boulder	rab be rob be'i rdo
རབ་བེ་རོབ་བེའི་ལས་ཀ	shoddy work	rab be rob be'i las ka
རབ་བྱངས	well-cleansed, purified	rab byangs
རབ་བྱུང	1) me yos fire rabbit year, 1st of rabjung; 2) rabjung; 3) renounce the householder's life and take monastic vows; 4) monk/ nun; 4); 5) renunciate, hopelessness; 6) [fully] ordained/ ordination; 7)...	rab byung
རེནུནཅིཨཏེ་ལཡ	vows. monks Syn {rab tu byung ba} renunciate, homelessness. the first year Syn {me mo yos} fully ordained attain excellence. Syn {khyim nas khyim med par rab tu byung}; 1) monks Syn {rab tu byung b...	renunciate lay
རབ་བྱུང་མཁན་པོ	preceptor bestowing the reniunciate's vow	rab byung mkhan po
རབ་བྱུང་གི་ཆས	monk's clothes	rab byung gi chas
རབ་བྱུང་གི་སྡོམ་ལྡན་ལྔ	the five who have taken renunciates vows [dge slong pha ma dang, dge slob ma, dge tsul pha ma bcas lnga'o	rab byung gi sdom ldan lnga
རབ་བྱུང་གི་སྡོམ་པ	renunciate's vows rab byung gi sdom pa'i snod du ma gyur does not meet the requirements laid down for taking the monastic vows	rab byung gi sdom pa
རབ་བྱུང་གི་བར་ཆད་དྲི་བ་བཞི	[TRS 22:3]	rab byung gi bar chad dri ba bzhi
རབ་བྱུང་གི་བར་ཆད་བཞི	CHN	rab byung gi bar chad bzhi
རབ་བྱུང་གི་གཞི	ground of renunciation ritual	rab byung gi gzhi
རབ་བྱུང་གི་ཡོ་བྱད་བཞི	TSE	rab byung gi yo byad bzhi
རབ་བྱུང་གི་བསླབ་བྱ་གཞི་ལྔ	the five fundamental precepts of a renunciate CHN	rab byung gi bslab bya gzhi lnga
རབ་བྱུང་གཅིག	a monk/ nun/ renunciate	rab byung gcig
རབ་བྱུང་གཉིས	CHN	rab byung gnyis
རབ་བྱུང་གཏོང་བར་ཞུས་པ	asked to be relieved of being a monk rab byung dang bsnyen rdzogs gnang ba'i	rab byung gtong bar zhus pa
རབ་བྱུང་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three degrees of ordination. {rab sbyang}, {dge tshul}, {bsnyen rdzogs}; three degrees of ordination. {rab sbyang, dge tshul, bsnyen rdzogs}	rab byung rnam pa gsum
རབ་བྱུང་མ	nun who has taken vows	rab byung ma
རབ་བྱུང་བཙུན་པ	ordained	rab byung btsun pa
རབ་བྱུང་བཙུན་མ	a monk and a nun	rab byung btsun ma
རབ་བྱེད	differentiation [ggd]	rab byed
རབ་བྱེད་དང་པོ	Chapter 1	rab byed dang po
རབ་དབེན་པ	spiritual turn of mind, retiring mind, retirement	rab dben pa
རབ་དབེན་ཡིད་བྱེད	by meditating on shamatha and vipashyana in turns, and becoming proficient, producing an antidote to the great klesha of desire/ passion	rab dben yid byed
རབ་དབྱེ	{rab tu dbye ba} detailed analysis; to analyze in detail	rab dbye
རབ་དབྱེ་བ	division, classification, topic, subject	rab dbye ba
རབ་འབར་བ	flaming, blazing	rab 'bar ba
རབ་འབུལ	fully offer	rab 'bul
རབ་འབྱམས	{rab 'byams pa} (entire) vast (cosmic) array/ immensity; immense	rab 'byams
རབ་འབྱམས་ཀུན་བཟང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Rabjam Gyurme Kunsang Namgyal, founded Shechen Monastery in 1735: 1713-1769	rab 'byams kun bzang rnam rgyal
རབ་འབྱམས་བཀའ་དབང	Abbr. of {rdo rje rgyal po bka' rab 'byams kyi dbang} empowerment of the vajra king of allencompassing teachings; one of the five enabling	rab 'byams bka' dbang
རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	oceans of galaxies	rab 'byams rgya mtsho
རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	1 billion [1,000 cubed {stong chen po}	rab 'byams rgya mtsho'i 'jig rten
རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱལ་བ	infinite conquerors	rab 'byams rgyal ba
རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱུད	infinite of continuums realm	rab 'byams rgyud
རབ་འབྱམས་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	one billion times one billion {stong chen po}	rab 'byams rgyud kyi 'jig rten
རབ་འབྱམས་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Rabjam Tenpey Gyaltsen:17th century	rab 'byams bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
རབ་འབྱམས་པ	1) infinite, 2) allencompassing. 3) a geshe degree. 4) entire vast cosmic array	rab 'byams pa
རབ་འབྱམས་རྩ་བ་གསུམ	allencompassing Three Roots	rab 'byams rtsa ba gsum
རབ་འབྱམས་མཚམས་སྦྱོར	infinite links realm	rab 'byams mtshams sbyor
རབ་འབྱམས་མཚམས་སྦྱོར་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན	1 billion *cubed? rab 'byams mtshams sbyor gyi 'jig rten one billion {stong chen po}	rab 'byams mtshams sbyor gyi 'jig rten
རབ་འབྱིང་ཐ་མ	high, middle, or low	rab 'bying tha ma
རབ་འབྱིང་ཐ་གསུམ	higher, middling, and lower	rab 'bying tha gsum
རབ་འབྱུང་ཆས	equipment of ordained monks	rab 'byung chas
རབ་འབྱེད	investigation	rab 'byed
རབ་འབྱོར	Subhuti [sh'akya thub pa'i nyan thos nye 'khor bcu'i gras stong nyid ston pa'i mchog tu gyur pa'o,//a prominent disciple of the buddha	rab 'byor
རབ་འབྱོར་ཆེན་པ	disciples of buddha who were astute in asking questions	rab 'byor chen pa
རབ་འབྲང་བ	one acting accordingly, following, imitating, one acting accordingly	rab 'brang ba
རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ	excellent, middling, and lesser	rab 'bring tha
རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་མ	superior, intermediate, and inferior capacities; excellent, mediocre, and inferior [faculties], higher, middle, and lesser	rab 'bring tha ma
རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་གསུམ	excellent, middling, and lesser	rab 'bring tha gsum
རབ་འབྲིང་མཐའ	excellent & middling & inferior	rab 'bring mtha'
རབ་འབྲིང་ཞེལ་སོགས	superior & middling & inferior	rab 'bring zhel sogs
རབ་སྦྱང	renunciate	rab sbyang
རབ་སྦྱར	anything put together, composition	rab sbyar
རབ་སྦྱོར	set out, coincidence, cooperation, application	rab sbyor
རབ་མང	very many	rab mang
རབ་མེད	vaigarani deep water, without a ford	rab med
རབ་མྱོས	the fourth year of {rab byung}. Syn {lcags po rta}	rab myos
རབ་མྱོས་མ	beautiful woman	rab myos ma
རབ་རྨོང་བ	pramoha (purity of defiled mind)	rab rmong ba
རབ་སྨིན	ripening greatly	rab smin
རབ་བཙལ	have looked	rab btsal
རབ་བརྩོན	very diligent	rab brtson
རབ་ཚ	1) feelings of great heat; 2) Fiercely Hot Hell	rab tsha
རབ་ཚ་བ	{rab tu tsha ba}	rab tsha ba
རབ་ཚའི་ས་ཁུལ	tropics	rab tsha'i sa khul
རབ་ཚའི་ས་ཁུལ་གྱི་ལོ་ཏོག	tropical crops	rab tsha'i sa khul gyi lo tog
རབ་ཚེས	15th year of rabjung	rab tshes
རབ་མཛེས	exquisite	rab mdzes
རབ་འཛག	urine	rab 'dzag
རབ་རྫོགས	perfected	rab rdzogs
རབ་རྫོགས་པ	complete, fulfillment	rab rdzogs pa
རབ་ཞི	tranquil, calm	rab zhi
རབ་བཟང	excellent one, an individual, buddha in one of his incarnations	rab bzang
རབ་འོག	less than the excellent, middling	rab 'og
རབ་ཡངས	very intelligent [extremely wide]	rab yangs
རབ་ཡངས་པ	totally vast, infinitude	rab yangs pa
རབ་ཡས	#	rab yas
རབ་ཡིད	rab byung bcu bzhi pa rab g.yo - peacock rab g.yos rmad byung ba'i gtum po'i shugs kyis sa yi 'jig rten snang mdzad pa flashing light w wrathful power, you brighten this superior world	rab yid
རབ་རབ	arms and legs krab krab tu shaking	rab rab
རབ་རིབ	indistinct, blurred, obscured, darkness, dimness, faintness, mist, glimmer, not clear, confused, troubled, mist, dimness, glimmer, twilight, dusk	rab rib
རབ་རིབ་ཅན	a distorted version; imprecise	rab rib can
རབ་རིབ་ཅན་གྱི་མིག་ཤེས	the visual perception of a person w cataracts/ impaired vision TSE	rab rib can gyi mig shes
རབ་རིབ་ཅན་གྱི་དམིགས་པ	the visual perception of a person w cataracts/ impaired vision	rab rib can gyi dmigs pa
རབ་རིབ་འཇོམས	sun	rab rib 'joms
རབ་རིབ་དག་པ	get rid of dimness	rab rib dag pa
རབ་རིབ་པ	1) darkness, dimness murkiness; 2) person w cataracts/ floaters	rab rib pa
རབ་རིབ་པའི་ཟླ་འོད་ནང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	go into dim moon light	rab rib pa'i zla 'od nang du 'gro ba
རབ་རིབ་པའི་གཟུགས་དབྱིབས	the shape of forms perceived by a person w cataracts/ floaters rab rib mig gis skra shad mthong ba ltar the vision of a person w cataracts/ impaired vision	rab rib pa'i gzugs dbyibs
རབ་རིབ་མེད་པ	free from darkness	rab rib med pa
རབ་རིབ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ	the knowledge of a person w/o cataracts/ impaired vision	rab rib med pa'i shes pa
རབ་རིབ་ཙམ་ཟིན	recognize a glimmer	rab rib tsam zin
རབ་རིབ་རབ་རིབ	dim, dimness	rab rib rab rib
རབ་རིབ་སེལ	1) morning; 2) cure the darkness of eye disease	rab rib sel
རབ་རོབ	rough, superficial, partial	rab rob
རབ་ལ	the best is--, it would be best if	rab la
རབ་ལོ	year of the Tibetan calendar	rab lo
རབ་ཤེས	know	rab shes
རབ་སད	full awakening or understanding	rab sad
རབ་སིམ་པ	ecstasy, delighted	rab sim pa
རབ་སོན	seed of the supreme level	rab son
རབ་གསལ	1) large window; 2) very clear/ bright, brilliant clarity; 3) buddha rab gsal, Pradotya; 4) sun; 5) Rab gsal; 6) very intelligent; 7) extremely clear; 8) completely banish, clear away	rab gsal
རབ་གསལ་ཟླ་བ	Rabsel Dawa, one of Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche's names. {dil mgo mkhyen brtse}, 1910-91	rab gsal zla ba
རབ་གསུམ་རབ་ལ	lha rab, supremest of the supreme	rab gsum rab la
རབ་བསགས	fully accumulated	rab bsags
རབ་ཧུ་ས་རབ	full awakening or understanding	rab hu sa rab
རབས	lineage, succession of families, race, family, history [lo rgyus,//skyes rabs,//rgyal rabs,//gdung rabs,//mkhan rabs,//bla rabs,//ya rabs,//ma rabs,//rabs dang rim pa,//khva ta nag po'i tsang nang ...	rabs
རབས་ཅན	modern	rabs can
རབས་ཅན་གྱི་མཚོན་ཆ	modern weapons	rabs can gyi mtshon cha
རབས་གཅིག་པ	mule	rabs gcig pa
རབས་གཅོད	people/ cattle kyi skye rgyun gcod pa	rabs gcod
རབས་ཆད	break the continuity of a family lineage, childless, barren	rabs chad
རབས་ཆད་ནས	the succession having been broken	rabs chad nas
རབས་ཆད་པ	break the continuity of a family lineage, childless, barren	rabs chad pa
རབས་ཆད་པོ	cut-off family; a (blood)line that has died out	rabs chad po
རབས་ཆད་མ	1) woman who has not had a child; 2) barren woman	rabs chad ma
རབས་སྡེ	genealogy	rabs sde
རབས་པ་རྣམས	followers	rabs pa rnams
རབས་འབྱམས་པ	licentiate degree holder	rabs 'byams pa
རབས་སྦྱང	those of the renunciate	rabs sbyang
རམ	or	ram
རམ་སྐྱོར	vocal accompaniment, chorus	ram skyor
རམ་གྱིས	SA snam bum	ram gyis
རམ་ཆོས	indigo plant, indigo dye	ram chos
རམ་བཏེག	accompanied. in song	ram bteg
རམ་ཐེག	accompany a song	ram theg
རམ་འདེགས	MG: 1) supplementary, subsidiary, auxilliary. ¦ ram 'degs kyi thabs tshul, supplementary means; va. -byed, to supplement. ¦ phar rgol la ram 'degs byed yas, for supplementing the attack. 2) sm. {ra...	ram 'degs
རམ་འདེགས་ཀྱི་ཐབས་ཚུལ	supplementary means	ram 'degs kyi thabs tshul
རམ་འདེགས་དགེ་རྒན	assistant teacher	ram 'degs dge rgan
རམ་འདེགས་པ	assistant, helper, aide	ram 'degs pa
རམ་འདེགས་པའི་སྙན་ཚིག	accompanying poetry/ verses	ram 'degs pa'i snyan tshig
རམ་འདེགས་པའི་རོལ་མོ	accompanying music	ram 'degs pa'i rol mo
རམ་འདེགས་བྱེད་པ	accompany, supplement	ram 'degs byed pa
རམ་པ	quick	ram pa
རམ་པ་དུག་འབྱེད	medicinal root which is an antidote against poison	ram pa dug 'byed
རམ་བུ	glee, song, catch, roundel polygonum vivparum l. 2577	ram bu
རམ་བུ་ཐེག	accompany [me] as [I] sing	ram bu theg
རམ་བུ་ཐེག་ཅིག	accompany me as I sing	ram bu theg cig
རམ་བུ་འདེགས་པ	1) gzhogs 'degs pa'am..rogs byed pa; 2) accompany in song	ram bu 'degs pa
རམ་འབྱམས	{ram 'byams} official rank in Bhutanese govt.	ram 'byams
རམ་མ	country between tipperah and arrakan in burma	ram ma
རམ་མེ་རུམ་མེ	aches and pains all over the body after hard laboring	ram me rum me
རམ་ཚོས	indigo plant, indigo dye	ram tshos
རམ་ཟླར་སྤྱན་པ	follow after	ram zlar spyan pa
རམ་ཤག	(A; 1) 'byor pa; 2) regret	ram shag
རམས	indigo, having a monastic degree	rams
རམས་ཀྱོང	indigo tshos 'dul sa rock basin/ trough	rams kyong
རམས་ཁོག	indigo skol snod	rams khog
རམས་དང་བསྡེབས་ན་སྔོ	if you dye it w indigo it is blue	rams dang bsdebs na sngo
རམས་རྡེལ	rams tshos 'dul byed rdo ril	rams rdel
རམས་པ	= rab 'byams pa, very learned, highest rank of geshe * universal	rams pa
རམས་ཕྱིས	[arch] snag bum	rams phyis
རམས་ཚོས	a dark blue, indigo dye	rams tshos
རམས་ཤིང	indigo plant	rams shing
རམས་སེ	light indigo color	rams se
རའི་སྤུ	goat hair	ra'i spu
རའི་ཨར	Reuter's	ra'i ar
རར	(not in das)	rar
རལ	1) [get] torn, rent, cleft; 2) mane; 3) goat's hair	ral
རལ་ཀ	SA ral gu	ral ka
རལ་ཀླུང	the river Ganges	ral klung
རལ་སྐོར་མཁན	skilled swordsman	ral skor mkhan
རལ་ཁ	1) sword blade; 2) [arch] gelongma's shing nga dpung bcad dang rnam pa cung mi 'dra ba'i stod gos	ral kha
རལ་ཁ་བརྡར་བ	sharpen a sword blade	ral kha brdar ba
རལ་ཁ་དཔུང་བཅད	bhikshu's rngul gzan sleeveless inner garment	ral kha dpung bcad
རལ་ཁ་དཔུང་ཆད	mthang gos kyis ma yogs par lhan byed dam kha gsab byed srid zheng gnyis kar khru do yod pa'i gos gru bzhi ma zhig	ral kha dpung chad
རལ་ཁ་སྤྲོད་པ	join blades together, fight hand to hand	ral kha sprod pa
རལ་ཁུར་ཅན	1) deity dbang phyug chen po; 2) lion	ral khur can
རལ་ག	ral gu	ral ga
རལ་གུ	cleft, chink, fissure. SK rallaka 1) stod kor; 2) ber; 3) snam gos	ral gu
རལ་གུ་ཅན	[arch] nyug rum pa ste eunuch of the queen's retinue	ral gu can
རལ་གུ་ཟུལ	bunches of pearl and coral in strings on hair	ral gu zul
རལ་གུ་ཟུལ་མ	hair-pendants of precious stones	ral gu zul ma
རལ་གྱི	[arch] sword	ral gyi
རལ་གྲི	a sword; the sword [one of the siddhis]. the sword [one of the siddhis]	ral gri
རལ་གྲི་རྒྱུན་འཛིན	1) always holding a sword; 2) general; 2) the deity gzhon nu gdong drug	ral gri rgyun 'dzin
རལ་གྲི་ཅན	1) possessing a sword; 2) chameleon; 3) Manjushri (/{ral gri	ral gri can
རལ་གྲི་རྗེན་པ	naked sword	ral gri rjen pa
རལ་གྲི་གནམ་གྱུག	brandish a sword [in the air] ral gri gnam gyug gis 'jigs snang bskul ba arouse fear by brandishing a sword	ral gri gnam gyug
རལ་གྲི་པ	fighting man	ral gri pa
རལ་གྲི་འཛིན་པ	1) sword grasper; 2) general; 2) Manjushri	ral gri 'dzin pa
རལ་གྲི་ཟླ་བ་དཀོད	sword of srin po'i rgyal po ral gri rang gis rang mi gcod pa bzhin du while people were killing each other w swords	ral gri zla ba dkod
རལ་གྲི་ལོ་མའི་ནགས་ཚལ	forest w leaves/ of blades of swords	ral gri lo ma'i nags tshal
རལ་གྲིའི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheel of swords	ral gri'i 'khor lo
རལ་གྲིའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	magical flourish of an enchanted sword	ral gri'i 'khrul 'khor
རལ་གྲིའི་རྒྱུན་འཛིན	general, commander	ral gri'i rgyun 'dzin
རལ་གྲིའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	1 of 8 ordinary accomplishments, SA dngos grub, enchanted sword	ral gri'i dngos grub
རལ་གྲིའི་མཇུག	1) tail of swords; 2) crocodile	ral gri'i mjug
རལ་གྲིའི་གཉེན	1) friend of the sword; 2) general	ral gri'i gnyen
རལ་གྲིའི་ཐབས	skill in swordsmanship [one of the sgyu rtsal drug cu rtsa bzhi	ral gri'i thabs
རལ་གྲིའི་ནགས་ཚལ	the forest of swords [one of the {nye 'khor ba'i dmyal ba}	ral gri'i nags tshal
རལ་གྲིའི་ཕྲེང	horse of the sun	ral gri'i phreng
རལ་གྲིའི་ཚལ	grove of swords	ral gri'i tshal
རལ་གྲིའི་མཚོན་འཁོར	wheel of swords	ral gri'i mtshon 'khor
རལ་གྲིའི་ལོ་མ	forest with leaves like swords neighboring hell, 1 of nye 'khor dmyal ba	ral gri'i lo ma
རལ་གྲིའི་ལོ་མ་ཅན	sugarcane plant which	ral gri'i lo ma can
ཨརེ་སྭོརད	like	are sword
རལ་གྲིའི་སོ་ཅན	1) teeth of swords; 2) big rakshasa	ral gri'i so can
རལ་གྲུམ	repairs and renovations	ral grum
རལ་གྲུམ་འཆོས	repairs and renovations are effected	ral grum 'chos
རལ་གྲུམ་པའི་ཁང་པ	renovated house	ral grum pa'i khang pa
རལ་ཅན	dilapidated, torn, worn out	ral can
རལ་ཅོག	long hair gi thor tshugs	ral cog
རལ་གཅན	braids	ral gcan
རལ་གཅིག་མ	ekajati, (blue, guardian)	ral gcig ma
རལ་གཅོད	meddler, interferer	ral gcod
རལ་གཅོད་བྱེད	meddle	ral gcod byed
རལ་ལྕང	skra lhas ma'i lan bu	ral lcang
རལ་ལྕོག	long hair gi thor tshugs	ral lcog
རལ་ལྕོགས་ཅན	long hair tied in a topknot	ral lcogs can
རལ་ཆུང་དཔུང་བཅད	bhikshu's inner garments	ral chung dpung bcad
རལ་དྲིའི་རིག་འཛིན	awareness-holders of the sword	ral dri'i rig 'dzin
རལ་རྡོལ	torn and w holes, tattered, dilapidated	ral rdol
རལ་རྡོལ་བའི་གྱོན་པ	tattered clothes 2578	ral rdol ba'i gyon pa
རལ་རྡོལ་བའི་ལྷམ	worn out/ tattered boots [w holes]	ral rdol ba'i lham
རལ་པ	drang srong rnams ral pa sa la	ral pa
ཚར་རོ	the sages'coiled locks, which held their power, fell to the earth	tshar ro
རལ་པ་ཅན	1) King Ralpachen	ral pa can
རལ་པ་གཅིག་བསྒྱིངས	hair bound in a single tuft	ral pa gcig bsgyings
རལ་པ་གཅིག་མ	Ekajati	ral pa gcig ma
རལ་པ་ལྡན	one having clotted hair	ral pa ldan
རལ་པ་འཛིན	tantric priest, epithet of mahadeva	ral pa 'dzin
རལ་པ་བརྫེས	SA ral pa gyen du brdzes, gos chas brdzes	ral pa brdzes
རལ་པ་ས་ལ་བསླགས་པ	[arch] ting ba or pile up ral pa on the ground	ral pa sa la bslags pa
རལ་པ་གསིག	he shakes his mane	ral pa gsig
རལ་པའི་ཐོར་ཚུགས	bound matted locks	ral pa'i thor tshugs
རལ་པའི་གདེངས་ཀ	hair bound to the foreheadz{ral pa'i khur can - the deity dbang phyug chen po	ral pa'i gdengs ka
རལ་པའི་ཟུར་ཕུད	ral pa'i thor cog	ral pa'i zur phud
རལ་པོ	1) tattered, dilapidated; 2) torn [clothes etc.]	ral po
རལ་པོའི་དར་ཆ	tattered flag	ral po'i dar cha
རལ་པོའི་སྡོད་ཁང	dilapidated house	ral po'i sdod khang
རལ་བ	to tear; {ral ba, ral ba, ral ba} intr. v	ral ba
རལ་བའི་ཐོར་ཚུགས	TSE	ral ba'i thor tshugs
རལ་བའི་གདེངས་ཀ	long hair	ral ba'i gdengs ka
རལ་བའི་ཤོག་ཆ	torn pieces of paper	ral ba'i shog cha
རལ་བུ་ཅན	[arch] nyug rum pa	ral bu can
རལ་བུ་འབྲེལ་པའི་དུས	1 of 9 dus ston	ral bu 'brel pa'i dus
རལ་མེད	wave, billow	ral med
རལ་མོ	cymbals	ral mo
རལ་བཙེམས	sew up tears	ral btsems
རལ་རུལ	torn and w holes, tattered, dilapidated	ral rul
རལ་ལི	RR	ral li
རལ་ལེ་རུལ་ལེ	torn, tattered, dilapidated	ral le rul le
རལ་ལེ་རུལ་ལེའི་གྱོན་པ	tattered clothes	ral le rul le'i gyon pa
རལ་སོ	sword edge	ral so
རས	cloth, woollen stuff, cotton cloth, cotton, woven cotton or synthetic material, fabric	ras
རས་ཀྱི	textile	ras kyi
རས་ཀྱི་ཁུག་མ	cotton bag/ sack	ras kyi khug ma
རས་ཀྱི་ཚགས	sift or filter with a piece of cotton rag	ras kyi tshags
རས་དཀར	white cotton	ras dkar
རས་དཀར་རྩི	white muslin	ras dkar rtsi
རས་རྐྱང	a single cotton cloth	ras rkyang
རས་རྐྱང་ཐུབ་པ	could withstand the cold with a single cotton cloth	ras rkyang thub pa
རས་རྐྱང་པ	dressed only in cotton cloth, met, ascetic, follower of a mystic school	ras rkyang pa
རས་སྐུད	cotton thread, yarn, cotton thread	ras skud
རས་ཁ	a square cloth	ras kha
རས་ཁུག	small bag made of cotton	ras khug
རས་ཁེབས	sheet ras khebs g.yog pa - drape	ras khebs
རས་ཁྲ	dyed/ printed cotton cloth	ras khra
རས་གུར	ras las bzos pa'i gur	ras gur
རས་གོས	cotton garments	ras gos
རས་གོས་རྐྱང་རེ	a single cotton garment	ras gos rkyang re
རས་གོས་འདང	cloth just enough for making a dress or robe, just as much as is required	ras gos 'dang
རས་གྱབ	cotton gyab	ras gyab
རས་གྲུབ་མ	appliqué tanka	ras grub ma
རས་འགའ	strong cotton fabric brought from sikkim	ras 'ga'
རས་སྒྱེ	large ras kyi snod	ras sgye
རས་གཅོད	1) MG: meddling; va. --byed, to meddle. 2) CM: i) khyad gsod byed pa, to look down upon, to treat with contempt/disrespect, to belittle, scorn, to undermine. ¦ gzhan gyi bslab bya bzang por ras gco...	ras gcod
རས་བཅོས་བུ	calico	ras bcos bu
རས་ཆ	cotton cloth	ras cha
རས་ཆ་འཁུམས་གཉེར་ཅན	'phur sul mang po chags pa'i ras	ras cha 'khums gnyer can
རས་ཆ་ཚོང་མཁན	draper	ras cha tshong mkhan
རས་ཆ་ཞིག	nylon, poplin	ras cha zhig
རས་ཆ་ཤུར་མ	corduroy	ras cha shur ma
རས་ཆུང	name of an opera	ras chung
རས་ཆུང་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	{bde mchog snyan brgyud}	ras chung snyan brgyud
རས་ཆུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲགས	1083-1161	ras chung rdo rje grags
རས་ཆུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་གྲགས་པ	1084-1161 Rechung Dorje Drakpa, a close disciple of Milarepa	ras chung rdo rje grags pa
རས་ཆུང་པ	Rechungpa: 1084-1161	ras chung pa
རས་ཆུང་ཕུག	a small monastery	ras chung phug
རས་ཆུང་ལུགས	tradition of Rechungpa	ras chung lugs
རས་ཆེན	1) large cloth used by monks as summer raincoat ['tso ba'i yo byad bcu gsum gyi nang gses, as protection from summer rains water worn, length du 9 cubits dang width du khru three dang sor bco brgya...	ras chen
རས་ཆེན་གྱི་སྤང་བ	the offence requiring abandonment of the rain cloth ras chen tshad las lhag pa'i ltung byed downfall of having too large a raincloth [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, have summer rainco...	ras chen gyi spang ba
རས་ཆོད	interpolation	ras chod
རས་སྟོད	cotton upper garment	ras stod
རས་ཐག	bandage, cotton rope	ras thag
རས་ཐུམ	ras kyis btums pa'i thum bu	ras thum
རས་ཐེར	drill	ras ther
རས་མཐིལ	boot sole made of cotton +_ cotton thread	ras mthil
རས་འཐག	cloth weaving	ras 'thag
རས་འཐག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cloth weaving machine, loom	ras 'thag 'phrul 'khor
རས་འཐག་བྱེད	weave cloth	ras 'thag byed
རས་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	cloth weaving factory, textile mill	ras 'thag bzo grwa
རས་དན་དལ	sieve made of cloth	ras dan dal
རས་པ	Repa, cotton-clad yogi	ras pa
རས་པ་དཀར་པོ	Repa Karpo. One of the early masters of the Barom Kagyü lineage	ras pa dkar po
རས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great repa, Milarepa	ras pa chen po
རས་སྤུ་མ	cotton cloth w pile	ras spu ma
རས་ཕད	cotton phad bu	ras phad
རས་ཕྱར	cotton sle'u	ras phyar
རས་ཕྲན	lus la sbyar nas gon pa'i nang 'jam	ras phran
རས་བལ	1) cotton wool; 2) cotton and wool	ras bal
རས་བལ་གྱི་གོས	cotton cloth	ras bal gyi gos
རས་བལ་ཤིང	cotton plant	ras bal shing
རས་བུབས	whole/ uncut piece of cloth	ras bubs
རས་བྱང	cloth gdong 'dzar	ras byang
རས་བྲིས	inscription on cloths, paint on textiles	ras bris
རས་བྲིས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	painted cloth mandala, painted mandala, mandala on painted canvas	ras bris kyi dkyil 'khor
རས་བྲེས་དཀྱིལ་འཁོལ	TSE	ras bres dkyil 'khol
རས་འབྲས	cotton fruit	ras 'bras
རས་སྦོམ་པ	strong cotton cloth	ras sbom pa
རས་སྦྱར་མ	ras mang po skyo mas sbyar te brtsed pa	ras sbyar ma
རས་མ	small piece of cotton, worn-out or old cotton clothes	ras ma
རས་མ་སེང	ras ngo ma yang min la seng ras kyang min pa'i ras shig	ras ma seng
རས་ཙགས	straining cloth [water, tea, etc.]	ras tsags
རས་ཚགས	straining cloth [water, tea, etc.]	ras tshags
རས་ཚལ་པ	piece of rag	ras tshal pa
རས་འཛར	1) roll of cloth bcad 'phro remainder; 2) cloth kyi sne 'dzar	ras 'dzar
རས་གཞི	cotton ground for painting thang ga etc.	ras gzhi
རས་ཟོམ	nobles ser mo ba and high tulku's boots	ras zom
རས་ཟོམ་རྒྱོང་འགོ	lham ras zom gyi mgo'i nang rgyong byed shing	ras zom rgyong 'go
རས་གཟན	{ngag pa} shawl} cotton shawl	ras gzan
རས་ཡུག	ras bubs}	ras yug
རས་ཡུག་ཆེན	large piece of cotton cloth	ras yug chen
རས་ཡོལ	ras kyi yol ba	ras yol
རས་རོས	different kinds of furniture & utensils	ras ros
རས་ཤོག	cotton paper, paper of linen rags	ras shog
རས་སང	thags mi zhib pa'i ras	ras sang
རས་སུ་བོར་བ	(A; 1) hold of little account, condescend to, disparage, look down on; 2) neglected; 3) strip off the garments [of]	ras su bor ba
རས་སེ་རིས་སེ་བྱས་པ	[arch] mig bgrad se bgrad se byas pa	ras se ris se byas pa
རས་སླག	furred garment lined with cotton cloth	ras slag
རས་སློག	fur coat covered with calico	ras slog
རས་བསེ	skyo mas byar ba'i ras brtsegs pa'am rtsi btang ba'i ras	ras bse
རས་ཧྲུག	ras kyi tsal bu chung chung	ras hrug
རས་ལྷན་ཛར་རྫོར	rag	ras lhan dzar rdzor
རས་ལྷམ	cloth shoes	ras lham
རས་ལྷེ	kind of cotton cloth	ras lhe
རི	{ri bo} mountain	ri
རི་ཀ	innermost [prophetic guide]	ri ka
རི་ཀ་ཤ	flower	ri ka sha
རི་ཀྲུང	CH and Japan	ri krung
རི་ཀླུང	a mountain valley	ri klung
རི་ཀླུང་རྒྱ་སྡོམ	ownerless animals living in mt valleys gang byung du bsad mi chog pa'i bkag rgya bkram pa	ri klung rgya sdom
རི་ཀླུང་སྔོན་པོར་སོང་བ	the mountains and valleys become green	ri klung sngon por song ba
རི་དཀར་ནམ་མཁར་སྙེགས་པ	the white mountain where he was pursued into the sky	ri dkar nam mkhar snyegs pa
རི་བཀའ་རྒྱ	prohibition to kill wild animals in the hills	ri bka' rgya
རི་བཀྲ	a tiger	ri bkra
རི་རྐང	[arch] small mt	ri rkang
རི་རྐེད	mountain-side	ri rked
རི་རྐེད་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	to reach the middle part of a climb. Syn {rked pa}	ri rked la phebs pa
རི་སྐད	middle part of a mt	ri skad
རི་སྐེགས	ri skyegs	ri skegs
རི་སྐེད	crystal	ri sked
རི་སྐྱེགས	large singing bird, SA skyegs, grouse, heath cock	ri skyegs
རི་སྐྱེས	1) naturally growing on mts/ in mt valleys ][herbs, trees etc.]; 2); 1) goddess Uma; 2) lhang tser; 3) bee	ri skyes
རི་སྐྱེས་དཀར་མོ	epithet of uma	ri skyes dkar mo
རི་སྐྱེས་སྐྱེ་སྔོས	wild mt grown herbs 2580	ri skyes skye sngos
རི་སྐྱེས་སྐྲ་བཟང	mt grown {skra bzang} med. herb from Kham ba sha ka	ri skyes skra bzang
རི་སྐྱེས་དགའ་བྱེད	gdong drug	ri skyes dga' byed
རི་སྐྱེས་རྟ་རྨིག་དཀར་པོ	mt grown herb {rta rmig dkar po}	ri skyes rta rmig dkar po
རི་སྐྱེས་བྱ་རྐང	herb {bya rkang} growing in the mts	ri skyes bya rkang
རི་སྐྱེས་མ	born in the mountain, daughter of himalaya	ri skyes ma
རི་སྐྱེས་ཙི་སྣ	wild/ mt grown fibre	ri skyes tsi sna
རི་སྐྱེས་ཟར་མ	linum nutans maxim., linum perene l. var. sibiricum planch.	ri skyes zar ma
རི་སྐྱེས་སྲོག་ཆགས	wild [mt dwelling] animals	ri skyes srog chags
རི་སྐྱེས་ཨར་ནག	lonicera syringantha maxim.	ri skyes ar nag
རི་ཁ	mountain pass	ri kha
རི་ཁ་བ་ཅན	snow mt.	ri kha ba can
རི་ཁམ	mt apricot fruit tree	ri kham
རི་ཁུག	gorge, valley, ravine	ri khug
རི་ཁུད	valley/ ravine in the mts	ri khud
རི་ཁུལ	mt/ hilly area	ri khul
རི་ཁོག་སྦུག་ལམ	ri khog phug nas bzos pa'i path/road	ri khog sbug lam
རི་ཁྱི	wolf	ri khyi
རི་ཁྱི་སྔོན་པོ	blue mt wolf	ri khyi sngon po
རི་ཁྱིམ	mt house	ri khyim
རི་ཁྲ	1) tshon mdangs spel ba'i variegated picture; 2) tigress	ri khra
རི་ཁྲོད	hermitage, chain of mountains, group of hills, recluse's cave, range of mountain peaks, hermit wilderness, mountain retreat hermitage, sanctuary, retreat, recluse's cell in the midst of a group of ...	ri khrod
རི་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་པ	hermit practitioner	ri khrod kyi chos pa
རི་ཁྲོད་གྲིམས་ཤིག	on a hill range take	ri khrod grims shig
རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམ་མཁན	who lived in mountain retreats	ri khrod 'grim mkhan
རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམ་རྒྱུ་བྱས	{tshe blos btang nas ri khrod 'grim rgyu byas} had renounced this worldly life to go wandering from one mountain retreat to another	ri khrod 'grim rgyu byas
རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམ་པ	wander on a mountain range	ri khrod 'grim pa
རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམས	I wander in mountain solitudes	ri khrod 'grims
རི་ཁྲོད་འགྲིམས་པ	wandered off into the wilderness	ri khrod 'grims pa
རི་ཁྲོད་ཐུབ་པ	so that [I] may keep to retreat. Syn {ri khrod non pa} / {ri khrod zin pa} / {ri khrod du gnas pa}	ri khrod thub pa
རི་ཁྲོད་ཐུབ་པར	so that [I] may keep to retreat	ri khrod thub par
རི་ཁྲོད་དུ	a retreat	ri khrod du
རི་ཁྲོད་དུ་གནས་པ	retreat	ri khrod du gnas pa
རི་ཁྲོད་བདེན་པ	remote mountain retreats	ri khrod bden pa
རི་ཁྲོད་པ	tshe blos btang ba'i ri khrod	ri khrod pa
རི་ཁྲོད་པའི་སྒོམ་ཁུང	hermit's meditation cavern	ri khrod pa'i sgom khung
རི་ཁྲོད་དབང་ཕྱུག	*{sha ba ri}* Lord Shavari, a disciple of Saraha, Lord of Hermits, heart son of Nagarjuna	ri khrod dbang phyug
རི་ཁྲོད་དབེན་པ	lonely hermitage	ri khrod dben pa
རི་ཁྲོད་དབེན་པ་སྟེན་ཅིག	stay in mountain solitudes!	ri khrod dben pa sten cig
རི་ཁྲོད་དབེན་པ་བསྟེན་པ	stayed in remote retreats	ri khrod dben pa bsten pa
རི་ཁྲོད་དབེན་པའི་གནས་མཆོག	an excellent place, a remote mountain retreat	ri khrod dben pa'i gnas mchog
རི་ཁྲོད་འཛིན་པ	choose the solitude of mountains	ri khrod 'dzin pa
རི་ཁྲོད་བཟུང་བ	to dwell in mountain hermitages	ri khrod bzung ba
རི་ཁྲོད་ལོ་མ་གྱོན་མ	goddess who eliminates all diseases	ri khrod lo ma gyon ma
རི་གངས་ཅན	Himalayas	ri gangs can
རི་གུ	young goat, kid	ri gu
རི་གྱི་རྩ་བ	foot of the mt	ri gyi rtsa ba
རི་གྱེན་ཐུར་གྱི་ངོས	mt slope	ri gyen thur gyi ngos
རི་གྲིབ	1) mt slope where the sun doesn't shine; 2) dark shadow of a mt.	ri grib
རི་གྲོང	1) city on/ near a mt.; 2) mt and city	ri grong
རི་གླག	[mt] eagle	ri glag
རི་གླིང	Japan	ri gling
རི་གླིང་བཀོད་པ	the structure of Mt Sumeru and the continents	ri gling bkod pa
རི་དགོན	mountain monasteries	ri dgon
རི་མགུལ	a mountain slope	ri mgul
རི་མགོ	mt peak/ top	ri mgo
རི་མགོ་མཐོན་པོ	lofty mt	ri mgo mthon po
རི་མགོའི་རིང་ལུགས	mt peak/ top-ism	ri mgo'i ring lugs
རི་འགག	narrow place between two mts, mt gorge	ri 'gag
རི་འགེམས	thunder	ri 'gems
རི་འགོག	resist the Japanese	ri 'gog
རི་འགོག་བྱེད	resist the Japanese	ri 'gog byed
རི་འགོག་མི་རིགས	anti-Japanese peoples	ri 'gog mi rigs
རི་འགོག་མི་རིགས་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ	antiJapanese peoples's united front	ri 'gog mi rigs 'thab phyogs gcig sgril
རི་འགོག་དམག་ཁྲུག	Sino-Japanese war ri 'gog g.yul 'byed - Sino-Japanese war	ri 'gog dmag khrug
རི་འགྲམ་དུ	on the slopes of the mountain	ri 'gram du
རི་རྒོད	bare mt	ri rgod
རི་རྒོལ	bare mt	ri rgol
རི་རྒྱ	no hunting law	ri rgya
རི་རྒྱ་ཀླུང་རྒྱ་བསྡམ་པ	prohibition to kill wild animals in the hills	ri rgya klung rgya bsdam pa
རི་རྒྱ་ནགས་གསོ	mt reforestation	ri rgya nags gso
རི་རྒྱབ	back of a mt	ri rgyab
རི་རྒྱལ	Mt. Meru	ri rgyal
རི་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་བཞི	the four sides of Mt Meru CHN	ri rgyal gyi phyogs bzhi
རི་རྒྱལ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse bodhicitta like Mt Meru	ri rgyal lta bu'i sems bskyed
རི་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་པོ	mountain tise	ri rgyal lhun po
རི་རྒྱུད	range, chain of hills	ri rgyud
རི་རྒྱུད་ཧི་མ་ལ་ཡ	the Himalaya mt range	ri rgyud hi ma la ya
རི་སྒང	[mt] peak summit	ri sgang
རི་སྒུལ་མཚོ་སྐྱོམ	move mts and dry up oceans, big job	ri sgul mtsho skyom
རི་སྒུལ་མཚོ་སློག	move mts and dry up oceans, big job	ri sgul mtsho slog
རི་སྒོག	garlic, tibetan hill, allium sphaeroceph, wild garlic, make one swear	ri sgog
རི་ངུ་བའི་མིག	the mountain of tears	ri ngu ba'i mig
རི་ངུར	ris skad rgyag pa	ri ngur
རི་ངོགས	face of the mountain; face of the mountain, hillside	ri ngogs
རི་ངོགས་སུ	in the mountains	ri ngogs su
རི་ངོས	hillside	ri ngos
རི་ངོས་ལས་རྡོ་ཞིག་འབོར	casts a stone down a mountain side	ri ngos las rdo zhig 'bor
རི་ཅན	hilly, mtous	ri can
རི་ཆུ	ri chu river * mt and river	ri chu
རི་ཆུ་ཡུལ་ལྗོངས	landscape, scenery	ri chu yul ljongs
རི་ཆུང་གི་མགོ	the top of a small hillock	ri chung gi mgo
རི་ཆུང་ཆུང	hillock, knoll	ri chung chung
རི་ཆེན	great mountains ri chen po brgyad la gnas pa'i drang srong	ri chen
རི་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ	5 great mountains of western continent of godaniya (na to ta na, rwa gsum pa, nor bu'i rta babs, pa rwa brgya po, rtsub pa)	ri chen po lnga
རི་ཆེན་པོ་དྲུག	6 great mountains of lus 'phags pa the eastern continent or purva videha (logs chen po, nags kyi phreng ba, rma bya'i tshogs, ri dwags kyi khrod, rgya mtsho gyen du 'gro, mig gi phreng ba)	ri chen po drug
རི་ཆེན་པོ་ནམ་མཁར་ཟུག་པ་ལྟ་བུ	a great mountain thrust up into the sky	ri chen po nam mkhar zug pa lta bu
རི་ཆེན་བཞི	4 great mountains of jambudvipa (ma na da ra, 'bigs byed, ma la ya, gangs can)	ri chen bzhi
རི་ཆོས	the practices of the retreat; practice in mountain retreat; on the joys of contemplation and anchoritic life	ri chos
རི་ཆོས་ངེས་དོན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	fundamental treatise by {dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan} 1292-1361 ri chos yon tan kun 'byung dang lhan	ri chos nges don rgya mtsho
རི་མཆོག	Supreme Mountain. Same as Sumeru	ri mchog
རི་འཇོམས	thunderbolt, kind of tree	ri 'joms
རི་ཉག	ri'i sgal nyag gshong bu	ri nyag
རི་ཉལ	deity dbang phyug	ri nyal
རི་ཉིལ་བ་འདྲ	like a mountain collapsing	ri nyil ba 'dra
རི་གཉན	mt w demonic spirit	ri gnyan
རི་གཉའ	mountain ridge	ri gnya'
རི་རྙིལ	have a landslide	ri rnyil
རི་སྙིང་པོ	Ri Nyingpo, Temple of the Great Dharma Wheel (chos 'khor chen po'i lha kang), in Domey	ri snying po
རི་བརྙིལ	have a landslide	ri brnyil
རི་བསྙིལ	the hills were thrown down	ri bsnyil
རི་ཏོག་ཏོག	1) ri tsog tsog; 2) ri chung tsam pa}	ri tog tog
རི་གཏོས	size of mts	ri gtos
རི་རྟོག	non thought, ex. {rnam rtog steng du rnyed} discovered non thought in the midst of discursive thought	ri rtog
རི་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	TSE	ri lta bu'i sems bskyed
རི་ལྟས	1) ri 'ur sogs good and bad omens; 2) ri/ sa dpyad, sogs kyi mtshan ma	ri ltas
རི་ལྟོང	depression in a ridge of mountains	ri ltong
རི་སྟེང	mountain top, peak	ri steng
རི་སྟོང	1) empty/ barren mt/ hills w/o people/ cattle etc.; 2) 1000 mts	ri stong
རི་ཐག་ཉེ་བ	standing near, being closely connected with	ri thag nye ba
རི་ཐག་ཉེ་བ་ཞིག	neighboring hill	ri thag nye ba zhig
རི་ཐང	mt and plain	ri thang
རི་ཐང་མཚམས	low plain at foot of a mountain, kind of fever, 1 of tsha ba'i nad	ri thang mtshams
རི་ཐང་འཚམས་ཀྱི་ཕྲང་གསུམ	CHN	ri thang 'tshams kyi phrang gsum
རི་ཐོ	tall mt, summit	ri tho
རི་ཐོད	mt peak	ri thod
རི་ཐོན	mt products	ri thon
རི་ཐོན་ཤིང་ཏོག	mt product[s &] fruits	ri thon shing tog
རི་ཐོའི་གྲོས་ཚོགས	summit conference	ri tho'i gros tshogs
རི་མཐོ	high mountain	ri mtho
རི་མཐོ་ས་གཙང	ri mgo 'phang mtho la sa gzhi dngos gtsang ba	ri mtho sa gtsang
རི་མཐོའི་ན་ཙ	illness in high places dmigs bsal can	ri mtho'i na tsa
རི་དགས	mrgini, deer	ri dags
རི་དགས་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of beasts	ri dags rgyal po
རི་དབ༹གས	wild (herbivorous) animal; (esp.) deer/ antelope	ri dvags
རི་དྭགས	wild animal, game animals, large game deer, wild animals with hooves, game, herbivorous wild animal	ri dwags
རི་དྭགས་ཀུ་རང་ག	dress	ri dwags ku rang ga
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་རྐང་རྗེས	pug	ri dwags kyi rkang rjes
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོད་ཅེས་བྱ་བའི་རི	name of mountain in continent of purva videha	ri dwags kyi khrod ces bya ba'i ri
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་དགྲ	SA ri bo chen po bcu	ri dwags kyi dgra
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་དགྲ་འདུལ་བ	1 of 10 great mountains	ri dwags kyi dgra 'dul ba
རི་དབ༹གས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	the lion	ri dvags kyi bdag po
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་གནས	deer-grove of 1st sermon, sarnath near benares	ri dwags kyi gnas
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་པགས	deer skin	ri dwags kyi pags
རི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་ཤ	game (as food)	ri dwags kyi sha
རི་དྭགས་སྐྱེས	musk	ri dwags skyes
རི་དྭགས་སྐྱེས་མ	1 of buddha's wives	ri dwags skyes ma
རི་དྭགས་ཁྲམ་པ	fo	ri dwags khram pa
རི་དྭགས་གོ་འདེད་དུ་བྱོན་པ	went deer hunting	ri dwags go 'ded du byon pa
རི་དྭགས་གྲིབ་མས་མཚན་པ	moon	ri dwags grib mas mtshan pa
རི་དྭགས་དགྲ	hunter	ri dwags dgra
རི་དྭགས་མགོ	1) the star mgo; 2) 11th month	ri dwags mgo
རྒྱ་ལས་ཐར་བ	you have escaped from the net of samsara like a wild animal who has escaped from a trap	rgya las thar ba
རི་དྭགས་རྒྱག	to hunt	ri dwags rgyag
རི་དྭགས་རྒྱལ་པོ	lion	ri dwags rgyal po
རི་དབ༹གས་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of beasts - + g.yu	ri dvags rgyal po
རི་དབ༹གས་སྒྲ་ལ་ཉན་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like a deer listening to music; x {chos nyan pa'i dus su ri dvags sgra la nyan pa lta bu zhig dgos} listen to the teachings like a deer listening to music	ri dvags sgra la nyan pa lta bu
རི་དྭགས་རྔོན	hunt	ri dwags rngon
རི་དྭགས་རྔོན་པ	hunt[er]	ri dwags rngon pa
རི་དྭགས་བརྔོན་ཏོ	hunted a wild animal	ri dwags brngon to
རི་དྭགས་ཅན་མ	a kind of woman	ri dwags can ma
རི་དྭགས་ཆང	musk	ri dwags chang
རི་དྭགས་ཆོས་འཁོར	dharma chakra w deer	ri dwags chos 'khor
རི་དྭགས་འཆང	musk	ri dwags 'chang
རི་དྭགས་འཆིང་བྱེད	trap large game	ri dwags 'ching byed
རི་དྭགས་འཆིར་འཇུག	mirage	ri dwags 'chir 'jug
རི་དྭགས་འཆོར་བ	chase a game	ri dwags 'chor ba
རི་དྭགས་རྙི་ཐག	wild animal trap cord	ri dwags rnyi thag
རི་དྭགས་རྟགས་ཅན	moon	ri dwags rtags can
རི་དྭགས་ལྟེ་བ	musk	ri dwags lte ba
རི་དྭགས་ཐེད་རོ	flesh/ bones of kills of predators etc.	ri dwags thed ro
རི་དྭགས་མཐར་བྱེད	hunter	ri dwags mthar byed
རི་དྭགས་དྲ་བ	net/ trap to catch wild animals	ri dwags dra ba
རི་དྭགས་རྣ་བ	gzungs mo bya'i thur	ri dwags rna ba
རི་དྭགས་སྣ་འཛིན	moon	ri dwags sna 'dzin
རི་དྭགས་པ	hunter	ri dwags pa
རི་དྭགས་པ་ལང་རྣ་བ	stag with ears resembling those of the cow	ri dwags pa lang rna ba
རི་དབ༹གས་ཕོ་མོ	doe and buck	ri dvags pho mo
རི་དྭགས་དབང་པོ	lion	ri dwags dbang po
རི་དབ༹གས་དབང་པོ	the king of wild animals	ri dvags dbang po
རི་དྭགས་མིག	doe-eyed	ri dwags mig
རི་དྭགས་མིག་ཅན་མ	handsome woman whose eyes compare with those of the deer	ri dwags mig can ma
དོཨེ	eyed	doe
རི་དྭགས་རྨན་མ་ཅན	[arch] wild animal wounded by weapons	ri dwags rman ma can
རི་དབ༹གས་གཙོད་གསོད་པ	hunters who kill of antelopes and other game	ri dvags gtsod gsod pa
རི་དྭགས་རྩི	musk	ri dwags rtsi
རི་དྭགས་ཚེ་རིང	1 of the tshe ring rnam drug	ri dwags tshe ring
རི་དྭགས་མཚན	moon	ri dwags mtshan
རི་དྭགས་མཚན་མ	moon	ri dwags mtshan ma
རི་དྭགས་འཚེ	lion	ri dwags 'tshe
རི་དྭགས་ཞགས་པས་ཟིན་བ་ལྟར	like a wild animal trapped in a lair	ri dwags zhags pas zin ba ltar
རི་དྭགས་ཟ	bear sow	ri dwags za
རི་དྭགས་ཟས་ཅན	lion	ri dwags zas can
རི་དྭགས་རུ་རུ	species of deer that cries "ru ru"	ri dwags ru ru
རི་དབ༹གས་ལ་སོགས་པ	and other wild animals	ri dvags la sogs pa
རི་དྭགས་ཤ་ར་བྷ	8 legged lion	ri dwags sha ra bha
རི་དྭགས་བཤར་ཏོ	chased game	ri dwags bshar to
རི་དྭགས་བཤོར་དུ་ཕྱིན	went to chase wild animals	ri dwags bshor du phyin
རི་དྭགས་སྲེད་སྐྱེད	mirage	ri dwags sred skyed
རི་དྭགས་གསད་པས་འཚོ	hunter	ri dwags gsad pas 'tsho
རི་དྭགས་གསོད	hunter	ri dwags gsod
རི་དིལ་འགའ	some hills	ri dil 'ga'
རི་དེའུ	small mt{ri dgu - the 9 mts	ri de'u
རི་དོ་ཆད	peak of a solitary mountain	ri do chad
རི་དྲུག	CHN	ri drug
རི་གདོང	ri sne'am ri zur	ri gdong
རི་བདག	lha dbang phyug	ri bdag
རི་བདུན	The seven mountain circles	ri bdun
རི་བདུན་གྱི་ཁ་ཁྱེར	the crests of the seven mountain ranges	ri bdun gyi kha khyer
རི་མདུང་མདུང	ri tsog tsog	ri mdung mdung
རི་འདབས	foot of the mountain	ri 'dabs
རི་འདོར	constellation ri byi	ri 'dor
རི་རྡོ་ཀླུང་འབེབས	example of unnecessarily changing places	ri rdo klung 'bebs
རི་ལྡེབས	mt/ hill side/ slope	ri ldebs
རི་སྡིངས	depression on a mountain ridge	ri sdings
རི་ནག་པོ་དགུ	9 Black Mts	ri nag po dgu
རི་ནུབ	Burma	ri nub
རི་ནེ་ལྦ	Geneva	ri ne lba
རི་གནས་མ	byi ba, marmot	ri gnas ma
རི་རྣ	lower slope of a mt	ri rna
རི་སྣ	mt's front side	ri sna
རི་སྣ་དགོན	Rina Monastery, in U	ri sna dgon
རི་པ	1) practitioner in mt. retreat; 2) hunter; 3) dweller in mts	ri pa
རི་པན	Japan	ri pan
རི་པའི་དབང་ལྔ	five empowerments of awareness	ri pa'i dbang lnga
རི་པའི་རྩལ་དབང	empowerment of awareness's expressive power	ri pa'i rtsal dbang
རི་པིན	Japan	ri pin
རི་པོ་ཏ་ལ	potala hill, mountain in south india	ri po ta la
རི་དཔྱད་གཟིགས་པ	inspect the mountains	ri dpyad gzigs pa
རི་སྤུག	mt cave	ri spug
རི་སྤོ་མཐོན་རིན་ཆེན་བྲག་རི	Jewel Rock Lofty Green Mt	ri spo mthon rin chen brag ri
རི་སྤོས་མཚོ་སྐྱོམ	move mts and dry up oceans, big job	ri spos mtsho skyom
རི་སྤོས་མཚོ་སློག	move mts and dry up oceans, big job	ri spos mtsho slog
རི་ཕག	1) back of a mt; 2) wild pig/ boar	ri phag
རི་ཕར	boar	ri phar
རི་ཕུག	cave, cavern	ri phug
རི་ཕྲ་མོ	the rarefied mountain	ri phra mo
རི་འཕེན	constellation ri byi	ri 'phen
རི་བ	worth; {ri ba, ri ba, ri ba} intr. v	ri ba
རི་བ་ཅོག་བཞག	freely resting mt, 1 of the *cog bzhag gsum}* - the threefold "freely resting"	ri ba cog bzhag
རི་བོ	1) [large] mt; 2) 7	ri bo
རི་བོ་བཀྲ་བཟང	Riwo Trazang, in Latö	ri bo bkra bzang
རི་བོ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང	mountain crane, bustard	ri bo khrung khrung
རི་བོ་གངས་ཅན	also {gnas ri} Mt. Everest [?], situated north of India after the {ri nag dgu}; also {gnas ri} Mt. Everest [?], situated north of India after the {ri nag dgu}	ri bo gangs can
རི་བོ་གྲུ་འཛིན	Potala mt/ ri bo po ta la	ri bo gru 'dzin
རི་བོ་དགའ་ལྡན	gelugpa school	ri bo dga' ldan
རི་བོ་དགའ་ལྡན་པ	{ri bo dga' ldan pa}	ri bo dga' ldan pa
རི་བོ་དགེ་ལྡན་དགོན་པ	the monastery of Ganden	ri bo dge ldan dgon pa
རི་བོ་དགེ་ལྡན་པ་དག	MSS: "those of Mount Ganden," an early name for the Gelugpa sect. E.g. R75: 698.1 [mss]	ri bo dge ldan pa dag
རི་བོ་དགེ་ལུགས	gelugpa school	ri bo dge lugs
རི་བོ་དགེ་ལུགས་པ	{ri bo dge lugs pa}	ri bo dge lugs pa
རི་བོ་ཅོག་གཞག	resting/ cog gzhag of a mt [ati: 1 of the chog gzhag bzhi]	ri bo cog gzhag
རི་བོ་ཅོག་གཞག་གི་ལྟ་བ	view of the freely resting mountain	ri bo cog gzhag gi lta ba
རི་བོ་ཅོག་བཞག	the mountain-like state of resting imperturbably/ imperturbable rest/ presence; the imperturbable presence/ rest(ing) of a mountain; state of resting imperturbably/ imperturbable rest/ presence tha...	ri bo cog bzhag
རི་བོ་ཆེ	stag lung ma thang ri bo che	ri bo che
རི་བོ་ཆེན་པོ	rwa mnyam pa, ri dwags kyi dgra 'dul ba, sprin dkar po 'dzin pa, mtho bar brtsegs pa, phreng ba'i nye 'khor, dus na dga' ba, kun dga' 'dzin pa, yid kyi rjes su mthun pa, pad ma ku she sha ya dang l...	ri bo chen po
རི་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	ri bo chen po brgyad
རི་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ	ten great mountains which surround the continent of uttara kuru (sang ka she ka	ri bo chen po bcu
རི་བོ་ཆོག་བཞག	mountain-like natural contemplation	ri bo chog bzhag
རི་བོ་མཆོག་རབ	Mt Meru	ri bo mchog rab
རི་བོ་འཇོམས	{ri bo 'joms}	ri bo 'joms
རི་བོ་ཏི་རྩེ	ri bo te se/ Ti Se snow mt	ri bo ti rtse
རི་བོ་ཏི་སེ	'phags yul gyi byang phyogs ri dpag tshad brgya ba, mdog dkar ba, dngul gyi rang bzhin rwa lnga yod pa'i gsum dngul dang, gnyis shel dang gser las grub pa	ri bo ti se
རི་བོ་བཏང་བཟུང	muchilinda mountain	ri bo btang bzung
རི་བོ་ཐང་ལྷ	Tangla mts	ri bo thang lha
རི་བོ་དྭངས་བསིལ	{ri bo dwangs bsil} [taught in the mdo phal po che in hran zhi province rje the five peaked mt of 'jam dbyangs in CH]	ri bo dwangs bsil
རི་བོ་དེ་ཤན	hill at ri bo rtse lnga in china	ri bo de shan
རི་བོ་པོ་ཏ་ལ	1) in S India ri bo gru 'dzin; 2) pho brang dmar po ri; 3) on a subcontinent in the S ocean place ri po ta la	ri bo po ta la
རི་བོ་དཔལ་འབར	Riwo Palbar, in Tö, Mangyul, one of Milarepa's meditation places	ri bo dpal 'bar
རི་བོ་སྤོ་མཐོ	tall mt.	ri bo spo mtho
རི་བོ་སྤོས	fragrant mountains	ri bo spos
རི་བོ་སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན	{ri bo spos ngad ldan} [on the E side of the city of med. herbs {lta na sdug} mot where herbs curing all diseses grow aa ru ra etc]	ri bo spos ngad ldan
རི་བོ་སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པ	The Fragrant Mt, N of ri bo gangs can}	ri bo spos ngad ldan pa
རི་བོ་བྱ་རྐང	{ri bo bya rkang} mt	ri bo bya rkang
རི་བོ་འབིགས་བྱེ	chain of hills in central india	ri bo 'bigs bye
རི་བོ་འབིགས་བྱེད	chain of hills in india	ri bo 'bigs byed
རི་བོ་མ་ལ་ཡ	Mount Malaya	ri bo ma la ya
རི་བོ་ཙན་དྲ་ཀ་ལ	mythical mountain full of medicinal plants in outer mountains near shambhala	ri bo tsan dra ka la
རི་བོ་ཙེ་ལྔ	five peak mt in CT	ri bo tse lnga
རི་བོ་རྩེ་ལྔ	mountain with 5 peaks in china, 1 of gnas chen lnga	ri bo rtse lnga
རི་བོ་བརྩེགས་པ	Mountain Pile. See Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	ri bo brtsegs pa
རི་བོ་ཡི་རྒྱལ	po, mount meru	ri bo yi rgyal
རི་བོ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Mount Meru	ri bo yi rgyal po
རི་བོ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ་མཆོག་རབ	excellent Mt. Meru	ri bo yi rgyal po mchog rab
རི་བོ་ཡེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	Mt Meru	ri bo ye rgyal po
རི་བོ་ཡེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་མཆོག་རབ	excellent Mt Meru	ri bo ye rgyal po mchog rab
རི་བོ་རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	hill sacred to bon in kongpo	ri bo rin chen spungs pa
རི་བོ་ལྷུན་སྟུག	che zhing brjid pa'i ri bo	ri bo lhun stug
རི་བོགས	formerly 'jal dgos pa'i mt growing plants and trees etc kyi bogs ma	ri bogs
རི་བོང	rabbit; hare	ri bong
རི་བོང་ཀླད་པ	rabbit brain	ri bong klad pa
རི་བོང་མཁྲིས་པ	hare's bile	ri bong mkhris pa
རི་བོང་གི་རྡུལ	a measure the size of 7 *chu rdul}* rabbit particle	ri bong gi rdul
རི་བོང་གི་རྭ	hare's horns	ri bong gi rwa
རི་བོང་གི་རིལ་མ	[pellet of] rabbit droppings	ri bong gi ril ma
རི་བོང་ཅན	1) moon; 2) 1	ri bong can
རི་བོང་ཅལ་འདྲོགས	rabbit's cal sound ["cal" = sound of fruit falling into water der depending on the sound of a scared rabbit, all the wild animals have to flee brosaccording to legend]	ri bong cal 'drogs
རི་བོང་སྙིང	rabbit heart animal med. ri bong dang sre mong gi rigs la'ang zer rodent	ri bong snying
རི་བོང་རྡུལ	rabbit particle [chu rdul bdun bsgril ba'i tshad]	ri bong rdul
རི་བོང་རྡོ་བརྫུས	rabbit disguased as a rock [rang bzhin g.yo sgom du sdod pa'i dpe,//sa gnas mi dmangs kyi bde sdug ji yod skabs 'phral du gong rim la snyan seng zhu dgos pa las rang bzhin ri bong rdo brdzus su sdo...	ri bong rdo brdzus
རི་བོང་མིག	1) rabbit's eye; 2) med. tree {lung tong mig}	ri bong mig
རི་བོང་ཚང་ལོག	rabbit going back to its nest, example of returning to its former state	ri bong tshang log
རི་བོང་མཚན	markings of/ like a rabbit	ri bong mtshan
རི་བོང་མཚན་ཅན	moon	ri bong mtshan can
རི་བོང་མཚན་མ	moon	ri bong mtshan ma
རི་བོང་འཛིན	moon	ri bong 'dzin
རི་བོང་ཟ	eagle	ri bong za
རི་བོང་རཱ	horn of a rabbit	ri bong rA
རི་བོང་རྭ	hare's horns (fictitious entity)	ri bong rwa
རི་བོའི་རྒྱན	SA spang rgyan me tog	ri bo'i rgyan
རི་བོའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	mt banner	ri bo'i rgyal mtshan
རི་བོའི་རྣ་རྒྱན	spang rgyan me tog	ri bo'i rna rgyan
རི་བོའི་རྣ་བ	the earth	ri bo'i rna ba
རི་བོའི་བུ་མོ	(daughter of the mountain), epithet of uma, name of indus river	ri bo'i bu mo
རི་བོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	Mt Meru	ri bo'i dbang phyug
རི་བོའི་རྩེ	the mountaintop	ri bo'i rtse
རི་བོའི་ཟོམ་དུ་འགྲོ	going to the top of the hill	ri bo'i zom du 'gro
རི་བོར་གྱི་གྲོང	mountain village	ri bor gyi grong
རི་བྱ	pheasant, turkey	ri bya
རི་བྱ་རྐང	buddhist sacred place in china	ri bya rkang
རི་བྱ་རྐང་པ་ཅན	hill in magadha	ri bya rkang pa can
རི་བྱ་སྐྱེགས	grouse 2584	ri bya skyegs
རི་བྱི	1) {ri byi} star/ rishi; 2) mt byi ba	ri byi
རི་བྱིའི་ཁྱིམ	residence of agastya	ri byi'i khyim
རི་བྲག	1) [arch] solitary place, remote	ri brag
བོརྡེར	city; 2) rocky mt; 3) mts and rocks	border
རི་བྲག་པ	city person in a remote border city	ri brag pa
རི་བྲག་ལ་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ	unhindered by mountains and rocks	ri brag la thogs pa med pa
རི་བྲག་ལ་གནས	mouse	ri brag la gnas
རི་བྲག་ལ་གནས་པ	rat	ri brag la gnas pa
རི་བྲགས	[arch] solitary place, remote	ri brags
རི་བྲགས་པ	hillman	ri brags pa
རི་དབང	lord of mts, Mt Meru	ri dbang
རི་དབང་དགུ	CHN	ri dbang dgu
རི་དབང་ལྷུན་པོ	mountain tise	ri dbang lhun po
རི་དབྲག	between mts., mt gorge	ri dbrag
རི་འབུར	small mt	ri 'bur
རི་འབུར་རང་རོང	small mt rang rong	ri 'bur rang rong
རི་འབོག	mt spur	ri 'bog
རི་མ	arid/ non-irrigated land	ri ma
རི་མ་ཐང	mound, hill	ri ma thang
རི་མ་འདབས	place neither mt or plain	ri ma 'dabs
རི་མིག	small checks or squares or enclosures made by lines crossing each other	ri mig
རི་མིན་ཕེས	PRC dollar unit, jin min pi	ri min phes
རི་མེ	Japanese-US	ri me
རི་མེའི་ལྷ་མོ	a goddess	ri me'i lha mo
རི་མོ	patterns	ri mo
རི་མོ་བསྐྱུངས	[arch] gus zhabs dor ba	ri mo bskyungs
རི་མོ་མཁན	artist	ri mo mkhan
རི་མོ་མཁས་པ	thangka/ picture painter, artist	ri mo mkhas pa
རི་མོ་འགྲེམས་སྟོན་ཚོགས་འདུ	art exhibition	ri mo 'grems ston tshogs 'du
རི་མོ་ཅན	castor oil plant, marked with figures, medicinal herb	ri mo can
རི་མོ་དེབ་ཆུང	illustrated/ picture/ comic book	ri mo deb chung
རི་མོ་ལྡན	marked with figures	ri mo ldan
རི་མོ་ནག་བྲིས	ink picture etc painted in black	ri mo nag bris
རི་མོ་པ	painter, artist	ri mo pa
རི་མོ་བ	painter, artist	ri mo ba
རི་མོ་བའི་དེབ	pictorial book	ri mo ba'i deb
རི་མོ་བྱེད	1) paint draw a picture; 2) be respectful, rim gro byed pa	ri mo byed
རི་མོ་བྱེད་པ	1) paint draw a picture; 2) be respectful, rim gro byed pa	ri mo byed pa
རི་མོ་བྲིས་མཁན	painter	ri mo bris mkhan
རི་མོ་འབྲི	paint, draw	ri mo 'bri
རི་མོ་འབྲི་བ	to paint, draw	ri mo 'bri ba
རི་མོ་དམར་སེར་ཅན	peacock	ri mo dmar ser can
རི་མོ་ཚོན་ཁྲ་ཅན	picture w various colors	ri mo tshon khra can
རི་མོ་གཟོང་གིས་བརྐོས་པ	engrave a design	ri mo gzong gis brkos pa
རི་མོ་རགས་པ	roughly painted picture	ri mo rags pa
རི་མོ་ལ་བྲིས	painted {rang gi sku gzugs ri mo la bris nas} had his portrait painted	ri mo la bris
རི་མོ་ལ་འབྲི	draw	ri mo la 'bri
རི་མོ་སུབ་པ	rub out a figure or a drawing	ri mo sub pa
རི་མོ་གསུམ་པ	neck, throat and voice	ri mo gsum pa
རི་མོའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	picture's rgyu mtshan 'god bshad	ri mo'i 'grel bshad
རི་མོའི་བཤད་པ	explanation of sa bkra'i dpe ris sogs	ri mo'i bshad pa
རི་མོར་བྱེད་པ	represent by means of figures and colors, to paint, honor, venerate	ri mor byed pa
རི་མོས་དོན་འགེལ	explanation w visual aids	ri mos don 'gel
རི་དམག	mt/ Japanese troops	ri dmag
རི་སྨན	med. [herb] from the mts	ri sman
རི་ཙིག་ལྷ་དཔང	ri dang lha dpang du btsugs nas mna' skyel ba	ri tsig lha dpang
རི་ཙེར	Indra's vajra	ri tser
རི་བཙོང	on a mt. skyes pa'i btsong	ri btsong
རི་མཙེ	mt growing {rtsva mtse}	ri mtse
རི་རྩ	bottom/ root/ foot/ base of a mt	ri rtsa
རི་རྩྭ	mt. grass	ri rtswa
རི་རྩིབས	ri ldebs su gyen thur du chags pa'i ri lag mang po	ri rtsibs
རི་རྩེ	mountain top, peak, peak of the rock	ri rtse
རི་བརྩེགས	summit of mts	ri brtsegs
རི་ཚག	hill yak, mountain yak	ri tshag
རི་ཚད	size/ height of a mt	ri tshad
རི་ཚོས	{ri tshos} herb med. = 'bri mog	ri tshos
རི་མཚམས	strict mountain retreat, retreat	ri mtshams
རི་མཚམས་ཤིག་ཚུགས	to lead a retreat	ri mtshams shig tshugs
རི་མཚོ་གླིང་གསུམ	see {brten pa ri mtsho gling gsum}	ri mtsho gling gsum
རི་ཛགས་ཕོ་མོ	a doe and a buck	ri dzags pho mo
རི་འཛིན	mountain-dweller	ri 'dzin
རི་འཛེགས	mt climbing	ri 'dzegs
རི་འཛེགས་བྱེད	climb a mt	ri 'dzegs byed
རི་འཛེགས་རུ་ཁག	mt climbing team/ expedition	ri 'dzegs ru khag
རི་འཛེགས་རུ་མི	mt climber	ri 'dzegs ru mi
རི་རྫོང	mt top castle/ fortress	ri rdzong
རི་རྫོང་སྲས་སྤྲུལ	(1860-1926? - blo bzang tshul khrims chos 'phel	ri rdzong sras sprul
ཁྲིམས་ཆོས་འཕེལ	(1860-1926?)	khrims chos 'phel
རི་ཞིང	mt side field	ri zhing
རི་ཞིམ	leopard cat, lynx	ri zhim
རི་ཞུམ	zhum bu' or cat living in the mts	ri zhum
རི་ཞོམ་འགྲམ	near the foot of the hill	ri zhom 'gram
རི་ཞོལ	lower zone of a mountain	ri zhol
རི་ཞོལ་གནས	residence on the plateau or plain at the foot of a mountain, an animal which is said to subsist on air	ri zhol gnas
རི་ཟག	Japanese gangsters	ri zag
རི་ཟུར	from a mt side 'bur du thon pa'i sne mo	ri zur
རི་ཟེ	ridge	ri ze
རི་ཟོམ	1) mt peak; 2) ri'i khong gseng ngam brag skyibs	ri zom
རི་ཟོར	brnga bya'i ri rtsva dang, rnga byed kyi zor chung	ri zor
རི་ཟོར་ག་འཛོལ	individual people's power and actions ga phyi log pa'i dpe	ri zor ga 'dzol
རི་གཟར	steep mt	ri gzar
རི་གཟར་གྱི་ངོས	steep declivity, cliff	ri gzar gyi ngos
རི་གཟར་གྱི་ཆུ	waterfall plunging down from a steep mountain	ri gzar gyi chu
རི་གཟར་ཆུ	waterfall, cascade on rocks	ri gzar chu
རི་གཟར་པོ	steep and rugged hill	ri gzar po
རི་གཟར་རྦབ་རྡོ	rock rolling down a mt., irreversibility	ri gzar rbab rdo
རི་གཟེར་གྱི་འབབ་ཆུ	a waterfall	ri gzer gyi 'bab chu
རི་འོར་བ	people living in the neighborhood of mountains and forests	ri 'or ba
རི་ཡི་རྐང་པ	small mt	ri yi rkang pa
རི་ཡི་ཁུ་བ	stream flowing from a mt peak	ri yi khu ba
རི་ཡི་ཁྱི་སེར	predator 'phar ba, large wild dog	ri yi khyi ser
རི་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Mt Meru	ri yi rgyal po
རི་ཡི་ངོས	mountain slope 2585	ri yi ngos
རི་ཡི་སྙིང་པོ	iron	ri yi snying po
རི་ཡི་ཐོད་ཅན	great ocean	ri yi thod can
རི་ཡི་རྣ་བ་ཅན	the earth	ri yi rna ba can
རི་ཡི་སྤོ	1) mt peak; 2) ri'i sgang ngam steng	ri yi spo
རི་ཡི་ཕུར་བུ་ཅན	the earth	ri yi phur bu can
རི་ཡི་ཕྲེང	medicinal fruit, the kalika plant	ri yi phreng
རི་ཡི་གཙུག་ཏོར	mt peak	ri yi gtsug tor
རི་ཡི་གཞུ་སྐྱེས	lha dbang phyug	ri yi gzhu skyes
རི་ཡི་འོད་ཅན	great ocean	ri yi 'od can
རི་ཡི་རུས་སྦལ	a dye	ri yi rus sbal
རི་ཡི་གཤམ་འོག	roots of mts	ri yi gsham 'og
རི་ཡི་སྲས་མོ	goddess Uma	ri yi sras mo
རི་ཡིག་སྐྱེས	deva, mt.	ri yig skyes
རི་ཡིག་བུ	deva, mt	ri yig bu
རི་རྭ	peak/ horn of a mt	ri rwa
རི་རབ	Mt Meru/ Sumeru	ri rab
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་ཁོང་སེར	interior of Mount Sumeru	ri rab kyi khong ser
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་ཁོང་གསེང	Mount Sumeru's interior cavities	ri rab kyi khong gseng
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་སྟེང་ན་གནས	live at the top of Mount Sumeru	ri rab kyi steng na gnas
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་བང་རིམ	terraces of Mount Sumeru	ri rab kyi bang rim
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་བང་རིམ་དང་པོ	1st terrace of Mt Meru	ri rab kyi bang rim dang po
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་བང་རིམ་བཞི	the fourth terrace of Mount Sumeru	ri rab kyi bang rim bzhi
རི་རབ་ཀྱི་རི་ཕྲན	a smaller peak of the mountain sumeru	ri rab kyi ri phran
རི་རབ་གྱི་ཟོམ	summit of the ri rab	ri rab gyi zom
རི་རབ་ལྟུན་པོ	the world mountain	ri rab ltun po
རི་རབ་དང་རི་བདུན་མཚོ་བདུན	Mount Sumeru, the seven mountains and the seven lakes	ri rab dang ri bdun mtsho bdun
རི་རབ་ཕྱོགས་མདོག་ཅན	the colored sides of Mt Meru	ri rab phyogs mdog can
རི་རབ་བང་རིམ་བཞིའི་སྟེང་མ	the fourth terrace of Mount Sumeru	ri rab bang rim bzhi'i steng ma
རི་རབ་མི་གྱོ་བ	motionless Mt Meru ri rab mi g.yo ba - unmoving Mount Sumeru	ri rab mi gyo ba
རི་རབ་ཙམ	like sumeru in height, large as mount meru	ri rab tsam
རི་རབ་ལྷུན་པོ	Mount Sumeru. The mythological giant mountain at the	ri rab lhun po
ཅེནཏེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོཨུར་ཝོརལད	system surrounded by the four continents, where the two lowest classes of gods of the Desire Realm live. It is encircled by chains of lesser mountains, lakes, continents, and oceans and is said to ...	center of our world
ལེཨགུཨེས་ཨབོབེ༹་སེཨ	level	leagues above sea
རི་རབས་ཀྱི་བང་རིམ	the layers/ terraces of Mt Meru	ri rabs kyi bang rim
རི་རི་བྱེད	wag [tail]	ri ri byed
རི་ལ	on the mountain	ri la
རི་ལ་སྐྱེས	born in the mountain	ri la skyes
རི་ལ་ཆགས་པ	takes to the mountains	ri la chags pa
རི་ལ་གནས་པ	living in mts, garuda, naga	ri la gnas pa
རི་ལ་འཕྱོ་དགུ	wild animals of the field	ri la 'phyo dgu
རི་ལ་འཛེག་མཁན	mountaineer	ri la 'dzeg mkhan
རི་ལ་འཛེག་པ	ascend a hill	ri la 'dzeg pa
རི་ལས་སྐྱེས	coming from mts. gold, tson zhig, goddess Uma	ri las skyes
རི་ལི	RR	ri li
རི་ལིའི་ཁང་པ	RR carriage/ compartment	ri li'i khang pa
རི་ལིའི་མགོ	locomotive	ri li'i mgo
རི་ལིའི་ལྕགས་ལམ	RR rails	ri li'i lcags lam
རི་ལིའི་ཏི་སིན	RR station	ri li'i ti sin
རི་ལིའི་བབས་ས	RR station	ri li'i babs sa
རི་ལིའི་ཨ་མ	locomotive	ri li'i a ma
རི་ལུ	little lump	ri lu
རི་ལུང	mt and valley	ri lung
རི་ལོགས	a mountainside	ri logs
རི་ཤ་བྷ	[Skt] 5th month	ri sha bha
རི་ཤའི་ལྕེ་འདྲ	sha ro dbus dma' zhing mtha' mtho ba srog chags ri sha'i lce 'dra bar 'byung ba'i mdze nad cig	ri sha'i lce 'dra
རི་ཤི	sage	ri shi
རི་ཤུར	ravine	ri shur
རི་ཤོ	ri sho thang sman	ri sho
རི་གཤམ	the foot of a mt	ri gsham
རི་གཤམ་ནས་ཡར་ཡོང་བ	of the mountain	ri gsham nas yar yong ba
རི་སུག	herb ri sug	ri sug
རི་སུག་གི་རིགས	herb of the kind ri sug	ri sug gi rigs
རི་སུལ	1) [valley] among the mts; 2) not natural, made by shva 'od etc. gad pa dog mo'am grog shur	ri sul
རི་སུལ་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	town in a lateral valley	ri sul gyi grong khyer
རི་སུལ་གཅིག་ན	in the mts	ri sul gcig na
རི་སྲིབ	hill side not exposed to sun, shady side, generally the north and nw sides of a mountain	ri srib
རི་སྲུང་བ	ri'i btsan sa/ dur khor guard	ri srung ba
རི་གསེབ	among the mts	ri gseb
རི་བསང	on mt peak btang ba'i bsang	ri bsang
རི་བསང་ཀླུང་སྐྱེད	dbang thang klung rta yar ldan du gso phyi gnas ri sogs grags ldan gyi ri mgo btho sar bsangs gsur gser skyems sogs gtong ba dang klun gskyed cod pan dar cog 'dzugs pa'i yul srol zhig	ri bsang klung skyed
རི་བསླབ་བྱ	teachings on mountain retreat	ri bslab bya
རི་ཧན	Japan and S Korea	ri han
རི་ཧན་ཆིངས་ཡིག	Japan S Korea Treaty	ri han chings yig
རིག	1) see; 2) intelligence, learning ability; 3) recognizing their, awareness, insight, cognition, knowledge,know, be aware; 4) science, vidya, learned, knowledge; 5) logic, logical deduction; 6) mant...	rig
རིག་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་བདག	universal master of knowledge/ the sciences	rig kun khyab bdag
རིག་ཀློང	state of rigpa	rig klong
རིག་མཁན	learned person, scholar	rig mkhan
རིག་གི་ཤེས་པ	noetic	rig gi shes pa
རིག་གེ	{rig ge ba} wakeful	rig ge
རིག་གེ་བ	wakeful	rig ge ba
རིག་གྲོལ	visual liberation	rig grol
རིག་གྲོལ་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱད	CHN	rig grol gyi yon tan brgyad
རིག་གྲོལ་དགེ་འདུན	the sangha, its intellect and liberation	rig grol dge 'dun
རིག་དགའ	happiness of wisdom	rig dga'
རིག་རྒྱུད	source of learning, intelligence, character	rig rgyud
རིག་ངོ	essence of rigpa	rig ngo
རིག་ངོར	before the face of pure presence, awareness state	rig ngor
རིག་ལྔ	five enlightened families [of Yogatantra]	rig lnga
རིག་སྔགས	knowledge mantra, gnostic mantras, mantra, syllables of esoteric meaning and power, magic arts. intrinsic awareness mantra; those of the Outer Tantras	rig sngags
ཨོཨུཏེར	tantras Book 2, p, deity's buddha activity and thugs rdo rje shes rab chiefly accomplishing mantra, deity w a woman's form &, de stong pa'i word and mantras etc.]	outer
རིག་སྔགས་མཁན	person skilled in charms, exorcist	rig sngags mkhan
རིག་སྔགས་འཆང	mount sumeru	rig sngags 'chang
རིག་སྔགས་འཆང་ཆེན་པོ	the greatest of	rig sngags 'chang chen po
རིག་སྔགས་འཆང་བ	Vidya-mantra-dhara	rig sngags 'chang ba
རིག་སྔགས་སྤྱིའི་སྒྲུབ་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the General Accomplishment of Knowledge Mantras. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras. Also named Galpo Düpa (gal po bsdus pa)	rig sngags spyi'i sgrub lugs kyi rgyud
རིག་སྔགས་འཛིན་པ	1) hold mastery of the mantra path; 2) hold the tantras in mind	rig sngags 'dzin pa
རིག་ཅན	learned man, intelligent person	rig can
རིག་གཅིག་རྐང་འཛིན	specialist	rig gcig rkang 'dzin
རིག་གཅིག་རྐང་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	specialize	rig gcig rkang 'dzin byed pa
རིག་བཅོས	self-made, khungs med tu bcos	rig bcos
རིག་ཆ	the aware aspect, the aspect of awareness, the quality of being aware, cognizant, the cognizant aspect, abbr. of {rig pa'i cha} Syn {gdangs cha}; on the side of awareness	rig cha
རིག་ཆད་པ	cut-off family	rig chad pa
རིག་ཆུང་ལྔ	five minor families of Yoga tantra	rig chung lnga
རིག་རྗེན་ལ་ཕུད་པ	to elicit awareness in all its nakedness; awareness bursting forth in all its nakedess	rig rjen la phud pa
རིག་གཏད	knowledge-entrustment. Syn {rig pa gtad pa}	rig gtad
རིག་བཏང	pondered	rig btang
རིག་སྟོང	insight/ awareness and emptiness	rig stong
རིག་སྟོང་ཀ་དག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	primordially pure wisdom of aware emptiness, the wisdom of primally pure empty awareness	rig stong ka dag gi ye shes
རིག་སྟོང་ཆོས་སྐུའི་གོ་འཕང	insight/ awareness and emptiness the level of dharmakaya	rig stong chos sku'i go 'phang
རིག་སྟོང་ཆོས་སྐུའི་འོད	luminosity of insight-emptiness dharmakaya	rig stong chos sku'i 'od
རིག་སྟོང་རྗེན་པ	naked void awareness	rig stong rjen pa
རིག་སྟོང་གཉིས་མེད	non-duality of the noetic act and nothingness	rig stong gnyis med
རིག་སྟོང་དོན་གྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	the true Vajrasattva of aware emptiness	rig stong don gyi rdo rje sems dpa'
རིག་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparable insight/ mind/ awareness and emptiness	rig stong dbyer med
རིག་སྟོང་རྫོགས་ཆེན་གྱི་ངང	state of awareness and emptiness according to Dzogchen	rig stong rdzogs chen gyi ngang
རིག་སྟོང་ཟང་ཐལ	unimpeded empty awareness; complete transparence of awareness	rig stong zang thal
རིག་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of being aware and empty, inseparability/ union/ interpenetration of awareness/ insight and emptiness	rig stong zung 'jug
རིག་སྟོབས	power of prajna/ intellect	rig stobs
རིག་སྟོབས་འཕེལ་རྒྱས	developing power of prajna/ intellect	rig stobs 'phel rgyas
རིག་ཐོག	direct awareness	rig thog
རིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཀློད་པ	relax in that state of awareness	rig thog tu klod pa
རིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་གྲོལ་བ	liberating through insight	rig thog tu grol ba
རིག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ངོ་སྤྲད་པ	upon awareness	rig thog tu ngo sprad pa
རིག་དང་མ་རིག	recognition or nonrecognition of awareness	rig dang ma rig
རིག་དྲུག	six enlightened families of Kriy tantra 2587	rig drug
རིག་གདངས	manifestation/ reflection of insight/awareness re *{thod rgal}*	rig gdangs
རིག་གདངས་སྐད་ཅིག	instantaneous state of the gdangs energy of rigpa	rig gdangs skad cig
རིག་གདངས་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	the gdangs energy of instantaneous rigpa	rig gdangs skad cig ma
རིག་གདངས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	vajra continuum of radiance of intrinsic awareness	rig gdangs rdo rje lu gu rgyud
རིག་མདངས	awareness-display	rig mdangs
རིག་མདངས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	Syn {shes rab rang byung gi sgron ma} vajra	rig mdangs rdo rje lu gu rgyud
ཆཻན་ཨོཕ༹་ཨཝརེནེསས	display	chain of awareness
རིག་འདེད	depending on 1 main point another connected point dran te bsam blo gtong pa	rig 'ded
རིག་འདོད	desire to gain	rig 'dod
རིག་ལྡན	knowledgeable, intelligent	rig ldan
རིག་སྡོམ	1) tshad ma blo rig gi sdom tshig; 2) #	rig sdom
རིག་ནས	knowing or having known	rig nas
རིག་གནལ	science	rig gnal
རིག་གནས	culture, science, knowable topic	rig gnas
རིག་གནས་ཀུན་འཇོམས་ཀྱི་དེབ	encyclopedia	rig gnas kun 'joms kyi deb
རིག་གནས་ཀུན་འཛོམས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་དེབ	encyclopedia	rig gnas kun 'dzoms kyi dpe deb
རིག་གནས་ཀུན་འཛོམས་དཔེ་དེབ	encyclopedia	rig gnas kun 'dzoms dpe deb
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་དངོས་རྫས	cultural/ study materials/ things	rig gnas kyi dngos rdzas
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག	master of culture/ science	rig gnas kyi mnga' bdag
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་ཆུ་ཚད	cultural level	rig gnas kyi chu tshad
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	cultural front	rig gnas kyi 'thab phyogs
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས	[informal] external knowledge	rig gnas kyi phyogs
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་བཙན་འཛུལ	cultural aggression	rig gnas kyi btsan 'dzul
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	culture/ academic/ scholarly [texts, tradition]	rig gnas kyi gzhung
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་བཞག་པ	cultural heritage	rig gnas kyi bzhag pa
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་ཆས	cultural/ study materials/ things	rig gnas kyi yo chas
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	cultural/ study materials/ things	rig gnas kyi yo byad
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཚད	cultural level	rig gnas kyi yon tshad
རིག་གནས་ཀྱི་གསར་བརྗེ	cultural revolution rig gnas kyi gsar brje'i 'thus mi'i tshogs	rig gnas kyi gsar brje
རིག་གནས་སྐུ་ཚབ་ཚོགས་པ	cultural delegation	rig gnas sku tshab tshogs pa
རིག་གནས་ཁང	cultural center	rig gnas khang
རིག་གནས་མཁས་པ	scholar	rig gnas mkhas pa
རིག་གནས་ལྔ	Five Traditional Sciences. Grammar, logic, craftsmanship, healing, and spirituality	rig gnas lnga
རིག་གནས་བཅུ	10 sciences (gso ba rig pa, sgra rig pa, tshad ma rig, gtan tshig rig, bzo rig pa)	rig gnas bcu
རིག་གནས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	rig gnas bco brgyad
རིག་གནས་ཆུང་ལྔ	five minor sciences	rig gnas chung lnga
རིག་གནས་ཆུང་བ་ལྔ	the five minor sciences	rig gnas chung ba lnga
རིག་གནས་ཆེ་བ་ལྔ	the five major sciences	rig gnas che ba lnga
རིག་གནས་ཆེན་བ་ལྔ	CHN	rig gnas chen ba lnga
རིག་གནས་ཆེན་བ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	CHN	rig gnas chen ba bco brgyad
རིག་གནས་གཉིས་པ	the two sciences	rig gnas gnyis pa
རིག་གནས་རྙིང་པ	old culture	rig gnas rnying pa
རིག་གནས་འཐུས་མིའི་ཚོགས་པ	cultural delegation	rig gnas 'thus mi'i tshogs pa
རིག་གནས་པ	scholar	rig gnas pa
རིག་གནས་པུའུ	Department/ Ministry of Culture	rig gnas pu'u
རིག་གནས་སྤེལ་རེས	cultural exchange	rig gnas spel res
རིག་གནས་ཕོ་བྲང	cultural palace	rig gnas pho brang
རིག་གནས་སྦྱོང	study [culture]	rig gnas sbyong
རིག་གནས་ཚན་ཁག	liberal arts, humanities	rig gnas tshan khag
རིག་གནས་ལ་མཁས་པ	pundit	rig gnas la mkhas pa
རིག་གནས་སློབ་གསོ	culture and education	rig gnas slob gso
རིག་གནས་སློབ་གསོའི་ལས་ཁུངས	cultural and educational institution	rig gnas slob gso'i las khungs
རིག་གནས་སློབ་གསོའི་ལས་འགུལ	culture and education work	rig gnas slob gso'i las 'gul
རིག་གནས་གསར་བརྗེ	cultural revolution	rig gnas gsar brje
རིག་གནས་གསར་བརྗེའི་ལས་འགུལ	modern cultural movement	rig gnas gsar brje'i las 'gul
རིག་རྣམ་གཉིས	2-fold buddha or enlightened family	rig rnam gnyis
རིག་སྣ	subject rig sna kun dzoms kyi slob grwa che ba university	rig sna
རིག་སྣ་ཛོམས་པའི་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ	university	rig sna dzoms pa'i slob grwa che ba
རིག་སྣང	visions of rigpa	rig snang
རིག་པ	1.(Tha mi dad pa) ; 1) seeing [mdun lam rig pa,//mun nang gang yang mi rig pa,//mig gis dngos su rig pa,//yid mi dga' bar rig pa,//rang gi ngo yi gyag mi rig gzhan gyi mgo yi shig rig pa]; 2) rtogs...	rig pa
བ༹ལུཨེ	sustained, pure non-dual) awareness, noetic act, pure sensation, information input, cognition, cognitive (capacity, being), energetic charge, intrinsic perception, science, SA rtogs pa'i rig pa, th...	value
ཀནོཝིང་ཨིན	a-flash, state of contemplation, intelligence, true condition of the mind of the individual, conscious mind, to notice, to recognize, to see, discovering, discovers, real knowledge, recognition	knowing in
རིག་པ་ཀ་དག	primordial purity of rigpa	rig pa ka dag
རིག་པ་ཀུན་བཟང	Rigpa Samantabhadra	rig pa kun bzang
རིག་པ་ཀུན་ལ་མཁས་པར་གྱུར་ཅིང	became wise in all ways	rig pa kun la mkhas par gyur cing
རིག་པ་དཀར་ཤམ	pure intelligence	rig pa dkar sham
རིག་པ་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	state of instant rigpa	rig pa skad cig ma
རིག་པ་ཁ་ཡན་དུ་ཀློད	unbridled awareness. open the eye of insight. letting be whatever arises in mind	rig pa kha yan du klod
རིག་པ་ཁུ་བྱུག་གི་ལུང	Awareness Cuckoo Scripture. A tantra belonging the Mind Section of the Great Perfection. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	rig pa khu byug gi lung
རིག་པ་གུ་ཡངས	{rig pa gu yangs yan pa blo bde} a vast, free, and serene awareness	rig pa gu yangs
རིག་པ་གོ་སྡུར་བྱེད་པ	compare attainments among scholars	rig pa go sdur byed pa
རིག་པ་གྲིམས་པ	be careful, on the alert, intelligent, SA grung po	rig pa grims pa
རིག་པ་འགྲིམས་པ	failing in intellect, growing foolish	rig pa 'grims pa
རིག་པ་སྒྱུ་རྟལ་སྤྱོད་པ	grown up, na tshod dar la babs pa	rig pa sgyu rtal spyod pa
རིག་པ་སྒྲིམ	concentrate, put all 1 has into something	rig pa sgrim
རིག་པ་སྒྲིམ་ཚད	attention span	rig pa sgrim tshad
རིག་པ་སྒྲིམས	steady attention	rig pa sgrims
རིག་པ་སྒྲོན་མ	light of the state of presence of min	rig pa sgron ma
རིག་པ་བརྒྱལ	to lose consciousness, to faint	rig pa brgyal
རིག་པ་བསྒྲིམས	concentrate, put all 1 has into something	rig pa bsgrims
རིག་པ་ངར	forceful insight	rig pa ngar
རིག་པ་ངོ་སྤྲོད	direct introduction to intrinsic awareness	rig pa ngo sprod
རིག་པ་ངོ་སྤྲོད་ཅེར་མཐོང་རང་གྲོལ་སེལཕ༹	liberated Direct Seeing that Points Out the Awareness	rig pa ngo sprod cer mthong rang grol Self
རིག་པ་ངོ་སྤྲོད་གཅེར་མཐོང་རང་གྲོལ་སེལཕ༹	liberation through Awareness Seen in its Nakedness, from the Selfliberated Wisdom Mind {zab chos zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol} revealed by Karma Lingpa. Self-liberated Direct Seeing that Points Out...	rig pa ngo sprod gcer mthong rang grol Self
རིག་པ་ངོས་ཟིན	recognize the mind	rig pa ngos zin
རིག་པ་ཅན	logician	rig pa can
རིག་པ་ཅན་པ	logician	rig pa can pa
རིག་པ་ཅོག་གཞག	freely resting awareness	rig pa cog gzhag
རིག་པ་ཅོག་གཞག་གི་མན་ངག	instruction of the freely resting awareness	rig pa cog gzhag gi man ngag
རིག་པ་ཅོག་བཞག	freely resting awareness [one of the {cog bzhag gsum}, 3fold "freely resting"]	rig pa cog bzhag
རིག་པ་གཅིག་པུ	unique state of instant presence	rig pa gcig pu
རིག་པ་གཅེར་མཐོང	Awareness Seen in its Nakedness, See {rig pa ngo sprod gcer mthong rang grol} Self-liberation Through Awareness Seen in its Nakedness	rig pa gcer mthong
རིག་པ་གཅེར་བུ	naked Awareness	rig pa gcer bu
རིག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	intelligent	rig pa chen po
རིག་པ་མཆོག	Unexcelled Knowledge (vidyottama)	rig pa mchog
རིག་པ་མཆོག་གི་རྒྱུད	Supreme Knowledge Tantra, Skt. Vidyottama Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	rig pa mchog gi rgyud
རིག་པ་རྗེན་པ	naked insight; naked Awareness	rig pa rjen pa
རིག་པ་རྙེད	get an idea	rig pa rnyed
རིག་པ་རྟུལ་ཞུགས	Awareness discipline. Action free from accepting and rejecting	rig pa rtul zhugs
རིག་པ་རྟོག་མེད	conceptionless awareness, awareness/ insight w/o discursive thoughts	rig pa rtog med
རིག་པ་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	awareness-discipline 2589	rig pa brtul zhugs
རིག་པ་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་སྤྱོད་པ་གྱིས	perform the yogic discipline of insight	rig pa brtul zhugs spyod pa gyis
རིག་པ་ཐལ་འབྱིན	penetrating insight	rig pa thal 'byin
རིག་པ་ཐུག་ཕྲད	the direct encounter that is awareness	rig pa thug phrad
རིག་པ་ཐོལ་སྐྱེས	the wisdom of realization suddenly/ spontaneously arising/ blossoming	rig pa thol skyes
རིག་པ་ཐོལ་སྐྱེས་སུ་འཁྲུངས	the sudden, spontaneous birth of awareness	rig pa thol skyes su 'khrungs
རིག་པ་དང་ལྡན	rich in knowledge, learned	rig pa dang ldan
རིག་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	talented rig pa dang dpa' rtsal rnams sbyangs grew to be intelligent, strong, and heroic	rig pa dang ldan pa
རིག་པ་དང་ཞབས་སུ་ལྡན་པ	(bity'atsarnasampanna: qualities of the buddhas greatness, rig pa = enlightenment and zhabs su ldan pa = possessing the bslab pa gsum, depending on that actually attaining enlightenment	rig pa dang zhabs su ldan pa
རིག་པ་དངས་གསལ	clear-minded, intelligent	rig pa dangs gsal
རིག་པ་དྭངས	clear sense of presence	rig pa dwangs
རིག་པ་དབ༹ངས	awareness is crisp	rig pa dvangs
རིག་པ་དབ༹ངས་པ	your mind becomes clear	rig pa dvangs pa
རིག་པ་དྭངས་གསལ	very clear/ luminous insight/awareness	rig pa dwangs gsal
རིག་པ་དོགས་ནས	became suspicious	rig pa dogs nas
རིག་པ་མདའ་བསྣུན	bon religious work	rig pa mda' bsnun
རིག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	the vajra chains of awareness, vajra continuum of intrinsic awareness	rig pa rdo rje lu gu rgyud
རིག་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	vajra chains of awareness	rig pa rdo rje'i lu gu rgyud
རིག་པ་ལྡན་པའི་གནས	residence of a hero	rig pa ldan pa'i gnas
རིག་པ་ནམ་མཁར་གཏད	sky gazing	rig pa nam mkhar gtad
རིག་པ་རྣོ་པོ	wise, intelligent, bright, clever, sagacious	rig pa rno po
རིག་པ་རྣོ་བ	versatile intellect, excellent wisdom	rig pa rno ba
རིག་པ་པོ	knower	rig pa po
རིག་པ་དཔངས་བསྟོད	let your awareness become heightened	rig pa dpangs bstod
རིག་པ་སྤྱི་བླུགས	{rig pa spyi blugs} [by	rig pa spyi blugs
གརབ་ཌོརྗེ	the immediacy of total awareness, 1 of the *{'jog thabs gnyis po}* = two Methods of Absortion]	Garab Dorje
རིག་པ་སྤྱི་ལུགས	the immediacy of total awareness, One of {'jog thabs gnyis}	rig pa spyi lugs
རིག་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	one's rigpabodhicitta	rig pa byang chub sems
རིག་པ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of the dimension of awareness	rig pa dbyings kyi sgron ma
རིག་པ་མ་སྨིན་པ	immature awareness	rig pa ma smin pa
རིག་པ་མི་གསལ	ignorant, unclear mind/ awareness	rig pa mi gsal
རིག་པ་མེད	denial of the fact of intrinsic awareness	rig pa med
རིག་པ་དམའ་བ	inferior intelligence	rig pa dma' ba
རིག་པ་རྩལ་གྱི་དབང	empowerment of awareness display	rig pa rtsal gyi dbang
རིག་པ་རྩལ་ཆེན་གྱི་ལུང	Great Strength of Awareness Scripture. A tantra belonging the Mind Section of the Great Perfection. A tantra with similar title is found in Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	rig pa rtsal chen gyi lung
རིག་པ་ཚད་ཕེབ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	vision of the increasing to the full measure of awareness	rig pa tshad pheb kyi snang ba
རིག་པ་ཚད་ཕེབས	reaching culmination of awareness, culminated awareness, Perfection of Awareness	rig pa tshad phebs
རིག་པ་ཚད་ཕེབས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the visionary appearance of reaching the	rig pa tshad phebs kyi snang ba
ལིམིཏ་ཨོཕ༹་ཨཝརེནེསས	- vision of awareness reaching fullness- culminated Awareness [snang ba bzhi'i nang gses, 'od kyi thig le sku ru smin pa rig pa tshad du phebs pas sku gsum rtogs pa'i lam snang]	limit of awareness
རེཨཆིང་ཕུ༹ལལནེསས	culminated Awareness	reaching fullness
རིག་པ་ཚད་ཕེབས་སྣང་བ	vision of reaching the limit of awareness	rig pa tshad phebs snang ba
རིག་པ་ཚད་འཕེབས	ripening of vision	rig pa tshad 'phebs
རིག་པ་ཚབ་ཕེབས	awareness reaching its greatest magnitude	rig pa tshab phebs
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པ	wisdom of mahasukha = rig pa, grasping that by profound upaya is rig pa 'dzin pa	rig pa 'dzin pa
ཀནོཝླེདགེ	holder, holder of intrinsic awareness	knowledge
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three Kinds of {Mundane Awareness-Holder	rig pa 'dzin pa rnam gsum
ཨརེ་ཐེ་ལེསསེར་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder of the eight common accomplishments {chen brgyad grub pa rig pa 'dzin pa chung ngu} the middling common awarenessholder of the desire realm {'bring ni 'dod pa'i rig pa 'dzin pa phal pa} and	are the lesser awareness
ཐེ་གྲེཨཏེར་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder of the desire and form realms {chen po ni 'dod pa dang gzugs kyi rig pa 'dzin pa}	the greater awareness
མིདདླིང་ཅོམམོན་ཨཝརེནེསས	holder of the desire realm *{'bring ni 'dod pa'i rig pa 'dzin pa phal pa}* and the greater	middling common awareness
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of vidyadharas	rig pa 'dzin pa gsum
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vidyadhara vehicle	rig pa 'dzin pa'i theg pa
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པའི་སྡེ་སྣོད	vidyadhara pitaka	rig pa 'dzin pa'i sde snod
རིག་པ་འཛིན་པའི་ས་བཞི	[TRS 45-3] rig pa gzhi thog tu phebs pa la 'khor ba ming tsam du'ang ma grub pas rgyu 'bras rnam smin la ma re ba'i gdeng The assurance that one does not have to aspire towards the maturation of th...	rig pa 'dzin pa'i sa bzhi
རིག་པ་ཟང་ཐལ་གྱི་ངང	the state of directly penetrating Awareness	rig pa zang thal gyi ngang
རིག་པ་ཟབ་པོ	don gnad la bsam blo gting zab gtong thub pa'am, hard for others to realize rig pa	rig pa zab po
རིག་པ་འི་ཡེ་ཤེས	awareness wisdom	rig pa 'i ye shes
རིག་པ་ཡངས་པ	intellectual, very intelligent	rig pa yangs pa
རིག་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས	intrinsic awareness, primordial wisdom,	rig pa ye shes
ཨིནསིགྷཏ	wisdom, awareness of primordial wisdom, wisdom of rigpa, 1 of phur pa bzhi	insight
རིག་པ་རང་གྲོལ	the Natural Liberation of Awareness	rig pa rang grol
རིག་པ་རང་གྲོལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Selfliberated Awareness. This scripture teaches how awareness is uncreated but is liberated by itself, how to control appearances, to grow familiar with the vajra chain, and to naturally ...	rig pa rang grol gyi rgyud
རིག་པ་རང་ངོ་སྤྲད་པ	introducing the awareness of 1's own nature	rig pa rang ngo sprad pa
རིག་པ་རང་གནས	self sustaining immediate Awareness	rig pa rang gnas
རིག་པ་རང་སྣང་གི་བློ་ཅན	one whose	rig pa rang snang gi blo can
མིནད་སྟཏེ་ཨིས་ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	manifest awareness	mind state is one of self
རིག་པ་རང་བྱུང་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	self-existing wisdom of awareness	rig pa rang byung gi ye shes
རིག་པ་རང་རྩལ་ཤར་བ	major klong sde tantra	rig pa rang rtsal shar ba
རིག་པ་རང་ཤར	self-arising insight/the Natural Arising of Awareness	rig pa rang shar
རིག་པ་རང་ཤར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Selfarising Awareness / Tantra of Selfmanifest Awareness. This scripture teaches how to resolve the view, meditation and action	rig pa rang shar gyi rgyud
རིག་པ་ལོངས་སྐུ	TSE	rig pa longs sku
རིག་པ་གཤིས་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕེབ་པ	awareness reassuming its essence	rig pa gshis thog tu pheb pa
རིག་པ་གཤིས་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཕེབས	awareness resuming its essence	rig pa gshis thog tu phebs
རིག་པ་སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་སོ་གཟུང་བ	let your awareness take hold of the natural state of mind	rig pa sems kyi rang so gzung ba
རིག་པ་སློང་བ	{rig pa lhong ba} challenge to one's recognition of awareness	rig pa slong ba
རིག་པ་གསར་བ	new information, disclosures, knowledge, news	rig pa gsar ba
རིག་པ་གསལ	clear rigpa	rig pa gsal
རིག་པ་གསལ་འདེབས	to remind of awareness	rig pa gsal 'debs
རིག་པ་གསལ་ལ་མ་གསལ	rig pa w/o its real essence	rig pa gsal la ma gsal
རིག་པ་གསུམ	three knowledges [last three of {mngon shes drug} or of {stobs bcu}. 1) {sngon gyi gnas shes pa} knowledge of past lives. 2) {'chi 'pho ba dang skye ba shes pa} knowledge of the process of death an...	rig pa gsum
རིག་པ་གསུམ་གསལ་བ	the Three Knowledges	rig pa gsum gsal ba
རིག་པ་བསླབ་པ	teaching of the sciences, 1 of 3 bka' drin, education, teaching of arts and sciences	rig pa bslab pa
རིག་པ་བསླབས་པ	teaching the ways of	rig pa bslabs pa
རིག་པ་ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་སྒྲིམ	to make the awareness clear, to be clear, to ignite, shake up, revitalize the awareness. Syn {gsal po byed pa}	rig pa hril gyis sgrim
རིག་པ་ལྷོང་བ	{rig pa slong ba} challenge to one's recognition of awareness	rig pa lhong ba
རིག་པའམ་མ་ཡིན་མ	rig pa'am ma yin pa'i rig pa: dge ba zag bcas dang ma bsgribs neutral and mtshungs par ldan pa'i rig pa'o	rig pa'am ma yin ma
རིག་པའི་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	Awareness Samantabhadra. In sadhana practice is an ornamented bodhisattva in the form	rig pa'i kun tu bzang po
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བོདཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཀརྨིཅ་རིཔེནིང་ཨོཕ༹་སམསརིཅ་ཨེགོ	clinging. He stands with the legs parallel and has joined the palms of his hands.	of the body of karmic ripening of samsaric ego
རིག་པའི་ཀློང	rigpa dimension	rig pa'i klong
རིག་པའི་ཀློང་རྡོལ་བ	inspiration	rig pa'i klong rdol ba
རིག་པའི་སྐུ་ལྔ	five kayas of rigpa	rig pa'i sku lnga
རིག་པའི་ཁུ་བྱུག	1 of 5 earlier translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, earlier translated sems sde tantra, 1 of snga 'gyur lnga	rig pa'i khu byug
རིག་པའི་འགྲོས	rig pa'i 'gro stangs sam 'gro ba'i tshul zhig	rig pa'i 'gros
རིག་པའི་རྒྱན	{rig pa'i rgyan} [by the shravaka bhikshu bde byad zer ba theg chen sna 'byin pa'i text of 1,200,000 shlokas]	rig pa'i rgyan
རིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	majestic awareness, prince of learning, science, supreme rigpa	rig pa'i rgyal po
རིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་བདུན	TSE	rig pa'i rgyal po bdun
རིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་གཙོ་བོ་རྣམས	designation of the chief gods of learning	rig pa'i rgyal po'i gtso bo rnams
རིག་པའི་རྒྱལ་མོ	a goddess, goddesses or queens of learning	rig pa'i rgyal mo
རིག་པའི་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	magical display of awareness	rig pa'i sgyu 'phrul
རིག་པའི་ངང	state of rigpa	rig pa'i ngang
རིག་པའི་ཅོག་བཞག	1 of cog bzhag, relaxed and uncorrected state of the presence of the mind	rig pa'i cog bzhag
རིག་པའི་ཆ	the cognitive aspect [short *{rig cha}*]	rig pa'i cha
རིག་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	core of awareness	rig pa'i snying po
རིག་པའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	[are] the quintessence of insight	rig pa'i snying po can
རིག་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	logical conclusions	rig pa'i gtan tshigs
རིག་པའི་རྟེན	receptacle of the soul, the body	rig pa'i rten
རིག་པའི་རྟོག་མེད	nonconceptual state of insight	rig pa'i rtog med
རིག་པའི་ཐིགས་པ	Nyaya-bindu	rig pa'i thigs pa
རིག་པའི་ཐེགས་པ	the Nyaya-bindu [on logic by Dharmakirti]	rig pa'i thegs pa
རིག་པའི་གདངས	Dang energy of rigpa	rig pa'i gdangs
རིག་པའི་མདངས	radiant insight, the radiance of awareness	rig pa'i mdangs
རིག་པའི་ནུས་པ	creative/ energetic potential of awareness	rig pa'i nus pa
རིག་པའི་གནས	science	rig pa'i gnas
རིག་པའི་གནས་ཀུན་མཁས་པར་གྱུར	became both learned and wise	rig pa'i gnas kun mkhas par gyur
རིག་པའི་གནས་ལྔ	Five branches of science; the five sciences, the five branches of traditional Buddhist learning. 1) {nang gi rig pa} spiritual philosophy. 2) {gtan tshigs kyi rig pa} dialectics / logic, 3) {sgra'i...	rig pa'i gnas lnga
རིག་པའི་གནས་ལྔ་ལ་མཁས་པ	has mastered the five sciences	rig pa'i gnas lnga la mkhas pa
རིག་པའི་གནས་བཅུ	10 Sciences [Arts, grammar, medicine, logic, Buddhism, astrology, poetics, prosody, synonymics, and drama]	rig pa'i gnas bcu
རིག་པའི་གནས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 65-1]	rig pa'i gnas bco brgyad
རིག་པའི་གནས་ཆུང་ལྔ	[TRS 63-5] expl	rig pa'i gnas chung lnga
རིག་པའི་གནས་ཆེན་ལྔ	five arts and sciences	rig pa'i gnas chen lnga
རིག་པའི་གནས་ཤེས་པ	= *{lnga rig}*	rig pa'i gnas shes pa
རིག་པའི་རྣ་བ	species of wild gentian	rig pa'i rna ba
རིག་པའི་སྣང་བ	perspective of awareness	rig pa'i snang ba
རིག་པའི་དཔའ་པོ	learned	rig pa'i dpa' po
རིག་པའི་དཔའ་བོ	learned/ knowledgeable, capable, competent person	rig pa'i dpa' bo
རིག་པའི་དབང	abhisheka of insight	rig pa'i dbang
རིག་པའི་དབང་ལྔ	five knowledge empowerments [of water, crown, vajra, bell, and name; particularly for *spyod	rig pa'i dbang lnga
ཨནད་ནམེ	- the first two of which are conferred in Kriya tantra and the last three in Ubhaya tantra. the five first {dbang} in {spyod rgyud} and {rnal 'byor rgyud}, the five abhisheka of insight; Five Empow...	and name
རིག་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	Lord of Knowledge	rig pa'i dbang phyug
རིག་པའི་མེ་ཏོག	the flower of awareness	rig pa'i me tog
རིག་པའི་རྩ	*{dbang}* - empowerment of	rig pa'i rtsa
རིག་པའི་རྩལ	potency of pure presence, power of awareness, manifestive power/expression of awareness, functioning energy of awareness	rig pa'i rtsal
རིག་པའི་རྩལ་ཀ་སྦྱོངས	train in the expression of awareness	rig pa'i rtsal ka sbyongs
རིག་པའི་རྩལ་གྱི་དབང	empowerment of awareness display. The empowerment for practicing Dzogchen. Sometimes it also refers to the realization achieved through Dzogchen practice. Empowerment of the Expression of Awareness	rig pa'i rtsal gyi dbang
རིག་པའི་རྩལ་དབང	awareness-expression empowerment; empowerment into the dynamic energy of intrinsic awareness; empowerment of awareness' expressive power, initiation of the display of awareness	rig pa'i rtsal dbang
རིག་པའི་རྩལ་དབང་བཞི	four empowerments of entering rdzogs chen aa ti yo ga	rig pa'i rtsal dbang bzhi
རིག་པའི་རྩལ་ལྷུང་བ	fall into the potentiality of awareness	rig pa'i rtsal lhung ba
རིག་པའི་ཚད	limit of awareness	rig pa'i tshad
རིག་པའི་ཚོགས	see rig tshogs or rigs tshogs	rig pa'i tshogs
རིག་པའི་ཟང་ཐལ	directly penetrating awareness	rig pa'i zang thal
རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	awareness wisdom, wakefulness of knowing, insight wisdom; knowledge which is immediate awareness. intrinsic pristine awareness	rig pa'i ye shes
རིག་པའི་རང་སྒྲ	inherent self-sound of awareness	rig pa'i rang sgra
རིག་པའི་རང་ངོ	the natural face of awareness	rig pa'i rang ngo
རིག་པའི་རང་མདངས	the natural radiance of mind	rig pa'i rang mdangs
རིག་པའི་རང་རྩལ	the play of the mind, natural expression of awareness	rig pa'i rang rtsal
རིག་པའི་རང་ཟེར	inherent self-rays of awareness	rig pa'i rang zer
རིག་པའི་རང་འོད	inherent self-light of awareness	rig pa'i rang 'od
རིག་པའི་རལ་གྲི	1250-1451 [ggd]	rig pa'i ral gri
རིག་པའི་རླུང	wind of awareness	rig pa'i rlung
རིག་པའི་གཤིས	state of rigpa	rig pa'i gshis
རིག་པའི་གཤུང་ལུགས	subject matter, field, intellectual discipline	rig pa'i gshung lugs
རིག་པའི་སེམས	the perceiving mind	rig pa'i sems
རིག་པའི་སློབ་གསོ	intellectual education	rig pa'i slob gso
རིག་པའི་གསལ་རིག	the cognizance of awareness	rig pa'i gsal rig
རིག་པར་གྱིས	may they understand!	rig par gyis
རིག་པར་བྱ	should be understood	rig par bya
རིག་པར་བྱ་བ	to be known	rig par bya ba
རིག་པར་བྱེད་པ	make perceptible	rig par byed pa
རིག་པར་བྱེད་པའི་གཟུགས	1) perceptible form; 2) body; 3) 1	rig par byed pa'i gzugs
རིག་པར་སླའོ	it may easily be understood	rig par sla'o
རིག་པར་གསལ་བ	manifest in the clarity of rig pa	rig par gsal ba
རིག་པས་འགྲུབ་པ	established by reasoning, confirmed by logical inquiry	rig pas 'grub pa
རིག་པས་འདྲེ་བ	discriminate by intelligence	rig pas 'dre ba
རིག་པས་དཔྱད་པ	intelligent investigation	rig pas dpyad pa
རིག་པས་ཕོངས་པ	devoid of intellect	rig pas phongs pa
རིག་པས་མི་ལྕོགས	poor in intelligence	rig pas mi lcogs
རིག་པས་མི་ལྕོགས་པ	ignorant	rig pas mi lcogs pa
རིག་པས་རིག་པ་གྲོལ་བ	awareness is liberated by awareness	rig pas rig pa grol ba
རིག་པོ་ཆེའི་བཟོ	jeweller's art	rig po che'i bzo
རིག་པོ་འཛིན་པའི་གཞི	fixation basis for cognizing	rig po 'dzin pa'i gzhi
རིག་པྱེད་བཞི	TSE	rig pyed bzhi
རིག་དཔྱད	vs practice theory	rig dpyad
རིག་འཕྲུལ	power of mind	rig 'phrul
རིག་བྱ	that which is known	rig bya
རིག་བྱེད	1) intellect, understanding; 2) Veda; 3) 1 Bhrama; 2) four; 3) [knowing] subjectz{rig bzang - intelligent, wise	rig byed
ཨནཅིཨེནཏ་པྲེ	Buddhist scriptures of India	ancient pre
རིག་བྱེད་ཀློག་པ	rishi, sage, one versed in the vedas	rig byed klog pa
རིག་བྱེད་སྐྱེས	fire god, Agni	rig byed skyes
རིག་བྱེད་མཁན	Indian worshippers of Bhrama and teachers of the Vedas	rig byed mkhan
རིག་བྱེད་མཁས	rishi	rig byed mkhas
རིག་བྱེད་ཆ	branches of the vedas	rig byed cha
རིག་བྱེད་སྙིང་པོ	Bhrama	rig byed snying po
རིག་བྱེད་མཐའ་པ	doctrinal exponents among the Bhramins	rig byed mtha' pa
རིག་བྱེད་དྲན་པ	Bhrama	rig byed dran pa
རིག་བྱེད་གདོང	epithet of brahma	rig byed gdong
རིག་བྱེད་བདག	epithet of brhaspati, teacher of the gods	rig byed bdag
རིག་བྱེད་བདག་པོ	Jupiter, Thursday, gza' phur bu	rig byed bdag po
རིག་བྱེད་འདོན་པ	deity dbang phyug	rig byed 'don pa
རིག་བྱེད་འདོན་མ	goddess Uma	rig byed 'don ma
རིག་བྱེད་པ	Indian doctrine, maintaining four kinds of pramana: mngon rjes lung gi tshad ma + dpe nyer 'jal gyi tshad ma; thog rtags yang dag dang ltar snang skor gyi tshul smra mkhan zhig	rig byed pa
རིག་བྱེད་དབང་པོ	Bhrama	rig byed dbang po
རིག་བྱེད་འབྱུང	sun	rig byed 'byung
རིག་བྱེད་མ	Kurukulle	rig byed ma
རིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པ	imperceptible	rig byed ma yin pa
རིག་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཟུང	unapparent	rig byed ma yin pa'i gzung
རིག་བྱེད་མིན་པའི་གཟུགས	behavior trait	rig byed min pa'i gzugs
རིག་བྱེད་མིན་པའི་ལས	imperceptible actions; Mipham Rinpoche: {sdom pa sdom min, bar ma'i sdom sdom min gsum gang rung gis bsdus pa ste, bya ba dngos su med kyang zin 'byung gi rgyus byung ba'i gzugs rgyun chags su 2593...	rig byed min pa'i las
རིག་བྱེད་མིན་གཟུགས	imperceptible	rig byed min gzugs
རིག་བྱེད་སྨྲ་བ	{blon po bram ze rig byed smra ba} brahmin minister who preaches the Vedas	rig byed smra ba
རིག་བྱེད་རྩལ	{rig byed rtsal gyi ye shes} (timeless awareness as) dynamic energy that functions as cognition	rig byed rtsal
རིག་བྱེད་བཞི	the four Vedas	rig byed bzhi
རིག་བྱེད་ལམ་པ	Vedas 'dzin mkhan	rig byed lam pa
རིག་བྱེད་གསུམ	the first three of the {rig byed bzhi}	rig byed gsum
རིག་བྱེད་ལྷ་མོ	epithet of goddess kurukulli	rig byed lha mo
རིག་མ	consort, spiritual consort, knowledge woman/ consort	rig ma
རིག་མ་མྱོང་བ	whom they had never seen before	rig ma myong ba
རིག་མ་རིག	knowledge and ignorance	rig ma rig
རིག་མའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the form of the consort	rig ma'i phyag rgya
རིག་མིན་གྱི་གཟུགས	chos kyi skye mched pa'i gzugs gang zhig rnam par rig byed dang ting nge 'dzin gang rung las skyes shing dge mi dge gang rung yin pa ni rig min spyi'i mtshan nyid	rig min gyi gzugs
རིག་མོ་གཞུང	{rig mo gzhung}	rig mo gzhung
རིག་མྱུར་མ	libidinous woman, voluptuous woman	rig myur ma
རིག་མྱོང	1) arising of knowledge and experience; 2) visual experience	rig myong
རིག་རྨོངས	ignorant, illiterate	rig rmongs
རིག་ཙམ	pure presence	rig tsam
རིག་ཙལ	strength, manifestation	rig tsal
རིག་རྩལ	1) awareness display, play / expression of the mind / insight, creative intelligence, artistic talent, expression of awareness. 2) literature and art. 3) manifestation. 4) strength; 1) awareness di...	rig rtsal
རིག་རྩལ་སྐོར་ཚན	artistic group	rig rtsal skor tshan
རིག་རྩལ་མཁན	artist, writer	rig rtsal mkhan
རིག་རྩལ་འཁྲབ་ཚན	artistic performance/ program	rig rtsal 'khrab tshan
རིག་རྩལ་གྱི་སྐྱོན་ཡོན་བརྗོད་པ	literary/ artistic criticism	rig rtsal gyi skyon yon brjod pa
རིག་རྩལ་གྱི་གར་སྟེགས	stage	rig rtsal gyi gar stegs
རིག་རྩལ་གྱི་རྩོམ་རིགས	works of literature and art	rig rtsal gyi rtsom rigs
རིག་རྩལ་གློག་བརྙན	art movie	rig rtsal glog brnyan
རིག་རྩལ་འགག་མེད་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	unobstructed play of the expression of awareness	rig rtsal 'gag med kyi rol pa
རིག་རྩལ་ཆེན་པོ	total manifestation of the energy of rig pa	rig rtsal chen po
རིག་རྩལ་བརྟག་སྤྱོད་པ	cultural/ arts scholar/ researcher	rig rtsal brtag spyod pa
རིག་རྩལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	vajra continuum ("chain formation") of/ as the dynamic energy of awareness*	rig rtsal rdo rje lu gu rgyud
རིག་རྩལ་པ	artist, writer	rig rtsal pa
རིག་རྩལ་པའི་གྲས	artistic/ literary circles	rig rtsal pa'i gras
རིག་རྩལ་འཕེལ	increase creative intelligence/ artistic talent/ power	rig rtsal 'phel
རིག་རྩལ་དབང་མཆོག	supreme empowerment of the display of awareness	rig rtsal dbang mchog
རིག་རྩལ་མ་འགགས	uninterrupted tsal energy of rigpa	rig rtsal ma 'gags
རིག་རྩལ་ཚད་གཞི	artistic standards	rig rtsal tshad gzhi
རིག་རྩལ་ཚོ་ཆུང	artistic troupe/ group	rig rtsal tsho chung
རིག་རྩལ་ཚོགས་པ	artistic troupe/ group/ ensemble	rig rtsal tshogs pa
རིག་རྩལ་ལས་བྱེད་པ	art/ literary/ cultural affairs workers	rig rtsal las byed pa
རིག་རྩལ་ལས་རིགས	art/ literary circles	rig rtsal las rigs
རིག་རྩལ་སླར་སོ	artistic/ cultural renaissance	rig rtsal slar so
རིག་རྩེད	cultural entertainment	rig rtsed
རིག་འཛིན	vidyadhara, (wisdom, knowledge) holder, those who hold to rig pa, mystical inspirations, he who holds to the intuitive, aesthetically moving awareness of reality, comprehension of a science with ea...	rig 'dzin
རིག་འཛིན་ཀུ་མ་ར་ཛ	disciple of {grub thob me long rdo rje} and guru of {kun mkhyen dri med 'od zer} in the {snying thig} lineage rig 'dzin ku ma ra dza ye shes gzhon nu 1266-1343 - Kumaradza, Yeshe Shönnu, Rigdzin, L...	rig 'dzin ku ma ra dza
རིག་འཛིན་ཀུན་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ	(1738-1805) rig 'dzin kun bzang rdo rje'i rnam thar skal ldan snying gi mun sel rig pa'i sgron me - the autobiography with interspersed 2594 songs of {rig 'dzin kun bzang rdo rje} (1738-1805)	rig 'dzin kun bzang rdo rje
རིག་འཛིན་ཀུན་བཟང་ཤེས་རབ	{kun bzang shes rab}	rig 'dzin kun bzang shes rab
རིག་འཛིན་ཀྱི་གནས	realm of the vidyadharas	rig 'dzin kyi gnas
རིག་འཛིན་ཀློང་གསལ་སྙིང་པོ	1625-92 Longsal Nyingpo, a tertön from Katok	rig 'dzin klong gsal snying po
རིག་འཛིན་གི་དེ་སྣོད	awareness holders's pitaka	rig 'dzin gi de snod
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་འདས་རྗེས་བཞི	Syn {rig 'dzin gyi zhal chems bzhi}	rig 'dzin gyi 'das rjes bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	scriptural division	rig 'dzin gyi sde snod
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཀནོཝླེདགེ	bearers, a tantra	of the knowledge
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the vows of the vidyadharas	rig 'dzin gyi sdom pa
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་ཞལ་ཆེམས་བཞི	the Four Testaments of the Vidyadharas: {tshig gsum gnad brdeg, sgom nyams drug pa, zer bu bdun pa, bzhag thabs bzhi pa}	rig 'dzin gyi zhal chems bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་ས	Vidyadhara levels	rig 'dzin gyi sa
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་ས་བཞི	CHN	rig 'dzin gyi sa bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན་བརྒྱད	8 Vidyadhara Masters	rig 'dzin gyi slob dpon brgyad
རིག་འཛིན་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Vidyadhara Accomplishment Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras. The Golden Garland Chronicles names this scripture The Tantra of Six Vidyadharas (rig 'dzin drug pa'i rgyud)	rig 'dzin grub pa'i rgyud
རིག་འཛིན་རྒོད་ཀྱི་ལྡེམ་ཕྲུ་ཅན	13371408 - Rigdzin Gödem	rig 'dzin rgod kyi ldem phru can
རིག་འཛིན་རྒོད་ཀྱི་ལྡེམ་འཕྲུ་ཅན	13371408	rig 'dzin rgod kyi ldem 'phru can
གྲུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{rig 'dzin rgod ldem}	grub rgyal mtshan
རིག་འཛིན་རྒོད་ལྡེམ	{rig 'dzin rgod ldem}	rig 'dzin rgod ldem
རིག་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of Vidyadharas	rig 'dzin rgya mtsho
རིག་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་བ	victorious rigdzins, vidyadharas & buddhas	rig 'dzin rgyal ba
རིག་འཛིན་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དརབ༹་བ	the Magical Net of the Vidyadharas	rig 'dzin sgyu 'phrul drva ba
རིག་འཛིན་སྒྲུབ་པ་པོ	rig pa 'dzin pa'i dngos grub sgrub mkhan	rig 'dzin sgrub pa po
རིག་འཛིན་བརྒྱད	eight vidyadharas	rig 'dzin brgyad
རིག་འཛིན་བརྒྱད་རྗེ་འབངས་ཉེར་ལྔ	the eight Vidyadharas, the twenty-five disciples	rig 'dzin brgyad rje 'bangs nyer lnga
རིག་འཛིན་དངོས་གྲུབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	the famous {rig 'dzin rgod ldem can} of the byang gter tradition	rig 'dzin dngos grub rgyal mtshan
རིག་འཛིན་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག	Tantric samayas of the vidyadharas. The commitments of a Vajrayana practitioner	rig 'dzin sngags kyi dam tshig
རིག་འཛིན་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་སྣོད	mantrapitaka of the awareness holders	rig 'dzin sngags kyi sde snod
རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ	great vidyadhara	rig 'dzin chen po
རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	8 great knowledge-holders	rig 'dzin chen po brgyad
རིག་འཛིན་མཆོག	Supreme vidyadhara level	rig 'dzin mchog
རིག་འཛིན་མཆོག་ལྡན་མགོན་པོ	sprul sku	rig 'dzin mchog ldan mgon po
ཨོཕ༹་རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང་པ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ལྷོ་བྲག	details: rnam thar mgur 'bum dad ldan spro ba bskyed byed	of rdo rje gling pa from lho brag
རིག་འཛིན་ཇིགས་མེད་གླིང་པ	Rigdzin Jigmey Lingpa: 1729-98	rig 'dzin jigs med gling pa
རིག་འཛིན་འཇའ་ཚོན་སྙིང་པོ	1585-1656 Jatshön Nyingpo, tertön	rig 'dzin 'ja' tshon snying po
རིག་འཛིན་འཇིགས་མེད་གླིང་པ	Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa	rig 'dzin 'jigs med gling pa
རིག་འཛིན་ཉི་མ་གྲགས་པ	Rigdzin Nyima Trakpa: 1647-1710	rig 'dzin nyi ma grags pa
རིག་འཛིན་གཏེར་བཏོན་གཉིས	two vidyadhara treasure revealers, The two vidyadhara treasure revealers and siddha kings are Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, alias Padma Ösel Do-Ngak Lingpa, and [Chokgyur Lingpa] Terchen Chokgyur Dechen...	rig 'dzin gter bton gnyis
རིག་འཛིན་ཐུགས་ཐིག	terma by {smin gling gter chen o rgyan gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje}?	rig 'dzin thugs thig
རིག་འཛིན་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the awareness-holders	rig 'dzin theg pa
རིག་འཛིན་གདུང་སྒྲུབ	from the Northern Terma cycle revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	rig 'dzin gdung sgrub
རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པ	terma on the nirmanakaya aspect of Padmasambhava by {kun mkhyen 'jigs med gling pa} belonging to {klong chen snying thig}	rig 'dzin 'dus pa
རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པ་རྩ་རྒྱུད	Vidyadhara Assemblage Root Tantra	rig 'dzin 'dus pa rtsa rgyud
རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པའི	of the assemblage of	rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i
རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པའི་རྩ་རྒྱུད	Root Tantra of the Assemblage of Vidyadharas	rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i rtsa rgyud
རིག་འཛིན་འདུས་པའི་ཚོགས	ganapuja of Rigdzin D?pa	rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i tshogs
རིག་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ	name of rtogs ldan o rgyan bstan 'dzin	rig 'dzin rdo rje
རིག་འཛིན་སྡོམ་པ	vidyadhara sdom [binding, stabilizing]	rig 'dzin sdom pa
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡ་རྒྱུད	symbolic transmission of the rigdzins 2595	rig 'dzin brda rgyud
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡ་བརྒྱུད	vidyadhara sign transmission lineage	rig 'dzin brda brgyud
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡ་ཡི་བརྒྱུད	transmission by signs of the Vidyadharas rig 'dzin brda' brgyud sems dpa' sems ma the male and female bodhisattvas of the symbol lineage of the vidyadharas	rig 'dzin brda yi brgyud
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡའ་ཡིས་བརྒྱུད	the symbolic	rig 'dzin brda' yis brgyud
ཏྲནསྨིསསིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ཀནོཝླེདགེ	holders	transmission of knowledge
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡའ་ཡིས་བརྒྱུད་པ	vidyadharas of the symbol lineage	rig 'dzin brda' yis brgyud pa
རིག་འཛིན་བརྡའི་བརྒྱུད་པ	lineage of transmission through symbols by/ of masters/ holders of awareness*	rig 'dzin brda'i brgyud pa
རིག་འཛིན་ནང་གི་སྡོམ་པ	inner vows of	rig 'dzin nang gi sdom pa
རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་ལྔ	the five vidyadharas	rig 'dzin rnam lnga
རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four kinds of vidyadhara	rig 'dzin rnam pa bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་པ་བཞིའི་གོ་འཕང	Four vidyadhara levels	rig 'dzin rnam pa bzhi'i go 'phang
རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་བཞི	Four Kinds of Awareness-Holder The aware ness-holder of	rig 'dzin rnam bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་རྣམ་གསུམ	three Kinds of *{Mundane Awareness-Holder [lesser	rig 'dzin rnam gsum
རིག་འཛིན་སྣ་ཚོགས་རང་གྲོལ་རྩལ	the initiation name of Adzom Drukpa given to him by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	rig 'dzin sna tshogs rang grol rtsal
རིག་འཛིན་པད་མ་ཕྲིན་ལས	Rigdzin Pema Trinley: 1641-1717	rig 'dzin pad ma phrin las
རིག་འཛིན་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	Vidyadhara Padmakara. Same as Guru Rinpoche	rig 'dzin pad ma 'byung gnas
རིག་འཛིན་སྤྱི་ཞྭ	general Nyingma hat [for lamas]	rig 'dzin spyi zhwa
རིག་འཛིན་བླ་མ	1 of sgrub pa bka' brgyad	rig 'dzin bla ma
རིག་འཛིན་དབང་མོ	Abhe, Rigdzin Wangmo, wife of Chögyal Ngakyi Wangpo	rig 'dzin dbang mo
རིག་འཛིན་མ	[h] address for nuns	rig 'dzin ma
རིག་འཛིན་རྩལ་འཆང	vidyadhara powerwielders	rig 'dzin rtsal 'chang
རིག་འཛིན་བཞི	four Vidyadhara levels which result from mahayoga practice (complete ripening, long life, mahamudra, self-perfection); rnam smin rig 'dzin, tshe la dbang ba'i rig 'dzin, phyag rgya chen po'i rig 'd...	rig 'dzin bzhi
རིག་འཛིན་ཡོངས་འདུས	terma by {mnga' ris paN chen padma dbang rgyal rdo rje}	rig 'dzin yongs 'dus
རིག་འཛིན་ར	sha thod phreng	rig 'dzin ra
རིག་འཛིན་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Vidyadhara Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga	rig 'dzin rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
རིག་འཛིན་སྲོག་སྒྲུབ	terma revealed by Lhatsün Namkha Jigmey in Sikkim	rig 'dzin srog sgrub
རིག་འཛིན་སྲོག་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྒྱབ་ཆོས	supportive texts explaining the fundamentals and ritual practices of the rediscovered teachings of the {rig 'dzin srog sgrub cycle} including the musical notation texts; by {lha btsun nam mkha' 'ji...	rig 'dzin srog sgrub kyi rgyab chos
རིག་འཛིན་གསུམ	three Kinds of *{Mundane	rig 'dzin gsum
རིག་རྫས	cultural relic/ artifact/ memento	rig rdzas
རིག་གཞུང	science; artistic tradition, traditional system of learning	rig gzhung
རིག་གཞུང་མཁས་དབང	cultural authorities	rig gzhung mkhas dbang
རིག་གཞུང་གྱི་ཆེད་རྩོམ	academic writings	rig gzhung gyi ched rtsom
རིག་གཞུང་གྱི་ཐ་སྙད	academic/ technical jargon	rig gzhung gyi tha snyad
རིག་གཞུང་བརྒྱུད་ཤུལ	cultural heritage	rig gzhung brgyud shul
རིག་གཞུང་བརྗེ་རེས	cultural exchange	rig gzhung brje res
རིག་གཞུང་བརྟག་དཔྱོད	academic research	rig gzhung brtag dpyod
རིག་གཞུང་དུས་དེབ	academic journal/ bulletin	rig gzhung dus deb
རིག་གཞུང་པུའུ	Ministry of Culture	rig gzhung pu'u
རིག་གཞུང་ཕོ་བྲང	Palace of Culture	rig gzhung pho brang
རིག་གཞུང་འཕེལ་ཚུལ	academic movement	rig gzhung 'phel tshul
རིག་གཞུང་ཚན་ཁག	academic subject	rig gzhung tshan khag
རིག་གཞུང་ལས་རིགས	academic circle	rig gzhung las rigs
རིག་གཞུང་སློབ་ཚོགས	academic society/ association	rig gzhung slob tshogs
རིག་གཞུང་སློབ་གསོ	culture and education	rig gzhung slob gso
རིག་བཞི	four enlightened families of Ubhaya tantra	rig bzhi
རིག་བཟང	intelligent, wise 2596	rig bzang
རིག་བཟོ	rtog bzo - rang 'dod blo bzo personal invention, fancy, imagination, fabrication, fantasy	rig bzo
རིག་རིག	knowing this and that; to think and know this and that, to be able to know whatever happens, sometimes clear awareness. Syn {ha go ba}	rig rig
རིག་རིག་འགྱུ་འགྱུ་བ	the lively and prying (mind)	rig rig 'gyu 'gyu ba
རིག་རིག་ཏུར་ཏུར་པ	awake and swift-moving cognizance	rig rig tur tur pa
རིག་རིག་ཏུར་ཏུར་པོ	flickering awareness/ sometimes sharp, sometimes gloomy turmoil	rig rig tur tur po
རིག་རིག་མིག་འབུར་ཙུགས་སུ་ལྟ་ཚུལ	//mig rig rig tu lta ba	rig rig mig 'bur tsugs su lta tshul
རིག་རིག་ཧུར་ཧུར	sparkling awareness	rig rig hur hur
རིག་ལམ	logic, attitude, inclination	rig lam
རིག་ལམ་ལ་བརྟེན	intellectual path	rig lam la brten
རིག་ཤེས	abbr of rig pa & shes rab, knowing awareness	rig shes
རིག་ཤེས་པ	intelligentsia, intellectual	rig shes pa
རིག་གཤིས	state of rigpa	rig gshis
རིག་སློབ	culture and education	rig slob
རིག་སློབ་ཁྲུའུ	Office of Culture and Education	rig slob khru'u
རིག་གསར	new sciences, cultural revolution	rig gsar
རིག་གསར་ལས་འགུལ	cultural revolution movement	rig gsar las 'gul
རིག་གསལ	clear awareness, awareness and clarity, clear rigpa	rig gsal
རིག་གསལ་གྱིས་བཏོན	bring forth clearly/ lucidly	rig gsal gyis bton
རིག་གསལ་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparability of awareness and clarity	rig gsal dbyer med
རིག་གསུམ	three families [of pure deities of	rig gsum
རེལཏིབེ༹	appearance] according to Kriy tantra]	relative
རིག་གསུམ་དགོན་པོ	lords of the three Families	rig gsum dgon po
མེཨན་པོཏེནཏིཨལ་ཨོར་སེཨེད	born, nature, kinds, varieties, types, aspects, caste, bloodline, lineage, family, class, gene [spiritual genes], type, category, status	mean potential or seed
ཨེནླིགྷཏེནེད	family, cf buddha-family	enlightened
རིགས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་བདག	a tantric system, epithet of rdo rje 'chang	rigs kun khyab bdag
རིགས་ཀུན་འདུས་པ	the embodiment of all families	rigs kun 'dus pa
རིགས་ཀུན་འདུས་གཟུགས	embodied form of all families	rigs kun 'dus gzugs
རིགས་ཀྱི	racial	rigs kyi
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པ	variety of the families	rigs kyi khyad pa
རིགས་ཀྱི་རྒན་རབས	rigs rgyud gcig pa'i nang nas lo na rgan pa	rigs kyi rgan rabs
རིགས་ཀྱི་ང་རྒྱལ	family arrogance	rigs kyi nga rgyal
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཅོད་པན	thod du bkur 'os kyi rigs te gus zhabs byed pa'i yul 2597	rigs kyi cod pan
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཐ་མ	Indian outcasts/ untouchable caste	rigs kyi tha ma
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཐུ་བ	brahman caste	rigs kyi thu ba
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཐུ་བོ	Bhramin caste	rigs kyi thu bo
རིགས་ཀྱི་མཐུ	by the power of family bloodline	rigs kyi mthu
རིགས་ཀྱི་དྲི་མ	Syn {blo bu ra gyi sgrib pa gnyis}	rigs kyi dri ma
རིགས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ	Lord of the family. The chief buddha of the family to which one's particular yidam deity belongs. For example, Avalokiteshvara's crown buddha is Amitabha	rigs kyi bdag po
རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ	noble one	rigs kyi bu
རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ	honored women	rigs kyi bu mo
རིགས་ཀྱི་དབང་རྟགས	the authentic sign of his family	rigs kyi dbang rtags
རིགས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་པ	subdivisions	rigs kyi dbye pa
རིགས་ཀྱི་མ	bride, mistress of the house	rigs kyi ma
རིགས་ཀྱི་གཙོ	lord of the family	rigs kyi gtso
རིགས་ཀྱི་གཙོ་བོ	rigs gtso'i che ming	rigs kyi gtso bo
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཚོམ་བུ	groups of buddhafamilies	rigs kyi tshom bu
རིགས་ཀྱི་ཚོམ་བུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of the groups of buddha families	rigs kyi tshom bu'i dkyil 'khor
རིགས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ལྡན་མ	woman of authentic being	rigs kyi mtshan ldan ma
རིགས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་བརྗོད་པ	rang bzhin brjod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, dngos po gang rung zhig gi khyad chos	rigs kyi rang bzhin brjod pa
རིགས་ཀྱི་ས	the shravaka path of preparation, path attained when rang gi rigs la mi 'khrul ba, dman pa sa brgyad kyi nang tshan zhig	rigs kyi sa
རིགས་ཀྱི་སྲུང་མ	protectors of the directions	rigs kyi srung ma
རིགས་ཀྱིས	by the day, by days, daily	rigs kyis
རིགས་སྐྱོང	bride, mistress of the house	rigs skyong
རིགས་སྐྱོངས་མ	housewife	rigs skyongs ma
རིགས་ཁམ	the gotra, sugatagarbha	rigs kham
རིགས་ཁམས	the causal ground, the buddha nature	rigs khams
རིགས་ཁུངས	caste	rigs khungs
རིགས་གྲྭ	scholastic gathering	rigs grwa
རིགས་འགའ	some people	rigs 'ga'
རིགས་འགྲེ	spyi mtshungs su gtong ba	rigs 'gre
རིགས་འགྲེ་བྱེད	to generalize	rigs 'gre byed
རིགས་འགྲེས	to follow the same pattern/ apply the same model	rigs 'gres
རིགས་རྒྱན	the ornament of their family	rigs rgyan
རིགས་རྒྱས་བསྡུས	elaborate and simplified mandalas	rigs rgyas bsdus
རིགས་རྒྱུད	ancestry; character, personality, disposition. Syn {ngang rgyud}	rigs rgyud
རིགས་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་མཐའ	racism, racial discrimination	rigs rgyud kyi phyogs mtha'
རིགས་རྒྱུད་འདྲེས་མ	mixed ancestry,	rigs rgyud 'dres ma
རིགས་རྒྱུད་ཕ་མེས	ancestors	rigs rgyud pha mes
རིགས་རྒྱུད་འཛིན་མཁན་གྱི་བུ	son of family lineage holder	rigs rgyud 'dzin mkhan gyi bu
རིགས་རྒྱུད་གཞན་ལ་གཉའ་གནོན	racial oppression	rigs rgyud gzhan la gnya' gnon
རིགས་རྒྱུད་གཞན་ལ་མཐོང་ཆུང	racial discrimination	rigs rgyud gzhan la mthong chung
རིགས་རྒྱུད་བཟང་པོ	noble	rigs rgyud bzang po
རིགས་རྒྱུད་རིང་ལུགས	racism	rigs rgyud ring lugs
རིགས་རྒྱུད་རླུང་རྟ་སྙན་གྲགས	descendants, luck and fame	rigs rgyud rlung rta snyan grags
རིགས་རྒྱུན	stream-of-being	rigs rgyun
རིགས་སྒོ	presentation the means of employing reasoning and pramana rigs par 'jug pa'i sgo zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa zhes bya ba [slob dpon phyogs kyi glang pos mdzad cing, kha che'i pandi ta chen po dpal...	rigs sgo
རིགས་བརྒྱ	the hundreds of buddhafamilies	rigs brgya
རིགས་བརྒྱ་འདུས་པའི་རིགས་གཅིག	1 family that embodies the 100 families	rigs brgya 'dus pa'i rigs gcig
རིགས་བརྒྱའི་བདག	rdo rje 'chang	rigs brgya'i bdag
རིགས་བརྒྱུང	ancestor	rigs brgyung
རིགས་བརྒྱུད	follower, descendant, offspring; ancestor, family lineage	rigs brgyud
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི	ethnic	rigs brgyud kyi
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་ཆད	family lineage will be interrupted	rigs brgyud chad
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་པ	descendant	rigs brgyud pa
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་དམའ་པོ	ignoble	rigs brgyud dma' po
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་རྩ་མེད	genocide	rigs brgyud rtsa med
རིགས་བརྒྱུད་འཛིན	male issue	rigs brgyud 'dzin
རིགས་བསྒྲེ	CM: rigs 'gre dang 'dra. [mss]	rigs bsgre
རིགས་ངན	barbarous, low caste [= gdol pa, gyung po'o]	rigs ngan
རིགས་ངན་གྱི་གནས	residence of low persons	rigs ngan gyi gnas
རིགས་ངན་ཐ་ཆད	barbarous, low caste/ birth *, outcast	rigs ngan tha chad
རིགས་ངས་པ	genealogical determinism	rigs ngas pa
རིགས་ངེས་རྣམས	confirmed followers, world horizons of meaning, forms of life 2598	rigs nges rnams
རིགས་ངེས་པ	instinctively, philosophical	rigs nges pa
རིགས་ངེས་བྱང་སེམས	TSE	rigs nges byang sems
རིགས་ངོར	in the face of reasoning	rigs ngor
Eནླིགྷཏེནེད་Fཨམིལིཨེས་ཊཐ་གཏ་ཨོར་བུདདྷ	family *{buddha rigs}* the vajrafamily or family of indestructible reality *{rdo rje'i rigs}* or vajrakula, the jewelfamily *{rin chen rigs}* or ratnakula, the	Enlightened Families Tath gata or buddha
རིགས་ལྔ་གང་ཆེན་མཚོ	the five aspects of immense ocean	rigs lnga gang chen mtsho
རིགས་ལྔ་ཅོད་པན	crown of the five families [lha'i dbu rgyan cod pan dang, gtsug tor, dar 'phan bcas]	rigs lnga cod pan
རིགས་ལྔ་སྙིང་པོའི་སྐོར་ལྔ	Five Essential Cycles of the Five Families, revealed by Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	rigs lnga snying po'i skor lnga
རིགས་ལྔ་སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	Gandavyuha w the five families [according to the way of meditation and rectation of yoga tantra, by practicing it in three lifetimes to the four families adding the don grub phrin las kyi rigs ther...	rigs lnga stug po bkod pa
རིགས་ལྔ་གདུལ་བྱ་རིགས་ལྔ	TSE	rigs lnga gdul bya rigs lnga
རིགས་ལྔ་སྤྱིའི་དམ་ཚིག	the general samayas of the five [buddha families	rigs lnga spyi'i dam tshig
རིགས་ལྔ་ཡབ་ཡུམ	the five Buddha Families and their consorts	rigs lnga yab yum
རིགས་ལྔ་ཡབ་ཡུམ་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ	the five families with their consorts and attendant deities	rigs lnga yab yum 'khor dang bcas pa
རིགས་ལྔ་ཡོངས་རྗོགས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of the complete five families	rigs lnga yongs rjogs kyi snang ba
རིགས་ལྔ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	the vision of the complete five families	rigs lnga yongs rdzogs kyi snang ba
རིགས་ལྔའི་སྐུ	the forms of the five families, the bodily forms of the five families	rigs lnga'i sku
རིགས་ལྔའི་སྐུ་ལྔ	CHN	rigs lnga'i sku lnga
རིགས་ལྔའི་རྒྱལ་བ	the five Buddha families, the Victorious Ones of the five families	rigs lnga'i rgyal ba
རིགས་ལྔའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	[TRS 137-5]	rigs lnga'i phyag rgya
རིགས་ལྔའི་དབང	five Buddha families, empowerment	rigs lnga'i dbang
རིགས་ལྔའི་དབུ་རྒྱན	head ornament symbolizing the five tathagata families	rigs lnga'i dbu rgyan
རིགས་ལྔའི་ཚོམ་བུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandalas of the groups of the five families	rigs lnga'i tshom bu'i dkyil 'khor
རིགས་ལྔའི་ཞིང	CHN	rigs lnga'i zhing
རིགས་ལྔའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the Buddhafields of the Five Families	rigs lnga'i zhing khams
རིགས་ལྔའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རང་མདངས	the natural radiance of the wisdoms of the five families	rigs lnga'i ye shes kyi rang mdangs
རིགས་ལྔའི་སངས་རྒྱས	the buddhas of the five families	rigs lnga'i sangs rgyas
རིགས་སྔགས	{rig sngags} Gnostic/ vidya mantras	rigs sngags
རིགས་སྔགས་འཆང	practitioners of knowledge mantras	rigs sngags 'chang
རིགས་སྔགས་འཛིན་པ	holder of a magic sentence	rigs sngags 'dzin pa
རིགས་ཅན	of the race of	rigs can
རིགས་ཅན་ལྔ	five lineages	rigs can lnga
རིགས་ཅན་དརབ༹་མ་ལྔ	Five Excellent Beings. Five recipients of the Anu Yoga teachings	rigs can drva ma lnga
རིགས་ཅན་དྲྭ་མ་ལྔ	five Excellent Beings	rigs can drwa ma lnga
རིགས་ཅན་བཞི	the four kinds of rigs can	rigs can bzhi
རིགས་ཅན་གསུམ	the three lineages [nyan thos kyi rigs can dang, rang rgyal gyi rigs can, theg chen gyi rigs can]	rigs can gsum
རིགས་གཅིག	1) khag gcig; 2) of the same kind/ family/ clan	rigs gcig
རིགས་གཅིག་པ	of identical kind/ type	rigs gcig pa
རིགས་གཅིག་པ་གཉིས	rigs gcig pa la dbye na, ldog pa rigs gcig pa dang, rdzas rigs gcig pa ste gnyis so	rigs gcig pa gnyis
རིགས་ཆད་ཀྱི་རིགས	the 'cut-off' type [of person]	rigs chad kyi rigs
རིགས་ཆད་པ	cut-off family	rigs chad pa
རིགས་ཆད་རིགས	cut-off family	rigs chad rigs
རིགས་ཆུང་ལྔ	five minor families of Yoga Tantra	rigs chung lnga
རིགས་ཆེ་ཕྲ	high or low status	rigs che phra
རིགས་ཆེན	1) good/ high/ noble family; 2) family of the noble 1s; 3) a kind of fine gold	rigs chen
རིགས་ཆེན་འབྱེད་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga making one of good family [in the ancient texts, when the path of preparation is attained, though one has defilements, ldog pa med pas rigs nges pa'i phyir, it is called rigs chen 'byed pa...	rigs chen 'byed pa'i rnal 'byor
རིགས་མཆོག	1) brahmin; 2) excellent horse	rigs mchog
རིགས་བརྗོད་ཀི་སྒྲ	inclusive class words (form)	rigs brjod ki sgra
རིགས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	rjod byed kyi sgra gang zhig rang gi dngos kyi brjod byar gyur pa'i rigs spyi yod pa ste, rang gi rigs du ma la khyab par byed pa, dper na, bem po zhes pa gzugs sgra dri ro thams cad kyi spyi yin p...	rigs brjod kyi sgra
རིགས་བརྗོད་པ་ཐོག་མའི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, thog mar bkod pa'i rigs kyi gsal byed des phyi ma'i tsig kun la phan zhing gsal bar byed pa'i rgyan zhig	rigs brjod pa thog ma'i gsal byed
རིགས་བརྗོད་པ་མཐའ་མའི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, mtha' mar bkod pa'i rigs kyi gsal byed des rang gi sngon la yod pa'i tsig kun la phan zhing gsal bar byed pa'i rgyan zhig	rigs brjod pa mtha' ma'i gsal byed
རིགས་བརྗོད་པ་བར་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད	gsal byed kyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, bar du bkod pa'i rigs kyi gsal byed des rang gi snga phyi'i tsig kun la phan zhing gsal bar byed pa'i rgyan zhig	rigs brjod pa bar gyi gsal byed
རིགས་ཉམས	deteriorated/ degenerated lineage/ race/ nationality	rigs nyams
རིགས་ཉམས་དགེ་སློང	fallen monk, monk disgracing his position or profession	rigs nyams dge slong
རིགས་ཉམས་པ	degenerate	rigs nyams pa
རིགས་ཉམས་པར་བྱེད་པ	bring degradation and poverty upon your family {byis pa 'di khyim bdag rang gi rigs nyams	rigs nyams par byed pa
པར་བྱེད་པ	this child will surely bring degradation and poverty upon your family and household}	par byed pa
རིགས་གཉིས	the two noble family	rigs gnyis
རིགས་གཉིས་པ	mule	rigs gnyis pa
རིགས་མཉམ་པ	Syn {rigs mthun pa}	rigs mnyam pa
རིགས་གཏད་པ	initiation	rigs gtad pa
རིགས་གཏེར་མཆན་འགྲེལ	tshad ma rigs pa'i gter gyi mchan 'grel sde bdun gsal ba'i sgron me	rigs gter mchan 'grel
རིགས་གཏེར་རང་འགྲེལ	see {tshad ma rigs pa'i gter gyi rang 'grel}	rigs gter rang 'grel
རིགས་ཐ་དད་པ	different kinds	rigs tha dad pa
རིགས་ཐམས་ཅད	in all instances	rigs thams cad
རིགས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཁྱབ་བདག	the lord who pervades all (buddha) families	rigs thams cad kyi khyab bdag
རིགས་ཐིགས	rigs pa'i thigs pa zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa zhes pa	rigs thigs
རིགས་ཐིགས་འགྲེལ་པ	tshad ma rigs thigs kyi 'grel pa legs bshad snying po'i gter zhes bya ba [by rgyal tsab dar ma rin chen]	rigs thigs 'grel pa
རིགས་མཐུན	suitable	rigs mthun
རིགས་མཐུན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས	previously grasped eye consciousness blue appearing as blue la dbang bar byed pa'i habitual patterns etc	rigs mthun gyi bag chags
རིགས་མཐུན་པ	of = rank/ social status/ caste, of the same kind	rigs mthun pa
རིགས་མཐུན་འབྱེད་པའི་ལྡོག་པ་ཅན	dpe don gnyis rigs mthun zhing byed las phyogs gcig nas mtshungs kyang, phyogs 'ga' zhig nas mi mtshungs par bstan nas so sor 'byed pa'i rgyan zhig, ldog pa can gyi rgyan gyi nang gses shig	rigs mthun 'byed pa'i ldog pa can
རིགས་མཐོ	of high/ powerful/ good family/ caste/ rank	rigs mtho
རིགས་མཐོ་བ	high station; one of {mtho ris kyi yon tan bdun} the seven virtues of a high rebirth. ['High station' means to be noble and of virtuous character. {rigs mtho zhing btsun pa rigs bzang ba'o}]	rigs mtho ba
རིགས་དང་འགལ་བ	illogical rigs dang longs spyod 'bring po tsam gyi	rigs dang 'gal ba
རིགས་དྲུག	six enlightened families of Kriya tantra	rigs drug
རིགས་དྲུག་གི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the sufferings of the six classes [of beings] rigs drug gi sdug bsnyal kyis gdung ba tormented by the miseries of the six realms of existence	rigs drug gi sdug bsngal
རིགས་དྲུག་གི་གནས	the abodes of the six classes [of beings]	rigs drug gi gnas
རིགས་དྲུག་གི་གནས་སོ་སོར	in which of the six realms	rigs drug gi gnas so sor
རིགས་དྲུག་འགྲོ་བའི	of the beings of the six lokas	rigs drug 'gro ba'i
རིགས་དྲུག་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of 4 guardian kings	rigs drug rgyal po
རིགས་དྲུག་འཇིག་རྟེན	worlds of the six classes of beings	rigs drug 'jig rten
རིགས་དྲུག་མཐོ་དམན	high or low, among the six classes	rigs drug mtho dman
རིགས་དྲུག་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of the six realms	rigs drug sdug bsngal
རིགས་དྲུག་པ	the sixth buddha family	rigs drug pa
རིགས་དྲུག་སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན	all the six kinds of beings	rigs drug sems can kun
རིགས་དྲུག་སོ་སོའི་ལས་སྣང	the karmic experiences of each of the six classes [of beings]	rigs drug so so'i las snang
རིགས་བདག	Lord of the family, lord of a particular tathagata lineage, lord of your family, lord of the families, root guru; lord of a particular buddha family, lord / ruler of the family	rigs bdag
རིགས་བདག་གི་ཚུལ་དུ་གསོལ་བ	to crown him as the lord of their family	rigs bdag gi tshul du gsol ba
རིགས་འདུས་རྩ་རྒྱུད	Rikdü Root Tantra	rigs 'dus rtsa rgyud
རིགས་འདྲ	phan tshun mtshungs pa, same kind, similar class, homogenous	rigs 'dra
རིགས་འདྲ་ཕྱི་མ	subsequent experience similar to the previous one	rigs 'dra phyi ma
རིགས་འདྲེས་པ	crossbreed	rigs 'dres pa
རིགས་ལྡན	oh you of noble family, 1 of 7 mtho ris kyi yon tan, noble birth, epithet of uccaicrava, horse of good breed, chieftain, general name for the kings of Shambhala, one who bears the lineage	rigs ldan
རིགས་ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཙོ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{rigs ldan rgya mtso rnam rgyal} [rigs ldan nyer lnga'i bcu pa de khrir phebs pa dang, kha che'i chos lugs tsugs pa, me mkha' rgya mtso'i 'go 'dzin pa gsum dus mnyam yin par bshad,//403//624]	rigs ldan rgya mtso rnam rgyal
རིགས་ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{rigs ldan rgya mtsho rnam rgyal}	rigs ldan rgya mtsho rnam rgyal
རིགས་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་དཀའ	{rigs ldan rgyal dka'}	rigs ldan rgyal dka'
རིགས་ལྡན་མཆོད་པའི་འོད་སྣང	{rigs ldan mchod pa'i 'od snang} [brag dgon bstan pa rab rgyas kyis rab byung bco lnga pa'i me yos lor brtsams pa'i skar rtsis kyi gzhung zhig]	rigs ldan mchod pa'i 'od snang
རིགས་ལྡན་འཇམ་དཔལ་གྲགས་པ	Rigden Jampel Drakpa [1st of the 25 rigdens de spyi lo'i sngon gyi 177 shing sprel lor came to the throne, dus 'khor rtsa rgyud ston hrag bcu gnyis pa las btus pa'i compiled abridged Kalachakra Tan...	rigs ldan 'jam dpal grags pa
རིགས་ལྡན་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 rigdens [rigs ldan 'jam dpal grags pa dang, padma dkar po, bzang po, rnam rgyal, bshes gnyen bzang po, rin chen phyag khyab 'jug sbas pa, nyi ma grags, shin tu bzang, rgya mtso rnam rgyal, r...	rigs ldan nyer lnga
རིགས་ལྡན་སྙིང་ཐིག	bstan bcos beed'urya dkar po dang nyin byed snang ba'i dgongs don gsal bar ston pa rtsis gzhi'i man ngag rigs ldan snying gi thig le zhes bya ba}	rigs ldan snying thig
རིགས་ལྡན་དྲག་པོ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	{rigs ldan drag po 'khor lo can} [25th rigden rab byung nyer gnyis pa'i chu lug ste spyi lo 1424 bar, dus bzhi phyi ma 'char ba zhes gsungs]	rigs ldan drag po 'khor lo can
རིགས་ལྡན་པ	ma dkar po	rigs ldan pa
རིགས་ལྡན་པད་མ་དཀར་པོ	name of or rgyan rin po che	rigs ldan pad ma dkar po
རིགས་བསྡུས་པ	the condensed family	rigs bsdus pa
རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སྐྱེས	TSE	rigs nas rigs skyes
རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེ་བ	one kind of rgyun zhugs 'bras/: rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas yin pa gzhir byas nas/ 'dod nyon gsum pa dang bzhi pa spangs pa'ang srid/ lnga pa gtan ma spangs pa de lha mi'i rten gang la thob pa de'i skye...	rigs nas rigs su skye ba
རིགས་ནེགས་པ	belonging to a definite family, niyatakula	rigs negs pa
རིགས་གནས་རིགས	[those who are reborn in the families of med and gods, respectively]	rigs gnas rigs
རིགས་རྣམ་གཉིས	ambhogak ya, 2-fold Buddha, the two types of affinity/ Enlightened Family [The enlightened family which naturally abides {rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs} and the enlightened family of inner growth {rgya...	rigs rnam gnyis
རིགས་རྣམས་ཀུན་བདག	lord of all families	rigs rnams kun bdag
རིགས་སྣ་ཁ	kind, type, variety, species	rigs sna kha
རིགས་པ	(line of) (logical) reasoning; (to be) logical/ reasonable/ rational; to apply; to make (perfect) sense	rigs pa
རིགས་པ་གྲུབ་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	{rigs pa grub pa'i sgron me} [rgya gar gyi slob dpon tsandra go mis brtsams pa'i tsad ma'i gzhung zhig]	rigs pa grub pa'i sgron me
རིགས་པ་ཅན	Logicians [thd]	rigs pa can
རིགས་པ་ཅན་པ	Nyaya, Hindu school of philosophy; divides all phenomena among six categories {tshig don}: rdzas - substance, yon tan - qualities, las - actions/ karmas, spyi - universals, bye	rigs pa can pa
རིགས་པ་གཏོང་བ	reason	rigs pa gtong ba
རིགས་པ་འཐད་པ	to be reasonable	rigs pa 'thad pa
རིགས་པ་འཐད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	NyTh: "correct and suitable reasonings" [mss]	rigs pa 'thad pa dang ldan pa
རིགས་པ་དང་མི་ལྡན་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས	improper reason	rigs pa dang mi ldan pa'i gtan tshigs
རིགས་པ་དང་མི་རིགས་པ	worthy and unworthy	rigs pa dang mi rigs pa
རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་པ	Sixty Verses of Reasoning; Yuktisastika-karika; Nagarjuna, 1st-2nd century	rigs pa drug cu pa
རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་བ	Yuki-s.ast.ika, one of the {rigs tshogs drug} the six logical works of the Madhyamika by Nagarjuna	rigs pa drug cu ba
རིགས་པ་ལྡན་པ	lineage	rigs pa ldan pa
རིགས་པ་སྡེ་བདུན་ཡིད་ཀྱི་མུན་སེལ	clearing mental darkness with respect to the seven sections on reasoning by mkhas grub rje; clearing mental darkness with respect to the seven sections on reasoning by {mkhas grub rje}	rigs pa sde bdun yid kyi mun sel
རིགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	irrational	rigs pa ma yin pa
རིགས་པ་མིན་པ	unbecoming, improper	rigs pa min pa
རིགས་པ་མིན་པའི་གཏན་ཙིགས	improper reason	rigs pa min pa'i gtan tsigs
རིགས་པ་སྨྲ་བ	theory, logician	rigs pa smra ba
རིགས་པ་སྨྲ་བ་རྣམས	logicians	rigs pa smra ba rnams
རིགས་པ་བཞི	The four kinds of reasoning; The four kinds of reasoning	rigs pa bzhi
རིགས་པ་ཡང་དག	correct reasoning	rigs pa yang dag
རིགས་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	tshad ma'i bstan bcos rigs pa la 'jug pa zhes bya ba	rigs pa la 'jug pa
རིགས་པ་གསུམ	[TRS 105-6] attained by the Buddha at dawn; diff. types	rigs pa gsum
རིགས་པའི་དགག་བྱ	object of negation by reasoning	rigs pa'i dgag bya
རིགས་པའི་དགག་བྱ་གཉིས	TSE	rigs pa'i dgag bya gnyis
རིགས་པའི་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, mthun pa'i rgyu las 'bras bu rigs mtshungs kyi dngos po bskyed pa ston pa'i rgyu'i rgyan zhig	rigs pa'i rgyu
རིགས་པའི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	logical proof	rigs pa'i sgrub byed
རིགས་པའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང	the river of reasoning [poetical]	rigs pa'i chu klung
རིགས་པའི་རྗེ་སུ	followers of reasoning	rigs pa'i rje su
རིགས་པའི་རྗེ་སུ་འབྲངས་པ	Followers of Reasoning	rigs pa'i rje su 'brangs pa
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་དཔག	hidden or not clearly apparent situation analyzing reasoning	rigs pa'i rjes dpag
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང	followers of reasoning [tshad ma sde bdun gyi rjes 'brang mdo sde pa dang sems tsam pa]	rigs pa'i rjes 'brang
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲང་གི་སེམས་ཙམ་པ	sems tsam pa/ mind only school proponents who follow the tshad ma sde bdun	rigs pa'i rjes 'brang gi sems tsam pa
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲངས་ཀྱི་མདོ་སྡེ་པ	Sautrantika following reasoning [ggd]	rigs pa'i rjes 'brangs kyi mdo sde pa
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	followers of reasoning	rigs pa'i rjes su 'brang ba
རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པ	Followers of Reasoning	rigs pa'i rjes su 'brangs pa
རིགས་པའི་ཐིགས་པའི་དོན་བསྡུས་པ	{rigs pa'i thigs pa'i don bsdus pa}	rigs pa'i thigs pa'i don bsdus pa
རིགས་པའི་ཐེགས་པ	Nyaya-bindu. Dharmakirti's "Drop of Reasoning", in English, "Buddhist Logic" by Stcherbatsky	rigs pa'i thegs pa
རིགས་པའི་གནས	science, topic of learning	rigs pa'i gnas
རིགས་པའི་གནས་ལྔ	five sciences, 1) {sgra'i rig pa}science of language. 2) {gtan tshigs kyi rig pa} science of logic. 3) {nang gi rig pa} science of philosophy. 4) {gso ba'i rig pa} science of medicine. 5) {bzo gnas...	rigs pa'i gnas lnga
རིགས་པའི་གནས་ལྔའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	awareness wisdom	rigs pa'i gnas lnga'i ye shes
རིགས་པའི་གནས་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 65-1]	rigs pa'i gnas bco brgyad
རིགས་པའི་སྦྱོར་བ	{rigs pa'i sbyor ba} [rgya gar gyi slob dpon rin chen rdo rjes brtsams pa'i tsad ma'i gzhung zhig]	rigs pa'i sbyor ba
རིགས་པའི་ཚུལ	logical procedure	rigs pa'i tshul
རིགས་པའི་ཚོགས	name of text	rigs pa'i tshogs
རིགས་པའི་ཚོགས་དྲུག	Syn {rigs tshogs drug} the collection of the six arguments	rigs pa'i tshogs drug
རིགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས	theory	rigs pa'i gzhung lugs
རིགས་པའི་ཡུལ	logical scope	rigs pa'i yul
རིགས་པའི་ལམ	path of reason, path of reasoning, [thd]	rigs pa'i lam
རིགས་པའི་ཤེས་པ	reasoning that analyzes the actual state of things	rigs pa'i shes pa
རིགས་པའི་གཤུང་ལུགས	theory, tradition of reasoning	rigs pa'i gshung lugs
རིགས་པར་སྨྲ་བ	logician	rigs par smra ba
རིགས་པས་ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ	proof, documentation	rigs pas khungs skyel
རིགས་པས་གྲུབ་པ	established by reasoning	rigs pas grub pa
རིགས་པས་གྲུབ་པའི་རྫས་ཡོད	a seeming knowable established by reasoning as a substantial object [rdzas yod bzhi'i nang gses]	rigs pas grub pa'i rdzas yod
རིགས་པས་འགྲུབ་པ	confirmed by logical inquiry, established by reasoning, [thd]	rigs pas 'grub pa
རིགས་པས་སྒྲུབ	prove, document	rigs pas sgrub
རིགས་པས་སྒྲུབ་པ	proof, documentation	rigs pas sgrub pa
རིགས་པས་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	prove, document	rigs pas sgrub byed
རིགས་པས་གཏན་ལ་ཕབ་པ	establishing through reasoning	rigs pas gtan la phab pa
རིགས་པས་ཐག་གཅོད	conclude, infer	rigs pas thag gcod
རིགས་པས་འདེད	reason, deduce	rigs pas 'ded
རིགས་པས་གནོད་པ	disproved through reasoning	rigs pas gnod pa
རིགས་པས་དཔྱད་བཟོད	something that can undergo being critically analyzed through reasoning	rigs pas dpyad bzod
རིགས་པས་དབེན་པ	reasonless	rigs pas dben pa
རིགས་དཔྱད	theory, analysis by reasoning	rigs dpyad
རིགས་དཔྱད་དང་ལག་ལེན	theory and practice	rigs dpyad dang lag len
རིགས་སྤྱི	type-generalities [rang gi rigs can du ma'i rjes su 'gro ba can gyi chos rigs spyi yin pa EG, "material thing" form, sound, taste, and smell all bem po'i rigs su gnas, spyi'i nang gses shig ste]	rigs spyi
རིགས་སྤྱི་དང་ཚོགས་སྤྱིའི་མུ་བཞི	CHN	rigs spyi dang tshogs spyi'i mu bzhi
རིགས་བར་པ་དམན་པའི་རིགས	middle class family {bdag ni skye ba thams cad du rigs bar pa dman pa'i rigs la, 'byor pa nyer mkho tsam yod pa'i rigs su skye bar gyur cig} May I, in all lives to come, be born in a middle class f...	rigs bar pa dman pa'i rigs
རིགས་བྱུང	extraction, descent	rigs byung
རིགས་བྱེད	kinds, vedic knowledge, discipline	rigs byed
རིགས་བྱེད་པ	Followers of the Vedas	rigs byed pa
རིགས་བྱེད་མ	1 of sman bla brgyad	rigs byed ma
རིགས་དབྱེ	classify, sort, discriminate, catalogue	rigs dbye
རིགས་འབྱུང	lineage	rigs 'byung
རིགས་འབྱེད	classify, sort, discriminate, catalogue	rigs 'byed
རིགས་མ་དག	impure blood, defiled caste rigs ma tsang ba'i khyad par brjod pa khyad par brjod pa'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, brjod 'dod dngos po gang zhig rigs kyi cha lag ma tsang yang, tsang ba dang khya...	rigs ma dag
རིགས་མང	a variety	rigs mang
རིགས་མང་པོ	a great variety of	rigs mang po
རིགས་མི་ཐུན་པ	discordant type	rigs mi thun pa
རིགས་མི་མཐུན་པ	1) different families/ clans; 2) different thoughts/ actions	rigs mi mthun pa
རིགས་མི་མཐུན་ལས་བཟློག་པའི་ཆ	the factor of opposition to [phenomena belonging to] a discordant kind [ggd]	rigs mi mthun las bzlog pa'i cha
རིགས་མི་མཐུན་སེལ་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	definition which eliminates discordant types	rigs mi mthun sel ba'i mtshan nyid
རིགས་མིན་གྱི་རྒྱུ	mthun pa'i rgyu las 'bras bu rigs pa min pa phyin ci log bskyed pa ston pa'i rgyan zhig, rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig	rigs min gyi rgyu
རིགས་མེད	4th pandava, mongoose	rigs med
རིགས་མེད་པ	those who do not belong to any family, kalachakra system	rigs med pa
རིགས་མྱུག	metaphor of [good] family secession as sprout	rigs myug
རིགས་དམན	low caste, outcast	rigs dman
རིགས་དམན་དབུལ་བ	a low caste and poverty	rigs dman dbul ba
རིགས་དམའ་བ	low caste, outcast	rigs dma' ba
རིགས་བཙུན་པ	rigs bzang ba, rigs ma 'chol ba	rigs btsun pa
རིགས་ཚོགས	a work on logic by Nagarjuna, collection of arguments	rigs tshogs
རིགས་ཚོགས་དྲུག	the six logical works of the Maadhyamika by Nargarjuna: 1) {dbu ma'i tshig le'u byas pa - Madhamika-kaarikaas 2) {rtsa ba shes rab Prajn~aamuula 3) {zhib mo rnam 'thag} -Vaaidalya-suutra 4) {rtsad ...	rigs tshogs drug
ཅུ་པ	S'unyataa-saptali 6) {rigs pa drug	cu pa
ཅུ་བ	Yuki-sastika 7) {rin chen phreng	cu ba
Vཨིགྲཧ	vyaavartanii. 5) {stong nyid bdun cu pa} Shunyataa-saptali. 6) {rigs pa drug cu ba} Yuki-s.ast.ika. 7) {rin chen phreng ba} Ratnavali	Vigraha
རིགས་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	a real or actual gotra	rigs mtshan nyid pa
རིགས་མཚུངས	similar kind	rigs mtshungs
རིགས་མཚུངས་སྦྱར་བ	mtshungs chos sbyar ba	rigs mtshungs sbyar ba
རིགས་འཚོབ་པ	be the first-born male in a family, represent a family	rigs 'tshob pa
རིགས་འཛིན	*{rig 'dzin}* family-holder	rigs 'dzin
རིགས་འཛིན་ཚེ་དབང་ནོར་བུ	Kathog Rigdzin Tsewang Norbu: 1698-1755	rigs 'dzin tshe dbang nor bu
རིགས་ཞེན	racial/ nationalistic/ caste loyalty/ affinity/ attachment	rigs zhen
རིགས་བཞི	four castes, Four Enlightened Families, according to Ubhaya tantra. four castes. 1) {bram ze} brahman, the priestly caste. 2) {rgyal rigs} ksatriya, the warrior or royal caste, 3) {rje'u rigs} vais...	rigs bzhi
རཏནཀུལ	[Tserig]. sngar rgya gar gyi mi'i rigs rim pa bzhi ste, bram ze'i rigs dang, rgyal rigs, rje rigs, dmangs rigs sam gdol rigs rnams so, rigs so so'i bar gyi dbye mtsams ha cang gsal bas phan tsun ba...	ratnakula
རིགས་བཞི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	the dakinis of the four classes	rigs bzhi mkha' 'gro
རིགས་བཞི་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པའི་ས	level of vidyadhara of the four families [in kriya meditation and recitation byas pa'i mthar 'bras mi tshe lnga na in addition to the rigs gsum rdo rje 'dzin pa'in is added the rin po che'i rigs an...	rigs bzhi rdo rje 'dzin pa'i sa
རིགས་བཞིའི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	the dakinis of the four families, four classes /aspects of dakinis	rigs bzhi'i mkha' 'gro
རིགས་བཞིའི་མཁའི་འགྲོ	dakinis of the four families	rigs bzhi'i mkha'i 'gro
རིགས་བཟང	of good family, ascetic, hermit	rigs bzang
རིགས་བཟང་སྤེལ	improve a family/ race/ species/ breed/ nationality/ kind	rigs bzang spel
རིགས་བཟང་བ	{rigs mtho zhing btsun pa rigs bzang ba'o} 'High station' means to be noble and of virtuous character	rigs bzang ba
རིགས་རམ་པ	rigs ram pa, next to the lowest of the four grades of geshe [gzhung pod lnga yi go ba mthar phyin pa ma lon pa'i dge bshes]	rigs ram pa
རིགས་རུས	progeny, descendants, race, lineage, relationship, family, caste	rigs rus
རིགས་རུས་སྐྱེ་རྒྱུད	generation of a human family lineage	rigs rus skye rgyud
རིགས་རུས་མཐུན་པ	of equal birth and extraction	rigs rus mthun pa
རིགས་ལ	by the day, by days, daily	rigs la
རིགས་ལ་མཁས་པ	knowledge of [the student's] affinity	rigs la mkhas pa
རིགས་ལམ	the method/ way/ textual tradition of reasoning, logic[al mind]	rigs lam
རིགས་ལམ་ཆུང་ངུ	introductory path of reasoning	rigs lam chung ngu
རིགས་ལམ་ཆེན་པོ	advanced path of reasoning	rigs lam chen po
རིགས་ལམ་འབྲིང་པོ	intermediate path of reasoning	rigs lam 'bring po
རིགས་ཤེས	rational cognition	rigs shes
རིགས་གཤེན	gshen of the ancestry	rigs gshen
རིགས་སད	to awaken to one's heritage (realize one's true nature); awaken the potential; awaken the potential, awaken your nature, awakened to his family / heritage	rigs sad
རིགས་སད་པ	awaken habitual patterns of the mahayana or hinayana	rigs sad pa
རིགས་སད་པའི་རྟགས	TSE	rigs sad pa'i rtags
རིགས་སུ་འཁྲུངས་པ	{bhri gu'i rigs su 'khrungs pa'i drang srong zhig} a sage of the family of Brigu	rigs su 'khrungs pa
རིགས་སུ་འགྲོ	ocean	rigs su 'gro
རིགས་སོ	well done	rigs so
རིགས་སྲས	1) son arising in a mantrayana family lineage; 2) son of a king etc.	rigs sras
རིགས་གསུམ	{lha rigs}, {mi rigs}, {klu rigs}; three enlightened families [of pure deities of relative - appearance] according to Kriya tantra; three families. {lha rigs}, {mi rigs}, {klu rigs}	rigs gsum
པུརེ་དེཨིཏིཨེས་ཨོཕ༹་རེལཏིབེ༹	appearance] according to Kriy tantra; 4) *{lha rigs}*, *{mi rigs}*, *{klu rigs}*]	pure deities of relative
རིགས་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ	deities of the three families (Arya Manjusri of the Tathagata family, Arya Avalokitesvara of the Padma family, and Sri Guhyapati Vajrapani of the Vajra family)	rigs gsum gyi lha
རིགས་གསུམ་དགོན་པོ	the lords of the three families	rigs gsum dgon po
རིགས་གསུམ་བགོས	make three categories	rigs gsum bgos
རིགས་གསུམ་མགོན་པོ	Lords of the three Families	rigs gsum mgon po
བྱ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་མགོན་པོ་གསུམ	[Tserig]	bya rgyud kyi mgon po gsum
རིགས་གསུམ་མགོན་པོའི་ཐོ	Floods, placard to avert, related to the Lords of the Three Families	rigs gsum mgon po'i tho
རིགས་གསུམ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པའི་ས	the three families, the level of a vajra holder [in kriya, lha'i sku gsung thugs dang mnyam par sbyor bas sku'i rigs rnam par snang mdzad, gsung gi rigs 'od dpag med, thugs kyi rigs rdo rje mi skyo...	rigs gsum rdo rje 'dzin pa'i sa
རིགས་གསུམ་གཞི་གཅིག	three things gathered into 1	rigs gsum gzhi gcig
རིགས་བསྲེས་པ	crossbreed	rigs bsres pa
རིང་སྐྱ	pink made from magenta	ring skya
རིང་སྐྱེལ	1) rdzong dang rdzong gi bar du khral 'ul skyel dgos pa'i don; 2) thag ring skyel ma byed pa	ring skyel
རིང་སྐྱོད	go on a long path	ring skyod
རིང་ཁར	during, when	ring khar
རིང་ཁྱད	length, distance, height	ring khyad
རིང་མཁན	specialist	ring mkhan
རིང་གག	jacket, waistcoat without sleeves	ring gag
རིང་གི་བཟོད་དཀའ་བའི་གྲལ་རིམ	longsuffering classes	ring gi bzod dka' ba'i gral rim
རིང་འགག	lama shawl	ring 'gag
རིང་འགུལ་ཆེ་སང	extended sweeping bow (in dance)	ring 'gul che sang
རིང་རྒྱུག	run a long way	ring rgyug
རིང་བརྒྱུད	long lineage. long lineage / transmission; long lineage	ring brgyud
རིང་བརྒྱུད་བཀའ་མ	the old transmission of the pronouncements, long transmission of the canon	ring brgyud bka' ma
རིང་ངེ་བ	every day warm meals	ring nge ba
རིང་བཅད་ཐུང་མཐུད	make up a deficiency from a surplus, cut off the long to supply the short	ring bcad thung mthud
རིང་ཆ	1) gcig las gcig ring ba'i cha shas; 2) distance	ring cha
རིང་འཇམ	long and gentle	ring 'jam
རིང་ཏུ་སྐྱུར་བ	throw at a distance	ring tu skyur ba
རིང་སྟབས་སུ་བྱན	hurried	ring stabs su byan
རིང་ཐུང	1) long and short; 2) length, distance, height	ring thung
རིང་ཐུང་མི་མཉམ་པ	unequal length	ring thung mi mnyam pa
རིང་ཐུང་ཚད་འཇལ་བ	measure the length	ring thung tshad 'jal ba
རིང་མཐའ	at the longest / most	ring mtha'
རིང་མཐོང	learned, far-sighted	ring mthong
རིང་དུ	for a long time, for the length of time of, for the duration of	ring du
རིང་དུ་བསྐུལ	cock, that which calls from a distance	ring du bskul
རིང་དུ་ཁྱབ	1) far-pervading; 2) pleasant smell	ring du khyab
རིང་དུ་གྱུར་བ	the Far Reaching [7th bhumi]	ring du gyur ba
རིང་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	growing longer and longer	ring du 'gro ba
རིང་དུ་གཏོང	1) lengthen; 2) send far away	ring du gtong
རིང་དུ་གཏོང་བ	1) lengthen; 2) send far away	ring du gtong ba
རིང་དུ་གཏོར	to prolong, extend	ring du gtor
རིང་དུ་མཐོང་བ	see to a distance, foreseeing, considerate, wise person, learned	ring du mthong ba
རིང་དུ་འདས	far from	ring du 'das
རིང་དུ་འདུག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of staying too long 2605	ring du 'dug pa'i ltung byed
རིང་དུ་སྤངས་པ	1) rgyang du bskyur ba; 2) rbad de bcad pa	ring du spangs pa
རིང་དུ་སོང	elongated, stretched	ring du song
རིང་དུ་སོང་བ	the one who has gone far [7th spiritual level/ bhumi]	ring du song ba
རིང་དུ་སོང་བའི་ས	the Far Going [7th bhumi]	ring du song ba'i sa
རིང་དུས	during, when	ring dus
རིང་དེར	during the time that	ring der
རིང་དྲགས	too long	ring drags
རིང་དྲགས་པ	too long; x {chos thun ring drags pa sogs kyis skyo ba} being discouraged if, for example, a teaching is too long	ring drags pa
རིང་མདའ	rifle	ring mda'
རིང་ནས	from a distance, from of old, from ancient times	ring nas
རིང་ནས་འགུག	dri zhim po -	ring nas 'gug
རིང་ནས་འགུགས	that attracts from smell, sweet scent	ring nas 'gugs
རིང་ནས་སྨྲ	speak from a distance	ring nas smra
རིང་པ	remote	ring pa
རིང་པོ	long time, tall, long, lengthwise	ring po
རིང་པོ་ཉིད་ཀྱང་ཉེ་བར་འོང	make even what seems very distant come close	ring po nyid kyang nye bar 'ong
རིང་པོ་ནས	from far away	ring po nas
རིང་པོར	{ring por ma lon pa -	ring por
རིང་པོར་མ་ལོན་པར	after a short time	ring por ma lon par
རིང་པོར་མི་ཐོགས	before too long	ring por mi thogs
རིང་པོར་མི་ཐོགས་པ	in no time at all; before long	ring por mi thogs pa
རིང་སྤུང་པ	Ringpungpa	ring spung pa
རིང་འཕུར	that which soars to a great height, a star vulture	ring 'phur
རིང་འཕུར་སྐྱེས	teacher of Gautama before enlightenment; teacher of Gautama in 'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan	ring 'phur skyes
རིང་བ	distant, long, high, tall [comp ring po]	ring ba
རིང་བ་ལྔ	5 objects to be long admired (arms, eyes, breast, nose, knees)	ring ba lnga
རིང་བ་དང་ཉེ་བ	earlier and immediate [preparations]	ring ba dang nye ba
རིང་བ་མ་ཡིན་ཉིད	no distance	ring ba ma yin nyid
རིང་བ་རེལ	sarira	ring ba rel
རིང་བའི་རྒྱུ	underlying/ long-term cause	ring ba'i rgyu
རིང་བའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན	remote cause	ring ba'i rgyu rkyen
རིང་བའི་འཆི་ལྟས	signs long before death	ring ba'i 'chi ltas
རིང་བའི་གཞི་ཤེས	ground awareness that i far off [from fruition] [gzhi shes gang zhig is w/o compassion and bound by grasping at true existence and is not a means of producing the fruition, the prajnaparamita; sher...	ring ba'i gzhi shes
རིང་བར་འགྱུར	to remain far from	ring bar 'gyur
རིང་བར་བསྒངས་པའི	SA rtsal gsum	ring bar bsgangs pa'i
རིང་བར་བསྒངས་པའི་རྩལ	power to make a long jump	ring bar bsgangs pa'i rtsal
རིང་བར་ཚམ	slender	ring bar tsham
རིང་བུ	single, simple, solitary, unconnected, prose	ring bu
རིང་འབྲས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	rgyu'i rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, ring por gnas pa'i rgyus, ring ba'i 'bras bu bskyed pa ston pa'i rgyu'i rgyan zhig	ring 'bras kyi rgyu
རིང་མ་ཐུང	neither long nor short	ring ma thung
རིང་མིན	Before long,	ring min
རིང་མིན་མྱུར་དུ	before too long, soon	ring min myur du
རིང་མོ	long, tall, far	ring mo
རིང་མོ་སྐྱེས	a medicinal plant	ring mo skyes
རིང་མོ་ཞིག་ནས་འདའ་བ	TSE	ring mo zhig nas 'da' ba
རིང་ཙམ་དུ	for some time	ring tsam du
རིང་ཚད	length, distance, height	ring tshad
རིང་ཚད་འབྲིང་གྲས	medium range [length, distance, height] ring tshad 'bring gras bskyod thub pa'i me	ring tshad 'bring gras
ཤུགས་འཕུར་མདེལ	medium range ballistic missile	shugs 'phur mdel
རིང་ཞིག	a long time	ring zhig
རིང་ཞིག་ཏུ	a long while, for a long time	ring zhig tu
རིང་ཞིག་ན	after a long time	ring zhig na
རིང་ཞིག་ལོན་ཏེ	after a long time	ring zhig lon te
རིང་ཞིག་ལོན་པ	1) procrastinate/ delay a long time; 2) yun ring tsam song ba	ring zhig lon pa
རིང་ལ	during, at, for a long distance, throughout	ring la
རིང་ལུགས	1) long-standing tradition; 2) ism view, doctrine, principal; 3) chos lugs [eleg]; 4) bsam pa'i 'khyer so	ring lugs
རིང་ལུགས་དྲི་མེད	flawless tradition	ring lugs dri med
རིང་ཤར	far E	ring shar
རིང་ཤོས	longest, tallest	ring shos
རིང་སུ་མཐོང	be far-sighted	ring su mthong
རིང་སེ་བ	long	ring se ba
རིང་སེལ	Relic pills. Tiny pills of sacred substance found in the ashes after the cremation of a practitioner who has reached a certain level of realization. Ringsel. 'relic pill.' small, very hard glitteri...	ring sel
རིང་སོང་གི་སྐགས་ཉན	rang gyis bdag med rtogs tshul gyi skor [mss]	ring song gi skags nyan
རིང་སྲེལ	relic (whitish, pill-like stuff from cremation residues), SA ring bsrel	ring srel
རིང་བསྲེལ	tiny pearl-like relics	ring bsrel
རིང་བསྲེལ་རྣམ་བཞི	four Kinds of Relics [Relics of the body of reality {chos sku'i ring bsrel} relics of bone remains {sku gdung ring bsrel} relics of clothing {sku bal ring bsrel} and relics of miniature size {nyung...	ring bsrel rnam bzhi
རིང་བསྲེལ་གསུམ	the three kinds of ring bsrel [chos sku'i ring bsrel dang, sku bal gyi ring bsrel, sku gdung gi ring bsrel bcas gsum mo]	ring bsrel gsum
རིངས	plotted {rgyal srid thob pa la rings so} plotted to take over the kingdom	rings
རིངས་སྟབས	brel ba byed pa'i tshul, eagerly, hurriedly	rings stabs
རིངས་སྟབས་སུ	most speedily	rings stabs su
རིངས་པ	quick, fast, speedy, hurried	rings pa
རིངས་པ་རྒྱུག་པ	run fast	rings pa rgyug pa
རིངས་པ་བཞིན	eager	rings pa bzhin
རིངས་པ་བཞིན་དུ	as if eager	rings pa bzhin du
རིངས་པ་ཡོད	I'm in a hurry	rings pa yod
རིངས་པའི་ཚུལ	{rings pa'i tshul zer ba de bla ma mjal ba la gcig tu dga' ba'i brel langs pa lta bu'i rnam 'gyur la zer ba yin} "longingly" here expressing a sense of impatience to be with the teacher, this being...	rings pa'i tshul
རིངས་པའི་བསོད་སྙོམས	quick slong ba'i bsod snyoms	rings pa'i bsod snyoms
རིངས་པར	hastily, speedily	rings par
རིངས་པོ	1) [arch] long (A; 2) brel ba dang 'tshab pa; 3) quick, fast	rings po
རིངས་སྤྱོད་ཟེར་བ	called Dirghacharayana	rings spyod zer ba
རིངས་རུང	though you are in a hurry	rings rung
རིངས་ཤིང་འཐད་པ	MSS: used at NNI, means something like "correct and suitable." It seems to be equivalent to rigs pa 'thad pa. [mss]	rings shing 'thad pa
རིཏ	emaciated	rit
རིད	meager	rid
རིད་ཅིག་སྡུག་པ	starving, miserable creatures	rid cig sdug pa
རིད་པ	{mdog skya zhing lus rid par gyur} became thin and wan	rid pa
རིན	price, value, charge	rin
རིན་སྐྱིན	payment, price and repayment	rin skyin
རིན་སྐྱིན་མི་དགོས་པ	w/o payment/ reward	rin skyin mi dgos pa
རིན་སྐྱིན་ཚབ་གསུམ	price, repayment, and replacement	rin skyin tshab gsum
རིན་ཁྱད	cost/ price differential	rin khyad
རིན་གི་འབོར་ཚད	[total] price/ cost	rin gi 'bor tshad
རིན་གོང	price, cost, rate, worth	rin gong
རིན་གོང་གི་ཁྱད་པར	cost/ price differential	rin gong gi khyad par
རིན་གོང་གི་སྲིད་ཇུས	government price policy	rin gong gi srid jus
རིན་གོང་འགོད	fix a price	rin gong 'god
རིན་གོང་ངོ་མ	true/ net price/ value	rin gong ngo ma
རིན་གོང་གཅོག་པ	depreciate, devalue	rin gong gcog pa
རིན་གོང་གཅོད	fix a price	rin gong gcod
རིན་གོང་ཆག	drop, lower [price]	rin gong chag
རིན་གོང་ཆག་པ	slump	rin gong chag pa
རིན་གོང་ཆུང་ཆུང	inexpensive	rin gong chung chung
རིན་གོང་ཆུང་དུ་བཏང་བ	discount	rin gong chung du btang ba
རིན་གོང་ཆེན་པོ	dear, expensive	rin gong chen po
རིན་གོང་མཉམ་པ	= value/ price	rin gong mnyam pa
རིན་གོང་མཐོན་པོ	high price	rin gong mthon po
རིན་གོང་བསྡོམས་འབོར	gross value	rin gong bsdoms 'bor
རིན་གོང་འཕར	raise, increase [price]	rin gong 'phar
རིན་གྱིས་ཉོས	{rdo log rin gyis nyos yong} gets hit by lots of stones	rin gyis nyos
རིན་གྱིས་ཉོས་པ	to reap	rin gyis nyos pa
རིན་གྱིས་བསླུ་བ	ransom	rin gyis bslu ba
རིན་དངུལ	money used to pay [for] something	rin dngul
རིན་ཅན	valuable, precious	rin can
རིན་ཅེན	SA rin chen	rin cen
རིན་གཅོད་པ	fix a price, determine a price	rin gcod pa
རིན་ཆེ་བ	of great price, valuable	rin che ba
རིན་ཆེད	price, cost	rin ched
རིན་ཆེན	fine x {grong dang rin chen skyed tshal 'di} this city and fine garden	rin chen
རིན་ཆེན་ཀུན་འདུས་ཀྱི་ལུང	All-embodying Jewel Scripture; One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen	rin chen kun 'dus kyi lung
རིན་ཆེན་ཀྱི་རིགས	jewel/ratna family	rin chen kyi rigs
རིན་ཆེན་སྐྱེས	gift	rin chen skyes
རིན་ཆེན་ཁྲི	jewel throne	rin chen khri
རིན་ཆེན་མཁའ་འགྲོ	Ratna dakini, jewel dakini	rin chen mkha' 'gro
རིན་ཆེན་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	ratna dakini rin chen 'khrungs dpe'am sman ngo gsal	rin chen mkha' 'gro ma
རིན་ཆེན་ག་ཏེར་ལྟར	1 of the {gcun thabs gsum}	rin chen ga ter ltar
རིན་ཆེན་གྱི	precious	rin chen gyi
རིན་ཆེན་གྱི་རྒྱན་ཆ	precious ornaments	rin chen gyi rgyan cha
རིན་ཆེན་གྱི་རིག་འཛིན	awareness-holders of precious gemstones 2607	rin chen gyi rig 'dzin
རིན་ཆེན་གྱི་རིགས	Ratna family. One of the five buddha families	rin chen gyi rigs
རིན་ཆེན་གྲུ་བོ	The Precious Ship by Longchenpa	rin chen gru bo
རིན་ཆེན་གླིང	1) island of jewels [former fabulous jewel having island/gling? on the other side of the ocean]; 2) place in mal gro gung dkar rdzong, on S bank of mal gro ma chu	rin chen gling
རིན་ཆེན་གླིང་མཆོག	the supreme jewel island rin chen gling du rin po che bsdu ba la	rin chen gling mchog
རིན་ཆེན་དགའ	joyful treasure	rin chen dga'
རིན་ཆེན་འགྱུར་བྱེད	fake gems, trinkets	rin chen 'gyur byed
རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	turquoise	rin chen rgyal po
རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	spos khang pa (15th cent)	rin chen rgyal mtshan
རིན་ཆེན་སྒང་བླ་བྲང	sa skya'i bla brang	rin chen sgang bla brang
རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོན་མེ	name of a book	rin chen sgron me
རིན་ཆེན་རྔུལ་བརྩེགས་ལྷའི་རི་བོ	mount sumeru	rin chen rngul brtsegs lha'i ri bo
རིན་ཆེན་ལྔ	1) {gser}. 2) {dngul} 3) {bye ru} 4) {mu men} 5) {mu tig}	rin chen lnga
རིན་ཆེན་སྔོན་པོ	mercury	rin chen sngon po
རིན་ཆེན་ཆེ	gold	rin chen che
རིན་ཆེན་ཆེ་བ	gold	rin chen che ba
རིན་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	embodiment of the	rin chen chos kyi sku
རིན་ཆེན་མཆོག	great worth, best of jewels; best of jewels, great worth	rin chen mchog
རིན་ཆེན་གཉིས་པ	silver	rin chen gnyis pa
རིན་ཆེན་སྙག་གི་འབྲུ	thang sman rtsad	rin chen snyag gi 'bru
རིན་ཆེན་སྙིང་པོ	treasure heart	rin chen snying po
རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར་ལྟར	one of the {gcun thabs gsum}	rin chen gter ltar
རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར་མཛོད	gter ma collection made by kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas	rin chen gter mdzod
རིན་ཆེན་ཐལ་བ	Precious Thalwa, 1 of thal ba bcu gsum	rin chen thal ba
རིན་ཆེན་དང་པོ	gold	rin chen dang po
རིན་ཆེན་དམ་པ	holy treasure	rin chen dam pa
རིན་ཆེན་དྲ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་ཞུས་པ	'phags pa rin chen dra ba can gyis zhus pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo	rin chen dra ba can gyis zhus pa
རིན་ཆེན་གདངས	Dang energy of ratna	rin chen gdangs
རིན་ཆེན་གདུགས	precious umbrella (denotes respect)	rin chen gdugs
རིན་ཆེན་བདུན	Seven precious substances. Ruby, sapphire, lapis, emerald, diamond, pearl and coral. Sometimes the list includes gold, silver, and crystal	rin chen bdun
རིན་ཆེན་མདོ་རྒྱུད	{rin chen mdo rgyud} inner Nyingma tantra	rin chen mdo rgyud
རིན་ཆེན་མདོག་བཟང	gold	rin chen mdog bzang
རིན་ཆེན་རྡུལ་བརྩེགས	Mt Meru	rin chen rdul brtsegs
རིན་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ	ratnavajra	rin chen rdo rje
རིན་ཆེན་ལྡན་པ	land of jewels	rin chen ldan pa
རིན་ཆེན་སྡིངས	Rinchen Ding, in Tsang	rin chen sdings
རིན་ཆེན་སྡོང་པོ	byu ru'i ming	rin chen sdong po
རིན་ཆེན་བརྡར་ཕྱེ	metal dust from rubbing	rin chen brdar phye
རིན་ཆེན་ནོར་བདུན	seven precious jewels (pad ma ra ga, in dra ni la, bai du rgya, ma rgad, rdo rje pha lam, mu tig, bye ru)	rin chen nor bdun
རིན་ཆེན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{tsha ba lo tsA ba}; disciple of Jamgön Kongtrül and Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo	rin chen rnam rgyal
རིན་ཆེན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three jewels/ three precious activities: 1) buddha, dharma, and sangha]; 2) rigs lam phra mo 'byed pa'i rnam dpyod, gzhung lugs gdams par shar ba'i nyams len, tshig sbyor tshul la mkhas pa'i ng...	rin chen rnam gsum
རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་ལྔ	five precious things [1) bud med kyi rgyab tu gyon rgyu'i pang gdan dang 'dra ba zhig //2) gser dang, dngul, gyu, byu ru, mu tig ste lnga la rin chen sna lnga zer, yang gser dngul zangs lcags gsha'...	rin chen sna lnga
རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་བདུན	Syn {rgyal srid sna bdun}. Syn {rgyal srid sna bdun}	rin chen sna bdun
རིན་ཆེན་པགས་པའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	ri dwags gser gyi mdog can	rin chen pags pa'i skye gnas
རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས	the Mound of Gemstones	rin chen spungs
རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པ	where precious things have been accumulated together, heap of precious stones, town in tibet	rin chen spungs pa
རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Piled Gems. This scripture explains how all the qualities manifest are all the essence of space and awareness	rin chen spungs pa'i rgyud
རིན་ཆེན་སྤུངས་ཤད	dbu can gzhir bzhag pa'i yig phreng gyon phyogs kyi mgor yig 'bru gsum ma tsang na; 'di lta 2608 bu 'bri dgos pa'i ming ste, de yang rdzogs tsig gi na ro can dang, tsigs bcad kyi rkang mtha' 'khel ...	rin chen spungs shad
རིན་ཆེན་སྤྲས་པ	studded with jewels	rin chen spras pa
རིན་ཆེན་ཕུང་པའི་མདོ	the Sutra of the Jewel Mound	rin chen phung pa'i mdo
རིན་ཆེན་ཕུན་ཚོགས	the {'bri gung chos rgyal}; tertön; {'bri gung pa} 1509-1557	rin chen phun tshogs
རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ	Precious Garland, Skt. Ratnavali	rin chen phreng ba
ཐེ་མཱདྷྱམིཀ་བཡ་ཎརྒརྗུན	- text on bodhicitta. rgyal po la gtam bya ba'i phrin yig]	the MAdhyamika by Nargarjuna
རིན་ཆེན་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཐབས་ལྡན་པ	to possess the jewel of miraculous means	rin chen 'phrul gyi thabs ldan pa
རིན་ཆེན་འཕྲེང་བ	Nagarjuna's "Precious Garland" of advice for the King	rin chen 'phreng ba
རིན་ཆེན་བང་མཛོད	jewel treasury	rin chen bang mdzod
རིན་ཆེན་བྱུང་གནས	Source of Jewels	rin chen byung gnas
རིན་ཆེན་བྲག་གི་མགུལ	the slope of jewel rock [mt]	rin chen brag gi mgul
རིན་ཆེན་བླ་མ	highest jewels	rin chen bla ma
རིན་ཆེན་དབང་རྒྱལ	the wishfulfilling jewel	rin chen dbang rgyal
རིན་ཆེན་དབང་སྔོན	blue gem stones aindra ni' la'/ aanda snyil	rin chen dbang sngon
རིན་ཆེན་འབར་བའི	sparkling/ blazing gem	rin chen 'bar ba'i
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང	Ratnasambhava	rin chen 'byung
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་དན	Ratnasambhava	rin chen 'byung dan
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་ལྡན	The Jewel-born, {rin chen 'byung gnas} Ratnasambhava	rin chen 'byung ldan
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས	earth, ocean, a bodhisattva	rin chen 'byung gnas
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་རིན་ཆེན	Source of jewels, Ratnasambhava, jewel family, ratna	rin chen 'byung gnas rin chen
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་ཤི་བ	ratnakarasanti	rin chen 'byung gnas shi ba
རིན་ཆེན་སྦུབས	the Precious Sphere	rin chen sbubs
རིན་ཆེན་སྦྱོར་བ	rin po che'i rigs sman la sre skabs dug sel byed pa	rin chen sbyor ba
རིན་ཆེན་མང	1) brgya byin; 2) Buddha {rin chen mang} (/ {rin chen mchog best of jewels, great worth	rin chen mang
རིན་ཆེན་མང་པོ་ཡོད	have many precious gems	rin chen mang po yod
རིན་ཆེན་མེ	buddha rin chen me	rin chen me
རིན་ཆེན་དམར་པོ	ruby	rin chen dmar po
རིན་ཆེན་སྨན	metallic and organic drugs	rin chen sman
རིན་ཆེན་གཙུག	{sangs rgyas rin chen gtsug} Buddha Ratnasikhin	rin chen gtsug
རིན་ཆེན་གཙུག་ཏོར	crest of jewel	rin chen gtsug tor
རིན་ཆེན་གཙུག་ཏོར་ཆེན	1 of sman bla brgyad	rin chen gtsug tor chen
རིན་ཆེན་རྩེ་བྲན	jewel crest ornaments	rin chen rtse bran
རིན་ཆེན་བརྩེགས་པ	Mt Meru, built of jewels	rin chen brtsegs pa
རིན་ཆེན་མཛེས་པ	beautiful treasure	rin chen mdzes pa
རིན་ཆེན་མཛོད	precious treasury, precious treasure	rin chen mdzod
རིན་ཆེན་བཞི་འདྲེན	great rivers like indus, ganges	rin chen bzhi 'dren
རིན་ཆེན་ཟུར་བརྒྱད	eight faced jewel throne	rin chen zur brgyad
རིན་ཆེན་ཟླ་བས་ཞུས་པ	'phags pa rin chen zla bas zhus pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo	rin chen zla bas zhus pa
རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོ	957-1055 - Rinchen Zangpo, the first translator of the New Translation period	rin chen bzang po
རིན་ཆེན་མཟེས་པ	beautiful treasure	rin chen mzes pa
རིན་ཆེན་འོད	light of jewels	rin chen 'od
རིན་ཆེན་འོད་ཀྱི་གླིང	Regions of Jewel Light	rin chen 'od kyi gling
རིན་ཆེན་འོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན	The Jewel Light Tantra [tr Vairochana] 1 of the {lung gi chos}	rin chen 'od kyi rgyun
རིན་ཆེན་འོད་འཕྲོ	{rin chen 'od 'phro} [one of the {phyogs bcu'i sangs rgyas the buddhas of the 10 directions]	rin chen 'od 'phro
རིན་ཆེན་རི་གསུམ	the three precious mts [ri bo gangs can dang, ri bo 'bigs byed, ri bo man dha ra bcas gsum]	rin chen ri gsum
རིན་ཆེན་རིགས	the Jewel Family	rin chen rigs
རིན་ཆེན་རིལ་བུ	a special medicine made of precious gems, etc	rin chen ril bu
རིན་ཆེན་ལམ	precious path]; precious path	rin chen lam
རིན་ཆེན་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་གཉིས	bodhicitta of aspiration smon pa'i sems bskyed, pra idicittotp da and bodhicitta of entering 'jug pa'i sems bskyed, prasth nacittotp da OR don dam byang chub sems absolute bodhicitta, p ram rthikab...	rin chen sems bskyed gnyis
རིན་ཆེན་སོ	teeth of jewels	rin chen so
རིན་ཆེན་གསུམ	the three jewels/ three precious activities: 1) buddha, dharma, and sangha]; 2) rigs lam phra mo 'byed pa'i rnam dpyod, gzhung lugs gdams par shar ba'i nyams len, tshig sbyor tshul la mkhas pa'i ng...	rin chen gsum
རིན་ཆེན་གསེར་འཕྲེང	Precious Garland of Gold	rin chen gser 'phreng
རིན་ཆོག	it is worthwhile, worth the price	rin chog
རིན་ཆོན་སོང	payment has been useless	rin chon song
རིན་ཇི་ཙམ་རི་བ	what price is it worth?	rin ji tsam ri ba
རིན་གཉིས་འཁོར་ལོ	dngul sgor mo	rin gnyis 'khor lo
རིན་མཉམ	= value	rin mnyam
རིན་མཉམ་དངོས་ཟོག	= value wares/ products	rin mnyam dngos zog
རིན་མཉམ་བརྗེ་འཚོང	mutually exchange/ trade	rin mnyam brje 'tshong
རིན་མཉམ་བརྗེ་ལེན	mutually exchange/ trade	rin mnyam brje len
རིན་རྟོག་པ	ascertain the price, estimate the value	rin rtog pa
རིན་རྟོགས	find out the price/ value	rin rtogs
རིན་ཐང	[inexpressibly) precious; [inexpressibly] precious	rin thang
རིན་ཐང་ཀུན	cowry, current coin of ancient india	rin thang kun
རིན་ཐང་གི་ཆོས་ཉིད	law of value	rin thang gi chos nyid
རིན་ཐང་དངུལ་འབབ	money used to pay [for] something	rin thang dngul 'bab
རིན་ཐང་ཅན	valuable, worthy	rin thang can
རིན་ཐང་ཆག	devaluate, depreciate	rin thang chag
རིན་ཐང་ཆེ	dear, costly	rin thang che
རིན་ཐང་ཆེ་བ	valuable	rin thang che ba
རིན་ཐང་ཆེན་པོ	costly, valuable	rin thang chen po
རིན་ཐང་ཆེན་པོར་བརྩི་བ	treasure	rin thang chen por brtsi ba
རིན་ཐང་འཇལ་བ	figure out the price/ value	rin thang 'jal ba
རིན་ཐང་གཏན་འབེབས	fixed value	rin thang gtan 'bebs
རིན་ཐང་ཐལ	invaluable, priceless	rin thang thal
རིན་ཐང་ལྡན་པ	valuable, precious	rin thang ldan pa
རིན་ཐང་དཔག་མེད	at any price	rin thang dpag med
རིན་ཐང་ཕབ	reduce the price	rin thang phab
རིན་ཐང་བྲལ	invaluable, priceless	rin thang bral
རིན་ཐང་བྲལ་བ	dear, precious, invaluable, priceless	rin thang bral ba
རིན་ཐང་མེད	invaluable, priceless	rin thang med
རིན་ཐང་མེད་པ	valueless	rin thang med pa
རིན་ཐང་ལྷག་མ	surplus value	rin thang lhag ma
རིན་དི	bad, musket-ball	rin di
རིན་དོད	payment	rin dod
རིན་དོད་གཏོང	pay, make a payment	rin dod gtong
རིན་རྣམ	rin chen rnam rgyal	rin rnam
རིན་པ	value, prize	rin pa
རིན་པ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	to bargain	rin pa bsgrigs pa
རིན་པོ་ཅེ	SA rin po che	rin po ce
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཀུན	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	rin po che kun
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་བཀོད་པ	jeweled array	rin po che bkod pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་འཁོར་ལོ	major klong sde tantra	rin po che 'khor lo
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྒྱལ་ཙ	{rin po che rgyal tsa [phag mo gru pa rdo rje rgyal po'i slob ma principal one of the khro phu bka' brgyud, rab byung gnyis pa'i sa pho khyi la gtsang gi shab smad du 'khrungs, zhang po gnubs kyi r...	rin po che rgyal tsa
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྒྲོན་མེའི་རྒྱུད	Jewel Lamp Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	rin po che sgron me'i rgyud
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལྔ	the five precious jewels	rin po che lnga
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་གཅིག་གི་མཐུས་ཀྱང	the power of even one of these gems	rin po che gcig gi mthus kyang
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་ལྔ	the five precious substances [gold, silver, turquoise, coral, pearl]	rin po che sna lnga
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་བདུན	7 royal treasures	rin po che sna bdun
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་ཚོགས	a variety of precious stones rin po che sna tshogs las grub pa'i pad ma 'dab ma 'bum brdal - a lotus of many kinds of jewels with a hundred thousand petals, in full bloom	rin po che sna tshogs
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྤུང་བ	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras	rin po che spung ba
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྤུངས་པ	nt. Heaped Jewels	rin po che spungs pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྤུངས་པའི་རྒྱུད	nt. Tantra of Heaped Jewels	rin po che spungs pa'i rgyud
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཕྲེང་བའི་རྒྱུད	Jewel Garland Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	rin po che phreng ba'i rgyud
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་འབར་པ	[Shri Guhyasamaajatantrararaaja-t.iikaa candraprabhaa- 2610 naama] one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}; [Shri Guhyasamaajatantrara...	rin po che 'bar pa
ཅནདྲཔྲབྷཨ	naama] one of the {chos bcu bzhi} fourteen treatises on the Guhyasamaja commentaries by {sangs rgyas ye shes}	candraprabhaa
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་འབར་བ	the blazing of gemstones- S'ri Guhyasamaajatantrararaajatiikaa candraprabhaa-naama	rin po che 'bar ba
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་འབར་བའི་རྒྱུད	Shining Jewel Tantra. One of The Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	rin po che 'bar ba'i rgyud
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྦུབས	precious interior	rin po che sbubs
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྫ་རི་པ	{rdza ri ras pa shes rab dpal} a bka' rgyud pa master	rin po che rdza ri pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཡི་གེ་ཅན	nt. Text of Precious Copper Letters	rin po che zangs kyi yi ge can
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཡི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	eight jewel ornaments [of a sambhogakaya buddha]	rin po che yi rgyan brgyad
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རང་འབར་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	a glowing jewelled wheel	rin po che rang 'bar gyi 'khor lo
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་རེག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of touching precious things [because of low-minded thoughts, touch rang la mi dbang ba'i jewels, pearls etc jewels or rin po che'i ming gis smros pa and conches, great drums and, weapo...	rin po che la reg pa'i ltung byed
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་རེག་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment- faullt of touching precious things [spang ltung sum cu'i nang gses, chags sems kyi sgo nas rung ba ma byas pa'i gser la sogs pa'i rin po che la reg gam reg tu bcug nas bdag gir bya...	rin po che la reg pa'i spang ba
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལེན་དུ་འགྲོ་བར	make his fortune in gems {rgya mtshor rin po che len du 'gro bar chas} - going to sea to make his fortune in gems	rin po che len du 'gro bar
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་གཉིས	Syn {sems bskyed rnam gnyis}; Twofold Precious Enlightened Attitude. The attitudes of aspiration {smon pa'i sems bskyed} and of undertaking. or entrance {'jug pa'i sems bskyed}	rin po che sems bskyed gnyis
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྐྱེམས	precious drink	rin po che'i skyems
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཁྲི	a jewel throne, a throne of precious substances; a jewel throne, a throne of precious substances	rin po che'i khri
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གླིང	a fabulous island	rin po che'i gling
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རྒྱན	precious ornaments	rin po che'i rgyan
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རྒྱན་གྱིས་བརྒྱན་པ	ornamented with jewels	rin po che'i rgyan gyis brgyan pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	Eight jewel ornaments. The crown, earrings, choker, short necklace, long necklace, arm rings, bracelets and anklets, belt	rin po che'i rgyan brgyad
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	turquoise	rin po che'i rgyal po
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	jeweled lamps	rin po che'i sgron me
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྒྲོམ	chest made of gold or silver studded with precious stones	rin po che'i sgrom
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཅོད་པན	TSE	rin po che'i cod pan
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	jeweled stupa	rin po che'i mchod rten
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་འཇིམ་པ	mortar composed of pulverized cement of marvelous properties	rin po che'i 'jim pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཏོག	the precious topornament	rin po che'i tog
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གཏེར	treasury, mine of jewels/ precious things	rin po che'i gter
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གདན	precious/ jewel seat	rin po che'i gdan
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གདུགས	precious umbrella [bkra shis rtags brgyad kyi nang gses shig]	rin po che'i gdugs
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྤར་ཁབ	gsang ba snying po'i 'grel pa spar khab rin po che'i pho brang gser dang mu tig	rin po che'i spar khab
གིས་བརྒྱན་པ	a palace ornamented with gold and pearls	gis brgyan pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕྱག་ཤིང	jewel scepter, a rod of precious material	rin po che'i phyag shing
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕྲེང་བ	{rin chen phreng ba} ratna mala, Ratnavali by Nagarjuna	rin po che'i phreng ba
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྦུབས	precious enclosure/ inner space/ matrix	rin po che'i sbubs
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྦྱོར་བ	sulfates or carbonates of metallic medicines	rin po che'i sbyor ba
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མྱུ་གུ	precious plants	rin po che'i myu gu
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྨན	precious jewel med. [including mer bsregs pa'i tse mi zhu ba gyu byur lta bu mi zhu ba'i khams kyi rigs dang, mer bsregs pa'i tse zhu ba gser dngul lta bu zhu ba'i khams dang gnyis mchis]	rin po che'i sman
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྨན་གཙོ་བོ་དགུ	CHN	rin po che'i sman gtso bo dgu
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་མཛོད	precious treasury	rin po che'i mdzod
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གཟི་བརྗིད	brilliance of jewels	rin po che'i gzi brjid
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་འོད	jewel light	rin po che'i 'od
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་རིགས	the ratna / jewel family / aspect	rin po che'i rigs
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ལུས	gem like body	rin po che'i lus
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ལྷམ་རན་པ	the jeweled boots	rin po che'i lham ran pa
རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ལྷུན་པོ	heaps of jewels	rin po che'i lhun po
རིན་སྤུངས	a town in tsang, name of a place in west Tibet	rin spungs
རིན་སྤུངས་སྙན་འགྲེལ	{rin spungs snyan 'grel}	rin spungs snyan 'grel
རིན་སྤུངས་པ	{rin spungs pa}	rin spungs pa
རིན་སྤུངས་མཙོ་ལ	rin spungs mtsho pass [yar klungs gtsang po'i rked rgyud kyi lho 'g u yod cing de'i mtho tsad rgya mtso'i ngos nas smi 5438 yod,//5438/	rin spungs mtso la
རིན་སྤུངས་མཚོ་ལ	rin spungs mtsho pass	rin spungs mtsho la
རིན་སྤུངས་རྫོང	{rin spungs} rdzong	rin spungs rdzong
རིན་ཕེའུ	PRC $ currency jin min pi	rin phe'u
རིན་བྱིན	rin gong sprad pa	rin byin
རིན་བྱུང	SA rin chen 'byung ldan	rin byung
རིན་འབབ	cost	rin 'bab
རིན་འབབ་པ	falling in value	rin 'bab pa
རིན་འབེབས་པ	/ 1 {rin gcog pa; 2) rin gong rgyag pa	rin 'bebs pa
རིན་འབྱུང	Ratnasambhava	rin 'byung
རིན་འབྱུང་གི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞི	TSE	rin 'byung gi dam tshig bzhi
རིན་འབྲི་བ	falling in value	rin 'bri ba
རིན་སྦྲ་གཉིས་མེད	w/o cost or postage	rin sbra gnyis med
རིན་མེད	w/o cost, free	rin med
རིན་མེད་དུ	gratis	rin med du
རིན་ཚད	price	rin tshad
རིན་ཚབ	[re]payment	rin tshab
རིན་ཚབ་སྤྲོད	[re]pay	rin tshab sprod
རིན་བརྫངས	a dowry	rin brdzangs
རིན་ལ་བྱུང་བ	received as fee for	rin la byung ba
རིན་ཤས་ཉོས	bought with money or price	rin shas nyos
རིན་ཧྲིན	ginseng	rin hrin
རིབ	lies, cheating	rib
རིབ་བྱེད	lie, cheat	rib byed
རིབ་མ	fence, hedge, enclosure	rib ma
རིབ་ཙམ	1) just a little [time]; 2) khram pa'i rnam pa'am gya' yod pa	rib tsam
རིབ་ཙམ་སྒུག་རོགས་གནང	please wait a bit	rib tsam sgug rogs gnang
རིབ་ཙམ་མཐོང་བྱུང	I got just a glimpse	rib tsam mthong byung
རིབ་རིབ	1) just a moment, 'khyug tsam; 2) unclear appearance	rib rib
རིབ་བཤད	lie, cheat	rib bshad
རིམ	level, stage, succession, grade, procedure, gradual; gradual, level, stage, succession, grade, procedure	rim
རིམ་སྐྱེལ	rim bzhin skyel ba'i ming,//'grul pa rim skyel,//bya 'os rim bskyal	rim skyel
རིམ་སྐྱེས་པ	the gradual person who develops slowly like a barley sprout	rim skyes pa
རིམ་འཁྲིད་པ	progressive guidance	rim 'khrid pa
རིམ་གྱིས	by stages, gradually, in succession, smoothly	rim gyis
རིམ་གྱིས་གོམས་པ	gradually trained	rim gyis goms pa
རིམ་གྱིས་འགྱུར	change gradually, evolve	rim gyis 'gyur
རིམ་གྱིས་འཇུག་པ	entering gradually	rim gyis 'jug pa
རིམ་གྱིས་ལྟར་བསྒོམ	gradual meditation	rim gyis ltar bsgom
རིམ་གྱིས་བལྟར་བཅུག	to apply one after the other	rim gyis bltar bcug
རིམ་གྱིས་པ	1) like stairs go gradually from lower to higher, Gradual type/ realization/ path; 2) Kagyu mahamudra gradual meditation method	rim gyis pa
རིམ་གྱིས་པ་གྲོལ་ལམ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three Aspects of the Gradual Path to Liberation [Mah yoga: The basis characterised as discriminative awareness is the view {rgyu shes pa'i mtshan nyid lta ba} the conditions characterised as the en...	rim gyis pa grol lam rnam gsum
རིམ་གྱིས་པ་དང་ཅིག་ཆར་བ	gradual or instantaneous type	rim gyis pa dang cig char ba
རིམ་གྱིས་པའི་གྲོལ་ལམ་གསུམ	mahayoga: the ground characterized as knowledge or discriminating awareness is the view, {rgyu shes pa'i mtshan nyid lta ba; conditions characterized as entrance are meditation {rkyen 'jug pa'i mts...	rim gyis pa'i grol lam gsum
རིམ་གྱིས་བའི་སྣ་ཚོགས་གཉིས་མེད་པ	sequential non-pluralists	rim gyis ba'i sna tshogs gnyis med pa
རིམ་གྱིས་རྫོགས	will gradually be perfected	rim gyis rdzogs
རིམ་གྲངས	numerals, #s, mathematical progression	rim grangs
རིམ་གྲས	stratum, class	rim gras
རིམ་གྲི	hunger	rim gri
རིམ་གྲོ	1) respect, reverence, service, worship, veneration; 2) obstacle clearing/ healing rites, long life practice/ service, religious ceremony, rite [of aid] 2612	rim gro
རིམ་གྲོ་བསྐྱེད་པ	the intention of applying it	rim gro bskyed pa
རིམ་གྲོ་བགྱི་བ	{dngos su bzhugs la rim gro bgyi ba med} they do not honor him while he is present in person	rim gro bgyi ba
རིམ་གྲོ་ཆེན་པོ	great sacrificial festival	rim gro chen po
རིམ་གྲོ་ཆེན་པོ་བྱས་ཀྱང	although they performed purifying rituals	rim gro chen po byas kyang
རིམ་གྲོ་དང་བཀུར་སྟི	serving and respecting	rim gro dang bkur sti
རིམ་གྲོ་པ	principal attendant	rim gro pa
རིམ་གྲོ་བ	rites of aid, healing ceremony	rim gro ba
རིམ་གྲོ་བྱེད་པ	to use for a rite of aid	rim gro byed pa
རིམ་གྲོ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ	ther highest respect/ veneration	rim gro bla na med pa
རིམ་གྲོ་བླ་མེད	extraordinary religious service	rim gro bla med
རིམ་གྲོའི་གནས	place of religious service	rim gro'i gnas
རིམ་གྲོའི་ལས	1) servant, attendant; 2) doing long life practice	rim gro'i las
རིམ་གྲོར་བཏང	to use for a rite of aid	rim gror btang
རིམ་གྲོས་ཐར་འགྱུར	he will yet be cured by religious ceremonies	rim gros thar 'gyur
རིམ་དགུའི་ཐེག་པ	the nine gradual vehicles	rim dgu'i theg pa
རིམ་འགྲོ	1) honor, respect. 2) rites of aid, healing ceremony	rim 'gro
རིམ་འགྲོ་ཆེན་པོ	great sacrificial festival	rim 'gro chen po
རིམ་འགྲོ་པ	attendant, attending servant,	rim 'gro pa
རིམ་འགྲོ་བ	attendant, aide-de-camp, household officials, priest conducting daily service	rim 'gro ba
རིམ་འགྲོར་བྱས་པ	to be honored, respected, revered	rim 'gror byas pa
རིམ་འགྲོས	rim pa ltar ram gom pa rim bgrod	rim 'gros
རིམ་རྒྱས	gradually over-spreading	rim rgyas
རིམ་བརྒལ	irregular, not gradual	rim brgal
རིམ་བརྒལ་ཞུ་གཏུག	appeal to a higher court in an irregular manner	rim brgal zhu gtug
རིམ་བརྒྱུད	lineal transmission from 1 to another	rim brgyud
རིམ་བསྒྲུབ	rtsa bsgrub bzhin mi byed par snga ma snga ma'i steng du dhru wa bsres pa'i sgo nas rjes ma rjes ma rim gyis sgrub pa	rim bsgrub
རིམ་ང་གསལ་སྒྲོན	by Tsongkhapa	rim nga gsal sgron
རིམ་ལྔ	the system of practical application of the father tantras especially taught by Nagarjuna and Aryadeva and Chandrakirti (body, speech, mind, illusory body, unity)	rim lnga
རིམ་ཅན	successively	rim can
རིམ་ཅིག་ཆར	gradually and altogether	rim cig char
རིམ་གཅིག	once, one time	rim gcig
རིམ་ཆག	decrease gradually	rim chag
རིམ་མཆེད	gradual spreading/ diffusion/ dissemination	rim mched
རིམ་འཇུག	gradual involvement / engagement	rim 'jug
རིམ་ཉམས་རིམ་སྟོངས	in order skyo ru song ba and khyim gzhis stongs pa	rim nyams rim stongs
རིམ་གཉིས	Two stages. 'development stage' and 'completion stage.'	rim gnyis
རིམ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	the yogas/ yogins of the two stages [utpattikrama and sampannakrama]	rim gnyis kyi rnal 'byor pa
རིམ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ལམ	Path of the two stages. The two stages of development and completion which are the means and knowledge (prajna and upaya) of Vajrayana practice	rim gnyis kyi lam
རིམ་གཉིས་རྣལ་འབྱོར	two-stage yoga	rim gnyis rnal 'byor
རིམ་སྟར	succession, series	rim star
རིམ་བསྟར	series, order, sequence	rim bstar
རིམ་མཐུད	1 after another, in succession	rim mthud
རིམ་དང་རིམ་མིན	in order and reverse order [the sun coursing in the six huses Cancer etc. is in order, and the six Capricorn etc. in reverse order, the five planets and comet mjug ring also rigs 'gre'o]	rim dang rim min
རིམ་དུ	progressively. Syn {rim gyis}	rim du
རིམ་ལྡབས	double	rim ldabs
པྲོཅེདུརེ	series, succession, stage,	procedure
རིམ་པ་གོང་མ	higher rank/ level/ grade, superior	rim pa gong ma
རིམ་པ་བརྒྱད	the eight vehicles from worldly vehicle of devas and humans up to anuyoga	rim pa brgyad
རིམ་པ་ལྔ་པ	5th rank	rim pa lnga pa
པོས་མཛད་པ	lo ts' ba dge slong rin chen grub kyis bsgyur pa'o] rim pa lnga'i don mdor bshad pa rnal 'byor pa'i yid 'phrog - {rim pa ltar -	pos mdzad pa
རིམ་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	don rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, mtshon bya dpe can gyi khyad chos 'ga' zhig sngon la bkod pa de rnams mtshon byed dpe'i dngos pos go rim bzhin du mtshon par byed pa'i rgyan zhig /	rim pa can gyi rgyan
རིམ་པ་གཉིས	Two Stages of the Path, according to Mahayoga. The path of skillful means {thabs lam} and the path of liberation {grol lam}. the two stages [of the path of Mahayoga]. {thabs lam, grol lam}; Two Sta...	rim pa gnyis
རིམ་པ་གཉིས་པའི	secondary rim pa gnyis po'i ting nge 'dzin nyams	rim pa gnyis pa'i
རིམ་པ་ལྟར	in order, gradually, step by step	rim pa ltar
རིམ་པ་ལྟར་དྲངས	take [it] down the row	rim pa ltar drangs
རིམ་པ་ལྟར་བྱེད	do in order/ gradually/ step by step	rim pa ltar byed
རིམ་པ་བསྟར་ཆགས	gcig rjes gcig gis bsnol zhing tsar du dngar ba ltar du yod	rim pa bstar chags
རིམ་པ་དང་པོ	Syn {bskyed rim}	rim pa dang po
རིམ་པ་ཕབ	be demoted	rim pa phab
རིམ་པ་བཞིན	respectively, successively, in sequence, gradually, in this same manner, variety [of songs]	rim pa bzhin
རིམ་པ་བཞིན་དུ	successively, in sequence, gradually	rim pa bzhin du
རིམ་པ་འོག་མ	lower rank/ level/ grade, subordinate	rim pa 'og ma
རིམ་པ་ཡིན་པ	progressive steps	rim pa yin pa
རིམ་པ་ཡིན་པར	progressive steps	rim pa yin par
རིམ་པ་རབ་འབྲིང་ཐ་གསུམ	of excellent, middling and inferior rank	rim pa rab 'bring tha gsum
རིམ་པ་ལ	in a gradual manner	rim pa la
རིམ་པ་གསུམ་པ	third level	rim pa gsum pa
རིམ་པ་ལྷག་པོ་བརྩིག་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of building extra walls [ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu'i nang gses, in a place w unstable ground or a time of rains gnod pa srung ba'i thabs ma byas par, for 1 day for the wall of th...	rim pa lhag po brtsig pa'i ltung byed
རིམ་པའི་ཁྱད་པར	rank, level, grade	rim pa'i khyad par
རིམ་པའི་སྔ་རྐང	the sun mtshon na is in Cancer, Leo, and Virgo the 1st three houses of the S transit	rim pa'i snga rkang
རིམ་པའི་ཕྱི་རྐང	the sun mtshon na is in Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius, in the last three houses of the S transit	rim pa'i phyi rkang
རིམ་པར	successively, one after another, gradually, consecutive, gradually, in series, in stages, one after another, gradual in series, in stages, one after another, slowly	rim par
རིམ་པར་སྐྱེ་བ	develop slowly	rim par skye ba
རིམ་པར་སྐྱེས་པའི་གང་ཟག	ordinary people who are receptive to the gradual path	rim par skyes pa'i gang zag
རིམ་པར་བགྲོད་པ་དབང	successive gradation of empowerment	rim par bgrod pa dbang
རིམ་པར་མཆེད་དེ	increased little by little	rim par mched de
རིམ་པར་གདམས་པ	gradually instructing	rim par gdams pa
རིམ་པར་ཕྱེ་བ	the progressive classification	rim par phye ba
རིམ་པར་བྱོན་པ	successive	rim par byon pa
རིམ་པས	developmentally; gradually/ in stages; eventually	rim pas
རིམ་པས་དཀྲིགས་པ	lined up	rim pas dkrigs pa
རིམ་དཔྱོད	sequential investigation	rim dpyod
རིམ་འཕར	progressive increase	rim 'phar
རིམ་བྱུང	gradual/ successive occurrence	rim byung
རིམ་བྱུང་དུ	successively	rim byung du
རིམ་བྱུང་ཚད་ཐོ	record [a'dzam	rim byung tshad tho
རིམ་བྱོན	approach/ arrive in order/ successively	rim byon
རིམ་བྲལ	disorderly, irregular, sporadic	rim bral
རིམ་དབྱེ	chapter, progressive classification, abbr. {rim par dbye ba} / {rim par bye ba}	rim dbye
རིམ་འབེབས་པ	degrade, bring down gradually	rim 'bebs pa
རིམ་འབྱུང	sequence, succession	rim 'byung
རིམ་འབྱུང་གི	successive	rim 'byung gi
རིམ་འབྱུང་བ	successor	rim 'byung ba
རིམ་འབྱོར	letters, people etc going by successively	rim 'byor
རིམ་མིན	reverse order	rim min
རིམ་མིན་གྱི་སྔ་རྐང	'khor lo ma bsnan par if 1/2 the circle is discarded that is the rim min gyi snga rkang. then the sun la mtshon na is in Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces	rim min gyi snga rkang
རིམ་མིན་གྱི་ཕྱི་རྐང	'khor lo bsnan nas, if 1/2 the circle is discarded that is the {rim min gyi phyi rkang}. Then the sun nyi ma la mtshon na is in Aries, Taurus and Gemini	rim min gyi phyi rkang
རིམ་མིན་བསྒོམ	meditate out of order/ in reverse order 2614	rim min bsgom
རིམ་མེད	disorderly, irregular, sporadic	rim med
རིམ་རྩོལ	gradual efforts, the stages of practice	rim rtsol
རིམ་རྩོལ་བྱེད་པ	to follow the stages of practice	rim rtsol byed pa
རིམ་བརྩེགས	tiers, layers, progressive stacking (one above the other); {'byung bzhi rim brtsegs} the tiers of the four elements	rim brtsegs
རིམ་འཚམ	turn, order	rim 'tsham
རིམ་འཛར་དུ་འཁོད་པ	having arranged in order sit, gan rgya sogs kyi mjug tu the'u rim pa bzhin du 'khod pa	rim 'dzar du 'khod pa
རིམ་འཛུད	infiltrate, penetrate	rim 'dzud
རིམ་བཞིན	gradually, in a row, by turn, in a line, in turn, by and by, successively, successively, gradually, one after the other	rim bzhin
རིམ་བཞིན་བསྒོམ	meditate in order [on a series like the dhyanas]	rim bzhin bsgom
རིམ་བཞིན་དུ	gradually, one after another	rim bzhin du
རིམ་བཞིན་ཟད་པ	lapse	rim bzhin zad pa
རིམ་ཡོད	rank, level, grade	rim yod
རིམ་ལེན་དངུལ་བུན	bu lon gyar bsdu byed stangs shig	rim len dngul bun
རིམ་སེལ	eliminate/ solve gradually	rim sel
རིམ་གསབ	gcig shul gcig gis 'tshab pa	rim gsab
རིམ་གསུམ	Three Stages	rim gsum
རིམ་བསགས	gradual accumulation	rim bsags
རིམ་བསགས་བྱེད	accumulate gradually	rim bsags byed
རིམས	'gos nad, infectious disease, epidemic	rims
རིམས་འགོག	epidemic prevention	rims 'gog
རིམས་འགོག་སྨན་ཁབ	inoculation, vaccination [for epidemic prevention]	rims 'gog sman khab
རིམས་ཆམ	influenza	rims cham
རིམས་རྙིང	rims nad that has lasted a long time	rims rnying
རིམས་གཏོང་བ	send or cause a plague	rims gtong ba
རིམས་དྲག་པོ	virulent contagious disease	rims drag po
རིམས་བདག	'go ba'i nad kyi bdag po}	rims bdag
རིམས་ནད	'gos nad, infectious disease, epidemic	rims nad
རིམས་ནད་རྨོངས་བུ	{rims nad rmongs bu} infectious disease	rims nad rmongs bu
རིམས་པ	[arch] brims pa	rims pa
རིམས་མི་ཟད་པ	typhoid fever	rims mi zad pa
རིམས་མི་བཟད་པ	'gos nad hard to bear	rims mi bzad pa
རིམས་མེད་པ	free from epidemic	rims med pa
རིམས་སྨྱོན	gnyan nad dang 'doms pa'i rims shig	rims smyon
རིམས་ཚད	1 of tsha ba'i nad	rims tshad
རིམས་ཚད་ལྔ	CHN	rims tshad lnga
རིམས་གསར	new rims nad just after being caught	rims gsar
རིའམ་བྲག་གཟར་པོ	declivity	ri'am brag gzar po
རིའི་ཀུ་ཤུ	mt ku shu tree	ri'i ku shu
རིའི་དཀྱུས	mt range/ chain	ri'i dkyus
རིའི་ཁུག་ཀྱོག	gorge, valley, ravine	ri'i khug kyog
རིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Mt Meru	ri'i rgyal po
རིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན	spos kyi ngad can, rnam par 'dal ba, drang srong ri, gnya' shing 'dzin, rta rna ri, sa 'dzin, khor yug, dpal can, ri rab)	ri'i rgyal po chen
རིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཅུ	10 kings of mountains (kha ba can	ri'i rgyal po chen po bcu
རིའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རི་རབ	TSE	ri'i rgyal po ri rab
རིའི་ཉིན་སྲིབ	mts S and N	ri'i nyin srib
རིའི་ལྡེར	the side of a hill, hillside	ri'i lder
རིའི་རྣ་བ་ཅན	the earth	ri'i rna ba can
རིའི་དཔུང་པ	in the center of a mt left/right continuations	ri'i dpung pa
རིའི་ཕར་རྒྱབ	back of a mt	ri'i phar rgyab
རིའི་ཕུར་བུ	the earth	ri'i phur bu
རིའི་བུ	became children of mts	ri'i bu
རིའི་སྨན་འཐུ་བ	gather medicinal plants on the mountains	ri'i sman 'thu ba
རིའི་ཡོམ་འབོག	kind of 'dag rdzas tree growing in the mts	ri'i yom 'bog
རིའི་རུས་སྦལ	hill tortoise	ri'i rus sbal
རིའི་ལོགས	mt slope	ri'i logs
རིའི་གཤམ་དུ	downhill	ri'i gsham du
རིའི་ལྷ་སྔོན་པོས་ལུང་བསྟན་པ་ལྟར	the blue god of the mountain foretold all that would come to pass	ri'i lha sngon pos lung bstan pa ltar
རིའུ་མིག	small checks or squares or enclosures made by lines crossing each other, chart, diagram	ri'u mig
རིའོ་དེ་རན་ནེ་རོ	Rio de Janeiro	ri'o de ran ne ro
རིར	on the mountain	rir
རིར་སྐྱེས	born in the mountain	rir skyes
རིར་གན་པ	one living near a mountain	rir gan pa
རིར་འཛག	mt climbing	rir 'dzag
རིལ	fall, collapse, [comp ril po] whole, complete, entire, round	ril
རིལ་གྱིས	strongly; syn {til gyis} ril gyis g.yogs pa - entirely covered, completely enveloped, wrapped up	ril gyis
རིལ་གྲངས	whole/ total count/ #	ril grangs
རིལ་འགྲོ	to roll	ril 'gro
རིལ་འགྲོ་བ	roll	ril 'gro ba
རིལ་ཆ	zla rkang whole and in part [gnas gong ma zla rkang ril po'i grangs yin, 'og ma zla rkang ril po gcig cha 3,780 divided by 30 parts = 126, which is in 1 phase day rkang pa ril po gcig &, rkang pa r...	ril cha
རིལ་འཇོག་མ	celestial courtesan	ril 'jog ma
རིལ་ཏིང	balls, globules made of flour as offerings, sacrificial water cup	ril ting
རིལ་པ	unit	ril pa
རིལ་པ་སྤྱི་བླུགས	TSE	ril pa spyi blugs
རིལ་པོ	1) complete zla rkang, moon step astr.; 2) all, whole, complete, entire, rolled into 1, unit, a whole, not composite/ accumulated; 2) round [opp of {du ma spungs pa}	ril po
རིལ་པོ་གཅིག	a single whole	ril po gcig
རིལ་པོ་འཛིན	holding [the body] entirely [sgra gcan gyis nyi zla'i dkyil 'khor ril po 'dzin pa]	ril po 'dzin
རིལ་པོའི་ལྷག་མ	remainder of the whole	ril po'i lhag ma
རིལ་པོར	wholly, entirely	ril por
རིལ་པོར་འཛིན	apprehending as a whole	ril por 'dzin
རིལ་པོར་འཛིན་པ	accepting as a food-ball	ril por 'dzin pa
རིལ་པོར་འཛིན་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	the meditation of apprehending as a whole 2615	ril por 'dzin pa'i bsam gtan
རིལ་བ	round	ril ba
རིལ་བ་ཆབ་ཙགས་ཅན	bum pa chu tshags can	ril ba chab tsags can
རིལ་བ་ཆུ་སྙིང་ཅན	bum pa chu blug yod pa	ril ba chu snying can
རིལ་བ་སྤྱི་བླུགས	a round water jug (for rinsing after eating or shitting)	ril ba spyi blugs
ཚོས་མོཨུཐ	washing water vessel, small vase tog can zhig ste rjes su pang du 'dogs rgyu'i chab blugs kyang bzos yod	tshos mouth
རིལ་བ་ཞབས་ཚགས་ཅན	soles of the feet nas chu tshags thub pa'i bum pa	ril ba zhabs tshags can
རིལ་བའི་སྤྱི་བླུགས	bottle narrow in the middle, gourd-bottle	ril ba'i spyi blugs
རིལ་བུ	lump, pill	ril bu
རིལ་བུའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	siddhi of [invisibility] pills	ril bu'i dngos grub
རིལ་བུའི་སྦྱོར་བ	{ril bu'i sbyor ba} zhi byed sman	ril bu'i sbyor ba
རིལ་བུར་སྒྲིལ་བ	roll into a pill	ril bur sgril ba
རིལ་བུར་དྲིལ	gather into a lump	ril bur dril
རིལ་མ	dung pellet [of sheep/ goats]	ril ma
རིལ་མིད་པ	swallow a thing entire	ril mid pa
རིལ་མོ	complete, round [lump]	ril mo
རིལ་ཚང	way of finding animal dung habitually left, and there hunters make a trap or hole	ril tshang
རིལ་འཛིན	holding [the body] entirely	ril 'dzin
རིལ་འཛིན་ལྟ་བ	materialistic view	ril 'dzin lta ba
རིལ་འཛིན་བརྟགས་པ	materialistic construction	ril 'dzin brtags pa
རིལ་གཟུགས	whole/ total form/ shape, globular	ril gzugs
རིལ་རིལ	piece, ball, round, sphere	ril ril
རིལ་རིལ་ཕྱེད་ཀ	hemisphere	ril ril phyed ka
རིལ་རིལ་དབྱིབས	spherical	ril ril dbyibs
རིལ་ལུད	globular manure/ fertilizer	ril lud
རིལ་ལེ་ཕྱིན་པ	[arch] thogs rdugs med par thal byung du phyin pa	ril le phyin pa
རིལ་སེམས	{ril sems gcig} (some single) collective mind/ oversoul	ril sems
རིལ་གསོག	whole/ total	ril gsog
རིས་བཀྲ	1) [vari]colored picture; 2) tiger	ris bkra
རིས་ཁྲ	ris bkra dang 'dra	ris khra
རིས་འགུལ་གློག་བརྙན	movie	ris 'gul glog brnyan
རིས་ཅན	partial, prejudices	ris can
རིས་ཅན་སོ་སོར	{ris can so sor grub pa} (to have ever existed as) distinct entities separate from one another	ris can so sor
རིས་བཅད	{ris su bcad pa} to make (arbitrary) divisions; to be partial/ prejudiced/ sectarian; to be divided	ris bcad
རིས་ཆ་དུ	partially. KKP, 240.10. [mss]	ris cha du
རིས་ཆད	misfortune; bias, partiality	ris chad
རིས་ཆད་བློ་ཡི་མི་ཁོམ་པ་བརྒྱད	the 8 unfavorable [characteristics] of a biased mind [nyon mongs pa'i 'ching ba dam po yod pa dang, kun spyod shin tu ngan pa, 'khor ba la yid mi skyo ba, dad pa cung zad kyang med pa, mi dge'i sdi...	ris chad blo yi mi khom pa brgyad
རིས་མཐུན་པ	(to be) alike	ris mthun pa
རིས་མཐུན་པར་གནས་པ	remain as one's similar class	ris mthun par gnas pa
རིས་ནོན	crushed by a mountain	ris non
རིས་བྲལ	impartial	ris bral
རིས་མ་བཅད	{ris su ma bcad pa} to be without preferences/ impartial/ nonsectarian/ unbiased	ris ma bcad
རིས་མེད	without distinction; {ris med kun la} to all without distinction	ris med
རིས་མེད་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great impartial equanimity; The Unbiased Great Equality	ris med mnyam pa chen po
རིས་མེད་བསྟན་པའི་བདག་པོ	Master of the	ris med bstan pa'i bdag po
རིས་མེད་དུ	without bias/ arbitrary division; unconditionally/ impartially	ris med du
རིས་མེད་པ	impartial; beyond partiality; one who is non sectarian, a follower of the Rimed or non sectarian movement	ris med pa
རིས་ཙན	class, sde tsan	ris tsan
རིས་གཟའ	seven (derived from the number of the greater planets together with the sun and moon)	ris gza'
རིས་བཤད	explanation of a picture	ris bshad
རིས་སུ	in figure	ris su
རིས་སུ་བཀོད	to write down	ris su bkod
རིས་སུ་བཀོད་པ	wrote down	ris su bkod pa
རིས་སུ་བཅད	particularize	ris su bcad
རིས་སུ་བཅད་པ	to make (arbitrary) divisions; to be partial/ prejudiced/ sectarian; to be divided	ris su bcad pa
རིས་སུ་ཆད	incline towards	ris su chad
རིས་སུ་ཆད་པ	incline towards. 2) R/GD: {so so nas grub pa}, "individually established." [mss]	ris su chad pa
རིས་སུ་བཏབ་པ	start to write down	ris su btab pa
རིས་སུ་བོར་བ	1) phyogs ris byed pa, mthong chung; 2) yal bar dor ba [bslab bya ris su ma bor ba,//rang 'gan ris su bor ba]	ris su bor ba
རིས་སུ་བྱེ་བར	in all its subdivisions	ris su bye bar
རིས་སུ་བྲིས་པ	drawn in pictures, decorated	ris su bris pa
རིས་སུ་འབྲི་བ	draw	ris su 'bri ba
རིས་སུ་མ་གཅོད་པར	impartial, nonsectarian [movement], non-partial, respect for all traditions, unbiased, not prejudiced/ biased, eclectic, w/o category/ judgements/ evaluations/ segmentation/ differentiation/ discri...	ris su ma gcod par
རིས་སུ་མ་བཅད་པ	nonsectarian, unbiased, impartial, unconfined, not limited to one type or category	ris su ma bcad pa
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆད་ཅིང	does not incline toward either-or; does not incline toward	ris su ma chad cing
ཨེཨིཐེར	or	either
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆད་ཆིང	does not incline towards either. or; does not incline towards either. or	ris su ma chad ching
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆད་པ	unbiased nonsectarian	ris su ma chad pa
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆད་པར	impartial, nonsectarian [movement], non-partial, respect for all traditions, unbiased, not prejudiced/ biased, eclectic, w/o category/ judgements/ evaluations/ segmentation/ differentiation/ discri...	ris su ma chad par
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆོད་པ	impartial, nonsectarian [movement], non-partial, respect for all traditions, unbiased, not prejudiced/ biased, eclectic, w/o category/ judgements/ evaluations/ segmentation/ differentiation/ discri...	ris su ma chod pa
རིས་སུ་མ་ཆོད་པར	impartial, nonsectarian [movement], non-partial, respect for all traditions, unbiased, not prejudiced/ biased, eclectic, w/o category/ judgements/ evaluations/ segmentation/ differentiation/ discri...	ris su ma chod par
རིས་བསགས་ཀྱི་བརྩི་བ	accumulated to date	ris bsags kyi brtsi ba
རུ	1) Shog,	ru
རུ་སྐོར	1) 'brog dud kha shas tshogs pa'i ming,//spang ljongs kyi ru skor; 2) 'brog dud kyi khyim mtshes	ru skor
རུ་སྐྱ	gru skya ste gru sgul ba'i shing leb	ru skya
རུ་ཁག	line, team	ru khag
རུ་ཁག་གི་རུ་མི	young pioneer	ru khag gi ru mi
རུ་ཁག་ཆུང་བ	squad, small team	ru khag chung ba
རུ་ཁལ	wt unit = about 25 kg.	ru khal
རུ་གྲལ	row, file	ru gral
རུ་གླུ	team/ brigade song	ru glu
རུ་མགོ་ལ་སྐྱེ	horn is growing on the head	ru mgo la skye
རུ་རྒྱ	Russia and CH/ India	ru rgya
རུ་རྒྱང་ཤ་མཐའ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	ru rgyang sha mtha'
རུ་སྒྲིག	procession, parade, to march in formation, to line up in rows	ru sgrig
རུ་སྒྲིག་གཏོང་བ	march	ru sgrig gtong ba
རུ་སྒྲིག་ས་ལམ	term used in traditional society for military salute, *presenting of arms	ru sgrig sa lam
རུ་བརྒྱ་ལྡིང་གསུམ	a Tibetan govt dmag dpon rank	ru brgya lding gsum
རུ་བསྒྲིགས	march in formation, line up in rows	ru bsgrigs
རུ་ང	1) dislike, hatred, anger, aggression; 2) ru ngar po, grudge, malice	ru nga
རུ་ངར་གད་གཙང	las ka zhib tsags 'thus tsang	ru ngar gad gtsang
རུ་ངར་ཏན་ཏིག	very precise/ definite/ meticulous/ fastidious [work etc]	ru ngar tan tig
རུ་ངར་པོ	1) fastidious, precise; 2) easily angered, hot-tempered; 3) greedy, avaricious	ru ngar po
རུ་བཅུད	ro bcud	ru bcud
རུ་ཆེན	battalion, large team/ brigade	ru chen
རུ་ཆེན་ལྔ	by king srong btsan sgam pos Tibet gtsang la g.yas ru &, ru lag dbus la dbu ru &, g.yon ru, and the rest divided into three ru: ru chen khag lngar divided, snga ma gnyis la bar also called {dbus gt...	ru chen lnga
རུ་རྟ	1) {ru rta} thang sman [SK kha lo yid 'ong ste ro tsa la mngar zhing kha ba, zhu rjes snyoms, nus pas rlung khrag 'khrugs pa'i nad dang, pho ba spos pa, glo nad, gag pa, sha ro, chu sri, zla mtshan...	ru rta
རུ་བསྟར	a line, row	ru bstar
རུ་ཐུང	{ru thung} bleeding nadi	ru thung
རུ་ཐུར	animal horn	ru thur
རུ་ཐོ་གར་སྐྱེས	Rutho karkye	ru tho gar skyes
རུ་ཐོག	fort in tibet	ru thog
སུ་ཡོད	byang ngos zhin cang yu gur rang skyong ljongs dang 'dabs 'brel yin]	su yod
རུ་ཐོབ་ཆབ་ཀྱི་སྐོར	Ruthop Chap gi Kor the Water Land of Ruthop. One of the three districts of Ngari (mnga' ris skor gsum)	ru thob chab kyi skor
རུ་དར	banner, military ensign of triangular shape, standard	ru dar
རུ་དར་འཕྱར་བ	display the banner, hoist the banner	ru dar 'phyar ba
རུ་དྲ	Rudras. 1) A type of unruly halfgod half-demon. 2) The demon of egoclinging	ru dra
རུ་དྲ་ཕོ་མོ	Rudra and his consort	ru dra pho mo
རུ་དྲ་སྨེ་བཤགས	Lamenting confession of Rudra	ru dra sme bshags
རུ་འདུད	group salute/ greeting	ru 'dud
རུ་འདྲེན	division leader	ru 'dren
རུ་འདྲེན་སྡེ་བཞི	front guard of those at a king's left right front and back	ru 'dren sde bzhi
རུ་འདྲེན་པ	division leader [dpung sna/ dmag gi ru sna leader]	ru 'dren pa
རུ་སྡེ	group of nomad tents. sde shog, sde tso, 'brog sde	ru sde
རུ་གནོན	Temples built by Songtsen Gampo; District Controlling [temple], one of Songtsen Gampo's geomantic temples to guard Tibet	ru gnon
རུ་གནོན་གྱི་ལྷ་ཁང་བཞི	the four district controlling temples CHN	ru gnon gyi lha khang bzhi
རུ་གནོན་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	king srong btsan sgam po'i skabs bod chags yul gyi sa dgra srin mo gan rkyal du nyal ba lta bu'i left and right palms of the hands and soles of the feet gyi kha gnon du bzhengs pa khams glong thang...	ru gnon gtsug lag khang
རུ་གནོན་ལྷ་ཁང	district controlling temples	ru gnon lha khang
རུ་སྣ	division of army, wing of army	ru sna
རུ་སྣེ	leader of a column/ line/ row	ru sne
རུ་པ	army, troops, rupa, statue	ru pa
རུ་པི	rupee	ru pi
རུ་པོ	ram	ru po
རུ་དཔུང	1) group of many people; 2) nomad tsho khag; 3) unit, team, brigade	ru dpung
རུ་དཔོན	regiment commander, commander of 250 troops, major	ru dpon
རུ་ཕྱག	group salute/ greeting	ru phyag
རུ་བ	nomads's them dud and shog khag [gzhung ru,//sger ru,//grwa ru]	ru ba
རུ་བ་སྐྱས་སྤོ	nomad ru khag moving from place to place	ru ba skyas spo
རུ་བ་པ	person living in a yak hair tent	ru ba pa
རུ་བ་སྤོ་བ	nomadic life	ru ba spo ba
རུ་བའི་ཚོགས	a group of yak hair tents, tent village	ru ba'i tshogs
རུ་སྦལ	tortoise	ru sbal
རུ་སྦལ་གི་རླུང	connecting w the eyes, wind of the tortoise	ru sbal gi rlung
རུ་མ	curded milk	ru ma
རུ་མི	young pioneer	ru mi
རུ་མིང	name of a unit, team, brigade	ru ming
རུ་མེ་ནི་ཡ	Rumania	ru me ni ya
རུ་མེན་ཉི་ཡ	Rumania	ru men nyi ya
རུ་དམག	1) troops arrayed in order/ lines; 2) ru shog gi khongs su gtogs pa'i dkyus dmag (	ru dmag
རུ་དམར	people, horses etc brdungs te having the horn of a slain animal	ru dmar
རུ་ཙན	sde tshan	ru tsan
རུ་གཙོ	leader of a group of many people/ nomad tsho khag/ unit, team, brigade	ru gtso
རུ་རྩི	zho/ chang making lees	ru rtsi
རུ་ཚར	fringes	ru tshar
རུ་ཚོགས	cluster	ru tshogs
རུ་མཚན	military colors/ standards	ru mtshan
རུ་མཚོན	1) soldiers's division-standard; 2) soldiers's weapons; 3) soldiers's division-standard and weapons	ru mtshon
རུ་འཛིངས	1) many tasks/ actions combined [rkyen ngan ru 'dzings]; 2) animals fighting w their horns	ru 'dzings
རུ་འཛིན	dmag dpung ru khag leader	ru 'dzin
རུ་གཞི	frame 2618	ru gzhi
རུ་བཞི	the four ranges [of C T]	ru bzhi
རུ་བཞི་སོག་པའི་གླིང	Regions of Four Sogdian Areas	ru bzhi sog pa'i gling
རུ་བཞིའི་གསས་སེལ	exorcism for the gsas of the four regions	ru bzhi'i gsas sel
རུ་ཟུང་བཞིའི་སྐོང་བཤགས	the four sets of fulfillment and confession; abbr. of {ru bzhi'i skong ba dang zung bzhi'i bshags pa}	ru zung bzhi'i skong bshags
རུ་ཡོང་བཟའ	{ru yong bza'}	ru yong bza'
རུ་རུ	1) tiger's roar; 2) stag's cry	ru ru
རུ་ལག	in the center brad kyi dur ba sna having been established, in the E 'jam na bkra, in the S bal po glang sna, in the W kem gyag mig, in the N bye ma la sngon; so so'i bar du song ba'i regions's old ...	ru lag
རུ་ལས་སྐྱེས	{ru las skyes} [minister of bod rje dgu pa pu de gung rgyal, phal cher han shar ma'i rgyal rabs kyi gong ma hrun tis dang dus mnyam, bod kyi lo rgyus thog blon po 'dis shing gi gshol dang, lcags da...	ru las skyes
རུ་ལུ	rulu mantra	ru lu
རུ་ལུ་སྔགས	rulu mantra	ru lu sngags
རུ་ལུ་འབྲུ་བརྒྱད	eight syllables of the ru lu mantra	ru lu 'bru brgyad
རུ་ལེ་སིམ་ཧ་ར་ཛ	Singharaja of Ruley. One of the first Tibetans to take ordination who received transmission from Hungkara in India. Also known as	ru le sim ha ra dza
Vཨིརྱརཇ་ཨོཕ༹་ཪུ	yong	Viryaraja of Ru
རུ་ལེབ	flat horns	ru leb
རུ་ལོག	reversal, process of reversing solid matter into radiant energy , when reversed, this is reversed	ru log
རུ་ལོག་གི་དགོངས	principle of reversal	ru log gi dgongs
རུ་ལོག་པ	reversed	ru log pa
རུ་ཤ་ཆེན	{ru sha chen} [one of five kinds of myrobalan, a medicinal tree [, pungent, sweet and sour tasting, by its power lus kyi sha tsil rgyas and degeneration of bodily strength are cured.]	ru sha chen
རུ་ཤན	separation, the gap between; distinction, the Rushen exercises (in Dzogchen)	ru shan
རུ་ཤན་ཕྱེ་བ	distinguishing between	ru shan phye ba
རུ་ཤན་དབྱེ་བ	distinction, separation	ru shan dbye ba
རུ་ཤན་འབྱེད་པ	to delineate/ distinguish the gap between . . .	ru shan 'byed pa
རུ་ཤར	county in 21th cent Tibet.	ru shar
རུ་ས	place where nomads stay	ru sa
རུ་སུ	Russia	ru su
རུག	gather together, collect, bend, bow	rug
རུག་གི	quickly, fast, soon	rug gi
རུག་གུ་མཚོ	{rug gu mtsho} lake [in mtsho sngon province mgo log Tibet rma stod rdzong]	rug gu mtsho
རུག་གེ	gathered, collected, bunched	rug ge
རུག་གེ་བ	gathering, collection, bunching together	rug ge ba
རུག་སྒོག	{rug sgog} garlic med. herb	rug sgog
རུག་པ	bend	rug pa
རུག་པ་དར་བཟང	herb {rug pa dar bzang}	rug pa dar bzang
རུག་བྱས	bent	rug byas
རུག་མ	town in sindhu	rug ma
རུག་འཚོགས	gathered into a group	rug 'tshogs
རུག་འཚོགས་དམག་མི	gathered soldiers	rug 'tshogs dmag mi
རུག་འཛོམ	gather together, collecting	rug 'dzom
རུག་རུག	compact	rug rug
རུག་རུག་བྱས་པའི་ཤིང་ལོ་སྐམ་པོ	dry leaves gathered together	rug rug byas pa'i shing lo skam po
རུག་རུག་བྱེད	gather together	rug rug byed
རུག་རུག་བྱེད་པ	collect together	rug rug byed pa
རུག་རུག་བཟོ	gather together rug rug bzos pa'i dpe cha 'thor ba rnams gathered pechas that had been scattered	rug rug bzo
རུང་ཁང	bake-house, kitchen	rung khang
རུང་ཁུས་ཟ་བ	[arch] fierce, vicious, wrathful	rung khus za ba
རུང་གི་ཆ་རྐྱེན	subsidiary factor	rung gi cha rkyen
རུང་ཆུ	water for washing the mouth before and after eating	rung chu
རུང་མཐུན	allowances	rung mthun
རུང་དུ་མི་འཐད	it is irrelevant	rung du mi 'thad
རུང་བ	fit, fitness [ggd]	rung ba
རུང་བ་ཉིད	appropriateness	rung ba nyid
རུང་བ་བྱ་ཚུལ་གསུམ	TSE	rung ba bya tshul gsum
རུང་བ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གཞི་བཅུ	Ten Transgressions. As stated in the Minor Transmissions {bka' 'gyur} Da pp. 646 663. the following ten transgressions were the issue of the second council at Vaishali, namely, exclamations of alas...	rung ba ma yin pa'i gzhi bcu
རུང་བའི་གོས་རྒྱུ་བདུན	CHN	rung ba'i gos rgyu bdun
རུང་བའི་ཚོན་གསུམ	the three suitable colors	rung ba'i tshon gsum
རུང་བའི་བཟའ་བ་ལྔ	the five suitable foods	rung ba'i bza' ba lnga
རུང་བའི་རིགས	analysis	rung ba'i rigs
རུང་བར་བྱ་བ	capability	rung bar bya ba
རུང་བྱ	rung ma yin	rung bya
རུང་མ་ཡིན	is [not] tenable	rung ma yin
རུང་མི་བྱིད་ཀྱང་རུང	it shouldn't matter [whether]	rung mi byid kyang rung
རུང་མི་བྱེད་ཀྱང་རུང	it shouldn't matter [whether]	rung mi byed kyang rung
རུང་མིན་གཞི་བཅུ	after the	rung min gzhi bcu
རུད	slip, that which has slipped down, falling mass, landslides	rud
རུད་རྒྱག	have an avalanche/ landslide	rud rgyag
རུད་པ	(tha mi dad pa nyil ba,//gangs ri rud pa,//sa rud pa	rud pa
རུད་རུད་པོ	gas pa'am nyil ba,. Angs rud sa rud brgyab pas 'gro lam rud rud po chags pa	rud rud po
རུན་ང་ཅན	spiteful, malicious	run nga can
རུབ	gathered together, collecting	rub
རུབ་རྒྱག	attack [in a gang], gang up on, rape	rub rgyag
རུབ་རྒྱབ་པ	to pounce, rush upon	rub rgyab pa
རུབ་བཅོམ	dgra bo sogs bskor nas bcom pa,//phyi nang gnyis nas rub bcom byed pa	rub bcom
རུབ་ཆས	'gro chas	rub chas
རུབ་ཆུ	large mountainous district of rupehhu in ladak	rub chu
རུབ་ཆོས	'gro chas gra sgrig	rub chos
རུབ་པ	rush in upon, attack, assault, join in an affray, close, shut	rub pa
རུབ་བྱུང	several people coming on to, attacking, a single person	rub byung
རུབ་འཛོམས	all combined	rub 'dzoms
རུབ་རུབ་ཏུ་སྤུངས་པ	piled together	rub rub tu spungs pa
རུབ་རུབ་བཟོས་པ	collected, amassed	rub rub bzos pa
རུབ་ཤོ	currant	rub sho
རུབས	imp. of {rub pa}	rubs
རུབས་པ	[p rub pa] rushed in upon, attacked, assaulted, ganged up, joined up w/ got together [for bad purposes]; 2) (Tha mi dad pa rubs pa, rub pa,, closed, shut	rubs pa
རུམ	1. Rum pa!; 2) womb, uterus; 2) inside, among [sprin rum,//smag rum]; 3) aam phrag [mgo rum rgyag pa]; 4) btags pa'i gdan [rgya rum,//gtsang rum]; 5) phag)	rum
རུམ་བཏེགས་ཀར་མ་ཆོས་སྒར	in sikkim	rum btegs kar ma chos sgar
རུམ་འཐག	weave a rug	rum 'thag
རུམ་འཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	rug factory	rum 'thag bzo grwa
རུམ་དུ་ཆོངས	keep in a [chuba's front] pocket	rum du chongs
རུམ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	1) put in 1's aam phrag [fold at the waist of a chuba like a big pocket]; 2) enter into a womb (	rum du 'jug pa
རུམ་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་དངོས་པོ	things put in 1's aam phrag [fold at the waist of a chuba like a big pocket]	rum du 'jug pa'i dngos po
རུམ་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	enter a womb, put in [chuba's front] pocket	rum du zhugs pa
རུམ་གདན	carpet	rum gdan
རུམ་པ	{rum pa, rum pa, rum pa, rum} trans. v	rum pa
རུམ་པོ	[arch] 'khyog pa, [crooked, carry?] dpung pa [shoulder?]	rum po
རུམ་མ	[having a] womb (tha dad pa,, incubate w body heat	rum ma
རུམ་མི་བདེ་བ	sensations of pain during pregnancy	rum mi bde ba
རུམ་ཤམ	syria	rum sham
རུམ་སུ་འཇུག་པ	take birth, enter into the womb	rum su 'jug pa
རུམས	womb, darkness, turkey, SA rum, uterus, obscurity, turkey, ottoman empire	rums
རུའི་ཁལ	gtan tshigs mkhar ru'i khal te, spyi lo'i dus rabs bcu bdun pa'i 'gor karma bstan skyong dbang pos bod kyi 'bo nyag rnams kyi tshad gzhi gcig gyur bzos nas gtan la phab pa'i khal	ru'i khal
རུའི་ཕུལ	mkhar ru'i phul	ru'i phul
རུའི་བྲེ	mkhar ru'i bre, 1/ 20 ru'i khal	ru'i bre
རུའེ་ཏན	Sweden	ru'e tan
རུའེ་ཧྲི	Switzerland	ru'e hri
རུལ	rot[ten], spoil[ed], decay[ed], decompose[d]	rul
རུལ་སྐྱུར	rotten and gone sour	rul skyur
རུལ་སྐྱོན	rotten, spoiled, decayed, decomposed	rul skyon
རུལ་འགྲོ་བ	go bad	rul 'gro ba
རུལ་དྲི	putrid, rotten smelling	rul dri
རུལ་དྲི་བྲོ་བ	degenerate, corrupt	rul dri bro ba
རུལ་པ	putrid, rot, rotten, septic	rul pa
རུལ་པོ	SA hrul po	rul po
རུལ་བ	(tha mi dad pa rot[ten], decay, gone bad/ putrid/ rancid 2620	rul ba
རུལ་བའི་དྲི་མ	stains of rot, putrid/ rotten smelling	rul ba'i dri ma
རུལ་བར་འགྱུར	(tha mi dad pa rot[ten], decay, gone bad/ putrid/ rancid	rul bar 'gyur
རུལ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	become putrid	rul bar 'gyur ba
རུལ་བྱེད་སྐྱེས	that which revives a rotten thing, a medicinal fruit	rul byed skyes
རུལ་སྦལ	tortoise	rul sbal
རུལ་མྱགས	rul ba'i 'dag pa sla po [sloppy rotten mud?]	rul myags
རུལ་བཟོས	decay[ed], spoil[ed], erode[d]	rul bzos
རུལ་ལད	skyon cha, corrupt, rotten, decadent	rul lad
རུལ་ལུད	manure	rul lud
རུལ་སུངས	putrid, rotten smelling	rul sungs
རུལ་སོམ	spoiled in storage, old-fashioned	rul som
རུལ་སོམ་འགོག་རྫས	preservative	rul som 'gog rdzas
རུལ་ལྷད	spoiled, rotten, decayed	rul lhad
རུལ་ལྷད་ཞུགས་པ	gone bad/ rotten	rul lhad zhugs pa
རུལ་ལྷུང	corrupt, rotten, decadent	rul lhung
རུས	bloodline; family lineage, clan; lineage, family	rus
རུས་ཀོ	bone	rus ko
རུས་ཀྱི་ཕ་ཚན	a relative	rus kyi pha tshan
རུས་ཀྱི་མིང	name of a tribe	rus kyi ming
རུས་ཀྲང	bare bones, skeleton	rus krang
རུས་བཀྲ	x ray/ picture of how bones are broken	rus bkra
རུས་རྐང	1) marrow; 2) bone trumpet	rus rkang
རུས་རྐྱང	bare bones	rus rkyang
རུས་སྐོགས་ཅན་གྱི་སྲོག་ཆགས	crustacean	rus skogs can gyi srog chags
རུས་སྐྱ	oar, paddle	rus skya
རུས་བརྐོམ་ཡི་གེ	oracle's bone inscription	rus brkom yi ge
རུས་ཁ	bone color	rus kha
རུས་ཁམས	clan	rus khams
རུས་ཁུ	1) stock/ broth/ soup of boiled bones; 2) [arch] rung khus za ba	rus khu
རུས་ཁོག	bone	rus khog
རུས་གོག	bone	rus gog
རུས་གོང	bare bones w/o even stains, bone	rus gong
རུས་གོང་དུས	in the 1st kalpa the time of living on boiled bones	rus gong dus
རུས་གོང་བཞག་པ	to leave the heap of my bones	rus gong bzhag pa
རུས་གྲུམ	gout affecting the bones	rus grum
རུས་མགོ་ལྤགས་ཀྱིས་གྱོགས	(lit. covered by skin and bones) emaciated	rus mgo lpags kyis gyogs
རུས་མགོ་ལྤགས་གྱོགས	very emaciated	rus mgo lpags gyogs
རུས་རྒྱན	bone ornaments	rus rgyan
རུས་རྒྱན་དྲུག	The six bone ornaments that are common for both the peaceful and wrathful deities are: the bone ornament at the crown of the head that symbolizes concentration and Akshobhya; the earrings that symb...	rus rgyan drug
རུས་རྒྱུད	lineage, clan, descent group, tribe	rus rgyud
རུས་རྒྱུད་སྤྱི་ཚོགས	tribal, class-having society	rus rgyud spyi tshogs
རུས་སྒྲོམ	RR - fleshless bones	rus sgrom
རུས་གཅིག་པ	kinsmen	rus gcig pa
རུས་གཅིག་པ་གསོད་པ	murder of a kinsman	rus gcig pa gsod pa
རུས་ཆག	1) bone fragments; 2) broken bones	rus chag
རུས་ཆང	beer made of fermented bones	rus chang
རུས་ཆེན	man's bones	rus chen
རུས་ཆེན་ལྔ	CHN	rus chen lnga
རུས་ཆེན་བཞི	4 original tribes of Tibet	rus chen bzhi
རུས་ཆོད	cut the root, eliminate, destroy	rus chod
རུས་ཆོལ	dice made of bone	rus chol
རུས་འཆིང	nadis	rus 'ching
རུས་སྙིའི་ནད	rickets	rus snyi'i nad
རུས་ཏྲེམ	mostly due to wind and rus par tsha zug che la 'gul mi nus pa'i grum bu rus la zhen pa'i nad	rus trem
རུས་བཏོག་རྒྱག་པ	gnaw, nibble	rus btog rgyag pa
རུས་ཐང	bone stock/ broth	rus thang
རུས་ཐོ	bone list oral family history told to children by parents & elders	rus tho
རུས་ཐོན་པ	clearly show the signs of being ---	rus thon pa
རུས་མཐོ	high clan/ birth	rus mtho
རུས་མཐོ་བ	high extraction	rus mtho ba
རུས་འཐག	gnawing [bones]	rus 'thag
རུས་འཐག་རྒྱག	gnaw [bones]	rus 'thag rgyag
རུས་གདོང	rkang ngar sogs kyi rus pa'i zur gdong	rus gdong
རུས་སྡོར	yak, sheep etc. bone thug sdor	rus sdor
རུས་པ	bone, lineage, family; descendants/ family line	rus pa
རུས་པ་དཀར་པོ	1) white bones; 2) pure descent	rus pa dkar po
རུས་པ་ཅན	bony	rus pa can
རུས་པ་ཆག་དུམ	bone fragments	rus pa chag dum
རུས་པ་ཆགས་པ	pith, meaning, real sense	rus pa chags pa
རུས་པ་འཆིང་བྱེད	nadis	rus pa 'ching byed
རུས་པ་མཐོ	high clan	rus pa mtho
རུས་པ་འབུགས་པའི་སོར	sort of trephine	rus pa 'bugs pa'i sor
རུས་པ་མུར་བ	crunch bones	rus pa mur ba
རུས་པ་དམའ	low clan	rus pa dma'
རུས་པ་བཙབས	pounded the bones	rus pa btsabs
རུས་པ་ལ་ཐུག	reach to the very bone	rus pa la thug
རུས་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	wheels / disks of bone	rus pa'i 'khor lo
རུས་པའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	the pelvic girdle; pelvic cradle, pubic / pelvic bones	rus pa'i 'khrul 'khor
རུས་པའི་རྒྱ་གྲམ	crossed-vajra design in bone	rus pa'i rgya gram
རུས་པའི་རྒྱན	bone ornament; also {rus rgyan}	rus pa'i rgyan
རུས་པའི་རྒྱན་ཅན	wears bone ornaments 2621	rus pa'i rgyan can
རུས་པའི་རྒྱན་ཆས	bone ornaments	rus pa'i rgyan chas
རུས་པའི་རྒྱན་དྲུག	the six bone ornaments	rus pa'i rgyan drug
རུས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ	marrow	rus pa'i snying po
རུས་པའི་གཏིང་ནས	in the depths of one's bones	rus pa'i gting nas
རུས་པའི་ཐལ་ཙོམ	dust/ ash of bone worn as ornament by mantra yogins	rus pa'i thal tsom
རུས་པའི་ཐུར་མ་གཏུར་བ	wearing bone hairpins	rus pa'i thur ma gtur ba
རུས་པའི་དུམ་བུ	small bones of which tibetan anatomy has 360	rus pa'i dum bu
རུས་པའི་དྲ་ཕྱེད	pendants on net of strung bone	rus pa'i dra phyed
རུས་པའི་དྲ་བ	framework of bones, skeleton	rus pa'i dra ba
རུས་པའི་དྲྭ་བ་དང་དྲྭ་ཕྱེད་འཕྱང་བ	fringed net of pieces of bone	rus pa'i drwa ba dang drwa phyed 'phyang ba
རུས་པའི་དྲྭ་མིག	squares of bone [in a hair net]	rus pa'i drwa mig
རུས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	perception of bones (from a corpse)	rus pa'i 'du shes
རུས་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra of bone	rus pa'i rdo rje
རུས་པའི་ནོར་བུ	jewel shapes made of bone	rus pa'i nor bu
རུས་པའི་པ་ཏ	bone pa ta or endless knot design	rus pa'i pa ta
རུས་པའི་པད་མ	lotuses of bone	rus pa'i pad ma
རུས་པའི་དཔལ་བེའུ	an endless-knot design made of bone	rus pa'i dpal be'u
རུས་པའི་རྩིབ་མ	rib	rus pa'i rtsib ma
རུས་པའི་དྭྲ་བ་དང་དྭྲ་ཕྱེད་འཕྱང་བ	fringed net/ garlands and pendants of pieces of bone	rus pa'i dwra ba dang dwra phyed 'phyang ba
རུས་པའི་ཟོང	cowries, bones or shells of exchange	rus pa'i zong
རུས་པའི་གཟེབ	skin	rus pa'i gzeb
རུས་པའི་རླུང་ཚབས	{rus pa'i rlung tshabs feminine disease [rlung tshabs kyi rigs shig rus pa khol bu na zhing grang la tshigs pa &, mtshang ra sogs la tshor ba	rus pa'i rlung tshabs
རུས་པའི་སེ་མོ་དོ	a short necklace of bone, def. {do shal thung ba}	rus pa'i se mo do
རུས་ཕྱེ	bone powder/ meal	rus phye
རུས་ཕྲེང	chains of bone	rus phreng
རུས་འཕྲེད་ཉལ	a bone in the head	rus 'phred nyal
རུས་བུ	small rus rdog	rus bu
རུས་བྱང	byang bu made of bone	rus byang
རུས་དབང	clan authority	rus dbang
རུས་འབོལ་བ	morbid symptoms, stone of	rus 'bol ba
ཐེ་ཨཔྲིཅོཏ་ཨནད་ཨོཐེར་སྟོནེ	fruits	the apricot and other stone
རུས་འབྲས	rus 'bras disease [become bone colored and in chu ser and watery pus khu tshig sro ma lta bu 'byung ba'i 'bras nad rus pa la zhen pa zhig]; stong tsho 'tshogs pa'i dbus su mi gnyis yar langs te gci...	rus 'bras
རུས་སྦལ	tortoise [animal med.]	rus sbal
རུས་སྦལ་ཀྱི་ཀ་གདན	base/pedestal of tortoise	rus sbal kyi ka gdan
རུས་སྦལ་སྐྱེས་མ	a nadi petal of the heart center	rus sbal skyes ma
རུས་སྦལ་འཁོར་ལོ	tortoise circle [nag rtsis las 'byung ba'i sa bdag gi 'khor lo zhig]	rus sbal 'khor lo
རུས་སྦལ་གྱི་མ་ཐེམ	tortoise groundsills	rus sbal gyi ma them
རུས་སྦལ་གྱི་ཟླ་བ	tortoise/ 4th/ sa ga month	rus sbal gyi zla ba
རུས་སྦལ་ཅན	4th/ sa ga month, tortoise month	rus sbal can
རུས་སྦལ་ཆེ་ལྡན	sea turtle, lake turtle	rus sbal che ldan
རུས་སྦལ་སྦུ	tortoise hair	rus sbal sbu
རུས་སྦལ་མ	tortoise shaped med.	rus sbal ma
རུས་སྦལ་མོ	female tortoise	rus sbal mo
རུས་སྦལ་ཞབས	tortoise-like feet	rus sbal zhabs
རུས་སྦལ་ཞབས་ཀྱི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of tortoise-like feet	rus sbal zhabs kyi mtshan bzang
རུས་སྦལ་སེར་པོ	a sa bdag demon	rus sbal ser po
རུས་མིག	1) rus pa kong kong; 2) joints	rus mig
རུས་མིང	surname, family name	rus ming
རུས་དམའ་བ	low extraction	rus dma' ba
རུས་སྨྱོ	over the bones sha'u mdzer thabs wound infection that pervades the bones	rus smyo
རུས་རྩ་སྒྱེད་པུ	white nadi/ nerve four fingers above the knee	rus rtsa sgyed pu
རུས་ཚད	SA rus tshod	rus tshad
རུས་ཚིགས	joint	rus tshigs
རུས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ནས	arthritis	rus tshigs kyi nas
རུས་ཚིགས་ན	have arthritis	rus tshigs na
རུས་ཚིགས་ན་ཚ	arthritis	rus tshigs na tsha
རུས་ཚིགས་སྦོམ་པོ	knee joint	rus tshigs sbom po
རུས་ཚུགས	shape of the bones	rus tshugs
རུས་ཚོ	1) paternal relatives; 2) [arch] knee	rus tsho
རུས་མཛོད	bone repository, genealogies and histories of clan members	rus mdzod
རུས་འཛེར	lumps where broken bones are joined etc.	rus 'dzer
རུས་ཞེན	enemy/ friend distinguishing la rgya	rus zhen
རུས་ཟོང	'gron bu	rus zong
རུས་གཟེབ	1) joints; 2) skin	rus gzeb
རུས་རིགས	family/ clan lineage	rus rigs
རུས་རིགས་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གསུམ	the 23 clans	rus rigs nyi shu rtsa gsum
རུས་རུས་པ་སྦ	a celebrated lama	rus rus pa sba
རུས་ལུད	bone fertilizer	rus lud
རུས་ཤིང	1) srog shing, main support, axle; 2) [arch] snying rus	rus shing
རུས་སྲལ	tortoise?	rus sral
རུས་གསེབ	inside the bones	rus gseb
རུས་ཧྲམ	hard bone	rus hram
ནེགཏིཨོན	like rna cod particle, not {mi bsam re} = won't I think of? byed re skan,//byed re shi,//yod re skan,//yod re shi,//yin re skan,//yin re shi,//'gro re skan,//'gro re shi]; 2) very [rgod re bro,//br...	negation
རེ་ཀན	seldom, by no means, never	re kan
རེ་སྐན	seldom, by no means, never	re skan
རེ་སྐོང	establish what 1 hopes for, fulfillment of wishes, satisfied, fulfilled	re skong
རེ་སྐོང་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	wish-fulfilling gem	re skong yid bzhin nor bu
རེ་སྐོན	med herb re skon [ro kha, zhu rjes bsil, nus pas khrag ngan skem, bad kan smug po 'joms, rtsa'i tsad pa sel, tsa 'khru gcod,//syn: rgya ri mthon po dang, phug ron rkang, rtsi dmar rkang gcig rtsi d...	re skon
རེ་སྐོན་པ	pomatosace filicula maxim., potentilla nivea l., coluria longifolia maxim.	re skon pa
རེ་བསྐུལ	request	re bskul
རེ་བསྐུལ་ཞུ་བ	request, solicit	re bskul zhu ba
རེ་ཁ	a picture, painting	re kha
རེ་ཁ་ཅན	SA ri mo can	re kha can
རེ་ཁའི་འདབ	birch tree	re kha'i 'dab
རེ་ཁེ	SK mu khyud	re khe
རེ་ཁྲོད	mountain hermitage	re khrod
རེ་འཁང	offence	re 'khang
རེ་འཁང་བྱེད་པ	make mischief	re 'khang byed pa
རེ་འཁང་འབྱུང་བ	become offended and abusive	re 'khang 'byung ba
རེ་འཁོན	frequent quarrel	re 'khon
རེ་གུར	tent covering made of yak's hair, goat's hair tent, castle of hope, tent of	re gur
རེ་གྲོན	1) [empty exhausted] hope; 2) become useless/ futile, addition, increase ?? [Gold: hope ???	re gron
རེ་གྲོན་མེད་པ	be hopeless, disappointed	re gron med pa
རེ་དགའ	How wonderful it would be if just	re dga'
རེ་དགོས	ask a favor	re dgos
རེ་དགོས་པའི་དུས	the time to ask a favor	re dgos pa'i dus
རེ་འགག	occasionally, at times	re 'gag
རེ་འགའ	a few, some	re 'ga'
རེ་འགས	some, several	re 'gas
རེ་རྒྱང་ཤ་མཐའ	1 of 37 sacred bon places	re rgyang sha mtha'
རེ་སྒུག	wait for a wish/ hope	re sgug
རེ་སྒུག་བྱེད	wait for a wish/ hope	re sgug byed
རེ་སྒུག་བྱེད་པ	hope, wish, expect	re sgug byed pa
རེ་ངན	evil/ malicious intent/ scheme/ plan/ conspiracy	re ngan
རེ་ངན་བཅངས	had evil/ malicious intent/ scheme/ plan, conspired	re ngan bcangs
རེ་ངན་འཆང	have evil/ malicious intent/ scheme/ plan, conspire	re ngan 'chang
རེ་ངན་ནང་འཆང	have evil/ malicious intent/ scheme/ plan/ wish conspire	re ngan nang 'chang
རེ་གཅིག	just one	re gcig
རེ་བཅོལ	entrusting, commissioning	re bcol
རེ་བཅོལ་གཏོང	entrust, commission	re bcol gtong
རེ་ལྕག	stellaria chamaejasne	re lcag
རེ་ལྕག་པ	{re lcag pa} field med.	re lcag pa
རེ་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད	to put great hopes into	re chen po byed
རེ་འཆར	hope, aspiration	re 'char
རེ་འཆར་འཛིན	hope for, aspire to	re 'char 'dzin
རེ་གཉིས	one or two/ a few	re gnyis
རེ་གཉིས་ཙམ	just 1 or 2/ a few	re gnyis tsam
རེ་གཉིས་རེ	one or two	re gnyis re
རེ་ཏ	felt [of long [yak] hair]	re ta
རེ་ལྟ	[arch] yun ring dang, rnam pa mang ba'am lan grangs du ma re lta thogs kyi srid pa lan bdun pa ba TSE	re lta
རེ་ལྟར	[arch] ji tsam mam ji ltar	re ltar
རེ་ལྟར་ཐོགས་ཀྱང	[arch] ji tsam thogs kyang	re ltar thogs kyang
རེ་ལྟར་ཐོགས་ན	[arch] dus yun ji ltar thogs na'am ji tsam ring na	re ltar thogs na
རེ་ལྟོས	{chad smra} hopes; hopes. {chad smra}	re ltos
རེ་ལྟོས་བཅས་པ་ཁྱོད་ལས་མེད	there is no 1 but you that I trust	re ltos bcas pa khyod las med
རེ་ལྟོས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཟད་ནས	having exhausted all hopes	re ltos thams cad zad nas
རེ་ལྟོས་བྱེད	hope for, expect [help] from], depend on	re ltos byed
རེ་ལྟོས་བྱེད་མི་དགོས་པར	not having to	re ltos byed mi dgos par
དེཔེནད་ཨོན	- [for help]	depend on
རེ་ལྟོས་བླ་མ་ལས་མེད	to depend / rely on no one other than the guru	re ltos bla ma las med
རེ་ལྟོས་གཞན་མ་མཆིས	there is no other hope	re ltos gzhan ma mchis
རེ་ལྟོས་ལིང་སྐྱུར	total confidence, complete reliance, to entrust oneself totally, to totally abandon hopes and aims. Syn {re ba gzhan med}; totally abandon hopes and aims	re ltos ling skyur
རེ་ལྟོས་ལིང་སྐྱུར་གྱིས	while totally abandoning all other hopes	re ltos ling skyur gyis
རེ་སྟེས	[arch] re legs sam very good	re stes
རེ་སྟོང	empty/ impossible hope, illusion, delusion	re stong
རེ་སྟོང་དུ་འགྱུར	lose hope, be disillusioned w	re stong du 'gyur
རེ་སྟོང་དུ་འགྲོ	lose hope, be disillusioned w	re stong du 'gro
རེ་སྟོང་དོར་བ	discard empty hopes/ delusions	re stong dor ba
རེ་བལྟོས	expectation, reliance upon	re bltos
རེ་བལྟོས་འཆའ་བ	to rely upon	re bltos 'cha' ba
རེ་ཐག	1) hope; 2) Tibetan matchlock powder lighting cord	re thag
རེ་ཐག་ཆད	lose hope, be disappointed, despair	re thag chad
རེ་ཐག་ཆད་པ	lost hope	re thag chad pa
རེ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	be disappointed, despair	re thag chod pa
རེ་ཐགས	felt thags ris	re thags
རེ་ཐབས་ཡོད་པ	prospective	re thabs yod pa
རེ་འཐགས	woven	re 'thags
རེ་དམ	is it? 2623	re dam
རེ་དོགས	hope & fear, expectations and doubt	re dogs
རེ་དོགས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	extremes of hope and fear	re dogs kyi mtha'
རེ་དོགས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to worry about something	re dogs bskyed pa
རེ་དོགས་གཉིས	hope and fear	re dogs gnyis
རེ་དོགས་བྲལ་བ	beyond hope and fear	re dogs bral ba
རེ་དོགས་མེད	being without hope or fear	re dogs med
རེ་དོགས་མེད་པ	without entertaining hope or worry, beyond hope and fear	re dogs med pa
རེ་བདེན	correct, true	re bden
རེ་འདུན	hope, hope	re 'dun
རེ་འདུན་འདོན	wish/ desire/ hope for	re 'dun 'don
རེ་འདུན་བྱེད	wish/ desire/ hope for	re 'dun byed
རེ་འདུན་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བྱ་ཚིག	modal verbs	re 'dun mtshon byed kyi bya tshig
རེ་འདུན་ཞུ	request, ask, petition	re 'dun zhu
རེ་འདུན་ཞུ་བ	demand, hope, wish, expect, request, ask	re 'dun zhu ba
རེ་འདུན་ཞུ་ཡིག	written/ signed agreement/ statement/ pledge	re 'dun zhu yig
རེ་འདོད	wish	re 'dod
རེ་འདོད་ཅན	anxious	re 'dod can
རེ་འདོད་ཆན	wishful	re 'dod chan
རེ་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ	aspiration, eager	re 'dod chen po
རེ་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་མཁན	aspirant	re 'dod chen po byed mkhan
རེ་འདོད་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	aspire	re 'dod chen po byed pa
རེ་འདོད་བྲལ	hopeless	re 'dod bral
རེ་འདོད་བྲལ་བའི་གནས	hopeless state	re 'dod bral ba'i gnas
རེ་ལྡེ	kind of buckler manufactured in gtsang	re lde
རེ་ལྡེ་ནག་པོ	black felt	re lde nag po
རེ་ལྡེའི་གུར	felt tent	re lde'i gur
རེ་ལྡེའི་རྣམ་པ	Syn {gru bzhi'i rnam pa}	re lde'i rnam pa
རེ་ལྡེའི་ཤམ་ཐབས	woven black shirt	re lde'i sham thabs
རེ་ནག	black felt for making nomad tents	re nag
རེ་ནས་ཙམ	just 1 each or re re tsam	re nas tsam
རེ་སྣམ	felt [of long [yak] hair &, wool cloth	re snam
རེ་པ	expect	re pa
རེ་ཕད	re ba las bzos pa'i phad bu	re phad
རེ་ཕྱར	woven cloth	re phyar
རེ་འཕགས	Triloknath	re 'phags
རེ་བ	hopeful; {mi re ba la sman rin len} to extort medical fees from the hopeful	re ba
རེ་བ་སྐོང	fulfill/ satisfy a hope/ wish	re ba skong
རེ་བ་སྐོང་བ	fulfil a hope, hope	re ba skong ba
རེ་བ་སྐོངས་ཤིག	may your hope be fulfilled	re ba skongs shig
རེ་བ་བསྐང	fulfils wishes	re ba bskang
རེ་བ་བསྐུལ	request, favor	re ba bskul
རེ་བ་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	make a request, ask a favor	re ba bskul byed
རེ་བ་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	make a request, ask a favor	re ba bskul zhu
རེ་བ་ཁེངས་པ	to satisfy	re ba khengs pa
རེ་བ་སྒྲུབ་པ	fulfill a hope, hope	re ba sgrub pa
རེ་བ་ཅན	hopeful	re ba can
རེ་བ་ཆད	give up hope	re ba chad
རེ་བ་ཆུང་ཆུང	pessimist	re ba chung chung
རེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	optimist	re ba chen po
རེ་བ་རྙེད་པ	get fulfilled, obtain what one has hoped for	re ba rnyed pa
རེ་བ་སྟོང་ཟད	disappointment	re ba stong zad
རེ་བ་སྟོང་ཟད་དུ་གཏོང	act ungrateful/ unworthy	re ba stong zad du gtong
རེ་བ་དང་ལྡན	hoping, full of hope	re ba dang ldan
རེ་བ་ནག་པོ	the black cloth made of yak's hair	re ba nag po
རེ་བ་ནག་མོ	kind of cap made of black goat's hair	re ba nag mo
རེ་བ་ནོན་པོ	urgent hope/ wish	re ba non po
རེ་བ་བྱེད	hope, wish for	re ba byed
རེ་བ་བྱེད་པ	demand, ask, hope, wish, expect	re ba byed pa
རེ་བ་མ་བྱེད	do not expect, be hopeless	re ba ma byed
རེ་བ་མེད	hopeless, no hope of --	re ba med
རེ་བ་མེད་པ	hopeless, despairing	re ba med pa
རེ་བ་མེད་པར་བྱེད་པ་ནི	if i were to leave them hopeless	re ba med par byed pa ni
རེ་བ་རྫོགས	khyed kyi re ba rdzogs pa'i	re ba rdzogs
ཐབས་ཡོད་ཀྱི	you will gain the means to fulfill all desires	thabs yod kyi
རེ་བ་རྫོགས་པ	to fulfill the hopes, wishes, aims	re ba rdzogs pa
རེ་བ་རྫོགས་ཕྱིར	to fulfill the hopes of	re ba rdzogs phyir
རེ་བ་གཞན་མེད	there is no other hope	re ba gzhan med
བུཏ	-	but
རེ་བ་བཟང	hold a hope/ wish [Gold]??	re ba bzang
རེ་བ་བཟུང	hold a hope/ wish	re ba bzung
རེ་བ་ལྷར་གྱུར	it has arisen as well as one could wish	re ba lhar gyur
རེ་བའི་གླུ་མཁན	someone singing of hope	re ba'i glu mkhan
རེ་བའི་ངང་ནས་སྒུག་པ	wait for a wish/ hope	re ba'i ngang nas sgug pa
རེ་བའི་བསམ་པ	attitude of hoping	re ba'i bsam pa
རེ་བལ	yak's wool	re bal
རེ་བས	hoping	re bas
རེ་བོ	coarse yak hair tent cover, sackcloth, kind of cloth of yak's hair, tent	re bo
རེ་བྱས	hope to	re byas
རེ་བྱུང་ན	when some happen;	re byung na
རེ་བྲལ	no hope to, beyond the hope of	re bral
རེ་འབོད	appeal	re 'bod
རེ་འབོད་བྱེད	appeal to/ for/ issue a call, urge	re 'bod byed
རེ་འབོད་བྱེད་ཡས	issuing a call/ appeal to/ for	re 'bod byed yas
རེ་འབྱམས་དཀར་པོ	White Poisonous Snake, reading in lde'u 'phrul	re 'byams dkar po
རེ་འབྱམས་ཁྲ་བོ	Mottled Poisonous Snake, reading in lde'u 'phrul	re 'byams khra bo
རེ་འབྱམས་ནག་པོ	Black Poisonous Snake, reading in lde'u 'phrul	re 'byams nag po
རེ་འབྱམས་སྦྲུལ	poisonous snakes	re 'byams sbrul
རེ་འབྲས	hope, wish	re 'bras
རེ་ལྦལ་སར	Mandi, alka. Tsopema, the birth place of Guru Rinpoche	re lbal sar
རེ་མ་ཏི	Remati	re ma ti
རེ་མ་ཏི་མཆེད་བཞི	Four Remati Sisters	re ma ti mched bzhi
རེ་མང	many hopes/ desires/ wishes	re mang
རེ་མེད	hopeless, no hope of --	re med
རེ་མོས	exchanging, in/ by turns, in series/ alternating	re mos
རེ་མོས་བརྗེ་བ	exchange, substitute	re mos brje ba
རེ་མོས་པ	alternately	re mos pa
རེ་མོས་བྱས	alternately	re mos byas
རེ་མོས་བྱས་ནས་འགན་འཁུར་བ	take turns in doing the task. taking responsibility	re mos byas nas 'gan 'khur ba
རེ་མོས་བྱེད	do in/ by turns/ in series/ alternating	re mos byed
རེ་མོས་བྱེད་པ	to alternate	re mos byed pa
རེ་དམིགས	ambition	re dmigs
རེ་རྨ	[arch] woman	re rma
རེ་སྨ	woman 2624	re sma
རེ་སྨོན	hopes and aspirations	re smon
རེ་སྨོན་འཇོག་པ	to place one's hope and desire	re smon 'jog pa
རེ་ཙམ	just about, only	re tsam
རེ་ཚིག	verbally expressed hope	re tshig
རེ་ཞིག	a while	re zhig
རེ་ཞིག་ཅིག་ན	after a little while	re zhig cig na
རེ་ཞིག་ཏུ	for a while	re zhig tu
རེ་ཞིག་དར་ཁྱབ	the rage/ fashion/ fad	re zhig dar khyab
རེ་ཞིག་དར་སྲོལ་ཆེ་བ	the rage/ fashion/ fad	re zhig dar srol che ba
རེ་ཞིག་ལྡོག་ཏེ	so that at least for awhile this might not happen	re zhig ldog te
རེ་ཞིག་སྡོད	wait awhile	re zhig sdod
རེ་ཞིག་སྡོད་དང་ཁོ་སླེབས་ཡོང	having stayed a little while he left	re zhig sdod dang kho slebs yong
རེ་ཞིག་ན	within a very short while, at a certain moment, then at a certain moment, after some time, at one point, after awhile, and then, at a certain point	re zhig na
རེ་ཞིག་ནས	after a while/ some time	re zhig nas
རེ་ཞིག་བར	for a while/ the time being	re zhig bar
རེ་ཞིག་རྫུན	it is for the short time of its presence false	re zhig rdzun
རེ་བཞིན	each, every, each	re bzhin
རེ་ཟུང	just 1 or two [mi re zung gis bshad par cha 'jog mi rung]	re zung
རེ་བཟུང་ནས	once one has grasped	re bzung nas
རེ་ཡུལ	person from whom 1 hopes for help	re yul
རེ་ཡུལ་གཅིག	only hope	re yul gcig
རེ་ཡུལ་བྱེད	place 1' hopes in someone	re yul byed
རེ་རན	now is the time!	re ran
རེ་རལ	{re ral} ldum bu'i med.	re ral
རེ་རེ	apiece	re re
རེ་རེ་གིས་དེབ་རེ་ཉོས	each 1 bought a book	re re gis deb re nyos
རེ་རེ་གཉིས་གཉིས	one and all, one with another, indiscriminately	re re gnyis gnyis
རེ་རེ་བྱས	1 by 1, 1 at a time	re re byas
རེ་རེ་བྱེད	1 by 1, 1 at a time	re re byed
རེ་རེ་ཙམ	a very few	re re tsam
རེ་རེ་བཞིན	1 by 1, 1 at a time, bit by bit, little by little	re re bzhin
རེ་རེ་ཟིན་དུས་རེ་རེ་བརྗེད་འགྲོ་བ	each time you seize one item, you forget the one before	re re zin dus re re brjed 'gro ba
རེ་རེ་རལ	a vegetable medicine	re re ral
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ	singly, each [1]	re re re re
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་གིས་དེབ་རེ་ཉོས	each 1 bought a book	re re re re gis deb re nyos
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་གཉིས་གཉིས	1 each two each, 1 or 2, a few	re re re re gnyis gnyis
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་བྱས	1 by 1, 1 at a time	re re re re byas
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་བྱེད	1 by 1, 1 at a time	re re re re byed
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་བཞིན	1 by 1, 1 at a time, bit by bit, little by little	re re re re bzhin
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེ་ལ	to each [1]	re re re re la
རེ་རེ་རེ་རེས	1 by 1	re re re res
རེ་རེ་ལ	to each [1]	re re la
རེ་རེའི	"of each"	re re'i
རེ་རེའི་གོང	unit price	re re'i gong
རེ་རེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང	followed each other	re re'i rjes su 'brang
རེ་རེའི་མིང་ནས་བརྗོད་མི་ལང	one cannot mention or enumerate each by its name	re re'i ming nas brjod mi lang
རེ་རེར	"to each"	re rer
རེ་རེར་སྤྲད	gave [it] to each 1	re rer sprad
རེ་རེས	by each 1	re res
རེ་རེས་བྱས་པ་རེད	each 1 did [it]	re res byas pa red
རེ་ཤད	last- ditch/ death-bed struggle	re shad
རེ་ཤི	I will absolutely not, I swear I'm not going to	re shi
རེ་ཤིག	some	re shig
རེ་ཤིག་ཏུ	for a while	re shig tu
རེ་ཤིག་དར་ཁྱབ	the rage/ fashion/ fad	re shig dar khyab
རེ་ཤིག་དར་སྲོལ་ཆེ་བ	the rage/ fashion/ fad	re shig dar srol che ba
རེ་ཤིག་སྡོད་དང་ཁོ་སླེབས་ཡོང	having stayed a little while he left	re shig sdod dang kho slebs yong
རེ་ཤིག་ན	a little while later	re shig na
རེ་ཤིག་ནས	after a while/ some time	re shig nas
རེ་ཤིག་བར	for a while/ the time being	re shig bar
རེ་ས	place of repose of one's hope	re sa
རེ་ས་ཁྱོད་ལས་མེད	[who] relies on no 1 but you	re sa khyod las med
རེ་ས་གཅིག	only hope	re sa gcig
རེ་ས་བྱེད	place 1's hopes in someone	re sa byed
རེ་ས་གཞན་མ་མཆིས་པ	have no other hope [but you]	re sa gzhan ma mchis pa
རེ་སང	recover a little/ rest a little	re sang
རེ་སེམས	hope	re sems
རེ་གསལ	as clear as possible	re gsal
རེ་ཧོ	Jehol Province	re ho
རེ་ཧོ་ཅིའི་མཚོན་ཆ	thermonuclear weapon	re ho ci'i mtshon cha
རེག	gain, sensations	reg
རེག་དགའ	prostitute	reg dga'
རེག་ཆོད	slash	reg chod
རེག་དུག	contagion, venereal disease, syphilis, poison that has entered the body by contact	reg dug
རེག་དུག་དང་རིམས	infectious or contagious disease	reg dug dang rims
རེག་དུག་ནད	syphilis 2625	reg dug nad
རེག་ལྡན	1) wind; 2) water god	reg ldan
རེག་ན	at a touch	reg na
རེག་ན་འཇམ་པ	soft to the touch, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	reg na 'jam pa
རེག་ན་བདེ་བ	pleasure in coming in contact with	reg na bde ba
རེག་ནད	1) venereal/ disease; 2) disease spread by physical contact; 3) contact poison	reg nad
རེག་པ	1.(Tha dad pa reach, touch, contact; 2) contact	reg pa
ཕི༹བེ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	present mental states, one of {kun 'gro lnga}; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {yul dbang yid byed gsum 'dus pa las tshor ba bde sdug dang mthun par dbang po'i 'gyur ba yongs su gcod par byed pa} Def. by ...	five ever
རེག་པ་དཀའ	gze ma ra mgo	reg pa dka'
རེག་པ་བཅུ་དྲུག	CHN	reg pa bcu drug
རེག་པ་དྲུག	the six kinds of contact	reg pa drug
ཡོད་དེ	1 mig gi 'dus te reg pa dang, two de bzhin du rna ba'i 'dus te reg pa dang, three sna'i 'dus te reg pa dang, four lce'i 'dus te reg pa dang, five lus	yod de
རེག་པ་མྱུར	sharp-minded	reg pa myur
རེག་པ་མཛད་པ	{phyag sa la reg pa mdzad pa} the Buddha touched the earth with his hand	reg pa mdzad pa
རེག་པ་ཟླ་བ	5th month w sun in Gemini	reg pa zla ba
རེག་པ་གསུམ	the three modes of contact [I rig pa'i reg pa ste 1) zag pa med pa'i reg pa dang, two ma rig pa'i reg pa zhes pa nyon mongs pa can gyi reg pa dang, three rig pa dang ma rig pa gnyis ka ma yin pa'i ...	reg pa gsum
རེག་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent-related contact	reg pa'i rten 'brel
རེག་པའི་དུག	venereal disease	reg pa'i dug
རེག་པའི་ཟས	tactile sustenance	reg pa'i zas
རེག་པའི་ཡན་ལག	link of contact [rten 'brel	reg pa'i yan lag
རེག་པའི་ལྷག་མ	by desire touch the naked flesh of a woman or grasp part of the body	reg pa'i lhag ma
རེག་བྱ	+ - textures, tangible object/ sensation, touchable, sense of touch	reg bya
རེག་བྱ་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense-field/ ayatana of touchables	reg bya skye mched
རེག་བྱ་ངན	thorny field herb med. {gze ma ra mgo}	reg bya ngan
རེག་བྱ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 touchables [sa dang chu, me, rlung, 'jam pa, rtsub pa, lci ba, yang ba, grang ba, bkres pa, skom pa]	reg bya bcu gcig
རེག་བྱ་ལྕི	feeling of heaviness	reg bya lci
རེག་བྱ་འཇམ་པ	soft to the touch	reg bya 'jam pa
རེག་བྱ་འཇམ་པོ	soft touchables/ sensations of touch	reg bya 'jam po
རེག་བྱ་འཇམ་རྩུབ	soft and rough touchables/ sensations of touch	reg bya 'jam rtsub
རེག་བྱ་ཉམས	diminishing tactile sensation	reg bya nyams
རེག་བྱ་གཉིས	CHN	reg bya gnyis
རེག་བྱ་དང་བྲལ་བ	be devoid of touch	reg bya dang bral ba
རེག་བྱ་དྲུག	the six touchables ['jam pa, rtsub pa, lci ba, yang ba, grang ba, bkres skom]	reg bya drug
རེག་བྱ་མ	Feeling Goddess	reg bya ma
རེག་བྱ་མི་ཚོར་བ	not apprehending touchables, w no sense of touch	reg bya mi tshor ba
རེག་བྱ་ཙུབ	rough to the touch	reg bya tsub
རེག་བྱ་ཚ	feeling of heat	reg bya tsha
རེག་བྱ་བཞི	the four touchable [elements]	reg bya bzhi
རེག་བྱ་ཡང	feeling of lightness	reg bya yang
རེག་བྱ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	love the physical feeling; x {lus reg bya la chags pas glang po 'dam du bying ba lta bu} elephants drown in the swamp because they love the physical feeling of mud	reg bya la chags pa
རེག་བྱ་བསིལ	feeling of coolness	reg bya bsil
རེག་བྱའི	touch	reg bya'i
རེག་བྱའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	sense-field of touchables [lus shes kyis gzungs bya, tsa ba dang, grang ba'i reg bya lta bu'o	reg bya'i skye mched
རེག་བྱའི་ཁམས	texture/ touchable element, the element of textures [one of the 18 elements/ dhatus]	reg bya'i khams
རེག་བྱེད	wind [god]	reg byed
རེག་བྱེད་གདོང	cinnamon	reg byed gdong
རེག་མྱོང	1) experience; 2) touching w the body feel smooth and rough 2626	reg myong
རེག་ཚོར	feeling [arising after contact], sense of touch	reg tshor
རེག་ཚོར་གསུམ	the three feelings arising after contact	reg tshor gsum
རེག་འཛིན	prostitute	reg 'dzin
རེག་འཛིན་དབང་མངོན	sense perception of touch, touchable grasping sense perception	reg 'dzin dbang mngon
རེག་འཛིན་ཡིད་མངོན	touchable grasping	reg 'dzin yid mngon
རེག་ཟིག	[arch] manuscript, notes, draft	reg zig
རེག་ཟིག་ནེའུ་ལེའི་རྐྱལ་པ	{reg zig ne'u le'i rkyal pa}	reg zig ne'u le'i rkyal pa
རེག་ཟིན	manuscript, notes	reg zin
རེག་ཟེགས	draft, SA zin bris	reg zegs
རེག་གཟིགས	instructions	reg gzigs
རེག་བཟང	a medicinal plant, soft or pleasant touch	reg bzang
རེགས་པ	bregs pa'i don	regs pa
རེགས་པ་མེད	is not discerned	regs pa med
རེང	(tha mi dad pa rengs pa, reng ba,, 1) become stiff/ hard/ rigid; 2) freeze solid/ stiff, solidify	reng
རེང་བ	to be stiff, hard, rigid; ft. of {reng ba}; {reng ba, rengs pa, reng ba} intr. v	reng ba
རེང་བུ	pastil for fumigating, separate, not belonging to anything else	reng bu
རེངས་འཁུམས	arms/ legs etc stiff and 'khums pa	rengs 'khums
རེངས་པ	paralyze, [p reng ba],, [became] stiff/ hard/ rigid, froze solid/ stiff, solidified	rengs pa
རེངས་པར་བྱེད་པ	paralyzing	rengs par byed pa
རེངས་པོ	alone, single, g.yong po, rigid, stiff, hard, stubborn, obstinate	rengs po
རེངས་པོར་གནས	be deadlocked/ stalemated, become stiff/ hard/ rigid	rengs por gnas
རེངས་བུ	alone, individually	rengs bu
རེངས་མཛད	paralyzing	rengs mdzad
རེངས་ལ་ཁང	paralyzed	rengs la khang
རེངས་ལ་ཁད	about to freeze stiff	rengs la khad
རེད་དམ	is it? --	red dam
རེད་དམ་མ་རེད	yes or no	red dam ma red
རེད་མད་བ་གཞོན་ནུ་བློ་གྲོས	1348/91412, Sakya philosopher [ggd]	red mda ba gzhon nu blo gros
རེད་མདའ	spent arrow	red mda'
རེད་མདའ་བ	{red mda' ba} [sa skya'i bla ma zhig ste mtshan la gzhon nu blo gros zer, rab byung drug pa'i sa glang lor gtsang sa skya dgon pa'i nye 'dabs su 'khrungs, dbu ma la 'jug pa dang tshig gsal sogs las...	red mda' ba
རེད་འདུག	was	red 'dug
རེད་པ	to be; {red pa, red pa, red pa} intr. v	red pa
རེད་པའི་ཡལ་ག	withered branch	red pa'i yal ga
རེད་པས	is it? --	red pas
རེད་བ	is it? --, it is	red ba
རེད་བས	is it? --	red bas
རེད་མིན	whether it is or not	red min
རེན་ཁར	at the time do do --	ren khar
རེན་པོ་ཆེ	7	ren po che
རེན་མིན	people	ren min
རེན་མིན་ཀུང་ཧྲེ	people's commune	ren min kung hre
རེབ་ཀོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	reb kong
རེབ་ཀོང་དགོན	{reb kong/ gser smug ljongs monastery	reb kong dgon
རེབ་གོང	Rekong, in Domey	reb gong
རེབ་གོང་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བརྒྱད	eight siddhas of Rekong reb gong grub pa thob pa'i gnas brgyad Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of. See under Eight reb gong grub pa thob pa'i gnas brgyad Places of the Accomplished Ones of Re...	reb gong grub thob brgyad
དང་དགུ་བརྒྱ	Phurba mantrapractitioners of Rekong, nineteen hundred	dang dgu brgya
རེབ་གཅིག	1) together, simultaneously; 2) 1 time	reb gcig
རེབ་པ	[arch] dried out/ withered	reb pa
རེབ་རེབ	be in a great haste, unclear, hazy	reb reb
རེབ་རེབ་པ	be in a great haste	reb reb pa
རེམ	to endeavor, try, to make carefully, again and again. Syn {brtson 'grus}; to exert oneself	rem
རེམ་པ	strive to	rem pa
རེམ་པོ	great effort/ endeavor/ attention	rem po
རེམ་རེམ	try hard to do, do whatever 1 can	rem rem
རེམ་ལ་གྱིས	to exert oneself	rem la gyis
རེམ་ལ་ཐོངས	Persevere!	rem la thongs
རེམས	run out, diffuse	rems
རེམས་པ	pf. of {rem pa}	rems pa
རེམས་ཤིག	be strong!	rems shig
རེའི་དར	radar	re'i dar
རེའི་མིག་དེབ་ཐོ	book w figures, graphs, charts etc	re'i mig deb tho
རེའི་རླུབས	fire pool	re'i rlubs
རེའུ	a kid, baby goat, panel or square, re'u tsar	re'u
རེའུ་མིག	table, chart, form, table of figures made of lines crossing each other and forming squares, kid's eye, squares of chess board	re'u mig
རེའུ་མིག་འགོད་པ	tabulate	re'u mig 'god pa
རེའུ་ལུག	kids and lambs	re'u lug
རེའུ་སྲེང	field of moss	re'u sreng
རེའུ་གསེང	lawn, beautiful grassy green as an offering to the nagas	re'u gseng
རེར	to/ in each [lo rer: yearly rer...re	rer
ཨེབེ༹རཡ་ཏིམེ	- happens-- also happens]	every time
རེལ་ཚར	skin of a kid	rel tshar
རེས	1) [in] turns/ series, reciprocally/ back and forth [phul res byed: gave each other; phyag gtong res gnag: shook hands w each other]; 2) sometimes; 3) time, times; 4) change; 5) by each	res
རེས་དཀར་རྩི	white muslin	res dkar rtsi
རེས་སྐོར	turn, shift, rotation	res skor
རེས་སྐོར་ཀྲུའུ་རིན	production/ shift manager	res skor kru'u rin
རེས་སྐོར་སྦྱོང་བརྡར	rotation training [putting people on different jobs or sending some at any 1 time for training]	res skor sbyong brdar
རེས་འཁོར	turn, shift, rotation	res 'khor
རེས་འཁོར་ཀྲུའུ་རིན	production/ shift manager	res 'khor kru'u rin
རེས་འཁོར་སྦྱོང་བརྡར	rotation training	res 'khor sbyong brdar
རེས་དགའ	at times cheerful	res dga'
རེས་འགའ	occasionally, sometimes, at times/ intervals	res 'ga'
རེས་འགའ་དགའ་ནས་གླུ་དབྱངས་ལེན	sometimes sing songs from joy	res 'ga' dga' nas glu dbyangs len
རེས་འགའ་བ	occasional, sometimes	res 'ga' ba
རེས་འགའ་ཙམ་ལས་མི་འབྱུང	doesn't happen more than once in a while	res 'ga' tsam las mi 'byung
རེས་འགྲོགས་ཟླ་སྐར	moon each day in turn accompanying star	res 'grogs zla skar
རེས་སྒྲུབ	rotate, take turns, change shifts	res sgrub
རེས་གཅིག	1 time	res gcig
རེས་ཆེ་རེ་ཆུང	now great and now small, partly great and partly small	res che re chung
རེས་འཇོག	occasional resting	res 'jog
རེས་འཇོག་ཏུ	alternately	res 'jog tu
རེས་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	change places alternately	res 'jog byed pa
རེས་འཇོག་མེད་པ	unchanging [action], w/o alternating	res 'jog med pa
རེས་སྟབས	way of succession/ series	res stabs
རེས་སྟོང་རེས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	alternate between state of emptiness and allpervasiveness	res stong res kun khyab
རེས་པོ	old, SA bgre ba	res po
རེས་བྱས་ན	if you alternate	res byas na
རེས་བྱེད་པ	to do a thing by turn with another person, vie with one another	res byed pa
རེས་སྦྱོང	rotation training	res sbyong
རེས་མ	1) [arch] woman; 2) prostitute	res ma
རེས་མ་བྱེད	do not alternate	res ma byed
རེས་མའི་གཙོ	chief prostitute	res ma'i gtso
རེས་མོ	[mutually taking] turn[s]	res mo
རེས་མོ་བྱས་ནས་འགན་འཁུར་བ	take turns in doing the task. taking responsibility	res mo byas nas 'gan 'khur ba
རེས་མོ་བྱས་ནས་ངལ་གསོ་བ	take turns/ substitute and rest	res mo byas nas ngal gso ba
རེས་མོ་བྱེད	do in/ by turns/ in series/ alternating	res mo byed
རེས་མོས	rotation, turn, shift	res mos
རེས་མོས་བསྐོར	alternating	res mos bskor
རེས་མོས་བྱེད	rotate, take turns, change shifts, alternate	res mos byed
རེས་མོས་བྱེད་པ	alternate sporadic practice	res mos byed pa
རེས་མོས་མེད་པ	simultaneously, not alternating	res mos med pa
རེས་མོས་བཞིན	alternate	res mos bzhin
རེས་མོས་ལ་བབས	nga'i res mos la babs pa now it is time for me / my turn	res mos la babs
རེས་མོས་སུ	in turns, by turns	res mos su
རེས་མོས་སུ་འོང	coming in turns	res mos su 'ong
རེས་གཟའ	(occasionally appearing, changing, wandering) star, planet	res gza'
རེས་གཟའ་ཕུར་བུ	thursday	res gza' phur bu
རེས་གཟའ་ལྷག་པ	wednesday	res gza' lhag pa
རེས་ཡོད་རེས་མེད	at one time is there and at another not	res yod res med
རེས་རེས	alternating between 2628	res res
རོ་རྐྱང	lalana and rasana = {ro ma} and {rkyang ma} nadis	ro rkyang
རོ་སྐོར་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བ	{ro skor lcags kyi phreng ba} med. text	ro skor lcags kyi phreng ba
རོ་སྐྱུར	1) sour taste; 2) ro g.yug pa'i byed skul	ro skyur
རོ་སྐྱེལ་མི	pall-bearers	ro skyel mi
རོ་སྐྲའི་རྔ་ཡབ	fans of corpse hair	ro skra'i rnga yab
རོ་བསྐམས	mya ngam thang	ro bskams
རོ་ཁ་བ	bitter taste [ro drug gi gras shig //sman bzang ro kha bas nad la phan, gtam bzang rna sun pos spyod par phan]	ro kha ba
རོ་ཁང	crypt, mausoleum	ro khang
རོ་ཁམས	taste element	ro khams
རོ་ཁེབས	corpse cover/ clothes	ro khebs
རོ་གོས	1 garments of a corpse; 2) clothes [pej] /	ro gos
རོ་གྱབ་པ	outcast corpse carrier	ro gyab pa
རོ་གྲིབ	defilement by a corpse	ro grib
རོ་རྒྱབ	the back	ro rgyab
རོ་རྒྱབ་པ	one who carries a corpse on his back	ro rgyab pa
རོ་སྒམ	coffin	ro sgam
རོ་སྒྲིལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རས	corpse wrapping cloth	ro sgril byed kyi ras
རོ་སྒྲུང	corpse legend [ro langs gser sgrub kyi legend, dngos grub can gyi sgrung dgos 'dod char 'bebs zhes bya. By both klu sgrub and king bde spyod bzang po. legend of a human corpse dngos sgrub can, rgya...	ro sgrung
རོ་སྒྲོམ	coffin	ro sgrom
རོ་བརྒྱ	very delicious taste and excellent nutrition/ potency, 100 tastes	ro brgya
རོ་བརྒྱ་དང་བརྒྱད	ro so drug po la lce shes la phan pa'i ro dang, 'ju bar mngon du phyogs pa'i tshe lus sems la mi gnod pa'i ro dang, zhu tshe lus sems la phan pa'i ro ste re re la gsum gsum phye bas brgya dang brgy...	ro brgya dang brgyad
རོ་བརྒྱ་པ	very delicious taste and excellent nutrition/ potency, 100 tastes ro brgyad kyi sha za ba'i phra men ma	ro brgya pa
རོ་བརྒྱའི་ཞལ་ཟས	hundred-flavored food	ro brgya'i zhal zas
རོ་མངར	sweet taste, sugar cane	ro mngar
རོ་མངར་ཤིང	1 sugar cane; 2) grape vine	ro mngar shing
རོ་གཅིག	(to be of) one taste/ identical value (with)	ro gcig
གཅིག་ཡིན	means dissolving appearance and mind into each other] 1 of the {phyag rgya chen po'i rnal 'byor bzhi the four yogas of mahamudra]	gcig yin
རོ་གཅིག་གྱུར་བ	to become inseparable from	ro gcig gyur ba
རོ་གཅིག་ཆུང་ངུ	lesser one taste	ro gcig chung ngu
རོ་གཅིག་ཆེན་པོ	greater 1 taste	ro gcig chen po
རོ་གཅིག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of one taste, the third of the four yogas of Mahamudra	ro gcig rnal 'byor
རོ་གཅིག་པ	to be of one taste/ identical value with	ro gcig pa
རོ་གཅིག་འབྲིང	medium 1 taste	ro gcig 'bring
རོ་བཅའ	Notes see {nor phyug pa dang ro bca' ba'i thog chod}	ro bca'
རོ་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	ro bcu gnyis
རོ་བཅུད	taste, nutrition, power, potency	ro bcud
རོ་བཅུད་ལྡན་པའི་ཟས་ཀྱིས་གསོ་བ	live by nutritious food	ro bcud ldan pa'i zas kyis gso ba
རོ་བཅུད་གསོལ་བ	savoring	ro bcud gsol ba
རོ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	[TRS 126-6]	ro chen brgyad
རོ་མཆོག	supreme/ excellent taste [zas kyi ro mchog lce yis myong, chu bo'i gting tshad nya mos rtogs]	ro mchog
རོ་འཇམ་པོ	smooth/ mild/ pleasant taste	ro 'jam po
རོ་འཇོག་སྣོད་ཀྱི་བུམ་པ	corpse jar	ro 'jog snod kyi bum pa
རོ་འཇོག་སའི་སྒམ	coffin	ro 'jog sa'i sgam
རོ་ཉལ	corpse-like sleep, slothfulness, sleep [pej]	ro nyal
ཅོརཔསེ	like sleep, slothfulness	corpse
རོ་ཉལ་མི་བྱེད་པ	not lying down as a corpse, not sleeping	ro nyal mi byed pa
རོ་ཉེ	lead	ro nye
རོ་མཉམ	equal taste, same taste. Ex {dang ro mnyam pa} to be of equal taste / value with	ro mnyam
རོ་མཉམ་གཅིག	single state of one taste	ro mnyam gcig
རོ་མཉམ་བཞག	rest in the same taste of ..	ro mnyam bzhag
རོ་མཉམས	=/ same taste/ flavor, =ity	ro mnyams
རོ་སྙན་པ	melodious	ro snyan pa
རོ་སྙམས	common savor, = taste/ flavor, =izing [the elements]	ro snyams
རོ་སྙོམ	=ity, equanimity	ro snyom
རོ་སྙོམ་སྐོར་དྲུག	Six Cycles of Even Taste	ro snyom skor drug
རོ་སྙོམས	= taste/ flavor, equalizing [the elements]	ro snyoms
རོ་སྙོམས་སྐོར་དྲུག	Six Cycles of Even Taste	ro snyoms skor drug
རོ་སྙོམས་ཐོག་འགེལ་གྱི་ཟློག་སྒོམ	reversive training that shelters equal taste	ro snyoms thog 'gel gyi zlog sgom
རོ་སྙོམས་པ	equal taste/ value	ro snyoms pa
རོ་བསྙོམས་པ	skyid sdug + - equalizing / equating happiness and sadness	ro bsnyoms pa
རོ་ཏོ	residue, remains, lees [chang gi ro to,//sman gyi ro to]	ro to
རོ་སྟོད	torso, trunk, upper part of the body	ro stod
རོ་སྟོད་སྒུར	to bend the upper part of the body ro stod seng ge 'dra ba'i mtshan bzang the major mark of an upper body like a lion [sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis kyi nang gses shig ste, rnam pa thams ca...	ro stod sgur
རོ་སྟོད་སེང་གེའི་འདྲ་བ	torso like that of a lion. one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} the thirty marks of a great being	ro stod seng ge'i 'dra ba
རོ་སྟོད་བསྲང	trunk of the body straightened up	ro stod bsrang
རོ་བརྟག་དཔྱད	autopsy	ro brtag dpyad
རོ་ཐ	[able to] have sex and reproduce, sexual instinct, carnal desire	ro tha
རོ་ཐག	1) corpse tying rope; 2) rope [pej]	ro thag
རོ་ཐབ	cremation hearth, crematorium	ro thab
རོ་ཐལ	ashes of a cremated body	ro thal
རོ་ཐོ	mi bsad pa'i stong du sprod rgyu'i zhing khar btsugs pa'i rdo phur	ro tho
རོ་དང་འདྲ་བ	as much as dead	ro dang 'dra ba
རོ་དང་བཙོག་པ་ཟ་མཁན	scavenger	ro dang btsog pa za mkhan
རོ་དྲངས་ཉེས་པ	defect in the performance of a funeral	ro drangs nyes pa
རོ་དྲུག	the six tastes [1 {mngar ba} = sweet; 2) {skyur ba} = sour; 3) {tshha ba} = pungent, four {lan tshva ba} = sour, salty, five {kha ba} = bitter, six {bska ba} = astringent]	ro drug
རོ་དྲུག་པའི་ཁོར་ལོ	throat chakra	ro drug pa'i khor lo
རོ་གདན	corpse-seat ro bdag mi bsad pa'i phung po'i bdag po	ro gdan
ཁྱིམ་དང་བཟའ་ཚང་སོགས	//mi la mi bdag med kyang ro la ro bdag yod,/	khyim dang bza' tshang sogs
རོ་འདུས	taste-unifying chakra	ro 'dus
རོ་ལྡན	1) tasty, having taste; 2) charnel ground; 3) garlic; 4) tongue; 3) mango	ro ldan
རོ་ལྡན་གནས	charnel ground	ro ldan gnas
རོ་ལྡན་མ	ocean	ro ldan ma
རོ་ལྡན་ཤིང	/ 1) grape vine; 2) sugar cane	ro ldan shing
རོ་ལྡོངས	hidden	ro ldongs
རོ་ནག	{ro nag thul le} stinking, rotting corpse	ro nag
རོ་ནག་ཐུལ་ལེ	a stinking corpse	ro nag thul le
རོ་གནས	charnel ground	ro gnas
རོ་རྣམས་འདུས་པ	gather tastes	ro rnams 'dus pa
རོ་རྣམས་འདུས་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	taste gathering wheel	ro rnams 'dus pa'i 'khor lo
རོ་སྣོམ	stage of 1 flavor	ro snom
རོ་བམ་པ	rotten corpse	ro bam pa
རོ་བུག	grave, tomb	ro bug
རོ་བུམ	structure resembling a mchod rten in which the ro stod is placed in upright position	ro bum
རོ་བྲོ	taste	ro bro
རོ་བྲོ་བ	experience the flavor	ro bro ba
རོ་བྲོ་བའི་མཆོག་ཏང་ལྡན་པ	having the finest sense of taste	ro bro ba'i mchog tang ldan pa
རོ་བྲོ་བའི་མཆོག་དང་ལྡན་པ	having the finest sense of taste [one of the {skyes bu chen po'i mthan sum bcu rtsa gnyis} = the 32 marks of a great being]	ro bro ba'i mchog dang ldan pa
རོ་བྲོ་མྱོང	experiencing taste	ro bro myong
རོ་འབྱོར་པ	corpse-like yogin, yogin [pej]	ro 'byor pa
རོ་སྦས་ས	tomb, grave	ro sbas sa
རོ་སྦེད	bury a corpse	ro sbed
རོ་སྦེད་ས	cemetery	ro sbed sa
རོ་མ	1) rasana, roma nadi [the main right channel/ nadi srog rtsa nag po sogs khrag rtsa thams cad kyi rten byed pa'i lus kyi rtsa'i gtso bo bo zhig ste	ro ma
སྐྱེས་པའི་ག	yon dang bud med kyi g.yas su yod cing, dvangs ma dmar po 'gyu bar byed la shes rab kyi rang bzhin can rtsa'i kha dog dmar po'o]; 2) Taste goddess [= {raa ma} TSE]; 3) snyigs ma [khu ba bton nas ro...	skyes pa'i ga
རོ་མ་རྐྱང་མ་ཀུན་འདར་མ	lalana, pingala and avadhuti	ro ma rkyang ma kun 'dar ma
རོ་མ་ཉི་ཡ	Rumania ro mi zhim pa ro mchog snang ba'i	ro ma nyi ya
ནད་པའི་ག	yog byas pas ro bro ba'i mchog snang ba]	nad pa'i ga
རོ་མིག	corpse eyes	ro mig
རོ་མེད	tasteless	ro med
རོ་མེད་དོ	without [leaving behind] a corpse	ro med do
རོ་མེད་པ	insipid, tasteless	ro med pa
རོ་མྱགས	1) rotten corpse; 2) mud, mire, filth	ro myags
རོ་མྱགས་འདམ	the putrid swamp, the swamp of rotten / decomposing corpses [an adjacent hell], the Dirty Pond of Putrid Factions	ro myags 'dam
རོ་མྱང	bee	ro myang
རོ་མྱང་བ	taste, tongue	ro myang ba
དང་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ	after tasting/ experience joyful and delighted	dang mngon par dga' ba
རོ་མྱང་མེད	w/o taste/ experience of	ro myang med
རོ་མྱོང་བ	to taste, relish, enjoy the flavor	ro myong ba
རོ་མྱོང་བར་བྱེད་པ	taste, experience	ro myong bar byed pa
རོ་མྱོང་མེད	absence of relishing	ro myong med
རོ་སྨད	lower body	ro smad
རོ་ཙ	sexual instinct, carnal desire	ro tsa
རོ་ཙ་ཀ	celestial flowers	ro tsa ka
རོ་ཙ་ཀ་ཆེན་པ	celestial flowers	ro tsa ka chen pa
རོ་ཙ་སྐྱེད་པ	procreate, increase carnal appetite by medicine	ro tsa skyed pa
རོ་ཙ་ཉམས	not able to have sex, w power of semen impaired	ro tsa nyams
རོ་ཙ་ན	kacimbala tree	ro tsa na
རོ་ཙ་འཕེལ	hot taste/ semen and desire for sex increasing	ro tsa 'phel
རོ་ཙ་བ	voluptuousness, sensual, lustful	ro tsa ba
རོ་ཙ་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{ro tsa yon tan rgya mtsho}	ro tsa yon tan rgya mtsho
རོ་ཙ་གསོ	w no children &, not able to have sex, w power of semen impaired rnams gso bar bya ba'i don	ro tsa gso
རོ་བཙའ་བ	[arch] 1) chags pa rgod po; 2) khu ba 'phel bar byed pa	ro btsa' ba
རོ་བཙོང་བ	importunate, persistence	ro btsong ba
རོ་ཚ་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{ro tsha yon tan rgya mtsho} [rab byung bdun pa'i nang zur mkhar mnyam nyid rdo rjes mdzad pa'i lus stobs skyed pa &, khu ba gso ba, 'dod pa 'phel ba sogs kyi thabs ston pa'i med. shastra]	ro tsha yon tan rgya mtsho
རོ་ཚན་གསུམ	kind of officinal plant	ro tshan gsum
རོ་ཚིག	truth	ro tshig
རོ་ཚོགས	funeral rituals	ro tshogs
རོ་འཛིན	tongue	ro 'dzin
རོ་འཛིན་དབང་མངོན	taste grasping sense perception	ro 'dzin dbang mngon
རོ་འཛིན་ཡིད་མངོན	taste grasping mental perception	ro 'dzin yid mngon
རོ་ཞིམ་པ	bro ba zhim pa,/	ro zhim pa
རོ་ཟ	pejorative phrase (corpse-eater)	ro za
རོ་ཟན	1) food left for corpses; 2) rakshasa; 3) corpse eating scavenger/ bird	ro zan
རོ་ཟས	1) food left for corpses; 2) rakshasa; 3) corpse eating scavenger/ bird	ro zas
རོ་གཟན	ro gtum byed kyi nyal gzan	ro gzan
རོ་བཟང་མ	a yaksha princess	ro bzang ma
རོ་འོག་རྨ་ཞི	when a person is killed though on the killer's body there may be wounds [rmas skyon scars?] he pays no attention to them	ro 'og rma zhi
རོ་ཡི་གེ་སར	saffron	ro yi ge sar
རོ་ཡི་གནས	place where dead bodies are disposed of	ro yi gnas
རོ་རས	corpse wrapping cloth, shroud	ro ras
རོ་རས་ཀྱིས་འཐུམ་པ	shroud	ro ras kyis 'thum pa
རོ་རུལ་བ	rotten corpse	ro rul ba
རོ་རོ	rubbish	ro ro
རོ་རླངས་རྒྱག་པའི་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས	reviving capitalism	ro rlangs rgyag pa'i ma rtsa'i ring lugs
རོ་ལང་མ	vetali (purity of consciousness of body)	ro lang ma
རོ་ལངས	Corpse raiser, corpse raising spirit, vetala. A kind of demon or spirit that occupies dead bodies	ro langs
རོ་ལངས་ཀྱི་གདོན	rolang demon disease [gdon chen gyi nang tshan ro langs zhes pas btang bar grags pa'i gdon nad cig ste, nad rtags su gnyid la dga' ba dang, rgyan 'dogs pa, lus 'dar ba bcas 'byung ba zhig]	ro langs kyi gdon
རོ་ལངས་རྒྱག་པ	resurrect, reanimate, make a come back * revive, restore [phung po'i nang du rkyen zhugs nas bskyar du langs pa; 2) in nyingma tradition etc rtsa med bzos nas slar gso ba]	ro langs rgyag pa
རོ་ལངས་གསེར་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྒྲུང	The Living Corpse that Turns into Gold	ro langs gser sgrub kyi sgrung
རོ་ལས	gshin 'don gyi bya ba rnams	ro las
རོ་ལས་པ	ro las byed mkhan	ro las pa
རོ་ཤད་རྒྱག	make a last ditch/ deathbed struggle	ro shad rgyag
རོ་ཤེས	tongue	ro shes
རོ་ས་སྦས་བཏང	to bury a corpse	ro sa sbas btang
རོ་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 tastes	ro so drug
རོ་སོལ་ནག་པོ	soot [from burned corpse]. soot / ashes from burned corpse; soot / ashes from burned corpse	ro sol nag po
རོ་སྲེག	cremate	ro sreg
རོ་སྲེག་ཆེད་ཤིང་གི་རྩིག་པ	pyre	ro sreg ched shing gi rtsig pa
རོ་སྲེག་པ	burn a corpse, cremate	ro sreg pa
རོ་སྲེག་སའི་ཐབ	cremation hearth, crematorium	ro sreg sa'i thab
རོ་བསྲེག་གི་ཆོ་ག	cremation liturgy	ro bsreg gi cho ga
རོ་བསྲེག་པའི	funeral	ro bsreg pa'i
རོ་ཧི་ཏ	SK 2nd month	ro hi ta
རོ་ཧི་ཏ་ཀ	place in ancient india	ro hi ta ka
རོ་ཧི་ཏི་ཀའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	the city of Rohitika [located on the route to Badara]	ro hi ti ka'i grong khyer
རོག་གེ་བ	black colored/ looking	rog ge ba
རོག་སྟོན་དཀོན་ཅོག་སྐྱབས	{rog ston dkon cog skyabs} 2631	rog ston dkon cog skyabs
པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་གཉིས་པ་ག	yu thog gsar ma yon tan mgon po la bka' babs so]	pa'i rgyal po gnyis pa ga
རོག་པོ	black animal	rog po
རོག་པོ་འཇོམས་སྐྱེས	{rog po 'joms skyes} med. herb	rog po 'joms skyes
རོག་བན་དེ་ཤེས་རབ་འོད	authour of grub mtha' so so'i bzhed tshul gzhung gsal bar ston pa chos 'byung grub mtha' chen po bstan pa'i sgron me	rog ban de shes rab 'od
རོག་མ	sha ma'am when a child is born phyi thum gyi sha	rog ma
རོག་རོག	black colored/ looking	rog rog
རོག་ལུགས	one of the two divisions of {phur pa rol pa'i skor}	rog lugs
རོགས	1) help[er] assstance [-ant] [Zla bo'am phan cha,//,//las ka'i rogs byed pa two after a verb polite ! please [phebs rogs,//gzigs rogs] two after a verb particle showing what the action will cause [...	rogs
རོགས་སྐྱོར	help	rogs skyor
རོགས་དངུལ	money to help, relief money	rogs dngul
རོགས་དངུལ་སྤྲོད་པ	subsidize	rogs dngul sprod pa
རོགས་མཐུན་ཚོགས་པ	league	rogs mthun tshogs pa
རོགས་དན	help, aid, assistance	rogs dan
རོགས་གནང	help, favor	rogs gnang
རོགས་སྣོན	gang zhig gis mi 'dang bar rgyab skyor dpung snon byed pa	rogs snon
རོགས་པ	accompaniment, companion, company, mate, partner	rogs pa
རོགས་པ་བྱེད་པ	accompany, keep some1 company	rogs pa byed pa
རོགས་པ་མེད་པར	single-handed	rogs pa med par
རོགས་བྱེད	to help	rogs byed
རོགས་བྱེད་པ	help [to], assist, give a hand, aid	rogs byed pa
རོགས་འབྲེལ	alliance, union	rogs 'brel
རོགས་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	ally, join [in union], combine	rogs 'brel byed
རོགས་སྦྲེལ	alliance, union	rogs sbrel
རོགས་སྦྲེལ་བྱེད	ally, join [in union], combine	rogs sbrel byed
རོགས་མེད	helpless, friendless	rogs med
རོགས་མེད་གཅིག་པུ	helpless and alone	rogs med gcig pu
རོགས་ཚོགས	aid/ relief agency	rogs tshogs
རོགས་ཟླ	rogs ya	rogs zla
རོགས་རམ	help, assistance, aid	rogs ram
རོགས་རམ་གནང་བ	h to aid	rogs ram gnang ba
རོགས་རམ་བྱེད་པ	help, assist, cooperate, befriend	rogs ram byed pa
རོགས་རམ་མེད	no aid/ help/ assistance	rogs ram med
རོགས་རམ་ཚོགས་པ	relief agency, aid agency	rogs ram tshogs pa
རོགས་རེས	mutual aid, helping each other	rogs res
རོགས་རེས་ཆིངས་ཡིག	mutual aid treaty	rogs res chings yig
རོགས་རེས་མཉམ་ལས	mutual assistance and cooperation	rogs res mnyam las
རོགས་རེས་བྱེད	mutually aid, help each other	rogs res byed
རོགས་རེས་ཚན་ཆུང	mutual aid team/ group	rogs res tshan chung
རོགས་རེས་ཚོ་ཆུང	mutual aid team/ group	rogs res tsho chung
རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང	mutual aid team/ group	rogs res tshogs chung
རོགས་ལམ	supply line	rogs lam
རོགས་ལས	cooperation	rogs las
རོང	cultivated valleys, valley bed, valley tropics, deep gorge, defile, narrow passage, cleft in a hill	rong
རོང་སྐོར	in doing the pilgrimage of circumambulation in Tsari of the skor lam gsum: rtse skor, bar skor &, rong skor: rong skor	rong skor
རོང་སྐོར་བརྒྱབ་པ	made the pilgrimage to the Ravines [of Tsari]	rong skor brgyab pa
རོང་སྐྱེས་ཤང་ཚེ	herb {rong skyes shang tshe}	rong skyes shang tshe
རོང་བསྐོར་བརྒྱབ་པ	made pilgrimage to the ravines of Tsari	rong bskor brgyab pa
རོང་བསྐོར་ལ་འགྲོ	making a pilgrimage to the ravines of Tsari	rong bskor la 'gro
རོང་ཁུང	narrow ravine/ canyon	rong khung
རོང་ཁུང་དོག་ས	a narrow gorge	rong khung dog sa
རོང་ཁུལ	low-lying narrow valley/ ravine/ canyon [region]	rong khul
རོང་ངེ	1 tshog ge'am zing nge; 2) lo tog sogs skye 'tshar legs pa [smyug gling rong nger skyes pa]	rong nge
རོང་ངེ་བ	crowded	rong nge ba
རོང་གཅོང	rocky defile	rong gcong
རོང་ལྕང	willow growing in sikkim or bhutan	rong lcang
རོང་ཆ་ག་པ	insect {rong cha ga pa}	rong cha ga pa
རོང་ཆད་དཀར	Rongchekar, in Lokha?	rong chad dkar
རོང་ཆུང	Rongchung, in Tsang	rong chung
རོང་རྟ	farmer's horse	rong rta
རོང་སྟོན་ཆེན་པོ	kun mkhyen rong ston chen po	rong ston chen po
རོང་སྟོན་ཆོས་རྗེ	Rongton choje	rong ston chos rje
མསྟེར་ཨོཕ༹་སཽཏྲནཏིཀ	madhyamika philosophy]	master of sautrantika
རོང་སྟོན་པད་མ་བྱེད་ཆེན་གླིང་པ	life story of Rongton choje {rong ston pad ma byed chen gling pa}	rong ston pad ma byed chen gling pa
རོང་སྟོན་ཤཱ་ཀྱ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	13671449 [ggd]	rong ston shA kya rgyal mtshan
རོང་སྟོན་ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་རིག	1367-1449	rong ston shes bya kun rig
རོང་སྟོན་ལྷ་དགས	Rongton Lhagpa [sp?]; one of Milarepa's teachers who predicted Marpa rong tha blo bzang chos 'byor lhun grub 1857-1900. the 4th rong tha chung tshang sprul sku rong tha blo bzang dam chos rgya mtsh...	rong ston lha dags
རོང་དོག་པོ	narrow ravine/ canyon	rong dog po
རོང་ལྡན	Rongden, birth place of Tennyi Lingpa, in Tsang	rong ldan
རོང་ནང	{rong nang} [place in mtsho sna rdzong khongs mon yul]	rong nang
རོང་པ	one of {chos rgyal chen po'i bka' rtags kyi phyag rgyas bskos pa'i rgyal phran bdun} the seven vassal kingdoms established by the royal decree of the great religious king (Songtsen Gampo)	rong pa
རོང་པ་གཏེར་སྟོན་བདུད་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	17th cent. - Rongpa Tertön Düdül Lingpa, the former incarnation of Tekchen Lingpa	rong pa gter ston bdud 'dul gling pa
རོང་པ་ཕྱག་སོར་བ	Mentioned @ R75: 252.3 as a disciple of nag tsho tshul khrims byal ba. See Blue Annals, I 321, 365, 374. [mss]	rong pa phyag sor ba
རོང་པོ	Rongpo, in Domey rong po dgon chen gyi gdan rabs rdzogs	rong po
ལྡན་གཏམ་གྱི་རང་སྒྲགས	History of the Great Monastery of Rongpo, by Jigmey Thekcho	ldan gtam gyi rang sgrags
རོང་པོ་ཆོ་ག་རྣམ་གསུམ	CHN	rong po cho ga rnam gsum
རོང་ཕུ	Rongphu, in Latö	rong phu
རོང་བོ་དགུ་ཆུ	{rong bo dgu chu} River	rong bo dgu chu
རོང་བོ་རྒྱ་མཁར	{rong bo rgya mkhar grong rdal}	rong bo rgya mkhar
རོང་བོའི་དགོན་ཆེན	{rong bo'i dgon chen} Monastery	rong bo'i dgon chen
རོང་བྱམས་ཆེན	[in gtsang rong region by bla ma gzhon nu rgyal mchog bzhengs skrun byas pa'i [byams pa'i sku brnyan painting? Manjushri?] large statue of Maitreya	rong byams chen
རོང་བྱམས་ཆེན་དགོན་པ	{rong byams chen dgon pa} Monastery [in the 6th me lug lor rin spungs nor bu bzang pos in rin spungs rdzong]	rong byams chen dgon pa
རོང་བྲག	{rong brag rdzong} [si khron zhing chen khongs dkar mdzes bod rigs rang skyong khul gyi shar ngos dang rgyal rong rgyal mo'i rngul chu'i stod rgyud du yod pa'i rong mi'i brag 'go zhes pa de'o]	rong brag
རོང་འབྲོག	farmers and nomads	rong 'brog
རོང་འབྲོག་འདྲེས་མ	mixed farmers and nomads	rong 'brog 'dres ma
རོང་མ	'brog yul ma 'brog OR sa ma 'brog]	rong ma
རོང་མ་འབྲོག	agro-pastoral, both farming and practicing animal husbandry	rong ma 'brog
རོང་མི	man coming from rong	rong mi
རོང་མེ་དཀར་མོ་སྟག་ཚང	Rongmey Karmo Taktsang. Karmo Taktsang {dkar mo stag tshang}	rong me dkar mo stag tshang
རོང་ཙུབ	rugged ravines	rong tsub
རོང་ཟོམ	celebrated lama of rong	rong zom
རོང་ཟོམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཟང་པོ	Rongzom Pandita, Chökyi Sangpo 11th cent: 1012-1088	rong zom chos kyi bzang po
རོང་ཟོམ་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བཟང་པོ	Rongzompa, Rongzom Pandita, Chökyi Sangpo. (1012-1088). Together with Longchenpa, he is regarded as the Nyingma scholar of outstanding brilliance	rong zom pa chos kyi bzang po
རོང་ཟོམ་ལུགས	one of the two divisions of the {phur pa rol pa'i skor}	rong zom lugs
རོང་ཟོམ་ལུངས	{rong zom lungs} [one of the two divisions of the {phur pa rol pa'i skor}	rong zom lungs
རོང་ཡུལ	country of ravines, nepal, sikkim, bhutan	rong yul
རོང་རོང	craggy, precipitous	rong rong
རོང་རོང་དུ་ལངས་པའི་ཤ་ཁྱིའི་རྣ་བ	, /	rong rong du langs pa'i sha khyi'i rna ba
རོང་རོང་རྩོལ་མོ	epithet of the devil	rong rong rtsol mo
རོང་ལི་མི	Limi - in Nepal	rong li mi
རོང་ལུགས	Rong/ nyang tradition of transmitted precepts	rong lugs
རོང་ཤར	formerly known as brin Rongshar, in Tsang	rong shar
རོང་ཤེལ་མོ་གངས	Rong Shelmo Gang. Crystal Peak of Rong, in Limi	rong shel mo gangs
རོང་ས	deep narrow valley, gorge, ravine	rong sa
རོད	lus kyi rnam pa dang, gzi mdangs [healthy complexion, luster, pride], stobs pride, haughtiness	rod
རོད་ལྕི་བ	unable to help oneself	rod lci ba
རོད་ལྕི་བའི་མི་གཉའ་རེངས་པ	person who obstinately indulges bad habits	rod lci ba'i mi gnya' rengs pa
རོད་ཉམས་པ	weak, feeble	rod nyams pa
རོད་སྣུམ་འདོན་ཁུལ	oil producing region	rod snum 'don khul
རོད་པ	stiff	rod pa
རོད་པོ	dress, stiff, unable to help oneself	rod po
རོད་རོད་པོ	1 hurried, rushed, speedy, quick, busy [kho rod rod por phyin 2633 song]; 2) unclear, weak, feeble minded, listless	rod rod po
རོད་རོད་པོའི་རིག་པ	weak/ feeble minded	rod rod po'i rig pa
རོན	(not in das)	ron
རོབ་བསྡུས	brief, rough, sketchy	rob bsdus
རོབ་ཙམ	[just] brief/ rough, coarse/ a glance	rob tsam
རོབ་ཙམ་མཐོང་བ	see only a glance	rob tsam mthong ba
རོབ་རྩིས	estimate	rob rtsis
རོབ་ཚོད་བྱེད་པ	guess	rob tshod byed pa
རོབ་རོབ	brief, rough, sketchy	rob rob
རོམ	thick	rom
རོམ་པོ	thick, big, stout	rom po
རོའི	of taste	ro'i
རོའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	* sense field/ ayatana of taste	ro'i skye mched
རོའི་ཁམས	taste element	ro'i khams
རོའི་ཉལ་ས	place where a corpse is laid, cemetery	ro'i nyal sa
རོའི་སྦྱང་ཀི	corpse-eating jackal/ wolf	ro'i sbyang ki
རོའི་གསེར	camphor	ro'i gser
རོལ	furrow, enjoy, packs, deep, abyss, chasm, to enjoy, manifests in	rol
རོལ་ཀྱང་མི་འབྱི	not going beyond the principle of that, not going outside of that	rol kyang mi 'byi
རོལ་ཁ	plowing las 'go	rol kha
རོལ་ཁ་གཏོང་བ	begin ploughing in spring	rol kha gtong ba
རོལ་གར	[enjoy-showing], display, imposing dance, emanation	rol gar
རོལ་གར་བསྒྱུར	dances and plays	rol gar bsgyur
རོལ་འགྲོ	Mars	rol 'gro
རོལ་འགྲོས	dance steps that match the music	rol 'gros
རོལ་སྒལ	plowed field's	rol sgal
རོལ་སྒེག	lus kyi sgeg pa'i nyams	rol sgeg
རོལ་སྒེག་མ	1) dancing girl; 2) mchor sgeg ma)	rol sgeg ma
རོལ་སྒྲོག་པ	sound, play musical instruments	rol sgrog pa
རོལ་སྔགས	Enjoyment mantra	rol sngags
རོལ་ཆ	musical instruments	rol cha
རོལ་ཆ་དཀྲོལ་བ	play music	rol cha dkrol ba
རོལ་ཆ་གཏོང་མཁས་པ	musician	rol cha gtong mkhas pa
རོལ་ཆ་གཏོང་བ	play music	rol cha gtong ba
རོལ་ཆ་བ	musician	rol cha ba
རོལ་ཆས	musical instruments	rol chas
རོལ་ཆས་རྐྱང་དཀྲོལ	mi gcig pu zhig gis rol cha sna gcig rdung dkrol byed pa,/	rol chas rkyang dkrol
རོལ་ཆས་གཏོང་བ	play musical instruments rol nyi shu rtsa gnyis can son 'debs 'phrul 'khor - 24 row planting machine	rol chas gtong ba
རོལ་རྙེད	playfulness	rol rnyed
རོལ་རྟ	the near horse	rol rta
རོལ་སྟབས	reveling posture	rol stabs
རོལ་དུ་ཁྲིད་ནས	taking as company	rol du khrid nas
རོལ་གདངས	musical composition	rol gdangs
རོལ་གདངས་བཟོ	compose music	rol gdangs bzo
རོལ་གདངས་ལེ་ཚན	movement of a musical composition	rol gdangs le tshan
རོལ་འདེབས	plant/ drill seeds in a plowed furrow, row seeding	rol 'debs
རོལ་འདེབས་རྒྱག	plant/ drill seeds in a plowed furrow/ row	rol 'debs rgyag
རོལ་འདེབས་འཐུག་འཛུགས	plant/ drill seeds in a plowed furrow, row seeding w close planting	rol 'debs 'thug 'dzugs
རོལ་ན	in the midst of	rol na
རོལ་གནས	stage, place of enjoyment, pleasure grove, heaven	rol gnas
རོལ་པ	(rich) display (of being)*; to display/ play/ enjoy/ partake (of)	rol pa
རོལ་པ་ཀུན་བཟང	rolpa energy of Samantabhadra	rol pa kun bzang
རོལ་པ་བཀོད་པ	display of emanations	rol pa bkod pa
རོལ་པ་འགག་མེད	space of unobstructed energy which arises spontaneously	rol pa 'gag med
རོལ་པ་འགག་མེད་རང་ཤར་གྱི་ཀློང	1 of klong dgu	rol pa 'gag med rang shar gyi klong
རོལ་པ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ	to accomplish the manifestation	rol pa mngon du gyur pa
རོལ་པ་ཆེ	majestic play	rol pa che
རོལ་པ་ཆེར་བྱས་པ	aroused his presence	rol pa cher byas pa
རོལ་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ	{rol pa rdo rje}	rol pa rdo rje
རོལ་པ་ཕྲིན་ལས	enlightened activity which is displayed	rol pa phrin las
རོལ་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	continuous display, wheel of manifestation of the wisdom unity	rol pa'i 'khor lo
རོལ་པའི་གར	display, dance	rol pa'i gar
རོལ་པའི་གར་གྱི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	the expressions of sporting dances	rol pa'i gar gyi rnam 'gyur
རོལ་པའི་གར་ཆེར་བཏང	performed an imposing dance	rol pa'i gar cher btang
རོལ་པའི་འགྲོས	musical gait, dancing to music	rol pa'i 'gros
རོལ་པའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་ལྔ	the five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization. {sgrub sde}. 1) {gshin thun nag po'i skor} in two divisions. i) {kha thun nag po'i skor} ii) {gnub lugs gshin rje ru m...	rol pa'i rgyud sde lnga
རོལ་པའི་ངང	display	rol pa'i ngang
རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Hevajra	rol pa'i rdo rje
རོལ་པའི་ནགས	[queen's] pleasure grove	rol pa'i nags
རོལ་པའི་རྩལ	displaying power, play of the power	rol pa'i rtsal
རོལ་པའི་མཚོ་ཆེ	play sea; play sea. the seven circular lakes surrounding Mt. Sumeru in between {gser re bdun}	rol pa'i mtsho che
རོལ་པའི་མཚོ་ཆེན	the Great Cosmic Ocean	rol pa'i mtsho chen
རོལ་པའི་མཚོ་བདུན	seven lakes where water moves in gentle dancing waves	rol pa'i mtsho bdun
རོལ་པའི་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང	infinite manifestation	rol pa'i gzhal med khang
རོལ་པའི་ས	celestial regions	rol pa'i sa
རོལ་པར་མཛད་པ	enjoyment	rol par mdzad pa
རོལ་པར་ཤར་བ	to arise as the display of ..	rol par shar ba
རོལ་པོ	rdo mching bu	rol po
རོལ་དཔོན	1) master of music. 2) person in charge of the cymbals	rol dpon
རོལ་བ	(tha dad pa 1 enjoy, live in [a state of] * two eat * three play, laugh, amuse or divert 1's self, play, frolic; 4) emanation, display	rol ba
རོལ་བར་གྱི་ས་འབུར	ridges between furrows in a plowed field	rol bar gyi sa 'bur
རོལ་དབང	vassal	rol dbang
རོལ་དབྱངས	music	rol dbyangs
རོལ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་ལྟད་མོ	concert	rol dbyangs kyi ltad mo
རོལ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	musicology	rol dbyangs kyi rig pa
རོལ་དབྱངས་དཀྲོལ	play music	rol dbyangs dkrol
རོལ་དབྱངས་འཁྲོལ	play music	rol dbyangs 'khrol
རོལ་དབྱངས་སྒྲོག་པ	to play / sound musical instruments	rol dbyangs sgrog pa
རོལ་དབྱངས་སྡེ་ཚན	band, orchestra	rol dbyangs sde tshan
རོལ་དབྱངས་པ	musician	rol dbyangs pa
རོལ་དབྱངས་ཚོགས་པ	orchestra	rol dbyangs tshogs pa
རོལ་མོ	music, pair of cymbals, sound of music, musical instrument, symphony, 1 of zlos gar, 1 of rig gnas bco brgyad	rol mo
རོལ་མོ་དཀྲོལ་བ	played music, play musical instruments	rol mo dkrol ba
རོལ་མོ་རྐྱང་གཏོང	solo performance	rol mo rkyang gtong
རོལ་མོ་ཁང	music hall	rol mo khang
རོལ་མོ་མཁན	musician, composer	rol mo mkhan
རོལ་མོ་མཁས་པ	musician, composer, expert on music	rol mo mkhas pa
རོལ་མོ་འཁྲོལ་བ	to sound, play musical instruments; to play / sound musical instruments	rol mo 'khrol ba
རོལ་མོ་གླུ་གཞས་འདུ་འཛོམས	concert, musical performance	rol mo glu gzhas 'du 'dzoms
རོལ་མོ་གཉིས་སྦྲགས	duet	rol mo gnyis sbrags
རོལ་མོ་མཉམ་གཏོང	play as an orchestra/ ensemble	rol mo mnyam gtong
རོལ་མོ་འཐོགས་པ	one carrying cymbals	rol mo 'thogs pa
རོལ་མོ་རྡུང་བ	to sound, play musical instruments; to play / sound musical instruments	rol mo rdung ba
རོལ་མོ་སྤྱོད་པ	musical profession	rol mo spyod pa
རོལ་མོ་བ	musician	rol mo ba
རོལ་མོ་བྱེད་པ	to make music	rol mo byed pa
རོལ་མོ་རྩེད་ཁང	[musical] club, cabaret rol mo tshogs pa'i rol mo mnyam gtong philharmonic symphony orchestra	rol mo rtsed khang
རོལ་མོ་ལ་སྲེད་པ	liking music	rol mo la sred pa
རོལ་མོའི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ	musical arts/ skills	rol mo'i sgyu rtsal
རོལ་མོའི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 musiacal arts/ skills [sgyu rtsal drug cu re bzhi'i nang gses kyi rigs shig ste, gar dang, bro, rnga bo che, rdza rnga, rnga phran, rnga chen po, 'khar rnga, pi wang rgyud gcig pa, rdza rnga...	rol mo'i sgyu rtsal bco brgyad
རོལ་མོའི་སྒྲ	sound of music	rol mo'i sgra
རོལ་མོའི་སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས་པ	sound of cymbals resounded	rol mo'i sgra bsgrags pa
རོལ་མོའི་སྒྲ་གདངས	musical composition, melody	rol mo'i sgra gdangs
རོལ་མོའི་ཆ་བརྒྱད	8 divisions of music	rol mo'i cha brgyad
རོལ་མོའི་ཆིངས	cymbal percussion notation	rol mo'i chings
རོལ་མོའི་འདུ་ཚོགས	music festival	rol mo'i 'du tshogs
རོལ་མོའི་སྡེ	group of musicians	rol mo'i sde
རོལ་མོའི་སྡེ་ཚན	band, orchestra	rol mo'i sde tshan
རོལ་མོའི་གནས	theatre, place where music is performed, place of music	rol mo'i gnas
རོལ་མོའི་པུའི་ཙི	musical score/ book	rol mo'i pu'i tsi
རོལ་མོའི་དཔོང་ས	[arch] rol mo bslab pa'i gnas	rol mo'i dpong sa
རོལ་མོའི་སྤོང་ས	school house where music is taught	rol mo'i spong sa
རོལ་མོའི་བྱེ་བྲག་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 appendages of music	rol mo'i bye brag bco brgyad
རོལ་མོའི་དབྱེ་བ	different kinds of musical instruments (cang te'u, ma du, sil khrol, dan di ma, bal rnga, mkhar rnga)	rol mo'i dbye ba
རོལ་མོའི་མཚམས་ཚིགས	rhythm	rol mo'i mtshams tshigs
རོལ་མོའི་གཞུང་ལུགས	musical theory 2635	rol mo'i gzhung lugs
རོལ་མོའི་ཡོ་ཆས	musical instruments	rol mo'i yo chas
རོལ་མོའི་ཡོ་བྱད	musical instruments	rol mo'i yo byad
རོལ་མོའི་རུ་ཁག	band, orchestra	rol mo'i ru khag
རོལ་མོའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	music school/ conservatory{rol mo'i slob ma - music student	rol mo'i slob grwa
རོལ་མོའི་སློབ་ཚན	music class	rol mo'i slob tshan
རོལ་མོའི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess of music	rol mo'i lha mo
རོལ་མོས	by music	rol mos
རོལ་མོས་རམ་འདེགས	musical accompaniment	rol mos ram 'degs
རོལ་རྨོད	seeding in furrows/ rows [after plowing]	rol rmod
རོལ་མཙོ	the [7] lakes of play [by the naga kings {rol pa'i mtsho bdun} {yan lag brgyad ldan gyi chus gang bas klu'i rgyal po rnams rtse zhing rol ba'am spyod pa'i mtsho ste, ri rab kyi mtha' skor gyi gser ...	rol mtso
རོལ་རྩལ	manifestive powers, manifestative power; manifestative power, manifestive powers	rol rtsal
རོལ་རྩེད	creative play, recreation, amusement, theatrical performance	rol rtsed
རོལ་རྩེད་ཁང	recreation/ amusement/ entertainment center/ club house/ building	rol rtsed khang
རོལ་རྩེད་མ	1 female dancer/ theatrical performer two prostitute /	rol rtsed ma
རོལ་བརྩེད	n. plays	rol brtsed
རོལ་ཚན	musical program/ performance	rol tshan
རོལ་མཚོ	the Sea of Enjoyment	rol mtsho
རོལ་མཚོ་དྲུག	CHN	rol mtsho drug
རོལ་མཚོ་བདུན	the 7 lakes of play [by the naga kings [tshva'i mtsho dang, chang gi mtsho, chu'i mtsho, 'o ma'i mtsho, zho'i mtsho, mar gyi mtsho, sbrang rtshi'i mtsho ste, dus 'khor lugs nas bshad pa ltar ri rab...	rol mtsho bdun
རོལ་མཚོ་ནས་འཐོན་པའི་ཀླུ	nagas issued forth from the rolling ocean	rol mtsho nas 'thon pa'i klu
རོལ་རིས	rol shul in a plowed field	rol ris
རོལ་ལེ་སྐས་ལ་ཕྱི་འབབ་བྱོན་སོང	ran down the stairs	rol le skas la phyi 'bab byon song
རོལ་སོན་རྒྱག	plant seed in a plowed furrow	rol son rgyag
རོལ་སོན་རྒྱག་པ	plant seed in a plowed furrow	rol son rgyag pa
རོལ་སོན་འདེབས	plant seed in a plowed furrow	rol son 'debs
རོལ་སོན་འདེབས་པ	plant seed in a plowed furrow	rol son 'debs pa
རོལ་སོན་བཤོས་པ	to sow behind a plow	rol son bshos pa
རོལ་གསལ	Rosa	rol gsal
རོས་ཏེན	Sweden	ros ten
རོས་མྱོས་པ	savoring	ros myos pa
རོས་སི	Switzerland	ros si
རྱེད་པར་དཀའ	rarely met with	ryed par dka'
རླ	SA bla	rla
རླ་པ་ཁམ་ནག	dark brown locks or mane	rla pa kham nag
རླག	destruction, loss, ruin, become bodiless	rlag
རླག་འཐོར	destruction, ruin, lose [f rlog]	rlag 'thor
རླག་པ	{brlag pa} to (bring to) ruin	rlag pa
རླག་པར་གྱིས་པ	be destroyed, ruined	rlag par gyis pa
རླག་པོ	foolish, stupid	rlag po
རླག་མོ	1) dri chen rnyang ma; 2) [arch] kleshas	rlag mo
རླག་ཟིན་པ	lost	rlag zin pa
རླགས་པ	destroyed, perished, lost [p rlog]	rlags pa
རླང་ཆེན་དཔལ་གྱི་སེང་གེ	Palgyi Senge, Langchen, one of Guru Padmasambhava's twenty-five main disciples	rlang chen dpal gyi seng ge
རླང་པ	Vaspa [one of the 1st disciples of the buddha]	rlang pa
རླངས	steamy; steam, vapor	rlangs
རླངས་ཀྱི་པོ་ཏི་བསེ་རུ	bsam yas rab gnas mdzad skabs mkhan slob dang, rgyal blon rnams gdan 'dzoms te bka' bgros gnang ba'i tshig rnams thor bsdus byas pa zhig	rlangs kyi po ti bse ru
རླངས་འཁུར	steamed momo	rlangs 'khur
རླངས་འཁོར་གྱི་གྱིག་འཁོར	vehicle tire	rlangs 'khor gyi gyig 'khor
རླངས་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ	highway rlangs 'khor mnyams gso bcos sgrig khang - auto/ vehicle repair shop	rlangs 'khor 'gro lam
རླངས་འཁོར་གཏོང	drive a [steam engine, vehicle, automobile]	rlangs 'khor gtong
རླངས་འཁོར་གཏོང་བ	drive	rlangs 'khor gtong ba
རླངས་འཁོར་འབབ་ཚུགས	bus stop	rlangs 'khor 'bab tshugs
རླངས་འཁོར་བཟོ་བཅོས་བཟོ་གྲ	auto/ vehicle repair shop	rlangs 'khor bzo bcos bzo gra
རླངས་འཁོར་རུ་ཁག	truck convoy	rlangs 'khor ru khag
རླངས་འཁོར་རུ་ཚོགས	truck convoy	rlangs 'khor ru tshogs
རླངས་གྲུ	motor/ steam boat	rlangs gru
རླངས་འགུལ་མ་འཁོར་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	steam turbine generator	rlangs 'gul ma 'khor gyi 'khor lo
རླངས་འགུལ་མ་འཁོར་བཟོ་གྲ	steam turbine works	rlangs 'gul ma 'khor bzo gra
རླངས་འགུལ་མེ་འཁོར་མགོ	steam locomotive	rlangs 'gul me 'khor mgo
རླངས་འགུལ་མེ་འཁོར་མ་མ	steam locomotive	rlangs 'gul me 'khor ma ma
རླངས་ཆུ	dew *, distilled water	rlangs chu
རླངས་ཆུ་འདོན	distil water	rlangs chu 'don
རླངས་ཆུ་འདོན་པ	distil	rlangs chu 'don pa
རླངས་ཆུ་ཕབ	distil water	rlangs chu phab
རླངས་ཆུ་བཟོ	distil water	rlangs chu bzo
རླངས་ཆུ་བཟོ་བྱེད	distil water	rlangs chu bzo byed
རླངས་ཆུ་བཟོ་བྱེད་འཁྲུལ་ཆས	distillation apparatus	rlangs chu bzo byed 'khrul chas
རླངས་དུག	1) kha rlangs kyi dug; 2) dug chu'i rlangs pa'i dug; 3) sbyar dug gi nang tsan gom pa rgyag skabs sa yi rlangs pa la rta byas nas bskur ba'i dug	rlangs dug
རླངས་དུང	steam whistle, siren	rlangs dung
རླངས་སྣུམ	gasoline	rlangs snum
རླངས་པ	1) steam, vapor [from heat and moisture]; 2) Vashya,	rlangs pa
རླངས་པ་ཆགས་པ	evaporate	rlangs pa chags pa
རླངས་པ་འཕྱུར་འཕྱུར	many vapors from heat 'thul stangs	rlangs pa 'phyur 'phyur
རླངས་པ་ཚུབ་ཚུབ	steaming hot	rlangs pa tshub tshub
རླངས་པར་འགྱུར	evaporate rlangs par 'gyur chog chog phar chag volatile	rlangs par 'gyur
རླངས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	condense	rlangs par 'gyur ba
རླངས་པར་འགྱུར་ཚད	volume of evaporation	rlangs par 'gyur tshad
རླངས་པས་དྲོད་གཏོང	steam heat	rlangs pas drod gtong
རླངས་པོ	lowest social grade	rlangs po
རླངས་དཔལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེ	Palgyi Yeshe of Lang. One of the first Tibetans to take ordination. He received also transmission from Hungkara in India but died on the way back	rlangs dpal gyi ye she
རླངས་དཔལ་གྱི་སེང་གེ	Palgyi Senge of Lang. His father was Amey Jangchub Drekhöl, a mantrika powerful enough to employ the eight classes of gods and demons as his servants. Palgyi Senge of Lang was one of the eight chie...	rlangs dpal gyi seng ge
རླངས་འཕྱད་པ་བྱེད་པ	to steam	rlangs 'phyad pa byed pa
རླངས་བ	steam	rlangs ba
རླངས་འབར་སྒུལ་ཤུགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	gas engine	rlangs 'bar sgul shugs 'phrul 'khor
རླངས་སྦུད་གནམ་གྲུ	jet plane	rlangs sbud gnam gru
རླངས་བཙོས	steamed	rlangs btsos
རླངས་བཙོས་རྒྱག་པ	to steam [food]	rlangs btsos rgyag pa
རླངས་ཚགས	rlangs 'tshod byed sa'i snod	rlangs tshags
རླངས་ཚོས་མ	steamed food	rlangs tshos ma
རླངས་རླུང	gas	rlangs rlung
རླངས་ལུམས	nad kyi bcos thabs shig	rlangs lums
རླངས་ཤུགས	steam power	rlangs shugs
རླངས་ཤུགས་ཁྲོ་ཐབ	steam boiler	rlangs shugs khro thab
རླངས་ཤུགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	steam engine/ turbine	rlangs shugs 'phrul 'khor
རླན	moisture, humidity, liquid	rlan
རླན་སྐྱེས	tree, arising from moisture	rlan skyes
རླན་གྲང	cold and damp	rlan grang
རླན་ཅན	moist, wet, humid	rlan can
རླན་སྟེང་ཉལ་བ	sleep in the wet	rlan steng nyal ba
རླན་དུག	dug arising from moisture	rlan dug
རླན་ནེ་རློན་ནེ	bzha' rlan chen po'am bzha' tshan che ba'i rnam pa	rlan ne rlon ne
རླན་སྣུམ	raw fat	rlan snum
རླན་པ	sloppy, wet, immersed in	rlan pa
རླན་པ་བཟོ་བ	drench	rlan pa bzo ba
རླན་པར་བྱེད་ཡས	sprinkling	rlan par byed yas
རླན་སྤང་བ	avoid the wet	rlan spang ba
རླན་མེད	dry	rlan med
རླན་ཚད	degree of moisture/ humidity	rlan tshad
རླན་ཚད་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བའི་ས་ཆ	very humid place	rlan tshad shin tu che ba'i sa cha
རླན་འཛིན	cloud	rlan 'dzin
རླན་ཞིང་གཤེར་བ	wetness and freshness	rlan zhing gsher ba
རླན་བཞའ	bzha' tshan	rlan bzha'
རླན་རློན	1) liquids; 2) moist, humid, damp, rlan ne rlon ne	rlan rlon
རླན་རློན་ཆང	beer	rlan rlon chang
རླན་ལས་སྐྱེས	SA rlan skyes	rlan las skyes
རླན་གཤེར	wet, moist[ure], damp[ness], humid[ity]	rlan gsher
རླན་ས་འདབ་མའི་གོས་ཅན	one dressed in leaves of trees	rlan sa 'dab ma'i gos can
རླབ་པ	remove, clear away	rlab pa
རླབས	1) wave, billow; 2) power, strength; 3) flood	rlabs
རླབས་ཀྱི	{rlabs kyis} wholly/ completely; in one fell swoop	rlabs kyi
རླབས་ཀྱི་རི་མོ	picture of waves	rlabs kyi ri mo
རླབས་ཀྱི་རིང་ཚད	wave length	rlabs kyi ring tshad
རླབས་ཀྱིས	wholly/ completely; in one fell swoop	rlabs kyis
རླབས་ཀྱིས་གཅོད་པ	(to be) thoroughly shattered	rlabs kyis gcod pa
རླབས་ཀྱིས་བཅད	to soar	rlabs kyis bcad
རླབས་དཀྲུག	agitating, stirring up	rlabs dkrug
རླབས་དཀྲུག་བྱེད	agitate, stir up	rlabs dkrug byed
རླབས་རྒྱུག	current, tide	rlabs rgyug
རླབས་ཅན	river, ocean	rlabs can
རླབས་ཆེ་བ	1) large waves; 2) great [strength]; 3) las chod che ba	rlabs che ba
རླབས་ཆེ་བའི་མནའ་གྲོགས	great ally	rlabs che ba'i mna' grogs
རླབས་ཆེན	very great strength, qualities, etc.	rlabs chen
རླབས་ཆེན་པོ	R/GTD (colloq): great, "precious" (said of layman, roughly equivalent to rtsa chen po which is said of high lamas & rinpoches). See MG. [mss] rlabs chen spyi khyab bkod 'dams pa great supreme comma...	rlabs chen po
རླབས་ཆེན་སྤྱོད་རྒྱུད	lineage from 'jam dbyangs to Shantideva etc.	rlabs chen spyod rgyud
རླབས་ཆེན་གཙོ་འཛིན	great leader	rlabs chen gtso 'dzin
རླབས་ཆེན་ཟིན་པ	accomplishing the great task	rlabs chen zin pa
རླབས་ཆེན་ཟླ་བ་བཅུ་པའི་གསར་བརྗེ	the great October Revolution	rlabs chen zla ba bcu pa'i gsar brje
རླབས་ཐུང	short wave	rlabs thung
རླབས་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of waves	rlabs dang bral ba
རླབས་ལྡན	river	rlabs ldan
རླབས་པ	remove, clear away	rlabs pa
རླབས་པར་སྒྱུར་བ	vaporize	rlabs par sgyur ba
རླབས་པོ	power	rlabs po
རླབས་པོ་ཆེ	immense; immense, splendid; immense, splendid. Great Wave of Compassion, benefit/ Mahayana, vast impact, enormously effective; of enormous power/ efficacy	rlabs po che
རླབས་ཕྲེང	secession of waves	rlabs phreng
རླབས་འཕྲིན	wireless	rlabs 'phrin
རླབས་འབྲིང	medium wave	rlabs 'bring
རླབས་ཡས	1) #; 2) utpala lotus	rlabs yas
རླབས་རིང	long wave	rlabs ring
རླབས་ཤུགས	force of waves	rlabs shugs
རླམ	[arch] klam: a thick wool cloth	rlam
རླམ་ཁྱེར	[arch] 1) ham pas khyer ba; 2) rlan gyis zin pa	rlam khyer
རླམ་པ	SA rlom pa	rlam pa
རླའ་ཏིང་མེ་གླིང	Latin America	rla' ting me gling
རླིག་སྐྲངས	swollen testicle	rlig skrangs
རླིག་སྒོང	[penis &] testicle[s]	rlig sgong
རླིག་ཅན	having testicles, stallion	rlig can
རླིག་གཅིག་པ	having only one testicle	rlig gcig pa
རླིག་ཐང	scrotum	rlig thang
རླིག་པ	testicle, stone	rlig pa
རླིག་པ་ཕྱུང	emasculated	rlig pa phyung
རླིག་པ་འཕྱི་བ	remove the testicles	rlig pa 'phyi ba
རླིག་པ་འཕྱིད་པ	castrate a man, geld an animal	rlig pa 'phyid pa
རླིག་པ་འབྱིན་པ	castrate	rlig pa 'byin pa
རླིག་པ་རླུགས	swollen testicle	rlig pa rlugs
རླིག་པའི་སྒྲོ་བ	scrotum	rlig pa'i sgro ba
རླིག་ཕྱུང་བ	castrat[ed man]	rlig phyung ba
རླིག་འཕྱིད	castrate	rlig 'phyid
རླིག་བུ	scrotum	rlig bu
རླིག་འབྲས	testicle	rlig 'bras
རླིག་འབྲས་བཏོན	castrate	rlig 'bras bton
རླིག་འབྲས་བཏོན་ཟིན་པ	castrated	rlig 'bras bton zin pa
རླིག་འབྲས་བཏོན་ཟིན་པའི་མི	castrated man	rlig 'bras bton zin pa'i mi
རླིག་སྦོས་པ	swollen testicles	rlig sbos pa
རླིག་མེད	castrated	rlig med
རླིག་རིལ	testicle	rlig ril
རླིག་རིལ་བཏོན་པ	castrate	rlig ril bton pa
རླིག་རླུགས	* testicular swelling disease	rlig rlugs
རླིག་རླུགས་པ	1) testicles thur du lhugs pa; 2) intestines protruding into the scrotum	rlig rlugs pa
རླིག་ཤུབས	condom, scrotum	rlig shubs
རླིངས	entire, all	rlings
རླིངས་ཀྱི	entirely, altogether	rlings kyi
རླིངས་པོ	[arch] big, vast	rlings po
རླིད	closed leather bag	rlid
རླིད་བུ	whole, lump, mass, skin, leather bag	rlid bu
རླིད་སྦུབས	sbubs bshus brgyab pa'i pags pa	rlid sbubs
རླིབས	[arch] klubs zhes pa ste gyogs pa	rlibs
རླིབས་པ	large, wide, spacious	rlibs pa
རླུ	(not in das)	rlu
རླུག་པ	purge	rlug pa
རླུགས	imp. of {rlug pa}	rlugs
རླུགས་པ	swollen, purge, cst, overthrow, pull down	rlugs pa
རླུགས་མ	anything cast forth or ejected, effusion, excretion of undigested food	rlugs ma
རླུང	1) wind, air [element], breeze; 2) breath, breathing, vital energy, vayu; 3) prana [vital current of energy/ air] four pranayama [cf rtsa lung thig le energy channels, currents and seminal points];...	rlung
རླུང་དཀྱིལ	the wind mandala	rlung dkyil
རླུང་བཀག་པ	to control anger	rlung bkag pa
རླུང་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 wind stars	rlung skar bdun
རླུང་སྐུལ་བྱེད	cool 1self	rlung skul byed
རླུང་སྐྱོད	wind chimes	rlung skyod
རླུང་སྐྱོན	wind/ storm damage	rlung skyon
རླུང་སྐྱོར	wind-break	rlung skyor
རླུང་སྐྲན	wind swelling disease	rlung skran
རླུང་བསྐམས	dried by wind	rlung bskams
རླུང་ཁ་སྦྱོར	prana-union	rlung kha sbyor
རླུང་ཁ་སྦྱོར་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	CHN	rlung kha sbyor yan lag bzhi
རླུང་ཁམས	the wind element	rlung khams
རླུང་ཁམས་ཆེན་པོ	atmosphere	rlung khams chen po
རླུང་ཁམས་ཆེན་པོའི་ཆགས་རིམ	atmospheric layers	rlung khams chen po'i chags rim
རླུང་ཁམས་ཆེན་པོའི་གནོན་ཤུགས	atmospheric pressure	rlung khams chen po'i gnon shugs
རླུང་ཁུག་པ	round of breathing	rlung khug pa
རླུང་ཁྱབ་བྱེད	pervading wind	rlung khyab byed
རླུང་ཁྱེམ	wind shovel ??	rlung khyem
རླུང་འཁོར	1) whirlwind; 2) wind- powered ma ni 'khor lo etc; 3) fan; 4) windmill; 5) helicopter	rlung 'khor
རླུང་འཁོར་བ	1) rlung 'khyir mor 'khor ba; 2) 'tshig pa za ba	rlung 'khor ba
རླུང་འཁོར་ཚུབ	strong cold wind, storm	rlung 'khor tshub
རླུང་འཁོར་འཚུབ་དྲག་པོ	typhoon, hurricane, cyclone	rlung 'khor 'tshub drag po
རླུང་འཁོར་རང་འཐག	windmill	rlung 'khor rang 'thag
རླུང་འཁྱིལ	wind whirling in a circle	rlung 'khyil
རླུང་འཁྲུགས་པ	1) strong wind arising; 2) body's wind element in conflict rlung gang nas rgyab rgyab la mgo gug	rlung 'khrugs pa
གུག་བྱེད་པ	bend 1's head in which ever direction the wind blows rlung gang nas rgyab rgyab la mgo gug	gug byed pa
རླུང་གི	aerial	rlung gi
རླུང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	atmosphere, sphere of wind	rlung gi dkyil 'khor
བ༹ཡུ	mandala	vayu
རླུང་གི་ཁམས	air element [light and motile yang zhing gyo ba'i rang bzhin can]	rlung gi khams
རླུང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	sphere of prana	rlung gi 'khor lo
རླུང་གི་འཁྱིལ་འཁོར	atmosphere * mandala of wind/ vayu	rlung gi 'khyil 'khor
རླུང་གི་གྲངས	quantity of breathing	rlung gi grangs
རླུང་གི་གྲུ	sailboat	rlung gi gru
རླུང་གི་གྲོགས	castor oil plant	rlung gi grogs
རླུང་གི་མགྱོགས་ཚད	wind velocity	rlung gi mgyogs tshad
རླུང་གི་འགྲུལ་ལམ	pathway of prana	rlung gi 'grul lam
རླུང་གི་རྒྱལ་མཚན	colors of the rainbow	rlung gi rgyal mtshan
རླུང་གི་རྒྱུ་བ	ventilation, air current	rlung gi rgyu ba
རླུང་གི་རྒྱུ་ཚུལ	activeness of motility	rlung gi rgyu tshul
རླུང་གི་རྒྱུ་ལམ་ལྔ	CHN	rlung gi rgyu lam lnga
རླུང་གི་རྟ་ལ་བསྐྱོན	mount this upon your breath	rlung gi rta la bskyon
རླུང་གི་རྟེན	lungs, SA dbang rten lnga	rlung gi rten
རླུང་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	ball of prana	rlung gi thig le
རླུང་གི་དེ་ཉིད་བདུན་བཅུ	the seventy qualities of prana	rlung gi de nyid bdun bcu
རླུང་གི་འདུ་བྱེད	functions of prana	rlung gi 'du byed
རླུང་གི་ནད	diseases caused by rlung	rlung gi nad
རླུང་གི་རྣམ་པ	fall into a coma [?] rlung gi rnam pas thugs dran nyams pa became unconscious and fell into a coma	rlung gi rnam pa
རླུང་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	wind yoga, prana yoga	rlung gi rnal 'byor
རླུང་གི་ཕྱོགས	wind direction, NW	rlung gi phyogs
རླུང་གི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	air pump	rlung gi 'phrul 'khor
རླུང་གི་བང་ཡོད་པ	fabulous bird	rlung gi bang yod pa
རླུང་གི་བལ	'ja' drang po	rlung gi bal
རླུང་གི་བུ	epithet of the monkey general of rama	rlung gi bu
རླུང་གི་བུ་རྒྱུད	monkey	rlung gi bu rgyud
རླུང་གི་བུ་བརྒྱུད	monkey	rlung gi bu brgyud
རླུང་གི་དབྱིབས	shape of prana	rlung gi dbyibs
རླུང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	rainbow	rlung gi 'bras bu
རླུང་གི་སྦྱི་རྟགས་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	rlung gi sbyi rtags bcu gcig
རླུང་གི་སྦྱོར་བ	prana practice	rlung gi sbyor ba
རླུང་གི་སྦྱོར་བ་བྱས་པ	to do pranayama, hold the prana	rlung gi sbyor ba byas pa
རླུང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད	the characteristic of wind: motility	rlung gi mtshan nyid
རླུང་གི་མཚན་མ་རྣམ་ལྔ	the five characteristics of wind	rlung gi mtshan ma rnam lnga
རླུང་གི་རྫི་དུག	rlung gis khyer nas 'gos pa'i dug	rlung gi rdzi dug
རླུང་གི་ཞི་བྱེད་གཉིས	CHN	rlung gi zhi byed gnyis
རླུང་གི་རླུང	vibration of movement	rlung gi rlung
རླུང་གི་ཤིང་རྟ	wind-chariot, born of the wind, horse, cloud	rlung gi shing rta
རླུང་གི་ཤུགས	force of the wind	rlung gi shugs
རླུང་གི་གཤོག་པ་ཅན	having wings of the wind, excellent horse	rlung gi gshog pa can
རླུང་གི་སོ་ནད	so nad bye brag cig	rlung gi so nad
རླུང་གིས་དཀྲུགས་པ	agitated by the wind	rlung gis dkrugs pa
རླུང་གིས་བསྐྱོད་པ	blown away	rlung gis bskyod pa
རླུང་གིས་ཁྱེར	coma rlung gis khyer te grong thengs yang	rlung gis khyer
རླུང་གིས་འཁྱེར	the wind carried them away	rlung gis 'khyer
རླུང་གིས་འཇིག་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	destruction by wind [at the end of the universe]	rlung gis 'jig pa'i rtse mo
རླུང་གིས་འདེབས་པ	beaten by the wind	rlung gis 'debs pa
རླུང་གིས་སླགས་པ	[arch] rlung gis ded pa	rlung gis slags pa
རླུང་གྱབ	a fan	rlung gyab
རླུང་གྱིས་འཁྱེར་དུ་བཅུག་པ	cast to the wind, completely abandon/ give up	rlung gyis 'khyer du bcug pa
རླུང་གྱིས་ཟད	weather/ be eroded by wind	rlung gyis zad
རླུང་གྱུག	lhags pa brgyab pa	rlung gyug
རླུང་གྱེན་རྒྱུ	upward moving energy	rlung gyen rgyu
རླུང་གྱེན་དུ་རྒྱུ་བ	wind element moving upward in the body	rlung gyen du rgyu ba
རླུང་གྱོབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	fan	rlung gyob byed kyi 'khor lo
རླུང་གྱོར	rlur yor	rlung gyor
རླུང་གྲིབ	apoplexy	rlung grib
རླུང་གྲིབ་ཕོག	have a stroke	rlung grib phog
རླུང་གྲུ	balloon ship, blimp	rlung gru
རླུང་གྲོགས	fire [god]	rlung grogs
རླུང་དགང་བ	to hold the breath	rlung dgang ba
རླུང་དགའ	1) snake; 2) naga	rlung dga'
རླུང་དགུ་ཕྲུགས	among ro rkyang dbu ma the wind three x three phyir gtong ba	rlung dgu phrugs
རླུང་བགྲང་བ	to count the breath	rlung bgrang ba
རླུང་འགུལ	air powered, pneumatic	rlung 'gul
རླུང་འགུལ་ཐོ་བ	air powered/ pneumatic hammer	rlung 'gul tho ba
རླུང་འགུལ་འབིགས་ཆས	air powered/ pneumatic drill	rlung 'gul 'bigs chas
རླུང་འགུལ་ཡོ་བྱད	air powered/ pneumatic tools	rlung 'gul yo byad
རླུང་འགོག	wind protection	rlung 'gog
རླུང་འགོག་བཙུགས་ཤིང	wind-break forest	rlung 'gog btsugs shing
རླུང་འགོག་ཚལ་ཤིང	indoor vegetable garden	rlung 'gog tshal shing
རླུང་འགོག་ཤིང་ནགས	wind-break forest	rlung 'gog shing nags
རླུང་འགྲོ	ventilation	rlung 'gro
རླུང་འགྲོ་བཟོ་བ	ventilate	rlung 'gro bzo ba
རླུང་འགྲོ་ས	ventilation chute/ opening	rlung 'gro sa
རླུང་འགྲོའི་སྒྲིག་ཆས	ventilation equipment	rlung 'gro'i sgrig chas
རླུང་འགྲོས	wind movement [28 motion stars in the gola as if set like gems because every day they completely circle the go la the planets coursein this and that star spyod bzhin pa and equally complete a circl...	rlung 'gros
རླུང་རྒྱག	wind blowing	rlung rgyag
རླུང་རྒྱག་པ	to blow	rlung rgyag pa
རླུང་རྒྱངས་པ	inflate	rlung rgyangs pa
རླུང་རྒྱས	direction	rlung rgyas
རླུང་རྒྱུན	air current	rlung rgyun
རླུང་སྒུལ	air powered, pneumatic	rlung sgul
རླུང་སྒུལ་ཐོ་བ	air powered/ pneumatic hammer	rlung sgul tho ba
རླུང་སྒུལ་འབིགས་ཆས	air powered/ pneumatic drill	rlung sgul 'bigs chas
རླུང་སྒུལ་ཡོ་བྱད	air powered/ pneumatic tools	rlung sgul yo byad
རླུང་སྒོ	1) window, skylight; 2) hole where the wind comes in	rlung sgo
རླུང་སྒོམ་པ	breathing meditation [on nang rgyu'i rlung gi byed rtsol la brten pa]	rlung sgom pa
རླུང་སྒོམ་པའི་གསོ་ཐབས	med. treatment by breathing meditation	rlung sgom pa'i gso thabs
རླུང་སྒྲ	sound of rlung 'gro 'ong	rlung sgra
རླུང་སྒྲིབ	rlung 'gog byed kyi yol ba	rlung sgrib
རླུང་ལྔ	the five pranas	rlung lnga
རླུང་ཅན	airy	rlung can
རླུང་བཅུ	10 kinds of vital energy	rlung bcu
རླུང་ཆ་ཕྲ་མོ	gentle movement of wind	rlung cha phra mo
རླུང་ཆེན	big wind, atmosphere	rlung chen
རླུང་ཆེན་ལྔ	the five primary winds	rlung chen lnga
རླུང་ཆེན་པོ	high wind rlung chen po langs pa'i sgra 'ur sgras 'jig	rlung chen po
རྟེན་ཁྱབ་པ་བྱུང	a great howling wind arose that extended over the world	rten khyab pa byung
རླུང་ཆེན་འཚུབ	the most violent storms	rlung chen 'tshub
རླུང་མཆིག	windmill	rlung mchig
རླུང་འཇམ	soft wind	rlung 'jam
རླུང་འཇམ་ཆར་ཟིམ	soft wind and gentle rain	rlung 'jam char zim
རླུང་འཇིལ	wind 'joms par byed pa	rlung 'jil
རླུང་འཇོར	pneumatic pick	rlung 'jor
རླུང་གཉིས་འཐུང	camel, dromedary	rlung gnyis 'thung
རླུང་གཏུམ་མོ	violent wind, hurricane	rlung gtum mo
རླུང་རྟ	1) khams [nature? health] dang success; 2) wind horse banners above houses etc.; 3) wind horse	rlung rta
རླུང་རྟ་སྙན་གྲགས	luck and fame	rlung rta snyan grags
རླུང་རྟགས	sign of air	rlung rtags
རླུང་ལྟར་འགྲོ	going like the wind	rlung ltar 'gro
རླུང་ལྟར་འཚུབས	violent like a hurricane	rlung ltar 'tshubs
རླུང་ལྟས་བརྟག	examine the breathing	rlung ltas brtag
རླུང་ཐིག་ལེ	prana & thigle	rlung thig le
རླུང་ཐུར་སེལ	[apaana] downward clearing wind	rlung thur sel
རླུང་ཐོག	gale of wind	rlung thog
རླུང་ཐོང	gale of wind	rlung thong
རླུང་འཐུང	1) snake; 2) naga	rlung 'thung
རླུང་དང་ཆུ་དང་ས་ཡི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandalas of wind, water and earth	rlung dang chu dang sa yi dkyil 'khor
རླུང་དང་སྦྱར	join w prana	rlung dang sbyar
རླུང་དང་སྦྱར་ནས	combined with the breath	rlung dang sbyar nas
རླུང་དང་རླུང་ཕྲད་པ	wind rushing upon wind	rlung dang rlung phrad pa
རླུང་དར	prayer flag	rlung dar
རླུང་དུས	period of the prana of air (35am, 3-5pm)	rlung dus
རླུང་དུས་སུ་ཁེགས	stop prana/ breath at the right time	rlung dus su khegs
རླུང་དྲག	high wind, gale	rlung drag
རླུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་གྲམ	the vajra-cross of wind	rlung rdo rje rgya gram
རླུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས	vajra recitation breathing	rlung rdo rje'i bzlas
རླུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས་པ	the vajra recitation of breathing	rlung rdo rje'i bzlas pa
རླུང་ལྡང་བ	Syn {rlung lang ba}	rlung ldang ba
རླུང་ནག	dust storm	rlung nag
རླུང་ནག་འཚུབས་མ	black tempest movement (in dance)	rlung nag 'tshubs ma
རླུང་ནང་མར་མེ	lamp in the wind, unstable, precarious	rlung nang mar me
རླུང་ནད	wind-disorder	rlung nad
རླུང་ནད་ཀྱི་ཟས་རིགས་བཅུ་གསུམ	CHN	rlung nad kyi zas rigs bcu gsum
རླུང་ནད་བརྒྱད	the 8 wind diseases CHN	rlung nad brgyad
རླུང་ནད་བི་ཤ་ཙེ	rlung nad lag pa'i rtsa rgyus la zhugs nas lag pa'i 'gul bskyod kyi bya ba nyams par 'gyur ba zhig	rlung nad bi sha tse
རླུང་ནད་རྩ་འཛིན	wind disease rtsa 'dzin	rlung nad rtsa 'dzin
རླུང་ནད་ཚོར་མ་ཅན	wind disease tshor ma can [rlung nad kyi rigs shig ste rkang pa'i long mor zhugs nas nad rtags su tser ma zug pa ltar zug 'byung ba zhig .. Lung nad brla rengs, rlung nad kyi nang tsan brla nang rt...	rlung nad tshor ma can
རླུང་ནད་ཤིང་རེངས	wind disease shing regs	rlung nad shing rengs
རླུང་ནད་སྲ་འཐེང	wind disease sra 'theng	rlung nad sra 'theng
རླུང་ནི་འཕེལ་བ་དང་འགྲིབ་པ	wind increases and decreases rlung ni rang bzhin gyis gyo ba'i phyir because wind is naturally motile	rlung ni 'phel ba dang 'grib pa
རླུང་ནུས	the power of prana	rlung nus
རླུང་གནད	key point of breath / prana	rlung gnad
རླུང་གནོན	air pressure	rlung gnon
རླུང་གནོན་མཐོན་པོ	high atmospheric pressure	rlung gnon mthon po
རླུང་གནོན་དཔྱད་ཆས	air pressure gauge, barometer	rlung gnon dpyad chas
རླུང་གནོན་དམའ་བ	low atmospheric pressure	rlung gnon dma' ba
རླུང་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	the five winds / pranas	rlung rnam pa lnga
རླུང་རྣམས་ཚུད་དུས	when prana has entered	rlung rnams tshud dus
རླུང་སྣུམ	natural gas	rlung snum
རླུང་པོ	lhags pa	rlung po
རླུང་པོས་བུར་གྱིས་ཁྱེར་བའི་གཏམ	[arch] like chaff carried by the wind no 1 knows where it will go	rlung pos bur gyis khyer ba'i gtam
རླུང་དཔྱད་གཉིས	CHN	rlung dpyad gnyis
རླུང་སྤུ་སུན་འབྱིན	1 of 7 winds of the human body	rlung spu sun 'byin
རླུང་སྤྱོད	1) vulture; 2) raven	rlung spyod
རླུང་ཕིང་ཕིང	breathing heavily	rlung phing phing
རླུང་ཕྱིར་འགྲོ་བ	exhalation	rlung phyir 'gro ba
རླུང་ཕྱིར་བཏོན་པ	deflate 2640	rlung phyir bton pa
རླུང་ཕྱོགས	1) rdzi phyogs, direction the wind is from; 2) NW direction of the wind god	rlung phyogs
རླུང་ཕྱོགས་སུ	windward	rlung phyogs su
རླུང་འཕར་བ	1) rlung gi na tsa phog pa; 2) anger arising	rlung 'phar ba
རླུང་འཕེལ་མེད	no increase in vital energy rlung 'phel med du sdod pas rnam rtog	rlung 'phel med
གྱོ་བའི་རྐྱེན་ཟད	The conditions of fluctuating thought cease by means of	gyo ba'i rkyen zad
རླུང་འཕྲིན	radio	rlung 'phrin
རླུང་འཕྲིན་ཁང	radio station	rlung 'phrin khang
རླུང་འཕྲིན་གྱི་གནམ་སྐུད	aerial	rlung 'phrin gyi gnam skud
རླུང་འཕྲིན་གློག་ཁང	radio station	rlung 'phrin glog khang
རླུང་འཕྲིན་སྒམ	radio [receiver]	rlung 'phrin sgam
རླུང་འཕྲིན་གཏོང་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	radio transmitter	rlung 'phrin gtong 'phrul 'khor
རླུང་འཕྲིན་གཏོང་བ	broadcast	rlung 'phrin gtong ba
རླུང་འཕྲིན་སྤྱི་ཁབ	chief radio/ signal officer	rlung 'phrin spyi khab
རླུང་འཕྲིན་ཟློས་གར	radio show/ play	rlung 'phrin zlos gar
རླུང་འཕྲིན་ལུས་རྩལ	radio exercise	rlung 'phrin lus rtsal
རླུང་འཕྲིན་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	radio [receiver]	rlung 'phrin len 'phrul 'khor
རླུང་བུ	lhags pa	rlung bu
རླུང་བུ་དབང་པོ	monkey	rlung bu dbang po
རླུང་བུད་ཤིང	the breath as fire-wood; kindling with breath	rlung bud shing
རླུང་བུམ་ཅན	vase-breath	rlung bum can
རླུང་བུམ་པ་ཅན	vase-breath	rlung bum pa can
བདུན་དང་རི་ཀུན་འཁོར	the winds called Beribha carried him through seven surrounding oceans and mountains	bdun dang ri kun 'khor
རླུང་དབྱིབས	shape of prana	rlung dbyibs
རླུང་འབུད	wind emitting	rlung 'bud
རླུང་འབུད་ཅན	stick, [arrow] shaft	rlung 'bud can
རླུང་འབུད་གནམ་གྲུ	jet plane	rlung 'bud gnam gru
རླུང་འབུད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	jet engine	rlung 'bud 'phrul 'khor
རླུང་འབྱིན་འཇུག་དང་སྦྲག་ནས	combined w breathing in and out	rlung 'byin 'jug dang sbrag nas
རླུང་འབྱིན་འཇུག་དང་སྦྲགས་ནས	combined with breathing in and out	rlung 'byin 'jug dang sbrags nas
རླུང་འབྱུང	hole	rlung 'byung
རླུང་འབྲས	rain	rlung 'bras
རླུང་སྦུད་གནམ་གྲུ	jet plane	rlung sbud gnam gru
རླུང་སྦུད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	jet engine	rlung sbud 'phrul 'khor
རླུང་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་འཇམ་རྩི་གསུམ	CHN	rlung sbyong byed 'jam rtsi gsum
རླུང་སྦྱོར	pranayama, prana practice	rlung sbyor
རླུང་སྦྱོར་ལྔ	5 prana practices of yantra yoga, SA de nyid rnam bzhi'i rlung sbyor, sbyor ba bzhi ldan gyi rlung sbyor, gsang rlung dbu mar 'jug pa'i rlung sbyor, yan lag bdud ldan gyi rlung sbyor, sbyor ba drug...	rlung sbyor lnga
རླུང་མ	wind, a yaksha princess	rlung ma
རླུང་མི་བཙིང	not force breathing	rlung mi btsing
རླུང་མེ་མཉམ	fire-equalizing wind; fire accompanying energy	rlung me mnyam
རླུང་དམར	gale, storm	rlung dmar
རླུང་དམར་གྱིས	by a strong gale/ storm/ hurricane	rlung dmar gyis
རླུང་དམར་དྲག་པོ	hurricane, typhoon, cyclone	rlung dmar drag po
རླུང་དམིགས	visualization of the vital wind	rlung dmigs
རླུང་ཙི	(CH vessel, cage	rlung tsi
རླུང་འཙང	1) dbugs stod la 'tsang ba; 2) bug sgo nas rlung nang du 'dzul ba	rlung 'tsang
རླུང་རྩ	nadis where prana moves [particularly white nadis connected w the brain or dbang nadi]	rlung rtsa
རླུང་རྩེ	(CH vessel, cage	rlung rtse
རླུང་ཚ་པོ	windy	rlung tsha po
རླུང་ཚ་བ	1) big wind; 2) khon hro za chog chog	rlung tsha ba
རླུང་ཚབས	1) strong wind; 2) wind disease na stangs; 3) a woman's menses irregular &, mo nad rnying par gyur skabs khrag stobs rgud nas disease coming mostly from wind	rlung tshabs
རླུང་ཚུབ	whirlwind, storm with rain and sleet, gale, hurricane, cold piercing wind	rlung tshub
རླུང་ཚུབ་ཆེན་པོ	blast	rlung tshub chen po
རླུང་ཚུབས	whirlwind	rlung tshubs
རླུང་ཚོམ	air mass	rlung tshom
རླུང་མཚམས	wind direction	rlung mtshams
རླུང་འཚབ་འཚུབ	confused wind, whirlwind	rlung 'tshab 'tshub
རླུང་འཚུབ	strong cold wind	rlung 'tshub
རླུང་འཚུབ་ཅན	stormy, tempestuous	rlung 'tshub can
རླུང་འཚུབ་ཆེན་པོ	cyclone	rlung 'tshub chen po
རླུང་འཚུབ་དྲག་པོ	typhoon, hurricane, cyclone	rlung 'tshub drag po
རླུང་འཚུབ་པ	cold wind arising	rlung 'tshub pa
རླུང་འཚུབ་སླར་ལོག	returning storm, make a comeback [pej]	rlung 'tshub slar log
རླུང་འཚུབས	hurricane	rlung 'tshubs
རླུང་འཚུབས་མ	cyclone, tornado, whirlwind	rlung 'tshubs ma
རླུང་འཛིན	air holding	rlung 'dzin
རླུང་རྫི	breeze	rlung rdzi
རླུང་ཞགས	wind-lasso	rlung zhags
རླུང་ཞི	1) wind becoming calm; 2) cure a wind disease; 3) calm anger	rlung zhi
རླུང་ཞི་བ	1) wind becoming calm; 2) cure a wind disease; 3) calm anger	rlung zhi ba
རླུང་ཞི་རླབས་འཇགས	clam, tranquil	rlung zhi rlabs 'jags
རླུང་ཞོན	to ride the wind	rlung zhon
རླུང་གཞི	natural gas	rlung gzhi
རླུང་བཞོན	1) gzugs mo byi thur; 2) smell	rlung bzhon
རླུང་ཟས་ཅན	snake	rlung zas can
རླུང་ཟི་རི་རི	howling or whizzing of the wind	rlung zi ri ri
རླུང་ཟིན	when air has been conquered	rlung zin
རླུང་ཟུག	because of wind zug gzer byung ba'i disease	rlung zug
རླུང་ཟེར་འདྲ་བ	like a strong wind	rlung zer 'dra ba
རླུང་གཟུགས	natural gas	rlung gzugs
རླུང་གཟེར	{rlung gzer disease	rlung gzer
རླུང་བཟུང	holding of the breath	rlung bzung
རླུང་བཟླས	prana recitation	rlung bzlas
རླུང་འུ་རུ་རུ	noise of wind	rlung 'u ru ru
རླུང་འུར	roar of wind	rlung 'ur
རླུང་འོད་ཟེར་ལྔ་པ	TSE	rlung 'od zer lnga pa
རླུང་ཡབ	fan	rlung yab
རླུང་ཡབ་རྒྱག	[fan w a] fan	rlung yab rgyag
རླུང་ཡབ་རླབས་དཀྲུག	stir up trouble	rlung yab rlabs dkrug
རླུང་ཡི་དུས	period of air	rlung yi dus
རླུང་ཡོར	sail	rlung yor
རླུང་ཡོལ	wind stopping curtain rlung g.yab - a fan rlung g.yab - fan rlung g.yab rgyag - [fan w a] fan rlung g.yab rlabs dkrug - stir up trouble rlung g.yo rlabs dkrug - stir up trouble rlung g.yob - fan rl...	rlung yol
རླུང་རགས་པ	gross wind	rlung rags pa
རླུང་རས	1) cloth w lung rta dharani written on it; 2) nadi and prana yoga meditator's 'doms dkris; 3) housetop flag pole la btags pa'i rlung skyed prayer flag	rlung ras
རླུང་རིག	Prana-mind	rlung rig
རླུང་རིག་དྭངས	prana and rigpa are limpid	rlung rig dwangs
རླུང་རིག་དབ༹ངས	prana and awareness will be clear	rlung rig dvangs
རླུང་རིམས་གཉིས	CHN	rlung rims gnyis
རླུང་རིམས་ཡེར་བུ	{rlung rims yer bu rims nad} disease	rlung rims yer bu
རླུང་རུས	wind bones [sa chu me rlung ste by the four elements created rus pa rigs bzhi'i nang tsan black rus pa created by the wind element kha hom che ba'i rus pa zhig]	rlung rus
རླུང་རོ	impure air, stale air	rlung ro
རླུང་རོ་དགུ་ཕྲུགས་སུ་བསལ་བ	eliminate impure air 9 times	rlung ro dgu phrugs su bsal ba
རླུང་རོ་དོར	expel the stale breath	rlung ro dor
རླུང་རོ་འདོན	to expel the impure air, expel the stale air	rlung ro 'don
རླུང་རོ་འབུད	clear [your) lungs	rlung ro 'bud
རླུང་རོ་གསལ	clear out stale breath	rlung ro gsal
རླུང་རོ་བསལ	Exhaling the stale breath	rlung ro bsal
རླུང་རོ་བསལ་བ	exhalations of the stale air	rlung ro bsal ba
རླུང་རླབས	unrest, agitation, ferment, wind and waves	rlung rlabs
རླུང་རླུང	prana of air in lungs which has the function of movement, is green and gives a feeling of lightness	rlung rlung
རླུང་ལ་བསྐུར	1) cast to the wind, completely abandon/ give up; 2) be careless about, not keep track of; 3) mngon med kyis skad cha bkram pa	rlung la bskur
རླུང་ལ་བསྐུར་བ	to cast to the wind, completely abandon / give up	rlung la bskur ba
རླུང་ལ་དགའ་བ	camel, that which delights in wind	rlung la dga' ba
རླུང་ལ་ཞགས་ལ་འཔེན	lasso the wind, do the impossible	rlung la zhags la 'pen
རླུང་ལང	1) rlung nad 'phar ba [getting worse?]; 2) get angry; 3) wind/ breeze arising	rlung lang
རླུང་ལང་པ	irritated, angry	rlung lang pa
རླུང་ལང་པོ	angry	rlung lang po
རླུང་ལང་བ	1) rlung nad 'phar ba [getting worse?]; 2) get angry; 3) wind/ breeze arising	rlung lang ba
རླུང་ལངས	1) rlung nad 'phar ba [getting worse?]; 2) get angry; 3) wind/ breeze arising	rlung langs
རླུང་ལངས་ཆོག་ཆོག	short-tempered	rlung langs chog chog
རླུང་ལངས་པ	to get angry	rlung langs pa
རླུང་ལངས་པོ	short-tempered	rlung langs po
རླུང་ལངས་སླ་པོ	narrow-minded	rlung langs sla po
རླུང་ལས་སྐྱེས	horse	rlung las skyes
རླུང་ལས་དགའ	camel	rlung las dga'
རླུང་ལས་མགྱོགས་པ	faster / swifter than the wind	rlung las mgyogs pa
རླུང་ལས་རྒྱལ	king of the horses, he that can win in the race with wind	rlung las rgyal
རླུང་ལུམས	lums kyi sman sbyor rnams rgya thab lta bu'i khar bskol nas de'i khar lding khri'i steng du nad pa bsnyal te lums kyi rlangs pa lus la phog par byas na wind, cold etc benefitting treatment	rlung lums
རླུང་ཤས	speediness	rlung shas
རླུང་ཤུགས	wind power/ force	rlung shugs
རླུང་ཤུགས་གློག་འདོན་ས་ཚིགས	wind power generating station	rlung shugs glog 'don sa tshigs
རླུང་ཤུགས་ཆུ་འཐེན་འཁོར་ལོ	wind powered water pump[ing wheel]	rlung shugs chu 'then 'khor lo
རླུང་ཤུགས་བལྟ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་འཁྲུལ་ཆས	barometer	rlung shugs blta tshod kyi 'khrul chas
རླུང་ཤུགས་རང་འཐག	wind mill	rlung shugs rang 'thag
རླུང་གཤོག	fast, quick	rlung gshog
རླུང་སང	purification of the breathing	rlung sang
རླུང་སངས་འགྲོ་ཆེད	constitutional walk for clearing the wind (digesting food)	rlung sangs 'gro ched
རླུང་སངས་འོད་ལ	1 of 11 gnam gyi 'then pa	rlung sangs 'od la
རླུང་སངས་འོད་ལ་འཐེན	a person's name	rlung sangs 'od la 'then
རླུང་སེམས	air/energy and mind, prana and mind, breathing & mind	rlung sems
ཨེནེརགཡ	currents in the body. 'Mind' is the dualistic consciousness of an unenlightened being. These two are closely related	energy
རླུང་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་སྐུ་འགྲུབ	accomplishment of the divine body of prana/ vital energy and mind	rlung sems kyi lha sku 'grub
རླུང་སེམས་ངོ་བོ	essence of prana and mind	rlung sems ngo bo
རླུང་སེམས་གཉིས་མེད	indivisible prana and mind	rlung sems gnyis med
རླུང་སེམས་འདུས་པའི་ལུས	a body composed of mind-and-energies	rlung sems 'dus pa'i lus
རླུང་སེམས་དབྱེར་མེད	the inseparability of prana and mind	rlung sems dbyer med
རླུང་སེམས་དམིགས་པ	breathing & mind & object of fixation	rlung sems dmigs pa
རླུང་སེམས་རགས་པ	coarse discursive thoughts and the prana o which they are mounted	rlung sems rags pa
རླུང་སེར	fresh wind	rlung ser
རླུང་སེལ་གྱི་རོ་གསུམ	CHN	rlung sel gyi ro gsum
རླུང་སེལ་སྤྱོད་ལམ་གཉིས	CHN	rlung sel spyod lam gnyis
རླུང་གསང	1) wind moxibustion point; 2) khong khro 'phar chag gi bar gsang	rlung gsang
ཚིགས་དང་པོ་དང	drug pa, bdun pa, brang gzhung dkar nag mtsams bcas su me btsa' bzhag pa'am dugs brgyab ste rlung gi rgyu lam bkag par bya ba'i bcos thabs shig] /rgyab kyi sgal tshigs dang po rlung dang 'brel ba'i...	tshigs dang po dang
རླུང་གསང་བསྡམས་པ	rlung gsang bkag pa, after a child is born phru gu skyes rjes kyi gsang mi shor ba'i ched du, ya khung dang, mtshog ma, tshang ra bcas kyi gsang mig la spags btsos tsa po'am, yang na mar dang, span...	rlung gsang bsdams pa
རླུང་གསེབ་ཀྱི་མར་མེ	many signs of death and few of life, nam 'chi cha med, 'chi rkyen nges med kyi dpe	rlung gseb kyi mar me
རླུང་གསོས	wave	rlung gsos
རླུང་བསང་བརྒྱད	8 yantra yoga exercises to purify the prana ('jug pa, dgang ba, gzhil ba, 'phen pa, rngub pa, skyil ba, 'dren pa, 'byin pa)	rlung bsang brgyad
རླུང་བསིལ་པོ	breeze	rlung bsil po
རླུང་བསེབ	gale	rlung bseb
རླུང་བསེར་བུ	slight gentle breeze	rlung bser bu
རླུང་བསྲག	musk deer	rlung bsrag
རླུང་བསྲེག	musk deer	rlung bsreg
རླུང་ལྷ	god of wind, type of lha	rlung lha
གུཨརྡིཨན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ནོརཐ	west quarter. Marut. Brahmanical god of the wind	guardian of the north
རླུང་ལྷ་སྔོན་མོ་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་མགོ	Vayudevi, the Wind Goddess [blue wolfheaded ?]	rlung lha sngon mo sbrul gyi mgo
རླུང་ལྷ་སྤྱང་གདོང	wolf-headed Vayudevi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	rlung lha spyang gdong
རླུན	(not in das)	rlun
རླུབས	corner, hole, place for hiding	rlubs
རླུབས་པ	[arch] excretion of undigested food	rlubs pa
རླུས་ལི	(CH sngar byas kyi tho rim bkod pa	rlus li
རློ་བ	[arch] 'phyang ba,. Log rlog pa!	rlo ba
རློག	destroy, SA rlog pa, to destroy, smash, lose	rlog
རློག་བརྒྱབ་པ	to overturn	rlog brgyab pa
རློག་ལྟ	distorted view, inverted view	rlog lta
རློག་པ	(tha dad pa brlag pa, brlag pa, rlogs,, 1) conquer, grind to powder and annihilate, destroy, smash; 2) pollute w faults	rlog pa
རློག་པོ	foolish, stupid	rlog po
རློགས	imp. of {rlog pa}	rlogs
རློང་དུ་གྱུར་པ	[arch] klong du gyur pa: attain stability	rlong du gyur pa
རློན	rlon pa!	rlon
རློན་ཐིག	"wet line", a line marked w a wet marking string	rlon thig
རློན་དོད	to wage workers etc. drink given instead of $	rlon dod
རློན་མདངས	wet grinding	rlon mdangs
རློན་སྡེབ	gser shog rlon pa sbyor ba'i don	rlon sdeb
རློན་པ	{rlon pa, brlan pa, brlan pa, rlon} trans. v.; fresh; wet	rlon pa
རློན་པ་ཁྲག་འཛག་ལྔ་བཅུ་ཡི	50 fresh [severed heads]	rlon pa khrag 'dzag lnga bcu yi
རློན་པ་བཟོ་བ	moisten	rlon pa bzo ba
རློན་པ་བཟོས་པ	drench	rlon pa bzos pa
རློན་པོ	wet, moist, damp	rlon po
རློན་ཕོགས	drinks as wages	rlon phogs
རློན་དབུར	damp polishing	rlon dbur
རློན་སྦྱོར	a moist compound	rlon sbyor
རློན་རཙབ༹	wet grass etc	rlon rtsva
རློན་གྷེར	moisture	rlon gher
རློབ་པ	{rlob pa, brlabs pa, brlab pa, rlobs} trans. v	rlob pa
རློམ	boast [of], pride, vanity, [be] conceit[ed], proud of, glory in, pretend, love, adhere to, be attached to, covet, hanker after	rlom
རློམ་ཅན	I pride myself [in being]	rlom can
རློམ་པ	arrogantly assume	rlom pa
རློམ་པས	conceit	rlom pas
རློམ་མེད་པ	absence of conceit	rlom med pa
རློམ་ཚོད	GDreyfus "from the point of view of conception" (not attested in any other source) R75; 143.4 [mss]	rlom tshod
རློམ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཅན	the conceived / assumed subject; comp with {song tshod kyi chos can} the actual subject [ggd]	rlom tshod kyi chos can
རློམ་ཚོད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	the conceived / assumed reason [ggd]	rlom tshod kyi rtags
རློམ་ཚོད་ལ	from the conceptual standpoint; assume, imagine [ggd]	rlom tshod la
རློམ་ཞེན	conceited attachment, niggardly	rlom zhen
རློམ་བརླམས་པ	1) to be conceited, to boast. 2) to covet	rlom brlams pa
རློམ་སེམས	arrogance, conceit, pride	rlom sems
རློམ་སེམས་མེད་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ	giving free from arrogance	rlom sems med pa'i sbyin pa
རློམས	tha dad par 'jug pa'i rlom pa! arose/ incite evil	rloms
རློམས་པ	to claim, pride; pride, to claim	rloms pa
རློམས་སེམས	covetousness	rloms sems
བརླ	thigh	brla
བརླ་རྐང	thigh-bone	brla rkang
བརླ་སྐྱེས	1) kshatriya caste; 2) rgod ma kha'i me	brla skyes
བརླ་བརྙན	augmenting, growth, increase	brla brnyan
བརླ་བསྣོལ་བ	cross 1 thigh over the other	brla bsnol ba
བརླ་བར	gap between the two thighs	brla bar
བརླ་བྱུང	kshatriya caste	brla byung
བརླ་མེད	1) steersman of the sun; 2) arising of dawn 2643	brla med
བརླ་ཛར	(yul on sheep's thighs long thick wool	brla dzar
བརླ་མཛེས	well shaped thighs	brla mdzes
བརླ་རུས	thigh-bone	brla rus
བརླ་རེངས	a wind disease [rlung nad]	brla rengs
བརླ་ལེགས་པར་ཟླུམ་པ	well-rounded thighs	brla legs par zlum pa
བརླ་ལེགས་པར་རླུམ་པ	well-rounded thighs	brla legs par rlum pa
བརླ་ལེགས་ཟླུམ་པོ	well rounded thighs	brla legs zlum po
བརླ་ཤ	muscular part of the thigh, thigh	brla sha
བརླག	crush, destroy, annihilate, break, smash, lost, wasted	brlag
བརླག་སྟོར	be destroyed/ stolen	brlag stor
བརླག་རྡུལ་དུ	reduce to dust	brlag rdul du
བརླག་པ	1) (Tha mi dad pa brlags pa, brlag pa,, expel, lose; 2) [p f rlog pa] will [crush, destroy, annihilate, break, smash]	brlag pa
བརླག་པར་གྱུར	were lost [at sea]	brlag par gyur
བརླག་པར་འགྱུར	become lost	brlag par 'gyur
བརླག་པར་བྱེད་པ	banishing	brlag par byed pa
བརླག་བྱེད	destructive	brlag byed
བརླགས	destroy, SA rlog pa, past of rlog	brlags
བརླགས་པ	pf. of {brlag pa}	brlags pa
བརླང་པོ	rough in temper, biting in remarks, rude, coarse, roughness in conversation	brlang po
བརླང་པོ་རྣམས་བྱེད་པ	to use rough language for abuse	brlang po rnams byed pa
བརླང་པོའི་ཚིག	rough words, abusive language	brlang po'i tshig
བརླང་པོའི་སེམས	aggression, anger	brlang po'i sems
བརླང་སྤྱོད	harsh/ abusive/ cruel/ inappropriate behavior	brlang spyod
བརླང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད་པ	be rude or rough in manners	brlang spyod byed pa
བརླང་བ	make wet, moisten	brlang ba
བརླང་མོ	fierce woman, amazon	brlang mo
བརླང་ཚིག་ཚིག་རྩུབ་པོ	harsh and abusive words	brlang tshig tshig rtsub po
བརླན	moist[en][ed] [p rlan, rlon]	brlan
བརླན་པ	pf. of {rlon pa}; ft. of {rlon pa}	brlan pa
བརླན་པོ	[arch] tsub ltas ??? sign of storms?	brlan po
བརླན་གཤེར	moisture, humidity	brlan gsher
བརླབ	consecration, SA byin	brlab
བརླབ་པ	ft. of {rlob pa}	brlab pa
བརླབས	SA byin	brlabs
བརླབས་པ	[p rlob pa]	brlabs pa
བརླམ	possessed/ controlled by a spirit/ ghost	brlam
བརླམ་པ	possessed/ controlled by a spirit/ ghost [f rlom pa]	brlam pa
བརླམས	be conceited, be proud of, SA rlom pa	brlams
བརླམས་པ	tremulous, trembling	brlams pa
བརླིང	{ri bo las kyang brling} firmer even than a mountain	brling
བརླིང་པོ	dependable, steady, firm, secure, safe	brling po
བརླིང་བ	(to be) profound [?]	brling ba
བརླིང་ལོག	confused, disorderly, not to be trusted	brling log
བརླུག་པ	ft. of {rlug pa}	brlug pa
བརླུགས་པ	[tha dad par p rlug pa]	brlugs pa
བརླུབས	SA rlubs, covered with clothes	brlubs
བརློན་ཏོ	made wet	brlon to
བརློན་པ	wet, saturated	brlon pa
བརློམ་པ	(to presume/ be) presumptuous	brlom pa
བརློམས་པ	to presume/ be presumptuous 'rya de ba - Aryadeva	brloms pa
ལ	LA; 2) upward going mt path; 3) pass; 4) adv particle * to, for, as well as; 5) La don gyi phrad; 6) what! how!; 7) as for	la
ཐེ་དཏིབེ༹	locative particle, conjunctive of adjectives ("as well *as"), as a clause connector, a mountain pass, can indicate "while something was going on", regarding	the dative
ལ་ཀ	top of a mountain	la ka
ལ་སྐུད	flax cord/ thread	la skud
ལ་སྐེ་ཏཱ	monastery Laksetra in the West [of India], place where Marpa met Jnanagarbha	la ske tA
ལ་སྐེ་ཏའ	Laksetra monastery	la ske ta'
ལ་སྐྱི་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ	evolutionary development	la skyi rnam par smin pa
ལ་ཁ	mt peak, [top of a] pass	la kha
ལ་ཁ་མཐོན་པོ	high, wide mountain pass	la kha mthon po
ལ་ཁད་ལ	"about to" clause connective	la khad la
ལ་ཁའི་ན་བུན་ལྡ་བུ	like mist on top of a pass	la kha'i na bun lda bu
ལ་ཁར	"about to" clause connective	la khar
ལ་ཁྱི	1) kind of dog, large, w big mouth and long hair; 2) sho khyi [dice lag khyi]	la khyi
ལ་ཁྱི་མོ	the mountain-weasel	la khyi mo
ལ་ཁྲལ	tax obligation to gather ri khul med. herbs and firewood etc. 'gro skabs sngon nas sprad	la khral
ལ་ག	two year old sheep	la ga
ལ་གི་ལུག་གེ	swaying, dangling, hanging	la gi lug ge
ལ་གོར	quick, swift, immediately	la gor
ལ་གླུ	dmangs khrod [crowd of? common people's] song nang don mostly 'dod pa'i showing affection	la glu
ལ་དགུ	la dgu mt	la dgu
ལ་དགུ་ལ	la dgu pass	la dgu la
ལ་དགུ་ལུང་དགུ	Lagu Lungu, in Tsari. See Nine passes and nine valleys	la dgu lung dgu
ལ་མགོ	1) mt. peak, top of a mt/ pass; 2) stack syllable w LA on top	la mgo
ལ་མགོའི་ཉི་ཟེར་ཙམ	no longer than the rays of the sun that have already touched the mountain pass	la mgo'i nyi zer tsam
ལ་རྒལ་བ	cross a mountain pass	la rgal ba
ལ་རྒྱ	government hunting order	la rgya
ལ་རྒྱ་འཆོར	1	la rgya 'chor
ལ་རྒྱ་འཚོ་བ	1	la rgya 'tsho ba
ལ་རྒྱ་ཤོར་བ	lose [affectionate attachment/ loyalty to 1's own side, prestige, honor, reputation]	la rgya shor ba
ལ་རྒྱ་བཤད་ན	explain in general	la rgya bshad na
ལ་རྒྱག	to cross a mountain pass	la rgyag
ལ་རྒྱབ་པ	cross a mountain pass	la rgyab pa
ལ་སྒོ	notch/ indentation/ low spot in mt pass/ peak	la sgo
ལ་སྒྲ་མཚམས་སྦྱོར	LA particle	la sgra mtshams sbyor
ལ་སྒྲ་ལྷག་བཅས	LA showing more to come	la sgra lhag bcas
ལ་བརྒལ་བ	cross a pass	la brgal ba
ལ་བརྒྱ་སྟེ་སོང་བ	crossing the pass	la brgya ste song ba
ལ་བརྒྱབ་ཆུ་བརྒལ	cross mts and rivers, travel far	la brgyab chu brgal
ལ་བརྒྱབ་ལུང་བརྒྱབ	cross passes and valley, travel far	la brgyab lung brgyab
ལ་ལྔ་མཚོ	la lnga Lake	la lnga mtsho
ལ་ཅོ	capsicum, hot peppers, chili	la co
ལ་གཅན་པ	1) pass tax/ toll collector; 2) pass guard	la gcan pa
ལ་ཆ	lac, sealing-wax. rgya skyegs snyigs ma med. [bitter, astrngent, body heat neutral, nus pas glo nad dang, mkhal nad, 'grams tshad sogs la phan]	la cha
ལ་ཆུ	rhubarb	la chu
ལ་ཆུང	la chung pass	la chung
ལ་ཆེན	subject, basis, principle	la chen
ལ་ཆེན་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	"he with sublime thoughts," one of the first monks ordained by the 'three men from Khams; "he with sublime thoughts," one of the first monks ordained by the three men from Khams	la chen dgongs pa rab gsal
ལ་འཇམ	1) w/o harm from bandits and predators etc. 'i la lam 'grim 'grul bde po; 2) la lam bde po	la 'jam
ལ་འཇོར	me shing spang 'gog byed kyi 'jor [tool, mattock]	la 'jor
ལ་ཉ་ཚ	Ran~ja. Indian script	la nya tsha
ལ་ཉག	low pass, pass top notch/ indentation/ low place	la nyag
ལ་ཉག་མཛོ་གཟེངས	la mos nyag tsam dang mdzo bos gzengs tsam ste, mi mthun pa'i phyogs gnyis kas bsam shes byed dgos pa'i dpe ???	la nyag mdzo gzengs
ལ་ཉུང	radishes and turnips	la nyung
ལ་ཉེ	1) rtags mtshan; 2) power/ strength	la nye
ལ་ཉེ་བ	vulture	la nye ba
ལ་ཉེ་བཟང་པོ	good sign	la nye bzang po
ལ་ཏ	1) kind of cord/ thread; 2) fine dar ras; 3) conch sick person's urine sign blug snod	la ta
ལ་ཏིང་གླིང	Latin America	la ting gling
ལ་ཏིན་གླིང	Latin America	la tin gling
ལ་གཏམ་ལུང་གཏམ	meaningless/ pointless/ idle speech	la gtam lung gtam
ལ་བཏགས	lata subscript l	la btags
ལ་ལྟོང	indentation of a mountain pass	la ltong
ལ་ལྟོས་ནས	with regard to {lnga po gzhan rkyen la ltos nas tshang dgos pas gzhan 'byor nga zhes bya} because these five factors need to be complete with regard to circumstances other than one's own, they are ...	la ltos nas
ལ་ལྟོས་པ	with regard to, depends upon	la ltos pa
ལ་སྟེགས	candlestick	la stegs
ལ་སྟོང	mountain pass, solitudes	la stong
ལ་སྟོད	Latö, western part of Tsang	la stod
ལ་སྟོད་བྱང	N Loto	la stod byang
ལ་སྟོད་ཚོ་བཞིར	in the four parts of Loto	la stod tsho bzhir
ལ་སྟོད་ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ	alias {dga' ldan legs bshad gling}	la stod shel dkar chos sde
ལ་སྟོད་ལྷོ	S Loto	la stod lho
ལ་བརྟེན	through	la brten
ལ་བརྟེན་ཏེ	grounded in	la brten te
ལ་བརྟེན་ནས	with the help of, because of; using, based on, by means of, through, by means of, dependent on; based on that; on account of	la brten nas
ལ་ཐ	conch sick person's urine sign blug snod	la tha
ལ་ཐག	distance over a pass	la thag
ལ་ཐིག	drop of sealing wax on which the seal is pressed	la thig
ལ་ཐིགས	1) drop of melted sealing wax; 2) on a person's body thigs brgyab punishment	la thigs
ལ་ཐིན་གླིང	Latin America	la thin gling
ལ་ཐིན་ཨ་མེ་རི་ཀ	Latin America	la thin a me ri ka
ལ་ཐུ	food eaten when travelling over big mt/ pass [milk honey sugar molasses sesame oil, butter, phyur ba, chis men finally ground and mixed like bread]	la thu
ལ་ཐུག་པ	at the point of/ equal to	la thug pa
ལ་ཐུར	ascents and descents	la thur
ལ་ཐེལ	seal on sealing wax	la thel
ལ་ཐོག	the summit of a mountain pass	la thog
ལ་ཐོད	head scarf, turban	la thod
ལ་ད	la ta	la da
ལ་དྭགས	ladak	la dwags
ལ་དབ༹གས	a district in Tibet	la dvags
ལ་དུ	kind of pastry, medicinal food	la du
ལ་དུག	going on high mt paths by or very hot 1s etc headache and vomiting producing humid heat	la dug
ལ་དུག་བརྒྱབ་པ	got altitude sickness	la dug brgyab pa
ལ་དོན	dative	la don
ལ་དོར་བ་སྤྱོད་པ	determinate conduct	la dor ba spyod pa
ལ་སྣམ	soft woolen cloth	la snam
ལ་པ་ཤ	kind of upper garment	la pa sha
ལ་པོ	buttermilk	la po
ལ་དཔག	"according to" construction	la dpag
ལ་དཔག་སྟེ	"according to" construction	la dpag ste
ལ་དཔག་ན	"according to" construction	la dpag na
ལ་སྤྱོད	to experience 2645	la spyod
ལ་སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམས	those who enjoy, those who experience	la spyod pa rnams
ལ་ཕུག	CH turnip, radish	la phug
ལ་ཕུག་གི་ལོ་མ	radish leaf	la phug gi lo ma
ལ་ཕུག་སྒོར་འཚོད	food w meat and turnips cut up and cooked together	la phug sgor 'tshod
ལ་ཕུག་གཞི	radish seed	la phug gzhi
ལ་ཕྱི	great tibetan mountain range	la phyi
ལ་ཕྱི་གངས་ཀྱི་ར་བ	{la phyi gangs kyi ra ba}	la phyi gangs kyi ra ba
ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ	to tend toward ..	la phyogs pa
ལ་བ	cloak	la ba
ལ་བ་དཀར་པོ	white soft woolen cloth la ba dkar po zhes pa'i rdo leb steng du	la ba dkar po
བཞུགས་ནས	sat on a flat stone called the White Blanket	bzhugs nas
ལ་བ་པ	or Kambalapada, 10th century Lawapa, a master who came to Tsari	la ba pa
ལ་བར	Labar	la bar
ལ་བོ་ཆེ	1) big pass; 2) {la bo che} pass	la bo che
ལ་དབྱངས	la gzhas	la dbyangs
ལ་འབོལ	la 'ber, by a gold/ silversmith gold/ silver leb mo sbyar te ri mo 'don sa'i la cha	la 'bol
ལ་འབྱམས	remain as mere--	la 'byams
ལ་མ	kind of herb	la ma
ལ་མ་ཀླུངས	neither mt or plain	la ma klungs
ལ་མ་ཟས་པ	unexhausted karma	la ma zas pa
ལ་མ་སྲོ	raspberry	la ma sro
ལ་མེད་ལ	{la med pass}	la med la
ལ་མོ	quickly, village near lhasa	la mo
ལ་མོ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	{la mo chos skyong}	la mo chos skyong
ལ་མོ་ལ་མོར	immediately, quickly ran kha ma	la mo la mor
ལ་མོ་ཤོག	come quickly	la mo shog
ལ་དམག་གྲུ་ཁ	{la dmag gru kha}	la dmag gru kha
ལ་སྨན	1) a bile med.; 2) sbyar ba'i med.; 3) imported medicine	la sman
ལ་བཙས	1) pass-top brtsegs tho dar lcog can; 2) la yi sho khral	la btsas
ལ་རྩ	lowest part of a pass road	la rtsa
ལ་རྩེ	mountain top, peak, summit of a mountain pass	la rtse
ལ་སྩོགས་པ	etc.	la stsogs pa
ལ་ཚད	height of pass/ mt peak	la tshad
ལ་ཚིགས	la steng la yod pa'i ri nyag	la tshigs
ལ་ཚུགས་པ	merchant's sho khral collector	la tshugs pa
ལ་རྫབ	shing la khra'i rdzab	la rdzab
ལ་རྫས	cairn	la rdzas
ལ་རྫས་རྡོ་ཕུང	rock cairn below/ at summit of a high pass	la rdzas rdo phung
ལ་གཞས	dmangs khrod [crowd of? common people's] song nang don mostly 'dod pa'i showing affection	la gzhas
ལ་གཞིགས	"according to" construction	la gzhigs
ལ་གཞིགས་ཏེ་ན	"according to" construction	la gzhigs te na
ལ་ཟུར	edge of a pass	la zur
ལ་ཟླ་བ	decisive resolving [thd]	la zla ba
ལ་ཟླས་པ	settle, decide finally	la zlas pa
ལ་ཟློ	pass beyond, decide finally	la zlo
ལ་ཟློ་བ	put limits to, settle finally	la zlo ba
ལ་ཟློ་བཟླ་བ	pass beyond	la zlo bzla ba
ལ་ཟློས	pass beyond, decide finally	la zlos
ལ་ཟློས་པ	{la bzla ba} - to reach/ come to a decisive experience (within)/ the decisive experience (of); isc. to leave behind/ cast off [MR]; - to reach a final decision (about/ concerning . . . )*	la zlos pa
ལ་ཟློས་ཤིག	imperative of settle, resolve decide on	la zlos shig
ལ་གཟིགས	fetus	la gzigs
ལ་བཟ་བ	to reach	la bza ba
ལ་བཟླ	resolve	la bzla
ལ་བཟླ་བ	{la zlos pa} to reach/ come to a decisive experience (within)/ the decisive experience (of); isc. to leave behind/ cast off [MR]; - to reach a final decision (about/ concerning . . . )*	la bzla ba
ལ་བཟླ་བར་འགྱུར	one finds oneself beyond all concepts	la bzla bar 'gyur
ལ་བཟླའི་མན་ངག	instructions for going beyond	la bzla'i man ngag
ལ་འུར	quickly, right now, immediately	la 'ur
ལ་འུར་ཁོལ	SA glo bur	la 'ur khol
ལ་འུར་ལོངས	let me -- spring out [of the mud]	la 'ur longs
ལ་འོ་གོ	Laos	la 'o go
ལ་འོག	a place	la 'og
ལ་འོང	yes, let it be so H	la 'ong
ལ་ཡག	the place Layak in the South	la yag
ལ་ཡང	even 2646	la yang
ལ་ཡང་བཟླ	to be beyond, SA la bzla ba	la yang bzla
ལ་ཡོག	put blame on others, ripening karma of past hidden deeds	la yog
ལ་ཡོགས	retribution	la yogs
ལ་རག་པ	depends on	la rag pa
ལ་རེད	yes, right	la red
ལ་རོང	mts and ravines/ valleys	la rong
ལ་ལ	some/ several/ a few	la la
ལ་ལ་སྙམ་དུ་སེམས	sometimes think	la la snyam du sems
ལ་ལ་དག་ན་རེ	some say	la la dag na re
ལ་ལ་ན	[Skt] rkyang ma nadi	la la na
ལ་ལ་ནི	some of others	la la ni
ལ་ལ་ཕུད	medicinal herb, trachyspermum ammi, bishop's weed	la la phud
ལ་ལ་ཞིག	certain, somebody, someone	la la zhig
ལ་ལར	some[one][times], really, a few, several	la lar
ལ་ལྭར་ཕིན་ཏི	Rawalpindi	la lwar phin ti
ལ་ལས་ནི	some	la las ni
ལ་ལི	someone	la li
ལ་ལི་ཏ	Lalita	la li ta
ལ་ལུང	mountain passes and valleys	la lung
ལ་ལོ	#	la lo
ལ་ལོ་ལ་མོར	gradually, by degrees	la lo la mor
ལ་ལོག་ཐེབས་པ	{la log thebs pa} disease	la log thebs pa
ལ་ཤགས	thin inner garment	la shags
ལ་ཤན་དབྱེ་བ	divide things that are mixed	la shan dbye ba
ལ་ཤོག	stencil paper	la shog
ལ་སིང	ladakpa and a sikh native of punjab	la sing
ལ་སུམ་རྒྱལ་བ་བྱང་ཆུབ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	la sum rgyal ba byang chub
ལ་སོ	top of a mountain pass	la so
ལ་སོ་ལྟ་མཁན	pass watching guard	la so lta mkhan
ལ་སོགས	etc.	la sogs
ལ་སོགས་པ	and so on, and the like, etc.	la sogs pa
ལ་སོགས་པའང	etc.	la sogs pa'ang
ལ་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བ་བྱང་ཆུབ	one of the first seven monks in Tibet	la gsum rgyal ba byang chub
ལ་ཧོར	Lahore	la hor
ལྭ	lva ba [soft woolen] cloth[ing]	lwa
ལབ༹་གོས	clothing of lva ba cloth	lva gos
ལབ༹་ཏ	[arch] dar zab kyi bye brag cig	lva ta
ལབ༹་བ	1) chags su ma bcags pa'i cloth w pile; 2) kam pa li ??; 3) clothing	lva ba
ལྭ་བ	1) lva ba [soft woolen] cloth[ing]; 2) kam pa li	lwa ba
ལྭ་བ་ནག་པོ	dress made of black blanket	lwa ba nag po
ལྭ་བ་པ	mahasiddha Lavapa	lwa ba pa
ལབ༹་བ་པ	Indian {dbu ma rnam rdzun pa} master wearing lva ba cloth	lva ba pa
ལབ༹་རིང	long gown, robe	lva ring
ལྭ་རིང	long gown, robe	lwa ring
ལབ༹་ཤག	phyu chen}	lva shag
ལག་ཀོར	kind of bracelet	lag kor
ལག་དཀྲིས	bracelets	lag dkris
ལག་རྐྱོང	beggar, destitute person	lag rkyong
ལག་སྐམ	1) small grasping tool; 2) like a bad caretaker food and wealth giving/ making little destroying much; 3) tight fisted, avaricious	lag skam
ལག་སྐོར	hand turned/ operated [mill [pestle?] ma ni wheel], pass something around/ from hand to hand	lag skor
ལག་སྐོར་འཁོར་སྟེགས	hand turned lathe	lag skor 'khor stegs
ལག་སྐོར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hand operated machine	lag skor 'phrul 'khor
ལག་སྐོར་བལ་སྲེག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	hand operated sheep- shearing machine	lag skor bal sreg 'phrul 'khor
ལག་སྐོར་བྱེད	pass something around/ from hand to hand	lag skor byed
ལག་སྐྱེས	1) rang gi sgo rtsar skyes pa'i horses cattle etc.; 2) kshatriya caste, rgyal rigs; 3) nails	lag skyes
ལག་སྐྱོགས	metal ladle, ladle	lag skyogs
ལག་སྐྱོང	knife	lag skyong
ལག་སྐྱོབ	gloves, mittens	lag skyob
ལག་ཁུག	small teapot etc, hand pouch/ bag	lag khug
ལག་ཁོག	both hands 'byar ba'i phyugs sha stod khog	lag khog
ལག་ཁྱེར	introductory or ngos sbyor gyi yi ge, pass[port], permit, certificate, diploma, hand carried	lag khyer
ལག་ཁྱེར་མ་མདའ་སྦག་སྦག	hand carried machine gun	lag khyer ma mda' sbag sbag
ལག་ཁྱོར	support/ help w 1 hand	lag khyor
ལག་ཁྱོར་བྱེད	support/ help w 1 hand	lag khyor byed
ལག་ཁྲག་རྡོ་ལ་བདྲབ	blood from her hands spilled on the stones,	lag khrag rdo la bdrab
ལག་ཁྲིད	instructions, directions, pointing out dngos khrid, dmar khrid	lag khrid
ལག་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	instruct, direct, point out	lag khrid byed
ལག་འཁར	'khar rgyug gam ber ka,//lag 'khar btsugs nas khyar khyor du 'gro ba	lag 'khar
ལག་འཁུམས	cripple, armless	lag 'khums
ལག་འཁོར	1) lag pas bskor bya'i mchig; 2) lag pas skor rgyu'i ma ni'i 'khor lo	lag 'khor
ལག་འཁྱེར	introductory or ngos sbyor gyi yi ge, pass[port], permit, certificate, diploma, hand carried	lag 'khyer
ལག་འཁྱེར་གློག་ཞུ	electric torch, flashlight	lag 'khyer glog zhu
ལག་འཁྱེར་འབར་རྫས	hand grenade	lag 'khyer 'bar rdzas
ལག་འཁྱེར་མ་མདའ་སྦག་སྦག	hand carried machine gun	lag 'khyer ma mda' sbag sbag
ལག་འཁྲུ	nails	lag 'khru
ལག་གི་བླ	1) work leader/ foreman; 2) dgon sde'i worker	lag gi bla
ལག་གིས་ལུས་བསིག་པ	fan the body with the hand	lag gis lus bsig pa
ལག་གོལ	wrong path 2647	lag gol
ལག་གཡོགས	ingratitude	lag gYogs
ལག་གྱོར	help w work	lag gyor
ལག་གྲམ	one sitting with his cheek resting on his hand, leaning one's head on the hand	lag gram
ལག་གྲོ	small leather bags, hand bag	lag gro
ལག་དགུར	drawn bent hands	lag dgur
ལག་མགོ	both hands put together in shape of a glove or ball, glove with only a thumb, mitten	lag mgo
ལག་འགྱོག	moving/ shaking the hand strike another [don rkyen phra mo tsam yang med par gzhan la lag 'gyog mi rigs]	lag 'gyog
ལག་འགྲིམ	succession of being in 1's hands from 1 person to another	lag 'grim
ལག་འགྲིམ་གྱིས་བརྒུས་པས	passing from hand to hand	lag 'grim gyis brgus pas
ལག་འགྲིམ་གྱིས་སྤྱི་རྫས་སྤྲོད་ལེན	give and receive common possessions by a succession of hands from 1 person to another	lag 'grim gyis spyi rdzas sprod len
ལག་འགྲིམ་པ	succession of being in 1's hands from 1 person to another	lag 'grim pa
ལག་འགྲོ	1) snake; 2) naga	lag 'gro
ལག་འགྲོ་ཟ	1) peacock; 2) garuda	lag 'gro za
ལག་འགྲོའི་མགོན་པོ	king of nagas	lag 'gro'i mgon po
ལག་འགྲོའི་སྙིང་པོ	tsan dan sbrul gyi snying po sandal wood	lag 'gro'i snying po
ལག་འགྲོའི་ཟས་ཅན	1) peacock; 2) garuda	lag 'gro'i zas can
ལག་རྒྱན	gru gdub, ring etc, hand jewelry, bracelet	lag rgyan
ལག་རྒྱུགས	cane, walking stick	lag rgyugs
ལག་རྒྱུན	habit, usage, custom, practice tradition	lag rgyun
ལག་རྒྱུན་ཆད་པ	broken/ discontinued/ lost practice tradition, habit, usage, custom	lag rgyun chad pa
ལག་སྒམ	* small box [for $, jewelry etc.]	lag sgam
ལག་སྒྲོ	small leather bag for little things/ food etc]	lag sgro
ལག་ངར	fore-arm	lag ngar
ལག་དངུལ	1) money/ cash in/ on hand; 2) money needed for doing something	lag dngul
ལག་དངུལ་དེབ་ཆུང	petty cash ledger	lag dngul deb chung
ལག་རྔ	drum with a handle; pole drum;	lag rnga
ལག་སྔ་བ	previous hand clap of debaters	lag snga ba
ལག་བཅག	lag lcag	lag bcag
ལག་བཅང་དུ་གཏོད་པ	delivered our minds into the palm of our hands	lag bcang du gtod pa
ལག་བཅངས་སུ་གཏོད་པ	delivers into the palm of one's hand	lag bcangs su gtod pa
ལག་བཅུད་ཆེ	lto chas gang bzos na yang having good taste	lag bcud che
ལག་ལྕག	1) brick cutting tool shing rgyug flat; 2) in the hand gzhu ba'i rdeg lcag	lag lcag
ལག་ལྕགས	handcuffs [-ing]	lag lcags
ལག་ལྕགས་རྒྱག	handcuff	lag lcags rgyag
ལག་ལྕི	tight fisted, not able to give much to other people	lag lci
ལག་ལྕིབས	1) gloves, mittens; 2) thab phyis lta bu	lag lcibs
ལག་ཆ	apparatus	lag cha
ལག་ཆད	cripple, armless	lag chad
ལག་ཆད་པ	having a mutilated or crippled hand	lag chad pa
ལག་ཆའི་དཔེ་དེབ	instruction manual	lag cha'i dpe deb
ལག་ཆས	tools, instrument	lag chas
ལག་ཆེན	mahabuhu	lag chen
ལག་མཆོད	hand offering [personal skull cup]; hand offering [personal skull cup]	lag mchod
ལག་འཆང་བྱེད	get involved w	lag 'chang byed
ལག་འཆང་མི་ཤེས	not able to get involved w	lag 'chang mi shes
ལག་འཇམ	soft/ gentle way of using the hands	lag 'jam
ལག་འཇུ	1) hold w the hands; 2) handle; 3) bannister; 4) vessel w handles	lag 'ju
ལག་རྗེས	1) handprint; 2) work's result, accomplishment, achievement	lag rjes
ལག་རྗེས་འཇོག་པ	leave behind a work which immortalizes a person's name	lag rjes 'jog pa
ལག་རྗེས་ཐོན་འབྲས	accomplishment, achievement	lag rjes thon 'bras
ལག་ཉ	* fore arm, hold/ keep [w/o permission/ dishonestly]	lag nya
ལག་ཉར	* [in the] fore arm, hold/ keep [w/o permission/ dishonestly]	lag nyar
ལག་ཉལ	Indra's vajra	lag nyal
ལག་ཉེས་ཁུར་བ	by evil deeds doing kun slong med kyang stes dbang gis misfortune arising //rta 'do ba'i steng gi pho rgod de, pho sngar ma'i lag nyes 'khur yang srid	lag nyes khur ba
ལག་གཉིས	two hands, hands	lag gnyis
ལག་གཉིས་ཀྱིས	with the hands	lag gnyis kyis
ལག་གཉིས་བསྣོལ	to cross the hands	lag gnyis bsnol
ལག་གཉིས་ལས་གོམས	ambidextrous	lag gnyis las goms
ལག་བསྙལ་བ	[arch] lag pa bkrus pa	lag bsnyal ba
ལག་ཏིག	hand pot or vessel to measure milk or arack	lag tig
ལག་ཏུ	in hand, practice,	lag tu
ལག་ཏུ་འཆང་བ	hold in the hand	lag tu 'chang ba
ལག་ཏུ་བསྣམས་པ	hold up in the hand	lag tu bsnams pa
ལག་ཏུ་སྤྲད	put into the hands, gave into the hands	lag tu sprad
ལག་ཏུ་སྤྲོད་པ	put into one's hand	lag tu sprod pa
ལག་ཏུ་བླང་བ	received in the hand, practiced, put into practice	lag tu blang ba
ལག་ཏུ་བླང་བར་བྱ་བ	to apply	lag tu blang bar bya ba
ལག་ཏུ་བླངས	to take in the hands, took in the hands	lag tu blangs
ལག་ཏུ་འབྱོར	come into 1's hands, get, obtain	lag tu 'byor
ལག་ཏུ་འབྱོར་དཀའ	hard to get	lag tu 'byor dka'
ལག་ཏུ་འབྱོར་དཀའ་པོ	hard to get	lag tu 'byor dka' po
ལག་ཏུ་འབྱོར་བ	come into 1's hands, get, obtain	lag tu 'byor ba
ལག་ཏུ་ཚགས་ཚུད་པ	test a thing properly by the hand	lag tu tshags tshud pa
ལག་ཏུ་ཚུད	lag par thebs pa,//wa sdar ma rngon pa'i lag tu tshud	lag tu tshud
ལག་ཏུ་བཞག	hand over	lag tu bzhag
ལག་ཏུ་བཞག་པ	hand over	lag tu bzhag pa
ལག་ཏུ་ལེན	to practice	lag tu len
ལག་ཏུ་ལེན་པ	to apply in practice	lag tu len pa
ལག་ཏུ་ཤོར	lose, fall into the hands of [enemy etc]	lag tu shor
ལག་ཏུ་སོན	get, gain, obtain	lag tu son
ལག་གཏད་བྱེད་པ	realize buddha in the palm of my hand	lag gtad byed pa
ལག་གཏམ	merchants arranging prices w/o speaking by hand signals 2648	lag gtam
ལག་གཏུགས	be in need/ short of	lag gtugs
ལག་གཏུབ	[arch] 1) quick; 2) theg thub pa	lag gtub
ལག་བཏགས	hand woven, gift	lag btags
ལག་བཏགས་ཚུད	wrist-watch	lag btags tshud
ལག་རྟགས	gift, present, sign, seal, manual sign made with the hand as a seal of verification, any small object, needle, present	lag rtags
ལག་རྟགས་སྤྲོད་པ	send gifts, give somebody a present	lag rtags sprod pa
ལག་རྟེན	hang-support, a board upon which the painting hand was rested during painting	lag rten
ལག་སྟབས	SA lag len, practice, practical knowledge	lag stabs
ལག་སྟབས་བྱེད	make a hand gesture/ signal	lag stabs byed
ལག་སྟོང	empty-handed	lag stong
ལག་སྟོང་དུ་ཕྱིར་འོང་བ	to return	lag stong du phyir 'ong ba
ལག་སྟོང་དུ་འོངས་པ	returning emptyhanded	lag stong du 'ongs pa
ལག་བརྟེན	lag rten	lag brten
ལག་བསྟར	work really done 1self, put into practice	lag bstar
ལག་བསྟར་མ	1) something in 1's own hand writing; 2) work done/ thing made 1self	lag bstar ma
ལག་ཐགས	hand woven, hand loom	lag thags
ལག་ཐལ	lag pa sdod mi tshugs par thal ba	lag thal
ལག་ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར	put your hands together palm to palm	lag thal mo sbyar
ལག་ཐིའུ	signature	lag thi'u
ལག་ཐུག་པ	lag pas rgyag res byed pa	lag thug pa
ལག་ཐུབ	1) [arch] quick; 2) capable	lag thub
ལག་ཐེལ	Tibetan govt dmag mi dkyus ma tsho'i lag gdub la rgyag pa'i the'u	lag thel
ལག་ཐོ	hammer, notes	lag tho
ལག་ཐོག	in/ on hand, ready, in cash	lag thog
ལག་ཐོག་ཏུ	in hand	lag thog tu
ལག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཡོད་པའི	in hand	lag thog tu yod pa'i
ལག་ཐོག་ཏུ་ལེན་པ	receive	lag thog tu len pa
ལག་ཐོག་ཚོང་ཟོག	wares in/ on hand	lag thog tshong zog
ལག་ཐོགས	temporarily, for the time being, be in need/ short of, shortage/ need of	lag thogs
ལག་ཐོགས་པོ	shortage/ [urgent] need of	lag thogs po
ལག་ཐོགས་པོ་བྱུང	there was a shortage/ [urgent] need of	lag thogs po byung
ལག་མཐིལ	palm of the hand	lag mthil
ལག་མཐིལ་གྱི་རི་མོ་ལྟར་གསལ་ལེར་མངོན	as clear as a picture in the palm of 1's hand	lag mthil gyi ri mo ltar gsal ler mngon
ལག་མཐིལ་ལྟར་མཉམ་པ	flat like the palm of the hand	lag mthil ltar mnyam pa
ལག་མཐིལ་དུ་བླངས་པ་འདྲ་བ	like receiving in the pal of 1's hand	lag mthil du blangs pa 'dra ba
ལག་མཐིལ་དུ་ཡོད་པ	to have in the palms of one's hand	lag mthil du yod pa
ལག་མཐིལ་བརྡུང་བ	clapping the hands	lag mthil brdung ba
ལག་མཐུ	power of the hands	lag mthu
ལག་འཐག	mill	lag 'thag
ལག་འཐབ་པ	to beat with the fists	lag 'thab pa
ལག་དམ	seal, close-fisted, stingy, niggardly	lag dam
ལག་དམ་པོ	close-fisted, stingy, niggardly	lag dam po
ལག་དར	kata, hand held flag	lag dar
ལག་དལ	w/o work	lag dal
ལག་དལ་གྱིས་རི་མོ་འབྲི	effortlessly painted the picture	lag dal gyis ri mo 'bri
ལག་དུ་སོན་པ	get, gain, obtain	lag du son pa
ལག་དུབ	bracelet	lag dub
ལག་དེབ	manual, note, notebook, hand book	lag deb
ལག་དོ	assistant, helper	lag do
ལག་དོ་རྒྱག	load a horse/ mule w packs	lag do rgyag
ལག་དོ་བ	horse and mule etc. packloader	lag do ba
ལག་དོག	handful	lag dog
ལག་གདང	joining/ holding hands, holding in the hand	lag gdang
ལག་གདངས་དཔུང་སྦྲེལ	hand in hand, combined forces	lag gdangs dpung sbrel
ལག་གདངས་དཔུང་སྦྲེལ་བྱེད	combine forces [to do something]	lag gdangs dpung sbrel byed
ལག་གདན	phor pa sogs dkrug byed kyi lag cha rten sa'i pang leb	lag gdan
ལག་གདུབ	bracelets	lag gdub
ལག་གདེང་བ	raise one's hand	lag gdeng ba
ལག་བདར་བ	really done by hand	lag bdar ba
ལག་བདེ	dainty hands, graceful, dexterous, clever, talented, cook, servant	lag bde
ལག་བདེ་དཔོན་པོ	chief cook, table server	lag bde dpon po
ལག་བདེ་བ	one who has practice in working with his hands, skilled, clever	lag bde ba
ལག་མདའ	pistol	lag mda'
ལག་མདུང	easily carryable short spear	lag mdung
ལག་མདེལ	hand grenade	lag mdel
ལག་འདེབས་ས་ཞིང	field owner privately do dam byas te 'debs pa'i field	lag 'debs sa zhing
ལག་འདོགས་ཆུ་ཚོད	wrist watch	lag 'dogs chu tshod
ལག་འདོགས་ཆུ་ཚོད་འཁོར་ལོ	wrist watch	lag 'dogs chu tshod 'khor lo
ལག་འདོན	vassal or subject paying his landlord in money or kind	lag 'don
ལག་རྡུགས	nye bar mkho skabs dgos mkho la phan 'dogs mi thub pa	lag rdugs
ལག་རྡུམ	1) cripple, armless; 2) sa bdag spirit	lag rdum
ལག་རྡུམ་མ	a cripple, armless	lag rdum ma
ལག་རྡེལ	hand grenade	lag rdel
ལག་རྡོ	small metal beating hammer	lag rdo
ལག་ལྡན	1) goods in hand; 2) elephant	lag ldan
ལག་ལྡན་མ	she-elephant	lag ldan ma
ལག་ལྡན་ར་བ	elephant stable, place where elephants are kept	lag ldan ra ba
ལག་སྡམ་པ	handcuffed	lag sdam pa
ལག་སྡོག	tight-fisted, not generous	lag sdog
ལག་བརྡ	hand signal 2649	lag brda
ལག་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	to beckon	lag brda gtong ba
ལག་བརྡ་བྱེད་པ	gesticulate	lag brda byed pa
ལག་བརྡུལ	1) lag pas gyob pa; 2) w the hands phye mar btul ba	lag brdul
ལག་བསྡམས	sexual embrace	lag bsdams
ལག་བསྡོགས	1) a kind of fried food; 2) arrange w the hands or sta gon byas pa	lag bsdogs
ལག་ན	in the hand	lag na
ལག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Vajrapani	lag na rdo rje
ལག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་གོས་སྔོན་པོ་ཅན	Vajrap ni w blue garments	lag na rdo rje gos sngon po can
ལག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབང་བསྐུར་བའི་རྒྱུད	Vajra Bearer Empowerment Tantra. A tantra belonging to Upa Yoga	lag na rdo rje dbang bskur ba'i rgyud
ལག་ན་བེ་ཅོན་ཅན	having a danda in his hand	lag na be con can
ལག་ན་གཞོང་ཐོགས	holding a basin in hand, a deity	lag na gzhong thogs
ལག་ན་རལ་གྲི་འཛིན་པ	hold a sword in one's hand	lag na ral gri 'dzin pa
ལག་ན་རིན་ཆེན	Ratnapani bodhisattva	lag na rin chen
ལག་ན་གཤོལ	the deity stobs bzang	lag na gshol
ལག་ནས	1) grain really in hand; 2) yul 'brog bar du tea, butter and grain etc selling/ exchanging lag gshor 'bru rigs	lag nas
ལག་ནས་འཕྲོག་པ	snatch out of a person's hand, deliver from another's power	lag nas 'phrog pa
ལག་ནས་ལྷུང་བ	fell from her hands	lag nas lhung ba
ལག་ནོམ	groping/ feeling blindly	lag nom
ལག་ནོར	property in hand, property that has not been sold or mortgaged	lag nor
ལག་གནད	lag 'dzangs, lag thogs,//'gro song gtong byed lag gnad chen po 'dug	lag gnad
ལག་སྣེ	expense, allowance $	lag sne
ལག་སྣོད	chang, milk etc. measuring vessel	lag snod
ལག་པ	1) arm, hand, fore leg; 3) motion star/ rgyu skar; 4) two	lag pa
ལག་པ་ཀྱོག་པ	[arch] lag pa yug yug byed pa	lag pa kyog pa
ལག་པ་བཀན	stretch the arm bending it upwards to pull anything	lag pa bkan
ལག་པ་བཀྲན་པོ	stingy	lag pa bkran po
ལག་པ་བཀྲུས་ནས	washed his hands	lag pa bkrus nas
ལག་པ་བཀྲེན་པ	stingy	lag pa bkren pa
ལག་པ་བཀྲེན་པོ	stingy	lag pa bkren po
ལག་པ་སྐྱོང	knife	lag pa skyong
ལག་པ་བརྐྱང	raise/ extend the arm	lag pa brkyang
ལག་པ་བརྐྱང་བ	epithet of the son of kamadeva	lag pa brkyang ba
ལག་པ་བསྐྱང	raise/ extend the arm ??	lag pa bskyang
ལག་པ་ཁ་སྦྱར	join the palms lag pa kha sbyar gyis gus 'dud zhu ba show respect w joined palms	lag pa kha sbyar
ལག་པ་ཁ་སྦྱར་བ	joining of the palms of the hands as in devotion	lag pa kha sbyar ba
ལག་པ་མཁས་པོ	adroit	lag pa mkhas po
ལག་པ་གློད	let go [of], have a free hand, release, take 1's hands off of	lag pa glod
ལག་པ་གློད་པ	to let go, have a free hand	lag pa glod pa
ལག་པ་འགྲམ་པ	lean one's head on one's hand in meditating, depend upon, rely on, proclaim, publish	lag pa 'gram pa
ལག་པ་འགྲམ་པ་ལ་རྟེན	keep the hand on one's cheeks	lag pa 'gram pa la rten
ལག་པ་འགྲམ་པ་ལ་རྟེན་པ	lay one's hand on the cheek	lag pa 'gram pa la rten pa
ལག་པ་སྒྲེང	raise the arm	lag pa sgreng
ལག་པ་སྒྲེང་བ	lift, raise, hold up	lag pa sgreng ba
ལག་པ་བརྒྱ་པ	{lag pa brgya pa}	lag pa brgya pa
ལག་པ་གཅུས་པ	interfere, meddle with	lag pa gcus pa
ལག་པ་ཆོད་ཅིག	let his hand be removed / cut off	lag pa chod cig
ལག་པ་མཆོད་པ	hand offering	lag pa mchod pa
ལག་པ་འཆང་བཞིན་པ	touching	lag pa 'chang bzhin pa
ལག་པ་འཆང་རུང་བ	touchable	lag pa 'chang rung ba
ལག་པ་འཇམ་པ་ལྷའི་པད་མ་འདྲ་བ	your hands are as soft as the lotuses of the gods	lag pa 'jam pa lha'i pad ma 'dra ba
ལག་པ་ལྗིད་པོ	heavy hand[ed]	lag pa ljid po
ལག་པ་སྙོབས	stretched out the hand	lag pa snyobs
ལག་པ་བསྙལ	[arch] wash the hands	lag pa bsnyal
ལག་པ་གཏོང་བ	shake hands	lag pa gtong ba
ལག་པ་དང་རྐང	arms & legs with the feet not proportionate	lag pa dang rkang
ལག་པ་དང་རྐང་མི་མཉམ་པ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad	lag pa dang rkang mi mnyam pa
ལག་པ་དམ་པོ	[tight hand] stingy	lag pa dam po
ལག་པ་གདངས	stretched apart the arms	lag pa gdangs
ལག་པ་གདོང་བ	shake hands	lag pa gdong ba
ལག་པ་བདེ་པོ	[active hand] talented, adept, skilled	lag pa bde po
ལག་པ་འདར་བ	his hands shaking	lag pa 'dar ba
ལག་པ་རྡབ་པ	applaud, clap 1's hands	lag pa rdab pa
ལག་པ་རྡེག་ཆ	weapon	lag pa rdeg cha
ལག་པ་བརྡབ	applaud, clap, bang the hand on something	lag pa brdab
ལག་པ་བརྡབས	folded arms	lag pa brdabs
ལག་པ་ན	lagsmana brother of rama (hero of ramayana)	lag pa na
ལག་པ་ནས་འཇུ་བ	take by the hand	lag pa nas 'ju ba
ལག་པ་ནས་འཛིན་པ	grasp a person's hand	lag pa nas 'dzin pa
ལག་པ་དཔྲལ་བ་གཏུགས་པ	joined one's hands at one's forehead	lag pa dpral ba gtugs pa
ལག་པ་སྤྲོད	give 1's hand, surrender, give in	lag pa sprod
ལག་པ་དབྱུག	fidgeted with their hands	lag pa dbyug
ལག་པ་དབྱུག་པ	flourish or brandish the hand	lag pa dbyug pa
ལག་པ་མ་སྐྱོག	do not move about the arms	lag pa ma skyog
ལག་པ་མ་སྦྲེལ	do not join hands	lag pa ma sbrel
ལག་པ་མི་སྤོབས	care, conscientiousness	lag pa mi spobs
ལག་པ་མི་སྤོབས་པ	care, conscientiousness	lag pa mi spobs pa
ལག་པ་གཙང་བ	honest	lag pa gtsang ba
ལག་པ་འཛིན	bride, wife, mistress of the house	lag pa 'dzin
ལག་པ་གཟེད	hold out the hands for/ ask for help	lag pa gzed
ལག་པ་ཡང་པོ	1) generous; 2) [light hand] accurate, sharp [shooting]	lag pa yang po
ལག་པ་རིང་པོ	1) long hand; 2) person using other's property w/o permission	lag pa ring po
ལག་པ་རིང་པོ་བྱེད	use other's property w/o permission	lag pa ring po byed
ལག་པ་ཤོག་པོ	[generous hand] generous	lag pa shog po
ལག་པ་གཤོགས་པོ	generous 2650	lag pa gshogs po
ལག་པ་ལྷུག་པོ	w/o avarice, generous	lag pa lhug po
ལག་པའི	manual	lag pa'i
ལག་པའི་གོང་མོ	middle finger	lag pa'i gong mo
ལག་པའི་རྒྱན	bangle ornament worn on the arms	lag pa'i rgyan
ལག་པའི་རྒྱབ	back of the hand	lag pa'i rgyab
ལག་པའི་ཆུ་བོ	name of river sita	lag pa'i chu bo
ལག་པའི་མདུན	palm of the hand	lag pa'i mdun
ལག་པའི་རྡེག་ཆ	weapons	lag pa'i rdeg cha
ལག་པའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	different forms and configurations of the hand	lag pa'i rnam 'gyur
ལག་པའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudras, hand gestures of sealing GD	lag pa'i phyag rgya
ལག་པའི་སྦལ	soft muscles of the palm of the hand	lag pa'i sbal
ལག་པའི་ཚེང་དུས	shrub	lag pa'i tsheng dus
ལག་པའི་ཚེར་མ	nails	lag pa'i tsher ma
ལག་པའི་མཛུག་གུ	fingers	lag pa'i mdzug gu
ལག་པའི་ཡལ་ག	fingers, branches of the hand	lag pa'i yal ga
ལག་པའི་ཤར་བུ	rain spouts of hands	lag pa'i shar bu
ལག་པའི་སེན་མོ	fingernail, nail of finger	lag pa'i sen mo
ལག་པའི་སོར་མོ	fingers	lag pa'i sor mo
ལག་པའི་སྲད་བུ	bangle ornament worn on the arms	lag pa'i srad bu
ལག་པར་ཁུར་བྱེས	hold in one's hand	lag par khur byes
ལག་པས་འཆང་བ	touch	lag pas 'chang ba
ལག་པས་འཇུ་བ	hold w the hands	lag pas 'ju ba
ལག་པས་འཐམ་པ	embrace	lag pas 'tham pa
ལག་པས་རྡོ་བསྒུལ་ཏོ	with his hand he shook the rock	lag pas rdo bsgul to
ལག་པས་ནོམ་པ	grabble	lag pas nom pa
ལག་པས་ཕར་འཕུལ་བ	push out with the arms	lag pas phar 'phul ba
ལག་པས་ཕྱིས་པས་དག་པ་མ་ཡིན	cleaning with the hand is not what makes one pure	lag pas phyis pas dag pa ma yin
ལག་པས་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	manual	lag pas byed rgyu
ལག་པས་འཛིར་བ	let drip from the fingers	lag pas 'dzir ba
ལག་པས་བཞོགས	split with the hand lag pas g.yabs - waved the hand to call somebody	lag pas bzhogs
ལག་པས་རེག་ན	if touched by the hand of	lag pas reg na
ལག་པོད	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag pod
ལག་པོད་ཀྱིས་བྱས་པ	act of returning a favor/ cooperation/ revenge	lag pod kyis byas pa
ལག་པོད་བྱེད	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag pod byed
ལག་པོད་བྱེད་པ	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag pod byed pa
ལག་པོད་ཚོགས་ཆུང	small mutual aid group	lag pod tshogs chung
ལག་པོད་སློག	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag pod slog
ལག་པོད་སློག་པ	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag pod slog pa
ལག་དཔོན	1) master/ supervisor of people who know how to make things; 2) beginner of an action	lag dpon
ལག་སྤོད	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag spod
ལག་སྤོད་ཀྱིས་བྱས་པ	act of returning a favor/ cooperation/ revenge	lag spod kyis byas pa
ལག་སྤོད་བྱེད	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag spod byed
ལག་སྤོད་བྱེད་པ	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag spod byed pa
ལག་སྤོད་ཚོགས་ཆུང	small mutual aid group	lag spod tshogs chung
ལག་སྤོད་སློག	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag spod slog
ལག་སྤོད་སློག་པ	1) [do something to ] return a favor; 2) do something together/ as mutual help; 3) revenge [1self]	lag spod slog pa
ལག་སྤོམ	hand grenade	lag spom
ལག་སྤྱད	hand tool/ implement	lag spyad
ལག་སྤྲོད	cash payment	lag sprod
ལག་ཕུབ	phub kyi ming,//shing gi lag phub kyis me mda' 'gog mi thub	lag phub
ལག་ཕྱི་བ	rnag gzan monastic garment	lag phyi ba
ལག་ཕྱིས	1) hand drying cloth etc, towel, handkerchief; 2) attribute 1's own faults to others	lag phyis
ལག་འཕེན་པོ་ལོ	volley ball	lag 'phen po lo
ལག་འཕེན་འབར་མདེལ	hand grenade	lag 'phen 'bar mdel
ལག་འཕོས	rngan nam khon gyi lan 'jal ba	lag 'phos
ལག་འཕྱེར	introductory or ngos sbyor gyi yi ge, pass[port], permit, certificate, diploma, hand carried	lag 'phyer
ལག་བུབས	SA 'bub pa	lag bubs
ལག་བེར	walking staff	lag ber
ལག་བྱང	hands and face	lag byang
ལག་བྲིས	letter, autograph, lines or marks in the hand	lag bris
ལག་བླངས	a practice	lag blangs
ལག་འབབ	come to hand	lag 'bab
ལག་འབབ་ཁེ་སྐྱེད	produce a profit	lag 'bab khe skyed
ལག་འབབ་ཁྲེ་སྐྱེད	net interest/ profit	lag 'bab khre skyed
ལག་འབམ	hand grenade	lag 'bam
ལག་འབུབ་བྱེད་པ	fall on the hands	lag 'bub byed pa
ལག་འབེག	briefcase	lag 'beg
ལག་འབོམ	hand grenade	lag 'bom
ལག་འབྱོར	come into 1's hands	lag 'byor
ལག་འབྱོར་བྱུང་བ	come into 1's hands	lag 'byor byung ba
ལག་འབྲས་ཐོན	cut up	lag 'bras thon
ལག་འབྲས་གཙང་མ	manufactured items of good quality	lag 'bras gtsang ma
ལག་འབྲེག	punishment by cutting off the hand	lag 'breg
ལག་འབྲེལ	joining hands, hand in hand, be of the same opinion, plot, conspiracy	lag 'brel
ལག་འབྲེལ་གཏོང	join hands, be hand in hand/ of the same opinion, plot, conspire	lag 'brel gtong
ལག་འབྲེལ་བཏང་བ	arm-in-arm	lag 'brel btang ba
ལག་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	join hands, be hand in hand/ of the same opinion, plot, conspire	lag 'brel byed
ལག་སྦུབ	horse's front leg joints 'chus te 'gyel grabs byed stangs shig //rta lag sbub brgyab na mi mdun phyogs su lhung yong	lag sbub
ལག་སྦྲེང	slong mo ba	lag sbreng
ལག་སྦྲེལ	1) work helper; 2) two hands joined ['phar spyang lag sbrel]	lag sbrel
ལག་མངས	many-armed	lag mangs
ལག་མར	1) grain etc btsongs pa'i rin lag thog tu 'phral sprod byed pa'i mar; 2) butter/oil really in hand	lag mar
ལག་མྱུལ	groping/ feeling blindly	lag myul
ལག་མྱུལ་རྒྱག	grope/ feel blindly	lag myul rgyag
ལག་དམར	1) butcher; 2) killer, murderer	lag dmar
ལག་དམར་བ	actual killer/ murderer of a person	lag dmar ba
ལག་བཙུག	shoot, scion	lag btsug
ལག་རྩ	pulse	lag rtsa
ལག་རྩལ	technique, technology, skill, art, craft, dexterity, skill	lag rtsal
ལག་རྩལ་མཁན	skilled worker, technician, craftsman	lag rtsal mkhan
ལག་རྩལ་མཁས་པ	artisan	lag rtsal mkhas pa
ལག་རྩལ་གྱི	skillful	lag rtsal gyi
ལག་རྩལ་གྱི་སྤུས་ཚད	craftsmanship	lag rtsal gyi spus tshad
ལག་རྩལ་ཅན	skillful hand, artful, skilled	lag rtsal can
ལག་རྩལ་ཅན་གྱི་བཟོ་པ	skilled worker	lag rtsal can gyi bzo pa
ལག་རྩལ་མི་སྣ	skilled worker, technician, craftsman	lag rtsal mi sna
ལག་རྩལ་མི་སྣའི་ལས་རོགས	assistant, helper	lag rtsal mi sna'i las rogs
ལག་རྩལ་མེད་པ	inapt 2651	lag rtsal med pa
ལག་རྩལ་མཛེས་རིག	industrial arts	lag rtsal mdzes rig
ལག་རྩལ་ཞིང་ལས	agricultural technology	lag rtsal zhing las
ལག་རྩལ་བཟོ་པའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	technical school	lag rtsal bzo pa'i slob grwa
ལག་རྩལ་ལས་མི	skilled worker, technician, craftsman	lag rtsal las mi
ལག་རྩལ་སློབ་གྲྭ	technical school	lag rtsal slob grwa
ལག་རྩལ་གསར་བཅོས	technical innovation	lag rtsal gsar bcos
ལག་རྩལ་གསར་བརྗེ	technical revolution	lag rtsal gsar brje
ལག་རྩིས	calculating/ counting [on the fingers/ w the hands], palmistry	lag rtsis
ལག་རྩེད་སྤོ་ལོ	basketball	lag rtsed spo lo
ལག་ཚབ	1) lag pa'i tshab; 2) helper skyin tshab (/ work exchange/ substitute/ given in repayment	lag tshab
ལག་ཚིགས	wrist, joints of the hand/ arm	lag tshigs
ལག་ཚེམ	'phrul 'khor sogs la ma brten par lag pas rgyag pa'i tshem bu	lag tshem
ལག་མཛོད	box	lag mdzod
ལག་འཛངས	lag tu rgyu chas sogs dkon po chags pa,//deng skabs phran la dngul lag 'dzangs chen po 'dug	lag 'dzangs
ལག་འཛིང	face to face/ hand to hand combat	lag 'dzing
ལག་འཛིང་གཏོང	engage in face to face/ hand to hand combat	lag 'dzing gtong
ལག་འཛིང་བྱས་པ	to commit an affray, brawl	lag 'dzing byas pa
ལག་འཛིངས	face to face/ hand to hand combat	lag 'dzings
ལག་འཛིངས་གཏོང	engage in face to face/ hand to hand combat	lag 'dzings gtong
ལག་འཛིན	receipt, acknowledgement	lag 'dzin
ལག་འཛིན་མ	bride, wife	lag 'dzin ma
ལག་འཛུགས	planting by hand	lag 'dzugs
ལག་འཛུགས་འདེབས	plant by hand	lag 'dzugs 'debs
ལག་འཛུགས་བྱེད	plant by hand	lag 'dzugs byed
ལག་བརྫེས	lag pa'i phu thung yar bsdogs pa	lag brdzes
ལག་ཝར	excellent	lag war
ལག་ཞ	lag pa la skyon shor ba	lag zha
ལག་ཞར	having only one hand	lag zhar
ལག་ཞོར	ched du ma yin par lag pa'i zhar zhor du khyer song ba	lag zhor
ལག་བཞག	work really done 1self [kha thog lag bzhag //de ltar 'phral du lag bzhag yod pa gyis]	lag bzhag
ལག་བཞུ	lantern, flashlight	lag bzhu
ལག་ཟད་དུ་གཏོང	abandon, give up, throw away, ruin	lag zad du gtong
ལག་ཟད་དཔུང་ཐུག	have exhausted 1's resources, at the end of 1's rope	lag zad dpung thug
ལག་ཟན	milker	lag zan
ལག་ཟིན	holding in 1's hand, 1st hand knowledge	lag zin
ལག་ཟིན་ཐུབ་པ	tangible	lag zin thub pa
ལག་ཟིན་མིག་མཐོང	[hold in 1's hand &] actually see	lag zin mig mthong
ལག་ཟེར་གྱག་པ	torture of red hot tacks into the fingers	lag zer gyag pa
ལག་གཟུགས	balustrade, banister, railing	lag gzugs
ལག་གཟུང	1) door bolt opening and shutting handle; 2) bannister	lag gzung
ལག་གཟེར་རྒྱག་པ	rkang lag gi sha sen bar du smyug gzer 'dzud pa punishment	lag gzer rgyag pa
ལག་གཟོང	stone-cutter's tool	lag gzong
ལག་བཟང	Subahu	lag bzang
ལག་བཟང་མ	celestial courtesan	lag bzang ma
ལག་བཟངས	Subahu, important monk follower of the Buddha	lag bzangs
ལག་བཟངས་ཀྱི་ཞུས་པའི་མདོ	subahu pariprccha sutra	lag bzangs kyi zhus pa'i mdo
ལག་བཟེད	hand basin	lag bzed
ལག་བཟོ	hand made	lag bzo
ལག་བཟོ་བ	hand made	lag bzo ba
ལག་བཟོས	hand made	lag bzos
ལག་བཟོས་དངོས་ཆས	hand made/ handicraft products	lag bzos dngos chas
ལག་བཟོས་དངོས་པོ	artefact	lag bzos dngos po
ལག་བཟོས་ཐོན་རྫས	hand made/ handicraft products	lag bzos thon rdzas
ལག་བཟོས་མཛེས་རིག་ཐོན་རྫས	hand made/ handicraft products	lag bzos mdzes rig thon rdzas
ལག་འོག	rang gis bkod gtong byed yul	lag 'og
ལག་ཡངས	gtong phod,//gzhan gyi rgyu nor lag yangs bed spyod ma byed	lag yangs
ལག་ཡངས་དང་ལྡན་པ	generous	lag yangs dang ldan pa
ལག་ཡར	'bri yar ma'i ming	lag yar
ལག་ཡུ	fore arm	lag yu
ལག་ཡོད	1) at hand; 2) courageous; 3) net/ take home	lag yod
ལག་ཡོད་ཚོང་ཟོག	merchandise in stock	lag yod tshong zog
ལག་ཡོད་ཡོང་བབ	net income, takehome pay	lag yod yong bab
ལག་ཡོད་ཡོང་འབབ	come to hand lag g.yas - right hand lag g.yas khu tshur - fist of right hand lag g.yug - swing/ wave the hands lag g.yug byed - swing/ wave the hands lag g.yug byed pa - wave lag g.yug 'bar mdel - ...	lag yod yong 'bab
ལག་རས	handkerchief, napkin, bathing towel	lag ras
ལག་རིང	demon who measured lances with shenrab	lag ring
ལག་རིལ	cripple, armless	lag ril
ལག་རིས	1) lines on the hand; 2) work's result	lag ris
ལག་རིས་བརྟག་ཐབས	palmistry	lag ris brtag thabs
ལག་རུབ	many hands gathered dpung rod	lag rub
ལག་ལག་བཅངས་སུ་གཏོད་པ	that delivers [the buddha] into the palm of one's hand	lag lag bcangs su gtod pa
ལག་ལན	rdung rdeg gi ya lan,//kha lan dang lag lan sprod pa	lag lan
ལག་ལས	hand/ manual work	lag las
ལག་ལས་སྐྱེས	king	lag las skyes
ལག་ལེན	procedure, application, handling; ritualistic procedures	lag len
ལག་ལེན་འཁྱེར་བ	implement, undertake	lag len 'khyer ba
ལག་ལེན་གྱི	practical	lag len gyi
ལག་ལེན་གྱི་རམ་གཞག	practical theory	lag len gyi ram gzhag
ལག་ལེན་གྱིས	practice!	lag len gyis
ལག་ལེན་དངོས	actual practice, practical	lag len dngos
ལག་ལེན་དངོས་ཀྱི་དོན་སྙིང	practical significance lag len gces bsdus kun gsal snang mdzod - {lag len gces bsdus kun gsal snang mdzod}	lag len dngos kyi don snying
ལག་ལེན་བསྟར	[put into] practice, implement, carry out	lag len bstar
ལག་ལེན་བསྟར་བ	work really done 1self 2652	lag len bstar ba
ལག་ལེན་དུ་བྱེད	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len du byed
ལག་ལེན་དུ་བྱེད་པ	put into effect	lag len du byed pa
ལག་ལེན་དུ་མཛད	practiced	lag len du mdzad
ལག་ལེན་དོན་འགེལ	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len don 'gel
ལག་ལེན་དོན་འགེལ་བ	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len don 'gel ba
ལག་ལེན་དོན་འགེལ་བྱེད	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len don 'gel byed
ལག་ལེན་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སོང་ནས	what they actually do thus contradict	lag len phyin ci log tu song nas
ལག་ལེན་བྱེད	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len byed
ལག་ལེན་མན་ངག་གི་ཆིངས	[among the chings lnga], lag tu len tshul gdams ngag gi sa bcad chings	lag len man ngag gi chings
ལག་ལེན་ཡང་དག་བསྟར་བ	work really done 1self	lag len yang dag bstar ba
ལག་ལེན་ལ་ཐེབས་པ	{lag len la ci thebs byed 'tshal} put it into practice the best you can	lag len la thebs pa
ལག་ལེན་ལག་བསྟར	tradition, custom, grasp w the hand, engage in, [put into practice, application, what 1 does, rubrics	lag len lag bstar
ལག་ལེན་ལག་བསྟར་བྱེད	[put into] practice, take in hand, engage in, implement, carry out	lag len lag bstar byed
ལག་ལེན་ལྷོད་མེད	unremitting engagement/ application/ practice	lag len lhod med
ལག་ཤུགས	glove	lag shugs
ལག་ཤུབས	gloves, mitlens; gloves, mittens	lag shubs
ལག་ཤེས	craft, handicraft	lag shes
ལག་ཤེས་པ	craftsman	lag shes pa
ལག་ཤེས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	handicraft center or factory	lag shes bzo grwa
ལག་ཤེས་བཟོ་ལས	hand made	lag shes bzo las
ལག་ཤོགས	gtong phod	lag shogs
ལག་གཤོར་རྩིས་སྤྲོད	grain etc. lag thog tu bshar nas rtsis sprod byed pa	lag gshor rtsis sprod
ལག་བཤད	in arguing clap the front of 1 palm and back of the other w angry expression	lag bshad
ལག་སག	1) rdeg rdung ngam lag 'gyogs skyen po; 2) gzhan la lag pas rdung lang shor ba	lag sag
ལག་སུག	lag pas mngon chung gi brda gtong ba	lag sug
ལག་སེན	finger nails	lag sen
ལག་སོག	phyogs gcig la 'chang gzung yod pa'i sog le	lag sog
ལག་སོན	acquisition, has come to hand	lag son
ལག་སོན་དུ	to/ in/ on hand	lag son du
ལག་སོན་དུ་བྱུག	it came to hand, [they] got it	lag son du byug
ལག་སོར	1) fingers [rang gi lag sor grangs 'dren bzhin, bya 'os rnam grangs blo la nges]; 2) rgyu skar lha mtshams	lag sor
ལག་སླེལ	small basket	lag slel
ལག་སློག	return good and bad	lag slog
ལག་གསག	1) rdeg rdung ngam lag 'gyogs skyen po [quick dexterous]; 2) strike another w the hands	lag gsag
ལག་གསར་པ	novice, beginner, rookie	lag gsar pa
ལག་གསོས	place cattle stay su nyar zhing gso ba'am after a short time in 1's own house gso ba	lag gsos
ལགས	1) is (H; 2) (H addressing particle; 3) yes [sir]	lags
ལགས་ང་བདེ་པོ	thank you	lags nga bde po
ལགས་ང་བདེ་པོ་ཡོད	I am well	lags nga bde po yod
ལགས་དག	sir, it is so	lags dag
ལགས་ན	this being so	lags na
ལགས་པ	to be, good	lags pa
ལགས་པར་གསུངས་པ	excellent words	lags par gsungs pa
ལགས་མ་ལགས	yes or no	lags ma lags
ལགས་མོ	clean	lags mo
ལགས་མོད་དམ	is it not	lags mod dam
ལགས་རེད	yes	lags red
ལགས་ལགས་སི	all right, very well	lags lags si
ལགས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཡོད	yes we know	lags shes kyi yod
ལགས་སོ	all right, very well	lags so
ལང	1) [tha mi dad pa langs pa, lang ba, longs],, [a]rise, get/ stand up, occur, come to be, get started; 2) [langs pa, lang ba],, daybreak; 3) [longs pa, lang ba],, be complete; 4) cow, ox	lang
ལང་ཀ	ceylon	lang ka
ལང་ཀ་མགྲིན་བཅུ	{lang ka mgrin bcu [king of the Rakshasas]	lang ka mgrin bcu
ལང་ཀ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen Lanka; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	lang ka bcu drug
ལང་ཀ་པུ་རི	Shri Lanka	lang ka pu ri
ལང་ཀའི་བདག་པོ	king of ceylon, guardian of south-western quarter	lang ka'i bdag po
ལང་ཀའི་བདག་པོ་བ	Lord of Lanka, King of Ceylon, guardian of the SW quarter	lang ka'i bdag po ba
ལང་ཀར་གཤེགས་པ	descent into Lanka sutra {lang kar gshegs pa'i mdo} Lankavatara Sutra	lang kar gshegs pa
ལང་ཀར་གཤེགས་པ་རྒྱ་ནག་འགྱུར	The Lankavatara Sutra translated from Chinese lang kar gshegs pa rin po che'i mdo las	lang kar gshegs pa rgya nag 'gyur
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་གསུང་གི་སྙིང་པོ	the Lankavatara Sutra, the essence of all the speech of the buddhas lang kar gshegs pa'i theg pa chen po'i	sangs rgyas thams cad kyi gsung gi snying po
ལང་ཀར་གཤེགས་པའི་མདོ	Lankavatara Sutra; Skt. Lankavatara-sutra, T 107	lang kar gshegs pa'i mdo
ལང་རྐྱེན	newly arisen condition/ situation	lang rkyen
ལང་སྐྱོན་ཆེ	that is very bad	lang skyon che
ལང་བསྐྱར	afresh	lang bskyar
ལང་གྲོ་དཀོན་མཆོག་འབྱུང་གནས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples lang gro dkon mchog 'byung gnas Könchok Jungney of Langdro. At first a minister at the court of Trisong Deutsen, he later became one of Padmasambhava's close dis...	lang gro dkon mchog 'byung gnas
ལང་གྲོ་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Translator from Langdro. One of the 25 disciples of Guru Rinpoche	lang gro lo tsa ba
ལང་འགྲོ་ལོ་ཙ་བ	Langdro Lotsawa, one	lang 'gro lo tsa ba
ཨོཕ༹་གུརུ་པདམསམབྷབ༹འས་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five main disciples 2653	of Guru Padmasambhava's twenty
ལང་ངེ་ལིང་ངེ	drifting, sinuous, swinging, swaying	lang nge ling nge
ལང་ངེ་ལོང་ངེ	weak, sluggish, languid, irregular	lang nge long nge
ལང་ཏང	species of hyoscyamus	lang tang
ལང་སྟེ་སྟན་སྟོབ	make a donation	lang ste stan stob
ལང་སྟེ་སྟན་སྟོབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	rising to offer one's own seat	lang ste stan stob par byed pa
ལང་ཐང་རྩེ	hyoscyamus niger l.	lang thang rtse
ལང་དང་པོ	young girl, virgin	lang dang po
ལང་བདེ	dainty hands	lang bde
ལང་བ	to arise, get up	lang ba
ལང་བའི་མོད	at the very moment of rising	lang ba'i mod
ལང་བར་མི་འཁྱུད	unable to rise (from bed)	lang bar mi 'khyud
ལང་མ་ཐག་པ	immediately upon their emergence	lang ma thag pa
ལང་མ་ཡིན	not repeat here	lang ma yin
ལང་མ་ལིང	[about bird] sweeps and soars	lang ma ling
ལང་མ་ལིང་མ	in groups and groups	lang ma ling ma
ལང་མ་ལོང་མ	weak, sluggish, languid, irregular	lang ma long ma
ལང་ཙང	Langtsang	lang tsang
ལང་ཚོ	youth (25-36); youth, health, strength, beauty, life, lovely, splendor; young	lang tsho
ལང་ཚོ་རྒྱས	be young/ healthy, in the full bloom of youth lang tsho rgyas kyang zhi zhing dul ba though full of youth, he was peaceful and subdued	lang tsho rgyas
ལང་ཚོ་རྒྱས་པ	the full bloom of youth	lang tsho rgyas pa
ལང་ཚོ་རྒྱས་པས	grown up to adolescence	lang tsho rgyas pas
ལང་ཚོ་ཅན	adolescent, youthful	lang tsho can
ལང་ཚོ་ཅན་མ	youthful maiden, bride	lang tsho can ma
ལང་ཚོ་བརྟན་བྱེད	the preserver of youth, Myrobalan emblica, skyu ru ra tree	lang tsho brtan byed
སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect and youthful strength, wealth, and enjoyments	sum tshogs pa
ལང་ཚོ་དང་པོ	girl just entering into youth	lang tsho dang po
ལང་ཚོ་དར	youthfulness	lang tsho dar
ལང་ཚོ་དར་བ	maturity, adult [vigor]	lang tsho dar ba
ལང་ཚོ་དར་བ་ཞིག་བྱུང	regain 1's health	lang tsho dar ba zhig byung
ལང་ཚོ་དར་བ་ཞིག་བྱུང་ཞིང	help me regain my health	lang tsho dar ba zhig byung zhing
ལང་ཚོ་དར་ལ་བབ་པ	reach maturity, adult [vigor]	lang tsho dar la bab pa
ལང་ཚོ་དར་ལ་བབས	x {skyes nas lang tsho dar la babs tshe} at once,while you are still young	lang tsho dar la babs
ལང་ཚོ་ལྡན	adolescent	lang tsho ldan
ལང་ཚོ་ལྡན་པ	youthful	lang tsho ldan pa
ལང་ཚོ་མ	maiden	lang tsho ma
ལང་ཚོ་མྱུར་དུ་རྒས	youth turns soon to age	lang tsho myur du rgas
ལང་ཚོ་སྨིན	reach maturity	lang tsho smin
ལང་ཚོ་ཡོལ	my life slips away, {yol tshe} when my youth is past; life slips away	lang tsho yol
ལང་ཚོ་ཡོལ་བ	[my] life slips away, youth is past, old person, age, grow old	lang tsho yol ba
ལང་ཚོ་ལོན་པ	womanhood	lang tsho lon pa
ལང་ཚོའི་དུས	the time of youth	lang tsho'i dus
ལང་ཚོའི་མཚན་མ	heaving breast of a maiden, breasts	lang tsho'i mtshan ma
ལང་བཞིན་པ	rising, standing	lang bzhin pa
ལང་ཟང་ལྒ་བྲག	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	lang zang lga brag
ལང་ལབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་རྡོ་རྗེ	13th cent Langlap Changchup Dorje, a siddha of Vajra Kilaya	lang lab byang chub rdo rje
ལང་ལིང	hanging, swaying/ drifting; gently drifting; drifting [clouds], sinuosity [movement of ripples on water]. Syn {g.yo ba'i nyams 'gyur zhig} swinging {ling ling} gently drifting	lang ling
ལང་ལིང་བ	drifting, sinuous, swinging	lang ling ba
ལང་ལོང	languid, irregularly assembling, sluggish, languid	lang long
ལང་ལོང་པོ	weak, sluggish, languid	lang long po
ལང་ཤོར	bad habit, stubbornness, obstinacy, indulgence, spoiled, pampered	lang shor
ལང་ཤོར་གཏོང	indulge, spoil, pamper	lang shor gtong
ལང་ཤོར་དན་བ	indulge	lang shor dan ba
ལང་ཤོར་དུ་གཏོང	indulge, spoil, pamper	lang shor du gtong
ལང་གཤེགས	Lankavatara sutra	lang gshegs
ལང་སུ་ཤོར	spoil, pamper	lang su shor
ལངས་རྐྱེན	cause [of disturbance/ disaster etc]	langs rkyen
ལངས་ཁ	the eve of/ time just before something happens	langs kha
ལངས་ཏེ་སྡོད་པ	get up and stand	langs te sdod pa
ལངས་སྡོད་པ	stand	langs sdod pa
ལངས་པ	appear, arise, manifest, stand, wells up, comes up and uplifts [p lang ba] 2654	langs pa
ལངས་པ་འབབས	to flow into	langs pa 'babs
ལངས་པ་རེད	it happened	langs pa red
ལངས་པའི་ཚོད	measure of sufficiency, being just what is wanted	langs pa'i tshod
ལངས་པར་སྔ་བ	gets up early	langs par snga ba
ལངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ	primordial contact with total richness and all its satisfactions	langs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku
ལངས་ཕྱོགས	1) in the case of essential meaning recognizing and resolving way of grasping the topic/ application; 2) gral rim gyi langs phyogs; 3) position	langs phyogs
ལངས་ཕྱོགས་དྲང་བདེན	just position/ stand	langs phyogs drang bden
ལངས་ཕྱོགས་བཟུང	take a position/ stand	langs phyogs bzung
ལངས་མི་ནུས་པ	unable to get out of bed	langs mi nus pa
ལངས་ཚོ	youthful	langs tsho
ལངས་ཟིན་པ	arose, stood	langs zin pa
ལངས་གཟུགས	three dimensional object	langs gzugs
ལངས་ལུགས	manner of rising	langs lugs
ལངས་ཤོར	bad habit, stubbornness, obstinacy, indulgence, spoiled, pampered	langs shor
ལངས་ཤོར་གཏོང	indulge, spoil, pamper	langs shor gtong
ལངས་ཤོར་དན་བ	indulge	langs shor dan ba
ལངས་ཤོར་དུ་གཏོང	indulge, spoil, pamper	langs shor du gtong
ལངས་ས	place something originated	langs sa
ལངས་སོ	he has arisen	langs so
ལད་ཀ	work	lad ka
ལད་འགྲོས	imitate the way someone walks	lad 'gros
ལད་པ	(tha mi dad pa weak, faint, exhausted, blunt, dull, damaged, weak, feeble	lad pa
ལད་པོ	wandering or spyod pa nyams pa'i mi,//mi lad po rnams la slob gso gtong ba, loafer, idler	lad po
ལད་མོ	imitation	lad mo
ལད་མོ་བདག་གི་ས	repeat after me	lad mo bdag gi sa
ལད་མོ་བྱས	emulate	lad mo byas
ལད་མོ་བྱེད	imitate, repeat, copy [dge rgan gyi lad mo byed: imitate the teacher]	lad mo byed
ལད་མོ་བྱེད་པ	imitate, mimic, say after another	lad mo byed pa
ལད་མོ་བྱེད་པ་ཡིན	to imitate	lad mo byed pa yin
ལད་མོ་མ་བྱེད	don't behave like	lad mo ma byed
ལད་མོ་ཟློ་བ	to imitate	lad mo zlo ba
ལད་དམར	red-handed, executioner, hangman	lad dmar
ལད་ཟློས	imitation/ repetition of another's actions	lad zlos
ལད་ཟློས་བྱེད	imitate, repeat, copy	lad zlos byed
ལད་ཟློས་བྱེད་པ	imitate	lad zlos byed pa
ལད་བཟོ	reproduction, copy	lad bzo
ལད་བཟོ་བྱེད	reproduce, copy	lad bzo byed
ལད་སོད	imitation	lad sod
ལད་སོད་ཙམ	mere imitating	lad sod tsam
ལན	return [of a favor]; answer, reply, because of, due to, blame, fault, times [Syn. {theng} as in many times]; gang	lan
གིས་ལན་ན	Why?	gis lan na
ལན་ཀ་བརྩེགས	Lanka Mound; charnel ground	lan ka brtsegs
ལན་ཀན	railing, bannister	lan kan
ལན་ཀའོ་པད་ཙལ	CH lan ka'o pad tsal vegetable	lan ka'o pad tsal
ལན་ཀྲང	company commander	lan krang
ལན་ཀྲོའུ	Lanchow	lan kro'u
ལན་རྐྱེན	ground of harm and faults	lan rkyen
ལན་སྐུར	send a message/ answer	lan skur
ལན་སྐྱར	retribution, return	lan skyar
ལན་སྐྱེལ	deliver a message/ answer	lan skyel
ལན་སྐྱེལ་མཁན	informer, messenger	lan skyel mkhan
ལན་སྐྱེལ་བ	deliver a message/ answer	lan skyel ba
ལན་བསྐུར	send a reply	lan bskur
ལན་བསྐུར་བ	send a reply	lan bskur ba
ལན་ཁག	remorse for faults etc coming fundamental condition	lan khag
ལན་ཁན	railing, fence, enclosures, SA pu shu, stegs bu, mda' yab	lan khan
ལན་གུས	foreigner	lan gus
ལན་གྱོག	vulg. for lan chags	lan gyog
ལན་གྲངས	count/number of times	lan grangs
ལན་གྲངས་དུ་མར	multiplied number, many times	lan grangs du mar
ལན་གྲངས་མང	a few times	lan grangs mang
ལན་གྲངས་མང་པོའི་བར་དུ	many times	lan grangs mang po'i bar du
ལན་གྲངས་གཞན་ལ་མྱོང་འགྱུར	to be experienced in other lifetimes than the present or the following	lan grangs gzhan la myong 'gyur
ལན་གླན	1) answer a question; 2) give good and bad replies	lan glan
ལན་གློན	1) answer a question; 2) give good and bad replies	lan glon
ལན་དགུ	nine times	lan dgu
ལན་དགུ་ཆད་མཚུད	repeated tries, not giving up easily, w great patience, breaking and joining 9 times	lan dgu chad mtshud
ལན་འགའ	some times	lan 'ga'
ལན་འགའ་ཞིག	sometimes	lan 'ga' zhig
ལན་འགའ་ཡང་མེད	not a single time, never	lan 'ga' yang med
ལན་འགར	a few times	lan 'gar
ལན་རྒྱག	answer, reply, respond	lan rgyag
ལན་རྒྱག་པ	answer, reply	lan rgyag pa
ལན་རྒྱབ	answer, reply, respond	lan rgyab
ལན་རྒྱབ་པ	to answer	lan rgyab pa
ལན་ལྒ་ལྟག་པ	give a reply	lan lga ltag pa
ལན་སྒྲ	echo	lan sgra
ལན་བརྒྱབ་པ	to answer	lan brgyab pa
ལན་མངོན་པར་མི་འདོད་པ	not hoping for reward 2655	lan mngon par mi 'dod pa
ལན་ཅི་ཙམ	how many times	lan ci tsam
ལན་ཅིག	only 1, 1 time	lan cig
ལན་ཅིག་སྐྱེ	raven	lan cig skye
ལན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས	crow (that gives birth to its young only once)	lan cig skyes
ལན་ཅིག་གི་ཚེ	single lifetime	lan cig gi tshe
ལན་ཅིག་དུས	decisive	lan cig dus
ལན་ཅིག་ཕིར་འོང་བ	once-returner (1 of lam bzhi)	lan cig phir 'ong ba
ལན་ཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང	once-returner lan cig phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu la gnas pa abide in the fruition of being a oncereturner lan cig phyir 'ong gi 'bras bu la gnas pa see. {phyir 'ong gi 'bras gnas} lan cig phyir 'ong gi...	lan cig phyir 'ong
ལན་ཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང་བ	once-returner; being tied to a single rebirth	lan cig phyir 'ong ba
ལན་ཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང་འབྲས་གནས	abide in the fruition of being a once returner lan cig phyir 'ong 'ong gi 'bras bu la zhugs	lan cig phyir 'ong 'bras gnas
ལན་ཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང་འོང་བ	once-returner	lan cig phyir 'ong 'ong ba
ལན་ཅིག་མ་ཡིན	not only once	lan cig ma yin
ལན་ཅིག་མིན་པར	repeatedly, not only once	lan cig min par
ལན་གཅིག	one time, once	lan gcig
ལན་གཅིག་ཅེས	once, equally, all at once	lan gcig ces
ལན་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང	SA lan cig phyir 'ong	lan gcig phyir 'ong
ལན་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང་བ	being tied to a single rebirth	lan gcig phyir 'ong ba
ལན་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང་བའི་འབྲས་བུས	the fruition of being a once-returner	lan gcig phyir 'ong ba'i 'bras bus
ལན་གཅིག་མ་ཡིན་པ	not only once	lan gcig ma yin pa
ལན་གཅིག་མ་ཡིན་པར	not only once	lan gcig ma yin par
ལན་གཅིག་འོང་བ	once returner	lan gcig 'ong ba
ལན་གཅིག་ཡིན	irreversible	lan gcig yin
ལན་བཅུ	ten times	lan bcu
ལན་ཆགས	retribution (answer indebtedness), karmic debts due to past actions, payment	lan chags
ལན་ཆགས་ཀྱི་མགྲོན	guests who are karmic creditors	lan chags kyi mgron
ལན་ཆགས་འདེད་པ	{srog gi lan chags 'ded pa yin} retaliation for the taking of life has come to pass	lan chags 'ded pa
ལན་ཆགས་པོ	creditor	lan chags po
ལན་ཆགས་བུ་ལོན	previously accumulated bad karmic debt which has to be paid off/ atoned for	lan chags bu lon
ལན་ཆགས་བུ་ལོན་བྱད་བ	clear off a karmic debt	lan chags bu lon byad ba
ལན་ཆགས་བྱད་བ	to clear off a karmic debt	lan chags byad ba
ལན་ཆིའུ	basketball	lan chi'u
ལན་ཆིའུ་པོ་ལོ	basketball	lan chi'u po lo
ལན་ཆིའུ་སྤོ་ལོ	basketball	lan chi'u spo lo
ལན་འཆོལ་བ	erroneous answer	lan 'chol ba
ལན་ཇི་ཙམ	as many times as	lan ji tsam
ལན་འཇལ	repay (kindness	lan 'jal
ལན་འཇལ་བ	reply, return, retaliate, repay, reciprocate	lan 'jal ba
ལན་གཉིས	twice	lan gnyis
ལན་ཏ་ཀ	a drug	lan ta ka
ལན་གཏོང	send a message/ answer	lan gtong
ལན་གཏོར	by monks/ dharma practitioners lan chags bu lon sbyong ched du gtong ba'i torma	lan gtor
ལན་བཏབ	answer	lan btab
ལན་ལྟོས	imitation	lan ltos
ལན་ལྟོས་བྱེད	imitate, copy	lan ltos byed
ལན་སྟེར	give a reply	lan ster
ལན་ཐེབས་པ	give a suitable reply	lan thebs pa
ལན་ཐོབ	get a reply	lan thob
ལན་དང་རྣམ་སྨིན་ལ་མི་རེ་བ	not hope for ripening and reward	lan dang rnam smin la mi re ba
ལན་དུ	in answer/ response	lan du
ལན་དུ་འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས	In answer, I sang this	lan du 'di skad ces smras
ལན་དུ་ཕན་པར་བྱེད་པ	beneficial consequences	lan du phan par byed pa
ལན་དུ་མ	many times	lan du ma
ལན་དུ་མར	many times	lan du mar
ལན་དེ་རང་ལ་འཁོར་བ་ཡིན	the blame is turned on you (oneself, once	lan de rang la 'khor ba yin
ལན་དྲང་པོར་སྨྲས་པ	answered directly	lan drang por smras pa
ལན་དྲུག་གི་བར་དུ་བྱུང	six times this happened	lan drug gi bar du byung
ལན་གདབ་པ	lan 'debs pa'i ma ongs pa. [mss]	lan gdab pa
ལན་བདུན་བར	seven times	lan bdun bar
ལན་འདེབས	to answer, reply, respond	lan 'debs
ལན་འདེབས་པ	answer, reply, respond, return	lan 'debs pa
ལན་འདེབས་པར	able to solve	lan 'debs par
ལན་འདེབས་བྱེད	answer, reply, respond	lan 'debs byed
ལན་ལྡོག	return a kindness	lan ldog
ལན་ལྡོག་བྱེད	answer, reply, respond	lan ldog byed
ལན་ལྡོན	answer [question], repay [kindness]	lan ldon
ལན་ལྡོན་པ	reply, give an answer	lan ldon pa
ལན་པ	1) rkyen rtsa [lo tog grung po mi skye ba'i lan pa btsa' sad than gsum la thug //nyi 'od 'grib pa'i lan pa sprin nag 'thibs pa la thug]; 2) nyes pa dang, khag [sta re rdo la phog pa'i lan pa shing ...	lan pa
ལན་པ་སྤྱིལ་བུ	place in c. tibet	lan pa spyil bu
ལན་པོ	answer, repay good and bad, suitable, appropriate	lan po
ལན་སྤྲད་པ	to announce	lan sprad pa
ལན་སྤྲོད	answer, reply, respond	lan sprod
ལན་སྤྲོད་པ	1) deliver a message/ answer [khungs so sor lan sprod pa]; 2) repay good and bad	lan sprod pa
ལན་ཕྲན	braid of hair, answer, reply, times	lan phran
ལན་འཕྲིན	ngag thog nas bskur ba'i lan	lan 'phrin
ལན་བུ	braid, plait, tress of hair	lan bu
ལན་བུ་ཅན	1 w braids/ tresses, woman	lan bu can
ལན་བུ་མ	woman	lan bu ma
ལན་བོན	[arch] answer, reply	lan bon
ལན་བྱེད	reply	lan byed
ལན་བྱེད་པ	reply, return, retaliate, repay	lan byed pa
ལན་བླན	answer, reply	lan blan
ལན་བླན་པ	give a reply 2656	lan blan pa
ལན་མང་དུ	many times. (R75: 134). See lan. [mss]	lan mang du
ལན་མང་པོ	many times	lan mang po
ལན་མི་རེ	not hoping for reward	lan mi re
ལན་མི་རེ་བ་མཚུངས་པ་ཉིད	as if not hoping for a reward	lan mi re ba mtshungs pa nyid
ལན་མེད	ungrateful	lan med
ལན་སྨྲ	give a reply	lan smra
ལན་སྨྲས་པ	expressed in reply, replied	lan smras pa
ལན་ཙ་བ	salty	lan tsa ba
ལན་ཙྭ	salt	lan tswa
ལན་ཙྭའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	salt ocean	lan tswa'i rgya mtsho
ལན་ཙྭའི་བཙབས	[arch] lan tsva'i rtsab mo ste, kha cig pi pi ling dkar po'i rtsab mo lan tsva can	lan tswa'i btsabs
ལན་ཙར	1) braids/ tresses' sne mo'i tsar phon; 2) woman's braids/ tresses	lan tsar
ལན་རྩ	rkyen rtsa	lan rtsa
ལན་ཚ	lan tsha characters	lan tsha
ལན་ཚ་བ	salty	lan tsha ba
ལན་ཚབ༹	rock salt	lan tshva
ལན་ཚྭ	salt	lan tshwa
ལན་ཚྭ་ཆུ	salt water	lan tshwa chu
ལན་ཚྭ་བ	salty {ro drug}	lan tshwa ba
ལན་ཚའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	salty ocean [which surrounds the 4 continents]	lan tsha'i rgya mtsho
ལན་ཚབ༹འི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the salty ocean	lan tshva'i rgya mtsho
ལན་ཚྭའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	the salty ocean	lan tshwa'i rgya mtsho
ལན་ཚྭའི་སྨན	medicines from mineral salts	lan tshwa'i sman
ལན་ཚར	SA skra lhas pa	lan tshar
ལན་ཛ	SA lan tsha	lan dza
ལན་ཡན	lad zlos	lan yan
ལན་རེ	each time	lan re
ལན་རེ་བ་མེད	w/o hope of reward	lan re ba med
ལན་རེ་བ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	[have] hope of reward	lan re ba yid la byed pa
ལན་རེ་རེ	at each time, every time	lan re re
ལན་རེ་ལན་གཉིས	once or twice	lan re lan gnyis
ལན་ལ་མི་ལྟ་བ	not considering the consequences	lan la mi lta ba
ལན་ལ་རེ་བ	hope for a reward	lan la re ba
ལན་ལོན	SA lan ldon	lan lon
ལན་བཤད་པ	answer	lan bshad pa
ལན་སློག	1) give an answer; 2) repay good and bad	lan slog
ལན་སློག་པ	to answer, reply	lan slog pa
ལན་གསུམ་བསྐོར་བ་བྱས་ནས	after three further lifetimes	lan gsum bskor ba byas nas
ལན་གསོལ	(h) To give an answer	lan gsol
ལན་གསོལ་བ	made this answer	lan gsol ba
ལབ	say, tell, talk, speak, turnip, radish	lab
ལབ་ཀྱི་སྒྲོན་མ	Lapkyi Drönma, a dakini	lab kyi sgron ma
ལབ་ག	talk	lab ga
ལབ་གྲོགས	companion, intimate friend	lab grogs
ལབ་གླེང	[topic of] discussion/ conversation, controversy, altercation	lab gleng
ལབ་སྒྲ	noise of tattle, talk	lab sgra
ལབ་ཅི་ཅི	greeting, call	lab ci ci
ལབ་ཅི་ཅི་བྱེད	call	lab ci ci byed
ལབ་ཅི་ཅི་བྱེད་པ	to greet, call	lab ci ci byed pa
ལབ་བཅོས	rkang 'bam gyi nad la bod la phug btsos te khu ba bsten nas bcos pa'i thabs shig	lab bcos
ལབ་འཆོལ	gnyid dus khungs med kyi skad cha shod pa'i bla 'chol	lab 'chol
ལབ་བརྗོད	lab rgyu,//bza' rgyu gla mgo las ma byung bar lab brjod gla spu las mang ba	lab brjod
ལབ་གཏོང་བ	talk, chat	lab gtong ba
ལབ་བདར	SA la bdar	lab bdar
ལབ་རྡར	la phug rdar byed metal tool w hole	lab rdar
ལབ་རྡོལ	say whatever comes out	lab rdol
ལབ་བརྡར	SA la bdar	lab brdar
ལབ་པ	{lab pa, lab pa, lab pa, lob} trans. v.; ft. of {lab pa}; to speak, talk, tell; pf. of {lab pa}	lab pa
ལབ་ཕིང	bean jelly	lab phing
ལབ་འཕྲོ	conversations are left unfinished	lab 'phro
ལབ་མི་ཐུབ	cannot speak	lab mi thub
ལབ་ཙམ་པ	speak while dreaming, be delirious	lab tsam pa
ལབ་རྩེ	heap of stones in which poles with little inscribed flags are pitched and gods are invoked to help travellers	lab rtse
ལབ་རྩེ་ལ	lab rtse pass	lab rtse la
ལབ་རྫས	cairn or votive pile on hilltop	lab rdzas
ལབ་གཞི	[topic of] discussion/ dispute, [cause of a] dispute/ controversy	lab gzhi
ལབ་བཞིན་པ	saying, speaking	lab bzhin pa
ལབ་ཟིན་པ	said, told	lab zin pa
ལབ་ཟླ	1) partner in conversation gtam lab grogs po; 2) ram 'degs pa, accompany	lab zla
ལབ་བཟང	good speech, eloquence	lab bzang
ལབ་ལབ	1) converse; 2) lkog nas zur za byed pa'i skad cha	lab lab
ལབ་ལབ་མང་པོ	chatter	lab lab mang po
ལབ་ལུང་ཁ་སོ	Lablung Khaso, in Domey	lab lung kha so
ལབ་ལེབ	flat	lab leb
ལབ་ལོབ	1) meaningless talk, idle gossip, chatter; 2) conversation; 3) swearing, cursing	lab lob
ལབ་ལོབ་གཏོང	swear, curse	lab lob gtong
ལབ་སོན	radish seed	lab son
ལམ་ཀ	road 2657	lam ka
ལམ་ཀ་ན	by the road side	lam ka na
ལམ་ཀར	on the way, along the road	lam kar
ལམ་ཀྱི་དབུ་མ	path Middle Way	lam kyi dbu ma
ལམ་ཀྱོག	winding road. Syn {kyog}	lam kyog
ལམ་དཀར་འཇམ་རྩའི་སྒྲོན་མ	the lamp of the white and smooth channel	lam dkar 'jam rtsa'i sgron ma
ལམ་བཀག	blockade	lam bkag
ལམ་བཀག་པ	blocking the path	lam bkag pa
ལམ་བཀག་བྱེད	blockade	lam bkag byed
ལམ་བཀྲིས	guided on the path, guide! on the path	lam bkris
ལམ་རྐྱང	right away, at once	lam rkyang
ལམ་རྐྱེན	lam gyi cha rkyen - the aspects of the path	lam rkyen
ལམ་རྐྱེན་སེལ་བ	clear away harm arising on the path	lam rkyen sel ba
ལམ་ལྐོག	secret road/ path	lam lkog
ལམ་སྐོར	wandering/ circuitous path	lam skor
ལམ་སྐོར་ལྔ	CHN lam skye ba dang rjes su mthun pa'i	lam skor lnga
ལམ་སྐྱེལ	[one who] sees someone off on the path	lam skyel
ལམ་བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་རིམ་པ་གཉིས	the generation and perfection phases	lam bskyed rdzogs rim pa gnyis
ལམ་ཁ	1) path/ road; 2) on the road	lam kha
ལམ་ཁ་གྱེན་ཐུར	path downward	lam kha gyen thur
ལམ་ཁ་དོག་པོ	narrow road/ path	lam kha dog po
ལམ་ཁ་བདེ་པོ	good/ pleasant path/ road	lam kha bde po
ལམ་ཁ་ན	on the road to	lam kha na
ལམ་ཁ་དབྲག	road which is branched into several paths lam kha dbrag lam ga gnyis gsum du gyes	lam kha dbrag
ལམ་ཁ་མང་པོ་འཛིམས་འདུས	crossroad	lam kha mang po 'dzims 'dus
ལམ་ཁག་ནོར་བ	to go astray	lam khag nor ba
ལམ་ཁར	by the road side	lam khar
ལམ་ཁར་ཐུག་བྱུང	two	lam khar thug byung
ལམ་ཁུག	solitary place on the path	lam khug
ལམ་ཁུག་པ	twist of a road	lam khug pa
ལམ་ཁྱེར	carry on along the path, daily practice; practice, application, proceed along the path, make [something] the path; proceed along the path, make [something] the path, practice, application	lam khyer
ལམ་ཁྱེར་དྲུག	sixfold application / taking as path	lam khyer drug
ལམ་ཁྱེར་སྤྱོད་པ	to utilize the conducts	lam khyer spyod pa
ལམ་ཁྱེར་བཞི	1) {theg pa lam khyer}. 2) {lha lam khyer} 3) snying po lam khyer} 4) {bslab bya lam khyer}	lam khyer bzhi
ལམ་ཁྱོག	crooked/ curving path/ road	lam khyog
ལམ་ཁྲིགས་ཆོད་ཐོད་གལ	the two paths of tregchö and th"gal	lam khrigs chod thod gal
ལམ་ཁྲིད	oral explanations for the practice	lam khrid
ལམ་ཁྲེགས་ཆོད་ཐོད་རྒལ་གཉིས	the two paths of tregchö and th"gal	lam khregs chod thod rgal gnyis
ལམ་མཁན	one who knows the way, guide, guide both in the ordinary and figurative senses	lam mkhan
ལམ་མཁྱེན་པ	1) lam rgyus yod pa; 2) knower of the path	lam mkhyen pa
ལམ་འཁེལ་རྫོང་གཞིས	lam kha chen po 'khel sa'i rdzong dang gzhis ka	lam 'khel rdzong gzhis
ལམ་འཁྱེར	bringing to the path	lam 'khyer
ལམ་ག	road, path	lam ga
ལམ་གུ་དོག	narrow path	lam gu dog
ལམ་གོལ	[blon po kha cig shing rta bde ba la zhon nas lam gol bar 'dong ba la sogs pa rmis so] strayings on the pathg go astray on/ mistake the path. phyogs su 'gro dus 'khyer rgyu'i bza' chas	lam gol
ལམ་གོལ་པ	go on the wrong way, go astray, mistake the right path	lam gol pa
ལམ་གོལ་བ	strayings/ go astray on the path	lam gol ba
ལམ་གོལ་བ་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་ཞུགས་པ	go completely astray on the path	lam gol ba la rab tu zhugs pa
ལམ་གྱི་སྐུ་གསུམ	path trikaya	lam gyi sku gsum
ལམ་གྱི་ཁེ་ཉེན	what is the right path, and what is the wrong	lam gyi khe nyen
ལམ་གྱི་དགག་བ	object of negation by the path	lam gyi dgag ba
ལམ་གྱི་དགག་བྱ	object of negation by the path TSE	lam gyi dgag bya
ལམ་གྱི་དགག་བྱ་གསུམ	three objects of negation by the path TSE lam gyi bgrod tshul zhib par bstan nas after detailing how to proceed	lam gyi dgag bya gsum
ལམ་གྱི་འགྲམ	roadside	lam gyi 'gram
ལམ་གྱི་རྒྱུད	continuum of the path GD	lam gyi rgyud
ལམ་གྱི་རྒྱུད་རྣམས	continua of the path	lam gyi rgyud rnams
ལམ་གྱི་རྒྱུན	continuity/ stream of the path	lam gyi rgyun
ལམ་གྱི་ངེས་འབྱུང་སྒྲུབ་པ	establish the renunciation of the path TSE	lam gyi nges 'byung sgrub pa
ལམ་གྱི་ངོ་བོ	the essence of the path TSE	lam gyi ngo bo
ལམ་གྱི་དངོས་གཞིར	main path	lam gyi dngos gzhir
ལམ་གྱི་སྔོན་འཀྲོ	the preliminaries for the path	lam gyi sngon 'kro
ལམ་གྱི་སྔོན་འགྲོ	preliminaries of the path	lam gyi sngon 'gro
ལམ་གྱི་ཆོས	the dharmas of the path	lam gyi chos
ལམ་གྱི་རྗེས་ཤེས	ensuing/ postmeditational knowledge of the path	lam gyi rjes shes
ལམ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	the essence of the path lam gyi snying po byang chub sems gnyis	lam gyi snying po
ཐེ་པཐ	the two types of bodhichitta	the path
ལམ་གྱི་རྟོགས	path realization	lam gyi rtogs
ལམ་གྱི་ཐེག་རིམ	the gradual vehicles of the path	lam gyi theg rim
ལམ་གྱི་མཐར་ཐུག	the ultimate part of the path	lam gyi mthar thug
ལམ་གྱི་གདན་པ	truth of path	lam gyi gdan pa
ལམ་གྱི་བདེན་པ	truth of the path	lam gyi bden pa
ལམ་གྱི་བདེན་པའི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	four aspects of the truth of the path	lam gyi bden pa'i rnam pa bzhi
ལམ་གྱི་འདམ་ག	the choice of the path	lam gyi 'dam ga
ལམ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ	sector of path, trajectory	lam gyi rnam pa
ལམ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད	all the aspects of the path	lam gyi rnam pa thams cad
ལམ་གྱི་རྣམ་བྱང	the complete purification of the path	lam gyi rnam byang
ལམ་གྱི་རྣམ་གཞག	presentation of the path	lam gyi rnam gzhag
ལམ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	path experiences, path phenomena	lam gyi snang ba
ལམ་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ	the things to be abandoned on the path TSE	lam gyi spang bya
ལམ་གྱི་སྤྱི་མཚན	lam/ rigs pa/ sgrub pa/ nges par 'byin pa bzhi	lam gyi spyi mtshan
ལམ་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	path mahamudra TSE	lam gyi phyag rgya chen po
ལམ་གྱི་ཕྲལ་ཤོར	temporary straying of the path	lam gyi phral shor
ལམ་གྱི་འཕྲལ་ཤོར	Temporary straying from the path	lam gyi 'phral shor
ལམ་གྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	particulars of the path	lam gyi bye brag
ལམ་གྱི་དབང	path-empowerment	lam gyi dbang
ལམ་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	fruition of the path	lam gyi 'bras bu
ལམ་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ་ཐམས་ཅད	the entire fruition of the path	lam gyi 'bras bu thams cad
ལམ་གྱི་དམིགས་པ	TSE	lam gyi dmigs pa
ལམ་གྱི་གཙོ་བ་རྣམ་གསུམ	chief things on the path	lam gyi gtso ba rnam gsum
ལམ་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ	chief paths, the chief things on the path	lam gyi gtso bo
ལམ་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the chief things on the path	lam gyi gtso bo rnam pa gsum
ལམ་གྱི་གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the Three Main Points of the Path; teaching by Atisha	lam gyi gtso bo rnam gsum
ལམ་གྱི་རྩ་བ	the root of the path	lam gyi rtsa ba
ལམ་གྱི་རྩ་བ་སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go for refuge, the root of the path	lam gyi rtsa ba skyabs su 'gro ba
ལམ་གྱི་འཚོ་བ	one who subsists by begging or clearing roads	lam gyi 'tsho ba
ལམ་གྱི་གཞི་རྟེན	the basis of the path	lam gyi gzhi rten
ལམ་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	clear light of the path	lam gyi 'od gsal
ལམ་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	the limbs/ aspects of the path	lam gyi yan lag
ལམ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Path wisdom. The experience of innate wakefulness pointed out by one's master in which full stability has not been reached. Compare with fruition wisdom	lam gyi ye shes
ལམ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤོར	basic straying of the path	lam gyi ye shor
ལམ་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtues/ good qualities of the path	lam gyi yon tan
ལམ་གྱི་རིག་པ	the path awareness	lam gyi rig pa
ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་གཉིས	two stages of the path according to Mahayoga	lam gyi rim gnyis
ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པ	stages of the path	lam gyi rim pa
ལམ་གྱི་གཤིས་ཤོར	basic straying from the path	lam gyi gshis shor
ལམ་གྱི་སེམས	path mind	lam gyi sems
ལམ་གྱིས	completely, suddenly	lam gyis
ལམ་གྱིས་སྐྱེས་པ	vividly occurs; syn {lam ste skyes pa}	lam gyis skyes pa
ལམ་གྱིས་སྒྲིབ་པ	sudden/ complete obscuration, things obscured by the path	lam gyis sgrib pa
ལམ་གྱིས་བདེན་པ	the truth of the path	lam gyis bden pa
ལམ་གྱིས་བྲལ་ཐོབ	the loss and gain of the path	lam gyis bral thob
ལམ་གྱིས་རང་བཞིན	the nature of the path	lam gyis rang bzhin
ལམ་གྱུར་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ་རིག་འཛིན	the vidyadhara of the result brought about by the path, One of {rim gyis pa grol lam rnam gsum}	lam gyur gyi 'bras bu rig 'dzin
ལམ་གྲོགས	travelling companion	lam grogs
ལམ་གྲོགས་ཞུས་པ	asked if he could accompany him, traveling companion	lam grogs zhus pa
ལམ་གྲོན	travel expenses	lam gron
ལམ་བགྲོད	chariot, tread the path, traveller, fore-runner	lam bgrod
ལམ་བགྲོད་པ	tread the path, traveller,	lam bgrod pa
ལམ་མགྱོགས	quickly traverse the path	lam mgyogs
ལམ་མགྲོན	light/ lamp of the path	lam mgron
ལམ་འགག	path, road	lam 'gag
ལམ་འགོག	blockade	lam 'gog
ལམ་འགོག་པ	blockade	lam 'gog pa
ལམ་འགོར	lam du 'gyangs pa,//don dag cung zad yod rkyen lam 'gor byung song	lam 'gor
ལམ་འགོལ	* strayings on/ go astray on/ mistake the path, food carried when travelling, wrong path/ road	lam 'gol
ལམ་འགོལ་བ	strayings/ go astray on the path	lam 'gol ba
ལམ་འགོལ་བ་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་ཞུགས་པ	go completely astray on the path	lam 'gol ba la rab tu zhugs pa
ལམ་འགོལ་ས	dben pa'i lam	lam 'gol sa
ལམ་འགྲུལ	1) traveller, pedestrians; 2) merchant	lam 'grul
ལམ་འགྲོ	luck, travelling the path	lam 'gro
ལམ་འགྲོ་མེད་པ	have bad luck	lam 'gro med pa
ལམ་འགྲོས	approach gait (in dance)	lam 'gros
ལམ་རྒྱ	wide path	lam rgya
ལམ་རྒྱ་གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	1) {nges 'byung}. 2) {byang sems lam} 3) {yang dag pa'i lta ba}	lam rgya gtso bo rnam gsum
ལམ་རྒྱ་བཞི་མདོ	crossing of 2 roads, when 4 roads meet	lam rgya bzhi mdo
ལམ་རྒྱགས	provisions for a journey	lam rgyags
ལམ་རྒྱུད	stages of moral and spiritual existence, area on both sides of a road	lam rgyud
ལམ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ	three characteristics of the continuum of the path	lam rgyud kyi mtshan nyid gsum
ལམ་རྒྱུད་ལྔ	the five continuous ways	lam rgyud lnga
ལམ་རྒྱུད་ལ་བསྟེན་པ	rely on the continua of the path	lam rgyud la bsten pa
ལམ་རྒྱུན་མི་གཅོད	continuous/ uninterrupted path	lam rgyun mi gcod
ལམ་རྒྱུས	know the way, knowledge of the path/ road, a guide	lam rgyus
ལམ་རྒྱུས་པ	SA lam mkhan	lam rgyus pa
ལམ་རྒྱུས་བྱེད	show/ know/ guide on the path/ road	lam rgyus byed
ལམ་རྒྱུས་བཟང	he knows the way well	lam rgyus bzang
ལམ་རྒྱུས་བཟང་པོ	he/ 1 who knows the way well, good guide	lam rgyus bzang po
ལམ་སྒོམ་པའི་ངོ་སྤྲོད་གསུམ	CHN	lam sgom pa'i ngo sprod gsum
ལམ་སྒོམ་པའི་བྱ་བ་ལྔ	CHN	lam sgom pa'i bya ba lnga
ལམ་སྒྱུར་ལམ་ལྕག	RR switch	lam sgyur lam lcag
ལམ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཁྱད་པར	the special quality of practicing the path	lam sgrub pa'i khyad par
ལམ་སྒྲོན	lamp/ torch of the path, street light	lam sgron
ལམ་བརྒྱགས	provision for the journey	lam brgyags
ལམ་བརྒྱད	eightfold path	lam brgyad
ལམ་བརྒྱུད	continua of the path, land on each side of the road, path lineage	lam brgyud
ལམ་བསྒོམ་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་རྟོགས་པ	the realization resulting from attainments acquired on the path. realization through cultivating the path, One of {rtogs pa gnyis}; realization through cultivating the path	lam bsgom stobs kyis rtogs pa
ལམ་བསྒོམས་པ	meditating on the path	lam bsgoms pa
ལམ་བསྒོམས་པ་ལས	from meditating on the path	lam bsgoms pa las
ལམ་བསྒྲོལ	escort	lam bsgrol
ལམ་ངན	1) bad path/ road/ tradition; 2) path w bad view	lam ngan
ལམ་ངན་པ	bad road, bad behavior	lam ngan pa
ལམ་ངོས	road surface	lam ngos
ལམ་དངུལ	[$ for] travelling expenses	lam dngul
ལམ་མངོན་པ	path manifestation	lam mngon pa
ལམ་ལྔ	five paths (tshogs lam, sbyor lam, mthong lam, yongs byang lam, sgrol lam)	lam lnga
ལམ་གཅིག་ཉིད	one way without variety	lam gcig nyid
ལམ་གཅོ་ལྔ	CHN	lam gco lnga
ལམ་གཅོད་པ	cut off the path	lam gcod pa
ལམ་བཅུ	10 good deeds (3 body, 4 speech, 3 mind)	lam bcu
ལམ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 paths	lam bco lnga
ལམ་ལྕག་མེད་པའི	bus	lam lcag med pa'i
ལམ་ལྕག་མེད་པའི་གློག་འཁོར	trolley	lam lcag med pa'i glog 'khor
ལམ་ལྕགས	RR track/ rails	lam lcags
ལམ་ལྕགས་གཉིས་གཤིབ	double RR track/ rails/ policy	lam lcags gnyis gshib
ལམ་ལྕགས་འདིང	lay RR track	lam lcags 'ding
ལམ་ལྕགས་འདིང་བ	lay RR track	lam lcags 'ding ba
ལམ་ལྕགས་ནས་ཟགས	get derailed	lam lcags nas zags
ལམ་ལྕགས་མེད་པའི་གློག་འཁོར	electric trolley bus	lam lcags med pa'i glog 'khor
ལམ་ལྕགས་ཞེང་ཆུང	narrow gauge RR	lam lcags zheng chung
ལམ་ཆག་པ	beaten & practicable road	lam chag pa
ལམ་ཆས	requirements or provisions for a journey	lam chas
ལམ་ཆུང	path, lane, alley, sidewalk, pavement, shortcut	lam chung
ལམ་ཆེ་བ	total path	lam che ba
ལམ་ཆེན	major road/ path, highway	lam chen
ལམ་ཆེན་བསྟན	Mah'apanthaka	lam chen bstan
ལམ་ཆེན་པོ	highway, place for practicing magic, way to heaven	lam chen po
ལམ་ཆེན་པོར་འཇུག་པ	entering the great path, pass away	lam chen por 'jug pa
ལམ་ཆོས་བཟོད	acceptance of dharmas concerning the path	lam chos bzod
ལམ་ཆོས་བཟོད་ཆོས་ཤེས	dharma acceptance and dharma cognition concerning the path	lam chos bzod chos shes
ལམ་ཆོས་ཤེས	cognition of dharmas concerning the path	lam chos shes
ལམ་མཆོག	{des ni lam mchog rnyed pa ma yin te} it will never lead you to the sublime path.	lam mchog
ལམ་མཆོག་འགྲོ	Uttarmantrina	lam mchog 'gro
ལམ་མཆོག་འདྲོ	treading the perfect path island, 1 of gling phran brgyad	lam mchog 'dro
ལམ་མཆོག་རིན་ཕྲེང	rje sgam po pa'i zhal gdams lam mchog rin po che'i phreng ba	lam mchog rin phreng
ལམ་འཆག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	steam roller	lam 'chag 'phrul 'khor
ལམ་འཆོལ་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	abberate	lam 'chol la 'gro ba
ལམ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་ཚུལ	the way to practice the path	lam ji ltar nyams su len tshul
ལམ་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the path	lam rje su dran pa
ལམ་རྗེས་བཟོད	{lam la rjes su shes pa'i bzod pa} patient acceptance producing subsequent knowledge of the path (specifically in the two higher realms)	lam rjes bzod
ལམ་རྗེས་བཟོད་རྗེས་ཤེས	the ensuing acceptance and ensuing cognition concerning the path	lam rjes bzod rjes shes
ལམ་རྗེས་ཤེས	ensuing cognition concerning the path	lam rjes shes
ལམ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the path	lam rjes su dran pa
ལམ་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས་པ	what has been practiced as the path	lam nyams su blangs pa
ལམ་ཉམས་སུ་བླངས་པའི	what has been practiced as the path	lam nyams su blangs pa'i
ལམ་ཉེ་བ	a short path	lam nye ba
ལམ་ཉེས	improper path tradition	lam nyes
ལམ་གཉིས	{rdzogs chen gyi lam gnyis} the two paths of the great perfection/ ati yoga cutting through resistance/ solidity {khregs chod} and sudden/ allsurpassing realization {thod rgal}	lam gnyis
ལམ་རྙེད་པ	find the path	lam rnyed pa
ལམ་གཏེར	treasure of path	lam gter
ལམ་བཏན	true path	lam btan
ལམ་རྟགས	road sign, signs of the path	lam rtags
ལམ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	virtues, qualities that are signs of the path	lam rtags kyi yon tan
ལམ་རྟགས་ཡོན་ཏན	signs and qualities of the path	lam rtags yon tan
ལམ་རྟོག་པ	path rtog dpyod byed [mkhan]	lam rtog pa
ལམ་ལྟར་བཅོས་པ	make a bad view look like the true path	lam ltar bcos pa
ལམ་སྟེ་སྐྱེས་པ	to vividly occur 2660	lam ste skyes pa
ལམ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicles of the gradual path [as opposed to at yoga]	lam stegs kyi theg pa
ལམ་སྟོན	admonition, counsel, direction, recommendation	lam ston
ལམ་སྟོན་མཁན	1) shower of] the path/ upaya and prajna; 2) establisher of a path tradition	lam ston mkhan
ལམ་སྟོན་སྒྲོན་མེ	1) sun; 2) light[house]; 3) street light	lam ston sgron me
ལམ་སྟོན་པ	direct, director, guide	lam ston pa
ལམ་སྟོན་བྱེད	1) show the path/ upaya and prajna; 2) establish of a path tradition; 3) guide, lead	lam ston byed
ལམ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	guide	lam ston byed pa
ལམ་བསྟན	one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [staviras] / [arhats]	lam bstan
ལམ་བསྟན་པ་ལྟར	pointed out the path	lam bstan pa ltar
ལམ་ཐག	length of the path, distance	lam thag
ལམ་ཐག་རིང་པོ	long path	lam thag ring po
ལམ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ་བཞི	the four suns of path upaya	lam thabs kyi nyi ma bzhi
ལམ་ཐིག	lines marking roads/ paths [on maps]	lam thig
ལམ་ཐོ	notes by a traveller setting out the nature of the path/ road, traveller's notes, diary	lam tho
ལམ་ཐོག་གི་བཀག་རྡོ	obstruction/ stumbling block [in the road]	lam thog gi bkag rdo
ལམ་ཐོག་མི་ཁལ	travellers and pack animals	lam thog mi khal
ལམ་མཐུན	peddlar or one of similar profession	lam mthun
ལམ་མཐུན་པ	1) in accord w the path road; 2) bya ba mthun pa	lam mthun pa
ལམ་མཐོ	road marker	lam mtho
ལམ་དང་འབྲས་བུ	path and fruition	lam dang 'bras bu
ལམ་དུ	en route, on the road, on the journey, when	lam du
ལམ་དུ་བསྐྱུར	become the path	lam du bskyur
ལམ་དུ་བསྐྱུར་བ	become the path	lam du bskyur ba
ལམ་དུ་ཁེར	to apply	lam du kher
ལམ་དུ་ཁྱེར	{lam du slongs} take as the path; brought onto the path	lam du khyer
ལམ་དུ་ཁྱེར་ནུས་བ	should be able to use [them] as the path	lam du khyer nus ba
ལམ་དུ་ཁྱེར་བ	take as/ make/ bring into/ carry on the path	lam du khyer ba
ལམ་དུ་འཁྱུར	they become the path	lam du 'khyur
ལམ་དུ་འགོར	linger, delay	lam du 'gor
ལམ་དུ་འགོར་བ	linger on the way	lam du 'gor ba
ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་རྒྱུ	miss the proper way, take the wrong path	lam du 'gro rgyu
ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་རྒྱུ་ནོར་བ	go astray	lam du 'gro rgyu nor ba
ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	traveling along the highway {glang chen la zhon nas lam du 'gro ba} was traveling, mounted upon his great elephant	lam du 'gro ba
ལམ་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of going on the path	lam du 'gro ba'i ltung byed
ལམ་དུ་རྒྱུག་པ	1) lam du phyin pa; 2) bya ba lam 'gro yod pa	lam du rgyug pa
ལམ་དུ་ཆས	to leave, go, start out	lam du chas
ལམ་དུ་འཇུག་ཉེས	miss the proper way, take the wrong path	lam du 'jug nyes
ལམ་དུ་འཇུག་ཉེས་པ	1) be mistaken about the path, go on an improper path; 2) enter a path w improper view	lam du 'jug nyes pa
ལམ་དུ་འཇུག་པ	set out, start, proceed on a journey	lam du 'jug pa
ལམ་དུ་བདེ	to go easily without problems	lam du bde
ལམ་དུ་སྣང་བ	experiences of the path	lam du snang ba
ལམ་དུ་ཕེབས་ཁར	as he was about to leave	lam du phebs khar
ལམ་དུ་ཕྱི་ཡུལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	gone on a journey	lam du phyi yul du phyin pa
ལམ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	have gone/ traversed on the path	lam du phyin pa
ལམ་དུ་བལ་ཐོགས་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment offense of carrying loads of wool	lam du bal thogs pa'i spang ba
ལམ་དུ་བྱ	use as path	lam du bya
ལམ་དུ་བྱེད	bring to the path	lam du byed
ལམ་དུ་བྱེད་པ	way/ means of forging the path; to make something the path	lam du byed pa
ལམ་དུ་མ་སོང	a failure/ unsuccessful	lam du ma song
ལམ་དུ་མི་འགྲོ	to go astray	lam du mi 'gro
ལམ་དུ་ཞུག་པ	take to/ be on the road [to], enter the path, join/ participate in a school/ doctrine/ faith/ course of action	lam du zhug pa
ལམ་དུ་ཞུགས	take to/ be on the road [to], enter the path, join/ participate in a school/ doctrine/ faith/ course of action	lam du zhugs
ལམ་དུ་ཞུགས་པ	taking to the road	lam du zhugs pa
ལམ་དུ་ཞུགས་སོ	he headed towards	lam du zhugs so
ལམ་དུ་བཞུད	gone away on a journey	lam du bzhud
ལམ་དུ་ལོང་བ	are brought to the path	lam du long ba
ལམ་དུ་སློང	become part of the path	lam du slong
ལམ་དུ་སློང་བ	becomes part of the path	lam du slong ba
ལམ་དུ་ལྷུང་བ	achievement, accomplishment [of 1's goals], falling into the road	lam du lhung ba
ལམ་དུ་ལྷོང	take as the path	lam du lhong
ལམ་དུས	the time of the path	lam dus
ལམ་དུས་ཀྱི་འོད་གསལ	path-luminosity, luminosity at the time of the path	lam dus kyi 'od gsal
ལམ་དོན་གཉེར་བ	strive on/ devote oneself to/ realize the path	lam don gnyer ba
ལམ་བདེ	good path, easy road	lam bde
ལམ་བདེ་བ	good path, easy road	lam bde ba
ལམ་བདེ་མ	good & easy road	lam bde ma
ལམ་བདེ་མོ	road is easy, road may be passed without risk	lam bde mo
ལམ་བདེན	true paths, truth of the path	lam bden
ལམ་བདེན་གྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	the four special dharmas of the truth of the path TSE 2661	lam bden gyi khyad chos bzhi
ལམ་བདེན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་བཅོ་ལྔ	the 15 aspects of the truth of the path TSE	lam bden gyi rnam pa bco lnga
ལམ་བདེན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་བདུན	the 7 aspects of the truth of the path TSE	lam bden gyi rnam pa bdun
ལམ་བདེན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four aspects of the truth of the path	lam bden gyi rnam pa bzhi
ལམ་བདེན་གྱི་སྤང་བྱ་བརྒྱད	the 8 things to be abandoned on the true path	lam bden gyi spang bya brgyad
ལམ་བདེན་མཐོང་བས་སྤང་བྱ	riddables/ things to be abandoned through insight into the truth of path	lam bden mthong bas spang bya
ལམ་བདེན་པ	truth of the path 4th of the {'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi} four noble truths	lam bden pa
ལམ་མདོ	crossroads, intersection	lam mdo
ལམ་འདེགས	1) lam du 'jug pa'am phyogs su 'gro ba; 2) bzhon pa	lam 'degs
ལམ་འདྲེན	guide	lam 'dren
ལམ་འདྲེན་པ	1) shower of] the path/ upaya and prajna; 2) establisher of a path tradition; 3) leader, guide	lam 'dren pa
ལམ་རྡུང	lam sgug byas te take the wealth of others and nyes rdung byed pa	lam rdung
ལམ་ན་སྒུག་པ	wait on the road	lam na sgug pa
ལམ་ན་དྲོངས	lead me along the path	lam na drongs
ལམ་ནག	planet, SA sgra gcan	lam nag
ལམ་ནག་ཞུགས	fire	lam nag zhugs
ལམ་ནས་འཛིན	remember	lam nas 'dzin
ལམ་ནས་འཛིན་ཡང་དག་པ	to remember in a correct way	lam nas 'dzin yang dag pa
ལམ་ནས་འཛིན་ཡང་དག་པའི	remember in a correct way	lam nas 'dzin yang dag pa'i
ལམ་ནས་འཛུར་བ	step aside in a path	lam nas 'dzur ba
ལམ་ནོར	false path, wrong path	lam nor
ལམ་ནོར་འཁྲིད་པ	mislead	lam nor 'khrid pa
ལམ་ནོར་ལྡོག་ཤེས	1) having recognized 1 is on the wrong path/ in error know how to return to the right 1/ correct it	lam nor ldog shes
ལམ་ནོར་ལྡོག་ཤེས་མེད	persist in error	lam nor ldog shes med
ལམ་ནོར་ལྡོག་ཤེས་མེད་པ	persist in error	lam nor ldog shes med pa
ལམ་གནད	essential aspects, main point of the path	lam gnad
ལམ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས	the two aspects of the path	lam rnam pa gnyis
ལམ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	lha dang tshangs pa'i theg pa/ nyan rang gi theg pa/ theg pa chen po	lam rnam pa gsum
ལམ་སྣ	guide, leading the way, path, first step of the path, beginning of the path; first step of the path, beginning of the path, guide, leading the way, path	lam sna
ལམ་སྣ་ཁྲིད	lead, guide	lam sna khrid
ལམ་སྣ་ཁྲིད་མཁན	leader, guide	lam sna khrid mkhan
ལམ་སྣ་འཁྲིད་པ	steer	lam sna 'khrid pa
ལམ་སྣ་དྲང་ཏེ	will be led to	lam sna drang te
ལམ་སྣ་དྲངས་ཏེ	to guide you to	lam sna drangs te
ལམ་སྣ་དྲོངས	guide [me] on the path, leading into the path; leading into the path, may go before me, to guide on the path, leading into the path [of.] {sna byed} to lead along the way	lam sna drongs
ལམ་སྣ་འདྲེན་པ	being guided	lam sna 'dren pa
ལམ་སྣ་འདྲོངས	{bdag gi lam sna 'drongs} may you lead the way for me!	lam sna 'drongs
ལམ་སྣ་པ	guide	lam sna pa
ལམ་སྣ་བྱེད	lead [along] the way to	lam sna byed
ལམ་སྣ་ཟིན	be entering/ begin the path	lam sna zin
ལམ་སྣ་ཟིན་ནས	having entered the path	lam sna zin nas
ལམ་སྣ་ཟིན་པ	had entered the path	lam sna zin pa
ལམ་སྣང	experiences of the path	lam snang
ལམ་སྣེ	'gro lam gyi 'go	lam sne
ལམ་པ	1) traveller; 2) beggar/ street person; 3) leader of a herd of animals; 4) policeman/ guard stationed on the road; 5) lam 'khrid mkhan; 6) merchant; 7) the sthavira Panthaka GD	lam pa
ལམ་པ་ཀམ	country west of india	lam pa kam
ལམ་པ་བ	practitioner	lam pa ba
ལམ་པ་བ་རྣམས	practitioners	lam pa ba rnams
ལམ་པའི་ཉམས་མྱོང	personal experience of the practitioner	lam pa'i nyams myong
ལམ་པོ	highway, place for practicing magic, way to heaven	lam po
ལམ་པོ་ཆེ	great road, highway, great path; highway, great path	lam po che
ལམ་པོ་ཆེ་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse the bodhicitta like a great highway	lam po che lta bu'i sems bskyed
ལམ་པོ་ཆེ་སྤྱི	great universal path	lam po che spyi
ལམ་པོ་ཆེ་སྤྱིའི	great [universal] path/ road/ highway	lam po che spyi'i
ལམ་པོ་ཆེན	highway, [the great] path	lam po chen
ལམ་དཔུ་མ	TSE	lam dpu ma
ལམ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	Path Mahamudra. The stages of approaching the recognition of the sugatagarbha and of applying that recognition in one's practice	lam phyag rgya chen po
ལམ་ཕྱེ	made way {phyag dang zhe sar bcas te lam phye zhing} made way for her, bowing and paying respect	lam phye
ལམ་ཕྱེད	halfway, midway	lam phyed
ལམ་ཕྱེད་ཙམ་དུ	about half way	lam phyed tsam du
ལམ་ཕྱོགས	way, line	lam phyogs
ལམ་ཕྱོད	bgrod pa'i myur tshad dam sa phyod,//rta las rlangs 'khor lam phyod shun tu che	lam phyod
ལམ་ཕྲན	* Ksudrapanthaka	lam phran
ལམ་ཕྲན་བསྟན	[Tsa'ut]panthaka	lam phran bstan
ལམ་འཕྱུག་པ	mistake the road	lam 'phyug pa
ལམ་འཕྲང	treacherous paths	lam 'phrang
ལམ་འཕྲལ	at once, right away, immediately	lam 'phral
ལམ་བར	on the road	lam bar
ལམ་བར་བཀག་པ	intercept 2662	lam bar bkag pa
ལམ་བར་གྱི་འགྲོ་སོང	travel expenses	lam bar gyi 'gro song
ལམ་བར་དུ	On the way, along the road	lam bar du
ལམ་བུ	1) path, road, way; 2) way of doing; 3) tradition, custom; 4) sphere/ place of	lam bu
ལམ་བྱི་མཆོག	supreme path	lam byi mchog
ལམ་བྱེད	{lam du byed pa} to incorporate into the spiritual path; (way/ means of) forging the path; to make (something) the path; to base the path on . . .	lam byed
ལམ་བྲལ	kind of tree	lam bral
ལམ་དབུ་མ	middle path	lam dbu ma
ལམ་འབྱོལ་བ	turn out of the way, step aside	lam 'byol ba
ལམ་འབྲས	Path & Fruit. the esoteric instructions of Virupa within the Sakya tradition. Lamdrey. path and the result, the path and fruition [of the Sakya system]. the advanced meditation practice of the Saky...	lam 'bras
ལམ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the path and fruit tradition	lam 'bras kyi lta ba
ལམ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་བཞག	presentation of the path and fruit tradition	lam 'bras kyi rnam bzhag
ལམ་འབྲས་པ	someone of the path and fruit tradition	lam 'bras pa
ལམ་འབྲས་དབྱེར་མེད	indivisible unity of path and fruition	lam 'bras dbyer med
ལམ་འབྲས་ཚོགས་བཤད	the assembled explanation of lam 'bras	lam 'bras tshogs bshad
ལམ་འབྲས་སློབ་བཤད	the master's explanation of lam 'bras	lam 'bras slob bshad
ལམ་འབྲས་བསྲེས་བརྒྱུད་ལུགས་བཞི	CHN lam sbyang bgrod med pa'i rdzogs pa che - The great perfection, without training and going through the path lam sbyang bgrod med pa'i rdzogs pa che - the great perfection, w/o training and goin...	lam 'bras bsres brgyud lugs bzhi
ལམ་སྦྱངས་པ	training on/ purification of the path lam sbyangs pa sngon song gi kang zag a person who has previously trained in the path	lam sbyangs pa
ལམ་མ་ནོར་བ	not going wrong path	lam ma nor ba
ལམ་མ་ནོར་བར་སྟོན་པ	the teacher who does not go on the wrong path	lam ma nor bar ston pa
ལམ་མང་པོ	often, many times	lam mang po
ལམ་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	{rten gyi dbang gis lam mi skye ba} the path [failing] to arise	lam mi skye ba
ལམ་མི་འདྲ་བ	different paths/ roads/ strategies/ approaches	lam mi 'dra ba
ལམ་མི་ཟ	female organ	lam mi za
ལམ་མི་ལུམ་མི	meat etc after cooking flexible/ mashed	lam mi lum mi
ལམ་མིན	what is not the path, wrong path/ way	lam min
ལམ་མིན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	[in this context] unfortunate rebirth	lam min du 'gro ba
ལམ་མེ	vivid	lam me
ལམ་མེ་བ	vividness	lam me ba
ལམ་མེར	vivid; vividly clear, ex. {dgongs par shar ba} arose in his mind. Syn {bkra}	lam mer
ལམ་མེར་སྣང་བ	vivid appearance	lam mer snang ba
ལམ་དམན་པ་ལས་ལྡོག་པ	turning away from the lower paths	lam dman pa las ldog pa
ལམ་ཙམ	more or less, mostly, roughly, briefly	lam tsam
ལམ་ཙམ་རྟོགས་བྱུང	perceive realize partially/ roughly	lam tsam rtogs byung
ལམ་ཙམ་བཤད	explain [more or less, mostly, roughly, briefly]	lam tsam bshad
ལམ་གཙོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three chief things on the path	lam gtso rnam gsum
ལམ་ཚད	measure/ length of the path, milage, distance	lam tshad
ལམ་ཚད་རྡོ་ཕུར	milestone	lam tshad rdo phur
ལམ་ཚུལ	the way of the path	lam tshul
ལམ་ཚོགས་གཉིས	the two accumulations of the path	lam tshogs gnyis
ལམ་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	the characteristics/ definition of the path	lam mtshan nyid pa
ལམ་འཛིམ་པ	crossing of roads, junction of roads	lam 'dzim pa
ལམ་འཛོམ	crossroads, intersection	lam 'dzom
ལམ་འཛོམ་པ	crossroads, intersection	lam 'dzom pa
ལམ་འཛོལ	STN (oral comm.): mistaken, mixed up, crossed, missed or skewed paths. [mss]	lam 'dzol
ལམ་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the path of the great perfection, path great perfection	lam rdzogs pa chen po
ལམ་རྫོགས་པའི་མཚམས་སུ	just where the road terminates	lam rdzogs pa'i mtshams su
ལམ་ཞུགས	entered the path	lam zhugs
ལམ་ཞོར	on the way	lam zhor
ལམ་གཞི	foundation/ basis of the path/ road	lam gzhi
ལམ་གཞུང	road, street, highway, path tradition	lam gzhung
ལམ་བཞི	Four Paths. Those of accumulation {tshogs lam} or sambharamarga. connection {sbyor lam} or prayogamarga. insight {mthong lam} or darshanamarga. and meditation {sgom lam} or bhavanamarga. 2) four pa...	lam bzhi
ལམ་ཟན་པ	beggar	lam zan pa
ལམ་ཟབ	profound path	lam zab
ལམ་ཟབ་མོ	the profound path	lam zab mo
ལམ་ཟུར་དུ	wayside	lam zur du
ལམ་གཟུར	side of a road	lam gzur
ལམ་གཟུར་འཇུག	divert, make move aside	lam gzur 'jug
ལམ་བཟང	good/ right/ excellent/ supreme path tradition/ road/ way	lam bzang
ལམ་བཟོ	road construction	lam bzo
ལམ་བཟོ་བྱེད	work in road construction	lam bzo byed
ལམ་འོད་སྲིང་བུ	firefly	lam 'od sring bu
ལམ་འོད་སྲིན་བུ	firefly	lam 'od srin bu
ལམ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	the 8-fold path	lam yan lag brgyad
ལམ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་པ	the 8-fold path	lam yan lag brgyad pa
ལམ་ཡིག	1) passport, permit to travel; 2) directions, guide book; 3) Tibetan govt transport service request authorization letter [rta khal khral 'ul skul 'ded chog pa'i travel document]	lam yig
ལམ་ཡུམ	[the emptiness of someone on the path]	lam yum
ལམ་ཡོངས་གྲུབ	lam gyi ye shes	lam yongs grub
ལམ་རབ་ཏུ་སྟོར་བ	completely lose the path, go completely astray on the path	lam rab tu stor ba
ལམ་རིང་པོ	long way, difficult way, tedious road	lam ring po
ལམ་རིམ	stages of the path, gradual path 2663	lam rim
ལམ་རིམ་གྱི་ཆེ་བ་བཞི	CHN	lam rim gyi che ba bzhi
ལམ་རིམ་ཆེན་མོ	work by tsong kha pa	lam rim chen mo
ལམ་རིམ་འཇམ་དཔལ་ཞལ་ལུང	Words of Manjushri, by the Fifth Dalai Lama	lam rim 'jam dpal zhal lung
ལམ་རིམ་བསྡུས་དོན	the Condensed Meaning of the Graded Path	lam rim bsdus don
ལམ་རིམ་པ་ལྔ	five stages of the path	lam rim pa lnga
ལམ་རིམ་དམར་མཆན	instructions on the stages of the path, notes on the lam rim chen mo	lam rim dmar mchan
ལམ་རིམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྙིང་པོ	Lamrim Yeshe Nyingpo, Oral Instructions in the Gradual Path of the Wisdom Essence. See Light of Wisdom, Vol 1) Shambhala Publ	lam rim ye shes snying po
ལམ་རིམ་གསལ་བའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	Torch That Illuminates the Graded Path, by Shabkar	lam rim gsal ba'i sgron me
ལམ་རོགས	fellow traveller	lam rogs
ལམ་ལ་བཀོད་པ	set onto the path	lam la bkod pa
ལམ་ལ་འཁོར་བ	wander about on the road, rove	lam la 'khor ba
ལམ་ལ་འགྲོ	be successful, go on the road	lam la 'gro
ལམ་ལ་ཆས་པ	leave, go, start out	lam la chas pa
ལམ་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་པ	knowledge of the phenomenon of the path (specifically in the desire realm)	lam la chos shes pa
ལམ་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of cognizing the dharmas concerning the path	lam la chos shes pa'i bzod pa
ལམ་ལ་འཇུག་མི་ནུས་པ	inability to enter the path	lam la 'jug mi nus pa
ལམ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་རྟོགས་པ	subsequent realization concerning the path	lam la rjes su rtogs pa
ལམ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	the ensuing cognition concerning the path	lam la rjes su shes pa
ལམ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ	acceptance of ensuing cognition concerning the path	lam la rjes su shes pa'i bzod pa
ལམ་ལ་འདྲེན་པ	guide on the path	lam la 'dren pa
ལམ་ལ་གནས	linger	lam la gnas
ལམ་ལ་ཞུག་པ	take to/ be on the road [to], enter the path, join/ participate in a school/ doctrine/ faith/ course of action	lam la zhug pa
ལམ་ལ་ཞུགས	take to/ be on the road [to], enter the path, join/ participate in a school/ doctrine/ faith/ course of action	lam la zhugs
ལམ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	take to/ be on the road [to], enter the path, join/ participate in a school/ doctrine/ faith/ course of action	lam la zhugs pa
ལམ་ལ་སོང་བ	has set out on the path of ...	lam la song ba
ལམ་ལམ	1) clear, vivid; 2) dazzling, flashing, glittering	lam lam
ལམ་ལམ་དུ	vividly, clearly	lam lam du
ལམ་ལམ་དུ་ཚུབ་པ	dazzling	lam lam du tshub pa
ལམ་ལམ་བྱེད	with colors flashing forth	lam lam byed
ལམ་ལམ་བྱེད་འོད་འཕྲོ	with colors flashing forth	lam lam byed 'od 'phro
ལམ་ལམ་མེ་བ	brightness vividness	lam lam me ba
ལམ་ལམ་ལམས་སེ་ལམ	fluttering	lam lam lams se lam
ལམ་ལས་གྲོལ་བ	freedom through [the practice of] the path	lam las grol ba
ལམ་ལས་བྱུང	derive from the way	lam las byung
ལམ་ལུགས	path tradition, path and tradition, way, system	lam lugs
ལམ་ལུགས་ལྟར་མ་ཡིན་པ	informal	lam lugs ltar ma yin pa
ལམ་ལུམ	meat etc after cooking flexible/ mashed	lam lum
ལམ་ལོག	wrong path	lam log
ལམ་ལོག་མགོ་རྨོངས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	lost and confused the path	lam log mgo rmongs su gyur pa
ལམ་ལོག་པ	wrong path	lam log pa
ལམ་ལོག་པ་ལས་ལྡོག་པ	avoids errant paths	lam log pa las ldog pa
ལམ་ལོག་པར་གོལ་བ	to deviate onto wrong paths	lam log par gol ba
ལམ་ལོག་པར་ལྟུང་བ་བཞིན	speeding down a road in the wrong direction	lam log par ltung ba bzhin
ལམ་ལོག་པར་ཞུགས་པ	enter into/ abide on wrong paths	lam log par zhugs pa
ལམ་ལོམ	large number	lam lom
ལམ་ཤུལ	path/ track left by others	lam shul
ལམ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན	path prajnaparamita	lam sher phyin
ལམ་ཤེས	knowledge of the path. Syn {lam gyi ye shes}	lam shes
ལམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 dharmas of knowing the paths	lam shes kyi chos bcu gcig
ལམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་སོ་དྲུག	the 36 aspects of knowing the paths TSE	lam shes kyi rnam pa so drug
ལམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	TSE	lam shes kyi sbyor ba
ལམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	limb of path knowledge	lam shes kyi yan lag
ལམ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five aspects of knowing the paths TSE CHN	lam shes kyi yan lag lnga
ལམ་ཤེས་ཉིད	knowledge of the paths	lam shes nyid
ལམ་ཤེས་པ	cognition, knowledge of the path	lam shes pa
ལམ་ཤོག	way-bill, passport	lam shog
ལམ་གཤོང	clearing the path/ way for, make way for	lam gshong
ལམ་གཤོང་བྱེད	clearing the path/ way for, make way for	lam gshong byed
ལམ་བཤོག་པ	hew a path	lam bshog pa
ལམ་ས་སེ་ལམ	fluttering, flashing forth, dazzles and dazzles	lam sa se lam
ལམ་སང	immediate, outright, soon, straightaway, at once, without delay	lam sang
ལམ་སང་གྲོལ་བ	Syn {cer grol} instantaneous liberation	lam sang grol ba
ལམ་སང་དུ	immediately	lam sang du
ལམ་སང་གསར་བཟོ་བྱེད་པ	improvise	lam sang gsar bzo byed pa
ལམ་སངས	at once, abruptly, suddenly, immediately	lam sangs
ལམ་སངས་མ་འགྲོ་ཞིག	do not go immediately	lam sangs ma 'gro zhig
ལམ་སུན་པར་བྱེད	condemning a religious doctrine, one who so condemns	lam sun par byed
ལམ་སེ	about, probably	lam se
ལམ་སེ་ལམ	vivid, so vivid	lam se lam
ལམ་སེང	at once, immediately, right away	lam seng
ལམ་སེལ	1) produce means of clearing away harm on the path; 2) lamp; 3) the little lamp at the {dgegs gtor} that dispels darkness on the way to the ocean at the end of the world	lam sel
ལམ་སོག	difficult dangerous road	lam sog
ལམ་སོག་པ	difficult & dangerous road	lam sog pa
ལམ་སོན	transport service letter of authorization [TT govt travel permit allowing bearer to ask for transport services of horse packs/ loads] etc from those obligated to provide them]	lam son
ལམ་སྲང	pathway, lane	lam srang
ལམ་སྲང་མདོ	street corners	lam srang mdo
ལམ་སྲང་དམག་མི	police, militia	lam srang dmag mi
ལམ་སྲིལ	tradition	lam sril
ལམ་སྲོལ	system, approach	lam srol
ལམ་སྲོལ་རྙིང་པ	conventional	lam srol rnying pa
ལམ་སྲོལ་བྱས	promote	lam srol byas
ལམ་སློང	make something the path, use something as the way, to integrate	lam slong
ལམ་གསུམ	triple path, the three paths, 1) {skyes bu chung ngu'i lam}. 2) {skyes bu 'bring gi lam} 3) {skyes bu chen po'i lam}; the three paths, 1) {skyes bu chung ngu'i lam}. 2) {skyes bu 'bring gi lam} 3) ...	lam gsum
ལམ་གསུམ་འགྲོ	epithet of the river ganges	lam gsum 'gro
ལམ་བསེལ	convoy, safe conduct, escort	lam bsel
ལམ་བསེལ་བྱེད་པ	accompany and protect one on the way, escort him	lam bsel byed pa
ལམ་ལྷ	deities of the roads, ride tigers	lam lha
ལམ་ལྷ་གཉན་པོ་མཆེད་བརྒྱད	eight powerful brothers deities of the road	lam lha gnyan po mched brgyad
ལམ་ལྷག་མ	excellent path	lam lhag ma
ལམ་ལྷོང	achievement, accomplishment [of 1's goals]	lam lhong
ལམ་ལྷོང་ཅན	prosperous	lam lhong can
ལམ་ལྷོངས	achievement, accomplishment [of 1's goals]	lam lhongs
ལམས	dazzle	lams
ལམས་སེ་ལམ	fluttering, flashing forth, dazzles and dazzles	lams se lam
ལའང	x {'jig rten pa'i kha skad la'ang zer ba ltar yin} as the proverb puts it:	la'ang
ལའང་ཐོས་མ་མྱོང	not even a fraction	la'ang thos ma myong
ལའི	oh yes	la'i
ལའི་གྱེན	ascent of a mountain pass	la'i gyen
ལའི་ཐུར	descent of a mountain pass	la'i thur
ལའི་ཟུག	top of a mountain pass	la'i zug
ལའོ་ཀོ	Laos	la'o ko
ལའོ་ལྭོ	Laos	la'o lwo
ལའོ་སེ	Laos	la'o se
ལའོ་ཧྲོ་ཆིས	Liu shao chi	la'o hro chis
ལར	1) ground, root, basis source; 2) in general; 3) but, yet, still, however; 4) again, in the future; 5) afterward	lar
ལར་རྒྱ	usage, local custom, integrity, unity	lar rgya
ལར་ད་ལྟའི་དུས་ན	these days,	lar da lta'i dus na
ལར་ན	in general	lar na
ལར་ནས	SA slar nas	lar nas
ལར་ཞེན	loyalty	lar zhen
ལར་ཞེན་བཟུང	have loyalty	lar zhen bzung
ལར་ཡང	afterwards, again	lar yang
ལས་ཀ	matter, affair, thing, work, job, business, employment, function, service, task, undertaking, working, action, SA las, labor, dignity, rank, title	las ka
ལས་ཀ་འགན་ལེན	labor/ work contract	las ka 'gan len
ལས་ཀ་ཅན	worker	las ka can
ལས་ཀ་ཆེར་མ	idleness	las ka cher ma
ལས་ཀ་ཆེར་མ་ཐུབ་པ	state of inactivity	las ka cher ma thub pa
ལས་ཀ་མཉམ་སྒྲུབ	working together/ cooperatively	las ka mnyam sgrub
ལས་ཀ་མཉམ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	work together/ cooperatively	las ka mnyam sgrub byed
ལས་ཀ་ཐོབ	get a job/ work las ka dang slob gra sogs nas gzur mkhan - truant	las ka thob
ལས་ཀ་འདྲ་བ་ལ་ཐོབ་ཆ་འདྲ་བ	= pay for = work	las ka 'dra ba la thob cha 'dra ba
ལས་ཀ་སྡུག་ཆགས	bad work	las ka sdug chags
ལས་ཀ་སྤྲོད་མཁན	employer	las ka sprod mkhan
ལས་ཀ་སྤྲོད་པ	employ	las ka sprod pa
ལས་ཀ་འཕྲོ་མ་ལུས་པ	work that has not been left unfinished	las ka 'phro ma lus pa
ལས་ཀ་འཕྲོ་ལུས་པ	work left unfinished 2665	las ka 'phro lus pa
ལས་ཀ་བྱས་པའི་ཕོགས་ཐོབ	salary for work	las ka byas pa'i phogs thob
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད	work	las ka byed
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་མཁན	employee worker	las ka byed mkhan
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་འགོ	touch	las ka byed 'go
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་འགོ་འཛུགས་པ	start work	las ka byed 'go 'dzugs pa
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་སྟངས	procedure, way of working/ doing things	las ka byed stangs
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་ཐབས	procedure, way/ method of working/ doing things	las ka byed thabs
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་པ	work, perform a task	las ka byed pa
ལས་ཀ་བྱེད་བཞིན་པ	working	las ka byed bzhin pa
ལས་ཀ་འབྱོང་པོ	skilful work	las ka 'byong po
ལས་ཀ་མེད་པ	idle	las ka med pa
ལས་ཀ་རྫབ་ཆེན	felony	las ka rdzab chen
ལས་ཀ་ཤོར	lose a job	las ka shor
ལས་ཀ་བཤག	strike [labor]	las ka bshag
ལས་ཀའི་སྐོར་གྲངས	work point	las ka'i skor grangs
ལས་ཀའི་ཁུར་བཞེས	take up the burden of work & responsibility	las ka'i khur bzhes
ལས་ཀའི་འགོར་རྒྱུན	term of/ continuity in office	las ka'i 'gor rgyun
ལས་ཀའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་འཛིན་སྟངས	work attitude	las ka'i rnam 'gyur 'dzin stangs
ལས་ཀར་སྒྱིད་ལུག	laziness/ slowdown/ sabotage in work	las kar sgyid lug
ལས་ཀྱང	aside from/ even more than/ a comparative, even more than	las kyang
ཨེབེ༹ན	- than	even
ལས་ཀྱང་ཆེས	even more than	las kyang ches
ལས་ཀྱང་ཐུ	worse than	las kyang thu
ལས་ཀྱང་མང་བ	even more than las kyang yod las kyi rnam par smin pa	las kyang mang ba
ཡང་ཡོད་ཀྱི	has [the creation of] karma as well as the ripening of karma	yang yod kyi
ལས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	affliction of karma, the karma group of bad thoughts	las kyi kun nas nyon mongs pa
ལས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་འབྱུང	the source of karma	las kyi kun 'byung
ལས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་གནས་པ	karmic birthplace	las kyi skye gnas pa
ལས་ཀྱི་བསྐོས་ཐང	1's lot in life, destiny	las kyi bskos thang
ལས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	distinctions of/ different activity	las kyi khyad par
ལས་ཀྱི་མཁའ་འགྲོ	karmadakini	las kyi mkha' 'gro
ལས་ཀྱི་གྲིབ་པ	obscuration of karma	las kyi grib pa
ལས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	cause of karma/ action	las kyi rgyu
ལས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་ལས	{sems can rnams las kyi rgyu las skyes} all beings are born from karmic causes	las kyi rgyu las
ལས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	The 'veil of karma'; Mipham Rinpoche: {mtshams med lnga dang chos spong sogs byas pas bden pa mthong mi nus pa las kyi sgrib pa} The 'veil of karma' is the inability to perceive the truths because ...	las kyi sgrib pa
ལས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ་རྒྱུན་གཅོད་པ	cut the continuity of karmic obscurations	las kyi sgrib pa rgyun gcod pa
ལས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	purify karmic obscurations	las kyi sgrib pa rnam par dag pa
ལས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་བཞི	TSE	las kyi ngo bo bzhi
ལས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་ག	activity rituals; protective etc. activity ritual	las kyi cho ga
ལས་ཀྱི་འཆིང་བ	main points of the activity	las kyi 'ching ba
ལས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་པ	moral works, good real work or employment	las kyi 'jug pa
ལས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	sign of work, plough	las kyi rtags
ལས་ཀྱི་ཐའ	lifestyles	las kyi tha'
ལས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	bindus of action	las kyi thig le
ལས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེའི་རྒྱུད	secret series of tantras	las kyi thig le'i rgyud
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐ	one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} the eightfold noble path	las kyi mtha
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	ends of action, aims of actions. one of the {'phags lam gyi yan lag brgyad} the eightfold noble path	las kyi mtha'
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པ	complete the work, be efficient	las kyi mtha' rnam par 'byed pa
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་མ་ལོག	good, virtuous karma, unperverted livelihood, good motivation	las kyi mtha' ma log
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་མ་ལོག་པ	to engage in unmistaken activities	las kyi mtha' ma log pa
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ལོག	have a conflicting lifestyle	las kyi mtha' log
ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ལོག་པ	bad karma, perverted livelihood, bad motivation	las kyi mtha' log pa
ལས་ཀྱི་གདངས	Dang energy of karma	las kyi gdangs
ལས་ཀྱི་རྡེའུ་དཀར་ནག	the white and black pebbles of karma	las kyi rde'u dkar nag
ལས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra server	las kyi rdo rje
ལས་ཀྱི་གནས	arts	las kyi gnas
ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ	the ripening of karma	las kyi rnam par smin pa
ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་དབྱེ	yul of an action la doer rang gi don du producing action nye bar ston pa'i rkyen: w 7 kinds or 2, eg in nam mkhar 'phyar [hoist, winnow] RA shows nam mkha' = bya ba'i yul, and in chu la zam pa btsu...	las kyi rnam dbye
ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་སྨིན	the power of knowing the maturation of deeds GD	las kyi rnam smin
ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་སྨིན་མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of knowing the maturation of deeds	las kyi rnam smin mkhyen pa'i stobs
ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམས་གྲངས	categories of actions	las kyi rnams grangs
ལས་ཀྱི་སྣེ	1) work assigner/ leader; 3) part/ aspect of work	las kyi sne
ལས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	activity emissary	las kyi pho nya
ལས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	1) [consort for] karma mudr [practice]; 2) buddha activity mudra yoga; 3) action seal, karmamudr	las kyi phyag rgya
ལས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་མ	karma mudr, consort for karma mudr practice	las kyi phyag rgya ma
ལས་ཀྱི་ཕྱང་རྒྱ	[karma mudra] action mudra, actual consort	las kyi phyang rgya
ལས་ཀྱི་འཕེན་པ	propulsion/ driving force of karma	las kyi 'phen pa
ལས་ཀྱི་འཕྲོ	a good karmic residue	las kyi 'phro
ལས་ཀྱི་འཕྲོ་ཅན	having the right karma	las kyi 'phro can
ལས་ཀྱི་འཕྲོ་མཐུད་པ	continuing 1's remaining karma	las kyi 'phro mthud pa
ལས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས	karmic traces of the material body, instincts of evolutionary actions	las kyi bag chags
ལས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས་འཇུག་པ་རྙེད་པ	attain habitual patterns of karma	las kyi bag chags 'jug pa rnyed pa
ལས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས་བསགས་པ	accumulate habitual patterns of karma	las kyi bag chags bsags pa
ལས་ཀྱི་བུམ་པ	certain vessel used in ceremonies to ascertain karma	las kyi bum pa
ལས་ཀྱི་བྱང་བུ	practice manual {las byang}	las kyi byang bu
ལས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	particulars of karma	las kyi bye brag
ལས་ཀྱི་བྱེད་འཕྲོ	projects uncompleted	las kyi byed 'phro
ལས་ཀྱི་བླ	work supervisor	las kyi bla
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང	{rang gi sngon las kyi dbang gis} by the power of your past actions	las kyi dbang
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་གིས	By the power of karma,	las kyi dbang gis
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	faculty of motor function	las kyi dbang po
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five lords of activity	las kyi dbang po lnga
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་དྲུག	the six faculties of action	las kyi dbang po drug
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོའི་བྱ་བ་དྲུག	the six actions of the faculties of action	las kyi dbang po'i bya ba drug
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་མོ	Leykyi Wangmo, Skt. Karma Indranila, Karmeshvari. The dakini who transmitted the Eight Sadhana Teachings to the Eight Vidyadharas and later the Assemblage of Sugatas to Padmasambhava. See also 'Kun...	las kyi dbang mo
ལས་ཀྱི་དབང་མོ་ཆེ	the great ladies of activity	las kyi dbang mo che
ལས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ	divisions of karma/ activity	las kyi dbye ba
ལས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the results of karma	las kyi 'bras bu
ལས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ་གསུམ	CHN	las kyi 'bras bu gsum
ལས་ཀྱི་མེ་ལོང	the mirror of karma	las kyi me long
ལས་ཀྱི་རྩོད་པ་ཞི་བྱེད	pacify the struggle of karma	las kyi rtsod pa zhi byed
ལས་ཀྱི་ཚེ་བཀག	to block karmic life	las kyi tshe bkag
ལས་ཀྱི་ཚེ་བསྐྱེད	to generate karmic life	las kyi tshe bskyed
ལས་ཀྱི་ཚེ་འགོག་པ	to arrest karmic life	las kyi tshe 'gog pa
ལས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཞི	CHN	las kyi mtshan nyid bzhi
ལས་ཀྱི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་དང་བཅས་པ	experiences magical karmic displays	las kyi rdzu 'phrul dang bcas pa
ལས་ཀྱི་གཞན་དབང	dependency of karma	las kyi gzhan dbang
ལས་ཀྱི་གཞི	basis for a karmic deed	las kyi gzhi
ལས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four limbs of activity	las kyi yan lag bzhi
ལས་ཀྱི་རིགས	karma/ activity family	las kyi rigs
ཐེ་ཨཅཏིཨོན	family; karma/ activity family; the action-family	the action
ལས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཚོགས	Action Family; karmakula	las kyi rigs tshogs
ལས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ	procedure	las kyi rim pa
ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང	Wind of karma. 1) Another word for conceptual thinking. 2) The inevitable force of the ripening effect of former deeds	las kyi rlung
ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང་དམར	red karmic wind [terrifying appearance of the bardo]	las kyi rlung dmar
ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང་ལོག	karmic prana reverses into its own condition	las kyi rlung log
ལས་ཀྱི་ལམ	path of action	las kyi lam
ལས་ཀྱི་གཤིན་རྗེ	'chi bdag gi sde dpon, gshin rje'i rgyal po	las kyi gshin rje
ལས་ཀྱི་གཤིན་རྗེར་ཞེད་དོན་མེད	TSE	las kyi gshin rjer zhed don med
ལས་ཀྱི་ས་པ	person/ place w great power of collecting karma and experiencing its ripening	las kyi sa pa
ལས་ཀྱི་སེམས་དཔའ	helper, assistant	las kyi sems dpa'
ལས་ཀྱི་སེམས་དབའ	helper, assistant	las kyi sems dba'
ལས་ཀྱི་སེམས་དབའ་ལས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the assistant karma deity	las kyi sems dba' las kyi lha
ལས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	master of ceremonies, umdze	las kyi slob dpon
ལས་ཀྱི་སློབ་དཔོན་གསུམ	TSE	las kyi slob dpon gsum
ལས་ཀྱི་སློབ་མ	helper student. Syn. mchod dpon	las kyi slob ma
ལས་ཀྱིས་བཀོལ་བ	enslaved by karma	las kyis bkol ba
ལས་ཀྱིས་སྐོ་བ	destiny	las kyis sko ba
ལས་ཀྱིས་འཆི་བ	death due to 1's karma, karmic death	las kyis 'chi ba
ལས་ཀྱིས་འཆུན་པ	subdued by hard work	las kyis 'chun pa
ལས་ཀྱིས་འཇུག་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཞུགས	consciousness then enters, due to karma	las kyis 'jug pa'i rnam shes zhugs
ལས་ཀྱིས་ཉམས་པ	harmed by karma	las kyis nyams pa
ལས་ཀྱིས་མནར་བ	suffer in consequence of former actions	las kyis mnar ba
ལས་ཀྱིས་འཕེན་ཚུལ་བཞི	CHN	las kyis 'phen tshul bzhi
ལས་ཀྱིས་བྱས་པ	karmic activities	las kyis byas pa
ལས་ཀྱིས་བྲེལ	busy with activities	las kyis brel
ལས་དཀར	good work, virtuous action	las dkar
ལས་དཀར་ནག	constructive and destructive deeds	las dkar nag
ལས་དཀར་པོ	white/ virtuous action/ karma	las dkar po
ལས་རྐང	post, position [at work]	las rkang
ལས་སྐལ	1) allotted share of the work; 2) destiny, fate [by earlier karma]	las skal
ལས་སྐལ་དབང་པོ	karma & capacity	las skal dbang po
ལས་སྐལ་དམན་པ	unfortunate people	las skal dman pa
ལས་སྐྱོང་ལྷན་ཚོགས	council [on]	las skyong lhan tshogs
ལས་སྐྲིབ	karmic obscuration	las skrib
ལས་བསྐོས	fate, fateful	las bskos
ལས་ཁང	workshop, lab	las khang
ལས་ཁུངས	bureau, office	las khungs
ལས་ཁུངས་ཁུ་འདུ	streamlining/ simplifying administrative structure	las khungs khu 'du
ལས་ཁུངས་ཁུ་བསྡུ	streamlining/ simplifying administrative structure	las khungs khu bsdu
ལས་ཁུངས་གྱི་ཚགས་པར	party/ governmental/ bureau newspaper	las khungs gyi tshags par
ལས་ཁུངས་འཛིན་སྐྱོངས	office administration	las khungs 'dzin skyongs
ལས་ཁུར	work obligation, jobs, duties, responsibilities, functions	las khur
ལས་ཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ	resignation [from office]	las khur dgongs zhu
ལས་ཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ་གནང	resign [from office] [h]	las khur dgongs zhu gnang
ལས་ཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ་བྱེད	resign [from office]	las khur dgongs zhu byed
ལས་ཁུར་དུས་ཡུན	term of office	las khur dus yun
ལས་ཁུར་དུས་ཡུན་རྫོགས	complete/ finish a term of office	las khur dus yun rdzogs
ལས་ཁུར་སྤྲོད	give duties/ responsibilities	las khur sprod
ལས་ཁུར་སྤྲོད་པ	give duties/ responsibilities	las khur sprod pa
ལས་ཁུར་ལོ་དུས	term of office	las khur lo dus
ལས་ཁུར་ལོ་དུས་རྫོགས	complete/ finish a term of office	las khur lo dus rdzogs
ལས་ཁྲལ	labor obligation [tax]	las khral
ལས་ཁྲལ་གྱི་ས་བོགས	leasing land in return for a labor obligation	las khral gyi sa bogs
ལས་ཁྲི	scaffold 2667	las khri
ལས་ཁྲིགས	arrangement of the activities [for a sadhana practice]	las khrigs
ལས་མཁན	1) worker; 2) messenger of the king of death; 3) servant, helper	las mkhan
ལས་འཁུར	work obligation, jobs, duties, responsibilities, functions	las 'khur
ལས་འཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ	resignation [from office]	las 'khur dgongs zhu
ལས་འཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ་གནང	resign [from office] [h]	las 'khur dgongs zhu gnang
ལས་འཁུར་དགོངས་ཞུ་བྱེད	resign [from office]	las 'khur dgongs zhu byed
ལས་འཁུར་དུས་ཡུན	term of office	las 'khur dus yun
ལས་འཁུར་དུས་ཡུན་རྫོགས	complete/ finish a term of office	las 'khur dus yun rdzogs
ལས་འཁུར་སྤྲོད	give duties/ responsibilities	las 'khur sprod
ལས་འཁུར་སྤྲོད་པ	give duties/ responsibilities	las 'khur sprod pa
ལས་འཁུར་ལོ་དུས	term of office	las 'khur lo dus
ལས་འཁུར་ལོ་དུས་རྫོགས	complete/ finish a term of office	las 'khur lo dus rdzogs
ལས་འཁྱུར	retirement	las 'khyur
ལས་གང་བྱས་པ	whatever you have done las gyi snang ba sna tshogs ma nges pa 'char zhing - various karmic experiences occur without any forewarning	las gang byas pa
ལས་གྲ	workshop, work site	las gra
ལས་གྲྭ	1) work-place; 2) large project of producing/ constructing	las grwa
ལས་གྲངས	work point [in PRC work system]	las grangs
ལས་གྲི	ro bsha' byed knife for cutting up corpses	las gri
ལས་གྲུབ་པ	made from	las grub pa
ལས་གྲུབ་པའི་རབ་ཏུ་འབྱེད་པ	[karmasiddhii-prak.aran.a]. one of the {pra ka ra na sde brgyad} the eight Prakarana of Vasubhandhu; the karma siddhi prakarana by Vasubandhu {pra ka ra na sde brgyad}	las grub pa'i rab tu 'byed pa
ལས་གྲོགས	helper, assistant [in work]	las grogs
ལས་གྲོལ་པ	to be free from	las grol pa
ལས་གླ	wages for work	las gla
ལས་དགེ་སྡིག	virtue and negativity, positive and negative karma	las dge sdig
ལས་དགེ་བ	virtuous action	las dge ba
ལས་དགེ་བ་དང	w good karma	las dge ba dang
ལས་དགོན	a raven-headed form of Mahakala	las dgon
ལས་བགོ	division of labor	las bgo
ལས་བགོས	division of labor	las bgos
ལས་འགན	responsibility, duty, task, mission, assignment, designation, portfolio, task, responsibility, duty	las 'gan
ལས་འགན་སྐུར	assign/ entrust w tasks/ duties/ responsibilities	las 'gan skur
ལས་འགན་ཁུར	take on tasks/ duties/ responsibilities	las 'gan khur
ལས་འགན་འཁུར་བཞིན་ཡོད་པ	present[ly in office]	las 'gan 'khur bzhin yod pa
ལས་འགན་འཁྱེར	bearer of. responsibility for the functions	las 'gan 'khyer
ལས་འགན་སྒྲུབ	accomplish a task/ duty/ responsibility/ job	las 'gan sgrub
ལས་འགན་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish a task/ duty/ responsibility/ job	las 'gan sgrub pa
ལས་འགན་གཅིག་ལྕོགས	having responsibility for more than 1 job/ office at once	las 'gan gcig lcogs
ལས་འགན་སྙེག་སྒྲུབ	accomplish a task/ duty/ responsibility/ job quickly	las 'gan snyeg sgrub
ལས་འགན་དང་པོ	first duty	las 'gan dang po
ལས་འགན་གནས་གཞི	office, position, post, job [esp officials]	las 'gan gnas gzhi
ལས་འགན་སྤོ	transfer an official from 1 office/ position/ post/ job to another	las 'gan spo
ལས་འགན་སྤྲོད	assign/ entrust w tasks/ duties/ responsibilities	las 'gan sprod
ལས་འགན་སྤྲོད་པ	assign/ entrust w tasks/ duties/ responsibilities	las 'gan sprod pa
ལས་འགན་བར་མཚམས་འཇོག	suspend from office/ duties	las 'gan bar mtshams 'jog
ལས་འགན་བླང་བ	to assume responsibility	las 'gan blang ba
ལས་འགན་གཙང་ལེན	take complete responsibility	las 'gan gtsang len
ལས་འགན་བཞེས	take on tasks/ duties/ responsibilities [h]	las 'gan bzhes
ལས་འགན་རེ་མོས་ཀྱི་ཐོ	roster	las 'gan re mos kyi tho
ལས་འགན་ལེགས་སྒྲུབ	accomplish a task/ duty/ responsibility/ job well/ successfully	las 'gan legs sgrub
ལས་འགན་ལེན	take on tasks/ duties/ responsibilities	las 'gan len
ལས་འགུལ	movement, campaign, movement	las 'gul
ལས་འགུལ་དངོས་གནས	genuine movement/ campaign	las 'gul dngos gnas
ལས་འགོ	beginning of work	las 'go
ལས་འགོ་བཙུགས	began to work	las 'go btsugs
ལས་འགོ་བཙུགས་པ	began to work	las 'go btsugs pa
ལས་འགོ་བཙོས	examine whether work is good or bad	las 'go btsos
ལས་འགོ་བཙོས་པ	examine whether work is good or bad	las 'go btsos pa
ལས་འགོ་རྩོམ	begin to work	las 'go rtsom
ལས་འགོ་ཚུགས	begin to work, undertake a project	las 'go tshugs
ལས་འགོ་ཚུགས་པ	begin to work, undertake a project	las 'go tshugs pa
ལས་འགོ་འཛུགས	begin to work	las 'go 'dzugs
ལས་འགོ་འཛུགས་པ	begin to work	las 'go 'dzugs pa
ལས་འགྱུར	change jobs	las 'gyur
ལས་འགྲིགས	application	las 'grigs
ལས་རྒྱ	action seal	las rgya
ལས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	countless deeds	las rgya mtsho
ལས་རྒྱབ་པ	foreman, leader of work, supervisor, overseer	las rgyab pa
ལས་རྒྱའི་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of action seal	las rgya'i rigs lnga
ལས་རྒྱལ་མཆོག	sublime regal activity [form of meditative absorption]	las rgyal mchog
ལས་རྒྱལ་མཆོག་གི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of the supreme king of action	las rgyal mchog gi ting nge 'dzin
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས	1) seed and harvest; 2) [cause &] effect/ result of [good and bad] karma	las rgyu 'bras
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཁྲིད	teaching on the effects of actions	las rgyu 'bras kyi khrid
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the karmic law of cause and effect	las rgyu 'bras kyi chos
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཤད	gave them teachings on the law of karmic cause and effect	las rgyu 'bras kyi chos bshad
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་མི་བསླུ་བའི་བདེན་སྟོབས	the infallible truth of karmic cause and effect	las rgyu 'bras mi bslu ba'i bden stobs
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་མི་བསླུ་བར་ངེས་པ	that actions have inevitable consequences	las rgyu 'bras mi bslu bar nges pa
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བརྩི་བ	to beware of the consequences of one's actions	las rgyu 'bras brtsi ba
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་པ	trust the law of karmic cause and effect; opp of {log lta}	las rgyu 'bras la yid ches pa
ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་བསླུ་བ་མེད	the consequences of actions are inevitable las rgyu 'bras bslu med kyi rang bzhin unerring nature of karma's cause and effect	las rgyu 'bras bslu ba med
ལས་རྒྱུན	term of/ continuity in office	las rgyun
ལས་རྒྱུན་འཛིན	succeed to an office	las rgyun 'dzin
ལས་རྒྱུན་རིང	during 1's term of office	las rgyun ring
ལས་སྒོ	work, job, task, factory, company	las sgo
ལས་སྒོ་ཞུགས	work	las sgo zhugs
ལས་སྒོའི་རྟགས	brand, trademark	las sgo'i rtags
ལས་སྒོའི་ཐབས་ཤེས	manner of doing business	las sgo'i thabs shes
ལས་སྒྱུར	change jobs	las sgyur
ལས་སྒྲ	action word [to place of an action the doer rang gi don du producing action nye bar ston pa'i rkyen: w 7 kinds or 2, eg in nam mkhar 'phyar [hoist, winnow] RA shows nam mkha' = place of action, and...	las sgra
ལས་སྒྲིབ	karmic obscuration	las sgrib
ལས་སྒྲིབ་སྦྱོང་བ	to purify their karma and obscurations	las sgrib sbyong ba
ལས་སྒྲུབ	practices done on activities	las sgrub
ལས་སྒྲུབ་འཆར་གཞི	work schedule/ plan	las sgrub 'char gzhi
ལས་སྒྲུབ་ཚོགས་ཆུང	work group/ team	las sgrub tshogs chung
ལས་སྒྲུབ་རུ་ཁག	work unit	las sgrub ru khag
ལས་བརྒྱ་རྩ་གཅིག་པ	One Hundred Formal Procedures, by Gunaprabha, (T 4118)	las brgya rtsa gcig pa
ལས་ངན	bad action, mean profession or work, evil action, wicked work	las ngan
ལས་ངན་གྱི་དབང་གིས	as a result of her bad karma	las ngan gyi dbang gis
ལས་ངན་སྡིག་སྒྲིབ	bad karma, unwholesome deeds, and obscurations las ngan pa dug sbrul gyi mche ba ltar our actions are as harmful as the bite of a serpent	las ngan sdig sgrib
ལས་ངན་པ་ཡིན་པ	with many negative actions	las ngan pa yin pa
ལས་ངན་པའི་བྱ་བས་ཟིན་མེད་བྲེལ	endlessly occupied with wrong activities	las ngan pa'i bya bas zin med brel
ལས་ངན་སོག་པ	repeated commission of sins	las ngan sog pa
ལས་ངེས	infallibility of karma	las nges
ལས་མངོན་གྱུར	manifest action/ the activity	las mngon gyur
ལས་ལྔ	TSE	las lnga
ལས་ཅན	fortunate beings	las can
ལས་ཅན་གྱི་གང་ཟག་མང་པོ	many disciples with the appropriate karma	las can gyi gang zag mang po
ལས་ཅན་གྱི་སློབ་མ	students of good karma	las can gyi slob ma
ལས་ཅན་པོ	fortunate one	las can po
ལས་ཅན་བུ	sons/ students of good karma	las can bu
ལས་ཅི་བྱས་འདི་བྱེས་མེད་པ	nothing to show of what has been done	las ci byas 'di byes med pa
ལས་ཅི་ཡང་མེད	nothing more than that	las ci yang med
ལས་ཅི་ཡིན	{dge slong rnams kyis bcom ldan 'das la dga' bo'i las ci yin zhus pa} the monks then asked the Buddha about Nanda's previous karma that had led to all this	las ci yin
ལས་ཆས	1) clothes hat etc for work; 2) tool	las chas
ལས་ཆུང་བ	1) little fortune/ merit / power of action/work; 2) easy/ convenient work	las chung ba
ལས་ཆེ	probably {khyod kyi rtsam pa zad las che byas pa} - "Your tsampa is probably finished by now," he said	las che
ལས་ཆེ་བ	1) great fortune/ luck/ merit; 2) great power of work/ action; 3) las ka rnyog 'dzing ? very busy che ba	las che ba
ལས་ཆེན་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	las chen bcu gnyis
ལས་ཆོག	pratimoksha vow liturgy	las chog
ལས་ཆོད	measure of power of work/ action, labor productivity	las chod
ལས་མཆེད་པ	descended from	las mched pa
ལས་འཆར	agenda, plan	las 'char
ལས་འཆོལ་བ	commission one with an affair or transaction	las 'chol ba
ལས་ཇུས	knowing/ skillful in means of work/activity	las jus
ལས་མཇུག	end of the work	las mjug
ལས་མཇུག་སྐྱེལ	finish work/ a project	las mjug skyel
ལས་མཇུག་ལེགས་སྡུད	end work/ a project successfully	las mjug legs sdud
ལས་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	worldly dhyana	las 'jig rten pa'i bsam gtan
ལས་རྗེས	[karmic] trace	las rjes
ལས་རྗེས་མི་མངོན་པར་བྱས	leaving no trace	las rjes mi mngon par byas
ལས་བརྗེས	work exchange	las brjes
ལས་ཉེས	wrong way of doing	las nyes
ལས་ཉོན	karma and kleshas. Syn {las dang nyon mongs pa}	las nyon
ལས་ཉོན་གྱི་སྒྲིབ་པ	tshogs	las nyon gyi sgrib pa
ལས་ཉོན་གྱི་འཕངས་པའི་སྲིད་པ	samsaric existence caused/impelled by karma and the kleshas	las nyon gyi 'phangs pa'i srid pa
ལས་ཉོན་གྱི་དབང་གིས་བྱུང་བ	produced by the power of karmic actions and disturbing emotions	las nyon gyi dbang gis byung ba
ལས་ཉོན་སྡུག	karma, neg. emotions and suffering	las nyon sdug
ལས་ཉོན་སྡུག་བསྔལ	karma, kleshas, and suffering	las nyon sdug bsngal
ལས་ཉོན་རྣམས	karma nad kleshas	las nyon rnams
ལས་ཉོན་མོངས	karma and kleshas	las nyon mongs
ལས་གཉིས	1) {zag bcas kyi las}. 2) {zag med kyi las}	las gnyis
ལས་གཉིས་ཉོན་མོངས་ཟད་པ	exhaustion of the kleshas of the two kinds of karma	las gnyis nyon mongs zad pa
ལས་རྟགས	emblem, dignity, rank, title incident to the office held	las rtags
ལས་སྟོད	place in upper tibet	las stod
ལས་སྟོབས་ཆེ་ཆུང	great and small powers of karma/action	las stobs che chung
ལས་ཐབས	act	las thabs
ལས་ཐམ	las khungs kyi gzhung thel	las tham
ལས་ཐའ་ལོག་པ	"conflicting lifestyle"	las tha' log pa
ལས་ཐར་མ་མཅིས	never free from bondage	las thar ma mcis
ལས་ཐར་མ་མཆིས	never free from bondage	las thar ma mchis
ལས་ཐིག	above a mandala a dam tshig gi thig, thig skud rgyu measure, color etc according to the sadhana	las thig
ལས་ཐུ་བ་མེད	nothing more powerful than	las thu ba med
ལས་ཐེབས་ཆག	be hindered/ delayed [work]	las thebs chag
ལས་ཐོག	present[ly in office]	las thog
ལས་ཐོག་པ	present incumbent, 1 in active service	las thog pa
ལས་ཐོག་འབྱོར་ཚད	rate of attendance	las thog 'byor tshad
ལས་ཐོག་མ་པ	beginner	las thog ma pa
ལས་ཐོག་ལས་བྱེད་པ	cadres in office/ service	las thog las byed pa
ལས་ཐོགས་པ	las don gra 'grig po ma byung ba	las thogs pa
ལས་མཐའ	destiny, {las 'phro}, potential karma	las mtha'
ལས་མཐའ་མ་ལོག	No perverted way of action	las mtha' ma log
ལས་མཐའ་མ་ལོག་པ	not having done or attempted the inexpiable deeds	las mtha' ma log pa
ལས་མཐའ་ལོག་པ	definition	las mtha' log pa
ལས་མཐའ་ལོག་པར་འགྱུར་བ	the action will regress/ be perverted	las mtha' log par 'gyur ba
ལས་མཐུན་པ	of similar profession, of similar karma	las mthun pa
ལས་འཐེན་ངལ་གསོ	retirement	las 'then ngal gso
ལས་འཐེན་ངལ་གསོ་བྱེད	retire	las 'then ngal gso byed
ལས་དང་སྐལ་པ་ལྡན་པ	fortunate and worthy	las dang skal pa ldan pa
ལས་དང་སྐལ་པར་ལྡན་པའི་གདུལ་བྱ	fortunate disciples	las dang skal par ldan pa'i gdul bya
ལས་དང་སྐལ་བར་ལྡན་པ	fortunate beings with suitable karma	las dang skal bar ldan pa
ལས་དང་སྐལ་བར་ལྡན་པའི་གང་ཟག	beings with fortune and favourable karma	las dang skal bar ldan pa'i gang zag
ལས་དང་སྐལ་བར་མི་ལྡན་པ་རྣམས	those who lacked the necessary karma and good fortune	las dang skal bar mi ldan pa rnams
ལས་དང་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས	by karma and nature	las dang ngo bo nyid kyis
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	Karmas and kleshas. These two comprise the truth of origin among the four noble truths	las dang nyon mongs pa
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་པའི་མུན་པ	darkness of karma and the kleshas	las dang nyon mongs pa'i mun pa
ལས་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ	karma and suffering	las dang sdug bsngal
ལས་དང་པོ	beginner	las dang po
ལས་དང་པོ་པ	beginner, first workers, pioneer	las dang po pa
ལས་དང་པོ་པའི་ས	first of four divisions of {tshogs lam}	las dang po pa'i sa
ལས་དང་པོ་བ	beginner * rookie, novice, trainee las dang po ba'i bsgrub bya bcu bzhi CHN	las dang po ba
ལས་དང་བག་ཆགས	actions & karmic traces	las dang bag chags
ལས་དང་འབྲས་བུ	inevitable relation between karma and its results	las dang 'bras bu
ལས་དང་འབྲེལ་བ	that which relates to las, what is directly connected with performance of work	las dang 'brel ba
ལས་དང་སྨོན་ལམ	karma and aspirations	las dang smon lam
ལས་དང་སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་དབང་གིས	your karma and aspirations have brought you ..	las dang smon lam gyi dbang gis
ལས་དམ	las khungs seal	las dam
ལས་དུས	working hours	las dus
ལས་དུས་བཅད་གྲངས	fixed working hours	las dus bcad grangs
ལས་དུས་འཕར་སྣོན	overtime	las dus 'phar snon
ལས་དོག་དཀའ་རྙོག་ཅན	crux	las dog dka' rnyog can
ལས་དོན	work/ activity and its foundation and goal, undertaking, enterprise, job, work, affairs, occupation, profession, career	las don
ལས་དོན་གལ་ཆེ་བ	important undertaking/ job	las don gal che ba
ལས་དོན་གྱི་གཞི་འདིང་བ	planning a job	las don gyi gzhi 'ding ba
ལས་དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཚུལ	handling of various matters	las don sgrub tshul
ལས་དོན་སྒྲུབ་སེམས	ambition	las don sgrub sems
ལས་དོན་བྱེད་པ	work	las don byed pa
ལས་དོན་ཚོ་ཆུང	work team	las don tsho chung
ལས་དོན་གཞི་འདིང་བ	planning a job	las don gzhi 'ding ba
ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	administrative council/ bureau	las don u yon lhan khang
ལས་དྲང་པོ	good actions, righteous deeds	las drang po
ལས་དྲིན་ཅན་མེད་པ	the kindest of all	las drin can med pa
ལས་དྲུག	actions of the six lokas	las drug
ལས་དྲུང	clerk	las drung
ལས་བདུད་གྱི	the work of Mara	las bdud gyi
ལས་འདས	transcended; gone beyond	las 'das
ལས་འདས་པའི་ངོ་བོ	essence that transcends [--/ the elaborations]	las 'das pa'i ngo bo
ལས་འདི་མ་བྱས་ཀ་མེད	this work should be done	las 'di ma byas ka med
ལས་འདུ་བྱེད	initiate karmic consequences	las 'du byed
ལས་འདུ་བྱེད་པ	formations of karma	las 'du byed pa
ལས་འདོན	act	las 'don
ལས་རྡོར	{las kyi rdo rje} karmavajra/ shrine keeper	las rdor
ལས་སྡེབ	labor exchange, mutual assistance, joint/ combined work	las sdeb
ལས་བསྡོམས	report	las bsdoms
ལས་བསྡོམས་རྒྱག	give a work/ progress report	las bsdoms rgyag
ལས་བསྡོམས་བྱེད	give a work/ progress report	las bsdoms byed
ལས་ནག	bad /evil karma/ action	las nag
ལས་ནག་པོ	bad /evil karma/ action	las nag po
ལས་ནད	occupational disease	las nad
ལས་ནམ་མྱོང་ཚུལ	time-frame and manner in which actions are experienced 2670	las nam myong tshul
ལས་ནི་ངོ་བོ་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	various kinds of activity	las ni ngo bo sna tshogs pa
ལས་ནུས	karmic capacity	las nus
ལས་ནོར་ས	lost the way (back home)	las nor sa
ལས་གནས	post, rank, position	las gnas
ལས་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ	CHN	las rnam pa lnga
ལས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་མདོ	Sutra on the Purification of Karma	las rnam par dag pa'i mdo
ལས་རྣམས་ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བར་གནས	dwelling within karmas and being lost/ strengthened	las rnams chud mi za bar gnas
ལས་རྣམས་དག་པ་ཕ་རོལ་འགྲོ	go to the other shore of pure action	las rnams dag pa pha rol 'gro
ལས་སྣ	post, rank, position, appointment	las sna
ལས་སྣ་པ	official, functionary	las sna pa
ལས་སྣ་ཚོགས	1) various work; 2) sun; 3) good and bad karma	las sna tshogs
ལས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅན	divine architect	las sna tshogs can
ལས་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ	1) odd jobs man, jack of all trades; 2); 1) smith of the gods; 2) sun	las sna tshogs pa
ལས་སྣང	impure samsaric appearances aroused by karma karmic experiences	las snang
ལས་སྣང་འཁོར་བ	karmic vision of samsara	las snang 'khor ba
ལས་སྣང་དག་པ	pure karmic perception; pure vision and good karma	las snang dag pa
ལས་སྣང་སོ་སོའི་ལས་སྣང	their respective karmic experiences	las snang so so'i las snang
ལས་སྣེ	1) dge 'dun pa spyi'i las byed mkhan; 2) las don gyi sne 'khrid mkhan nam sne mdzad mkhan,//las sne sbrel po	las sne
ལས་སྣེ་དབུ་ཆོས	monks' leaders umdze& geko [dbu mdzad / dge bskos]	las sne dbu chos
ལས་སྣོན	processing	las snon
ལས་སྣོན་བྱེད	processing	las snon byed
ལས་སྣོན་བཟོ་གྲྭ	processing plant	las snon bzo grwa
ལས་སྣོན་བཟོ་ལས	processing industry	las snon bzo las
ལས་པ	corrupt form of lus pa, workman, laborer, vice-magistrate of a village	las pa
ལས་དཔོན	1) supervisor, foreman, overseer; 2) 'u lag [compulsory post service] bskul nas farm-work leader	las dpon
ལས་སྤོས	change jobs	las spos
ལས་སྤྱོད	works, actions, way of life	las spyod
ལས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	abundant/ perfect activities	las phun sum tshogs pa
ལས་ཕུར	Action dagger	las phur
ལས་ཕོགས	salary for work	las phogs
ལས་ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ	be far from	las phyi rol du
ལས་ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས	turn away from	las phyir phyogs
ལས་ཕྱེད་སློབ་ཕྱེད	part time working and part time studying	las phyed slob phyed
ལས་ཕྱོད	measure of power of work/ action, labor productivity	las phyod
ལས་ཕྲན	small action/ responsibility/ duty	las phran
ལས་ཕྲན་ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས	various minor actions / activities	las phran phyogs bsdus
ལས་འཕྲལ	at once, immediately	las 'phral
ལས་འཕྲོ	(unripened, fortunate, leftover) karma, blessings following meritorious deeds, prosperity in consequence of good works, good luck, fortunate events	las 'phro
ལས་འཕྲོ་ཅན	to have the karmic connection; of fortunate karma, have the karmic stream [of.], possessing the karma	las 'phro can
ལས་འཕྲོ་བརྟུལ་བ	1	las 'phro brtul ba
ལས་འཕྲོ་མེད་ན	without the right conditions created by your past actions	las 'phro med na
ལས་འཕྲོ་ལུས་པ	1	las 'phro lus pa
ལས་འཕྲོའི་རྩིས་གྲངས	x {rim pas 'khor ba thar med 'ching ba'i las 'phro'i rtsis grangs} we start to do things that bind us inexorably to samsara	las 'phro'i rtsis grangs
ལས་འཕྲོས་དབང་བ	{rang rang las 'phros dbang ba'i chos bka'} whichever teaching was destined for them by their individual karma	las 'phros dbang ba
ལས་བུམ	Activity-vase	las bum
ལས་བུམ་སྒྲུབ་པ	consecration of the action vase	las bum sgrub pa
ལས་བུམ་ཆུ	tshogs	las bum chu
ལས་བྱ་བར་ཆུང	less energetic	las bya bar chung
ལས་བྱ་བར་ཆུང་བ	less active	las bya bar chung ba
ལས་བྱང	practice	las byang
ལས་བྱང་རྒྱས་འབྲིང	extensive and intermediate sadhana (manual(/ liturgy	las byang rgyas 'bring
ལས་བྱང་གཏེར་གཞུང	sadhana from the terma text	las byang gter gzhung
ལས་བྱང་ཚོར་ཆུང	the short sadhana text for {kar gling zhi khro}	las byang tshor chung
ལས་བྱང་ལས་ཀྱི་བྱང་བུ	ritualinstruction, practice manual	las byang las kyi byang bu
ལས་བྱས་པ་དོན་ལྡན	meaningful thing	las byas pa don ldan
ལས་བྱུང	source; come from	las byung
ལས་བྱུང་བ	arising from	las byung ba
ལས་བྱུང་བར	arising from	las byung bar
ལས་བྱུད་པ་ཀུན་ཇོབ་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse the relative bodhichitta of performing activities 2671	las byud pa kun job sems bskyed
ལས་བྱེ་བ	'dul ba'i brda chad cig ste, members of the sangha las la mi mthun par quarrel occurring	las bye ba
ལས་བྱེད	executive, perpetrator of acts, doer, staff, functionary, active ones	las byed
ལས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	attendants	las byed kyi pho nya
ལས་བྱེད་པ	1) country's officials/ government/ civil service, military and ordinary office and other workers/ cadres [~ including dmag dkyus, and doers of minor tasks]; 2) 1 w leading/ supervising work duty o...	las byed pa
ལས་བྱེད་པ་པོ	presiding	las byed pa po
ལས་བྱེད་པ་སློབ་དཔོན	ceremonial master [during an ordination]	las byed pa slob dpon
ལས་བྱེད་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན	ceremonial master	las byed pa'i slob dpon
ལས་བྱེད་པོ	attendants, workers	las byed po
ལས་བྱེད་ཕོ་ཉ	attendant divinities	las byed pho nya
ལས་བྱེད་མི་སྣ	country's officials/ government/ civil service, military and ordinary office and other workers/ cadres; 2) 1 w leading/ supervising work duty or a certain caretaking work bzo tshogs kyi worker; 3) ...	las byed mi sna
ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ	cadre/ administrative school	las byed slob grwa
ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་སྦྱོང	administrative training/ course	las byed slob sbyong
ལས་བྲེལ	having a karmic connection	las brel
ལས་བློན	minister supervising all the work	las blon
ལས་དབང	the power of action, 1's lot in life, destiny	las dbang
ལས་དབང་གིས	the power of our past actions	las dbang gis
ལས་དབོན	head workman	las dbon
ལས་དབྱེ་བ	the divisions of action/ karma	las dbye ba
ལས་འབོ	unstandardized local 'bo measure [not the usual = 20 bre]	las 'bo
ལས་འབྱུང	appear	las 'byung
ལས་འབྱུང་བ	bla ma'i man ngag las 'byung ba ltar - following your teachers oral advice	las 'byung ba
ལས་འབྲས	karma and its results, karmic connection, karma	las 'bras
ལས་འབྲས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཤད་པ	gave them teachings on the karmic law of cause and effect	las 'bras kyi chos bshad pa
ལས་འབྲས་ཀྱི་བསྡུས་པའི་ཆོས	the dharmas included within karma and fruition	las 'bras kyi bsdus pa'i chos
ལས་འབྲས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་གཞག་པ	presentation of karma and fruition	las 'bras kyi rnam par gzhag pa
ལས་འབྲས་འཁོར	get retribution	las 'bras 'khor
ལས་འབྲས་ཆུད་མི་ཟ་པ	1 who does not waste karma and fruition, karma and fruition never being lost	las 'bras chud mi za pa
ལས་འབྲས་དྲན་པ	become aware of the consequences of his acts	las 'bras dran pa
ལས་འབྲས་ནི	Concerning the cause and effect of their karma:	las 'bras ni
ལས་འབྲས་བུ	karma, and fruition, the fruit of 1's deeds	las 'bras bu
ལས་འབྲས་ལ་བརྩིས་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	to reckon the consequences of your actions	las 'bras la brtsis 'jog byed pa
ལས་འབྲས་ལ་ལོག་ལྟ	wrong view of karma and fruition	las 'bras la log lta
ལས་འབྲེལ	karmic link/ connection	las 'brel
ལས་སྦྱོར	application of the activities	las sbyor
ལས་སྦྱོར་མགོན་པོ	lord of applications	las sbyor mgon po
ལས་སྦྲེལ	an associate	las sbrel
ལས་མ	manufactured things	las ma
ལས་མ་མངོན	manifested as not more than	las ma mngon
ལས་མ་དག་པ	not purified of karma	las ma dag pa
ལས་མ་བྱས་པ་དང་མི་འཕྲད་པ	TSE	las ma byas pa dang mi 'phrad pa
ལས་མ་ཟད་པས	because the measure of his deeds was not yet fulfilled las ma g.yos pa - has not strayed/ wavered/ deviated (from); there is no denying/ getting away from the fact (that)	las ma zad pas
ལས་མ་རུངས་པ་འདི་འདྲ	How could he misbehave like this?	las ma rungs pa 'di 'dra
ལས་མ་བསགས་པ	before accumulating the action	las ma bsags pa
ལས་མི	worker *, laborer	las mi
ལས་མི་དགེ་སྤོངས	Avoid unwholesome acts!	las mi dge spongs
ལས་མི་ཉུང་བ	not less than	las mi nyung ba
ལས་མི་ལྡོག་པར	there is no turning back from	las mi ldog par
ལས་མི་འབྱུང	not arise other than	las mi 'byung
ལས་མི་གཞན་པ	{las mi gzhan par} without being anything other than . . .	las mi gzhan pa
ལས་མི་གཞན་པར	(to be) none other than. without being anything other than ..	las mi gzhan par
ལས་མི་བསླུ་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	such is karma, which cannot be deceived	las mi bslu ba'i chos nyid
ལས་མིན་པས	no other way except	las min pas
ལས་མེད	the undestined ones, unemployed	las med
ལས་མེད་པ	the undestined ones, unemployed	las med pa
ལས་མྱུར་དུ་བྱེད་པ	do work quickly	las myur du byed pa
ལས་མྱུར་དུ་བྱེད་པའི་མིང	terms signifying the quick performance of work	las myur du byed pa'i ming
ལས་དམག	military engineer corps	las dmag
ལས་དམག་དམག་དཔུང	military engineer corps	las dmag dmag dpung
ལས་རྨས	work injury	las rmas
ལས་སྨོན	karma and aspiration. Syn {las dang smon lam}	las smon
ལས་སྨོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	feast song by Jigmey Lingpa	las smon rten 'brel
ལས་སྨོན་མྱི་དབང་གིས	due to my previous karma and aspirations 2672	las smon myi dbang gis
ལས་སྨོན་ལམ	karma and aspirations	las smon lam
ལས་གཙོ	foreman, supervisor, overseer	las gtso
ལས་རྩལ་དགེ་རྒན	technician	las rtsal dge rgan
ལས་རྩལ་པ	technician	las rtsal pa
ལས་རྩལ་བཟོ་པ	skilled worker	las rtsal bzo pa
ལས་རྩི་བ་པོ	figurer of good and bad karma [of earlier and later birth]	las rtsi ba po
ལས་རྩིས	figurer of good and bad karma [of earlier and later birth]	las rtsis
ལས་རྩོམ	beginning/ planning/ undertaking [of work/ a job]	las rtsom
ལས་རྩོམ་པ	beginning/ planning/ undertaking [of work/ a job]	las rtsom pa
ལས་རྩོལ	labor, work	las rtsol
ལས་རྩོལ་ནུས་ཕྱོད	labor productivity	las rtsol nus phyod
ལས་རྩོལ་པ	laborer	las rtsol pa
ལས་རྩོལ་བྱེད	labor, work	las rtsol byed
ལས་རྩོལ་ཚོགས་པ	labor party	las rtsol tshogs pa
ལས་བརྩོན་ཅན	hard-working	las brtson can
ལས་ཚད	amount/ level/ quota of work	las tshad
ལས་ཚན	classifications of work, work department/ section, position/ rank in an office	las tshan
ལས་ཚན་དུ་འཇུག	appoint	las tshan du 'jug
ལས་ཚན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	put into office	las tshan du 'jug pa
ལས་ཚན་ནས་འདོན	dismiss	las tshan nas 'don
ལས་ཚན་ནས་འདོན་པ	put out of office	las tshan nas 'don pa
ལས་ཚན་པ	Tibetan govt. 5th rank of workers	las tshan pa
ལས་ཚབ	substitute/ replacement worker, acting [khri pa las tshab: acting chair], charge d'affairs, deputy	las tshab
ལས་ཚིག	action showing word	las tshig
ལས་ཚེགས་པྲན་བུ	minor activities	las tshegs pran bu
ལས་ཚེགས་ཕྲན་བུ	minor activities	las tshegs phran bu
ལས་ཚོགས	yogic applications, actions	las tshogs
ལས་ཚོགས་རབ་འབྱམས	aspects of various activities	las tshogs rab 'byams
ལས་མཚན་ཉིད་སྒྲུབ་དགོས	the characteristics of karma must be established	las mtshan nyid sgrub dgos
ལས་མཚམས	work intervals/ break	las mtshams
ལས་མཚམས་འཇོག	strike, walk out, stop work	las mtshams 'jog
ལས་མཚམས་འཇོག་པ	strike	las mtshams 'jog pa
ལས་འཚེར	not wanting to work	las 'tsher
ལས་མཛད་པ	perform action	las mdzad pa
ལས་འཛིན་གཉེར་པ	caretaker las thog	las 'dzin gnyer pa
ལས་འཛིན་པ	one holding an office, one having work on his hand	las 'dzin pa
ལས་འཛིན་པའི་བསྡུ་བ	basis of distinction and distinguishing dharma gathered into a common basis	las 'dzin pa'i bsdu ba
ལས་འཛིན་ལྷན་ཚོགས	administrative committee, board of directors	las 'dzin lhan tshogs
ལས་འཛོལ	mistakes [in work/ activity]	las 'dzol
ལས་རྫོགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	completed action {gzhi bsam sbyor ba mthar thug tshang bas las rdzogs par byed de}	las rdzogs par byed pa
ལས་ཞྭ་ལས་གོས	Tibetan govt. skabs las khungs la 'gro skabs hat and garments that are worn	las zhwa las gos
ལས་ཞག	work day	las zhag
ལས་ཞུགས	employment	las zhugs
ལས་ཞུགས་མི་གྲངས	employed population	las zhugs mi grangs
ལས་ཞུགས་སོང་ལོ	length of time employed	las zhugs song lo
ལས་ཞོར	spare time	las zhor
ལས་ཞོར་གི་རོལ་མོ་བ	amateur musicians	las zhor gi rol mo ba
ལས་ཞོར་སློབ་གྲྭ	night/ spare time school	las zhor slob grwa
ལས་གཞན	other than	las gzhan
ལས་གཞན་ཅི་ཞིག	what else other than	las gzhan ci zhig
ལས་གཞན་དུ་མེད་པ	nothing other than {ngo bo rang gi rtsa ba'i bla ma las gzhan du med pa} the nature of all of them is nothing other than your own root teacher	las gzhan du med pa
ལས་གཞན་པ	other than	las gzhan pa
ལས་གཞན་མེད	there is nothing other than . . .	las gzhan med
ལས་གཞི	project, undertaking	las gzhi
ལས་གཞུག	subsequent action {tshe 'di'i las gzhug tshos kyis bsdu tshul}	las gzhug
ལས་གཞུག་ཞིབ་བཤེར	evaluation of work performance	las gzhug zhib bsher
ལས་གཞུངས་པ	1) skilled in work; 2) in work having very good thoughts	las gzhungs pa
ལས་བཞི	Four Rites, Four activities, Four karmas. Pacification {zhi} enrichment {rgyas} subjugation {dbang} and wrath {drag}. the four actions; rites, the four	las bzhi
ལས་བཞི་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གྱི་ཚོགས	the feast that spontaneously accomplishes the four activities	las bzhi lhun grub gyi tshogs
ལས་བཞིའི་སྣེ་འཛིན	leader/ guide in the four karmas	las bzhi'i sne 'dzin
ལས་བཞིའི་སྦྱིན་སྲེག	fire puja of the four activities	las bzhi'i sbyin sreg
ལས་བཞིའི་ཡན་ལག	CHN	las bzhi'i yan lag
ལས་བཞིའི་རིམ་པས	by the stages of the four karmas	las bzhi'i rim pas
ལས་བཞུགས་གསར་པ	apprentice	las bzhugs gsar pa
ལས་ཟག་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	w defiled karma	las zag pa dang bcas pa
ལས་ཟད	exhaustion of karma	las zad
ལས་ཟད་པ	having exhausted [karma]	las zad pa
ལས་ཟམ	in bricklaying/ masonry rkang zam/las khri	las zam
ལས་ཟུར	present and former (office holder) las gzugs kyi phung po'i char gtogs pa	las zur
ལས་གཟེངས	good or distinguished service or work	las gzengs
ལས་བཟང	good work	las bzang
ལས་བཟང་ངན་གང་བྱས	whatever you have done, good or bad	las bzang ngan gang byas
ལས་བཟུང	beginning w, from -- onwards, ever since	las bzung
ལས་བཟོ	officials and workers (abbr of las byed pa and bzo pa)	las bzo
ལས་བཟོ་ཚོགས་པ	trade union	las bzo tshogs pa
ལས་བཟོའི་སློབ་གྲྭ	staff and workers school	las bzo'i slob grwa
ལས་བཟློག	opposite	las bzlog
ལས་བཟློག་སྟེ	eliminate, turn back	las bzlog ste
ལས་འོང་འོང་འདྲ་མོ	some work action gang yang byed thub mdog kha po	las 'ong 'ong 'dra mo
ལས་ཡང་མེད	other than that	las yang med
ལས་ཡུན་ཆུ་ཚོད་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་ལམ་ལུགས	8 hour labor system [PRC]	las yun chu tshod brgyad kyi lam lugs
ལས་ཡུལ	work site/ area	las yul
ལས་ཡུལ་དངོས	on the spot/ work site/ area	las yul dngos
ལས་ཡུལ་དངོས་ཀྱི་གྲོས་ཚོགས	on the spot meeting	las yul dngos kyi gros tshogs
ལས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱོང་བ	having completely abandoned karma	las yongs su sbyong ba
ལས་རབ་གྲུབ་པ	* Accomplishing the Highest Action	las rab grub pa
ལས་རབ་གླིང་པ	1856-1926. alias {ngag bla bsod rgyal} (1856-1926)	las rab gling pa
ལས་རབ་རྗོགས་པ	Fulfilled Action 2673	las rab rjogs pa
ལས་རབ་འབྱམས	infinitely various activities	las rab 'byams
ལས་རབ་རྫོ་གས	totally fulfilled action	las rab rdzo gas
ལས་རབ་རྫོགས	totally fulfilled action	las rab rdzogs
ལས་རབ་རྫོགས་པ	(pure realm of) Utterly Perfect and Complete Activity/ Skt.?	las rab rdzogs pa
ལས་རབ་རྫོགས་པའི་ཞིང	Totally Fulfilled Action, Buddhafield of Consummate Activity, Amoghasiddhi's Buddhafield	las rab rdzogs pa'i zhing
ལས་རབ་རྫོགས་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས	the realm of Fulfilled Activity	las rab rdzogs pa'i zhing khams
ལས་རིགས	different kinds of work/ action, occupation, vocation	las rigs
ལས་རིགས་ཁག	various occupations/ walks of life	las rigs khag
ལས་རིགས་ཁག་གི་མི་དམངས	people from all walks of life	las rigs khag gi mi dmangs
ལས་རིགས་གཅིག་པ	w the same occupation[al background]	las rigs gcig pa
ལས་རིགས་ཆུང་རྩག་གི་བདག་པོ	small proprietor	las rigs chung rtsag gi bdag po
ལས་རིགས་སློབ་སྦྱོང	vocational training	las rigs slob sbyong
ལས་རིམ	sequence, activities, procedures/ stages/ levels/ steps for the activities [sadhana practice]/ work	las rim
ལས་རུང	workable, ability to perform a function, bar bkol bzod pa	las rung
ལས་རེམ་པ	make a great effort in work	las rem pa
ལས་རེས	shift, taking turns to work/ on duty	las res
ལས་རེས་བརྗེ	change shifts, relieve the guard	las res brje
ལས་རེས་སྡོད	work a shift, take turns to work/ on duty	las res sdod
ལས་རོ	remainder of work	las ro
ལས་རོགས	colleague, subordinate	las rogs
ལས་རོགས་ངལ་རྩོལ་པ	auxiliary laborer/ worker	las rogs ngal rtsol pa
ལས་རོགས་པ	helper, assistant	las rogs pa
ལས་རོགས་གཞོན་པ	deputy	las rogs gzhon pa
ལས་རོར་མ་སོང་བ	there was no work left	las ror ma song ba
ལས་རོར་སོང་བ	work left unfinished	las ror song ba
ལས་རླུང	action motility, karmic (winds, energy), wind of karma, (ye shes in rkyang ma or ro ma), SA gzung bskyed kyi rlung, 'dzin gyi rlung, karmic energy	las rlung
ལས་རླུང་གི་འགྱུ་བ	capricious movements of karmic energy	las rlung gi 'gyu ba
ལས་རླུང་གིས་བསྐྱོད་པ་བཞིན	moved by the winds of karma	las rlung gis bskyod pa bzhin
ལས་རླུང་རྒྱུགས	work out, go smoothly	las rlung rgyugs
ལས་ལ་བཀོལ	set aside/ use action	las la bkol
ལས་ལ་བཀྲལ་བ	engage in business	las la bkral ba
ལས་ལ་སྐོ་བ	destine	las la sko ba
ལས་ལ་བསྐོས་པ	destined, appointed to the work	las la bskos pa
ལས་ལ་འགྱེད་པ	to send into action	las la 'gyed pa
ལས་ལ་འཇུག	enter into /abide in karma	las la 'jug
ལས་ལ་འཇུག་པར	enter into /abide in karma	las la 'jug par
ལས་ལ་དུར་བ	hasten to work	las la dur ba
ལས་ལ་དབང་བ	power to mitigate the punishments of creatures, SA dbang bcu	las la dbang ba
ལས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	application of the activities	las la sbyor ba
ལས་ལ་མྱུར	quick to act	las la myur
ལས་ལ་འཛུར་བ	shun work, evade labor	las la 'dzur ba
ལས་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	incumbent, one holding an office	las la zhugs pa
ལས་ལ་སུགས་པ	incumbent	las la sugs pa
ལས་ལམ	karmic deeds	las lam
ལས་ལམ་གསུམ	TSE	las lam gsum
ལས་ལས་སྐྱེས	arose through karma	las las skyes
ལས་ལས་བྱུང་བ	the arising of karma	las las byung ba
ལས་ལུགས	1) way of karma, way/ system/ custom of doing work; 2) path tradition	las lugs
ལས་ལོ	working years, years employed	las lo
ལས་ལོ་ཅན	lazy	las lo can
ལས་ལོག	work bskyar du byed pa	las log
ལས་ཤག	work hostel	las shag
ལས་ཤིང	bamboo stick	las shing
ལས་ཤུགས་ཅན	1) powerful in working; 2) powerful work	las shugs can
ལས་ཤོག	government document	las shog
ལས་ཤོགས	measure of power of work/ action, labor productivity	las shogs
ལས་ཤོར	jobless/ unemployed [person]	las shor
ལས་སུ	concerning	las su
ལས་སུ་སྐོ་བ	appoint a person to work	las su sko ba
ལས་སུ་བསྐུལ་བ	engage	las su bskul ba
ལས་སུ་བསྐོ་བ	employ, appoint to an work	las su bsko ba
ལས་སུ་བསྐོས་བ	employed, employment	las su bskos ba
ལས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	execute	las su 'jug pa
ལས་སུ་བཏང	to waste time	las su btang
ལས་སུ་རྣམ་པར་དག	completely purify karma	las su rnam par dag
ལས་སུ་བྱ་བ	2nd case of tibetan grammar, dative case	las su bya ba
ལས་སུ་བྱ་བའི་སྒྲ	yul of an action la doer rang gi don du producing action nye bar ston pa'i rkyen: w 7 kinds or 2, eg in nam mkhar 'phyar [hoist, winnow] RA shows nam mkha' = bya ba'i yul, and in chu la zam pa btsu...	las su bya ba'i sgra
ལས་སུ་མ་རུངས་པ	dysfunctional {rang rgyud las su ma rungs pa} his mind does not function properly	las su ma rungs pa
ལས་སུ་མི་རུང་པ	unmanageable, inept, inapplicability, ineptitude, inability, not apt / fitting, unsuitable, inappropriate, incapacity, awkward, clumsy	las su mi rung pa
ལས་སུ་མི་རུང་བ	deficient, incomplete; x {lkugs par skyes na rnam shes las su mi rung bas chos byed du mi khoms} those born mute or mentally deficient have no opportunity to practise the Dharma because their facul...	las su mi rung ba
ལས་སུ་རུང	adequate (realization, perfectly fit, capable, competent, workable	las su rung
ལས་སུ་རུང་པ	adequate (realization, perfectly fit, capable, competent, workable make workable TSE	las su rung pa
ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	(to become) flexible/ pliable/ adaptable; finely attuned	las su rung ba
ལས་སུ་རུང་བ་ཐོབ	pliancy is attained	las su rung ba thob
ལས་སུ་རུང་བར་བྱས་པ	made workable	las su rung bar byas pa
ལས་སུ་རུངས	right orientation; x {blo las su ma rungs pas} their minds lack the right orientation	las su rungs
ལས་སེ	ah, good, fine, nice, yes, all right, right	las se
ལས་སེང	beaks in work/ activity	las seng
ལས་སྲབ་པ	delicate karma, reins of karma	las srab pa
ལས་སྲོལ	1) way of karma, way/ system/ custom of doing work; 2) path tradition	las srol
ལས་སླ་པོ	easy	las sla po
ལས་སླ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	facilitate	las sla po bzo ba
ལས་སླ་པོར	easily	las sla por
ལས་སླ་བ	easy work	las sla ba
ལས་སློབ	assistant preceptor [during an ordination ceremony]	las slob
ལས་སློབ་གསུམ	CHN	las slob gsum
ལས་གསར	new work	las gsar
ལས་གསར་པ	new work[er]	las gsar pa
ལས་གསུམ	{rten gyi sgo nas lus ngag yid kyi las gsum} In terms of basis there are three: karmic actions of body, of speech and of mind	las gsum
ལས་གསུམ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure of the three kinds of action	las gsum rnam par dag pa
ལས་གསུམ་པོ	three types of deeds	las gsum po
ལས་གསེང	beaks in work/ activity	las gseng
ལས་གསེང་ལུས་སྦྱང	exercise beaks in work	las gseng lus sbyang
ལས་གསོག་ཚུལ	ways to create karma	las gsog tshul
ལས་བསགས	; x {mi dge ba'i las du ma bsags} done terrible things	las bsags
ལས་བསགས་པ	karma can be created	las bsags pa
ལས་ལྷག་པ	more than {bdud rtsi'i 'od zer zla ba stong phrag tshogs las lhag pa spros} rays of nectar radiated as if from more than a thousand moons	las lhag pa
ལི	li =.333mm, pear, bronze, bell metal, apple, SA sli, fire element, 1 of spar kha brgyad	li
ལི་ཀ	a tree	li ka
ལི་ཀ་ར	sugar [cane]	li ka ra
ལི་ཀ་ར་ཤིང་འཕེལ	ancient malda and dinajpur districts	li ka ra shing 'phel
ལི་དཀར	kind of bronze	li dkar
ལི་སྐུ	image of bronze	li sku
ལི་ཁ་ར	1) sugar cane; 2) region in India	li kha ra
ལི་ཁར	phye hvag rdog por byas pa, 'dul ba las bshad pa'i zhag bdun pa'i sman gyi bye brag cig	li khar
ལི་ཁྲ	compound made of gold & silver & zinc & iron	li khra
ལི་ཁྲི	1) orange/ sindhura color	li khri
ཨོརངེ	red color, vermilion, rust	orange
ལི་ག་དུར	{li ga dur} med. herb	li ga dur
ལི་གི་སྐྱེས	crow	li gi skyes
ལི་འགག	small plate made of bell metal	li 'gag
ལི་ཆུ	"minium water, thin minium pain	li chu
ལི་ཏྭ	plum	li twa
ལི་གཏི	red lead, mercury, 1 of 8 sman bla ritual objects	li gti
ལི་ཐང	li thang rdzong	li thang
ལི་ཐི	calendar, almanac, SA lo tho, le'u tho	li thi
ལི་ཐུར	bronze spoon	li thur
ལི་ཐོ	calendar	li tho
ལི་དོང་གྲ	sga dmar	li dong gra
ལི་དོང་ར	medicinal drug	li dong ra
ལི་སྡེ་པ་གོ	Lidepago, in Tsang	li sde pa go
ལི་སྡེར	plate or dish made of bell-metal	li sder
ལི་སྡེར་སྡེར་མ	plate, saucer, dish	li sder sder ma
ལི་སྡོང	pear tree	li sdong
ལི་ནག	lcags rigs li nag shas che ba	li nag
ལི་ནམ	auction, public sale	li nam
ལི་པ་ནུན	Lebanon	li pa nun
ལི་པེ་པའི་ཡ	Liberia	li pe pa'i ya
ལི་ཕང	the color orange	li phang
ལི་བ	1) hair [tightly] curled/ hanging down; 2) squinting, squint-eyed, faulty eyes	li ba
ལི་བ་མིག	squinting eyes 2675	li ba mig
ལི་མ	bronze	li ma
ལི་མ་ཆུ	li ma river	li ma chu
ལི་མ་ལོག	evil return for good done	li ma log
ལི་མིག	squinting eyes	li mig
ལི་མེ	CH 1 of the spar kha brgyad	li me
ལི་དམར	metal li dmar shas che ba	li dmar
ལི་སྨུག	kind of bronze	li smug
ལི་ཙ་བྱི	a noble family of magadha	li tsa byi
ལི་ཚ་བིའ	Lichivis	li tsha bi'
ལི་ཚ་བྱི	[Skt] 1) region and people of Vaishali; 2) good natured, eminent, noble, wise, learned, competent; 3) Lichivis	li tsha byi
ལི་ཚི	CH li fruit	li tshi
ལི་ཝ	squint-eyed	li wa
ལི་ཝང	1) orange color; 2) li khri	li wang
ལི་ཡུའུ་ཉ	carp	li yu'u nya
ལི་ཡུལ	a district in Tibet	li yul
ལི་ཡེ་ཚེ	CH buddhist teacher li g.yas - right LI	li ye tshe
ལི་ལིང	China	li ling
ལི་ལུགས	khotan, central asian art style	li lugs
ལི་ཤི	one of the {phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad} the eight outer principal [medicines]; cloves	li shi
ལི་ཤི་ཝེར	nutmeg	li shi wer
ལི་ཤི་འོད་ལྡན་མཚོ	{li shi 'od ldan} lake	li shi 'od ldan mtsho
ལི་ཤིའི་གུར་ཁང	{li shi'i gur khang} [TT old and new brda'i distinguishing legs par bshad pa 15th century by skyogs ston smon grub lo tsh' ba, 'dir brda gsar rnying gi tha snyad chig stong lhag tsam yod pa tshang ...	li shi'i gur khang
ལི་སི་ལོང	Lisbon	li si long
ལི་སུ	a district in Tibet	li su
ལི་སེར	1) yellow bell metal; 2) yellowish orange	li ser
ལི་ཧང	orange color[ed]	li hang
ལིག་བུ	malachite [med.]	lig bu
ལིག་བུ་མིག	malachite	lig bu mig
ལིག་མི་རྒྱ	king of ancient zhang zhung, term used as an attribute by many	lig mi rgya
ལིག་ཤི་ཝེར	[arch] dza' ti	lig shi wer
ལིང	[arch] /(1 dar srab mo zhig; 2) twinkling [w stars]; 3) red flag	ling
ལིང་སྐེད	rngon pa 'khrab dus thig ral gyi 'og tu bcing rgyu'i dar gyi ska rags shig	ling sked
ལིང་བསྐྱུར	cast out entirely	ling bskyur
ལིང་ག	sign, mark, male organ, effigy of devil or enemy, large lhasa gardens	ling ga
ལིང་ག་ཅན	man	ling ga can
ལིང་ག་འབྲུབ་ཁུང་དུ་བཅུག	Place the effigy in the triangular pit	ling ga 'brub khung du bcug
ལིང་ག་ལ་ཕུར་པ་གདབ	Stabbing the purpa into the effigy	ling ga la phur pa gdab
ལིང་གིས་བོར	completely abandon	ling gis bor
ལིང་གེས	completely	ling ges
ལིང་གོལ་མ	a large hornet	ling gol ma
ལིང་བསྒྲལ	ling ga bsgral ba ste gdon bgegs la drag gnon byed pa	ling bsgral
ལིང་ངེ	dangling, waving, floating [about a cloud]. swinging, [--their staffs]	ling nge
ལིང་ངེ་ཕོད་ཀ་བ	flowing (hair	ling nge phod ka ba
ལིང་ངེ་བ	rocking	ling nge ba
ལིང་གཅིག	of one piece	ling gcig
ལིང་ཆུ་གསེར་ཁབ	a district in Tibet	ling chu gser khab
ལིང་ཏོག	film, pellicle, cataracts	ling tog
ལིང་སྟེ	entirely, complete	ling ste
ལིང་ཐོག	film on the eye, cataract	ling thog
ལིང་པ	hunter	ling pa
ལིང་པོ	whole piece	ling po
ལིང་བ	any entire piece	ling ba
ལིང་བྱེད་པ	to swing {lang ling}	ling byed pa
ལིང་ཙེ	lattice	ling tse
ལིང་ཚབ	the substitute of the effigy, substitute for the effigy	ling tshab
ལིང་ཚེ	1) dum bu dum bu [many fragments/ pieces?; 2) lattice, grating	ling tshe
ལིང་ཚེ་དགུ	lattice of nine sectors	ling tshe dgu
ལིང་མཚོ་སྔོན་མོ	Lingtso Ngönmo	ling mtsho sngon mo
ལིང་བཞི	four pieces	ling bzhi
ལིང་རོ	effigy corpse	ling ro
ལིང་ལིང	gently drifting, twinkling, tremble, palpitate, shake	ling ling
ལིང་ལོང	gently drifting, twinkling, tremble, palpitate, shake	ling long
ལིང་ཤང	CH lcags sam li gyer [chant?] kha shas dang red tail [rnga dmar gyi tshom bus [clusters?] adorned horses' mules' donkeys' neck ornament	ling shang
ལིང་ཧྲི	consul	ling hri
ལིང་ཧྲིའི་ལས་ཁུངས	consulate	ling hri'i las khungs
ལིངས	banished, forsaken, abandoned, hunting in which a number of people ar engaged	lings
ལིངས་ཀྱི	hound	lings kyi
ལིངས་ཀྱིས	completely	lings kyis
ལིངས་ཀྱིས་བསྐྱུར	cast out entirely	lings kyis bskyur
ལིངས་བསྐྱུར	total surrender; abandon completely. See {blos lings bskyur}	lings bskyur
ལིངས་ཁྱི	hound, hunting dog	lings khyi
ལིངས་ཁྲ	hunting falcon, hawk	lings khra
ལིངས་གྱིས་བོར	cast away completely	lings gyis bor
ལིངས་གཏོང་བ	get by hunting, hunt down	lings gtong ba
ལིངས་བཏང་བ	what has been got by hunting, game shot or caught	lings btang ba
ལིངས་དུང	hunting horn or flute	lings dung
ལིངས་འདེབས་པ	hunt	lings 'debs pa
ལིངས་པ	hunter, huntsman, quite round or globular 2676	lings pa
ལིངས་པ་མོ	huntress	lings pa mo
ལིངས་པོ	1) total, complete; 2) round, spherical	lings po
ལིངས་ལ་འགྲོ	go hunting	lings la 'gro
ལིངས་ལ་འགྲོ་བ	go a shooting, hunting	lings la 'gro ba
ལིངས་སེ	entirely, completely, all	lings se
ལིངས་སེ་ཁ་ལ	entirely, completely, all	lings se kha la
ལིངས་སེ་ཁ་ལ་མོས་བྱེད་པ་རེད	she did it all by herself	lings se kha la mos byed pa red
ལིངས་སེ་མོས་བྱེད་པ་རེད	she did it all by herself	lings se mos byed pa red
ལིན་ཐན	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lin than
ལིན་ཐལ་རྡོ	apatite	lin thal rdo
ལིན་རྡོ	phosphorite	lin rdo
ལིན་རྡོའི་གཏེར་ཁ	phosphorite mine	lin rdo'i gter kha
ལིན་པིའོ	Lin Piao	lin pi'o
ལིན་ལུད	phosphate fertilizer	lin lud
ལིབ	all	lib
ལིམ་ལོག	[arch] ungratefulness	lim log
ལིའི་པི་ཡ	Libya	li'i pi ya
ལིའི་ཙི	chestnut	li'i tsi
ལིའི་ཡུལ	1) li yul district; 2) Khotan	li'i yul
ལིའི་ཡོ་ཆས	bronze implements	li'i yo chas
ལིའི་ཡོ་ཆས་སྤྱོད	use bronze implements	li'i yo chas spyod
ལིའི་ཡོ་ཆས་སྤྱོད་པའི་དུས་རབས	bronze age	li'i yo chas spyod pa'i dus rabs
ལིའུ་ཐོ	notebook of years and months	li'u tho
ལིའུ་སོན	sulfuric acid	li'u son
ལིའུ་ཧའོ་ཆི	Liu Shao chi	li'u ha'o chi
ལིའོ་ཉིང	Liaoning Province	li'o nying
ལིའོ་ཉིན	Liaoning Province	li'o nyin
ལུ	girl, knot, snag	lu
ལུ་ཀང	crucible for melting gold and silver	lu kang
ལུ་ཀུ་མི་ཏོ་ནེ	Lu Cumitoni (village in Sardinia)	lu ku mi to ne
ལུ་གུ	lamb	lu gu
ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད	(self-perpetuating) continuum; interlinking (manner)	lu gu rgyud
ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད་དུ	uninterruptedly, continuously, 1 after another	lu gu rgyud du
ལུ་གུ་མེ་ཏོག	{lu gu me tog} med. herb	lu gu me tog
ལུ་གུ་ལག་སྐྱེས	rang sa nas thon pa'i yon tan can sogs kyi dpe, rang dgon gyi lu gu lag skyes kyi dge bshes	lu gu lag skyes
ལུ་ཏི་ཏ	name of a group of hills near patwalotana river	lu ti ta
ལུ་བ	to cough; {lu ba, lu ba, lu ba} intr. v	lu ba
ལུ་མ	green grass growing in swamps, pool containing a spring	lu ma
ལུ་མ་ཅན	rich in springs	lu ma can
ལུ་མ་བྱང་སྟོང་མཚོ	{lu ma byang stong} lake	lu ma byang stong mtsho
ལཱུ་ཡི་བ	Luyipa [mahasiddha]	lU yi ba
ལུ་ལུ	endearment interjection	lu lu
ལུ་ཧང	CH med. minerals	lu hang
ལུ་ཧི་ཏ	group of hills on bank of patwalotana	lu hi ta
ལུ་ཧི་པ	Luhipa [mahasiddha]	lu hi pa
ལུག	1) sheep * [2 animal of the 12 yr cycle]; 3) Aries	lug
ལུག་ཀླད	sheep brain [med.]	lug klad
ལུག་སྐྱེས	fragrant bark of feronia elephantum	lug skyes
ལུག་ཁལ་པ	khal 'gel sa'i sheep	lug khal pa
ལུག་ཁོག	carcass of a slaughtered sheep	lug khog
ལུག་ཁྱིམ	sign of the zodiac called the ram	lug khyim
ལུག་ཁྱུ	flock of sheep, herd of sheep	lug khyu
ལུག་ཁྱུའི་སྣ་འཁྲིད་མཁན	leader of a flock of sheep	lug khyu'i sna 'khrid mkhan
ལུག་གལ	sheep's load, bags put on the back of sheep	lug gal
ལུག་གི་དཀར་མོ་ལག་པའི་གཅོས	mutton of sheep slaughtered by the hand	lug gi dkar mo lag pa'i gcos
ལུག་གི་སྐད་སྒྲ	baa	lug gi skad sgra
ལུག་གི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion of Aries, third of {skar khyim bcu gnyis}	lug gi khyim
ལུག་གི་ཁྱུ	flock of sheep	lug gi khyu
ལུག་གི་རྡུལ	1) dust raised by sheep; 2) sheep particle	lug gi rdul
ལུག་གི་བལ	sheep's wool	lug gi bal
ལུག་གི་རིལ་མ	sheep dung	lug gi ril ma
ལུག་གི་ལོ	sheep-year	lug gi lo
ལུག་གི་གཤེད	wolf	lug gi gshed
ལུག་གུ	lamb	lug gu
ལུག་མགོ	1) sheep head; 2) in Tibetan local custom on new year rten 'brel sgrig chas shig	lug mgo
ལུག་རྒྱག་པ	to apply, fertilizer, manure, exudes, expelled [boiled out]	lug rgyag pa
ལུག་རྒྱུད	threads	lug rgyud
ལུག་སྒལ	sheep's load, bags put on the back of sheep	lug sgal
ལུག་ངལ	{lug ngal} herb [= {lug chung}	lug ngal
ལུག་ངལ་བ	medicinal herb	lug ngal ba
ལུག་ཆིང་བ	{lug ching ba} herb = {lug ngal}	lug ching ba
ལུག་ཆུང	aster poliothamnus diels	lug chung
ལུག་ཆུང་བ	medicinal herb	lug chung ba
ལུག་ཆེན	aster asteroides o. ktze., aster farreri w. w. smith et j. f. jeffrey., aster flaccidus bunge	lug chen
ལུག་མཉེ	herb {lug mnye}	lug mnye
ལུག་སྙིད	wether	lug snyid
ལུག་ལྟར་ལྐུགས་པ	stupid, innocent like a sheep	lug ltar lkugs pa
ལུག་ཐང	wether	lug thang
ལུག་ཐུག	ram	lug thug
ལུག་ཐུག་གི་རྭ	ram's horn	lug thug gi rwa
ལུག་ཐུག་གི་རྭ་དབྱིབས	like a rma's horn	lug thug gi rwa dbyibs
ལུག་ཐུལ	dress of sheep skin	lug thul
ལུག་ཐོང་པ	three year old ram	lug thong pa
ལུག་ཐོང་ཙིར	three-year-old ram	lug thong tsir
ལུག་གདང	sheep 'dogs byed kyi thag gdang	lug gdang
ལུག་རྡང	sheep 'dogs byed kyi thag gdang	lug rdang
ལུག་རྡུལ	1) a measure the size of 7 {ri bong gi rdul}; 2) dust raised by a flock of sheep	lug rdul
ལུག་ནང་བཞིན་རྡུང་ཀ་རྒྱབ་པ	ram	lug nang bzhin rdung ka rgyab pa
ལུག་སྣོད	dry or wet bcud lug sa'i snod spyad	lug snod
ལུག་པ	to give way, to fall down; intr. pf. of {lug pa}; {lug pa, lugs pa, lug pa, lugs} trans. v.; ft. of {lug pa}	lug pa
ལུག་པར་མི་འགྱུར་བའི་སླད་དུ	never hold back their energy 2677	lug par mi 'gyur ba'i slad du
ལུག་ལྤགས	sheepskin	lug lpags
ལུག་ཕོ	ram	lug pho
ལུག་ཕྲུག	lamb	lug phrug
ལུག་བལ	fleece, sheep's wool	lug bal
ལུག་འབྱུང་ཤར	arise in ordinary sequence	lug 'byung shar
ལུག་མ་ཉེ	polygonatum graminifolium hook.	lug ma nye
ལུག་མ་མོ	ewe	lug ma mo
ལུག་མིག	aster souliei franch., aster diplostephiloides (dc.) c. b. clarke, erigeron breviscapus (vant.) hand.-mazz., a flower	lug mig
ལུག་མིག་མེ་ཏོག	chrysanthemum	lug mig me tog
ལུག་མུར	field herb {lug mur}	lug mur
ལུག་མུར་དཀར་པོ	herb {lug mur dkar po}	lug mur dkar po
ལུག་མུར་ཕོ	herb {lug mur pho}	lug mur pho
ལུག་མུར་མ་ནིང	herb {lug mur ma ning}	lug mur ma ning
ལུག་མོ	ewe	lug mo
ལུག་རྩི་དོ་བོ	saussurea superba anthony f. pygmaea anthong, saussurea obvallata wall. var. orientalis diels	lug rtsi do bo
ལུག་ཚང	sheep barn/ fold/ pen	lug tshang
ལུག་ཚིལ	mutton fat	lug tshil
ལུག་ཚོན་པོ	fat sheep	lug tshon po
ལུག་མཚེ	mtshe ldum	lug mtshe
ལུག་རྫི	shepherd	lug rdzi
ལུག་གཞུག	1) sheep's hind end/ tail; 2) armpit/ shoulder	lug gzhug
ལུག་བཞོན་མ	milch sheep	lug bzhon ma
ལུག་ཟླ	sheep month, 6th	lug zla
ལུག་ར	sheep pen	lug ra
ལུག་ར་པད་དཀར་ཆོས་གླིང	Lukra Pekar Chöling, in Domey	lug ra pad dkar chos gling
ལུག་རིལ	sheep dung	lug ril
ལུག་རུ	ram's horn	lug ru
ལུག་རུ་དཀར་པོ	{lug ru dkar po med. herb *, white sheep's horn	lug ru dkar po
ལུག་རུ་སྨུག་པོ	pedicularis muscicola maxim., pedicularis rhinanthoides screnksubsp. labellata (jacq.) tsoong, pedicularis decorissima diels, pedicularis oliveriana prain	lug ru smug po
ལུག་རུ་སེར་པོ	pedicularis longiflora rudolph. var. tubiformis (klotz.) tsoong, pedicularis przewalskii maxim. var. microphyton tsoong	lug ru ser po
ལུག་ལ་ལྟོ་སྟེར	feed the sheep	lug la lto ster
ལུག་ལུག	hanging down	lug lug
ལུག་ལོ	sheep year	lug lo
ལུག་ཤ	mutton	lug sha
ལུག་ཤ་ཆ་ཚང	sheep carcass	lug sha cha tshang
ལུག་ཤ་གསར་པ	fresh mutton	lug sha gsar pa
ལུག་ཤིག	sheep louse, tick	lug shig
ལུག་ཤུབས	molten gold etc blugs te nar mo bzo spyad	lug shubs
ལུག་ཤེད	a coat of a sheep skin/ hair	lug shed
ལུག་ཤོ	herb	lug sho
ལུག་བཤས	slaughtered a sheep	lug bshas
ལུག་སུག	{lug sug} herb	lug sug
ལུག་ལྷས	sheep barn/ enclosure etc	lug lhas
ལུགས་ཀ	continuous tradition	lugs ka
ལུགས་ཀོང	crucible, mold lugs kyi bstan bcos skye bo gso ba'i thig	lugs kong
ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་པ	khrims dpon	lugs kyi spyan pa
ལུགས་སྐུ	cast statue	lugs sku
ལུགས་ཁང	sheep barn	lugs khang
ལུགས་མཁན	metal caster/ foundry worker	lugs mkhan
ལུགས་གོང	crucible	lugs gong
ལུགས་མགར	metal caster/ foundry worker and smith	lugs mgar
ལུགས་རྒྱག་པ	cast, do foundry work	lugs rgyag pa
ལུགས་རྒྱག་བཟོ་ཁང	casting shop, foundry	lugs rgyag bzo khang
ལུགས་ངན	bad systems [ggd]	lugs ngan
ལུགས་ལྔོག་གི་ཉེར་ཐོབ	attainment of the reverse order TSE	lugs lngog gi nyer thob
ལུགས་གཉིས	temporal and spritual traditions {chos lugs} and {srid lugs}, established by 5th Dalai Lama	lugs gnyis
ལུགས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་བྱ	advice on worldly and spiritual affairs	lugs gnyis kyi bslab bya
ལུགས་གཉིས་ཟུང་འབྲེལ	combination of the two traditions [spiritual and termporal: usu refers to Tibetan govt]	lugs gnyis zung 'brel
ལུགས་རྙིང	old tradition/ custom	lugs rnying
ལུགས་རྙིང་ལེ་ཐོ	traditional lunar calendar	lugs rnying le tho
ལུགས་ལྟར	according to the system (of	lugs ltar
ལུགས་མཐུན	according to the rule/ system/ tradition, legal, correct, valid	lugs mthun
ལུགས་མཐུན་ཁེ་དབང	correct/ traditional/ legitimate profit	lugs mthun khe dbang
ལུགས་མཐུན་སྤྱོད་ལམ	traditional/ correct behavior	lugs mthun spyod lam
ལུགས་མཐུན་བྱེད་སྟངས	doing according to the rule/ system/ tradition	lugs mthun byed stangs
ལུགས་མཐོན	in direct order	lugs mthon
ལུགས་དང་མཐུན་པ	according to the rule/ system/ tradition, legal, correct, valid	lugs dang mthun pa
ལུགས་དང་མ་མཐུན་པ	irregular	lugs dang ma mthun pa
ལུགས་དང་མི་མཐུན་པ	not in accord w tradition	lugs dang mi mthun pa
ལུགས་དམ་པ	the holy --, manner, way, mode style, order, system	lugs dam pa
ལུགས་དམ་པའི	the holy manner, true manner/ way/ mode style/ order/ system	lugs dam pa'i
ལུགས་ལྡོག	reverse order	lugs ldog
ལུགས་ལྡོག་སྐྱེས་པ	phru gu rkang pa sngon la thon nas skyes pa lta bu	lugs ldog skyes pa
ལུགས་ལྡོག་གི་གོ་རིམ	in reverse order	lugs ldog gi go rim
ལུགས་ལྡོག་གི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	the nidanas in reverse order lugs ldog gi rten 'brel rtogs par byed ba nang gi rten 'brel ni keng rus la brtags te keng rus 'di rga shi las byung/ de ltar rim gyis 'khor ba'i rtsa ba ma rig pa'i ba...	lugs ldog gi rten 'brel
ལུགས་ལྡོག་གི་སྣང་གསུམ	the three experiences in reversed order	lugs ldog gi snang gsum
ལུགས་ལྡོག་སྟོང་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	Twelve Empty Counterparts Reversing Dependent Origination. The antidote for the twelve modes of dependent origination which are enumerated below	lugs ldog stong pa bcu gnyis
ལུགས་ལྡོག་ཕྲིགས་ཆགས་སུ་སྒོམ	in the proper order [like reversing the thing in tsalung practice]	lugs ldog phrigs chags su sgom
ལུགས་སྣོད	dry or wet bcud lug sa'i snod spyad	lugs snod
ལུགས་པ	pf. of {lug pa}	lugs pa
ལུགས་པར	mold, cast	lugs par
ལུགས་དཔར	two	lugs dpar
ལུགས་སྤྱད་བཟོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་པར	mold, cast	lugs spyad bzo byed kyi par
ལུགས་སྤྱི	general principle	lugs spyi
ལུགས་བླུག	pour a casting, cast, mold	lugs blug
ལུགས་བླུག་པ	pour a casting, cast, mold	lugs blug pa
ལུགས་འབྱུང	progressive order, forward progression	lugs 'byung
ལུགས་འབྱུང་སྐྱེ་བ	progression of births	lugs 'byung skye ba
ལུགས་འབྱུང་གི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	interdependent links in progressive order, progressive order	lugs 'byung gi rten 'brel
ལུགས་འབྱུང་ལྡོག	successively and in reverse order	lugs 'byung ldog
ལུགས་འབྱུང་ལུགས་ལྡོག	in order and in reverse order	lugs 'byung lugs ldog
ལུགས་འབྱུང་སྲིད་པའི་བར་དོ	the bardo of becoming	lugs 'byung srid pa'i bar do
ལུགས་མ	casting [metal item]	lugs ma
ལུགས་མི་མཐོན་ལ	in reverse order	lugs mi mthon la
ལུགས་བཞིན	in order, according to the tradition/ rule, properly	lugs bzhin
ལུགས་ཟུང	combination of the two traditions	lugs zung
ལུགས་ཟློག	contrary to custom, a special contramanding order	lugs zlog
ལུགས་བཟང	good manners or morals	lugs bzang
ལུགས་བཟང་སྐྱེས	that born in a good manner, the north star, fixed stars	lugs bzang skyes
ལུགས་ཤུབས	molten gold etc blugs te nar mo bzo spyad	lugs shubs
ལུགས་ཤོག	papier mache mold/ model	lugs shog
ལུགས་སུ་བཀྲལ་བ	way of presentation	lugs su bkral ba
ལུགས་སུ་གྱིས་ཅིག	act according to the tradition!	lugs su gyis cig
ལུགས་སུ་གདབ་པ	make a casting	lugs su gdab pa
ལུགས་སུ་བྱེད་གོས	you must act according to the tradition	lugs su byed gos
ལུགས་སུ་བླུག	pour a casting, cast, mold	lugs su blug
ལུགས་སུ་བླུག་པ	found, cast	lugs su blug pa
ལུགས་སུ་འབྱུང་བ	to come about/ occur in the usual method/ progression/ fashion/ - - ordinary manner	lugs su 'byung ba
ལུགས་སྲོལ	rule, tradition, custom, system. Syn {phyag srol} system	lugs srol
ལུགས་སྲོལ་གོམས་གཤིས	rule, tradition, custom, system	lugs srol goms gshis
ལུགས་སྲོལ་རྙིང་པ	old [rule, tradition, custom, system]	lugs srol rnying pa
ལུགས་སྲོལ་དང་འགལ་བ	against custom/ tradition/ the rules	lugs srol dang 'gal ba
ལུགས་སྲོལ་གསར་པ	new [rule, tradition, custom, system]	lugs srol gsar pa
ལུགས་གསར་འཛུགས་པ	establish a new tradition/ custom/ rule	lugs gsar 'dzugs pa
ལུགས་གསར་ལེ་ཐོ	modern solar calendar	lugs gsar le tho
ལུང	scriptural authority	lung
ལུང་བཀའ	recitation/ reading transmission	lung bka'
ལུང་བཀའ་རིགས	precepts and knowledge/ quotation and logic/ esoteric teachings	lung bka' rigs
ལུང་ཁ	a district in Tibet	lung kha
ལུང་ཁུག	wild place, solitary valley	lung khug
ལུང་ཁྲིད	transmissions and instructions	lung khrid
ལུང་ཁྲིད་བྱས	I gave him the transmissions and explanations	lung khrid byas
ལུང་ཁྲིད་བྱས་པ	gave the transmission and explanations / instructions for 2679	lung khrid byas pa
ལུང་ཁྲིད་ཞུས་པ	received transmissions; received the reading transmission and instructions	lung khrid zhus pa
ལུང་གི་གོལ་ས	deviations which concern the scriptures	lung gi gol sa
ལུང་གི་སྒོ་ནས	by means of scripture	lung gi sgo nas
ལུང་གི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	scriptural proof	lung gi sgrub byed
ལུང་གི་ཆོས	scriptural teaching; comp {rtogs pa'i chos}	lung gi chos
ལུང་གི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་བཞི	CHN	lung gi chos kyi mtha' bzhi
ལུང་གི་ཆོས་འཁོར	doctrinal wheel, dharmachakra in relation to scripture	lung gi chos 'khor
ལུང་གི་ཆོས་རྟོགས་པའི་ཆོས	what has been told and what has been experienced	lung gi chos rtogs pa'i chos
ལུང་གི་རྗེ་སུ་འབྲང་པ	followers of the scripture, dogmatism	lung gi rje su 'brang pa
ལུང་གི་རྗེ་སུ་འབྲོང་པ	Followers of Scripture	lung gi rje su 'brong pa
ལུང་གི་རྗེས་བྲང	those who follow the precepts of the saints	lung gi rjes brang
ལུང་གི་རྗེས་འབྲང	followers of the precepts/ scriptures * dogmatism	lung gi rjes 'brang
ལུང་གི་རྗེས་འབྲངས་པའི་མདོ་སྡེ་པ	Sautrantika following scripture [ggd]	lung gi rjes 'brangs pa'i mdo sde pa
ལུང་གི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	followers of scripture	lung gi rjes su 'brang ba
ལུང་གི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པ	Followers of scripture, dogmatism	lung gi rjes su 'brangs pa
ལུང་གི་གཏན་ཚིག	testimony (valid means of cognition in some schools)	lung gi gtan tshig
ལུང་གི་བསྟན་པ	TSE prophesy	lung gi bstan pa
ལུང་གི་དུས	scripture period, precept period	lung gi dus
ལུང་གི་ཚད་མ	scriptural pr mana	lung gi tshad ma
ལུང་གི་ཡོན་ཏན	the virtues of [learning in] scripture	lung gi yon tan
ལུང་གི་ལེའུ་གསུམ	the three periods of the teachings	lung gi le'u gsum
ལུང་གིས་བསྐོར	set into action by the scriptures	lung gis bskor
ལུང་གིས་གྲུབ་པ	established by scriptural authority [thd]	lung gis grub pa
ལུང་གིས་ཕྱུག་པ	displays a wealth of transmissions / scriptural statements	lung gis phyug pa
ལུང་གིས་ཟིན་པ	described in [the scriptures], foretold	lung gis zin pa
ལུང་གྱི་སྤྱི	General Discourses, unidentified text quoted in bsam gtan mig sgron	lung gyi spyi
ལུང་དགུ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lung dgu
ལུང་འགའ་བྱུང	had some indications	lung 'ga' byung
ལུང་རྒྱུན	line of reading transmission. Syn {lung brgyud}	lung rgyun
ལུང་སྒྲོ་སྐུར	to conceptualize the scriptures	lung sgro skur
ལུང་སྒྲོ་འདོགས	intellectual interpretation of the scriptures	lung sgro 'dogs
ལུང་བརྒྱུད	the lineage of the reading transmission	lung brgyud
ལུང་ངང་འགལ་བ	internal contradiction in scriptures/ teaching lung ngo bo'i sgo nas rnam pa bcu [CHN]	lung ngang 'gal ba
ལུང་ལྔ	five lands	lung lnga
ལུང་ཅུང་ཟད་ལ་རྟེན་པ	depend little on scripture	lung cung zad la rten pa
ལུང་གཅིག་ཆུ་ལ་མི་བཏུང	with the addition of the commitments not to drink water in a locality inhabited by violators of commitments	lung gcig chu la mi btung
ལུང་གཅིག་ལས་འཕྲོས་པ	1 of the mdo sde lung sde bzhi	lung gcig las 'phros pa
ལུང་ཆུང	yul gru chung chung	lung chung
ལུང་ཆུས་གང་བ	valley filled with water	lung chus gang ba
ལུང་ཆེན	large valley, important statements, scripture, transmission, teaching	lung chen
ལུང་ཆེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	18 texts of sems sde, SA man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, SA snga 'gyur lnga, phyi 'gyur bcu gsum, 18 fundamental lungs of sems sde	lung chen bco brgyad
ལུང་ཆེན་ཐོབ	fulfill the great prophecy	lung chen thob
ལུང་ཆེན་ཐོབ་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of attaining a great prophesy	lung chen thob pa'i rnal 'byor
ལུང་ཆེན་པོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Major Scriptures; Eighteen Dzogchen tantras of the Mind Section taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana and Lekdrub. Found in Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	lung chen po bco brgyad
ལུང་ཆོས	Dharma of Statements	lung chos
ལུང་ཆོས་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of scriptural dharma	lung chos smra ba
ལུང་ཏོང	{lung tong mig} med. tree	lung tong
ལུང་ཏོང་མིག	{lung tong mig} med. tree	lung tong mig
ལུང་གཏོང	give precepts/ transmission	lung gtong
ལུང་གཏོང་བ	admonish, enjoin	lung gtong ba
ལུང་རྟགས	lha la lung zhus pa'i rtags mtshan	lung rtags
ལུང་རྟོགས	Scriptures and realization. Authoritative scriptures and the realization of the Dharma in the minds of noble beings	lung rtogs
ལུང་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of scripture and realization	lung rtogs kyi bstan pa
ལུང་རྟོགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཆོས	the holy dharma of experience and realization	lung rtogs kyi dam chos
ལུང་རྟོགས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	{lung rtogs rgya mtsho} * the ocean of scripture and realization	lung rtogs rgya mtsho
ལུང་རྟོགས་གཉིས	learning and realization, perception and learning, what has been told and what has been experienced	lung rtogs gnyis
ལུང་རྟོགས་བསྟན་པ	teachings of what is heard and realized	lung rtogs bstan pa
ལུང་རྟོགས་དམ་པའི་ཆོས	true doctrine transmitted and realized	lung rtogs dam pa'i chos
ལུང་སྟེ་བཞི	the four predictions	lung ste bzhi
ལུང་སྟེར	give reading transmission 2680	lung ster
ལུང་སྟེར་བ	give reading transmission	lung ster ba
ལུང་སྟེར་བ་པོ	giver of reading transmission	lung ster ba po
ལུང་སྟོང	an empty valley	lung stong
ལུང་སྟོང་པ	desolate/ solitary valley/ area	lung stong pa
ལུང་སྟོན	prophesize	lung ston
ལུང་སྟོན་པ	to prophecy/ predict; proclaim/ issue edict/ expound	lung ston pa
ལུང་སྟོན་པ་བཞི	the four predictions	lung ston pa bzhi
ལུང་སྟོན་པར་འགྱུར	the scriptures were taught	lung ston par 'gyur
ལུང་བརྟག་ཞུགས་པ	consulted to	lung brtag zhugs pa
ལུང་བསྟན	1) prophesy, predict[ion], revelation; 2) mo divination etc. [showing ripening of good and bad dharmas as pleasure and pain to be expected, foretold, described, prescribed, ordained, directed, enjo...	lung bstan
ལུང་བསྟན་བཀའ་མ	Prophecies of the Oral Lineage	lung bstan bka' ma
ལུང་བསྟན་མཁའ་འགྲོ	a message from the dakinis	lung bstan mkha' 'gro
ལུང་བསྟན་མཁའ་འགྲོའི	a message from the dakinis	lung bstan mkha' 'gro'i
ལུང་བསྟན་གྱི	prophetic	lung bstan gyi
ལུང་བསྟན་རྒྱག	prophesy, predict	lung bstan rgyag
ལུང་བསྟན་རྡོ་རྗེ	Lungten dorje	lung bstan rdo rje
ལུང་བསྟན་ནས	he received a prophesy	lung bstan nas
ལུང་བསྟན་གནང	prophesy, predict	lung bstan gnang
ལུང་བསྟན་པ	gave the prophecy/ was taught prophesy	lung bstan pa
ལུང་བསྟན་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great prophesy	lung bstan pa chen po
ལུང་བསྟན་པ་ལྟར	complying with [her] instructions	lung bstan pa ltar
ལུང་བསྟན་པ་བཞི	four types of revelation/ prophesy	lung bstan pa bzhi
ལུང་བསྟན་ཕོག་པ	prophetic	lung bstan phog pa
ལུང་བསྟན་དབེན་པའི་གནས་བརྒྱད	CHN	lung bstan dben pa'i gnas brgyad
ལུང་བསྟན་སྦྱིན་པ	give a prophecy	lung bstan sbyin pa
ལུང་བསྟན་མིན་པ	is not taught/ prophesied, neutral	lung bstan min pa
ལུང་བསྟན་ཚལ་ཆེན་ཕུག	Prophesied Cave of the Great Forest, at Labchi	lung bstan tshal chen phug
ལུང་ཐག	strap, strap or rope by which anything is suspended or held	lung thag
ལུང་ཐག་སྐེ་ལ་བརྒྱུས་པ	'dogs thag ske la bskon pa'i dpe bzhin du don gnad kyi reason is like this clearly ngo sprod pa lung thag ring yang nyin phyed na sleb	lung thag ske la brgyus pa
ཐུབ་པ་བྱ	though its a long valley/ large region [you] can get there in half a day	thub pa bya
ལུང་ཐང	SA lbu 'dzin, sapindus mukorossi, medicinal plant	lung thang
ལུང་ཐན	name of a tree	lung than
ལུང་ཐོབ་པ	to receive a reading transmission	lung thob pa
ལུང་དག་ལྡན	having pure scriptures/ precepts, the sutras	lung dag ldan
ལུང་དང་འགལ་བའི་དཔེ	an example contradicting scripture	lung dang 'gal ba'i dpe
ལུང་དང་འགལ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities contradicting the scriptures	lung dang 'gal ba'i yon tan
ལུང་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཆུ	eater given w the transmission	lung dang bcas pa'i chu
ལུང་དང་རྟོགས་པའི་ཆོས	Dharma of Statement and Realization; the dharma of that has been told and what has been realized, experienced, the told and realized teachings	lung dang rtogs pa'i chos
ལུང་དང་ལྡན་པ	authoritative, authentic	lung dang ldan pa
ལུང་དང་རིག་པ	scriptures and philosophies, reasoning and scriptural authority	lung dang rig pa
ལུང་དང་རིག་པའི་མདའ་མོ	Arrow of Scriptures and Reason, on the harmful effects of tobacco, by Shabkar	lung dang rig pa'i mda' mo
ལུང་དང་རིགས་ཀྱི་དཔྱད་པ	analysis with scripture and reasoning; i.e. the type of analysis is one done with scripture and reasoning	lung dang rigs kyi dpyad pa
ལུང་དང་རིགས་པ	scriptural reference and reason	lung dang rigs pa
ལུང་དང་རིགས་པའི་ལམ	the path of scripture and reasoning	lung dang rigs pa'i lam
ལུང་དུ་སྟོན་པ	grammar. The Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit word for grammar "Vyakarana"	lung du ston pa
ལུང་དུ་སྟོན་པ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་འཇུག་པ	"Grammar, the Guide to Signs", the sixth of Thu mi Sambhota's eight treatises which defined the Tibetan grammar and language. Deals with signs in grammar and because of that has a section on verbs ...	lung du ston pa rtags kyi 'jug pa
ལུང་དུ་སྟོན་པ་རྩ་བ་སུམ་ཅུ་པ	"The Root Grammar in Thirty Verses", the first of Thu mi Sambhota's eight treatises which defined the Tibetan grammar and language. Deals with the bases of the grammar system by first defining the ...	lung du ston pa rtsa ba sum cu pa
ཅསེས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བ༹རིཨོཨུས་ནོན	cases in the Tibetan language. Of the eight treatises only two are extant, the other six having been destroyed by King Langdarma in the tenth century A.D. See also {lung du ston pa rtags kyi 'jug p...	cases of the various non
ལུང་དུ་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	grammatical term(s), terms of grammar	lung du ston pa'i sgra
ལུང་དུ་བསྟན་པ	Prophecies; one of the 12 aspects of excellent speech {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	lung du bstan pa
ལུང་དུ་བསྟན་པའི་སྡེ	prophecies	lung du bstan pa'i sde
ལུང་དུ་དྲངས་པ	used as quotation, quoted	lung du drangs pa
ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན	unidentified	lung du ma bstan
ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པ	neutral, what was not taught, undetermined, neutral. Syn {lung ma bstan}	lung du ma bstan pa
ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པའི་དངོས་པོ	the things that are not taught lung du ma bstan pa'i dngos po bcu bzhi the 14 things that are not taught	lung du ma bstan pa'i dngos po
ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པའི་ཆོས	natural dharmas, dharmas that are not taught	lung du ma bstan pa'i chos
ལུང་དུ་མ་བསྟན་པའི་ལྟ་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 views that are [not taught]	lung du ma bstan pa'i lta ba bcu bzhi
ལུང་དུ་མི་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	to beings brjod bya'i don mi ston pa/ gling bu'i sgra lta bu rjod byed kyi sgra ma yin pa rnams so	lung du mi ston pa'i sgra
ལུང་དོ་སྟོན་པ	instruct/ five precepts/ prophecy	lung do ston pa
ལུང་དོན	intention of a scriptural text, prophesied aims	lung don
ལུང་དྲངས་པ	to cite a quotation, repeat a passage / citation	lung drangs pa
ལུང་མདའ	lower plateau	lung mda'
ལུང་མདོ	the lower end of the valley	lung mdo
ལུང་འདི	this teaching	lung 'di
ལུང་འདུས་མདོ	Embodiment Scripture of Statement [Anu Yoga]	lung 'dus mdo
ལུང་འདྲེན	quote, cite	lung 'dren
ལུང་འདྲེན་པ	cite, quote	lung 'dren pa
ལུང་འདྲེན་བྱས	use some quotations, bring in some quotations	lung 'dren byas
ལུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཀོད་པ	Lung Dorje Köpa. An Anu Yoga scripture	lung rdo rje bkod pa
ལུང་སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ	the three pitakas of the scriptures	lung sde snod gsum
ལུང་སྡེ་བཞི	the four sections of Statements	lung sde bzhi
ལུང་སྡེབས	combined transmissions	lung sdebs
ལུང་སྡེབས་ཚུལ་ལྔ	five ways to confer a reading transmission	lung sdebs tshul lnga
ལུང་ནག་ལ	lung nag pass	lung nag la
ལུང་ནོད	to receive a reading transmission	lung nod
ལུང་ནོད་པ	give instruction, precepts given	lung nod pa
ལུང་ནོད་པ་པོ	the receiver of the reading transmission	lung nod pa po
ལུང་ནོས	received a reading transmission	lung nos
ལུང་གནང	give precepts/ transmission	lung gnang
ལུང་མནོས་པ	received reading transmission	lung mnos pa
ལུང་རྣམ་འབྱེད	Scripture on Discernment	lung rnam 'byed
ལུང་པ	country, nationality, district, valley, furrow, hollow, groove, one's country, native place, place, country	lung pa
ལུང་པ་གང	yul gang ba ste example of very many / mgo rnyog lung pa gang bzos pa// ming ngan lung pa gang lus pa, rdzun lung pa gang bshad de mi la mgo skor ba	lung pa gang
ལུང་པ་སྟོང་པ	empty valley, province	lung pa stong pa
ལུང་པ་ད་གའི	indigenous	lung pa da ga'i
ལུང་པ་འདི་ལ	in this valley	lung pa 'di la
ལུང་པ་འབྲུ་སྐྱེ་བ	valleys where corn grows	lung pa 'bru skye ba
ལུང་པ་གཞན་དུ་སྤོ་བ	emigrate	lung pa gzhan du spo ba
ལུང་པ་གཞན་ནས་ཡོང་མཁན	emigrant	lung pa gzhan nas yong mkhan
ལུང་པ་ས་རོང་དོག་པོ	steep and precipitous area	lung pa sa rong dog po
ལུང་པའི་སྐད	regional/ valley dialect	lung pa'i skad
ལུང་པའི་མདའ	the lower terrace of a plateau, lower part of a valley	lung pa'i mda'
ལུང་པའི་ནང་རྙོག་ཁྲ	anarchy	lung pa'i nang rnyog khra
ལུང་པའི་ཕུ	upper part of a valley	lung pa'i phu
ལུང་པའི་དབུས	central portion of a valley	lung pa'i dbus
ལུང་པའི་གཞུང	[main] valley	lung pa'i gzhung
ལུང་ཕུ	upland part of a valley	lung phu
ལུང་ཕོག	conferred the transmissions	lung phog
ལུང་ཕོག་པ	one who has received instruction, one who is inspired	lung phog pa
ལུང་ཕྲན་ཚིགས	Syn {'dul ba phran tshegs kyi gzhi}	lung phran tshigs
ལུང་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	'dul ba phran tshegs kyi gzhi, Minor Precepts [of the vinaya] [one of the {'dul ba lung sde bzhi} 59 vol translated by lo tsh' ba dpal 'byor]	lung phran tshegs
ལུང་བམ་པོ་བརྒྱད་པ	Scripture in Eight Chapters. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras. Vol. LA of the Nyingma Gyübum	lung bam po brgyad pa
ལུང་བར་མ	lung bar ma [one of the mdo sde lung sde bzhi]	lung bar ma
ལུང་བོང	bullock	lung bong
ལུང་བྱང	catalogue of prophets, prophetic certificate	lung byang
ལུང་བྱང་བཏབ	give a prophesy	lung byang btab
ལུང་བྱིན་པ	gave the transmission	lung byin pa
ལུང་བྱེད་པ	to read the transmission of, give reading transmission of, give the transmission for 2682	lung byed pa
ལུང་དབྱུག་གསུམ་གི་ཕྲེང་བ	a scripture	lung dbyug gsum gi phreng ba
ལུང་འབེབས	prophesy	lung 'bebs
ལུང་འབེབས་པ	prophesy	lung 'bebs pa
ལུང་འབོག་པ	{/ phog pa} to bestow transmission	lung 'bog pa
ལུང་འབོག་པ་པོ	giver of the reading transmission	lung 'bog pa po
ལུང་འབོགས	give reading transmission	lung 'bogs
ལུང་འབོགས་པ	explaining; {spang slang gi lung 'bogs pa} explaining the prohibitions and duties	lung 'bogs pa
ལུང་མ་བསྟན	indeterminate {dug gsum dang de med pa'i sems gsum gang yang min pa'i sems kyis rang gar zhugs pa'i las thams cad ni lung ma bstan no} All actions naturally engaged in by a mind which is neither [c...	lung ma bstan
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གྱི་ཆོས	neutral phenomenon	lung ma bstan gyi chos
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ	views that are not taught	lung ma bstan gyi lta ba
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གྱི་ལྟ་བ་བཅུ་བཞི	14 views that are not taught CHN	lung ma bstan gyi lta ba bcu bzhi
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གྱི་མ་རིག་པ	undetermined ignorance	lung ma bstan gyi ma rig pa
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གྱི་རླུང	neutral wind/ prana lung ma bstan rnams kyi de bzhin nyid the suchness of the neutral (states	lung ma bstan gyi rlung
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་པ	undetermined, neutral, not indicated, not to be expected	lung ma bstan pa
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་པ་བཞི	[CHN]	lung ma bstan pa bzhi
ལུང་མ་བསྟན་པའི་ལས	undetermined actions {mtho ris dang ngan song gnyis gang yang mi skyed pa lung ma bstan pa'i las} undetermined actions that create neither of the higher realms nor the lower realms	lung ma bstan pa'i las
ལུང་མ་མོ	a vinaya pitaka sde snod	lung ma mo
ལུང་མ་མོའི་སྐོར	abhidharma cycle	lung ma mo'i skor
ལུང་ཙམ་འཛིན་པ	be dogmatic	lung tsam 'dzin pa
ལུང་ཙམ་འཛིན་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	dogmatism	lung tsam 'dzin pa'i ring lugs
ལུང་ཚགས་པ	collected mind	lung tshags pa
ལུང་ཚན	region, province, locality	lung tshan
ལུང་ཚན་ཕྱོགས་རིས	provincial, prejudiced toward 1's own region	lung tshan phyogs ris
ལུང་ཚིག	dogma, direct quotations	lung tshig
ལུང་མཚན	region, province, locality	lung mtshan
ལུང་མཚན་ཕྱོགས་རིས	provincial, prejudiced toward 1's own region	lung mtshan phyogs ris
ལུང་འཛིན	grasp/ understand/ fixate the scriptures	lung 'dzin
ལུང་འཛིན་ཁུག་པ	{lung 'dzin khug pa} nadi	lung 'dzin khug pa
ལུང་འཛིན་རིང་ལུགས	dogmatism	lung 'dzin ring lugs
ལུང་རྫི	wind blowing at open places where rivers meet	lung rdzi
ལུང་ཞུ	1) bka' lung zhu ba issue an edict [h]; 3) request [give?] teachings/ prophesy/ a [reading] transmission	lung zhu
ལུང་ཞུ་བ	1) {lung zhu ba} [one of the 'dul ba lung sde bzhi]; 2) bka' lung zhu ba issue an edict [h]; 3) request teachings/ prophesy/ a [reading] transmission	lung zhu ba
ལུང་ཞུ་འབུལ	give a prophesy/ lung [h]	lung zhu 'bul
ལུང་ཞུས	I received the transmission of the texts for	lung zhus
ལུང་ཞུས་པ	requested the transmission for	lung zhus pa
ལུང་གཞི	Syn {'dul ba gzhi}. Syn {'dul ba gzhi} caturagama	lung gzhi
ལུང་གཞུང	[main] valley/ scriptural text	lung gzhung
ལུང་གཞུང་བླ་མ་ཞུ་བ	{lung gzhung bla ma zhu ba} [a'dul ba lung sde bzhi'i ya gyal zhig ste, volume bam po 53, tr by lo tsh' ba klu'i rgyal mtshan]	lung gzhung bla ma zhu ba
ལུང་བཞི	4 borders or limits, SA mtha' bzhi	lung bzhi
ལུང་ཟིན	prophesized	lung zin
ལུང་ཟིན་ཆོས་བདག	prophesied recipients of the teaching	lung zin chos bdag
ལུང་ཡང་དག་པ	true scriptures	lung yang dag pa
ལུང་ཡིག	written prophesy, scriptural writings	lung yig
ལུང་རང་རིགས་པ	scripture and logic	lung rang rigs pa
ལུང་རིག	mis-spelling of {lung rigs}	lung rig
ལུང་རིག་གི་གསལ་བར་གྲུབ་པ	clear establishment through scripture and reasoning	lung rig gi gsal bar grub pa
ལུང་རིག་རྟགས	scriptures & logic & evidence	lung rig rtags
ལུང་རིག་ས་འཇིན་པ	have a grasp of scripture and reasoning	lung rig sa 'jin pa
ལུང་རིག་བསླབ་པ	learning of scripture & logic	lung rig bslab pa
ལུང་རིགས	scripture and reasoning	lung rigs
ལུང་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད	establish by scripture and reasoning	lung rigs kyi sgrub byed
ལུང་རིགས་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	established by scripture and reasoning	lung rigs kyis grub pa
ལུང་རིགས་དཔེ་གསུམ	scripture, logic and similes	lung rigs dpe gsum
ལུང་རིགས་སྨྲ་བ	expounder of scripture and philosophy	lung rigs smra ba
ལུང་རིང་པོ	1 of the mdo sde lung sde bzhi	lung ring po
ལུང་རིང་མོ	the longstanding precepts	lung ring mo
ལུང་ལ་རྟེན་པ	depending on scripture	lung la rten pa
ལུང་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་རྗེས་དཔག	inference depending on scripture TSE	lung la brten pa'i rjes dpag
ལུང་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པའི་མན་ངག	the Upadesha that does not depend on scriptures	lung la ma brten pa'i man ngag
ལུང་ལས	from the texts/ scriptures	lung las
ལུང་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	it is said in the scriptures	lung las 'byung ba
ལུང་ལུགས་ཕུར་པ	Vajrakila of the "scripture tradition", one of the three Vajrakila treasures of {mchog gyur gling pa} corresponding to the Anuyoga class of tantra [tsd]	lung lugs phur pa
ལུང་ཤར	name of a noble family in Tibet	lung shar
ལུང་ཤུར	ravine	lung shur
ལུང་གཤོངས	gorge valley	lung gshongs
ལུང་སིལ་བུ	short quotations, bits of scripture	lung sil bu
ལུང་གསུམ་ལྗོངས	Lungsum Valley	lung gsum ljongs
ལུང་ཧྲུལ	wild place, solitary valley	lung hrul
ལུང་ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་ག	Lung Anu Yoga. The second of the Three Inner Tantras emphasizing the completion stage	lung a nu yo ga
ལུང་ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་གའི་ཐེག་པ	the anu yoga vehicle of scriptures, the vehicle of 'lung' Anuyoga	lung a nu yo ga'i theg pa
ལུད	fertilizer, manure	lud
ལུད་ཁུ	dung water	lud khu
ལུད་འགྲེམ	spread manure	lud 'grem
ལུད་འགྲེམ་པ	spread manure	lud 'grem pa
ལུད་རྒྱག	spread fertilizer, overflow, boil over	lud rgyag
ལུད་རྒྱག་པ	spread fertilizer, overflow, boil over	lud rgyag pa
ལུད་རྒྱུ	coughing	lud rgyu
ལུད་སྒྲ	sound of clearing the throat	lud sgra
ལུད་ཆུ	manure/ fertilizer in water	lud chu
ལུད་དོང	dung hole	lud dong
ལུད་ནུས	fertilizing power/ effect	lud nus
ལུད་པ	phlegm, mucus; {lud pa, lud pa, lud pa} intr. v.; phlegm	lud pa
ལུད་པ་སྐྱུར་བ	eject a phlegm, throw off a rider, give up, abandon a work, forsake a friend, abort	lud pa skyur ba
ལུད་པ་འདོན་པ	expel mucus	lud pa 'don pa
ལུད་པ་མང་བ	excessive / much mucus lud pa g.yug pa - expectorate	lud pa mang ba
ལུད་པ་ལུ་བ	cough and throw out phlegm	lud pa lu ba
ལུད་སྤུངས	pile/ store manure, compost	lud spungs
ལུད་ཕུང	dunghill, dung/ compost/	lud phung
མནུརེ	heap	manure
ལུད་ཕོར	spittoon	lud phor
ལུད་ཕྱེ	powdered fertilizer	lud phye
ལུད་འབུ	insects in a dung heap	lud 'bu
ལུད་འབོད་པ	cough up	lud 'bod pa
ལུད་སྦྱོར་བ	1) smar lud and skya lud mixed; 2) put manure on a field; 3) newly manured field	lud sbyor ba
ལུད་རྫས	chemical fertilizer	lud rdzas
ལུད་ར	place to put manure	lud ra
ལུད་རའི་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus inside and outside the houses of Lhasa commoners mi phyugs kyi btsog lud sngar rgyun ltar gsog 'jog byas 'thus tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	lud ra'i 'khrol 'dzin
ལུད་གསོག་པ	collect manure	lud gsog pa
ལུན་ཏུན	London	lun tun
ལུན་ད	a deity	lun da
ལུན་མ་བསྟན་པའི་ལས	works for doing which there is inspiration	lun ma bstan pa'i las
ལུབ་བ	bubble, foam	lub ba
ལུམ་པ	saying that one is coming	lum pa
ལུམ་པ་གློང་ག	grove in the village of lum pa	lum pa glong ga
ལུམ་བི	queen lum bi	lum bi
ལུམ་བི་ནི	Lumini [city in Nepal terai where Buddha was born]	lum bi ni
ལུམ་བིའི་ཚལ	a grove named after a queen	lum bi'i tshal
ལུམ་ལུམ	rising up	lum lum
ལུམས	a bath rtsa dkar dang rengs 'khums kyi nad sogs ldan 'dus mkhris pa shas cher sel ba'i phyir sman dang 'bru gnyis mnyam du btsos nas phabs rtsi sbyar te langs pa'i khu ba drod 'jam bsros pa'i nang ...	lums
ལུའི	brigade	lu'i
ལུའི་ཀྲང	brigade commander	lu'i krang
ལུའི་ལྕགས	aluminum	lu'i lcags
ལུའི་རླུང	chlorine	lu'i rlung
ལུའུ་ཀྲུང	factory charge hand	lu'u krung
ལུའེ་ད	radar	lu'e da
ལུའོ་ཁྲོན	Lochuan County	lu'o khron
ལུལ	(not in das)	lul
ལུས་ཀུན	entire body	lus kun
ལུས་ཀུན་སྐམ་པའི་རླུང་ནད	body entirely drying wind disease	lus kun skam pa'i rlung nad
ལུས་ཀུན་བསྒྲིམ	straighten the entire body	lus kun bsgrim
ལུས་ཀྱི	the body GD	lus kyi
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་གཞི	the all-ground of the body	lus kyi kun gzhi
ལུས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	body mandala	lus kyi dkyil 'khor
ལུས་ཀྱི་བཀྲག་མདངས་བཟང་བ	his complexion was more radiant	lus kyi bkrag mdangs bzang ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད	body ayatana	lus kyi skye mched
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	body element[s]/ dhatu	lus kyi khams
ལུས་ཀྱི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	body posture	lus kyi 'khrul 'khor
ལུས་ཀྱི་གུས་འདུད	bowing, physically showing respect	lus kyi gus 'dud
ལུས་ཀྱི་གྱོ་འགུལ	moving and shaking of the body	lus kyi gyo 'gul
ལུས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ་གསུམ	TSE	lus kyi dge ba gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱོལ	fighting with the body, foot soldier	lus kyi rgyol
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོམ	1) the body's bone frame; 2) container of the body 2684	lus kyi sgrom
ལུས་ཀྱི་ངལ་རྩོལ	* physical/ manual labor	lus kyi ngal rtsol
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྔུལ་ནག	sweat	lus kyi rngul nag
ལུས་ཀྱི་བཅུད	bodily essence	lus kyi bcud
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཆ་བྱད	the shape of [such a being's] body	lus kyi cha byad
ལུས་ཀྱི་འཆི་ལུགས་ཤེར་དབང་འདའ་ཀ་མ	the departure which is the mode of the body's death according to the discriminating empowerment	lus kyi 'chi lugs sher dbang 'da' ka ma
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་སྟོབས	body shape	lus kyi nyams stobs
ལུས་ཀྱི་གཉན་ས	body's gnad che sa	lus kyi gnyan sa
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྟོད	upper part of the body	lus kyi stod
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས	bodily strength	lus kyi stobs
ལུས་ཀྱི་བརྟག་པ	physiognomy	lus kyi brtag pa
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཐ་མ	final body, end of the body	lus kyi tha ma
ལུས་ཀྱི་མཐའ	the [inevitable] end of the body	lus kyi mtha'
ལུས་ཀྱི་དབ༹ངས་མ	essence of the body	lus kyi dvangs ma
ལུས་ཀྱི་དོན་ལྔ	CHN	lus kyi don lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་མདངས	spirit	lus kyi mdangs
ལུས་ཀྱི་མདུད་པ་བཞི	CHN	lus kyi mdud pa bzhi
ལུས་ཀྱི་འདུག་ཐབས	body posture	lus kyi 'dug thabs
ལུས་ཀྱི་བརྡ	overt activity	lus kyi brda
ལུས་ཀྱི་བརྡ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་རིག	perceptible signs and gestures	lus kyi brda chos kyi rnam rig
ལུས་ཀྱི་ན་ཚ་བསལ་བ	be relieved from physical illness	lus kyi na tsha bsal ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་གནད	the essential elements/ key point(s of body [posture]	lus kyi gnad
ལུས་ཀྱི་གནད་བཅའ་བ	assume a posture	lus kyi gnad bca' ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་གནས་ངན་ལེན	physical rigidity [?]	lus kyi gnas ngan len
ལུས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལྔ	1) forehead, palms, knees; 2) the five chakras of the body	lus kyi gnas lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	physical expressions	lus kyi rnam 'gyur
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་བྱེད	body consciousness	lus kyi rnam par rig byed
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	tactile consciousness, body or touching consciousness	lus kyi rnam par shes pa
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས	body consciousness element	lus kyi rnam par shes pa'i khams
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཤེས	tactile consciousness	lus kyi rnam shes
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣས་ངན་ལེན	physical rigidity	lus kyi rnas ngan len
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྣས་ངན་ལེན་ཉོན་མོབས	the affliction of physical rigidity	lus kyi rnas ngan len nyon mobs
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྣོད་དྲུག	the six kinds of bodily vessels	lus kyi snod drug
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	bodily activity	lus kyi spyod pa
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	configurations of the body and hands in making salutations to deities, hand gestures	lus kyi phyag rgya
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱི	external (to the body	lus kyi phyi
ལུས་ཀྱི་བ་སྤུ་གྱོ་བ	body hairs standing on end lus kyi ba spu g.yo - the very hairs on their body stood on end lus kyi ba spu g.yo ba - one's thin hair standing on end	lus kyi ba spu gyo ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་བུ་ཀ་དགུ	the 9 holes in the body	lus kyi bu ka dgu
ལུས་ཀྱི་བོངས་ཚད	size/ mass of the body	lus kyi bongs tshad
ལུས་ཀྱི་དབང་མངོན	bodily sense perception	lus kyi dbang mngon
ལུས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	sense of feeling in the skin	lus kyi dbang po
ལུས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ	the five physical senses	lus kyi dbang po lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ་གཟུགས་ཅན	the material bodily sense faculties/ organs	lus kyi dbang po gzugs can
ལུས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་བ	devil of the body, kama, lust	lus kyi 'byung ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་བ་བཞི	the four elements of the body lus kyi sbyin pa la bar chad byed du mi	lus kyi 'byung ba bzhi
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོང་བ	body training, training the body	lus kyi sbyong ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་མ་ལྔ	5 principal parts of the body to be touched to ground in prostrations	lus kyi ma lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་མལ་ལྔ	the five mal of the body	lus kyi mal lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བ་གསུམ	the three nonvirtuous actions of body	lus kyi mi dge ba gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས་གསུམ	the three	lus kyi mi dge ba'i las gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྨད	lower part of the human body	lus kyi smad
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཙ	muscles	lus kyi tsa
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩ	muscles ???	lus kyi rtsa
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བའི་མཁྲིས་པ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five biles	lus kyi rtsa ba'i mkhris pa rigs lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩ་རླུང	bodily (yoga of nadi and prana	lus kyi rtsa rlung
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩའི་གཙོ་བོ་གསུམ	the chief muscles ??? of the body CHN	lus kyi rtsa'i gtso bo gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩལ་གསུམ	the three bodily skills	lus kyi rtsal gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བ	bodily sensations	lus kyi tshor ba
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བའི་རང་བཞིན	reflex	lus kyi tshor ba'i rang bzhin
ལུས་ཀྱི་མཚན	shape and peculiar characteristics of separate parts of the body, marks of beauty	lus kyi mtshan
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཟུངས	the vital force in the body; 'vital force of the body'	lus kyi zungs
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཟུངས་བདུན	CHN	lus kyi zungs bdun
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of the body CHN	lus kyi yan lag lnga
ལུས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ	objects of the body lus kyi g.yas - right side of the body lus kyi g.yon - left side of the body	lus kyi yul
ལུས་ཀྱི་རང	internal [to the body]	lus kyi rang
ལུས་ཀྱི་རིག་འཛིན	bodily vidyadhara	lus kyi rig 'dzin
ལུས་ཀྱི་རེག་པ	bodily contact/ touch	lus kyi reg pa
ལུས་ཀྱི་རླན	sweat, perspiration	lus kyi rlan
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལས	physical karma	lus kyi las
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལས་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ་མོ	the three aspects of body	lus kyi las rnam pa gsum mo
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལས་གསུམ	three physical [unvirtuous] actions {pha rol gyi srog bsam bzhin gcod pa, gzhan gyi nor ma byin par len pa, gzhan gyi bud med sogs bgrod bya min pa la 'dod pas log par g.yem pa} The three physical ...	lus kyi las gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལུགས་བཞིན	in a natural way	lus kyi lugs bzhin
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལེ་བའི	umbilical	lus kyi le ba'i
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལེགས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of good conduct of body	lus kyi legs par spyod pa gsum
ལུས་ཀྱི་ལྷུ་ལག	limbs of the body	lus kyi lhu lag
ལུས་ཀྱིས་འཁྱུད	embrace	lus kyis 'khyud
ལུས་ཀྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	1 of rdzu 'phrul rnam pa	lus kyis 'gro ba
ལུས་ཀྱིས་རྒོལ	foot soldiers	lus kyis rgol
ལུས་ཀྱིས་ཉེས་པ་སྤྱོད་པ་སུམ	three wrong activities of body	lus kyis nyes pa spyod pa sum
ལུས་ཀྱིས་འཐབ	foot soldiers	lus kyis 'thab
ལུས་ཀྱིས་རྩལ་སྦྱོང	physical exercises, athletics	lus kyis rtsal sbyong
ལུས་ཀྱེན་དུ་བཀན	the body bent backwards, to put, to apply, to press. Syn {bkan pa}	lus kyen du bkan
ལུས་ཀྲབ	tiger, leopard	lus krab
ལུས་དཀར	white swan	lus dkar
ལུས་དཀྱིལ	{lus kyi dkyil 'khor} body mandala	lus dkyil
ལུས་བཀྲ	leopard	lus bkra
ལུས་རྐྱང	naked body	lus rkyang
ལུས་སྐུ	body and kaya [the last is [h] or enlightened level]	lus sku
ལུས་སྐེམ་པ	flesh and strength exhausting emaciated/ feeble body	lus skem pa
ལུས་སྐྱེད	growth of the body	lus skyed
ལུས་སྐྱེད་པའི་དྲིན	the kindness of producing your body	lus skyed pa'i drin
ལུས་སྐྱེས	1) blood; 2) body hairs; 3) feathers	lus skyes
ལུས་སྐྱོབ	coat of mail, armor, sun	lus skyob
ལུས་སྐྱོབ་གོས	armor	lus skyob gos
ལུས་བསྐུམ	cat	lus bskum
ལུས་བསྐུམས	cat (that which can contract the body)	lus bskums
ལུས་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཕ་མ	the parents who gave you life	lus bskyed pa'i pha ma
ལུས་བསྐྱེད་ཚུལ	a body comes into being	lus bskyed tshul
ལུས་ཁམས	1) seed, semen; 2) the body's four elements: the body; 3) the body dhatu, the dhatu of touch; 4) the body	lus khams
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་ཐང	health	lus khams bde thang
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་ཐང་སླས་གསོ	restore health	lus khams bde thang slas gso
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་ཐང་སླས་གསོ་ཐུབ	be able to restore health	lus khams bde thang slas gso thub
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་དྭངས	good health	lus khams bde dwangs
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་པོ	[good] health, healthy	lus khams bde po
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་ས་ཚིགས	health care center	lus khams bde sa tshigs
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་སྲུང	health care	lus khams bde srung
ལུས་ཁམས་བདེ་སྲུང་ཁང	health care center	lus khams bde srung khang
ལུས་ཁམས་འཛག་པ	leaking/ emitting semen	lus khams 'dzag pa
ལུས་ཁོག	trunk of the body	lus khog
ལུས་ཁོང་གློད་པ	to deeply relax the body	lus khong glod pa
ལུས་ཁྲག	blood	lus khrag
ལུས་ཁྲག་འདོན་པ	draw blood	lus khrag 'don pa
ལུས་ཁྲུད་པ	cleanse out dirt from body, wash	lus khrud pa
ལུས་འཁྱགས	freezing body	lus 'khyags
ལུས་གུ་རྒྱུད	inter-linked	lus gu rgyud
ལུས་གོས	clothing	lus gos
ལུས་གྱི་འདུ་བྱེད	formations/ conditionings of the body	lus gyi 'du byed
ལུས་གྱེན་དུ་བཀན	body bent backwards	lus gyen du bkan
ལུས་གྱོང་རུར་བཞིན	though (my being has remained hardened	lus gyong rur bzhin
ལུས་གྱོང་རུས་བཞིན	though [my being) has remained hardened	lus gyong rus bzhin
ལུས་གྲིབ་བྲལ	one's body without shadow	lus grib bral
ལུས་གྲིམ་གྱིས་བསྒྲིམ	sitting in the poised position	lus grim gyis bsgrim
ལུས་གློད	relax the body	lus glod
ལུས་བགྲང་བར་སླ་བ་མ་ཡིན་ནོ	to count/ give an account of the body bodies is not easy	lus bgrang bar sla ba ma yin no
ལུས་མགྱོགས	bird	lus mgyogs
ལུས་འགྱིངས	che nyams can gyi gzugs po'i rnam 'gyur	lus 'gyings
ལུས་རྒྱ	enclosure of the physical body	lus rgya
ལུས་རྒྱ་ཞིག་པ	the destruction of the trap of body	lus rgya zhig pa
ལུས་རྒྱགས	[body] fat	lus rgyags
ལུས་རྒྱགས་པ	fat	lus rgyags pa
ལུས་རྒྱའི་འཆིང་བ	the bonds of the trap of body	lus rgya'i 'ching ba
ལུས་རྒྱས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི	four causes for bodily development	lus rgyas pa'i rgyu bzhi
ལུས་རྒྱས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི་གཉིད	sleep, one of the four causes for bodily development	lus rgyas pa'i rgyu bzhi gnyid
ལུས་རྒྱས་པའི་རྒྱུ་བཞི་ཟས	food, one of the four causes for bodily development	lus rgyas pa'i rgyu bzhi zas
ལུས་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	develops the body	lus rgyas par byed pa
ལུས་རྒྱུ	residual, something left behind	lus rgyu
ལུས་སྒྱུར	CM: i) sprul pa bstan pa. ii) lo keg zla keg sogs tshe 'phrang gi bar chad zhi phyir lus kyi cha lugs sgryu ba'i gto bcos zhig. iii) lus bsgyur dang don gcig. [mss]	lus sgyur
ལུས་སྒྱུར་མ	CM: (mngon) smad 'tshong ma, a prostitute (lit. "she who sells her lower half). [mss]	lus sgyur ma
ལུས་སྒྲིབ	physical, body obscuration	lus sgrib
ལུས་བརྒྱན་པ	adorned body	lus brgyan pa
ལུས་བསྒྱུར	CM: Has no entry for lus bsgyur, but this is probably similar to lus sgyur for which CM does have an entry. See lus sgyur. [mss]	lus bsgyur
ལུས་བསྒྱུར་མ	prostitute	lus bsgyur ma
ལུས་ངག	body and speech	lus ngag
ལུས་ངག་གི་སྒོ་ནས་འབྲེལ་བ	participating physically or verbally	lus ngag gi sgo nas 'brel ba
ལུས་ངག་གི་སྡོམ་པ	the vows of body and speech	lus ngag gi sdom pa
ལུས་ངག་གི་རྣམ་པ	aspects/ phenomena of body and speech	lus ngag gi rnam pa
ལུས་ངག་གི་སྤྱོད་པ	activities of body and speech	lus ngag gi spyod pa
ལུས་ངག་གི་མི་དགེ་བ་བདུན	the 7 nonvirtuous actions of body and speech	lus ngag gi mi dge ba bdun
ལུས་ངག་གི་ཞབས་ཏོག	service [in words and deeds]	lus ngag gi zhabs tog
ལུས་ངག་གི་ལས	actions of body and speech	lus ngag gi las
ལུས་ངག་གི་ལས་བདུན	the 7 actions of body and speech TSE	lus ngag gi las bdun
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད	body, speech, and mind	lus ngag yid
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་ཀྱི་དབེན་གསུམ	three solitudes of body, speech, and mind	lus ngag yid kyi dben gsum
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་སེམས་བཞི	Body, speech, mind, and cognition	lus ngag yid sems bzhi
ཏེཨཆེས་ཐཏ་སེམས་ཨིས་ཐེ་ཨལལ	ground consciousness, yid is the disturbed mind [consciousness] and rnam shes is the six collections (tshogs drug). 2686	teaches that sems is the all
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་གསུམ	physically, verbally or mentally	lus ngag yid gsum
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་གསུམ་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	activities of body speech and mind TSE	lus ngag yid gsum gyi spyod pa
ལུས་ངག་ལས	[karma] of body and speech	lus ngag las
ལུས་ངག་སེམས་བདེ	happiness/ bliss/ wholesomeness of body speech and mind	lus ngag sems bde
ལུས་ངན	ugly body, epithet of vaicravana, a yaksha demon	lus ngan
ལུས་ངན་གྱི་ཕྱོགས	quarter of the uglybodied beings	lus ngan gyi phyogs
ལུས་ངན་པོ	1) lus mdog stobs dman po; 2) rnam sras	lus ngan po
ལུས་ངན་མ	1) sug smel; 2) a demoness	lus ngan ma
ལུས་ངན་མིག	patala tree	lus ngan mig
ལུས་ངན་མོ	1 of lha mo bdun	lus ngan mo
ལུས་དངོས	1) bodily things; 2) main body/ subject of a shastra	lus dngos
ལུས་མངོན་བྱེད	{'gog snyoms mngon du byas nas mya ngan las 'da' ba'i rigs can no} one kind of {phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas}	lus mngon byed
ལུས་མངོན་བྱེད་པ	[dge 'dun nyi shu'i nang gses] lus kyis mngon sum du byed pa ste, phyir mi 'ong rnam thar brgyad la snyoms par 'jug par nus pa, 'bras gnas khyad par can gyi gras shig	lus mngon byed pa
ལུས་རྔུལ	sweat	lus rngul
ལུས་སྔ་མ	former life	lus snga ma
ལུས་ཅན	having a body, living being, being, embodied being	lus can
ལུས་ཅན་གནས	town, city	lus can gnas
ལུས་ཅན་མོས་པ	devotion/ concern for embodied beings	lus can mos pa
ལུས་གཅིག་གིས་འཚང་རྒྱ་བ	be enlightened in a single body/ lifetime	lus gcig gis 'tshang rgya ba
ལུས་གཅིག་པ	Mercury	lus gcig pa
ལུས་གཅེར་བུ	naked body	lus gcer bu
ལུས་བཅུད	the body's khu ba [semen or dvangs ma [essence]	lus bcud
ལུས་ལྕི་མ	pregnant woman	lus lci ma
ལུས་ལྕིམ	pregnant woman	lus lcim
ལུས་ཆགས་ཚུལ་གྱི་རིག་པ	physiology	lus chags tshul gyi rig pa
ལུས་ཆད	corporal punishment	lus chad
ལུས་ཆད་གཅོད	give corporal punishment	lus chad gcod
ལུས་ཆས	clothes	lus chas
ལུས་ཆས་ཆ་ཚང	a set of clothes	lus chas cha tshang
ལུས་ཆས་སྤོང་ཐག	chos lugs pas rang gi gyon chas la chags zhen spangs te mchod sbyin gyi rgyur gtong srol zhig	lus chas spong thag
ལུས་ཆུ	rngul	lus chu
ལུས་ཆེ་བ	huge body, giant, gigantic	lus che ba
ལུས་ཆེན	1) big body; 2) camel; 3) Rahu	lus chen
ལུས་ཆེས་ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འཕགས་པ	the e continent superior body, lus chos gral na yod kyang chos tshig gcig	lus ches khyad par du 'phags pa
ཀྱང་རང་གིས་མི་ཐོས	although you are physically present, you do not hear a word of the teaching	kyang rang gis mi thos
ལུས་ཆོས་པར་བྱས་པ	outwardly, I appear to be a practitioner of Dharma	lus chos par byas pa
ལུས་མཆོག	cinnamon	lus mchog
ལུས་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ	supreme body	lus mchog tu gyur pa
ལུས་མཆོག་མ	beautiful woman	lus mchog ma
ལུས་མཆོམ་མ	handsome woman	lus mchom ma
ལུས་འཆལ	improper behavior	lus 'chal
ལུས་འཆོས	lus kyi rnam 'gyur dang rnam pa la bzo bcos byed pa	lus 'chos
ལུས་འཇིགས་མེད	fearless body, firm body	lus 'jigs med
ལུས་འཇོམས་བྱེད་སྣ་དགུ	CHN	lus 'joms byed sna dgu
ལུས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	mindfulness of the body, one of the {rjes su dran pa bcu} ten mindfulnesses. [kyagatanusmr.ti]	lus rjes su dran pa
ལུས་ཉམས	experience of the body	lus nyams
ལུས་ཉམས་ཆུང་བ	lean body	lus nyams chung ba
ལུས་ཉམས་པ	damaged body	lus nyams pa
ལུས་གཉིས་པ	of composite body, epithet of ganapati	lus gnyis pa
ལུས་གཉོད་ཆུང	weak body, feeble constitution	lus gnyod chung
ལུས་བསྙལ་བ	[arch] if others don't give 1 all the things they are supposed to de'i mdun du khro bas lus bsgyel zhing bsnyal ba	lus bsnyal ba
ལུས་གཏོང	bud med kyi phyir du la la lus	lus gtong
ལུས་རྟེན	physical form	lus rten
ལུས་རྟེན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	the best--,	lus rten phun sum tshogs pa
ལུས་སྟོད	torso, trunk, upper body	lus stod
ལུས་སྟོན་པ	show one's self, appear	lus ston pa
ལུས་སྟོབས	bodily vigor, physical strength	lus stobs
ལུས་སྟོབས་སྐྱེད་སྨན	strength giving med., tonic, vitamins	lus stobs skyed sman
ལུས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས་པ	gaining full strength	lus stobs rgyas pa
ལུས་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	big/ massive/ strong [body]	lus stobs chen po
ལུས་སྟོབས་དར་ལ་བབས་པ	we mature, reach maturity	lus stobs dar la babs pa
ལུས་སྟོབས་ཞན་པ	weak	lus stobs zhan pa
ལུས་བརྟན་པ	firm body	lus brtan pa
ལུས་ཐ་མལ་དུ་གནས་པ	abide in the body for the last time	lus tha mal du gnas pa
ལུས་ཐ་མལ་པར་གནས་པ	be actual people	lus tha mal par gnas pa
ལུས་ཐང་པོ	physically strong, healthy	lus thang po
ལུས་ཐད་ཀྲོང	body erectly stood	lus thad krong
ལུས་ཐིག	body measurements	lus thig
ལུས་ཐུང་བ	to be short	lus thung ba
ལུས་ཐོག་ཉེས་ཆད	corporal punishment	lus thog nyes chad
ལུས་ཐོག་འདི	while in this body	lus thog 'di
ལུས་མཐུ	bodily strength	lus mthu
ལུས་མཐུན་པ	personal union, intimacy	lus mthun pa
ལུས་དག་གི་ལས	physical/ verbal action	lus dag gi las
ལུས་དག་པ	the purity of the body	lus dag pa
ལུས་དང་དཀྲིལ་ལེ	[arch] lus dang 'khyil le ste sbrel ba ltar mi 'bral ba'i don	lus dang dkril le
ལུས་དང་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན་འགྲོགས་པ	accompany you like your shadow	lus dang grib ma bzhin 'grogs pa
ལུས་དང་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན་དུ་འགྲོགས	followed as shadow accompanies body	lus dang grib ma bzhin du 'grogs
ལུས་དང་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན་དུ་འགྲོགས་པ	accompany like a body and its shadow	lus dang grib ma bzhin du 'grogs pa
ལུས་དང་གྲིབ་བཞིན་འགྲོགས	accompany like a body and its shadow	lus dang grib bzhin 'grogs
ལུས་དང་ངག	body and speech / voice	lus dang ngag
ལུས་དང་ངག་གི་ལས	physical and verbal karmic actions	lus dang ngag gi las
པར་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྤྱོད་པ	rightly/ purely perform actions of body, speech, and mind lus dang ngag dang yid dang ni bden pa	par kun tu spyod pa
ཤེས་པས	by rightly knowing body, speech, and mind	shes pas
ལུས་དང་ངག་ནི་ཞི་བ	pacify body and speech	lus dang ngag ni zhi ba
ལུས་དང་ནི་སྲོག་ལ་མི་ལྟ	w/ o regard for life and limb	lus dang ni srog la mi lta
ལུས་དང་ཡན་ལག	body and limbs	lus dang yan lag
ལུས་དང་ལུས་འཕགས	body of land and great body of land * {lus and lus 'phags pa}	lus dang lus 'phags
ལུས་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	your body and all your possessions	lus dang longs spyod
ལུས་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར	particular details regarding physical bodies, and enjoyments	lus dang longs spyod kyi khyad par
ལུས་དང་སེམས	body and mind	lus dang sems
ལུས་དང་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of body and mind	lus dang sems kyi sdug bsngal
ལུས་དང་སེམས་དབེན་པ	solitary in body and mind	lus dang sems dben pa
ལུས་དང་སེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	suppleness of body and mind, shinjang of body and mind	lus dang sems shin tu sbyangs pa
ལུས་དང་སྲོག	body and life, life and limb	lus dang srog
ལུས་དང་སྲོག་གཏོང་ཤིང	because of losing body and life/ life and limb	lus dang srog gtong shing
ལུས་དང་སྲོག་ལ་འཚེ་བ	may harm your body and life	lus dang srog la 'tshe ba
ལུས་དར་ཅིག	lost myself for a moment	lus dar cig
ལུས་དལ	body not busied w work/ activity	lus dal
ལུས་དལ་བར་མ་སྡོད	don't sit around idly!	lus dal bar ma sdod
ལུས་དུབ་པ	be fatigued, be tired	lus dub pa
ལུས་དུམ་བུ་གཉིས་སུ་བཅད	his body was cut into two	lus dum bu gnyis su bcad
ལུས་དེང	devil, mara, demon	lus deng
ལུས་དོགས་སྔོན་འཚང	press to the front for fear of being left out	lus dogs sngon 'tshang
ལུས་དྲང་པོར་བསྲང་ནས	holding the body straight	lus drang por bsrang nas
ལུས་དྲན་པ་ཉི་བར་བཞག་པ	[essential] recollection/ mindfulness of body GD	lus dran pa nyi bar bzhag pa
ལུས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ	application of mindfulness based on the body	lus dran pa nye bar gzhag pa
ལུས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	application of mindfulness of body	lus dran pa nye bar bzhag pa
ལུས་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག	essential recollections of body	lus dran pa nyer gzhag
ལུས་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག	application of mindfulness of body	lus dran pa nyer bzhag
ལུས་དྲོད	physical heat	lus drod
ལུས་དྲོད་དཔྱད་ཆས	thermometer	lus drod dpyad chas
ལུས་དྲོད་འབར	the body is bursting with heat	lus drod 'bar
ལུས་བདེ	healthy	lus bde
ལུས་བདེ་བ	healthy in body	lus bde ba
ལུས་མདངས་ཅན	vital body	lus mdangs can
ལུས་འདི་ཅི་རུང	why should we care so much for this our body	lus 'di ci rung
ལུས་འདིའི་སྟེང་ནས	in this life	lus 'di'i steng nas
ལུས་འདུད	bow, bend the body	lus 'dud
ལུས་འདེགས	wing feathers	lus 'degs
ལུས་འདོད་དགུར་སྒྱུར་བ	transform one's body at pleasure	lus 'dod dgur sgyur ba
ལུས་འདོད་པ	wish to take embodiment	lus 'dod pa
ལུས་འདོར་བ	1) rang srog blos gtong ba; 2) pass away (/ discard the body, leave the body behind	lus 'dor ba
ལུས་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་དུ	total dissolution	lus rdul phran du
ལུས་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་དུ་དེངས	dissolving the body into atoms	lus rdul phran du dengs
ལུས་རྡོལ་ཆེ	huge body, giant, gigantic	lus rdol che
ལུས་རྡོས	size/ mass of the body	lus rdos
ལུས་རྡོས་ཆེ་བ	very corpulent body	lus rdos che ba
ལུས་ལྡན	1) sentient/ embodied/ living being; 2) camel	lus ldan
ལུས་ལྡན་མ	woman, goddess	lus ldan ma
ལུས་ལྡན་མོས་པ	devotion/ concern for embodied beings	lus ldan mos pa
ལུས་བསྡད	1) the rest remaining there; 2) be left over/ behind, pending, remaining	lus bsdad
ལུས་བསྡད་པ	1) the rest remaining there; 2) be left over/ behind, pending, remaining	lus bsdad pa
ལུས་ནད་མེད་དུ་གྱུར་པ	I am never ill	lus nad med du gyur pa
ལུས་ནས	after leaving behind	lus nas
ལུས་ནས་ཐོན་པའི་རྔུལ་ཆུ	sweat	lus nas thon pa'i rngul chu
ལུས་གནད	gzugs po'i gnad yod sa	lus gnad
ལུས་གནད་དང་བཅས	w good posture lus gnad drang por bsrang nying straighten the body posture	lus gnad dang bcas
ལུས་གནད་དྲང་བོར་བསྲང་བ	to straighten one's back	lus gnad drang bor bsrang ba
ལུས་གནད་རྣམ་སྣང་ཆོས་བདུན	the sevenfold body posture of Vairochana	lus gnad rnam snang chos bdun
ལུས་གནད་རྩའི་འཁོར	wheel of the points of the body	lus gnad rtsa'i 'khor
ལུས་གནད་རྩའི་འཁོར་ལོ	The System of the Channels of the Body	lus gnad rtsa'i 'khor lo
ལུས་གནད་ཚུལ	For the key point of body, assume the postures of the	lus gnad tshul
ལུས་གནད་ལེགས་པར་བཅའ	assume correctly	lus gnad legs par bca'
ལུས་གནད་བསྲང	upright posture	lus gnad bsrang
ལུས་གནས	posture	lus gnas
ལུས་གནས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བཞི	1) {spyi bo bde chen gyi 'khor lo}. 2) {mgrin pa longs spyod kyi 'khor lo} 3) {snying ga chos kyi 'khor lo} 4) {gsang ba bde skyong gi 'khor lo}	lus gnas kyi 'khor lo bzhi
ལུས་གནས་པ་ལ་མངའ་བ	possessing/ master of the chakras of the body/ good posture	lus gnas pa la mnga' ba
ལུས་སྣང	feeling of body, appearance of body, bodily perception	lus snang
ལུས་སྣང་སེམས་གསུམ	body, perception, and mind	lus snang sems gsum
ལུས་སྣད་ནས	being hurt in the body	lus snad nas
ལུས་སྣེད་པ	in part of the body skyon shor ba	lus sned pa
ལུས་པ	(tha mi dad pa incomplete, broken, left alone, lost, abandoned, remained[er], be left [behind/ w/ w/o	lus pa
ལུས་པོ	body, body	lus po
ལུས་པོ་གྲང	one feels the body to be cold	lus po grang
ལུས་པོ་བཟང་བ	to be healthy	lus po bzang ba
ལུས་པོར་སྐྱེས	hair	lus por skyes
ལུས་སྤུ	body hairs	lus spu
ལུས་སྤྱོད	activities of the body	lus spyod
ལུས་སྤྲུག་སིལ་བྱེད་པ	shake one's self	lus sprug sil byed pa
ལུས་ཕུང	body	lus phung
ལུས་ཕུང་རྒྱས	grow [up]	lus phung rgyas
ལུས་ཕུང་རྒྱས་པའི་དུས་སྐབས	period of growing [up]	lus phung rgyas pa'i dus skabs
ལུས་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect body	lus phun sum tshogs pa
ལུས་ཕྱི་མ	later body	lus phyi ma
ལུས་ཕྱེད	half the body	lus phyed
ལུས་ཕྱེད་འགུལ་མི་ཐུབ་པ	paralysis of half of the body	lus phyed 'gul mi thub pa
ལུས་ཕྱེད་བཅད་པ	body cut in half lus phyed g.yas pa - right half of the body lus phyed g.yon pa - left half of the body	lus phyed bcad pa
ལུས་ཕྲ	(fine, subtle, slender) body, lightning, woman, waist 2688	lus phra
ལུས་ཕྲ་བདེ་འཐུང	lightning	lus phra bde 'thung
ལུས་ཕྲ་བ	subtle body TSE	lus phra ba
ལུས་ཕྲ་མ	beautiful woman	lus phra ma
ལུས་འཕགས	Sublime in Body. Videha	lus 'phags
ལུས་འཕགས་སྐྱེས	pi pi ling	lus 'phags skyes
ལུས་འཕགས་གོ	great body, Videha (the E continent	lus 'phags go
ལུས་འཕགས་གླིང	continent of Superior body, Videha	lus 'phags gling
ལུས་འཕགས་པ	Superior body, Videha (the E continent, Mithila/ ancient Tirhut	lus 'phags pa
ལུས་འཕགས་པོ	Superior body, Videha (E continent	lus 'phags po
ལུས་འཕགས་པོ་ཤར	the eastern continent "Noble Body" / superior body, so-called because {lus ches khyad par du 'phags pa}	lus 'phags po shar
ལུས་འཕགས་ཡུལ	continent of Sublime Physical Form	lus 'phags yul
ལུས་འཕྲེང་བའི་རྣམ་འགྱུར	touching / moving gestures	lus 'phreng ba'i rnam 'gyur
ལུས་བ་སྤུ	body hair lus ba spu g.yo bas mgul mi shes pa	lus ba spu
ལུས་བབ	sweat	lus bab
ལུས་བེམ	physical matter of the body	lus bem
ལུས་བོངས	bulk/ size of the body	lus bongs
ལུས་བོངས་ཆེ	bulky, fat, tall, big [body]	lus bongs che
ལུས་བྱ་བ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	abiding of the body in activity lus bya ba la mi gnas par sdod pas 'khor	lus bya ba la mi gnas pa
བའི་འཁྲུལ་རྟོག་དག	The bewildering thoughts of sams ra are purified by the presence in which there is no abiding of the body in activity GD	ba'i 'khrul rtog dag
ལུས་བྱད	1) shape of the body; 2) body and face	lus byad
ལུས་བྱིང་གྲང	one's body is cold all over	lus bying grang
ལུས་བྲེལ	body busy/ not at ease	lus brel
ལུས་བྲེལ་སེམས་བྲེལ	busy in mind and body lus brel sems brel byas nas las don sgrub	lus brel sems brel
ལུས་བླང་བ	to take rebirth	lus blang ba
ལུས་བླངས	to take on a body	lus blangs
ལུས་དབང	body sense, sense of touch	lus dbang
ལུས་དབང་པོ	sensory activity	lus dbang po
ལུས་དབེན	1) body free from complexities of activity; 2) * lower gate phra mo bsgoms nas prana gathering and dissolving in the central channel produce	lus dben
ལུས་དབྱིབས	body shape/ build	lus dbyibs
ལུས་འབབ	sweat	lus 'bab
ལུས་འབུལ་བའི་མཆོད་པ	liturgy of offering 1's body [in gcod practice]	lus 'bul ba'i mchod pa
ལུས་འབོད་པ	cough	lus 'bod pa
ལུས་འབྱར	clothes 1 is wearing	lus 'byar
ལུས་འབྲེལ	sexual intercourse	lus 'brel
ལུས་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	have sexual intercourse	lus 'brel byed
ལུས་འབྲེལ་ཞུ	to request body-link [especially in Bhutan]	lus 'brel zhu
ལུས་སྦས	secret parts of the body	lus sbas
ལུས་སྦྱང	exercises	lus sbyang
ལུས་སྦྱང་བྱེད	have drills, be drilling, exercise	lus sbyang byed
ལུས་སྦྱང་བྱེད་པ	have drills, be drilling	lus sbyang byed pa
ལུས་སྦྱངས	{lus kyi sbyong ba} body training	lus sbyangs
ལུས་སྦྱིན	body offering ritual	lus sbyin
ལུས་སྦྱིན་པ	I sacrificed my body to others	lus sbyin pa
ལུས་སྦྱོང	body training, training the body	lus sbyong
ལུས་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	have drills, be drilling, exercise	lus sbyong byed
ལུས་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་པ	have drills, be drilling, exercise	lus sbyong byed pa
ལུས་སྦྱོར	bodily union, sex	lus sbyor
ལུས་མ	remainder, balance, residue	lus ma
ལུས་མ་འཁྲུགས་པར	without agitating the body	lus ma 'khrugs par
ལུས་མ་འགྱུར་ཀྱང	Even without changing body	lus ma 'gyur kyang
ལུས་མ་རྙིད་པ	[arch] lus zungs ma nyams pa'am mdangs ma shor ba	lus ma rnyid pa
ལུས་མ་བྲལ་བ	w/o remainder/ balance	lus ma bral ba
ལུས་མ་བསྲུངས	1) by a woman relying on many husbands; 2) fire	lus ma bsrungs
ལུས་མི་སྐྱོང	not taking care of the body	lus mi skyong
ལུས་མི་བདེ	1) unhealthy body; 2) bud med sbrum ma	lus mi bde
ལུས་མི་སྡུག	1) ugly body; 2) horned scorpion	lus mi sdug
ལུས་མི་དམིགས་པ	w/ o concern for body lus mi g.yo - the body does not move	lus mi dmigs pa
ལུས་མིར	in a human body	lus mir
ལུས་མེད	bodiless	lus med
ལུས་མེད་མཁའ་འགྲོ	bodiless kin	lus med mkha' 'gro
ལུས་མེད་མཁའ་འགྲོ་སྐོར་དགུ	Nine Cycles of the Bodiless Dakinis lus med mkha' 'gro snyan brgyud chos	lus med mkha' 'gro skor dgu
སྐོར་དགུ	the nine teachings of the formless dakini hearing lineage lus med mkha' 'gro snyan brgyud chos	skor dgu
ལུས་མེད་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སྐོར་དགུ	The Nine Cycles of the Formless (lit. disembodied) Dakini; received by Tilopa from the wisdom dakinis at the Gandhola Temple. The teachings were then transmitted to Naropa, and then in part to Marp...	lus med mkha' 'gro'i skor dgu
ལུས་མེད་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་འཁོར་དགུ	Nine Cycles of Formless (lit. bodiless) Dakini	lus med mkha' 'gro'i 'khor dgu
ལུས་མེད་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཆོས་སྐོར་དགུ	CHN	lus med mkha' 'gro'i chos skor dgu
ལུས་མེད་ཐུལ	a buddha	lus med thul
ལུས་མེད་བདག་པོ	the mara dga' rab dbang phyug	lus med bdag po
ལུས་མེད་ལམ	space	lus med lam
ལུས་དམར	saffron	lus dmar
ལུས་དམར་ཅན	Mars	lus dmar can
ལུས་དམར་འདབ	coral	lus dmar 'dab
ལུས་དམར་དམག་དཔོན	Mars	lus dmar dmag dpon
ལུས་སྨད་ལྔ་ས	prostrate oneself	lus smad lnga sa
ལུས་སྨད་ལྔ་ས་ལ་གཏུག་པ	bring the 5 lower parts of the body in contact with the ground	lus smad lnga sa la gtug pa
ལུས་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ripen the body	lus smin par byed pa
ལུས་གཙང	pure body	lus gtsang
ལུས་བཙངས་གན་རྒྱ	contract selling 1self as slave/ prostitute	lus btsangs gan rgya
ལུས་རྩའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandalas/ chakras of the nadis 2689	lus rtsa'i dkyil 'khor
ལུས་རྩའི་གཙོ་གསུམ	the three chief nadis/ veins of the body	lus rtsa'i gtso gsum
ལུས་རྩལ	[training in] physical skill/ sport/ culture/ education/ exercise, gymnastics	lus rtsal
ལུས་རྩལ་ཁང	gym	lus rtsal khang
ལུས་རྩལ་མཁས་པ	gymnast	lus rtsal mkhas pa
ལུས་རྩལ་འགྲན་ཚོགས	athletic/ sports meet[/ competition	lus rtsal 'gran tshogs
ལུས་རྩལ་ངོམས་པ	jumping about	lus rtsal ngoms pa
ལུས་རྩལ་ཐང	(drill, sports) ground, playground	lus rtsal thang
ལུས་རྩལ་པ	athlete	lus rtsal pa
ལུས་རྩལ་སྤོ་ཁང	sports club	lus rtsal spo khang
ལུས་རྩལ་བྱེད་ས	athletic/ sports field	lus rtsal byed sa
ལུས་རྩལ་སྦྱང་ཁང	gymnasium	lus rtsal sbyang khang
ལུས་རྩལ་སྦྱང་བ	to drill, exercise	lus rtsal sbyang ba
ལུས་རྩལ་སྦྱངས་པ	fully trained my body	lus rtsal sbyangs pa
ལུས་རྩལ་རྩེད	do [training in] physical skill/ sport/ culture/ education/ exercise, gymnastics]	lus rtsal rtsed
ལུས་རྩལ་ཚགས་པར	sports newspaper	lus rtsal tshags par
ལུས་རྩལ་ཚོགས་ཆེན	athletic/ sports meet[ing]/ competition	lus rtsal tshogs chen
ལུས་རྩལ་ཚོགས་འདུ	athletic/ sports meet[ing]/ competition	lus rtsal tshogs 'du
ལུས་རྩལ་ཡང་པོ	light physical exercise	lus rtsal yang po
ལུས་རྩལ་ར	athletic/ sports field	lus rtsal ra
ལུས་རྩལ་ར་བ	athletic/ sports field	lus rtsal ra ba
ལུས་རྩལ་ལ་བརྟེན་པའི་གསོ་ཐབས	gymnastic/ kinesthetic therapy	lus rtsal la brten pa'i gso thabs
ལུས་རྩལ་སློབ་གསོ	physical education	lus rtsal slob gso
ལུས་རྩིས་པོ་ཆེ	one that makes much of his own body by indulging and adorning it	lus rtsis po che
ལུས་ཚགས	lus kyi sha nyams	lus tshags
ལུས་ཚད	size/ mass of the body lus tshad dang snod dang dpangs gzhal	lus tshad
ཚུལ་བཅུ་དྲུག	CHN	tshul bcu drug
ལུས་ཚུགས་ཐུབ	keep humility, propriety	lus tshugs thub
ལུས་ཚོར	physical feeling	lus tshor
ལུས་ཚོར་དྲུག	CHN	lus tshor drug
ལུས་ཚོར་སེམས་ཚོར་གཉིས	CHN lus mtshan dang dpa' rtsal gyis brgyan pa whose body was ornamented with the marks of a great hero	lus tshor sems tshor gnyis
ལུས་འཚག་བཟང་བ	body or constitution that is healthy and sleek	lus 'tshag bzang ba
ལུས་འཚོ	sustain life	lus 'tsho
ལུས་མཛེས་ཤིང་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ	beautiful and appealing	lus mdzes shing yid du 'ong ba
ལུས་རྫོགས	1) physical strength; 2) reach full growth	lus rdzogs
ལུས་ཞིག་ནས	after the body is destroyed	lus zhig nas
ལུས་བཞག་སྟང	postures of the body lus bzhag stang las mi 'gul bas rtsa rlung	lus bzhag stang
རང་དལ	W/ o moving from the postures of the body, the energy channels and currents are relaxed of their own accord GD	rang dal
ལུས་ཟ་ཟིང	one's body is itching	lus za zing
ལུས་ཟུངས	bodily/ physical strength	lus zungs
ལུས་ཟུངས་དབ༹ངས་མ	semen, bindu	lus zungs dvangs ma
ལུས་ཟུངས་བདུན	7 bodily constituents	lus zungs bdun
ལུས་ཟུངས་གསུམ་པ	meat	lus zungs gsum pa
ལུས་གཟུགས	shape of body, stature	lus gzugs
ལུས་བཟང་བ	well-built	lus bzang ba
ལུས་བཟང་མ	beautiful woman	lus bzang ma
ལུས་བཟོ	art in reference to the body	lus bzo
ལུས་ཡང	light body, the body is light	lus yang
ལུས་ཡང་ཡང་འདོར་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of losing 1's body again and again	lus yang yang 'dor ba'i sdug bsngal
ལུས་ཡངས	light body	lus yangs
ལུས་ཡོངས་སུ་བཏང་བ	completely leave the body lus yongs su dpyad pa'i bsgom pa'i rim pa - the stage/ details of meditation that completely analyzes the body	lus yongs su btang ba
ལུས་ཡོངས་སུ་རྫོགས་པ	completely perfect body	lus yongs su rdzogs pa
ལུས་ཡོད	any given form of a body	lus yod
ལུས་ཡོད་མི་ཚོར	body's existence is no longer felt, lus g.yogs med pa - nothing to cover	lus yod mi tshor
ལུས་རགས་པ	the coarse body TSE	lus rags pa
ལུས་རགས་པའི་སྣང་བར་འདོད་ཁམས	the desire realm which is the variable coarse appearance of body	lus rags pa'i snang bar 'dod khams
ལུས་རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང	{dga' bo'i lus rab tu byung yang} though Nanda took on the form of a monk	lus rab tu byung
ལུས་རློན	sweat	lus rlon
ལུས་ལ་གྱོན་ཡོད་པའི་ཆས་གོས	clothes 1 is wearing	lus la gyon yod pa'i chas gos
ལུས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ	something dependent upon the body	lus la brten pa
ལུས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ་ལྔ	CHN	lus la brten pa lnga
ལུས་ལ་དྲ་བར་འབྲེལ	spread throughout the body like a network	lus la dra bar 'brel
ལུས་ལ་བདེ་དྲད་འབར་བ	The blazing of blissful warmth in the body GD	lus la bde drad 'bar ba
ལུས་ལ་བདེ་དྲོད་འབར་བ	The blazing of blissful warmth in the body	lus la bde drod 'bar ba
ལུས་ལ་ནད་འགྲམས་པ	infect the body with disease	lus la nad 'grams pa
ལུས་ལ་ཕན་པ་སྐྱེད་པ	produce benefits for the body	lus la phan pa skyed pa
ལུས་ལ་དམིགས་པ	meditation object/ conception/ image of the body	lus la dmigs pa
ལུས་ལ་ཟུངས	hold or bear on the person lus la yod pa'i mi gtsang ba'i rdzas so drug - the thirty-six impure substances existent in the body lus la yod pa'i mi gtsang ba'i rdzas so drug - the 36 impure substanc...	lus la zungs
ལུས་ལ་སོགས་པ	body and so forth	lus la sogs pa
ལུས་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་བདག་མེད་པ	the dharmas of the body and so forth are egoless	lus la sogs pa'i chos la bdag med pa
ལུས་ལ་སྲེད་པ	physical craving	lus la sred pa
ལུས་ལ་སྲེད་བྲལ	absence of physical craving	lus la sred bral
ལུས་ལས་འཕེལ	child	lus las 'phel
ལུས་ལས་རུང	workability of body	lus las rung
ལུས་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཚ	muscles	lus lus kyi tsha
ལུས་ལེན་པ	receive a body, take birth	lus len pa
ལུས་ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness that takes birth/ receives a body	lus len pa'i rnam shes
ལུས་ལོང་སྤྱོད	body or possessions	lus long spyod
ལུས་ལོངས	physical comfort	lus longs
ལུས་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བ	very subtle body TSE	lus shin tu phra ba
ལུས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	suppleness of body	lus shin tu sbyangs pa
ལུས་ཤིན་སྦྱངས	suppleness/ shinjang of body, completely trained body TSE	lus shin sbyangs
ལུས་ཤུགས	physical strength	lus shugs
ལུས་ཤེད	physical strength	lus shed
ལུས་ཤེད་འགྲན་པ	vie in strength	lus shed 'gran pa
ལུས་ཤེས	body consciousness/ awareness	lus shes
ལུས་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	the body consciousness element, abbr. of {lus kyi rnam par shes pa'i khams}	lus shes kyi khams
ལུས་གཤེར	search/ frisk the body	lus gsher
ལུས་གཤེར་གཏོང	search/ frisk the body	lus gsher gtong
ལུས་བཤེར	body search	lus bsher
ལུས་ས་ལ་རྡེབས་པ	prostrate oneself	lus sa la rdebs pa
ལུས་ས་ལ་བརྡབས	to throw oneself on the ground	lus sa la brdabs
ལུས་སམ་སྐུའི་ཐིག་ལེ	the body drop	lus sam sku'i thig le
ལུས་སིག་པ	shake or jerk the body	lus sig pa
ལུས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	leave behind, leave a remainder	lus su 'jug pa
ལུས་སུ་སྣང་བ	appearance as a body, feeling of the body, bodily perception	lus su snang ba
ལུས་སེམས	body and mind, physical or mental	lus sems
ལུས་སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ངན་ལེན	physical and mental rigidity 2690	lus sems kyi gnas ngan len
ལུས་སེམས་ཁོང་གློད	to relax body and mind	lus sems khong glod
ལུས་སེམས་དགའ་བདེས་ཁྱབ་པ	filling body and mind w [feelings of] joy/ happiness [& bliss]	lus sems dga' bdes khyab pa
ལུས་སེམས་ཉམས་མྱོང	experiences of body and mind	lus sems nyams myong
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་ཀར་ཕན་པ	benefitting both body and mind	lus sems gnyis kar phan pa
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་ངལ	both physical and mental weariness/ hardship	lus sems gnyis ngal
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་བདེ	physically and mentally healthy [& happy]/ well-being	lus sems gnyis bde
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་བདེ་ཐང	physically and mentally healthy [& happy]/ well-being	lus sems gnyis bde thang
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་གནོད	harm both body and mind	lus sems gnyis gnod
ལུས་སེམས་གཉིས་གནོད་བྱེད	harm both body and mind	lus sems gnyis gnod byed
ལུས་སེམས་བདེ་ཐང	physically and mentally healthy [& happy]/ well-being	lus sems bde thang
ལུས་སེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	suppleness/ shinjang of body and mind	lus sems shin tu sbyangs pa
ལུས་སེམས་ཤིན་སྦྱངས་ཀྱི་དགའ་བདེ	joy and bliss/ happiness/ wholesomeness of physical and mental pliancy/ shinjang TSE	lus sems shin sbyangs kyi dga' bde
ལུས་སེམས་ཤིན་སྦྱངས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	bliss/ happiness/ wholesomeness of physical and mental pliancy/ shinjang	lus sems shin sbyangs kyi bde ba
ལུས་སོ	the body and its proper/ natural state	lus so
ལུས་སྲིང་མ	mother	lus sring ma
ལུས་སྲུང	1) armor etc.; 2) protect 1's body from harm	lus srung
ལུས་སྲུང་བ	1) protect 1's body from harm; 2) by woman not do it w a man to whom she is not married	lus srung ba
ལུས་སྲུལ་པོ	1 of 12 kinds of yi dwags, evil spirits with rotten body, sorcerer, those that putrefy the body, Kataputana	lus srul po
ལུས་སྲེ་བ	communicate with another (live, eat, drink, smoke with a person)	lus sre ba
ལུས་སྲོག	life, body and life	lus srog
ལུས་སྲོག་སྐྱེད་མཁན་ཕ་མ	My parents who gave me life	lus srog skyed mkhan pha ma
ལུས་སྲོག་གི་ཐོབ་ཐང	right to live	lus srog gi thob thang
ལུས་སྲོག་གཅིག་དང་ཐ་དད་དུ་ལྟ་བ	the views that body and life are the same or different	lus srog gcig dang tha dad du lta ba
ལུས་སྲོག་གཏོང་ནུས་པ	able to give life and body	lus srog gtong nus pa
ལུས་སྲོག་གཏོང་བ	given their bodies and lives	lus srog gtong ba
ལུས་སྲོག་བཏང	{rang gi lus srog btang ngo} better to give up our own lives	lus srog btang
ལུས་སྲོག་ཐོད་ལ་བོར་ལགས་སམ	Did you feel no more attachment to body and life than you would to a rotting carcass?	lus srog thod la bor lags sam
ལུས་སྲོག་བསྡོས་པ	risked body and life	lus srog bsdos pa
ལུས་སྲོག་ཕྱིར་ཡང	even at the cost of your own life	lus srog phyir yang
ལུས་སྲོག་འཕངས་མེད	sacrificing 1's life for another	lus srog 'phangs med
ལུས་སྲོག་ལ་ལྟ་བ	views about body and life	lus srog la lta ba
ལུས་སྲོག་ལ་གནོད་པ	injury to life and limb	lus srog la gnod pa
ལུས་སྲོག་ལ་བབས་ཀྱང	even at the cost of your life	lus srog la babs kyang
ལུས་གསིག་གསིག་བྱེད	drawing up the body, shake the body	lus gsig gsig byed
ལུས་གསུམ	the three bodies	lus gsum
ལུས་གསུམ་གྱི་གདམས་པ	instructions of the three bodies	lus gsum gyi gdams pa
ལུས་གསོ	refresh/ ease/ cure the body, restore health, physical therapy	lus gso
ལུས་གསོ་ཁང	rest home, sanatorium	lus gso khang
ལུས་གསོ་རྒྱག་པ	recuperate, convalesce, refresh/ ease/ cure the body, restore health, do physical therapy	lus gso rgyag pa
ལུས་གསོ་བ	nourish the body, restore health	lus gso ba
ལུས་བསྲང	upright posture	lus bsrang
ལུས་བསྲེ་བ	mixing bodies, sex	lus bsre ba
ལུས་ཧྲེང	Port Arthur	lus hreng
ལུས་ལྷ	the divine body	lus lha
ལུས་ཨུས་མི་རུང་བ	unworkable states	lus us mi rung ba
ལེ	chapter, division, section, li measure = 500 meters, kilometer	le
ལེ་ཁག	1) section, chapter; 2) blame, reproach, le thogs: mistake [in work] mistake etc. [kyi rtsa ba thug sa]	le khag
ལེ་འཁོན	idleness, fighting, quarrelling	le 'khon
ལེ་འཁྲི	gyod gzhi'i do bdag ma yin par gnad don de dang 'brel ba yod cing khrims sar gtug dgos pa'i mi	le 'khri
ལེ་འགྲིག	reconcile a quarrel	le 'grig
ལེ་བརྒན	1) red/ violet color; 2) madder [med.]/juice; 3) red silk; 4) liver; 5) rims nad mostly due to bile; 6) violet; 7) poppy, opium; 8) flower-design print	le brgan
ལེ་བརྒན་རྒྱས་པ	{le brgan rgyas pa} disease [rtsib thung [inner body part] gyas gyon thad swell and ro stod gzer ba'i mchin nad cig	le brgan rgyas pa
ལེ་བརྒན་འཇོལ་བེར	flowered dress with a train	le brgan 'jol ber
ལེ་བརྒན་དར	red silk	le brgan dar
ལེ་བརྒན་མེ་ཏོག	poppy lower	le brgan me tog
ལེ་བརྒན་རྩི	ordinary saffron	le brgan rtsi
ལེ་ཆོན	TSE	le chon
ལེ་ཉིན་རིང་ལུགས	at the time of btsan rgyal ring lugs and the time by revolution by the proletariat le nyin gyis yar rgyas dang 'thus tshang du btang ba'i marxist revolution rigs pa'i gzhung lugs	le nyin ring lugs
ལེ་ཐེར	serge made of very soft goat's wool	le ther
ལེ་ཐོ	calendar, almanac	le tho
ལེ་ཐོགས	1) mistake in work; 2) mistake etc. kyi rtsa ba thug sa	le thogs
ལེ་ན	shawl wool	le na
ལེ་བར	li = 500 meters, kilometer	le bar
ལེ་དབར	li = 500 meters, kilometer	le dbar
ལེ་མ	SA le'u, striped broad sheets of cotton and wool manufactured in sikkim	le ma
ལེ་ཚན	sections; serial number	le tshan
ལེ་ཚེ	lattice, diagram, plaid	le tshe
ལེ་ལག	appendix, supplement, addition	le lag
ལེ་ལག་ཕྲལ	take apart, dismember	le lag phral
ལེ་ལན	blame; blame, rebuke, reprimand	le lan
ལེ་ལན་བདའ་བ	blame	le lan bda' ba
ལེ་ལན་འདེད	blame [others etc] 2691	le lan 'ded
ལེ་ལན་པ	blame	le lan pa
ལེ་ལན་བཤད་པ	blame	le lan bshad pa
ལེ་ལམ་མཁན	SA las lam mkhan	le lam mkhan
ལེ་ལེན	blame	le len
ལེ་ལོ	laziness, mibp 84, passive, inactive, indolent, sloth, indolence, tardiness	le lo
ལེ་ལོ་འགྲོས	lazy motion/ gait	le lo 'gros
ལེ་ལོ་ཅན	lazy, careless, slothful, sleepy, indifferent	le lo can
ལེ་ལོ་ཆེ་ན	if your laziness is great	le lo che na
ལེ་ལོ་སྙོམས་ལས་བྱེད་པ	to be lazy or	le lo snyoms las byed pa
ལེ་ལོ་བ	fool, stupid fool	le lo ba
ལེ་ལོ་བྱེད	procrastinate, be lazy	le lo byed
ལེ་ལོ་མ	lazy woman	le lo ma
ལེ་ལོ་མ་བྱེད་ཅིག	don't be lazy	le lo ma byed cig
ལེ་ལོ་སྨད་པ	condemn laziness	le lo smad pa
ལེ་ལོ་བཟློག་པ	to overcome laziness	le lo bzlog pa
ལེ་ལོ་གསུམ	the three kinds of laziness	le lo gsum
ལེ་ལོ་གསུམ་སྒྱིད་ལུག་པ	lack of selfconfidence	le lo gsum sgyid lug pa
ལེ་ལོ་གསུམ་གཉིད་སོགས་སྙོམ་ལས	the three neutral activities such as sleep	le lo gsum gnyid sogs snyom las
ལེ་ལོ་གསུམ་བྱ་བ་ངན་པ་ལ་ཞེན་པ	attachment to negative activities of the three kinds of laziness	le lo gsum bya ba ngan pa la zhen pa
ལེ་ལོའི་ཚིག	words of idleness	le lo'i tshig
ལེ་ལོས་འཁྱེར	overcome with idleness	le los 'khyer
ལེ་ལོས་འགྲོས	slothful motion, walking very slowly out of laziness	le los 'gros
ལེ་ཤོར	lazy byas te 'thus shor byung ba ste, las don tshags tshud po ma byung ba ??	le shor
ལེ་བྷ་ནོན	Lebanon	le bha non
ལེག་རྒན	poppy, opium, diapered design of warm fabrics	leg rgan
ལེག་སོ	well done	leg so
ལེག་གསུང་གི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ	10 aspects of excellent teaching GD	leg gsung gi rnam pa bcu
ལེགས	beautiful, elegant; good, {lam} the ~ path, auspicious, perfect, [seeing whatever he does as ~], well, positive, ex-	legs
ལེགས་སྐར	Sunaksatra {legs pa'i skar ma}	legs skar
ལེགས་སྐྱེས	Dyutimana {legs skyes kyis mchod rten de la gser gyi gdugs phul} Dyutimana offered a golden umbrella for that stupa	legs skyes
བོརན་ཝེལལ	grown; 4) award, tribute, medal	born well
ལེགས་སྐྱེས་འབུལ་བ	contribute, send gifts, give someone a present	legs skyes 'bul ba
ལེགས་སྐྱེས་མ	the bhramin girl legs 'tsho ma	legs skyes ma
ལེགས་སྐྱེས་གཟེངས་རྟགས	championship/ winner's award/ medal	legs skyes gzengs rtags
ལེགས་སྐྱོང་བ	to protect well	legs skyong ba
ལེགས་སྐྱོབ	Indra	legs skyob
ལེགས་བསྐྱངས	properly sustaining	legs bskyangs
ལེགས་ཁྱབ	divine tree	legs khyab
ལེགས་འཁེལ	finely spun textiles	legs 'khel
ལེགས་འཁྲུངས	well grown	legs 'khrungs
ལེགས་གྲུབ	Lekdrub. See {gtsang legs grub} Lekdrub of Tsang	legs grub
ལེགས་དགའ་མ	woman	legs dga' ma
ལེགས་དགུ	positive, ex, {'i bsam pa} thoughts	legs dgu
ལེགས་དགུའི་བསམ་པ	positive thoughts	legs dgu'i bsam pa
ལེགས་འགུགས	the asura stobs bzang	legs 'gugs
ལེགས་འགྲུབ	well-done, success[ful], achievement, completion	legs 'grub
ལེགས་འགྲུབ་ཟིན	complete successfully	legs 'grub zin
ལེགས་འགྲོ	"going gracefully", epithet of king of horses	legs 'gro
ལེགས་སྒྲིག	well arrange	legs sgrig
ལེགས་སྒྲིག་བྱེད་པ	to put in order, arrange, to rectify, reorganize	legs sgrig byed pa
ལེགས་བརྒྱ་སྐོར་གཅིག	example of many points thabs shes gcig thog nas sgrub pa	legs brgya skor gcig
ལེགས་བརྒྱན་མ	1 of lha'i smad 'tshong ma	legs brgyan ma
ལེགས་བསྒོམས	well thought of, carefully considered	legs bsgoms
ལེགས་བསྒྲུབས	well-done, success[ful], achievement, completion	legs bsgrubs
ལེགས་བསྒྲུབས་ཟིན	complete successfully	legs bsgrubs zin
ལེགས་བཅོས	reformation, reform	legs bcos
ལེགས་བཅོས་གཏོང	improve, reform * repair, renovate	legs bcos gtong
ལེགས་བཅོས་པ	reformer	legs bcos pa
ལེགས་བཅོས་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	reformist clique/ bloc	legs bcos phyogs khag
ལེགས་བཅོས་བྱེད	to reform	legs bcos byed
ལེགས་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	to improve, make better, reform	legs bcos byed pa
ལེགས་བཅོས་རིང་ལུགས	reformism	legs bcos ring lugs
ལེགས་བཅོས་སུ་གཏོང	improve, reform * repair, renovate	legs bcos su gtong
ལེགས་ཆ	good/ virtuous/ beneficial aspect/ qualities	legs cha
ལེགས་ཆང	auspicious coincidence zhu ba'i chang	legs chang
ལེགས་བརྗོད	1) elegant saying, well said; 2) words of auspiciousness; 3) full description; 4) praise, compliment; 5) saying "it is good" etc.	legs brjod
ལེགས་བརྗོད་བདག་པོ	Indra	legs brjod bdag po
ལེགས་བརྗོད་མ	Indra's wife	legs brjod ma
ལེགས་ཉེས	quality, good and evil	legs nyes
ལེགས་ཉེས་སྟངས་འཛིན	look and resolve whether things are good or bad	legs nyes stangs 'dzin
ལེགས་ཉེས་བླང་དོར	to take up good and avoid evil	legs nyes blang dor
ལེགས་ཉེས་འབྱེད	distinguish good and evil/ right and wrong	legs nyes 'byed
ལེགས་ཉེས་བརྩི་བགྲང	counting virtues and faults minutely	legs nyes brtsi bgrang
ལེགས་ཉེས་ལ་བལྟོས་ནས	depending upon the quality of	legs nyes la bltos nas
ལེགས་གཏོང	improve	legs gtong
ལེགས་རྟོག	good/ thorough understanding	legs rtog
ལེགས་རྟོག་བྱེད	have good/ thorough understanding	legs rtog byed
ལེགས་རྟོགས	wisdom, good understanding	legs rtogs
ལེགས་ལྟན་འབྱེད	Bhavaviveka	legs ltan 'byed
ལེགས་ཐོག་ལེགས་འཚོལ	seeking good on top of good, always looking for improvements	legs thog legs 'tshol
ལེགས་ཐོས་ནས	truly heard	legs thos nas
ལེགས་མཐོང་ཆེན་པོ	Sudarshana 2692	legs mthong chen po
ལེགས་དར	kata showing good aupicious coincidence [given as comp[liment/ tribute]	legs dar
ལེགས་འདབ	turnip, radish	legs 'dab
ལེགས་འདུལ	1) lightning; 2) cloud	legs 'dul
ལེགས་ལྡན	1) the deity dbang phyug; 2) excellent, good	legs ldan
ལེགས་ལྡན་ནག་པོ	excellent black 1	legs ldan nag po
ལེགས་ལྡན་འབྱེད	bhavaviveka	legs ldan 'byed
ཨནད་པྲེཅེཔཏ	successor of Nagarjuna. Founder of Svatantrika. founder of {mdo sde'i dbu ma} SautrantikaMadhyamika	and precept
ལེགས་ལྡན་མ	the goddess Uma	legs ldan ma
ལེགས་ན	at best	legs na
ལེགས་ནས་འོང	will be excellent	legs nas 'ong
ལེགས་གནས	best	legs gnas
ལེགས་པ	goodness {zhe sdang gis legs pa 'joms} hatred vanquished his goodness	legs pa
ལེགས་པ་ཉིད	goodness, excellence	legs pa nyid
ལེགས་པ་ཉོན	to listen carefully	legs pa nyon
ལེགས་པ་ཡིན	it is best	legs pa yin
ལེགས་པའི་སྐར་མ	Sunaksatra {bcom ldan 'das kyi mched ya dge slong legs pa'i skar ma zhes bya ba} the monk Sunaksatra was the Buddha's half-brother	legs pa'i skar ma
པྲེཏ་ཨིན་ཨ་ཕ༹ློཝེར	garden	preta in a flower
ལེགས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	in perfectly good condition, all right	legs pa'i sgo nas
ལེགས་པའི་ངང	in perfectly good condition, all right	legs pa'i ngang
ལེགས་པའི་ཐོག	in perfectly good condition, all right	legs pa'i thog
ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	the one having good discrimination (level 9), unerringly effective, intentions stage, excellent intelligence stage	legs pa'i blo gros
ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་ས	[9th] bhumi "good intellect"	legs pa'i blo gros kyi sa
ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་མ	lady of fine understanding	legs pa'i blo gros ma
ལེགས་པའི་ཚུལ་དུ་བྱེད	acting for the best	legs pa'i tshul du byed
ལེགས་པའི་ཚོགས	great benefits	legs pa'i tshogs
ལེགས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་དྲུག	the six excellent qualities	legs pa'i yon tan drug
ལེགས་པའི་ལན་ཉེས་པས	return evil for good	legs pa'i lan nyes pas
ལེགས་པའི་ཤིང	{sbrang shing} tree	legs pa'i shing
ལེགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	good prajna	legs pa'i shes rab
ལེགས་པར	well, elegantly well, duly, properly, correctly, completely, thoroughly, skillfully, perfectly, carefully	legs par
ལེགས་པར་བཀག་པ	properly refuted	legs par bkag pa
ལེགས་པར་སྐྱེས	auspiciously born	legs par skyes
ལེགས་པར་སྐྱེས་པ	auspiciously born, wellgrown	legs par skyes pa
ལེགས་པར་གྲུབ	well-accomplished, successful	legs par grub
ལེགས་པར་གྲུབ་པ	Susiddhikara. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	legs par grub pa
ལེགས་པར་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Excellent Accomplishment, Skt. Susiddhikara Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	legs par grub pa'i rgyud
ལེགས་པར་དགོངས	pay close attention! (h)	legs par dgongs
ལེགས་པར་མཆོད་པ	adored, worshipped	legs par mchod pa
ལེགས་པར་མཇལ	to see well	legs par mjal
ལེགས་པར་འཇུག	well grown, well-undertaken	legs par 'jug
ལེགས་པར་འཇོམས	fully conquered	legs par 'joms
ལེགས་པར་བརྗོད་པ	well-expressed, elegant saying	legs par brjod pa
ལེགས་པར་ཉོན	listen well	legs par nyon
ལེགས་པར་ཉོན་ལ་ཡིད་ལ་ཟུངས་ཤིག	listen carefully and remember these words!	legs par nyon la yid la zungs shig
ལེགས་པར་གཉིད་ལོག	always sleeping	legs par gnyid log
ལེགས་པར་མཉམ་བཞག	well-arranged,	legs par mnyam bzhag
ལེགས་པར་རྙེད་པ	good facilities, [easily obtain food and clothing]	legs par rnyed pa
ལེགས་པར་བསྙེད་རྫོགས	fully ordained	legs par bsnyed rdzogs
ལེགས་པར་རྟམ་པར་ཕྱེ་ག	distinguish w/o any doubt, completely	legs par rtam par phye ga
ལེགས་པར་རྟམ་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the thoroughly and totally uncovered vehicle, open vehicle	legs par rtam par 'byed pa'i theg pa
ལེགས་པར་རྟོགས་པ	well-realized	legs par rtogs pa
ལེགས་པར་སྟོན་པ	effectively transmits	legs par ston pa
ལེགས་པར་སྟོན་པ་ཉིད	good teacher	legs par ston pa nyid
ལེགས་པར་བརྟག	thoroughly investigate	legs par brtag
ལེགས་པར་བརྟགས	carefully examining	legs par brtags
ལེགས་པར་བརྟགས་པ	to examine with care	legs par brtags pa
ལེགས་པར་བལྟས་པ	to look carefully, looked carefully, looked thoroughly, looked well	legs par bltas pa
ལེགས་པར་འཐབ་པ	1 of srin po'i rgyal po	legs par 'thab pa
ལེགས་པར་འཐུལ	good smelling	legs par 'thul
ལེགས་པར་ད་སྒོམས་ཤིག	now experience well!	legs par da sgoms shig
ལེགས་པར་གདམས་པ	clearly revealed	legs par gdams pa
ལེགས་པར་འདུས	well collected, gathered carefully	legs par 'dus
ལེགས་པར་སྡོམ་པ	proper restraint	legs par sdom pa
ལེགས་པར་བསྡུ	fully gathered, carefullygathered legs par bsdu byas} fully acquired, wellqualified	legs par bsdu
ལེགས་པར་བསྡུ་བྱས	fully acquired, well qualified	legs par bsdu byas
ལེགས་པར་རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་བ	completely distinguish without any doubt legs par rnam par phye ba'i chos 'khor the wheel of doctrine of good discrimination legs par rnam par 'byed pa'i chos kyi 'khor	legs par rnam par phye ba
ལེགས་པར་རྣམ་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the thoroughly and totally uncovered vehicle, open. Syn {bka' tha ma rdo rje theg pa}	legs par rnam par 'byed pa'i theg pa
ལེགས་པར་སྤངས	give them up altogether	legs par spangs
ལེགས་པར་སྤངས་པ	completely abandoned, completely given up	legs par spangs pa
ལེགས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	good actions 2693	legs par spyod pa
ལེགས་པར་ཕན་པ	doing good service, being useful	legs par phan pa
ལེགས་པར་ཕན་བྱེད	do good service, be useful, benefit benefactor	legs par phan byed
ལེགས་པར་ཕྱེས	to open wide	legs par phyes
ལེགས་པར་འཕེལ	prosperity, increase in happiness	legs par 'phel
ལེགས་པར་བྱ	do nicely	legs par bya
ལེགས་པར་བྱ་བ	wholesome activities	legs par bya ba
ལེགས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to enrich	legs par byed pa
ལེགས་པར་འབྱེས་པ	unwrinkled	legs par 'byes pa
ལེགས་པར་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ripen well	legs par smin par byed pa
ལེགས་པར་སྨིན་བྱེད	ripening in the good, [in faith and devotion]	legs par smin byed
ལེགས་པར་སྨོན་པ	correct aspiration	legs par smon pa
ལེགས་པར་སྨྲ་བ	fully described, wellsaid	legs par smra ba
ལེགས་པར་བརྩམས	good beginning	legs par brtsams
ལེགས་པར་བརྩམས་པ	good beginning	legs par brtsams pa
ལེགས་པར་ཞིམ	delicious	legs par zhim
ལེགས་པར་ཞིམ་པ	delicious	legs par zhim pa
ལེགས་པར་བཞངས	fat	legs par bzhangs
ལེགས་པར་ཟུངས	imprint well	legs par zungs
ལེགས་པར་གཟུང་བ	firmly grasped	legs par gzung ba
ལེགས་པར་བཟོས	finely-wrought	legs par bzos
ལེགས་པར་འོངས	welcome	legs par 'ongs
ལེགས་པར་འོངས་པ	welcome[gone]	legs par 'ongs pa
ལེགས་པར་རབ་ཏུ་སད	fully and completely awake, quite correct, very accurate	legs par rab tu sad
ལེགས་པར་ཤེས	intelligent	legs par shes
ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པ	elucidate	legs par bshad pa
པའི་དོན	the meaning of good explanation and poor explanation, {legs par	pa'i don
བཤད་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གཏེར	Precious Treasury of Good Explanation, by sakya pandita legs par bshad pa dang nyes par bshad pa	bshad pa rin po che'i gter
ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གཏེར	precious treasury of good explanation, by Sakya pandita	legs par bshad pa rin po che'i gter
ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པའི་ཆོས	well-explained dharma	legs par bshad pa'i chos
ལེགས་པར་སོང	one who has happily passed away	legs par song
ལེགས་པར་སློབ་དང	do learn well	legs par slob dang
ལེགས་པར་གསན	to listen well	legs par gsan
ལེགས་པར་བསམ་པ	to think about [something] carefully	legs par bsam pa
ལེགས་པོ	good	legs po
ལེགས་པོར་གོ	well understood	legs por go
ལེགས་པོར་ཤེས་པ	well acquainted with	legs por shes pa
ལེགས་སྤེལ	progress, advance	legs spel
ལེགས་སྤེལ་ཉེས་འགོག	great increase of good characteristics and cessation of faults	legs spel nyes 'gog
ལེགས་སྤྱད	goodness, virtue	legs spyad
ལེགས་སྤྱོད	good actions	legs spyod
ལེགས་ཕན	1 of 'od bdun pa	legs phan
ལེགས་ཕྱིན	among the 60 #s	legs phyin
ལེགས་ཕྱེ་ཆོས་འཁོར	{legs par rnam par	legs phye chos 'khor
ཕྱེ་བའི་ཆོས་འཁོར	the wheel of doctrine of good discrimination	phye ba'i chos 'khor
ལེགས་བྱས	1) well done actions; 2) virtuous actions; 3) the well done	legs byas
ལེགས་བྱས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ནས	from the perspective of good deeds	legs byas kyi phyogs nas
ལེགས་བྱིན	fine gift	legs byin
ལེགས་བྱིན་ཉི་མ	Legjin Nyima	legs byin nyi ma
ལེགས་བྱིན་མ	name of sgrol ma	legs byin ma
ལེགས་བྱེད་གསུམ	excellence [3 virtuous actions of body, speech and mind]	legs byed gsum
ལེགས་བྲིས	1) deity; 2) peacock	legs bris
ལེགས་བྲིས་སྒྲོ	peacock	legs bris sgro
ལེགས་བྲིས་དབང་པོ	Indra	legs bris dbang po
ལེགས་བྲིས་གཙོ	name of brgya byin lha	legs bris gtso
ལེགས་བྲིས་གཙོ་བོ	Indra	legs bris gtso bo
ལེགས་བླངས	properly receiving	legs blangs
ལེགས་འབུལ	"legs so" zhu ba'i 'bul tshan,//thugs rje legs 'bul,//bkra shis bde legs kyi dar dkar legs 'bul zhus	legs 'bul
ལེགས་འབྱོར	good fortune	legs 'byor
ལེགས་འབྲེལ	coordination	legs 'brel
ལེགས་འབྲེལ་བྱེད	coordinate	legs 'brel byed
ལེགས་སྦྱར	Sanskrit, the "perfected"; one of {skad rigs chen po bzhi} four great language groups	legs sbyar
ལེགས་སྦྱར་སྐད	SK	legs sbyar skad
ལེགས་སྦྱར་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབྱངས	the SK vowels	legs sbyar skad kyi dbyangs
ལེགས་སྦྱར་སྐད་ཀྱི་དབྱངས་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 SK vowels CHN	legs sbyar skad kyi dbyangs bcu drug
ལེགས་སྦྱར་སྐད་ཀྱི་གསལ་བྱེད	the [34] SK consonants	legs sbyar skad kyi gsal byed
ལེགས་སྦྱར་སྐད་དུ	in SK	legs sbyar skad du
ལེགས་སྦྱར་གྱི་སྐད	Sanskrit. The language of ancient India	legs sbyar gyi skad
ལེགས་སྦྱར་གྱི་ཁྲུས	{legs sbyar gyi khrus} med.	legs sbyar gyi khrus
ལེགས་སྦྱར་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད་སོ་བཞི	the 34 SK consonants	legs sbyar gyi gsal byed so bzhi
ལེགས་སྦྱར་ལྷའི་སྐད	the divine SK language	legs sbyar lha'i skad
ལེགས་སྦྱིན	good wisher	legs sbyin
ལེགས་མོ	fine, good, SA legs pa	legs mo
ལེགས་རྨོས་ཞིབ་ལས	intensive cultivation	legs rmos zhib las
ལེགས་སྨིན	well-ripened	legs smin
ལེགས་སྨོན	blessing, benediction	legs smon
ལེགས་སྨོན་གྱི་ཆོས	to devote 1self to the happiness of gods and human beings enter into the gate of dharma	legs smon gyi chos
ལེགས་སྨོན་གྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of aspiring to goodness	legs smon gyi tshul khrims
ལེགས་སྨྲ	words of praise	legs smra
ལེགས་ཚང	complete in good qualities	legs tshang
ལེགས་ཚོགས	good things	legs tshogs
ལེགས་ཚོགས་རྒྱས་པ	enrichment of excellent provisions	legs tshogs rgyas pa
ལེགས་ཞེར	good and bad, quality	legs zher
ལེགས་གཞེར་དཔལ་མོ	Leksher Palmo	legs gzher dpal mo
ལེགས་བཞད	excellent statement [thd]	legs bzhad
ལེགས་བཟང	Vishnu	legs bzang
ལེགས་འོང	S'agata [ravaka student of the Buddha]	legs 'ong
ལེགས་འོངས	Svagata, important monk follower of the Buddha	legs 'ongs
ལེགས་འོངས་ལམ་གྱི་རིམ་པའི་ལུང	beneficial teachings of the graded path	legs 'ongs lam gyi rim pa'i lung
ལེགས་ལགས	truly wonderful, impressive	legs lags
ལེགས་ལམ	auspiciously	legs lam
ལེགས་ལམ་ནས་འོང	will prove to be good, pretty/beautiful	legs lam nas 'ong
ལེགས་ལེགས	impressive	legs legs
ལེགས་ཤོས	best	legs shos
ལེགས་བཤད	elegant description, elegant saying, eloquent elucidation, elegant teachings; elegant saying, eloquent elucidation, elegant teachings. general 2694 exegesis; writings [of a great master]	legs bshad
ལེགས་བཤད་ཉི་མ་རང་ཤར	Self-arising Sun, an Excellent Discourse, by Shabkar	legs bshad nyi ma rang shar
ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ	{tsong kha pa} great treatise on the two truths; {drang nges rnam 'byed legs bshad snying po}	legs bshad snying po
ལེགས་བཤད་དྲི་མ	text by tsong kha pa	legs bshad dri ma
ལེགས་བཤད་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན	Stream of Ambrosia, an Excellent Discourse, by Shabkar	legs bshad bdud rtsi'i chu rgyun
ལེགས་བཤད་ནོར་བུ	Jewel of Elegant Teaching	legs bshad nor bu
ལེགས་བཤད་མཛོད	basic text of Bonpo historiography	legs bshad mdzod
ལེགས་བཤད་ཞེན་འཁྲིས་ཀུན་གཅོད	Mind Training on Cutting All Ties of Attachment, by Chen-ngawa Lodrö Gyaltsen	legs bshad zhen 'khris kun gcod
ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་གྱི་ཐུར་མ	Golden Scalpel, an Excellent Discourse, by Shabkar	legs bshad gser gyi thur ma
ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་ཕྲེང	Tsongkhapa's shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan 'grel pa dang bcas pa'i rgya cher bshad pa'i legs bshad gser gyi phreng ba zhes bya ba	legs bshad gser phreng
ལེགས་སུ་གཏོང	improve	legs su gtong
ལེགས་སུ་གཏོང་བ	to improve	legs su gtong ba
ལེགས་སུ་སྨོན་པ	blessing, benediction	legs su smon pa
ལེགས་སེམས	fine mind	legs sems
ལེགས་སོ	So be it!; wonderful	legs so
ལེགས་སོ་བརྗོད	applaud, cheer	legs so brjod
ལེགས་སོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	"it is well"	legs so zhes bya ba
ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ	"good, good" legs so legs so legs so zhes bya ba byin te - say "It is good."	legs so legs so
ལེགས་སྲུང་འཛིན	conserve	legs srung 'dzin
ལེགས་གསུང	1) Buddha['s teaching]; 2) fine teaching/ words	legs gsung
ལེགས་གསུང་གི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ	Ten Aspects of the Excellent Teachings. According to the Rational Exposition T. 4061. these are the nature of their genuine source {yang dag par bslang ba nyid} their scope {dbang du mdzod pa nyid}	legs gsung gi rnam pa bcu
ལེགས་གསུངས	fine teaching, fine words	legs gsungs
ལེགས་གསོ	repairs	legs gso
ལེགས་གསོ་བྱེད	repair, restore	legs gso byed
ལེགས་གསོལ	thanks, acknowledgement, gratitude	legs gsol
ལེགས་གསོལ་བྱེད་པ	congratulate	legs gsol byed pa
ལེགས་བསླབས་ཉེས་བཅོས	study/ train in good and create evil	legs bslabs nyes bcos
ལེན་ཀ་ར	a place	len ka ra
ལེན་མཁན་ཡོད་ན་ལོངས་དང	Whoever has a wish, come and fulfill it!	len mkhan yod na longs dang
ལེན་གྱི་ཡོད་འདུག	started to sing	len gyi yod 'dug
ལེན་གྱིན	still singing	len gyin
ལེན་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་མི་འོང	non-returner	len gcig phyir mi 'ong
ལེན་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་འོང	once-returner	len gcig phyir 'ong
ལེན་བཅས	appropriator	len bcas
ལེན་བཏང་བ	to send for	len btang ba
ལེན་པ	upadana, ascription-organization,	len pa
ལེན་པ་འདྲ	as if stolen	len pa 'dra
ལེན་པ་པོ	recipient	len pa po
ལེན་པ་བཞི	4 graspings ('dod pa, lta ba len pa, tshul khrims dang brtul zhugs, bdag smra ba len pa)	len pa bzhi
ལེན་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent related grasping	len pa'i rten 'brel
ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	receiving consciousness	len pa'i rnam par shes pa
ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	receiving consciousness	len pa'i rnam shes
ལེན་པའི་ཟླ་བ	8th month, sun in Virgo	len pa'i zla ba
ལེན་པའི་ཡན་ལག	link of grasping	len pa'i yan lag
ལེན་པར་བྱེད	take, bring, carry, take, fetch, get, catch, sing, receive	len par byed
ལེན་པོ	becoming, attractive	len po
ལེན་མེད	nonacceptance (of extremes)	len med
ལེན་ཚ	sacred stored salt	len tsha
ལེན་འཛིན	bill/ invoice/ receipt for money/ goods etc	len 'dzin
ལེན་བཞིན་པ	taking	len bzhin pa
ལེན་ཟིན་པ	took	len zin pa
ལེན་འོས	acceptable	len 'os
ལེན་འོས་པ	acceptable	len 'os pa
ལེན་ཧོ་གོ	UN	len ho go
ལེབ	flat	leb
ལེབ་ངོས	flat face/ side/ surface	leb ngos
ལེབ་ཅན	flat, level	leb can
ལེབ་སྟོངས	entirely empty	leb stongs
ལེབ་ཐགས	lace, bandage, ribbon	leb thags
ལེབ་མདངས	flat shading, ordinary dry shading	leb mdangs
ལེབ་འདུར	su la'ang dmigs bsal med pa,//bya ba tshang ma rgyug pa leb 'dur gyis sgrub pa	leb 'dur
ལེབ་པ	flat 2695	leb pa
ལེབ་པོ	flat	leb po
ལེབ་འཕྱག	sweeping/ driving away	leb 'phyag
ལེབ་འཕྱག་བྱེད	sweep/ drive away	leb 'phyag byed
ལེབ་འབྱར	shoe gyi snga rting rgyong byed shing flat shaped	leb 'byar
ལེབ་སྦྱོར	leb 'byar	leb sbyor
ལེབ་མ	flat	leb ma
ལེབ་མ་བཟོ	flatten, level	leb ma bzo
ལེབ་མ་ས་དཀྲིས	tied with bandages	leb ma sa dkris
ལེབ་མོ	//1 flat; 2) complete, whole	leb mo
ལེབ་མོར་གླེབ	make flat	leb mor gleb
ལེབ་རྩིས	complete, whole rtsi ba'i rtsis	leb rtsis
ལེབ་གཟི	flat burnishing [of gold details]	leb gzi
ལེབ་ལེབ	mchu ba leb leb - lips mumbling diligently	leb leb
ལེབ་ལེབ་བཟོ	flatten, level	leb leb bzo
ལེབ་ཤིང	board, plank	leb shing
ལེའི་པིས་ཞི	Leipzig	le'i pis zhi
ལེའུ་གློན	1) join a new chapter to a text; 2) [arch] question answering brda rnying	le'u glon
ལེའུ་ཐོ	notebook of years and months	le'u tho
ལེའུ་དང་པོ	first chapter	le'u dang po
ལེའུ་བདུན་མ	the 7 chapters	le'u bdun ma
ལེའུ་བདུན་ཟིན་བྲིས	Notes on the Seven Chapters; written by Chagmey Rinpoche	le'u bdun zin bris
ལེའུ་ཚན	sections, serial number, chapter, part	le'u tshan
ལེའུ་ཚེ	lattice, diagram, plaid	le'u tshe
ལེའུ་ལག	SA sgyu 'phrul le lag, The Sections	le'u lag
ལེའུ་ལྷ་ལོག་མཁན	practitioners who defy the protective deities	le'u lha log mkhan
ལེའུར་བཅད་པ	versified, put into chapters/ sections/ acts	le'ur bcad pa
ལེའུར་ཕྱེ་བ	versified, put into chapters/ sections/acts	le'ur phye ba
ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	versified, put into chapters/ sections/acts	le'ur byas pa
ལེའུར་བྱེད་པ	versify, put into chapters/ sections/ acts	le'ur byed pa
ལེར	See for instance {khyil ler}	ler
ལོ་ཀ	world	lo ka
ལོ་ཀ་སར་བ	the whole univere	lo ka sar ba
ལོ་ཀག	obstacle year	lo kag
ལོ་ཀའི་སྒྲོན་མེ་མཆོག	you will light up the whole world	lo ka'i sgron me mchog
ལོ་ཀི་ཆུང	Loki Chung. Syn {skye'u chung lo tsa ba}	lo ki chung
ལོ་ཀི་ཆུང་པ	Lokyi Chungpa. A close disciple of Padmasambhava who became a Buddhist translator while very young, hence his name. He is also	lo ki chung pa
ཀནོཝན་ཨས་ཁྱེཨུ	chung Lotsawa, 'Boy Translator.' Among his later incarnations are the tertön Düdül Dorje (16151672), Dudjom Lingpa (1835-1903), and H.H. Dudjom Rinpoche, Jigdrel Yeshe Dorje (1904-1987)	known as Khyeu
ལོ་ཀེག	CM: nag rtsis las bshad pa'i rang gi lo rtags shar skabs kyi lo'i bar chad cig. "obstacle-year" [mss]	lo keg
ལོ་སྐག	MSS: probably lo skeg dang 'dra. (see lo skeg for note) "obstacle-year" [mss]	lo skag
ལོ་སྐད	occurs after statements meaning "it is said" or "it is rumored"	lo skad
ལོ་སྐར	year star * [year of the 12 year cycle in which 1 was born, astr important]	lo skar
ལོ་སྐེག	hindrances of the year	lo skeg
ལོ་སྐོར	cycle of years	lo skor
ལོ་སྐོར་བཅུ་གཉིས	cycle of 12 years	lo skor bcu gnyis
ལོ་སྐྱ	harvest/ crops, yearly harvest of edible grain	lo skya
ལོ་སྐྱ་རྒྱས	bumper crop occurring	lo skya rgyas
ལོ་སྐྱ་རྒྱས་པ	bumper crop occurring	lo skya rgyas pa
ལོ་སྐྱིན	lo tog gi tshab	lo skyin
ལོ་སྐྱེག	in CH astrology obstacle year	lo skyeg
ལོ་སྐྱེད	yearly interest	lo skyed
ལོ་ཁ་པད་ཚལ	cauliflower, cabbage	lo kha pad tshal
ལོ་ཁ་བྲག	mountainous wild country ne of bhutan	lo kha brag
ལོ་ཁམས	[60 year cycle of 12 animal] years x [the 5] elements	lo khams
ལོ་ཁམས་བརྩི་སྟངས	calendrical calculations	lo khams brtsi stangs
ལོ་ཁྱིམ་ལ་བབས་པ	zodiac (?)/ in the year of	lo khyim la babs pa
ལོ་ཁྱུད་འཁོར	whole year	lo khyud 'khor
ལོ་ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང་བ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	lo khye'u chung ba
ལོ་ཁྲལ	yearly tax/ service obligation	lo khral
ལོ་ཁྲི་ཕྲག	10,000 years	lo khri phrag
ལོ་ཁྲི་ཕྲག་ཏུ་བརྟན	last 10,000 years	lo khri phrag tu brtan
ལོ་ཁྲི་ཕྲག་ཏུ་བརྟན་པར་ཤོག	long live -	lo khri phrag tu brtan par shog
ལོ་ཁྲིམས	crops guarding khrims	lo khrims
ལོ་འཁོར	1) a whole year; 2) yearly, anniversary; 3) tree's year lines; 4) 1 year old; 5) be a certain # of years since	lo 'khor
ལོ་འཁོར་བཅུ་གཉིས	cycle of 12 years, 12 year cycle	lo 'khor bcu gnyis
ལོ་འཁོར་ཏེ	after one year had passed	lo 'khor te
ལོ་འཁོར་དུས་ཆེན	anniversary	lo 'khor dus chen
ལོ་འཁོར་དྲུག་བཅུ	cycle of 60 years	lo 'khor drug bcu
ལོ་འཁོར་མ	all year around	lo 'khor ma
ལོ་འཁོར་རྩིས་ཁྲ	balance sheet	lo 'khor rtsis khra
ལོ་གེ་རྟ་ཞོན་བཞུགས	he mounted the horse and turned around	lo ge rta zhon bzhugs
ལོ་གྱ	Logya, in Domey	lo gya
ལོ་གྲངས	at the age of	lo grangs
ལོ་དགོན	Lo Monetary	lo dgon
ལོ་དགྲ	in CH astrology in an individual 12 year cycle four earlier and later	lo dgra
ལོ་བགྲེས	old 2696	lo bgres
ལོ་མགོ	the beginning of the year	lo mgo
ལོ་འགོ	beginning/ early part of the year	lo 'go
ལོ་རྒན	old	lo rgan
ལོ་རྒན་གཞོན	old and young	lo rgan gzhon
ལོ་རྒས	old	lo rgas
ལོ་རྒས་གཞོན	old and young	lo rgas gzhon
ལོ་རྒོད་རྣམ་གཉིས	Lorepa and Gotsangpa	lo rgod rnam gnyis
ལོ་རྒྱུད་བགྲང་བ	narrate	lo rgyud bgrang ba
ལོ་རྒྱུན	# of years, term, set period [in years]	lo rgyun
ལོ་རྒྱུན་ཆགས	yearly, every year	lo rgyun chags
ལོ་རྒྱུས	annals	lo rgyus
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་དངོས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས	historical materialism [theory of human historical development invented by Marx and Engels]	lo rgyus kyi dngos gtso'i ring lugs
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་ཆ་གཏོགས	domain/ sphere of history	lo rgyus kyi cha gtogs
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་ལྟ་ཚུལ	historical point of view	lo rgyus kyi lta tshul
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་དུས་རིམ	historical stage/ period	lo rgyus kyi dus rim
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་དོན་དངོས	historical fact	lo rgyus kyi don dngos
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་དོན་སྙིང	historical significance/ importance	lo rgyus kyi don snying
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	historical context/ background/ situation	lo rgyus kyi gnas tshul
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	historic[al]	lo rgyus kyi rang bzhin
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན	historic[al]	lo rgyus kyi rang bzhin can
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཀྱི་སེམས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས	historical idealism	lo rgyus kyi sems gtso'i ring lugs
ལོ་རྒྱུས་སྐྲུན	make history	lo rgyus skrun
ལོ་རྒྱུས་བསྐྲུན་པ་པོ	maker of history	lo rgyus bskrun pa po
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཅན	historic[al]	lo rgyus can
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཆེན་མོ	sba bzhed kyi ming = bsam yas dkar chag chen mo	lo rgyus chen mo
ལོ་རྒྱུས་བརྗོད་པ	told their tale	lo rgyus brjod pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་བསྙད་པ	told what had happened	lo rgyus bsnyad pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཐོག་གི་སྲོལ་རྒྱུན	historical tradition	lo rgyus thog gi srol rgyun
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཐོག་ནས་ཆགས་པ	historical origin	lo rgyus thog nas chags pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཐོག་བྱུང་མ་མྱོང་བ	unprecedented in history	lo rgyus thog byung ma myong ba
ལོ་རྒྱུས་དོན་གྱིས་མ་བཤད་ན	{lo rgyus don gyis ma bshad na gsang chen nges pa'i bka' 'di la yid mi ches pa'i skyon du 'gyur} If you do not explain the history of its origins, people will commit the fault of not believing in t...	lo rgyus don gyis ma bshad na
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ལྡན	historic[al]	lo rgyus ldan
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ལྡན་པ	historic[al]	lo rgyus ldan pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ན	in a book of history	lo rgyus na
ལོ་རྒྱུས་པ	historian	lo rgyus pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་དཔྱད་གཞིའི་ཡིག་རིགས	historical records	lo rgyus dpyad gzhi'i yig rigs
ལོ་རྒྱུས་འཕེལ་རྒྱས	historical development	lo rgyus 'phel rgyas
ལོ་རྒྱུས་མཚོན་ཉེད་སྙན་ངག	historical epic	lo rgyus mtshon nyed snyan ngag
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཞུས་པ	they told him their problem	lo rgyus zhus pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཡོད	news, containing a history	lo rgyus yod
ལོ་རྒྱུས་རིག་པ	study of history	lo rgyus rig pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་བཤད	to tell a story	lo rgyus bshad
ལོ་རྒྱུས་བཤད་པ	explained that it was	lo rgyus bshad pa
ལོ་རྒྱུས་གསོལ	tell a story/ the history [h] [h also for the 1 being told]	lo rgyus gsol
ལོ་སྒམ	CH gro zhib 'tshag byed kyi dar tshags	lo sgam
ལོ་སྒར་པད་ཚད	cabbage	lo sgar pad tshad
ལོ་བརྒྱ	one hundred years	lo brgya
ལོ་བརྒྱ་འཁོར་བའི	centenary	lo brgya 'khor ba'i
ལོ་བརྒྱ་བཅུ་ལོན་པ	octogenarian	lo brgya bcu lon pa
ལོ་བརྒྱད	eight years	lo brgyad
ལོ་བརྒྱད་དྲི་ཆུ	8 year old child's urine	lo brgyad dri chu
ལོ་བརྒྱའི་ཇུས་ཆེན	100 year/ long range plan	lo brgya'i jus chen
ལོ་ངམ་རྟ་རྫི	{lo ngam rta rdzi}	lo ngam rta rdzi
ལོ་ངོ	whole year	lo ngo
ལོ་ངོ་བརྒྱད	8 whole years	lo ngo brgyad
ལོ་ལྔ	five years	lo lnga
ལོ་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལོན	of fifty years	lo lnga bcu lon
ལོ་ལྔ་བཅུ་ལོན་པ	fifty years old	lo lnga bcu lon pa
ལོ་ལྔའི་འཆར་གཞི	five year plan	lo lnga'i 'char gzhi
ལོ་ལྔའི་དུས་སྟོན	1 of 9 dus ston	lo lnga'i dus ston
ལོ་སྔ་མ	the preceding year lo snga ma phyi ma gnyis kyi snga ma this year rather than next	lo snga ma
ལོ་ཅི་ཙམ་ལོན	how old are you	lo ci tsam lon
ལོ་གཅིག	a year, {zla ba bcu gnyis}	lo gcig
ལོ་གཅིག་གི་ངུས་བཞི	CHN	lo gcig gi ngus bzhi
ལོ་བཅུ	[monk of] ten years standing	lo bcu
ལོ་བཅུ་ཐུབ་པ	when life spans of humans are 10 years	lo bcu thub pa
ལོ་བཅུ་ཐོག་ལྔ	lo bcu la ston thog lnga ste lo gnangs 'char du 'debs rgyu'i field ???	lo bcu thog lnga
ལོ་བཅུ་རེར	decennial	lo bcu rer
ལོ་ཆག	every second year	lo chag
ལོ་ཆུ	crops and rainfall	lo chu
ལོ་ཆུ་ལམ་ལྷོངས	after timely rain have a good autumn harvest	lo chu lam lhongs
ལོ་ཆུ་ལེགས་པ	good crops and rainfall	lo chu legs pa
ལོ་ཆུང	teenager, early youth, young, lesser sanskrit scholar	lo chung
ལོ་ཆུང་གདོང་ལེན	young pioneer	lo chung gdong len
ལོ་ཆུང་པ	1) [very] young, teenager; 2) little/ junior tr	lo chung pa
ལོ་ཆུན	[arch] lhan pa [patch?] leb mo	lo chun
ལོ་ཆེན	great age/ tr	lo chen
ལོ་ཆེན་འགྱུར་མེད་བདེ་ཆེན	1540-1615 Lochen Gyurme Dechen, author of Tangtong Gyalpo's biography	lo chen 'gyur med bde chen
ལོ་ཆེན་དང་ཆ་པ	great tr and partisans	lo chen dang cha pa
ལོ་ཆེན་བE་རོ་ཊསཱ་ན	the great translator Vairochana	lo chen bE ro TsA na
རོང་དུ་སྐྱུགས་པའི་ཚེ	During the period of his exile in Gyalmo Tsawarong, the great translator Vairotsana	rong du skyugs pa'i tshe
ལོ་ཆེན་བྱང་ཆུབ་རྩེ་མོ	Khenchen Changtse: 1303-1380	lo chen byang chub rtse mo
ལོ་ཆེན་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོ	Lochen Rinchen Sangpo is regarded as the first translator of the New Mantra School	lo chen rin chen bzang po
ལོ་མཆོད	for a person who died the previous year zla dus tshes grangs bzung ste byed pa'i puja of homage	lo mchod
ལོ་མཇུག	11th/ 12th month, end of the year	lo mjug
ལོ་རྗེས་མ	next year	lo rjes ma
ལོ་ལྗང་བ	green leaf	lo ljang ba
ལོ་ཉེས	year of calamities, bad harvest	lo nyes
ལོ་གཉིས་རེར་ཐེངས	bi-yearly	lo gnyis rer thengs
ལོ་གཉིས་རེར་ཐེངས་གཅིག	bicentennial	lo gnyis rer thengs gcig
ལོ་མཉམ	same age 2697	lo mnyam
ལོ་རྙིང	last year	lo rnying
ལོ་སྙམ་པ	think	lo snyam pa
ལོ་སྙིང	year animal sign	lo snying
ལོ་ཏོག	crops, produce of a year, year, harvest, crop	lo tog
ལོ་ཏོག་རྔ་བ	reap harvest, gather crop in	lo tog rnga ba
ལོ་ཏོག་མཆོག་ཏུ་བདེ་བ	sal tree	lo tog mchog tu bde ba
ལོ་ཏོག་གཉེན	rain	lo tog gnyen
ལོ་ཏོག་འདེབས	plant crops	lo tog 'debs
ལོ་ཏོག་པར་བྱེད	welfare of crops	lo tog par byed
ལོ་ཏོག་ཕན་བྱེད	welfare of crops	lo tog phan byed
ལོ་ཏོག་ལ་བཙའ་ཞུགས་པ	the corn has been spoiled by blight	lo tog la btsa' zhugs pa
ལོ་ཏོག་གཤེད	hail	lo tog gshed
ལོ་གཏོར	mgon khang nang du a year bshams [arrayed?] nas 'jog pa'i torma	lo gtor
ལོ་རྟགས	1) astr sign symbolizing the individual lo khams of 12 animals; 2) year sign of 1's birth; 3) style of an emperor's reign	lo rtags
ལོ་རྟགས་དང་ཁམས	year animal signs and elements GD	lo rtags dang khams
ལོ་རྟགས་གསོལ་རས་ཞུ་བ	when a bride etc. slong, slong yul parents, sons and daughters asking her year animal sign	lo rtags gsol ras zhu ba
ལོ་ལྟར	every year, year by year, yearly	lo ltar
ལོ་ལྟར་གྱི	annual	lo ltar gyi
ལོ་ལྟར་རེ་བཞིན	yearly, annually	lo ltar re bzhin
ལོ་སྟ་ཀ	arrow	lo sta ka
ལོ་སྟར	every year	lo star
ལོ་སྟོང་ཕྲག་གཅིག	millennium	lo stong phrag gcig
ལོ་སྟོད	1st half of the year	lo stod
ལོ་ཐང	measure of produce, yearly tribute	lo thang
ལོ་ཐང་གཅོད་པ	fix yearly tribute	lo thang gcod pa
ལོ་ཐུག	vegetable leaf thug pa	lo thug
ལོ་ཐོ	almanac, book of astr tables	lo tho
ལོ་ཐོག	crops, harvest, harvested grain	lo thog
ལོ་ཐོག་རྩེ་མོ	ear of grain	lo thog rtse mo
ལོ་ཐོག་གཤེད	hail	lo thog gshed
ལོ་དང་ལོ	every year, year by year, annually, yearly	lo dang lo
ལོ་དར་མ	young [maturity 20-30 years old], teenager	lo dar ma
ལོ་དུ་ཐལ	how many years have elapsed	lo du thal
ལོ་དུ་ཡིན	how old?	lo du yin
ལོ་དུས	# of years, term, set period [in years]	lo dus
ལོ་དུས་གྲངས་བཅད	money debt etc lo dus rgyas dpyad kyis kha grangs thag bcad pa	lo dus grangs bcad
ལོ་དུས་ཐིམ	term of office expiring/ finishing	lo dus thim
ལོ་དུས་ཐིམ་པ	term of office expiring/ finishing	lo dus thim pa
ལོ་དུས་རྫོགས	term of office expiring/ finishing	lo dus rdzogs
ལོ་དུས་རྫོགས་པ	term of office expiring/ finishing	lo dus rdzogs pa
ལོ་དེབ	year-book, annal	lo deb
ལོ་དོང	kind of quiver manufactured in lo country	lo dong
ལོ་དྲི་བ	dge tshul gyi lo dri ba	lo dri ba
ལོ་དྲུག་གི་དུས་སྟོན	1 of 9 dus ston	lo drug gi dus ston
ལོ་དྲུག་གི་སྤང་བ	abandoning in the 6th year	lo drug gi spang ba
ལོ་བདག	1) planet when the sun enters Aries, said to control the year; 2) lo'i bdag po ste every year la dbang ba'i year deity	lo bdag
ལོ་འདབ	large leaf, leaf, leaves of trees which fall every year	lo 'dab
ལོ་འདབ་རྒྱས	be fully grown/ in full bloom [plants]	lo 'dab rgyas
ལོ་འདབ་རྒྱས་པ	luxuriant, exuberant, flourishing	lo 'dab rgyas pa
ལོ་འདབ་ཐུར་དུ་འཕྱང་བ	hanging foliage	lo 'dab thur du 'phyang ba
ལོ་འདོད	1) caring about fame; 2) yearning	lo 'dod
ལོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག	Lo Dorje Drak, in Domey	lo rdo rje brag
ལོ་སྡོང་མེ་འབྲས་བཞི	leaf, stalk, flower, and fruit	lo sdong me 'bras bzhi
ལོ་ན	age	lo na
ལོ་ན་ཆུང་བ	young	lo na chung ba
ལོ་ན་ཆེན་པོ	great age, old	lo na chen po
ལོ་ན་མཐོ་བ	old [age]	lo na mtho ba
ལོ་ན་མཐོ་བ་ཁ་ཁྱེར	using old age as an excuse	lo na mtho ba kha khyer
ལོ་ན་མཐོ་ལ་ལུས་སྟོབས་ཞན་པ	old and weak, in old age the body is weak	lo na mtho la lus stobs zhan pa
ལོ་ན་ཕྲ་བ	young	lo na phra ba
ལོ་ན་མ་སོན	not grown up/ old	lo na ma son
ལོ་ན་མ་སོན་པ	not grown up/ old	lo na ma son pa
ལོ་ན་འཚམས་པ	of the right/ suitable age	lo na 'tshams pa
ལོ་ན་གཞོན་པ	young	lo na gzhon pa
ལོ་ན་སོན	to reach adolescence	lo na son
ལོ་ན་སོན་པ	grow up, age, get old	lo na son pa
ལོ་ནག	black year when inauspicious to do good work	lo nag
ལོ་ནད་སྟན་འབྱར	by disease continuously staying in bed, bed-ridden	lo nad stan 'byar
ལོ་ནས་ལོ་རུ	from year to year	lo nas lo ru
ལོ་གནངས་འཆར	occurring yearly	lo gnangs 'char
ལོ་པ	scholars and tr	lo pa
ལོ་པན	scholars and tr	lo pan
ལོ་པན་བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	part of {bka' thang sde lnga}, terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323)	lo pan bka'i thang yig
ལོ་དཔག་མེད་ཐུབ་པ	when the lifespan is "immeasurable"	lo dpag med thub pa
ལོ་ཕུད	offering of first fruits of harvest	lo phud
ལོ་ཕོག	yearly pay	lo phog
ལོ་ཕོགས	1 year salary	lo phogs
ལོ་ཕྱག	yearly homage/ prostration	lo phyag
ལོ་ཕྱགས་ལེགས་པ	good harvest and healthy cattle	lo phyags legs pa
ལོ་ཕྱུག	crops and animals	lo phyug
ལོ་ཕྱུགས	crops and cattle	lo phyugs
ལོ་ཕྱུགས་ལེགས་པ	crops be abundant and cattle thrive	lo phyugs legs pa
ལོ་འཕོ	border between the previous year and the new one	lo 'pho
ལོ་འཕོ་དུས	time of the change of the year, new year's day	lo 'pho dus
ལོ་འཕོའི་ཞག་རྩིས	count of how many days after new year/winter solstice	lo 'pho'i zhag rtsis
ལོ་འཕོའི་གཟའ་སྐར	winter solstice planets and stars, when the next year arises	lo 'pho'i gza' skar
ལོ་བ	Lowa, in Domey 2698	lo ba
ལོ་བུར་གྱི་སྒྲིབ་གཉིས	two kinds of suddenly arisen obscuration GD	lo bur gyi sgrib gnyis
ལོ་བོན་རྩིས་འདེབས	bon of harvests	lo bon rtsis 'debs
ལོ་འབུལ	yearly offering	lo 'bul
ལོ་འབྲས	grain	lo 'bras
ལོ་མ	1) leaf; 2) snying po med pa,//tshig gi lo ma; 3) woman born in a certain year of the 12 year cycle	lo ma
ལོ་མ་སྐམ་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྲ	rustle	lo ma skam po'i skad sgra
ལོ་མ་བསྐྱོད	bodhi tree	lo ma bskyod
ལོ་མ་ཁ	1) tshos gzhi ljang khu; 2) Varuna tree	lo ma kha
ལོ་མ་གྱོན་མ	parnasabari	lo ma gyon ma
ལོ་མ་གྱོན་མའི	gzungs dharani of goddess who dresses in leaves and helps in epidemics	lo ma gyon ma'i
ལོ་མ་ལྔ	five leaves (tshul khrims, thos pa, khyim nas 'byung, dgon pa la gnas, 'phags pa'i rigs chog shes pa)	lo ma lnga
ལོ་མ་ཅན	tree	lo ma can
ལོ་མ་ཅན་གྱི་གསང་ཚིག	Leafy Spells [thd]	lo ma can gyi gsang tshig
ལོ་མ་ཆུང་ཆུང	leaflet	lo ma chung chung
ལོ་མ་ཆེ་རིགས་ཤིང	broad leafed trees	lo ma che rigs shing
ལོ་མ་ཉི་ཡ	Rumania	lo ma nyi ya
ལོ་མ་དང་འདབ་མ	leaves and petals	lo ma dang 'dab ma
ལོ་མ་འདོར་ལེན	deciduous	lo ma 'dor len
ལོ་མ་ཕྲ་རིགས	needles [on trees]	lo ma phra rigs
ལོ་མ་ཕྲ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཤིང་ནགས	conifer forest	lo ma phra rigs kyi shing nags
ལོ་མ་མེད	leafless, epithet of dpal ldan lha mo	lo ma med
ལོ་མ་མེད་མ	goddess Uma	lo ma med ma
ལོ་མ་ཟུག་པར་བྱེད	the leaves sting	lo ma zug par byed
ལོ་མ་བཟང	SA dong ga	lo ma bzang
ལོ་མ་རལ་གྲི་ལྟ་བུའི་ནགས	forest w leaves like swords (in hell	lo ma ral gri lta bu'i nags
ལོ་མ་གསུམ་པ	{dur byid} med. herb	lo ma gsum pa
ལོ་མང་ཁུར་ལྡན	old man, one who is under the weight of many years	lo mang khur ldan
ལོ་མང་ཐུབ་པ	able to live/ last many years	lo mang thub pa
ལོ་མང་ཐུབ་པའི་རྩི་ཤིང	perennial plants	lo mang thub pa'i rtsi shing
ལོ་མང་སྡོད་པ	living for many years	lo mang sdod pa
ལོ་མང་པོ	many years	lo mang po
ལོ་མང་པོ་མི་འགྱང་བར	not many year shall have passed	lo mang po mi 'gyang bar
ལོ་མན་ཐང	Lo Mantang, now known as Mustang, in Nepal	lo man thang
ལོ་མའ	Rome	lo ma'
ལོ་མའི་ཁྲི་ཤིང	a creeping plant	lo ma'i khri shing
ལོ་མའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	a leafy creeping plant	lo ma'i 'khri shing
ལོ་མའི་ཕུར་མ	fragrant bsang shing [juniper?] leaves brdar ba'i thum bu	lo ma'i phur ma
ལོ་མར	year's supply of butter	lo mar
ལོ་མས་འབྲས་སྒྲིབ	can't see the branch for the leaves	lo mas 'bras sgrib
ལོ་མོ	Lo mo	lo mo
ལོ་ཙ	translating	lo tsa
ལོ་ཙཱ་བརྒྱ་དང་རྩ་བརྒྱད	one hundred and eight translators [at the time of king Trisong Detsen]	lo tsA brgya dang rtsa brgyad
ལོ་ཊསཱ་ཆེན་པོ	the great translator	lo TsA chen po
ལོ་ཙཱ་བ	translator	lo tsA ba
ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་ཐོན་མི་སམ་བྷོ་ཊ	the translator Tönmi Sambhota	lo tsA ba thon mi sam bho Ta
ལོ་ཙ་བ་དྲུག	six translators	lo tsa ba drug
ལོ་ཙ་བ་བ༹E་རོ་ཙ་ན	Lotsawa Vairochana	lo tsa ba vE ro tsa na
ལོ་ཙཱ་བསླབས	learned the art of translation	lo tsA bslabs
ལོ་ཙྭ་བ	tr	lo tswa ba
ལོ་ཙྭ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོ	the tr rin chen bzang po	lo tswa ba rin chen bzang po
ལོ་ཙན	1) harvest, crops, good or bad harvest kyi gnas tshul; 2) med. herb = {lo tshan}	lo tsan
ལོ་བཙན་པ	klung skyes [among ti mu sa ri skyes dang klung skyes]	lo btsan pa
ལོ་བཙའ	crops' btsa' skyon	lo btsa'
ལོ་རྩིས	calculations relative to the year	lo rtsis
ལོ་ཚ་སློབ	to learn translation	lo tsha slob
ལོ་ཚད	age limit	lo tshad
ལོ་ཚན	year's produce, harvest	lo tshan
ལོ་ཚིགས	story of former generations dang 'brel ba'i lo zla'i dus tshigs	lo tshigs
ལོ་ཚོད	age	lo tshod
ལོ་ཚོད་ག་ཚད་རེད	what is your age?	lo tshod ga tshad red
ལོ་མཚམས	years of retreat lo mtshams zla mtshams mdzad pa completed years or months of retreat	lo mtshams
ལོ་གཞུག་ལ	at the end of the year	lo gzhug la
ལོ་གཞེས་འཆར	lo gnyis res bar du chod pa'i lo gsum pa,//phru gu gzhes 'char la skyes par gsum tshigs zer	lo gzhes 'char
ལོ་གཞོན	young	lo gzhon
ལོ་གཞོན་གཞོན	young	lo gzhon gzhon
ལོ་ཟླ	1) year and month; 2) people of = age or born in = year	lo zla
ལོ་ཟླ་བ་བྱས་ནས	as months and years went by	lo zla ba byas nas
ལོ་ཟླ་ཙམ	for a few months or years	lo zla tsam
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག	year, month and day	lo zla zhag
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས	[the time periods/ terms of] years months and days	lo zla zhag dus
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	element of the year, month and day	lo zla zhag dus kyi khams
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་ཀྱི་ལྷ	the time deities of years months and days [in Kalachakra Tantra]	lo zla zhag dus kyi lha
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་སོགས	year month day etc.	lo zla zhag sogs
ལོ་ཟླའི་ཐོ	almanac, calendar	lo zla'i tho
ལོ་ཟླའི་མཐའ་ཅན	with the limit of years or months	lo zla'i mtha' can
ལོ་གཟའ	year planet	lo gza'
ལོ་ཡག་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	excellent year	lo yag phun sum tshogs pa
ལོ་ཡི་ཆ་ཤས་ཅན	month	lo yi cha shas can
ལོ་ཡི་ཐེག་པ	old person	lo yi theg pa
ལོ་ཡི་ཐོག་མ	11th month	lo yi thog ma
ལོ་ཡི་དང་པོ	1) lo 'go gang nas 'dzin pa'i thog ma; 2) mouse year	lo yi dang po
ལོ་ཡི་ཕུང་པོ	1) 30 day month; 2) kalpa	lo yi phung po
ལོ་ཡི་སྨེ་བ	lo gang la 'char ba'i sme ba ???	lo yi sme ba
ལོ་ཡི་མཛོད	1) month; 2) kalpa	lo yi mdzod
ལོ་ཡི་ཡན་ལག	month	lo yi yan lag
ལོ་ཡི་ཤིང་རྟ	sun	lo yi shing rta
ལོ་ཡུན	period/ term of a year	lo yun
ལོ་རང་དྲུག་ཅུ	sixty year cycle	lo rang drug cu
ལོ་རབས	1) lo rgyus kyi dus rabs dum bu gcig; 2) lo rgyus kyi gnas tshul; 3) decade	lo rabs
ལོ་རས་པ	Lorepa	lo ras pa
ལོ་རིང་པོ་མ་ལོན	without having grown old	lo ring po ma lon
ལོ་རིམ	succession of earlier and later periods of time, grade in school	lo rim
ལོ་རིམ་བཞིན	year-wise 2699	lo rim bzhin
ལོ་རིལ་པོ	whole year, all year around	lo ril po
ལོ་རེ	every year, annually	lo re
ལོ་རེ་པ	1187-1250, great master of the Drukpa Kagyu school, also known as dbang phyug brtson 'grus	lo re pa
ལོ་རེ་བཞིན	annually, yearly	lo re bzhin
ལོ་རེ་རེ	annually	lo re re
ལོ་རེ་རེ་བཞིན	annually, yearly	lo re re bzhin
ལོ་རེའི	annual, yearly	lo re'i
ལོ་རེའི་སྔོན་རྩིས་སམ་དགོས་དངུལ	budget	lo re'i sngon rtsis sam dgos dngul
ལོ་རེའི་དུས་བཞི	the four seasons of the year	lo re'i dus bzhi
ལོ་ལི་མ	prostitute, harlot	lo li ma
ལོ་ལེགས	good/ bumper harvest	lo legs
ལོ་ལེགས་པ	good/ bumper harvest	lo legs pa
ལོ་ལེགས་འབྱུང	bumper crop occurring	lo legs 'byung
ལོ་ལེགས་འབྱུང་བ	bumper crop occurring	lo legs 'byung ba
ལོ་ལོངས་པ	nar son pa	lo longs pa
ལོ་ལོན	rgan mo + - very old woman	lo lon
ལོ་ལོན་མ་རེད	not very old	lo lon ma red
ལོ་ཤ	year old rotten meat [med.]	lo sha
ལོ་ཤས	a few years	lo shas
ལོ་ཤས་ཀྱི་སྔོན་དུ	some years ago	lo shas kyi sngon du
ལོ་ཤས་རིང	for some years	lo shas ring
ལོ་ཤིང	[arch] year animal sign	lo shing
ལོ་ཤུག་ཁ	silk /satin the color of juniper leaves	lo shug kha
ལོ་ཤེས	monetary account, astronomy	lo shes
ལོ་ཤེས་པ	accountant, astrologer	lo shes pa
ལོ་གཤེད	of an individual one in the cycle of 12 years 4th previously or later	lo gshed
ལོ་བཤད	almanac * astr prophesy for a year	lo bshad
ལོ་སར	new year	lo sar
ལོ་སར་ཀྱི་སྟོན་མོ	new year festival	lo sar kyi ston mo
ལོ་གསར	new year	lo gsar
ལོ་གསར་གྱི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས	new year's greetings	lo gsar gyi bkra shis bde legs
ལོ་གསར་གནམ་གང	New Year's Eve	lo gsar gnam gang
ལོ་གསར་གནམ་ཚེས	new year's day	lo gsar gnam tshes
ལོ་གསར་མེ་ཏོག	1) on new year gro so phye mar gyi steng du placed flower; 2) an herb ?	lo gsar me tog
ལོ་གསར་ཚེ་གཅིག	the first day of the new year	lo gsar tshe gcig
ལོ་གསུམ་ཁམ་བུ	after btab [planting] three years 'bras bu yong ba'i kham bu ? [part/ mouthful?]	lo gsum kham bu
ལོ་གསུམ་གཏོང་བ	to practice for three years	lo gsum gtong ba
ལོ་གསུམ་ཕྱོགས་གསུམ	retreat of three years, three months and three days	lo gsum phyogs gsum
ལོ་ཧིཏ	Bhramaputra river in Assam	lo hit
ལོ་ཧིན་ཏ་ར	lohintara river	lo hin ta ra
ལོ་ཧྲིལ	a year	lo hril
ལོ་ཧྲིལ་པོ	whole year, all year around	lo hril po
ལོ་ལྷ	1) harvest deity; 2) lo khams kyi lha	lo lha
ལོག	back, opposite, wrong, return, go/ come back, get in the wrong order, bu upside down/ inside out/ backwards/ inverted, collapse, fall/ tumble down	log
ལོག་སྐད	way of speaking not understood except in a given region/ profession etc.	log skad
ལོག་ཁྱིམ་ལ་པ	go/ come/ return home	log khyim la pa
ལོག་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	mislead	log 'khrid byed pa
ལོག་གི་རིག་པ	false knowledge	log gi rig pa
ལོག་གེ་བ	return, {gyur}; heresy	log ge ba
ལོག་གེ་བ་ཁྱེར	take back	log ge ba khyer
ལོག་གྱུར	(past tense fallen back	log gyur
ལོག་གླུ	secret hummed song	log glu
ལོག་དགར	separate, apart	log dgar
ལོག་དགར་བྱེད	separate, part, cause fission, divorce	log dgar byed
ལོག་འགྲོས	exiting gait (in dance)	log 'gros
ལོག་རྒྱག	plow a field after harvest	log rgyag
ལོག་རྒྱུ	flow on the wrong side	log rgyu
ལོག་སྒྲུབ	ingratitude, being ungrateful, show ingratitude	log sgrub
ལོག་བསྒྲུབ་བཟོད་པའི་བཟོད་པ	the patience of bearing maltreat meat	log bsgrub bzod pa'i bzod pa
ལོག་བསྔོ	wrongly dedicate virtuous roots	log bsngo
ལོག་ཆུང	young in years	log chung
ལོག་ཆོས	heresy	log chos
ལོག་འཆམ	exiting dance (in dance)	log 'cham
ལོག་འཇལ	wrong return for kindness, ungratefulness, thankless[ness]	log 'jal
ལོག་འཇལ་བའི་དྲིན་ལན	wrong return for kindness, ungratefulness, thankless[ness]	log 'jal ba'i drin lan
ལོག་འཇལ་བྱེད	be ungrateful, thankless	log 'jal byed
ལོག་འཇུག	shirt, underclothes, undershirt, underwear	log 'jug
ལོག་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	1	log tu 'jug pa
ལོག་རྟོག	false conception [ggd]	log rtog
ལོག་རྟོག་དགག་པ	to stop wrong ideas	log rtog dgag pa
ལོག་རྟོག་རྒྱུན	endless wrong ideas; x {don log par bzung na log rtog rgyun 'byams nas} if you remember incorrectly what has been said, endless wrong ideas will proliferate	log rtog rgyun
ལོག་རྟོག་ལྔ	TSE	log rtog lnga
ལོག་རྟོག་བཅུ་དྲུག	TSE	log rtog bcu drug
ལོག་རྟོག་མི་བཟད་པ་སྐྱེས	came to the erroneous conclusion	log rtog mi bzad pa skyes
ལོག་རྟོག་སེལ་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད	definition which eliminates wrong ideas	log rtog sel ba'i mtshan nyid
ལོག་རྟོག་བསལ་བ	eliminating doubt / incorrect ideas	log rtog bsal ba
ལོག་རྟོགས་པ	those of wrong understanding	log rtogs pa
ལོག་ལྟ	[holding] wrong/ perverted/ false views, disbelief, disbelieving, wrong faith	log lta
ལོག་ལྟ་སྐྱེས	they will view it wrongly	log lta skyes
ལོག་ལྟ་སྐྱེས་པ	had disbelief	log lta skyes pa
ལོག་ལྟ་ཁོ་ན་བྱས་པ	held only wrong views	log lta kho na byas pa
ལོག་ལྟ་ལྔ	the five wrong views TSE	log lta lnga
ལོག་ལྟ་ཅན	persons w wrong views	log lta can
ལོག་ལྟ་ཅན་གྱི་རིགས	to hold wrong views	log lta can gyi rigs
ལོག་ལྟ་སྤངས	discard wrong views	log lta spangs
ལོག་ལྟ་སྤོང་བའི་སེམས་པ	the thought of/ wish to discard wrong views	log lta spong ba'i sems pa
ལོག་ལྟ་བྱེད་པ	have wrong views	log lta byed pa
ལོག་ལྟ་བཞི	CHN	log lta bzhi
ལོག་ལྟ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་པ	having wrong views, being born when there is no buddha	log lta sangs rgyas kyis stong pa
ལོག་ལྟའི་རྒྱུས་ངན་སོང་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ	they are reborn in the lower realms because of their wrong views log lta'i rab rib sel la dad pa'i mig phye the eyes of devotion and faith, clearing away the veil of wrong views	log lta'i rgyus ngan song du skye ba
ལོག་ལྟས་དགེ་རྩ་ཆད་པ	cutting of the root of virtue through wrong views	log ltas dge rtsa chad pa
ལོག་ལྟས་བསླད	{rang gi rgyud log ltas bslad nas} such wrong views spoil our minds	log ltas bslad
ལོག་ལྟས་བསླད་པ	influenced by those mistaken beliefs; x {mu stegs byed dam de dang rjes mthun pa'i log ta can du skyes na rang rgyud log ltas bslad pas chos byed du mi khoms} those born as Tirthikas or with simila...	log ltas bslad pa
ལོག་ཐང	a kind of linen	log thang
ལོག་ཐོག་དངུལ	cash on hand	log thog dngul
ལོག་དད་སེལ	remove wrong faith	log dad sel
ལོག་དུ་འགྲོ་བ	to go in a reverse direction; to (become) pervert(ed)	log du 'gro ba
ལོག་འདྲ	like something reversed	log 'dra
ལོག་འདྲེན	1) master of the feast ???; 2) agents of perversion, corrupting influences, misleading spirits, negative forces, evil 1's	log 'dren
ལོག་འདྲེན་བགེགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	1) king of obstructing spirits and agents of perversion Vinayaka; 2) Ganesha	log 'dren bgegs kyi rgyal po
ལོག་འདྲེན་པ	mislead	log 'dren pa
ལོག་ནས	elsewhere (looked for turn away from, stop, have ended, return, come, go back	log nas
ལོག་ནས་ཉེས་པ	to veer away from	log nas nyes pa
ལོག་ནས་ཐལ	stopped and turned around	log nas thal
ལོག་ནས་སོང	returned	log nas song
ལོག་ནོན	suppression	log non
ལོག་གནོན	countermeasures	log gnon
ལོག་གནོན་ཆེན་མོ	bsam yas dkar chag chen mo	log gnon chen mo
ལོག་པ་སྐྱུག	nauseated, disgusted	log pa skyug
ལོག་པ་མཁན	rebel	log pa mkhan
ལོག་པ་བརྒྱད	CHN	log pa brgyad
ལོག་པ་ངེས་པར་སེལ་བ	truly eliminate what is wrong	log pa nges par sel ba
ལོག་པ་ཆ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	severe ascetic penances such as letting 1's living body be eaten by vultures, or burning part of the body in a fire	log pa cha 'dzin gyi spyod pa
ལོག་པ་ཉིད་དུ་ངེས་པ	hold an erroneous notion as something positively good	log pa nyid du nges pa
ལོག་པ་ཉིད་དུ་ངེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	aggregate of holding what is wrong as true	log pa nyid du nges pa'i phung po
ལོག་པ་ལྟ་བ	wrong views	log pa lta ba
ལོག་པ་འཐད	let us turn back	log pa 'thad
ལོག་པ་དང་ལྡོག་པ	that which is distinguished and the distinguisher [ggd]	log pa dang ldog pa
ལོག་པ་དུད་འགྲོའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ཅན	religious sect who imitate beasts	log pa dud 'gro'i spyod pa can
ལོག་པ་འབྲད	let us turn back	log pa 'brad
ལོག་པ་རྩོམ་པ	plot, stir up an insurrection	log pa rtsom pa
ལོག་པ་འི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	false relative (truth	log pa 'i kun rdzob
ལོག་པ་འི་ལྟ་བ	wrong view	log pa 'i lta ba
ལོག་པ་ར	perversely	log pa ra
ལོག་པ་ར་འགྱུར	regress	log pa ra 'gyur
ལོག་པ་ར་དད་པ	perverted faith	log pa ra dad pa
ལོག་པ་ལ་ལོག་ཞུགས	perverted engagement is the mistaken	log pa la log zhugs
ལོག་པ་ལོག་རྟོག	wrong grasping	log pa log rtog
ལོག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	false relative [truth]. the wrong relative. false conventional truth, erroneous / fictitious relative truth, def. {snang srid snod bcud blo bkod pa'i chos so cog dang bcad pa yul 'khrul snang blo r...	log pa'i kun rdzob
ལོག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཀྱི་བདེན་པ	false superficial/relative truth 2701	log pa'i kun rdzob kyi bden pa
ལོག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	unreal conventional truth, wrong/false relative truth	log pa'i kun rdzob bden pa
ལོག་པའི་ཀླུན་རྫོབ	snang la don byed mi nus pa	log pa'i klun rdzob
ལོག་པའི་སྐད	secret language	log pa'i skad
ལོག་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	perverse pride	log pa'i nga rgyal
ལོག་པའི་ངག	wrong speech	log pa'i ngag
ལོག་པའི་ངག་ཀྱལ	false/ deluded pride	log pa'i ngag kyal
ལོག་པའི་ལྕི་བ་བཞི	[TRS 30:5]	log pa'i lci ba bzhi
ལོག་པའི་རྟོག་གེ	wrong philosophizing/ reasoning	log pa'i rtog ge
ལོག་པའི་ལྟ་བ	wrong view	log pa'i lta ba
ལོག་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་བཞི	the four perverted / incorrect conceptions / ideas [opposite of {yang dag pa'i 'du shes bzhi}. 1) {bla ma la gla ba'i 'du shes}. 2) {chos la gla rtsu'i} 3) {rang la rngon pa'i} 4) {nan tan nyams su...	log pa'i 'du shes bzhi
ལོག་པའི་སྣང་བ	wrong/ false appearance	log pa'i snang ba
ལོག་པའི་བློ	misapprehension, mistake	log pa'i blo
ལོག་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	blunder, err, make mistake	log pa'i blo gros
ལོག་པའི་རྩིག་པ	collapsed wall	log pa'i rtsig pa
ལོག་པའི་ཚིག	wrong words	log pa'i tshig
ལོག་པའི་ལམ	wrongly, wrong path	log pa'i lam
ལོག་པའི་ལམ་དུ་འཛིན་པ	to mistake	log pa'i lam du 'dzin pa
ལོག་པའི་ཤེས་པ	wrong knowledge	log pa'i shes pa
ལོག་པར	mistakenly, in error; erroneously, wrongly, incorrectly	log par
ལོག་པར་འཁུ་བ	1) produce useless anger/ rage; 2) be angry to the depths of 1's mind	log par 'khu ba
ལོག་པར་གྲུབ	wrongly perform	log par grub
ལོག་པར་སྒྲུབ	wrongly perform a thing	log par sgrub
ལོག་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ	wrong establishment	log par sgrub pa
ལོག་པར་བསྒྲུབ	wrong establishment, heresy	log par bsgrub
ལོག་པར་ངེས་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	wrongly fixed accumulations	log par nges pa'i phung po
ལོག་པར་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	wrong attachment	log par mngon par zhen pa
ལོག་པར་ཇིན་པ	misunderstand, remember incorrectly	log par jin pa
ལོག་པར་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	wrong experience	log par nyams su myong ba
ལོག་པར་རྟོག་པ	erroneous/ wrong ideas;	log par rtog pa
ཝྲོང	headed thinking; to think incorrectly/ hold incorrect opinoins	wrong
ལོག་པར་རྟོགས་པ	understanding wrongly	log par rtogs pa
ལོག་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རིགས་ཅན	whose understanding is contrary; x {de dang cha 'dra ba'i yang dag pa'i chos dang gang zag la log par rtogs pa'i rigs can yin na yang dam pa'i chos tshul bzhin sgrub pa la mi khoms pa yin te} howev...	log par rtogs pa'i rigs can
ལོག་པར་ལྟ་བ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {rgyu 'bras dang been pa dang dkon mchog sogs med par lta ba ste / snga ma bzhi sgro 'dogs dang / phyi ma phal cher skur 'debs kyi lta ba'o} Perverted belief, as one of the...	log par lta ba
ལོག་པར་ལྟ་བས་སྐྱོན་ལ་བརྟགས་པ	misinterpreting and criticizing	log par lta bas skyon la brtags pa
ལོག་པར་ལྟུང་བ	downfall, perversity	log par ltung ba
ལོག་པར་བལྟ་བ	misinterpret {mdzad spyod gang la yang log par mi blta ba} not to take any of your teacher's actions in the wrong way; to not misinterpret how he acts	log par blta ba
ལོག་པར་དད་སེལ	eliminate wrong faith	log par dad sel
ལོག་པར་མདོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་པ	wrong perception/ conception	log par mdon par 'du byed pa
ལོག་པར་དཔྱད་པའི་ལྟ་བ	wrongly examined view	log par dpyad pa'i lta ba
ལོག་པར་སྤོབས	shameless, shamelessness, effrontery, boldness	log par spobs
ལོག་པར་སྤྱད་པ	wrong [sexual] action	log par spyad pa
ལོག་པར་སྤྱོད་པ	do wrong [sexual] actions	log par spyod pa
ལོག་པར་བྱས་པ	mistake, falsity, perversion	log par byas pa
ལོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	do wrongly, pervert, go back on, return, turn away from, do the opposite	log par byed pa
ལོག་པར་སྦྱོར	wrong engagement/ practice/ action 2702	log par sbyor
ལོག་པར་མི་བལྟ་བ	R/GD: w/o reverting from the view, not relinquishing the view/regard for. [mss]	log par mi blta ba
ལོག་པར་མོས་པ	irreverence	log par mos pa
ལོག་པར་སྨྲ་བ	proponents of falsity, falsehood, slander, perverse speech, false speaking	log par smra ba
ལོག་པར་འཚོ་བ	live by crime, live in a sinful manner, 5 kinds (tshul 'chos, kha gsag, gzhog slongs, thob kyis 'jal ba, rnyed pa las rnyed pa sgrub par byed)	log par 'tsho ba
ལོག་པར་འཛིན་དུ་འཇུག་པ	enter into wrong grasping/ understanding	log par 'dzin du 'jug pa
ལོག་པར་འཛིན་པ	remembering them incorrectly	log par 'dzin pa
ལོག་པར་བཞུགས་པ	hold heretical views, heretic	log par bzhugs pa
ལོག་པར་བཞུགས་པའི་དགྲ	the enemy of heretics log par g.yem - wrong sex log par g.yem - illicit sexual intercourse log par g.yem pa - wrong sex log par g.yem pa - to commit adultery log par g.yem pa - commit adultery log ...	log par bzhugs pa'i dgra
ལོག་པར་རབ་སོད	turned to great error	log par rab sod
ལོག་པར་ཤེས་པ	1 of log lta	log par shes pa
ལོག་པར་སེམས་པ	think evil, have suspicions	log par sems pa
ལོག་པར་བསམ་པའི་དོན	wrongly conceived object/ meaning	log par bsam pa'i don
ལོག་པར་བསམས་པའི་དོན	wrongly conceived object/ meaning	log par bsams pa'i don
ལོག་པར་ལྷུང	SA log par ltung ba	log par lhung
ལོག་པར་ལྷུང་བ	1) [fall into] mistake[n partialities]/ the wrong side; 2) the lower realms	log par lhung ba
ལོག་པར་ལྷུང་བའི་སྐྱེ་གནས	birth place of falling into perversion	log par lhung ba'i skye gnas
ལོག་པོ	(A; 1) 'dam pa po, chooser? appointer?; 2) ldab [a'phar] [increase, extra additional???],//ldab grangs log por btang ba,//mi grangs log por 'phar ba ??? [double, times, recited???	log po
ལོག་པོ་བྱེད་པ	revolt, rebel	log po byed pa
ལོག་པོ་ལ་ཞུགས	turn to what is wrong	log po la zhugs
ལོག་པོ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	rush into error	log po la zhugs pa
ལོག་སྤྱོད	do wrong [sexual] actions, reactionary, wrong/ perverted actions/ conduct	log spyod
ལོག་སྤྱོད་གྲལ་རིམ	reactionary class	log spyod gral rim
ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཅན	reactionary, person w wrong [sexual] actions	log spyod can
ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཅན་གྱི་བསམ་བློ	reactionary idea	log spyod can gyi bsam blo
ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ	reactionary	log spyod pa
ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཕྱོགས་ཁག	reactionary clique/ bloc/ group, reactionaries	log spyod phyogs khag
ལོག་སྤྱོད་དབང་སྒྱུར	reactionary rule	log spyod dbang sgyur
ལོག་སྤྱོད་དབང་སྒྱུར་གྲལ་རིམ	reactionary ruling class	log spyod dbang sgyur gral rim
ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཚོགས་ཁག	reactionary clique/ bloc/ group, reactionaries	log spyod tshogs khag
ལོག་སྤྱོད་སྲིད་གཞུང	reactionary government	log spyod srid gzhung
ལོག་ཕྱོགས་པ	reactionary	log phyogs pa
ལོག་བ	fall back	log ba
ལོག་བློ	renounce	log blo
ལོག་སྦྱོར	1) wrong grammar; 2) * produce an action not in accord w its nature	log sbyor
ལོག་སྨོན	prayer/ supplication for something bad	log smon
ལོག་སྨོན་ཅན	one who wishes to do evil, one who prays for what is perverse	log smon can
ལོག་སྨྲ	wrong/ heretical theories	log smra
ལོག་སྨྲ་བ	false speaking	log smra ba
ལོག་སྨྲ་བའི་ནགས་ཚལ	wilderness of the perversity of speech	log smra ba'i nags tshal
ལོག་སྨྲ་ཚར་གཅོད	refute proponents of wrong views, eliminate false speaking	log smra tshar gcod
ལོག་སྨྲ་ཚར་གཅོད་པ	to refute proponents of wrong views	log smra tshar gcod pa
ལོག་ཚོང	traitorous	log tshong
ལོག་ཚོང་གི་བྱ་བ	traitorous activities	log tshong gi bya ba
ལོག་འཚོ	perverted livelihood; wrong livelihood	log 'tsho
ལོག་འཚོ་སྒྲུབ་པ	leading a perverted livelihood	log 'tsho sgrub pa
ལོག་འཚོ་ལྔ	Five kinds of wrong livelihood. Hypocrisy, flattery, soliciting, expropriating, and calculated generosity	log 'tsho lnga
ལོག་འཚོ་ལོག་འཚོ་མ་སྒྲུབ	Don't practice wrong livelihood	log 'tsho log 'tsho ma sgrub
ལོག་འཚོའི་སྡིག་ཟས	sinful food	log 'tsho'i sdig zas
ལོག་ཞག	days after the solstice [from the winter solstice 24 days, de'i ring la kha rlung dang grang ngar che na dbyar zhod zer, fro the summer solstice 21 days, de'ang nyi ldog nyin dang, bdun dang po, gn...	log zhag
ལོག་ཞུགས	perverted, heretical	log zhugs
ལོག་ཞུགས་བཅུ་དྲུག	TSE	log zhugs bcu drug
ལོག་གཞལ	ingratitude, ungrateful return for a service done	log gzhal
ལོག་ཡིག་ལྔ	5 reversed letters for transcribing sanskrit	log yig lnga
ལོག་ཡོང	come back, return log g.yang dbyen - wicked spirits of death log g.yem - {gzhan gyi bud med sogs bgrod bya min pa la 'dod pas log par g.yem pa} To lust for and engage in sexual misconduct with some...	log yong
ལོག་རླུང	adverse wind	log rlung
ལོག་ལ་འདོད་དོ	let us turn back	log la 'dod do
ལོག་ལམ	perverted 2703	log lam
ལོག་ལོག་ཟླུམ་པོའམ་རིལ་མོ	//grod pa'i nang du btums pa'i mar log log de la rgya ma ci tsam 'dug log shes wrong consciousness/knowledge, error, perception of one w jaundice	log log zlum po'am ril mo
ལོག་ཤེས	wrong consciousness, error, blunder, incorrect understanding	log shes
ལོག་ཤེས་གཉིས	TSE	log shes gnyis
ལོག་ཤེས་འདུག་ན	if one has a wrong understanding, in case an incorrect understanding is held	log shes 'dug na
ལོག་སྲིད་བསྐྱར་ལངས	restoration/ comeback of an evil government/ regime	log srid bskyar langs
ལོག་སྲེད་ཅན	one who delights in vicious actions and sin, one who blasphemes sacred buddhist religion	log sred can
ལོག་བསམ	* misunderstanding *, misconception, perversion, perverted views/ thoughts/ conception, wrong ideas/ understanding/ thinking, fallacy, misapprehension, misinterpretation	log bsam
ལོགས	1) side, face, surface, front of; 2) Yi ge 'di'i mthar su sbyar na gzhan du'am zur du, region, direction, wall	logs
ལོགས་སྐད	kind of speech not understood by others not in a certain region, line of work etc	logs skad
ལོགས་སྐྱེས	udder, female breast	logs skyes
ལོགས་ཁང	house apart from others	logs khang
ལོགས་དགར	apart from others, separate	logs dgar
ལོགས་འགེལ	wall hangings	logs 'gel
ལོགས་ངན	left or lower side of a cloth	logs ngan
ལོགས་ཆེན་པོ	1 of 6 great mountains of lus 'phags pa, SA ri chen po drug	logs chen po
ལོགས་ཆེན་པོའི་རི	{logs chen po} mt	logs chen po'i ri
ལོགས་ལྟར་སྣང་བ	to seem as though separate/ on its own	logs ltar snang ba
ལོགས་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ	on all sides	logs thams cad du
ལོགས་ན	apart/ off to one side/ on its own	logs na
ལོགས་ན་ཡོད	separate, distinct	logs na yod
ལོགས་ན་ཡོད་པ	be distinct/ separate/ solitary	logs na yod pa
ལོགས་པ	other, additional	logs pa
ལོགས་པར་ཞུགས	to be opinionated	logs par zhugs
ལོགས་བྲིས	paintings on the inside of a house	logs bris
ལོགས་ཞལ	wall's ldebs zhal	logs zhal
ལོགས་རིང	snake	logs ring
ལོགས་རིས	fresco, mural	logs ris
ལོགས་ལ	aside, apart	logs la
ལོགས་ལ་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 lokla de	logs la sde brgyad
ལོགས་ལ་བཞག་པ	put aside, put out of the way, clear away	logs la bzhag pa
ལོགས་ཤིག	outside	logs shig
ལོགས་ཤིག་ན་བྲིས	painted/ written on 1 surface	logs shig na bris
ལོགས་སུ	aside, elsewhere, separate, apart	logs su
ལོགས་སུ་བཀར་བ	lay aside	logs su bkar ba
ལོགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ	be/ become separate/ another	logs su gyur pa
ལོགས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ	exist as separate/ another	logs su grub pa
ལོགས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ་མེད	are no other, nothing existing separate from	logs su grub pa med
ལོགས་སུ་དགར་བ	separate, isolate	logs su dgar ba
ལོགས་སུ་བསྒྲུབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	to be accomplished elsewhere	logs su bsgrub tu yod pa
ལོགས་སུ་བཅད་པ	to disregard	logs su bcad pa
ལོགས་སུ་བཅར་བ	prop sideways	logs su bcar ba
ལོགས་སུ་འདོན་པ	isolate	logs su 'don pa
ལོགས་སུ་ཕྱེ	to separate	logs su phye
ལོགས་སུ་ཕྱེ་ན	when classified separately	logs su phye na
ལོགས་སུ་ཕྱེ་བ	set/ keep apart	logs su phye ba
ལོགས་སུ་དབྱེ་བ	to explain as a separate topic	logs su dbye ba
ལོགས་སུ་མ་གྲུབ་པ	it does exist as separate, another, {pha yul su} another homeland	logs su ma grub pa
ལོགས་སུ་བཞག་པ	humiliate, deprecate, put in opposition	logs su bzhag pa
ལོགས་སུ་ཡོད་པར	be separate/ another	logs su yod par
ལོགས་སུ་ལུས	be left alone, be isolated/ apart/ separated	logs su lus
ལོགས་སུའམ་སྒེར་དུ	aside, apart	logs su'am sger du
ལོང་ཀ	intestines, entrails, guts	long ka
ལོང་ཀི	red cloth	long ki
ལོང་སྐུ	sambhogakaya	long sku
ལོང་སྐུ་འི་སྣང་བ	sambhogakaya appearance/ manifestations	long sku 'i snang ba
ལོང་སྐུའི་སྣང་བ	sambhogakaya appearance / manifestations	long sku'i snang ba
ལོང་ཁ	entrails, intestines	long kha
ལོང་ཁེབས	rta'i long g.yog byed	long khebs
ལོང་ཁྱི	hunting dog	long khyi
ལོང་ཁྲིད	guidance for a blind man	long khrid
ལོང་ཁྲིད་པ	someone who leads the blind	long khrid pa
ལོང་འཁྲིད	1) leader of the blind; 2) blind person's lag rten	long 'khrid
ལོང་ག	entrails, intestines, abdomen	long ga
ལོང་ང	blind, stand still, come to a halt	long nga
ལོང་ངེ	stand still, come to a halt	long nge
ལོང་མཆོང	act rashly/ blindly/ impulsively	long mchong
ལོང་མཆོང་བྱེད	act rashly/ blindly/ impulsively	long mchong byed
ལོང་མཆོངས	confused by ignorance act rashly long mchongs byas na gnas tshul la ma brtags ma dpyad pa'i phyir pham nyes	long mchongs
ཡོང་རྒྱུ་ལས་མེད	if [you] act rashly because [you] don't look things over there can be no result but failure	yong rgyu las med
ལོང་མཆོངས་རིང་ལུགས	putch-ism	long mchongs ring lugs
ལོང་གཏམ	1) explanatory talk not realizing the reason in detail; 2) talk w/ o reason and meaning	long gtam
ལོང་གཏམ་ཅ་ཅོ	ignorant/ nonsensical conversation	long gtam ca co
ལོང་གཏམ་ཟེར་བ	to chatter	long gtam zer ba
ལོང་བཏང་བ	send a reply	long btang ba
ལོང་ཐེར	long ther moxibustion point	long ther
ལོང་དམ	to converse, conversation	long dam
ལོང་ནད	intestinal diseases	long nad
ལོང་ནད་གྲང་བ	intestinal disease grang ba	long nad grang ba
ལོང་ནད་ལྔ	CHN	long nad lnga
ལོང་པས་རྟ་ཞར་བཞོན	blind person riding a horse, imminent danger	long pas rta zhar bzhon
ལོང་པས་རྟ་ཞར་བཞོན་པ	blind person riding a horse, imminent danger	long pas rta zhar bzhon pa
ལོང་པོ	blind man	long po
ལོང་པོ་སྟོད	district in kongpo	long po stod
ལོང་སྤྱོད	enjoyment, pleasures, possessions, wealth	long spyod
ལོང་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	enjoyment wheel / chakra	long spyod kyi 'khor lo
ལོང་སྤྱོད་བག་ཡོད	careful action, conscientious enjoyment	long spyod bag yod
ལོང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	live off of	long spyod byed
ལོང་སྤྱོད་མ་ཆག་བློ	the mind that does not desire enjoyments, the mind that is not attached to enjoyment	long spyod ma chag blo
ལོང་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ	Complete Enjoyment Body, sambhogakaya	long spyod rdzogs pa'i sku
ལོང་ཕུགས་གསང	long phyugs moxibustion point	long phugs gsang
ལོང་ཕྲེང	= glo phreng, woman's ska rags [dngul thag hanging under woman's belt/ sash	long phreng
ལོང་བ	blind, blinded, receive, SA len pa, sightless, blind med	long ba
ལོང་བ་ཐང་དཀྱིལ	{long ba thang dkyil du lus pa} the blind man, lost in the desert	long ba thang dkyil
ལོང་བ་ཐང་དཀྱིལ་དུ་ལུས་པ་ལྟ་བུ	like a ~ lost in the middle of a plain	long ba thang dkyil du lus pa lta bu
ལོང་བ་ཐང་དཀྱིལ་ལུས་པ	blind men lost in the middle of a plain long ba nang bzhin lag snyab byed pa grope	long ba thang dkyil lus pa
ལོང་བའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	the sun	long ba'i kha lo pa
ལོང་བའི་དགྲ	deity dbang phyug chen po	long ba'i dgra
ལོང་བར་གྱུར	was blinded	long bar gyur
ལོང་བར་བྱམས་པ	blind and lost	long bar byams pa
ལོང་བར་འབྱམས་པ	blind and lost	long bar 'byams pa
ལོང་བར་ལམ་འདྲི	ask a blind/ ignorant person the way	long bar lam 'dri
ལོང་བར་ལམ་འདྲི་བ	ask a blind/ ignorant person the way	long bar lam 'dri ba
ལོང་བར་ལོང་འཁྲིད་མེད་པ	blind person w/o a guide	long bar long 'khrid med pa
ལོང་བས་ལོང་བ་ཁྲིད	the blind leading the blind	long bas long ba khrid
ལོང་བས་ཤིག་བཟུང	guessing	long bas shig bzung
ལོང་བུ	ankle-bone, astragal, ankles; ankles	long bu
ལོང་བུ་མི་མངོན་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of the ankle bones not showing	long bu mi mngon pa'i dpe byad
ལོང་བྱའི་ཚིགས	ankle joint	long bya'i tshigs
ལོང་སྦྱད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ	complete enjoyment body	long sbyad rdzogs pa'i sku
ལོང་མ་མཆིས	leaving little time for	long ma mchis
ལོང་མེད	no time/ unfree	long med
ལོང་མེད་ཀྱི་བློ་སྣ	an attitude of urgency, worthless schemes	long med kyi blo sna
ལོང་མེད་པ	sngon 'gro nyams su len	long med pa
ལོང་མོ	knuckle, ankle bone	long mo
ལོང་རྩ	intestines nadi	long rtsa
ལོང་ཚད	in the intestines heat zhugs pa'i disease	long tshad
ལོང་ཚིགས	ankle joint	long tshigs
ལོང་ཚེ་མེད	life is brief, leisure	long tshe med
ལོང་ཚོགས	ankle-bone, astragal, ankles	long tshogs
ལོང་ཡེ	leisure, spare time, vacant time	long ye
ལོང་ཡེ་མེད་པ	restless, continually at work, leisureless	long ye med pa
ལོང་ཡོད	leisure	long yod
ལོང་ལོང	milling around, rising in waves, swirling up, protruding, convex, bulging	long long
ལོང་ལོང་འདུག་པ	milling about	long long 'dug pa
ལོང་ལོང་མི་མང་པོ་འདུག་པ	many people	long long mi mang po 'dug pa
ལོང་ཤད	stretching the ankle, to stretch the ankles, SA rtsa 'dul lnga	long shad
ལོང་གསང	intestines moxibustion point	long gsang
ལོངས	1) len pa! two ldang ba! lang!; 2) be able to reach a set #; 3) grow	longs
ལོངས་སྐུ	Enjoyment Body. sambhogakaya [complete enjoyment body]. Sambhogakaya, [sambhogakaya]; sambhogakaya [complete enjoyment body]	longs sku
ལོངས་སྐུ་ཁྲོ་བོའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	sambhogakaya mandala of the wrathful ones	longs sku khro bo'i dkyil 'khor
ལོངས་སྐུ་རྒྱལ་བ་རིགས་ལྔ	sambhogak ya is the five families of jinas	longs sku rgyal ba rigs lnga
ལོངས་སྐུ་ངེས་པ་ལྔ་ལྡན	possessing the five certainties of sambhogak ya	longs sku nges pa lnga ldan
ལོངས་སྐུ་འཆི་མེད་འོད་སྣང	sambhogakaya sadhana of Padmasambhava from {byang gter dgongs pa zang thal}	longs sku 'chi med 'od snang
ལོངས་སྐུ་རྟག་པ	permanent sambhogak ya	longs sku rtag pa
ལོངས་སྐུ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ	Sambhogakaya Great Compassionate One; sm. Avalokiteshvara 2705	longs sku thugs rje chen po
ལོངས་སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན་པོ	sambhogak ya is great Vajradhara	longs sku rdo rje 'chang chen po
ལོངས་སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ	sambhogak ya is Vajrasattva	longs sku rdo rje sems dpa'
ལོངས་སྐུ་སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་དབང	sambhogak ya Avalokiteshvara empowerment longs sku spyan ras gzigs shi ba dang	longs sku spyan ras gzigs dbang
ཁྲོ་བོ་པ	ma rta mgrin longs sku spyan ras gzigs shi ba dang	khro bo pa
ཁྲོ་བོ་པད་མ་རྟ་མགྲིན	peaceful sambhogak ya is Avalokiteshvara and wrathful is Pema Hayagriva	khro bo pad ma rta mgrin
ལོངས་སྐུ་ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་འཕོ་བ	sambhogakaya phowa of unity	longs sku zung 'jug gi 'pho ba
ལོངས་སྐུ་འི་རྟེན་ཟླ་བ	sen the support of sambhogak ya is the moon	longs sku 'i rten zla ba
ལོངས་སྐུ་རང་བབས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	natural realization of sambhogak ya CHN	longs sku rang babs kyi dgongs pa
ལོངས་སྐུ་ལ་རྟགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་བཅུ	CHN	longs sku la rtags kyi rgyan bcu
ལོངས་སྐུའི་རྒྱན་ཆས་བདུན	the five ornaments of sambhogak ya CHN	longs sku'i rgyan chas bdun
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ངེས་པ་ལྔ	the five certainties of sambhogak ya	longs sku'i nges pa lnga
ལོངས་སྐུའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of sambhogak ya CHN	longs sku'i mtshan nyid lnga
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ཞི་བའི་སྣང་བ	the peaceful manifestations of sambhogakaya	longs sku'i zhi ba'i snang ba
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ཞིང་སྣང	perceive the manifestation of the sambhogk ya realm	longs sku'i zhing snang
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ཞིང་གཟིགས	perceive the manifestation of the sambhogk ya realm	longs sku'i zhing gzigs
ལོངས་སྐུའི་གཟིགས་སྟངས	the gaze of sambhogak ya	longs sku'i gzigs stangs
ལོངས་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ	Sambhogakaya luminosity. Often: The luminosity during the bardo of dharmata	longs sku'i 'od gsal
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་ཁྱད་པར་ལྔ	the five special qualities of sambhogak ya	longs sku'i yon tan gyi khyad par lnga
ལོངས་སྐུའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ	the five qualities of sambhogak ya CHN	longs sku'i yon tan lnga
ལོངས་སྐུའི་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱན་བརྒྱད	the 8 precious ornaments of sambhogak ya CHN	longs sku'i rin chen rgyan brgyad
ལོངས་མགྲིན་པ	the throat	longs mgrin pa
ལོངས་ཆེ་བ	great riches, wealth, property	longs che ba
ལོངས་པ	1) was blind; 2) arrived at [p long ba]; 2) [arch] rgyags pa; 3) * receive, arise	longs pa
ལོངས་སྤྱད་པ	eating	longs spyad pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད	{'khor dang longs spyod} servants and possessions	longs spyod
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྟོན་པ	display all enjoyments	longs spyod kun tu ston pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀུན་རྫོགས	perfect all enjoyments	longs spyod kun rdzogs
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	center of enjoyment, the chakra of enjoyment	longs spyod kyi 'khor lo
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་མཚན	the reason for enjoyment	longs spyod kyi rgyu mtshan
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱེད	{khyod kyi longs spyod kyi phyed nga la dgos} You must give me half of everything you have	longs spyod kyi phyed
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རྩ	lus rtsa'i bye brag cig	longs spyod kyi rtsa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་རིག་འཛིན	the vidyadhara of enjoyment	longs spyod kyi rig 'dzin
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱིས་ཕམ	conquered by enjoyments	longs spyod kyis pham
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱིས་བྲེལ་བ	devoid of wealth	longs spyod kyis brel ba
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སྐུ	SA longs sku	longs spyod sku
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འཁོར་ལོ	the chakra of enjoyment	longs spyod 'khor lo
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་གྱི་ཆར་འབབ	prosperity falls like rain	longs spyod gyi char 'bab
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཅན	prosperous, possessed of health & prosperity & happiness	longs spyod can
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཆགས	desire enjoyment, be attached to enjoyments	longs spyod chags
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཆེ	1 of 7 mtho ris kyi yon tan	longs spyod che
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཆེ་བ	great enjoyment	longs spyod che ba
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྗོགས་པའི་སྐུ	sambhogak ya	longs spyod rjogs pa'i sku
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཉིད	enjoyment, prosperity, abundance	longs spyod nyid
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བསྟན་པ	the teaching of enjoyment, the teaching of action	longs spyod bstan pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དག་གིས་སྤེལ་བ	increase enjoyment	longs spyod dag gis spel ba
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དག་ལ་མ་ཆགས་པ	not desire enjoyment, not attached to enjoyments	longs spyod dag la ma chags pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དག་ལྷ་མ་ཆགས་པ	not attached to enjoyments and the pure divinity	longs spyod dag lha ma chags pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལྡན	prosperous, possessed of health & prosperity & happiness	longs spyod ldan
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ནི་སྐད་ཅིག་ཙམ	our enjoyments are over in an instant	longs spyod ni skad cig tsam
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་གནས	treasury, repository longs spyod rnams la mngon par mi dga'o - not rejoice in enjoyments	longs spyod gnas
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྣམས་ལ་མ་ཆགས་པ	not desire enjoyments	longs spyod rnams la ma chags pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoy, use, have the benefit of, cohabit, enjoy sensually	longs spyod pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་པོ	Acc to KR = longs spyod pa, longs spyod pa po, longs spyod mkhan. [mss]	longs spyod po
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སྤྱད་པ	experience of enjoyments	longs spyod spyad pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect enjoyment	longs spyod phun sum tshogs pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཕོངས	bereft of enjoyments 2706	longs spyod phongs
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	increase enjoyment	longs spyod 'phel bar byed pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འབྲི་བའི་གནས་དྲུག	TSE longs spyod ma thub pa'i rgyu nor wealth 1 is unable to enjoy longs spyod mi rdzogs ka med byung could not help but become prosperous longs spyod mi rdzogs ka med byung could not help but becom...	longs spyod 'bri ba'i gnas drug
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མོད་པ	great wealth	longs spyod mod pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མཛེས་པ	wind god	longs spyod mdzes pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས	enjoyment, Sambhogak ya	longs spyod rdzogs
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་སྐུ	dimension of the full richness of being	longs spyod rdzogs sku
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་སྐུ་གཉིས	two body of the completion of wealth	longs spyod rdzogs sku gnyis
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པ	perfect happiness, full enjoyment (material & spiritual)	longs spyod rdzogs pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པ་སྐུའི་བསྟན་པ	the Sambhogak ya doctrine	longs spyod rdzogs pa sku'i bstan pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི	sku, SA longs sku	longs spyod rdzogs pa'i
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ	sambhogakaya	longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་ཆས	the apparel of the sambhogakaya forms, sambhoga attire	longs spyod rdzogs pa'i chas
མིདདླེ	length necklace, a very long necklace, armlets, bracelets and anklets. Crown-ribbons of five colors, large blue silk ribbon hanging from the rear of the crown, short green blouse, skirt of dark mar...	middle
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཟད	fall from prosperity, loss of wealth longs spyod la kun tu 'dzin pa med pa w/ o any grasping at enjoyments	longs spyod zad
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས་པ	partial by indulging in enjoyments	longs spyod la rgyab kyis phyogs pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་ཆག་པ	desirous of/ attached to enjoyment	longs spyod la chag pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་མི་དགྱེས་པ	I take no delight in such worldly attainment	longs spyod la mi dgyes pa
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་མི་ལྟ་བ	not view enjoyment	longs spyod la mi lta ba
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་མི་ལྡན	not possessing enjoyment	longs spyod la mi ldan
ལོངས་བུ	ankle-bone longs sbyod rdzogs sku kha sbyor yan lag	longs bu
ལོངས་མེད	there is no, spring out (of the mud	longs med
ལོངས་མེད་རྩེ་གཅིག	one-pointedly without wasting time	longs med rtse gcig
ལོངས་རྫོགས	[perfect] enjoyment	longs rdzogs
ལོངས་ཡར་དང	get up!, take!	longs yar dang
ལོངས་ཡར་དང་ལོང	leisure	longs yar dang long
ལོངས་ཤིག	get it from	longs shig
ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱད་པ	enjoyed [-ment], acted [-ivity] benefitted from, used	longs su spyad pa
ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ	enjoyment, resources, experience, perfect rapture, possessions, riches resources, pleasure, wealth, enjoy, survive on	longs su spyod pa
ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པོར	as enjoyment	longs su spyod por
ལོད	be of use, make a difference	lod
ལོད་པ	relaxed, lazy, careless, slow, loose, unstrung, slackened, easy, unconcerned	lod pa
ལོད་པོ	bad, poor * relaxed, lazy, careless	lod po
ལོད་ཡོད་པ་མ་རེད	there is no use in --, it	lod yod pa ma red
ཝིལལ་མཀེ་ནོ་དིཕ༹ཕེ༹རེནཅེ་ཨིཕ༹	-	will make no difference if
ལོད་རིགས	the poor class of cultivators who are unable to raise a good crop	lod rigs
ལོན	receive, SA len pa, news, tidings, message, to reach, to get, SA sems lon	lon
ལོན་ཀྲོན	London	lon kron
ལོན་སྐྱུར	give a reply	lon skyur
ལོན་སྐྱུར་བ	give a reply	lon skyur ba
ལོན་ལྔ་བཅུ་པ	fifty years old, of fifty years	lon lnga bcu pa
ལོན་ཐབས	dredge	lon thabs
ལོན་ཐབས་བྱེད་པ	drag for, dredge up	lon thabs byed pa
ལོན་དན	London	lon dan
ལོན་པ	arrive, reach; {lon pa, lon pa, lon pa} intr. v.; to reach the age of; arrive, reach, to take, to receive; elapsed; lo +: to reach the age of; to elapse, to pass (in time)/ to get, acquire, obtain/...	lon pa
ལོན་པའི་རོ	fresh corpse	lon pa'i ro
ལོན་སྤྲིང	question answering letter	lon spring
ལོན་སྤྲིང་བ	give notice, send word, send a message	lon spring ba
ལོན་ཞིག་ཁྱེར་ལ	send me word lon zhig khyer la shog} let me know, send word	lon zhig khyer la
ལོན་ཟླ་བ་གསུམ་པ	after 3 months had elapsed	lon zla ba gsum pa
ལོན་བཟང	good news 2707	lon bzang
ལོབ	imp. of {lab pa}	lob
ལོབ་པ	learn	lob pa
ལོབ་མཚོ	Lake Lobnor	lob mtsho
ལོབས་པ	{lobs pa, lobs pa, lobs pa} intr. v	lobs pa
ལོའི་ཆ་ཤས	division or parts of the year	lo'i cha shas
ལོའི་ཐེག་པ	old person	lo'i theg pa
ལོའི་ཐོག་མ	beginning of the year	lo'i thog ma
ལོའི་དང་པོ	beginning of the year	lo'i dang po
ལོའི་ཤིང་རྟ	sun	lo'i shing rta
ལོའི་ལྷ	deity of the year	lo'i lha
ལོར	paper $	lor
ལོས	1) las pa!; 2) truth, certain[ly], indeed, of curse, certainly; 3) how --	los
ལོས་ཀྱང	in the same way	los kyang
ལོས་ཀྱང་བདེན	it is sure and true, certainly it will come to pass	los kyang bden
ལོས་ཐུབ	yes i can	los thub
ལོས་དད	opposing beliefs	los dad
ལོས་བདེན	certainly true	los bden
ལོས་ཡིན	must indeed be	los yin
ལོས་ཡོད	of course	los yod
ལོས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་ལོས་ཡིན	it was indeed true as he had said	los gsungs pa ltar los yin
རླྱལ་མཚོང	dive	rlyal mtshong
རླྱལ་མཚོང་རྒྱག	dive	rlyal mtshong rgyag
ཤ	SHA [R]; 2) noun mo yig; 3) meat *, flesh, muscle; 4) deer	sha
ཤ་ཀ	kind of game	sha ka
ཤ་ཀ་མ	saffron from kashmir	sha ka ma
ཤ་ཀ་ར	1) shing sha ka ra; 2) molasses gyi dvangs ma; 3) granulated sugar; 4) crocodile	sha ka ra
ཤ་ཀ་ཤི་ལ	precious stone, gem	sha ka shi la
ཤ་ཀུའི་འབྲས	sami tree	sha ku'i 'bras
ཤ་ཀོན	[arch] sha 'khon nam dgra sha	sha kon
ཤ་ཀྱ	race to which last buddha belonged	sha kya
ཤ་ཀྱ་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the shakyas	sha kya rgyal po
ཤ་ཀྱ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	celebrated lama	sha kya rgyal mtshan
ཤཱ་ཀྱ་མཆོག་ལྡན	gser mdog pan chen, 1428-1507	shA kya mchog ldan
ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་ཆེན	an earlier buddha	sha kya thub chen
ཤཱ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ	Shakyamuni; Shakya Sage; twelfth of {ston pa bcu gnyis}; Gautama Buddha	shA kya thub pa
ཤཱ་ཀྱ་དེ་མ	Shakyadema - Mindemanation of Vajra Varahi	shA kya de ma
ཤ་ཀྱ་དེ་ཝི	Shakyadevi. The daughter of the Nepalese king Punyedhara. She is one of the five chief female disciples of Padmasambhava. Since her mother died during her birth, she was abandoned in a charnel grou...	sha kya de wi
ཤཱ་ཀྱ་མིང་ཆེན	Sakyan nobleman Mahanaman	shA kya ming chen
ཤ་ཀྱ་མུ་ནེ	Shakyamuni	sha kya mu ne
ཤ་ཀྱ་བཟང་པོ	{yol mo gter chen}	sha kya bzang po
ཤ་ཀྱ་འོད	Shakyaprabha; Born in Kashmir, he was a disciple of Punyakirti and Shatiprabha. He wrote several treatises on Vinaya	sha kya 'od
ཤ་ཀྱ་ལག་ན	father in law of buddha	sha kya lag na
ཤ་ཀྱ་ལག་ན་བེ་ཅོན	shakya who carries a club in his hand (father-in-law of buddha)	sha kya lag na be con
ཤ་ཀྱ་ཤྲཱི	Shakya Shri. A Tibetan mahasiddha of the 19th century belong chiefly to the Drukpa Kagyü lineage	sha kya shrI
ཤཱ་ཀྱ་བཤེས་གཉེན	Shakyamitra, Indian pandita who maintained the nonpartisan Prasangika view	shA kya bshes gnyen
ཤ་ཀྱ་སེང་གེ	Shakya Senge. One of the eight manifestations of Padmasambhava	sha kya seng ge
ཤཱ་ཀྱའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	{sngon sha' kya'i grong khyer ser skya} Long ago in Kapilavastu, the city of the Sakyas,	shA kya'i grong khyer
ཤཱ་ཀྱའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the twelfth of the {rdzogs chen ston pa bcu gnyis}	shA kya'i rgyal po
ཤཱ་ཀྱའི་མཛད་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the Buddha's twelve deeds	shA kya'i mdzad pa bcu gnyis
ཤ་ཀྱའི་སེང་གེ	Shakya Singha, the Buddha	sha kya'i seng ge
ཤ་ཀྲད	deer horn thumb ring	sha krad
ཤ་ཀྲིང	canned meat	sha kring
ཤ་ཀླད	mi'i klad pa like meat	sha klad
ཤ་དཀར	light flesh color, tin	sha dkar
ཤ་བཀྲ	vein, cutaneous disease, white leprosy	sha bkra
ཤ་བཀྲག	beautiful appearance	sha bkrag
ཤ་བཀྲག་དྭངས	brilliant complexion	sha bkrag dwangs
ཤ་སྐད	cawing or croaking of raven, cry of the stag	sha skad
ཤ་སྐམ་པོ	thin, lean, bony, skinny	sha skam po
ཤ་སྐམ་པོ་མི	thin person	sha skam po mi
ཤ་སྐམ་མ	Kashmiri saffron	sha skam ma
ཤ་སྐེམ་པོ	1) emaciated flesh; 2) poor quality meat	sha skem po
ཤ་སྐྱ	mostly white deer living in places w few spang ri and forests	sha skya
ཤ་སྐྱི	body flesh and shun pa [scaly?'am skyi mo [cracks?	sha skyi
ཤ་སྐྱོ་བ	emaciated	sha skyo ba
ཤ་སྐྲན	1) khog pa'i swelling disease; 2) flesh swelling starting in the skin; 3) cancer	sha skran
ཤ་ཁ	flesh color	sha kha
ཤ་ཁ་མ	Kashmiri saffron	sha kha ma
ཤ་ཁ་ར	1) sugar cane; 2) molasses gyi dvangs ma; 3) flesh color	sha kha ra
ཤ་ཁང	butcher shop	sha khang
ཤ་ཁུ	broth, gravy	sha khu
ཤ་ཁུ་ཤ་ཐིམ	something that has to go back where it came from	sha khu sha thim
ཤ་ཁུག	bag in which powdered dried meat is kept by travellers	sha khug
ཤ་ཁེབས	gdong gi pags steng la chags pa'i skyi mdog nag khra	sha khebs
ཤ་ཁོག	a carcass 2708	sha khog
ཤ་ཁོན	sha 'khon	sha khon
ཤ་ཁོལ་བུར་འཕར་བ	part of the skin trembling	sha khol bur 'phar ba
ཤ་ཁྱི	hunting dog	sha khyi
ཤ་ཁྲ	bile	sha khra
ཤ་ཁྲག	flesh and blood, bloody	sha khrag
ཤ་ཁྲག་གི་ཕུང་པོ	heap of flesh and blood	sha khrag gi phung po
ཤ་ཁྲག་གི་འབྲེལ་བ	blood relationship	sha khrag gi 'brel ba
ཤ་ཁྲག་གི་ཟས	food made of flesh and blood	sha khrag gi zas
ཤ་ཁྲག་སྒྲིབ	chu rgyus [ligament?]	sha khrag sgrib
ཤ་ཁྲག་གཅིག་འབྲེལ	closely related, blood relationship	sha khrag gcig 'brel
ཤ་ཁྲག་གཏོར་མ	toma of flesh and blood	sha khrag gtor ma
ཤ་ཁྲག་འཛིན་པ	skin	sha khrag 'dzin pa
ཤ་ཁྲག་རུས	flesh, blood and bone	sha khrag rus
ཤ་ཁྲག་རུས་པ	meat, blood & bones sha khrag rus pa'i gzugs phung 'dra ba like a mass of flesh, blood and bones sha khrag gsar pa ma sbyin na srin po 'di	sha khrag rus pa
ནི་མི་ཚིམ	if I do not give the demon freshly killed meat, the demon will continue to suffer	ni mi tshim
ཤ་ཁྲག་གསལ་བ	sound body	sha khrag gsal ba
ཤ་ཁྲི	1) gri gung btsan po's oldest son sa skal du kong po thob pa de'o; 2) platform for putting meat	sha khri
ཤ་ཁྲིམས་བསྡམས་པ	ban on butchering when rain does not fall and in the saga month	sha khrims bsdams pa
ཤ་ཁྲོམ	meat market	sha khrom
ཤ་མཁོན	flesh-debt, killing debts	sha mkhon
ཤ་མཁོན་ཁྱེར་བ	repay a flesh debt	sha mkhon khyer ba
ཤ་མཁྲེགས	sha ro on the skin	sha mkhregs
ཤ་འཁོན	enmity/ grudge, anger, resentment, hatred [from killing another]	sha 'khon
ཤ་འཁོན་ཞུགས	bearing grudge against a person, harboring enmity	sha 'khon zhugs
ཤ་འཁྲིག་པ	sexual instinct	sha 'khrig pa
ཤ་གང	place in tibet	sha gang
ཤ་གོན	TSE	sha gon
ཤ་གོས	lower garment	sha gos
ཤ་གྲི	1) knife for cutting up meat; 2) knife for cutting up ko ba'i sha	sha gri
ཤ་གྲུམ	podagra, feeling of lameness in the limbs	sha grum
ཤ་དགའ	rakshasa	sha dga'
ཤ་འགུགས	curled flesh or body, flower of the tree butea frondosa	sha 'gugs
ཤ་འགྱུར	blood	sha 'gyur
ཤ་རྒོད	hard body flesh	sha rgod
ཤ་རྒོད་ལོག་པ	impaired strength, lus thang chad pa	sha rgod log pa
ཤ་རྒྱགས	fat meat	sha rgyags
ཤ་རྒྱགས་པ	1) fat; 2) fatty meat	sha rgyags pa
ཤ་རྒྱས	healthy corpulence	sha rgyas
ཤ་རྒྱས་པ	[get] fat	sha rgyas pa
ཤ་རྒྱུས	muscle	sha rgyus
ཤ་རྒྱུས་མཉམ་ཆོད	don tshan khag gnyis thag mnyam du chod pa'i dpe	sha rgyus mnyam chod
ཤ་སྒ	1) camel back hump nyag ka can; 2) camel back sha lcog	sha sga
ཤ་སྒོག	mt growing {sgog pa} zhig	sha sgog
ཤ་སྒྲེན	tumor (?)	sha sgren
ཤ་སྒྲོ	1) leather meat pouch; 2) deerskin pouch	sha sgro
ཤ་བརྒྱུད	matrilineal line	sha brgyud
ཤ་རྔམས	sha bongs	sha rngams
ཤ་རྔོད་པ	roast meat	sha rngod pa
ཤ་རྔོན	fry/ roast meat	sha rngon
ཤ་ལྔ	five meats, five meats (elephant, human, horse, dog, ox or peacock)	sha lnga
ཤ་ལྔ་བདུད་རྩི་ལྔ	the five meats and the five nectars	sha lnga bdud rtsi lnga
ཤ་སྔོན་ཅན	a heretical lama of tibet	sha sngon can
ཤ་ཅན	fleshy, meaty, fibrous root, medicinal plant called katki	sha can
ཤ་གཅིག་པ	1) sibling w the same mother; 2) [arch] of 1 mind/ opinion	sha gcig pa
ཤ་གཅུས	w thumb and finger the body's flesh and skin gcu ril rgyag pa [pinch?]	sha gcus
ཤ་གཅོད་པ	castrate	sha gcod pa
ཤ་བཅད	outlining of flesh	sha bcad
ཤ་བཅད་རྒྱག་པ	ri mo'i gzugs la bcad ris rgyag pa	sha bcad rgyag pa
ཤ་བཅུད	pinch	sha bcud
ཤ་བཅུད་རྒྱག	pinch	sha bcud rgyag
ཤ་བཅུད་གསུམ	3 kinds of flesh (sha chen tshon po, sram gyi sha, 'phyi ba'i sha)	sha bcud gsum
ཤ་ཆགས་པ	[arch] 1) blo la yod pa'am blo la chags pa; 2) mthug pa'am brling ba	sha chags pa
ཤ་ཆང	meat and chang, food and enjoyment	sha chang
ཤ་ཆང་བུད་མེད	meat, wine, and women	sha chang bud med
ཤ་ཆང་ཟན་གསུམ	meat, liquor and dough/ bread etc. [the three minimum materiels 1 has to gather for a feast offering]	sha chang zan gsum
ཤ་ཆུ	bya gong ma sreg	sha chu
ཤ་ཆུང་བ	thin, emaciated	sha chung ba
ཤ་ཆེན	human flesh	sha chen
ཤ་ཆེན་ལྔ	five meats	sha chen lnga
ཤ་ཆེན་སྣ་ལྔ	sha lnga	sha chen sna lnga
ཤ་ཆེན་ཚོན་པོ	human flesh, 1 of sha bcud gsum	sha chen tshon po
ཤ་ཆོབ	spang ri dang nags ri sogs la skyes pa'i sha mong zhan gras	sha chob
ཤ་མཆོག	heart	sha mchog
ཤ་འཇུམ་པ	contraction of the muscles, shrinking	sha 'jum pa
ཤཱ་རྗེ་དབང་པོ	mighty lord of the Shakyas	shA rje dbang po
ཤ་རྗེན	1) raw meat; 2) naked	sha rjen
ཤ་རྗེན་ཟ	rakshasa	sha rjen za
ཤ་ཉམས	1) emaciated; 2) shape of body flesh bzo dbyibs	sha nyams
ཤ་ཉམས་རྒྱས	health & ill-health	sha nyams rgyas
ཤ་ཉམས་རྒྱས་ཤིང	healthy corpulence	sha nyams rgyas shing
ཤ་ཉམས་རྒྱས་ཤིང་རྒྱགས་པ	become healthy after illness	sha nyams rgyas shing rgyags pa
ཤ་ཉེ	sibling, relative, descendant	sha nye
ཤ་ཉོག་རུས་ཉོག་ཆག་ཉིལ	people and horses many hundreds sha nyog rus nyog tu btang	sha nyog rus nyog chag nyil
ཤ་ཏ	hundred	sha ta
ཤ་ཏོ་ར	[Skt] food vessel w long legs	sha to ra
ཤ་ཏྲེམ	sha la babs and mostly from phlegm and bile grum nad	sha trem
ཤ་གཏུབ་པ	cut meat into pieces, mince	sha gtub pa
ཤ་གཏུབ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གྲི	knife for cutting up meat	sha gtub byed kyi gri
ཤ་རྟགས	birthmark 2709	sha rtags
ཤ་སྟ	SA klu	sha sta
ཤ་སྟག	all/ only; only, simply; only, nothing but, else, other, solely, just, merely; only, nothing but, else, other, solely, just, merely, consecration ceremony	sha stag
ཤ་སྟགས	lucky or unlucky marks on the body	sha stags
ཤ་སྟོན	consecration ceremony	sha ston
ཤ་སྟོབས	body strength/ health	sha stobs
ཤ་སྟྲ	treatises	sha stra
ཤ་ཐག	horse saddle's sha thag rgyun bu	sha thag
ཤ་ཐང	CM: sha'i khu ba, meat sauce/broth. R75: 212.2 [mss]	sha thang
ཤ་ཐང་ཆད	be exhausted	sha thang chad
ཤ་ཐང་ཆད་ཆད	with all one's strength sha thang chad chad bar du phyugs rigs la	sha thang chad chad
བཀོལ་སྤྱོད་མ་བྱེད	don't work cattle when they are exhausted	bkol spyod ma byed
ཤ་ཐང་ཆད་པ	be exhausted	sha thang chad pa
ཤ་ཐང་ཐང	sha zad zad	sha thang thang
ཤ་ཐང་བ	great difficulty/ hardship and exhaustion sha zad pa	sha thang ba
ཤ་ཐུག	soup mostly of meat	sha thug
ཤ་ཐུད	meat and cheese sha thud kyi zas ri bo ltar spungs pa meat and cheese piled like a mt sha thog mar rtseg sha bza' rgyu yod thog	sha thud
མར་ཡང་བཟའ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ་སྟེ	be good and again good occurring	mar yang bza' rgyu yod pa ste
ཤ་ཐོར་རུས་ཐོར	destroy flesh and bones, rip to shreds, annihilate	sha thor rus thor
ཤ་མཐང	lower body flesh	sha mthang
ཤ་འཐུག་པོ	1) sha rgyags pa; 2) smyug ma sha 'thug po lta bu	sha 'thug po
ཤ་འཐོགས་པ་པོ	one who places the meat	sha 'thogs pa po
ཤ་འཐོར	rus 'thor, randomly scattered	sha 'thor
ཤ་དག	mere, merely, only	sha dag
ཤ་དང་པགས་པ	flesh and skin	sha dang pags pa
ཤ་དུག	gyur dug occurring after eating meat	sha dug
ཤ་དུས	month january when meat is cured and rent paid	sha dus
ཤ་དྲོད	gos kyi dang po sha drod la	sha drod
གཅར	Your first clothing was the warmth of your mother's body as she held you close to her	gcar
ཤ་མདངས	the shading of flesh yellowish flesh color	sha mdangs
ཤ་མདོག	skin/ [meat] color	sha mdog
ཤ་མདོག་ཅན་གྱི་རས	skin/ meat colored cotton	sha mdog can gyi ras
ཤ་མདོག་མི་འདྲ་བའི་མི་རིགས	races of different skin color	sha mdog mi 'dra ba'i mi rigs
ཤ་མདོག་ཚོས་གཞི	skin/ [meat] color sha rdog sha dum bur gtubs pa'i rdog po sha rdog sgang la mar rdog gos chen sgang la phar phyin	sha mdog tshos gzhi
ཤ་སྡུག་ཁྱི་སྡུག	deer suffers, dogs suffer	sha sdug khyi sdug
ཤ་སྡུག་ཁྱི་སྡུག་རྔོན་པ་སྡུག	deer suffers, dogs suffer, hunter suffers	sha sdug khyi sdug rngon pa sdug
ཤ་སྡུག་འབུ་སྡུག	deer suffers, bugs suffer	sha sdug 'bu sdug
ཤ་ན	[Skt] hemp, marijuana, flax	sha na
ཤ་ནའི་གོས	cloth of flax, garment made of fine linen	sha na'i gos
ཤ་ནའི་གོས་ཅན	[Skt] w hempen garments, arhat	sha na'i gos can
ཤ་ནའི་རས	fine linen	sha na'i ras
ཤ་ནས་ཆད་པ	of my own blood [sons -]	sha nas chad pa
ཤ་གནག	flesh	sha gnag
ཤ་གནག་ནག་པོ	under the neck vertebrae sha zhig	sha gnag nag po
ཤ་གནད	in the human body sha'i gnad kyi gtso bo	sha gnad
ཤ་སྣག	meat w/o sinew, bone and fat	sha snag
ཤ་པ	1) {sha pa} tree, aa ka ru; 2) dgra sha len mkhan; 3) butcher	sha pa
ཤ་པ་སྨད་མ	{sha pa smad ma} district	sha pa smad ma
ཤ་པོས	thick blanket	sha pos
ཤ་ལྤགས	flesh and skin	sha lpags
ཤ་སྤུ	meat and hair	sha spu
ཤ་སྤྱིན	meat-jelly, slime	sha spyin
ཤ་ཕིང	kind of tea, meat cooked with pea vermicelli	sha phing
ཤ་ཕོ	buck, male dear	sha pho
ཤ་ཕོ་རུ་རྟ	medicinal plant costus speciosus	sha pho ru rta
ཤ་ཕྱི་ལ་འབུར་བ	protruding flesh	sha phyi la 'bur ba
ཤ་ཕྱིས	by potter new clay rdza gsar par 'jam sha 'don byed sha ba'i pags pa lhe pa zhig	sha phyis
ཤ་ཕྲག	meat and gaps	sha phrag
ཤ་ཕྲུག	fawn	sha phrug
ཤ་འཕྲུ	bird's crest	sha 'phru
ཤ་བ	deer	sha ba
ཤ་བ་ངུ་བ	deer calling	sha ba ngu ba
ཤ་བ་ཆེན	stag, male deer	sha ba chen
ཤ་བ་རྣ་བ	country in east of india	sha ba rna ba
ཤ་བ་ཕོ	buck, hart stag	sha ba pho
ཤ་བ་མོ	doe	sha ba mo
ཤ་བ་རི	hunter	sha ba ri
ཤ་བ་རི་རྣམས	the hunters	sha ba ri rnams
ཤ་བ་རི་པ	Shavaripa	sha ba ri pa
ཤ་བ་རི་ཞེས་ཁྱི་ར་བ	a group of hunters led by one called Shavari	sha ba ri zhes khyi ra ba
ཤ་བ་རུ་རྒྱས	rite of deer with branched antlers	sha ba ru rgyas
ཤ་བག་ལེབ	meat filled fried bread/ pancake	sha bag leb
ཤ་བམ	rotten meat	sha bam
ཤ་བའི་ཁྲག	deer blood animal med	sha ba'i khrag
ཤ་བའི་ག་དོར	growth of a new branch on a stag's horn	sha ba'i ga dor
ཤ་བའི་གླིང་བུ	deer call flute	sha ba'i gling bu
ཤ་བའི་བོག་རབ༹	{sha ba'i bog rva} [khrag rva] animal med.	sha ba'i bog rva
ཤ་བའི་འབག	'cham chas sam lha mo ba'i chas kyi gras shig	sha ba'i 'bag
ཤ་བའི་ཚིལ་བུ	deer fat animal med.	sha ba'i tshil bu
ཤ་བའི་རབ༹་རྒན	old deer horn animal med.	sha ba'i rva rgan
ཤ་བལ	1) sa thog la chags pa'i sa zhag sngon po; 2) sa dreg ste sa gzhi ba tsva can la chags pa'i dkar sha lta bu	sha bal
ཤ་བུབས	sha khog	sha bubs
ཤ་བུར	boil, abscess, ulcer, mark left by a lash, weal	sha bur
ཤ་བེ་ཤོབ་བེ	inferior [things]	sha be shob be
ཤ་བེམ	flesh, body	sha bem
ཤ་བེམ་སྐྲངས་པ	swollen flesh/ body	sha bem skrangs pa
ཤ་བོ	dvangs ma dang chief/ principal, //dgra sha bo	sha bo
ཤ་བོ་སྒང་པ	Shawopa, or Shawo Gangpa; 1067-1131, a disciple of Langri Tangpa; (glang ri thang pa) and of	sha bo sgang pa
ཐེ་ཋྲེཨེ་བྲོཐེརས	- Putowa; (pu to ba), Chengnawa; (spyan snga ba), and Puchungwa; (phu chung ba)--the three main disciples of Dromtönpa; ('brom ston pa)	the Three Brothers
ཤ་བོ་ངལ་སོས	rdog khres khur nas dka' las byung skabs gsig tsam byas pas ngal sangs pa	sha bo ngal sos
ཤ་བོ་རུ་རྟ	{ru rta} field herb	sha bo ru rta
ཤ་བླང	Shalang, in Domey	sha blang
ཤ་འབུ	flies/ maggots [on meat]	sha 'bu
ཤ་འབུར	protruding flesh	sha 'bur
ཤ་འབྲས	rice mixed with small pieces of meat	sha 'bras
ཤ་སྦོས	swollen flesh	sha sbos
ཤ་སྦྱང	gteg byed kyi nya ga	sha sbyang
ཤ་སྦྲང	meat flies	sha sbrang
ཤ་མ	1) umbilicus, placenta, afterbirth; 2) sha ma bird; 3) divine clothing	sha ma
ཤ་མ་ཙིལ	meat and fat mixed	sha ma tsil
ཤ་མ་ཟ་མཁན	vegetarian	sha ma za mkhan
ཤ་མ་ཤིག་མ	comp. {khral ma khrol ma}	sha ma shig ma
ཤ་མང	{sha mang} med. herb	sha mang
ཤ་མའི་སྣོད	phyi nas g.yogs pa'i shun pa srab mo	sha ma'i snod
ཤ་མི་ཟ	not to eat meat	sha mi za
ཤ་མིའེ	shrimp	sha mi'e
ཤ་མེད	vegetarian, fleshless, emaciated, a hell	sha med
ཤ་མེད་རུས་པ	bar-bone, skeleton, bones when stripped of flesh and skin	sha med rus pa
ཤ་མོ	1) deer, doe; 2) mushroom; 3) lug gi tsang ra	sha mo
ཤ་མོ་རིགས	fungi	sha mo rigs
ཤ་མོ་རིགས་ཤིག	toadstool	sha mo rigs shig
ཤ་མོག་མོག	steamed stuffed bun	sha mog mog
ཤ་མོང	mushroom	sha mong
ཤ་དམར	raw meat, reddish flesh color	sha dmar
ཤ་དམར་པོ	raw meat	sha dmar po
ཤ་དམར་ཟ་བ	eat raw meat	sha dmar za ba
ཤ་རྨེན	fleshy tumor, lump in the muscular flesh	sha rmen
ཤ་སྨན	spice bringing out taste of meat	sha sman
ཤ་གཙང་རུས་གཙང	family lineage not mixed w others	sha gtsang rus gtsang
ཤ་བཙོ	cook meat	sha btso
ཤ་བཙོན	1) slaughter pen; 2) prison for the enemy	sha btson
ཤ་བཙོས	cooked meat	sha btsos
ཤ་བཙོས་པའི་ཁུ་བ	broth of boiled meat	sha btsos pa'i khu ba
ཤ་རྩི	skin/ meat color	sha rtsi
ཤ་རྩི་ཚོས་གཞི	skin/ [meat] color	sha rtsi tshos gzhi
ཤ་རྩིད་རྒོ་རྩིད	wool like antelope hair	sha rtsid rgo rtsid
ཤ་ཚ	love, affection, concern for/ fondness; sympathy, poor thing!, {nga la ba} was very fond of me, loving, dear; affection	sha tsha
ཤ་ཚ་ཅན	amicable, attached	sha tsha can
ཤ་ཚ་ཆེ་བ	love ardently	sha tsha che ba
ཤ་ཚ་བ	affectionate	sha tsha ba
ཤ་ཚ་བའི་གཏམ	affectionate talk	sha tsha ba'i gtam
ཤ་ཚ་མེད	without affection	sha tsha med
ཤ་ཚ་མེད་པ	heartless	sha tsha med pa
ཤ་ཚ་ཡི་གནས་མེད་པ	1) no point in pitying. 2) ungrateful	sha tsha yi gnas med pa
ཤ་ཚན	1) maternal relatives; 2) body flesh dron mo	sha tshan
ཤ་ཚན་དམར་པོ	tumor resembling a weal or a wart	sha tshan dmar po
ཤ་ཚིལ	fat of meat/ flesh	sha tshil
ཤ་ཚུགས	lus kyi bzo lta	sha tshugs
ཤ་ཚེ	gsha' dkar	sha tshe
ཤ་མཚན	lucky or unlucky marks on the body	sha mtshan
ཤ་མཚན་དམར་པོ	red mole/ birthmark	sha mtshan dmar po
ཤ་འཚོང་ས	place meat is sold, butcher shop	sha 'tshong sa
ཤ་འཚོད་པ	boil meat	sha 'tshod pa
ཤ་མཛེར	lus kyi sha mdzer	sha mdzer
ཤ་འཛར	sha'i lam rgyags	sha 'dzar
ཤ་འཛིན	hook for cooked meat w handle, fork, prong	sha 'dzin
ཤ་འཛེར	wart	sha 'dzer
ཤ་འཛེར་ཅན	one having warts in his skin	sha 'dzer can
ཤ་རྫོང་རི་ཁྲོད	{sha rdzong ri khrod}	sha rdzong ri khrod
ཤ་ཝ་རི	Variant spelling of {sha ba ri pa}, see infra. E.g., R75: 326.1. [mss]	sha wa ri
ཤ་ཞིན་མེད་པ	disloyal, unpatriotic, patriotism	sha zhin med pa
ཤ་ཞུ་བ	1) lus kyi sha bri ba; 2) sha 'khyag zhu ba	sha zhu ba
ཤ་ཞེན	allegiance, attachment, fondness	sha zhen
ཤ་ཞེན་ཅན	loyal, patriotic	sha zhen can
ཤ་ཞེན་ཆེ་བ	affection and attachment, loyalty	sha zhen che ba
ཤ་ཞེན་མེད་པ	disloyal	sha zhen med pa
ཤ་གཞའ	sha'u mi skye ba'i wound	sha gzha'
ཤ་ཟ	Pishachi; the "demons"; one of {skad rigs chen po bzhi} four great language groups	sha za
ཕ༹ླེཤ	eater spirits	flesh
ཤ་ཟ་ཁྲག་འཐུང	rakshasa	sha za khrag 'thung
ཤ་ཟ་མཁན	carnivore	sha za mkhan
ཤ་ཟ་མཁན་གྱི	carnivorous	sha za mkhan gyi
ཤ་ཟ་མཁན་བྱ་རིགས་ཀྱི་ཚང	aerie	sha za mkhan bya rigs kyi tshang
ཤ་ཟ་ལྕེ་སྤྱང་གདོང	1) demon w jackal head; 2) a door guard deity	sha za lce spyang gdong
ཤ་ཟ་ཆེན་པོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	sha za chen po
ཤ་ཟ་མོ	kind of flesh-eating demon	sha za mo
ཤ་ཟ་སྲིན་པོ	cannibal, hobgoblin	sha za srin po
ཤ་ཟ་ཧོར་མ	Shasa Horma or Shasa Khamoche (sha za kha mo che), a female protector	sha za hor ma
ཤ་ཟན	meat eater, flesh-eater, carnivorous animal, class of demons	sha zan
ཤ་ཟའི་སྐད	pi shA tshi	sha za'i skad
ཤ་ཟའི་གླིང	city/ country of the rakshasas	sha za'i gling
ཤ་ཟའི་མདུང་ཐུང་འཛིན་པ	gdong drug, son of dbang phyug chen po	sha za'i mdung thung 'dzin pa
ཤ་ཟིང་སྤུ་ཟིང	hairs standing on end from fear	sha zing spu zing
ཤ་ཟུག	SA zug	sha zug
ཤ་ཟུངས	meat hook	sha zungs
ཤ་ཟོང	dry flesh, one who eats flesh	sha zong
ཤ་ཟོས་ནས་བྱུང་བའི	gyur dug occurring after eating meat 2711	sha zos nas byung ba'i
ཤ་གཟན	meat-eater	sha gzan
ཤ་གཟིག་བདུ	kind of disease, white leprosy	sha gzig bdu
ཤ་གཟུག	SA zug	sha gzug
ཤ་གཟུགས	material body	sha gzugs
ཤ་གཟུགས་མ	lham mgo lham mthil bcas sha rkyang gi gzugs dbyibs can gyi ko lham zhig ste dbus gtsang gi grva lham dmigs bsal can zhig	sha gzugs ma
ཤ་བཟན	big mature ram	sha bzan
ཤ་འུག་སྟག་སྒོ	{sha 'ug stag sgo} [gtsang phyogs kyi secret hidden valley in lha rtse rdzong	sha 'ug stag sgo
ཤ་འོད	blood	sha 'od
ཤ་ཡི་སྐྱུ་རུམ	sauce made of vinegar for meat	sha yi skyu rum
ཤ་ཡི་གོང་བུ	lump of flesh, senseless person	sha yi gong bu
ཤ་ཡི་མཆོག	heart, seat of life	sha yi mchog
ཤ་ཡི་སྤྱན	the flesh-eye/ ordinary eye	sha yi spyan
ཤ་ཡི་བུར་བུ	mdzer pa on the skin	sha yi bur bu
ཤ་ཡི་མིག	the eye of flesh	sha yi mig
ཤ་ཡི་ཟང་ཟིང	meat, fish, animal food	sha yi zang zing
ཤ་ཡི་ཟས་ཅན	1) predator; 2) rakshasa; 3) flesh eater	sha yi zas can
ཤ་ཡི་རི་མོ	spots on the skin, stripes on the skin	sha yi ri mo
ཤ་ཡི་ལུས་བཅུད	blood	sha yi lus bcud
ཤ་ཡི་ས་བོན	blood	sha yi sa bon
ཤ་ཡོད་པགས་ཡོད	what is directly there to see or blta rin yod pa'i dpe	sha yod pags yod
ཤ་ར	deer park, deer horn	sha ra
ཤ་ར་པ	an indian saint	sha ra pa
ཤ་ར་བ	{sha ra ba}	sha ra ba
ཤ་ར་འབིགས་བྱེད	arrow	sha ra 'bigs byed
ཤ་ར་མ་ར	direct unobstructed [running]	sha ra ma ra
ཤ་ར་ཡུ་གུར	a district in Tibet	sha ra yu gur
ཤ་ར་ར	1) unobstructed, directly thar ba'i tshul; 2) sound of whirling storm winds, strong rain, busy and noisy movement; 3) rise up and abound; 4) shimmer; 5) racing along, streams and streams	sha ra ra
ཤ་ར་ཤོ་རེ	moist	sha ra sho re
ཤ་ར་བྷ	[Skt] king of beasts 8 legged lion	sha ra bha
ཤ་རབ༹	antlers	sha rva
ཤ་རག	dried apricots with little pulp and almost as hard as stones	sha rag
ཤ་རར	kind of sugar, refined sugar	sha rar
ཤ་རི	{ri skyegs} bird	sha ri
ཤཱ་རི་བུ	Syn {shA ra dwa ti'i bu} Shariputra, one of the two foremost disciples of Buddha	shA ri bu
ཤ་རི་རམ	jewel-like relics	sha ri ram
ཤ་རི་ཤུ་རི	to whisper	sha ri shu ri
ཤ་རིགས	meats	sha rigs
ཤ་རིད་པ	thin, emaciated	sha rid pa
ཤ་རིད་དབུགས་ཉམས	weak and emaciated	sha rid dbugs nyams
ཤཱ་རིའི་བུ	arhat of the Abhidharma tradition; one of the compilers of the Abhidharma	shA ri'i bu
གྱུར་ཏེ	she became Shariputra, brilliant and wise	gyur te
ཤ་རིལ	1) sha btsabs nas ril mo bzos pa'i food; 2) ring bsrel sku spur	sha ril
ཤ་རུ	stag horn	sha ru
ཤ་རུ་རྫུ་བའི་རྒྱུ་མ	entrails feigning to be flesh	sha ru rdzu ba'i rgyu ma
ཤ་རུད་པ	1) dried meat; 2) emaciated, thin [body flesh]	sha rud pa
ཤ་རུད་པ་མི	thin person	sha rud pa mi
ཤ་རུའི་ཐོ་བ	stag horn hammer	sha ru'i tho ba
ཤ་རུའི་ལིངས་འདེབས	stag horn --	sha ru'i lings 'debs
ཤ་རུལ	rotten meat	sha rul
ཤ་རུས	flesh and bone	sha rus
ཤ་རུས་གཅིག་པ	sibling	sha rus gcig pa
ཤ་རུས་གཅིག་པའི་སྤུན་མཆེད	sibling of the same family	sha rus gcig pa'i spun mched
ཤ་རུས་འབྲལ་མེད	inseparable flesh and bone, tight connection	sha rus 'bral med
ཤ་རེ་བ	1) quickly, right away; 2) said, spoke, tsa re ba, unbroken, continuously, w/o interruption, rgyun na re ba	sha re ba
ཤ་རེ་བར་སླེབས་པ	left right away	sha re bar slebs pa
ཤ་རེ་མ་རེ	right away, at once	sha re ma re
ཤ་རེ་མ་རེར་ཡོང་བ	come right away	sha re ma rer yong ba
ཤ་རེ་ཚ	1) compassionate [//bu chung gnyis po sha re tsa]; 2) mthong chung ngam sma 'bebs kyi tshig //sdug khyod tsam 'jigs mdog sha re tsa	sha re tsha
ཤ་རེ་ཤ་རེ	'phral 'phral lam lam sang lam sang, //phar 'gro tshur yong sha re sh er gyis shig //yi ge sha re sha rer 'bri ba, //skad cha shar shar shod pa, //lam du shar shar 'gro ba	sha re sha re
ཤ་རེ་ཤོ་རེ	1) hol rgyug //las ka sha re sho rer byed pa; 2) quickly w/o delay	sha re sho re
ཤ་རོ	1) lesions of mdze nad, chu ser, pags nad etc or those w no sensation of touch near them; 2) scar etc. la chags pa'i swelling; 3) corpse	sha ro
ཤ་རོ་འབུར་པོ	protruding sha ro	sha ro 'bur po
ཤ་རོ་དྷ	lha'i yi ge	sha ro dha
ཤ་རློན	fresh meat	sha rlon
ཤ་རློན་པ	raw meat	sha rlon pa
ཤ་ལ	'khor byed, meat fly, sa zhing khod snyoms byed pa'i yo byad cig	sha la
ཤ་ལ་དགའ་བ	delighting in flesh	sha la dga' ba
ཤ་ལ་བརྒྱབ་པ	to level / even out fields	sha la brgyab pa
ཤ་ལ་གཟན་པ	hungry for flesh	sha la gzan pa
ཤ་ལ་ཡུ་རིང	rma rnams 'drub pa'i rtsi	sha la yu ring
ཤ་ལ་སྲེད་པ	craving for meat	sha la sred pa
ཤ་ལག	[arch] gnyen sbyor -	sha lag
ཤ་ལང་འབངས	{sha lang 'bangs} med. herb	sha lang 'bangs
ཤ་ལན	revenge by death for killing	sha lan
ཤ་ལམ་གྲི་བཅད	sha gcod skabs thog mar gris lam phye nas gcod dgos pa ste, las ka gang yin rung thog mar gzhi zhig bting, de nas lag len bstar dgos pa'i dpe	sha lam gri bcad
ཤ་ལི་ཧོ་ཏ	religious instruction	sha li ho ta
ཤ་ལུ	sha lu nose disease	sha lu
ཤ་ལུས	muscles	sha lus
ཤ་ལེབ	meat filled fried bread/ pancake	sha leb
ཤ་ལོ་དཀར	fair-skinned	sha lo dkar
ཤ་ལོག	warped, oblique, aslant, bloated	sha log
ཤ་ལོག་ལོག	bloated	sha log log
ཤ་ཤང	large number	sha shang
ཤ་ཤན	kind of chinese tea	sha shan
ཤ་ཤུན	[flesh &] skin	sha shun
ཤ་ཤུལ་དྲི་ཆུ	wine	sha shul dri chu
ཤ་ཤེད	animal skin['s coat] and shed mo [strength, health, fatness] appearance	sha shed
ཤ་ཤེད་སྐྱོ་པོ	thin, in poor health, w bad coat [animals]	sha shed skyo po
ཤ་ཤེད་རྒྱས	put on weight, have the coat improve, get fat	sha shed rgyas
ཤ་ཤེད་བཟང་པོ	good coat/ health/ condition, strong and healthy [animals	sha shed bzang po
ཤ་ཤེད་ཡག་པོ	good coat/ health/ condition, strong and healthy [animals	sha shed yag po
ཤ་བཤགས	lug sha byed bshags	sha bshags
ཤ་སེར	yellowish flesh color	sha ser
ཤ་སྲབ	SA sha nyams 2712	sha srab
ཤ་སྲབ་པོ	1) lus kyi sha tshan chung ba; 2) bamboo like sha srab mo lta bu	sha srab po
ཤ་སྲིན	ulcer	sha srin
ཤ་སྲེགས	roast meat	sha sregs
ཤ་སྲེགས་གཏོང	roast meat	sha sregs gtong
ཤ་སྲེད	1) craving for meat; 2) rakshasa	sha sred
ཤ་གསར	fresh meat	sha gsar
ཤ་བསྲེགས	roasted meat	sha bsregs
ཤ་བསྲེགས་གཏོང	roast meat	sha bsregs gtong
ཤ་ཧྲམ	tough meat	sha hram
ཤ་ཧྲུག	meat cut in pieces	sha hrug
ཤ་ལྷག	excrescence on any part of the body	sha lhag
ཤ་ལྷུ	1) pieces of meat cut from the body joints; 2) sha bzhi gling re	sha lhu
ཤྭ	1) torn upper lip, hare lip; 2) flood; 3) star phreng; 4) deer	shwa
ཤྭ་རྒལ	flood	shwa rgal
ཤྭ་སྒྲོས	1) torn lip, hare lip; 2) scar	shwa sgros
ཤྭ་ན	dog	shwa na
ཤྭ་ན་མ་མཆེད	Shvana Sisters	shwa na ma mched
ཤབ༹་ན་མ་མཆེད་བཞི	Four Shvana Sisters	shva na ma mched bzhi
ཤྭ་ན་མ་མུ་ཁ	[4]	shwa na ma mu kha
ཤྭ་ན་མུ་ཁ	Svanamukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	shwa na mu kha
ཤྭ་ན་མོ	class of mkha' 'gro ma	shwa na mo
ཤྭ་ནག	broad-brimmed black hat	shwa nag
ཤྭ་ཕོ	stag	shwa pho
ཤྭ་ཕྲུག	fawn	shwa phrug
ཤྭ་བ	deer	shwa ba
ཤབ༹་བ	deer	shva ba
ཤྭ་བ་རྣ་བ	country in east india	shwa ba rna ba
ཝཧོསེ་ཨིནཧབིཏནཙ་ཧབེ༹་དེཨར	like ears	whose inhabitants have dear
ཤབ༹་བ་ཕོ	stag	shva ba pho
ཤྭ་བའི་ཁྲག་རྭ	pilose antler	shwa ba'i khrag rwa
ཤྭ་བའི་མཉེན་ཞུ	the Deerskin Hat	shwa ba'i mnyen zhu
ཤྭ་བོ་སྒང	district in kham	shwa bo sgang
ཤྭ་མོ	doe	shwa mo
ཤྭ་མོའི་སྙིང	{shwa mo'i snying} mt	shwa mo'i snying
ཤྭ་དམར་ནག་གཉིས	the two Karmapas one red hat wearer and one black hat wearer	shwa dmar nag gnyis
ཤྭ་འུད	spring flood	shwa 'ud
ཤྭ་འོད	flood	shwa 'od
ཤྭ་ལ	shwa pass	shwa la
ཤྭ་ས་ན	class of brahman	shwa sa na
ཤག	1) house, dwelling, cell cubicle [usu for monks]; 2) greater than what there is/ 1 has; 3) past participle particle	shag
ཤག་གི་ཤིག་གི	crooked not in straight lines	shag gi shig gi
ཤག་གིས	all of a sudden, completely	shag gis
ཤག་ཆས	house's furniture	shag chas
ཤག་ཆུ	Shag River, in Tsari	shag chu
ཤག་ཆུ་ཁ	{shag chu kha}	shag chu kha
ཤག་ཆུང	small room/ dwelling	shag chung
ཤག་ཏི	spear, lance, pike, sword, trident	shag ti
ཤག་ཏེར་གས	broke, it burst asunder	shag ter gas
ཤག་ཐང	plain abounding with gravel, gravelly plain	shag thang
ཤག་པོ	male friend, companion	shag po
ཤག་པོ་བཟང་པོ་ཞིག་བསྒྲིགས	make a friendly deal	shag po bzang po zhig bsgrigs
ཤག་མ	stone or rock, gravel	shag ma
ཤག་མ་ཅན	gravelly	shag ma can
ཤག་མིག	[small] room/ dwelling	shag mig
ཤག་མོ	female companion, girl friend	shag mo
ཤག་མཙེས་པ	neighbor's house	shag mtses pa
ཤག་ཚང	corporate household of monks	shag tshang
ཤག་མཚེས	neighbor's house	shag mtshes
ཤག་རད	rocky ground	shag rad
ཤག་རུག	gravel	shag rug
ཤག་རོག	roommate	shag rog
ཤག་རོགས	housemate	shag rogs
ཤག་ཤག	splashing [water~]	shag shag
ཤག་ཤག་གིས	with no doubt	shag shag gis
ཤག་ས	flint & earth, ore, metal, earth mixed with pebbles, stony sterile ground	shag sa
ཤགས	joke, jest, fun, cause of contention, object of a dispute, matter in dispute, quarrel in general	shags
ཤགས་འགྱེད་པ	x. [mss]	shags 'gyed pa
ཤགས་རྒྱག་པ	make mutual jokes/ banter	shags rgyag pa
ཤགས་ཆེ་པ་བྱེད	turn into ridicule with sarcasm	shags che pa byed
ཤགས་ཆེ་པ་བྱེད་པ	rally maliciously	shags che pa byed pa
ཤང	1) small village administrative unite in CH controlled T; 2) bon equivalent of ghanta, looking rather like cymbal = gshang	shang
ཤང་ཀར	religious sect in india, epithet of maheshvara	shang kar
ཤང་ཀོང	Hong Kong	shang kong
ཤང་ཁ	conch shell	shang kha
ཤང་སྟོད་བྱ་རུ་སུམ་མདོ	place in Tibet	shang stod bya ru sum mdo
ཤང་ཐག	warp, longitudinal threads of cloth, length	shang thag
ཤང་དྲིལ	{shang dril} med. herb	shang dril
ཤང་དྲིལ་སྔོན་པོ	primula atrodentata w. w. smith	shang dril sngon po
ཤང་དྲིལ་དམར་པོ	a medicine	shang dril dmar po
ཤང་དྲིལ་སེར་པོ	primula sikkimensis hook.	shang dril ser po
ཤང་པོ	'dris sla ba and mthun sla ba ste sgam po min pa, //gshis ka shang po	shang po
ཤང་ཚེ	1) {shang tshe} med. herb; 2) (CH 'u su	shang tshe
ཤང་མཚེ་ནག་པོ	descurainia sophia (l.) webb ex prantl	shang mtshe nag po
ཤང་འོ	buttermilk	shang 'o
ཤང་ལང	1 bladed sword	shang lang
ཤང་ལེན་སྨུག་པོ	{bdud rtsi gangs sham}	shang len smug po
ཤང་ཤང	shang shang birds	shang shang
ཤང་ཤང་ཏེའུ	pheasant, partridge	shang shang te'u
ཤང་ཤང་དྲིལ་བུ	{shang shang dril bu} med. herb	shang shang dril bu
ཤང་ཤོང	#	shang shong
ཤང་ཤོང་ཆུ	chu mig, chu rdzing	shang shong chu
ཤང་ཤོངས	high & low, any undulating surface shang shos ri gzar gyi chu dang 'dra ba like the force of water cascading over a waterfall 2713	shang shongs
ཤངས	nose, shang. Bönpo musical instrument	shangs
ཤངས་ཀྱི་པོང་ཚལ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	shangs kyi pong tshal
ཤངས་ཀྱི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of the nose [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, shangs mtho ba dang, shangs mchog tu dag pa'o]	shangs kyi dpe byad gnyis
ཤངས་ཀྱི་ཟབ་བུ་ལུང	Sabbu land of Shang	shangs kyi zab bu lung
ཤངས་སྐྱོར	bent nose	shangs skyor
ཤངས་ཁུང	nostril [h]	shangs khung
ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར	{shangs dga' ldan chos 'khor	shangs dga' ldan chos 'khor
ཤངས་ཆུ	shangs river	shangs chu
ཤངས་མཆོག་ཏུ་དག་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a high nose * [h]	shangs mchog tu dag pa'i dpe byad
ཤངས་ཐ	snuff	shangs tha
ཤངས་ཐག	snuff	shangs thag
ཤངས་མཐོ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of a high nose * [h]	shangs mtho ba'i dpe byad
ཤངས་དྲིལ	tambourine	shangs dril
ཤངས་སྣ	nose	shangs sna
ཤངས་པ	{shangs pa bka' brgyud	shangs pa
ཤངས་པ་བཀའ་རྒྱུད	sect of bka' rgyud	shangs pa bka' rgyud
ཤངས་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	Shangpa Kagyü	shangs pa bka' brgyud
ཤངས་པ་གསེར་ཆོས་ལྔ	five golden doctrines of the shangpas [The root is the six doctrines of niguma {rtsa ba ni gu chos drug} the trunk is the Amuletbox precept of the great seal {phyag chen ga'u ma} the branches are t...	shangs pa gser chos lnga
ཤངས་ཕྱིས	handkerchief [h]	shangs phyis
ཤངས་འཕྱིད	handkerchief [h]	shangs 'phyid
ཤངས་འཕྱིས	handkerchief [h]	shangs 'phyis
ཤངས་རྩ་གསེར	place in shangs	shangs rtsa gser
ཤངས་རྩེ	tip of the nose	shangs rtse
ཤངས་མཚལ	blood in/ from the nose [h]	shangs mtshal
ཤངས་རུ	snuff box/ horn [h]	shangs ru
ཤངས་ལང	sabre	shangs lang
ཤད	straight, perpendicular, punctuation mark, the vertical line marking the end of clauses, bull	shad
ཤད་ཀྱི་རྒྱ	sign/ shad indicating a line of verse /	shad kyi rgya
ཤད་སྐྲ	comb	shad skra
ཤད་སྐྲ་པ	comb	shad skra pa
ཤད་རྒྱག་པ	brush, stroke, rub gently	shad rgyag pa
ཤད་དེ་བརྐྱང	stretch out	shad de brkyang
ཤད་དེན་བ་ཞུགས	seated in shining light	shad den ba zhugs
ཤད་པ	{shad pa, bshad pa, bshad pa, shod} trans. v	shad pa
ཤད་སྦྱངས	1) encountering a task 1 can't do by 1self, not just leaving in an untimely way telling the situation straightforwardly by gentle words; 2) eliminate the evil deeds of others instruct by gentle spe...	shad sbyangs
ཤད་སྦྱོང	exercise	shad sbyong
ཤད་མ	comb	shad ma
ཤད་མོ	three year old female cattle	shad mo
ཤད་མཚམས	breaks between words etc	shad mtshams
ཤད་བཟང་པོ	sheep skin etc thick and soft	shad bzang po
ཤད་འོག	snam bu shad ma las spus ka cung zhan pa zhig	shad 'og
ཤད་ཡར	yak calf one year old	shad yar
ཤད་ཤད	1) suddenly, abruptly; 2) 'dzings bkrol pa, remove the fur?	shad shad
ཤན	1) boat; 2) adulteration, admixture; 3) divide, discriminate; 4) bonds ties; 5) metal band; 6) snow leopard; 7) slaughter; 8) cleaver; 9) CH administrative unit shan = hsien	shan
ཤན་ཀྲང	head of CH administrative unit shan = hsien	shan krang
ཤན་སྐྱེས	innate	shan skyes
ཤན་ཁ	wharf, dock	shan kha
ཤན་ཁ་གྲུ་ཁ	the Shenka boat landing	shan kha gru kha
ཤན་ཁང	slaughter house, butcher's shop	shan khang
ཤན་གྱི་རྣམ་བཞག་བཞི	CHN	shan gyi rnam bzhag bzhi
ཤན་གྲི	butcher's knife	shan gri
ཤན་གྲིབ	disease coming from butchers	shan grib
ཤན་གླ	boat fare	shan gla
ཤན་རྒྱག	band w metal	shan rgyag
ཤན་ཅིག་བྱེད་རྐྱེན	cooperative condition	shan cig byed rkyen
ཤན་ཅིག་བྱེད་རྒྱེན	cooperative condition	shan cig byed rgyen
ཤན་མཆུ	bellows mouth, iron tube tip of bellows	shan mchu
ཤན་ཇ	kind of chinese tea	shan ja
ཤན་འཇུག	transferring a fault [when one has broken the spang ltung]	shan 'jug
ཤན་ཏི་པ	an indian buddhist teacher	shan ti pa
ཤན་སྟོབས	fault of non-blessing	shan stobs
ཤན་ད་ཏི་ལ	a race	shan da ti la
ཤན་དི་ལ	a race	shan di la
ཤན་དུང	chinese provinces of shantung	shan dung
ཤན་སྡོབས	due to transferring the fault	shan sdobs
ཤན་བརྡེག	blessed implements defiled by unblessed 1s	shan brdeg
ཤན་པ	1) butcher, killer, slaughterer; 2) sailor/ boat man	shan pa
ཤན་པ་སོགས་སྡིག་བྱེད	evil-doers, such as butchers	shan pa sogs sdig byed
ཤན་ཕྱེད	differentiating	shan phyed
ཤན་འབྱེད	cleary distinguish	shan 'byed
ཤན་འབྱེད་པ	distinguish, decide, differentiate	shan 'byed pa
དུ་སྟོན་པ་རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	the Atiyoga of the great perfection, and clearly pointed out the three key points: distinguishing, clear decision	du ston pa rdzogs chen a ti yo ga
ཤན་སྦྱར	correspondence; {skad gnyis shan sbyar} correspondence between the two languages	shan sbyar
ཤན་དམར	wild animal of the deer class	shan dmar
ཤན་རྩ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	shan rtsa
ཤན་ཞུགས	1) mixing incompatible kinds; 2) rigs 'gre shor ba; 3) a monks equipment nyes pa'i g.ya' zhugs pa [unusable because of violations of monastic rules of blessing etc.]	shan zhugs
ཤན་ཤོར	affected by company	shan shor
ཤན་གསུམ	the three kinds of incompatibility faults	shan gsum
ཤབ	whisper	shab
ཤབ་སྒོ་ལྔ	place in gtsang	shab sgo lnga
ཤབ་པ	ft. of {shab pa}; {shab pa, shabs pa, shab pa, shobs} trans. v	shab pa
ཤབ་བི་ཤུབ་བི	talk w few words, speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shub bi
ཤབ་བི་ཤུབ་བེ	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shub be
ཤབ་བི་ཤུབ་བེ་ལབ	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shub be lab
ཤབ་བི་ཤུབ་བེ་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shub be shod
ཤབ་བི་ཤུབ་བེ་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shub be shod pa
ཤབ་བི་ཤོབ་བི་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shob bi shod
ཤབ་བི་ཤོབ་བེ་ལབ	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shob be lab
ཤབ་བི་ཤོབ་བེ་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shob be shod
ཤབ་བི་ཤོབ་བེ་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab bi shob be shod pa
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བི་ལབ	speak falsely, whisper	shab be shob bi lab
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བི་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab be shob bi shod pa
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བེ	false talk, whisper	shab be shob be
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བེ་ལབ	speak falsely, whisper	shab be shob be lab
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བེ་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab be shob be shod
ཤབ་བེ་ཤོབ་བེ་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab be shob be shod pa
ཤབ་ཤུབ	talk w few words	shab shub
ཤབ་ཤུབ་ཅན	deceitful, fraudulent, crafty	shab shub can
ཤབ་ཤུབ་བྱེད་པ	lie, cheat	shab shub byed pa
ཤབ་ཤུབ་ལབ	speak falsely, whisper	shab shub lab
ཤབ་ཤུབ་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab shub shod
ཤབ་ཤུབ་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab shub shod pa
ཤབ་ཤོབ	false words	shab shob
ཤབ་ཤོབ་ཤོད	speak falsely, whisper	shab shob shod
ཤབ་ཤོབ་ཤོད་པ	speak falsely, whisper	shab shob shod pa
ཤབས	foot	shabs
ཤབས་ཀྱུ	sign for tibetan vowel U	shabs kyu
ཤབས་པ	pf. of {shab pa}	shabs pa
ཤབས་འབུར་མི་མངོན	his ankle-joints are inconspicuous	shabs 'bur mi mngon
ཤམ	fringe	sham
ཤམ་ཀ	shell	sham ka
ཤམ་གོས	under-vest, under garment, lower garment	sham gos
ཤམ་སྔོན	having a blue skirt, a type of bonpo	sham sngon
ཤམ་སྔོན་ཅན	having a blue skirt, type of bonpo	sham sngon can
ཤམ་ཐབས	cassock-like garment, skirt,	sham thabs
པེཏཏིཅོཨཏ	like clothes, under garment or petticoat worn by lamas	petticoat
ཤམ་ཐབས་ཀྱི་གཟན	monastic garment worn in the second 1/2 of the night	sham thabs kyi gzan
ཤམ་ཐབས་སྔོན་པོ་ཅན	extremist pandit who wore a blue robe	sham thabs sngon po can
ཤམ་དུ	under it, underneath	sham du
ཤམ་པ	lowlander	sham pa
ཤམ་པོ	yar lha sham po, original spirit of Tibet	sham po
ཤམ་བུ	door and window ornament	sham bu
ཤམ་བུ་སྐེད་རིས	in a house gyang ngos kyi sham bu'i ri mo &, tshon sna sum ldan gyi sked ris	sham bu sked ris
ཤམ་བུ་བཏགས་པ	1) door and windows la sham bu bkal ba; 2) gzungs sngags kyi kha tsar ram kha snon btab pa	sham bu btags pa
ཤམ་བུར	append at the end	sham bur
ཤམ་མ	man or woman of lower ladak	sham ma
ཤམ་ལ	below, lower, under	sham la
ཤམ་ཤམ་བྱས་འགྲོ་བ	walk along decorously [arrayed in robes	sham sham byas 'gro ba
ཤམ་སུལ	sham thabs la wrinkle gathered sul	sham sul
ཤམ་བྷ་ལ	buddhist utopia, SA bde 'byung, 1 of gnas chen lnga	sham bha la
ཤམ་བྷ་ལའི་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རྣམ་བདུན	the 7 dharmarajas of Shambhala	sham bha la'i chos rgyal rnam bdun
ལྡན་གྱི་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སོ་གཉིས	the 32 rigden kings of Shambhala taught in the Kalachakra CHN	ldan gyi chos rgyal so gnyis
ཤམས	(not in das)	shams
ཤའ་ཀྱ་རྣམས	the Sakyans	sha' kya rnams
ཤའ་ཀྱའི་གྲོང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went to the city of the Sakyas sha' kya'i bu mo gzhon nu mdzes ma zhig - one of the Sakyan maidens, very young and beautiful	sha' kya'i grong du phyin pa
ཤའ་ཀྱའི་བུ་མོའི་ཚོགས	the rest of the Sakyan women	sha' kya'i bu mo'i tshogs
ཤའ་ཀྱའི་རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེས	a member of the Sakyan clan	sha' kya'i rigs su skyes
ཤའང་ཀའང	Hong Kong 2715	sha'ang ka'ang
ཤའི་ཀོང་བུ	hole/ depression in the flesh	sha'i kong bu
ཤའི་ཀོང་བུ་བྲུས་ཏེ	dug holes in the flesh	sha'i kong bu brus te
ཤའི་ཁ་དོག	skin/ [meat] color	sha'i kha dog
ཤའི་རྒྱུས་པ	a? nadi	sha'i rgyus pa
ཤའི་དྲི	the smell of putrefying flesh	sha'i dri
ཤའི་སྤྱང་ཀི	carnivorous jackal	sha'i spyang ki
ཤའི་སྤྱན	physical eye, one of the {spyan lnga} five eyes; fleshy eye/ fleshand-blood eye	sha'i spyan
ཤའི་སྤྱིན	eye of flesh	sha'i spyin
ཤའི་ཕྲི	sha skyi	sha'i phri
ཤའི་མིག	fleshy eye {mig lnga}; fleshy eye {mig lnga}	sha'i mig
ཤའི་འཛེར་པ	1) moles etc. on the body; 2) hard warts and excrescences	sha'i 'dzer pa
ཤའི་ཤུན་ལྤགས	skin	sha'i shun lpags
ཤའུ	new flesh under a curing wound	sha'u
ཤར	1) E; 2) [a]rise; 3) go quickly forward * (directly, w/o obstacles	shar
ཤར་ཀྱག	straightforwardly, directly, w/o hinderance/ obstacle	shar kyag
ཤར་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 E stars	shar skar bdun
ཤར་བསྐྱོད	go/ proceed straight ahead/ directly	shar bskyod
ཤར་ཁ	place in tibet	shar kha
ཤར་ཁ་དཔོན་པོ	ruler of shar kha, celebrated lama known as pandan shar kha wa	shar kha dpon po
ཤར་ཁུམས་གཤོང་རོང	Solukhumbu, Nepal	shar khums gshong rong
ཤར་གངས་ལ	shar gangs pass	shar gangs la
ཤར་གྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	sun, moon	shar gyi thig le
ཤར་གྱི་གནམ་དམག	drought, rainlessness	shar gyi gnam dmag
ཤར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	E direction protector	shar gyi phyogs skyong
ཤར་གྱི་གཞུང་ཐིག	E longitude	shar gyi gzhung thig
ཤར་གྱི་རི་བོ	one residing in the eastern hills, early buddhist sect	shar gyi ri bo
ཤར་གྱི་རི་བོ་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	sde living on the E mt	shar gyi ri bo la gnas pa'i sde
ཤར་གྱི་ལུས་འཕགས	eastern continents of great mass. {lus dang lus 'phags} body of land and great body and land	shar gyi lus 'phags
ཤར་གྱི་སུམ་སྐུར	TSE	shar gyi sum skur
ཤར་གྱིས	spontaneously	shar gyis
ཤར་གྲོལ	liberated upon arising, which liberates upon arising; to liberate upon arising; self-liberated as it arises; liberation as soon as it arises; freed as they arise	shar grol
ཤར་གྲོལ་རིས་མེད	no distinction/ gap between things/ thoughts arising and being free/ the arising of thoughts and their freedom	shar grol ris med
ཤར་གླིང་དབུས་མ	Middle East	shar gling dbus ma
ཤར་བགྲོད	go/ proceed straight ahead/ directly	shar bgrod
ཤར་འགྱུར་བྱེད	blood	shar 'gyur byed
ཤར་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན	great ocean extending to the east of china	shar rgya mtsho chen
ཤར་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ	Pacific Ocean	shar rgya mtsho chen po
ཤར་རྒྱག	straightforwardly, directly, w/o hinderance/ obstacle	shar rgyag
ཤར་རྒྱག་རྒྱུགས	run at once	shar rgyag rgyugs
ཤར་རྒྱབ་པ	sew in long stitches	shar rgyab pa
ཤར་རྒྱུན	eastern	shar rgyun
ཤར་སྒོ་མེ་ལོང་གླིང	a place	shar sgo me long gling
ཤར་སྒོམ	meditate immediately as soon as the details of the visualization arise in mind	shar sgom
ཤར་ཆུ	shar chu river	shar chu
ཤར་ཆེན་ཉི་མ	great E sun	shar chen nyi ma
ཤར་ཇ	tea imported to tibet from amdo	shar ja
ཤར་གཏེར་སྨིན་པ་འབྲས་བུ་ལྟ་བུ	E mature treasures like fruits GD	shar gter smin pa 'bras bu lta bu
ཤར་གཏོང	send/pass/ go directly/ straight/ w/o obstacles	shar gtong
ཤར་གཏོང་ཐུབ	able to send directly	shar gtong thub
ཤར་སྟོད	upper E part	shar stod
ཤར་ཐག	easterly direction	shar thag
ཤར་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ	Shar Tamchey Khyenpa, Omniscient One of Shar, from Rekong in Domey	shar thams cad mkhyen pa
ཤར་མཐའ	far E	shar mtha'
ཤར་དབ༹གས་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	Shar Dakpo Tashi Namgyal; see {dvags po bkra shis rnam rgyal}	shar dvags po bkra shis rnam rgyal
ཤར་དང་གྲོལ་བ	arises & self-liberates	shar dang grol ba
ཤར་དུ་གནས	resides in the east	shar du gnas
ཤར་དུས་ཉིད་ནས	as soon as (it/ they) occur	shar dus nyid nas
ཤར་དུས་ནས	as soon as (it/ they) occur	shar dus nas
ཤར་དེད་བྱེད་པ	to trace (e.g., a lineage) directly	shar ded byed pa
ཤར་བདག་ལ	dawns upon me	shar bdag la
ཤར་ནས་འོངས	come from the east	shar nas 'ongs
ཤར་ནུབ	rising and setting	shar nub
ཤར་ནུབ་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	[one of the phal chen sde pa lnga]	shar nub ri la gnas pa'i sde
ཤར་པ	1) person from the E; 2) ancient Tibetan {shar pa} clan; 3) of sa skya'i bla brang divided E/W E; 4) {rong shar pa} region on the Nepalese border; 5) sherpa	shar pa
ཤར་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞི་ཐོག་པ	{shar pa 'jam dbyangs bzhi thog pa}	shar pa 'jam dbyangs bzhi thog pa
ཤར་པ་མི་རིགས	sherpa	shar pa mi rigs
ཤར་པ་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མཚན	shar pa rin chen rgyal mtshan	shar pa rin chen rgyal mtshan
ཤར་པ་ལ	shar pa pass	shar pa la
ཤར་པུ	[Tse]	shar pu
ཤར་པོ	adulterous husband, youth	shar po
ཤར་སྤྲོགས	abruptly	shar sprogs
ཤར་སྤྲོགས་ནས་གཤེགས	abruptly disappeared	shar sprogs nas gshegs
ཤར་ཕོ	/ young [man]	shar pho
ཤར་ཕྱོགས	E [side/ direction]	shar phyogs
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	oriental	shar phyogs kyi
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱང་གྲགས	some distance to the east	shar phyogs rgyang grags
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་མངོན་དགའི་ཞིང	the eastern Buddhafield of Pure Joy	shar phyogs mngon dga'i zhing
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་དམར	song the E is Red shar phyogs rin chen bkod pa'i zhing	shar phyogs dmar
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ལུས་འཕགས་ཡུལ	eastern continent of Sublime Physical Form 2716	shar phyogs lus 'phags yul
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ལོ་གསར	so nam farmers? new year lo gsar	shar phyogs lo gsar
ཤར་བ་རྐྱ་དྲུག	manifestations of the six cords	shar ba rkya drug
ཤར་བ་དེ	that experience	shar ba de
ཤར་བ་དེ་ཀ	exactly what appears	shar ba de ka
ཤར་བུ	cornice (of mansion)	shar bu
རཻན	spout motif; 2) garlands and pendants	rain
ཤར་བུ་ཕྲའུ	kind of belt/ sash	shar bu phra'u
ཤར་བྱང	NE	shar byang
ཤར་བྱུང	rose, appeared; x {zla ba shar byung bas} the moon appeared	shar byung
ཤར་མ	1) grown young woman; 2) ri mo elongated oval; 3) things in the E; 4) kher rkyang ston pa'i grangs kyi tshig grogs shig	shar ma
ཤར་མར	w/o obstruction	shar mar
ཤར་མེ་གླིང	E America	shar me gling
ཤར་མོ	young woman	shar mo
ཤར་སྨད	lower E part	shar smad
ཤར་ཙམ	in the very moment it arises	shar tsam
ཤར་ཙམ་ཉིད་ནས	from the very moment they appear , if the moment they arise	shar tsam nyid nas
ཤར་ཙོང་ཁ་པ	tsong khapa	shar tsong kha pa
ཤར་རྩེ་ཆོས་རྗེ	throne holder of dga' ldan shar rtse grva tshang	shar rtse chos rje
ཤར་རྩེ་ནོར་བུ་གླིང	the shar rtse grva tsang of dga' ldan monastery near Lhasa	shar rtse nor bu gling
ཤར་ཚུལ	manifestation modes of	shar tshul
ཤར་འཚོལ་ནུབ་བསྡུ	put together odds and ends, scrape together w/p thinking	shar 'tshol nub bsdu
ཤར་རྫ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	Bonpo Master Shardza Rinpoche	shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan
ཤར་རྫ་ཆུ	shar rdza river	shar rdza chu
ཤར་རྫོང	Shardzong, in Domey	shar rdzong
ཤར་ཟིན་པ	became	shar zin pa
ཤར་ཡོ་གླིང	E Europe	shar yo gling
ཤར་རས	kind of cotton cloth formerly manufactured in bengal and assam	shar ras
ཤར་རི	E mt	shar ri
ཤར་རི་བོ་རྩེ་ལྔ	1 of gnas chen lnga	shar ri bo rtse lnga
ཤར་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	1 of the phal chen sde pa lnga shar ri'i rtse mor nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor shar	shar ri la gnas pa'i sde
ཤར་རེ	directly, straight ahead	shar re
ཤར་ལུ	man {shar dar ma}	shar lu
ཤར་ལུགས་བརྒྱད	the 8 modes of manifestation	shar lugs brgyad
ཤར་ལུང	Sharlung Valley, in Amnye Machen	shar lung
ཤར་ལུས་འཕགས་གླིང་དུ་ཕྱིན་ནས	traveled to Videha, the eastern continent	shar lus 'phags gling du phyin nas
ཤར་ལུས་འཕགས་པ	purva videha, eastern continent of buddhist cosmogony	shar lus 'phags pa
ཤར་ལུས་འཕགས་པོ	p'urb'abideha	shar lus 'phags po
ཤར་ཤར	a little bit of	shar shar
ཤར་ཤར་དུ	as it arises, right away	shar shar du
ཤར་ཤར་དུ་འཛིན་པ	recognize each 1 as it arises	shar shar du 'dzin pa
ཤར་ཤུར	poor quality, speedy/ busy w incidental things	shar shur
ཤར་ཤོར	1) quickly and carelessly; 2) quickly w/o delay	shar shor
ཤར་གསུམ་མཁན་པོ	{shar gsum mkhan po	shar gsum mkhan po
ཤར་ལྷོ	SE, S and E	shar lho
ཤར་ལྷོ་སྙིང་པོ་བྱང་ཆུབ	one of the {phyogs bcu'i zhing khams} the [buddha] realms of the ten directions	shar lho snying po byang chub
ཤར་ལྷོའི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོད	fire [god]	shar lho'i phyogs skyod
ཤལ་དཀར	kind of white silk scarf	shal dkar
ཤལ་སྒོར	disc harrow	shal sgor
ཤལ་ཐག	reins	shal thag
ཤལ་ཐག་རྦད་ཀྱིས་ཆོད	cut off completely the ties	shal thag rbad kyis chod
ཤལ་འདྲུད་པ	[pull a] harrow	shal 'drud pa
ཤལ་བ	rake, harrow	shal ba
ཤལ་མ	stony ground, mountainside consisting of detritus	shal ma
ཤལ་མ་ཅན	full of sharp stones	shal ma can
ཤལ་མ་རིའི་སྡོང་པོ	one of the {nye 'khor pa'i dmyal ba}	shal ma ri'i sdong po
ཤལ་མ་ལི	hell tree with sword-leaves; the	shal ma li
སྭོརད	leafed tree of hell	sword
ཤལ་མ་ལི་ཡི་སྡོང་པོ	shalmali tree	shal ma li yi sdong po
ཤལ་མ་ལིའི་ནགས	forest of iron spikes neighboring hell, 1 of nye 'khor dmyal ba	shal ma li'i nags
ཤལ་མ་ལིའི་ཚལ	forest of {shal ma li} trees	shal ma li'i tshal
ཤལ་མ་ལིའི་ཚལ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཤིང	the forest of iron shalmali trees	shal ma li'i tshal lcags kyi shing
ཤལ་མ་ལིར་གནས	garuda	shal ma lir gnas
ཤལ་འཛིན	raker, harrowed	shal 'dzin
ཤལ་ལ	earth leveling equipment for fields, harrow	shal la
ཤལ་ཤལ་བ	to harrow	shal shal ba
ཤལ་བཤལ་བ	[pull a] harrow	shal bshal ba
ཤས	a few; chance, ways, caused	shas
ཤས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་འབབ	landlord's profit from a sharecropped field	shas kyi khe 'bab
ཤས་ཁ	part, share	shas kha
ཤས་ཆུང	very few, small part	shas chung
ཤས་ཆུང་བ	very few, small part	shas chung ba
ཤས་ཆེ	many, good deal, the greater part of, much, very strong, acute, powerful, hardened, obdurate, sharp, unexhausted, "maybe" particle, compelling, predominant, too strong	shas che
ཤས་ཆེ་བ	many, majority, strong, SA shas che	shas che ba
ཤས་ཆེ་བ་ལྟར	according to the greater or lesser emphasis, according to the degree of emphasis upon	shas che ba ltar
ཤས་ཆེན	in an eminent degree, in exceedingly great measure	shas chen
ཤས་ཆེར	predominantly, maybe	shas cher
ཤས་ཆེར་མི་འབྱུང	did not grow very powerful or strong	shas cher mi 'byung
ཤས་ཆེས	in an eminent degree, in exceedingly great measure	shas ches
ཤས་ཉོག་ཅན	fondling something	shas nyog can
ཤས་པ	sharecropper landlord dividing autumn yield of grain in half w the tenant	shas pa
ཤས་མི་བཟོད	unbearable, overwhelming	shas mi bzod
ཤས་མི་བཟོད་པ	unbearable, overwhelming	shas mi bzod pa
ཤས་འཚོ་བའི་ཉང་བ	the chance of living very slim, the way of staying alive	shas 'tsho ba'i nyang ba
ཤས་ཞིང	field sharecropped for 50% of the harvest	shas zhing
ཤས་བཟང	[arch] few but of good quality	shas bzang
ཤས་ར	slaughter house	shas ra
ཤས་ལ་གཏོང	landlords sharecropping fields and dividing autumn yield of grain in half w the tenant	shas la gtong
ཤས་ལ་གཏོང་བ	landlords sharecropping fields and dividing autumn yield of grain in half w the tenant	shas la gtong ba
ཤས་ཤས་སུ་བགོ་བ	distribute among	shas shas su bgo ba
ཤས་ཤས་སུ་བགོད་པ	distribute into shares	shas shas su bgod pa
ཤས་ཤིག་གནང	please give me some	shas shig gnang
ཤས་སུ་འགྲོ	to exaggerate	shas su 'gro
ཤས་སོན	seed for planting in field sharecropped for 50% of the harvest	shas son
ཤས་སླེབས	landlord's profit from a sharecropped field	shas slebs
ཤི	to die, to go out, put off, turn off, to die, death	shi
ཤི་ཀ	a king who mourned at buddha's death	shi ka
ཤི་ཀ་ཀོ་ལ	a place in orissa on the seaside	shi ka ko la
ཤི་ཀི་མ	dying, death	shi ki ma
ཤི་ཀི་མ་ཡོད	he is at the point of death, he is at death's door	shi ki ma yod
ཤི་ཀི་མ་རུ	in dying	shi ki ma ru
ཤི་ཀྲུ	{pho ba ris dkar po} herb	shi kru
ཤི་སྐྱིད	happy to die	shi skyid
ཤི་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་ཇག་པ་གཉིས	two bandits, happy to die/ heedless of dying	shi skyid kyi jag pa gnyis
ཤི་སྐྱོན	death	shi skyon
ཤི་སྐྲ་དང་གསོན་སྐྲ	locks of hair from dead and living	shi skra dang gson skra
ཤི་ཁན་དི་ལ	peacock	shi khan di la
ཤི་གོ་ལོག	after a child has died, the parents left alone	shi go log
ཤི་གོད	old/ sick etc. animal dying	shi god
ཤི་དགེ	dead persons's virtuous roots	shi dge
ཤི་འགྲོ་སྙམ་པ	the thought that I may die	shi 'gro snyam pa
ཤི་རྒྱགས	virtuous action of benefit in later births	shi rgyags
ཤི་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	eternal, immortal	shi rgyu med pa
ཤི་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	perishable	shi rgyu yod pa
ཤི་རྒྱུའི	expiry	shi rgyu'i
ཤི་ཆད	death	shi chad
ཤི་ཆད་བྱུང་བ	when someone dies	shi chad byung ba
ཤི་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	mindfulness of death	shi rjes su dran pa
ཤི་ཉལ་རོ་ཉལ	sleeping [deprecative]	shi nyal ro nyal
ཤི་ཉིད	quiescence, going to rest	shi nyid
ཤི་སྟེ	having died, been dead	shi ste
ཤི་ཐབས	mode of death	shi thabs
ཤི་ཐེ་ལེ	Hitler	shi the le
ཤི་དང་སྙོམས་པར	sgom yun shi dang	shi dang snyoms par
སྙོམས་པར་མཛོད	let your meditation practice last until your death!	snyoms par mdzod
ཤི་འདུག	is dead, died	shi 'dug
ཤི་འདྲེ	ghost; sky-travelling preta-demon	shi 'dre
ཤི་བརྡ	knell	shi brda
ཤི་ནས	having died, been dead	shi nas
ཤི་གནས	place of death	shi gnas
ཤི་པོ	dead person	shi po
ཤི་སྤར	death grip	shi spar
ཤི་ཕུགས་བྲག་ལ་གཏད	leave your death to a cave; one of {gtad pa bzhi} the four ultimate aims	shi phugs brag la gtad
ཤི་འཕོ	death and transmigration	shi 'pho
ཤི་འཕོ་བ	death and transmigration	shi 'pho ba
ཤི་འཕོ་བྲལ་བ	free from death and transmigration	shi 'pho bral ba
ཤི་འཕོས	dead and gone / transmigrated	shi 'phos
ཤི་འཕོས་པ	dead [& gone]/ transmigrated	shi 'phos pa
ཤི་འཕྲས	death struggle	shi 'phras
ཤི་བ	pf. of {'chi ba}; death, to lie dead; quietude	shi ba
ཤི་བ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	Syn {mindfulness of death; one of the {rjes su dran pa bcu} ten mindfulnesses	shi ba rjes su dran pa
ཤི་བ་ཐང་ཆད་པ	breathless	shi ba thang chad pa
ཤི་བ་ནང་བཞིན	deadly	shi ba nang bzhin
ཤི་བ་ཡིན	i shall die	shi ba yin
ཤི་བ་ལས་གསོས་པ	reviving from death	shi ba las gsos pa
ཤི་བ་སོས་པར་བྱེད་པར་གྱུར	one already dying still recovered	shi ba sos par byed par gyur
ཤི་བའི	death	shi ba'i
ཤི་བའི་རྗེས་སུ	posthumous	shi ba'i rjes su
ཤི་བའི་མཐར་ཐུག་པ	(to come to) the end of one's days	shi ba'i mthar thug pa
ཤི་བའི་འདུ་བྱེད	the associations of the dead, funeral observances	shi ba'i 'du byed
ཤི་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ	the suffering of death/ dying	shi ba'i sdug bsngal
ཤི་བའི་ཕྱོགས	quarter of the dead, the south in which the lord of death dwells	shi ba'i phyogs
ཤི་བའི་ཟན	food of the dead, food given to lamas at funerals shi ba'i 'og ngan song du skye bar 'gyur ba - after death it takes one to the state of damnation	shi ba'i zan
ཤི་བའི་རོ	the corpse of the dead	shi ba'i ro
ཤི་བའི་ལུས	body of the deceased	shi ba'i lus
ཤི་བར་གྱུར	grew peaceful	shi bar gyur
ཤི་བར་འོང	he will die	shi bar 'ong
ཤི་བར་ཤེས	knowing [yourself] to be dead	shi bar shes
ཤི་བས་བསྐོར	surrounded by death	shi bas bskor
ཤི་བི་ཀ	[Skt] ro skyel byed kyi khyogs, coffin shi bir skyes tshe yang long ba zhig la mig	shi bi ka
གཉིས་སྦྱིན་པ་དྲན	also remember giving both my eyes to a blind man at the time I was born as a Shibi	gnyis sbyin pa dran
ཤི་བོ	a corpse	shi bo
ཤི་བོའི་རོ་སྔས་སུ	on your death-bed	shi bo'i ro sngas su
ཤི་བྲལ	will die [& separate]	shi bral
ཤི་འབྱར་རོ་འབྱར	diligently trying to cling/ stick to/ stay/ live in, stay/ remain	shi 'byar ro 'byar
ཤི་སྦར་འཐམས་པ	at death hold wealth etc. tightly/greedily in the hand	shi sbar 'thams pa
ཤི་མ་ཐག	as soon as they die; x {shi ma thag ngan song du 'gro ba mang pas mi khoms pa'i gnas yin} many of them fall into lower realms as soon as they die. For such people there is no 2718 opportunity to pr...	shi ma thag
ཤི་མ་རན་པ་ཤི་བ	die an untimely death	shi ma ran pa shi ba
ཤི་མ་རོ	not dead/ a corpse	shi ma ro
ཤི་མ་གསོན	shi ma gson lta bur gya gyur	shi ma gson
ཤི་མིག་གསོན་བལྟས	example of 'chi khar gson byed	shi mig gson bltas
ཤི་མིན་རོ་མིན	almost dead, near death	shi min ro min
ཤི་མིན་གསོན་མིན	not dead/ a corpse	shi min gson min
ཤི་རྨས	dead and wounded/ injured, casualties	shi rmas
ཤི་ཚད	death/ mortality rate	shi tshad
ཤི་ཚར་བ	dead, defunct, extinct	shi tshar ba
ཤི་ཚིགས	year after a person dies	shi tshigs
ཤི་ཚེ	at the time of death	shi tshe
ཤི་འཛིང	fighting until death	shi 'dzing
ཤི་འཛིན	when animal dies to the owner giving head and hide rtsis sprod [giving] byas pa'i byung 'dzin [assertion "it's mine"	shi 'dzin
ཤི་རྫུ	ma shi shi khul	shi rdzu
ཤི་ཟན	from things of a dead person the compiled food	shi zan
ཤི་ར་ཆུག	accepting death	shi ra chug
ཤི་རབས་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the genealogies of the dead	shi rabs kyi bon
ཤི་རི་ཁན་ད	a kind of medicine	shi ri khan da
ཤི་རི་དཔལ་ལྡན་ཆུ	{shi ri dpal ldan chu river	shi ri dpal ldan chu
ཤི་རི་ར་ཏ	[Skt] {shi ri ra ta	shi ri ra ta
ཤི་རི་ཤ	a tree, its flower or fruit, acacia sirisa	shi ri sha
ཤི་རིག	clinking, jingling	shi rig
ཤི་རུང་གསོན་རུང	though i live or though i die	shi rung gson rung
ཤི་རོ	corpse	shi ro
ཤི་རོག	sort of early barley	shi rog
ཤི་ལ	moral behavior	shi la
ཤི་ལ་ཐུག་ཚེ	at the point of death	shi la thug tshe
ཤི་ལ་དྲུ	SA skyer pa	shi la dru
ཤི་ལམ	dangerous road	shi lam
ཤི་ལས་ཐུ	worse than dead	shi las thu
ཤི་ལུ་དཀར་པོ	species of tree	shi lu dkar po
ཤི་ལོག	returned from death	shi log
ཤི་ཤ	meat from animals that had a natural death	shi sha
ཤི་ཤ་སྦང་མ	{shi sha sbang ma mt	shi sha sbang ma
ཤི་གཤགས་པ	inquest, inquiry into the death of a person	shi gshags pa
ཤི་གཤེད	murderous executioner, the personification of the erroneous investment of one's body with true existence, gshed of death	shi gshed
ཤི་སོང	have passed away	shi song
ཤི་སོས	revived the dead	shi sos
ཤི་སྲི	sri of death	shi sri
ཤི་གསོན	dead or alive, life and death	shi gson
ཤི་གསོན་འདྲེས་པ	{nya shi gson 'dres pa gzhong pa gang} a wooden tub of fish, of which some were still alive and some dead	shi gson 'dres pa
ཤི་གསོས་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩི	the elixir that conquers death; x {sman shi gsos kyi bdud rtsi lta bu'i dam pa'i chos dang mjal ba'i skabs} so now that you have met the Dharma, the elixir that conquers death	shi gsos kyi bdud rtsi
ཤིག་གི	totally free	shig gi
ཤིག་གི་སྒོང	egg of a louse	shig gi sgong
ཤིག་གི་འདྲ་གཟུགས	wooden puppet	shig gi 'dra gzugs
ཤིག་གེ	relaxed, free	shig ge
ཤིག་གེ་སྒོང	egg of a louse, small bubble, medicinal herb	shig ge sgong
ཤིག་གེ་བ	close-bonded, standing close together, trembling, tottering, wavering	shig ge ba
ཤིག་གེ་ལྷོད་དེ	free and easy; {sems shig ge lhod de gnas pa} remaining in a free and easy state of mind. Syn: {shigs bshig lhod klod} release and relaxation	shig ge lhod de
ཤིག་གེག	relaxed	shig geg
ཤིག་སྒོང	louse nits/ eggs	shig sgong
ཤིག་སྒྲུག	pick lice	shig sgrug
ཤིག་ཅན	full of lice	shig can
ཤིག་ལྡན	infested w lice	shig ldan
ཤིག་བྱ	will give	shig bya
ཤིག་ཚད	measure = 7 sro ma louse eggs	shig tshad
ཤིག་རལ	cigarette	shig ral
ཤིག་ཤིག	flickering / fluttering; see {snang ba ban bun} fluttering appearances	shig shig
ཤིག་སེན་ར་སྤྲོད	find an actual louse w the nails, getting to the main point w certainty shig sen ra sprod kyis khungs skyel ba verify/ prove by finding an actual louse	shig sen ra sprod
ཤིག་སྲོ	louse and eggs	shig sro
ཤིག་སྲོ་འདུ	nits are increasing fast	shig sro 'du
ཤིག་གསོད་སྟ་རེ	killing a louse loft an axe	shig gsod sta re
ཤིག་གསོད་སྟར་འཕྱར	kill a louse by swinging an axe, small actions don't need great force	shig gsod star 'phyar
ཤིག་གསོད་པར་སྟ་རེ་འཕྱར་མི་དགོས	you don't need to swing an axe to kill a louse	shig gsod par sta re 'phyar mi dgos
ཤིག་བསལ་བ	clean from lice	shig bsal ba
ཤིགས	destroy	shigs
ཤིགས་པ	destructible, destroy	shigs pa
ཤིགས་ཤིག་འགུལ	wavering shaking	shigs shig 'gul
ཤིགས་ཤིགས	waving, rocking	shigs shigs
ཤིགས་བཤིག	release	shigs bshig
ཤིགས་བཤིག་ལྷོད་ཀློད	release and relaxation	shigs bshig lhod klod
ཤིགས་བཤིགས	interrupt, interrupted the practice, release	shigs bshigs
ཤིགས་བཤིགས་ལ་ཅུང་ཟད་རེ་ངལ་གསོ	then interrupt to take a short break	shigs bshigs la cung zad re ngal gso
ཤིགས་སེ	[hanging] lose "as a goose", loose, free, open, unfastened and relaxed, not uptight/ clamped together	shigs se
ཤིགས་སེ་བྲོ་གར་ཤིག	march in formation	shigs se bro gar shig
ཤིགས་སེ་ཤིག	(to) sway and whirl (in dance)	shigs se shig
ཤིང་ཀ་ཀུ་བྷ	arjuna tree	shing ka ku bha
ཤིང་ཀ་ད་བ	cadamba tree	shing ka da ba
ཤིང་ཀ་དམ་པ	tree cadamba	shing ka dam pa
ཤིང་ཀ་པེཏ་ཐ	kapettha tree	shing ka pet tha
ཤིང་ཀ་པེད་ཐ	kind of lemon	shing ka ped tha
ཤིང་ཀ་ཤིམ་བ་ལ	kacimbala tree	shing ka shim ba la
ཤིང་ཀིར་ཏི	carrying-frame for packs 2719	shing kir ti
ཤིང་ཀུན	asafoetida used as medicine and spice, asafoetida, ferula assafoetida, devil's dung, food of the gods	shing kun
ཤིང་ཀོ་ཀི་ལ	plant asteracantha longifolia	shing ko ki la
ཤིང་ཀོར	wooden cup which tibetans carry in coat next to bosom, wooden cup	shing kor
ཤིང་དཀར	Shingkar, in Domey	shing dkar
ཤིང་རྐང	1) tree roots; 2) shing gi rkang grangs; 3) wooden leg	shing rkang
ཤིང་རྐུན་མའི་མེ་ཏོག	thief's flower tree	shing rkun ma'i me tog
ཤིང་ལྐོགས	bark of trees, cinnamon	shing lkogs
ཤིང་སྐམ་པོ	a dead tree {shing skam po gcig gi 'gram du bzhugs pa} seated in front of a dead tree	shing skam po
ཤིང་སྐམ་པོའི་མེ་ཏོག	flower of a dead tree	shing skam po'i me tog
ཤིང་སྐུ	any wooden image	shing sku
ཤིང་སྐོགས	tree bark	shing skogs
ཤིང་སྐྱ	medicinal fruit, SA dug mo nyung	shing skya
ཤིང་སྐྱ་ནར	patala tree	shing skya nar
ཤིང་སྐྱུར་རུ་མ	ceratostigma ulticinum prain	shing skyur ru ma
ཤིང་སྐྱེས	hong len ???	shing skyes
ཤིང་སྐྱོ	wood pulp	shing skyo
ཤིང་སྐྱོགས	wooden ladle	shing skyogs
ཤིང་སྐྲས་པ	cut wood	shing skras pa
ཤིང་བརྐོམ	wood carving/ engraving	shing brkom
ཤིང་བརྐོམ་རྒྱག	carve/ engrave wood	shing brkom rgyag
ཤིང་བརྐོམ་བྱེད	carve/ engrave wood	shing brkom byed
ཤིང་བརྐོམ་རི་མོ	wood carving/ engraving, woodcut	shing brkom ri mo
ཤིང་བརྐོས	woodcarving	shing brkos
ཤིང་བརྐོས་པར་ཤིང	xylograph	shing brkos par shing
ཤིང་ཁ	1) tree trunk gi sgang; 2) flat wood sbyar kha	shing kha
ཤིང་ཁང	1) wooden house; 2) wood store house	shing khang
ཤིང་ཁམས	wood element	shing khams
ཤིང་ཁུ	sap of trees	shing khu
ཤིང་ཁུར	load/ bundle of wood	shing khur
ཤིང་ཁོ	1) wooden mortar; 2) wooden dog bowl kong kong [concave/ uneven] sogs	shing kho
ཤིང་ཁྱི	wood dog year	shing khyi
ཤིང་ཁྱི་པ	man born in the wood dog year	shing khyi pa
ཤིང་ཁྱི་མོ	woman born in the wood dog year	shing khyi mo
ཤིང་ཁྲལ	subjects tax to government in firewood and wood implements	shing khral
ཤིང་ཁྲི	wooden chair	shing khri
ཤིང་ཁྲོལ	tray, tray	shing khrol
ཤིང་མཁན	carpenter	shing mkhan
ཤིང་ག	1) shoemaker's tool; 2) potter's tool	shing ga
ཤིང་གི་སྐུ་འདྲ	any wooden image	shing gi sku 'dra
ཤིང་གི་ཁ་གཅོད	cork	shing gi kha gcod
ཤིང་གི་ཁོང་སྙིང	pith or inner wood of a tree	shing gi khong snying
ཤིང་གི་གྲིབ་མ	shadow of a tree	shing gi grib ma
ཤིང་གི་སྙིང་པོ	camphor	shing gi snying po
ཤིང་གི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	branch	shing gi brtul zhugs
ཤིང་གི་པགས་པ	bark	shing gi pags pa
ཤིང་གི་ཕུར་པ	purpa made out of wood	shing gi phur pa
ཤིང་གི་བ་ཐག	creeping parasitical plants	shing gi ba thag
ཤིང་གི་བྱི་བ	rat, mouse	shing gi byi ba
ཤིང་གི་དབང་པོ	peepul tree, indian figtree	shing gi dbang po
ཤིང་གི་འབྲས་བུ	fruits	shing gi 'bras bu
ཤིང་གི་མིག	squint-eyed, plant shorea robusta	shing gi mig
ཤིང་གི་མེ་ཏོག	flowering of a tree	shing gi me tog
ཤིང་གི་མེ་ཏོག་ཁ་ཕྱེ	blossoming	shing gi me tog kha phye
ཤིང་གི་རྩ་བ	root or foot of tree	shing gi rtsa ba
ཤིང་གི་རྩེ་མོ	top of a tree	shing gi rtse mo
ཤིང་གི་ཡ་ཡོ་སྲོང་སྲོང	straightening a crooked piece of wood	shing gi ya yo srong srong
ཤིང་གི་ར	ta lnga	shing gi ra
ཤིང་གི་ར་བ	wooden fence, fence of boards	shing gi ra ba
ཤིང་གི་ལས་ཀ	woodwork	shing gi las ka
ཤིང་གི་ལོ་མ་ལ་འཇུས	grabbed onto a branch	shing gi lo ma la 'jus
ཤིང་གི་ཤུན་པ	bark or fibers	shing gi shun pa
ཤིང་གི་སྲིན་བུ	wood-eating worm, moth, writer	shing gi srin bu
ཤིང་གི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess living in a tree	shing gi lha mo
ཤིང་གེལ་པ	1) branch; 2) tree w many branches	shing gel pa
ཤིང་གྲུ	wooden boat/ ship, junk [ship]	shing gru
ཤིང་གྲོགས་ས	the friend of wood is earth	shing grogs sa
ཤིང་གླང	wood ox year	shing glang
ཤིང་གླང་པ	man born in the wood ox year	shing glang pa
ཤིང་གླང་མ	woman born in the wood ox year	shing glang ma
ཤིང་གླིང	wooden flute	shing gling
ཤིང་དགྲ་ལྕགས	the enemy of wood is metal	shing dgra lcags
ཤིང་རྒོན	woodpecker	shing rgon
ཤིང་རྒོན་ཁྲ་བོ	spotted woodpecker	shing rgon khra bo
ཤིང་རྒོན་མགོ་ནག	black woodpecker	shing rgon mgo nag
ཤིང་རྒྱབ་པ	put wood	shing rgyab pa
ཤིང་རྒྱལ	tree of extraordinary height or circumference, giant-tree, water-god	shing rgyal
ཤིང་སྒམ	crate	shing sgam
ཤིང་སྒོ་ཅན	1) building w wooden doors; 2) Tibet gyi ming gi bla dvags shig	shing sgo can
ཤིང་སྒོ་ཆེན་པ	Shing go chen pa lord of the land of wooden doors GD	shing sgo chen pa
ཤིང་སྒྲོམ	1) wooden sgrom skyor [rail, lattice box?; 2) wooden box	shing sgrom
ཤིང་ང་དཔུང་བཅད	nun's breast hiding sleeveless upper garment	shing nga dpung bcad
ཤིང་ངམ་རྡོ་ཆགས་རོ་ཞིབ་ཞིབ	splinter	shing ngam rdo chags ro zhib zhib
ཤིང་དངུལ	Lhasa smon lam gyi tshogs, subjects money tax for wood	shing dngul
ཤིང་མངར	licorice [root] field med.	shing mngar
ཤིང་མངར་ལྡན་པ	aromatic plant anethum panmorium	shing mngar ldan pa
ཤིང་སྔོན	SA spyi zhur	shing sngon
ཤིང་ཅང	Sinkiang Province	shing cang
ཤིང་ཅང་ཡུ་གུར	Xinjiang Uighur autonomous region	shing cang yu gur
ཤིང་ཅན	wooden	shing can
ཤིང་ཅུ་གང	milky tree sap med.	shing cu gang
ཤིང་གཅིག	white species of plant calotropis gigantea	shing gcig
ཤིང་གཅིག་རྐང་ཟམ	1 beam wooden	shing gcig rkang zam
ཤིང་གཅོད	cut wood, cut down trees	shing gcod
ཤིང་གཅོད་ཁེ་ལས	lumber company/ industry	shing gcod khe las
ཤིང་གཅོད་པ	lumberjack, tree faller, wood cutter	shing gcod pa
ཤིང་བཅག	split wood	shing bcag
ཤིང་བཅུད	molasses, tree sap, syrup	shing bcud
ཤིང་ཆ	timber	shing cha
ཤིང་ཆ་གཅོད	cut timber/ lumber	shing cha gcod
ཤིང་ཆ་འབྲེག	cut timber/ lumber	shing cha 'breg
ཤིང་ཆ་འབྲེག་བྱེད	cut timber/ lumber	shing cha 'breg byed
ཤིང་ཆ་འབྲེག་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	timber/ lumber cutting machine, chain saw	shing cha 'breg byed 'phrul 'khor
ཤིང་ཆ་ཚོང་ར	lumber yard	shing cha tshong ra
ཤིང་ཆ་བཟོ་གྲྭ	lumber mill	shing cha bzo grwa
ཤིང་ཆ་ར་བ	lumber yard	shing cha ra ba
ཤིང་ཆའི་ར་བ	lumber yard	shing cha'i ra ba
ཤིང་ཆས	wood articles/ wares/ utensils	shing chas
ཤིང་ཆས་བཟོ་གྲྭ	woodworking shop/ factory	shing chas bzo grwa
ཤིང་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 121-5]	shing chen po brgyad
ཤིང་ཆོལ	wooden dice	shing chol
ཤིང་འཆའ་བ	gnaw at a piece of wood	shing 'cha' ba
ཤིང་འཆེག་པ	split wood	shing 'cheg pa
ཤིང་འཇོག་པ	carpenter	shing 'jog pa
ཤིང་འཇོམས	1) * shing rta mo bird; 2) multicolored insect living in wood shing nya gro ta ltar chu zheng gab pa body proportional like the nyagrodha tree shing nya gro tha ltar chu zheng gab pa body proportio...	shing 'joms
ཤིང་གཉེར	tree/ wood/ firewood distributor/ controller/ caretaker	shing gnyer
ཤིང་ཏ་ལ	palm[yra] tree	shing ta la
ཤིང་ཏིང་ཏིང་ཁུན་པ	ting khun pa/ tamarind tree?	shing ting ting khun pa
ཤིང་ཏུ	very, exceedingly, completely, utterly	shing tu
ཤིང་ཏུ་དཀའ་བའི་ལས	very difficult work	shing tu dka' ba'i las
ཤིང་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར	very hidden phenomenon, extremely concealed [object, fact]	shing tu lkog gyur
ཤིང་ཏུ་གཁྲོས་པ	extremely wrathful [figures]	shing tu gkhros pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ	1 of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis}	shing tu rgyas pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ་འི་སྡེ	the development, the [work] great extent, extensive explanations	shing tu rgyas pa 'i sde
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ	very large/ great	shing tu che ba
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྙེད་དཀའ	very rare/ hard to find	shing tu rnyed dka'
ཤིང་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	greatest giving	shing tu gtong ba
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྟོང་པ	very empty	shing tu stong pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་བསྟན་པའི་དབང	empowerment of thorough introduction	shing tu bstan pa'i dbang
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཐ་དད་པ	complete difference	shing tu tha dad pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་མཐོང	good view	shing tu mthong
ཤིང་ཏུ་མཐོང་བ	good view	shing tu mthong ba
ཤིང་ཏུ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	completely spotless	shing tu dri ma med pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་མ་ཡིན	not completely spotless	shing tu dri ma med pa ma yin
ཤིང་ཏུ་ནས	extremely, very	shing tu nas
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྣམ་དག	utterly pure, those absolutely, perfectly pure	shing tu rnam dag
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྣམ་འབྱེས	well proportioned	shing tu rnam 'byes
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྤྱངས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	be supple	shing tu spyangs pa dang bcas pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་རླུང	very subtle wind	shing tu phra ba'i rlung
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་སེམས	very subtle mind	shing tu phra ba'i sems
ཤིང་ཏུ་བྱམས་པ	utmost love, extreme kindness	shing tu byams pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྦྱང་དཀའ་བ	[the 1] difficult to conquer	shing tu sbyang dka' ba
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྦྱང་བ	thorough training shing tu sbyang ba byas pa'i ting nge 'dzin - samadhi of thorough training	shing tu sbyang ba
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་དཀའ་པ	[the 1] difficult to conquer	shing tu sbyangs dka' pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	suppleness, pliancy, flexibility, refinement, thoroughly purified, cleaned up, processed out, tranquility, quietude, shinjang	shing tu sbyangs pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ་ཆེ	very supple/ pliant/ pure/ tranquil shinjanged shing tu sbyangs pa yang dag byang chub	shing tu sbyangs pa che
ཤིང་ཏུ་མང་པོ	very many	shing tu mang po
ཤིང་ཏུ་དམན	very low	shing tu dman
ཤིང་ཏུ་དམན་པ	very low	shing tu dman pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་མཛའ་བར་གྱུར	became close friends	shing tu mdza' bar gyur
ཤིང་ཏུ་རྫོགས་པ	completely exhausted/ perfected	shing tu rdzogs pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཟུབ་པའི་སྣང་པ	very depressed feeling	shing tu zub pa'i snang pa
ཤིང་ཏུ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	utterly completely pure	shing tu yongs su dag pa
ཤིང་ཏོག	fruit, fruit of a tree, 1 of 5 snying po lnga, fruit	shing tog
ཤིང་ཏོག་ཁུ་བ	squash	shing tog khu ba
ཤིང་ཏོག་རྒྱལ་པོ	sour fruit used for medicine	shing tog rgyal po
ཤིང་ཏོག་ངང་ལག་མ	banana	shing tog ngang lag ma
ཤིང་ཏོག་དང་མངར་ཟས	dessert shing tog dang 'bru'i phyi pags skam po husk	shing tog dang mngar zas
ཤིང་ཏོག་སྡུམ་ར	orchard	shing tog sdum ra
ཤིང་ཏོག་པིལ་བ	wood-apple	shing tog pil ba
ཤིང་ཏོག་བི་ཛ་པུ་ར	bi dza pu ra fruit	shing tog bi dza pu ra
ཤིང་ཏོག་བིལ་བ	the bilba fruit	shing tog bil ba
ཤིང་ཏོག་མོད་པོ	abounding in tree fruits	shing tog mod po
ཤིང་ཏོག་མཛུག་གུ	banana	shing tog mdzug gu
ཤིང་ཏོག་ཞིག	banana	shing tog zhig
ཤིང་ཏོག་རིགས	different fruits	shing tog rigs
ཤིང་ཏོག་རློང་པ	unripe	shing tog rlong pa
ཤིང་ཏོག་ཨ་མྲ	persimmon mango	shing tog a mra
ཤིང་གཏུབ་པ	split wood in chips	shing gtub pa
ཤིང་རྟ	* carriage, cart, wagon, chariot, wood horse year	shing rta
ཤིང་རྟ་མཁན	wagon maker	shing rta mkhan
ཤིང་རྟ་འཁོར་ལོ	carriage, cart	shing rta 'khor lo
ཤིང་རྟ་འཁོར་ལོ་གཏོང་མཁན	chariot driver	shing rta 'khor lo gtong mkhan
ཤིང་རྟ་འགོག	wagon stopper, tree	shing rta 'gog
ཤིང་རྟ་བརྒྱ་པ	{shing rta brgya pa	shing rta brgya pa
ཤིང་རྟ་བརྒྱད	8 charioteers, 8 operating methods, 8 traditional approaches	shing rta brgyad
ཤིང་རྟ་བཅུ་པ	king of ayodhya whose son was rama	shing rta bcu pa
ཤིང་རྟ་བཅུ་པའི	king rama, shing rta ma river, stream	shing rta bcu pa'i
ཤིང་རྟ་བཅུ་པའི་སྲས	son of dasaratha	shing rta bcu pa'i sras
ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེ	great charioteers (asanga, nagarjuna)	shing rta che
ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོ	great steersman / charioteer, champion	shing rta chen po
ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 great schools/ chariots of Buddhist teaching	shing rta chen po brgyad
ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	commentaries upon the Trilogy of Natural Ease (ngal gso skor gsum), by Longchen Rabjam	shing rta chen po rnam gsum
ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོའི་དགོངས་པ	the realization/ intention of the great chariots/ schools of Buddhist teaching	shing rta chen po'i dgongs pa
ཤིང་རྟ་གཉིས	Nagarjuna and Asanga [dbu sems kyi shing rta'i srol 'byed klu sgrub dang, thogs med do]	shing rta gnyis
ཤིང་རྟ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་གཞུང་ལུགས	the Scriptural traditions of the Two Charioteers: Nagarjuna and Asanga 2721	shing rta gnyis kyi gzhung lugs
ཤིང་རྟ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ལུགས་མཆོག	the eminent systems of the Two Charioteers: Nagarjuna and Asanga	shing rta gnyis kyi lugs mchog
ཤིང་རྟ་མཐོ་བ	sun, champion, great steersman/ charioteer	shing rta mtho ba
ཤིང་རྟ་འདྲེན་པ	wagon puller, ox	shing rta 'dren pa
ཤིང་རྟ་སྣ་ཚོགས	caitra ratha, name of a forest to the east of	shing rta sna tshogs
ཤིང་རྟ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཚལ	park of various chariots	shing rta sna tshogs kyi tshal
ཤིང་རྟ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅན	various coaches park	shing rta sna tshogs can
ཤིང་རྟ་སྣ་ཚོགས་པའི་ཚལ	various coaches park * end of a lacuna in notes	shing rta sna tshogs pa'i tshal
ཤིང་རྟ་པ	chariot driver/ owner/ maker, man born in the wood horse year, pioneer	shing rta pa
ཤིང་རྟ་བྱེད	carpenter	shing rta byed
ཤིང་རྟ་བྱེད་པོ	wagon maker	shing rta byed po
ཤིང་རྟ་མ	stream, woman born in the wood horse year	shing rta ma
ཤིང་རྟ་མོ	bya shing rta mo - woodpecker	shing rta mo
ཤིང་རྟ་འི་སྲོལ	champion's way	shing rta 'i srol
ཤིང་རྟ་འི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེབ	champion's way, pioneer	shing rta 'i srol phyeb
ཤིང་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་སོང	travelled in a carriage	shing rta la zhon song
ཤིང་རྟན	chariot	shing rtan
ཤིང་རྟན་སྣ་ཚོགས	caitra ratha forest	shing rtan sna tshogs
ཤིང་རྟའི་བསྐྱོད་ཤུགས	a kind of war cry	shing rta'i bskyod shugs
ཤིང་རྟའི་ཁ་ལོ	charioteer	shing rta'i kha lo
ཤིང་རྟའི་ཁ་ལོ་པ	chariot driver	shing rta'i kha lo pa
ཤིང་རྟའི་ཁང་བཟང	chariot, body of a wagon	shing rta'i khang bzang
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྒལ	cart load, wagon load	shing rta'i sgal
ཤིང་རྟའི་རྗེས	track of a car or cart	shing rta'i rjes
ཤིང་རྟའི་གཉའ་ཤིང	yoke attached to chariot to which animals are tied	shing rta'i gnya' shing
ཤིང་རྟའི་གཉེན	chariot driver	shing rta'i gnyen
ཤིང་རྟའི་མདའ	pole or beam or shaft of a cart	shing rta'i mda'
ཤིང་རྟའི་འཕང་ལོ	chariot wheel	shing rta'i 'phang lo
ཤིང་རྟའི་འཕྲེང་བ	sets of chariots	shing rta'i 'phreng ba
ཤིང་རྟའི་ཚོགས	chariot troops	shing rta'i tshogs
ཤིང་རྟའི་ལམ་སྲོལ	vehicle tradition, philosophical system shing rta'i lam srol dbye ba mdzad pa blazed the trail for, opened up for the tradition of the chariot so and so	shing rta'i lam srol
ཤིང་རྟའི་ལུས	yellow goose	shing rta'i lus
ཤིང་རྟའི་ཤིང	tree called harimantha	shing rta'i shing
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ	champions' way	shing rta'i srol
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་གཉིས	the two chariots' traditions [theg pa chen po la thogs med dang klu sgrub gnyis kyi lugs su phye ba rgya chen spyod pa'i srol dang, zab mo lta ba'i srol]	shing rta'i srol gnyis
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱི་བ	champions's way pioneer	shing rta'i srol phyi ba
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བ	found/ instigate a scriptural tradition [of philosophy], champions's way pioneer	shing rta'i srol phye ba
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད	chariot leader of the teachings	shing rta'i srol 'byed
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་གཉིས	Nagarjuna and Asanga	shing rta'i srol 'byed gnyis
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་སྟོན་པ	charioteer tradition founding teachers shing rta'i srol 'byed pa rnam pa gnyis kyi	shing rta'i srol 'byed ston pa
ཤིང་སྟག	wood tiger year	shing stag
ཤིང་སྟག་པ	man born n the wood tiger year	shing stag pa
ཤིང་སྟག་མ	rhododendron	shing stag ma
ཤིང་སྟན	chopping block	shing stan
ཤིང་ཐགས	1) fence/ line/ hedge of many connected trees; 2) [arch] turret/ pinnacle; 2) table	shing thags
ཤིང་ཐུན	one who picks up sticks	shing thun
ཤིང་ཐུན་པ	wood cutter	shing thun pa
ཤིང་ཐུར	1) wooden spoon/ shovel; 2) little piece of wood	shing thur
ཤིང་ཐུར་གཅིག་གིས་གུར་མི་ཕུབ	you can't pitch a tent w a wooden spoon	shing thur gcig gis gur mi phub
ཤིང་ཐོ	wooden hammer, mallet	shing tho
ཤིང་ཐོག	fruit of a tree	shing thog
ཤིང་ཐོག་གུ	fruits	shing thog gu
ཤིང་འཐུ	collecting wood	shing 'thu
ཤིང་འཐུ་བ	collecting wood	shing 'thu ba
ཤིང་འཐུན	wood-collectors	shing 'thun
ཤིང་འཐུར་འགྲོ	goes collecting wood	shing 'thur 'gro
ཤིང་དང་ཐག་པ	ropes and levers	shing dang thag pa
ཤིང་དུག	poison of trees	shing dug
ཤིང་དུམ	block	shing dum
ཤིང་དུམ་བུ	log	shing dum bu
ཤིང་དུམ་ལ་མཚོན་བཞིན	like when an axe hits a log	shing dum la mtshon bzhin
ཤིང་དོང	wooden tube	shing dong
ཤིང་དྲིལ་དཀར་པོ	lepyrodiclis holosteoides (edgew.) fisch. et c. a. mey.	shing dril dkar po
ཤིང་དྲུང	[sitting] under trees GD	shing drung
ཤིང་དྲུང་པ	sitting under trees GD TSE	shing drung pa
ཤིང་དྲུང་ཞིག་ཏུ	under a tree	shing drung zhig tu
ཤིང་དྲུངས་པ	wells at the foot of a tree	shing drungs pa
ཤིང་འདོམ་དོ	piece of wood 2 fathoms long	shing 'dom do
ཤིང་ལྡན	forest	shing ldan
ཤིང་ལྡུམ	bush	shing ldum
ཤིང་སྡོང	tree, tree	shing sdong
ཤིང་སྡོང་སྐམ་པ	dead [& dried out] tree [trunk]	shing sdong skam pa
ཤིང་སྡོང་ཆུང་ཆུང	sapling, shrub	shing sdong chung chung
ཤིང་སྡོང་པོ	tree	shing sdong po
ཤིང་སྡོང་པོ་ལ་འཛེག་པ	climb up a tree	shing sdong po la 'dzeg pa
ཤིང་སྡོད	tree	shing sdod
ཤིང་ནགས	forest	shing nags
ཤིང་ནགས་ལྟ་རྟོགས་པ	forester	shing nags lta rtogs pa
ཤིང་ནགས་སྟུགས་པོ	thick forest	shing nags stugs po
ཤིང་ནགས་མེད་པར་བཟོ་བ	deforest	shing nags med par bzo ba
ཤིང་ནགས་སུ་འགྱུར་བ	afforest	shing nags su 'gyur ba
ཤིང་གནས	birds and mice, living in the earth	shing gnas
ཤིང་པགས	bark	shing pags
ཤིང་པང་པ་གང	armful of wood	shing pang pa gang
ཤིང་པད་མ	peony, tree peony	shing pad ma
ཤིང་པར	wood engraving/ printing [block]	shing par
ཤིང་པར་རྐོ་བ	engrave a wood engraving/ printing [block]	shing par rko ba
ཤིང་པུན་ན་ག	Punnaga tree, punnaga vrksa. Rottleria tinctoria or Calphyllum inophyllum	shing pun na ga
ཤིང་དཔག་བསམ	wish- fulfilling tree	shing dpag bsam
ཤིང་ལྤགས	bark of trees, cinnamon	shing lpags
ཤིང་སྤགས	bark 2722	shing spags
ཤིང་སྤང	woodland meadow	shing spang
ཤིང་སྤང་གསེར་གྱི་མན་དལ	Golden Mandala of Meadows and Woods, in India	shing spang gser gyi man dal
ཤིང་སྤེ	pile of wood	shing spe
ཤིང་སྤྱིལ	hut made of twigs etc	shing spyil
ཤིང་སྤྲེ	wood monkey year	shing spre
ཤིང་སྤྲེ་པ	man born in the wood monkey year	shing spre pa
ཤིང་སྤྲེ་མ	woman born in the wood monkey year	shing spre ma
ཤིང་ཕག	wood pig year	shing phag
ཤིང་ཕག་པ	man born in the wood pig year	shing phag pa
ཤིང་ཕག་མ	man born in the wood pig year	shing phag ma
ཤིང་ཕལ་རྣམས	common trees	shing phal rnams
ཤིང་ཕུར	wood purpa	shing phur
ཤིང་ཕོ	wood male	shing pho
ཤིང་ཕོར	wooden bowl	shing phor
ཤིང་ཕྱེ	sawdust	shing phye
ཤིང་ཕྲུག	sapling	shing phrug
ཤིང་འཕེལ	fire	shing 'phel
ཤིང་བ་གླང་རྨིག་པ	bull's eye-flower	shing ba glang rmig pa
ཤིང་བལ	1) lcang rnyid, [willow ?fading?]; 2) cotton [plant] *, cotton wool, vegetable silk	shing bal
ཤིང་བལ་བགོས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of cotton dividing	shing bal bgos pa'i ltung byed
ཤིང་བལ་ཅན	cadamba tree	shing bal can
ཤིང་བལ་ལྟར	like cotton [wool]	shing bal ltar
ཤིང་བལ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of cotton	shing bal rigs lnga
ཤིང་བིམ་པ་ལ	Bimpala tree. Perhaps an error for bimba, Momordica monadelpha, a plant with bright red gourd fruits	shing bim pa la
ཤིང་བུ	1) short small wooden spoon, stirring stick; 2) fire puja offering stick; 3) piece of wood, a pole, stick	shing bu
ཤིང་བུ་མེ	the son of wood is fire	shing bu me
ཤིང་བྱ	wood bird year	shing bya
ཤིང་བྱ་ན	woman born in the wood bird year	shing bya na
ཤིང་བྱ་པ	man born in the wood bird year	shing bya pa
ཤིང་བྱང	a board	shing byang
ཤིང་བྱང་ཆུབ	peepul tree	shing byang chub
ཤིང་བྱི	wood mouse * year	shing byi
ཤིང་བྱི་པ	man born in the wood mouse year	shing byi pa
ཤིང་བྱི་མ	man born in the wood mouse year	shing byi ma
ཤིང་བླུག་བྱེད་པ	put wood on	shing blug byed pa
ཤིང་དབང	the great tree	shing dbang
ཤིང་འབག	wooden mask	shing 'bag
ཤིང་འབག་ཀྲང་ཞི	puppet theater	shing 'bag krang zhi
ཤིང་འབིགས	chisel, indian fig tree	shing 'bigs
ཤིང་འབྲས	fruit; fruits	shing 'bras
ཤིང་འབྲས་འཐོག་པ	pick, pluck	shing 'bras 'thog pa
ཤིང་འབྲས་ལྡུམ་ར	orchard	shing 'bras ldum ra
ཤིང་འབྲས་བུ་མེད་པ	tree without fruit	shing 'bras bu med pa
ཤིང་འབྲས་བུ་སྨིན་ནས་འཇིག་པ	tree that dies after its fruit has ripened	shing 'bras bu smin nas 'jig pa
ཤིང་འབྲས་མོ	rice	shing 'bras mo
ཤིང་འབྲུག	wood dragon year	shing 'brug
ཤིང་འབྲུག་པ	man born in the wood dragon year	shing 'brug pa
ཤིང་འབྲུག་མ	woman born in the wood dragon year	shing 'brug ma
ཤིང་འབྲུག་དམག	wood dragon war w the English	shing 'brug dmag
ཤིང་སྦུབས	hollow in a tree	shing sbubs
ཤིང་སྦྱར་མ	flat pieces of wood joined together	shing sbyar ma
ཤིང་སྦྲུལ	wood-snake year	shing sbrul
ཤིང་སྦྲུལ་པ	man born in the wood snake year	shing sbrul pa
ཤིང་སྦྲུལ་མ	man born in the wood snake year	shing sbrul ma
ཤིང་མ་ཆུ	the mother of wood is water	shing ma chu
ཤིང་མ་རུ་ར	olive tree	shing ma ru ra
ཤིང་མ་རུ་རའི་ཡལ་ག	olive branch	shing ma ru ra'i yal ga
ཤིང་མི	woodsman	shing mi
ཤིང་མོ	wood female	shing mo
ཤིང་མོ་གླང་གི་ལོ	the year of the Female Wood Ox	shing mo glang gi lo
ཤིང་མོད་པོ	wood is plentiful	shing mod po
ཤིང་མྱུག	sapling	shing myug
ཤིང་མྱུག་ར་བ	tree nursery	shing myug ra ba
ཤིང་དམར	parrot's nose, red tree, parrot	shing dmar
ཤིང་རྨ་བྱའི་གཙུག	species of grass cyperus rotundus	shing rma bya'i gtsug
ཤིང་རྨ་བྱའི་གཙུག་ཕུད	peacock's crest tree	shing rma bya'i gtsug phud
ཤིང་སྨན	barks, roots, medicinal herbs or leaves or fruits, medicines from trees	shing sman
ཤིང་རྩ	tree roots	shing rtsa
ཤིང་རྩི	varnish	shing rtsi
ཤིང་རྩི་གཏོང་བ	varnish	shing rtsi gtong ba
ཤིང་ཚ	Indian cassia, Cinnamomum tamala	shing tsha
ཤིང་ཚྭ	one of the {phyi'i rtsa ba brgyad} the eight outer principal [medicines]	shing tshwa
ཤིང་ཚའི་ལོ་མ	cinnamon leaf	shing tsha'i lo ma
ཤིང་ཚལ	forest, clip, shaving, splinter	shing tshal
ཤིང་ཚི	sticky tree sap med.	shing tshi
ཤིང་ཚུག	wooden cauterizing stick	shing tshug
ཤིང་ཚེ	liter	shing tshe
ཤིང་ཚེ་རིང	{shing tshe ring} 1 of the tshe ring rnam drug	shing tshe ring
ཤིང་ཚེར་འབྲས་ཅན	jack-fruit tree	shing tsher 'bras can
ཤིང་ཚོན	dye from trees	shing tshon
ཤིང་མཚེ	{shing mtshe} tree med.	shing mtshe
ཤིང་ཛ	bu bri-ksha, Jambu tree GD	shing dza
ཤིང་འཛིན	plantain plant	shing 'dzin
ཤིང་འཛུགས	plant trees	shing 'dzugs
ཤིང་འཛུགས་ནགས་གསོ	planting and cultivating trees, forestation	shing 'dzugs nags gso
ཤིང་འཛེག	climbing up	shing 'dzeg
ཤིང་རྫིངས	wooden boat/ ship	shing rdzings
ཤིང་ཞིག	some wood	shing zhig
ཤིང་ཞོགས	1) shing la 'bur len brgyab pa'i rgyan pa srab mo; 2) pieces/ fragments of wood	shing zhogs
ཤིང་གཞུ	wooden bow	shing gzhu
ཤིང་གཞོང	wooden basin, tray, trough, tub	shing gzhong
ཤིང་གཞོན་ནུ	new tree	shing gzhon nu
ཤིང་བཞོག་པ	cut, hew, make wood smooth with the hatchet, split wood	shing bzhog pa
ཤིང་ཟ	chisel, indian fig tree	shing za
ཤིང་ཟ་བ	hong len	shing za ba
ཤིང་ཟན	food at funeral ceremony,	shing zan
ཤིང་ཟམ	wooden bridge	shing zam
ཤིང་ཟེལ	wood shaving	shing zel
ཤིང་གཟུགས	wooden puppet, marionette	shing gzugs
ཤིང་གཟུགས་རྩེད་ཆས	wooden puppet, marionette	shing gzugs rtsed chas
ཤིང་གཟུགས་ཟློས་གར	[wooden] puppet/ marionette show	shing gzugs zlos gar
ཤིང་གཟེར	wooden nail	shing gzer
ཤིང་གཟོང	implement that bores into wood, gimlet, chisel, adze, indian fig tree	shing gzong
ཤིང་བཟང་པགས་རུལ	having good qualities but left unused, good wood w rotten bark	shing bzang pags rul
ཤིང་བཟའ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ	celebrated tibetan female saint shing bza' pan di ta blo bzang dar rgyas 1759-1854 - Shingsa Pandita Lobsang Dargye, an incarnation of Tsongkhapa's mother	shing bza' rnal 'byor ma
ཤིང་བཟའ་ཨ་ཆོས	tsong khapa's mother	shing bza' a chos
ཤིང་བཟོ	woodworking, carpentry	shing bzo
ཤིང་བཟོ་པ	carpenter	shing bzo pa
ཤིང་བཟོ་བ	carpenter, carpenter 2723	shing bzo ba
ཤིང་བཟོ་བྱེད	do carpentry	shing bzo byed
ཤིང་བཟོ་རིག་པ	woodcraft	shing bzo rig pa
ཤིང་བཟོས	wooden, made of wood	shing bzos
ཤིང་ཡག	wooden hoe	shing yag
ཤིང་ཡན་ལག	thorn	shing yan lag
ཤིང་ཡོངས་འདུ་ས	medicinal plant of the lily species	shing yongs 'du sa
ཤིང་ཡོངས་འདུ་ས་བརྟོལ	wish-fulfilling tree	shing yongs 'du sa brtol
ཤིང་ཡོས	wood rabbit year	shing yos
ཤིང་ཡོས་པ	man born in the wood rabbit year	shing yos pa
ཤིང་ཡོས་སྨིན་དྲུག་ཟླ་བ	in the smin drug month of the wood rabbit year	shing yos smin drug zla ba
ཤིང་ར	1) wooden fence; 2) enclosure/ place for putting wood	shing ra
ཤིང་ར་རི	twisted trees	shing ra ri
ཤིང་ར་ལས་ཁུངས	firewood office for major Tibetan govt offices	shing ra las khungs
ཤིང་རགས	stack of wood	shing rags
ཤིང་རིགས	[types of] trees	shing rigs
ཤིང་རིས	decorated tablets	shing ris
ཤིང་ལ་ཕུག	{shing la phug} med. tree	shing la phug
ཤིང་ལ་རྩེ	peacock	shing la rtse
ཤིང་ལ་སོགས་པ་བུད་ཤིང	kindling/ fuel of wood etc.	shing la sogs pa bud shing
ཤིང་ལམ	wooden tracks	shing lam
ཤིང་ལམ་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	carts going on wooden tracks	shing lam 'phrul chas
ཤིང་ལས་བབས	tumbled down from the tree	shing las babs
ཤིང་ལུག	wood sheep year	shing lug
ཤིང་ལུག་པ	man born in the wood sheep year	shing lug pa
ཤིང་ལུག་མ	man born in the wood sheep year	shing lug ma
ཤིང་ལེབ	board, plank	shing leb
ཤིང་ལེབ་ནག་པོའི་གསར་འགྱུར	blackboard news posting	shing leb nag po'i gsar 'gyur
ཤིང་ལོ	tree leaves	shing lo
ཤིང་ལོ་མ་བདུན	tree alstonia	shing lo ma bdun
ཤིང་ལོ་མ་བདུན་པ	seven-leaved	shing lo ma bdun pa
ཤིང་ལོ་གསར་དུ་ཁ་འབུས་པ	fresh shoots of leaves	shing lo gsar du kha 'bus pa
ཤིང་ཤ་མི	sami tree	shing sha mi
ཤིང་ཤི་རི་ཤ	tree acacia sirisa	shing shi ri sha
ཤིང་ཤི་ལུ	species of tree	shing shi lu
ཤིང་ཤུག་པ	cypress	shing shug pa
ཤིང་ཤུན	bark	shing shun
ཤིང་ཤུན་ལྔ	1) {tsan-dan dkar po}. 2) {tsan-dan dmar po} 3) {u dum ba ra} 4) {nyA gro ta} 5) {prap-ta}	shing shun lnga
ཤིང་ཤུན་ཆང	wine from certain barks of trees such as cinnamon	shing shun chang
ཤིང་ཤོག	bark paper	shing shog
ཤིང་གཤགས	kindling	shing gshags
ཤིང་གཤོག་མཁན	carpenter	shing gshog mkhan
ཤིང་གཤོག་པ	split wood	shing gshog pa
ཤིང་ས་ལ	sal trees	shing sa la
ཤིང་སེ་བ	food of the silkworm	shing se ba
ཤིང་སེང་གེའི་མཇུག་མ	lion's tail tree	shing seng ge'i mjug ma
ཤིང་སེད	file, rasp	shing sed
ཤིང་སེར	yellow tree, berberry, yellow plant	shing ser
ཤིང་སོག	wood saw	shing sog
ཤིང་སོགས་བདར་བའི་གཙེར་སྒྲ	creaky	shing sogs bdar ba'i gtser sgra
ཤིང་སོན	tree seeds	shing son
ཤིང་སོན་གྱི་ལྡུམ་ར	tree nursery	shing son gyi ldum ra
ཤིང་སོན་གྱི་ར་བ	tree nursery	shing son gyi ra ba
ཤིང་སོན་ལྡུམ་ར	tree nursery	shing son ldum ra
ཤིང་སོན་རྩ་སྤོས	transplant a tree seedling	shing son rtsa spos
ཤིང་སོབ་སོབ	hollow tree, spongy wood	shing sob sob
ཤིང་སྲིན	insect living in wood	shing srin
ཤིང་སྲིན་བྲུན	excrement of woodeating moth which is said to cure worm disease	shing srin brun
ཤིང་བསྲེགས་པའི་དུམ་བུ	hunks of burned wood {yi dwags mang po lus kyi sha dang rus pa chu rgyus kyi bar skams shing, shing bsregs pa'i dum bu lta bu} were nothing but skin and bones, their bodies like hunks of burned woo...	shing bsregs pa'i dum bu
ཤིང་ལྷམ	wooden clogs	shing lham
ཤིང་ཨ་རྐ་པ	white species of this plant	shing a rka pa
ཤིང་ཨ་རྐ་པ་རྣ	plant calotropis gigantea	shing a rka pa rna
ཤིང་ཨ་པ་མ་རྒ	kind of tree	shing a pa ma rga
ཤིང་ཨུ་དུམ་ཝ་ར	glomerous fig tree	shing u dum wa ra
ཤིང་ཨེ་རནད་ད	castor oil plant	shing e rand da
ཤིང་ཨེ་ལ་བ་ལུ་ཀ	fragrant bark of feronia elephantum	shing e la ba lu ka
ཤིད	1) * funeral ceremony; 2) fruit from a tree	shid
ཤིད་ཅང	Sinkiang Province	shid cang
ཤིད་ཆོས	dead person having done visualization virtuous roots establishing dharma	shid chos
ཤིད་སྟོན	for dead person visualizing/establishing virtuous roots dharma	shid ston
ཤིད་བུ	shiva	shid bu
ཤིད་ཟན	food left by a dead person, ro zas [all meanings?]	shid zan
ཤིད་ལས	work for the sake of a dead person	shid las
ཤིད་ས	burying ground, cemetery, fruitful field	shid sa
ཤིད་སྲང	kind of steelyard	shid srang
ཤིད་ལྷ	lord of death, TSE	shid lha
ཤིན	{shin tu}	shin
ཤིན་ཁྲེལ་ཏེ	mortified	shin khrel te
ཤིན་ཏམ་གར་བྷ	see {rig 'dzin brgyad}	shin tam gar bha
ཤིན་ཏུ	very, exceedingly, completely, utterly	shin tu
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཀློག་གྱུར	very secret, most confidential	shin tu klog gyur
ཤིན་ཏུ་དཀའ	extremely difficult	shin tu dka'
ཤིན་ཏུ་དཀར	very/ completely white	shin tu dkar
ཤིན་ཏུ་དཀོན	this is exceedingly rare	shin tu dkon
ཤིན་ཏུ་བཀྲག	very bright	shin tu bkrag
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར	very hidden phenomenon, extremely concealed [object, fact]	shin tu lkog gyur
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐོག་གྱུར	TSE	shin tu skog gyur
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྱིད་པའི་གདུང་རབས་ལྔ	the five very happy generations	shin tu skyid pa'i gdung rabs lnga
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྱོ་བ	mind of sadness	shin tu skyo ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྲངས	among the sbyor ba nyer bdun	shin tu skrangs
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྲངས་པ	1 of 27 coincidences in astrology, SA sbyor ba nyer bdun	shin tu skrangs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཁྲོ	fierce, terrific	shin tu khro
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཁྲོས་པ	extremely wrathful [figures]	shin tu khros pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་འཁོར་བ	be blundering, mistakeful	shin tu 'khor ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་འཁྲུགས	very stormy	shin tu 'khrugs
ཤིན་ཏུ་གལ་ཆེ	it is very important, this is very important, extremely important, most important	shin tu gal che
ཤིན་ཏུ་གྲིམས་པ	firm and solid	shin tu grims pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་གྲོལ་བ་ཅན	tree called harimantha	shin tu grol ba can
ཤིན་ཏུ་དགའ	joyful 2724	shin tu dga'
ཤིན་ཏུ་དགའ་བ	very pleased, great joy	shin tu dga' ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་དགེ་བ	very auspicious	shin tu dge ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{shin tu rgyal mtshan	shin tu rgyal mtshan
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ	very extensive TSE	shin tu rgyas pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	great extent shin tu rgyas pa chen po byang chub	shin tu rgyas pa chen po
སེམས་དཔའ་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ	bodhisattvapitakas of extensive teaching GD shin tu rgyas pa chen po byang chub	sems dpa' phal po che
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པའི་སྡེ	extensive teachings, one of the {gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis} twelve divisions of the teachings	shin tu rgyas pa'i sde
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་བ	very rapidly moving one	shin tu rgyu ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ངན་པ	very bad, completely evil	shin tu ngan pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་ངེས་པ	very certain	shin tu nges pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་གཅེས	[it is]. essential; [it is] essential	shin tu gces
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྕི་བ	very heavy	shin tu lci ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ	very big	shin tu che
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཆོག	very excellent, superior, sublime, exalted, very good	shin tu mchog
ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	most supramundane wisdom	shin tu 'jig rten las 'das pa'i ye shes
ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིགས་པ	terrified	shin tu 'jigs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཉམས་མཚར	amazing	shin tu nyams mtshar
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྙེད་དཀའ	extremely difficult to find	shin tu rnyed dka'
ཤིན་ཏུ་གཏོང་བ	greatest giving	shin tu gtong ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྟུང་བ	among the sbyor ba nyer bdun	shin tu ltung ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྟབས་བདེ	very simple	shin tu stabs bde
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྟུགས་པོ	very dense	shin tu stugs po
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྟོང་པ	greater emptiness	shin tu stong pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྟོང་པའི་འོད་གསལ	the completely empty luminosity	shin tu stong pa'i 'od gsal
ཤིན་ཏུ་བསྟན་པའི་དབང	empowerment of thorough introduction	shin tu bstan pa'i dbang
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཐ་དད་པ	complete difference	shin tu tha dad pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཐོང	Immense Vista	shin tu mthong
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཐོང་བ	good view, the fourth of the {gnas gtsang ma lnga} 4th pure abode in the form realm; good view, the fourth of the {gnas gtsang ma lnga}. 4th pure abode in the form realm	shin tu mthong ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་དག་པའི་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ	tath gatas who are utterly pure GD	shin tu dag pa'i de bzhin gshegs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་དྭངས་པ	vaidurya, lapis lazuli	shin tu dwangs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་དད་ཅིང་གུས་པས	with humility and great faith	shin tu dad cing gus pas
ཤིན་ཏུ་དད་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས	his mind had been full of devotion	shin tu dad pa'i sems kyis
ཤིན་ཏུ་དད་པར་གྱུར་པ	all of one mind in their devotion	shin tu dad par gyur pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་དུག	bong nga, aconite	shin tu dug
ཤིན་ཏུ་དུབ་པ	completely exhausted	shin tu dub pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་དོག་པ	very narrow bounds shin tu don ldan kun rdzogs kyi theg pa Way Wherein Everything is Perfect and Meaningful	shin tu dog pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་དྲག་པོ	very strong	shin tu drag po
ཤིན་ཏུ་བརྡལ་བ	very extensive	shin tu brdal ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་བརྡུང་བ	malleable, soft, pliant	shin tu brdung ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ནས	extremely, very	shin tu nas
ཤིན་ཏུ་ནས་ཀྱང	extremely, very. [mss]	shin tu nas kyang
ཤིན་ཏུ་གནོངས	I sincerely regret	shin tu gnongs
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣམ་དག	utterly pure, those absolutely, perfectly pure	shin tu rnam dag
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣམ་འབྱེས	well proportioned	shin tu rnam 'byes
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Skt Ati Yoga; yoga of the innermost essence	shin tu rnal 'byor
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	Ati Yoga Yana	shin tu rnal 'byor gyi theg pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣོ	very sharp	shin tu rno
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣོན་པོ	very sharp	shin tu rnon po
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤོབས་པ	inner confidence	shin tu spobs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྱངས་པ	tranquillity	shin tu spyangs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	extremely unelaborate phase of Mahayoga GD	shin tu spros bral
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད	very unelaborate, simple	shin tu spros med
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Very unelaborate conduct. A type of conduct for enhancement	shin tu spros med kyi spyod pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་མེད་དབང་བསྐུར	the very unelaborate empowerment shin tu spros med shes rab ye shes kyi	shin tu spros med dbang bskur
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བ	extremely fine, extremely subtle, most subtle; extremely fine, most subtle	shin tu phra ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་སྒོ་གསུམ	the most subtle three doors shin tu phra ba'i sgo gsum rdo rje mi shigs	shin tu phra ba'i sgo gsum
སི྾་པུརེ	essences of the five elements and mind shin tu phra ba'i sgo gsum rdo rje mi shigs	six pure
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་བར་དོ	TSE	shin tu phra ba'i bar do
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་ཡིད་ལུས	TSE	shin tu phra ba'i yid lus
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་རླུང	very subtle wind	shin tu phra ba'i rlung
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་རླུང་སེམས	TSE	shin tu phra ba'i rlung sems
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བའི་སེམས	very subtle mind	shin tu phra ba'i sems
ཤིན་ཏུ་བ	SA phul tu phyin, te por	shin tu ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་བྱམས་པ	utmost love, extreme kindness 2725	shin tu byams pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་བྱམས་པས་བསྐྱེད་བསྲིངས	protecting us with great love	shin tu byams pas bskyed bsrings
ཤིན་ཏུ་བྱུང	a class of brahmans	shin tu byung
ཤིན་ཏུ་བླུན	senseless, foolish	shin tu blun
ཤིན་ཏུ་འབོལ	very soft	shin tu 'bol
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱང་དཀའ	the one difficult to conquer (level 5)	shin tu sbyang dka'
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱང་དཀའ་བ	hard to conquer, [the one] difficult to conquer, name of the 5th bodhisattva bhumi "one this level there are two difficulties, 1) striving to bring sentient beings to spiritual maturity while. 2) n...	shin tu sbyang dka' ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱང་དཀའ་བའི་ས	level very difficult to train in	shin tu sbyang dka' ba'i sa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱང་བ	thorough training	shin tu sbyang ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་དཀའ་བ	extremely/ very difficult to win 5th bhumi	shin tu sbyangs dka' ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	pliancy	shin tu sbyangs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ་དང་བཅས་པ	to be supple	shin tu sbyangs pa dang bcas pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ་ཡང་དག	pure ecstasy, one of the {byang chub yan lag bdun} the seven causes of enlightenment	shin tu sbyangs pa yang dag
ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག	enlightened flexibility shin tu sbyangs pa yang dag byang chub	kyi yan lag
ཤིན་ཏུ་མ་འོས་པ	shocking, outrageous	shin tu ma 'os pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་མང་པོ	extremely many	shin tu mang po
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་སྣང	entirely devoid of light	shin tu mi snang
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་དམིགས	1 of mi dmigs pa gsum	shin tu mi dmigs
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་དམིགས་པ	higher nonconceptuality	shin tu mi dmigs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་བཟད་མ	a yaksha princess	shin tu mi bzad ma
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་སྲུན་པ	language of gods of tusita heaven	shin tu mi srun pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་བསྲུན	being unruly, malicious, malignant	shin tu mi bsrun
ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་བསྲུན་ཞིང	very wild	shin tu mi bsrun zhing
ཤིན་ཏུ་མོ་ཡིག	very feminine syllable; 2) very feminine prefix ma	shin tu mo yig
ཤིན་ཏུ་མོའི་འཇུག་ཚུལ	very female [gently pronounced] suffix/ final letter	shin tu mo'i 'jug tshul
ཤིན་ཏུ་མོའི་ཡི	very feminine letters	shin tu mo'i yi
ཤིན་ཏུ་མོའི་ཡི་གེ	very soft letters	shin tu mo'i yi ge
ཤིན་ཏུ་མྱུར་བ	instantaneous/ extremely swift	shin tu myur ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་མྱུར་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	rapid wisdom	shin tu myur ba'i ye shes
ཤིན་ཏུ་དམན་པ	exceedingly inferior	shin tu dman pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྨོངས་པ	completely stupid/ ignorant	shin tu rmongs pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་བཙན་པའི་ས	very inaccessible and fearful place	shin tu btsan pa'i sa
ཤིན་ཏུ་བརྩོན	try/ exert 1self very hard	shin tu brtson
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཚེ་རིང་བ	1 of 7 mtho ris kyi yon tan	shin tu tshe ring ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཛད་དཀའ་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ	not knowing what to do	shin tu mdzad dka' bar gyur te
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཛའ་བ	rgyal po yang btsun mo	shin tu mdza' ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཛའ་བར་གྱུར	became close friends.	shin tu mdza' bar gyur
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཛེས	well-adorned, very handsome, very beautiful	shin tu mdzes
ཤིན་ཏུ་མཛེས་པ	the most beautiful shin tu mdzes shing 'jo sgeg dang ldan pa - both charming and beautiful	shin tu mdzes pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་གཞོན་ནུ	very young	shin tu gzhon nu
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཟབ	very profound	shin tu zab
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཟབ་པ	extremely deep	shin tu zab pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཟུབ་པའི་སྣང་པ	very depressed feeling	shin tu zub pa'i snang pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	finest of all	shin tu bzang po
ཤིན་ཏུ་བཟང་མོ	a heart nadi circle petal	shin tu bzang mo
ཤིན་ཏུ་བཟནད་པོ	finest of all	shin tu bzand po
ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡང་བདེན	that is indeed true	shin tu yang bden
ཤིན་ཏུ་རིང	one always remains very far, one will always remain very far	shin tu ring
ཤིན་ཏུ་རིང་པོ	<plu ta> very long [SK syllables]	shin tu ring po
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལན་ཚ་བ	rgya tshva CH salt	shin tu lan tsha ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལན་ཚྭ	very salty	shin tu lan tshwa
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལན་ཚྭ་བ	indian table salt	shin tu lan tshwa ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་སེམས་ངན་པ	has an evil mind	shin tu sems ngan pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སེམས་པ	thoughts zhib tu gtong ba	shin tu sems pa
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྲུང	well protected realm	shin tu srung
ཤིན་ཏུ་གསལ་བ	very brilliant, extremely clear	shin tu gsal ba
ཤིན་ཏུ་གསལ་བའི་གཅུང	Jupiter, gza' phur bu	shin tu gsal ba'i gcung
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྷག་པར	far more, very exceedingly, uncommonly	shin tu lhag par
ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྷུང་བ	1 of 27 coincidences in astrology, SA sbyor ba nyer bdun	shin tu lhung ba
ཤིན་ཏུའང་མི་འཐད	utterly mistaken	shin tu'ang mi 'thad
ཤིན་ཏེ་མ	1) humility, poverty; 2) impurity, corruption, defilement	shin te ma
ཤིན་པ་ཅན	having bark, skin or rind, scaly fish	shin pa can
ཤིན་བོད	Sinkiang-T	shin bod
ཤིན་བོད་གཞུང་ལམ	Sinkiang-T Highway	shin bod gzhung lam
ཤིན་སྦྱང	pliancy	shin sbyang
ཤིན་སྦྱངས	suppleness, buoyancy	shin sbyangs
ཤིན་སྦྱངས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	happiness/ bliss of shinjang/ pliancy	shin sbyangs kyi bde ba
ཤིན་སྦྱངས་བློ	supple/ shinjanged mind/ thoughts shin sbyangs yang dag byang chub kyi	shin sbyangs blo
ཤིན་མན	Hsinan River	shin man
ཤིན་མཚོན་པ་ཞིག	handful of sticks 2726	shin mtshon pa zhig
ཤིན་རྫི་ཏ	a fruit	shin rdzi ta
ཤིན་ཤུན་ཅན	SA sman po	shin shun can
ཤིན་ཧྭ་གསར་འགྱུར་ཁང	Shinhwa News Agency PRC	shin hwa gsar 'gyur khang
ཤིབ་པ	whisper	shib pa
ཤིབ་ཤི་ལུ་ལུ	fruit of the dog rose	shib shi lu lu
ཤིབས	[arch] tell a secret, be in close contact/ associate w, arrange in line/ a series	shibs
ཤིབས་པ	[arch] tell a secret, be in close contact/ associate w, arrange in line/ a series	shibs pa
ཤིམ	[arch] mixed	shim
ཤིམ་པ	mixed up	shim pa
ཤིམ་མི་ཤིམ	composite, different things together	shim mi shim
ཤིམ་ཤ་པ	a kind of tree or wood	shim sha pa
ཤིའི་མན	Sian	shi'i man
ཤིར	gush out, stream forth, musical note	shir
ཤིར་ཆུག	accepting death	shir chug
ཤིར་ཤིར	kind of rushing sound	shir shir
ཤིལ་བ	drip through	shil ba
ཤིལ་ལི	denotes the noise of anything	shil li
ཤིལ་ཤིལ	denotes the noise of anything	shil shil
ཤིས	auspicious, good luck/ fortune	shis
ཤིས་བརྗོད	uttering of auspiciousness, auspicious wishes; auspicious wishes, uttering of auspiciousness	shis brjod
ཤིས་བརྗོད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	mngon par 'dod pa'i yul gyi dngos po bsrung ba'am bsgrub pa la bar chad med par smon lam 'debs pa'i rgyan zhig, don sgon gyi nang gses shig	shis brjod kyi rgyan
ཤིས་བརྗོད་ཀྱིས་འགོག་པ	dgag bya mi 'dod pa'i bya ba'i dngos po zhig 'gog byed bkra shis dge legs kyi smon tshig brjod pa'i sgo nas rang la 'byung 'gyur gnas tshul ngan pa yong rgyu shugs kyis bstan te 'gog pa'i rgyan zhi...	shis brjod kyis 'gog pa
ཤིས་བརྗོད་ཉན	name of brgya byin lha	shis brjod nyan
ཤིས་བརྗོད་ཉན་པོ	Indra	shis brjod nyan po
ཤིས་ལྡང	{kyi lce} med. herb	shis ldang
ཤིས་པ	good luck, fortune, glory, bliss, blessedness, to support	shis pa
ཤིས་པ་བརྗོད་པ	auspicious verses, expressing auspiciousness	shis pa brjod pa
བྱས་ཏེ	began by making benevolent gestures	byas te
ཤིས་པ་པ	one blessed	shis pa pa
ཤིས་པ་སྩོལ	please bestow auspiciousness	shis pa stsol
ཤིས་པ་ཡིན་པ	be blessed	shis pa yin pa
ཤིས་པན་ཡ	Spain	shis pan ya
ཤིས་པའི་མིང	name foreboding good	shis pa'i ming
ཤིས་པར་འགྱུར་བ	become blessed	shis par 'gyur ba
ཤིས་པར་མཆོག་ཏུ་མཛད་པ	the 1 who bestows supreme auspiciousness	shis par mchog tu mdzad pa
ཤིས་པར་བྱེད་པ	make blessed, bless	shis par byed pa
ཤིས་འཕྲིན	auspicious message/ letter	shis 'phrin
ཤིས་འཕྲིན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	letter of greetings/ good news	shis 'phrin gyi yi ge
ཤིས་མན	Sian	shis man
ཤིས་སྨོན	auspicious aspirations/ prayer	shis smon
ཤིས་ཚིག	words of auspiciousness/ praise/ congratulation	shis tshig
ཤིས་མཛད	auspicious, foreboding good	shis mdzad
ཤིས་ཧུང་ཧྲེ	tomato	shis hung hre
ཤུ	place in tibet	shu
ཤུ་ཀྲ་མ	constellation nabs so	shu kra ma
ཤུ་གུ	paper	shu gu
ཤུ་གླུ	whistled song shu glu len pa'i lug rdzi mnyam du lug 'tsho bar 'gro - sheep grazing with the whistling shepherd	shu glu
ཤུ་རྒྱག	peel, pare, copy, whistle	shu rgyag
ཤུ་སྒྲ	whistle	shu sgra
ཤུ་སྒྲ་རྒྱག	whistle	shu sgra rgyag
ཤུ་སྒྲ་རྒྱག་པ	whistle	shu sgra rgyag pa
ཤུ་སྒྲ་གཏོང	whistle	shu sgra gtong
ཤུ་སྒྲ་གཏོང་བ	whistle	shu sgra gtong ba
ཤུ་སྒྲ་འདེབས་བཞིན་ར་ལུག་འདེད	herd the sheep while whistling	shu sgra 'debs bzhin ra lug 'ded
ཤུ་སྒྲས་གཏོང	whistle	shu sgras gtong
ཤུ་སྒྲས་གཏོང་བ	whistle	shu sgras gtong ba
ཤུ་ལྕོག	drawer	shu lcog
ཤུ་ཉ་ཏའི་སྔགས	Shunyata mantra. The mantra Om svabhava shuddho sarva dharma svabhava shuddho 'ham	shu nya ta'i sngags
ཤུ་ཏི	shu ti med. herb	shu ti
ཤུ་ཐོག	1) {gnyan nad shu ba} skin disease, sore, abscess, blister, ulcer; 2) scar, scab; 3) za phrug can small wound	shu thog
ཤུ་ཐོར	abscess becomes absorbed	shu thor
ཤུ་དག	the rush, acorus calamus, sweet flag	shu dag
ཤུ་དག་དཀར་པོ	medicinal herb-drug	shu dag dkar po
ཤུ་དག་ནག་པོ	{shu dag nag po} field med.	shu dag nag po
ཤུ་བརྡ	shu sgra	shu brda
ཤུ་ནི་ཀ་ར་ན	city in shambhala	shu ni ka ra na
ཤུ་བ	abscess	shu ba
ཤུ་བ་ཁ་བརྒྱ	{shu ba kha brgya} mdze nad	shu ba kha brgya
ཤུ་བ་ཐོན	an abscess	shu ba thon
ཤུ་བ་ན	abscess gives pain	shu ba na
ཤུ་བ་ཕན	abscess heals	shu ba phan
ཤུ་བུ་དཔལ་གྱི་སེང་གེ	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	shu bu dpal gyi seng ge
ཤུ་འབུབས	peel off an old roof and put on a new 1	shu 'bubs
ཤུ་འབྲས	berries of juniperus squamosa	shu 'bras
ཤུ་མོ་ཟ	pulse	shu mo za
ཤུ་ཟ	shu za med. herb	shu za
ཤུ་བྷམ	[Skt] dge ba, bde legs	shu bham
ཤུག	thrust, push, knock, old but still fit for use, softly	shug
ཤུག་གུ	SA shob bu	shug gu
ཤུག་ཉིན་རི་ཁྲོད	Shuknyin Hermitage, in Domey	shug nyin ri khrod
ཤུག་དག	sweet flag (acorus calamus)	shug dag
ཤུག་དུད	smoke or perfume of juniper incense	shug dud
ཤུག་འདུས	Shukdu, in upper Rekong, Domey	shug 'dus
ཤུག་སྡོང	juniper tree, cedar, cypress	shug sdong
ཤུག་ནུར	[arch] yawn, stone	shug nur
ཤུག་པ	1) (Tha dad pa bshugs pa, bshug pa, shugs,, among friends and family w/o profit sell things; 2) [himalayan] juniper, cypress, cedar	shug pa
ཤུག་པ་དག་བྱེད	gysophila acutifolia fisch. var. gmelini regel., astragalus melilotoides pall.	shug pa dag byed
ཤུག་པ་ཚེར་ཅན	{shug pa tsher can}/ thorny juniper med. tree 2727	shug pa tsher can
ཤུག་ཕུལ་བ	slove by a more gentle motion	shug phul ba
ཤུག་འབྲས	juniper berry	shug 'bras
ཤུག་འབྲུ	sabina wallichiana (hook. f. et thoms.) kom.	shug 'bru
ཤུག་འབྲུམ	juniper 'bru	shug 'brum
ཤུག་གཙང	kind of sheer silk	shug gtsang
ཤུག་རྩང	little juniper phurba	shug rtsang
ཤུག་ཚོད	sort of mistletoe, viscum oxycedri	shug tshod
ཤུག་རིལ	juniper w roundish leaves	shug ril
ཤུག་ལེབ	flat juniper leaves	shug leb
ཤུག་ཤུག	unperceived by others	shug shug
ཤུག་ཤུག་ལ	softly, gently	shug shug la
ཤུག་གསེབ	{shug gseb}	shug gseb
ཤུག་གསེབ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད	{shug gseb bka' brgyud} shug gseb rje btsun cho nyid bzang mo 1852-1953 - Shuksep Jetsün Chönyi Zangmo, an eminent female teacher shug gseb rje btsun cho nyid bzang mo Shuksep Jetsün Rigdzin Chönyi...	shug gseb bka' brgyud
ཤུགས	wake, power, automatically, by itself, strength, velocity, force, inherent energy, groan, energy	shugs
ཤུགས་ཀྱི	implicitly	shugs kyi
ཤུགས་ཀྱི་བསྒྲུབ་བྱའི་ཆོས	implied predicate of the thesis	shugs kyi bsgrub bya'i chos
ཤུགས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་བ	can naturally practice	shugs kyi 'byung ba
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	violently	shugs kyis
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	shoot	shugs kyis 'gro ba
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་ཆོད	naturally resolved, decided by strength	shugs kyis chod
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་འབྱང་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of natural purification	shugs kyis 'byang ba'i ting nge 'dzin
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་སྦུད་རྒྱག་རྒྱབ་པ	jerk	shugs kyis sbud rgyag rgyab pa
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་གཞུ་བ	thump	shugs kyis gzhu ba
ཤུགས་རྐྱེན	condition of strength/ power, influence, effect	shugs rkyen
ཤུགས་རྐྱེན་ངན་པ	bad influence	shugs rkyen ngan pa
ཤུགས་རྐྱེན་ཐེབས	[be] influence[d]/ affect[ed]	shugs rkyen thebs
ཤུགས་རྐྱེན་ཐེབས་པ	[be] influence[d]/ affect[ed]	shugs rkyen thebs pa
ཤུགས་རྐྱེན་བཟང་བ	bad influence	shugs rkyen bzang ba
ཤུགས་སྐད	loud/ powerful voice	shugs skad
ཤུགས་སྐད་རྒྱག	whistle	shugs skad rgyag
ཤུགས་སྐད་རྒྱག་པ	whistle	shugs skad rgyag pa
ཤུགས་སྐད་བརྒྱབ་པ	whistle	shugs skad brgyab pa
ཤུགས་སྐྱིལ	act as a check on, clamp down on, rein in	shugs skyil
ཤུགས་བསྐྱེད་སྟོབས་སྤེལ	energetically, vigorously	shugs bskyed stobs spel
ཤུགས་གང་ཡིད་ཀྱིས	w all 1's strength	shugs gang yid kyis
ཤུགས་གླུ	a kind of song	shugs glu
ཤུགས་མགོན	Shungon, a class of divine manifestations	shugs mgon
ཤུགས་མགོན་རྫིའི་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen shugs mgon guardians	shugs mgon rdzi'i bcu gsum
ཤུགས་འགྲོ	shugdro, secondary dakinis, mule	shugs 'gro
ཤུགས་འགྲོ་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད	[TRS 127-5]	shugs 'gro chen po brgyad
ཤུགས་འགྲོའི་ཕ	donkey, father of the mule, ass	shugs 'gro'i pha
ཤུགས་འགྲོས	powerful gait	shugs 'gros
ཤུགས་རྒྱག	employ/ use 1's strength, exert 1self, try [hard] to, work hard at	shugs rgyag
ཤུགས་སྒྲ	whistling	shugs sgra
ཤུགས་སྒྲ་གཏོང	whistle	shugs sgra gtong
ཤུགས་ངོམ་སྲིད་ཇུས	policy of strength	shugs ngom srid jus
ཤུགས་ངོམ་སྲིད་བྱུས	policy of strength	shugs ngom srid byus
ཤུགས་ཅན	strong	shugs can
ཤུགས་ཅི་ཡོད་འདོན	do all 1 can/1's best	shugs ci yod 'don
ཤུགས་ཅི་ཡོད་འདོན་པ	do all 1 can/1's best	shugs ci yod 'don pa
ཤུགས་ཆད	strength/ power weakened/ exhausted	shugs chad
ཤུགས་ཆེ་དཔའ་ཐལ	dpa' tshod ma zin pa	shugs che dpa' thal
ཤུགས་ཆེ་བ	strong, firm, earnestly, vehemently, violently, moreover, powerful, great velocity or motion	shugs che ba
ཤུགས་ཆེ་རུ་གཏོང	strengthen, reinforce, increase in power	shugs che ru gtong
ཤུགས་ཆེན་རྒྱག་པ	enthusiastic, energetic	shugs chen rgyag pa
ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ	intense, strong	shugs chen po
ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ་བསྐྱེད	concentrate	shugs chen po bskyed
ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོར་ཡོང་བ	gust	shugs chen por yong ba
ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོར་ལབ་པ	stress	shugs chen por lab pa
ཤུགས་ཇེ་ཆེར	ever greater strength	shugs je cher
ཤུགས་ཇེ་ཆེར་གཏོང	increase the power of, strengthen, reinforce	shugs je cher gtong
ཤུགས་མཉམ	equal strength, balance of power	shugs mnyam
ཤུགས་མཉམ་པ	equal strength, balance of power	shugs mnyam pa
ཤུགས་རྟོགས	naturally entailed realization	shugs rtogs
ཤུགས་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོ	muscular	shugs stobs chen po
ཤུགས་བསྟན	implicit indicated [object] [ggd]	shugs bstan
ཤུགས་བསྟན་ཁ་འདོན	implication, hidden meaning	shugs bstan kha 'don
ཤུགས་བསྟན་གོ་འདོན	implication, hidden meaning	shugs bstan go 'don
ཤུགས་བསྟན་ལས་སྒྲུབ	act by calculating one's power	shugs bstan las sgrub
ཤུགས་བསྟུན་པས་སྒྲུབ	act by calculating 1's strength	shugs bstun pas sgrub
ཤུགས་འཐེན	strain	shugs 'then
ཤུགས་དིར་བ	groan loud from pain	shugs dir ba
ཤུགས་དྲག	intensive, violent	shugs drag
ཤུགས་དྲག་སྐྱེས་པ	felt strongly, grew even more fierce	shugs drag skyes pa
ཤུགས་དྲག་པོ	strong tremor	shugs drag po
ཤུགས་འདོན	employ/ use 1's strength, exert 1self, try [hard] to, work hard at	shugs 'don
ཤུགས་འདོན་པ	do all 1 can/1's best	shugs 'don pa
ཤུགས་ལྡན	powerful, forceful, strong	shugs ldan
ཤུགས་ནར	[long] sigh	shugs nar
ཤུགས་ནར་བྱེད་པ	sigh, groan	shugs nar byed pa
ཤུགས་ནར་འབྱིན་པ	sigh, groan	shugs nar 'byin pa
ཤུགས་གནོན	stress	shugs gnon
ཤུགས་སྣང་བརྒྱད	the 8 natural appearances/lights?	shugs snang brgyad
ཤུགས་སྣོན	reinforcement	shugs snon
ཤུགས་སྣོན་རྒྱག	add to power * emphasize, reinforce, strengthen, augment	shugs snon rgyag
ཤུགས་པ	juniper	shugs pa
ཤུགས་པ་འབྱིན་པ	unclear speaking	shugs pa 'byin pa
ཤུགས་དཔྱད	dynamics	shugs dpyad
ཤུགས་དཔྱད་རིག་པ	dynamics	shugs dpyad rig pa
ཤུགས་སྤྲུག	intensified	shugs sprug
ཤུགས་སྤྲུགས་པ	intensified	shugs sprugs pa
ཤུགས་ཕྱུང་བ	send out the power [ of compassion]	shugs phyung ba
ཤུགས་ཕྱུངས	[energized] without effort	shugs phyungs
ཤུགས་འཕྱོ	a number	shugs 'phyo
ཤུགས་བུ	girdle	shugs bu
ཤུགས་བུལ	slow/ weak force	shugs bul
ཤུགས་འབྱུང	spontaneously, spontaneously born	shugs 'byung
ཤུགས་འབྱུང་གི་དྲན	spontaneous presence of mind	shugs 'byung gi dran
ཤུགས་འབྱུང་དུ	arising by itself	shugs 'byung du
ཤུགས་འབྱུང་དུ་བྱུང་བ	arise spontaneously, suddenly	shugs 'byung du byung ba
ཤུགས་འབྱུང་ཟང་ཐལ	unobstructed dynamic flow	shugs 'byung zang thal
ཤུགས་སྦྱུངས	[energized] without effort	shugs sbyungs
ཤུགས་མ་ཐུབ	not have the power to	shugs ma thub
ཤུགས་མེད	weak	shugs med
ཤུགས་མེད་པ	weak	shugs med pa
ཤུགས་དམའ་རུ་གཏོང	weaken, decrease in power	shugs dma' ru gtong
ཤུགས་རྩལ	wrestling	shugs rtsal
ཤུགས་རྩལ་རྩེ་མཁན	wrestler	shugs rtsal rtse mkhan
ཤུགས་རྩལ་རྩེ་བ	wrestle	shugs rtsal rtse ba
ཤུགས་རྩེད	wrestling	shugs rtsed
ཤུགས་རྩེད་རྩེད	wrestle	shugs rtsed rtsed
ཤུགས་འཛུགས	jab	shugs 'dzugs
ཤུགས་ཞན	weak	shugs zhan
ཤུགས་ཞན་ཏུ་གཏོང	weaken, bring into submission	shugs zhan tu gtong
ཤུགས་ཞན་པ	thin, light, weak, frail	shugs zhan pa
ཤུགས་ཡུལ	implicit objects [ggd]	shugs yul
ཤུགས་རིང	deep sigh, groan	shugs ring
ཤུགས་རིང་འདོན་པ	praying aloud	shugs ring 'don pa
ཤུགས་རིང་འབྱིན	sigh	shugs ring 'byin
ཤུགས་རླུང	~wind	shugs rlung
ཤུགས་ལ་འཇིན	[naturally] possess	shugs la 'jin
ཤུགས་ལ་རྟོགས་པ	realized implicitly [ggd]	shugs la rtogs pa
ཤུགས་ལ་འཕངས་པ	indirectly suggesting	shugs la 'phangs pa
ཤུགས་ལ་འཛིན	naturally possess	shugs la 'dzin
ཤུགས་ལ་གཤོལ་བཏབ	oppose or try to dissuade one from an undertaking, obstruction to progress of any work	shugs la gshol btab
ཤུགས་ལས	by itself	shugs las
ཤུགས་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	automatically is	shugs las 'byung ba
ཤུགས་ལེན་ཆུ་རགས	dam	shugs len chu rags
ཤུགས་སོག	gather force/ power	shugs sog
ཤུགས་སྱུངས	[energized] without effort	shugs syungs
ཤུགས་གསེབས	1) Juniper Grove. 2) a nunnery in Central Tibet; near {gangs ri thod dkar}	shugs gsebs
ཤུང	1) meek, mild, weak; 2) snore	shung
ཤུང་དྲིལ	{shung dril} med. herb	shung dril
ཤུང་དྲིལ་སྔོན་པོ	{shung dril sngon po} med. herb	shung dril sngon po
ཤུང་དྲིལ་པད་ལྡན	{shung dril pad ldan} med. herb	shung dril pad ldan
ཤུང་བ	snore, hum, buzz	shung ba
ཤུང་མི་ཟ་བ	inexhaustible	shung mi za ba
ཤུང་ཡ་ལི	Hungary	shung ya li
ཤུང་ཡ་ལོ	Hungary	shung ya lo
ཤུང་ཤུང	sna shu	shung shung
ཤུངས	gshung ba!	shungs
ཤུངས་དམོད	deprecate, secretly talk about	shungs dmod
ཤུད	bshud pa! [p bshur],, rub, scrape, pat, stroke, smear whistled	shud
ཤུད་འགྲོ་བ	glide	shud 'gro ba
ཤུད་པ	{shud pa, bshud pa, bshud pa, shud} trans. v	shud pa
ཤུད་བུ་དཔལ་གྱི་སེང་གེ	Palgyi Senge of Shubu. One of the ministers of King Trisong Deutsen, sent among the first emissaries to invite Padmasambhava to Tibet. He learned translation from Padmasambhava and rendered numerou...	shud bu dpal gyi seng ge
ཤུད་བྱེད་པ	steal silently away, sneak off unperceived	shud byed pa
ཤུད་ཤུད་གཏོང	1) bshud pa rub, scrape, stroke, pat, smear [p shu]; 2) destroy	shud shud gtong
ཤུན	layer, cover, skin, peel	shun
ཤུན་ཀོག	shell, rind, skin of animals	shun kog
ཤུན་སྐོགས	external skin, peel	shun skogs
ཤུན་གླིང་ཁར	grassy swamp of tibet	shun gling khar
ཤུན་འཇམ་ཤིང	wood tiger	shun 'jam shing
ཤུན་བརྗེ	shed/ change [layer, cover, skin, peel, bark]	shun brje
ཤུན་བརྗེས	1) old skin shed and new one grew, change/ shed skins; 2) snake	shun brjes
ཤུན་གདོང་དཀར	place in tibet	shun gdong dkar
ཤུན་བདག་མི་ཤེས་ངར་འཛིན་གྱི་པ་བུད་ཐེ་སྐིན་ཨོཕ༹་ཨིགནོརནཏ་ཨེགོ	fixation fell away shun bdag mi shes ngar 'dzin gyi pags pa	shun bdag mi shes ngar 'dzin gyi pa bud the skin of ignorant ego
ཤུན་ལྡན	SA shun pa can	shun ldan
ཤུན་པ	cover, shell, husk; shell	shun pa
ཤུན་པ་མཁྲེགས	bamboo	shun pa mkhregs
ཤུན་པ་ཅན	fish	shun pa can
ཤུན་པ་འཇམ	SA stag pa shing	shun pa 'jam
ཤུན་པ་རྗེས་པ	cast off or change skin as snakes do	shun pa rjes pa
ཤུན་པ་བརྗེས་པ	snake, shed the skin	shun pa brjes pa
ཤུན་པ་དྲི་ཞིམ	tree, SA klu shing	shun pa dri zhim
ཤུན་པགས	skin of animals	shun pags
ཤུན་ལྤགས	bark, peel	shun lpags
ཤུན་གསང་བདེ	district with a fort	shun gsang bde
ཤུན་གསར	new skin	shun gsar
ཤུབ	case	shub
ཤུབ་སྐད	words spoken in low/ small voice	shub skad
ཤུབ་པ	cypress-like juniper tree, juniperus excelsa, speak in a low voice, whisper	shub pa
ཤུབ་པར་སྨྲ་བ	whisper in the ears	shub par smra ba
ཤུབ་བུ	small quiet voice	shub bu
ཤུབ་བུར	softly, gently	shub bur
ཤུབ་བུར་སྨྲ་བ	speak softly, whisper in one's ear	shub bur smra ba
ཤུབ་བུས་སྨོད་པ	reprehend in a whisper 2729	shub bus smod pa
ཤུབ་བུས་ཟློ་བ	recite in a low voice	shub bus zlo ba
ཤུབ་བྱེད་པ	whisper	shub byed pa
ཤུབ་ཙམ་མ་སྨྲས་ན	if you had not spoken even whisperingly	shub tsam ma smras na
ཤུབ་ཤུབ	speaking w low/ small voice, whisper	shub shub
ཤུབ་ཤུབ་ཏུ་སྨྲ་བ	speaking w low/ small voice, whisper	shub shub tu smra ba
ཤུབ་ཤུབ་སྨྲ	whisper	shub shub smra
ཤུབས	sheath/ case/ envelope; cocoon	shubs
ཤུབས་ཀྱི་ནང་བླུག་པ	encase	shubs kyi nang blug pa
ཤུབས་མེད	without a case, unsheathed	shubs med
ཤུམ	[p bshums, f bshum],, spreading, increasing grang * cry, weep[ing] [h]	shum
ཤུམ་པ	cry, weep, shudder	shum pa
ཤུམ་མེད	unimpaired, undaunted, intrepid	shum med
ཤུམས	imp. of {bshum pa}	shums
ཤུའི་ཁུ་བ	gravy	shu'i khu ba
ཤུར	1) bshur ba!; 2) notch, indentation, small hole, ravine	shur
ཤུར་ཁུང	chute	shur khung
ཤུར་སྒྲ	whizzing sound	shur sgra
ཤུར་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	whiz	shur sgra sgrog pa
ཤུར་ཅོག	nang du shur sgam yod pa'i table	shur cog
ཤུར་བུ	sash, belt	shur bu
ཤུར་བུ་ཁྲེའུ	tied w varicolored cord short sash dra mig can	shur bu khre'u
ཤུར་བུ་ཕྲེའུ	short belt, sash	shur bu phre'u
ཤུར་འབེན	shur 'don byed kyi lag cha 'bur len zhig	shur 'ben
ཤུར་མ	long haired cloth like dgu lung dgu, corduroy	shur ma
ཤུར་རྩི	(CH kind of leather pho lham	shur rtsi
ཤུར་ཤུར	small	shur shur
ཤུར་ཤེ་ན	tract in neighborhood of mathura	shur she na
ཤུལ	empty place, place that has been left, ruins, way, track, narrow passage, property left by a deceased person, behind, trace, "while" clause connective	shul
ཤུལ་ཀ	a trail, narrow passage	shul ka
ཤུལ་ཁ	road	shul kha
ཤུལ་གྱི་བྱ་བྱེད	unfinished works left behind	shul gyi bya byed
ཤུལ་རྒྱུན	tradition, heritage, inheritance, legacy	shul rgyun
ཤུལ་བརྒྱུད	legacy, inheritance, something left behind	shul brgyud
ཤུལ་བརྒྱུད་བཞག	leave a legacy/ inheritance/ something left behind	shul brgyud bzhag
ཤུལ་རྗེས	legacy, inheritance, something left behind	shul rjes
ཤུལ་རྗེས་བཞག	leave a legacy/ inheritance/ something left behind	shul rjes bzhag
ཤུལ་རྙིང	house etc. old remains	shul rnying
ཤུལ་སྟོང	previous rjes shul stong pa	shul stong
ཤུལ་སྟོངས	be annihilated w/o a trace remaining	shul stongs
ཤུལ་ཐག་རིང	a long way	shul thag ring
ཤུལ་དུ	after someone death, after the death	shul du
ཤུལ་དུ་བསྐྱུར་བ	to cast something behind you/ to leave behind; left behind	shul du bskyur ba
ཤུལ་དུ་པོར	will be left behind	shul du por
ཤུལ་དུ་བོར	will be left behind	shul du bor
ཤུལ་དུ་འབོར	ex {gnyen bshes nor rdzas shul du 'bor} you will leave behind relatives, friends and wealth	shul du 'bor
ཤུལ་དུ་བཞག་པ	be left behind	shul du bzhag pa
ཤུལ་དུ་ལུས	left behind	shul du lus
ཤུལ་དུ་ལུས་པ	left behind	shul du lus pa
ཤུལ་དུ་ལྷུང	rang rgyud ngan pa'i shul	shul du lhung
དུ་ལྷུང	revert to your former bad habits	du lhung
ཤུལ་སྡོད	person remaining/ surviving	shul sdod
ཤུལ་པ	khyim tshang gi shul 'dzin mkhan	shul pa
ཤུལ་བྱི	tibetan polecat	shul byi
ཤུལ་མ	thing left behind	shul ma
ཤུལ་མི	the people left behind after one's passing away; a ghost	shul mi
ཤུལ་མེད	w/o a trace/ remains	shul med
ཤུལ་མེད་དུ་གཏོང	annihilate, obliterate	shul med du gtong
ཤུལ་ཙམ་མེད	w/o a trace/ remains	shul tsam med
ཤུལ་ཙམ་མེད་པ	[destroy] w/o a trace/ remains, annihilated, obliterated	shul tsam med pa
ཤུལ་རྩེ	boot	shul rtse
ཤུལ་འཛིན	1) 1 who gets the result of work/ an action; 2) inheritor [of house after owner's death]; 3) succeed, carry on, inherit	shul 'dzin
ཤུལ་འཛིན་དབང་ཆ	right of succession/ inheritance	shul 'dzin dbang cha
ཤུལ་བཞག	inheritance, legacy	shul bzhag
ཤུལ་བཞག་རྒྱུ་རྫས	inheritance, legacy	shul bzhag rgyu rdzas
ཤུལ་བཞག་ཟིན་བྲིས	will	shul bzhag zin bris
ཤུལ་ལ་བྲག་མོ	Shula Dragmo	shul la brag mo
ཤུལ་ལམ	manner, method	shul lam
ཤུལ་ལུས	the one left behind	shul lus
ཤུལ་ལུས་ན་ཡོད་པ	who are abandoned / left behind	shul lus na yod pa
ཤུལ་ལུས་པ	survivor	shul lus pa
ཤུལ་ས	a path	shul sa
ཤུལ་ཧང་ངེ	{'phro long nge shul hang nge} everything is just left behind, discarded	shul hang nge
ཤུས	imp. of {bshu ba}	shus
ཤུས་འདེབས	to signal others kha nas shu rgyag pa	shus 'debs
ཤུས་མ	anything copied, copy	shus ma
ཤེ་ཁ	moment of death	she kha
ཤེ་ཁག	tribe	she khag
ཤེ་ཁག་གི་སྤྲ་ཚད	measure of	she khag gi spra tshad
ཧེརདསྨེནའས་ཡཀ	hair tents	herdsmen's yak
ཤེ་ཁའི་འཕག་འཚག	last-ditch struggle	she kha'i 'phag 'tshag
ཤེ་ཁའི་འཕག་འཚག་རྒྱག	last-ditch struggle	she kha'i 'phag 'tshag rgyag
ཤེ་ཁྲལ	butter tax on leased cattle	she khral
ཤེ་ཁྲོས	angered	she khros
ཤེ་གཅོད	immodest and unwarrantable conduct, acting not according to one's wish	she gcod
ཤེ་གཏོང	nomad lord having "leased" 'bri and mdzo mo to nomads	she gtong
ཤེ་བཏང	nomad lord having "leased" 'bri and mdzo mo to nomads	she btang
ཤེ་སྟག	only	she stag
ཤེ་ཐོབ	yield of butter and cheese etc. from leased livestock	she thob
ཤེ་མཐུན	1) friend, companion; 2) [h] = sku zhabs; 3) shugs mthun pa	she mthun
ཤེ་དེ་ལས་གཞན་པ་པོད་རེ་ཤེ	there is certainly no other than this	she de las gzhan pa pod re she
ཤེ་དོ་ཀར་ཏིང་ནས	Shedo kertingne 2730	she do kar ting nas
ཤེ་སྡང་མགར་ནག	sgra bla Black Angry Smith	she sdang mgar nag
ཤེ་ན	[if someone asks] why, what does it mean to say ... *, as said/ written	she na
ཤེ་པ	incorrectly for shes pa	she pa
ཤེ་པ་ཞིན་མིན་པ	lack of conscience	she pa zhin min pa
ཤེ་དཔོན	she dkar nomad workers foreman	she dpon
ཤེ་བ	cataracts	she ba
ཤེ་བམ	Tibetan govt sbug dam mam srid tham brgyab pa'i sgrub chag 'jags gsum skor gyi gzhung yig spyi'am gtso bo'i gras	she bam
ཤེ་འབབ	nomad region animals la 'khri ba'i butter, cheese etc dairy products yield	she 'bab
ཤེ་སྦྱོར	sexual union, copulation	she sbyor
ཤེ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད	[arch] have sex	she sbyor byed
ཤེ་སྦྱོར་མ	woman that likes sex, prostitute	she sbyor ma
ཤེ་མ	dkar chu nomad workers, 1 who looks after others's livestock on lease basis	she ma
ཤེ་མར	yield of butter from cattle leased by nomads	she mar
ཤེ་མི་ཆོད	will not serve as/ substitute for	she mi chod
ཤེ་མུན	[arch] 1) darkness; 2) prison	she mun
ཤེ་མོ	1) splendor, brilliance and power; 2) [astr texts] a certain time of year [when eg 'ol ba bird comes]; 3) physical strength/ dbang thang	she mo
ཤེ་མོ་ཞག་བདུན	nyi skar 25 and chu tshod 22 in April 2nd skor nas, during which time if it rains it is said dgung than yong bar, she pho she mo zhes pa rtsangs pas sdig pa za ba'i dus yin zhes &, mouse hawk pho m...	she mo zhag bdun
ཤེ་མོང	divine predestination, divine protection, nature, fate, destiny, power, origin of power or authority, strength	she mong
ཤེ་མོང་རྒྱས	muscles full	she mong rgyas
ཤེ་མོང་འཚོང	stobs shed kyis [by power/strength] search for faults in others	she mong 'tshong
ཤེ་བཞིན	attentiveness, SA shes bzhin	she bzhin
ཤེ་ཟ	flesh eater	she za
ཤེ་ཟོག	in old time Tibet leased cattle	she zog
ཤེ་ཡོད་རེ	there is no! she g.yog - she dkar nomad workers foreman's assistant/ servant	she yod re
ཤེ་རབ	prajna	she rab
ཤེ་རུ	she la blangs pa'i phyugs zog gnyer nas sdod mkhan dud tshang	she ru
ཤེ་རུལ	fetid, putrid	she rul
ཤེ་ལ་གཏོང	nomad lord having "leased" 'bri and mdzo mo to nomads	she la gtong
ཤེ་ལ་བཏང	nomad lord having "leased" 'bri and mdzo mo to nomads	she la btang
ཤེག་གེ	loose and easy	sheg ge
ཤེང་འཐུན	gatherer of wood	sheng 'thun
ཤེད	1) force/ power/ strength; 2) domestic animals's strength, health, fatness; 3) [arch] mind; 4) commentator	shed
ཤེད་ཀྱིས	stiffly, vigor, vim	shed kyis
ཤེད་ཀྱིས་མི་ལྕོགས	failing in strength, weak	shed kyis mi lcogs
ཤེད་ཀྱིས་མི་ལྕོགས་པ	feeble in strength	shed kyis mi lcogs pa
ཤེད་སྐྱེད	1) power increase/ spread; 2) put forth power	shed skyed
ཤེད་སྐྱེད་པ	grow strong	shed skyed pa
ཤེད་བསྐུར་ནས	complained about	shed bskur nas
ཤེད་ཁྱེར	show off 1's strength	shed khyer
ཤེད་དགའ	good natured	shed dga'
ཤེད་དགའ་བ	good-natured	shed dga' ba
ཤེད་ངན	wild	shed ngan
ཤེད་ཅན	1) sentient being; 2) stong, powerful; 3) [arch] earnestly, diligently, persistently	shed can
ཤེད་ཆུང	weak, feeble	shed chung
ཤེད་ཆེན་པོ	strong, vigorous	shed chen po
ཤེད་ཉམས	strength is impaired	shed nyams
ཤེད་སྙོམས	equalize strength [of things unequal] par byed pa	shed snyoms
ཤེད་མཐུན	honorable, sir, noble, lord	shed mthun
ཤེད་བདག	1) person; 2) king	shed bdag
ཤེད་ཕྱུང་ནས	push hard	shed phyung nas
ཤེད་བུ	1) manaba:, manu, human being, gtso bo 1st bskal mi'i ming; 2) 14 [because = ma nu whatever that means ]	shed bu
ཤེད་བུ་ལས་སྐྱེས	man, humanity	shed bu las skyes
ཤེད་བུ་སེར་སྐྱ	1) Indian ancient rig gyud; 2) in India rakshasa w 18 heads who in a former life was a bhikshu	shed bu ser skya
ཤེད་བྱེ་བ	intellectually developed, accomplished, sensible	shed bye ba
ཤེད་དབང	abuse, force, domination	shed dbang
ཤེད་དབྱེ་མཁས་པ	one clever in discrimination	shed dbye mkhas pa
ཤེད་དབྱེ་སོམ་གཞིག	[arch] blo byang bar som mam brda don byang bar som	shed dbye som gzhig
ཤེད་འབྱེ	power of body and mind skye bzhin pa	shed 'bye
ཤེད་འབྱེད	unlock/open the door of bsam blo	shed 'byed
ཤེད་འབྲི	strength decreases, force begins to fail	shed 'bri
ཤེད་སྦྱག་པ	impaired strength	shed sbyag pa
ཤེད་སྦྱངས་པ	purify faults	shed sbyangs pa
ཤེད་སྦྱོང	physical exercise	shed sbyong
ཤེད་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	do physical exercise	shed sbyong byed
ཤེད་མ་བྱེ་བ	undeveloped	shed ma bye ba
ཤེད་མེད	weak, feeble, powerless	shed med
ཤེད་མོ	1) physical strength; 3) dbang thang; 4) coat of an animal	shed mo
ཤེད་མོང	/ power [1 stobs rtsal; 2) dbang thang]	shed mong
ཤེད་རྩལ	wrestling	shed rtsal
ཤེད་ཚན	strength	shed tshan
ཤེད་ཟ་ན་མ	she who develops and strengthens, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	shed za na ma
ཤེད་བཟང	strong, healthy, good coat [animals]	shed bzang
ཤེད་ལས་སྐྱེས	man, humanity	shed las skyes
ཤེད་ཤུགས	strength	shed shugs
ཤེད་ཤུགས་རིག་པ	dynamics	shed shugs rig pa
ཤེད་གསོས	strength is restored	shed gsos
ཤེན	SA ce na, priests	shen
ཤེན་ཏུ་དགེ་བ	very auspicious	shen tu dge ba
ཤེན་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པའི་སྡེ	extensive teachings	shen tu rgyas pa'i sde
ཤེན་ཏེ་མ	[arch] 1) snyigs ma; 2) weak, feeble poor humble; 3) chud za ba	shen te ma
ཤེན་པ	1) killer, butcher; 2) [arch] quick; 3) desire; 4) conviction	shen pa
ཤེན་བོན	priests	shen bon
ཤེའུ	fawn	she'u
ཤེའོ	terminative = so	she'o
ཤེར	1) wt = 2.06 lb. [p bsher],, compare, examine, investigate, discuss, argue about	sher
ཤེར་སྙིང	Heart of Transcendent Knowledge	sher snying
ཤེར་སྙིང་བདུད་ཟློག	Heart Sutra exorcism liturgy	sher snying bdud zlog
ཤེར་ཏོ་ཐོབ་སོང	i got it by asking for it	sher to thob song
ཤེར་ཕྱིན	prajnaparamita, transcendent knowledge, perfection of wisdom [sutras], female deity personifying the perfection and the sutra	sher phyin
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་མན་ངག	Prajñaparamita Upadesha	sher phyin gyi man ngag
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་རྒྱས་པ	the Extensive prajnaparamita	sher phyin rgyas pa
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་དངོས	actual perfection of wisdom	sher phyin dngos
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད	the 8 topics of prajnaparamita	sher phyin dngos po brgyad
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན	shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan sher phyin mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi tshig don rnam par bshad pa ma pham	sher phyin mngon rtogs rgyan
མོནུམེནཏལ་སཡསྟེམཏིཟཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་པྲཇཉའཔའརམིཏ་ཕིལོསོཕཡ	the abhis'amay'alangk'ara; by {bod pa sprul sku mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyi ma} (1907-1959)	monumental systematization of prajny'ap'aramita philosophy
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་པ	the Prajnaparamita in 8,000 shlokas	sher phyin stong phrag brgya pa
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་སྟོང་ཕྲག་ཉི་ཤུ་ལྔ་པ་ཐེ་ཏྭེནཏཡ	five thousand stanza perfection of wisdom sutra sher phyin stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa the 25,000 stanza perfection of wisdom sutra	sher phyin stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa the twenty
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་དོན་བདུན་ཅུ	the 90 topics of prajnaparamita	sher phyin don bdun cu
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་སྡུད་པ	the condensed perfection of wisdom	sher phyin sdud pa
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་བསྡུས་པ	Condensed Prajnaparamita; the Arya prajnaparamita samcayagatha from the sher phyin section of the bka' sgyur. Short text in approximately 60 4-line verses	sher phyin bsdus pa
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཕྱག་བཞི་མ	Four-armed Prajnaparamita [female buddha]	sher phyin phyag bzhi ma
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་འབུམ་པ	prajnaparamita in 100,000 shlokas	sher phyin 'bum pa
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་མ	Prajnaparamita. The Perfection of Wisdom as a female deity	sher phyin ma
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་བཞི	TSE	sher phyin bzhi
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཟབ་མོའི་སྣོད་བཞི	the four profound vessels of prajnaparamita TSE	sher phyin zab mo'i snod bzhi
ཤེར་བ	compare, confront	sher ba
ཤེར་བུ	product of karma	sher bu
ཤེར་དབང	Syn {shes rab ye shes kyi dbang} the knowledge empowerment	sher dbang
ཤེར་བཟང་གཉིས	the two shes rab bzang po's	sher bzang gnyis
ཤེར་འོད	{shes rab 'od zer}	sher 'od
ཤེར་ལས་སྐྱེས	bearer of karma	sher las skyes
ཤེར་ལེའུ	see {shes rab le'u}	sher le'u
ཤེར་ལྷ་མོ	dbyangs can ma	sher lha mo
ཤེལ	mirror; crystal; crystal, crystalline, {shel gyi sa gzhi} pavements [in a palace], glass, mirror	shel
ཤེལ་ཀ་ར	crystal-like white sugar, rock candy	shel ka ra
ཤེལ་ཀར	(refined, crystalline) sugar	shel kar
ཤེལ་ཀོར	drinking glass	shel kor
ཤེལ་དཀར	1) lho shel dkar region; 2) lung nag shel dkar; 3) crystal, glass	shel dkar
ཤེལ་དཀར་བཀའ་འགྱུར་བླ་མ	1856-1932. alias: ngag dbang blo bzang bstan 'dzin tshul khrims rgyal mtshan	shel dkar bka' 'gyur bla ma
ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ	Shelkar Chöde; A monastery founded by a Sakya Lama, Sindeu Rinchen, who then turned to the Geluk order	shel dkar chos sde
ཤེལ་དཀར་མཆོད་རྟེན	a crystal stupa	shel dkar mchod rten
ཤེལ་དཀར་པོ	crystal, glass	shel dkar po
ཤེལ་དཀར་རྫོང	Shelkar Dzong; The White Crystal Castle /Fortress, was the provincial capital for the Dingri area	shel dkar rdzong
ཤེལ་ཁམས་དྭངས་པ	pure & clean glass	shel khams dwangs pa
ཤེལ་ཁྲ	glass window	shel khra
ཤེལ་ག་བུར	crystal-like camphor	shel ga bur
ཤེལ་གི་མེ་ལོང	crystal mirror	shel gi me long
ཤེལ་གོང	crystal ball	shel gong
ཤེལ་གོང་ཤེལ་ཕྲེང	{shel gong shel phreng} med.	shel gong shel phreng
ཤེལ་གྱི་ཁང་ཁྱིམ	crystal houses	shel gyi khang khyim
ཤེལ་གྱི་ཁང་པ	crystal house	shel gyi khang pa
ཤེལ་གྱི་ཁྱེའུ་ཆུང	Crystal Child, a form of dga' rab rdo rje	shel gyi khye'u chung
ཤེལ་གྱི་མཁར	crystal building	shel gyi mkhar
ཤེལ་གྱི་རྣ་རུ	crystal horn	shel gyi rna ru
ཤེལ་གྱི་བྲག་རིའི་རྫོང	the Crystal Cave of Padmasambhava above the {yar klungs} valley	shel gyi brag ri'i rdzong
ཤེལ་གྱི་སྦུ་གུ	crystal tubes	shel gyi sbu gu
ཤེལ་གྱི་སྦུ་གུ་ཅན	see {ka ti}	shel gyi sbu gu can
ཤེལ་གྱི་རི་ལ་བགྲོད་ནས	climbed the crystal mountain	shel gyi ri la bgrod nas
ཤེལ་གྱི་ས་གཞི	crystal ground	shel gyi sa gzhi
ཤེལ་གྲོང	village s.w. of lhasa	shel grong
ཤེལ་དགོན	Shelgon, in Domey	shel dgon
ཤེལ་སྒམ	crystal/ glass box, show-case	shel sgam
ཤེལ་སྒོ	1) glass, crystal; 2) crystal things shaped like a face; 3) mirror	shel sgo
ཤེལ་སྒོ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁྲ་མ	glass window	shel sgo yod pa'i khra ma
ཤེལ་སྒོང	1) lump of crystal; 2) sheep	shel sgong
ཤེལ་ཆས	crystal/ glass-ware	shel chas
ཤེལ་ཏ	kind of gum	shel ta
ཤེལ་ཏང	kyi lce med. herb	shel tang
ཤེལ་ཏང་དཀར་ནག	kyi lce dkar po and nag po	shel tang dkar nag
ཤེལ་ཏོག	light bulb, vacuum tube	shel tog
ཤེལ་དང་བE་དུར་ཡ	crystal and lapis	shel dang bE dur ya
ཤེལ་དྭངས་པ	clear mirror	shel dwangs pa
ཤེལ་དམ	1) bottle; 2) crystal seal	shel dam
ཤེལ་དེལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་བྲང	Sheldel Chökyi Podrang, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	shel del chos kyi pho brang
ཤེལ་རྡོ	rock crystal, crystal	shel rdo
ཤེལ་རྡོ་ཟུར་གསུམ	prism	shel rdo zur gsum
ཤེལ་རྡོག	light bulb, vacuum tube	shel rdog
ཤེལ་སྣོད	crystal/ glass container	shel snod
ཤེལ་སྤྱད	glass/ crystal implement	shel spyad
ཤེལ་ཕུག་ཆུ་ཤིང་རྫོང	Crystal Cave Reed Fortress, near Chubar, in Tsang	shel phug chu shing rdzong
ཤེལ་ཕོར	glass, glass cup	shel phor
ཤེལ་ཕྲེང	string of crystal or glass beads, crystal mala, Crystal Necklace, abbreviation of 'dus pa chen po mdo'i ngang sgom gyi khrid rim khil phyung du bkod pa shel dkar phreng mdzes in volume ka of gdams ...	shel phreng
ཤེལ་ཕྲེང་བྱ་རྒོད་སུག་པ	de'u dmar geshe bstan 'dzin phun tshogs's crystal 2732 mala nang 'khod pa'i {bya rgod sug pa} med. herb	shel phreng bya rgod sug pa
ཤེལ་བུག་ཅན	crystal tube	shel bug can
ཤེལ་བུམ	crystal vase	shel bum
ཤེལ་བྲག	Sheldrak, in Lokha	shel brag
ཤེལ་བྲག་གི་ཕུག་པ	cave of crystal rock	shel brag gi phug pa
ཤེལ་བྲག་མཐོན་པོ	high crystal rock	shel brag mthon po
ཤེལ་སྦུག	glass tubes	shel sbug
ཤེལ་སྦུག་ཅན	having glass tubes	shel sbug can
ཤེལ་སྦུབ	crystal tube	shel sbub
ཤེལ་མིག	spectacles, glasses	shel mig
ཤེལ་མིག་མེག་དུ་ཡོད་པ	glassy-eyed	shel mig meg du yod pa
ཤེལ་མེག	spectacles, glasses	shel meg
ཤེལ་ཚིགས	mixture of roasted barley grains part of which are scorched to give its black coloring; it symbolizes the offering of livestock animals	shel tshigs
ཤེལ་ཚོན་ཅན་བཞིན	like a crystal with colors	shel tshon can bzhin
ཤེལ་ཟླ	crystal disc, the moon	shel zla
ཤེལ་འོད	crystal lights	shel 'od
ཤེལ་རི	crystal mountain	shel ri
ཤེལ་རི་འཇམ་པོ་ནམ་མཁར་སྙེགས་པ	a smooth glass mountain that rose straight upward into the sky	shel ri 'jam po nam mkhar snyegs pa
ཤེལ་རིགས	1) kinds of crystal; 2) diamond	shel rigs
ཤེལ་རོང་འབྲོང་རྩེད	shel grong 'brong rtsed	shel rong 'brong rtsed
ཤེལ་ཤུར	carpenter's tool shur 'don 'bur len	shel shur
ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁེ	[arch] besides dharma aspire to worldly abundance phun tshogs	shes kyi khe
ཤེས་བཀྲ་གཟུགས་བཟང	prajna bkra and beautiful form	shes bkra gzugs bzang
ཤེས་རྐྱང	simple/ pure[ly] knowing	shes rkyang
ཤེས་ཁེ	profit of knowledge	shes khe
ཤེས་མཁན	he who knows, someone who understands	shes mkhan
ཤེས་འཁོས་གཉིས་ལྡན	qualities exist and cause also exists	shes 'khos gnyis ldan
ཤེས་གྱི་སྦུ་གུ་ཅན	see {ka ti}	shes gyi sbu gu can
ཤེས་དགོངས	realize	shes dgongs
ཤེས་དགོས	must know	shes dgos
ཤེས་རྒྱ	extent of intellect, understanding, good qualities, knowledge, learning, wisdom	shes rgya
ཤེས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	[be] poorly informed/ shallow	shes rgya chung ba
ཤེས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	[be] well informed/ learned, have a far reaching intellect	shes rgya chen po
ཤེས་རྒྱུ	something to be known	shes rgyu
ཤེས་རྒྱུད	knowledge, stream of consciousness, consciousness	shes rgyud
ཤེས་རྒྱུད་འཇམ་པ	gentle character	shes rgyud 'jam pa
ཤེས་རྒྱུད་དལ	gentleness in character	shes rgyud dal
ཤེས་རྒྱུད་ཟིན་པའི་ཕུང་པོ	the aggregates held by that particular stream of consciousness	shes rgyud zin pa'i phung po
ཤེས་རྒྱུན	continuity of awareness	shes rgyun
ཤེས་རྒྱུན་དལ	gentleness in spirit	shes rgyun dal
ཤེས་རྒྱུས	lore	shes rgyus
ཤེས་སྒོ	the door of knowledge, science, learning	shes sgo
ཤེས་སྒོ་ཆུང་བ	[be] poorly informed/ shallow	shes sgo chung ba
ཤེས་སྒོ་ཆེན་པོ	[be] well informed/ learned, have a far reaching intellect	shes sgo chen po
ཤེས་སྒོ་བྱེད་པ	without learning	shes sgo byed pa
ཤེས་སྒོ་ཞན	poor in learning	shes sgo zhan
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ	obstruction to knowledge	shes sgrib
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་ཀུན་བཏགས	imputed knowledge obscuration TSE	shes sgrib kun btags
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་ཉོན་མོངས་གཟུང་རྟོག	TSE	shes sgrib nyon mongs gzung rtog
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་བཏགས་འཛིན་རྟོག་པ	TSE	shes sgrib btags 'dzin rtog pa
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་རྣམ་བྱང་གཟུང་རྟོག	TSE	shes sgrib rnam byang gzung rtog
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་རྫས་འཛིན་རྟོག་པ	TSE	shes sgrib rdzas 'dzin rtog pa
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་རིགས་དགུ	the 9 kinds of obscurations of knowables	shes sgrib rigs dgu
ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	inherent knowledge obscuration; inherent knowledge obscuration	shes sgrib lhan skyes
ཤེས་བསྒྲིབ	intellectual obscuration	shes bsgrib
ཤེས་ཅན	intelligent	shes can
ཤེས་ཆ	{shes pa'i cha} conscious quality; isc. [kun gzhi] preconscious quality/ aspect	shes cha
ཤེས་འཆལ	wrong prajna, meaningless	shes 'chal
ཤེས་འཇུག	knowledge and application	shes 'jug
ཤེས་བརྗོད་འཇུག་གསུམ	cognizing expressing or engaging; knowing utterance and [bodily] action	shes brjod 'jug gsum
ཤེས་ཉམས	mind-experiences; meditation-moods of dualistic mind; ephemeral experiences of states of consciousness; refer to {nyams gsum / bde gsal mi rtog}, as opposed to {snang nyams}	shes nyams
ཤེས་ཉིད	knowledge	shes nyid
ཤེས་ཉེན	[arch] spiritual friend	shes nyen
ཤེས་ཉོན	{shes bya'i sgrib pa} + {nyon mongs pa'i sgrib pa}	shes nyon
ཤེས་གཉེན	spiritual friends	shes gnyen
ཤེས་གཉེར་ཅན	learned, knowledgeable, wise	shes gnyer can
ཤེས་ཏེ	understood	shes te
ཤེས་རྟོག	learned that	shes rtog
ཤེས་རྟོགས	understand[ing], realize the meaning, know[ledge][able], comprehension	shes rtogs
ཤེས་རྟོགས་བྱེད	understand, realize the meaning, know, comprehend	shes rtogs byed
ཤེས་རྟོགས་བྱེད་ཁག་པོ	incomprehensible	shes rtogs byed khag po
ཤེས་རྟོགས་བྱེད་མ་ཐུབ་པ	incognizable	shes rtogs byed ma thub pa
ཤེས་ཐབས	method of learning	shes thabs
ཤེས་ཐུབ་པའི་རང་བཞིན	knowable	shes thub pa'i rang bzhin
ཤེས་ཐོག་ཏུ	in that very recognition	shes thog tu
ཤེས་མཐོང	immediate	shes mthong
ཤེས་མཐོང་གི་འདོད་པ་ཅན	curious	shes mthong gi 'dod pa can
ཤེས་དང་ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་མཁྱེན	knowledge of all knowing and knowables	shes dang shes bya kun mkhyen
ཤེས་བདག	person	shes bdag
ཤེས་འདོད	interest, curiosity	shes 'dod
ཤེས་འདོད་ཆོས་ཅན	the subject concerning which knowledge is sought	shes 'dod chos can
ཤེས་འདོད་དང་མཐོང་འདོད	curiosity	shes 'dod dang mthong 'dod
ཤེས་འདོད་བྱེད	show interest/ curiosity	shes 'dod byed
ཤེས་འདོད་ཚ་པོ	inquisitive	shes 'dod tsha po
ཤེས་ལྡན	wise one	shes ldan
ཤེས་ལྡན་མགྲོན་པོ	distinguished guests	shes ldan mgron po
ཤེས་ལྡན་རྣམས	wise ones	shes ldan rnams
ཤེས་ལྡན་མ	woman w understanding	shes ldan ma
ཤེས་ན	If you know that,	shes na
ཤེས་ནས	recognize	shes nas
ཤེས་ནུས	knowledge and ability	shes nus
ཤེས་རྣམ	TSE	shes rnam
ཤེས་པ་བཀྲ	versatile intellect, excellent wisdom	shes pa bkra
ཤེས་པ་སྐད་ཅིག	instant consciousness	shes pa skad cig
ཤེས་པ་སྐད་ཅིག་ཆ་མེད	partless instant of cognition	shes pa skad cig cha med
ཤེས་པ་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	instant of cognition	shes pa skad cig ma
ཤེས་པ་གློད་པ	to let consciousness relax	shes pa glod pa
ཤེས་པ་རྒྱ་བསྐྱེད་པ	to widen one's perspective	shes pa rgya bskyed pa
ཤེས་པ་རྒྱས་བྱེད	one of the lunar mansions	shes pa rgyas byed
ཤེས་པ་ཅན	1) bsam blo gtong thub mkhan; 2) heretic extremist; 3) sentient being	shes pa can
ཤེས་པ་ཅན་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བོན་པོ	Bönpos of the twelve lores	shes pa can bcu gnyis kyi bon po
ཤེས་པ་གཅེས	it is of importance to know	shes pa gces
ཤེས་པ་བཅུ	the 10 knowledges of the buddha level	shes pa bcu
ཤེས་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven [ten] cognitions	shes pa bcu gcig
ཤེས་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 lores or sciences of Bon, SA mgon shes lha bon, g.yang shes phywa bon, 'gro shes glud gtong, 'dur shes srid gshen, gtsang shes sel 'debs, 'grol shes gtad byad, phan shes sman dpyad, skos shes rt...	shes pa bcu gnyis
ཤེས་པ་འཇུར་ལ་དྲངས	focus your attention	shes pa 'jur la drangs
ཤེས་པ་ཉིད	the consciousness itself	shes pa nyid
ཤེས་པ་གཉིས	/ the two knowledges	shes pa gnyis
ཤེས་པ་གཏད་པ	maintain presence	shes pa gtad pa
ཤེས་པ་རྟག་པ	eternal awareness	shes pa rtag pa
ཤེས་པ་རྟོག་མེད	awareness w/o [discursive] thoughts/ concepts	shes pa rtog med
ཤེས་པ་སྟོང་གིས་བརྒྱན་པའི་རྒྱུད	Tantra Adorned with Thousandfold Knowledge. A Mahayoga scripture	shes pa stong gis brgyan pa'i rgyud
ཤེས་པ་ཐུག་ཕྲད	consciousness directly encountering (sensory appearances)	shes pa thug phrad
ཤེས་པ་འཐིབས	consciousness grows dim	shes pa 'thibs
ཤེས་པ་འཐིབས་པ	unclear understanding	shes pa 'thibs pa
ཤེས་པ་དྭངས་སང	limpidity of consciousness	shes pa dwangs sang
ཤེས་པ་ནང་བཞིན	as is known	shes pa nang bzhin
ཤེས་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure awareness	shes pa rnam par dag pa
ཤེས་པ་རྣམ་ཤེས	consciousness	shes pa rnam shes
ཤེས་པ་རྣལ་དུ་དབབ	bringing consciousness to its natural state	shes pa rnal du dbab
ཤེས་པ་པོ	knower person	shes pa po
ཤེས་པ་དཔངས་བསྟོད་པ	to heighten awareness	shes pa dpangs bstod pa
ཤེས་པ་སྤྲོས་མེད	mind undistracted by discursive thoughts	shes pa spros med
ཤེས་པ་ཕྱི་མ	subsequent thoughts	shes pa phyi ma
ཤེས་པ་ཕྱོ་ཕྱོ་བ	unsteady mind; {shes pa gcig tu mi gnas pa, 'gyur zhing 'gro ba}; Syn {shes pa yed yed pa, seng seng ba, gyu gyu ba, breng breng ba}	shes pa phyo phyo ba
ཤེས་པ་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle feeling	shes pa phra mo
ཤེས་པ་འཕྱོ	consciousness gives way, awareness wavering	shes pa 'phyo
ཤེས་པ་འཕྱོ་བ	to feel dismay	shes pa 'phyo ba
ཤེས་པ་བྱར་མེད	without insight 11.3	shes pa byar med
ཤེས་པ་བློ་ཐ་སྙད་པ	cognition, conventional	shes pa blo tha snyad pa
ཤེས་པ་བློ་ཐ་སྙད་པར	cognition, conventional	shes pa blo tha snyad par
ཤེས་པ་འབྱུང་བར	{don shes pa 'byung bar lung bstan pa bzhin} in accordance with prophecies that he would understand the meaning	shes pa 'byung bar
ཤེས་པ་མེད	does not know	shes pa med
ཤེས་པ་སྨྲ་བ	[exponent of a] theory of knowledge	shes pa smra ba
ཤེས་པ་ཚད་མ	TSE shes pa zhim mngar kun sgyu mar ra	shes pa tshad ma
ཤེས་པ་ཟང་ཐལ	unimpeded wakefulness	shes pa zang thal
ཤེས་པ་ཡེར་རེ་སིང་ངེ	[arch] clear/ vivid and luminous insight/ awareness	shes pa yer re sing nge
ཤེས་པ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་བྱ	bya	shes pa yongs rdzogs bya
ཤེས་པ་རང	self-revealing noetic	shes pa rang
ཤེས་པ་རང་གྲོལ	{rtogs ldan}	shes pa rang grol
ཤེས་པ་རང་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བ	selfexperiencing awareness	shes pa rang nyams su myong ba
ཤེས་པ་རང་བཞིན་གནས	being of sound mind	shes pa rang bzhin gnas
ཤེས་པ་རང་གསལ	the self-aware min, selfluminous consciousness, def. {'khod 'das kyi gzhi} Syn {rang rig rang gsal}	shes pa rang gsal
ཤེས་པ་རིག་ཚོར་ཤོར་བ	def {mi 'phro bar 'dzin 'dod pa}; The 'straying into a noticing frame of mind' means the desire to maintain a state of not thinking	shes pa rig tshor shor ba
ཤེས་པ་སིང་ངེ་བ	lucid wakefulness	shes pa sing nge ba
ཤེས་པ་ཧད་པོ	vacant state of mind	shes pa had po
ཤེས་པ་ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གློད་ནས་བཞག་པ	to let consciousness relax completely	shes pa lhod kyis glod nas bzhag pa
ཤེས་པའི	cognitive	shes pa'i
ཤེས་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ	cognitive superficial reality	shes pa'i kun rdzob bden pa
ཤེས་པའི་ཁམས་དྲུག	the six consciousness elements	shes pa'i khams drug
ཤེས་པའི་ཁེ་ཁྱེ	gain, advantage obtained by experience	shes pa'i khe khye
ཤེས་པའི་ཆ	{shes cha} conscious quality; isc. [kun gzhi] preconscious quality/ aspect	shes pa'i cha
ཤེས་པའི་སྟོབས	power of mind/ prajna	shes pa'i stobs
ཤེས་པའི་རྣམ་བཤད	theory of knowledge	shes pa'i rnam bshad
ཤེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	sphere of cognitive activity	shes pa'i spyod yul
ཤེས་པའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of daksa, epithet of uma, wife of mahesvara	shes pa'i bu mo
ཤེས་པའི་བློ	sagacity, intelligence, judgment	shes pa'i blo
ཤེས་པའི་རྩོམ	flux of cognition	shes pa'i rtsom
ཤེས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	1 of mtshan nyid gsum, characteristic of knowledge of the view as the primary cause shes pa'i mtshan yid zhe brgyad shes	shes pa'i mtshan nyid
མཚན་ཞེ་བརྒྱད	TSE	mtshan zhe brgyad
ཤེས་པའི་རྫས	yul gyi rnam par shes pa la 'char zhing rnam par rig pa	shes pa'i rdzas
ཤེས་པའི་ས་བོན	germinal noetic event	shes pa'i sa bon
ཤེས་པར་གྱིས	I will understand this	shes par gyis
ཤེས་པར་བགྱིས་ཤིག	[imp.] understand this	shes par bgyis shig
ཤེས་པར་འགྱུར	he will know	shes par 'gyur
ཤེས་པར་བྱ	{shes par gyis} recognize, know!, ex. {bden par}. should be known as truth	shes par bya
ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ	five to be known	shes par bya ba
ཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ་ལྔ	* five to be known GD	shes par bya ba lnga
ཤེས་པར་བྱོས	one should recognize	shes par byos
ཤེས་པས་སྲིད་ལ་མི་གནས་པའི་གཞི་ཤེས	the fundamental knowledge by which 1 does not dwell in samsara	shes pas srid la mi gnas pa'i gzhi shes
ཤེས་སྤྱོད	learning and character	shes spyod
ཤེས་ཕྱིན	prajnaparamita	shes phyin
ཤེས་འཕྱོས་པ	CHN	shes 'phyos pa
ཤེས་བའི་དབྱེ་སྒོ་དྲུག	CHN	shes ba'i dbye sgo drug
ཤེས་བྱ	objects known'; topics of knowledge; knowable/ object of knowledge; knowable object; knowable objects; any knowable entity or phenomena litt. that which generates knowledge, the phenomena which ser...	shes bya
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན	everything worth knowing, all the sciences	shes bya kun
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	All-Encompassing Knowledge	shes bya kun khyab
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་མཛོད	{shes bya kun khyab mdzod}	shes bya kun khyab mdzod
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་མཁྱེན	the 7th bde chen chos 'khor yongs 'dzin 'jam dpal shes bya kun mkhyen mi pham ye shes snang ba	shes bya kun mkhyen
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་གྱི་དེ་ཉིད	thatness, reality of all knowable things	shes bya kun gyi de nyid
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་ཏུ་གཟིགས་པ	seeing all knowables	shes bya kun tu gzigs pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་གཟིགས	seeing all knowables	shes bya kun gzigs
ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་རིག	rong ston shes bya kun	shes bya kun rig
ཤེས་བྱ་སྒྲིབ་པ	obscuration of cognition [thd]	shes bya sgrib pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གསུམ	the three natures of knowables	shes bya ngo bo nyid gsum
ཤེས་བྱ་ལྔ	the five topics	shes bya lnga
ཤེས་བྱ་ཇི་སྙེད་པ	all possibly existent things	shes bya ji snyed pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	nature or actual state of knowables	shes bya ji lta ba
ཤེས་བྱ་ཉེར་ལྔ	the 25 knowables	shes bya nyer lnga
ཤེས་བྱ་ཉེར་ལྔའི་མུ་བཞི	CHN	shes bya nyer lnga'i mu bzhi
ཤེས་བྱ་རྟོག་པ	knower	shes bya rtog pa
ཤེས་བྱ་སྟོང་ཉིད་འི་གཤིས་ལ་ཤོར་བ	going astray by regarding the nature of the knowable as empty	shes bya stong nyid 'i gshis la shor ba
ཤེས་བྱ་ཐམས་ཅད	all knowables	shes bya thams cad
ཤེས་བྱ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཅན	perceiver-subject of all knowable things shes bya thams cad rnam pa thams cad all phenomena and knowables, all aspects and all knowables	shes bya thams cad kyi yul can
ཤེས་བྱ་ཐམས་ཅད་གཞི་ལྔ	Five Basic Categories of the Knowable, according to the Vaibhashikas. Forms that appear {snang ba gzugs} or rupa. the dominant mind {gtso bo sems} or chitta. the concomitant mental events {'khor du...	shes bya thams cad gzhi lnga
ཤེས་བྱ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡུལ	the sphere of all knowables	shes bya thams cad yul
ཤེས་བྱ་མཐའ་དག	all knowables shes bya mtha' dag gzigs pa'i ye shes wisdom that sees all knowables	shes bya mtha' dag
ཤེས་བྱ་མཐའ་མེད	limitless knowables	shes bya mtha' med
ཤེས་བྱ་མཐའ་ཡས་པའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Infinite Ocean of Knowledge, by Jamgön Kongtrül	shes bya mtha' yas pa'i rgya mtsho
ཤེས་བྱ་མཐའ་ཡས་པའི་ཡུལ	the sphere of limitless knowables	shes bya mtha' yas pa'i yul
ཤེས་བྱ་ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ	the infinite depths of knowable phenomena	shes bya nam mkha'i mtha'
ཤེས་བྱ་སྤྱིའི་ཁོག་དབུབ	{shes bya spyi'i khog dbub	shes bya spyi'i khog dbub
ཤེས་བྱ་བ	what is called, one acts as	shes bya ba
ཤེས་བྱ་སྦྱོང	learn, study	shes bya sbyong
ཤེས་བྱ་ཚིག་གི་དོན་དྲུག	CHN	shes bya tshig gi don drug
ཤེས་བྱ་མཛོད	the treasury of knowledge	shes bya mdzod
ཤེས་བྱ་གཞི་ལྔ	fivefold basis of knowables, the five foundations of the knowable. fivefold basis of knowables, the five foundations of the knowable; snang ba gzugs dang gtso sems 'khor sems byung / / ldan min 'du...	shes bya gzhi lnga
ཤེས་བྱ་འི་སྒྲིབ་པ	knowledge veil/ obscuration	shes bya 'i sgrib pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཅོག	all knowables	shes bya yin no cog
ཤེས་བྱ་ལ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ	non erroneous object of knowledge	shes bya la phyin ci ma log pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ལ་མི་སྲིད་པ	unknowable	shes bya la mi srid pa
ཤེས་བྱ་ལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་ཁྱབ་པ	knowables pervaded by wisdom	shes bya la ye shes kyis khyab pa
ཤེས་བྱའི་ཁོངས	the realm of objects of cognition, the realm of the knowable	shes bya'i khongs
ཤེས་བྱའི་གྲོས་ཐག་བཅད་པ	to attain certainty about what is to be known	shes bya'i gros thag bcad pa
ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ	the obscuration concerning the knowable GD	shes bya'i sgrib
ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	knowledge veil/ obscuration	shes bya'i sgrib pa
ཐེ་བ༹ཇྲ	like samadhi at the end of the tenth bhumi. Also: knowledge veil, knowledge obscuration, obscuration concerning the knowable, obstruction to omniscience, obstructions to objects of knowledge, veil ...	the vajra
ཤེས་བྱའི་དངོས་པོ	things to be known	shes bya'i dngos po
ཤེས་བྱའི་ཆོས	phenomena to be known, knowable phenomena	shes bya'i chos
ཤེས་བྱའི་གནས	objects of knowledge, basis of knowledge	shes bya'i gnas
ཤེས་བྱའི་གནས་མ་ལུས་པ	all objects of knowledge shes bya'i rnam pa thams cad mkhyen pa - knower of all [aspects of] knowables, buddha	shes bya'i gnas ma lus pa
ཤེས་བྱའི་བྱ་བ་བཞི	4 activities of knowing	shes bya'i bya ba bzhi
ཤེས་བྱའི་དབྱེ་བ་བཞི	the four divisions of knowables CHN	shes bya'i dbye ba bzhi
ཤེས་བྱའི་འཛིན་པ་བརྒྱད	CHN	shes bya'i 'dzin pa brgyad
ཤེས་བྱའི་གཞི་ལྔ	the five basic categories of knowables, the five bases for all knowables	shes bya'i gzhi lnga
ཤེས་བྱའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of knowables	shes bya'i rang bzhin
ཤེས་བྱའི་གཤིས	nature of knowables	shes bya'i gshis
ཤེས་བྱའི་གཤིས་ལ་ཤོར་བ	straying as to the nature of knowables	shes bya'i gshis la shor ba
ཤེས་བྱེད	cognitive acts, cognizing, the knower, the one who experiences; the knowing agent	shes byed
ཤེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བློ	mind the knower	shes byed kyi blo
ཤེས་དབང	wisdom initiation, SA sher dbang	shes dbang
ཤེས་འབྱོན	knowledge and capabilities	shes 'byon
ཤེས་སྦྱོར	that has consciousness only, beast, animal	shes sbyor
ཤེས་བརྦྱ་ཤེས་པར་གྱིས	recognize, know!, should be known	shes brbya shes par gyis
ཤེས་མི་ཡོང	not understand	shes mi yong
ཤེས་མེད	a moron; senseless	shes med
ཤེས་མྱུར	bringing quick understanding	shes myur
ཤེས་དམན	ignorant	shes dman
ཤེས་ཚད	level of knowledge/ education, degree	shes tshad
ཤེས་ཚད་ལག་འཁྱེར	diploma	shes tshad lag 'khyer
ཤེས་ཚོད	what I knew	shes tshod
ཤེས་ཚོར	activities of consciousness; feeling, sense	shes tshor
ཤེས་ཚོར་མགྱོགས་པོ	keen, penetrating	shes tshor mgyogs po
ཤེས་ཚོར་མ་ཐུབ་པ	indiscernible	shes tshor ma thub pa
ཤེས་ཚོར་ཡོད་པའི	sentient	shes tshor yod pa'i
ཤེས་མཛད	making known	shes mdzad
ཤེས་མཛོད	professor, teacher	shes mdzod
ཤེས་ཞན	weak/ inferior prajna, illinformed, illiterate, uneducated	shes zhan
ཤེས་བཞི	four knowledges	shes bzhi
ཤེས་བཞིན	attentiveness, 1 of 6 stobs, continuously paying attention, mindfulness of the realization, consciously, introspection, state of knowing, vigilance, mental faculty of guarding the meditative proces...	shes bzhin
ཤེས་བཞིན་གྱི་སྟོབས	power of awareness/ introspection	shes bzhin gyi stobs
ཤེས་བཞིན་སྒྲིབ་བྱང	deliberate action	shes bzhin sgrib byang
ཤེས་བཞིན་ཆེན་པོ	total awareness, total contemplation	shes bzhin chen po
ཤེས་བཞིན་འཇུག་པ	to apply awareness	shes bzhin 'jug pa
ཤེས་བཞིན་དུ	knowingly, deliberately; 2) again and again examining body and mind, introspectively; 3) conscientiously; 4) attentively, [cognitive] alertly	shes bzhin du
ཤེས་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན	not alert, unaware	shes bzhin ma yin
ཤེས་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-introspection/ awareness/ attention /alertness, unaware	shes bzhin ma yin pa
ཤེས་བཞིན་མིན་པ	non-vigilance	shes bzhin min pa
ཤེས་བཞིན་མེད་པ	not deliberately, unintentional	shes bzhin med pa
ཤེས་བཞིན་ཙམ་པོ་བ	simple awareness	shes bzhin tsam po ba
ཤེས་བཞིན་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན་བཅུ	the 10 downfalls of introspection etc	shes bzhin sogs kyi sde tshan bcu
ཤེས་བཞིན་བསྲུང་བ	the guarding of awareness	shes bzhin bsrung ba
ཤེས་ཟིན་པ	learnt shes bzod kyi ye shes skad cig ma bcu	shes zin pa
ཤེས་བཟོད་སྐད་ཅིག་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 16 moments of the wisdom of cognition and acceptance TSE	shes bzod skad cig ma bcu drug
ཤེས་ཡོང	SA shes rgya	shes yong
ཤེས་ཡོན	learning, knowledge, education, qualification, talent, knowledge, education	shes yon
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཁང	institute of --	shes yon khang
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཅན	intellectual, intelligent, learned	shes yon can
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཅན་གྱི་ཐོབ་ཐང	academic degree/ title	shes yon can gyi thob thang
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཅི་ཡོད	all the/whatever learning/ knowledge 1 has	shes yon ci yod
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཐོབ་ཐང	academic degree/ title	shes yon thob thang
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཐོབ་ཐང་གི་ཆིད་རྩོམ	academic thesis/ dissertation	shes yon thob thang gi chid rtsom
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཐོབ་ཐང་གི་ཆེད་རྩོམ	academic thesis/ dissertation	shes yon thob thang gi ched rtsom
ཤེས་ཡོན་དང་སྤྱོད་པ	learning and character	shes yon dang spyod pa
ཤེས་ཡོན་སྣ་འཛོམས	gifted/ talented in many ways	shes yon sna 'dzoms
ཤེས་ཡོན་ཚོགས་ཆུང	study group	shes yon tshogs chung
ཤེས་ཡོན་རིགས་གཅིག་རྐང་འཛིན་པ	specialist	shes yon rigs gcig rkang 'dzin pa
ཤེས་ཡོན་སློབ་སྤེལ	education	shes yon slob spel
ཤེས་རག་ཀྱི་ཕ	section of bka' 'gyur collection	shes rag kyi pha
ཤེས་རག་གི་བར་དུ	until we understand thoroughly	shes rag gi bar du
ཤེས་རབ	prajna, knowledge * [sometimes contrasted to ye shes as intellectual knowledge vs [religious] wisdom, but sometimes = shes rab pha rol phyin and contrasted w shes yon giving a similar meaning w she...	shes rab
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	TSE	shes rab kyi go sgrub
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ	the superknowledge of discrimination	shes rab kyi mngon par shes pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཆ	the aspect of wisdom/prajna	shes rab kyi cha
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of prajna	shes rab kyi chos bzhi
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་སྟོབས	see. {stobs lnga}; see. {stobs lnga}	shes rab kyi stobs
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	gradually meditate on and unite w prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi mthar gyis pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར	gradual union w prajna TSE	shes rab kyi mthar gyis sbyor
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ནོར	the wealth of prajna	shes rab kyi nor
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལམ	liberating path of discriminative awareness	shes rab kyi rnam grol lam
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་པ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕིན་པ	* the perfection of wisdom prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi pa rol tu phin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་པ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	canonical scriptures, on mental, contemplation and wisdom	shes rab kyi pa rol tu phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་དཔྱད་པ	intelligent inquiry	shes rab kyi dpyad pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་སྤྱན	1 of spyan lnga, eye of prajna	shes rab kyi spyan
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ	different versions are 1st century 8000 verses, the satasahasrika in 100,000 verses, the pancavima atisahasrika in 25,000 verses, the astadasa saharsrika in 18,000 verses, and the Heart Sutra (Hrda...	shes rab kyi pha
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent wisdom, ultimate transcendent knowledge, prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
བརྒྱ་པའི་མདོ	Pannchashatikaaprajnnaapaaramitaasuutra, Five Hundred stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa lnga	brgya pa'i mdo
ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་པ	Prajñaparamita in a Hundred Thousand Verses shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa dum bu dang po - Pan~cavim.shatisa-hasrika- prajn~apa-ramita-; The Sutra on the Perfection o...	phrag brgya pa
པའི་རྒྱན	{shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa' rgyan	pa'i rgyan
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་མ	1) prajnaparamita; 2) dbyangs can ma, Sarasvati	shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin ma
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ	transcendent knowledge, Transcendent Knowledge [thd]	shes rab kyi pha rol du phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་མ	transcendental perfection of discriminative awareness GD the perfection of wisdom prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi pha rol du phyin ma
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ	the perfection of wisdom prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi pha rol phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	prajnaparamita	shes rab kyi phar phyin
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕར་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	perfection of wisdom	shes rab kyi phar rol tu phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	the component of discriminative awareness GD	shes rab kyi phung po
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས	inspiration of wisdom	shes rab kyi byin gyis brlabs
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	wisdom faculty; wisdom faculty	shes rab kyi dbang po
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ	the giving of knowledge	shes rab kyi sbyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་མིག	wisdom eye, [that sees all things as unreal]	shes rab kyi mig
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་རྩ	prajna nadi	shes rab kyi rtsa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་རྩལ	the power of insight, strength of intelligence	shes rab kyi rtsal
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	shes rab kyi tshogs sgrub
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་རྫས	prajña substances	shes rab kyi rdzas
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	higher training in sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge 2738	shes rab kyi bslab pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ལྷ	SA 'jam dpal	shes rab kyi lha
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱིས་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ	arhat liberated from the obscuration of kleshas and not? [ni nus in transcription] able to perform rnam thar brgyad la snyoms par 'jug	shes rab kyis rnam par grol ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཀློང་རྡོལ	wells forth from the vast expanse of transcendent knowledge, welling forth of a vast expanse of transcendent knowledge	shes rab klong rdol
ཤེས་རབ་ཀློང་ནས	expanse of knowledge	shes rab klong nas
ཤེས་རབ་དཀུ	da gyad detailed list	shes rab dku
ཤེས་རབ་སྐུ	'jam dbyangs, Manjushri	shes rab sku
ཤེས་རབ་འཁོར་ལོ	'jam dbyangs, Manjushri	shes rab 'khor lo
ཤེས་རབ་དགུ	nine kinds of knowledge (che ba, rno ba, myur ba, rnam grol, shin tu zab pa, rgya che ba, mtha' yas pa, pham pa med pa, yang dag pa)	shes rab dgu
ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	1) {mnyam med} 1356-1415 Bönpo master; 2) dol po pa, 1292-1361; mnyam med	shes rab rgyal mtshan
ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དོལ་བུ་པ	Jonang Künkhyen Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen: 1292-1361	shes rab rgyal mtshan dol bu pa
ཤེས་རབ་སྒྲོན་མེ	prajnaa-paradiipa of Bhaavavika	shes rab sgron me
ཤེས་རབ་བརྒྱ་པ	a work of 100 wise saying of nagarjuna	shes rab brgya pa
ཤེས་རབ་ལྔ	CHN	shes rab lnga
ཤེས་རབ་ཅན	person w prajna, intellect, understanding * wisdom [eye], wise person, genius	shes rab can
ཤེས་རབ་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	follower foremost in wisdom	shes rab can rnams kyi mchog
ཤེས་རབ་ཆུང་བ	those who have limited knowledge prajna	shes rab chung ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཆེ་བ	profound wisdom; vast intelligence /insight	shes rab che ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཆེན་པོ	great discrimination	shes rab chen po
ཤེས་རབ་འཆལ	erratic stupid person	shes rab 'chal
ཤེས་རབ་འཆལ་བ	foolish TSE	shes rab 'chal ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཉམས་པ་མི་མངའ་བ	not possessing defective prajna	shes rab nyams pa mi mnga' ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཉམས་པ་མེད་པ	unwaning discriminative awareness	shes rab nyams pa med pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཅན	disturbed discrimination	shes rab nyon mongs can
ཤེས་རབ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཆན	disturbed discrimination	shes rab nyon mongs chan
ཤེས་རབ་མཉམ་པ་མེད་པ	TSE	shes rab mnyam pa med pa
ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་རྗེ་དང་ལྡན་པ	intelligent and compassionate	shes rab snying rje dang ldan pa
ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་པོ	Essence of Knowledge	shes rab snying po
ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་རྩེའི་སྒྲུབ་པ	TSE shes rab stong pa chen po'i rnal 'byor The yoga of great emptiness which is discriminative awareness. knowledge, the yoga of great emptiness, One of {ting nge 'dzin gsum}	shes rab snying rtse'i sgrub pa
ཤེས་རབ་སྟོང་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	the yoga of great emptiness which is discriminative awareness GD, knowledge the yoga of great emptiness	shes rab stong pa chen po'i rnal 'byor
ཤེས་རབ་སྟོབས	strength of wisdom	shes rab stobs
ཤེས་རབ་དམ་པ	supreme knowledge or capacity for understanding	shes rab dam pa
ཤེས་རབ་ལྡན	having great intelligence	shes rab ldan
ཤེས་རབ་སྡེ	army of wisdom	shes rab sde
ཤེས་རབ་སྡོང་བུ	{shes rab sdong bu	shes rab sdong bu
ཤེས་རབ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three prajnas	shes rab rnam pa gsum
ཤེས་རབ་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བའི་ལམ	liberating path of discriminative awareness	shes rab rnam par grol ba'i lam
ཤེས་རབ་རྣམ་གསུམ	three kinds of prajna	shes rab rnam gsum
ཤེས་རབ་རྣོ་བ	TSE	shes rab rno ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	prajnaparamita	shes rab pha rol tu phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན	perfect wisdom	shes rab pha rol phyin
ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ	prajnaparamita	shes rab pha rol phyin pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཕར་ཕྱིན	Prajnaparamita	shes rab phar phyin
ཤེས་རབ་ཕུན་ཚོགས	1 of 7 mtho ris kyi yon tan	shes rab phun tshogs
ཤེས་རབ་འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	increasing intelligence	shes rab 'phel bar byed pa
ཤེས་རབ་བྱིན	gift of wisdom	shes rab byin
ཤེས་རབ་འབྱུང་གནས་བློ་གྲོས	Prajnakaramati, author of bodhicaryavatara	shes rab 'byung gnas blo gros
ཤེས་རབ་མ	SA shes ldan ma, prajna consort	shes rab ma
ཤེས་རབ་མ་ཞལ	the face personifying the female principle of wisdom	shes rab ma zhal
ཤེས་རབ་མར་མེས	lam- of wisdom	shes rab mar mes
ཤེས་རབ་མེད་ཀྱང་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཡོད	not wise/ perfected in [religious] knowledge but intellectually learned	shes rab med kyang shes yon yod
ཤེས་རབ་མྱུར་བ	TSE	shes rab myur ba
ཤེས་རབ་དམན	weak intelligence	shes rab dman
ཤེས་རབ་དམན་པ	weak/ inferior prajna	shes rab dman pa
ཤེས་རབ་སྨྲ་བའི་སེང་གེ	Bönpo equivalent of the Buddhist Manjushri	shes rab smra ba'i seng ge
ཤེས་རབ་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	the feet of miraculous discernment	shes rab rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཟབ་པ	TSE	shes rab zab pa
ཤེས་རབ་བཟང་པོ	{bdag chen rgya gar ba} alias {sa skya bdag chen rgya gar ba shes rab rgyal mtshan}	shes rab bzang po
ཤེས་རབ་འོད	rog ban de - authour of grub mtha' so so'i bzhed tshul gzhung gsal bar ston pa chos 'byung grub mtha' chen po bstan pa'i sgron me	shes rab 'od
ཤེས་རབ་འོད་ཟེར	{me ston} 1058-1132 Bönpo master	shes rab 'od zer
ཤེས་རབ་ཡངས་པ	TSE	shes rab yangs pa
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom-knowledge empowerment	shes rab ye shes
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Wisdom Knowledge Tantra. One of the Twentyfive Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	shes rab ye shes kyi rgyud
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དབང	empowerment of sublime knowing/ wisdom/ 2739 transcendent knowledge and timeless awareness	shes rab ye shes kyi dbang
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་དབང་བརྒྱད	CHN	shes rab ye shes kyi dbang brgyad
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབང	prajna jnana abhisheka	shes rab ye shes dbang
ཤེས་རབ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་ཡེ་ཤེས་མེད	has intellectual knowledge but not wisdom/ pristine cognition	shes rab yod kyang ye shes med
ཤེས་རབ་ཡོད་པ	to have insight	shes rab yod pa
ཤེས་རབ་རང་བྱུང་གི་སྒྲོན་མ	lamp of	shes rab rang byung gi sgron ma
ཤེས་རབ་རང་བྱུང་སྒྲོན	lamp of selfarisen prajna	shes rab rang byung sgron
ཤེས་རབ་རང་བྱུང་སྒྲོན་མ	light of	shes rab rang byung sgron ma
ཤེས་རབ་རལ་གྲི	sword of knowledge	shes rab ral gri
ཤེས་རབ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	name of text	shes rab la 'jug pa
ཤེས་རབ་ལེའུ	the transcendental perfection of discriminative awareness GD	shes rab le'u
ཤེས་རབ་སེང་གེ	Sherab Senge, founder, in 1433, of Gyu Me (rgyud smad), the Tantric College of Lower Tibet, rgyud chen, d. 1445	shes rab seng ge
ཤེས་རབ་གསུམ	three kinds of prajna/ discriminative awareness	shes rab gsum
ཤེས་རབ་ལྷ་མོ	dbyangs can ma, Sarasvati	shes rab lha mo
ཤེས་རིག	civilization, awareness, wisdom, awareness which knows, a knowing awareness	shes rig
ཤེས་རིག་གི་སྐྱེས་བུ	conscious principle or purusha [eternalist view]	shes rig gi skyes bu
ཤེས་རིག་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of cognizant consciousness	shes rig gi rgyal po
ཤེས་རིག་ཅན	1) possessing understanding of accepting/ rejecting; 2) being w knowledge/ awareness and insight/ understanding	shes rig can
ཤེས་རིག་དར	civilize, spread culture	shes rig dar
ཤེས་རིག་པར་ཁང	Cultural Printing Press	shes rig par khang
ཤེས་རིག་འཕེལ	civilize, spread culture	shes rig 'phel
ཤེས་རིག་བློན་ཆེན	Minister of Culture/ Education	shes rig blon chen
ཤེས་རིག་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	Institute of Learning	shes rig gtsug lag khang
ཤེས་རིག་ལས་ཁུངས	Cultural Office	shes rig las khungs
ཤེས་རིག་གསར་བརྗེ	Cultural Revolution	shes rig gsar brje
ཤེས་རེ་སྐན	oath that 1 does not know	shes re skan
ཤེས་ལས་སྐྱེས	person	shes las skyes
ཤེས་ལུགས	culture, customs	shes lugs
ཤེས་ལོ	mere knowledge, merely knowing	shes lo
ཤེས་བཤིན	self-possession	shes bshin
ཤེས་ས	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	shes sa
ཤེས་སམ	Do you know?	shes sam
ཤེས་སླ་བ	quick perception, understanding readily, easy to understand	shes sla ba
ཤེས་གསལ	1) blo la gsal ba ?; 2) clear prajna; 3) well-known, common knowledge	shes gsal
ཤེས་གསལ་ལྟར	as is commonly known	shes gsal ltar
ཤེས་གསལ་མ	something clearly/ commonly/ well known	shes gsal ma
ཤེས་གསལ་མོ	daughter of daksa, dA shes pa'i bu mo	shes gsal mo
ཤོ	1) row/ string/ columns [of animals]; 2) tax; 3) dice * * lapse, slip, stray, lose it; 2) [arch] bkrab pa ste, 'dams pa (/; 4) shva	sho
ཤོ་ཀ་ལི	bamboo, cotton etc bsgrigs nas Tibetan pecha container opening to a stand	sho ka li
ཤོ་བཀྲ་བ	partridge	sho bkra ba
ཤོ་སྐོམ	one of the 3 meditators from Kham	sho skom
ཤོ་སྐྱམ	place in tibet	sho skyam
ཤོ་ཁལ	sunhat. Syn {nyi zhwa}	sho khal
ཤོ་ཁྱི	dice playing paraphernalia lag khyi	sho khyi
ཤོ་ཁྲལ	tax on merchandise when 1 comes to an individual place, customs duty, toll, transport tax	sho khral
ཤོ་གམ	1) customs, road, sales taxes etc; SK shu lka; 2) rdzong g.yog rnams kyi requisites of livelihood du bsdu ba'i gtan 'khel ba'am, lam srol chags pa'i tax	sho gam
ཤོ་གམ་ལྕི་བ	high duty	sho gam lci ba
ཤོ་གམ་པ	collector of tolls, receiver of customs, toll gatherer	sho gam pa
ཤོ་གམ་པའི་བྱ་བ་བྱས	did the work of	sho gam pa'i bya ba byas
ཨ་ཏ྾	collector	a tax
ཤོ་གམ་ཟློས་པ	1) khral 'ded pa; 2) khral log sdud pa	sho gam zlos pa
ཤོ་གམ་བཟླ་བ	smuggle, circumvent or defraud a customs officer	sho gam bzla ba
ཤོ་གམ་ལེན་པ	take tol, levy a duty	sho gam len pa
ཤོ་འགྱེད་པ	having bet play dice, to divide black and white throw dice ['gyed compete?]	sho 'gyed pa
ཤོ་རྒལ	flood	sho rgal
ཤོ་རྒྱག་སྐབས་འཛུགས་པའི་རྒྱན	bet in a dice game	sho rgyag skabs 'dzugs pa'i rgyan
ཤོ་རྒྱག་པའི་རྒྱན	bet in a dice game	sho rgyag pa'i rgyan
ཤོ་རྒྱག་པའི་རྩེད་མོ	dice playing	sho rgyag pa'i rtsed mo
ཤོ་རྒྱན	bet in a dice game	sho rgyan
ཤོ་རྒྱབ་པ	dice	sho rgyab pa
ཤོ་སྒམ	tax on merchandise when 1 comes to an individual place, customs duty, toll, transport tax ???	sho sgam
ཤོ་སྒོམ	1 of 3 meditators from khams	sho sgom
ཤོ་སྒྲ	gos dang shing lo lhags pas khyer ba'i shob sgra lta bu	sho sgra
ཤོ་སྒྲིག	1) phreng sgrig; 2) ras sogs in various colors gru bzhi sgrig pa	sho sgrig
ཤོ་བརྒྱབ	play/ throw dice	sho brgyab
ཤོ་བསྒྲིགས	well arranged	sho bsgrigs
ཤོ་ཆས	dice playing things	sho chas
ཤོ་ཏོ	upper lip torn, hare lip	sho to
ཤོ་རྟེན	pad for playing dice	sho rten
ཤོ་སྟན	pad for playing dice	sho stan
ཤོ་སྟོད་སྟི་སྒྲོ	Tidro Cave at Shotö. Sacred place of Padmasambhava and Yeshe Tsogyal near Drigung Til in Central Tibet. Opened by Padmasambhava for future practitioners, this important pilgrimage site also has hot...	sho stod sti sgro
ཤོ་བརྟག	do divination w dice	sho brtag
ཤོ་ཐུག་རྒྱག	have two lines of animals meet on a narrow road where only 1 can pass	sho thug rgyag
ཤོ་གདན	pad for playing dice	sho gdan
ཤོ་བདང	throw dice	sho bdang
ཤོ་མདོ	abbr of sho pa mdo	sho mdo
ཤོ་འདོར་བ	throw the dice	sho 'dor ba
ཤོ་རྡེའུ	in playing dice score keeping rde'u	sho rde'u
ཤོ་པ	dice player	sho pa
ཤོ་པོ་ལྟག་ལ	{sho po ltag} pass	sho po ltag la
ཤོ་ཕོར	sho dkrug sa'i bowl	sho phor
ཤོ་བ	nyag khe ste la nyag	sho ba
ཤོ་བེ	chaotic unexamined false words, whatever comes to mind, nonsensical	sho be
ཤོ་སྦག	curds and dough, dice and mah jong gambling	sho sbag
ཤོ་སྦག་གི་འཛིན	smon lam tshugs dus lha ldan mi dmangs nas sho sbag brgyab chog pa tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	sho sbag gi 'dzin
ཤོ་སྦག་རྒྱག	gamble [playing dice and mah jong]	sho sbag rgyag
ཤོ་སྦག་རྒྱག་པ	gamble [playing dice and mah jong]	sho sbag rgyag pa
ཤོ་སྦག་ནང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	mah jong winning tile, trump card etc	sho sbag nang gi rgyal po
ཤོ་སྦག་རྩེ་བ	gamble	sho sbag rtse ba
ཤོ་མང	{sho mang} med. herb	sho mang
ཤོ་མིག	dots on dice	sho mig
ཤོ་མིག་གཅིག	ace	sho mig gcig
ཤོ་མོ	sho mo, "halloo," "yoohoo "	sho mo
ཤོ་མོ་ས	SA sho sa	sho mo sa
ཤོ་རྩེད	dice playing	sho rtsed
ཤོ་རྩེད་རྒྱལ་བ	win at dice	sho rtsed rgyal ba
ཤོ་ཚ	pair of scales to weigh gold and silver, kind of steel yard	sho tsha
ཤོ་ཚྭ་ཁ	{sho tshwa kha	sho tshwa kha
ཤོ་ཚད	going price/ rate	sho tshad
ཤོ་ཚུགས	tax collecting sa tshigs	sho tshugs
ཤོ་ཚེད	going price/ rate	sho tshed
ཤོ་ཟོ	grain measure for barley or cor or flour	sho zo
ཤོ་ར	SA shor ba	sho ra
ཤོ་རལ	torn upper lip, hare lip	sho ral
ཤོ་རེ	thoughtless promise, hare-lip, defect, flaw, notch, gap, damaged, spoiled	sho re
ཤོ་ལན་ལེན་པ	seek an answer from the dice in [mo] divination w dice	sho lan len pa
ཤོ་ལམ	path tradition	sho lam
ཤོ་ལོ	dice player	sho lo
ཤོ་ལོ་ཀ	[Skt] shloka, stanza	sho lo ka
ཤོ་བཤད	things said while playing dice	sho bshad
ཤོ་ས	kind of bean whose leaves are cooked with gruel	sho sa
ཤོ་སོགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ	gain a wager in diceplaying	sho sogs kyi rgyal
ཤྭོ་མོ	system of divination by casting dice	shwo mo
ཤོག	May!	shog
ཤོག་ཀ་ལི	sho ka li pecha holder/ storer	shog ka li
ཤོག་དཀྲི	wrapping with paper, envelope	shog dkri
ཤོག་བཀྲ	various colored paper	shog bkra
ཤོག་རྐྱང་བ	spread the wings	shog rkyang ba
ཤོག་ཁ	unit, group, clique, sector shog kha g.yas phyogs - right wing clique	shog kha
ཤོག་ཁག	gang, band, party, wing	shog khag
ཤོག་ཁང	paper house, house where paper is kept or manufactured, papermaker's farm	shog khang
ཤོག་ཁྲ	1) vari-colored paper; 2) shog bu sbyar yod pa'i khra ma	shog khra
ཤོག་གང	full sheet of paper	shog gang
ཤོག་གུ	paper	shog gu
ཤོག་གྲངས	# of pages	shog grangs
ཤོག་གྲངས་འཁོད་པ	paginate	shog grangs 'khod pa
ཤོག་གྲི	paper knife	shog gri
ཤོག་གྲིལ	scroll	shog gril
ཤོག་གླུད་འཕེན	throw a paper [mdos glud] ransom offering	shog glud 'phen
ཤོག་གླེགས	volume, page of a pecha	shog glegs
ཤོག་སྒམ	box	shog sgam
ཤོག་སྒོམ	cardboard box	shog sgom
ཤོག་སྒོར	yuan	shog sgor
ཤོག་སྒོར་ཁ་གྲངས	amount due on a bill	shog sgor kha grangs
ཤོག་སྒོར་གྱི་འཛ་ཐང	currency value	shog sgor gyi 'dza thang
ཤོག་སྒོར་ཟུར	.1 yuan PRC currency	shog sgor zur
ཤོག་སྒྲིལ	scroll, joining together, joint-, taking sides	shog sgril
ཤོག་སྒྲིལ་གྱི་དཔུང་རྒོལ	joint attack	shog sgril gyi dpung rgol
ཤོག་སྒྲོམ	box for keeping paper[s]	shog sgrom
ཤོག་ངོ	page	shog ngo
ཤོག་ངོས	page	shog ngos
ཤོག་ངོས་གཉིས་པ	second page	shog ngos gnyis pa
ཤོག་ངོས་དང་པོ	first page	shog ngos dang po
ཤོག་དངུལ	paper $	shog dngul
ཤོག་དངུལ་རྫུན་མ	counterfeit $	shog dngul rdzun ma
ཤོག་ཅིག	come, let him come	shog cig
ཤོག་རྟགས	label	shog rtags
ཤོག་སྟོང	blank paper	shog stong
ཤོག་ཐུག	shog snyigs brdungs te skyo ma mixed w water lta bu'i ming	shog thug
ཤོག་ཐུམ	spoon of rolled paper thum bu	shog thum
ཤོག་ཐོག་ཕབ་པ	having set out words on a practice board write them on paper	shog thog phab pa
ཤོག་དུད	cigarette, tobacco	shog dud
ཤོག་དྲས་རྒྱག་པ	shog bu'i mtha' gtsang mar 'dra ba	shog dras rgyag pa
ཤོག་དྲས་རི་མོ	scissor-cut/ silhouette picture	shog dras ri mo
ཤོག་དྲིལ	scrolls of paper, scroll of text; a scroll, scrolls of paper, scroll of text	shog dril
ཤོག་དྲིལ་སྐོར་གསུམ	the three scrolls [dus rabs bcu gnyis pa'i nang rje btsun gyu thog yon tan mgon po gsar mas mdzad pa'i rtsa chu nad rtags sogs gsal bar ston pa'i sman gyi bstan bcos tshad ldan zhig]	shog dril skor gsum
ཤོག་དྲིལ་ཆེན་པོ	big scroll of text	shog dril chen po
ཤོག་དྲིལ་སེར་པོ	SA shog ser	shog dril ser po
ཤོག་འདམ	clay statue making clay w paper	shog 'dam
ཤོག་འདེམས	election by ballot	shog 'dems
ཤོག་ལྡན	bird, one having wings	shog ldan
ཤོག་ལྡུམ་པ	re lcag pa ste paper making material	shog ldum pa
ཤོག་ལྡེབས	flat paper	shog ldebs
ཤོག་ནག	black paper 2741	shog nag
ཤོག་པ	section * wing	shog pa
ཤོག་པག	explosive, fire cracker	shog pag
ཤོག་པོ	generous	shog po
ཤོག་པོ་སྦྱར་བ	paste paper	shog po sbyar ba
ཤོག་སྤང	cardboard	shog spang
ཤོག་ཕག	explosion	shog phag
ཤོག་འཕྲིན	gtong yig	shog 'phrin
ཤོག་བམ	shog bu sdem kha	shog bam
ཤོག་བུ	paper, sheet of paper	shog bu
ཤོག་བུ་གྲིལ་མ	scroll	shog bu gril ma
ཤོག་བུ་གཏུབ་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	paper cutting machine	shog bu gtub byed 'phrul 'khor
ཤོག་བུ་དྲས་རོ	useless bskyur ba'i shog ro	shog bu dras ro
ཤོག་བུ་དྲིལ་མ	scroll	shog bu dril ma
ཤོག་བུ་སྣུམ་ཟོས	oil paper, complete absorption, gradual pervasion pa	shog bu snum zos
ཤོག་བུ་སྣུམ་བཟོས	oil paper	shog bu snum bzos
ཤོག་བུ་སྦྱར་མ	shog bu kha shas sdebs gcig tu brtsegs te sbyar ba'i shog bu	shog bu sbyar ma
ཤོག་བུ་ལ	{shog bu} pass	shog bu la
ཤོག་བུའམ་རས་སྒྲིལ	scroll	shog bu'am ras sgril
ཤོག་བུའི་ཀྱོ་མ	pulp	shog bu'i kyo ma
ཤོག་བུའི་སྤང་ལེབ	cardboard	shog bu'i spang leb
ཤོག་བུས་རས་རློམ	boasting paper is cloth, lying	shog bus ras rlom
ཤོག་བྱ	kite	shog bya
ཤོག་བྱང	shog bur tho bris pa'i shog 'dzar	shog byang
ཤོག་སྦག	firecracker	shog sbag
ཤོག་སྦག་རྒྱག	shoot firecrackers	shog sbag rgyag
ཤོག་སྦག་རྒྱག་པ	shoot firecrackers	shog sbag rgyag pa
ཤོག་སྦག་སྤར	shoot firecrackers	shog sbag spar
ཤོག་སྦག་སྤར་བ	shoot firecrackers	shog sbag spar ba
ཤོག་སྦག་རླུང་འཚང	fill the air w firecrackers, incite/ stir up trouble	shog sbag rlung 'tshang
ཤོག་སྦུག་རླུང་འཚང	secretly ngan bslab byed pa'i dpe	shog sbug rlung 'tshang
ཤོག་སྦུབས	the hollow of a (rolled-up) paper/ a paper-cone	shog sbubs
ཤོག་སྦུབས་རླུང་འཚང	secretly ngan bslab byed pa'i dpe, secretly give bad precepts/ incite	shog sbubs rlung 'tshang
ཤོག་རྩལ་སྦྱོང	agility in flying	shog rtsal sbyong
ཤོག་ཚལ	bit/ fragment of paper, card, ballot	shog tshal
ཤོག་ཚལ་འཕེན	cast a ballot, vote	shog tshal 'phen
ཤོག་འཛར	shog lhe nar mo 'dzar 'dzar du yod pa	shog 'dzar
ཤོག་ཟེར་བ	say come, invite	shog zer ba
ཤོག་བཟོ	paper factory/ mill	shog bzo
ཤོག་རས	paper box lining/ bottom cloth	shog ras
ཤོག་རོ	shog bu dras ro dang, used paper	shog ro
ཤོག་ལས	to arange for texts to be copied out [KNT]	shog las
ཤོག་ལས་པ	paper manufacturer	shog las pa
ཤོག་ལི	bamboo, cotton etc bsgrigs nas Tibetan pecha container opening to a stand	shog li
ཤོག་ལིང	paper ling ga	shog ling
ཤོག་ལེ	sheet	shog le
ཤོག་ལེབ	page, piece of paper	shog leb
ཤོག་ལོ	sentence in a book	shog lo
ཤོག་ལོར	paper $	shog lor
ཤོག་ཤིང	daphne plant, plant from whose bark paper is made	shog shing
ཤོག་ཤིང་བ	previous son	shog shing ba
ཤོག་ཤུབས	paper wrapping/ envelope	shog shubs
ཤོག་ཤོག	1) come here!; 2) sound of paper etc. moved by wind	shog shog
ཤོག་སེར	yellow scrolls; scroll[ed], yellow parchment. golden paper; Yellow Scroll	shog ser
ཤོག་སེར་ཚིག་བརྒྱུད	verbal transmission of the yellow scroll	shog ser tshig brgyud
ཤོག་སེར་ཚིགས་གི་བརྒྱུད་པ	whispered oral teachings lineage	shog ser tshigs gi brgyud pa
ཤོག་གསེར་རིགས་ལྔ	Five Kinds of Yellow Scroll. Those scrolls on which earth treasures. or their inventories were concealed are of five kinds, symbolizing the five enlightened families	shog gser rigs lnga
ཤོག་ལྷེ	page, * piece of paper	shog lhe
ཤོག་ལྷེ་གསུམ་སྦྲེལ་མ	three part/ page bill/ invoice	shog lhe gsum sbrel ma
ཤོགས	extent	shogs
ཤོགས་པོ	generous, giving w/o avarice	shogs po
ཤོགས་ཤིག	approach it	shogs shig
ཤོང	mountain ridge, pit, hole, cavity, excavation, valley, SA sdings, place in tibet, to fit, hold, have room for	shong
ཤོང་དཀར་རྩེ་མོ	tip of a tea plant	shong dkar rtse mo
ཤོང་དགོས་པའི་ཡོར་བུ	gutter which needs to be cleaned out	shong dgos pa'i yor bu
ཤོང་འགེལ་བ	thin branch, twig	shong 'gel ba
ཤོང་སྒོ	vessel able to contain all of something	shong sgo
ཤོང་ཆེན	Shongchen, in Domey	shong chen
ཤོང་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{shong rdo rje rgyal mtshan, shong ston lo tsh' ba's actual name	shong rdo rje rgyal mtshan
ཤོང་བ	hold, contain, have room in, comprehend, hold in mind, hold, contain, have room in or on, comprehend, hold in mind, empty, remove, carry, take away	shong ba
ཤོང་བུ	furrow	shong bu
ཤོང་བློ་གྲོས་བརྟན་པ	{shong blo gros brtan pa	shong blo gros brtan pa
ཤོང་བློར་མ་བ	could not accommodate in their minds, fit, hold, have room, accommodated	shong blor ma ba
ཤོང་ཚད	capacity, volume	shong tshad
ཤོང་ཡང་ཤོང	easily accommodated/ contained	shong yang shong
ཤོང་ཤོང	rough, rugged	shong shong
ཤོང་ས	accommodation, shelter, refuge, depression, [con]cavity	shong sa
ཤོང་སོབ་སོབ	pitted/ spongy wood	shong sob sob
ཤོངས	imp. of {gshong ba}	shongs
ཤོངས་བུ་འཐེན་པ	make furrows	shongs bu 'then pa
ཤོད	1) tha dad par 'chad pa / shad pa / shod pa!/ {bshad}!,, tell me! say, talk, speak, explain; 2) bottom. lower [part], down * valleys	shod
ཤོད་སྐོར	Tibetan govt lay/ householder official = drung 'khor	shod skor
ཤོད་གོད	[arch] aang grangs nas subtract/ lessen	shod god
ཤོད་མགྲོན	bod rgyal tshab kyi mgron gnyer dkyus ma, sne mgron	shod mgron
ཤོད་འགག	bod rgyal tshab kyi las khungs 'gag ste, mostly taking care of guests	shod 'gag
ཤོད་སྒྲ	explanatory word, word explained	shod sgra
ཤོད་སྟངས	way of speaking/ saying	shod stangs
ཤོད་སྟེང	lower and upper bottom and top	shod steng
ཤོད་ཐབས	1) # calculating abacus &, rtsi thabs; 2) means of speaking	shod thabs
ཤོད་དུ	to or toward the bottom, down, downwards	shod du
ཤོད་དུ་བབས་པ	descended to the lowlands	shod du babs pa
ཤོད་དྲུང	close lay retinue of Tibetan govt {bod kyi rgyal tshab} &, {srid blon}, {bka' blon}	shod drung
ཤོད་པ	(tha dad pa bshad pa, bshad pa, shod,, say, speak, tell about	shod pa
ཤོད་བ	fit	shod ba
ཤོད་ཚུལ	way of speaking/ saying	shod tshul
ཤོད་མཛོད	khang pa'i 'og khang du yod pa'i treasury	shod mdzod
ཤོད་རིན་མེད་པ	insignificant, unimportant, negligible	shod rin med pa
ཤོད་སྲོལ	way of speaking/ saying	shod srol
ཤོད་སྲོལ་ལ	as is commonly said, according to oral legend	shod srol la
ཤོན	form of dance, turning to left in pantomimic dancing of women	shon
ཤོན་ལྗང	"green color", a synonym for malachite	shon ljang
ཤོན་པ	[arch] 1) [folk] dance; 2) quick	shon pa
ཤོན་བྱེད	dance w/o song, do a dance show/ dance w drum	shon byed
ཤོན་བྱེད་པ	dance w/o song, do a dance show/ dance w drum	shon byed pa
ཤོབ	false words, boasting, lie	shob
ཤོབ་ཏོ	fissure, faction	shob to
ཤོབ་བེ	false words, boasting, lie, lying	shob be
ཤོབ་སྨྲ་བ	tell a lie	shob smra ba
ཤོབ་ཤོབ	lie	shob shob
ཤོབ་ཤོབ་སྨྲ	lie	shob shob smra
ཤོབ་ཤོབ་ཤོད	lie	shob shob shod
ཤོབས	shab pa!	shobs
ཤོམ	prepare, SA shom pa	shom
ཤོམ་འགྱིང	great pride	shom 'gying
ཤོམ་ཅན	stately, grand	shom can
ཤོམ་པ	prepare, make ready, arrange, put in order	shom pa
ཤོམ་ར	[extensive] preparations * exhibition hall	shom ra
ཤོམ་ར་བྱེད་པ	show off, dress smartly	shom ra byed pa
ཤོམས	prepare, SA shom pa	shoms
ཤོམས་ར	preparation, arrangement, fitting out	shoms ra
ཤོམས་ར་བགྱིས་པ	have made arrangement	shoms ra bgyis pa
ཤོམས་རས་ཆེ་བ	luxurious, elegant	shoms ras che ba
ཤོའི་བཟོ་དབྱིབས	cube	sho'i bzo dbyibs
ཤོར་ཁ	breach, gap	shor kha
ཤོར་གོལ	strayings and sidetracks	shor gol
ཤོར་ཐལ	have violated, slip into, stray	shor thal
ཤོར་དུ་སོང་བ	to give too liberally	shor du song ba
ཤོར་དོགས	might slip away, might lose	shor dogs
ཤོར་དོགས་ཡོད་པས	because there is the danger of losing	shor dogs yod pas
ཤོར་བ	get distracted; x {da lta rtog pa rkyen yul du shor ba} to let your present thoughts get distracted by anything around you	shor ba
ཤོར་བ་སྡོམ་པ	broken the precepts	shor ba sdom pa
ཤོར་བ་གསུམ་པོ	1) {sngon song bag chags kyi rjes dpyod pa}. 2) {ma 'ongs pa nyon mongs khyi mdun bsu ba} 3) {da lda rtog pa rkyen yul du shor ba gsum po}; 1) {sngon song bag chags kyi rjes dpyod pa}. 2) {ma 'ongs...	shor ba gsum po
ཤོར་བ་བསུམ་པོ	the three shor ba	shor ba bsum po
ཤོར་ཟིན་པ	lost	shor zin pa
ཤོར་ར་རེ	'chor yong, shor dogs yod	shor ra re
ཤོར་ས	deviations, strayings	shor sa
ཤོར་ས་བརྒྱད	Eight deviations	shor sa brgyad
ཤོར་ས་བཞི	the four strayings	shor sa bzhi
ཤོལ	excess, additional	shol
ཤོལ་གྱི་རྐ	furrow of the plough	shol gyi rka
ཤོལ་པོ	species of willow	shol po
ཤོལ་བ	to give up	shol ba
ཤོལ་ཙེ	(CH [kind of leather] boot	shol tse
ཤོལ་རྩེ	boots	shol rtse
ཤོལ་ཚོགས	cultivators, husbandmen	shol tshogs
ཤོལ་ཟླ	remainder of the month	shol zla
ཤོས	1) gsho ba! throw! [dirt, liquids] bail!; 2) the other [of 2, opposite; 3) mostly, very; 4) superlative, -est	shos
ཤོས་ཁང	offerings made in fanciful designs of temples & castles	shos khang
ཤོས་བུ	offerings of cakes	shos bu
ཤྲ་བ་ཀ	shravaka	shra ba ka
ཤྲ་བ་ན	the ear	shra ba na
ཤྲི	glory, magnificence, splendid, grand, glorious, signifies worthy master, Shri	shri
ཤྲཱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the glorious king, dza paltrul rinpoche, orgyen jigme chokyi wangpo	shrI rgyal po
ཤྲི་རི	mountain in india shrI sa skya pa sngags 'chang bla ma khri chen rdo rje 'chang ngag dbang mthu stobs dbang phyug drag shul yon tan rgya mtsho bkra shis grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po'i rnam p...	shri ri
པའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	written by {sde gzhung lung rig sprul sku kun dga' bstan pa'i nyi ma} (1906-?)	pa'i sgra dbyangs zhes bya ba
ཤྲི་སིང	Shri Singha	shri sing
ཤྲི་སིང་ག	Shri Singha	shri sing ga
ཤྲཱི་སིང་ཧ	Shri Singha	shrI sing ha
ཤྲཱི་སིང་གྷ	passed away 984 years after the nirvana of buddha, disciple of Jampal Shenyen	shrI sing gha
ཤྲི་སིན་ག	Shri Singha	shri sin ga
ཤྲིའ་སིམ་ཧ	Shri Singha	shri' sim ha
ཤློ་ཀ	Shloka. A stanza, esp. One of	shlo ka
ཕོ༹ཨུར་ཨེཨིགྷཏ	syllable padas; as a unit of length of prose, 32 syllables	four eight
གཤ་དཀར	tin	gsha dkar
གཤག	to chop, split	gshag
གཤག་གཅོད	incision	gshag gcod
གཤག་བཅོས	operation [med.]	gshag bcos
གཤག་བཅོས་ཀྱི	surgical	gshag bcos kyi
གཤག་བཅོས་ཁང	operating room	gshag bcos khang
གཤག་བཅོས་བྱེད	operate on, have an operation [med.] gshag bcos byed ched kyi gri chung scalpel	gshag bcos byed
གཤག་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	operate	gshag bcos byed pa
གཤག་བཅོས་ཨེམ་ཆེ	surgeon	gshag bcos em che
གཤག་གཏུབ	scission	gshag gtub
གཤག་པ	chop, split, slice, slit, distinction, difference, distinguish, differentiate, SA gshog pa	gshag pa
གཤག་གཟོང	large rock splitting/ cutting steel chisel	gshag gzong
གཤག་ལས	cutting open, dissection, operation	gshag las
གཤག་ལས་བྱེད	cut open, dissect, operate on [med.]	gshag las byed
གཤགས	slashed, cleave, confess, SA gshog pa, right, justice	gshags
གཤགས་བཀྱེ	argument, verbal quarrel	gshags bkye
གཤགས་འགྱེད	argue [-ment], verbal[ly quarrel	gshags 'gyed
གཤགས་རྒྱལ་བ	win in discussion	gshags rgyal ba
གཤགས་ངན	kha gshags ngan pa	gshags ngan
གཤགས་བཅོས	operation [med.]	gshags bcos
གཤགས་བཅོས་ཁང	operating room	gshags bcos khang
གཤགས་བཅོས་བྱེད	operate on, have an operation [med.]	gshags bcos byed
གཤགས་པའི་རྨ	wounds arising from sudden weapon thrusts among the rma rigs brgyad sha gyen thur du gshags pa'i rma	gshags pa'i rma
གཤགས་འབྱེད	investigate/ determine justice	gshags 'byed
གཤགས་འབྱེད་པ	investigate the righteousness	gshags 'byed pa
གཤགས་མ	gzhung gshags mang po btang ba'i me shing	gshags ma
གཤགས་རལ	kha shags bkye ba	gshags ral
གཤགས་ལས	cutting open, dissection, operation	gshags las
གཤགས་ལས་བྱེད	cut open, dissect, operate on [med.]	gshags las byed
གཤང	musical instrument, bon tambourine, bon bell, small metal plate with a clapper in the concave side rung by holding the instrument between the thumb and index finger of the left hand	gshang
གཤང་ངེ་གཤོང་ངེ	w depressions,	gshang nge gshong nge
ལོཝ	lying areas, basin, deep valley, ravine, concavity, indentation, cavity	low
གཤང་བ	empty, clear [out], unclog, dredge, [f shong],,	gshang ba
གཤང་གཤོང	depressions, low-lying areas, basin, deep valley, ravine, concavity, indentation, cavity	gshang gshong
གཤད	expound	gshad
གཤད་སྒྲ	a prime minister of tibet	gshad sgra
གཤད་པ	comb	gshad pa
གཤད་མོ	smile, laughing, joking, joyful sound/ aspect	gshad mo
གཤན	other	gshan
གཤན་གྱི་རྐེན་གྱིས་འགྲོ་བ	the fact that he goes for help to outsiders	gshan gyi rken gyis 'gro ba
གཤན་གྲགས་ཀྱི་རྟགས	dialectical [public] reason	gshan grags kyi rtags
གཤན་དུ་འགྲོ	become something else, go elsewhere	gshan du 'gro
གཤན་པ	shan pa	gshan pa
གཤན་ཡང	furthermore	gshan yang
གཤན་ཡིན	the other	gshan yin
གཤན་ལ་བརྙས་པ	deprecation of others	gshan la brnyas pa
གཤན་ལ་རག་ལས་མེད	not conditioned by anyone else	gshan la rag las med
གཤམ	below, under, underneath. {phyung} the lower part	gsham
གཤམ་བཏང	demoted, transferred to lower levels	gsham btang
གཤམ་བཏང་ལས་བྱེད་པ	workers/ cadres demoted/ transferred to lower levels	gsham btang las byed pa
གཤམ་ཐབས	skirt	gsham thabs
གཤམ་དུ	below	gsham du
གཤམ་ནས	what followed	gsham nas
གཤམ་བུ	followed by	gsham bu
གཤམ་མ	lower/ following [1]	gsham ma
གཤམ་མར	the lowest of the low	gsham mar
གཤམ་མར་འཁོད་པ	be [situated as/ called] the lowest of the low	gsham mar 'khod pa
གཤམ་མི	subordinates, underlings	gsham mi
གཤམ་འཛར	hanging down/ behind	gsham 'dzar
གཤམ་འོག	below, lower, under[neath] gsham g.yon ma - the lower left 1	gsham 'og
གཤམ་རི	the foot of the mountain	gsham ri
གཤམ་རིམ	lower/ lowest level/ rank, subordinate, inferior, lesser	gsham rim
གཤམ་ལ	below, underneath	gsham la
གཤམ་གསལ	following, listed below, cited below	gsham gsal
གཤམས་གྲལ	gral gshams - mtha' gral Back central space - The area directly in front of the mandala, and facing the dorje lobpön	gshams gral
གཤའ	worthy, becoming, fitting, suitable	gsha'
གཤའ་དཀར	tin, nickel silver	gsha' dkar
གཤའ་མ	stainless, righteous, upright, honest, good, only, merely, nothing but, natural, authentic	gsha' ma
གཤའ་མ་ཆོས	the true dharma	gsha' ma chos
གཤའ་མ་ཆོས་ཞིག་བྱེད	practice the true dharma	gsha' ma chos zhig byed
གཤའ་མ་ཆོས་ཞིག་བྱེད་ན	if you want to practice the true dharma	gsha' ma chos zhig byed na
གཤའ་ཚེ	tin, aluminum	gsha' tshe
གཤའ་རིང	three bleeding sites under the	gsha' ring
གཤར	again and again, march/ move 1 after another	gshar
གཤར་རྒྱག་པ	by a sewer clothes's nang sha [inside, lining, stuffing] etc. la steng gnon gyi tshugs sam gshar thor re ba [a little] rgyag pa	gshar rgyag pa
གཤར་ཐོར་རེ་བ་རྒྱག་པ	gshar rgyag	gshar thor re ba rgyag pa
གཤར་བ	(tha dad pa bshar ba, gshar ba, gshor,, go in series, successively, again and again, march/ move 1 after another	gshar ba
གཤར་སྦྱང	recite again and again [to remember]	gshar sbyang
གཤར་སྦྱངས	recite/ practice again and again	gshar sbyangs
གཤར་མ	dbu med letters	gshar ma
གཤར་ཡིག	headless letters	gshar yig
གཤལ	wash, clean	gshal
གཤལ་གོས་པ	tainted by faults, tarnished [w evil], dirty	gshal gos pa
གཤལ་ནད	diarrhoea	gshal nad
གཤལ་བྱ	[thing to be] washed/ cleaned	gshal bya
གཤས་མ	SA gsha' ma	gshas ma
གཤི	ground, earth, base, basis, fundamental	gshi
གཤི་མེད	groundless	gshi med
གཤི་མེད་པ	groundless[ness]	gshi med pa
གཤི་རེ	whistled [about wind]	gshi re
གཤིག	SA gshib pa	gshig
གཤིག་པ	demolish	gshig pa
གཤིག་ཡེ་བབས	primordial state	gshig ye babs
གཤིད་རྗེ་གཤེན་དམར	a bon deity	gshid rje gshen dmar
གཤིད་སྟོན	funeral repast	gshid ston
གཤིད་ཟན	funeral repast	gshid zan
གཤིད་གཤིད་མ	funeral repast	gshid gshid ma
གཤིན	Shin. A type of spirit; either the Yama type or simply consciousness of a human who has passed away but is still lingering in the bardo state	gshin
གཤིན་དཀོར	wealth offered to the sangha for the sake of a dead person	gshin dkor
གཤིན་གྱི་ཆོག	funeral ritual	gshin gyi chog
གཤིན་གྱི་ནགས	cemetery, cremation ground	gshin gyi nags
གཤིན་གྱི་རོ་དུད	the smoke from corpses cremated without the due ritual purifications	gshin gyi ro dud
གཤིན་དགེ	virtuous roots liturgy? dge rtsa for dead person	gshin dge
གཤིན་རྒྱལ	Yama, the lord of death	gshin rgyal
གཤིན་རྒྱལ་སྐར་མ	planet Pluto	gshin rgyal skar ma
གཤིན་ལྕགས	torturers of the dead	gshin lcags
གཤིན་ཆོག	liturgy for a dead person rjes 'dzin byed pa	gshin chog
གཤིན་ཆོས	funeral rite	gshin chos
གཤིན་འཆི་བདག་རྗེ	Yama, the lord of death	gshin 'chi bdag rje
གཤིན་རྗེ	Yama. Lord of Death. 1) A personification of impermanence and the unfailing law of cause and effect and one's inevitable mortality. 2) ('chi bdag) The demon with this name is one of the four Maras;...	gshin rje
གཤིན་རྗེ་སྐོར	the {rol pa'i rgyud sde lnga}, the five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization {sgrub sde}	gshin rje skor
གཤིན་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ	King Yama. The Lord of Death. The terrible judge of the dead. Also a personification of impermanence, the unfailing law of karma and one's inevitable mortality	gshin rje rgyal po
གཤིན་རྗེ་རྒྱུད	tantras of Yamantaka, [translated by Vairo, one of {lung gi chos}	gshin rje rgyud
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	lord of death, king of dharmas, the dharma king, the lord of death	gshin rje chos kyi rgyal po
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	Dharmaraja, The Lord of Death. Our mortality; a per- sonification of impermanence and the unfailing law of cause and effect	gshin rje chos rgyal
གཤིན་རྗེ་དྲེགས་འཇོམས	revealed by Minling Terchen Terdag Lingpa	gshin rje dregs 'joms
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཕོ་རོག	demon	gshin rje pho rog
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཕྱོགས	south which is the quarter of the lord of death	gshin rje phyogs
གཤིན་རྗེ་མ	Yamantaki	gshin rje ma
གཤིན་རྗེ་མོ	constellation bra nye	gshin rje mo
གཤིན་རྗེ་དམར་ནག	Dark Red Yamantaka	gshin rje dmar nag
གཤིན་རྗེ་དམར་ནག་གི་རྒྱུད	Dark Red Yama Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga	gshin rje dmar nag gi rgyud
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཚེ་བདག	Longevity Lord Yamantaka	gshin rje tshe bdag
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཟས་འཕྲོག	a demon	gshin rje zas 'phrog
གཤིན་རྗེ་འི་སྐྱེས་བུ	the servants of the lord of the dead	gshin rje 'i skyes bu
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཡི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the Lord of death, king of the pretas	gshin rje yi dwags kyi rgyal po
གཤིན་རྗེ་རོལ་པ	Syn {'jam dpal drag po}	gshin rje rol pa
གཤིན་རྗེ་རོལ་པ་རྩ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Yama Display Root Tantra. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga. 118	gshin rje rol pa rtsa ba'i rgyud
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤིད་པོ	destroyer of death	gshin rje gshid po
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད	Yamantaka. A wrathful form of Manjushri, representing wisdom that subdues death. Among the Eight Sadhana Teachings he is the wrathful buddha of the Body Family. Yamantaka means 'Slayer of Yama,' th...	gshin rje gshed
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད་པོ	destroyer of death	gshin rje gshed po
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད་དམར	red bhairava	gshin rje gshed dmar
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད་དམར་ནག་འཇིགས་གསུམ	Yamantaka red, black, and the terrifying one	gshin rje gshed dmar nag 'jigs gsum
གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད་དམར་པོ	tutelary god	gshin rje gshed dmar po
གཤིན་རྗེའི་སྐྱེས་བུ	the workers of Yama, the lord of the dead; the servants of the Lord of the Dead	gshin rje'i skyes bu
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁྲམ	lord of death's 'chi brda gtong ba'i rtags sam mtshan ma	gshin rje'i khram
གཤིན་རྗེའི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wheel of Yama. Tantra belonging to the Sadhana Section of Mahayoga; focused on a wrathful form of Manjushri	gshin rje'i 'khor lo
གཤིན་རྗེའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	world of the lord of death, i.e. the world of ghosts/ pretas	gshin rje'i 'jig rten
གཤིན་རྗེའི་གཏམ་རྒྱུད	n. of an Mahayoga tantra	gshin rje'i gtam rgyud
གཤིན་རྗེའི་དྲིལ་བུ	1 of the chiefs of the srin po	gshin rje'i dril bu
གཤིན་རྗེའི་གདོན	a fearful evil spirit	gshin rje'i gdon
གཤིན་རྗེའི་བདག་པོ	planet saturn	gshin rje'i bdag po
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ནགས	charnel ground	gshin rje'i nags
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཕོ་ཉ	the messengers of Yamaraja, the lord of the dead	gshin rje'i pho nya
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཕོ་ཉ་གཏུམ་པོ	lord of the dead	gshin rje'i pho nya gtum po
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཕྱོགས	(met S	gshin rje'i phyogs
གཤིན་རྗེའི་བ་དན	flag of the lord of death	gshin rje'i ba dan
གཤིན་རྗེའི་བུ	grog ma	gshin rje'i bu
གཤིན་རྗེའི་གཞོན	buffalo	gshin rje'i gzhon
གཤིན་རྗེའི་བཞོན་པ	buffalo	gshin rje'i bzhon pa
གཤིན་རྗེའི་བཟློག་མདོས	mdos to repel the curses of the gshin rje	gshin rje'i bzlog mdos
གཤིན་རྗེའི་ལས་མཁན	the agents of the Lord of death	gshin rje'i las mkhan
གཤིན་རྗེའི་གཤེད	Yamantaka gshin rje'i gshed char ka nag po'i sgrub	gshin rje'i gshed
གཤིན་རྗེའི་གཤེད་མ	the slaughterers of Yamaraja	gshin rje'i gshed ma
གཤིན་རྗེའི་སྲིང་མོ	1) the river Pakshu; 2) consort of the lord of death	gshin rje'i sring mo
གཤིན་སྟོང	gna' dus according to Tibetan legal custom bsad pa'i mi srog gi khrims 'jal zhig	gshin stong
གཤིན་འདྲེ	dre demon who harms the living after a person has died	gshin 'dre
གཤིན་གནས	charnel ground	gshin gnas
གཤིན་པ	good, fine dead [person]	gshin pa
གཤིན་པར་རྨོ་བ	plough well	gshin par rmo ba
གཤིན་པོ	1) dead [person]; 2) fertile; 3) 1 soft and gentle; 4) compatible, harmonious	gshin po
གཤིན་པོ་རྗེས་འཛིན	funeral ritual, funeral rites and ceremonies	gshin po rjes 'dzin
གཤིན་པོ་འདུར་བ	funerary rite to liberate the dead from obstacles	gshin po 'dur ba
གཤིན་པོའི་དོན་དུ	for the benefit of the dead	gshin po'i don du
གཤིན་པོའི་བླ	the ghost soul, the ghost spirit; a spirit-ghost	gshin po'i bla
གཤིན་ཕོ	dead person	gshin pho
གཤིན་འབྲས	convulsive motions, writhings of a dying creature	gshin 'bras
གཤིན་སྦྱང	consciousness of the dead gnas spor byed pa'i liturgy	gshin sbyang
གཤིན་མོ	dead woman	gshin mo
གཤིན་རྩིས	astrology of death	gshin rtsis
གཤིན་རྫས	wealth of a dead person	gshin rdzas
གཤིན་ཟན	1) dead person gyi rgyu dngos thog nas bzos pa'i food; 2) things given for the sake of a dead person	gshin zan
གཤིན་ཟས	merit /food offerings on behalf of the dead	gshin zas
གཤིན་ཡུལ	realm of the dead	gshin yul
གཤིན་ས	1) zhing sa 'bol po dul ma; 2) mthun po byed sa	gshin sa
གཤིབ	cross over [back and front], be in close contact w, associate w, arrange in [straight] line/ series/ row	gshib
གཤིབ་པ	anything arranged, arrangement	gshib pa
གཤིབ་གཤིག་བྱེད་པ	snuggle	gshib gshig byed pa
གཤིབ་གཤིབ	close, near by, side by side, crowded together	gshib gshib
གཤིབས	[p ! gshib pa],, put in rows, associated w, parallel	gshibs
གཤིབས་ཏེ་འཇོག་པ	juxtapose	gshibs te 'jog pa
གཤིབས་བདེ་པོ	{bshibs bde po} compliant, accommodating, agreeable, compatible, congenial, amiable	gshibs bde po
གཤིབས་པ	[p ! gshib pa],, put in rows, associated w	gshibs pa
གཤིབས་བྱའི་གྲལ	row or file that has been drawn up	gshibs bya'i gral
གཤིབས་མ	together w	gshibs ma
གཤིབས་གཤིབ་བྱེད་པ	cuddle	gshibs gshib byed pa
གཤིབས་གཤིབས	gather/ bring together& arrange [in lines rows series]/ put in order, close, near by, side by side, crowded together	gshibs gshibs
གཤིམ་པ	ground down, crushed	gshim pa
གཤིམ་པོ	fertile	gshim po
གཤིས	ultimate nature, pure being, existentially given fact, dynamic phenomenon, deep-structured dynamics, being as such, innate, nature, temper, natural disposition, person, body, absolute nature, causa...	gshis
གཤིས་ཀ	nature, quality [of materials], character, personality	gshis ka
གཤིས་ཀ་གྱོང་པོ	brutal	gshis ka gyong po
གཤིས་ཀ་དག	the primordially pure nature, innate primordial purity 2746	gshis ka dag
གཤིས་ཀ་བཟང་ངན	good or bad nature, quality	gshis ka bzang ngan
གཤིས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	causal links resting upon the nature	gshis kyi rten 'brel
གཤིས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the nature of what is	gshis kyi gnas lugs
གནས་ལུགས་ངོ་ཤེས་ན	if you realize your mind as the nature of what is	gnas lugs ngo shes na
གཤིས་ཀྱི་ཕྲལ་ཤོར	temporary straying of the essence	gshis kyi phral shor
གཤིས་ཀྱི་འཕྲལ་ཤོར	Temporary straying from the essence	gshis kyi 'phral shor
གཤིས་ཀྱི་ཡིན་ལུགས	innate state	gshis kyi yin lugs
གཤིས་ཀྱིས	by the very nature of the case, naturally, quite of itself	gshis kyis
གཤིས་ཀློང	the innate space, ex. {stong nyid kyi gshis klong la thims} dissolved into the innate space of emptiness	gshis klong
གཤིས་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པ	non-arising essence	gshis skye ba med pa
གཤིས་སྐྱེ་མེད	non-arising essence	gshis skye med
གཤིས་ཁ	nature or quality [of materials], character, personality	gshis kha
གཤིས་ཁག	separate estates, individual estate	gshis khag
གཤིས་གང་དུ	when one is in the state	gshis gang du
གཤིས་རྒྱུད	temper, nature, temperament, disposition	gshis rgyud
གཤིས་རྒྱུད་གྱོང་པོ	strong/ rough/ tough/ stubborn natured	gshis rgyud gyong po
གཤིས་རྒྱུད་ངན་པ	bad/ evil nature/ character	gshis rgyud ngan pa
གཤིས་རྒྱུད་བཙན་པོ	strong/ violent/ stern nature	gshis rgyud btsan po
གཤིས་རྒྱུད་རྩིང་པོ	crude/ cruel natured	gshis rgyud rtsing po
གཤིས་རྒྱུད་བཟང་པོ	good nature/ character	gshis rgyud bzang po
གཤིས་ངན	bad disposition	gshis ngan
གཤིས་ངན་པ	bad/ evil nature/ character	gshis ngan pa
གཤིས་ངོ	essence	gshis ngo
གཤིས་ངོར	at the level of the essence', essential level, in the essence itself, from, the viewpoint of the essence	gshis ngor
གཤིས་ངོར་ལ་བདེན	true while in the basic nature; don dam	gshis ngor la bden
གཤིས་དངོས་པོ	reality	gshis dngos po
གཤིས་དངོས་པོའི	reality	gshis dngos po'i
གཤིས་ཇི་བཞིན་པ	the basic nature, exactly as it is	gshis ji bzhin pa
གཤིས་གཉུག་མ	the innate nature	gshis gnyug ma
གཤིས་གཉུག་མའི	the innate nature	gshis gnyug ma'i
གཤིས་ཐོག་ཏུ	ex. {pheb pa}	gshis thog tu
གཤིས་ཐོག་ཏུ་ཤོར་བ	straying into the innate	gshis thog tu shor ba
གཤིས་དྲང	just, upright, honest	gshis drang
གཤིས་གདངས་རྩལ	essence, nature, and expression; basic nature, expression, energy	gshis gdangs rtsal
གཤིས་མདངས་རྩལ	basic nature, expression, energy	gshis mdangs rtsal
གཤིས་ལྡན	sensible	gshis ldan
གཤིས་ནུས	function	gshis nus
གཤིས་སྤྱོད	nature, quality [of materials], character, personality	gshis spyod
གཤིས་མི་བློ	ignorance	gshis mi blo
གཤིས་བཙན་པོ	strong/ violent/ stern nature	gshis btsan po
གཤིས་རྩིང་པོ	crude/ cruel natured	gshis rtsing po
གཤིས་རྩུབ	acrimony	gshis rtsub
གཤིས་བཟང	innate goodness, one who is by nature good	gshis bzang
གཤིས་བཟང་པོ	good nature/ character, kindness, goodness	gshis bzang po
གཤིས་ཡེ་བབས	natural primordial state	gshis ye babs
གཤིས་ཡོན་གཉིས་ལེགས	morally upright and highly educated	gshis yon gnyis legs
གཤིས་རང་བྱུང	self existing nature	gshis rang byung
གཤིས་རིག	tradition, culture, culture, manner	gshis rig
གཤིས་ལ	fundamentally	gshis la
གཤིས་ལ་མེད་པ	not exist at all	gshis la med pa
གཤིས་ལ་རྫོགས་པ	naturally complete	gshis la rdzogs pa
གཤིས་ལ་ཤོར་བ	slipping into a pattern. Syn {ngo bo} like the sun itself whereas {gdangs} is like radiance of the sun	gshis la shor ba
གཤིས་ལུགས	the basic state, fundamental nature / reality; essential conditions, way of being, inherent / intrinsic nature, fundamental character, funda- mentally unconditioned nature mode of being. Syn {gnas ...	gshis lugs
གཤིས་ལུགས་གཉུག་མའི་འཕོ་བ	innate phowa of the natural state	gshis lugs gnyug ma'i 'pho ba
གཤིས་ལུགས་ལ་བརྟགས་པ	look into the nature {snang ba'i mkhan po yul can sems kyi gshis lugs la brtags pa} - when you look into the nature of the subject that perceives them—the mind those objects that appear to	gshis lugs la brtags pa
གཤིས་ལུང་པའི་ཐམས་ཅད	the whole valley	gshis lung pa'i thams cad
གཤིས་ཤོར	lose the nature	gshis shor
གཤིས་ཤོར་གི་གོལ་སྒྲིབ	the obscuration of the basic straying from the nature of things	gshis shor gi gol sgrib
གཤིས་ཤོར་གྱི་གོལ་སྒྲིབ	strayings and obscurations of losing the nature	gshis shor gyi gol sgrib
གཤིས་ཤོར་གྱི་གོལ་བ	the deviation of basic straying	gshis shor gyi gol ba
གཤིས་ཤོར་གྱི་གོལ་ས	deviation where one falls away from one's innate disposition	gshis shor gyi gol sa
གཤིས་སུ	in the state, naturally present in the state of, in the real condition	gshis su
གཤུ་འདོམ	fathom	gshu 'dom
གཤུང	1) [p gzhings],, * reproach, blame; 2) (Tha dad pa bshungs pa, bshung ba, shungs,, secretly deprecate * 2.(A in person tell the faults of 1self and others	gshung
གཤུང་བ	1) [p gzhung],, * reproach, blame; 2) (Tha dad pa bshungs pa, bshung ba, shungs,, secretly deprecate * 2.(A in person tell the faults of 1self and others	gshung ba
གཤུང་བའི་གཤིས་ལུགས	habit of secretly criticizing/ deprecating	gshung ba'i gshis lugs
གཤུང་བར་དམོད་པ	secretly insult/ swear at	gshung bar dmod pa
གཤུངས	1) [p gzhung],, * reproached, blamed; 2) (Tha dad pa bshungs pa, bshung ba, shungs,, secretly deprecated * 2.(A in person told the faults of 1self and others	gshungs
གཤུངས་པ	curse, rebuke, censure	gshungs pa
གཤུངས་བ	1) [p gzhung],, * reproached, blamed; 2) (Tha dad pa bshungs pa, bshung ba, shungs,, secretly deprecated * 2.(A in person told the faults of 1self and others	gshungs ba
གཤུར	a certain Tibetan script	gshur
གཤེ	abuse, revile; despised	gshe
གཤེ་སྐུར	MSS: {gshe} means "to scold," {skur} means "slander, calumny," hence {gshe skur} means "abuse." [mss]	gshe skur
གཤེ་སྐུར་བཏབ་པ	cast abuse on	gshe skur btab pa
གཤེ་གཏམ	scolding words	gshe gtam
གཤེ་གཏོང་བ	scold, curse, ridicule	gshe gtong ba
གཤེ་བ	{gshe ba, gshe ba, gshe ba, gshe} trans. v.; abuse, revile; attached, to abuse, revile; attached, to abuse, to scold; stern (one of nine moods of dance); to abuse, to scold	gshe ba
གཤེ་བ་མེད་པ	not cursing, SA dge sbyong gi chos	gshe ba med pa
གཤེ་བ་ལ་སླར་མི་གཤེ་བ	although abused, 1 does not return abuse	gshe ba la slar mi gshe ba
གཤེ་རྨོད་བྱེད	bespatter, abuse	gshe rmod byed
གཤེ་ཚིག	words of abuse/ rebuke/ insult/ criticism	gshe tshig
གཤེ་ཞིང་སྡིགས་པ	scolding and threatening	gshe zhing sdigs pa
གཤེ་ཡང་སླར་མི་གཤེ་བར་བྱ	although abused, one does not return abuse, one of the {dge sbyong chos bzhi} 4 dharmas of those skilled in virtue	gshe yang slar mi gshe bar bya
གཤེ་རེས	scolding/ criticizing each other	gshe res
གཤེ་རེས་བྱེད	scolding/ criticizing each other	gshe res byed
གཤེ་གཤེ	scolding	gshe gshe
གཤེ་གཤེ་གཏོང་བ	scold, yell at, abuse, revile, criticize	gshe gshe gtong ba
གཤེ་སེམས	scolding/ critical mind/ thoughts	gshe sems
གཤེག	[p gshegs],, break up, split, cleave	gsheg
གཤེག་བཅོས	surgical operation	gsheg bcos
གཤེག་པ	[p gshegs],, break up, split, cleave	gsheg pa
གཤེགས	to depart, gone	gshegs
གཤེགས་ཀྱེམས	departing drink	gshegs kyems
གཤེགས་སྐྱེམས	departing beverage	gshegs skyems
གཤེགས་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་པ	see a person off	gshegs skyel byed pa
གཤེགས་བསྐྱེལ	see off	gshegs bskyel
གཤེགས་བསྐྱེལ་བྱས	saw him off	gshegs bskyel byas
གཤེགས་བསྐྱེལ་བྱེད	see off	gshegs bskyel byed
གཤེགས་བསྐྱེས	parting present	gshegs bskyes
གཤེགས་ཁར	when at the point of death	gshegs khar
གཤེགས་མགྲོན	parting feast	gshegs mgron
གཤེགས་རྗེས	khyed gshegs rjes - after you are gone	gshegs rjes
གཤེགས་གཏོར	departing torma	gshegs gtor
གཤེགས་སྟངས་བདུན	the ways of walking	gshegs stangs bdun
གཤེགས་དུས	at the time of his death	gshegs dus
གཤེགས་ན་ཞབས་འབྲིང	walk with him [when he walks]	gshegs na zhabs 'bring
གཤེགས་པ	to die; to approach; {gshegs pa, gshegs pa, gshegs pa} intr. v.; passed away, to proceed	gshegs pa
གཤེགས་པ་བྱེད་པ	beg, ask for alms	gshegs pa byed pa
གཤེགས་པའི་གོ་ཆ	fortitude and assiduity	gshegs pa'i go cha
གཤེགས་པའི་ཤུལ	the path followed	gshegs pa'i shul
གཤེགས་པར་ཞུ	Pray go on your way	gshegs par zhu
གཤེགས་རྫོགས	farewell ceremony	gshegs rdzogs
གཤེགས་རྫོངས	farewell ceremony	gshegs rdzongs
གཤེགས་བཞུད	arriving and departing	gshegs bzhud
གཤེགས་ཤུལ	the way	gshegs shul
གཤེགས་སུ་གསོལ	please approach	gshegs su gsol
གཤེགས་སོང	has departed	gshegs song
གཤེགས་གསོལ	to request [the deity] to depart	gshegs gsol
གཤེང	often used in bon literature as a synonym of bon po	gsheng
གཤེད་གྲི	knife of gshed	gshed gri
གཤེད་སྒྲོ	sack of gshed	gshed sgro
གཤེད་སྟ	axe of gshed	gshed sta
གཤེད་མདའ	sickle of gshed	gshed mda'
གཤེད་འདུར	vanquishment of the gshed	gshed 'dur
གཤེད་འདུལ	more recent expression for 'dur rites	gshed 'dul
གཤེད་ལྡན	vile one	gshed ldan
གཤེད་པོ་དུར་འདེབས	a demon	gshed po dur 'debs
གཤེད་བྲིང	thong of gshed	gshed bring
གཤེད་མ	executioner, hangman, angel of death, gods of vengeance, mean person	gshed ma
གཤེད་མ་སྐོ་བ	engage a hangman, pay a murderer	gshed ma sko ba
གཤེད་མ་པ	murderer, executioner	gshed ma pa
གཤེད་མས་བདས་པ	dragged before the executioner	gshed mas bdas pa
གཤེད་མིན	whereabouts not known	gshed min
གཤེད་དམག	militarist, war lord	gshed dmag
གཤེད་དམར་སྤུ་ཏིལ	a bon deity	gshed dmar spu til
གཤེད་གཞུ	bow of gshed	gshed gzhu
གཤེན	{gshen} clan	gshen
གཤེན་གཉན	head shaman	gshen gnyan
གཤེན་རབ	Shenrab / - according to the Bon tradition, the founder of the Bon religion	gshen rab
གཤེན་རབ་མི་བོ	master from zhang zhung	gshen rab mi bo
གཤེན་རབ་མི་བོ་ཆེ	founder of bon	gshen rab mi bo che
གཤེན་རབས	founder of the Bon religion	gshen rabs
གཤེན་རབས་མི་བོ་ཡེ་གཤེན	Shenrab [Bön tradition founding teacher]	gshen rabs mi bo ye gshen
གཤེན་ལོ	gshen year equal to 100 human years	gshen lo
གཤེན་སྲས	b"n bodhisattva	gshen sras
གཤེན་ལྷ	bon deity	gshen lha
གཤེན་ལྷ་འོད་དཀར	bon god who suppresses nga rgyal, Buddha Shenlha Okar	gshen lha 'od dkar
གཤེམ་པོ	fertile	gshem po
གཤེར	dampness, wetness, moisture, get/ be wet, liquid	gsher
གཤེར་བཅས	cloud	gsher bcas
གཤེར་ལྡན	moon	gsher ldan
གཤེར་པ་འགྱུར་བ	to get thoroughly wet, to be drenched, be moistened	gsher pa 'gyur ba
གཤེར་པའི་འབྲས	modesty, bashfulness	gsher pa'i 'bras
གཤེར་པོ་འགྱུར་བ	to get thoroughly wet, to be drenched, be moistened	gsher po 'gyur ba
གཤེར་དཔང	judge	gsher dpang
གཤེར་བ	moist, damp, wet, water, liquid, ask for, beg for, measure, SA rlang pa, rlon pa, move in file, SA gshor ba, freshness 2748	gsher ba
གཤེར་བ་འགྱུར་བ	to get thoroughly wet, to be drenched, be moistened	gsher ba 'gyur ba
གཤེར་བར་སྣང་བའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness / cognition appearing as liquidity	gsher bar snang ba'i rnam shes
གཤེར་བར་བྱེད་པ	make damp, moisten	gsher bar byed pa
གཤེར་བྱེད	maintain wetness	gsher byed
གཤེར་འབོད་མི་སྣ	bailiff	gsher 'bod mi sna
གཤེར་ཚག	{gsher tshag} eye disease	gsher tshag
གཤེར་འཛིན	water, cloud	gsher 'dzin
གཤེར་གཟུགས	liquid, fluid	gsher gzugs
གཤེར་གཟུགས་འབར་རྫས	liquid fuel	gsher gzugs 'bar rdzas
གཤེར་ལན་པ	interrogate, question, try judicially, criminal judge	gsher lan pa
གཤེར་ཤིང	parrot, red tree	gsher shing
གཤེར་ས	wet/ damp place/ ground	gsher sa
གཤེལ་མ	executioners, demons which carry off souls	gshel ma
གཤེས	abuse, SA gshe ba	gshes
གཤེས་རྒྱུད	temper, nature, temperament, disposition	gshes rgyud
གཤེས་ངན	bad disposition	gshes ngan
གཤེས་ཐོག་ཏུ	ex. {pheb pa}	gshes thog tu
གཤེས་ལྡན	sensible	gshes ldan
གཤེས་སྤྱོད	quality, character {gshis ka	gshes spyod
གཤེས་མི་བློ	ignorance	gshes mi blo
གཤོ	(tha dad pa bshos pa, bsho ba, shos,, throw/ pour out/ away [liquids, dirt], bail, gtan du 'khel [permanently resolved?] ba'i lam srol	gsho
གཤོ་བསྒྲིགས་འགྲོ་བ	go one after another in a row or file	gsho bsgrigs 'gro ba
གཤོ་བ	to pour out, to pour away; {gsho ba, gshos pa, bsho ba, shos} trans. v	gsho ba
གཤོ་མོ	lever	gsho mo
གཤོག	1) [p ! {gshags} f gshag],, ripped, cut through, split, cleaved, admitted, confessed; 2) dpung ngam stobs; 3) grong tsho chen po	gshog
གཤོག་དཀར	swan	gshog dkar
གཤོག་བཀྲ	bya sreg pa	gshog bkra
གཤོག་ཁ	faction, clique	gshog kha
གཤོག་ཁ་འགལ་ཟླ	rival factions/ cliques	gshog kha 'gal zla
གཤོག་གླིང	separate plates	gshog gling
གཤོག་འགྲོ	bird	gshog 'gro
གཤོག་སྒྲ	sound of wing-flap, sound of ripping	gshog sgra
གཤོག་སྒྲོ	wings	gshog sgro
གཤོག་སྒྲོ་རྒྱས་པ	to have grown feathers and wings	gshog sgro rgyas pa
གཤོག་སྒྲོ་ལྡེམ་པ	flapping of wings	gshog sgro ldem pa
གཤོག་སྒྲོ་བཟང་བ	powerfully feathered wings	gshog sgro bzang ba
གཤོག་གཅིག་དབང་སྲོལ	totalitarianism	gshog gcig dbang srol
གཤོག་གཅིག་སྲོལ་འཛིན	totalitarian	gshog gcig srol 'dzin
གཤོག་ཆགས	bird	gshog chags
གཤོག་ལྗང	parrot	gshog ljang
གཤོག་ཐོགས	place in tibet	gshog thogs
གཤོག་དྲུག	wing feathers	gshog drug
གཤོག་ལྡན	bird	gshog ldan
གཤོག་པ	wing; {gshog pa, bshags pa, gshag pa, gshogs} trans. v	gshog pa
གཤོག་པ་ཅན	1) horse; 2) bird	gshog pa can
གཤོག་པ་ཆད	wings cut off gshog pa g.yab g.yab byed pa - flutter gshog pa g.yob pa - flutter the wings	gshog pa chad
གཤོག་པ་ལྷེབ་ལྷེབ	bird flapping its wings	gshog pa lheb lheb
གཤོག་ཕྱེད་མར་ཅིག	rip it in half	gshog phyed mar cig
གཤོག་རྩལ	bird's wings's skill in flight	gshog rtsal
གཤོག་རྩལ་སྦྱངས་པ	fully trained my wings	gshog rtsal sbyangs pa
གཤོག་རླབས	a wing movement, flab; wing flap	gshog rlabs
གཤོག་རླབས་བསྐྱོད་པ	{gshog rlabs bskyod de nam mkha' nas wa ra Na sir babs te} flew through the sky to Varanasi	gshog rlabs bskyod pa
གཤོགས	imp. of {gshog pa}; to split open	gshogs
གཤོགས་སློང	overpraising, mibp 87	gshogs slong
གཤོང	{spang gshong} meadow	gshong
གཤོང་ཆུ	water in a ravine/ ditch, hole in the ground/ low place	gshong chu
གཤོང་པའི་ལྷ་ཆུ	Divine Valley Water. 'Shongpey Lhachu.' Even today a place with clear and sweet water, situated near Lhasa in Central Tibet	gshong pa'i lha chu
གཤོང་བ	{gshong ba, bshangs pa, bshang ba, shongs} trans. v	gshong ba
གཤོང་བུ	vessel for water	gshong bu
གཤོང་ཞིང	thang la yod pa'i field	gshong zhing
གཤོང་གཤོང	basin [place]; Syn {thang gshongs}	gshong gshong
གཤོང་གཤོང་མང་པོ	many defiles or ravines	gshong gshong mang po
གཤོང་ས	basin [incl geological], trough, low place, deep valley, ravine	gshong sa
གཤོང་ས་དམའ་པོ	deep valley, ravine	gshong sa dma' po
གཤོངས	region, valley	gshongs
གཤོངས་ཞིང	fields for cultivation on flat slopes or in valleys	gshongs zhing
གཤོངས་ས	basin [incl geological], trough, low place, deep valley, ravine	gshongs sa
གཤོད་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	speechless	gshod rgyu med pa
གཤོད་པ	comb, SA shad pa, express, mention, relate, state, tell	gshod pa
གཤོད་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	communicate	gshod 'brel byed pa
གཤོན་ཆ་ཆགས	tender	gshon cha chags
གཤོན་ཤ་ཅན་ཉིད	fresh and delicate like beautiful youth	gshon sha can nyid
གཤོབ	lie, falsehood	gshob
གཤོམ	(tha dad pa bshams pa, bsham pa, shoms,, 1) make preparations/ arrangements, establish, plan; 2) draw [weapons]	gshom
གཤོམ་པ	SA shom pa	gshom pa
གཤོམ་ར	1) preparations, arrangements; 2) place for arranging things/ putting things in order	gshom ra
གཤོམ་ར་འཐེན་པ	yod nyams dang yin nyams ston pa	gshom ra 'then pa
གཤོམས	(tha dad pa bshams pa, bsham pa, shoms,, 1) make preparations/ arrangements, establish, plan; 2) draw [weapons]	gshoms
གཤོམས་པ	(tha dad pa bshams pa, bsham pa, shoms,, 1) make preparations/ arrangements, establish, plan; 2) draw [weapons]	gshoms pa
གཤོམས་ལས	plans/ projects/ programs	gshoms las
གཤོམས་ལས་ལག་ལེན་ཚོགས་པ	committee for preparing and implementing plans [/ projects/ programs]	gshoms las lag len tshogs pa
གཤོར	1) [Tha dad pa],, bshor ba, bshor ba, gshor!,, hunt wild animals/ fish; 2) bshar ba, bshar ba, gshor,, measure, weigh, count, go 1 after another single file; 3) rough, not soft; 4) gshar! gshor!; 5...	gshor
གཤོར་ཁ་རྒྱག་པ	'bru srang etc measure	gshor kha rgyag pa
གཤོར་མདའ	hunting arrow	gshor mda'
གཤོར་བ	to count; intr. {gshor ba, bshar ba, bshar ba}; {gshor ba, bshor ba, bshor ba, gshor} trans. v	gshor ba
གཤོར་བྲེ	bre vol. measure [of grain etc]	gshor bre
གཤོལ	plough, tibetan plough made of crooked beam (gshol mda') and share (gshol lcags or thong lcags)	gshol
གཤོལ་སྐོར	disk plow	gshol skor
གཤོལ་གྱིས་རྨོ་བ	plow	gshol gyis rmo ba
གཤོལ་མགོ	head of a plow	gshol mgo
གཤོལ་ཅན	buffalo	gshol can
གཤོལ་ལྕགས	iron tip of a plow	gshol lcags
གཤོལ་བཏབ་པ	1) pull out phyir 'then byed du bcug pa; 2) plow a field	gshol btab pa
གཤོལ་རྟེན	long plow handle	gshol rten
གཤོལ་ཐོང	plough	gshol thong
གཤོལ་མདའ	a plough	gshol mda'
གཤོལ་མདའ་འཛིན	1 of 7 fabulous mountains, 1 of gser gyi ri bdun, plough mountain range, 1 of gser gyi ri bdun	gshol mda' 'dzin
གཤོལ་འདེབས་པ	to dissuade	gshol 'debs pa
གཤོལ་ལྡན	coconut, cadamba tree, cocoa-nut	gshol ldan
གཤོལ་པོ	poplar-tree	gshol po
གཤོལ་སྤྱད	plow gyi yan lag	gshol spyad
གཤོལ་འཛིན	evil spirit	gshol 'dzin
གཤོས	1) [arch] [a'khrig pa], [have sex, be depraved, cohabit; 2) cohere, stick to; 3) [p gsho],, threw [dirt, liquid, bailed	gshos
གཤོས་པ	SA gsho ba, bsho ba	gshos pa
གཤོས་བུ	sacrificial cakes	gshos bu
བཤ་དཀར	tin	bsha dkar
བཤ་པ	exegesis	bsha pa
བཤ་ལུང	exegetical transmission	bsha lung
བཤག	confess, split, cleave, SA gshog pa, sog pa, 'cheg pa	bshag
བཤག་བཅོས	operation [surgical]	bshag bcos
བཤག་བཅོས་བྱེད	have an operation [surgical]	bshag bcos byed
བཤག་པ	[p bshags],, split, cleave, cut through, [f 'chag] will step/ stamp/ walk on/ about, visit move, break/ beat down/ abate	bshag pa
བཤག་པར་བྱ་བ	add on to	bshag par bya ba
བཤག་བ་འབྱིན་པ	operate on the bowels	bshag ba 'byin pa
བཤགས	confession, [p bshag, 'cheg],, split, cleaved, cut through	bshags
བཤགས་སྐོང	confession and fulfillment	bshags skong
བཤགས་རྒྱུད	see {dri ma med pa'i bshags rgyud}	bshags rgyud
བཤགས་རྟེན	offering of remorse or confession	bshags rten
བཤགས་སྡོམ	confess [faults] and vow to refrain	bshags sdom
བཤགས་སྡོམ་བྱ	Confess and vow never to repeat it.	bshags sdom bya
བཤགས་སྡོམ་བྱེད་པ	to confess and vow to refrain	bshags sdom byed pa
བཤགས་སྡོམ་མཛད་པ	to confess and retake a vow, offer apology and a promise	bshags sdom mdzad pa
བཤགས་སྡོམ་སོགས་བྱ	confess your faults and vow not to repeat them	bshags sdom sogs bya
མེད་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Tantra of Confession. Sanskrit: Samaya sarva viti anu sarva sanitantra Vimala raja." The Stainless King, the Tantra of all Confessions". Translated by Vimalamitra and Ngak Jnana Kumara	med pa'i rgyal po
བཤགས་པ་བྱ་དགོས་སྙམ	intending to express his apology / confession, act of contrition	bshags pa bya dgos snyam
བཤགས་པ་བྱེད་པར་གྲོས་བྱས	decided to apologize / confess	bshags pa byed par gros byas
བཤགས་པར་བྱ་བ	to be confessed	bshags par bya ba
བཤགས་པར་བཙམས	wrote to compensate for an apology	bshags par btsams
བཤགས་བྱའི་ཉེས་བྱས	faults to be confessed [in the dge tsul precepts, the {blangs 'das so gsum}, all but the root four {rtza ba bzhi}	bshags bya'i nyes byas
བཤགས་རལ	disclosure (of harmful actions)	bshags ral
བཤང	empty, remove, carry away, take away, shit, 1 of dri ma gsum, SA shong ba	bshang
བཤང་བཀག	constipation	bshang bkag
བཤང་སྒོ	anus/ asshole	bshang sgo
བཤང་གཅི	shit and piss, excrement and urine	bshang gci
བཤང་ལྕི	dirty, filthy, shitty	bshang lci
བཤང་དྲི	fart/ flatulence, shit/ excrement	bshang dri
བཤང་པོ	frank, open	bshang po
བཤང་བ	alvine discharges	bshang ba
བཤང་བ་དོར	discharge, ordure	bshang ba dor
བཤང་བ་དོར་བ	defecate, take a shit/ dump/ crap	bshang ba dor ba
བཤང་བ་འབྱིན་པ	defecate, take a shit/ dump/ crap	bshang ba 'byin pa
བཤང་བ་སྦས་པ	cat (that which discharges ordure secretly or covers it) 2750	bshang ba sbas pa
བཤང་བ་སྦེད	1) brun sbed par byed pa; 2) 1, frog; 2) cat	bshang ba sbed
བཤང་བ་ཟ	shit-eater, village pig	bshang ba za
བཤང་འབུ	bug in excrement/ up the ass	bshang 'bu
བཤང་འབྲུམ	wound/ pain in the anus	bshang 'brum
བཤང་ལམ	"path of excretion"	bshang lam
བཤང་ལམ་རྒྱུ་མ་ཕྱིར་ལུག་པ	entrails exuding from the anus	bshang lam rgyu ma phyir lug pa
བཤང་ལེན	cat	bshang len
བཤང་སེང	species of catechu tree	bshang seng
བཤངས	1) dug cleansed [p gshong ba]; 2) [arch] defecate, shit; 3) leaky, full of crevices	bshangs
བཤངས་པ	leaky, leaking, full of crevices; pf. of {gshong ba}	bshangs pa
བཤད་ཀྱིས་ཉོན	Listen while I explain	bshad kyis nyon
བཤད་བཀའ	commentary	bshad bka'
བཤད་ཁྲིད	commentary, explanation	bshad khrid
བཤད་མཁས	those who are good at explaining	bshad mkhas
བཤད་མཁས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	skillful articulation; Syn {smra mkhas ldan pa} articulate	bshad mkhas pa dang ldan pa
བཤད་འཁྲིད	the teacher gives the entire instruction all at once	bshad 'khrid
བཤད་གོ་ངེས་སུ	I will explain the true understanding	bshad go nges su
བཤད་གྲ	study center	bshad gra
བཤད་གྲྭ	scriptural college, study center	bshad grwa
བཤད་གྲྭ་དང་སྒྲུབ་ཁང	study center and meditation center	bshad grwa dang sgrub khang
བཤད་གླེང	discussion, conversation	bshad gleng
བཤད་རྒྱུད	explanatory tantra	bshad rgyud
བཤད་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་འགྲེལ་པ	exposition tantra commentary bshad rgyud kyi 'grel pa bdud rtsi'i chu	bshad rgyud kyi 'grel pa
བཤད་རྒྱུད་རྒྱ་མཚོ	tantra in 22 chapters belonging to the sgyu 'phrul series of mahayoga, Ocean of the Explication Tantra	bshad rgyud rgya mtsho
བཤད་རྒྱུད་ཐལ་བ	tantra in 26 chapters belonging to the sgyu 'phrul series of mahayoga, Explicative All-Surpassing Tantra	bshad rgyud thal ba
བཤད་རྒྱུད་མདོ་དགོངས་པ་འདུས་པ	revealing tantra teaching of the gathering of wisdom	bshad rgyud mdo dgongs pa 'dus pa
བཤད་རྒྱུན	current of explanation	bshad rgyun
བཤད་སྒྲུབ	teaching and practice	bshad sgrub
བཤད་སྒྲོས	manner of explaining	bshad sgros
བཤད་བརྒྱུད	to scholastic lineage, to transmission of what was explained, the commentary lineage, study center, the transmission of what is to be explained	bshad brgyud
བཤད་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the scholarly lineage	bshad brgyud kyi bstan pa
བཤད་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བཤད་པ	the teachings of the scholarly lineage	bshad brgyud kyi bshad pa
བཤད་བརྒྱུད་འདེགས་པའི་ཀ་ཆེན་བཅུ	10 great pillars who supported the exegetical lineages	bshad brgyud 'degs pa'i ka chen bcu
བཤད་ཉན	telling and listening	bshad nyan
བཤད་ཉེན	speaking and listening	bshad nyen
བཤད་ཉེས	faults in/ faulty explanation	bshad nyes
བཤད་ཉེས་པ	defective explanation, wrong explanation	bshad nyes pa
བཤད་སྟེགས	rostrum, pulpit, platform	bshad stegs
བཤད་ཐབས	style of explanation, teaching method, style of teaching, methods of explanation	bshad thabs
བཤད་ཐབས་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five kinds of means of explanation	bshad thabs yan lag lnga
བཤད་དུ་ཅུང་ཟད་ཀྱང་མེད་དོ	here is hardly no explanation	bshad du cung zad kyang med do
བཤད་དོགས	{mos gzhan la bshad dogs} afraid that she would give away his intentions to others	bshad dogs
བཤད་འདྲ	dialectics school	bshad 'dra
བཤད་ན	to explain ..	bshad na
བཤད་ན་བརྗོད་མི་ལང་བ	fathomless	bshad na brjod mi lang ba
བཤད་རྣམ་པར་པ	expounds	bshad rnam par pa
བཤད་པ་དག་ནི་ཀུན་ཏུ་འབྱུང	explanations are the source of suffering	bshad pa dag ni kun tu 'byung
བཤད་པ་པོ	commentator	bshad pa po
བཤད་པ་མང་ན	if the explanation is too long	bshad pa mang na
བཤད་པ་བཟང་པོ	good explanation or utterance	bshad pa bzang po
བཤད་པ་རང་གསལ་གྱི་ཚུལ	those given in the manner of exegeses which are naturally clear	bshad pa rang gsal gyi tshul
བཤད་པ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	undertake an explanation	bshad pa la zhugs pa
བཤད་པའི་སྐབས	opportunity of explaining	bshad pa'i skabs
བཤད་པའི་བརྒྱད	lineage of teaching	bshad pa'i brgyad
བཤད་པའི་ཆོས	preaching the scriptures	bshad pa'i chos
བཤད་པའི་དོན	the meaning that is being taught	bshad pa'i don
བཤད་པའི་དོན་དེ་དག་ཡིད་ལ་བཟུང	the meaning of what has been said bshad pa'i 'bras bu ni rnam pa brgyad the fruition of explanation is the 8 worldly dharmas bshad pa'i 'bras bu rnam par dbye ba classify the fruition of explanation	bshad pa'i don de dag yid la bzung
བཤད་པའི་ཚུལ	method of narration	bshad pa'i tshul
བཤད་པའི་ལུགས་ལྡོག	reverse system of explanation	bshad pa'i lugs ldog
བཤད་པའི་ལུགས་འབྱུང	forward system of explanation	bshad pa'i lugs 'byung
བཤད་པར་གྱུར་པ	be explained	bshad par gyur pa
བཤད་པར་དམ་བཅས་པ	promised to teach	bshad par dam bcas pa
བཤད་པར་བྱ	it should be explained	bshad par bya
བཤད་པར་བྱ་བ	[thing] to be] explained	bshad par bya ba
བཤད་པར་ཟད	exhaust explanation	bshad par zad
བཤད་པས་མཁས་པ	formal knowledge	bshad pas mkhas pa
བཤད་པས་འགག་བསྡུ་བ	concluding explanation	bshad pas 'gag bsdu ba
བཤད་འཕེལ་གླིང་དགོན	Shephel Ling Monastery, in Purang	bshad 'phel gling dgon
བཤད་བྱ	{gshegs shul} {gshed bzhi} 1) {shar gshin rje}. 2) {lhor bdud} 3) {nub srin po} 4) {byang gnod sbyin}	bshad bya
བཤད་བྱ་དངོས	the actual topic of exposition	bshad bya dngos
བཤད་བྱ་གཞུང་དངོས	the actual text to be explained	bshad bya gzhung dngos
བཤད་བྱའི་ཆོས	[the order of] the teachings to be explained	bshad bya'i chos
བཤད་བྱའི་དོན	the subject to be explained	bshad bya'i don
བཤད་བྱའི་ཡན་ལག	subsidiary topics of exposition	bshad bya'i yan lag
བཤད་བྱའི་རིམ་པ	aspects of teaching	bshad bya'i rim pa
བཤད་སྦྱང་མཛད	study	bshad sbyang mdzad
བཤད་སྦྱངས	1) finely distinguish/ divide; 2) give a commentary	bshad sbyangs
བཤད་སྦྱར	name of a work, subject of a discourse, a discourse written down	bshad sbyar
བཤད་མ་ཐག་པ	as soon as explained	bshad ma thag pa
བཤད་མི་དགོས་པ	no doubt, of course, certainly	bshad mi dgos pa
བཤད་མི་ཚུགས	unable to explain	bshad mi tshugs
བཤད་མི་ཤེས་པ	those who cannot explain	bshad mi shes pa
བཤད་ཚབ	advocate, spokesman	bshad tshab
བཤད་ཚུལ	explanations	bshad tshul
བཤད་མཛོད	treasury of explanations (often for pious lay people)	bshad mdzod
བཤད་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ	Great Treasury of Exposition; bye brag bshad mdzod chen mo	bshad mdzod chen mo
བཤད་ཟིན་པ	spoke	bshad zin pa
བཤད་ཡམ	wordy and deceptive, discourse, babble on	bshad yam
བཤད་ཡུལ	listeners	bshad yul
བཤད་རབས	skad cha gang dang gang bshad kyi lo rgyus ???	bshad rabs
བཤད་ལུགས	name/ way of explanation/ speaking, theory, doctrine,	bshad lugs
བཤད་ལུང	exegetical transmission	bshad lung
བཤད་ལུང་གནང་ཡ	the transmitting and explaining of	bshad lung gnang ya
བཤད་ཤེས	know how to explain	bshad shes
བཤད་བཤད	never ending chatter, scolding	bshad bshad
བཤད་བཤད་གཏོང	scold	bshad bshad gtong
བཤད་སྲོལ	commentary maxim	bshad srol
བཤན་ཁང	slaughterhouse, butcher shop	bshan khang
བཤན་གྲི	butcher's knife	bshan gri
བཤན་གྲིབ	stains from killed animals on a butcher	bshan grib
བཤན་ཆས	at the time of a goddess play {lha mo 'khrab} bshan pa'i chas gos	bshan chas
བཤན་པ	butcher, butcher, cruel person	bshan pa
བཤན་པ་པེ་ཀར	Shenpa Pekar	bshan pa pe kar
བཤན་པ་ལག་དམར	1) red-handed murderer; 2) skilled butcher continuously slaughtering	bshan pa lag dmar
བཤན་པ་སྲིན་པོ	Slaughter Rakshasas	bshan pa srin po
བཤན་པས་ཤ་བཤས	butcher slaughters flesh	bshan pas sha bshas
བཤན་པོ	1) straight; 2) good shot (/ [rock, arrow etc]	bshan po
བཤན་བུ	butcher's son	bshan bu
བཤན་མོ	w/o turns and curves	bshan mo
བཤམ	prepare, SA shom pa	bsham
བཤམ་གཀོད	shrine arrangement	bsham gkod
བཤམ་བཀོད	shrine arrangement	bsham bkod
བཤམ་པ	to set up/ arrange/ lay out	bsham pa
བཤམ་མ	deception, defrauding	bsham ma
བཤམས	set out, arrange[d], array[ed], exhibit[ed], display[ed] drew [sword] [p shom]	bshams
བཤམས་སྟོན	exhibit, display	bshams ston
བཤམས་སྟོན་ཁང	exhibition hall, museum	bshams ston khang
བཤམས་སྟོན་ཚོགས་འདུ	exhibition, fair	bshams ston tshogs 'du
བཤམས་པ	pf. of {gshom pa} 2752	bshams pa
བཤམས་བྱ་ཚུལ	shrine arrangement	bshams bya tshul
བཤམས་མ	things set out/ arranged	bshams ma
བཤམས་བཞེས	eating [h]	bshams bzhes
བཤམས་བཞེས་མཛད	eat [h]	bshams bzhes mdzad
བཤའ	apportionment, service, inundation, flood	bsha'
བཤའ་དཀར	= gsha' tse dkar po [kind of lcags]	bsha' dkar
བཤའ་གྲི	butcher knife	bsha' gri
བཤའ་རྒྱུ	animal to be butchered	bsha' rgyu
བཤའ་རྡོ	rock of zha nye dkar po	bsha' rdo
བཤའ་ནག	bsha' tse nag po [kind of lcags]	bsha' nag
བཤའ་བ	(tha dad pa bshas pa, bsha' ba, bshos,, 1) slaughter, killing; 2) distribute, allot, separate	bsha' ba
བཤའ་སྦྱར	apportion, butcher	bsha' sbyar
བཤའ་མ	animals kept for slaughter	bsha' ma
བཤའ་ཙེ	1) ti tsha [anvil, or mineral medicine]; 2) zha nye, a kind of iron/ metal [bsha' tse'i snod]	bsha' tse
བཤའ་ཙེ་དཀར་པོ	zha nye dkar po metal, white lead	bsha' tse dkar po
བཤའ་ཙེ་ནག་པོ	zha nye nag po metal, black lead	bsha' tse nag po
བཤའ་ཚེ	tin	bsha' tshe
བཤའ་ལུག	a sheep going to the slaughter	bsha' lug
བཤར	weigh, measure	bshar
བཤར་སྒོམ	investigative meditation	bshar sgom
བཤར་བ	1) go through stage by stage [p gshar ba]; 2) [p f gshor ba],, [will weigh[ed], measure[d], count[ed], go 1 after another in single file, hunt, fish	bshar ba
བཤར་སྦྱང	study	bshar sbyang
བཤར་མ	measured grain	bshar ma
བཤལ	to crawl/ to cleanse, purge	bshal
བཤལ་སྐོར	having planted seeds, level the field	bshal skor
བཤལ་སྐོར་འདྲུད་པ	having planted seeds, level the field	bshal skor 'drud pa
བཤལ་སྐྱུག	cholera	bshal skyug
བཤལ་ཆུ	rinse water	bshal chu
བཤལ་ཐག	water with which vessels have been washed	bshal thag
བཤལ་འདྲུད	sa la bshal bzhin du 'drud pa'i tshul, , 'theng bo'i lus smad bshal 'drud rgyag gin rgyag gin 'gro ba [drag w repeated motion as if washing the ground]	bshal 'drud
བཤལ་ནད	dysentery, diarrhea	bshal nad
བཤལ་འཕྱེ	drud nas [drag] 'gro ba ste, 'phye bo'i 'gros sam 'theng bo'i 'gros zer ba ltar lus smad sa la bshal bzhin du 'gro ba [way of dragging or pulling like washing the ground]	bshal 'phye
བཤལ་བ	ft. of {bshal ba}; {bshal ba, bshal ba, bshal ba, bshol} trans. v.; pf. of {bshal ba}; to wash, to wash out or off, to clean by washing, to rinse	bshal ba
བཤལ་བྱེད	laxative	bshal byed
བཤལ་སྨན	purgative, purgative medicine	bshal sman
བཤལ་རིམས	rims nad w diarrhea	bshal rims
བཤལ་ལ	earth leveling implement for fields [rake?]	bshal la
བཤས	slaughtered; cut open	bshas
བཤས་ཁང	slaughter-house	bshas khang
བཤས་གྲི	butcher knife	bshas gri
བཤས་པ	pf. of {bsha' ba}	bshas pa
བཤས་ར	slaughter house	bshas ra
བཤས་ལུག	slaughtered sheep	bshas lug
བཤས་སུ་ཕབ	slaughtered, killed, butchered	bshas su phab
བཤི་རིང་ངེ	shrieked ???	bshi ring nge
བཤིག	disrupt, destroy, break in pieces, unravel, demolish, tear/ pull down [p 'jig]	bshig
བཤིག་གཏོར	MG: destruction, demolishment; va. - byed to destroy/demolish. [mss]	bshig gtor
བཤིག་བསྟན་པ	destroying [your]. teachings	bshig bstan pa
བཤིག་བསྟན་པ་པ	destroyer of (your teachings	bshig bstan pa pa
བཤིག་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indestructible	bshig thabs med pa
བཤིག་ན་ཉིལ་པ	if broken it crumbles away, 1 of bde ba'i rtags dgu	bshig na nyil pa
བཤིག་པ	dkon mchog gi rten bshig pa destroyed representations of the Three Jewels	bshig pa
བཤིག་བོན	bon quarterers	bshig bon
བཤིགས	destroyed, disrupted [p {bshig pa}	bshigs
བཤིགས་བསྟན	the teachings	bshigs bstan
བཤིགས་པ	dismantle. invalidate; {rig pas dpyad nas bshigs pa} invalidating them through intelligent investigation	bshigs pa
བཤིགས་པར་བྱེད	undermine	bshigs par byed
བཤིང་སྐྱུ་མ་པའི	which destroys illusion	bshing skyu ma pa'i
བཤིད	funerary rites	bshid
བཤིན་དུ་སྦྱོར	the same applies to	bshin du sbyor
བཤིབ	arranged evenly/ properly/ in order/ lines/ rows [p {bshibs}, be in close contact w, associate w	bshib
བཤིབ་འདོད་པ	easy to get along w, amiable, friendly	bshib 'dod pa
བཤིབ་པ	arrange evenly	bshib pa
བཤིབ་བཤིག	close together, side by side	bshib bshig
བཤིབས	joining	bshibs
བཤིབས་བདེ་པོ	{gshibs bde po} compliant, accommodating, agreeable, compatible, congenial	bshibs bde po
བཤིབས་པ	arranged evenly/ properly/ in order/ lines/ rows [p {bshibs}, was in close contact w, associated w	bshibs pa
བཤིས	nature, temper, natural disposition, person, body	bshis
བཤུ	take off, SA shu ba, to peel, skin, take off	bshu
བཤུ་བ	(tha dad pa bshus pa, bshu ba, shus,, 1) [f shu],, peel, husk, skin pare; 2) [f shu],, copy 3) whistle ???	bshu ba
བཤུ་གཞོག	exploit[ation] 2753	bshu gzhog
བཤུ་གཞོག་གི་རྣམ་པ	form of exploitation	bshu gzhog gi rnam pa
བཤུ་གཞོག་གྲལ་རིམ	ranks of those exploited [by someone who takes the things the expoited person produces, for example as a servant is in the master's gral rim and, a tenant farmer field owner's gral rim, a borrower ...	bshu gzhog gral rim
བཤུ་གཞོག་གཏོང	exploit	bshu gzhog gtong
བཤུ་གཞོག་གཏོང་མཁན	exploiter	bshu gzhog gtong mkhan
བཤུ་གཞོག་གཏོང་བ	to exploit	bshu gzhog gtong ba
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད	exploit	bshu gzhog byed
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད་མཁན	exploiter	bshu gzhog byed mkhan
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད་མཁན་གྲལ་རིམ	exploiting class	bshu gzhog byed mkhan gral rim
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད་ཐབས	[means of] exploiting	bshu gzhog byed thabs
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད་པ	exploit	bshu gzhog byed pa
བཤུ་གཞོག་བྱེད་པོ	exploiters	bshu gzhog byed po
བཤུ་གཞོག་མྱོང་མཁན་གྲལ་རིམ	exploited class	bshu gzhog myong mkhan gral rim
བཤུ་གཞོག་ལམ་ལུགས	systems of exploitation	bshu gzhog lam lugs
བཤུག	whistling	bshug
བཤུག་གླུ	whistling tune	bshug glu
བཤུག་གླུའི་དབྱངས	whistling tune	bshug glu'i dbyangs
བཤུག་པ	[p bshugs],, sell, barter, exchange	bshug pa
བཤུག་པའི་གླུ	bshugs glu - whistling tune	bshug pa'i glu
བཤུག་སླུ	song	bshug slu
བཤུགས	[p bshug pa] sold, bartered, exchanged	bshugs
བཤུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་ཆེན་པོ་སྒྲོག་པ	sends out loud whistling noises	bshugs kyi sgra chen po sgrog pa
བཤུགས་གླུ	bshug pa'i glu - whistling tune	bshugs glu
བཤུགས་གླུའི་དབྱངས	whistling tune	bshugs glu'i dbyangs
བཤུགས་པ	[p bshug pa] sold, bartered, exchanged	bshugs pa
བཤུང་དོན	religious subject	bshung don
བཤུང་བ	will bring/ fall down, degrade, curse [f gshung ba]	bshung ba
བཤུངས་པ	brought/ fell down, degraded, cursed [p gshung ba]	bshungs pa
བཤུད	rub, SA shud pa	bshud
བཤུད་སྒྲ	whistle	bshud sgra
བཤུད་པ	(Tha dad pa bshud pa, bshud pa, shud,, 1) [p shud],, rub, scratch, scrape, stroke; 2) take off; 3) (tha mi dad pa,, freeze, blister w cold; 4) sheathe (/ [= bshub]	bshud pa
བཤུད་མེ	purifying fire	bshud me
བཤུབ	sheathe	bshub
བཤུབ་བ	to sheathe	bshub ba
བཤུམ	weep, SA shum pa	bshum
བཤུམ་པ	{bshum pa, bshums pa, bshum pa, shums} intr. v.; ft. of {bshum pa}	bshum pa
བཤུམས	wept; cried, wept	bshums
བཤུམས་པ	weeping	bshums pa
བཤུམས་མང་དུ	shed many tears	bshums mang du
བཤུར་བཏང་བ	singe, scorch	bshur btang ba
བཤུར་ནས་འདོན	leaving out parts	bshur nas 'don
བཤུར་བ	pf. of {bshur ba}; ft. of {bshur ba}; {bshur ba, bshur ba, bshur ba, shur} trans. v	bshur ba
བཤུར་མ	scorched, singed, burned	bshur ma
བཤུར་ཡིག	a certain dakini script	bshur yig
བཤུལ	journey, road	bshul
བཤུལ་ཀ	1) journey; 2) back [of body]	bshul ka
བཤུལ་ཀར	on the road	bshul kar
བཤུལ་ཁ	1) journey; 2) back [of body]	bshul kha
བཤུལ་རྒྱགས	articles for travel	bshul rgyags
བཤུལ་ཆག	[arch] hoofed	bshul chag
བཤུལ་རྗེས	footsteps	bshul rjes
བཤུལ་ཐག་རིང་པོ	traveled a long way	bshul thag ring po
བཤུལ་དུ	upon leaving	bshul du
བཤུལ་ཚིལ	back fat	bshul tshil
བཤུལ་རིང	long way, long journey	bshul ring
བཤུལ་ལམ	journey, road [travelled]	bshul lam
བཤུལ་ཤ	back/ thigh flesh	bshul sha
བཤུལ་སེལ	'tsang kha bshang mkhan nam lam thog la yod pa'i 'gog rkyen med par bzo mkhan	bshul sel
བཤུས	flayed, copied, removed [clothes] [p {[b]shu ba}	bshus
བཤུས་གོས	clothes are removed	bshus gos
བཤུས་བཅད་རྨ	wound w flayed skin or cut across the flesh	bshus bcad rma
བཤུས་དག་པར་པ	transcribed correctly	bshus dag par pa
བཤུས་དེབ	copied book	bshus deb
བཤུས་པ	flayed; to strip/ to be flayed, skinned/ to make a copy of; pf. of {bshu ba}	bshus pa
བཤུས་བྲིས	copying, transcribing	bshus bris
བཤུས་བྲིས་བྱེད	copy, transcribe	bshus bris byed
བཤུས་མ	copy, duplicate	bshus ma
བཤུས་ཡིག	letter copied from another	bshus yig
བཤེ་བསྐུར	slander	bshe bskur
བཤེ་བསྐུར་འདེབས	to denigrate and slander	bshe bskur 'debs
བཤེ་བསྐུར་འདེབས་པ	to denigrate and slander	bshe bskur 'debs pa
བཤེག་གེ	relaxed, free	bsheg ge
བཤེད	consider	bshed
བཤེད་པ	blaze, burn	bshed pa
བཤེད་པ་ཡིན	be understood/ enumerated/ regarded	bshed pa yin
བཤེའུ	inundation, flood	bshe'u
བཤེར	compare, SA sher ba 2754	bsher
བཤེར་ཁང	court [& offices]	bsher khang
བཤེར་ཁྲ	quarrel deciding legal document	bsher khra
བཤེར་རྒྱག	detailed wordy arguing	bsher rgyag
བཤེར་དཔང	legal sentence decider[judge???] or witness in a law case or bsher khang gi 'go byed	bsher dpang
བཤེར་བ	ft. of {sher ba}; pf. of {sher ba}	bsher ba
བཤེར་བློན	leader of people who are bsher byed mkhan of truth and falsity [disputants? lawyers ? judges? researchers? detectives? government investigators?]	bsher blon
བཤེར་ཙག	words getting to the fine points bsher 'tshol [closely] investigate/compare/ examine, seek the truth, hunt/ search for	bsher tsag
བཤེར་གཟུང	in the place where something was looked for have found it, search and arrest	bsher gzung
བཤེར་བཟུང	in the place where something was looked for have found it, search and arrest	bsher bzung
བཤེར་ལེན	1) receive pleading documents from participants in a legal case; 2) count of money etc look into, decide and receive	bsher len
བཤེས	relation, friend	bshes
བཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་འདོད	make a profit out of religion	bshes kyi khe 'dod
བཤེས་ཀྱི་ཁེ་འདོད་པ	profit by friendship	bshes kyi khe 'dod pa
བཤེས་ཁྲུང	beer [h]	bshes khrung
བཤེས་ངོ	depending on a friend, las ka byas pa, sngar yod bshes ngor mi brtsi ba, dga' grogs kyi bshes ngor mthun 'jug byed pa,/ acquaintance, friend ???	bshes ngo
བཤེས་ངོར་འཕྱས་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of blaming friends [one of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, to a gelong who performs the actions of the sangha la having an appropriate measure of the common property and requisites ...	bshes ngor 'phyas pa'i ltung byed
བཤེས་ཆང	beer [h]	bshes chang
བཤེས་གཉེན	teacher, spiritual friend, friend, virtuous friend, teachers	bshes gnyen
བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་བཅུ	10 characteristics of a spiritual friend [of the mahayana*	bshes gnyen gyi mtshan nyid bcu
བཤེས་གཉེན་ངན་པ	bad spiritual friend [who leads on the wrong path]	bshes gnyen ngan pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་ཆེན་པོ	1) great spiritual friend; 2) name of a buddha	bshes gnyen chen po
བཤེས་གཉེན་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arouse an attitude like a spiritual friend [one of the 22 kinds of arousing bodhicitta in the 7th bhumi ba' gyud? as for arousing bodhicitta possessing the upayaparamita by being skilled in compass...	bshes gnyen lta bu'i sems bskyed
བཤེས་གཉེན་སྟེན་པ	to follow a spiritual guide; ex {bshes gnyen dam pa sten cig} rely on sublime spiritual friends!	bshes gnyen sten pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་བསྟེན་པ	to follow a spiritual teacher	bshes gnyen bsten pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་བསྟེན་ཚུལ་གྱི་སེམས་དགུ	9 attitudes of attending on a spiritual friend	bshes gnyen bsten tshul gyi sems dgu
བཤེས་གཉེན་དམ་པ	true spiritual friend	bshes gnyen dam pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་དམ་པ་བསྟེན	{grogs dag byang chub ma thob bar du bla ma dgos pas bshes gnyen dam pa bsten} Friends, until you attain enlightenment you need a teacher, so follow a supreme spiritual friend. Atisa	bshes gnyen dam pa bsten
བཤེས་གཉེན་པ	spiritual friend	bshes gnyen pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect spiritual friend [with all the good qualities]	bshes gnyen phun sum tshogs pa
བཤེས་གཉེན་ཚུལ་བཇུང	keep the lifestyle of a spiritual guide	bshes gnyen tshul bjung
བཤེས་གཉེན་ཚུལ་བཟུང་ནས	keeping the lifestyle of a spiritual guide	bshes gnyen tshul bzung nas
བཤེས་གཉེན་ཚུལ་བཟུང་བ	in the form of a spiritual friend	bshes gnyen tshul bzung ba
བཤེས་གཉེན་བཟང་པོ	1) good [spiritual] friend; 2) dharma teacher; 3) name of a buddha	bshes gnyen bzang po
བཤེས་བཉེན	teacher, [close][spiritual] friend	bshes bnyen
བཤེས་འདྲིན	loving friends	bshes 'drin
བཤེས་ལྡན	new year sweet w molasses, cream, butter, beer, etc.	bshes ldan
བཤེས་རྣམས་ལ་མི་རྟེན	not to depend on friends	bshes rnams la mi rten
བཤེས་པ	be in accord with, in harmony with, be friendly, be acquainted with, relation, relative, friend	bshes pa
བཤེས་པའི་སྤྲིང་ཡིག	suhrilleka, work on the	bshes pa'i spring yig
བཤེས་པའི་སྤྲིན་ཡིག	Friendly Letter by Nagarjuna	bshes pa'i sprin yig
བཤེས་པར་བྱ་བ	treat as friends {de dang rang nyid bshes par mi bya ba} do not treat them as your friends	bshes par bya ba
བཤེས་སྤྲིང	Friendly Letter	bshes spring
བཤེས་སྤྲིངས	Friendly Letter	bshes springs
བཤེས་སྤྲོ	cake, biscuit	bshes spro
བཤེས་སྦྲིང	Suhrllekha	bshes sbring
བཤེས་མི་བྱེད་པ	an enemy	bshes mi byed pa
བཤེས་མེད	friendless/ without a guide	bshes med
བཤོ་ཐེམས་མེད་པ	unavoidable, irresistible	bsho thems med pa
བཤོ་བ	pour out, lie with, will pour out/ away [f gsho ba]	bsho ba
བཤོག	cut through, split, cleave, admit, confess	bshog
བཤོག་པ	SA gshog pa	bshog pa
བཤོགས	confess! ['chags pa!]	bshogs
བཤོང་ས	a low place, ravine	bshong sa
བཤོངས	excavate, wearied, SA gcong ba	bshongs
བཤོད་པ	rumor, report	bshod pa
བཤོད་བུ	pellet [on a torma]	bshod bu
བཤོམ	prepare, SA shom pa	bshom
བཤོམས	prepare, SA shom pa	bshoms
བཤོར	[arch] vessel	bshor
བཤོར་པོ	liberal, munificent	bshor po
བཤོར་བ	hunting	bshor ba
བཤོལ	delay, putting off, discourage	bshol
བཤོལ་ཀྱང་ཁེགས་མི་འོང	there is no point in trying to delay my departure	bshol kyang khegs mi 'ong
བཤོལ་སྙིང་འདོད་པ	to feel like giving up	bshol snying 'dod pa
བཤོལ་བཏབ	dissuaded, prevented, discouraged, kept back, objected to {p bshol 'debs}	bshol btab
བཤོལ་བཏབ་པ	obstruct	bshol btab pa
བཤོལ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	no one can keep	bshol thabs med pa
བཤོལ་ཐེབ	to delay, postpone, put off	bshol theb
བཤོལ་ཐེབས་པ	dissuade, prevent, discourage, keep back, object to	bshol thebs pa
བཤོལ་འཐེབས་པ	delay, SA bshol ba	bshol 'thebs pa
བཤོལ་འདེབས	dissuade, prevent, discourage, keep back	bshol 'debs
བཤོལ་འདེབས་པ	dissuade, prevent, discourage, keep back, object to [maybe only for while]	bshol 'debs pa
བཤོལ་ལྡན	chameleon	bshol ldan
བཤོལ་ལྡན་མཉེས	chang	bshol ldan mnyes
བཤོལ་པོ་ཟླ་ཕྱེད	nyi [la shar ba'i rgyu] skar 23 and chu tshod 32 or spyi zla three pa'i tshes 9 skor nas zhag 15 ring la {bshol po zla phyed}, such is the way of counting in the region of Lhasa and {yar klung}. "b...	bshol po zla phyed
བཤོལ་བ	{bshol ba, bshol ba, bshol ba, shol} trans. v.; to put off, postpone, defer, delay; ft. of {bshol ba}; pf. of {bshol ba}	bshol ba
བཤོལ་བྱེད	to postpone, not trouble about	bshol byed
བཤོལ་མ	spirit, wine	bshol ma
བཤོལ་མ་ཐེབས	not diverted from purpose	bshol ma thebs
བཤོལ་མེད	without delay	bshol med
བཤོལ་ཟླ	lunar day extra over solar day [= zla bshol]	bshol zla
བཤོས	1) distribute! kill! butcher!; 2) food [h]	bshos
བཤོས་པ	breed, from unions with	bshos pa
བཤོས་བུ	offering morsel, small pieces of butter offered to gods, small gtor ma used as an offering	bshos bu
བཤོས་ཞིང	field in which food grain can be grown	bshos zhing
བཤོས་ཟིན་པ	spilt	bshos zin pa
བཤོས་ལྷ	divine	bshos lha
བཤྲ	shining, beautiful, variegated	bshra
མཤང	defects, essence	mshang
མཤང་རྗེན་པ	expose nakedly	mshang rjen pa
མཤང་ཕྱར	exposing the faults	mshang phyar
མཤན	epithet, mark, title, name	mshan
མཤན་བཅས	w form/ marks/ qualities/ signs	mshan bcas
མཤན་བརྗོད	Namasangiti	mshan brjod
མཤན་ཉིད	manifestation	mshan nyid
མཤན་ཉིད་ལྡན	competent	mshan nyid ldan
མཤན་ལྟས	dream prophecy	mshan ltas
མཤན་ལྟས་བརྟག་པའི་གཅིག་ལག	science of interpreting omens	mshan ltas brtag pa'i gcig lag
མཤན་ཐུན	night session	mshan thun
མཤན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད	the major and minor marks	mshan dang dpe byad
མཤན་ལྡན	authentic	mshan ldan
མཤན་པ	ornamented, manifests	mshan pa
མཤན་མ	symptom, quality, fixation, omen, "mark" or "sign" (philosophical contexts)	mshan ma
མཤན་མ་ཆོད	unable to pass the night mshan mar 'dzin gyi pa'i rnam rtog pa discursive thoughts of fixation, ordinary thoughts	mshan ma chod
མཤན་མེད	non-conceptual, w/o fixation, formless, not centralized	mshan med
མཤན་སྨོས	call upon	mshan smos
ས་ཀ་ཤེ	ancient indian city	sa ka she
ས་ཀུན་དབང	emperor of the universe, chakravartti raja	sa kun dbang
ས་ཀུན་དབང་པོ	chakravartin/ universal monarch	sa kun dbang po
ས་ཀོང	trench, hole	sa kong
ས་ཀོང་ཀོང	undulating ground	sa kong kong
ས་ཀྱ་པཎ་ཌི་ཏ	the great Sakya pandita of the Sakya tradition. Famous for his scholarship, including {sdom gsum}	sa kya paN Di ta
ས་ཀྲ	map, plan, accommodation for travellers, rest house, established a dharmasala	sa kra
ས་དཀར	white, lime, chalk, white-wash 2756	sa dkar
ས་དཀར་འབྱུག	whitewashing	sa dkar 'byug
ས་དཀར་འུ་ལག	in former Tibetan government, rtse potala palace gis gtsos gzhung khang khag la sa dkar gsol skabs bskul ba'i 'u lag	sa dkar 'u lag
ས་དཀར་ཤར་ཇོ་ཁང	Sakarshar, Jokhang Temple, in Domey	sa dkar shar jo khang
ས་དཀོར	landed endowments of a monastery	sa dkor
ས་དཀོར་ཟུག་པ	sa bed ha cang spyad drags pa'i la yogs sam rnam smin 'khor ba	sa dkor zug pa
ས་དཀྱིལ	earth mandala sa dkyil gyi phyed man chad cha bdun CHN	sa dkyil
ས་བཀྲ	atlas, map	sa bkra
ས་བཀྲེན་པོ	bare place w/o grass, water etc.	sa bkren po
ས་རྐོ་མཁན	tiller	sa rko mkhan
ས་རྐོ་བ	dig[ger]	sa rko ba
ས་རྐོ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	downfall of digging in the earth	sa rko ba'i ltung byed
ས་རྐོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི	mattock	sa rko byed kyi
ས་རྐོ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འཇོར	hoe	sa rko byed kyi 'jor
ས་སྐམ	dry ground, steppe	sa skam
ས་སྐམ་པོ	barren land	sa skam po
ས་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 earth stars	sa skar bdun
ས་སྐལ	share/ allotment of land	sa skal
ས་སྐོར	tour, travel, journey, circuit	sa skor
ས་སྐོར་འགྲོ	go on an inspection tour of a place, make an expedition/ trip	sa skor 'gro
ས་སྐྱ	1) white/ light earth; 2) sa skya rdzong (/; 2) Sakya school	sa skya
ས་སྐྱ་དཀར་པོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three sakya karpo	sa skya dkar po rnam gsum
ས་སྐྱ་ཁྲི་པ	sa chen kun dga' snying po man chad, name for both sa skya pa'i gdung rgyud and chos rgyud	sa skya khri pa
ས་སྐྱ་ཁྲི་འཛིན	the Throne Holder of the Sakya School sa skya khri 'dzin ngag dbang kun dga'	sa skya khri 'dzin
ཐེག་ཆེན་དཔལ་འབར	1945	theg chen dpal 'bar
ས་སྐྱ་གོང་མ	kun dga' blo gros (1729-1783)	sa skya gong ma
ས་སྐྱ་གོང་མ་ལྔ	sa skya dkar po rnam gsum and sa skya dmar po rnam gnyis	sa skya gong ma lnga
ས་སྐྱ་གོང་མ་རྣམ་ལྔ	sa skya dkar po rnam gsum and sa skya dmar po rnam gnyis	sa skya gong ma rnam lnga
ས་སྐྱ་དགོན	Sakya Monastery	sa skya dgon
ས་སྐྱ་སྔགས་འཆང་ཆེན་མོ	(15171584) - kun dga' rin chen - his biography is {sngags 'chang chen mo kun dga' rin chen rnam thar} sa skya mchog ldan gser mdog pan chen Sakya Chogden, Serdog Panchen : 1428-1507 sa skya 'jam db...	sa skya sngags 'chang chen mo
ས་སྐྱ་ཐལ་ལེ	clear ground, a gray area	sa skya thal le
ས་སྐྱ་བདག་ཆེན	{sa skya gong ma}	sa skya bdag chen
ས་སྐྱ་བདག་ཆེན་བཟང་པོ་དཔལ	{sa skya bdag chen bzang po dpal	sa skya bdag chen bzang po dpal
ས་སྐྱ་པ	Sakyapa	sa skya pa
ས་སྐྱ་པ་ཁྲི་ཆེན	ngag dbang mthu	sa skya pa khri chen
སྟོབས་དབང་ཕྱུག	biography: shrI sa skya pa sngags 'chang bla ma khri chen rdo rje 'chang ngag dbang mthu stobs dbang phyug drag shul yon tan rgya mtsho bkra shis grags pa rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po'i rnam par thar...	stobs dbang phyug
ས་སྐྱ་པན་ཆེན	1182-1252, eminent master of sa skya pa tradition	sa skya pan chen
ས་སྐྱ་པཎ་ཌི་ཏ	Sakya Pandita [thd]	sa skya paN Di ta
ས་སྐྱ་དཔོན་ཆེན	{sakya dpon chen} sa skya sprul pa'i gtsug lag khang chen	sa skya dpon chen
ས་སྐྱ་འབག་མོ	sakya samaya bound 'dre mo demoness	sa skya 'bag mo
ས་སྐྱ་དམར་པོ་རྣམ་གཉིས	the two sakya marpo	sa skya dmar po rnam gnyis
ས་སྐྱ་ལེགས་བཤད	by Sakya Pandita	sa skya legs bshad
ས་སྐྱའ	CHN	sa skya'
ས་སྐྱའི་དཀར་བོ་རྣམ་གསུམ	CHN	sa skya'i dkar bo rnam gsum
ས་སྐྱའི་མཁའ་སྦྱོད་སྐོར་གསུམ	CHN	sa skya'i mkha' sbyod skor gsum
ས་སྐྱའི་འགྲོ་མགོན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ	Sakya Drogön Chögyal	sa skya'i 'gro mgon chos rgyal
ས་སྐྱའི་གདན་རབས	Sakya seat holder lineage * 1344-1346 1347 1349 sa skya'i gdung rabs rin chen bang mdzod - 'dzam gling byang phyogs kyi thub pa'i rgyal tshab chen po dpal ldan sa skya pa'i gdung rabs rin po che ji...	sa skya'i gdan rabs
ས་སྐྱའི་དམར་ཆུང་སྐོར་གསུམ	CHN	sa skya'i dmar chung skor gsum
ས་སྐྱའི་ལེགས་བཤད	work by {sa skya	sa skya'i legs bshad
ས་སྐྱའི་གསེར་ཆོས་བཅུ་གསུམ	the 13 golden doctrines of the sakya	sa skya'i gser chos bcu gsum
ས་སྐྱེས	1) Mars; 2) tree; 3) singer of the gods	sa skyes
ས་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་སྐྱེས	1) born like earth maturing like rock, way a region naturally 2757 developed; 2) ga sa gar skyes pa, summer flowers sa skyes rdo skyes red	sa skyes rdo skyes
ས་སྐྱེས་མ	very useful and important medicine	sa skyes ma
ས་སྐྱོ	white cloth for painting thang kas etc.	sa skyo
ས་སྐྱོང	king, governor, emperor	sa skyong
ས་སྐྱོང་ཆེན་པོ	great protector of the world; Great Protector of the World	sa skyong chen po
ས་སྐྱོང་བ	rule [a country]	sa skyong ba
ས་སྐྱོང་དབང་པོ	emperor, great king	sa skyong dbang po
ས་སྐྱོན	cattle disease {sa skyon}	sa skyon
ས་སྐྱོབ	1) mt; 2) goat	sa skyob
ས་སྐྱོར	earth and sand etc. retaining wall	sa skyor
ས་བརྐོ	dig	sa brko
ས་བརྐོ་བ	excavation	sa brko ba
ས་བརྐོའི་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	digging machine	sa brko'i 'phrul 'khor
ས་བསྐོར	inspection tour of a place, expedition/ trip	sa bskor
ས་བསྐོར་འགྲོ	go on an inspection tour of a place, make an expedition/ trip	sa bskor 'gro
ས་བསྐོས	town, city	sa bskos
ས་ཁ	surface of the earth/ a field	sa kha
ས་ཁ་ཐག་རིང་པོའི་བར་དུ་ཆོད	separated by a great distance	sa kha thag ring po'i bar du chod
ས་ཁ་ཐག་རིང་པོས་བར་ཆོད	great distances will separate us	sa kha thag ring pos bar chod
ས་ཁ་ཐག་རིང་བ	distance	sa kha thag ring ba
ས་ཁ་འབྱེད་པ	1st month of spring 1st plowing	sa kha 'byed pa
ས་ཁང	estate	sa khang
ས་ཁང་བདག་པོ	tenant	sa khang bdag po
ས་ཁད	distance between	sa khad
ས་ཁམས	earth element *, geography	sa khams
ས་ཁམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན་ཤེས	geography, geographical features	sa khams kyi rgyun shes
ས་ཁམས་གནས་ཚུལ	geographical environment/ conditions	sa khams gnas tshul
ས་ཁམས་རིག་པ	geography [science]	sa khams rig pa
ས་ཁལ་ལེ་བ	sa 'gos pa'i shul skya thal le ba, smin phrag dang sna'i bya gshog gi gshongs	sa khal le ba
ས་ཁུ	mud	sa khu
ས་ཁུ་བྱུགས་པ	made dirty by earth, soiled with clay	sa khu byugs pa
ས་ཁུག	corner	sa khug
ས་ཁུང	hole/ cave/ pit [in the earth]	sa khung
ས་ཁུང་རྐོ	dig a hole/ cave/ pit [in the earth]	sa khung rko
ས་ཁུང་དྲུ	dig a hole/ cave/ pit [in the earth]	sa khung dru
ས་ཁུངས	precinct, zone	sa khungs
ས་ཁུངས་ཀྱི	zonal	sa khungs kyi
ས་ཁུལ	region, zone, district	sa khul
ས་ཁུལ་གྱི	territorial	sa khul gyi
ས་ཁོང	interior of the earth	sa khong
ས་ཁོངས	territory	sa khongs
ས་ཁོངས་ཀ་ཤི་མིར	territory of Kashmir	sa khongs ka shi mir
ས་ཁོངས་རང་སྐྱོང	regional autonomy	sa khongs rang skyong
ས་ཁོད་སྙོམས་པོ	level/ flat land	sa khod snyoms po
ས་ཁོད་མི་སྙོམས་པ	bare uneven ground	sa khod mi snyoms pa
ས་ཁྱད	sa cha'i khyad par	sa khyad
ས་ཁྱབ	covering the earth	sa khyab
ས་ཁྱི	earth dog year	sa khyi
ས་ཁྱི་པ	man born in the earth dog year	sa khyi pa
ས་ཁྱི་མ	man born in the earth dog year	sa khyi ma
ས་ཁྱོན	size/ extent/ area of land	sa khyon
ས་ཁྲ	map	sa khra
ས་ཁྲ་བོ	picture w various colors	sa khra bo
ས་ཁྲམ	land registration	sa khram
ས་ཁྲམ་རྒྱག	register land titles	sa khram rgyag
ས་ཁྲམ་ཆེན་པོ	land register records of Bhutan	sa khram chen po
ས་ཁྲའི་ཐིག་རིམ	map coordinates	sa khra'i thig rim
ས་ཁྲའི་འཕྲེད་ཐིག	degrees of latitude	sa khra'i 'phred thig
ས་ཁྲའི་གཞུང་ཐིག	degrees of longitude	sa khra'i gzhung thig
ས་ཁྲལ	tax on land	sa khral
ས་ཁྲི	platform/ seat of earth, brick bed	sa khri
ས་ཁྲུ་སློག	cultivate land for agriculture	sa khru slog
ས་ཁྲོལ	sieve/ sifter for earth	sa khrol
ས་བཁྱིལ	earth mandala	sa bkhyil
ས་མཁན	guide "experienced with a place", one who has to do with the soil	sa mkhan
ས་མཁར	castle fortress/ building made of earth and rock	sa mkhar
ས་འཁོལ་རྡོ་འཁོལ	intense activity, bubbling stones and earth	sa 'khol rdo 'khol
ས་འཁྱག	sa 'khyag pas bsdams pa	sa 'khyag
ས་འཁྲུ་བ	[arch] phag nyan pa'am, bya ra ba'am, mel tshe ba	sa 'khru ba
ས་འཁྲུག	1 of the sa g.yo drug, six kinds of motion of the earth	sa 'khrug
ས་འཁྲེགས	hard and solid	sa 'khregs
ས་ག་སྐྱེ་མ	the goddess Uma	sa ga skye ma
ས་ག་སྐྱེས	epithet of uma the wife of maheshvara	sa ga skyes
ས་ག་མ	daughter of an ancient householder	sa ga ma
ས་ག་ཟླ་བ	name of the 4th Tibetan month, full moon of the Saga Constellation (ceremony on the 11th day of the 4th Tibetan month)	sa ga zla ba
སཱ་ག་ར	the sea	sA ga ra
ས་གད་བརྒྱབ་པ	clean up dust of barley, wheat etc, rubbish on the ground	sa gad brgyab pa
ས་གའི་ཟླ་བ	month of vaisakha when buddha was born	sa ga'i zla ba
ས་གས་ཉ་བ	full moon in April-may	sa gas nya ba
ས་གས་རི་ཉིལ	cracking of earth and crumbling of mts, great natural disaster	sa gas ri nyil
ས་གུ་ཙེ	worm	sa gu tse
ས་གོ	often makes a verb active (has an agent)	sa go
ས་གོང	bong ba'am sa rdog rdog	sa gong
ས་གོང་མ	above the earth	sa gong ma
ས་གོང་འོག	the higher and lower levels	sa gong 'og
ས་གྱང	1) sa bcud; 2) meritorious place	sa gyang
ས་གྱོང	tough soil, hard ground	sa gyong
ས་གྱོང་རྐོ་ན་འཇོར་རྩེ་རྣོན་པོ་དགོས	if you dig hard ground your 'jor needs a sharp tip	sa gyong rko na 'jor rtse rnon po dgos
ས་གྲགས་གནམ་གྲགས	very great fame	sa grags gnam grags
ས་གྲོགས་ཆུ	the friend of earth is water	sa grogs chu
ས་གླ	rent/ lease for land	sa gla
ས་གླང	1) 1st month 1st day sa using glang gi kha dog etc see whether harvest will be good etc, a divination from ma h' tsi na region = CH glang rtsis; 2) [earth female] ox year 2758	sa glang
ས་གླང་པ	man born in the earth ox year	sa glang pa
ས་གླང་མ	woman born in the earth ox year	sa glang ma
ས་དགའ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	sa dga'
ས་དགུ	TSE	sa dgu
ས་དགུ་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བཅུ་གཉིས	TSE	sa dgu pa'i yongs sbyong bcu gnyis
ས་དགེ་བཀའ་རྙིང	Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu and Nyingma [schools]	sa dge bka' rnying
ས་དགྱེས	lily	sa dgyes
ས་དགྲ	1) inauspicious {sa dpyad}/ [feng shui] geomantic situation; 2) enmities of the elements	sa dgra
ས་མགོ	superscribed sa	sa mgo
ས་མགོན	hind, landlord	sa mgon
ས་འགག	* [earth] obstacle/ barrier	sa 'gag
ས་འགུལ	earth shaking, earthquake	sa 'gul
ས་འགུལ་རྒྱག	have an earthquake	sa 'gul rgyag
ས་འགུལ་བརྟག་ཆས	seismograph	sa 'gul brtag chas
ས་འགུལ་བ	earth trembling, earthquake	sa 'gul ba
ས་འགོ	rdzong leader	sa 'go
ས་འགོད	signing	sa 'god
ས་འགོད་བྱེད	sign [a document]	sa 'god byed
ས་འགྲོ	peacock "that which walks the ground"	sa 'gro
ས་རྒོད	uncultivated/ wild/ waste/ virgin place/ land	sa rgod
ས་རྒོད་འཕྲུ་སློག་རུ་ཁག	land reclamation team	sa rgod 'phru slog ru khag
ས་རྒོད་རྨོ	plow/ cultivate/ reclaim [uncultivated/ wild/ waste/ virgin place/ land]	sa rgod rmo
ས་རྒོད་རྨོ་བ	plow/ cultivate/ reclaim [uncultivated/ wild/ waste/ virgin place/ land]	sa rgod rmo ba
ས་རྒོད་སློག	plow/ cultivate [uncultivated/ wild/ waste/ virgin place/ land]	sa rgod slog
ས་རྒོད་སློག་པ	plow/ cultivate [uncultivated/ wild/ waste/ virgin place/ land]	sa rgod slog pa
ས་རྒྱ	extent of earth/ place, area	sa rgya
ས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	small area	sa rgya chung chung
ས་རྒྱ་དཔངས་གྲུ་བཞི	unit of area	sa rgya dpangs gru bzhi
ས་རྒྱབ་ལྐོག་ལངས	run behind the hill, lost, slips away	sa rgyab lkog langs
ས་རྒྱུ	nature/ quality of the soil	sa rgyu
ས་རྒྱུ་གཞུང་ལེན	one's fields and wealth gzhung bzhes byed pa	sa rgyu gzhung len
ས་རྒྱུ་ལེགས་བཅོས	soil improvement	sa rgyu legs bcos
ས་རྒྱུ་ལེགས་བཅོས་བྱེད	improve the soil	sa rgyu legs bcos byed
ས་རྒྱུ་གཤིན་པོ	soft earth	sa rgyu gshin po
ས་རྒྱུའི་རིག་པ	agronomy	sa rgyu'i rig pa
ས་རྒྱུས	geography	sa rgyus
ས་སྒང	sa cha 'bur po	sa sgang
ས་སྒོ	ground-breaking ceremony	sa sgo
ས་སྒོ་ཕྱེ	broke ground for a construction project	sa sgo phye
ས་སྒོ་འབྱེད	break ground for a construction project	sa sgo 'byed
ས་སྒོང	mound, heap of earth, 1 of zhing las	sa sgong
ས་སྒྲིབ	become night/ dark	sa sgrib
ས་སྒྲེ	bare ground	sa sgre
ས་སྒྲེ་བོ	bare uneven ground	sa sgre bo
ས་སྒྲོག	white water lily	sa sgrog
ས་སྒྲོག་རི་ལ་གནས་པའི་སྡེ	mang bkur ba gsum gyi ya gyal zhig	sa sgrog ri la gnas pa'i sde
ས་བརྒྱད	8 stages of saintly perfection	sa brgyad
ས་བརྒྱད་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བརྒྱད	TSE	sa brgyad pa'i yongs sbyong brgyad
ས་ངན	1) wild/ coarse/ rough terrain; 2) sa ngan district	sa ngan
ས་ངོར	sakyapa ngorpa	sa ngor
ས་ངོས	clay, face of the earth	sa ngos
ས་ངོས་སྙོམས་ཐིག	horizon	sa ngos snyoms thig
ས་ངོས་རིག་པ	topography	sa ngos rig pa
ས་རྔོག་བུ་གསུམ	sa skya pandi ta kun dga' rgyal mtshan and rngog legs pa'i shes rab and bu ston rin chen grub	sa rngog bu gsum
ས་ལྔ་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བཅུ	TSE	sa lnga pa'i yongs sbyong bcu
ས་སྔགས	sngags brgyab pa'i/btab pa'i round piece of earth/ clay	sa sngags
ས་སྔོན	blue clay, blue earth	sa sngon
ས་གཅིག	one level, singular dimension	sa gcig
ས་གཅིག་ཏུ་མི	flighty, inattentive	sa gcig tu mi
ས་གཅིག་ཏུ་མི་ཚུགས་པ	not being able to settle in one place	sa gcig tu mi tshugs pa
ས་གཅིག་པ	single stage	sa gcig pa
ས་གཅེར་བུ	bare uneven ground	sa gcer bu
ས་བཅག་པ	cultivate, till ground	sa bcag pa
ས་བཅད	chapter, section, subject, division, outline, stages {don tshan}	sa bcad
ས་བཅད་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་ཆིངས	* chapter/ outline divisions	sa bcad rnam 'byed kyi chings
ས་བཅད་ཙམ	a brief survey/ outline	sa bcad tsam
ས་བཅུ	the ten stages, the ten bhumis, [dashabhu:mi]; Ten Levels, According to Anu Yoga. Corresponding to the above, they are the levels of Indefinite Transformation {'gyur ba ma nges pa} Basis of Relianc...	sa bcu
ས་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 bhumis	sa bcu gcig
ས་བཅུ་གཉིས	TSE	sa bcu gnyis
ས་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen levels	sa bcu drug
ས་བཅུ་ནོན	tread the 10 bhumis	sa bcu non
ས་བཅུ་པ	Sutra on the Ten Stages	sa bcu pa
ས་བཅུ་པའི་མདོ	Dasa-bhumika Sutra, the ten bhumi sutra	sa bcu pa'i mdo
ས་བཅུ་དབང་ཕྱུག	1) Maitreya; 2) 10th bhumi bodhisattva 2759	sa bcu dbang phyug
ས་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 bhumis	sa bcu bzhi
ས་བཅུ་ལ་གནས་པའི་དཔའ་བོ	10th bhumi bodhisattva	sa bcu la gnas pa'i dpa' bo
ས་བཅུ་གསུམ	Thirteen bhumis. According to the New Schools there are an additional three stages which are actually degrees of manifesting complete enlightenment. See Tsele Natsok Rangdröl's The Lamp of Mahamudr...	sa bcu gsum
ས་བཅུད	sulfur, essence of the earth	sa bcud
ས་བཅུད་བུམ་པ	sa gnad kyi gyang bcud gso ba'i treasure vase	sa bcud bum pa
ས་བཅུད་བུམ་པ་སྦ་བའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual for burial of vessels containing precious things	sa bcud bum pa sba ba'i cho ga
ས་བཅུད་འཛོམ་པོ	fertile [land]	sa bcud 'dzom po
ས་བཅུད་བཟང་པོ	rich, fertile	sa bcud bzang po
ས་བཅུད་སེར་པོ	sulfur	sa bcud ser po
ས་བཅུའི་ཁྱད་པར་བཅུ	chn	sa bcu'i khyad par bcu
ས་བཅུའི་འགྲེལ་མདོར་བསྡུས་བཅུ	chn	sa bcu'i 'grel mdor bsdus bcu
ས་བཅུའི་མཐར་སོན་རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཆེ	the ten bhumis and realize the great regency	sa bcu'i mthar son rgyal tshab che
ས་བཅུའི་བྱང་སེམས	bodhisattvas of the ten bhumis	sa bcu'i byang sems
ས་བཅུའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	master of the tenth bhumi, {dbang phyug} literally means rich with power; master of the tenth bhumi, {dbang phyug} literally means rich with power. the lords of the ten bhumis Syn great bodhisattva...	sa bcu'i dbang phyug
ས་བཅུའི་སེམས་པ	bodhisattva of the 10th bhumi	sa bcu'i sems pa
ས་ཆ	place, locale; land, soil, territory; place, level, location, land, soil, territory, property	sa cha
ས་ཆ་གཅོད	cede a territory	sa cha gcod
ས་ཆ་བཅད	ceded a territory	sa cha bcad
ས་ཆ་དོག	narrow place	sa cha dog
ས་ཆ་ནས་དབྱུང་བ	dislocate	sa cha nas dbyung ba
ས་ཆ་དམའ་བ	low place	sa cha dma' ba
ས་ཆ་ཡངས་པ	wide open country, a spacious place	sa cha yangs pa
ས་ཆགས་ཡུལ་འདྲིས	by having stayed in a region a long time mnga' che ba	sa chags yul 'dris
ས་ཆའི་ཆགས་ཚུགས	geography, geology	sa cha'i chags tshugs
ས་ཆའི་བདག་འཛིན	claiming land	sa cha'i bdag 'dzin
ས་ཆའི་བདག་འཛིན་བྱེད	claim land	sa cha'i bdag 'dzin byed
ས་ཆའི་འཛིན་མཁན	land owner/ holder	sa cha'i 'dzin mkhan
ས་ཆུ	earth and water, the natural environment	sa chu
ས་ཆུ་གཉིས་ཀར་གནས་མཁན	amphibian	sa chu gnyis kar gnas mkhan
ས་ཆུ་འཕྲོད	be a suitable environment	sa chu 'phrod
ས་ཆུ་འཕྲོད་པོ	environmentally/ climatically/ physically suitable	sa chu 'phrod po
ས་ཆུ་མ་འཕྲོད	to whom the place and water were not suitable	sa chu ma 'phrod
ས་ཆུ་མེ་རླུང་བཞི	earth, water, airs, and fire	sa chu me rlung bzhi
ས་ཆུ་ལ་ཐིམ་པ	earth dissolving in water	sa chu la thim pa
ས་ཆུ་ཤིང་སོགས	on the earth, in water, or in trees	sa chu shing sogs
ས་ཆུང་ཆུང་རྒྱབ་སྟེ་ཟ་བ	nibble	sa chung chung rgyab ste za ba
ས་ཆེན	high level of spirituality (8,9,10)	sa chen
ས་ཆེན་ཀུན་དགའ་སྙིང་པོ	1092-1158 Kunga Nyingpo, Sachen, one of the five founding lamas of the Sakya tradition	sa chen kun dga' snying po
ས་ཆེན་པོ	large place, whole earth, high degree	sa chen po
ས་ཆེན་པོ་པ	{sems kyi sa mang chen po} general factors; general factors. {sems kyi sa mang chen po}	sa chen po pa
ས་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་གནས་པ	who have reached the higher stages of awakening	sa chen po la gnas pa
ས་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	1 of the sa g.yo drug	sa chem chem
ས་ཆོག	ritual for the land; means taking hold of the site	sa chog
ས་ཆོད	amount of ground one can cover	sa chod
ས་ཆོད་ཆེན་པོ	certain risks	sa chod chen po
ས་ཆོད་པ	able/ having ability to to cross/ cover/ go through	sa chod pa
ས་མཆོག	1) sa rgyu bzang po; 2) white sandal wood	sa mchog
ས་མཆོག་མ	ocean	sa mchog ma
ས་མཆོག་ཙན་དན	white sandal wood	sa mchog tsan dan
ས་མཆོང་གནམ་མཆོང	not looking at the path leap as one likes	sa mchong gnam mchong
ས་མཆོད་མ	ocean	sa mchod ma
ས་འཆག་ཁུངས་མྱུལ	a demon	sa 'chag khungs myul
ས་འཆིང	lotus	sa 'ching
ས་འཇུ	for nomad tent rope joined to the earth	sa 'ju
ས་འཇོ	lightning, a hog	sa 'jo
ས་འཇོམས	hole digger, wild boar, wishfulfilling tree	sa 'joms
ས་རྗི་ག	medicinal herb and flower	sa rji ga
ས་རྗེན་པ	bare ground, uncovered ground	sa rjen pa
ས་ཉམས	1) sa bcud nyams pa; 2) layout of the region	sa nyams
ས་ཉལ	1) nyams tshod [test experiment], gzhan phyogs kyi sa nyal yod pa'i dogs gnas; 2) buffalo	sa nyal
ས་ཉིང་ཁུ	inner fluid of the earth	sa nying khu
ས་ཉིལ་ཆུ་ཤོར	earth eroding and water rushing elsewhere	sa nyil chu shor
ས་ཉུང་ཟད་ཅིག	1) small place; 2) sa nyung nyung spar gang spar do sogs	sa nyung zad cig
ས་ཉུལ	spy	sa nyul
ས་ཉོར	soft earth	sa nyor
ས་གཉན	1) sa bdag mi ma yin; 2) place of power where 'dre srin etc live	sa gnyan
ས་གཉིས་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བརྒྱད	TSE	sa gnyis pa'i yongs sbyong brgyad
ས་སྙིང	gold	sa snying
ས་སྙིང་འཁོར་ལོ་བདུན་གྱི་མདོ	Seven Wheels of Kshitigarbha Sutra	sa snying 'khor lo bdun gyi mdo
ས་སྙུག	chalk	sa snyug
ས་ཊི	samputra tantra	sa Ti
ས་ཏྲ	diploma, patent	sa tra
ས་གཏམ་པ	hill	sa gtam pa
ས་གཏིང་བརྟགས་ཐབས	geology	sa gting brtags thabs
ས་གཏེར	concealed treasures hidden in the earth, texts and objects rediscovered as continuing revelation, earth dharma treasures, earth terma, minerals, earth-treasure, earth treasures	sa gter
ས་གཏེར་སྔོག	mine/ extract minerals	sa gter sngog
ས་གཏེར་འདོན	mine/ extract minerals, rediscover a buried terma	sa gter 'don
ས་བཏིང	under the earth	sa bting
ས་རྟ	earth horse year	sa rta
ས་རྟ་པ	man born in the earth horse year	sa rta pa
ས་རྟ་མ	woman born in the earth horse year 2760	sa rta ma
ས་རྟགས	sign of earth	sa rtags
ས་རྟེན	1) land which is the basis of a tax; 2) the world	sa rten
ས་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing bodhicitta like the earth	sa lta bu'i sems bskyed
ས་ལྟེ་བཙུགས	take the earth as witness	sa lte btsugs
ས་སྟག	earth tiger year	sa stag
ས་སྟག་པ	man born in the earth tiger year	sa stag pa
ས་སྟག་མ	woman born in the earth tiger year	sa stag ma
ས་སྟན	rug, floor carpet, seat on the ground	sa stan
ས་སྟེང	surface of the earth, earth, floor	sa steng
ས་སྟེང་སྐྱོང་བ	ruled the land {chos kyi spyod pas sa steng skyong ba} protected the earth by acting according to the Dharma	sa steng skyong ba
ས་སྟེང་ཁྱབ	fill the land	sa steng khyab
ས་སྟེང་གི་མི	people on the earth	sa steng gi mi
ས་སྟེང་དུ	aground	sa steng du
ས་སྟེང་ན	in the world	sa steng na
ས་སྟེང་ན་གནས་པ	people/ places on the earth	sa steng na gnas pa
ས་སྟེང་ས	space above the surface of the earth sa steng lha mi'i 'jig rten kun snyan pa'i	sa steng sa
གྲགས་པས་ཁྱབ་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ	their fame spread throughout their realm and beyond, into the lands of men and gods	grags pas khyab par gyur to
ས་སྟོང	empty/ vacant/ waste land/ place/ lot, room for.., field, open country, margin, blank space	sa stong
ས་སྟོང་ཁྲུ་སློག	bring waste/ virgin land under cultivation	sa stong khru slog
ས་སྟོང་འཇོག	leave a margin/ blank space sa stong tha mal du dar gcig kyang ma lus	sa stong 'jog
ས་སྟོང་རི་སྟོང	desert place with mountains only	sa stong ri stong
ས་སྟོང་སློག་པ	work/ cultivate [waste/ virgin] soil	sa stong slog pa
ས་སྟོད	high/ upper land	sa stod
ས་སྟོན་པ	1 of 7 thams cad yod par smra ba	sa ston pa
ས་སྟོན་པའི་སྡེ	sa ston pa school	sa ston pa'i sde
ས་སྟོབས་མིག	a prince	sa stobs mig
ས་བརྟག་པ	earth examination	sa brtag pa
ས་བརྟོལ	wish-fulfilling tree	sa brtol
ས་ཐག་རིང་བ	very distant place	sa thag ring ba
ས་ཐང	plain	sa thang
ས་ཐམ	sa tham	sa tham
ས་ཐམས	hole in the ground	sa thams
ས་ཐར་མ	people/ cattle cured of earth disease [sa nad]	sa thar ma
ས་ཐལ	dust, a number	sa thal
ས་ཐི་ཨ་ལ་བེ	Saudi Arabia	sa thi a la be
ས་ཐིག	boundary/ demarcation line	sa thig
ས་ཐུལ	prepare the soil	sa thul
ས་ཐེ་འཛུགས་པ	sar ti 'dzugs pa	sa the 'dzugs pa
ས་ཐེལ་ནག་པ	a demon, deity of horpa tribe	sa thel nag pa
ས་ཐོག	[on the] ground/ earth	sa thog
ས་ཐོག་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན	overland commerce/ shipping	sa thog skyel 'dren
ས་ཐོག་འདི་ན་ཡོད་པ	alive on this earth	sa thog 'di na yod pa
ས་ཐོབ	find place {phyag 'tshal ba'i sa ma thob pa} found no place to bow down	sa thob
ས་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	a true bodhisattva	sa thob kyi byang chub sems dpa'
ས་ཐོབ་པ	attain a certain level	sa thob pa
ས་མཐའ	border region, gzhan yul; 3) final SA	sa mtha'
ས་མཐའི་ལུང་ཁྱོག	remote village	sa mtha'i lung khyog
ས་མཐར་འཁྱམས	traveled to the ends of the earth	sa mthar 'khyams
ས་མཐིལ	center of a place or most important part	sa mthil
ས་མཐོ	high place, highland, plateau	sa mtho
ས་མཐོ་ས	high place, highland, plateau	sa mtho sa
ས་མཐོངས	hole in the earth sa'i srubs kha che ba zhig	sa mthongs
ས་མཐོའི་རྫ་ཆབ	rocky highland spring	sa mtho'i rdza chab
ས་འཐེན	retreat	sa 'then
ས་དག	ni gnas pa zhes bya'i ???	sa dag
ས་དང་ཁང་པ	land and house	sa dang khang pa
ས་དང་པོ	novice's level, first stage of saintly perfection	sa dang po
ས་དང་པོ་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter the 1st bhumi	sa dang po la 'jug pa
ས་དང་པོའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བཅུ	TSE	sa dang po'i yongs sbyong bcu
ས་དམ	'jang sa / 'jang yul region	sa dam
ས་དུག	earth poison, evaporation?, poison of earth	sa dug
ས་དུལ་མ	tiller of the earth	sa dul ma
ས་དོ	half a load of earth, sackful of earth	sa do
ས་དོང	cellar; cellar, pit, hole in the ground; pit, hole in the ground; pit, hole in the ground, cellar	sa dong
ས་དོང་གཏིང་རིང་པོ	abyss	sa dong gting ring po
ས་དྲ	diploma, patent	sa dra
ས་དྲག	rjes 'jug ga nga ba ma'i rjes su 'jug pa'i yang 'jug	sa drag
ས་དྲི་ཨེ་སང	bon word for prajnaparamita	sa dri e sang
ས་དྲུག་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བཅུ་གཉིས	TSE	sa drug pa'i yongs sbyong bcu gnyis
ས་དྲེག	1) sa gzhi ba tshva can la chags pa'i tshi smug shig ge ba; 2) in the 1st kalpa sa zhag mngar po	sa dreg
ས་དྲོད	on the earth 'khor ba'i power of heat	sa drod
ས་གདན	carpet, seat on the ground	sa gdan
ས་བདག	demon, SA byi la, king, master, land owner, demons of naga class, god of the ground, earth lords, landlord, SA the se, 1 of sde brgyad, SA rtsang rtsang, class of spirits, landlord, lord of the kin...	sa bdag
ས་བདག་ཀླུ	non-human dwelling on earth	sa bdag klu
ས་བདག་ཀླུ་གཉན་བཅོས་པ	rites for reconciliation with the sa bdag klu & gnyan	sa bdag klu gnyan bcos pa
ས་བདག་ཁྱིམ	king's palace	sa bdag khyim
ས་བདག་འཁྲུགས་མདོས	thread cross/ ransom offering for conflict w sa bdag mi ma yin	sa bdag 'khrugs mdos
ས་བདག་གྲལ་རིམ	landlord class	sa bdag gral rim
ས་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོ	rulers; {bzang ba sa bdag rgyal po} eminent rulers	sa bdag rgyal po
ས་བདག་བཅོས་པ	hostile sa bdag's harm eliminating gto bcos byed pa	sa bdag bcos pa
ས་བདག་གཏད་དཀྲུག	'don byed/ dkrug byed ritual for oppressive obnoxious people	sa bdag gtad dkrug
ས་བདག་གཏོད་ཀྱི་སྤུར་མདོས	mdos of redemption from corpses caused by the sa bdag and the gtod	sa bdag gtod kyi spur mdos
ས་བདག་གདོན་འགྲོལ	liberating ritual for those afflicted by mdze nad etc caused by nagas/ dons 2761	sa bdag gdon 'grol
ས་བདག་སྨེ་བའི་གླིང་འགྲམས་བཅོས	rites to repair disturbances to the sa bdag in the seats of the sme ba	sa bdag sme ba'i gling 'grams bcos
ས་བདག་རིང་ལུགས	feudal system	sa bdag ring lugs
ས་བདག་བཤགས་འབུམ	liturgical text in verse addressed to the deities of the earth (sa bdag) for propitiation and atonement for transgressions	sa bdag bshags 'bum
ས་བདར	rasp, sandalwood	sa bdar
ས་བདུན	7 levels	sa bdun
ས་བདུན་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་ཉི་ཤུ	TSE	sa bdun pa'i yongs sbyong nyi shu
ས་མདའ	mousetrap, large trap, fabulous plant	sa mda'
ས་མདའ་ཆུ་སྒྲོ་མ	sharp pointed arrow	sa mda' chu sgro ma
ས་མདའ་བོན་དགོན	sa mda' bon Monastery	sa mda' bon dgon
ས་མདོག	khaki	sa mdog
ས་འདུལ	site of a building	sa 'dul
ས་འདེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	bulldozer	sa 'ded 'phrul 'khor
ས་འདོལ	soft earth mixed w sand	sa 'dol
ས་འདྲ་ཞིག	whoever	sa 'dra zhig
ས་འདྲེ་བ	mixed w the earth, wild animals/ deer	sa 'dre ba
ས་འདྲེས	adjoining	sa 'dres
ས་རྡུ	land slop, descent of a mass of earth	sa rdu
ས་རྡུལ	[fine] dust	sa rdul
ས་རྡེ	persistence	sa rde
ས་རྡོ	earth and rocks	sa rdo
ས་རྡོ་སྤུངས་པ	heaped earth and stones	sa rdo spungs pa
ས་རྡོ་རི་བྲག	earth, stones, mts and rocks	sa rdo ri brag
ས་རྡོག	lump of earth	sa rdog
ས་རྡོའི་བཅུད	extracting a precious ore from the rocks of the earth	sa rdo'i bcud
ས་ལྡན	hill, king, landholder	sa ldan
ས་ལྡེག	move shake	sa ldeg
ས་ལྡོག	metal	sa ldog
ས་སྡེ	a work	sa sde
ས་སྡེ་ལྔ	treatises on the five levels	sa sde lnga
ས་བརྡར་བ	gnash	sa brdar ba
ས་བརྡོ་སྤང	gelong rule not to dig the earth	sa brdo spang
ས་ནག་པོ	black earth, soil, place in tibet	sa nag po
ས་ནད	imbalance in earth, sa skyon, 'go nad tshabs chen for people/ cattle	sa nad
ས་ནས	from --	sa nas
ས་ནས་ཡར་འཐོན་པ	issue forth from the ground	sa nas yar 'thon pa
ས་ནོན་པ	{sa gnon pa} to master a spiritual level	sa non pa
ས་གནད	place cha gnad 'gag che [important?] sa	sa gnad
ས་གནད་ཆེ་བ	any important place free from bad spirits	sa gnad che ba
ས་གནས	local authorities, sacred kusha grass, district, region, country, landscape, local manifestation of energy, power place, species of bird, regional, local	sa gnas
ས་གནས་ཀྱི་གོ་སྐུལ་དབང་ཆ	decentralized power/ authority	sa gnas kyi go skul dbang cha
ས་གནས་ཀྱི་མན་ཚོགས	local masses	sa gnas kyi man tshogs
ས་གནས་རྒྱལ་གཉེར་ཁེ་ལས	locally administered state enterprise	sa gnas rgyal gnyer khe las
ས་གནས་དེ་གའི	local	sa gnas de ga'i
ས་གནས་དྲུང་ཆེ	local/ branch secretary	sa gnas drung che
ས་གནས་རྩད་གཅོད་པ	locate	sa gnas rtsad gcod pa
ས་གནས་གཞུང	regional government	sa gnas gzhung
ས་གནས་རང་སྐྱོང	regional autonomy	sa gnas rang skyong
ས་གནས་ལོ་རྒྱུས	ethnography, local history	sa gnas lo rgyus
ས་གནས་སྲིད་གཞུང	local regional government	sa gnas srid gzhung
ས་གནས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	local party committee	sa gnas u yon lhan khang
ས་གནོད་སྦྱིན	demi-god living in mountain caverns	sa gnod sbyin
ས་གནོན	earth-touching [mudra]	sa gnon
ས་གནོན་པ	invading a country, conquest	sa gnon pa
ས་གནོན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the earth-pressing / touching mudra	sa gnon phyag rgya
ས་རྣམ	place in tibet sa rnam pa drug tu g.yo ba - sa g.yo drug sa rnam pa drug tu g.yos pa - [TRS 104-2]	sa rnam
ས་རྣམས་ཀྱང་ཡུད་ཀྱིས་འཁོར་བ	saw the earth speed by sa rnams kyang rab tu g.yos - the earth itself moved sa rnams g.yo ba - the earth shook	sa rnams kyang yud kyis 'khor ba
ས་སྣ	guide	sa sna
ས་སྣ་ལྔ	soil of 5 different kinds	sa sna lnga
ས་སྣ་རུ	border	sa sna ru
ས་སྣུམ	petroleum [burning oil], kerosene	sa snum
ས་སྣུམ་འདོན་ས	oil field	sa snum 'don sa
ས་སྣུམ་པོ	place w snum mdangs [oily shine?]*	sa snum po
ས་སྣེའི་བརྫང་ཐོ	sa sne nas btang ba'i list of merchandise	sa sne'i brdzang tho
ས་སྣོད	earthen pot, a kind of jasmine	sa snod
ས་པ	one belonging to sakya, inhabitant of the earth	sa pa
ས་པ་ཀ	a great river of godaniya	sa pa ka
ས་པག	bricks * pha gu [wall? tiles? ]	sa pag
ས་པན	sakya pandita	sa pan
ས་པཎ་མཁས་འཇུག	Gateway to Knowledge by Sakya Pandita	sa paN mkhas 'jug
ས་པོན	germ	sa pon
ས་པྲ	prasena divination depending on earth	sa pra
ས་དཔྱད	discrimination of land, ascertaining the suitability of land	sa dpyad
ས་སྤུང	mound	sa spung
ས་སྤྱིན	gzugs brnyan and rdza ma etc. making soft sa tshi can	sa spyin
ས་སྤྱིལ	little cave/ earthen/ brick hut	sa spyil
ས་སྤྱོད	king, terrestrial realm	sa spyod
ས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་གནས་བརྒྱད	eight Earthly Abodes; among the {gnas chen nyi shu rtsa bzhi}	sa spyod kyi gnas brgyad
ས་སྤྱོད་པ	1) king; 2) devas of the pure fields	sa spyod pa
ས་སྤྱོད་མ	lady, queen	sa spyod ma
ས་སྤྱོད་མའི་གནས	place a queen lives	sa spyod ma'i gnas
ས་སྤྲེལ	Earth-Monkey year	sa sprel
ས་ཕག	brick	sa phag
ས་ཕག་པ	man born in the earth pig year	sa phag pa
ས་ཕག་མ	woman born in the earth pig year	sa phag ma
ས་ཕག་ལེབ་ལེབ	tile	sa phag leb leb
ས་ཕུ	bricks * pha gu [wall? tiles? ]	sa phu
ས་ཕུག	cave, hole, cavern	sa phug
ས་ཕུག་ཆུང་ངུ	cell, small cavern	sa phug chung ngu
ས་ཕུང	mound/ pile of earth	sa phung
ས་ཕུད	offering of stones or earth when a house is built	sa phud
ས་ཕུར་བུ	hill, mountain	sa phur bu
ས་ཕོ	earth male ..	sa pho
ས་ཕོང	bat, flitter-mouse	sa phong
ས་ཕྱོགས	place; area, location, land, a place; a place	sa phyogs
ས་ཕྱོགས་མི་རིགས་རིང་ལུགས	local nationalism	sa phyogs mi rigs ring lugs
ས་ཕྱོགས་རིང་ལུགས	localism	sa phyogs ring lugs
ས་ཕྱོགས་གཤིན་པ	rich country	sa phyogs gshin pa
ས་ཕྱོགས་སུ	in a land	sa phyogs su
ས་ཕྱོད	amount of ground 1 can cover	sa phyod
ས་ཕྲ་རབས་ཅན	matter, atom, earth	sa phra rabs can
ས་འཕང	sa'i rngams or dpags tshad measure	sa 'phang
ས་འཕོས་པ	1) move to a new living place; 2) sa lam rim pa 'phos pa	sa 'phos pa
ས་འཕོས་པ་ལས	by shifting states	sa 'phos pa las
ས་བ	cellar, level, bhumi, earth, soil	sa ba
ས་བ་ཀ	[Skt] river of the gods	sa ba ka
ས་བ་ཅུ་དབང་ཕྱུག	lord of the 10th bhumi	sa ba cu dbang phyug
ས་བ་དྲུག	16 levels GD	sa ba drug
ས་བ་ཚྭ་ཅན	salty/ alkaline soil	sa ba tshwa can
ས་བབ	shape of the earth	sa bab
ས་བབས	terrain, topography, geographical features	sa babs
ས་བུ་ལྕགས	the son of earth is metal	sa bu lcags
ས་བུག	hole	sa bug
ས་བུམ	vase of the power of the earth	sa bum
ས་བོགས	[income from] leased land	sa bogs
ས་བོན	seed; potential(ity); seed syllable	sa bon
ས་བོན་སྐྱེད	world, earth	sa bon skyed
ས་བོན་སྐྱེད་མ	earth "bringing forth seed"	sa bon skyed ma
ས་བོན་སྐྲན	seed swelling illness	sa bon skran
ས་བོན་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	fruit of a wishfulfilling tree	sa bon gyi grong khyer
ས་བོན་གྱིས་འཆི	death of a seed, stalk	sa bon gyis 'chi
ས་བོན་ལྔ	the five seeds	sa bon lnga
ས་བོན་ཅན	having seeds, alaya vijnana [R]	sa bon can
ས་བོན་ཉམས	fruitless	sa bon nyams
ས་བོན་བཏབ་པ	grain has been planted	sa bon btab pa
ས་བོན་སྟོབས	semen	sa bon stobs
ས་བོན་ཐམས་ཅད་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	sa bon thams cad kyi rten byed pas na sa bon thams cad pa'i rnam shes; Syn {kun gzhi'i rnam shes}	sa bon thams cad pa'i rnam shes
ས་བོན་ཐེབས	sow the seeds [of hell.]; sow the seeds [of hell.]	sa bon thebs
ས་བོན་ཐེབས་པ	to plant the seed	sa bon thebs pa
ས་བོན་འཐེབས་པ	seed having been strewn	sa bon 'thebs pa
ས་བོན་གདབ་པ	plant seeds, sow grain	sa bon gdab pa
ས་བོན་འདེབས	plant seeds, cultivate	sa bon 'debs
ས་བོན་འདེབས་འཁོར	seed planting machine	sa bon 'debs 'khor
ས་བོན་འདེབས་པ	sow, throw seed	sa bon 'debs pa
ས་བོན་འདེབས་པར	plant seeds	sa bon 'debs par
ས་བོན་ནམ་དུས་དཔྱིད་ལ་འདེབས	plant in spring	sa bon nam dus dpyid la 'debs
ས་བོན་སྤྲོ་བསྡུས་བསྐྱེད	visualize through the emanation and absorption of the seed syllable	sa bon spro bsdus bskyed
ས་བོན་ཕྱག་མཚན་སྐུ	seed syllable, the attribute and the bodily form	sa bon phyag mtshan sku
ས་བོན་མི་རུང	rotten seed	sa bon mi rung
ས་བོན་མྱུ་གུ	seed and sprout	sa bon myu gu
ས་བོན་སྨན་བསྲེས	insecticide treated seeds	sa bon sman bsres
ས་བོན་བཙུགས་པ	1 of zhing las	sa bon btsugs pa
ས་བོན་མཛོད	center of a lotus	sa bon mdzod
ས་བོན་འཛག་པ	1) ejaculate semen; 2) by grang ba'i nad emit semen	sa bon 'dzag pa
ས་བོན་རུལ་པ	putrid seeds	sa bon rul pa
ས་བོན་ལས་བྱུང	lineage, grown of the seed	sa bon las byung
ས་བོན་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན་བཅུ	the set of 10 downfalls seed etc.	sa bon sogs kyi sde tshan bcu
ས་བོན་གསོ	raise/ grow seedlings	sa bon gso
ས་བྱ	earth bird year	sa bya
ས་བྱ་པ	man born in the earth bird year	sa bya pa
ས་བྱ་མ	woman born in the earth bird year	sa bya ma
ས་བྱམ	left side of the body	sa byam
ས་བྱས་བརྒྱ་དང་བཅུ་གསུམ	chn	sa byas brgya dang bcu gsum
ས་བྱི	earth mouse year	sa byi
ས་བྱི་པ	man born in the earth mouse year	sa byi pa
ས་བྱི་མ	woman born in the earth mouse year	sa byi ma
ས་བྱུང	Mars	sa byung
ས་བྲུ་བ	unearth	sa bru ba
ས་བླ	1) above the earth, higher than/ not connected w earth; 2) space; 3) celestial/ god realms \	sa bla
ས་བླ་གནས་པ	{sa bla gnas pa}	sa bla gnas pa
ས་བླའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the celestial world[s]. 1) {'thab bral sogs bzhi}. 2) {gzugs khams bcu bdun} 3) {gzugs med}	sa bla'i 'jig rten
ས་བླའི་ལྷ	gods above the earth	sa bla'i lha
ས་དབང	king, ruler, governor of a place, a king	sa dbang
ས་དབྱིབས	shape of the place, terrain, topography	sa dbyibs
ས་དབྱིབས་ཆགས་ཚུལ	topography	sa dbyibs chags tshul
ས་དབྱིབས་ལས་བྱེད་པ	geo-morphological worker	sa dbyibs las byed pa
ས་དབྱིབས་ས་ཁྲལ	topographical map	sa dbyibs sa khral
ས་འབར་རྡོ་འབར	earth burns rocks burn	sa 'bar rdo 'bar
ས་འབུམ	earth house or stupa containing relics	sa 'bum
ས་འབུམ་མཆོད་རྟེན	stupa made of earth containing ashes of holy person	sa 'bum mchod rten
ས་འབུར	a place like a lump-like hill	sa 'bur
ས་འབུས་པ	1) earth opening up, pha ba dgo dgo skye bar nye skabs sa 'bur 'bur byas nas 'bus pa, by spring heat earth 2763 cracking; 2) [arch] bee's nest; 2) tshva sgo can	sa 'bus pa
ས་འབོ་འདུག	ground is verdant, the ground heaves	sa 'bo 'dug
ས་འབོལ	soft earth	sa 'bol
ས་འབྱེད	hoe	sa 'byed
ས་འབྲས	med tree	sa 'bras
ས་འབྲི	sa skya and 'bri khungs monasteries	sa 'bri
ས་འབྲི་ཀ་ཚལ	Sakya, {'bri gung}/ Drikung, ka, and tshal pa schools	sa 'bri ka tshal
ས་འབྲི་འཁྲུག་རྩོད	civil war in {sa 'bri}	sa 'bri 'khrug rtsod
ས་འབྲུག	earth dragon year	sa 'brug
ས་འབྲུག་པ	man born in the earth dragon year	sa 'brug pa
ས་འབྲུག་མ	woman born in the earth dragon year	sa 'brug ma
ས་འབྲུལ	earth snake year	sa 'brul
ས་འབྲུལ་པ	man born in the earth snake year	sa 'brul pa
ས་འབྲུལ་མ	woman born in the earth snake year	sa 'brul ma
ས་འབྲེལ	mutually connected things, adjacent, adjoining	sa 'brel
ས་རྦ་མ་ནི	serpent's gem	sa rba ma ni
ས་སྦས་གཏོང	bury	sa sbas gtong
ས་སྦས་གཏོང་བ	bury	sa sbas gtong ba
ས་སྦིར	earth moving/ shaking	sa sbir
ས་སྦུབས	sa shur khog stong, chu 'gro sa'i sa sbubs	sa sbubs
ས་སྦོལ	1) on a rock wall 'grems rgyu'i wet earth; 2) work/ cultivate [waste/ virgin] soil	sa sbol
ས་སྦོལ་རྒྱག་པ	work/ cultivate [waste/ virgin] soil	sa sbol rgyag pa
ས་སྦོལ་བའི་ཞིང་ཁ	cultivated field	sa sbol ba'i zhing kha
ས་སྦྱང	levels [of realization] on which to train	sa sbyang
ས་སྦྱང་བ	stages of cultivation, clearing the ground, to progress through the bhumis	sa sbyang ba
ས་སྦྱིན	gift of the earth	sa sbyin
ས་སྦྱུང་བ་གསུམ	CHN	sa sbyung ba gsum
ས་སྦྲུལ	earth-snake year	sa sbrul
ས་མ་ག་མ	man	sa ma ga ma
ས་མ་འགག	serious cattle disease mixed sa nad and 'gag nad	sa ma 'gag
ས་མ་རྡོ	1) mixed earth and rock; 2) kind of rock that is not hard	sa ma rdo
ས་མ་འབྲོག	semi-nomadic farmingpastoral life	sa ma 'brog
ས་མ་མེ	the mother of earth is fire	sa ma me
ས་མཱ་ཛ	Please come!	sa mA dza
ས་མ་ཡ	samaya, SA MA YA	sa ma ya
ས་མ་ཡ་རྒྱ	seal of commitment GD	sa ma ya rgya
ས་མ་ཡ་རྒྱ་རྒྱ་རྒྱ	samaya, seal, seal, seal	sa ma ya rgya rgya rgya
ས་མ་ལ	sanctuary in manyul	sa ma la
ས་མ་ཧྲིབ	dusk, darkness	sa ma hrib
ས་མང	bases} gods and human beings having the qualities of samadhi	sa mang
ས་མང་ལྔ	the five kinds of sa mang	sa mang lnga
ས་མན་ཏེ་གསུམ	3 different countries	sa man te gsum
ས་མལ	bare ground used as a bed, death bed	sa mal
ས་མི	spy	sa mi
ས་མི་ཆོད	not tread on the paths and bhumis sa mi g.yo ba - 1) stable ground; 2) 8th bhumi sa mi g.yo ba la sogs pa gsum - the three no earthquakes etc.	sa mi chod
ས་མི་སིམ་མི	drizzle [rain]	sa mi sim mi
ས་མི་གསོད	produced no unpleasantness	sa mi gsod
ས་མིག	1) sa'i 'gag mdo, sa gnad; 2) object of geomantic investigation	sa mig
ས་མིན	white sand	sa min
ས་མིན་རྡོ་མིན	neither earth nor stone, conglomerate	sa min rdo min
ས་མུ་ཙ་ཡ	a king	sa mu tsa ya
ས་མུག	building's wall after many years naturally dul 'gro ba	sa mug
ས་མེ	earth and fire, mine	sa me
ས་མེ་རྒྱག	mine	sa me rgyag
ས་མེད	cannot/ no opportunity, chance, possibility, occasion (to do something)	sa med
ས་མེད་མི་སེར	landless people	sa med mi ser
ས་མོ	earth female..	sa mo
ས་མོ་ཕག་ལོ	earth female pig year	sa mo phag lo
ས་མོས	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po, Utpala	sa mos
ས་མོས་ཚལ	group of lily plants	sa mos tshal
ས་མྱགས	1) sa myags earth med.; 2) in summer mud where water has pooled	sa myags
ས་མྱོས	1) wolf, jackal; 2) fox	sa myos
ས་དམའ་ས	low-lying land	sa dma' sa
ས་དམར	red earth	sa dmar
ས་དམར་འབོང	a small monastery	sa dmar 'bong
ས་དམིགས	1) sa'i 'gag mdo, sa gnad; 2) object of geomantic investigation	sa dmigs
ས་སྨན	mineral medicine like soda or salt or saltpeter or sulfur	sa sman
ས་སྨན་གཙོ་བོ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 principle earth meds CHN	sa sman gtso bo bcu gcig
ས་སྨུག	dark red earth used in medicine	sa smug
ས་སྨྱུག	1) chalk; 2)	sa smyug
སཱ་ཙ་ཚའི་བརྐོལ་ཕོར	a tsa-tsa mould	sA tsa tsha'i brkol phor
ས་ཙི	whitewash	sa tsi
ས་ཙིག	stage, post station	sa tsig
ས་གཙང	country free from contagious disease	sa gtsang
ས་གཙང་རྡོ་གཙང	pure earth pure rocks, something unadulterated	sa gtsang rdo gtsang
ས་བཙད	chapter, subject, division	sa btsad
ས་རྩ	crude	sa rtsa
ས་རྩི	solution/suspension of red/ white etc earth	sa rtsi
ས་རྩི་དཀར་པོ	{sa rtsi dkar po} rock med.	sa rtsi dkar po
ས་རྩིས	stage, post station	sa rtsis
ས་རྩིས་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱུད	bonpo work	sa rtsis yon tan rgyud
སཱ་ཚ	{tsa ba}; Sanskrit of {sen cha}. Syn stupa	sA tsha
ས་ཚན	thickness of the ground	sa tshan
ས་ཚི་ཅན	soft sticky earth, clay	sa tshi can
ས་ཚིག	heat/ drought	sa tshig
ས་ཚིགས	station, stop, journey; journey, station, stop; geography	sa tshigs
ས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ	among Tibetan govt phyi khral, people and things transporting obligation	sa tshigs kyi khral
ས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཆ	Tibetan govt sa tshigs la 'khri ba'i khral	sa tshigs kyi sgrub cha
ས་ཚིགས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་དབུས	a geographically central region; the central region in terms of geography sa tshigs dang chos tshigs gnyis ka'i yul	sa tshigs kyi yul dbus
ས་ཚིགས་མི་ཧྲེང	sa rgyus byed mkhan at individual stops on the road placed solitary person	sa tshigs mi hreng
ས་ཚུགས	place of one day's halt, SA bab mal	sa tshugs
ས་ཚུབ	sa nas langs pa'i dust and rlung tshab tshub	sa tshub
ས་ཚུར	sa mtshur	sa tshur
ས་ཚོད་ལམ་ཚོད	definitions of the paths and bhumis	sa tshod lam tshod
ས་ཚོན	earth pigment	sa tshon
ས་ཚོན་བཙག་དམར	red earth	sa tshon btsag dmar
ས་ཚོས	earth pigment 2764	sa tshos
ས་མཚམས	1) borders of a place, boundary line; 2) stages [of the paths and bhumis], dividing point, landmark, threshold	sa mtshams
ས་མཚམས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་འཛུགས	stone boundary marker	sa mtshams kyi rdo 'dzugs
ས་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ཚད་ཐིག	demarcation	sa mtshams kyi tshad thig
ས་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ས་ཆ	borderland	sa mtshams kyi sa cha
ས་མཚམས་འགྱེད	delimit a border/ boundary	sa mtshams 'gyed
ས་མཚམས་བརྒལ	cross a border	sa mtshams brgal
ས་མཚམས་གཅོད་པའི་ལམ་ལྔ	CHN	sa mtshams gcod pa'i lam lnga
ས་མཚམས་ཚུན་ལ	this side of the boundary	sa mtshams tshun la
ས་མཚུར	tshos dang tshos gdan byed rgyu'i sa sa mtsho gnas gsum gyi dmag dpung army navy and air force	sa mtshur
ས་འཚམས	confines	sa 'tshams
ས་འཚོ	SA dgang gzar shing, sa skyong	sa 'tsho
ས་འཚོ་འདབ	SA be ta'i shing coconut	sa 'tsho 'dab
ས་འཚོ་མ	wife of buddha	sa 'tsho ma
ས་འཚོག་སྐྱེས	elephant of indra	sa 'tshog skyes
ས་འཚོའི་བུ་མོ	lotus, a medicinal plant	sa 'tsho'i bu mo
ས་འཛིན	embracer of the earth	sa 'dzin
ས་འཛིན་དཀར་པོ	white mountain, snowy mountain	sa 'dzin dkar po
ས་འཛིན་སྐྱེས	an insect	sa 'dzin skyes
ས་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of 4 guardian kings	sa 'dzin rgyal po
ས་འཛིན་འཇོམས	Vishnu	sa 'dzin 'joms
ས་འཛིན་པ	1) kind of zlos gar mkhan; 2) graceful w beautiful clothing/ ornaments; 3) place's tax collector; 4) sa gnas gzhan la rgyang phud btang ba'i mi	sa 'dzin pa
ས་འཛིན་དབང་པོ	sumeru	sa 'dzin dbang po
ས་འཛིན་མ	2nd wife	sa 'dzin ma
ས་འཛིན་ཟ་ཕ	taxpayer's landlord	sa 'dzin za pha
ས་རྫི་ཀ	soda	sa rdzi ka
ས་ཞྭ	Sakya hat - cap	sa zhwa
ས་ཞག	1) a soft earth; 2) food of the 1st kalpa; 3) mud where water has pooled	sa zhag
ས་ཞིང	land, soil, territory; farmland, field; farmland, field, land, soil, territory	sa zhing
ས་ཞིང་སྒེར་ཡོད་ལམ་ལུགས	system of private ownership of fields/ land	sa zhing sger yod lam lugs
ས་ཞིང་སྒེར་ལ་དབང་བ	privately owned field/ land	sa zhing sger la dbang ba
ས་ཞིང་བཅོས་སྒྱུར	land reform	sa zhing bcos sgyur
ས་ཞིང་འདེབས་པ	do farm work, till land, cultivate	sa zhing 'debs pa
ས་ཞིང་སྤྱི་ཡོད་ལམ་ལུགས	system of public ownership of fields/ land	sa zhing spyi yod lam lugs
ས་ཞིང་སྤྱི་ལ་དབང་བ	publicly/ commonly owned field	sa zhing spyi la dbang ba
ས་ཞིང་དབང་ལུགས	system of ownership of fields/ land	sa zhing dbang lugs
ས་ཞིང་ལམ་ལུགས	system of ownership of fields/ land	sa zhing lam lugs
ས་ཞིང་གསར་བརྗེ	agrarian revolution	sa zhing gsar brje
ས་ཞིབ	1) sa rgyu zhib mo; 2) sa cha la zhib 'jug byed pa	sa zhib
ས་ཞུ	kerosene lamp	sa zhu
ས་གཞན་གྱི་བསྡུས་པ	included within the former state	sa gzhan gyi bsdus pa
ས་གཞི	earth; foundation, ground; foundation of the earth, vast ground, soil	sa gzhi
ས་གཞི་སྐྱོང	king sa gzhi dga' zhing rgod pa'i tshul gyis	sa gzhi skyong
གྱེན་དུ་བསྐྱོད་པ་ལྟར་མཛེས་པ	the earth itself moved to and from as if swept up in the festivities	gyen du bskyod pa ltar mdzes pa
ས་གཞི་ངན་པ	sandy desert, bleak tract, bad soil, sterile ground	sa gzhi ngan pa
ས་གཞི་ཆེན་པོ	the earth	sa gzhi chen po
ས་གཞི་འཆང	mt	sa gzhi 'chang
ས་གཞི་འདི	this place	sa gzhi 'di
ས་གཞི་སྤོས་བྱུགས	Land Sprinkled with Incense, abbreviated form of mandala offering	sa gzhi spos byugs
ས་གཞི་བྱིན་རླབས་བྱེད་པ	to perform the consecration of the ground	sa gzhi byin rlabs byed pa
ས་གཞི་འབད་པ	cultivate the ground	sa gzhi 'bad pa
ས་གཞི་མ	woman	sa gzhi ma
ས་གཞི་མ་དག་པ	TSE	sa gzhi ma dag pa
ས་གཞི་མི་རིག་གི་ལྷ	earth gods	sa gzhi mi rig gi lha
ས་གཞི་འཛིན	support of the earth, king, mountain	sa gzhi 'dzin
ས་གཞི་བཟང་པོ	good soil, fertile earth	sa gzhi bzang po
ས་གཞི་ཡོད་མཁན	landed	sa gzhi yod mkhan
ས་གཞི་ལ་བརྟེན	touching the ground	sa gzhi la brten
ས་གཞི་ལས་བྱུང	Mars	sa gzhi las byung
ས་གཞི་ལྷ་མོ	{sa gzhi lha mo sa gzhi lha mo zhes zer ba'i glu} the song that begins, "Earth goddess, earth goddess...,"	sa gzhi lha mo
ས་གཞིའི་མདངས	1) lower p[art of a thangka meadow/ malachite color; 2) yul lung color	sa gzhi'i mdangs
ས་གཞིའི་འོག	under the earth	sa gzhi'i 'og
ས་གཞིའི་རིག་པ	geology	sa gzhi'i rig pa
ས་གཞིར	afield, to the ground	sa gzhir
ས་གཞིར་སྟོངས་པ	level with the ground, raze, demolish entirely	sa gzhir stongs pa
ས་གཞིར་སླེབས	reached the ground	sa gzhir slebs
ས་གཞུང	local government	sa gzhung
ས་གཞོང	1) sgra rtsis kyi sa ris 'bri sa; 2)	sa gzhong
ཏྲོཨུགྷ	like shape	trough
ས་བཞི་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་བཅུ	TSE	sa bzhi pa'i yongs sbyong bcu
ས་བཞུ	kerosene [pressure] [lamp]	sa bzhu
ས་ཟད	digging into rock, means exhausted	sa zad
ས་ཟད་རྡོ་ཐུག	digging into rock, means exhausted	sa zad rdo thug
ས་ཟིན་པ	{sa 'dzin pa} to provide the basis (for)	sa zin pa
ས་ཟླ	the fourth month	sa zla
ས་ཟླའི་བཅོ་ལྔ	sa ga month 15th day	sa zla'i bco lnga
ས་ཟླའི་ལྷུན་པོ	golden mountain	sa zla'i lhun po
ས་གཟུང	taking the ground	sa gzung
ས་གཟུང་བ	taking the ground	sa gzung ba
ས་བཟང	1) good place; 2) kshatriya caste; 3) place where lotsawa bamati panchen stayed	sa bzang
ས་བཟང་པོ	kind of fragrant earth	sa bzang po
ས་བཟང་བ	a healthy place [not giving diseases]	sa bzang ba
ས་འུར་འུར	1 of the sa g.yo drug 2765	sa 'ur 'ur
ས་འོག	1) [nagas who live] underground; 2) A kind of fine multi-colored brocade; 3) subway	sa 'og
ས་འོག་ཀླུའི་ཡུལ	the land of the nagas under the earth	sa 'og klu'i yul
ས་འོག་ཀླུའི་སྲིད་པ	The nether world of the nagas	sa 'og klu'i srid pa
ས་འོག་གི་དངོས	SA dngos grub, power of passing through solid objects	sa 'og gi dngos
ས་འོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	underground [treasure] siddhi	sa 'og gi dngos grub
ས་འོག་གི་ཆུ	underground water	sa 'og gi chu
ས་འོག་གི་ཆུ་ལམ	underground drain/ sewer/ water passage	sa 'og gi chu lam
ས་འོག་གི་གཏེར	treasure underground	sa 'og gi gter
ས་འོག་གི་གཏེར་གཅིག	unique buried treasure sa 'og gi gter mthong ba'i dngos grub siddhi of seeing treasures under the ground	sa 'og gi gter gcig
ས་འོག་གི་གནས་བརྒྱད	underground abodes, Skt. bhugarbha	sa 'og gi gnas brgyad
ས་འོག་སྒོམ་ཆེན	marmot	sa 'og sgom chen
ས་འོག་ཆུ་འགྲོ	underground river sa 'og dar 'thag lkog gyo ngan gshom	sa 'og chu 'gro
མམ་དྲན་འཕྲུལ	bad person dpung bsdebs kyis sa 'og dar 'thag byed pa	mam dran 'phrul
ས་འོག་འདམ་ལངས	underground mire/ filth being brought above the earth, hidden fault being revealed	sa 'og 'dam langs
ས་འོག་སྡེ	naga demigods occupying the nether region	sa 'og sde
ས་འོག་ནས་ཐོན་པའི་རིག་རྫས	unearthed relics	sa 'og nas thon pa'i rig rdzas
ས་འོག་གནས	asura	sa 'og gnas
ས་འོག་པ	subterranean	sa 'og pa
ས་འོག་སྤྱོད	subject to earth	sa 'og spyod
ས་འོག་ཕྲེང་བ	sulfate of arsenic	sa 'og phreng ba
ས་འོག་འཕྲེང་བ	{ba bla} med. herb	sa 'og 'phreng ba
ས་འོག་འབར་མདེལ	mine	sa 'og 'bar mdel
ས་འོག་མ	subterrainians, subterranean worlds	sa 'og ma
ས་འོག་ཚ་ཁུང	burrow	sa 'og tsha khung
ས་འོག་ཚང	burrow	sa 'og tshang
ས་འོག་ཚུད	trapped under the ground	sa 'og tshud
ས་འོག་རིམ་པ་དགུ	the 9 subterranean realms	sa 'og rim pa dgu
ས་འོག་རིམ་པ་དགུའི་ས་བདག	earth lord of the 9 subterranean realms	sa 'og rim pa dgu'i sa bdag
ས་འོག་ལམ	tunnel	sa 'og lam
ས་འོག་ས་དཀྱིལ་གྱི་གནས་སུ་ཆགས	formed in the center of the earth, below the ground	sa 'og sa dkyil gyi gnas su chags
ས་འོབས	trench, ditch, gutter	sa 'obs
ས་འོབས་ཁ་སྤྱོད	approach trench [military]	sa 'obs kha spyod
ས་ཡ	1,000,000	sa ya
ས་ཡ་གཅིག	one million	sa ya gcig
ས་ཡ་ཕྲག་དགུ	nine million	sa ya phrag dgu
ས་ཡ་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད	eight million	sa ya phrag brgyad
ས་ཡ་ཕྲག་བདུན	7 million	sa ya phrag bdun
ས་ཡང་རབ་ཏུ་འདར་རོ	at which point the earth shook	sa yang rab tu 'dar ro
ས་ཡངས	broad/ open country	sa yangs
ས་ཡངས་པ	wide open country	sa yangs pa
ས་ཡབ	sovereign	sa yab
ས་ཡི་ཀ་བ	pillar of earth	sa yi ka ba
ས་ཡི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	sphere of earth	sa yi dkyil 'khor
ས་ཡི་སྐུ	the form of the earth element	sa yi sku
ས་ཡི་ཁམས	earth element	sa yi khams
ས་ཡི་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	king	sa yi brgya byin
ས་ཡི་ཆ	land	sa yi cha
ས་ཡི་ཆོ་ག	{sa chog} earth breaking ritual; consecration of locale	sa yi cho ga
ས་ཡི་མཇུག་མ	monkey	sa yi mjug ma
ས་ཡི་སྙིང་པོ	the bodhisattva Kshitigarbha, the Essence of Earth. [In the bardo {zhi khro} his consort is {lAs-ye}; (white/southeast)	sa yi snying po
ས་ཡི་རྟེན	spleen, SA dbang rten lnga	sa yi rten
ས་ཡི་ལྟེ་བ	any important place free from bad spirits	sa yi lte ba
ས་ཡི་སྟེང	on the earth [one of the three worlds]	sa yi steng
ས་ཡི་ཐིག་ལེ	ruler	sa yi thig le
ས་ཡི་ཐིག་ལེ་འཛིན	king	sa yi thig le 'dzin
ས་ཡི་དུས	period of earth	sa yi dus
ས་ཡི་གདུ་པ	blue water lily	sa yi gdu pa
ས་ཡི་གདུ་བུ	utpala lotus flower	sa yi gdu bu
ས་ཡི་མདོག	1) earth color, light yellow; 2) a wild [hoofed] animal	sa yi mdog
ས་ཡི་འདབ	dur ba grass	sa yi 'dab
ས་ཡི་རྣ་བ	mt	sa yi rna ba
ས་ཡི་རྣ་ཝ	epithet of karna	sa yi rna wa
ས་ཡི་ཕུར་བུ	mt	sa yi phur bu
ས་ཡི་འཕུང་བྱེད་ནག་མོ	a female monster	sa yi 'phung byed nag mo
ས་ཡི་བྱི་ལམ	a demon	sa yi byi lam
ས་ཡི་དབང་ཕྱུག	1) king and minister; 2) 1st mgo month	sa yi dbang phyug
ས་ཡི་མེ་ཏོག	yellow sulfur	sa yi me tog
ས་ཡི་ཙན་དན	red sandalwood	sa yi tsan dan
ས་ཡི་ཙི་ཙི	field shrew	sa yi tsi tsi
ས་ཡི་ཚངས་པ	king	sa yi tshangs pa
ས་ཡི་ཛམ་བུ་ཀ	betel plant	sa yi dzam bu ka
ས་ཡི་ཟླ་བ	gold sa yi g.yag rgod - wild yak of the ground, a snake	sa yi zla ba
ས་ཡི་ལས་བྱེད	potter	sa yi las byed
ས་ཡི་སང་ག	an indian king	sa yi sang ga
ས་ཡི་ལྷ	earth god, a brahmana	sa yi lha
ས་ཡི་ལྷ་མོ	goddess living on the earth, bstan ma	sa yi lha mo
ས་ཡི་ལྷ་མོ་བསྟན་མ	goddess who keeps certain demons under terror	sa yi lha mo bstan ma
ས་ཡིག	signature	sa yig
ས་ཡིག་འགོད	sign	sa yig 'god
ས་ཡིག་རྒྱག	sign	sa yig rgyag
ས་ཡུལ	property	sa yul
ས་ཡུལ་བཤད་པ	topography	sa yul bshad pa
ས་ཡོམ	earthquake, shaking of the earth	sa yom
ས་ཡོམ་རྒྱག	have an earthquake	sa yom rgyag
ས་ཡོམ་བརྟག་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་ཆས	seismograph	sa yom brtag byed 'phrul chas
ས་ཡོམ་ཡོམ	earthquake, shaking of the earth sa 'gul	sa yom yom
ས་ཡོམ་རིག་པ	seismology	sa yom rig pa
ས་ཡོས	earth rabbit year	sa yos
ས་ཡོས་པ	man born in the earth rabbit year	sa yos pa
ས་ཡོས་མ	woman born in the earth rabbit year sa g.yo - [have an] earthquake sa g.yo - earthquake sa g.yo bco brgyad - the 18 kinds of earthquakes sa g.yo drug - the six kinds of earthquakes/ motions of the ...	sa yos ma
ས་ར	[Skt] ocean	sa ra
ས་ར་ན	son of 'char ka	sa ra na
ས་ར་ལ	a tree	sa ra la
ས་ར་སོ་རི	coarse grained and fine grained mixed up together	sa ra so ri
ས་ར་ཧ	Saraha	sa ra ha
ས་ར་ཧ་པ	indian saint sa ra ha pa mda' mkhan kyi tshul du yod	sa ra ha pa
ས་ར་ཧས་ཀྱང	as Saraha says:	sa ra has kyang
ས་རགས	earth embankment/ ditch/ dike	sa rags
ས་རང	[Skt] knife	sa rang
ས་རང་བཞིན་དུ་གནས་པ	holding one's usual rank [not having been demoted]	sa rang bzhin du gnas pa
ས་རང་བཞིན་པ	holding one's usual rank [within a monastic community]	sa rang bzhin pa
ས་རང་བཞིན་རན	w a nature that	sa rang bzhin ran
ས་རང་རོང	uneven earth w ridges/ravines	sa rang rong
ས་རབ	very soft/ good/ fertile field/ earth	sa rab
ས་རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ	Joyous Bhumi. The first of ten bodhisattva stages; liberation from samsara and realization of the truth of reality	sa rab tu dga' ba
ས་རམ་རྩི	a green zangs rtsi herb	sa ram rtsi
ས་རི	one of the {rgyu skar nya shu rtsa brgyad} 20 nakshatras gods of the constellations	sa ri
ས་རི་ཆད་དུམ	geologic fault	sa ri chad dum
ས་རི་ཏ	stream, river	sa ri ta
ས་རི་ཛ་ཏི	[Skt] Indra's jewel	sa ri dza ti
ས་རིག	geography	sa rig
ས་རིག་པ	king, earthly	sa rig pa
ས་རིགས	1) Tibetan govt drung 'khor gyis gzhung sa'i zhi drag zhabs 'degs sgrub rten pha gzhis kyi sa cha; 2) region where field work is done	sa rigs
ས་རིམ	route stages, taking corvee labor from villages in turn	sa rim
ས་རིམ་པ་དགུ	9 strata underground	sa rim pa dgu
ས་རིམ་སྲབ་མོ	thin grade of soil	sa rim srab mo
ས་རིས	arithmetic. arithmetical calculations traced in sand, which are then easily erased	sa ris
ས་རིས་ཐང་གསལ	skad cha gang 'dra zhig shod min la not depending on, one's own actions mngon gsal du yod pa'i dpe	sa ris thang gsal
ས་རུད	earth eroding/ falling away, landslide	sa rud
ས་རུད་རྒྱག	have a landslide	sa rud rgyag
ས་རུབ	1) become night/ dark, sa srib khyi'i dus su slebs pa; 2) sunset	sa rub
ས་རུབ་ཡོང་བའི་དུས	dusk	sa rub yong ba'i dus
ས་རུས	1) nature of the earth/ soil; 2) the family of earth	sa rus
ས་རེ་སོ་རེ	sigh	sa re so re
ས་རེག	gentleman, vaicya caste	sa reg
ས་རེག་གི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the earth-touching seal/mudra GD	sa reg gi phyag rgya
ས་རེང་ལྡན	epithet of vishnu	sa reng ldan
ས་རེངས	1) having broken hard earth, field 'debs mi nyan pa'i place; 2) Vishnu	sa rengs
ས་རོ	unneeded earth and refuse	sa ro
ས་རོ་དུ་ཧ	indian saint	sa ro du ha
ས་རོ་རྡོ་རོ	earth and rock debris	sa ro rdo ro
ས་རོང	rough ground of a bad road	sa rong
ས་རླངས	exhalations, vapors of earth	sa rlangs
ས་རླུང	prana of earth in spleen which stabilizes, is yellow and gives a feeling of heaviness	sa rlung
ས་རླུང་དུས་སུ	in the period of the prana of earth (1-3pm, 1-3am)	sa rlung dus su
ས་རློག	pig	sa rlog
ས་རློག་རྒྱག	reclaim land	sa rlog rgyag
ས་རློག་པ	reduce to powder	sa rlog pa
ས་རློན	sa bzha' tshan can	sa rlon
ས་ལ	1) sala tree; 2) on the ground; 3) on the bhumi[s]; 4) trees plants; 5) to the place/ in the presence of	sa la
ས་ལ་ཀི་ས	flower of sal tree	sa la ki sa
ས་ལ་རྐང་ལག་བཙུགས་ཏེ་ཕྱིན་པ	crawl	sa la rkang lag btsugs te phyin pa
ས་ལ་སྐྱེས	earth-born, tree, mars	sa la skyes
ས་ལ་ཁ་བུབ་ཏུ་འགྱེལ་བ	fall forward	sa la kha bub tu 'gyel ba
ས་ལ་འཁྱག་ཕྲན་བུ་སླེབས	sa gzhi sdom byed 'khyag mdangs cung zad slebs pa	sa la 'khyag phran bu slebs
ས་ལ་འཁྱོག	snake	sa la 'khyog
ས་ལ་འཁྲིས་པའི་ཁྲལ	tax on land	sa la 'khris pa'i khral
ས་ལ་འགྱེལ	tumbled on the ground	sa la 'gyel
ས་ལ་འགྱེལ་བ	faint	sa la 'gyel ba
ས་ལ་འགྲེ་བ	roll on the ground	sa la 'gre ba
ས་ལ་སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས	peacock	sa la sgra sgrogs
སཱ་ལ་ཅན	Sala tree	sA la can
ས་ལཱ་ཆེན་པོའི་ས་བོན	Seed of the Great Sal Tree. Text by Jamgön Kongtrül on sadhana practice	sa lA chen po'i sa bon
ས་ལ་གཏོར་བ	scatter on the ground	sa la gtor ba
ས་ལ་དྲོད་བབས	when the earth warms up	sa la drod babs
ས་ལ་འདྲུད་པ	drag	sa la 'drud pa
ས་ལ་གནས	1) kusha grass; 2) dwell on the bhumis	sa la gnas
ས་ལ་གནས་པ	to abide on the bhumis	sa la gnas pa
ས་ལ་གནས་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	vidyadhara established in the stages/bhumis	sa la gnas pa'i rig 'dzin
ས་ལ་འཕར་བ	fidget, be restless	sa la 'phar ba
ས་ལ་འཕྱེ	snake	sa la 'phye
ས་ལ་འཕྱོ	snake	sa la 'phyo
ས་ལ་བབས་ཟིན་པ	landed	sa la babs zin pa
ས་ལ་འབྱར་སྡོད	bend over	sa la 'byar sdod
ས་ལ་འབྱར་སྡོད་པ	lie on one's stomach	sa la 'byar sdod pa
ས་ལ་མ་རྨོས་པའི་འབྲུ་སྨིན	the fruit of the earth grew and ripened without need for ploughing	sa la ma rmos pa'i 'bru smin
ས་ལ་གཙུགས་པ	put in the ground	sa la gtsugs pa
ས་ལ་འཛུལ་དགུ	1) {phyi ba}. 2) {grum pa} 3) {sbre} 4) {sre mong} 5) {bra ba} 6) {phyi ba} 7) {se lo} 8) {tis lo} 9) {rmig bu}	sa la 'dzul dgu
ས་ལ་རབ་བརྟན	elephant that is Indra's mount	sa la rab brtan
ས་ལ་ལེགས་དྲུག	Six Sala Lek	sa la legs drug
ས་ལ་ལྷུང	fell to the earth	sa la lhung
ས་ལམ	Paths and bhumis. The five paths and the ten bodhisattva levels	sa lam
ས་ལམ་བགྲོད་པ	traverse the paths and stages	sa lam bgrod pa
ས་ལམ་སྦྱུངས	train in the paths and bhumis/ levels	sa lam sbyungs
ས་ལམ་སྦྱོངས	Train in the paths and levels	sa lam sbyongs
ས་ལམ་མ་ཕྱིན	Won't result in progress along the paths and stages	sa lam ma phyin
ས་ལའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of Sala trees	sa la'i rgyal po
སཱ་ལའི་མཆོག་དབང	the great Sala tree	sA la'i mchog dbang
ས་ལའི་ལྗོན་པ	spos dkar tree	sa la'i ljon pa
ས་ལའི་ཚལ	TSE	sa la'i tshal
ས་ལས	work w earth, rocks, clay etc 2767	sa las
ས་ལས་རྡོ་ལས	work w earth and rocks, bricklaying, masonry	sa las rdo las
ས་ལས་བྱུང	Mars	sa las byung
ས་ལས་འབྱུང	earth-grown, mars, tree	sa las 'byung
ས་ལི་ཀ	[Skt] sa li ka bird	sa li ka
ས་ལིམ	an indian king	sa lim
ས་ལུ	wild rice, salu rice, indian rice	sa lu
ས་ལུ་འཇམ་པོ	kind of grain for making chang	sa lu 'jam po
ས་ལུ་ལྗང་པ	1) salu sprout/ stalk; 2) kind of flower	sa lu ljang pa
ས་ལུ་ལྗང་པའི་མདོ	'phags pa sa lu'i ljang pa zhes bya ba	sa lu ljang pa'i mdo
ས་ལུ་ལྗང་བའི་མདོ	Salu Tree Sutra; Salu Sprout Sutra	sa lu ljang ba'i mdo
ས་ལུག	earth sheep year	sa lug
ས་ལུག་པ	man born in the earth sheep year	sa lug pa
ས་ལུག་མ	woman born in the earth sheep year	sa lug ma
ས་ལུགས	sa[kya] tradition	sa lugs
ས་ལུགས་ཀུན་རིག	the sa skya pa tradition for the practice of the sarvadurgatiparishodhana tantra	sa lugs kun rig
ས་ལུད	po tho and 'dam sogs las byung ba'i lud, silt/ mud etc as fertilizer	sa lud
ས་ལུད་ཉལ	elephant	sa lud nyal
སཱ་ལུའི་ལྗང་པའི་མདོ	Salistamba-sutra, Rice Seedling Sutra; Salistamba-sutra; Rice Seedling Sutra	sA lu'i ljang pa'i mdo
ས་ལུས	musk deer	sa lus
ས་ལེ	nyi ma bzhin + - brilliant as the sun	sa le
ས་ལེ་བ	vividness	sa le ba
ས་ལེ་སྦྲམ	fine gold	sa le sbram
ས་ལེ་གཟིགས་པ	{ci yang sa le gzigs pa} you who see everything with perfect clarity	sa le gzigs pa
ས་ལེ་འོད	{bu mo sa le 'od} the girl Saleh Ö, Brilliant Light; disciple of Jetsün Milarepa	sa le 'od
ས་ལེ་ཧྲིག་གེ་བ	vividly clear and alertly awake, nakedly arising luminosity/ emptiness	sa le hrig ge ba
ས་ལེབ	shallow	sa leb
ས་ལེར	everything, clearly	sa ler
ས་ལེར་མཁྱེན	total clarity of knowledge	sa ler mkhyen
ས་ལེར་གཟིགས་པ	clearly see everything	sa ler gzigs pa
ས་ཤས	inertia	sa shas
ས་ཤིང་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin gyi sa zhing dbang ba'i lam lugs bcos bsgyur byed pa'i las 'gul la zer, rang rgyal gyi sa zhing bcos bsgyur gyi las 'gul ni krung go gung khran tang gi 'go khrid 'og zhing pa ...	sa shing bcos bsgyur
ས་ཤིང་ལས་གརབ༹	earth and wood work work place/large project	sa shing las grva
ས་ཤུན	the earth's crust	sa shun
ས་ཤུར	ditch, trench	sa shur
ས་གཤལ	tour, inspection	sa gshal
ས་གཤིན་པོ	fertile/ rich soil	sa gshin po
ས་གཤིས	nature/ qualities of earth, geology	sa gshis
ས་གཤིས་ཀྱི་ཆགས་ཚུལ	geological features/ structure	sa gshis kyi chags tshul
ས་གཤིས་ཀྱི་ཆགས་ལོ	geological time	sa gshis kyi chags lo
ས་གཤིས་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	geological structure or features	sa gshis kyi gnas tshul
ས་གཤིས་བརྟག་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས	geological survey office	sa gshis brtag zhib las khungs
ས་གཤིས་ཐིག་ལེན	geological survey	sa gshis thig len
ས་གཤིས་རིག་པ	geology	sa gshis rig pa
ས་གཤིས་རིག་པ་མཁས་པ	geologist	sa gshis rig pa mkhas pa
ས་གཤིས་སློབ་གྲྭ	geological institute	sa gshis slob grwa
ས་གཤེན་པ	vigour of land, fertile land	sa gshen pa
ས་གཤོང	geological basin	sa gshong
ས་བཤད་རྡོ་བཤད	explain the earth, explain the rocks	sa bshad rdo bshad
ས་སད་ནས	ones awareness having awaken	sa sad nas
ས་སམ	crossing of roads	sa sam
ས་སེར་པོ་གྲུ་བཞི	yellow square of [symbolizing] earth	sa ser po gru bzhi
ས་སོབ་སོབ་བཟོ་པ	loosen soil with a hoe	sa sob sob bzo pa
ས་སྲིན་ཏ་ལ	'bu ta la	sa srin ta la
ས་སྲིབ	toward evening, at dusk	sa srib
ས་སྲིབ་མཚམས	at dusk	sa srib mtshams
ས་སྲུང	tree	sa srung
ས་སྲུང་གི་བུ	elephant that is Indra's mount	sa srung gi bu
ས་སྲུང་བ	border policeman	sa srung ba
ས་སྲུང་བུ	elephant that is Indra's mount	sa srung bu
ས་སྲུང་མ	irawadi river	sa srung ma
ས་སྲུང་དམག་མི	border guard/ policeman	sa srung dmag mi
ས་སྲུངས་བུ	1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po	sa srungs bu
ས་སྲུབ་སྦྲུལ་ཞུགས	bad person gyis seeking an opportunity to harm	sa srub sbrul zhugs
ས་སྲོད	dusk, twilight	sa srod
ས་སྲོས	toward evening, at dusk time, after dusk, 1 of 12 dus tshod, dusk	sa sros
ས་སྲོས་ནས	when it grew dark	sa sros nas
ས་སྲོས་པ	hour of the dog * at dusk, towards evening	sa sros pa
ས་སློག	dig out	sa slog
ས་སློག་རྒྱག	reclaim land	sa slog rgyag
ས་སློག་པ	plough up, turn up the soil, dig up	sa slog pa
ས་གསུམ	three places	sa gsum
ས་གསུམ་གྱི་སྒྲོན་མེ	a lamp for the three worlds	sa gsum gyi sgron me
ས་གསུམ་ན་འགྲན་ཟླ་དང་བྲལ་བ	unequalled throughout the three worlds	sa gsum na 'gran zla dang bral ba
ས་གསུམ་པའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་ལྔ	TSE	sa gsum pa'i yongs sbyong lnga
ས་གསུམ་པོ	3 realms	sa gsum po
ས་གསེན	female counterparts of sa bdag sa gser zla sogs rten gyis nyi shu gnyis CHN	sa gsen
ས་བསྲུང་བ	guard/ protect the land	sa bsrung ba
ས་བསླང་བ	request land	sa bslang ba
ས་ཧ་ཀ་ར	mango flower, 1 of a mra'i mchog gi ming	sa ha ka ra
ས་ཧ་པ་ར	a buddhist monastery	sa ha pa ra
ས་ཧ་ལིང	Sakhalin Island	sa ha ling
ས་ཧེ་བྷེ་ཐར	great city in SW india	sa he bhe thar
ས་ཧེབ	sahib	sa heb
ས་ཧོ་ར	[Skt] E India's bhangga la'i yul = za hor now meng ca la sa ho ra'i rgyal po dza yi rmis ltas ngo	sa ho ra
མཚར་ཅན་བདུན	CHN	mtshar can bdun
ས་ཧོལ་དགོས	ground must be loosened, ground must be made soft	sa hol dgos
ས་ཧྲུག	rubble	sa hrug
ས་ཧྲེངས	fallow	sa hrengs
ས་ལྷ་མགོན་འབུམ་རྗེ	lord of the hundred thousand protector deities of the earth	sa lha mgon 'bum rje
ས་ལྷོག	lhog pa [ulcerous sores] caused by earth	sa lhog
སྭ་སྟི	Skt for {bde legs}	swa sti
སག	slow and oblique, brawn, callosity, scale of a fish	sag
སག་གིས་འགྲོ་བ	go straight/ directly	sag gis 'gro ba
སག་འགྲོས	slow in moving	sag 'gros
སག་ཅན	brawny	sag can
སག་གཏར	a rasp	sag gtar
སག་སྟེ་འགྲོ་བ	go directly/ suddenly	sag ste 'gro ba
སག་སྟེ་ཕྱིན་པ	suddenly arrive	sag ste phyin pa
སག་ཐག	quiver	sag thag
སག་ཐུག	thick brawn	sag thug
སག་ཐེབས	bse thebs, summer hat of bse ras	sag thebs
སག་བདག་རིས	smaller species of cardamom	sag bdag ris
སག་བདར	a file	sag bdar
སག་བདར་རྒྱག་པ	to rasp	sag bdar rgyag pa
སག་རྡར	metal grinding/ sharpening tool, file, rasp	sag rdar
སག་རྡར་ཟུར་གསུམ་མ	triangular file	sag rdar zur gsum ma
སག་བརྡར	metal grinding/ sharpening tool, file, rasp	sag brdar
སག་པ	little bubble	sag pa
སག་རྩ་སྐྱེལ	[arch] enduring vow/ promise	sag rtsa skyel
སག་རྫུན	Tibetan blue leather	sag rdzun
སག་རམ་ཙི	gold colored/ leafed paper	sag ram tsi
སག་རམ་རྩི	sulphuric acid	sag ram rtsi
སག་རི	1) shagreen; 2) thick bodily dreg pa	sag ri
སག་རེ	thick Moroccan goat leather	sag re
སག་ལད	cloth	sag lad
སག་ས	rgyu ma skam po sil ma	sag sa
སག་སག	1) sag sa; 2) ras sogs tshags zhib po med pa thin, loosely woven cloth	sag sag
སག་སིག	moving and resting	sag sig
སག་ལྷམ	shagreen leather lham gog	sag lham
སྭག་ཞུ	a hat	swag zhu
སགས་རི	shagreen, obliquely cut edgelining of a robe	sags ri
སང	to-morrow	sang
སང་ཀ་ཤེ་ཀ	1 of 10 great mountains, SA ri bo chen po bcu	sang ka she ka
སང་ཀྲི་ཏའི་སྐད	the Sanskrit language	sang kri ta'i skad
སང་གི་རྩི་ལ་མི་འབད་པར	rather than making plans for tomorrow	sang gi rtsi la mi 'bad par
སང་དགོང	tomorrow evening, tomorrow night	sang dgong
སང་དགྲ	harmful enemy	sang dgra
སང་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	Buddhist teachings	sang rgyas kyi bstan pa
སང་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས	Buddhapalita	sang rgyas bskyangs
སང་རྒྱས་མཉམ་སྦྱོར	mahayoga body tantra	sang rgyas mnyam sbyor
སང་རྒྱས་མ་བྱོན་པའི་ཞིང་སྟོང་པ	a universe where no buddha has appeared	sang rgyas ma byon pa'i zhing stong pa
སང་ང	secretly, privately, whisperingly, by report	sang nga
སང་ངེ	nam kha' bzhin + - transparent as the sky	sang nge
སང་ངེ་བ	crystal clear/ pure	sang nge ba
སང་ངེ་སེང་ངེ	clear light	sang nge seng nge
སང་སྔ་བར	early tomorrow morning	sang snga bar
སང་ཉིན	tomorrow, morrow, tomorrow	sang nyin
སང་ཉིན་དགོང་མོ	tomorrow evening/ night	sang nyin dgong mo
སང་ཉིན་གནངས་ཉིན	tomorrow &/or the day after	sang nyin gnangs nyin
སང་ད་ཙམ་དུ	a year from now	sang da tsam du
སང་ནང་པ	tomorrow [early] morning	sang nang pa
སང་ནང་པར	tomorrow	sang nang par
སང་ནུབ	tomorrow night	sang nub
སང་གནངས	1) tomorrow and the day after; 2) not far in the future	sang gnangs
སང་གནངས་ཙམ་ལ	after a few days	sang gnangs tsam la
སང་ཕོད	last year/ next year; next year/ the coming year	sang phod
སང་བ	to do away with	sang ba
སང་སྦད	hidden, latent, concealed	sang sbad
སང་སྦྱིན	secret gift	sang sbyin
སང་མ་སེང	{sang seng} vividly/ vibrantly clear [?]	sang ma seng
སང་ཚགས	tshags spyad	sang tshags
སང་ཞོགས	tomorrow morning, early tomorrow, the morning after	sang zhogs
སང་རས	cleansing rag, towel, gauze, muslin	sang ras
སང་ལོ	next year	sang lo
སང་ཤི	sang shi 2769	sang shi
སང་ཤི་ཏ	in the time of king khri srong lde btsan dus kyi btsun pa	sang shi ta
སང་ཤི་གནངས་ཤི	near death	sang shi gnangs shi
སང་ཤོང	craggy place, broken eroded country	sang shong
སང་སང	a number	sang sang
སང་སང་གནངས་གནངས	postpone	sang sang gnangs gnangs
སང་སང་པོ	brightly shining sang sang po'i 'od snang shar phyogs nas brightly shining light from the E	sang sang po
སང་སང་བྱེད	sit/ position upright	sang sang byed
སང་སེ་སང	shining brightly	sang se sang
སང་སེང	hiding-place, chink, crevice	sang seng
སང་གྷ	[Skt] sangha	sang gha
སངས	[be] purified, cleared, cleansed, awakened, free from	sangs
སངས་ཀྱིས	by awakening	sangs kyis
སངས་གྱས་པ	enlightenment	sangs gyas pa
སངས་གླིང	sangs rgyas gling pa	sangs gling
སངས་རྒྱ	[p sangs rgyas],, become enlightened	sangs rgya
སངས་རྒྱ་བ	will awaken to buddhahood	sangs rgya ba
སངས་རྒྱ་བའི་གནས	the place where they attain enlightenment	sangs rgya ba'i gnas
སངས་རྒྱའོ	will become enlightened	sangs rgya'o
སངས་རྒྱལ་ལ་སྐྱབས་སུ་སོང་ཞིང	took refuge in the Buddha	sangs rgyal la skyabs su song zhing
སངས་རྒྱས	awakened being/ buddha(hood)	sangs rgyas
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀུན་དངོས	embodiment of all Buddhas	sangs rgyas kun dngos
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ	Buddha Samantabhadra	sangs rgyas kun tu bzang po
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀུན་འདུས	the embodiment of all buddhas	sangs rgyas kun 'dus
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི	18 distinct doctrines of the buddhas	sangs rgyas kyi
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བཀའ	the teaching of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi bka'
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བཀའ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	the flawless teachings of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi bka' dri ma med pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བཀའ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	sang gyas kyi bka' gsum	sangs rgyas kyi bka' rnam pa gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བཀའ་གསུམ	the three kinds of words of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi bka' gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	the kayas of buddhahood, the body of a buddha [h]	sangs rgyas kyi sku
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གཟུགས	a Buddha statue sangs rgyas kyi sku gsung thugs kyi yon	sangs rgyas kyi sku gzugs
ཏན་གསུམ	the three virtues of body speech and mins od buddhahood CHN sangs rgyas kyi sku'i mtshan bzang bkod pa mtha' yas pa mthong ba tsam gyis by merely seeing the wondrous signs upon the form of the Buddha	tan gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕང	buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕང་ཐོབ་པ	to attain the state of buddhahood sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang ma 'thob kyi bar	sangs rgyas kyi go 'phang thob pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕད་ཐོབ་པ	attain the state of buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi go 'phad thob pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	buddha mind, the intent of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi dgongs pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	his mind is the essence of buddhahood / the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi ngo bo
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆེ	SA mngon par sangs rgyas pa'i che ba	sangs rgyas kyi che
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆེ་བ	greatness of enlightenment	sangs rgyas kyi che ba
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆེ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན	superior qualities of buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi che ba'i yon tan
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	buddhism, buddha's law, phenomenon of enlightenment, (buddha dharmas are 10 stobs, 4 mi 'jigs pa, 3 dran pa nyer bzhag, and snying rje chen po)	sangs rgyas kyi chos
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་མ་འདྲེས་པ	distinct dharmas/qualities of the buddhas sangs rgyas kyi chos ma 'dres pa bco	sangs rgyas kyi chos ma 'dres pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ལུགས	buddhadharma	sangs rgyas kyi chos lugs
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཆོད་རྟེན	a stupa of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi mchod rten
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་པོ	buddha nature; essence of awakened being	sangs rgyas kyi snying po
པར་སྐྱེས་པ་སྟེ	birth in a dark kalpa means to be reborn in a period during which there is no buddha	par skyes pa ste
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	the 10 powers of the Buddha 2770	sangs rgyas kyi stobs bcu
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	Buddhadharma, Buddhism, the teachings of the Buddha. Syn {bstan pa, chos} sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa dam pa'i chos the sublime Buddhadharma	sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious teaching of the Buddha sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa las phyi rol du	sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa rin po che
གྱུར་པའི་ལྟ་ལོག་ཅན	"wrong views" includes views contrary to, and outside, the teaching of the buddha sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa lo lnga stong du gnas par bshad pa'i lnga brgya phrag	gyur pa'i lta log can
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པའི་སྲོལ་བཏོད	that the Dharma really took root in Tibet sangs rgyas kyi thun mong ma yin pa'i	sangs rgyas kyi bstan pa'i srol btod
རྣམ་པ་སོ་དགུ	TSE	rnam pa so dgu
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the buddha	sangs rgyas kyi theg pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་དུས་ཆེན་བཞི	the four holidays of buddha	sangs rgyas kyi dus chen bzhi
གཉིས་པ་གསུམ་པ	SA 'das rjes	gnyis pa gsum pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་བཞི	[TRS 43-3] sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po	sangs rgyas kyi sde bzhi
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྤངས་པ	the abandonment of buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi spangs pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན	buddha eye	sangs rgyas kyi spyan
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	the deeds of the buddha	sangs rgyas kyi spyod pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the domain of experience of the buddhas	sangs rgyas kyi spyod yul
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་འཕྲིན་ལས་ཉེར་བདུན	CHN	sangs rgyas kyi 'phrin las nyer bdun
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruit of Buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi 'bras bu
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མིག	buddha eye	sangs rgyas kyi mig
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཚན་བཅུ	the 10 names of the Buddha sangs rgyas kyi mtshan thos pa tsam gyis simply through hearing the name of the Buddha sangs rgyas kyi mtshan de thos pa tsam	sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bcu
གྱིས་སྔོན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས་སད་ནས	the sound of the Buddha's name awakened her propensities toward the Dharma	gyis sngon gyi bag chags sad nas
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཚན་དཔེ	major and minor marks of a buddha sangs rgyas kyi mtshan bzang so gnyis the 32 major marks of a buddha CHN	sangs rgyas kyi mtshan dpe
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཛད	enlightened activities of Buddhas	sangs rgyas kyi mdzad
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཛད་པ	the actions of buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi mdzad pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཛད་པ་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 actions of a Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi mdzad pa bcu gnyis
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་སྐྱིན་མཆེད	Twin Buddhas; the representatives of the Buddha; the two Jowo Shakyamuni statues in Lhasa	sangs rgyas kyi zhal skyin mched
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ནས	the Buddha said:	sangs rgyas kyi zhal nas
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཞིང	buddha field	sangs rgyas kyi zhing
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཞིང་ཁམས	Buddhafield	sangs rgyas kyi zhing khams
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཞིང་དག	pure buddha field[s]	sangs rgyas kyi zhing dag
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས	the Buddha's bodily form	sangs rgyas kyi gzugs
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་སྐུ	the buddha's rupakaya	sangs rgyas kyi gzugs sku
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་འོད	the light of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi 'od
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of buddha[hood]	sangs rgyas kyi ye shes
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་བཀོད་པ	created by the wisdom of the buddhas	sangs rgyas kyi ye shes kyis bkod pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	enlightened qualities	sangs rgyas kyi yon tan
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	buddha/ enlightened nature	sangs rgyas kyi rang bzhin
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རིགས	1) the study of the buddha nature; 2) buddha family	sangs rgyas kyi rigs
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཅན	possessing the buddha family/ nature sangs rgyas kyi rigs gsang sngags kyi bzlas	sangs rgyas kyi rigs can
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ལས	the actions of buddhahood sangs rgyas kyi lo rgyus zhib tu bshad pa'i	sangs rgyas kyi las
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ས	the level of buddhahood	sangs rgyas kyi sa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ས་ཀུན་ཏུ་འོད	the buddhahood of universal illumination	sangs rgyas kyi sa kun tu 'od
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་ས་ཐམས་ཅད	all levels of enlightenment sangs rgyas kyi sa'i mi mnyam pa'i thung	sangs rgyas kyi sa thams cad
པོ་ལྔ	CHN sangs rgyas kyi sa'i mi mnyam pa'i phung	po lnga
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྲས	offspring of the Buddha	sangs rgyas kyi sras
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གསུང	speech of buddha	sangs rgyas kyi gsung
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གསུང་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ	the Buddha's flawless teachings	sangs rgyas kyi gsung dri ma med pa
སངས་རྒྱས་དཀོན་མཆོག	the Buddha jewel, the precious buddha	sangs rgyas dkon mchog
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ	buddha kayas, for the body of a Buddha	sangs rgyas sku
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ་གཟུགས	buddha's relic, buddha's image or figure, buddha's tomb containing relics	sangs rgyas sku gzugs
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ་ཤ་མ	kind of silk brocade from India/ Nepal	sangs rgyas sku sha ma
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ་གསུམ	Three kayas of buddhahood. The dharmakaya is free from elaborate constructs and endowed with the '21 sets of enlightened qualities.' Sambhogakaya is of the nature of light and endowed with the perf...	sangs rgyas sku gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐྱངས	Buddhapalita, "Buddha guardian, name of the founder of	sangs rgyas skyangs
ཐེ་པྲསངིཀ	Madhyamika system in first half of 5th century A.D	the Prasangika
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱང	budddhapalita	sangs rgyas bskyang
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས	c. 450 B.C.? Buddhapalita	sangs rgyas bskyangs
སངས་རྒྱས་ཁམས	buddha nature	sangs rgyas khams
སངས་རྒྱས་ཁོ་ནའོ	only the Buddha is such a being	sangs rgyas kho na'o
སངས་རྒྱས་ཁོ་ནས་མཁྱེན་པ	the exclusive knowledge of a buddha	sangs rgyas kho nas mkhyen pa
སངས་རྒྱས་མཁའ་འགྲོ	buddha dakini 2771	sangs rgyas mkha' 'gro
སངས་རྒྱས་གངས་ཆེན་མཚོ	{sangs rgyas gangs chen mtsho}	sangs rgyas gangs chen mtsho
སངས་རྒྱས་གོ་ནའི་མ་འདྲེས་པའི་ཆོས	the exclusive dharmas of buddhahood	sangs rgyas go na'i ma 'dres pa'i chos
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་བཀའ	Buddha's teaching	sangs rgyas gyi bka'
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་ཆོས	the religion of Buddha, buddha-dharma, buddhism sangs rgyas gyi chos la bya pa byas pa practice the religion of Buddha	sangs rgyas gyi chos
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་ཆོས་ལ་བྱ་པ་བྱས་པ	to practice the religion of Buddha	sangs rgyas gyi chos la bya pa byas pa
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་ཆོས་ལུགས	the religion of Buddha, buddha-dharma, buddhism	sangs rgyas gyi chos lugs
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་བསྟན་པ	the religion/ teachings of Buddha, buddha-dharma, buddhism	sangs rgyas gyi bstan pa
སངས་རྒྱས་གྱི་ས	the level of buddhahood	sangs rgyas gyi sa
སངས་རྒྱས་གླིང་པ	gter ston, (13401396)	sangs rgyas gling pa
སངས་རྒྱས་དགོངས་པ	state of enlightenment, buddhamind	sangs rgyas dgongs pa
སངས་རྒྱས་འགྱུར་འདོད	aspire after buddhahood	sangs rgyas 'gyur 'dod
སངས་རྒྱས་འགྱུར་བ	will become buddhas	sangs rgyas 'gyur ba
སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	sde srid - (16531705)	sangs rgyas rgya mtsho
སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	{sangs rgyas rgyal mtshan	sangs rgyas rgyal mtshan
སངས་རྒྱས་སྒྲིམ་པོ	wise Buddhas	sangs rgyas sgrim po
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས	real buddha, buddha in person	sangs rgyas dngos
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ཤེས	considering him to be a real Buddha	sangs rgyas dngos kyi 'du shes
མ་ཡིན་པ་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས	it dawned on me that he was genuinely a Buddha sangs rgyas dngos kyi 'du shes dang ma	ma yin pa rgyud la skyes
བྲལ་བ་བྱེད་དགོས	never cease to consider as a real Buddha	bral ba byed dgos
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་ཀྱི་འདུ་ཤེས་བཞག	to consider him to be a real Buddha	sangs rgyas dngos kyi 'du shes bzhag
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་གྲུབ	Syn {bden par grub par 'dod pa}	sangs rgyas dngos grub
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་སྣང	Buddha in person (from JKR's bskyed rdzogs gnad bsdus). Also written: dngos sangs rgyas snang (see same). [mss]	sangs rgyas dngos snang
སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་ཤིག	a true Buddha	sangs rgyas dngos shig
སངས་རྒྱས་མངོན་གྱུར	manifest/ display the blessed enlightened emanations/ manifestations of a victorious one	sangs rgyas mngon gyur
སངས་རྒྱས་ཅན་འཁྲུངས་ལྷ་མོ	goddess sgrol ma sangs rgyas gcig pa nyid dang du ma nyid	sangs rgyas can 'khrungs lha mo
སངས་རྒྱས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས	buddha bhagavat sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das kyis mkhyen	sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das
ལ་ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བས་གསུངས་པ་ཡིན	the teachings the Buddha taught to living beings in his compassion	la thugs brtse bas gsungs pa yin
སངས་རྒྱས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཞེས	the Buddha Bhagavan	sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das zhes
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆུང	shravaka	sangs rgyas chung
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ་ལྡན	buddhahood endowed with the threefold greatness: supreme courage, abandonment and realization. The great courage means great compassion that is not directed at the benefit of beings the ultimate gr...	sangs rgyas chen po gsum ldan
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ	dharmakaya of buddhahood	sangs rgyas chos kyi sku
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་དགེ་འདུན	Buddha, Dharma and Sangha sangs rgyas chos dang dge 'dun gsum la	sangs rgyas chos dge 'dun
སྐྱབས་སུ་སོང་ན	when you and go for refuge to the Three Jewels	skyabs su song na
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་འཛོམ	'das log sangs rgyas chos 'dzom gyi rnam thar dad	sangs rgyas chos 'dzom
པའི་སྤུ་ལོང	the relation of the story of sangs rgyas chos 'dzom, incarnation of the precious Avalokiteshvara who visited hells and paradises for seven days and came back from death	pa'i spu long
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ལུགས	buddhism sangs rgyas mchod cing smon lam yang	sangs rgyas chos lugs
དག་པར་བཏབ་བ	he offered this to the Buddha and made a wishing prayer of holy aspirations	dag par btab ba
སངས་རྒྱས་འཇིག་རྟེན་དུ་བྱོན་སྐབས	in the days of the buddha	sangs rgyas 'jig rten du byon skabs
སངས་རྒྱས་འཇིག་རྟེན་དུ་བྱོན་པ	a buddha appeared in the world sangs rgyas 'jig rten du byon pa nas	sangs rgyas 'jig rten du byon pa
སངས་རྒྱས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the Buddha	sangs rgyas rjes su dran pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད	buddhahood GD the Buddha himself	sangs rgyas nyid
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་དུ	{mdo rgyud kun nas sangs rgyas nyid du bstan} all sutras and tantras say he is the Buddha himself. sangs rgyas nyid du lung bstan pa bshad	sangs rgyas nyid du
སངས་རྒྱས་གཉིས་པ	epithet of padma sambhava	sangs rgyas gnyis pa
སངས་རྒྱས་མཉམ་སྦྱོར	Sarvabuddha Samayoga. 'Equalizing Buddhahood.' A Mahayoga scripture. Three tantras of this name are found in Vol. MA of the Nyingma Gyübum. Sometimes counted among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras as ...	sangs rgyas mnyam sbyor
སངས་རྒྱས་སྙིང་པོ	{sangs rgyas kyi snying po} buddha nature; heart essence of awakened being 2772	sangs rgyas snying po
སངས་རྒྱས་སྟོང་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	a thousand Buddhas' accomplishments	sangs rgyas stong gi dngos grub
སངས་རྒྱས་སྟོང་རྩ་གཅིག	One Thousand Buddhas	sangs rgyas stong rtsa gcig
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ	[tradition of] Buddha's teaching	sangs rgyas bstan pa
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་འཛིན	Lopon Sangye Tenzin Rinpoche	sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐམས་ཅད	all buddhas sangs rgyas thams cad dgongs pa 'dus pa root sutra of anuyoga sangs rgyas thams cad dgongs pa 'dus pa'i	sangs rgyas thams cad
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ལྷག་པ	exceed all buddhas sangs rgyas thams chad dgongs pa 'dus	sangs rgyas thams cad las lhag pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐོད་པ	1) buddhakapala,	sangs rgyas thod pa
བུདདྷཀཔལ	tantra	Buddhakapala
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐོད་པའི་རྒྱུད	Buddha Skull Tantra	sangs rgyas thod pa'i rgyud
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐོབ	attain buddhahood	sangs rgyas thob
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐོབ་པ	become a buddha, attain buddhahood	sangs rgyas thob pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཐོབ་པར	attaining buddhahood	sangs rgyas thob par
སངས་རྒྱས་འཐོབ་ཕྱིར	rang gzhan sangs	sangs rgyas 'thob phyir
རྒྱས་འཐོབ་ཕྱིར	that I and others may attain buddhahood	rgyas 'thob phyir
སངས་རྒྱས་འཐོབ་ཕྱིར་བསྔོ	We dedicate [our accumulated merit] toward the attainment of Buddhahood sangs rgyas dang dge 'dun la bya ba byas	sangs rgyas 'thob phyir bsngo
སངས་རྒྱས་དུ་མ་རང་གྲོལ	natural freedom of the many/ diverse aspects of buddhahood	sangs rgyas du ma rang grol
སངས་རྒྱས་དྲན་དྲུག	mindfulness of the Buddha, one of the {rjes su dran pa drug} the six recollections, six of the {rjes su dran pa bcu} ten mindfulnesses	sangs rgyas dran drug
སངས་རྒྱས་འདོད་པ	who wish to reach buddhahood	sangs rgyas 'dod pa
སངས་རྒྱས་རྡོ་རྗེ	bya bral sangs rgyas	sangs rgyas rdo rje
སངས་རྒྱས་ནས	having awakened	sangs rgyas nas
སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད	the Buddha Vairochana	sangs rgyas rnam par snang mdzad
སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམ་གཟིགས	Buddha Vipasyin	sangs rgyas rnam gzigs
སངས་རྒྱས་སྣང་བ་མཐའ་བ	[??] Buddha Amitabha, the Buddha of Boundless Light	sangs rgyas snang ba mtha' ba
སངས་རྒྱས་སྣང་བ་མཐའ་ཡས	the buddha Amitabha	sangs rgyas snang ba mtha' yas
སངས་རྒྱས་པ	enlightenment, buddhahood, attainment of nirvana, buddhist, one practicing buddhism, state of enlightenment, buddhahood, attaining buddhahood	sangs rgyas pa
སངས་རྒྱས་པ་ཉིད	perfectly enlightened, state of enlightenment	sangs rgyas pa nyid
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	religious doctrines of the buddhists	sangs rgyas pa'i grub mtha'
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་སྒྲ	the term "enlightenment"	sangs rgyas pa'i sgra
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཆོས	a teaching which enlightens, buddha-dharma	sangs rgyas pa'i chos
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་ཚུལ་གསུམ	CHN	sangs rgyas pa'i tshul gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of enlightenment	sangs rgyas pa'i rang bzhin
སངས་རྒྱས་པར་འགྱུར	would become a Buddha	sangs rgyas par 'gyur
སངས་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ	to cause enlightenment, make buddhahood attained	sangs rgyas par byed pa
སངས་རྒྱས་པར་མེད	non-existence of enlightenment	sangs rgyas par med
སངས་རྒྱས་དཔའ་བོ་བདུན	the 7 buddha warriors	sangs rgyas dpa' bo bdun
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱན	Buddha-Lochana. Lochana	sangs rgyas spyan
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱན་མ	buddhalocana (yum is mi bskyod pa; ?? locana, yab is rnam par snang mdzad)	sangs rgyas spyan ma
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱིའི་མ	common mother of all buddhas, shes rab personified	sangs rgyas spyi'i ma
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the sphere of experience of Buddhas, sphere of experience of enlightenment	sangs rgyas spyod yul
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ	the Nirmanakaya Buddha; [Buddha Shakyamuni]	sangs rgyas sprul sku
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྲུལ་པ	buddha emanation	sangs rgyas sprul pa
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	buddha nirmanakaya	sangs rgyas sprul pa'i sku
སངས་རྒྱས་ཕན་བཞེད	Skt. Hitaishin Buddha Beneficial Speech	sangs rgyas phan bzhed
སངས་རྒྱས་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེ	Avatamsaka Sutra	sangs rgyas phal po che
ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	[Buddhavatamshakanamamahaavaipulyasuutra] sangs rgyas phal po che zhes bya ba shin	tu rgyas pa chen po'i mdo
སངས་རྒྱས་ཕལ་པོ་ཆེའི་མདོ	buddha vatamsaka	sangs rgyas phal po che'i mdo
སངས་རྒྱས་འཕགས་པ	Buddha superiors/ noble ones	sangs rgyas 'phags pa
སངས་རྒྱས་བྱ་བ	buddha activity sangs rgyas byon dang des chos gsungs a buddha has appeared and has preached the Dharma	sangs rgyas bya ba
སངས་རྒྱས་བྱོན་པ	the presence of a Buddha. one of the {gzhan 'byor lnga} five events occurring through others, five circumstantial endowments, one of the {gzhan 'byor lnga} five events oc- 2773 curring through othe...	sangs rgyas byon pa
སངས་རྒྱས་བྱོན་པའི་བསྐལ་པ	a kalpa in which a Buddha has appeared	sangs rgyas byon pa'i bskal pa
སངས་རྒྱས་བླ་མ	Tertön Sangye Lama: (1000-1080); the first tertön; known for {rtsa gsum dril sgrub}, rediscovered by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo; the first tertön; also called {'dro 'dul sangs rgyas bla ma}	sangs rgyas bla ma
སངས་རྒྱས་དབས་བདུན	CHN	sangs rgyas dbas bdun
སངས་རྒྱས་འབངས	name of a king	sangs rgyas 'bangs
སངས་རྒྱས་འབྲིང	pratyekabuddha	sangs rgyas 'bring
སངས་རྒྱས་སྦས་པ	Buddhagupta	sangs rgyas sbas pa
སངས་རྒྱས་སྦས་པའི་མགོན་པོ	buddhist sage who visited tibet through nepal	sangs rgyas sbas pa'i mgon po
སངས་རྒྱས་མ་ཐོབ་བར	until I achieve enlightenment	sangs rgyas ma thob bar
སངས་རྒྱས་མ་བྱོན་པའི་ཞིང	to dwell in a realm where a buddha has not appeared	sangs rgyas ma byon pa'i zhing
སངས་རྒྱས་མར་མེ་འོད	Skt. Pradipaprabha - Buddha Bright Lamp	sangs rgyas mar me 'od
སངས་རྒྱས་མུ་སྟེགས	a heretical [nontantric] Buddhist, buddhists and outsider extremists	sangs rgyas mu stegs
སངས་རྒྱས་མོས་པ	the Buddha Aspiration	sangs rgyas mos pa
སངས་རྒྱས་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	passing into the nirvana of buddhahood	sangs rgyas mya ngan las 'das pa
སངས་རྒྱས་སྨན་བླ	med buddha	sangs rgyas sman bla
སངས་རྒྱས་མཚན་འབུམ	a collection of the names of the buddha	sangs rgyas mtshan 'bum
སངས་རྒྱས་ཞིང	buddhafield	sangs rgyas zhing
སངས་རྒྱས་འོད་མི་འགྱུར་བ	Buddha Unchanging Light	sangs rgyas 'od mi 'gyur ba
སངས་རྒྱས་འོད་སྲུང	kasyapa buddha, he who immediately preceded buddha shakyamuni	sangs rgyas 'od srung
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པ	to delight in Buddhas	sangs rgyas yid la byed pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས	{mkhas grub} 15251591	sangs rgyas ye shes
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོན་ཏན	qualities of buddhahood, enlightened qualities	sangs rgyas yon tan
སངས་རྒྱས་རང་རྒྱད་པར་མ་གོལ	don't mistake the Buddha for an ordinary being	sangs rgyas rang rgyad par ma gol
སངས་རྒྱས་རབ་བདུན	succession of 7 buddhas who preceded gautama buddha ('od srung, gser thub, 'khor ba 'jig)	sangs rgyas rab bdun
སངས་རྒྱས་རབས་བདུན	sangs rgyas dpa' bo bdun	sangs rgyas rabs bdun
སངས་རྒྱས་རིགས	the Buddha-causalground, enlightened potential	sangs rgyas rigs
སངས་རྒྱས་རིགས་བརྒྱ	Hundred Families of Buddhas. Those of the Forty-two	sangs rgyas rigs brgya
པེཨཅེཕུ༹ལ་ཌེཨིཏིཨེས་ཨནད་ཐེ་Fཨིཕ༹ཏཡ	eight Wrathful Deities. or Blood-drinkers	Peaceful Deities and the Fifty
སངས་རྒྱས་རིགས་ལྔ	the five buddha families GD	sangs rgyas rigs lnga
སངས་རྒྱས་ལ་ཀ་ཁ	teach the alphabet to the Buddha, teach some1 who knows more than 1self	sangs rgyas la ka kha
སངས་རྒྱས་ལག་བཅང	to hold buddha in the palm of [your] hand	sangs rgyas lag bcang
སངས་རྒྱས་ལག་བཅངས	placing enlightenment in the palm of the hand; a famous terma by Ratna Lingpa	sangs rgyas lag bcangs
སངས་རྒྱས་ལག་ཆང	revealed by Namchö Mingyur Dorje	sangs rgyas lag chang
སངས་རྒྱས་ལག་འཆང	Buddha in the Palm of Your Hand, revealed by Namchö Mingyur Dorje	sangs rgyas lag 'chang
སངས་རྒྱས་ལག་འཆང་གི་འགྲེལ་ཆེན	major work by {kar-ma chags med} 17th cent. belonging to the gnam chos cycle	sangs rgyas lag 'chang gi 'grel chen
སངས་རྒྱས་ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ	Buddha Shakyamuni	sangs rgyas sha kya thub pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ཤིང	buddha field	sangs rgyas shing
སངས་རྒྱས་ས	the level of buddhahood	sangs rgyas sa
སངས་རྒྱས་ས་ལ་བཀོད་པ	brought to buddhahood	sangs rgyas sa la bkod pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ས་གསུམ	three levels of enlightenment in the tantric teachings (kun tu 'od, pad ma can, yi ge 'khor lo tshogs chen)	sangs rgyas sa gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་སུ་བགྲོད་པར་བྱེད་པ	cross over to buddhahood	sangs rgyas su bgrod par byed pa
སངས་རྒྱས་སུ་འགྱུར་བར་འོས་པ	worthy/ capable of becoming enlightened	sangs rgyas su 'gyur bar 'os pa
སངས་རྒྱས་སྲས	buddha sons sangs rgyas sras gcig gi rgyud zab mo rgyun khyer du bya ba'i yan lag mdor	sangs rgyas sras
བསྡུས་པ་འཁྲུལ་སྣང་རང་གྲོལ	by {kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas} (18131899)	bsdus pa 'khrul snang rang grol
སངས་རྒྱས་སྲས་བཅས	the buddha together w his sons	sangs rgyas sras bcas
སངས་རྒྱས་སྲས་གསུམ	CHN	sangs rgyas sras gsum
སངས་རྒྱས་གསང་བ	Acharya Buddhaguhya	sangs rgyas gsang ba
སངས་རྒྱས་གསང་བའི་ལམ་རིམ	Buddhaguhya's Progressive Stages of the Path sangs rgyas gsung la nam yang bslu ba	sangs rgyas gsang ba'i lam rim
སངས་རྒྱས་གསོལ་བ་གདབ་པ	supplicate the Buddha	sangs rgyas gsol ba gdab pa
སངས་རྒྱས་ལྷ	Buddhadeva	sangs rgyas lha
སངས་རྒྱས་ལྷ་མོ	epithet of vajra varahi sangs mnyam par rgya ba'i rten 'brel yod we have established an auspicious connection so that we may achieve Buddhahood together sangs mdog dpal gyi ri bo pad ma 'od kyi	sangs rgyas lha mo
ཕོ་དྲང	the lotus-light palace of the	pho drang
སངས་ནས	have been cleared away	sangs nas
སངས་པ	pristine; cleared away/ cleansed/ revealed/ dispelled/ dispersed; to clear away/ vanish/ cleanse/ reveal; immaculate; isc. unsullied; isc. to (be) resolve(d); isc. devoid (of . . . ); (w. instr.) u...	sangs pa
སངས་པའི་ལྷོང	dangers of secret or concealed origin (mental suffering, depression, ravings)	sangs pa'i lhong
སངས་པོ	patriarch king of the bon, 1st patriarch of bon whose wife was chu lcam	sangs po
སངས་པོའི་དྲན་པ	sharp memory/ perception	sangs po'i dran pa
སངས་པོའི་ནམ་མཁའ	pure space	sangs po'i nam mkha'
སངས་པོའི་རྣ་བ	sharp ears	sangs po'i rna ba
སངས་པོའི་ལུས་ཁམས	healthy body ??	sangs po'i lus khams
སངས་སྤྱན	eye of buddha, transcendental wisdom 2774	sangs spyan
སངས་འཕགས	buddha noble one	sangs 'phags
སངས་མ་སངས	unobstructed, unhindered, freely pervading [a yogi who can traverse through anything], in the context of realizing phenomena and mind to be the same, {sangs ma sangs} signifies all the various disp...	sangs ma sangs
སངས་མི་རྒྱ	Buddhahood is not gained	sangs mi rgya
སངས་ཡེ	Guhyajnana. Abbr. of {mkha' 'gro gsang ba ye shes}	sangs ye
སངས་ཤིང	incense tree, cypress-like juniper tree, juniperus excelsa	sangs shing
སངས་སངས་ཡལ་ཡལ	dissolve by themselves	sangs sangs yal yal
སངས་སེ་བ	immaculate	sangs se ba
སད	1) awaken[ed]; 2) frost, cold [air], coldness; 3) test, examine, try	sad
སད་ཀྱིས་འཁྱེར་བ	be destroyed by frost	sad kyis 'khyer ba
སད་སྐྱོན	frost damage	sad skyon
སད་ཁོམ	not getting ill after one has awakened from sleep	sad khom
སད་རྒྱག	awaken, test, examine, try	sad rgyag
སད་རྒྱག་པ	hoarfrost [appears, happens]	sad rgyag pa
སད་རྒྱག་པའི་དུས	frost period	sad rgyag pa'i dus
སད་རྗེས་སུ	after waking up	sad rjes su
སད་གཏན	permafrost	sad gtan
སད་རྟོགས	awakened realization	sad rtogs
སད་དུས	frost period, time of awakening	sad dus
སད་དུས་སུ	during the waking state, while awake	sad dus su
སད་དེ་སུད་དེ	few/ partial	sad de sud de
སད་མདའ	when doubt occurs from not realizing the purpose of undertaking/ avoiding some action, so that the purpose may be clearly known, beforehand test/experiment	sad mda'
སད་ན་ལེགས	Syn {mu tig bstan po}	sad na legs
སད་ན་ལེགས་མཇིང་ཡོན	king {sad na legs mjing yon	sad na legs mjing yon
སད་ན་ལེགས་འཇིང་ཡོན	Seyna-lek Jing-yön	sad na legs 'jing yon
སད་པ	{sad pa, sad pa, sad pa, sad} trans. v.; 1) to examine, see, try, test, 2) to be activated, awaken, become active	sad pa
སད་པའི་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	drop of awakening	sad pa'i skabs kyi thig le
སད་པའི་རིགས	the awakened type [of person]	sad pa'i rigs
སད་པར་གྱུར་པ	awakened [from sleep]	sad par gyur pa
སད་པར་བྱེད་པ	wake from sleep	sad par byed pa
སད་མ་ཐག་ཏུ	as soon as I woke up	sad ma thag tu
སད་མི	original 7 monks of Tibet	sad mi
སད་མི་ཁོམ	falling ill or feeling unwell as soon as one gets awakened from sleep	sad mi khom
སད་མི་བདུན	Seven Chosen Ones	sad mi bdun
སད་མི་མི་བདུན	7 most awakened men chosen to be the first monks in Tibet; the seven men of trial [as the first to receive ordination to test if Tibetans could observe monks' vows]	sad mi mi bdun
སད་མེ	the 7 early tibetan men chosen to be monks	sad me
སད་མེད	poisonous snake	sad med
སད་ལ་བསྐུར	destroyed by frost	sad la bskur
སད་སུད	in myself faith and repentance arose	sad sud
སད་སེ་ར	frost & hail	sad se ra
སད་སེར	cold and hail, frost & hail	sad ser
སད་སེར་བཙའ་ཐན	frost, hail, rust/ disease, heat/ drought	sad ser btsa' than
སད་ལྷུང	9th month when thunder occurs and crops are lost	sad lhung
སན་གིན	bayonet	san gin
སན་ཏ་ནི་ཀ	flower	san ta ni ka
སན་ཏ་ནི་ག་ཆེན་པོ	flower	san ta ni ga chen po
སན་ཏི་མ་ཧ་སང་གྷ	Santi Maha Sangha training program of Chogyal Namkhai Norbu	san ti ma ha sang gha
སན་ཏི་ཡ་གོ	Santiago	san ti ya go
སན་ནེ	restless	san ne
སན་ནེ་བ	{san ne ba brang nge ba 'tshub be ba} - restless, unsettled and fidgety	san ne ba
སན་བུན	fluttering	san bun
སན་བུན་ཕྲ་སེམ་མེ	subtle fluttering	san bun phra sem me
སན་ལུན་ཁྲེ	pedicab, tricycle	san lun khre
སབ་སྤག་སྤག	machine gun	sab spag spag
སབ་བེ་སོབ་བེ	soft and unable to bear pressure etc. or btags ma'i thags rkang mi led pa'i rnam pa	sab be sob be
སབ་མ	1) shing gi lcug ma sbom phra mtheb sor tsam phan tshun bsnol te gyang [wall] gi tshul du bskor ba'i ra ba lta bu; 2) bamboo/ grass mat	sab ma
སབ་མོ	1) shing gi lcug ma sbom phra mtheb sor tsam phan tshun bsnol te gyang [wall] gi tshul du bskor ba'i ra ba lta bu; 2) bamboo/ grass mat	sab mo
སབ་རག་བླང	RC: (spelling tentative) to itch. It is the feeling that you scratch to relieve. [mss]	sab rag blang
སབ་སུབ	hide, conceal	sab sub
སབ་སོབ	something rotten, putrefied, incomplete, defective	sab sob
སབ་སོབ་མིན	not incomplete, in good order	sab sob min
སམ་ཀྲི་ཏའི་སྐད	sanskrit, refined classical language of india	sam kri ta'i skad
སམ་ཀྲི་ཏའི་སྐྲད	SK	sam kri ta'i skrad
སམ་ཀྲི་ཏི	SK	sam kri ti
སམ་ཁྲ	pocket book, notebook, memorandum book, tablets	sam khra
སམ་ཏ	wooden board used as school slate for drafting and computation	sam ta
སམ་དལ	mustaches	sam dal
སམ་དྲ	pocket book, notebook, memorandum book, tablets	sam dra
སམ་བུ་ཏྲ	the Samputa	sam bu tra
སམ་མ་སུམ་མེ	with a low voice, lowly, softly	sam ma sum me
སམ་ལེ་ངྲི་བྱེད	what's happening	sam le ngri byed
སམ་སང	at once, immediately	sam sang
སམ་སུ་ཁ	fabulous region beyond shambhala	sam su kha
སམ་སུམ	lowly, softly	sam sum
སཾ་གྷ	the community	saM gha
སམ་བྷ་རི	religious sect of ancient india	sam bha ri
སམ་བྷུ་ཏི	Sambhuti is the Exposition Tantra of the Two Discernments (brtag gnyis bshad rgyud), meaning "union" (kha sbyor), or "perfectly united" (yang dag par kha sbyor)	sam bhu ti
སམ་བྷོ་ཏ	name be which father of tibetan literature was known both in india and tibet	sam bho ta
སམས	(not in das)	sams
སའ་ཙ་ཚ	clay stupa 2775	sa' tsa tsha
སའ་ལའི་ནགས་གསེབ་ནས	as they were passing through the sala forest	sa' la'i nags gseb nas
སའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	earth mandal, the earth/ ground	sa'i dkyil 'khor
སའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞི	[TRS 107-3]	sa'i dkyil 'khor bzhi
སའི་སྐྱོན་བརྒྱད	bsam gtan gyi skyon brgyad	sa'i skyon brgyad
སའི་ཁམས	element of earth	sa'i khams
སའི་གོ་ལ	1) the earth/ globe; 2) sa gzhi ril mo rgyu sa'i mkha' lam	sa'i go la
སའི་གོ་ལའི་དངོས་ཁམས་རིག་པ	geophysics	sa'i go la'i dngos khams rig pa
སའི་གོ་ལའི་འཐུན་ཤུགས	earth's gravity	sa'i go la'i 'thun shugs
སའི་གོ་ལའི་ཕྱེད	hemisphere	sa'i go la'i phyed
སའི་གོ་ལའི་ཕྱེད་ནུབ་མ	W hemisphere	sa'i go la'i phyed nub ma
སའི་གོ་ལའི་ཕྱེད་བྱང་མ	N hemisphere	sa'i go la'i phyed byang ma
སའི་གོ་ལའི་ཕྱེད་ཤར་མ	E hemisphere	sa'i go la'i phyed shar ma
སའི་གོ་ལའི་ཕྱེད་ལྷོ་མ	S hemisphere	sa'i go la'i phyed lho ma
སའི་གོང་བ	lump of earth, clod	sa'i gong ba
སའི་འགྱུར་བྱེད	bull's eye-flower	sa'i 'gyur byed
སའི་རྒྱ་བྱིན	emperor, great king	sa'i rgya byin
སའི་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	king	sa'i brgya byin
སའི་ངོས	surface of the earth	sa'i ngos
སའི་དངོས་གཞི	actuality of the stages; name of text	sa'i dngos gzhi
སའི་ཆགས་རིམ	geological strata	sa'i chags rim
སའི་ཆོ་ག	earth liturgies	sa'i cho ga
སའི་ཆོ་ག་ལྔ	CHN	sa'i cho ga lnga
སའི་མཇུག་མ	monkey	sa'i mjug ma
སའི་ཉིང་ཁུ	sa'i bcud	sa'i nying khu
སའི་སྙིང་པོ	1) gold; 2) rdo rje gdan, Bodhgaya; 2) bodhisattva Kshitigarbha	sa'i snying po
སའི་སྙིང་པོ་འཁོར་ལོ་བཅུ་པ	Ten	sa'i snying po 'khor lo bcu pa
ཝཧེཨེལས་ཨོཕ༹་Eཨརཐ	essence Sutra	Wheels of Earth
སའི་སྙིང་པོ་འཁོར་ལོ་བཅུ་པའི་མདོ	Sutra of the Ten Wheels of Ksitigarbha	sa'i snying po 'khor lo bcu pa'i mdo
སའི་སྙིང་པོའི་འཁོར་ལོ་བཅུ་པ	{sa'i snying po 'khor lo bcu pa'i mdo	sa'i snying po'i 'khor lo bcu pa
སའི་རྟེན	body's mtsher pa	sa'i rten
སའི་སྟེང་མིའི་སྲིད་པ	the surface world of humans GD	sa'i steng mi'i srid pa
སའི་ཐིག་ལེ	auspicious place	sa'i thig le
སའི་གདུ་བུ	utpala lotus	sa'i gdu bu
སའི་བདག་པོ	local spirit, lord of the site / land	sa'i bdag po
སའི་བདག་མོ་བཞི	Four Mistresses of the Earth. The four guardians of Yangleshö who confronted Padmasambhava at Chumig Jangchub in Nepal. Their names are Dorje Yacin, Dechen Decin, Secin, and Phakcin. See Jikme Lingpa,	sa'i bdag mo bzhi
སའི་ལྡེ་བརྒྱད	CHN	sa'i lde brgyad
སའི་དཔྱད་བཟང་བར་ཤེས་པ	know that this inspection will turn out favorable	sa'i dpyad bzang bar shes pa
སའི་ཕུར་བུ	mt	sa'i phur bu
སའི་བུ	Mars	sa'i bu
སའི་བྱེད་ལས	function of the earth	sa'i byed las
སའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	king	sa'i dbang phyug
སའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་ཟླ་བ	11th mgo month sa'i ming btags pa'i ye shes kyi khyad par	sa'i dbang phyug gi zla ba
སའི་ཚེར་མ	bull's eye-flower	sa'i tsher ma
སའི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	TSE	sa'i tshogs sgrub
སའི་ཛམ་བུ་ཀ	plant flacourtia spadia	sa'i dzam bu ka
སའི་ཟླ་བ	gold	sa'i zla ba
སའི་འོག་ཏུ་སྦེད	hide in the ground sa'i 'og na gnas pa 'di rnams la sa 'og pa	sa'i 'og tu sbed
ཞེས་བྱའོ	the [beings] living below the earth are called 'subterranean'	zhes bya'o
སའི་འོག་ལ་སྦས་པ	to bury	sa'i 'og la sbas pa
སའི་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང	completely training in the bhumis	sa'i yongs sbyong
སའི་རིམ་པ	bhumi levels	sa'i rim pa
སའི་རླུང	vibration of solidification	sa'i rlung
སའི་ལས་རླུང	the karma-prana of earth	sa'i las rlung
སའི་ལེགས	early tibetan dynasty	sa'i legs
སའི་ལེགས་དུག	CHN	sa'i legs dug
སའི་ལེགས་དྲུག	the six kings named "legs"	sa'i legs drug
སའི་ལོགས	surface of the earth	sa'i logs
སའི་སྲོག་ཤིང	earth's axis	sa'i srog shing
སའི་ལྷ་སྟ་གོན	earth goddess prelude ritual	sa'i lha sta gon
སའི་ལྷ་མོ	one of the {phyogs skyong bcu} the ten guardians of the directions	sa'i lha mo
སར	in the place, on the ground	sar
སར་འགྱེལ	fell to the ground	sar 'gyel
སར་འགྲོ	peacock	sar 'gro
སར་ཉལ	1) sleep on the ground; 2) buffalo	sar nyal
སར་ཏི་འཛུགས་པ	sa the 'dzugs pa, dam bca' byas nas sa gcig tu sdod pa'i don	sar ti 'dzugs pa
སར་བརྟན	put on the ground	sar brtan
སར་དེ་ཉ	Sardinia (Italy)	sar de nya
སར་བསྡད	sit on the ground	sar bsdad
སར་གནས	dwelling on the bhumis	sar gnas
སར་གནས་དཔའ་བོ	buddha who has attained the stage of saintly perfection	sar gnas dpa' bo
སར་པ	fresh, new	sar pa
སར་པ་སྒུགས་པ	to lay an ambush for	sar pa sgugs pa
སར་བ	all	sar ba
སར་བ་མ་ནི	serpent's gem	sar ba ma ni
སར་ལྦ་དོར	Salvador	sar lba dor
སར་མི	1) newcomer; 2) [arch] messenger	sar mi
སར་མི་ཕེབས	{dpal sbas sar mi phebs dgos} Do not go to Srigupta's house!	sar mi phebs
སར་བཞུགས་པ	to sit down on the ground	sar bzhugs pa
སར་སོར	SA sa ra so re	sar sor
སལ	flash	sal
སལ་གྱིས	vividly and distinctly. Syn {wal gyis} / {lam gyis}	sal gyis
སལ་ངོ	conceptualization	sal ngo
སལ་བབ	gold lace	sal bab
སལ་ལེ	brilliant	sal le
སལ་ལེ་སྣང་བ	lighted up, brilliant, well lighted	sal le snang ba
སལ་ལེ་བ	lucid; clear, bright, brilliant, lucid	sal le ba
སལ་ལེ་སེང་ངེ་ལྷག་གེ་ལྷང་ངེ	distinct, alive, vibrant and vivid; four	sal le seng nge lhag ge lhang nge
མེཨསུརེས་ཨོཕ༹་ཅླརིཏཡ	{gsal ba'i tshad bzhi}	measures of clarity
སལ་ལེ་ཧྲིག་གེ་བ	ex {phyang chad du ma song bar rang gi shes rig ma 'gags pa sal le hrig ge ba}	sal le hrig ge ba
སལ་སིལ	gold ornament, gold laces	sal sil
སལ་སུལ	1) ngam grog sang gshong mang po'i sal sul dod pa; 2) gos sogs kyi sul	sal sul
སས	sa yis	sas
སས་བསྡུན་པ	grouped within/ taken in by a level	sas bsdun pa
སས་བསྡུས་པ	grouped into a level, taken in by a level	sas bsdus pa
སས་བྱིན	gift of the earth	sas byin
སི	death, sound of whistling through the teeth, whistle	si
སི་སྐད	whistle	si skad
སི་ཁྲོན	Szechuan Province	si khron
སི་ཁྲོན་ཤིང་ཆེན	Szechuan Province	si khron shing chen
སི་གླ	lump, bulbous plant	si gla
སི་གླུ	whistling song	si glu
སི་གླུ་གཏོང	whistle a song	si glu gtong
སི་རྒྱག	whistle	si rgyag
སི་རྒྱབ	whistle	si rgyab
སི་རྒྱབ་པ	whistle	si rgyab pa
སི་སྒྲ	whiz	si sgra
སི་ཇི་བི་ཇི	hermit thrush	si ji bi ji
སི་ཏ	1 of 4 great rivers of jambudvipa	si ta
སི་ཏ་ལིན	Stalin	si ta lin
སི་ཏ་ལིན་གེ་ལེ	Stalingrad	si ta lin ge le
སི་ཏའི་བདག	husband of sita, rama	si ta'i bdag
སི་ཏུ	(CH rank name, Situ Rinpoche	si tu
སི་ཏུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Katok Situ Chökyi Gyatso: 1880-1925	si tu chos kyi rgya mtsho
སི་ཏུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉིན་བྱེད	si tu chos kyi 'byung gnas}	si tu chos kyi nyin byed
སི་ཏུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གནས	{si tu chos kyi 'byung gnas}	si tu chos kyi 'byung gnas
སི་ཏུ་པད་མ་ཉིན་བྱེད	Situ Padma Nyinche. [1774-1853] The 9th Situ Rinpoche and one of the root teachers of the 14th Karmapa and Jamgön Kongtrül. He was predicted by Guru Rinpoche as his own mind-emanation si tu pan che...	si tu pad ma nyin byed
སི་ཏུ་གཙུག་ལག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	si tu chos kyi 'byung gnas}	si tu gtsug lag chos kyi snang ba
སི་ཏུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	3rd bkra shis dpal 'byor, 1498-1541 [tsd] si tu rin po che - 4th mi 'khrugs chos kyi go cha, 1542-1585 [tsd]	si tu rin po che
སི་ཏུའི་སྐྱེས་རབས་བརྒྱད	CHN si tu'i sum rtags 'grel chen mu tig phreng	si tu'i skyes rabs brgyad
སི་ཏོག་ཧོ་ལིམ	Stockholm	si tog ho lim
སི་བཏགས་དངོས་རྫས	silk fabric	si btags dngos rdzas
སི་ཐ	date tree	si tha
སི་བརྡ	whistling as a sign	si brda
སི་པན	chilis, cayenne pepper	si pan
སི་སྤན	hot chili	si span
སི་འབུད	whistle	si 'bud
སི་ལྦ་ཞི་ལི	Spain	si lba zhi li
སི་ལྦ་ཧི་ལི	Swahili	si lba hi li
སི་ལྦའི་ལི	Spain	si lba'i li
སི་ལྦེ་ཏེན	Sweden	si lbe ten
སི་སྨྱུག	(CH rgyal nang nas thon pa'i bamboo good quality pen	si smyug
སི་ཛ་ཛུ	tree with milky sap	si dza dzu
སི་ར	worship	si ra
སི་ར་བསླས་པ	woven basket	si ra bslas pa
སི་རི	pack thread, twine, bar, bolt, door bar	si ri
སི་རི་འབུ	centipede	si ri 'bu
སི་རི་ཡ	Syria	si ri ya
སི་རི་རི	little sound of wind etc	si ri ri
སི་རིལ	kind of ink horn, case for carrying ink stand in one's pocket	si ril
སི་ལ	sort of incense	si la
སི་ལའི་ཤིང	sillahi tree, boswellia thurifera	si la'i shing
སི་ལི་མ	winter time chus khyer te rgyug pa'i frozen fragments	si li ma
སི་ལི་ལི	noise produced by the incessant downpour of rain, jingling	si li li
སི་ལིག་སི་ལིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་སྒྲ་གྲོག་པ	jingle	si lig si lig zer te sgra grog pa
སི་ལིང	commander	si ling
སི་ལིང་ཡོན	commander	si ling yon
སི་ལིང་ལུའུ	command headquarters	si ling lu'u
སི་ལེགས	silk	si legs
སི་ཤན	(CH silk thread/ cord	si shan
སི་སག	military division	si sag
སི་སི	sound of whistling through the teeth	si si
སི་སུ་མ་ར	dolphin	si su ma ra
སི་ཧ	kind of pomade, perfumed ointment, olibanum tree, incense, turpentine	si ha
སི་ཧུ་རྒྱལ་པོ	mi nyag si'u rgyal po	si hu rgyal po
སིག	1) Sikh; 2) jerk, shake, hitch up	sig
སིག་པ	jerk, hitch up, give a hitch as porters do with a load on their back	sig pa
སིག་བུ	sort of a basket	sig bu
སིག་དབུ	basket carried on the back	sig dbu
སིག་ར	sort of a basket	sig ra
སིག་སིག	move, jerk	sig sig
སིག་སིག་གཏོང	jerk, shake, hitch up	sig sig gtong
སིགས	gsig pa!	sigs
སིགས་མ	tshigs ma, snyigs ma	sigs ma
སིང	fine bells. [p sings] pick, choose, select	sing
སིང་སྐྱུར	chang juice again and again btsags nas thin chags pa'i btung stong zer ba de yin	sing skyur
སིང་ག་པུར	Singapore	sing ga pur
སིང་ག་ཕོར	Singapore	sing ga phor
སིང་ག་ལ	Ceylon, Shri Lanka	sing ga la
སིང་ག་ལའི་གླིང	modern ceylon	sing ga la'i gling
སིང་ག་ལའི་གླིང་དུ	in the land of Singala	sing ga la'i gling du
སིང་ག་ལའི་བདག་པོར་གྱུར	became a great personage in Sri Lanka	sing ga la'i bdag por gyur
སིང་གེ	lion	sing ge
སིང་སྒྲ	small bell sound	sing sgra
སིང་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	to produce a sound like small bells	sing sgra sgrog pa
སིང་ངེ	{sing nge ba} limpid (awareness)/ limpidity; clarity	sing nge
སིང་ངེ་བ	holy, pure character, clear, lucid	sing nge ba
སིང་ངེ་བ་ཡེ་རེ་བ་ཧྲིག་གེ་བ	clear, lucid and awake	sing nge ba ye re ba hrig ge ba
སིང་ངེ་ཡེ་རེ	clear and lucid; {sems sing nge ye re bzhag} keep a clear and lucid attention	sing nge ye re
སིང་ངེ་ཡེ་རེ་བ	very clear	sing nge ye re ba
སིང་ངེ་ཡོ་རེ་བ	Mahamudra: {rig pa sing nge yo re bar bcos} fashioning your conscious mind into being clear and open	sing nge yo re ba
སིང་དྭངས	limpid	sing dwangs
སིང་པ	[people of] Ladak [la dvags] and neighboring regions, Sikhs	sing pa
སིང་པོ	chang bcud dang po gnyis pa bsings zin pa'i weak/ thin tasting remains	sing po
སིང་བ	pick out wool, sort out wool, black	sing ba
སིང་བག་དང་བཅས་པ	crystal clear	sing bag dang bcas pa
སིང་བུ	mare's milk liquor, tartar arrack	sing bu
སིང་མོ	sister	sing mo
སིང་ཚོལ	teapot	sing tshol
སིང་ཡོལ	SA seng ras	sing yol
སིང་རག	chang and liquor	sing rag
སིང་རི	a mountain, SA sings po	sing ri
སིང་སིང	sound of steel when struck to test its quality, thin, limped	sing sing
སིང་སིང་གི་སྒྲ	sound of small bells 2777	sing sing gi sgra
སིང་སིང་པོ	bell and bangles etc. sound	sing sing po
སིངས	[p sing],, choose, pick, select	sings
སིངས་པ	sing po, weak/ thin drink/ liquid	sings pa
སིངས་པོ	sing po, weak/ thin drink/ liquid	sings po
སིད	way of speaking between the teeth	sid
སིད་སྐད	whistle	sid skad
སིད་གླུ	whistling song	sid glu
སིད་གླུ་གཏོང	whistle a song	sid glu gtong
སིད་རྒྱག	whistle	sid rgyag
སིད་སྒྲ	whistle	sid sgra
སིད་སྒྲོག	1) lion's sgra khyad par sid sgrog; 2) whistle a little tune between the teeth	sid sgrog
སིད་ཉིས	Sidney	sid nyis
སིད་བརྡ	whistle signal	sid brda
སིད་པ	whistle	sid pa
སིད་དྷ	{grub thob}	sid dha
སིན་ག་ལ	ceylon	sin ga la
སིན་དུ་གི་རི	mountain bordering sindh, a king of darada	sin du gi ri
སིན་འབེན	ramrod	sin 'ben
སིན་འབྱིན་པ	renounce, break	sin 'byin pa
སིན་དྷར	ancient indian sect	sin dhar
སིན་དྷུ	river Sindhu	sin dhu
སིན་དྷུ་ར	sindhura. Red or deep orange substance often used in tantric rituals. Syn {si 'dur ra}	sin dhu ra
སིན་དྷུ་རའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	sindura mandalas	sin dhu ra'i dkyil 'khor
སིན་དྷུ་རའི་མེ་ལོང	the mirror coated with sindhura	sin dhu ra'i me long
སིན་དྷུའི་བདག་པོ	ocean	sin dhu'i bdag po
སིབ	sib bi	sib
སིབ་ཀྱི་ཐིམ་པ	dissolving directly / completely	sib kyi thim pa
སིབ་ཀྱིས་ཐིམ་པ	evaporate or vanish quickly	sib kyis thim pa
སིབ་དྲི	body odor	sib dri
སིབ་ནད	measles	sib nad
སིབ་པ	be absorbed, evaporate, soak in, be imbibed	sib pa
སིབ་བི	measles, a disease	sib bi
སིབ་བུ	sort of smallpox, measles	sib bu
སིབ་མེད	measles	sib med
སིབ་སིབ	very slightly dissolving * drizzling, lightly/ softly falling	sib sib
སིབ་སིབ་ཐིབ་པ	to vanish into, be absorbed	sib sib thib pa
སིབ་སིབ་ཐིབས་པ	drizzling, lightly/ softly falling	sib sib thibs pa
སིབ་སིབ་ཐིམ	dissolve one after the other	sib sib thim
སིབ་སིབ་ཐིམ་པ	be lost in, vanish in the air	sib sib thim pa
སིམ	dissolves	sim
སིམ་ཁུང	sim bi'a, rdzong thur 'jug khung	sim khung
སིམ་སྒྲ་ཅན	rivulet that makes a refreshing sound	sim sgra can
སིམ་གདུང་གཉིས	satiating and agonizing	sim gdung gnyis
སིམ་གདུང་བར	satiating, agonizing and neutral	sim gdung bar
སིམ་གདུང་བར་མ	satiating, agonizing and neutral	sim gdung bar ma
སིམ་པ	1) [Tha mi dad pa sims pa, sim pa],, dissolve, subside, seep through; 2) happiness, pleasure, well-being [R]	sim pa
སིམ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	satisfied	sim pa dang ldan pa
སིམ་པ་བདེ་བ	happy well being	sim pa bde ba
སིམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	satisfy	sim par byed pa
སིམ་པོ	happy	sim po
སིམ་བྱིད	moon	sim byid
སིམ་བྱེད	1) wind; 2) moon	sim byed
སིམ་མེ	quietly, peacefully	sim me
སིམ་མེ་ཉན་པ	entranced; x {ri dvags pi wang gi sgra la chags pa zur nas rngon pas dug mda' bsnun kyang mi go bar sim me nyan pa dang 'dra bar} like a deer so entranced by the sound of the vina it does not notic...	sim me nyan pa
སིམ་མེ་བ	happy comfortable	sim me ba
སིམ་འཛིན	cool	sim 'dzin
སིམ་འོད་ཅན	moon	sim 'od can
སིམ་སིམ	very slightly dissolving, zim zim, [fine [soft rain], slightly opened eyes]	sim sim
སིམ་ཧ་བརྒྱད	eight Simhas or 8 Pisaci (Simhamukha, Yaghrimukha, Srgalamukha, Svanamukha, Grdhramukha, Kankamukha, Kakamukha, Ulumukha; seng ha mu kha, bya kri mu kha, sri la mu kha, shwa na mu kha, kri ta mu kh...	sim ha brgyad
སིམས་པ	[p sim pa]	sims pa
སིམས་པར	happily, contentedly	sims par
སིའུ	[flight of] rock stairs	si'u
སིའུ་སྐྱུར	sour si'u fruit	si'u skyur
སིར	(not in das)	sir
སིར་སྒྲ	sir sir sound	sir sgra
སིར་སིར	flying bee sound	sir sir
སིལ	ringing	sil
སིལ་ཁྲོལ	sounding	sil khrol
སིལ་ཁྲོལ་གྱི་སྒྲ	sound produced by one	sil khrol gyi sgra
སིལ་མཁན	cymbal player	sil mkhan
སིལ་སྒྲོག	peacock	sil sgrog
སིལ་དངུལ	rupee of ladak	sil dngul
སིལ་ཆབ	gurgling water, rippling brook	sil chab
སིལ་སྙན	[dkrol bya sbubs chal] kind of cymbal	sil snyan
སིལ་སྙན་དཀྲོལ་བ	play cymbals	sil snyan dkrol ba
སིལ་སྙན་མ	cymbal playing woman	sil snyan ma
སིལ་ཏོག	[arch] fruit	sil tog
སིལ་གཏོར	smithereens	sil gtor
སིལ་གཏོར་བྱེད་པ	shatter	sil gtor byed pa
སིལ་ཐོར	smithereens	sil thor
སིལ་བལ	sil bur bsed pa'i bal	sil bal
སིལ་བུ	bits	sil bu
སིལ་བུའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	individual/ private economy	sil bu'i dpal 'byor
སིལ་བུར	partially	sil bur
སིལ་བུར་གྲོལ་བ	loose	sil bur grol ba
སིལ་བུར་འགྲོ	to fall into pieces	sil bur 'gro
སིལ་བུར་འཐོར	disintegrate, fall to pieces, split apart	sil bur 'thor
སིལ་བུར་གནས	be/ remain in small pieces/ parts/ units	sil bur gnas
སིལ་བྱེད	[arch] staff	sil byed
སིལ་མ	fragments, pieces, small change	sil ma
སིལ་མ་བཞི་བཅུ	Forty Principalities. As a result of constant warfare between the Twelve Minor Kingdoms, power devolved into the hands of forty principalities {sil ma bzhi bcu} Apart from {'brog mo rnam gsum} rule...	sil ma bzhi bcu
སིལ་མར	fragments/ auspicious (?)	sil mar
སིལ་ཚོང	sell retail	sil tshong
སིལ་ཚོང་བྱེད	[sell] retail	sil tshong byed
སིལ་ཚོང་བྱེད་པ	[sell] retail	sil tshong byed pa
སིལ་འཚོང	retail sales	sil 'tshong
སིལ་འཚོང་ཁང	retail store/ outlet	sil 'tshong khang
སིལ་འཚོང་པ	retailer	sil 'tshong pa
སིལ་འཚོང་བ	retailer	sil 'tshong ba
སིལ་འཚོང་བྱེད	sell retail	sil 'tshong byed
སིལ་འཚོང་བྱེད་པ	retail	sil 'tshong byed pa
སིལ་ར	basket	sil ra
སིལ་ལི་མ	winter time chus khyer te rgyug pa'i frozen fragments	sil li ma
སིལ་ཤིང	wood/ tree cut into pieces	sil shing
སིལ་སིལ	cymbals	sil sil
སིལ་སིལ་སྒྲོག	peacock, sound cymbals	sil sil sgrog
སུ་ཀུན	every1	su kun
སུ་ཀྱང	/ su yang + neg. particle - no one	su kyang
སུ་ཁ་ལྦ་ཏི	Sukhavati	su kha lba ti
སུ་གང	whoever, anyone	su gang
སུ་གི	yogi	su gi
སུ་མགྱོགས	race, running match	su mgyogs
སུ་ཅུ་ཏིག	medicinal herb	su cu tig
སུ་ཆེ་བལྟ	let's see who's bigger	su che blta
སུ་ཏ་ཡ	an elephant	su ta ya
སུ་ཏ་རི	place in himavata	su ta ri
སུ་ཐུག་ཐུག	anyone you happen to meet	su thug thug
སུ་ཐོད་ཐོད	su dang su zhig gam ci byung gang byung	su thod thod
སུ་དག	who?	su dag
སུ་དང་གང་ལ་ཡང་འཆི་བ	everyone dies	su dang gang la yang 'chi ba
སུ་དྲག་འགྲེན	compete	su drag 'gren
སུ་འདྲ་ཞིག	who, what kind of person, any1, every1	su 'dra zhig
སུ་ནས	from whom	su nas
སུ་ནས་ཟེར	who says?	su nas zer
སུ་རྣམས	who?	su rnams
སུ་བར་ཏ	a gandharva princess, daughter of kabula	su bar ta
སུ་བྱའོ	make yourself	su bya'o
སུ་ལྦ་ཡེཏ	soviet	su lba yet
སུ་མ་ཏ་ར	Sumatra	su ma ta ra
སུ་མ་ན	a flower	su ma na
སུ་མི	medicinal root	su mi
སུ་མི་ཐུབ	incapable of contentment	su mi thub
སུ་མེ་ཐོ	a mountain	su me tho
སུ་ཞིག	some1, whoever	su zhig
སུ་ཞིག་གི	who will	su zhig gi
སུ་ཡང	anybody, none	su yang
སུ་ཡང་མི	no one	su yang mi
སུ་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ན	it seemed impossible that there could be any	su yang mi 'dug na
སུ་ཡང་མེད	no one	su yang med
སུ་ཡང་ཡོད་དམ	{te lo pa bya ba su yang yod dam byas pa} "Is there nobody named Tilopa?" he asked	su yang yod dam
སུ་ཡང་རུང	any	su yang rung
སུ་ཡི	whose	su yi
སུ་ཡིན	who is	su yin
སུ་ཡིན་ན	anybody	su yin na
སུ་ཡིན་ནའང	whosoever	su yin na'ang
སུ་ཡིན་རུང	whoever	su yin rung
སུ་ཡིས	by whom?, by whom	su yis
སུ་ཡིས་མཐོང	who could identify?	su yis mthong
སུ་ར	[arch] alcoholic beverage, chang	su ra
སུ་རུ་པན་ཙ	chilis	su ru pan tsa
སུ་རུ་ཕན་ཚ	red pepper, capsicum annuum, guinea-pepper	su ru phan tsha
སུ་རུག	1) kind of leather for shoes; 2) (M herd of khyu'am phyugs	su rug
སུ་རུང	whoever, anyone	su rung
སུ་རུང་རུང	just anybody	su rung rung
སུ་རུའི་སྣོད	wine-jug, water-pot	su ru'i snod
སུ་རེད	who are?	su red
སུ་རེན་དྲ་བོ་དྷི	SK {su ren dra bo dhi	su ren dra bo dhi
སུ་རྱ	Skt for {nyi ma}	su rya
སུ་ལ	whom, to whom	su la
སུ་ལ་ཡང	whether	su la yang
སུ་ལའང	everyone	su la'ang
སུ་ལུ	rue milaraspa's sitting posture, curl	su lu
སུ་ལུ་ཀ	[arch] grain chang	su lu ka
སུ་ལུ་མགོ	1) {ba lu} med. tree; 2) cattle entrails sul mang	su lu mgo
སུ་སུ	who!	su su
སུ་སུ་ཟེར་བ	inhaling to fan a fire	su su zer ba
སུ་སོང	who went?	su song
སུ་གསུངས་སྤ	of divinities?	su gsungs spa
སུག	1) arm, hand; 2) reward, gift, present; 3) push, nudge [person	sug
སུག་ཀྱོག	crooked legs	sug kyog
སུག་དཀར	w white arms and legs [horse, yak etc]	sug dkar
སུག་བཀྱིགས	bind the four arms and legs	sug bkyigs
སུག་རྔན	reward, recompense	sug rngan
སུག་རྗེད	mark of honor as a reward	sug rjed
སུག་ཏ	[arch] adulterated/ watered down chang	sug ta
སུག་རྟེན	base, pedestal	sug rten
སུག་མཐིལ	1) hoof; 2) palm of the hand	sug mthil
སུག་འདྲ	1) {sug 'dra} med. herb; 2) kind of metal	sug 'dra
སུག་པ	hand, 4 legs of animals, medicinal root, push, jog, nudge a person, push open a door with a stick	sug pa
སུག་པ་སྐྱེས	SA hong len	sug pa skyes
སུག་པ་ཞིག་བྱེད	shove, displace	sug pa zhig byed
སུག་པ་ཞིག་བྱེད་པ	push	sug pa zhig byed pa
སུག་པོ	limb	sug po
སུག་ཕྱེ	powdered medicinal root	sug phye
སུག་བྲིས	calligraphy	sug bris
སུག་བྲིས་སུ་བྱས	reduced to writing	sug bris su byas
སུག་མེལ	cardamum	sug mel
སུག་རྨེལ	smaller species of cardamom, kind of spice, cardamom	sug rmel
སུག་སྨེལ	Elettaria cardamonum	sug smel
སུག་ཙ	hairs of the hoof	sug tsa
སུག་བཞི	4 limbs of an animal	sug bzhi
སུག་བཞིར་རྟེན་ཁྲལ	tax depending on animals	sug bzhir rten khral
སུག་ཡོབ	arm and leg, hand and foot	sug yob
སུག་ལག	arm[s] and leg[s], limbs	sug lag
སུག་ལས	work [h]	sug las
སུག་སུག་རྒོད	laughing loudly	sug sug rgod
སུགས་བསྟན	indirect	sugs bstan
སུང་ང	amulet 2779	sung nga
སུང་ཧན་ཅིའང་གཙང་པོ	Sungari River	sung han ci'ang gtsang po
སུངས	rotten	sungs
སུངས་པ	rotten[ness]	sungs pa
སུད་དེ་ཤི་བ	die by being choked or suffocated	sud de shi ba
སུད་པ	few, little, short	sud pa
སུད་སི	Switzerland, swiss	sud si
སུད་སིའི་མཚོ་ཡུར	Suez Canal	sud si'i mtsho yur
སུན་ཀྲུང་ཧྲན	Sun Yat Sen	sun krung hran
སུན་ཁྱུད	scandal	sun khyud
སུན་གྲོགས་བློ	poisoned or prejudiced mind	sun grogs blo
སུན་ཆིན་ལིང	Mme. Sun Yat Sen	sun chin ling
སུན་འཇུག་པ	annoy	sun 'jug pa
སུན་དེ	SA dus de	sun de
སུན་འདོན	{skyon can sun 'don} rebuking people with faults, exposing people's faults	sun 'don
སུན་སྣང	state of being irritated/ vexed/ bothered/ fed up tired w	sun snang
སུན་སྣང་སྐྱེ	be irritated/ vexed/ bothered/ fed up tired w	sun snang skye
སུན་སྣང་མེད་པ	patient	sun snang med pa
སུན་པ	weary/ blame, accuse; weariness,	sun pa
ཕེ༹ད	up, boredom; cause of sadness, boredom, annoying, irritating, discouraged; {sun pa, sun pa, sun pa} intr. v	fed
སུན་པར་བྱེད	to displease, upset	sun par byed
སུན་པར་འབྱིན་པ	stun or drown with, overpower with noise, silence, refute, confute, disapprove, renounce, resign	sun par 'byin pa
སུན་པོ	sad, anxious	sun po
སུན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	dislike	sun po byed pa
སུན་པོ་བཟོས་པ	to annoy	sun po bzos pa
སུན་ཕྱུང	irritated	sun phyung
སུན་ཕྱུང་པ	{sun 'byung ba} to undermine [in logic]	sun phyung pa
སུན་ཕྱུང་བ	= remorse, refutation, disparaging	sun phyung ba
སུན་བྱུང	became corrupted, biased, prejudiced	sun byung
སུན་དབྱུང	break, renounce, disprove	sun dbyung
སུན་འབྱིན	angry words, discomfiting, assaulting the defilements	sun 'byin
སུན་འབྱིན་རྒྱང་པ	refute	sun 'byin rgyang pa
སུན་འབྱིན་ལྟར་སྣང	mere semblance of refutation	sun 'byin ltar snang
སུན་འབྱིན་ལྟར་སྣང་གསུམ	the three mere semblances of refutation CHN	sun 'byin ltar snang gsum
སུན་འབྱིན་ནུས	power /ability of refutation	sun 'byin nus
སུན་འབྱིན་པ	discredit, disprove [thd]	sun 'byin pa
སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་གཉེན་པོ	the remedial power of remorse	sun 'byin pa'i gnyen po
སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་སྟོབས	strength to renounce the world	sun 'byin pa'i stobs
སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་ཚིག	libel, words of insult or disgrace to another person	sun 'byin pa'i tshig
སུན་འབྱིན་བྱེད	refute, disparage * repudiate, criticize, condemn, expose faults	sun 'byin byed
སུན་འབྱིན་མེད་པ	w/o refutation	sun 'byin med pa
སུན་འབྱིན་ཡང་དག	true refutation	sun 'byin yang dag
སུན་འབྱུང་བ	{sun phyung pa} to undermine [in logic]	sun 'byung ba
སུན་མ	escort, 1 who goes to meet a person, call [of the dakinis]	sun ma
སུན་མང	repeatedly bored	sun mang
སུན་མེད་ངང་རིང	forebearing happy nature w/o irritation	sun med ngang ring
སུན་གཙེར	sad [to hear], unhappy and uncomfortable	sun gtser
སུན་ཞུས	were annoyed	sun zhus
སུན་བཟློག	averting/ sending back the call	sun bzlog
སུན་རེ	[arch] just a little [each]	sun re
སུན་ཧུ་ཅང	Sungari River	sun hu cang
སུབ་བཀྱིགས	preparations or arrangements	sub bkyigs
སུབ་པ	{sub pa, bsubs pa, bsub pa, subs} trans. v	sub pa
སུབ་སུབ	obliterated, rubbed out, erased	sub sub
སུབ་སུབ་བྱེད	obliterate, erase, rub out	sub sub byed
སུབས	imp. of {sub pa}	subs
སུམ	three (in compounds before consonants)	sum
སུམ་སྐོར་མ	front channel	sum skor ma
སུམ་སྐྱ	cord of three twisted threads	sum skya
སུམ་ཁྲི	thirty thousand	sum khri
སུམ་ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང	39,000	sum khri brgyad stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་ལྔ་སྟོང	35,000	sum khri lnga stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་ཉིས་སྟོང	thirty two thousand	sum khri nyis stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་དྲུག་སྟོང	thirty-six thousand	sum khri drug stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་བདུན་སྟོང	37,000	sum khri bdun stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང	34,000	sum khri bzhi stong
སུམ་ཁྲི་སུམ་སྟོང	33,000	sum khri sum stong
སུམ་ག	shoulder bag	sum ga
སུམ་གལ	shoulder bag. Syn {gal ta}	sum gal
སུམ་འགྱུར	multiplied by 3, 3-fold, three times	sum 'gyur
སུམ་བརྒྱ	300	sum brgya
སུམ་བརྒྱ་པ	{sum brgya pa}	sum brgya pa
སུམ་ཅུ	30	sum cu
སུམ་ཅུ་གཉིས	32	sum cu gnyis
སུམ་ཅུ་གཉིས་མཚན་ལྡན་པ	having the 32 marks	sum cu gnyis mtshan ldan pa
སུམ་ཅུ་ཏིག	saxifraga przewalskii engl, saxifraga tanguitica engl.	sum cu tig
སུམ་ཅུ་ཏིག་ཏ	{sum cu tig ta} field herb	sum cu tig ta
སུམ་ཅུ་པ	1) The Trimsika-karika by Vasubandhu; 2) work byu by {thon mi sam bho ta}; 3) the 30 consonants	sum cu pa
དབང་ཅན་རེ་བཞི	CHN	dbang can re bzhi
སུམ་ཅུ་པའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད	1) commentary on the {bod kyi brda sprod rig pa sum cu pa}; 2) commentary on the {mdo sde sum cu pa}	sum cu pa'i 'grel bshad
སུམ་ཅུ་པའི་ཚིག་ལེའུ་བྱས་པ	The Trimsika-karika by Vasubandhu	sum cu pa'i tshig le'u byas pa
སུམ་ཅུ་པའི་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ	the Trimsika-karika by Vasubandhu. Syn {phra ka ra na sde brgyad} one of the {pra ka ra na sde brgyad} the eight Prakarana of Vasubhandhu	sum cu pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa
སུམ་ཅུ་པའི་རབ་བྱེད	text by dbyig gnyen	sum cu pa'i rab byed
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	35	sum cu rtsa lnga
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	31	sum cu rtsa gcig
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	32	sum cu rtsa gnyis
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	36	sum cu rtsa drug
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན	37	sum cu rtsa bdun
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི	34	sum cu rtsa bzhi
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	residence of the 33 gods, heaven of indra deva realm of 33, the thirty-three heaven, 1 of 'dod lha rigs drug	sum cu rtsa gsum
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་ཀྱི་ལྷ	chiefs of the 33 groups of gods	sum cu rtsa gsum kyi lha
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་གྱི་གནས	the Heaven of the Thirty three	sum cu rtsa gsum gyi gnas
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ་ཡུལ	the god realm of the 33	sum cu rtsa gsum gyi lha yul
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་པ	the Thirty-three; one of {'dod lha rigs drug} six classes of desire gods	sum cu rtsa gsum pa
ཨཱབོདེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཋིརཏཡ	three; {ri rab kyi steng na gnas} live at the top of Mount Sumeru sum cu rtsa gsum pa'i steng gi nam mkha' - in the sky above the Abode of the	Abode of the Thirty
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་པའི་ལྷ་རྣམས	the 33 deities of the desire realm	sum cu rtsa gsum pa'i lha rnams
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་ལྷ་ཚོགས	the assembly of the 33 gods of the desire realm	sum cu rtsa gsum lha tshogs
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་ལྷའི་གནས	the Heaven	sum cu rtsa gsum lha'i gnas
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཋིརཏཡ	three	of the Thirty
སུམ་བཅུ	30	sum bcu
སུམ་བཅུ་ཏིག	1 of 6 kinds of bitters which have healing powers, SA dngul tig	sum bcu tig
སུམ་བཅུ་རྩ་དགུ	39	sum bcu rtsa dgu
སུམ་བཅུ་རྩ་བརྒྱད	38	sum bcu rtsa brgyad
སུམ་བཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	trayastrimsa gods	sum bcu rtsa gsum
སུམ་ཆ	thirds	sum cha
སུམ་ཆ་གཉིས	2\3	sum cha gnyis
སུམ་གཉིས	two-thirds	sum gnyis
སུམ་ཏིག	saxifraga umbellulata hook. f. et thoms., saxifraga sanguinea franch.	sum tig
སུམ་རྟགས	sum cu pa + two {rtags kyi 'jug pa} ??	sum rtags
སུམ་སྟོང	3 thousand	sum stong
སུམ་སྟོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟུངས	{sum ston ye shes gzungs}	sum ston ye shes gzungs
སུམ་ཐོག	three story building	sum thog
སུམ་མདོ	where several roads or rivers meet, junction of roads or rivers, chakra of fire at joint	sum mdo
སུམ་ལྡན	having three parts	sum ldan
སུམ་ལྡན་དུས	time of having three parts	sum ldan dus
སུམ་ལྡབ	three times	sum ldab
སུམ་པ	1) (Tha dad pa bsums pa, bsum pa, sums,, put together; 2) = Sum pa'i ru	sum pa
སུམ་པ་མཁན་པོ	celebrated tibetan author	sum pa mkhan po
སུམ་པ་འགག	{sum pa 'gag}	sum pa 'gag
སུམ་པ་ཆོས་འབྱུང	the three fold wishfulfilling tree of the arising of the dharma	sum pa chos 'byung
སུམ་པའི་བོན་པོ	sum pa B"n	sum pa'i bon po
སུམ་པའི་རུ	the three ru	sum pa'i ru
སུམ་བིད	(corrupt SK shastra beginning ornamentation in lantsha, wartu, and Tibetan	sum bid
སུམ་བུ་རྩ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ་གནས	the	sum bu rtsa gsum gyi lha gnas
Hཨེཨབེ༹ན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཋིརཏཡ	Three	Heaven of the Thirty
སུམ་འབུམ	300,000	sum 'bum
སུམ་འབུམ་ཆིག་ཁྲི	310 thousand	sum 'bum chig khri
སུམ་འབུམ་ཆེག་ཁྲི	310,000	sum 'bum cheg khri
སུམ་འབུམ་ཉི་ཁྲི	320,000	sum 'bum nyi khri
སུམ་འབུམ་དྲུག་སྟོང	306,000	sum 'bum drug stong
སུམ་འབྱིན	mortify	sum 'byin
སུམ་སྦྱར	triply joined	sum sbyar
སུམ་སྦྲགས	three united as one	sum sbrags
སུམ་སྦྲེལ	triple, threefold	sum sbrel
སུམ་རྩེག	three stories/ layers, stacked in 3s	sum rtseg
སུམ་རྩེན	the place of the three principal 1s	sum rtsen
སུམ་རྩེན་འདུན་ས	city/ [meeting place] of the gods	sum rtsen 'dun sa
སུམ་ཚན	every three days, triple	sum tshan
སུམ་ཚུགས	shape sum tshugs, thab rdo sum tshugs shig btsugs te tsha phogs brgyab	sum tshugs
སུམ་ཟུར	1) 1/3; 2) triangular	sum zur
སུམ་ཡར	more than 3, 1/3	sum yar
སུམ་རིམ་པ	three storied/ layered	sum rim pa
སུམ་ལོག	three times	sum log
སུམས	imp. of {sum pa}	sums
སུའང	anyone	su'ang
སུའི	whose, of whom	su'i
སུའི་དོན་དུའོ	for whose benefit 2781	su'i don du'o
སུའི་ཛར་ལན	Switzerland	su'i dzar lan
སུའུ	soviet	su'u
སུའུ་ཀེ་ལན	Scotland	su'u ke lan
སུའུ་གུང་ཀྲང་དབྱང	Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union	su'u gung krang dbyang
སུའུ་ཏན	Sudan	su'u tan
སུའུ་རྡེན	Sweden	su'u rden
སུའུ་དབྱུ་ཧི་གཙང་པོ	Suez Canal	su'u dbyu hi gtsang po
སུའུ་ལྦི་ཡེ	soviet	su'u lbi ye
སུའུ་མོང	Soviet-M	su'u mong
སུའུ་ཝེ་ཡེད	soviet su'u we yed spyi tshogs ring lugs spyi mthun rgyal khab khag mna' 'brel gyi	su'u we yed
སུའུ་ལེན	Soviet Union	su'u len
སུའུ་ལེན་དང་མོང་གོལ	Soviet-M	su'u len dang mong gol
སུའུ་ལེན་སྲིད་གཞུང	soviet government	su'u len srid gzhung
སུར	to whom	sur
སུར་ཀར	ledum palustre, type of rhododendron	sur kar
སུར་དཀར	med. tree [a kind of ba lu]	sur dkar
སུར་སྒྲ	word like water scattered in fire	sur sgra
སུར་དུག	{sur dug} disease	sur dug
སུར་པན	red pepper or capsicum	sur pan
སུར་ཕན	red pepper	sur phan
སུར་ཡ	sun, colocynth, a disease	sur ya
སུར་སུར	coarse-grained, grits	sur sur
སུལ	1) cleft. 2) in the midst of; ravine/ fissure/ crevice/ fold	sul
སུལ་ཅན	SA ka wa can, furrowed, having plaits or folds	sul can
སུལ་འབྱིན	ascribe faults, refute	sul 'byin
སུལ་མ	angular or grooved vessel	sul ma
སུལ་མང	nang khrol lam nang cha grod pa	sul mang
སུལ་མང་ཟུར་བརྒྱད	eight-faceted interior	sul mang zur brgyad
སུལ་མལ	3rd stomach of ruminating animals, psalterium or book tripe	sul mal
སུལ་ལམ	difficult path w many ridges and hollows	sul lam
སུལ་སུལ	many ridges and hollows gshib pa [arrange, be together]	sul sul
སུས	whoever, by whom	sus
སུས་ཀྱང	everyone	sus kyang
སུས་ཀྱང་མ་བྱེད་པ	not made by anyone	sus kyang ma byed pa
སུས་ཀྱང་མི་ཤེས	no 1 knows	sus kyang mi shes
སུས་བཀག	stopped by whom	sus bkag
སུས་ཐོབ	greedily snatch/ grab/ take/ quarrel over what 1 wants,	sus thob
སུས་ཐོས	for whoever hears them	sus thos
སུས་པ	belly, stomach	sus pa
སུས་སྤྱོད་པ	whoever practices	sus spyod pa
སུས་ཚོད	circumstances	sus tshod
སུས་རིག་པ	one who has real knowledge	sus rig pa
སུས་ཤེས	who knows, who can tell	sus shes
སེ	1 of 4 original races of tibet, SA nang gi rigs bzhi, 1 of mi bu gdung drug, 1 of 6 early tribes of tibet, kind of small bird, little, very small, number 118	se
སེ་སྐྱ་པ	followers of kapila and the Yoga school of hinduism	se skya pa
སེ་ཁྲ་མ	species of fly	se khra ma
སེ་ཁྲོམ	place in tibet	se khrom
སེ་གོ་དིང	{se go ding} bird	se go ding
སེ་གོ་བོ	{se go ding} bird	se go bo
སེ་གོལ	finger-snap	se gol
སེ་གོལ་གྱི་སྒྲ	sound produced by snapping the fingers	se gol gyi sgra
སེ་གོལ་གྱི་བརྡ	signal given by snapping one's fingers	se gol gyi brda
སེ་གོལ་གྱི་ཡུན	period of a finger snap, as long as a finger snap	se gol gyi yun
སེ་གོལ་སྒྲ	sound from the snapping of fingers	se gol sgra
སེ་གོལ་གཅིག་ལ	in the snap of a finger	se gol gcig la
སེ་གོལ་གཏོགས་པ	snapping his fingers	se gol gtogs pa
སེ་གོལ་གཏོགས་པ་ཙམ	as much as the snap of one's fingers as a sign of contempt or indignation	se gol gtogs pa tsam
སེ་གོལ་གཏོང	snap the fingers	se gol gtong
སེ་གོལ་རྡེབ	snap the fingers	se gol rdeb
སེ་གོལ་བརྡབ	snap the fingers	se gol brdab
སེ་གོལ་བརྡབས་པ	to snap the fingers	se gol brdabs pa
སེ་གོལ་ཙམ་རེའི་ཡུན་ལ	in the snap of a finger	se gol tsam re'i yun la
སེ་གོལ་ཙམ་ལ	in the snap of a finger	se gol tsam la
སེ་དགེ	1 of the {gcan gzan che dgu}	se dge
སེ་རྒོད	rosa sweginzowii koehne, wild pomegranate	se rgod
སེ་ཅིག	a little, very small	se cig
སེ་ཆང	Seychang, in Domey	se chang
སེ་ཆུང	1) {se chung} ancient clan; 2) a valley	se chung
སེ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	{se chen rgyal po	se chen rgyal po
སེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ	one of the tartar emperors of china	se chen chos rje
སེ་ལྗང	yellowish green	se ljang
སེ་ཉ་བ	probably tibetanized form of siddha, buddhist monk, mendicant	se nya ba
སེ་ཏ་རོག་པོ	species of aquatic bird	se ta rog po
སེ་ཐ	{se tha} district	se tha
སེ་དུག	syphilis	se dug
སེ་དུག་ནད	syphilis	se dug nad
སེ་དྲི	disagreeable smell of the sweat of the armpits	se dri
སེ་དྲི་བསྣམ་པ	having the smell of armpits	se dri bsnam pa
སེ་བདར	[arch] having lcags bdar [ground/ sharpened iron, polished metal?] surface =izing file	se bdar
སེ་བདུད	demon	se bdud
སེ་འདྲི	body odor	se 'dri
སེ་རྡུར	place in tibet	se rdur
སེ་ན་བཞི	CHN	se na bzhi
སེ་སྣོལ་གནམ་ལྡེ	Tibetan king	se snol gnam lde
སེ་སྣོལ་པོ་ལྡེ	{se snol po lde	se snol po lde
སེ་པན	capsicum, hot pepper, chili	se pan
སེ་པེན	hot pebber, chili	se pen
སེ་ཕུང	{klu gnas pa'i se phung zhig} the thicket in which the naga lived	se phung
སེ་བ	a small sphere	se ba
སེ་བ་རང་རྟ	horse on which a demon rides	se ba rang rta
སེ་བན་ནས་པ	1 of the disciples of mi la ras pa	se ban nas pa
སེ་བན་རས་པ	se ban Repa	se ban ras pa
སེ་བའི་མེ་ཏོག	{se ba'i me tog} wild rose whose petals yield a yellow dye	se ba'i me tog
སེ་བོ	pure white, yellow, gray	se bo
སེ་བོན	se Bon school	se bon
སེ་བྱ	se bird [R]	se bya
སེ་འབག	mask of the Se spirit / leather mask	se 'bag
སེ་འབུ	bad-smelling insect	se 'bu
སེ་འབྲས	1) se tree fruit; 2) monasteries se ra and 'bras spungs	se 'bras
སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ	three monasteries se ra, 'bras spungs, and dga' ldan	se 'bras dga' gsum
སེ་འབྲས་དགེ་གསུམ	Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries	se 'bras dge gsum
སེ་འབྲུ	pomegranate tree med. *, berries	se 'bru
སེ་འབྲུ་རྒོད	wild pomegranate	se 'bru rgod
སེ་འབྲུ་རྒོད་པ	1) new se tree fruit; 2) wild pomegranate tree	se 'bru rgod pa
སེ་འབྲུ་ནག་པོ	blackberry	se 'bru nag po
སེ་འབྲུ་མེ་ཏོག	pomegranate flower	se 'bru me tog
སེ་འབྲུ་དམར་པོ	strawberry	se 'bru dmar po
སེ་འབྲུམ	hip fruit of wild brier, pomegranate	se 'brum
སེ་འབྲོག	spite, malice, backbiting	se 'brog
སེ་མོ	necklace	se mo
སེ་མོ་དོ	short necklace; long necklace	se mo do
སེ་མོག	syphilis, venereal disease	se mog
སེ་དམར	a ferry near the monastery of bsam yas	se dmar
སེ་རྨ	syphilitic ulcers	se rma
སེ་བཙུན	{se btsun	se btsun
སེ་ཞིག	meet (?)	se zhig
སེ་ཞོ	1) gold/ silver weight srang count rtsis gzhi; 2) {bdud rtsi se dkar} tree med.	se zho
སེ་ཡབ	fig	se yab
སེ་ཡོ	grey	se yo
སེ་ཡོ་རེ་བ	pure white hair	se yo re ba
སེ་ར	place of wild rose or brier, large monastery near lhasa, Sera monastery	se ra
སེ་ར་མཁའ་འགྲོ་བདེ་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	x	se ra mkha' 'gro bde ba'i rdo rje
སེ་ར་དགོན་པ	Sera Monastery	se ra dgon pa
སེ་ར་ཆོས་སྡིངས	{se ra chos sdings se ra rje btsun chos kyi rgyal mtshan 1469-1546	se ra chos sdings
སེ་ར་ཐེག་ཆེན་གླིང	{se ra theg chen gling	se ra theg chen gling
སེ་ར་པ	monk of sera	se ra pa
སེ་ར་ཕུར་མཇལ	Sera phurba showing festival	se ra phur mjal
སེ་ར་ཕུར་བུ	the Sera Phurbu (ceremony on the 27th day of the 12th Tibetan month)	se ra phur bu
སེ་ར་བྱེས	(college)	se ra byes
སེ་ར་བྱེས་གྲྭ་ཚང	Sera Jey monastery in Bylakuppe, Karnataka	se ra byes grwa tshang
སེ་ར་སྨད་ཐོས་བསམ་ནོར་བུ་གླིང	college	se ra smad thos bsam nor bu gling
སེ་ར་བཞི་མཆོད	the Offerings on the	se ra bzhi mchod
སེ་རྭ	Sera, a large monastery near Lhasa	se rwa
སེ་རག་དུར་སྨན	carrot	se rag dur sman
སེ་རལ་ཁ	shoulder-belt	se ral kha
སེ་རལ་འཕྲེང་བ	above the shoulders and under the chin left and right fastened/ wound ornaments	se ral 'phreng ba
སེ་རུ	[arch] yellow	se ru
སེ་རུལ	kind of mineral earth used as medicine, probably bismuth, yak-cow's dung	se rul
སེ་རེལ	half open	se rel
སེ་ལིང་ཡོན	commander	se ling yon
སེ་ལེ་ལྗང་པ	orchid	se le ljang pa
སེ་ལོ་ས་ཕྱགས	house sweeper of the king of sa bdag demons	se lo sa phyags
སེ་ཤར་རེ་བ	whitish brown	se shar re ba
སེ་ཤིང	bse tree	se shing
སེ་སེ	kind of brick tea	se se
སེ་ཧང	kind of brick tea	se hang
སེ་ཧྲང	yellow beads of a rosary	se hrang
སེག	obliquely, awry	seg
སེག་གཅོད་པ	cut obliquely	seg gcod pa
སེག་རྡར	metal grinding/ sharpening tool, file, rasp	seg rdar
སེག་བརྡར	metal grinding/ sharpening tool, file, rasp	seg brdar
སེག་པ	(tha mi dad pa so brtse ba, tsampa mixed w rock powder so seg pa	seg pa
སེག་བྱ	aquatic bird, snipe	seg bya
སེག་མ	small stones, gravel	seg ma
སེག་སེག	obliquely, awry	seg seg
སེགས་ཅན	gravelly	segs can
སེང	gseng, lion, acacia wood * [p bsang],, raise, lift cleanse, refresh 1self	seng
སེང་དཀར	white lion [living on snow mts.]	seng dkar
སེང་དཀར་མོ	snowlioness	seng dkar mo
སེང་དཀར་གསང་བ	white sog w red head on the penis med.	seng dkar gsang ba
སེང་ཁྲི	lion throne	seng khri
སེང་ཁྲི་པད་མ་ཉི་ཟླ	lion throne, lotus, sun and moon	seng khri pad ma nyi zla
སེང་ག་གླིང	Sri Lanka	seng ga gling
སེང་ག་ལ	Sri Lanka seng gi rnam par rol ba'i ting nge 'dzin TSE	seng ga la
སེང་གིའི་འགྲོས	stride of the lion	seng gi'i 'gros
སེང་གིའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བུ	lion prince	seng gi'i rgyal po'i bu
སེང་གིའི་སྟོབ་ས	strength of lions	seng gi'i stob sa
སེང་གེ	lion. singha; lion, simha	seng ge
སེང་གེ་དཀར་མོ	the white lion	seng ge dkar mo
སེང་གེ་རྐང་བརྒྱད	8 legged lion	seng ge rkang brgyad
སེང་གེ་རྐང་པ་བརྒྱད་པ	"Eightfooted Lion"	seng ge rkang pa brgyad pa
སེང་གེ་སྐྲོད	tree, species of euphorbia used in offerings to the snake goddess	seng ge skrod
སེང་གེ་ཁ་འབབ	{seng ge kha 'bab river	seng ge kha 'bab
སེང་གེ་ཁ་འབབ་གངས་རི	{seng ge kha 'bab} snow mt	seng ge kha 'bab gangs ri
སེང་གེ་ཁྲི	throne, chair born by carved lion	seng ge khri
སེང་གེ་གླལ་བ	lion's attitude or posture	seng ge glal ba
སེང་གེ་མགོ་ལྷ་ལུང	Lhalung of Senge Go	seng ge mgo lha lung
སེང་གེ་འགྱིང་བའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	lion gaze	seng ge 'gying ba'i lta stangs
སེང་གེ་རྒྱན་གཞི	seng ge'i ri mo yod pa'i brocade	seng ge rgyan gzhi
སེང་གེ་སྒྲ་གྲོགས	Roaring Lion. Senge Dradrog. One of Padmasambhava's eight manifestations	seng ge sgra grogs
སེང་གེ་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག	{seng ge sgra sgrog}, lion's roar	seng ge sgra sgrog
སེང་གེ་བསྒྱིངས་པ	lions playing seng ge bsgyings pa'i ting nge 'dzin Samadhi of the Majestic Lion. Described in the 'Flower Adornment Sutra,' Vol. III, Shambhala Publications	seng ge bsgyings pa
སེང་གེ་ཅང་ཤེས	the wise/ all-knowing lion	seng ge cang shes
སེང་གེ་ཅན	gru shan, kind of wooden boat	seng ge can
སེང་གེ་འཇིགས་མེད	{seng ge 'jigs med} med. herb	seng ge 'jigs med
སེང་གེ་འཇོམས	sha ra bha	seng ge 'joms
སེང་གེ་ཉལ་ལུགས	way of sleeping like a lion	seng ge nyal lugs
སེང་གེ་ལྟ་བུ	like a lion	seng ge lta bu
སེང་གེ་སྟག	lion and tiger	seng ge stag
སེང་གེ་དོང་མ	Lion-faced/headed Dakini	seng ge dong ma
སེང་གེ་གདན་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	lion seat circle	seng ge gdan gyi 'khor lo
སེང་གེ་གདོང	sihamukha, simhamukha, singhamukha, simhavaktra, lion-headed dakini 2783	seng ge gdong
སེང་གེ་གདོང་ཅན	simhavaktra (lionheaded dakini)	seng ge gdong can
སེང་གེ་གདོང་པ་ཅན	Dakini Singhamukha. Singhamukha: "The Lion-Faced"	seng ge gdong pa can
སེང་གེ་གདོང་མ	a deity	seng ge gdong ma
སེང་གེ་མདོང་མ	Singhamukha	seng ge mdong ma
སེང་གེ་རྣམ་བསྒྱིངས	lion's attitude or posture	seng ge rnam bsgyings
སེང་གེ་རྣམ་པར་བསྒྱིངས	the lion's sport/ ramping seng ge rnam par bsgyings pa'i ting nge 'dzin - lions sport/ ramping samadhi	seng ge rnam par bsgyings
སེང་གེ་རྣམ་པར་རྩེ	1) lion lus rtsal ngoms = prancing and playing; 2) bodhisattva {seng ge rnam par rtse} (/ gi mtshan	seng ge rnam par rtse
སེང་གེ་དཔལ	heart-son of {o rgyan pa}	seng ge dpal
སེང་གེ་དཔུང་པ	way of making shoulders of upper garment	seng ge dpung pa
སེང་གེ་སྦར་མོ	herb {ga bur tis lo}	seng ge sbar mo
སེང་གེ་མོའི་བུ	SA sgra gcan, planet rahu	seng ge mo'i bu
སེང་གེ་གཙང་པོ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	seng ge gtsang po
སེང་གེ་རྩལ་རྫོགས	1 of 17 man ngag sde tantras, tantra of the perfected lion	seng ge rtsal rdzogs
སེང་གེ་རྩལ་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	Tantra of the Perfected Lion	seng ge rtsal rdzogs kyi rgyud
སེང་གེ་རྩེན	epithet of 'jam dpal	seng ge rtsen
སེང་གེ་བཟང་པོ	haribhadra, indian buddhist pandit who wrote shar phyin commentary	seng ge bzang po
སེང་གེ་བཟང་པོའི་འགྲེལ་ཆུང	nt. Haribhadra's Minor Commentary [on the Ornament of Higher Realization]	seng ge bzang po'i 'grel chung
སེང་གེ་ཡོད་པ	lion inhabited realm seng ge g.yu mtsho - Turquoise Lion Lake	seng ge yod pa
སེང་གེ་རབ་བརྟན	one of the {thub pa drug} sage of the animals, Steadfast Lion. Syn the buddha of the animals	seng ge rab brtan
སེང་གེའི་ཁྱིམ	the mansion of Leo	seng ge'i khyim
སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི	lion throne {rin po che rab tu 'bar ba seng ge'i khri yangs shing rgya che ba bshams pa} the gods prepared for the Buddha a broad and lofty lion throne sparkling with brilliant jewels	seng ge'i khri
སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི་འཛིན་པ	holder of the lion throne seng ge'i khri la rang gi phu bo de bzhag	seng ge'i khri 'dzin pa
རྒྱལ་སར་བསྐུར	placed his older brother on the lion throne and made him king	rgyal sar bskur
སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི་བཤམས་པ	arrya? a lion throne	seng ge'i khri bshams pa
སེང་གེའི་མགོ	lion head Lady, = {rdo rje dmar mo}	seng ge'i mgo
སེང་གེའི་མགོ་ཅན	having a lion's head	seng ge'i mgo can
སེང་གེའི་འགྲམ	lion's jaw	seng ge'i 'gram
སེང་གེའི་འགྲོས	stride of the lion	seng ge'i 'gros
སེང་གེའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བུ	lion prince	seng ge'i rgyal po'i bu
སེང་གེའི་སྒྲ	6th in list of 1000 buddhas	seng ge'i sgra
སེང་གེའི་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་པ	epithet of son of kamadeva	seng ge'i sgra sgrog pa
སེང་གེའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས	the Lion's Roar	seng ge'i sgra dbyangs
སེང་གེའི་ང་རོ	1) lion's roar; 2) buddha {seng ge'i nga ro; 3) fearless proclamation of the teachings	seng ge'i nga ro
སེང་གེའི་ཉལ་སྟངས	sleeping position like Buddha	seng ge'i nyal stangs
སེང་གེའི་ཉལ་སྟབས	lion position	seng ge'i nyal stabs
སེང་གེའི་ཉལ་ལུགས	manner of a sleeping lion	seng ge'i nyal lugs
སེང་གེའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	gazing directly straight ahead in a direct way of looking seng ge'i stabs su gshegs pa'i dpe byad the minor mark of walking like a lion	seng ge'i lta stangs
སེང་གེའི་སྟོབས	strength of lions	seng ge'i stobs
སེང་གེའི་གདོང་ཅན	wrathful lionheaded form of wisdom dakini, SA seng ge gdong	seng ge'i gdong can
སེང་གེའི་གདོང་ཅན་མ	Simhamukha	seng ge'i gdong can ma
སེང་གེའི་གདོང་བ་ཅན	ye shes kyi mkha' 'gro ma seng ge'i gdong ba can - the	seng ge'i gdong ba can
སེང་གེའི་རྩལ	prowess of the lion, one powerful as the lion	seng ge'i rtsal
སེང་གེའི་རྩལ་གསུམ	three strengths of a lion	seng ge'i rtsal gsum
སེང་གེའི་བཞོན་པ	Manjushri seng ge'i g.yu ral ngom sa - the place	seng ge'i bzhon pa
ཝཧེརེ་སྣོཝ	lions toss their turquoise manes	where snow
སེང་གེའི་རལ་པ	mane of the lion	seng ge'i ral pa
སེང་གེའི་རིགས	dog	seng ge'i rigs
སེང་གེའི་ཤིང་རྟ་མ	goddess Uma	seng ge'i shing rta ma
སེང་གེའི་སོབ	stuffed skin of a lion	seng ge'i sob
སེང་སྒྲོགས	Senge Dradrok	seng sgrogs
སེང་ངེ	{seng nge ba} limpid (awareness)/ limpidity; clarity; (not falling in the direction of appearances; free from the concepts of the three times; purely; lucid)	seng nge
སེང་ངེ་བ	limpid (awareness)/ limpidity; clarity; (not falling in the direction of appearances; free from the concepts of the three times; purely; lucid)	seng nge ba
སེང་ངེར་ཡེ་རེ་སྡོད	Syn {khams sang nge dvangs se sdod}	seng nger ye re sdod
སེང་ལྕམ་དཀར་མོའི	natural ice-water, glacier stream	seng lcam dkar mo'i
སེང་ལྕམ་དཀར་མོའི་ནུ་ཞོ	glacial water	seng lcam dkar mo'i nu zho
སེང་ཆེན་ནམས་བྲག	Sengchen Namtrak. One of the 25 sacred places of Kham opened by Chokgyur Lingpa. Sengchen Namdrak means 'Great Lion Sky Cliff.'	seng chen nams brag
སེང་ཆེན་གནམ་བྲག	Great lion sky boulder 2784	seng chen gnam brag
སེང་ཐང་ཚ་ཁ	chu tshan [R] river? hot spring?	seng thang tsha kha
སེང་དྲག	completely cure/ recover from a disease	seng drag
སེང་དྲག་བྱུང་ཚད	rate of recovery from disease	seng drag byung tshad
སེང་གདན	lion seat	seng gdan
སེང་གདོང	lion-faced	seng gdong
སེང་གདོང་མ	Singhamukha	seng gdong ma
སེང་གདོང་མ་དཀར་མོ	the White Lionfaced Dakini	seng gdong ma dkar mo
སེང་གདོང་མ་དམར་མོ	red lion-head. Syn {lcags sgrog ma} / {sgo ma bzhi}	seng gdong ma dmar mo
སེང་གདོང་མའི་ཟློག་སྒྱུར	practicing meditation and recitation of the wisdom dakini seng gdong ma w the principal deity and retinue gtso 'khor gsum [does that mean three or two retinue???] bar chad phyir sgyur gyi liturgy	seng gdong ma'i zlog sgyur
སེང་ལྡང	tree growing on the southern lower ranges with red wood whose bark is used for tea and sap serves as officinal drug	seng ldang
སེང་ལྡེང	Khadira. Acacia catechu, a tree with very hard wood used for the points of ploughshares, the axle-pins of chariots, amulets, etc. Its resin is used medicinally	seng ldeng
སེང་ལྡེང་ངན་མ	inferior species seng ldeng	seng ldeng ngan ma
སེང་ལྡེང་ཅན	{seng ldeng can	seng ldeng can
སེང་ལྡེང་ལྡན	1 of 7 fabulous golden mountains	seng ldeng ldan
སེང་ལྡེང་ནགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོལ་མ	green Tara	seng ldeng nags kyi sgrol ma
སེང་ལྡེང་རིགས་གསུམ	the three kinds of teak/ rosewood	seng ldeng rigs gsum
སེང་སྡེང་ནགས་པ	Khadira Vanika, important monk follower of the Buddha	seng sdeng nags pa
སེང་པོ	pure, clean	seng po
སེང་ལྤགས	lion skin	seng lpags
སེང་ཕྲུག	the young lion	seng phrug
སེང་ཕྲུག་གུ	a lion cub	seng phrug gu
སེང་ཕྲུག་དར་མ	young lion cubs	seng phrug dar ma
སེང་ཕྲོམ	zhu mkhan tree leaf med	seng phrom
སེང་བ	lift up, raise what was hanging down or dropping	seng ba
སེང་བག	awake quality, alive; opp. of {bying nyams can}	seng bag
སེང་བྱས	cleansed refreshed, purified	seng byas
སེང་འབྲུག	lion and dragon	seng 'brug
སེང་འབྲུག་སྟག་རྩེ	{seng 'brug stag rtse castle} [R]	seng 'brug stag rtse
སེང་མ	1) w gaps/ interstices; 2) [arch] lan kan	seng ma
སེང་ཚགས	very fine cloth like chu tshags	seng tshags
སེང་ཚེར	thorns of seng ldeng tree [teak?]	seng tsher
སེང་བཟང	proponent of Svatantrika	seng bzang
སེང་ཡོལ	[R] sheer almost transparent cloth curtain seng g.yab - khang pa'i dkyil gyi dkar gsal mthongs g.yab seng g.yab - balcony Syn {mda' g.yab}	seng yol
སེང་རས	very sheer semi-transparent cloth, gauze	seng ras
སེང་ལ་མཛད་པ	drive out, take the air in a carriage	seng la mdzad pa
སེང་ཤང	white, bleached	seng shang
སེང་ཤིང	SA seng ldeng	seng shing
སེང་ཤོར	losing sight of, oversight, escaping from the memory	seng shor
སེང་སེང	thin, airy, transparent, not dense, not tight	seng seng
སེང་སེང་པོ	with many gaps	seng seng po
སེང་སེང་བ	unsteady, flicker, waver, flutter; see {shes pa phyo phyo ba} unsteady mind	seng seng ba
སེང་ཧ་མུ་ཁ	Simhamukha, 1 of sim ha brgyad	seng ha mu kha
སེང་ཧ་མུ་ཁ་སྨུག་ནག	Sinhamukha,	seng ha mu kha smug nag
སེངས་པ	pf. of {seng ba}	sengs pa
སེད	imp. of {gsed pa}	sed
སེན་སྐྱི	fingernail cuticle	sen skyi
སེན་གེ་རྐང་པ་བརྒྱད་པ	8-footed lion" GD	sen ge rkang pa brgyad pa
སེན་གེ་རྩལ་རྫོགས	Tantra of the perfected Lion	sen ge rtsal rdzogs
སེན་གེའི་འདྲ	lion	sen ge'i 'dra
སེན་རྗེས	nail prints	sen rjes
སེན་ཐོག	gripe, pinch, nip, twitch	sen thog
སེན་ཐོག་རྒྱག	pinch	sen thog rgyag
སེན་ཐོག་འདེབས	pinch	sen thog 'debs
སེན་འཐོག	w the nails grasp and pull flesh and skin	sen 'thog
སེན་འཐོག་རྒྱབ་པ	pinch	sen 'thog rgyab pa
སེན་ད་བ	probably tibetanized form of siddha, buddhist monk, mendicant	sen da ba
སེན་ལྡེང་ཅན་གྱི་མཚོ	lake w sandal wood trees	sen ldeng can gyi mtsho
སེན་མ་འབྲེག་མཁན	barber	sen ma 'breg mkhan
སེན་མོ	[finger/ toe] nail	sen mo
སེན་མོ་མདོག་སྣུམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of glossy nails	sen mo mdog snum pa'i dpe byad
སེན་མོ་འདེབས་པ	pinch, squeeze	sen mo 'debs pa
སེན་མོ་དབུས་མཐོ་བའི་དཔེ་བྱད	minor mark of nails high in the center	sen mo dbus mtho ba'i dpe byad
སེན་མོ་ཟངས་ཀྱི་མདོག་ལྟ་བུ	nails w a	sen mo zangs kyi mdog lta bu
སེན་མོ་ལ་ཆགས་པ	grown or appeared on the nails	sen mo la chags pa
སེན་མོའི་གར	peacock	sen mo'i gar
སེན་མོའི་སྟེང་གི་རྡུལ	very small #	sen mo'i steng gi rdul
སེན་མོའི་མདོག་སྣུམ་པ	glossy nails	sen mo'i mdog snum pa
སེན་མོའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	the three minor marks of the nails	sen mo'i dpe byad gsum
སེན་མོས་དབྲལ་བ	scratch/ tear w the nails	sen mos dbral ba
སེན་མོས་བསྲལ	scratched by the nails	sen mos bsral
སེན་ཙམ	as much as may be put on a fingernail, small quantity	sen tsam
སེན་རྩ	roots of the nails	sen rtsa
སེན་ཞོ	white spot on fingernail, speck on the finger nail	sen zho
སེན་ཤ	skin/ flesh around the nails 2785	sen sha
སེན་དྷ་པ	Das: prob. Tibetanized form of the word Siddha = bsod snyoms pa a Buddhist monk or mendicant; ser na ba and sen da ba are its corrupt forms. [mss]	sen dha pa
སེབ	stallion, narrow interstices between persons or things, multitude, crowd, SA gseb	seb
སེབ་ན	between, among	seb na
སེབ་ནས	from between	seb nas
སེབ་སེབ	soft, not firm and hard	seb seb
སེམ་བྱང	mental factor	sem byang
སེམ་མེ	slightly smiling	sem me
སེམས་ཀུན་གནས་པ	complete stabilization	sems kun gnas pa
སེམས་ཀྱི	mental, psychological	sems kyi
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཁང་པ	the heart, where the soul resides	sems kyi khang pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཁམས	the element [dhatu] of mind	sems kyi khams
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བདུན	[Tse]	sems kyi khams bdun
སེམས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	the elephant of the mind	sems kyi glang po
སེམས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ	" "	sems kyi dgongs pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་བ	mental movement [ggd]	sems kyi rgyu ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་ངང	natural constitution of mind	sems kyi ngang
སེམས་ཀྱི་ངལ་གསོ	the resting of the mind	sems kyi ngal gso
སེམས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ	character, ultimate essence of the mind, identity of mind	sems kyi ngo bo
སེམས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད	temperament sems kyi ngo bo de 'di 'dra zhes ngag tu smrar ma tshugs sems kyis bsam du	sems kyi ngo bo nyid
ཐཏ་ཐེ་ཨིདེནཏིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐིས་མིནད་ཨིས་སུཆནད	such nor can you mentally form a thought of it	that the identity of this mind is suchand
སེམས་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ	mental phenomena	sems kyi dngos po
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	the magical play of the mind	sems kyi cho 'phrul
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཉིད	the ultimate content of experience	sems kyi chos nyid
སེམས་ཀྱི་མཆོག	most eminent thought	sems kyi mchog
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	following of a cognitive act	sems kyi rjes su 'jug pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བ	pertain to mind	sems kyi rjes su 'brang ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	mind practice	sems kyi nyams len
སེམས་ཀྱི་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	mental equanimity	sems kyi mnyam pa nyid
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the stage of miraculous ability which combines training in the contemplation of the mind	sems kyi ting nge 'dzin
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་འཛིན	the mind's samadhi	sems kyi ting 'dzin
སེམས་ཀྱི་གཏིང་དུ་གནས་པ	in the blood	sems kyi gting du gnas pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྟ	the steed of thought	sems kyi rta
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྟ་རྒོད	the 'wild horse' of the mind	sems kyi rta rgod
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྟོག་པ་ཡིས	by discursive mind	sems kyi rtog pa yis
སེམས་ཀྱི་དག་པ	the purity of mind	sems kyi dag pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་དམ་པ	sublime thought	sems kyi dam pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་དོན	the nature of mind	sems kyi don
སེམས་ཀྱི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་སྔོན་འཇུག	psycho	sems kyi don ston pa'i sngon 'jug
སེམས་ཀྱི་དྲི་མ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ	purifying his mental defilements	sems kyi dri ma yongs su dag pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	mental happiness	sems kyi bde ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	indestructible mind, vajra-citta [Ll]	sems kyi rdo rje
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བསལ་བ	be relieved from mental suffering	sems kyi sdug bsngal bsal ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	Syn {sems sde}; Mind Section; Mental Class of the Great Perfection, Category of Mind	sems kyi sde
སེམས་ཀྱི་ན་མོ་ཙམ	even the notion of	sems kyi na mo tsam
སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ངན་ལེན	mental rigidity	sems kyi gnas ngan len
སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ངན་ལེན་ཉོན་མོངས	the affliction of mental rigidity	sems kyi gnas ngan len nyon mongs
སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ཆ	mental calm	sems kyi gnas cha
སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	mind as it is, the ultimate nature/ real condition of mind	sems kyi gnas lugs
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྣང་ཆ	the mind's perceiving quality	sems kyi snang cha
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	manifestation of mind, projections of one's own nature of mind, vision of the mind	sems kyi snang ba
མེད་ཁམས	The formless realm which is the intangible appearance of mind sems kyi snang ba ma myong ba gzugs	med khams
སེམས་ཀྱི་དཔའ་ཞུམ	you lost your bravery	sems kyi dpa' zhum
སེམས་ཀྱི་དཔྱོད་པ	mindfulness, examination	sems kyi dpyod pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	intellectual powers, mental faculties	sems kyi spyod pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ	the mind's domain	sems kyi spyod yul
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས་ཡིན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ	Semde view that everything is part of mind	sems kyi phyogs yin du smra ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་བུ	child of my heart	sems kyi bu
སེམས་ཀྱི་བྱ་བ	activity of mind 2786	sems kyi bya ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་བྱུང་ཚོར	mental sensations	sems kyi byung tshor
སེམས་ཀྱི་བྱེ་བྲག	mental action/ functioning	sems kyi bye brag
སེམས་ཀྱི་དབང	ruled by thought	sems kyi dbang
སེམས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	last thought at death	sems kyi dbang po
སེམས་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	mentally applied	sems kyi sbyor ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྩལ	mind's expressive power	sems kyi rtsal
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྩོལ་བ	dpyod pa'am dpog pa	sems kyi rtsol ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བ	mental feeling	sems kyi tshor ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་མཚང་བཙལ་བ	searching for the innate mode of mind	sems kyi mtshang btsal ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་འཚོར་བ	emotion	sems kyi 'tshor ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་གཞི	basis of "mind" fundamental consciousnesses	sems kyi gzhi
སེམས་ཀྱི་གཞི་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	[Tse]	sems kyi gzhi la gzhol ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་བཞག་ཐབས	mental attitude	sems kyi bzhag thabs
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཟས	food of thoughts	sems kyi zas
སེམས་ཀྱི་འོང་ལུགས	way it happened, memorism	sems kyi 'ong lugs
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཡལ་བ	the dissolving of mental activities	sems kyi yal ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ས	the vanishing point of mind	sems kyi yul sa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་ངོ་མཐོང་བ	saw the natural face of mind	sems kyi rang ngo mthong ba
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བབས	natural state of mind, the way mind naturally is, natural flow of mind	sems kyi rang babs
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་རྩལ	the natural play of mind	sems kyi rang rtsal
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན	the actuality or true nature of experience, the nature of mind	sems kyi rang bzhin
སེམས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	psychology	sems kyi rig pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རོལ་པ	rolpa of the mind	sems kyi rol pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་རོལ་པར་སྣང	appearance of mind's rolpa	sems kyi rol par snang
སེམས་ཀྱི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	thought, thinking, imagination, SA rnam rtog	sems kyi longs spyod
སེམས་ཀྱི་གཤིས	mind essence	sems kyi gshis
སེམས་ཀྱི་གཤིས་ལུགས	the basic condition of mind	sems kyi gshis lugs
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང	general mind bases	sems kyi sa mang
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང་བཅུ	10 general mind bases	sems kyi sa mang bcu
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང་ཆེན་པོ	general mental factors	sems kyi sa mang chen po
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང་པོ་བཅུ	the 10 general mind bases/ bases of/for cognitive acts	sems kyi sa mang po bcu
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང་པོ་པ	general mind bases	sems kyi sa mang po pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་ས་མང་པོ་པ་བཅུ	Def: Jamgön Kongtrül: {tshor dang sems pa 'du shes dang/ /'dun dang reg pa blo gros dran/ /yid byed mos dang ting 'dzin no}	sems kyi sa mang po pa bcu
སེམས་ཀྱི་སེམས	mental motivation	sems kyi sems
སེམས་ཀྱི་གསལ་སྣང	your mind's vivid presence	sems kyi gsal snang
སེམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	higher training of mind, discipline of mind. Syn {ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab pa}	sems kyi bslab pa
སེམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ	by means of meditative training	sems kyi bslab pa dang ldan pa
སེམས་ཀྱིས	mentally	sems kyis
སེམས་ཀྱིས་རྒོལ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	irresistible	sems kyis rgol thabs med pa
སེམས་ཀྱིས་འདྲེན	using your mind to guide	sems kyis 'dren
སེམས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	comprised of cognition	sems kyis bsdus pa
སེམས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པའི་ཁམས	see {nang sems kyis bsdus pa'i khams}	sems kyis bsdus pa'i khams
སེམས་ཀྱིས་ཟིན་མ་ཟིན	embraced or not embraced by mind / attention	sems kyis zin ma zin
སེམས་ཀྱིས་སོ་སོར་བརྟག་པ	using your mind to inquire minutely	sems kyis so sor brtag pa
སེམས་ཀྱིས་བསྲན་ཏོ	endured mentally	sems kyis bsran to
སེམས་ཀློང་ཀྱི་སྡེ	Mind and Space Sections. The first two of the three sections of Dzogchen	sems klong kyi sde
སེམས་ཀློང་མཁས་པ་ཉེར་གཅིག	the	sems klong mkhas pa nyer gcig
སེམས་ཀློང་མན་ངག་གི་སྡེ	the divisions/scriptural classes of mind space and oral instructions	sems klong man ngag gi sde
སེམས་ཀློང་མན་ངག་གི་སྡེ་གསུམ	Mind, Space and Instruction Sections. After Garab Dorje established the six million four hundred thousand tantras of Dzogchen in the human world, his chief disciple, Manjushrimitra, arranged these ...	sems klong man ngag gi sde gsum
སེམས་དཀར་བ	1) good/ virtuous mind/ thoughts; 2) kindred spirits, friends/ lovers	sems dkar ba
སེམས་དཀྱིལ	posture of a bodhisattva GD	sems dkyil
སེམས་སྐད་ཅིག	instant of consciousness	sems skad cig
སེམས་སྐད་ཅིག་མ	present mind	sems skad cig ma
སེམས་སྐད་ཅིག་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག	sixteen "moments" of experience (on the mahayana path of seeing)	sems skad cig ma bcu drug
སེམས་སྐྱིད་མདོག་ཅན	cheerful	sems skyid mdog can
སེམས་སྐྱིད་པོ	happy, joyful, cheerful, pleasant, hilarious	sems skyid po
སེམས་སྐྱིལ	bodhisattva posture	sems skyil
སེམས་སྐྱེ་བ	happiness	sems skye ba
སེམས་སྐྱེད་པ	allow thoughts to rise in one's mind	sems skyed pa
སེམས་སྐྱེས	Vishnu	sems skyes
སེམས་སྐྱོ	repentance, weariness dejection	sems skyo
སེམས་སྐྱོ་སྟེ	became extremely upset	sems skyo ste
སེམས་སྐྱོ་མདོག	pensive	sems skyo mdog
སེམས་སྐྱོ་མདོག་ཅན	sentimental	sems skyo mdog can
སེམས་སྐྱོ་པོ	sad	sems skyo po
སེམས་སྐྱོ་པོ་ཅན	dejected	sems skyo po can
སེམས་སྐྱོ་བ	repent, repentance, deject, regret	sems skyo ba
སེམས་སྐྱོ་བའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས	with a sad heart	sems skyo ba'i shugs kyis
སེམས་སྐྱོན་ནད་རིགས	schizophrenia	sems skyon nad rigs
སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing/ generating bodhicitta, cultivation of an enlightened attitude GD, mental disposition	sems bskyed
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་སྐྱེས་པ	generated the mind of enlightenment sems bskyed rgyud yongs su dag pa yod (we hold the vows which purify (our being arousing bodhichitta	sems bskyed skyes pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཉེར་གཉིས	the 22 kinds of bodhicitta [R]	sems bskyed nyer gnyis
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་གཉིས	the two bodhicittas [in terms of essence ngo bo'i sgo nas dbye na rnam pa gnyis te, don dam sems bskyed dang, kun rdzob sems bskyed do absolute and relative [Tse] chn]	sems bskyed gnyis
པར་འདུག	(I need to persevere and confirm (my vow hold the vows	par 'dug
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་དམ་བཅའ་བཞི	the four vows of arousing bodhicitta [of a prince; rgyal sras kyi sems bskyed dam bca' bzhi ste, 1 sems can thams cad sdug bsngal las bsgral ba dang, two sems can thams cad 'khor ba las dgrol ba da...	sems bskyed dam bca' bzhi
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་སྡོམ་པ	to pledge the resolve	sems bskyed sdom pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ	to give rise to/ arouse (the motivation of) bodhicitta	sems bskyed pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པ་བསྔགས་པ	in Praise of the Enlightened Resolve sems bskyed pa'i byang chub sems dpa' la	sems bskyed pa bsngags pa
བསྔགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་མི་སྙན་པ	to disparage those bodhisattvas who have cultivated an enlightened attitude sems bskyed pa'i byang chub sems dpa' la bsngags pa ma yin pa'i mi snyan pa disparage those bodhisattvas who have cultiva...	bsngags pa ma yin pa'i mi snyan pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད་པ	develop the intent	sems bskyed par byed pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཕོག་པ	encourage to adopt an attitude	sems bskyed phog pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་བྱས	aroused bodhicitta	sems bskyed byas
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་བྱེད་པ	to form the resolve, generate bodhichitta	sems bskyed byed pa
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་འབོག་ཆོག	the ritual of conferring bodhimind generation	sems bskyed 'bog chog
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་བཞི	the four kinds of bodhicitta [divided by sa mtshams [stages of the path] 1 mos pa spyod pa'i sems bskyed dang, two lhag bsam dag pa'i sems bskyed, three rnam par smin pa'i sems bskyed, four sgrib p...	sems bskyed bzhi
སེམས་བསྐྱེད་གསུམ	the three aspirations. 1) {'dod chen po'i} first to free oneself, then others. 2) {ye shes dma pa'i} self and others together. 3) {dpe med pa'i} first others, then oneself	sems bskyed gsum
སེམས་ཁ	spirit, mood, morale	sems kha
སེམས་ཁམས	psychology, mood	sems khams
སེམས་ཁམས་གྱི་རིག་པ	psychology	sems khams gyi rig pa
སེམས་ཁམས་བདུན	the 7 mental elements {shes pa'i khams drug} and {yid kyi khams}	sems khams bdun
སེམས་ཁམས་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་གཉིས	the two types of occasion of blocked cognition	sems khams pa'i gnas skabs gnyis
སེམས་ཁུར	concern, interest	sems khur
སེམས་ཁུར་བྱེད	care for, be concerned about, keep thinking about *, show interest/ concern in	sems khur byed
སེམས་ཁུར་བྱེད་པ	care for, be concerned about, keep thinking about *, show interest/ concern in	sems khur byed pa
སེམས་ཁེགས་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	occasion of blocked cognition	sems khegs pa'i gnas skabs
སེམས་ཁོང་ཆུད	misery, grief, suffering, sorrow	sems khong chud
སེམས་ཁོང་དུ	in the depth of the heart	sems khong du
སེམས་ཁྲལ	anxious	sems khral
སེམས་ཁྲལ་བྱེད	worry, be anxious	sems khral byed
སེམས་ཁྲལ་བྱེད་པ	worry, be anxious	sems khral byed pa
སེམས་ཁྲལ་མེད་པ	to be / feel at ease, relieved	sems khral med pa
སེམས་ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག	mind/ thoughts not really good sems khrig khrig yod pas yag po rang	sems khrig khrig
བྱས་མི་ཡོང	since 1's mind is not really good, 1 doesn't act/ speak really well	byas mi yong
སེམས་ཁྲིད	mind-teaching	sems khrid
སེམས་ཁྲིད་སྙིང་གི་ནོར་བུ	Heart Jewel, teaching on the nature of mind, by Shabkar	sems khrid snying gi nor bu
སེམས་ཁྲིད་བཏབ་པ	gave some teaching on the nature of mind	sems khrid btab pa
སེམས་ཁྲིད་བྱས་པ	gave some instructions on the nature of the mind	sems khrid byas pa
སེམས་ཁྲིད་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ	Teaching on Mind, the Wish-fulfilling Gem, concealed by Gampopa and revealed by Dungtso Repa the earlier	sems khrid yid bzhin nor bu
སེམས་ཁྲེལ	concern	sems khrel
སེམས་ཁྲེལ་བྱེད	worry, be anxious	sems khrel byed
སེམས་ཁྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	worry, be anxious	sems khrel byed pa
སེམས་ཁྲེལ་མེད་པ	be/ feel at ease, relieved	sems khrel med pa
སེམས་མཁན	1) thinker/ knower; 2) sentient being	sems mkhan
སེམས་མཁྲེགས་པོ	[hard mind] tough, hard hearted	sems mkhregs po
སེམས་འཁུར	concern, interest	sems 'khur
སེམས་འཁུར་བྱེད	care for, be concerned about, keep thinking about, show interest/ concern in	sems 'khur byed
སེམས་འཁུར་བྱེད་པ	care for, be concerned about, keep thinking about, show interest/ concern in	sems 'khur byed pa
སེམས་འཁུལ་བ	tame the mind	sems 'khul ba
སེམས་འཁོལ་བ	be joyful	sems 'khol ba
སེམས་འཁྱུག	mind travels quickly	sems 'khyug
སེམས་འཁྱོག་པོ	cunning, not straightforward	sems 'khyog po
སེམས་འཁྲལ	afflicted mind, painful agitation	sems 'khral
སེམས་འཁྲལ་བྱེད་པ	to worry, be anxious	sems 'khral byed pa
སེམས་འཁྲི	attachment to joy	sems 'khri
སེམས་འཁྲིད	mind instructions, mind guidelines, teaching on the mind	sems 'khrid
སེམས་འཁྲུགས	bu upset/ disturbed/ agitated	sems 'khrugs
སེམས་འཁྲུགས་པ	agitated mind, vexation, affliction	sems 'khrugs pa
སེམས་འཁྲུལ་སྣང	fantasy	sems 'khrul snang
སེམས་འཁྲུལ་བ	1) think what is is ~; 2) intoxicated by liquor or tshad nad	sems 'khrul ba
སེམས་འཁྲེལ	misgiving, worry, anxiety, mental burden	sems 'khrel
སེམས་འཁྲེལ་བྱེད	worry, be anxious	sems 'khrel byed
སེམས་འཁྲེལ་བྱེད་པ	worry, be anxious	sems 'khrel byed pa
སེམས་འཁྲེལ་མེད་པ	be/ feel at ease, relieved	sems 'khrel med pa
སེམས་འཁྲོག་པོ	cunning, deceitful	sems 'khrog po
སེམས་གང་ཤར	as it occurs to one's mind, according to one's own sweet will sems gan bcar mdun tshubs hrig hrig	sems gang shar
མང་པོ་བྱེད་པ	lying/ rubbing on back/ front/ blinking, don't do a lot for, impose, focus, rubbing back and forth ?? sems gan bcar mdun tshubs hrig hrig	mang po byed pa
སེམས་གུ་དོག་པོ	narrow-minded	sems gu dog po
སེམས་གུ་ཡང་པོ	[open mind] open minded, light hearted, easy going	sems gu yang po
སེམས་གུ་ཡངས་པ	broad & generous heart	sems gu yangs pa
སེམས་གུ་ཡངས་པོ	[open mind] open minded, light hearted, easy going	sems gu yangs po
སེམས་གྱ་གྱུ་ཅན	TSE	sems gya gyu can
སེམས་གྱ་མ་གྱུ	"crooked/ devious" mind, deceptive/ beguiling wild thoughts/ fantasies	sems gya ma gyu
སེམས་གྱོ་བའི་ཉམས	the experience of mental agitation	sems gyo ba'i nyams
སེམས་གྱོང་པོ	harsh	sems gyong po
སེམས་གྲོལ	liberate the mind	sems grol
སེམས་གློད་པ	relax the mind, be at ease	sems glod pa
སེམས་དགའ	be joyful/ happy	sems dga'
སེམས་དགའ་དགུ་བ	merry, cheerful, enjoyment	sems dga' dgu ba
སེམས་དགའ་བ	ease of mind, carefree, happy, joyful, cheerful	sems dga' ba
སེམས་དགའ་བར་བྱེད་པ	to please, delight, cheer, enchant, gratify, tickle, pleasure, gladden, satisfy	sems dga' bar byed pa
སེམས་དགའ་ཚོར་བྱས་པ	be sufficiently pleased	sems dga' tshor byas pa
སེམས་དགེ	healthy attitude	sems dge
སེམས་དགེ་བ	virtuous frame of mind	sems dge ba
སེམས་དགེ་བ་གཅིག	a single virtuous thought / state of mind	sems dge ba gcig
སེམས་འགག་པ	1) become unconscious; 2) subsidence of dualistic thoughts/ appearances	sems 'gag pa
སེམས་འགུག	capture the mind, attract, charm	sems 'gug
སེམས་འགུལ	emotionally moved, touched	sems 'gul
སེམས་འགུལ་ཆོག་ཆོག	touchy	sems 'gul chog chog
སེམས་འགུལ་ཐེབས	deeply move[d], touch[ed], affect[ed] emotionally	sems 'gul thebs
སེམས་འགུལ་ཐེབས་པ	be moved, be touched	sems 'gul thebs pa
སེམས་འགྱུ་བ	mental movements	sems 'gyu ba
སེམས་འགྱུར	change 1's mind/ views	sems 'gyur
སེམས་འགྱུར་བ	change the mind	sems 'gyur ba
སེམས་འགྲེལ་སྐོར་གསུམ	Semdrel Korsum, Trilogy of Commentaries by Bodhisattvas	sems 'grel skor gsum
སེམས་རྒོད	1) excited; 2) sure of oneself,	sems rgod
སེམས་རྒོད་ཅན	ambitious, greedy for power/ authority	sems rgod can
སེམས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང	narrow-minded	sems rgya chung chung
སེམས་རྒྱ་ཆུང་བ	narrow-minded	sems rgya chung ba
སེམས་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	open-minded	sems rgya che ba
སེམས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་བའི་ཕྱིར	to develop/ expand the mind	sems rgya chen ba'i phyir
སེམས་རྒྱུད	one's mind, primordial state, mental continuum, mind-stream	sems rgyud
སེམས་རྒྱུད་ངང་རིང	1) mind w/o conflict, peaceful tame and forebearing; 2) good natured	sems rgyud ngang ring
སེམས་རྒྱུན	1) [time of] thinking, contemplating [sems rgyun thung ba]; 2) [unbroken] stream of moments of awareness	sems rgyun
སེམས་སྒུལ་ཐེབས	MG: vi., to be emotionally moved. ¦ kho'i shad chas khong tshor sems sgul thebs shad, They were moved by his speech. [mss]	sems sgul thebs
སེམས་སྒོམ་རྡོ་ལ	SA rdo la gser zhun	sems sgom rdo la
སེམས་སྒོམ་རྡོ་ལ་གསེར་ཞུན	1 of snga' 'gyur lnga	sems sgom rdo la gser zhun
སེམས་སྒྱུར	change some1's mind/ views	sems sgyur
སེམས་སྒྱུར་ལུས་སྒྱུར	complete change	sems sgyur lus sgyur
སེམས་བསྒོམ་རྡོ་ལ་གསེར་ཞུན	SA rdo la gser zhun	sems bsgom rdo la gser zhun
སེམས་ངན	bad/ evil/ malicious/ cruel mind/ thoughts	sems ngan
སེམས་ངན་པོ	[evil mind] bad hearted	sems ngan po
སེམས་ངར་བསྐྱེད	generate sharpness of attention, invigorate attention, sharpen attention	sems ngar bskyed
སེམས་ངལ	misgiving, worry, anxiety, mental burden	sems ngal
སེམས་ངོ	1) the mind essence, {sems kyi ngo bo}. 2) [simply] mind 2789	sems ngo
སེམས་ངོ་སྐྱོང་ཚུལ	the way to maintain the essence of mind	sems ngo skyong tshul
སེམས་ངོ་སྐྱོངས་པ	maintaining the mind essence	sems ngo skyongs pa
སེམས་ངོ་མཐོང་བ	seeing of mindessence	sems ngo mthong ba
སེམས་ངོ་སྤྲོད་པ	gave mind transmission	sems ngo sprod pa
སེམས་ངོ་འཕྲོད	click in to a situation, get it, transmission of/ introduction to mind	sems ngo 'phrod
སེམས་ངོ་འཕྲོད་སོང་པས	did you get it?	sems ngo 'phrod song pas
སེམས་ངོ་ཞུ	request transmission	sems ngo zhu
སེམས་དངོས	entity of the mind	sems dngos
སེམས་སྔ་མ	previous mind	sems snga ma
སེམས་ཅན	sentient being[s], [sattva]; being, living creature. living being	sems can
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན	all sentient beings	sems can kun
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་བྱ་བ	the actions of all sentient beings	sems can kun gyi bya ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན	universal benefit for sentient beings	sems can kun tu 'gro ba'i don
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་ཚིམ་པར་མཛད་པ	was able to satisfy all beings	sems can kun tshim par mdzad pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཀྱི་མཆོག་ཉིད	most excellent of beings, Buddha	sems can kyi mchog nyid
སེམས་ཅན་ཀྱི་གནས་རིགས་དགུ	[TRS 27:2]	sems can kyi gnas rigs dgu
སེམས་ཅན་ཁུར་ཆེན	the great burden of sentient beings	sems can khur chen
སེམས་ཅན་མཁས་པ	wise in the ways of sentient beings	sems can mkhas pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་རྐང་ལག་བཅད་པ	cut off the legs of animals	sems can gyi rkang lag bcad pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས	1) realm of sentient beings, 2) a sentient being's capability	sems can gyi khams
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས་ཐམས་ཅད	all the realms of sentient beings	sems can gyi khams thams cad
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་ལུགས	how sentient beings were deluded	sems can gyi 'khrul lugs
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱུད	the continuua of sentient beings	sems can gyi rgyud
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པ	to bring beings' mind to maturity sems can gyi 'jig rten de'i chos kyi rnam	sems can gyi rgyud smin pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ཉེས་པ	the transgressions of sentient beings	sems can gyi nyes pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་སྙིགས་མ	{lus rgud pa sems can gyi snyigs ma ste, gzugs blo nad med sogs nyams pa'i snyigs ma lta bu'o} 'degeneration of sentient beings' is the decline in the physical body, for example, the degeneration l...	sems can gyi snyigs ma
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན	the benefit of sentient beings	sems can gyi don
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་དུ	for the sake of sentient beings	sems can gyi don du
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་རྣམ་པ་བཞི་པོ	the four benefits for sentient beings	sems can gyi don rnam pa bzhi po
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་བྱ་བ	actions for the benefit of sentient beings sems can gyi don bya tshul rtogs ma'i	sems can gyi don bya ba
ཤེས་རབ་ཤེས་རབ་གསུམ	wisdom analyzing how to benefit sentient beings	shes rab shes rab gsum
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་བྱེད	produce benefit for sentient beings	sems can gyi don byed
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་བྱེད་པར་སྨོན་པ	aspire to benefit sentient beings	sems can gyi don byed par smon pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་མཛད་པ	accomplish the welfare/ benefit of beings [h] work for sentient beings	sems can gyi don mdzad pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་ལ་བག་མེད་པ	not caring about the benefit of sentient beings	sems can gyi don la bag med pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་ལ་ཞུགས་པ	thinking about/ engaging in/ consisting of benefit for sentient beings	sems can gyi don la zhugs pa
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་དོན་ལ་སེམས་པ	thinking of/ wishing for benefit for sentient beings sems can gyi sdog bsngal ba bsal ba don	sems can gyi don la sems pa
དུ་གཉེར་བ	dedicating 1self to eliminating the sufferings of sentient beings	du gnyer ba
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་གནས་པ་དགུ	the 9 realms of sentient beings	sems can gyi gnas pa dgu
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་གནས་རིགས་དགུ	the 9 realms of sentient beings CHN	sems can gyi gnas rigs dgu
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ཕུང་པོའི་དུས	the time of the skandhas of sentient beings	sems can gyi phung po'i dus
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་རིགས	other kinds of beings	sems can gyi rigs
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་རིགས་དྲུག་པོ	the six kinds of sentient beings	sems can gyi rigs drug po
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ལས་སྣང	the karmic perceptions of sentient beings	sems can gyi las snang
སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ལུས་ལ་སོགས་པ	the bodies etc. of sentient beings	sems can gyi lus la sogs pa
སེམས་ཅན་རྒྱུད	the continuum of sentient beings	sems can rgyud
སེམས་ཅན་ངན་པ	bad/ evil sentient beings	sems can ngan pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཆེད་དུ	for the sake of sentient beings	sems can ched du
སེམས་ཅན་འཆི་འཕོའི་རྒྱུ་གསུམ	CHN	sems can 'chi 'pho'i rgyu gsum
སེམས་ཅན་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of living beings	sems can 'jig rten
སེམས་ཅན་སྙིགས་མ	impurities/ corruptions of sentient beings	sems can snyigs ma
སེམས་ཅན་སྙིང་པོ	heart/essence of sentient beings	sems can snying po
སེམས་ཅན་སྙིང་རེ་རྗེ	poor creatures	sems can snying re rje
སེམས་ཅན་ལྟོགས་པ་རྣམས	hungry animals	sems can ltogs pa rnams
སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད	all being	sems can thams cad
སྦྱིན་པ་རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ	delighted in benefiting beings by giving from his coffers	sbyin pa rab tu dga' ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཤིན་ཏུ་སེལ་བ	completely clear away the doubt of sentient beings sems can dag ni tshad med pa yongs su	sems can the tshom shin tu sel ba
སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	completely ripen limitless sentient beings sems can dag yongs su smin par byed do - completely ripen sentient beings	smin par byed pa
སེམས་ཅན་དང་ལྡན	big with child	sems can dang ldan
སེམས་ཅན་དང་ལྡན་པ	pregnant	sems can dang ldan pa
སེམས་ཅན་དུ་སྟོན་པ	articulate [sound], animate [sound], intentionally indicating meaning to sentient beings {sgra brgyad}	sems can du ston pa
སེམས་ཅན་དུ་མི་རྟོན་པ	inarticulate [sound], inanimate [sound] 2790	sems can du mi rton pa
སེམས་ཅན་དུ་མི་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	inarticulate sounds sems can don gyi nges 'byung sgrub pa TSE	sems can du mi ston pa'i sgra
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་སྒྲུབ	accomplish the benefit of sentient beings	sems can don sgrub
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་ནི་སྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish the benefit of sentient beings	sems can don ni sgrub pa
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་བྱེད	acting on behalf of sentient beings GD	sems can don byed
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline of benefiting beings / acting for the sake of others. One of {tshul khrims gsum}; the discipline of benefiting beings. One of {tshul khrims gsum} acting for the sake of others	sems can don byed kyi tshul khrims
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་བྱེད་ཀྱིས	by benefitting sentient beings	sems can don byed kyis
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་བྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of benefitting sentient beings	sems can don byed pa'i tshul khrims
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་ལ་ཤིན་ཏུ་བརྩོན	exert 1self strenuously for the sake of sentient beings	sems can don la shin tu brtson
སེམས་ཅན་འདི་རྣམས་སྙིང་རེ་རྗེ	poor sentient beings!	sems can 'di rnams snying re rje
སེམས་ཅན་སྡིག་པ་བྱེད་པ	evil doer sentient being	sems can sdig pa byed pa
སེམས་ཅན་སྡུག་བསྔལ	suffering of sentient beings	sems can sdug bsngal
སེམས་ཅན་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཞི་ཕྱིར	in order to assuage the misery of the people	sems can sdug bsngal zhi phyir
སེམས་ཅན་ནི་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ripen sentient beings sems can ni smin par byed pa 'grub par 'gyur - the ripening of sentient beings will be accomplished	sems can ni smin par byed pa
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམ་གྲོལ་མཛད	liberate sentient beings	sems can rnam grol mdzad
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམ་སྨིན་བྱེད	ripen sentient beings	sems can rnam smin byed
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས	sentient beings	sems can rnams
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དོན་དུ་གནས	abide in benefitting sentient beings	sems can rnams kyi don du gnas
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དོན་བྱེད	produce benefit for sentient beings	sems can rnams kyi don byed
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་སྐྱོང་བ	nurtured sentient beings	sems can rnams skyong ba
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ནི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད	all beings are buddhas	sems can rnams ni sangs rgyas nyid
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་གནས་པའི་སྣོད	the container within which sentient beings live sems can rnams yongs su mi gtong ba'i	sems can rnams gnas pa'i snod
སེམས་ཅན་སྣོད་དུ་གྱུར་པ	sentient being who is a vessel	sems can snod du gyur pa
སེམས་ཅན་སྣོད་དུ་མ་གྱུར་པ	sentient being who is not a vessel	sems can snod du ma gyur pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཕན་འདོགས་དགའ	delighting in benefitting sentient beings	sems can phan 'dogs dga'
སེམས་ཅན་ཕན་པར་སེམས	the intent to help beings	sems can phan par sems
སེམས་ཅན་ཕན་བྱེད་དོན་ཆེན	the great purpose/ goal of benefitting sentient beings	sems can phan byed don chen
སེམས་ཅན་ཕལ་པ	ordinary people sems can byung ba rnams 'tsho zhing	sems can phal pa
གནས་པར་བྱེད	sustain the lives of the sentient beings who have already appeared	gnas par byed
སེམས་ཅན་མི་སྟོན་པ	inarticulate	sems can mi ston pa
སེམས་ཅན་མི་འཚེ	not harming sentient beings	sems can mi 'tshe
སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ	a hell being	sems can dmyal ba
སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	major hell = hot hell	sems can dmyal ba chen po
སེམས་ཅན་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	ripen sentient beings sems can tsam la dmigs pa'i snying rje because of impermanence and egolessness not making any exclusions whatever compassion w sentient beings as object	sems can smin par byed pa
སེམས་ཅན་རྩ་ལག་འདྲ་བ	sentient beings like relatives	sems can rtsa lag 'dra ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཚད་མེད་པ	innumerable sentient being sems can tshad med pa yongs su smin par	sems can tshad med pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཚོགས	assembly/ host of sentient beings	sems can tshogs
སེམས་ཅན་ཞུགས	pregnant woman	sems can zhugs
སེམས་ཅན་གཞན་ལ་བྱམས་འདོད	kind wishes for sentient beings	sems can gzhan la byams 'dod
སེམས་ཅན་ཡལ་བར་མི་དོར་བ	so that they might never forsake sentient beings	sems can yal bar mi dor ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སྨིན་བྱེད	completely ripen sentient beings	sems can yongs smin byed
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱོང་བ	completely train/ purify sentient beings	sems can yongs su sbyong ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ	completely ripen sentient beings	sems can yongs su smin pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པར་བྱ་བ	action of completely ripening sentient beings sems can yongs su smin par byed pa completely ripen sentient beings sems can yongs su smin par byed pa	sems can yongs su smin par bya ba
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན་པ	completely accept sentient beings	sems can yongs su 'dzin pa
སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་བཟུང་བ	completely accepted sentient beings	sems can yongs su bzung ba
སེམས་ཅན་རབ་ཏུ་སྨིན་པ	completely ripen[ed] sentient beings	sems can rab tu smin pa
སེམས་ཅན་རབ་འདུལ	completely tame sentient beings	sems can rab 'dul
སེམས་ཅན་རིགས	kind of sentient being, family of sentient beings	sems can rigs
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་ཆགས་པའི་ལྷག་མ་ལྔ	the five additional precepts concerning sexual desire for sentient beings [one khu ba 'byin pa'i lhag ma dang, two reg pa'i lhag ma dang, three 'khrig tshig smra ba'i lhag ma, four bsnyen bkur bsng...	sems can la chags pa'i lhag ma lnga
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེ་བ	great compassion for living creatures	sems can la snying rje che ba
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	articulate sound	sems can la ston pa'i sgra
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་བདར་བ	bestowed/ give to beings	sems can la bdar ba
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་ཕན	benefit for sentient beings	sems can la phan
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་ཕན་འདོགས་པ	to benefit sentient beings sems can la phan pa'i smon lam btab having made a wishing prayer to benefit all beings sems can la phan par byed pa'i rgyu yin	sems can la phan 'dogs pa
སྦྱིན་ནུས་ན	when you are able to give even your own body to benefit sentient beings	sbyin nus na
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་མི་སྟོན་པའི་སྒྲ	inarticulate sound	sems can la mi ston pa'i sgra
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་དམིགས་པ	observing sentient beings	sems can la dmigs pa
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་རྙིང་རྗེ	compassion observing sentient beings [thd]	sems can la dmigs pa'i rnying rje
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་སྙིང་རྗེ	compassion with reference to all sentient beings	sems can la dmigs pa'i snying rje
སེམས་ཅན་ལ་བརྩེ་བ	kindness/ affection for sentient beings 2791	sems can la brtse ba
སེམས་ཅན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཅན	sentient being of the family of the Buddha	sems can sangs rgyas kyi rigs can
སེམས་ཅན་གསོས་པ	caring for animals	sems can gsos pa
སེམས་གཅོང	depression	sems gcong
སེམས་ཆགས	attachment	sems chags
སེམས་ཆགས་ཏེ	became infatuated with	sems chags te
སེམས་ཆགས་སྡོད་པ	hopeful, attached	sems chags sdod pa
སེམས་ཆགས་ནས	strong feelings of desire arose	sems chags nas
སེམས་ཆགས་པ	be fond of, loving, passionately devoted to sems chags pas 'dod pa bzhin spyad do felt desire and acted accordingly	sems chags pa
སེམས་ཆུང	care, carefulness, abbr. of {sems dpa' chung chung}	sems chung
སེམས་ཆུང་ཆུང	small mind] humble, timid, meek; small mind, humble, timid, meek	sems chung chung
སེམས་ཆུང་བ	timid, weak-minded	sems chung ba
སེམས་ཆེན	1) great courage/ mental/ spiritual power/contents; 2) mahasattva buddha son	sems chen
སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	supreme mind. the great mind [of Mahayana] Syn {ye shes chen po} great wisdom; supreme mind	sems chen po
སེམས་ཆོས་ཉིད	the dharmata of mind	sems chos nyid
སེམས་མཆོག་བསྐྱེད་ཅིང	I arouse supreme bodhichitta, mind generation	sems mchog bskyed cing
སེམས་འཆལ	minds apprehension impaired	sems 'chal
སེམས་འཇགས	bearing/ keeping in mind, remembering	sems 'jags
སེམས་འཇགས་བྱེད	bear/ keep in mind, remember	sems 'jags byed
སེམས་འཇགས་ཞུ	bear/ keep in mind, remember [h]	sems 'jags zhu
སེམས་འཇགས་རོགས	please keep [us] in mind	sems 'jags rogs
སེམས་འཇའ་ཕབ་ནས་སྨྲས་པ	discourse on religious matters with an accordant mind	sems 'ja' phab nas smras pa
སེམས་འཇོག་པ	mental placement/ resting, conscience, conscious, [cognitive]	sems 'jog pa
སེམས་འཇོམས་པ	lose spirit, be depressed	sems 'joms pa
སེམས་ཉམས	experience of the mind	sems nyams
སེམས་ཉིད	Mind essence. (sems ngo). The nature of mind. A synonym for 'buddha nature.'	sems nyid
ཇུསཏ	mind, spirituality, mind as shunyata, inner working, memory, soul, spirit, intelligence, consciousness, mind itself, the pure fact of (awareness, of being aware), unique fact of awareness, reality,...	just
སེམས་ཉིད་ཀུན་ཁྱབ	the all-pervasive mind	sems nyid kun khyab
སེམས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཀློང	amplitude of the mind. Syn {klong}	sems nyid kyi klong
སེམས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རང་ཞལ་བསྒྲིབས	obscuring the true face of the Nature of Mind	sems nyid kyi rang zhal bsgribs
སེམས་ཉིད་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་པ	nonarising nature of mind. In the aspect of ultimate truth, all phenomena are devoid of an independent, concrete identity and have therefore no basis for such attributes as 'arising, dwelling or ce...	sems nyid skye ba med pa
སེམས་ཉིད་སྒོམ་པ	1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad	sems nyid sgom pa
སེམས་ཉིད་ངལ་གསོ	relaxing in the natural state of the mind	sems nyid ngal gso
སེམས་ཉིད་གཅིག་གི་རོལ་པ	the display of the single mind essence	sems nyid gcig gi rol pa
སེམས་ཉིད་གཅིག་པུ	same mind, single mind	sems nyid gcig pu
སེམས་ཉིད་གཉུག་མའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the nature of mind	sems nyid gnyug ma'i ye shes
སེམས་ཉིད་སྟོང་པའི་ངང	the state of	sems nyid stong pa'i ngang
ཨེམཔཏཡ་མིནད	essence	empty mind
སེམས་ཉིད་དག་པ	pure nature of mind	sems nyid dag pa
སེམས་ཉིད་དོན	what mind is all about	sems nyid don
སེམས་ཉིད་སྤྲོས་བྲལ	mind-essence free from constructs	sems nyid spros bral
སེམས་ཉིད་འཕྲོག་པ	take another person's heart, run away with his affections, captivate him	sems nyid 'phrog pa
སེམས་ཉིད་དབྱིངས	expanse of the nature of mind sems nyid me long gsal la mgur dbyangs	sems nyid dbyings
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གང་ཤར	by Shabkar sems nyid me long gsal la mgur dbyangs	gzugs brnyan gang shar
སེམས་ཉིད་ཡེ་གྲོལ	primordial selfliberation of the nature of mind sems nyid ye nas sangs rgyas pa'i rang	sems nyid ye grol
སེམས་ཉིད་རང་ཞལ	natural face of mind	sems nyid rang zhal
སེམས་ཉིད་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཁམས	dhatus arising from the nature of mind	sems nyid las byung ba'i khams
སེམས་ཉིད་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate mindessence	sems nyid lhan skyes
སེམས་ཉིད་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ	coemergent mind	sems nyid lhan cig skyes pa
སེམས་ཉེ	friend, intimate	sems nye
སེམས་གཉུག་མའི་རང་ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	to see the natural face of original mind, behold the innate simplicity of mind	sems gnyug ma'i rang zhal mthong ba
སེམས་མཉམ་ཉིད	even attitude	sems mnyam nyid
སེམས་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	equality/ equanimity of mind sems mnyam par ma gzhag pa med pa they are w/o an unbalanced mind GD sems mnyam par ma gzhag pa med pa they are without an unbalanced mind sems mnyam par ma bzhag pa mi...	sems mnyam pa nyid
སེམས་མཉམ་པོ	imperturbability, evenness of mind, not to be affected by kindness or by the reverse	sems mnyam po
སེམས་སྙ་བ	[arch] go to sleep, faint	sems snya ba
སེམས་སྙོམས	timid person 2792	sems snyoms
སེམས་ཏིག	infinitesimal sphere	sems tig
སེམས་ཏེ	thinking that	sems te
སེམས་གཏད	focus attention	sems gtad
སེམས་གཏད་པ	be careful, pay attention	sems gtad pa
སེམས་གཏིང་ནས	sincerely	sems gting nas
སེམས་གཏོང་བ	heed	sems gtong ba
སེམས་གཏོད	look up to	sems gtod
སེམས་རྟེན	keepsake, token	sems rten
སེམས་རྟེན་གཉིས	the two mental supports [ting 'dzin sgom pa'i snod rung gi sems kyi rten 'di la 1 ngo bo tha dad pa'i sems rten &, two ngo bo gcig pa'i sems rten gnyis las: dang po ni: sems phyi ma de skyed par by...	sems rten gnyis
སེམས་རྟེན་མི་བྱ	not place attention	sems rten mi bya
སེམས་རྟོག་ཞེན་པ	attachments of mind and thoughts	sems rtog zhen pa
སེམས་རྟོགས	self-knowledge	sems rtogs
སེམས་རྟོགས་ཁ	simtokha monastery in Bhutan	sems rtogs kha
སེམས་སྟོབས	fortitude, courage; courage	sems stobs
སེམས་སྟོར་བ	1) lose consciousness; 2) impaired dran shes [alertness] or understanding	sems stor ba
སེམས་བརྟན་པོ་སྒྲུབ་པ	to attain a firm mind	sems brtan po sgrub pa
སེམས་བརྟན་པོ་མེད	crazy	sems brtan po med
སེམས་ཐག	[continuum of] mind, absolutely, certainly [col]	sems thag
སེམས་ཐག་གཅོད	resolve/ decide/ make up [the mind]	sems thag gcod
སེམས་ཐག་གཅོད་པ	resolve/ decide/ make up [the mind]	sems thag gcod pa
སེམས་ཐག་བཅད	resolved/ decided/ made up [the mind]	sems thag bcad
སེམས་ཐག་བཅད་པ	determination, resolution	sems thag bcad pa
སེམས་ཐག་ཆོད	be decided/ convinced, come to a decision, make up 1's mind	sems thag chod
སེམས་ཐག་ཆོད་ཡིག	resolution [written]	sems thag chod yig
སེམས་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང	[I] am convinced	sems thag chod song
སེམས་ཐག་རྦད་བཅད	determined, firm	sems thag rbad bcad
སེམས་ཐག་རྦད་བཅད་ཀྱིས	resolutely	sems thag rbad bcad kyis
སེམས་ཐག་གཙང་བཅད	resolute[ness], determined	sems thag gtsang bcad
སེམས་ཐག་རིང་བ	alienated	sems thag ring ba
སེམས་ཐང་ཅད	1) depressed, discouraged; 2) mentally tired, fatigued, exhausted	sems thang cad
སེམས་ཐང་ཐང	sane, sanity	sems thang thang
སེམས་ཐུལ་ལ་འདིར་འདུག	here to subdue the mind	sems thul la 'dir 'dug
སེམས་ཐེབས་པ	mental absorption, to be absorbed in thought	sems thebs pa
སེམས་ཐོག	direct experience of mind	sems thog
སེམས་ཐོག་ཏུ	on the mind	sems thog tu
སེམས་ཐོག་ཏུ་བླང	bring to mind/ take to heart/ visualize	sems thog tu blang
སེམས་མཐུན་པ	mental unity, agreement	sems mthun pa
སེམས་མཐོ	uplifted mind, highmindedness, pride	sems mtho
སེམས་འཐད་དེ	cheerfully, joyfully	sems 'thad de
སེམས་དག་པ	by samadhi master everything	sems dag pa
སེམས་དང་ལྡན	sentient	sems dang ldan
སེམས་དང་ལྡན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	nonsentient	sems dang ldan pa ma yin pa
སེམས་དང་ལྡན་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཆོས	nonsentient dharma	sems dang ldan pa ma yin pa'i chos
སེམས་དང་བ	pure mind, sincere disposition	sems dang ba
སེམས་དང་བྲལ་བའི་འདུས་བྱས	conditioned events disjoined from thoughts. see {ldan min 'du byed}	sems dang bral ba'i 'dus byas
སེམས་དང་མཚུངས་ལྡན	concurrent w a mind/ cognitive act	sems dang mtshungs ldan
སེམས་དང་མཚུངས་ལྡན་པ	manifestations of the mind	sems dang mtshungs ldan pa
སེམས་དང་མཚུངས་ལྡན་མི་ལྡན	concurrent and non-concurrent w a mind/ cognitive act sems dang mtshungs par ldan pa min pa'i 'du byed - * formation not concurrent with a mind/ cognitive act sems dang mtshungs par ldan pa min pa'...	sems dang mtshungs ldan mi ldan
ཕོ༹རྨཏིཨོནས	formation not concurrent with mind sems dang mtshungs par ldan min pa'i 'du	formations
མཏིཨོནས	formation not concurrent with mind sems dang mtshungs par ldan min pa'i 'du	mations
སེམས་དང་ཡིད་དང་རྣམ་ཤེས	cognitive act, mental faculty and consciousness	sems dang yid dang rnam shes
སེམས་དང་སེམས་བྱུང	cognitive acts and mental states	sems dang sems byung
སེམས་དང་སེམས་འབྱུང་རྣམས	thought and its constituents	sems dang sems 'byung rnams
སེམས་དང་སེམས་ལས་བྱུང	cognitive acts and mental states, mind and mental contents	sems dang sems las byung
སེམས་དང་སེམས་ལས་བྱུང་བ	cognitive acts and mental states sems dang lhan cig mtshungs par ldan pa - concurrent with mind/ cognitive act	sems dang sems las byung ba
སེམས་དྭངས	unpolluted heart	sems dwangs
སེམས་དྭངས་པ	clearness of understanding	sems dwangs pa
སེམས་དྭངས་བ	lucid state of mind	sems dwangs ba
སེམས་དམ་པ	bodhicitta	sems dam pa
སེམས་དུང་ངེ	growth of real attachment or regard	sems dung nge
སེམས་དུམ་རེ་ཡེངས	occasional wandering of mind	sems dum re yengs
སེམས་དུལ་བ	gently attitude	sems dul ba
སེམས་དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ	CHN	sems de nyid bcu
སེམས་དོགས	misgiving, worry, anxiety	sems dogs
སེམས་དོན་རིག་གནས	psychology	sems don rig gnas
སེམས་དྲང་པོ	honest, straight-forward, upright	sems drang po
སེམས་དྲང་བ	upright	sems drang ba
སེམས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་གཞག་པ	application of mindfulness based on the mind	sems dran pa nye bar gzhag pa
སེམས་དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ	application of mindfulness of the thinking	sems dran pa nye bar bzhag pa
སེམས་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག	application of mindfulness based on the mind	sems dran pa nyer gzhag
སེམས་དྲུག	the six coinsciousnesses [mig dang, rna ba, sna, lce, lus, yid bcas kyi rnam shes drug]	sems drug
སེམས་གདེང་ཅན	person w faith/ confidence	sems gdeng can
སེམས་བདེ	cheerfulness, ease of heart, cheerful, merry, glad	sems bde
སེམས་བདེ་པོ	happy	sems bde po
སེམས་བདེ་བ	1) happiness, pleasure,	sems bde ba
སེམས་བདེ་ལྷམ་མེ	state full of bliss	sems bde lham me
སེམས་བདེན་གྲུབ་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ	conceive as truly existing	sems bden grub tu rtog pa
སེམས་བདེན་གྲུབ་དུ་འདོད་པ	maintain that mind is truly existing	sems bden grub du 'dod pa
སེམས་བདེན་མེད་དུ་འདོད་པ	maintain that mind is w/o true existence	sems bden med du 'dod pa
སེམས་མདོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	the 18 sems mdo ati tantras	sems mdo bco brgyad
སེམས་འདས	beyond mind	sems 'das
སེམས་འདི་ཀ	this very mind itself, this very mind	sems 'di ka
སེམས་ལྡན	sensible	sems ldan
སེམས་ལྡན་རབ་རྟོག	rab rtog gi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sems ldan gyi dngos po'i rang bzhin gyi bya ba'i gnas lugs shig la bsam blo'i 'du shes gang zhig med bzhin du yod par sgro btags te brjod pa'i rgyan zhig	sems ldan rab rtog
སེམས་སྡུག	sadness, depression	sems sdug
སེམས་སྡུག་པ	sorrowful, sad, worried	sems sdug pa
སེམས་སྡུག་བྱེད	be sad/ depressed	sems sdug byed
སེམས་སྡུག་བྱེད་པ	deplore, lament	sems sdug byed pa
སེམས་སྡེ	{sems kyi sde} Category of Mind*	sems sde
སེམས་སྡེ་ཀློང་སྡེ	Mind and Space Sections [R]	sems sde klong sde
སེམས་སྡེ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Esoteric Instructions of the Mental Class. As stated in Longchenpa, Treasury of Spiritual and Philosophical Systems, pp. 357 8, they are {rig pa'i khu byug}, {rtsal chen sprug pa}, {khyung...	sems sde bco brgyad
སེམས་སྡེ་ཉེ་ཤུ་རྩ་གཅིག	list of 21 tantras	sems sde nye shu rtsa gcig
སེམས་སྡེ་མ་བུ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Mothers and Children of the Mind Section	sems sde ma bu bco brgyad
སེམས་སྡེ་ལུགས་གསུམ	three traditions of the mental class	sems sde lugs gsum
སེམས་སྡེའི་དགོངས་པ	the intent / meaning of the Mind Section	sems sde'i dgongs pa
སེམས་སྡེའི་རྒྱུད་ཆེན་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་བཞི་ཊྭེནཏཡ	four Great Tantras of the Mental Class. As enumerated in Long- chenpa, Treasury of Spiritual and Philosophical Systems, pp. 258-260, they are as follows. {sems nyid bya rtsol las 'das pa nam mkha' ...	sems sde'i rgyud chen nyi shu rtsa bzhi Twenty
སེམས་ན་འདུག	troubled mind	sems na 'dug
སེམས་ན་བ	1) mental pain; 2) unhappy through being afflicted by 1's faults	sems na ba
སེམས་ནག	black mindedness, bad/ evil mind, meanness, malice, ill- will	sems nag
སེམས་ནག་ཐམ་ཐམ	oblivious, unconscious	sems nag tham tham
སེམས་ནག་པོ	black mindedness, bad/ evil mind, meanness, malice, ill- will	sems nag po
སེམས་ནག་བྱེད	be mean/ malicious	sems nag byed
སེམས་ནག་བྱེད་པ	be mean/ malicious	sems nag byed pa
སེམས་ནང	within the mind sems nang gang yod mi la ma gzhod	sems nang
སེམས་ནང་དུ་ཞི་བར་གནས་པ	mental tranquility	sems nang du zhi bar gnas pa
སེམས་ནང་དུ་ཡང་དག་འཇོག	to turn within	sems nang du yang dag 'jog
སེམས་ནད	heart grief, affliction, emotional disturbance	sems nad
སེམས་ནད་བཅོས་མཁན	psychiatrist	sems nad bcos mkhan
སེམས་ནས་དགའ་བ་སྐྱེས་པ	adore	sems nas dga' ba skyes pa
སེམས་གནག་པོ	[black mind] mean, malicious, ill-willed	sems gnag po
སེམས་གནད	pith instruction of mind	sems gnad
སེམས་གནས	mental abiding/ stillness/ quiescence	sems gnas
སེམས་གནས་དགུ	9 steps of stabilizing/resting the mind, 9 mental abidings/stages	sems gnas dgu
སེམས་གནས་འགྱུ	the calm and the moving mind	sems gnas 'gyu
སེམས་གནས་རྣམས་ལ་སེམས་སྡེ	firmness of mind	sems gnas rnams la sems sde
སེམས་གནས་པ	to quiet the mind, calm state of mind	sems gnas pa
སེམས་གནས་པའི་ཐབས་དགུ	nine methods of bringing the mind to rest/ causing the mind to settle	sems gnas pa'i thabs dgu
སེམས་གནས་རིམ་པ་དགུ	Syn {sems gnas dgu}	sems gnas rim pa dgu
སེམས་རྣམ་རྟོག	discursive mind	sems rnam rtog
སེམས་རྣམ་པར་གྱེངས་པ	distracted mind	sems rnam par gyengs pa
སེམས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	completely pure mind	sems rnam par dag pa
སེམས་རྣམ་པར་མ་ཞི་བ	1) mind speedy, not relaxed/ comfortable; 2) rang snang gang dran byed mkhan sems rnam par g.yeng ba - distracted mind	sems rnam par ma zhi ba
སེམས་རྣལ་དུ་འདུག་པ	bar du zhum rgod de phyir 'byung du dogs bzhin du gnas pa	sems rnal du 'dug pa
སེམས་རྣལ་དུ་ཕབ	cool headed, unflustered	sems rnal du phab
སེམས་རྣལ་དུ་ཕབ་པ	cool headed, unflustered	sems rnal du phab pa
སེམས་རྣལ་མ	1) straightforward and right to the point; 2) mind not out of control; 3) natural state of mind	sems rnal ma
སེམས་སྣང	thoughts	sems snang
སེམས་སྣང་གསུམ	three qualities of mind	sems snang gsum
སེམས་སྣལ	calm/ peaceful state of mind	sems snal
སེམས་སྣུམ་པ	gladness	sems snum pa
ཨོནེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕི༹བེ༹་ཨེབེ༹ར	present mental states; one of {kun 'gro lnga}. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {sems yul la g.yo ba'i gnas skabs kyi yid kyi rnam 'byur}, connects primary mind to an object of perception or action. Syn {l...	one of the five ever
སེམས་པ་འཁྲུགས་ནད་ཅན	delirious 2795	sems pa 'khrugs nad can
སེམས་པ་རྒྱུན་ཆགས་པ	continuous intention	sems pa rgyun chags pa
སེམས་པ་ངན	have ill-will GD	sems pa ngan
སེམས་པ་ཅན	pregnant, bearing child	sems pa can
སེམས་པ་ཉིད་པ	set the mind	sems pa nyid pa
སེམས་པ་འཐོམས་པ	preoccupy	sems pa 'thoms pa
སེམས་པ་བྲལ	to lose interest	sems pa bral
སེམས་པ་སྦུག་སྲུབ་དོག་པོ	narrowminded	sems pa sbug srub dog po
སེམས་པ་མ་སྐྱོ	Don't be sad!	sems pa ma skyo
སེམས་པ་ཡིད་ཀྱི་ལས	mentally intending action	sems pa yid kyi las
སེམས་པ་ལས་གྱུར་བའི་ལས་ལྔ	CHN	sems pa las gyur ba'i las lnga
སེམས་པ་ཤོར	1) longed for. 2) fall in love	sems pa shor
སེམས་པའི་འཁྱེར་ཕྱོགས	mentality	sems pa'i 'khyer phyogs
སེམས་པའི་ཟས	sustenance of will	sems pa'i zas
སེམས་པའི་ལས	action of willing; action of willing	sems pa'i las
སེམས་པར་ཟད་མོད	NyDh: an idiom meaning something like "devoid of thought" [mss]	sems par zad mod
སེམས་པས་འཕང་བསྟོད	to rouse the mind	sems pas 'phang bstod
སེམས་པས་བཟོས་པ	fantasy	sems pas bzos pa
སེམས་དཔང་བསྐྱེད	feel exalted	sems dpang bskyed
སེམས་དཔངས་བསྟོད	their courage was revived	sems dpangs bstod
སེམས་དཔངས་བསྟོད་པ	tried to hearten them	sems dpangs bstod pa
སེམས་དཔངས་མཐོ་བ	great pride courage [inspiration brilliance]	sems dpangs mtho ba
སེམས་དཔའ་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བཅས་པ	assuming the sattvasana	sems dpa' skyil krung bcas pa
སེམས་དཔའ་ཆུང་ཆུང	timid, cowardly	sems dpa' chung chung
སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེ	courageous	sems dpa' che
སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ	mahasattva; great being. A term that refers to great bodhisattvas	sems dpa' chen po
སེམས་དཔའ་ཏིང་གིས་སོང	became completely brave sems dpa' dang sems ma lha dang lha	sems dpa' ting gis song
མོའི་རང་བཞིན་དུ་གསལ་གདབ	consider as male and female bodhisattvas sems dpa' dang sems ma'i rang bzhin du	mo'i rang bzhin du gsal gdab
གསལ་གདབ	consider as male and female bodhisattvas	gsal gdab
སེམས་དཔའ་རྡོ་རྗེ	Sattvavajra	sems dpa' rdo rje
སེམས་དཔའ་སུམ་བརྩེགས	triple stacked sattvas	sems dpa' sum brtsegs
ཐེ་སམདྷི་བེཨིང་ཨིས་ཐེ་སེཨེད	syllable.	the samadhi being is the seed
སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་མ	male and female bodhisattvas	sems dpa' sems ma
སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་མ་བརྒྱད	the eight male and female bodhisattvas; see {sems dpa' brgyad, sems ma brgyad}	sems dpa' sems ma brgyad
སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་མ་སོགས	the male and female bodhisattvas	sems dpa' sems ma sogs
སེམས་དཔའ་གསུམ་བརྩེགས	[Tse] CHN	sems dpa' gsum brtsegs
སེམས་དཔའི་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང	cross-legged meditation posture of bodhisattvas, mental concentration, posture of sitting perfectly still of a bodhisattva, sitting with one leg bent and the other slightly stretched out, lotus pos...	sems dpa'i skyil krung
སེམས་དཔའི་སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང	Sattvaparyanka	sems dpa'i skyil mo krung
སེམས་དཔའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	immersion in (the) genuine (state of) courageous mind	sems dpa'i rnal 'byor
སེམས་དཔའི་སྦྱོར་བ	[Tse]	sems dpa'i sbyor ba
སེམས་དཔའི་སྦྱོར་བའི་ཁྱད་མཚན	bodhisattva wisdom's special characteristics like being unencompassed by thought	sems dpa'i sbyor ba'i khyad mtshan
སེམས་དཔའི་སྦྱོར་བའི་བྱེད་མཚན	bodhisattva wisdom w its special characteristics of action such as benefit, happiness, and protection/refuge	sems dpa'i sbyor ba'i byed mtshan
སེམས་དཔའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ	[Tse] sems dpa'i gzhi shes sbyor ba'i byed pa	sems dpa'i rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa
སེམས་དཔྱོད་འདི་ཕུལ་ལོ	offered this examination of her mind	sems dpyod 'di phul lo
སེམས་སྤྲོ	joyful mind	sems spro
སེམས་སྤྲོ་བ	overjoyed	sems spro ba
སེམས་ཕམ	disappointment, discouragement	sems pham
སེམས་ཕམ་པ	grieved, sorrowful, lose hope, be disappointed	sems pham pa
སེམས་ཕམ་ཡི་ཆད	discouraged, dependent, depressed, sad	sems pham yi chad
སེམས་ཕམ་ཡིད་ཆད	discouraged, dependent, depressed, sad	sems pham yid chad
སེམས་ཕིན་ཆི་ལོག	wrong thoughts/ wishes	sems phin chi log
སེམས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པར	correct thoughts	sems phyin ci ma log par
སེམས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག	wrong thoughts/ wishes TSE	sems phyin ci log
སེམས་ཕྱོགས	teachings pertaining to the Dzogchen Semdey, the Mind Section of the Great Perfection	sems phyogs
སེམས་ཕྱོས་པ	distracted mind, mind unable to fix on anything	sems phyos pa
སེམས་ཕྲ་བ	subtle thinking	sems phra ba
སེམས་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle mind TSE	sems phra mo
སེམས་ཕྲན	82 minor works of the sems sde	sems phran
སེམས་འཕང་གཟེངས་མཐོན་པོ	proud,	sems 'phang gzengs mthon po
ཧིགྷ	spirited	high
སེམས་འཕར	1) mental power increasing higher and higher; 2) snying ldem du g.yugs pa	sems 'phar
སེམས་འཕྱོ་བ	1) mind elevated; 2) unhappy, sad	sems 'phyo ba
སེམས་འཕྲེང	1) saddened. 2) {snying rje'i sems 'phreng drag ste} felt strong pity for	sems 'phreng
སེམས་འཕྲེང་ཅུང་སྐྱེས	worry a little	sems 'phreng cung skyes
སེམས་འཕྲེང་སྟེ	I feel sad	sems 'phreng ste
སེམས་འཕྲེང་བ	mental desire/ attachment	sems 'phreng ba
སེམས་འཕྲེང་ལ་ཕྲེང་བར་གདའ	I am sad	sems 'phreng la phreng bar gda'
སེམས་འཕྲོག	gzhan sems 'phrog la mkhas	sems 'phrog
སེམས་འཕྲོག་པ	mind inseparably lost in the object and become inseparable	sems 'phrog pa
སེམས་བག་ཚ་བ	1) sems 'tshab pa'am zhum pa; 2) yid la mtsher snang yod pa	sems bag tsha ba
སེམས་བུག་དོག་པོ	[narrow mind] narrow minded	sems bug dog po
སེམས་བེམ་པོ	dumb, unable to speak	sems bem po
སེམས་བྱིང་བ	drowsiness, indolence, depression of spirits	sems bying ba
སེམས་བྱུང	caitta, specific functions, function events, specific operations of sems, phenomena which arise from mind, specific details of experience, mental (factor, events, states), mibp 18, particular exist...	sems byung
སེམས་བྱུང་ཀུན་འགྲོ	ever-present mental states, omnipresent mental factors	sems byung kun 'gro
སེམས་བྱུང་ཀུན་འགྲོ་ལྔ	the five everpresent mental events [1) {sems pa} 2) {tshor pa} 3) {'du shes} 4) {yid la byed pa} 5) {rig pa}	sems byung kun 'gro lnga
སེམས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ	virtuous mental factors; Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {'di dag la tshul bzhin du spyad pas rnam smin yid du 'ong ba 'byin par byed pa'i phyir dge ba'i chos su bzhag ste rgyu la 'bras bu'i ming gis btag...	sems byung dge ba
སེམས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་གཅིག	11 virtuous mental states	sems byung dge ba bcu gcig
སེམས་བྱུང་ང་གཅིག	51 mental factors CHN	sems byung nga gcig
སེམས་བྱུང་ལྔ་བཅུ་ང་གཅིག	[1,32-33], [1,34-] - fifty-one mental states	sems byung lnga bcu nga gcig
སེམས་བྱུང་ལྔ་བཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	Fifty-one Mental Events. The five ever-present ones {kun 'gro lnga} of rapport, imagination, feeling, cognition and motivation, the five object-determined ones {yul so sor nges pa lnga} or craving,...	sems byung lnga bcu rtsa gcig
སེམས་བྱུང་བཅུ་གཅིག	eleven virtuous mental states	sems byung bcu gcig
སེམས་བྱུང་གནས་སྐབས་ཉེར་ལྔ	CHN	sems byung gnas skabs nyer lnga
སེམས་བྱུང་གཞན་གྱུར་བཞི	four variable mental states	sems byung gzhan gyur bzhi
སེམས་བྱུང་གཞན་འགྱུར	changeable mental factors, variable	sems byung gzhan 'gyur
སེམས་བྱུང་བཞི་བཅུ་རྩ་དྲུག	see {'khor sems byung gi gzhi}	sems byung bzhi bcu rtsa drug
སེམས་བྱུང་ཡུལ་ངེས	determining mental factors	sems byung yul nges
སེམས་བྱུང་ཡུལ་ངེས་བྱེད་ལྔ	five object determining mental states	sems byung yul nges byed lnga
སེམས་བྱུང་སེམས་པ	the mental state will	sems byung sems pa
སེམས་བྲེལ	sems lhod po med pa	sems brel
སེམས་བློང་བློང་པོ	depressed heart	sems blong blong po
སེམས་དབེན	mental isolation	sems dben
སེམས་དབེན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	isolated mind of clear light	sems dben gyi 'od gsal
སེམས་དབེན་དཔེའི་འོད་གསལ	isolated mind of clear light	sems dben dpe'i 'od gsal
སེམས་དབེན་དཔེའི་འོད་གསལ་ཐར་ཐུག	isolated mind of ultimate example clear light sems dben dpe'i 'od gsal mthar thug ma	sems dben dpe'i 'od gsal thar thug
སེམས་དབེན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་དཔེའི་འོད་གསལ	nonisolated mind of example clear light	sems dben ma yin pa'i dpe'i 'od gsal
སེམས་དབེན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འོད་གསལ	nonisolated mind of clear light	sems dben ma yin pa'i 'od gsal
སེམས་འབྱུང	mental factor, specific details of experience	sems 'byung
སེམས་འབྱུང་བ	mental factor, specific details of experience	sems 'byung ba
སེམས་འབྲེལ	ideological relationship, mental connection	sems 'brel
སེམས་སྦྱོང་བ	1) sadness because of suffering; 2) train the mind; 3) cleanse the mind of faults	sems sbyong ba
སེམས་མ	female [bodhi]sattva {byang chub sems ma}; female [bodhi] sattva {byang chub sems ma}	sems ma
སེམས་མ་བརྒྱད	Syn {phreng ma}	sems ma brgyad
སེམས་མ་བདེ	uneasiness of the mind, unhappy state of mind	sems ma bde
སེམས་མ་གནས་པ	unsettled, unsteady	sems ma gnas pa
སེམས་མ་འཕྲོས་ཙམ	simply keep from wandering off	sems ma 'phros tsam
སེམས་མ་ཟིན་པ་ཟིན་པར་བྱེད་པ	capturing the uncaught mind	sems ma zin pa zin par byed pa
སེམས་མ་རུངས་པ	his mind is coarse and evil	sems ma rungs pa
སེམས་མང	having many desires, speculating on many things	sems mang
སེམས་མི་སྐྱིད་པ	feeling bad, unbearable, distressed	sems mi skyid pa
སེམས་མི་དགའ་བ	disconsolate, unhappy, displeased, dissatisfied, be wrathful, hurt at heart, offend, irritate	sems mi dga' ba
སེམས་མི་བརྟན	unstable thought	sems mi brtan
སེམས་མི་གནས་པ	vacillating mind, unsteady mind, fickle-minded sems mi g.yo ba - not mentally wandering/ wavering/ distracted	sems mi gnas pa
སེམས་མི་རངས་པར	discontented	sems mi rangs par
སེམས་མེད	suspension of attitudinal and functional operations sems med kyi gnas skabs la gnas bzhin while abiding in the cognitionless states	sems med
སེམས་མེད་པ	1) material things; 2) stupid person 2797	sems med pa
སེམས་མེད་པའི་སྐབས	times of absence of cognizance	sems med pa'i skabs
སེམས་མེད་པའི་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five mindless situations	sems med pa'i skabs lnga
སེམས་མེད་པའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	[Tse]	sems med pa'i ting nge 'dzin
སེམས་མེད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	cognitionless states; Mipham Rinpoche: {'du shes med pa dang, 'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug, 'du shes med pa'i snyoms 'jug gsum lta bu'o} cognitionless states are, for instance, the perceptionless [gods], ...	sems med pa'i gnas skabs
སེམས་མེད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་ལྔ	the five situations w/o mind/ thoughts *, gnyid sleep, brgyal ba fainting/ unconsciousness]	sems med pa'i gnas skabs lnga
སེམས་མེད་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་གསུམ	the three mindless states [occasions]: 1) {'du shes med pa} 2) {'gog pa'i snyoms 'jug} 3) {'du shes med pa'i snyoms 'jug}	sems med pa'i gnas skabs gsum
སེམས་མེད་བེམ་པོ	inanimate material things	sems med bem po
སེམས་མེད་བེམས་པོ	inanimate material things	sems med bems po
སེམས་མེད་རབ་རྟོག	rab rtog gi rgyan gyi nang gses shig ste, sems med kyi dngos po'i rang bzhin gyi gnas lugs la rnam rtog gi bsam blo med bzhin du yod par sgro btags te brjod pa' gyan zhig sems rmad du byung ba bco ...	sems med rab rtog
ལེའུ་ལྔ་བཅུ	Eighteen Marvels of Mind in Fifty Chapters. Several tantras in the first three volumes of the Nyingma Gyübum bear a resembling name although none of them have 50 chapters. A writing mistake seems t...	le'u lnga bcu
སེམས་རྨོངས་པ	be unhappy, displeased	sems rmongs pa
སེམས་སྨད་བཅུ་གསུམ	SA phyi 'gyur bcu gsum	sems smad bcu gsum
སེམས་སྨད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Marvels of Mind	sems smad bco brgyad
སེམས་སྨད་པ	humble oneself before a person	sems smad pa
སེམས་ཙམ	Mind Only school, Chittamatra; the doctrine of Mind Only; founded by Maitreya and Asanga, idealist-mentalist, just displays of mind. Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {gzung 'dzin gnyis las grol ba'i rnam s...	sems tsam
སེམས་ཙམ་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	the view of the Cittamatra/ mind-only school	sems tsam kyi lta ba
སེམས་ཙམ་དང་དབུ་མའི་ཁྱད་པར	Def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {gzung 'dzin gnyis kyis stong pa'i shes pa rang rig rang gsal don dam grub par 'dod pa dang mi 'dod pa theg chen sde gnyis kyi khyad par gyi gtso bo yin}	sems tsam dang dbu ma'i khyad par
སེམས་ཙམ་རྣམ་བདེན་པ	True Image Mind Only School; def {sgo lnga'i dbang shes la phyi rol don du snang ba thams cad nang shes pa'i rdzas su bden par 'dod} phyi rol gyi don bden dngos su grub pa med kyang don du rtog pa'...	sems tsam rnam bden pa
སེམས་ཙམ་རྣམ་མེད་པ	Syn {sems tsam rnam rdzun pa}	sems tsam rnam med pa
སེམས་ཙམ་རྣམ་རྫུན་པ	false image/ aspectarian mind only school	sems tsam rnam rdzun pa
སེམས་ཙམ་རྣམ་རྫུན་པའི་ལུགས	the system of the False Image Mind Only School	sems tsam rnam rdzun pa'i lugs
སེམས་ཙམ་རྣམ་བརྫུན་པ	{sems tsam rnam rdzun pa}	sems tsam rnam brdzun pa
སེམས་ཙམ་པ	Chittamatrin/ proponent of mind only school	sems tsam pa
སེམས་ཙམ་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of cittamatra/ Mind-only school TSE	sems tsam pa gnyis
སེམས་ཙམ་པ་རྣམ་བརྫུན	false aspectrarian mind only school [Tse]	sems tsam pa rnam brdzun
སེམས་ཙམ་པ་རྣམ་བརྫུན་གཉིས	the two kinds of false aspectrarian mind only school TSE	sems tsam pa rnam brdzun gnyis
སེམས་ཙམ་པ་གསུམ	the three kinds of mind only school 2798	sems tsam pa gsum
སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ	mind only school doctrine	sems tsam pa'i grub mtha'
སེམས་ཙམ་པོ	pure consciousness	sems tsam po
སེམས་ཙམ་མོ	they exist only in our fancy	sems tsam mo
སེམས་གཙོ	idealistic	sems gtso
སེམས་གཙོ་སྨྲ་བ	idealism [-ist]	sems gtso smra ba
སེམས་གཙོ་རིང་ལུགས	idealism	sems gtso ring lugs
སེམས་གཙོའི་རིང་ལུགས	idealism	sems gtso'i ring lugs
སེམས་རྩ་འཁོལ་པོ	try hard to accomplish a task	sems rtsa 'khol po
སེམས་རྩ་འཁྲུགས	will stir up [your] mind	sems rtsa 'khrugs
སེམས་རྩ་དགའ་བ	be very pleased	sems rtsa dga' ba
སེམས་རྩ་འགྲུལ	want strongly	sems rtsa 'grul
སེམས་རྩལ	{sems kyi rtsal} mental energy. Syn {rnam rtog} discursive thought	sems rtsal
སེམས་རྩལ་སྦྱངས་པ	fully trained my mind	sems rtsal sbyangs pa
སེམས་རྩིང་བ	rough thinking	sems rtsing ba
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག	1 pointed mind * concentrate on 1 thing	sems rtse gcig
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲིམ	concentrate the mind 1-pointedly	sems rtse gcig sgrim
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཆགས	become absorbed by/ fascinated w something	sems rtse gcig chags
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྒྲིམ	concentrate the mind 1-pointedly	sems rtse gcig tu sgrim
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གཏད	mind focused on a single point	sems rtse gcig tu gtad
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	the mind rests	sems rtse gcig tu gnas pa
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་པ	1 pointed mind * concentrate on 1 thing	sems rtse gcig pa
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་པ་ཉིད	1 pointed mind	sems rtse gcig pa nyid
སེམས་རྩེ་གཅིག་པའི་བསམ་གཏན	dhyana w 1 pointed mind	sems rtse gcig pa'i bsam gtan
སེམས་རྩེག་ཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	mind resting 1 pointedly	sems rtseg cig tu gnas pa
སེམས་ཚགས་ཚུད་པ	gentle	sems tshags tshud pa
སེམས་ཚབ་ཚུབ	mind/ thoughts anxious and speedy	sems tshab tshub
སེམས་ཚབས	worried, anxious, nervous, restless	sems tshabs
སེམས་ཚབས་བྱེད	be [worried, anxious, nervous, restless]	sems tshabs byed
སེམས་ཚིམ་པར་བྱས་པ	action of making thoughts dissolve	sems tshim par byas pa
སེམས་ཚིམ་པར་བྱེད་པ	make thoughts dissolve	sems tshim par byed pa
སེམས་ཚུབ	trouble of mind	sems tshub
སེམས་ཚོར	mental sensation / feeling	sems tshor
སེམས་ཚོར་ཞིག་བྱུང	to have the feeling that	sems tshor zhig byung
སེམས་ཚོལ	seeking the mind	sems tshol
སེམས་མཚེར	1) disappointment, discouragement; 2) shame, modesty, politeness, decency; 3) sadness	sems mtsher
སེམས་འཚབ	to be worried or anxious or nervous	sems 'tshab
སེམས་འཚབ་པ	distressed	sems 'tshab pa
སེམས་འཚབ་འཚུབ	mental hurry, confusion, perplexity	sems 'tshab 'tshub
སེམས་འཚབས	distressed	sems 'tshabs
སེམས་འཚབས་པ	worry	sems 'tshabs pa
སེམས་འཚུབ	impatient	sems 'tshub
སེམས་འཚུབས་ན	if attention gets restless	sems 'tshubs na
སེམས་འཚེར	be shy	sems 'tsher
སེམས་འཚོར་གྱི	emotional	sems 'tshor gyi
སེམས་འཚོལ	quest for the mind, searching for mind	sems 'tshol
སེམས་འཛིན	focusing of the mind, fixing the mind / attention, concentration, focused attention; fixation of mind, Semdzin (a series of meditation exercises in Dzogchen); fixation	sems 'dzin
སེམས་འཛིན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the regal way of holding the mind	sems 'dzin gyi rgyal po
སེམས་འཛིན་པ	focus the attention on	sems 'dzin pa
སེམས་ཞི་བ	soothed	sems zhi ba
སེམས་ཞི་བའི་ཐབས་དགུ	nine means of bringing mind to rest	sems zhi ba'i thabs dgu
སེམས་ཞི་རུ་བཅུག་པ	to alleviate [an emotion]	sems zhi ru bcug pa
སེམས་ཞུབ	be discouraged/ dispirited/ sad	sems zhub
སེམས་ཞུམ	faint-heartedness, disheartened	sems zhum
སེམས་ཞུས	dismayed	sems zhus
སེམས་གཞན	regardless, thinking differently	sems gzhan
སེམས་གཞན་དུ་མ་ཡེངས་པར	without distraction; x {bla ma'i gdams pa las sems gzhan du ma yengs par nyan pa} listen to the lama's instructions without distraction	sems gzhan du ma yengs par
སེམས་བཞིན་དུ	knowingly, wilfully, purposely, lost in thoughts, absorbed in meditation	sems bzhin du
སེམས་ཟང་ཟིང	blo tshab tshub	sems zang zing
སེམས་ཟིན་པ	captured mind, conquering the mind	sems zin pa
སེམས་ཟིན་པ་བརྟན་པར་བྱེད་པ	stabilizing the captured mind	sems zin pa brtan par byed pa
སེམས་ཟློག་དཀའ	hard to give up	sems zlog dka'
སེམས་གཟུང་བ	focusing the attention	sems gzung ba
སེམས་བཟང	goodwill, good heart	sems bzang
སེམས་བཟང་པོ	[kind mind] kind hearted	sems bzang po
སེམས་བཟུང	fix your mind on ...; fix your mind; see {sems 'dzin}	sems bzung
སེམས་བཟུང་བ	to fix the attention, focus/ hold the mind, attention	sems bzung ba
སེམས་བཟོ་དགེ་དགན	psychologist sems bzo med la mi 'gul bas dbyings rigs	sems bzo dge dgan
ཟུང་དུ་ཆུད་པར་བྱེད	w/o moving from the state of the unfabricated mind, the expanse and awareness are integrated GD	zung du chud par byed
སེམས་ཡང་དག་པར་རབ་ཏུ་འཇོག་པ	to place the attention truly and fully	sems yang dag par rab tu 'jog pa
སེམས་ཡངས་པ	magnanimous, one with liberal views, broad heart	sems yangs pa
སེམས་ཡིད་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ	mind, thought, and consciousness	sems yid rnam par shes pa
སེམས་ཡུལ་དུ་ངེས་པ	ascertain the object of mind	sems yul du nges pa
སེམས་ཡེར	light-headed 2799	sems yer
སེམས་ཡོད་དང་སེམས་མེད	existence and	sems yod dang sems med
སེམས་རགས་པ	gross mind [R]	sems rags pa
སེམས་རང་པར་གྱུར	mind becomes joyous	sems rang par gyur
སེམས་རང་བབས	the way mind naturally is	sems rang babs
སེམས་རང་བཞག	naturally resting the mind sems rang bzhag gnyug ma'i ngang	sems rang bzhag
སེམས་རང་བཞིན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ་བ	the luminous nature of mind sems rang bzhin gyis rnam par dag pa'i gnas lugs ji lta ba shes pa'i lhag mthong - vipashyana that perceives the naturally perfect and innate state of mind as it is	sems rang bzhin gyi 'od gsal ba
སེམས་རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་འོད་གསལ་བ	the natural luminosity of mind	sems rang bzhin gyis 'od gsal ba
སེམས་རིག	mind, sem and rigpa; mind	sems rig
སེམས་རིག་དབྱེར་མེད	undifferentiated sems and rigpa	sems rig dbyer med
སེམས་རིགས་པ	gross mind	sems rigs pa
སེམས་ལ་བཀོད	meditation	sems la bkod
སེམས་ལ་སྐྱེས་པ	arose in his mind	sems la skyes pa
སེམས་ལ་ཁྱད་བྱུང	a difference of opinion arose	sems la khyad byung
སེམས་ལ་འཁུར་བ	bear in mind	sems la 'khur ba
སེམས་ལ་འཁོར	have some thought come to mind	sems la 'khor
སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བ	joyful in mind	sems la dga' ba
སེམས་ལ་ངག་པ	remember, have in mind	sems la ngag pa
སེམས་ལ་ངེས	remember, have in mind	sems la nges
སེམས་ལ་ངེས་པ	remember, have in mind	sems la nges pa
སེམས་ལ་གཅགས	miss	sems la gcags
སེམས་ལ་ཆོངས	Keep them in mind!	sems la chongs
སེམས་ལ་འཆང་བ	bear in the mind, retain in memory	sems la 'chang ba
སེམས་ལ་ཇོག་པ	keep in mind, remember	sems la jog pa
སེམས་ལ་འཇོག	keep in mind, remember	sems la 'jog
སེམས་ལ་འཇོག་པ	sems la dran par byed pa	sems la 'jog pa
སེམས་ལ་ཉམས་སུ་བླང་བ	comprehend	sems la nyams su blang ba
སེམས་ལ་སྙམ་པ	+ byung - these thoughts arose in my mind	sems la snyam pa
སེམས་ལ་རྟེན་མེད་པ	mind w/o support	sems la rten med pa
སེམས་ལ་རྟོགས་པ་འབར་བ	the blazing of realization in the mind	sems la rtogs pa 'bar ba
སེམས་ལ་ཐོང	Keep in mind!	sems la thong
སེམས་ལ་ནག་པ	black-hearted, scowling, impious	sems la nag pa
སེམས་ལ་གནོད་པ	to deeply hurt	sems la gnod pa
སེམས་ལ་གནོད་པའི་ཚིག་སྨྲ་བ	to say things that hurt [people's] feelings	sems la gnod pa'i tshig smra ba
སེམས་ལ་ཕན	x {chos kyis sems la mi phan} the Dharma will fail to help your mind	sems la phan
སེམས་ལ་ཕན་པའི་གདམས་པ	beneficial instructions	sems la phan pa'i gdams pa
སེམས་ལ་ཕོག	1) be struck w/ fall into faults and transgressions la phog pa; 2) unhappiness arising	sems la phog
སེམས་ལ་ཕོག་པ	1) be struck w/ fall into faults and transgressions la phog pa; 2) unhappiness arising	sems la phog pa
སེམས་ལ་འཕྲེང་བ	truly loved one another	sems la 'phreng ba
སེམས་ལ་དབང་བ	to have power over one's mind, power at one's own pleasure to enter into any meditation, SA dbang bcu	sems la dbang ba
སེམས་ལ་འབྱར	was borne in mind, was remembered	sems la 'byar
སེམས་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ	impress on the mind	sems la sbyor ba
སེམས་ལ་དམིགས་པའི་ཞི་གནས	TSE	sems la dmigs pa'i zhi gnas
སེམས་ལ་ཙལ་སྤྱོད	meditative exercises	sems la tsal spyod
སེམས་ལ་འཛིན་པ	be grasped by the mind	sems la 'dzin pa
སེམས་ལ་ཞོག	keep in your hearts	sems la zhog
སེམས་ལ་གཞོལ་བ	contemplate	sems la gzhol ba
སེམས་ལ་གཞོལ་བའི་ཡན་ལག	the limb of contemplation	sems la gzhol ba'i yan lag
སེམས་ལ་བཞག་པ	to bear in mind	sems la bzhag pa
སེམས་ལ་ཟུངས	keep in mind!	sems la zungs
སེམས་ལ་གཟན	gnaws at the heart/ heartbreaking	sems la gzan
སེམས་ལ་གཟན་པོ	irritate, stimulate, excite	sems la gzan po
སེམས་ལ་ཤར་བ་ལྟར	whatever came to my mind	sems la shar ba ltar
སེམས་ལ་བཤག	kept in mind, remembered	sems la bshag
སེམས་ལ་སེམས་ཀྱིས་བལྟ་བའི་ཚུལ	in the manner of mind looking into mind	sems la sems kyis blta ba'i tshul
སེམས་ལ་བསམ	considered	sems la bsam
སེམས་ལམ་མེར་གནས་པ	the attention to remain clear	sems lam mer gnas pa
སེམས་ལས	burdens, worries, to worry	sems las
སེམས་ལས་ཆེ	brain work, philosopher, one who thinks of many subjects	sems las che
སེམས་ལས་འདས་པ	[which] transcends dualistic mind	sems las 'das pa
སེམས་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wakefulness beyond thought; a primal awareness which transcends the mind	sems las 'das pa'i ye shes
སེམས་ལས་བྱུང་བ	phenomena which arise from mind, SA sems byung, derived from mind	sems las byung ba
སེམས་ལས་བྱུང་བ་ལྡ་བཅུ་ང་གཅིག	51 mental events/ contents	sems las byung ba lda bcu nga gcig
སེམས་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	mental contents/ events	sems las 'byung ba
སེམས་ལས་མ་གཏོགས	apart from mind	sems las ma gtogs
སེམས་ལས་མ་བྱུང་བའི་ཆོས	dharma that does not derive from mind	sems las ma byung ba'i chos
སེམས་ལས་མེད་པ	felt indifferent	sems las med pa
སེམས་ལས་རུང	workability of mind	sems las rung
སེམས་ལས་རུང་གི་ཤིན་སྦྱངས	mental suppleness	sems las rung gi shin sbyangs
སེམས་ལས་སུ་རུང་བ	mind workable/ peaceful and tamed	sems las su rung ba
སེམས་ལས་སུ་རུང་བའི་ཞི་གནས	the tranquility of a pliant mind	sems las su rung ba'i zhi gnas
སེམས་ལུང་ཆེན་པོའི་མདོ	Scripture of the Great Prophesy of Awakened Mind. An Anu Yoga scripture	sems lung chen po'i mdo
སེམས་ལོན	text frequently cited in bsam gtan mig sgron as one of main sources of the cig char ba tradition	sems lon
སེམས་ཤི་བ	pacifying the mind	sems shi ba
སེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཕྲ་བ	very subtle mind TSE	sems shin tu phra ba
སེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྦྱངས་པ	suppleness of mind	sems shin tu sbyangs pa
སེམས་ཤིན་སྦྱང་ཐོབ་པ	attain mental pliancy	sems shin sbyang thob pa
སེམས་ཤུག་གཅོག་པ	dishearten	sems shug gcog pa
སེམས་ཤུགས	enthusiasm	sems shugs
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྐུལ	arouse the power of mind	sems shugs skul
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྐུལ་བ	arouse the power of mind	sems shugs skul ba
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྐྱེད	arouse the power of mind	sems shugs skyed
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྐྱེད་པ	arouse the power of mind	sems shugs skyed pa
སེམས་ཤུགས་འཁོར	become motivated, get enthusiasm	sems shugs 'khor
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྒྲིམ	strive for, try/ make an effort to	sems shugs sgrim
སེམས་ཤུགས་བཅག་པ	discourage	sems shugs bcag pa
སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆག	lose enthusiasm, be discouraged	sems shugs chag
སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆག་པ	his enthusiasm abated	sems shugs chag pa
སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆིག་སྒྲིལ	power of mind focused on a single point, united/ concerted effort	sems shugs chig sgril
སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆེ་བ	enthusiastic, ardent,	sems shugs che ba
སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ་དང་བཅས	w great enthusiasm	sems shugs chen po dang bcas
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྤར་བ	encourage	sems shugs spar ba
སེམས་ཤུགས་སྤར་ལས	encouragement	sems shugs spar las
སེམས་ཤུས་གཅོག་པ	daunt	sems shus gcog pa
སེམས་ཤེས	1) thinker; 2) learned person	sems shes
སེམས་ཤེས་ཁྱིམ	residence of a sage or hero	sems shes khyim
སེམས་ཤེས་པ	learned person, sage, learned	sems shes pa
སེམས་ཤོར	fall in love	sems shor
སེམས་ཤོར་བ	to admire; fall in love	sems shor ba
སེམས་སམ་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	mind drop	sems sam thugs kyi thig le
སེམས་སུ་ཆུག	GDreyfus/MSS: "set the mind on" (imperative voice) e.g. R75: 144.6 [mss]	sems su chug
སེམས་སུ་འདུས་པ	derive from mind	sems su 'dus pa
སེམས་སུ་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns/ vasanas of mind	sems su bag chags
སེམས་སེམས་ནས	thinking mostly about	sems sems nas
སེམས་སེམས་བྱུང	primary cognition and secondary mental events. Syn {rtog pa} and {dpyod pa} gross and subtle	sems sems byung
སེམས་སེམས་བྱུང་གི་རྒྱུ་བ	cause of mind and mental events sems sems byung rgyun gtan pa ma yin	sems sems byung gi rgyu ba
པའི་འདུ་བྱེད	compositional factor not associated w either mind or mental events sems sems byung dang ldan par ma yin	pa'i 'du byed
སེམས་སྲུང་བ	1) properly place/ keep the mind; 2) not let the mind be afflicted by others's faults	sems srung ba
སེམས་གསལ་སྟོང	aware and empty mind, empty and aware mind, aware emptiness of mind	sems gsal stong
སེམས་གསལ་དྭངས	cleared up mind	sems gsal dwangs
སེམས་གསལ་སིང་ངེ་གནས་པ	your attention will remain utterly lucid	sems gsal sing nge gnas pa
སེམས་གསོ	consolation, refreshed, condolence, solace	sems gso
སེམས་གསོ་གཏོང	offer means of relieving/ curing [refreshing] the mind of suffering/ sadness/ consolation/ comfort/ solace	sems gso gtong
སེམས་གསོ་གཏོང་བ	console	sems gso gtong ba
སེམས་གསོ་བཏང	comforted, consoled	sems gso btang
སེམས་གསོ་བཏང་བ	comforted, consoled	sems gso btang ba
སེམས་གསོ་ཐོངས	Console!	sems gso thongs
སེམས་གསོ་བ	console	sems gso ba
སེམས་གསོ་བྱེད	offer means of relieving/ curing [refreshing] the mind of suffering/ sadness/ consolation/ comfort/ solace	sems gso byed
སེམས་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	to comfort, console	sems gso byed pa
སེམས་གསོའི་མཇལ་དར	kata offered to the dead	sems gso'i mjal dar
སེམས་གསོའི་མཚམས་འདྲི	visit/ message of consolation/ condolence	sems gso'i mtshams 'dri
སེམས་གསོའི་མཚམས་འདྲི་ཞུ	offer consolation/ condolence	sems gso'i mtshams 'dri zhu
སེམས་བསུན་ནས་བསྐྱུར་བ	abandoned prodigality	sems bsun nas bskyur ba
སེམས་བསུན་ཕྱུང་བ	make some1 fed up/ disappointed	sems bsun phyung ba
སེམས་བསུན་བྱེད་པ	offend 2801	sems bsun byed pa
སེམས་ཧང་ལྟས	thoughtless, oblivious	sems hang ltas
སེམས་ལྷག་ཅན	lha'i bu sems lhag can	sems lhag can
ཞེས་གྲགས་སོ	became known as Devaputra Adhicitta, "the god's son of superior mind." sems lhag can la rgyal thabs spyi blugs rdzogs pa'i dbang brda'i sgo nas bskur transmitted to him, by means of symbols, the en...	zhes grags so
སེམས་ལྷན་སྐྱེས	innate mind	sems lhan skyes
སེམས་ལྷིང་པོ	calm	sems lhing po
སེམས་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	mthar [on the goal? gradually?] yun ring du bsgoms te [meditate for a long time] after becoming accustomed to that depression and wild discursiveness do not arise and one rests wo fear and doubt se...	sems lhun gyis grub pa
སེམས་ལྷོད་ཀྱིས	in a relaxed way	sems lhod kyis
སེམས་ལྷོད་གློད	relax attention loosely	sems lhod glod
སེམས་ལྷོད་ལྷོད	[mind] not speedy or busy, comfortable and relaxed, calm	sems lhod lhod
སེའུ	1) se'u/ cherry tree; 2) teeth as soon as they grow; 3) (CH a kind of brocade	se'u
སེའུ་བཅུ་པ	small child	se'u bcu pa
སེའུ་རྟ་ཁྲིད	groom of the chief of a class of demons	se'u rta khrid
སེའུ་འབྲུ	{se'u} fruit se'u la byams mgon ngag dbang rgyal	se'u 'bru
སེར	yellow, golden [comp ser po], moisture	ser
སེར་ཀ	crack, hole, chasm, cleft, fissure, fracture, cavity	ser ka
སེར་ཀ་ཆེན་པོ	crevice	ser ka chen po
སེར་ཀ་མ	1) found in autumn mts the best burning dung; 2) [something] w gaps/ cracks	ser ka ma
སེར་ཀ་ཤོར	crack, split, get a fissure/ gap	ser ka shor
སེར་དཀྱ་མཆོག་དམན	monks and lay people both rich and poor, people from all walks of life	ser dkya mchog dman
སེར་རྐང	hail shar shar du 'bab pa'i gzugs	ser rkang
སེར་སྐམ་མ	autumn on the mts the best burning dung	ser skam ma
སེར་སྐེ	yellow-sash of monk	ser ske
སེར་སྐེ་སྐེ	ser po krong krong [yellow standing straight up???]	ser ske ske
སེར་སྐྱ	1) human beings; 2) clergy and lay people; 3) Kapilavastu/ {ser skya} city; 4) pale/ light yellow, yellowish; 5)	ser skya
སེར་སྐྱ་པ	Followers of Kapila	ser skya pa
སེར་སྐྱ་མ	a yaksha princess	ser skya ma
སེར་སྐྱའི	Kapilavastu	ser skya'i
སེར་སྐྱའི་གྲོང	city of kapila	ser skya'i grong
སེར་སྐྱའི་ལྟ་བྱེད	owl	ser skya'i lta byed
སེར་སྐྱའི་གནས	hermitage of kapila	ser skya'i gnas
སེར་སྐྱའི་གནས་ཀྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	Kapilavastu	ser skya'i gnas kyi grong khyer
སེར་སྐྱའི་གཞི	the city of Kapilavastu {bcom ldan 'das ser skya'i gzhi nya gro rda'i kun dga' ra ba na bzhugs pa la} When the Buddha was residing in the Grove of Nyagrodha in the city of Kapilavastu	ser skya'i gzhi
སེར་ཁ	things w outer surface cracked, crack, fissure, gap	ser kha
སེར་ཁ་གས	crack, split, get a fissure/ gap	ser kha gas
སེར་ཁ་མ	in autumn on the mts the best burning dung	ser kha ma
སེར་ཁང	house for mantrikas who are paid to guard against hail	ser khang
སེར་ཁམ་ཁམ	pale yellow	ser kham kham
སེར་ཁྱིམ་པ	householder improperly w accoutrements of a monk	ser khyim pa
སེར་ཁྱིམ་ལ	{ser khyim} pass	ser khyim la
སེར་ཁྱུག་གེ	bright yellow	ser khyug ge
སེར་ཁྲ	1) vari-colored picture/ pattern w yellow ground; 2) yellow mottled	ser khra
སེར་ཁྲལ	fees paid to ser khyim pa for hail insurance	ser khral
སེར་འཁྱིལ་འཁྱིལ	turning yellow [R]	ser 'khyil 'khyil
སེར་འཁྱུག་གེ་བ	glittering in yellow lustre, shine	ser 'khyug ge ba
སེར་ག	1) cracked on the surface; 2) sbud pa'i shan mchu 'jug sa made of red clay hollow; 3) cracked skin due to cold wind etc.	ser ga
སེར་ག་དགས་པ	have cracks or be cracked	ser ga dgas pa
སེར་ག་མ	tumeric, curcuma	ser ga ma
སེར་གས	gaps, cracks	ser gas
སེར་གོས	yellow robe of monk	ser gos
སེར་གླ	wages for mantrikas who protect crops from hail	ser gla
སེར་གླིང་མཚོ	{ser gling mtsho} lake	ser gling mtsho
སེར་རྒོད	wild whirling wind	ser rgod
སེར་སྒོང	egg yolk	ser sgong
སེར་ཅན	yellow	ser can
སེར་ཅན་བོག་ཏོ	yellow turban worn by lay people of tibet	ser can bog to
སེར་ཅན་ཞིང་ས	moist soil	ser can zhing sa
སེར་ཆ	1) {ser cha} med. herb; 2) yellow thing/ mud	ser cha
སེར་ཆས	monastic clothing/ articles	ser chas
སེར་ཆེ	yellow flower, saxifraga flagellaries	ser che
སེར་ཆེན	hailstones	ser chen
སེར་ཆེན་བབ་པ	fall of hail	ser chen bab pa
སེར་མཆོད	offerings to monastic clergy	ser mchod
སེར་ཉི་ཀླད་རྐོ	summer sign of hail hot sun	ser nyi klad rko
སེར་བསྙལ	plowing w addition of water until a proper degree of dampness neither wet nor dry is attained	ser bsnyal
སེར་ལྟེམ་ལྟེམ	yellow mottled/ ground color	ser ltem ltem
སེར་ཐག་ཆོད་པ	dry field whose dampness has evaporated	ser thag chod pa
སེར་ཐིང་ཐིང	way of showing color eg spang rgyan me tog gsar pa ser thing thing	ser thing thing
སེར་དེབ	books about monks	ser deb
སེར་གདུང	Golden Reliquary:	ser gdung
སེར་མདངས	yellow	ser mdangs
སེར་མདོག	yellow color	ser mdog
སེར་མདོག་ཅན	yellowish	ser mdog can
སེར་ནག	yellow-black/ [brown] [clay] color	ser nag
སེར་ནག་མ	yellowish black	ser nag ma
སེར་ནད	jaundice	ser nad
སེར་ནས	in autumn mantrikas hail stopping yon gyi 'bru rigs	ser nas
སེར་སྣ	stinginess, avarice, mibp 85, miserliness, frugality, greed, parsimony, avaricious, greedy	ser sna
སེར་སྣ་ཅན	avaricious, stingy, miserly	ser sna can
སེར་སྣ་ཉིད	avarice, greed, stinginess	ser sna nyid
སེར་སྣ་དང་བཅས་པ	subject to avarice	ser sna dang bcas pa
སེར་སྣ་དང་འཕང་སེམས་མེད་པ	without the slightest stinginess or second thoughts	ser sna dang 'phang sems med pa
སེར་སྣ་བྱས་ཏེ	miserly	ser sna byas te
སེར་སྣ་བྱས་པ	to be stingy	ser sna byas pa
སེར་སྣ་བྱེད	be avaricious/ stingy/ miserly	ser sna byed
སེར་སྣ་བྱེད་པ	{mchod pa la ser sna che ba byas pa} was very stingy in offering her wealth	ser sna byed pa
སེར་སྣ་མ་ཆེ	Don't be stingy!	ser sna ma che
སེར་སྣ་མེད	absence of meanness/ avarice	ser sna med
སེར་སྣ་མེད་པ	absence of meanness/ avarice	ser sna med pa
སེར་སྣ་ཚ་པོ	avaricious, stingy, miserly	ser sna tsha po
སེར་སྣ་ཚ་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པ	extravagant	ser sna tsha po ma yin pa
སེར་སྣ་ལ་སོགས་ཉོན་སྒྲིབ	obscuring kleshas of avarice etc.	ser sna la sogs nyon sgrib
སེར་སྣའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obstacle of avarice	ser sna'i sgrib pa
སེར་སྣའི་མདུད་པ་གྲོལ་བ	untied the knot of avarice	ser sna'i mdud pa grol ba
སེར་སྣའི་སྲེད་པ	the craving of avarice	ser sna'i sred pa
སེར་སྣས་བསགས་པ	hoarded in miserliness	ser snas bsags pa
སེར་སྣས་བསགས་པའི	hoarded in miserliness	ser snas bsags pa'i
སེར་པོ	yellow	ser po
སེར་པོ་རྒུ་དྲུས	swertia kingii hook. f.	ser po rgu drus
སེར་པོ་དཔའ་བོ	ser po btsan dug	ser po dpa' bo
སེར་པོ་ཚན་དུག	{ser po tshan dug} med. herb	ser po tshan dug
སེར་ཕྱུར་ཕྱུར	yellow mdangs can S*	ser phyur phyur
སེར་ཕྲེང	bsu ba ser phreng tshar du	ser phreng
དངར་བ་བྱས་པ	came to welcome us in a beautiful procession	dngar ba byas pa
སེར་ཕྲེང་སྒྲིག	stand in a line of monks w offerings [greeting some1	ser phreng sgrig
སེར་འཕྲེང	1) line of monks w offerings; 2) yellow garland/ necklace	ser 'phreng
སེར་བ	hail	ser ba
སེར་བ་རྒྱག	hail	ser ba rgyag
སེར་བ་གཏོང	hail	ser ba gtong
སེར་བའི་འགོར	the beginning of the hail	ser ba'i 'gor
སེར་བུ	a fresh breeze	ser bu
སེར་བྱས་གྲྭ་ཚང	meditation school section	ser byas grwa tshang
སེར་བྱེད་མ	very useful and important medicine	ser byed ma
སེར་བྱེས་དཔེ་མཛོད	byes college of sera monastery	ser byes dpe mdzod
སེར་སྦྲེང	procession of lamas	ser sbreng
སེར་སྦྲེངས	procession of lamas w offerings	ser sbrengs
སེར་མ	buddhist nun	ser ma
སེར་མོ	finger, six-rowed barley, late barley, monk	ser mo
སེར་མོ་བ	practitioner, monastic clergy, monk	ser mo ba
སེར་མོ་བ་དང་སྐྱ་བོ	clergy and lay people	ser mo ba dang skya bo
སེར་མོས་ཁ་བརྒྱུར་བའི་གོས	yellowcolored robes	ser mos kha brgyur ba'i gos
སེར་མོས་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བའི་གོས	yellowcolored robes	ser mos kha bsgyur ba'i gos
སེར་དམག	monk soldier	ser dmag
སེར་རྨེ	[arch] tightly/ avariciously grasping, great attachment/ fixated desire ser smad mkhas grub bstan pa dar rgyas 1493-1568	ser rme
སེར་བཙག	sa son ser po zhig	ser btsag
སེར་རྩའི་གོས	robe from bark of kalpadruma tree	ser rtsa'i gos
སེར་ཚ	khyung po ser tsha region	ser tsha
སེར་ཚུར	{ser tshur salt tshur ser	ser tshur
སེར་ཚོགས	assembly/ crowd of monastics	ser tshogs
སེར་གཟུགས	saffron-robed [monk]	ser gzugs
སེར་གཟུགས་ཀྱིས་ས་སྟེང་གང་ན་ཡང	although the surface of the earth is covered w people in yellow robes	ser gzugs kyis sa steng gang na yang
སེར་ཡོན	hail protecting wages	ser yon
སེར་ར་ཐེང་ཆེན་གླིང	{ser ra theng chen gling	ser ra theng chen gling
སེར་ར་ལུང	"Hailstorm Valley," to the east, founded by the great yogi Drigung Dordzin Könchok Gyudzin ('bri gung rdor 'dzin dkon mchog rgyud 'dzin); one of the eight monasteries around Manasarovar [MR]	ser ra lung
སེར་ར་ལུང་དགོན་པ	Sera Lung Gönpa, monastery near Lake Manasarovar. See Hailstorm Valley	ser ra lung dgon pa
སེར་རོག་གེ	yellow-black	ser rog ge
སེར་རླུང	hailstorm	ser rlung
སེར་ལངས	damp ground	ser langs
སེར་ལམ	pure yellow	ser lam
སེར་ལུས	monastic exterior, fake monk	ser lus
སེར་ཤ	[yellow meadow] mushroom	ser sha
སེར་ཤང་ངེ	a kind of yellow	ser shang nge
སེར་ཤུལ	ser shul rdzong	ser shul
སེར་སྲུང	hail protectors * maintain moisture in the soil	ser srung
སེར་སྲུབས	cracks/ gaps	ser srubs
སེར་བསང	a kind of yellow	ser bsang
སེར་ཧུར་ཧུར	bright yellow	ser hur hur
སེར་ཧྲག	hailstorm	ser hrag
སེར་ཧྲག་བབས	to hail	ser hrag babs
སེར་ལྷབ་ལྷབ་པ	gleaming / glimmering yellow	ser lhab lhab pa
སེལ	1) block[age]; 2) expel, dispel; 3) cure; 4) clear away, remove, annihilate; 5) exclude [a counterpart]; 6) overcome, surmount; 7) impurities removal	sel
སེལ་དཀར	white rites of exorcism	sel dkar
སེལ་གྱི་སྒོ	exorcism rites	sel gyi sgo
སེལ་གྱི་གཞུང	exorcism rites	sel gyi gzhung
སེལ་དགའ	delighting in conquest, quarrelsome, brawler	sel dga'
སེལ་ངོ	eliminative point of view; [ggd]	sel ngo
སེལ་ངོའི་རྫས	the substance considered from the point of view of exclusion [ggd]	sel ngo'i rdzas
སེལ་ངོར	from the eliminative point of view [ggd]	sel ngor
སེལ་འཇུག	[subjects of] eliminative engagement [ggd]	sel 'jug
སེལ་འཇུག་གི་བློ	mind of partial engagement	sel 'jug gi blo
སེལ་འཇུག་གི་བློ་དོན་མཐུན	thought corresponding to the object	sel 'jug gi blo don mthun
སེལ་འཇུག་གི་བློ་དོན་མི་མཐུན	thought not corresponding to the object	sel 'jug gi blo don mi mthun
སེལ་འཇུག་གེ་བློ	mind of partial engagement	sel 'jug ge blo
སེལ་འཇུག་པ	exorcise	sel 'jug pa
སེལ་ནག	black exorcism	sel nag
སེལ་པོ	basket made of twigs etc.	sel po
སེལ་བ་གྲུབ་པ	{sel ba grub pa	sel ba grub pa
སེལ་བ་ལྔ	CHN	sel ba lnga
སེལ་བའི་དབྱེ་བ་གསུམ	TSE	sel ba'i dbye ba gsum
སེལ་བའི་ཡུལ་ཅན	eliminative subject [ggd]	sel ba'i yul can
སེལ་བར་བྱེད	causes to be removed	sel bar byed
སེལ་བས་འཇུག་པ	perception through exclusion	sel bas 'jug pa
སེལ་མེད	perfect	sel med
སེལ་ཞུགས	cause a rift in relations	sel zhugs
སེལ་ཟེར་ཅན	moon	sel zer can
སེལ་འཟུག	eliminative engager, otherknower	sel 'zug
སེས	(not in das)	ses
སེས་ཅན་གསོ་སྐྱོང	animal husbandry	ses can gso skyong
སོ་ཀ	spring	so ka
སོ་ཀྲར	soda	so krar
སོ་དཀར	white tooth	so dkar
སོ་སྐུད	hempen cord	so skud
སོ་སྐྱག	impurities in the teeth	so skyag
སོ་སྐྱེ	ordinary people. Syn {so so skye bo; ordinary being, {so so skye bo}	so skye
སོ་སྐྱེ་ཚོགས་ལམ་པ	an ordinary person on the path of accumulation	so skye tshogs lam pa
སོ་སྐྱེའི་ཀུན་རྟོག	ordinary thinking	so skye'i kun rtog
སོ་སྐྱེའི་རྒྱུད	the stream of being of an ordinary person	so skye'i rgyud
སོ་སྐྱེའི་གནས་བཅུ་གཉིས	12 ordinary form realms [Mvt 3085- 3100 Refer to fundamentals, p 000, 000 for their correspondence to the four concentrations [gd]	so skye'i gnas bcu gnyis
སོ་སྐྱེའི་གནས་གསུམ	see {so so'i skye bo'i gnas gsum}	so skye'i gnas gsum
སོ་སྐྱེའི་བློ་གྲོས	the intelligence of an ordinary person	so skye'i blo gros
སོ་སྐྱེའི་བཤེས་གཉེན	the spiritual guide who is an ordinary person; Syn {dge ba'i bshes gnyen so so skye bo}	so skye'i bshes gnyen
སོ་སྐྱེས	ordinary people, short for {so so skye bo rnams kyis}; ordinary people, short for {so so skye bo rnams kyis}; ordinary people, short for {so so skye bo rnams}	so skyes
སོ་སྐྱེས་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཚོར་བ	{zhen pa rten tshor ba}	so skyes rgyud kyi tshor ba
སོ་སྐྱེས་དྲི	stains etc on the teeth	so skyes dri
སོ་སྐྱེས་རྣམས	common men	so skyes rnams
སོ་སྐྱོབ	lips	so skyob
སོ་ཁ	the mussel of a gun/ borders	so kha
སོ་ཁ་སྲུང་བ	to guard against	so kha srung ba
སོ་ཁང	pill/ sentry box [military]	so khang
སོ་ཁའི་མཁར་བུ	staff or stick to take rest by leaning on it while travelling	so kha'i mkhar bu
སོ་ཁུང	turret, parapet	so khung
སོ་ཁྲབ	natural, not artificial	so khrab
སོ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	successor of 1st king, Tibetan king	so khri btsan po
སོ་ཁྲུ	brush the teeth	so khru
སོ་ཁྲུས	toothbrush	so khrus
སོ་མཁར	watchman's castle	so mkhar
སོ་འཁོར	mtha' 'khor mo yug tu sog le lta bu'i so dang ldan pa'i 'khor lo	so 'khor
སོ་འཁྲུ	toothbrush	so 'khru
སོ་འཁྲུད་པ	brush one's teeth, rinse one's mouth, gargle	so 'khrud pa
སོ་ག	spring, sos ka	so ga
སོ་གོས	lip	so gos
སོ་གྱོགས	lips	so gyogs
སོ་གྲི	saw	so gri
སོ་འགྲམ	jaw bone	so 'gram
སོ་འགྲིག་པ	one with even and symmetrical teeth	so 'grig pa
སོ་རྒྱག	bite	so rgyag
སོ་རྒྱག་པ	bite	so rgyag pa
སོ་རྒྱབ་པ	bite	so rgyab pa
སོ་སྒོ	teeth	so sgo
སོ་སྒྲ	watch-word, teeth sound, whistle	so sgra
སོ་སྒྲ་ཏོག་ཏོག	chattering teeth	so sgra tog tog
སོ་སྒྲ་འདེབས་པ	1) upper and lower teeth brdar ba'i sound; 2) so'i bar nas si sgra rgyag pa	so sgra 'debs pa
སོ་སྒྲིབ	cover of the teeth, lips	so sgrib
སོ་བརྒྱབ་པ	bite	so brgyab pa
སོ་བརྒྱབ་ཟིན་པ	bitten, bit	so brgyab zin pa
སོ་ངོས་སྙོམས་པ	even and regular teeth	so ngos snyoms pa
སོ་ཅན	elephant	so can
སོ་ཅོག	all	so cog
སོ་བཅག་བཅག་བྱེད་པ	chew	so bcag bcag byed pa
སོ་ལྕིབས	lips	so lcibs
སོ་ཆ	an emetic fruit	so cha
སོ་ཆང	Gola; go la, A drink of sugar cane or grain from Nepal	so chang
སོ་ཆིས	well-being, happiness, comfort	so chis
སོ་འཆའ་མ	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	so 'cha' ma
སོ་འཆིང	lip	so 'ching
སོ་ཉམས་བྱེད	kapettha tree	so nyams byed
སོ་ཉུལ	1) watch for enemies, thieves etc; 2) so lta'i phyir du gsang myul byed pa; 3) spy, secret agent	so nyul
སོ་ཉུལ་གྱི་གནམ་གྲུ	spy/ reconnaissance plane	so nyul gyi gnam gru
སོ་གཉིས	1) four tear old cattle; 2) 32	so gnyis
སོ་གཉིས་པ	with 2 tusks, elephant	so gnyis pa
སོ་རྙིལ	1) gums; 2) a tooth disease	so rnyil
སོ་ཏོ་རོག་པོ	a bird whose feathers are used to make black dye 2804	so to rog po
སོ་གཏོང	fire bricks/ pottery	so gtong
སོ་གཏོང་ཁུང	pottery/ brick kiln	so gtong khung
སོ་གཏོང་ཐབ་ཁ	pottery/ brick kiln	so gtong thab kha
སོ་བཏབ	bit	so btab
སོ་རྟ་སྐྲ་ལུག	former Tibetan legal tradition, mi gnyis 'dzings te pha rol po'i kha so gcig bkog pa'i 'jal du rta gcig sprod pa dang, skra rkang gsum yan gyi bunch gcig btogs pa'i 'jal du lug gcig sprod srol	so rta skra lug
སོ་ལྟ	1) watchman soldier; 2) archery target la 'khel min lta ba'am, tshod lta ba; 3) be on watch	so lta
སོ་ལྟ་བ	1) watchman soldier; 2) archery target la 'khel min lta ba'am, tshod lta ba; 3) be on watch	so lta ba
སོ་ལྟོ་བ	1 of 18 skyon bco brgyad, bottle-teeth	so lto ba
སོ་སྟོ	so phyir zing ba, so sto ba, so sto mo	so sto
སོ་སྟོ་བ	protruding teeth	so sto ba
སོ་བལྟས་པ	to take aim	so bltas pa
སོ་ཐག	hempen rope	so thag
སོ་ཐགས	so gral,	so thags
སོ་ཐམ་ཐམ་པ	teeth chatter; chattering teeth; [the Hell of] Chattering Teeth, the fifth cold hell	so tham tham pa
སོ་ཐམ་ཐམས་པ	grinning, showing teeth	so tham thams pa
སོ་ཐམ་པ	the Hell of Chattering Teeth, one of {grang dmyal brgyad} eight cold hells	so tham pa
སོ་ཐམས་པ	lock jaw	so thams pa
སོ་ཐར	Individual Liberation	so thar
སོ་ཐར་ཁྲིམས	the rules of the Pratimoksha	so thar khrims
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་ལྟུང་བ་སྡེ་ལྔ	ltung ba sde lnga	so thar gyi ltung ba sde lnga
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་སྡོམ་ལྡན་བཞི	bsnyen gnas dang, dge bsnyen, dge tshul, dge slong	so thar gyi sdom ldan bzhi
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	so sor thar pa'i sdom pa'o	so thar gyi sdom pa
ཐེ་ཨོནེ	day vow.	the one
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ་བརྒྱད	1) {dge bsnyen pha ma gnyis}. 2) {dge tshul pha ma gnyis} 3) {dge slong pha ma gnyis} 4) {dge slob ma} 5) {bsnyen gnas kyi sdom pa}	so thar gyi sdom pa brgyad
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ་གཏོང་ཚུལ	Mipham Rinpoche: {dge slong sogs ji srid 'tsho'i mtha' can rnams, shi ba dang brda 'phrod pa'i drung du 'slab pa phul bas gtong la, gzhan yang dge rtsa chad pas bsrung 'dod kyi gzhi rten med pa dan...	so thar gyi sdom pa gtong tshul
སོ་ཐར་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	a monastic preceptor Syn {so sor thar pa'i bla ma}	so thar gyi slob dpon
སོ་ཐར་མདོ	Pratimoksha-sutra {so sor thar pa'i mdo}	so thar mdo
སོ་ཐར་སྡོམ	vows of the pratimoksha	so thar sdom
སོ་ཐར་སྡོམ་བརྒྱད	eight pratimoksha vows	so thar sdom brgyad
སོ་ཐར་སྡོམ་པ	pratimoksha vows	so thar sdom pa
སོ་ཐར་སྡོམ་པ་གཉིས	the two kinds of pratimoksha vows	so thar sdom pa gnyis
སོ་ཐར་སྡོམ་པའི་རྩ་ལྟུང་བཞི	rtsa ba bzhi	so thar sdom pa'i rtsa ltung bzhi
སོ་ཐར་རིགས་བརྒྱད	dge slong pha ma gnyis, dge slob ma, dge tshul pha ma gnyis, dge bsnyen pha ma gnyis, bsnyen gnas bcas kyi sdom pa ste brgyad	so thar rigs brgyad
སོ་ཐར་རིས་བརྒྱད	eight categories of precepts of individual emancipation	so thar ris brgyad
སོ་ཐར་རིས་བརྒྱད་པོ	The eight ordinations of individual liberation	so thar ris brgyad po
སོ་ཐར་རིས་བདུན	seven types of Individual Liberation	so thar ris bdun
སོ་ཐར་རིས་བཞི	the four divisions of the pratimoksha sangha so thar bsam gtan zag med kyi sdom pa	so thar ris bzhi
སོ་ཐུབ་པ	1) so gtang du rung ba'i rdza sa, rdza ma bzo dus thog mar so thub pa'i rdza sa 'tshol dgos; 2) phugs thub pa'am, yid brtan 'pher ba; 3) rang rkya 'pher ba'i tshugs thub pa, rang so 'dzin thub pa	so thub pa
སོ་ཐོ་རོག་པོ	nya 'dzin pa'i chu bya bongs che zhing spu mdog nag po can zhig	so tho rog po
སོ་ཐོག	Syn {mar}	so thog
སོ་མཐིལ	shoe sole of so skud and hemp	so mthil
སོ་དང་རྐན	teeth or palate	so dang rkan
སོ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི	dental	so dang 'brel ba'i
སོ་དམ་པོ	1) so tshags dam po; 2) straight teeth	so dam po
སོ་དུང་སོ	many teeth	so dung so
སོ་དོགས	watchman	so dogs
སོ་དྲུག	1) 36; 2) six yr old cattle	so drug
སོ་དྲེག	stains, residue on the teeth	so dreg
སོ་བདར་བ	brush the teeth, grind the teeth	so bdar ba
སོ་འདེབས	bite	so 'debs
སོ་འདེབས་པ	bite	so 'debs pa
སོ་འདྲུ	1) so 'dru ba'i shing thur, so 'dru'i shubs; 2) between the teeth food scraps 'don pa	so 'dru
སོ་ལྡན	elephant	so ldan
སོ་སྡོམ་པ	press the teeth together, gnash	so sdom pa
སོ་བརྡར་བ	whet	so brdar ba
སོ་ན	have a toothache	so na
སོ་ན་གནས	old-fashioned, remaining unchanged/ as before/ in its former place/ as it was	so na gnas
སོ་ན་གནས་པ	to stagnate	so na gnas pa
སོ་ནད	toothache	so nad
སོ་ནད་ཀྱི་དྲུང་འཚོ	dentist	so nad kyi drung 'tsho
སོ་ནད་སྨན་པ	dentist	so nad sman pa
སོ་ནད་ཚན་ཁག	dentistry 2805	so nad tshan khag
སོ་ནམ	harvest	so nam
སོ་ནམ་གྱི་ཡོ་ཆས	agricultural implements/ tools	so nam gyi yo chas
སོ་ནམ་གྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	agricultural implements/ tools	so nam gyi yo byad
སོ་ནམ་གྱི་རིག་པ	agronomy	so nam gyi rig pa
སོ་ནམ་གྱི་ལས	work of husbandry, trading, tending and rearing up cattle	so nam gyi las
སོ་ནམ་གྱི་ལས་ཀ	comprises husbandry	so nam gyi las ka
སོ་ནམ་གྱིས	work on the farm [imp.]	so nam gyis
སོ་ནམ་གྲོང	agricultural village	so nam grong
སོ་ནམ་གླ་པ	agricultural laborer	so nam gla pa
སོ་ནམ་དུས་བཞི	the four seasons of the farmer	so nam dus bzhi
སོ་ནམ་མདོ་ཆེན	Agricultural Director	so nam mdo chen
སོ་ནམ་འདེབས་ལས	agriculture	so nam 'debs las
སོ་ནམ་པ	farmer, 1 who cultivates, peasant	so nam pa
སོ་ནམ་པའི་ལས་ཀ	husbandry	so nam pa'i las ka
སོ་ནམ་པུའུ་ཁང	Ministry of Agriculture	so nam pu'u khang
སོ་ནམ་ཕྱུག་པོ	rich farmer	so nam phyug po
སོ་ནམ་བྱེད	cultivate, farm, do agricultural work	so nam byed
སོ་ནམ་འབྲིང་པོ	middle-rank farmer	so nam 'bring po
སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས	Agriculture Office/ Department	so nam las khungs
སོ་ནམ་ལོ་གསར	= shar phyogs lo gsar, in some regions of Tibet like chu shur farmers winter months so so'i tshes shar du gtong ba'i lo gsar	so nam lo gsar
སོ་ནམས	agriculture	so nams
སོ་ནམས་གྱི་ཡོ་ཆས	agricultural implements/ tools	so nams gyi yo chas
སོ་ནམས་གྱི་ཡོ་བྱད	agricultural implements/ tools	so nams gyi yo byad
སོ་ནམས་གྱི་རིག་པ	agronomy	so nams gyi rig pa
སོ་ནམས་གྱིས	work on the farm!	so nams gyis
སོ་ནམས་གྲོང	agricultural village	so nams grong
སོ་ནམས་གླ་པ	agricultural laborer	so nams gla pa
སོ་ནམས་སྒྲུབ་པ	husbandman, farmer	so nams sgrub pa
སོ་ནམས་དུས་བཞི	the four seasons of the farmer	so nams dus bzhi
སོ་ནམས་མདོ་ཆེན	Agricultural Director	so nams mdo chen
སོ་ནམས་པ	farmer, 1 who cultivates, peasant	so nams pa
སོ་ནམས་པུའུ་ཁང	Ministry of Agriculture	so nams pu'u khang
སོ་ནམས་ཕྱུག་པོ	rich farmer	so nams phyug po
སོ་ནམས་བྱེད	cultivate, farm, do agricultural work	so nams byed
སོ་ནམས་བྱེད་པ	till the ground, practice agriculture, farming	so nams byed pa
སོ་ནམས་འབད་པ	husbandman, farmer	so nams 'bad pa
སོ་ནམས་འབྲིང་པོ	middle-rank farmer	so nams 'bring po
སོ་ནམས་ལས་ཁུངས	Tibetan govt sa stong gsar sbol &, mi bogs bsdu len byed pa'i office	so nams las khungs
སོ་ནམས་ལོ་གསར	= shar phyogs lo gsar, in some regions of Tibet like chu shur farmers winter months so so'i tshes shar du gtong ba'i lo gsar	so nams lo gsar
སོ་ནས	agriculture	so nas
སོ་པ	scout, spy, keeper, guard, emissary, watchman, spy	so pa
སོ་པ་རྒྱག	guard, watch, scout out	so pa rgyag
སོ་པ་བྱེད	guard, watch, scout out	so pa byed
སོ་པ་ར	areca-nut	so pa ra
སོ་པའི་ལས་ཀ	espionage	so pa'i las ka
སོ་དཔོན	ancient times watchman's 'go pa	so dpon
སོ་ཕག	brick, toothbrush, tile, brickwork, tiling	so phag
སོ་ཕག་ཁུ་བ	tile juice	so phag khu ba
སོ་ཕག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	brick factory	so phag bzo grwa
སོ་ཕད	phad khog of hemp	so phad
སོ་ཕེ་ཡ	Sophia	so phe ya
སོ་ཕྲ	peak tip	so phra
སོ་འཕགས	ordinary individuals and sublime beings	so 'phags
སོ་བ	1) watchman; 2) a kind of grain/ barley; 3) unhusked grain	so ba
སོ་བུད	tooth that has fallen out	so bud
སོ་བྱ	phalacrocorax carbo sinensiks blumenbach, aquatic bird	so bya
སོ་བྱང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the disciplines of pratimoksha, bodhisattva, and secret mantra	so byang sngags kyi tshul khrims
སོ་བྱང་སྔགས་གསུམ	monastic, bodhisattva, or tantric ...	so byang sngags gsum
སོ་བྱའི་སྒྲོ	water bird so tho rog po	so bya'i sgro
སོ་བྱེད་པ	watch, spy, look out	so byed pa
སོ་བྲད	irregular teeth with space between	so brad
སོ་བྲད་བྱེད	gnawing flesh from the bones	so brad byed
སོ་བློན	ancient times watchman's 'go pa	so blon
སོ་འབམ	so 'bam tooth disease	so 'bam
སོ་འབུས	new teeth growing in [after a child is born in about five months]	so 'bus
སོ་འབྲུ	so 'dru	so 'bru
སོ་སྦྱོང	1 of 3 principal ceremonies performed in order to purify the pratimoksa precepts	so sbyong
སོ་སྦྱོང་ལ་གནས	making confession of sin	so sbyong la gnas
སོ་སྦྱོང་ལ་གནས་པ	observing the vow of fasting	so sbyong la gnas pa
སོ་མ	fresh, freshness, naturalness, [present awareness], [brand] new	so ma
སོ་མ་རྗེན་པ	fresh and naked state	so ma rjen pa
སོ་མ་ན་ཐ	bramanical sanctuary	so ma na tha
སོ་མ་མ་བཅོས	uncontrived freshness	so ma ma bcos
སོ་མ་མ་བཅོས་པར་བཞག	let be in uncontrived freshness	so ma ma bcos par bzhag
སོ་མ་ར་ཙ	jute, flax	so ma ra tsa
སོ་མ་ར་ཙའི་ངན་ཐག	hashish	so ma ra tsa'i ngan thag
སོ་མ་ར་ཙའི་རས	linen	so ma ra tsa'i ras
སོ་མ་ར་རྩ	hemp	so ma ra rtsa
སོ་མ་ར་ཚ	hemp, marijuana, flax, jute	so ma ra tsha
སོ་མ་ར་ཛ	flax cannabis sativa l.	so ma ra dza
སོ་མ་རྭ་ཛ	datura stramonium l.	so ma rwa dza
སོ་མ་རང་ཐང་ལྷུག་པ	freshness, artlessness, ease	so ma rang thang lhug pa
སོ་མ་ཤོར	do not lose	so ma shor
སོ་མང	comb, many teeth	so mang
སོ་མང་སྐྱེས	Indra	so mang skyes
སོ་མང་ཆུ	{so mang chu} river	so mang chu
སོ་མང་བ	SA rnam 'phyo'i bdag po	so mang ba
སོ་མང་བུ	Indra	so mang bu
སོ་མར་འཇོག་པ	rest in nowness 2806	so mar 'jog pa
སོ་མར་བཞག	remain fresh	so mar bzhag
སོ་མར་བཞག་པ	to remain in freshness, to remain in a state of natural freshness	so mar bzhag pa
སོ་མི་ཟིན	not keeping the inner nature	so mi zin
སོ་མི་གསོད	uncomfortable	so mi gsod
སོ་མི་བསོད	unhappy, uncomfortable, unsteadiness, fickleness, wavering	so mi bsod
སོ་མེད	toothless	so med
སོ་མྱུལ	1) watch for enemies, thieves etc; 2) so lta'i phyir du gsang myul byed pa	so myul
སོ་དམག	watchman soldier	so dmag
སོ་སྨན	tooth paste	so sman
སོ་སྨན་བྱེ་མ	tooth powder	so sman bye ma
སོ་བཙེས་པོ	avarice; 2) roots of the teeth	so btses po
སོ་རྩམ	so ba grain [a kind of grain or any grain unhusked] rtsam pa	so rtsam
སོ་རྩི	tooth-paint, spiced betel leaves used by the indians which give color to their teeth, pomelo	so rtsi
སོ་བརྩེ་བ	bite, become unable to bear	so brtse ba
སོ་བརྩེགས་མ	tooth arising in back of another	so brtsegs ma
སོ་བརྩེབ	bite, become unable to bear	so brtseb
སོ་ཚགས་དམ་ཞིང	teeth standing close and firm	so tshags dam zhing
སོ་ཚབ	1) false teeth; 2) substitute/ relief guard	so tshab
སོ་ཚི	so rtsi	so tshi
སོ་ཚིགས	housekeeping, management of domestic concerns, husbandry	so tshigs
སོ་ཚིས	1 of rig gnas bco brgyad, housekeeping, management of domestic concerns, husbandry	so tshis
སོ་མཚམས	threshold, land boundary	so mtshams
ཐེ་ཏུརྣིང	point which will determine our fate, for better or worse, far into the future	the turning
སོ་འཛིན	occupying the confines of a country or region, lip	so 'dzin
སོ་ཞོ	speck on the tooth, small white spot on the tooth	so zho
སོ་བཞི་པ	the four-tusked, epithet of indra's elephant	so bzhi pa
སོ་ཟིང	so mchu to'i phyir thon pa	so zing
སོ་ཟིན་པ	regaining power, strength {rang dbang}	so zin pa
སོ་ཟུར་གནུབ	3 lamas of rnying ma	so zur gnub
སོ་ཟུར་གནུབས་ཉང	So Zur Nub Nyang	so zur gnubs nyang
སོ་ཟུར་གནུབས་གསུམ	so ye shes dbang phyug, zur sh'akya 'byung gnas, gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes	so zur gnubs gsum
སོ་ཟུར་བསྣུབས་ཉག	So Zur Nub Nyag. Great masters in the Nyingma lineage	so zur bsnubs nyag
སོ་ཟེད	tooth-brush	so zed
སོ་ཟོས་ཀྱང	in whatever manner impeded or delayed	so zos kyang
སོ་གཟེར	toothache	so gzer
སོ་འོན	watch for thieves/ enemies etc, gsang myul byed pa	so 'on
སོ་འོན་དམག་མི	watchman soldier	so 'on dmag mi
སོ་ཡིག	seed syllable	so yig
སོ་ཡིས་ཟིན་པ	caught by the teeth	so yis zin pa
སོ་ཡོ	{lus kyi 'jig ltas so yo skra zad} hair and teeth fall out as the omen that the body falls apart	so yo
སོ་ར	clay vessel la so gtong yul gyi ra ba	so ra
སོ་རལ	irregular teeth, teeth having space between them	so ral
སོ་རས	linen	so ras
སོ་རུ	measure = width of 1 finger	so ru
སོ་རོ	rubbish	so ro
སོ་རོང	so sto ste so phyir zing ba	so rong
སོ་ལ་བར	space between the teeth	so la bar
སོ་ལུག	lees of liquors, yeast of beer	so lug
སོ་ལེ	saw	so le
སོ་ལེ་སྡོང	remain or appear fresh,	so le sdong
ཕ༹ྲེཤ	looking	fresh
སོ་ལོ་སྔོན་པོ	green chilis	so lo sngon po
སོ་ལོག	high road, causeway	so log
སོ་ཤ	gum	so sha
སོ་ཤྭ	large gap between the two upper front teeth	so shwa
སོ་ཤད	toothbrush	so shad
སོ་ཤིང	monk's tooth cleaning stick * tooth pick	so shing
སོ་ཤིང་གི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ	the five virtues of a tooth stick [kha nang du chu skye ba, mkhris mchin cha snyoms par byed pa, bad kan zil gyis gnon pa, kha nang gi dri ma sel bar byed pa, mig la phan pa ste lnga]	so shing gi yon tan lnga
སོ་ཤུན	lips	so shun
སོ་ཤོ	large gap between the two upper front teeth	so sho
སོ་ས	to support	so sa
སོ་ས་གླིང	Sosaling	so sa gling
སོ་སངས	spaces between teeth of horse etc	so sangs
སོ་སའི་གླིང	Sosaling, name of a cremation ground in India	so sa'i gling
སོ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས	32 teeth	so sum cu rtsa gnyis
སོ་སོ	1) dissimilar, not 1, individual, distinct, each 1; 2) unconnected	so so
སོ་སོ་སྐྱེ་བོ	'phags lam ma thob pa'i gang zag Ordinary persons GD common being, ordinary being/individual who has not attained the Path of insight, a non-arya TSE	so so skye bo
སོ་སོ་སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	the discipline for ordinary beings	so so skye bo'i tshul khrims
སོ་སོ་སྐྱེའི་ས	stage of ordinary perfection	so so skye'i sa
སོ་སོ་འགྲོ	gait, manner of walking or movement	so so 'gro
སོ་སོ་ངེས་པ	certainty of difference 2807	so so nges pa
སོ་སོ་ཅི་རིགས་པ	1) different things which are OK; 2) whoever it is is OK	so so ci rigs pa
སོ་སོ་ཆ	medicinal herb, emetic	so so cha
སོ་སོ་བརྟགས་མིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation	so so brtags min gyi 'gog pa
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པ	Pratimoksha. "Individual Liberation," the seven sets of precepts for ordained and lay people according to the Vinaya. thar(pa). Vowed discipline common to followers of all three Vehicles. It is of ...	so so thar pa
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་མདོ	{so so thar pa'i mdo} CHN	so so thar pa'i mdo
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་མདོ་འདོན་ཚུལ་ལྔ	CHN	so so thar pa'i mdo 'don tshul lnga
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་སྡོམ་པ	individual liberation vows. liberation vows; individual liberation vows	so so thar pa'i sdom pa
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་རིས་བདུན	Seven kinds of vows of the pratimoksha. Seven sets of vows for ordained monks and nuns, novices and lay people. See 'Individual Liberation.'	so so thar pa'i ris bdun
སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་བསླབ་པ	the trainings of individual liberation	so so thar pa'i bslab pa
སོ་སོ་ནས	individually, separately	so so nas
སོ་སོ་སྣ་ཚོགས	myriad different types of things	so so sna tshogs
སོ་སོ་བ	distinct [ggd]	so so ba
སོ་སོ་བ་མེད་པ	cannot be split	so so ba med pa
སོ་སོ་བྱེད་པ	separate, disjoin, divided	so so byed pa
སོ་སོ་འབྲང་བ་ཆེན་མོ	SK mahapratisara	so so 'brang ba chen mo
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག	analytical knowledges, (four are don, chos, nges pa'i tshig, spobs pa), meaning, phenomena, and courageous eloquence)	so so yang dag
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པ་རིག་པ་བཞི	four modes of specific genuine awareness	so so yang dag pa rig pa bzhi
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པའི་རིག་པ་ཞི	Four analytical knowledges	so so yang dag pa'i rig pa zhi
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པའི་རིག་པ་བཞི	CHN	so so yang dag pa'i rig pa bzhi
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ	authentic/ correct discerning awareness	so so yang dag par rig pa
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ་བཞི	fourfold correct discrimination; four discriminating / analytical knowledges, penetrations, accurate understanding; 1) {don} meaning. 2) {chos} dharmas, 3) {nges pa'i tshig} languages, 4) {spobs pa...	so so yang dag par rig pa bzhi
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་རིག	analytical knowledge	so so yang dag rig
སོ་སོ་ཡང་དག་རིག་པ་བཞི	{so sor yang dag par rig pa bzhi} four states of authentic discerning awareness	so so yang dag rig pa bzhi
ཝིསྡོམ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	discriminating awareness	wisdom of self
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་གཟིགས་པ	[ used about sugatas, probably for {so so rang gi rig pa}	so so rang gi gzigs pa
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་རིག	self-cognizant, inherent knowledge	so so rang gi rig
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་རིག་ངོར	at the level of individual self-cognizance	so so rang gi rig ngor
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་རིག་པ	particularizing, intrinsic awareness [gd]	so so rang gi rig pa
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating awareness wisdom, also {so so rang dge ye shes} believed to exist in absolute truth by {sems tsam}	so so rang gi rig pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོ་རང་གི་ཤེས་པ	individual cognizance	so so rang gi shes pa
སོ་སོ་རང་གིས	abbr of {so so rang gis rig pa'i rang byung gi ye shes}	so so rang gis
སོ་སོ་རང་གིས་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཨོནེའས་སེལཕ༹	cognizant jnana, selfknowing wisdom so so rang gis rig pa'i rang byung gi ye	so so rang gis rig pa'i ye shes kyis through one's self
སོ་སོ་རང་རང	each and every	so so rang rang
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག	individual knowledge, individual self-cognizance, individual selfinsight/awareness, that which perceives or knows, absolute real in {sems tsam pa}	so so rang rig
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་གི་ཡེ་ཤེས	individually selfcognizant wisdom/wakefulness, the wisdom of discriminating insight	so so rang rig gi ye shes
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་པ	individual selfcognizing awareness	so so rang rig pa
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་པ་ཉིད	individual selfcognizing awareness	so so rang rig pa nyid
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེ	wakefulness of	so so rang rig pa'i ye she
ཨིནདིབི༹དུཨལ་སེལཕ༹	awareness [thd] 2808	individual self
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Individual selfcognizant wisdom	so so rang rig pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོ་རང་རིག་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating awareness wisdom /Vys 19:2	so so rang rig ye shes
སོ་སོ་རུ་གྱེས་པ	so sor gyes pa - to depart each going his separate way; to go our separate ways	so so ru gyes pa
སོ་སོ་སོ་སོར	separately, individually, to each 1	so so so sor
སོ་སོའི	of each, individual ways of, of individuals, respective, special	so so'i
སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ	ordinary/ individual person	so so'i skye bo
སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་དགེ་འདུན	the sangha of ordinary individuals	so so'i skye bo'i dge 'dun
སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་གནས་བཅུ་གཉིས	[TRS 26:4]	so so'i skye bo'i gnas bcu gnyis
སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་གནས་གསུམ	the three realms of individual beings	so so'i skye bo'i gnas gsum
སོ་སོའི་ཁམས	the condition of each of	so so'i khams
སོ་སོའི་གོ་ལུགས	individual ways of comprehension	so so'i go lugs
སོ་སོའི་དགོངས་རྒྱུད	individual state	so so'i dgongs rgyud
སོ་སོའི་ཅ་ལག	belonging	so so'i ca lag
སོ་སོའི་ཆ	portion	so so'i cha
སོ་སོའི་བདག	the self-[cognizant] nature, probably abbr. of {so so rang rig pa'i bdag nyid}	so so'i bdag
སོ་སོའི་མིང	surname	so so'i ming
སོ་སོའི་མྱོང་བ	personal experience	so so'i myong ba
སོ་སོའི་མཚན་ཉིད	respective qualifications so so'i gzhung las grags pa bzhin no which are described in the respective root texts	so so'i mtshan nyid
སོ་སོའི་བཞེད་པ	their respective approaches	so so'i bzhed pa
སོ་སོའི་རང་ནུས་གང་ཐོན	from each according to his ability	so so'i rang nus gang thon
སོ་སོའི་ལུང་པའི	vernacular	so so'i lung pa'i
སོ་སོར	separately, individually, to each 1	so sor
སོ་སོར་བཀག་པ	avoid[ing]	so sor bkag pa
སོ་སོར་སྐྱེ་བ	ordinary being	so sor skye ba
སོ་སོར་སྐྱེ་བོ	common people	so sor skye bo
སོ་སོར་ཁ་བྲལ	separation	so sor kha bral
སོ་སོར་ཁ་བྲལ་བ	enumeration	so sor kha bral ba
སོ་སོར་འཁྲུལ	repelled, beaten back	so sor 'khrul
སོ་སོར་གོ་བར་བྱེད	comprehension	so sor go bar byed
སོ་སོར་གོ་བྱེད	accurate understanding of the particulars of anything	so sor go byed
སོ་སོར་གྱུར	separated, surety, security	so sor gyur
སོ་སོར་གྱེས	+ khar - when the time came to part; went on their own ways	so sor gyes
སོ་སོར་གྱེས་པ	to part	so sor gyes pa
སོ་སོར་འགོག	obstruction	so sor 'gog
སོ་སོར་འགྱེས་པ	decompose	so sor 'gyes pa
སོ་སོར་རྒོད	flower	so sor rgod
སོ་སོར་ངེས་ངེས་ལྟར	as if defined by singularity	so sor nges nges ltar
སོ་སོར་ངེས་པ	difference between cause and effect, distinction; distinction, Definitive distinctiveness, as one of the	so sor nges pa
སོ་སོར་བཅོམས	vanquished, subdued	so sor bcoms
སོ་སོར་ཆ་བ	1) logs logs su 'gro ba; 2) so cha ste skyug sman zhig	so sor cha ba
སོ་སོར་འཆིང	obstruction, ruggedness	so sor 'ching
སོ་སོར་འཇོམས	reaction, resistance	so sor 'joms
སོ་སོར་ཉིན་བྱེད	every day	so sor nyin byed
སོ་སོར་ཉེས་པ་མེད་པ	that would harm no one	so sor nyes pa med pa
སོ་སོར་མཉན	promise, assurance	so sor mnyan
སོ་སོར་བཏག་པའི	cessation due to insight	so sor btag pa'i
སོ་སོར་བཏགས་མེན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation	so sor btags men gyi 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པ	identify as being different	so sor rtog pa
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པའི་བློ་གྲོས	the intellect that discerns	so sor rtog pa'i blo gros
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Discriminating wisdom, the Wisdom of Discriminating Awareness, discriminating pristine awareness; the cognition that is individual experiencing	so sor rtog pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	discerning (aspect of) sublime knowing/ wisdom/ transcendent knowledge	so sor rtog pa'i shes rab
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པའི་ལྷག་མཐོང	analytical insight	so sor rtog pa'i lhag mthong
སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པས་བརྟགས་པ	investigated	so sor rtog pas brtags pa
སོ་སོར་རྟོགས་པ	watchfulness, knowledge	so sor rtogs pa
སོ་སོར་རྟོགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating wisdom so sor rtogs pa'i shes rab kyi lhag mthong - chos rab rnam 'byed	so sor rtogs pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོར་སྟོན་པ	to disclose clearly	so sor ston pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟག་པ	mindfulness, inspecting mind, examine in detail	so sor brtag pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས	to analyze one at a time	so sor brtags
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་འགོག	analytical cessation	so sor brtags 'gog
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་འགོགས	analytical cessation [thd]	so sor brtags 'gogs
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ	discriminating, intellectual comprehension / discrimination, knowing things individually, not mixed together [different term for {so sor rtog pa}; discrimination; discriminating, intellectual compr...	so sor brtags pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་འགོག་པ	analytical cessation	so sor brtags pa 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation	so sor brtags pa ma yin gyi 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་གྱིས་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation	so sor brtags pa ma yin gyis 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འགོག་པ	the cessation which results from incompleteness of the necessary conditions; the cessation resulting from incompleteness of necessary conditions, the cessation resulting from discrimination, analyt...	so sor brtags pa ma yin pa'i 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་མིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation the cessation which results from incompleteness of the necessary conditions/ discrimination, analytical cessation	so sor brtags pa min gyi 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པ་མིན་འགོག	non-analytical cessation	so sor brtags pa min 'gog
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པའི	individual analytical cessation	so sor brtags pa'i
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པའི་འགོག་པ	analytical cessation	so sor brtags pa'i 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminating knowledge	so sor brtags pa'i shes rab
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པས་འགོག་པ	cessation through discrimination, as one of the seven elements of mental objects	so sor brtags pas 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་པས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་འགོག་པ་ནོན	analytical cessation	so sor brtags pas ma yin pa'i 'gog pa non
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་མིན་ཀྱི་འགོགས་པ	nonanalytical cessation [thd]	so sor brtags min kyi 'gogs pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་མིན་གྱི་འགོག་པ	nonanalytical cessation	so sor brtags min gyi 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟགས་མིན་གྱིས་འགོག་པ	cessation not through discrimination, as one of the seven elements of mental objects	so sor brtags min gyis 'gog pa
སོ་སོར་བརྟོགས་འགོག	the cessation of corruption due to individual scrutiny [gd]	so sor brtogs 'gog
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པ	Syn {so so thar pa} vows of pratimoksha, individual liberation / deliverance; personal liberation	so sor thar pa
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པ་རིགས་བརྒྱད	[TRS 108-2]	so sor thar pa rigs brgyad
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པའི་མདོ	Pra-timoks.a su-tra; Sutra on the Vows of Individual Freedom	so sor thar pa'i mdo
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པའི་མདོ་ཡི་མཆན་འགྲེལ	by	so sor thar pa'i mdo yi mchan 'grel
གཞན་ཕན་བྱམས་པའི་གོ་ཆ	alias	gzhan phan byams pa'i go cha
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པའི་སྡོམ་པ	Vow of Individual Liberation. The seven sets of precepts one of which should be kept by a Hinayana practitioner	so sor thar pa'i sdom pa
སོ་སོར་ཐར་པའི་བླ་མ	a monastic preceptor; Syn {so thar gyi slob dpon}	so sor thar pa'i bla ma
སོ་སོར་ཐོབ་པ	received back	so sor thob pa
སོ་སོར་འདོང་བ	separate, disperse	so sor 'dong ba
སོ་སོར་སྡུད	SA bsdus pa, btus	so sor sdud
སོ་སོར་བསྡུས་པ	drawing back, combination of a group of letters into one whole	so sor bsdus pa
སོ་སོར་ནང་གསེས་དབྱེ་བ	internally subdivided	so sor nang gses dbye ba
སོ་སོར་གནས	residing separately, removal, setting aside	so sor gnas
སོ་སོར་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ	making known [or causing to know] respectively/individually, = {mngon pa}	so sor rnam par rig pa
སོ་སོར་སྣང་བ	brilliance, ingenuity	so sor snang ba
སོ་སོར་དཔྱོད་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	the wisdom of discerning [reality]	so sor dpyod pa'i shes rab
སོ་སོར་སྤང་བ	rules of moral discipline, rules of conduct	so sor spang ba
སོ་སོར་ཕྱེ	separated, set apart	so sor phye
སོ་སོར་ཕྱེ་བ	'byed pa/ dbye ba - to divide (up)/ analyze in detail	so sor phye ba
སོ་སོར་ཕྱེ་བའི་སྐོང	specific ? categories	so sor phye ba'i skong
སོ་སོར་ཕྱེ་བའི་སྐོར	specific textual categories [as opposed to {spyi bsdus kyi skor}]	so sor phye ba'i skor
སོ་སོར་ཕྱེས་པ	dwangs snyigs + separate the pure essence from the dross	so sor phyes pa
སོ་སོར་བྱེ་བ	trying to separate	so sor bye ba
སོ་སོར་དབྱེ་བ	'byed pa/ phye ba - to divide (up)/ analyze in detail	so sor dbye ba
སོ་སོར་དབྱེར་བྱེད	differentiate	so sor dbyer byed
སོ་སོར་དབྱེར་བྱེད་པ	make distinction	so sor dbyer byed pa
སོ་སོར་འབད	individual exertion, repairing, reforming	so sor 'bad
སོ་སོར་འབྱེད	separate, set apart	so sor 'byed
སོ་སོར་འབྱེད་པ	/dbye/ phye ba - to divide (up)/ analyze in detail	so sor 'byed pa
སོ་སོར་འབྲང་བ་ཆེན་མོ	{so sor 'brang ba chen mo}	so sor 'brang ba chen mo
སོ་སོར་འབྲང་མ	gzugs grva lnga'i nang tshan zhig	so sor 'brang ma
སོ་སོར་འབྲལ	separated from	so sor 'bral
སོ་སོར་འབྲལ་བ	scatter, confused so sor ma rtogs pa'i btang snyoms med pa - they are w/o the equanimity which does not make distinction [gd] 2810 so sor ma rtogs pa'i btang snyoms med pa - without the equanimity ...	so sor 'bral ba
སོ་སོར་མ་འདྲེས་ས་ལེར་གསལ	appear vivid and distinct	so sor ma 'dres sa ler gsal
སོ་སོར་སྨིན	ripens in everyone	so sor smin
སོ་སོར་སྨྲ་བ	answer, reply	so sor smra ba
སོ་སོར་འཛིན	effort, endeavor	so sor 'dzin
སོ་སོར་བཞག་པ	set, put, lay apart, removal, setting aside	so sor bzhag pa
སོ་སོར་བཞད	a flower	so sor bzhad
སོ་སོར་བཞེས	receive, follow	so sor bzhes
སོ་སོར་ཟས	sesame	so sor zas
སོ་སོར་གཟིགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminative wisdom	so sor gzigs pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོར་བཟུང	to regard as separate	so sor bzung
སོ་སོར་བཟློག	mtshungs pa gsal byed kyi	so sor bzlog
སོ་སོར་ཡང་དག་པར་རིག་པ་བཞི	{so so yang dag rig pa bzhi} four states of authentic discerning awareness	so sor yang dag par rig pa bzhi
སོ་སོར་ཡང་དག་རིག་པ	See so so yang dag par rig pa. E.g., R75: 695.1 [mss]	so sor yang dag rig pa
སོ་སོར་རང་གིས	by one's own [individual] self, also {so so rang gis}	so sor rang gis
སོ་སོར་རང་གིས་རིག་པ	discriminating insight	so sor rang gis rig pa
སོ་སོར་རང་གིས་རིག་པར་བྱ་བ	object of personal intuition	so sor rang gis rig par bya ba
སོ་སོར་རང་རིག་པ	individual self-knowing	so sor rang rig pa
སོ་སོར་རང་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom aware of its own nature	so sor rang rig pa'i ye shes
སོ་སོར་བཤགས་པ	confession, an offense which must be confessed, fourth {ltung ba sde bzhi} the reprehensible acts [in context of the {so tar} vows]; the reprehensible acts [in context of the so thar vows]; confess...	so sor bshags pa
སོ་སོར་བཤད	demonstration	so sor bshad
སོ་སོར་གསལ	appear individually	so sor gsal
སོ་སོར་གསལ་བ	1) gzugs brnyan ma 'dres par gsal ba'am mthong ba; 2) tshig don gzhung rang rang du bshad pa; 3) las don so so blor nges pa	so sor gsal ba
སོ་སོས་ཐར་པ	liberation, deliverance	so sos thar pa
སོ་སྲིང	dental caries, tooth decay	so sring
སོ་སྲིན	tooth worm disease	so srin
སོ་སྲུང	1) so lta dang 'gog srung; 2) myul zhib byed mkhan, O srubs, so'i bar stong	so srung
སོ་སྲུབ	gap in the teeth	so srub
སོ་སྲུབས	gap between the teeth	so srubs
སོ་གསོད་པ	w/o speediness everyday preoccupation in happiness power increasing [bang thang 'phel ba]	so gsod pa
སོ་གསོད་པོ	w/o speediness everyday preoccupation in happiness power increasing [bang thang 'phel ba]	so gsod po
སོ་བསོད	comfortable	so bsod
སོ་བསོད་ཅིག་བགྱིད	do enjoy, let us enjoy	so bsod cig bgyid
སོ་ཧྲས་རྒྱག་པ	to gnaw, nibble	so hras rgyag pa
སོ་ཧྲུག	1) (M so rug gi sgra 'gyur ba, phyugs 'brog ru ba; 2) tanned leather rtsi ldan zhig	so hrug
སོ་ཧྲུབ	minced meat, pounded dried meat	so hrub
སོ་ཧྲུབས	spaces in the teeth	so hrubs
སོ་ལྷུ	rows of teeth	so lhu
སོག	winter fodder fields, SA sob, Mongolian	sog
སོག་ཀ	an axe/ a saw	sog ka
སོག་ཀ་པ	{sog ka pa} med. herb fruit	sog ka pa
སོག་སྐད	M	sog skad
སོག་ཁ	a certain shape	sog kha
སོག་ཁ་པ	{sog ka pa} med. herb fruit	sog kha pa
སོག་ཁ་ཡུ་བ་ནང	the narrow part of a shoulder blade	sog kha yu ba nang
སོག་ག་པ	{sog ka pa} med. herb fruit	sog ga pa
སོག་ག་བ	capsella bursa - pastoris medic.	sog ga ba
སོག་གུ	narrow extremity of shoulder blade	sog gu
སོག་གུར	1) felt tent or cloth 1 in nomad tent shape	sog gur
སོག་སྒྲོམ	box for a large saw	sog sgrom
སོག་ཆགས་ཕྲ་མོ	the smallest of insects; x {sog chags phra mo tshun chad la gnod pa mi byed} avoid harm to living beings, even the smallest of insects	sog chags phra mo
སོག་ཆས	M clothing	sog chas
སོག་ཆུ	de'i chu 'go gdang la'i ri rgyud nas byung zhing bod rang skyong ljongs kyi sbra chen rdzong dang sog rdzong brgyud de nag chu dang 'dres rjes rgyal mo rngul chu zer	sog chu
སོག་འཇོག	hoarding money	sog 'jog
སོག་རྟ	mongol horse	sog rta
སོག་ཐལ	human shoulder-blade ash [med.]	sog thal
སོག་དར	sog lugs kyi kha btags sngon po zhig	sog dar
སོག་ལྡུམ	stubbles	sog ldum
སོག་ལྡུར	lo tog brngas shul gyi sog ma'i lhag 'phro	sog ldur
སོག་ནོན	additional detail	sog non
སོག་པ	shoulder; shoulder blades	sog pa
སོག་པ་པོ	one who hoards	sog pa po
སོག་པའི་མེ་ལོང	the flat part of the shoulder blade	sog pa'i me long
སོག་པར་བྱེད་པ	collect, earn, hoard	sog par byed pa
སོག་པོ	Mongolia	sog po
སོག་པོ་སྟག་ཁྲིད	sgo skyor rtsig ldebs su 'bri ba'i sog pos stag khrid pa'i ri mo, bgegs dbang bar chad med cing bkra shis bde legs yong ba'i mtshon byed cig	sog po stag khrid
སོག་པོ་དཔལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	Palgyi Yeshe of Sogpo. Disciple of Padmasambhava and Jnana Kumara of Nyag. Palgyi Yeshe means 'Glorious Wisdom.'	sog po dpal gyi ye shes
སོག་པོ་ལྷ་དཔལ་གྱི་ཡེ་ཤེས	one of Padmasambhava's 25 disciples	sog po lha dpal gyi ye shes
སོག་པོའི་ཆ་ལུགས	M clothing	sog po'i cha lugs
སོག་པོའི་མི་རིགས	M people	sog po'i mi rigs
སོག་པོའི་ལུགས་སྲོལ	M custom	sog po'i lugs srol
སོག་དཔྱད	shoulder-blade divination	sog dpyad
སོག་སྤྲང	vagabond	sog sprang
སོག་ཕྱེ	sog le brgyab pa'i shing phye	sog phye
སོག་ཕྲུག	mongol child, mongol boy	sog phrug
སོག་བྱིལ	CT man's long ear ring	sog byil
སོག་འབུར	small blade of straw, chaff	sog 'bur
སོག་འབོལ	cushion/ pillow stuffed w straw	sog 'bol
སོག་འབྲུ	green corn that begins to sprout	sog 'bru
སོག་སྦུབས	rtsva'am sog ma khog stong	sog sbubs
སོག་མ	fodder grass	sog ma
སོག་མའི་འབུ་ལ	a shoe of straw	sog ma'i 'bu la
སོག་མོ	mongolian woman	sog mo
སོག་མོ་འདེབས་པ	do mo divination w the shoulder blade of a goat/ sheep	sog mo 'debs pa
སོག་དམར	scapula (divination method)	sog dmar
སོག་བཙུན	M monk	sog btsun
སོག་ཚབ༹	1) sog yul nas thon pa'i tshva; 2) sman gyi bye brag tshva sngon po zhig	sog tshva
སོག་ཚིགས	1) snye ma'i yu ba'i tshigs pa; 2) lus kyi sog pa'i tshigs	sog tshigs
སོག་ཚེམ	lham gyi sna mgo'i steng gi zur gyi 'ja' sum sgrig	sog tshem
སོག་རྫོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	sog rdzong
སོག་ཞྭ	M hat	sog zhwa
སོག་གཞུང	1) hor sog gi lung pa'i mthil; 2) bar khams byang rgyud kyi lung pa zhig	sog gzhung
སོག་ཟློག་པ	SA sog bzlog	sog zlog pa
སོག་ཟློག་པ་བློ	author of nges don 'brug sgra in which he refutes criticisms of rdzogs chen	sog zlog pa blo
སོག་ཟློག་པ་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	15521627	sog zlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan
སོག་བཟློག་པ་བློ	"he who drove back the Mongolians", wrote down the nyang sems sde tradition	sog bzlog pa blo
སོག་བཟློག་པ་བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	b. 1552	sog bzlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan
སོག་ཡིག	M writing	sog yig
སོག་ཡུ	1) lo tog gi sog ma'i yu ba; 2) lus kyi sog pa'i tshigs mtshams kyi yu ba	sog yu
སོག་ཡུལ	M	sog yul
སོག་ཡུལ་གྱི་འབྲོག་པ	M nomad	sog yul gyi 'brog pa
སོག་ར	1) hay/ straw loft; 2) field where hay/ straw or ljang pa [leaves of barley/ oats] are put	sog ra
སོག་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས	M autonomous Region PRC	sog rang skyong ljongs
སོག་རིགས	M people/ race	sog rigs
སོག་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྐད	M	sog rigs kyi skad
སོག་རིགས་ཀྱི་གརབ༹་པ	M monk	sog rigs kyi grva pa
སོག་རུ	M nomad	sog ru
སོག་རུ་སོག་རུམ	stubbles	sog ru sog rum
སོག་རུམ	M rum/ grum rtse	sog rum
སོག་ལུག	M sheep	sog lug
སོག་ལུགས	M custom	sog lugs
སོག་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ལྷམ	M boots	sog lugs kyi lham
སོག་ལེ	a saw; saw	sog le
སོག་ལེ་ཁ	tooth edge of a saw, separated leaves	sog le kha
སོག་ལེ་རྒྱག་པ	saw	sog le rgyag pa
སོག་ལེ་རྒྱབ	saw-back, back of certain animals which resembles a saw	sog le rgyab
སོག་ལེ་སྒྲིབ	tree, SA klu shing	sog le sgrib
སོག་ལེ་ཅན	rtsangs pa kha ral sog le lta bu'i bsam sbyor zhi zhing rigs	sog le can
པའི་ཚུལ་དུ་བྱས་ནས	planning his moves carefully, he arrived looking like a man of peace	pa'i tshul du byas nas
སོག་ལེ་རྣོ་ཞིང་རྩུབ་པ	a sharp saw	sog le rno zhing rtsub pa
སོག་ལེའི་འཁོར་སྟེགས	saw horse	sog le'i 'khor stegs
སོག་ལེའི་རྒྱབ་ཅན	saw-back, fish	sog le'i rgyab can
སོག་ལེའི་སེམས་ལྡན	woman with heart as rough as teeth of a saw, cure & heartless woman	sog le'i sems ldan
སོག་ལེའི་སེམས་ལྡན་མ	saw-minded, fierce woman	sog le'i sems ldan ma
སོག་ལེས	a saw	sog les
སོག་ལེས་གཅོད་པ	saw to pieces	sog les gcod pa
སོག་ལེས་འཆེག་པ	cut with a saw	sog les 'cheg pa
སོག་ལེས་གཏུབ་པ	cut up w a saw	sog les gtub pa
སོག་ལེས་འདྲ་བ	sawn pieces of wood	sog les 'dra ba
སོག་ལེས་གཤགས	sawn up	sog les gshags
སོག་གཤག་རྒྱག་པ	saw in pieces	sog gshag rgyag pa
སོག་ལྷམ	M boots	sog lham
སོག་ལྷུ	shoulder as a piece of meat for boiling	sog lhu
སོགས	and other objects	sogs
སོགས་ཁོངས	sogs zhes pa'i sdud pa'i tshig phrad kyi nang du bsdus pa'i don, kho rang gi ming sogs khongs su btang ba	sogs khongs
སོགས་སྒྲ	sogs khongs su bsdus pa, me phag la sogs 'das pa'i lo zhes pa ni me phag dang sa byi sa glang lcags stag la sogs dang, bug sogs zhes pa ni nyin zhag nyi dhru skabs kyi rang cha bug mkha' mig bug yi...	sogs sgra
སོགས་པ	{sogs pa, sogs pa, sogs pa} intr. v	sogs pa
སོགས་སོགས	and so forth, [about texts) and elsewhere; and so forth, [about texts] and elsewhere	sogs sogs
སོང་ཁྲ	'gro song gi gzhung khra	song khra
སོང་ངེ	brighten up, lucid	song nge
སོང་སྟེ	having proceeded	song ste
སོང་ཐོ	records of expenditures	song tho
སོང་དུས	time has passed, time will have passed	song dus
སོང་ནས་མེད	disappeared, vanquished	song nas med
སོང་བ	having passed to, gone	song ba
སོང་བ་བྱེར་ཅིག	let them go, let them disperse	song ba byer cig
སོང་བ་ཡིན	past, has gone, no longer extent	song ba yin
སོང་མ་ཐག	as soon as it was done	song ma thag
སོང་ཙ་ན	because, therefore, since	song tsa na
སོང་གཙང	because, therefore, since	song gtsang
སོང་ཚོད	GDreyfus: "in actuality" (not attested in any other source) see R75: 143.4 [mss]	song tshod
སོང་ཚོད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་ཅན	the actual subject; comp with {rlom tshod kyi chos can} the assumed subject [ggd]	song tshod kyi chos can
སོང་ཚོད་ཀྱི་རྟགས	actual reason	song tshod kyi rtags
སོང་ཚོད་ཀྱི་གཞལ་བྱ	the actual object of comprehension [ggd]	song tshod kyi gzhal bya
སོང་ཚོད་དང་རློམ་ཚོད	the actual and the assumed / conceived [ggd]	song tshod dang rlom tshod
སོང་ཚོད་ལ	in actuality [ggd]	song tshod la
སོང་ཞིག་གསུངས	told him that him he should travel	song zhig gsungs
སོང་ཡིག	records of expenditures	song yig
སོང་རབས	phyin pa'i gtam mam lo rgyus	song rabs
སོང་ས	where I had walked	song sa
སོང་སོང་པ	those that had gone	song song pa
སོང་སོང་བ	went on {lho phyogs su song song ba} went on further south 2812	song song ba
སོང་སོང་བ་ལས	going on continually, continuing to do a thing	song song ba las
སོངས	imp. of {bsang ba}	songs
སོད	kill, slay, SA gsod pa, imperfect of gsod	sod
སོད་པ	bstun pa, not according with	sod pa
སོད་སོད	Kill! Kill!	sod sod
སོན	1) seed; 2) lam yig lam son	son
སོན་ཁུག	leather container for carrying seed to be planted	son khug
སོན་འགྲོ	amount of seed a field takes	son 'gro
སོན་འགྲོ་བོགས་འགྲོ	giving as rent on a field as much seed as the field takes	son 'gro bogs 'gro
སོན་བཏབ	planted seed	son btab
སོན་བཏབ་པ	to sow	son btab pa
སོན་འདེབས	plant seed	son 'debs
སོན་འདེབས་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	seed planting machine	son 'debs 'khrul 'khor
སོན་འདེབས་རྒྱ་ཁྱོན	amount of seed a field takes	son 'debs rgya khyon
སོན་འདེབས་པ	grow, plant, cultivate, sow	son 'debs pa
སོན་འདེབས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	seed planting machine	son 'debs 'phrul 'khor
སོན་འདེབས་བྱེད	plant seed	son 'debs byed
སོན་རྡོགས་འདེབས	select seeds	son rdogs 'debs
སོན་པ	{son pa, son pa, son pa} intr. v	son pa
སོན་ཕན	(CH abacus	son phan
སོན་འབྲུ	seed grain	son 'bru
སོན་སྦྱོར	hybrid seed	son sbyor
སོན་མ་བྱེད	cultivate	son ma byed
སོན་མེད་སྲིང་བལ	ginned cotton	son med sring bal
སོན་མེད་སྲིན་བལ	ginned cotton	son med srin bal
སོན་དམིགས	seed put aside for planting	son dmigs
སོན་ཞིང	seed-bed, seeding-field	son zhing
སོན་བཟང	good/ high yield etc. seed	son bzang
སོན་རིགས	seeds	son rigs
སོབ	give on equivalent, SA 'dzab pa, null, void, vain, empty, some stuffed thing	sob
སོབ་ཁྲ	bad in its quality	sob khra
སོབ་ཇ	inferior tea	sob ja
སོབ་སྟན	grass or spu sob sob gdan wide or soft	sob stan
སོབ་པ	* hollow	sob pa
སོབ་པོ	hollow soft, spongy	sob po
སོབ་སོབ	soft; {rdo sol sob sob} bituminous [soft] coal	sob sob
སོབ་སོབ་ཅན	spongy	sob sob can
སོབ་སོབ་བཟོ་བ	soften	sob sob bzo ba
སོབས	gsob pa!	sobs
སོམ	= even	som
སོམ་ཉི	?, doubt, uncertainty, hesitation	som nyi
སོམ་ཉི་བྱ་བའི་གནས	point about which 1 is in doubt	som nyi bya ba'i gnas
སོམ་ཉི་ཟ་བ	be in doubt	som nyi za ba
སོམ་ཉི་ཟློག་པ	eliminate doubt	som nyi zlog pa
སོམ་ཉིའི་དྲ་བ	net of doubts	som nyi'i dra ba
སོམ་ཤིང	fir, pine tree	som shing
སོམས་དང	think about this!	soms dang
སོམས་འདྲིས་བྱུང	accustomed to	soms 'dris byung
སོའི	dental	so'i
སོའི་སྙིལ	gums	so'i snyil
སོའི་ན་ཟུག	toothache	so'i na zug
སོའི་སྨན་པ	dentist	so'i sman pa
སོའི་ལག་ཏུ་འོངས་སོ	victuals came into the hands of the individual persons	so'i lag tu 'ongs so
སོའི་ཨེམ་ཆེ	dentist	so'i em che
སོའུ་གན་དྷི་ཀ	flower	so'u gan dhi ka
སོར	SK angula, a finger's breadth	sor
སོར་ཀྲམ་ཡིག་པར	typewriting	sor kram yig par
སོར་ཀྲམ་ཡིག་པར་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	typewriter	sor kram yig par 'phrul 'khor
སོར་སྐོར	sor mos skor ba	sor skor
སོར་སྐྱོབ	thimble	sor skyob
སོར་གང	finger width	sor gang
སོར་གྲངས་འདོམ་བསྒྲིལ	sor mo'i grangs 'bor mtho dang khru 'dom bcas rim bzhin gong du bsgril ba ste EG sor 80 ni 'dom med khru gsum mtho med sor brgyad yod	sor grangs 'dom bsgril
སོར་ལྔ	five-finger breadth	sor lnga
སོར་ལྕིབས	thimble	sor lcibs
སོར་ཆུད	restore/ bringing back to its former condition	sor chud
སོར་ཆུད་ཐུབ་བྱུང	[they] were able to restore it	sor chud thub byung
སོར་ཆུད་པ	restored, recovering	sor chud pa
སོར་ཆུད་པའི་སྟོབས	power of restoration; power of restoring	sor chud pa'i stobs
སོར་འཇུག་པ	sustaining freshness, renew	sor 'jug pa
སོར་འཇུད་པ	restore, renew	sor 'jud pa
སོར་གཉིས	two fingers	sor gnyis
སོར་རྟོག	discriminating wisdom	sor rtog
སོར་རྟོག་གི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminating knowledge	sor rtog gi shes rab
སོར་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the pristine cognition of discernment	sor rtog pa'i ye shes
སོར་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས	discriminating primal awareness, discriminating wisdom, discerning wisdom	sor rtog ye shes
སོར་བརྟགས་མིན་འགོག	abbr. of {so sor brtags min gyi 'gog pa}	sor brtags min 'gog
སོར་དོ	two finger widths	sor do
སོར་གདུབ	rings, finger-rings	sor gdub
སོར་མདོ	{so sor thar pa'i mdo} The Sutra of Individual Liberation	sor mdo
སོར་ཐར་པའི་མདོ	pratimokshas'utra, Buddhist canonical work dealing with monastic discipline	sor thar pa'i mdo
སོར་འདུས	withdrawal	sor 'dus
སོར་རྡེའུ	mtheb sor bar nas 'phen pa'i rde'u, rtsal can gyis sor rde'u 'phangs pas btul	sor rde'u
སོར་རྡོ	sor rde'u	sor rdo
སོར་ལྡེམ	{sor ldem med herb	sor ldem
སོར་སྡུད	individual convergence, withdrawal	sor sdud
སོར་སྡུད་བསྙེན་པའི་ཡན་ལག	the branch of ritual service which develops withdrawal (according to the system of Orgyenpa); the approach-branch of withdrawal, One of {bsnyen sgrub rdo rje gsum}	sor sdud bsnyen pa'i yan lag
སོར་སྡོམ	pratimoksha/ individual liberation vow	sor sdom
སོར་གནས	separate place	sor gnas
སོར་གནས་པ	old-fashioned, remaining unchanged/ as before/ in its former place/ as it was	sor gnas pa
སོར་གནས་བྱེད	keep unchanged, leave fixed/ invariant	sor gnas byed
སོར་གནས་སུ་འཇུག	keep unchanged, leave fixed/ invariant	sor gnas su 'jug
སོར་ཕྲེང	angulimala 2813	sor phreng
སོར་ཕྲེང་གི་མདོ	Angulimala Sutra	sor phreng gi mdo
སོར་ཕྲེང་ཅན	Angulimala	sor phreng can
སོར་མ	toes and fingers	sor ma
སོར་མ་གནས	not remaining unchanged/ as it was	sor ma gnas
སོར་མོ	finger, inch	sor mo
སོར་མོ་ལྔ	the five fingers	sor mo lnga
སོར་མོ་ལྔ་པ	castor oil plant	sor mo lnga pa
སོར་མོ་བཅུ་དྲུག་ཙམ་པ	distance of sixteen finger-widths	sor mo bcu drug tsam pa
སོར་མོ་ཆུང་བ	little finger, little toe	sor mo chung ba
སོར་མོ་འཇར་བ	web-fingers, one whose fingers are joined to each others, inch, symbol for 10	sor mo 'jar ba
སོར་མོ་གཉིས་ཙམ་གྱི་ཚད	inch	sor mo gnyis tsam gyi tshad
སོར་མོ་དང་པོ	thumb	sor mo dang po
སོར་མོ་རྣམས་རྒྱས་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of large fingers sor mo rnams byin gyis phra ba'i dpe	sor mo rnams rgyas pa'i dpe byad
སོར་མོ་རྣམས་ཟླུམ་པའི་དཔེ་བྱད	the minor mark of round fingers [sangs rgyas kyi dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i nang gses shig ste, tshul kha na ma tho ba med pa nyid kyis sor mo rnams zlum pa]	sor mo rnams zlum pa'i dpe byad
སོར་མོ་ཕྲེང་བ	Anguli Mala. A disciple of the Buddha who murdered 999 people, was converted and became an arhat	sor mo phreng ba
སོར་མོ་མེད་པ	fingerless	sor mo med pa
སོར་མོ་བཞི་པ	{sor mo bzhi pa} med.	sor mo bzhi pa
སོར་མོ་རིང་བའི་མཚན་བཟང	the major mark of long fingers	sor mo ring ba'i mtshan bzang
སོར་མོའི་རྒྱན	ring	sor mo'i rgyan
སོར་མོའི་ཐུ་བོ	thumb	sor mo'i thu bo
སོར་མོའི་ནེའུ་ལེ	at the tips of the front of the fingers lines shaped like mt and lake	sor mo'i ne'u le
སོར་མོའི་དཔེ་བྱད་གསུམ	the three minor marks of the fingers [dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu'i gras shig ste, sor mo rnams zlum pa dang, sor mo rnams rgyas pa dang, sor mo rnams byin gyis phra ba bcas gsum mo]	sor mo'i dpe byad gsum
སོར་མོའི་ཕྲེང་བ	king {sor mo'i phreng ba	sor mo'i phreng ba
སོར་མོའི་ཚིགས	mdzug gu'i rus pa'i lhu dum gyi bar mtshams	sor mo'i tshigs
སོར་རྩེ	finger-tips	sor rtse
སོར་ཚད	finger width	sor tshad
སོར་ཚིག	joint of a finger	sor tshig
སོར་ཚིགས	finger joints	sor tshigs
སོར་ཞུགས	Sustaining freshness. The Dzogchen version of vipashyana	sor zhugs
སོར་གཞུག	sustaining freshness	sor gzhug
སོར་བཞག	resting naturally	sor bzhag
སོར་བཞག་གི་ཐེག་པ	see {sor bzhag lha dang mi'i theg pa}	sor bzhag gi theg pa
སོར་བཞག་པ	put in its place	sor bzhag pa
སོར་བཞག་ལྷ་དང་མིའི་ཐེག་པ	Longchen Rabjam's def: {dge ba bcu dang gso sbyong la nges par gnas pa la sogs pa bsod nams cha mthun gyi las bsags pas lha dang mi'i bde legs phyi ma la 'grub pa'i thabs te gang gi grub pa la 'jug...	sor bzhag lha dang mi'i theg pa
སོར་བཞག་ལྷ་མིའི་ཐེག་པ	distinct vehicles for gods and human; see def {sor bzhag lha dang mi'i theg pa}	sor bzhag lha mi'i theg pa
སོར་བཞགས	take as authoritative, leave alone/ as it is/ untouched, put aside as reserve	sor bzhags
སོར་བཞི	four inch, four fingers in size	sor bzhi
སོར་བཞི་པ	four-inched	sor bzhi pa
སོར་ཟླུམ	round fingers	sor zlum
སོར་རིས	lines of the hands and feet	sor ris
སོར་གཤག་པ	to put or stay in its place, to lay aside, set apart	sor gshag pa
སོར་བཤགས	{so sor bshag pa}	sor bshags
སོར་བཤགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ	A group of 4 moral laws for monks, which have to be confessed in public	sor bshags kyi sde
སོར་བཤགས་བཞི	the four precepts of leaving alone [food]	sor bshags bzhi
སོར་སོར	way of exhaling from the throat cavity	sor sor
སོལ	remove, SA sel ba	sol
སོལ་ཁུ	liquid charcoal	sol khu
སོལ་ཁྲལ	Tibetan govt nomad subjects sa nas brought sol ba tax [coal or charcoal]	sol khral
སོལ་གྱི་རླངས་པ	coal gas	sol gyi rlangs pa
སོལ་གཏེར	coal mine	sol gter
སོལ་དུ་འཁྱུད་གསུམ	sol is past, du future, 'khyud present	sol du 'khyud gsum
སོལ་དུང	charcoal kiln	sol dung
སོལ་དོང	charcoal container	sol dong
སོལ་མདུད	gem worn on the neck	sol mdud
སོལ་མདོག	[char]coal-color, black	sol mdog
སོལ་རྡོ	coal	sol rdo
སོལ་ནག	charcoal	sol nag
སོལ་ནག་ཐང	Geluk Monastery	sol nag thang
སོལ་ནག་ཐང་པོ	place in tibet	sol nag thang po
སོལ་སྣུམ	cart-grease	sol snum
སོལ་པིར	charcoal stick for drawing	sol pir
སོལ་པོ	friendly, kind, affable	sol po
སོལ་བ	charcoal	sol ba
སོལ་བ་བསྲེགས	make charcoal	sol ba bsregs
སོལ་བ་བསྲེགས་མཁན	charcoal maker	sol ba bsregs mkhan
སོལ་བའི་མདོག	coal-color, black	sol ba'i mdog
སོལ་བའི་མེ	charcoal fire	sol ba'i me
སོལ་བས་བྲིས་པའི་རི་མོ	charcoal drawing	sol bas bris pa'i ri mo
སོལ་མལ	charcoal kiln	sol mal
སོལ་རྫས་ནག་པོ	soot	sol rdzas nag po
སོལ་རིལ	briquette	sol ril
སོལ་རིས	charcoal drawing	sol ris
སོལ་རླངས	gas, coal	sol rlangs
སོས	come back to life	sos
སོས་ཀ	summer season	sos ka
སོས་ཀ་གཉིས	2 summer months	sos ka gnyis
སོས་ཀ་ཚ་བའི་དུས	hot season from midapr to mid-jun	sos ka tsha ba'i dus
སོས་ཀ་བཞད	rainbow	sos ka bzhad
སོས་བཅེམ	[arch] sos mur zin pa	sos bcem
སོས་འཆེམ	[arch] cattle chewing the cud	sos 'chem
སོས་བཏབ་པ	bite, back-bite, calumniate	sos btab pa
སོས་དལ	relaxed state, without haste, unhurried, slowly, leisurely, to remain calm, relax	sos dal
སོས་དལ་གྱིས	take it easy	sos dal gyis
སོས་གདལ	1) free and easy, slow; 2) lazy	sos gdal
སོས་གདོལ	slow, with relaxation	sos gdol
སོས་རྡལ	slowly, not in a hurry	sos rdal
སོས་ལྡད	chew, cattle chewing the cud	sos ldad
སོས་ལྡད་པ	chew, cattle chewing the cud	sos ldad pa
སོས་པ	healed; x {rma 'di sos par gyur cig gsungs pa} may my wound be healed	sos pa
སོས་པར	freshly	sos par
སོས་ཕྲུམ་ཕྲུམ	gsar pa [by rain falling flowers sos phrum phrum byas 'dug	sos phrum phrum
སོས་བླད	chew, cattle chewing the cud	sos blad
སོས་བླད་པ	chew	sos blad pa
སོས་ཟིན	caught by the teeth, tetanus, lockjaw	sos zin
སོས་རེ་དལ	no troubles, very peaceful	sos re dal
སྲ	hord, solid, strong, firm, durable [comp sra ba]	sra
སྲ་སྐམ	hard and dry	sra skam
སྲ་བརྐྱང	bhikshu's dharma robes not destroyed but laid in a box etc. called 'jug pa la sra brkyang	sra brkyang
སྲ་བརྐྱང་གི་གཞི	<kathani> see notes	sra brkyang gi gzhi
སྲ་བརྐྱང་གདིང་བ	see notes	sra brkyang gding ba
སྲ་བརྐྱང་འདིང	coarse blanket used by indian buddhist monks in ancient india	sra brkyang 'ding
སྲ་བརྐྱང་འདིང་བའི་ཆོ་ག	see notes	sra brkyang 'ding ba'i cho ga
སྲ་བརྐྱང་དབྱུང་བ	see notes	sra brkyang dbyung ba
སྲ་མཁྲང་ཅན་འགྱུར	hearty, sound, robust constitution	sra mkhrang can 'gyur
སྲ་མཁྲང་ཅན་འགྱུར་མེད	firm	sra mkhrang can 'gyur med
སྲ་མཁྲེག་གེ	solid	sra mkhreg ge
སྲ་མཁྲེགས	solid; hard	sra mkhregs
སྲ་མཁྲེགས་སྟོབས་ལྡན	solid and strong	sra mkhregs stobs ldan
སྲ་འཁྱག	ice etc hard and very cold	sra 'khyag
སྲ་ངར	overbearing, wilful, aggressive	sra ngar
སྲ་སྙི	hard and soft	sra snyi
སྲ་བརྟན	solid, firm, hard, strong, firm & compact, firm, stable, strong	sra brtan
སྲ་བརྟན་འགྱུར་མེད	unbreakable, indestructible	sra brtan 'gyur med
སྲ་བརྟན་དུ་གཏོང	stabilize strengthen, solidify, consolidate	sra brtan du gtong
སྲ་ཐང	healthy	sra thang
སྲ་འཐས	hard	sra 'thas
སྲ་འཐས་པ	solid, concrete	sra 'thas pa
སྲ་འཐེང	a kind of wind disease rlung rting pa'i chu ba la zhugs nas 'theng 'gros bya dgos pa zhig	sra 'theng
སྲ་པོ	hard, tough	sra po
སྲ་བ	incorruptibility; incorruptible; ("gzhan gyis gcod du med pa"); (one of seven vajra qualities)	sra ba
སྲ་བ་ཉིད	solidity, hardness, compactness	sra ba nyid
སྲ་བའི་ཆུ	hard water	sra ba'i chu
སྲ་བའི་ཟས	solid food	sra ba'i zas
སྲ་བའི་གཟུགས	solid [body]	sra ba'i gzugs
སྲ་བར་འགྱུར་བ	robust constitution	sra bar 'gyur ba
སྲ་བར་སྣང་བའི་རྣམ་ཤེས	the consciousness/ cognition appearing as solidity	sra bar snang ba'i rnam shes
སྲ་བར་བྱེད་པ	making firm, tight, strict	sra bar byed pa
སྲ་བོ	hard, SA sra ba, hard, solid, thick, firm, compact	sra bo
སྲ་འབྲས	{sra 'bras} tree med	sra 'bras
སྲ་མོ	hard, SA sra ba, solid, thick, firm, compact	sra mo
སྲ་རྨ་སྒང	{sra rma sgang mt	sra rma sgang
སྲ་རྩི	sap juice usable for dye etc., varnish	sra rtsi
སྲ་རྩི་རྒྱག་པ	varnish	sra rtsi rgyag pa
སྲ་རྩི་གཏོང་བ	varnish	sra rtsi gtong ba
སྲ་རྩི་པོག	sala tree incense = spos dkar	sra rtsi pog
སྲ་རྩི་སྤོག	sala tree incense = spos dkar	sra rtsi spog
སྲ་རྩི་སྤོས	sala tree incense = spos dkar	sra rtsi spos
སྲ་རྩི་ཤིང	1) tree which yields sap juice usable for dye etc.; 2) spos dkar shing	sra rtsi shing
སྲ་ཚད	hardness	sra tshad
སྲ་འཛིན	solid [body]	sra 'dzin
སྲ་ཞིང་བརྟན་པ	firm & compact	sra zhing brtan pa
སྲ་ཞིང་འཐས	solidity and hardness	sra zhing 'thas
སྲ་གཟུགས་འབར་རྫས	solid fuel	sra gzugs 'bar rdzas
སྲ་ཤིང	hard tree	sra shing
སྲ་ཤོག	hard paper	sra shog
སྲ་སྲ	sin	sra sra
སྲ་སྲེ	1) mix; 2) [arch] threat, evil deed	sra sre
སྲག	sreg	srag
སྲག་ཤུལ	violent	srag shul
སྲང	1) balance, scale; 2) road, path, street; 3) srang measure of weight; 4) Libra; 5) in between [objects/ time]	srang
སྲང་སྐར	i weighing gold, silver etc srang la yod pa'i skar ma	srang skar
སྲང་སྐུད	cords between scale/ balance's arm and pan	srang skud
སྲང་ཁྱིམ་ཅན	having the house of Libra	srang khyim can
སྲང་ག	hall of a house	srang ga
སྲང་གང	one ounce	srang gang
སྲང་གི་ཁྱིམ	Libra	srang gi khyim
སྲང་སྒོ	srang lam gyi mdo	srang sgo
སྲང་གཅིག	one pala weight	srang gcig
སྲང་ཆ	balance and what belongs to it	srang cha
སྲང་ཐག	cords between scale/ balance's arm and pan	srang thag
སྲང་མཐིལ	balance pan	srang mthil
སྲང་དུ་འཛུད་པ	to put to the test; to follow the structure	srang du 'dzud pa
སྲང་དུ་གཞུག	to enter, begin, in a	srang du gzhug
སྲང་དོ	two ounces	srang do
སྲང་མདའ	scale-beam or lever of a pair of scales	srang mda'
སྲང་མདའི་མཐོ་དམན་བཞིན	like [the swing of] the armature on a scale	srang mda'i mtho dman bzhin
སྲང་མདའི་མཐོ་དམའ	the balance of a weight scale 2815	srang mda'i mtho dma'
སྲང་མདོ	ending/ crossing of a road	srang mdo
སྲང་འདེགས	weigh w a balance	srang 'degs
སྲང་རྡོ	stone used as balance weight	srang rdo
སྲང་ནང	street running through a town	srang nang
སྲང་པོ	direct, straight[-forward]	srang po
སྲང་ཕོར	balance pan	srang phor
སྲང་ཕྱེད	one half a pala weight	srang phyed
སྲང་བ	drang por srang ba - straightened out	srang ba
སྲང་བར	space between houses, walled enclosures, etc	srang bar
སྲང་མིག	on scale arm engraved markings	srang mig
སྲང་ཚད	weight	srang tshad
སྲང་གཞི	balance pan	srang gzhi
སྲང་ཟེ	the kind of bones, a kind of pure knot in ju thig	srang ze
སྲང་ཡར	tortuous path	srang yar
སྲང་ལ	set of scales	srang la
སྲང་ལ་བཅུར	apply the key points, regular, balanced [sleep time]	srang la bcur
སྲང་ལ་བཏེག	{ri'i rgyal po srang la bteg na bgrang bar nus kyi} If you could lift the king of mountains, you might be able to weigh it	srang la bteg
སྲང་ལ་ཐེག་པ	{mos gus kyi srang la theg pa} because they were driven by the counterbalancing force of their devotion	srang la theg pa
སྲང་ལ་འདེགས	weigh w a balance	srang la 'degs
སྲང་ལ་འདེགས་པ	weigh, balance, put on the balance	srang la 'degs pa
སྲང་ལ་གཞལ་བ	weigh, balance	srang la gzhal ba
སྲང་ལམ	lane, alley, path, side-street	srang lam
སྲང་ལམ་བཙོག་པ	slum	srang lam btsog pa
སྲང་གསེང	srang dbrag, space between houses	srang gseng
སྲད	district in tibet	srad
སྲད་དཀར	oxytropis ochrocephala bge., oxytropis kansuensis bge.	srad dkar
སྲད་རྒྱུད	srad lineage	srad rgyud
སྲད་སྒོར	lham gyi mgo	srad sgor
སྲད་སྔོན	astragalus tanguticus bat., oxytropis melanocalyx bunge, hedysarum tuberosum fedtsch.	srad sngon
སྲད་ནག	{srad nag med herb	srad nag
སྲད་བུ	cord, thread	srad bu
སྲད་བུ་འཁལ་བ	to make thread	srad bu 'khal ba
སྲད་བུ་སྒྲིལ་བ	twist or roll yarn into thread	srad bu sgril ba
སྲད་བུའི་མེ་ཏོག་ཅན	cotton plant	srad bu'i me tog can
སྲད་བུས་དཀྲི་བ	= srad bus bre ba, sku gzugs la bya sogs 'bab cing bya thal gtong ba sogs 'gog ched skud pa'i dra ba 'then pa	srad bus dkri ba
སྲད་མ	pease, SA sran ma	srad ma
སྲད་མ་དམུག་པོ	oxytropis yunnanensis fr.	srad ma dmug po
སྲད་དམར	hedysarum sikkimense benth.	srad dmar
སྲད་སྨུག	{srad smug} herb med.	srad smug
སྲད་སེར	{srad ser} med. herb	srad ser
སྲན	hard	sran
སྲན་དཀར	white bean/ lentil	sran dkar
སྲན་ཆུང	light red, flat small bean, lentil	sran chung
སྲན་ཆེ་བ	one who can endure much	sran che ba
སྲན་ཆེན	rgya sran ma mkhal ma lta bu de'am large flat bean, soy bean	sran chen
སྲན་ཆོས	greed, avarice	sran chos
སྲན་ལྗང	mung bean, green gram; mong bean, green gram	sran ljang
སྲན་ཏུང	Shantung Province	sran tung
སྲན་ཐུབ	endurance, patience	sran thub
སྲན་ཐུབ་མཁན	one who can endure much	sran thub mkhan
སྲན་དེས་མ	patient forbearing good natured woman	sran des ma
སྲན་རྡོག	bean/ pea * lentils	sran rdog
སྲན་སྣུམ	bean oil	sran snum
སྲན་པ	hardship, severe distress or toil, bear, endure, be hardened, hard, firm, durable, strict	sran pa
སྲན་པ་པོ	one that endures	sran pa po
སྲན་པར	toilsomely, rigorously	sran par
སྲན་ཕུང	heap of peas	sran phung
སྲན་ཕུབ	pea-straw, pease-straw, skin of a bean	sran phub
སྲན་ཕྱེ	pea flour	sran phye
སྲན་ཕྱེ་ཉུང་ངུ	a little bean-tsampa / tsampa made from beans	sran phye nyung ngu
སྲན་བླ	unable to do/ endure	sran bla
སྲན་འབྲུ་ཙམ་པ	the size of a pea	sran 'bru tsam pa
སྲན་འབྲུ་ཙམ་པར	the size of a pea	sran 'bru tsam par
སྲན་མ	bean, flat bean, green pea, gram, grain, indian corn, peas, pulses	sran ma
སྲན་མ་ཆེན་པོ	rgya sran ma mkhal ma lta bu de'am large flat bean, soy bean	sran ma chen po
སྲན་མ་ཕོས་པ་ཙམ	as big as swelled peas	sran ma phos pa tsam
སྲན་མ་ཕྱག་གང་ཕུལ་ཞིང	a handful of grain	sran ma phyag gang phul zhing
སྲན་མ་ཙམ	pea-sized	sran ma tsam
སྲན་མའི་ཞིང	field of peas	sran ma'i zhing
སྲན་མི་བཇོད་པ	unbreakable	sran mi bjod pa
སྲན་མེ་ཏོག	blossoms of the pea	sran me tog
སྲན་དམར	small red bean	sran dmar
སྲན་བཙུག་པ	to persist in	sran btsug pa
སྲན་རྩམ	bean-tsampa {sran rtsam nyung ngu tsam} only a handful of brown tsampa made from beans	sran rtsam
སྲན་འཛུགས་པ	hold out, stand, endure much	sran 'dzugs pa
སྲན་གཟུགས་བྱེད་པ	to stand firm	sran gzugs byed pa
སྲན་རིལ	green pea	sran ril
སྲན་ལེབ	flat/ split bean/ lentil	sran leb
སྲན་བཤོས	1) food of beans; 2) bean tsampa torma	sran bshos
སྲན་སེར	soybean	sran ser
སྲབ	bridle with bit	srab
སྲབ་ཀྱི་ཁ་དུར	[arch] srab mthur ram srab mda'a	srab kyi kha dur
སྲབ་ཀྱི་ལྕེ་མདུད	bridle bit kyi kha ru'i rtse'i mdud mtshams	srab kyi lce mdud
སྲབ་ཀྱིས་བསྒྱུར་བ	steering by the reins; x {drong chog pa rnams shi bo'i ro sngas su phyin nas yar 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba dang 'dra zhes zer gyin 'dug} those who conduct village cerem...	srab kyis bsgyur ba
སྲབ་ཀྱོགས	reins	srab kyogs
སྲབ་སྐོན	put on a bridle	srab skon
སྲབ་སྐྱོག	srab skyogs	srab skyog
སྲབ་སྐྱོགས	reins	srab skyogs
སྲབ་ཁུག	srab 'gugs	srab khug
སྲབ་གོར	bridle mouthpiece left and right two metal rings	srab gor
སྲབ་འགུགས	horse etc. bzhon pa gang yi ha skyog pa'i bridle rope khug pa can placed snga rur on the saddle	srab 'gugs
སྲབ་སྒ་སྟན་ཆ་ཚང	complete tack for horse/ mule	srab sga stan cha tshang
སྲབ་སྒ་སྟན་ཚང་པོ	complete riding gear	srab sga stan tshang po
སྲབ་སྒོར	bridle mouthpiece left and right two metal rings	srab sgor
སྲབ་ལྕགས	bit for a horse's mouth	srab lcags
སྲབ་འཇམ	light and soft	srab 'jam
སྲབ་ཐག	reins	srab thag
སྲབ་མཐིལ	inner sole, welt	srab mthil
སྲབ་མཐུག	thin and thick, thickness	srab mthug
སྲབ་མཐུར	halter	srab mthur
སྲབ་འཐུག	thickness in consistency, dense, strong	srab 'thug
སྲབ་མདའ	reins	srab mda'
སྲབ་པ	slender, very delicate; less/ slight/ thin; {srab pa, bsrabs pa, bsrab pa, srobs} trans. v.; very delicate, slender	srab pa
སྲབ་པོ	thin, sheer	srab po
སྲབ་བི་སྲིབ་བི	evening /twilight light	srab bi srib bi
སྲབ་བོ	thin	srab bo
སྲབ་མེད	unbridled [without the bit in the mouth one uses to control the horse]; unbridled	srab med
སྲབ་མོ	thin, rare, fine, slender	srab mo
སྲབ་ཞན	srab and hrul ba, srab la poor quality	srab zhan
སྲབ་བཞག་པ	{kha la srab bzhag} put a bridle in the mouth	srab bzhag pa
སྲབ་གཟེར	horse's bit binding nail	srab gzer
སྲབ་ལོག	remove a bridle	srab log
སྲབ་ཤུ	wound in horse's mouth from bit	srab shu
སྲབ་སར	where[ever] it is fine	srab sar
སྲབ་སྲིག	dim, gloomy, somber, dismal	srab srig
སྲབ་སྲིབ	evening /twilight light	srab srib
སྲམ	sable; an otter	sram
སྲམ་གྱི་མཆིན་པ	sram liver animal med	sram gyi mchin pa
སྲམ་གྱི་ཤ	otter's flesh, 1 of sha bcud gsum	sram gyi sha
སྲམ་མདོག	sram colored	sram mdog
སྲམ་ལྤགས	otter skin	sram lpags
སྲམ་ཤ	sram meat animal med.	sram sha
སྲར	severely, rigorously	srar
སྲལ	interstices, crack	sral
སྲལ་བ	1) rig pa sgrim nas gzab gzab byed pa; 2) good, perfect, excellent	sral ba
སྲལ་ལེན	taking care of	sral len
སྲས	children, child, son, male child	sras
སྲས་ཀྱི་ཐུ་བོ	1) chief student; 2) oldest or best child	sras kyi thu bo
སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས	prince or son of high ranking people	sras sku zhabs
སྲས་མཁར	tower	sras mkhar
སྲས་མཁར་དགུ་ཐོག	9 story Sekhar tower	sras mkhar dgu thog
སྲས་བཅུ་གཅིག	[TRS 100-1]	sras bcu gcig
སྲས་མཆོག་ཕུར་པ	sras phur - Supreme Son Purpa. Syn. {las phur}; Supreme Son Purpa; has only one face, two arms and the lower part of his body is a triangular tip of the purpa	sras mchog phur pa
སྲས་ལྟོར	bastard prince	sras ltor
སྲས་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	Child of Great Bliss; basic space and wisdom as nondual is the Child of Great Bliss, also called 'the fundamental mandala of awakened mind.'	sras bde ba chen po
སྲས་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	prince of great joy mandala	sras bde ba chen po'i dkyil 'khor
སྲས་པོ	son [h]	sras po
སྲས་དཔོན	young master	sras dpon
སྲས་ཕུར	sras mchog phur pa - Supreme Son Purpa. Syn. {las phur}	sras phur
སྲས་བུ	SA sras	sras bu
སྲས་བྱུང་བ	{de nas 'phreng can mar rgyal po'i sras shig byung ba} Mallika then had a son by the king	sras byung ba
སྲས་བློན་འབངས	the king's son, the ministers and his subjects	sras blon 'bangs
སྲས་མོ	daughter; Miss; spiritual heir	sras mo
སྲས་མོ་སྐུ་ཞབས	daughter of high ranking people, princess	sras mo sku zhabs
སྲས་མོ་མེ་ཏོག་གསལ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	a young girl named Bright Flower	sras mo me tog gsal zhes bya ba
སྲས་མོ་ལྷ་ལྕམ	sisters	sras mo lha lcam
སྲས་མོ་ལྷ་ལྕམ་མཆེད་བཞི	four princesses	sras mo lha lcam mched bzhi
སྲས་མོའི་སྐུ་ཞབས	princess, daughter of high ranking people [h]	sras mo'i sku zhabs
སྲས་ཚབ	adopted son or child	sras tshab
སྲས་སྲོས	children	sras sros
སྲས་སློབ	chief disciples	sras slob
སྲི་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	srib khri btsan po	sri khri btsan po
སྲི་ངན	evil demons of destruction	sri ngan
སྲི་བཅུ	the 10 sri	sri bcu
སྲི་བཅུ་ཐུར་དུ་གནོན་པ	rites for the suppression of the ten sri	sri bcu thur du gnon pa
སྲི་བཅུ་གནོན་པའི་སྲི་གཏོ	sri rites for the suppression of the ten sri	sri bcu gnon pa'i sri gto
སྲི་བཅུའི་ཚང་མདོས	mdos for the ransom of families from the ten sri	sri bcu'i tshang mdos
སྲི་ཆོད	separated from a misfortune bringing devil	sri chod
སྲི་ཐར	separated from a misfortune bringing devil	sri thar
སྲི་འདུར	'dur of the sri for youths	sri 'dur
སྲི་གནོན	subjugation of the si spirit	sri gnon
སྲི་དཔུང	military division	sri dpung
སྲི་བ	(tha dad pa bsris pa, bsri ba, sris,, 1) scrimp save, be thrifty, not waste; 2) stop up, restrain	sri ba
སྲི་མ་སྣོམ་པ	smell	sri ma snom pa
སྲི་མེད	liberal	sri med
སྲི་ཞུ	reverence, respect	sri zhu
སྲི་ཞུ་མཁན	one who shows respect	sri zhu mkhan
སྲི་ཞུ་སྒྲུབ	esteem, pay respect	sri zhu sgrub
སྲི་ཞུ་བ	paying respect, show deference	sri zhu ba
སྲི་ཞུ་བྱེད	esteem, pay respect/ reverence	sri zhu byed
སྲི་ཞུའི་མགྲོན	={dkon mchog sri zhu'i mgron} 2817	sri zhu'i mgron
སྲི་ཟློག	averting the malevolent influences of the sri spirits	sri zlog
སྲི་བཟློག	si-repelling [ritual]	sri bzlog
སྲི་བཟློག་འཁོར་ལོ་འབར་བ	ritual work recited after the death of an infant to prevent the malevolent "sri" spirits from harming other children	sri bzlog 'khor lo 'bar ba
སྲི་ལ་མུ་ཁ	Fox-head	sri la mu kha
སྲི་ཤིང	dz' ti'i tree	sri shing
སྲི་སྲི་བ	continually try to keep wealth from being wasted	sri sri ba
སྲིག་བླུ	save life	srig blu
སྲིང	to prolong, extend	sring
སྲིང་ཀ་ཏ་ཀ	aquatic plant trapa bispinosa, tree whose wood is used in the sacrificial fire	sring ka ta ka
སྲིང་སྐུད	cotton cord/ string/ thread	sring skud
སྲིང་སྐུད་ཀྱི་བཏགས་རྫས	cotton fabric/ goods	sring skud kyi btags rdzas
སྲིང་སྐུད་འཁེལ་སྐོར	cotton spinning machine	sring skud 'khel skor
སྲིང་འཁོར	string spinning machine	sring 'khor
སྲིང་བཏགས་ཐོན་ཟོག	things tied w string etc.	sring btags thon zog
སྲིང་བ	prolong, extend, stretch, stretch out, fling far away, postpone, send, bring up, train up, rear	sring ba
སྲིང་བ་གཉིས་ལྡན	{lus sems sring ba gnyis ldan}	sring ba gnyis ldan
སྲིང་བལ	cotton	sring bal
སྲིང་བལ་ཁྲབ	quilted cloth armor	sring bal khrab
སྲིང་བལ་འཁེལ་ཐག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	cotton textile mill	sring bal 'khel thag bzo grwa
སྲིང་བལ་གྱི་ཚི་སྣ	cotton fiber	sring bal gyi tshi sna
སྲིང་བལ་གནོད་འབུ	cotton aphid/ louse	sring bal gnod 'bu
སྲིང་བལ་ཞིང་པ	cotton farmer	sring bal zhing pa
སྲིང་བལ་ཤེད་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cotton carding machine	sring bal shed byed 'phrul 'khor
སྲིང་བལ་གསེད་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cotton gin	sring bal gsed byed 'phrul 'khor
སྲིང་བལ་གསེད་མ	ginned cotton	sring bal gsed ma
སྲིང་མོ	sister	sring mo
སྲིང་མོ་རྒན་པ	older sister	sring mo rgan pa
སྲིང་མོ་ཙ་མིན་མཆེད་གསུམ	three tsa min sisters	sring mo tsa min mched gsum
སྲིང་བཞི	the four sisters; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	sring bzhi
སྲིང་སོན	cotton seed	sring son
སྲིངས	also {sring}, {bsrings}; imp. of {sring ba}	srings
སྲིད	1) worldly or spyi tshogs kyi bya gzhag, society, social, governmental, political, temporal, dominion, rule; 2) length, high, height; 3) world, cosmic, existence; 4) phenomena; 5) becoming; 6) sams...	srid
སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཆུ་མིག	source of existence, reading in lde'u 'phrul	srid kyi chu mig
སྲིད་ཀྱི་མཚམས་སྦོར	link for rebirth	srid kyi mtshams sbor
སྲིད་སྐྱོང	secular ruler	srid skyong
སྲིད་བསྐྱངས	[p srid skyong],, ruled, governed, reigned	srid bskyangs
སྲིད་ཁག	political party/ clique/ faction	srid khag
སྲིད་ཁྲི	political office, throne of office	srid khri
སྲིད་ཁྲི་ལས་བབ	give up/ step down from political office	srid khri las bab
སྲིད་ཁྲིར་སླེབས	assume political office, come into power	srid khrir slebs
སྲིད་གྲོས་ཁང	parliament, congress	srid gros khang
སྲིད་གྲོས་པ	political spokesman, diplomat, senator	srid gros pa
སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས་འདུ	parliament, congress	srid gros tshogs 'du
སྲིད་འགན	political responsibility	srid 'gan
སྲིད་འགན་བཞེས	to take political responsibility	srid 'gan bzhes
སྲིད་འགྱུར	coup d'etat	srid 'gyur
སྲིད་འགྲོ	samsaric activities	srid 'gro
སྲིད་རྒྱུ	possibility	srid rgyu
སྲིད་སྒྱུར	coup d'etat	srid sgyur
སྲིད་སྒྲིབ་ཤིང	tree terminalia arjuna	srid sgrib shing
སྲིད་སྒྲུབ	white, celebrated mathematician during buddha's time	srid sgrub
སྲིད་སྒྲུབ་མ	river si t'a	srid sgrub ma
སྲིད་ཇུས	policy, policy	srid jus
སྲིད་ཇུས་སྐྱོང་ཕྱོགས	[way of] government plan, strategy, policy	srid jus skyong phyogs
སྲིད་ཇུས་མཁས་པ	statesman	srid jus mkhas pa
སྲིད་ཇུས་གཏོང	work out a strategy/ policy	srid jus gtong
སྲིད་ཇུས་ལག་ལེན	put a governmental strategy/ plan/ policy into practice	srid jus lag len
སྲིད་ཇུས་ལག་ལེན་བྱེད	put a governmental strategy/ plan/ policy into practice	srid jus lag len byed
སྲིད་རྗེ་བྲང་དཀར	eldest son of the patriarch king of the bon called sangs po	srid rje brang dkar
སྲིད་རྗེ་འབྲང་དཀར	white lord who controls existence, 1 of srid pa pho dgu	srid rje 'brang dkar
སྲིད་ཉོན	the kleshas of samsara	srid nyon
སྲིད་རྙིང	old former government	srid rnying
སྲིད་ཏང	political party	srid tang
སྲིད་ཐར	fully released from the suffering of the world	srid thar
སྲིད་ཐུང	short reign, short-lived government	srid thung
སྲིད་མཐའ	1) 1 who lives more than 100 years; 2) end of samsara; 3) something hard to get	srid mtha'
སྲིད་མཐའ་ཙམ	is next to impossible	srid mtha' tsam
སྲིད་མཐའ་ལ་མི་གནས་པའི་གཞི་ཤེས	fundamental knowledge not abiding in samsaric extremes	srid mtha' la mi gnas pa'i gzhi shes
སྲིད་མཐའི	(bodhisattva in his/ her) final incarnation	srid mtha'i
སྲིད་མཐའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ	bodhisattva in his/ her final incarnation	srid mtha'i byang chub sems dpa'
སྲིད་དང་མི་སྲིད	forms of existence and	srid dang mi srid
སྲིད་དང་ཞི་བ	existence and peace	srid dang zhi ba
སྲིད་དང་ཞི་བའི	of samsara and nirvana	srid dang zhi ba'i
སྲིད་དུ	in length	srid du
སྲིད་དུ་མི་རུང་བ	impossible	srid du mi rung ba
སྲིད་དོ་ཅོག	CM: yod do cog ste yod tshad. For yod do cog, CM gives: gang yod tshang ma. See entry for cog for MG's usage notes. [mss]	srid do cog
སྲིད་དོ་འཚལ་གྱིས	NyDh: = "by however many/much" Eg. R75: 239.1. N.B. srid do 'tshal gyis would appear to be similar to srid do cog, which means "all that is possible/exists" See entry under cog 2818 for MG's usage ...	srid do 'tshal gyis
སྲིད་དོན	politics	srid don
སྲིད་དོན་མཁས་པ	politician, political expert	srid don mkhas pa
སྲིད་དོན་གྱི	political	srid don gyi
སྲིད་དོན་གྱི་སྐྱབ་བཅོལ	political asylum	srid don gyi skyab bcol
སྲིད་དོན་གྱི་འགུལ	political shifts/ changes	srid don gyi 'gul
སྲིད་དོན་གྱི་ཉམས་མྱོང	political experience	srid don gyi nyams myong
སྲིད་དོན་གྲོས་ཚོགས	political conference	srid don gros tshogs
སྲིད་དོན་བརྗོད་གཏམ	political commentary	srid don brjod gtam
སྲིད་དོན་བརྗོད་པ་པོ	political commentator	srid don brjod pa po
སྲིད་དོན་ཉམས་མྱོང	political experience	srid don nyams myong
སྲིད་དོན་ཚོགས	political party	srid don tshogs
སྲིད་དོན་ཚོགས་པ	political party	srid don tshogs pa
སྲིད་དོན་འཛིན་སྐྱོང	political rule/ administration	srid don 'dzin skyong
སྲིད་ལྡན	having becoming, the moon	srid ldan
སྲིད་སྡེ	gnyen tshan, grong sde	srid sde
སྲིད་ན	in the world	srid na
སྲིད་ན་དཀོན་པ	rarest in the universe	srid na dkon pa
སྲིད་ན་ཉེད་དཀའ	most rare	srid na nyed dka'
སྲིད་ན་རྙེད་དཀའ	so rare to find in the world	srid na rnyed dka'
སྲིད་ན་སྤྱོད་པ	politician	srid na spyod pa
སྲིད་པ་སྐྱེ་བ་ཕྱི་མ	subsequent live[s] in samsara	srid pa skye ba phyi ma
སྲིད་པ་འཁོར་བ	cyclic existence	srid pa 'khor ba
སྲིད་པ་འཁོར་ལོ	the wheel of existence	srid pa 'khor lo
སྲིད་པ་གར་གྱི་གྱེན་སེལ	exorcism to develop the positive force of existence	srid pa gar gyi gyen sel
སྲིད་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བོན	bon of the original lineage of existence	srid pa rgyud kyi bon
སྲིད་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བོན་པོ	Bönpos of the lineage of existence	srid pa rgyud kyi bon po
སྲིད་པ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ལས	karma of samsaric deeds	srid pa sgrub pa'i las
སྲིད་པ་སྔ་མ་འགག	the ceasing of the previous existence	srid pa snga ma 'gag
སྲིད་པ་སྔ་མའི་གཟུགས	the likeness of his previous life	srid pa snga ma'i gzugs
སྲིད་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན	in the world, having eliminated a well known cause, ornament showing the cung zad tsam gyi fruition of another less ell known outer or inner cause	srid pa can gyi rgyan
སྲིད་པ་ཅན་གྱི་རྒྱན་གཉིས	CHN	srid pa can gyi rgyan gnyis
སྲིད་པ་བཅུ་བཞི	CHN srid pa chags gnas 'jig stong bzhi'i yun the four periods of arising, existing, destruction, and emptiness of samsaric existence	srid pa bcu bzhi
སྲིད་པ་ཆགས་པ	created existence	srid pa chags pa
སྲིད་པ་ཆགས་པའི་ལྷ་དགུ	1) {'o de gung rgyal}. 2) {yar lha sham po} 3) {gnyan chen thang lha} 4) {rma chen spom ra} 5) {sgyogs chen gdong ra} 6) {sgom po lha rtse} 7) {zhog lha sgyug po} 8) {jo bo gyul rgyal} 9) {she'u mk...	srid pa chags pa'i lha dgu
སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་པར	as long as samsara lasts, until the end of becoming	srid pa ji srid par
སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་བར	until the end of becoming	srid pa ji srid bar
སྲིད་པ་འཇིག་པ	destruction of the world	srid pa 'jig pa
སྲིད་པ་འཇིགས	the god dbang phyug	srid pa 'jigs
སྲིད་པ་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ	srid pa'i chos mtha' dag bsdus pa nyi shu rtsa lnga ni gzhi chos nyer gcig/ lam gsum/ chos kyi dbyings	srid pa nyi shu rtsa lnga
སྲིད་པ་ཏྲ	astrological chart	srid pa tra
སྲིད་པ་སྟང་དབྱལ	progenitors of existence	srid pa stang dbyal
སྲིད་པ་ཐ་མ་པ	1 in their last samsaric life	srid pa tha ma pa
སྲིད་པ་མཐར་བྱེད	annihilator of samsara, buddha	srid pa mthar byed
སྲིད་པ་དང་ཞི་བ	Existence and quiescence	srid pa dang zhi ba
སྲིད་པ་བདུན	the 7 existences	srid pa bdun
སྲིད་པ་ལྡོག་པའི་ལམ	the path reversing/ eliminating samsara	srid pa ldog pa'i lam
སྲིད་པ་པ	single being, death	srid pa pa
སྲིད་པ་པ་སྲིད་པ་འཕོ་བའི་མདོ	sutra on the termination of worldly life	srid pa pa srid pa 'pho ba'i mdo
སྲིད་པ་སྤྱི་མདོས	ancient bon ritual text	srid pa spyi mdos
སྲིད་པ་སྤྱི་བླུགས	a sorcerer	srid pa spyi blugs
སྲིད་པ་སྤྱི་རིས	cross (probably)	srid pa spyi ris
སྲིད་པ་ཕོ་དགུ	nine primordial males, sa srid rje 'brang dkar, skos rje drang dkar, phywa rje ring dkar, lha rabs gnyan rum rje, thum thum rnal med rje, skyin dang ngar gyi rje, ye mkhyen 'phrul gyi rgyal, sa lha...	srid pa pho dgu
སྲིད་པ་ཕྱི་མ	following existence srid pa phyi ma mngon du 'grub pa rnam	srid pa phyi ma
ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཟས	the sustenance of consciousness actualizes that next life	shes kyi zas
སྲིད་པ་འཕོ་བ	n. of a sutra Bhavasamkranti	srid pa 'pho ba
སྲིད་པ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་ཇུ་ཐིག	ju thig that renders existence manifest	srid pa 'phrul gyi ju thig
སྲིད་པ་བར་དོ	intermediate state of (becoming, existence), intermediate period of existence	srid pa bar do
སྲིད་པ་བར་དོ་རྨི་ལམ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	the dream appearances of the bardo of becoming srid pa bar do'i skabs kyi ma nges pa'i	srid pa bar do rmi lam gyi snang ba
རྟགས་དྲུག	CHN 2819	rtags drug
སྲིད་པ་བར་དོའི་ཡིད་ལུས	the mental body of the bardo of becoming	srid pa bar do'i yid lus
སྲིད་པ་བར་མ	intermediate state between life and rebirth {bar [do'i] srid [pa]}	srid pa bar ma
བེལོང་ཏོ་ཐེ་ཅླསས་ཨོཕ༹་འསཅེནཏ	eaters'.	belong to the class of 'scent
སྲིད་པ་བར་མ་རྣམས	[beings in] the intermediate existence	srid pa bar ma rnams
སྲིད་པ་བྱེད་པོ	producer of samsara (met the female organ	srid pa byed po
སྲིད་པ་མ	the goddess Uma	srid pa ma
སྲིད་པ་མ་མོ	Universal Mother Deities	srid pa ma mo
སྲིད་པ་མིང་ཙམ	existence is only a name	srid pa ming tsam
སྲིད་པ་མིའུ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་གཞུང	tradition of the human generations of the origins of existence	srid pa mi'u rgyud kyi gzhung
སྲིད་པ་མིའུ་རྒྱུད་འབུམ	hundred thousand human generations of the origin of existence	srid pa mi'u rgyud 'bum
སྲིད་པ་མེད་པའི་སྲིད་པ	craving for nonbecoming, {srid pa gsum}; craving for (non-becoming, {srid pa gsum}	srid pa med pa'i srid pa
སྲིད་པ་མོ་དགུ	nine primordial females, SA gnam phyi gung rgyal, gnam sman dkar mo, smra ste mi mkhan ma mo, za ma stag mo, shed za na ma, dbal so rnon mo, ya sha 0hyug mo, phywa tshe'i rgyal mo, lha mo dkar mo	srid pa mo dgu
སྲིད་པ་བརྩེགས་པ	kacimbala tree srid pa tshol ba bar srid pa rnams la phan	srid pa brtsegs pa
སྲིད་པ་འཚོལ་བ	the bardo	srid pa 'tshol ba
སྲིད་པ་འཛིན	epithet of maheshvara	srid pa 'dzin
སྲིད་པ་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས་ཅན	sentient beings holding a samsaric existence	srid pa 'dzin pa'i sems can
སྲིད་པ་བཞི	1) the four kinds of birth; 2) the four kinds of existence	srid pa bzhi
སྲིད་པ་ཡོ་བཅོས་སྨོན་ལམ	multicolored rite called aspiration vow to restore the harmony of existence	srid pa yo bcos smon lam
སྲིད་པ་རུ་ལོག	to turn the world completely around	srid pa ru log
སྲིད་པ་ལ་སྐྲག་པ	fear of samsara	srid pa la skrag pa
སྲིད་པ་ལ་འདོད་པའི་སྲེད་པ	in {'dod khams}	srid pa la 'dod pa'i sred pa
སྲིད་པ་ལ་དབང་བྱེད་པར་བསྐོས་པ	astrologer with the authority to control the course of existence	srid pa la dbang byed par bskos pa
སྲིད་པ་ལ་མི་གནས་པའི་གཞི་ཤེས	know the ground/ topic of not dwelling in samsara	srid pa la mi gnas pa'i gzhi shes
སྲིད་པ་ལན་བདུན་པ	who will be reborn seven times at the most among gods and humans, {dge 'dun nyi shu}; one kind of rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas	srid pa lan bdun pa
སྲིད་པ་ལས་ཀྱི་བར་དོ	Karmic bardo of becoming. The period from emerging in a mental body until entering a womb at the moment of conception	srid pa las kyi bar do
སྲིད་པ་ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང	karmic wind of existence	srid pa las kyi rlung
སྲིད་པ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond samsaric existence	srid pa las 'das pa
སྲིད་པ་སད་པོ	B"n tulku {srid pa sad po	srid pa sad po
སྲིད་པ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག	the 31 realms of samsara	srid pa sum cu rtsa gcig
སྲིད་པ་གསས	officiant of the original lineage of existence	srid pa gsas
སྲིད་པ་གསུམ	three levels of existence, three states of conditioned existence; three types of becoming. three worlds, three spheres of existence. the three realms / three worlds of existence. Syn {khams gsum} s...	srid pa gsum
སྲིད་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ལྷ	the gods of the Three Realms	srid pa gsum gyi lha
སྲིད་པ་གསུམ་ན་འཁོར་ཞིང	spinning through the three levels of existence	srid pa gsum na 'khor zhing
སྲིད་པ་ཧོ	tangka w spar kha brgyad, sme ba dgu etc, ho	srid pa ho
སྲིད་པའི	. . . of conditioned existence; cosmic (in certain cases)	srid pa'i
སྲིད་པའི་སྐྱོན་གྱི་མ་གོས	untainted by the shortcomings of samsaric existence	srid pa'i skyon gyi ma gos
སྲིད་པའི་ཁོལ་པོ་དག	slaves of existence	srid pa'i khol po dag
སྲིད་པའི་ཁྲག་སྣ	bcu gsum thirteen types of blood of existence	srid pa'i khrag sna
སྲིད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	Wheel of Life / Becoming, spinning wheel of existence, wheel of life, center of existence connected with the navel. pictorial representation of samsara as a wheel with the three poisons at the hub,...	srid pa'i 'khor lo
སྲིད་པའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	the spinning wheel of existence	srid pa'i 'khrul 'khor
སྲིད་པའི་གངས་རྒན	srid pa'i snow mt.	srid pa'i gangs rgan
སྲིད་པའི་གངས་རི	eternal/ universal snow mt.	srid pa'i gangs ri
སྲིད་པའི་གྲོལ་ཕུག	myth of the origin of existence, myth which describes the origin of existence	srid pa'i grol phug
སྲིད་པའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ	ocean of existence	srid pa'i rgya mtsho
སྲིད་པའི་རྒྱུན	stream of becoming. Syn samsara	srid pa'i rgyun
སྲིད་པའི་སྒོ་ང	cosmic egg	srid pa'i sgo nga
སྲིད་པའི་སྒོང་ང	cosmic egg, cosmic eggs	srid pa'i sgong nga
སྲིད་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	light of existence 2820	srid pa'i sgron me
སྲིད་པའི་ངན་འགྲོ་འཇོམས་ནུས	was able to triumph over all unfavourable states of existence	srid pa'i ngan 'gro 'joms nus
སྲིད་པའི་ལྕམ་དྲལ	forebears of mankind	srid pa'i lcam dral
སྲིད་པའི་ལྕམ་དྲལ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	eighteen brothers and sisters	srid pa'i lcam dral bco brgyad
སྲིད་པའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང	single being	srid pa'i chu klung
སྲིད་པའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཆེན་པོ	great stream of existence	srid pa'i chu klung chen po
སྲིད་པའི་ཆུ་བོ	river of srid pa	srid pa'i chu bo
སྲིད་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	natural laws of existence	srid pa'i chos nyid
སྲིད་པའི་འཆིང་བ	bond of becoming, attachment to the Formless Realm	srid pa'i 'ching ba
སྲིད་པའི་རྗེ	king of existence, king of existence	srid pa'i rje
སྲིད་པའི་གཏོ	original rite, gto of existence	srid pa'i gto
སྲིད་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent-related existence	srid pa'i rten 'brel
སྲིད་པའི་དུག་ཡས་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen poisons of existence	srid pa'i dug yas bcu gsum
སྲིད་པའི་དྲྭ་བ	the web/ net of existence	srid pa'i drwa ba
སྲིད་པའི་གདོན	d"ns of samsara	srid pa'i gdon
སྲིད་པའི་བདག་པོ	yama, lord of existence	srid pa'i bdag po
སྲིད་པའི་བདེ་བ	samsaric happiness	srid pa'i bde ba
སྲིད་པའི་བདེ་འབྱོར	worldly pleasure and wealth	srid pa'i bde 'byor
སྲིད་པའི་འདོད་ཆགས	attachment of existence/ to becoming	srid pa'i 'dod chags
སྲིད་པའི་འདྲེ་དགུ	CHN	srid pa'i 'dre dgu
སྲིད་པའི་དཔག་བསམ	Wishes of Existence, reading in lde'u 'phrul	srid pa'i dpag bsam
སྲིད་པའི་དཔེ	archetypal events	srid pa'i dpe
སྲིད་པའི་སྤོས་སྣ་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen incenses of existence srid pa'i spyod tshul 'di dag smyon pa'i gar	srid pa'i spos sna bcu gsum
སྲིད་པའི་བར་དོ	the bardo of becoming; lit. def. Jamgön Kongtrül: {'khrul snang ci'ang srid pa'i bar do} the bardo of becoming where any deluded experience is possible	srid pa'i bar do
སྲིད་པའི་བྱེ་མ	1) lugs par bzo byed kyi bye ma; 2) heap of sand from former times	srid pa'i bye ma
སྲིད་པའི་འབྱོར་བ	bond of becoming	srid pa'i 'byor ba
སྲིད་པའི་རྦ་རླབས	flood of becoming	srid pa'i rba rlabs
སྲིད་པའི་མ་མོ	the cosmic mamos	srid pa'i ma mo
སྲིད་པའི་མིག	eye of existence, the sun	srid pa'i mig
སྲིད་པའི་སྨྲང	proclamation of the origin of existence	srid pa'i smrang
སྲིད་པའི་ཙ་ཀྲ	the wheel of life	srid pa'i tsa kra
སྲིད་པའི་བཙོན་ར	the prison of samsara	srid pa'i btson ra
སྲིད་པའི་རྩ	root of samsara	srid pa'i rtsa
སྲིད་པའི་རྩ་བ	the root of samsara	srid pa'i rtsa ba
སྲིད་པའི་རྩ་བ་ཕྲ་རྒྱས་དྲུག	[Tse]	srid pa'i rtsa ba phra rgyas drug
སྲིད་པའི་རྩ་བོ་ཆེ་རྣམ་བཞི	the four great roots of samsara	srid pa'i rtsa bo che rnam bzhi
སྲིད་པའི་རྩེ	pinnacle [or summit] of existence	srid pa'i rtse
སྲིད་པའི་རྩེ་མོ	the peak / pinnacle of existence, pinnacle state of conditioned existence. Syn {yod min med min skye mched} [the highest of the formless realms]	srid pa'i rtse mo
སྲིད་པའི་རྩེ་མོའི་རྟེན	the support of the pinnacle of existence	srid pa'i rtse mo'i rten
སྲིད་པའི་རྩེ་མོར	in the peak/ pinnacle of existence	srid pa'i rtse mor
སྲིད་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད	the nature of becoming	srid pa'i mtshan nyid
སྲིད་པའི་མཚོ	ocean of existence	srid pa'i mtsho
སྲིད་པའི་མཚོན་ཆ་སྣ་དགུ	nine arms of existence	srid pa'i mtshon cha sna dgu
སྲིད་པའི་མཛོད་ཕུག	text which expounds principles of Bon cosmogony and metaphysics, Treasure of Existence, text on bon cosmogony & metaphysics, Treasury of the Origin of Existence	srid pa'i mdzod phug
སྲིད་པའི་རྫས་སྣ་བཅུ་གསུམ	thirteen substances of existence	srid pa'i rdzas sna bcu gsum
སྲིད་པའི་གཞུང	original ritual tradition	srid pa'i gzhung
སྲིད་པའི་ཟག་པ	the corruption/ defilement of rebirth/ becoming/ existence	srid pa'i zag pa
སྲིད་པའི་ཟླ་བ	9th month w sun in Libra	srid pa'i zla ba
སྲིད་པའི་ཡན་ལག	factor of becoming [link of dependent arising, any of the twelve]; link of becoming	srid pa'i yan lag
སྲིད་པའི་ཡན་ལག་གི་བག་ཆགས	habitual patterns of the limbs of samsara	srid pa'i yan lag gi bag chags
སྲིད་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	affairs of the world	srid pa'i yo byad
སྲིད་པའི་ར་བ་བྲལ	were free from the wall of samsaric existence	srid pa'i ra ba bral
སྲིད་པའི་རིམ་པ་གསུམ	three stages of existence	srid pa'i rim pa gsum
སྲིད་པའི་ལམ	the road to samsara, vagina	srid pa'i lam
སྲིད་པའི་ལས་ཁུངས	administrative office	srid pa'i las khungs
སྲིད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད	actions/ enjoyments of samsara	srid pa'i longs spyod
སྲིད་པའི་ས་བདག་ཐུར་སེལ	exorcism downwards of the sa bdag of existence	srid pa'i sa bdag thur sel
སྲིད་པའི་སྲིད་པ	craving for becoming	srid pa'i srid pa
སྲིད་པའི་སྲེད་པ	in {khams gong ma gnyis}	srid pa'i sred pa
སྲིད་པའི་ལྷ་མོ	deity of existence 2821	srid pa'i lha mo
སྲིད་པར	in extension, in samsara	srid par
སྲིད་པར་འཁྱམས	roaming about in samsara occurs	srid par 'khyams
སྲིད་ཕྱོགས	secular	srid phyogs
སྲིད་འཕོ་ཚུལ	TSE	srid 'pho tshul
སྲིད་བོན	a bon po who specialized in rites for the continuation and increase of generations	srid bon
སྲིད་བོན་མུ་ཆོ	bon of the generations	srid bon mu cho
སྲིད་བྱུས	policy	srid byus
སྲིད་བྱུས་སྐྱོང་ཕྱོགས	[way of] government plan, strategy, policy	srid byus skyong phyogs
སྲིད་བྱུས་སྐྱོང་བ	be used for political ends	srid byus skyong ba
སྲིད་བྱུས་གཏོང	work out a strategy/ policy	srid byus gtong
སྲིད་བྱུས་ལག་ལེན་བྱེད	put a governmental strategy/ plan/ policy into practice	srid byus lag len byed
སྲིད་བྱེད	rule, govern, reign	srid byed
སྲིད་བྱེད་པ	reign, govern	srid byed pa
སྲིད་བློན	(MG) prime minister [mss]	srid blon
སྲིད་དབང	political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang
སྲིད་དབང་སྒེར་གཅོད	dictatorship, despotism, autocracy	srid dbang sger gcod
སྲིད་དབང་སྒེར་གཅོད་ལམ་ལུགས	dictatorial/ despotic, autocratic system	srid dbang sger gcod lam lugs
སྲིད་དབང་སྒེར་འཛིན	dictatorship, despotism, autocracy	srid dbang sger 'dzin
སྲིད་དབང་སྒེར་འཛིན་ལམ་ལུགས	dictatorial/ despotic, autocratic system	srid dbang sger 'dzin lam lugs
སྲིད་དབང་རྙིང་པ	old regime	srid dbang rnying pa
སྲིད་དབང་བྱེད	hold political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang byed
སྲིད་དབང་བྱེད་པ	hold political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang byed pa
སྲིད་དབང་འཛིན	hold political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang 'dzin
སྲིད་དབང་འཛིན་མཁན	holder of political rule/ power/ authority srid dbang 'dzin mkhan gyi tshogs pa party holding political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang 'dzin mkhan
སྲིད་དབང་འཛིན་མཁན་ལས་ཁུངས	organs of political power	srid dbang 'dzin mkhan las khungs
སྲིད་དབང་འཛིན་པ	hold[er of] political rule/ power/ authority	srid dbang 'dzin pa
སྲིད་དབང་འཛུགས་ལུགས	political form/ system	srid dbang 'dzugs lugs
སྲིད་དབང་རྫུས་མ	puppet government	srid dbang rdzus ma
སྲིད་འབྱོར	celebrated 7th cent. AD sanskrit poet	srid 'byor
སྲིད་སྦྱིན	gift of existence	srid sbyin
སྲིད་མིན་གྱི་དཔེ	impossible example	srid min gyi dpe
སྲིད་རྩ	the root of existence / becoming	srid rtsa
སྲིད་རྩེ	summit of existence, peak of existence; pinnacle of existence; peak existence [level], the summit of the world, the pinnacle of cyclic existence, {srid pa'i rtse mo}	srid rtse
སྲིད་རྩེ་མཐར་ཐུག་འགྲོ	the highest sphere of phenomenal existence srid rtse la snyoms par zhugs pa'i 'du shes - conception of the equilibrium at the summit of existence, equilibrium at the summit of existence, conception...	srid rtse mthar thug 'gro
སྲིད་རྩེའི་གཉེན་པོ	antidote of? for? the ultimate pinnacle of samsara	srid rtse'i gnyen po
སྲིད་རྩེའི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	samadhi of the peak of samsara	srid rtse'i snyoms 'jug
སྲིད་རྩེའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	contemplation/ samadhi of the pinnacle of existence	srid rtse'i ting nge 'dzin
སྲིད་རྩེའི་རྟེན	support which is the pinnacle of samsara	srid rtse'i rten
སྲིད་རྩེའི་མཐར་ཐུག	ultimate pinnacle of samsara	srid rtse'i mthar thug
སྲིད་རྩེའི་མཐར་ཐུག་པར་འགྲོ་བ	go to the ultimate pinnacle of samsara	srid rtse'i mthar thug par 'gro ba
སྲིད་རྩེའི་འོག་མིན	the Akanishtha realm at the summit of cyclic existence [the highest form realm]	srid rtse'i 'og min
སྲིད་རྩེའི་སེམས	state of mind of the summit of existence	srid rtse'i sems
སྲིད་ཚབ	regent	srid tshab
སྲིད་ཚོགས	political party/ clique/ faction	srid tshogs
སྲིད་ཚོང་པ	politician	srid tshong pa
སྲིད་འཚོ་བ	pass life, continue in a state, exist, rule justly	srid 'tsho ba
སྲིད་འཚོང་པ	politician	srid 'tshong pa
སྲིད་འཚོལ་མཁན་སོགས	the search party	srid 'tshol mkhan sogs
སྲིད་འཛིན	president, president, president	srid 'dzin
སྲིད་འཛིན་ཐིག་གི	administrative	srid 'dzin thig gi
སྲིད་འཛིན་ཐིག་གི་བཀའ་འབེབས	administrative order/ decree	srid 'dzin thig gi bka' 'bebs
སྲིད་འཛིན་ཐིག་གི་ཆད་གཅོད	administrative measure	srid 'dzin thig gi chad gcod
སྲིད་འཛིན་ཐིག་གི་བྱེད་ཐབས	administrative action	srid 'dzin thig gi byed thabs
སྲིད་འཛིན་ཕྱག་རོགས	vice-president	srid 'dzin phyag rogs
སྲིད་འཛིན་བྱེད	to serve as president, to rule	srid 'dzin byed
སྲིད་འཛིན་མི་སྣ	executive/ administrative personnel	srid 'dzin mi sna
སྲིད་འཛིན་གཞོན་པ	vice president	srid 'dzin gzhon pa
སྲིད་འཛིན་འོག་མ	vice president	srid 'dzin 'og ma
སྲིད་འཛིན་ས་ཁུལ	administrative district	srid 'dzin sa khul
སྲིད་འཛིན་ས་ཁོངས	administrative district	srid 'dzin sa khongs
སྲིད་ཞི	conditioned existence and the state of peace (=samsara and nirvana); isc. the material world and that of the spirit	srid zhi
སྲིད་ཞི་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not dwelling in the extremes of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi gnyis kyi mtha' la mi gnas pa
སྲིད་ཞི་མཉམ་ཉིད	=ity of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi mnyam nyid
སྲིད་ཞི་མཉམ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	practice of the =ity of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi mnyam nyid kyi sbyor ba
སྲིད་ཞི་མཉམ་ཉིད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ	realization of the =ity of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi mnyam nyid du rtogs pa
སྲིད་ཞི་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད	=ity of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi mnyam pa nyid
སྲིད་ཞིའི་འཆིང་བ་ལས་གྲོལ་བ	liberation from the bonds of samsara and nirvana srid zhi'i mtha' gnyis la mi gnas pa'i myang 'das - nirvana not dwelling in the extremes of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi'i 'ching ba las grol ba
སྲིད་ཞིའི་མཐའ་ལ་མི་གནས་པ	not remaining / dwelling in the extremes of existence or quiescence (samsara or nirvana) srid zhi'i mtha' la mi gnas pa'i mya ngan	srid zhi'i mtha' la mi gnas pa
སྲིད་ཞིའི་མཐར	the extremes of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi'i mthar
སྲིད་ཞིའི་མཐར་མི་གནས	not dwelling in the extremes of samsara and nirvana	srid zhi'i mthar mi gnas
སྲིད་ཞིའི་བདེ་སྐྱིད	1) the happiness of samsara and nirvana; 2) Tibetan govt bka' shag gi las tham lte ba'i kha ris kyi tshig gzhi; 3) kind of good kata	srid zhi'i bde skyid
སྲིད་ཞིར་མངོན་པར་ཞེན་པ	attachment to samsara and nirvana	srid zhir mngon par zhen pa
སྲིད་ཞིར་གཉིས	samsara and nirvana 2822 srid zhir mi gnas myang 'das mchod rten nirvana stupa of not abiding in samsara or nirvana	srid zhir gnyis
སྲིད་ཞུ	praise, service	srid zhu
སྲིད་ཞེང	width and height, total height	srid zheng
སྲིད་གཞུང	government, government	srid gzhung
སྲིད་གཞུང་མེད་པའི་གནས་ཚུལ	situation of anarchy	srid gzhung med pa'i gnas tshul
སྲིད་གཞུང་མེད་པའི་རིང་ལུགས	anarchy	srid gzhung med pa'i ring lugs
སྲིད་གཞུང་ལས་དྲུང	Secretary of State	srid gzhung las drung
སྲིད་ཟུར	ex-prime minister srid yul mtshan ma rnam par mi rtog pa not conceptualize the objects/ sphere and characteristics of samsara	srid zur
སྲིད་རིང	long	srid ring
སྲིད་རུང་བ	probable	srid rung ba
སྲིད་ལ་མ་འཆམ་པས	falling out with one another about the government	srid la ma 'cham pas
སྲིད་ལ་མི་འཆམ	not agreeing about the government	srid la mi 'cham
སྲིད་ལ་མི་གནས	you will not dwell in samsara	srid la mi gnas
སྲིད་ལས་གྲོལ	liberation from existence	srid las grol
སྲིད་ལུགས	from/ system of government	srid lugs
སྲིད་ལོ	by former kings srid skyong ba'i lo ming	srid lo
སྲིད་གཤེན	Shen of existence	srid gshen
སྲིད་གཤེན་ཐེག་པ	Way of the Shen of Existence, way of the shen of existence, 1 of rgyu'i bon	srid gshen theg pa
སྲིད་སྲིད	existence initial desire	srid srid
སྲིད་སྲུང	Atharva veda	srid srung
སྲིད་སྲུང་གི་རིག་བྱེད	atharva veda	srid srung gi rig byed
སྲིད་སྲུང་འཛིན	deity dbang phyug	srid srung 'dzin
སྲིད་སྲུངས	priest versed in the atharva veda	srid srungs
སྲིད་སྲེད	existence initial desire	srid sred
སྲིད་གསུམ	the three worlds/realms	srid gsum
སྲིད་གསུམ་མགོན	protector of the three existences	srid gsum mgon
སྲིད་གསུམ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	victorious over the three worlds, leopard	srid gsum rnam rgyal
སྲིད་བསྲུང	1 of rig byed bzhi	srid bsrung
སྲིན	barbarous, savage; vampire, worm. Syn {'bu}	srin
སྲིན་ཀླད	disease in which worms grow in the brains, sort of flint stone	srin klad
སྲིན་སྐུད	silk thread	srin skud
སྲིན་སྐྲན	pho ba dang long ga'i gnas su swelling from ball of worms and mucus	srin skran
སྲིན་ཁུང	1) depression at the temples; 2) bug's nest	srin khung
སྲིན་གོང	silkworm cocoon	srin gong
སྲིན་གྱི་མེ	1) spider-like poisonous creature w fatal bite; 2) firefly	srin gyi me
སྲིན་གླང	having the staggers of horses, being mad	srin glang
སྲིན་གླིང	cannibal island	srin gling
སྲིན་ཅན	bamboo tree	srin can
སྲིན་འཇོམས	med. for srin nad, or that kills insects etc	srin 'joms
སྲིན་ཐོར	skin disease	srin thor
སྲིན་ནད	worm/ [insect] disease	srin nad
སྲིན་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the raksasa	srin pa'i rgyal po
སྲིན་པོ	bloodthirsty demon	srin po
སྲིན་པོ་ཁྲོས་པ	wrathful rakshasa	srin po khros pa
སྲིན་པོ་གཉའ་རིང	name of square in lde'u 'phrul	srin po gnya' ring
སྲིན་པོ་དབང	king of the rakshasas	srin po dbang
སྲིན་པོ་མིག་དམར	red-eyed sea monsters	srin po mig dmar
སྲིན་པོ་མིར་བརྫུས	rakshasa pretending to be a man	srin po mir brdzus
སྲིན་པོ་ལང་ཀ་མགྲིན་བཅུ	rakshasa lang ka mgrin bcu	srin po lang ka mgrin bcu
གདོན་ངན	this brahmin is a demon in disguise	gdon ngan
སྲིན་པོའི་མཁར་མདོས	mdos castle of the srin po constructed to appease the srin po and gnod sbyin	srin po'i mkhar mdos
སྲིན་པོའི་གླིང	the Land of rakshasas	srin po'i gling
སྲིན་པོའི་འགྲོས	the 'gait of a rakshasa'	srin po'i 'gros
སྲིན་པོའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	cannibal demon king	srin po'i rgyal po
སྲིན་པོའི་གདོན	fearful gdon, evil spirit	srin po'i gdon
སྲིན་པོར་རྫུ་བ	change into a srin po	srin por rdzu ba
སྲིན་ཕོལ	phol mig disease lesion w worms	srin phol
སྲིན་ཕྲན་མ	ant	srin phran ma
སྲིན་བ	craving	srin ba
སྲིན་བལ	cotton, flock-silk, raw silk, cotton wool	srin bal
སྲིན་བལ་ཅན	sewing thread	srin bal can
སྲིན་བལ་སྟན་གྱི་སྤང་བ	abandonment offense of silk seats	srin bal stan gyi spang ba
སྲིན་བལ་བར་འཚང་གི་སྟོད་ཐུང	cottonpadded coat	srin bal bar 'tshang gi stod thung
སྲིན་བལ་འབྲུ་ལེན་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	gin (machine)	srin bal 'bru len 'phrul 'khor
སྲིན་བལ་གསེད་པ	fluff (cotton)	srin bal gsed pa
སྲིན་བལ་གསེད་མ	cotton fiber	srin bal gsed ma
སྲིན་བུ	1) insect, worm etc; 2) Raksasa, 49th year of {rab byung}= {shing mo yos}	srin bu
སྲིན་བུ་ཀྭ་ཀྭ	maggot-worm	srin bu kwa kwa
སྲིན་བུ་གླང་འཐབ	{srin bu glang 'thab} disease [R]	srin bu glang 'thab
སྲིན་བུ་མགོ་སྔོན	blue-headed worms 2823	srin bu mgo sngon
སྲིན་བུ་མགོ་རྡེབས	flat-headed worm	srin bu mgo rdebs
སྲིན་བུ་མགོ་དམར	redheaded worm	srin bu mgo dmar
སྲིན་བུ་འགུལ	season from the beginning of the 2nd month [R]	srin bu 'gul
སྲིན་བུ་མཆུ་རིང	mosquito	srin bu mchu ring
སྲིན་བུ་འཇོམས	light	srin bu 'joms
སྲིན་བུ་དོ་ལོག	centipede; caterpillar	srin bu do log
སྲིན་བུ་ལྡན་བུ	[arch] firefly	srin bu ldan bu
སྲིན་བུ་པད་མ	leech	srin bu pad ma
སྲིན་བུ་ཕྱེ་བོ	dust-worm	srin bu phye bo
སྲིན་བུ་མིར་ཁི	small brain worm causing a disease w fainting and severe headache	srin bu mir khi
སྲིན་བུ་མེ་ཁྱེར	firefly srin bu me khyer nyi 'od la 'gran pa bzhin like a firefly light competing with the sun light	srin bu me khyer
སྲིན་བུ་དམར་ལེབ	tree butea frondosa	srin bu dmar leb
སྲིན་བུ་ཚེར་མ	horned scorpion	srin bu tsher ma
སྲིན་བུ་ལངས་པའི་མོ་ནད	feminine illnesses caused by insects/ worms	srin bu langs pa'i mo nad
སྲིན་བུའི་སྒོ	anus	srin bu'i sgo
སྲིན་བུའི་ནད	disease caused by worms in the stomach or skin or brains	srin bu'i nad
སྲིན་བུའི་མེ་འོད་འཕྲོ	light radiating from a freely	srin bu'i me 'od 'phro
སྲིན་བྱ	screech owl; {'ug pa}	srin bya
དེམོན	bird, nocturnal bird, owl	demon
སྲིན་འབུ	worm, caterpillar, bacteria	srin 'bu
སྲིན་འབུ་གླང་འཐབ	{srin bu glang 'thab} disease [R]	srin 'bu glang 'thab
སྲིན་འབུ་ལྡན་བུ	[arch] firefly	srin 'bu ldan bu
སྲིན་འབུ་པད་མ	leech	srin 'bu pad ma
སྲིན་འབུ་མིར་ཁི	small brain worm causing a disease w fainting and severe headache	srin 'bu mir khi
སྲིན་འབུ་མེ་ཁྱེར	firefly	srin 'bu me khyer
སྲིན་འབུ་དམར་ལེབ	= ma ru rtse fruit	srin 'bu dmar leb
སྲིན་འབུ་ཚེར་མ	horned scorpion	srin 'bu tsher ma
སྲིན་འབུ་ལངས་པའི་མོ་ནད	feminine illnesses caused by insects/ worms	srin 'bu langs pa'i mo nad
སྲིན་འབུའི་དུག	animal poison from {srin bu aa lang ka} etc	srin 'bu'i dug
སྲིན་འབུའི་ནད་བདུན	CHN	srin 'bu'i nad bdun
སྲིན་འབུའི་སྦུབས	cocoon of silkworms etc	srin 'bu'i sbubs
སྲིན་འབུའི་རི	ant hill	srin 'bu'i ri
སྲིན་འབྲུ	mulberry	srin 'bru
སྲིན་མེད	anabhraka (4th dhyana)	srin med
སྲིན་མོ	Rakshasis, female spirits subdued by Guru Padmasambhava	srin mo
སྲིན་མོ་ཁྱི་གདོང	dog-headed Raksasi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	srin mo khyi gdong
སྲིན་མོ་ཁྱིའི་མགོ	red dog-headed raksasi demoness	srin mo khyi'i mgo
སྲིན་མོ་ཁྲག་ལ་རོལ་པ	witches revelling in blood	srin mo khrag la rol pa
སྲིན་མོ་གན་རྐྱལ	supine rakshasa	srin mo gan rkyal
སྲིན་མོ་མཆེ་བ	wild boar, monster with huge teeth	srin mo mche ba
སྲིན་མོ་སྟག་གདོང	tiger-headed Raksasi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	srin mo stag gdong
སྲིན་མོ་ཕྱག་ཞོན་མ	name of square in lde'u 'phrul	srin mo phyag zhon ma
སྲིན་མོ་སྨུག་ནག་གྱག་མགོ་མ	Raksasi,	srin mo smug nag gyag mgo ma
སྲིན་མོ་མཚན་མོ	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo srin mo g.yag gdong - yak-headed Raksasi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad srin mo g.yengs byed - 1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	srin mo mtshan mo
སྲིན་མོ་སེར་ནག་སྟག་གི་མགོ	Raksasi, dark yellow demoness with the head of a tiger, {dbang phyug ma}	srin mo ser nag stag gi mgo
སྲིན་མོ་སོ་ཅན	1 of srin mo'i gtso mo	srin mo so can
སྲིན་མོ་ལྷ་ཁང	{srin mo lha khang	srin mo lha khang
སྲིན་མོང་མགོ	Syn {gtogs 'dod} mongoose-head, {dbang phyug ma}	srin mong mgo
སྲིན་མོའི་གླིང	island of cannibals/rakshasas	srin mo'i gling
སྲིན་མོའི་གཙོ་མོ	raksasa princess	srin mo'i gtso mo
སྲིན་མོའི་ཟ་ལམ	feeding pathway of the rakshasa; is the name for the location which is 70 steps towards the north or east.	srin mo'i za lam
སྲིན་ཚང	1) between and ear depressed place = temples; 2) insect nest	srin tshang
སྲིན་མཛུབ	from the thumb the 4th finger = ming med	srin mdzub
སྲིན་ཞལ	face of a wrathful rakshasa	srin zhal
སྲིན་ཟམ	bridge between two buildings	srin zam
སྲིན་ཡུལ	the country of the ogres, the Rakshasas' land; the Rakshasa Land. Syn {srin po'i gling, rnga yab gling}	srin yul
སྲིན་རིགས	[11 kinds of] body insects/ worms	srin rigs
སྲིན་ལག	ring-finger	srin lag
སྲིན་ལག་རྒྱབ་རྩ	from the root joint of the ring finger in the direction of the wrist measuring a tshon gang bleeding nadi srin lag g.yas - right ring finger	srin lag rgyab rtsa
སྲིན་ལད	middle finger	srin lad
སྲིན་ལོང	left intestines	srin long
སྲིན་ཤིང	mulberry tree	srin shing
སྲིན་ཤིང་དར་འབུ	silk worm	srin shing dar 'bu
སྲིན་ཤིང་སྣ་མ	daphne tangutica maxim.	srin shing sna ma
སྲིབ	Das: 1) darkness, gloom, night. 2) shady side of a high mountain, north side of a mountain. [mss]	srib
སྲིབ་སྐྱིད་ལ	srib skyid pass	srib skyid la
སྲིབ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ	king, Tibetan king	srib khri btsan po
སྲིབ་གཅིག་ལ	in one moment	srib gcig la
སྲིབ་ནག	1) black shadow; 2) srib ri nag chag ger yod pa	srib nag
སྲིབ་ནགས	forest where the sun does not shine	srib nags
སྲིབ་ནད	sib bi'i na tsha	srib nad
སྲིབ་པ	{srib pa, srib pa, srib pa} intr. v	srib pa
སྲིབ་ཙམ	little, little while, moment, about a moment	srib tsam
སྲིབ་ཚལ	forest where the sun does not shine	srib tshal
སྲིབ་རི	mt not shone on by the sun	srib ri
སྲིབ་ལུང	valley where the sun does not penetrate	srib lung
སྲིབས	dark, dim, w no sunshine	sribs
སྲིབས་པ	shaded, SA srib pa	sribs pa
སྲིའི་རྒྱ་ཕིབས	one of bsam yas's great gilt domes	sri'i rgya phibs
སྲིའི་བཅུད	flower, lotus, virtue, nutriment of scent, smell, substances like camphor and assafoetida	sri'i bcud
སྲིའི་ཆུ	a tributary of the tsangpo river	sri'i chu
སྲིའུ	infant [death]	sri'u
སྲིའུ་ནག	mulberry tree	sri'u nag
སྲིལ	'bu mug pa,	sril
སྲིས	sri ba!	sris
སྲིས་རྒྱ	red pigment for pictures of flowers	sris rgya
སྲུ	aunt [maternal]	sru
སྲུ་བ	pour	sru ba
སྲུ་མོ	aunt [maternal]	sru mo
སྲུག་པ	shake, shake out, stir, stir up, twirl, make to totter, SA sprug pa, srub pa, dkrug pa	srug pa
སྲུང	keep [in mind], protect[ion], observe	srung
སྲུང་སྐར	artificial satellite	srung skar
སྲུང་སྐར་གཏོང	launch an artificial satellite	srung skar gtong
སྲུང་སྐུད	amulet consisting of enchanted threads	srung skud
སྲུང་སྐྱེལ	escort, accompany on the road to protect from harm	srung skyel
སྲུང་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད	escort, accompany on the road to protect from harm	srung skyel byed
སྲུང་སྐྱེལ་བྱེད་པ	escort, accompany on the road to protect from harm	srung skyel byed pa
སྲུང་སྐྱེས	the vajra of Indra	srung skyes
སྲུང་སྐྱོང	tutelary, protection	srung skyong
སྲུང་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	defend, protect, safeguard	srung skyong byed
སྲུང་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	defend, protect, safeguard	srung skyong byed pa
སྲུང་སྐྱོང་འོག	tutelage	srung skyong 'og
སྲུང་སྐྱོངས་བྱེད་པ	protect	srung skyongs byed pa
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ	defend, guard and protect, safeguard, defend	srung skyob
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ཀྱི	defensive	srung skyob kyi
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ཀྱི་དྲུང་ཆེ	Minister of Defense [US]	srung skyob kyi drung che
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁབ	Minister of Defense	srung skyob kyi spyi khab
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ཀྱི་བློན་ཆེན	Minister of Defense	srung skyob kyi blon chen
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་པ	guardian	srung skyob pa
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་སྤྱི་ཁབ	Minister of Defense	srung skyob spyi khab
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	defend, guard and protect, safeguard	srung skyob byed
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད་མཁན	defender, guardian and protector, safeguarder	srung skyob byed mkhan
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད་པ	defend, safeguard	srung skyob byed pa
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་བློན་ཆེན	defense minister	srung skyob blon chen
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་དམག་འཐབ	defensive war	srung skyob dmag 'thab
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ལས་ཁུངས	defense ministry	srung skyob las khungs
སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་ལྷན་ཁང	UN Security Council	srung skyob lhan khang
སྲུང་སྐྱོབས	help and assist	srung skyobs
སྲུང་མཁན	keeper, guardian, watchman, warden	srung mkhan
སྲུང་མཁར	watch-tower	srung mkhar
སྲུང་འཁོར	protection circle; yantra	srung 'khor
སྲུང་འཁོར་བསྒོམ་པ	meditate on the protection circle	srung 'khor bsgom pa
སྲུང་འཁོར་བ	mantrika, mantra holder	srung 'khor ba
སྲུང་འཁོར་མཛད	set up a boundary of protection	srung 'khor mdzad
སྲུང་འགེབས	give [protection, shielding, covering], harbor, cover up	srung 'gebs
སྲུང་འགེབས་བྱེད	give [protection, shielding, covering], harbor, cover up	srung 'gebs byed
སྲུང་འགེབས་བྱེད་པ	give [protection, shielding, covering], harbor, cover up	srung 'gebs byed pa
སྲུང་འགོག	guard 1's own place and stop enemies srung rta'i 'phung sri bsgyur ba'i sha ba deer that diverts the destroyer sri away from the protective horse	srung 'gog
སྲུང་ཐབས་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	TSE	srung thabs yan lag lnga
སྲུང་མདུད	protection cord, amulet of string / thread	srung mdud
སྲུང་འདོམས	so that there will be no faults and transgressions guard/ restrain and 'doms [admonish, choose]	srung 'doms
སྲུང་སྡོམ	not going against one's promise/ vow keep it	srung sdom
སྲུང་པོ	guardian	srung po
སྲུང་བ	watch, guard, guard against, keep, keep in custody, save from, protect, shelter, be cautious, observe, hinder, forbid, prohibit, person who guards, cover, defend, fend, deity shield, talisman, vigi...	srung ba
སྲུང་བ་བཏགས་པ	suspend an amulet	srung ba btags pa
སྲུང་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས	various protective means	srung ba sna tshogs
སྲུང་བ་པ	kasyapiyas, guard, keeper	srung ba pa
སྲུང་བ་པའི་སྡེ	[one of the mang bkur sde ba gsum]	srung ba pa'i sde
སྲུང་བ་པོ	1) guard[ian]; 2) rakshasa	srung ba po
སྲུང་བ་བྱེད	1 (Tha dad pa bsrungs pa, bsrung ba, srungs,, 1) protect, guard, defend, keep safe; 2) stop/ prevent harm; 3) have respect for, keep	srung ba byed
སྲུང་བའི་འཁོར་ལོ	protection circle	srung ba'i 'khor lo
སྲུང་བར་བྱེད	to keep control	srung bar byed
སྲུང་བུ	guardian	srung bu
སྲུང་བུམ	vase of protection	srung bum
སྲུང་བྱ	regulations, what is to be kept/ protected	srung bya
སྲུང་བྱེད	city of avanti, demigod, custodian of treasures	srung byed
སྲུང་བྱེད་ཁ་དོག	protective coloration	srung byed kha dog
སྲུང་བྱེད་ཅན	dbang phyug chen po	srung byed can
སྲུང་བྱེད་མ	night	srung byed ma
སྲུང་མ	[dharma] protectors/ guardian [divinities]	srung ma
སྲུང་མ་ཁང	protector shrine house	srung ma khang
སྲུང་མ་ཅན	queen's palace	srung ma can
སྲུང་མ་མཆོད་པ	to make offerings to the protectors	srung ma mchod pa
སྲུང་མའི་བསྐང་གསོ	ceremony for one's guardian deity	srung ma'i bskang gso
སྲུང་དམག	bodyguards, bodyguard troops, defending troops	srung dmag
སྲུང་དམག་བཀྲམ	deploy guard [soldiers]/ defending troops	srung dmag bkram
སྲུང་དམག་ཕྱིར་འཐེན	remove guard [soldiers]/ defending troops	srung dmag phyir 'then
སྲུང་དམག་དམར་པོ	red guards	srung dmag dmar po
སྲུང་དམག་རུ་ཁག	corps of guards	srung dmag ru khag
སྲུང་བརྩི	adhere/ respect/ honor/ keep [rules/ laws etc.]	srung brtsi
སྲུང་བརྩི་བྱེད	adhere/ respect/ honor/ keep [rules/ laws etc.]	srung brtsi byed
སྲུང་བརྩི་བྱེད་པ	adhere/ respect/ honor/ keep [rules/ laws etc.]	srung brtsi byed pa
སྲུང་བརྩི་ཞུ	adhere/ respect/ honor/ keep [rules/ laws etc.]	srung brtsi zhu
སྲུང་བརྩི་ཞུ་བ	adhere/ respect/ honor/ keep [rules/ laws etc.]	srung brtsi zhu ba
སྲུང་མཚམས	line of defense	srung mtshams
སྲུང་མཛད	preserver 2825	srung mdzad
སྲུང་འཛིན	reservation	srung 'dzin
སྲུང་འཛིན་བྱེད	keep, remain, maintain, preserve, conserve	srung 'dzin byed
སྲུང་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	keep, remain, maintain	srung 'dzin byed pa
སྲུང་རྫས	substance protecting from obstructing spirits, weapons etc.	srung rdzas
སྲུང་ཡུལ	barrier, defense line	srung yul
སྲུང་སེམས	taking heed, being cautious	srung sems
སྲུངས	keep; imp. of {srung ba}	srungs
སྲུངས་པ	latent, kept secret, hidden	srungs pa
སྲུངས་སེ་སྲུང	billows, is impressive	srungs se srung
སྲུན	+ {mi} v {bsrun}/ {mi bsrun}	srun
སྲུན་པ	calm, soft, mild, gentleness, meekness	srun pa
སྲུན་པོ	tame and peaceful, mild, gentle	srun po
སྲུབ	gap, crack	srub
སྲུབ་ཀ	srub ka med herb	srub ka
སྲུབ་ཀ་བ	anemone obtusiloba d. don, anemone rivularis bucy.-ham.	srub ka ba
སྲུབ་དཀྲུག	mix, blend	srub dkrug
སྲུབ་དཀྲུག་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	mixer, blender	srub dkrug 'phrul 'khor
སྲུབ་ཇ	buttered tea	srub ja
སྲུབ་གཉིས་བསྡམས་པ	fastened the linings	srub gnyis bsdams pa
སྲུབ་གཏོར་བ	rend, tear to pieces	srub gtor ba
སྲུབ་ཐག	rope with which the piston of a churner is twirled when making butter	srub thag
སྲུབ་མདའ	piston	srub mda'
སྲུབ་སྣོད	tea/ milk stirring vessel	srub snod
སྲུབ་པ	stir, stir up, churn, rummage, rake up, turn over, rub	srub pa
སྲུབ་བྱེད	1) milk tea etc dkrog byed; 2) sun; 3) boat's paddle, rudder	srub byed
སྲུབ་འབྱེ	severing, wound	srub 'bye
སྲུབ་མ	1) mdong mo'i rgya lo; 2) gap, crack	srub ma
སྲུབ་མེད	seamless, without cracks, gaps or fractures	srub med
སྲུབ་མེད་པ	seamless	srub med pa
སྲུབ་ཤིང	stirring/ churning stick	srub shing
སྲུབས	stir, SA srub pa, cleft, slit, gap, fissure, cleft, gap, fissures	srubs
སྲུབས་ཀ	cracks	srubs ka
སྲུབས་ཁ་བསྡུས་པ	to join the liningfolds	srubs kha bsdus pa
སྲུབས་གཏོར་བ	rend asunder, tear	srubs gtor ba
སྲུབས་གནོན	clothes pressing iron	srubs gnon
སྲུབས་པ	{byis pa gos kyis srubs pa} infants are smothered under their blankets	srubs pa
སྲུབས་བྱེད	churner	srubs byed
སྲུབས་དབར	door etc. bar srubs or gseng dbar	srubs dbar
སྲུབས་དབྲག	door etc. bar srubs or gseng dbar srubs	srubs dbrag
སྲུབས་མ	churning rod	srubs ma
སྲུབས་མེད་གོས	very fine silk robe	srubs med gos
སྲུབས་མེད་ལྕགས་མདོང	seamless stainless steel pipe	srubs med lcags mdong
སྲུབས་ཟན	tshem bu'i srubs [between seams in sewing] gtong ba'i tshangs	srubs zan
སྲུབས་ཤིང	pieces of wood stuck in gaps, churning/ mixing rod	srubs shing
སྲུབས་ལྷན	patches	srubs lhan
སྲུམ	sha [h]	srum
སྲུམ་ཁོག	animal slaughtered and cut up for a person of quality	srum khog
སྲུར	funeral	srur
སྲུར་ཁང	funeral pyre	srur khang
སྲུལ	[arch] rot, decompose, putrefy	srul
སྲུལ་པོ	Sülpo. A type of hideous hungry ghost	srul po
སྲུལ་པོའི་གདོན	a frightful evil spirit	srul po'i gdon
སྲུལ་བ	[arch] rot[ten], decompose, putrefy	srul ba
སྲུལ་མོ	putrid, decomposed, rotten	srul mo
སྲུས	green unripe ears of grain	srus
སྲུས་ཐུག	soup of green unripe ears of grain	srus thug
སྲུས་པ	thicken, become more consistent by evaporation or boiling	srus pa
སྲུས་ཕུད	offering of ears of corn wound round a pillar of the house	srus phud
སྲེ་ད	harvested ears tshad longs pa'i fruitless, black	sre da
སྲེ་དྲི་ཆིལ་ཆིལ	v dri chil chil	sre dri chil chil
སྲེ་ནག	soot	sre nag
སྲེ་ནག་མདོག	dark yellow	sre nag mdog
སྲེ་པོ	ferocious (?)	sre po
སྲེ་བ	(tha dad pa bsres pa, bsre ba, sres, increase, mix, blend	sre ba
སྲེ་བོ	dark red, maroon, reddish brown	sre bo
སྲེ་མོ	1) weasel; 2) [arch] mi dred	sre mo
སྲེ་མོག	dark brown	sre mog
སྲེ་མོང	mongoose-like creature, weasel	sre mong
སྲེ་མོང་ཤ	weasel meat animal med.	sre mong sha
སྲེ་ཟན	bra bo btags pa'i phye ma	sre zan
སྲེ་ལོང	1) protruding bone on the leg	sre long
སྲེག	to fry	sreg
སྲེག་ཁ	folding	sreg kha
སྲེག་ཁང	crematorium	sreg khang
སྲེག་ཐབ	furnace, oven	sreg thab
སྲེག་མདེལ	incendiary shell/ bomb	sreg mdel
སྲེག་གནས	charnel ground [where corpses are cremated]	sreg gnas
སྲེག་པ	partridge	sreg pa
སྲེག་པའི་རྒྱ	pecha title/ beginning page left and right etc ornamental pictures	sreg pa'i rgya
སྲེག་བྱེད	piper longum burning glass 2826	sreg byed
སྲེག་བྱེད་རྡོ	burning rock, burning glass	sreg byed rdo
སྲེག་བླུག	fire puja	sreg blug
སྲེག་བླུགས	fire [puja], "poured into the fire "	sreg blugs
སྲེག་སྦྱང	funeral ritual	sreg sbyang
སྲེག་མ	baked, anything burnt, barren spot	sreg ma
སྲེག་རྫས	clarified butter and other articles required to be thrown in the sacrificial fire	sreg rdzas
སྲེག་ཟ	fire	sreg za
སྲེག་ཤ	partridge meat, roasted/ broiled meat	sreg sha
སྲེག་ཤིང	firewood, kindling [for fire puja]	sreg shing
སྲེག་ཤེལ	burning glass	sreg shel
སྲེགས	burn! roast! sreg pa!	sregs
སྲེགས་བླུགས	burning and pouring; in feast	sregs blugs
ཨནད་ཕི༹རེ	puja	and fire
སྲེང	SA mi sreng, mi rkyang	sreng
སྲེང་མེད	Narayana	sreng med
སྲེད	be attached to, have desire for, love, lust for	sred
སྲེད་རྒྱལ་མ	bon deity	sred rgyal ma
སྲེད་ལྡན	passionate, very earnest	sred ldan
སྲེད་པ	(Tha mi dad pa,, craving, attachment * love, lust, desire	sred pa
སྲེད་པ་ཅན	passionately attached, very lewd, lascivious	sred pa can
སྲེད་པ་འཕེལ་བ	to always want more and more	sred pa 'phel ba
སྲེད་པ་ལས་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲོལ་བ	quite free of any desire	sred pa las yongs su grol ba
སྲེད་པ་གསུམ	the three cravings	sred pa gsum
སྲེད་པའི་ཆུ་བོ	the river of craving	sred pa'i chu bo
སྲེད་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	dependent-related craving	sred pa'i rten 'brel
སྲེད་པའི་དམིགས་པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	CHN	sred pa'i dmigs pa bcu gcig
སྲེད་པའི་ཟླ་བ	7th month w sun in Leo	sred pa'i zla ba
སྲེད་པའི་ཡན་ལག	limb of craving	sred pa'i yan lag
སྲེད་པའི་རང་བཞིན	the nature of craving	sred pa'i rang bzhin
སྲེད་པོ	attached, lustful, desirous	sred po
སྲེད་བོ	miserly	sred bo
སྲེད་བྱེད	producer of craving, vulture, Kamadeva	sred byed
སྲེད་བྱེད་མདའ	craving producing arrow	sred byed mda'
སྲེད་མ	damsel of mara	sred ma
སྲེད་མེད་ཀྱི་བུ	Narayana	sred med kyi bu
སྲེད་མེད་བུ	epithet of vishnu	sred med bu
སྲེད་མེད་མ	wife of vishnu	sred med ma
སྲེད་མོ	sweetheart	sred mo
སྲེད་ཞེན	joy passion desire	sred zhen
སྲེད་ཞེན་ཆེ་བ	earnest desire or longing for, one very eager in love	sred zhen che ba
སྲེའུ	infant death	sre'u
སྲེའུ་གསོས	healed women of the condition of infant death	sre'u gsos
སྲེལ	(tha dad pa bsrel ba, bsrel ba, srel,, 1) hold, grasp, keep; 2) increase; 3) rear, raise, bring up; 4) srel!	srel
སྲེལ་བ	(tha dad pa bsrel ba, bsrel ba, srel,, 1) hold, grasp, keep; 2) increase; 3) rear, raise, bring up; 4) srel!	srel ba
སྲེལ་བྱ	gold	srel bya
སྲེལ་ཚིག	additional verses	srel tshig
སྲེས	imp. of {sre ba}; mingle	sres
སྲེས་པ	mix up	sres pa
སྲོ	ardor, cheerfulness	sro
སྲོ་ཁང	hot house, bath house, bsro khang	sro khang
སྲོ་གང	bsro khang kitchen?	sro gang
སྲོ་སྒོང	bsro khang kitchen ?	sro sgong
སྲོ་ཅན	furious, raging	sro can
སྲོ་བ	{sro ba, bsros pa, bsro ba, sros} trans. v	sro ba
སྲོ་མ	egg of a louse, nit, small bubble, medicinal herb	sro ma
སྲོ་མ་ནག་པོ	black species of sro ma	sro ma nag po
སྲོ་མ་སེང་གེ	medicinal herb	sro ma seng ge
སྲོ་མོ	aunt	sro mo
སྲོ་རི་སྲོ་མཐོན	lofty green mountain	sro ri sro mthon
སྲོ་ལོ	sedum and similar plants	sro lo
སྲོ་ལོ་དཀར་པོ	cochlearia scapiflora hook. f. et thoms.	sro lo dkar po
སྲོ་ལོ་དམར་པོ	{sro lo dmar po} herb med.	sro lo dmar po
སྲོ་ལོ་སྨུག་པོ	{sro lo smug po} herb med.	sro lo smug po
སྲོ་ལོ་སུག་འདྲ	{sro lo dkar po} herb med.	sro lo sug 'dra
སྲོ་ལོང	kind of bird	sro long
སྲོ་ཤད	louse egg removing comb	sro shad
སྲོ་ཤི་བ	[arch] cowardly, intimidated	sro shi ba
སྲོ་ཤིག	worm growing in the body and its eggs	sro shig
སྲོག་སྐྱབས	protector/ place of refuge saving 1's life	srog skyabs
སྲོག་སྐྱོན	loss of life, casualties, death	srog skyon
སྲོག་སྐྱོབ	save a life, rescue	srog skyob
སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་འགྱིག་སྒོར	life preserver, buoy	srog skyob 'gyig sgor
སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་པ	save a life, rescue	srog skyob pa
སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་འཕྲུལ་སྒམ	med. life support unit	srog skyob 'phrul sgam
སྲོག་སྐྱོབ་བྱེད	save a life, rescue	srog skyob byed
སྲོག་སྐྱོབས	preservation of life, escape, he that saves another's life, helper	srog skyobs
སྲོག་བསྐྱབ	save / protect life, opp. {srog gcad pa}	srog bskyab
སྲོག་བསྐྱབས	protected, saved life	srog bskyabs
སྲོག་ཁམས་རིག་གནས	biology	srog khams rig gnas
སྲོག་ཁུང	hole or passage through which life passes away, deep cut in butchering animals	srog khung
སྲོག་ཁུང་འབྱེད་པ	stab in the manner of butchering animals	srog khung 'byed pa
སྲོག་ཁྲིམས	law w capital penalty, capital punishment, death sentence	srog khrims
སྲོག་མཁར	magic diagram, palace of life	srog mkhar
སྲོག་མཁྲེགས་པོ	spyod shan che ba	srog mkhregs po
སྲོག་འཁོར	{thugs srog gi 'khor lo} wheels of essential mantras	srog 'khor
སྲོག་གི	vital	srog gi
སྲོག་གི་ཀ་བ	name of a vein	srog gi ka ba
སྲོག་གི་སྐྱབས་བྱེད	{gzhan la srog gi skyabs byed cing srog la 'tshe ba las ldog pas tshe ring ba} long life-span results from protecting the lives of others and turning away from the intention to hurt any living being	srog gi skyabs byed
སྲོག་གི་ཁམས	life element	srog gi khams
སྲོག་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of man ngag lung chen bco brgyad, 1 of 13 later translated sems sde tantras, 1 of phyi 'gyur bcu gsum, a magic diagram used for the destruction of the e...	srog gi 'khor lo
སྲོག་གི་འཁོར་ལོའི་ལུང	Wheel of Life Scripture. One of the Eighteen Major Scriptures of the Mind Section of Dzogchen. Vol. KA of the Nyingma Gyübum	srog gi 'khor lo'i lung
སྲོག་གི་གླུད	ransom for life	srog gi glud
སྲོག་གི་ཆད་པ	capital punishment, death sentence	srog gi chad pa
སྲོག་གི་ཆད་པ་གཅོད	give capital punishment/ death sentence	srog gi chad pa gcod
སྲོག་གི་སྙིང་པོ	heart's blood, one's own life	srog gi snying po
སྲོག་གི་སྙིང་པོ་ཕུལ	to offer the core of your life	srog gi snying po phul
སྲོག་གི་སྙིང་པོ་ཕུལ་བ	offered the core of [her] life	srog gi snying po phul ba
སྲོག་གི་གཏའ་རུ	life force pledge/ vow, vital pledge/ vow	srog gi gta' ru
སྲོག་གི་དངས་མ	the pure essence of the	srog gi dangs ma
སྲོག་གི་གནས	heart, seat of life	srog gi gnas
སྲོག་གི་སྤུ་གྲི	pad gling phur pa	srog gi spu gri
སྲོག་གི་དབང་པོ	life faculty	srog gi dbang po
སྲོག་གི་དབང་པོ་འགག་པ	to stop the life force	srog gi dbang po 'gag pa
སྲོག་གི་མེ་ཏོག	bear's bile used as medicine	srog gi me tog
སྲོག་གི་རླུང	life-prana	srog gi rlung
སྲོག་གི་གསོས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	provided the nourishment for its life	srog gi gsos su byed pa
སྲོག་འགྲོ	dead	srog 'gro
སྲོག་སྔགས	life mantra	srog sngags
སྲོག་ཅན	1) SB, alive; 2) consonants w vowels	srog can
སྲོག་ཅན་སྡེ་དགུ	CHN	srog can sde dgu
སྲོག་ཅན་ཚོང་ཟོག	live merchandise	srog can tshong zog
སྲོག་གཅོག་སྤང་བ	to abandon killing	srog gcog spang ba
སྲོག་གཅོད	cutter of life force; murder/ killing/ taking life; (to slay/ kill)	srog gcod
སྲོག་གཅོད་ཀྱི	sanguinary	srog gcod kyi
སྲོག་གཅོད་ཀྱི་དངོས་གཞི	the main act of taking a life	srog gcod kyi dngos gzhi
སྲོག་གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྡིག་པ་མ་བྱས་པ	gave up the sin of killing	srog gcod kyi sdig pa ma byas pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་ཀྱི་སྡིག་པ་མ་བྱེད	renounce the evil of killing!	srog gcod kyi sdig pa ma byed
སྲོག་གཅོད་ཉེས་པ	capital punishment	srog gcod nyes pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་ནད་དགུ	the 9 fatal illnesses	srog gcod nad dgu
སྲོག་གཅོད་གནོད་སྦྱིན	Murderous Yakshas	srog gcod gnod sbyin
སྲོག་གཅོད་པ	taking life, murder, slaughter, kill, taking the life of an animal, stop life	srog gcod pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་པ་སྤོང་བ	Do not kill, one of the {bslab pa lnga} five precepts and one of the {bslab pa'i gzhi brgyad} eight basic teachings	srog gcod pa spong ba
སྲོག་གཅོད་པ་ལ་རྔམ་པ	be bloodthirsty	srog gcod pa la rngam pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་པའི་ཕམ་པ	defeat of cutting off life	srog gcod pa'i pham pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་སྤངས་པ	abandon cutting off life	srog gcod spangs pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་སྤོང་བ	abandon cutting off life	srog gcod spong ba
སྲོག་གཅོད་སྤོང་བའི་སྡོམ་པ	the vow of giving up killing	srog gcod spong ba'i sdom pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་བྱས་ནས་ཆོས་བྱེད་པ	to kill in the name of the Dharma	srog gcod byas nas chos byed pa
སྲོག་གཅོད་བྱེད	slaughter, kill	srog gcod byed
སྲོག་གཅོད་བྱེད་པ	[to] slaughter	srog gcod byed pa
སྲོག་བཅད་པ	taken lives	srog bcad pa
སྲོག་ཆག་གི་རིག	zoology	srog chag gi rig
སྲོག་ཆག་གི་རིག་པ	zoologist	srog chag gi rig pa
སྲོག་ཆགས	animal, animated beings, insect, life, insects & worms, living being, living, animate, sentient creature	srog chags
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང	herd or collection of animals, swarm of flies, number of worms or insects	srog chags kyi phung
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	flock srog chags kyi sman gtso bo don gsum CHN	srog chags kyi phung po
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་རིག་པ	zoology	srog chags kyi rig pa
སྲོག་ཆགས་རྐང་མང	an insect having many feet, small earthworm	srog chags rkang mang
སྲོག་ཆགས་གླིང་ཁ	zoo	srog chags gling kha
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཐམས་ཅད	all beings srog chags dang ldan par 'debs pa'i ltung	srog chags thams cad
སྲོག་ཆགས་ལྡན	pregnant woman srog chags ldan pa'i chu longs su spyod	srog chags ldan
པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	drink, wash in, etc water w living beings in it	pa'i ltung byed
སྲོག་ཆགས་སྡེབ་སྡེ	zoology/ biology department	srog chags sdeb sde
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཕྲ་མོ	insects, animalculae	srog chags phra mo
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཕྲ་མོས་ཟ་བ	bitten by insects	srog chags phra mos za ba
སྲོག་ཆགས་བུང་བ	bees	srog chags bung ba
སྲོག་ཆགས་སྨན	animal medicine	srog chags sman
སྲོག་ཆགས་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་སྨན	medicines from animal products	srog chags las byung ba'i sman
སྲོག་ཆགས་སྲིན་བུ	smallest insect	srog chags srin bu
སྲོག་ཆགས་གསོད་པ	kill living beings/ insects	srog chags gsod pa
སྲོག་ཆགས་བསད་པ	killing animals	srog chags bsad pa
སྲོག་ཆད	capital punishment, death sentence	srog chad
སྲོག་ཆད་གཅོད	give capital punishment/ death sentence	srog chad gcod
སྲོག་ཆད་པ	death, life extinct	srog chad pa
སྲོག་ཆུང	in reading let out a small amount of breath from the mouth	srog chung
སྲོག་ཆེན	in reading from the mouth let out a large amount of breath	srog chen
སྲོག་ཆེན་པོའི་རླུང	vital energy of great	srog chen po'i rlung
སྲོག་འཆད	die [of fright]	srog 'chad
སྲོག་ཉེན	danger to life	srog nyen
སྲོག་ཉེས	capital crime/ punishment	srog nyes
སྲོག་སྙིང	vital-heart mantras. life and heart; life and heart, vital-heart mantras	srog snying
སྲོག་ཏིག	life-drop	srog tig
སྲོག་ཏུ་ལྟོས	guard with one's life	srog tu ltos
སྲོག་གཏད	life-[force] entrustment [of]	srog gtad
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	force [of.]	of the life
སྲོག་གཏོང	sacrifice/ give 1's life	srog gtong
སྲོག་གཏོང་དཔའ་བོ	martyr[ed hero]	srog gtong dpa' bo
སྲོག་གཏོང་བ	sacrifice/ give 1's life	srog gtong ba
སྲོག་གཏོང་མེས་པོ	martyred ancestors	srog gtong mes po
སྲོག་རྟེན	snying ngam bla'am tshe	srog rten
སྲོག་ལྟར་ཆོངས	guard with your life	srog ltar chongs
སྲོག་ལྟར་བཙའ་བ	valuing as their own lives	srog ltar btsa' ba
སྲོག་ཐག	life-line/ rope	srog thag
སྲོག་ཐར	release 1 deserving of execution	srog thar
སྲོག་ཐིག	the life drop	srog thig
སྲོག་ཐུག་རྨས་སྐྱོན	fatal wound	srog thug rmas skyon
སྲོག་ཐོག་ཁྲིམས་གཅོད	death-sentence/ punishment	srog thog khrims gcod
སྲོག་ཐོག་གི་ཉེས་པ	capital punishment	srog thog gi nyes pa
སྲོག་ཐོག་ཉེས་ཆད	death-sentence/ punishment	srog thog nyes chad
སྲོག་ཐོག་ཉེས་སྤྱོད	capital crime	srog thog nyes spyod
སྲོག་ཐོག་ཉེས་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	commit a capital crime	srog thog nyes spyod byed
སྲོག་ཐོག་ཏུ་གཏོང	execute	srog thog tu gtong
སྲོག་ཐོག་གཏོང་བ	execute	srog thog gtong ba
སྲོག་ཐོན་པ	life [saved], individual soul	srog thon pa
སྲོག་མཐུ	life force	srog mthu
སྲོག་དང་བསྔོ་བ	risk, hazard one's life	srog dang bsngo ba
སྲོག་དང་འདྲ་བའི་ཆུང་མ	his wife, as dear to him as his life	srog dang 'dra ba'i chung ma
སྲོག་དང་འདྲ་བའི་བཙུན་མོ	a queen he held even dearer than his life	srog dang 'dra ba'i btsun mo
སྲོག་དང་སྡོ	risk 1's life, go all out even at risk of 1's life	srog dang sdo
སྲོག་དང་སྡོ་བ	risk life	srog dang sdo ba
སྲོག་དང་བསྡོས	to risk one's life	srog dang bsdos
སྲོག་དང་འཕྲལ་བ	separate from life, put to death, execute	srog dang 'phral ba
སྲོག་དང་བྲལ	lifeless, die	srog dang bral
སྲོག་དང་འབྲལ་བ	die	srog dang 'bral ba
སྲོག་དོར	sacrifice/ give 1's life	srog dor
སྲོག་དོར་བ	die	srog dor ba
སྲོག་བདག	1 of sde brgyad, ruler of life	srog bdag
སྲོག་བདག་ཆེན་པོ	guardian genius of the monaster of samye, SA pe dkar	srog bdag chen po
སྲོག་བདུད	bdud that attack the vital principle	srog bdud
སྲོག་མདའ	axis, axle	srog mda'
སྲོག་འདོན	life-saving	srog 'don
སྲོག་འདོར	sacrifice/ give 1's life	srog 'dor
སྲོག་འདོར་བ	one's own life blos gtong ba	srog 'dor ba
སྲོག་ལྡན	1) SB; 2) life force	srog ldan
སྲོག་སྡོ	risk 1's life, go all out even at risk of 1's life	srog sdo
སྲོག་སྡོམ་ཟེར་བཞིས་རྒྱས་བཏབ	applying	srog sdom zer bzhis rgyas btab
ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུར་ལིཕེ༹	binding nails [technique in developing stage]	the four life
སྲོག་སྡོམ་གཟེར་བཞི	the four life-binding nails	srog sdom gzer bzhi
བིནད་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	force,' the object to be purified is the state of affairs of a sentient being's body, speech and mind as well as its activities. The result of purifica- tion is the Body, Speech, Mind, Qualities an...	bind the life
ཏོ་བིནད་ཐེ་ལིཕེ༹	force and hereby you are able to realize the way it ultimately is. Thus, by binding samsara and nirvana with the life-force of their purity in being equality, both the basic and the	to bind the life
ཨཔཔརེནཏ་ཨསྤེཅཙ	the practitioner's three gates and activities and the deity's Body, Speech, Mind and Activities - are brought into the path as the great primordial purity. This is therefore the extraordinary key p...	apparent aspects
ཅོནཏྲོལ་ལིཕེ༹	breath	control life
སྲོག་སྡོམ་བཟེར་བཞིས་རྒྱས་བདབ	applying the four life-binding nails	srog sdom bzer bzhis rgyas bdab
སྲོག་བསྡོད	suicidal activities [see {bsdod}	srog bsdod
སྲོག་བསྡོས	suicidal, risking one's life	srog bsdos
སྲོག་གནད	MSS: vital point. variant of {srog gnas}? Eg., R75: 326.1 [mss]	srog gnad
སྲོག་གནས	CM: (mngon) snying, heart/essence. [mss]	srog gnas
སྲོག་པ	1 of 28 constellations, SA rgyu skar	srog pa
སྲོག་ཕང་བ	spare one's life	srog phang ba
སྲོག་ཕན	life helper, shoes	srog phan
སྲོག་འཕྲོག	depriving an animal of its life	srog 'phrog
སྲོག་བྱིན་པའི་དྲིན་དྲན	remember her kindness in giving life	srog byin pa'i drin dran
སྲོག་བྲལ	1) die; 2) corpse	srog bral
སྲོག་བྲལ་བྱས	cut off the life [of someone]	srog bral byas
སྲོག་བླུ	save life	srog blu
སྲོག་བླུ་གཏོང	rescue, save [some1's] life, buy and free animals that were to be killed	srog blu gtong
སྲོག་བླུ་བྱས་པ	ransomed the lives of [sheep; bought and set free]	srog blu byas pa
སྲོག་བླུ་བྱེད་པ	to ransom the lives (of animals)	srog blu byed pa
སྲོག་བླུག་པ	resuscitate	srog blug pa
སྲོག་བླུས	rescued, saved [some1's] life, bought and freed animals that were to be killed 2829	srog blus
སྲོག་བླུས་གཏོང	risk/ to have sacrificed 1's life	srog blus gtong
སྲོག་བློས་གཏོང་བ	sacrifice	srog blos gtong ba
སྲོག་དབང	life-force empowerment [for a protector]	srog dbang
སྲོག་དབང་ཤོང	to overstep one's bounds?	srog dbang shong
སྲོག་དབུགས	life supporting wind/ prana	srog dbugs
སྲོག་དབུགས་རྒྱུ་བ	moving of the lifewind	srog dbugs rgyu ba
སྲོག་དབུགས་གཏོང་བ	commit suicide	srog dbugs gtong ba
སྲོག་འབུལ་བ	sacrifice, yield up one's life	srog 'bul ba
སྲོག་འབེན་ལ་འཛུགས	risk one's life	srog 'ben la 'dzugs
སྲོག་འབེན་ལ་འཛུགས་པ	put up a desperate fight	srog 'ben la 'dzugs pa
སྲོག་འབྱིན་པ	save life, preserve life	srog 'byin pa
སྲོག་སྦྱིན	give/protect life	srog sbyin
སྲོག་སྦྱིན་པ	liven	srog sbyin pa
སྲོག་མ་ཆད་ཀྱང་རོ	it would be like being a living corpse	srog ma chad kyang ro
སྲོག་མི་གཅོད་པ	not killing living beings	srog mi gcod pa
སྲོག་མི་གཅོད་པའི	not taking life	srog mi gcod pa'i
སྲོག་མི་གཅོད་པའི་ལམ་ལུགས	ahimsa	srog mi gcod pa'i lam lugs
སྲོག་མེད	1) lifeless [material thing]; 2) not hard; 3) consonants w/o vowels	srog med
སྲོག་མེད་ནང་བཞིན	listless	srog med nang bzhin
སྲོག་མེད་དབུགས	offering lamp	srog med dbugs
སྲོག་རྩ	1) * life nadis; 2) * avadhuti, central channel; 3) aorta; 4) life- line/ essence/ blood	srog rtsa
སྲོག་རྩ་དཀར་ནག	black and white life nadis	srog rtsa dkar nag
སྲོག་རྩ་གཅོད	destroying life, cut the aorta	srog rtsa gcod
སྲོག་རྩར་ཐུག་པ	having reached the point of life and death, critical, crucial	srog rtsar thug pa
སྲོག་རྩར་ཐུག་པའི་གནས་སྐབས	critical/ crucial moment/ situation	srog rtsar thug pa'i gnas skabs
སྲོག་རྩོལ	(yogic practices for) harnessing and channelling subtle energy	srog rtsol
སྲོག་རྩོལ་ཀྱི་འོག	procreative and creative energy of genital center	srog rtsol kyi 'og
སྲོག་རྩོལ་ཀྱི་འོག་རླུང	life-force	srog rtsol kyi 'og rlung
སྲོག་རྩོལ་གྱི་རླུང་བསྒོམས	he practiced the prana of life force	srog rtsol gyi rlung bsgoms
སྲོག་རྩོལ་འཕོ་བ	life force and descent	srog rtsol 'pho ba
སྲོག་རྩོལ་བ	to draw breath, take courage	srog rtsol ba
སྲོག་འཚོ	1) living; 2) employ means of long life; 3) sustain life	srog 'tsho
སྲོག་འཚོ་བ	sustain life, recover, grow well again	srog 'tsho ba
སྲོག་འཛིན	prana, vitality in general, the	srog 'dzin
བྲེཨཐིང་ལིཕེ༹	accompanying wind, assists breathing, seat in heart center), 1 of rlung lnga, prana which sustains life, life accompanying wind, life-sustaining rlung	breathing life
སྲོག་འཛིན་ཀྱི་རླུང	vitalizing wind	srog 'dzin kyi rlung
སྲོག་འཛིན་གྱི་རླུང	subtle energy maintaining life force	srog 'dzin gyi rlung
སྲོག་འཛིན་གྱི་རླུང་ཕྲ་མོ	subtle lifesupporting wind [Tse]	srog 'dzin gyi rlung phra mo
སྲོག་འཛིན་གྱི་རླུང་རགས་པ	coarse life supporting wind TSE	srog 'dzin gyi rlung rags pa
སྲོག་འཛིན་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཡན་ལག	the accomplishment-branch of prana-control. One of {bsnyen sgrub rdo rje gsum}	srog 'dzin sgrub pa'i yan lag
སྲོག་འཛིན་བཅུ་དུག	medicine with 16 ingredients	srog 'dzin bcu dug
སྲོག་འཛིན་རླུང	life supporting wind/ prana	srog 'dzin rlung
སྲོག་རྫས	provisions, victuals	srog rdzas
སྲོག་ཞུ	a crown	srog zhu
སྲོག་ཟུངས	bodily strength/ power	srog zungs
སྲོག་ཟོན	srog skyon 'byung ba'i vigilance/ caution	srog zon
སྲོག་ཡིག	seed syllable	srog yig
སྲོག་ཡོད་བཟོ་བ	enliven srog g.yas dgag - close the right life-force	srog yod bzo ba
སྲོག་རླུང	'wind in the life vein'. [an illness]. Life-wind. life prana / wind ref. {rlung lnga} II	srog rlung
སྲོག་ལ་དགའ་པ	pleasures of life	srog la dga' pa
སྲོག་ལ་རྒོལ་བ	to take a life	srog la rgol ba
སྲོག་ལ་ཆགས་པ	cling to life	srog la chags pa
སྲོག་ལ་འཆུམས་པ	[arch] wish for life	srog la 'chums pa
སྲོག་ལ་འཆོངས	guard with your life	srog la 'chongs
སྲོག་ལ་ཐུག་ཀྱང	even if it means your life	srog la thug kyang
སྲོག་ལ་ཐུག་པ	was on the verge of death	srog la thug pa
སྲོག་ལ་འཐུད་པ	to prolong one's life	srog la 'thud pa
སྲོག་ལ་བབ་ཀྱང	even at the cost of 1's life	srog la bab kyang
སྲོག་ལ་བབས	at the cost of one's life	srog la babs
སྲོག་ལ་བབས་ཀྱང	even at the cost of one's life	srog la babs kyang
སྲོག་ལ་དབབ་པ	at the cost of life; potentially life-threatening	srog la dbab pa
སྲོག་ལ་འབབས་པ	to be potentially lifethreatening	srog la 'babs pa
སྲོག་ལ་མ་འཛེམས་པ	risk/ not care for life, not fear death	srog la ma 'dzems pa
སྲོག་ལ་མི་ལྟ་བ	make light of oneself	srog la mi lta ba
སྲོག་ལ་གཟན	preys upon life	srog la gzan
སྲོག་ལ་རང་གཞན་ཀུན་གྱིས་གཅེས	life is dear to all	srog la rang gzhan kun gyis gces
སྲོག་ལན	payment in return for killing another	srog lan
སྲོག་ལས་གཅེས་པས་འབྲལ་བར་མི་བཟོད	I cannot bear to be separeted from her. She is more dear to me than my life srog las nor lhag pa'i gtam mang po smras - said many things about how wealth is more important than life itself	srog las gces pas 'bral bar mi bzod
སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་ཀླུང་བཞི	life body power and wind horse [*	srog lus dbang klung bzhi
སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་ཐང	life body and power	srog lus dbang thang
སྲོག་ལེན་པ	deprive of life, kill, taking life	srog len pa
སྲོག་ཤིང	1) main beam, axle; 2) chief/ essential part, nucleus, core, backbone, 2830 what holds something together central pillar life tree/ pillar	srog shing
སྲོག་ཤིང་གི་ནུས་པ	nuclear/ central/ key function	srog shing gi nus pa
སྲོག་ཤིང་གཟེད་བྱེད	support of the central pillar	srog shing gzed byed
སྲོག་ཤེད	life-filler	srog shed
སྲོག་ཤོར	lose 1's life, die	srog shor
སྲོག་གཤེད	1) times of obstacles to life; 2) killer	srog gshed
སྲོག་སིང	vitality-lengthening	srog sing
སྲོག་སེར་གཏད	life-wheel, hail and spells	srog ser gtad
སྲོག་སེར་གཏད་གསུམ	Life-wheel, hail and spells. Three aspects of protective tantric rituals	srog ser gtad gsum
སྲོག་གསུམ	three vital essences (gnas srog, dwangs srog, gdags srog)	srog gsum
སྲོག་བསླུ	life-ransom [freeing animals who are to be killed]	srog bslu
སྲོག་བསླུ་བ	ransom life	srog bslu ba
སྲོག་ལྷ	life deity	srog lha
སྲོགས	{zhabs srogs}	srogs
སྲོང་སྒྱུར	giving up and transmuting	srong sgyur
སྲོང་བསྟན་སྒམ་པོ	Tibetan king	srong bstan sgam po
སྲོང་པ	straight	srong pa
སྲོང་པོ	growing straight and upright	srong po
སྲོང་བ	(tha dad pa bsrangs pa, bsrang ba, srongs,, straighten, correct	srong ba
སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ	Songtsen Gampo. (569-650) or (617-650). The king of Tibet in the seventh century Tibetan who prepared the way for transmission of the teachings. He is regarded as an incarnation of Avalokiteshvara....	srong btsan sgam po
རྒྱལ་རབས་བཅུ་གཅིག	king srong btsan sgam po and his 11 royal descendants CHN srong btsan sgam po'i ring la dam pa chos	rgyal rabs bcu gcig
ཀྱི་སྲོལ་བཏོད་པ	the Dharma was firmly established by Songtsen Gampo srong btsan dus kyi sku gsum thugs rten	kyi srol btod pa
སྲོང་སྲོང	straighten - shing gi ya yo	srong srong
སྲོངས	make straight, SA srong ba	srongs
སྲོངས་པ	straight, not bent, not crooked	srongs pa
སྲོད	dusk	srod
སྲོད་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	practice of the evening	srod kyi rnal 'byor
སྲོད་འཁོར	period of the pig * late evening	srod 'khor
སྲོད་འཇིང	middle part of 1st 1/2 of night	srod 'jing
སྲོད་ཐུན	evening / midnight session	srod thun
སྲོད་ཐོ	evening and dawn	srod tho
སྲོད་དང་ཐོ་རངས	in the evening and at the dawn	srod dang tho rangs
སྲོད་དུས	evening	srod dus
སྲོད་བ་པ	renunciant	srod ba pa
སྲོད་བྱིང་སོང	dusk is over, night has set in	srod bying song
སྲོད་བྱིངས	twilight, darkness	srod byings
སྲོད་མུན	darkness of evening	srod mun
སྲོད་ཡུལ	beginning of night, after dusk	srod yul
སྲོད་ཡོལ	night's 1st part until midnight	srod yol
སྲོད་ཡོལ་སོང	the evening has past	srod yol song
སྲོད་ལ	in the evening after sunset	srod la
སྲོད་ལ་རྒྱུ	rakshasa	srod la rgyu
སྲོད་ལ་རྒྱུ་བ	moving about at dusk or dawn, tiger, srin po	srod la rgyu ba
སྲོད་ལ་ཟ	rakshasa	srod la za
སྲོད་ལོང	1) faulty night vision, night blindness; 2) mig 'gribs	srod long
སྲོན	sran pa!	sron
སྲོན་པོ	human-eating demons	sron po
སྲོབ	effigy	srob
སྲོབས	criticize	srobs
སྲོབས་པ	confidence	srobs pa
སྲོལ	tradition, custom, way, system	srol
སྲོལ་ཀ	traditions	srol ka
སྲོལ་ཁ	tradition, custom	srol kha
སྲོལ་གོང	soroseris hookeriana (c. b. clarke) stebb.	srol gong
སྲོལ་གོང་གི་རིགས	herb	srol gong gi rigs
སྲོལ་གོང་པ	{srol gong pa} med. herb	srol gong pa
སྲོལ་གོང་དམར་པོ	saussurea stella maximj.	srol gong dmar po
སྲོལ་གོང་སྨུག་པ	herb {srol gong smug pa}	srol gong smug pa
སྲོལ་གོང་སེར་པོ	herb {srol gong ser po}	srol gong ser po
སྲོལ་འགལ	against customs/ rules	srol 'gal
སྲོལ་རྒྱུན	tradition, any established custom or law or usage	srol rgyun
སྲོལ་རྒྱུན་ཆགས	become a continuous/ usual custom/ tradition	srol rgyun chags
སྲོལ་ངན	bad custom/ tradition	srol ngan
སྲོལ་ངན་པ་བྱུང	following a bad usage	srol ngan pa byung
སྲོལ་ངན་པ་བྱུང་བ	introduction of a bad custom	srol ngan pa byung ba
སྲོལ་ཆགས	become a custom/ tradition	srol chags
སྲོལ་ཆགས་པ	become the custom 2831	srol chags pa
སྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ་བཙུག	established the great tradition	srol chen po btsug
སྲོལ་རྙིང	old custom/ tradition	srol rnying
སྲོལ་རྙིང་པ	demode	srol rnying pa
སྲོལ་རྙིང་ལ་ཞེན	adhere to old customs/ traditions, be conservative	srol rnying la zhen
སྲོལ་གཏོད	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol gtod
སྲོལ་གཏོད་མཁན	instigator/ founder/ introducer/ establisher of a tradition	srol gtod mkhan
སྲོལ་གཏོད་པ	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol gtod pa
སྲོལ་གཏོད་བྱེད	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol gtod byed
སྲོལ་བཏོད	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol btod
སྲོལ་བཏོད་པ	to introduce a custom; the introduction of something new, invention, initiation of	srol btod pa
སྲོལ་དུ་འགྱུར	become a custom/ tradition	srol du 'gyur
སྲོལ་དུ་འགྱུར་བ	become the custom	srol du 'gyur ba
སྲོལ་བསྣུབས	abolished the custom	srol bsnubs
སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བ	systematizer [pioneer]	srol phye ba
སྲོལ་འབྱེད	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol 'byed
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་པ	to found a system	srol 'byed pa
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་སློབ་དཔོན	tradition founding master	srol 'byed slob dpon
སྲོལ་འཛིན	adhering to the old practice or custom, follower	srol 'dzin
སྲོལ་འཛིན་པ	holder of a tradition; upholder of [a, the] tradition	srol 'dzin pa
སྲོལ་འཛུག་པ	institute a custom	srol 'dzug pa
སྲོལ་འཛུགས	instigate/ found/ introduce/ establish a tradition	srol 'dzugs
སྲོལ་འཛུགས་པ	settle a custom, begin, set about any business	srol 'dzugs pa
སྲོལ་བཟང	good custom	srol bzang
སྲོལ་བཟུང	'dul ba dang mdo lugs kyi srol	srol bzung
སྲོལ་ཡིག	regulation, rule, ordinance	srol yig
སྲོལ་ལམ	continuous/ usual custom/ tradition	srol lam
སྲོལ་ལམ་ཆགས	become a continuous/ usual custom/ tradition	srol lam chags
སྲོལ་ལུགས	continuous/ usual custom/ tradition	srol lugs
སྲོལ་ལུགས་ཆགས	become a continuous/ usual custom/ tradition	srol lugs chags
སྲོས	imp. of {sro ba}	sros
སྲོས་ཐུན	afternoon session	sros thun
སྲོས་སྣོད	censor	sros snod
སྲོས་པ	(tha mi dad pa,, dusk, sunset, twilight	sros pa
སླ	easy	sla
སླ་ང	vegetable frying, grain parching etc pan	sla nga
སླ་བཅོས	carelessly/ perfunctorily/ slipshod/ superficial [doing something]	sla bcos
སླ་བཅོས་བྱེད	carelessly/ perfunctorily/ slipshod/ superficial [doing something]	sla bcos byed
སླ་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	be perfunctory rough, careless, slipshod superficial, muddle 1's work	sla bcos byed pa
སླ་ཆོས	just elementary; x {gang sla ba dang nyung ba yang sla chos kyis brnyas bcos mi byed par} and however short and simple it may be, do not undervalue it as just elementary	sla chos
སླ་ཆོས་སུ་བྱས	to regard as trivial	sla chos su byas
སླ་ཆོས་སུ་མི་གཏོང་བ	without allowing it to become sloppy	sla chos su mi gtong ba
སླ་དྭངས	liquid thin and clean/ clear	sla dwangs
སླ་སྡུད་པ	withdrawal, {slar sdud pa}	sla sdud pa
སླ་པོ	rare, thin, light fluid, simple, watery	sla po
སླ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	dilute	sla po bzo ba
སླ་བཔོ	[weak head] gullible	sla bpo
སླ་བ	easy (to . . . )	sla ba
སླ་བ་བྱེད	easy work, easy doing	sla ba byed
སླ་བ་མ་ཡིན	not easily obtained	sla ba ma yin
སླ་བར་འགྱུར	become easy	sla bar 'gyur
སླ་བོ	weak [tea]	sla bo
སླ་བྱེད་བདེ་བ	easy	sla byed bde ba
སླ་མོ	thin/ weak [liquid], easy	sla mo
སླ་ཚ	slad tsha	sla tsha
སླ་རུ་གཏོང	1) dilute, thin, weaken; 2) simplify, make easy	sla ru gtong
སླག་མཆོག་འཚང་བ་པོ	ministers of srin po'i rgyal po	slag mchog 'tshang ba po
སླག་པ	robe, fur coat	slag pa
སླགས་པ	1) fur/ fleece coat; 2) [arch] arrange, array; 3) fault arising; 4) have read; 5) gtad pa [firmness steadiness hold give, focus on]; 5) nyen pa [work, pain, danger]	slags pa
སླང	cause, SA slong, sla nga, slong ba	slang
སླང་ཁ	the time of rising or raising, shelf, shelves, stand	slang kha
སླང་དྲེག	soot from sla nga [parch, roast, fry]	slang dreg
སླང་དྲེགས	soot adhering to a cooking pan	slang dregs
སླང་སྡེར	wide mouth sla nga pan/pot	slang sder
སླང་བ	to receive alms	slang ba
སླང་མ	space between furrows	slang ma
སླང་རྨོས	disc plowing	slang rmos
སླང་ཡང	and again, once more, again	slang yang
སླང་ཤིང	pile, stay, prop	slang shing
སླངས	cause, SA slong	slangs
སླད	1) for the sake/ purpose of, because of, in order to; 2) later, afterward, henceforth, again, bslad, lhad	slad
སླད་ཀྱི	subsequent, posterior	slad kyi
སླད་ཀྱིས	after, afterwards, subsequently, hereafter	slad kyis
སླད་གྲོལ	to free	slad grol
སླད་ཆ	later [time/ occasion]	slad cha
སླད་ཆད	henceforth	slad chad
སླད་དུ	for the purpose of; for the sake of, in order to / that, out of, in order to; deliberate 2832	slad du
སླད་དུ་ཁྲུས	deliberate slad du khrus cho ga byang bzhus sogs name burning?	slad du khrus
སླད་དུ་སྤྱོད་པ	attain fully accomplished	slad du spyod pa
སླད་འདོམས་ཁྲིམས་གཅོད	rjes su bkag sdom byed thub pa'i khrims gcod	slad 'doms khrims gcod
སླད་ན	SA 'og tu	slad na
སླད་ནས	in the future	slad nas
སླད་ནས་སྤེལ	spread in the future	slad nas spel
སླད་ནས་བྱོན་པའི	who will come in the future	slad nas byon pa'i
སླད་པ	corrupted, fallen into	slad pa
སླད་ཕྱིན	later, hereafter, from now on, henceforth, in future	slad phyin
སླད་ཕྱིན་ཆད	in future, henceforward	slad phyin chad
སླད་ཕྱིན་འབྱུང	later, hereafter, from now on, henceforth, in future	slad phyin 'byung
སླད་མ	later, afterward	slad ma
སླད་མ་ནས་ཡོང	arrive later	slad ma nas yong
སླད་མར	later, hereafter, from now on, henceforth, in future	slad mar
སླད་མར་ཡང	again, in future	slad mar yang
སླད་མེད	unstained, unadulterated	slad med
སླད་ཚ	ordure, feces, human excrement	slad tsha
སླད་བཞིན	again	slad bzhin
སླད་བཞིན་དུ	Das: in the future, behind = spyi bzhin du. [mss]	slad bzhin du
སླད་བཞིན་པར་མཆིའོ	i shall come later	slad bzhin par mchi'o
སླད་བཞིན་པར་འབྲང་བ	walk behind one	slad bzhin par 'brang ba
སླད་རོལ	outside, hind part, back part	slad rol
སླད་རོལ་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	later nature/ situation	slad rol gyi gnas tshul
སླད་ལ	zhin pa [clinging] and lar rgya [local custom], mi rigs kyi slad la bor mi rung	slad la
སླད་ས	[arch] excrement	slad sa
སླན	patch, patching, furred ear coverings used by tibetan ladies, SA slad	slan
སླན་ཆད	[arch] phyin chad, later, [there]after, henceforward, in future	slan chad
སླན་ཏེ	SA sbyar nas	slan te
སླན་ཏེ་འཇོག་པ	re-setting	slan te 'jog pa
སླན་པ	[arch] again	slan pa
སླབ	lab	slab
སླབ་པ	SA slob pa	slab pa
སླབ་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	one who has been given a training [as a penance for a severe offense], one given [a penance] according to the rules, penitent	slab pa sbyin pa
སླབ་པའི་གཞི་བཅའ་བ	teaching the subject of discipline	slab pa'i gzhi bca' ba
སླབས་གསུམ་ལ་བ་དཀར་པོ	white stone throne in the Deva loka [where Buddha taught the devas]	slabs gsum la ba dkar po
སླམ་པ	roast slightly, parch, make brown by exposing to heat, fry	slam pa
སླའོ	it may be easily	sla'o
སླར	consequently	slar
སླར་སྐྱེ	1) hair; 2) nails	slar skye
སླར་སྐྱེས	hair, grown or born again	slar skyes
སླར་འཁོར་ནས	returning home	slar 'khor nas
སླར་གྲིབ་མ	reflection	slar grib ma
སླར་རྒོལ་བ	rejected	slar rgol ba
སླར་སྒོམ	something else is needed, meditate once more, i must create a better state later	slar sgom
སླར་བརྗོད	1) repeat; 2) bhramin	slar brjod
སླར་བཏང་བ	having forsaken, having cast away	slar btang ba
སླར་སྟོབས་སྐྱེད	he regains strength	slar stobs skyed
སླར་དར	revival renaissance	slar dar
སླར་དར་བྱེད	have a revival/ renaissance	slar dar byed
སླར་དུ	1) after, later; 2) again	slar du
སླར་དུག	dug bong nga	slar dug
སླར་སྡུད	the outer ten are the mandala, contemplation, seal, stance, seated posture, recitation, burnt offerings, offerings, rites of enlightened activity, and concluding acts	slar sdud
སླར་སྡུད་པ	withdrawal	slar sdud pa
སླར་བསྡུ	A term of grammar. Recompound. Synonyms are {rdzogs tshig} and {zla sdud}. There are eleven particles {go/ ngo/ do/ bo/ mo/ 'o/ ro/ lo/ so/ to/} which are used as terminators of a sentence. They ha...	slar bsdu
སླར་བསྡུ་བ	re-duplication of terminal letters (yin-no), reduplicate	slar bsdu ba
སླར་བསྡུམ་པ	1 of gdul ba'i dngos po	slar bsdum pa
སླར་ནས	again in future	slar nas
སླར་འཕྲོ	emanating again	slar 'phro
སླར་བྱད་མཐུན	reflection's 'phrul spar	slar byad mthun
སླར་བྱས་མཐུན	effigy	slar byas mthun
སླར་བྱིན་ཟེར་ནས་རྐུ་བ	rob one by soft words	slar byin zer nas rku ba
སླར་བྱིན་ཟེར་བ	speak softly	slar byin zer ba
སླར་བྱུང	dus tshod hour?	slar byung
སླར་འབྱུང	regeneration, re-existence, young widow remarried	slar 'byung
སླར་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	not born again	slar mi skye ba
སླར་མི་ལྡོག་པ	irreversible	slar mi ldog pa
སླར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་ཚུལ་དུ་སྤངས་པ	TSE	slar mi ldog pa'i tshul du spangs pa
སླར་མི་ལྡོག་པར	not returning	slar mi ldog par
སླར་མི་སྡོག་པར་གཤེགས་པ	gone w/o returning	slar mi sdog par gshegs pa
སླར་སྨྲ་པ	spoke again	slar smra pa
སླར་སྨྲ་བ	speak again	slar smra ba
སླར་སྨྲ་བར་བྱ	should speak again	slar smra bar bya
སླར་མཚམས་སྦྱོར་བ	reconnecting	slar mtshams sbyor ba
སླར་ཞིང	phyir zhing ste later again and again	slar zhing
སླར་གཟུགས	form of a statue, image, portrait, picture	slar gzugs
སླར་འོང་བ	come back	slar 'ong ba
སླར་ཡང	furthermore; moreover; in addition, . . . ; once again, . . .	slar yang
སླར་ཡང་འགོ་འཛུགས་པ	resume	slar yang 'go 'dzugs pa
སླར་ཡང་འགྲོ	transmigration, rotation	slar yang 'gro
སླར་ཡང་འཇུག་པ	add again	slar yang 'jug pa
སླར་ཡང་ཐུག་འཕྲད་བྱུང་བ	reunite	slar yang thug 'phrad byung ba
སླར་ཡང་ཐོན་སྐྱེད	reproduction	slar yang thon skyed
སླར་ཡང་ཕྱིན་ནས	when they again went slar rang bzhin sbrul sku'i zhing du dbugs	slar yang phyin nas
དབྱུང་སྟེ	doubtlessly pass on to a natural nirmanakaya realm slar rang bzhin sbrul sku'i zhing du dbugs	dbyung ste
སླར་ལོག	return, come back	slar log
སླར་ལོག་འགྲོ	return, come back	slar log 'gro
སླར་ལོག་ནས	having returned	slar log nas
སླར་ལོག་པ	return	slar log pa
སླར་ཤར་ཞིང་གསལ་ན	when the sun shines bright again	slar shar zhing gsal na
སླར་གཤེགས	return, gone back	slar gshegs
སླར་གཤེགས་པ	return, come back, die	slar gshegs pa
སླར་གཤེགས་སུ་གསོལ	i beg you would come back, pray come back	slar gshegs su gsol
སླར་སོས	revive	slar sos
སླར་གསོ	revival	slar gso
སླར་གསོ་བྱེད	restore, revive, re-establish, bring back to life, reconstruct	slar gso byed
སླར་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	regenerate, revive	slar gso byed pa
སླས	1) friends and attendants; 2) queen's retinue, servant, attendant, [p sla],, braided, knitted, wove	slas
སླས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་ཁང	little temple subsidiary to a bigger 1	slas kyi lha khang
སླས་འཐག	weaving, knitting	slas 'thag
སླས་འཐག་བྱེད	weave, knit	slas 'thag byed
སླས་པ	bslas pa'i lhas ma	slas pa
སླས་མ	braid, wicker, rope plait lhas ma	slas ma
སླས་ར	nomad temporary enclosure [rope? wicker?	slas ra
སླི	yellowish red apple, indian apple, cherries, pears	sli
སླི་ཙི	small dwarf apple pyrus baccata	sli tsi
སླུ	(tha dad pa bslus pa, bslu ba, slus,, deceive, lure, entice, beguile	slu
སླུ་ཁྲིད	enticement, seduction, leading one into bad actions, bait, instruction to an evil purpose, seduction	slu khrid
སླུ་མཁན	deceiver, deluder, imposter	slu mkhan
སླུ་འཁྲིད	lure, entice, beguile, deceive	slu 'khrid
སླུ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	lure, entice, beguile, deceive	slu 'khrid byed
སླུ་གུ	[arch] 1) small [clay] chang, tea curds vessel; 2) small cooking pot; 3) measure of volume	slu gu
སླུ་འདྲིད	seduce, deception	slu 'drid
སླུ་རྡོ	bait, temptation	slu rdo
སླུ་བ	ransom, seduce, SA bslu ba, entice, allure, ensnare, beguile, bait, betray, deceive, delude, lure, tempt, to disappoint	slu ba
སླུ་བ་མེད་པ	infallible, undeceiving, guilelessness	slu ba med pa
སླུ་བ་མེད་པར	infallibly	slu ba med par
སླུ་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	deceptive phenomena	slu ba'i chos can
སླུ་བར་བྱེད་པའི་ཁྲམ་པ	seducing or deceiving	slu bar byed pa'i khram pa
སླུ་བྱེད	1) deceive[r]; 2) fox; 3) jackal; 4) fire [god]	slu byed
སླུ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གབ་ཚིག	dngos po gzhan la grags pa'i sgra stobs ldan 'dzes par brjod nus pa lha bu dag gis don de gab nas gang du mi mdzes pa lta bu zhig tu 'khrul bas slu ba ni slu byed gab tshig gi rgyan	slu byed kyi gab tshig
སླུ་བྲིད	ruse, temptation	slu brid
སླུ་བྲིད་མཁན	a charlatan	slu brid mkhan
སླུ་བྲིད་པ	imposter	slu brid pa
སླུ་འབྲིད	deceive	slu 'brid
སླུ་མི་མེས	a person	slu mi mes
སླུ་མེད	w/o deceit, sincere, upright	slu med
སླུ་ཟས	bait	slu zas
སླུ་ཡོན	ransom	slu yon
སླུག་བརྫུས་འདེབས་པ	to play the fool	slug brdzus 'debs pa
སླུས	imp. of {slu ba}	slus
སླེ	to weave	sle
སླེ་ཁ	[arch] crooked mouth	sle kha
སླེ་ཁོག	big basket usu carried on the back	sle khog
སླེ་འཇམ	1) 'jam rtsi'i nang tshan rlung rkyang pa la bsngags pa'i sbyor ba zhig ste, lug sha'i tsho kh + 'bri yi 'o ma mar zhun bcas + ru rta +, de ba dva ru, pi pi ling, rgyam tsha, aa ru rnams kyi phye m...	sle 'jam
སླེ་ཏྲེ	polygonum aubersti henry	sle tre
སླེ་ཏྲེས	{sle tres} med. tree	sle tres
སླེ་འདམ་ཅན	woman w sickness of genitals and anus	sle 'dam can
སླེ་འདམས་པ	man w damaged/ deformed genitals	sle 'dams pa
སླེ་པོ	big basket usu carried on the back	sle po
སླེ་བ	1) crooked eye; 2) deformed/ twisted limbs	sle ba
སླེ་བོ	1) crooked eye; 2) deformed/ twisted limbs	sle bo
སླེ་མིག	crooked eye	sle mig
སླེ་མོ	1) wild animal skin raincoat; 2) re lde'i [felt] door curtain, phyar ba [cover]	sle mo
སླེ་ཡོན	crookedness and cunning, craft, deceit, trickery	sle yon
སླེ་ཡོན་བྱེད་པ	cheat, deceive, impose upon sle lung rje drung bzhad pa'i rdo rje b.1697	sle yon byed pa
སླེ་ལུང་རྗེ་དྲུང་བཞད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	(b. 1697)	sle lung rje drung bzhad pa'i rdo rje
སླེ་ཧྲེས	climbing plant, universal medicine	sle hres
སླེད	knitting needle	sled
སླེབ	(tha mi dad pa slebs pa, sleb pa,, go/ get to, bring, arrive, reach, extend to *, come in [of money] come to [their senses]	sleb
སླེབ་ཏུ་སླེབ་པ	extending from one end to another	sleb tu sleb pa
སླེབ་ཐོ	account of receipts	sleb tho
སླེབ་པ	arrive, reach, extend, coming in (of interest or rent), revenue, receipt of customs, come into something, to attain	sleb pa
སླེབ་ཚར	has arrived	sleb tshar
སླེབ་ཡོང	he will come, he will come	sleb yong
སླེབས་རྟགས	'byor tshes bkod pa'i ming	slebs rtags
སླེབས་ཐོ	how much arrival earlier/ later note[book]	slebs tho
སླེབས་པ	pf. of {sleb pa}; to return; arrived	slebs pa
སླེབས་པའི་ཙ་ནས	from the time of arrival, since coming	slebs pa'i tsa nas
སླེབས་ཟིན	i have arrived, he has arrived	slebs zin
སླེབས་ཟིན་པ	came	slebs zin pa
སླེབས་ཡོང	{nga da lta slebs yong byas pa} I will be right back, he said	slebs yong
སླེབས་ས	access	slebs sa
སླེབས་ས་ཡོད་པ	accessible	slebs sa yod pa
སླེའུ	blanket [coarse, yak hair]	sle'u
སླེའོ	talk, words	sle'o
སླེལ་ཁོག	big basket usu carried on the back	slel khog
སླེལ་གོག	big basket usu carried on the back	slel gog
སླེལ་པོ	big basket usu carried on the back	slel po
སླེལ་ཕྱར	re ta' or, felt le'u 'or phyar ba	slel phyar
སླེས	weave! braid! plait!	sles
སློ	contents of the stomach of sheep or kid, ruminants	slo
སློ་དྲོན	warm fresh dung, warm fresh contents of the stomach	slo dron
སློ་མ	winnowing basket	slo ma
སློག	[p bslogs, f bslog slogs!],, 1) give/ send back, return, repay; 2) reverse; 3) digging/ searching through	slog
སློག་གོས	reversed/ fleece-lined garment	slog gos
སློག་དངུལ	indemnity, contribution	slog dngul
སློག་ཆ	1) for things received something given back; 2) not having received all things given part given back	slog cha
སློག་ལྟ	distorted view, inverted view	slog lta
སློག་སྟོན་ཁང	academy	slog ston khang
སློག་པ	1) {slog pa, bslogs pa, bslog pa, slogs} trans. v.; 2) a coat; fur-lined coat	slog pa
སློག་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	great master, guru padmasambhava	slog dpon chen po
སློག་རུལ	a tattered robe	slog rul
སློག་ཧྲུལ	old tattered robe, skin/ reversed fleece garment	slog hrul
སློགས	imp. of {slog pa}	slogs
སློང་རྐྱེན	inciting power/ influence/ cause/ condition	slong rkyen
སློང་བསྐུལ	solicitation/ appeal for aid/$	slong bskul
སློང་བསྐུལ་བྱེད	solicit/ appeal for aid/$	slong bskul byed
སློང་བསྐུལ་ཞུ	solicit/ appeal for aid/$ [h]	slong bskul zhu
སློང་མཁན	beggar, fund-raiser	slong mkhan
སློང་གི་སྟབས	poised in space (?)	slong gi stabs
སློང་ཆང	proposal-wine, wine sent with proposal of marriage	slong chang
སློང་ཆང་བཏང་བ	to betroth	slong chang btang ba
སློང་ཆང་ཚེས་གྲངས	astr reckon the slong chang date	slong chang tshes grangs
སློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས	infinite great expanse	slong chen rab 'byams
སློང་སྟེར་ག་འཛོལ	from the giver the asker dbang cha [power?] che ba ste, dbang che chung ga 'dzol ba'i [error/ blunder?] dpe	slong ster ga 'dzol
སློང་དུ་བཏང	were sent to request his return	slong du btang
སློང་དུ་བཏང་བ	asked for	slong du btang ba
སློང་འདྲ	tall cushion	slong 'dra
སློང་སྤྲང	{ltogs pa slong sprang} starving beggars	slong sprang
སློང་ཕོར	beggar's bowl	slong phor
སློང་བ	ask for, violate, commit, want, wish, generated, arouse, ask, beg, erect, repudiate, rouse	slong ba
དགོས་སྙམ	I think I will go and beg the king for his body	dgos snyam
སློང་བ་རྣམས་རེ་བ་སྐོང་བ	fulfills the hopes of beggars	slong ba rnams re ba skong ba
སློང་བ་པོ	beggar	slong ba po
སློང་བ་པོ་མཐོང་བ	seeing a beggar	slong ba po mthong ba
སློང་བ་པོ་མེད་པ	no beggars could be found in the land	slong ba po med pa
སློང་བ་གསུམ	the three motivations	slong ba gsum
སློང་བའི་དགེ་བ	{dge ba'i sems byung gis kun nas bslang ba'i las slong ba'i dge ba} 'Motivated virtues' are actions motivated by the [eleven] virtuous mental states.	slong ba'i dge ba
སློང་བའི་དགེ་སློང	mendicant bhikshu	slong ba'i dge slong
སློང་བའི་དངོས་པོ	alms obtained from begging	slong ba'i dngos po
སློང་བའི་སྤང་བ	the abandonment offense of begging [clothing]	slong ba'i spang ba
སློང་བའི་ཕྱིར་དུ་དགེ་སློང	TSE	slong ba'i phyir du dge slong
སློང་བའི་མི་དགེ་བ	motivated nonvirtue	slong ba'i mi dge ba
སློང་བའི་རེ་བ་རྫོགས་ཕྱིར	would fulfill the hopes of all beggars	slong ba'i re ba rdzogs phyir
སློང་བར་བྱེད	1) small bird khug rta; 2) chick; 3) rtsangs pa [chameleon] kha ral	slong bar byed
སློང་བར་བྱེད་པ	to make it surface	slong bar byed pa
སློང་འབེབས་ཞུ་བ	kha mchu bar 'dum byas chog pa zhes sngar phul snyan zhu phyir 'then zhu ba	slong 'bebs zhu ba
སློང་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་ངོས་ཟིན	being aware of it as soon as it arises, notice it at the start	slong ma thag tu ngos zin
སློང་མོ	begging, alms	slong mo
སློང་མོ་མཁན	beggar, fund-raiser	slong mo mkhan
སློང་མོ་རྒྱག	solicit, beg, fund-raise	slong mo rgyag
སློང་མོ་རྒྱག་པ	solicit, beg, fund-raise	slong mo rgyag pa
སློང་མོ་པ	beggar	slong mo pa
སློང་མོ་བ	beggar, fund-raiser, 1 who solicits	slong mo ba
སློང་མོ་བྱེད	beg, fund-raise	slong mo byed
སློང་མོ་བྱེད་པ	begging; to beg alms	slong mo byed pa
སློང་མོ་སློང	beg alms, fund-raise	slong mo slong
སློང་མོ་སློང་བ	beg alms, fund-raise	slong mo slong ba
སློང་མོས་འཚོ་བ	live by begging, alms	slong mos 'tsho ba
སློང་ཚད	whatever comes up	slong tshad
སློང་ཞུགས་ལ	should be awakened	slong zhugs la
སློང་ཡིག	book/ register of donations	slong yig
སློངས	(tha dad pa bslang pa, bslang ba, slongs,; 1) arise! make rise/ stand up! raise! erect! put up!*; 2) don du gnyer ba dang, ask/ solicit/ beg for! request!; 3) incite! provoke! make start!	slongs
སློད	loose, slod pa! adulterate, pollute, mix w faults	slod
སློད་པ	(tha dad pa bslad pa, bslad pa, slod,, adulterate, pollute, mix w faults	slod pa
སློན	imp. of {slon pa}	slon
སློན་པ	{slon pa, bslan pa, bslan pa, slon} trans. v	slon pa
སློན་མོ	alms	slon mo
སློབ	trained; ex {slob 'jug} inspiring others to train / be trained	slob
སློབ་སྐྱོང	teach and take care of, education	slob skyong
སློབ་སྐྱོང་བ	educator	slob skyong ba
སློབ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	teach and take care of, educate	slob skyong byed
སློབ་ཁང	classroom, schoolroom	slob khang
སློབ་ཁང་གི་བསྐྱར་སྦྱོང	classroom practice work	slob khang gi bskyar sbyong
སློབ་ཁང་གི་གྲོས་བསྡུར	classroom discussion	slob khang gi gros bsdur
སློབ་ཁྱད	use, practice, exercise	slob khyad
སློབ་ཁྲིད	teaching, instructing, lecturing	slob khrid
སློབ་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་རྩ་གནད	teaching, lecture, outline	slob khrid kyi rtsa gnad
སློབ་ཁྲིད་གྲོལ	finish/ get out of class, class is over	slob khrid grol
སློབ་ཁྲིད་གྲོལ་བ	to finish / get out of class, class is over	slob khrid grol ba
སློབ་ཁྲིད་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	teaching reform	slob khrid bcos bsgyur
སློབ་ཁྲིད་འཆར་གཞི	teaching plan	slob khrid 'char gzhi
སློབ་ཁྲིད་བརྟགས་དཔྱོད་ཁང	teaching research room	slob khrid brtags dpyod khang
སློབ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད	attend/ go to class, teach, instruct, lecture	slob khrid byed
སློབ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད་ཐབས	teaching method	slob khrid byed thabs
སློབ་ཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	attend/ go to class, teach, instruct, lecture	slob khrid byed pa
སློབ་ཁྲིད་ཡོ་བྱད	teaching aids	slob khrid yo byad
སློབ་མཁན	teacher, a faction of disciples; teacher	slob mkhan
སློབ་འཁྲིད	teaching	slob 'khrid
སློབ་འཁྲིད་ཀྱི་རྩ་གནད	teaching, lecture, outline	slob 'khrid kyi rtsa gnad
སློབ་འཁྲིད་གྲོལ	finish/ get out of class, class is over	slob 'khrid grol
སློབ་འཁྲིད་གྲོལ་བ	finish/ get out of class, class is over	slob 'khrid grol ba
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བཅོས་བསྒྱུར	teaching reform	slob 'khrid bcos bsgyur
སློབ་འཁྲིད་འཆར་གཞི	teaching plan	slob 'khrid 'char gzhi
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བརྟགས་དཔྱོད་ཁང	teaching research room	slob 'khrid brtags dpyod khang
སློབ་འཁྲིད་པ	teach	slob 'khrid pa
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བྱས	to instruct	slob 'khrid byas
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད	attend/ go to class, teach, instruct, lecture	slob 'khrid byed
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་ཐབས	teaching method	slob 'khrid byed thabs
སློབ་འཁྲིད་བྱེད་པ	attend/ go to class, teach, instruct, lecture	slob 'khrid byed pa
སློབ་འཁྲིད་ཡོ་བྱད	teaching aids	slob 'khrid yo byad
སློབ་གྱེར་བ	student	slob gyer ba
སློབ་གྲ	school	slob gra
སློབ་གྲྭ	school	slob grwa
སློབ་གྲྭ་གྲོལ་བ	school is over, school closes	slob grwa grol ba
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་གོང་གྲོལ	upper grades of elementary school	slob grwa chung gong grol
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་བ	(primary, elementary, grade) school	slob grwa chung ba
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་ཞོལ་གྲོལ	lower grades of elementary school	slob grwa chung zhol grol
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ	high school * upper level school, college	slob grwa che ba
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ	college, academy, institute	slob grwa chen mo
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཐོན	graduate/finish school	slob grwa thon
སློབ་གྲྭ་ནས་ཐོན	graduate/finish school	slob grwa nas thon
སློབ་གྲྭ་ནས་ཐོན་པ	graduate/finish school	slob grwa nas thon pa
སློབ་གྲྭ་སྤོ	transfer between schools	slob grwa spo
སློབ་གྲྭ་བ	student, pupil	slob grwa ba
སློབ་གྲྭ་བ་རྣམས	students	slob grwa ba rnams
སློབ་གྲྭ་བའི་བསྲུང་བྱ	school rules	slob grwa ba'i bsrung bya
སློབ་གྲྭ་བའི་ལྷན་ཁང	student union	slob grwa ba'i lhan khang
སློབ་གྲྭ་བའི་ལྷན་ཚོགས	student society/ association	slob grwa ba'i lhan tshogs
སློབ་གྲྭ་འབྲིང་བ	middle school	slob grwa 'bring ba
སློབ་གྲྭ་ཨ་མ	main school [vs branches], alma mater	slob grwa a ma
སློབ་གྲའི་དབུ་འཛིན	principal	slob gra'i dbu 'dzin
སློབ་གྲྭའི་ལམ་ལུགས	school system	slob grwa'i lam lugs
སློབ་གྲྭར་འགྲོ་བ	attend school	slob grwar 'gro ba
སློབ་གྲྭར་འསྲོ་བ	go to/be at/attend school	slob grwar 'sro ba
སློབ་གྲོགས	schoolmate, classmate, school fellow, co-disciple	slob grogs
སློབ་དགེ	school teacher	slob dge
སློབ་འགོ་རྩོམ	begin class/ school	slob 'go rtsom
སློབ་འགོ་བརྩམས	began class/ school	slob 'go brtsams
སློབ་འགོ་ཚུགས	begin class/ school	slob 'go tshugs
སློབ་རྒྱུད	spiritual (descent, inheritance, succession), ministerial succession by disciples, hierarchical	slob rgyud
སློབ་བརྒྱུད	lineage [of] disciples	slob brgyud
སློབ་ཆས	teaching aids	slob chas
སློབ་ཆུང་སློབ་གསོ	primary education	slob chung slob gso
སློབ་འཇུག	inspiring others to train / be trained	slob 'jug
སློབ་གཉེར	studies [questions to the teacher]	slob gnyer
སློབ་གཉེར་ཁང	academic institution	slob gnyer khang
སློབ་གཉེར་མཁས་པ	learned student	slob gnyer mkhas pa
སློབ་གཉེར་གང་དུ	at what college have you been a student	slob gnyer gang du
སློབ་གཉེར་གང་དུ་བགྱིས	where have you studied	slob gnyer gang du bgyis
སློབ་གཉེར་བ	student, pupil	slob gnyer ba
སློབ་གཉེར་བའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	scholarship	slob gnyer ba'i mthun rkyen
སློབ་གཉེར་བྱ	to study	slob gnyer bya
སློབ་གཉེར་བྱས	studied	slob gnyer byas
སློབ་གཉེར་བྱེད	study	slob gnyer byed
སློབ་གཉེར་བྱེད་པ	study	slob gnyer byed pa
སློབ་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	let one take lessons, get one instructed	slob tu 'jug pa
སློབ་སྟངས	way of teaching/ studying	slob stangs
སློབ་སྟོན	advice, counsel, instruction, instruction, letters containing direction or orders, advice, teachings	slob ston
སློབ་སྟོན་ཁང	administration	slob ston khang
སློབ་སྟོན་པ	instructor, guide, teacher, advisor	slob ston pa
སློབ་སྟོན་བྱིན	instruct, guide, teach	slob ston byin
སློབ་སྟོན་བྱིན་པ	to instruct, guide, teach	slob ston byin pa
སློབ་སྟོན་བྱེད	instruct, guide, teach	slob ston byed
སློབ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	instruct, guide, teach	slob ston byed pa
སློབ་སྟོན་བྱེད་འོས་པ	advisable	slob ston byed 'os pa
སློབ་སྟོན་མཛད	instruct, guide, teach	slob ston mdzad
སློབ་སྟོན་མཛད་པ	instructor, guide, teacher, advisor, instruct, guide, teach	slob ston mdzad pa
སློབ་ཐབས	[means of] study, style/ methods of teaching	slob thabs
སློབ་ཐེངས	class period	slob thengs
སློབ་ཐོན	complete studies/ education, graduate	slob thon
སློབ་ཐོན་པ	graduate[s]	slob thon pa
སློབ་ཐོན་ལག་ཁྱེར	diploma	slob thon lag khyer
སློབ་འཐུས	student representative	slob 'thus
སློབ་དང་མི་སློབ	the stages of training and of no more learning	slob dang mi slob
སློབ་དུས	time of study, period, tem, semester	slob dus
སློབ་དེབ	textbook	slob deb
སློབ་དོན	discipline	slob don
སློབ་ན	school age	slob na
སློབ་ན་མ་སོན	not having reached school age, pre school age	slob na ma son
སློབ་ན་མ་སོན་གོང་གི་སློབ་གསོ	preschool education	slob na ma son gong gi slob gso
སློབ་ན་སོན	reach school age	slob na son
སློབ་ན་སོན་བའི་བྱིས་པ	children of school age	slob na son ba'i byis pa
སློབ་པ	1 (Tha dad pa bslabs pa, bslab pa, slobs,, teach learn[er], disciple; 2) precepts, teachings; 2) 1 undergoing training; 3) [arch] offer	slob pa
སློབ་པ་དང་མི་སློབ་པ	person on the path of training or on the path beyond training	slob pa dang mi slob pa
སློབ་པ་རྣམས	disciples	slob pa rnams
སློབ་པ་པོའི་གང་ཟག	the trainee, person undergoing the training	slob pa po'i gang zag
སློབ་པ་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པ	irreversible disciples	slob pa phyir mi ldog pa
སློབ་པ་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་དགེ་འདུན	irreversible aspirants to virtue	slob pa phyir mi ldog pa'i dge 'dun
སློབ་པ་འཕགས་པའི་ལམ	the noble path of learning, the path of learning for noble beings slob pa 'phags pa'i lam zung 'jug ye shes	slob pa 'phags pa'i lam
ཀྱི་སྐུ	the wisdom kaya of the unity of learning/ union needing practice	kyi sku
སློབ་པ་བཙོན་པ	diligent in teaching/ learning	slob pa btson pa
སློབ་པ་ལ་འགྲུས་པ	diligent study	slob pa la 'grus pa
སློབ་པ་བསད་པ	killing one's student or teacher, one of the {mtshams med pa dang nye ba lnga} five nearly boundless offenses	slob pa bsad pa
སློབ་པའི་སྐལ་ལྡན	fortunate students	slob pa'i skal ldan
སློབ་པའི་ཟུང་འཇུག	the unity of learning, union needing practice	slob pa'i zung 'jug
སློབ་པའི་ཟུང་འཇུག་གི་སྐུ	the unified kaya of the [stage / state of] training	slob pa'i zung 'jug gi sku
སློབ་པའི་ལམ	path involving learning	slob pa'i lam
སློབ་པའི་ལམ་བཞི	Four Paths of Learning. See the entry under four paths. the four paths of training	slob pa'i lam bzhi
སློབ་དཔོན	teacher, spiritual advisor, master, 1 of gnas pa dgu, school master, title of more learned lamas, chief in teaching, instructor, master, professor, acarya 2837	slob dpon
སློབ་དཔོན་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ	Acharya Nagarjuna	slob dpon klu sgrub
སློབ་དཔོན་ཀླུ་ཡི་དབང་པོ	1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug	slob dpon klu yi dbang po
སློབ་དཔོན་མཁས་པ	the learned preceptors	slob dpon mkhas pa
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དཔེ་མཁྱུད	by a teacher hiding yon tan and not teaching them	slob dpon gyi dpe mkhyud
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང	TSE	slob dpon gyi dbang
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང་བསྐུར་དྲུག	CHN	slob dpon gyi dbang bskur drug
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་དབང་དྲུག	the six archarya abhishekas	slob dpon gyi dbang drug
སྒོའི་དབང་བཅུ་གཅིག་ལས	slob dpon gyi dbang drug ste phyir mi ldog pa'i dbang, gsang ba'i dbang, rjes gnang, lung bstan, dbugs dbyung, gzengs bstod de drug go]	sgo'i dbang bcu gcig las
སློབ་དཔོན་རྒན་པ	full professor	slob dpon rgan pa
སློབ་དཔོན་མངོན་གྱུར	las kyi slob dpon &, gsang ste ston pa'i slob dpon gnyis dngos su zhugs pa'o	slob dpon mngon gyur
སློབ་དཔོན་ལྔ	[TRS 23:5]	slob dpon lnga
ཆེན་བརྒྱད	CHN	chen brgyad
སློབ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	Mahaguru - Great Master	slob dpon chen po
སློབ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ་པད་མའི་བཀའ་སྲོལ་སྙིང་ཐིང	spiritual instructions came in succession from Guru Rinpoche	slob dpon chen po pad ma'i bka' srol snying thing
སློབ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ་ལགས	great spiritual master [Padmasambhava]	slob dpon chen po lags
སློབ་དཔོན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug slob dpon 'jam dpal bshes gnyen zhes	slob dpon chos kyi grags pa
གྲགས་པ་ལ	received the name Master Manjusrimitra	grags pa la
སློབ་དཔོན་ཏྲི་པི་ཏ་ཀ	author of {tshul gsum sgron ma}	slob dpon tri pi ta ka
སློབ་དཔོན་རྟ་དབྱངས	the master Asvagosha slob dpon thon mi'i gdung rgyud pa bcu	slob dpon rta dbyangs
སློབ་དཔོན་དྲུག	the six kinds of master [dam tshig dang sdom pa sbyin pa'i slob dpon dang, bzlas lung sbyin pa'i slob dpon, rgyud bshad pa'i slob dpon, man ngag ston pa'i slob dpon, dbang bskur ba'i slob dpon, las...	slob dpon drug
སློབ་དཔོན་བདུན	CHN	slob dpon bdun
སློབ་དཔོན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three masters	slob dpon rnam gsum
སློབ་དཔོན་པད་འབྱུང	the Lotus-born Guru	slob dpon pad 'byung
སློབ་དཔོན་པད་མ	Master Padmasambhava	slob dpon pad ma
ལུགས་ཡི་ཆེས་གསུམ་ལྡན	life story of Padmasambhava according to Indian sources, composed by Taranatha slob dpon pad ma'i rnam thar rgya gar	lugs yi ches gsum ldan
སློབ་དཔོན་དཔའ་བོ	Famous non-Buddhist yogi in India in Nagarjuna's time. Mentioned in Taranatha's rise of Buddhism in India {chos 'byung}. Almost defeated the monks at Nalanda in debate so they sent a message to Nag...	slob dpon dpa' bo
སློབ་དཔོན་དཔལ་སྦས	a disciple and precept-successor of Bhavaviveka	slob dpon dpal sbas
སློབ་དཔོན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	Nirmanakaya master. A respectful way of addressing Guru Rinpoche showing that he is a manifestation of an enlightened being	slob dpon sprul pa'i sku
སློབ་དཔོན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	1 of 'dzam gling rgyan drug	slob dpon phyogs kyi glang po
སློབ་དཔོན་འཕགས་པ་ཀླུ་རྒྲུབ	the noble master Nagarjuna	slob dpon 'phags pa klu rgrub
སློབ་དཔོན་བོ་དྷི་ས་ཏབ༹	Master Bodhisattva. Shantarakshita	slob dpon bo dhi sa tva
སློབ་དཔོན་གཞོན་པ	junior professor, lecturer	slob dpon gzhon pa
སློབ་དཔོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the Precious Master, Padmasambhava	slob dpon rin po che
སློབ་དཔོན་ཤན་ཏི་པ	Acharya Shantipa	slob dpon shan ti pa
སློབ་དཔོན་ཤི	tam gar-bha	slob dpon shi
སློབ་དཔོན་ས་ར་ཧ	TSE	slob dpon sa ra ha
སློབ་དཔོན་གསུམ	the three masters: 1) Padmasambhava; 2) Vimalamitra 3) Shilamanju]	slob dpon gsum
སློབ་དཔོན་ཧ་སྟི་བྷ་ལ	the master Hastibala	slob dpon ha sti bha la
སློབ་དཔོན་དྷར་མོ་ཏ	a master who transmitted the {bsam gtan} Chan teachings of Kashyapa that came to China; [Bodhidharma], also {mkhan po chen po bo dhe dar mo ta ra}, {dar mo ta'a ri shar phyogs nas rgya mtsho brgal ...	slob dpon dhar mo ta
སློབ་སྤྱི	school principal	slob spyi
སློབ་ཕྲུག	student, pupil	slob phrug
སློབ་བུ	skal ldan + - fortunate spiritual son	slob bu
སློབ་བུ་རྣམས	the disciples	slob bu rnams
སློབ་བུའི་གྲལ་གཏོགས	among the [rows of] students	slob bu'i gral gtogs
སློབ་བྱ	subject of study	slob bya
སློབ་བྱོལ	neighboring studies - subject of study	slob byol
སློབ་དབེ	institute, academy	slob dbe
སློབ་དབོན་ལྔ	CHN	slob dbon lnga
སློབ་དབོན་དྲུག	TSE	slob dbon drug
སློབ་འབངས	disciples and servants, scholar, pupil, disciple 2838	slob 'bangs
སློབ་འབྲིང	middle school	slob 'bring
སློབ་འབྲིང་མཐོ་གྲས	senior secondary/ high school	slob 'bring mtho gras
སློབ་འབྲིང་མཐོ་རིམ	senior secondary/ high school	slob 'bring mtho rim
སློབ་འབྲིང་དམའ་གྲས	junior secondary/ high school	slob 'bring dma' gras
སློབ་འབྲིང་དམའ་རིམ	junior secondary/ high school	slob 'bring dma' rim
སློབ་སྦྱོང	education study, tuition, study	slob sbyong
སློབ་སྦྱོང་ཁང	learning/ study center	slob sbyong khang
སློབ་སྦྱོང་གྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས	educational background, curriculum vitae	slob sbyong gyi lo rgyus
སློབ་སྦྱོང་ཐོག	academically	slob sbyong thog
སློབ་སྦྱོང་ཐོན	finish 1's studies, graduate	slob sbyong thon
སློབ་སྦྱོང་སྤྲོད་པ	educate	slob sbyong sprod pa
སློབ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད	to study	slob sbyong byed
སློབ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་བ	study, learn	slob sbyong byed ba
སློབ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་བཞིན་པ	studying	slob sbyong byed bzhin pa
སློབ་སྦྱོང་རོགས་དངུལ	fellowship, stipend, study grant	slob sbyong rogs dngul
སློབ་སྦྲིང	sisyalekha	slob sbring
སློབ་མ	student, pupil, disciple *, apprentice	slob ma
ཏན་མཐར་ཕྱིན	a disciple to whom he had taught all he knew	tan mthar phyin
སློབ་མ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	to student actual abhisheka's direct preliminaries	slob ma dkyil 'khor du 'jug pa
སློབ་མ་སྐྱ་བོ	lay disciple	slob ma skya bo
སློབ་མ་སྐྱོང་བ	managing pupils	slob ma skyong ba
སློབ་མ་ཁྱད་ཆོས་གསུམ་ལྡན	TSE	slob ma khyad chos gsum ldan
སློབ་མ་ཆོས་པ	disciple practitioners	slob ma chos pa
སློབ་མ་རྗེས་འཛིན	abhisheka	slob ma rjes 'dzin
སློབ་མ་ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ལམ	lam shes gang zhig gang zag gi bdag med tsam rtogs pa'i nyi tshe ba'i mkhyen pa ste, nyan thos kyi lam shes pa'i lam shes so, sher phyin don bdun cu'i nang gses	slob ma nyan thos kyi lam
སློབ་མ་སྟ་གོན	abhisheka preliminary/ prelude liturgies	slob ma sta gon
སློབ་མ་སྟ་གོན་བཞི	CHN	slob ma sta gon bzhi
སློབ་མ་རྣམས	students	slob ma rnams
སློབ་མ་མྱོང་བ	become a student	slob ma myong ba
སློབ་མ་ཞུགས་པ	conduct the abhisheka, enter disciples [into the mandala]	slob ma zhugs pa
སློབ་མ་གཞན་དག	the other pupils	slob ma gzhan dag
སློབ་མ་གཞུག	conduct empowerment (enter disciples)	slob ma gzhug
སློབ་མ་གཞུག་པ	to enter disciples [into the mandala]	slob ma gzhug pa
སློབ་མ་གཟུང	conduct abhisheka, "enter disciples"	slob ma gzung
སློབ་མ་ཡོན་བདག	disciples and patrons	slob ma yon bdag
སློབ་མ་རབ་ཏུ་བྱུང་བ	cleric disciples	slob ma rab tu byung ba
སློབ་མ་རིས་སུ་གཏོགས	included among disciples	slob ma ris su gtogs
སློབ་མའི་རྒྱུད	minds of students	slob ma'i rgyud
སློབ་མའི་རྒྱུད་དུ	into the disciple's mind	slob ma'i rgyud du
སློབ་མའི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four qualities of a student	slob ma'i chos bzhi
སློབ་མའི་བྱ་བ་ལྔ	the five actions of the student	slob ma'i bya ba lnga
སློབ་མའི་དབང་ལྔ	the five abhishekas for students	slob ma'i dbang lnga
སློབ་མའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ	the five characteristics of a student	slob ma'i mtshan nyid lnga
སློབ་མའི་མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ	the three characteristics of a student [blo gsal ba dang, shes 'dod, bla mar gus pa]	slob ma'i mtshan nyid gsum
སློབ་མའི་ཡ་གྱལ	main disciple	slob ma'i ya gyal
སློབ་མིང	student/ school name	slob ming
སློབ་ཚད་ལག་འཁྱེར	diploma	slob tshad lag 'khyer
སློབ་ཚན	lesson, lesson, division of lessons	slob tshan
སློབ་ཚན་ཁྲིད	teach a lesson, course, class	slob tshan khrid
སློབ་ཚན་གྱི་རིམ་པ	syllabus	slob tshan gyi rim pa
སློབ་ཚིག	words to be studied, teaching, instruction	slob tshig
སློབ་ཚོགས	students	slob tshogs
སློབ་མཚན	a faction of disciples	slob mtshan
སློབ་མཚམས་འཇོག	stop school/ class, go on strike	slob mtshams 'jog
སློབ་གཞི	teaching materials	slob gzhi
སློབ་ཡ	teacher, instructor	slob ya
སློབ་ཡོན	school fee, tuition	slob yon
སློབ་རན	school age	slob ran
སློབ་རིམ	level	slob rim
སློབ་ལམ	path of training	slob lam
སློབ་ལམ་བཞི	the four paths of learning	slob lam bzhi
ལམ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་པ	comprised of the 'path without impediment' of the final point of the four paths of training	lam gyis bsdus pa
སློབ་ལོ	school age, year of school	slob lo
སློབ་ལོ་བཞི་པ	4th year of school	slob lo bzhi pa
སློབ་ལོ་ལོན	reach school age	slob lo lon
སློབ་ལོབ་འགན་ལེན	by a teacher of what is to be taught &, by the student to be learned receive the responsibility	slob lob 'gan len
སློབ་ཤིང	black board	slob shing
སློབ་ཤེས་ཅན	scholar despot	slob shes can
སློབ་ཤོར	school dropout, uneducated person	slob shor
སློབ་བཤད	1) instructions; 2) explain training/studies; 3) lam 'bras slob bshad	slob bshad
སློབ་སེང	study period breaks	slob seng
སློབ་གསར	new student	slob gsar
སློབ་གསེང	time between classes/ school	slob gseng
སློབ་གསེང་གྱི་འཚོ་བ	extra-curricular activities	slob gseng gyi 'tsho ba
སློབ་གསེང་བྱེད་སྒོ	extra-curricular activities	slob gseng byed sgo
སློབ་གསེང་ཚོ་ཆུང	extra-curricular activities	slob gseng tsho chung
སློབ་གསོ	education *, advice, instruction	slob gso
སློབ་གསོ་ཆུང་རིམ	primary education	slob gso chung rim
སློབ་གསོ་གཏོང	educate, give advice/ instruction	slob gso gtong
སློབ་གསོ་མཐོ་རིམ	higher education	slob gso mtho rim
སློབ་གསོ་བྱེད	educate	slob gso byed
སློབ་གསོ་བྱེད་པ	to educate 2839	slob gso byed pa
སློབ་གསོ་འབྲིང་རིམ	middle/ secondary education	slob gso 'bring rim
སློབ་གསོ་ལུའུ	Bureau of Education	slob gso lu'u
སློབ་གསོའི་བྱེད་ཕྱོགས	educational policy	slob gso'i byed phyogs
སློབ་གསོའི་རིག་པ	educational science, pedagogy	slob gso'i rig pa
སློབས	[p bslabs, f bslab] slobs,, 1) study! learn!; 2) teach! instruct! show!; 3) follow!	slobs
སློམ	small basket w cover	slom
སློས	1) sla ba! two [arch] zlos pa	slos
སློས་པ	say tell express, explain	slos pa
གསག	(A; 1) ma tshor ba; 2) quick, //gsag gis 'gro ba	gsag
གསག་གཅོད	par rko ba'i yig ris dngos gzhi rko spyad cig	gsag gcod
གསག་པ	to sew together	gsag pa
གསག་སྦྱང	practice, accumulation and purification	gsag sbyang
གསག་ལ	traverse	gsag la
གསག་སློག་ནས	transverse	gsag slog nas
གསག་གསིར	[arch] bang brgyugs te mchong ba,//gsag gsir sgra	gsag gsir
གསགས	accumulate	gsags
གསགས་ཀ	gseg ka	gsags ka
གསགས་ཚད	whatever you have accumulated	gsags tshad
གསང	thems - Secret Document	gsang
གསང་སྐད	slang	gsang skad
གསང་སྐུད	gsang ba'i sgo nas brda gtong ngam, glod 'then byed pa'i thread/ cord	gsang skud
གསང་སྐོར	Secret Cycle, innermost cycle of teaching	gsang skor
གསང་སྐོར་སྙིང་ཁྲག་ལྟ་བུ	innermost	gsang skor snying khrag lta bu
ཅཡཅླེ་ཝཧིཆ་ཨིས་ལིཀེ་ཐེ་ཧེཨརཏ	blood	cycle which is like the heart
གསང་སྐོར་ལུས་དཀྱིལ	the body-mandala of the Secret Cycle	gsang skor lus dkyil
གསང་ཁང	secret room	gsang khang
གསང་ཁབས	loincloth	gsang khabs
གསང་ཁུང	1) anus; 2) privy-hole	gsang khung
གསང་ཁྲིད	instruction in the innermost meaning; secret guidance manual	gsang khrid
གསང་འཁྱེར	smuggle	gsang 'khyer
གསང་འཁྱེར་བྱེད	smuggle	gsang 'khyer byed
གསང་གེ་འཕྲུལ་པོ་ཆེ	Sange Trhulpoche. One of {ma sang dpun dgu} Nine Masang Brothers	gsang ge 'phrul po che
གསང་གོས	undergarment	gsang gos
གསང་གྲོགས	consort	gsang grogs
གསང་གྲོས	secret discussion/ talks	gsang gros
གསང་གྲོས་བྱེད	have secret discussion/ talks	gsang gros byed
གསང་འགྲེལ	Commentary on the [Essence of] Secrets	gsang 'grel
གསང་འགྲེལ་སྤར་ཁབ	commentary on Guhyagarbha tantra by Lalitavajra	gsang 'grel spar khab
གསང་འགྲེལ་ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་མུན་སེལ	commentary on the Guhyagarbha tantra / by klong chen rab 'byams pa dri med 'od zer	gsang 'grel phyogs bcu mun sel
གསང་རྒྱ	important and gsang ba dam po, secrecy, confidentiality	gsang rgya
གསང་རྒྱ་བྱེད	keep secret	gsang rgya byed
གསང་རྒྱ་བྱེད་པ	keep secret	gsang rgya byed pa
གསང་རྒྱ་མཛད་པ	to keep secret, main the seal of secrecy	gsang rgya mdzad pa
གསང་རྒྱ་ཤོར	leak/ break a secret	gsang rgya shor
གསང་རྒྱས་རིགས་བརྒྱ	100 authentic families of buddhas	gsang rgyas rigs brgya
གསང་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Secrets	gsang rgyud
གསང་རྒྱུད་ཟབ་མོ	the profound tantras of secrecy	gsang rgyud zab mo
གསང་སྒོ	private door	gsang sgo
གསང་སྒོ་འཆལ་བ	misuse the secret gate	gsang sgo 'chal ba
གསང་སྒོ་མ་རལ་པ	to keep secret	gsang sgo ma ral pa
གསང་སྒྲུབ	secret sadhana	gsang sgrub
གསང་སྒྲུབ་མཚོ་སྐྱེས་སྙིང་ཐིག	Secret Sadhana Tsokye Nyingtig	gsang sgrub mtsho skyes snying thig
གསང་སྒྲོ	scrotum	gsang sgro
གསང་སྒྲོག	disclose secrets	gsang sgrog
གསང་སྒྲོགས	mystic association	gsang sgrogs
གསང་སྒྲོགས་ཀྱི་རྩ་ལྟུང	the root downfall of revealing the secret	gsang sgrogs kyi rtsa ltung
གསང་སྔག་ཀྱི་ཆོས་འཁོར	wheel of doctrine of the secret mantras gsang sngags} Secret mantra, seal, esoteric teachings, guhyamantra [see also under mantra and gnostic mantra [-]. The {dgongs pa grub pa'i rgyud}. says, "One...	gsang sngag kyi chos 'khor
མནཏྲས་ཝཧིཆ་ཨརེ་ཐེ་ནོན	dual pristine cognition." Thus dh ra i^s originate from the teachings of the transcendent perfection of discriminative awareness, gnostic mantras from the kriy tantra and secret mantras from the ma...	mantras which are the non
གསང་སྔགས	Guhyamantra - Secret Mantra. Synonymous with Vajrayana or tantric teachings. 'Guhya' means secret, both concealed and self-secret. 'Mantra' in one context means eminent, excellent, or praiseworthy	gsang sngags
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི	occult	gsang sngags kyi
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	thatness of	gsang sngags kyi kho na nyid
གུཧྱ	mantra. The five aspects of Mantra: The thatness of deity is the relative bodhichitta. The thatness of self is the body mandala. The thatness of guhyamantra is the placement of the seedsyllable and...	guhya
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བཞི	the four special dharmas of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi khyad chos bzhi
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད	the tantras of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi rgyud
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་བཞི	the four kinds/ orders of anuttara tantras of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi rgyud sde bzhi
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཆོག	the rituals of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi chog
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས	the tantric teachings	gsang sngags kyi chos
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་འཁོར	wheel of the doctrine of the secret mantras	gsang sngags kyi chos 'khor
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ	the teachings of the Secret Mantra	gsang sngags kyi bstan pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of secret mantras. secret Mantrayana; secret mantra vehicle, secret Mantrayana, vehicle of secret mantras	gsang sngags kyi theg pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ལྔ	the five vehicles of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi theg pa lnga
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the great vehicle of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi theg pa chen po
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་དྲུག	Six limits of Secret Mantra. The views of the expedient and definitive meaning, the implied and the not implied, the literal and the not literal	gsang sngags kyi mtha' drug
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དམ་ཚིག	samaya of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi dam tshig
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གདུལ་བྱ་བཞི	the four kinds of students/ styles of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi gdul bya bzhi
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	tantric vows	gsang sngags kyi sdom pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ	tantric yogis	gsang sngags kyi rnal 'byor pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	* vessel of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi snod
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད	spros med, shin tu spros med)	gsang sngags kyi spyod
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ	Secret Mantra conduct	gsang sngags kyi spyod pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བཞི	the four mudras of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi phyag rgya bzhi
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་བབས་སོ་གསུམ	the three transmissions of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi babs so gsum
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དབང་བསྐུར	empowerment of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi dbang bskur
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་དབེན་པ་གསུམ	three solitudes of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi dben pa gsum
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་གཞུང	tantric works	gsang sngags kyi gzhung
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་བཟླས་བརྗོད	recitation of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi bzlas brjod
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་རིམ	the stages of the Secret Mantra path	gsang sngags kyi lam rim
གསང་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སློབ་མ་ལྔ	the five kinds of students of secret mantra	gsang sngags kyi slob ma lnga
གསང་སྔགས་ཁྲོམ་དུ་ཀློག	secret spells are read in the market	gsang sngags khrom du klog
གསང་སྔགས་གྲུབ་པ	mystic	gsang sngags grub pa
གསང་སྔགས་དགའ་ཚལ	Sang-ngak Gatsel, in Tsari	gsang sngags dga' tshal
གསང་སྔགས་རྒྱལ	king of secret mantra, Vajradhara rdo rje 'chang	gsang sngags rgyal
གསང་སྔགས་རྒྱལ་པོ	imperial Mantrayana	gsang sngags rgyal po
གསང་སྔགས་ངེས་པ་དོན	Secret Mantra of true meaning	gsang sngags nges pa don
གསང་སྔགས་སྔ་འགྱུར	Early Translation School of Secret Mantra	gsang sngags snga 'gyur
དུ་བརྗོད་པ་ངེས་པ་དོན་གྱི་འབྲུག་སྒྲ་ངེས་དོན་འབྲུག་སྒྲ	refutations of the charges leveled against the tantric works of Nyingmapa at various periods in Tibetan history; by Sogdokpa Lodrö Gyaltsen; {sog bzlog pa blo gros rgyal mtshan} (b. 1552) gsang sng...	du brjod pa nges pa don gyi 'brug sgra nges don 'brug sgra
གསང་སྔགས་ཆེན་མོ	mahamantra nusarini, (spell goddess, one of 5 gcan rim pa)	gsang sngags chen mo
གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས	teachings of secret mantra	gsang sngags chos
གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་གླིང	the seat of 'brug chen	gsang sngags chos gling
གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་རྫོང	{gsang sngags chos rdzong	gsang sngags chos rdzong
གསང་སྔགས་རྗེས་འཛིན་མ	among the gzungs chen grva lnga	gsang sngags rjes 'dzin ma
གསང་སྔགས་རྙིང་མ	Old Tantras, the Ancient Tantric Tradition	gsang sngags rnying ma
གསང་སྔགས་ཐིག་ལེ	work on mysticism	gsang sngags thig le
གསང་སྔགས་ཐེག་པ	Secret Mantra Way	gsang sngags theg pa
གསང་སྔགས་མཐའ་དྲུག	Six Limits of Secret Mantra gsang sngags mtha' bzhi'i bdag nyid can the secret mantra possessing mastery over the four extremes gsang sngags rdo rje bkod pa'i pho brang - Vajra Arrayed Palace of Gu...	gsang sngags mtha' drug
གསང་སྔགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ	Vajra Vehicles of Secret Mantra	gsang sngags rdo rje theg pa
གསང་སྔགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ་རྒྱུད	tantra[yana], the secret and sublime vajra vehicle of secret mantra, vajrayana	gsang sngags rdo rje theg pa rgyud
གསང་སྔགས་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཐེག་པ	Vajra Vehicle of Secret Mantra	gsang sngags rdo rje'i theg pa
གསང་སྔགས་ནང་གི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ	Inner Tantras of Secret Mantra. Usually this term refers to the Three Inner Tantras of Mahayoga, Anu Yoga and Ati Yoga, but in the specific context of the translation of the tantras in chapter twel...	gsang sngags nang gi rgyud sde
གསང་སྔགས་པ	follower of tantra	gsang sngags pa
གསང་སྔགས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ཚུལ	the Secret Mantrayana tradition	gsang sngags spyod pa'i tshul
གསང་སྔགས་ཕོ་བྲང	Sang-ngak Podrang, Mansion of Secret Mantra	gsang sngags pho brang
གསང་སྔགས་ཕྱི་འགྱུར	new tantric tradition	gsang sngags phyi 'gyur
གསང་སྔགས་ཕྱི་ནང་གི་ཆོས	Outer and inner teachings of Secret Mantra. The three outer are Kriya, Upa and Yoga. The three inner are Mahayoga, Anu Yoga and Ati Yoga gsang sngags phyi nang rgyud sde'i lha	gsang sngags phyi nang gi chos
གསང་སྔགས་ཕྱི་པ	outer secret mantra	gsang sngags phyi pa
གསང་སྔགས་ཕྱིའི་རྒྱུད་སྡེ	Outer Tantras of Secret Mantra. The tantras belonging to the three vehicles of Kriya, Ubhaya and Yoga. In the context of the Old School of the Early Translations, Ngagyur Nyingma, they were transla...	gsang sngags phyi'i rgyud sde
གསང་སྔགས་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་ལམ	secret mantra the path of blessings	gsang sngags byin rlabs kyi lam
གསང་སྔགས་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱི་ལམ་པ	Secret Mantra is the path of blessings	gsang sngags byin rlabs kyi lam pa
གསང་སྔགས་བླ་མ	a master of Secret Mantra, Vajrayana master	gsang sngags bla ma
གསང་སྔགས་བླ་མེད	tradition of the higher tantras	gsang sngags bla med
གསང་སྔགས་དབང་ཁྲིད	empowerments and instructions of the Secret Mantrayana gsang sngags mer gnas dngos grub ster Abiding in the flame of secret mantras accomplishment is conferred gsang sngags mer gnas dngos grub ster...	gsang sngags dbang khrid
གསང་སྔགས་སྨྲ	one versed in mysticism	gsang sngags smra
གསང་སྔགས་སྨྲ་བ	exponent of secret mantra	gsang sngags smra ba
གསང་སྔགས་འཛིན་པ	tantrika	gsang sngags 'dzin pa
གསང་སྔགས་འོག་སྡེ	Lower sections of Secret Mantra. The Three Outer Tantras: Kriya, Charya/Upa, and Yoga Tantra	gsang sngags 'og sde
གསང་སྔགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious secret mantra	gsang sngags rin po che
གསང་སྔགས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	enter into the secret mantra gsang sngags la spyod pa'i rnal 'byor pa tantric yogi gsang sngags la spyod pa'i rnal 'byor pa tantric yogin gsang sngags lam rim rin chen gsal ba'i	gsang sngags la 'jug pa
གསང་སྔགས་གསར་རྙིང	new and old schools of the secret mantra	gsang sngags gsar rnying
གསང་སྔགས་གསར་རྙིང་ལུགས་གཉིས	the old and new traditions of secret mantra	gsang sngags gsar rnying lugs gnyis
གསང་སྔགས་གསར་མ	new tr/ sarma tantras */ tantra schools	gsang sngags gsar ma
གསང་སྔགས་གསར་མ་པ	sarma tantrika, follower of the new translation tantra schools	gsang sngags gsar ma pa
གསང་བསྔགས་ཀྱི	esoteric	gsang bsngags kyi
གསང་གཅོད	toilet	gsang gcod
གསང་ལྕི	urine and faeces, piss & shit	gsang lci
གསང་ཆ	1) sba gsang, means of hiding/ keeping secret// gsang cha byed pa; 2) lkog nas btang ba'i yig cha'am 'phrin (/ clarity ??	gsang cha
གསང་ཆ་བྱེད་པ	produce means of hiding/ keeping secret	gsang cha byed pa
གསང་ཆབ	urine	gsang chab
གསང་ཆེན	Great Secret; Vajrayana	gsang chen
གསང་ཆེན་ངེས་པའི	(of/ into) the definitive supreme secret; defining the supreme secret	gsang chen nges pa'i
གསང་ཆེན་ངེས་པའི་བཀའ	the profoundly secret true teaching gsang chen chos kyi bdud rtsis myos pa'i mgrin glu thol byung dad pa'i rang sgra	gsang chen nges pa'i bka'
གསང་ཆེན་བསྟན་པ	the great secret doctrine	gsang chen bstan pa
གསང་ཆེན་བསྟན་པའི་གསལ་བྱེད	clarify/ spread the great secret doctrine	gsang chen bstan pa'i gsal byed
གསང་ཆེན་དོན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	the true vehicle of the great secret	gsang chen don gyi theg pa
གསང་ཆེན་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Perfection of the Great secret	gsang chen rdzogs pa chen po
གསང་ཆེན་རིགས་གཅིག	the single family of the great secret	gsang chen rigs gcig
གསང་ཆེན་རོལ་པ	Display of Great Secret charnel ground	gsang chen rol pa
གསང་མཆོད	secret offering	gsang mchod
གསང་མཆོད་ལྔ	five secret offerings	gsang mchod lnga
གསང་ཇུས་འགོད	scheme, plot secretly	gsang jus 'god
གསང་ཉུལ	spy[ing]	gsang nyul
གསང་སྙིང	Guhyagarbha, secret essence	gsang snying
གསང་སྙིང་གི་དབང་ལྔ	Five Empowerments According to the Secret Nucleus. They are also known as the five empowerments of ability {nus pa'i dbang lnga} which are included among the fifteen ordinary sacraments of empowerm...	gsang snying gi dbang lnga
གསང་སྙིང་པོ	the Guhya-garbhatantra, main theme of the Mahayoga tantras	gsang snying po
གསང་སྙིང་ཡིག་ཆ	collection of texts explaining the Guhyagarbha tantra, the fundamental example of the Mahayoga class	gsang snying yig cha
གསང་གཏམ	secrets/ coded/ essential talk/ narration, secrets	gsang gtam
གསང་གཏམ་འགྲོལ་བ	explain the secret discourse	gsang gtam 'grol ba
གསང་གཏེང	secretly discovered terma	gsang gteng
གསང་གཏེར	secret treasure	gsang gter
གསང་གཏོར	sprinkling of consecrated water in mystical rites	gsang gtor
གསང་རྟགས	non-evident/ imperceivable reason, secret sign, password	gsang rtags
གསང་སྟབས་ཀྱིས	secretly	gsang stabs kyis
གསང་སྟེ་སྟོན་པ	reveal a thing treated as a secret, let out a secret, hide oneself, be concealed	gsang ste ston pa
གསང་སྟོན	gsang ste ston pa'i slob dpon, mentor	gsang ston
གསང་སྟོན་མཛད	acted as the abbot who asked the private questions	gsang ston mdzad
གསང་ཐག	string for manipulating something not visible to others	gsang thag
གསང་ཐག་འཐེན	pull strings, maneuver secretly to gan something	gsang thag 'then
གསང་ཐབས	stealth, surreptitiously	gsang thabs
གསང་ཐིག་སྐོར་གསུམ	Sangthik Korsum. Termas by Chokgyur Lingpa and Jamgön Kongtrül	gsang thig skor gsum
གསང་ཐིག་ཕུར་པ	Sangtik Purpa; terma revealed by Chokgyur Lingpa	gsang thig phur pa
གསང་ཐུབ་པ	able to keep a secret	gsang thub pa
གསང་ཐེམས	Secret Document	gsang thems
གསང་དུ	recently	gsang du
གསང་དོན	secret pith/ meaning/ main point/ matter/ business	gsang don
གསང་བདག	the master of the Secret doctrine, the lord of secret[s] Vajrapani; 3) Vaishravana	gsang bdag
གསང་བདག་དགོངས་རྒྱན	smin gling lo chen's exegesis of the Guhyagarbha	gsang bdag dgongs rgyan
གསང་བདག་གཅེས་ཕྲེང་རྡོ་རྗེ	Precious	gsang bdag gces phreng rdo rje
གསང་བདག་དྲེགས་པ་ཀུན་འདུལ	revealed by Pema Ledreltsel	gsang bdag dregs pa kun 'dul
གསང་བདག་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Vajradhara, the lord of secrets	gsang bdag rdo rje 'chang
གསང་བདག་རྡོ་རྗེ་བེ་ཅོན	Vajra Club of the Lord of Secrets. Sangdag Dorje Bechön	gsang bdag rdo rje be con
གསང་བདག་ཕྱག་རྡོར	Guhyapati Vajrapani	gsang bdag phyag rdor
གསང་མདོར	at the secret place	gsang mdor
གསང་འདུས	Guhyasamaja	gsang 'dus
གསང་འདུས་དཀའ་གནད་མཐའ་གཅོད	{dpal gsang ba 'dus pa'i rtsa rgyud le'u bcu bdun po so so'i rdo rje'i tshig rkang zab mo'i lam 'khrugs pa rnams sgrub pa po'i nyams len gyi rim par bsgrigs pa le'u so so'i dka' gnad mtha' gcod pa'...	gsang 'dus dka' gnad mtha' gcod
གསང་འདུས་འཕགས་སྐོར	the Guhyasamaja teachings of Arya Nagarjuna	gsang 'dus 'phags skor
གསང་འདུས་བླ་མའི་ཐུགས་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྐོར	a collection of teachings from the revelations of {gu ru chos kyi dbang phyug} (1212-1273)	gsang 'dus bla ma'i thugs sgrub kyi skor
གསང་འདུས་མི་བསྐྱོད་པ	Guhyasamaja Akshobhya	gsang 'dus mi bskyod pa
གསང་འདུས་རིམ་ང་གདན་རྫོགས	by Tsongkhapa	gsang 'dus rim nga gdan rdzogs
གསང་འདུས་བཤད་རྒྱུད	Exposition Tantra of Guhyasamaja	gsang 'dus bshad rgyud
གསང་འདེབས	reminder	gsang 'debs
གསང་འདྲིས་ཚོལ	seek dinner friends	gsang 'dris tshol
གསང་རྡོར	SA gsang ba'i bdag po, rdo rje 'chang	gsang rdor
གསང་བརྡ	secretly told words, secret signals, password	gsang brda
གསང་བརྡ་གཏོང	give [secretly told words, secret signals, password]	gsang brda gtong
གསང་བརྡ་གཏོང་བ	give [secretly told words, secret signals, password]	gsang brda gtong ba
གསང་བརྡ་སྤྲད	give [secretly told words, secret signals, password]	gsang brda sprad
གསང་བརྡ་སྤྲད་པ	give [secretly told words, secret signals, password]	gsang brda sprad pa
གསང་ན་སྐུའི་བསྟན་པ	the doctrine of the esoteric kaya, teaching of the secret kaya	gsang na sku'i bstan pa
གསང་གནད	pith/ point that is not wellknown/ secret	gsang gnad
གསང་གནས	sex region, perineum loins, mysteries, secrets, secret abode, place where secret matters are done, private parts of the body, pudenda, anus, secret parts, secret place	gsang gnas
གསང་གནས་འཁོར་ལོ	chakra of the secret place	gsang gnas 'khor lo
གསང་གནས་བདེ་སྐྱོང	1 of 'khor lo drug, cakra which maintains pleasure at the secret place	gsang gnas bde skyong
གསང་གནས་བདེ་སྐྱོང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	the	gsang gnas bde skyong gi 'khor lo
གསང་པ	recovered [from fainting]	gsang pa
གསང་པོ	yangs po'am 'khrol po,//skad gsang po,//kha gsang po	gsang po
གསང་སྤྱོད	lavatory, toilet, washroom, water closet, latrine, copulation, sexual union, privy, secret conduct, sexual practices of yoga	gsang spyod
གསང་སྤྱོད་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས	the yogic discipline of secret practice	gsang spyod brtul zhugs
གསང་སྤྱོད་བྱས	to perform secret practices	gsang spyod byas
གསང་སྤྱོད་བྱེད	perform secret practices 2843	gsang spyod byed
གསང་ཕུ	skyid shod smad kyi gsang phu zhes pa'i yul dang dgon pa	gsang phu
གསང་ཕུ་དགོན་པ	gsang phu ne'u thog monastery	gsang phu dgon pa
གསང་ཕུ་ནེའུ་ཐོག	{gsang phu ne'u thog} Monastery	gsang phu ne'u thog
གསང་ཕུག	Secret Cave, at Drak Yerpa	gsang phug
གསང་ཕུའི་དབྱར་ཆོས	gsang phu ne'u thog monastery summer assembly chos ra	gsang phu'i dbyar chos
གསང་ཕོད	secret dress, secret gown, undergarment	gsang phod
གསང་འཕྲིན	secret message/ letter/ information	gsang 'phrin
གསང་བ་གྲུབ་པ	type of lha	gsang ba grub pa
གསང་བ་འགྱིང་བའི་ལྟ་སྟངས	secret gaze	gsang ba 'gying ba'i lta stangs
གསང་བ་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་རྒྱུད	Secret Ocean Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	gsang ba rgya mtsho'i rgyud
གསང་བ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	the Secret Magical Display; {rgyud gsang ba snying po}	gsang ba sgyu 'phrul
གསང་བ་སྒྲིགས་པ	conspiracy, secret arrangement or design, intrigue	gsang ba sgrigs pa
གསང་བ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་སློང	the attitude of the secret mantrayana	gsang ba sngags kyi kun slong
གསང་བ་སྔགས་སྤྱོད	to practice the way of the Secret Mantra	gsang ba sngags spyod
གསང་བ་ཆེན་པོ	supreme secret/ mystery (of being)	gsang ba chen po
གསང་བ་ཆེན་པོ་དེ་ཉིད་གྲུབ་པ	Accomplishment of the Great Secret Thatness	gsang ba chen po de nyid grub pa
གསང་བ་ཆོས་ལུགས	the secret Buddhist tradition	gsang ba chos lugs
གསང་བ་གཉིས	2 secret ingredients (khams dkar, khams dmar)	gsang ba gnyis
གསང་བ་སྙིང་ཏིག	the Secret Heart Essence. Syn {rdzogs pa chen po}	gsang ba snying tig
གསང་བ་སྙིང་ཐིག	Secret Heart Essence, transmitted by Guru Padmasambhava	gsang ba snying thig
གསང་བ་སྙིང་པོ	Gyuhagarbha, the secret essence	gsang ba snying po
གསང་བ་དམ་པ་མ	a yaksini princess	gsang ba dam pa ma
གསང་བ་དམ་པོ	very secret/ confidential	gsang ba dam po
གསང་བ་དུར་ཁྲོད་ཁུ་བྱུག་རོལ་བ	root sutra of anuyoga	gsang ba dur khrod khu byug rol ba
གསང་བ་དོན་གྱི་ཕྲིན་ལས	the Sadhana of the Ultimate Secret. Syn {kun bzang don phrin}	gsang ba don gyi phrin las
གསང་བ་དོན་གྱི་བླ་མ	the secret, ultimate guru	gsang ba don gyi bla ma
གསང་བ་བདག་ལྟའི་རུ་དྲ	innermost Rudra of Egotism; secret rudra of viewing in terms of a self	gsang ba bdag lta'i ru dra
གསང་བ་བདུས་པ	Sang dui	gsang ba bdus pa
གསང་བ་བདེ་སྐྱོང་གི་འཁོར་ལོ	secret	gsang ba bde skyong gi 'khor lo
གསང་བ་འདུས་པ	Guhyasamaja. Literally, 'Assembly of Secrets.' One of the major tantras and yidams of the New School	gsang ba 'dus pa
ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕ༹ཐེར	tantras	of the father
གསང་བ་འདུས་པའི་བཤད་རྒྱུད	Exposition Tantra of Guhyasamaja	gsang ba 'dus pa'i bshad rgyud
གསང་བ་སྡེ་དྲུག	Six Secret Sections. Listed in Chapter 12 of Sanglingma. The five first are found in the most common list of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras gsang ba rnal 'byor chen po'i rgyud rdo	gsang ba sde drug
རྗེ་རྩེ་མོ	The Vajra Peak Tantra; Skt.	rje rtse mo
Vཨཇྲསེཁར	mahaguhya-yogatantra, (T 480) gsang ba rnal 'byor chen po'i rgyud rdo	Vajrasekhara
གསང་བ་པ	guhyaka, class of yaksa living in the himalayas	gsang ba pa
གསང་བ་སྤྱི་རྒྱུད	Secret General Tantra. In Derge Kangyur it is text 806 in volume Wa. pages 141-168. dkyil 'khor thams cad kyi spyi'i cho ga gsang ba'i rgyud. In Sanskrit: Sarvamandala Samanyavidhinam Guhya Tantra....	gsang ba spyi rgyud
གསང་བ་སྤྱི་ཆོག	General Secret Rite:. Also known as gsang ba spyi rgyud. 2844 Text 806 in Derge Kangyur. Vol. Wa, pages 141-168. The Sarva mandala Samanyavidhinam Guhya Tantra. No known Sanskrit original survives,...	gsang ba spyi chog
གསང་བ་བྱེད	keep secret/ confidential	gsang ba byed
གསང་བ་བླ་ན་མེད་པ་སྐོར	most inner secret cycle	gsang ba bla na med pa skor
གསང་བ་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the most inner secret cycle	gsang ba bla na med pa'i theg pa
གསང་བ་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་ཟབ་ལམ	the profound path of unsurpassable secretness	gsang ba bla na med pa'i zab lam
གསང་བ་བླ་མེད	secret and unexcelled section	gsang ba bla med
གསང་བ་བླ་མེད་སྐོར	innermost secret category of man ngag sde gsang ba dbang bsgyur thabs kyi theg pa secret empowerment upaya vehicles	gsang ba bla med skor
གསང་བ་སྦས་པའི་ཚུལ	manner of keeping secrecy	gsang ba sbas pa'i tshul
གསང་བ་མེ་ལྔ་བསྟེན་པའི་ལྟ་བ	doctrine of tirthika school of ancient india	gsang ba me lnga bsten pa'i lta ba
གསང་བ་སྨྲ	charm	gsang ba smra
གསང་བ་འཛིན	Vajrapani	gsang ba 'dzin
གསང་བ་ཟབ་མོ	secret & profound teachings	gsang ba zab mo
གསང་བ་ཟབ་མོའི་དབང་གསུམ	the three secret profound empowerments; the latter includes the three secret empowerments of profundity	gsang ba zab mo'i dbang gsum
གསང་བ་ཡང་ཟབ	secret and most profound	gsang ba yang zab
གསང་བ་ཡུམ་གྱི་ཟ་མ་ཏོག	the womb of the secret consort [sm. dharmadhatu]	gsang ba yum gyi za ma tog
གསང་བ་ཡུལ་གྱི་མཁའ	the space of the secret consort. Syn{chos kyi dbyings}	gsang ba yul gyi mkha'
གསང་བ་ཡེ་ཤེས	revealed by Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo	gsang ba ye shes
གསང་བ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས	Total Perfection of Esoteric Attainments, a teaching on {bka' brgyad}. Syn {bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs}	gsang ba yongs rdzogs
གསང་བ་རིག་པ	SA zhang zhung snyan rgyud gsang ba rig pa gcer mthong du bshad pa - secret teachings of the methods of meditation on the vision of the light gsang ba rlung sems la dbang thob pa attainment of powe...	gsang ba rig pa
གསང་བ་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་གི་དབང	the secret empowerment that is very unelaborate	gsang ba shin tu spros bral gi dbang
གསང་བ་གསུམ	Three Secrets. 1) The three indestructible realities of buddhabody, speech and mind. three secrets; 2) don dang lung dang nges pa'i gsang ba gsum	gsang ba gsum
གསང་བ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱད་པ	name of text	gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyad pa
གསང་བ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	inconceivable secrets, {gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i mdo}	gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyab pa
གསང་བའི	private	gsang ba'i
གསང་བའི་དཀར་གསུམ	three secret white virtues	gsang ba'i dkar gsum
གསང་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	three secret mandalas	gsang ba'i dkyil 'khor gsum
གསང་བའི་སྐད་ཆ	tete-a-tete	gsang ba'i skad cha
གསང་བའི་སྐུ	esoteric form / kaya	gsang ba'i sku
གསང་བའི་འཁོར་ལོ	secret chakra, the female organ	gsang ba'i 'khor lo
གསང་བའི་གར	mystic dance, secret dancing and singing	gsang ba'i gar
གསང་བའི་གྲོས་མོལ	secret discussion	gsang ba'i gros mol
གསང་བའི་དགྲ་གསུམ	three secret enemies	gsang ba'i dgra gsum
གསང་བའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	secret king, king of secrets	gsang ba'i rgyal po
གསང་བའི་རྒྱས་བཏབ	kept secret	gsang ba'i rgyas btab
གསང་བའི་སྒྲོལ་གིང་བཅུ་བརྒྱད	18 secret liberators	gsang ba'i sgrol ging bcu brgyad
གསང་བའི་སྒྲོལ་གིང་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	Eighteen Secret Liberators. As listed in Nebesky-Wojkowitz, op. cit. pp. 278-279, these comprise nine male spirits {pho dgu} namely, vajra {ging ka ra}, {rdo rje gnod sbyin}, {rdo rje srin po}, {rd...	gsang ba'i sgrol ging bco brgyad
གསང་བའི་མངར་གསུམ	the secret three sweets	gsang ba'i mngar gsum
གསང་བའི་རྔེའུ་ཆུང	secret small	gsang ba'i rnge'u chung
གསང་བའི་བཅོས་ཐབས	secret method	gsang ba'i bcos thabs
གསང་བའི་ཆོས	doctrine of the mystics	gsang ba'i chos
གསང་བའི་མཆོད་པ	secret offering	gsang ba'i mchod pa
གསང་བའི་སྙིང་པོ	Sangwey Nyingpo	gsang ba'i snying po
གསང་བའི་ཏང	secret/ underground party	gsang ba'i tang
གསང་བའི་གཏམ	secret talk	gsang ba'i gtam
གསང་བའི་རྟགས	secret sign	gsang ba'i rtags
གསང་བའི་རྟགས་ཐབས	secret sign	gsang ba'i rtags thabs
གསང་བའི་རྟགས་ཐབས་གསུམ	1) {mer mer}. 2) {chil chil} 3) {dga' ya le}	gsang ba'i rtags thabs gsum
གསང་བའི་རྟགས་འབྱུང	will have limitless secret signs	gsang ba'i rtags 'byung
གསང་བའི་རྟགས་སུ	as the secret signs	gsang ba'i rtags su
གསང་བའི་ཐེག་པ	secret vehicle	gsang ba'i theg pa
གསང་བའི་ཐོག	secretly	gsang ba'i thog
གསང་བའི་དུར་ཁྲོད་བརྒྱད	the eight secret / innermost charnel grounds	gsang ba'i dur khrod brgyad
གསང་བའི་དོང	secret fire pit	gsang ba'i dong
གསང་བའི་དོན	hidden reality	gsang ba'i don
གསང་བའི་བདག་གཉིད	mysticism	gsang ba'i bdag gnyid
གསང་བའི་བདག་པོ	1) Vaishravana/ rnam thos sras; 2) Vajrapani, possessor of the secret, lord of secret	gsang ba'i bdag po
གསང་བའི་བདག་མོ	lady of the secret teaching, Yeshe Tsogyal	gsang ba'i bdag mo
གསང་བའི་འདྲེས	secret union	gsang ba'i 'dres
གསང་བའི་རྡོ་རྗེ	penis	gsang ba'i rdo rje
གསང་བའི་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	1) {bdud po kha	gsang ba'i sde brgyad
ཐུན་རཀ	sha}. 2) {gshin rje gshed po dmar po} 3) {klu bdud naa ga raa dza} 4) {gnod sbyin bshan pa gri thogs} 5) {ma mo srid pa khram 'debs} 6) {btsan yam shud srod len} 7) {bdud po re lde 'gong yag} 8) {s...	thun rak
གསང་བའི་ནད	disease of the genitals	gsang ba'i nad
གསང་བའི་རྣམ་ཐར	of Shabkar	gsang ba'i rnam thar
གསང་བའི་པད་མ	female organ	gsang ba'i pad ma
གསང་བའི་སྤྱོད་པ	Secret conduct. One of the different types of conduct used as an enhancement practice	gsang ba'i spyod pa
གསང་བའི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	secret mudra	gsang ba'i phyag rgya
གསང་བའི་བར་ཆད	Secret or innermost obstacles. The habitual tendency for grasping and fixation	gsang ba'i bar chad
གསང་བའི་བླ་མ	the deity dbang phyug chen po	gsang ba'i bla ma
གསང་བའི་དབང	secret abhisheka	gsang ba'i dbang
གསང་བའི་དབང་གཉིས	refer to jamgon kongtrul, {shes-bya kun-khyab mdzod} ol 2, pp 748-749, and peking kangyur, vol 9, pp 276- 277]	gsang ba'i dbang gnyis
གསང་བའི་མ་མོ་ཆེན་མོ	great secret mamos	gsang ba'i ma mo chen mo
གསང་བའི་མན་ངག	secret oral instructions	gsang ba'i man ngag
གསང་བའི་མིང	secret name	gsang ba'i ming
གསང་བའི་རྩ་འཛུགས	secret/ underground organization	gsang ba'i rtsa 'dzugs
གསང་བའི་མཚན་བརྒྱད	the 8 secret names	gsang ba'i mtshan brgyad
གསང་བའི་ཟླ་བ	Guhyachandra	gsang ba'i zla ba
གསང་བའི་ཡུམ་མཆོག	supreme secret consort	gsang ba'i yum mchog
གསང་བའི་རང་རྣམ	secret autobiographies	gsang ba'i rang rnam
གསང་བའི་རླུང་ལྔ	the secret five pranas, {ye shes lnga}	gsang ba'i rlung lnga
གསང་བའི་ལས་འགུལ	secret movement	gsang ba'i las 'gul
གསང་བའི་གསུང	concealed oral teachings and precepts	gsang ba'i gsung
གསང་བའི་ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 secret classes of gods and spirits	gsang ba'i lha srin sde brgyad
གསང་བའི་ལྷོང	obstructing spirits or obstacles, eg khro ba dang yid mug pa	gsang ba'i lhong
གསང་བའི་ཨང་ཀི	secret code	gsang ba'i ang ki
གསང་བར	confidentially, secretly, secrecy gsang bar bya ba gsang bar byed pa what is kept secret and the 1 who keeps it secret	gsang bar
གསང་བྱ	that which should be kept secret	gsang bya
གསང་བྲོས	escape, secret flight	gsang bros
གསང་དབང	1) secret abhisheka; 2) Vajrapani secret empowerment	gsang dbang
གསང་སྦེད	hide, hidden	gsang sbed
གསང་སྦེད་བྱེད	hide	gsang sbed byed
གསང་མིང	secret name, pen name	gsang ming
གསང་མོལ	secret talk/ private conversation	gsang mol
གསང་མྱུལ	spy, secret agent, detective	gsang myul
གསང་མྱུལ་གྱི་གནམ་གྲུ	spy plane	gsang myul gyi gnam gru
གསང་མྱུལ་རུ་ཁག	intelligence unit	gsang myul ru khag
གསང་ཚིག	words of secret	gsang tshig
གསང་མཚན	penis, secret name (initiation), esoteric initiatory name, secret name obtained during initiation, secret name conferred during a tantric initiation	gsang mtshan
གསང་མཛོད	secret treasury	gsang mdzod
གསང་མཛོད་གསུམ	the three secret treasuries gsang 'dzin dbyings phyug pad ma'i lcam Yeshe Tsogyal	gsang mdzod gsum
གསང་རྫོགས	Syn {bka' brgyad gsang ba yongs rdzogs} terma text in six volumes by {gu ru chos dbang}	gsang rdzogs
གསང་རྫོགས་རྒྱུད	Tantra of Secret Perfection	gsang rdzogs rgyud
གསང་ཞུ	intelligence report, secret information 2846	gsang zhu
གསང་ཟབ	secret & profound	gsang zab
གསང་འོས	that which is confidential, fit to be kept secret	gsang 'os
གསང་ཡིག	code	gsang yig
གསང་ཡུམ	sangyum, secret consort, sangyum	gsang yum
གསང་ཡུམ་སྦས་ཚུལ	Sangyum in the secret style	gsang yum sbas tshul
གསང་ཡེ	Guhyajnana; (mkha' 'gro gsang ba ye shes	gsang ye
གསང་རླིག	testicles	gsang rlig
གསང་རླུང་དབུ་མར	SA rlung sbyor lnga gsang rlung dbu mar 'jug pa'i rlung sbyor practice of prana to trap the secret prana in the central channel	gsang rlung dbu mar
གསང་ལམ	secret path/ road/ way	gsang lam
གསང་ཤོར	leak, tell a secret	gsang shor
གསང་ས	1) sa gnad kyi 'dus mdo; 2) sba gsang bya sa'i yul	gsang sa
གསང་སྲུང	keep secret	gsang srung
གསང་སློང	secret upheaval	gsang slong
གསང་སློབ	gelong vow giver gsang ste ston pa'i slob dpon	gsang slob
གསང་གསང་སྦྱོད	keep very secret	gsang gsang sbyod
གསང་གསུམ	three secrets / mysteries; see {gsang ba gsum}	gsang gsum
གསངས	keep secret	gsangs
གསངས་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་བཞི	four gates of Secret Mantra; [listing, Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 138]	gsangs sngags kyi sgo bzhi
གསངས་སྔགས་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ	secret mantra of vajrayana	gsangs sngags rdo rje theg pa
གསངས་གནས་བདེ་སྐྱོང་འཁོར་ལོ	bliss guarding center	gsangs gnas bde skyong 'khor lo
གསངས་པ	[p gsang ba]	gsangs pa
གསངས་བ་འདུས་པ	Syn {thugs kyi rgyud gsang ba 'dus pa}	gsangs ba 'dus pa
ན་གསལ་བའི་གནད	the essential which clarifies the primordially pure intention wherein all things have ceased, just as it is, by focusing on the secret object which is awareness just as it is	na gsal ba'i gnad
གསད	kill, slay, SA gsod pa, put out, extinguished, future of gsod, killing	gsad
གསད་པ	dead; ft. of {gsod pa}	gsad pa
གསད་བྱ་བ	murder	gsad bya ba
གསན	[h] {thos pa} study, see, listen to, hear, understand	gsan
གསན་རྒྱ	knowledge, understanding	gsan rgya
གསན་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ངེས	either you have not learned enough or	gsan rgya chung nges
གསན་འཇོག་གནང	[h] {thos pa} study, see, listen to, hear, understand	gsan 'jog gnang
གསན་པ	heard	gsan pa
གསན་པར་ཞུ་འཚལ	please listen! [h]	gsan par zhu 'tshal
གསན་སྦྱངས་མཛད་པ	(h) to study and train	gsan sbyangs mdzad pa
གསན་སྦྱོང་གནང	[H] study, listen to and practice	gsan sbyong gnang
གསན་འཚལ	listen! [imp]	gsan 'tshal
གསན་འཛོལ	misunderstanding	gsan 'dzol
གསན་འཛོལ་གནང	misunderstand	gsan 'dzol gnang
གསན་བཞེས	nyan 'jog //bsam 'char gsan bzhes gnang ba	gsan bzhes
གསན་བཞེས་མཛད	learn, study [h]	gsan bzhes mdzad
གསན་གཟིགས	learning, studying [h], noticing, hearing &/or seeing	gsan gzigs
གསན་ཡིག	record of teachings received [h]	gsan yig
གསན་ཡིག་སྐོར	record of teachings, initiations, and instructions received	gsan yig skor
གསན་བསམ	learning, studying [h]	gsan bsam
གསབ	[f gsob pa] [p bsabs, f bsab] make up for, supplement, repay, return	gsab
གསབ་ཁྲིད	make-up class	gsab khrid
གསབ་རྒྱུགས	make-up examination	gsab rgyugs
གསབ་དངུལ	compensation, indemnity	gsab dngul
གསབ་བཅོས	remedy	gsab bcos
གསབ་ཆ	kha gsab byed dngos rigs,//a'tsho ba'i gsab cha,//gun gsab	gsab cha
གསབ་འདེབས	make-up planting	gsab 'debs
གསབ་འདེམས	run-off election	gsab 'dems
གསབ་སྣོན	subsidy	gsab snon
གསབ་སྣོན་བྱེད	subsidize	gsab snon byed
གསབ་པ	SA gsob pa	gsab pa
གསབ་སྦྱོང	supplemental/ make up study	gsab sbyong
གསབ་སྦྱོང་སློབ་གྲྭ	supplemental/ make up study school	gsab sbyong slob grwa
གསབ་ཚིག	at the end kha skong gi tshul du bris pa'i tshig kha shas grammatical complement	gsab tshig
གསབ་འཛུགས	make-up planting	gsab 'dzugs
གསམ་མཆོག	excellent thoughts gsam gtan gyi don du brtson par 'gyur strive for the benefit of meditation	gsam mchog
གསའ	snow leopard	gsa'
གསའ་ཡས	a number	gsa' yas
གསར	new, fresh [comp gsar pa]	gsar
གསར་རྐྱང	something as soon as it is made, brand new	gsar rkyang
གསར་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་པ	regenerate	gsar skyed byed pa
གསར་སྐྱེས	fresh shoots of leaves, newborn, fresh shoots and leaves, buds	gsar skyes
གསར་སྐྱེས་སྟོབས་ཤུགས	new forces/ strength	gsar skyes stobs shugs
གསར་སྐྲུན	create, produce, invent, founding/ establishing a new creation	gsar skrun
གསར་སྐྲུན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	creativity	gsar skrun gyi rang bzhin
གསར་སྐྲུན་གྱི་སློབས་པ	initiative	gsar skrun gyi slobs pa
གསར་སྐྲུན་བྱེད	found/ establish a new creation, invent	gsar skrun byed
གསར་སྐྲུན་བྱེད་པ	create, produce	gsar skrun byed pa
གསར་བསྐྲུན	founding/ establishing a new creation	gsar bskrun
གསར་བསྐྲུན་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	creativity	gsar bskrun gyi rang bzhin
གསར་བསྐྲུན་གྱི་སློབས་པ	initiative	gsar bskrun gyi slobs pa
གསར་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	found/ establish a new creation, invent	gsar bskrun byed
གསར་ཁང	press, news agency, newspaper office	gsar khang
གསར་མཁན	newspaper reporter	gsar mkhan
གསར་འཁྲུངས	newly born	gsar 'khrungs
གསར་གད་པ	inquire into, investigate, examine, study	gsar gad pa
གསར་གྲོགས	gsar du 'grogs pa'i grogs	gsar grogs
གསར་འགོད	news report	gsar 'god
གསར་འགོད་གླེང་བརྗོད	news editorial	gsar 'god gleng brjod
གསར་འགོད་པ	newspaper reporter	gsar 'god pa
གསར་འགོད་བྱེད	report	gsar 'god byed
གསར་འགོད་ལྷན་ཚོགས	news/ press conference	gsar 'god lhan tshogs
གསར་འགྱུར	communication, news dispatch, news, information, broadcast, news	gsar 'gyur
གསར་འགྱུར་ཀློག་སྐོར	newspaper reading circle	gsar 'gyur klog skor
གསར་འགྱུར་ཁང	news agency	gsar 'gyur khang
གསར་འགྱུར་གྱི་ལས་དོན	journalism	gsar 'gyur gyi las don
གསར་འགྱུར་གློག་འཕྲིན	news broadcast	gsar 'gyur glog 'phrin
གསར་འགྱུར་འགོད་མཁན	news reporter, news correspondent	gsar 'gyur 'god mkhan
ཨོདད	job man, journalist, newspaperman	odd
གསར་འགྱུར་འགོད་མི	news reporter, news correspondent	gsar 'gyur 'god mi
གསར་འགྱུར་དངོས་བསུས་གློག་བརྙན	newsreel	gsar 'gyur dngos bsus glog brnyan
གསར་འགྱུར་མདོར་བསྡུས	news summary	gsar 'gyur mdor bsdus
གསར་འགྱུར་འཕར་མ	special edition of a newspaper/ magazine	gsar 'gyur 'phar ma
གསར་འགྱུར་བྱེད་པོ	news reporter, news correspondent	gsar 'gyur byed po
གསར་འགྱུར་རྩོམས་སྒྲིག་མཛད་པོ	newspaper editor	gsar 'gyur rtsoms sgrig mdzad po
གསར་འགྱུར་འཚོལ་མཁན	news reporter, news correspondent	gsar 'gyur 'tshol mkhan
གསར་འགྱུར་ལས་བྱེད་པ	news reporter, news correspondent	gsar 'gyur las byed pa
གསར་འགྲོགས་པ	tell each other news, make new acquaintance	gsar 'grogs pa
གསར་རྒྱག	construct, build [anew]	gsar rgyag
གསར་རྒྱག་བྱེད	construct, build [anew]	gsar rgyag byed
གསར་བསྒྱུར	New translation schools	gsar bsgyur
གསར་བསྒྲིགས	revised arrangement	gsar bsgrigs
གསར་ངད	dri ngad gsar pa,//gyon pa'i gsar ngad	gsar ngad
གསར་ངས་བྱེད་པ	to befriend easily / quickly	gsar ngas byed pa
གསར་བཅོས	newly bcos pa, innovation, change, transformation	gsar bcos
གསར་བཅོས་བྱེད	newly bcos pa, innovate, change, transform	gsar bcos byed
གསར་མཇལ	inaugural ceremony for officials including interview w Dalai Lama	gsar mjal
གསར་བརྗེ	* revolution, complete renovation	gsar brje
གསར་བརྗེ་བ	revolutionaries	gsar brje ba
གསར་བརྗེར་ངོ་རྒོལ	counter-revolution	gsar brjer ngo rgol
གསར་བརྗེར་ངོ་རྒོལ་པ	counterrevolutionary [person]	gsar brjer ngo rgol pa
གསར་བརྗེར་ངོ་རྒོལ་བ	counterrevolutionary [person/ element]	gsar brjer ngo rgol ba
གསར་རྙིང	new and old, stale and fresh, age, duration, existence	gsar rnying
གསར་རྙེད	discovery	gsar rnyed
གསར་རྙེད་པ	discover	gsar rnyed pa
གསར་སྙིང	Sarma and Nyingma, new and old schools	gsar snying
གསར་གཏོད	invention, invention, new creation	gsar gtod
གསར་གཏོད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་སྟོབས	initiative	gsar gtod kyi snying stobs
གསར་གཏོད་བྱེད	create, invent, found, establish	gsar gtod byed
གསར་གཏོད་བྱེད་པ	invert	gsar gtod byed pa
གསར་གཏོད་བྱེད་དབང	inventor's right, patent, copyright	gsar gtod byed dbang
གསར་གཏོད་རླབས་ཆེན	great invention/ creation	gsar gtod rlabs chen
གསར་སྟོད	new	gsar stod
གསར་ཐོག	new produce, the year's crop	gsar thog
གསར་ཐོབ	an attainment of something new	gsar thob
གསར་འཐོམ་པ	deprecatory word for a new monk	gsar 'thom pa
གསར་དར	newly spread	gsar dar
གསར་དུ	newly, anew	gsar du
གསར་དུ་བསྐྲུན་པའི་དངོས་པོ	newly made thing	gsar du bskrun pa'i dngos po
གསར་དུ་འཆོས་པ	renew, renovate, repair	gsar du 'chos pa
གསར་དུ་རྟོགས་པའི་བློ	a mental episode that newly realizes / identifies [its object] [ggd]	gsar du rtogs pa'i blo
གསར་དུ་བྱུང་བ	newly arisen	gsar du byung ba
གསར་དུ་འབྱུང་བ	to come out newly	gsar du 'byung ba
གསར་དུ་མི་བསླུ་བའི་ཤེས་པ	the cognition which is newly nondeceptive [ggd]	gsar du mi bslu ba'i shes pa
གསར་དུ་འཛུགས	establish newly/ anew	gsar du 'dzugs
གསར་དུ་བཞད	refresh	gsar du bzhad
གསར་དུ་འོངས་པ	newcomer, guest	gsar du 'ongs pa
གསར་དུ་བསད་པའི	fresh meat	gsar du bsad pa'i
གསར་དུ་བསད་པའི་ཤ	flesh of animals that have just been slaughtered	gsar du bsad pa'i sha
གསར་དེབ	magazine	gsar deb
གསར་ནས	fresh or new barley	gsar nas
གསར་གནས	news	gsar gnas
གསར་པ	Das: = gsar ba. new, fresh, young. [mss]	gsar pa
གསར་པ་མ་ཡིན་པ	conventional	gsar pa ma yin pa
གསར་པ་བཟོ་བ	contrive	gsar pa bzo ba
གསར་པ་གསར་རྐྱང	brand new, as soon at it was made	gsar pa gsar rkyang
གསར་པ་གསར་པ	fresh shoots of leaves	gsar pa gsar pa
གསར་སྤེལ	spreading news, distributing newspapers broadcasting news, publicity	gsar spel
གསར་སྤེལ་ལས་ཁུངས	news information service	gsar spel las khungs
གསར་སྤྲོས	made newly to arise	gsar spros
གསར་འཕྲིན	newsletter	gsar 'phrin
གསར་བ	newcomers	gsar ba
གསར་བ་རྙེད་པ	discover	gsar ba rnyed pa
གསར་བའི	new	gsar ba'i
གསར་བུ	new, beginner	gsar bu
གསར་བུ་བ	1) bslab pa gzhon pa; 2) unexperienced person, new beginner; 3) youth	gsar bu ba
གསར་འབྱེད	* create, invent, found, establish	gsar 'byed
གསར་འབྱོར	new arrival, newly arrived	gsar 'byor
གསར་སྦོལ	break/ plow new land, reclaim land	gsar sbol
གསར་སྦོལ་བྱེད	break/ plow new land, reclaim land	gsar sbol byed
གསར་མ	the New Schools / Traditions; new translation school [as in {gsar ma}, {rnying ma}	gsar ma
གསར་མ་པ	new tradition 2848	gsar ma pa
གསར་མ་བ	after the great tr rin chen bzang po mantrayana tr into Tibetan tradition holders	gsar ma ba
གསར་བཙུགས	create, produce, newly established/ constructed, built, founded	gsar btsugs
གསར་བཙུགས་བྱེད	create, produce, newly establish/ construct, build, found	gsar btsugs byed
གསར་བཙུགས་བྱེད་པ	create, produce, newly establish/ construct, build, found	gsar btsugs byed pa
གསར་རྩོམ	creating/ composing/ write [literature/ art]	gsar rtsom
གསར་རྩོམ་བྱེད	creating/ composing/ write [literature/ art]	gsar rtsom byed
གསར་ཚེས	years, months, days etc beginning	gsar tshes
གསར་འཚེ	fresh disease or accident	gsar 'tshe
གསར་འཛུགས	newly established	gsar 'dzugs
གསར་འཛུགས་བྱེད	create, produce, newly establish/ construct, build, found	gsar 'dzugs byed
གསར་འཛུགས་བྱེད་པ	create, produce, newly establish/ construct, build, found	gsar 'dzugs byed pa
གསར་གཟིགས་པ	newspaper audience/ readers	gsar gzigs pa
གསར་བཟོ	making/ creating/ inventing anew	gsar bzo
གསར་བཟོ་མཁས་པ	creative	gsar bzo mkhas pa
གསར་བཟོ་བྱེད	make/ create/ invent anew	gsar bzo byed
གསར་བཟོ་ལ་མཁས་པ	ingenious	gsar bzo la mkhas pa
གསར་བཟོས	newly made/ manufactured [thing]	gsar bzos
གསར་འོངས	fresh arrival	gsar 'ongs
གསར་ཡིག	literature which lists the works studied by the author	gsar yig
གསར་ཤོག	newspaper	gsar shog
གསར་ཤོག་ཁང	press	gsar shog khang
གསར་ཤོག་རྩོམ་སྒྲིབས་བྱེད་པོ	newspaper editor	gsar shog rtsom sgribs byed po
གསར་སླད་མེད་པ	without any recent injury to health	gsar slad med pa
གསར་བསལ་ལྟར	according to recent news	gsar bsal ltar
གསལ་བཀྲ	Bright Effulgence; text name	gsal bkra
གསལ་བཀྲོལ	give a detailed commentary	gsal bkrol
གསལ་ཁ	[degree of] clarity, specification	gsal kha
གསལ་ཁ་གཏོད་པ	some understood idea	gsal kha gtod pa
ཧབི༹ང་བེཨེན་རེ	explained, is clarified	having been re
གསལ་ཁུང	hole	gsal khung
གསལ་གྱུར་བ	evident, manifest	gsal gyur ba
གསལ་གྲགས	fame, celebrated, well-known	gsal grags
གསལ་འགྲིབ་མེད་པ	free[dom] from bright and dim	gsal 'grib med pa
གསལ་འགྲིབ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom beyond clarification or obscuration	gsal 'grib med pa'i ye shes
གསལ་རྒྱལ	Prasenajit {ko sa la'i rgyal po gsal rgyal} Prasenajit, the king of Kosala	gsal rgyal
གསལ་རྒྱས	to elucidate, clearly and in detail	gsal rgyas
གསལ་སྒྲིབ་ཀུན་བྲལ	that can be neither clarified nor obscured, beyond being made clear or obscured	gsal sgrib kun bral
གསལ་སྒྲོན	bright light, shining lamp	gsal sgron
གསལ་སྒྲོས་ཆེ	large characters (letters)	gsal sgros che
གསལ་སྒྲོས་དག	clear & elegant & pure	gsal sgros dag
གསལ་བསྒྲགས	declaration, notice, notification	gsal bsgrags
གསལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད	make a statement, proclaim, declare	gsal bsgrags byed
གསལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་མཁན	spokesman, speaker	gsal bsgrags byed mkhan
གསལ་བསྒྲགས་བྱེད་པ	to state, declare	gsal bsgrags byed pa
གསལ་ངར	sharp (edge of) lucidity/ clarity	gsal ngar
གསལ་ཆ	(activity of stong pa), revealing and manifesting, clarity, vividness of awareness as well as the object in meditative practice, one the side of luminous clarity	gsal cha
གསལ་ཆ་ཅན	clear	gsal cha can
གསལ་ཆ་ཅན་གྱི་གནས་ཚུལ	clear account	gsal cha can gyi gnas tshul
གསལ་ཆ་ཆུང་བ	little clarity	gsal cha chung ba
གསལ་ཆ་ཆེ་བ	great clarity	gsal cha che ba
གསལ་ཆ་ཐོན་པ	clarify 2849	gsal cha thon pa
གསལ་ཆ་མི་སྣང་བ	to lacking lucid clarity	gsal cha mi snang ba
གསལ་ཆ་མེད་པ	w/o clarity	gsal cha med pa
གསལ་ཆ་ཞིག་གནང	pray send me a message	gsal cha zhig gnang
གསལ་ཆ་ཞིག་གནང་ཞུ	i request you to give me a clear account	gsal cha zhig gnang zhu
གསལ་ཆའི་ངར	strength of clarity with which the mind apprehends the object	gsal cha'i ngar
གསལ་ཆེན	great luster, sun	gsal chen
གསལ་མཆོག	supremely shining	gsal mchog
གསལ་རྗེ	great tibetan mountain range	gsal rje
གསལ་རྗེན	direct naked clarity, directly and nakedly clear, real, camouflaged clarity	gsal rjen
གསལ་རྗེན་རྗེན་པ	direct naked clarity	gsal rjen rjen pa
གསལ་རྗེན་དུ་སྟོན	show the naked reality/ in naked clarity	gsal rjen du ston
གསལ་རྗེན་དུ་སྟོན་པ	show the naked reality/ in naked clarity	gsal rjen du ston pa
གསལ་རྗེན་དུ་འདོན	expose, bering into the open	gsal rjen du 'don
གསལ་ཉམས	clarity experience	gsal nyams
གསལ་བཏབ	to visualize; read aloud clearly [ about reading a text]	gsal btab
གསལ་བཏབ་པ	{/ 'debs pa} to visualize clearly; to formulate/ fix clearly (in mind); isc. to highlight	gsal btab pa
གསལ་རྟོགས	clear realization, perceived in fine detail, thorough understanding	gsal rtogs
གསལ་སྟོང	clarity and emptiness, the unity of clarity and openness, luminosity-emptiness, aware emptiness, empty awareness, state of aware emptiness	gsal stong
གསལ་སྟོང་ཀྱི་ཉམས	the experience of luminous emptiness	gsal stong kyi nyams
གསལ་སྟོང་རྗེན་པ	the naked state of cognizant emptiness; an empty brilliance in its nakedness	gsal stong rjen pa
གསལ་སྟོང་བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་པའི་ཉམས	an experience of luminous emptiness beyond words	gsal stong brjod du med pa'i nyams
གསལ་སྟོང་ཉམས	experience of clarity and emptiness	gsal stong nyams
གསལ་སྟོང་གཉིས་མེད	inseparability of clarity and emptiness	gsal stong gnyis med
གསལ་སྟོང་ཐུགས་ཀྱི་མཁའ་དབྱིངས	the	gsal stong thugs kyi mkha' dbyings
གསལ་སྟོང་དུ་ཧྲིག་གེ	vividly awake in cognizant emptiness	gsal stong du hrig ge
གསལ་སྟོང་བདེ་ཉམས	experiences of clarity & emptiness & pleasure	gsal stong bde nyams
གསལ་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད	inseparability of clarity and emptiness	gsal stong dbyer med
གསལ་སྟོང་འཛིན་མེད	ungraspable luminosity emptiness * not fixating luminous emptiness	gsal stong 'dzin med
གསལ་སྟོང་འཛིན་མེད་ཀྱི་ལྟ་བ	view that does not fixate luminous emptiness	gsal stong 'dzin med kyi lta ba
གསལ་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	unified cognizance and emptiness	gsal stong zung 'jug
གསལ་སྟོང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	spontaneously present wisdom of luminosity and emptiness	gsal stong ye shes lhun grub
གསལ་སྟོང་རིག	rigpa related to clarity and emptiness	gsal stong rig
གསལ་སྟོང་རིག་པ	rigpa of clarity and emptiness	gsal stong rig pa
གསལ་སྟོང་རླུང	prana for clarity and emptiness, prana relating to clarity and emptiness, clarity & emptiness related to prana	gsal stong rlung
གསལ་སྟོང་རླུང་གི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱ	The Yoga of Prana for Clarity and Emptiness (in volume one of Chögyal Namkhai Norbu's klong gsal teachings) expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 111]	gsal stong rlung gi rnal 'byor rgya
གསལ་ཐག་ཆོད	evident	gsal thag chod
གསལ་ཐེབས	be reminded/ recall and think about the meaning te so that it arises in mind,//khyed kyis bshad rjes nga'i sems la gsal thebs byung	gsal thebs
གསལ་ཐེབས་པ	to be clear, established clearly	gsal thebs pa
གསལ་ཐེབས་བྱུང	[it] refreshed my memory	gsal thebs byung
གསལ་མཐོང	sky, clear sight	gsal mthong
གསལ་འཐེབས་པ	be opened out clearly, made plain	gsal 'thebs pa
གསལ་དག	correct	gsal dag
གསལ་དག་སྙན་པའི་ཚིག	words that are lucid, well enunciated and pleasant sounding	gsal dag snyan pa'i tshig
གསལ་དག་འབྱུང་ལྔ	clarity and purity of the 5 elements	gsal dag 'byung lnga
གསལ་དང་སྟོང་པ	cognizance and emptiness	gsal dang stong pa
གསལ་དངས	{gsal dvangs} pristine lucidity	gsal dangs
གསལ་དྭངས	vivid and lucid	gsal dwangs
གསལ་དབ༹ངས	{gsal dangs} pristine lucidity	gsal dvangs
གསལ་དབ༹ངས་བརྟན་པར་འབར་བ	burns bright and steady	gsal dvangs brtan par 'bar ba
གསལ་དྭངས་ཕྱེད་དྭངས་པ	translucence	gsal dwangs phyed dwangs pa
གསལ་དྭངས་ཕྱེད་པ	brilliantly clear	gsal dwangs phyed pa
གསལ་གདངས	cognizant expression	gsal gdangs
གསལ་སྟོང་ལྷང་ངེ	vivid wakefulness of luminosity/emptiness	gsal stong lhang nge
གསལ་སྟོན	demonstration, show clearly, demonstrate	gsal ston
གསལ་སྟོན་བྱེད་མཁན	exponent	gsal ston byed mkhan
གསལ་སྟོན་བྱེད་པ	demonstrate, represent, unravel	gsal ston byed pa
གསལ་བརྟན་ཚད་བརྒྱད	eight measures of clarity and steadiness; [detailed	gsal brtan tshad brgyad
གསལ་གདབ་པ	to visualize	gsal gdab pa
གསལ་གདེབས	SA gsal gdab	gsal gdebs
གསལ་བདོ་བ	vividness 2850	gsal bdo ba
གསལ་མདངས	luminous radiance	gsal mdangs
གསལ་འདེབས	1) to remind / make clear; to refresh the memory, remind oneself; to make a clear exposition, to lay something out clearly. 2) Remindinginstruction. The pointing-out instruction for recognizing the...	gsal 'debs
གསལ་འདེབས་པ	1) to visualize, imagine, visualize clearly, bring to mind. 2) to elucidate {gsal zhig 'debs} I will now explain this clearly. to fix clearly in mind	gsal 'debs pa
གསལ་འདེབས་བེ་བུམ	small note book to remind 1 of the teaching	gsal 'debs be bum
གསལ་འདེབས་བྱས	to remind oneself	gsal 'debs byas
གསལ་འདེབས་བྱེད	remind[ing instruction], make clear, advise, guide, shine, illumine, visualize, imagine, bring to mind, elucidate	gsal 'debs byed
གསལ་འདེབས་བྱེད་པ	remind[ing instruction], make clear, advise, guide, shine, illumine, visualize, imagine, bring to mind, elucidate	gsal 'debs byed pa
གསལ་འདེབས་ཞལ་གདམས	reminder	gsal 'debs zhal gdams
གསལ་འདེབས་སུ	to remind of	gsal 'debs su
གསལ་འདེབས་སུ་ཤེས་པ	have distinct recollection of a thing	gsal 'debs su shes pa
གསལ་ལྡན	sun, brilliant, fire, blue color, epithet of buddha, son of the moon, a planet in indian and tibetan astronomy	gsal ldan
གསལ་ལྡན་གྱི་ཆོས	phenomenon which has manifestations	gsal ldan gyi chos
གསལ་ལྡན་མ	city of kasi, modern benares	gsal ldan ma
གསལ་བརྡ	notice, announcement	gsal brda
གསལ་གནས	sky, void space	gsal gnas
གསལ་རྣམ	distinct	gsal rnam
གསལ་རྣམ་ཅན	distinct	gsal rnam can
གསལ་སྣང	vivid presence	gsal snang
གསལ་སྣང་འགྲུབ་པ	establish luminous appearance	gsal snang 'grub pa
གསལ་སྣང་སྟོང་གཟུགས	clearly apparent yet empty forms	gsal snang stong gzugs
གསལ་སྣང་ཐོན་པ	to bring forth a vivid presence	gsal snang thon pa
གསལ་སྣང་བདེ	clarity & vision & bliss	gsal snang bde
གསལ་སྣང་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	vivid presence is the mudra	gsal snang phyag rgya
གསལ་སྣང་མིག་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་འཕོ་བ	magical phowa of vivid presence	gsal snang mig 'phrul gyi 'pho ba
གསལ་སྣང་རྫོགས	perfect/ completed luminous appearance/ vivid presence	gsal snang rdzogs
གསལ་སྣང་རྫོགས་པ	the vivid presence of the former is perfected	gsal snang rdzogs pa
གསལ་སྣང་ཤར་བ	When a vivid presence appears	gsal snang shar ba
གསལ་པོ	bright, shining, clear, obvious, definite, distinct, visible, vivid, light, pure, visible to a great distance, conspicuous, distinct, apparent, intelligible, clear, clearly	gsal po
གསལ་པོ་བེད་པ	dim	gsal po bed pa
གསལ་པོ་མེད་པ	ambiguous	gsal po med pa
གསལ་པོ་བཟོ་བ	clarify, articulate, enlighten	gsal po bzo ba
གསལ་པོར	clearly, lucidly, clearly, distinctly, clearly	gsal por
གསལ་པོར་མངོན་བྱུང	have a clear feeling that, had the clear impression that	gsal por mngon byung
གསལ་པོར་སྟོན	show, demonstrate	gsal por ston
གསལ་པོར་ཐོན	reveal, become evident, be shown	gsal por thon
གསལ་པོར་མཐོང	see clearly, clearly saw	gsal por mthong
གསལ་པོར་མཐོང་བ	clearly see	gsal por mthong ba
གསལ་པོར་དྲན	to remember clearly, clearly remembered	gsal por dran
གསལ་པོར་དྲན་གསོས	to remember clearly	gsal por dran gsos
གསལ་པོར་སྣང	clearly visible	gsal por snang
གསལ་པོར་མཚོན་པ	evident	gsal por mtshon pa
གསལ་པོར་ཤེས	to understand	gsal por shes
གསལ་པོར་ཤེས་པ	understand	gsal por shes pa
གསལ་པོར་གཤོད་པ	enunciate	gsal por gshod pa
གསལ་པོར་བཤད	state, declare	gsal por bshad
གསལ་པོར་བཤད་པ	state, declare	gsal por bshad pa
གསལ་སྤུངས་ཀྱི་ཐལ་འགྱུར	many dharmas to be established by the same dharmin and reason	gsal spungs kyi thal 'gyur
གསལ་བ	to illuminate, elucidate	gsal ba
གསལ་བ་ཅན	1) learned person; 2) mthing gsal ba ni rang du rig cing rang du gsal ba - luminosity is self-awareness and selfillumination	gsal ba can
གསལ་བ་འོད་ཀྱི་གླིང	birthplace of the bon teacher gshen rabs	gsal ba 'od kyi gling
གསལ་བ་འོད་གྱི་གླིང	birth place of gshen rab	gsal ba 'od gyi gling
གསལ་བ་རང་བྱུང	Bonpo deity connected with the yellow light	gsal ba rang byung
གསལ་བ་གསུམ་ལྡན	threefold vividness [in development stage]	gsal ba gsum ldan
གསལ་བའི་སྒོ	learned person, gate of clarity/ luminosity	gsal ba'i sgo
གསལ་བའི་སྒྲ	clear voice, murmuring noise	gsal ba'i sgra
གསལ་བའི་ཉམས	experience of clarity; temporary experience of clarity, one of the three {nyams}	gsal ba'i nyams
གསལ་བའི་ཐབས	method of clarity	gsal ba'i thabs
གསལ་བའི་འདྲེན་པ	explanation	gsal ba'i 'dren pa
གསལ་བའི་བརྡ	sign of clarity in which the clarity of all visions which appear manifests automatically, SA brda bzhi, Da of clarity	gsal ba'i brda
གསལ་བའི་ནོར་བུ	the sun	gsal ba'i nor bu
གསལ་བའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of daksa, epithet of durga, SA tha skar	gsal ba'i bu mo
གསལ་བའི་མ་མ	mother of the patriarch daksa	gsal ba'i ma ma
གསལ་བའི་ཚད་བཞི	four measures of clarity; {sal le seng nge lhag ge lhang nge} distinct, alive, vibrant and vivid	gsal ba'i tshad bzhi
གསལ་བའི་གཟུགས	clear forms	gsal ba'i gzugs
གསལ་བའི་ལོ་མ	very useful and important medicine	gsal ba'i lo ma
གསལ་བར	clearly, lucidly, reveal itself clearly	gsal bar
གསལ་བར་བརྗོད་པ	elucidate, describe clearly	gsal bar brjod pa
གསལ་བར་སྟོན་པ	to clearly show	gsal bar ston pa
གསལ་བར་བསྟན་པ	we have seen, clear explanation	gsal bar bstan pa
གསལ་བར་དྲན	to remember clearly	gsal bar dran
གསལ་བར་དྲན་པ	clearly remembered	gsal bar dran pa
གསལ་བར་དྲན་གསོས	to remember quite distinctly	gsal bar dran gsos
གསལ་བར་སྣང	to shed light	gsal bar snang
གསལ་བར་བྱས་པ	clarified	gsal bar byas pa
གསལ་བར་བྱེད	makes clear	gsal bar byed
གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ	elucidation, clarification; to clarify, shed light upon, illuminate, elucidate, explain	gsal bar byed pa
གསལ་བར་མཛད་པ	clarify	gsal bar mdzad pa
གསལ་བར་ཤེས་པ	to identify clearly	gsal bar shes pa
གསལ་བར་བཤད་པ	clear explanation	gsal bar bshad pa
གསལ་བལ	clarity, clear	gsal bal
གསལ་བྱེད	elucidate, illuminate, the 30 simple letters, 1 of 8 phyogs kyi glang po, alphabet, eye, consonants, elucidation	gsal byed
གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན	rigs dang, bya ba, yon tan, rdzas te any of the brjod bya don gyi dngos po bzhi showing rjod byed kyi tshig gcig tshigs bcad kyi rkang pa beginning, middle, and end gsum gang du gnas pa des, rang t...	gsal byed kyi rgyan
གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་བཅུ་གཉིས	the 12 gsal byed ornaments	gsal byed kyi rgyan bcu gnyis
གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ	causal force of illumination	gsal byed kyi rgyu
གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	clarifying acting cause	gsal byed kyi byed rgyu
གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	yi ge'i tshogs	gsal byed kyi tshogs
གསལ་བྱེད་རྐྱང་པ	consonants w/o vowels	gsal byed rkyang pa
གསལ་བྱེད་ངེས་པའི་བྱ་དཀའི་རྒྱན	1 verse's tshig rkang re re', or for four only the consonant sounds w/o the vowels nges pa sbyar te ston pa'i ornament	gsal byed nges pa'i bya dka'i rgyan
གསལ་བྱེད་དབྱངས་བཅས	for the 30 consonants w vowels	gsal byed dbyangs bcas
གསལ་བྱེད་དབྱངས་མེད	the 30 consonants w/o vowels	gsal byed dbyangs med
གསལ་བྱེད་མེ་ལོང་པྲ་ཡི་འཕྱོང	rites of prognostication using a mirror	gsal byed me long pra yi 'phyong
གསལ་བྱེད་མཚམས་སྦྱོར	SK consonants sdeb gcig tu sbyar nas 'don pa'i tshul	gsal byed mtshams sbyor
གསལ་བྱེད་ཡི་གེ	consonant	gsal byed yi ge
གསལ་བྱེད་སུམ་ཅུ	30 consonants of the tibetan alphabet	gsal byed sum cu
གསལ་བྱེད་སོ་བཞི	the thirty-four consonants	gsal byed so bzhi
གསལ་འབྱེད	distinguish, make clear-cut, show clearly	gsal 'byed
གསལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚིག	preposition	gsal 'byed kyi tshig
གསལ་མ	prosperous, a goddess	gsal ma
གསལ་མི་ཐེབས་པ	will not be able to clarify, remind	gsal mi thebs pa
གསལ་མི་གསལ	what is or what isn't	gsal mi gsal
གསལ་མེ	[shining] lamp	gsal me
གསལ་མོ	clear, distinct, clear and unobscured, bright	gsal mo
གསལ་ཙམ	pure clarity	gsal tsam
གསལ་འཚེར	brilliance	gsal 'tsher
གསལ་མཛད	/ name of a bodhisattva, illuminat[or], clarifi[er]	gsal mdzad
གསལ་མཛད་པ	illuminator, clarifier	gsal mdzad pa
གསལ་འཛིན	a place	gsal 'dzin
གསལ་ཞག	spyi zhag [days of the W calendar?] de'i res gza' and gza' dag gi res gza' having examined to see whether they correspond mthun par byas pa'i spyi zhag la gsal zhag ces brjod	gsal zhag
གསལ་ཞིག་འདེབས	I will now explain this clearly	gsal zhig 'debs
གསལ་ཞིང་སྙན་པ	clear and gentle	gsal zhing snyan pa
གསལ་ཞིང་སྙན་པར་གདམས	instruct clearly and gently	gsal zhing snyan par gdams
གསལ་ཞིང་དག་པའི་འོད་ཟེར	radiant and pure rays of light	gsal zhing dag pa'i 'od zer
གསལ་ཞིང་འཚེར་བ	clear and radiant	gsal zhing 'tsher ba
གསལ་ཞིང་རིག་པ	being luminous and cognitive, clear and knowing	gsal zhing rig pa
གསལ་གཞག	excluding and retaining	gsal gzhag
གསལ་འོས	explicit, clear	gsal 'os
གསལ་ཡས	a #	gsal yas
གསལ་རིག	cognizant and conscious, clear awake. 2) term from {mtshan nyid}; one of the characteristics of mind is that it knows things clearly; the bare fact of knowing	gsal rig
གསལ་རིག་གི་བློ	conscious mind	gsal rig gi blo
གསལ་རིག་གི་ཤེས་པ	the conscious mind. Syn {rang rig rang gsal}	gsal rig gi shes pa
གསལ་རིག་རྗེན་ནེ་བ	stark, clear awareness	gsal rig rjen ne ba
གསལ་རིག་རྗེན་པ	stark, clear awareness	gsal rig rjen pa
གསལ་རིག་ཉག་གཅིག	single clarity and presence	gsal rig nyag gcig
གསལ་རིག་སྟོང་གསུམ	luminosity, awareness, and emptiness	gsal rig stong gsum
གསལ་རིག་དང་ལྡན་པ	cognizant and conscious, clear and awake	gsal rig dang ldan pa
གསལ་རིག་དང་བྲལ་བ	not cognizant and conscious, not clear and awake	gsal rig dang bral ba
གསལ་ལ་གོ་བདེ	clear and easy to understand	gsal la go bde
གསལ་ལ་སྒྲིབ་མེད	clear & unobstructed	gsal la sgrib med
གསལ་ལ་དྭངས	bright and sparking, pure, free from impurities	gsal la dwangs
གསལ་ལ་དྭངས་པ	luminous and clear	gsal la dwangs pa
གསལ་ལ་མ་འདྲེས	clear and distinct presence	gsal la ma 'dres
གསལ་ལ་མ་ཚང་བ་མེད་པ	clearly and thoroughly	gsal la ma tshang ba med pa
གསལ་ལ་མ་གསལ	MG, E-T 182: fuzzy, iso, not clear. e.g., a fuzzy picture, dpar gsal la ma gsal zhig. [mss]	gsal la ma gsal
གསལ་ལ་མི་རྟོག	clear and without concepts	gsal la mi rtog
གསལ་ལ་མི་རྟོག་པ	to be cognizant yet nonconceptual; awake yet thoughtfree	gsal la mi rtog pa
གསལ་ལ་མི་གསལ	unclear	gsal la mi gsal
གསལ་ལ་འཚེར་བ	luminous and brilliant	gsal la 'tsher ba
གསལ་ལ་ཧྲིག་གེ་བཞག་པ	present in clear and vivid wakefulness	gsal la hrig ge bzhag pa
གསལ་ལམ་གྱིས	lam gyis - vividly	gsal lam gyis
གསལ་ལམ་མེ	vivid clarity, bright	gsal lam me
གསལ་ལམ་མེར	with vivid clarity	gsal lam mer
གསལ་ལམ་མེར་གནས་པ	to remain vividly clear	gsal lam mer gnas pa
གསལ་ལམ་མེར་ཤར	to shine brightly, vividly appeared gsal lam lam clearly perceived/understood, awake vividness	gsal lam mer shar
གསལ་ལེ	clear	gsal le
གསལ་ལེ་བ	sparkling, clear and vivid	gsal le ba
གསལ་ལེ་འོད	Saleh Ö, Milarepa's chief female disciple	gsal le 'od
གསལ་ལེ་སིང་ངེ	clear and lucid	gsal le sing nge
གསལ་ལོ	clarify!	gsal lo
གསལ་ཤིང	a stick for impalement; a torch; pointed stake for impalement; stake, torch, fire-brand, spear	gsal shing
གསལ་ཤིང་དུ་འཇུག་པ	to impale	gsal shing du 'jug pa
གསལ་ཤིང་པ	impaler, one who has been impaled	gsal shing pa
གསལ་ཤིང་རིག་པ	{gsal rig} lucidity and awareness; (to be) lucid and aware (characteristics of ordinary mind)	gsal shing rig pa
གསལ་ཤེས	thorough understanding	gsal shes
གསལ་བཤད	elucidation, clarification	gsal bshad
གསལ་བཤད་ཀྱི	explanatory	gsal bshad kyi
གསལ་བཤད་གྱི་ཡི་གེ	synopsis, written explanation	gsal bshad gyi yi ge
གསལ་བཤད་བྱེད	[clearly] explain, clarify, explanation, clarification	gsal bshad byed
གསལ་བཤད་བྱེད་པ	explain, illustrate, hand over, make clear, elucidate	gsal bshad byed pa
གསལ་སང་ངེ	bright and clear; lucidly awake	gsal sang nge
གསལ་སང་ངེ་བ	lucidly clear	gsal sang nge ba
གསལ་སིང	pointed stake	gsal sing
གསལ་སིང་ངེ	limpid lucidity/ clarity	gsal sing nge
གསལ་སིང་ངེ་གནས	remain utterly lucid	gsal sing nge gnas
གསལ་སིང་ངེ་བ	perceive very clearly	gsal sing nge ba
གསལ་གསལ་རྗེན་རྗེན	nakedly clear and unobscured	gsal gsal rjen rjen
གསལ་ཧྲིག་གིས་ཕྱུང	brought fourth lucid wakefulness	gsal hrig gis phyung
གསལ་ཧྲིག་གེ	vividly awake	gsal hrig ge
གསལ་ལྷང་ངེ	clear wakefulness, clear and vivid	gsal lhang nge
གསལ་ལྷམ་མེར	vividly clear	gsal lham mer
གསས	officiants, practitioners, synonymous with lha, deity gsas mkhar castle of the gsas, sacred constructions in general, temples, tabernacles, small construction in stone or clay to which are attached...	gsas
གསས་ཁང	B"n temple	gsas khang
གསས་ཁང་གེ་སར་འབུམ་གླིང	Continent of the Hundred Thousand Gesars that is the Castle of the Lha	gsas khang ge sar 'bum gling
གསས་མཁར	[divine] castle [dwelling place of the local gods]	gsas mkhar
གསས་རྗེ་མང་པོ	bon god who suppresses phrag dog	gsas rje mang po
གསས་མོ	mother's milk	gsas mo
གསིག་རྒྱག	shake, rattle	gsig rgyag
གསིག་པ	(tha dad pa bsigs pa, bsig pa, sigs,, shake, rattle; 1) 'dar du 'jug pa dang dkrugs pa'am sprug pa,//lus gsig pa,//brdab gsig gtong ba,//seng ge'i ral pa bsigs nas stag dang 'thab; 2) gyen du bstod...	gsig pa
གསིགས	[p gsig]	gsigs
གསིང་གིས་དབྱེ	using medicines, food and behavior to help clarify or separate the hot characteristics from the cold	gsing gis dbye
གསིང་ཆུ	pond water from meadows and forests	gsing chu
གསིང་བ	syn {gseng ba} to clear up, tidy up, refresh [a state of mind]	gsing ba
གསིང་མ	1) meadow w green grass; 2) little pond n a meadow	gsing ma
གསིང་མ་མེ་ཏོག	flower growing in ne'u gsing	gsing ma me tog
གསིད་པ	mend, repair, pick, sort, hair, wool	gsid pa
གསིན་རྗེ་གཤིད	Yamantaka	gsin rje gshid
གསིར་བ	whirl about, swirl 2853	gsir ba
གསིལ	destroy	gsil
གསིལ་གྱབ	fan	gsil gyab
གསིལ་སྙན	pleasant ringing sound, kind of cymbal	gsil snyan
གསིལ་པ	a little, SA sil bu, shaking	gsil pa
གསིལ་བ	(tha dad pa; 1) play, ring, clang emit sound; 2) bsil ba, gsil ba, gsil,; 1) cut to pieces, break, split, divide; 4) urinate	gsil ba
གསིལ་བའི་མཐའ	the limit of reduction, final reduction. Syn {rtsom gzhi cha med gnyis}	gsil ba'i mtha'
གསིལ་བལ	well-combed wool	gsil bal
གསིལ་བྱེད	staff of tantrika with tinkling bells attached to it	gsil byed
གསིལ་མ	separate pieces, SA sil ma, sil bu	gsil ma
གསིལ་ཟེར་ཅན	moon gsil g.yab - a fan	gsil zer can
གསུ་བེལ	white discharge from the vagina	gsu bel
གསུག	bribe an official	gsug
གསུག་པ	bribe an official	gsug pa
གསུག་ཟ	take/ accept bribes	gsug za
གསུག་ཟ་བ	take/ accept bribes	gsug za ba
གསུགས་མཆོང	parachuting	gsugs mchong
གསུགས་མཆོང་རྒྱག	parachute	gsugs mchong rgyag
གསུགས་མཆོང་བྱེད	parachute	gsugs mchong byed
གསུང	1) speech, words, say, speak, utter, tell [h]; 2) buddha's teachings; 3) buddha dharma; 4) [h] particle; 5) writings of the siddha forefathers; 6) communication, symphony, sound the voice	gsung
གསུང་ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྗོད་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	allexpressing miracles of speech	gsung kun tu brjod pa'i cho 'phrul
གསུང་ཀློག་པ	read the sayings	gsung klog pa
གསུང་སྐྱེས	shravaka, those arisen from speech, shravaka	gsung skyes
གསུང་བསྐུལ	appeal [h]	gsung bskul
གསུང་ཁུངས	source of speaking/ teaching? bshad pa'i khungs,//de gsung ba po'i gsung khungs gang yin zhib phra gsal bshad [subject?	gsung khungs
གསུང་མཁྱེན	form of abject entreaty like i appeal to your honor's sacred words	gsung mkhyen
གསུང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	1 of sku lnga rgyal po	gsung gi rgyal po
གསུང་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ	accomplished/ siddhi of speech	gsung gi dngos grub
གསུང་གི་མངའ་བདག	master[y] of speech, Manjushri	gsung gi mnga' bdag
གསུང་གི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན	a river of speech	gsung gi chu rgyun
གསུང་གི་རྟེན	representing their speech	gsung gi rten
གསུང་གི་ཐིག་ལེ	bindu of speech	gsung gi thig le
གསུང་གི་གདངས	the sound of his voice	gsung gi gdangs
གསུང་གི་བདག་ཉིད	master/ nature of speech	gsung gi bdag nyid
གསུང་གི་བདུད་རྩི	nectar of speech, complimentary expression applied to a person's speech	gsung gi bdud rtsi
གསུང་གི་བདུད་རྩི་མྱང་བ	to savor the nectar of his words / speech	gsung gi bdud rtsi myang ba
གསུང་གི་སྣང་བས་འབྲེལ་ཚད	whoever heard you speak gsung gi snang bas 'brel tshad thar lam	gsung gi snang bas 'brel tshad
གསུང་གི་དཔེ་བྱད་གཉིས	the two minor marks of speech	gsung gi dpe byad gnyis
གསུང་གི་ཕྲིན་ལས	buddha activity of speech	gsung gi phrin las
གསུང་གི་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ	epithet of 'jam dpal	gsung gi dbang phyug chen po
གསུང་གི་དབང་བྱུག	lord of speech	gsung gi dbang byug
གསུང་གི་དབེན་གནས་མཆིམས་ཕུ	power place of Guru rinpoche's speech	gsung gi dben gnas mchims phu
གསུང་གི་བཟླས་པ	the verbal recitation	gsung gi bzlas pa
གསུང་གི་གསང་བ	the secret of speech	gsung gi gsang ba
གསུང་གིན	saying, talking about, reciting, reading, preaching	gsung gin
གསུང་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	ma ala of buddhaspeech	gsung gyi dkyil 'khor
གསུང་གྲོགས	command in reply, SA bka' mchid	gsung grogs
གསུང་གྲོས	instructions	gsung gros
གསུང་གླེགས	1) letter; 2) books of the Buddha's teachings; 3) conversation	gsung glegs
གསུང་གླེང	discussion	gsung gleng
གསུང་གླེང་བགྱིས་པ	discussion had on religious subjects	gsung gleng bgyis pa
གསུང་གླེང་གནང	tell the news, discuss, converse, give a [speech, address, talk] [h]	gsung gleng gnang
གསུང་གླེང་བ	tell a story, converse, discourse, that which is spoken	gsung gleng ba
གསུང་གླེང་བྱུང	conversed	gsung gleng byung
གསུང་གླེང་བྱེད་པ	converse	gsung gleng byed pa
གསུང་བགྲོས	report, statement, opinion	gsung bgros
གསུང་བགྲོས་ཤིག་བྱུང	he spoke of	gsung bgros shig byung
གསུང་མགུར	spiritual song	gsung mgur
གསུང་མགུར་ཤར་གངས་རི་མ	a poem of Buddhist mysticism ; and rje btsun sgrol ma sgrub tshul : a method for the propitiation of the tutelary goddess Tara; by {ri rdzong sras sprul blo bzang tshul khrims chos 'phel} (1860-1926?)	gsung mgur shar gangs ri ma
གསུང་རྒྱ	conference, consultation	gsung rgya
གསུང་རྒྱུ	{de las lhag pa gsung rgyu med pa} he would have nothing to add	gsung rgyu
གསུང་རྒྱུད	oral lineage	gsung rgyud
གསུང་རྒྱུད་ཟླ་གསང་ཐིག་ལེ	the tantra dealing w communication	gsung rgyud zla gsang thig le
གསུང་རྒྱུན	oral tradition/ lineage, traditional interpretation by the lineage	gsung rgyun
གསུང་རྒྱུན་མ	oral teaching	gsung rgyun ma
གསུང་སྒྲོག	recitation	gsung sgrog
གསུང་སྒྲོག་པ	read the sacred words, birds sending forth their cries	gsung sgrog pa
གསུང་སྒྲོས	(h) for {zer sgros} sayings	gsung sgros
གསུང་སྒྲོས་ལས་འབྱུང་བ	has said that. (h)	gsung sgros las 'byung ba
གསུང་སྒྲོས་ཤིག་བྱུང	he spoke of	gsung sgros shig byung
གསུང་བསྒྱུར	tr [h]	gsung bsgyur
གསུང་བསྒྲུབ་པ	accomplish a command	gsung bsgrub pa
གསུང་ལྔ	the five modes of buddha speech	gsung lnga
པ་དུ་མ་ཉེ་བར་གནས་པ	In cognition of the sound of 1 act of speech, many aspects are absent	pa du ma nye bar gnas pa
གསུང་གཅོག་པ	to break the word / command, be disobedient, insubordinate	gsung gcog pa
གསུང་བཅག་པ	not heed/ violate the guru's command	gsung bcag pa
གསུང་བཅད	observing silence	gsung bcad
གསུང་ཆོས	the dharmas of speech, [spoken] dharma, dharma discourse/ teachings [h]	gsung chos
གསུང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དུང	the conch of Dharma, the throat of a buddha gsung chos kyi phyag rgya'i rnal 'byor the yoga of speech as dharma mudra	gsung chos kyi dung
གསུང་ཆོས་གནང	teaching religion, to give religious instruction, a seminary or Dharma course / talk	gsung chos gnang
གསུང་ཆོས་ཞུ་མཁན	audience	gsung chos zhu mkhan
གསུང་མཆན	oral annotations	gsung mchan
གསུང་མཆིད	/ conversation w, talk, speech, prayer, advice, official missive mchid (/ [h]	gsung mchid
གསུང་མཆོག	supreme speech	gsung mchog
གསུང་མཆོག་པད་མའི་རིགས	lotus family of supreme speech	gsung mchog pad ma'i rigs
གསུང་རྗེས་སུ་བསྟན་པའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	miraculous display of the Doctrine gsung mnyen zhing 'jam pa'i dpe byad minor mark of soft and supple/pleasing speech	gsung rjes su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul
གསུང་སྙན	harmonious voice, agreeable speech	gsung snyan
གསུང་བསྙེན	service and worship	gsung bsnyen
གསུང་བཏུས	quotes, excerpts	gsung btus
གསུང་རྟ་མཆོག་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	{rta mchog rol pa'i skor}	gsung rta mchog rol pa'i skor
གསུང་རྟེན	word support, religious writings, letters, writings, holders of the doctrine, volume of holy writings, support of the voice, sacred text	gsung rten
གསུང་བརྟག	thugs brtag, mo'i brtag dbyad	gsung brtag
གསུང་ཐིག་ལེ	{gsung gi gyud zla gsang thig le}	gsung thig le
གསུང་ཐོར་བུ	collection of writings	gsung thor bu
གསུང་ཐོས	hear [his] voice	gsung thos
གསུང་ཐོས་པ་ཙམ	simply to hear his voice	gsung thos pa tsam
གསུང་དག་པ	unmistakable, voice like that of buddha	gsung dag pa
གསུང་དམ་ཆོས	speech the Dharma	gsung dam chos
གསུང་དྲུང	continuous	gsung drung
གསུང་མདུད	having recited dharani or mantra phus btab pa'i srung ba	gsung mdud
གསུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	vajra speech; [expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 36]	gsung rdo rje
གསུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ	living up to authentic communication)	gsung rdo rje rnal
གསུང་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	vagvajrayoga (inner rdo rje sems dpa'	gsung rdo rje rnal 'byor
གསུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of vajra speech	gsung rdo rje'i ye shes
གསུང་སྡོད	fulfil requests	gsung sdod
གསུང་ནང་མ	teachings not given externally	gsung nang ma
གསུང་གནང་བ	speak [h]	gsung gnang ba
གསུང་རྣ་བས་ཐོས་པ	to hear his voice	gsung rna bas thos pa
གསུང་རྣམ་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ	the 60 aspects of speech	gsung rnam pa drug cu
གསུང་རྣམས	teachings	gsung rnams
གསུང་པ་ལྟར	as is taught	gsung pa ltar
གསུང་པད་མའི་རིགས	lotus family of speech, padma family of enlightened speech	gsung pad ma'i rigs
གསུང་སྤྲུལ	speech emanation	gsung sprul
གསུང་སྤྲུལ་པ	speech emanation	gsung sprul pa
གསུང་སྤྲོས	conversation between persons of rank	gsung spros
གསུང་འཕྲིན	chab shog, letter, message [h]	gsung 'phrin
གསུང་འཕྲོས	1) 'phros pa, skad cha; 2) remainder of the talk	gsung 'phros
གསུང་བ	(tha dad pa gsungs pa, gsung ba, gsungs,, speak [h] discuss[ed]	gsung ba
གསུང་བྱུང	voice arose, a voice was heard	gsung byung
གསུང་བྱེད	mouth	gsung byed
གསུང་བྱོན་མ	talking deity, statue which has given oral prophesy	gsung byon ma
གསུང་བྲིས	1) letter; 2) letters/ writings of VIPS [h]	gsung bris
གསུང་དབྱངས	melody	gsung dbyangs
གསུང་དབྱངས་མི་ཟད	inexhaustible melodies of speech [h] 2855	gsung dbyangs mi zad
གསུང་དབྱངས་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of melodious speech * [h]	gsung dbyangs yan lag lnga
གསུང་དབྱངས་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག་ཅུ	[TRS 852 / 86-4 / 87-1] 3 types; 1 according to Sutra and 2 of Tantra	gsung dbyangs yan lag drug cu
གསུང་དབྱངས་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག་བཅུ	the 60 limbs of melodious speech [h]	gsung dbyangs yan lag drug bcu
གསུང་དབྱངས་ཡིན་ལག་དྲུག་ཅུ	melodious voice in sixty variations, the sixty elements of eloquent speech, the sixty	gsung dbyangs yin lag drug cu
ཏོནེ	aspects of Buddha Speech, {rtsa ba drug} six root tones each multiplied by {yan lag bcu} ten branches. 1) {tshangs pa lta bu}. 2) {sil snyan lta bu} 3) {glu gar lta bu} 4) {ka la ping ka lta bu} 5)...	tone
གསུང་དབྱངས་རོལ	speak, talk [h]	gsung dbyangs rol
གསུང་འབུམ	complete works, collected works	gsung 'bum
གསུང་འབུམ་འཐོར་བུ	fragments of [her] teachings gsung 'brug gi sgra dang ldan pa'i dpe	gsung 'bum 'thor bu
གསུང་མ་གནང	do not express yourself	gsung ma gnang
གསུང་མད	[arch] true speech	gsung mad
གསུང་མི་འགྱུར	would not be transmitted	gsung mi 'gyur
གསུང་མོལ	discuss, converse, talk w [h]	gsung mol
གསུང་སྨྲ	a remark	gsung smra
གསུང་རྩོམ	writings, literary works	gsung rtsom
གསུང་རྩོམ་གཅེས་བསྡུས	anthology	gsung rtsom gces bsdus
གསུང་སྩལ་བ	speech made	gsung stsal ba
གསུང་ཚངས་དབྱངས་ལྟ་བུ	speech like the melody of Bhram	gsung tshangs dbyangs lta bu
གསུང་ཚད	all that is ordered, all that is proclaimed	gsung tshad
གསུང་ཚོགས	collection of teachings/writings	gsung tshogs
གསུང་འཚལ	i beg you to speak	gsung 'tshal
གསུང་ཞིང་བྱོན་པའི་ཚེ	after saying all this, he started on his way	gsung zhing byon pa'i tshe
གསུང་ཞུ་བ	audience of speech, [dharma] discourse	gsung zhu ba
གསུང་གཞས	song [h]	gsung gzhas
གསུང་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབ་པ	practice according to your instructions	gsung bzhin bsgrub pa
གསུང་བཞིན་དུ	in accord with the words of	gsung bzhin du
གསུང་བཞིན་ནུས་པ	ex {rgyal ba'i gsung bzhin nus pa} to be able to act in accordance with the words of the Buddha	gsung bzhin nus pa
གསུང་ཡི་དམ	his speech the yidam	gsung yi dam
གསུང་ཡིག	utterances and writings, letter	gsung yig
གསུང་ཡིག་བྲུ	the speech in the form of	gsung yig bru
གསུང་ཡིག་འབྲུ	the seed-syllables of buddha-speech	gsung yig 'bru
གསུང་རབ	the scriptures, excellent speech, buddha's teachings]. religious/ classical text, writings of a lama	gsung rab
གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve branches of the scriptures. the twelve kinds of excellent speech, twelve categories of Buddhist scripture. 1) {mdo 'i sde} general teachings. 2) {dbyangs kyis bsnyad pa'i sde} hymns and prai...	gsung rab kyi yan lag bcu gnyis
གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་གསུམ	three limbs of the scriptures	gsung rab kyi yan lag gsum
གསུང་རབ་བཀའ་རྩོམ	tshad mar 'jog 'o 'i rtsom yig	gsung rab bka' rtsom
གསུང་རབ་གླེགས་བམ	volume of he Buddha's teaching	gsung rab glegs bam
གསུང་རབ་རྒྱུན་སྤེལ་འཁྲུལ་པར་ཁང	religious printing press gsung rab thams cad kyi snying po shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa nyams su len pa'i man ngag lam lnga gsal sgron an instruction on the use of the prajny'ap'aramit'a in con...	gsung rab rgyun spel 'khrul par khang
གསུང་རབ་ཡན་ལག	dbyang kyis bsnyad, lung du bstan pa, tshigs su bcad pa, chad du brjod pa, gleng gzhi, rtogs pa brjod pa, de lta bu byung ba, skyes pa rabs, shin tu rgyas pa, rmad du byung ba, gtan la 'bab pa)	gsung rab yan lag
གསུང་རབ་ཡན་ལག་དགུ	9 limbs of the scriptures	gsung rab yan lag dgu
གསུང་རབ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས	twelve aspects of excellent speech. These are also known as the Twelve sections of Sutra and are the twelve main divisions of the Buddhist Canon: General Discourses (mdo sde); Proclamations in Song...	gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis
གསུང་རབ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས་པ	12 divisions of the teachings	gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis pa
གསུང་རབ་ཡན་ལག་གཉིས	Twelve Branches of the Scriptures. The above listed nine branches of the scriptures with the addition of narratives {rtogs pa brjod} or nidana. parables {de lta byung} or avadana. and established i...	gsung rab yan lag gnyis
གསུང་རབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	precious teachings	gsung rab rin po che
གསུང་རབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་བལྟ་བ	to read the precious and excellent teachings	gsung rab rin po che blta ba
གསུང་རབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་གཏམ	the precious speech of the scripture	gsung rab rin po che'i gtam
གསུང་རིག་པས་འདུལ་བ	instruction by knowledge conveyed in speech	gsung rig pas 'dul ba
གསུང་ལ་བཟོ་བཅོས་བྱེད་པ	reinterprets what the guru says, changing it	gsung la bzo bcos byed pa
གསུང་ལ་བསླུ་བ་མེད་པ	[the Buddha's] words never deceive	gsung la bslu ba med pa
གསུང་ལན	reply in the way of instruction	gsung lan
གསུང་ལོངས་སྐུ	his speech the sambhogakaya	gsung longs sku
གསུང་ཤོག	letter	gsung shog
གསུང་བཤད	[give a] talk, [make a] report, explain, speaking [h]	gsung bshad
གསུང་བཤད་སྡིངས་ཆ	tribunal	gsung bshad sdings cha
གསུང་བཤད་གནང	[give a] talk, [make a] report, explain [h]	gsung bshad gnang
གསུང་བཤད་གནང་བ	to report, talk, give a talk, make a report	gsung bshad gnang ba
གསུང་སྲས	chief disciple of the master's words	gsung sras
གསུང་སྲོལ	customarily spoken, repeatedly said, traditionally repeated	gsung srol
གསུང་གསལ་བ	lucid expression	gsung gsal ba
གསུང་གསུང	speak and speak, teach and teach [h]	gsung gsung
གསུངས་གྱིན	teaching	gsungs gyin
གསུངས་བསྒྲུབས	ci gsungs ma bsgrubs pa - failing to carry out your words	gsungs bsgrubs
གསུངས་ཏེ	having expounded	gsungs te
གསུངས་དོན	as/ according to was said- gsungs rdo rjes ngag la sbyangs ste srog 'dzin sgrub pa'i yan lag - training the	gsungs don
སྤེཨེཆ་ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ཐེ་ཨིནདེསྟྲུཅཏིབླེ་རེཨལིཏཡ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་བུདདྷ	speech, there is the branch of attainment associated with breath control gsungs rdo rjes ngag la sbyangs ste srog 'dzin sgrub pa'i yan lag - training the	speech through the indestructible reality of the buddha
གསུངས་པ	so it is said (indicated direct quotation from scripture); (in debate used to indicate correct opinion being defended or proven)	gsungs pa
གསུངས་པ་ལྟར	ces gsungs pa ltar - according to these words	gsungs pa ltar
གསུངས་པ་བཞིན	as is taught	gsungs pa bzhin
གསུངས་པ་བཞིན་བྱེད	to follow orders	gsungs pa bzhin byed
གསུངས་འབུམ	collected writings, works, bka' 'bum	gsungs 'bum
གསུངས་ཚུལ	manner of speaking	gsungs tshul
གསུངས་མཚུངས་པ	uniformity in speech or expression, 1 of 4 mtshungs pa rnam pa	gsungs mtshungs pa
གསུངས་རབ	scripture, texts	gsungs rab
གསུངས་རབ་རྣམས་ནས	from the scriptures	gsungs rab rnams nas
གསུངས་སོ	taught	gsungs so
གསུད་ནད	indigestion disease from the downward voiding prana being re- versed, symptom: dbugs ngan sri ba, dry stool, food impurities, from the nose belching	gsud nad
གསུད་པ	form of cholera, disease produced by undigested food, be lost, be dispersed, fill with food beyond satiety, stuff, cram	gsud pa
གསུད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་རླུང	a prana in the body	gsud par byed pa'i rlung
གསུབ	1) [p sub],, erased, rubbed out, suffocated, choked 2.(A by a dog grasp w the teeth gnaw, chew; 2) rub, scratch	gsub
གསུབ་ཐེངས་གཅིག་ལ་བསུབ	cancel w 1 stroke, reject out of hand	gsub thengs gcig la bsub
གསུབ་པ	1) [p sub],, erased, rubbed out, suffocated, choked 2.(A by a dog grasp w the teeth gnaw, chew; 2) rub, scratch	gsub pa
གསུབ་བྱིན	give a bribe	gsub byin
གསུམ་ཀ	the three	gsum ka
གསུམ་ཀ་གཉིས	2/3	gsum ka gnyis
གསུམ་སྐས	ladder with three sections {rin po che'i skas ring dbus beedu'u ra' g.yas gser g.yon dngul ste gsum skas shig btsugs} created a ladder with three sections: In the middle were steps made of lapis la...	gsum skas
གསུམ་སྐོར་མ	a nadi	gsum skor ma
གསུམ་ཁ	the 3, all three	gsum kha
གསུམ་ཁ་གཉིས	2/3	gsum kha gnyis
གསུམ་ཁྲི	30,000	gsum khri
གསུམ་ག	the three, all three	gsum ga
གསུམ་གྱི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་སྔོན་འཇུག	tri	gsum gyi don ston pa'i sngon 'jug
གསུམ་འགྱུར་ལྟ་བུར	3 times as much	gsum 'gyur lta bur
གསུམ་སྒྲ	byed pa'i sgra	gsum sgra
གསུམ་སྒྲ་ཅན	bee	gsum sgra can
གསུམ་སྒྲོན་ཞབས་བཏགས	Spelling uncertain. LKh: "the offering of three mouthfuls." A term used throughout Tibet to refer to a practice which is done at special occassions such as {lo gsar} or after the singing of the {ja...	gsum sgron zhabs btags
གསུམ་རེཕེ༹རས་ཏོ་བོཐ་ཐེ་ནུམབེར་ཨོཕ༹་ཨོཕ༹ཕེ༹རིངས	- the glass is ritually filled 3	gsum refers to both the number of offerings
ཏིམེས	- and the number of "sips" or mouthfuls (zhabs btags) the recipient must take from it. Acc to LKh one must finish the glass on the third "sip." [mss]	times
གསུམ་བརྒྱ	300	gsum brgya
གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དང་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་དགུ	349	gsum brgya dang bzhi bcu zhe dgu
གསུམ་བསྒྲིལ	three things combined into 1	gsum bsgril
གསུམ་སྔགས	vedic meter 2857	gsum sngags
གསུམ་སྔགས་འཕྲེང	a series of three charms	gsum sngags 'phreng
གསུམ་བཅུ་དུས་ཆེན	March 10th Holiday	gsum bcu dus chen
གསུམ་ཆ	one-third, a third part	gsum cha
གསུམ་ཆ་གཅིག	one third	gsum cha gcig
གསུམ་ཆ་གཉིས	2/3	gsum cha gnyis
གསུམ་གཉིས	two thirds	gsum gnyis
གསུམ་སྟོང	3,000	gsum stong
གསུམ་ཐོག	[roof of a] three story house	gsum thog
གསུམ་ཐོན	three story [house]	gsum thon
གསུམ་དུ་སྣང་བ	to appear threefold	gsum du snang ba
གསུམ་མདོ	junction where three [rivers roads etc] combine into 1	gsum mdo
གསུམ་མདོ་ཁ	bifurcation, split, divergence; {mdo gsum, kha brag}	gsum mdo kha
གསུམ་འདུས	three things gathered into 1	gsum 'dus
གསུམ་འདུས་པའི་སེམས་བྱུང་རེག་པ	the mental state contact consisting of three components	gsum 'dus pa'i sems byung reg pa
གསུམ་ལྡན	{gsum ldan gyi dus} age of three quarters perfection	gsum ldan
གསུམ་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས	age of three quarters perfection	gsum ldan gyi dus
གསུམ་ལྡན་དུས	three having time	gsum ldan dus
གསུམ་ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ	vajra-holder w the three vows	gsum ldan rdo rje 'dzin pa
གསུམ་ལྡབ	treble, triple	gsum ldab
གསུམ་བརྡ་ལ	gsum brda la zhes pa'i gzhas tshig	gsum brda la
གསུམ་བསྡེབས	trio	gsum bsdebs
གསུམ་པ་རང་བྱུང་རྡོ་རྗེ	Rangjung Dorje, the Third [Karmapa]	gsum pa rang byung rdo rje
གསུམ་པའི་རང་བཞིན	neuter, neither male nor female	gsum pa'i rang bzhin
གསུམ་པར	thirdly	gsum par
གསུམ་པོ་ཕན་ཚུན	the three	gsum po phan tshun
གསུམ་སྤྲུལ	emanation of the third degree	gsum sprul
གསུམ་ཕྲུགས	in groups of three	gsum phrugs
གསུམ་ཕྲེང་ཅན	parrot	gsum phreng can
གསུམ་འབུམ	300,000	gsum 'bum
གསུམ་སྦྲུལ	third stage in incarnations, emanation of the third degree	gsum sbrul
གསུམ་ཙམ	about three	gsum tsam
གསུམ་རྩེན	n of god	gsum rtsen
གསུམ་རྩེན་དབང	lord of heaven	gsum rtsen dbang
གསུམ་བརྩེགས	three things piled one upon another	gsum brtsegs
གསུམ་ཚ	great-grandchildren	gsum tsha
གསུམ་ཚན	sets of three	gsum tshan
གསུམ་ཚོང	tshong pa tshos ma rtsa sgor gcig gis tshong brgyab nas sgor gsum byung ba lta bu	gsum tshong
གསུམ་ཟུར	three-cornered	gsum zur
གསུམ་རིག་པ	3-fold understanding	gsum rig pa
གསུམ་ལ་སོགས	3 or 4, 3 or more	gsum la sogs
གསུམ་ལས	from the three, among those three	gsum las
གསུམ་ཤས	by zhing pa and dud tshang ordinarily the landlord's field shas received harvests w landlord and farmer equally divided parts	gsum shas
གསུམ་བསྲེས	three things mixed into 1	gsum bsres
གསུམ་རསེན	1) divine realm, where Bhrama Shiva and Vishnu play; 2) the celestial realms	gsum rsen
གསུར	Sur, burnt offering	gsur
གསུར་ཁོག	Tibetan custom du phung po yod sa'i sgo'i phyi rol tu 'gel ba'i gsur snod khog ma	gsur khog
གསུར་བསྔོ	butter tsampa etc after being burned gsur btang ba de and dedicated to 'byung po etc, burned food offering	gsur bsngo
གསུར་མཆོད	Nyingmapa liturgical work outlining a method for propitiation of local deities through the burning of a mixture of barley flour and butter	gsur mchod
གསུར་དྲི	smell of singed thing	gsur dri
གསུར་མ	singed, burned	gsur ma
གསུས་རྐེད	belly & waist	gsus rked
གསུས་ཁོག	belly	gsus khog
གསུས་ཁྱིམ	belly	gsus khyim
གསུས་ཁྱིམ་ཆེན་བ	large belly	gsus khyim chen ba
གསུས་གྲོད	belly	gsus grod
གསུས་ལྕིབས	lto dkris, rked dkris te gyon pa'i rigs shig	gsus lcibs
གསུས་ལྟོ	belly	gsus lto
གསུས་ནད	dropsy of the belly	gsus nad
གསུས་པ	belly, stomach; belly	gsus pa
གསུས་པ་འགེངས	bellyful, full stomach, stomachful	gsus pa 'gengs
གསུས་པ་ཆེ	huge bellies	gsus pa che
གསུས་པ་ཆེ་བ	huge bellies	gsus pa che ba
གསུས་པ་སྦོས	distend belly, swollen stomach	gsus pa sbos
གསུས་པར་ཆིལ་གྱིས་མནན	press down the stomach forcefully	gsus par chil gyis mnan
གསུས་པོ	belly	gsus po
གསུས་པོ་ཆེ	1) big belly; 2) an arhat	gsus po che
གསུས་པོ་ཆེ་བ	big belly	gsus po che ba
གསུས་པོ་ཆེས	arhat of the Abhidharma tradition	gsus po ches
གསུས་འཕྱང	1) hanging belly; 2) (met camel	gsus 'phyang
གསུས་འཕྱང་པོ	a deity	gsus 'phyang po
གསུས་རྫིང་ཅན	pot-belly, large belly	gsus rdzing can
གསུས་ཤ	offal	gsus sha
གསེ	(tha dad pa gses pa, gse ba, gses,, 1) cut/ split/ smash to pieces; 2) divide up; 3) card, dress [wool, cotton]; 4) choose, select	gse
གསེ་དྲི	disagreeable smell of the sweat of the armpits	gse dri
གསེ་བ	ft. of {gse ba}; {gse ba, gses pa, gse ba, gses} trans. v	gse ba
གསེ་རུ	rhinoceros, SA bse ru	gse ru
གསེག	oblique, sideways, inclined	gseg
གསེག་ཀ	on 1 side gseg gseg byas nas bzos pa'i bcad kha,//smyug kha gseg //gdung mar gseg ka bton pa,//thad ka la ma phyin par gse gros su phyin,//gseg tshad	gseg ka
གསེག་ཀ་ལི	Tibetan pecha holder = sho ka li	gseg ka li
གསེག་ཁ	gseg ka	gseg kha
གསེག་ཁྲོན	inclined wall 2858	gseg khron
གསེག་གྲི	by a carpenter shing bzhur byed knife w a gseg ka can point	gseg gri
གསེག་གྲི་ཤུར་ཅན	shing bzo bas shing bzhur byed gri so gseg kha can chung ba zhig	gseg gri shur can
གསེག་ངོས	inclined plane/ surface	gseg ngos
གསེག་གཅོད	'phred du gcod byed carpenter's lcags gzong w flat teeth	gseg gcod
གསེག་གཅོད་ཁ་གཉིས་མ	yig 'bru'i bar mtshams 'don byed kha'i phyogs gnyis ka brdar ba'i lag cha zhig	gseg gcod kha gnyis ma
གསེག་གཅོད་ཁ་སྦུབས	yig 'bru'i bar mtshams 'don byed kyi lag cha zhig	gseg gcod kha sbubs
གསེག་གཅོད་ཁ་རིལ	na yig sogs yig 'bru'i mig 'don byed kyi lag cha zhig	gseg gcod kha ril
གསེག་གཅོད་ཁ་ལེབ	yig 'bru'i bar mtshams 'don byed kyi lag cha zhig	gseg gcod kha leb
གསེག་གཅོད་ཁ་ལོག	yig 'bru'i bar mtshams 'don byed kyi lag cha zhig	gseg gcod kha log
གསེག་གཅོད་ཆེ་སག	par shing gi stong cha 'don byed che gras shig	gseg gcod che sag
གསེག་གཅོད་པུས་འགུགས	par shing gi stong cha chung rigs 'don byed kyi lag cha	gseg gcod pus 'gugs
གསེག་གཅོད་སེན་གཟུགས་མ	yig 'bru'i bar mtshams 'don byed sen mo'i gzugs can gyi gzong chung zhig	gseg gcod sen gzugs ma
གསེག་ཆེན	copper making tool	gseg chen
གསེག་བདར	file	gseg bdar
གསེག་རྡར	file, rasp	gseg rdar
གསེག་རྡར་རྒྱག	file, rasp	gseg rdar rgyag
གསེག་བརྡར	file, rasp	gseg brdar
གསེག་བརྡར་འཁོར་སྟེགས	filing stand	gseg brdar 'khor stegs
གསེག་བརྡར་རྒྱག	file, rasp	gseg brdar rgyag
གསེག་ནས	obliquely, sideways	gseg nas
གསེག་ནས་འཕྲོ	radiate, sideways	gseg nas 'phro
གསེག་པ	begging-bowl	gseg pa
གསེག་མ	pebbles	gseg ma
གསེག་ཚད	degree of incline, gradient	gseg tshad
གསེག་ལམ	ri'i 'phred du yod pa'i lam kha	gseg lam
གསེག་ལོན	carpenters's tool	gseg lon
གསེག་ཤང	<khakhikara:> gsil byed, 'khar gsil	gseg shang
གསེག་སེབ་ཅན	full of stones	gseg seb can
གསེང	1) fissure, cleft, chink, crevice, fissure, gap, leak, seam, space between [space/time]; 2) in the middle, between among, between [in time]; 3) springiness, revitalizing	gseng
གསེང་པ	refresh	gseng pa
གསེང་པོ	cautious, watchful, clean, white, thin, airy, transparent, not dense, not tight	gseng po
གསེང་ཕྲག	interstices, intervals	gseng phrag
གསེང་བ	syn {gsing ba} to refresh; comp {bsang ba, sangs pa}	gseng ba
གསེང་བར	intervals, interstices, cracks, gaps	gseng bar
གསེང་བུག	fissure, cleft, chink, crevice, fissure, little holes/ gaps breaks	gseng bug
གསེང་དབར	intervals, interstices, cracks, gaps	gseng dbar
གསེང་དབྲག	intervals, interstices, cracks, gaps	gseng dbrag
གསེང་རྨོས	plowing between furrows	gseng rmos
གསེང་རྨོས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	machine for plowing between furrows	gseng rmos 'phrul 'khor
གསེང་ཡབ	balcony	gseng yab
གསེང་ལམ	direct/ secret path w/o hinderance	gseng lam
གསེང་ལམ་ཆེ	great secret path	gseng lam che
གསེང་ཤོར	1) bar gseng du shor ba,//mi dogs can gcig kyang gseng shor byung med pa; 2) bar chod pa'am nar lus shor ba	gseng shor
གསེང་གསེང	bar bar [sometimes, at intervals] or w many gaps	gseng gseng
གསེང་བསྲུབ་པ	stop up, plug up	gseng bsrub pa
གསེངས	revitalizing, springiness	gsengs
གསེད	(tha dad pa gses pa, gse ba, gses,, 1) cut/ split/ smash to pieces; 2) divide up; 3) card, dress [wool, cotton]; 4) choose, select; 5) (tha dad pa bsed pa, gsed pa, sed,, pick, sort, assort, pull/ ...	gsed
གསེད་བཀྲོལ	finely/ individually/ separately divided	gsed bkrol
གསེད་མདངས	smooth dry shading	gsed mdangs
གསེད་པ	fluff (cotton), pick out, sort, pull or pluck in pieces	gsed pa
གསེད་མ	fibre	gsed ma
གསེབ	{sprin gseb nas} among the clouds	gseb
གསེབ་ཏུ	in [the midst of], among	gseb tu
གསེབ་ཏུ་བཙངས	pushed one's way into the assembly	gseb tu btsangs
གསེབ་གཏོང་བ	breeding	gseb gtong ba
གསེབ་ན	in [the midst of], among	gseb na
གསེབ་ནས	from within	gseb nas
གསེབ་འབྲས་གཅོད་པ	castrate [horse etc.]	gseb 'bras gcod pa
གསེབ་ལམ	small/ narrow path	gseb lam
གསེར་ཀོ	gser rtsi, rag btul byugs pa'i ko ba	gser ko
གསེར་ཀོང	gold lamp; gser gyi mchod kong	gser kong
གསེར་ཀོང་བཞག་པ	offered a lamp made of gold	gser kong bzhag pa
གསེར་ཀྱི་མེ་ཏོག་ཅན	magnolia	gser kyi me tog can
གསེར་ཀྱི་ཨ་སྒོར	gold ear-ornament	gser kyi a sgor
གསེར་དཀར	platinum	gser dkar
གསེར་དཀར་པོ	platinum	gser dkar po
གསེར་རྐོ་བ	1) gser sngog mkhan; 2) gser sngog pa'am gser 'don pa	gser rko ba
གསེར་སྐུ	gold [and copper] statue of a deity	gser sku
གསེར་སྐུད	cuscuta major chois., usnea diffracta vain., gold wire, gold thread	gser skud
གསེར་སྐྱ	pale & whitish gold	gser skya
གསེར་སྐྱེམས	serkyem; a drink offering to the protectors	gser skyems
གསེར་སྐྱེམས་པ	offerer of drink to gods	gser skyems pa
གསེར་སྐྱོགས	smallest size spoon tipped with gold, golden spoon, gold cup	gser skyogs
གསེར་ཁ	gold mine	gser kha
གསེར་ཁ་བརྡོལ་བ	gold ore was found	gser kha brdol ba
གསེར་ཁང	Serkhang, in Domey	gser khang
གསེར་ཁང་ཇོ་བོ	{gser khang jo bo, the Crowned buddha of the golden pagoda	gser khang jo bo
གསེར་ཁང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	celebrated lama of amdo	gser khang rin po che
གསེར་ཁབ	golden needle	gser khab
གསེར་ཁུ་བ	Agnideva, god of fire	gser khu ba
གསེར་ཁོག	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gser khog
གསེར་ཁྲི	golden throne	gser khri
གསེར་མཁན	gold smith	gser mkhan
གསེར་མཁར	royal castle	gser mkhar
གསེར་གི་གདོང་ཅན	wish-fulfilling tree	gser gi gdong can
གསེར་གི་གཙུག་ཕུད	a fabulous king	gser gi gtsug phud
གསེར་གུག་སྲང	ounce of gold of guge	gser gug srang
གསེར་གྱའ	flawed / impure gold	gser gya'
གསེར་གྱི	golden	gser gyi
གསེར་གྱི་ཀ་བ	1) a nadi; 2) golden gdung 'degs	gser gyi ka ba
གསེར་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of gold	gser gyi dkyil 'khor
གསེར་གྱི་བཀའ	royal edict, king's command, government order	gser gyi bka'
གསེར་གྱི་སྐ་རག	golden belt/ skirt	gser gyi ska rag
གསེར་གྱི་སྐ་རགས	golden cords	gser gyi ska rags
གསེར་གྱི་སྐུད་པ	gold wire, medicinal grass	gser gyi skud pa
གསེར་གྱི་ཁང་པའི་སྒོར་སླེབས	arrived at the door of the house of gold	gser gyi khang pa'i sgor slebs
གསེར་གྱི་ཁུ་བ	1) fire [god, Agnideva]	gser gyi khu ba
གསེར་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	precious wheel of dharma, golden wheel, 1 of 8 auspicious articles	gser gyi 'khor lo
གསེར་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན	[TRS 102-2]	gser gyi 'khor lo can
གསེར་གྱི་དགྲ	iron, enemy of gold	gser gyi dgra
གསེར་གྱི་མགོ་བོ	Gold Head, reading in lde'u 'phrul	gser gyi mgo bo
གསེར་གྱི་རྒྱ་ཐིབས	big heaping up of gold	gser gyi rgya thibs
གསེར་གྱི་རྒྱ་ཕིབས	gilded copper tsha gser btang ba'i rooftop rgya phibs [gser tog]	gser gyi rgya phibs
གསེར་གྱི་སྒྲོམ་བུ	small golden box	gser gyi sgrom bu
གསེར་གྱི་ལྕགས་རི	golden fence	gser gyi lcags ri
གསེར་གྱི་ཆབ་བླུག	golden water pot	gser gyi chab blug
གསེར་གྱི་ཆར་པ་བབས	there was a rain of gold	gser gyi char pa babs
གསེར་གྱི་ཆུན་པོ	gold necklace, gold chain	gser gyi chun po
གསེར་གྱི་མཆོག	finest gold	gser gyi mchog
གསེར་གྱི་མཆོད་ཀོང	butter lamp of gold	gser gyi mchod kong
གསེར་གྱི་མཆོད་རྟེན་བཞེངས	built golden stupas	gser gyi mchod rten bzhengs
གསེར་གྱི་མཆོད་སྡོང་ལྟར་བསྒྲུབས	became like a pillar of gold	gser gyi mchod sdong ltar bsgrubs
གསེར་གྱི་ལྗོན་ཤིང	{gzhon nu gser gyi ljon shing yid 'phrog de, mdzes dang bral ba srin bus zos pa'i shing ltar} the captivating golden tree of youth loses its beauty and becomes like wormeaten wood	gser gyi ljon shing
གསེར་གྱི་ཉ	two golden fish (representing buddha's eyes), golden fish, 1 of 8 auspicious articles, precious gem	gser gyi nya
གསེར་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ	1) unalloyed gold; 2) the earth	gser gyi snying po
གསེར་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན	Suvarna-garbha, name of a ? in Buddhist cosmology	gser gyi snying po can
གསེར་གྱི་ཊཾ་ཀ	{gser gyi TaM ka sum cu} thirty gold tangka-coins	gser gyi TaM ka
གསེར་གྱི་ཏེལ	golden cautery	gser gyi tel
གསེར་གྱི་ཐིག་ལེ	Vishnu	gser gyi thig le
གསེར་གྱི་ཐིགས་པོ	gold in drop form	gser gyi thigs po
གསེར་གྱི་ཐུར་མ	golden stick	gser gyi thur ma
གསེར་གྱི་དྲིལ་བུ	dkon mchog gsum gyi sgra sgrogs pa	gser gyi dril bu
གསེར་གྱི་གདུ་བུ་འཁྲོལ་བ	jingling the golden bracelets	gser gyi gdu bu 'khrol ba
གསེར་གྱི་མདོང	wish fulfilling tree	gser gyi mdong
གསེར་གྱི་འདབ་ཅན	epithet of vishnu	gser gyi 'dab can
གསེར་གྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	golden vajra	gser gyi rdo rje
གསེར་གྱི་སྡོང་པོ	golden plant, kind of aquatic grass	gser gyi sdong po
གསེར་གྱི་པ་ཏྲ	brick of gold; a gold knot of enternity	gser gyi pa tra
གསེར་གྱི་ཕུད་པུ	kind of medicinal grain	gser gyi phud pu
གསེར་གྱི་ཕུད་བུ	1) {gser gyi phud bu} med. herb; 2) gold adorned ral pa'i thor cog	gser gyi phud bu
གསེར་གྱི་བ་གམ	golden dome	gser gyi ba gam
གསེར་གྱི་བེའུ	Kana kavata	gser gyi be'u
གསེར་གྱི་བྱ་སྐྱིབ	Golden Bird-shelter, near Lake Manasarovar	gser gyi bya skyib
ཨིན་ཐེ་ནོརཐ	west, a place said to have been first blessed by the Buddha and his five hundred arhats, afterwards by	in the north
ཌྲིགུང་ཆེན	nga Lingpa ('bri gung spyan snga gling pa) and his five hundred great meditators, then by Tsang Nyön Heruka (gtsang smyon he ru ka, 1452-1507) who established a retreat center there; one of the eig...	Drigung Chen
གསེར་གྱི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་དགོན་པ	Serkyi Chakyip Gonpa, monastery near Lake Manasarovar. See Golden Bird-shelter	gser gyi bya skyibs dgon pa
གསེར་གྱི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་ཅན	olden rock	gser gyi bya skyibs can
གསེར་གྱི་བྱེ་མ	golden sand, kind of mineral used for medicinal purpose	gser gyi bye ma
གསེར་གྱི་བྱེ་མ་ཅན	fragrant bark of feronia elephantum	gser gyi bye ma can
གསེར་གྱི་དབྱངས	horse of the sun	gser gyi dbyangs
གསེར་གྱི་སྦྲམ་བུ	piece-gold, pieces of pure gold picked up from sand, pure & unalloyed gold gser gyi maN Dal la g.yu byir bkod pa - offered a golden mandala heaped with corals and turquoise	gser gyi sbram bu
གསེར་གྱི་མིག་ཅན	fish	gser gyi mig can
གསེར་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག	flower of gold, golden flower, magnolia champaka, golden flowers	gser gyi me tog
གསེར་གྱི་མོན་ལྷས	gold-braided head ornament or necklace gser gyi gtsug tor cod paN rna cha sogs	gser gyi mon lhas
བསྒྲུབས་ཤིང	he wore a golden crown, jeweled earrings, and other ornaments of a chakravartin king	bsgrubs shing
གསེར་གྱི་གཙུག་ཕུད	a bird	gser gyi gtsug phud
གསེར་གྱི་གཙུག་ཕུད་ཅན	golden crest	gser gyi gtsug phud can
གསེར་གྱི་རྩ་ཆེན	Syn {ka ti gser gyi rtsa chen}	gser gyi rtsa chen
གསེར་གྱི་བརྩིག	an island in the eastern ocean	gser gyi brtsig
གསེར་གྱི་གཟུགས	golden image	gser gyi gzugs
གསེར་གྱི་འོག་པགས	gold sash, apron with little gold bells attached to its edge 2860	gser gyi 'og pags
གསེར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ་མཛེས་པ	beautiful letters of gold	gser gyi yi ge mdzes pa
གསེར་གྱི་རང་བཞིན	nature of gold	gser gyi rang bzhin
གསེར་གྱི་རི	mount sumeru	gser gyi ri
གསེར་གྱི་རི་བདུན	the seven golden mountains	gser gyi ri bdun
གསེར་གྱི་རི་བོ	golden mountain beyond pragjyotisa	gser gyi ri bo
གསེར་གྱི་རིལ་བ	golden water pot	gser gyi ril ba
གསེར་གྱི་རུས་སྦལ	golden tortoise	gser gyi rus sbal
གསེར་གྱི་ལག	shrub	gser gyi lag
གསེར་གྱི་ལིང་བ	piece of unwrought gold	gser gyi ling ba
གསེར་གྱི་ལུས	golden body, complimentary address for noble ladies	gser gyi lus
གསེར་གྱི་ས་གཞི	golden base/ ground	gser gyi sa gzhi
གསེར་གྱི་ས་གཞིར་ཐུག་གི་བར	down to the golden base gser gyi seng ge'i khri bkod pa'i ngos de	gser gyi sa gzhir thug gi bar
བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐུ་འདུག་པ	the Tathagata seated upon the golden lion throne	bzhin gshegs pa'i sku 'dug pa
གསེར་གྱི་ཧ་རི	golden patterns / designs	gser gyi ha ri
གསེར་གྲི	gold cutting scissors	gser gri
གསེར་གླིང	Serling	gser gling
གསེར་གླིང་པ	Dharmamati of Suvarnadvipa, guru of Atisha	gser gling pa
གསེར་གླིང་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ	Serlingpa Dharmakirti, Atisha's main teacher	gser gling pa chos kyi grags pa
གསེར་གླེགས	1) dharma volume written in powdered gold ink; 2) bka' yig brkos yod pa'i gser leb	gser glegs
གསེར་མགར	goldsmith	gser mgar
གསེར་མགོ	golden flower	gser mgo
གསེར་འགྱུར	transformed/changed into gold	gser 'gyur
གསེར་འགྱུར་མཁན	alchemist	gser 'gyur mkhan
གསེར་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྩི	alchemy, the art of transforming materials into gold	gser 'gyur gyi rtsi
གསེར་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྩི་ཡི་སྦྱོར་བ	alchemy, the art of making gold	gser 'gyur gyi rtsi yi sbyor ba
གསེར་འགྱུར་རྩི	alchemy	gser 'gyur rtsi
གསེར་འགྱུར་རྩིའི་དངོས་གྲུབ	the accomplishment of alchemy	gser 'gyur rtsi'i dngos grub
གསེར་སྒ	tsha gser btang yod pa'i saddle	gser sga
གསེར་ངང	ngang ser, ngur pa [golden/ yellow duck]	gser ngang
གསེར་ངུར	golden/ yellow duck	gser ngur
གསེར་དངུལ	1) gold and silver; 2) expense $	gser dngul
གསེར་དངུལ་ཕྱེད་མའི་གླེགས་བམ	book written both in gold and silver	gser dngul phyed ma'i glegs bam
གསེར་དངུལ་ཟངས་ལྕགས	gold, silver, copper and iron	gser dngul zangs lcags
གསེར་མངལ་ཅན	epithet of brahma	gser mngal can
གསེར་ཅན	golden city, city in southern india, officinal plant	gser can
གསེར་ཅན་འདབ	coral	gser can 'dab
གསེར་ཅན་བུ	asura	gser can bu
གསེར་བཅད	way of painting a thangka tshon gzhan la 'then pa'i gser gyi ri mo'i bcad	gser bcad
གསེར་ཆབ	gser gyi khu ba sla mo 'dres pa'i chu	gser chab
གསེར་ཆུ	gold ink	gser chu
གསེར་ཆུ་གཏང་བ	gild with gold	gser chu gtang ba
གསེར་ཆོ་ལོང	kind of precious stone	gser cho long
གསེར་ཆོས་བཅུ་གསུམ	tshar lugs las lcags ri'i phyi rol tu mi 'da' ba'i chos [mkha' spyod skor gsum, dmar chen skor gsum, dmar chung skor gsum, 'chi med rdo rje lha mo, dzam dmar, seng gdong ma, 'jam dpal nag po]	gser chos bcu gsum
གསེར་མཆོག	1) gold of dzambu'i chu; 2) {gser mchog} buddha	gser mchog
གསེར་ལྗང་བརྡུངས	solid gold articles	gser ljang brdungs
གསེར་ཉ	gold[en colored] fish	gser nya
གསེར་སྙན་སྒྲོན	honorary title for royalty	gser snyan sgron
གསེར་སྙན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	1) ear [h]; 2) mchog la 'bul rgyu'i yi ge'i che bstod	gser snyan rin po che
གསེར་ཏམ	gold coin	gser tam
གསེར་ཏིག	{gser tig} med. herb	gser tig
གསེར་ཏིལ	golden nad dmigs sreg byed kyi til pa ste	gser til
གསེར་ཏོག	golden badge, golden button	gser tog
གསེར་རྟེན	undercoat for gold paint	gser rten
གསེར་ལྟ་བུའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing bodhicitta like gold	gser lta bu'i sems bskyed
གསེར་སྟན	smith's anvil	gser stan
གསེར་སྟན་འོག་ཚ	goldsmith's implement	gser stan 'og tsha
གསེར་ཐང	a tangka in which the color gold predominates	gser thang
གསེར་ཐབ	goldsmith's apparatus/forge	gser thab
གསེར་ཐམ	gold seal	gser tham
གསེར་ཐར	gser thar rdzong	gser thar
གསེར་ཐལ	gold dust, oxide of gold, golden powder, medicine from prolonged baking	gser thal
གསེར་ཐིག	{gser thig} B"n text	gser thig
གསེར་ཐིག་པོ	drop of gold	gser thig po
གསེར་ཐུབ	kanakamuni, 1 of previous 7 buddhas, SA sangs rgyas rab bdun, 2nd buddha of present kalpa	gser thub
གསེར་ཐེབ	golden hat [for officials when riding]	gser theb
གསེར་ཐོག	= rgya phibs} gold roof ornaments	gser thog
གསེར་ཐོད	gold crown or prog zhu	gser thod
གསེར་དམ	1) gold seal; 2) gold dam bi	gser dam
གསེར་དུག	poison of gold	gser dug
གསེར་དུལ་མ	gold dust, oxidized powder of gold	gser dul ma
གསེར་དེབ	gser byung song gi deb gzhung yi ge	gser deb
གསེར་གདུགས་ཅན	having a golden dome,	gser gdugs can
གིལཏ	dome in shape of royal umbrella	gilt
གསེར་གདུང	gold covered body reliquary stupa	gser gdung
གསེར་གདུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	the precious golden reliquary, at Ganden	gser gdung rin po che
གསེར་གདུབ	golden bangle	gser gdub
གསེར་བདུན་པ	woman's sked chings	gser bdun pa
གསེར་མདངས	golden ornaments, glittering golden, glittering gold	gser mdangs
གསེར་མདུང	1) golden spear; 2) {gser mdung} bleeding nadi	gser mdung
གསེར་མདུང་དངུལ་མདུང	bloodletting vein above eyebrows	gser mdung dngul mdung
གསེར་མདོག	1) a wild animal; 2) a kind of aa ru ra; 3) color of gold	gser mdog
གསེར་མདོག་བཅུ་པ	medicine with 10 ingredients	gser mdog bcu pa
གསེར་མདོག་བཅུ་གསུམ	medicine with 13 ingredients gser mdog paN chen shA kya mchog ldan - 1428-1509 [ggd] gser mdog paN chen sha kya mchog ldan - 1428-1507 gser mdog pan chen sa kya mchog ldan Sakya Chogden, Serdog Pan...	gser mdog bcu gsum
གསེར་མདོག་སེ་བ་མེ་ཏོག	yellow rose	gser mdog se ba me tog
གསེར་མདོངས་འབུམ་ཞུ	the golden crown of hundred thousand dakinis	gser mdongs 'bum zhu
གསེར་འདབ	1) gser zangs bird feather or rgya phibs [= ser tog] roof ornament; 2) golden leaf, 'dab ma	gser 'dab
གསེར་འདབ་ཅན	garuda	gser 'dab can
གསེར་འདུམ	SA 'dum bu	gser 'dum
གསེར་འདོན	mine gold	gser 'don
གསེར་འདྲ	like gold, of gold color	gser 'dra
གསེར་རྡར	file	gser rdar
གསེར་རྡུལ	powdered gold	gser rdul
གསེར་རྡེ་ཉི་མ	white mustard	gser rde nyi ma
གསེར་རྡོ	{gser rdo} med. mineral *, gold ore	gser rdo
གསེར་ལྡན	myrobalan, capital of indra	gser ldan
གསེར་ལྡན་མ	possessing gold, wife of krishna, goddess uma, river ganges, planet buddha	gser ldan ma
གསེར་ལྡན་གཞི	the earth	gser ldan gzhi
གསེར་ལྡེམ	gser gyi ldem 'phru: bla chen dpon chen etc kyi hat top	gser ldem
གསེར་སྡུག་མཛེས	as beautiful as gold	gser sdug mdzes
གསེར་སྡོང	1) wish-fulfilling tree; 2) body reliquary stupa covered w gold	gser sdong
གསེར་སྡོང་འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱན་གཅིག	{gser sdong 'dzam gling rgyan gcig} gser sdong 'dzam gling rgyan gcig {gser	gser sdong 'dzam gling rgyan gcig
སྡོང་འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱན་གཅིག	[begun in the 11th water monkey year, fin-	sdong 'dzam gling rgyan gcig
གསེར་བརྡུངས་མ	gol again and again bzhu btul byas pa	gser brdungs ma
གསེར་རྣ	gold ear-ring	gser rna
གསེར་སྣང	{nga rma bya'i rgyal po gser snang bya bar skyes dus} I was a golden king of peacocks	gser snang
གསེར་སྣོད	golden vessel gser snod du zhal zas mngar ba'i yo byad	gser snod
གསེར་པ	gold searcher, gold washer, dealer in gold	gser pa
གསེར་ཕུག་གངས་རི	Serphuk Gangri ?	gser phug gangs ri
གསེར་ཕུད	medicinal herb used as an emetic	gser phud
གསེར་ཕུར	1) fixed star; 2) gold phur pa/ nail	gser phur
གསེར་ཕོར	golden cup	gser phor
གསེར་ཕྱེ	gold dust	gser phye
གསེར་ཕྱེ་བྲེ	a measure of gold dust	gser phye bre
གསེར་ཕྱེ་བྲེ་གང	one bre measure of gold dust	gser phye bre gang
གསེར་ཕྲེང	golden garland	gser phreng
གསེར་འཕྱང	Hemalamba, 31st year of {rab byung} Syn {me mo bya}	gser 'phyang
གསེར་འཕྲུ	/(1 gold ornament on a house's roof; 2) gold ldem 'phru [kind	gser 'phru
ཨོཕ༹་ཧཏ	top]	of hat
གསེར་འཕྲེང	1) legs bshad gser 'phreng; 2) golden mala/ necklace ?	gser 'phreng
གསེར་བ	[gsir ba??]; 1) (Tha dad pa,, skor ba, 'phang lo gsir ba,//'phrul 'khor gsir ba; 2) Sgra'i khyad par,//lham nas gsir sgra grag pa,.. .Thad ka dang tal ma dang ma thogs pa,//nyi 'od gsir bar 'phro b...	gser ba
གསེར་བུ	bird of golden color	gser bu
གསེར་བུམ	gold pot	gser bum
གསེར་བེའུ	1 of the 16 sthaviras or arhats	gser be'u
གསེར་བྱེ	golden sand, sand containing gold	gser bye
གསེར་བྱེ་འདྲེན་མའི་ཀླུང	great river like ganges or indus	gser bye 'dren ma'i klung
གསེར་བྱེ་ནག་པོ	med. herb {gser bye nag po}	gser bye nag po
གསེར་བྱེ་དམན་པ	verbascum thapsus l.	gser bye dman pa
གསེར་བྲག་བྱ་ཁྱུང་ཚལ	Golden Rock Garuda Forest. The place where the Indian master Hungkara lived	gser brag bya khyung tshal
གསེར་བྲིས	written in gold	gser bris
གསེར་འབར	(met fire [god]	gser 'bar
གསེར་སྦལ	Golden Frog	gser sbal
གསེར་སྦྱང	fine gold, refined gold	gser sbyang
གསེར་སྦྱངས	refined gold, purified gold	gser sbyangs
གསེར་སྦྲམ	gser gar bu'am, rdog po ste leb lcug sogs	gser sbram
གསེར་མིག	1) fish; 2) owl	gser mig
གསེར་མིག་འཁྱིལ་པ	round golden eye	gser mig 'khyil pa
གསེར་མིག་ཅན	with golden eyes, fish, owl gser mig la g.yu yis phra bkod ltar - like a turquoise set in gold	gser mig can
གསེར་མིང་ཅན	SA na ga ge sar	gser ming can
གསེར་མེ	gold flower	gser me
གསེར་མེ་ཐོག	magnolia champaka, yellow champa	gser me thog
གསེར་མོ་ལྗོངས	Golden Valley	gser mo ljongs
གསེར་དམར་པོ	red gold, compound of copper and gold	gser dmar po
གསེར་སྨར་རྐྱང	refined gold, not mixed w anything else	gser smar rkyang
གསེར་སྨུག་མདོག	auburn	gser smug mdog
གསེར་ཙོ་གཏར་རྡོ	flaming gold stone	gser tso gtar rdo
གསེར་གཙོ་མ	unalloyed purified gold, refined gold	gser gtso ma
གསེར་བཙོ	purified gold	gser btso
གསེར་བཙོ་མ	purified gold, refined gold, golden	gser btso ma
གསེར་ཚག	gser spyad kyi dkrol tshag //dngul gyi bum par gser tshag rgyag pa	gser tshag
གསེར་མཛོད	gold treasury	gser mdzod
གསེར་ཞྭ	golden hat [for tulkus when riding]. Syn {nam mkha' rab 'byams}	gser zhwa
གསེར་ཞལ	royal face, golden face, polite expression, compliment to respectable ladies	gser zhal
གསེར་ཞལ་མཇལ	meet [h]	gser zhal mjal
གསེར་ཞལ་རྣམ་གཉིས	husband and wife [h]	gser zhal rnam gnyis
གསེར་ཞུན	pure gold, molten gold	gser zhun
གསེར་ཞུན་མ	btso sbyangs tshar ba'i gser molten gold, gold ore	gser zhun ma
གསེར་ཞུན་མས་བྲིས	written with molten gold	gser zhun mas bris
གསེར་ཞོ	a zho measure [of gold]	gser zho
གསེར་ཞོ་གང	one zho of gold, a coin	gser zho gang
གསེར་ཞོ་གསུམ་བརྒྱ	300 zho of gold	gser zho gsum brgya
གསེར་གཞི་མ	a skyin khebs 2862	gser gzhi ma
གསེར་གཞུང་རིང་མོའི་ཀླུང	epithet of ganges river	gser gzhung ring mo'i klung
གསེར་གཞུན་པོ	purest gold	gser gzhun po
གསེར་གཞོང	golden tray	gser gzhong
གསེར་ཟངས	{gser zangs kyi rgyal mtshan} victory banners made of copper covered with gold	gser zangs
གོལད	gilt, gold laid on copper	gold
གསེར་ཟིལ	1) gold color, gleam; 2) med. minerals gser mdog zil 'od 'phro and shape like rgya khab gshib pa	gser zil
གསེར་བཟང་དྲི་མེད	good spotless gold	gser bzang dri med
གསེར་བཟང་དྲི་མེད་རིན་ཆེན་སྣང	1 of sman bla brgyad	gser bzang dri med rin chen snang
གསེར་བཟུང	keep gold and other precious materials]	gser bzung
གསེར་བཟོ	goldsmith's shop	gser bzo
གསེར་བཟོ་བ	goldsmith	gser bzo ba
གསེར་འོ་མ	glomerous fig tree	gser 'o ma
གསེར་འོད	1) light/ gleam of gold; 2) the sutra gser 'od dam pa	gser 'od
གསེར་འོད་ཅན	lightning	gser 'od can
གསེར་འོད་དམ་པ	Sutra of the sacred golden light	gser 'od dam pa
གསེར་འོད་འཚེར	glittering in gold gser 'od rin chen rgyan gyis brgyan pa jewelry shining brightly	gser 'od 'tsher
གསེར་ཡིག	golden letters written in gold ink	gser yig
གསེར་ཡིག་ཅན	golden letters	gser yig can
གསེར་ཡིག་པ	1) letter by emperor/ superiors; 2) messenger bringing emperor's/ superiors's command	gser yig pa
གསེར་ཡིག་གསེར་ཐམ	gong mas mchod gnas offered to the guru bka' rgya written in gold and gser bzos tham ga [stamp]	gser yig gser tham
གསེར་རི	a mountain of gold	gser ri
གསེར་རི་བདུན	the seven golden mountain [circles] 1) {gnya' shing 'dzin}. 2) {gshol mda' 'dzin} 3) {seng ldeng can} 4) {lta	gser ri bdun
གསེར་རིའི་ཕྲེང་བ	range of golden mountains	gser ri'i phreng ba
གསེར་རིལ་སྨྱུག་ཁྲོག	Tibetan govt. high secretaries and rtsis phrug pa etc. kyis 'dogs rgyu'i ink well and pen shubs	gser ril smyug khrog
གསེར་རིས	patterns picked out in gold thread	gser ris
གསེར་ལ་མེ་ཡིས་བཞུ་བ་བཞིན	like gold melts when heated	gser la me yis bzhu ba bzhin
གསེར་ལ་ར་གན་གཤོར་བ	weigh out brass for gold	gser la ra gan gshor ba
གསེར་ལག	the river Sit'a	gser lag
གསེར་ལས་པ	goldsmith	gser las pa
གསེར་ཤིང	wish-fulfilling tree	gser shing
གསེར་ཤུལ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	gser shul
གསེར་ཤོག	gold leaf, thin film of gold, leafgold, gold-foil	gser shog
གསེར་ས	gold ore	gser sa
གསེར་ས་ཕག	gold brick	gser sa phag
གསེར་ས་ལེ་སྦྲམ	natural unsmelted unpolished gold rdog rdog	gser sa le sbram
གསེར་སལ་ལེ་སྦྲམ	pure gold	gser sal le sbram
གསེར་སྲང	a gold srang [measure]	gser srang
གསེར་སྲང་གང་རི་བ	worth of an ounce of gold	gser srang gang ri ba
གསེར་སྲང་ཉི་ཤུ་ཐམ་པ	twenty 'sang' of gold	gser srang nyi shu tham pa
གསེར་སྲབ	gser tshag little ornaments having bridle	gser srab
གསེར་ལྷད་ཅན	alloyed gold	gser lhad can
གསེལ	(not in das)	gsel
གསེས	1) [p ! gse],; 1) cut/ split/ smash to pieces; 2) divide up; 3) card, dress [wool, cotton]; 4) choose, select; 5) part of a class; 6) reciprocal, mutual	gses
གསེས་ཁྲ	cha bgos byas pa'i tho yig	gses khra
གསེས་པ	pf. of {gse ba}	gses pa
གསོ	feed, keep alive, live, nourish, SA 'tsho ba, to heal, rear, raise, feed	gso
གསོ་སྐུད་འཁེལ	spin flax into thread	gso skud 'khel
གསོ་སྐྱེད་ལེན་པོ	gzugs po'i sha shed 'phel ba,//rta 'di gso skyed len po 'dug	gso skyed len po
གསོ་སྐྱོང	nurture	gso skyong
གསོ་སྐྱོང་བ	foster	gso skyong ba
གསོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད	rear, foster, train, bring up, care for, training	gso skyong byed
གསོ་སྐྱོང་བྱེད་པ	to foster, train, bring up	gso skyong byed pa
གསོ་སྐྱོང་མ	matron, nanny, child care worker	gso skyong ma
གསོ་སྐྱོང་རེམ	look after them!	gso skyong rem
གསོ་སྐྱོད	nursing	gso skyod
གསོ་བསྐྲུན	reconstruction	gso bskrun
གསོ་བསྐྲུན་བྱེད	reconstruct	gso bskrun byed
གསོ་ཁུག	hempen sack, gunny sack	gso khug
གསོ་མཁན	fosterer, restorer, cherisher	gso mkhan
གསོ་གླགས་མེད	incurable, no possibility of helping	gso glags med
གསོ་དགའ་བྱེད	kind of citron, larger species of lime used for medicinal purpose	gso dga' byed
གསོ་དངུལ	alimony	gso dngul
གསོ་ཆག	fodder	gso chag
གསོ་ཆག་ལས་སྣོན་བཟོ་གྲྭ	fodder processing plant	gso chag las snon bzo grwa
གསོ་ཉར	rearing, keeping, raising	gso nyar
གསོ་ཉར་བྱེད	rear, keep, raise	gso nyar byed
གསོ་ཐག	hempen cord	gso thag
གསོ་ཐབས	1) means of curing/ healing; 2) means of nourishing, raising children/ animals	gso thabs
གསོ་ཐབས་བྱེད་རུང་བ	curable	gso thabs byed rung ba
གསོ་ཐབས་ལག་ལེན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད	sman pas nad pa'i khams ma snyoms pa gso zhing nad las grol ba'i thabs lag len gyi rim pa bco brgya e, thang dang, phye ma, ril bu, lde gu, sman mar, snum 'chos, bshal, skyugs, sna sman, 'jam rtsi,...	gso thabs lag len bco brgyad
གསོ་ཐིག	cure-drop	gso thig
གསོ་ན	rear x {da khyod rang rgyal po'i khab nas bu blangs nas gso na dang} Now you will take the boy from the king and rear him	gso na
གསོ་དཔེ་ལ	gso dpe pass	gso dpe la
གསོ་དཔྱད	curative/ therapeutic dpyad thabs, science of med., med. treatment	gso dpyad
གསོ་དཔྱད་མཁན	physician, restorer of health	gso dpyad mkhan
གསོ་དཔྱད་པ	physician	gso dpyad pa
གསོ་དཔྱད་བྱེད	treats medically, makes medical treatment	gso dpyad byed
གསོ་སྤེལ	breeding, raising	gso spel
གསོ་སྤེལ་བྱེད	breed, raise	gso spel byed
གསོ་སྤྱད	physician's sman bcos yo byad	gso spyad
གསོ་ཕད	gunny sack, bag	gso phad
གསོ་བ	to mend; to feed, nourish, to mend; to enhance; ft. of {gso ba}; {gso ba, gsos pa, gso ba, gsos} trans. v.; {gso ba, bsos pa, bso ba}	gso ba
གསོ་བ་པོ	physician, fosterer, parents	gso ba po
གསོ་བ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད	[TRS 68-3]	gso ba yan lag brgyad
གསོ་བ་རིག་པ	science of healing/ medicine	gso ba rig pa
གསོ་བ་རིག་པའི་སྐོར	section in Tengyur: the major Indic treatises and commentaries on ayurvedic medicine translated into Tibetan	gso ba rig pa'i skor
གསོ་བ་རིག་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས	med. shastra	gso ba rig pa'i bstan bcos
གསོ་བའི་ཐབས	means to preserve life	gso ba'i thabs
གསོ་བའི་སྨན	healing medicine	gso ba'i sman
གསོ་བའི་རིག་གནས	science of medicine	gso ba'i rig gnas
གསོ་བའི་རིག་པ	science of medicine	gso ba'i rig pa
གསོ་བའི་ལྷ་མོ	1) the constellation nam gru; 2) sman gyi srung ma mo rigs	gso ba'i lha mo
གསོ་བར་འདོད	wishes to cure or nourish or bring up	gso bar 'dod
གསོ་བར་བྱེད	enhance, feed, nourish, mend, heal, restore	gso bar byed
གསོ་བར་བྱེད་པ	revitalize	gso bar byed pa
གསོ་བྱ	thing to be cured, disease	gso bya
གསོ་བྱེད	enhance, feed, nourish, mend, heal, restore. healer, nourisher	gso byed
གསོ་སྦྱོང	restoring the vow ceremony [for gelongs]. vow and purification, absolution, purification / reconciliation ceremony, posadha confession. Skt poshada. This ceremony must be done by getsul and above	gso sbyong
གསོ་སྦྱོང་གི་ཆོ་ག	getsuls and gelongs transgression confession liturgy and, mahayana gso sbyong len pa'i liturgy, rite of posadha	gso sbyong gi cho ga
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བཅུ་བཞི་པ	mthun pa'i gso sbyong las dus nges pa'i gso sbyong gi nang gses shig ste, on the 14th day of the waning part of the month of the rgyal, dbo dang, sa ga, chu stod, khrums smad, and smin drug months ...	gso sbyong bcu bzhi pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བཅོ་ལྔ་པ	mthun pa'i gso sbyong las dus nges pa'i gso sbyong gi nang gses te, lo skor zla ba bcu gnyis kyi waxing period, and the waning period of mgo, mchu, nag pa, snron, gro zhun, tha skar those 18 gso sb...	gso sbyong bco lnga pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་དྲུག	14th, 15th, harm pacifying, mthun pa'i, auspicious, zhi gnas kyi gso sbyong	gso sbyong drug
གསོ་སྦྱོང་འདོན་སྒྲིགས	the rites of the gso sbyong observance on uposatha day	gso sbyong 'don sgrigs
གསོ་སྦྱོང་པ	one who has taken the vow of fasting	gso sbyong pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་འཕགས	[ancient Indian king]	gso sbyong 'phags
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བ	removing faults, washing sin away by making confession to a priest, reparation by penitence	gso sbyong ba
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བླངས་པའི་དུས་དགུ	[TRS 985]	gso sbyong blangs pa'i dus dgu
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བཞག་པ	'dul ba'i phyag len zhig ste, ltung ba gleng kyang skabs mi 'byed mnyan par mi byed pa'i gang zag la, dge 'dun dang lhan cig tu gso sbyong byed du mi 'jug pa'o	gso sbyong bzhag pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་བཞག་པའི་གཞི	among the 'dul ba gzhi bcu bdun gdams ngag gso sbyong bzhag pa'i gzhi ste, ltung ba gleng ba'i skabs mi 'byed pa la gdams ngag bzhag pa dang, gso sbyong bzhag pa, dgag dbye bzhag par byed pa'o	gso sbyong bzhag pa'i gzhi
གསོ་སྦྱོང་ལ་གནས་པ	in the place of offerings	gso sbyong la gnas pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་ལེན་པ	taking the vow of fasting	gso sbyong len pa
གསོ་སྦྱོང་གསུམ	the three kinds of posadha	gso sbyong gsum
གསོ་སྦྱོན	collective confession	gso sbyon
གསོ་སྦྱོར	performance of purifying acts	gso sbyor
གསོ་མ	1) mother, nurse, nourisher; 2) hemp, flax; 2) fresh and new	gso ma
གསོ་མ་སེར་མོ	jute	gso ma ser mo
གསོ་སྨན	curative med.	gso sman
གསོ་ཚགས	rearing, keeping, raising	gso tshags
གསོ་ཚགས་བྱེད	rear, keep, raise	gso tshags byed
གསོ་ཚུལ	1) means of curing/ healing; 2) means of nourishing, raising children/ animals	gso tshul
གསོ་ར	enclosed place where animals/ plants are raised	gso ra
གསོ་རས	rag, tatter	gso ras
གསོ་རིག	science of healing/ medicine	gso rig
གསོ་རིག་ཉེར་མཁོའི་དོན་གསལ	{gso rig nyer mkho'i don gsal}	gso rig nyer mkho'i don gsal
གསོ་རིག་མདོ་ཆེན	chief med. officer	gso rig mdo chen
གསོ་རིག་གནས	medicine, healing	gso rig gnas
གསོ་རིག་པ	science of med. medicine, physician gso rig 'dzin pa'i drang srong chen po	gso rig pa
གསོ་རིག་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་པོ	med. school	gso rig slob grwa chen po
གསོ་རོགས	1) rear, foster, train, bring up, care for; 2) 'go 'dzin rogs ram gyi thabs,//mi rigs kyi las byed pa gso skyong byed pa, training	gso rogs
གསོ་རོགས་བྱེད	rear, foster, train, bring up, care for, training	gso rogs byed
གསོ་རོགས་བྱེད་པ	rear, foster, train, bring up, care for, training	gso rogs byed pa
གསོ་སླ་བ	easy to bring up, easy to nourish	gso sla ba
གསོག	1) accumulating, amassing. 2) empty, insignificant, unreal	gsog
གསོག་ཁྲ	rgyu nor gsog sgrub kyi tho yig	gsog khra
གསོག་གྲུན	[arch] rgyu nor sogs 'jog pa	gsog grun
གསོག་རྒྱོང	gsog gsob khog stong rdzas kyis rgyong ba,//mgo sngas gla spus gsog rgyong byed pa,//khog pa gsog rgyong	gsog rgyong
གསོག་སྒྲུབ	earnings	gsog sgrub
གསོག་བཅོལ	deposit	gsog bcol
གསོག་ཆས	condensing apparatus	gsog chas
གསོག་འཇོག	to hoard, accumulate, gathered and stored, collecting and hoarding	gsog 'jog
གསོག་འཇོག་གི་སྤང་བ	abandonment offence of eating what is gathered and stored	gsog 'jog gi spang ba
གསོག་འཇོག་བྱས་པ་ཟ་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the fault of monks eating what is gathered and stored	gsog 'jog byas pa za ba'i ltung byed
གསོག་འཇོག་བྱེད	gather and store, [collect &] hoard, save, accumulate, stock-pile, set aside as reserve	gsog 'jog byed
གསོག་འཇོག་མ་དངུལ	reserve funds	gsog 'jog ma dngul
གསོག་འཇོག་མེད་པར	without stinginess	gsog 'jog med par
གསོག་ཉར	gathered and stored, collecting and hoarding, hoard, saving accumulating, stock-piling, set aside as reserve	gsog nyar
གསོག་ཉར་བྱེད	gather and store, [collect &] hoard, save, accumulate, stock-pile, set aside as reserve	gsog nyar byed
གསོག་ལྡང	nad lkog gyur du gsog cing mngon gyur du ldang bar byed pa	gsog ldang
གསོག་ལྡང་ཞི་གསུམ	nad dang po mi mngon pa, bar du phyir lang ba, tha mar drag pa ste gsum	gsog ldang zhi gsum
གསོག་པ	{gsog pa, bsags pa, bsag pa, sog} trans. v.; {gsog pa, bsogs pa, bsog pa}; to gather, accumulate, hoard; amass, reinforce; vain	gsog pa
གསོག་པར་བྱེད	hoards, gathers	gsog par byed
གསོག་པོ	false, essenceless, hollow	gsog po
གསོག་བྱེད་སེམས	mind which accumulates	gsog byed sems
གསོག་བྲུབ	sdeb gcig tu rub nas 'jog pa,//nyams myong gsog brub	gsog brub
གསོག་བརྫུས	essenceless, false things,//byas rjes gsog brdzus	gsog brdzus
གསོག་རུན	[arch] wealth etc. collect and store	gsog run
གསོག་རུམ	phyogs sdud byas nas mnyam du rub pa,//ri skyes sman rid gsog rum byed pa	gsog rum
གསོག་གསོག	empty, probably. Syn {gsob}	gsog gsog
གསོག་གསོག་བྱས	collecting	gsog gsog byas
གསོག་གསོག་བྱེད	collect	gsog gsog byed
གསོག་གསོབ	empty	gsog gsob
གསོག་གསོབ་ཡ་མ་བརླ	fallacious, hollow, and insignificant	gsog gsob ya ma brla
གསོགས་འཇོག	accumulate and hoard riches	gsogs 'jog
གསོང	gsang ba, gsang!, [comp gsong po] straightforward, honest, sincere	gsong
གསོང་ལྡོང	btsog chu 'gro ba'i wa kha	gsong ldong
གསོང་པོ	sincere	gsong po
གསོང་པོར་སྨྲ་བ	speak sincerely	gsong por smra ba
གསོང་བ	gsang ba, gsang!	gsong ba
གསོངས	gsang!	gsongs
གསོངས་ཤིག	keep it confidential	gsongs shig
གསོད་སྐྱིད་པ	happiness, ease	gsod skyid pa
གསོད་མཁན	killer	gsod mkhan
གསོད་གཅོད	kill [& cut off the limbs etc], murder	gsod gcod
གསོད་གཅོད་བྱེད	kill [& cut off the limbs etc], murder	gsod gcod byed
གསོད་གཅོད་མང་པོ	slaughter, massacre	gsod gcod mang po
གསོད་གཅོད་མང་པོ་བྱེད་པ	murder	gsod gcod mang po byed pa
གསོད་སྙམ	intending to kill	gsod snyam
གསོད་རྟགས	1) gsod rgyur thag chod pa'i rtags; 2) mtshon cha zhig gi ming gsod rtags me tog sngar rgya gar gyi lugs la nyes can gsod pa'i rtags su mgo la 'ching ba'i me tog dmar po zhig ste - SK ka ra w'i ra,...	gsod rtags
གསོད་ཐབས	way to kill; x {mda' 'am snyis gla ba gsod thabs kyi 'du shes bzhag nas} as though [practice] the way to kill the deer with an arrow or a trap	gsod thabs
གསོད་དུ་འཇུག་པ	putting to death, causing to be killed	gsod du 'jug pa
གསོད་བདག་སྐྱེས	1) gshin rje; 2) dbang phyug chen po; 3) bdud dga' rab dbang phyug; 4) srin po'i rgyal po	gsod bdag skyes
གསོད་བདག་བུ	rakshasa	gsod bdag bu
གསོད་བརྡུང་བཀོལ་གསུམ	killing beating and enslaving	gsod brdung bkol gsum
གསོད་བརྡུང་བཅོམ་གསུམ	killing beating and enslaving	gsod brdung bcom gsum
གསོད་ནམས་གཟི་བརྗིད་འོད	light of brilliant merit 2865	gsod nams gzi brjid 'od
གསོད་རྣམས	merit	gsod rnams
གསོད་པ	(tha dad pa bsad pa, gsad pa, sod,; 1) kill, slaughter, murder; 2) eliminate, eradicate, annihilate, extinguish, go out, put out, turn off	gsod pa
གསོད་པ་པོ	murderer, slaughterer	gsod pa po
གསོད་པ་ལ་དགའ་བ	delight in killing	gsod pa la dga' ba
གསོད་པ་གསུམ	the three precepts concerning killing	gsod pa gsum
གསོད་པའི་འདྲེ	murderous spirit	gsod pa'i 'dre
གསོད་པའི་ལས	act of killing, karma of killing	gsod pa'i las
གསོད་པར་ཆས	they started killing	gsod par chas
གསོད་པོ	SA legs pa skyid pa	gsod po
གསོད་པོར	sincerely	gsod por
གསོད་བྱས་པ	him who has been killed	gsod byas pa
གསོད་བྱེད	the lord of death, rakshasagshin rje	gsod byed
གསོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་གནས	slaughter house, place of execution	gsod byed kyi gnas
གསོད་བྱེད་རྔོན་པ	murderous hunter	gsod byed rngon pa
གསོད་བྱེད་པ	killer	gsod byed pa
གསོད་བྱེད་སྦྱང་ཀི་ནག་པོ	SA gu gul nag po	gsod byed sbyang ki nag po
གསོད་མ	lha mo au ma	gsod ma
གསོད་ཟ	killed or eaten alive	gsod za
གསོད་ལུགས	manner of killing	gsod lugs
གསོད་ས	place of execution/ the gallows	gsod sa
སྤོས་པ་ལྟར	like an animal being taken to the slaughterhouse [draws closer to its death] with every step it takes	spos pa ltar
གསོད་སར་འཁྲིད་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ལྟར	like animals drawing near to the slaughterhouse	gsod sar 'khrid pa'i sems can ltar
གསོན	gsan pa! gson pa! live, survive	gson
གསོན་ཀྱང་རོ་དང་འདྲ	you ask me to live, but to live as lifeless as a corpse	gson kyang ro dang 'dra
གསོན་སྐྲ	{shi skra dang gson skra} locks of hair from dead and living	gson skra
གསོན་བསྐྱུར	punishment where a living person chu'am g.yang du bskyur ba	gson bskyur
གསོན་གྱུར	be living	gson gyur
གསོན་ཉམས་དོད་པོ	lively	gson nyams dod po
གསོན་ཉམས་ལྡན་པ	lively, living, alive	gson nyams ldan pa
གསོན་སྟོང	Tibetan khrims yig rnying pa'i nang gi khrims lugs shig ste, gsod sems byed mis pha rol po gsod grabs byed pa'i sngon du gsad bya'i mi des khrims la gtugs te gsod sems byed mi'i lag nas len pa'i 'jal	gson stong
གསོན་དང	Listen!	gson dang
གསོན་དུར	bury alive	gson dur
གསོན་བདུད	living demons	gson bdud
གསོན་འདྲེ	goblin possessing a living man	gson 'dre
གསོན་འདྲེ་མ	woman [pej]	gson 'dre ma
གསོན་ནས་ཅི་བྱེད	how could I live?	gson nas ci byed
གསོན་ནོ	he is alive	gson no
གསོན་པ	life, to live, to be alive; {gson pa, gson pa} intr. v.; {gson pa, gsan pa, gsan pa, gson} trans. v.; life; alive (opp. of shi ba)	gson pa
གསོན་པ་ལ་མི་འདོད	i do not wish to live any longer	gson pa la mi 'dod
གསོན་པའི་སྐབས	while you are still alive; x {yar 'gro mar 'gro'i sa mtshams rta kha srab kyis bsgyur ba dang 'dra nges pa de da res gson pa'i skabs 'di nyid yin} the turning point, the only time that you really c...	gson pa'i skabs
གསོན་པའི་རྒྱུ་མ་འདྲེན་པ	tear out the bowels of a living man	gson pa'i rgyu ma 'dren pa
གསོན་པའི་དུས་སུ	during life	gson pa'i dus su
གསོན་པའི་ཚེ་ན	during life	gson pa'i tshe na
གསོན་པོ	[being] alive	gson po
གསོན་པོ་ཡོད་པ	to be alive	gson po yod pa
གསོན་པོའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world of the living	gson po'i 'jig rten
གསོན་པོའི་དུས	while they were alive	gson po'i dus
གསོན་པོའི་དུས་སུ	while they were alive	gson po'i dus su
གསོན་པོར	while they were still alive	gson por
གསོན་པོར་དུར་དུ་འཇུག་པ	bury alive	gson por dur du 'jug pa
གསོན་པོར་བྱེད་པ	call into life, animate	gson por byed pa
གསོན་དཔེ	live model	gson dpe
གསོན་འཕོ	phowa for the living	gson 'pho
གསོན་བ	live	gson ba
གསོན་བྲལ	ma shi bar kha gyes pa	gson bral
གསོན་སྦེད	sngar log spyod dbang sgyur pas punishment of a putting living person in a hole du sbed pa	gson sbed
གསོན་སྦྱང	evil deeds and obscurations of the living purifying ritual	gson sbyang
གསོན་མ	SA gson po	gson ma
གསོན་ཚད	survival rate	gson tshad
གསོན་ཚེ	the time of being alive, life	gson tshe
གསོན་གཟུང་བྱེད་པ	to capture	gson gzung byed pa
གསོན་བཟུང	capture alive, take prisoner	gson bzung
གསོན་བཟུང་བྱེད	capture alive, take prisoner	gson bzung byed
གསོན་བཟུང་བྱེད་པ	capture	gson bzung byed pa
གསོན་བཟུང་དམག་སྒར	prisoner of war camp	gson bzung dmag sgar
གསོན་རེ	hope of surviving/ for life	gson re
གསོན་ལ་འཕྲེང	attached to life, long for life	gson la 'phreng
གསོན་ལམ་འཚོལ	to seek a way to stay alive	gson lam 'tshol
གསོན་ཤུགས	vigor, vitality, dynamic energy	gson shugs
གསོན་གཤིན	living and the dead	gson gshin
གསོན་གཤིན་ཡུལ་བགོས་པའི་བོན	bon that divides the dimension of the living from that of the dead	gson gshin yul bgos pa'i bon
གསོན་སྲེག་བྱེད་པ	to burn alive	gson sreg byed pa
གསོན་བསྲེག	creature burnt alive	gson bsreg
གསོན་བསྲེགས་མཛད་པ	tried to burn him alive	gson bsregs mdzad pa
གསོབ	fictitious, hollow, stuffed, fake, nang don stong pa'i phyi shun nam, khog stong,//lha 'dre'i 'dra gsob,//gcan gzan gyi pags gsob, make up for, supplement, repay/ return	gsob
གསོབ་པ	1.(Tha dad pa bsabs pa, bsab pa, sobs,; 1) 'jal ba'am tshab sprod pa,//drin lan bsab chog pa,//bu lon gsob pa; 2) kha non pa'am kha tshang bar byed pa,//grangs ka ma tshang ba rnams kha bsabs pa,//...	gsob pa
གསོབ་པོ	soft, spongy 2866	gsob po
གསོབ་ཕྱུར	phyur ba gsob gsob	gsob phyur
གསོབ་སྨན	1) sman gsob gsob; 2) gsob byed kyi sman	gsob sman
གསོབ་ཚིག	lies, nonsense	gsob tshig
གསོབ་ཞུགས	hollow like a taxidermist's dummy	gsob zhugs
གསོབ་བསོམ	stuffed, spongy	gsob bsom
གསོམ	pine [wood]	gsom
གསོམ་ཤིང	abies spectabilis (d. don) spach, pine tree	gsom shing
གསོམ་སེང་ལྡེང	{gsom seng ldeng} tree	gsom seng ldeng
གསོར	imp. of {gsor ba}	gsor
གསོར་ཁ	drill, awl	gsor kha
གསོར་ཁ་རྒྱག	drill, bore holes	gsor kha rgyag
གསོར་ཁྲོན	bored well	gsor khron
གསོར་སྒྲོམ	drilling tower/ stand	gsor sgrom
གསོར་སྟབས	stabbingly	gsor stabs
གསོར་སྟེགས	drilling machine	gsor stegs
གསོར་འདེམ་པ	kind of medicinal grass	gsor 'dem pa
གསོར་འདོམས་པ	halerpestes tricuspis (maxim.)	gsor 'doms pa
གསོར་ལྡེམ	{gsor ldem} med. herb	gsor ldem
གསོར་བ	1) [tha dad pa],, drill twirl, thrust in, hoist aloft, brandish, flourish * 2,bsar ba, bsar ba, gsor,, bring out and arrange	gsor ba
གསོར་བྱེད་པ	to brandish	gsor byed pa
གསོར་འབིགས	drill, pierce	gsor 'bigs
གསོར་འབིགས་བརྟག་ཞིབ་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	drilling and surveying machines	gsor 'bigs brtag zhib 'phrul 'khor
གསོར་འབིགས་པ	chisel	gsor 'bigs pa
གསོར་འབིགས་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	drilling machine	gsor 'bigs 'phrul 'khor
གསོར་འབེགས་པ	chisel	gsor 'begs pa
གསོར་མི་རུང	incurable	gsor mi rung
གསོར་མི་རུང་བ	MSS/Dreyfus: "incurable" [mss]	gsor mi rung ba
གསོར་སི་ལི་ལི	brandishes	gsor si li li
གསོལ	{. . . du gsol} I pray (that/ ,) . . .	gsol
གསོལ་ཀྲུམ	[h]	gsol krum
གསོལ་ཀླུམས	meat that is offered to a respected person	gsol klums
གསོལ་དཀར	crockery, china cup	gsol dkar
གསོལ་དཀྲུམ	meat [h]	gsol dkrum
གསོལ་རྐུབ	anus	gsol rkub
གསོལ་སྐྲུམ	meat prepared for important person, meat for honored people	gsol skrum
གསོལ་ཁ	1) lha mchod pa; 2) bskang gso	gsol kha
གསོལ་ཁ་ཁང	1) gsol kha zhu sa'i rgyal khang; 2) mgon khang ngam srung ma khang	gsol kha khang
གསོལ་ཁ་བ	1) chos skyong gi mgon po ba; 2) bla ma'i gsol dpon	gsol kha ba
གསོལ་ཁང	kitchen	gsol khang
གསོལ་གྲོད	abdomen, stomach, belly	gsol grod
གསོལ་དགུང	period of 49 days after death (hon.}	gsol dgung
གསོལ་ངན	poisoned/ [-ous food]	gsol ngan
གསོལ་ཅོག	table [h]	gsol cog
གསོལ་ལྕོག	dining table, small low table	gsol lcog
གསོལ་ཆང	chang [h]	gsol chang
གསོལ་ཆས	foods, provisions [h]	gsol chas
གསོལ་ཆེན	gsol dpon chen mo	gsol chen
གསོལ་མཆོད	verses of offering and invocation; petition-offering; usually to Dharma protectors	gsol mchod
གསོལ་ཇ	tea	gsol ja
གསོལ་ཇ་ཁྱོག	bring in the tea	gsol ja khyog
གསོལ་ཇ་སྒྲོན	offering tea, teaentertainment, honorary title for prince's tea	gsol ja sgron
གསོལ་ཇ་གསོལ	drink tea [h]	gsol ja gsol
གསོལ་ཇའི་མཚམས	tea-break	gsol ja'i mtshams
གསོལ་ཉ	fish for an important person	gsol nya
གསོལ་སྙོམ་པ	mendicant	gsol snyom pa
གསོལ་ཏིབ	teapot	gsol tib
གསོལ་བཏབ	invoke	gsol btab
གསོལ་ལྟིར	tea pot [h]	gsol ltir
གསོལ་སྟེགས	dining table	gsol stegs
གསོལ་སྟོན	banquet; {gsol ston bshams pa} to give a banquet	gsol ston
གསོལ་སྟོན་བཤམས	give a banquet/ feast, have a reception	gsol ston bshams
གསོལ་ཐབ	kitchen [h]	gsol thab
གསོལ་ཐབས	fireplace, kitchen	gsol thabs
གསོལ་ཐུག	porridge or gruel from barley with meat and curds	gsol thug
གསོལ་དང	appetite	gsol dang
གསོལ་དོད	zhal lag 'bul rgyu'i 'gro song do ngul	gsol dod
གསོལ་མདོང	[h]	gsol mdong
གསོལ་འདེབས་རྣམ་ཐར་དྲི་མེད་མ	a reverential petition cum biography of Padmasambhava - by {nyang ral nyi ma'i 'od zer}	gsol 'debs rnam thar dri med ma
གསོལ་འདེབས་བར་ཆད་ཀུན་སེལ	Prayer for Dispelling Obstacles on the Path, by Tertön Bakal Mukpo	gsol 'debs bar chad kun sel
གསོལ་འདེབས་བར་ཆད་ལམ་སེལ	The Barchey Lamsel prayer. Is found in Vol. Ka and Nga of the Collected New Treasures of Chokgyur Lingpa (mchog gling gter gsar). This prayer was also discovered by other treasure revealers (gter s...	gsol 'debs bar chad lam sel
གསོལ་འདེབས་བྱེད	request, pray, supplicate, appeal	gsol 'debs byed
གསོལ་འདེབས་བླ་མ་སྐུ་གསུམ	The Supplication to the Trikaya Guru; found in the Seven Chapter Supplication (le'u bdun ma)	gsol 'debs bla ma sku gsum
གསོལ་འདེབས་ཚུལ་དུ	in the manner of supplication	gsol 'debs tshul du
གསོལ་འདེབས་ཞུ	request, pray, supplicate, appeal	gsol 'debs zhu
གསོལ་འདེབས་ཞུས་པ་ལྟར	in accord w what was requested	gsol 'debs zhus pa ltar
གསོལ་འདེབས་ལེའུ་བདུན་མ	o rgyan gu ru padma 'byung gnas kyis rdo rje'i gsungs 'khrul pa med pa'i gsol 'debs le'u bdun	gsol 'debs le'u bdun ma
གསོལ་འདེབས་བསམ་པ་མྱུར་གྲུབ་མ	a prayer	gsol 'debs bsam pa myur grub ma
གསོལ་འདེབས་བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	a terma revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	gsol 'debs bsam pa lhun grub
གསོལ་ལྡོང	churn, tea churner	gsol ldong
གསོལ་སྡེབས་ལེའུ་བདུན་མ	Supplication to Guru Rinpoche in Seven Chapters, revealed by Rigdzin Gödem	gsol sdebs le'u bdun ma
གསོལ་སྡེར	plate, dish, platter, saucer	gsol sder
གསོལ་པ	replied	gsol pa
གསོལ་དཔོན	head cook, master cook, a household official, butler, kitchen steward, chief food steward	gsol dpon
གསོལ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ	steward in charge of grand lama's tea and food	gsol dpon mkhan po
གསོལ་སྤྲོ	[h]	gsol spro
གསོལ་ཕུད	offering-drink [to Dharma protectors, for instance]	gsol phud
གསོལ་ཕོགས	salary, allowance	gsol phogs
གསོལ་ཕྱུགས་ཁང	cattle barn [h]	gsol phyugs khang
གསོལ་འཕྲིན	'dod don gsol ba'i 'phrin bcol	gsol 'phrin
གསོལ་བ	ft. of {gsol ba}; pf. of {gsol ba}; to wear (h); 1) to ask, request. 2) (h) to wear. 3) clothed [in silks], wearing [ornaments]. to congratulate, to wish joy; {gsol ba, gsol ba, gsol ba, gsol} tran...	gsol ba
གསོལ་བ་སྒྲོན	offering of food, honorary title for food served to a prince	gsol ba sgron
གསོལ་བ་མངོན་གྱུར	bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i mngon gyur bcu'i ya gyal zhig ste, dge 'dun la bsnyen par rdzogs pa'i gsol ba lan gsum btab pa'o	gsol ba mngon gyur
གསོལ་བ་གཅིག་པ	supplicate 1 time	gsol ba gcig pa
གསོལ་བ་བཏབ	to supplicate	gsol ba btab
གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་ནས	begged him	gsol ba btab nas
གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ	{kun gyis lta bar 'dod nas gsol ba btab pa} all expressed the desire to see it	gsol ba btab pa
གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ་ཐེབས་པ	my prayers have brought fruit / given result	gsol ba btab pa thebs pa
གསོལ་བ་ཐོབ	supplicate [thob is impthrow out]	gsol ba thob
གསོལ་བ་ཐོབ་ཅིག	supplicate!	gsol ba thob cig
གསོལ་བ་དང་གཉིས	gsol ba dang gnyis kyi las la ltos	gsol ba dang gnyis
གསོལ་བ་དང་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ལས	'dul ba las bshad pa'i gnas dang blo mthun par bya ba &, dge slong ma'i sdom pa 'bog pa sogs su gsol ba tshar gcig &, las dngos tshar gcig bcas rnam grangs gnyis su 'byung bas gsol gnyis las zhes b...	gsol ba dang gnyis kyi las
གསོལ་བ་དང་བཞིའི་ལས	bsnyen rdzogs bsgrub pa sogs la, gsol ba lan gcig dang las dngos tshar gsum brjod pa'o	gsol ba dang bzhi'i las
གསོལ་བ་གདབ་པ	supplicated	gsol ba gdab pa
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས	supplicate	gsol ba 'debs
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་རྟེན	lha bla ma la rang gi 'dod don skyabs 'jug zhu rten	gsol ba 'debs rten
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་ནུས	khyed rnams kyis nyams su len cing gsol ba 'debs nus na - for those who can practise and pray	gsol ba 'debs nus
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་པ	requested, pray, supplicate	gsol ba 'debs pa
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་པ་ལགས	I beg you to. entreat	gsol ba 'debs pa lags
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་པར་བྱེད་པ	supplicate	gsol ba 'debs par byed pa
གསོལ་བ་འདེབས་སོ	we pray	gsol ba 'debs so
གསོལ་བ་ཕུར་ཚུགས	supplicate w 1 pointed/ changeless mind	gsol ba phur tshugs
གསོལ་བ་འབའ་ཞིག་པའི་ལས	in the vinaya gsang ston bsko ba sogs gsol ba kho na las brjod pa med pas gsol ba 'ba' zhig pa'i las zhes bya'o	gsol ba 'ba' zhig pa'i las
གསོལ་བ་འཚལ་བ	za ma za ba	gsol ba 'tshal ba
གསོལ་བ་ཞིག་ཐོབ	say an invocation	gsol ba zhig thob
གསོལ་བ་ཞུ་བ་ལན་གཅིག	supplicate 1 time	gsol ba zhu ba lan gcig
གསོལ་བ་བཞེས	eat, dine [h]	gsol ba bzhes
གསོལ་བ་བཞེས་པ	eat, dine [h]	gsol ba bzhes pa
གསོལ་བའི་ལས	act of {gsol ba} gsol ba 'ba' zhig pa'i las	gsol ba'i las
གསོལ་བར་མཛད	devour, banquet, feast, gobble, swallow, down	gsol bar mdzad
གསོལ་བར་མཛད་ཅིག	do eat, take food	gsol bar mdzad cig
གསོལ་བྱ	to petition the protectors	gsol bya
གསོལ་བྱང	request inscription	gsol byang
གསོལ་མར	butter, oil [h]	gsol mar
གསོལ་སྨན	medicine; {snyun gyi gsol sman} medicine; herbs for healing	gsol sman
གསོལ་སྩལ	giving, bestowing	gsol stsal
གསོལ་ཚིགས	food [h]	gsol tshigs
གསོལ་ཚིགས་འབུལ	entertain guests, invite to dinner [party, dance, etc.]	gsol tshigs 'bul
གསོལ་ཚིགས་འབུལ་བ	to entertain guests, invite to dinner [party, dance, etc.]	gsol tshigs 'bul ba
གསོལ་ཚིགས་གཤོམ་པ	arrange/ set out food [h]	gsol tshigs gshom pa
གསོལ་ཚིགས་གཤོམ་པའི་སྟོན་མོ	banquet, feast, reception	gsol tshigs gshom pa'i ston mo
གསོལ་མཛད་པ	[took] a meal, was having a meal	gsol mdzad pa
གསོལ་ཞལ	cup	gsol zhal
གསོལ་ཞིབ	[h]	gsol zhib
གསོལ་ཞོ	curds, curdled milk	gsol zho
གསོལ་བཞི	gsol ba dang bzhi'i las	gsol bzhi
གསོལ་གཟིམས་མཆོད་གསུམ	* gsol dpon, gzims dpon and mchod dpon	gsol gzims mchod gsum
གསོལ་འོ	milk [h] gsol g.yog - under waiter, table servant	gsol 'o
གསོལ་རས	1) present, gift, reward, tip, giving, bestowing, * [h]; 2) bowl wiping cloth, napkin [h]	gsol ras
གསོལ་རས་དངུལ	bonus	gsol ras dngul
གསོལ་རས་མཐུན་རྐྱེན	provisions	gsol ras mthun rkyen
གསོལ་རས་བདག་རྐྱེན	gifts, presents, some presents	gsol ras bdag rkyen
གསོལ་རས་གནང་བ	to give [us] presents	gsol ras gnang ba
གསོལ་རས་སླང་བ	distribute food 2868	gsol ras slang ba
གསོལ་ལོ་མཆོད་ཅིག	i place it before you, help yourself	gsol lo mchod cig
གསོས	feed, keep alive, SA 'tsho ba, gso ba, past of gso, past of gso	gsos
གསོས་སྐྱོར	repairing, restoring, renovating	gsos skyor
གསོས་སྐྱོར་བྱེད	repair, restore, renovate	gsos skyor byed
གསོས་བསྒྲོན	snon pa btab pa'am nyams gso byas pa,//sku gzugs gsos bsgron gnang ba	gsos bsgron
གསོས་ཆུ	[cultivating] water	gsos chu
གསོས་ཐང	rma 'jal gyi tshad gzhi	gsos thang
གསོས་ཐེབས་པ	to nurture/ nourish; to restore; strengthened	gsos thebs pa
གསོས་འདེབས	1) nyams par kha gsos rgyag pa,//khang rnying gsos 'debs pa; 2) phan byed kyi dran gso gtong ba,//not forgetting = dran gsos 'debs pa	gsos 'debs
གསོས་འདེབས་པ	{gsos thebs pa} to nurture/ nourish; to restore	gsos 'debs pa
གསོས་འདེབས་བྱེད་པ	non-merit	gsos 'debs byed pa
གསོས་པ	foster, cherish	gsos pa
གསོས་ཕྲུག	adopted/ foster child	gsos phrug
གསོས་བུ	adopted/ foster child	gsos bu
གསོས་བྱེད	{srog gi gsos su byed pa} provided the nourishment for its life	gsos byed
གསོས་བྱེད་པ	cure	gsos byed pa
གསོས་མ	cure, medicine	gsos ma
གསོས་མ་བཏང་བ	med. treat, cure	gsos ma btang ba
གསོས་མ་འདེབས་པ	apply a remedy	gsos ma 'debs pa
གསོས་སྨན	med. [h]	gsos sman
གསོས་ཟིན་པ	bred	gsos zin pa
གསོས་སུ་བྱེད་པ	{srog gi gsos su byed pa} provided the nourishment for its life gsrid pa bar do rmi lam gyi snang ba dream appearances of the bardo of becoming	gsos su byed pa
གསྲོག་གི་དབང་པོ་འགག་པ	stop the life force	gsrog gi dbang po 'gag pa
བསབ༹་སྒྲ	bso sgra	bsva sgra
བསབ༹་བསྭ	(see {ki ki} B"n/ Shambhala war cry to the victory gods	bsva bswa
བསྭ་བསྭ	see {ki ki}	bswa bswa
བསག	fall, collect, gather, SA sog pa, gsog pa	bsag
བསག་པ	ft. of {gsog pa}; to gather/ reinforce	bsag pa
བསགས	collected	bsags
བསགས་རྒྱབ	wealth and power	bsags rgyab
བསགས་གཅོད	hair	bsags gcod
བསགས་རྡུལ	accumulated atoms	bsags rdul
བསགས་པ	violate, commit, accumulation of merits, composite, cumulate, accumulated, accumulating	bsags pa
བསགས་པ་ཅན	who has an accumulation [of merit]	bsags pa can
བསགས་པའི་རྡུལ་ཕྲ་རབ	accumulated atoms	bsags pa'i rdul phra rab
བསགས་པའི་ནོར་རྫས	amassed wealth; the wealth they've accumulated	bsags pa'i nor rdzas
བསགས་པའི་ལས	accumulated karma	bsags pa'i las
བསགས་སྦྱང	accumulate and purify	bsags sbyang
བསགས་སྦྱང་སྒྲུབ	accumulation, purification and practice	bsags sbyang sgrub
བསགས་སྦྱང་སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས	accumulation, purification, and practice	bsags sbyang sgrub tshugs
བསགས་སྦྱངས	gathering and purifying, accumulation and purification abbr. of {tshogs bsags sgrib sbyangs}	bsags sbyangs
བསགས་སྦྱངས་སྤེལ་གསུམ་གྱི་རྐྱེན	the three conditions of accumulating, purifying, and increasing	bsags sbyangs spel gsum gyi rkyen
བསང	smoke offering; purify with incense; consecrate, bless, cleanse, purify, sanctify, clear away; (incense); purification and payment" offering.	bsang
བསང་ཁུང	source of purification	bsang khung
བསང་གི་ཆོ་ག	collected rituals for the propitiation of various protective and local deities through the burning of juniper boughs	bsang gi cho ga
བསང་སྔགས་ངེས་པ་དོན	secret mantra of true meaning	bsang sngags nges pa don
བསང་ཆུ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	bsang chu
བསང་ཆེན	great purification	bsang chen
བསང་མཆོད	purifying smoke (of fragrant plants) 2869	bsang mchod
བསང་གཏོང་བ	make a smoke offering	bsang gtong ba
བསང་གཏོར	purifying water	bsang gtor
བསང་དང་གསུར	smoke-purified and signed/ burned [offering]	bsang dang gsur
བསང་དུད	purifying smoke [lhasang etc]	bsang dud
བསང་བདུག་གཏོང་བ	in a building burn cleansing incense	bsang bdug gtong ba
བསང་ཕོར	bsang gtong sa'i snod [vessel] ???	bsang phor
བསང་བ	(tha dad pa bsangs pa, bsang ba, songs,, cleanse, remove, clear [away], come out of grief/ sorrow	bsang ba
བསང་བ་ལུ	kind of bsang shing [incense/ juniper?]	bsang ba lu
བསང་བུ	food, fare	bsang bu
བསང་འབྲས	dish of rice, rice	bsang 'bras
བསང་སྦྱང	cleanse and purify	bsang sbyang
བསང་རྩམ	tsampa for smoke offering	bsang rtsam
བསང་ལ་འདེབས་རྒྱུ	to be offered in a smoke offering	bsang la 'debs rgyu
བསང་ཤིང	incense, juniper tree	bsang shing
བསང་གསུར	smoke-cleansed and burned food smoke offering	bsang gsur
བསང་གསོལ	bsangs offering	bsang gsol
བསངས	purify, cleanse, clear away [comp {sangs} [p bsang] loose incense, shrubs used for incense	bsangs
བསངས་བརྔན	offering of fragrant substances	bsangs brngan
བསངས་ཆུ	sanctified water	bsangs chu
བསངས་ཆོག	smoke-offering ritual	bsangs chog
བསངས་མཆོད	religious ceremony of burning incense/ juniper etc.	bsangs mchod
བསངས་གཏོང	have an incense burning ceremony, burn incense	bsangs gtong
བསངས་གཏོང་བ	have an incense burning ceremony, burn incense	bsangs gtong ba
བསངས་གཏོར་བ	burn incense as an offering	bsangs gtor ba
བསངས་བཏང་བ	to burn incense	bsangs btang ba
བསངས་སྟེགས	a smoke-offering stand, platform	bsangs stegs
བསངས་དུད	smoke puja	bsangs dud
བསངས་པ	1) cleansed, cleared away, removed [p bsang ba]; 2) incense	bsangs pa
བསངས་རྫ	{bsangs rdza} mt [in mtsho sngon province N of the lake in rkang tsha rdzong]	bsangs rdza
བསངས་རྫས	smoke-offering articles	bsangs rdzas
བསངས་ཡིག	rituals for the offering of bsangs in propitiation of the local and mountain deities	bsangs yig
བསངས་ཤིང	incense stick, juniper tree, trees/ bushes/ plants used for incense	bsangs shing
བསངས་གསོལ	smoke offering	bsangs gsol
བསངས་བསེལ	incense removes defilement	bsangs bsel
བསད	killed, slaughtered [p gsod pa]	bsad
བསད་སྐྱོན	killed and wounded, casualties, killing, murdering	bsad skyon
བསད་སྐྱོན་གཏོང	kill, murder	bsad skyon gtong
བསད་མཁན	the man who is or who kills, murderer	bsad mkhan
བསད་པ	kill, killed, slaughter, scorned	bsad pa
བསད་པ་སྟོང་གི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	zhal lce bcu drug gi ya gyal zhig ste, gna' rabs kyi khrims yig nang gsal bsam bzhin mi bsad kyi nyes can rigs la stong gi chad pa 'gel lugs kyi khrims shig	bsad pa stong gi zhal lce
བསད་པ་ལ་ཐུག	just on the point of being executed	bsad pa la thug
བསད་པ་ལ་ཐུག་ཚེ	at the time of being executed	bsad pa la thug tshe
བསད་པའི་མི་རོ་སློང་བ	resuscitate the slain	bsad pa'i mi ro slong ba
བསད་བྱ	animal to be slaughtered	bsad bya
བསད་མ་ཐག་པའི་ཤ	flesh of an animal just slaughtered	bsad ma thag pa'i sha
བསད་རྨས	killed and wounded, casualties	bsad rmas
བསད་ཟིན་པ	slain, to turn off	bsad zin pa
བསད་ལན	receive the meat of an animal killed by another	bsad lan
བསད་ཤ	meat of killed beings	bsad sha
བསད་གསོ	to revive the dead	bsad gso
བསན	hear, listen, SA gson pa	bsan
བསབ	give on equivalent, SA 'dzab pa, fill out, SA gsob pa	bsab
བསབ་པ	ft. of {gsob pa}	bsab pa
བསབས	[p gsob, gsab]	bsabs
བསབས་པ	pf. of {gsob pa}	bsabs pa
བསམ	intent, think, thought, idea, ideology, SA sems pa, reflection, wish, imagination, fancy, the will, soul, heart, thinking	bsam
བསམ་གྱི་ཁྱབ་པ	thinkable, conceivable	bsam gyi khyab pa
བསམ་གྱི་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	inconceivable nature/ dharmata	bsam gyi mi khyab pa'i chos nyid
བསམ་གྱི་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	pristine cognition of inconceivability	bsam gyi mi khyab pa'i ye shes
བསམ་གྱིས་ཁྱབ	thinkable, conceivable	bsam gyis khyab
བསམ་གྱིས་ཁྱབ་པ	conceivable	bsam gyis khyab pa
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ	unimaginably	bsam gyis mi khyab
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	myriad {'khrul snang bsam gyis mi khyab pa} myriad hallucinations	bsam gyis mi khyab pa
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ་ལྔ	the five inconceivables	bsam gyis mi khyab pa lnga
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ་ཞིག	innumerable	bsam gyis mi khyab pa zhig
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ་ལས་འདས་པ	a #	bsam gyis mi khyab pa las 'das pa
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི	inconceivable numbers of bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i 'gyur ba 'pho ba the inconceivable change of death	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད	inconceivable nature	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i chos nyid
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་འཆི་འཕོ	inconceivable death and transmigration	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i 'chi 'pho
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་དུས	inconceivable/ 4th time	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i dus
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་གནས་ལུགས	inconceivable basic state	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i gnas lugs
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་དཔལ	{bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i dpal} bodhisattva	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i dpal
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་དབྱིངས	inconceivable space	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i dbyings
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the secret center it gives rise to the pristine cognition of inconceivability	bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i ye shes
བསམ་གྲན	(dhyana concentration	bsam gran
བསམ་གྲུབ	establish what is desired/ wished	bsam grub
བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་ཁར	{bsam grub ljongs khar} Bhutan	bsam grub ljongs khar
བསམ་གྲོས་ལེགས་བསྡུར	have a good discussion where people mutually convey the sense of their ideas	bsam gros legs bsdur
བསམ་གླིང	Samling, in Tsibri, Latö	bsam gling
བསམ་གླིང་བྱམས་ཆེན་ལྷ་ཁང	Maitreya Temple of Samling, in Tsibri	bsam gling byams chen lha khang
བསམ་འགྲུབ	fulfillment (of 1's desires	bsam 'grub
བསམ་ངན	evil thoughts	bsam ngan
བསམ་ངན་སྐྱེ་བྱ་བ	he gave rise to selfish thoughts	bsam ngan skye bya ba
བསམ་ངན་སྐྱེས་ཏེ	producing this selfserving thought	bsam ngan skyes te
བསམ་ངན་ཁོག་བཅུག	malice aforethought, bad ulterior motive	bsam ngan khog bcug
བསམ་ངན་ཁོག་འཇུག	malice aforethought, bad ulterior motive	bsam ngan khog 'jug
བསམ་ངན་ཅན	malicious, evil, spiteful bsam ngan dang sbyor rtsub byed pa evil thoughts and violence	bsam ngan can
བསམ་ངན་ཕུང་སྦྱོར	by bad thoughts reckon up others's faults	bsam ngan phung sbyor
བསམ་ངན་རང་རྒྱུད	the stream of my negative thoughts	bsam ngan rang rgyud
བསམ་ངོ་དང་བྲལ་བ	free of any context in which it can be imagined	bsam ngo dang bral ba
བསམ་ཆུང	small-minded	bsam chung
བསམ་མཆོག	excellent thoughts	bsam mchog
བསམ་འཆར	opinion, suggestion, idea	bsam 'char
བསམ་འཆར་སྟོན་པ	suggest	bsam 'char ston pa
བསམ་འཆར་འདོན	express an opinion/ suggestion/ idea	bsam 'char 'don
བསམ་འཆར་འདོན་པ	express an opinion/ suggestion/ idea	bsam 'char 'don pa
བསམ་འཆར་འབྲི་དེབ	opinion/ suggestion book	bsam 'char 'bri deb
བསམ་འཆར་ཤོད	express an opinion/ suggestion/ idea	bsam 'char shod
བསམ་ལྗོངས	{bsam grub ljongs khar} Bhutan	bsam ljongs
བསམ་བརྗོད	words/ expression of/ and thoughts	bsam brjod
བསམ་བརྗོད་བྲལ་བ	beyond thought & expression	bsam brjod bral ba
བསམ་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས	beyond thought or expression	bsam brjod las 'das
བསམ་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond thought or expression	bsam brjod las 'das pa
བསམ་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས་པའི་ངང	the state beyond thought and description	bsam brjod las 'das pa'i ngang
བསམ་གཏན་ཁང	1 sgom rgyag sa'i khang pa chung chung, two dgon pa, . meditation hall	bsam gtan khang
བསམ་གཏན་ཁང་བུ	mountain retreat of buddhist sages and saints, hermitage on a lonely mountain	bsam gtan khang bu
བསམ་གཏན་ཁང་བཟང	hermitage propitious to contemplation, excellent meditation hut	bsam gtan khang bzang
བསམ་གཏན་ཁྱད་པར	modification of the first type of dhyana	bsam gtan khyad par
བསམ་གཏན་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	special dhyana (dhyana w/o vitarka, the first	bsam gtan khyad par can
བསམ་གཏན་ཁྱད་པར་བ	special stage of dhyana	bsam gtan khyad par ba
བསམ་གཏན་ཁྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	dhyana paramita	bsam gtan khyi pha rol tu phyin pa
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	the mandala of dhyana/ meditation	bsam gtan gyi dkyil 'khor
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་བརྒྱད	{'gyur byed bde sdug gis mi g.yo bas na mi g.yo ba zhes bya ste}, {rtog dpyod gnyis}, {dbugs dbyung rngub gnyis}, {bde sdug gnyis}, {yid bde yid mi bde gnyis te brgyad do}	bsam gtan gyi skyon brgyad
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་མཁན	Chan master	bsam gtan gyi mkhan
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་མཁན་པོ	teacher of chan	bsam gtan gyi mkhan po
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་གོ་སྒྲུབ	establish the armor of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi go sgrub
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་ཚོགས	accumulate the causes of concentration	bsam gtan gyi rgyu tshogs
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་དངོས་གཞི	the actual concentrations	bsam gtan gyi dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཆོས་བཞི	the four dharmas of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi chos bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཉེར་བསྡོགས	the preliminary part of meditation	bsam gtan gyi nyer bsdogs
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག	the absorptions of the dhyanas	bsam gtan gyi snyoms 'jug
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག་བཞི	the four absorptions of the four dhyanas	bsam gtan gyi snyoms 'jug bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	reach the limit of meditation, reach ultimate dhyana, ultimate application of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi mthar gyis pa
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་མཐར་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བ	reach the limit of meditation, reach ultimate dhyana	bsam gtan gyi mthar gyis sbyor ba
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the suchness of meditation	bsam gtan gyi de kho na nyid
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་དེ་ཉིད་གསུམ	threefold reality of concentration/ meditation	bsam gtan gyi de nyid gsum
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་བདེ་ལ་རོ་མྱང་མེད	not tasting the bliss of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi bde la ro myang med
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་འདུ་བྱེད	the formations of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi 'du byed
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་སྡོམ་པ	discipline born from meditative concentration	bsam gtan gyi sdom pa
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་གནས་རིས	Dhyana Realms	bsam gtan gyi gnas ris
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་གནས་རིས་བཞི	Four Dhyana Realms	bsam gtan gyi gnas ris bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ	the perfection of concentration, the dhyana paramita	bsam gtan gyi pha rol tu phyin pa
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན	the perfection of meditation, the dhyanaparamita [possessing the khyad chos bzhi moind	bsam gtan gyi phar phyin
ཕོ༹ཅུསེད་ཨོནེ	pontedly on its object with the virtuous seeds {dge ba sa bon} [one of the six perfections {pha rol tu phyin pa drug}	focused one
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	the seal of concentration	bsam gtan gyi phyag rgya
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་བར་དོ	Bardo of meditation	bsam gtan gyi bar do
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of dhyana	bsam gtan gyi 'bras bu
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	the accumulations of the dhyanas	bsam gtan gyi tshogs sgrub
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཞག	meditation day	bsam gtan gyi zhag
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཟས	the food of meditation	bsam gtan gyi zas
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་འོད་གསལ	the luminosity of dhyana/ meditation	bsam gtan gyi 'od gsal
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཡན	(five are rtog pa, dpyod pa, dga' ba, sla ba, rtse mo gcig)	bsam gtan gyi yan
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག	meditation aids	bsam gtan gyi yan lag
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five dhyana factors, the five limbs of trance. 1) {rtog pa} thoughts adjusted. 2) {dpyod pa} thoughts discoursing. 3) {dga' ba} zest. 4) {sla ba} ease. 5) {rtse mo gcig}	bsam gtan gyi yan lag lnga
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་རོ་མྱོང	experience the taste of meditation	bsam gtan gyi ro myong
བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་ས	the levels of concentrations, dhyana levels	bsam gtan gyi sa
བསམ་གཏན་གླིང	Meditation Temple. A temple at Samye 2872	bsam gtan gling
བསམ་གཏན་གླིང་པ	1682-? - Samten Lingpa, also known as Taksham Nüden Dorje (stag sham nus ldan rdo rje)	bsam gtan gling pa
བསམ་གཏན་དགེ་བ	good dhyana, the bliss of dhyana	bsam gtan dge ba
བསམ་གཏན་འགྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཚོགས	gathering of causes for achieving concentration/ dhyana	bsam gtan 'grub pa'i rgyu tshogs
བསམ་གཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Samten Gyatso. The root guru of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	bsam gtan rgya mtsho
བསམ་གཏན་རྒྱ་ལུང་ཆེན་པོ	SA rgya lung chen po	bsam gtan rgya lung chen po
བསམ་གཏན་སྒོམ་པ	to practice meditation	bsam gtan sgom pa
བསམ་གཏན་སྒོམས་ཤིག	meditate!	bsam gtan sgoms shig
བསམ་གཏན་བརྒྱུད་པའི་མདོ་རྒྱུད	Short Indirect Meditation Tantra. One of the	bsam gtan brgyud pa'i mdo rgyud
བསམ་གཏན་བསྒོམ་པ	to practice meditation	bsam gtan bsgom pa
བསམ་གཏན་ངལ་གསོ	Easing Weariness Through Meditation	bsam gtan ngal gso
བསམ་གཏན་དངོས་གཞི	the main part of dhyana	bsam gtan dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་མངོན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ	establish/ establish dhyana	bsam gtan mngon par sgrub pa
བསམ་གཏན་གཅིག་པུའི་རྒྱུད	Single Meditation Tantra. One of the Twenty-five Tantras of the Great Perfection taught by Shri Singha to Vairochana	bsam gtan gcig pu'i rgyud
བསམ་གཏན་ཆོ་ག	meditation chant text	bsam gtan cho ga
བསམ་གཏན་ཆོས་བདུན	the 7 dharmas of samadhi	bsam gtan chos bdun
བསམ་གཏན་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollection of the meditation	bsam gtan rje su dran pa
བསམ་གཏན་ཉམས་སྒྲོན	The torch of meditation experience, by Garab Dorje	bsam gtan nyams sgron
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས	the two kinds of meditation	bsam gtan gnyis
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པ	the 2nd dhyana	bsam gtan gnyis pa
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པ་སྐྱོན་ཅན	w the faults of the 2nd dhyana	bsam gtan gnyis pa skyon can
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པའི་དངོས་གཞི	the main part of the 2nd dhyana	bsam gtan gnyis pa'i dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པའི་གནས	the god realms of the 2nd dhyana in space above the 1st from 'od chung to dge chung]	bsam gtan gnyis pa'i gnas
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པའི་གནས་གསུམ	the three realms of the 2nd dhyana {'od chung} {tshad med 'od} {'od gsal} bsam gtan gnyis pa'i zhi gnas khyad par	bsam gtan gnyis pa'i gnas gsum
བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་པའི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four limbs of the 2nd dhyana	bsam gtan gnyis pa'i yan lag bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་བསྟན་པ	training in being concentrated, the transcendental perfection of concentration	bsam gtan bstan pa
བསམ་གཏན་དག་པ་བཞི	the four pure dhyanas	bsam gtan dag pa bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་དག་པར་ཆ་མཐུན་བཞི	the four aspects that accord w pure samadhi bsam gtan dang ting nge 'dzin thob pa attain dhyana and samadhi	bsam gtan dag par cha mthun bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་དང་དུ་ཞུགས	enter the samadhi	bsam gtan dang du zhugs
བསམ་གཏན་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing dhyana bsam gtan dang rnam thar dang ting 'dzin	bsam gtan dang ldan pa
དང་སྙོམས་འཇུག	dhyana, liberation, samadhi, and samapatti; concentration, liberation, contemplation and absorption bsam gtan dang rnam thar dang ting 'dzin	dang snyoms 'jug
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་དང་སྟོབས	snyoms par 'jug pa mkhyen pa'i	ting nge 'dzin dang stobs
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོ	the levels realized through the first concentration. First Dhyana. the first heaven of Gods in Concentration States is divided into. 1) {tshangs ris}. 2) {tshangs pa mdun na 'don gyi lha} 3) {tshan...	bsam gtan dang po
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་དངོས་གཞི	the main part of the 1st dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་ཉེར་བསྡོགས	preparatory stages of the 1st dhyana bsam gtan dang po'i nyer bsdogs drug six preparatory stages of the 1st dhyana bsam gtan dang po'i nyer bsdogs drug six preparatory stages of the first dhyana; 1...	bsam gtan dang po'i nyer bsdogs
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་གནས	god realms of/ resting in the 1st dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i gnas
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་གནས་རིས་གསུམ	the three realms of the 1st dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i gnas ris gsum
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་གནས་གསུམ	the three realms of the 1st dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i gnas gsum
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	five aspects of the 1st dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i yan lag lnga
བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་ལྷ་གནས	divine realms of the 1st dhyana bsam gtan dang zag pa med pa'i sdom pa - spotless discipline of pure dhyana	bsam gtan dang po'i lha gnas
བསམ་གཏན་དང་ཤེས་རབ	dhyana and prajna	bsam gtan dang shes rab
བསམ་གཏན་དུས	time of dhyana, night	bsam gtan dus
བསམ་གཏན་བདེ་བ	good/ blissful meditation bsam gtan bde ba phul gyis gnas shing the field of perfection of good/ blissful meditation	bsam gtan bde ba
བསམ་གཏན་བདེ་བ་ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བ	perfect good/ blissful meditation	bsam gtan bde ba phul du byung ba
བསམ་གཏན་གནས་དུས	time of abiding in dhyana, night bsam gtan rnam thar ting 'dzin snyoms 'jug sogs mkhyen pa'i stobs - the power of knowing dhyana, liberation, samapatti and so forth bsam gtan rnam thar ting 'dzin s...	bsam gtan gnas dus
བསམ་གཏན་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three kinds of meditation; {byis pa nyer spyod kyi bsam gtan}, approach of a child [in a temple] beginner's mind {don rab 'byed pa'i bsam gtan} revelation of the ultimate meaning, {de bzhin gsh...	bsam gtan rnam gsum
བསམ་གཏན་རྣམས་བཟློག	return from/ eliminate dhyana	bsam gtan rnams bzlog
བསམ་གཏན་སྣོད་རུང་བ	suitable vessel of mediation	bsam gtan snod rung ba
བསམ་གཏན་པ	1 meditator [in dhyana, samadhi]; 2) a division of/ 1 among nang gses zhig ?? the extremist {mu stegs rgyang 'phen pa} doctrine .. Sam gtan ma, bsam gtan sgom pa'i bud med, . meditator	bsam gtan pa
བསམ་གཏན་པའི་དཔེ་མཁྱུད་ཀྱི་མདོ	Sutra on the Grasping [at true existence] of One in Trance	bsam gtan pa'i dpe mkhyud kyi mdo
བསམ་གཏན་སྤེལ་སྒོམ་ལྔ	the five dhyana increasing familiarities?	bsam gtan spel sgom lnga
བསམ་གཏན་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན	dhyana paramita	bsam gtan pha rol phyin
བསམ་གཏན་ཕྱི་མ	Dhyaanottarapat,alakrama	bsam gtan phyi ma
བསམ་གཏན་ཕྱི་མའི་རྒྱུད	Later Meditation Tantra. A tantra belonging to Kriya Yoga	bsam gtan phyi ma'i rgyud
བསམ་གཏན་བར་དོ	intermediate state of meditative concentration	bsam gtan bar do
བསམ་གཏན་བྱེད	concentrate the mind on a certain moral virtue, transpose oneself into the state of contemplation	bsam gtan byed
བསམ་གཏན་མིག་སྒྲོན	{gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes rin po ches mdzad pa'i sgom gyi gnad gsal bar phye ba bsam gtan mig sgron ces bya ba bzhugs so}	bsam gtan mig sgron
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི	four contemplations	bsam gtan bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པ	the fourth heaven of Gods in Concentration States is divided into. 1) {sprin med 'od}. 2) {bsod nams skyes} 3) {'bras bu che ba} 4) - 8) {gtsang ma lnga}	bsam gtan bzhi pa
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་དངོས་གཞི	the main object of the 4th dhyana bsam gtan bzhi pa'i dngos gzhi'i sems the mind which is the main object of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་གནས	god realms of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i gnas
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་གནས་བརྒྱད	the 8 realms of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i gnas brgyad
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་གནས་རིས་བརྒྱད	the 8 realms of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i gnas ris brgyad
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་ཡན་ལག་བཞི	the four limbs of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i yan lag bzhi
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་པའི་སེམས	the mind of the 4th dhyana	bsam gtan bzhi pa'i sems
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་སེམས	the mind of the 4th dhyanas	bsam gtan bzhi sems
བསམ་གཏན་བཞིའི་དངོས་གཞི	the main objects of the four dhyanas	bsam gtan bzhi'i dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་བཞིའི་གནས་རིས	the abodes of the four dhyanas	bsam gtan bzhi'i gnas ris
བསམ་གཏན་བཞིའི་ཡན་ལག་གསུམ	the three limbs of the four dhyanas [1) antidote gnyen po'i yan lag 2) beneficial qualities phan yon.., 3) gnas kyi..]	bsam gtan bzhi'i yan lag gsum
བསམ་གཏན་ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི་སྡོམ་པ	the dhyana vow and the undefiling vow	bsam gtan zag med kyi sdom pa
བསམ་གཏན་གཟུགས་མེད་མིན	meditation w form bsam gtan gzugs med la 'jug pa'i 'jug	bsam gtan gzugs med min
བསམ་གཏན་ཡོད་པ	to be able to meditate	bsam gtan yod pa
བསམ་གཏན་རབ་བདེས་གནས་ནས་ན	from resting in the bliss of perfect meditation bsam gtan la mnyam par bzhag pa placed evenly in dhyana, meditation	bsam gtan rab bdes gnas nas na
བསམ་གཏན་ལས་བྱུང་བདེ་བ་མངལ	the womb of bliss arising from meditation	bsam gtan las byung bde ba mngal
བསམ་གཏན་ས་དགུ	the 9 levels of dhyana	bsam gtan sa dgu
བསམ་གཏན་ས་དྲུག	the six levels of dhyana; 1) the preliminaries of the 1st dhyana {bsam gtan dang po'i nyer bsdogs mi lcogs med} 2) the main meditation {dngos gzhi tsam po ba}, 3) the special 1st dhyana de khyad pa...	bsam gtan sa drug
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ	the three dhyanas	bsam gtan gsum
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པ	3rd concentration 5) {bsam btan bzhi pa - 4th concentration 6) {nam mkha' mtha' yas - infinite space 7) {rnam shis mtha' yas - infinite consciousness 8) {di yang med - nothingness 9) {srid rtse - p...	bsam gtan gsum pa
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པའི་དངོས་གཞི	the main part of the 3rd dhyana	bsam gtan gsum pa'i dngos gzhi
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པའི་གནས	god realms of the 3rd dhyana [in the space above the second from {dge chung} to {sprin med 'od}	bsam gtan gsum pa'i gnas
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པའི་གནས་རིས་གསུམ	the three realms of the 3rd dhyana	bsam gtan gsum pa'i gnas ris gsum
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པའི་གནས་གསུམ	the three realms of the 3rd dhyana	bsam gtan gsum pa'i gnas gsum
བསམ་གཏན་གསུམ་པའི་ཡན་ལག་ལྔ	the five limbs of the 3rd dhyana	bsam gtan gsum pa'i yan lag lnga
བསམ་གཏན་ལྷ	samadhi gods	bsam gtan lha
བསམ་བཏང་དྲན་སྐྱེས	sngar gyi bsam gros la mi gnas par gsar spros 'gyur ldog byed pa	bsam btang dran skyes
བསམ་བཏན་གྱི་མིག	the eye of dhyana	bsam btan gyi mig
བསམ་བཏན་བཞི	the four dhyanas	bsam btan bzhi
བསམ་རྟོག	thinking (process) and/ or (discrete) thoughts; conceptualization	bsam rtog
བསམ་ལྟར	according to intention	bsam ltar
བསམ་སྟན་གླིང་པ	alias stag sham nus	bsam stan gling pa
ལྡན་རྡོ་རྗེ	b. 1655	ldan rdo rje
བསམ་སྟན་བཞི	four dhyanas	bsam stan bzhi
བསམ་སྟོང	illusion, illusory thoughts	bsam stong
བསམ་ཐག	the rope of thoughts [the fundamental root or essence that holds them together]	bsam thag
བསམ་ཐོག་དོན་ཁེལ	accomplish 1's wish	bsam thog don khel
བསམ་མཐུན	being of the same opinion 2875	bsam mthun
བསམ་དུ་མེད	unthinkable, carefree nonthought	bsam du med
བསམ་དུ་མེད་པ	unthinkable, carefree	bsam du med pa
བསམ་དུ་མེད་པའི་ཉམས	experience of	bsam du med pa'i nyams
བསམ་དོན	desire, wish, goal	bsam don
བསམ་དོན་ཀུན	whatever mind desires	bsam don kun
བསམ་དོན་འགྲུབ	fulfillment of one's desire	bsam don 'grub
བསམ་དོན་འགྲུབ་པ	accomplish 1's wishes/ goals	bsam don 'grub pa
བསམ་དོན་མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པ་ཤོག	may the aspirations be swiftly accomplished	bsam don myur du 'grub pa shog
བསམ་དོན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	complete [spontaneous] fulfillment of 1's wishes/ goals	bsam don lhun grub
བསམ་འདས	transcending thought, infinite	bsam 'das
བསམ་འདས་གདོད་མའི་གནས་ལུགས	original state transcending thought	bsam 'das gdod ma'i gnas lugs
བསམ་འདུན	hope, goal, expectation	bsam 'dun
བསམ་ལྡིང་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕག་མ	seat of female Tulku Dorje Phagmo	bsam lding rdo rje phag ma
བསམ་ནག	malice	bsam nag
བསམ་ནོར་འཁོར་བ	misjudge	bsam nor 'khor ba
བསམ་མནོ	thoughts, thinking, plan, frame of mind, [contemplation, reflection, idea, ideology, cognition, intellection, brains, mind, the way thinking arises pondering]	bsam mno
བསམ་མནོ་གཏོང་བ	think carefully about	bsam mno gtong ba
བསམ་མནོ་བཏང	ponder over	bsam mno btang
བསམ་མནོ་བ	muse upon	bsam mno ba
བསམ་པ	1) [will] think/ wish/ contemplate, thought, thinking, idea, intention,	bsam pa
ཨིདེཨ་ཨོཕ༹་ཧོཝ་ཏོ	- [ci byed bsam pa med]; 2) external actions really being appearances in the head	idea of how to
བསམ་པ་དཀར་པོ	pure intention, good will/ intentions	bsam pa dkar po
བསམ་པ་དཀར་པོ་གྱིས	have kind thoughts!	bsam pa dkar po gyis
བསམ་པ་དཀར་པོ་བགྱི་བ	to keep / have pure thoughts	bsam pa dkar po bgyi ba
བསམ་པ་གྲུ་གཅིག	w the same idea[s]	bsam pa gru gcig
བསམ་པ་དགའ་བ	joyful thought	bsam pa dga' ba
བསམ་པ་དགུ་པོ	many thoughts	bsam pa dgu po
བསམ་པ་དགེ་བ	what makes an action good	bsam pa dge ba
བསམ་པ་འགལ	contradict what is desired	bsam pa 'gal
བསམ་པ་འགྲུབ་པ	accomplishing whatever one wishes, to fulfill wishes	bsam pa 'grub pa
བསམ་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ	1 vast mind/ thought; 2) among the ornaments of vastness {rgya che ba'i rgyan}, showing difficult to establish by another bya ba rngam chen gyi khur len par bzod pa'i thought's vast essential power...	bsam pa rgya che ba
ཀྱི་ཀུན་སློང	the immense thought of the bodhichitta motivation, attitude bsam pa rgya che ba byang chub sems	kyi kun slong
བསམ་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	vast thought	bsam pa rgya chen po
བསམ་པ་མངོན་ཕྱོགས	bent of mind, inclination	bsam pa mngon phyogs
བསམ་པ་གཅིག་འགྱུ	a thought passed through my mind	bsam pa gcig 'gyu
བསམ་པ་གཅིག་པ་ཉིད	single thought	bsam pa gcig pa nyid
བསམ་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ	deepest resolves bsam pa ji lta ba dang 'dod pa ji lta bar	bsam pa ji lta ba
བསམ་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ	in accordance with others' wishes	bsam pa ji lta ba bzhin du
བསམ་པ་ཉུང་ངུས་མཆོག	grasp lesser thoughts as best	bsam pa nyung ngus mchog
བསམ་པ་མཉམ་པ	impartial contemplation	bsam pa mnyam pa
བསམ་པ་སྟོར	mind is scattered	bsam pa stor
བསམ་པ་ཐག་པ	sincere thought	bsam pa thag pa
བསམ་པ་དག་པ	whose minds are pure	bsam pa dag pa
བསམ་པ་དང་སྒོམ་པ	contemplation and meditation bsam pa dang ldan pa'i sems bskyed pa arouse bodhicitta possessing thoughts/ wishes	bsam pa dang sgom pa
བསམ་པ་དང་བློ	thoughts and attitudes bsam pa dang sbyor ba mchog dang ldan	bsam pa dang blo
བསམ་པ་དང་རང་བཞིན	thoughts and disposition	bsam pa dang rang bzhin
བསམ་པ་དྲག་པོ	a significant frame of mind	bsam pa drag po
བསམ་པ་རྣམ་དག	sincere, earnest, genuine	bsam pa rnam dag
བསམ་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure thoughts/ aspiration/ wishes, sincere, earnest, genuine 2876	bsam pa rnam par dag pa
བསམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས	myriad speculations	bsam pa sna tshogs
བསམ་པ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ	perfect/ abundant thoughts [thoughts/ wishes chos nas as arise establishing, and though these arise in full measure thoughts of livlihood do not, concern for great enlightenment]	bsam pa phun sum tshogs pa
བསམ་པ་འབོར་བ	conceive an idea, think of a plan	bsam pa 'bor ba
བསམ་པ་སྦྱོར་བ	apply thoughts, engage in aspirations, thoughts and actions, aspirations and applications	bsam pa sbyor ba
བསམ་པ་མ་གོས་པ	not covered w thoughts	bsam pa ma gos pa
བསམ་པ་མ་དག	impure thoughts	bsam pa ma dag
བསམ་པ་མ་ཡིན	kind of flesh-eating demon	bsam pa ma yin
བསམ་པ་མི་འགྲུབ་པ་ལགས་སམ	Must my plans remain unrealized?	bsam pa mi 'grub pa lags sam
བསམ་པ་མྱུར་གྲུབ་མ	Swift Fulfillment of Wishes, a prayer	bsam pa myur grub ma
བསམ་པ་དམན་པ	lesser intention bsam pa tsam gyi chog par 'dzin pa grasp mere thought as enough	bsam pa dman pa
བསམ་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས	merely by the power of his thought	bsam pa tsam gyis
བསམ་པ་རྫོགས་པ	1) the fulfillment of 1's [high] aspiration; 2) exhaust thoughts	bsam pa rdzogs pa
བསམ་པ་བཞིན	intentionally	bsam pa bzhin
བསམ་པ་བཟང་པོ	good intention, good design	bsam pa bzang po
བསམ་པ་བཟང་བ	kind-hearted, his thoughts are kind bsam pa bzang zhing blo gros che ba kindhearted and wise	bsam pa bzang ba
བསམ་པ་ཡང་ནི་དག་པ	thought too is pure	bsam pa yang ni dag pa
བསམ་པ་ཡངས་པ	broad heart, magnanimity	bsam pa yangs pa
བསམ་པ་ཡིད་བཞིན	wishes	bsam pa yid bzhin
བསམ་པ་ཡིད་བཞིན་དུ་འགྲུབ་པ	one's intentions will be spontaneously fulfilled	bsam pa yid bzhin du 'grub pa
བསམ་པ་ལ་བརྟན	concentrate steadily	bsam pa la brtan
བསམ་པ་ལ་བསྟེན་པ	rely on thought	bsam pa la bsten pa
བསམ་པ་ལ་བསམ་པའི་ཚེ	when he	bsam pa la bsam pa'i tshe
ཐོཨུགྷཏ་སུཆ	and-such	thought such
བསམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	resulting from reflection	bsam pa las byung ba
བསམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་པ	understanding born from reflection	bsam pa las byung ba'i shes pa
བསམ་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	superior knowledge arising from reflection, prajna resulting from contemplation; that which is born of thought	bsam pa las byung ba'i shes rab
བསམ་པ་ལུས་ངག་གི་ལས	bodily and verbal intended actions	bsam pa lus ngag gi las
བསམ་པ་ལོག་པ	wrong thoughts [1 split by duality and doubt [rtse gnyis] two wrong attachment]	bsam pa log pa
བསམ་པ་སོ་སོ	different opinions, dissension	bsam pa so so
བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	Spontaneous Fulfillment of Wishes. 1) Sampa Lhündrub; a terma of Chokgyur Lingpa. inner sadhana; also known as Tukdrub Yishin Norbu 2) A supplication to Guru Rinpoche	bsam pa lhun grub
བསམ་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་མ	The Prayer which Spontaneously Fulfills all Aspirations	bsam pa lhun grub ma
བསམ་པའི་བཀོད་པ	1) style of worldly view; 2) impression/ way of manifesting of thought, imagination, mental vision	bsam pa'i bkod pa
བསམ་པའི་བཀོད་ཤུགས	power of imagination/ mental vision, imaginativeness	bsam pa'i bkod shugs
བསམ་པའི་ཁྱད་པར་གྱི་འབྱོར་པ	the special advantage of intention	bsam pa'i khyad par gyi 'byor pa
བསམ་པའི་ཁྱབ་ཁོངས	spiritual world	bsam pa'i khyab khongs
བསམ་པའི་འཁོར་ཕྱོགས	current/ trend of thought	bsam pa'i 'khor phyogs
བསམ་པའི་འཁྱེར་སོ	attitude, mental outlook	bsam pa'i 'khyer so
བསམ་པའི་གོ་མཚོན	ideological weapon	bsam pa'i go mtshon
བསམ་པའི་འགྱུར་བ་བརྒྱད	the 8 changes of mood	bsam pa'i 'gyur ba brgyad
བསམ་པའི་རྒྱུགས་ཕྱེ	spiritual food	bsam pa'i rgyugs phye
བསམ་པའི་སྒོ་ནས	by means of contemplation [thinking, reflecting wishing]	bsam pa'i sgo nas
བསམ་པའི་བསྒྱུར་བཅོས	ideological reform	bsam pa'i bsgyur bcos
བསམ་པའི་ངལ་རྩོལ	mental labor	bsam pa'i ngal rtsol
བསམ་པའི་མངོན་ཕྱོགས	mental inclination	bsam pa'i mngon phyogs
བསམ་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	spiritual world	bsam pa'i 'jig rten
བསམ་པའི་སྟོབས	resolution, strength of mind, determination	bsam pa'i stobs
བསམ་པའི་དོན་འབྱོར་བ	apply 1's aspirations	bsam pa'i don 'byor ba
བསམ་པའི་དོམ་མི་འགྲུབ	you won't achieve your aims	bsam pa'i dom mi 'grub
བསམ་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས	ideology	bsam pa'i 'du shes
བསམ་པའི་རྣམ་པ	ideological form	bsam pa'i rnam pa
བསམ་པའི་ཕྱིར	because of thought/ contemplation	bsam pa'i phyir
བསམ་པའི་འཕེན་ཤུགས་ཆད་པ	when the force of one's intention is interrupted	bsam pa'i 'phen shugs chad pa
བསམ་པའི་བྱ་བ	ideological function, mental activity	bsam pa'i bya ba
བསམ་པའི་གཙོ་བོ	main concern	bsam pa'i gtso bo
བསམ་པའི་མཚོན་བྱེད	symbol of 1's thought	bsam pa'i mtshon byed
བསམ་པའི་འཚོ་བ	spiritual life	bsam pa'i 'tsho ba
བསམ་པའི་ཡུལ	conceptual realm	bsam pa'i yul
བསམ་པའི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond the contents of thoughts	bsam pa'i yul las 'das pa
བསམ་པའི་རླབས་རྒྱུན	trend of thought	bsam pa'i rlabs rgyun
བསམ་པའི་ལས	action done after willing	bsam pa'i las
བསམ་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	discriminating wisdom arising from reflection; the wisdom, intelligence of reflection /in reflecting, the prajna of contemplation	bsam pa'i shes rab
བསམ་པར	he thought	bsam par
བསམ་པར་བྱ་བ	[to be] contemplated	bsam par bya ba
བསམ་པར་བྱའོ	imagine	bsam par bya'o
བསམ་པར་བྱུང་བ	occurred in the mind	bsam par byung ba
བསམ་པས་ཐག་བཅད	attain conviction through reflection	bsam pas thag bcad
བསམ་པས་ཟིན་པ	exhaust/ accomplish by contemplation	bsam pas zin pa
བསམ་དཔྱད་པ	analyzed 2877	bsam dpyad pa
བསམ་དཔྱོད་ལས་འདས	transcend the intellect and analysis	bsam dpyod las 'das
བསམ་སྤྱོད	attitude	bsam spyod
བསམ་ཕྱོགས	1 way of thinking/ idea, inclination, attitude; 2) worry about	bsam phyogs
བསམ་འཕེལ	granting whatever one imagines/ desires	bsam 'phel
བསམ་འཕེལ་ལྗོན་དབང	wish fulfilling tree	bsam 'phel ljon dbang
བསམ་འཕེལ་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of	bsam 'phel dbang gi rgyal po
བསམ་འཕེལ་མ་མ	wish fulfilling mother, ocean	bsam 'phel ma ma
བསམ་བོ	conception	bsam bo
བསམ་བྱ	object of meditation, that which is meditated	bsam bya
བསམ་བྱ་མཚུངས་པ	coincident thoughts having the same or similar objects in view	bsam bya mtshungs pa
བསམ་བྱའི་དངོས་པོ	things that are [to be] thought about/ contemplated	bsam bya'i dngos po
བསམ་བྱའི་ཡུལ་ལས	inconceivable	bsam bya'i yul las
བསམ་བྱའི་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	unimaginable	bsam bya'i yul las 'das pa
བསམ་བྱུང	having thought about and analyzed the meaning one has heard gain certainty [divisions, thinking about the words and the sense]	bsam byung
བསམ་བྱུང་གི་རྟོག་པ	[conceptions] arising in thought, thoughts/ (prajna arising from contemplation	bsam byung gi rtog pa
བསམ་བྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna arising from thinking/ contemplation	bsam byung gi shes rab
བསམ་བྱུང་རྟོག་པ	conceptions arising in thought, arising thoughts, thoughts arising from contemplation	bsam byung rtog pa
བསམ་བྲལ	unimaginable	bsam bral
བསམ་བློ	{bsam pa} thought, plan, contemplation, idea, ideology, cognitions, frame of mind, intellection, brains, mind, think, thought; thoughts	bsam blo
བསམ་བློ་སྐོར་བ	reflect	bsam blo skor ba
བསམ་བློ་བསྐྱར་འཁོར	afterthought	bsam blo bskyar 'khor
བསམ་བློ་འཁོར་རྒྱུ	thoughtless	bsam blo 'khor rgyu
བསམ་བློ་འཁོར་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	senseless	bsam blo 'khor rgyu med pa
བསམ་བློ་འཁོར་བ	think of/ about, get an idea, have a thought	bsam blo 'khor ba
བསམ་བློ་འཁྱེར་སྟངས	belief	bsam blo 'khyer stangs
བསམ་བློ་འཁྱེར་ཕྱོགས	concept	bsam blo 'khyer phyogs
བསམ་བློ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	vast thinking/ ideas/ perception, broad-minded, farsighted	bsam blo rgya chen po
བསམ་བློ་སྔོན་ནས་གཏོང་བ	premeditate	bsam blo sngon nas gtong ba
བསམ་བློ་ཆུང་ཆུང	childish, timid	bsam blo chung chung
བསམ་བློ་ཏང་ཏང	thinking and thinking	bsam blo tang tang
བསམ་བློ་གཏང	reflect	bsam blo gtang
བསམ་བློ་གཏོང	use 1's brains, take into account, attend to, consider, think [over/ about], reflect	bsam blo gtong
བསམ་བློ་གཏོང་སྟངས	attitude, mental outlook	bsam blo gtong stangs
བསམ་བློ་གཏོང་ཕྱོགས	attitude, mental outlook	bsam blo gtong phyogs
བསམ་བློ་གཏོང་བ	to plan, intend	bsam blo gtong ba
བསམ་བློ་གཏོང་ས	motive, objective	bsam blo gtong sa
བསམ་བློ་གཏོར་བ	scatter 1's thoughts	bsam blo gtor ba
བསམ་བློ་བཏང	reflect	bsam blo btang
བསམ་བློ་བཏང་རྗེས	he decided to	bsam blo btang rjes
བསམ་བློ་བཏང་ན	when you reflect	bsam blo btang na
བསམ་བློ་བཏང་བ	reflecting	bsam blo btang ba
བསམ་བློ་སྟོང	empty/ idle thoughts	bsam blo stong
བསམ་བློ་སྟོང་པ	empty/ idle thoughts	bsam blo stong pa
བསམ་བློ་ཐེངས་པ	SA bsam blo btang ba	bsam blo thengs pa
བསམ་བློ་ཐོངས	think about ...!	bsam blo thongs
བསམ་བློ་འདྲ་མིན་འཁོར་མཁན	imaginative	bsam blo 'dra min 'khor mkhan
བསམ་བློ་ལྡན་པ	thoughtful	bsam blo ldan pa
བསམ་བློ་སྡུམ་སྡུམ	simple minded	bsam blo sdum sdum
བསམ་བློ་ནན་གྱིས་གཏོང་དགོས་པ	1 must think seriously about	bsam blo nan gyis gtong dgos pa
བསམ་བློ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་སྐྱེ	give rise to wrong ideas	bsam blo phyin ci log tu skye
བསམ་བློ་བ	thinker	bsam blo ba
བསམ་བློ་མ་འཁོར་བ	think about	bsam blo ma 'khor ba
བསམ་བློ་མ་མང	don't think so much!	bsam blo ma mang
བསམ་བློ་མ་མང་བ	don't think too much	bsam blo ma mang ba
བསམ་བློ་མང་པོས་མགོ་མ་འཁོར	do not confuse yourself with all sorts of cognitions	bsam blo mang pos mgo ma 'khor
བསམ་བློ་མེད་པའི	insensible	bsam blo med pa'i
བསམ་བློ་རྩེ་གཉིས	distracted/ doubtful thinking	bsam blo rtse gnyis
བསམ་བློ་མཚུངས་པ	similar thinking	bsam blo mtshungs pa
བསམ་བློ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་བཏང་བ	to consider this carefully	bsam blo zhib tu btang ba
བསམ་བློ་གཞིག་འབྲེལ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་བཏང	think it over, examine well, reason carefully	bsam blo gzhig 'brel zhib tu btang
བསམ་བློ་ཡང་དག	correct ideas	bsam blo yang dag
བསམ་བློ་ཡང་དག་པ	correct ideas	bsam blo yang dag pa
བསམ་བློ་ཡོད་མེད	whether or not you have reason	bsam blo yod med
བསམ་བློ་ལེགས་པར་ཐོང	consider this properly	bsam blo legs par thong
བསམ་བློ་ལོག་པ་འཁོར་བ	pervert	bsam blo log pa 'khor ba
བསམ་བློའི་འཁྱེར་བཟོ	attitude, mental outlook	bsam blo'i 'khyer bzo
བསམ་བློའི་གོ་རྟོགས	understanding, comprehension	bsam blo'i go rtogs
བསམ་བློའི་འཆར་གཞི	intention	bsam blo'i 'char gzhi
བསམ་བློའི་རྟོགས་ཚད	imagination	bsam blo'i rtogs tshad
བསམ་བློའི་འཐབ་ཕྱོགས	ideological front	bsam blo'i 'thab phyogs
བསམ་བློའི་འཐབ་རྩོད	ideological struggle	bsam blo'i 'thab rtsod
བསམ་བློའི་ནང་འཆར་གཞི་བཀོད་པ	envisage	bsam blo'i nang 'char gzhi bkod pa
བསམ་བློའི་ནང་མཐོང་བ	contemplate	bsam blo'i nang mthong ba
བསམ་བློའི་མ་ལག	ideological system 2878	bsam blo'i ma lag
བསམ་བློའི་བརྩེ་གདུང	ideological sentiments	bsam blo'i brtse gdung
བསམ་བློའི་མཚོན་ཆ	ideological weapon	bsam blo'i mtshon cha
བསམ་བློར་འཁོར་བ	imagine	bsam blor 'khor ba
བསམ་བློར་འཁོར་མི་ཐུབ་པ	unthinkable	bsam blor 'khor mi thub pa
བསམ་བློར་བཅོས་འགྱུར་གཏོང་བ	brainwash	bsam blor bcos 'gyur gtong ba
བསམ་དབང	{smra bsam dbang dang ldan pa} able to speak and reflect	bsam dbang
བསམ་འབྱུང་གི་ཤེས་རབ	wisdom arisen from contemplation	bsam 'byung gi shes rab
བསམ་སྦྱོར	attitude and deeds	bsam sbyor
བསམ་སྦྱོར་གཉིས	thought and deed	bsam sbyor gnyis
བསམ་སྦྱོར་བྱེད་པ	to plan, scheme, project a plan	bsam sbyor byed pa
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ	unthinkable	bsam mi khyab
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་ཉིད	inconceivability	bsam mi khyab nyid
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པ	incomprehensible, inconceivable	bsam mi khyab pa
བསམ་མི་ཤེས	unable to think of anything	bsam mi shes
བསམ་མིན་གྱི་བྱེད་པོ	unthinking doer	bsam min gyi byed po
བསམ་མེད	{bsam du med pa} inconceivable; unimaginable	bsam med
བསམ་མེད་བུ་ཆུང	small children	bsam med bu chung
བསམ་ཚུལ	way of thinking, idea, view, impression, thought, sentiment, mood, feeling, opinion	bsam tshul
བསམ་ཚུལ་གྱི་རིག་པ	ideology	bsam tshul gyi rig pa
བསམ་ཚུལ་འདྲ་མིན	different opinions	bsam tshul 'dra min
བསམ་ཚུལ་བྲེ་དེབ	suggestion book	bsam tshul bre deb
བསམ་ཚུལ་འབྲི་དེབ	suggestion book	bsam tshul 'bri deb
བསམ་ཚུལ་ཙམ	concept or idea	bsam tshul tsam
བསམ་ཚོད	supposition	bsam tshod
བསམ་འཛིན	ideology	bsam 'dzin
བསམ་རྫོགས	complete 1's aspirations	bsam rdzogs
བསམ་ཞིང	thinking about it,	bsam zhing
བསམ་ཞིབ	thinking/ considering/ looking into carefully	bsam zhib
བསམ་ཞིབ་བྱེད	think/ consider/ look into carefully	bsam zhib byed
བསམ་གཞིག	to reflect, think over, investigate, examine, look into carefully, analyze, ponder	bsam gzhig
བསམ་གཞིག་མང་པོ	much thinking and examining bsam gzhig bsam blo zhib phra gtong ba ponder the essential meaning	bsam gzhig mang po
བསམ་གཞིགས	thinking	bsam gzhigs
བསམ་གཞིགས་བྱེད	think/ consider/ look into carefully	bsam gzhigs byed
བསམ་གཞིགས་བྱེད་པ	consider, think over	bsam gzhigs byed pa
བསམ་བཞིན	willingly; {bsam bzhin skye ba bzhes pa} willingly took birth	bsam bzhin
བསམ་བཞིན་སྐྱེ་བ	intentional rebirth	bsam bzhin skye ba
བསམ་བཞིན་ཏུ	intentionally, on purpose, consciously, deliberately	bsam bzhin tu
བསམ་བཞིན་དུ	intentionally	bsam bzhin du
བསམ་བཞིན་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ	let arise/ be born knowingly/ intentionally	bsam bzhin du skye ba
བསམ་བཞིན་དུ་སྐྱེ་བ་བཞེས་པ	had consciously taken rebirth	bsam bzhin du skye ba bzhes pa
བསམ་བཞིན་དུ་སྲིད་པར་སྐྱེ་བ	intentional arising/ birth of/ within samsara	bsam bzhin du srid par skye ba
བསམ་བཞིན་བྱེད་པ	to create knowingly	bsam bzhin byed pa
བསམ་བཞིན་སོགས་ཀྱི་སྡེ་ཚན	the section on intentional killing and so forth	bsam bzhin sogs kyi sde tshan
བསམ་ཟིན་པ	thought	bsam zin pa
བསམ་གཟུགས	Syn {'jig rten pa'i sgom lam} the mundane path of cultivation	bsam gzugs
བསམ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྙོམ་འཇུག	absorption of thought and form	bsam gzugs kyi snyom 'jug
བསམ་གཟུགས་འགོག་པ	cessation of thought and form	bsam gzugs 'gog pa
བསམ་གཟུགས་ཆེན་མོ	work by {'jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson 'grus} 1648-1721; on the caturdhy'anas (of the r'upadh'atu) and the a'ar'upyadh'atu	bsam gzugs chen mo
བསམ་གཟུགས་གཉིས	thought and form	bsam gzugs gnyis
བསམ་ཡས	Samye. The wondrous temple complex, modeled after the Indian monastery Odantapuri, built by King Trisong Deutsen (790-844) and consecrated by Guru Rinpoche in 814. A major center of the early trans...	bsam yas
བསམ་ཡས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	the temple of Samye	bsam yas kyi gtsug lag khang
བསམ་ཡས་དཀར་ཆག	the catalog of Samye rab 'byams dam pa'i zhing gi yon tan kun tshang dpal lugs gsum mi 'gyur lhun gyis grub pa'i gtsug lag khang rten dang brten par bcas pa legs gso'i sri zhu ji ltar bsgrubs pa'i ...	bsam yas dkar chag
བསམ་ཡས་དཀར་ཆག་ཆེན་མོ	the great catalogue of Samye	bsam yas dkar chag chen mo
བསམ་ཡས་དགེ་འདུན	the monks of Samye	bsam yas dge 'dun
བསམ་ཡས་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲ་བ	the inconceivable net of miracles	bsam yas sgyu 'phrul dra ba
བསམ་ཡས་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་དྲྭ་བ	the inconceivable net of miracles	bsam yas sgyu 'phrul drwa ba
བསམ་ཡས་ཆིམས་ཕུ	Samye Chimphu. The sacred place of Padmasambhava's speech. A mountain retreat situated four hours walk above Samye. During the last twelve centuries numerous great masters have meditated in the cav...	bsam yas chims phu
བསམ་ཡས་ཆོས་སྐྱོང	Protector, of Samye	bsam yas chos skyong
བསམ་ཡས་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་ཆེན་པོ	the great Protector Oracle of Samye	bsam yas chos skyong chen po
བསམ་ཡས་ཆོས་འཁོར	Tibet's first monastery	bsam yas chos 'khor
བསམ་ཡས་ཆོས་རྗེ	the Dharma Lord of Samye	bsam yas chos rje
བསམ་ཡས་མཆིམས་ཕུ	Samye Monastery's hermitage	bsam yas mchims phu
བསམ་ཡས་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ	inconceivable and immeasurable	bsam yas dpag tu med pa
བསམ་ཡས་བྱ་བ་སྒྲུབ་བ	accomplish inconceivable actions	bsam yas bya ba sgrub ba
བསམ་ཡས་དབུ་རྩེ	the main temple of Samye	bsam yas dbu rtse
བསམ་ཡས་དབུ་རྩེའི་བར་ཁང	the middle story of the central temple at Samye bsam yas mi 'gyur lhun gyis grub pa'i	bsam yas dbu rtse'i bar khang
བསམ་ཡས་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	the temple of Samye [in the 8th century by king khri srong lde btsan, the great khenpo Shantarakshita, and the master Padmasambhava established temple. outside the temple bkod par Mount MEru, the f...	bsam yas gtsug lag khang
བསམ་ཡས་ཡོན་ཏན	inconceivable virtues/ [buddha] qualities	bsam yas yon tan
བསམ་ཡས་ཧས་པོ་རི	Hepori hill at Samye bsam yas lhun gyis grub pa'i gtsug lag	bsam yas has po ri
བསམ་ཡུལ	object/ sphere of thought/ contemplation	bsam yul
བསམ་ཡུལ་འདས་པ	beyond the imagination	bsam yul 'das pa
བསམ་ཡུལ་མིན	not an object of/ within the realm of the imagination	bsam yul min
བསམ་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས	beyond the conceptual realm/ objects of thought	bsam yul las 'das
བསམ་ཡུལ་ལས་འདས་པ	beyond being an object/ the realm of the imagination/ thought	bsam yul las 'das pa
བསམ་ཡོད	w [awareness of] thoughts/ able to think/ wish	bsam yod
བསམ་ཡོད་དུ་བརྩི་བ	reckon up the existence of thoughts	bsam yod du brtsi ba
བསམ་རིག	moving-mind awareness	bsam rig
བསམ་རུང	hope	bsam rung
བསམ་བརླག་སོང་བ	lost 1's judgement	bsam brlag song ba
བསམ་ལས་འདས	beyond thought/ conception, unimaginable	bsam las 'das
བསམ་ལས་འདས་པ	are beyond reckoning, surpassing the reach of thought	bsam las 'das pa
བསམ་ཤིང་བརྟགས་པ	contemplate and examine	bsam shing brtags pa
བསམ་ཤེས	decent person	bsam shes
བསམ་ཤེས་ཅན	understanding, conscious, aware	bsam shes can
བསམ་ཤེས་པ	a good thinker	bsam shes pa
བསམ་སེའུ	vesicle of regeneration	bsam se'u
བསམ་བསེའུ	1) in the lower trunk just under the 13th vertebra, 1 of the {snod drug}. Its function, the bodily seed elements white and red gtong ba and making the essential power of the body increase; 2) [arch...	bsam bse'u
བསམས	think, thoughts, premeditation, SA sems pa, past of bsam	bsams
བསམས་པ	set the mind, having thought about it	bsams pa
བསམས་པ་བཞིན	intentionally	bsams pa bzhin
བསམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བ	arise from thought/ contemplation 2880	bsams pa las byung ba
བསམས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཤེས་རབ	prajna arisen from thinking/ contemplation.	bsams pa las byung ba'i shes rab
བསམས་དཔྱད་པ	analyzed	bsams dpyad pa
བསམས་བྱུང	intentionally arisen	bsams byung
བསམས་བཤིན	at will	bsams bshin
བསའ	snow leopard, SA gsa'	bsa'
བསར	[will] prepar[ation][ed] arrange[ment][d] [f p gsor ba]	bsar
བསར་བ	arrange, arrangement	bsar ba
བསལ	remove, negation, SA sel ba, clear up, expel, dispel	bsal
བསལ་དུ་གསོལ	pray clear up	bsal du gsol
བསལ་ནས	clearing away, burning away	bsal nas
བསལ་བ	negate, opened, disclosed, revealed, cleared up, advertise, make known by drum, reputation, advertising, make known by trumpet or drum, reputation, cleared away, purified, to eliminate, to remove	bsal ba
བསལ་བ་འབབ་པ	occurrence of clearing away/ refutation	bsal ba 'bab pa
བསལ་བ་བཞི	the four kinds of clearing away [mngon sum gyis bsal ba dang, dngos stobs kyis bsal ba dang, khas blangs kyis bsal ba dang, grags pas bsal ba by perception, the power of things	bsal ba bzhi
བསལ་བའི་རྣམ་པ་སྒོམ་པ	meditate on clearing away	bsal ba'i rnam pa sgom pa
བསལ་བྱ	should be taken away, dispel, clears, cleansed, cleared away, something to eradicate, {sel} opp. {bsgrub bya}	bsal bya
བསལ་བྱ་ལོག་སྒྲུབ	establish a wrong object to be eradicated [one of the {sher phyin don bdun cu}, awareness that has a contradictory grasp of the two truths so that one is to be refuted]	bsal bya log sgrub
བསལ་བྱ་ལོག་སྒྲུབ་རྗོད་བྱེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	1) the expressing phrase, "establish a wrong object to be eradicated."; 2) either of the two truths wrongly being made into a reason for refuting the other	bsal bya log sgrub rjod byed kyi sgra
བསལ་ཚགས	straining cloth to remove debris in water or tea etc.	bsal tshags
བསལ་གཞག	removed from. added to, disposing and gathering, sending away and keeping, to remove, to add. Syn {spang blang}, {dgag sgrub}	bsal gzhag
བསལ་བཞག	disposing and gathering, sending away and keeping, to remove, to add. Syn {spang blang}, {dgag sgrub}	bsal bzhag
བསལ་བཞག་བྲལ་བ	beyond adding or omitting	bsal bzhag bral ba
བསལ་བཞག་མེད	w/o trying to settle or uproot anything, w/o keeping or casting away	bsal bzhag med
བསལ་བཞག་མེད་པ	without trying to settle or uproot anything	bsal bzhag med pa
བསལ་བཞག་མེད་པར	without trying to settle or uproot anything	bsal bzhag med par
བསལ་ཡས	grangs gnas shig	bsal yas
བསིག་པ	fan [f gsig] fan	bsig pa
བསིགས	fanned [p {bsig pa}	bsigs
བསིགས་པ	pf. of {gsig pa}	bsigs pa
བསིང	(not in das)	bsing
བསིང་སྐྱུར	chang bsings btung [lowest of three grades of chang]	bsing skyur
བསིང་ཆང	last strained, weakest chang	bsing chang
བསིང་བ	(tha dad pa bsings pa, bsing ba, bsings!,, collect, take care of, press, strain, be radiantly healthy	bsing ba
བསིངས	imp. of {bsing ba}	bsings
བསིངས་ཁུ	very thin chang	bsings khu
བསིངས་སྙིགས	residue strained from chang	bsings snyigs
བསིངས་བཏུང	lowest of three grades of chang	bsings btung
བསིངས་པ	[p bsing ba]	bsings pa
བསིངས་པོ	again and again straining w water, the final thin essence	bsings po
བསིངས་བུ	= bsings po	bsings bu
བསིད	mend, repair, put in order	bsid
བསིད་པ	mend, repair, pick, sort, hair, SA gsid pa	bsid pa
བསིར་བ	(tha dad pa,, 1) quickly throw, shoot, send; 2) sip	bsir ba
བསིལ	{bsil ba thob par byed pa}; bathe	bsil
བསིལ་སྐམ	med. herbs etc which grib skam byed	bsil skam
བསིལ་ཁང	1) cool pavilion, summer cottage; 2) [unpleasantly] cold house	bsil khang
བསིལ་གྲིབ	cool, grateful shade	bsil grib
བསིལ་གྲིབ་ཅན	shady 2881	bsil grib can
བསིལ་འགུགས	bringing cool weather, 7th month sgang gi dus tshigs	bsil 'gugs
བསིལ་སྒྲིབ	shade	bsil sgrib
བསིལ་ངད	coolness	bsil ngad
བསིལ་ངད་ཅན	cool	bsil ngad can
བསིལ་ཆབ	cold water	bsil chab
བསིལ་ལྗོངས	1) * cooling [med. sala] tree; 2) Tibet	bsil ljongs
བསིལ་ཐང	1) cool plain; 2) ro bcud bsil ba'i drink	bsil thang
བསིལ་འཐུང	cool draught, cooling beverage	bsil 'thung
བསིལ་དུགས	inflammation from cold	bsil dugs
བསིལ་དྲོད	temperature	bsil drod
བསིལ་དྲོད་ཁོད་སྙོམས	the weather remains cool and pleasant	bsil drod khod snyoms
བསིལ་དྲོད་སྙོམས་པོ	moderate temperature/ climate	bsil drod snyoms po
བསིལ་གདུགས	parasol	bsil gdugs
བསིལ་ལྡན	cool, the moon	bsil ldan
བསིལ་ལྡན་དུས	time when snow falls, winter	bsil ldan dus
བསིལ་ལྡན་མ	winter	bsil ldan ma
བསིལ་ལྡན་འཚོ་བྱེད	SA bsil byed, moon	bsil ldan 'tsho byed
བསིལ་ལྡན་ས་ལའི་སྨན་ལྗོང	name of tibet	bsil ldan sa la'i sman ljong
བསིལ་པོ	cool	bsil po
བསིལ་སྤོལ་རྩེད་མོ	basketball	bsil spol rtsed mo
བསིལ་བ	cut, cool, coolness, wash, shed, species of tree, cut, to bathe	bsil ba
བསིལ་བ་སྟོབ	fan	bsil ba stob
བསིལ་བ་ཐོབ་པ	attain coolness/ enlightenment	bsil ba thob pa
བསིལ་བ་ཐོབ་པར་བྱེད་པ	attain coolness	bsil ba thob par byed pa
བསིལ་བ་ཕན	coolness is wholesome	bsil ba phan
བསིལ་བ་བྱེད་པ	to assuage, give shade, cool down	bsil ba byed pa
བསིལ་བ་ཚལ	Cool Grove; Sitavana, charnel ground situated near Bodhgaya	bsil ba tshal
བསིལ་བ་འཛིན	medicinal fruit	bsil ba 'dzin
བསིལ་བ་གསུམ	three cooling medicines (cu gang, gur gum, sug rmel)	bsil ba gsum
བསིལ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	1) something naturally cold; 2) liberation beyond suffering	bsil ba'i dngos po
བསིལ་བའི་ཆར་ལྡན	1) chu shel; 2) the moon	bsil ba'i char ldan
བསིལ་བའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས	lcags rigs 'khar ba ???	bsil ba'i chu skyes
བསིལ་བའི་ཚལ	Shitavana, cool forest, cremation ground near Bodh Gaya, sitavana, famous cremation ground southeast of Bodhgaya in India	bsil ba'i tshal
བསིལ་བའི་ཚལ་ཆེན་མོ	mahasitavati (1 of 5 gcan rim pa)	bsil ba'i tshal chen mo
བསིལ་བའི་རྫི	cool breezes	bsil ba'i rdzi
བསིལ་བའི་འོད་ཟེར	moonbeam, cooling beam	bsil ba'i 'od zer
བསིལ་བའི་འོད་ཟེར་ཅན	possessing cool light rays	bsil ba'i 'od zer can
བསིལ་བར་གྱུར་པ	become cold, the state of being cold, calm, composure	bsil bar gyur pa
བསིལ་བུ	cool, coolness	bsil bu
བསིལ་བུའི་རླུང	cool breeze	bsil bu'i rlung
བསིལ་བྱེད	snow, hoarfrost, coolers (moon, cloud, wind, sandalwood), moon	bsil byed
བསིལ་སྦྱིན་མཁན	moon	bsil sbyin mkhan
བསིལ་མོ	cool, cold	bsil mo
བསིལ་འཛིན	water god, Varuna	bsil 'dzin
བསིལ་ཞིང་གྲང་བ	being shady and cool	bsil zhing grang ba
བསིལ་ཟས	cooling food	bsil zas
བསིལ་ཟེར	cool-rays, moonbeams	bsil zer
བསིལ་ཟེར་ཅན	moon	bsil zer can
བསིལ་ཡབ	cool roof projection/ shelter bsil g.yab - fan bsil g.yab - 1) fan; 2) kind of hat = {zhva mo bskal bzang bsil gyab} bsil g.yab - swinging fan bsil g.yab - fan [cool roof projection/ shelter?]	bsil yab
བསིལ་རི	1) snow mountain; 2) cool moumtain [one of the nang gi ri drug whose peak and Mount Meru's rva lnga pa thur 'phyang dang phrad pas inside the light of the sun and moon don't penetrate outside of wh...	bsil ri
བསིལ་རི་ཕྱོགས་ལ་བསྟད	on the side of a cool hill	bsil ri phyogs la bstad
བསིལ་རླུང	cool air/ breeze	bsil rlung
བསིལ་སར་བསྡད	sit in a cooler place	bsil sar bsdad
བསིལ་གསུམ	three meds w a cooling power [sman cu gang, gur kum, li shi]	bsil gsum
བསིལ་བསིར	cool and light/ gentle	bsil bsir
བསིལ་བསིལ	cool	bsil bsil
བསིལ་བསེར	[arch] cold wind	bsil bser
བསུ	to receive, welcome	bsu
བསུ་སྐྱེལ	onset and departure, lit. to	bsu skyel
ཝེལྕོམེ་ཨནད་སེནད	off	welcome and send
བསུ་བསྐྱལ	going to meet and to accompany	bsu bskyal
བསུ་ཆང	1) bride-welcoming; 2) chang brought when 1 goes out to meet/ receive guests	bsu chang
བསུ་བ	meet, welcome, greet, go to meet, a medicine, medicine that is first taken to be followed by another immediately, join, make advances, interest oneself in, welcome a respected person	bsu ba
བསུ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	great festivities on the occasion of reception	bsu ba rgya chen po
བསུ་བ་བྱས	had gone to receive the party 2882	bsu ba byas
བསུ་བ་མཛད	conducted a welcome escort	bsu ba mdzad
བསུ་བ་འོང་བ	to come to receive	bsu ba 'ong ba
བསུ་བ་ལ་བཏང	sent to escort you	bsu ba la btang
བསུ་བར	the coming, following	bsu bar
བསུ་བེལ	gsu bel	bsu bel
བསུ་བྱེད	welcome/ greet/ receive/ meet guests	bsu byed
བསུ་མ	welcoming/ greeting/ receiving/ meeting guests	bsu ma
བསུ་མ་བྱེད་པ	to invite, escort, go to meet	bsu ma byed pa
བསུ་མི	escort	bsu mi
བསུ་སྨན	clyster	bsu sman
བསུ་རུ་བཏང	sent a welcoming party	bsu ru btang
བསུ་རུ་བཏང་བ	sent a welcoming party	bsu ru btang ba
བསུ་རུ་ཕྱིན	went to receive	bsu ru phyin
བསུ་རུ་ཕྱིན་པ	went to receive	bsu ru phyin pa
བསུ་རུ་སོང་བ	come to greet them	bsu ru song ba
བསུག་པ	[arch] 1) blug pa; 2) 'phur ba dang mnye ba	bsug pa
བསུང་གི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར	a sweet-scented flower	bsung gi grong khyer
བསུང་ངེད	fragrance	bsung nged
བསུང་མྱོས	a fragrant flower	bsung myos
བསུང་མྱོས་ཆེན་པོ	a fragrant flower	bsung myos chen po
བསུད་པ	form of cholera, disease produced by undigested food, be lost, be dispersed, fill with food beyond satiety, stuff, cram	bsud pa
བསུན	[p f sun],, be irritated, annoyed, sick/ tired of	bsun
བསུན་བསྐྱུར	irregularity of life, dissoluteness	bsun bskyur
བསུན་པ	be dissolute [p f sun],, be irritated, annoyed, sick/ tired of, dissolute, undisciplined, spoiled	bsun pa
བསུན་པར་བྱེད་པ	be dissolute, be irregular in habits	bsun par byed pa
བསུན་པོ	troublesome	bsun po
བསུན་པོ་བྱེད་པ	to annoy, disturb	bsun po byed pa
བསུན་པོ་བཟོ་མཁན	pest	bsun po bzo mkhan
བསུན་པོ་བཟོ་བ	annoy, disturb, pester, trouble	bsun po bzo ba
བསུན་མ	messenger lady who goes to meet/ welcome some1	bsun ma
བསུན་ཙམ	disgusting, obscene	bsun tsam
བསུན་གཙེར	annoyance, disturbance	bsun gtser
བསུབ	will rub out/ obliterate [f sub pa]	bsub
བསུབ་ཐབས་མེད་པ	indelible	bsub thabs med pa
བསུབ་པ	ft. of {sub pa}	bsub pa
བསུབ་ཕྱིས	omission	bsub phyis
བསུབ་བྱེད	erasure	bsub byed
བསུབས	obliterate, SA bsub pa	bsubs
བསུབས་པ	pf. of {sub pa}	bsubs pa
བསུམ	[f sum pa] 3rd, will smile/ draw together/ close/ shut	bsum
བསུམ་པ	ft. of {sum pa}; third	bsum pa
བསུམས	[p sum pa] smiled, drew together, closed, shut	bsums
བསུམས་པ	pf. of {sum pa}	bsums pa
བསུར	smiling, searing (incense of searing human flesh	bsur
བསུར་ཕེབས་པ	came to look out for him	bsur phebs pa
བསུར་སྨྱིག	clyster, SA bsu sman	bsur smyig
བསུས་ནས	having received or escorted, join, welcome	bsus nas
བསུས་པ	pf. of {bsu ba}	bsus pa
བསུས་པའི་རྫོངས	given in marriage	bsus pa'i rdzongs
བསུས་ཤིག	let him go to meet	bsus shig
བསེ	se-stone. tanned leather; rhinoceros/ a guardian demon of Kilaya teachings	bse
བསེ་ཀོ	rhinoceros hide	bse ko
བསེ་ཁ་སྒོ	8 legged lion	bse kha sgo
བསེ་ཁ་བསྒོ	wild animal	bse kha bsgo
བསེ་ཁྲབ	plates, corselet of hide	bse khrab
བསེ་ཁྲབ་དབང	the hide corselet of power	bse khrab dbang
བསེ་སྒམ	rhinoceros skin box	bse sgam
བསེ་སྒྲོམ	chest of rhinoceros hide	bse sgrom
བསེ་ཅན	stained	bse can
བསེ་ལྕགས་དུང	Sey, Chak and Dung	bse lcags dung
བསེ་ཐེབ	summer hat of ras bse worn by former rtse drung etc	bse theb
བསེ་ཐེབས	summer hat of ras bse worn by former rtse drung etc	bse thebs
བསེ་དུག	reg dug [venereal disease?]	bse dug
བསེ་དོང	hide quiver	bse dong
བསེ་དྲི	mchan 'og rmen bu'i rgyud du gnas pa'i bse rags zhes pa'i srin bu 'phel ba las byung ba'i lhan skyes kyi lus nas dri ma ngan pa mnam pa zhig , bse dri mnam pa	bse dri
བསེ་ཕུར	wooden bowl of dark golden color	bse phur
བསེ་བ	thorny plant, rose, SA se ba	bse ba
བསེ་བག	se-mask	bse bag
བསེ་བོ	a bad smelling black insect	bse bo
བསེ་བོན	bon carvers	bse bon
བསེ་འབག	[cloth] se mask	bse 'bag
བསེ་འབག་ནག་པོ	a deity	bse 'bag nag po
བསེ་འབག་སྨུག་ཆུང	sacred mask kept at Samye	bse 'bag smug chung
བསེ་འབག་སྨྲག་ཆུང	sacred mask kept at Samye	bse 'bag smrag chung
བསེ་སྦུར	{bse sbur} kind of animal medicine	bse sbur
བསེ་མ་ནུ	pomegranate seed	bse ma nu
བསེ་མོ	Semo	bse mo
བསེ་མོ་མཆེད་བཞི	Four Semo Sisters 2883	bse mo mched bzhi
བསེ་མོ་བཞི	4 Semo Sisters	bse mo bzhi
བསེ་མོག	venereal disease gzhan la 'ga zhig = reg dug	bse mog
བསེ་ཡབ	bse yab	bse yab
བསེ་རག	a type of preta; ghost of poverty	bse rag
བསེ་རུ	1) rhinoceros [horn]; 2) 1 [because rhino has 1 horn]	bse ru
བསེ་རུ་དཀར་པོ	{bse ru dkar po} a kind of animal med. [bitter, cooling, by its power drying up glo ba sogs byang khog gi rnag khrag chu ser, and curing dug tshad]	bse ru dkar po
བསེ་རུ་ཁྲ་བོ	{bse ru khra bo} a kind of animal medicine, bitter and hot, body heat neutral, by its power glo ba sogs byang khog gi rnag khrag chu ser skem, dug nad srung, glang thabs 'joms	bse ru khra bo
བསེ་རུ་ལྟ་བུ	1 who is like a rhinoceros/ unicorn	bse ru lta bu
བསེ་རུ་ལྟ་བུའི་རང་སངས་རྒྱས	rhinoceros like pratyekabuddha [one of the {dge 'dun nyi shu}, pratyekabuddha arhat gang tshe rabs snga ma la nges 'byed cha mthun ma bskyed pa ste, the shravaka path {nyan thos kyi lam} sngon du m...	bse ru lta bu'i rang sangs rgyas
བསེ་རུ་ནག་པོ	{bse ru nag po} an animal medicine [hot and astringent, heating, by its power drying up glo ba sogs byang khog gi rnag khrag chu ser rnams and prarticularly glo ba'i rnag chu]	bse ru nag po
བསེ་རུ་རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ལམ	path of the rhinoceros-like pratyekabuddha [among the {sher phyin don bdun}, lam shes with 1 1/2 egolessness, a partial realization {bdag med phyed dang gnyis} the pratykekabuddha lam shes.]	bse ru rang rgyal gyi lam
བསེ་རུའི་རྒྱལ་བ	SA rang sangs rgyas	bse ru'i rgyal ba
བསེ་རུའི་རྭ	rhinoceros horn	bse ru'i rwa
བསེ་རེ	wild yak	bse re
བསེ་ལེ་སྦུར་གོག	bad-smelling black insect	bse le sbur gog
བསེ་ཤིང	bse tree	bse shing
བསེ་ཤིང་དུག	a kind of mi rgyu ba'i dug taken from bse shing nag po	bse shing dug
བསེགས་པ	come from one side, come across one's way, come into collision with	bsegs pa
བསེགས་བ	come from the side, collide, cross 1's path [meet but not straight on]	bsegs ba
བསེང	lift up, SA seng ba	bseng
བསེང་བ	revive spirit, awaken, rouse	bseng ba
བསེད	[p gsed] sort, discriminate, get into the details	bsed
བསེད་པ	pick out, sort, pull or pluck in pieces, sort, discriminate, SA gsed pa	bsed pa
བསེད་དཔྱད	bow for setting a drill in motion	bsed dpyad
བསེད་བལ	bsed zin pa'i bal [sorted wool ?]	bsed bal
བསེན	[arch] 1) spiritual friend; 2) d"n	bsen
བསེན་ཁུས་པ	allure, seduce	bsen khus pa
བསེན་ཐོར	thor nad in which a just born child is said to be harmed by a bsen mo demoness	bsen thor
བསེན་འཐོར་བ	[arch] companionless [no friends or relatives]	bsen 'thor ba
བསེན་པ	[arch] sems la gcags shing mdza' ba ???	bsen pa
བསེན་མོ	Senmo. A type of evil spirit often found in company with the gyalpo class and thus are the male and female spirits symbolizing desire and anger	bsen mo
བསེའི་ཁྲབ་ཅན	a deity	bse'i khrab can
བསེའི་སྒྲམ་བུ	leather box	bse'i sgram bu
བསེའི་ལྷ་མོ	[4]	bse'i lha mo
བསེའུ	berries, berry	bse'u
བསེའུ་རུ་གཅིག	rhinoceros, type of singlehorned roebuck, unicorn	bse'u ru gcig
བསེར	wind, feeling of cold	bser
བསེར་གྱིས་ཕོག	he is affected by a cold wind	bser gyis phog
བསེར་དུ་ཡོང	you will feel cold	bser du yong
བསེར་བ	to feel cold, chilly	bser ba
བསེར་བ་ཙམ་ཞིག་བྱུང	felt a slight chill	bser ba tsam zhig byung
བསེར་བུ	airy, wind, feeling of cold	bser bu
བསེར་མ	[arch] 1) [cold] wind/ breeze [h]; 2) feeling of cold	bser ma
བསེར་མ་མི་སྐྱེ་བ	SA rlung mi skye ba	bser ma mi skye ba
བསེར་མོ	cold, catarrh	bser mo
བསེར་མོའི་ནད	cold	bser mo'i nad
བསེར་རུ	in solitude	bser ru
བསེར་རླུང	a breeze/ cold wind	bser rlung
བསེལ	followers, retinue, protect from danger, remove fear or cause of danger	bsel
བསེལ་པ	safeguard, guide	bsel pa
བསེལ་བ	[arch] escort/ protect [on a dangerous path]	bsel ba
བསེལ་བྱེད	[arch] escort/ protect [on a dangerous path]	bsel byed
བསེལ་མ	[arch] escort	bsel ma
བསེལ་རི	himalaya mountains	bsel ri
བསེས་དོ་རུ་ཉིན	Sedo Runyin, in Domey 2884	bses do ru nyin
བསོ	[f gso ba] [will] rest, refresh, ease 1self [H]	bso
བསོ་ཁུང	peep hole	bso khung
བསོ་གང་གི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ	the five good qualities of being fully refreshed	bso gang gi yon tan lnga
བསོ་སྒྲ	[= bsva sgra] "ki ki bso bso" war cries	bso sgra
བསོ་བ	[f gso ba] [will] rest, refresh, ease 1self [H]	bso ba
བསྭོ་བསྭོ་ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ལོ	Shambhala war cry to the victory gods	bswo bswo lha rgyal lo
བསབོ༹་བསབོ༹་ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ལོ	B"n/ Shambhala supplication of the gods	bsvo bsvo lha rgyal lo
བསོག	accumulate[d wealth]	bsog
བསོག་འཇོག་མེད་པར	w/o avarice/ keeping up and holding back	bsog 'jog med par
བསོག་པ	alt. ft. of {gsog pa}	bsog pa
བསོགས	accumulate	bsogs
བསོགས་པ	[f gsog pa] will pile gather accumulate, hold back	bsogs pa
བསོང་པོ	straight, honest	bsong po
བསོད	merit	bsod
བསོད་ཉམས	MSS: variant speling of bsod snyoms, alms. See CM. [mss]	bsod nyams
བསོད་ཉམས་པ	1) fall away from/ destroy / 1's good fortune/ merit two destroy 1's physical strength; 3) 'dod pa la lhag par spyod pa behavior from extreme desire?	bsod nyams pa
བསོད་ཉོམས	alms	bsod nyoms
བསོད་སྙམས	alms	bsod snyams
བསོད་སྙམས་ལ་བྱོན་པ	come begging alms	bsod snyams la byon pa
བསོད་སྙོམས	ascetic, alms, overenjoyment, alms of cooked food, edible things or money, gifts presented to clerical persons	bsod snyoms
བསོད་སྙོམས་ཀྱི་ཕུད་སྦྱིན	offering of alms	bsod snyoms kyi phud sbyin
བསོད་སྙོམས་ཀྱིས་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ	be satisfied w what 1 gets when begging alms	bsod snyoms kyis chog shes pa
བསོད་སྙོམས་གྱིས	[imp.] Beg alms!	bsod snyoms gyis
བསོད་སྙོམས་གྱིས་འཚོ	live on charity	bsod snyoms gyis 'tsho
བསོད་སྙོམས་གྱིས་འཚོ་བ	live by alms	bsod snyoms gyis 'tsho ba
བསོད་སྙོམས་དགོས་གསུངས་པ	asked her for alms	bsod snyoms dgos gsungs pa
བསོད་སྙོམས་པ	beg for food, alms foodeater *[1 of {sbyang ba'i yon tan bcu gsum} ]	bsod snyoms pa
བསོད་སྙོམས་ཕུལ་བ	offered alms	bsod snyoms phul ba
བསོད་སྙོམས་ཕེབས	asking for alms {sangs rgyas rnam gzigs bsod snyoms phebs pa} the Buddha Vipasyin approached him asking for alms	bsod snyoms phebs
བསོད་སྙོམས་བྱེད་པ	beg, ask for alms	bsod snyoms byed pa
བསོད་སྙོམས་སྦྱོར་བ	prepare an entertainment for the priesthood	bsod snyoms sbyor ba
བསོད་སྙོམས་མཛད	went begging alms	bsod snyoms mdzad
བསོད་སྙོམས་ལ་རྒྱུ	ask for alms	bsod snyoms la rgyu
བསོད་སྙོམས་ལ་རྒྱུ་བ	beg	bsod snyoms la rgyu ba
བསོད་སྙོམས་ལ་ཕེབས་པ	go begging alms	bsod snyoms la phebs pa
བསོད་སྙོམས་སླང་བ	receive alms, beg alms	bsod snyoms slang ba
བསོད་སྙོམས་སློང	beg for alms	bsod snyoms slong
བསོད་སྙོམས་སློང་བ	collect alms by begging	bsod snyoms slong ba
བསོད་བཏགས	fortuitous	bsod btags
བསོད་བདེ	fortune, luck, good fortune, happiness, felicity, destiny, fate	bsod bde
བསོད་བདེ་སྐམ་པོ	unlucky	bsod bde skam po
བསོད་བདེ་ཅན	lucky, happy	bsod bde can
བསོད་བདེ་ཆེན་པོ	blest	bsod bde chen po
བསོད་བདེ་མེད	unhappy, wretched	bsod bde med
བསོད་བདེ་མེད་པ	hapless, unlucky	bsod bde med pa
བསོད་ནམས	punya; merit, meritorious karma, meritorious, moral virtue, luck, good fortune, happiness. Def: The positive karmic result from virtuous actions	bsod nams
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་སྐལ་པ	meritorious fortune, fortune bsod nams kyi rnga la sbyin pa'i dbyug	bsod nams kyi skal pa
གུས་བརྡུངས་པ	beating the drum of your merit with the drumstick of giving	gus brdungs pa
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཆོགས	the collection of merit	bsod nams kyi chogs
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་སྟོབས་འབྱོར་བ	benevolent rule	bsod nams kyi stobs 'byor ba
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་མཐུས	{sngon gi bsod nams kyi mthus} because of the merit you accumulated previously bsod nams kyi mthus skyes pa zhig someone born through the power of merit	bsod nams kyi mthus
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་གནས	holy place to visit which brings merit	bsod nams kyi gnas
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་སྣོད	1) object of collecting merit; 2) w merit	bsod nams kyi snod
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ	assemblage/ mass of merit	bsod nams kyi phung po
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྔ	the five assemblies of merit bsod nams kyi phung po mtho ba yin manifest the most uplifting accumulation of merit 2885	bsod nams kyi phung po lnga
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ	the fruition of merit [long life, freedom from disease, and great enjoyment]	bsod nams kyi 'bras bu
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulation of merit, [punya sambhara]; provision of merit. good fortune merit accumulation gathering, store of merit, one of the {tshogs gnyis} the two accumulations; {sangs rgyas kyi gzugs sku'i...	bsod nams kyi tshogs
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	establish the accumulation of merit	bsod nams kyi tshogs sgrub
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཞིང	field of merit	bsod nams kyi zhing
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ལས	meritorious action [the 10 virtues]	bsod nams kyi las
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ལས་ཀྱི་བདུད	Mara of meritorious action. The seduction to aim one's spiritual practice towards selfish ends. Virtuous deeds that are not embraced by renunciation or bodhichitta	bsod nams kyi las kyi bdud
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ལས་ལམ་བཅུ	the 10 paths of meritorious action	bsod nams kyi las lam bcu
བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཤུགས	the strength of merit	bsod nams kyi shugs
བསོད་ནམས་བཀྲ་ཤིས	1352-1412 - Sönam Tashi, Sakya master who built the Gyang Bumoche Stupa	bsod nams bkra shis
བསོད་ནམས་སྐྱེ་བོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	king of the rakshasas	bsod nams skye bo'i dbang phyug
བསོད་ནམས་སྐྱེས	1 production/ increase of merit, the 2nd of the {so skye'i gnas gsum} heavens of the 4th dhyanabhumi, 1 of the 28 classes of gods of the {gzugs khams} = form realm since it is the supreme place of ...	bsod nams skyes
ཧེཨབེ༹ན་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཕོ༹ཨུརཐ་དྷྱན	bhumi, increasing merit, one of the 28 classes of gods of the {gzugs khams} form realm on the {bsam gtan bzhi pa'i} fourth absorption	heaven of the fourth dhyana
བསོད་ནམས་སྐྱེས་པོ	meritorious person, one having moral merits	bsod nams skyes po
བསོད་ནམས་ཁང་པ	king's palace	bsod nams khang pa
བསོད་ནམས་གྱི་ཆ	the aspect of merit, merit	bsod nams gyi cha
བསོད་ནམས་གྱི་འབྱུང་གནས	source of merit	bsod nams gyi 'byung gnas
བསོད་ནམས་གྲགས་པ	{pan chen} 14781554	bsod nams grags pa
བསོད་ནམས་དགེ་བའི་ལས	meritorious actions of virtue	bsod nams dge ba'i las
བསོད་ནམས་བགྱིས་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་པ	to possess the causes [for the arising of	bsod nams bgyis pa'i rgyu yod pa
ཐེ་པཐ་ཨིན་ཨོནེའས་སྟྲེཨམ	of-being] through having created merit bsod nams rgya chen rgyun mi 'chad vast and continuous merit	the path in one's stream
བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་འཕེལ	wide spreading of merit	bsod nams rgya chen po 'phel
བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Sönam Gyatso, the third Dalai lama	bsod nams rgya mtsho
བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱལ་མཚན	disciple of marpa, sa skya hierarch, 1 of ka can bzhi	bsod nams rgyal mtshan
བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱུན་བྱས	one who is adorned with moral virtues	bsod nams rgyun byas
བསོད་ནམས་སྒྲ་སྒྲོགས	proclamation of merit	bsod nams sgra sgrogs
བསོད་ནམས་དངོས་གྲུབ	accomplish merit	bsod nams dngos grub
བསོད་ནམས་ཅན	(meritorious, virtuous, pious) person	bsod nams can
བསོད་ནམས་ཆ་མཐུན	{mtho ris kyi bde ba'i ched du dge ba byed pa} 'aid to merit' is to carry out virtuous actions for the sake of the pleasure of the higher realms	bsod nams cha mthun
བསོད་ནམས་ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་དགེ་བ	meritorious virtue	bsod nams cha mthun gyi dge ba
བསོད་ནམས་ཆ་མཐུན་གྱི་ལས	actions that are in conformity w merit	bsod nams cha mthun gyi las
བསོད་ནམས་ཆེ	(general name for a bodhisattva)	bsod nams che
བསོད་ནམས་ཆེ་བ་ཡིན	is more powerful bsod nams che bas dpal 'byor rgyas pa nobility through great merit	bsod nams che ba yin
བསོད་ནམས་ཆེན་པོ	great merit	bsod nams chen po
བསོད་ནམས་ཆེན་པོ་ཐོབ	obtained great merit	bsod nams chen po thob
བསོད་ནམས་ཆེན་བ	very virtuous person, of great moral merit	bsod nams chen ba
བསོད་ནམས་ཆོས་འགྲུབ	{rme ba mkhan chen}	bsod nams chos 'grub
བསོད་ནམས་མཆོག	the best moral virtue, name of prince, son of king	bsod nams mchog
བསོད་ནམས་མཆོད་འོས	suitable offerings of merit	bsod nams mchod 'os
བསོད་ནམས་ཉམས་པ	spoiled his merit	bsod nams nyams pa
བསོད་ནམས་མཉམ་པ	equal merit	bsod nams mnyam pa
བསོད་ནམས་སྙན་གྲགས	merit and fame	bsod nams snyan grags
བསོད་ནམས་རྟེན་གྱི་ས	Supporting Merit	bsod nams rten gyi sa
བསོད་ནམས་སྟོབས	strength of merit bsod nams thams cad bsdus pa'i ting nge 'dzin - the samadhi that gathers all merits bsod nams dang mthun pa'i chos bstan teaching [Nanda] the Dharma that accorded with his merit	bsod nams stobs
བསོད་ནམས་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཞིག་འདུག	who has such merit that	bsod nams dang ldan pa zhig 'dug
བསོད་ནམས་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས	merit and wisdom	bsod nams dang ye shes
བསོད་ནམས་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	the accumulations of merit and wisdom bsod nams dang ye shes kyi tshogs chen	bsod nams dang ye shes kyi tshogs
པོ་ཡང་དག་པར་གྲུབ་པ	perfectly establish the great accumulations of merit and wisdom bsod nams dang ye shes kyi rang bzhin	po yang dag par grub pa
གྱི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ	the virtuous roots of the nature of merit and wisdom bsod nams dang ye shes kyi rang bzhin	gyi dge ba'i rtsa ba
གྱི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་འཕེལ་བ	increase the virtuous roots of the nature of merit and wisdom bsod nams dang ye shes tshogs gnyis the two accumulations of merit and wisdom 2886 bsod nams dang bsod nams min pa merit or demerit	gyi dge ba'i rtsa ba 'phel ba
བསོད་ནམས་དར་རྒྱས	increased and abundant merits, father of a dalai lama	bsod nams dar rgyas
བསོད་ནམས་ལྡན	1) meritorious; 2) Rahu meritorious	bsod nams ldan
བསོད་ནམས་ལྡན་པ	lucky, fortunate, meritorious, w white karma	bsod nams ldan pa
བསོད་ནམས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	1874-1952	bsod nams rnam rgyal
བསོད་ནམས་དཔག་མེད་ཐོབ	obtained inconceivable merit	bsod nams dpag med thob
བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ	glory of merit	bsod nams dpal
བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འཛོམས	sngo tshal zhig ste 'u su ???	bsod nams dpal 'dzoms
བསོད་ནམས་ཕུང	assemblage/ mass of merit	bsod nams phung
བསོད་ནམས་ཕུང་པོ	assemblage/ mass of merit	bsod nams phung po
བསོད་ནམས་ཕུན་ཚོགས་པ་ཐོབ	obtained glorious merit	bsod nams phun tshogs pa thob
བསོད་ནམས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ	2nd Pan chen, aer te ni, born in the 7th rab byung earth sheep year, died in the 8th wood mouse year, (1439-1504(,	bsod nams phyogs kyi glang po
བསོད་ནམས་འཕེལ	increase of moral merit, a king of benares	bsod nams 'phel
བསོད་ནམས་བྱ་བའི་དངོས་པོ	the things performing the function of doing merit??	bsod nams bya ba'i dngos po
བསོད་ནམས་བྱ་བའི་དངོས་པོ་གསུམ	the three things that produce merit??	bsod nams bya ba'i dngos po gsum
བསོད་ནམས་བྱས་པ་ཉིད	meritorious action	bsod nams byas pa nyid
བསོད་ནམས་བློ་གྲོས	{dmar sgom} 14561521 bsod nams blo gros snying stobs dang	bsod nams blo gros
ལྡན་རྣམས	those with merit, intelligence, and courage	ldan rnams
བསོད་ནམས་མ་ཡིན	act that is not pious	bsod nams ma yin
བསོད་ནམས་མ་ཡིན་པ	non-merit, nonmeritorious, unvirtuous	bsod nams ma yin pa
བསོད་ནམས་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ལས	sinful deed	bsod nams ma yin pa'i las
བསོད་ནམས་མ་ཡིན་སྤྱོད	unmeritorious conduct	bsod nams ma yin spyod
བསོད་ནམས་མིན་པ	{'dod par sdug bsngal myong ba'i mi dge ba'i las} 'nonmeritorious actions' are the nonvirtues that create painful experiences within the desire realms	bsod nams min pa
བསོད་ནམས་མིན་པ་མི་དགེ་བའི་ལས	nonmeritorious actions of nonvirtue	bsod nams min pa mi dge ba'i las
བསོད་ནམས་མིན་པ་བཟློག་པ	eliminate what is not meritorious	bsod nams min pa bzlog pa
བསོད་ནམས་མིན་པའི་ལས	'dod khams kyi mi dge ba	bsod nams min pa'i las
བསོད་ནམས་མེ་ཏོག	se ba flower	bsod nams me tog
བསོད་ནམས་དམན་པ	with little merit	bsod nams dman pa
བསོད་ནམས་རྩེ་མོ	Sönam Tsemo :11421182. One of the Five Sakya Forefathers; son of Kunga Nyingpo	bsod nams rtse mo
བསོད་ནམས་ཚད་མེད་པ	immeasurable merit	bsod nams tshad med pa
བསོད་ནམས་ཚུལ་བྱ་བ	a man called Punyashila	bsod nams tshul bya ba
བསོད་ནམས་ཚོགས་དང་ལྡན་པ	possessing the accumulation of merit	bsod nams tshogs dang ldan pa
བསོད་ནམས་ཞིང	field of merit, holy place, place of pilgrimage. [virtuous place, object of prostrations]	bsod nams zhing
བསོད་ནམས་ཟད་ཀར	when his merits was finished	bsod nams zad kar
བསོད་ནམས་བཟང་པོ	excellent merit, {bsod nams bzang po}	bsod nams bzang po
བསོད་ནམས་ཡང་དག་བསྡུས་པ	have gathered perfect merit	bsod nams yang dag bsdus pa
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	accumulations of merit and wisdom bsod nams ye shes kyi tshogs dpag tu	bsod nams ye shes kyi tshogs
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབང་པོ	{'bras spungs gzims khang gong ma} the 2nd (1556-1592)	bsod nams ye shes dbang po
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚོགས	the accumulations of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes tshogs
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་གཉིས	the two accumulations of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes tshogs gnyis
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་རྫོགས	perfect the accumulations of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes tshogs rdzogs
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་རྫོགས་པ	to perfect the accumulations of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes tshogs rdzogs pa
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་བསགས	gather the accumulations of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes tshogs bsags
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་བཞིན	the nature of merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes rang bzhin
བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་རབ་རྫོགས	fully complete merit and wisdom	bsod nams ye shes rab rdzogs
བསོད་ནམས་རིན་ཆེན	alias {sgam po pa} 1079-1153 bsod nams su bya ba'i dngos po gsum the three things that produce merit sbyin pa/ tshul khrims/ bsgom pa las byung ba'i bsod nams bya ba'i dngos po	bsod nams rin chen
བསོད་ནམས་སོག་པ	collect, accumulate merits	bsod nams sog pa
བསོད་ནམས་གསོག	accumulate merit	bsod nams gsog
བསོད་ནམས་བསགས་པ	accumulated merit	bsod nams bsags pa
བསོད་ནམས་བསགས་པའི་རྟེན	a basis for accumulating merits	bsod nams bsags pa'i rten
བསོད་ནམས་བསུང	tsam pa ka ???	bsod nams bsung
བསོད་ནམས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ	glo bo mkhan	bsod nams lhun grub
བསོད་ནམས་ཨནད་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས	Merit and wisdom, twofold accumulation of	bsod nams and ye shes kyi tshogs
བསོད་པ	1) [especially] good, excellent; 2) be pleased with, take a delight in, like	bsod pa
བསོད་པ་དང་ངན་པ	good and bad	bsod pa dang ngan pa
བསོད་པའི་ཟས	meritorious food	bsod pa'i zas
བསོད་པར་གནས	dwell in good fortune/ happiness	bsod par gnas
བསོད་པར་གནས་པ	dwell in good fortune/ happiness	bsod par gnas pa
བསོད་པར་བྱེད	be pleased with, take a delight in, like	bsod par byed
བསོད་པར་བརྩི	considered especially good	bsod par brtsi
བསོད་ཞན་པོ	1) little merit/ happiness; 2) food of pleasant savor	bsod zhan po
བསོད་ཟད	unfortunate ones	bsod zad
བསོད་ཟས	alms food	bsod zas
བསོད་ཤེས	acceptance of the cognition of dharma	bsod shes
བསོར	spear	bsor
བསོར་བ	exchange	bsor ba
བསོལ	[arch] good/ wholesome companion	bsol
བསོས	1) recreate, refresh; 2) indemnification damages	bsos
བསོས་པ	foster, SA gsos pa, bsos	bsos pa
བསྱེན་རྫོགས	complete monkhood	bsyen rdzogs
བསྲ་བརྟན	firm	bsra brtan
བསྲང	straightened, make straight, SA srong ba, align, straightened up, stretched up	bsrang
བསྲང་པོ	straight, upright	bsrang po
བསྲང་བ	straight, upright, will straighten/ correct [f srong]	bsrang ba
བསྲང་མའི་ཚང	a beehive	bsrang ma'i tshang
བསྲངས	make straight, SA bsrang ba, srong ba	bsrangs
བསྲངས་པ	pf. of {srong ba}	bsrangs pa
བསྲད	SA bsrod pa	bsrad
བསྲད་པ	dry in the sun	bsrad pa
བསྲན	patience, [p sran],, was patient	bsran
བསྲན་པ	[p f sran pa] be patient	bsran pa
བསྲན་བཙུག	do persistently	bsran btsug
བསྲན་ཚུགས	be able to, endurance	bsran tshugs
བསྲན་ཚུགས་པ	be able to, endurance	bsran tshugs pa
བསྲན་གཟུགས	able to do	bsran gzugs
བསྲབ་པ	will bridle keep under, restrain, check, curb, refrain. [f srab pa]	bsrab pa
བསྲབས	keep under, restrain, check, curb, refrain, thin, dilute	bsrabs
བསྲབས་པ	pf. of {srab pa}	bsrabs pa
བསྲབས་པའི་ས	object of restraint [shravaka kyi phyir 'ong ba'i mngon rtogs, path in which the last three of	bsrabs pa'i sa
བསྲལ	[arch] action	bsral
བསྲལ་ཅན	[arch] 1 who works steadily/ persistently	bsral can
བསྲལ་བ	[arch] rig pa grims pa'am las ka la sgrim pa	bsral ba
བསྲི	retain, SA sri	bsri
བསྲི་ཆགས	economical management, thrift, economizing	bsri chags
བསྲི་ཆགས་བྱེད	economize, be thrifty	bsri chags byed
བསྲི་བ	ft. of {sri ba}	bsri ba
བསྲི་བ་མེད	cruel, unrelenting	bsri ba med
བསྲི་ཚགས	little expenditure	bsri tshags
བསྲི་ཚགས་ཅན	frugal	bsri tshags can
བསྲི་ཚགས་བྱེད་པ	save, spare	bsri tshags byed pa
བསྲི་ཚགས་ཚ་པོ	stingy, thrifty	bsri tshags tsha po
བསྲིང	extend, prolonged, extend, SA sring ba, send to or cast to a distance, to be increased, prolongs	bsring
བསྲིང་བསྟུང	expansion and contraction, elasticity	bsring bstung
བསྲིང་བ	[f sring ba] prolong, send [to a distance], maintain, extend, remove	bsring ba
བསྲིངས	prolonged, SA bsring, extend, SA sring ba, maintaining, extending	bsrings
བསྲིངས་པ	pf. fut. of pres. tense {bsring} 1) to maintain. 2) prolonged, extended. 3) remove from; pf. of {sring ba}	bsrings pa
བསྲིངས་འབྱོར	btang 'byor, de nas gnas tshul bsrings 'byor gyi don rnams blor nges yod, ???	bsrings 'byor
བསྲིངས་མིག	far-seeing eye	bsrings mig
བསྲིས	[p sri],, scrimped, was thrifty, saved	bsris
བསྲིས་པ	stinginess	bsris pa
བསྲིས་རྨེ	[arch] (/ 1 avarice; 2) small expenditure	bsris rme
བསྲུ་བས་པ	churn	bsru bas pa
བསྲུང	[f srung] a tutelar genius, will guard/ keep/ protect	bsrung
བསྲུང་དཀའ	difficult to keep, observe	bsrung dka'
བསྲུང་འཁོར	protection circle; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 82]	bsrung 'khor
བསྲུང་འཁོར་བ	tantric priest who drives away evil with charms	bsrung 'khor ba
བསྲུང་འཁོར་མཛད་པ	set up a boundary of protection [around him], a protective yantra. Syn {bsrung ba} bsrung rta mthon por dar ba'i gegs sel exorcism of the hindrances to the ascent of the protective horse	bsrung 'khor mdzad pa
བསྲུང་དུ་མེད་པའི་དམ་ཚིག	samaya that (by its nature) cannot/ is not to be deliberately observed/ maintained/ cannot be kept*	bsrung du med pa'i dam tshig
བསྲུང་འདོད་ཀྱི་གཞི་རྟེན	the basis for the wish to keep them	bsrung 'dod kyi gzhi rten
བསྲུང་པ	royal body guard	bsrung pa
བསྲུང་པ་བྱས	keep, control, protect	bsrung pa byas
བསྲུང་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	protecting mandala	bsrung pa'i 'khor lo
བསྲུང་བ	[f srung ba] guard	bsrung ba
བསྲུང་བ་བྱ	perform protections	bsrung ba bya
བསྲུང་བ་བྱས	keep, control, protect	bsrung ba byas
བསྲུང་བ་སྦྱིན	perform protections, give protection cords	bsrung ba sbyin
བསྲུང་བ་མེད་པ	way in which 1 has nothing to hide	bsrung ba med pa
བསྲུང་བ་མེད་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	three unguardedness or ways of having nothing to hide	bsrung ba med pa rnam pa gsum
བསྲུང་བ་མེད་པ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three ways in which 1 has nothing to hide	bsrung ba med pa rnam gsum
བསྲུང་བ་མེད་པ་གསུམ	the three ways in which 1 has nothing to hide	bsrung ba med pa gsum
བསྲུང་བ་ལ་བག་ཡོད་པ	conscientiously keep/ guard 2888	bsrung ba la bag yod pa
བསྲུང་བའི་འཁོར་ལོ	protective circle (during rgyu'i ting nge 'dzin)	bsrung ba'i 'khor lo
བསྲུང་བའི་དམ་ཚིག	samaya to be observed	bsrung ba'i dam tshig
བསྲུང་བའི་ནོར་བུ	rgyal po'i sku lus 'di 'gro ba kun bsrung ba'i nor bu yin pa - a king's body is a guardian jewel to this people	bsrung ba'i nor bu
བསྲུང་བའི་ཕྱིར	in order to preserve	bsrung ba'i phyir
བསྲུང་བར་བྱ་བ	to guard	bsrung bar bya ba
བསྲུང་བར་མཛད	guard, protect, keep	bsrung bar mdzad
བསྲུང་བྱ	will guard against, SA bsrung ba	bsrung bya
བསྲུང་བྱ་རྣམས	precepts which are kept, observances bsrung bya'i dam tshig rtsa ltung bcu bzhi - 14 basic violations of the commitments/ root downfalls of samaya, which are to be guarded against bsrung bya'i dam ...	bsrung bya rnams
བསྲུང་བྱའི་སྡོམ་པ	for Hinayana: nges 'byung gi bsam pas kun nas bslangs pa'i gzhan gnod gzhir bcas spong ba'i sems pa mtshungs ldan dang bcas pa'i so so thar ba'i tshul khrims	bsrung bya'i sdom pa
བསྲུང་མ	guardian spirits, spirits that guard buddhism	bsrung ma
བསྲུང་མིའི་ཚོགས	body of guards	bsrung mi'i tshogs
བསྲུང་མེད་གསུམ	{bsrung ba med pa gsum} three factors that need not be closely guarded	bsrung med gsum
བསྲུང་མཚམས་ལས་འདས་པ	transcended the borderline between keeping and breaking	bsrung mtshams las 'das pa
བསྲུང་མཛད	guard, watcher	bsrung mdzad
བསྲུང་རྫས	charms, talisman	bsrung rdzas
བསྲུང་སེམས	protective mind	bsrung sems
བསྲུངས	[p {bsrung ba} kept, guarded, protected	bsrungs
བསྲུངས་ཀྱང་མ་ཐུབ་པ་བགྲོད	but they were unable to move	bsrungs kyang ma thub pa bgrod
བསྲུངས་ཀྱང་མ་ཐུབ་པར	unable to prevent	bsrungs kyang ma thub par
བསྲུངས་པ	[p {bsrung ba} kept, guarded, protected	bsrungs pa
བསྲུངས་མ	guardian [deity]	bsrungs ma
བསྲུད་བའི་ཕྱིར	in order to preserve	bsrud ba'i phyir
བསྲུན	unruliness	bsrun
བསྲུན་པ	tamed, disciplined, civilized, peaceful	bsrun pa
བསྲུན་པོ	1 who is disciplined tamed and peaceful, matured, clam, gentle	bsrun po
བསྲུན་མོ	disciplined tamed and peaceful	bsrun mo
བསྲུབ	will churn [f srub pa]	bsrub
བསྲུབ་པ	churned	bsrub pa
བསྲུབ་བྱེད	sun	bsrub byed
བསྲུབས	churned [p srub pa]	bsrubs
བསྲུབས་སྐྱེས	arising from churning, butter	bsrubs skyes
བསྲུབས་པ	churn	bsrubs pa
བསྲུབས་མ	ja bsrubs ma	bsrubs ma
བསྲུམ་པ	be broken into pieces	bsrum pa
བསྲུལ	[arch] torn/ tattered [p f srul] rot, decompose, putrefy	bsrul
བསྲུལ་བ	[arch] torn/ tattered [p f srul] rot, decompose, putrefy	bsrul ba
བསྲུས་མ	Tibetan style tea	bsrus ma
བསྲེ	mixing [mind and prana]	bsre
བསྲེ་དང་འཕོ་བ	the mixing of mind and prana and the ejection of consciousness	bsre dang 'pho ba
བསྲེ་པོ	brindled	bsre po
བསྲེ་འཕོ	Combining and Transfer	bsre 'pho
བསྲེ་འཕོ་དགུ་སྐོར	the 9 divisions of mixing and pho ba [rje ras chung ba'i bzhed srol du, 1 'dod chags bde chen dang bsre ba gtum mo, two zhe sdang bden med dang bsre ba sgyu lus, three gti mug mi rtog pa dang bsre ...	bsre 'pho dgu skor
བསྲེ་འཕོ་སྒོར་གསུམ	the three teachings of mixing and ejecting of consciousness	bsre 'pho sgor gsum
བསྲེ་འཕོ་མཚམས་སྦྱོར	the union of mixing and ejecting bsre 'pho mtshams sbyor gyi gdams ngag - the oral instruction of the union of mixing and ejecting	bsre 'pho mtshams sbyor
བསྲེ་འཕོའི་འཁྲུལ་འཁོར	esoteric yogic practices of the six doctrines	bsre 'pho'i 'khrul 'khor
བསྲེ་བ	integrate, mix; ft. of {sre ba}	bsre ba
བསྲེ་བ་དགུ	nine mixings	bsre ba dgu
བསྲེ་བ་རོ་སྙོམ	the teaching of mixing and equal taste	bsre ba ro snyom
བསྲེ་བ་གསུམ	three mixings	bsre ba gsum
བསྲེ་བོ	1) variegated; 2) dark red, reddish brown, maroon	bsre bo
བསྲེག	burn, SA sreg pa, burning method of exorcism	bsreg
བསྲེག་ཁང	funeral pyre, crematory	bsreg khang
བསྲེག་གླུག་ཀྱི་རྫས	Syn {bsreg blug gi rdzas}	bsreg glug kyi rdzas
བསྲེག་གླུགས	ghee offered in fire offering 2889	bsreg glugs
བསྲེག་གཏོར་བཀྲུས་གསུམ	burning, scattering by wind, and washing away	bsreg gtor bkrus gsum
བསྲེག་པ	fry, parch, burn, burning	bsreg pa
བསྲེག་བྱ	1) fuel; 2) gold [to be smelted]	bsreg bya
བསྲེག་བྱ་ཟ་བའི	SA me gsum	bsreg bya za ba'i
བསྲེག་བྱ་ཟ་བའི་མེ	fire which devours	bsreg bya za ba'i me
བསྲེག་བླུག་གི་རྫས	fire offering poured substance [ghee]	bsreg blug gi rdzas
བསྲེག་བླུགས	ghee offered in fire offering	bsreg blugs
བསྲེག་རྫས	fire offering substances [yum shing sticks, til sesame seed, ram pa,??? me tog flowers etc.]	bsreg rdzas
བསྲེག་རྫས་བཅུ	1) {yum shing}. 2) {til} 3) {zas mchog} 4) {'bras} 5) {da'u rba} 6) {sob},{so ba} 7) {nas} 8) {sran ma dkar po} 9) {ku sha} 10) {gro}	bsreg rdzas bcu
བསྲེགས	burned up; burning	bsregs
བསྲེགས་བཅད་བརྡར་བའི་གསེར་བཞིན	like smelted, shaped, and burnished gold	bsregs bcad brdar ba'i gser bzhin
བསྲེགས་བཅད་བརྡར་གསུམ	1) smelted, shaped, and burnished; 2) diligently clean and polish [burn, break, and rub]	bsregs bcad brdar gsum
བསྲེགས་གཏོར་སྦྱངས	purified by being burned and scattered by wind	bsregs gtor sbyangs
བསྲེགས་ཐམ	brand[ing iron] [for animals]	bsregs tham
བསྲེགས་ནས་བསད	were killed by being burned at the stake	bsregs nas bsad
བསྲེགས་པ	[p sreg pa] burned	bsregs pa
བསྲེགས་ཚ	heat given off when copper, iron etc are smelted	bsregs tsha
བསྲེགས་རྫས	fuel, gasoline	bsregs rdzas
བསྲེགས་ཟིན་པ	burnt	bsregs zin pa
བསྲེགས་བརླག	burn down, destroy, demolish	bsregs brlag
བསྲེགས་བརླག་གཏོང	burn down, destroy, demolish	bsregs brlag gtong
བསྲེད་པ	dry by exposing to sun rays	bsred pa
བསྲེལ	rear, maintain, keep, SA srel ba	bsrel
བསྲེལ་བ	[f p srel ba] keep, maintain	bsrel ba
བསྲེས	mixed, confused, drifted along [p sre]	bsres
བསྲེས་དཀྲུགས	gong 'og rim pa bsnor dkrugs	bsres dkrugs
བསྲེས་ལྕགས	alloy of many metals	bsres lcags
བསྲེས་པ	integrated; pf. of {sre ba}	bsres pa
བསྲེས་ལྷད	faults of mixing good and evil	bsres lhad
བསྲོ	make warm, SA sro ba	bsro
བསྲོ་ཁང	kitchen, bakery	bsro khang
བསྲོ་ཁང་འཁོར་མ	sangha bath-house dge 'dun gyi khrus khang mtha' 'khor te yod pa kitchen	bsro khang 'khor ma
བསྲོ་ཁང་དུད་སྒོ	dge 'dun gyi khrus chas me gdan sogs 'jog sa'i me khang gi du ba 'gro sa'i sgo, smoke hole of a kitchen	bsro khang dud sgo
བསྲོ་སྤྱད	in the sangha bsro khang vessels, implements etc.	bsro spyad
བསྲོ་བ	{kha lag bsro ba} to warm one's face and hands	bsro ba
བསྲོ་སྦྱད	dry, roast	bsro sbyad
བསྲོད་པ	to dry	bsrod pa
བསྲོས	make warm, SA sro ba, bsro ba	bsros
བསྲོས་པ	pf. of {sro ba}	bsros pa
བསྲོས་པ་བསླངས	heat, warm, dry, sit and get warm/ dry	bsros pa bslangs
བསླ་བ	quickly	bsla ba
བསླང	will rise up/ erect/ set up, bloated [f slong ba]	bslang
བསླང་ལྡན	bloated	bslang ldan
བསླང་བ	will rise up/ erect/ set up, bloated [f slong ba]	bslang ba
བསླང་བ་ལ་ཡིན	wished to take it away with them	bslang ba la yin
བསླང་བའི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན	{sdang ba dang dvangs pa gang yang min pa'i sems kyis bslang bas lus ngag gi las ni bslang ba'i lung ma bstan} 'Motivated indeterminates' are the actions of body and speech motivated by a mind that...	bslang ba'i lung ma bstan
བསླང་བས་མ་བྱིན	When you beg for alms and people give you nothing	bslang bas ma byin
བསླངས	beggar, cause, SA slong, raise, lift up, SA bslang ba, past of slong, past of slong	bslangs
བསླངས་ན	If I take	bslangs na
བསླངས་པ	erect, set up, stand up; pf. of {slong ba}	bslangs pa
བསླངས་པའི	prompted by	bslangs pa'i
བསླངས་ཟེར་བ	he has asked for	bslangs zer ba
བསླད	deceiving, addition, adulteration, mix, SA slad pa, conditioned	bslad
བསླད་སྐྱོན	corruption	bslad skyon
བསླད་སྐྱོན་རྒྱག	corrupt	bslad skyon rgyag
བསླད་སྐྱོན་གཏོང	corrupt	bslad skyon gtong
བསླད་བཅོས	corrupting/ contaminating and contrived	bslad bcos
བསླད་པ	corrupt, pollute, spoil, alloy with base metals, contaminated, to become involved in, to be defiled by, to be conditioned by , tainted by	bslad pa
བསླད་པའི་སྒྲིབ་པ	obstacle caused by being defiled by dualism 2890	bslad pa'i sgrib pa
བསླད་ཕྱིར་དཀའ	it is difficult because one is defiled by dualism	bslad phyir dka'
བསླད་བྱ	will be corrupted	bslad bya
བསླད་བྱེད	polluting (condition/ factor)	bslad byed
བསླད་མ	corrupted, distorted	bslad ma
བསླད་མ་ཤུགས	undistorted [ggd]	bslad ma shugs
བསླད་མེད	stainless, untainted, unsullied, unadulterated, never having been adulterated, unconditioned	bslad med
བསླན	collected, put in, arrange, kept together	bslan
བསླན་ཏེ་འཇོག་པ	re-setting [3rd of the sems gnas dgu, if the mind is distracted by externals, having realized that, bring it back	bslan te 'jog pa
བསླན་པ	[p f slon pa] collect, put in, arrange, classify, sort, group	bslan pa
བསླན་པར་བྱ	{bslab pa}	bslan par bya
བསླབ	learn, training, culture, doctrine, SA slob pa, to train in	bslab
དམ་ཚིག་ཉམས་པ་ལ	to restore broken vows and samayas	dam tshig nyams pa la
བསླབ་ཁྲིམས	discipline of precepts	bslab khrims
བསླབ་གྲྭ	school	bslab grwa
བསླབ་དགོས	it is necessary to train in	bslab dgos
བསླབ་རྒན	[monk] who has trained for a long time [with vows, precepts]	bslab rgan
བསླབ་རྒྱག	advise, instruct	bslab rgyag
བསླབ་བཏུས	Compendium of Instructions [Shantideva's supplement and commentary to {spyod 'jug}	bslab btus
བསླབ་སྟོན	consultation, instruction	bslab ston
བསླབ་དོན	[pith] meaning of the precepts	bslab don
བསླབ་བདེ་པོ	docile	bslab bde po
བསླབ་མདོ་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ	the 85 Bodhisattva precepts	bslab mdo brgyad cu rtsa lnga
བསླབ་སྡོམ	precept vows [of the three yanas]	bslab sdom
བསླབ་པ	precepts, training, discipline, learning	bslab pa
བསླབ་པ་ཀུན་བཏུས	Compendium of Trainings, Shiksasamuccaya; (T 3939 / 3940)	bslab pa kun btus
བསླབ་པ་ཀུན་ལས་བཏུས་པ	Compendium of Instructions [Shantideva's supplement and commentary to {spyod 'jug}	bslab pa kun las btus pa
བསླབ་པ་རྒྱུན་གྱི་ས	continuous training [in Nyingma tradition, 4th sa attained by the 2nd yoga {rnal 'byor gnyis pa} because day and night without gaps there is training in the illusion like luminous union of appearan...	bslab pa rgyun gyi sa
བསླབ་པ་ལྔ	the five precepts	bslab pa lnga
བསླབ་པ་ལྔའི་ཕན་ཡོན་གྱི་མདོ	The Sutra on the beneficial qualities of the five precepts	bslab pa lnga'i phan yon gyi mdo
བསླབ་པ་བཅའ་བའི་ཐབས་བདེ་བ	good means of supporting the precepts	bslab pa bca' ba'i thabs bde ba
བསླབ་པ་བཅས་པ	w the precepts	bslab pa bcas pa
བསླབ་པ་འཆའ་བ	support/ cherish the precepts	bslab pa 'cha' ba
བསླབ་པ་འཆལ་བ	person who has perverted his precepts	bslab pa 'chal ba
བསླབ་པ་བརྗོད་པ	recite the precepts	bslab pa brjod pa
བསླབ་པ་གཏོང་བ	1) monks and so forth who cannot keep the precepts and become householders; 2) having lost faith in karma and fruition give up 1's vows	bslab pa gtong ba
བསླབ་པ་དྲལ་བ	one whose observance has been broken	bslab pa dral ba
བསླབ་པ་རྣམ་པར་བཞག་པ	present the precepts/ training bslab pa rnams dang bsgoms pa yi 'bras	bslab pa rnam par bzhag pa
བསླབ་པ་སྤོང་བའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of abandoning the precepts	bslab pa spong ba'i ltung byed
བསླབ་པ་ཕྱི་མ་གཉིས	the two later precepts	bslab pa phyi ma gnyis
བསླབ་པ་འབུལ་བ	offer up the precepts	bslab pa 'bul ba
བསླབ་པ་སྦྱིན་པ	give the precepts	bslab pa sbyin pa
བསླབ་པ་གཞི་ལྔ	the five root precepts for genyens [R]	bslab pa gzhi lnga
བསླབ་པ་ཡོངས་སྦྱོང་གི་གཞི་གསུམ	the three bases of completely [purifying the precepts [explained in the vinaya, among the {rab byung gi bsgrub pa'i bslab bya gzhi bcu bdun}, 1) gso sbyong 2) dbyar gnas, 3) dgag dbye restoring the...	bslab pa yongs sbyong gi gzhi gsum
བསླབ་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three precious trainings	bslab pa rin po che rnam pa gsum
བསླབ་པ་ལ་སློབ་པ	train in precepts	bslab pa la slob pa
བསླབ་པ་གསུམ	three trainings [morality, concentration and wisdom) {lhag pa tshul khrims kyi bslab pa} {lhag pa ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab pa} {lhag pa shes rab kyi bslab pa}	bslab pa gsum
བསླབ་པ་བསྲུང་བའི་གཞི་དགུ	the 9 grounds of keeping the precepts [among the 17 {'dul ba gzhi bcu bdun}, grounds of keeping the ordination vows without violation: 1) bslab pa yongs sbyong gi gzhi gsum, 2) bde bar gnas pa rkye...	bslab pa bsrung ba'i gzhi dgu
བསླབ་པའི་སྟོབས་ལྔ	the five powers [of training] * ???	bslab pa'i stobs lnga
བསླབ་པའི་གནས	precepts	bslab pa'i gnas
བསླབ་པའི་གནས་ལྔ	the five precepts {srog gcod pa song ba} (pr tip tavirti = do not kill {ma byin par len spong ba} (adatt d navirati = do not steal {'dod pas log par gwem pa spong ba} (k mamithy c ravirati = do not...	bslab pa'i gnas lnga
བསླབ་པའི་འབྲས་བུ་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four fruitions of the precepts	bslab pa'i 'bras bu rnam pa bzhi
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི	basis of study, subjects of study	bslab pa'i gzhi
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་བརྒྱད	the 8 fundamental precepts	bslab pa'i gzhi brgyad
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་བཅའ་བ	support the precepts	bslab pa'i gzhi bca' ba
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་བཅུ	the ten fundamental precepts [getsul precepts condensed into then general 1s" the four root 1s rtsa ba bzhi, 5) liquor chang, 6) gar sogs, play of song dance and music, 6) phreng sogs, necklaces an...	bslab pa'i gzhi bcu
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	the minor fundamental precepts. [lesser down- 2892 falls, srog la thug na gnang ba yod par zer]	bslab pa'i gzhi phran tshegs
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་འཛིན་ན	if you grasp the basics of this teaching	bslab pa'i gzhi 'dzin na
བསླབ་པའི་གཞི་ལས་འགལ་བ	break the fundamental precepts	bslab pa'i gzhi las 'gal ba
བསླབ་པར་བགྱི་བ	to train oneself in	bslab par bgyi ba
བསླབ་པར་བྱ་བ	should study	bslab par bya ba
བསླབ་པར་བྱ་བའི་གནས་དྲུག	{phung po dang/ khams dang/ skye mched dang/ rten 'brel dang/ gnas yin min dang/ bden pa ste}	bslab par bya ba'i gnas drug
བསླབ་ཕྲུག	student	bslab phrug
བསླབ་བྱ	1) discipline [required]. 2) training, lesson, points of training, advice, oral instructions. 3) precepts; rules; precepts; advice, admonishment, consultation	bslab bya
བསླབ་བྱ་རྒྱབ་པ	advise	bslab bya rgyab pa
བསླབ་བྱ་བཅུ	[TRS 24:4]	bslab bya bcu
བསླབ་བྱ་སྟོན་པ	give admonitions, exhort, reprimand	bslab bya ston pa
བསླབ་བྱ་གདམས་པ	offering counsel; Syn {bsdoms pa}	bslab bya gdams pa
བསླབ་བྱ་གནང་བ	to admonish, give counsel	bslab bya gnang ba
བསླབ་བྱ་མུ་ཐི་ལིའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང	{bslab bya mu thi li'i 'khri shing}	bslab bya mu thi li'i 'khri shing
བསླབ་བྱ་ལ་མི	not to act according to instruction	bslab bya la mi
བསླབ་བྱ་ལ་མི་ཉན	not listen to instructions, not do as directed	bslab bya la mi nyan
བསླབ་བྱ་ལ་བཞུན	very attentive in study	bslab bya la bzhun
བསླབ་བྱ་གསུམ	the three trainings	bslab bya gsum
བསླབ་བྱེད	advise, instruct	bslab byed
བསླབ་སྦྱངས	train	bslab sbyangs
བསླབ་སྦྱིན	give the precepts [forgiveness for precepts violated w/o hypocrisy]	bslab sbyin
བསླབ་གཙང	spiritual purity, keeping one's morals and vows pure	bslab gtsang
བསླབ་ཚིག	advice, instruction	bslab tshig
བསླབ་ཚིགས	words of the precepts [for dge tshul, dge slong etc.]	bslab tshigs
བསླབ་ཚིགས་གསུམ	three words of the precepts [three kinds of words of individual liberation vows for: dge bsnyen, dge tshul, dge slong.	bslab tshigs gsum
བསླབ་ཚུལ	discipline	bslab tshul
བསླབ་གཞི	basis or root of the three vows and precepts etc, fundamental precepts, teaching materials	bslab gzhi
བསླབ་གཞི་ཁྱད་གསོད་ཀྱི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of contempt of the fundamental precepts [one of the {ltung byed 'ba' zhig pa dgu bcu}, at times like those of {gso sbyong}, reciting the sutras of individual liberation, by reciting th...	bslab gzhi khyad gsod kyi ltung byed
བསླབ་གཞི་ཐོབ་པ	has obtained the benefit of the teachings	bslab gzhi thob pa
བསླབ་གཞི་ཡང་བ	light [violations of the bodhisattva] precepts	bslab gzhi yang ba
བསླབ་ཟིན་པ	taught	bslab zin pa
བསླབ་ཡང་དག་བླང་བ	accept true discipline	bslab yang dag blang ba
བསླབ་རིམ་དང་པོ	first level training	bslab rim dang po
བསླབ་རིམ་གཞོན་པ	1 new to the stages of training, novice	bslab rim gzhon pa
བསླབ་ལས་ཉམས་ལ་སྨོད་པ	condemn those who transgress the precepts	bslab las nyams la smod pa
བསླབ་ཤེས་ཅན	w prajna	bslab shes can
བསླབ་གསུམ	3 trainings (tshul khrims, ting 'dzin, shes rab), self-discipline, rapturous awareness, sharpening one's critical acumen through learning	bslab gsum
བསླབ་གསུམ་རྒྱན་ལྡན	a person ornamented by the Three Trainings	bslab gsum rgyan ldan
བསླབས	learned; instructed/ to train in	bslabs
བསླབས་པ	learned, trained,studied, taught, instructed, showed [p slob]	bslabs pa
བསླབས་པའི་གཞི	the foundation of the trainings	bslabs pa'i gzhi
བསླབས་པས་ཤེས་ཏེ	when he had learned it	bslabs pas shes te
བསླབས་ཤེས་ཅན	intelligent, student, studious, educated person	bslabs shes can
བསླས	lhas ma bslas pa - to braid	bslas
བསླས་པ	[p sla ba]	bslas pa
བསླས་མ	1) braid wicker, rope; 2) wool upper garment; 3) plates (in armor	bslas ma
བསླས་སུམ	lham gyi ngar gdong thad kyi tshem drub ???	bslas sum
བསླུ	deceive, seduce, persuade, cheat, ransom [part bslu ba]	bslu
བསླུ་ཁྲིད	[give] deceptive instructions	bslu khrid
བསླུ་ངོ་འཕྲོད	show it's been a misunderstanding	bslu ngo 'phrod
བསླུ་ཆོས	deceptive teachings	bslu chos
བསླུ་ཐབས	means of deception	bslu thabs
བསླུ་ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པ	skilled in the art of deception	bslu thabs la mkhas pa
བསླུ་རྡོ	temptation, bait, "stone thrown at dog to divert attention"	bslu rdo
བསླུ་པ	deceiver	bslu pa
བསླུ་བ	entice, beguile; {bslus}	bslu ba
བསླུ་བ་མེད	inevitable; {las rgyu 'bras bslu ba med} the consequences of actions are inevitable	bslu ba med
ཡང་བསླུ་བ་མེད	the Buddha's words never deceive	yang bslu ba med
བསླུ་བ་མེད་པ	guileless, not false, not deceptive	bslu ba med pa
ཚོམ་མེད་པ	there is no doubt that the fruit will come forth	tshom med pa
བསླུ་བའི་ཆོས	fraudulent/ deceptive dharma	bslu ba'i chos
བསླུ་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན	1 false things; 2) compounded/ conditioned dharmas, fraudulent/ deceptive dharmin	bslu ba'i chos can
བསླུ་བྱ་བསླུས	ransom life	bslu bya bslus
བསླུ་བྲིད	deception[ive], seductions	bslu brid
བསླུ་བྲིད་བྱེད་པ	abduct	bslu brid byed pa
བསླུ་བྲིད་ཚིག	luring words	bslu brid tshig
བསླུ་བྲེད	deceptions, deceptive seductions	bslu bred
བསླུ་མེད	1) true, w/o error, unfailing [blo bkal chog p undeceiving, unfailing, unmistaken, unequivocal, infallible, unerring, never-failing, inexhaustible, constant, steadfast, genuine, inevitable, not dec...	bslu med
བསླུ་མེད་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ	Unfailing interdependence of cause and effect. The law of relative truth	bslu med rgyu 'bras kyi rten 'brel
བསླུ་མེད་ལས་འབྲས	unfailing karma and fruition	bslu med las 'bras
བསླུ་ཚིག	deceptive/ enticing words	bslu tshig
བསླུ་ཟས	deceptive food	bslu zas
བསླུ་ཡོན	ransom money	bslu yon
བསླུ་ས་མེད	nothing to be deceived about	bslu sa med
བསླུགས་པ	destroy [walls etc.]	bslugs pa
བསླུས	deceive; deceived, duped	bslus
བསླུས་པ	betrayed	bslus pa
བསླུས་བ	deceived, seduced, persuaded, cheated, ransomed	bslus ba
བསླུས་བསླུས	confused	bslus bslus
བསླེ	[f sle] will weave/ braid/ plait	bsle
བསླེ་པ	braid, SA sle ba	bsle pa
བསླེབས	arrive, SA sleb, find oneself somewhere, arrived, went back to, gone, had reached, to reach	bslebs
བསླེབས་པ	gone, had reached, to reach	bslebs pa
བསླེས	[p sle] wove, braided, plaited	bsles
བསློག	[f {slog} will turn around/ up/ [upside] down/ inside out	bslog
བསློག་པ	[f slog pa] will turn around/ up/ [upside] down/ inside out	bslog pa
བསློགས	[p {slog pa} turned around/ up/ [upside] down/ inside out	bslogs
བསློགས་པ	pf. of {slog pa}	bslogs pa
བསློངས	to beg, solicit, ask for alms	bslongs
བསློངས་པ	ask for donations	bslongs pa
བརསུང	defend, protect	brsung
བརསུང་འཁོར་མཛད	set up a boundary of protection (around him, a protective yantra (= {bsrung ba}	brsung 'khor mdzad
བརསུང་པ་བྱས	keep, control, protect	brsung pa byas
བརསུང་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ	protecting mandala/ circle	brsung pa'i 'khor lo
བརསུང་བ	protection yantra	brsung ba
བརསུང་བ་བྱ	perform protections	brsung ba bya
བརསུང་བ་མེད་པ་རྣམ་པ་གསུམ	the three aspects of protectionlessness	brsung ba med pa rnam pa gsum
བརསུང་བྱ	observances	brsung bya
བརསུང་མཚམས་བྲལ་བ	w/o protection borders	brsung mtshams bral ba
ཧ	number 29, alas, be in ecstasy, breath, yonder, further, picture, painting, collar of a coat	ha
ཧ་ཁོག	the body of the letter 'HA'	ha khog
ཧ་གི	over there	ha gi
ཧ་གི་ལ	just there, over there	ha gi la
ཧ་གོ	to understand	ha go
ཧ་གོ་ཁག་པོ	abstruse	ha go khag po
ཧ་གོ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ	unintelligible	ha go rgyu med pa
ཧ་གོ་འདི་གོ	not knowing [w neg.]	ha go 'di go
ཧ་གོ་པ	know	ha go pa
ཧ་གོ་བ	know, understand	ha go ba
ཧ་གོ་ཟིན་པ	knew	ha go zin pa
ཧ་དགོད	horse-laugh	ha dgod
ཧ་རྒོད	powerful laugh	ha rgod
ཧ་སྒྲ	laughing sound	ha sgra
ཧ་ཅང	too, very; excessive; very	ha cang
ཧ་ཅང་གི	extremely, highly, paramount, terrific, tremendous	ha cang gi
ཧ་ཅང་གི་མཁས་པའམ་སྦྱང་པ	genius	ha cang gi mkhas pa'am sbyang pa
ཧ་ཅང་གི་དགའ	rapture	ha cang gi dga'
ཧ་ཅང་གི་དགའ་བ	enrapture	ha cang gi dga' ba
ཧ་ཅང་གི་དགའ་ཚོར	felicity	ha cang gi dga' tshor
ཧ་ཅང་གི་རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་ཆེན་པོ	immense	ha cang gi rgya khyon chen po
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ངན་པ	atrocious	ha cang gi ngan pa
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཆུང	microscopic, minute, tiny	ha cang gi chung
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཆུང་ཆུང	infinitesimal	ha cang gi chung chung
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཆེན	gigantic	ha cang gi chen
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཆེན་པོ	exorbitant	ha cang gi chen po
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཉམ་ཐག	austere	ha cang gi nyam thag
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཉེ་པོ	point-blank	ha cang gi nye po
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཞེན་ཁོག་ཚ་པོ	fanatic	ha cang gi zhen khog tsha po
ཧ་ཅང་གི་ཡང་པོ་དང་འཇམ་པོ	feathery	ha cang gi yang po dang 'jam po
ཧ་ཅང་དགའ་པོ	very happy	ha cang dga' po
ཧ་ཅང་སྒྲིམ་པ	too much concentration, to focus excessively	ha cang sgrim pa
ཧ་ཅང་ངན་པ	very bad	ha cang ngan pa
ཧ་ཅང་ཆེ	too much; x {ha cang sdud che na gnyid rmugs la sogs pa'i skyon kyang 'jug pa yin} too much concentration also makes you sleepy	ha cang che
ཧ་ཅང་ཆེ་བ	excessive	ha cang che ba
ཧ་ཅང་ཆེན་པོ	very large, great	ha cang chen po
ཧ་ཅང་ལྟོགས་པ	famish	ha cang ltogs pa
ཧ་ཅང་ཐལ	absurdity {ha cang thal ba'i rigs pa} logical absurdity	ha cang thal
ཧ་ཅང་ཐལ་འགྱུར	just talking nonsense	ha cang thal 'gyur
ཧ་ཅང་ཐལ་བ	extreme consequence	ha cang thal ba
ཧ་ཅང་ཐལ་བའི་རིགས་པ	logical absurdity	ha cang thal ba'i rigs pa
ཧ་ཅང་བྱེད་པ	to overdo	ha cang byed pa
ཧ་ཅང་བྲེལ་ཚ	impatient, calling for inquiry	ha cang brel tsha
ཧ་ཅང་བྲེལ་ཚ་བོ	urgent	ha cang brel tsha bo
ཧ་ཅང་སྦོམ་པ	very big, stout	ha cang sbom pa
ཧ་ཅང་མང་པོ	too many	ha cang mang po
ཧ་ཅང་མི་ཉེ	not very near, not close	ha cang mi nye
ཧ་ཅང་མི་རིང	not very far	ha cang mi ring
ཧ་ཅང་བཟང་པོ	exceedingly good	ha cang bzang po
ཧ་ཅང་ཡག་པོ	service	ha cang yag po
ཧ་ཅང་ཡག་པོ་བྱུང	this is very good! apportionment	ha cang yag po byung
ཧ་ཅང་རིང	too long	ha cang ring
ཧ་ཅང་རིང་བ	very long, very far	ha cang ring ba
ཧ་ཅང་ལེགས་པ	very good, excellent	ha cang legs pa
ཧ་ཅང་གསལ་པོ	evident	ha cang gsal po
ཧ་ཅིང	very, exceedingly, too much, excessive	ha cing
ཧ་ཆ	'phya gad cher dgod pa, mi mang gis ha cha rgyag pa	ha cha
ཧ་གཉིད་སད་པ	bsam pa rnyed pa, phru gu de lo lon nas ha gnyid sad de mi rgan par gus zhabs byed stangs shes kyi 'dug	ha gnyid sad pa
ཧ་བཏབ	like the moist breath of saying HA [temporarily steaming a mirror]	ha btab
ཧ་སྟི	an elephant; glang po che	ha sti
ཧ་སྟོང་འདབ	double flower	ha stong 'dab
ཧ་ཐལ་ཆེས་པ	utterly 2894	ha thal ches pa
ཧ་ཐོ	Hato, in Domey	ha tho
ཧ་དུ་དཀར་པོ	white hadu (teacher in nepal)	ha du dkar po
ཧ་འདེབས་པ	breathe	ha 'debs pa
ཧ་ན་ཧོ་ནི	very angry, much enraged, stupid dull man, dozing dull man	ha na ho ni
ཧ་ན་ཧོ་ནེ	mind fogged/ dazed [angry]	ha na ho ne
ཧ་ནི	all of them, all together, in a body	ha ni
ཧ་ནི་ཧོན་ནེ	mind fogged by being very angry	ha ni hon ne
ཧ་ནུ་མན་ཏ	he with high cheeks, mongolian, hun, monkey warrior in epic of ramayana	ha nu man ta
ཧ་ནུ་མན་ཐ	Hanuman	ha nu man tha
བེ༹དིཅ་ལེགེནད་ཨ་མོནཀེཡ	king-emanation of Vishnu who was King Rama'w cmpanion when he faught the demon Ravana]	vedic legend a monkey
ཧ་ནོས	Hanoi	ha nos
ཧ་པ	1) w/o capital tshong pa chen po yin mdog byed mkhan; 2) many debts zug yod pa'i mi	ha pa
ཧ་པ་ཧ་པ	breathe out steam or vapor	ha pa ha pa
ཧ་པོ	medicinal herb	ha po
ཧ་ཕུན	fen = 3.33mm	ha phun
ཧ་ཕུན་རྩི	molecule	ha phun rtsi
ཧ་ཕེ་ཧོ་ཕེ	hurried, quickly, hastily, in a rush, carelessly	ha phe ho phe
ཧ་ཕྱད་དེ	astonishment; struck dumb/ dumbfounded	ha phyad de
ཧ་བ	SK cononants HA to BA [ha ba//ha//ba//ha ya wa ra la nya na na nga ma dzha dha dha gha bha dza da da ga ba]	ha ba
ཧ་བ་ཧ་བ	to breathe out steam	ha ba ha ba
ཧ་བུ་སྦ་བ	medicinal herb	ha bu sba ba
ཧ་བེ་ཧོ་བེ	hurried, quickly, hastily, in a rush, carelessly	ha be ho be
ཧ་བེ་ཧོབ་བེ	hurried, quickly, hastily, in a rush	ha be hob be
ཧ་བོ་གངས་བཟང	great tibetan mountain range	ha bo gangs bzang
ཧ་མ་གོ	not understand/ know	ha ma go
ཧ་མི་གོ	not understand	ha mi go
ཧ་མི་ལས	nothing to be wondered at	ha mi las
ཧ་མིང་ཅན	the deity dbang phyug chen po	ha ming can
ཧ་མེ་ལོང་ལ་འདེབས་པ	exhale moist breath w Ha fogging a mirror briefly	ha me long la 'debs pa
ཧ་ཛོ་ག་འོང	small town in assam	ha dzo ga 'ong
ཧ་ཞུ་ཧུ་འཁྱགས	1) unbearable cold; 2) big change	ha zhu hu 'khyags
ཧ་གཟེར	crucial position of HA	ha gzer
ཧ་ཡང	aluminum	ha yang
ཧ་ཡང་ཁོག་ལྟིར	aluminum pot	ha yang khog ltir
ཧ་ཡང་ཧ	counterfeit money	ha yang ha
ཧ་ཡིན་གུ་ཡིན	pointless reason [with neg.]	ha yin gu yin
ཧ་ཡིན་འདི་ཡིན	pointless reason [with neg.]	ha yin 'di yin
ཧ་ཡེགས	woe	ha yegs
ཧ་ཡོ	tiring, exhaustion	ha yo
ཧ་ར	play at dice	ha ra
ཧ་ར་ཝོལ་གྱི་བྲག་ཕུག	Harawol Cave, near Kokonor	ha ra wol gyi brag phug
ཧ་ར་ཧུ་རེ	impetuous, violent, rude, impudent	ha ra hu re
ཧ་རམ	deny, disown, disavow	ha ram
ཧ་རི	parrot, pattern, linear design; pattern, linear design	ha ri
ཧ་རི་ཀི་ལ	Harikila [city in Zahor]	ha ri ki la
ཧ་རི་ཏ	SK wild animal	ha ri ta
ཧ་རི་ཏ་ཀ	vegetables, greens, pot herbs	ha ri ta ka
ཧ་རི་རྟ་ཅན	Indra	ha ri rta can
ཧ་རི་དྲ	turmeric plant, curcuma	ha ri dra
ཧ་རི་ན	SK wild animal	ha ri na
ཧ་རི་ནི་ཀ	a flower	ha ri ni ka
ཧ་རི་ནི་སའི་སྔགས	Harinisa mantra	ha ri ni sa'i sngags
ཧ་རི་ནུ་ཀ	vitex agnus-castus, kind of pulse with fragrant bitter medicine	ha ri nu ka
ཧ་རི་ཙན་དན	sandal-wood	ha ri tsan dan
ཧ་རི་ཙན་དན་ལྟར་བསིལ་བ་འདུག	he was as cool as the finest sandalwood ha ri tsan dan la lho phyogs kyi rlung	ha ri tsan dan ltar bsil ba 'dug
ཕོག་པ་བཞིན	like the southern winds that carry the sweet smell of sandalwood	phog pa bzhin
ཧ་རི་ཙམ	centipede	ha ri tsam
ཧ་རི་ཧུ་རི	careless	ha ri hu ri
ཧ་རིའི་རྟ་ཅན	name of brgya byin lha	ha ri'i rta can
ཧ་རིས	overlapping designs"	ha ris
ཧ་རུ་དཀར་པོ	White haru [see notes]	ha ru dkar po
ཧ་རུབ་སྦ་རུབ	cooperative effort	ha rub sba rub
ཧ་རེ	{ha re 'gro dgos} you must go	ha re
ཧ་རེ་ཉ་ཀ	medicinal plant	ha re nya ka
ཧ་རེ་གཏད	to focus the eyes without moving the eyes	ha re gtad
ཧ་རེ་བ	1) gap, hole; 2) staring straight ahead	ha re ba
ཧ་རེ་ལོང	blind like a statue, having eyes but without sight like a statue	ha re long
ཧ་རེ་ལོང་བ	completely blind, from the eyes bzo tsam yod pa las really not able to see	ha re long ba
ཧ་རེ་ཧུ་རེ	careless	ha re hu re
ཧ་རོགས་སྤ་རོགས	cooperative effort	ha rogs spa rogs
ཧ་རླངས	exhale noise breath w HA sound	ha rlangs
ཧ་ལ	herb bong nga nag po	ha la
ཧ་ལ་རྒྱུག	go to that place, do not stay here, be gone	ha la rgyug
ཧ་ལ་གནས	tshogs bdag an elephant headed wealth god	ha la gnas
ཧ་ལ་ཤོར་བ	bad person lyingly says rang gi money and things de'i lag tu shor ba	ha la shor ba
ཧ་ལ་ཧ་ལ	SK 1) 1 of the spyan ras gzigs rigs lnga; 2) Manjushri	ha la ha la
ཧ་ལྭན	Havana	ha lwan
ཧ་ལམ	about, near, nearly, pretty, tolerably, rather, almost. Syn {phal cher}, mostly; almost	ha lam
ཧ་ལས	astonish, to be surprised, surprised	ha las
ཧ་ལས་དགོས་པ	marvelous, wonderful, amazing, terrific	ha las dgos pa
ཧ་ལས་ཏེ་འཐོམས་པ	wonder-struck	ha las te 'thoms pa
ཧ་ལས་པ	be startled, get a fright, aghast, amaze, baffle, bewilder, consternation, daze, marvel, surprise, be astonished, frightened	ha las pa
ཧ་ལས་པ་རེད	he was amazed, astonished	ha las pa red
ཧ་ལས་པའི	appalling, fantastic, marvelous	ha las pa'i
ཧ་ལས་པའི་རྣམ་པ	stupor	ha las pa'i rnam pa
ཧ་ལས་པའི་ཕྱུག་པོ	millionaire	ha las pa'i phyug po
ཧ་ལས་པའི་ཡག	excellent, magnificent	ha las pa'i yag
ཧ་ལས་པའི་ཡག་པོ	admirable	ha las pa'i yag po
ཧ་ལས་པར་གྱུར	was struck by surprise	ha las par gyur
ཧ་ལས་པོ	stupendous	ha las po
ཧ་ལས་ཡག	amazing	ha las yag
ཧ་ལིའུ	(M sram lpags	ha li'u
ཧ་ལུང་མ་གོ་བ	not understanding the meaning	ha lung ma go ba
ཧ་ལེ	li [CH distance measure]	ha le
ཧ་ལེ་ཧུང་འཐོར	amazing, fantastic	ha le hung 'thor
ཧ་ལེ་ཧོ་ལེ	careless, blurred	ha le ho le
ཧ་ལེན	sprod dmigs gang yang med par from another place money dngos bu lon len pa	ha len
ཧ་ལོ	a beautiful flower, flower	ha lo
ཧ་ལོ་དཀར་པོའི་མེ་ཏོག	rgya lcam w white flower, sweet hot, body heat neutral, good for mkhal tshad, mngal tshad, khu ba 'dzag pa etc	ha lo dkar po'i me tog
ཧ་ལོ་རྐྱང་པ	simple flower	ha lo rkyang pa
ཧ་ལོག་པ	1) bankrupt, bereft of capital; 2) wealth	ha log pa
ཧ་ཤང	Chan teacher, Taoists. A Chinese Buddhist priest, doctor, scholar	ha shang
ཧ་ཤང་གི་ལྟ་བ	Hashang view	ha shang gi lta ba
ཧ་ཤང་མ་ཧ་ཡ་ན	{ha shang ma ha ya na	ha shang ma ha ya na
ཧ་ཤིག	(CH) khu dkar, med mineral [sweet, cooling, by its powers mig rims sel, rtsa nad sbyong bar byed syn: ka ko trig, kha tam ga, khu dkar, thod le kor, ha shiggi]	ha shig
ཧ་ས	SK from HA to SA: ksha, ha, sa	ha sa
ཧ་ས་དབྱངས་མེད	SK HA SA w/ o consonants	ha sa dbyangs med
ཧ་སག	small autonomous people in zhin cang yu gur and kan su'u zhing chen etc [by the 1982 census more then khri phrag 90]	ha sag
ཧ་སང་ངེ་བ་རྒྱ་ཡན	a state of realization, like space, w/o hope or fear	ha sang nge ba rgya yan
ཧ་སོང་ཆེན་པོའི་རིན	great difference in price	ha song chen po'i rin
ཧ་ཧ	male laughter, ha-ha!	ha ha
ཧ་ཧ་རྒོད་པ	1 of 8 dur khrod chen po	ha ha rgod pa
ཧ་ཧ་སྒྲོག	1) laughter; 2) owl	ha ha sgrog
ཧ་ཧ་ཐོབ་བྱེད	SA kun 'byung ba	ha ha thob byed
ཧ་ཧ་བ	pain interjection	ha ha ba
ཧ་ཧ་བྲལ	SA 'gog pa	ha ha bral
ཧ་ཧ་བྲལ་བྱེད	SA lam	ha ha bral byed
ཧ་ཧ་ཧེ་ཧེ	laughing sound	ha ha he he
ཧ་ཧ་ཧོ	misery	ha ha ho
ཧ་ཧར་རྒོད་པ	1) big laugh; 2) 1 of the 8 great charnel grounds	ha har rgod pa
ཧྭ	picture, painting	hwa
ཧབ༹	1) top and bottom of garment; 2) CH picture	hva
ཧྭ་ཀང་ཨན	granite	hwa kang an
ཧྭ་ཀྲུང	C CH	hwa krung
ཧྭ་ཏུང	telephone receiver	hwa tung
ཧྭ་ནན	S CH	hwa nan
ཧྭ་པེ	N CH	hwa pe
ཧྭ་པེ་ཅུས	N CH Bureau	hwa pe cus
ཧྭ་ཞང་ཅི	glider	hwa zhang ci
ཧབ༹་ཤང	Hashang	hva shang
ཧྭ་ཤང	CH Buddhist monk	hwa shang
ཧབ༹་ཤང་དགེ་བསྲུང	{hva shang dge bsrung}	hva shang dge bsrung
ཧབ༹་ཤང་ཏེ་ཙ	Hashang Tetsa. A Chinese doctor	hva shang te tsa
ཧབ༹་ཤང་མ་ཧ་ཡ་ན	Hashang Mahayana	hva shang ma ha ya na
ཧྭ་ཤང་མ་ཧཱ་ཡ་ན	Hwa Shang Mahayana	hwa shang ma hA ya na
ཧྭ་ཤིན་ཀྲོན	Washington	hwa shin kron
ཧྭ་ས	Washington	hwa sa
ཧྭ་ཧེང	peanut	hwa heng
ཧྭ་ཧེང་སྣུམ	peanut oil	hwa heng snum
ཧྭ་ཧྲེང་ཏུན	Washington	hwa hreng tun
ཧག་སྒྲ	lud pa 'phen pa, and stopped throat sound	hag sgra
ཧག་ཐོབ་རྒྱབ་པ	scowl	hag thob rgyab pa
ཧག་ཧག	by chance, fortunately	hag hag
ཧགས	sugar, treacle	hags
ཧྭགས	sugared medicine, lozenges	hwags
ཧབ༹གས	essence of molasses, sugar	hvags
ཧབ༹གས་ཀྱི་ལ་དུ	sweet foods mixed w molasses, honey etc	hvags kyi la du
ཧང	squander, dissipate, wide open, blank and oblivious, empty *, bank, firm	hang
ཧང་ཀྲའོ	Hangchow	hang kra'o
ཧང་ག་རི	Hungary	hang ga ri
ཧང་གེ	a gap, flabbergasted, moonstruck. 'spaced out'	hang ge
ཧང་གོག	goulashes	hang gog
ཧང་འགྲོས	careless, arrogant	hang 'gros
ཧང་རྒྱ	rang 'khos dang inappropriate spros gshom gyi blo rgya'i spyod tshul, brgya bshig stong 'gugs kyi spros gshom hang rgya tsa po	hang rgya
ཧང་རྒྱག	unthinking, careless	hang rgyag
ཧང་ང་རི་རྒན	Hang-nga Rigen, in Domey	hang nga ri rgan
ཧང་ངེ	clearly awake [thoughtless] Syn {lhang nge} / {hrig ge}	hang nge
ཧང་ཆུ	{hang chu river [branch of the upper rma chu river in mtsho sngon province zhing chen S of the lake in zhin ha'e rdzong]	hang chu
ཧང་གཏམ	byung rgyal gyi gtam	hang gtam
ཧང་དུ	Nepali btsun pa	hang du
ཧང་ནེ	2nd wife of sa bdag king	hang ne
ཧང་ཕན་སེར་པོ	king of sa bdag demons	hang phan ser po
ཧང་བ	pant, gasp	hang ba
ཧང་བུག	1) faults of gaps/ holes and tears; 2) faults and errors	hang bug
ཧང་བུག་ཞུགས་པ	be full of gaps and tears	hang bug zhugs pa
ཧང་བུབ	1) faults of gaps/ holes and tears; 2) faults and errors 2896	hang bub
ཧང་བྱེད་པ	fake high meditation, moon	hang byed pa
ཧང་ཚང	fault, be faulty	hang tshang
ཧང་ཚིག	bsam blo ma btang ba'i gtam	hang tshig
ཧང་ཚོན	same as hang tshon?	hang tshon
ཧང་འཛོམ་པ	squander, dissipate	hang 'dzom pa
ཧང་ཟོམ	blatant mistake, don't go/ fit together	hang zom
ཧང་ཟོལ	misunderstanding, misapprehension	hang zol
ཧང་ཡོན	kind of brick tea	hang yon
ཧང་རལ	faulty, rough, crude, rude coarse	hang ral
ཧང་ཤེད	1) coarse, crude, rude, rough; 2) very subjective/ self-regarding	hang shed
ཧང་སང	[be] astonished/ frightened/ surprised/ startled/ amazed/ shocked	hang sang
ཧང་སང་ངེ	suspended in empty space, without movement or thought, empty, suspended in the space between the thought that went and the new thought that has not yet come. Syn {stong song nge}	hang sang nge
ཧང་སང་བ	dazzel	hang sang ba
ཧང་སངས	oblivious, 'spaced out', 'mindblown'. to be startled, get a fright; to be startled, get a fright, oblivious, 'spaced out', 'mind-blown'	hang sangs
ཧང་སངས་པ	be startled, get a fright	hang sangs pa
ཧང་སོང	blatant/ obvious mistake, don't go/ fit together, exaggerated, astonishing/ great difference	hang song
ཧང་སོང་བཤད	exaggerate	hang song bshad
ཧང་ཧང	wide open, blank and oblivious	hang hang
ཧང་ཧང་བྱེད་པ	fake high meditation,	hang hang byed pa
ཧབ༹ང་ཏི	CH emperor	hvang ti
ཧད	abrupt	had
ཧད་ཀྱི	abruptly	had kyi
ཧད་ཀྱིས	abruptly	had kyis
ཧད་ཀྱིས་ལང་བ	rise suddenly	had kyis lang ba
ཧད་ཀྱིས་ལངས	fleeing from harm	had kyis langs
ཧད་ཆ་གཅིག	pair of shoes	had cha gcig
ཧད་ད་བ	startled, startled awareness, surprised astonishment	had da ba
ཧད་དེ	look with dumb surprise, be astounded and senseless	had de
ཧད་དེ་འཇོག་པ	blo'i 'jog lugs 'di yin 'di min 'phro 'du bkag nas ha thang nger 'jog pa	had de 'jog pa
ཧད་དེ་བ	1) Syn {mi rtog pa}; totally blank, thoughtless, disengaged, uninvolved; totally blank, thoughtless, free of thoughts, emptied, 2) surprised astonishment, astounded, startling, astounded, startled ...	had de ba
ཧད་དེ་བར་ལུས	be dumbfounded, be left blank w astonishment	had de bar lus
ཧད་དེ་སེམས	absent-minded; syn {dmigs yul med pa}	had de sems
ཧད་དེ་སེམས་འདུག	absent-minded	had de sems 'dug
ཧད་པ	person from Bhutan	had pa
ཧད་པོ	blank, vacant	had po
ཧད་པོའི་བློ་རྩིང	hasty gross mind	had po'i blo rtsing
ཧད་པོའི་བློ་རྩིངས	hasty gross mind	had po'i blo rtsings
ཧད་པོར	blank, staring unmovingly straight. Syn {had re}	had por
ཧད་པོར་བལྟས་པ	stare straight ahead [w/o blinking]	had por bltas pa
ཧད་པོར་ཤི་བ	sudden death, go into a coma and die	had por shi ba
ཧད་སྨན	kind of fruit	had sman
ཧད་རམས	indigo of the best quality	had rams
ཧད་ལངས་པ	sudden blankness arising	had langs pa
ཧད་ཧད	to exert one's self	had had
ཧད་ཧད་པོ	1) scattered mind [from fear, panic etc]; 2) breath hard, wheezing panting	had had po
ཧན	(M king/ khan, Han CH	han
ཧན་ཀོའུ	Hankow	han ko'u
ཧན་ལྡང	dumb, mute	han ldang
ཧན་ནེ་ཧོན་ནེ	blank and dull stupor	han ne hon ne
ཧན་ནེ་ཧོན་ནེ་ཐོམ་མེ་བ	vague and hazy stupefaction	han ne hon ne thom me ba
ཧན་ནེ་ཧོན་ནེ་བྱས	space out, go into a stupor	han ne hon ne byas
ཧན་མི་རིགས	Han CH race/ nationality	han mi rigs
ཧན་ཧོན	space out, go into a stupor, dumb, mute, dazed	han hon
ཧབ	w great continual greed craving and attachment, obsessively doing again and again	hab
ཧབ་གོད་བྱེད་པ	laugh sneeringly	hab god byed pa
ཧབ་དགོད	suddenly occurring	hab dgod
ཧབ་རྒྱུག	suddenly arising	hab rgyug
ཧབ་སྒྲ	greedy careless sound [eating and drinking gulping and slurping etc.]	hab sgra
ཧབ་བཅད	needy wretch, starving person	hab bcad
ཧབ་བཅད་ཀྱིས་འཕྲོག་བཅོམ་བྱས	take/ ravish w attachment	hab bcad kyis 'phrog bcom byas
ཧབ་ཆ	way of laughing	hab cha
ཧབ་ཆི	sbrid pa ste by sna 'tshangs pa etc involuntarily sgra go "hab chi hab chi" sneeze?	hab chi
ཧབ་ཐོབ	very greedily attain/ take what 1 wants, snatch, grab quarrel	hab thob
ཧབ་ཐོབ་རྒྱག་པ	goods, wares	hab thob rgyag pa
ཧབ་ཐོབ་རྒྱབ་པ	scramble	hab thob rgyab pa
ཧབ་ཐོབ་པ	take by plunder, loot, snatch another's possession	hab thob pa
ཧབ་ཐོབ་བྱེད	to contend for, scramble for/ to loot, plunder	hab thob byed
ཧབ་ཐོབ་བྱེད་པ	scramble for, strive for	hab thob byed pa
ཧབ་འཐུང	drink w great desires	hab 'thung
ཧབ་པན	shorts	hab pan
ཧབ་བེ་ཧོབ་བེ	careless, w/o directed effort or attention	hab be hob be
ཧབ་བྲིད	sneeze	hab brid
ཧབ་བྲིད་རྒྱག	sneeze 2897	hab brid rgyag
ཧབ་སྦྲིད	sneeze	hab sbrid
ཧབ་སྦྲིད་རྒྱག	sneeze	hab sbrid rgyag
ཧབ་འཙེམ	hral 'tsem mam rob tsam 'tsem pa, do po rnams hab 'tsem rgyag pa	hab 'tsem
ཧབ་ཟ་བྱེད་པ	eat quickly	hab za byed pa
ཧབ་ལོག	greed log	hab log
ཧབ་ཤ	a dispute, a quarrel, grab, snatch; grab, snatch	hab sha
ཧབ་ཤ་ཆེ	dispute, quarrel	hab sha che
ཧབ་ཤ་བྱེད་པ	dispute, quarrel	hab sha byed pa
ཧབ་ཤང་ཙེའུ	hab shang mtse'u	hab shang tse'u
ཧབ་ཤང་མཙེའུ	CH dbang po lag pa	hab shang mtse'u
ཧབ་གཤགས	quarreling dispute or greedy/ snatching quarrel	hab gshags
ཧབ་ཧབ་རྔམ་པ	obsessive greed/ craving	hab hab rngam pa
ཧབ་ཧོབ	careless/ inattentive, grabbing/ scrambling/ rushing for	hab hob
ཧབ་ཧོབ་རྒྱག	grab/ scramble/ rush for	hab hob rgyag
ཧབ་ཧོབ་ཟ་བ	eat quickly	hab hob za ba
ཧམ	ham (head, father, white, nectar, produces lustre of body, nar 65)	ham
ཧམ་བསྐྱོད	adventurous/ daring/ risky advance	ham bskyod
ཧམ་ཁྱེར	1) by desire for things etc take them by force; 2) be rotten/ moldy	ham khyer
ཧམ་ཅན	shameless, deceitful, mendacious, audacious, barbarous, savage, brutal	ham can
ཧམ་བཅོས	revising, changing, correcting [sneakily/ w/o permission]	ham bcos
ཧམ་ཆེ	braggart, boaster	ham che
ཧམ་ཆེན	braggart, boaster	ham chen
ཧམ་བསྙོན	ham pas skyon 'dzugs	ham bsnyon
ཧམ་དྲི	defilement of rottenness in food etc.	ham dri
ཧམ་འདོད	ham che'i 'dod pa, greed ham 'dod kyis gzhan la btsan 'dzul byed	ham 'dod
ཧམ་འདོད་ངོམས་མེད	insatiable greed	ham 'dod ngoms med
ཧམ་པ	conceit, vanity, boasting, avarice, covetousness, greediness, strength, force, courage, bravery	ham pa
ཧམ་པ་རྒྱག	lie, be deceitful, brag, be brutal/ vicious	ham pa rgyag
ཧམ་པ་རྒྱག་པ	lie, be deceitful, brag, be brutal/ vicious	ham pa rgyag pa
ཧམ་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	lie, be deceitful, brag, be brutal/ vicious	ham pa rgyab pa
ཧམ་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	avarice, covetousness, greediness	ham pa brgyab pa
ཧམ་པ་ཆེ་མདོག	overbearing, audacious, truculent	ham pa che mdog
ཧམ་པ་བྱེད	lie, be deceitful, brag, be brutal/ vicious	ham pa byed
ཧམ་པ་བྱེད་པ	lie, be deceitful, brag, be brutal/ vicious	ham pa byed pa
ཧམ་པ་མ་བཅོ	be not covetous	ham pa ma bco
ཧམ་པ་ཚ་པོ	liar, mendacious, deceitful, greedy	ham pa tsha po
ཧམ་པ་ཟོས་པ	corrupt, greedy	ham pa zos pa
ཧམ་པ་ཤོད	liar, braggart	ham pa shod
ཧམ་པ་ཤོད་མཁན	braggart, boaster, liar	ham pa shod mkhan
ཧམ་པ་གཤོད་པ	exaggerate	ham pa gshod pa
ཧམ་པ་བཤད	boast, brag, lie	ham pa bshad
ཧམ་པས་ཁྱེར	taken away by force	ham pas khyer
ཧམ་པོ	moldy	ham po
ཧམ་སྤུ	rotten g.ya' spu	ham spu
ཧམ་སྤྱོད	barbarous, vicious, brutal, savage, deceitful, mendacious	ham spyod
ཧམ་ཕོད་ཅན	liar, mendacious, deceitful, greedy	ham phod can
ཧམ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་པ	grab	ham 'phrog byed pa
ཧམ་སྨྱོན	maddened by craving, fury, frenzy, rage	ham smyon
ཧམ་འཚམ་པ	make a stitch here and there	ham 'tsham pa
ཧམ་འཛིན	monopoly, control	ham 'dzin
ཧམ་འཛིན་བྱེད	monopolize, control	ham 'dzin byed
ཧམ་འཛུལ	invasion, intrusion, trespass	ham 'dzul
ཧམ་འཛུལ་བྱེད	invade, intrude, trespass	ham 'dzul byed
ཧམ་འཛུལ་བྱེད་པ	trespass	ham 'dzul byed pa
ཧམ་རྫུན	gang la'ang mi bltos pa'i ham pa tsa po'am complete lies, deceit	ham rdzun
ཧམ་ཟོས	corrupt, greedy	ham zos
ཧམ་གཟུང	[wrongly] taken into 1's possession because of greed, seizing/ occupying, holding by force, monopolizing	ham gzung
ཧམ་གཟུང་བྱེད	[wrongly] take into 1's possession because of greed, seize/ occupy, hold by force, monopolize	ham gzung byed
ཧམ་བཟུང	[wrongly] taken into 1's possession because of greed, seizing/ occupying, holding by force, monopolizing	ham bzung
ཧམ་བཟུང་བྱེད	[wrongly] take into 1's possession because of greed, seize/ occupy, hold by force, monopolize	ham bzung byed
ཧམ་བཟོས	gzhan nor ham pa zos pa	ham bzos
ཧམ་ཡུ	[arch] pride	ham yu
ཧམ་ཡུས	bsnyon ham gyi yus, byas rjes ham yus 'tshong ba, rdzun gtam gyis ham yus drangs pa, mi mang po'i khrod du ham yus ma shod	ham yus
ཧམ་ལུ	child's shoes	ham lu
ཧམ་ལེན	take by force	ham len
ཧམ་ཤད	lies, deceptive talk	ham shad
ཧམ་ཤེད	misuse of power disregarding laws and rules	ham shed
ཧམ་ཤེད་ཁྲལ་བསྡུ	unscrupulous tax gouging	ham shed khral bsdu
ཧམ་ཤེད་གང་འདོད	ruthless greedy caprice	ham shed gang 'dod
ཧམ་ཤོད	tell lies, deceptive talk	ham shod
ཧམ་བཤད	lies, deceptive talk	ham bshad
ཧམ་བཤད་མགོ་སྐོར	lies, deception, swindle, trick, con	ham bshad mgo skor
ཧམ་སེམས	greedy, w much desire, craving, ambition, scheming	ham sems
ཧམ་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ	very greedy/ ambitious	ham sems chen po
ཧའི	shoe	ha'i
ཧའེ་ཀྲུའུ	Haichow	ha'e kru'u
ཧའེ་ཀྲེ	blubber	ha'e kre
ཧའེ་ཏེ	edible sea weed	ha'e te
ཧའེ་ནན	Hainan Island	ha'e nan
ཧའེ་མན	sponge	ha'e man
ཧའེ་ལུན་ཅན	Amur River	ha'e lun can
ཧའེ་ཧྲན	sea slug	ha'e hran
ཧའེ་ཧྲན་མ་གནང་རོགས་གནང	no sea slug please	ha'e hran ma gnang rogs gnang
ཧའེ་ཨོའུ	sea gull	ha'e o'u
ཧའོ་ཁྲེའེ	train	ha'o khre'e
ཧའོ་ཁྲེའེ་བབས་ཚུགས	train station	ha'o khre'e babs tshugs
ཧའོ་ལན	Holland	ha'o lan
ཧའོ་ཧྲེང	cubic centimeters	ha'o hreng
ཧར	suddenly	har
ཧར་གོང	zog gong yang tig ma 'grig gong 'ud kyis phab pa'i rin gong	har gong
ཧར་གྱིས	abruptly	har gyis
ཧར་གྱིས་ཁྲོ་བ	suddenly angry	har gyis khro ba
ཧར་གྱིས་ལངས	arise suddenly, suddenly got/ stood up	har gyis langs
ཧར་སྒོམ	meditate w straight forward direct gaze/ stare	har sgom
ཧར་སྒོམ་བྱེད་པ་རྣམས	crank meditators looking for a quick result	har sgom byed pa rnams
ཧར་སྒྲ	meaningless wprds [of exhaustion, talking in one's sleep, dying]	har sgra
ཧར་ཅན	mi ham pa can nam khram pa	har can
ཧར་ཆེན	false/ nonsensical talk	har chen
ཧར་ཏེ	suddenly	har te
ཧར་ཏེ་ལྟ་བ	look fixedly, stare	har te lta ba
ཧར་གཏམ	nonsensical talk	har gtam
ཧར་ཐོན	suddenly leave	har thon
ཧར་ཐོན་བྱས	suddenly left	har thon byas
ཧར་གདོང	CH place in mtsho sngon province ancient name 2898	har gdong
ཧར་འདོན	false/ nonsensical talk	har 'don
ཧར་པ	1) liar, swindler, charlatan; 2) gap, hole	har pa
ཧར་པིང	Harbin	har ping
ཧར་པིན	Harbin	har pin
ཧར་པོ	1) flashy, gaudy, bright, variegated and loud; 2) dkrog dkrog che ba; 3) mig gdangs te lta tshul, abruptly, suddenly, instantaneously, directly, {lam sang}; 4) 1 of mar khe si ming po gsum	har po
ཧར་པོར་བཀྲ་བ	flashy, gaudy, bright, variegated and loud	har por bkra ba
ཧར་པོར་ལྟ་བ	look abruptly, suddenly, instantaneously, directly	har por lta ba
ཧར་བར་མི་ཤོང	1) mi tshad tsam shong ba'i bar stong che ba; 2) las ka hang zom che ba'i dpe	har bar mi shong
ཧར་མ་ཤོད	blabber	har ma shod
ཧར་མིག	hole	har mig
ཧར་ཙ་པོ	blabber	har tsa po
ཧར་ཟང	Syn {zang thal, 'gags pa med pa}	har zang
ཧར་རེ	{har po} vividly clear [acc. to KOT, such words are nyams kyi skad cha and all have a sense of gsal cha rnam rtog med pa]	har re
ཧར་རེ་གཏད	gaze straight ahead	har re gtad
ཧར་རེ་གཤེགས་འདུག	was empty	har re gshegs 'dug
ཧར་ལང་བ	rise suddenly	har lang ba
ཧར་ལངས	suddenly got up, suddenly stood up	har langs
ཧར་ལངས་བྱས་པ	arise suddenly, suddenly got/ stood up	har langs byas pa
ཧར་བཤད	blabber	har bshad
ཧར་སང	suddenly/ wakeful	har sang
ཧར་སང་རྒྱ་ཡན	translucent and wakeful openness w/ o conceptual thought and points of reference, like space, {zang thal khyab gdal}, {kha yan}	har sang rgya yan
ཧར་སངས	sudden revelation	har sangs
ཧར་ཧུར	careless	har hur
ཧལ	exhaustion	hal
ཧལ་ནས་ཤི་བ	died from being out of breath	hal nas shi ba
ཧལ་བ	to pant, to wheeze, to snort	hal ba
ཧལ་ཚོན	same as hang tshon?	hal tshon
ཧལ་ལེ་བ	wheezing, panting ngang tshul, dbugs hal le bar rgyug bzhin 'ong ba	hal le ba
ཧལ་ལེ་ཧོལ་ལེ	careless	hal le hol le
ཧལ་ཤ	wheeze, pant	hal sha
ཧལ་ཧ	(M M khal kha region	hal ha
ཧལ་ཧལ	wheezing panting ngang tshul	hal hal
ཧལ་ཧོལ	careless	hal hol
ཧས	exaggeration, hyperbole	has
ཧས་གྲི	knife for shearing sheep	has gri
ཧས་སྒྱུར་བ	put on, assume another's dress	has sgyur ba
ཧས་ཆེར་སྨྲ་བ	exaggerate	has cher smra ba
ཧས་སྟག་ཚང	place in bhutan	has stag tshang
ཧས་པ	hitch, doubt, discrepancy, error	has pa
ཧས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	nothing to doubt	has pa chen po
ཧས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་མི་འདུག	nothing to be afraid of	has pa chen po mi 'dug
ཧས་པ་མི་འདུག	there is no hitch about it	has pa mi 'dug
ཧས་པ་ཤོར	taking or giving money or things to another party if there be a difference in the accounts	has pa shor
ཧས་པོ་རི	Hepo hill	has po ri
ཧས་པོ་རི་ཐང	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun, place of bon pilgrimage	has po ri thang
ཧས་སེ	thought-free wakefulness	has se
ཧི	holla!	hi
ཧི་ཀ	1) disturbance of body temp. hence breathing like skyugs pa; 2) HIK	hi ka
ཧི་དིག	blow 1's nose	hi dig
ཧི་མ་ལ་ཡ	SK Himalaya Range	hi ma la ya
ཧི་མ་ལ་ཡ་བྱང་མ	Ti Se snow mt	hi ma la ya byang ma
ཧི་ར	diamond	hi ra
ཧི་རི	corn stack	hi ri
ཧི་རི་རྩིག་པ	build a corn stack	hi ri rtsig pa
ཧི་ལ	Greece	hi la
ཧི་ལར	Hitler	hi lar
ཧི་ལིང	noise	hi ling
ཧི་ལིང་བཏང་མཁན	bully, brawler	hi ling btang mkhan
ཧི་ལོང་ཤན	river mentioned in purana probably mongolian river khelenchuan	hi long shan
ཧི་ཧི	1) pleasant graceful beautiful laughter; 2) wrathful laughter; 3) yuk yuk	hi hi
ཧིག	the act of sobbing, HIG	hig
ཧིག་ཀ	act of shuddering, sobbing	hig ka
ཧིཏ་ལར	Hitler	hit lar
ཧིན་སྒོར	rupee	hin sgor
ཧིན་ཏི	Hindi	hin ti
ཧིན་དི	Hindi	hin di
ཧིན་དུ	Hindu, India[n]	hin du
ཧིན་དུ་ཅན	hindu, hinduish	hin du can
ཧིན་དུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲ་རིགས	brahman	hin du chos kyi gra rigs
ཧིན་དུ་ཆོས་ལུགས	hindu	hin du chos lugs
ཧིན་དུ་ཙི་མ	Indo-China	hin du tsi ma
ཧིན་དུ་སི་ཏན	Hindustan	hin du si tan
ཧིན་དུ་སི་ཏན་སི་ཀྲན་ཨ	Hindustan Standard newspaper	hin du si tan si kran a
ཧིན་རྡུ	Hindu, India[n]	hin rdu
ཧིན་གཞིང	Indian government	hin gzhing
ཧིན་ཡང	Shenyang	hin yang
ཧིན་དྷུ	region of the Indian river hin rdu 'bab and corruption of sin rdu	hin dhu
ཧིའི་ཀ	breast bone	hi'i ka
ཧིར་ཤིན་ཅི	Helsinki	hir shin ci
ཧིལ་པོ	whole, full, entire, round	hil po
ཧིས	he is panting	his
ཧུ	kind of tea, number 89, breath	hu
ཧུ་ཀ	the hookah	hu ka
ཧུ་ཀུམ	order, command	hu kum
ཧུ་ཁྱུ	sound of sighing	hu khyu
ཧུ་སྒྲ	cries of hu hu	hu sgra
ཧུ་ཆིན	CH kind of solidified bile	hu chin
ཧུ་ཆིན་འཁྲོལ་འཛིན	in goddess play Tibetan opera lha ldan smon lam gyi dus su hu chin btang chog pa zhes tshogs chen zhal ngor dgongs pa zhus pa'i 'khrol 'dzin	hu chin 'khrol 'dzin
ཧུ་ཐུག	1 of 36 border countries, SA 'u thug pa	hu thug
ཧུ་ཐུག་ཐུ	venerable, most holy	hu thug thu
ཧུ་བདེ	kind of sword used by the mongols	hu bde
ཧུ་ན	mongols, indo-mongolian family to which tibetans are allied, place in tibet	hu na
ཧུ་ཡེ་རིགས	Hui nationality	hu ye rigs
ཧུ་རུ་རུ	stare at with the eyes fixed and not revolving	hu ru ru
ཧུ་རེ	he stares/ goggles, vivid wake	hu re
ཧུ་རེ་བ	stare at directly/ exaggeratedly	hu re ba
ཧུ་ལུ་ཀུན་ད	bird of the asura land	hu lu kun da
ཧུ་ལུ་མུ་ཁ་མཐིང་ཁ	dark blue Ulumukha, owl-head	hu lu mu kha mthing kha
ཧུ་ལུ་མུ་མཁ	Ulumukha, 1 of simha brgyad	hu lu mu mkha
ཧུ་ལུ་ཧུ་ལུ	exclamations of alas	hu lu hu lu
ཧུ་ཤར	well again; diligent, dedulous	hu shar
ཧུ་སུ	coriander	hu su
ཧུ་ཧུ	oh, alas, woe, grief interjection	hu hu
ཧུང	chinese imperial dynasty	hung
ཧུང་ཀྭ	cucumber, white gourd	hung kwa
ཧུང་ཀྲ་ཅི་གཤམ་གྲུ	bomber [plane]	hung kra ci gsham gru
ཧུང་ཁུང	pyramid, triangle	hung khung
ཧུང་ཁྲང	Red Square, Moscow	hung khrang
ཧུང་ག་རི	Hungary	hung ga ri
ཧུང་ཆེན་འགྲོ་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	1901-1956; master of {bon gsar} the sixth kun grol grags pa}	hung chen 'gro 'dul gling pa
ཧུང་མེ་སུའུ	erythromycin	hung me su'u
ཧུང་ཙེ་མཚེའུ	Hung che hu	hung tse mtshe'u
ཧུང་མཛད	master hung mdzad ka ra	hung mdzad
ཧུང་མཛད་ཆེན་པོ	anuyoga rare tantra	hung mdzad chen po
ཧུང་ལ	CH thel tse rgyag par dgos pa'i la cha lta bu zhig	hung la
ཧུང་ལའི་རྒྱ་སྡེམ	zhu yig gi rgya skogs la the'u sogs phab nas rgya bcad rgyag stangs	hung la'i rgya sdem
ཧུང་ལྭོའེ་ཞན	infrared rays	hung lwo'e zhan
ཧུད	(not in das)	hud
ཧུད་ཧུད་པོ	[arch] very rough, crude	hud hud po
ཧུན	news	hun
ཧུན་མེད་ལ	unexpectedly, unawares	hun med la
ཧུན་ཧྭ	Hue, S Vietnam	hun hwa
ཧུབ	gulf, a draught, mouthful, sip	hub
ཧུབ་ཀྱིས་འཐུང་བ	drink in 1 gulp	hub kyis 'thung ba
ཧུབ་སྐོར	drink hub 'thung gi res skor	hub skor
ཧུབ་གང	1) mouthful of drink; 2) drink in gulps; 3) gulp, draught	hub gang
ཧུབ་གང་བཏུང	drink a [full] draught/ gulp/ mouthful	hub gang btung
ཧུབ་རྒྱག་པ	drink a/ in mouthful[s]	hub rgyag pa
ཧུབ་རྒྱབ་ཏེ་འཐུང་བ	sip	hub rgyab te 'thung ba
ཧུབ་གཅིག	one mouthful	hub gcig
ཧུབ་དོ	a pair of mouthfuls	hub do
ཧུབ་འདེབས	drink in gulps	hub 'debs
ཧུབ་ཕོགས	a kind of tea	hub phogs
ཧུབ་རེས	from a cup/ bowl res skor gyis drink	hub res
ཧུབ་ལོག	drink again and again in big gulps	hub log
ཧུམ	khro bo'i sngags	hum
ཧཱུཾ་གི་གླུ	the song of hung	hUM gi glu
ཧཱུཾ་གི་བཟླས་པ	hung recitation	hUM gi bzlas pa
ཧུམ་ང	angry self	hum nga
ཧུམ་གདངས་བཅས་པས	while sounding the HUM	hum gdangs bcas pas
ཧུམ་པ	snuggle	hum pa
ཧུམ་མཛད	expression of challenge and fearlessness, alarm an enemy	hum mdzad
ཧུམ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ	rare tantra of anuyoga	hum mdzad chen mo
ཧཱུམ་མཛད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ	mudra of creating HUM	hUm mdzad phyag rgya
ཧུམ་ཡིག	the letter HUM	hum yig
ཧཱུཾ་རལ་བདུད་འདུལ་རྩལ	n of master	hUM ral bdud 'dul rtsal
ཧུའ་ཧྲིན	ground nut	hu' hrin
ཧུའང་ཕུའུ་ཅང	Yellow River	hu'ang phu'u cang
ཧུའང་ཧྭ་ཚལ	day lilies	hu'ang hwa tshal
ཧུའི	Hui nationality	hu'i
ཧུའུ	teapot	hu'u
ཧུའུ་ཀོང་ཧེང	arc lamp	hu'u kong heng
ཧུའུ་ཀྲི་མིང	Ho Chi Minh	hu'u kri ming
ཧུའུ་ཅིས	secretary	hu'u cis
ཧུའུ་ཆིན	chinese violin with 2 strings	hu'u chin
ཧུའུ་ནན	Hunan Province	hu'u nan
ཧུའུ་པེ	Hupeh Province	hu'u pe
ཧུའུ་རི་ཙེ	CH winter hat	hu'u ri tse
ཧུའེ	society, association, meeting, committee	hu'e
ཧུའེ་ཀྲང	president of a [society, association, meeting, committee[	hu'e krang
ཧུའོ་ཁྲེ	train	hu'o khre
ཧུའོ་ཁྲེའེ	train	hu'o khre'e
ཧུའོ་ཟན་ཐུང	rocket launcher	hu'o zan thung
ཧུར	stare at out of wonder or surprise, expression of amazement	hur
ཧུར་སྐྱེད	make great exertion, diligence, conscientiousness	hur skyed
ཧུར་བག་ཏུ་གཟིགས	gazing w calm, wideawake eyes	hur bga tu gzigs
ཧུར་སྒྲ	hurda (a sound)	hur sgra
ཧུར་བཏོན	to bring forth wakefulness	hur bton
ཧུར་བཏོན་པ	{/ 'don pa/ phyung ba} to arouse vigorously	hur bton pa
ཧུར་ཐག	suddenly ??, diligence, conscientiousness	hur thag
ཧུར་ཐག་གིས	diligently, conscientiously	hur thag gis
ཧུར་ཐག་གྱིས	nyams len hur thag gyis Put all your energy into practice!	hur thag gyis
ཧུར་ཐག་བྱེད	suddenly ??, do something w diligence/ conscientiousness	hur thag byed
ཧུར་ཐག་འབད་ཐག	suddenly ??, diligence, conscientiousness hur thag 'bad thag gis slob sbyong byed	hur thag 'bad thag
ཧུར་ཐག་འབད་རྩོལ	having worked hard in the fields to have a good harvest	hur thag 'bad rtsol
ཧུར་ཐག་ཚ་པོ	enthusiastic, eager	hur thag tsha po
ཧུར་ཐུམས	dza: zer ba ste drag las skabs kyi dgug sngags gras shig	hur thums
ཧུར་འདོན་པ	{/ bton pa/ phyung ba} to arouse vigorously	hur 'don pa
ཧུར་པོ	active, agile	hur po
ཧུར་པོ་བྱེད	make great effort/ exertion/ do something energeticly, diligently/ w concentrated attention/ alertness	hur po byed
ཧུར་པོ་མེད་པ	spiritless	hur po med pa
ཧུར་པོར་ལྟ་བ	look attentively	hur por lta ba
ཧུར་ཕྱུང	1) alertness. 2) intensity; Thrangu Rinpoche: = ngar bskyed	hur phyung
ཧུར་ཕྱུང་པ	{/ 'don pa/ bton ba} to arouse vigorously	hur phyung pa
ཧུར་ཕྱུངས	invigorate, roused, energized	hur phyungs
ཧུར་ཕྱུངས་དྲག	intensity 2900	hur phyungs drag
ཧུར་ཕྱུངས་པ	try to make stronger, freshen, energize, awaken	hur phyungs pa
ཧུར་བ	dexterity, cleverness, skillfulness	hur ba
ཧུར་བག་ཅན	w exertion	hur bag can
ཧུར་བག་ཏུ་གཟིགས	gazing with calm, wideawake eyes	hur bag tu gzigs
ཧུར་བྱུང	= {ham pa chen po	hur byung
ཧུར་འབུངས་ཞེ་བསྐྱེད	make a great effort	hur 'bungs zhe bskyed
ཧུར་སྦྱོར	do w great exertion	hur sbyor
ཧུར་བཙོན་ཅན	industrious, strenuous	hur btson can
ཧུར་བརྩོན	make a great/ total effort, [do w] energy, diligence, conscientiousness	hur brtson
ཧུར་བརྩོན་མཁན	activist	hur brtson mkhan
ཧུར་བརྩོན་གྱིས	energetically, diligently, conscientiously	hur brtson gyis
ཧུར་བརྩོན་གྲོན་ཆུང	industriousness and thrift, diligence and frugality	hur brtson gron chung
ཧུར་བརྩོན་ཅན	ardent	hur brtson can
ཧུར་བརྩོན་ཆེན་པོ	energetic, diligent, conscientious, active	hur brtson chen po
ཧུར་བརྩོན་རང་བཞིན	activist/ energetic/ diligent nature/ character	hur brtson rang bzhin
ཧུར་རེ	jealous, wide/bulging-eyed, stare directly	hur re
ཧུར་རེ་བ	stare directly	hur re ba
ཧུར་སེམས	great exertion snying stobs	hur sems
ཧུར་ཧུར	1) sound of bird's wings, arrow feathers, bullets etc; 2) look w wonder	hur hur
ཧུར་ཧུར་པོ	sparkling	hur hur po
ཧུས	moisture, humidity, dampness	hus
ཧུས་ཅན	wet	hus can
ཧུས་ཕོག	injured by damp	hus phog
ཧུས་མེད	dry	hus med
ཧུས་ཧུས	Muslim, Uighur	hus hus
ཧེ	humph, hi (with scorn)	he
ཧེ་ཆེན་བརྡལ་བ	Pervasive Great Joy; charnel ground	he chen brdal ba
ཆེན་བརྡལ་བ	a vast charnel ground called the Golden Place of Mahahe [in Uddiyana]	chen brdal ba
ཧེ་ཏུ	cause, reason, argument, logic	he tu
ཧེ་དེ་ཝ	startled awareness	he de wa
ཧེ་པན་པོ	black board	he pan po
ཧེ་ཕང་ཆིན	organ	he phang chin
ཧེ་བ་ཛྲ	Hevajra	he ba dzra
ཧེ་བག	provocation, taunts, sarcasms	he bag
ཧེ་བག་རྙེད	find the difference	he bag rnyed
ཧེ་བག་ཤོར་བ	differ	he bag shor ba
ཧེ་བགས	difference	he bags
ཧེ་མ	SK 1) gold; 2) {tsam pa ka} flower	he ma
ཧེ་བཛྲ	SK Hevajra	he bdzra
ཧེ་རམ་པ	SK master of the feast	he ram pa
ཧེ་རམས	an inferior quality of indigo	he rams
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ	[Skt] 1) blood drinker; 2) Chakrasamvara, 'khor lo bde mchog; 3) wrathful deity)/ ["Drinking-blood from skullcup"]	he ru ka
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་གལ་པོ	Heruka Galpo. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras; focused on Vishuddha Mind. Both the Galpo and the Galpoche tantras are found in Vol. RA of the Nyingma Gyübum	he ru ka gal po
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་གལ་པོ་ཆེ	Heruka Galpoche. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras; focused on Vishuddha Mind. Several tantras with resembling titles are found in Vol. RA of the Nyingma Gyübum	he ru ka gal po che
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་འདུས་པ	Heruka Assemblage	he ru ka 'dus pa
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་འདུས་པའི་རྒྱུད	Heruka Samaja tantra	he ru ka 'dus pa'i rgyud
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་རོལ་པའི་སྐོར	{he ru ka rol pa'i skor [one of the {rol pa'i rgyud sde lnga}. - the five tantras which are additions to the section of meditative realization, sgrub sde]	he ru ka rol pa'i skor
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་རོལ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Heruka Display Tantra. One of the Five Display Tantras among the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	he ru ka rol pa'i rgyud
ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་རོལ་བ	mahayoga sadhana, mahayoga sgrub thabs	he ru ka rol ba
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	heruka sadhana	he ru ka'i sgrub thabs
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཆས	accouterments of heruka	he ru ka'i chas
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཆས་ཅན	heruka's attire	he ru ka'i chas can
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཆས་བཅུ་བྷི	the fourteen attires of a heruka [TRS 149-1]	he ru ka'i chas bcu bhi
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཆས་དྲུག	[TRS 148-5]	he ru ka'i chas drug
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཐོད་རྒྱ	heruka skull mudra	he ru ka'i thod rgya
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་དམ་རྒྱ	heruka samaya mudra	he ru ka'i dam rgya
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་གནས་བཅུ	[TRS 140-1]	he ru ka'i gnas bcu
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་གནས་བཅུ་གཉིས	[TRS 140-2]	he ru ka'i gnas bcu gnyis
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཞལ་དུ་བསྟབ་པ	placed into the mouth of the Herukas	he ru ka'i zhal du bstab pa
ཧེ་རུ་ཀའི་ཡི་གེ་བརྒྱ་པ	Hundred Syllables of the Herukas	he ru ka'i yi ge brgya pa
ཧེ་ལུང་ཅང	Heilungkiang Province, Amur River	he lung cang
ཧེ་ཧེ	hi (with scorn), sound made unconsciously while laughing	he he
ཧེག་པོ	stale, putrid, rancid	heg po
ཧེག་ཨར	hectare	heg ar
ཧེང	humph	heng
ཧེང་ཞུས་ཧོ	Yokosuka	heng zhus ho
ཧེབ་ལངས	arising of greed	heb langs
ཧེབ་ལངས་པ	arising of greed	heb langs pa
ཧེའི་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapon	he'i mtshon cha
ཧེའུ	CH rank in bkas bkod rgyud 'dzin lam lugs lineage	he'u
ཧེའེ་ནན	Hunan Province	he'e nan
ཧེའེ་ལུང་ཅང	Heilungkiang Province, Amur River	he'e lung cang
ཧེལ་གེ	soft leather, wash-leather	hel ge
ཧེལ་པོ	extended, wide, easy	hel po
ཧེལ་བ	width	hel ba
ཧོ	{ho} expression of wonder	ho
ཧོ་ཀྲི་མིང	Ho Chi minh	ho kri ming
ཧོ་ཀྲེ་རིགས	Hote nationality	ho kre rigs
ཧོ་ཁྲེ	train, railway	ho khre
ཧོ་ཁྲེའེ	train, railway	ho khre'e
ཧོ་སྒྲ་ཀུ་སྒྲ	ho ho and ku ku sounds showing fear and awe	ho sgra ku sgra
ཧོ་ཐི	{ho thi} valley	ho thi
ཧོ་ཐོག་ཐུ	{ho thog thu}	ho thog thu
ཧོ་ཐོག་ཐུ་ཆེན་པོ	{ho thog thu}	ho thog thu chen po
ཧོ་དན	Khotan 2901	ho dan
ཧོ་ནན	Hunan Province	ho nan
ཧོ་པེ	Hopei Province	ho pe
ཧོ་འབར་གས	nuclear explosion	ho 'bar gas
ཧོ་མ	burnt-offering	ho ma
ཧོ་མ་ཁུང	Syn {'brub khung}	ho ma khung
ཧོ་ཙི	nuclear, atomic	ho tsi
ཧོ་མཚོན	nuclear weapons	ho mtshon
ཧོ་མཚོན་ཆ	nuclear weapons ho mtshon chas sdigs mo byed pa threats of using nuclear weapons, nuclear blackmail, missile rattling	ho mtshon cha
ཧོ་གཟེར	crucial position of HO	ho gzer
ཧོ་ར་ཎ	gate pediment	ho ra Na
ཧོ་ལན་ཨེ	Holland	ho lan e
ཧོ་ཤོད	(M {ho shod}, [one of the mong gol tsho bzhi, ao rod la ltos]	ho shod
ཧོ་ཧོ	intimidating laugh	ho ho
ཧོག་ཧོག	abruptly	hog hog
ཧོང་ཀོང	Hong Kong	hong kong
ཧོང་གཏོར	be confused	hong gtor
ཧོང་ཐོར	be confused	hong thor
ཧོང་ཕུའུ་ཅིང	Whangpoo River	hong phu'u cing
ཧོང་ཡུས	yellow croaker	hong yus
ཧོང་ལེན	CH ser tshos med. herb	hong len
ཧོང་ལེན་སེར་པོ	myang rtsi spras	hong len ser po
ཧོང་ཧའེ་རྒྱ་མཚོ	Yellow Sea	hong ha'e rgya mtsho
ཧོན	weight equal to 10 chinese li	hon
ཧོན་གཏོར	= {dran med}, confused, not knowing what 1 is doing	hon gtor
ཧོན་སྟོར་བ	confused, not knowing what 1 is doing	hon stor ba
ཧོན་ཐོར	to be confused	hon thor
ཧོན་ཐོར་བ	be confused, astound, perplex	hon thor ba
ཧོན་མཐོང་བ	look with dumb surprise, be astounded and senseless	hon mthong ba
ཧོན་འཐོར	fright, confusion	hon 'thor
ཧོན་འཐོར་བ	dismay, shock, startle	hon 'thor ba
ཧོན་འཐོར་སོང	became frightened/ confused	hon 'thor song
ཧོན་དུ་ར་སི	Honduras	hon du ra si
ཧོན་ནད	rinderpest, cattle plague	hon nad
ཧོན་ནེ་བ	a state of emptiness	hon ne ba
ཧོན་ལེན	medicinal herb picrorhiza	hon len
ཧོན་ཧོན	stupid, foolish	hon hon
ཧོབ་ཏེ་ཁ་ལ	abruptly. Syn {glo bur du}, {kha ri kha thug}	hob te kha la
ཧོབ་ཏེ་འཛུལ་བ	to rush, dash	hob te 'dzul ba
ཧོབ་སྟེ་བྱེད་པའམ་གཤོད་པ	extempore	hob ste byed pa'am gshod pa
ཧོབ་སྟེ་གཟུང་བ	nab	hob ste gzung ba
ཧོབ་དེ་ཁ་ལ	suddenly, immediately	hob de kha la
ཧོབ་པ	bent in or battered	hob pa
ཧོབ་ཧེ་ཁ་ལ	abrupt	hob he kha la
ཧོབ་ཧོ	bent in, battered	hob ho
ཧོབ་ཧོབ	suddenly	hob hob
ཧོམ	mongol word signifying a pad placed under a camel's load	hom
ཧོམ་བསྐྱེད	visualize a triangular pit/ prison	hom bskyed
ཧོམ་ཁུང	destruction-pit	hom khung
ཧོམ་གྱི་སྦྱོར་བ	application of destruction	hom gyi sbyor ba
ཧོམ་པ	to fall away, to shrink, to shrivel	hom pa
ཧོམ་སྤར	effigy of obstructing spirits burning me spar ba	hom spar
ཧོམ་བྱེད་པ	sacrifice	hom byed pa
ཧོམ་གཟར	pit-ladle	hom gzar
ཧོམ་ཤིང	wood for wrathful fire puja	hom shing
ཧོམ་སྲེག	1) wrathful fire offering; 2) burn an effigy of obstructing spirits	hom sreg
ཧོའང་ཡས	yellow croaker [fish]	ho'ang yas
ཧོའུ་ཆི་མིན	Ho chi minh	ho'u chi min
ཧོའུ་ཆི་མིན་ལམ་གཞུང	Ho chi minh trail	ho'u chi min lam gzhung
ཧོའེ་ཧོ	Huai ho River	ho'e ho
ཧོའེ་ཧོ་ཆུ་བོ	Huai ho River	ho'e ho chu bo
ཧོའོ་ཅིན	a Chinese musical instrument	ho'o cin
ཧོར	yu gur, mongol, N Tibet [has had different meanings at different times, t' dben rgyal rabs yan chad la phal cher = "yu gur rigs", t' dben gyi dus su "monggol rigs", de tshun chad du skabs 'gar ' zh...	hor
ཧོར་ཀོང	gap, intervening emptiness/ space	hor kong
ཧོར་ཁོག་ཁག་ལྔ	si khron province dkar mdzes = rta'u, brag mgo, tre bo, dkar mdzes, stong skor together]	hor khog khag lnga
ཧོར་ཁོང	gap, intervening emptiness/ space	hor khong
ཧོར་ཁོངས	1) gap, intervening emptiness/ space; 2) in Mongolia	hor khongs
ཧོར་གོས	kind of chinese satin, SA gos chen	hor gos
ཧོར་གྱི་མི་ཆེན	mongol grandees	hor gyi mi chen
ཧོར་གླིང	region north of eastern Tibet in what is now Xinjiang Uighur	hor gling
ཧོར་གླུ	M song	hor glu
ཧོར་རྒྱ་སྡེ	a district in Tibet	hor rgya sde
ཧོར་ཆམས	trunks, cups, trays, bucklers made of leather and painted	hor chams
ཧོར་ཆས་བྱེད	put on a tartar dress	hor chas byed
ཧོར་ཇིན་གིས་ཁན	mongol genghis khan	hor jin gis khan
ཧོར་ཏིང	M mchod ting	hor ting
ཧོར་དུ	turk's smoke, nomad's tents, mongolian encampment, family	hor du
ཧོར་དུད	N nomad hor household/ family	hor dud
ཧོར་དོང	turkestan quiver	hor dong
ཧོར་འདྲ	Tibetan govt representative messenger, by Tibetan subjects rgyal po hor gyi sku tshab bang chen la gus bkur Sne len ji bzhin zhus pa ltar sde pa gzhung gi sku tshab bang chen la'ang de bzhin byed d...	hor 'dra
ཧོར་འདྲ་དོས་དྲག	former dpon pos btang ba'i powerful khral collector	hor 'dra dos drag
ཧོར་འདྲ་བབས་པ	confiscate	hor 'dra babs pa
ཧོར་འདྲ་འབབས	confiscate, seize	hor 'dra 'babs
ཧོར་འདྲ་ཟ་རྐང་གི་ཞལ་ལྕེ	hor dus gong ma'i mi sna dang 'dra bar rgyal khab kyi don gcod mi sna la sdod sgrig dang, za chas ston chas sogs sprod len byed lugs kyi khrims, among the zhal lce bcu drug	hor 'dra za rkang gi zhal lce
ཧོར་ནག་ལ་ཁ	Hornag Lakha, in Domey	hor nag la kha
ཧོར་པ	1) aa po hor NT; 2) person from [khams tre] hor [hor khog khag lnga la ltos]; 3) wood-grouse	hor pa
ཧོར་པ་དཀར་པོ	species of hawk	hor pa dkar po
ཧོར་པ་ཤ་གཟན	Mongolian shepherds	hor pa sha gzan
ཧོར་དཔོན	Horpa chieftain	hor dpon
ཧོར་སྤྱི	Tibetan govt officer in charge of N nomads/ hor sde tsho [pa] 39 spyi khyab	hor spyi
ཧོར་ཕོ	M man gtam aa phas gtong rgyu aa mas, mda' hor phos rgyag rgyu hor mos	hor pho
ཧོར་བ་ཤི	Hor Pashi, in Domey	hor ba shi
ཧོར་སྦུག	mongolian cymbals, cymbals imported from mongolia	hor sbug
ཧོར་སྦུབ	hor rgyal po'i skabs music coming from hor yul 'i sbub chal	hor sbub
ཧོར་མོ	northern nomad/ Mongolian woman,	hor mo
ཧོར་ཟླ	[Mongolian way of figuring year and] month [1 hor zla dang po syn: kam pa, dka' thub zla ba, cho 'phrul, mchu zla, rta zla, 'du byed zla ba, dpyid zla ra ba, m' gha, two hor zla gnyis pa syn: khra ...	hor zla
ཧོར་ཟླ་དགུ་པ	9th month	hor zla dgu pa
ཧོར་ཟླ་བ	[M] month [in the 4th fire pig yr the Mongolian jing gir rgyal pos mi nyag gi lag nas in the month the kingdom was attained an auspicious feast byas pa mchu zla was taken as new year ba dkyus su sh...	hor zla ba
ཧོར་ཡིག	M writing	hor yig
ཧོར་ཡིག་གསར་པ	new M writing [in the 5th earth snake yr by yon rgyal rabs kyi gong ma se chen han, re 'dun bton pa ltar 'gro mgon 'phags pas having gotten an example of Tibetan writings made a new Mongolian writi...	hor yig gsar pa
ཧོར་ཡུལ	Turkestan	hor yul
ཧོར་སེ	painted leather trunk manufactured in turkestan	hor se
ཧོར་སེར་ཁག་ལྔ	si khron province dkar mdzes = rta'u, brag mgo, tre bo, dkar mdzes, stong skor together]	hor ser khag lnga
ཧོར་སེར་ཤར་ཤ་རའི་གོལ	tartar tribe in hor yul	hor ser shar sha ra'i gol
ཧོར་སླེ	kind of coarse blanket manufactured in turkestan	hor sle
ཧོལ	hoe, cultivate, loosen the soil	hol
ཧོལ་འགྲོས	rough/ careless way of going	hol 'gros
ཧོལ་རྒྱུག	careless/ thoughtless [behavior]	hol rgyug
ཧོལ་རྒྱུགས	careless/ thoughtless [behavior]	hol rgyugs
ཧོལ་སྤྱོད	unexamined/ considered actions, dissolute, licentious, wild	hol spyod
ཧོལ་བ	loosen the soil	hol ba
ཧོལ་ཧོལ	soft, loose, light	hol hol
ཧྱང་ཧྱང	very light	hyang hyang
ཧྱབ་ཧྱབ	lightly applied [as lightly gilded]	hyab hyab
ཧྱམ་ཧྱམ	lightly applied	hyam hyam
ཧྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས་བཅུ	ten powers of perfect knowledge {stobs bcu} (1 {gnas dang gnas min mkhyen pa'i stobs} power of knowing what is possible and impossible two {las kyi rnam par smin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs} power of know...	hyen pa'i stobs bcu
ཧྲ་ཏག	solid, careful and precise	hra tag
ཧྲ་ཐང	1) able to work; 2) good health, body in good shape/ firm	hra thang
ཧྲ་མུན	Amoy	hra mun
ཧྲ་མེན	Amoy	hra men
ཧྲ་ཝུན	chauvinism	hra wun
ཧྲ་ཝུན་རིང་ལུགས	chauvinism	hra wun ring lugs
ཧྲ་ལེ་ཧྲི་ལེ	1) not of any 1 definite style/ shape/ kind; 2) loose dough balls joined together	hra le hri le
ཧྲ་ཧོང་གོང་མ	czar	hra hong gong ma
ཧྲ་ཧོང་གོང་མའི་རིང་ལུགས	czarism	hra hong gong ma'i ring lugs
ཧྲ་ཨ	shah	hra a
ཧྲག	cleft, gap, fissures	hrag
ཧྲག་གི	absorbed in a state of devotion [?]	hrag gi
ཧྲག་གིས	absorbed in a state of devotion [?]	hrag gis
ཧྲག་གེ་ཧྲུག་གེ	inferior small pieces of anything	hrag ge hrug ge
ཧྲག་སྒྲུག	select the best	hrag sgrug
ཧྲག་སྒྲུག་བྱེད	select the best	hrag sgrug byed
ཧྲག་པ	powerful, beneficial, capable, require more and more	hrag pa
ཧྲག་པོ	powerful, beneficial, capable	hrag po
ཧྲག་པོ་ཡོད་ན་དགའ	it is good to have the best / most able/ high quality	hrag po yod na dga'
ཧྲག་ཧྲག	strong [person]	hrag hrag
ཧྲག་ཧྲག་ཡོད་ན་དགའ	it is good to have the best / most able/ high quality	hrag hrag yod na dga'
ཧྲག་ཧྲུག	twigs	hrag hrug
ཧྲགས	coarse, rough	hrags
ཧྲགས་བསྡུས	summary of important points, few in # but high in quality	hrags bsdus
ཧྲང	strong, hardy, alone	hrang
ཧྲང་གོང	very tough strong, rough, stubborn	hrang gong
ཧྲང་རྒྱལ་རབས	Shang Dynasty	hrang rgyal rabs
ཧྲང་ངེ་བ	naked	hrang nge ba
ཧྲང་ཅང	general, admiral	hrang cang
ཧྲང་ཏོ	stiff	hrang to
ཧྲང་པ	robust constitution	hrang pa
ཧྲང་པོ	1) savage, wild, rough, stubborn, coarse; 2) [pulled out] alone, solitary; 3) naked	hrang po
ཧྲང་བ	1) slip into/ indulge bad habits; 2) stiff, alone	hrang ba
ཧྲང་ལྦེ	captain [army, AF] lieutenant [navy]	hrang lbe
ཧྲང་མའོ	CH Tibetan nobles travelling hat	hrang ma'o
ཧྲང་ཞའོ	colonel [army, AF] captain [navy]	hrang zha'o
ཧྲང་ཧད	Shanghai	hrang had
ཧྲང་ཧའི	Shanghai	hrang ha'i
ཧྲང་ཧའེ	Shanghai	hrang ha'e
ཧྲང་ཧྲང	1) alone, solitary, single bachelor; 2) pulled out alone like a bone from dry meat	hrang hrang
ཧྲང་ཧྲང་གི་མི	person alone w/o family	hrang hrang gi mi
ཧྲང་ཧྲང་དུ་དོན་པ	pull out from the rest	hrang hrang du don pa
ཧྲང་ཧྲང་བ	standing on its own	hrang hrang ba
ཧྲང་ཧྲི	sergeant 1st class	hrang hri
ཧྲད	scratch	hrad
ཧྲད་པ	to thrust, to push violently, to stem	hrad pa
ཧྲན་ཀན་ཉིང	Shensi-Kansu-Nyingsia	hran kan nying
ཧྲན་ཏུང	Shantung Province	hran tung
ཧྲན་ཞི	Shensi Province	hran zhi
ཧྲན་ཤི	Shensi Province	hran shi
ཧྲན་ཤིས	Shensi Province	hran shis
ཧྲབ་ཧྲབ	mist, dimness, glimmer	hrab hrab
ཧྲབ་ཧྲིབ	dim, SA rab rib	hrab hrib
ཧྲམ་དཀར	species of gout	hram dkar
ཧྲམ་ནག	species of gout	hram nag
ཧྲམ་པ་ཁམ་བུ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	hram pa kham bu
ཧྲམ་མེ་ཧྲོམ་མེ	be tired	hram me hrom me
ཧྲའོ་ཅང	major general, rear admiral	hra'o cang
ཧྲའོ་ལྦེ	2nd lieutenant, ensign	hra'o lbe
ཧྲའོ་ཞའོ	major, lieutenant commander	hra'o zha'o
ཧྲལ	torn	hral
ཧྲལ་པོ	1) irregular, coarse; 2) torn; 3) undisciplined, untamed and coarse, crude; 2) [arch] immorally indulgent, w desire/ attachment, dissolute, licentious	hral po
ཧྲལ་བ	tear, SA ral ba, rip, rend, tear up, tear to pieces	hral ba
ཧྲལ་མེད་པ	not in pieces, entire	hral med pa
ཧྲལ་ལེ་ཧྲུལ་ལེ	tattered and torn	hral le hrul le
ཧྲལ་ཧྲལ	spread out [big spaces between letters or else]. torn and tattered; spread out [big spaces between letters or else]	hral hral
ཧྲལ་ཧྲུལ	1) old and torn, torn and tattered; 2) poor quality, broken	hral hrul
ཧྲལ་ཧྲོལ	phantasmal	hral hrol
ཧྲི	division [military]	hri
ཧྲི་ཀྲང	division commander, major	hri krang
ཧྲི་གེ	awake	hri ge
ཧྲི་གེར	alertly	hri ger
ཧྲི་ཐན་སོན	carbolic acid, phenol	hri than son
ཧྲི་དང་པོ	1st division [military]	hri dang po
ཧྲི་ལྦུའུ་ཀྲང	office head, business manager	hri lbu'u krang
ཧྲི་མོ	graphite	hri mo
ཧྲཱི་ཡིག	the syllable / letter hrih	hrI yig
ཧྲི་ཡོན	commune member	hri yon
ཧྲི་ཨུ	divisional committee [military]	hri u
ཧྲིག	to hand	hrig
ཧྲིག་གིས	wakeful, awake	hrig gis
ཧྲིག་གེ	{blta stangs hrig ge bzhugs pa}	hrig ge
ཤེ་ཝོཨུལད་སྟཡ་སྟརིང་ཝིཐ་ཝིདེ	open eyes	she would stay staring with wide
ཧྲིག་གེ་བ	Thrangu Rinpoche: gsal cha chen po	hrig ge ba
ཧྲིག་གེ་བའི་རིག	wide-awake rigpa	hrig ge ba'i rig
ཧྲིག་གེར	vividly, widely awake	hrig ger
ཧྲིག་གེར་རིག་པ	wide-awake rigpa	hrig ger rig pa
ཧྲིག་པ	cut [up], split	hrig pa
ཧྲིག་ཙམ	simply seeing the very essence of discursive thought	hrig tsam
ཧྲིག་ལ་ཤི	died by hanging	hrig la shi
ཧྲིག་ཧྲིག	{mig gis hrig hrig gnyen la lta bzhin} casting haggard glances at their relatives	hrig hrig
ཧྲིང	(not in das)	hring
ཧྲིང་ཆགས་པ	fully formed	hring chags pa
ཧྲིང་ཡང	Shenyang	hring yang
ཧྲིངས་པ	(tha mi dad pa 1) ngan lang shor ba, phru gu la byams drags nas gnya' ba hrings pa; 2) mnyen po mkhrang du song ba, dgun dus lag pa hrings pa; 3) sla ba sra ru song ba, mar khu hrings pa, zhag tshi...	hrings pa
ཧྲིན་ཡང	Shenyang	hrin yang
ཧྲིབ་གྱིས	quickly, instantly, in a moment	hrib gyis
ཧྲིབ་ཙ	quickly, instantly, in a moment	hrib tsa
ཧྲིབ་ཙམ	a short period	hrib tsam
ཧྲིབ་ཙམ་གྱིས	quickly, instantly, in a moment	hrib tsam gyis
ཧྲིབ་ཙམ་གཅིག་ལ	quickly, instantly, in a moment	hrib tsam gcig la
ཧྲིལ་གྱིས	completely	hril gyis
ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་གྱོགས	completely covered up	hril gyis gyogs
ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་བསྒྲིམས	maintaining	hril gyis bsgrims
ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་བསྡུ	abridged, summarized, made into a cie hril gyis g.yogs - completely covered up	hril gyis bsdu
ཧྲིལ་བསྒྲིལ་ན	to summarize	hril bsgril na
ཧྲིལ་འདུས་ཏེ་འདུག་པ	sit or stand close together in rows	hril 'dus te 'dug pa
ཧྲིལ་པ	round, globular, entire	hril pa
ཧྲིལ་པོ	1) round [& regular]; 2) all, full, complete, entire, whole	hril po
ཧྲིལ་པོའི་དབྱིབས	round shape	hril po'i dbyibs
ཧྲིལ་པོའི་ལོ	whole year	hril po'i lo
ཧྲིལ་བ	1) round and regular; 2) all, full, complete, entire	hril ba
ཧྲིལ་བུ	name of the round base of a torma	hril bu
ཧྲིལ་མོ	1) round and regular; 2) all, full, complete, entire	hril mo
ཧྲིལ་མོར་འདྲིལ་བ	gathered in a circle, summarized	hril mor 'dril ba
ཧྲིལ་འཛིན	total eclipse	hril 'dzin
ཧྲིལ་ལེ་བ	round	hril le ba
ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ	1) round [& regular]; 2) all, full, complete, entire, whole	hril hril
ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ་ཀད་ཀར་བྱེད་པ	be writhing and then again stretching oneself or starting up	hril hril kad kar byed pa
ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ་འགྲོ་བ	ngam ngam shugs kyis 'gro ba ste, naturally going	hril hril 'gro ba
ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ་དྲིལ་བ	1) entirely round; 2) abridged, summarized	hril hril dril ba
ཧྲིལ་ཧྲིལ་བྱེད་པ	writhe with pain	hril hril byed pa
ཧྲིས་ནག	Hrinag, in Domey	hris nag
ཧྲུ་ཅི	secretary, clerk	hru ci
ཧྲུ་ཅི་དང་པོ	1st secretary	hru ci dang po
ཧྲུག	small things, little pieces/ fragments/ bits	hrug
ཧྲུག་གེ	1) solid 'cha' ba'am breaking sound , rgyus pa hrug ger bldad; 2) way of going to pieces , mi rta mang po hrug ger btang ste rgyal kha blangs	hrug ge
ཧྲུག་ཆག	broke in pieces	hrug chag
ཧྲུག་པ	small things, little pieces/ fragments/ bits	hrug pa
ཧྲུག་པོ	small things, little pieces/ fragments/ bits	hrug po
ཧྲུག་ཧྲུག	broken to pieces	hrug hrug
ཧྲུད་པ	when a new person comes rgod mdog byed pa'i arrogant person, rough, rugged, severe, austere, roughness	hrud pa
ཧྲུད་པོ	jagged	hrud po
ཧྲུད་ཧྲུད་པོ	1) rough; 2) tasteless	hrud hrud po
ཧྲུབ་པ	fine pieces, hashed, minced	hrub pa
ཧྲུབ་ཧྲུབ	small pieces	hrub hrub
ཧྲུམ་པ	to break, to smash	hrum pa
ཧྲུམ་ཧྲུམ	delicate way of cutting up	hrum hrum
ཧྲུའི་རིགས	Shui nationality	hru'i rigs
ཧྲུའི་ཤན	narcissus plant	hru'i shan
ཧྲུའུ་ཅི	secretary, chairman	hru'u ci
ཧྲུའུ་ཅི་ཁྲུའུ	secretariat	hru'u ci khru'u
ཧྲུའུ་ཡན་ཚལ	vegetable soaked ion salt water	hru'u yan tshal
ཧྲུའོ་ཇི	secretary	hru'o ji
ཧྲུའོ་ཇི་ཁྲུའུ	secretariat	hru'o ji khru'u
ཧྲུའོ་ཧྲི	master's degree	hru'o hri
ཧྲུལ	worn-out, tattered	hrul
ཧྲུལ་སྐྱོན	be ragged/ tattered	hrul skyon
ཧྲུལ་གྱིས	completely	hrul gyis
ཧྲུལ་གྱིས་ཐོང	of the buddhas, let go completely	hrul gyis thong
ཧྲུལ་གྱིས་ཐོད	let go completely/ at once	hrul gyis thod
ཧྲུལ་གྱིས་ཞིག	fall apart	hrul gyis zhig
ཧྲུལ་པོ	torn, tattered, ragged	hrul po
ཧྲུལ་པོའི་གོས་གྱོན	wear tattered clothes	hrul po'i gos gyon
ཧྲུལ་པོར	utterly	hrul por
ཧྲུལ་པོར་བཏང	he utterly abandoned	hrul por btang
ཧྲུལ་བ	torn tattered, ragged[ness	hrul ba
ཧྲུལ་བུ	torn, tattered, ragged	hrul bu
ཧྲུལ་ཧྲུལ	poor people	hrul hrul
ཧྲེ	commune	hre
ཧྲེ་ཀྲང	chairperson of a commune	hre krang
ཧྲེ་ནང་དག་ཐེར	checking up on/ rectifying a commune	hre nang dag ther
ཧྲེ་ཡོན	commune member	hre yon
ཧྲེ་ཡོན་འཐུས་མིའི་ཚོགས་ཆེན	meeting of commune representatives	hre yon 'thus mi'i tshogs chen
ཧྲེ་ཡོན་ཚོགས་ཆེན	meeting of commune members	hre yon tshogs chen
ཧྲེང	sheng 1 liter	hreng
ཧྲེང་ཀྲང	governor of a province	hreng krang
ཧྲེང་ངེ	1) naked; 2) straight/ direct	hreng nge
ཧྲེང་པོ	1) alone, solitary; 2) naked	hreng po
ཧྲེང་བ	1) slip into/ indulge bad habits; 2) stiff, alone	hreng ba
ཧྲེང་ཞུས་ཧོ	Yokosuka	hreng zhus ho
ཧྲེང་ཧྲེང	alone and w/o help, solitary, naked	hreng hreng
ཧྲེང་ཨུ	provincial committee	hreng u
ཧྲེན་ཡང	Shenyang	hren yang
ཧྲེམ་པ	swollen	hrem pa
ཧྲེམ་པོ	solid and stiff	hrem po
ཧྲེམ་མེ	swollen	hrem me
ཧྲེལ་པོ	1) round [& regular]; 2) all, full, complete, entire, whole	hrel po
ཧྲེལ་པོའི་དབྱིབས	round shape	hrel po'i dbyibs
ཧྲེལ་པོའི་ལོ	whole year	hrel po'i lo
ཧྲོག	rug, sheet 'thag byed shing sgrom gyi above and below shing rnams, clatter	hrog
ཧྲོག་པ	coarse	hrog pa
ཧྲོག་པོ	coarse	hrog po
ཧྲོག་ཧྲོག	coarse	hrog hrog
ཧྲོབ	grit, bits	hrob
ཧྲོབ་པ	coarse, rough	hrob pa
ཧྲོབ་པོ	coarse, rough	hrob po
ཧྲོབ་ཙམ	coarse, rough	hrob tsam
ཧྲོབ་སྲང	tael, ounce of silver in lump used as a currency	hrob srang
ཧྲོབ་ཧྲོབ	coarse/ rough [gravel]	hrob hrob
ཧྲོབ་ཧྲོབ་སྒྲ་སྒྲོག་སྟེ་ཟ་བ	crunch	hrob hrob sgra sgrog ste za ba
ཧྲོའུ་དབྱིན	radio	hro'u dbyin
ཧྲོའུ་དབྱིན་ཅི	radio	hro'u dbyin ci
ཧྲོའུ་དབྱིན་བབ་ཚུགས	radio station	hro'u dbyin bab tshugs
ཧྲོའུ་ལིའུ་ཏན	hand grenade	hro'u li'u tan
ཧྲོལ་བ	[arch] tear, flay	hrol ba
གྷ	(not in DAS)	gha
གྷན	(not in DAS)	ghan
གྷན་དྷེ་མ	Gandha. Syn {sdug spos ma; GandhA. Syn {sdug spos ma}	ghan dhe ma
གྷན་དྷོ་ལ	ghandhola spire. a caitya or	ghan dho la
གྷས	(not in DAS)	ghas
གྷི་ཝང	solidified bile, a med.	ghi wang
གྷི་ཝམ	solidified bile, a med. gi wam	ghi wam
གྷིར་ཏི་མ	G ta, {glu ma}, goddess of song	ghir ti ma
གྷུ་ར་ཝི་ར	sacred place in central part of the world called Akara where thang stong rgyal po lives	ghu ra wi ra
གྷུ་རུ	{gu ru} master, lama	ghu ru
གྷུར་ཁ	mo gcus bzo byed	ghur kha
དྷ་ཏུ	dhatu	dha tu
དྷ་ཐིམ	symbol's dissolved, esoteric utterance marking the end of a visionary revelation	dha thim
དྷ་དུ་ར	SK having many appearances, thang phrom white, black, and variegated	dha du ra
དྷ་ན་ཀོ་ཤའི་གླིང	the region of Dhanakosha	dha na ko sha'i gling
དྷ་ན་ཀོ་ཤའི་མཚོ	Lake Danakosha, Skt. dhana kosha	dha na ko sha'i mtsho
དྷ་རྨ	dharma	dha rma
དྷ་རྨ་པ་ལ	dharmap la	dha rma pa la
དྷ་རྨ་རཏ་ན	dharma ratna	dha rma rat na
དྷ་རྨ་སིང་ཧ	Dharma singha	dha rma sing ha
དྷ་རྨ་སེང་གྷ	Dharma singha	dha rma seng gha
དྷར	(not in DAS)	dhar
དྷར་མ་སྐྱབས	10-11th cent. - Dharma Kyap, disciple of Karak Gomchung	dhar ma skyabs
དྷར་མ་པ་ལ	dharmap la	dhar ma pa la
དྷར་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག	1100-? - Dharma Wangchuk	dhar ma dbang phyug
དྷར་མ་རིན་ཆེན	Je Dharma Rinchen: 1364-1432	dhar ma rin chen
དྷར་མ་ཤྲཱི	Syn {smin gling lo chen}, the brother of Terdag Lingpa	dhar ma shrI
དྷར་མ་སིང་ཧ	Dharma singha	dhar ma sing ha
དྷར་མ་སེང་གེ་སངས་རྒྱས་དབོན	Sangye On: 1177-1237	dhar ma seng ge sangs rgyas dbon
དྷི་དྷི་ཀ	dh'i ti ka	dhi dhi ka
དྷུ	(not in DAS)	dhu
དྷུ་ཏི	dhuti. the central energy channel, avadhuti	dhu ti
དྷུ་ཏིར་ཚུད	enter the central channel	dhu tir tshud
དྷུ་པ	Dhupa, [female bodhisattva, offering goddess]. Dhupa, [female bodhisattva, offering goddess]	dhu pa
དྷུ་མ་ཐ་ལ	[the abode of the dakinis in Uddiyana]	dhu ma tha la
དྷུ་ཝ་ཀ	SK rtsa ba'am nges pa, [eg, nyi ma'i dhu wa, gza' dhu]	dhu wa ka
དྷེ་ལ	half a paisa	dhe la
དྷྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐམས་ཅད་འབྱུང་བ	the source of all mandalas	dhyil 'khor thams cad 'byung ba
བྷ	?? where in dictionary, capable of carrying heavy burdens	bha
བྷ་ཀུ་ལ	the western continent of Godaniya, bakula	bha ku la
བྷ་ཀེ་ར་ཀུད	town in country of tamal	bha ke ra kud
བྷ་ག	(cosmic) vagina	bha ga
བྷ་ག་ན	fairy	bha ga na
བྷ་ག་བཱན	1) detailed explanation; 2) bhagavan	bha ga bAn
བྷ་ག་ཝན	1) detailed explanation; 2) bhagavan	bha ga wan
རིགས་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ་རྣམས	the Bhagavan Padmaprabha and all the innumerable Tathagatas of the Padma family	rigs bsam gyis mi khyab pa rnams
བྷ་ག་ལ	Bengal	bha ga la
བྷ་གའི་ཀློང	secret space	bha ga'i klong
བྷ་གའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	mandala of the bhaga/ cosmic vagina	bha ga'i dkyil 'khor
བྷ་ཉ་ཛ	skull[cup], [bhanja, bandha]	bha nya dza
བྷ་ཏ་ཧོར	Bhata Mongolia	bha ta hor
བྷ་དྲ	[Skt] 4th month	bha dra
བྷ་དྲ་ལ	SA bha dra la'i phye ma	bha dra la
བྷ་ར་ཏ	actor, stage player, king	bha ra ta
བྷ་ར་ན	indian buddhist pandit about 61 Ad	bha ra na
བྷ་ར་དྷྭ་ཛ	one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug} the sixteen [sthaviras], [arhats]	bha ra dhwa dza
བྷ་ར་དྷབ༹་ཛ་གསེར་ཅན	Bharadvaja	bha ra dhva dza gser can
བྷ་ར་དྷྭ་ཛ་གསེར་ཅན	{bha ra dhwa dza gser can [one of the 16 sthaviras dwelling in the W continent {ba lang spyod} Godaniya]	bha ra dhwa dza gser can
བྷ་ར་དྷབ༹་ཛ་བསོད་སྙོམས་ལེན	receive the alms of Bharadvaja	bha ra dhva dza bsod snyoms len
བྷ་ར་དྷྭ་ཛ་བསོད་སྙོམས་ལེན	receive the alms of Bharadvaja the almsbeeing? of bharadvaja [one of the {'phags pa'i gnas brtan bcu drug: 16 sthaviras]	bha ra dhwa dza bsod snyoms len
བྷ་ལེན་དྲ	country varendra, north bengal	bha len dra
བྷང་ག་ལ	Bengal	bhang ga la
བྷང་གེ	hemp	bhang ge
བྷང་བའི་ཏུང་བར	entreaty, application of perfumes	bhang ba'i tung bar
བྷང་བའི་ཏུང་བར་བྱས	invitation	bhang ba'i tung bar byas
བྷན་ད	bhanda, bhajana? skull[cup]	bhan da
བྷན་དམར	a fresh skull	bhan dmar
བྷན་རྩེ	[Skt] M forehead ornament [gyu [turquoise] byur ??? sogs las byas pa]	bhan rtse
བྷན་གྷལ	Bengal	bhan ghal
བྷན་དྷ	skull, cranium	bhan dha
བྷན་དྷ་བདུད་རྩི	Amrita from the skull	bhan dha bdud rtsi
བྷན་དྷ་སྣོད	bhanda	bhan dha snod
བྷན་དྷ་འཕར་ཞིང	skull cup will tremble	bhan dha 'phar zhing
བྷན་དྷ་འབར་བའི་གཞལ་ཡས	immeasurable mansion of the radiant skullcup	bhan dha 'bar ba'i gzhal yas
བྷན་དྷའི་བརྩེགས་པ	walls of skulls	bhan dha'i brtsegs pa
བྷའ	inspiration	bha'
བྷིར་ཡ་ལ	a city in India	bhir ya la
བྷུ	mixed	bhu
བྷུ་ཀམ	[Skt] = 'phags pa bhu kam Nepalese statue sku rten	bhu kam
བྷུ་མི	bodhisattva levels	bhu mi
བྷེ་ཀ	toad	bhe ka
བྷེ་ར་ཟིལ	Brazil	bhe ra zil
བྷོ་ཏ	[Skt] Tibet	bho ta
བྷོ་བོ་ཉིད་མེད་པ	entitynessless	bho bo nyid med pa
བྷྲ་མ་ར	[Skt] name of a bee [translation buzzing/gong in circles 2906	bhra ma ra
བྷྲིང་ཀ་ར	[Skt] gold coronation vase	bhring ka ra
ལྷ	Celestial beings	lha
མེདིཏཏིཨོནལ	]. god, deva, 3) divine, sacred. gods. sentient beings of the higher realms. deva. gods within the three realms of samsara. celestial being[s), divine ones, pleasure being, yidam, deva. celestial b...	meditational
ལྷ་ཀླུ	name of a noble family in Tibet	lha klu
ལྷ་ཀླུ་མཐུ་བོ་ཆེ	{'jig rten lha klu mthu bo che la sogs pa rnams} powerful gods, nagas and so forth	lha klu mthu bo che
ལྷ་དཀར	white deities	lha dkar
ལྷ་དཀོན་མཆོག	the deities and the Three Jewels	lha dkon mchog
ལྷ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ	the excellent Three Jewels	lha dkon mchog gsum
ལྷ་བཀའ	oracular trance	lha bka'
ལྷ་སྐད	language of the deities	lha skad
ལྷ་སྐལ	* the heritage of the deity, destined deity	lha skal
ལྷ་སྐུ	the forms of the deities	lha sku
ལྷ་སྐུ་སྒོམ་པ	meditation on the divine body	lha sku sgom pa
ལྷ་སྐུ་སྣང་སྟོང་ཟུང་འཇུག	the body of the deity the union of appearance and emptiness	lha sku snang stong zung 'jug
ལྷ་སྐུ་འབུམ་ཕྲག་བསྒོམས་པ	meditating on a hundred thousand deities	lha sku 'bum phrag bsgoms pa
ལྷ་སྐུ་ཞལ་ཕྱག	form & face & arms of the deity lha sku rab 'byams kyi dag pa'i snang ba the pure experience of allencompassing forms of deities	lha sku zhal phyag
ལྷ་སྐུའི་རྣམ་པ	[in] the form of the deity's body	lha sku'i rnam pa
ལྷ་སྐུའི་རྣམ་པར	(in the form of the deity's body	lha sku'i rnam par
ལྷ་སྐུའི་ཕྱག་ཆེན	the Great Seal of the Deity's form; one of {phyag chen lnga ldan} The Fivefold Mahamudra of the Drigungpas	lha sku'i phyag chen
ལྷ་སྐུའི་གསལ་སྣང	the vivid presence of the deity forms	lha sku'i gsal snang
ལྷ་སྐྱིད	arhat of the Abhidharma tradition; dgra bcom pa and compiler of Abhidharma	lha skyid
ལྷ་སྐྱེས	spontaneous	lha skyes
ལྷ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	spontaneously arisen bliss	lha skyes kyi dge ba
ལྷ་སྐྱོང་རྒྱལ་པོ	CH emperor chan lung	lha skyong rgyal po
ལྷ་བསྐྱེད་སྒོམ	cultivating the visualization of the deity	lha bskyed sgom
ལྷ་ཁ	1) ca ali; 2) divine fame	lha kha
ལྷ་ཁང	temple, chapel, shrine room	lha khang
ལྷ་ཁང་ཀེ་རུ	an ancient Nyingmapa temple	lha khang ke ru
ལྷ་ཁང་ནང་རྒྱན	temple ornaments, objects for the interior decoration of the temple	lha khang nang rgyan
ལྷ་ཁང་པ	belonging to the divine mansion	lha khang pa
ལྷ་ཁང་བཞེངས་པ	to build temple	lha khang bzhengs pa
ལྷ་ཁང་ལ	lha khang Pass	lha khang la
ལྷ་ཁང་སེར་པོ	yellow temple	lha khang ser po
ལྷ་ཁང་སྲུང་བ	guard the temple	lha khang srung ba
ལྷ་ཁུང	bend of the knee	lha khung
ལྷ་ཁོག་འདྲེ་ཞུགས	bzang po'i khog pa ngan pas brlams pa'i dpe	lha khog 'dre zhugs
ལྷ་ཁྲི	seat of the gods	lha khri
ལྷ་ཁྲིད	explanations of deities; explanation of the deities	lha khrid
ལྷ་ཁྲོ་བོ	Wrathful Deities. Buddhas and bodhisattvas appearing in wrathful forms in order to tame what cannot be overcome by peaceful means	lha khro bo
ལྷ་ཁྲོ་བོ་རྣམ་འཇོམས	the deity {khro bo rnam 'joms}	lha khro bo rnam 'joms
ལྷ་མཁར	dkar phyogs guarding castle	lha mkhar
ལྷ་འཁུ་བ	wrath or harm fro the gods	lha 'khu ba
ལྷ་འཁོན	harm of the gods from dislike or anger	lha 'khon
ལྷ་གོར	sha'i lhu dum	lha gor
ལྷ་གོས	satin, silk, handkerchief used by kings and gods, silk scarf enclosed as a present to accompany a letter	lha gos
ལྷ་གྲལ	row in which images are placed in a temple	lha gral
ལྷ་གྲལ་འཐོབ	find a place among celestial beings; one of {bud bsnyegs thob gsum}	lha gral 'thob
ལྷ་གླུ	devas and nagas; belongs also under {lhag mgron}	lha glu
ལྷ་དགའ	joy of the gods	lha dga'
ལྷ་དགའ་བར་བྱེད་པ	MSS: "that which serves as the joy of the gods." @ R75: 349.2 {lha dga' bar byed palha dga' bar byed pa tsam du zad pa} [mss]	lha dga' bar byed pa
ལྷ་དགུ	a sa bdag demon	lha dgu
ལྷ་བགྲོད	southern march/ transit	lha bgrod
ལྷ་འགྲོ་བའི་མགོན་པོ	Lha the lord of beings	lha 'gro ba'i mgon po
ལྷ་འགྲོལ	LKh: "release from the [protector] deities." This refers to the ritual performed at the time a new bride leaves from her ancestral home to move to home of her new husband. Before leaving the linkag...	lha 'grol
ལྷ་རྒོད	savage god bgegs obstructive spirits, hostile spirits	lha rgod
ལྷ་རྒོད་གངས་རི	lha rgod snow mt	lha rgod gangs ri
ལྷ་རྒོད་ཉི་ཁྲིའི་དམོད་བྱད	tantra of destructive magic of the curses of twenty thousand lha rgod	lha rgod nyi khri'i dmod byad
ལྷ་རྒོད་བདུད་དུལ	subduer of the bdud	lha rgod bdud dul
ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི	{lha rgya ri}	lha rgya ri
ལྷ་རྒྱལ	"bsvo bsvo lha rgyal lo"	lha rgyal
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ཁང	shrine-room/building	lha rgyal khang
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་གླིང	{lha rgyal gling} 2907	lha rgyal gling
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་བཞི	The great divine victorious 1s of the four families	lha rgyal chen rigs bzhi
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་འདུལ	garuda	lha rgyal 'dul
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་བོད	SA jus legs pa	lha rgyal bod
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་མཚོན་ཆ	strong tea	lha rgyal mtshon cha
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་མཚོན་མ	rainbow	lha rgyal mtshon ma
ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ལོ	glory to the gods	lha rgyal lo
ལྷ་སྒང	place in kham	lha sgang
ལྷ་སྒང་དགོན་པ	lha sgang Monastery	lha sgang dgon pa
ལྷ་སྒོ	B"n means of establishing divine dharmas	lha sgo
ལྷ་སྒོམ་པ	to visualize deities	lha sgom pa
ལྷ་སྒྲུང	fabulous/ mythical tale [of gods 'dre etc.]	lha sgrung
ལྷ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་ཀ་བ	pillars of the eight gods	lha brgyad kyi ka ba
ལྷ་བསྒོམ	meditation of a deity, to meditate on the [yidam] deity	lha bsgom
ལྷ་བསྒོམ་ཀྱང	be it meditating on a deity	lha bsgom kyang
ལྷ་བསྒོམ་པ	meditate on the deities; to visualize the deity	lha bsgom pa
ལྷ་ང	knee pan, kneecap	lha nga
ལྷ་དངོས	real god	lha dngos
ལྷ་རྔ	great drum of the gods	lha rnga
ལྷ་སྔགས	deities and mantras	lha sngags
ལྷ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན	practice of deity and mantra	lha sngags kyi nyams len
ལྷ་སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྤྲོས་པ	elaboration of deity and mantra	lha sngags kyi spros pa
ལྷ་སྔགས་ཆོས་སྐུའི་ངང	deity and mantra win dharmak ya	lha sngags chos sku'i ngang
ལྷ་སྔགས་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་འཁོར་ལོ	the continuity of deity, mantra and luminosity	lha sngags 'od gsal gyi 'khor lo
ལྷ་སྔགས་ཡེ་ཤེས	deity, mantra, and wisdom	lha sngags ye shes
ལྷ་ཅིག	princess	lha cig
ལྷ་གཅིག	the one deva; the deity in a single form [without retinue]	lha gcig
ལྷ་གཅིག་ཁྲི་བཙུན	Bhrikuti, King Songtsen Gampo's Nepalese queen	lha gcig khri btsun
ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ་མ	the 13 deities of rdo rje 'jigs byed	lha bcu gsum ma
ལྷ་ལྕམ	princess, lady of rank, nobleman's wife, great mistress	lha lcam
ལྷ་ལྕམ་དཀར་མོ	White princess. Same as Mandarava	lha lcam dkar mo
ལྷ་ལྕམ་གྱི་ཆས	Tibetan wives of high officials fine clothing and ornaments	lha lcam gyi chas
ལྷ་ལྕམ་གྱི་རིགས	class of ladies	lha lcam gyi rigs
ལྷ་ལྕམ་ནུས་འབྱིན་ས་ལེ	Lhacham Nuchin Sale, one of King Trisong Deutsen's Queen	lha lcam nus 'byin sa le
ལྷ་ལྕམ་པ	ma gsal - daughter of King trisong deutsen	lha lcam pa
ལྷ་ལྕམ་པད་མ་རྩལ	Lhacham Pema Tsal, King Trisong Deutsen's daughter	lha lcam pad ma rtsal
ལྷ་ལྕམ་པད་མ་སལ	Pema Sal, Princess. The daughter of King Trisong Deutsen, to whom Padmasambhava entrusted his own lineage of the Great Perfection known as Khandro Nyingtig. She died at an early age, after which Pa...	lha lcam pad ma sal
ལྷ་ལྕམ་པད་མ་གསལ	daughter of King Trisong Deutsen	lha lcam pad ma gsal
ལྷ་ཆས	1) clothes of a divine image; 2) in inviting deities gyon pa'i chas	lha chas
ལྷ་ཆུ	1) byin can gyi chu mig; 2) chu bo gangg'a'i ming	lha chu
ལྷ་ཆེན	Mahadeva, great lha, great local deity	lha chen
ལྷ་ཆེན་དཀར་ལྗང་གཟིག་མགོ་མ	Mahadevi, great goddess	lha chen dkar ljang gzig mgo ma
ལེཨོཔརད	headed, {dbang phyug ma}	leopard
ལྷ་ཆེན་དགོངས་པ་རབ་གསལ	892-975 or 832-915? - Lhachen Gongpa Rabsel, who helped to save the monastic lineage in Tibet	lha chen dgongs pa rab gsal
ལྷ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	king of the gods	lha chen rgyal po
ལྷ་ཆེན་བརྒྱད	eight classes of Mahadevas; 1) {dbang phyug nag po}. 2) {brgya byin dkar ser} 3) {tshangs pa ser po} 4) {khyab 'jug nag po} 5) {'dod pa'i dbang phyug dmar po} 6) {tshogs bdag dkar po} 7) {bhring gi...	lha chen brgyad
ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ	1) great deity image; 2) buddha lha chen po; 3) great god	lha chen po
ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ་གཙོ་འཁོར་དགུ	CHN	lha chen po gtso 'khor dgu
ལྷ་ཆེན་དབང་ཕྱུག	Mahadeva	lha chen dbang phyug
ལྷ་ཆེན་མ་ཧ་དེ་བ༹	the great deity Mahadeva	lha chen ma ha de va
ལྷ་ཆེན་ཟངས་རག	{lha chen zangs rag} mt	lha chen zangs rag
ལྷ་ཆེན་གཟིག་གདོང	leopard-headed Mahadevi, SA dbang phyug nyi shu brgyad	lha chen gzig gdong
ལྷ་ཆོས	the divine/ sacred/ sublime Dharma	lha chos
ལྷ་ཆོས་དགེ་བ་བཅུ	Ten Divine Virtues.	lha chos dge ba bcu
ཨཱབསྟིནེནཅེ་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཏེན་ནོན	virtues.	Abstinence from the ten non
སེཨེ་ཐེ་ཨེནཏརཡ་ཨུནདེར་ཏེན་ནོན	virtues, ten rules for religious services	See the entry under ten non
ལྷ་ཆོས་བགྱི་བ	to practice the sacred Dharma	lha chos bgyi ba
ལྷ་ཆོས་བདུན་ལྡན	the 7 having the divine dharma	lha chos bdun ldan
ལྷ་ཆོས་རྣམ་དག་ཡོང་བ	achieve a perfectly pure Dharma	lha chos rnam dag yong ba
ལྷ་ཆོས་པ	practitioner of the 10 virtues	lha chos pa
ལྷ་ཆོས་བྱས་པ	who have practiced the sublime Dharma	lha chos byas pa
ལྷ་ཆོས་མཛད་པ	to practice the Dharma	lha chos mdzad pa
ལྷ་ཆོས་མཛོད	take up a divine practice/pure teaching, practice the sacred Dharma	lha chos mdzod
ལྷ་ཆོས་འོང་བ	to make true Dharma come alive	lha chos 'ong ba
ལྷ་མཆོག	supreme deity	lha mchog
ལྷ་མཆོད་ཀླུ་མཆོད	many pujas and praises	lha mchod klu mchod
ལྷ་མཆོད་བཅུ་གཉིས	CHN	lha mchod bcu gnyis
ལྷ་མཆོད་པ	worshipping divinities	lha mchod pa
ལྷ་འཆམ	sacred dance	lha 'cham
ལྷ་རྗེ	physician, the king's master}	lha rje
ལྷ་རྗེ་པ	physician	lha rje pa
ལྷ་རྗེ་རགས	physician who build river embankment	lha rje rags
ལྷ་རྗེ་སུ་དྲན་པ	remembering the yidam deity; recollection of the deity	lha rje su dran pa
ལྷ་རྗེས་དྲན	devat nusm i, mindfulness of divinity	lha rjes dran
ལྷ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ	recollecting the yidam deity; mindfulness of divinity, one of the {rjes su dran pa drug} the six recollections / mindfulnesses	lha rjes su dran pa
ལྷ་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པའི་མཐར་གྱིས་པ	gradual recollection of the deity	lha rjes su dran pa'i mthar gyis pa
ལྷ་ཉིད	godhead, divinity	lha nyid
ལྷ་ཉིན་དཀར་པོ	auspicious day	lha nyin dkar po
ལྷ་གཉན་ཀླུ	dominate atmospheric space, earth, and underworld respectively	lha gnyan klu
ལྷ་གཉན་རྒོད་རྩེ	Lhanyen Götse, one of Arik Geshe's meditation places, near Amnye Machen	lha gnyan rgod rtse
ལྷ་གཉན་རྣམས	deities of terror	lha gnyan rnams
ལྷ་གཉེར	shrine-keeper, temple attendant	lha gnyer
ལྷ་གཏོ	white rite addressed to the lha	lha gto
ལྷ་གཏོར	eater of offerings to the gods, the crow	lha gtor
ལྷ་གཏོར་ཟ་བ	eater of offerings made to the gods, crow	lha gtor za ba
ལྷ་རྟགས	sign, indication of / by the yidam deity. Syn {lha yi rtags} divine indication	lha rtags
ལྷ་རྟེན	holy objects, image of a god, temple of gods	lha rten
ལྷ་རྟེན་བྱེད་པ	to take a god as support, using an altar	lha rten byed pa
ལྷ་ལྟར་བརྩི་འཇོག་བྱེད་པ	deify	lha ltar brtsi 'jog byed pa
ལྷ་སྟ་གོན	preparatory ritual for the deity	lha sta gon
ལྷ་སྟིམ་པ	dissolving the deity	lha stim pa
ལྷ་སྟེང	{lha steng} monastery [si khron zhing chen gyi chu chen rdzong gi khongs su yod cing, sngar bon dgon pa yin la, chan lung skabs dge lugs par bsgyur pa'i rgyal rong gi dgon chen zhig]	lha steng
ལྷ་བསྟན	show the devis	lha bstan
ལྷ་ཐབས་མ	glued-applique thangka	lha thabs ma
ལྷ་ཐོ	heaps of stone erected on mountain passes or on the tops of mountains as votive cairns	lha tho
ལྷ་ཐོ་ཐོ་རི	king of Tibet during whose time the first Buddhist text arrived in Tibet	lha tho tho ri
ལྷ་ཐོ་ཐོ་རི་གཉན་བསྟན	last of the first 28 Tibetan kings	lha tho tho ri gnyan bstan
ལྷ་ཐོ་ཐོ་རི་གཉན་བཙན	1 of early kings of tibet	lha tho tho ri gnyan btsan
ལྷ་ཐོ་ཐོ་རི་སྙན་བཙན	{'phags pa kun tu bzang po'i sprul pa lha tho tho ri snyan btsan} Lha-Thothori Nyentsen, who was an emanation of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra	lha tho tho ri snyan btsan
ལྷ་ཐོ་རི་གཉན་བཙན	{lha tho ri gnyan btsan}	lha tho ri gnyan btsan
ལྷ་ཐོ་རི་གཉེན་བཙན་གྱི་སྐུ་རིང་ལ	during the reign of Lha-Thothori Nyentsen	lha tho ri gnyen btsan gyi sku ring la
ལྷ་ཐོག	lha thog district	lha thog
ལྷ་ཐོར	lha 'brum disease	lha thor
ལྷ་མཐམས	delta scorpio, 1 of rgyu skar	lha mthams
ལྷ་མཐོ	TSE	lha mtho
ལྷ་མཐོ་ཆེན	{lha mtho chen} mt	lha mtho chen
ལྷ་མཐོང་འདྲེ་མཐོང	see gods, see demons	lha mthong 'dre mthong
ལྷ་མཐོང་ལོ་ཙ་བ	a tibetan sanskrit scholar	lha mthong lo tsa ba
ལྷ་མཐོང་ལོ་ཚའ་བ	Lhathong Lotsawa	lha mthong lo tsha' ba
ལྷ་དག་བྱེད་པ	nectar, ambrosia, ganges river	lha dag byed pa
ལྷ་དང་གྲུབ་པས་གང་བའི་གནས	home of gods and siddhas	lha dang grub pas gang ba'i gnas
ལྷ་དང་བཅས་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	all of the world, including the gods lha dang nye bar bsnyen pa'i dgongs pa the intent of the full approach to the deity	lha dang bcas pa'i 'jig rten
ལྷ་དང་བླ་མ	the Buddhas and teachers	lha dang bla ma
ལྷ་དང་མི	gods and men; gods and ordinary mortals	lha dang mi
ལྷ་དང་མི་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་པ	* teacher of gods and human beings	lha dang mi rnams kyi ston pa
ལྷ་དང་མི་ཡི་དྲང་སྲོང	human and divine sages	lha dang mi yi drang srong
ལྷ་དང་མིའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of gods and men	lha dang mi'i theg pa
ལྷ་དང་མིའི་བར་གྱི་དབྱེན་སེལ	exorcism of the discords between men and deities	lha dang mi'i bar gyi dbyen sel
ལྷ་དང་ཚངས་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle for devas and brahmas lha dang rang sems ro mnyam bzhag rest in the same taste of the deity and your mind	lha dang tshangs pa'i theg pa
ལྷ་དང་ལྷ་མོ	male and female deities; devas and devis, gods and goddesses	lha dang lha mo
ལྷ་དང་ལྷ་མོའི་རང་བཞིན	nature of male and female deities lha dang lha mo'i rang bzhin du gsal gdab - imagine that they have the nature of male and female deities	lha dang lha mo'i rang bzhin
ལྷ་དལ་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བའི་ཤ་བ	deer that diverts elsewhere disturbances from the lha	lha dal kha bsgyur ba'i sha ba
ལྷ་དེ་བ་བཟང་སྐྱོང	a god named Devabhadrapala	lha de ba bzang skyong
ལྷ་དྲག་པོ	wrathful deity	lha drag po
ལྷ་དྲུག	the six deities	lha drug
ལྷ་དྲུག་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of the six [modes of the] deities	lha drug rnal 'byor
ལྷ་དྲུག་པ	6 divine presences in kriyatantra, SA don dam stong pa'i lha, sgra'i lha, yi ge'i lha, gzugs kyi lha, phyag rgya'i lha, mtshan ma'i lha (absolute, its message, articulation, vision, meditator's emp...	lha drug pa
ལྷ་གདོང	lha gdong shan kha	lha gdong
ལྷ་བདག	the officiant who enters into contact with the deity through the rite	lha bdag
ལྷ་བདག་སྔག་དྲོ	Ladag Nagdro	lha bdag sngag dro
ལྷ་འདབ	SA klu shing	lha 'dab
ལྷ་འདེགས	lha sa'i rgya ma [sash?]	lha 'degs
ལྷ་འདོགས	pho mo chang sa'i skabs bzhugs gral grol rjes went home te the wife from her own house bskur ba'i khams mthun gyi dar lcog se ou, as supplication to the gods	lha 'dogs
ལྷ་འདྲ་བ	like a god	lha 'dra ba
ལྷ་འདྲེ	god(s) and demons(s)	lha 'dre
ལྷ་འདྲེ་བཀའི་ཐང་ཡིག	part of {bka' thang sde lnga}, terma by {o rgyan gling pa} (b. 1323)	lha 'dre bka'i thang yig
ལྷ་འདྲེ་ཁོག	zhugs kyi rten khog sku rten or lord of dharma lha 'dre stong gi sgrib shing srung ba Protective Ritual of the Invisibility Wand Against One Thousand Gods and Demons	lha 'dre khog
ལྷ་འདྲེ་སྟོང་གི་དརབ༹་བ	Net of Thousand Gods and Demons. Name of tantric scripture lha 'dre thams cad 'dar zhing 'byung po 'dul ba - makes all gods and demons tremble, and subjugates the elemental spirits	lha 'dre stong gi drva ba
ལྷ་འདྲེ་མཐོང་བ	who could see gods and demons	lha 'dre mthong ba
ལྷ་འདྲེ་གནོད་བགེགས	gods, demons, yakshas and obstructing spirits lha 'dre rnams zhi bas mi thul drag pos 'dul dgos par 'dug - only wrathful methods will work since gods and demons cannot be subdued by such peaceful m...	lha 'dre gnod bgegs
ལྷ་འདྲེ་མི་གསུམ	gods, men, and demons	lha 'dre mi gsum
ལྷ་འདྲེ་ས་གཅོད	1 of 4 phyogs kyi gcod bgegs	lha 'dre sa gcod
ལྷ་འདྲེའི་ཁོག་རྟེན་བུད་མེད	worldly gods and demons khog zhugs kyi rten woman	lha 'dre'i khog rten bud med
ལྷ་འདྲེའི་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ	power of gods and demons	lha 'dre'i cho 'phrul
ལྷ་འདྲེའི་བུ་ཚུབ	whirlwind	lha 'dre'i bu tshub
ལྷ་འདྲེའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན	apparition	lha 'dre'i gzugs brnyan
ལྷ་རྡེའུ	lha rde'u disease	lha rde'u
ལྷ་ལྡན	Lhasa	lha ldan
ལྷ་ལྡན་མ	a constellation, SA chu smad skar ma	lha ldan ma
ལྷ་ལྡན་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	lhasa temple	lha ldan gtsug lag khang
ལྷ་ལྡིངས	eminence where gods dwell	lha ldings
ལྷ་སྡིངས	place in yarklung	lha sdings
ལྷ་སྡེ	servants included in a monastery	lha sde
ལྷ་སྡེ་མི་སྡེ	clergy and laity, class of gods and class of men	lha sde mi sde
ལྷ་སྡོད	people living in Lhasa	lha sdod
ལྷ་ན་གནས་པ	live among the gods	lha na gnas pa
ལྷ་ནང་བཞིན	god-like, godly	lha nang bzhin
ལྷ་ནད	hysterics, madness	lha nad
ལྷ་ནས	barley grain offered to the gods, from the gods	lha nas
ལྷ་ནུབ	south-west	lha nub
ལྷ་གནས	the heavenly realms	lha gnas
ལྷ་གནས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེད་མོའི་ཚལ་གསུམ	CHN lha gnas so gsum gyi lha sum cu rtsa	lha gnas kyi skyed mo'i tshal gsum
ལྷ་གནས་གསུམ	[TRS 138-2] acc. to Nyingma / Sarma; Three Divine Realms. The pure abodes, the ordinary form realms and the realms of the six species of Kama divinities. 1) {'og min}. 2) {dga' ldan} 3) {sum cu rts...	lha gnas gsum
ལྷ་གནས་གསུམ་དུ་གྲགས་པ	known in the three divine realms	lha gnas gsum du grags pa
ལྷ་རྣམ་སྲས	Vaishravana, wealth god	lha rnam sras
ལྷ་རྣམས	gods, deities, divine beings	lha rnams
ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོང་བའི་གནས	land ruled by gods lha rnams mnyes par byed pa'i bsang	lha rnams kyis skyong ba'i gnas
མཆོད་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ་བ	a smokeoffering ritual by the fifth Dalai Lama lha rnams mnyes par byed pa'i bsang	mchod bkra shis 'khyil ba
ལྷ་སྣམ	gods' seats in mandala	lha snam
ལྷ་པ	person w indwelling god/ demon	lha pa
ལྷ་སྤྱིན	the best quality size adhesive, used for religious paintings	lha spyin
ལྷ་ཕབ་པ	sorcerer's dance in a trance	lha phab pa
ལྷ་ཕེབས	god/ demon dwelling win someone	lha phebs
ལྷ་ཕྱྭ	divination, a person's protective force, phywa of the deities	lha phywa
ལྷ་ཕྱག	paying homage, making salutation	lha phyag
ལྷ་ཕྱག་འབུལ་བ	salute respected persons in letters and otherwise	lha phyag 'bul ba
ལྷ་ཕྱག་བཙལ	prostrated	lha phyag btsal
ལྷ་ཕྱི	outer mountain of everest group	lha phyi
ལྷ་ཕྲན	demi-god	lha phran
ལྷ་ཕྲུག	divine prince, child deity	lha phrug
ལྷ་བ	lha ba'i snying po	lha ba
ལྷ་བབ	possessed, channeler	lha bab
ལྷ་བབ་མཆོད་རྟེན	lha bab stupa	lha bab mchod rten
ལྷ་བབ་རི	mountain where god descended	lha bab ri
ལྷ་བབས་དུས་ཆེན	the Divine Descent (ceremony on the 22nd day of the 8th Tibetan month)	lha babs dus chen
ལྷ་བུ	prince, place in hol dga'	lha bu
ལྷ་བུ་མགོ་དཀར	{lha bu mgo dkar}	lha bu mgo dkar
ལྷ་བུ་བདུད	godling devil	lha bu bdud
ལྷ་བུམ	deity vase	lha bum
ལྷ་བོན	a bon po entrusted with performing rites of purification for the deities that protect the individual in order to develop power, bon of the deities	lha bon
ལྷ་བོན་སྒོ་བཞི	Four Series of Divine Bon, SA dpon gsas, chab nag, chab dkar, bon sgo bzhi	lha bon sgo bzhi
ལྷ་བོན་ཐོད་དཀར	thod dkar bon of deities	lha bon thod dkar
ལྷ་བྱ	divine bird	lha bya
ལྷ་བྱ་ཁུ་བྱུག	cuckoo	lha bya khu byug
ལྷ་བྱ་གོང་མོ	mt bird	lha bya gong mo
ལྷ་བྲག་དཀར་པོ	Lhadrak Karpo, one of the Eight Places of the Accomplished Ones of Rekong	lha brag dkar po
ལྷ་བྲག་གྲུབ་ཆེན་ལས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	saint and author visited by tsong kha pa	lha brag grub chen las kyi rdo rje
ལྷ་བྲན	dancing deity	lha bran
ལྷ་བྲི་བ	artist, painter	lha bri ba
ལྷ་བྲིས	icon/ thangka painter	lha bris
ལྷ་བྲིས་པ	icon painter, artist	lha bris pa
ལྷ་བླ་མ	king's rab tu byung ba'i name	lha bla ma
ལྷ་བླ་མ་ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད	TSE	lha bla ma ye shes 'od
ལྷ་དབང	deity empowerment; king of god; empowerment for the deities; usually part of the vase empowerment; deity empowerment, king of god; empowerment for the deities	lha dbang
ལྷ་དབང་རྒྱ་བྱིན	Powerful Indra	lha dbang rgya byin
ལྷ་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་བློ་གྲོས	Lhatsün Ngönmo. (gter ston lha btsun sngon mo), Revealed the terma of Liberating History of the Great Stupa Jarung Khashor	lha dbang rgya mtsho blo gros
ལྷ་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་བློ་གྲོས	{lha btsun sngon mo}	lha dbang rgya mtsho'i blo gros
ལྷ་དབང་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Mighty Indra	lha dbang brgya byin
ལྷ་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ	Shiva	lha dbang phyug chen po
ལྷ་དབང་བློ	devendrabuddhi, Devendrabuddhi	lha dbang blo
ལྷ་དབང་ལེགས་སྐྱོབ	epithet of indra	lha dbang legs skyob
ལྷ་འབག	picture/ mask of a deities face	lha 'bag
ལྷ་འབངས	1) rgyal po'i mnga' 'bangs; 2) Tibetan monastery's serfs	lha 'bangs
ལྷ་འབབ	descent of the gods	lha 'bab
ལྷ་འབེབས་པ	to people deities and 'dre gzhug tu 'jug pa	lha 'bebs pa
ལྷ་འབོད་ཀླུ་འབོད	example of looking everywhere for a refuge or protector	lha 'bod klu 'bod
ལྷ་འབྲི་པ	artists, depictors of deities	lha 'bri pa
ལྷ་འབྲི་བ	paint a deity	lha 'bri ba
ལྷ་འབྲུམ	smallpox	lha 'brum
ལྷ་འབྲུམ་འཛུགས	vaccinate	lha 'brum 'dzugs
ལྷ་འབྲུམ་འཛུགས་པ	vaccination	lha 'brum 'dzugs pa
ལྷ་འབྲོང	rnying ma Monastery in sde dge dbon stod rdzong founded by grub dbang dpal ldan chos rgyal (12th century)	lha 'brong
ལྷ་སྦྱིན་གི་རླུང	prana connecting w the nose of Devadatta GD	lha sbyin gi rlung
ལྷ་སྦྱིན་ཉིད	devadatta	lha sbyin nyid
ལྷ་མ	lha 'dre khog zhugs kyi rten khog female	lha ma
ལྷ་མ་ཡིན	* anti-gods, asura GD demigod	lha ma yin
ལྷ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་བཞི	CHN lha ma yin gyi thub pa thag bzang ris Vemacitra, Splendid Robe, sage of the jealous gods, one of {thub pa drug}	lha ma yin gyi grong khyer bzhi
ལྷ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་གདོན	asura d"n	lha ma yin gyi gdon
ལྷ་མ་ཡིན་གྱི་གནས	the realm of the jealous gods	lha ma yin gyi gnas
ལྷ་མ་སྲིན	nun-human spirits	lha ma srin
ལྷ་མ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	8 classes of gods and demons	lha ma srin sde brgyad
ལྷ་མང་ཆོས་ལུགས	polytheism	lha mang chos lugs
ལྷ་མི	gods and humans	lha mi
ལྷ་མི་ཀླུ་ཡི་གནས	the realms of the gods, humans and nagas	lha mi klu yi gnas
ལྷ་མི་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ	to all gods and men	lha mi thams cad la
ལྷ་མི་ཕོད	i cannot bear to see that	lha mi phod
ལྷ་མི་གཞན་རྟེན་གྱི་ཐེག་པ	Way of Gods and Men where One Relies upon Another	lha mi gzhan rten gyi theg pa
ལྷ་མིག	clairvoyance, divine sight, the sight	lha mig
ལྷ་མིག་དང་ལྡན་པ	endowed with the vision of the gods	lha mig dang ldan pa
ལྷ་མིན	asura, demigods, anti-gods, titan demigods perpetually at war with the lha	lha min
དེམིགོདས་ལིབེ༹་ཕ༹ྲོམ་ཐེ་ཝཏེར	line of Mount Sumeru's interior cavities down to its golden base. Listing them from uppermost to nether, they reside in the Abodes of the Four Kings called Rahu, White Garland, Necklace and Splendi...	demigods live from the water
ལྷ་མིན་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as an asura	lha min skye gnas
ལྷ་མིན་ཁྲག	garlic	lha min khrag
ལྷ་མིན་འཁྲུགས་མདོས	mdos for the reparation of disturbances caused to the lha min	lha min 'khrugs mdos
ལྷ་མིན་གྱི་དཔུང་འཇོམས་པ	conquered the armies of the demigods	lha min gyi dpung 'joms pa
ལྷ་མིན་དགྲ	enemy of the demons, gods	lha min dgra
ལྷ་མིན་དགྲ་བོ	god, deity	lha min dgra bo
ལྷ་མིན་ཉིང་ཁུ	chang and aa rag, alcoholic beverages	lha min nying khu
ལྷ་མིན་སྙིང་ཁུ	wine	lha min snying khu
ལྷ་མིན་སྟོད་རིས	higher class of demigods sometimes counted as {lha}	lha min stod ris
ལྷ་མིན་བདག་པོ	Venus	lha min bdag po
ལྷ་མིན་བླ་མ	friday, venus	lha min bla ma
ལྷ་མིན་དབང་པོ	asura king	lha min dbang po
ལྷ་མིན་དབང་པོ་ཐག་བཟང་རིས	one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad} the eight outer classes	lha min dbang po thag bzang ris
ལྷ་མིན་མོ	ske tshe	lha min mo
ལྷ་མིན་སྨད་རིས	lower class of demigods	lha min smad ris
ལྷ་མིན་ཡུལ	the realm of the asuras	lha min yul
ལྷ་མིན་ལ་འཐབ་རྩོད	demigods suffer strife	lha min la 'thab rtsod
ལྷ་མིན་ས་བོན	seed of the asuras	lha min sa bon
ལྷ་མིན་སྲིད	produces the existence of the asuras	lha min srid
ལྷ་མིན་བསེ་ཡི་ནུ་ཞོ་ཅན	medicinal plant whose leaves treat wounds and sores	lha min bse yi nu zho can
ལྷ་མིན་ལྷ	name of the sea god	lha min lha
ལྷ་མིའི་འགྲོ་བ་ན་གནས་པ	to dwell among the class of beings of [either] gods or humans	lha mi'i 'gro ba na gnas pa
ལྷ་མིའི་རྟེན	the support of gods and humans, Buddha	lha mi'i rten
ལྷ་མིའི་རྟེན་བཟང	the excellent support of a celestial or human existence	lha mi'i rten bzang
ལྷ་མིའི་སྟོན་པ	the teacher of gods and humans, Buddha	lha mi'i ston pa
ལྷ་མིའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of gods and humans	lha mi'i theg pa
ལྷ་མིའི་བདེ་འབྲས	fruition of happiness for gods and humans	lha mi'i bde 'bras
ལྷ་མིའི་འདྲེན་མཆོག	supreme leader of gods and human beings	lha mi'i 'dren mchog
ལྷ་མིའི་རྣམ་འདྲེན	leader of gods and men	lha mi'i rnam 'dren
ལྷ་མིའི་འབྱོར་པ་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཡོང	he will gain the finest fortune of both gods and men	lha mi'i 'byor pa dang ldan pa yong
ལྷ་མིའི་ཡོན་ཏན་བདུན	[TRS 72-3]	lha mi'i yon tan bdun
ལྷ་མེད་པ་སྨྲ་བ	atheist [-ism]	lha med pa smra ba
ལྷ་མོ	goddess	lha mo
ལྷ་མོ་དཀར་མོ	white goddess, 1 of srid pa mo dgu	lha mo dkar mo
ལྷ་མོ་ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཅན	1) wrathful Tara; 2) wrathful goddess	lha mo khro gnyer can
ལྷ་མོ་གོས་དཀར་མོ	the goddess Pandaravasini	lha mo gos dkar mo
ལྷ་མོ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ	1 of 8 sgyu 'phrul rtsa ba'i rgyud	lha mo sgyu 'phrul
ལྷ་མོ་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་མ	mother of gautama buddha	lha mo sgyu 'phrul ma
ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད	Eight goddesses. Lasya, Mala, Gita, Nirti, Pushpa, Dhupa, Aloka and Gandha	lha mo brgyad
ལྷ་མོ་བཅུ་དྲུག	the 12 goddesses	lha mo bcu drug
ལྷ་མོ་རྟ	certain insect	lha mo rta
ལྷ་མོ་དུང་གི་ནུ་ཞོ་ཅན	officinal herb growing in the clefts of rocks used for ulcers and wounds	lha mo dung gi nu zho can
ལྷ་མོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་མདོ	Immaculate Goddess Sutra	lha mo dri ma med pa'i mdo
ལྷ་མོ་བདུད་གསོལ་མ	Tusolma	lha mo bdud gsol ma
ལྷ་མོ་བདུན	7 goddesses (tshangs ma, dbang mo, phag mo, drag mo, lus ngan mo, khyab 'jug ma, gzhon nu ma)	lha mo bdun
ལྷ་མོ་བདེ་ཆེན	Lhamo Dechen, monastery in Domey	lha mo bde chen
ལྷ་མོ་དཔལ་ཆེན་མོ	dpal ldan lha mo	lha mo dpal chen mo
ལྷ་མོ་བ	TT/ opera [zlos gar] dancer	lha mo ba
ལྷ་མོ་བའི་ཆས	goddess play costume	lha mo ba'i chas
ལྷ་མོ་བླ་མཚོ	important oracle lake	lha mo bla mtsho
ལྷ་མོ་དབྱངས་ཅན	SA sgra dbyangs lha mo	lha mo dbyangs can
ལྷ་མོ་དབྱངས་ཅན་མ	the goddess Sarasvati	lha mo dbyangs can ma
ལྷ་མོ་མ་གོལ་བའི་རྒྱུད	Nonstraying Goddess Tantra. One of the Eighteen Mahayoga Tantras	lha mo ma gol ba'i rgyud
ལྷ་མོ་མའ་མ་ཀི	the goddess M maki	lha mo ma' ma ki
ལྷ་མོ་མོ་ཕག་གི་ཤིང་རྟ་ཅན	sa yi lha mo bstan ma	lha mo mo phag gi shing rta can
ལྷ་མོ་དམར་མོ་ཙ་མུན་དི	indian goddess chamandi	lha mo dmar mo tsa mun di
ལྷ་མོ་ཚེ་རིང་མཆེད་ལྔ	tshe ring mched lnga	lha mo tshe ring mched lnga
ལྷ་མོ་ཚོགས་པ	opera association	lha mo tshogs pa
ལྷ་མོ་མཛེས་ལྡན་མ	beautiful goddess	lha mo mdzes ldan ma
ལྷ་མོ་འཛུམ་ཁ་མ	smiling goddess	lha mo 'dzum kha ma
ལྷ་མོ་གཟུགས་ཅན་མ	the goddess Rupinisuradevata	lha mo gzugs can ma
ལྷ་མོ་ཡིད་ལ་འདོད་པ	his desire was to be with goddesses	lha mo yid la 'dod pa
ལྷ་མོ་རོ་ལངས་མ	the goddess ro langs ma	lha mo ro langs ma
ལྷ་མོ་ཨུ་མ	the goddess Uma	lha mo u ma
ལྷ་མོ་E་ཀ་ཛ་ཏི	the goddess Ekajati	lha mo E ka dza ti
ལྷ་མོའི་རྒྱུད་ལུང་བཅུ་གསུམ	Thirteen Tantras of the Goddess	lha mo'i rgyud lung bcu gsum
ལྷ་མོའི་ཆས	1) women's goddess play costume; 2) lha mo ba'i chas	lha mo'i chas
ལྷ་མོའི་བཞོན་པའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་གསུམ	TSE	lha mo'i bzhon pa'i khyad chos gsum
ལྷ་དམག	army of gods	lha dmag
ལྷ་དམག་གྱི་རྫོང	castle containing an army of deities	lha dmag gyi rdzong
ལྷ་རྨོག	divine helmet	lha rmog
ལྷ་སྨན་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང་མ	the suspicious divine physician Tseringma	lha sman bkra shis tshe ring ma
ལྷ་སྨན་པ	divine physician	lha sman pa
ལྷ་བཙད་པོ	king, ruler	lha btsad po
ལྷ་བཙན	king, ruler	lha btsan
ལྷ་བཙན་པོ	king, ruler	lha btsan po
ལྷ་བཙུན	1) btsun pa; 2) king who takes renunciate vows	lha btsun
ལྷ་བཙུན་སྔོན་མོ	Lhatsün Ngonmo, a tertön who first revealed the History of the Great Stupa of Jarung Khashor, and concealed it again	lha btsun sngon mo
ལྷ་བཙུན་ནམ་མཁའ་འཇིགས་མེད	Lhatsün Chenpo Namkha Jigme, 1587-1653 / 1597-c.1650	lha btsun nam mkha' 'jigs med
ལྷ་བཙུན་བྱང་ཆུབ་འོད	Lhatsün Jangchub Ö; the nephew of the King of Gugey, Lha Lama Yeshe Ö (lha bla ma ye shes 'od). Lha Lama sent envoys with offerings of gold to invite Atisha to Tibet so that he could restore the pu...	lha btsun byang chub 'od
ཨོཕ༹་ནིནེཏཡ	two if he remained in India	of ninety
བུཏ་ཨོནལཡ་ཨུནཏིལ་སེབེ༹ནཏཡ	three if he went to Tibet. [MR]	but only until seventy
ལྷ་རྩེ	district in upper gtsang	lha rtse
ལྷ་རྩེ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	bde chen chos 'khor	lha rtse pa chen po
ཡོངས་འཛིན་ཨི	ngag dbang bzang po, 1546-1615	yongs 'dzin i
ལྷ་རྩེ་དཔོན་མོ	tibetan saintess of lha rtse	lha rtse dpon mo
ལྷ་རྩེ་རྫོང	Lhatse Dzong; gram pa lha rtse	lha rtse rdzong
ལྷ་རྩེ་རོལ་པའི	heaven	lha rtse rol pa'i
ལྷ་རྩེ་རོལ་པའི་གནས	sky	lha rtse rol pa'i gnas
ལྷ་རྩེན	space/ sky	lha rtsen
ལྷ་ཚ་རིང་པོ	long-lived god, being a	lha tsha ring po
ལྷ་ཚངས་པ	name of brahma	lha tshangs pa
ལྷ་ཚུགས	divine abode's rten mkhar	lha tshugs
ལྷ་ཚེ་རིང་པོ	Syn {'dud shes med pa};	lha tshe ring po
ལྷ་ཚོགས་ཀུན	countless hosts	lha tshogs kun
ལྷ་ཚོགས་རྣམས	hosts of deities	lha tshogs rnams
ལྷ་ཚོགས་རང་ལ་རྫོགས	the assembly of deities will be perfected within you	lha tshogs rang la rdzogs
ལྷ་མཚམས	lha mtshams	lha mtshams
ལྷ་མཚམས་སྐྱེས	Mercury	lha mtshams skyes
ལྷ་མཚོ་སྲིན་མཚོ	Lake of the Gods and Rakshasa, Pelgu Lake, in Gungthang, Tö, Mangyul	lha mtsho srin mtsho
ལྷ་མཛེས	most beautiful [more beautiful than a god]	lha mdzes
ལྷ་འཛུགས	1) lha btsugs; 2) corners of a housetop place to put dar shing, a square atone structure	lha 'dzugs
ལྷ་རྫས	silk, divine substances / silk, celestial varieties	lha rdzas
ལྷ་རྫས་གོས	divine silk	lha rdzas gos
ལྷ་རྫས་དྲི་མེད	a white scarf {kha btags}	lha rdzas dri med
ལྷ་རྫས་མེ་ཏོག	celestial varieties of flowers	lha rdzas me tog
ལྷ་རྫིང	pond	lha rdzing
ལྷ་ཞལ	perfect face	lha zhal
ལྷ་ཞལ་དངོས་སུ་མཐོང་བ	to meet the deity in actuality, to actually have a vision of the deity	lha zhal dngos su mthong ba
ལྷ་ཞལ་མཐོང་བ	to have a vision of the deity, meet the deity	lha zhal mthong ba
ལྷ་ཞལ་མཐོན་བ	beheld visions of deities	lha zhal mthon ba
ལྷ་ཞི་བ	mild aspect of any god	lha zhi ba
ལྷ་ཞིས	Lhashi, in Domey	lha zhis
ལྷ་ཞུགས་ནས་སྨྲས་པ	took on the form of a god and said	lha zhugs nas smras pa
ལྷ་ཞེན་གྱི་རྟོགས་པ	The thought of clinging to the deity as sublime form.	lha zhen gyi rtogs pa
ལྷ་ཞོ	snow drop, ice-drop	lha zho
ལྷ་ཞོལ	1) Lhasa zhol/ town district; 2) tshe thar du btang ba'i lha g.yag	lha zhol
ལྷ་བཞི	CHN	lha bzhi
ལྷ་བཞིན་པ	knitting	lha bzhin pa
ལྷ་བཞུགས་པ	trance	lha bzhugs pa
ལྷ་ཟ་དང་གྲགས	queen of srid rje brang dkar	lha za dang grags
ལྷ་གཟིགས་རས་པ	spyan snga - author of dpal ye shes kyi mgon po'i bskang bshags	lha gzigs ras pa
ལྷ་གཟུགས་ཁམས་གནས་རིས་བཅུ་བདུན	17 form realms	lha gzugs khams gnas ris bcu bdun
ལྷ་བཟང	benevolence of the gods	lha bzang
ལྷ་བཟང་ཀླུ་དཔལ	Lhazang Lupel; minister of khri srong lde'u btsan	lha bzang klu dpal
ལྷ་བཟང་ཧན	{lha bzang han}	lha bzang han
ལྷ་བཟོ	divine artisan, art of making images of gods, divine artist, framer of gods	lha bzo
ལྷ་བཟོ་པ	religious artist/ sculptor	lha bzo pa
ལྷ་བཟོ་བ	artist, painter	lha bzo ba
ཨིམགེ	maker, artist, religious sculptor, tangka painter	image
ལྷ་བཟོ་བོ	divine artist, framer of gods lha yan lag bzhi rdzogs su bskyed pa CHN	lha bzo bo
ལྷ་ཡི་རྐང་པ	the Ganges	lha yi rkang pa
ལྷ་ཡི་སྐད	the divine language; {legs sbyar} Sanskrit	lha yi skad
ལྷ་ཡི་སྐུ	[body of] the deity	lha yi sku
ལྷ་ཡི་སྐུར་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ	fully matured into the form of a deity	lha yi skur rnam par smin pa
ལྷ་ཡི་སྐྱེ་གནས	rebirth as a deva	lha yi skye gnas
ལྷ་ཡི་གྲོང	celestial realms	lha yi grong
ལྷ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ	name of brgya byin lha	lha yi rgyal po
ལྷ་ཡི་རྒྱུད་བསྐུལ	invoking the mind of the deity	lha yi rgyud bskul
ལྷ་ཡི་ཆུ་བོ	the Ganges	lha yi chu bo
ལྷ་ཡི་ཐེག་པ	vehicle of the gods	lha yi theg pa
ལྷ་ཡི་གདོན	gdon nad sent by the gods	lha yi gdon
ལྷ་ཡི་བདག	name of brgya byin lha	lha yi bdag
ལྷ་ཡི་འདབ	SA klu shing	lha yi 'dab
ལྷ་ཡི་ནོར་བུ	jewel of the gods, the deity dbang phyug chen po	lha yi nor bu
ལྷ་ཡི་གནས	divine realm	lha yi gnas
ལྷ་ཡི་སྤྱན	divine eye	lha yi spyan
ལྷ་ཡི་ཕོ་བྲང	celestial palace	lha yi pho brang
ལྷ་ཡི་ཕྱག་མཚན	trident	lha yi phyag mtshan
ལྷ་ཡི་བུ	Devaputra	lha yi bu
ལྷ་ཡི་བུ་མོ	a daughter of the gods	lha yi bu mo
ལྷ་ཡི་བླ་མ	renowned teacher of the gods, brhaspati	lha yi bla ma
ལྷ་ཡི་དབང་པོ	king of the gods, Indra	lha yi dbang po
ལྷ་ཡི་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Indra the king of the gods	lha yi dbang po brgya byin
ལྷ་ཡི་མིག	Divine eye. One of the superknowledges; the capacity to clearly see distant places	lha yi mig
ལྷ་ཡི་མིག་གི་མངོན་ཤེས	higher perception of the divine eye	lha yi mig gi mngon shes
ལྷ་ཡི་བཟའ་ཤིང	alstonia tree	lha yi bza' shing
ལྷ་ཡི་ཡང་ལྷ	supreme god of gods	lha yi yang lha
ལྷ་ཡི་ཡུལ	celestial realms	lha yi yul
ལྷ་ཡི་ཡུལ་དང་མཚུངས་པ	which resembles a celestial realm	lha yi yul dang mtshungs pa
ལྷ་ཡི་ས་བོན	seed of the devas	lha yi sa bon
ལྷ་ཡི་སློབ་དཔོན	loppon of the gods, Jupiter	lha yi slob dpon
ལྷ་ཡི་གསལ་སྣང	clear appearance/ visualization of the deity	lha yi gsal snang
ལྷ་ཡི་གསལ་སྣང་ཚད་དུ་འདོན	bring the clear appearance of the deity to the limit	lha yi gsal snang tshad du 'don
ལྷ་ཡི་ལྷ	god of gods	lha yi lha
ལྷ་ཡི་ལྷ་མཆོག	supreme god of gods	lha yi lha mchog
ལྷ་ཡི་ལྷར་གྱུར་པ	God of Gods	lha yi lhar gyur pa
ལྷ་ཡིས་འཚོ་བ	shrine/ temple keeper	lha yis 'tsho ba
ལྷ་ཡུམ	mother of high officials	lha yum
ལྷ་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ	mother of Dalai Lama	lha yum chen mo
ལྷ་ཡུལ	celestial realm	lha yul
ལྷ་ཡུལ་གུང་ཐང	2 of 37 holy bon places	lha yul gung thang
ལྷ་ཡུལ་གུར་ཐང	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	lha yul gur thang
ལྷ་ཡུལ་དུ་འཁྲིད་ནས	led him to the heaven realms	lha yul du 'khrid nas
ལྷ་ཡུལ་ནས་བབས་པ	descended from the realm of the gods	lha yul nas babs pa
ལྷ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་དཔའ	deity of wisdom being, jnanasattva deity	lha ye shes sems dpa'
ལྷ་ཡེར་བ	1 of gnas sum cu so bdun	lha yer ba
ལྷ་ཡོད་པར་སྨྲ་བ	theism [-ists] lha g.yag - bull/ yak tshe thar du btang ba	lha yod par smra ba
ལྷ་རབ	best	lha rab
ལྷ་རབ་བྱུང་ན	rab byung na'am yag shos la,//lha rab byung na khyed rang ngo ma phebs dang	lha rab byung na
ལྷ་རབས་གཉན་རུམ	1 of srid pa pho dgu 2913	lha rabs gnyan rum
ལྷ་རབས་གཉན་རུམ་རྗེ	powerful narrator of the divine genealogies	lha rabs gnyan rum rje
ལྷ་རམ་པ	highest of the four grades of Geshe	lha ram pa
ལྷ་རམ་འཛིན་གྲྭ	the highest class of Geshe	lha ram 'dzin grwa
ལྷ་རམས་པ	doctor's degree holder	lha rams pa
ལྷ་རམས་པའི་དགེ་བཤེས	geshe lharampa	lha rams pa'i dge bshes
ལྷ་རས	divine cloth, kata	lha ras
ལྷ་རི	holy mountain	lha ri
ལྷ་རི་གྱང་ཐོ	{lha ri gyang tho} mt	lha ri gyang tho
ལྷ་རི་ཚན་དན	white sandalwood	lha ri tshan dan
ལྷ་རི་གཟིམ་ཕུག	small monastery with a large library presided over by an incarnate lama in gtsang	lha ri gzim phug
ལྷ་རིག་པའི་སེང་གེ	{rgya gar paNDi ta lha rig pa'i seng ge} the Indian pandita Simha	lha rig pa'i seng ge
ལྷ་རིགས	1 of rigs gsum	lha rigs
ལྷ་རིགས་གཉིས	CHN	lha rigs gnyis
ལྷ་རིས	1) kshatriya; 2) picture of a deity; 3) of the divine side/ family/ realm; 4) renunciation	lha ris
ལྷ་རིས་པ	1) of the divine [realms]; 2) kshatriya (30 picture of a deity	lha ris pa
ལྷ་རུ	born as a god or among the gods in heaven, cartilage	lha ru
ལྷ་རུ་སྐྱེས	born as a god or among the gods in heaven	lha ru skyes
ལྷ་རུ་རྩེ	lha ba can bone tip	lha ru rtse
ལྷ་རུ་སྲིད	produces the existence of the devas	lha ru srid
ལྷ་རེག	kata	lha reg
ལྷ་ལ་གཏོར་བ	propitiate the gods by showing eatables to them	lha la gtor ba
ལྷ་ལ་རྡེག	fire [god]	lha la rdeg
ལྷ་ལ་སྡང	asura	lha la sdang
ལྷ་ལ་ཕྱོགས	mode of movement, gait in walking	lha la phyogs
ལྷ་ལ་འཕོ་ལྟུང	gods suffer transmigration and downfall	lha la 'pho ltung
ལྷ་ལ་སྨད་པོ	1) deprecator of the gods; 2) asura	lha la smad po
ལྷ་ལ་སོགས་པ	gods and other beings of the kind	lha la sogs pa
ལྷ་ལ་ལྷ་ཐིམ	one deity dissolves into another	lha la lha thim
ལྷ་ལམ	custom, usage	lha lam
ལྷ་ལས་སྐྱེས	originated from the gods,	lha las skyes
ལྷ་ལས་རྒན	elder brothers of the gods, name for lha ma yin, senior to the gods, asura	lha las rgan
ལྷ་ལས་རྒན་པ	1) Bhrama; 2) asura lha las phul du byung bar bstod pa Praise Exceeding that of the Gods lha las phul du byung bar bstod pa 'Praise Exceeding that of the Gods' by Shamkarapati	lha las rgan pa
ལྷ་ལས་ཕུལ་བྱུང	{lha las phul byung [praise to Buddha by the Indian master bde byed bdag po]	lha las phul byung
ལྷ་ལས་བབ་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	lha bab stupa	lha las bab pa'i mchod rten
ལྷ་ལས་བབ་པའི་དུས་ཆེན	festival of descent from the god realms	lha las bab pa'i dus chen
ལྷ་ལས་བབས་པ	descended from the heavenly realms	lha las babs pa
ལྷ་ལས་བབས་པའི་མཆོད་རྟེན	memorial temple of buddha's return from heaven	lha las babs pa'i mchod rten
ལྷ་ལས་བབས་པའི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད	the story of the Descent From Heaven	lha las babs pa'i rtogs brjod
ལྷ་ལས་མཛེས་པ	[a body] more beautiful than that of a god	lha las mdzes pa
ལྷ་ལས་མཛེས་པ་ཡོད་པ	was as beautiful as a goddess	lha las mdzes pa yod pa
ལྷ་ལུང	Lhalung, in Domey. Valley of Buddhas	lha lung
ལྷ་ལུང་དཔལ་གྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	Lhalung Palgyi Dorje. Born in Upper Drom, he was first a border guard but developed renunciation and received ordination from Vimalamitra, together with his two brothers. He received the bodhisattv...	lha lung dpal gyi rdo rje
ལྷ་ལུང་དཔལ་རྡོར	Lhalung paldor	lha lung dpal rdor
ལྷ་ལུས	divine body/ support	lha lus
ལྷ་ཤང་ཀ་ར	the deity dbang phyug	lha shang ka ra
ལྷ་ཤིག	bug	lha shig
ལྷ་ཤིང	trees in a divine realm	lha shing
ལྷ་ཤིང་ཤུག་པ	1) juniper [bsang shing] offered to the gods; 2) juniper in a divine realm	lha shing shug pa
ལྷ་ཤུག	medicinal plant	lha shug
ལྷ་ཤེས	wise man, diviner, astrologer	lha shes
ལྷ་བཤད་འདྲེ་བཤད	talk w/o cha 'jog dang nges gtan	lha bshad 'dre bshad
ལྷ་བཤོས	deities' food or bshos bu, divine cakes	lha bshos
ལྷ་ས	capital of tibet, divination deity	lha sa
ལྷ་ས་གཉེར་ཚང་ལས་ཁུངས	when the Dalai Lama goes to Lhasa puja and livelihood las don sgrub mkhan las khungs	lha sa gnyer tshang las khungs
ལྷ་ས་ཐིལ	Thil, Lhasa	lha sa thil
ལྷ་ས་པ	one of lhasa	lha sa pa
ལྷ་ས་འཕྲུལ་སྣང	temple in Lhasa containing the Indian image of Buddha Shakyamuni in the lha sa 'phrul snang temple, brought to Tibet by the Nepalese queen of Songtsen Gampo	lha sa 'phrul snang
ལྷ་ས་ཞོ་སྟོན	the Curd Feast at Lhasa (ceremony on the first 5 days of the 7th Tibetan month)	lha sa zho ston
ལྷ་ས་འོང་བསྐོར	the circumambulation of the fields (ceremony on the first 15 days of the 7th Tibetan month)	lha sa 'ong bskor
ལྷ་སའི་རྐྱེན་ངན	crisis in Lhasa	lha sa'i rkyen ngan
ལྷ་སའི་ཁུལ	all the places within the town jurisdiction of lhasa lha sa'i bcu gcig zhal khyad par du 'phags	lha sa'i khul
པ་བཞེངས	made the particularly sacred statue of eleven-headed Avalokiteshvara which is in Lhasa	pa bzhengs
ལྷ་སའི་ཇོ་ཁང	Jokhang temple, Lhasa	lha sa'i jo khang
ལྷ་སའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང	the central temple of Lhasa	lha sa'i gtsug lag khang
ལྷ་སའི་ཡེར་པ་ལྷ་རི་སྙིང་པོ	Yerpa Lhari Nyingpo Mountain near Lhasa	lha sa'i yer pa lha ri snying po
ལྷ་སའི་གསར་བརྗེའི་ངོ་ལོག	Lhasa Revolutionary Rebels Red Guard Organization	lha sa'i gsar brje'i ngo log
ལྷ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ	the 33 gods	lha sum cu rtsa gsum
ལྷ་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གསུམ་པ	Realm of the 33 Gods	lha sum cu rtsa gsum pa
ལྷ་སོ་སོའི་དག	purity of the diverse deities which are phung po lnga, etc.	lha so so'i dag
ལྷ་སོ་སོའི་དག་པ	1 of 3 dag pa gsum	lha so so'i dag pa
ལྷ་སྲང་ཉ་ག	former nyaga measure of Lhasa alone	lha srang nya ga
ལྷ་སྲས	prince, nobleman's son	lha sras
ལྷ་སྲས་ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེའུ་བཙན	king Trisong Detsen	lha sras khri srong lde'u btsan
ལྷ་སྲས་དགེ་མགོན	Prince Virtuous Protector. The youngest son of Trisong Deutsen also known as Murub Tseypo	lha sras dge mgon
ལྷ་སྲས་འཇིང་ཡོན་སད་ན་ལེགས	Syn {mu tig btsad po}	lha sras 'jing yon sad na legs
ལྷ་སྲས་དམ་འཛིན	Prince Damdzin	lha sras dam 'dzin
ལྷ་སྲས་དོག་སེལ	exorcism for the land of the divine princes	lha sras dog sel
ལྷ་སྲས་མུ་རུབ	Prince Murub. The second son of King Trisong Deutsen	lha sras mu rub
ལྷ་སྲས་རོལ་པ་རྩལ	Prince Yeshe Rölpa Tsal. Same as Prince Chökyi Lodrö	lha sras rol pa rtsal
ལྷ་སྲིན	gods and spirits	lha srin
ལྷ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད	eight classes of gods and spirits: 1) {gshin rje}. 2) {ma mo} 3) {bdud} 4) {btsan} 5) {rgyal po} 6) {klu} 7) {gnod sbyin} 8) {gza'}; eight classes of gods and demons	lha srin sde brgyad
ལྷ་སྲུང	tutelar god, gods who guard buddhism in tibet	lha srung
ལྷ་སྲུང་རྒྱུད་སྐུལ	ram 'degs gnang rogs zer invoke the gods	lha srung rgyud skul
ལྷ་གསལ་གདབ་པ	to visualize the deity	lha gsal gdab pa
ལྷ་གསས་ལྕམ	spiritual brothers and sisters	lha gsas lcam
ལྷ་གསས་དར་མ	Young Deities	lha gsas dar ma
ལྷ་གསས་དབལ	may be 3 different classes of deities	lha gsas dbal
ལྷ་གསུམ	the three kinds of gods	lha gsum
ལྷ་གསོལ	offerings to divine spirits, place in dwag po, invocation and offerings to the local gods	lha gsol
ལྷ་གསོལ་འདྲེ་བརྡུང	example of praising good above and deprecating evil below	lha gsol 'dre brdung
ལྷ་གསོལ་བ	worship a god	lha gsol ba
ལྷ་བསང	lhasang	lha bsang
ལྷ་བསང་རྣམ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུ་མ	sprul sku rin po che bsod nams ye shes	lha bsang rnam dag chos sku ma
དབང་པོས་མཛད་པ	{bsod nams ye shes dbang po} alias {'bras spungs gzims khang gong ma} the 2nd (15561592)	dbang pos mdzad pa
ལྷ་བསངས	ritual text outlining the method of offering bsangs	lha bsangs
ལྷ་བསོལ	exited	lha bsol
ལྷཱ་ལྷཱ	thin, loosely woven cloth	lhA lhA
ལྷ་ལྷམ	1) divine boots; 2) necessary things from the king's storehouses	lha lham
ལྷག་འཁྲོལ	lhag 'phro	lhag 'khrol
ལྷག་གི	which is superior to, more important than	lhag gi
ལྷག་གི་ལྷུག་གི	not tight, loose	lhag gi lhug gi
ལྷག་གིས	wildly, excessively; resplendent [like a rising sun], clearly, brightly, vividly	lhag gis
ལྷག་གེ	vivid/ resplendent; isc. obvious	lhag ge
ལྷག་གེ་བ	clear, shining, glittering	lhag ge ba
ལྷག་གེ་བར་འཚེར་བ	brilliant	lhag ge bar 'tsher ba
ལྷག་གེ་ལྷོག་གེ	on the body many swollen protuberances	lhag ge lhog ge
ལྷག་གེར	clearly, vividly	lhag ger
ལྷག་གེར་མཐོང	clearly saw	lhag ger mthong
ལྷག་གེར་ཤར་བ	to experience vividly	lhag ger shar ba
ལྷག་མགྲོན་འབོད	mgron bkug - the calling of the residual guests	lhag mgron 'bod
ལྷག་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	(Tserig)	lhag cig skyes pa'i ye shes
ལྷག་ཅིག་དམིགས་ངེས	(Tserig)	lhag cig dmigs nges
ལྷག་བཅས	with residual [R]	lhag bcas
ལྷག་བཅས་ཀྱི་འགོག་པ	cessation with remaineder tse	lhag bcas kyi 'gog pa
ལྷག་བཅས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ	te ste de	lhag bcas kyi sgra
ལྷག་བཅས་དགྲ་བཅོམ	sdug bsngal nyer len gyi phung po'i lhag ma dang bcas pa	lhag bcas dgra bcom
ལྷག་བཅས་ཉང་འདས	nyon mongs pa ma lus par spangs kyang phung po'i rgyun ma chad pa	lhag bcas nyang 'das
ལྷག་བཅས་བརྟགས་འགོག	cessation with examination and remainder lhag bcas dang lhag med kyi myang 'das nirvana with and without remainder	lhag bcas brtags 'gog
ལྷག་བཅས་མྱང་འདས	nirvana with remainder of 'upadhi'. nirvana with remainder	lhag bcas myang 'das
ལྷག་བཅས་ལྷག་མེད་ཀྱི་དགྲ་བཅོམ	the arhatship with and without residual [R]	lhag bcas lhag med kyi dgra bcom
ལྷག་བཅས་ལྷག་མེད་ཀྱི་མྱང་འདས	nirvana with remainder and remainderless nirvana lhag bcas lhag med kyi myang 'das gnyis nirvana with and without remainder	lhag bcas lhag med kyi myang 'das
ལྷག་ཆད	adding extra and leaving out, duplications and omissions	lhag chad
ལྷག་ཆད་ཁ་སྐོངས	keep the mouth from additions/duplications and ommissions	lhag chad kha skongs
ལྷག་ཆད་མེད	with neither omission nor duplication	lhag chad med
ལྷག་ཆད་མེད་པ	without omission or duplication	lhag chad med pa
ལྷག་ཆོག	lhag ma'i cho ga - Residual ceremony	lhag chog
ལྷག་མཆོད་བྱ་བ	to make the residual offering. Syn. lhag ma'i gtor ma btang ba	lhag mchod bya ba
ལྷག་ཏུ་འདས་པ	surpass	lhag tu 'das pa
ལྷག་གཏོར	residual torma	lhag gtor
ལྷག་གཏོར་སྣོད	Residual torma plate lhag gtor byin gyis brlab pa dang bsngo	lhag gtor snod
བ་ལ་ཐུགས་གཏད་པར་ཞུ	Please direct you mind towards the consecration and dedication of the residual torma	ba la thugs gtad par zhu
ལྷག་བཏང	I far exceeded	lhag btang
ལྷག་ཐོན་པ	1) increase very greatly; 2) be more excellent/ noble than others	lhag thon pa
ལྷག་མཐོང	[KOT=rDzogs chen equivalent of lhag mthong; cf. rang bzhin ye babs kyi bsam gtan]	lhag mthong
ལྷག་མཐོང་བསྐྱེད་པ	developing insight	lhag mthong bskyed pa
ལྷག་མཐོང་གི་ཁྲིད	guidance in vipashyana	lhag mthong gi khrid
ལྷག་མཐོང་གི་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ	(Tserig)	lhag mthong gi tshogs sgrub
ལྷག་མཐོང་གི་རིག་པ	insight/ understanding of vipashyana	lhag mthong gi rig pa
ལྷག་མཐོང་ཆེ་ཆུང	(2 sections 6001, 6002, of tsong kha pa's lam rim)	lhag mthong che chung
ལྷག་མཐོང་རྗེས་མཐུན་པ	gnas lugs kyi don cha 'dra tsam mthong ba,//. according to vipashyana	lhag mthong rjes mthun pa
ལྷག་མཐོང་ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་པ	infallible insight	lhag mthong phyin ci ma log pa
ལྷག་མཐོང་སྦར་བ	insight deepened	lhag mthong sbar ba
ལྷག་མཐོང་མཚན་ཉིད་པ	[R] the characteristics of vipashyana	lhag mthong mtshan nyid pa
ལྷག་མཐོང་གསུམ	the three kinds of vipashyana chn	lhag mthong gsum
ལྷག་ལྡན	having remainder of doubt [R]	lhag ldan
ལྷག་ལྡན་གྱི་མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས	reasons/ sign for having a remainder of doubt [R]	lhag ldan gyi ma nges pa'i rtags
ལྷག་ལྡན་གྱི་མ་ངེས་པའི་རྟགས་གཉིས	the two kinds of reasons/ sign for having a remainder of doubt [R]	lhag ldan gyi ma nges pa'i rtags gnyis
ལྷག་སྡུད	gathered to receive the remainders	lhag sdud
ལྷག་གནས	bringing down	lhag gnas
ལྷག་གནས་དངོས་གཞི་ལྔ	the five main objects of consecration chn	lhag gnas dngos gzhi lnga
ལྷག་པ	{bla ma las lhag pa med} none greater than	lhag pa
ལེཕ༹ཏ	over; 2) beyond/better than a certain measure; 3) Mercury, Wenesday [R]	left
ལྷག་པ་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་བསླབ་པ	the training in superior samadhi/excellent concentration [R]	lhag pa ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པ་བསྣན	to add something better	lhag pa bsnan
ལྷག་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ	1 of phur pa bzhi	lhag pa byang chub
ལྷག་པ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས	supreme bodhicitta	lhag pa byang chub sems
ལྷག་པ་མེད་པ	without remainder	lhag pa med pa
ལྷག་པ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	[of Mahayana] - sdom pa'i tshul khrims sogs rnams pa gsum ste theg pa dman pa las sems bskyed sogs kyis khyad par du gyur pas lhag pa zhes pa'i sgra sbyar ba; the training in excellent discipline /...	lhag pa tshul khrims kyi bslab pa
ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	the three trainings of higher discipline, concentration and knowledge; ethics, meditation, and wisdom	kyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པ་ཞིག་བྱུང	a wind arose lhag pa gzugs brnyan gyi dkyil 'khor gsum - three supreme image mandalas. The three supreme image mandalas are made of colored powder (rdul tshon), painted cloth (ras bris) and heaps (...	lhag pa zhig byung
ལྷག་པ་འི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གྱི་བསླབ་པ	supreme training of discipline	lhag pa 'i tshul khrims gyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པ་ཡི་ས	the superior levels	lhag pa yi sa
ལྷག་པ་ལེན་པའི་ལྟུང་བྱེད	the downfall of rceiving too much [R]	lhag pa len pa'i ltung byed
ལྷག་པ་ཤེས་རབ	higher understanding	lhag pa shes rab
ལྷག་པ་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	the supreme training of discrimination, training in superior wisdom/ intelligence/ knowledge /prajna [R]	lhag pa shes rab kyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པའི་ཀུན་རྫོབ	superior relative truth lhag pa'i khrims sogs slob pa la sbyor ba the activities of learning such as supreme discipline	lhag pa'i kun rdzob
ལྷག་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ	excessive arrogance, mibp 48	lhag pa'i nga rgyal
ལྷག་པའི་མཉམ་པ་གཉིས	twofold superior equality; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 154]	lhag pa'i mnyam pa gnyis
ལྷག་པའི་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་འབྱོར་པ	the wealth of supreme compassion	lhag pa'i thugs rje'i 'byor pa
ལྷག་པའི་དམ་ཚིག	[TRS 120-1] according to Ati Yoga	lhag pa'i dam tshig
ལྷག་པའི་དམ་ཚིག་ཉི་ཤུ	the 20 special/extra samayas	lhag pa'i dam tshig nyi shu
ལྷག་པའི་དོན	become supreme	lhag pa'i don
ལྷག་པའི་དོན་དམ	superior absolute truth	lhag pa'i don dam
ལྷག་པའི་བདེན་གཉིས་དབྱེར་མེད	superior indivisibility of the two truths	lhag pa'i bden gnyis dbyer med
ལྷག་པའི་བདེན་པ	superior truth	lhag pa'i bden pa
ལྷག་པའི་བདེན་པ་གཉིས	two superior truths	lhag pa'i bden pa gnyis
ལྷག་པའི་བདེན་པ་དབྱེར་མེད	superior indivisible truths; [detailed expl., Light of Wisdom, Vol. 2, page 153]	lhag pa'i bden pa dbyer med
ལྷག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	atiyoga, Atiyoga	lhag pa'i rnal 'byor
མེད་པའི་ལྟ་བ	Manjushrimitra's view of nonduality in accordance with the higher mahayoga	med pa'i lta ba
ལྷག་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག	emperor, supreme lord, king, supreme queen	lhag pa'i dbang phyug
ལྷག་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ	queen	lhag pa'i dbang phyug ma
ལྷག་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས	superior moral discipline	lhag pa'i tshul khrims
ལྷག་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གྱི་བསླབ་པ	supreme training of discipline lhag pa'i tshul khrims rnam par dag pa supreme completely pure discipline	lhag pa'i tshul khrims gyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པའི་ཚུལ་བཞི	Four Superior Commitments of Anu Yoga. There are no limits to guard because the essence of the ultimate commitment is free from transgressions and violations, there is	lhag pa'i tshul bzhi
ཨེ྾ཅླུསིབེ༹་ཨཔཐཡ་ཨནད་ཨེབེ༹ནནེསས་བེཅཽསེ་ཐེ་ཕོ༹རམས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་སུབཇེཅཏ	object dichotomy have been transcended,	exclusive apathy and evenness because the forms of the subject
ཐེསེ་ཨརེ་གཐེརེད་ཨིན་ཐེ་སིངླེ་ཨེ྾པནསེ་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་མིནད	as-such, and there is the commitment of reality itself	these are gathered in the single expanse of the mind
ལྷག་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད	extra implements [R]	lhag pa'i yo byad
ལྷག་པའི་ཡོ་བྱད་ཕྲན་ཚེགས	Tse	lhag pa'i yo byad phran tshegs
ལྷག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	supreme prajna/ knowledge/ wisdom	lhag pa'i shes rab
ལྷག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	[0f Mahayana] mtshan ma dang rnam par rtog pa thams cad spangs te/ rnam par rtog pa med par lhun gyis grub pa dang/ rjes sgyur ma lta bur spyod pa ni shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa	lhag pa'i shes rab kyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	training in the highest wisdom/prajna)	lhag pa'i shes rab rnam par dag pa
ལྷག་པའི་སེམས	higher thoughts	lhag pa'i sems
ལྷག་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ	[of Mahayana] {phar rol tu phyin pa bsgom pa dang/ sems can smin par bya ba dang/ sangs rgyas kyi chos thams cad bsgrub pa'i phyir byang chub sems dpa'i ting nge 'dzin dpa' bar 'gro ba la sogs pa l...	lhag pa'i sems kyi bslab pa
ལྷག་པའི་སེམས་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	supreme completely pure mind	lhag pa'i sems rnam par dag pa
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ	the noblest intention	lhag pa'i bsam pa
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ་བསྐུལ་བའི་མདོ	Sutra Requested by Superior Intention	lhag pa'i bsam pa bskul ba'i mdo
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ་དག་པ	superior pure intention	lhag pa'i bsam pa dag pa
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ་དག་པའི་ས	the level of superior pure intention	lhag pa'i bsam pa dag pa'i sa
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	Syn {lhag bsam rnam dag}	lhag pa'i bsam pa rnam par dag pa
པར་དགའ་བ	the supreme joy of superior pure intention	par dga' ba
ལྷག་པའི་བསམ་པའི་སྟོབས	the power of superior intention [R]	lhag pa'i bsam pa'i stobs
ལྷག་པའི་བསེར་བུ	a cold gusty wind lhag pa'i bslab pa ting nge 'dzin gyi bslab	lhag pa'i bser bu
ལྷག་པའི་བསླབ་པ་གསུམ	three excellent moral trainings/ superior disciplines [R]	lhag pa'i bslab pa gsum
ལྷག་པའི་ལྷ	supreme deity, special deity; especially exalted one [deity], supreme god / deity, one's personal yidam. Syn {yi dam gyi lha} tutelary deities, favored deity	lhag pa'i lha
ལྷག་པའི་ལྷ་གཙོ་བོ	chief yidam	lhag pa'i lha gtso bo
ལྷག་པར	more than usual; especially; moreover; extremely, completely, fully, totally, most especially, more, mostly, exceedingly, surpassingly, greatly, particularly, further	lhag par
ལྷག་པར་སྐྱོ་བ	extremely sad	lhag par skyo ba
ལྷག་པར་མཁས་པ	very capable, supremely learned	lhag par mkhas pa
ལྷག་པར་མཐུ་ཆེ	powerful	lhag par mthu che
ལྷག་པར་མཐོང་བ	intense insight tse	lhag par mthong ba
ལྷག་པར་དུ	strongly, earnestly, vehemently, violently, moreover, moreover, in particular, particularly	lhag par du
ལྷག་པར་ལྡན་མ	lady possessing more than what one ordinarily possesses, a yaksha princess	lhag par ldan ma
ལྷག་པར་འཕེལ་བ	increases exceedingly	lhag par 'phel ba
ལྷག་པར་བྱ་བ་དོན་དུ་མི་གཉེར་བ	not aspere to supreme activity	lhag par bya ba don du mi gnyer ba
ལྷག་པར་བྱས	done his duties	lhag par byas
ལྷག་པར་མཛེས	1) supremely beautiful; 2) mtshungs gsal gyi sgra zhig ste 'dra ba)	lhag par mdzes
ལྷག་པར་ཞེན་པ	coveting, grasping, longing for	lhag par zhen pa
ལྷག་པར་བཟང	most excellent	lhag par bzang
ལྷག་པར་ཡག་པོ	particularly good	lhag par yag po
ལྷག་པར་ལེགས་པ	uncommonly good	lhag par legs pa
ལྷག་པར་གསལ	supremely clear	lhag par gsal
ལྷག་པས་བརྩེ་དགོས	love him all the more!	lhag pas brtse dgos
ལྷག་པོ	excess, additional	lhag po
ལྷག་པོ་བསྣན་པ	add an additional part	lhag po bsnan pa
ལྷག་པོ་མེད	nothing higher	lhag po med
ལྷག་པོའི་ཆོ་ག	bhikshu daily lto chas kyi leftovers lhag ma lus na nyin rjes ma bar nyar thabs kyi liturgy/. supreme ritual	lhag po'i cho ga
ལྷག་པོར་མ་བྱས་པ	leave no leftovers	lhag por ma byas pa
ལྷག་པོར་ལེན་པའི་སྤང་བ	the abandoning fault of receiving too many [robes]	lhag por len pa'i spang ba
ལྷག་སྤྱོད	lhag spyod	lhag spyod
ལྷག་ཕུད	phud lhag - primary residual	lhag phud
ལྷག་ཕྱོགས་སུ	windward	lhag phyogs su
ལྷག་འཕྲོ	remainder/ leftover of/ from some activity [R]	lhag 'phro
ལྷག་འཕྲོས	remnant	lhag 'phros
ལྷག་འབྱོར	opulent, very wealthy	lhag 'byor
ལྷག་སྦོམ་ལྕི་བ	Heavy penalty of nearly breaking the group of 13	lhag sbom lci ba
ལྷག་མ	{mu stegs lhag ma rnams} all the other tirthikas	lhag ma
ལྷག་མ་ཅན	1) limitless; 2) the naga king mtha' yas; 3) latter part of winter)	lhag ma can
ལྷག་མ་བཅུ་གསུམ	a Vinaya term, the additional thirteen [vows / precepts]	lhag ma bcu gsum
ལྷག་མ་བཏང་བ	Giving the residual	lhag ma btang ba
ལྷག་མ་དང་བཅས་པ	with remainder	lhag ma dang bcas pa
ལྷག་མ་དང་བཅས་པའི་འགོག་པ	nyon mongs thams cad spangs kyang tshe ma 'phos pas sngar gyi rnam smin phung po 'dod gzugs na lnga dang gzugs med na bzhi'i lhag ma dang bcas pa'i 'gog pa gang yin pa	lhag ma dang bcas pa'i 'gog pa
ལྷག་མ་ལྡས	(A) completely, remainder, excess	lhag ma ldas
ལྷག་མ་བསྡུས	collecting the leftovers	lhag ma bsdus
ལྷག་མ་མ་ལུས་པ	all-inclusive, with no remainder lhag ma ma lus pa'i mya ngan las 'das pa nirvana with no remainder	lhag ma ma lus pa
ལྷག་མ་མེད་པ	without residue	lhag ma med pa
ལྷག་མ་མེད་པའི་འགོག་པ	Def. by Jamgön Kongtrül: {nyon mongs thams cad spangs shing tshe 'phos pas rnam smin phung po'i lhag ma med pa'i 'gog pa gang yin pa}	lhag ma med pa'i 'gog pa
ལྷག་མ་ཙམ	even more than	lhag ma tsam
ལྷག་མ་བཙོན་འཛིན་བྱེད་པ	to imprison the residual [at the time of dwelling in retreat]	lhag ma btson 'dzin byed pa
ལྷག་མ་ལས	entirely/ completely	lhag ma las
ལྷག་མ་ལས་མ་སོང	there were none at all	lhag ma las ma song
ལྷག་མ་ལུས་པ	all-inclusive, with no remainder [R]	lhag ma lus pa
ལྷག་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	residual mandala	lhag ma'i dkyil 'khor
ལྷག་མའི་མགྲོན	the residual guests	lhag ma'i mgron
ལྷག་མའི་ཆོ་ག	lhag chog - Residual ceremony	lhag ma'i cho ga
ལྷག་མའི་ཆོ་ག་བྱ་བ་ནི	as for performing the ritual of the leftovers	lhag ma'i cho ga bya ba ni
ལྷག་མའི་གཏོར་མ	lhag gtor - residual torma	lhag ma'i gtor ma
ལྷག་མའི་གཏོར་མ་བཏང་བ	to give the residual torma, to dedicate the residual torma. Syn. lhag mchod bya ba	lhag ma'i gtor ma btang ba
ལྷག་མའི་དམ་ཚིག	residual samaya	lhag ma'i dam tshig
ལྷག་མའི་བདག་པོ	the owner of the residuals [the {mar gyi gnas bdun po}	lhag ma'i bdag po
ལྷག་མའི་སྡེ	the additional [precepts] [R]	lhag ma'i sde
ལྷག་མའི་ཡར་གྱི་གནས་བདུན	the supreme higher realms	lhag ma'i yar gyi gnas bdun
ལྷག་མར་ཁ་ཕྲུ་འདེབས་པ	spit amrita/sman rinsewater on the leftovers	lhag mar kha phru 'debs pa
ལྷག་མེད	{lhag ma med pa} without remainder	lhag med
ལྷག་མེད་ཀྱི་འགོག་པ	cessation without remainder (Tserig) lhag med kyi dbyings su mya ngan las 'das	lhag med kyi 'gog pa
ལྷག་མེད་ཀྱི་མྱང་འདས	nirvana withut remainders	lhag med kyi myang 'das
ལྷག་མེད་ཀྱི་མྱང་འདས་གསུམ	the three kinds of nirvana without remainder	lhag med kyi myang 'das gsum
ལྷག་མེད་དགྲ་བཅོམ	sdug bsngal nyer len gyi phung po'i lhag ma phrad cing mthar phyin pa	lhag med dgra bcom
ལྷག་མེད་ཉང་འདས	dgra bcom pa nyon mongs pa ma lus par spangs pa tshe'i 'du byed btang zhing phung po'i rgyun chad pas sdug bsngal lam phung po'i lhag ma cung zad kyang ma lus par mar me shi ba lta bu	lhag med nyang 'das
ལྷག་མེད་བརྟགས་མིན་འགོག	unexamined cessation without remainder	lhag med brtags min 'gog
ལྷག་མེད་དུ	without remainder	lhag med du
ལྷག་མེད་དུ་ཞུགས	abide without remainder	lhag med du zhugs
ལྷག་མེད་མྱང་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ	nirvana without remainder	lhag med myang ngan las 'das pa
ལྷག་མེད་མྱང་འདས	perfect peace without remainder	lhag med myang 'das
ལྷག་ཙམ	a little more/ over [lo gcig lhag tsam ma 'gor bar: in a little more than a year]	lhag tsam
ལྷག་ཙམ་དུ	a little more, a little over, even more	lhag tsam du
ལྷག་བཙོན	residual prison, imprisoned residual [ at the time of retreat]	lhag btson
ལྷག་ཚད	remainder, remnant, left-over, residual, excess, surplus	lhag tshad
ལྷག་མཛེས	bhramin's thread	lhag mdzes
ལྷག་ཞབས	last phase, remainder	lhag zhabs
ལྷག་འོག	upper and lower	lhag 'og
ལྷག་ཡོད	there are more than --	lhag yod
ལྷག་ཡོད་པ	abundance, have a surplus	lhag yod pa
ལྷག་རོ	remainders of enjoyment, leftovers, remains, dregs, waste products, surplus, excess	lhag ro
ལྷག་རོལ	[arch] leftover food	lhag rol
ལྷག་ལུས	all-inclusive, with no remainder	lhag lus
ལྷག་ལུས་མེད་པ	without exception	lhag lus med pa
ལྷག་བསམ	superior intention	lhag bsam
ལྷག་བསམ་བསྐུལ་བ	Questions of Adhyasaya Sutra	lhag bsam bskul ba
ལྷག་བསམ་དགེ་བ	noble virtue	lhag bsam dge ba
ལྷག་བསམ་དག་པ	pure motivation / intention	lhag bsam dag pa
ལྷག་བསམ་དག་པའི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	arousing a pure superior intention [R]	lhag bsam dag pa'i sems bskyed
ལྷག་བསམ་རྣམ་དག	highest mind tse. perfect noble intention [R]	lhag bsam rnam dag
ལྷག་བསམ་རྣམ་དག་གི་སེམས་བསྐྱེད	the aspiraton of the pure superior intention [1st to the 7th bhumi]	lhag bsam rnam dag gi sems bskyed
ལྷག་བསམ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ	pure motivation lhag bsam rnam par dag pa'i sems bskyed - bodhichitta of pure superior intention	lhag bsam rnam par dag pa
ལྷག་བསམ་ཟོལ་མེད	superior [pure] aspiration/ highest mind beyond deception	lhag bsam zol med
ལྷག་ཧྲུལ	completely inferior and delapidated/tattered/ deteriorated	lhag hrul
ལྷག་ལྷག་དགོད	laughing loudly	lhag lhag dgod
ལྷག་ལྷག་དགོད་པ	to laugh loudly	lhag lhag dgod pa
ལྷག་ལྷུག	not tight, loose	lhag lhug
ལྷག་ལྷོག	on the body many swollen protuberances	lhag lhog
ལྷགས	reach, approach, come, exude, fester, ferment	lhags
ལྷགས་སྒང	[intense cold of an] icy wind	lhags sgang
ལྷགས་ངར	[intense cold of an] icy wind	lhags ngar
ལྷགས་པ	wind, cold, icy wind; wind; to meet, approach, assemble; {lhags pa, lhags pa, lhags pa} intr. v	lhags pa
ལྷགས་པ་རྒྱག་པ	blow, be windy, come, arrive [mdun du lhags: come before--]	lhags pa rgyag pa
ལྷགས་པ་རྒྱབ་པ	to blow [the wind]	lhags pa rgyab pa
ལྷགས་པ་ཚ་པོ	windy	lhags pa tsha po
ལྷགས་པས་འཁྱེར	to be blown / carried by the wind	lhags pas 'khyer
ལྷགས་པས་སྦྲེབས་པ	[arch] grang bas 'khyad pa	lhags pas sbrebs pa
ལྷགས་འཕྱར	wind arising	lhags 'phyar
ལྷགས་འཕྱར་བརྒྱབ་པ	to winnow	lhags 'phyar brgyab pa
ལྷགས་འཚུབ	swirling [icy] wind	lhags 'tshub
ལྷགས་རླུང	[icy] wind	lhags rlung
ལྷགས་སིར	cool wind	lhags sir
ལྷགས་བསིལ	cold wind	lhags bsil
ལྷང	1) stain, dirt; 2) power; 3) a little, a part	lhang
ལྷང་གིས་སྐྱེས་པ	vividly arisen	lhang gis skyes pa
ལྷང་གེ	clear	lhang ge
ལྷང་ངེ	perfectly white	lhang nge
ལྷང་ངེ་བ	1) alertly wide awake, fully aware, clear and bright. Syn {rang bzhin gsal ba} where {had de ba, ngo bo stong pa}. 2) clear, vivid, vividly resplendent. Syn {lhan ne} / {lham me}	lhang nge ba
ལྷང་ངེར	clear, w/o wavering, clear and unstirred, clearly awake, bright and alert, thrillingly	lhang nger
ལྷང་ངེར་བཞུགས	sit in shinning light/ glory	lhang nger bzhugs
ལྷང་བལྟས	to look vividly	lhang bltas
ལྷང་ཙམ	only a little/ part	lhang tsam
ལྷང་ཚེར	{lang tsher} med. mineral	lhang tsher
ལྷང་འཚེར	impressive expression, words that one feels	lhang 'tsher
ལྷང་འོག་བྱ་རོག་མིག	knee pan left and right bone kong kong yod pa'i gsang dmigs shig	lhang 'og bya rog mig
ལྷང་ལྷང	1) clear [and distinct], vivid; 2) be/do manifestly, openly, not hidden; 3) thrill	lhang lhang
ལྷང་ལྷང་དགའ་བྱེད་པ	openly be joyful	lhang lhang dga' byed pa
ལྷང་ལྷང་ངེ་བ	naturally & distinctly	lhang lhang nge ba
ལྷང་ལྷང་བརྗོད་པ	speaking with a clear & sonorous voice	lhang lhang brjod pa
ལྷང་ལྷང་ཐོས	clearly hear	lhang lhang thos
ལྷང་ལྷང་དུ	bright, distinctly	lhang lhang du
ལྷང་ལྷང་དུ་གསལ	to shine vividly	lhang lhang du gsal
ལྷང་ལྷང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གཟེར་བ	pain strikes obviously	lhang lhang sdug bsngal gzer ba
ལྷང་ལྷང་གཙུག	1 of 37 sacred bon places	lhang lhang gtsug
ལྷང་ལྷང་བཙུག	1 of drang srong bdun	lhang lhang btsug
ལྷང་ལྷང་ཚོར་བ	thrilling	lhang lhang tshor ba
ལྷད	alloy, fault, stain dirt	lhad
ལྷད་ཀྱིས་མ་སླད་པ	not marred by any defects	lhad kyis ma slad pa
ལྷད་སྐྱོན་མེད	without faults of adulteration	lhad skyon med
ལྷད་རྒྱབ་པ	adulterate	lhad rgyab pa
ལྷད་ཅན	adulterated, alloyed, corrupt, impure	lhad can
ལྷད་འཇུག་པ	gang gsungs bcos bsgyur	lhad 'jug pa
ལྷད་བཏང་བ	to adulterate, spoil	lhad btang ba
ལྷད་དེ་ལྷོད་དེ	dam po med pa'i don,//rked rags lhad de lhod de zhig bcings pa,//phad gog lhad de lhod de zhig brgyangs pa	lhad de lhod de
ལྷད་འདུག་པ	adulterated	lhad 'dug pa
ལྷད་པ	relax	lhad pa
ལྷད་མ	basket	lhad ma
ལྷད་མེད	unalloyed	lhad med
ལྷད་མེད་གད་གཙང	completely pure w/o gad snyigs [grain]	lhad med gad gtsang
ལྷད་མེད་པ	pure	lhad med pa
ལྷད་མོ	spectacle	lhad mo
ལྷད་མོ་ཆེན་པོ	spectacular	lhad mo chen po
ལྷད་མོ་ཚུགས་རྭ	stadium	lhad mo tshugs rwa
ལྷད་ཞུགས་པ	lhad 'jug pa; lhad bzhugs refers to lhad. [mss]	lhad zhugs pa
ལྷད་ཟན	mixed tsampa with adulterant	lhad zan
ལྷན	quiet, starved together	lhan
ལྷན་ཀྱི་དགའ་བ	innate joy	lhan kyi dga' ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས	coemergence. innate, natural. spontaneously born. Syn {lhan cig skyes pa} [sahaja] spontaneous coemergence, innate, instinctual [natural, unconscious]. Syn {lhan cig skyes pa} [sahaja] spontaneous ...	lhan skyes
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དགའ་བ	the spontaneously arisen bliss, innate bliss; spontaneously arisen bliss, spontaneous joy	lhan skyes kyi dga' ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བ	spontaneously arisen bliss	lhan skyes kyi dge ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་འཇིག་ལྟ	co-emergent view of a transitory collection	lhan skyes kyi 'jig lta
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་པ	coemergent kleshas	lhan skyes kyi nyon mongs pa
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དྲི	co-emergent defilements	lhan skyes kyi dri
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དྲི་སྤོས	self-existing fragrance	lhan skyes kyi dri spos
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་དྲི་མ	co-emergent defilements	lhan skyes kyi dri ma
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་བདག	co-emergent ego/ nature	lhan skyes kyi bdag
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ	simultaneous joy TSE	lhan skyes kyi bde ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོ	simultaneous joy	lhan skyes kyi bde ba chen po
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ནད	hereditary disease	lhan skyes kyi nad
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ཕོ་ཉ	co-emergent messengers	lhan skyes kyi pho nya
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་མ་རིག་པ	co-emergent ignorance	lhan skyes kyi ma rig pa
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་རྨ	innate holes in the body	lhan skyes kyi rma
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་རྩ་བའི་ཁ་དོག	natural primary color	lhan skyes kyi rtsa ba'i kha dog
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན	co-emergent/ innate good qualities	lhan skyes kyi yon tan
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་རླུང	coemergent wind	lhan skyes kyi rlung
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་སེམས	innate mind 2920	lhan skyes kyi sems
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཀྱི་ལྷ་འདྲེ	co-emergent gods and demons	lhan skyes kyi lha 'dre
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་གྲུབ་པ	Accomplishment of the Innate	lhan skyes grub pa
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་དགའ་བ	co-emergent delight,	lhan skyes dga' ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་དགའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of the innate joy, pristine cognition of coemergence	lhan skyes dga'i ye shes
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཐ་སྙད་པའི་ཚད་མ	natural conventional validating cognition	lhan skyes tha snyad pa'i tshad ma
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་དང་ཀུན་བཏགས	innate and imputed, [instinctive and learned]	lhan skyes dang kun btags
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ནད	hereditary disease	lhan skyes nad
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་པའི་དགའ་བ	coemergent delight	lhan skyes pa'i dga' ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་པའི་བདེ་བ	coemergent bliss	lhan skyes pa'i bde ba
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ	three solitudes of body speech and mind and luminosity realizing pho nya mo ? co-emergent mother	lhan skyes ma
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ་འདྲེས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	inherent unmixed ignorance	lhan skyes ma 'dres pa'i ma rig pa
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ་རིག	innate delusion	lhan skyes ma rig
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ་རིག་པ	{lhan cig skyes pa'i ma rig pa} innate/ coemergent nonrecognition of awareness; nonrecognition of awareness (that is) coemergent with being itself	lhan skyes ma rig pa
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་རྨ	coemergent lesions	lhan skyes rma
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་རྨ་བརྒྱད	CHN	lhan skyes rma brgyad
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ཡེ་ཤེས	{lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes} innate/ coemergent timeless awareness; timeless awareness coemergent with being itself	lhan skyes ye shes
ལྷན་སྐྱེས་ལྷ་ལྔ	the five co-emergent deities	lhan skyes lha lnga
ལྷན་སྐྲེན	tumor	lhan skren
ལྷན་ཁང	council	lhan khang
ལྷན་འཁྲབ	joint performance, festival of performing arts	lhan 'khrab
ལྷན་གིས	quietly	lhan gis
ལྷན་གྱི་གྲུབ་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	spontaneous attention	lhan gyi grub par 'jug pa'i yid byed
ལྷན་གྱིས	(H together, w quietly	lhan gyis
ལྷན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ་བཟོད་པ་འཐོབ	attain quiet/accompanying patience	lhan gyis grub pa bzod pa 'thob
ལྷན་གྱིས་གནས་པ	to dwell quietly, to remain utterly still	lhan gyis gnas pa
ལྷན་གྱིས་ཞི	completely subside	lhan gyis zhi
ལྷན་གླན་པ	gos la lhan pa brgyab pa	lhan glan pa
ལྷན་རྒྱས	1) ordinary; 2) gather, convene; 3) [state] council/ society/ company; 4) individuals using the same seal together; 5) together w (/ [mo lhan rgyas: w her]	lhan rgyas
ལྷན་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་གོ་ས	ministerial rank	lhan rgyas kyi go sa
ལྷན་རྒྱས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	plenary session	lhan rgyas gros tshogs
ལྷན་རྒྱས་འཆིབ་རྒྱུ་གནང་བ	h. to accompany	lhan rgyas 'chib rgyu gnang ba
ལྷན་རྒྱས་ཐོག	bring together, assemble lhan rgyas thog nas bka' bsdur zhib lhing	lhan rgyas thog
ལྷན་སྒྲུབ	cooperation, joint effort	lhan sgrub
ལྷན་ཅིག	together [w]	lhan cig
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེ་སྦྱོར	[sahaja yoga] the means of realizing coemergent awareness	lhan cig skye sbyor
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་དགའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of coemergent joy/ bliss	lhan cig skyes dga'i ye shes
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་འདྲེ	innate demon	lhan cig skyes 'dre
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ	1) primordially arising w, coemergent, innate, inherent, intrinsic, coemergence; 2) mtse ma ???	lhan cig skyes pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ་འི་མ་རིག་པ	coemergent ignorance	lhan cig skyes pa 'i ma rig pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི	coemergent, intrinsic	lhan cig skyes pa'i
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་དགའ་བ	innate joy	lhan cig skyes pa'i dga' ba
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་བདག	co-emergent ego/ nature	lhan cig skyes pa'i bdag
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་འདེས	inherent/innate demon	lhan cig skyes pa'i 'des
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་འདྲེས	inherent / innate demon	lhan cig skyes pa'i 'dres
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	sahaja yoga, {lhan cig skyes sbyor}	lhan cig skyes pa'i rnal 'byor
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རིམ་པ་ཐེ་སྟགེས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཡོག་ཨོཕ༹་ཅོ	emergence	lhan cig skyes pa'i rnal 'byor gyi rim pa the stages of the yoga of co
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	innate/ coemergent nonrecognition of awareness; nonrecognition of awareness (that is) coemergent with being itself	lhan cig skyes pa'i ma rig pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	coemergent wisdom, intrinsic wakefulness; coemergent pristine awareness, spontaneously born primal awareness / knowledge	lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	coemergent nature	lhan cig skyes pa'i rang bzhin
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	co-emergent prajna	lhan cig skyes pa'i shes rab
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ	inherent / innate god / deity	lhan cig skyes pa'i lha
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་འབྱོར	connate conjunction	lhan cig skyes 'byor
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་སྦྱོར	sahaja yoga the means of realizing coemergent awareness TSE	lhan cig skyes sbyor
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་མ	the coemergent mother/consort	lhan cig skyes ma
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་ལྷ	innate deity	lhan cig skyes lha
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཁ་སྤྱ་ཟེར	[arch] 1) discuss together; 2) speak pointless talk	lhan cig kha spya zer
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཁ་གཤགས་འདེབས་པ	discuss together	lhan cig kha gshags 'debs pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་འགྲོགས་པ	to accompany; escort, companion	lhan cig 'grogs pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་རྒྱུ་བ	accompanying	lhan cig rgyu ba
ལྷན་ཅིག་བརྗོད་པ	expressing together	lhan cig brjod pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན	ornament of expressing together	lhan cig brjod pa'i rgyan
ལྷན་ཅིག་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན་གསུམ	CHN	lhan cig brjod pa'i rgyan gsum
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ	simultaneously, together with; together	lhan cig tu
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་པ	co-emergently arising	lhan cig tu skyes pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་བ	going co-emergently	lhan cig tu rgyu ba
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་འདུ་པ	gather into coemergence	lhan cig tu 'du pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་པ	gathered into coemergence	lhan cig tu 'dus pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	abiding coemergently	lhan cig tu gnas pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་བྱས་པ	made co-emergent	lhan cig tu byas pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་མི་གནས་པ	not abiding coemergently	lhan cig tu mi gnas pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་འཛོམས	gather together	lhan cig tu 'dzoms
ལྷན་ཅིག་མཐོང	gnam gang ste bod zla so so'i tshes pa sum cu'i nyin mor nyi zla skar gsum dus gcig tu mthong thub zer	lhan cig mthong
ལྷན་ཅིག་འཐམས་པ	[arch] fasten together [to the hands]	lhan cig 'thams pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་འདུག	to stay together	lhan cig 'dug
ལྷན་ཅིག་འདོན་པའི་འབྲུག་སྒྲ	thunder	lhan cig 'don pa'i 'brug sgra
ལྷན་ཅིག་གནས་པ	to abide simultaneously with being itself	lhan cig gnas pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་པ	combined with	lhan cig pa
ལྷན་ཅིག་པའི་མ་རིག	x {'jig lta dang mthar lta de gnyis dang lhan cig pa'i ma rig pa} the belief in the transitory [collection], the belief that [upholds] extremes	lhan cig pa'i ma rig
ཨནད་ཐེ་ཨིགནོརནཅེ་ཅོ	existing with these two	and the ignorance co
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྤྱོད	wife, mistress of the house	lhan cig spyod
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྤྱོད་མ	bride, wife	lhan cig spyod ma
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱས་རྐྱེན	co-operative condition	lhan cig byas rkyen
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	comergent cause	lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད	new moon day, 30th of the month	lhan cig byed
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད་རྐྱེན	cooperative condition, cooperative [nonsubstantial] cause	lhan cig byed rkyen
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད་རྒྱུ	co-operating cause [thd]	lhan cig byed rgyu
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད་པའི་རྐྱེན	co-operating conditions	lhan cig byed pa'i rkyen
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱུ	co-operating cause	lhan cig byed pa'i rgyu
ལྷན་ཅིག་བྱེད་འབྲས	co-operative effect	lhan cig byed 'bras
ལྷན་ཅིག་འབྱུང་རྒྱུ	co-emergent cause	lhan cig 'byung rgyu
ལྷན་ཅིག་འབྱུང་བ	occurring together, occur concurrently	lhan cig 'byung ba
ལྷན་ཅིག་འབྱུང་བའི་རྐྱེན	co-originating/	lhan cig 'byung ba'i rkyen
ལྷན་ཅིག་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	co-originating cause, mutual cause, simultaneously arising cause	lhan cig 'byung ba'i rgyu
ལྷན་ཅིག་མི་གནས་འགལ	contradictory in the sense of not abiding together. + into	lhan cig mi gnas 'gal
ཏྭོ་ཏཡྤེས	Non-coexistent oppositeness. contradictory in the sense of not abiding together	two types
ཐྲོཨུགྷ་ནེབེ༹ར་ཅོ	existing	through never co
ལྷན་ཅིག་མི་གནས་འགལ་གྱི་རྟགས་སྦྱོར	syllogism of the contradiction of not existing together lhan cig mi gnas 'gal gyi rtags sbyor bcu	lhan cig mi gnas 'gal gyi rtags sbyor
ལྷན་ཅིག་མི་འབྱུང་བ	cannot occur together	lhan cig mi 'byung ba
ལྷན་ཅིག་དམིགས་ངེས	ascertainment of simultaneous observation [ggd]	lhan cig dmigs nges
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཡེ་ཤེས	intrinsic wakefulness	lhan cig ye shes
ལྷན་ཅིག་ཡོད་པ	to be coexistent	lhan cig yod pa
ལྷན་གཅིག	together with, altogether, SA lhan cig	lhan gcig
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེ་སྦྱོར	(sahaja yoga the means of realizing coemergent awareness	lhan gcig skye sbyor
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་དགའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of coemergent joy/ bliss	lhan gcig skyes dga'i ye shes
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ	1) primordially arising w, coemergent, innate, inherent, intrinsic, coemergence; 2) mtse ma ??? lhan gcig skyes pa chos sku rang bzhin	lhan gcig skyes pa
གྱི་འོད་གསལ	the coemergent natural luminosity of dharmakaya lhan gcig skyes pa bde ba chen po'i ye	gyi 'od gsal
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ་འི་མ་རིག་པ	coemergent ignorance	lhan gcig skyes pa 'i ma rig pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་བདག	co-emergent ego/ nature 2922	lhan gcig skyes pa'i bdag
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་འདེས	inherent/innate demon	lhan gcig skyes pa'i 'des
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་རིམ་པ་ཐེ་སྟགེས་ཨོཕ༹་ཐེ་ཡོག་ཨོཕ༹་ཅོ	emergence	lhan gcig skyes pa'i rnal 'byor gyi rim pa the stages of the yoga of co
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ	coemergent ignorance	lhan gcig skyes pa'i ma rig pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས	the wisdom of coemergence, coemergent wisdom	lhan gcig skyes pa'i ye shes
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རང་བཞིན	coemergent nature	lhan gcig skyes pa'i rang bzhin
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཤེས་རབ	coemergent prajna	lhan gcig skyes pa'i shes rab
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ	inherent/innate god/deity/divinity	lhan gcig skyes pa'i lha
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་སྦྱོར	sahaja yoga the means of realizing coemergent awareness TSE	lhan gcig skyes sbyor
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྐྱེས་མ	the coemergent mother/consort	lhan gcig skyes ma
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཁ་སྤྱ་ཟེར	[arch] 1) discuss together; 2) speak pointless talk	lhan gcig kha spya zer
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཁ་གཤགས་འདེབས་པ	discuss together	lhan gcig kha gshags 'debs pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་འགྲོགས་པ	accompany	lhan gcig 'grogs pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་རྒྱུ་བ	accompanying	lhan gcig rgyu ba
ལྷན་གཅིག་བརྗོད་པ	expressing together	lhan gcig brjod pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན	ornament of expressing together	lhan gcig brjod pa'i rgyan
ལྷན་གཅིག་བརྗོད་པའི་རྒྱན་གསུམ	CHN	lhan gcig brjod pa'i rgyan gsum
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ	together	lhan gcig tu
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་པ	co-emergently arising	lhan gcig tu skyes pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་བ	going co-emergently	lhan gcig tu rgyu ba
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུ་པ	gather into coemergence	lhan gcig tu 'du pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུས་པ	gathered into coemergence	lhan gcig tu 'dus pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ	abiding coemergently	lhan gcig tu gnas pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱས་པ	made co-emergent	lhan gcig tu byas pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་མི་གནས་པ	not abiding coemergently	lhan gcig tu mi gnas pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཏུ་འཛོམས	gather together	lhan gcig tu 'dzoms
ལྷན་གཅིག་མཐོང	gnam gang ste bod zla so so'i tshes pa sum cu'i nyin mor nyi zla skar gsum dus gcig tu mthong thub zer	lhan gcig mthong
ལྷན་གཅིག་འཐམས་པ	[arch] fasten together [to the hands]	lhan gcig 'thams pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་འདུག	stay together	lhan gcig 'dug
ལྷན་གཅིག་གནས་པ	live together in harmony	lhan gcig gnas pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་པ	co-emergent, =	lhan gcig pa
ལྷན་གཅིག་སྤྱོད	wife, mistress of the house	lhan gcig spyod
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱས་རྐྱེན	co-operative condition	lhan gcig byas rkyen
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱེད	new moon day, 30th of the month	lhan gcig byed
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱེད་རྐྱེན	co-operative condition/ (non-substantial cause	lhan gcig byed rkyen
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱེད་པའི་རྐྱེན	co-operating conditions	lhan gcig byed pa'i rkyen
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱུ	co-operating cause	lhan gcig byed pa'i rgyu
ལྷན་གཅིག་བྱེད་འབྲས	co-operative effect	lhan gcig byed 'bras
ལྷན་གཅིག་འབྱུང་རྒྱུ	co-emergent cause	lhan gcig 'byung rgyu
ལྷན་གཅིག་འབྱུང་བ	co-arising, coemergent	lhan gcig 'byung ba
ལྷན་གཅིག་འབྱུང་བའི་རྐྱེན	cooriginating/ co-emergent/ mutual condition of production	lhan gcig 'byung ba'i rkyen
ལྷན་གཅིག་འབྱུང་བའི་རྒྱུ	co-originating/	lhan gcig 'byung ba'i rgyu
ལྷན་གཅིག་མི་གནས་འགལ	contradiction of not existing together	lhan gcig mi gnas 'gal
ལྷན་གཅིག་མི་གནས་འགལ་གྱི་རྟགས་སྦྱོར	syllogism of the contradiction of not existing together lhan gcig mi gnas 'gal gyi rtags sbyor bcu	lhan gcig mi gnas 'gal gyi rtags sbyor
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཡེ་ཤེས	co-emergent wisdom	lhan gcig ye shes
ལྷན་གཅིག་ཡོད་པ	be coexistent	lhan gcig yod pa
ལྷན་ཏེ	SA dgu te	lhan te
ལྷན་ཐབས	syn {kha skong}	lhan thabs
ལྷན་ཐོག	brought together, completed	lhan thog
ལྷན་ཐོག་ནས་ཐག་གཅོད་གནང	having brought everything together, he decided	lhan thog nas thag gcod gnang
ལྷན་ཐོག་ལྷན་བརྩེགས	patch, join, unite	lhan thog lhan brtsegs
ལྷན་དུ	common together, with one another, with, together, combining also with, while at the same time	lhan du
ལྷན་དུ་ཁྱེར་སོང	was carried away with it	lhan du khyer song
ལྷན་དུ་འགྲོགས་པ	to accompany, go with	lhan du 'grogs pa
ལྷན་དུ་སྡོད	cohabit	lhan du sdod
ལྷན་དུ་འབྲེལ་བ	cohabit	lhan du 'brel ba
ལྷན་དུ་ཡོད	living together	lhan du yod
ལྷན་དུ་སོང	gone together with	lhan du song
ལྷན་དྲུབ་མ	applique thangka	lhan drub ma
ལྷན་བསྡུས	mix together	lhan bsdus
ལྷན་ནས	together, with one another	lhan nas
ལྷན་ནེ	ex {ma 'phros pa'i lhan ne}	lhan ne
ལྷན་ནེ་གནས་པ	be able to concentrate calmly [in shamatha]	lhan ne gnas pa
ལྷན་ནེ་བ	(to be) very present stable/ abiding/ steadfast; [EPK: "remaining in nonduality/ a natural state"]	lhan ne ba
ལྷན་ནེ་བག་ཕབ	rest quietly and relaxed	lhan ne bag phab
ལྷན་ནེར	serene/ quietly/carefully; gentle, stillness, like a small tired bird completely resting on a vast plain, quietly	lhan ner
ལྷན་ནེར་ཉོན	listen one-pointedly/ attentively	lhan ner nyon
ལྷན་ནེར་གནས་པ	became serene	lhan ner gnas pa
ལྷན་ནེར་བཞག	vivid	lhan ner bzhag
ལྷན་ནེར་གསན	listen carefully	lhan ner gsan
ལྷན་གནས	{lhan ne gnas pa}, {lhan ner gnas pa} quiet / serene calm	lhan gnas
ལྷན་པ	patch, a patch	lhan pa
ལྷན་པ་གླན་པ	patch/ mend clothes	lhan pa glan pa
ལྷན་པ་རྒྱག	mend, patch	lhan pa rgyag
ལྷན་པ་རྒྱག་པ	mend	lhan pa rgyag pa
ལྷན་པ་བརྒྱབ་པ	patch/ mend clothes	lhan pa brgyab pa
ལྷན་པ་གདབ	patch together, [subsequent thoughts are not patched together in the mind]	lhan pa gdab
ལྷན་པ་འདེབས་པ	patch together	lhan pa 'debs pa
ལྷན་པའི་ཚབ་ལ་ཚེམ་བུ་རྒྱབ་པ	darn	lhan pa'i tshab la tshem bu rgyab pa
ལྷན་ཕེབས	come together	lhan phebs
ལྷན་ཕེབས་མི་སྣ	entourage, party	lhan phebs mi sna
ལྷན་བྱེད་པའི་རྒྱན	auxiliary cause or dependence	lhan byed pa'i rgyan
ལྷན་འབྱུང	together, friend, companion	lhan 'byung
ལྷན་འབྲེལ	continuing the session	lhan 'brel
ལྷན་སྦྲེལ	together 2923	lhan sbrel
ལྷན་མེར	relaxed mind	lhan mer
ལྷན་མོལ	discussion, talk [h]	lhan mol
ལྷན་ཚོགས	assembly, seminar, session	lhan tshogs
ལྷན་འཛོམས	convention	lhan 'dzoms
ལྷན་འཛོམས་འཁྲབ་སྟོན	festival	lhan 'dzoms 'khrab ston
ལྷན་འཛོམས་གྲོས་མོལ	[joint] discussion, conversation [h]	lhan 'dzoms gros mol
ལྷན་འཛོམས་གྲོས་མོལ་གནང	have a [joint] discussion/ conversation [h]	lhan 'dzoms gros mol gnang
ལྷན་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས	[plenary] meeting, conference	lhan 'dzoms gros tshogs
ལྷན་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཆེན་པོ	[plenary] meeting, conference	lhan 'dzoms gros tshogs chen po
ལྷན་འཛོམས་དམབ་འཐབ	joint battle	lhan 'dzoms dmab 'thab
ལྷན་འཛོམས་ཚོགས་ཆེན	[plenary] meeting, conference	lhan 'dzoms tshogs chen
ལྷན་ལྷན	clear and vivid	lhan lhan
ལྷབ	(A) very wide	lhab
ལྷབ་བེ་ལྷུབ་བེ	1) gently waving; 2) hospitable; 3) [excessively] wide; 4) flowing; 5) excessively ornamented (6) slovenly clothes)	lhab be lhub be
ལྷབ་སེ་ལྷབ་པ	flutter to and fro, glimmer	lhab se lhab pa
ལྷབ་ལྷབ	gently waving or hospitable; blazing/ flickering (?)	lhab lhab
ལྷབ་ལྷབ་པ	1) gently waving; 2) hospitable)	lhab lhab pa
ལྷབ་ལྷབ་པ་དན་བསྐྱོད་པའི་སྒྲ	a kind of war cry	lhab lhab pa dan bskyod pa'i sgra
ལྷབ་ལྷུབ	1) gently waving; 2) hospitable; 3) [excessively] wide; 4) flowing; 5) excessively ornamented (6) slovenly clothes)/ [R]	lhab lhub
ལྷབ་ལྷེབ	lhe ba chung ngu [little braid?],//kha ba lhab lheb tu 'bab	lhab lheb
ལྷབས	middle	lhabs
ལྷབས་སེ་ལྷབ	(to) snap in the wind/ flap/ wave	lhabs se lhab
ལྷམ	shoes/ boots	lham
ལྷམ་ཀོ	shoe-leather	lham ko
ལྷམ་ཀྲད	pieces of leather used for patching soles	lham krad
ལྷམ་ཁོག	shoes/ boots	lham khog
ལྷམ་མཁན	worker in hide and leather, shoemaker	lham mkhan
ལྷམ་གོག	shoes/ boots	lham gog
ལྷམ་གོག་པོ	shoes/ boots	lham gog po
ལྷམ་གྱི་ཆེད་དུ་རྐང་པ་གཞོག	whittle the feet to fit the shoes, stretch facts to fit preconceived ideas	lham gyi ched du rkang pa gzhog
ལྷམ་གྱི་འཇུར་སྒྲོག	belt, ribbon, tape	lham gyi 'jur sgrog
ལྷམ་གྱི་རྡོག་པ	shoe sole	lham gyi rdog pa
ལྷམ་གྱི་ཨ་ཀྲད	worn out leather of old shoes and boots, leather-shoe	lham gyi a krad
ལྷམ་གྱོན	put on shoes/ boots	lham gyon
ལྷམ་མགོ	1) boot front [R]; 2) shoe/ boot	lham mgo
ལྷམ་འགྲམ	upper leather or vamp of boots	lham 'gram
ལྷམ་སྒྲོ	shoe-strap, lace, latchet, shoe strap, string for lacing felt leggings	lham sgro
ལྷམ་སྒྲོ་གུ་ཅན	boots sgro gu can ??? lta bu	lham sgro gu can
ལྷམ་སྒྲོག	boot strap	lham sgrog
ལྷམ་ལྕགས	boot-sole wear protecting nail	lham lcags
ལྷམ་ཆ་གཅིག	a pair of boots	lham cha gcig
ལྷམ་འཇའ་ཆེན་སྔོན་པོ	Tibetan govt. gi gung bka' blon gyis {rgya lu chas} official clothes wearing spros skabs elegant boots	lham 'ja' chen sngon po
ལྷམ་ཉེ་བའི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	boots of a universal monarch	lham nye ba'i rin po che
ལྷམ་བརྙིངས	old shoes	lham brnyings
ལྷམ་རྟ་ཟོན་མ	{lha lcam}'s [high noble woman] gyi elegant boots	lham rta zon ma
ལྷམ་བསྟུན་རྐང་གཞོག	whittle the feet to fit the shoes, stretch facts to fit preconceived ideas	lham bstun rkang gzhog
ལྷམ་ཐག	lham sgrog [strap, ties?]	lham thag
ལྷམ་མཐིལ	boot sole, sole of boots	lham mthil
ལྷམ་རྡོག	boot sole wear-protector lham rdog la glan pa'i ko krad rnying	lham rdog
པའམ་རྡོག་པ་རྙིང་པ	worn out shoe sole	pa'am rdog pa rnying pa
ལྷམ་སྣ་བསྒྱུར	turn the boot tips and go	lham sna bsgyur
ལྷམ་སྣ་བསྒྱུར་བ	turn the boot tips and go	lham sna bsgyur ba
ལྷམ་པ	square, cubic TSE	lham pa
ལྷམ་སྤུ	boot-top making cloth	lham spu
ལྷམ་སྤུ་མ	cotton fiber shoes	lham spu ma
ལྷམ་ཕུད	remove/ take off shoes/ boots	lham phud
ལྷམ་བུ་ཆུ་གཤེར	insect/ worm	lham bu chu gsher
ལྷམ་བུ་གཤེར	insect/ worm	lham bu gsher
ལྷམ་འབོལ	cloth boots/ shoes	lham 'bol
ལྷམ་མེ	radiant; bright, brilliant, luminous, incandescent, lustrous, beaming, effulgent, lambent, lucent, refulgent, shining; mind is vivid [due to compassion]	lham me
ལྷམ་མེ་འཕྲོ	be shining/ illuminated	lham me 'phro
ལྷམ་མེ་འཕྲོ་བ	be shining/ illuminated	lham me 'phro ba
ལྷམ་མེ་བ	radiance	lham me ba
ལྷམ་མེ་ལྷང་ངེ	vivid, clear, shining, brilliant	lham me lhang nge
ལྷམ་མེ་ལྷན་ནེ	clear, and brilliant,	lham me lhan ne
ལྷམ་མེ་ལྷན་ནེ་ལྷང་ངེ	radiant, clear, and brilliant, shimmering, glimmering, glittering	lham me lhan ne lhang nge
ལྷམ་མེའོ	luminous, blazing, bright	lham me'o
ལྷམ་མེར	luminous, blazing, bright	lham mer
ལྷམ་མེར་འཕྲོ	be shining/ illuminated	lham mer 'phro
ལྷམ་མེར་འཕྲོ་བ	be shining/ illuminated	lham mer 'phro ba
ལྷམ་མེར་འབར་བ	to blaze brilliantly, brilliant	lham mer 'bar ba
ལྷམ་མེར་གསལ	shone brightly	lham mer gsal
ལྷམ་ཞིག	slipper	lham zhig
ལྷམ་ཟོན	felt boots	lham zon
ལྷམ་ཟོན་པ	felt boots	lham zon pa
ལྷམ་ཟོམ་པ	boot w sole sewed w thread dang to that boot tops fixed	lham zom pa
ལྷམ་བཟོ	make boots/ shoes	lham bzo
ལྷམ་བཟོ་མཁན	boot maker	lham bzo mkhan
ལྷམ་བཟོ་བ	cobbler	lham bzo ba
ལྷམ་ཡུ	boot tops/ legs	lham yu
ལྷམ་ཡུ་ཆད	sort of slippers to which cotton leggings are attached	lham yu chad
ལྷམ་ཡུ་ཐུང	short topped boots	lham yu thung
ལྷམ་ཡུ་རིང	boots	lham yu ring
ལྷམ་རུལ་ནང་ནས་དྲི་ངན	bad smell of rotting boots	lham rul nang nas dri ngan
ལྷམ་ལྷམ	brilliantly blazing radiating w light	lham lham
ལྷྭམ	boots	lhwam
ལཧབ༹མ	boots	lhvam
ལྷམས་ཀྱིས	once, all, everything 2924	lhams kyis
ལྷའ་ལྷའ	thin, loosely woven cloth	lha' lha'
ལྷའི	divine, sacred, sublime	lha'i
ལྷའི་སྐད	the gods' tongue; Sanskrit	lha'i skad
ལྷའི་སྐུ	form of a deity	lha'i sku
ལྷའི་སྐུ་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ	devak yamah mudr	lha'i sku phyag rgya chen po
ལྷའི་སྐྱེ་བ	divine rebirth	lha'i skye ba
ལྷའི་འཁོར་ཉུང་ངུ་དང་བཅས	I will take along a small entourage of gods	lha'i 'khor nyung ngu dang bcas
ལྷའི་གར་མཁན	divine dancer	lha'i gar mkhan
ལྷའི་གར་འཆམ	religious dances	lha'i gar 'cham
ལྷའི་གོས	a garment worn by divinities	lha'i gos
ལྷའི་གླུ་མཁན	celestial musician	lha'i glu mkhan
ལྷའི་འགྲོ་བ	beings born in the god realm	lha'i 'gro ba
ལྷའི་རྒྱབ་ཡོལ	lha'i bzhugs khri'i rgyab yol	lha'i rgyab yol
ལྷའི་རྒྱལ་ཆེན	1) Bhrama and Indra; 2) the four great kings; 3) buddha lha'i rgyal chen	lha'i rgyal chen
ལྷའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	the king of the gods	lha'i rgyal po
ལྷའི་སྒྲོན་མེ	eye	lha'i sgron me
ལྷའི་ང་རྒྱལ	divine pride of identification with a deity; "vajra pride"	lha'i nga rgyal
ལྷའི་ངར་རྒྱལ	divine pride	lha'i ngar rgyal
ལྷའི་མངོན་རྟོགས	divine realization	lha'i mngon rtogs
ལྷའི་རྔ་སྒྲ	{lha dang dri za mi'am ci dang thub dbang rnams kyis lha'i rnga sgra dung dang bcas bcom ldan 'das la bstod dbyangs sgrogs} gods, gandharvas, kinnaras, and sages alike sounded drums and conch shell...	lha'i rnga sgra
ལྷའི་རྔ་ཅན	having the divine drum, Indra	lha'i rnga can
ལྷའི་རྔ་བོ་ཆེ	the great drum of the gods	lha'i rnga bo che
ལྷའི་ལྕུག་མ	tree, SA klu shing, bcud mi ldan	lha'i lcug ma
ལྷའི་ཆུ་བོ	heavenly rivers	lha'i chu bo
ལྷའི་ཆུ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན	CHN	lha'i chu yan lag brgyad ldan
ལྷའི་ཆོས་ལུགས	religion of the gods, Bon	lha'i chos lugs
ལྷའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	celestial/ god realm	lha'i 'jig rten
ལྷའི་རྗེ	the king's master	lha'i rje
ལྷའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང	divine wish-fulfilling tree; 2) tree of the god realm	lha'i ljon shing
ལྷའི་བསྙེན་པ	divine approximation	lha'i bsnyen pa
ལྷའི་བཏུང་བ	drink of the gods lha'i rten can gyi rgyun zhugs srid pa lan	lha'i btung ba
ལྷའི་ཐིག་ཚད	divine proportions [R]	lha'i thig tshad
ལྷའི་ཐུབ་པ་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Indra of the hundred sacrifices, sage of the gods [R]	lha'i thub pa dbang po brgya byin
ལྷའི་ཐོ་ཡོར	[R] stone pyramid of the gods	lha'i tho yor
ལྷའི་དག་བྱེད	River Ganges	lha'i dag byed
ལྷའི་དེ་ཁོ་ན་ཉིད	the suchness of the gods	lha'i de kho na nyid
ལྷའི་དྲང་སྲོང	divine i hi	lha'i drang srong
ལྷའི་གདུང་བརྒྱུད	lineage of the gods	lha'i gdung brgyud
ལྷའི་བདག་པོ	1) Buddha; 2) Bhrama; 3) Indra; 4) lord/ king of the gods	lha'i bdag po
ལྷའི་བདུད་རྩི	drink of the gods, ambrosia	lha'i bdud rtsi
ལྷའི་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆུས	with divine water lha'i bdud rtsi'i sman gyis rgyal po'i lus	lha'i bdud rtsi'i chus
སྔར་བཞིན་སོས་པར་བྱས་ཏེ	restored the king's body to its former state with the magical elixir of the gods	sngar bzhin sos par byas te
ལྷའི་མདོ་ཉུང་ངུ	{lha'i mdo nyung ngu}	lha'i mdo nyung ngu
ལྷའི་འདབ	tree	lha'i 'dab
ལྷའི་འདུན་ས	meeting place of the gods	lha'i 'dun sa
ལྷའི་ནང་ན་ཡོད	{mdze mo dga' ldan lha'i nang na yod pa} about the leper woman going to the Tushita heaven	lha'i nang na yod
ལྷའི་ནོར་བུ	the Gem of the Gods	lha'i nor bu
ལྷའི་གནས	the realm of the gods	lha'i gnas
ལྷའི་གནས་གཞི	vihara, monastery	lha'i gnas gzhi
ལྷའི་གནོད་པ	disturbances by the lha	lha'i gnod pa
ལྷའི་རྣ་བ	divine ear	lha'i rna ba
ལྷའི་རྣ་བའི་མངོན	1 of mngon shes lnga	lha'i rna ba'i mngon
ལྷའི་རྣ་བའི་མངོན་ཤེས	skyes pa de dag gis smra ba'i ngag tshig shes pa	lha'i rna ba'i mngon shes
ལྷའི་རྣ་བའི་མངོན་ཤེས་དྲུག	the six superknowledges of the divine ear [R]	lha'i rna ba'i mngon shes drug
ལྷའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	deity yoga	lha'i rnal 'byor
ལྷའི་སྣང་བ	divine splendor	lha'i snang ba
ལྷའི་སྣོད	a heavenly vessel {lha rnams kyis lha'i snod bzang po bdud rtsis bkang ste 'od srung la phul ba} the gods filled a heavenly vessel with ambrosia and offered it to Mahakashyapa	lha'i snod
ལྷའི་པུའི་བདུད་རགས་པ	the coarse devaputra m ra TSE	lha'i pu'i bdud rags pa
ལྷའི་དཔལ	1) buddha lha'i dpal; 2) [the perfect] glory stobs 'byor of the gods	lha'i dpal
ལྷའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར	godlike wealth	lha'i dpal 'byor
ལྷའི་སྤྱན	divine vision/ eye	lha'i spyan
ལྷའི་བུ	Devaputra. One of the four Maras symbolizing laziness and attachment to sense pleasures	lha'i bu
ལྷའི་བུ་བདུད	Devaputra m ra	lha'i bu bdud
ལྷའི་བུ་མོ	daughter of the gods	lha'i bu mo
ལྷའི་བུ་མོ་འདྲ་བ	lovely like a daughter of the gods	lha'i bu mo 'dra ba
ལྷའི་བུ་གཙུག་ཏོར	devaputra, usnisa	lha'i bu gtsug tor
ལྷའི་བུ་སེམས་ལྷག་ཅན	Garab Dorje's former life as a god 2925	lha'i bu sems lhag can
ལྷའི་བུ་སེམས་ལྷག་ཅན་ཞེས་གྲགས་སོ	became known as Devaputra Adhicitta, "the god's son of superior mind."	lha'i bu sems lhag can zhes grags so
ལྷའི་བུ་སེམས་ལྷག་ཅན་ཡོད་པ	Adhichitta, the God's Son	lha'i bu sems lhag can yod pa
ལྷའི་བུའི་བདུད	devaputra m ra	lha'i bu'i bdud
ལྷའི་བུའི་བདུད་ཕྲ་མོ	the subtle devaputra m ra	lha'i bu'i bdud phra mo
ལྷའི་བུའི་བདུད་རགས་པ	ruler of the gzhan 'phrul dbang byed gods, dga' rab dbang phyug	lha'i bu'i bdud rags pa
ལྷའི་བླ་མ	teachers of the gods (sangs rgyas, phur bu)	lha'i bla ma
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ	lord of the gods Indra	lha'i dbang po
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་ཀོའུ་ཤི་ཀ	Kaushika, king of the gods lha'i dbang po sgra dbyangs ltar snyan pa - pleasant voice like the lord of the gods	lha'i dbang po ko'u shi ka
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན	Shakra, Lord of the Gods, one of the {phyi'i sde brgyad} the eight outer classes	lha'i dbang po brgya byin
ལྷའི་མ	mother of the gods	lha'i ma
ལྷའི་མིག	divine / heavenly / deva eye / sight [unlimited vision]	lha'i mig
ལྷའི་མིག་གི་མངོན	1 of mngon shes lnga	lha'i mig gi mngon
ལྷའི་མིག་གི་མངོན་ཤེས	the superknowledge of divine sight, [is free from {skyon bcu gcig}, clairvoyance / superknowledge of the divine eye	lha'i mig gi mngon shes
ལྷའི་མིག་གེ་མངོན་ཤེས	clairvoyance / superknowledge of the divine eye. the superknowledge of divine sight, [is free from {skyon bcu gcig}, clairvoyance / superknowledge of the divine eye lha'i mig dang zag pa zad pa'i m...	lha'i mig ge mngon shes
ལྷའི་མེ་ཏོག	1) flower of the god realm; 2) cloves	lha'i me tog
ལྷའི་དམག་དཔོན	little son of dbang phyug w six faces	lha'i dmag dpon
ལྷའི་སྨད་འཚོང་མ	celestial courtesan, heavenly courtesans (mtho ris smad 'tshong lags myos skyes, chu skyes rag dga', glog 'od can, dga' ba'i shing rta, legs brgyan ma, chu shing brla can, pad dkar mo) lha'i sman g...	lha'i smad 'tshong ma
གསོས་སོ	cured the king with divine medications	gsos so
ལྷའི་སྨན་པ	celestial physicians	lha'i sman pa
ལྷའི་གཙོ་བོ	chief of the gods	lha'i gtso bo
ལྷའི་གཙོ་བོ་གསུམ	the three chief deities	lha'i gtso bo gsum
ལྷའི་བཙུན་མོ	name of brgya byin ma, celestial damsels residing in the sky and regarded as wives of the gandharvas	lha'i btsun mo
ལྷའི་ཚལ་བཞི	the four groves of the gods [R]	lha'i tshal bzhi
ལྷའི་ཚོན་རིས	celestial colors, rainbow	lha'i tshon ris
ལྷའི་མཚོ་བོ་གསུམ	TSE	lha'i mtsho bo gsum
ལྷའི་མཛེས་མས་ཡིད་འཕྲོག་པ	enchanted by the beauty of the goddesses	lha'i mdzes mas yid 'phrog pa
ལྷའི་རྫིང་རིང	sky, space	lha'i rdzing ring
ལྷའི་ཝེར་མ་བདུད་འདུལ	wer ma of the lha that subjugate the bdud lha'i zhal yas rin po che'i khri la bzhugs seated himself upon the jewel covered crystal throne made by the gods	lha'i wer ma bdud 'dul
ལྷའི་ཟླ་བ	moon of gods	lha'i zla ba
ལྷའི་གཟུགས་ཚོང་མ	celestial courtesan	lha'i gzugs tshong ma
ལྷའི་འོད	divine light	lha'i 'od
ལྷའི་ཡང་ལྷ	supreme god of gods [R]	lha'i yang lha
ལྷའི་ཡི་ལྷ	supreme deity	lha'i yi lha
ལྷའི་ཡུལ	the land of the gods	lha'i yul
ལྷའི་ཡུལ་ཚངས་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན	the heaven of Brahma	lha'i yul tshangs pa'i 'jig rten
ལྷའི་རི་བོ	Mt Meru	lha'i ri bo
ལྷའི་རིག་འཛིན	divine vidy dhara	lha'i rig 'dzin
ལྷའི་རིགས	god lineage/ kind/ family	lha'i rigs
ལྷའི་རིགས་ནས་རིགས	1 of the kinds of gods, born only among gods	lha'i rigs nas rigs
ལྷའི་རིགས་ནས་རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེ་བ	born as 1 of the kinds of gods [R]	lha'i rigs nas rigs su skye ba
ལྷའི་རོལ་མོ	muses, goddesses born as musicians	lha'i rol mo
ལྷའི་ལུས་སུ་གྱུར་ནས	turned into the body of a god	lha'i lus su gyur nas
ལྷའི་ལོ	year of the gods lha'i longs spyod phun sum tshogs pa the most perfect heavenly substances	lha'i lo
ལྷའི་ཤིང	deodar, juniper, tree of paradise	lha'i shing
ལྷའི་གཤེན་པོ	gshen po of the deities	lha'i gshen po
ལྷའི་ས་བོན	the seed syllables of the divinities	lha'i sa bon
ལྷའི་སྲས་པོ	son of the gods	lha'i sras po
ལྷའི་གསལ་སྣང	the deity's vivid presence	lha'i gsal snang
ལྷའི་གསེར་འདབ	a flower	lha'i gser 'dab
ལྷའི་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་རིས	Dhyana realms of the gods	lha'i bsam gtan gyi ris
ལྷའི་ལྷ	god of gods	lha'i lha
ལྷར	born as a god or among the gods in heaven	lhar
ལྷར་བསྐྱེད	visualize as deity	lhar bskyed
ལྷར་གྱར་འདྲེར་བསྐྱིས	borrow from the gods borrow from the demons	lhar gyar 'drer bskyis
ལྷར་འགྲོ	SA 'gro ba'i rim pa	lhar 'gro
ལྷར་བཅས	including the gods	lhar bcas
ལྷར་བཅས་འཇིག་རྟེན	the world and its gods	lhar bcas 'jig rten
ལྷར་བཅས་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐམས་ཅད	all worlds / realms including the gods	lhar bcas 'jig rten thams cad
ལྷར་སྣང	deity's appearance	lhar snang
ལྷར་སྨོད	asura	lhar smod
ལྷར་གསལ	Syn {lhar gsal} to visualize as the deity	lhar gsal
ལྷས	pen, fold	lhas
ལྷས་བཀང	pond [overgrown] w lotuses	lhas bkang
ལྷས་བསྐོས	[arch] power, strength, authentic presence	lhas bskos
ལྷས་བསྒོས་པ	to be governed by the deity	lhas bsgos pa
ལྷས་མཆོད	worshiped by gods	lhas mchod
ལྷས་བསྟན	city in magadha, birth place of mother of buddha, pointed out or directed by the gods	lhas bstan
ལྷས་པ	braid, plait	lhas pa
ལྷས་སྤྱིན	devadatta	lhas spyin
ལྷས་བྱིན	brother of ananda, cousin of gautama buddha, certain king of benares, Devadatta	lhas byin
ལྷས་བྱིན་གྱི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ལྔ	the five disciplines of Devadatta	lhas byin gyi brtul zhugs lnga
ལྷས་བྱིན་གྱི་རླུང	Devadatta energy 2926	lhas byin gyi rlung
ལྷས་བྱིན་གྱི་བསླབ་ཚིག་ལྔ	the five precepts of Devadatta	lhas byin gyi bslab tshig lnga
ལྷས་བྱེན	Devadatta	lhas byen
ལྷས་སྦྱིན	Devadatta	lhas sbyin
ལྷས་སྦྱིན་གྱི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ལྔ	CHN	lhas sbyin gyi brtul zhugs lnga
ལྷས་མ	braid	lhas ma
ལྷས་མ་བསླས	to braid	lhas ma bslas
ལྷས་རྩེན	sky, space	lhas rtsen
ལྷས་ར	cow shed, corral, sheep pen	lhas ra
ལྷས་ལུད	manure from a cattle pen	lhas lud
ལྷིང	an abscess	lhing
ལྷིང་སྐྲན	wind produced swelling disease	lhing skran
ལྷིང་ཆགས	unbending, unflagging, stable	lhing chags
ལྷིང་འཇགས	calm, peaceful, tranquil, settled	lhing 'jags
ལྷིང་འཇགས་པ	lull	lhing 'jags pa
ལྷིང་འཇགས་སུ་གཏོང	make calm/ peaceful/ tranquil/ settled	lhing 'jags su gtong
ལྷིང་ནན	lhing po [strong, firm, steady, changeless, peaceful and tamed dang not restless/ agitated/ starting [esp from fear] and nan po [stong assiduous conscientious earnest, persistent]	lhing nan
ལྷིང་པོ	strong, firm, steady, changeless, peaceful and tamed dang not restless/ agitated/ starting [esp from fear], calm, peaceful, tranquil	lhing po
ལྷིང་བ	stable/ constant; steadfast	lhing ba
ལྷིང་རྩ	blood nadi's bye brag sdod rtsa	lhing rtsa
ལྷིང་ལྷིང	gently	lhing lhing
ལྷིངས་འཇགས	quiet, peaceful	lhings 'jags
ལྷིངས་པ	strong, firm, steady, changeless	lhings pa
ལྷུ	part, portion	lhu
ལྷུ་མགོ	limb joint	lhu mgo
ལྷུ་འགྲིག་པ	1) things las don etc. khungs 'grig pa; 2) stabs 'grig pa	lhu 'grig pa
ལྷུ་སྒྲིག	attach parts together, arrange parts, install, put together, erect	lhu sgrig
ལྷུ་སྒྲིག་བྱེད	attach parts together, arrange parts, install, put together, erect	lhu sgrig byed
ལྷུ་སྒྲིག་བཟོ་གྲྭ	assembly plant	lhu sgrig bzo grwa
ལྷུ་སྒྲིག་བཟོ་པ	mechanic, assembler, installer	lhu sgrig bzo pa
ལྷུ་བསྒྲིགས་པ	to assemble	lhu bsgrigs pa
ལྷུ་ཆ	parts of the parts/ limbs	lhu cha
ལྷུ་ཆུང	small 1's/ parts [nying lag gi lhu chung,//'phrul 'khor gyi lhu chung]	lhu chung
ལྷུ་ཆུང་བ	little parts lhu chung mang po lhu chen du bsgrigs assemble little parts into big 1s	lhu chung ba
ལྷུ་ཆེ་བ	large parts	lhu che ba
ལྷུ་ཆེན	large parts [rkang lag bzhi'i lhu chen,//'phrul 'khor gyi lhu chen]	lhu chen
ལྷུ་གཏོར	break up, disintegrate, demolish, disassemble	lhu gtor
ལྷུ་འཐོར	disassemble, take apart	lhu 'thor
ལྷུ་ཕྲག	spaces between the joints/ parts	lhu phrag
ལྷུ་ཕྲལ	dismantle, take apart	lhu phral
ལྷུ་མོ	interlocking	lhu mo
ལྷུ་རྩིས	calculating seed for a field portion out	lhu rtsis
ལྷུ་ཚིགས	segments; joints of the limbs	lhu tshigs
ལྷུ་ཚིགས་འཁྲོལ	separate the joints	lhu tshigs 'khrol
ལྷུ་མཚམས	borders/ edges of pieces	lhu mtshams
ལྷུ་བཟེད་འཐང་བ	hold out the alms bowl, buddhist monk	lhu bzed 'thang ba
ལྷུ་རུ་ལོངས	to undertake	lhu ru longs
ལྷུ་རུ་གསིལ་བ	divide, parcel out	lhu ru gsil ba
ལྷུ་རུས	segments between the bonejoints	lhu rus
ལྷུ་ལག	parts * details, features	lhu lag
ལྷུ་ལག་སྒྲིག	assemble/ install parts/ details/ features	lhu lag sgrig
ལྷུ་ལག་ལ་ལས་སྣོན་བྱེད	machine/ process a part	lhu lag la las snon byed
ལྷུ་བཤིག	take apart/ separate into pieces	lhu bshig
ལྷུ་བཤིག་བསྐྱར་བསྒྲིག	reassemble what was taken apart	lhu bshig bskyar bsgrig
ལྷུག	pour out, SA ldug pa, loose, easy	lhug
ལྷུག་གིས	relaxed	lhug gis
ལྷུག་གིས་འདྲེས་པ	relaxed & integrated	lhug gis 'dres pa
ལྷུག་གེ	totally free	lhug ge
ལྷུག་གེ་བ	totally free, hanging loosely down	lhug ge ba
ལྷུག་འདོན	chant as 1	lhug 'don
ལྷུག་པ	relaxation; (in a) relaxed (way/ manner); gentle/ gently	lhug pa
ལྷུག་པའི་རང་བབས	the natural mind	lhug pa'i rang babs
ལྷུག་པའི་གཤིས	simple freedom (uninterrupted nature)	lhug pa'i gshis
ལྷུག་པར	letting everything be, amply, abundantly, plentifully, spontaneously	lhug par
ལྷུག་པར་སྐྱང་པ	continue the practice with unbound ease	lhug par skyang pa
ལྷུག་པར་འཇོག	to leave in natural & relaxed presence	lhug par 'jog
ལྷུག་པར་གཏོང་བ	give in charity, liberally	lhug par gtong ba
ལྷུག་པར་སྨྲ	to speak freely	lhug par smra
ལྷུག་པར་ཞོག	[imp] Rest naturally!	lhug par zhog
ལྷུག་པར་བཞག	remain free, rest naturally	lhug par bzhag
ལྷུག་པར་བཞག་པ	to remain free	lhug par bzhag pa
ལྷུག་པར་ཤོག	rest at ease; rest in the ease of [non-meditation, etc.]	lhug par shog
ལྷུག་པར་བཤད	1) prose pecha; 2) explain extensively and in detail	lhug par bshad
ལྷུག་པར་བཤད་པ	full statement, explain completely	lhug par bshad pa
ལྷུག་པོ	abundant, diffuse, luxurious, loose	lhug po
ལྷུག་པོར་གནང	give lavishly	lhug por gnang
ལྷུག་པོར་གནས་པ	remain naked or loosely dressed	lhug por gnas pa
ལྷུག་པོར་བཤད་པ	explain loosely/ abundantly	lhug por bshad pa
ལྷུག་མ	prose	lhug ma
ལྷུག་སྩོལ	phyag bris lhug stsol zhes sogs thogs pa med par gnang ba'am sprod pa	lhug stsol
ལྷུག་ཚིག	prose	lhug tshig
ལྷུག་ཡངས་པོ	sgrigs khrims sogs not tight/ strict	lhug yangs po
ལྷུག་ཤིག་གེ་བ	not tight/ narrow	lhug shig ge ba
ལྷུག་ལྷུག	loose	lhug lhug
ལྷུག་ལྷུག་བྱེད	loosen	lhug lhug byed
ལྷུག་ལྷུག་བཟོ	loosen	lhug lhug bzo
ལྷུག་ལྷུག་བཟོ་བ	loosen	lhug lhug bzo ba
ལྷུགས	successive, continuous, uninterrupted, w/o gaps, unreserved, continuous [praise]	lhugs
ལྷུགས་ནས	thrown into, poured into	lhugs nas
ལྷུགས་པ	1) prose; 2) successive, continuous, uninterrupted, w/o gaps; 3) unreserved; 4) abundant, diffuse, luxuriant; 5) generous, open-handed, free and easy, loose, relaxed; 6) not limited/ controlled	lhugs pa
ལྷུགས་པར	loosely	lhugs par
ལྷུགས་པར་སྐྱོང་བ	continues loosely	lhugs par skyong ba
ལྷུགས་པར་འདྲེས་པ	loosely integrates	lhugs par 'dres pa
ལྷུགས་ཚིག	1) prose; 2) continuous praise	lhugs tshig
ལྷུགས་ལྷུགས	loose elaborate, not formally structured	lhugs lhugs
ལྷུང	[f {lhung} fall, tumble, drop down, lose	lhung
ལྷུང་གིས་དོགས་པ	have no fear of falling	lhung gis dogs pa
ལྷུང་བཇེད་འཆང་བ	hold the monk's begging bowl	lhung bjed 'chang ba
ལྷུང་བ	{...r lhung ba} to fall into . . . ; isc. the pitfall of . . .	lhung ba
ལྷུང་བ་ཉིད	fall, state of falling	lhung ba nyid
ལྷུང་བའི་རྨ	[among the 8 kinds of wound from knife, weapon etc glo bur gri mtshon sogs las byung ba'i rma rigs brgyad kyi nang tshan] both flesh and bone cut so that the joints fall off]	lhung ba'i rma
ལྷུང་བཟེད	begging bowl	lhung bzed
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཀྱི་ག་གྱོགས	begging bowl cover	lhung bzed kyi ga gyogs
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཀྱི་སྣོད	begging bowl	lhung bzed kyi snod
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཀྱི་རུང་བ་ལྔ	CHN	lhung bzed kyi rung ba lnga
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཀྱི་ཤན	shan of the begging bowl [rdzas kyi shan gyi nang gses, lhung bzed zung not blessed if 10 days pass zhag bcu 'chang spang gi lhung ba 'byung ba'o	lhung bzed kyi shan
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཁེབས	alms bowl cover	lhung bzed khebs
ལྷུང་བཟེད་བསྒྲིགས	old alms-bowl	lhung bzed bsgrigs
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཆུང་ངེ	small platter	lhung bzed chung nge
ལྷུང་བཟེད་འཆང་བ	to hold the begging bowl [of the gelong]	lhung bzed 'chang ba
ལྷུང་བཟེད་འཆང་བའི་སྤང་བ	give up holding the begging bowl ?? check	lhung bzed 'chang ba'i spang ba
ལྷུང་བཟེད་བསྙིགས	begging bowl left after many are chosen	lhung bzed bsnyigs
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཐག་པ	straps by which begging platter is carried	lhung bzed thag pa
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཐོགས་པ	take up the begging bowl	lhung bzed thogs pa
ལྷུང་བཟེད་དང་ཆོས་གོས	begging bowl and Dharma robes lhung bzed dang chos gos lhag par 'chang	lhung bzed dang chos gos
བ་སྟེ	the excellent holding of monks robes and the begging bowl	ba ste
ལྷུང་བཟེད་བསྣམས་པ	{chos gos dang lhung bzed bsnams nas} donned his robes, took up his begging bowl	lhung bzed bsnams pa
ལྷུང་བཟེད་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་བཅུ་བཞི	the 14 ways of conduct w a begging bowl	lhung bzed spyod tshul bcu bzhi
ལྷུང་བཟེད་དབྱར་འདབ	summer cover for the begging bowl	lhung bzed dbyar 'dab
ལྷུང་བཟེད་ཤུབས	alms bowl case lhung bzed lhag po 'chang ba'i spang ba abandon the excellent holding of the begging bowl	lhung bzed shubs
ལྷུང་ཡས	#	lhung yas
ལྷུང་ལྷུང	[words] like a flowing stream	lhung lhung
ལྷུང་ལྷུང་སྒྲ་འབྱིན	river	lhung lhung sgra 'byin
ལྷུངས	(not in das)	lhungs
ལྷུངས་པ	pf. of {lhung ba}	lhungs pa
ལྷུད	(not in das)	lhud
ལྷུན	mass, bulk	lhun
ལྷུན་གྱི	spontaneously	lhun gyi
ལྷུན་གྱི་གྲུབ་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	Vidyadhara of spontaneous presence, awareness holder of spontaneous presence GD	lhun gyi grub pa'i rig 'dzin
ལྷུན་གྱིས	spontaneous, complete, effortlessly, spontaneously, effortlessly, naturally	lhun gyis
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ	spontaneous [presence]/accomplishment	lhun gyis grub
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་ཅིང	because it is spontaneously present lhun gyis grub cing rgyun mi chad pa'i	lhun gyis grub cing
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ	SA lhun grub, selfperfection	lhun gyis grub pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ་ཉིད	spontaneous presence	lhun gyis grub pa nyid
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པ་བཟོད་པ་འཐོབ	attain	lhun gyis grub pa bzod pa 'thob
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་མངའ་དབང	selfexisting mastery	lhun gyis grub pa'i mnga' dbang
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ཉམས	experience of spontaneous presence	lhun gyis grub pa'i nyams
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ཐུགས་རྗེ	spontaneously present capacity / compassion	lhun gyis grub pa'i thugs rje
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ཐེག་པ	the vehicle of absolute spontaneity	lhun gyis grub pa'i theg pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན	spontaneously present qualities	lhun gyis grub pa'i yon tan
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་རིག་འཛིན	the vidyadhara level of spontaneous perfection. the spontaneously arisen / perfect vidyadhara; Vidyadhara of Spontaneous Accomplishment, spontaneously accomplished holder of intrinsic awareness	lhun gyis grub pa'i rig 'dzin
ལེབེ༹ལ་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	perfection 2928	level of self
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པར་འཇུག་པ	spontaneous engagement	lhun gyis grub par 'jug pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡི་བྱེད	the natural achievement attention, perceiving spontaneous penetration	lhun gyis grub par 'jug pa'i yi byed
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པར་འཇུག་པའི་ཡིད་བྱེད	the natural achievement/engagement of attention, perceiving spontaneous penetration	lhun gyis grub par 'jug pa'i yid byed
ལྷུན་གྱིས་འཇུག་པ	entering spontaneously	lhun gyis 'jug pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གནས་པ	abiding spontaneously, remaining effortlessly	lhun gyis gnas pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གནས་པའི	SA thig le drug	lhun gyis gnas pa'i
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གནས་པའི་ཐིག་ལེ	sphere of selfperfection	lhun gyis gnas pa'i thig le
ལྷུན་གྱིས་གནས་པས་བཞག་པ་ཡིན	it is self/spontaneously established	lhun gyis gnas pas bzhag pa yin
ལྷུན་གྱིས་རྫོགས་པ	spontaneously perfected/ complete	lhun gyis rdzogs pa
ལྷུན་གྱིས་རྫོགས་ཤིང་གྲུབ་པ	spontaneously perfect and present	lhun gyis rdzogs shing grub pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ	1) effortlessly naturally established; 2) spontaneous presence; 3) lhun grub dzong	lhun grub
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀ་དག	spontaneous presence and primordial purity	lhun grub ka dag
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཀློང	the space of spontaneous presence	lhun grub kyi klong
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	the three naturally present mandalas	lhun grub kyi dkyil 'khor gsum
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྒོ	8 gates of spontaneous presence (manifesting as compassion, lights, kayas, wisdom, nonduality, freedom from extremes, impure gate of samsara, and pure gate of wisdom)	lhun grub kyi sgo
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	eight gates of spontaneous presence: the gate of manifesting as compassion, as lights, as kayas, as wisdom, as nonduality, as freedom from extremes, as the impure gate of samsara and as the pure ga...	lhun grub kyi sgo brgyad
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འཆར་སྒོ	the manifestation avenues of spontaneous presence	lhun grub kyi 'char sgo
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འཆར་སྒོ་བརྒྱད	eight avenues for the arising of spontaneous presence lhun grub kyi 'char sgo dbyings su yal nas - when the visions of luminosity have subsided into space	lhun grub kyi 'char sgo brgyad
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་འཆར་ཚུལ་བརྒྱད	the 8 manifestation modes of spontaneous presence	lhun grub kyi 'char tshul brgyad
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས	the spontaneously present natural state	lhun grub kyi gnas lugs
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སྣང་བ	experiences of spontaneous presence, spontaneously present manifestations	lhun grub kyi snang ba
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཞིང་སྣང	realm-display of spontaneous presence	lhun grub kyi zhing snang
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཞིང་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ	great	lhun grub kyi zhing snang chen po
རེཨལམ	display of spontaneous presence	realm
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་སྐུ	Rupakaya of spontaneous presence. The display of the bardo of dharmata	lhun grub kyi gzugs sku
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་སངས་རྒྱས	spontaneously present/ accomplished buddhahood	lhun grub kyi sangs rgyas
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་སྐུ་གསུམ	spontaneous presence that is/ as the three kayas	lhun grub sku gsum
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་སྒང་པ	theatrical troupe	lhun grub sgang pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ངང	state of self-perfection	lhun grub ngang
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཆེན་པོ	the great spontaneous presence	lhun grub chen po
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྐུ	the body/k ya of the great spontaneous presence	lhun grub chen po'i sku
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཏུ་འཇུག་པ	spontaneously engaging	lhun grub tu 'jug pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཏུ་རྫོགས་པ	spontaneously complete/ perfect spontaneous presence of perfection	lhun grub tu rdzogs pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཏུ་ཡོད་པ	in all its spontaneous presence	lhun grub tu yod pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་སྟུག་པོ་བཀོད་པ	the dense array of spontaneous presence	lhun grub stug po bkod pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཐོད་རྒལ	Direct Crossing of spontaneous presence	lhun grub thod rgal
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་དོན་གྱི་དགོངས་པ	spontaneous presence as ultimate enlightened intent	lhun grub don gyi dgongs pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྣལ་འབྱོར	1 of rnal 'byor bzhi,	lhun grub rnal 'byor
ཡོག་ཨོཕ༹་སེལཕ༹	perfection	yoga of self
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་པའི་ངང་ཆེན་པོའི་ལྟ་བ	dga' rab rdo rje's view of the total state of	lhun grub pa'i ngang chen po'i lta ba
སྤོནཏནེཨོཨུས་སེལཕ༹	perfection	spontaneous self
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་བླ་མ	master of selfperfection	lhun grub bla ma
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་དབྱིངས	spontaneous presence as basic space	lhun grub dbyings
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་བརྩེགས	Spontaneously Accomplished Mound; charnel ground	lhun grub brtsegs
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོགས་ཆེན	total completeness of self-perfection, the state of natural perfection of every individual beyond the dualism of samsara and nirvana	lhun grub rdzogs chen
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གཞི་སྣང	the inherently present ground-appearance, the groundappearance of spontaneous presence	lhun grub gzhi snang
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ	the spontaneously present luminosity of rupakaya	lhun grub gzugs kyi sku'i 'od gsal
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གཟུགས་སྐུ	form body of spontaneous presence, R pak ya of spontaneous presence	lhun grub gzugs sku
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གཟུགས་སྐུའི་སྣང་བ	the spontaneously present body / display of rupakaya	lhun grub gzugs sku'i snang ba
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་གཟུགས་སྐུའི་འོད་གསལ	spontaneously present luminosity of the form bodies	lhun grub gzugs sku'i 'od gsal
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་འོད་ཀྱི་བསུན་མ	welcoming light of spontaneous presence	lhun grub 'od kyi bsun ma
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་འོད་ལྔ	five self-perfected lights	lhun grub 'od lnga
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་འོད་གསལ་གྱི་སྣང་བ	luminosity manifestations of spontaneous presence, spontaneously present manifestations of luminosity	lhun grub 'od gsal gyi snang ba
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཡེ་ཤེས	wisdom of selfperfection	lhun grub ye shes
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རང་མལ	spontaneous presence as the natural place of rest	lhun grub rang mal
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིག་པ	spontaneously present awareness	lhun grub rig pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིག་རྩལ་གྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན	the samadhi of the spontaneously present expression of awareness	lhun grub rig rtsal gyi ting nge 'dzin
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིག་འཛིན	{lhun gyis grub pa'i rig 'dzin} master/ holder of awareness of spontaneous presence*	lhun grub rig 'dzin
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིག་འཛིན་གྱི་ས	Vidyadhara level of spontaneous presence. One of the stages during the bardo of dharmata	lhun grub rig 'dzin gyi sa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྣང་བ	display/ experience/ manifestation of the precious spontaneous presence	lhun grub rin po che'i snang ba
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྦུབས	sphere of precious spontaneous accomplishment	lhun grub rin po che'i sbubs
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཞིང	Precious realms of spontaneous presence. One of the last experiences in the bardo of dharmata	lhun grub rin po che'i zhing
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པ	sambhogak yas of spontaneous presence	lhun grub longs spyod rdzogs pa
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཨོད་གསལ	spontaneous luminosity	lhun grub od gsal
ལྷུན་སྒྲུབ	spontaneously present, spontaneously perfect	lhun sgrub
ལྷུན་ཅན	massy, bulky	lhun can
ལྷུན་ཆགས	elegant, unchanging	lhun chags
ལྷུན་ཆགས་པ	high and brjid chags pa	lhun chags pa
ལྷུན་ཆེ་བ	1) brilliant, brightly sparkling; 2) large, extensive, massive; 3) spontaneously arise; 4) unchanging; 5) great Meru	lhun che ba
ལྷུན་ཆེན	great Meru	lhun chen
ལྷུན་ཆེན་བ	very large	lhun chen ba
ལྷུན་མཉམ	spontaneous evenness/ equalness; spontaneous and uniform/ even/ equal	lhun mnyam
ལྷུན་མཉམ་ཡེ་གྲོལ	space of relaxed state which is free from the beginning and spontaneously identical lhun mnyam ye grol cog bzhag gi klong 1 of klong dgu	lhun mnyam ye grol
ལྷུན་སྟུག	1) very high and extensive/ solid/ massive; 2) abundant, thick; 3) Gandavyuha	lhun stug
ལྷུན་སྟུགས་རྒྱན	the ornament/ densely ornamented realm of Gandavyuha	lhun stugs rgyan
ལྷུན་སྟུགས་པ	massive	lhun stugs pa
ལྷུན་མཐོ	imposing and lofty	lhun mtho
ལྷུན་སྡིངས་བདུད་རྩི་འགྱུར་མེད	self depression changeless amrita	lhun sdings bdud rtsi 'gyur med
ལྷུན་སྡུག	1) glorious and beautiful; 2) massive, abundant, thick; 3) Gandavyuha	lhun sdug
ལྷུན་པོ	mount meru (made up of 4 precious metals), monolithic structure, heap, mountain, hill, upheaval	lhun po
ལྷུན་པོ་སྟུགས་པ	Gandavyuha, densely arrayed/adorned	lhun po stugs pa
ལྷུན་པོ་སྟུགས་པའི་རྒྱན	the ornament/ densely adorned realm Gandavyuha	lhun po stugs pa'i rgyan
ལྷུན་པོ་སྦྱིན	gift of Meru	lhun po sbyin
ལྷུན་པོ་བརྩེགས་པ	1) summit of the central mountain; 2) very high and brjod chags pa'i mt; 3) {lhun po brtsegs pa} buddha	lhun po brtsegs pa
ལྷུན་པོ་རི་དང་འདྲ	like mount Meru/ a massive mountain	lhun po ri dang 'dra
ལྷུན་པོ་རིན་ཆེན་བཞི	Mount Meru made of four precious metals	lhun po rin chen bzhi
ལྷུན་པོའི་འགྲམ་སྟེགས	[bank = slope, surrounding slopes, foothills? or more even] at Mt Meru's root mthar 'gram stegs 1000 dpag tshad	lhun po'i 'gram stegs
ལྷུན་པོའི་རྩེར	at the peak of Mount Meru	lhun po'i rtser
ལྷུན་པོའི་རྭ་ལྔ་པ	the five peaks/ horns of Mt Meru	lhun po'i rwa lnga pa
ལྷུན་ཕབ	unshakable	lhun phab
ལྷུན་བྲག	Lhodrak, birthplace of Marpa	lhun brag
ལྷུན་བྲག་མར་པ	Marpa of Lhodrak	lhun brag mar pa
ལྷུན་འབྱམས	spontaneous vastness/ expanse	lhun 'byams
ལྷུན་རྩེ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lhun rtse
ལྷུན་རྩེ་གཞུང་ཆུ	{lhun rtse gzhung river	lhun rtse gzhung chu
ལྷུན་བརྩེགས	summit of the central mountain	lhun brtsegs
ལྷུན་རྫོགས	self-perfection, spontaneously/ effortlessly perfect/complete	lhun rdzogs
ལྷུན་རྫོགས་ཆེན་པོ	spontaneous great perfection	lhun rdzogs chen po
ལྷུན་རྫོགས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད	spontaneously perfect suchness; def {bsam gtan mig sgron}: {snang srid gyi chos so cog rang byung gi ye shes rnam par dag pa'i klong du sel med par ye nas rang gsal ba la rgyu dang bras bu ril ma b...	lhun rdzogs de bzhin nyid
ལྷུན་ཞུགས	spontaneous entry (into gzhon nu bum sku)	lhun zhugs
ལྷུན་བཟེད	beggar's bowl, alms-pot carried by buddhist monks	lhun bzed
ལྷུན་ཡས	#	lhun yas
ལྷུབ་གྱོན	loose	lhub gyon
ལྷུབ་པ	width	lhub pa
ལྷུམས	uterus, womb	lhums
ལྷུམས་འཇུག	abbr. of {lhums su 'jug pa}	lhums 'jug
ལྷུམས་སུ་འཇུག་པ	to enter the womb; (h) to enter the womb, be conceived	lhums su 'jug pa
ལྷུམས་སུ་ཞུགས	enter the womb/ conception	lhums su zhugs
ལྷུམས་སུ་ཞུགས་པ	entry into the womb	lhums su zhugs pa
ལྷུམས་སུ་ཞུགས་པའི་དུས་མཆོད	anniversary commemorating Shakyamuni's entering his mother's womb	lhums su zhugs pa'i dus mchod
ལྷུའི་དུམ་བུ	pieces [of pieces]	lhu'i dum bu
ལྷུར	devotion, earnest application	lhur
ལྷུར་པོ	devoted, sincere, earnest, great effort/ attention to	lhur po
ལྷུར་བླངས	to make great effort	lhur blangs
ལྷུར་མི་ལེན་པ	sloppy, carefree, inattentive	lhur mi len pa
ལྷུར་བརྩོན	make a great effort	lhur brtson
ལྷུར་མཛད	be devoted, earnestly apply oneself	lhur mdzad
ལྷུར་བཞེས་པ	sympathy, commiseration	lhur bzhes pa
ལྷུར་ལེན	sympathetic and concerned, inviting, rushing into	lhur len
ལྷུར་ལེན་པ	to take care voluntarily, be sincerely involved with, to devote oneself to something, someone; to seek actively/ be motivated by/ strive after	lhur len pa
ལྷུས་ཐིངས་པ	tshod thig pa,//las don 'di da dung lhus ma things pa,//nyams myong ji ltar che ba de tsam gyis lhus things pa yong	lhus things pa
ལྷེ་པ	little pieces	lhe pa
ལྷེ་བ	braid, SA sle ba	lhe ba
ལྷེང	(not in das)	lheng
ལྷེན	part of the belly below the breast	lhen
ལྷེན་སྐྲན	ma zhu increasing mucus de by wind gong bur bsgril ba'i swelling	lhen skran
ལྷེན་ན	lhen disease phlegm	lhen na
ལྷེན་ན་བ	lhen disease phlegm	lhen na ba
ལྷེན་སྣ	breastbone	lhen sna
ལྷེན་རུས	breastbone	lhen rus
ལྷེན་གསང	lhen sna'i rtse nas tshon gang gzhal ba'i gnas su yod pa'i me btsa'i gsang zhig ste, der me btsa' bzhag na ma zhu be snabs 'phel ba sogs me drod nyams pa la phan	lhen gsang
ལྷེབ	gasping for breath	lheb
ལྷེབ་བེ	flat	lheb be
ལྷེབ་ལྷེབ	gasping like a fish when taken out of water	lheb lheb
ལྷེམ	just now, at present, directly, instantly	lhem
ལྷེམ་མེ་བ	shaking, trembling, flickering	lhem me ba
ལྷེམ་མེར་འབར	flickered	lhem mer 'bar
ལྷེམ་ལྷེམ	shaking, trembling, flickering	lhem lhem
ལྷེའུ	practitioner, benefactor	lhe'u
ལྷེས་མ	to plait	lhes ma
ལྷོ	south	lho
ལྷོ་ཀེར་མོ	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lho ker mo
ལྷོ་སྐར་བདུན	the 7 s stars	lho skar bdun
ལྷོ་ཁ	tract where tsangpo turns its course southward, s.e. part of dbu, name of a region in southern Tibet	lho kha
ལྷོ་གྲོ་པོ་ལུང་གི་དགོན་པ	a hermitage in Trowolung in the South	lho gro po lung gi dgon pa
ལྷོ་བགྲོད	southern transit	lho bgrod
ལྷོ་རྒྱལ་འཛམ་གླིང་གི་ལྟེ་བ	the very center of the southern continent, Jambudvipa	lho rgyal 'dzam gling gi lte ba
ལྷོ་རྒྱུད	S side of/ direction from	lho rgyud
ལྷོ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བླ	SA nye brgyud	lho rgyud kyi bla
ལྷོ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	masters of the south	lho rgyud kyi bla ma
ལྷོ་སྒོ	s gate	lho sgo
ལྷོ་སྒོ་སྦྱོངས	sleight of hand	lho sgo sbyongs
ལྷོ་སྒོའི་ཆོ་ག	ritual of the s gate	lho sgo'i cho ga
ལྷོ་ངོས	southern side or slope 2931	lho ngos
ལྷོ་འཇང་ས་ཐམ	{lho 'jang sa tham} district	lho 'jang sa tham
ལྷོ་འཇུ་མི་ཐུབ་མཁན	apepsy	lho 'ju mi thub mkhan
ལྷོ་གཏེར	termas of terdag Lingpa, gter bdag gling pa 'gyur med rdo rje, 16461714; Southern Treasures. those discovered by Terdag Lingpa; smin gling lugs	lho gter
ལྷོ་གཏེར་དྲིལ་བ་སྡོང་པོ་ལྟ་བུ	southern treasures, enveloping like stalks	lho gter dril ba sdong po lta bu
ལྷོ་སྟོད	the upper S	lho stod
ལྷོ་ནས་འོངས	come from the south	lho nas 'ongs
ལྷོ་ནུབ	SW	lho nub
ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཀྱི་སྲིན་པོ	the orcs and ogres of the southwest	lho nub kyi srin po
ལྷོ་ནུབ་རྔ་ཡབ་གླིང	Ngayab ling in the SW	lho nub rnga yab gling
ལྷོ་ནུབ་རྡུལ་ཚོགས་བྲལ་བ	"w/o gathered particles"	lho nub rdul tshogs bral ba
ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	king of the rakshasas	lho nub phyogs skyong
ཅནནིབལ	goblins, king of lanka	cannibal
ལྷོ་ནུབ་སྲིན་ཡུལ	the Cannibal Island to the southwest	lho nub srin yul
ལྷོ་སྣེ	sa gzhi ril mo'i lho phyogs kyi zur sne	lho sne
ལྷོ་པ	Lhopa, tribes of Tsari	lho pa
ལྷོ་པ་བྱ་བྲལ	master contemporary of the eighth zhwa nag karma pa mi bskyod rdo rje 1507-1554	lho pa bya bral
ལྷོ་སྤྲིན	southern cloud	lho sprin
ལྷོ་སྤྲིན་སྨུག་པོ	warm southern clouds	lho sprin smug po
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས	the S	lho phyogs
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	southern	lho phyogs kyi
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	guardian of the south, epithet of the lord of death	lho phyogs skyong
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་བདག་པོ	1) the star ri byi; 2) the lord of death lho phyogs dpal dang ldan pa'i shing	lho phyogs bdag po
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་མེ	rta gdong gi me'am rgod ma kha'i me ???	lho phyogs me
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་མོན་པ	people from the south lands of Mön	lho phyogs mon pa
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་མྱ་ངན་མེད་པ	"w/o suffering"	lho phyogs mya ngan med pa
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་འཛམ་བུ་གླིང	the southern	lho phyogs 'dzam bu gling
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་སུ	southerly, to the south, towards the south	lho phyogs su
ལྷོ་བུན	haze, mist, fog	lho bun
ལྷོ་བུར	haze, mist, fog	lho bur
ལྷོ་བྱང	s and n [place?]	lho byang
ལྷོ་བྱང་གི་བགྲོད་པ་གཉིས	the two equinoxeslhun pos bang rim	lho byang gi bgrod pa gnyis
ལྷོ་བྲག	Lhodrak, birthplace of Marpa, a district in Tibet	lho brag
ལྷོ་བྲག་བཀའ་འབུམ	the writings of Lhodrak Marpa	lho brag bka' 'bum
ལྷོ་བྲག་ཁོ་མཐིང	temple in Lhodrak	lho brag kho mthing
ལྷོ་བྲག་མཁར་ཆུ	Kharchu at Lhodrak. The retreat place of Padmasambhava's mind. It is situated one day's walk from Lord Marpa's house in Lhodrak	lho brag mkhar chu
ལྷོ་བྲག་གྲུབ་ཆེན་ལས་ཀྱི་རྡོ་རྗེ	13261401 - Lodrak Drupchen Lekyi Dorje, also known as Namkha Gyaltsen (nam mkha' rgyal mtshan	lho brag grub chen las kyi rdo rje
ལྷོ་བྲག་ནུབ་ཆུ	{lho brag nub chu} River	lho brag nub chu
ལྷོ་བྲག་པ	Lhotrakpa An epithet for Marpa, who was from the southern region of Lhodrak	lho brag pa
ལྷོ་བྲག་པོ་མཐིང	Lhodrak Po-ting	lho brag po mthing
ལྷོ་བྲག་དཔའ་བོའི་སྐྱེས་རབས་དྲུག	CHN	lho brag dpa' bo'i skyes rabs drug
ལྷོ་བྲག་བུམ་པ	Vase of Lhodrak	lho brag bum pa
ལྷོ་བྲག་མར་པ	Marpa of lhodrak	lho brag mar pa
ལྷོ་བྲག་མར་པའི་སྙན་བརྒྱུད	oral lineage of Lhodrak Marpa	lho brag mar pa'i snyan brgyud
ལྷོ་བྲག་ཤར་ཆུ	{lho brag shar chu} river	lho brag shar chu
ལྷོ་འབྲུག	Bhutan	lho 'brug
ལྷོ་འབྲུག་པ	thunderers or sect of buddhist inhabiting bhutan	lho 'brug pa
ལྷོ་འབྲུང	a district in Tibet	lho 'brung
ལྷོ་སྨད	the lower S	lho smad
ལྷོ་ཚོང	commerce carried out in the S	lho tshong
ལྷོ་ཚོང་བྱང་སྐྱེལ	brought from lung pa lho byang merchandise brje res byed pa'i tshong	lho tshong byang skyel
ལྷོ་ཛམ་བུའི་གླིང	the southern Jambu continent, so called due to the Jambu briksa fruits falling into lake {ma dros mtsho}. make s the sound 'Jambu'	lho dzam bu'i gling
ལྷོ་འཛམ་བུ་གླིང	Jambudvipa in the south	lho 'dzam bu gling
ལྷོ་འཛམ་བུའི་གླིང	the S continent Jambuling	lho 'dzam bu'i gling
ལྷོ་རྫོང	lho rdzong	lho rdzong
ལྷོ་འུར་མ	haze, mist, fog	lho 'ur ma
ལྷོ་ཡི་འཛམ་བུའི་གླིང	Southern continent of the Rose-apple [Jambudvipa]	lho yi 'dzam bu'i gling
ཡབ་གཞན	Tail of the continent and minor tail lho yi 'dzam bu'i gling rnga yab dang rnga	yab gzhan
ལྷོ་ཡུལ	Syn {dkar sha}	lho yul
ལྷོ་རི་བོ་པོ་ཏ་ལ	1 of gnas chen lnga	lho ri bo po ta la
ལྷོ་རུ	to the south	lho ru
ལྷོ་རོང	county in 21th cent Tibet.	lho rong
ལྷོ་ལ	= klo la	lho la
ལྷོ་ལ་སྟོད	South Latö	lho la stod
ལྷོ་ཤིང	shing tshva	lho shing
ལྷོག	fatal disease, cancer, ulcers, large sore	lhog
ལྷོག་རྒོད	fatal ulcerous sores	lhog rgod
ལྷོག་ཐབས	lhog like illness	lhog thabs
ལྷོག་དུག་པ	1) med. herb stag sha; 2) gnyan nad cig	lhog dug pa
ལྷོག་པ	a large ulcer or sore	lhog pa
ལྷོག་པ་ཡང་རྒོད	{lhog pa yang rgod} disease [lhog pa'i rigs kyi dbye ba bzhi'i nang tshan] thor pa khong du 'chor skyen pa dang, quickly contagious]	lhog pa yang rgod
ལྷོག་པ་ཡམ་བུ	{lhog pa yam bu} disease [lhog ba'i rigs kyi dbye ba bzhi'i nang tshan], w swelling 'bar 'bur &, [yams thabs kyis] infecting others]	lhog pa yam bu
ལྷོག་ལྷོག	zang zing ngam 'ba' 'bur gyi rnam pa	lhog lhog
ལྷོགས་པ	lost things being returned, return, give or pay back	lhogs pa
ལྷོང	{lhongs} alt. sp. of slong (q.v.) 2932	lhong
ལྷོང་དུ་བུད	boldly discovered	lhong du bud
ལྷོང་ཕོག་པ	slightly affected	lhong phog pa
ལྷོང་བ	(tha mi dad pa lhongs pa, lhong ba,; 1) go to, reach, enter; 2) be successful	lhong ba
ལྷོང་ཚད	surprise attack	lhong tshad
ལྷོང་ཤོར	has lost his senses	lhong shor
ལྷོང་ལྷོང	1) work zing long long ba,//'grul pa lhong lhong du slebs pa,//phar 'gro tshur 'gro brel zing lhong lhong 'dug; 2) picture be engraved in relief	lhong lhong
ལྷོངས	eruption, critical point, to transform, to dissolve	lhongs
ལྷོངས་འགྲིགས་པ	settle to a critical point, danger	lhongs 'grigs pa
ལྷོངས་པ	[p lhong ba]	lhongs pa
ལྷོངས་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་མདོག	the color of threatening/ rain clouds	lhongs pa lta bu'i mdog
ལྷོངས་ཚད་ཚར་ཚད་ཆོད་ཚད	arising of challenging experiences and their successful termination	lhongs tshad tshar tshad chod tshad
ལྷོངས་སུ་འགྱུར་པ	to become selfsufficient	lhongs su 'gyur pa
ལྷོད	bulky, slow, loose, relaxed, unstrung, slackened, easy, careless, unconcerned, loosely	lhod
ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་ཀློད	relax at ease, "loosen loosely"	lhod kyis klod
ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གློད	to let be at ease and relaxed, relax loosely, loosen, relax at ease; relax without grasping {rnam rtog dang 'dzin pa med pa}	lhod kyis glod
ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གློད་དེ	relax loosely	lhod kyis glod de
ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གློད་ནས་བཞག་པ	shes pa + to let consciousness relax completely	lhod kyis glod nas bzhag pa
ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་ཞོག	rest loosely	lhod kyis zhog
ལྷོད་གྱེང	lhod yengs	lhod gyeng
ལྷོད་གྲོལ	{'ching ba lhod grol la langs song} the bindings loosen by themselves	lhod grol
ལྷོད་གློད	relaxation	lhod glod
ལྷོད་ངོས	gradually, in slow course, smoothly	lhod ngos
ལྷོད་ཆ	relaxed	lhod cha
ལྷོད་ཆ་མ་རྙེད	unrelaxed	lhod cha ma rnyed
ལྷོད་ཆེ་བ	too relaxed/ loose	lhod che ba
ལྷོད་མཇལ	dal lhod kyi ngang nas phan tshun mjal tshul,//grogs po dang lhod mjal byed pa	lhod mjal
ལྷོད་འཇག་ས	tranquillity	lhod 'jag sa
ལྷོད་གཏོང་བ	relax, loosen	lhod gtong ba
ལྷོད་དལ	not busy/ speedy	lhod dal
ལྷོད་དེ	relaxed; loosely, at ease; eased, loosened, slackened, loosed, slacked	lhod de
ལྷོད་དེ་འཇོག	remain relaxed	lhod de 'jog
ལྷོད་དེ་ཉོལ་ཅིག	sleep well, sleep soundly	lhod de nyol cig
ལྷོད་དེ་བ	relaxation	lhod de ba
ལྷོད་དེ་བཞག་པ	rest loosely	lhod de bzhag pa
ལྷོད་དེ་ལམ་མེ་ཝལ་ལེ་འབོལ་ལེ	relaxed and clear, lucid and at ease	lhod de lam me wal le 'bol le
ལྷོད་དེར་གནས་པ	remain in a relaxed state, relaxed mood	lhod der gnas pa
ལྷོད་དེར་བཞུགས	to remain in a relaxed state, remained relaxed	lhod der bzhugs
ལྷོད་བདེ	relaxed and comfortable	lhod bde
ལྷོད་པ	relax, relaxed, lazy, careless, to loosen tensions, relaxation, relaxed, to relax	lhod pa
ལྷོད་པ་སྒྲིམ་པ	tighten what is loose	lhod pa sgrim pa
ལྷོད་པ་ཅན	careless, unconcerned, carefree, laid-back	lhod pa can
ལྷོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	the Great Relaxation, totally relaxed, a state of total relaxation, (Syn. Dzogchen)	lhod pa chen po
ལྷོད་པ་མ་བཅོག	uncontrived release	lhod pa ma bcog
ལྷོད་པ་མ་བཅོས	uncontrived release	lhod pa ma bcos
ལྷོད་པ་ལྷོས་པ	more relaxed, more relaxed	lhod pa lhos pa
ལྷོད་པའི་ངང	relaxed condition	lhod pa'i ngang
ལྷོད་པོ	free and easy	lhod po
ལྷོད་པོ་ཆགས་པ	slacken	lhod po chags pa
ལྷོད་ཕབ་པ	relax	lhod phab pa
ལྷོད་བབ་པ	sems kyi brel dngangs 'jags pa	lhod bab pa
ལྷོད་མེད	lhod yangs med pa	lhod med
ལྷོད་མེད་རྒྱུན་འཁྱོངས	carry through w/o relaxing/a break	lhod med rgyun 'khyongs
ལྷོད་མེར་རེ	like undisturbed ocean, totally relaxed	lhod mer re
ལྷོད་བཞག་པ	to leave relaxed	lhod bzhag pa
ལྷོད་ཡངས	free and easy, carefree	lhod yangs
ལྷོད་ཡེངས	mind not tense/tight lhod g.yeng - benumbed, blunt, careless lhod g.yeng gtong ba - relax, loosen	lhod yengs
ལྷོད་ཤིག་ཤིག	totally relaxed	lhod shig shig
ལྷོད་ལྷོད	leisurely, relaxing	lhod lhod
ལྷོད་ལྷོད་འགྲོ་བ	completely at ease	lhod lhod 'gro ba
ལྷོད་ལྷོད་བཅིངས	tie loosely	lhod lhod bcings
ལྷོད་ལྷོད་གཏོང་བ	slacken	lhod lhod gtong ba
ལྷོད་ལྷོད་བྱེད་པ	to be /act at easy	lhod lhod byed pa
ལྷོན་པ	{lhon pa, lhon pa, lhon pa} intr. v.; to return, to give or pay back	lhon pa
ལྷོན་ཤིང	magic tree	lhon shing
ལྷོབ་ལྷོབ	loose things]	lhob lhob
ལྷོའི་འདོད་མ	TSE	lho'i 'dod ma
ལྷོའི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང	lord of death 2933	lho'i phyogs skyong
ལྷོའི་ཛ་མབུ་གླིང	S continent of the	lho'i dza mbu gling
ལྷོའི་འུར་མ	mist, haze fog	lho'i 'ur ma
ལྷོར	{lho ru}, in the S	lhor
ཨ	A [bod yig gsal byed sum cu pa'am, la las dbyangs gsal gnyis chod kyi yi ger 'dod pa 'di'i nga ro 'don tsul la skye gnas mgrin pa dang, byed pa mgrin pa lce rtsa dang sbyar ba, nang gi rtsol ba mgr...	a
ཨ་ཀ	[Skt] a ga ru med., aloe wood	a ka
ཨ་ཀ་མ	dry dung	a ka ma
ཨ་ཀ་ར	world system 16 worlds to the	a ka ra
ཨ་ཀ་རུ	[Skt] a ga ru med. tree, aloe wood	a ka ru
ཨ་ཀ་རུ་ཕུར་གཟུགས	wooden pin made of the agaru tree	a ka ru phur gzugs
ཨ་ཀཱ་ལ	untimely	a kA la
ཨ་ཀ་བསོད་ནམས་བཟང་པོ	one of the successors of tsong kha pa	a ka bsod nams bzang po
ཨ་ཀམ	firewood, fuel	a kam
ཨ་ཀར	red pepper or capsicum	a kar
ཨ་ཀར་ཏ	Jakarta	a kar ta
ཨ་ཀོར	ear-ring [woman's]	a kor
ཨ་ཀྱང	ah, well, of course, I am only joking	a kyang
ཨ་ཀྱུ	hook that produces twisting together at the tip of a spindle	a kyu
ཨ་ཀྱོག་པ་ཀྱོག	zigzag	a kyog pa kyog
ཨ་ཀྲ་གུ	a fruit	a kra gu
ཨ་ཀྲད	leather to make patches in shoes, leather of old shoes	a krad
ཨ་ཀྲེ་ལན་ཀྲིས	Atlantic	a kre lan kris
ཨ་ཀྲོང	species of fern	a krong
ཨ་ཀྲོང་དཀར་པོ	arenaria kansuensis maxim. var. ovatipetala tsui, saxifraga divaricata engl. et irmsch.	a krong dkar po
ཨ་ཀྲོང་ཁྲ་པོ	saxifraga atrata engl.	a krong khra po
ཨ་ཀྲོང་རིགས་གསུམ	a krong, a kind of field herb med., with three kinds [: a krong dang, root a krong, shing [wood/tree] shing a krong, sweet bitter and and sour tastng, cooling, by its power good for glo tsad dang, ...	a krong rigs gsum
ཨ་དཀར	white quartz	a dkar
ཨ་དཀར་ཐེག་པ	Way of the White A, way of the white a, 1 of 'bras bu'i bon	a dkar theg pa
ཨ་རྐ་ཤི	legs nyi ma shing,.. ????	a rka shi
ཨ་སྐྱ	boswellia serrata, indian frankincense tree	a skya
ཨ་ཁ	{a kha}, expression of dismay, what a pity!	a kha
ཨ་ཁ་ཁ	displeasure interjection, alas	a kha kha
ཨ་ཁ་བ	SK bad nature	a kha ba
ཨ་ཁ་མ	bad, no good	a kha ma
ཨ་ཁུ	[paternal]. uncle, father's brother, uncle; [paternal] uncle	a khu
ཨ་ཁུ་སྟོན་པ	the Tales of Uncle Tonpa	a khu ston pa
ཨ་ཁུ་བསྟན་པའི་གཏམ་རྒྱུད	Tales of Uncle Tonpa (Tibetan stories published in 1980)	a khu bstan pa'i gtam rgyud
ཨ་ཁུ་སྡོམ་ཐག	himalayan black bear	a khu sdom thag
ཨ་ཁུ་ལྷ་ཤིང་ཤུག་པ	tree in the middle of a goddess play	a khu lha shing shug pa
ཨ་ཁྲིད	transmission of the A, Guide of A	a khrid
ཨ་ག་མ	bad, no good	a ga ma
ཨ་ག་རུ	[Skt] a ga ru, aloe wood [med. and incense. syn: lci med, snying sel. three divisions: ar skya, ar nag, ar dmar, white, black, and red. syn: thal ba'i snying po dang, dri zhim ljon pa, 'dab zung ca...	a ga ru
ཨ་ག་རུ་མཆོག	best quality of aloe	a ga ru mchog
ཨ་ག་རུ་ནག་པོ	black a ga ru, aloe wood [mostly black medicinal herb, bitter, body heat neutral, by whose power diseases of the life and essence nadis are completely eliminated]	a ga ru nag po
ཨ་གར	aloe wood	a gar
ཨ་གར་གོ་སྙོད	1 of a ga ru	a gar go snyod
ཨ་གར་སྒྲོན་ཤིང	cedar	a gar sgron shing
ཨ་གར་ནག་པོ	black a ga ru, aloe wood [mostly black medicinal herb, bitter, middle melting, by whose power diseases of the life and essence nadis are cmpletely eliminated.]	a gar nag po
ཨ་གར་དམར་པོ	red a ga ru, aloe wood, med. and incense [[predomiantly red, with agreeable fragrance of 'go snyod' [herb name], by its power heart and life nadi heat and in particular tshad rlung is cured. sun: g...	a gar dmar po
ཨ་གུ	uncle	a gu
ཨ་གྱིས	yes, have you done it, did you do so	a gyis
ཨ་གྲགས་གངས་ལྷ	{a grags gangs lha} mt	a grags gangs lha
ཨ་གྲོ	well colored and beaded wheat	a gro
ཨ་དགོས་ཆུང	helpless not to	a dgos chung
ཨ་འགང	Agang, in Domey	a 'gang
ཨ་འགོག་ཁྲའོ་རོགས	stop the US help Korea	a 'gog khra'o rogs
ཨ་འགྲོ་མི་འགྲོ	do yo go or not go	a 'gro mi 'gro
ཨ་སྒོར	woman's ear-ring, US $	a sgor
ཨ་སྔོན	space, sky	a sngon
ཨ་སྔོན་ཁིས་ཁ	{a sngon khis kha} pass	a sngon khis kha
ཨ་སྔོན་མཐོངས	the midst of the blue sky	a sngon mthongs
ཨ་ཅག	sister-in-law {jo jo'i skye dman}, [older, elder] sister, wife of a cousin	a cag
ཨ་ཅག་ལགས	elder sister, woman, sister-inlaw [address]	a cag lags
ཨ་ཅང	of course!	a cang
ཨ་ཅང་ཅང	1) cannot be explained, los bden ???	a cang cang
ཨ་ཅང་ཆེ	it is certain	a cang che
ཨ་ཅང་ཡང་ཆེ	it is even more so for	a cang yang che
ཨ་ཅུག	ankle-bone	a cug
ཨ་ཅེ	woman, older sister, wife	a ce
ཨ་ཅེ་རྒྱ་བཟའ	a ce Indian queen of King srong btzan sgam po [he sent the minister mgar thang tha'i tzung's daughter, how he asked for her as his queen and how the princess came to Tibet and so forth, these stori...	a ce rgya bza'
ཨ་ཅེ་སོང	madam has left	a ce song
ཨ་ཅེ་ལྷ་མོ	tibetan opera	a ce lha mo
ཨ་ཅེ་ལྷ་མོ་འཁྲབ་པ	name of a play/ Tibetan folk opera	a ce lha mo 'khrab pa
ཨ་ཅོ	older brother	a co
ཨ་ཅོག	elder brother, cousin	a cog
ཨ་ཅོར	towel. Syn {lag phyis}	a cor
ཨ་ལྕག	elder sister	a lcag
ཨ་ལྕག་གི་ཁྱོ་ག	brother-in-law	a lcag gi khyo ga
ཨ་ལྕག་ལགས	elder sister	a lcag lags
ཨ་ལྕགས	sister	a lcags
ཨ་ལྕགས་ལགས	elder sister, woman, sister-inlaw [address]	a lcags lags
ཨ་ལྕི	AR paternal grandmother	a lci
ཨ་ལྕེ	woman, older sister, wife	a lce
ཨ་ལྕེ་ལགས	oh madam	a lce lags
ཨ་ལྕེ་ལགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	your ladyship	a lce lags rin po che
ཨ་ལྕོག	ear	a lcog
ཨ་ཆས་སེ་བ	vividly awake	a chas se ba
ཨ་ཆི་ཐུ	regent of tibet when gshad sgra was prime minister	a chi thu
ཨ་ཆི་ཐོ	{a chi tho}, kind one [M term of rank]	a chi tho
ཨ་ཆུ	{a chu chu} [said after being chilled.]	a chu
ཨ་ཆུ་ཆུ	pain from cold interjection, expressive of pain from cold	a chu chu
ཨ་ཆུ་ཟེར་བ	Crying cold hell [3rd cold hell, "brr" hell]	a chu zer ba
ཨ་ཆུང	' chung letter	a chung
ཨ་ཆུང་གནམ་རྫོང	Achung Namdzong, in Domey	a chung gnam rdzong
ཨ་ཆེ	woman, older sister, wife	a che
ཨ་ཆེ་ལྷ་མོ	actor, actress	a che lha mo
ཨ་ཆེ་ལྷ་མོ་འཁྲབ་པ	name of a play/ Tibetan folk opera	a che lha mo 'khrab pa
ཨ་ཆེན་གངས་རྒྱབ	{a chen gangs rgyab} mt [= a mye rma chen yin zhing SE of mtso sngon province]	a chen gangs rgyab
ཨ་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ	cosmic king	a chen rgyal po
ཨ་ཆེན་ཐང	great plain	a chen thang
ཨ་ཆོག	ear	a chog
ཨ་ཆོར	towel	a chor
ཨ་མཆོག	ear	a mchog
ཨ་མཆོག་ལྟེབ་ཙིགས	folding your ear, exhausted hope [because all you can do is let go again]	a mchog lteb tsigs
ཨ་མཆོད	[usu monk] person who does ceremonies	a mchod
ཨ་ཇོ	elder brother, man's elder brother, elder brother of a male, sir, mr, gentleman, lord, friend, a god	a jo
ཨ་འཇོག	seat on a horse saddle	a 'jog
ཨ་ཉན	hesitation, doubt as to whether one should listen to advice or not	a nyan
ཨ་ཉོག	infant, child	a nyog
ཨ་ཏ	male, elder brother, father	a ta
ཨ་ཏ་ཏ	pain interjection	a ta ta
ཨ་ཏ་པལ	a vegetable medicine	a ta pal
ཨ་ཏ་ར་དམར་པོ	an indian saint	a ta ra dmar po
ཨ་ཏི	ati [yoga] yana]	a ti
ཨ་ཏི་བཀོད་པ	ti kopa [text?]	a ti bkod pa
ཨ་ཏི་བཀོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ	Great Ati Array; tantra	a ti bkod pa chen po
ཨ་ཏི་བཀོད་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྒྱུད	the Great Display of Perfection Tantra; n. of a Dzogchen tantra	a ti bkod pa chen po'i rgyud
ཨ་ཏི་དགོངས་པ	state of total completeness	a ti dgongs pa
ཨ་ཏི་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོ	Ati Yoga, the Vajra Essence	a ti rdo rje snying po
ཨ་ཏི་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྙིང་པོའི་ཐེག་པ	The vehicle of Ati Yoga, the Vajra Essence	a ti rdo rje snying po'i theg pa
ཨ་ཏི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་སྒོམ་བའི་ཐབས	the means of meditation of ati yoga	a ti rnal 'byor gyi sgom ba'i thabs
ཨ་ཏི་བྱང་སེམས	primordial bodhicitta	a ti byang sems
ཨ་ཏི་མ་ཝེར	bon god resembling spyan ras gzigs	a ti ma wer
ཨ་ཏི་མུ་ཏ་ཀ	kind of flower on tibetan plateaus	a ti mu ta ka
ཨ་ཏི་རྫོགས་པ་ཆེན་པོ	ati, the great perfection	a ti rdzogs pa chen po
ཨ་ཏི་ཟབ་དོན་སྙིང་པོ	revealed by Minling Terchen Terdag Lingpa	a ti zab don snying po
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག	Ati Yoga, atiyoga, primordial yoga. Syn Dzogchen	a ti yo ga
ཨོཕ༹་རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེལཕ༹	arising wisdom [rang byung also means one's own intrinsic, natural, spontaneously occuring.] There is nothing other than that. That fundamental ground [gzhi gnas, also = shamatha meditation by whic...	of rang byung ye shes self
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག་ལྷག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Ati Yoga	a ti yo ga lhag pa'i rnal 'byor
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད་རྣམས	Atiyoga tantra	a ti yo ga'i rgyud rnams
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་བསྒོམ	meditation of Ati Yoga	a ti yo ga'i bsgom
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་ཐེག་པ	ati yoga yana [the 9th of 9 vehicles of Nyingma [, also called shin tu rnal 'byor rdzogs pa chen po'i theg pa supreme yoga, the [vehicle of the] great perfection. As preliminaries rig pa'i rtsal bz...	a ti yo ga'i theg pa
ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་སྦྱི་དོན་དྲུག	the six meanings of ati	a ti yo ga'i sbyi don drug
ཨ་ཏི་རང་སྒྲ	natural primordial sound	a ti rang sgra
ཨ་ཏི་ཤ	= Atisha [means perfcted. In east india, born as son of the king of Sahor in the water horse year, named dpal mar me mdzad ye shes, in Maghadha made master of the gtzug lag gnas chen 'ga'i assembly...	a ti sha
ཨ་ཏི་སུམ་ཚན་ཆོས	triple primordial existence	a ti sum tshan chos
ཨ་ཏི་སེམས	primordial nature of mind	a ti sems
ཨ་ཏིའི་དགོངས་པ	in volume 2 of klong gsal teachings of chos rgyal nam mkha'i nor bu, state of knowledge of Ati, the state of Ati	a ti'i dgongs pa
ཨ་ཏིའི་དགོངས་པ་སྒོ་འབྱེད་རྒྱ	Opening of the Gate to the State of Ati	a ti'i dgongs pa sgo 'byed rgya
ཨ་ཏིའི་ཆོས	Ati teaching	a ti'i chos
ཨ་ཏིའི་ཏིང་འཛིན	SA ting 'dzin rnam bzhi	a ti'i ting 'dzin
ཨ་ཏིའི་ཏིང་འཛིན་བཞི	4 contemplations of ati	a ti'i ting 'dzin bzhi
ཨ་ཏིའི་ཐེག་པ	primordial approach to the teaching	a ti'i theg pa
ཨ་ཏིའི་དོན	meaning of Ati	a ti'i don
ཨ་ཏིའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	yoga of ati	a ti'i rnal 'byor
ཨ་ཏིའི་ལམ	path of Ati	a ti'i lam
ཨ་ཏོ	mostly, almost	a to
ཨ་སྟོང	yawn	a stong
ཨ་སྟོང་རྒྱག	yawn	a stong rgyag
ཨ་སྟོང་རྒྱག་པ	yawn	a stong rgyag pa
ཨ་སྟོང་རྒྱབ་པ	yawn	a stong rgyab pa
ཨ་བརྟན	1) very stable; 2) fixed/ pole star	a brtan
ཨ་ཐང་ཆད་པ	very weary	a thang chad pa
ཨ་ཐབས	method, means, skillfulness	a thabs
ཨ་ཐུང	upside down partial A triangle in navel	a thung
ཨ་ཐུལ	expression of doubt as to whether an enemy would be vanquished	a thul
ཨ་ཐོ་འགོད	register	a tho 'god
ཨ་ཐོ་བ	AR bzang po	a tho ba
ཨ་ཐོད	skull, forehead	a thod
ཨ་ཐོད་རི་མོ	merit	a thod ri mo
ཨ་འཐས	exclusive reality, clinging, fantasies, fixation, grasping, phenomenon always occurring to oneself which is taken for reality	a 'thas
ཨ་འཐས་ཀྱི་བདེན་འཛིན	clinging to a solid reality	a 'thas kyi bden 'dzin
ཨ་འཐས་ཆེད་འཛིན	possessiveness and attachment [to the notions of.] 2936	a 'thas ched 'dzin
ཨ་འཐས་མཚན་མ	fixation and conceptions	a 'thas mtshan ma
ཨ་འཐས་བཟུང་བ	1) grasped as solid and real; 2) fantasies; 3) solidifying	a 'thas bzung ba
ཨ་དའི་བུ	son of aditi, sun	a da'i bu
ཨ་དར་ཆགས་ཀ	Adarchaka, in Domey	a dar chags ka
ཨ་དར་ཤ	SK mirror	a dar sha
ཨ་དུ་མ་ཡ	a country	a du ma ya
ཨ་དོགས	table	a dogs
ཨ་དོན	emptiness, the unborn	a don
ཨ་དྲག	doubt as to whether a thing is good or bad	a drag
ཨ་དྲུང	1) [TT govt mounted] post-rider/ messenger/ runner; 2) former monastic abbot's groom	a drung
ཆིཨེཕ༹	groom, muleteer, messenger riding a swift horse who carries official dispatches	chief
ཨ་དྲུང་རྟ་བཞོན	a drung rta shad dang don gcig	a drung rta bzhon
ཨ་དྲུང་རྟ་ཤད	Tibetan govt mounted	a drung rta shad
ཨ་མདོ	Amdo	a mdo
ཨ་མདོ་དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ	1905? 1951?	a mdo dge 'dun chos 'phel
ཨ་མདོ་མགོ་རིལ	in Amdo name of hyer yong ba'i[khab] [needle] ???	a mdo mgo ril
ཨ་མདོ་ཞབ༹་དམར	(1852-1910), alias {dge 'dun bstan 'dzin rgya mtsho}; author of {byang chub bde lam gyi khrid dmigs skyong tshul shin tu gsal bar bkod pa dge legs 'od snang 'gyed pa'i nyin byed}	a mdo zhva dmar
ཨ་མདོའི་ཆས	Amdo style clothes a mdo'i chos 'byung deb ther rgya mtsho Ocean Annals, a religious history of Amdo, by Könchok Rabgye	a mdo'i chas
ཨ་སྡུག	low and wretched/ destitute	a sdug
ཨ་ན	from that (?)	a na
ཨ་ན་ན	sorrow interjection	a na na
ཨ་ན་མ་ན	similar, alike	a na ma na
ཨ་ན་རུ	there, thither	a na ru
ཨ་ན་ཨ་ར	shame, modesty	a na a ra
ཨ་ནན	little 1	a nan
ཨ་ནན་ད	Ananda	a nan da
ཨ་ནར	there, thither	a nar
ཨ་ནཱི	nun (H.)	a nI
ཨ་ནིའི་དགོན་པ	nunnery	a ni'i dgon pa
ཨ་ནིའི་ཚོགས་པ	sisterhood	a ni'i tshogs pa
ཨ་ནུ	1) child, youth; 2) lesser, subtle; 3) master a nu or thu mi [sam bho ta] four younger brother [affec.]	a nu
ཨ་ནུ་ན	mountain east of 'dzam gling	a nu na
ཨ་ནུ་སྣང་གྲགས	{a nu snang grags} [father of thu mi sam bho ta who established Tibetan writing]	a nu snang grags
ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་ག	supreme method of transformation	a nu yo ga
ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་གའི་རྒྱུད་རྣམས	Anu Yoga tantra	a nu yo ga'i rgyud rnams
ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་གའི་བསྒོམ	meditation of Anu Yoga	a nu yo ga'i bsgom
ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་གའི་ཐེག་པ	anuyoga yana [8th of the 9 vehicles of nyingma tantra]	a nu yo ga'i theg pa
ཐེ་མེདིཏཏིཨོན་ཨོཕ༹་ནོན	thought, the meaning subsequent yoga, yi ge'i rjes su 'jug pa bskyed by merely saying the mantra[s] rtsal snang the mandal of the deities du gsal ba the path that frees and, the upaya marga relying...	the meditation of non
ཨ་ནུ་ཡོ་གའི་སྡེ་སྣོད་རྣམས	Anu Yoga pitakas	a nu yo ga'i sde snod rnams
ཨ་ནུའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གསུམ	three mandalas of Anu [Yoga]. For the three mandalas of Anu [Yoga], the view is to establish distinctly that all ground phenomena are three mandalas: 1) the unconstructed basis space of nonarising ...	a nu'i dkyil 'khor gsum
ལུམིནོཨུསལཡ་པྲེསེནཏ་ཨས་སེལཕ༹	existing awareness, which is wisdom Samantabhadra, also called 'the natural mandala of spontaneous presence.' 3) This basic space and wisdom as nondual is the Child of Great Bliss, also called 'the...	luminously present as self
ཨ་ནེ	nun (H.); [paternal] aunt, father's sister, aunt, grand-aunt	a ne
ཨ་ནེ་དྲུང	honorable miss	a ne drung
ཨ་ནེ་མ་མོ	certain red worm or vermin	a ne ma mo
ཨ་ནེས	Amdo dialect for father-in-law's aunt	a nes
ཨ་གནད་ལྟ་བ	see or examine as to the condition of a thing, any scruple about a thing or matter	a gnad lta ba
ཨ་པ	father, expression of compassion	a pa
ཨ་པ་ཆེན་པོ	elder husband of a woman who is held to be father of all the children born of her	a pa chen po
ཨ་པ་བ་ཀ	royal personage, official	a pa ba ka
ཨ་པ་ལ	{a pa la} [expression of surprise and wonder]	a pa la
ཨ་པ་ས་བྱམ	right side of the body	a pa sa byam
ཨ་པར་སྐྱུར་གསུམ	three main ingredients for med.	a par skyur gsum
ཨ་པི	interjection expressive of wonder	a pi
ཨ་པོ	1) master of a house; 2) old sibling/ relative; 2) northerner, nomad; 3) building?	a po
ཨ་པོ་ཧོར	northerner, nomad	a po hor
ཨ་པོའོ	what, oh, ah, why, hey	a po'o
ཨ་པྲ	species of lagomys, tailless shrew	a pra
ཨ་ཕ	dad, father, papa, uncastrated male animal, father	a pha
ཨ་ཕ་རྒྱ་བོ	a kind of barley	a pha rgya bo
ཨ་ཕ་རི་ཁ	Africa	a pha ri kha
ཨ་ཕི་རི་ཀའི་མི	african	a phi ri ka'i mi
ཨ་ཕིམ	[CH] a phim med. herb [emetic/ poison good for gzer 'jags and glo 'gog pa]	a phim
ཨ་ཕིམ་སྐྱ་གོག	cheese	a phim skya gog
ཨ་ཕོ	brave man, he-man	a pho
ཨ་ཕོ་ང	i myself	a pho nga
ཨ་ཕོ་བླ་བྲང	monastery in Manali, Himachal Pradesh, founded by the late Apho Rinpoche	a pho bla brang
ཨ་ཕྱ	grandmother	a phya
ཨ་ཕྱག་གཟེར་འཇོམས	{a phyag gzer 'joms} med. herb	a phyag gzer 'joms
ཨ་ཕྱི	grandmother	a phyi
ཨ་ཕྱི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོལ་མ	a female protective deity, especially popular with the 'bri gung bka' brgyud school [tsd]	a phyi chos kyi sgrol ma
ཨ་ཕྱི་མ	1) grandmother [= phyi mo, ma yi ma]; 2) Drikungpa 'bri gung pa'i female protector	a phyi ma
ཨ་ཕྱིམ	old woman, goody, dame	a phyim
ཨ་ཕྱིར	Apache	a phyir
ཨ་ཕྱུག་ཙག་པ	locust	a phyug tsag pa
ཨ་ཕྲག	breast pocket attached to a tibetan robe	a phrag
ཨ་ཕྲག་ཏུ་སྡུ་བ	put into the bosom	a phrag tu sdu ba
ཨ་ཕྲུག	1) child; 2) 'running dog,' attendant [dog that runs after its master when called, [pej]	a phrug
ཨ་ཕྲུམ	cartilage	a phrum
ཨ་ཕྲེང	garland of vowels	a phreng
ཨ་ཕྲེང་ཀ་ཕྲེང	garlands of vowels and consonants a phreng ka phreng gi sngags kyi rim pa mantric succession of the vowels and consonants	a phreng ka phreng
ཨ་བ	[Skt] letters a to ba *]	a ba
ཨ་བ་གླང་མགོ	{a ba glang mgo} [one of the minions of the Lord of Death]	a ba glang mgo
ཨ་བ་ཏཱ་ར་མུ་ཁ	Avataramukha; {'jug sgo}	a ba tA ra mu kha
ཨ་བ་རི	not place much importance on compassion	a ba ri
ཨ་བ་ལོ་ཀི་ཏ	SK Avalokiteshvara	a ba lo ki ta
ཨ་བ་དྷཱུ་ཏི	central channel, see also {a wa dhU ti}	a ba dhU ti
ཨ་བ་བྷང་ཤ	[Skt] uncommon form of speech with parts of letters words and phrases apparently missing left out {a ba bhram sha} 1 of the {rgya gar gyi skad rigs chen po bzhi, great four kinds of SK speech]	a ba bhang sha
ཨ་བ་བྷྲང་ཤ	SK uncommon form of speech w parts of letters words and phrases apparently missing left out	a ba bhrang sha
ཨ་བ་བྷྲམ་ཤ	[Skt] uncommon form of speech w parts of letters words and phrases apparently missing	a ba bhram sha
ཨ་བང	husband of the father's or mother's sister	a bang
ཨ་བར	yellow and beleric myrobalan [medicines: a ru ra, ba ru ra]	a bar
ཨ་བར་སྐྱུ་གསུམ	yellow, beleric, and emblic myrobalan	a bar skyu gsum
ཨ་བར་སྐྱུར་གསུམ	yellow, beleric, and emblic myrobalan	a bar skyur gsum
ཨ་བི་ཁ་དམན་པ	fritillaria cirrhosa d. don	a bi kha dman pa
ཨ་བི་ཤ	fritillary bulb	a bi sha
ཨ་བི་ཤ་ཡ	= {dbab pa}., = {bstim}, descend	a bi sha ya
ཨ་བུམ	bottle, gourd	a bum
ཨ་བོ	that	a bo
ཨ་བོ་ཙེ	good, tolerable, middling	a bo tse
ཨ་བྱག	{a byag} kind of herb	a byag
ཨ་བྱག་ཙེར་སྔོན	{a byag tser sngon}, med. herb [in which is {lo sdong tser ma can} with blue flowers, bitter tasting, cooling, by whose power rus tshad and gaps and breaks in bones, lus stod dang rtzib logs gzer b...	a byag tser sngon
ཨ་བྱག་གཟེར་འཇོམས	senecio integrifolius (l.) clairv.	a byag gzer 'joms
ཨ་བྲ	guinea pig, species of bra ba, small rodent, ochotona erythrotis	a bra
ཨ་དབྱི	auntie	a dbyi
ཨ་འབྲས	{a 'bras} med. tree	a 'bras
ཨ་སྦྱར	thin broth	a sbyar
ཨ་མ	ma, mother, mom	a ma
ཨ་མ་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ	Ama Khandroma, said to be a human descendant of the dakini guardian of Tsari	a ma mkha' 'gro ma
ཨ་མ་གྱིས	no, you be to me a mother, behave to me as a mother	a ma gyis
ཨ་མ་ང	expression of sorrow	a ma nga
ཨ་མ་དེ་བ	tibetan corruption of amitabha	a ma de ba
ཨ་མ་དྲིན་ཆེན	my kind mother	a ma drin chen
ཨ་མ་ན་སེ	[Skt] yid la mi byed pa [not apprehend?]	a ma na se
ཨ་མ་ནང་བཞིན	motherly	a ma nang bzhin
ཨ་མ་ཕག	pocket, pouch	a ma phag
ཨ་མ་ཕྲག	breast pocket attached to a tibetan robe	a ma phrag
ཨ་མ་ཙད་རྡོ	stone indicating the center of a field	a ma tsad rdo
ཨ་མ་མཚོ་སྨན་རྒྱལ་མོ	Ama Tsomen Gyalmo; the chief among the four sisters (sman mo) who are guardians of the Lake Kokonor	a ma mtsho sman rgyal mo
ཨ་མ་ར	mango	a ma ra
ཨ་མ་ལགས	mamma, mother	a ma lags
ཨ་མ་ལི་ཧོ	{a ma li ho}, expression of joy	a ma li ho
ཨ་མ་ལེ་ཧོ	{a ma le ho}, expression of joy	a ma le ho
ཨ་མ་སླ་པོ	[weak sinus] gullible	a ma sla po
ཨ་མའི་གནས་སྐབས	maternity, motherhood	a ma'i gnas skabs
ཨ་མའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི	maternal	a ma'i phyogs kyi
ཨ་མའི་བུ	substitute, replacement [person]	a ma'i bu
ཨ་མའི་འོ་མ་འཐུང་བཞིན་པ	suckling	a ma'i 'o ma 'thung bzhin pa
ཨ་མའོ	{a ma'o} expression of fright/ being overwhelmed	a ma'o
ཨ་མར་གྱུར་པ	be[come] a mother	a mar gyur pa
ཨ་མི་དེ་བ	Syn {'od dpag med}	a mi de ba
ཨ་མི་མུ་ཟི	ancient dynasty	a mi mu zi
ཨ་མི་མུ་ཟི་ཁྲི་དོ	one of the earliest tribes of tibet	a mi mu zi khri do
ཨ་མི་རི་ཀའི་སྒོར་མོ	dollar	a mi ri ka'i sgor mo
ཨ་མུ་ཀམ	cemetery	a mu kam
ཨ་མེ་རི་ཀ	America	a me ri ka
ཨ་མེས	1) forefather; 2) * {a mes byang chub 'byung gnas}	a mes
ཨ་མེས་སྐྱེ་རི	The name of a mountain in the area where HHDL 14 was born. [mss]	a mes skye ri
ཨ་མོ་ཉིད	bon word for emptiness	a mo nyid
ཨ་མོ་ལི་ཀའི་རྡོ་ལེབ	name of large flat rock in Heaven of the Thirty three, where the gods go for picnic	a mo li ka'i rdo leb
ཨ་མྱེ	grandfather	a mye
ཨ་མྱེ་དཀར་ལྡང	{a mye dkar ldang} mt	a mye dkar ldang
ཨ་མྱེས	Amdo dialect for father-in-law	a myes
ཨ་མྱེས་གེ་ཐོ	Amnye Getho, in Domey	a myes ge tho
ཨ་མྱེས་ཇ་སྒྲོན	Amnye Jadrön	a myes ja sgron
ཨ་མྱེས་རྨ་ཆེན	1) {a myes rma chen} snow mountain [= Magyel Pomra = rma rgyal gangs ri, in SE mtso sngon province, el. smi 6282; 2) mtso sngon zhing chen mgo log, Tibet's great earthlord, = Magyel Pomra. [he is l...	a myes rma chen
ཨ་མྱེས་རི་ཆེན	{a myes ri chen} mt.	a myes ri chen
ཨ་མྲ	mangoe	a mra
ཨ་མྲ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན	1 of a mra'i mchog gi ming	a mra khyad par can
ཨ་མྲ་མཆོག	the best mango tree/fruit syn: bcud bzang dang, dpyid ka'i gnyen no]	a mra mchog
ཨ་མྲ་ཤིང	mangoe tree	a mra shing
ཨ་མྲའི་འཁུར་བ	1) food made from mango fruit bca' ba; 2) mri ta	a mra'i 'khur ba
ཨ་མྲའི་མཆོག་གི	dpyid ka'i gnyen, sa ha ka ra, dri zhim a mra, a mra khyad par can)	a mra'i mchog gi
ཨ་མྲའི་མཆོག་གི་མིང	names of best kinds of mangoe (bcud bzang	a mra'i mchog gi ming
ཨ་མྲའི་འབྲས་བུ	mango fruit	a mra'i 'bras bu
ཨ་མྲའི་འབྲས་བུ་རིགས་བཞི	the four kinds of mango fruit ??	a mra'i 'bras bu rigs bzhi
ཨ་མྲའི་ཚལ	a mango grove	a mra'i tshal
ཨ་མྲའི་འོ་མ	froth of milk, milk and mangoes	a mra'i 'o ma
ཨ་མྲི་ཏ	nectar, ambrosia	a mri ta
ཨ་མྲི་ཏ་ནམ	place of nectar	a mri ta nam
ཨ་མྲོ	mangoe	a mro
ཨ་ཙ	expression of wonder or pity	a tsa
ཨ་ཙ་མ	expression of wonder or pity, alas	a tsa ma
ཨ་ཙ་མ་ན	tsamana	a tsa ma na
ཨ་ཙ་ར	a mendicant	a tsa ra
ཨ་ཙ་ར་དཀར་ནག་ཁྲ་གསུམ	white, black and variegated atsara ???	a tsa ra dkar nag khra gsum
ཨ་ཙ་ར་གླང་ཁྲིད	[painting of] {a tsa ra} leading an elephant	a tsa ra glang khrid
ཨ་ཙཱ་ར་སྔགས་ཡིག	x	a tsA ra sngags yig
ཨཱ་ཙ་རྱ	slob dpon, master	A tsa rya
ཨ་ཙ་རྱ་ས་ལེ	8th cent. - Atsara Sale, a disciple of Yeshe Tsogyal	a tsa rya sa le
ཨ་ཙག་ཙག་པ	locust	a tsag tsag pa
ཨ་ཙམ་རེ	las!. SK for {slob dpon}	a tsam re
ཨ་ཙར་ཡ	Skt. for {slob dpon} spiritual guide or father, instructor, professor, doctor	a tsar ya
ཨ་ཙར་ཡེ་ཤེས	Atsara Yeshe. Same as Atsara Yeshe Yang of Ba. See under Yeshe Yang	a tsar ye shes
ཨ་ཙི	/ {a tsi}; 1) expression of surprise, wonder fear, etc.; 2) expression of joking, playing	a tsi
ཨ་ཙི་ཙི	/ {a tsi tsi}; 1) expression of surprise, wonder fear, etc.; 2) expression of joking, playing	a tsi tsi
ཨ་ཙི་ཚེ	expression of repentance, regret	a tsi tshe
ཨ་ཙི་ཨ་ཙི	oh my	a tsi a tsi
ཨ་ཙུག	doubt/ ? word skyid sdug legs nyes a tsug yong, las ka 'di 'dra byas na a tsug	a tsug
ཨ་ཙེ	/ {a tse}; 1) expression of surprise, wonder fear, etc.; 2) expression of joking, playing	a tse
ཨ་རྩ་མཚོ	a rtsa lake	a rtsa mtsho
ཨ་རྩིས	Oh my!	a rtsis
ཨ་ཚ	hey, ouch, pain from heat interjection, expressing pain occasioned by burning heat or fire	a tsha
ཨ་ཚ་ཚ	pain from heat interjection, expressing pain occasioned by burning heat or fire	a tsha tsha
ཨ་ཚི	fright interjection	a tshi
ཨ་ཚི་ཚི	fright interjection	a tshi tshi
ཨ་ཚོར	interjection or interrogative	a tshor
ཨ་མཚར	wonderful, curious	a mtshar
ཨ་མཚར་པོ	wonderful, astonishing	a mtshar po
ཨ་འཚམ	is it all right	a 'tsham
ཨ་ཛ་ག་ར	python snake	a dza ga ra
ཨ་ཛ་ན	hairy skin of black antelope	a dza na
ཨ་ཛི་ར་བ་ཏི	river in ancient india	a dzi ra ba ti
ཨ་ཛོམ་འབྲུག་པ	1842-1924, SA a 'dzam 'brug pa	a dzom 'brug pa
ཨ་འཛམ་འབྲུག་པ	'gro 'dul dpa' bo rdo rje, 1842-1934, great rdzogs chen master	a 'dzam 'brug pa
ཨཱ་འཛོམ་འབྲུག་པ	Azom Drukpa: 18421924	A 'dzom 'brug pa
ཨ་འཛོམས་གླིང	Adzam Ling retreat & practice place near Campomolino in North Italy	a 'dzoms gling
ཨ་འཛོམས་འབྲུག་པ	1842-1924 a 'dzoms 'brug pa rig 'dzin sna tshogs rang	a 'dzoms 'brug pa
ཨ་རྫ་ཀའི་དོག་པ	1) {a rdza ka'i dog pa} flower w petals like sun = ngos 'dzin mkhan; 2) lcam pa fruit	a rdza ka'i dog pa
ཨ་རཏཟ་མཙོ	a rtza lake [in lha ri rdzong]	a rtza mtso
ཨ་ཝ	children [h]	a wa
ཨ་ཝ་གླང་མགོ་སེ	one of the {thub pa drug} the one in the hell realm. Syn Dharmaraja, the Dharma King, sage of the hell beings, the buddha of the hell realm	a wa glang mgo se
ཨ་ཝ་བྲག་ཏྲི་ཏ	language of the ghosts	a wa brag tri ta
ཨ་ཝ་དྷུ་ཏི	air passage	a wa dhu ti
ཨ་ཝ་དྷུ་ཏི་པ་བཙུན་པ་བསོད་ནམས	author of Kalachakra instructions	a wa dhu ti pa btsun pa bsod nams
ཨཱ་ཝར་ཏ	dizziness	A war ta
ཨ་ཝར་ཐེའུ	Awartheu, in Domey	a war the'u
ཨ་ཞང	maternal uncle, uncle, uncle by the mother's side, mother's brother, maternal uncle	a zhang
ཨ་ཞང་ཙ་བོ	maternal uncle and nephew[s]	a zhang tsa bo
ཨ་ཞང་ཚ་བོ	uncle and nephew	a zhang tsha bo
ཨ་ཞི་ལ	a zhi pass	a zhi la
ཨ་ཞེ	mistress of the house	a zhe
ཨ་ཞོམ	corn	a zhom
ཨ་ཟིང་སྟག་སེང	the a zing lion and tiger	a zing stag seng
ཨ་གཟེར	crucial position of AH	a gzer
ཨ་འུ་ཙི	it is of no consequence, it does not matter, a plant	a 'u tsi
ཨ་འོ	endearment interjection	a 'o
ཨ་ཡ	expression of regret of yi thang chad pa'i tsig a ya nga ci drag a ya nga re 'gyod, a ya nga re gnong, a ya nga re ngal ???	a ya
ཨ་ཡ་ང	i am tire of that kind of work	a ya nga
ཨ་ཡ་ཏ་ན	ayatana	a ya ta na
ཨ་ཡ་དྷུ་ཏི	SK uma nadi, avadhuti [central of the body's three main nadis or prana channels.]	a ya dhu ti
ཨ་ཡས	grandmother	a yas
ཨ་ཡི་ཁུ་ག	ovum	a yi khu ga
ཨ་ཡི་སྒྲ་སྦྱོང	sound the A	a yi sgra sbyong
ཨ་ཡི་ལ	a yi pass [w of sgar rdzong]	a yi la
ཨ་ཡི་ལ་རི་རྒྱུད	a yi pass mountain range	a yi la ri rgyud
ཨ་ཡིག	letter a	a yig
ཨ་ཡིས	with the sound A	a yis
ཨ་ཡུ	hornless	a yu
ཨ་ཡུ་མ	hornless [cattle, goats, sheep.]	a yu ma
ཨ་ཡུ་ཤེ	SK life	a yu she
ཨ་ཡུ་སཤི	SK life	a yu sshi
ཨ་ཡུར	SK life 2940	a yur
ཨ་ཡེ་རིགས་ཅན	" " family [probably surname, clan name]	a ye rigs can
ཨ་ཡོ	whelp	a yo
ཨ་ཡོད་ད་ཡོད	1) best or essential part; 2) yolk of an egg	a yod da yod
ཨ་ར	1) cry after sickness or pain; 2) moustache, beard; 3) saw	a ra
ཨ་ར་པ་ཙ་ན	aspect of Manjushri	a ra pa tsa na
ཨ་ར་པ་ཙ་ནའི་སྒྲུབ་ཐབས	arapachana sadhana	a ra pa tsa na'i sgrub thabs
ཨ་ར་བ	kind of actor	a ra ba
ཨ་ར་བ་རྩི་ན	pertaining to charms of 'jam dbyangs	a ra ba rtsi na
ཨ་ར་མོ་བན་དྷེ	robber-monks who took tantras literally	a ra mo ban dhe
ཨ་ར་ར	sorrow interjection	a ra ra
ཨ་ར་ཨུ་རུ	aches and pains	a ra u ru
ཨ་རག	mare liquor, wine, alcoholic drink, liquor, spirits, arrack, spirit, brandy, arrack, usual barley-brandy	a rag
ཨ་རག་ཞིག	rum, wine	a rag zhig
ཨ་རང	{a rang}, expression of doubt	a rang
ཨ་རང་ད་རང	actual place/ nature, actuality, the real thing	a rang da rang
ཨ་རང་གཤོམ	expression of hesitation as to believing a thing	a rang gshom
ཨ་རབ	arab	a rab
ཨ་རབ་སྒང	place in khams a rab dmangs gtso spyi mthun rgyal khab United Arab Republic	a rab sgang
ཨ་རི	America[n]	a ri
ཨ་རི་མང་སྡེ་གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ	America	a ri mang sde gcig bsgril
ཨ་རིག	country of nomad herdsmen west of amdo	a rig
ཐེ་ནོརཐ	eastern banks of Lake Kokonor A rig dge shes bya bral nga dbang bsod	the north
ཨ་རིགས་ཅན	" " family [clan name]	a rigs can
ཨ་རིར	conway in America ?? (on the AH hill)	a rir
ཨ་རུ	yellow myrobalan, terminabli chebula	a ru
ཨ་རུ་སྐེམ་པོ་སུལ་མང	{a ru skem po sul mang} med. tree	a ru skem po sul mang
ཨ་རུ་མཆུ་སྨྱུང	sharp beak myrobalan, med. herb a ru ra mchu rnon [sharp tongue/ beak]	a ru mchu smyung
ཨ་རུ་འཇིགས་མེད	{a ru 'jigs med}, one of five kinds of myrobalan [, a ru rigs lnga, pungent, bitter, heating, by its powers gdon nad especially in the eyes are helped]	a ru 'jigs med
ཨ་རུ་བདུད་རྩི་ཤ་མཐུག	= {a ru sha chen}	a ru bdud rtsi sha mthug
ཨ་རུ་ནག་ཆུང	small black myrobalan	a ru nag chung
ཨ་རུ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{a ru rnam rgyal} [chief of the five kinds of myrobalan, a medicinal tree, very rare, universal medicine	a ru rnam rgyal
ཨ་རུ་འཕེལ་བྱེད	{a ru 'phel byed}	a ru 'phel byed
ཨ་རུ་ར	<har'itak'i> myrobalan medicinal tree syn: brgya byin spos dang, bcud len, 'jigs med, bdud rtzi gser ldan, nad 'dor, nad med, phan pa can.]	a ru ra
ཨ་རུ་རིགས་ལྔ	the five kinds of myrobalan	a ru rigs lnga
ཨ་རུ་ཤིང	myrobalan med. tree	a ru shing
ཨ་རུ་གསེར་མདོག	[gold] myrobalan	a ru gser mdog
ཨ་རུམ	species of garlic with a pale-red blossom, allium strictum	a rum
ཨ་རེ	how ...!	a re
ཧོཔེ་ཨོཕ༹	-,	hope of
ཨ་རེ་སྐྱིད	very happy	a re skyid
ཨ་རེ་འཁྲུལ	How foolish of me!	a re 'khrul
ཨ་རེ་དགའ	{a re dga' dangs re spro} what great joy! how delightful!; with great joy and enthusiasm	a re dga'
ཨ་རེ་དགའ་ན	What a wonder!	a re dga' na
ཨ་རེ་ཕངས	well then, throw it away	a re phangs
ཨ་རེ་མཛེས	how beautiful	a re mdzes
ཨ་རོ	{a ro}! expression of unbearable shame	a ro
ཨ་རོ་ག	without disease, in good health	a ro ga
ཨ་རོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་འབྱུང་གནས	Aro Yeshe Jungney	a ro ye shes 'byung gnas
ཨ་རོ་ལུགས	rdzogs chen sems sde tradition established by the teacher a ro ye shes 'byung gnas in the 10th century	a ro lugs
ཨ་རོག	companion, friend	a rog
ཨ་རོག་ཁྱ	be[come] free from disease	a rog khya
ཨ་རོགས	companion, friend	a rogs
ཨ་རོའི་ཐེག་ཆེན་རྣལ་འབྱོར	Aro's Yogas of the Greater Vehicle, by Aro Yeshe Jungney	a ro'i theg chen rnal 'byor
ཨ་རོའོ	hey, ouch	a ro'o
ཨ་རྱ	exalted	a rya
ཨ་རྱ་ཏཱ་ར	{'phags ma sgrol ma}	a rya tA ra
ཨཱ་རྱ་དེ་བ	Aryadeva; {'phags pa'i lha}	A rya de ba
ཨ་རྱ་དེ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ་ཀུན་བཏུས	Aryadeva's {snying po kun btus}	a rya de ba'i snying po kun btus
ཨ་རྱ་པ་ལོའི་གླིང	Exalted Palo Temple. A temple at Samye	a rya pa lo'i gling
ཨཱ་རྱ་པའ་ལོའི་གླིང	Aryapalo; temple at Samye	A rya pa' lo'i gling
ཨ་ལ	{a la, expression of joy and wonder 2941	a la
ཨ་ལ་པ་ལ	inferior, shoddy, the bare minimum, slipshod, careless	a la pa la
ཨ་ལ་པེ་ཀོག་གི་མི	puppet, doll	a la pe kog gi mi
ཨ་ལ་པོ	Arabia	a la po
ཨ་ལ་པོའི་ཨང་ཀི	Arabic #s	a la po'i ang ki
ཨ་ལ་སྤུ་ཡུག	'dog tree' w thorns	a la spu yug
ཨ་ལ་བ་འཏོག	brightness of the moon	a la ba 'tog
ཨ་ལ་མ་ལ	skabs thog thabs cha byung ba	a la ma la
ཨ་ལ་རོང	birth place of 10th karmapa rol pa'i rdo rje	a la rong
ཨ་ལ་ལ	how delightful! How wonderful!	a la la
ཨ་ལ་ལ་ཧོ	ha ha, joy and wonder interjection, ye gods be propitious to us, pray hear our prayers, marvelous!	a la la ho
ཨ་ལ་ལའོ	{a la la'o}, expression of joy and wonder	a la la'o
ཨ་ལག	Alak, an honorific title given to lamas and notables in Amdo	a lag
ཨ་ལག་ནོའུར	mtso sngo ring lake [in mtsho sngon]	a lag no'ur
ཨ་ལགས	1) tulku; 2) respectful word of address	a lags
ཨ་ལང་ཀ	alangka bug [a source of poison]	a lang ka
ཨ་ལན	reply to a call, response, answer	a lan
ཨ་ལན་འདེབས	reply to a call	a lan 'debs
ཨ་ལན་འདེབས་པ	reply to a call	a lan 'debs pa
ཨ་ལན་འབྱིན	reply to a call	a lan 'byin
ཨ་ལན་འབྱིན་པ	reply to a call	a lan 'byin pa
ཨ་ལན་སློག	reply to a call	a lan slog
ཨ་ལན་སློག་པ	reply to a call	a lan slog pa
ཨ་ལན་ཨུ་ལན	reply, answer	a lan u lan
ཨ་ལས	oh, oh yes	a las
ཨ་ལས་ལ་མོ	in singing, substitute words	a las la mo
ཨ་ལི	' li ???	a li
ཨཱ་ལི་ཀཱ་ལི	vowels and consonants	A li kA li
ཨ་ལི་ཁུག་ཏ	a swallow	a li khug ta
ཨ་ལི་བཅུ་དྲུག	the sixteen vowels	a li bcu drug
ཨ་ལི་དང་པོ	the 1st vowel	a li dang po
ཨ་ལི་ལ་བར་ཏ	a great river	a li la bar ta
ཨ་ལིག	little, little boy	a lig
ཨ་ལུ	infant, small child	a lu
ཨ་ལུང	1) round handle/ grip [door, knife, chain]; 2) ear- ring; 3) gold or silver ring set w jewel[s]; 4) buckle, clasp	a lung
ཨ་ལུང་གི་ཁྲབ	shield of iron rings or foils	a lung gi khrab
ཨ་ལུས	cat	a lus
ཨ་ལེ	{a le} 1) expression of surprise; 2) well, [a space filler] = {a rtsi}, (u rtsi ]	a le
ཨ་ལེ་སྒུགས་རོགས	wait awhile, stop a bit	a le sgugs rogs
ཨ་ལོ	sir, address to gentlemen in sikkim	a lo
ཨ་ལོ་ཀེ	SK loka, lamp	a lo ke
ཨ་ལོ་ཀྱོག་ལོ	an unwanted development	a lo kyog lo
ཨ་ལོག	1) roll back and forth [horse etc.]; 2) turn over [top to bottom]	a log
ཨ་ལོག་རྒྱག	turn over, roll over, [horse etc.] upset	a log rgyag
ཨ་ལོགས་རྒྱབ་པ	invert	a logs rgyab pa
ཨ་ལོང	men's earring ring, ring, bracelet	a long
ཨ་ལོང་ཁ་ཟ	buttocks and anus	a long kha za
ཨ་ལོང་སྒོར་མོ	1) round metal ear-rings; 2) round metal thag lung rgyud byed ??	a long sgor mo
ཨ་ལོང་འཕྲུལ་རྩེད	hoop	a long 'phrul rtsed
ཨ་ལོང་འཕྲུལ་རཏཟེད	hoop [circling on the end of a stick w which variuos games are played like not letting it fall]	a long 'phrul rtzed
ཨ་ལོང་མེ་ལོང	vast flat pleasant expanse [grassy plain]	a long me long
ཨ་ལོང་ཡང་ལོང	1) put 1 ring in another [just two or a chain??][lcags thag cig a long yang long du brgyus pa]; 2) repeat.	a long yang long
ཨ་ཤ་པ	a yaksha demon	a sha pa
ཨ་ཤ་ཝར་ཐ	{a sha war tha} med. herb	a sha war tha
ཨ་ཤབ༹་ཀ	SK ashoka [tree/ flower]	a shva ka
ལོཅུསཏ	like leaves and thorns = a sho ka]	locust
ཨ་ཤྭ་གན་དྷ	plant physalis flexuosalin	a shwa gan dha
ཨ་ཤབ༹་ནི	SK 9th month	a shva ni
ཨ་ཤབ༹་ར	The preta-fire, or 'flesh-eater's fire,' refers to ashvara which is a type of Tirthika (non-Buddhist). Among the	a shva ra
ཕོ༹ཨུར་ཏཡྤེས་ཨོཕ༹་ཕི༹རེ	pit mentioned in the Immaculate Light, the ashvara-fire	four types of fire
ཤོཨུལད་བེ་ཨིདེནཏིཕི༹ཨེད་ཨས་ཐེ་ཊིརཐིཀའས་ཨོཕ༹ཕེ༹རིང	fire. In Tibet, it means charnel ground fire which means charcoal from a funeral pyre. Jamdrak Rinpoche said that the ingredients for showering down the resplendence of wisdom are vital, while the ...	should be identified as the Tirthika's offering
ཨ་ཤད	partial Ah (navel region or below, derives from mother, red, produces biological warmth), second half of Ah, fierce	a shad
ཨ་ཤྭར་ཐ	medicinal herb	a shwar tha
ཨ་ཤིང	1) door bar/ bolt; 2) ever-turning [wheel]	a shing
ཨ་ཤུ	apricot	a shu
ཨ་ཤེ	kata	a she
ཨ་ཤོ་ཀ	[Skt] ashoka [tree/ flower] [T: mya ngan med, kind of acacia, small	a sho ka
ཨ་ཤོ་ཏ་ར	kind of worm growing in the clefts of withered trees	a sho ta ra
ཨ་ཤོ་ལེགས	one of the early kings of tibet	a sho legs
ཨ་ཤོམ	maise	a shom
ཨ་ས་ན	tree terminalia tomentosa	a sa na
ཨ་ས་ར	kind of flower	a sa ra
ཨ་སམ	1) thick soup; 2) noodle porridge/ gruel; 3) ssam; 4) district in T; 5) {a tsa ra}, yogi mendicant	a sam
ཨ་སི	knife 2942	a si
ཨ་སི་ཕི་ལིང	aspirin	a si phi ling
ཨ་སུ་ར	SK asura	a su ra
ཨ་སུ་རའི་བྲག་ཕུག	Asura Cave	a su ra'i brag phug
ཨ་སེ་ཏེ་རེ་ཡར	Australia	a se te re yar
ཨ་སོ	{a so ka} worm/ insect	a so
ཨ་སོ་ཀ	{a so ka} worm/ insect	a so ka
ཨ་སོ་ལི་ཀ	lag pa'i gru khug tu yod pa'i snying dang 'brel ba'i 'phar rtsa zhig ???	a so li ka
ཨ་སྲུ	maternal aunt	a sru
ཨ་སློག	1) roll back and forth [horse etc.]; 2) turn over [top to bottom]	a slog
ཨ་སློག་རྒྱག	turn over, roll over, [horse etc.] upset	a slog rgyag
ཨ་སློག་རྒྱག་པ	turn [1self] over	a slog rgyag pa
ཨ་སློག་རྒྱབ་པ	topple	a slog rgyab pa
ཨ་སློག་ཐེབས་པ	capsize tumble	a slog thebs pa
ཨ་གསར	[good] news, glad tidings, fickleness	a gsar
ཨ་གསར་ཡོལ	lose interest after s short time	a gsar yol
ཨ་གསལ་ལ	openly, manifestly, publicly	a gsal la
ཨ་ཧ	{a ha ha} [joking/ laughing, surprise]	a ha
ཨ་ཧང	do you understand/ now then /well	a hang
ཨ་ཧང་སྐྱེས་བུའི་དྲེགས་སྒྲ	a kind of war cry	a hang skyes bu'i dregs sgra
ཨ་ཧང་མི་ཁུག	Now, then!/ to not respond	a hang mi khug
ཨ་ཧུང	ai si la mu'am kha che'i chos lugs kyi 'go 'dzin ???	a hung
ཨ་ཧོ	{a ho}, expression of joy, hurrah!]	a ho
ཨ་ཧོ་ཡེ	yes, expression of laughter	a ho ye
ཨ་ཧྲང་ད་ཧྲང	the most penetrating cold weather	a hrang da hrang
ཨ་ཧྲུག་ཅ་ཧྲུག	the best	a hrug ca hrug
ཨ་དྷི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Adhi Rinpoche	a dhi rin po che
ཨ་བྷི་ཤ	SK {a bhi sha} med. herb	a bhi sha
ཨ་བྷི་ས	a medicinal fruit	a bhi sa
ཨ་ཨུ	hornless	a u
ཨ་ཨུ་ར་བྲི་ཏ	language of the demons or asura	a u ra bri ta
ཨག་ཏར	Dr.	ag tar
ཨག་སྟྱ	SK rishi, ri byi' mountain mouse?, star	ag stya
ཨག་པ	fall, drop	ag pa
ཨག་པོ	bad	ag po
ཨག་ཙོམ	goatee	ag tsom
ཨག་ཚམ	beard, chin-tuft- goatee	ag tsham
ཨག་ཚར་ཅན	bearded or shaggy man, goat	ag tshar can
ཨག་ཚོམ	goatee, beard of the chin, chin tuft	ag tshom
ཨག་ཚོམ་ཅན	bearded or shaggy man, goat	ag tshom can
ཨག་ཟ་བ	be in doubt	ag za ba
ཨག་ཟེར	scold, address harshly	ag zer
ཨག་ལིག	{ag lig} med. tree	ag lig
ཨག་གསར	lover of new things, fickleminded	ag gsar
ཨང	Ang; An exclamation of deep-felt sadness	ang
ཨང་ཀ	#	ang ka
ཨང་ཀི	class, grade, number, figure, score	ang ki
ཨང་ཀི་མཇུག་མ	the last one	ang ki mjug ma
ཨང་ཀི་དང་པོ	the first quality	ang ki dang po
ཨང་ཀིའི	numerical	ang ki'i
ཨང་ཁུག	stupid at answering the #	ang khug
ཨང་མཁན	liar	ang mkhan
ཨང་ག	1) #, 0; 2) the root of a plant; 3) !	ang ga
ཨང་གའི་རྒྱལ་པོ	epithet of karna	ang ga'i rgyal po
ཨང་གི	Oh!, figure, number, cipher; Oh!	ang gi
ཨང་གི་གཉིས་པ	# 2, 2nd, runner up	ang gi gnyis pa
ཨང་གི་དང་པོ	# 1, 1st, winner/ best	ang gi dang po
ཨང་གི་ར	SK water male monkey year	ang gi ra
ཨང་གིར	Angiras, the sixth year of {rab byung} Syn {chu pho sprel}	ang gir
ཨང་གུ་ལི	finger, hand limbs	ang gu li
ཨང་གྲངས	number, digit, mark, numeral, figure	ang grangs
ཨང་གྲངས་ཀྱི	serial	ang grangs kyi
ཨང་གྲངས་སྒྲིག	order/ arrange by #	ang grangs sgrig
ཨང་འགའ་རག	shorts	ang 'ga' rag
ཨང་རྒར་འཇིག	English	ang rgar 'jig
ཨང་ང	Oh!, figure, #, cipher	ang nga
ཨང་ངེ	Oh! Hey!	ang nge
ཨང་ཉན	hope	ang nyan
ཨང་གཉིས་པ	# 2, 2nd, runner up	ang gnyis pa
ཨང་རྟ	loin cloth	ang rta
ཨང་རྟགས	# [of the count]	ang rtags
ཨང་ཐུང	under garment	ang thung
ཨང་དང་པོ	# 1, 1st, winner/ best	ang dang po
ཨང་མ་ཙི	flies	ang ma tsi
ཨང་རྩིས	arithmetic	ang rtsis
ཨང་རྩིས་ཀྱི	mathematical	ang rtsis kyi
ཨང་རྩིས་རྒྱག	do arithmetic, calculate	ang rtsis rgyag
ཨང་འཛིན	license, certificate	ang 'dzin
ཨང་ཡིག	request, exhortation, admonition	ang yig
ཨང་ཡིག་བདུན་ཅུ་པ	the Seventy Admonitions; by Karak Gomchung Rinpoche; [ending with the interjection ex {ang}!-please!]	ang yig bdun cu pa
ཨང་ཡིག་བདུན་བཅུ་པ	Seventy Admonitions, by Karak Gomchung	ang yig bdun bcu pa
ཨང་རག	A period of holding the breath in meditation	ang rag
ཨང་རས	loin cloth, trousers, breeches	ang ras
ཨང་རིམ	a numerical order	ang rim
ཨང་རིམ་གཉིས་པ	runners-up	ang rim gnyis pa
ཨང་ལན	answer	ang lan
ཨང་ཤོག	slip, ticket, coupon, #'d piece of paper	ang shog
ཨང་གསར	readiness, preparation	ang gsar
ཨང་གསར་བྱེད	get ready, be prepared to	ang gsar byed
ཨང་གསར་སྦེ་ལེན	prepared and ready	ang gsar sbe len
ཨང་བསར	alert, ready, set to go	ang bsar
ཨཏ་ཐེའི་རི་བོ	Altai mts	at the'i ri bo
ཨད་མོ་ནིག	white woollen covering or blanket	ad mo nig
ཨན	white chalk	an
ཨན་ཁྲིའུ	A bookstand/ platform	an khri'u
ཨན་ཏ་སཐ	SK ya ra la wa [4 mthar gnas yi ge]	an ta stha
ཨན་ཏར	1) cutting board; 2) board as a torma tray	an tar
ཨན་ཏས་ཐ	standing at the end, letters ya ra la va ha	an tas tha
ཨན་ཏི་སི	Andes	an ti si
ཨན་གཏད	wooden stocks for the feet	an gtad
ཨན་སྟོང	cervical vertebra	an stong
ཨན་ད་རྙིལ	sapphire	an da rnyil
ཨན་དར	1) cutting board; 2) board as a torma tray	an dar
ཨན་གདོས	chinese life boards, head and arm stocks	an gdos
ཨན་གདོས་ལ་འཇུག་པ	put a person into the stocks	an gdos la 'jug pa
ཨན་འདར	board, plank, panel, iron instrument of torture, kind of press	an 'dar
ཨན་རྡར	1) cutting board; 2) board as a torma tray	an rdar
ཨན་པང	flat CH noodles ['ang pan]	an pang
ཨན་ཙམ	a little	an tsam
ཨན་ཙིགས	1st joint of the backbone	an tsigs
ཨན་ལ	An Pass	an la
ཨབ	numb from cold	ab
ཨབ་ཅོར	pilgrim ? gnas skor ba	ab cor
ཨབ་ཏང	wrestling	ab tang
ཨབ་ཏང་རྩིད་པ	trial of strength between combatants	ab tang rtsid pa
ཨབ་བཏབ་པ	SA rgya brgyab pa, rgya btab pa	ab btab pa
ཨབ་རྟ	an a bra'i rta byi'u: byi'u that stays together w an a bra ??	ab rta
ཨབ་པ	1) take by deceit; 2) 'khob pa, [become rough?] from cold	ab pa
ཨབ་ཕྲུག	general commanding one thousand soldiers	ab phrug
ཨབ་ར	guinea pig	ab ra
ཨབ་རིལ	zong min smar, [pure not for sale?] the gold and silver ab ril hide in the treasury]	ab ril
ཨམ	mango	am
ཨམ་ཀྲོང	1) kong po'i sha khyi ??; 2) krong krong ear ??; 3) hope	am krong
ཨམ་ཁྲལ	ear tax [former Tibetan government: nomad cattle herders spyi'i Ear count 'bor la gzhigs nas bkal ? ba'i kind of tax]	am khral
ཨམ་གུག	bend down the top of the ear	am gug
ཨམ་ཅོག་ཀྲབ་པོ	[thin ears] easily angered, gullible	am cog krab po
ཨམ་ཅོག་མཐུག་པོ	[thick ears] a matter of no concern	am cog mthug po
ཨམ་ཅོག་སངས་པོ	[sharp ears] person who hears everything	am cog sangs po
ཨམ་ཆས	Amdo clothing	am chas
ཨམ་ཆི	doctor, physician	am chi
ཨམ་ཆོག	ear	am chog
ཨམ་ཆོག་ཀྲབ་པོ	thin ears, easily angered, gullible	am chog krab po
ཨམ་ཆོག་མཐུག་པོ	thick ears, matter of no concern	am chog mthug po
ཨམ་ཆོག་སངས་པོ	sharp ears, person who hears everything	am chog sangs po
ཨམ་མཆོག	ear	am mchog
ཨམ་བསྙལ	folding the ear behind	am bsnyal
ཨམ་ཐེར་ར	w ears like a wide-mouthed pitcher [pejorative]	am ther ra
ཨམ་རྡུམ	short ears	am rdum
ཨམ་གནོན	in a shoe piece of cloth pressing the end?]	am gnon
ཨམ་ཕོའི་ཆས	Amdo style garments	am pho'i chas
ཨམ་ཕྲག	fold at the waist of a garment like a big pocket	am phrag
ཨམ་ཕྲག་ལག་རྒྱུས	familiarity of the ear to the hand	am phrag lag rgyus
ཨམ་བག་ལ་ཏེག	put into the breast pocket	am bag la teg
ཨམ་བན	chinese residents in tibet	am ban
ཨམ་འབྱར	ear joined to the head [pej]	am 'byar
ཨམ་གཙིགས	biting the lower lip [concentratng the body's strength in great phsical effort, w very wrathful mind, also pressing the lower lip [in keeping silence]	am gtsigs
ཨམ་གཙིགས་ཁོག་བཅུག	hide and not speak one's thoughts	am gtsigs khog bcug
ཨམ་གཙིགས་དྲག་ཏུ་བསྡམ་པ	fiercely biting his lower lip	am gtsigs drag tu bsdam pa
ཨམ་གཙིགས་བསྡམ	biting the lower lip, gritting the teeth	am gtsigs bsdam
ཨམ་གཙིགས་བསྡམས	biting the lower lip, gritting the teeth	am gtsigs bsdams
ཨམ་ར	the mango tree and fruit	am ra
ཨམ་རལ	torn ear [from the edge]	am ral
ཨམ་ཪིཏ	Skt. Syn {sman}, {bcud}	am Rit
ཨམ་ལུག	ear tips hanging down	am lug
ཨམ་ཧྲག	fold at the waist of a garment like a big pocket	am hrag
ཨམ་ཨིཏ	SK medicine, elixir	am it
ཨའ་ཆུང	small 'a'	a' chung
ཨའ་འབུ	I, myself [milarepa]	a' 'bu
ཨའ་རི་འུ་རི	hurried, careless	a' ri 'u ri
ཨའ་ལི་བཞི	the four Tibetan vowels [i u e o]	a' li bzhi
ཨའང	1) &; 2) also; 3) but four though [after vowel finals]	a'ang
ཨའམ	1) or; 2) [?] [vowel finals]	a'am
ཨའུ	1) diminutive [rte'u, be'u, rde'u]; 2) * this; 3) kiss	a'u
ཨའུ་ནེ་ཙོ	parrot	a'u ne tso
ཨའུ་ཙམ	not too bad, so-so	a'u tsam
ཨའུ་ཙེ	so-so	a'u tse
ཨའུ་ལག	compulsory service [eg post service people and/ or horses]	a'u lag
ཨའུ་ལག་སྐུལ་སྤྱོད	compulsory service [eg post people and/ or horses]	a'u lag skul spyod
ཨའུར་བསྐྱོད	sounds of motion [animal stampede, work, bustle]	a'ur bskyod
ཨའུར་ཆིལ་ལེ	clatter [army passing]	a'ur chil le
ཨའུར་ཆོམ	roar [earthquake]	a'ur chom
ཨའུར་དིར་དིར	crowd sound [many people speaking]	a'ur dir dir
ཨའུར་རྡོ་ཆུ་མིག་དགུ་སྒྲིལ	sling w many	a'ur rdo chu mig dgu sgril
ཨའུར་བ	roar [horses or cattle shying, crowd, market place, wind. geyser]	a'ur ba
ཨའུར་ཞོགས	startling talk/ noise [brings on shying]	a'ur zhogs
ཨའུར་འུར	roar, clamor [water, wind, fire]	a'ur 'ur
ཨའུར་འུར་ཆེམ་ཆེམ	rush and roar [great fire, many drums. folk dance + drums]	a'ur 'ur chem chem
ཨའུར་འུར་སིལ་སིལ	[sound of many kinds of melodious music]	a'ur 'ur sil sil
ཨའོ་མ	milk [syn: nu skyes dang, nu zho, bzhos pa]	a'o ma
ཨའོ་ཚབས	{a'o tshabs} female illness [w khrag tshabs, menses a watery milky color 'dzag cing, chu so na zhing skyug producing the thought]	a'o tshabs
ཨའོ་ཟོམ	[a kind of large zo ba [measuring vessel, bucket], a milk vessel, milking bucket	a'o zom
ཨར་ཀ	marble, plaster-floor	ar ka
ཨར་ཀ་མེ་ཏོག	flower of the plant gynandropsis pentaphylla	ar ka me tog
ཨར་ཀའི་འདམ་བག	cement, plaster	ar ka'i 'dam bag
ཨར་ཀའི་མེ་ཏོག	spra ba flower	ar ka'i me tog
ཨར་ཀིའི	Turkey	ar ki'i
ཨར་ཀོང	previously Tibet close retinue rgya lu chas spros skabs kyi hat	ar kong
ཨར་སྐོན	previously Tibet close retinue drung 'khor rgya lu chas spros skabs hat	ar skon
ཨར་སྐྱ	a kind of {a ga ru}, myrobalan	ar skya
ཨར་ཁང	tavern	ar khang
ཨར་ཁྲལ	monastery pa khag dang sku drag la rang khongs built by a tribute worker's brick work	ar khral
ཨར་ག	clay, marble	ar ga
ཨར་གོན	offspring of parents not having the same rank religion or nation	ar gon
ཨར་རྒྱག་གི་འུ་ལག	brick laying service obligation	ar rgyag gi 'u lag
ཨར་རྒྱབ་པ	lay bricks	ar rgyab pa
ཨར་ཆེན	plaster floor or a floor made of pebbles	ar chen
ཨར་ཆོར	(M face wiping cloth, handkerchief	ar chor
ཨར་ཆོལ	towel	ar chol
ཨར་ཆོས	camel hair/ walnut shell color	ar chos
ཨར་ཇག	bandits and raiders from a regions borders	ar jag
ཨར་ཇག་རྒོད	wild bandits	ar jag rgod
ཨར་ཏི	cloth of raw silk imported from assam having three stripes lengthwise used for wrappers	ar ti
ཨར་གཏད	aim, target, to direct the eyes / attention	ar gtad
ཨར་བརྟེན	act w patience, be able to go on steadily for a long time	ar brten
ཨར་འདམ	cement, plaster, concrete	ar 'dam
ཨར་འདམ་བླུག	lay concrete	ar 'dam blug
ཨར་འདམ་བསྲེས་བྱེད་འཕྲུལ་འཁོར	cement mixer	ar 'dam bsres byed 'phrul 'khor
ཨར་ནག	black myrobalan med. herb	ar nag
ཨར་པ	thief, robber	ar pa
ཨར་པ་ཉི་ཡ	Albania	ar pa nyi ya
ཨར་པོ	brick	ar po
ཨར་པོ་བ	bricklayer	ar po ba
ཨར་པོ་བྱེད	bricklayer, construct, build [w bricks]	ar po byed
ཨར་པོའི་དོ་དམ	former text of bricklaying and instruction for 'gro gron gtong mkhan	ar po'i do dam
ཨར་མོ	legendary, black calcareous stone found in southern Tibet	ar mo
ཨར་མོ་ནིག	legendary, black calcareous stone found in southern Tibet	ar mo nig
ཨར་དམར	red aloeswood	ar dmar
ཨར་བཙུན	[arch] very heavy drinker	ar btsun
ཨར་ཛ་ཀ	cotton	ar dza ka
ཨར་རྫ་བེ་སོག	{ar rdza be sog}	ar rdza be sog
ཨར་ཞབ༹	hat worn by the N nomads	ar zhva
ཨར་ཞལ	a face of carved marble/ plaster	ar zhal
ཨར་གཞས	bricklayer's song [in doing bricklayer's work for mutually helping [by coordination?] and if a little tired du gtong rgyur gtong ba'i gzhas, [song,[game?]	ar gzhas
ཨཱར་ཡ་དེ་བ	Aryadeva	Ar ya de ba
ཨར་ལ་གཏད	pushed to the breaking point, reduced to nothing, to gze openly (into space)	ar la gtad
ཨར་ལ་གཏད་པ	pushed/ strained to the breaking point, reduced to nothing	ar la gtad pa
ཨར་ལན	Ireland	ar lan
ཨར་ལས	brick-laying	ar las
ཨར་ལས་ཀུང་སི	construction company	ar las kung si
ཨར་ལས་དགེ་རྒན	master builder	ar las dge rgan
ཨར་ལས་དགེ་རྒན་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ	chief engineer	ar las dge rgan spyi khyab
ཨར་ལས་རྒྱག་པ	to construct, build	ar las rgyag pa
ཨར་ལས་འཆར་བཀོད་མཁས་པ	engineer	ar las 'char bkod mkhas pa
ཨར་ལས་ཡོ་ཆས	construction materials	ar las yo chas
ཨར་ལས་ལག་རྩལ	civil engineering	ar las lag rtsal
ཨར་ལས་ལག་རྩལ་པ	civil engineer	ar las lag rtsal pa
ཨར་ས	concrete	ar sa
ཨར་སངས	fundamentally cleared away	ar sangs
ཨར་སངས་པ	primordial wakefulness	ar sangs pa
ཨར་ཧན	arhan, arhat	ar han
ཨར་གྷམ	SK argham, drinking water	ar gham
ཨར་དྷ་མེ་རུ	fabulous mountain with lapis lazuli mines	ar dha me ru
ཨལ་གཅིག	one	al gcig
ཨལ་ཇི་རི་ཡ	Algeria	al ji ri ya
ཨལ་ཏ	now, at present, today	al ta
ཨལ་ཏིང	something bulky or heavy	al ting
ཨལ་སྟོང	a stone	al stong
ཨལ་ཐན་ཧན	{al than han}	al than han
ཨལ་ལ	SA a la la, SA a la la	al la
ཨས་མ་གར་བྷ	emerald	as ma gar bha
ཨས་སར་ཏ	female breast, teats of woman	as sar ta
ཨི	beer, lynx, invisible entity	i
ཨི་ཀྲར་ལི	Italy	i krar li
ཨི་ཁུག	hiccough, hiccough, yex, sob	i khug
ཨི་ཁུང	pocket	i khung
ཨི་ཁུང་ཅན	porous	i khung can
ཨི་ཁུང་རྟོལ་བ	to bore a hole	i khung rtol ba
ཨི་ཁུང་ཕུག་པ	to bore a hole	i khung phug pa
ཨི་ཁུང་འབིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ལུག་ཆ	drill	i khung 'big byed kyi lug cha
ཨི་ཁུང་འབིགས་པ	perforate, pierce, punch	i khung 'bigs pa
ཨི་གུ་ལ	limb 2945	i gu la
ཨི་གོ	Syn {e go} Kham. Have you understood. Syn {ha ko song ngas}	i go
ཨི་འགྲུབ	will it work out / be done?	i 'grub
ཨི་ཏ་ལི	Italy	i ta li
ཨི་ཏ་ལི་ཡ	Italy	i ta li ya
ཨི་གཏེམ	to press the I points	i gtem
ཨི་ཐི་ཡོ་པི་ཡ	Ethiopia	i thi yo pi ya
ཨི་དྲན	Do you remember?	i dran
ཨི་ལྡན	letters surmounted by the vowel sign i	i ldan
ཨི་ནུས	i shall, may i	i nus
ཨི་མུས	May I [die], I shall	i mus
ཨི་ཙི	soap	i tsi
ཨི་རྩི་སྐུལ་བ	tickle	i rtsi skul ba
ཨི་རྩི་སྐུལ་སླ་པོ	ticklish	i rtsi skul sla po
ཨི་རན	Iran	i ran
ཨི་ལ་བ་ཏི	great river in ancient india	i la ba ti
ཨི་ཤི་ཀ	grass-like herb	i shi ka
ཨི་ཤོ་མ་ཏི	great river in india	i sho ma ti
ཨི་ཤོ་ལེགས	son of king tho de gung rgyal	i sho legs
ཨི་སི་ཀུལ	school	i si kul
ཨི་སི་རལ	Israel	i si ral
ཨིག་ཀ	hiccups	ig ka
ཨིག་ཀ་རྒྱག	have hiccups	ig ka rgyag
ཨིག་སྒྲ	hiccup	ig sgra
ཨིང་ག་རྟིང་ག	walking with one foot [playing] hopping	ing ga rting ga
ཨིང་ཇི	English, British	ing ji
ཨིང་ལན	England, UK	ing lan
ཨིང་ལན་ཏ	England, UK	ing lan ta
ཨིང་ལན་ཨ	England, UK	ing lan a
ཨིན་ཇི	British; syn {dbyin}	in ji
ཨིན་ཐེ་ཨེནད	mthar	in the end
ཨིན་དུ་ནི་ཤ་ཡ	Indonesia	in du ni sha ya
ཨིན་དྲ་གོ་པ	cochineal	in dra go pa
ཨིན་དྲ་ནཱི་ལ	sapphire	in dra nI la
ཨིན་དྲ་བྷུ་ཏི	King of Oddiyana who was a prominent member of the higher tantric lineage	in dra bhu ti
ཨིན་ནཱི་ལ	sapphire	in nI la
ཨིམ་ཆི	tibetanized mongol term for a physician, doctor, physician	im chi
ཨིར་ཀ་འུན་གྱི་ཆོས་ལུགས	{za ba} to eat	ir ka 'un gyi chos lugs
ཨིས་ཆུང	novice	is chung
ཨུ	number 90, symbol of the unheard, committee, council	u
ཨུ་ཁང་པ	Jowo Ukhangpa, a crowned Buddha image in Patan, Kathmandu, Nepal	u khang pa
ཨུ་རྒེ	top of a tent pole protruding above the canvas, in M Ulan Bator	u rge
ཨུ་རྒེ་ཁྲ་ཆགས་སེ	[descriptive) a group of tent pole sticks when one only sees the top	u rge khra chags se
རྒྱས་གླིང	Urgeh Tratsang Sang-ngak Mingyeling	rgyas gling
ཨུ་རྒྱན	Uddiyana, (o rgyan). The country to the north-west of ancient India where Guru Rinpoche was born on a lotus flower. The literal meaning of Uddiyana is 'vehicle of flying' or 'going above and far.' ...	u rgyan
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ཆེན་པོ	Great Lord of Orgyen, Padmasambhava	u rgyan chen po
ཨུ་རྒྱན་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	see {o rgyan bsnyen sgrub}	u rgyan bsnyen sgrub
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ནས་བྱུང་བ་གསང་བ	secret arising from Uddiayana	u rgyan nas byung ba gsang ba
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ནས་བྱུང་བ་གསང་བའི	arising from Uddiyana, the secret	u rgyan nas byung ba gsang ba'i
ཨུ་རྒྱན་པ	Ugyenpa	u rgyan pa
ཨུ་རྒྱན་པ་རིན་ཆེན་དཔལ	Rinchen Pal of Uddiyana	u rgyan pa rin chen dpal
ཨུ་རྒྱན་པད་ཞབ༹	the lotus hat of Urgyen	u rgyan pad zhva
ཨུ་རྒྱན་པད་ཞྭ	the lotus hat of Urgyen. Syn {za hor rgyal pa gtsug lag 'dzin gyi thob zhva}	u rgyan pad zhwa
ཨུ་རྒྱན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གནས	the emanated land of Orgyen / Uddiyana	u rgyan sprul pa'i gnas
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་དབང་མཆོག་གྲུབ	Urgyen Tsewang Chokdrub. The name of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	u rgyan tshe dbang mchog grub
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ཡུལ	country of udyana	u rgyan yul
ཨུ་རྒྱན་རིག་འཛིན	Ugyen Rigdzin Dorje	u rgyan rig 'dzin
ཨུ་རྒྱན་རིག་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ	name of rtogs ldan o rgyan bstan 'dzin	u rgyan rig 'dzin rdo rje
ཨུ་རྒྱན་ལུང་བསྟན	prophesized by Ugyen	u rgyan lung bstan
ཨུ་ཅུག	persistency	u cug
ཨུ་ཅུག་བྱེད་པ	persuade, press, urge, persist in any matter	u cug byed pa
ཨུ་ཅུམ་ཆིང	monastery in mongolia	u cum ching
ཨུ་ཏ་ཀ	an ancient sage	u ta ka
ཨུ་ཏུལ་ལྟར་གས་པ	Splitting open like a night lotus [6th cold hell]	u tul ltar gas pa
ཨུ་ཏྲ་ཡ་ན	ancient indian king	u tra ya na
ཨུ་དུམ་བ་ར	ficus clomerata, fabulous lotus of immense size, flower which only appears and blossoms when a universal monarch or a buddha is born into the world	u dum ba ra
ཨུ་དུམ་བ་རའི	immense blue 1000petalled lotus flower which blooms once a yuga	u dum ba ra'i
ཨུ་དུམ་བ་རའི་མེ་ཏོག	udumbara lotus GD	u dum ba ra'i me tog
ཨུ་དུམ་བ༹་ར	udumbara lotus GD	u dum va ra
ཨུ་དུམ་ཝ་རའི་ནགས་ཚལ	a forest of udumbara flowers	u dum wa ra'i nags tshal
ཨུ་རྡུག་པ	a wreck, one shattered by indiscreet actions, entangled with debts, destitute person	u rdug pa
ཨུ་ནི་ཀོ	demon yaksha of kashmir	u ni ko
ཨུ་པ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྒོམ	meditation of ubhaya tantra GD	u pa rgyud kyi sgom
ཨུ་པ་ཡ	Ubhaya Tantra	u pa ya
ཨུ་པ་ཡ་ཏན་ཏྲ	upayoga tantra, ubhaya tantra GD	u pa ya tan tra
ཨུ་པ་ཡའི་རྒྱུད	upaya/ ubhayatantra/ nondual tantra; (fifth of nine yanas)	u pa ya'i rgyud
ཨུ་པ་ཡའི་ཐེག་པ	see {gnyis ka rgyud kyi theg pa}	u pa ya'i theg pa
ཨུ་པ་ཡོ་ག	upayoga tantra, ubhaya tantra GD	u pa yo ga
ཨུ་པ་ལ	learned disciple of buddha	u pa la
ཨུ་པ་ལི	Up li	u pa li
ཨུ་པའི་རྒྱུད	Ubhaya/ Cary tantra GD	u pa'i rgyud
ཨུ་པའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ	Ubhaya tantra GD	u pa'i rgyud kyi theg pa
ཨུ་པལ་ལྟར་གས་པ	Splitting Open like a Night Lotus, the sixth cold hell	u pal ltar gas pa
ཨུ་སྤུ	tea kettle	u spu
ཨུ་མ	Uma. A mother-goddess, identified with Parvati, Durga, etc; it is prophesied that she will one day be reborn as the Buddha Umeshvara	u ma
ཨུ་མུ་སུ་ལུ	socks, stockings	u mu su lu
ཨུ་མུ་སུའི་སྟོད་ཐུང	sweater 2946	u mu su'i stod thung
ཨུ་ཙི་ཏིང་ག	an insect whose touch produces sexual excitement	u tsi ting ga
ཨུ་བཙུགས	do with an effort, obstinate, stubborn	u btsugs
ཨུ་བཙུགས་བྱེད	insist, persist	u btsugs byed
ཨུ་ཚུགས	insistence, persistence	u tshugs
ཨུ་ཚུགས་རྒྱབ་པ	coax, coerce, goad, induce, insist, persist	u tshugs rgyab pa
ཨུ་ཚུགས་ཅན	willful	u tshugs can
ཨུ་ཚུགས་བྱེད	insist, persist	u tshugs byed
ཨུ་ཚུགས་ཚ་པོ	indomitable, stubborn	u tshugs tsha po
ཨུ་ཡི	of us	u yi
ཨུ་ཡོན	committee member	u yon
ཨུ་ཡོན་ཀྲང	committee chairman	u yon krang
ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང	committee, commission, council	u yon lhan khang
ཨུ་རུ་མུ་རུ	make effort	u ru mu ru
ཨུ་རུ་སུ	Russia	u ru su
ཨུ་རུ་སུ་གོང་མའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ	Russian Empire	u ru su gong ma'i rgyal khab
ཨུ་ཤའི་རི	hill range in central india or magadha	u sha'i ri
ཨུ་སུ	socks, stockings	u su
ཨུ་སུ་མུ་ལུ	socks, stockings	u su mu lu
ཨུ་སུ་སུ་ལུ	socks, stockings	u su su lu
ཨུ་ཧན	Wu Han	u han
ཨུ་ཧུ་ལགས	oh my	u hu lags
ཨུ་ཧུ་ཧུ	{u hu hu} cold hell	u hu hu
ཨུ་བྷ་ཡ	Ubhaya Tantra	u bha ya
ཨུ་བྷ་ཡའི་རྒྱུད་བཞི	Four Ubhaya Tantras	u bha ya'i rgyud bzhi
ཨུ་ལྷམ་མེ་བ	vivid, clear, shining, brilliant	u lham me ba
ཨུག་ཆོས	incarvillea compacta maxim., a flower	ug chos
ཨུག་ལི་ས་ཐོ	sanctuary containing image of hayagriba vishnu	ug li sa tho
ཨུང་གུ	oil lamp	ung gu
ཨུཏ་པ་ལྡན	city in ancient india	ut pa ldan
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ	blue lotus, utpala	ut pa la
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་དཀར་པོ	SA ku mu da	ut pa la dkar po
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་ཆེ	full blown lotus	ut pa la che
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་ལྟར་གས་པ	1 of 8 cold hells, splitting like a blue lotus hell, 1 of grang dmyal brgyad	ut pa la ltar gas pa
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་མདའ	castor-oil plant	ut pa la mda'
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་སྡོང་པོ	lily plant	ut pa la sdong po
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་དམར་པོ	red lotus	ut pa la dmar po
ཨུཏ་པ་ལ་ཤིང	lotus plant	ut pa la shing
ཨུཏ་པ་ལའི་མདོག	1 of earliest disciples of buddha	ut pa la'i mdog
ཨུཏ་པ་ལའི་རྩ་བ	lotus root	ut pa la'i rtsa ba
ཨུཏ་པལ	blue lotus	ut pal
ཨུཏ་པལ་དཀར་པོ	white lotus	ut pal dkar po
ཨུཏ་པལ་སྔོ་ལྡན	blue lotus, utpala	ut pal sngo ldan
ཨུཏ་པལ་སྔོན་པོ	meconopsis quintuplinervia regel., blue utpala, meconopsis quintuplinervia, eliminates inflammations of the lungs and the liver	ut pal sngon po
ཨུཏ་པལ་ལྟར་གས་པ	split like a lotus [cold hell]	ut pal ltar gas pa
ཨུཏ་པལ་མདོག	{dge slong ma utpal mdog zhes pa} the nun Utpalavarna	ut pal mdog
ཨུཏ་པལ་དམར་པོ	red lotus	ut pal dmar po
ཨུཏ་པལ་སེ་པོ	a yellow derived from the petals of an alpine flower	ut pal se po
ཨུཏ་པལ་སེར་པོ	a yellow derived from the petals of an alpine flower	ut pal ser po
ཨུད་པ་ལ	blue lotus	ud pa la
ཨུད་པལ་དམར་པོ	meconopsis punicea maxim.	ud pal dmar po
ཨུད་པལ་སེར་པོ	meconopsis integrifolia (maxim.) franch., meconopsis paniculata (d. don) prain	ud pal ser po
ཨུན་ཆུང	young monk	un chung
ཨུན་ཐུག	SA 'u thug	un thug
ཨུར་གེ	place in Amdo	ur ge
ཨུར་རྒྱ	warm meal, porridge, fermenting dough	ur rgya
ཨུར་རྒྱན་ཡུལ	1 of gnas chen lnga	ur rgyan yul
ཨུར་རྡོ	SA 'ur rdo	ur rdo
ཨུར་བ	SA dbur ba	ur ba
ཨུར་ཤོད	exaggerate	ur shod
ཨུལ་འཐག	SA g.yul 'thag	ul 'thag
ཨུས་དྲན་པ་ཉེར་གཞག	the essential recollections of body GD TSE	us dran pa nyer gzhag
ཨེ	1) might be, maybe; 2) + verb - an interrogative particle, is it?	e
ཨེ་ཀ་ཇ་ཏི་ནག་མོ་ཁྲོས་མ	major man ngag sde tantra	e ka ja ti nag mo khros ma
ཨེ་ཀ་ཙ་ཏི	ekajati, protectress of teachings	e ka tsa ti
ཨེ་ཀ་ཛ་ཏི	protectress of teachings	e ka dza ti
ཨེ་ཀར	acre	e kar
ཨེ་ཀྱུག་བྱེད	Mahaesvara	e kyug byed
ཨེ་ཀློང་འབྲུབ་ཁུང	triangular ritual receptacle	e klong 'brub khung
ཨེ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར	E Kyilkhor, in E Yul	e dkyil 'khor
ཨེ་ཁྲམ	matrix of E/ basic space	e khram
ཨེ་གོ	1) Kham. Have you understood?. 2) in Milarepa's namthar. {e go} + neg. - I shall not; do you understand? [Khampa dialect]	e go
ཨེ་གླིང	Asia	e gling
ཨེ་གླིང་ཤར	E Asia	e gling shar
ཨེ་འགྲུབ་བལྟ་དགོས	Let's find out if you can attain ..	e 'grub blta dgos
ཨེ་འགྲོ་མི་འགྲོ	do you go or not go	e 'gro mi 'gro
ཨེ་སྒོར	earring	e sgor
ཨེ་སྒྲོམ	the E box. Syn hom khung brub khung - 'brub khung - brubs khung - lcags sgrom - lcags hom - Triangular pit	e sgrom
ཨེ་ཉ་ཡ	fabulous black antelope with short legs and black eyes, enaya	e nya ya
ཨེ་ཉན	hesitation, doubt as to whether one should listen to advice or not	e nyan
ཨེ་ཐུལ	expression of doubt as to whether an enemy would be vanquished	e thul
ཨེ་འཐད	has he come?	e 'thad
ཨེ་དྲག	superfine, the best	e drag
ཨེ་དྲན	SA dran nam	e dran
ཨེ་འདུག	whether or not/ is it?	e 'dug
ཨེ་འདུག་ལྟ་གིན	checking whether I could	e 'dug lta gin
ཨེ་ན་ཡ	kind of antelope {{one of the marks of the Buddha is calves like the antelope e na ya.]	e na ya
ཨེ་ནུས	can you, are you able?; can you?	e nus
ཨེ་མ	admiration interjection, interjection expressing compassion, oh my	e ma
ཨེ་མ་ངོ་མཚར	Ah how marvelous	e ma ngo mtshar
ཨེ་མ་ཆེ	doctor	e ma che
ཨེ་མ་ཆེའི	physician	e ma che'i
ཨེ་མ་རྨད་བྱུང	isn't it astounding!	e ma rmad byung
ཨེ་མ་ཧོ	E MA HO [an exclamation of wonder]	e ma ho
ཨེ་མ་ཨེ་མ	alas alas! 2947	e ma e ma
ཨེ་མའོ	E MA HO [an exclamation of wonder]	e ma'o
ཨེ་ཝང་ཟུང་འཇུག	the union of E and VAM	e wang zung 'jug
ཨེ་ཝམ	yes, certainly, to be sure, thabs & shes rab, a book	e wam
ཨེ་ཝམ་ཡི་གེ	EVA syllable	e wam yi ge
ཨེ་འོང་ལྟོས	see if you can!	e 'ong ltos
ཨེ་ཡི་བཙོན་ཁང	The E prison or the space prison	e yi btson khang
ཨེ་ཡིན	what, did you have a guide, maybe	e yin
ཨེ་ཡིན་སྙམས	think that it might be, thinking something might be the case	e yin snyams
ཨེ་ཡིན་སྙམས་པ	that I thought could have been, which I thought maybe could have been	e yin snyams pa
ཨེ་ཡོད་ལྟ	{zad e yod lta'o zer nas} "Let's have a look to see if it is finished," he said	e yod lta
ཨེ་ར་ཨུན	Dehra Dun	e ra un
ཨེ་རན་རྒྱལ་པོ་འཛིགས་མེད	the yellowcolored myrabolan	e ran rgyal po 'dzigs med
ཨེ་རན་ད	castor oil plant	e ran da
ཨེ་རིག་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས	E Rigpai Jungne, in E Yul	e rig pa'i 'byung gnas
ཨེ་ལ	pomegranate	e la
ཨེ་ལན	empress of 10th tartar emperor	e lan
ཨེ་ལའི་བརྒྱུད	epithet of vairocana	e la'i brgyud
ཨེ་ལའི་འདབ	the tongue	e la'i 'dab
ཨེ་ལས་གྲུབ་པའི་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཁང་སྒྲོམ	iron fortress arisen from E	e las grub pa'i lcags kyi khang sgrom
ཨེ་ལེའི་བརྒྱུད	SA rnam thos sras	e le'i brgyud
ཨེ་ཤེ་ཡ	Asia	e she ya
ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི་བ	scion of ancient line of kings	e lha rgya ri ba
ཨེ་ཨེ	recollection interjection	e e
ཨེང་ཀེ་སི	Engels	eng ke si
ཨེང་ག་ར	water male monkey year	eng ga ra
ཨེད་ནུ་མ་ཀ་ཀ་དྷེ་ནུ	a bird	ed nu ma ka ka dhe nu
ཨེན	SA cung zad	en
ཨེན་ཅིག	a little bit	en cig
ཨེན་ཆུང	a little bit	en chung
ཨེན་འདར	SA an 'dar	en 'dar
ཨེན་མཱར་ཀ	Denmark	en mAr ka
ཨེན་ཙམ	SA cung zad tsam, only a little, the little one	en tsam
ཨེན་རེ	SA cung zad re, a little only, fast, rapid	en re
ཨེམ་ཆི	doctor, physician, doctor	em chi
ཨེམ་རྫེ	physician	em rdze
ཨེའུ་རོབ	Europe	e'u rob
ཨེར་ཀ	SA ar ka	er ka
ཨེར་ཏེ་ནི	Mongol title of Panchen Lama	er te ni
ཨེར་ལང་རི་བོ	{er lang} mts	er lang ri bo
ཨོ	a kiss	o
ཨོ་དཀར་བྲག	rock-cave under a huge white rock in ancient india	o dkar brag
ཨོ་གོ	Russia	o go
ཨོ་རྒྱན	Uddiyana, Odiyana; {u rgyan}. 1) Uddiyana, the country. The country to	o rgyan
ལམ་བགྲོད་པའི་ཐེམ་སྐས	account of a journey through India to o rgyan (swat); by {stag tshang ras pa ngag dbang rgya mtsho} (1574-1651) o rgyan gu ru pad ma 'byung gnas kyis rdo rje'i gsungs 'khrul pa med pa'i gsol 'debs ...	lam bgrod pa'i them skas
ཨོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་མཁན་པོ	Learned Master of Uddiyana	o rgyan gyi mkhan po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན	Master of Uddiyana. Another name for Padmasambhava	o rgyan gyi slob dpon
ཨོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ	great master of Uddiyana	o rgyan gyi slob dpon chen po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་གྱི་སློབ་དཔོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Precious Master of Uddiyana. Same as Guru Rinpoche	o rgyan gyi slob dpon rin po che
ཨོ་རྒྱན་གླིང་པ	gter ston, b. 1323	o rgyan gling pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་འགྲོ་འདུལ་གླིང་པ	sgam po mchog sprul v, b. 1757 of dvags la sgam po o rgyan 'gro 'dul mchog gyur bde chen	o rgyan 'gro 'dul gling pa
ཞིག་པོ་གླིང་པ	Orgyen Drodül Chokgyur Dechen Shikpo Lingpa. The full name of Chokgyur Lingpa	zhig po gling pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཨིན་དྲ་བྷུ་ཏི	Indrabhuti, the king of Uddiyana	o rgyan rgyal po in dra bhu ti
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སྒྲུབ་ཕུག	meditation cave of the Guru of Orgyen (Padmasambhava)	o rgyan sgrub phug
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སྒྲོལ་མ	common lady's name; Uddiyana Savioress	o rgyan sgrol ma
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཆེན་པོ	Great master from Uddiyana. Same as Guru Rinpoche	o rgyan chen po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཆེན་པོས་ཀྱང	as the great one of Uddiyana says:	o rgyan chen pos kyang
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ	Dharma King of Uddiyana	o rgyan chos kyi rgyal po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་མཆོག་གྱུར་གླིང	Ugyen Chogyur Ling	o rgyan mchog gyur gling
ཨོ་རྒྱན་མཆོག་གྱུར་གླིང་པ	mchog	o rgyan mchog gyur gling pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་འཇིགས་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་པོ	dpal	o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྗེ	lord of Uddiyana	o rgyan rje
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྗེ་འབངས་ཉེར་ལྔ	Padmasambhava, the king and the 25 disciples	o rgyan rje 'bangs nyer lnga
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྙེན་གྲུབ	Orgyen Nyendrub, one of the eight main traditions of Ti- 2948 betan Buddhism, founded by Drubtob Orgyen pa	o rgyan bsnyen grub
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	Uddiyana Tradition of Ritual Service and Attainment	o rgyan bsnyen sgrub
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་པ	a follower of this tradition {o rgyan rdo rje bsnyen sgrub}; one of the {sgrub brgyud shing rta brgyad}	o rgyan bsnyen sgrub pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྙེབ་སྒྲུབ་པ	U iy na Tradition of ritual service and attainment	o rgyan bsnyeb sgrub pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་གཉིས་གླིང་པ	gter ston	o rgyan bstan gnyis gling pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་འཛིན	namkhai norbu's uncle Urgyen tenzin	o rgyan bstan 'dzin
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ	author of {bde smon gyi spyi bshad byang chub sems dpa'i myur lam}	o rgyan bstan 'dzin nor bu
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཐོད་ཕྲེང་རྩལ	Orgyen Tötreng Tsal, Padmasambhava	o rgyan thod phreng rtsal
ཨོ་རྒྱན་དྲི་མེད	Immaculate Uddiyana; common male name	o rgyan dri med
ཨོ་རྒྱན་དྲི་མེད་ཀུན་དགའ	name of tertön	o rgyan dri med kun dga'
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང	palace of the great vajra of Uddiyana o rgyan rdo rje chen po'i pho brang place name	o rgyan rdo rje chen po'i pho brang
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང	Vajradhara / Vajra-holder of Uddiyana. One of the names of Guru Rinpoche	o rgyan rdo rje 'chang
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་ཆེན་པོ	the great	o rgyan rdo rje 'chang chen po
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྡོ་རྗེ་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ	one of the {sgrub brgyud shing rta brgyad}	o rgyan rdo rje bsnyen sgrub
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ	{'khrul zhig} o rgyan rnam thar dpag bsam ljon shing a brief biography of Padmasambhava attributed to ye shes mtsho rgyal; from the {zab pa skor bdun} rediscovered by the {gter ston o rgyan mchog g...	o rgyan rnam rgyal
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པ	the great master Orgyenpa; founder of {o rgyan rdo rje bsnyen sgrub}	o rgyan pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པ་ངག་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོ	stag tshang ras pa ngag dbang rgya mtsho (1574-1651) o rgyan pa ngag dbang rgya mtsho'i mgur 'bum zal gdams zab don ut pa la'i 'phreng ba - the collected mystic poems and instructions of {stag tsha...	o rgyan pa ngag dbang rgya mtsho
པ་བཅུ་གཅིག	the 11 deeds of Padmasambhava famed in Tibet CHN	pa bcu gcig
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་འབྱུང	the Lotus-Born Master of Uddiyana	o rgyan pad 'byung
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་མ	Padmasambhava of Uddiyana; Orgyen Padma	o rgyan pad ma
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་མ་ཀ་ར	Orgyen Padmakara. Same as Guru Rinpoche	o rgyan pad ma ka ra
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས	He, arisen from a lotus, from the land of Orgyen, Padmasambhava	o rgyan pad ma 'byung gnas
ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་མ་འབྱུང་གནས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཀནོཝན་ཨས་ཐེ་ལོཏུས	Born of Oddiyana	o rgyan pad ma 'byung gnas zhes bya ba known as the lotus
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ	Nirmanakaya of Uddiyana	o rgyan sprul pa'i sku
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སྤྲུལ་པའི་གླེགས་བམ	by Shabkar	o rgyan sprul pa'i glegs bam
ཨོ་རྒྱན་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར	guru yoga of Padmasambhava	o rgyan bla ma'i rnal 'byor
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང	Ugyen Mindrol Ling	o rgyan smin grol gling
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་དབང་མཆོག་གྲུབ	Orgyen Tsewang Chokdrub. The name of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche	o rgyan tshe dbang mchog grub
ཨོ་རྒྱན་མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེ	"Adamantine Lake-Born [Master] of Uddiyana." R/GD: Epithet for Padmasambhava. [mss]	o rgyan mtsho skyes rdo rje
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྫོང	Orgyen Dzong in Rishö (ri shod)	o rgyan rdzong
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཟ་ཧོར་མ	the Sahor style of depicting Padmasambhava	o rgyan za hor ma
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཡུལ	the land of Uddiyana	o rgyan yul
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	Orgyen Rinpoche. Same as Guru Rinpoche	o rgyan rin po che
ཨོ་རྒྱན་རོག་རྗེ་གླིང་པ	1682-1725 - Orgyen Rogje Lingpa	o rgyan rog rje gling pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་སངས་རྒྱས་གཉིས་པ	the second buddha, Padmasambhava of Uddiyana	o rgyan sangs rgyas gnyis pa
ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཨུ་རྒྱན	TSE	o rgyan u rgyan
ཨོ་ཏན་ཏ་པུ་རི	Odantapuri	o tan ta pu ri
ཨོ་དི་བི་ཤ	1 of 5 provinces of the eastern part of india, modern orissa	o di bi sha
ཨོ་དི་ཡན	SA o rgyan	o di yan
ཨོ་དདི་ཡ་ན	Uddiyana	o ddi ya na
ཨོ་དདི་ཡན	Uddiyana. Syn {o rgyan}, {u rgyan}	o ddi yan
ཨོ་ལྡོང	wind-pipe	o ldong
ཨོ་བོ་ལགས	h younger brother	o bo lags
ཨོ་མོ་སུ	stocking, socks	o mo su
ཨོ་ཙེ	Ho! expression of wonder	o tse
ཨོ་ཙོང	onion	o tsong
ཨོ་མཛད་མ	TSE	o mdzad ma
ཨོ་ཡན	uncommon abbreviation of {o rgyan} derivative of Sanskrit Uddiyana	o yan
ཨོ་ཡིག་དྲུག	insertion of the sound o in different places with variety of prosodial length and accentuation in the recitation of hymns	o yig drug
ཨོ་རོག་ཇུག་འགར	jungar srad of mongolia	o rog jug 'gar
ཨོ་ལོ	the confluence	o lo
ཨོ་སུའི་སྟོད་གོས	sweater	o su'i stod gos
ཨོག་རྒྱ	beard	og rgya
ཨོག་རྒྱུ	subconscious gossip	og rgyu
ཨོག་འཇོལ	gullet, SA lkog ma, larynx	og 'jol
ཨོག་ཏོམ	Adam's apple	og tom
ཨོག་གདོང་དཀར	red cat-bear of sikkim and e. nepal, ailurus ochracoeus	og gdong dkar
ཨོག་སྡོམ	Adam's-apple	og sdom
ཨོག་མ	SA tsi tsu, throat, neck, chin	og ma
ཨོག་མིན	Akani h a	og min
ཨོག་ཚུམ	SA ag tshom	og tshum
ཨོག་ཚོམ	chin-beard	og tshom
ཨོག་ཞོལ	laryn	og zhol
ཨོག་ལར	$	og lar
ཨོག་ཤོ	beautiful white neck	og sho
ཨོང་གུ	lamp	ong gu
ཨོང་བུ	ankle[-bone], astragal	ong bu
ཨོང་རས	wick of a lamp	ong ras
ཨོང་རིལ	dung [horses etc.]	ong ril
ཨོང་ལོག	ptarmigan	ong log
Oཏ་པ་ལ	blue lotus; usually utpala	Ot pa la
ཨོད་མ	superior, supreme, gentleman, throat, neck 2949	od ma
ཨོད་གསལ	clear light on zla ba gsum pa zhag bcu bzhi tsa na after 14 days pass, each day, receive, accept, suffer, gain, obtain	od gsal
ཨོམ	famous mystic syllable	om
ཨོམ་ཏྲམ	country where king dasaratha ruled	om tram
ཨོམ་དི་ཡ་ན	1 of gnas chen lnga	om di ya na
ཨོམ་མ་ནི་པད་མེ་ཧུང	the Mani Mantra of Avalokiteshvara; Syn {yi ge drug pa}	om ma ni pad me hung
ཨོམ་མོག	throat and chest	om mog
ཨོམ་མཛད	name of sgrol ma, priest who begins religious service by saying om	om mdzad
ཨོཾ་མཛད་མ	a form of Tara	oM mdzad ma
ཨོཾ་ཡེ་དྷར་མ	All phenomena arise from causes; Those causes and what puts an end to them Have been proclaimed by the Tathagata himself. He who truly speaks such words is the Great Shramana	oM ye dhar ma
ཨོམ་ཤིང	brace	om shing
ཨོམ་ཤོ	1 or earliest kings of tibet of sa'i legs dynasty	om sho
ཨོམ་སྭ་སྟི	may virtuous goodness prevail! {bde legs su gyur cig}	om swa sti
ཨོམ་སབ༹་སྟི	OM SVASTI	om sva sti
OM་ཨ་ཧུང	O A HU	OM a hung
ཨོམ་ཨཱ་ཧཱུཾ	om ah hung; the seed syllables for the Body, Speech and Mind of all buddhas	om A hUM
ཨོའུ་གླིང	European continent	o'u gling
ཨོའོ	oh yes, yes	o'o
ཨོར་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ	(pad ma 'gro mgon rtsal, pad ma dbang phyug mgon, pad ma grub pa'i blo gros, pad ma che mchog rtsal, pad ma mkha' 'gro'i dbang phyug, mgon po bir wa pa, pad ma nag po spyod pa, khye'u chung mkha' l...	or rgyan rin po
ཨོར་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ	epithet of padma sambhava	or rgyan rin po che
ཨོལ་གྲོང	Adam's apple, it seems too late	ol grong
ཨོལ་ཅོག	windpipe	ol cog
ཨོལ་མདུད	Adam's apple	ol mdud
ཨོལ་པ་འདྲ	it seems too late	ol pa 'dra
ཨོལ་མ	throat, windpipe	ol ma
ཨོས་སྐོ	chin	os sko
ཨོས་ཆོས	chin	os chos
ཨོས་ལོ	Oslo, Norway	os lo
སྒོམ་རིམ་གསུམ	three stages of training	sgom rim gsum
བE་རོ་ཙ་ན་ར་ཀཤི་ཏ	Vairochana the Translator	bE ro tsa na ra kshi ta
བE་རོ་ཙ་ན་རཀ་ཤི་ཏ	Vairochana the Translator	bE ro tsa na rak shi ta
བདེན་པ་གཅིག་པོའི་ལེའུའི་མདོ	Satyaka Parivara Sutra, Chapter of The True One Sutra bha ksha ka ra rdo rje rtse mo'i rgyud Bhaksakara Vajra Pinnacle Tantra. A tantra belonging to Yoga Tantra	bden pa gcig po'i le'u'i mdo
བྷ་ཉ	dza - / bhan dha - skull, skullcup, bhanja, bhandha	bha nya
བྷན་དྷ་རཀ་ཏ་གཏོར་མ་གསུམ	bhandha, rakta and torma bi kra ma shi la'i byang sgo srung ba'i paN	bhan dha rak ta gtor ma gsum
ཌིཏ་མཛད་པ	was given the position of pandita protector of the northern gate of Vikramashila	Dita mdzad pa
བི་རུ་པ་ཀཤ	one of the four guardian kings	bi ru pa ksha
བསྒྲལ་བའི་རཀ་ཏ	the rakta of liberation / deliverance	bsgral ba'i rak ta
བཤེས་པའི་འཕྲིང་ཡིག་གི་ཊའི་ཀ	'phags pa klu sgrub kyi rtogs brjod mdor bsdus commentary on the suhrIllekha of Nagarjuna with a brief biography ; by ngag gi dbang phyug dge legs rgya mtsho'i sde.	bshes pa'i 'phring yig gi T'i ka
བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་ཛཔ་དགོངས་ཆིག་དྲིལ	the recitation intents of approach and accomplishment combined into one	bsnyen sgrub dzap dgongs chig dril
བཟླས་པའི་ཛཔ་དགོངས	intent of recitation	bzlas pa'i dzap dgongs
དར་ཊིཀ	detailed commentary on the Bodhicharyavatara; Gyaltsab Darma Rinchen, 1364-1432	dar Tik
དམར་ཆེན་རཀ་ཏའི་བསྐང་བ	the mending offering of the great red rakta	dmar chen rak ta'i bskang ba
དམར་ཆེན་རཀ་ཏའི་མཆོད་པ	the rakta offering of human blood	dmar chen rak ta'i mchod pa
དངུལ་གྱི་མཎ	Dal - a mandala of silver	dngul gyi maN
ཛམ་བུ་བྲཱི་ཀཤ	the rose-apple tree dzam bu bri ksha shing sdong 'bras bu	dzam bu brI ksha
ཛཔ་ཀྱི་བཀོལ་བྱང	Dzapkyi Köljang, the Recitation Manual	dzap kyi bkol byang
ཛྷ	(not in das) g.yag Tik - the complete yig cha for the study of the Prajnaparamita literature by {g.yag ston sangs rgyas dpal} 1350?1414 in 8 volumes	dzha
གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཀར་མ་པ་ཀཤི	the great siddha Karma Pakshi; the second Karmapa	grub chen kar ma pa kshi
གུཔ་ཏའི་ཡི་གེ	the Gupta script	gup ta'i yi ge
ཇོ་ཤཱཀ་རྣམ་གཉིས	see {jo shak rnam gnyis}	jo shAk rnam gnyis
ཇོ་ཤཱཀ་རྣམ་གསུམ	the three statues of Buddha Shakyamuni	jo shAk rnam gsum
ཇོ་ཤཀ	abbr. of {jo bo shakya mu ni}	jo shak
ཇོ་ཤཀ་མཆེད	the brothers Jowo and Shakya, statues in the main temples in Lhasa	jo shak mched
ཀཪི་ཤནའི་ཚིགས	sm. {bur shing} ka: thog dgon - Katok Monastery. In Derge of Kham region east Tibet, founded by Kadampa Deshek in 1159 ka: thog mkhan po ngag dbang dpal	kRi shna'i tshigs
ཀཻ་ལ་ཤ	Mt. Kailash. See also {ri bo gangs can}	kai la sha
ཀཀ་ཀོ་ལ	female organs	kak ko la
ཀར་ཎ་ཀཤ་ར	borax	kar Na ksha ra
ཀར་མ་པ་ཀཤི	Karma Pakshi. (12041283). The second in the line of Karmapa incarnations and is regarded as the first recognized Tibetan tulku. The name Pakshi is Mongolian for 'master,' a title he became renowned...	kar ma pa kshi
ཀར་མ་པ་ཀཤི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	Karma Pakshi Chökyi Lama, 1204-1283, the second Karmapa	kar ma pa kshi chos kyi bla ma
ཀར་མ་པཀསཿཨི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བླ་མ	Karma Pakshi (1204-1283), the second Karmapa and the first Karmapa tulku. [mss]	kar ma pakSHi chos kyi bla ma
ཁ་ཆེའི་མཁས་པ་ལ་ཀཤམི	n of master	kha che'i mkhas pa la kshmi
ཁྲོ་རྒྱལ་ཡ་ཀཤ	Yaksha Wrathful King khye'u'i mthus btsun mo sngar bas kyang	khro rgyal ya ksha
སྦྱིན་པ་ལ་མོས	owing to the powers of the child she was carrying,her devotion to giving continued even as before	sbyin pa la mos
ཀོ་ཀི་ལཀ་ཤ	a tree	ko ki lak sha
ཀྲཱིཤ་ན་སཱ་ར	the spotted antelope, {krishna sA ra'i lpags pa}. the skin of the spotted antelope which is used by yogas and {rnying ma pa} lamas as a carpet	krIsh na sA ra
ཀྲི་ཥན་སཱ་ར	spotted antelope	kri Shna sA ra
ཀྲིཧ་ས་ར	a rice gruel made from cooking black sesame, mashed peas and rice 2950	krih sa ra
ཀྲིཤ་ནའི་པགས་གདན	a seat of a krishnasara skin	krish na'i pags gdan
ཀཤེ་ཏྲ་པཱ་ལ	1) Tib {zhing skyong} guardian of the realm. 2) Tib. {rgyal skyong} a yaksha in the retinue of Sixarmed Mahakala	kshe tra pA la
ཀུཀ་ཀུ་རཱི་པཱ	Kukkuripa. one of the teachers of Marpa	kuk ku rI pA
ཀུན་གཞི་ཏྭོ	fold - alaya & alaya-vijnana	kun gzhi two
ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏྭོ	fold - yang dag kun rdzob veridically conventionally real	kun rdzob two
ཀུན་ཏུ་བརྟགས་པ་ཏྭོ	fold - pluralistic - the knowable	kun tu brtags pa two
ལྕང་སྐྱ་ཧུ་ཏུཀ་ཏུ	the Hutuktu of Changkya	lcang skya hu tuk tu
ལྷ་ཙཀ	deity icon	lha tsak
མOཨཱུ་འགལ་གྱི་བུ་ཆེན་པོ	Maudgalyayana	mOU 'gal gyi bu chen po
མ་ཀཤའི་ལས་སྦྱོར	bean-sprout rites	ma ksha'i las sbyor
མ་ཤིཀ	Christ	ma shik
མཎ་ཌལ་རྟེན་གསུམ	long life ceremony	maN Dl rten gsum
མཀ་སི་ས	a kind of mercury used in the alchemical process	mak si sa
མཀ་ཏི་ཀ	a kind of mercury used in the alchemical process	mak ti ka
མཆན་ཏིཀ	a filling-in commentary	mchan tik
མཆོད་པའི་མནདལ	offering mandala	mchod pa'i mandal
མཛོད་ཏིཀ	Treasury Commentary; explaining the Abhidharma Kosha	mdzod tik
མཁས་པ་ཛཉའ་ན་སུ་ཏྲ	the learned Jnanasutra	mkhas pa dzanya' na su tra
ན་རཀ	the lowest hells	na rak
ན་རཀ་དོང་སྤྲུགས	1) overturning the deepest hell. 2) ritual for doing so	na rak dong sprugs
ན་རཀ་སྐོང་བཤགས	see also: {na rak dong sprugs skong bshags}	na rak skong bshags
པ་གོར་བE་རོ་ཙ་ན་ར་ཀཥི་ཏ	Vairochana the Translator	pa gor bE ro tsa na ra kShi ta
པ་ཀཥི	title of Chinese dignitary	pa kShi
པ་ཀཤ	see {}	pa ksha
པ་ཀཤུ	river	pa kshu
པཎ་ཆེན་ཤཱཀ་མཆོག་པ	{sha kya mchog ldan}	paN chen shAk mchog pa
པྲ་ཛ	nyA - Skt for {shes rab}	pra dza
ར་ཀཤ	Skt for {srin po}	ra ksha
རཀ	rak ta	rak
རཀ་ཤ	Skt for {srin po}	rak sha
རཀ་ཤ་ཕྲེང་བ	Raksha rosary. A mala made of a certain dried fruit	rak sha phreng ba
རཀ་ཤ་ཐོད་ཕྲེང	Raksha Tötreng. 1) One of the 12 manifestations of Guru Rinpoche. 2) the king of the rakshasa on one of the subcontinents	rak sha thod phreng
རཀ་ཏ	blood, red, saffron, minium, cinnabar, blood, 1 of bdud rtsi lnga	rak ta
རཀ་ཏ་དམར་གྱི་རྒྱུད	anuyoga rare tantra	rak ta dmar gyi rgyud
རཀ་ཏ་ཀ་པ་ལ	thod khrag - rakta vessel	rak ta ka pa la
རཀ་ཏ་མར་གྱི	rare tantra of anuyoga	rak ta mar gyi
རཀ་ཏ་ཚོས	red	rak ta tshos
རཀ་ཏའི་ཨི་རྫས་སོ་ལྔ	thirty-five different rakta substances	rak ta'i i rdzas so lnga
རཀ་ཏའི་སྤོད	rakta substance; consists of	rak ta'i spod
རཀ་ཏའི་ཐིག་ལེ	drops of blood	rak ta'i thig le
རཀ་ཏའི་ཡན་ལག་སོ་ལྔ	35 rakta ingredients	rak ta'i yan lag so lnga
རཀཏ	rakta/ (menstrual) blood	rakta
རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཛཔ་དགོངས་རྣམ་པ་བཞི	the four intents of vajra recitation	rdo rje'i dzap dgongs rnam pa bzhi
རེག་ཟིཀ་དམར་པོ	'red notes;' the text of teachings on the Prajna Paramita that were given to {khri srong 'de'u bstan}	reg zik dmar po
རེག་ཟིཀ་སྔོན་པོ	'blue notes;' spiritual son of {khri srong 'de'u bstan}; wrote down teachings with lapis lazuli rgyal po dza: - King Jah rje btsun bla ma rdo rje 'chang chen po shA kya shrI dznya na'i rnam thar me	reg zik sngon po
ཏོག་ཕྲེང་བ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ	Biography of {rtogs ldan shA kya shrI} by {shar ka: thog si tu chos kyi rgya mtsho}	tog phreng ba zhes bya ba
རྣམ་འགྲེལ་ཊིཀ་ཆུང	n of a scripture	rnam 'grel Tik chung
རྩ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཊིཀ་ཀ་སྦས་དོན་ཀུན་གསལ	n of a scripture	rtsa rgyud kyi Tik ka sbas don kun gsal
རུ་རཀ་ཥ	raksha bead	ru rak Sha
རུ་རཀ་ཤའི་ཕྲེང་བ	a rosary of raksha beads ru tse so lnga khrag dang sbyar ba'i rak ta - rakta made of 35 special ingredients sdom pa gsum bstan pa'i le'u'i mdo [Trisambara Nirdesha Parivarta Sutra] Chapter Showing ...	ru rak sha'i phreng ba
སྡོམ་ཏིཀ་དཔག་བསམ་སྙེ་མ	n of scripture	sdom tik dpag bsam snye ma
སྒྲུབ་ཆེན་གྱི་ཛཔ་དགོངས	recitation intent of great accomplishment	sgrub chen gyi dzap dgongs
སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཛཔ་དགོངས	recitation intent of accomplishment	sgrub pa'i dzap dgongs
ཤཱཀ་ཐུབ	sm. {shA kya thub pa}	shAk thub
ཤཱཀ་ཐུབ་རྒྱལ	glorious Shakyamuni	shAk thub rgyal
ཤཀ་པུ་ཏྲི	Shakputri. The son of King Jah and lineage holder of both Mahayoga and Anu Yoga. He is also known as Indrabhuti the Younger and Master Lawapa shar ka: thog - see {ka: thog dgon} shar ka: thog pa bs...	shak pu tri
མེད་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུའི་ཕྲེང་བ	the autobiography of the rnying ma pa master {ka: thog pa bsod nams rgyal mtshan} completed by his disciple rnam grol ye shes bzang po	med yid bzhin nor bu'i phreng ba
ཤེས་རབ་ལེའུའི་དཀའ་འགྲེལ	n of scripture	shes rab le'u'i dka' 'grel
ཤིང་ཨ་ཏི་མུཀ་ཏ	tree called harimantha	shing a ti muk ta
ཤིང་ཛམ་བུ་བྲི་ཀཤའི་ལྗོན་པ	Jambu Tree	shing dzam bu bri ksha'i ljon pa
ཤིང་ཀོ་ཀི་ལ་ཀས	tree of cuckoo's eye skal ldan rgyal po dza: - the Worthy King Jah	shing ko ki la ksa
སྐུ་ཙཀ	icon, image, picture. See also {tsak li}	sku tsak
སྨན་རཀ	amrita and rakta. Two types of blessed substance used on the shrine in Vajrayana rituals	sman rak
སྨན་རཀ་གཏོར་གསུམ	amrita, rakta and torma; [amrita]-medicine, rakta and torma	sman rak gtor gsum
སྔགས་འཆང་ཧའུཾ་ཀ་ར་ཛ་ཡ	author of {brtag thabs pad ma dkar po'i 'chun po} ston pa'i rgyal tshab jo shAk rnam gnyis the statues called the Jowo Mikyö Dorje and the Jowo Shakyamuni, the actual representatives of the buddha	sngags 'chang h'uM ka ra dza ya
ཏཀ་ཤད་དྲག་ཤད་མགོན་པོ	n of deity	tak shad drag shad mgon po
ཏིཀ་ཀ	commentary	tik ka
ཏིཀ་ཀ་སྐྱོར་དཔོན	the lead rehearser / reciter of a commentary; Tika-reciter at the {rgyud} college, the lead Tika recitership	tik ka skyor dpon
ཙ་ཀཤུ	Skt for {mig}; the eye	tsa kshu
ཙ་ཀཤུའི་འབྲས་བུ	the eye ball	tsa kshu'i 'bras bu
ཙཀ	icon, sm. {tsak li}	tsak
ཨུཏ	pal ltar gyes pa - the Hell of Splitting like a Blue Lotus; one of {grang dmyal brgyad} eight cold hells	ut
ཡཀ་ཤ་སྟག་འོག	the Yaksha Temples; at Samye	yak sha stag 'og
ཞི་ཁྲོ་ན་རཀ་དོང་སྤྲུགས	sadhana of the peaceful and wrathful deities to overturn the deepest hell	zhi khro na rak dong sprugs
